Cover

Cover

未知

  版权信息

  Copyright information毕淑敏散文集

  Bi Shumin's essay collection作者：毕淑敏

  Author: Bi Shumin本书由中南博集天卷文化传媒有限公司授权亚马逊全球范围发行

  This book is authorized by Zhongnan Boji Tianjuan Culture Media Co., Ltd. to be distributed worldwide by Amazon

Contents

    目录

  directory
    版权信息 Copyright information

    白云剪裁的衣服 Clothes cut by white clouds

    一个人就是一支骑兵 One person is a cavalryman

    欣喜是自酿的 The joy is homebrewed

    恰到好处的幸福 Just the right amount of happiness

    向好葡萄学习：精装典藏本 Learning from Good Grapes: A Hardcover Collection

    你的支持系统：精装典藏本 Your support system: hardcover collections

    总有风景打动你：精装典藏本 There is always a scenery that impresses you: hardcover collection

    最大程度逼近真实：精装典藏本 Maximum Approach to Reality: Hardcover Collection

    雪线上的蛋花汤：精装典藏本 Egg drop soup on the snow line: a hardcover collection

    幸福的颜料：精装典藏本 Paints of Happiness: Hardcover Collection

    温柔就是能够对抗世间所有的坚硬 Gentleness is to be able to resist all the hardness in the world

    预约幸福 Appointment happiness

    柔和的力量 Gentle power

    在雪原与星空之间 Between the snowy fields and the starry sky

    你站在金字塔的第几层 You stand on the first floor of the pyramid

    离太阳最近的树 The tree closest to the sun

    切开忧郁的洋葱 Cut the melancholic onion

    旅行使我们谦虚 Traveling humbles us

    没有人是一座孤岛 No one is an island

Cover

Contents

    01.为了雪山的庄严和父母的期望 01. For the solemnity of the snow-capped mountains and the expectations of parents

    02.到西藏去 02. Go to Tibet

    03.绿色皮诺曹 03. Green Pinocchio

    04.白云剪裁的衣服 04. Clothes cut by white clouds

    05.走，到阿里去 05. Let's go, go to Ali

    06.糖衣氧气压缩片 06. Sugar-coated oxygen compression tablets

    07.黑白拂尘 07. Black and white dust

    08.“回”字形银饰 08. "Hui" zigzag silver jewelry

    09.灵魂飞翔的地方 09. Where the soul flies

    10.八月里穿棉衣 10. Wear cotton clothes in August

    11.胖听 11. Fat listening

    12.拉练 12. Training

    13.在雪原与星空之间 13. Between the snowfield and the starry sky

    14.冰川上有毒蛇咝咝声 14. The sizzling sound of poisonous snakes on the glacier

    15.信使 15. Messenger

    16.葵花之最 16. The best of sunflowers

    17.西藏猪 17. Tibetan pig

    18.制花圈 18. Wreath making

    19.三块糖 19. Three pieces of sugar

    20.最高的花生糖作坊 20. The tallest peanut candy workshop

    21.碗里的小太阳 21. The little sun in a bowl

    22.雪线上的蛋花汤 22. Egg drop soup on the snow line

    23.乘降落伞的西瓜 23. Watermelon by parachute

    24.第一次打针 24. First injection

    25.女孩的纸 25. Paper for girls

    26.藏族的花围裙 26. Tibetan flower apron

未知

  01.为了雪山的庄严和父母的期望

  01. For the solemnity of the snow-capped mountains and the expectations of parents

  一

  One人们常常问我，你发表处女作是哪一年？我说，是l987年，那一年我已经三十五周岁了。人们就“啊”了一声，不再说什么，但表情里含了疑惑：早些年你干吗去了？

  People often ask me, what year did you publish your debut novel? I said, it was l987, when I was thirty-five years old. People just said "ah" and didn't say anything more, but there was a doubt in their expressions: Why did you go in the early years?在写作以前，我在遥远的西藏当兵，学的是医务。我在白衣战士的那条战线上，当到了内科主治医师的位置。假如不是改了行，就当到了副主任，您现在到医院看我的门诊，就要挂三块钱一个的号1了。

  Before writing, I was a soldier in distant Tibet and studied medicine. I was on the front line of the white warriors and became the attending physician of internal medicine. If you don't change your career, you will become the deputy director, and you will have to hang up the number 1 of three yuan a piece when you go to the hospital to see my outpatient clinic.一个女人，更具体地说，是一个医术很好颇有人缘的女大夫，在已过了“而立之年”的沉稳日子里，为什么要弃医从文，拿起生疏的文学之笔开始艰难的跋涉？

  A woman, more specifically, a popular female doctor with good medical skills, in the calm days of "standing in the year", why should she abandon medicine and follow literature, pick up an unfamiliar literary pen and start a difficult trek?在许多孤寂写作的深夜，我对着苍天自问。

  In the late night of many lonely writings, I asked myself to the sky.我不知道。

  I do not know.但是我感到一个苍凉而喑哑的声音，在寒冷的西部呼唤我。

  But I felt a desolate and hoarse voice calling me in the cold West.你既然来到了这里，你就要让世人知道这里。

  Since you are here, you must let the world know about it.他说。带着无上的权威。

  He said. With supreme authority.我没有办法抗拒。你可以违背一个人的意志，但是你不能违背一座雪山。

  I couldn't resist. You can go against a person's will, but you can't go against a snowy mountain.这就是昆仑山啊。我们民族最伟大的峰峦。

  This is Kunlun Mountain. The greatest peak of our nation.不管文化古籍里怎样考证，说传说中的昆仑山是现如今的什么什么山，我总认为它不是一座具体的山，而是一个象征。想想那时候，交通工具多么不便，又没有精确的地图，指南针还没有发明出来。古人绝不可能把山与山的分野搞得条块分明。他们只有对着西部广袤的隆起兴叹，在落日辉煌的余晖里，勾勒云霭中浮动着鬼斧神工的宫殿……于是他们把无数神奇的传说附丽其上，敷衍出最雄伟的想象。那里有九条尾巴的天神把守的天宫，那里有直插云霄的天稻，每一粒谷子都是鸡蛋大的玉石……

  No matter how it is verified in ancient cultural books, I always think that the legendary Kunlun Mountain is what it is today, but a symbol. Think about how inconvenient transportation was at that time, there was no accurate map, and the compass had not yet been invented. The ancients could never have made the division between mountains clear. They could only sigh at the vastness of the west, and in the glorious afterglow of the setting sun, they outlined the palace floating in the clouds...... So they attached countless magical legends to it, perfunctory the most majestic imagination. There is the heavenly palace guarded by the nine-tailed heavenly god, and there is the heavenly rice that reaches straight into the sky, and every grain of grain is a jade the size of an egg......无独有偶。在印度辽阔的恒河平原上，更为优雅的神话野火般流传。赤足的人们向西眺望，看到皑皑的冰峰劈裂云霄。他们认为有超凡入圣的法力统治其上，于是说那里是佛祖居住的地方……

  Coincidentally. In the vast Ganges plains of India, more elegant myths spread like wildfire. Barefoot people looked west and saw the white ice peaks splitting the sky. They believed that there was a transcendent magic power ruling over it, so they said that it was where the Buddha lived......两大古老种族神秘的目光交会于此——这就是地球上最高耸的原野——藏北高原。

  The mysterious eyes of two ancient races meet here - this is the highest wilderness on earth - the northern Tibetan plateau.当我十六岁的时候，离开北京，穿上军装。火车不断地向西向西，到了新疆的乌鲁木齐。又换上汽车向西向西。在茫茫戈壁上奔跑了六天以后，到达南疆重镇喀什。这一次汽车不是向地面上的哪个方向行驶了，而是向“天上”爬去。又经历了六天无与伦比的颠簸，我作为藏北某部队第一批五个女兵当中的一员，到达了共和国这块最高的土地。

  When I was sixteen, I left Beijing and put on my military uniform. The train continued to go west to Urumqi, Xinjiang. Then I changed to the car and headed west. After running on the vast Gobi for six days, he arrived at Kashgar, an important town in southern Xinjiang. This time the car did not drive in any direction on the ground, but crawled "into the sky". After six days of unparalleled turbulence, I arrived at the highest land of the Republic as one of the first five female soldiers of a certain unit in northern Tibet.这块土地是喜马拉雅山、冈底斯山和喀喇昆仑山聚合的地方，平均高度在海拔五千米以上，它有一个奇怪的名字，叫作“阿里”。

  This land is the convergence of the Himalayas, Gangdis and Karakoram Mountains, with an average altitude of more than five thousand meters above sea level, and it has a strange name called "Ali".没有人知道“阿里”是什么意思。我曾经问过博学的藏学家，也没能给一个明晰的回答，只是说这个词语可能属于一个早已消亡了的语系。于是我就沿用了一个我在阿里搜集到的民间传说：阿里的意思是“我的”。

  No one knows what "Ali" means. I once asked a learned Tibetan scholar, but I couldn't give a clear answer, just saying that this word may belong to a language family that has long died out. So I followed a folklore I collected from Ali: Ali means "mine".“我的”什么呢？我的高原？我的山川？我的牦牛和我的盐巴？我的清澈的湖泊和险恶的风暴？不知道。人类的远祖用我们不懂的语言，为我们留下了一道永恒的谜。也许在先民们眼中，所有的一切都是有灵性的，他们都在呼喊着“我的”。

  What is "my"? My plateau? My mountains and rivers? My yak and my salt? My crystal clear lakes and treacherous storms? I don't know. The distant ancestors of mankind left us an eternal mystery in a language we did not understand. Perhaps in the eyes of the ancestors, everything was spiritual, and they were all shouting "mine".我小的时候，学习很好。语文好，数学也好。语文老师说我以后可以当个记者，数学老师则说我以后可以上清华大学，成为一个女数学家。我回到家里，很高兴地把这些话学给妈妈。没想到，她训斥我说，这都是老师逗你玩的，你不要相信别人说你如何好的话。

  When I was young, I studied well. Chinese is good, and mathematics is also good. The Chinese teacher said that I could be a journalist in the future, and the math teacher said that I could go to Tsinghua University in the future and become a female mathematician. I returned home and happily learned these words from my mother. Unexpectedly, she reprimanded me and said that this is all the teacher's trick to tease you, don't believe what others say about you.我挺伤心的，从此对别人的夸奖总是半信半疑。我不知这习惯到底好不好，但它使我在荣誉面前天生地镇静起来。比如我的作文被老师批过“5+”的分数，但是小小的我丝毫不骄傲，因为我知道那是她逗我玩的。

  I was very sad, and I was always skeptical about other people's praises from now on. I don't know if this habit is good or not, but it makes me naturally calm in the face of honor. For example, my composition was graded by the teacher with a score of "5+", but I was not proud at all because I knew that she was teasing me.我小学毕业后考进了北京外国语学院附属学校。据说是很难考的，录取率只有几百分之一，而且女生录取得很少，只及总数的四分之一。在我这个年纪的北京人，都会记得当时每年一度的北京外语学校招生，是怎样地惊动京城。

  After graduating from elementary school, I was admitted to the Affiliated School of Beijing Chinese Language University. It is said that it is difficult to take the exam, the admission rate is only a few percent, and the admission rate for girls is very small, only a quarter of the total. Beijingers my age will remember how the annual enrollment of Beijing Foreign Language School alarmed the capital.我考上了，妈妈难得地高兴了一回。但是我已经养成了宠辱不惊的脾气，并没有特别地兴奋。

  I was admitted, and my mother was very happy. But I had developed a temper of not being frightened, and I wasn't particularly excited.在外语学校读书的时候，我的成绩依然很好。我现在还保存着一张当时的成绩单，所有的科目平时都是5分，期末考试都是“优”。我后来在军队院校军医专业学习的时候，每次考试也都是第一。由于一贯的优异，使我在内心深处看不起在校学习这件事。你想啊，上边有老师喋喋不休在讲，周围有同学可研讨，你什么事都没有，一门心思学那点前人遗下的知识，你要是还学不好，不是太说不过去了吗？

  When I was studying at a foreign language school, my grades were still very good. I still have a transcript from that time, all subjects are usually 5 points, and the final exam is "excellent". Later, when I studied military medicine in military academies, I was the first in every exam. Because of my consistent excellence, I look down on studying at school in my heart. You think, there are teachers chattering above, there are classmates around you to discuss, you have nothing, you are focused on learning the knowledge left by your predecessors, if you still can't learn well, isn't it too unreasonable?我在外语学校最大的收获，是见了一个比较大的世面，读了不少的书。退回去三十多年，许多社会名流的孩子已经在“反帝反修”的同时，孜孜不倦地开始学习外语。我们这所学校干部子女的密集程度，大概超过了京城的任何一所学校。我的父亲是军队的一位正师级干部，但相比之下，我只能算作平民子弟。由于我优异的学习成绩，使我保持了一种有尊严的生活态度。我得以近距离地观察到真正的“贵族”气派，看到它的华贵，也看到它的羸弱。

  The biggest gain I gained from foreign language school was that I saw a relatively large world and read a lot of books. After more than 30 years of regression, many children of celebrities have already begun to learn foreign languages tirelessly while "anti-imperialism and anti-revision". The density of cadres and children in our school is probably more than that of any school in the capital. My father was a division-level cadre in the army, but in comparison, I could only be counted as a civilian child. Due to my excellent academic performance, I have maintained a dignified attitude towards life. I was able to observe the true "aristocratic" style up close, see its luxury, and see its weakness.读了许多课外书，则得益于“文化大革命”的停课。我们学校里有一个很大的图书馆，平日里我们是没有机会读小说的。功课压得非常紧，老师原本要求我们夜里说梦话都用外语的。现在一停课，大松心了，快活无比。只是图书馆里的书可不是无偿看的，看一本，要写出一篇批判文章。

  After reading many extracurricular books, he benefited from the suspension of classes during the "Cultural Revolution". We have a large library in our school, and we don't have the opportunity to read novels on weekdays. The homework was very tight, and the teacher originally asked us to speak in a foreign language at night. Now that classes are suspended, I am very relieved and extremely happy. It's just that the books in the library are not free to read, and you have to write a critical article to read a book.刚开始大伙觉得这个交易做得来，不就是看完之后胡乱照着报纸抄点革命词语就能交差了吗？于是大家都去借，并相约看完了自己的那本以后，彼此交换。这样各人写一篇批判稿，就可以看几本好小说，不是太合算了吗？

  At first, everyone thought that this deal could be done, and after reading it, they could just copy some revolutionary words in the newspaper. So everyone went to borrow it, and after reading their own book, they exchanged it with each other. In this way, each person can write a critical manuscript and read a few good novels, isn't it too cost-effective?但实践的结果并不美妙。很多人书看了，但批判稿久久写不出来，时间长了，就失去了继续借书的资格。我也不愿意写大批判文章，你想啊，都是世界名著，看的时候，对大师们佩服得五体投地，书皮一合上，就要批判他们，这是一件多么残酷的事情！但管图书馆的小个子老师很严厉，交不了稿，你就不要想从她的手里再借出一张纸。为了阅读大师们的作品，我只有硬起头皮来批判大师们。

  But the results of practice are not wonderful. Many people read books, but they couldn't write critical manuscripts for a long time, and after a long time, they lost their qualifications to continue borrowing books. I don't want to write big critical articles, you think, they are all world masterpieces, when I read them, I admire the masters to the ground, and as soon as the book cover is closed, I have to criticize them, what a cruel thing this is! But the little teacher in charge of the library is very strict and can't turn in the manuscript, so don't think about borrowing another piece of paper from her. In order to read the works of the masters, I can only bite the bullet to criticize the masters.道理虽说明白了，但写的时候，心痛如绞。我终于想出了一个两全其美的办法。比如看完《复活》，我就在纸上写：以下部分暴露出列夫·托尔斯泰的资产阶级人道主义倾向……然后我开始大段地抄录老托尔斯泰的原文，抄得很仔细，连一个标点都不错过……

  Although the truth is clear, when I wrote it, my heart ached. I finally came up with a way to get the best of both worlds. For example, after reading "Resurrection", I wrote on paper: The following part exposes Leo Tolstoy's bourgeois humanitarian tendencies...... Then I began to transcribe the original text of the old Tolstoy in large paragraphs, copying it very carefully, not missing a single punctuation......还书的时候心情好忐忑，生怕小个子老师看出什么。没想到，她连连表扬我的认真，原来她是只看标题，看字迹是否整齐，看篇幅的长短，并不在意你写的是什么。

  When I returned the book, I was in a very uneasy mood, for fear that the little teacher would see something. Unexpectedly, she praised my seriousness again and again, it turned out that she only looked at the title, whether the handwriting was neat, the length of the page, and didn't care what you wrote.只有我一个人坚持借书写批判稿了，同屋的同学开始央求我，要我看完了书暂不要还，让大家都传着看一看。我当然不能拒绝，只是有的人看得很慢，已经过了好多天了，你问她看完了没有，她还说没完。知道书看到半截被人夺走的苦处，我不好意思催，只得耐心地等。但看惯了书的人，就像大烟瘾，是很难忍得住的。我就在下次借书的时候想办法——连借带偷。图书馆的小老师对我已是十分地信任了，每次我来借书，她不跟着，让我自己在书架里挑。

  I was the only one who insisted on borrowing the critical manuscript, and my classmates in the same room began to beg me not to return the book for the time being, so that everyone could pass it on. Of course I can't refuse, but some people watch it very slowly, it has been many days, you ask her if she has finished watching, and she still says it is not finished. Knowing that the book saw half of the suffering of being taken away, I was embarrassed to urge it, so I had to wait patiently. But people who are used to reading books, like a big smoking addiction, are hard to bear. The next time I borrow a book, I will find a way - borrow and steal. The little teacher in the library already trusts me very much, and every time I come to borrow books, she doesn't follow me and asks me to pick them from the bookshelf.我们的图书馆是一座建立于20世纪初期的西式楼房，窗户很高很小，像旧时的教堂。加上书架遮挡了大部分的阳光，走道幽暗深邃。这真是一个作案的好场所。我在书架里转啊转，看到一本好书，就夹在胳肢窝的衣服里……这样几圈下来，双臂就像机械的木偶，动也不敢动了。最后僵硬地走到老师跟前，只把手里抱着的书登记。

  Our library is a Western-style building built in the early 20th century, with tall and small windows, like an old church. In addition, the bookshelves block most of the sunlight, and the aisles are dark and deep. This is really a good place to commit crimes. I was spinning around the bookshelf and saw a good book, and I put it in my clothes in my arm socket...... After a few laps like this, the arms were like mechanical puppets, and they didn't dare to move. Finally, he walked up to the teacher stiffly and only registered the book he was holding in his hand.这样我看好几本书，只需写一本书的大批判稿，不但减轻了手的负担，加快了看书的速度，更重要的是减轻了心灵的负担。

  In this way, I am optimistic about a few books, and I only need to write a big critical draft of a book, which not only reduces the burden on my hands, speeds up the speed of reading, but more importantly, reduces the burden on my soul.但还书的时候，气氛挺吓人的。借的时候，只图一时快活，完全忘记是从哪个犄角旮旯掏出来的书，可还的时候一定要归位。小老师是很认真的，一旦她发现大量的图书放错了地方，怀疑到我身上，我的秘密书库就会被彻底摧毁了，损失不堪设想。我谨慎地控制着偷书的数量，严格地完璧归赵。每次还书时候，都恐惧万分。身上夹带着好几本书，像个沉重的孕妇，还要等着小老师验收批判文章，心中狂跳不止。待老师那里过了关，急急钻进书架的峡谷，拼命回想上次取书的位置，冷汗涔涔。好不容易放了回去，刚轻松了一秒钟，又贪婪地开始了新一轮的夹带……

  But when returning the book, the atmosphere was quite scary. When borrowing, I only want to be happy for a while, completely forgetting which corner the book was taken out from, but when I return it, I must return it to its place. The little teacher is very serious, once she finds that a large number of books are misplaced and suspects me, my secret library will be completely destroyed, and the loss will be unimaginable. I carefully controlled the number of books stolen and returned them to Zhao strictly. Every time I return the book, I am extremely afraid. Carrying several books on her body, like a heavy pregnant woman, she still had to wait for the little teacher to accept the critical article, and her heart was beating wildly. After passing the teacher's place, I hurriedly got into the canyon of the bookshelf, desperately recalling the last time I picked up the book, and broke out in a cold sweat. Finally put it back, and after just a second of relaxation, it greedily started a new round of entrainment......同学们坐享其成，却全然不体谅我的苦衷，轮到我要还书了，她们就耍赖，说还没看完呢。我说，那你们也得给我一个时间，你们不能老这么耽误我呀。她们就说，要不这样吧，书你现在就可以拿走，但是你得把书中的故事讲给我们听。

  The classmates sat back and enjoyed their success, but they didn't understand my hardships at all, and when it was my turn to return the book, they played tricks, saying that they hadn't finished reading it yet. I said, then you have to give me a time, you can't delay me like this all the time. They said, otherwise, you can take the book now, but you have to tell us the story in the book.于是，在“文化大革命”最激烈的年代，在北京城内一所古老的校舍里，每逢夜深人静，在一间住着八个女孩的房间里，就会传出娓娓的话语，中外文学大师的智慧，像月光清冷地笼罩着我们，伴我们走进悠远的梦乡。

  Therefore, in the most intense years of the "Cultural Revolution", in an old school building in Beijing, in the dead of night, in a room where eight girls lived, eloquent words would come out, and the wisdom of Chinese and foreign literary masters would envelop us like moonlight, accompanying us into a distant dreamland.

  为了给同学们讲得不露破绽，我读原著的时候就格外地认真。几十年过去了，我的一位现已在美国定居的朋友，说她至今记着我给她讲过的《笑面人》，而且拒绝看雨果的原著。她说，毕淑敏在那个夏夜所讲的《笑面人》是世界上最好的《笑面人》，我从来没有听过比这再好的故事了。

  In order to tell my classmates without revealing any flaws, I read the original work very seriously. Decades later, a friend of mine who has now settled in the United States said that she still remembers what I told her about "The Smiling Man" and refused to read Hugo's original book. She said that the "Smiling Man" that Bi Shumin told on that summer night was the best "Smiling Man" in the world, and I had never heard a better story than this.我对这个评价淡然一笑。我知道，这是她在怀念自己的少年时代。

  I smiled indifferently at this evaluation. I know that this is her nostalgia for her youth.二

  Two我从北京来到西藏的阿里当兵，严酷的自然环境将我震撼。所有的日子都充满严寒，绿色已成为遥远而模糊的记忆。

  I came to Ali from Beijing to Tibet to serve as a soldier, and the harsh natural environment shocked me. All the days were filled with bitter cold, and green had become a distant and vague memory.吃的是脱水菜，像纸片一样干燥的洋葱皮，在雪水的浸泡下，膨胀成赭色的浆团。炒或熬以后，一种辛辣而令人懊恼的气味充斥军营。即使在日历上最炎热的夏季，你也绝不可以脱下棉衣，否则夜里所有的关节就会嘎嘎作响。

  What I ate was dehydrated vegetables, onion skins that were as dry as paper pieces, and when soaked in snow water, they swelled into ochre slurry. After stir-frying or boiling, a pungent and annoying smell fills the barracks. Even in the hottest summer on the calendar, you should never take off your cotton coat, otherwise all the joints will rattle at night.由于缺乏维生素，我的嘴唇像兔子一样裂开了，讲话的时候就会有红红的血珠掉下来。这是很不雅的事情，我就去问老医生怎样才能治好嘴唇？医生想了半天说，你要大量地吃维生素。我说吃啦，每天都吃一大把，足足有二十多片呢！可我的嘴唇为什么还是长不拢？医生说那就是你说话太多了，紧紧地闭一个星期嘴巴，你的嘴唇就长好了。我说，那可不行，我是卫生员的班长，就算跟伙伴可以不说话，跟病人也是要讲话的……老医生表示爱莫能助。

  Due to the lack of vitamins, my lips cracked like rabbits, and red blood droplets fell when I spoke. This is a very indecent thing, so I asked the old doctor how to cure his lips? The doctor thought for a long time and said that you should take a lot of vitamins. I said eat, eat a lot every day, more than 20 pieces! But why can't my lips still grow together? The doctor said that you talk too much, close your mouth tightly for a week, and your lips will grow. I said, that's not good, I'm the squad leader of the hygienist, even if I can not talk to my partner, I have to talk to the patient...... The old doctor said that love could not help.后来我的嘴唇还是我自己给治好的。夜里睡觉的时候，用胶布把自己的嘴巴粘起来，强迫裂开的口子靠在一起。白天撕开照常讲话。坚持了一段时间，后来就好了。

  Later, my lips were healed by myself. When sleeping at night, glue your mouth with tape and force the cracked openings to come together. Tear open during the day and speak as usual. I held on for a while, and then it got better.由于缺氧，我的指甲猛烈地凹陷下去，像一个搅拌咖啡的小勺。年轻的女孩就是爱斗嘴，有一天，女卫生员争论起来谁的指甲凹得最厉害，最后决定用注射器针头往指甲坑里注水，一滴滴往下灌，水的滴数多而不流者为胜。记得我得了第一。好像是贮藏了十几滴水吧，凝聚得圆圆的，像一颗巨大的露珠，乖乖地趴在我的指甲上。

  Due to lack of oxygen, my nails sink violently, like a small spoon for stirring coffee. One day, the female hygienist argued about whose nails were the most sunken, and finally decided to use a syringe needle to pour water into the nail pit, drop by drop, and the one with more drops of water would win. I remember I won the first place. It seems to have stored more than a dozen drops of water, condensed into a circle, like a huge dewdrop, lying obediently on my fingernails.我是一个优秀的卫生员。有一天，我在军报上看到了一个叫作“毕淑敏”的人写的一首诗，就轻轻地笑了一下。我知道我的名字很大众，全中国从八岁到八十岁的女人，有许多叫这个名字。但是我的姓是比较少的。现在有了一个同名同姓的人写了一首诗，觉得很亲切，就很仔细地读。

  I am an excellent hygienist. One day, I saw a poem written by a man named "Bi Shumin" in the military newspaper, and I smiled softly. I know that my name is very popular, and there are many women in China from the age of eight to eighty who have this name. But my last name is relatively few. Now there is a person with the same name and surname who wrote a poem, and I feel very kind, so I read it carefully.一读之下，我吃了一惊。因为这首诗是我写的。但是千真万确，我没有向任何一家报刊投过稿。

  When I read it, I was surprised. Because I wrote this poem. But to be honest, I have not submitted my manuscript to any newspaper.我不知道这是怎么一回事，也没有人负责向我解释。时间一长，我就把它忘了。但是军邮车下次上高原的时候（由于道路封山，邮车很长时间才上来一趟），报社给我寄来了一个黄色封面的采访本，我才得以确认那首诗是我的作品，这个本子就是稿费了。我用这个本子记了许多有关解剖和生理方面的知识。

  I don't know what this is going on, and no one is responsible for explaining it to me. After a long time, I forgot about it. But the next time the military mail car went to the plateau (due to the road closure, the mail car took a long time to come up), the newspaper sent me an interview book with a yellow cover, and I was able to confirm that the poem was my work, and this book was the manuscript fee. I used this notebook to record a lot of knowledge about anatomy and physiology.一个很偶然的机会，政治部的一位干事对我说，你的那首诗，充满了鲜血和死亡的意识，真不像一个十几岁的女孩子写的。

  By chance, an officer of the Political Department said to me, "Your poem is full of blood and the consciousness of death, and it really doesn't look like it was written by a teenage girl."我恍然大悟说，噢！原来我的那首诗是你给我投到报社去的啊？

  I suddenly realized and said, Oh! It turns out that you sent me to the newspaper for that poem?他说，不是他。

  He said, not him.他这才告诉我，军报的一位记者到阿里高原采访。高原反应像重量级的拳击手，毫不留情地击倒了他，第二天他就下山返回平原了。但记者很忠于职守，就在高原的这仅有的一天里，挣扎着看了一些单位的黑板报，摘了一些作品带回去，我的小诗也在其中。回去以后，别人的都没选中，只发了我的那一首……

  He then told me that a reporter from the military newspaper went to the Ali Plateau for an interview. Altitude sickness, like a heavyweight boxer, knocked him down mercilessly, and the next day he went down the mountain and returned to the plains. But the reporter was very loyal to his duties, and in this only day on the plateau, he struggled to read the blackboard newspapers of some units, picked up some works to take back, and my little poems were among them. After going back, none of the others chose it, only my ......我不知道自己随手涂抹的句子还有这样的经历，但幼时妈妈的教育使我绝不大惊小怪。我没有看见自己的作品变成铅字的喜悦，只认为这是一个巧合。不会再有第二个记者匆匆下山，不会再有人看上我的小诗……

  I didn't know that I had such an experience with the sentences I scribbled, but my mother's education when I was young made me never fuss. I didn't see the joy of seeing my work turn into lead letters, I just thought it was a coincidence. There will be no second reporter rushing down the mountain, and no one will take a fancy to my poems......我继续专心地学习医学知识，一点也没有因此想投稿搞创作什么的。

  I continued to concentrate on learning medical knowledge, and I didn't want to contribute to creation or anything because of this.当了几年兵，我回家探亲。我的父亲很郑重地同我谈到了那首诗，说他很高兴。

  After a few years of being a soldier, I went home to visit relatives. My father spoke to me about the poem very solemnly, saying that he was very happy.我从小是一个乖孩子，愿意使自己的父母快活。但我还是没想到写作，只感到一种隐隐约约的愿望在内心起伏。

  I grew up as a well-behaved child who was willing to make my parents happy. But I still didn't think about writing, I only felt a faint desire rising and falling in my heart.我在藏北高原当了十一年的兵，把自己最宝贵的青年时代留在了冰川与雪岭之间。

  I served as a soldier on the northern Tibetan plateau for eleven years, leaving my most precious youth between glaciers and snowy mountains.我曾经背负武器、红十字箱、干粮、行军帐篷跋涉在无人区，也曾骑马涉过冰河给藏族老乡送医药。

  I once trekled through no man's land with weapons, red cross boxes, dry food, and marching tents, and also rode horses across glaciers to deliver medicine to Tibetan villagers.我曾在万古不化的寒冰上，铺一张雨布席地而眠，初次这样露营时，我想醒来身体还不得泊在一片汪洋之中？我真是高估了人的微薄热量，黎明当我掀开雨布查看时，只见雪原依旧，连个人形的凹陷都没有。除了双膝凝固般的疼痛，一切都很正常。

  I once slept on the eternal ice, spreading a raincloth on the ground, and when I first camped like this, I thought I woke up and my body couldn't be parked in the ocean? I really overestimated the meager heat of people, and when I lifted the raincloth to check at dawn, I saw that the snowfield was still there, not even a depression in the human figure. Except for the coagulating pain in both knees, everything was normal.攀越海拔六千多米的高山时，心脏在胸膛炸成碎片，仿佛要随着急遽的呼吸迸溅出嘴巴。仰望云雾缭绕的顶峰，俯视脚下深不可测的渊薮，只有十七岁的我，第一次想到了死。我想这样爬上去太苦难了，干脆装作一失足，掉下悬崖……没有人会发现我是故意这样做的，在如此险恶的行军中，死人的事经常发生。我牺牲于军事行动，也要算作小小的烈士，这样我的父母也会有一份光荣……我把一切都周密地盘算好了，只需找一块陡峻的峭壁实施自戕的方案。不一会儿，地方选好了。那是一处很美丽的山崖，天像纯蓝墨水一样浓郁地蓝着，有凝然不动的苍鹰像图钉似的进苍天。这里的积雪比较薄，赭色的山岩像礁石一般浮出雪原（我知道要找一块山石狰狞的地方下手，否则叫厚雪一垫，很可能功亏一篑）……

  When climbing a mountain at an altitude of more than 6,000 meters, his heart exploded into pieces in his chest, as if it was about to burst out of his mouth with rapid breathing. Looking up at the cloudy peak and looking down at the unfathomable abyss under my feet, I was only seventeen years old and thought of death for the first time. I thought it was too painful to climb up like this, so I simply pretended to stumble and fell off the cliff...... No one will find out that I did it on purpose, and in such a sinister march, dead things happen often. I sacrificed myself in military operations, and I must also be counted as a small martyr, so that my parents will also have an honorable ...... I calculated everything carefully, just find a steep cliff to carry out the plan of suicide. After a while, the place was chosen. It was a very beautiful cliff, the sky was as blue as pure blue ink, and there were still goshawks entering the sky like thumbpins. The snow here is relatively thin, and the ochre-colored rocks emerge from the snowfield like reefs (I know to find a hideous place to start, otherwise it will be called a thick snow mat, and it is likely to fall short)......一切都策划好了，但是我遇到了最大的困难。我的脚不听我的指挥，想让右脚腾空，可是它紧紧地用脚趾抠住毛皮鞋底儿，鞋底儿粘在酷寒的土地上，丝毫不肯像我计划的那样飞翔而起……我转而命令左脚，它倒是抬起来了，可它不是向下滑动，而是挣扎着向上挪去……青春的机体不服从我的死亡指令，各部分零件出于本能居然独自求生……那一瞬我苦恼至极，生也不成，死也不成，生命为何如此苛待于我？

  Everything was planned, but I encountered the biggest difficulty. My foot did not obey my commands, and wanted to let my right foot take off, but it tightly pinched the fur sole with its toes, and the sole stuck to the cold land, refusing to fly as I had planned...... I turned to command my left foot, and it lifted up, but instead of sliding down, it struggled to move up...... The youthful body did not obey my death orders, and the parts survived alone out of instinct...... At that moment, I was extremely distressed, I couldn't live or die, why did life treat me so harshly?一个老兵牵着咻咻吐白汽的马走过来，他是负责后卫收容的。他说，曼巴2，拉着我的马尾巴吧，它会把你带到山顶。我看了一眼马毛被汗湿成一绺绺的军马，背上驮着掉队者的背包和干粮，已是不堪重负。

  A veteran came over with a horse spitting white steam, and he was in charge of the rearguard's containment. He said, Mamba 2, pull my horse's tail, and it will take you to the top of the mountain. I glanced at the horse's horse, which was soaked with sweat into strands of horse hair, and was already overwhelmed with backpacks and dry food for stragglers on its backs.不。我不。我说。

  No. I don't. I say.老兵痛惜地看着我说，你是不是怕它扬起后蹄踢了你？放心吧，它没有那个劲儿了。在这么陡的山上，它再累也不敢踢你。只要它的蹄子一松劲儿，就得滚到谷里去。它是老马了，懂得这个利害。你就大胆地揪它的尾巴吧。

  The veteran looked at me with regret and said, are you afraid that it will raise its hind hooves and kick you? Don't worry, it doesn't have that energy anymore. On such a steep mountain, no matter how tired it is, it won't dare to kick you. As long as its hooves loosen, it has to roll into the valley. It is an old horse and understands the stakes. Just boldly grab its tail.我迟疑着，久久没有揪那条马尾。

  I hesitated, not pulling the ponytail for a long time.不是害怕马。甚至也不是怜悯马。

  Not afraid of horses. Not even a pity horse.我在考虑自己的尊严。

  I was thinking about my dignity.

  一个战士，揪着马尾巴攀越雪山，这是不是比死还让人难堪？我的意志做出一个回答，生存的本能做出另一个回答。

  A soldier, holding a horse's tail and climbing over a snow-capped mountain, is this more embarrassing than death? My will gives one answer, and my survival instinct gives another.意志在本能面前屈服，我伸出手，揪住了马尾巴……

  Giving in to instinct, I reached out and grabbed the horse's tail......我看到许多年轻的生命永远地留在了万水千山之间。他们发生过悲凉或欣喜的故事，被呼啸的山风卷得毫无痕迹。

  I saw many young lives forever left between thousands of rivers and mountains. They have had stories of sadness or joy, swept away by the howling mountain wind without a trace.我为一个二十岁的班长换过尸衣，脱下被血染红的军装，清理他口袋里的遗物。他兜里装着几块水果糖，纸都磨光了，糖块像一只只斑驳的小乌龟，沾着他的血迹……我一点都不害怕，因为我的兜里也有和他一样的水果糖，这件小小的物品使我觉得他是兄弟。

  I changed the corpse clothes of a twenty-year-old squad leader, took off his blood-stained military uniform, and cleaned up the relics in his pocket. He had a few pieces of fruit candy in his pocket, and the paper was polished, and the sugar cubes were like mottled little turtles, stained with his blood...... I wasn't afraid at all, because I had the same fruit candy in my pocket as him, and this little item made me feel like a brother.我们把他肚子上覆盖的瓷碗取下来。碗里扣着的，是他流出的肠子。敌人的子弹贯穿了他的腹腔，肠管已经变得像铁管一样坚硬，没有办法再填回他的肚子里去了。

  We took off the porcelain bowl covering his stomach. What was buckled in the bowl was his intestines. The enemy's bullets pierced his abdominal cavity, and his intestines had become as hard as iron pipes, and there was no way to fill them back into his stomach.我们给他换上崭新的军装，把风纪扣严严实实地系好。除了他的腰间因为流出的肠子，扎了皮带也显得有些臃肿，真是一个精干的小战士呢。

  We put on a brand new military uniform and fastened the discipline tightly. In addition to the intestines that flowed out of his waist, he also looked a little bloated with a belt, and he was really a capable little warrior.趁人不注意，我在他的衣兜里又放上了几块水果糖。我不敢让别人知道，因为老兵们一定要嘲笑我的。但我真的觉得这个班长需要这几块水果糖。糖是我特意挑的，每一块的糖纸都很完整，硬挺地支棱着，像一种干燥的翅果。

  While no one was paying attention, I put a few more pieces of fruit candy in his pocket. I don't dare to let others know, because the veterans must laugh at me. But I really think this squad leader needs these pieces of fruit candy. I specially picked the sugar, and each piece of sugar paper is very intact, stiffly and stiff, like a kind of dried winged fruit.那个小兵被安葬在阿里高原，距今已经有二十多年了。我想他身边的冻土，有一小块一定微微发甜。他在晴朗的月夜，也许会尝一尝吧？

  The soldier was buried on the Ali Plateau more than 20 years ago. I think there must be a small piece of frozen soil around him that must be slightly sweet. He might taste it on a clear moonlit night, right?三

  Three1980年我转业到北京，在一家工厂的卫生所当医生，后来当了所长。结婚、生子、操持家务……一个女人来到这个世界上该做的事情，我都很认真地做了。贤妻良母好医生，这是人们众口一词的评价。

  In 1980, I moved to Beijing and worked as a doctor in a factory health center, and later became the director. Marriage, childbearing, housekeeping...... What a woman should do when she comes into this world, I do it very seriously. A good wife and a good mother are good doctors, this is the evaluation of people.对一个三十岁的女医生来说，你还需要什么？

  What more do you need for a thirty-year-old female doctor?按说是不需要什么了，我应该安安静静地沿着命运已经勾勒的轨道，盘旋下去。

  It is said that I don't need anything, I should quietly hover along the track that fate has outlined.我虽然从小生活在北京，对北京的一草一木都那样熟悉，此次归来，我却不再是过去的那个我了。怀里揣了那么多藏北的风雪，它们强烈地撞击着我的心脏。我对这个巨大的都市，开始了新的审视。我到过这个国家最偏远最荒凉的地方，在横贯整个中国的旅行中，我知道了它的富饶与贫瘠。我在妖娆的霓虹灯中行走，身旁会突然显现白茫茫的雪原。在文明的喧哗与躁动之间，我倾听到遥远的西部有一座山在虎啸龙吟……

  Although I have lived in Beijing since I was a child and am so familiar with every plant and tree in Beijing, this time I return, I am no longer the same me I used to be. With so many winds and snows in northern Tibet in my arms, they hit my heart strongly. I began a new look at this huge city. I have been to the most remote and desolate places in this country, and in my travels across China, I have learned its richness and barrenness. I was walking in the enchanting neon lights, and a vast white snowfield suddenly appeared beside me. Between the noise and restlessness of civilization, I heard a mountain roaring in the far west......我的父亲有一天对我说，我看你是可以写一点东西的，你为什么不写呢？

  My father said to me one day, I think you can write something, why don't you write?我的父亲是一个很聪明的人，而且在文学艺术方面有很好的天赋。只是由于他们那一代人所处的环境，使他戎马一生，始终未能从事文学。我从他的目光里看到了期望，我决定一试。

  My father was a very intelligent man and had a good talent for literature and art. It was only because of the environment in which their generation lived that he was never able to engage in literature throughout his life. I saw the expectation in his gaze and I decided to give it a try.一个微茫的希望在远方磷火般地闪动。我想用我的笔，告诉世人一些风景和故事。我想让我的父母惊喜。

  A faint hope flashed like phosphorus in the distance. I want to use my pen to tell the world some scenery and stories. I want to surprise my parents.于是在一个普通的日子，我铺开一张洁白的纸。那是在深夜的内科值班室，轮到我值班，恰好没有病人。日光灯管发出咝咝的叫声，四周一片寂静。记忆在蛰伏了多少年后苏醒，将高原的生命与鲜血铺陈于我面前。

  So on an ordinary day, I spread out a piece of white paper. It was in the internal medicine duty room late at night, and it was my turn to be on duty, and there happened to be no patients. The fluorescent lamps sizzled, and there was silence all around. The memory awakened after many years of dormancy, spreading the life and blood of the plateau in front of me.我在高耸的雪山上开始了我为医的生涯，雪山也将它的身影，倾泻于我的笔端。
I started my career as a doctor on the towering snow-capped mountains, and the snow-capped mountains also poured out their figures on the tip of my pen.

未知

  02.到西藏去

  02. Go to Tibet

  小小的年纪，告别了父母，到一个遥远而陌生的地方去，本应该是很伤心的。妈妈到火车站送我的时候，险些哭了。但我心中充满了快乐，到西部去，到高原去，真是一次空前的冒险啊！

  At a young age, it should have been very sad to say goodbye to my parents and go to a distant and unfamiliar place. When my mother came to the train station to see me off, I almost cried. But my heart is full of happiness, going to the west, to the plateau, what an unprecedented adventure!从北京坐上火车，一直向西向西。窗外的景色，由密集的村落演变成空旷的荒野。气候越来越干燥，人烟越来越稀少，绿色逐渐被荒凉的戈壁滩所代替。三天三夜之后，我们这群女孩子到达了新疆的乌鲁木齐。在这里要进行最后的体检，才能决定谁可以到海拔五千米以上的西藏去。

  Take the train from Beijing and go all the way west to the west. The view outside the window evolves from a dense village to an empty wilderness. The climate is getting drier and sparsely populated, and the green is gradually replaced by the desolate Gobi Desert. After three days and three nights, our group of girls arrived in Urumqi, Xinjiang. A final medical examination is required here to decide who can go to Tibet at an altitude of more than 5,000 meters.我的身体一向很好，但这次医生说我的小便化验不正常，要是过几天复查还不合格的话，就要把我退回北京。

  I have always been in good health, but this time the doctor said that my urine test was not normal, and if the re-examination was still unqualified in a few days, I would be sent back to Beijing.这不是“出师未捷身先死”吗？我的探险还没有开始，难道就要这么狼狈地打道回府啦？

  Isn't this "dying before the army succeeds"? My expedition hasn't started yet, am I going to go home in such a hurry?我一定要想出一个办法！

  I must come up with a way!我的目光停留在一个同我最要好的女孩子身上。

  My eyes were fixed on a girl who was the best with me.我悄悄地把她扯到一个僻静的地方，对着她的耳朵说，你说，我们是不是好朋友啊？

  I quietly pulled her to a secluded place and said in her ear, you say, are we good friends?她说，当然是啦。你怎么想起问这个不成问题的问题？

  She said, of course. How do you think of asking this question that is not a problem?我说，既然是好朋友，我向你借一样东西，你一定是借的啦？

  I said, since we are good friends, I borrowed something from you, you must have borrowed it?她一扭头嚷起来，什么东西呀？咱们的东西都是统一发的，我有的，你都有啊！

  She turned her head and shouted, what is it? Our things are all sent uniformly, I have them, you have them!我一把捂住她的嘴说，干吗这么大声？是不是太小气不想借给我？实话说吧，我跟你借的这样东西，对你是一点用处都没有的，但对我的好处就大了！

  I covered her mouth and said, why are you so loud? Are you too stingy and don't want to lend it to me? To be honest, the thing I borrowed from you is of no use to you, but it is of great benefit to me!"她说，那是什么宝贝呀？

  She said, what kind of baby is that?我说，是尿啊！

  I said, it's urine!我把我的打算告诉她，复查的时候把她的尿当成我的标本送上去。她刚开始吓了一跳，然后，很犹豫地说，这不是骗人吗？我说，要是我复查不合格，到不了西藏，被退回北京，我们俩就再也见不到面了，更甭提做朋友了。她想了想，答应了。

  I told her my plan and sent her urine as my specimen during the review. She was startled at first, and then, hesitantly, said, isn't this a lie? I said, if I fail the review, I can't go to Tibet, and I'm sent back to Beijing, the two of us will never see each other again, let alone be friends. She thought about it and agreed.好不容易挨到了复查的那一天，没想到是通知我一个人单独到医院的检查科去。在卫生间里，我拈着盛标本的小瓶子，急得直掉泪。我真想到水龙头那儿，接一点自来水送上去，或者干脆把眼泪送上去化验，那就绝对没问题了。可是，我不敢。你想啊，化验员用的是显微镜，还不一下子就发现我的花招了？万般无奈之下，只好把自己的“标本”交上去了。

  Finally, on the day of the review, I didn't expect to be notified to go to the hospital's examination department alone. In the bathroom, I was holding a small bottle containing the specimen, and I was so anxious that I burst into tears. I really want to go to the faucet, take a little tap water, or simply send tears for testing, then there is absolutely no problem. However, I don't dare. Do you think, the laboratory technician uses a microscope, and he discovered my tricks all at once? In desperation, he had to hand over his "specimen".等待结果的日子，我和我的好朋友都充满了悲哀，以为我们必定分手了。

  On the days of waiting for the results, my good friends and I were filled with sadness, thinking that we must break up.不可思议的是，这一次的化验结果完全正常。

  Incredibly, the test results were completely normal this time.我终于和我的好朋友一道，踏上了遥远的奔赴西藏的道路。

  Finally, together with my good friend, I embarked on the long road to Tibet.

  我们告别了乌鲁木齐，在广阔的戈壁滩与高原上坐了整整十二天的汽车，到达了白雪皑皑的世界屋脊。我在那里待了十年。

  We bid farewell to Urumqi and took a twelve-day car ride on the vast Gobi Desert and plateau to reach the snow-capped roof of the world. I stayed there for ten years.后来，我把这一段有惊无险的遭遇和我的计谋，讲给一位老医生听，口气中充满了得意。没想到，他皱着眉说，幸好你本身的体检合格了。要知道，西藏高原缺氧，氧气只有海平面的一半。要是你的小便有问题，就说明你的肾脏有问题；要是你的肾脏真的有病，又用别人的标本蒙混过关，那是很危险的。

  Later, I told an old doctor about this thrilling encounter and my plan, and my tone was full of pride. Unexpectedly, he frowned and said, fortunately, your own physical examination has passed. You know, the Tibetan plateau lacks oxygen, and the oxygen is only half of the sea level. If you have problems urinating, it means that there is a problem with your kidneys; If your kidneys are really sick and you use other people's specimens to get by, it is very dangerous.我承认他的话很对，但也仍旧很佩服当年那两个十几岁的少女，我们为了友谊和理想，真是很勇敢呢！而且不服气地想，西藏人的肾脏，就个个都是铁打的了？我在高原见过不少肾脏有病的人，活得也很快乐啊！
I admit that he is right, but I still admire the two teenage girls back then, we are really brave for friendship and ideals! And I was not convinced to think, the kidneys of Tibetans are all ironed? I have seen many people with kidney disease on the plateau, and they are living happily!

未知

  03.绿色皮诺曹

  03. Green Pinocchio

  我从小就很想当兵，最主要的动机是喜欢绿色。小时候，每逢妈妈要给我买衣服，我就大叫，要绿的。妈妈生起气来，说，你也不看看自己，毛衣毛裤围巾手套都是绿色，再套上一件绿外衣，活像一只青蛙！我低头一瞧，说，哪怕就是像只绿豆蝇，我也还要绿衣服。

  I have wanted to be a soldier since I was a child, and the main motivation is to like green. When I was a child, whenever my mother wanted to buy me clothes, I would shout for green. Mom got angry and said, you don't look at yourself, sweaters, sweaters, scarves, and gloves are all green, and put on a green coat, like a frog! I looked down and said, even if I look like a mung bean fly, I still want green clothes.当兵多好啊！从此，可以名正言顺地一年到头穿绿衣服，再也没人说你一句闲话。可那时候要当女兵也挺难的，想当的人太多了，僧多粥少。听说男兵和女兵的比例是千分之二点五，也就是说，征一千名男兵，才要两个半女兵，女兵简直像空气中的惰性气体。身体检查严格极了，差不多和当女飞行员同样标准。幸好我那时身高一百七十厘米，两眼裸视力二点零还有富余，心、肝、脾、肺、肾全像刚从工厂造出来一样合格，属于特等甲级身体，经过了一轮又一轮的淘汰，我终于过五关斩六将，拿到了入伍通知书。

  How good it is to be a soldier! From then on, you can legitimately wear green clothes all year round, and no one will gossip about you again. But at that time, it was quite difficult to be a female soldier, there were too many people who wanted to be women, and there were more monks and less porridge. I heard that the ratio of male soldiers to female soldiers is 2.5 per thousand, that is to say, for 1,000 male soldiers, only two and a half female soldiers are needed, and female soldiers are like inert gas in the air. The physical examination is extremely strict, almost the same standard as being a female pilot. Fortunately, I was 170 centimeters tall at that time, with a naked vision of 2.0 and surplus, and my heart, liver, spleen, lungs, and kidneys were as qualified as if they had just been made from the factory, and they belonged to the special Class A body.我几乎不相信自己的好运气，连连问妈妈，您说，事情到了这个份儿上，还会有令人悲痛的变化吗？

  I hardly believed in my good luck, and asked my mother again and again, do you think there will be sad changes when things get to this point?妈妈说，不会吧。你就把通知书放在枕头底下，安心睡个好觉。

  Mom said, no. You just put the notice under your pillow and get a good night's sleep.我说，没穿上绿衣服之前，我可放心不下。

  I said, before I put on the green clothes, I can't rest assured.妈妈说，要变，你穿上军服还会让你脱下，担心也没有用。解放军应该是说话算话的。

  Mom said, if you want to change, you will take it off if you put on a military uniform, and it is useless to worry. The People's Liberation Army should be able to speak and count.发衣服的时候，穿着五颜六色家常衣服的新兵，排成一队，依次从司务长面前走过。司务长像大商场的成衣售货员，眯起眼睛打量着走过的小伙子和姑娘，大声地说，帽子二号……衣服三号……蹲在一旁的上士，就像老鹰抓小鸡一样，手疾眼快取出相应号码的衣物，把衬衣铺在最下面，其余所有东西都堆在上面，一时间好似平地起了一座绿色的小山，然后麻利地把衬衣的两条袖子抻出来，把它们打个结，怀抱里就塞满了崭新的衣物。领了军衣的人，就快乐地抱着这个绿色的半截人，走进一间密闭的小屋。再走出来的时候，就是一个英姿勃勃的兵了。

  When distributing clothes, recruits wearing colorful homely clothes lined up and walked past the secretary in turn. The secretary was like a ready-to-wear salesperson in a big shopping mall, squinting his eyes at the young men and girls walking by, and said loudly, hat number two...... Clothing number three...... The sergeant squatting on the side, like an eagle catching a chicken, quickly took out the clothes with the corresponding number, spread the shirt at the bottom, and piled everything else on it, as if a green hill had risen on the ground for a while, and then quickly stretched out the two sleeves of the shirt, tied them into a knot, and stuffed the arms with brand new clothes. The person who received the military uniform happily hugged the green half of the man and walked into a closed hut. When he came out again, he was a heroic soldier.好不容易轮到我的时候，司务长目测了一下，自言自语说，这个兵啊，长得不合尺寸。穿一号的小，穿特号的又大……

  When it was finally my turn, the secretary looked at it and said to himself, this soldier is not the size. Wearing a small size and a large size wearing a special size......我赶紧说，您甭为难。我要特号的。

  I hurriedly said, don't be embarrassed. I want a special number.司务长说，咦？女孩子都愿意穿得比较秀气，你这个兵倒奇怪。发给你特号的衣服，到时候裤腿踩到脚底下，窝窝囊囊，一不留神摔个大马趴，可别怪我。

  The director said, huh? Girls are willing to dress more delicately, but you are strange. The clothes I gave you a special number, when the trouser legs stepped under the soles of your feet, you were squishy, and you fell on a big horse if you didn't pay attention, don't blame me.我忙说，不怪不怪，绝不找你。我妈说过，衣服是会缩水的，当然是大点好了。裤腿长了可以裁，要是短了，就得自己找布接，多不合算！

  I hurriedly said, no blame, no blame, I will never look for you. My mother said that clothes will shrink, of course, it is better to be bigger. If the trouser legs are long, they can be cut, but if they are short, you have to find a cloth connection yourself, which is not cost-effective!司务长说，看不出来，你小小年纪，还挺会过日子的。好吧，依你，给特号。

  The director said, I can't see that you are young and can live quite well. Well, it's up to you, give a special number.

  我欢天喜地地去换衣服，一试之下，特号衣服果然名不虚传，上衣还凑合，裤子好像是给跳高运动员预备的，腿长无比。我把裤脚挽起来两折，自觉比较利索了，抱着旧衣服正准备从更衣小屋往外走，先换好军衣的一个女孩端详着我说，你像一个打鱼的。

  I happily went to change my clothes, and after a try, the special clothes really lived up to their name, the top was still made, and the pants seemed to be prepared for high jumpers, and the legs were extremely long. I rolled up my trousers in half, feeling more neat, holding my old clothes and was about to walk out of the changing room, a girl who had changed into a military uniform looked at me and said, you look like a fisherman.我看了她一眼，屋里光线不好，看不清眉眼，只觉得军装好像是特地比量她的身材做的，妥帖极了。我愤愤地说，你的意思是我不像一个兵？

  I glanced at her, the light in the room was not good, I couldn't see her eyebrows clearly, I just felt that the military uniform seemed to be specially made to measure her figure, which was very appropriate. I said indignantly, you mean I don't look like a soldier?她轻轻笑笑，露出雪白的牙说，你还是像一个兵的，只不过是个邋遢兵。

  She smiled softly, showed her snow-white teeth and said, you are still like a soldier, but a sloppy soldier.她的口气很老练，虽然军装同我一样没钉领章，军龄倒好像已有一百年。我没好气儿地说，兵工厂的人太没有节约观念了，裤子做得这么大，使人穿上像皮诺曹。

  Her tone is very sophisticated, although the military uniform is the same as mine, but the military experience seems to be a hundred years. I said angrily that the people in the arsenal had no concept of thrift, and the pants were made so big that people wore them like Pinocchio.她说，皮诺曹是谁？是咱们一块儿当女兵的吗？我叫小如，你叫什么？

  She said, who is Pinocchio? Are we here to be female soldiers? My name is Xiaoru, what is your name?我说，你就叫我小毕好了。咱们就甭理那个姓皮的家伙了，反正三言两语也说不清它的来历，还是讨论这条讨厌的裤子吧。我想把它剪掉一截，哪儿有剪刀？

  I said, you can call me Xiao Bi. Let's ignore the guy surnamed Pi, anyway, I can't tell where it came from in a few words, let's discuss these pesky pants. I want to cut it off, where are the scissors?小如说，剪了不好。一剪子下去倒是痛快，以后要是觉得短了，或者你再长个儿了，就没法补救了。不到万不得已，还是别干一锤子买卖的事。

  Xiaoru said, it's not good to cut it. It's fun to cut it down, but if you feel short in the future, or if you grow taller, you can't remedy it. Unless it is a last resort, it is better not to do a hammer deal.我不耐烦了，说，你倒是想得蛮周到，可大道理以后慢慢说，现在要解决的问题是，我怎么走出这间房子？

  I became impatient and said, you are quite thoughtful, but the truth will be slowly said later, and the problem to be solved now is, how can I get out of this house?小如笑起来，说，真是个急性子。一条裤子少说要穿一年，可你连这么几分钟时间都不愿等，活该你像那个姓皮的。

  Xiaoru laughed and said, what an impatient person. A pair of pants will take a year to wear, but you don't even want to wait for so many minutes, you deserve to be like that one surnamed Pi.想起木偶皮诺曹的狼狈样，我只好安静下来，听小如的主意。

  Thinking of the embarrassment of the puppet Pinocchio, I had to quiet down and listen to Xiaoru's idea.小如不说话，往外走。我说，你干吗去？

  Xiaoru didn't speak and walked out. I said, why are you going?她说，我去找司务长借针线。

  She said, I went to the secretary to borrow a needle and thread.我忙拦住说，使不得。

  I hurriedly stopped and said, no way.小如说，为什么呢？

  Xiaoru said, why?我苦着脸说，你不知道，我刚才跟司务长夸了口的，说衣服大了和他没关系。现在你去求他，不是太丢我的面子吗！

  I said with a bitter face, you don't know, I just boasted to the secretary, saying that the clothes are big and have nothing to do with him. Now you go and beg him, isn't it too much of a shame for me!"小如说，你就放心好了。

  Xiaoru said, don't worry.我竖起耳朵听外面小如和司务长的对话。小如说话的声调带一点乡下口音，但是很甜，好像那种高高地长在地里的玉米秸，清凉而柔韧。她说，司务长，借我一根细细的针、一条长长的线，好吗？

  I pricked up my ears to listen to the conversation between Xiaoru and the secretary outside. Xiaoru's tone has a slight country accent, but it is very sweet, like the corn stalks growing high in the ground, cool and flexible. She said, Director, borrow me a thin needle and a long thread, okay?硬邦邦的司务长好像被糖醋过了，声音变得软绵绵，说，针啊有有，只不过又粗又大，你就凑合着使吧，留神别扎了手。只是你要针线干什么？

  The hard secretary seemed to have been sweet and sour, and his voice became soft, saying, there are needles, but they are thick and big, you can make do, be careful not to prick your hands. But what do you want needle and thread for?缝衣服啊。

  Sew clothes.缝什么衣服？司务长立刻警觉起来。

  What clothes to sew? The secretary immediately became alert.缝你发给我们的衣服啊。小如很机智地回答。

  Sew the clothes you sent us. Xiaoru replied very wittily.我发给你们的衣服都是新的，哪里用得着缝？莫不是有什么破损的地方，你拿来，我给你换。然后再找被服厂的人理论。司务长很负责地说。

  The clothes I sent you are all new, where can you use sewing?" Could it be that there is something damaged, you bring it, and I will replace it for you." Then find the people in the quilt factory to theorize. The secretary said responsibly.小如笑笑，说，没那么严重。我只不过是想把衣服改一改。

  Xiaoru smiled and said, it's not that serious. I just want to change my clothes.司务长如临大敌，严肃起来，说，你是新兵，我是老兵，必要的规矩要告诉你。军装是不能任意改的，大家是个统一的整体。

  The secretary was like facing a great enemy, became serious, and said, you are a recruit, I am a veteran, and I want to tell you the necessary rules. Military uniforms cannot be changed arbitrarily, everyone is a unified whole.小如不理这一套，说，衣服太肥了，你总不能让我们一甩袖子，就像舞台上唱戏的青衣啊。

  Xiao Ru ignored this set and said, the clothes are too fat, you can't let us throw off our sleeves, just like the green clothes singing on the stage.司务长嘿嘿笑着说，袖子改得太瘦了，打靶的时候弯不过肘子来，小心吃鸭蛋。

  The secretary smiled and said, the sleeves have been changed too thin, and you can't bend your elbows when shooting targets, so be careful to eat duck eggs.小如说，鸭蛋多了就腌起来呗，腌得蛋黄流红油，就着馒头吃，香死个人！

  Xiaoru said, if there are too many duck eggs, marinate them, marinate the yolk with red oil, and eat it with steamed buns, which is fragrant to death!司务长说不过小如，就把针线给了小如。小如进了屋，拿过我的裤子，开始飞针走线，一会儿就把裤腿改得熨熨帖帖。我穿上后，举手投足，再不拖泥带水。

  The director couldn't say anything to Xiaoru, so he gave Xiaoru the needle and thread. Xiaoru entered the house, took my pants, and began to fly needles, and after a while, she changed her trouser legs to iron and iron. After I put it on, I gesture and don't drag my feet again.我说，小如，谢谢你。

  I said, Xiaoru, thank you.小如说，不必谢，我们乡下的女孩子，从小就要学会使针线，要不长大了，没人娶你做媳妇。

  Xiaoru said, no need to thank you, our girls in the countryside have to learn to use needles and threads since they were young, or if they grow up, no one will marry you as a daughter-in-law.

  我说，哎呀呀，像你这样的一手好活计，岂不是说媒的要挤破门！像我这样的，只好像个坏橘子一般，剩在筐里没人要了。

  I said, oh, if you are a good job, doesn't it mean that the matchmaker wants to squeeze the door! People like me are just like a bad orange, and no one wants them left in the basket.小如说，小声点，这种玩笑还是少开的好。你知道吗？当兵的时候是不准谈恋爱的。

  Xiaoru said, be quiet, it's better to make less jokes. Do you know? When you are a soldier, you are not allowed to fall in love.我连忙闭了嘴，要晓得为穿上这套绿衣服，我是多么费尽心机，哪能稀里糊涂地就叫人打发回家了。

  I quickly closed my mouth, knowing how hard I had tried to put on this green dress, how could I send someone home in a daze.等我们走出密闭的小屋时，司务长看了看我的裤子，叹了口气说，你是特号的身子一号的腿。

  When we walked out of the closed cabin, the secretary looked at my pants, sighed and said, you are the leg of the special body No. 1.我听了怒火中烧，这意思不就是我身子长腿短吗？哪个女孩子爱听这种话！我狠狠地瞪了他一眼，可惜司务长正瞧着别的地方，对我的愤怒没反应。不管怎么说，从今天开始，我成为一个真正的兵了。

  I was furious when I heard this, doesn't that mean that I have a long body and short legs? What girl loves to hear this kind of thing! I glared at him fiercely, but unfortunately the secretary was looking elsewhere and did not respond to my anger. In any case, from today onwards, I became a real soldier.

未知

  04.白云剪裁的衣服

  04. Clothes cut by white clouds

  河莲个儿矮，像个敦实的土丘。司务长低估了她的胖，给了一套正二号的军装。河莲勉强把自己装了进去，觉得憋得慌，大叫起来，说上衣的第二颗扣子压迫了心脏，喘不过气来。司务长只好给她去换副号衣服。

  He Lian is short, like a solid mound. The secretary underestimated her fatness and gave her a military uniform of number two. Ha Lian barely put herself in, feeling so panicked that she screamed, saying that the second button of her shirt pressed her heart and she couldn't breathe. The secretary had no choice but to change her sub-number clothes.军衣的型号挺奇怪，号数愈大的尺寸愈小。比如正五号衣服，中学生都能穿，但要是正一号，就得一米八以上的个头才撑得起来。当然，这讲的是标准身材，要是你长得比较圆滚，就得穿副号军装。副号的意思，是长度同正号一样，宽窄要肥出许多。女孩子一般都很忌讳副号。你想啊，军装为了行军打仗的方便，本来就宽宽大大，再一“副”，就更没款没型了。但河莲是个敢想敢说的女孩，她才不会为了别人的眼睛，让自己的心肺受委屈。

  The model of the military uniform is quite strange, the larger the number, the smaller the size. For example, No. 5 clothes can be worn by middle school students, but if they are No. 1, they have to be more than 1.8 meters tall to hold up. Of course, this is about the standard figure, if you are relatively round, you have to wear a secondary military uniform. The meaning of the secondary number is that the length is the same as the regular number, and the width is much fatter. Girls are generally very taboo about sub-numbers. You think, for the convenience of marching and fighting, military uniforms are originally wide and wide, and if they are "secondary", they will be even more stylish. But Ha Lian is a girl who dares to think and speak, so she will not let her heart and lungs be wronged for the eyes of others.正号军装是大路货，后勤部门保证供应。副号属于稀少品种，司务长颇费了一番心思，恨不能跟后勤部门说河莲胖得像个孕妇，才算领来一套副二号的衣服。

  The regular military uniform is a big road, and the logistics department guarantees the supply. The deputy number is a rare breed, and the secretary took a lot of effort, wishing he could tell the logistics department that He Lian was as fat as a pregnant woman, so he could get a set of clothes for deputy number two.试穿之后，河莲大为满意。不仅她的心脏跳动正常，这套衣服还有许多妙不可言的好处。一般衣服都是军绿色，好像夏天的松树林，这种独特的颜色有一个雄赳赳的名字，叫作“国防绿”。河莲的副号却是安宁的黄绿色，好像秋风扫过的草原，温暖而朴素。普通的衣服都是平纹布，河莲的衣服却是“人字呢”的。虽说它不是真正的呢子，只是布的纹路互相交叉，好像一行行一排排细密的“人”字，故而得了这样一个考究的名字，但看起来要比平纹布挺括得多。最最重要的是，河莲的军装是四个兜的！

  After trying it on, Ha Lian was very satisfied. Not only does her heart beat normally, but this outfit has many wonderful benefits. The general clothes are military green, like pine forests in summer, and this unique color has a majestic name, called "national defense green". The subtitle of He Lian is a peaceful yellow-green, like a grassland swept by the autumn wind, warm and simple. Ordinary clothes are plain fabric, but Ha Lian's clothes are "herring". Although it is not a real wool, it is just that the lines of the cloth intersect with each other, like rows of fine "people" characters, so it got such a sophisticated name, but it looks much more crisp than plain weave. The most important thing is that Ha Lian's military uniform is four pockets!没有当过兵的人，不知道衣兜的重要性。它除了装东西之外，更是一个标志。战士服只在胸前有两个口袋，提升了干部，才能穿有四个口袋的上衣。口袋因此成了某种地位的象征。不过女兵喜欢四个兜的衣服，倒不是势利的缘故。因为胸高，随身又总有些小零碎儿，比如手绢、钢笔什么的要经常带着，若衣服下摆没有兜，只得都塞在胸前，鼓鼓囊囊，像藏了一窝鸽子，显得很不利落。

  People who have never been soldiers do not know the importance of clothing pockets. In addition to holding things, it is also a sign. The soldier's uniform only has two pockets on the chest, and only after the cadre is promoted can a top with four pockets be worn. The pocket thus became a status symbol. However, female soldiers like clothes with four pockets, not because of snobbery. Because of the high chest, there are always some small bits and pieces with you, such as handkerchiefs, pens, etc., if there is no pocket on the hem of the clothes, you have to stuff them all in front of your chest, bulging, like hiding a nest of pigeons, which is very unfavorable.副号有这么多优越性，大家都去找司务长要求换军装。司务长火了，说没见过这么难缠的兵！婆婆妈妈的，谁要是不想干了，就向后转，回家去，爱穿什么穿什么！

  The sub-number has so many advantages that everyone went to the secretary to ask for a change of uniform. The secretary was angry and said that he had never seen such a difficult soldier! Mother-in-law's, if anyone doesn't want to do it, turn back, go home, and wear whatever you like!话说到如此凶狠的份儿上，我们只好乖乖地穿正号衣服。河莲独自乐了没几天，发现人字呢也有弊病。洗衣的时候，刚把衣服泡在脸盆里，就有浑黄的汤沁出来。刚开始，河莲以为衣服格外脏，就拼命搓，搓得两个手掌像红萝卜一样。洗了几水之后，正号衣服还像葱叶一般绿，河莲的副号军衣已泛出菜心般的黄。

  Speaking of such ferocity, we had to obediently wear the right clothes. He Lian had fun alone for a few days, and found that the herringbone also had drawbacks. When washing, as soon as I soaked the clothes in the basin, a yellow soup came out. At first, Ha Lian thought that her clothes were particularly dirty, so she rubbed them desperately, rubbing her palms like carrots. After washing a few waters, the legitimate clothes were still as green as green onion leaves, and He Lian's sub-number military uniform had turned yellow like cabbage.一天，果平大惊小怪地喊起来，河莲，要是敌机轰炸，第一个阵亡的肯定是你！

  One day, Guo Ping shouted in a fuss, He Lian, if the enemy plane bombs, you will definitely be the first to die!我们大吃一惊，不知果平为何发此恶毒咒语。

  We were taken aback and didn't know why Guohing cast this vicious spell.果平说，你们想啊，我们都有绿色伪装，只有河莲的衣服像经了霜的野草，还不一下就被发现了？

  Guo Ping said, you think, we all have green camouflage, only He Lian's clothes are like frosted weeds, and they are discovered in a hurry?河莲脑子快，立即反驳说，依我看，还不知谁第一个为国捐躯呢！没准儿正是你们这些国防绿。

  He Lian was quick-witted, and immediately retorted, in my opinion, I don't know who was the first to sacrifice his life for the country! Maybe it's you national defense greens.所有穿正号军装的都不干了，定要河莲说个清楚。

  All those wearing regular military uniforms are gone, and He Lian must make it clear.河莲不慌不忙地说，要是春夏季节开仗，大地一片翠绿，自然你们的衣服是最好的保护色。可要是秋天呢？丰收在望，落叶满地，到处都是金黄，肯定是我的衣服伪装性更好。

  He Lian said calmly, if the war starts in spring and summer, the earth will be green, and naturally your clothes will be the best protective color. But what if it's autumn? The harvest is in sight, the fallen leaves are all over the ground, and there is gold everywhere, it must be that my clothes are better camouflaged.大家你看看我、我看看你，不得不承认河莲的话有几分道理，只好自我解嘲道，反正我们也不是敌人的参谋长，谁知道仗哪会儿打？要是春夏开战，河莲你就留在后方做饭。要是秋天开战，河莲你就一个人打冲锋。

  Everyone, look at me, I look at you, I have to admit that He Lian's words have some truth, so I have to laugh at myself, anyway, we are not the enemy's chief of staff, who knows when the battle will be fought? If there is a war in spring and summer, Ha Lian you will stay in the rear to cook. If there is a war in the fall, Ha Lian will charge alone.河莲也不理我们，只是更起劲儿地洗军装，盆子里倒进一大堆洗衣粉，激起的泡沫，好像有一百只大螃蟹愤怒地吞云吐雾。她还专拣大太阳当头的日子，在外面晒衣服。这样，没用多长时间，副号不断褪色，最后简直变成白的了。

  He Lian ignored us, but washed his military uniform even harder, poured a lot of laundry detergent into the basin, and the foam stirred up seemed to be a hundred big crabs angrily swallowing clouds and mist. She also chose a day when the sun was shining to dry her clothes outside. In this way, it didn't take long for the sub-number to fade and finally turn white.古代有句俗话叫：男要俏，一身皂；女要俏，一身孝。

  There is an ancient saying: Men should be pretty, and they should be dressed in soap; Women should be beautiful and filial.

  关于“皂”到底是什么色，我们争论了好长时间，基本上统一了意见，认定是一种近乎月亮和蓝天混合在一起的颜色。关于“孝”，倒是没有什么争论的，就是医院里没有染上血的棉花颜色了。河莲在黎明的晨光里，背对着太阳走向我们的时候，白衣白裤，好像云彩剪裁做成的军装。

  We argued for a long time about what color "soap" was, and basically unified our opinion, believing that it was a color that was almost a mixture of the moon and the blue sky. There is no debate about "filial piety", that is, there is no blood-stained cotton color in the hospital. When He Lian walked towards us with her back to the sun in the morning light of dawn, she was dressed in white clothes and white pants, like a military uniform made of clouds.正号们充满嫉妒之心，果平甚至痛下决心，要在一年之内，把自己吃成一个大胖子，明年就可名正言顺地领人字呢副二号了。

  The regular numbers were full of jealousy, and Guo Ping even made up his mind to eat himself into a big fat man within a year, and next year he would be able to rightfully lead the second pair of people.看着果平像北京填鸭似的大吃特吃，小如提醒她，人字呢因为染料不过关，属淘汰产品，已经不生产了。河莲领的是库底子，谁知明年会怎样？若是你辛辛苦苦吃成相扑手模样，明年的副号已变成国防绿，你岂不白胖了一回？

  Seeing Guoping eating like a Peking duck, Xiaoru reminded her that the herringbone is no longer produced because the dye is not up to par and is an obsolete product. He Lian is led by Kudizi, who knows what will happen next year? If you work hard to become a sumo wrestler, next year's sub-number has become national defense green, won't you gain weight in vain?果平这才放慢了胡吃海塞的速度。

  Only then did Guo Ping slow down the speed of eating Haisai.我问河莲，你把衣服洗得这样白，是否准备冬天打仗的时候，一个人趴在雪地上，狙击敌人？你不要闹个人英雄主义，要知道，冬天的伪装并不难办，只要每个人披上一条白床单，任你火眼金睛也发现不了埋伏。

  I asked He Lian, you wash your clothes so white, are you preparing to fight in winter, lying on the snow alone and sniping the enemy? Don't make personal heroism, you know, winter disguise is not difficult, as long as everyone wears a white sheet, you can't find an ambush even if you are hot.河莲说，你以为我是孤胆英雄？你不穿这衣服，不知它的毛病。特别不经脏，刚穿一两天，袖口就黑得像套了一圈猴皮筋，抹了机油似的，所以，我就老得洗。

  Ha Lian said, do you think I am a lone hero? If you don't wear this dress, you don't know what's wrong with it. It's very dirty, and after just wearing it for a day or two, the cuffs are as black as a circle of monkey rubber bands and oiled, so I'm old and washable.练习匍匐前进，连长一个鱼跃，趴到草丛中，泥土四溅。女孩子虽然酷爱干净，但连长这般身先士卒，也就只好奋不顾身地扑过去，手脚并用，在粗糙的草叶上敏捷地爬行。草汁和着汗水涂抹在脸上，人好像流了绿色的血。

  Practice crawling forward, and the company leader jumped a fish, lying down in the grass, and the mud was splashed. Although the girl loves to be clean, the company commander took the lead so much that she had to pounce on it, using her hands and feet, and crawling agilely on the rough blades of grass. Grass juice and sweat were smeared on the face, and the person seemed to have green blood.所有的人都趴下了，唯有河莲笔直地站在那里。

  Everyone fell down, except for He Lian standing straight there.你为什么不卧倒？连长的好奇更大于震怒，在他当兵若干年的历史中，还从未看到过一个面对命令敢于不趴下的士兵。

  Why don't you lie down? The company commander's curiosity was greater than anger, and in his several years of military service, he had never seen a soldier who dared not lie down in the face of orders.我的衣服颜色浅，趴在这样的泥土里，再也洗不干净了。河莲理直气壮。

  My clothes are light-colored, lying in such dirt, and I can no longer wash them. He Lian is justified and strong.是衣服重要还是胜利重要？如果在战场上，你不卧倒，衣服可能始终干净，但你的小命就没有啦！连长声色俱厉。

  Is it the clothes or the victory that matters? If you don't lie down on the battlefield, your clothes may always be clean, but your life will be gone! The company commander's voice and expression were fierce.我是傻子吗？到了打仗的时候，我自然知道生命比衣服更重要。炮声一响，我就像邱少云一样趴在地上，纹丝不动。河莲才不吃他那一套，有板有眼地回答。我们都忍不住笑起来。

  Am I a fool? When it came time to fight, I naturally knew that life was more important than clothes. As soon as the cannon sounded, I lay on the ground like Qiu Shaoyun, motionless. He Lian didn't eat his set, and replied with a clear eye. We all couldn't help but laugh.连长大怒，认为河莲没有战斗观念，目无上级，给了她一个队前警告。看得出，河莲非常不服，但是有什么办法呢？一个小兵，而且是个新兵，哪里有你说话的份儿！我们顿生兔死狐悲之心，希望自己快快地老起来，满脸皱纹，穿破十套军装，就有了倚老卖老的资格。比如我们的班长，都是通信部队来的老兵，她们可以自由自在地打闹和嗑瓜子，连长皱皱眉，一声也不敢吭。

  The company commander was furious, thinking that He Lian had no concept of combat and had no superiors, and gave her a warning in front of the team. It can be seen that He Lian is very dissatisfied, but what can be done? A small soldier, and a recruit, where is your part to speak! We suddenly felt sad and sad, hoping that we would grow old quickly, with wrinkles on our faces and wearing ten sets of military uniforms, and we would have the qualifications to rely on the old and sell the old. For example, our squad leaders are all veterans from the communication unit, and they can play and eat melon seeds freely, but the company commander frowned and did not dare to say a word.由于不断地卧倒，草绿色军装很快变成灰黑，勤快的人隔两天洗一回，使它勉强保持着衣服的本色。我是个懒虫，心想反正洗了也是脏，不洗也是脏，索性由它脏着好了。好在也不是我一个人不成嘴脸，大家基本上都是暗无天日。

  Due to the constant lying down, the grass green military uniform quickly turned gray and black, and diligent people washed it every two days, so that it barely maintained the true color of the clothes. I was a lazy person, thinking that it would be dirty if I washed it anyway, and it would be dirty if I didn't wash it, so I just let it get dirty. Fortunately, I'm not alone, everyone is basically dark.一天连长看到我，咧着嘴说，我从来没有看到过像你这么脏的女兵。

  One day, the company commander saw me and grinned and said, I have never seen a female soldier as dirty as you.我说，这是节约啊。

  I said, this is saving.连长很奇怪，说，脏衣服比干净的衣服更耐磨吗？我当了这么多年兵，从没听说过。

  The company commander was very strange, saying, is dirty clothes more wear-resistant than clean clothes? I have been a soldier for so many years and have never heard of it.我说，每天都洗衣服，要用掉多少洗衣粉和肥皂？多少时间？多少力气？搭在铁丝上，水珠会让铁丝生锈，日子久了，铁丝还可能会被压断……只要不洗衣服，这些岂不都省了？

  I said, how much laundry detergent and soap do you use to wash clothes every day? How much time? How much strength? On the wire, water droplets will rust the wire, and over time, the wire may be crushed...... As long as you don't wash your clothes, won't these be saved?连长第一次听到这种逻辑，气得咻咻喘，可一时也没话好说。但他似乎怀恨在心，在紧接下来的射击训练中，故意不指导我和河莲。别人托着枪练习瞄准，连长会耐心地趴在旁边，从瞄准镜中观察他们的动作是否符合要领，矫正他们有毛病的动作。走到我和河莲身旁，他总是淡淡地说，你们俩还需要辅导啊？都是很见过世面的老兵了，一个知道战斗英雄邱少云，一个是节约模范，到了靶场上，打个优秀是没说的了。

  The company commander heard this logic for the first time, and he was so angry that he couldn't say anything for a while. But he seemed to hold a grudge and deliberately did not instruct me and Ha Lian in the next shooting training. When others practice aiming with guns, the company commander will patiently lie next to them, observe whether their movements are in line with the essentials from the scope, and correct their faulty movements. Walking next to me and He Lian, he always said lightly, do you two still need tutoring? They are all veterans who have seen the world very well, one knows the combat hero Qiu Shaoyun, and the other is a model of thrift, and when he arrives at the shooting range, there is nothing to say about playing excellently.我和河莲苦着脸。多倒霉啊，刚当新兵，就和顶头上司结下冤仇。我使劲儿打了一下军衣的下襟，好像它是一个有生命的小动物。所有的麻烦，都是衣服惹出来的。当然啦，结果是除了军衣冒出一股尘土以外，疼的还是我的手和肚子。

  He Lian and I made bitter faces. How unlucky, as soon as he became a recruit, he made a grudge against his immediate boss. I tapped the hem of my military uniform vigorously, as if it were a living animal. All the trouble is caused by clothes. Of course, the result was that in addition to a cloud of dust coming out of the military uniform, it was my hands and stomach that hurt.晚饭后，河莲和我坐在葡萄架下商量，连长这么恨我们，怎么办呢？要不然，我从此不洗衣服，尽快把白军装穿成黑的，连长是不是就会笑口常开？河莲手托着腮帮，好像牙疼般地说。

  After dinner, He Lian and I sat under the grape trellis and discussed, what should we do if the company commander hates us so much? Otherwise, if I don't wash my clothes and wear the white military uniform black as soon as possible, will the company commander smile all the time? He Lian held her cheek in her hand and said as if she had a toothache.我没好气儿地答，做梦吧！我的衣服倒是黑的，可连长还不是耿耿于怀？关键是我们顶撞了他。俗话说，连长连长，半个皇上。咱们再怎么赔笑脸，也没法挽回影响啦。

  I replied angrily, dream! My clothes are black, but isn't the company commander worried about it? The point is that we contradicted him. As the saying goes, the company commander is half the emperor. No matter how much we lose our smiling faces, we can't undo the impact.河莲倔强地说，你猜，连长现在最希望我们干什么？

  He Lian said stubbornly, guess what the company commander wants us to do most now?我把葡萄藤卷曲的须子含在嘴里嚼着，苦涩的清水像小水枪一样滋在舌头上，酸得人打寒战。我说，他最巴望着咱俩在射击场上吃鸭蛋吧。

  I chewed the curly whiskers of the grapevines in my mouth, and the bitter water nourished my tongue like a small water gun, souring and shivering. I said, he is most looking forward to the two of us eating duck eggs on the shooting range.河莲说，英雄所见略同。我们现在只有用行动证实自己是个好兵。要不，就会被人指着脊梁骨耻笑。

  He Lian said that the hero's vision is roughly the same. We can only prove that we are good soldiers with our actions. Otherwise, you will be pointed at the spine and laughed at.

  人们多以为爱可以给人以力量，其实，憋着一口气的劲头更是大得可怕。我和河莲从此抓紧一切时间练习瞄准，每天趴在地上，胳膊肘磨破了皮，脖子上永远淌着几条透明的蚯蚓。口中念念有词，把射击要领背得像父母的名字一样熟，看到任何物体，想的都是“三点成一线”的口诀。至于军装，再不去理它，脏得简直没法提，活似两个卖炭翁。

  People often think that love can give people strength, but in fact, the momentum of holding a breath is even more terrifying. From then on, He Lian and I seized all the time to practice aiming, lying on the ground every day, our elbows worn out of the skin, and a few transparent earthworms always flowing around our necks. He muttered words in his mouth, memorized the essentials of shooting as familiar as his parents' names, and when he saw any object, he thought of the mantra of "three points into a line". As for the military uniform, if you don't pay attention to it, it is so dirty that you can't mention it, like two charcoal sellers.连长还是不理我们。好在射击要领也不是他的专利，班长和其他人也可以指导我们。再有什么不明白的，我和河莲就自己揣摩，争取自学成才。

  The company commander still ignored us. Fortunately, the essentials of shooting are not his patent, and the squad leader and others can also guide us. If there is anything we don't understand, He Lian and I will figure it out by ourselves and strive to be self-taught.实弹射击的时候到了。靶场上的气氛很森严，掩体里等待报靶的士兵戴着亮闪闪的钢盔，在远处神出鬼没。二百米开外的半身胸环靶，在阳光下好似幻影。我不由得紧张，手心像攥了两把糨糊，黏黏糊糊。我看看河莲，她倒一副胸有成竹的模样。我也定了心，心想到了这个关头，你腿肚子发软，只会把事情弄得更糟，索性豁出去拼了。

  It's time for live ammunition. The atmosphere on the shooting range was very strict, and the soldiers waiting for the target in the bunker wore shiny steel helmets and were elusive in the distance. The half-body chest ring target 200 meters away looks like a phantom in the sun. I couldn't help but be nervous, my palms seemed to be holding two handfuls of paste, sticky. I looked at He Lian, and she looked confident. I also made up my mind, thinking that at this juncture, your legs and stomach are weak, which will only make things worse, so I simply give up and fight.枪声响起来。我的第一感觉，是它绝没有想象中的响亮，只相当于一个中等二踢脚崩出的动静。对真枪实弹声音的失望，使我的心很快宁静下来。偷眼看看连长，他似乎比我们还要紧张，目光炯炯地注视着一个个进入射位的女兵。每逢射手扣扳机的时候，他颊上的肌肉就会跳动一下，令人猜到他是牙关紧咬。

  Gunshots rang out. My first feeling was that it was by no means as loud as I imagined, just equivalent to the movement of a medium second kick. The disappointment of the sound of real guns and live ammunition quickly calmed my heart. Stealing a glance at the company commander, he seemed to be more nervous than us, staring brightly at the female soldiers who entered the shooting position. Whenever the shooter pulls the trigger, the muscles on his cheek jump, making people guess that he is clenching his teeth.我打了个“良好”。说不上很理想，但我已殚精竭虑。

  I typed "good". It's not ideal, but I've done my best.河莲平时的眼神不怎么好，没想到九发子弹竟打出了八十六环的优秀成绩，特别是她前八发子弹，居然是发发命中十环，简直是个神枪手。唯一美中不足的是，最后一枪，不知是何差池，江郎才尽，只中了六环。

  He Lian's eyes are usually not very good, but she didn't expect that nine bullets would hit an excellent result of eighty-six rings, especially her first eight bullets, which actually hit ten rings, which was simply a sharpshooter. The only fly in the ointment is that the last shot, I don't know what kind of mistake it was, Jiang Lang was exhausted, and only hit the sixth ring.不管怎么说，河莲为自己大大地挣回了面子。当连长向她走来的时候，我们就直直地盯着连长，看他对这个自己不喜欢但创造出优异成绩的刺儿头兵，如何反应。

  In any case, He Lian earned a lot of face for herself. When the company commander walked towards her, we stared straight at the company commander to see how he reacted to this assassin who didn't like him but created excellent results.连长仿佛什么事也不曾发生过的样子，对河莲说，要是你最后一枪打得再从容些，就能得满环，也许我会为你报个功呢。可惜了。

  The company commander seemed to have never happened, and said to He Lian, if you shoot the last shot more calmly, you can get a full ring, maybe I will repay you. It's a pity.河莲刚查完自己的靶纸，不服气地说，我这最后一枪，端端正正地打到了敌人的脑袋瓜上。我看这报靶的环数定得不科学。若打到右胸偏上的位置，按规定就是八环，可谁都知道，那地方离心脏远着呢，并不一定会置人于死地。我的这个六环，正中人的太阳穴，明摆着，一枪就能取了人性命。

  As soon as He Lian finished checking her target paper, she said unconvincedly, "My last shot hit the enemy's head neatly." I think the number of rings of this target is unscientific. If it hits the upper position of the right chest, it is the eighth ring according to the regulations, but everyone knows that the place is far from the heart, and it may not necessarily put people to death. My six rings, right in the temple, are clearly one shot can take a person's life.我们一听，都觉得河莲说得有理，且看连长如何答对。

  When we heard this, we all felt that He Lian was reasonable, and let's see how the company commander answered correctly.连长微微一笑说，河莲，没想到，你还有一套打不准的理论。可是我问你，瞄准的时候，你瞄的是敌人的脑袋还是敌人的胸脯？

  The company commander smiled slightly and said, He Lian, I didn't expect that you still have a set of inaccurate theories. But let me ask you, when aiming, are you aiming at the enemy's head or the enemy's chest?河莲说，连长你这个问题难不倒我。瞄准的要领是准星、缺口和胸环靶的下沿正中呈一条直线，当然是胸脯了……

  He Lian said, company commander, you can't trouble me. The key to aiming is that the crosshair, notch and chest ring target are in a straight line in the middle of the lower edge, of course, the chest......连长用一个坚决的手势，制止了河莲略带卖弄的背诵。他可不想听一个新兵，把自己烂熟于心的拿手好戏再演练一遍。好了，你既然瞄准的是敌人的肚子，结果子弹却打到了头上，就算敌人躺倒了，也是瞎猫碰到了死耗子，没什么可吹的。很可能下次你瞄的是敌人的天灵盖，打到的却是脚指头。连长说。

  The company commander used a resolute gesture to stop He Lian's slightly ostentatious recitation. He didn't want to listen to a recruit and rehearse his favorite tricks again. Well, since you are aiming at the enemy's stomach, but the bullet hits the head, even if the enemy lies down, it is a blind cat that touches the dead mouse, and there is nothing to brag. It is likely that next time you will aim at the enemy's heavenly spirit cover, but you will hit your toes. The company commander said.大家笑起来。我真替河莲抱不平，但连长的话驳不倒。可怜河莲本是功高盖世的英豪，此刻倒成了大家的笑料。

  Everyone laughed. I really feel sorry for He Lian, but the company commander's words cannot be refuted. Poor He Lian was originally a hero with great merits, but now she has become everyone's laughingstock.实弹训练结束后，有两天的休整。我和河莲把自己的军衣都洗了，天哪，水黑如墨，沉淀了半盆的泥沙。看见我泼水的人直嚷：快去叫老农！这样的肥水，可以浇两亩好地。

  After the live ammunition training, there are two days of rest. He Lian and I washed all our military uniforms, oh my God, the water was as black as ink, and half a basin of sediment was deposited. The person who saw me splashing water shouted: Go and call the old farmer! Such fertilizer water can water two acres of good land.我们耐心地等着太阳把湿军装晒干。洁净的衣服重新穿在身上的时候，令人有一种脱胎换骨的感觉。我们俩你看看我、我看看你，好像不认识似的。我的军装绿如橄榄，河莲的衣服恢复了白云的颜色。

  We patiently waited for the sun to dry our wet military uniforms. When clean clothes are put back on the body, people feel reborn. You two look at me, I look at you, as if we don't know each other. My military uniform is as green as olives, and Ha Lian's clothes have regained the color of white clouds.连长走过来说，现在这个样子嘛，我这个当连长的面子上也有光。不管怎么说，你俩是我带过的最邋遢最不听话的新兵了。不过，幸好还不算太笨。
The company commander came over and said, now that it looks like this, I also have light on my face as a company commander. In any case, you two are the most sloppy and disobedient recruits I have ever led. Fortunately, though, it's not too stupid.

未知

  05.走，到阿里去

  05. Let's go, go to Ali

  新兵训练要结束了，分配就在眼前。大家心里都关心这事，可表面上显得很淡漠，没心没肺地打打闹闹。因为你要是特别表现出对去向的关注，别人会觉得你挑肥拣瘦，思想有问题。领导知道了，没准儿会特地把你分到一个倒霉的单位，制裁一下你呢。

  Recruit training is coming to an end, and assignments are just around the corner. Everyone was concerned about this matter in their hearts, but on the surface they seemed very indifferent, fighting heartlessly. Because if you show special attention to where you are going, others will think that you are picking the fat and thin, and you have a problem with your thinking. If the leader knows, he may specially assign you to an unlucky unit and sanction you.我对这事想得比较简单，希望做一个通信兵。女兵基本上只有两个工种可挑——卫生员和电话员。卫生员要给病人端屎端尿，我一想就心中作呕。要是当着病人的面吐起来，是多么尴尬的事！通信兵就比较安稳，每天打交道的无非是塞绳和电线，都是不会说话的哑巴，当然省心了。

  I think about this relatively simply, I hope to be a signal soldier. Female soldiers basically have only two types of jobs to choose from - hygienists and telephone operators. The hygienist wanted to give the patient feces and urine, and I felt nauseous when I thought about it. How embarrassing it would be to vomit in front of the patient! The signal soldiers are relatively stable, and they deal with nothing more than plugged ropes and wires every day, and they are all mute people who can't speak, of course, they don't have to worry.墙上有一幅油画，叫“我是海燕”，一个英姿勃勃的女兵，在漫天风雨中攀上高耸的电线杆，维修线路。狂风卷起她漆黑的短发，因为淋了水，橡胶雨衣显出乌鸦羽毛一般油亮的光泽，随风飘荡……她高喊着“我是海燕”，这既是一句线路修复之后的联络用语，也充满了勇敢的象征意味，使我年轻的心激荡万分。油画的技术如何，我不知道，但暴风雨中的女通信兵成了我的青春偶像。我想，要是我当通信兵，力争比她干得还棒。打仗时，我会用两手把线路接通，让进攻的命令通过我的身体传达到火线，立个功给大家看。

  There is an oil painting on the wall called "I am Haiyan", a heroic female soldier climbing a towering telephone pole in the wind and rain to repair the lines. The wind swept up her short black hair, and because of the water, the rubber raincoat showed the shiny luster of a crow's feather, fluttering in the wind...... She shouted "I am Haiyan", which was not only a contact phrase after the line was repaired, but also full of brave symbolism, which made my young heart excited. I don't know how the technique of oil painting is, but the female signal soldier in the storm became my youth idol. I think if I become a signal soldier, I will strive to do better than her. When fighting, I will connect the line with both hands, so that the command to attack is transmitted to the line of fire through my body, and I will make a meritorious service for everyone to see.在树林里，小如悄悄凑近我的耳朵说，这次有五个名额，分到阿里去。

  In the woods, Xiaoru quietly approached my ear and said that there were five places this time, and they were assigned to Ali.我从这一句话里听出了两个问题：阿里是哪儿？你从谁那儿听说的？

  I heard two questions from this sentence: Where is Ali? Who did you hear about it from?小如拢拢耷拉到眼前的头发说，阿里是西藏的一个地方，听说海拔有五千多米呢，高寒缺氧，还有好多地方根本就没有人去过，号称“无人区”。

  Xiao Ru gathered his hair in front of him and said that Ali is a place in Tibet, I heard that the altitude is more than 5,000 meters, the high cold and lack of oxygen, and there are many places that no one has been to at all, known as "no man's land".我吓得抽了一口凉气说，既然是无人区，要我们去干什么？

  I was so frightened that I took a breath and said, since it's a no-man's land, what do you want us to do?小如说，普通人当然没有了，但有国防军啊。听说那里以前从来没有女兵，这次是头一回。

  Xiaoru said, of course ordinary people don't have it, but there is a national defense force. I heard that there had never been female soldiers there before, and this was the first time.我说，你的情报还挺详细，哪儿来的？道听途说还是你自己编的？

  I said, your information is quite detailed, where did it come from? Hearsay or did you make it up yourself?小如说，你还挺高看我的，这样机密的消息，我就是蒙着头想它个三天三夜，也编不出。是连长告诉我的。

  Xiaoru said, you think highly of me, such a confidential news, I just cover my head and think about it for three days and three nights, and I can't make it up. It was the company commander who told me.我大吃一惊，说看连长那个严肃样，恨不能把我们都当成射击胸靶，怎会把兵家大事透露给你？

  I was surprised, saying that looking at the company commander's serious look, I wish I could treat us all as shooting targets, how could I reveal the major events of the military family to you?小如说，这事对你我是大事，对连长来说，不过小菜一碟。经他的手，把多少新兵送往四面八方啊。这是我给他洗衣服的时候，随口问来的。

  Xiaoru said, this matter is a big deal for you and me, but for the company commander, it is just a piece of cake. How many recruits were sent to all directions through his hands. This is what I asked casually when I was washing his clothes.我的疑问更大了，说，小如，你再说一遍，你给谁洗衣服？

  My question was even bigger, saying, Xiaoru, say it again, who do you wash clothes for?给连长啊。小如清清楚楚地重复。

  To the company commander. Xiao Ru repeated clearly.你为什么要给连长洗衣服呢？他难道是个残疾人，自己没有手吗？我很纳闷，惊奇中又很不以为然，看不起她巴结领导。

  Why do you want to wash the company commander? Is he a disabled person who has no hands? I was very puzzled, surprised and dissatisfied, and looked down on her flattering the leader.小如坦然地说，每天训练回来，一身泥一身土的，谁像你似的，那么懒，帽子脏得像炸油饼的锅盖也不洗。我可天天要洗的，要不睡不着觉。好几次遇到连长，他一个男人家，洗衣的时候笨手笨脚，肥皂泡溢了一地。帮一下呗，顺手的活儿。在家的时候，我也净帮着我哥。

  Xiaoru said frankly that when he came back from training every day, he was covered in mud and dirt, who was like you, so lazy, and his hat was as dirty as a fried pancake and didn't wash the lid. I have to wash it every day, or I can't sleep. Several times I met the company commander, who was a man's family, clumsy when doing laundry, and soap bubbles overflowed all over the floor. Help, it's a convenient job. When I was at home, I also helped my brother.我大笑起来，原来你把连长当成了哥，他就向你透露军情。

  I laughed, it turned out that you regarded the company commander as a brother, and he revealed the military situation to you.小如说，没事闲聊呗，话赶话地就说到那儿了。

  Xiaoru said, it's okay to chat, and that's it.我说，请继续刺探下去，特别是通信兵和卫生兵的比例问题。

  I said, please continue to spy on the issue, especially the ratio of signal soldiers and medics.小如说，你干吗特别关心这个呢？

  Xiaoru said, why are you particularly concerned about this?我说，我讨厌卫生员这个行当，一天到晚遇见的不是病人就是死人，反正都是些没有笑容的脸，晦气啊。而且从根本上来说，我是一个缺乏同情心的人，所以，我不想穿白大褂。

  I said, I hate the hygienist, all day long I meet either patients or dead people, anyway, they are all faces without smiles, bad luck. And fundamentally, I'm a person who lacks compassion, so I don't want to wear a white coat.小如反驳我说，当个医生多么好！治好了一个病人，人家全家都感谢你，会记你一辈子的。

  Xiaoru retorted to me, how good it is to be a doctor! If you cure a patient, the whole family will thank you and will remember you for the rest of your life.我说，你怎么光想好事？就不想想，若给人家治死了，全家都恨你，也许到海枯石烂。

  I said, why do you just think about good things? Don't think about it, if you are killed by others, the whole family will hate you, and maybe the sea will rot.小如说，为什么光想坏事？再说，你就不会把本事练得精点，别把人家给治死吗？

  Xiaoru said, why just think about bad things? Besides, you won't practice your skills more refined, don't you kill people?我说，天有不测风云啊。再说，人总是要死的，这是伟人说的……

  I said, there are unforeseen circumstances. Besides, people always have to die, this is what the great man said......我俩正拌嘴，果平跑过来说，你们躲在犄角旮旯，是不是正说我的坏话呢？背人没好事。

  We were arguing, and Guo Ping ran over and said, you are hiding in the corner, are you talking bad about me? There is no good thing to carry people.我们大叫冤枉。果平嘻嘻一笑说，既然不是说我的坏话，就把正说的话告诉我吧。要不我不信。

  We shouted that we were wronged. Guo Ping smiled and said, since you are not speaking ill of me, tell me what you are saying. Otherwise, I don't believe it.我看着小如。消息的主要来源是小如，不能喧宾夺主。小如是个好脾气，虽然她不想把消息散布得人人皆知，但考虑到友谊至上，还是把所有的情报都告诉了果平。

  I looked at Xiao Ru. The main source of the news is Xiaoru, which cannot be overpowered. Xiaoru is a good-natured person, although she doesn't want to spread the news to everyone, but considering the supremacy of friendship, she still told Guo Ping all the information.我以为果平会激动得捶胸顿足，没想到她一撇嘴说，就这个啊，早嚷破天了。

  I thought Guo Ping would be so excited that she beat her chest and stomped her feet, but she curled her lips and said, that's it, I've already shouted at the sky.我这才明白，有些消息的传播，是不需要“海燕”的。

  Only then did I understand that the spread of some news does not require "Haiyan".果平接着说，连分配中卫生兵和通信兵的比例是九比一，也已是公开的秘密。

  Guo Ping went on to say that the ratio of medical soldiers and signal soldiers in the company is 9 to 1, which is an open secret.好像有千吨陨铁自九天坠下，正好砸到我的头上。我揪着果平说，你这话当真？

  It seemed that a thousand tons of meteorite fell from the Nine Heavens and hit my head. I grabbed Guo Ping and said, are you serious?果平说，向毛主席保证！

  Guo Ping said, I promise Chairman Mao!这是一句极有威力的誓言，我再也无法怀疑它的准确性。

  This is a very powerful oath, and I can no longer doubt its accuracy.小如沉静地说，看来，只有极少数的幸运儿才能当上海燕，绝大多数都是小白鸽啦。

  Xiaoru said calmly, it seems that only a very small number of lucky people can be petrels, and the vast majority are little white pigeons.小白鸽是小说《林海雪原》中女卫生员的爱称。果平说，悲痛欲绝！我本来想若是一半对一半的比例，不哼不哈地等着，也许就会分我到通信站。没想到，事实这般残酷！

  The little white pigeon is the nickname of the female hygienist in the novel "Lin Hai Snow Field". Guo Ping said, grief-stricken! I originally thought that if I waited for a half-to-half ratio, maybe I would be assigned to the communication station. I didn't expect the facts to be so cruel!完啦！我彻底绝望，近在咫尺就有竞争者。我简直想变成老鹰，把小白鸽抓走几只。

  It's over! I was completely desperate, there were competitors close at hand. I wanted to turn into an eagle and take away a few little white pigeons.河莲走过来说，这次分配最艰苦的地方是阿里。越是艰苦越光荣，我想写一份血书，你们谁与我同甘共苦？

  He Lian came over and said that the hardest part of this assignment was Ali. The more difficult it is, the more glorious it is, I want to write a blood book, which of you will share the joys and sorrows with me?

  果平说，哈！我只是在小说和电影里才看到血书什么的，没想到，真有人打算这么做！太棒了，我的血和你流在一起！

  Guo Ping said, ha! I only saw blood books in novels and movies, but I didn't expect that someone really planned to do this! Great, my blood flows with you!现在果平和河莲成一伙的了，神采飞扬地看着我和小如。

  Now Guoping and He Lian are together, looking at me and Xiaoru with high spirits.小如描绘的阿里，令我心惊胆战。要是分到我头上，那是没法的事，军人以服从命令为天职。可我不打算主动争取，那里离家太远了。再说，我的理想是当一个通信兵，阿里要的都是卫生员。我要写了血书，就从根上绝了成为海燕的希望。

  Ali as small as the depiction makes me tremble. If it is assigned to me, it will be impossible, and soldiers take obedience to orders as their duty. But I don't plan to take the initiative to fight for it, it's too far from home. Besides, my ideal is to be a signal soldier, and Ali wants all the hygienists. I want to write a blood letter, and I will cut off the hope of becoming a petrel from the root.不想，宁静的小如抢先说道，我写血书。

  I don't want to, Tranquility Xiaoru said first, I wrote a blood book.一下子局面成了三比一，我变成失道寡助的少数派，心里不由得有一点慌。想想海燕飞舞的雨衣，我咬着牙坚持道，你们要写就写好了，反正我是不写的。

  All of a sudden, the situation became three to one, and I became a helpless minority, and I couldn't help but feel a little panicked. Thinking of the flying raincoat of the petrel, I gritted my teeth and insisted, if you want to write it, you can write it, I won't write anyway.果平和河莲有些失望，但她们毕竟人多势众，便不理我，一齐商量血书的操作规程。因为以往只是听人家说，真到了自己演练的时候，才发现有许多具体的步骤很朦胧。比如用什么部位的血呢？当然是用手指头上的血来得方便，可是“十指连心”，一想到要把好好的手指头扎一个洞，挤出血来，大家都直抽冷气。

  Guo Ping and He Lian were a little disappointed, but after all, they were so crowded that they ignored me and discussed the operating procedures of the blood book together. Because in the past, I only heard people say, but when it was time to practice by myself, I found that there were many specific steps that were very vague. For example, what part of the blood is used? Of course, it is convenient to use the blood on the fingers, but "ten fingers are connected to the heart", when they think of pricking a hole in a good finger and squeezing out the blood, everyone immediately pumps the air conditioner.我在一旁待着，有些尴尬，走不好，继续留下，好像也不伦不类。我胡乱找个碴儿要溜，小如却拼命扯我的袖子，要不是军装缝得格外结实，简直要揪出个窟窿。

  I stayed on the sidelines, a little embarrassed, couldn't walk well, and continued to stay, which seemed nondescript. I randomly found a ballast to slip away, but Xiaoru desperately pulled my sleeves, if it weren't for the extra strong sewing of the military uniform, I would have to dig out a hole.我说，你到底要干吗，跟抓壮丁似的？

  I said, what are you going to do, like catching a strong man?小如说，上厕所啊。咱们俩一起去吧。

  Xiaoru said, go to the toilet. Let's go together.我们的厕所离得很远，大概总有几百米的距离，这样，每次方便就有了散步的性质。两个好朋友一边走一边说，讲到开心处，有时真希望厕所修得更远一些，或者多喝几杯水，制造出更多上厕所的机会。

  Our toilets are far away, probably a few hundred meters away, so that every time it is convenient to take a walk. The two good friends said as they walked, and when it came to happy things, sometimes they really wished the toilet was built further, or drank a few more glasses of water to create more opportunities to go to the toilet.就算我和她们成了血书和非血书两个阵营，也不能拒绝要同你一道上厕所的朋友吧？

  Even if I and I become two camps of blood books and non-blood books, I can't refuse friends who want to go to the toilet with you, right?我和小如默默地往前走。

  Xiaoru and I walked forward silently.小如说，你真的打定主意不写血书了？

  Xiaoru said, have you really made up your mind not to write a blood letter?我说，是。

  I said, yes.小如说，其实也没什么，不过就是疼一下子。别人都能忍过去，偏你就不行？

  Xiaoru said, in fact, it's nothing, it's just a pain. Others can endure it, but you can't?我说，也不光是个疼的事，了不起就像得一回肠炎，再说得邪乎点，就算悲惨地拉了一场痢疾，一咬牙一跺脚也就过去了。

  I said, it's not just a painful thing, it's amazing like having enteritis, and to put it more evilly, even if you have a tragic diarrhea, it's over with gritted teeth and stomping your feet.小如笑起来说，我看，你对医学还挺懂点门道的。

  Xiaoru smiled and said, I see, you know a bit about medicine.我说，我一辈子就得过这么两种病，疼痛如绞，记忆犹新。

  I said, I have had these two diseases in my life, the pain is like strangling, and the memory is still fresh.在靠近厕所的地方，小如停下脚步，板着脸说，既然你不怕，我看你还是写血书的好。

  Near the toilet, Xiaoru stopped and said with a straight face, since you are not afraid, I think you should write a blood book.看着她的严肃样，我很惊诧，因为她平时总是笑眯眯的，姐姐一般温柔和气，这是怎么啦？

  Looking at her seriousness, I was surprised, because she is always smiling, and her sister is generally gentle and kind, what's wrong?小如看出了我的心思，小声解释道，我听连长说，他就是要用敢不敢主动要求去阿里来考验一些人。要是你主动要求了，也许就不让你去了，会特地按照你的爱好，分你一个想去的地方。要是你缩手缩脚地不表态，往后躲，就偏让你去。

  Xiaoru saw my thoughts and explained in a low voice, I heard the company commander say that he was going to test some people by daring to take the initiative to ask to go to Ali. If you take the initiative to ask, maybe you won't be allowed to go, and they will specially give you a place you want to go according to your hobbies. If you shrink back and don't take a stand and hide back, I will let you go.我好似被人兜头灌了一脖子的冷水，脊梁骨变成一根又硬又直的鱼刺，梗在那里，回不过弯儿。原想革命大家庭温暖和谐，不想还有阴谋埋伏在里面。

  I felt like I had been poured cold water on my neck, and my spine turned into a hard and straight fishbone, which was there and couldn't turn back. I originally wanted the revolutionary family to be warm and harmonious, and I didn't want there to be a conspiracy ambushing inside.我一急，结巴起来，说，河莲她们……都是……知道了，才故意……是吗？

  I was in a hurry, stammered, and said, He Lian and the others...... It's all ...... I knew it, so I deliberately ...... Is it?小如说，我不知道，也不愿瞎猜。估计她们不明白这里的奥妙，真是一腔热血。你想啊，连长是多么精明的一个人，哪里能让大家都摸了他的底牌，那他的试验还有什么意义呢？

  Xiaoru said, I don't know, and I don't want to guess. It is estimated that they don't understand the mystery here, it is really passionate. Do you think, what a shrewd person the company commander is, where can everyone touch his trump card, so what is the point of his experiment?我稍微缓过一点神来，淡淡地说，热血也好，冷血也好，反正我是不打算写血书的。

  I calmed down a little and said lightly, whether it's hot blood or cold blood, I don't plan to write a blood book anyway.小如说，我把话都说到了这个份儿上，看在咱俩是好朋友，才把这天大的秘密告诉你，你怎么就这样不开窍！

  Xiaoru said, I have said everything to this extent, for the sake of us being good friends, I will tell you this big secret, why are you so unenlightened!我说，小如，你是一番好意，我领情了。我要是不知道这个底细，也许你劝劝我，我也会写的。可我既然知道了，我是说什么也不写的。我不想当卫生员，我不愿去阿里，我也不做这种装样子的事。

  I said, Xiao Ru, you are a good intention, I appreciate it. If I don't know the details, maybe you persuade me, I will write it too. But since I know, I said I wouldn't write anything. I don't want to be a hygienist, I don't want to go to Ali, and I don't do this kind of pretense.小如急了，说，你怎么这么固执呢？大家都写了，就你一个人不写，不就显得你太落后了吗？你写了吧！连长私下问过我愿到哪里去，说他可以照顾我。我反正只是想当个医生，这回学医的名额多得很，我也不需要他特别为我做安排，我求求他，让他分你去当海燕。

  Xiaoru was anxious and said, why are you so stubborn? Everyone has written, but if you don't write alone, won't it seem that you are too backward? You wrote it! The company commander privately asked me where I wanted to go, saying that he could take care of me. I just want to be a doctor anyway, there are a lot of places to study medicine this time, and I don't need him to make special arrangements for me, I beg him to let him divide you to be a petrel.我一把捂住小如的嘴说，你别侮辱了我心中的海燕。

  I covered Xiaoru's mouth and said, don't insult the petrel in my heart.

  小如气得眼眶里注满了泪水，说，小毕，你这样不懂别人的心，我是为了你好！

  Xiao Ru's eyes were filled with tears when he was so angry, and said, Xiao Bi, you don't understand other people's hearts like this, I am for your own good!我说，小如，你的这份情谊，我会永远记得。只是我不能违背自己的心愿做事，你该理解我。

  I said, Xiaoru, I will always remember this friendship of yours. It's just that I can't do things against my wishes, you should understand me.往回走的路上，我们一句话都不再说了，因为所有的话都已经说完。我们看着远方，那里有很多云彩，像棉花垛一般笔直地堆积着，渐渐地高入遥远的天际，在云的边缘，就形成了峭壁一般险峻的裂隙。云像马群一般飞腾着向我们扑过来，粗大的雨滴像被击中的鸟一样，从乌云里降落下来，砸到我们的帽子上，留下一个个深绿色的斑点。

  On the way back, we didn't say a word anymore, because all the words were finished. We looked into the distance, where there were many clouds, piled up straight like cotton stacks, gradually rising into the distant sky, and at the edge of the clouds, a steep crack like a cliff was formed. The clouds flew towards us like a herd of horses, and thick raindrops fell from the clouds like a hit bird and smashed into our hats, leaving dark green spots.快回去吧。我对小如说。

  Go back quickly. I said to Xiaoru.这儿的雨和内地的雨不一样。我家乡的雨，很细很小，牛毛一般。你要是不留意，好像觉不出来似的。但它的后劲儿很大，你在雨中走一会儿，全身的衣服都会湿透，阴冷会一直沁到骨头缝里。这儿，雨来得很猛，可是这一颗雨滴和那一颗雨滴之间，隔得很远，简直能跑一只骆驼呢！小如说。

  The rain here is different from the rain in the mainland. The rain in my hometown is very fine and small, like cow hair. If you don't pay attention, it's as if you can't notice it. But it has a lot of stamina, if you walk in the rain for a while, your clothes will be soaked, and the cold will soak into your bones. Here, the rain is coming very hard, but between this raindrop and that raindrop, there is a long distance, and it can run a camel! Xiaoru said.我不知她为什么要说这些关于雨的没什么意思的话。从领新军装那天起，我们就是要好的朋友。但我拒绝了她最后的忠告，分手就在眼前。可能她不愿伤感，才故意找个轻松的话题吧。

  I don't know why she said these meaningless things about rain. From the day we received the new uniform, we were good friends. But I rejected her last advice, and the breakup was just around the corner. Maybe she didn't want to be sad, so she deliberately found a light topic.整个连队掀起了如火如荼的写血书运动。我本想离这件事远一点，后来才发现完全躲不开。这个屋子的人在写，那个屋子的人也在写，你总不能老是待在操场上像长跑运动员一般乱转吧。这是一件让人可以充分发挥想象力的事，大家八仙过海，各显其能。手指上的血量很少，再加上很快就凝固了，根本就没法写字。后来就有人割腕取血，血虽然多，但那女孩子脸色苍白，一副快要晕过去的样子，把老兵班长吓得不轻，坚决制止了此类盲动行为。后来不知是谁，发明了一种节约而科学的方法，用少量的血，掺上一部分红颜色，再兑上水，就调成了一种美丽的樱红色，写出字来艳若桃花。

  The entire company set off a blood book writing campaign in full swing. I wanted to stay away from this, but later I realized that I couldn't avoid it at all. The people in this room are writing, and the people in that room are also writing, you can't always stay on the playground and run around like a long-distance runner. This is a thing that allows people to give full play to their imagination, and everyone crosses the sea and shows their abilities. The amount of blood on the fingers was very small, and it solidified quickly, so it was impossible to write at all. Later, someone cut his wrists to take blood, although there was a lot of blood, but the girl's face was pale, and she looked like she was about to faint, which frightened the veteran squad leader a lot and resolutely stopped such blind behavior. Later, I don't know who invented a frugal and scientific method, using a small amount of blood, mixing a part of the red color, and then mixing it with water, it was adjusted into a beautiful cherry red, and the words were as beautiful as peach blossoms.我东跑西颠，把大家的发明创造互通有无，像个联络员。

  I run around, sharing everyone's inventions and creations, like a liaison.终于到了最后分配的日子，不想，连长陷入了困境。因为写血书的人太多了，也闹不清谁是最勇敢最忠诚最大无畏的。连长不愧足智多谋，他把堆积如山的血书放在墙角，开始实施新的选择方案。

  Finally, the day of the final assignment came, and the company commander was in trouble. Because there are too many people who write blood letters, it is impossible to tell who is the bravest, most loyal and most fearless. The company commander was worthy of his resourcefulness, and he put the mountain of blood books in the corner and began to implement a new option.那是一个晴朗的日子，扎着武装带的连长，像一株笔直的白杨站在操场中央，对所有的女兵大声发布命令——面向我，按个子高低，成一路横队集合！

  It was a sunny day, and the company commander wearing an armed belt stood in the center of the playground like a straight poplar, loudly issuing orders to all the female soldiers - facing me, according to their height, and gathering in a horizontal line all the way!我们都愣了一秒钟。这是一道古怪的命令，想想吧，一个连两百多人呢，平常都是成几路横队或几路纵队集合，方方正正才像队伍。就算连长萌发新招，编成一路纵队也够标新立异了。现在可好，一路横队，士兵像鲫鱼似的一个挨一个要排出多远！还要按个子高矮，真是复杂啊。

  We were all stunned for a second. This is a strange order, think about it, a company of more than 200 people, usually gathered in several horizontal lines or columns, square like a team. Even if the company commander sproutes a new move, it is unusual enough to form a column all the way. Now it's good, all the way to the horizontal line, how far do the soldiers have to be discharged one by one like crucian carp! It's really complicated to be tall and short.但命令，谁敢不服从？片刻犹豫之后，大家都开始迅速寻找自己应该站的位置。其中又发生许多混乱，女兵招收时对身高要求很严格，个头集中在一米六到一米七之间，同样身高的人，少说也有十几个，实在难分上下。于是彼此推推搡搡，各不相让。还有的人，入伍时测的身高，这一两个月过去了，部队的伙食好，又蹿起一截，按照旧印象排队，显然比旁人高出个脑袋尖儿，就得重新调换地方。还有的人因为胖瘦不同，引起视觉上的误差，非得背靠背地比了高矮，才能分出伯仲，难度不亚于一道数学题。

  But who dares to disobey the order? After a moment of hesitation, everyone began to quickly look for where they should stand. There was a lot of confusion in it, female soldiers were recruited with very strict height requirements, concentrated between 1.6 meters and 1.7 meters, and there were at least a dozen people of the same height, which was really difficult to distinguish. So they pushed and shoved each other, and neither of them gave in. There are also people who have measured their height when they enlisted in the army, and after a month or two, the army's food is good, and they jump up again, lining up according to the old impression, obviously a head higher than others, so they have to change places again. Some people have to compare height and shortness back-to-back to distinguish between equal and short, which is no less difficult than a math problem.操场上吵嚷得像个蛤蟆坑，要是往日，连长早火了，非大声呵斥不可。但今天他竟是出奇地好脾气，由着女孩们颠来倒去地比量，直到每个人找好了自己的位置。

  The playground was noisy like a toad pit, and if it had been in the past, the company commander would have been on fire early, and he had to shout loudly. But today he was surprisingly good-natured, and the girls compared them upside down until everyone found their place.队伍排得实在惭愧，因为太长，形成了一个大大的“S”形，好像一道漫长的绿色篱笆，被大风吹过，前拱后弯。依连长往常的性子，必得让解散了，重新集结。但这一回，连长的容忍度极好，犀利的目光像梳子，从队头刮到队尾，又从队尾刮到队头，仍是什么话也没有说。

  The line is really ashamed because it is too long, forming a large "S" shape, like a long green fence, blown by the wind, arched in front and bent back. According to the usual temperament of the company commander, he must be disbanded and regrouped. But this time, the company commander's tolerance was excellent, and his sharp eyes were like combs, scraping from the head of the team to the tail of the team, and from the tail of the team to the head of the team, and still didn't say anything.我偷着往四处瞧了瞧，好朋友都彼此隔得很远，大家是一片茫然，不知道连长玩的什么把戏。

  I secretly looked around, and my good friends were far away from each other, and everyone was at a loss, not knowing what trick the company commander was playing.连长调整了一下自己的位置，主要是大踏步地向后面退去，然后立定。他像一个等边三角形的顶点，在远远的地方，严峻地注视着我们。他那双猎鹰般的眼睛，睁得很大。

  The company commander adjusted his position, mainly striding back and then standing. He is like the apex of an equilateral triangle, staring at us grimly from a distance. His falcon-like eyes were wide open.待他看到队伍自发地调整为笔直以后，温和地发布了第一道口令：单双数，报数！

  After he saw that the team spontaneously adjusted to straight, he gently issued the first password: odd and even numbers, report numbers!每个女孩子都竭尽全力把数字报得很响，记得我是“二”。说句实在话，我不喜欢“二”，比较爱好的是“一”。报一的时候，嘴咧得很开，音波清脆嘹亮，好像时刻在微笑。报二就不同了，上下唇基本不动，喉咙里发出古怪的一声，好像吃多了白薯，打嗝似的。想想看吧，古代的故事里，老大总是勤劳勇敢的，老二多半又懒又馋。

  Every girl tried her best to report the numbers very loudly, remembering that I was "two". To be honest, I don't like "two", and my favorite is "one". When I reported to the first day, my mouth was very open, and the sound waves were crisp and loud, as if I was smiling all the time. Bao Er was different, his upper and lower lips were basically motionless, and there was a strange sound in his throat, as if he had eaten too much white potatoes and burped. Think about it, in ancient stories, the eldest was always hardworking and brave, and the second was mostly lazy and greedy.唯一可以安慰自己的是，我听到河莲、小如和果平，报的数也都是偶数。人嘛，只要有和自己同命运的好朋友，就有了安慰。

  The only thing I can comfort myself is that I heard that He Lian, Xiao Ru and Guo Ping reported that the numbers were all even. As long as people have good friends who share the same fate as themselves, they will be comforted.大家注意，听我的口令，偶数——向前——一步——走！连长拖长了嗓门儿，发布新的口令。

  Everyone, pay attention, listen to my password, even number - forward - one step - go! The company commander dragged his voice and issued a new password.于是，大约有一百个女孩向前迈出一步。这样，操场上就有了两条彼此等长的队伍，像一个巨大的等号。

  So, about a hundred girls took a step forward. In this way, there are two teams of equal length to each other on the playground, like a giant equal sign.大家都不知道连长葫芦里卖的什么药，充满人的操场显出了异样的安静，好像一片旷野。

  Everyone didn't know what medicine was sold in the company commander's gourd, and the playground full of people looked strangely quiet, like a wilderness.连长又让我们继续报数。他稍微变了一下方式，不再是把我们分成一、二两组，而是让大家一五一十地报，然后命令逢五逢十的人向前迈一大步，好像农村赶集时挑选的日子。这时迈出向前的人显著少了，好像间过苗的庄稼，又被田鼠吃了一些秧苗，隔好远才稀稀拉拉地有一个人。

  The company commander asked us to continue to report the numbers. He changed his approach slightly, no longer dividing us into groups of one or two, but asked everyone to report one by one, and then ordered the people to take a big step forward, like the day chosen when the countryside rushed to the market. At this time, there were significantly fewer people stepping forward, as if the crops had passed the seedlings, and some seedlings were eaten by voles, and there was only one person far away.人们越发莫名其妙，连长当然不做任何解释。他按照自己的预定方针，继续发布命令，让站在队伍最前列的那排人，按一定规律报数，然后命令逢到某个特定号码的人向前迈步……几番操作下来，剩下的人越来越少，大家的好奇心也越来越强烈了。

  People became more and more inexplicable, and the company commander certainly did not give any explanation. According to his predetermined policy, he continued to issue orders, asking the people standing at the front of the line to report the number according to a certain rule, and then ordered the person who met a certain number to step forward...... After several operations, there were fewer and fewer people left, and everyone's curiosity became stronger and stronger.现在，站在最前列的只有五个女孩子了。我很想看看都是谁，可是不行。连长的目光像探照灯一样盯着我们，只要你稍微拧一下脖子，立刻就会被他发现。

  Now, there are only five girls at the forefront. I really wanted to see who it was, but I couldn't. The company commander's eyes are staring at us like a searchlight, and as long as you twist your neck a little, you will be immediately discovered by him.连长走到我们面前，对着我们五个人，也对着操场上所有的女兵说，现在我宣布，站在最前列的这五名，光荣地被选为第一批奔赴西藏阿里的女战士。这是她们的光荣，也是我们所有人的荣耀。让我们以热烈的掌声，欢送她们走上共和国最高的国土……

  The company commander walked up to us, said to the five of us, and to all the female soldiers on the playground, and now I announce that the five who stand at the forefront have been honorably selected as the first female soldiers to go to Ali, Tibet. This is their glory and the glory of all of us. Let us send them off to the highest land of the Republic with warm applause......掌声暴风雨般地响起来，缠绕我们许久的问号，就被连长用这样宿命的方式，三下五除二地解决了。

  Applause rang out like a storm, and the question mark that had entangled us for a long time was solved by the company commander in such a fateful way.连长接着用毫无感情色彩的语调，念出其余人的分配名单，对谁都是一视同仁。

  The company commander then read out the allocation list of the rest of the people in an emotionless tone, treating everyone equally.直到这时，我才有胆量偷偷斜了旁边一眼，哈！果平、小如、河莲都和我并排站着，还有一个瘦弱的小姑娘，站在队伍的尾巴上，她叫苏鹿鹿。

  Only then did I have the courage to secretly glance to the side, ha! Guo Ping, Xiao Ru, and He Lian were all standing side by side with me, and there was a thin little girl standing at the tail of the team, her name was Su Lulu.和朋友们在一起的狂喜，冲散了我不愿当卫生员的愁云。况且，我也想通了，即使我不被分配到西藏去，也很难保证能当上海燕。听天由命吧，也许我的命里注定，必须要在工作中见到许多呻吟的人。不管怎么说，就算上班的时候愁眉苦脸，下班以后可以和伙伴们开心一乐，也该知足啊。

  The ecstasy of being with my friends dispelled my sorrow that I didn't want to be a hygienist. Moreover, I also figured out that even if I was not assigned to Tibet, it would be difficult to guarantee that I would be a petrel. Leave it to fate, maybe it is destined that I must see many moaning people at work. In any case, even if you are sad when you go to work, you can have fun with your friends after get off work, and you should be content.解散以后，大家立刻把我们几个围起来，充满好奇之情，好像此刻的我们已和大家有了显著的不同。

  After the disbandment, everyone immediately surrounded a few of us, full of curiosity, as if we were significantly different from everyone at this moment.我大叫，不要这样对我们虎视眈眈好不好？好像我们不是要到阿里去，是从阿里已经绕回一圈似的。

  I yelled, don't look at us like this, okay? It seems that we are not going to Ali, but have already circled back from Ali.大家就笑起来说，毕竟你们是要到那么遥远的一个地方，仿佛去另一个星球。到了那里，千万记得要给我们写信啊。

  Everyone laughed and said, after all, you are going to such a distant place, as if you are going to another planet. When you get there, remember to write to us.我说，你们那么多人，我怎么写得过来？等我以后当了作家，写一本书，你们大家传着看吧。

  I said, how can I write it with so many of you? When I become a writer and write a book, you can read it.大家就笑个不停，说这个家伙多么会吹牛啊。

  Everyone laughed non-stop, saying how good this guy was at bragging.连长走过来，大家的笑声立刻消失了，等着听他的指示。连长不看大家，单对我们五个说，现在，你们已经是西藏阿里边防部队医院的战士了，我们已经用电报通知了那里，那边工作很忙，要求你们立即上山。

  The company commander came over, and everyone's laughter immediately disappeared, waiting to listen to his instructions. The company commander didn't look at everyone, and only said to the five of us, now, you are already soldiers from the Ali Border Guard Hospital in Tibet, and we have notified there by telegram, and the work over there is very busy, and I ask you to go up the mountain immediately.我小声嘟囔了一声，为什么不用电话呢，那可比电报要快得多啊。

  I muttered softly, why not use a phone, it's much faster than a telegram.连长看着我，说，那里不通电话。我们只能用最简练的词句，把最多的内容用无线电波传递上去。

  The company commander looked at me and said, there is no phone there. We can only use the most concise words and phrases to transmit the most content on the radio waves.大家都不由自主地吐了吐舌头。连长并不理睬我们的惊讶，也不看大家，只是对着我们五个人说，上山的路途艰难而遥远，你们要做好充分的思想准备。为了领导方便，你们要选出一个班长来。

  Everyone couldn't help but stick out their tongues. The company commander ignored our surprise and didn't look at everyone, but just said to the five of us that the road up the mountain is difficult and long, and you must be fully mentally prepared. For the convenience of the leader, you have to choose a squad leader.大家面面相觑。自当兵以来，凡事都是领导指定，今日为何民主起来？

  Everyone looked at each other. Since becoming a soldier, everything has been designated by the leader, why is it democratic today?河莲最先说出我们的心里话，选什么？连长看着谁合适，就让谁当呗！

  He Lian was the first to say what was in our hearts, what to choose? The company commander sees whoever is suitable, let him be whoever he wants!一向说一不二的连长破天荒地缓缓说道，从现在开始，我已不再是你们的连长，你们已经完成了新兵的训练课目，就要走上工作岗位。希望你们能够记住这一段岁月，它是你们军旅生涯的开端。

  The company commander, who has always been unambiguous, said slowly, from now on, I am no longer your company commander, you have completed the training courses of recruits, and you are about to go to work. I hope you can remember this period of time, it was the beginning of your military career.

  大家的鼻子就有些酸，感觉到分手就在眼前。想想连长虽说严厉、偏心，但也有可敬可爱的地方。比如这一次分配，就并没有利用自己手中的权力做什么特意安排。他宁可用一种概率的方法来决定大家的命运。

  Everyone's nose was a little sore, and they felt that the breakup was just around the corner. Think about it, although the company commander is strict and partial, he also has respectable and lovely things. For example, this time he did not use the power in his hands to make any special arrangements. He would rather use a probabilistic method to decide everyone's fate.我们伤感了一会儿，才发觉班长的人选问题并没有随着心情的变化而解决。小如最先打破沉寂，说，我看就选小毕吧。

  We were sad for a while before we realized that the problem of the squad leader was not solved with the change of mood. Xiaoru was the first to break the silence and said, I think I will choose Xiao Bi.我吓得大喊，不同意！不同意！

  I was so scared that I cried out that I didn't agree! Disagree!大家齐刷刷地问我，为什么？

  Everyone asked me in unison, why?我说，谁不知道班长是军队里最小的官啊，当不当的，实在也说明不了是否进步。可吃苦在前，享受在后，身先士卒是第一位的。我这个人，从骨子里就比较怕苦怕累，要是有别人给我做了榜样，带领着我向前，基本上还算一个服从命令的兵。要是想让我冲锋在前地起到某种表率作用，实事求是地说，我做不到。

  I said, who doesn't know that the squad leader is the smallest officer in the army, and if he is not appropriate, it really can't tell whether he has progressed. But hardship is first, enjoyment is later, and taking the lead is the first. If someone else sets an example for me and leads me forward, I am basically a soldier who obeys orders. If I want to charge forward and play some kind of role model, to be honest, I can't do it.大伙看我这副不堪重任的样子，也就不勉强我。但总得有个班长啊，连长等得不耐烦了，直搓手掌。我说，我提个人，你们可不能说我有私心。好不好？

  Everyone saw that I was overwhelmed, so they didn't force me. But there must be a squad leader, the company commander waited impatiently and rubbed his palms. I said, I mention someone, you can't say that I am selfish. Good no good?

  大家说，真啰唆。没人议论你，快提吧。

  Everyone said, it's really instigative. No one is talking about you, bring it up.我说，刚才小如提名我当班长，现在我再提她，好像有点互相吹捧的意思。我可真的是出于公心地认为，小如是班长的合适人选。她温柔细心，组织纪律性强，关心爱护同志，还爱给别人洗衣服……

  I said, just now Xiaoru nominated me as the class president, and now I mention her again, as if I am praising each other. I really think out of public conscience that Xiaoru is the right candidate for the squad leader. She is gentle and careful, has strong organizational discipline, cares for her comrades, and loves to wash clothes for others......大家笑起来，说同意同意，就小如啦！

  Everyone laughed and said they agreed, just like that!连长大手一挥，宣布说，奔赴西藏阿里的女兵班现在组建完成，还是由小毕担任临时班长。

  The company commander waved his hand and announced that the female soldier squad going to Ali, Tibet, had now been formed, and Xiao Bi would serve as the temporary squad leader.走，到阿里去！我们五个女孩手拉起手。

  Let's go, go to Ali! The five of us girls held hands.

未知

  06.糖衣氧气压缩片

  06. Sugar-coated oxygen compression tablets

  上山了。

  Up the mountain.我们五个——小如、果平、河莲、鹿鹿和我，有幸成为西藏阿里的第一批女兵，开始向雪山之巅进发。

  The five of us—Xiaoru, Guoping, Helian, Lulu, and me—were honored to be the first female soldiers of Ali in Tibet and began to march to the top of the snow-capped mountains.一个炎热的早晨，我们坐上了从平原到西藏去的军用大卡车。大车厢里载了许多麻袋，内装大米。坐在麻袋上，把脚像芭蕾舞演员一般竖起，插进麻袋的缝隙。汽车摇摇晃晃地在布满石子的路上向山上爬，像一只笨拙的绿毛龟。

  One hot morning, we got into a large military truck from the plains to Tibet. The large carriage was loaded with many sacks of rice. Sit on the sack, stand up like a ballerina, and insert it into the gap of the sack. The car staggered up the hill on the gravel road, like a clumsy green turtle.人人脑袋上方，笼罩着一片绿色。不是天的颜色，是汽车篷布笼罩的效果。我们大呼憋死了，要求同行的老兵批准揭开这顶盖子，看看外面的风景。

  Above everyone's head, there is a green shroud. It's not the color of the sky, it's the effect of the car tarpaulin. We screamed and suffocated, asking the veterans who were traveling with us to approve the lifting of the lid and see the scenery outside.透过篷布上的窟窿，你们尽管看，看个够。针尖大的窟窿能透过斗大的风。没听人说吗？眼皮是世界上最大的物件，你只要睁着眼，有什么看不到的？同行的老兵懒洋洋地说。他是下山治病的，听说病还没治好，工作紧张，要他上山，所以，他闷闷不乐，一副苦大仇深的样子。新兵连长把我们几个女兵交给他，委托照应，他好像不堪重负的毛驴，又被人强压了一捆柴火，愤愤地不爱理人。

  Through the hole in the tarpaulin, you can see enough. The hole with the tip of the needle can pass through the big wind. Didn't you hear from anyone? The eyelids are the largest object in the world, as long as you open your eyes, what can't you see? The veteran said lazily. He went down the mountain to treat his illness, and when he heard that the disease had not been cured, he was intense at work, so he was sullen and looked bitter and hateful. The recruit company commander handed over a few of our female soldiers to him and entrusted them with care, he was like an overwhelmed donkey, and he was forced to be pressed with a bundle of firewood, and he was indignantly ignoring people.我们只好像预备行窃的小偷一样，每人揪住篷布上的一个小孔，尽力向外张望。汽车颠簸着，大米麻袋不停地上下蹿动，好像一尊浑身长着硬颗粒的庞然大物，不甘心驮人，一有机会就想把我们从它背上掀下来。我被晃得肠胃错位，说，一会儿你们谁帮我一下？我打算改造一下座位，用几袋大米摞成沙发模样，虽说硌屁股，肯定比现在舒服得多。

  We were like thieves preparing to steal, each of us grabbed a small hole in the tarpaulin and tried our best to look out. The car was bumpy, and the rice sacks kept jumping up and down, like a behemoth covered in hard particles, unwilling to carry people, and wanted to lift us off its back at the first opportunity. I was shaken so that my stomach was misaligned, and I said, who of you will help me for a while? I plan to remodel the seat and use a few bags of rice to make it look like a sofa, although the buttocks are definitely much more comfortable than now.同病相怜的女兵们精神一振，都说我主意不错。

  The female soldiers who were sick and sympathetic to each other cheered up and said that I had a good idea.胡说！老兵斥我。

  Nonsense! The veteran reprimanded me.怎么啦？我不服气。

  What's wrong? I am not convinced.你找死啊！上山的路，奇险无比，咱是摸着阎王鼻子走钢丝，你还想舒服？到时候一个急转弯，你的麻袋沙发砸下来，屁股倒是不硌了，整个人成了米粉肉！老兵慢吞吞地说着刻毒的话。

  You are looking for death! The road up the mountain is extremely dangerous, we are walking on a tightrope with the nose of the King of Hell, do you still want to be comfortable? When the time comes, a sharp turn, your sack sofa will smash down, your butt will not be flat, and the whole person will become rice noodles! The veteran slowly said harsh words.想想也是。我讨了个没趣，只得乖乖地坐着重新张望。车外是一片青翠的原野，有薄荷样的清凉味道弥漫在裹着黄沙的空气中。

  Think about it. I was bored, so I had to sit obediently and look again. Outside the car is a verdant field, with a cool mint-like smell filling the air wrapped in yellow sand.要走几天，才能到目的地啊？有人问。

  How many days do you have to walk to reach your destination? Someone asked.大家都默不作声，车里能回答这个问题的，只有一个人。可是此刻他眯缝着眼，好像已经昏过去了。

  Everyone was silent, and there was only one person in the car who could answer this question. But at this moment he squinted his eyes, as if he had passed out.要是没什么意外的话，也就是说，不翻车，不遇上暴风雪，司机不得急病，车子不抛锚……六天。过了好久，当我们对获知答案基本绝望的时候，老兵瓮声瓮气地回答。

  If there is no accident, that is, if the car does not roll over, does not encounter a snowstorm, the driver must not be suddenly ill, and the car will not break down...... Six days. After a long time, when we were basically desperate to learn the answer, the veteran replied angrily.天哪，要走那么远的路！那还不到外国啦？要是能快点就好了，到了我就能给我妈妈写信了。鹿鹿说。她是我们之中最小的，肯定想家了。

  Oh my God, it's been such a long journey! That's not a foreign country? If only I could hurry, I would be able to write to my mother when I arrived. Lulu said. She is the youngest of us and must be homesick.老兵突然睁开眼，说，车走得那么快，有什么好的？还是慢点好，抓紧时间，好好看看，好好闻闻吧。他说得很认真，像是在传授什么秘诀。

  The veteran suddenly opened his eyes and said, what's so good about the car going so fast? It's better to slow down, hurry up, take a good look, and smell it. He spoke seriously, as if he was teaching some secret.我们四处乱瞧，耸动鼻子，但除了山峦和扑面的尘土以外，没发现什么特别的好味道。只好请教他，你让我们看什么闻什么呢？

  We looked around and shook our noses, but we found nothing particularly good except for the mountains and the dust that hit our faces. I had to ask him, what do you let us see and smell?看地。闻气。老兵很简略地说。

  Look at the ground. Smell the breath. The veteran said briefly.地有什么好看的呢？每个人都在地上生活了十几年，地就像我们的身体，早就熟透了。现在我们巴望的是早早到陌生的高原上去。至于空气，不就是一种无色无味风一样流动的东西吗？它无时无刻不在陪伴着我们，鼻子里嘴巴里胸膛中都充满了它，从我们一出生就与之相伴了。

  What is so beautiful about the land? Everyone has lived on the earth for more than ten years, and the earth is like our body, which has long been ripe. Now what we hope to do is to go to the unfamiliar plateau early. As for air, isn't it just a colorless and odorless thing that flows like wind? It is with us all the time, the nose, mouth, chest are full of it, and it has been with us since we were born.不得要领，只得继续请教傲慢的老兵。老兵这一回很健谈，好像一直在等着教育我们的机会，马上就要开始爬山了，当然，是汽车在爬，不是我们爬。但是都一样，你会觉得路在我们面前立起来，汽车像个铁猴子攀登。爬得高了，氧气就慢慢稀薄了，好像空气和冰雪有不共戴天的仇恨，雪多的地方，空气就越来越少。

  I didn't get to the point, so I had to continue to consult the arrogant veterans. The veteran was very talkative this time, as if he had been waiting for the opportunity to educate us, and was about to start climbing the mountain, of course, it was the car that was climbing, not us. But all the same, you will feel that the road stands in front of us, and the car climbs like an iron monkey. As you climb higher, the oxygen slowly becomes thinner, as if there is a hatred between air and ice and snow, and where there is more snow, the air becomes less and less.空气少了，是一种什么滋味呢？是不是就像感冒时，鼻子里堵满了鼻涕的感觉？大家纷纷议论。

  What does it feel like to have less air? Is it like the feeling of a stuffy nose when you have a cold? Everyone talked about it.不是那么回事。比起来，感冒就太舒服了。缺氧的感觉，就像有人掐住你的脖子，然后用鞭子赶着你在玻璃罩子里跑。你拼命张大了嘴呼吸，可是肺永远是空的……老兵若有所思地说。

  Not so so. In comparison, colds are too comfortable. The feeling of lack of oxygen, like someone grabbing your neck and driving you through the glass cover with a whip. You desperately open your mouth wide to breathe, but your lungs are always empty...... The veteran said thoughtfully.这真是太可怕了。我们一个个煞白着脸，好像在听一个从地狱里回来的人讲旅游经历。

  It's terrible. We all looked pale, as if we were listening to a person returning from hell talk about his travel experience.老兵是个很奇怪的人，当我们满不在乎的时候，他就吓唬我们。我们真的害怕了，他又变得大大咧咧。

  The veteran is a very strange person, and when we are full of care, he scares us. We were really scared, and he became carefree again.我告诉你们一个治缺氧的好办法吧，百治百灵的……他很神秘地说。

  Let me tell you a good way to treat hypoxia, Baizhi Bailing's ...... He said mysteriously.啊，我知道的。一定是吸氧气了。鹿鹿的家里有从医的根底，抢先说道。

  Ah, I know. It must be oxygen. Lulu's family has a foundation in medicine, and he said first.老兵有些泄气，但他很快恢复了指点江山的气概，说，你那是洋法子。荒山野岭的，到哪儿去找氧气筒？我说的是土方子，偏方治大病，你们知不知道？

  The veteran was a little discouraged, but he quickly regained his spirit of pointing out the country and said, you are a foreign method. In the barren mountains and wilderness, where can I find an oxygen tank? I'm talking about earthworks, folk remedies to treat serious diseases, do you know?我们怕他一生气，就不讲了，忙狠狠地瞪小鹿，齐声说，知道知道，偏方治大病。

  We were afraid that he would be angry, so we stopped talking, and hurriedly glared at the deer fiercely, saying in unison, knowing, knowing, folk remedies to cure serious diseases.老兵这才告诉我们，治缺氧最好的办法是——用背包带，喏，就是你们捆行李的那种，把自己的头紧紧地缠起来。记住，一定要用那根宽带子，窄的不管事。

  Only then did the veteran tell us that the best way to treat hypoxia is to use a backpack strap, the kind you tie up your luggage with, and wrap your head tightly. Remember, be sure to use that wide band, narrow and nothing.我们目瞪口呆，果平第一个战战兢兢地说，那还不得把人勒死了？

  We were stunned, and Guo Ping was the first to say tremblingly, then you can't strangle people to death?老兵大不耐烦，说，我让你勒的是太阳穴那个位置，又没让你勒脖子，怎么就会死了！

  The veteran was impatient and said, I asked you to strangle the temple, and I didn't let you strangle my neck, how could I die!大家想想也是，河莲说，是不是勒成日本浪人那副模样？

  Everyone think about it, Ha Lian said, is it like a Japanese ronin?老兵说，日本浪人什么样，我没见过。反正这个法子治好了许多缺氧头痛的兵，信不信由你们。

  The veteran said, I have never seen what Japanese ronin looks like. Anyway, this method has cured many soldiers with hypoxic headaches, believe it or not.我们赶快说，信信！

  Let's say quickly, believe in it!说话间，汽车马达发出很怪异的声响，好像是发动机得了肺炎，吭哧吭哧直咳嗽。老兵警觉地说，这就是开始爬达坂了。平原已经一去不复返。

  As he spoke, the car motor made a very strange sound, as if the engine had pneumonia, and he coughed. The veteran said alertly, this is the beginning of climbing the slope. The plains are gone.我们从墨绿色的汽车篷布缝隙，注视着越退越远的平原，意识到一种巨大的变化就要出现了。

  We looked at the plain that was receding further and further away from the gaps in the dark green car tarpaulin, and realized that a great change was about to appear.老兵谆谆告诫我们，今天到了兵站的时候，你们一定不可以跳下车就撒腿跑。因为身体根本不适应高原，你一剧烈活动，心脏的负担突然加重，它受不了，就罢工了。你就永远睡在第一个兵站了。

  The veteran earnestly warned us that when you arrive at the military station today, you must not jump out of the car and run away. Because the body is not adapted to the plateau at all, when you are vigorous, the burden on the heart suddenly increases, it can't stand it, and it strikes. You will sleep forever in the first military station.尽管老兵的口气很平稳，我们还是吓得不敢大口喘气。河莲似乎连笑也很节省气力，再不像往日那样哈哈个不停，只是小小地抿着嘴，好像旧时代的小姐。她不放心地说，如果背包带勒头不管事，怎么办呢？老兵很干脆地说，那就成烈士呗。阿里这地方就这点好，不管你是因为什么原因死的，只要牺牲在高原，就算是正经八百的烈士。说起来也有道理，要不是保家卫国，谁到这天边似的地方来呢。

  Despite the veteran's steady tone, we were too scared to take a deep breath. He Lian seemed to be very energy-saving even when she smiled, and she didn't stop laughing like before, she just pursed her lips slightly, like a young lady from the old era. She said uneasily, what if the backpack strap doesn't matter? The veteran said simply, then he will become a martyr. Ali is this good place, no matter what reason you died, as long as you died on the plateau, even if you are a serious martyr. It makes sense, if it weren't for defending the country, who would come to this place like the edge of the sky.我们都不想小小的年纪就成为烈士，因此，就很注意保养自己，大家话也不敢多说，软软地靠在大米袋子上，生怕一个微小的举动，消耗掉体内宝贵的氧气，悲惨地成了第一个用背包带勒头的人。

  None of us want to become martyrs at a young age, so we pay great attention to taking care of ourselves, and we don't dare to say much, leaning softly on the rice bag, for fear that a small gesture will consume the precious oxygen in the body, and tragically become the first person to strangle our heads with a backpack.缺氧有一种轻度的麻醉作用，像喝了酒似的，晕晕乎乎。初次体验这种感觉的我们，以为它是晕车呢，并不在意。只是原来观看景色的眼皮，好像被糊了一层透明胶纸，你什么都可以看到，却觉得遥远而虚假。刚开始是冷漠地眯起眼帘，后来干脆昏昏欲睡，仿佛被人施了武林中的“麻骨松筋散”，大脑一片空白。

  Hypoxia has a mild anesthetic effect, like drinking alcohol, dizzy. When we first experienced this feeling, we thought it was motion sickness and didn't care. It's just that the eyelids of the original view seem to be pasted with a layer of transparent tape, and you can see everything, but it feels distant and false. At first, he squinted his eyes indifferently, but then he simply became drowsy, as if he had been given the "numb bones and loose tendons" in the martial arts, and his brain was blank.

  到啦到啦！老兵喊起来。

  It's here, it's here! The veteran shouted.我们一惊，今天怎么过得这么快？老兵说，第一天登山的路，料到大伙都不习惯，特地安排得短些。以后甭想这么舒服了，晓行夜宿，早上摸着星星出兵站，晚上揣着月亮进兵站。对了，这还是在车子不闹脾气的好运气下。要是出了故障，另当别论，也许在冰达坂上蹲上个三天两宿，也正常。

  We were surprised, why did today pass so quickly? The veteran said that on the first day, he expected that everyone would not be used to it, so he specially arranged it shorter. In the future, I don't want to be so comfortable, I will stay at night, feel the stars in the morning and enter the military station with the moon in the evening. By the way, this is still under the good luck of not losing a temper in the car. If something goes wrong, it's another matter, maybe squatting on Bingda Slope for three days and two nights is normal.老兵有个爱好，特别喜欢说不吉利的话，好像能从中感到极大的乐趣。

  Veterans have a hobby, especially like to say unlucky things, as if they can feel great fun from it.河莲撇撇嘴。那没说出来的话，我们都听到了——吓唬人呗！

  He Lian curled her lips. We all heard the unspoken words - scary!老兵不傻，看出了我们的不以为然。他撩开篷布，一指兵站后面的小山，说，看到了吗？

  The veterans are not stupid and see that we are not impressed. He lifted the tarpaulin, pointed to the hill behind the military station, and said, do you see it?兵站这个名字，很有点烽烟缭绕的边塞感，想象中该是庞大的屯兵之地，发生过“增兵减灶”之类的惊险故事。哪怕是军棋上的兵站，也有些不凡。谁一躲进去，就可避免炸弹的袭击。军长、司令也常常在内休养生息。可眼前的这几间低矮的小平房，冒着袅袅的炊烟，和普通的民居差不多，实在让人难以生出英武之感。至于兵站后面的小山，要不是老兵特意提示，根本就没人注意。一路上，这种貌不惊人的山梁，大约经过了几万座。

  The name of the military station is a bit of a sense of border fortification, and it should be a huge garrison in the imagination, and there have been thrilling stories such as "increasing troops and reducing stoves". Even the military station on military chess is a bit extraordinary. Whoever hides in will avoid the bomb attack. Commanders and commanders also often recuperate inside. But the few low bungalows in front of me, with the smoke of cooking, are similar to ordinary houses, which is really difficult to give birth to a sense of heroism. As for the hill behind the military station, if it weren't for the veteran's special reminder, no one would have paid attention at all. Along the way, this kind of unamazing-looking mountain beam passed by about tens of thousands.看到了。大家应付老兵说。

  See. Everyone said to the veteran.看到什么啦？老兵穷追不舍，好像诲人不倦的老师，课堂上提问没完成作业的差生。

  What do you see? Veterans chase relentlessly, like tireless teachers, poor students who ask questions in class and have not completed their homework.看到一座普普通通的山。我们懒懒地答道。

  See an ordinary mountain. We replied lazily.谁让你们看山了？我让你们看的是山上的东西。老兵有些火了，脸皱得像汽车轮胎。

  Who let you see the mountain? I let you see things on the mountain. The veteran was a little angry, his face wrinkled like a car tire.山上还有东西？我们很吃惊，幸好我们都是刚验过身体的新兵，视力绝对是雏鹰般敏锐，很快就看到了小山坡上的确有一些隆起的小土包，好像还有凋零的白花。

  Is there something else on the mountain? We were surprised, fortunately we were all recruits who had just undergone physical examinations, and our eyesight was definitely as sharp as a young eagle, and we soon saw that there were indeed some raised small earthen bags on the hillside, as if there were withered white flowers.知道那是什么东西吗？坟。是一些像你们一样年轻、第一次上山的兵，没经验，觉得高原也没有什么了不起的，天是一样地蓝，水是一样地清。他们不听招呼，低估了高原的杀伤力。有人因为憋了一泡尿，下了车就跑，啪，摔倒了，再也没起来，永远留在高原上了。从今天开始，你们在上山的每一个兵站后面，都会看到一片铺满白雪的墓地。今天才是高原的边角，雪山的第一级台阶。假如你们要想在高原上活下去，必须对高原毕恭毕敬。你瞧不起它，它就让你拿命来向它赔不是。记住了吗？老兵这一席话，说得我们开始对他佩服得五体投地。

  Do you know what that thing is? Grave. They are some soldiers who are young like you and are going up the mountain for the first time, inexperienced, and feel that there is nothing great about the plateau, the sky is the same blue, and the water is the same clear. They did not listen to greetings and underestimated the lethality of the plateau. Some people ran out of the car because they held back their urine, snapped, fell, never got up again, and stayed on the plateau forever. Starting today, behind every military station you go up the mountain, you will see a cemetery covered with snow. Today is the corner of the plateau, the first step of the snow-capped mountains. If you want to live on the plateau, you must be respectful to the plateau. If you look down on it, it will let you take your life to compensate it. Remember? The veteran's words made us admire him so much that we began to admire him.老兵率先下了车，铁拐李似的，走得极慢。我们按照他的样子，像旧社会的小脚女人，一步迈不了三寸。

  The veteran got out of the car first, like an iron crutch, walking extremely slowly. We follow his image, like a woman with small feet in the old society, who can't take a step three inches.西部夜幕落得晚，这天行程也短，此刻太阳在很高的山上悬挂着，像一只金羽毛的火鸟，灿烂而冷漠。果平说，啊，我对高原的第一个感觉是寂静，第二个感觉是寒冷，第三个感觉是空旷，第四个感觉是……

  The night in the west fell late, and the itinerary was short, and at this moment the sun hung on the high mountains, like a firebird with golden feathers, brilliant and indifferent. Guo Ping said, ah, my first feeling of the plateau is silence, the second feeling is cold, the third feeling is emptiness, and the fourth feeling is ......老兵不屑地说，这里才三千多米，你就那么多的感觉。要是到了阿里，足有六千多米，你还不得弄个十来八条的感觉，累不累啊？

  The veteran said disdainfully, it's only more than 3,000 meters here, and you have so many feelings. If you arrive in Ali, there are more than 6,000 meters, you still have to make a feeling of ten or eight, are you tired?果平仿佛被人塞了一脖子雪，立时没了说话的情绪。我们慢慢走到食堂，默不作声地开始吃饭。主食是大米饭，菜肴因为一下来了这么多人，兵站措手不及，不及准备，就倒了半盆酱油，说用这个拌米饭，很好吃的。

  Guo Ping seemed to have been stuffed with snow in his neck, and immediately lost the mood to speak. We slowly walked to the cafeteria and started eating in silence. The staple food is rice, and the dish was caught off guard by so many people at once, and before they could prepare, they poured half a pot of soy sauce, saying that it was delicious to mix with rice.我心说，这玩意儿黑不溜秋咸不啦唧的，倒在米饭里，能咽得下去吗？

  I thought to myself, this thing is black and salty, can it be swallowed when poured into rice?嘿！真奇怪，舌头一上了高原，好像也发生了奇妙的变化，竟然完全分辨不出食物的味道。米饭吃到嘴里，像一粒粒长着刺的锯末。酱油汁把米饭渗透到发红发黑的地步，也不觉咸，好像搅拌进去的是一种无味的特殊颜料。不过，胃比舌头可捣蛋多了，刚吃第一口，就想吐。

  Hey! It's really strange, as soon as the tongue goes up to the plateau, it seems to have undergone a wonderful change, and it can't distinguish the taste of food at all. When the rice is eaten in the mouth, it is like sawdust with thorns. The soy sauce sauce penetrates the rice to the point of turning red and black, and it doesn't feel salty, as if it is stirred in a special odorless pigment. However, the stomach is much more tricky than the tongue, and as soon as I take the first bite, I want to vomit.看我们眉头紧锁不动筷子，老兵大口咽着饭说，知道了吧，这就是高原的厉害了。它会变魔术。从现在开始，你们要放弃在平原上的许多怪毛病。吃东西，不是为了舌头，而是为了肚子，为了脑袋，为了胳膊腿……一句话，为了能在高原上好好地活下去，你必须得吃。别理舌头那个家伙，听它的，你什么也不想吃。更别理胃那个软溜溜的没骨气的玩意儿，它想吐，你愣吃，它也没法，吃进去就是胜利。

  Seeing that we frowned and couldn't move our chopsticks, the veteran swallowed his food and said, you know, this is the power of the plateau. It works magic. From now on, you will give up the many strange problems of the plains. Eat not for the tongue, but for the stomach, for the head, for the arms and legs...... In a word, in order to survive well on the plateau, you have to eat. Ignore the tongue guy, listen to it, you don't want to eat anything. Don't pay attention to the soft and spineless thing in the stomach, it wants to vomit, you are stunned to eat, it can't eat, eating it is victory.我们像吃毒药似的，每人填了半碗饭。甭管老兵怎么用眼光督战，还是义无反顾地撤离饭桌，到各自房间睡觉。躺进冷硬如铁的被子时，我最后一个动作是看了看宽背包带放在哪儿。

  We were like poison, each filling half a bowl of rice. Regardless of how the veterans supervised the battle with their eyes, they still evacuated the dinner table and went to sleep in their respective rooms without hesitation. When I lay down on the quilt, which was as cold as iron, my last action was to look at where the wide backpack strap was placed.咳，也不知道明天早上，我还会不会在阳光下醒来？要是就这样“烈士”了，倒也不算太难受。我想着，很快睡着了。

  Cough, I don't know if I will wake up in the sun tomorrow morning? If he is a "martyr" like this, it is not too uncomfortable. I thought about it and fell asleep quickly.第二天起来的时候，没什么独特的倒霉感觉，我甚至都有点失望了，高原不过如此。

  When I got up the next day, there was no unique feeling of bad luck, and I was even a little disappointed, just like the plateau.但很快，我就知道自己小瞧了高原。它用大智若愚的绵长内力，慢慢地持久地消耗着我们，当到达海拔六千米的界山达坂时，猛地一变脸，发动了全面的攻击。

  But soon, I knew I underestimated the plateau. It used its long internal force to consume us slowly and persistently, and when it reached Jieshan Daban at an altitude of 6,000 meters, it suddenly changed its face and launched an all-out attack.胸膛里吸进的好像不再是空气，而是一种黏糊糊的金属，沉重而压抑。肋骨好像变成了八脚章鱼，紧紧地箍着肺，让它没法像平日那般自由扩张。脑袋里装满了打火石，摇一下就金星乱冒。眼珠子胀得难受，恨不能把它抠出来，用冰凉的雪水擦擦四周，再安回狭小的眼眶。每个人都嘴唇青紫，好像刚刚吃完玫瑰香葡萄，葡萄皮没吐干净。

  It seemed that what was sucked in in the chest was no longer air, but a slimy metal, heavy and oppressive. The ribs seemed to have turned into an eight-legged octopus, tightly clamping the lungs, preventing it from expanding freely as usual. The head is full of flint, and when you shake it, Venus will appear. The eyeballs were swollen uncomfortably, and I wished I could pick it out, wipe it around with cold snow water, and then put it back into the narrow eye sockets. Everyone's lips were blue, as if they had just eaten rose grapes, and the grape skin was not spit out.

  恰好这时，由于海拔太高，气压太低，汽车也犯了高原病，水箱开锅了，呼呼直冒热气，像个火车头。司机只好停车，到远处去背雪，赶快给发高烧的汽车降温，让它歇息一会儿才可继续赶路。

  At this time, due to the high altitude and low air pressure, the car also suffered from altitude sickness, and the water tank turned on and steamed up, like a locomotive. The driver had to stop and go to a distant place to carry the snow, quickly cool down the car with a high fever, and let it rest for a while before continuing on the road.我们像些八十岁的老婆婆，颤颤巍巍地爬下车。虽然一上一下又要消耗不少体力，喘似多年的老气管炎病人，我们还是要站在雪地上透透风。

  We are like eighty-year-old women, trembling and climbing out of the car. Although it takes a lot of physical strength to go up and down, and we still have to stand on the snow to ventilate the air.

  无垠的雪原环绕着我们。五个女孩互相搀扶着，站在巨大的高原中央，惊讶它无比的美丽和壮观。天蓝得让人误以为是深不可测的海底，一朵白云像沉睡千年的珊瑚礁，凝然不动地沉没在空中，喜马拉雅鹰像热带鱼一般翩翩而过，黑翅掀起的气流，使山影像浸在水里的绸缎般抖动不止。陡峭的山峰戴着白雪的桂冠，安然地屹立着，好像在打坐，思索着人世间的难题。在偏戴着的帽子顶端，镶着钻石般的冰川，阳光照耀下，折射出的无数根银线，几乎要把人的双眼刺瞎。精灵般的野马，用花瓣一样的蹄子，把山石敲打出紫色的火星，似岚气顺着山脊蜿蜒攀升，只把一条乱甩的尾巴，留在跟踪它的眼光里……

  Endless snowfields surround us. Five girls supported each other and stood in the middle of the huge plateau, amazed at its incomparable beauty and spectacle. The sky is so blue that people mistake it for an unfathomable seabed, a white cloud sinks into the air like a coral reef that has been dormant for thousands of years, the Himalayan eagle flutters like a tropical fish, and the air currents raised by the black wings make the mountain image shake like satin immersed in water. The steep peaks stand peacefully with snow-white laurel crowns, as if meditating, thinking about the problems of the world. At the top of the hat he was wearing, there was a diamond-like glacier, and under the sunlight, countless silver threads were refracted, almost blinding people's eyes. The elf-like wild horse, with its petal-like hooves, knocked the rocks out of purple sparks, and climbed up along the ridge like mist, leaving only a flicking tail in the eyes that followed it......我们呆呆地看着，缺氧使我们变傻，恍惚间觉得自己到了月亮背面，虽然极端荒凉，但美得令人不可思议。

  We watched blankly, the lack of oxygen made us stupid, and in a trance we felt that we were on the far side of the moon, which was extremely desolate but incredibly beautiful.果平掐掐自己的腮帮子，说，咦，我怎么不觉得疼？这是在梦里吧？

  Guo Ping pinched his cheeks and said, hey, why don't I feel pain? This is in a dream, right?河莲很有经验地说，因为太冷，你脸上的肉都变成木板了，所以感觉不出疼。你可换种方式，比如用牙咬咬舌头，狠一点，才会见效果。

  He Lian said with great experience that because it was too cold, the flesh on your face turned into a wooden board, so you didn't feel any pain. You can change the way, such as biting your tongue with your teeth, and be more ruthless, to see the effect.果平“呸”了她一口说，我宁愿相信自己是到了火星，也不愿把舌头咬出血。

  Guo Ping "bah" her and said, I would rather believe that I was on Mars than bite my tongue and bleed.河莲做出很无辜的样子说，我在脑子缺氧的情况下，还替你想出这样有效的办法，而你，真是不识好人心！

  He Lian made a very innocent look and said, I came up with such an effective method for you when my brain was deprived of oxygen, and you really don't know good people!什么事都怕说，本来每个人都头痛欲裂，以为别人没感觉，就不好意思呻吟叫唤。现在有人开了头，大家就同仇敌忾地叫起苦来。

  Everyone was afraid to say anything, and everyone had a headache, thinking that others didn't feel it, so they were embarrassed to moan. Now that someone has started, everyone will cry out in anger with the enemy.鹿鹿的头上早已绑了背包带，因为用力过大，额头勒得像个细腰葫芦，嘴巴被扯到耳朵根，好像她无时无刻不在嘲笑谁。她说，还偏方治大病呢，我的脑袋都捆成炸药包了，一点用也没有。

  Lu Lu had already tied a backpack strap to her head, because of the excessive force, her forehead was strangled like a slender-waisted gourd, and her mouth was pulled to the base of her ears, as if she was laughing at someone all the time. She said, "I also have folk remedies to treat serious diseases, and my head is tied up in explosive bags, which is of no use at all."果平说，真想把肺从肚子里掏出来，邮寄到平原去，让家里人给灌饱了氧气，再寄回来。

  Guo Ping said that he really wanted to take the lungs out of his stomach and mail them to the plains, so that his family could fill them with oxygen and send them back.河莲说，那可得挂号。要是万一寄丢了，你不就成了有心没肺的人了？

  He Lian said, you have to register. If you lose it, won't you become a heartless person?沉稳的小如说，我有一个设想……

  The calm Xiaoru said, I have an idea......大家就都很感兴趣地凑过来，要知道在这里冒出来的设想，很有可能是世界上最高级的。别的地方海拔哪儿有这么高！

  Everyone came over with great interest, knowing that the ideas that emerged here were likely to be the most advanced in the world. Where else is the altitude so high!小如说，我想制造一种氧气压缩片。小小的，白白的，很洁净的样子。含在嘴里，甜甜的，用舌头一抿，就有清凉的氧气从牙缝中源源不断地冒出来。呼吸到肺里，肺就像海上的风帆一般，张开来，像白蝴蝶一样，所有缺氧的难受就都消失了。

  Xiaoru said, I want to make an oxygen compression tablet. Small, white, very clean. Holding it in your mouth, sweet, with a spurse of your tongue, cool oxygen continues to come out from between your teeth. Breathing into the lungs, the lungs are like sails on the sea, opening up, like white butterflies, and all the discomfort of lack of oxygen disappears.我们听着，都无限神往地舔着嘴唇……可惜啊，嘴里翻腾的都是昨晚上的酱油泡米饭滋味，小如的氧气压缩片只是一个梦。

  We listened and licked our lips with infinite fascination...... It's a pity that all that is churning in my mouth is the taste of soy sauce-soaked rice from last night, and Xiaoru's oxygen compression tablets are just a dream.老兵不知道什么时候走了过来，听了我们的谈话，说，氧气可以压缩到瓶子里，关键时刻真的能救命呢。压成片，没听说过。就是能行，也不能做。太危险了。比如，你兜里装了许多氧气片，要是经过炉子旁边，会呼地一下烧起来，爆炸起火……

  The veteran didn't know when he came over, listened to our conversation, and said that oxygen can be compressed into a bottle, and it can really save lives at critical moments. Pressed into pieces, I have never heard of it. Even if it can be done, it cannot be done. It's too dangerous. For example, if you have a lot of oxygen sheets in your pocket, if you pass by the stove, it will burn and explode......我们掐着自己的太阳穴，困难地思索着老兵的话，在高原上，神经的传导也像蜗牛一般磨蹭。半晌之后，我们在心里强烈地反驳他：老兵，你也太没点想象力了。难道不能在氧气压缩片的外面，裹上一层保护用的红色糖衣，让它像巧克力豆一般美丽吗？揣着它穿过火焰的时候，至多是外皮有一点发黏，并不会影响使用。需要的时候含在嘴里，轻微的香甜过去之后，糖衣融化完，就一定会有带着薄荷味儿的氧气，像雨后森林的风一般，源源涌出。

  We pinched our temples and thought about the veteran's words with difficulty, and on the plateau, the conduction of nerves also rubbed like snails. After a while, we strongly refuted him in our hearts: Veteran, you are too unimaginative. Can't you wrap a protective red icing coating on the outside of the oxygen compression tablet to make it as beautiful as a chocolate chip? When carrying it through the flame, at most the skin is a little sticky, which will not affect the use. Hold it in your mouth when you need it, and after the slight sweetness passes, after the sugar coating melts, there will definitely be oxygen with the smell of mint, like the wind in the forest after the rain, gushing out.

未知

  07.黑白拂尘

  07. Black and white dust

  抵达阿里，我们受到了热烈的欢迎。头几天，领导上照顾我们，说是不安排工作，让安心休息以适应高原。我们住在医院最暖和的房子里，清闲得像一群公主。

  Arriving in Ali, we were warmly welcomed. In the first few days, the leader took care of us, saying that they would not arrange work and let them rest in peace to adapt to the plateau. We lived in the warmest house in the hospital, as leisurely as a group of princesses.一天早上，我走出房门，突然看到一个奇怪的庞然大物卧在雪地上，目光炯炯地面对着我。它眼若铜铃，身披长毛，威风凛凛地凝视远方，丝毫也不把寒冷放在心上，好像身下不是皑皑的白雪，而是温暖的丝绵。它一动也不动，仿佛一堵古老残破的褐色城墙。长而弯曲的犄角，散发着不可抗拒的威严。

  One morning, I walked out of the door and suddenly saw a strange behemoth lying on the snow, its eyes staring at me. Its eyes were like copper bells, covered in long hair, staring majestically into the distance, and it did not take the cold to heart at all, as if it was not white snow under it, but warm silk. It didn't move, like an old and dilapidated brown wall. The long, curved horns exude irresistible majesty.天哪！这是什么？我小声喊道。原本是想大叫的，只是突然想到若是一下子惊动了这猛兽，它还不得用舌头把我卷上天空，然后掉下来摔成一摊肉泥！声音就在喉咙里飞快地缩小，最后成了恐惧的嘟囔。

  Oh, my God! What is it? I whispered. I originally wanted to scream, but suddenly thought that if I alarmed this beast all of a sudden, it wouldn't have to roll me up into the sky with my tongue, and then fall down and fall into a pile of meat paste! The voice quickly shrank in his throat, and finally became a muttering of fear.声音虽弱，但受了惊吓的慌张劲儿还是成色十足。河莲一边用牙刷捅着腮帮子，一边吐着泡沫从屋里走出来说，一大清早，你瞎叫什么呀？好像撞见了鬼？

  Although the voice was weak, the frightened panic was still full of color. He Lian poked her cheeks with a toothbrush, while spitting out foam and walked out of the house and said, early in the morning, what are you talking about? It seems like you have bumped into a ghost?我战战兢兢地指给她看，说，比鬼可怕多了。鬼是轻飘飘的，可它比一百个鬼都有劲儿！

  I pointed to her tremblingly and said, "It's much more terrifying than a ghost." The ghost is light, but it is more energetic than a hundred ghosts!河莲顺着我的手指看去，眼光触到怪物，大叫了一声，哎哟，我的妈呀，肯定是牛魔王闯到咱们家来啦！说罢，吐着牙膏沫子逃向别处。

  He Lian followed my finger, her eyes touched the monster, and she shouted, oh, my mother, it must be the Bull Demon King who broke into our house! After saying that, he spat out toothpaste foam and fled elsewhere.本来我想河莲会给我壮个胆，没想到她临阵脱逃。我偷着瞅了一眼怪物，只见它的大眼睛很温驯地瞄着我们的小屋，并没有露出恼火的神色。过了半天，它沉重地眨了一下眼皮，就又悠然自得地注视远方去了。

  Originally, I thought He Lian would give me courage, but I didn't expect her to escape. I stole a glance at the monster, only to see its big eyes staring at our cabin very meekly, without showing an annoyed look. After a long time, it blinked its eyelids heavily, and then looked into the distance leisurely.我屏住气，悄悄地走近它。只见它浑身上下都是尺把长的棕黑毛，好像裹着一件硕大的蓑衣，连海碗大的蹄子上方也长满了毛，像毛靴一样把自己保护得严严实实，难怪它对酷寒无动于衷，没准儿觉得像乘凉一般舒服呢。连它的尾巴也不同寻常，不似水牛、黄牛的，只是小小的一绺儿，在屁股后面抽抽打打地赶蚊蝇，好像苍蝇拍一样。这家伙的尾巴是蓬蓬松松的一大把，好像一只同样颜色的小松鼠顽皮地蹲在它身后。我正看得带劲儿，它突然不耐烦起来，挺起胸膛，大大地张开嘴巴，我看到雪白的牙齿和红红的舌头，一股淡黄色的热气喷涌而出，好像它的嘴巴是一个即将爆发的火山口……

  I held my breath and quietly approached it. I saw that it was covered with brown and black hair all over its body, as if it was wrapped in a huge raincoat, and even the top of the hooves of the sea bowl was covered with hair, protecting itself tightly like woolen boots, no wonder it was indifferent to the cold, and maybe it felt as comfortable as enjoying the shade. Even its tail is unusual, unlike that of buffalo and scalpers, just a small strand, whipping behind its buttocks to drive away mosquitoes and flies, like fly swatters. The guy's tail is a large fluffy handful, like a small squirrel of the same color squatting playfully behind it. I was watching it vigorously, it suddenly became impatient, puffed out its chest, opened its mouth wide, and I saw snow-white teeth and a red tongue, a pale yellow heat gushed out, as if its mouth was a crater about to erupt......更可怕的事还在后面，从它粗大得像水桶一般的喉咙里，发出了震撼山峦的吼叫。

  More terrible things were yet to come, and from its throat, which was as thick as a bucket, there was a roar that shook the mountains.我被这叫声吓呆了，不仅仅是因为它的声音大，像它这么大的体积，吼声震天是意料中的事。令人惊异的是它的叫声太像猪了，好像宇宙间有一大群猪八戒，接受了统一的口令，齐声高歌。

  I was stunned by this cry, not only because of its loud voice, but because of its size, it was expected to roar to shake the sky. What is amazing is that its cry is too much like a pig, as if there is a large group of pig Bajie in the universe, accepting a unified password and singing in unison.我看着发出猪叫的怪物，它也很得意地看着我，好像在说，对，就是我在叫。怎么样啊？真正的猪也没我叫得像吧？

  I looked at the monster that was barking, and it looked at me proudly, as if to say, yes, I was screaming. How is it? The real pig doesn't look like me, right?震耳欲聋的猪叫声把老蓝给引出来了。老蓝是医院里最老的医生，有一种爷爷的风度。他一看我和怪物对峙的局面，忙打了一声奇怪的呼哨。那怪物好像听到了同伴的召唤，慢慢爬起来，恋恋不舍地看了我们一眼，向远处的深山走去。

  The deafening pig cry lured Lao Lan out. Lao Lan is the oldest doctor in the hospital, and he has a grandfather's demeanor. When he saw the situation where I was confronting the monster, he hurriedly blew a strange whistle. The monster seemed to hear the call of its companions, slowly got up, glanced at us reluctantly, and walked towards the deep mountains in the distance.老蓝说，你这个女娃胆忒大，知道它是什么吗？

  Lao Lan said, you girl is bold, do you know what it is?我说，知道。它是野猪。

  I said, I know. It is a wild boar.老蓝说，错啦！它要是野猪，你还能安安生生地在这儿跟我耍贫嘴？它是牦牛！

  Lao Lan said, wrong! If it is a wild boar, can you still play with me here in peace?" It's a yak!

  我说，野牦牛？

  I said, wild yak?老蓝说，它是家牦牛，你没看它挺和气的，我一发出牧人的信号，它就找自己的伙伴去了？野牦牛的脾气要比它大得多，一不高兴，就会用犄角把你的肚子顶出两个透明的窟窿。

  Lao Lan said, it is a domestic yak, you didn't see that it is quite kind, as soon as I sent out the signal of the shepherd, it went to find its own partner? The wild yak has a much bigger temper than it, and when it is unhappy, it will use its horns to push your belly out of two transparent holes.我说，老蓝你没搞错吧？它的叫声分明是猪啊。我小的时候，在我姥姥家住过，猪圈就在窗户根底下，每天不是公鸡打鸣报告天亮，而是猪像闹钟一样准时把我叫醒。我可以证明，我们平常说猪是懒惰的动物，真是冤枉了它。猪是很勤快的，起得可早了……

  I said, Lao Lan, you are not mistaken, are you? Its cry is clearly a pig. When I was a child, I lived in my grandmother's house, and the pigsty was under the window, and every day it was not the rooster that crowed to report dawn, but the pig woke me up on time like an alarm clock. I can attest that we usually say that pigs are lazy animals, and we are really wronged about it. Pigs are very diligent and get up early......老蓝不耐烦地打断了我的啰唆，说我在西藏喝过的雪水，比你过的河都多。你看见过长角的猪吗？

  Lao Lan interrupted my insistence impatiently, saying that I had drunk more snow water in Tibet than you had crossed the river. Have you ever seen a pig with horns?我一下子傻了眼。是啊，古今中外，还真没听说过猪长角。

  I was dumbfounded. Yes, in ancient and modern China and abroad, I have never heard of pig horns.老蓝说，牦牛是一种特殊的牛，老在寒冷的高原住着，它们身上的毛就越长越长，恨不能拖拉到地上，变成一件毛大氅。它的叫声像猪，老乡就给它起了一个好听的小名，叫作“猪声牛”，其实，它和猪没有一点关系，是地地道道的牛科反刍动物。别看牦牛长得挺吓人，其实，它的脾气最好，而且特别能吃苦耐劳。早年间西藏没有公路不通汽车的时候，牦牛就是最主要的运输工具，被人赞为“高原之舟”，和骆驼属一个级别的。牦牛奶也很好喝，颜色是淡黄的，营养价值特别高。牦牛的肉也很好吃，因为它经常跋山涉水的，瘦肉多，一点也不腻。它的毛非常结实，细的可以用来纺线织牦牛绒的衣服，暖和极了。粗的毛可以搓绳子，擀毡，制帐篷……牦牛简直浑身都是宝。对了，它的油更是好东西，能打出上好的酥油茶，那个香啊……还有牦牛血，提神壮胆……

  Lao Lan said that yaks are a special kind of cow, always living on the cold plateau, the hair on their bodies is growing longer and longer, and they can't drag it to the ground and become a big cloak. Its cry is like a pig, and the fellow gave it a nice nickname, called "Pig Sound Cow", in fact, it has nothing to do with pigs, it is an authentic bovid ruminant. Don't look at the yak looking scary, in fact, it has the best temper and is particularly hardworking. In the early years, when Tibet had no roads and cars, yaks were the most important means of transportation, and were praised as "plateau boats", which belonged to the same level as camels. Yak milk is also very delicious, the color is light yellow, and the nutritional value is particularly high. The meat of the yak is also very tasty, because it often trekkes mountains and rivers, has a lot of lean meat, and is not greasy at all. Its fur is very strong, and the fine ones can be used to spin yak wool clothes, which are extremely warm. Coarse wool can be used to rub ropes, roll felt, and make tents...... The yak is simply full of treasures. By the way, its oil is even better, it can make good butter tea, that fragrant...... There is also yak blood, which is refreshing and courageous......老蓝说得得意起来，有滋有味地咂摸着，好像酥油茶抹了一嘴唇。

  Lao Lan said proudly, smacking it with taste, as if butter tea had wiped his lips.我刚开始听得很起劲儿，到了后来，忍不住说，老蓝，你怎么老说吃牦牛的事啊，都是高原上的生物，多不容易啊，为什么不让牦牛越养越多，漫山遍野？

  I listened very energetically at first, but later, I couldn't help but say, Lao Lan, why do you keep talking about eating yaks, they are all creatures on the plateau, how difficult it is, why not let the yaks raise more and more, all over the mountains?老蓝说，你这个女娃的想法怪。牦牛养得太多了，你让它们吃什么？高原上只有很少的地方能长草，牦牛的舌头一舔过去，地上就秃了。

  Lao Lan said, you girl has strange ideas. Yaks are raised too much, what do you let them eat? There are only a few places on the plateau where grass can grow, and when the yak's tongue licks it, the ground is bald.想想也是，我只好为牦牛的命运叹了一口气。

  Thinking about it, I had to sigh for the fate of the yak.这时河莲走来，说，那个可怕的家伙跑了？

  At this time, He Lian came over and said, that terrible guy ran away?我说，河莲，如果发生了战争，我断定你是个叛徒。

  I said, Ha Lian, if there is a war, I will conclude that you are a traitor.河莲说，你可冤枉了我！你以为老蓝是自发来的吗？那是我呼叫来的援军，我陪着你死守有什么用？还是老高原有办法。这是机动灵活的战略战术啊！

  He Lian said, you have wronged me! Do you think Lao Lan came spontaneously? That's the reinforcements I called, what's the use of me staying with you?" There is still a way for the old plateau. This is a mobile and flexible strategy and tactics!老蓝趁我们俩斗嘴的工夫，回到自己的房间。当他再次出现的时候，手里多了一柄雪白的拂尘。它长丝垂地，根根都像精心锻造的银线笔直刚硬，拂动晨风，令人有飘飘欲仙之感。

  Lao Lan took advantage of the bickering between the two of us and returned to his room. When he reappeared, there was a snow-white duster in his hand. Its filaments hang down to the ground, and the roots are straight and hard like carefully forged silver threads, blowing the morning breeze, making people feel like they are floating.

  我和河莲看傻了，觉得老蓝一下子变成了观音菩萨的化身，手持拂尘，仙风道骨，超然脱俗。

  He Lian and I were dumbfounded, and felt that Lao Lan suddenly became the incarnation of Guanyin Bodhisattva, holding a duster, with a fairy style and bones, transcendent and refined.老蓝当然还是那个倔老头儿的模样，关键是他手中的那柄拂尘，像精彩的道具，让老蓝摇身一变，使人耳目一新。

  Of course, Lao Lan still looks like the stubborn old man, the key is that the duster in his hand is like a wonderful prop, which makes Lao Lan transform and make people refreshed.您这个东西是干什么用的？河莲问。

  What is this thing for? He Lian asked.老蓝得意地一挥拂尘，轻盈地旋转了一下，原先聚在一起的银丝，就像一把白绸伞，缓缓地张开了翅膀，绽成一朵白莲花，在初升的太阳照耀下，晶莹剔透，神奇极了。

  Lao Lan waved the dust proudly and spun lightly, and the silver threads that had been gathered together were like a white silk umbrella, slowly spreading their wings and blooming into a white lotus, which was crystal clear and magical under the rising sun.我和河莲还没来得及表达惊叹，老蓝就把这美丽的白伞高高举起，重重地抽在自己身上，于是，一股黄烟从老蓝油脂麻花的棉袄上腾起，好像在他身上爆炸了一颗手榴弹。高原上的风沙大，大家都是“满面尘灰烟火色”，衣服更成了沙尘的大本营。这柄拂尘好像鸡毛掸子，把灰沙从衣服布丝的缝隙里驱赶出来，抖在空气中，化成呛人的气流，随着寒风远去。老蓝用短短的胳膊挥着长长的银丝，围着自己圆柱形的身体，反复抽打着，直到把浑身打扫得如同河滩上一块干净的鹅卵石。

  Before He Lian and I could express our amazement, Lao Lan raised this beautiful white umbrella high and slammed it on himself, so a puff of yellow smoke rose from Lao Lan's grease twist cotton jacket, as if a grenade had exploded on him. The wind and sand on the plateau are large, and everyone is "covered in dust and fireworks", and their clothes have become the base camp of sand and dust. This duster is like a feather duster, driving the gray sand out of the gaps in the cloth of the clothes, shaking in the air, turning into a choking airflow, and going away with the cold wind. Lao Lan waved a long silver wire with his short arms, surrounded his cylindrical body, and whipped repeatedly until he cleaned his whole body like a clean pebble on the river beach.老蓝表演结束后，看着我们说，怎么样？

  After the performance of Lao Lan, he looked at us and said, how is it?这是从哪儿搞来的？河莲不理老蓝的问话，追问感兴趣的话题。

  Where did this come from? He Lian ignored Lao Lan's question and asked about the topic of interest.老蓝说，是牦牛的尾巴啊。

  Lao Lan said, it's the tail of a yak.我和河莲惊得几乎跳起来，说，牦牛的尾巴能做拂尘？

  He Lian and I were so shocked that we almost jumped up and said, can a yak's tail be a duster?老蓝说，正是。你们不是亲眼见了吗！

  Lao Lan said, exactly. Didn't you see it with your own eyes!我们又问，哪里有白牦牛啊？

  We asked again, where are the white yaks?老蓝得意起来，说，白牦牛就像白蛇白猿一样，非常稀少。我在西藏多年，只碰见过一头白牦牛，浑身上下像是雪捏的。

  Lao Lan became proud and said that white yaks are like white snakes and white apes, very rare. I have been in Tibet for many years, and I have only met a white yak, which looks like snow all over its body.你就把它的尾巴活活给割下来了？我战战兢兢地说。

  You cut off its tail alive? I said tremblingly.不是我给割下来的。是我让牧民在这头牦牛老死的时候，把它的尾巴给我留下来，做个纪念。老蓝很认真地更正。

  I didn't cut it off. It was I who asked the herdsmen to leave its tail to me as a souvenir when this yak died of old age. Lao Lan corrected it very seriously.我从老蓝手里接过牦牛尾巴做成的拂尘，它仿佛有神奇的法力，扑打出那么多的灰尘，自己还是洁白如雪。想到它曾是一头巨大生物的尾巴，每一根银丝都好像具有灵性，在阳光下抖得像琴弦，我不禁肃然起敬。

  I took the dust made of the yak tail from Lao Lan's hand, it seemed to have magical power, fluttering so much dust, and I was still as white as snow. I couldn't help but be in awe at the thought that it was once the tail of a huge creature, and each silver thread seemed to have spirituality, shaking like strings in the sun.我央告老蓝，你去对牧民说说，让他们也送我一条牦牛尾巴。

  I beg Lao Lan, you go and tell the herdsmen and let them give me a yak tail too.老蓝说，一个女娃，勤洗着点衣服，身上哪有那么多土？实在脏了，找条手巾拍打拍打就是。一头牦牛只有一条尾巴，拂尘，难搞着呢。

  Lao Lan said, a girl, washing some clothes frequently, how can there be so much soil on her body? It's really dirty, just find a handkerchief and pat it. A yak has only one tail, dusting, and it is difficult to deal with it.我说，我不是要拿它掸土，是要把它挂在墙上。

  I said, I don't want to dust it off, I want to hang it on the wall.老蓝说，干啥？当画？

  Lao Lan said, what are you doing? Should I paint?我说，留个纪念。以后我回了家，会指着它对别人说，知道这是什么吗？它是牦牛啊！一个尾巴就这样震撼人心，要是整个现出原形，庞大得会让你腿肚子朝前。

  I said, keep a souvenir. When I go home in the future, I will point to it and say to others, do you know what it is? It's a yak! A tail is so shocking that if the whole thing shows its original shape, it will be so huge that it will make your legs and stomach forward.老蓝说，你这么一说，我这个白牦牛尾巴也不用它掸土了。牦牛毛虽然很结实，也是掉一根少一根。掸土时再精心，也免不了伤了它。从今往后，我就把这牦牛尾巴当宝贝藏起来。探亲的时候拿出来，人家还以为我是从南海观音那儿借来的呢！

  Lao Lan said, if you say this, my white yak tail doesn't need to dust off it. Although the yak hair is very strong, it also sheds one less strand. No matter how careful you are when dusting the soil, you will inevitably hurt it. From now on, I will hide this yak tail as a treasure. When I took it out when I visited relatives, people thought I borrowed it from Guanyin in the South China Sea!河莲一撇嘴说，谁那么傻！仔细闻闻，您这个掸子，牛毛味儿大着呢！

  He Lian curled her lips and said, who is so stupid! Smell carefully, you duster, the smell of cow hair is big!老蓝听了，真就把牦牛尾巴托到鼻子跟前，像猎犬那样闻个不止。我和河莲哈哈大笑起来，因为雪白长须挂在他的下巴上，太像唱戏的老生了。

  When Lao Lan heard this, he really put the yak's tail to his nose and sniffed it like a hound. Ha Lian and I laughed because the snow-white beard hung on his chin, too much like an old singer.老蓝说，嗯，是有点膻气。怪我当时洗得不干净。

  Lao Lan said, well, it's a bit smelly. Blame me for not washing it cleanly at that time.河莲凑过去说，老蓝，我给你再洗洗怎么样？用我洗头发使的胰子，保证让您的牦牛尾巴从此香得跟茉莉花似的。

  He Lian leaned over and said, Lao Lan, how about I wash you again? Use the pancreas I wash my hair to ensure that your yak tail will smell like jasmine from now on.老蓝摆手说，那倒不必，东西还是天然味儿的好。你这个女娃心眼儿多，手脚勤快。不过，我看你是个无利不起早的人，说吧，有什么要求我办的事？

  Lao Lan waved his hand and said, that's not necessary, things still taste good. You girl has a lot of heart and eyes, and your hands and feet are diligent. However, I think you are a person who can't afford to make a profit, tell me, what do you want me to do?"河莲说，老蓝你真是火眼金睛，怎么一下就把我看穿了呢？我要办的事一点也不复杂，就是你给小毕搞牦牛尾巴的时候，顺便给我也剁下一绺儿。

  He Lian said, Lao Lan, you are really hot-eyed, why did you see through me all at once? What I want to do is not complicated at all, that is, when you make a yak tail for Xiao Bi, by the way, chop a strand for me as well.我说，河莲，你怎么抢我的？

  I said, Ha Lian, how did you rob me?河莲说，不是抢，是分个二分之一到三分之一的，无伤大雅。

  He Lian said that it was not a robbery, but a half to a third, which was harmless.我说，我的牦牛尾巴被你砍去一半，只剩下电话线粗细的一小撮儿，成什么样子？人家没准儿以为是马尾巴呢！

  I said, my yak tail was cut off in half by you, leaving only a small handful of the thickness of the telephone line, what did it look like? People might think it's a ponytail!河莲说，那就叫老蓝多给我们弄些就是了。

  He Lian said, then ask Lao Lan to get us more.老蓝气得说，谁答应你们啦？还闹起分赃不均！

  Lao Lan said angrily, who promised you? There is also an uneven distribution of stolen goods!我们又赶快哄他说，咱们换工吧。你若是给我们搞来了牦牛尾巴，我们就给你洗衣服。

  We quickly coaxed him again, let's change jobs. If you get us a yak tail, we will wash your clothes.老蓝脸色像夏天的雪山，有了一丝暖气，说，那好吧。一根牦牛尾巴合一件衣服。

  Lao Lan's face was like a snow-capped mountain in summer, with a hint of heating, and he said, okay. A yak tail is combined into one dress.我和河莲大惊失色，说老蓝你太黑！一柄拂尘少说也有几千根牦牛毛，这样洗下去，十个手指头还不搓得露出骨头来！

  He Lian and I were shocked and said that Lao Lan is too dark! A duster has thousands of yak hairs, to say the least, and if you wash it like this, ten fingers won't rub their bones out!老蓝微笑着说，我的意思是，我给你们每人一柄拂尘，你们只需为我洗一件衣服即可。

  Lao Lan smiled and said, I mean, I'll give each of you a duster, you only need to wash one piece of clothing for me.我很惭愧，觉得自己以小人之心度君子之腹。河莲到底深谋远虑，说您让我们洗的那件衣服，该不会是皮大衣吧？

  I am ashamed and feel that I have the heart of a villain to cross the belly of a gentleman. Ha Lian was far-sighted, saying that the clothes you asked us to wash should not be a fur coat, right?老蓝说，普通的外衣，就是脖领上的油泥稍厚了些。

  Lao Lan said that the ordinary coat is slightly thicker in the oil sludge on the neck.事情就这么说定了。老蓝是个说话算话的人，当我们催他把外衣赶快送来时，他总是不好意思地说，牦牛尾巴还没搞到，还是以物易物好，我不喜欢拖欠。

  That's it. Lao Lan is a man of words, and when we urge him to send his coat quickly, he always says embarrassedly, the yak tail hasn't been obtained yet, it's better to barter, I don't like to be in arrears.一天，老蓝提着麻袋来了，往地上一倒，一团黑白夹杂的毛发滚到地上。河莲说，天哪，简直像谋杀案里的人头。

  One day, Lao Lan came with a sack and fell to the ground, and a ball of black and white hair rolled to the ground. Ha Lian said, oh my God, it looks like a human head in a murder case.老蓝说，这就是牦牛尾巴，剩下的事我就不管了，你们俩自己分吧，互相谦让着点，别打起来。

  Lao Lan said, this is the tail of a yak, I don't care about the rest, you two divide it yourself, be humble to each other, don't fight.河莲说，老蓝你没有搞错吧，这团毛黑白相间像围棋子似的，是牦牛尾还是荷兰黑白花的奶牛尾巴？

  He Lian said, Lao Lan, you are not mistaken, this ball of black and white hair is like a Go piece, is it a yak tail or a cow tail with Dutch black and white flowers?

  老蓝说，你想得美！娇气的荷兰奶牛若还能在这海拔五千米的高原活着，挤出的就不是牛奶，而是牛骨髓了。这是地地道道的牦牛尾。

  Lao Lan said, you think beautifully! If the squeamish Dutch cow can still live on this plateau at an altitude of 5,000 meters, it will not be milk, but cow bone marrow will be squeezed out. This is an authentic yak tail.河莲说，那为什么不是白的？

  He Lian said, why isn't it white?老蓝说，我不是跟你们讲过了吗，纯白牦牛极其少见，这种黑白交叉的也不多，算稀有品种呢。最大路的货是褐色的，还有黑的，没掸灰呢就显出脏，不好看。

  Lao Lan said, didn't I tell you, pure white yaks are extremely rare, and there are not many black and white crosses, which is a rare breed. The goods on the biggest road are brown, and there are black ones, and if they are not dusted, they will look dirty and not good-looking.我们只得谢谢他，然后自己开始洗涤和分割牦牛尾巴。

  We had to thank him and start washing and dividing the yak tail ourselves.先用清水泡，再用碱水反复搓洗，最后用洗发膏加工，在阳光下晾干。直到抖开时每一根尾丝都滑如琴弦，柔顺地搭在我们的胳膊上，像一道奇特的瀑布。

  Soak it in water, then scrub it repeatedly with alkaline water, and finally process it with shampoo and dry it in the sun. Until it is shaken off, each tail silk is as smooth as a string, and it rests smoothly on our arms, like a peculiar waterfall.河莲说，它黑的黑、白的白，好似中老年人的头发。虽说是珍稀品种，终是不大好看。我想，咱们能不能把黑白两色分开，一个人专要黑的，另一人专要白的。要知道有一句谚语说，单纯就是美。

  He Lian said that it is black and white, like the hair of middle-aged and elderly people. Although it is a rare variety, it is not very good-looking after all. I wondered, can we separate black and white, one person wants black, and the other wants white. You must know that there is a proverb that simply is beautiful.我晓得河莲是很有谋略的，赶忙先下手为强说，那我要白的，你要黑的。

  I knew that He Lian was very strategic, so I hurriedly said first, then I want white, you want black.河莲说，我想出的主意，却被你占了先。好吧，谁让我年纪比你大呢，让你一回吧。

  He Lian said, the idea I came up with was preempted by you. Well, who made me older than you, let you go once.我们于是找来外科专用的有齿镊子，一根根地从牦牛尾皮上往下拽毛。河莲把黑色的归成一堆，我把白色的拢在一起。尾毛长得很牢实，像一根根长针扎进皮里，拔起来挺费力气的。但是一想起我们每人将有一把纯色的拂尘，我们干得还是很起劲儿，一边干一边聊天。

  We then found surgical toothed tweezers and pulled the hair down from the yak tail skin one by one. He Lian put the black ones together, and I put the white ones together. The tail hair grows very firmly, like long needles stuck into the skin, and it takes a lot of effort to pull it out. But when we thought that each of us would have a solid color duster, we still worked very hard, chatting while working.你说人的头发，除了黑的白的以外，还有灰白的。牦牛尾毛要么油黑，要么雪白，怎么就没个中间色的呢？我说。

  You say that human hair, in addition to black and white, is also gray and white. The yak tail hair is either oily black or snow-white, why is there no middle color? I say.人的头发从黑变白，是渐渐老了呗。这头黑白相间的牦牛，是天生的，所以不变灰。河莲解释。

  People's hair turns from black to white, which is gradually getting older. This black and white yak is born, so it does not turn gray. Ha Lian explained.我说，这头牦牛并不老，就死了。想起这个，我心里有点难过。

  I said, this yak is not old, it is dead. Thinking of this, I feel a little sad.河莲说，牦牛死了，尾巴留给我们。它的尾巴那么美丽地活着，它就没死。

  He Lian said that the yak is dead, and the tail is left to us. Its tail is so beautiful that it is not dead.我说，人死了以后，也该有点美丽的东西留在世上啊。

  I said, after a person dies, there should be something beautiful left in the world.河莲说，是啊。我们一定要给人间留点什么，才不算白活过。

  He Lian said, yes. We must leave something for the world so that we don't live in vain.正说着，我突然发现了一个致命的问题——牦牛毛拔下来以后，我们有什么法子，再把它做成一柄拂尘？

  As I was talking, I suddenly discovered a fatal problem - after the yak hair is pulled out, what can we do to make it into a duster?普通的拂尘制作工艺很简单，把长着牛毛的尾皮，直接钉在一根木柄上，在木柄上画点花草，再涂上一层清漆，就大功告成了。可是脱离了皮的毛，怎么钉在木柄上？

  The ordinary dusting process is very simple, nail the tail skin with cow hair directly to a wooden handle, draw some flowers and plants on the wooden handle, and then apply a layer of varnish, and you're done. But how can the hair that is separated from the skin nail to the wooden handle?也许在特殊的工厂里，可以把单根的毛发，用强力的胶水粘到布或皮革上。但在荒凉的高原，我们没有任何办法！

  Perhaps in special factories it is possible to glue individual hairs to cloth or leather with strong glue. But on the desolate plateau, we have no way!河莲捶胸顿足，懊悔自己智者千虑，有此一失。不过，她很快恢复了镇静，说，事已至此，我们只有一个办法。

  He Lian pounded her chest and stomped her feet, regretting that she had made such a mistake by thinking a thousand times as a wise man. However, she quickly regained her composure and said, "It's over, we have only one way."我忙问，什么办法？

  I hurriedly asked, what can be done?她一字一句地说，把所有揪下的尾毛，都扔了。

  She said word by word, throwing away all the tail hairs she had pulled.我说，这算什么办法呢？

  I said, what is this method?河莲说，而且永远不对别人说。咱们实在太蠢了。

  Ha Lian said, and never to others. We are so stupid.我们沿着狮泉河走，把撕下的牛尾毛，挽成两个大大的毛圈，抛进清澈的河水。它们像两位黑发与白发美女的遗物，打着旋儿飘荡着，半个环浸入水里，半个环挂满阳光和风，好像水下有两只巨手托举着它们，缓缓地浮沉，漂向远方。

  We walked along the Shiquan River, rolled the torn oxtail hair into two large terry rings, and threw it into the clear river. They are like the relics of two black-haired and white-haired beauties, floating in a spiral, half of the ring is immersed in the water, and the half ring is full of sunlight and wind, as if two giant hands are holding them underwater, slowly floating and sinking, drifting into the distance.由于失误，剩下的牦牛尾巴再裁成两份，就比较单薄了。我们只有在木柄上多下功夫，精心打磨，请了画画最好的人，为我们各画了一幅雪山风景。别人见了，都说我们的牦牛拂尘，小是小了一点，但十分精致。

  Due to a mistake, the remaining yak tail was cut into two parts, which was relatively thin. We only put a lot of effort into the wooden handle, carefully polished it, and invited the best painter to paint a snow-capped mountain landscape for us. When others saw it, they all said that our yak dusted off, which was a little smaller, but very exquisite.心情总算好起来。河莲突然又叫道，糟了！

  The mood finally improved. He Lian suddenly shouted again, oh no!我摸着胸口说，河莲你别一惊一乍的，我算叫你吓怕了。又有什么糟糕事？

  I touched my chest and said, Helian, don't be surprised, I think I'm scaring you. What's wrong with that?河莲说，我们俩的牦牛尾巴是来自同一条牦牛，不但颜色是一样的，连毛发的根数都几乎相等，木柄也是同一个人画的，除了咱们两个以外，别人怎么能分清哪个是你的、哪个是我的？

  He Lian said that the yak tails of the two of us are from the same yak, not only the color is the same, even the number of hair roots is almost the same, and the wooden handle is also drawn by the same person.我说，哈！这算什么事啊。你忘了咱们俩有一个巨大的区别了？

  I said, ha! What is this? Have you forgotten that there is a huge difference between the two of us?河莲说，是什么？

  He Lian said, what is it?我说，你家在南方，我家在北方，我们以后把牛尾拂尘挂在自己家的墙上，隔了十万八千里，哪里会弄混！

  I said, your home is in the south, my family is in the north, we will hang the oxtail duster on the wall of our house in the future, 108,000 miles apart, where will we mix up!

  河莲说，我真是糊涂了。这世上是没有两头一模一样的牦牛的，像我们俩这种黑白相间的拂尘，注定也只有这两柄。以后，无论我们到了什么地方，都会记得这头牦牛，都会记得我们一起度过的时光。
He Lian said, I'm really confused. There are no two identical yaks in this world, and black and white dusters like the two of us are destined to only have these two. In the future, no matter where we go, we will remember this yak and the time we spent together.

未知

  08.“回”字形银饰

  08. "Hui" zigzag silver jewelry

  头发和女孩有着不解的缘分。

  Hair and girls have an indissoluble fate.果平梳的是长辫子，她的头发可真好，在被雪山冰川反射的强烈阳光下，会发出蓝缎子似的闪光，让人以为她在头发里偷偷抹了纯蓝钢笔水，秀发才能幻化出这样美丽的色彩，羡慕死人了。

  Guo Ping combed long braids, her hair is really good, under the strong sunlight reflected by the snow-capped mountain glacier, it will emit a flash like blue satin, making people think that she secretly smeared pure blue pen water in her hair, and her hair can transform into such a beautiful color, envious of death.小如人长得很甜，特别是右嘴角上方生着一个深深的酒窝，在她笑的时候，里面放一颗圆圆的药片，会妥帖地跟着她的笑容旋转，一定不会掉出来。可惜她的头发不争气，又稀又黄，好像大旱之年贫瘠山坡上的三类苗。

  Xiao Ruren is very sweet, especially there is a deep dimple above the right corner of her mouth, and when she smiles, a round pill is placed in it, which will rotate properly with her smile and will definitely not fall out. It's a pity that her hair is not up to the task, thin and yellow, like three types of seedlings on a barren hillside in a year of drought.河莲的头发和她的长相一样，居中。就是说，不怎么好也不怎么坏，发质不黑也不黄，数目不多也不少，发际不高也不低，整个是沧海一粟芸芸众生的代表。

  Ha Lian's hair is the same as her appearance, in the center. That is to say, it is neither good nor bad, the hair quality is neither black nor yellow, the number is neither too much nor less, the hairline is neither high nor low, and the whole is a drop in the sea of representatives of all living beings.不过，除了女孩子自己，没人知道我们的头发是什么样。这是一个大大的秘密。当兵的人不能把头发露在帽子外面，好像那是一些见不得人的东西。军规要求把每一根头发都藏在军帽里面，据说是为了打仗时行动方便。我总想不通，打仗嘛，较量的是武器和智慧，关毛茸茸、乱蓬蓬的头发什么事？

  However, no one knows what our hair looks like, except for the girls themselves. This is a big secret. Soldiers cannot show their hair outside their hats, as if it were something shameful. Military regulations require that every hair be hidden in a military cap, which is said to be for ease of movement during war. I can't figure it out, war, it's about weapons and wisdom, what's the matter with hairy and messy hair?我从小剪短发，关于头发的军规，对我的影响倒是不怎么严重，甚至还有好处。不管发型如何杂草丛生，只要把像个鸭蛋壳似的帽子往脑袋上一扣，就像罩上了变魔术的黑斗篷，没人知道里面是啥货色。你尽可以瞒天过海地三天不梳头，让头发自由自在地乱成鸟窝。当然啦，你要在帽子的边缘下些功夫，尽可能地把所有不听指挥、张牙舞爪预备伺机蹿出帽圈的发丝严格围困起来，使它们不得擅自行动。这个过程说起来简单，真正做起来有一定难度。短发不易将整个帽子填满，虚虚囊囊的空帽袋，就像装泡沫塑料的盒子，一遇大风，很容易飞走。

  I have cut my hair short since I was a child, and the military regulations on my hair have not had a serious impact on me, and it is even beneficial. No matter how overgrown the hairstyle is, as long as the hat like a duck eggshell is buckled on the head, it is like a black cloak that is magical, and no one knows what color is inside. You can hide it from the sky and not comb your hair for three days, and let your hair be free into a bird's nest. Of course, you have to put some effort into the edge of the hat, and try to tightly encircle all the hairs that do not obey the command and are ready to jump out of the hat circle as much as possible, so that they cannot act without authorization. This process is simple to say, but it is difficult to do it in practice. Short hair is not easy to fill the entire hat, and the empty hat bag is like a box containing styrofoam, which is easy to fly away in the event of a strong wind.帽子被刮跑，真是一件可怕的事情。灾难在眨眼间降临，根本没有任何先兆，仿佛空气中有一根魔杖，轻轻一挑，久存反叛之心的帽子，就像优秀的三级跳远选手，听到了比赛的口令，兴奋而轻盈地一跃，嗖地一个腾挪就蹦上了屋檐的高度。它还算讲义气，略微停留一下，转过身来看你一眼，算是和往日的主人依依不舍地告个别。接下来的动作就是跃上云端，风筝一般义无反顾地向着蓝天飞去，寻找无拘无束的自由去了。最后一个姿势简直优美绝伦，腾云驾雾地在半空中翻着跟头，飞快地旋转着，越来越远，越来越小，像哪吒的风火轮，凝成一个黑点，消失在雪山背后。

  It was a terrible thing to have the hat scraped off. Disaster came in the blink of an eye, without any warning at all, as if there was a magic wand in the air, and with a light lift, the hat of rebellion for a long time was like an excellent triple jumper, hearing the command of the competition, he jumped excitedly and lightly, and jumped to the height of the eaves with a whoosh. It's also considered loyal, pause for a moment, turn around to look at you, and say goodbye to the former master reluctantly. The next action was to jump into the clouds, and the kite flew towards the blue sky without hesitation, looking for unrestrained freedom. The last posture was simply beautiful, somersaulting in mid-air, spinning rapidly, getting farther and farther away, smaller and smaller, like Nezha's hot wheels, condensed into a black dot, and disappeared behind the snow-capped mountains.这种干脆利索的丢失，还算痛快的。最可恨的是帽子和你逗着玩，并不是一开始就飞得无影无踪，好让你干脆死了心。它装作漫不经心地在地上散步，不急不缓，距离你始终只有一步之遥，诱你快步去追。每次在胜利即将到手的一瞬，它仿佛被咒语保佑，猛地往旁一闪，打一个滚，灵巧地逃开了你的手指尖。你不灰心，继续追下去，帽子就像一个小偷，躲躲藏藏又机智无比，在你就要把它追捕归案的时候，旱地拔葱一跃而起，飘悠悠迂回到一侧，成功地躲避了缉拿。你若追得狠了，它干脆耍开了无赖，专往陡峭的山壁或险恶的河面上跑，滴溜溜地好似滚动的圆盘，让你眼睁睁地看着它逍遥法外，无可奈何。

  This kind of neat loss is quite pleasant. The most hateful thing is that the hat plays with you, not flying without a trace from the beginning, so that you simply give up. It pretends to walk carelessly on the ground, unhurried, and is always one step away from you, tempting you to chase quickly. Every time at the moment when victory is about to be in hand, it seems to be blessed by a spell, flashing aside suddenly, rolling, and deftly escaping your fingertips. You don't lose heart, continue to chase, the hat is like a thief, hiding and witty, when you are about to hunt it down, the dry land jumps up, drifts back to the side, and successfully evades arrest. If you chase it hard, it will simply play away the scoundrel and run on the steep mountain wall or the treacherous river, dripping like a rolling disc, making you watch it go unpunished, helpless.

  司务长，我的帽子丢了。因为每人只有单、棉帽各一顶，丢了就没有替换的了，只好马上报告，以便补发。

  Director, I lost my hat. Because each person only has a single and a cotton hat, there is no replacement if they are lost, so they have to report immediately so that they can be reissued.帽子怎么又丢了？司务长不耐烦，这已是今天上午第三个要求补发帽子的女兵了。

  Why did you lose your hat again? The secretary was impatient, and this was the third female soldier to ask for a reissue of her hat this morning.叫大风刮跑了。小如如实汇报。今天外面的风特别大，山都给吹得摇晃起来了。小如补充说明，以求得司务长的同情。

  The wind blew away. Small as reporting truthfully. The wind outside was particularly strong today, and the mountains were shaking. Supplementary explanations are provided to gain the sympathy of the secretary.司务长被补发帽子的申请搅得手忙脚乱，没好气儿地说，风大有什么稀奇的？这里一年只刮两次风。一次是从一月一号到六月三十号。下一次是从七月一号到十二月三十一号。别人都不怕，就你们这几个女兵事多，要是打起仗来，还不得把枪都丢了？被服库又不是你们家的小皮箱，丢了手心向上就领新的，你们倒方便！照这样下去，军需仓库就要底儿朝天啦！

  The secretary was in a hurry by the application for a reissue of the hat, and said angrily, what's so strange about Feng Da? It winds here only twice a year. The first time was from January 1 to June 30. The next one is from July 1 to December 31. Others are not afraid, just you female soldiers have a lot of things, if you start a war, you can't lose all your guns? The quilt garage is not your small suitcase, and if you lose your palm, you will get a new one, which is convenient for you! If this continues, the munitions warehouse will be upside down!要依我的性子，就得和司务长吵起来。我就说，哼！仓库也不是你们家开的，帽子是被风抢走的，你有本事，找风发脾气好了。

  If you want to follow my temperament, you have to quarrel with the secretary. I said, hum! The warehouse is not opened by your family, the hat was snatched away by the wind, you have the ability, it's good to lose your temper with the wind.小如比我有涵养多了，她微微一笑，酒窝就在面颊上旋起来，缓缓地说，司务长，今天的风力足有十级，我们也没长飞毛腿，也不是会翻筋斗云的孙悟空，哪能追得上风啊？

  Xiaoru is much more cultivated than me, she smiled slightly, her dimples swirled up on her cheeks, and said slowly, Secretary, today's wind is enough to be level ten, we don't have scuds, and we are not Sun Wukong who can somersault clouds, how can we catch up with the wind?司务长的脸色好看了一点，说，你们也太笨了，怎么连自己头上三寸之地的一顶帽子也看不住？

  The secretary's face looked a little better, and said, you are too stupid, why can't you even look at a hat three inches above your head?说得我们不好意思。想想也是，都是一样的人，怎么人家的帽子就服服帖帖地粘在脑瓜上，偏我们的帽子好像是属车轱辘的，总是跑个不停。直着身子挨完司务长的训，领了新帽子回到宿舍，小如一声不吭。

  We're sorry to say it. Think about it, they are all the same people, why do people's hats stick to their heads obediently, but our hats seem to be wheeled, always running non-stop. After receiving the training of the director straight, he received a new hat and returned to the dormitory, Xiao Ru said nothing.我说，还难过呢？我有法子报复这个爱耷拉驴脸的司务长。人吃五谷杂粮，我就不信他不生病。等他躺在床上的时候，就是你我的天下了。别看他现在闹得欢，那会儿就再逞不了强。让我们一齐诅咒他得一场不轻不重的病吧！咱们就可以板起脸，狠狠地训他一顿了。

  I said, are you still sad? I have a way to take revenge on this director who loves to droop his donkey's face. When a person eats grains, I don't believe he doesn't get sick. When he is lying in bed, it will be your world and me. Don't look at him having fun now, he won't be able to be strong at that time. Let's curse him for a serious illness! We can straighten our faces and give him a hard beating.我沉浸在想象的报复快乐里，几乎笑出了声，小如还是闷闷不乐的样子。我说，你到底怎么了？

  I was immersed in the imaginary pleasure of revenge, and almost laughed out loud, but Xiaoru still looked sullen. I said, what's wrong with you?小如说，我在想，为什么我们的帽子总爱丢？

  Xiaoru said, I'm thinking, why do we always lose our hats?河莲说，可能山爷爷是个帽子爱好者，头上光秃秃的怕感冒，自己想戴又没人发给它，它的脑袋太大了，只好把我们的帽子收了去救急。

  He Lian said that maybe Grandpa Shan is a hat lover, his head is bare and afraid of catching a cold, he wants to wear it but no one sends it to him, his head is too big, so he has to put our hat away for emergency.我说，不对啊。山爷爷是个老头儿，可我们的帽子是女式的，岂不阴阳倒错？

  I said, no. Grandpa Shan is an old man, but our hats are women's, isn't it yin and yang?小如茅塞顿开说，小毕，你说得太对了！

  Xiao Ru Mao Sai suddenly said, Xiao Bi, you are so right!我大叫，哪儿太对了啊？我怎么一点也听不明白！

  I shouted, where is it so right? I can't understand it at all!小如兴奋地比画着给我解释，男式帽子和女式帽子是有区别的。我们的帽子又浅又大，像一只浅浅的碟子倒扣在头发上，当然不牢靠，所以，很容易被山风卷走……

  Xiaoru excitedly gestured and explained to me that there is a difference between a men's hat and a women's hat. Our hats are shallow and large, like a shallow saucer that is upside down in our hair, of course, it is not secure, so it is easy to be swept away by the mountain wind......我打断她的话说，就算你搞得水落石出真相大白了也丝毫没用。被服厂不会为我们这几个雪线上的女孩子，特制出带胶水的抗风帽子。最好的办法就是以后看到司务长的时候多赔几个笑脸，只求下回训我们的时候嗓门儿小点，就阿弥陀佛了。

  I interrupted her and said that even if you make the truth come to light, it won't be useful. The quilt factory will not make wind-resistant hats with glue for us girls on the snow line. The best way is to pay a few more smiles when you see the secretary in the future, and just ask for a quieter voice when you train us next time, and it will be Amitabha.小如不再理我，埋头翻自己的包袱。战士一般没箱子，连手提袋也没有，所有的家当都储存在一块白布打起的包袱里，可在十五分钟内收拾好所有的东西，出发到地球上的任何一个角落。

  Xiaoru ignored me and buried her head in her own baggage. Soldiers generally have no boxes, not even handbags, and all their belongings are stored in a bag made of white cloth, and they can pack everything up in fifteen minutes and set off to any corner of the earth.我突然看见小如从包袱里掏出一枚黑黑亮亮的物件，细长如针。那时谁的包袱里有什么稀罕东西，大伙都了如指掌，这玩意儿却是我从来没注意到的，不由得好奇。待定睛一看，原来是一根发卡。小如把头发和帽子用发卡别在一起，固定在头上，帽子就像土里长出的蘑菇一般牢靠，再也不怕被山风掠去。

  I suddenly saw Xiaoru take out a black and shiny object from her baggage, slender as a needle. At that time, everyone knew what rare things were in someone's baggage, but I had never noticed this thing, and I couldn't help but be curious. When I looked at it carefully, it turned out to be a hairpin. Xiaoru pinned her hair and hat together with a hairpin and fixed it on her head, and the hat was as firm as a mushroom growing in the soil, and she was no longer afraid of being swept away by the mountain wind.可惜只有小如有发卡，是她从平原来的时候，偶然放在包袱里的。别人就没有这样好的运气了。想去买吧，山上的商店根本料不到女孩子们还会有这种特殊遭遇，从来没备过这货色。于是大家纷纷给内地的亲人写信，让他们十万火急地寄黑发卡到高原。家里的人倒是关怀备至，行动很快，赶紧四处采办。那一段时间，我们格外关心军邮车上高原的日子，接到家信的第一个动作，是先隔着信封摸摸捏捏，看里面掖没掖着火柴梗粗细不折不弯的硬物。有了就高兴，没有就噘嘴，埋怨遥远的亲人太不拿我们的迫切要求当回事了。有一天，果平笑得前仰后合，慷慨地说要分给我们每人一包发卡，足够把头发和帽子钢铁般地焊在一起。因为她家给她寄来了一个包裹，包内有何物一栏里，赫然填写着：发卡。想想吧，整整一包发卡，那是怎样激动人心的事！足足够我们全体用一百年！迫不及待地拆开一看，大家顿时傻了眼，果平简直要哭出来。发卡美丽而脆弱，是塑料制成的。

  Unfortunately, only Xiao Ru had a hairpin, which she accidentally put in her baggage when she came from the plains. Others don't have such good luck. I want to buy it, but the shop on the mountain didn't expect girls to have this special experience, and they had never prepared this goods. So everyone wrote letters to their relatives in the mainland, asking them to send 100,000 black hair cards to the plateau in a hurry. The family was very caring, acted quickly, and quickly procured everywhere. During that period of time, we were particularly concerned about the days when the military mail truck went to the plateau, and the first action we took when we received a letter from home was to first touch and pinch it through the envelope to see if there were any hard objects inside that were not bent or bent with match stalks. If you have it, you will be happy, and if you don't, you will pout, complaining that your distant relatives are too unwilling to take our urgent demands seriously. One day, Guo Ping smiled and generously said that he would give each of us a pack of hairpins, enough to weld our hair and hats together like steel. Because her family sent her a package, the column of what was in the bag was filled in: issuing a card. Think about it, a whole pack of cards, how exciting it is! Enough for all of us to use it for a hundred years! Can't wait to take it apart, everyone is dumbfounded, Guo Ping is about to cry. Hairpins are beautiful and fragile, they are made of plastic.本来黑发卡也不是什么稀罕物，便宜得一毛钱买一板。可那时有一位人物讲话说，妇女用的发卡是钢丝做的，一年要消耗多少吨钢……这句话以后，全国就不造钢丝发卡了，一律用塑料制品代替。也许在平原还可凑合，高原的严寒中，塑料如纸，一碰就碎，哪能担当把帽子和头发紧紧地别在一起的重大使命！

  Originally, black hair cards were not a rarity, and they were cheap enough to buy a board for a dime. But at that time, a person said that the hairpins used by women are made of steel wire, how many tons of steel do they consume a year...... After this sentence, the whole country will no longer make wire hairpins, and they will be replaced with plastic products. Maybe in the plains, you can make do, in the cold of the plateau, plastic is like paper, it breaks when touched, how can it take on the major mission of pinning hats and hair tightly!大家依旧愁眉苦脸，继续沉浸在帽子随时飞上天的恐惧中。只有小鹿的日子稍微好过一些，因为她妈妈把自己以前用过的旧发卡寄了来。拆开信的时候，发卡上还挂着一根头发，可以想见老母亲是多么匆忙地把发卡从自己头上拔了下来，以满足高山上的女儿。因为两代人用的时间太久，钢丝发卡上的黑漆都磨光了，露出银亮的本色。小鹿的帽檐边，远远看去，好像斜插着一根针。

  Everyone still frowned, continuing to be immersed in the fear of hats flying into the sky at any time. Only Xiaolu's life was slightly better, because her mother sent her an old hairpin that she used before. When the letter was opened, there was still a hair hanging on the hairpin, and you can imagine how hastily the old mother pulled the hairpin off her head to satisfy her daughter on the mountain. Because the two generations have used it for too long, the black paint on the wire hairpin has been polished, revealing the true color of silver. The brim of the fawn's hat, from a distance, looks like a needle is inserted diagonally.小如看着小鹿，突然说，我有办法了。她跑到司务长那里，说我要领一包曲别针。司务长对所有要领东西的人都抱有戒心，他警惕地问，干什么用？

  Xiaoru looked at the deer and suddenly said, I have a way. She ran to the secretary and said I wanted a pack of paper clips. The secretary was wary of all those who wanted things, and he asked vigilantly, what is the use?各部门司务长都是些婆婆妈妈的小气鬼，也不知他们是因为格外小气才当上了司务长，还是当上司务长才变得格外小气？反正这个职务有危险的传染性，能让所有坐这把交椅的人，都既吝啬又爱刨根问底。

  The secretaries of various departments are all stingy mothers-in-law, and I don't know if they became secretaries because they were particularly stingy, or because they became superior secretaries? Anyway, this position is dangerously contagious, which can make everyone who sits in this chair both stingy and love to get to the bottom of it.

  小如不肯正面回答他，只是说，明天你就会看到这些曲别针干什么用了。

  Xiaoru refused to answer him directly, just saying that tomorrow you will see what these paper clips are for.司务长嘟囔着，用不完，可记得给我拿回来啊！

  The secretary muttered, I can't use it up, but remember to get it back for me!第二天，在高原的蓝天和白云下，每个女兵的帽子和头发间，都别了一枚崭新的曲别针，它“回”字形的轮廓，大部分别在发丝里，小部分露在帽子外，仿佛一种美丽绝伦的银饰，在雪域的阳光中，闪闪发亮。

  The next day, under the blue sky and white clouds of the plateau, a brand new paper clip was pinned between the hat and hair of each female soldier, and its "back" zigzag-shaped outline was mostly pinned in the hair, and a small part was exposed outside the hat, like a beautiful silver jewelry, shining in the snowy sun.山风依旧肆虐地逞凶，只是它再也无法把我们的帽子掳去，只得打着呼哨，愤愤地把远山的雪雾卷起来，从空中撒向峡谷。

  The mountain wind was still raging, but it could no longer take our hats away, so it had to whistle and indignantly roll up the snow and mist of the distant mountains and scatter them from the air into the canyon.高山的帽子，永远是皑皑的积雪。
The hat of the mountains is always covered with snow.

未知

  09.灵魂飞翔的地方

  09. Where the soul flies

  高原上的卫生员没有正规的课堂，几乎像小木匠学徒一样，由老医生手把手地教。医学这门学问，不太适合自学。你没法在病人身上做试验，基本上不允许反复的失败。你付出的是时间，就算辛苦点不在乎，但病人付出的是血和生命，没法一而再，再而三地让你演习。

  The hygienists on the plateau did not have formal classes, almost like little carpenter apprentices, taught by old doctors. The science of medicine is not suitable for self-study. You can't do experiments on patients, and you can't afford to fail repeatedly. You pay time, even if you don't care about the hard work, but the patient pays blood and life, and you can't let you practice again and again.为病人做臀部肌肉注射时，老医生总是叮嘱：小心啊，千万别把药打到坐骨神经上，万一打错了，病人就会一辈子下肢瘫痪！

  When doing intramuscular injections of the buttocks for patients, the old doctor always advised: Be careful, don't put the medicine on the sciatic nerve, if you hit it wrong, the patient will be paralyzed for the rest of his life!想想吧，多可怕！你随意挥洒，几秒钟的一个动作，就让一个人永远站不起来了，吓不吓人？但这根绞索似的坐骨神经究竟在什么地方，谁知道？你去问老医生，他会说，书上写着呢，自己看去吧！可你翻开书一看，那张人体解剖图上，蛛网似的血管神经，画了几十上百条，好像一张军用地图。坐骨神经只是细细一根，从肌肉中央穿过。臀部——活人身体里这个每天牢牢坐在凳子上的大部位，在书上缩成了乒乓球般的一个简图，埋伏在其中的纤弱神经，头发丝一般，无法想象它的真实模样。更不用说在解剖图谱的下方，还一本正经地注释着：神经走向可有变异，本书仅供参考。

  Think about it, how scary! You wave it at will, and a few seconds of action will make a person never stand up, is it scary? But where exactly is this noose-like sciatic nerve, who knows? You go and ask the old doctor, and he will say, it's written in the book, see it for yourself! But when you open the book, you can see that on the human anatomy map, dozens or hundreds of spider web-like blood vessels and nerves are drawn, like a military map. The sciatic nerve is just a thin one that runs through the center of the muscle. The buttocks, the large part of the living body that sits firmly on the stool every day, shrunk into a simple picture like a ping-pong ball in the book, and the delicate nerves lying in ambush in it, the hair is like a strand, and it is impossible to imagine its true appearance. Not to mention that under the anatomical atlas, there is also a serious annotation: the direction of nerves can be varied, and this book is for reference only.简直让你没法相信它。

  You can't believe it.老医生还形容说，万一把针戳到坐骨神经上，你会有竹扦子扎在粉条上的感觉，这时候悬崖勒马，虽说有损失，还来得及弥补。所以，每次打针的时候，都要高度警惕。

  The old doctor also described that if the needle is poked into the sciatic nerve, you will have the feeling of a bamboo stick stuck in the vermicelli, and at this time you will rein in the cliff, although there is a loss, you will have time to make up for it. Therefore, every time you get an injection, you must be highly vigilant.我们紧追着问，那粉条是粗的还是细的？绿豆粉还是红薯粉？竹扦子是毛衣针那样的，还是穿糖葫芦那种竹棍？

  We chased after each other and asked, are the vermicelli thick or thin? Mung bean flour or sweet potato flour? Is the bamboo skewer like a sweater needle, or is it a bamboo stick like a candied haw?老医生拉下脸来，说你们这帮女孩子怎么这么啰唆，不知道，不知道！医生的嘴、护士的腿，这种事问老护士去！

  The old doctor pulled down his face and said why are you girls so indecisive, I don't know, I don't know! The doctor's mouth, the nurse's legs, ask the old nurse about this kind of thing!老护士的态度倒是不错，可惜只有他一个人碰到过类似的危险情况。他说，注射的时候，碰到病人像弹簧一般跳了起来，结果针头断在肉里面，幸好针只扎进去了一半，根部还像刺一样露在屁股外面。忙过来了几个人，把病人像犯人一样按住，赶快用止血钳揪着针尾，好歹把针拔了出来。他抚着胸口说，那一回，吓得我真魂出窍。

  The old nurse's attitude was good, but unfortunately he was the only one who had encountered a similar dangerous situation. He said that when injecting, the patient jumped up like a spring, and the needle broke in the flesh, but fortunately the needle was only half pierced, and the root was still exposed outside the buttocks like a thorn. A few people were busy, held the patient down like a prisoner, and quickly grabbed the end of the needle with hemostats, and finally pulled out the needle. He stroked his chest and said, that time, I was really out of my mind.我们很感兴趣地问，是扎在坐骨神经上了吗？

  We asked with great interest, is it stuck in the sciatic nerve?老护士说，谁知道？也许是扎在病人的脑神经上了，要不他怎么会大叫一声蹦起来？

  The old nurse said, who knows? Maybe it was stuck in the patient's cranial nerve, otherwise how could he scream and jump up?我们锲而不舍地追问，有竹扦子扎粉条的感觉吗？

  We persistently asked, do you have the feeling of bamboo sticks prickly vermicelli?老护士心有余悸地说，忘啦！忘啦！哪儿有那么复杂精细！不过，从那以后，我看见屁股就害怕，打针的时候，尽量往臀部的上方和外方打，那里似乎离坐骨神经最远。

  The old nurse said with lingering fear, forget it! Forget! Where is it so complex and fine! However, since then, I have been afraid when I see my buttocks, and when I inject them, I try to hit them above and outside my buttocks, which seem to be the farthest from the sciatic nerve.我们趴在图谱上对照，发现老护士说的是一条真理。坐骨神经长得再怎么变异，也不会长到臀部的上外方去。那里像马路上的安全岛，是一个保险地带。

  We lay on the map and found that the old nurse was saying a truth. No matter how much the sciatic nerve grows, it will not grow to the upper and outer side of the buttocks. It is like a safety island on the road, an insurance zone.我们照方办理，而且不断发扬光大。直到有一天，老医生对我们说，我给病人开的医嘱是臀部肌肉注射，可你们把针戳到病人的腰眼上了。

  We handle it as we do and continue to carry it forward. Until one day, the old doctor told us that the doctor's order I gave to the patient was to inject the buttocks intramuscularly, but you poked the needle into the patient's waist and eyes.我们引经据典地说，那儿没有坐骨神经。

  We quote the scriptures that there is no sciatic nerve there.老医生严厉起来，说，那儿有肋间神经！

  The old doctor became stern and said, there is an intercostal nerve there!我们也气起来，说，这神经那神经，谁知道神经是个啥玩意儿？总有一天，大家非要发神经！

  We also got angry and said, this nerve and that nerve, who knows what the nerve is? One day, everyone will have to go crazy!老医生就愣在那儿，自己先发起神经来。

  The old doctor was stunned there, and he started to get nervous first.再比如说学习眼睛，老医生在墙上挂了一张彩色图，说是眼球的横剖面。就是说，用一把又薄又快的刀片，沿着眼球的横轴，向着颅骨方位切下，然后绘出图来。图倒是挺好看的，花花绿绿，最上面是一座弯弯的拱桥，好像苏州园林建筑。据说那就是虹膜。不过，拱桥下面可没有小巧的木船和长长的流水，是一团电线似的黄斑，按照图上的标志，那是视网膜最灵敏的区域。

  Another example is to learn about the eyes, the old doctor hung a color picture on the wall, saying that it was a cross-section of the eyeball. That is to say, use a thin and fast blade to cut along the horizontal axis of the eyeball towards the skull, and then draw a picture. The picture is quite beautiful, with green flowers, and a curved arch bridge at the top, like a Suzhou garden building. It is said that it is the iris. However, there are no small wooden boats and long flowing water under the arch bridge, it is a mass of wire-like macula, which is the most sensitive area of the retina according to the signs on the picture.我隔着眼皮按了按很有弹性的眼珠，对照着这张神秘莫测的图，实在想不通，滴溜溜圆的眼睛，怎么变成了一座五彩的拱桥。

  I pressed my elastic eyeballs through my eyelids, and compared with this mysterious picture, I really couldn't figure out how the dripping round eyes turned into a colorful arch bridge.我同老医生谈了自己的感想，他吹胡子瞪眼地说，你的几何一定不好，没有空间想象力。

  I talked to the old doctor about his feelings, and he blew his beard and glared and said, your geometry must be bad, and you have no space for imagination.我说，那你别让我当卫生员好了，我正不想干这个呢！爬电线杆子不需要空间想象力，本来就在空间里。

  I said, then don't let me be a hygienist, I don't want to do this! Climbing telephone poles does not require spatial imagination, it is originally in space.老医生被我呛得没话说，若有所思。

  The old doctor was choked by me and thoughtful.有一天，老医生对我们说，你们愿不愿意上一堂人世间最真实的解剖课？

  One day, the old doctor said to us, would you like to take the most real anatomy class in the world?我们齐叫，当然愿意。

  We call together, of course we do.老医生说，那就要不怕吃苦，不怕受累，不怕爬山，不怕血……

  The old doctor said that you must not be afraid of hardship, tiredness, climbing, or blood......果平说，那是上课还是打仗？怎么比拉练还艰难？

  Guo Ping said, is it a class or a war? How is it more difficult than training?老医生说，算你猜得对。我们就是要到高高的山上去解剖。说穿了，是一种简易的天葬。

  The old doctor said, you guessed right. We just have to go to the high mountains to dissect. To put it bluntly, it is a simple heavenly burial.天葬是当地兄弟民族的风俗，人死了，请天葬师把尸体背上专门的天葬台，用特制的工具，把肉身分解成无数小块儿，飞翔的兀鹰就把分散的人体，噙向高渺的天空……

  Heavenly burial is the custom of the local brotherly people, when a person dies, ask the heavenly undertaker to carry the body on a special heavenly burial platform, use special tools, and decompose the body into countless small pieces, and the flying vulture will throw the scattered human body into the high sky......我们说，你会天葬吗？

  We said, will you be buried in the sky?

  老医生说，我不会。现在情况特殊，天葬师都找不到了，无法实施正规的天葬，我可以通过解剖，达到和天葬同样的效果。我已经和病人的家属商量好了，由我安葬他们逝去的亲人，尽量达到天葬的效果，他们同意了。

  The old doctor said, I won't. Now the situation is special, the heavenly burial master cannot be found, and it is impossible to carry out a formal heavenly burial, I can achieve the same effect as the heavenly burial through dissection. I have discussed with the patient's family that I will bury their deceased relatives and try to achieve the effect of sky burial, and they agreed.我们战战兢兢地说，什么时间？

  We said tremblingly, what time?老医生一字千钧，说，明天。你们除了可以看到坐骨神经和眼球的构造，还可以看到真正的恶性肿瘤。

  The old doctor said that tomorrow. In addition to the structure of the sciatic nerve and eyeball, you can also see real malignant tumors.那一天晚上，我们都睡得很不安宁，总像有一双铺天盖地的灰色翅膀，毛茸茸地抚摸着我们的头顶。

  That night, we all slept restlessly, always like a pair of overwhelming gray wings, fluffy caressing the top of our heads.早上起来，小如穿上高筒毡靴，戴着口罩，佩着风镜，从头武装到脚。河莲笑她，你这是上解剖课，还是去疫区作战？

  When she got up in the morning, Xiaoru put on high felt boots, a mask, and goggles, armed from head to toe. Ha Lian laughed at her, are you taking an anatomy class, or are you going to fight in an epidemic area?小如说，这样，我的胆子就会大一些。

  Xiaoru said, in this way, I will be bolder.死者是一个牧羊人，得的病是肝癌。病故后，家属本着对解放军的高度信任，把亲人的遗体托付给金珠玛米3，由医生安排。家中活着的人，就赶着羊群向远方走去。老医生拿出一副担架，对我们说，把尸体抬到上面去。

  The deceased was a shepherd who suffered from liver cancer. After his death, the family entrusted the remains of their relatives to Jinzhu Mami 3 in a high degree of trust in the People's Liberation Army, which was arranged by the doctor. The living people in the family drove the sheep into the distance. The old doctor took out a stretcher and said to us, carry the body up to it.我们七手八脚行动起来。逝者是一个五十岁上下的汉子，瘦骨嶙峋。我们把他从太平间请出来，安放在担架上，再把担架抬进解放牌大卡车车厢。

  We took action. The deceased was a man in his fifties, skinny. We took him out of the morgue, placed him on a stretcher, and carried the stretcher into the compartment of the Jiefang brand truck.司机也是第一次执行这种奇特任务，说，开哪儿去？

  The driver is also the first time to perform such a peculiar task, saying, where to drive?老医生说，很简单，开到最高的山上去。

  The old doctor said that it was very simple, drive to the highest mountain.司机说，那可办不到。咱们这里最高的地方是喜马拉雅山，爬上去的人都是登山英雄，汽车绝对上不了。

  The driver said, that can't be done. The highest place here is the Himalayas, and the people who climb up are mountaineering heroes, and cars can never get on it.老医生说，我的意思，是把车开到附近公路能够到达的最高海拔。

  The old doctor said, I mean, drive the car to the highest altitude that can be reached by a nearby road.司机说，明白了。反正我就一直往前开，开到汽车不能走的地方，我就停下来。

  The driver said, understood. Anyway, I kept driving forward, and when I got to a place where the car couldn't go, I stopped.担架蒙着白单子，很圣洁的样子。解放车车厢里的地方不算小，但中央摆了一副担架，剩下的地方也就不很宽敞了。我们拼命想离担架远一些，挤到大厢四角。但甭管怎么躲，与死人的距离也超不过两尺。我昨天还给这汉子化验过血，和他说着话，此刻他却静静地躺在那里，再不会呼吸。随着车轮的每一次颠簸，他像一段木头，在白单子底下自由滚动。

  The stretcher was covered with a white sheet, which looked very holy. The place in the carriage of the liberation car is not small, but a pair of stretchers is placed in the center, and the rest of the space is not very spacious. We desperately tried to stay away from the stretcher and squeeze into the four corners of the compartment. But no matter how you hide, the distance from the dead is no more than two feet. I also had a blood test for this man yesterday and talked to him, but at the moment he was lying there quietly, not breathing again. With every bump of the wheel, he rolled freely under the white sheet like a piece of wood.汽车在蜿蜒的公路上盘旋，离山顶还有很远，路已到尽头。司机把车停下来说，四个轮子没办法了，剩下的路就靠你们的两个轮子了。我在这里等你们。

  The car circled on the winding road, far from the top of the mountain, and the road was at its end. The driver stopped the car and said, four wheels are no way, and the rest of the road depends on your two wheels. I'm here waiting for you.我们把担架抬下来，望着白云缭绕的山顶发愁。老医生说，两个人一组，共需四个人，你们还剩一人做替补，谁累了就换一下。我在前面做向导。好了，现在报名，你抬前架还是后架？

  We lifted the stretcher down and looked at the top of the mountain surrounded by white clouds and worried. The old doctor said that in a group of two, a total of four people are needed, and you still have one person left to be a substitute, and whoever is tired will be replaced. I was the guide in front. Okay, sign up now, do you carry the front rack or the back rack?看着平放在地上的担架，我想想说，我抬后面吧。

  Looking at the stretcher lying flat on the ground, I want to say, I'll lift it back.这实在是利己的想法。想想吧，如果抬前架，一个死人头颅就在你身后不到半尺的地方，沉默地跟随着你，是不是有寒毛奓起的感觉？在后面虽然离死人的距离是一样的，但你的目光可以随时观察他的动作，心里毕竟安宁多了。

  This is really a self-interested idea. Think about it, if you lift the front frame, a dead man's head is less than half a foot behind you, following you silently, does it feel like a chill? Although the distance from the dead man is the same in the back, your eyes can observe his movements at any time, and your heart is much more peaceful after all.小如赶紧说，我和小毕在一起。

  Xiaoru hurriedly said, I am with Xiao Bi.河莲勇敢，痛快地说，我抬前面。

  He Lian said bravely and happily, I lifted the front.还剩下小鹿和果平。果平说，小鹿你就当后备队吧，我和河莲并肩战斗。

  There are still deer and Guoping left. Guo Ping said, Xiaolu, you can be a reserve, and I will fight side by side with He Lian.分工已毕，小小的队伍开始向山头挺进。老医生走在最前面，负有重大使命，须决定哪座峰峦才是这白布下的灵魂最后的安歇之地。

  The division of labor was completed, and the small team began to advance towards the top of the mountain. The old doctor walked at the forefront, with a major mission, and had to decide which peak would be the last resting place for the soul under this white cloth.在高海拔的地方，徒步行走都很吃力，更甭说抬着担架。幸好病人极瘦，我们攀登时费力稍轻。我们艰难地高擎担架，在交错的山岩上竭力保持平衡。尸体冰凉的脚趾，因为每一次的颠簸，隔着被单颤动不止。坚硬的指甲像啄木鸟的长嘴，不时敲着我和小如的面颊。小如拼命躲闪，连累得担架也歪了，病人的身体发生倾斜，她那个方向被啄得更多。倒是我这边听天由命，比较从容。

  At high altitudes, it is difficult to walk on foot, let alone carry a stretcher. Fortunately, the patient was very thin, and we climbed with a little less effort. We struggled to hold the stretcher high and struggled to balance on the staggered rocks. The cold toes of the corpse, because of every bump, trembled through the sheets. The hard nails were like the long beak of a woodpecker, tapping my cheeks and Xiaoru's cheeks from time to time. Xiaoru dodged desperately, and even the stretcher was crooked from exhaustion, the patient's body tilted, and she was pecked more in that direction. On the contrary, I resigned myself to fate and was more calm.我们不敢有片刻的大意，紧盯着前面人的步伐。河莲和果平往东我也往东，她们往西我也往西。若是配合不默契，一失手，肝癌牧羊人就会从担架上滑下来，稳稳坐在我和小如的肩膀上。

  We didn't dare to be careless for a moment and stare at the steps of the person in front of us. He Lian and Guo Ping went east and I went east, and they went west and I went west. If there is no tacit understanding, the liver cancer shepherd will slide off the stretcher and sit firmly on the shoulders of me and Xiaoru.山好高啊！河莲仰头望望说，我的天！再这样爬下去，你们干脆把我就地给天葬了算了。

  The mountain is so high! He Lian looked up and said, my God! If you climb down like this, you can simply bury me on the spot.果平也说，真想和担架上躺着的人换换位置哦。

  Guo Ping also said that he really wanted to switch places with the person lying on the stretcher.小鹿说，我替换你们。

  The deer said, I'll replace you.小如说，你也不是三头六臂，能把我们都换了吗？

  Xiaoru said, you are not three-headed and six-armed, can you change us all?我身为班长，在关键时刻得为民请命。抑制着喉头血的腥甜，对走在前头的老医生说，秃鹫已经在天上绕圈子了，再不把死人放下，会把我们都当成祭品的。

  As a squad leader, I have to ask for the people's lives at a critical moment. Suppressing the sweetness of the blood in his throat, he said to the old doctor who was walking in front that the vulture was already circling in the sky, and if we didn't put the dead down, we would all be sacrificed.老医生沉着地说，你太看不起这些翱翔的喜马拉雅鹰了。鹰眼会在十公里以外，把死人和活人像白天和黑夜一般截然分开。只有到了最高的山上，才能让死者的灵魂飞翔。我们既然受人之托，切不可偷工减料。

  The old doctor calmly said, you look down on these soaring Himalayan eagles too much. Hawkeye will be ten kilometers away, separating the dead from the living like day and night. Only when you reach the highest mountain can the soul of the deceased fly. Since we are entrusted by others, we must not cut corners.只好继续爬啊爬……终于，到了高高的山上，一伸手就可以摸到天的眉毛。我们“嘭”的一声把担架放下，牧羊人差点从担架上跳起来。老医生把白单子掀开，把牧羊人铺在山顶的沙石上，如一块门板样周正，锋利的手术刀口流利地反射着阳光，簌然划下……他像拎土豆一般把布满肿瘤的肝脏提出腹腔，仔细地用皮尺量它的周径，用刀柄敲着肿物，倾听它核心处混沌的声响，一边惋惜地叹道，忘了把炊事班的秤拿来，这么大的癌块儿，罕见啊……

  I had to keep climbing and climbing...... Finally, when I reached the high mountain, I could touch the eyebrows of the sky as soon as I stretched out my hand. We put the stretcher down with a bang, and the shepherd almost jumped off the stretcher. The old doctor lifted the white sheet and spread the shepherd on the sand and gravel on the top of the mountain, like a door panel, and the sharp scalpel edge fluently reflected the sunlight and drew it down...... He lifted the tumor-covered liver out of the abdominal cavity like a potato, carefully measured its circumference with a tape measure, tapped the lump with the handle of the knife, listened to the chaotic sound at its core, and sighed regretfully, forgetting to bring the scale of the cooking class, such a large cancer mass, rare......喜马拉雅鹰在我们头顶上愤怒地盘旋着，巨大的翅膀呼啸而过，扇起阳光的温热、峡谷的阴冷。牧羊人安然的面庞上，耳垂还留着我昨日化验时打下的针眼儿，粘着我贴上去的棉丝。因为病的折磨，他干枯得像一张纸。记得当时我把刺血针调到最轻薄的一挡，还是几乎将他的耳朵打穿。他的凝血机制已彻底崩溃，稀薄的血液像红线一般无休止地流淌……我使劲儿用棉球堵也无用，枕巾成了湿淋淋的红布。牧羊人看出我的无措，安宁地说，我身上红水很多，你尽管用小玻璃瓶灌去好了，我已用不着它……

  Himalayan eagles hover angrily above us, their huge wings whizzing by, fanning the warmth of the sun and the coldness of the canyon. On the shepherd's safe face, the earlobes still have the needle eyes I made during yesterday's test, and the cotton silk I pasted on them was still there. Because of the torment of illness, he was as dry as a piece of paper. I remember that when I set the lancet to the thinnest gear, I almost pierced his ear. His blood clotting mechanism has completely collapsed, and thin blood flows endlessly like a red thread...... I tried hard to block it with cotton balls, but it was useless, and the pillow towel became a wet red cloth. The shepherd saw that I was at a loss and said peacefully, "I have a lot of red water on me, and you can pour it in a small glass bottle, I don't need it anymore......注视着生命的短暂与无常，我在这一瞬，痛下决心，从此一生努力，珍爱生命。大家神情肃穆，也都和我一样，在惨烈的真实面前，感到生命的偶然与可贵。

  Looking at the transience and impermanence of life, at this moment, I made up my mind to work hard and cherish life from now on. Everyone looked solemn, and like me, they all felt the chance and preciousness of life in the face of the tragic truth.

  好了，现在，我把坐骨神经解剖出来给你们看。老医生说着，将牧羊人翻转，把一根粗大的白色神经纤维从肉体里剔了出来。

  Okay, now, I'll dissect the sciatic nerve for you to see. The old doctor said, turning the shepherd over and removing a thick white nerve fiber from his flesh.看清楚了吗？他问。

  See clearly? He asked.看清楚了。我们连连点头。

  See clearly. We nodded repeatedly.还要看什么？老医生像一个服务态度很好的售货员，殷勤地招呼着顾客。

  What else to see? The old doctor is like a salesperson with a good service attitude, greeting customers attentively.不，我们什么都不看了。我们异口同声地说。

  No, we don't look at anything. We said in unison.好像我还记得，你们之中有谁说过，她不明白眼球的解剖？我现在可以演示给你们看。老医生说着，又把牧羊人翻过来。

  As if I remember, who among you said that she did not understand the anatomy of the eyeball? I can show you now. The old doctor said, turning the shepherd over again.我大叫道，是我说的。可是我现在已经明白了，非常清楚，我不需要您演示了。我们想回家。

  I shouted, I said it. But I understand now, very clearly, I don't need your demonstration. We want to go home.是的。现在最想干的一件事，就是回家。我们迫不及待地说。

  Yes. One of the things I want to do most now is to go home. We can't wait to say.老医生狐疑地看着我们说，这个机会可是千载难逢。不过，既然你们全都懂了，我就不给你们详细讲了。现在，请你们慢慢往山下走吧。

  The old doctor looked at us suspiciously and said that this opportunity was a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity. However, since you all understand, I won't tell you in detail. Now, please walk slowly down the mountain.我们说，你呢？

  We say, what about you?他说，我要留在这里，把牧羊人分成许多部分，让喜马拉雅鹰把他带到云中去。那是他们信仰的灵魂居住的地方。

  He said, I will stay here and divide the shepherd into many parts and let the Himalayan eagle take him to the clouds. That is where the souls of their faith live.我们说，你害怕吗？

  We say, are you afraid?老医生很沉着地说，为什么要害怕呢？我这是在做善事啊。包括让你们看这些解剖的场面，你们一定觉得很残酷，其实，一个好的医生，必须精确地了解人体的构造，这才是对生命的爱护。不然，你看起来好像很仁慈，因为稀里糊涂一知半解，就会给人看错了病，耽误了病情，那才是最大的残忍呢。

  The old doctor said calmly, why should you be afraid? I'm doing good deeds. In fact, a good doctor must have an accurate understanding of the structure of the human body, which is the love of life. Otherwise, you seem to be very benevolent, because if you are confused and half-understood, you will misjudge the disease and delay the disease, which is the greatest cruelty.我们除了点头，再说不出别的话。

  We can't say anything else but nod.我下决心问道，人的眼睛和别的动物的眼睛，是一样的吗？

  I made up my mind to ask, are human eyes the same as those of other animals?老医生说，从理论上讲，哺乳动物的眼睛结构都是一样的。这话什么意思？

  The old doctor said that theoretically, mammals have the same eye structure. What does this mean?我说，哦，没什么意思。随便问问。

  I said, oh, it's not interesting. Just ask.听了老医生的话，我虽然从道理上明白了，在尸体上学习解剖，是正义、正当的事业，但我还是无法在牧羊人的眼球上，进行学习研究。他曾经那么信任地注视过我，用的就是这双眼睛，我不忍心看到它破碎。还是以后找机会，在一只牛眼上学习吧。

  After listening to the old doctor's words, although I understood from the truth that learning anatomy on corpses was a just and legitimate cause, I still couldn't study and study in the eyes of shepherds. He used to look at me so trustingly, with these eyes, and I couldn't bear to see it broken. It's better to find an opportunity in the future and learn from a bull's eye.我们走了。不敢往身后看。巨大的鹰群从我们头顶俯冲而下，好像巨型轰炸机。

  We are gone. Don't dare to look behind you. A huge flock of eagles swoops down from above us, like giant bombers.小鹿对我说，你知道我今天最大的感想是什么？

  The deer said to me, do you know what my biggest feeling is today?我说，你看着我们累得不行，自己却躲了清闲，一定在暗中偷偷乐吧？

  I said, you look at us so tired, but you hide from leisure, you must be secretly having fun, right?小鹿说，班长，别开玩笑。也许因为你们一直是在负重行军，所以就来不及想更多的事情。我空着手走路，想得就格外多些。

  Xiaolu said, squad leader, don't joke. Maybe because you've been marching with weights, you don't have time to think about more. I walked empty-handed, thinking more about it.小鹿附在我的耳边悄声说，我想的是，生命真好，活着真好，年轻真好。
The deer whispered in my ear, what I thought was that life is good, life is good, and it is good to be young.

未知

  10.八月里穿棉衣

  10. Wear cotton clothes in August

  阿里的军人照相，只有等待一个机会，就是高原服务队上山的日子。山下的人们会在高原最温和的季节，临时组织起一支慰问的队伍。十几个人，文武都有。文的指的是文工团员带来几个小节目，边防哨卡巡回演出。武的是一部浑身散发热气的洗澡车，它呼哧呼哧开到哪儿，汲水烧锅，那里的人就可以洗上一次热水澡。但是，看节目的时候虽然开心，节目看完，也就忘了。洗澡当时舒服，过一段时间，身上又脏起来。最受人欢迎的，还要数服务队的摄影师。

  Ali's soldiers took pictures, and only waited for an opportunity, which was the day when the plateau service team went up the mountain. People at the foot of the mountain will temporarily organize a condolence team during the mildest season of the plateau. There are more than a dozen people, both civil and military. The text refers to the members of the art troupe bringing several small programs and border post card tours. Wu is a bathing car that emits heat all over its body, and it drives wherever it goes, drawing water and boiling pots, and people there can take a hot bath. However, although I was happy when I watched the show, I forgot about it after watching the show. The bath was comfortable at the time, but after a while, the body became dirty again. The most popular is the photographer of the service team.摄影师通常是两个男人，一个老一个年轻。不知人员配备时出于何种考虑，大概是想老摄影师有经验，但是身体可能顶不住，年轻人可以扛机器，多干点力气活儿，有取长补短、前赴后继的意思。

  The photographer is usually two men, one old and one young. I don't know what the consideration is for staffing, probably because the old photographer has experience, but the body may not be able to withstand it, young people can carry the machine, do more hard work, and have the meaning of learning from each other's strengths and moving forward.一天，果平对我说，高原工作队上山来了，里头有一位老资格的摄影师，助手是个机灵的小伙子。

  One day, Guoping told me that the plateau task force had come up the mountain, and there was an old qualified photographer inside, and the assistant was a clever young man.我说，情报这么准，是不是已经偷着去照了一张？

  I said, the intelligence is so accurate, have you already secretly taken a photo?果平大叫冤枉，说摄影师一天只能照五十个人，每人只限两张。大家得排着队来，轮到谁会通知，别的人一律原地待命。

  Guo Ping shouted injustice, saying that photographers can only take 50 photos a day, and each person is limited to two. Everyone has to line up, who will notify when it's their turn, and everyone else will be on standby.我说，那我们这拨儿排在何时？

  I said, then when are we lined up?果平丧气地说，据我所知，大约是三个月后。

  Guo Ping said dejectedly, as far as I know, it was about three months later.我灰心丧气地说，那么久！我都成老太太了。

  I said discouragedly, for so long! I've become an old lady.可是有什么法子呢！等着吧。在那以后的日子里，你要是看到哪个人一边走，一边偷着看什么，不时地捂着嘴乐，一见别人注意他，马上若无其事一本正经起来，飞快地把什么东西藏进兜里……不用猜，他一定是刚从摄影师那里，取回了自己的照片。

  But what can be done! Wait. In the days that followed, if you saw someone walking and secretly looking at something, covering your mouth from time to time, and seeing others paying attention to him, you immediately became serious as if nothing had happened, and quickly hid something in your pocket...... No need to guess, he must have just retrieved his photo from the photographer.我们掐着手指头，计算着轮到我们留影的日子。不料传来的都是坏消息，先是摄影师每天拍摄的人数不断减少，好像一支行动迟缓、作风稀拉的队伍，在玩“增兵减灶”的游戏。摄影师刚开始解释，说是为了保障每人的形象都笑容可掬，照得不好的，比如愁眉苦脸、眨了眼成了瞎子的等等，都要返工，所以耽误了时间。大家刚开始还谅解他们，但后来进度越来越慢，简直像磨洋工，每天只能照十几个人，有些人照得很丑，也并不返工。人们开始愤愤不已，但又敢怒不敢言。生怕谁打了小报告，把说坏话的你告诉了摄影师，他们怀恨在心，轮到你照相的时候，随便一个动作，就把你照成丑八怪。这样的照片，你不要吧，过了这个村，就没这个店。要吧，万里迢迢地寄回家，你妈一看你这么不成嘴脸，准得吓一大跳，心里不好受，多不划算啊。出于这种考虑，人们暗地里埋怨，当面见了摄影师，又是主动打招呼，问寒问暖，再亲切不过了。

  We pinched our fingers and counted the days when it was our turn to take pictures. Unexpectedly, there was bad news, first of all, the number of photographers shooting every day was decreasing, as if a slow-moving and sparse team was playing the game of "increasing troops and reducing stoves". The photographer explained at the beginning, saying that in order to ensure that everyone's image is smiling, and if the photo is not good, such as frowning, blinking and becoming blind, etc., they have to rework, so the time is delayed. At first, everyone forgave them, but then the progress became slower and slower, like grinding foreign workers, they could only take pictures of a dozen people a day, and some of them were ugly and did not rework. People began to be indignant, but they dared not speak out. For fear that someone will make a small report and tell the photographer who said bad things about you, they will hold a grudge and take a picture of you as an ugly person with any action when it is your turn to take pictures. You don't want such a photo, after this village, there is no store. Yes, send it home thousands of miles, your mother will be shocked when she sees you so unattractive, and she feels uncomfortable, how not cost-effective. For this reason, people secretly complained, and when they met the photographer in person, they took the initiative to say hello and ask for warmth, which could not be more cordial.最坏的消息传来了，摄影师无法适应山上的恶劣气候，得了很重的高原病，改变计划，再过两天就要下山返回平原了。

  The worst news came, the photographer could not adapt to the harsh climate in the mountains, suffered from severe altitude sickness, changed his plans, and was going down the mountain to return to the plains in two days.简直是晴天霹雳。（注意啊，这只是一个形容词，因为高原只下雪，不下雨，所以，是没有霹雳这种雷电现象的。）

  It was a bolt from the blue. (Note that this is just an adjective, because the plateau only snows, not rains, so there is no thunder and lightning phenomenon like thunder.) ）怎么办？果平问我。

  What to do? Guo Ping asked me.还能有什么办法？等着服务队明年重来吧。我无可奈何地说。

  What else can be done? Wait for the service team to come back next year. I said helplessly.再想想嘛！果平不屈不挠。

  Think again! Indeed, he was unyielding and unyielding.我说，除非你绑架摄影师，用手枪逼着他给你单独摄影。

  I said, unless you kidnap the photographer and force him to take a photo of you alone with a pistol.你这个办法好极了！果平一蹦老高，然后又赶紧蹲在地上抚着胸口喘气。要知道，高原上任何突如其来的动作，都相当于百米赛跑和徒手格斗。

  Your method is great! Guo Ping jumped high, and then quickly squatted on the ground and stroked his chest and gasped. You know, any sudden action on the plateau is equivalent to a 100-meter race and hand-to-hand combat.我说，什么办法？绑架还是手枪？

  I said, what way? Kidnapping or pistols?果平说，不是绑架，是单独拜访。我们为什么不可以登门找找摄影师，哀求他坚持站好最后一班岗，为我们留个影？

  Guo Ping said that it was not a kidnapping, but a solo visit. Why can't we go to the door to find the photographer and beg him to insist on standing on the last shift and take a picture for us?我说，好啊，不妨一试。咱们快叫上大伙儿，一起去。

  I said, okay, you might as well give it a try. Let's call everyone and go together.果平说，不可。你以为这是打狼啊？一窝蜂，那么多人，还不得把摄影师的心脏病吓成心力衰竭？要是一两个人要照，还能咬咬牙，这么大一群，除了断然拒绝，把你们赶走，谁也没法发慈悲。

  Guo Ping said, "No." Do you think this is a wolf fight? A swarm of bees, so many people, can't scare the photographer's heart disease into heart failure? If one or two people want to take pictures, they can still grit their teeth, such a large group, except for categorically refusing and driving you away, no one can show mercy.我说，咱俩吃独食，总有点于心不忍。

  I said, let's eat alone, and it's always a little unbearable.果平一打我的手说，看你还当了真！谁知成不成事？没准儿白跑一趟，落个话把儿，还不够大伙儿笑话咱的。单独行动，到时见机行事。行则成，不成也不丢人。

  Guo Ping slapped my hand and said, look at you seriously! Who knows if it will succeed or not? Maybe it's a waste of time, and it's not enough for everyone to laugh at us. Act alone and act when the time comes. If you do it, you will succeed, and if you don't do it, you will not be ashamed.于是，我们背着大伙儿，开始了秘密行动。第一步是打听到摄影师的住址。这不难办，他们也不是什么国家首脑，住所不保密。我就把写着招待所门牌号码的字条，交到果平手里。

  So, we carried everyone behind our backs and started a secret operation. The first step is to find out the photographer's address. This is not difficult, they are not heads of state, and their residences are not confidential. I handed the note with the house number of the guest house to Guoping.事不宜迟，咱们明天早上就去。果平说。

  Without further ado, let's go tomorrow morning. Guoping said.为什么一定要早上？晚上不是更从容些？我不解。

  Why must it be in the morning? Isn't it more calm at night? I don't understand.晚上人一般比较累，心情不好。大清早精神饱满，是求人的好时机。你看见过一大早就气哼哼的人吗？果平解释。

  At night, people are generally tired and in a bad mood. Early in the morning is full of energy, which is a good time to ask for help. Have you ever seen someone who is angry early in the morning? Guoping explained.我说，早上心情好？那可不一定。要是正巧做了噩梦呢？

  I said, are you in a good mood in the morning? That's not necessarily. What if you happen to have a nightmare?果平说，不跟你抬杠。记住了，明早行动。

  Guo Ping said, I won't lift the bar with you. Remember, act tomorrow morning.第二天，我们黎明即起，赶往招待所。开门的是个小伙子，想必是那个较为年富力强的摄影师了。原以为我们会看到一张经过睡眠容光焕发的脸，没想到，他的眼圈像扣了两个蓝墨水瓶盖，眼白像一张满布飞机航线的地图，都是红丝。至于有经验的摄影师，根本就没露面，不知躲在哪里。

  The next day, we got up at dawn and rushed to the guest house. The person who opened the door was a young man, presumably the photographer who was in his prime. I thought we would see a radiant face after sleeping, but unexpectedly, his eyes were like two blue ink bottle caps, and the whites of his eyes were like a map full of airplane routes, all red silk. As for the experienced photographer, he didn't show up at all, and he didn't know where to hide.干什么？年富力强堵着门口问。

  Do? Nian Fengqiang blocked the door and asked.我们……想请你……一看他怒气冲冲的模样，我不知该怎样开口。

  We...... I would like to invite you...... When I saw his angry appearance, I didn't know how to speak.我们是卫生员，听说你们身体不好，特地来看望。果平伶牙俐齿地接过话头说。

  We are hygienists, and we heard that you are not in good health, so we came to visit. Guo Ping took over the conversation sharply.年富力强脸色好看些了，说，既是看望，那就感谢了。只是屋里有些不方便，我们还好，放心就是。说完露出送客的模样。

  The young man's face looked better, and he said, since it is a visit, then thank you. It's just that the house is a little inconvenient, we are fine, don't worry. After saying that, he showed off the appearance of seeing off the guests.我想摄影师们一定是刚起床，没叠被子，怕别人看到狼狈样。心想要是不让进屋，其他的话就不好提。就说，我们也不是检查卫生的，请别紧张。

  I think the photographers must have just gotten up and didn't fold the quilt, for fear that others would see the embarrassment. I want to not let you into the house, and it is not easy to mention anything else. Let's just say, we are not checking hygiene, please don't be nervous.年富力强有气无力地说，我要是能紧张起来就好了，现在是疲惫不堪。

  The young man said weakly, if only I could get nervous, but now I am exhausted.果平说，大清早刚起来就疲惫，是不是太娇气了？

  Guo Ping said that he was tired as soon as he got up early in the morning, isn't it too squeamish?年富力强反问，谁刚起来？

  The prime of life asked, who just got up?果平更正道，难道说你们半夜就起来了吗？

  Guo Ping corrected, did you get up in the middle of the night?年富力强说，我还没有睡呢！

  Nian Fengqiang said, I haven't slept yet!我们说，不信。你一夜不睡觉，干什么啦？

  We say, don't believe it. You don't sleep all night, what are you doing?"年富力强说，既然你们不相信人，我就请你们参观参观。说着，侧着身子，请我们进屋。

  Nian Fengqiang said, since you don't believe in people, I invite you to visit. Saying that, he turned sideways and invited us into the house.屋里的混乱程度，超出了我们最大胆的想象。到处都是水盆，里面泡着一张张白色的相纸，纸上不同的风景和人物，在药水里起伏着、重叠着。色泽深浅不同的人脸，好像扁扁的黑蝌蚪，懒洋洋地仰着脸，好像在晒太阳。

  The chaos in the house is beyond our daring imagination. There are basins of water everywhere, soaked in white photo paper, and different landscapes and characters on the paper are undulating and overlapping in the potion. The faces of different shades of color are like flat black tadpoles, lazily raising their faces, as if basking in the sun.我俩齐声问，这是怎么回事？

  We asked in unison, what's going on?年富力强没好气儿地说，这就是在干你们想干的事啊。

  Nian Liqiang said angrily, this is what you want to do.我们说，不懂不懂。我们想干什么事呢？

  We said, don't understand, don't understand. What do we want to do?年富力强说，照相啊。你们以为相片就是那么“咔嗒”一捏，就出来人影了？后面的事麻烦着呢！我们白天照相，晚上冲洗，连轴转，这么干活儿，平原上都受不了，别说是在连鹰都飞不上来的高原。要是不得高原病，那才叫天理不容呢！所以啊，病了是好事，我们就可以名正言顺地下山了。现在我们手里就剩下这点活儿了，抓紧冲洗出来，就能回到山下把氧气吃个饱了！

  The young man said, take pictures. Do you think the photo is so "clicked" and a figure comes out? The rest is troublesome! We take pictures during the day, rinse at night, and rotate the axis, and we can't stand it on the plains, let alone on the plateau where even eagles can't fly up. If you don't get altitude sickness, then it is called heavenly intolerance! So, it's a good thing to be sick, and we can go down the mountain justifiably. Now we have this little work left in our hands, hurry up and rinse it out, and we can go back to the bottom of the mountain to eat enough oxygen!"他这番话虽是气哼哼地说出来，细想想，也有理。看来我们的计策没等实施，就破产了。得，打道回府吧。我向果平使眼色——撤吧。

  Although he said these words angrily, if you think about it carefully, it makes sense. It seems that our plan went bankrupt before it was implemented. Okay, let's go home." I winked at Guo Ping—withdraw.果平假装看不见，对年富力强说，我真同情你们，可惜你这顿牢骚话，应该对他们说。

  Guo Ping pretended not to see and said to Nian Fengliqiang, I really sympathize with you, but it's a pity that you should say this complaint to them.他们是谁？年富力强问。

  Who are they? Nian Feng asked strongly.果平随手一指水盆里的人脸说，罪魁祸首在那儿。是他们害得你们这么辛苦。

  Guo Ping casually pointed to the face in the basin and said, the culprit is there. They are the ones who have made you work so hard.年富力强又不乐意了，说，你这个小姑娘嘴这么损。大家都有父母，家里都惦记着，想看看照片也是人之常情。

  He was in his prime and was unhappy, saying, you little girl has such a broken mouth. Everyone has parents, and it is human nature to want to see photos.

  果平一乐说，接受你的批评。问你一个问题，你说，家里人是更惦记男孩还是女孩？

  Guoping Yile said, accept your criticism. I ask you a question, do you think your family cares more about boys or girls?年富力强不假思索地说，当然是女孩了。女孩麻烦事多，男孩总归要好些。

  In the prime of life, he said without thinking, of course he was a girl. Girls have a lot of trouble, and boys are always better.果平说，对啊，所以，你该优待我们才是。

  Guo Ping said, yes, so, you should treat us preferentially.年富力强明白自己陷入了果平的伏击圈，半晌没作声。正在这时，门开了，一个胡子拉碴的半老头儿走进来，从他一眼扫过药水盆子的犀利目光，我们明白，经验丰富的老摄影师来了。

  Nian Fengliqiang understood that he had fallen into Guoping's ambush circle, and remained silent for a long time. At this moment, the door opened, and a bearded half-old man walked in, and from his sharp gaze that swept over the potion basin, we understood that an experienced old photographer was coming.还顺利吗？老摄影师咳嗽着问。

  Is it still going well? The old photographer coughed and asked.还好。只是去海拔最高的边防站照的相片，因为气候实在太差，风雪来临前抢拍的那些张，曝光量明显不足，底片经过处理，还是不行，人影模糊……年富力强汇报。

  OK. It's just a photo taken at the highest border station, because the climate is too bad, and the exposure is obviously insufficient for those photos taken before the wind and snow...... Report from Nian Fengliqiang.这可如何是好？老摄影师非常不安。

  How can this be good? The old photographer was very upset.把钱退给他们。算我们白辛苦了。年富力强说。

  Return the money to them. It's in vain. Nian Fengqiang said.老摄影师说，是我们失职，太对不起他们了。这样吧，让没照好的人从边防站下来，我们补照。

  The old photographer said that we were derelict in our duties and we were so sorry for them. Let's let those who didn't take good photos come down from the border guards, and we will make up the photos.年富力强说，恐怕不成。照坏了的不是少数，要是都从边防站撤下来，国境线上就没人站岗了。

  If you say it strongly, I'm afraid it won't work. If they all withdraw from the border station, there will be no one standing guard on the border.老摄影师说，既是这样，只有一个办法，我们再上一次最高的哨所。

  The old photographer said that since this is the case, there is only one way, and we will go to the highest post again.年富力强说，您的身体已经这样虚弱了，再上去，危险太大。

  Nian Fengliqiang said, your body is already so weak, and if you go up again, the danger is too great.果平立即插嘴说，我们可以给你们保健，你的心脏要是跳不动，我们给你按摩。呼吸要是困难了，立刻给你吸氧。

  Guo Ping immediately interjected and said, we can give you health care, if your heart can't beat, we will give you a massage. If breathing is difficult, give you oxygen immediately.老摄影师这才发现我们，说，你们是谁？

  The old photographer then found us and said, who are you?果平说，是两个没照上相的女卫生员。

  Guo Ping said that they were two female hygienists who did not take pictures.年富力强说，你是想用这种方式感动我们，好给你照相吧？

  Nian Fengqiang said, you want to move us in this way, so that you can take pictures of you, right?果平说，是你们感动了我们。为了给高原战士照相，自己差点要被照了遗像。

  Guo Ping said, it was you who moved us. In order to take pictures of the plateau soldiers, he almost got a posthumous portrait.我刚想说，果平你这个乌鸦嘴，没想到老摄影师笑起来，牙齿在黑胡子楂儿里闪烁，说，你这姑娘说得不对，摄影师要是以身殉职了，还真没人给他摄遗像，如同理发师不会给自己理发。

  I just wanted to say, Guo Ping, you crow's mouth, I didn't expect the old photographer to laugh, his teeth flashing in the black-bearded hawthorn, and said, you girl is not right, if the photographer dies in the line of duty, no one will really take a portrait of him, just like a barber will not cut himself.果平想想也是，不好意思地笑起来。

  Guo Ping thought about it and laughed embarrassedly.老摄影师对我们说，走吧。又对年富力强说，把摄影包给我。

  The old photographer said to us, let's go. He also said to Nian Fengliqiang, give me the photography package.我们只好走出屋门，老摄影师跟在后面。我说，您身体不好别客气，不必送了。

  We had to walk out of the house, followed by the old photographer. I said, you're not in good health, don't send it.老摄影师说，我不是送你们，是去工作。

  The old photographer said, I'm not sending you off, I'm going to work.我们就一齐默默地往外走。这是高原上一个很晴朗的上午，无遮无拦的紫外线像巨大的光伞，从高远的天际倾泻下来，晒在脸上，感觉不到暖和，但是很刺痛。远处的冰山像正在休息的白骆驼，不规则地趴着，白云在它的脚下浮动，好像脱落下的片片驼绒。

  We walked out silently together. It was a very sunny morning on the plateau, and the unobstructed ultraviolet rays were like huge umbrellas, pouring down from the high sky, shining on the face, not feeling warm, but very stinging. The iceberg in the distance is like a resting white camel, lying irregularly, and the white clouds float at its feet, like pieces of camel fluff falling off.好。停。就这儿。老摄影师命令说。

  Good. Stop. That's it. The old photographer ordered.我和果平继续往前走。跟着老摄影师的年富力强说，你们这两个女兵，怎么不听招呼？

  Guo Ping and I continued to walk forward. Following the old photographer's youth, why don't you two female soldiers listen to greetings?我们愣了，说，谁知说谁呢？

  We were stunned and said, who knows who to say?年富力强说，谁想照相就是说谁呢。

  Nian Liqiang said, whoever wants to take pictures is who it is.我们大喜过望，说，真想不到，摄影师带病坚持工作。

  We were overjoyed and said, I really didn't expect that the photographer insisted on working despite illness.年富力强说，你没看老师傅要亲自给你们照相？他的技术比我高明多了。要是男兵，我就动手。因为你们是女娃子，刚才不说了吗，女孩比男孩重要。

  Nian Fengqiang said, didn't you see that the master wanted to take pictures of you in person? His skills are much smarter than mine. If it's a male soldier, I'll do it. Because you are girls, didn't you just say it, girls are more important than boys.我们很感激，又不知如何表达，只有乖乖地听老摄影师调遣。

  We are very grateful, but we don't know how to express it, so we can only obediently listen to the old photographer's dispatch.果平本想以险峻的雪山为背景，照一张雄赳赳气昂昂的照片。老摄影师说，不可。你们的父母听说孩子到了高山上，一定担心不已。如果看到背景这么荒凉寒冷，心里一定不是滋味。你寄照片回家，原本是想让家长放心，这么着，他们就更不放心了。

  Guo Ping originally wanted to take a majestic photo with the steep snow-capped mountains as the background. The old photographer said, "No." Your parents must be worried when they hear that their children have reached the mountains. If you see the background so desolate and cold, you must not feel good. You sent photos home, originally to reassure parents, but in this way, they are even more uneasy.果平不知所措地说，那以什么为背景呢？在阿里高原，要找一处没有雪山的背景，几乎是不可能的。

  Guo Ping said at a loss, what is the background? In the Ali Plateau, it is almost impossible to find a background without snow-capped mountains.但我们可以让荒凉的感觉尽量淡薄一些啊。老摄影师领着我们往前走。在狮泉河旁像眉毛一般短的道路上找了半天，停在一块标语牌前。这地方怎么样？老摄影师的语气很有点沾沾自喜，好像发现了一个宝石矿。

  But we can make the feeling of desolation as light as possible. The old photographer led us forward. After looking for a long time on the road as short as eyebrows next to the Shiquan River, I stopped in front of a placard. How is this place? The old photographer's tone was a little complacent, as if he had discovered a gem mine.不怎么样。像人民公社的大队部。果平撇撇嘴。

  Not so good. Like the brigade headquarters of the People's Commune. Guo Ping curled his lips.在这穷乡僻壤，能有个像大队部的风景，就很不错了。别的地方照出来，简直像在土星上。年富力强说。

  In this remote area, it would be very good to have a scenery like the brigade headquarters. Shining from other places, it looks like Saturn. Nian Fengqiang said.虽然我也很讨厌毫无情趣的标语牌子，可是想到妈妈假如看到我站在崇山峻岭中的留影，显得那么渺小孤单，一定忧心忡忡，便同意了老摄影师的选择。

  Although I also hate boring slogans, I thought that if my mother saw me standing in the mountains, she would be so small and lonely, she would be worried, so I agreed to the old photographer's choice.摄影师选好角度，支稳机器，指挥着我们摆好姿势。刚要照，果平突然说，慢着，等我一会儿好吗？说完不等别人表态，撒腿就跑。

  The photographer chooses the angle, stabilizes the machine, and directs us to pose. Just about to take a photo, Guo Ping suddenly said, slow down, can you wait for me for a while? After saying that, he didn't wait for others to express his position, and ran away.干什么去？大家问。

  What are you doing? Everyone asked.我得换身衣服。果平回答。

  I have to change my clothes. Guo Ping replied.我用挑剔的目光审查了果平一番，没什么不妥的地方啊，衣服干干净净，脸上也没污点。就说，你像刚消毒完的注射器，清洁极了。

  I reviewed Guo Ping with a critical eye, there was nothing wrong with it, the clothes were clean, and there was no stain on my face. Just say that you are like a freshly sterilized syringe, very clean.果平说，建议你也换换衣服。现在是几月？八月。我们身上穿的是什么？全套的棉袄棉裤，窝囊得像北极熊。这种相片寄回家，我妈掐指一算，什么鬼地方，夏天还会下雪啊？我在信里给我妈描述得这好那好，都会露了馅儿。所以，我得换套单衣，显得精干些。

  Guo Ping said that it is recommended that you also change your clothes. What month is it? August. What do we wear? A full set of padded jackets and pants, nestled like polar bears. This kind of photo is sent home, my mother pinched her fingers, what the hell, will it snow in summer? I described this to my mother in the letter, and it would be stuffy. So, I had to change into a single outfit to look leaner.果平的理由很有说服力，我也想去换衣服了。可老摄影师说，你们是要脸还是要命？这么冷的天，穿着棉衣脚都冻得慌，换单衣，亏你们想得出。只怕照片还没洗出来，你们就躺在床上发烧了。你们并不知道老人的心，以为编一套瞎话，他们就信了？才不是呢！他们会拿着你们的信，反复揣摩，从信瓤看到信封，从邮票看到邮戳，从时间推算路程，心会提到嗓子眼儿。再说，我选景就是再小心，也避不开远处的雪山，总得进到镜头里一星半点，老人是一定会发现的。要是看到你在雪山下面还穿着单衣，认定你不会安顿自己，照顾自己，心就缩成一个硬疙瘩。你寄回照片本来是为了让他安心，结果他更担心。倒还不如穿着棉袄，家里人会想，噢，那里可真冷。不过，孩子知道自己心疼自己……心里反倒安宁些。

  Guo Ping's reasons are very convincing, and I want to change my clothes too. But the old photographer said, do you want face or death? On such a cold day, wearing cotton clothes and feet are frozen and panicked, change into single clothes, you can think of it. I'm afraid that before the photos are developed, you will lie in bed with a fever. You don't know the old man's heart, thinking that if you make up a set of lies, they will believe it? It's not! They will hold your letters, ponder them repeatedly, see the envelope from the letter, see the postmark from the stamp, calculate the distance from time, and their hearts will be in their throats. Besides, no matter how careful I am in choosing the scene, I can't avoid the snow-capped mountains in the distance, I have to enter the camera for a star and a half, and the old man will definitely find out. If you see that you are still wearing a single coat under the snow-capped mountains, and you think that you will not settle down and take care of yourself, your heart will shrink into a hard pimple. You sent back the photos to reassure him, but he was more worried. It's better to wear a padded jacket, and the family will think, oh, it's so cold there. However, the child knows that he feels sorry for himself...... I feel more at ease.我和果平再无话可说，按照部署，各照了一张全身、一张半身的照片。

  Guo Ping and I had nothing more to say, so according to the deployment, we each took a photo of the whole body and a half-body.谢谢。我们向年轻和年老的两位摄影师表示衷心的谢意。

  Thank you. We would like to express our heartfelt gratitude to both photographers, young and old.不必言谢，并不一定成功。万一照坏了，我会通知你们补照的。老摄影师虚弱地说。看来，刚才这一番折腾，耗尽了他的力气。

  Needless to say, it doesn't necessarily work. In case the photo is broken, I will notify you to retake it. The old photographer said weakly. It seems that this tossing just now exhausted his strength.果平说，如果成功了，我们什么时候能看到照片呢？

  Guoping said, if it succeeds, when will we see the photos?那就不一定了。我们还要到边防站去，还有许多照片要洗印。不过，请放心，我们会尽快把相片给你们，让你们的爸爸妈妈看到你们的新样子。年富力强说。

  Not necessarily. We still have to go to the border station, and there are still many photos to be printed. However, don't worry, we'll give you the photos as soon as possible so that your mom and dad can see your new look. Nian Fengqiang said.我和果平，在以后的日子里，怀揣着最美好的想象等待着。我们不敢到招待所去，怕摄影师以为我们催他。他们实在太忙了，我们不忍心再添麻烦。

  Guo Ping and I are waiting with the best imagination in the days to come. We didn't dare to go to the guest house, for fear that the photographer would think we were urging him. They are so busy that we can't bear to add any more trouble.

  有一天，别人带给我们一个纸包，打开一看，正是我和果平的照片。在那块标语牌做背景的照片上，我和果平穿着鼓鼓囊囊的棉衣棉裤，笑得都很开心。

  One day, someone brought us a paper bag, and when we opened it, it was a photo of me and Guoping. In the photo with the placard as the background, Guo Ping and I were wearing bulging cotton clothes and pants, smiling happily.他们呢？我们问。

  What about them? We ask.你们说的是谁？带给我们纸包的人问。

  Who are you talking about? The person who brought us the paper bag asked.就是一老一少的摄影师啊。

  It's a photographer of one old and one young.他们后来又到最高的边防站给战士们照相。加上以前照了没洗出来的活儿，工作量很大。他们连轴转，把所有的照片洗出来，装到袋子里，都写好了名字……后来，他们累得晕倒了，被紧急送回山下。现在，我们按照他们留下的记录，把纸袋里的照片一一分送给大家。来人说。

  They later went to the highest border station to take pictures of the soldiers. In addition, the work that was not washed out before was a lot of work. They turned around, washed out all the photos, put them in bags, and wrote their names...... Later, they fainted from exhaustion and were rushed back down the mountain. Now, according to the records they left, we will give you the photos in the paper bags one by one. The person said.我和果平什么也说不出来，只是朝山下的方向望着。但愿一老一少的摄影师，在充足的氧气里恢复健康。

  Guo Ping and I couldn't say anything, we just looked in the direction down the mountain. I hope that photographers of all ages will recover their health with sufficient oxygen.

未知

  11.胖听

  11. Fat listening

  每月发罐头的日子，是高原的节日。大家聚在司务长的房间里，好像是赶集，七嘴八舌，议论纷纷。人们挑三拣四，乱哄哄的。军用品，质量没得说，主要是选择什么品种水果的问题。

  The day of canning every month is a festival on the plateau. Everyone gathered in the secretary's room, as if they were rushing to the market, gossiping and talking. People are picky and clamoring. Military supplies, there is nothing to say about the quality, the main thing is the question of what variety of fruit to choose.有一个专门要橘子的人，一月是橘子，七月还是橘子。据说他领的罐头从来不吃，都堆在床底下精心保管着。用木板垫起一个架子，罐头像商店陈列的货物，摆得整整齐齐。罐头上还罩着报纸，防着扫地泼水的时候，水珠溅到罐头，铁皮就锈了。大家私下笑话他：这人已经把一棵橘子树的收成，都藏到自己铺板底下啦！后来听说他是准备探家的时候，把橘子罐头都装在麻袋里背回家，让从来没吃过橘子的父母，尝尝南国水果的滋味，人们就不好意思再议论他了。

  There is a person who specializes in oranges, oranges in January, and oranges in July. It is said that he never eats the canned food he receives, and he keeps it carefully under the bed. A shelf is lined with wooden planks, and the cans are neatly arranged like goods displayed in a store. The can is also covered with newspaper, to prevent water droplets from splashing on the can when sweeping the floor and splashing water, and the iron sheet rusts. Everyone laughed at him privately: This person has hidden the harvest of an orange tree under his paving! Later, I heard that when he was preparing to visit his family, he put canned oranges in sacks and carried them home, so that his parents, who had never eaten oranges, could taste the taste of tropical fruits, and people were embarrassed to talk about him anymore.罐头后来有了一市斤和一公斤两种包装，就是一种小筒一种大筒。一般的人都喜欢要大筒的，因为吃起来痛快淋漓，解馋顶饿。再说开罐头的时候方便些，一次解决。要是弄个小筒的，得多费一倍的力气。有个叫小叶的人，偏偏反其道而行之，每次专要小筒。世上的事就是奇怪，大家都不要小筒的时候，司务长巴不得把小筒罐头早点推出去。小叶指名道姓地要小筒，司务长又烦了，说小叶你事真多，大筒小筒还不都是一样吃，到了肚子里一样都化成屎，你不嫌烦我还嫌乱呢！

  Canned food later came in two packages: one pound and one kilogram, which was a small tube and a large tube. Most people like to ask for big tubes, because they taste happy and relieved, satisfying hunger. Besides, it is more convenient when opening cans, and it can be solved at once. If you get a small tube, it will take twice as much effort. There is a man named Xiaoye, but he does the opposite, and every time he wants a small tube. Things in the world are strange, when everyone doesn't want small tubes, the secretary wants to push out the small tubes as soon as possible. Xiao Ye asked for a small tube by name, and the secretary was annoyed again, saying that Xiao Ye has a lot of things, and the big and small tubes are not all eaten the same, and they all turn into in their stomachs.小叶一点也不着急，笑嘻嘻地回敬道，那可不一样。吃豆子拉的是臭的；吃菜拉的是绿的；吃了司务长发的水果罐头，打的嗝儿都又甜又香。

  Xiao Ye was not in a hurry at all, and replied with a smile, that was different. Eating Pacific is stinky; the vegetables are green; After eating the canned fruit from the secretary's hair, the burps were sweet and fragrant.司务长就笑了，说小叶你是属救火队的，叫人发不起火。你可知道，这次来的小筒罐头箱都压在大箱底下，搬动一场，肺里有进的气儿没出的气儿，累得真魂出窍，我不给你当搬运工。真想要小筒，自己动手，丰衣足食吧。

  The secretary laughed and said that Xiaoye, you belong to the fire brigade, so people can't afford to get angry. Do you know that the small canned boxes that came this time were pressed under the big boxes, and they were moved, and there was no air in their lungs, and they were so tired that they were really out of their minds, and I wouldn't be a porter for you. If you really want a small tube, do it yourself, and have plenty of food and clothing.小叶说，我是真想要。可你这儿是“仓库重地，闲人免进”，就不怕我顺手牵羊，多拿了几筒走？

  Xiao Ye said, I really want it. But you are here "a warehouse is an important place, idlers are exempt from entering", so you are not afraid that I will take the sheep and take a few more tubes?司务长说，你不是闲人，是苦力的干活儿。不过，你这么一说，倒是提醒了我，你等大家都领完了罐头，再来忙活你的这点私事吧。一来你可避嫌，二来我也好给你搭把手。

  The secretary said, you are not an idler, you are a coolie. However, when you say this, you remind me that you wait until everyone has finished receiving the canned food before you can get busy with your private affairs. First, you can avoid suspicion, and secondly, I can help you.正好我也在一旁，就说，到时候我来帮忙。

  I happened to be on the side, so I said, I'll help when the time comes.大家就说有人愿意义务劳动，好啊好啊。其实，我心里想的是，库房是个神秘的地方，我倒要看看里头藏着什么宝贝。

  Everyone said that some people were willing to volunteer to work, okay, okay. In fact, what I thought to myself was that the warehouse was a mysterious place, and I wanted to see what treasures were hidden in it.大家领完罐头，已是傍晚时分。吃了晚饭，天就黑透了。小叶叫我去帮忙，库房里黑黢黢的，好像一个阴森的山洞。我嘟囔着说，库房为什么不安个电灯呢？现在我每一个寒毛孔，都充满做贼的感觉。

  After everyone finished receiving the can, it was already evening. After dinner, it was dark. Xiao Ye asked me to help, and the warehouse was dark, like a gloomy cave. I muttered, why is the warehouse uneasy about the light? Now every cold pore of me is full of the feeling of being a thief.也不是打仗需要弹药，谁没事半夜三更时分到库房瞎翻腾？都是小叶这个倒霉鬼，搅得我们不得安宁。司务长手擎一根蜡烛，在一摞罐头箱子后面闪出来，愤愤地说。跳跃的烛光从他的右下颌向左上眉弓闪去，使他那张在白天看来还挺中看的脸庞，顿生凶狠之色。

  It's not that you need ammunition for war, who has nothing to do to go to the warehouse in the middle of the night to toss and turn? It's all Xiaoye, the unlucky ghost, who makes us restless. The chief clerk held a candle in his hand, flashed out from behind a stack of canned boxes, and said indignantly. The jumping candlelight flashed from his right lower jaw to the arch of his upper left eyebrow, making his face, which seemed quite medium during the day, suddenly turn fierce.小叶说，谢谢你啦，我代表家乡的父老乡亲们谢谢你啦。

  Xiao Ye said, thank you, I thank you on behalf of the fathers and villagers in my hometown.司务长说，小叶你别扯得那么远，你老家的人认得我是谁？闲话少说，开始干活儿吧。

  The secretary said, Xiaoye, don't go so far, who do the people in your hometown recognize me? Stop gossiping and get to work.所谓干活儿，就是把顶端的罐头箱子搬下来，垛在一旁，慢慢地寻找不知隐藏在哪里的小筒罐头箱。箱子的外表都是一样的，只是标签不同。我们搬了一箱，用烛光一照，不是，只得把它摞在旁边。又搬了一箱，拿烛光来照，还不是，只好又摆在一边。本来搬几个箱子，对司务长和小叶这样年纪的男子汉来说，不是什么了不起的活儿，但高原这个阴险的魔术师，在人们不知不觉当中，把大家的力气溶解在空气中了。过了没一会儿，他俩就像八十岁的老翁，喘个不停。

  The so-called work is to move down the top canning box, stack it aside, and slowly look for the small canning box that is hidden somewhere. The appearance of the box is the same, but the label is different. We moved a box and lit it with candlelight, no, we had to stack it next to it. I moved another box and took a candlelight to shine, but it wasn't, so I had to put it aside again. Originally, moving a few boxes was not a great job for a man of the age of the secretary and Xiao Ye, but the plateau, an insidious magician, dissolved everyone's strength into the air without people knowing. After a while, they were like eighty-year-old men, panting.司务长鼻孔喷着白汽说，小叶，这是何苦？想体验码头扛大个儿的滋味？

  The chief secretary's nostrils sprayed white steam and said, Xiaoye, why is this bothering? Want to experience what it's like to carry a big man at the dock?小叶说，不好意思，小筒罐头，显得筒子多一些，分的时候好办些。

  Xiao Ye said, I'm sorry, the small tube can, it seems that there are more tubes, and it is easier to do when dividing.我听不懂他的话，说，小叶，你到底什么意思？解释解释。

  I couldn't understand his words, and said, Xiaoye, what do you mean? Explain the explanation.小叶说，我的罐头要带回老家，亲戚朋友多，姑姑舅舅大姨大妈表婶叔伯哥哥……全村人都沾亲。咱从这么远的地方回去，大伙儿都来看我，拿什么招待呢？罐头是个新鲜物，我就每户送上一筒。僧多粥少。也许不该把亲戚叫“僧”，反正就那个意思，嘴多罐头少，要是大筒的就分不过来了，所以……

  Xiao Ye said, I want to take my canned food back to my hometown, I have many relatives and friends, aunts, uncles, uncles, and brothers...... The whole village is close. Let's go back from such a far place, everyone comes to see me, what kind of hospitality should we get? Canned food is a fresh thing, so I will give one tube to each household. There are many monks and little porridge. Maybe you shouldn't call your relatives "monks", anyway, that's what it means, there are more mouths and fewer cans, and if it's a big tube, you can't tell it apart, so ......司务长打断小叶的话说，你就甭“所以”了，我明白啦。休息过来了没有？开始干活儿吧。

  The secretary interrupted Xiao Ye and said, you don't have to say "so", I understand. Have you rested?" Let's get to work.我也开始给他们打下手，终于像挖煤工人一样，在层层叠叠的罐头箱子下面，掘到了一箱标有“每听500克装”的罐头。大家那个高兴啊，就像盗墓贼发现了皇帝的玉玺。司务长用钳子扭开绑箱子的铁丝铁钉，“嘭”地将木板打开，一筒筒雪亮的罐头暴露在烛光下，圆圆的锡铁盖子好像大号勋章，朦胧地反射着一朵朵浅红色的烛火。

  I also began to give them a hand, and finally, like a coal digger, I dug a box of cans marked "500 grams per listen" under the layers of canning boxes. Everyone is happy, just like the tomb robbers found the emperor's jade seal. The secretary twisted the wire and iron nails tied to the box with pliers, opened the board with a "bang", and the snowy cans were exposed to the candlelight, and the round tin and iron lids were like large medals, hazily reflecting light red candles.司务长用调兵遣将的口气说，拿你的吧。

  The chief said in the tone of a troop dispatcher, take yours.小叶欣喜地打量着整箱的罐头，好像那都是他的财产。要知道平常的日子里，你该领几筒，司务长就给你拿出几筒，从未让人如此一饱眼福。现在虽然明知这许多罐头并不是都属于自己，看着也高兴。瞅了半天，小叶指着一筒胖胖的罐头说，我就要那筒了。

  Xiao Ye looked at the whole box of cans happily, as if they were all his property. You must know that on ordinary days, when you should receive a few tubes, the secretary will take out a few tubes for you, which has never been so feast for the eyes. Now although I know that many cans do not belong to me, I am happy to look at them. After looking at it for a long time, Xiao Ye pointed to a chubby can and said, I want that tube.司务长脸上显出很怪异的神情，说，满满一箱罐头任你挑，你为什么偏要那筒？

  The secretary had a very strange look on his face and said, a box full of cans for you to choose, why do you want that tube?小叶费力地把那筒胖罐头从挤得紧紧的箱子里取出，说，满满一箱罐头，我为什么偏偏不能要这筒呢？

  Xiao Ye struggled to take out the fat can from the tightly squeezed box, saying, full of cans, why can't I ask for this tube?我也觉得很纳闷，特别认真地听他们对话。

  I also felt very puzzled, and listened to their conversation very carefully.司务长说，你哪筒都能拿，就是不能拿这筒。

  The secretary said, you can take any tube, but you can't take this tube.小叶的犟脾气上来了，说，我哪筒都不要，就是要拿这筒。

  Xiaoye's stubborn temper came up and said, I don't want any tube, I just want to take this tube.司务长说，我是管发放军用物资的，没有我的批准，你想拿也拿不走。

  The secretary said, I am in charge of distributing military supplies, and without my approval, you can't take it even if you want to.

  小叶一看司务长用职务来压他，正着说是说不过了，反唇相讥道，莫非是司务长看着这筒罐头格外饱满，要利用职权，专门留给自己吃啦？

  Xiao Ye saw that the secretary was using his position to suppress him, and he couldn't say it, and he sarcastically said, could it be that the secretary looked at this tube of canned food that was particularly full, and wanted to use his power to leave it for himself?我想司务长一定会反驳的，没想到，他笑着说，你说得对。我就是要利用一次职权，把这筒罐头留给自己。而且还特地邀请你和我一道品尝这筒罐头。

  I thought the secretary would definitely refute, but I didn't expect him to smile and say, you are right. I just want to use my power to keep this can to myself. And I specially invite you to taste this canned tube with me.我们都不知司务长的确切意思，只见他抽出一把开罐头的专用刀，刚要戳进胖罐头亮闪闪的鼓肚子，突然又停了手，对小叶说，你把它放在自己耳朵边，摇一摇，它就有话对你说。

  We didn't know the exact meaning of the secretary, only to see him pull out a special knife for opening cans, and just about to poke into the shiny bulging belly of the fat can, he suddenly stopped again and said to Xiao Ye, you put it next to your ear, shake it, and it will have something to say to you.罐头会说话？我和小叶吃了一惊。小叶按着司务长说的，把罐头凑在耳边晃了晃。我也赶过去凑热闹，小叶就把罐头递给我。我用力把胖罐头颠来倒去，侧耳细听。它咕嘟着，好像一个不会游泳的胖子，被人开玩笑扔进深潭，套着救生圈，竭力挣扎。

  Can talk? Xiaoye and I were taken aback. Xiao Ye followed what the secretary said, and put the can to his ear and shook it. I also rushed over to join in the fun, and Xiaoye handed me the can. I turned the fat can upside down and listened carefully. It grunts, like a fat man who can't swim, is jokingly thrown into a deep pool, wearing a lifebuoy, and struggling hard.小叶说，这罐头要是一个人，会被你折腾出脑震荡。

  Xiao Ye said, if this can is alone, it will be tossed by you and cause a concussion.司务长问，听到罐头对你说的话了吗？

  The secretary asked, did you hear what the can said to you?我叹了口气说，没听到。

  I sighed and said, I didn't hear it.司务长不急也不恼地说，没听到不要紧，你还可以敲敲它的肚皮，它很诚实，会把刚才对你说过的话，再重复一遍。

  The secretary said without hurry or annoyance, it doesn't matter if you don't hear it, you can still knock on its belly, it is very honest and will repeat what it just said to you.

  这一次，我抢在小叶前面，用手指猛力弹胖罐头。它气愤地发出空空洞洞的回音，好像一个老爷爷被打断了午睡，气得直咳嗽。

  This time, I grabbed Xiaoye in front of him and flicked the fat can with my fingers. It made an empty echo angrily, as if an old man had been interrupted from a nap and coughed angrily.我做了一个鬼脸。小叶不理睬，面带思索之色，好像胖罐头真把什么绝密的情报透露给他了。

  I made a face. Xiao Ye ignored it, with a thoughtful look on his face, as if Fat Can had really revealed some top-secret information to him.司务长对着不开窍的我说，看你这样子，只有让胖罐头自己坦白交代，你才会明白啊。

  The secretary said to me, who was not enlightened, looking at you like this, only if you let the fat can confess himself, you will understand.他说着，果断地用罐头刀扎了下去……只听“噗”的一声响，那动静不像是刺一个没有生命的物体，倒像是宰了一头肥猪。随之一股恶臭从胖罐头的裂口处喷涌而出，蜡烛光都被呛了一个跟头，险些熄灭。那股黑色的气体在仓库内久久盘旋，好像放了一颗催泪弹，我们的眼睛都被熏得眯起来。

  He said, decisively stabbing it with a can knife...... Just listening to the sound of "poof", the movement was not like stabbing an inanimate object, but like slaughtering a fat pig. Then a foul smell gushed out from the crack in the fat can, and the candlelight was choked and almost extinguished. The black gas lingered in the warehouse for a long time, as if a tear gas had been released, and our eyes were squinted with smoke.我说，哎呀，罐头里面藏着一个妖怪？

  I said, oh, there's a monster hidden in the can?司务长说，你过来一看，就明白啦！

  The secretary said, come over and take a look, and you will understand!我躲得远远的，说，不看不看。瞧这味儿，像进了公共厕所。再到跟前看，胃就得来一个反向运动了。

  I hid far away and said, don't look, don't look. Look at this smell, it's like entering a public toilet. Then look at it, and the stomach has to move in reverse.那时候，我们的卫生课刚刚讲到消化器官，正向运动是从口腔到肠胃，反向运动就可想而知了。

  At that time, our hygiene class had just talked about the digestive organs, and the forward movement was from the mouth to the stomach, and the reverse movement could be imagined.小叶比我坚强得多，一声不响地走过去，头俯在那筒胖罐头跟前。正确地讲，那筒罐头现在已经不胖了，垂头丧气地蹲在那里，好像一个饿瘪了的囚徒。我听到小叶喃喃地说……果肉都变成黑色的了……有气体……黄色马口铁的镀膜也脱落了……

  Xiaoye was much stronger than me, and walked over silently, leaning his head in front of the fat can. To be precise, the tube was no longer fat, and he squatted there dejectedly, like a starving prisoner. I heard Xiao Ye murmuring...... The flesh has turned black...... There is gas...... The coating of the yellow tinplate also peeled off......司务长连连夸奖说，小叶你观察得很仔细，对，就是这几个特征。

  The secretary praised again and again, Xiao Ye, you have observed very carefully, yes, these are the characteristics.我还不明白，愣愣地问，我听这些话，好像是在描绘一个病人。

  I still don't understand, I asked in a daze, I heard these words, as if I was describing a patient.司务长说，正是啊！这种胖罐头，按我们军需的行话就叫“胖听”，是罐头中的次品，也就相当于病人了。因为制作或运输中的问题，密封的罐头里面发生了污染，无所不在的细菌大肆繁殖。罐头腐败了，细菌产气，就把罐头的铁皮顶得膨胀起来，变成大胖子。它完全丧失了食用的价值，吃了拉肚子是轻的，碰上肉毒菌，小命就呜呼了。平时我发罐头之前，都要仔细检查，像查特务一般把它们严格挑出来，怕坏了大家的健康。今儿个咱们是到库房里直接取货，你们好眼福啊，看到了平常无缘一见的胖听……

  The secretary said, exactly! This kind of fat canned food, according to the jargon of our military supplies, is called "fat listening", which is a defective product in the can, which is equivalent to a patient. Due to problems in production or transportation, the sealed cans were contaminated and ubiquitous bacteria multiplied. When the canned food rots and bacteria produce gas, the tin sheet of the can is inflated and becomes a big fat man. It completely loses its edible value, and it is light to eat diarrhea, and when it encounters botulinum toxin, it will be dead. Usually, before I send out canned food, I have to check them carefully, and I pick them out strictly like a spiper, for fear of ruining everyone's health. Today, we went to the warehouse to pick up the goods directly, you are so eye-catching, you see the fat listening that you usually don't have the chance to see......小叶不好意思地说，多谢司务长，今天长了见识。本来，我以为胖听比别的罐头更鼓，以为里面装的货色特别多，想让家乡的人多尝尝。司务长，顶撞了，多包涵。

  Xiao Ye said embarrassedly, thank you, Secretary, I gained knowledge today. Originally, I thought that Fat Listening was more bulging than other cans, and I thought that there were a lot of goods in it, and I wanted people in my hometown to try more. The director of the department, confronting me, is more inclusive.司务长说，甭客气啦，快领了你的小罐头走吧。

  The secretary said, don't be polite, take your little can and go.说着，司务长亲自动手，把一堆身材苗条的罐头，推到小叶手里。小叶数了一下，说，司务长，你给我发多了。

  Saying that, the secretary took matters into his own hands and pushed a bunch of slender cans into Xiaoye's hand. Xiao Ye counted and said, Director, you sent me too much.司务长说，这不是骂我吗？我做了多少年的军需，连数都不认？不会多的。快拿着走吧。

  The secretary said, isn't this scolding me? How many years have I been a military quartermaster, and I don't even recognize the number? There won't be much. Take it and go."小叶说，司务长，你再数一遍。我可不愿多吃多占。

  Xiao Ye said, Director, you count again. I don't want to eat too much.司务长说，小叶，我把我这个月的那份也给你了。谁叫你有那么多倒霉亲戚呢！

  The secretary said, Xiao Ye, I also gave you my share of this month. Who told you to have so many unlucky relatives!

未知

  12.拉练

  12. Training

  “拉练”这个词，顾名思义，是“拉到外面去训练”的意思。这个“外面”指的又是哪儿呢？它说的是“屋子外面”。

  The word "pulling", as the name suggests, means "pulling outside to train". Where does this "outside" refer to? It says "outside the house".有人又得说了，屋外有什么了不起的？我们不是常常到屋外活动吗？

  Someone has to say again, what's so great outside the house? Aren't we often outside the house?我说的这个屋外，有几点特殊的地方。第一是时间。它不是春暖花开的三月，也不是赤日炎炎的夏天，还不是金风送爽的秋天……对了，现在只剩下最后一个季节，就是白雪皑皑的冬天了。第二是地点。不是江南，不是塞北，不是平原，是海拔五千米雪线以上的高原永冻地带。

  There are a few special things about this house I mentioned. The first is time. It is not the spring of March, nor the scorching summer, nor the autumn of the golden wind...... By the way, now there is only one last season left, which is a snowy winter. The second is the location. It is not Jiangnan, not the north of the Great Wall, not the plains, but the plateau permafrost above the snow line of 5,000 meters above sea level.什么叫雪线呢？刚听到这个词的人，脑海里会不由自主地出现一条又白又亮的银线，好像是一根由千万根蚕丝拧成的粗绳子，悬挂在险峻的高山半腰。其实，雪线可没那么浪漫，它只是地图上一条假想的线，表示在这个高度以上，积雪和冰川永不融化，寿命与天地同存。在雪线以上的高山行走，随手拣起一块透明的冰块，它的历史都可能超过了一千年，比你爷爷的爷爷还要古老得多。拉练就是让大家到雪线之上露营和自己起火做饭，当然，最主要的节目是行军和真枪实弹的演习。听了动员令后，大家都摩拳擦掌，做着拉练前的诸项准备。

  What is a snow line? When people first hear this word, a white and bright silver thread will involuntarily appear in their minds, like a thick rope twisted from tens of millions of silks, hanging halfway up the steep mountain. In fact, the snow line is not so romantic, it is just an imaginary line on the map, indicating that above this height, the snow and glaciers will never melt, and the life will coexist with heaven and earth. Walking on the mountains above the snow line, picking up a transparent ice cube, it may be more than a thousand years old, much older than your grandfather's grandfather. The training is to let everyone camp on the snow line and start a fire to cook by themselves, of course, the most important program is marching and real gun drills. After listening to the mobilization order, everyone geared up and made various preparations before training.第一要紧的是每人要有一口锅。平常日子都是吃炊事班的大锅饭，自己不用发愁。这回不行了，要野炊，首先得自己备好锅勺。不由得想起一句古话——巧妇难为无米之炊，心想，它说得也不怎么确切，就算有了米，没有锅，巧妇也得抓瞎。

  The first thing is that everyone should have a pot. On ordinary days, I eat a big pot of rice in the cooking class, so I don't have to worry about it. This time it won't work, if you want to have a picnic, you must first prepare your own pots and spoons. I can't help but think of an old saying - it is difficult for a clever woman to cook without rice, thinking that it is not very accurate, even if there is rice, there is no pot, the clever woman has to catch blind.河莲先到炊事班求援。班长说，甭瞎忙活。你们不用备炊具，到时候有我呢。

  Ha Lian first went to the cooking class to ask for help. The squad leader said, don't be busy. You don't need to prepare cooking utensils, I'll be there then."有人自告奋勇帮忙自然好，但不知这忙如何帮法。河莲说，让我先看看你准备的锅。

  It's natural for someone to volunteer to help, but I don't know how to help. Ha Lian said, let me take a look at the pot you prepared first.班长说，我的锅，没什么新鲜的，你天天见，喏，就在那儿。

  The squad leader said, my pot, nothing fresh, you see it every day, oh, it's there.河莲一看，原来炊事班长根本没做特殊准备，打算把每天给大伙烧开水的大铁锅，背出去煮饭就是。

  He Lian saw that the cooking squad leader had not made any special preparations at all, and planned to carry the big iron pot that boiled water for everyone every day and carry it out to cook.河莲说，那怎么行？到时候一安营扎寨，传下号令，就地生火做饭，等你做完了，队伍也该开拔了，我会饿肚子。

  He Lian said, how can that work? When the time comes, as soon as you set up camp, give orders, light a fire and cook on the spot, and when you finish it, it's time for the team to start, and I will be hungry.班长晃着大方脑壳说，我是那样的人吗？要是万一来不及，怎么也得让其他同志先吃，我是享乐在后的。

  The squad leader shook his generous head and said, Am I that kind of person? If it's too late, I have to let other comrades eat first, and I'll have fun later.河莲说，那也不成。你的锅那么大，得多少柴草才能把水烧开？伺候不起。

  He Lian said, that won't work either. Your pot is so big, how much firewood do you need to boil water? He couldn't wait.河莲是我们派出的侦察兵，本以为她会带回好消息，不想无功而返。全班人唉声叹气之时，新情报传回来了，说是经过摸索，有人发明了用罐头盒子做成很漂亮、实用的小行军锅。

  Ha Lian was a scout sent by us, and I thought she would bring back good news, and I didn't want to return in vain. When the whole class sighed, new information came back, saying that after exploration, someone invented a beautiful and practical small marching pot made of a can box.高原海拔高，气压低，饭很不容易做熟。避免夹生的办法，就是尽量提高锅的密闭性，保持住锅里的温度和压力。当然要是有小的高压锅，那是最方便了，可拉练的宗旨就是让大家在冰天雪地里锻炼，哪儿会给大家配锅？不知是谁的创造，用锉刀把罐头盒顶端的焊锡锉掉，使罐头盒盖完整地脱落下来，用的时候再盖上去，一个因陋就简的小锅就成功了。

  The plateau is high at high altitude and low air pressure, making it difficult to cook rice. The way to avoid sandwiching is to try to improve the airtightness of the pot and maintain the temperature and pressure in the pot. Of course, if there is a small pressure cooker, it is the most convenient, but the purpose of the training is to let everyone exercise in the ice and snow, where will everyone be equipped with a pot? I don't know whose creation it was, use a file to file off the solder at the top of the can box, so that the lid of the can box comes off completely, and then cover it when it is used, and a small pot that is simple because of ugliness is successful.我们每人拿出一个水果罐头，开始像手工作坊一般干起来。锉刀吱吱，银屑飘飘。不一会儿，河莲就兴奋地大叫起来，我的小锅出厂啦！

  We each took out a can of fruit and started to do it like a handicraft workshop. The file creaked, and the silver chips fluttered. After a while, He Lian shouted excitedly, my small pot is out of the factory!大家凑过去一看，河莲把罐头盖子平平整整地卸了下来，盖上去的时候严丝合缝，简直像是原装的锅盖。河莲又操起锤子，用小钉在罐头盒——也就是锅的主体部分，钻了两个洞。

  Everyone leaned over to take a look, and He Lian removed the lid of the can flat, and when the lid was put on, it was tightly sealed, just like the original pot lid. He Lian picked up the hammer again, used small nails to pierce the canning box, that is, the main part of the pot, and drilled two holes.我们吃惊地问，这是什么？

  We asked in surprise, what is this?河莲说，这都不明白？拴上铁丝，做个锅耳朵。不然，锅那么烫，谁敢用手提？再说，如何捆到背包上？都是问题。我这是一箭双雕。

  He Lian said, don't understand this? Tie the wire and make a pot ear. Otherwise, the pot is so hot, who dares to carry it with a hand? Besides, How to tie to a backpack? are all questions. I killed two birds with one stone.我们衷心佩服河莲的深谋远虑，锅的制造已进入精加工阶段。低头看看自己手下的活儿，还是粗坯，就赶快提高速度。

  We sincerely admire Ha Lian's foresight, and the manufacturing of the pot has entered the finishing stage. Look down at the work under your hands, it is still rough, so quickly increase your speed.真是见了鬼，我拼命挥舞锉刀，像一个地道的老工人。可我的罐头盒子好像变成一发炮弹，其壳坚硬无比。我累得一脑门儿热汗，它还是岿然不动。

  I really saw a ghost, I desperately wielded a file, like an authentic old worker. But my canned box seemed to have turned into a cannonball, and its shell was extremely hard. I was so tired that I was sweating profusely, but I still remained still.我去找河莲，她成了我们之中的总工程师。真是高人啊，只看了一眼，她就说出了症结所在。你真傻，为什么专门挑了橘子罐头来锉？要知道，它的铁皮质量最好，简直像是不锈钢制成的，难怪你锉不开。像我，选一筒菠萝罐头，又小巧铁皮又软，自然马到成功了。

  I went to find He Lian, and she became the chief engineer among us. What a master, just one look, she said the crux of the matter. You are so stupid, why did you choose canned oranges to file? You know, its iron sheet is of the best quality, it is almost like it is made of stainless steel, no wonder you can't file it. Like me, choose a canned pineapple, small and soft, and naturally succeed.面对先天的失误，除了改换门庭，没别的选择。我立刻加入了“菠萝一族”，其他的操作也和河莲一模一样。经过手忙脚乱的一阵努力，小锅也宣布竣工，同河莲的产品摆在一起，简直是双胞胎。

  In the face of congenital mistakes, there is no other choice but to change the door. I immediately joined the "pineapple clan", and the other operations were exactly the same as Ha Lian. After a period of hard work, the small pot was also announced, and the products of Helian were placed together, which was simply twins.锅的问题解决之后，就是领粮食。规定每个单兵要携带足够三天食用的口粮。按照士兵最低热量标准，共需粮食四斤半。

  After the problem of the pot is solved, it is to receive food. It is stipulated that each individual soldier should carry enough rations for three days. According to the minimum calorie standard for soldiers, a total of four and a half pounds of food is needed.干粮袋是草绿色的，细细长长，瘪的时候好像一段蛇蜕。领导用秤给大家分粮，四斤半大米装进去，粮袋撑得圆圆滚滚，像一条苏醒过来的大蟒。

  The dry food bag is grass green, slender and long, and looks like a snake molt when deflated. The leader used a scale to distribute grain to everyone, and four and a half pounds of rice were loaded into it, and the grain bag was stretched out round, like a big python that had woken up.

  我生平最讨厌吃米饭了，总觉得那些软绵绵的小白粒子，吃多少也填不饱肚子。平日也就罢了，饿了可随时补充零食。可这次是模拟实战，总不能一边坚守阵地，一边嘴巴嚼个不停吧。我对领导说，给我发白面，成吗？

  I hate eating rice the most in my life, and I always feel that those soft little white particles can't fill my stomach no matter how much I eat. It's okay on weekdays, you can replenish snacks at any time when you are hungry. But this time it is a simulated actual combat, and you can't hold your position while chewing your mouth. I said to the leader, give me white noodles, is it okay?不行。领导很干脆地拒绝。

  No way. The leader simply refused.为什么？米面都是碳水化合物，提供的热量卡路里是一样的。我用刚学到的医学知识，为自己做论据。

  Why? Rice and noodles are both carbohydrates and provide the same calorie content. I used the medical knowledge I had just learned to make arguments for myself.在高原上，米可以煮熟。面呢？泡在罐头盒子里，成了糊糊，你怎么吃？领导不理我的卡路里学说，一针见血地指出面的弊病。

  On the plateau, rice can be cooked. Where's the face? Soaked in a can box, it becomes a mush, how do you eat it? The leader ignored my calorie theory and pointed out the shortcomings of the noodles.我宁愿吃那种糨糊样的东西，也不吃米饭。再说红军过雪山草地的时候，吃的也是面粉，不过就是炒熟了而已。我小声反驳。

  I'd rather eat that mushy thing than rice. Besides, when the Red Army crossed the snow-capped mountains and grasslands, they also ate flour, but they were just fried. I retorted in a low voice.领导没想到我会引经据典，一时竟想不出如何批评我，停了一会儿，终于发现了更强大的理由，说，干粮袋就那么长，米能够装进三天的量，面就不行了。

  The leader didn't expect me to quote the classics, and he couldn't think of how to criticize me for a while, and after stopping for a while, he finally found a stronger reason, saying that the dry food bag was so long, and the rice could be filled for three days, and the noodles would not work.我说，不信。

  I said, I don't believe it.领导说，你这个女孩，怎不见棺材不落泪。来，我装给你看！

  The leader said, you girl, why don't you see the coffin and not cry. Come on, I'll pretend to show you!"领导说着，称出四斤半面粉，倒进干粮袋。面比米要难收拾，不少面粉洒在外面，领导就像颗粒归仓的老农，不厌其烦地把每一撮儿面粉都收拾起来，愣往干粮袋里塞。

  The leader said, weighed four and a half pounds of flour and poured it into the dry food bag. Noodles are more difficult to clean up than rice, a lot of flour is spilled outside, and the leader is like an old farmer who returns to the warehouse, tirelessly packing up every pinch of flour and stuffing it into the dry food bag.干粮袋鼓如圆柱，秤里还遗有面粉。在铁的事实面前，我不得不低头服输。同等重量的面，要比米占的地方大。比如说一麻袋可装大米两百斤，装面粉就放不下了。领导告诫道。

  The dry food bag is bulging like a cylinder, and there is flour left in the scale. In the face of ironclad facts, I had to bow my head and admit defeat. The surface of the same weight is larger than the place occupied by the meter. For example, a sack can hold 200 pounds of rice, and it can't hold flour. The leader warned.但我仍不死心，说，具体情况要具体分析。对我的胃来说，三斤面就抵得过四斤半米。

  But I still don't give up, saying that the specific situation needs to be analyzed in detail. For my stomach, three pounds of noodles is worth four and a half pounds.领导说，这不是抵不抵的问题，也不是你的胃说了算的事。你刚才不是说什么卡路里吗？关键是热量，在冰雪高原，你要是没有热量，就得变成白雪公主。

  The leader said that this is not a matter of whether it is worth it, nor is it a matter of your stomach having the final say. Didn't you just say what calories? The key is heat, in the ice and snow plateau, if you don't have heat, you have to become Snow White.我一声不吭地跑出去，过了一会儿，抱着一堆糖进来，对领导说，我不带大米，带水果糖行不行？它提供的卡路里比大米可多多啦。

  I ran out without saying a word, and after a while, I came in with a pile of candy and said to the leader, can I bring fruit candy without rice? It provides more calories than rice.领导这次把脸沉下来，斩钉截铁地说，不成！一个战士不可能在冲锋的时候，往嘴里不停地塞糖！

  The leader sank his face this time and said categorically, no! A warrior can't keep stuffing sugar into his mouth while charging!最后一线希望破灭。虽然他的话也很无理，冲锋的战士不能往嘴里塞糖，难道就可以往嘴里塞米饭团子吗？但人家是领导，咱当小兵的，就只有服从了。

  The last glimmer of hope was dashed. Although his words are also very unreasonable, the charging soldiers can't stuff sugar into their mouths, can they stuff rice balls into their mouths? But they are leaders, and we can only obey as soldiers.衣食住行这句话，我以为很科学。在解决了吃饭问题以后，考虑的就是拉练中的穿了。皮大衣当然是必备的了，要不然，会在酷寒的夜晚冻成冰雕。狼皮褥子也是要带的，在万古不化的寒冰上露宿，没有它，地心的寒气会把我们的五脏六腑凝成一坨。狗毛皮鞋也是要带的，不然会把脚趾冻得指甲脱落。皮帽子当然更得带了，要不，回家的时候会丢了耳朵……我们贴身穿了衬衣衬裤，外面罩了绒衣绒裤，再外面裹着棉衣棉裤，然后披上皮大衣，每个人的体积都比平日增大百分之七十以上，走路的时候像一座毛皮小山在移动。

  I think the phrase "food, clothing, housing and transportation" is very scientific. After solving the problem of eating, the consideration is to wear it during training. A fur coat is of course a must, otherwise, it will freeze into ice sculptures on a cold night. The wolf skin mattress is also to be brought, sleeping on the eternal ice, without it, the cold air in the center of the earth will condense our internal organs into a lump. Dog fur shoes should also be brought, otherwise the toes will freeze and the nails will fall off. Of course, you have to bring a leather hat, otherwise, you will lose your ears when you go home...... We put on shirts and pants, velvet pants on the outside, cotton clothes and pants on the outside, and then put on fur coats.相比之下，住的问题反倒比较简单。每人带一件塑胶雨衣，它的边上有一排纽扣，我以前一直不知是干什么用的，此次经人指教，才知道可以和另外一件雨衣结成一块巨大的篷布，搭一座简易帐篷。每人还要带一把行军锹，到了宿营地，在冰上挖洞，然后把锹把儿埋在里面，就成了帐篷的支柱。

  In contrast, the problem of living is relatively simple. Each person brought a plastic raincoat, which had a row of buttons on the side, I didn't know what it was used for, but this time, after being instructed, I learned that I could tie a huge tarpaulin with another raincoat and set up a simple tent. Each person also had to bring a marching shovel, go to the camp, dig a hole in the ice, and then bury the shovel in it, which became the pillar of the tent.没想到在这个简单的环节上出了问题，因为是两个人合住帐篷，睡觉的时候为了保暖，必须头脚颠倒，打通腿。小鹿是个汗脚，谁都不愿意与她合伙，怕熏着自己。最后还是我高风亮节（谁让我是班长呢），自动表示愿和小鹿同甘苦共患难。大家私下里夸我侠肝义胆，因为小鹿的脚臭让人惨不忍闻。我解释说，其实，我也不是担子拣重的挑，只是想雪地里那么冷，我就不信小鹿的脚还敢出汗？

  I didn't expect something to go wrong in this simple link, because two people shared a tent, and in order to keep warm when sleeping, they had to turn their heads and feet upside down and open their legs. The deer is a sweaty foot, and no one wants to partner with her, for fear of smoking themselves. In the end, it was my high style (who made me the class leader), and I automatically expressed my willingness to share joys and sorrows with Xiaolu. Everyone privately praised me for my chivalrous courage, because the smell of the deer's feet was miserable. I explained that in fact, I don't pick up heavy burdens, I just want to be so cold in the snow, I don't believe that the deer's feet dare to sweat?最后是行。果平穿戴整齐，缓缓地吃力地移出房门，过了一会儿，又像一艘航空母舰似的挪了回来，哭丧着脸道，你们猜，把咱们的全套行头穿起来，负重多少斤？

  Finally, there is the line. Guo Ping was neatly dressed, slowly and laboriously moved out of the door, and after a while, he moved back like an aircraft carrier, crying and saying, "Guess, how many pounds do you carry when you put on our full set of clothes?"河莲说，还不得有三十斤？

  He Lian said, you can't have thirty pounds?果平冷笑道，想得美！改成公斤还差不多！

  Guo Ping sneered, think beautifully! It's almost the same as changing to kilograms!我们花容失色道，你的意思是我们要背着六十斤重的物品，跋涉在冰雪高原？

  We said with a pale face, do you mean we are going to carry sixty pounds of items on our backs and trek on the ice and snow plateau?果平说，那还是少说了，都武装起来，只怕七十斤也打不住。

  Guo Ping said, that's less to say, they are all armed, I'm afraid that they can't stop even seventy pounds.大家半信半疑说，有那么恐怖吗？

  Everyone is dubious, is it that scary?果平说，听我给你们算个细账。

  Guo Ping said, listen to me give you a detailed account.她就掰着手指头，一五一十地算起来。干粮、红十字包、手枪、狼皮褥子、背包、子弹带、行军锹、备用解放鞋、雨衣……我们听到一半，就说别算了，我们信了。

  She broke her fingers and counted them one by one. Dry food, red cross bag, pistol, wolf skin mattress, backpack, bullet belt, marching shovel, spare liberation shoes, raincoat...... When we heard half of it, we said forget it, we believed it.听说行军的平均路程是每日九十华里，个别日子会在一百华里以上，最多的一天将达到一百二十华里。这个数字，对平原来说也许不算什么，但在高原，足以让人胆战心惊。

  I heard that the average distance of the march is 90 miles per day, and some days will be more than 100 miles, and the most day will reach 120 miles. This number may not be much to the plains, but in the plateaus, it is enough to make people tremble.我们能行吗？所有的人心里都在打鼓，可是没有人说出来。谁也不愿被人当作胆小鬼。

  Can we do it? Everyone was beating drums in their hearts, but no one said it. No one wants to be treated as a coward.行军开始了。女兵和男兵一样背负着行囊，像绿色的骆驼在雪原上缓缓移动。为了预防雪盲，临出发时每人又配发了一副墨镜，透过茶色镜片，平日熟悉的风景，变成另外的嘴脸，煞是好玩。冰峰成了咖啡色，远远看去，好像巨大的巧克力冰激凌。白雪成了淡红豆沙色，使人忍不住想舔一口。至于大家的脸色，都成了非洲人的模样，嘴唇成了浓重的黑褐色，好像刚刚吃了炸酱面还没把嘴巴抹干净……

  The march began. Female soldiers carry bags on their backs like male soldiers, moving slowly on the snowy field like green camels. In order to prevent snow blindness, each person was given a pair of sunglasses before departure, and through the brown lenses, the familiar scenery turned into a different face, which was really fun. The ice peaks are coffee-colored, and from a distance, they look like giant chocolate ice cream. The white snow turned into a light red bean paste, making people want to lick it. As for everyone's faces, they all became Africans, and their lips became a thick black brown, as if they had just eaten fried noodles and had not wiped their mouths clean......面对种种奇怪的景色，我们只有自己偷偷地笑，没法彼此交换感想。因为在高原上行军，需要全力以赴，要是你开玩笑的时候，正好一个雪坑没看见，脚下一滑，一个大马趴，大家笑的就不是你的笑话，而是你本人了。笑完了，还得千辛万苦地帮你爬起来。再说那近七十斤重的包袱，稳稳地坐在背上，把肺都压成了薄饼，膨胀不起来，使我们根本没法开怀大笑，只好把笑的念头储存起来，留着晚上空闲的时候再交流吧。

  In the face of all kinds of strange scenery, we can only laugh secretly and cannot exchange feelings with each other. Because marching on the plateau requires all your might, if you are joking, you happen to not see a snow pit, your feet slip, and a big horse lying down, everyone will laugh not at your jokes, but at you. After laughing, I have to work hard to help you get up. Besides, the nearly seventy pounds of baggage sat firmly on his back, pressing his lungs into a pancake and unable to expand, so that we couldn't laugh at all, so we had to store the idea of laughing and save it for the evening when we were free.第一天是适应性行军，有一百华里路程，只翻一座雪山。老兵们说，这简直和玩一样。可女兵们确实没玩过这种严酷的游戏，刚走了不到一半的路程，我们就筋疲力尽。原来为了保护女兵，把我们安排在队伍的中间部分，现在眼看着别人一步步超过我们，越走越远。最后大队人马整体越过疲惫的女兵远去，成了天边的一个黑豆样的斑点。

  The first day was an adaptive march, with a distance of 100 miles and only one snow-capped mountain. Veterans say it's like playing. But the female soldiers really didn't play this harsh game, and we were exhausted after less than half of the journey. It turned out that in order to protect the female soldiers, we were placed in the middle of the team, but now we are watching others surpass us step by step and go further and further. In the end, the brigade as a whole passed the tired female soldiers and became a black bean-like spot on the edge of the sky.我们你看看我，我看看你，明白了以前从书本上看到的一个可怕的词——掉队。那就是你像一粒纽扣，从大衣上掉下来，滚到人所不知的犄角旮旯里。要是没人找到你，你就得在那个黑暗的角落待到海枯石烂。

  We look at me, I look at you, and understand a terrible word I saw in books before - falling behind. That is, you are like a button, falling off your coat and rolling into a corner that no one knows. If no one finds you, you'll have to stay in that dark corner until it's dry.这可怎么办？小鹿几乎要哭起来。

  What can I do? The fawn almost cried.现在最重要的事，是赶上队伍。小如很坚决地说。

  The most important thing now is to catch up with the team. Xiaoru said very resolutely.

  这话当然是不错了。可是，我们赶得上吗？我们为什么会掉队，不就是因为我们追不上大家的脚步吗？赶上队伍谈何容易？不但要赶上部队此刻的行军速度，还要把我们以前落下的补上。恕我悲观，我看是梦想。河莲有根有据地说。因为话太长而且很严肃，说完之后她喘个不停。

  Of course this is good. But, can we catch up? Why do we fall behind, isn't it because we can't keep up with everyone? How easy is it to catch up with the team? Not only to catch up with the marching speed of the troops at the moment, but also to make up for what we left behind before. Forgive me for being pessimistic, I think it's a dream. He Lian said with evidence. Because the words were too long and serious, she gasped after saying them.果平用手揪起背包带子，胸膛能比较自由地吸进更多氧气，说话的时候就可以带出微笑的口吻。她说，你们知道现在最重要的事是什么吗？

  Guo Ping pulled up the strap of his backpack with his hands, and his chest could take in more oxygen more freely, and he could bring out a smile when he spoke. She said, do you know what is the most important thing right now?对于她的重复设问，我们都不理睬。太累了，你打算说什么，快说吧，别啰唆啦！

  We ignored her repeated questions. It's too tiring, what are you going to say, say it quickly, don't be instigated!"果平只好自问自答，说，现在最重要的事，是休息啊。

  Guo Ping had to ask himself and answer, saying, the most important thing now is rest.乌拉！我们立刻用俄语欢呼起来，倒不是对这种语言情有独钟，主要是电影里苏联红军打胜仗的时候，都是这样表达兴奋心情的。

  Ulla! We immediately cheered in Russian, not because we had a soft spot for this language, but mainly because when the Soviet Red Army won the battle in the movie, they expressed their excitement in this way.不管三七二十一，大家立刻倒在雪地上，大口地喘气，先把氧气吸个饱。背上的负重也不敢卸掉，因为再背妥帖很费时间。我们像蜗牛一般，脊梁枕在背包上，头仰得高高，摘下墨镜，看着蔚蓝色的天空。

  Regardless of the three seven twenty-one, everyone immediately fell on the snow, gasped for breath, and took a full breath of oxygen first. I don't dare to remove the weight on my back, because it takes a lot of time to memorize it properly. We were like snails, resting our spines on our backpacks, raising our heads high, taking off our sunglasses, and looking at the azure sky.黄昏已悄然来临，天空急遽地转换着颜色，从海一般清澈的蓝，逐渐加深，好像一缸靛青的染料被打碎了，没有波纹地扩散开来，整个天幕被无声无息地染成蓝宝石的颜色，透明中闪着银光。雪山反射着夕阳的余晖，勾勒出一圈虾红色的轮廓，像是华贵的绸缎织成的剪影。有一只喜马拉雅鹰凝然不动地贴在天际，使你相信在它铁一般的鹰爪下，有一股神秘的高空风，像巨掌一样轻轻托住它的翅膀。

  Dusk had quietly come, and the sky changed color rapidly, from the clear blue of the sea, gradually deepening, as if a jar of indigo dye had been broken and spread out without ripples, and the entire sky was silently dyed the color of sapphire, shining with silver light in the transparency. The snow-capped mountains reflect the afterglow of the setting sun, outlining a circle of shrimp red silhouettes, like a silhouette woven from luxurious silk. A Himalayan eagle stands motionless in the sky, making you believe that under its iron-like claws, there is a mysterious high-altitude wind gently holding its wings like a giant palm.我们要是喜马拉雅鹰就好了。大家齐声说。

  If only we were Himalayan eagles. Everyone said in unison.可惜我们不但不是鹰，连一只最普通的麻雀也不是。我们就这样静静地躺着，感觉万古寒冰的森然阴气，像泉水一般从地心漫上来，渐渐地俘虏了我们的脚，弥漫在我们的关节，浸满了骨髓，笼罩在血液中……一种酷寒而舒适的陌生幻觉，像雾一样包裹了我们的大脑，使它变得像玻璃一般脆而晶莹。我模模糊糊地想到，为什么卖火柴的小女孩，在被冻死以前，会看到那么多美妙的景象，寒冷真是美丽而凄清的神仙世界啊！

  Unfortunately, we are not only not eagles, but even the most ordinary sparrows. We lay quietly like this, feeling the cold yin energy of the eternal ice, spreading from the center of the earth like a spring, gradually capturing our feet, permeating our joints, soaking the bone marrow, and shrouding the blood...... An unfamiliar illusion of cold and comfort that envelops our brain like fog, making it as brittle and crystal clear as glass. I vaguely thought about why the little girl who sold matches, before she was frozen to death, saw so many wonderful scenes, the cold was really a beautiful and desolate fairy world!我们躺着，手拉着手，刚开始很紧很紧，透过皮手套，可以感觉到对方的力量。但是这力量渐渐地涣散下去，骨骼松弛了，血的温度下降了，手套变得像海带一般黏滑，很快就抓不住了，只好彼此松开。我的手刚一接触到雪地，就被它吸了过去，牢牢地粘在冰上。好像手是一块生铁，地是巨大的磁石。我觉得这事有点怪，很想挣脱冰雪的引力。但是没办法，手指根本就不听指挥，它们不再属于我，已经成了绵延万里的冰山的一部分。

  We lay down, holding hands, very tight at first, and through the leather gloves, we could feel each other's strength. But this power gradually dissipated, the bones relaxed, the temperature of the blood dropped, and the gloves became as sticky as kelp, and soon they couldn't hold on, so they had to let go of each other. As soon as my hand touched the snow, it sucked it over and stuck firmly to the ice. It was as if the hand was a piece of pig iron, and the ground was a huge magnet. I think this is a bit strange, and I really want to break free from the gravity of ice and snow. But there is no way, the fingers do not listen to the command at all, they no longer belong to me, they have become part of the iceberg that stretches for thousands of miles.思维变得迟钝而漂浮，苍白无力地混乱运行着，好在一点都不痛苦，也不恐惧，有一种近乎飞翔的感觉……

  The mind became dull and floating, pale and weak and chaotic, but fortunately, there was no pain or fear at all, and there was a feeling of almost flying......你们都给我起来！

  You all give me up!一声断喝，从天而降。我们就是再麻木，也被惊得半坐了起来。只见一彪形大汉，天神般地矗立在面前。

  A broken shout fell from the sky. No matter how numb we were, we were so shocked that we sat up halfway. I saw a big man, standing in front of me like a god.你是谁？我们说不出话，只是用眼光问他。

  Who are you? We couldn't speak, we just asked him with our eyes.我是后勤部收容队的队长。大队人马已经到达宿营地了，到处找不到你们这几位女兵，我们就沿着来路往回找，没想到，你们在这里睡大觉！收容队长怒气冲冲地说。

  I am the leader of the containment team of the logistics department. The brigade has arrived at the camp, and we can't find you female soldiers anywhere, so we will look back along the way we came, but I didn't expect that you would sleep here! The containment captain said angrily.我们懒洋洋地看着他，眼珠也不愿转一下。什么后勤部，什么宿营地，听不懂啦！好像是古代故事里的名词。

  We looked at him lazily, reluctant to roll our eyes. What logistics department, what camp, I don't understand! It seems to be a noun in an ancient story.收容队长很有经验，知道我们已经进入冻伤的意识淡漠期，如果不马上振作起来，就会在这种迟钝的幻觉当中进入昏迷。他指挥带来的收容队员们，把我们拉起来。可是刚把这个从雪地上拉起来，那个又躺下了。把那个扶起来，这个又坐下去。雪地好像一张巨大的软垫子，极力诱惑着我们沉睡在它的怀抱。

  The containment captain was experienced and knew that we had entered a period of frostbite and would fall into a coma in this dull hallucination if we didn't pick ourselves up immediately. The containment team he commanded and brought pulled us up. But as soon as I pulled this one up from the snow, that one lay down again. Lift that one up, and this one sits down. The snow is like a huge soft cushion, trying to tempt us to sleep in its arms.你们还是不是兵了？简直是逃兵！要是指着你们保卫祖国，敌人都得打到家门口！人都说女兵不行，我原来还不信，今天一看，果然不错。应该把你们都开除出去，回家守着父母的热炕头……收容队长怒骂我们，滔滔不绝。

  You are still not soldiers? Simply deserter! If you defend the motherland, the enemy will have to hit your doorstep!" People say that female soldiers can't do it, I didn't believe it at first, but when I looked at it today, it was really good. You should all be expelled and go home to guard your parents' hot kang...... The containment captain scolded us angrily, gushing endlessly.这一骂，把我们骂醒了，自尊心生长起来，神经也变得灵敏了。我们咬着牙，摇摇晃晃地站起来，好像一批女醉鬼。

  This scolding woke us up, our self-esteem grew, and our nerves became sensitive. We gritted our teeth and stood up staggeringly, like a group of female drunkards.快，把她们的背包卸下来！队长命令他的士兵。

  Quick, take off their backpacks! The captain ordered his soldiers.几个男兵把我们的背包放到自己身上。要是平日，我们是一定不会同意的，但在夜色沉沉的雪山上，我们已没有任何反对的力量。

  A few male soldiers put our backpacks on themselves. If it were a weekday, we would definitely not agree, but on the snow-capped mountains in the dark night, we no longer have any opposition.背包一摘走，被压扁的气管立刻膨胀起来，恢复了弹性，我们的精神得了充足气体的灌溉，立刻清醒多了。我们试着走了两步，哎呀，感觉奇妙极了，好像遍地都是弹簧，脚下生风，似乎在飞，无比轻松。

  As soon as the backpack was removed, the flattened trachea immediately expanded, regained its elasticity, and our spirit was irrigated with sufficient gas, and we immediately became much more awake. We tried to take two steps, oh, it felt wonderful, it seemed that there were springs everywhere, and the wind was blowing under our feet, as if we were flying, extremely relaxed.因为我们整天都是在负重七十斤以上的状态中行走，那个附加的重量已经成了身体的组成部分。现在一旦卸下，简直若腾云一般轻盈。巨大的喜悦与轻松，使我们恢复了青春的活力。

  Because we walk with a weight of more than 70 pounds all day long, that additional weight has become an integral part of the body. Now once unloaded, it is as light as a cloud. Great joy and ease restored our youthful vitality.小如说，你们把我们的背包拿走了，多辛苦啊。

  Xiaoru said, how hard it is for you to take our backpacks away.她是一个好心肠的女孩，无论在多么困难的情况下，首先想到别人，总觉得自己对不起别人。

  She is a kind-hearted girl, no matter how difficult the situation, she always thinks of others first and always feels sorry for others.收容队长不耐烦地说，快走吧。我们是男人，比你们的耐力要好多了。再说我们还有马。

  The containment captain said impatiently, let's go. We are men, much better than your endurance. Besides, we still have horses.我这才在黑暗中看到了几匹马。它们美丽的大眼睛闪烁着星星的光芒。

  I saw a few horses in the dark. Their large, beautiful eyes sparkle with the light of the stars.果平说，还是把红十字包和手枪还给我吧。一个是我的工作工具，一个是战士必备的武器。

  Guo Ping said, "Give me back the Red Cross bag and pistol." One is my work tool, and the other is a necessary weapon for a soldier.听果平这么一讲，我们也纷纷要求他们归还这两样卫生兵最基本的标志。好吧，还给你们。可是你们再不许躺下。夜已经越来越深，你们若不能在午夜以前赶到宿营地，就会在雪山上冻死。收容队长严厉地说。

  Listening to Guo Ping's words, we also asked them to return these two most basic symbols of the medical soldiers. Well, back to you. But you are not allowed to lie down again. The night is getting deeper, and if you don't make it to the camp before midnight, you'll freeze to death on the snowy mountains. The containment captain said sternly.我们不再说什么，跟着队长快步向苍茫的远方奔去。也许是长时间的休息，的确让我们恢复了体力；也许是队长的破口大骂，使我们生出雪耻的决心；也许是甩掉背包真的使我们身轻如燕；也许是死亡近在咫尺的威胁，让我们深切地体会到生命的可贵……反正在后面的行军路程中，我们不再说三道四，而是钳闭着嘴唇，机械地迈动双脚，向前向前。

  We didn't say anything more, and followed the captain to run quickly into the vast distance. Maybe it was a long rest that did allow us to regain our strength; Perhaps it was the captain's scolding that made us determined to avenge our shame; Maybe it's because throwing off the backpack really makes us as light as a swallow; Perhaps it is the threat of death that makes us deeply appreciate the preciousness of life...... Anyway, during the march that followed, we no longer talked about it, but closed our lips and mechanically moved our feet forward.赶到宿营地的时候，已经是下半夜了。当我们看到朦胧的灯火时，几乎流出眼泪。好了，总算把你们活着带回来了。收容队长说完，“扑通”一声，差点跪在地上。要知道，为了接应我们，他几乎走了双倍的路啊。

  When I arrived at the camp, it was already the second half of the night. When we saw the dim lights, we almost shed tears. Okay, I finally brought you back alive. After the containment captain finished speaking, he almost knelt on the ground with a "plop". You know, in order to meet us, he has almost doubled the way.

未知

  13.在雪原与星空之间

  13. Between the snowfield and the starry sky

  拉练的夜晚，我们在雪原与星空之间露营。

  On the night of training, we camped between the snowfield and the starry sky.两顶雨布搭的帐篷很窄小，像田野中看秋的农人用玉米秸支的小窝棚。我和小鹿头脚相对，用体温暖和着对方。刚躺下的时候，根本睡不着。平日柔软的被子，此刻变得铁板一样冷硬，被头像锐利的铁锨头，直砍我们的脖子。棉絮好像变成了冰屑，又沉又冷地压在身上。

  The tents set up by two raincloths are very narrow, like small shacks supported by farmers watching autumn in the fields with corn straw. I faced the deer head and toe, warming each other with my body. When I first lay down, I couldn't sleep at all. The usually soft quilt has now become as cold and hard as an iron plate, and our heads are like sharp shovels, cutting our necks. The cotton wool seemed to have turned into ice chips, heavy and cold.这是怎么回事？被子被施了妖法！小鹿在对面瓮声瓮气地说。

  What's going on? The quilt was enchanted! The fawn said angrily on the opposite side.我本想看看她，但沉重的负担使我没法抬起头来。为了保暖，我们把所有的物品，比如十字包、干粮袋、皮大衣，包括毛皮鞋，都堆在被子上面，像一座拱起的绿色坟堆。此刻，要是有一双眼睛从帐篷外窥视我们，一定以为这是军需品仓库。

  I wanted to see her, but the heavy burden prevented me from lifting my head. To keep warm, we piled all our items, such as cross bags, dry food bags, fur coats, including fur shoes, on top of the quilt, like an arched green grave. At this moment, if a pair of eyes peeked at us from outside the tent, they would think that this was a munitions warehouse.我说，被子又不是暖气，自己不会产生热度。它像个水银瓶胆，装进开水它就热，放根冰棍它就凉。我们在零下几十摄氏度的气候里行军，被子的温度当然也是零下了。不能着急，得靠自己身体的暖气，把被子焐热，才会觉得暖和。

  I said, the quilt is not heated, and it will not generate heat. It is like a mercury bottle gall, it is hot when it is filled with boiling water, and it is cold when it is put in a popsicle. We marched in a climate of minus tens of degrees Celsius, and the temperature of the quilt was of course below zero. You can't be in a hurry, you have to rely on the heating of your body and heat the quilt to feel warm.小鹿说，只怕到了明天早上，我们还像两条冻带鱼一样，舒展不开手脚。

  Xiaolu said that I am afraid that by tomorrow morning, we will still be like two frozen hairtails, unable to stretch our hands and feet.我说，反正也睡不着，咱们就说说在高原露营的好处吧。

  I said, I can't sleep anyway, let's talk about the benefits of camping on the plateau.小鹿说，有什么好处？硬要说，第一个好处就是让你不但不困，而且精神抖擞。

  Xiaolu said, what are the benefits? To put it bluntly, the first benefit is that you are not only not sleepy, but also energetic.此话千真万确。不管你行军多么疲劳，在越来越深的午夜中，寒冷的空气好像不是吸入肺里，而是进了胃，化作无数薄荷糖，让你从里往外透出绿色的清醒，神志警觉无比。

  This is absolutely true. No matter how tired you are from marching, in the deeper and deeper midnight, the cold air does not seem to be inhaled into the lungs, but into the stomach, turning into countless mints, making you green sobriety from the inside out, and your mind is extremely alert.我说，可惜这是以第二天的疲倦为代价，要不然，真该推荐所有的科学家都到高原来工作，人类的伟大发明一定会成倍增加。

  I said, unfortunately, this is at the cost of the next day's fatigue, otherwise, I should really recommend all scientists to work on the plateau, and the great inventions of mankind will surely multiply.小鹿说，第二个好处是空气新鲜。城里的空气被人的鼻子滤过千百遍了。这里的空气从没有人呼吸过，就像从没污染过的泉水。你说是不是世界一绝？

  The second benefit is fresh air, Xiaolu said. The air in the city has been filtered by people's noses thousands of times. The air here has never been breathed by anyone, like a spring that has never been polluted. Do you think it's the best in the world?我说，空气倒是很新鲜，只是它里面的氧气含量很少。这就像一种外表很美丽的果子，里面的果仁却又瘦又小。营养太少，中看不中用。

  I said, the air is very fresh, but there is very little oxygen in it. It's like a fruit that looks beautiful on the outside, but the kernel inside is thin and small. There is too little nutrition, and it is not useful.小鹿说，这话可不对。你敢说这里的空气不中用？那你把头钻进被子里，再捏住鼻子。要是你能支撑三分钟以上，明天我帮你背手枪。

  Xiaolu said, this is not right. Do you dare to say that the air here is useless? Then you get your head into the quilt and pinch your nose. If you can hold on for more than three minutes, I'll help you carry the pistol tomorrow."我说，我当然不敢把头埋进被子，你的脚太臭了。至于手枪，你别卖假人情。你知道规定是人不离枪、枪不离人的。

  I said, of course I don't dare to bury my head in the quilt, your feet stink too much. As for pistols, don't sell fake favors. You know the rule that people do not leave guns and guns.小鹿说，谁的脚要是在这种滴水成冰的时候，还能出汗，一定是赤脚大仙托生的。不信你试试！百见不如一闻。

  Xiaolu said that if anyone's feet can still sweat when the water drips into ice, it must be born of the barefoot immortal. If you don't believe me, try it! It is better to see than to hear once.我不想扫小鹿的兴，就把头缩进被子，但根本不喘气，然后很快地探出头来，说，喔，真的没什么味儿了。

  I didn't want to lose the excitement of the deer, so I retracted my head into the quilt, but I didn't pant at all, and then quickly poked my head out and said, "Oh, it's really tasteless."小鹿很高兴，说露营的第三个好处是，可以增长你的天文学知识。你看，天上的星星亮得像猫眼！

  The deer was happy and said that the third benefit of camping is that it can increase your astronomical knowledge. You see, the stars in the sky are as bright as cat's eyes!我们的雨布虽然薄，但没破洞。只有从两侧的缝隙中，观察星空。铁锹做的帐篷杆和雨布的边缘构成的间隙，很不规则，像是一幅抽象图案。

  Although our raincloth is thin, there are no holes. Only from the gaps on both sides, observe the starry sky. The gap between the shovel tent pole and the edge of the raincloth is very irregular, like an abstract pattern.我说，根本看不到天空的全貌。从我这个角度，北斗七星只能看到一个勺子把儿，牛郎只挑了一个孩子，那个丢了。

  I said, I can't see the whole picture of the sky at all. From my point of view, the Big Dipper can only see a spoon handle, and the cowherd only picked one child, and that one was lost.小鹿说，你以为我这儿完整吗？银河基本断流，蟹状星云变成了对虾的模样。

  Xiaolu said, do you think I'm complete here? The Milky Way is basically cut off, and the crab-shaped nebula has become the appearance of a shrimp.我说，哎哟，真了不起，还知道星云。

  I said, oh, it's amazing, and I know about nebulae.小鹿说，我妈妈最喜欢天文了，从小就教我。

  Xiaolu said, my mother likes astronomy the most and has taught me since I was a child.于是，我们半天都不说话。最后还是小鹿打破了沉默，说我们别说妈妈，那样说一会儿就会流泪的。还是说星星吧。

  So, we didn't speak for a long time. In the end, it was Xiaolu who broke the silence and said that we should not talk about mother, we will cry after saying that for a while. Let's talk about the stars.我赶快拥护，说，就形容自己看到的天和星星的模样吧。

  I quickly supported it, saying, just describe what I saw in the sky and stars.小鹿赶快说，好。

  Xiaolu hurriedly said, okay.想念亲人就像大海中危险的台风眼，我们思维的小船要赶快掉转航向，飞速离开。

  Missing our loved ones is like a dangerous typhoon eye in the sea, and the boat of our thinking must quickly turn around and leave quickly.我摇头晃脑端详了半天说，从我这个角度看天空，它的轮廓像一棵宝蓝色的树冠，树上结着许多银色的榛子。

  I shook my head and looked at it for a long time and said, looking at the sky from my point of view, its outline was like a royal blue crown, and many silver hazelnuts were borne on the tree.小鹿说，从我这边看哪，天空的形状像一件天蓝色的礼服，那几颗最明亮的星星，就是礼服上的银扣子。

  The deer said, from my side, the sky is shaped like a sky blue dress, and the brightest stars are the silver buttons on the dress.我调整了一下姿势，又说，从我的铁锹把儿侧面看过去，天像一扇敞开的钢蓝色大门，星星就是门上凸起的门钉。

  I adjusted my posture and said, looking from the side of my shovel handle, the sky was like an open steel-blue gate, and the star was the raised door nail on the door.小鹿也扭了身子说，我有一个比喻，你可不要笑我。你答应了，我就说。

  Xiaolu also twisted his body and said, I have a metaphor, don't laugh at me. You agreed, I said.我说，只要风和雪不笑你，我才不管呢。

  I said, as long as the wind and snow don't laugh at you, I don't care.小鹿说，从我这儿看上去，天空像极了一头蓝色的奶牛。那些凸起的星星，就像奶牛的乳头，它们离我们这么近，好像一伸手就可以摸着。用嘴吸一吸，就会有蓝色的乳汁流出来。

  The deer said, from my point of view, the sky looks like a blue cow. Those raised stars, like cows' nipples, are so close to us that they seem to be touched with a hand. If you suck it with your mouth, blue milk will flow out.我笑起来，说，小鹿，你是不是饿了或是渴了？

  I laughed and said, Xiaolu, are you hungry or thirsty?小鹿说，你一提醒，我才想起雪原上露营的最大好处，那就是你随时都有冰激凌吃。

  Xiaolu said, as soon as you reminded me, I remembered the biggest benefit of camping on the snowfield, that is, you have ice cream to eat at any time.小鹿说着，伸手到褥子下面去抓，我听到类似野兽爪子搔扒的声音，再以后是积雪被挤压的声音，最后是小鹿咯吱咯吱的嚼雪声和牙帮骨大肆打架的声音。

  The deer said, reaching under the mattress to grab it, I heard a sound similar to the scratching of a beast's claws, then the sound of the snow being squeezed, and finally the sound of the deer creaking and the sound of the teeth and bones fighting.我们的身下，枕着一尺厚的白雪。领导宣布在这里露营以后，我埋头用铁锹拼命挖雪，一会儿就在身边堆起一座小雪山。领导走过来说，你这是干什么？

  Under us, there is a foot of snow on the pillow. After the leader announced that he was camping here, I buried my head in digging snow desperately with a shovel, and after a while, I piled up a small snowy mountain next to me. The leader came over and said, what are you doing?我说，把雪挖走，才能把铁锹埋进土里当支柱，把帐篷支起来。

  I said that only by digging up the snow can the shovel be buried in the soil as a pillar and the tent can be propped up.领导说，你这个傻女子。雪下面是冰，睡在冰地上，明天你的关节就像多年的螺丝钉淋了水，非得锈死不可。

  The leader said, you stupid woman. Under the snow is ice, sleeping on the ice, tomorrow your joints will be like years of screws drenched in water, and they must rust to death.我说，冰和雪还不一样吗？

  I said, isn't ice and snow the same?领导说，当然不一样了。雪是新下的，并不算冷。你没听俗话说过，下雪不冷化雪冷吗？雪底下的永冻冰层，那才是最可怕的。睡在雪地上，就像睡在棉花包里，很暖和的。

  The leader said, of course it's different. The snow is new, not cold. Haven't you heard the saying that snow doesn't get cold when it snows? The permafrost under the snow is the most terrifying. Sleeping on the snow is like sleeping in a cotton bag, it's very warm.

  我半信半疑，但实在没有力气把所有的冰雪都挖走，清理出足够大的面积安营扎寨，只好睡在雪上。这会儿看小鹿吃得很香，不由得也从身下掏一把雪吃。为了预防小鹿汗脚的污染，特地选了我脑袋这侧的积雪。

  I was skeptical, but I really didn't have the strength to dig up all the ice and snow, and cleared up a large enough area to set up camp, so I had to sleep on the snow. At this moment, seeing that the fawn was eating very deliciously, he couldn't help but take out a handful of snow from under him to eat. In order to prevent the contamination of the sweaty feet of the fawn, the snow on this side of my head was specially chosen.海拔绝高地带纯正无瑕的积雪，有一种蜂蜜的味道。刚入口的时候，粗大的颗粒贴在舌头上，冰糖一般坚硬。要过好半天，才一丝丝融化，变成微甜的温水，让人吃了没够。

  The pure and flawless snow at the highest altitude has a honey taste. When you first enter the mouth, the coarse particles stick to the tongue, and the rock candy is as hard as rock sugar. It takes a long time for it to melt and turn into slightly sweet warm water, which makes people eat enough.一时间我们不作声，吭哧哧地吃雪，好像一种南极嗜雪的小野兽。我说，小鹿，你把床腿咽进去半截了。

  We were silent for a while, eating snow like a small snow-loving beast in Antarctica. I said, Xiaolu, you swallowed half of the bed leg.小鹿说，你还说我，你把床头整个装进胃里了。

  Xiaolu said, you still say me, you put the whole bedside into your stomach.我们互相开着玩笑，没想到才一会儿，我和小鹿的身体都像钟摆一样哆嗦起来，好像有一双巨手在疯狂地摇撼着我们，这才感到雪的力量。

  We joked with each other, but we didn't expect that after a while, the bodies of Xiaolu and I trembled like a pendulum, as if a pair of giant hands were shaking us frantically, and then we felt the power of snow.小鹿……我们……不能再……吃下去了，会……冻死。我抖着嘴唇说。

  Fawn...... We...... I can't ...... it anymore If you eat it, you will ...... Freeze to death. I said with a shake of my lips.小鹿回答我，好……我不吃了……我发现，雪是越吃越渴……

  The fawn replied to me, okay...... I don't eat it...... I found that the more I ate snow, the more thirsty I became......我们把自己缩成小小的一团，借以保存最后的热量。许久，许久，才慢慢缓过劲儿来，被雪凝结的内脏有了一点暖气。

  We shrink ourselves into small balls to conserve the last heat. After a long time, a long time, it slowly eased up, and the internal organs condensed by the snow had a little heating.

  我有点困了。小鹿说。

  I was a little sleepy. Xiaolu said.困了就睡呗。我说，觉得自己的睫毛也往一起粘。

  If you are sleepy, go to sleep. I said, feeling my eyelashes sticking together.可是我很害怕。小鹿说。

  But I was scared. Xiaolu said.怕什么？我们的枕头下面有手枪。真要遭到袭击，无论是鬼还是野兽，先给它一枪再说。周围都是帐篷，会有人帮助我们的。我睡意蒙眬地说。

  What are you afraid of? We have a pistol under our pillow. If you really want to be attacked, whether it's a ghost or a beast, give it a shot first. There are tents all around, and someone will help us. I said sleepily.小鹿说，我不是怕那些，是怕明早我们起来，会漂浮在水上。

  Xiaolu said, I'm not afraid of those, but I'm afraid that when we get up tomorrow morning, we will float on the water.我说，怎么会？难道会发山洪？

  I said, how could it be? Will there be flash floods?小鹿说，你是不是感到现在比刚才暖和了？

  Xiaolu said, do you feel warmer now than just now?我说，是啊。刚才我就觉得暖和些了，所以才敢吃雪。吃了雪，就又凉了半天。现在好像又缓过劲儿来了。

  I said, yes. I felt warmer just now, so I dared to eat snow. After eating snow, it was cold for half a day. Now it seems to be slowing down again.小鹿说，这样不停地暖和下去，还不得把我们身下的雪都焐化了？明天我们会在汪洋中醒来。

  Xiaolu said, if the ground keeps warming up like this, it won't melt all the snow under us? Tomorrow we will wake up in the ocean.我说，别管那些了，反正我会游泳。

  I said, forget about that, I'll swim anyway.小鹿说，我不会。

  Xiaolu said, I won't.我说，我会救你的。你知道在水中救人的第一个步骤是什么？

  I said, I'll save you. Do you know what the first step is to save someone in the water?小鹿说，让我浮出水面，先喘一口气。

  The deer said, let me surface and take a breath first.我说，不对。是一拳把你砸晕，叫你软得像面条鱼。你这样的胆小鬼，肯定会把救你的人死死缠住，结果是大家同归于尽。把你打昏后，才可以从容救你。

  I said, no. It was a punch that smashed you unconscious, making you as soft as a noodle fish. A coward like you will definitely entangle the person who saved you, and the result is that everyone will die together. Only after knocking you unconscious can I calmly save you.小鹿说，求求你，高抬贵手，还是不要把我砸晕。我这个人本来脑子就笨，要是你的手劲儿掌握不准，一下过了头，还不得把我打成脑震荡，那岂不是更傻了？我保证在你救我的时候，不会下毒手玉石俱焚。

  The deer said, please, raise your hand, or don't smash me unconscious. I'm stupid in the first place, if you can't control your hand strength accurately, you can't beat me into a concussion, wouldn't that be even stupider? I promise that when you save me, I will not burn the jade and stone."我说，哼，现在说得好听，到时候就保不齐了……

  I said, hum, if you say it nicely now, you won't be able to keep it when the time comes......小鹿说，我们是同吃一床雪的朋友，哪儿会呢……

  Xiaolu said, we are friends who eat the same bed of snow, where will it be......我们各自抱着对方的脚，昏昏睡去。

  We each hugged each other's feet and fell asleep.起床号把我们唤醒的时候，已是高原上另一个风雪弥漫的黎明。我们赶忙跳起，收拾行装。待到我们把被褥收起，把帐篷捆好，才来得及打量一眼昨晚上送我们一夜安眠的雪床。

  When the wake-up call woke us up, it was another snowy dawn on the plateau. We hurriedly jumped up and packed our bags. When we put away the bedding and tied up the tent, we had time to take a look at the snow bed that gave us a good night's sleep last night.咳！伤心极了，我们太高估了人体微薄的热量。雪地上不但没有任何发洪水的迹象，就连我们躺卧的痕迹也非常浅淡，只有一个轻轻的压痕，好像不是两个全副武装的活人曾在此一眠，而是两片大树叶落在这里，又被风卷走了。只是在人形痕迹的两端，有几个不规则的凹陷，好像某种动物遗下的爪痕。

  Cough! It's very sad that we overestimate the meager calories in the human body. Not only did there not show any signs of flooding on the snow, but even the traces of our lying down were very shallow, only a slight indentation, as if it were not two heavily armed living people who had slept here, but two large leaves that fell here and were swept away by the wind. It's just that at both ends of the traces of the human figure, there are a few irregular depressions, like claw marks left by some kind of animal.那是我们半夜吃雪的遗址。
It was the site where we ate snow in the middle of the night.

未知

  14.冰川上有毒蛇咝咝声

  14. The sizzling sound of poisonous snakes on the glacier

  在高原上，爬山是家常便饭。就像你住在六楼，怎么能不爬楼梯呢？在拉练的日子，攀登更是必备的功课，几乎每天都要爬山。

  On the plateau, climbing mountains is commonplace. It's like you live on the sixth floor, how can you not climb the stairs? On the days of training, climbing is a must-have homework, and I have to climb mountains almost every day.爬山的实质，是人和地心引力做不懈的斗争。你用自身的体力，挣脱大地对你的控制，使自己向着太阳升去。如果你背的东西比较多，或者比较胖，那就更倒霉了，你不但得付出和别人一样的努力，还得加倍拼搏。因为那些东西和你多长出来的分量，都像秤砣一般拖着你的腿，逼你后退，你必须像扶老携幼的壮士，带着这些重量一道攀上高峰。

  The essence of climbing mountains is the unremitting struggle between man and gravity. You use your physical strength to break free from the earth's control over you and rise towards the sun. If you carry more things, or are fatter, you are even more unlucky, not only do you have to put in the same effort as others, but you also have to work harder. Because those things and the weight you grow are dragging your legs like scales and forcing you to retreat, you must climb to the peak with these weights like a strong man who helps the old and the young.爬山的时候，喉咙会一阵阵地发出腥甜的味道，好像有一条流着血的小鱼卡在那里。按说，这很没道理，因为爬山时最辛苦的是手和脚。手要紧紧地扒住裸露的山岩，无论多么尖锐的石缝，为了有稳固的支点，你都必须把手指插进去，好像在坚硬的墙壁上钉入十根铁条。脚像螃蟹的爪子，要么尽量向两侧伸展，以扩大身体和山石接触的面积，一旦发生下滑，可以最大限度地增加摩擦力；要么利用脚骨的斜面，把它变成没有知觉的木橛子，深深插入岩缝，就像在巨幅画像下钉两根巨钉，才能保证悬挂着的身体突然坠下时可挽救危局。至于躯干，恨不能生出壁虎似的吸盘，牢牢粘在悬崖上。爬山使人体的各部分紧急动员，所有功能都充分调动起来，肌肉高度紧张，神经分外敏感。此刻的每一瞬间，都执掌着人的生生死死。

  When climbing a mountain, there will be a sweet smell in your throat, as if a small bleeding fish is stuck there. It is said that this is very unreasonable, because the hardest thing when climbing a mountain is the hands and feet. Your hands must grip the exposed rocks tightly, no matter how sharp the stone crevices are, and in order to have a stable fulcrum, you must insert your fingers into them, as if driving ten iron bars into a hard wall. The feet are like crab claws, either stretched to the sides as much as possible to expand the area of contact between the body and the rocks, and once the slide occurs, the friction can be maximized; or use the bevel of the foot bone to turn it into an unconscious wooden stake and insert it deep into the rock crevice, just like nailing two giant nails under a huge portrait, to ensure that the hanging body can be saved when it suddenly falls. As for the torso, I wish I could give birth to a gecko-like sucker, firmly stuck to the cliff. Climbing makes all parts of the human body urgently mobilize, all functions are fully mobilized, muscles are highly tense, and nerves are extremely sensitive. Every moment at this moment is in charge of people's life and death.说起来，喉咙也很要紧，因为它是气道。爬山需要消耗大量的空气，就像前方在打仗，公路上运输的弹药物品就格外多。要是供不上气，手脚必得瘫痪。偏偏高原上稀少的就是空气，喉咙就得拼命工作，那种甜腥的感觉，一定是喉咙的某条微血管崩裂了，沁出鲜血。

  Speaking of which, the throat is also very important because it is the airway. Climbing a mountain requires a lot of air, just like fighting ahead, and there is a lot of ammunition and ammunition transported on the road. If you can't breathe, your hands and feet will be paralyzed. What is scarce on the plateau is air, and the throat has to work hard, and the sweet and fishy feeling must be that a certain microvessel in the throat has broken and blood is pouring out.一天，行军路上遇到一座险峻的高峰。尖兵报告说，曲折的冰崖阻住通路，攀登极为困难。领导给我们每人发了一条登山绳，让死死系在腰上。

  One day, on the march, he encountered a steep peak. The vanguard reported that the winding ice cliffs blocked the passage and the climb was extremely difficult. The leader gave each of us a hiking rope to tie around our waists.干什么用的？这绳子看起来还挺结实。小鹿说。

  What is it for? This rope looks quite strong. Xiaolu said.这是结组绳。你们三个人把它系好，就成了一个结绳组。领导指指小鹿、我和河莲。

  This is a knot rope. The three of you tie it up and it becomes a knot group. The leader pointed to Xiaolu, me and He Lian.什么叫结绳组？小鹿还问。

  What is a knot rope set? The fawn asked again.小鹿，你怎么这么笨？结绳组顾名思义，就是用绳子把咱们三个结成了一组。从今儿后登山时生死与共。要活大家一块儿笑，要死一起成烈士。河莲快人快语。

  Xiaolu, why are you so stupid? As the name suggests, the knot group is to use rope to tie the three of us into a group. From now on, when I climb the mountain, I will share life and death. If you want to live and laugh together, you want to die and become martyrs together. He Lian is quick to speak.领导点头不语，看来河莲解释得不错。

  The leader nodded silently, it seemed that He Lian explained well.那咱们就成了刘关张桃园三结义，恨不同日同时生、但求同日同时死啦！小鹿兴奋得两眼放光。

  Then we will become Liu Guan and Zhang Taoyuan three righteousness, hating that they will be born at the same time on the same day, but they will die at the same time on the same day! The deer's eyes lit up with excitement.领导不爱听，说，这只是万一时的紧急处置措施，不要动不动就说死的事，你们还年轻。

  The leader doesn't like to listen and says, this is just an emergency measure, don't talk about death at every turn, you are still young.河莲思忖着说，要是小鹿掉下去了，还比较好救。她反正分量轻，一把就拽住了。要是小毕嘛，就有点危险，那么重。她要是万一失脚，只怕一个人会把我们两个都拖入深渊，同归于尽。

  He Lian thought and said, if the fawn fell, it would be easier to save. She was light anyway, so she grabbed it with one hand. If it were Xiao Bi, it would be a bit dangerous, so heavy. If she slipped on her feet, she was afraid that one person would drag both of us into the abyss and die together.我说，不就是因为我的吨位比较大，你们就这么害怕吗？好啦，我好汉做事好汉当，要是出现了可怕的事情，一定不会连累你们。我会自动把结组绳解开，和你们脱钩，一个人滑下去好了。

  I said, isn't it because my tonnage is relatively large, are you so afraid? Okay, I'm a good man and a good man, if something terrible happens, it will definitely not affect you. I will automatically untie the knot rope, unhook it from you, and slide down alone.领导说，不许乱讲。真到了那种时候，更要同心协力，两个人的力量怎么也比一个人强。团结就是力量嘛！

  The leader said, don't talk nonsense. When that time comes, it is even more necessary to work together, and the strength of two people is stronger than one person. Unity is strength!河莲说，我和小鹿这就在腰里装些石头，提高自重，救小毕的时候把握大些。

  He Lian said, Xiaolu and I will put some stones in our waists to improve our self-weight, and grasp it more when saving Xiao Bi.我说，不定谁救谁呢！

  I said, maybe whoever will save whom!大家说笑了一会儿，一根绳子让我们格外地亲近起来。

  Everyone laughed and laughed for a while, and a rope made us particularly close.拉练已经进行了许久，我们对爬山也司空见惯。因为第一天行军就出现险情，领导调整了女兵背负的重量，让军马代我们驮一些装备。在后面的行军里，我们基本上可以保证不掉队了。我们自觉已是老兵，对山也有些满不在乎起来。

  Training has been going on for a long time, and we are used to climbing mountains. Because there was a dangerous situation on the first day of the march, the leader adjusted the weight carried by the female soldiers and asked the military horses to carry some equipment for us. In the march that followed, we could basically guarantee that we would not fall behind. We feel that we are veterans and are a little indifferent to the mountains.等到那座陡峭的冰峰矗立眼前，我们才知道，自己又一次低估了山的庄严和伟大。

  When the steep ice peak stood in front of us, we knew that we had once again underestimated the majesty and greatness of the mountain.它横空出世，好像盘古开天辟地时丢下的一根冰棍，高耸入云，经过亿万年冰雪的滋润，长得庞大无比，晶莹剔透。人踏在上面，像一只甲虫爬过，不留一丝痕迹。

  It was born out of thin air, like a popsicle dropped by Pangu when he opened the world, towering into the clouds, and after hundreds of millions of years of ice and snow, it grew huge and crystal clear. People step on it, like a beetle crawling by, leaving no trace.

  队伍拉开距离，开始攀登。小鹿在最前面，我居中，河莲殿后。结组绳松弛地连接着我们，像一根保险索。在通常的时候，它并不影响我们的动作，只是无声地跟随着我们，好像听话的小狗。

  The team distanced themselves and began to climb. The fawn is at the front, I am in the center, behind the River Lotus Hall. The knotted cord is loosely connected to us, like a safety cord. At normal times, it does not affect our movements, but only follows us silently, like an obedient puppy.爬山这件事，在没有出现险情的时候，基本上是你一个人单独挑战大自然。你和大山徒手格斗，每向上前进一尺，都是一个新的回合。你一步一步升高，山就一步一步退却。但山可不是好惹的，嫌你惊扰了它绵延千万年的安静，抽冷子就会给你一点颜色，让你措手不及。要是处置不力，也许就会在瞬息间，以生命作为疏忽的代价。

  When there is no danger, you basically challenge nature alone. You fight the mountain hand-to-hand, and every foot you advance is a new round. You rise step by step, and the mountain retreats step by step. But the mountain is not easy to mess with, if you disturb its quietness that has lasted for thousands of years, it will give you a little color and catch you off guard. If you don't deal with it well, you may pay the price of negligence with your life in an instant.我仰望山顶，上面有松软的冰雪，看起来离我们很近。我想，顶峰上的雪和别处的雪，一定有很大不同。要不然，它们为什么会落在山顶，而不是在山腰呢？就像深海和浅海的鱼是不一样的，高山上的雪更神秘。我一定要尝尝山顶上的雪。

  I looked up at the top of the mountain, with soft snow and ice on it, which seemed very close to us. I think the snow at the top must be very different from the snow elsewhere. Otherwise, why would they land on the top of the mountain, and not on the mountainside? Just like fish in the deep sea and shallow sea are different, the snow in the mountains is more mysterious. I must taste the snow on the top of the mountain.我们爬啊爬，谁也不说话。不是不想说，是不能说。因为一说话，分散注意力，容易发生意外。还有一个原因，雪像音乐厅里特制的墙壁一样，有很好的吸音效果，让你的声音像蒙在棉絮里呻吟一样，传不远，说起来很吃力。但是冰多的地方，又当别论。平滑的冰是音响良好的反射体，相当于大理石板，会使你的声音发出清澈的回音。我们此刻能发出的最大声音，是不停的喘息声。

  We crawled and crawled, and no one spoke. It's not that I don't want to say it, it's that I can't say it. Because when you speak, you are distracted and prone to accidents. Another reason is that snow, like a special wall in a concert hall, has a good sound absorption effect, making your voice like moaning in cotton wool, not far away, and it is very difficult to say. But where there is a lot of ice, it should be a different matter. Smooth ice is a good acoustic reflector, equivalent to a marble slab, that will make your voice echo clear. The loudest sound we can make at the moment is a constant gasp.爬啊爬，距离山顶好像只有五十米的距离了。我们费尽千辛万苦爬过这段距离，发现山顶还骄傲地耸立在五十米之外，漠然地俯视着我们。高原上稀薄的空气发生折射，使距离感变得虚无缥缈，引人错觉。我们并不懊丧，只是坚忍地向前，向上……爬山很能锻炼人的耐力，在攀登的队伍中，你像一支射出的箭，只能一往无前地努力挺进，绝无后退的可能。

  Climbing and climbing, it seems that it is only fifty meters away from the top of the mountain. We struggled to climb this distance and found that the top of the mountain still towered proudly fifty meters away, looking down on us indifferently. The thin air on the plateau is refracted, making the sense of distance ethereal and illusory. We are not frustrated, we just move forward and upward with perseverance...... Climbing a mountain is very good for exercising people's endurance, and in the climbing team, you are like an arrow shot, you can only work hard to advance, and there is no possibility of retreating.我看见有一些鲜红色的小珠子，从我的嘴边滚落。我知道那是我把嘴唇咬破了，鲜血流了出来，马上又被严寒冻成固体。我一直不由自主地咬着嘴唇，好像那样就可以使自己积聚力量，保持高度的警觉，提高对付突然危险的能力。

  I saw some small bright red beads rolling down from my mouth. I knew it was me who bit my lip, blood flowed out, and I was immediately frozen into a solid by the cold. I have been biting my lip involuntarily, as if that would allow me to accumulate strength, maintain a high level of alertness, and improve my ability to deal with sudden danger.在攀登中，人的思想变得很单一，就是抓牢山岩，不要被山甩下来。这样爬得久了，容易想别的事情。我想，祖先创造“爬”这个字，真是英明。它原本一定是预备形容野兽用的，爪和巴，表示所有的爪子，都紧紧地巴在地上，才能完成这个动作。我想，我的二十根脚趾和手指，都是大功臣。假如没有它们劳苦功高地揪住山的毫毛，我一定像块圆圆的鹅卵石，叽里咕噜地滚到山涧里去了……

  In climbing, people's thoughts become very simple, that is, to hold on to the mountains and rocks and not be thrown off by the mountains. After climbing like this for a long time, it is easy to think about other things. I think it is really wise for our ancestors to create the word "climb". It must have been used to describe the beast, the claws and the bark, indicating that all the claws were firmly pressed to the ground to complete this action. I think my twenty toes and fingers are all great heroes. If it weren't for their hard work to grab the hairs of the mountain, I would have rolled into the mountain stream like a round pebble......在我们就要到达山顶之前，我突然听到一种奇怪已极的“咝咝”声，好像毒蛇的舌头在搅拌空气。当然，这是绝不可能的，阿里高原因为酷寒，是没有蛇的。就算有蛇，也绝不可能在冰天雪地里生存。恐怖的声音到底来自何方？没容我思索，腰间仿佛挨了致命的一击，猛地抽紧，勒得我喘不过气，一股螺旋般的下坠力量，像龙卷风一样吸住了我，裹着我迅猛地向山底滑去。

  Before we reached the top of the mountain, I suddenly heard a strange "sizzle" sound, like the tongue of a poisonous snake stirring the air. Of course, this is absolutely impossible, Ali Gao is cold and there are no snakes. Even if there are snakes, it is absolutely impossible to survive in the ice and snow. Where does the sound of horror come from? Without allowing me to think, my waist seemed to have been hit with a fatal blow, and it tightened violently, strangling me to the point of breathlessness, and a spiral of falling force sucked me like a tornado, wrapping me around me and sliding rapidly towards the bottom of the mountain.我在极端的恐惧中明白了——那毒蛇般的声音，是结组绳快速收紧、摩擦冰面的响声。河莲遇到了巨大的危险，正在滑向深渊。随即我看到小鹿在我的上方，也被绳揪动，开始了危险的下滑。

  I understood in extreme fear - the sound of a poisonous snake was the sound of a knot tightening quickly and rubbing against the ice. Ha Lian is in great danger and is sliding into the abyss. Then I saw the fawn above me, also pulled by the rope, and began a dangerous descent.这就是结组绳的力量。它把我们三个联成一个统一的生死与共的集体。要么共赴深渊，要么同挽狂澜。

  This is the power of knotted ropes. It unites the three of us into a unified collective of life and death. Either go to the abyss together, or turn the tide together.稳住！一定要稳住！我听见河莲在喊，小鹿在喊，我也在喊……其实，那一瞬什么声音也没有，只是我们生命的本能在发出共鸣。我们被惯性拖着向下滑，就像坐滑梯，越到后面力量越大。当务之急是拦住我们的身体，阻止致命的下滑。

  Steady! Be sure to hold on! I heard He Lian shouting, Xiaolu shouting, and I was shouting...... In fact, there was no sound at that moment, just the instincts of our lives were resonating. We are dragged down by inertia, like sitting on a slide, and the further we go, the more powerful we become. The priority is to stop our bodies and stop the fatal slide.我们每个人都像八脚章鱼一般，拼命扩大自己与山体接触的面积，以增加摩擦力。见到任何一条岩缝，都毫不犹豫地把手脚插进去，鲜血直流却毫无知觉。脚蹬掉一块又一块石头和冰块，听它们发出震耳欲聋的轰鸣声。七手八脚飞快地做着霹雳舞中类似擦窗户的动作，由于极度奋力，动作扭曲得可怕。我们甚至把脸也紧紧地贴在冰面上，利用凸起的鼻子和眉毛，使身体滑动的速度减慢……

  Each of us, like an eight-legged octopus, desperately expands the area of contact with the mountain in order to increase friction. When they saw any rock crevice, they did not hesitate to insert their hands and feet in, and the blood flowed without any consciousness. Kick off rocks and ice blocks and listen to their deafening roars. The seven hands and eight feet quickly did the movement similar to cleaning the window in breakdancing, and due to the extreme effort, the movements were terribly distorted. We even pressed our faces tightly to the ice, using our raised noses and eyebrows to slow down the sliding of our bodies......终于，恐怖悲惨的下滑停止了。河莲被一块冰凌阻挡在半山，我们从死神手里赢回了关键的一局。

  Finally, the terrifying and tragic decline stopped. He Lian was blocked halfway up the mountain by a piece of ice, and we won a crucial game from the god of death.

  我们彼此看了看，脸色都像铁一般，冰冷坚硬。擦破的地方并没有鲜血流出，它们被冻住了，成了淡红色的冰。哈！我们还活着！这是多么值得庆贺的事情啊！我们揉揉脸上冻僵的肌肉，彼此做个鬼脸。我抖了一下结组绳，沾满冰凌的绳子发出嘣嘣的声响，好像一根巨大的琴弦，也在为我们高兴地叹息。

  We looked at each other, our faces were like iron, cold and hard. No blood flowed out of the scratched places, they were frozen and turned into reddish ice. Ha! We are alive! What a celebration it is! We rubbed the frozen muscles on our faces and grimaced at each other. I shook the knotted rope, and the ice-covered rope made a banging sound, like a huge string, sighing happily for us.剩下的事，就是继续攀登。经历了一次生与死的模拟演习，我们更小心地珍惜生的权利。

  The rest is to continue climbing. After a life and death simulation, we cherish the right to life more carefully.爬啊爬……我几乎已经不去想顶峰的事了，只是机械地爬……突然，眼前一亮。整整几个小时，我的眼帘里除了冰雪还是冰雪，我们已经忘记了世界上还有其他的颜色。一片极大的蔚蓝色，像大鸟的羽毛，无声地将我覆盖。阳光温暖地抚摸着我的额头，把一种让人流泪的关怀，从九天之上无边无际地倾倒下来。

  Climb, climb...... I hardly think about the summit anymore, just climbing mechanically...... Suddenly, his eyes lit up. For a few whole hours, I had forgotten that there were other colors in the world besides ice and snow. A great azure blue, like the feathers of a big bird, silently covered me. The sun warmly caressed my forehead, pouring a tear-jerking care down from the top of the nine days.啊，顶峰到了！

  Ah, the peak has arrived!顶峰是很小的一块地方，眼前一片凄凉的空寂，什么也没有。不，不对，这里有太阳和风。太阳在比你更高的地方，孤单地悬挂着，等着你来作伴。风几乎是和你一般高矮，掠着你的肩膀和头发飞过，好像要把你征服山的消息带到远方。我捏了一小撮儿雪，没敢取太多。我想山顶上的雪，必有一种神圣的魔力，我应该给其他登上山顶的人留一些。伸出舌头舔了一下，遗憾得很，山顶的雪和别的地方的雪，味道是一样的。如果一定要找出它有什么不同，那就是有一点咸、有一点甜，那是我咽喉的血混到里面了。

  The summit is a very small place, and there is a desolate emptiness in front of it, with nothing. No, no, there is sun and wind here. The sun hangs alone higher than you, waiting for you to come as a companion. The wind is almost as tall as you, flying over your shoulders and hair, as if to bring the news of your conquest of the mountain into the distance. I pinched a small handful of snow and didn't dare to take too much. I think the snow on the top of the mountain must have a divine magic, and I should save some for others who climb to the top of the mountain. I stretched out my tongue and licked it, regretting that the snow on the top of the mountain tasted the same as the snow elsewhere. If I had to find out what was different about it, it was a little salty and a little sweet, and it was the blood in my throat mixed in.我站在山顶的时候，小鹿在下山的路上，河莲在上山的路上，结组绳像金字塔的两条边长，山顶暂时成为它的制高点。我轻轻抽了抽绳子，她们都感觉到了，给了我一个回应。

  When I stood on the top of the mountain, the deer was on the way down, and the river lotus was on the way up, and the rope was like the two sides of a pyramid, and the top of the mountain temporarily became its commanding heights. I gently pulled the rope, and they all felt it and gave me a response.我感觉到这是我们的生命之绳。山是不能征服的，我们爬上了山，我们又迅速地离开了山。我们只是山的匆匆过客。当我们还不曾来到这个世界的时候，山就存在了。在我们已经不存在的将来，山依然存在。和山相比，我们是那样渺小，可人也是很伟大的，以我们渺小的身躯，由于努力和团结，我们终于也有一瞬，站得比山更高，群山匍匐在我们脚下。

  I feel that this is our lifeline. The mountain cannot be conquered, we climbed the mountain, and we quickly left the mountain. We are just passers-by in a hurry in the mountains. When we have not yet come to this world, mountains exist. In a future where we no longer exist, the mountains still exist. Compared with the mountains, we are so small, but people are also very great, with our small bodies, because of hard work and unity, we finally have a moment, standing higher than the mountains, and the mountains are crawling at our feet.我又向四周张望了一下，然后下山。不知为什么，登上山以后，人很容易感到心里空荡荡的，好像把一种很宝贵的东西安放在雪山之巅了。

  I looked around again and went down the mountain. For some reason, after climbing the mountain, it is easy for people to feel empty in their hearts, as if they have placed a very precious thing on the top of the snow-capped mountain.

  我们默默地下着山，不断地对付着险情。俗话说，上山容易下山难。上山的时候，容易避开危险。下山则不然，脚心也没长眼睛，一不小心就出问题，有几次我失足下滑，要不是结组绳帮助，也许就会像在幼儿园滑滑梯一样，一直滑到雪山的肚子里，再也不见天日。

  We went down the mountain silently, constantly dealing with danger. As the saying goes, it's easy to go up the mountain, it's hard to go down. When going up the mountain, it is easy to avoid danger. If it weren't for the help of the knot rope, maybe it would be like a slide in kindergarten, all the way to the belly of the snow-capped mountain, and never see the light of day again.下了山，重新回到坚实的土地上，我们把结组绳解开，回头仰望高山，几乎不相信我们用自己的双脚，把它一尺尺量过。但结组绳上的冰雪可以作证，我们以集体的力量，曾经到达过怎样的高度。

  Coming down the mountain and returning to the solid ground, we untied the knot rope and looked back at the mountain, almost believing that we had measured it with our feet. But the ice and snow on the knot rope can testify to what heights we have reached with collective strength.

未知

  15.信使

  15. Messenger

  我十七岁的生日，是在藏北高原过的。那天，正好是军邮车上山的日子，这个生日便像美丽的项圈，久久地悬挂在我胸前。

  My seventeenth birthday was on the northern Tibetan plateau. That day happened to be the day when the military mail truck went up the mountain, and this birthday was like a beautiful collar, hanging on my chest for a long time.喜马拉雅山、冈底斯山、喀喇昆仑山，像三柄巨大的棱锥，将我所在的部队，托举到了离海平面五千多米的高度。我的生日在十月，这正是平原上麦秸垛金黄而干燥的时光，昆仑山却已万里雪飘。就要封山了，封山是冰雪发出的禁令，我们将与世隔绝到春天。

  The Himalayas, Gangdis, and Karakoram Mountains, like three huge pyramids, lifted my troops to a height of more than 5,000 meters above sea level. My birthday is in October, which is the golden and dry time when the wheat straw stacks on the plain are golden and dry, but the Kunlun Mountains are already snowing for thousands of miles. The mountain is about to be closed, and the mountain closure is a ban issued by ice and snow, and we will be isolated from the world until spring.战友们把水果罐头汁倾倒在茶褐色的刷牙缸里，彼此碰得山响，向我祝贺。对于每月只有一筒半罐头的我们来说，这是一场盛大的庆典。

  The comrades-in-arms poured canned fruit juice into the tea-brown toothbrushing jar, bumped into each other, and congratulated me. It was a grand celebration for those of us who only had one and a half cans per month.但心中总有淡淡的悲愁——我想家。

  But there is always a faint sadness in my heart - I miss home.一位白发苍苍的老医生对我说，也许军邮车今天会来的。

  A gray-haired old doctor said to me, maybe the military mail truck will come today.你骗人！我大叫。有时候猛烈地指责别人说谎，其实是太渴望那消息真实。

  You liar! I screamed. Sometimes I violently accuse others of lying, but I am actually too eager for the truth of the news.军邮车大约每月从新疆喀什开上昆仑山一次，日子并不准，仿佛一只来去无踪的青鸟。老医生戍边多年，他的话有时像符咒一样灵验。“每年封山前上山的最后一辆车，总是军邮车。山下的人都知道我们的心。他晃着满头的白发，像一丛银针。”

  The military mail truck drives up the Kunlun Mountains from Kashgar, Xinjiang about once a month, and the days are not accurate, like a blue bird coming and going without a trace. The old doctor has been stationed at the border for many years, and his words are sometimes as effective as charms. "The last car that goes up the mountain before the mountain is closed every year is always a military mail car. People below the mountain know our hearts. He shook his head full of white hair, like a cluster of silver needles. ”那天夜里，军邮车像破冰船一样，跋涉五天，英勇地到了，整个军营为之沸腾。我们真想欢呼，但军人只有打了胜仗才允许欢呼，于是我们屏住气盯着一处房舍。房舍门口站着两个威武的士兵。因为曾有一次，迫不及待的边防军人们跑去抢信，从此在军邮车到来的日子，分拣信件的房间便加站双岗。

  That night, the military mail car traveled like an icebreaker for five days and arrived heroically, and the entire barracks were boiling. We really wanted to cheer, but the soldiers were only allowed to cheer if they won the battle, so we stared at a house with bated breath. There were two mighty soldiers standing at the door of the house. Because once, the border guards who couldn't wait ran to grab the letter, and since then, on the day the military mail car arrived, the room for sorting letters has been double-posted.各单位取信的人站在房外，一取到信就像古代的驿马接到加急文书，拔腿就跑，去把信件送给望眼欲穿的人们。

  The people who took the letter from each unit stood outside the room, and as soon as they received the letter, it was like an ancient stagecoach who received an urgent document and ran away to deliver the letter to the people who were looking forward to it.在高原上奔跑，不是一件轻松的事。这活儿一般都分给腰细腿长的年轻人，但白发苍苍的老医生执拗地要做这件事。知情的人私下里说，他家中有很老的双亲、很弱的妻子、很小的孩儿，想信比别人更甚。

  Running on the plateau is not an easy task. This work is usually given to young people with thin waists and long legs, but the gray-haired old doctor stubbornly wants to do it. People in the know privately said that he had very old parents, a very weak wife, and a very young child in his family, and he wanted to believe more than others.老医生说，有一年封山的时间格外长。半年后军邮车首次上山，信件一直摞到分拣人的胸前。他们在信海中游走，呼吸都很困难。

  The old doctor said that there was a year when the mountain was closed for an exceptionally long time. Half a year later, the military mail truck went up the mountain for the first time, and the letters were stacked all the way to the chest of the sorter. They swim in the sea of letters and have difficulty breathing.

  老医生抱着一大摞信，我们扑上去抢。那时候干部去干校，知青接受再教育，妻离子散的多，信件也格外多。每个人都像蜘蛛一样，吐出思念思索的长丝，织一张自己的情感信息之网。

  The old doctor was holding a large stack of letters, and we rushed to grab them. At that time, cadres went to cadre schools, educated youths received re-education, and their wives and children were separated, and there were many letters. Everyone is like a spider, spitting out the filaments of longing and thinking, weaving their own web of emotional information.霎时老医生手中就空了，接下来是唰唰地撕信，信皮的断屑萧萧而下。

  In an instant, the old doctor's hand was empty, and then he tore up the letter, and the crumbs of the letter skin fell down.我最先看的是父母的信。仿佛有一只温暖而柔软的手，从洁白的笺纸中探出来，抚摸着我额前飘动的乌发，心便不再凄然。

  The first thing I read was a letter from my parents. It was as if a warm and soft hand came out of the white paper and stroked the black hair fluttering on my forehead, and my heart was no longer sad.再看同学和朋友的信。我的同桌此刻在遥远的西双版纳，信中夹了一朵花的标本。她说这是景洪最美丽的花，有沁人肺腑的香气。夹花的那页信纸留有大片紫色的痕液，想象得出花盛开时的娇嫩。我低头嗅那被花汁浸泡过的地方，哪儿有什么香气，有的只是纯正而凛冽的冰雪气息缭绕其中。

  Look at the letters from classmates and friends. My deskmate is in Xishuangbanna in the distance at the moment, and the letter contains a specimen of a flower. She said that this is the most beautiful flower in Jinghong, with a refreshing aroma. The page of letter paper with flowers left a large purple trace, which can be imagined as delicate when the flowers bloom. I looked down and smelled the place soaked in flower juice, where there was any aroma, and some were just pure and awe-inspiring ice and snow scents lingering in it.我连夜回信。平常日子，营区是柴油发电机供电，每晚只亮两个小时，然后就像木偶人似的眨几下眼睛，熄灭了。军邮车一来，首长便传令延长发电时间，以利于拣信和回信。首长其实也很盼信到来。

  I replied overnight. On normal days, the camp is powered by diesel generators, which only light up for two hours a night, and then blinks a few times like a puppet and goes out. As soon as the military mail truck arrived, the chief ordered the power generation time to be extended to facilitate the selection and reply to letters. The chief is actually looking forward to the arrival of the letter.同屋的女兵嘤嘤地哭了起来。她的小侄子病了。我们都放下笔去劝她。然而，女孩子常常是这样：越劝哭得越欢畅。

  The female soldier in the same room cried. Her little nephew is sick. We all put down our pens to persuade her. However, girls often do this: the more they persuade them to cry, the happier they become.老医生悠长地叹了一口气，告诉离得这么远的一个小姑娘，孩子的病就能好了吗？我家里人是从不这样的。

  The old doctor sighed long and told a little girl who was so far away that the child's illness would be cured. My family has never been like this.不一会儿，女兵停止了哭泣，因为从老医生送来的第二批信中，她得知小侄子的病已经好了。

  After a while, the female soldier stopped crying, because from the second batch of letters sent by the old doctor, she learned that her little nephew's illness had been cured.要有经验，老医生说，把信全拆开，码饼干似的排好，从最后面的看起，前面的只能做参考。

  To have experience, the old doctor said, open all the letters, arrange them like biscuits, and look at the back from the back, and the front can only be used as a reference.这自然是至理名言。这么办，时间长了，我们也发现了弱点。好比一本荡气回肠的小说，快刀斩乱麻先看了结尾，再回过头去细细咀嚼，便少了许多悬念和曲折。

  This is naturally a wise saying. After a long time, we also found weaknesses. It's like a heart-wrenching novel, if you read the end of the mess quickly, and then go back and chew it carefully, there will be a lot less suspense and twists.那一次军邮车上山，老医生没有收到一封信。按照他们家的逻辑，没有信来也许就是出事了。他的忧郁持续了整个冬天。

  That time the military mail truck went up the mountain, and the old doctor did not receive a letter. According to their family's logic, if there is no letter, something may have happened. His melancholy lasted all winter.在这海拔五千米的高原营地，每逢有人下山，就会挨门挨户地问，我要走了，要不要带信？哪怕是平日最自私的人，在这件事上也绝对平和而周到，这是高原的风俗。

  In this plateau camp at an altitude of 5,000 meters, whenever someone goes down the mountain, they will go door to door and ask, I am leaving, do you want to bring a letter? Even the most selfish people on weekdays are absolutely peaceful and thoughtful in this matter, which is the custom of the plateau.有时候突然写好一封信，又不知谁能带走，就在吃饭人多时喊，谁能下山，告我一声。一次，一个素不相识的人对我说，我知道你父亲的名字。你看过我的档案？我问。不是。几年前我为你代发过家信。我已经完全记不得是托什么人又转到他手中的，于是赶忙表示迟到的谢意。

  Sometimes I suddenly write a letter, and I don't know who can take it away, so I shout when there are many people eating, who can go down the mountain and tell me. Once, a stranger said to me, I know your father's name. Have you seen my profile? I asked. No. A few years ago, I sent you a letter from home. I couldn't remember who I asked to pass it on to him, so I hurriedly expressed my gratitude for being late.在我十七岁生日过去半年的时候，收到了西双版纳同学的回信，那朵花怎么是紫色的呢？它是雪白的呀！而且，绝不可能没有香气！

  Half a year after my seventeenth birthday, I received a reply from a classmate in Xishuangbanna, why is that flower purple? It's snow-white! Moreover, it is impossible to be without aroma!信是老医生送来的。这是开山后的第一次通邮，他也很快乐，他的家里寄来了平安信。有时候他又突然疑惑，说他家会不会有什么事瞒了不肯告诉他。我们都说不会不会，你是家里的顶梁柱，他们离了你，根本就办不了事，怎么会瞒你！他也觉得很有道理，心宽许多。

  The letter was sent by the old doctor. This was the first mail call since the opening of the mountain, and he was also very happy, and a letter of peace was sent from his home. Sometimes he suddenly wondered, saying that his family would hide something and refused to tell him. We all said no, no, you are the pillar of the family, they can't do anything without you, how can they hide it from you! He also felt that it made sense and was much more relaxed.终于，轮到他探家了。很早就告诉我们：他下山时专门预备一个提包，为大家装信。我便对着昆仑山皑皑的冰雪，咬着笔杆，从从容容地写了大约三十封信，每一封都竭尽我的才能。

  Finally, it was his turn to visit the house. He told us very early that he had prepared a bag when he went down the mountain to carry letters for everyone. I faced the ice and snow of Kunlun Mountain, bit the pen barrel, and calmly wrote about thirty letters, each of which exhausted my talents.我双手捧着这摞信，郑重地交给老医生。他的白发在雪峰的映衬下，晃动得像一盆水中的粉丝，你放心好了！我到了山下第一件事就是为大家发信。假如回信快的话，下次军邮车上来，你们也许就能收到回信了。

  I held the stack of letters in both hands and solemnly handed them to the old doctor. His white hair swayed like a fan in a basin of water against the backdrop of the snowy peaks, don't worry! The first thing I did when I arrived at the foot of the mountain was to send letters to everyone. If the reply is fast, you may be able to receive a reply next time the military mail truck comes up.他走了。军邮车像候鸟，飞来一次又一次，但那三十封信一封也不见回音。原来他下山乘坐的车翻了，这在高原是很平常的事。熊熊烈火吞噬了他银发苍苍的头颅，那个装满信件的旅行包，顷刻间化为青烟。

  He's gone. The military mail truck flew in again and again like migratory birds, but there was no reply to the thirty letters. It turned out that the car he was riding down the mountain overturned, which is a common thing on the plateau. The raging fire engulfed his silver-haired head, and the travel bag full of letters turned into green smoke in an instant.那三十封信，只有给父母的那封，我重写了托人发出。给其他人的，便再也提不起兴致重写。只要抓起笔，老医生的白发就在眼前灼目地闪动，眼珠便发酸。大团大团的冰雪，在我胸中凝结。

  Of those thirty letters, only the one for my parents, I rewrote and sent it to someone. If you give it to others, you can no longer be interested in rewriting it. As long as he grabbed the pen, the old doctor's gray hair flashed in front of his eyes, and his eyes became sour. A large mass of ice and snow condensed in my chest.后来，在老医生的追悼会上，我才知道他的生辰，远没有我想象的那样老。满头灿然的白发，是昆仑山馈赠他的不能拒绝的礼物。

  Later, at the memorial service for the old doctor, I learned that his birthday was far from as old as I thought. The brilliant white hair is a gift that Kunlun Mountain cannot refuse.他死了以后，军邮车还带来过他的家信。我第一次注意了一下地址：是广西一个很偏远的小城。又在地图上仔细寻找，那地方在北回归线以南，属于热带，该是非常炎热的。老医生的家乡，距离昆仑山大约有一万五千里。

  After his death, the military mail truck also brought his family letter. I paid attention to the address for the first time: it is a very remote town in Guangxi. I searched carefully on the map, and the place was south of the Tropic of Cancer, which was tropical, and it should be very hot. The old doctor's hometown is about 15,000 miles away from Kunlun Mountain.

  那封迟到的信，边缘已经磨损，好像烙熟又蒸了几遭的馅饼，几处裂口的地方，被薄而坚韧的透明纸粘贴过，上面打着蓝色的印章：“邮件已破，军邮代封”。

  The late letter, the edges were worn, like a pie that had been baked and steamed several times, and several cracks were pasted with thin and tough transparent paper, with a blue seal on it: "The mail is broken, and the military mail is sealed."不知这是否是封报平安的家信？
I wonder if this is a family letter that reports peace?

未知

  16.葵花之最

  16. The best of sunflowers

  二十年前的那个春天，我是在昆仑山上度过的。

  Twenty years ago, that spring, I spent it on Kunlun Mountain.昆仑山其实只有一个季节——冬天，春节过后那段漫长而寒冷的日子被称为春天，这是我们这帮小女兵从平原家中带来的习惯。

  Kunlun Mountain actually has only one season - winter, and the long and cold days after the Spring Festival are called spring, which is a habit brought by our little female soldiers from their homes in the plains.快到“五一”了，冰封的道路渐渐开通，春节慰问品运到了。五颜六色来自五湖四海的慰问袋最受欢迎。小伙子们希望从绣着花的漂亮布袋里，摸出一双精致的鞋垫，做一个浪漫的梦。姑娘们没有这份心思，只想找点稀罕的吃食，打打牙祭。整整一个冬天，除了脱水菜和军用罐头，没有见过绿色。可惜，关山重重，山路迢迢，花生走了油，瓜子变哈喇，沙枣颠成粉末，面粉烙的小馃子像出土文物……

  It is almost "May Day", the icy road is gradually opened, and the Spring Festival condolences have arrived. Colorful condolence bags from all over the world are the most popular. The guys hope to find a pair of exquisite insoles from a beautiful cloth bag embroidered with flowers and have a romantic dream. The girls didn't have this mind, they just wanted to find some rare food and make a tooth sacrifice. For a whole winter, except for dehydrated vegetables and military cans, I did not see green. Unfortunately, there are many mountains and mountains, mountain roads are long, peanuts are oily, melon seeds become hara, sand dates are turned into powder, and small steamed buns baked with flour are like unearthed cultural relics......突然闻到一股奇异的清香。

  Suddenly smelled a strange fragrance.那是一个绣着黄色“八一”和红色五星的小白口袋。针脚毛茸茸的，绣活手艺不高，想必出自一个笨手笨脚的胖姑娘。

  It was a small white pocket embroidered with yellow "Bayi" and red five stars. The stitches are hairy, and the embroidery skills are not high, presumably from a clumsy fat girl.打开一看，是一袋葵花子。颗颗像小炮弹一样结实，饱满得可爱。我们每人抢了一把，一尝，竟是生的。葵花子中埋着一封信。

  When I opened it, it was a bag of sunflower seeds. Each one is as strong as a small cannonball, full and cute. We each grabbed a handful and tasted it, and it was raw. There is a letter buried in the sunflower seeds.“敬爱的解放军叔叔们……”

  "Dear uncles of the People's Liberation Army......信是从广东省湛江市第二小学发出的。

  The letter was sent from the No. 2 Primary School in Zhanjiang City, Guangdong Province.我们趴在地图上找。唔，湛江，好远！那里是亚热带，一个很热的地方。

  We look for it on the map. Hmm, Zhanjiang, it's a long way! It was subtropical, a very hot place.孩子们请求解放军叔叔们，把他们精心挑选出的葵花种子，种在祖国的边防线上。

  The children asked the uncles of the People's Liberation Army to plant the sunflower seeds they carefully selected on the border defense line of the motherland.我们把手中的葵花子放回布袋。那清香，是阳光、土地和绿色植物的芬芳。

  We put the sunflower seeds in our hands back into the cloth bag. The fragrance is the fragrance of sunshine, land and green plants.昆仑山咆哮的暴风雪，伴随我们进行讨论。

  The roaring blizzard of Kunlun Mountain accompanied us in our discussion.为什么只写给解放军叔叔？边防线上也有解放军阿姨呀。

  Why only write to the uncle of the People's Liberation Army? There are also aunts of the People's Liberation Army on the border line.在国境线上种葵花，多美妙的想法！每当葵花开放的时候，我们将有一条金色的国境线。

  What a wonderful idea to plant sunflowers on the border! Whenever the sunflowers bloom, we will have a golden border.这根本不可能！昆仑山是世界第三极，雪线上连草都不长，还能开葵花？！

  It's simply impossible! Kunlun Mountain is the third pole in the world, and even grass does not grow on the snow line, and sunflowers can still bloom?!我们都默不作声了，只听见屋外风在嘶鸣。

  We were all silent, only to hear the wind hissing outside the house.大家决定由我给孩子们回一封信，就说葵花子是解放军阿姨们收到的，只是这里很冷很冷……

  Everyone decided that I would reply to the children, saying that the sunflower seeds were received by the aunts of the People's Liberation Army, but it was very cold here......昆仑山的“夏天”到了。

  The "summer" of Kunlun Mountain has arrived.信早已写好，却始终没有发出。我们大着胆子，把葵花子种在院子里。

  The letter had already been written, but it was never sent. We had the courage to plant sunflower seeds in the yard.人们都说活不了，却天天跑来看，松土施肥。

  People say they can't live, but they run every day to loosen the soil and fertilize.葵花发芽了。先探出两片嫩黄的叶子，像试探风向的小手掌，肥厚而天真。然后舒展腰肢，前仰后合生机盎然地长大起来。

  The sunflowers have sprouted. First, two tender yellow leaves were poked out, like small palms that tested the direction of the wind, fat and innocent. Then stretch your waist and grow up vigorously.昆仑山默默地认可了这些来自亚热带的绿色幼苗，就像它认可了我们一样。

  Kunlun Mountain silently recognizes these green seedlings from the subtropics, just as it recognizes us.然而，我们高兴得太早了。不知道该算是上个冬天最迟还是下个冬天最早的一股冷风，冻死了绝大部分葵花。

  However, we rejoiced too soon. I don't know if it was the latest cold wind last winter or the earliest next winter, which froze most of the sunflowers to death.奇迹般地保存下一棵幼苗。它并不是最强壮的，也许因为近旁有一块大石头。受到启发，我们用石头为葵花围起一圈不透风的篱笆。

  Miraculously saved the next seedling. It is not the strongest, perhaps because there is a large stone nearby. Inspired by this, we used stones to enclose the sunflowers with an impermeable fence.现在，我们每天趴在石头围墙上看葵花，不知道的人，会以为里面养着活蹦乱跳的小生灵。

  Now, we lie on the stone wall every day to watch the sunflowers, and those who don't know will think that there are living creatures in it.这棵幸运的葵花，一往情深地看着太阳，勇敢地展开桃形的枝叶，茎上纤巧的绒毛，像蜜蜂翅膀一样，在寒风中抖个不停。也许它感到了昆仑山喜怒无常的威严，急匆匆地压缩自己生命的历程，才长到一尺高，就萌出了纽扣大的花蕾，压得最高处的茎叶微微下垂，好像惭愧自己为什么不长得更高一些。

  This lucky sunflower looks at the sun affectionately, bravely spreads its peach-shaped branches and leaves, and the delicate fluff on the stem is like bee wings, shaking in the cold wind. Perhaps it felt the majesty of Kunlun Mountain's moodiness, and hurriedly compressed the course of its life, and only when it grew to a foot high, it sprouted button-sized buds, and the stems and leaves at the highest point drooped slightly, as if it was ashamed of why it didn't grow taller.那一年没有秋天。寒凝一切的风雪，毫无先兆地骤然降临。早上起来，天地一片苍茫，我们几乎是跌跌撞撞地扑向葵花。

  There was no autumn that year. The wind and snow that condensed all the cold suddenly fell without warning. In the morning, the sky and earth were vast, and we almost stumbled to the sunflowers.石围墙也被飓风吹得四散飘去，向日葵却凝然不动地站立在那里，在冰雕玉琢的莹白之中，保持着凄清的翠绿。叶片傲然舒展，像一面面玻璃做的旗，发出环佩般的叮当之声。最不可思议的是，在它生命的最后一刻，居然绽开了一朵明艳的花。那花盘只有五分硬币那么大，薄而平整，冰雪凝冻其上，像一块光滑的表蒙子，刚分裂出的葵花子还未成熟，像丝丝柳絮一样优雅地弯曲着，沁出极轻淡的紫色。最令人警醒的是花盘四周弹射出密集的黄色花瓣，箭头一般怒放着，像一颗永不泯灭的星。

  The stone wall was also blown away by the hurricane, but the sunflowers stood there still, maintaining a desolate emerald green in the white of ice carvings and jade. The leaves stretch proudly, like flags made of glass, making a jingling sound like a ring. The most incredible thing is that at the last moment of its life, a bright flower actually bloomed. The flower plate was only the size of a five-cent coin, thin and flat, frozen on it with ice and snow, like a smooth surface mask, and the newly split sunflower seeds were not yet ripe, bending gracefully like a silk willow catkins, exuding a very light purple. The most sobering thing is that dense yellow petals eject around the flower plate, and they bloom like arrows, like a star that never disappears.

  向日葵身上的冰花越结越厚，最后凝固成一方柱形的冰晶。

  The ice flowers on the sunflower became thicker and thicker, and finally solidified into a square columnar ice crystal.广东省湛江市第二小学当年的孩子们，但愿不要看到我这篇小文。愿他们心中永存一条盛开葵花的金色国境线。

  The children of Zhanjiang No. 2 Primary School in Guangdong Province hope they don't see my article. May their hearts always have a golden border of blooming sunflowers.假如有一天，我能重回昆仑山。在两座最高的山峰中间，有一块只有我们才知道的地方。在深深的永冻土层之下，有一方冰清玉洁的水晶，水晶中有一朵美丽绝伦的花，宛若雏菊半仰着脸，灿然微笑着……

  If one day, I can return to Kunlun Mountain. In the middle of the two highest peaks, there is a place that only we know. Under the deep permafrost, there is a crystal with a beautiful flower, like a daisy with its face half-tilted, smiling brightly......我不知道它是不是世界上最小的葵花，但我知道它是世界上最高的葵花。
I don't know if it's the smallest sunflower in the world, but I know it's the tallest sunflower in the world.

未知

  17.西藏猪

  17. Tibetan pig

  高原上的生物很少。像平原常见的飞鸟，比如麻雀、喜鹊，一种也没有。只有像乌云一般的秃鹫偶然飞过。大概鸟儿也因缺氧憋得喘不过气来吧？

  There are few creatures on the plateau. Like the common birds in the plains, such as sparrows and magpies, there is none. Only vultures like dark clouds flew by by chance. Probably the birds are also out of breath due to lack of oxygen, right?人有一种爱养小动物的天性，我们就从山底下抱上来一只公鸡。一路上，随着海拔的不断升高，鸡冠子越来越紫，最后简直变成黑的了。好不容易熬到了目的地，我们赶紧把公鸡放在雪地上，心想让它换点新鲜空气，也许它会舒服一些。没想到，它的爪子刚一着地，立即就飞跑起来。跑了没多远，就一个跟头栽在地上，扑棱着翅膀死了。大家非常伤心。初到高原的生灵，是不能做剧烈运动的，要给身体一个慢慢适应的过程，可惜公鸡不懂得这个道理，就丧了命。

  People have a nature to raise small animals, so we pick up a rooster from the bottom of the mountain. Along the way, as the altitude continued to rise, the cockscomb became more and more purple, and finally turned black. Finally made it to our destination, we quickly put the rooster on the snow, thinking that maybe it would be more comfortable if it got some fresh air. Unexpectedly, as soon as its claws hit the ground, it immediately flew away. Not far away, one fell to the ground and died with his wings. Everyone is very sad. Creatures who have just arrived at the plateau cannot do strenuous exercise, and they have to give their bodies a slow adaptation process, but unfortunately the rooster does not understand this truth and dies.以后又从山下带上来一头小猪。这回大家有经验了，刚开始半个月，人们紧紧抱着小猪，不叫它活动，可小猪后来还是死了。医生说，小猪得了一种叫作高原肺水肿的重病。

  Later, a piglet was brought up from the bottom of the mountain. This time everyone has experience, in the first half month, people hugged the piglet tightly and did not call it to move, but the piglet died later. The doctor said that the piglet had a serious illness called plateau pulmonary edema.过了些日子，有人从国界那边的印度进口了一只小黑猪。听说它老家的地势也很高，这样就不存在水土不服的问题了。

  A few days later, someone imported a little black pig from India on the other side of the border. I heard that the terrain of its hometown is also very high, so there is no problem of acclimatization.果然，这只来自异国的小黑猪平安地活下来了。大伙给它起名叫黑黑。

  Sure enough, the little black pig from a foreign country survived safely. Everyone named it Heihei.黑黑每天在我们的住处悠闲地漫步，把它的小尾巴得意地卷成一个“8”字。一到开饭的时间，它就从野外赶回来，等在饭厅门口，用长着双眼皮的大眼睛，眼巴巴地瞅着大家，嘴角还会滴下一串口水。

  Heihei strolled leisurely in our residence every day, proudly curling its little tail into a "figure 8". As soon as it was time to eat, it rushed back from the wilderness, waiting at the door of the dining room, staring at everyone with big eyelids, and a string of saliva dripping from the corner of its mouth.我们宁可自己先不吃饭，也要喂黑黑。这个给它撕一块馒头，那个给它舀一勺米饭。黑黑也很聪明，吃完了这个人的一口饭，就会走开，绝不会老围着你。人们抢着喂黑黑，有时就把黑黑搞得很狼狈，鼻梁上贴了一块豆腐，耳朵上挂着一缕粉丝。它很绅士，一点也不着急。等人们散开了，就自己跑到大石头旁边，把头上挂的食物蹭下来，再慢慢吃掉。

  We would rather not eat ourselves or feed Heihei. This one tears a piece of steamed bun for it, and the other scoops a spoonful of rice for it. Hei Hei is also very smart, after eating a bite of this person's meal, he will walk away, and he will never surround you all the time. People rushed to feed Heihei, and sometimes they made Heihei very embarrassed, with a piece of tofu stuck on the bridge of his nose and a wisp of vermicelli hanging from his ears. It is gentlemanly and not in a hurry at all. When the people dispersed, they ran to the big rocks, rubbed off the food hanging on their heads, and then ate them slowly.黑黑最爱喝甜牛奶了。刚开始是因为许多人是从农村来的，喝不惯牛奶。轮到喝牛奶的日子（不是鲜牛奶，高原上哪儿有奶牛啊，是用奶粉冲开的），剩的就格外多。炊事班就准备了一个大木槽盛剩牛奶。黑黑跑过来，把嘴巴拱进槽里，只剩两只眼睛在外面，咻咻地喘着气，埋下头谁也不理。你看不见它狼吞虎咽，只见它的脖子均匀地颤动，但槽里白色奶液的水平面迅速下降，一会儿就露出槽底的木纹了。好像槽子在我们找不到的地方裂了一个大洞，牛奶都渗到地下去了。黑黑抬起头，也很遗憾很吃惊地注视着木槽，好像自己也不明白：刚才还那么多牛奶，怎么一眨眼的工夫就不见了？

  Heihei loves to drink sweet milk. At first, it was because many people came from the countryside and were not used to drinking milk. When it was the turn to drink milk (not fresh milk, where are the cows on the plateau, they were washed away with milk powder), there was a lot left. The cooking class prepared a large wooden trough to hold the leftover milk. Heihei ran over, arched his mouth into the groove, leaving only two eyes outside, panting, burying his head and ignoring anyone. You can't see it gobbling up, only its neck trembling evenly, but the level of the white milk in the trough drops rapidly, and the wood grain at the bottom of the trough is revealed in a while. It was as if the trough had cracked a big hole in a place where we couldn't find it, and the milk seeped into the ground. Hei Hei raised his head, and stared at the wooden trough with regret and surprise, as if he didn't understand: There was so much milk just now, why did the time disappear in the blink of an eye?知道黑黑爱喝牛奶以后，我们就有意多给它剩下一些。

  After knowing that Heihei loves to drink milk, we deliberately gave it more leftovers.在这样丰富的营养下，黑黑迅速长大，不久就成了一只威武的大黑猪。甩着大肚皮走动的时候，好像一张黑丝绒壁毯在旷野移动。

  Under such rich nutrition, Heihei grew up quickly and soon became a mighty big black pig. When I walked around with my big belly, it was like a black velvet carpet moving in the wilderness.高原上的尖石把黑黑的肚皮磨破了。开饭的时候，黑黑再也不能像原来那样飞快地跑过来，只能慢慢往家里挪。炊事班长看了心痛，就领黑黑到卫生科，对正在给人包扎伤口的护士说，给我们的黑黑看看病。

  The sharp stones on the plateau wore out the black belly. When it was time to eat, Hei Hei could no longer run over as quickly as before, so he could only slowly move home. The cooking squad leader saw the heartache, so he took Heihei to the health department and said to the nurse who was bandaging the wound, "Give our Heihei a doctor."

  护士吓了一跳，说，我又不是兽医。

  The nurse was startled and said, I'm not a veterinarian.班长说，这病不用兽医，我就能看。把伤口消消毒，抹点药膏包起来就行。

  The squad leader said, I can see this disease without a veterinarian. Disinfect the wound and wrap it with some ointment.护士说，谁敢钻到猪肚子底下去上药？它不咬人才怪呢！

  The nurse said, who dares to get under the pig's belly and apply medicine? It's no wonder it doesn't bite!班长对护士说，黑黑绝对不会咬你的。然后又对黑黑说，这是给你看病呢，千万不要乱动啊！好了，趴下吧。

  The squad leader said to the nurse, Heihei will never bite you. Then he said to Heihei, this is for you, don't move around! Okay, lie down.黑黑就乖乖地躺在卫生科门外的地上，像平日吃饱了饭晒太阳的样子。

  Hei Hei obediently lay on the ground outside the health department, like he was eating enough to bask in the sun on weekdays.护士双手托着治疗盘，战战兢兢地走过去，消毒、上药……涂酒精的时候，黑黑可能感到有点痛，浑身抖了一下，但真的是没有动。

  The nurse held the treatment tray in both hands and walked over tremblingly, disinfecting and applying medicine...... When applying alcohol, Heihe may feel a little pain, and his whole body trembles, but he really doesn't move.上完了药，黑黑站起来。它的肚子上多了一块雪白的纱布，好像一枚巨大的邮票。

  After applying the medicine, Hei Hei stood up. It has a snow-white gauze on its belly, like a huge stamp.第二天，护士偶然走出治疗室，看见黑黑正在屋外绕来绕去。见到护士，它哼了两声，然后自动躺在地上。原来它肚子上的纱布掉了，伤口又露了出来。护士就又给它上了药。

  The next day, the nurse accidentally walked out of the treatment room and saw Hei Hei walking around outside the house. Seeing the nurse, it snorted twice and then automatically lay on the ground. It turned out that the gauze on its stomach fell off and the wound was exposed again. The nurse gave it medicine again.后来，黑黑的肚子好了，又可以很有风度地在房前屋后散步了。我们眯起眼看看它，想起平原的家。有人说，在我们村子里，有一头和这一模一样的黑猪呢！
Later, my dark stomach was healed, and I could walk in front of and behind the house in a very personable way. We squint at it and think of our home on the plains. Some people say that in our village, there is a black pig exactly like this!

未知

  18.制花圈

  18. Wreath making

  我是特意用“制”花圈这个词，而不用通常的“做”花圈。因为“制”的规模大，有流水作业大生产的味道。

  I deliberately used the word "make" the wreath instead of the usual "make" wreath. Because of the large scale of "production", it has the taste of large-scale production of flow operations.二十多年前，我在藏北高原当兵。高寒、缺氧、病痛……一把把利刃悬挂在半空，时不时地抚摸一下我们年轻的头颅。一般是用冷飕飕的刀背，偶尔也试试刀锋。

  More than 20 years ago, I served as a soldier on the northern Tibetan plateau. High cold, hypoxia, and pain...... A handful of sharp blades hang in mid-air, stroking our young heads from time to time. Generally, a cold blade is used, and occasionally the blade is tried.于是就常有生命骤然折断，滚烫的血沁入冰雪，高原的温度因此有微弱的升高。

  As a result, life is often broken suddenly, hot blood seeps into the ice and snow, and the temperature of the plateau rises slightly.凡有部队的地方就有陵园。每逢清明和突然牺牲将士的时候，我们就要赶制花圈。因为我们是女兵，花圈就要扎得格外美丽。当我们最初扎花圈的时候，觉得像做手工一样有趣。

  Wherever there are troops, there is a cemetery. Whenever there is a Qingming Festival and when soldiers are suddenly sacrificed, we have to rush to make wreaths. Because we are female soldiers, the wreath must be tied particularly beautifully. When we first tied the wreath, we thought it was as fun as making a handicraft.做花圈先要有架子。若在平原，竹子、藤条、木棍……都是上好的材料。但对于高原，这些平常物都是奢侈品。男兵用钢筋焊出一人多高的巨环，中间用钢丝攀出蛛网似的细格。花圈的骨骼就挺立起来了。

  To make a wreath, you need to have a rack. If in the plains, bamboo, rattan, and sticks...... They are all good materials. But for the plateau, these ordinary things are luxuries. The male soldier welded a giant ring more than one person high with steel bars, and climbed out of a thin grid like a spider web with steel wire in the middle. The bones of the wreath stand upright.我们在乒乓球案子上做花。五颜六色的花纸堆积如山，刚开始的时候，似乎有些节日的气氛。女孩们分成几组，有的把纸裁成大小不等的方块儿，有的剪出形状各异的花瓣，有的用糨糊粘绿叶……有条不紊，各显神通。

  We make flowers on table tennis cases. Colorful flower papers are piled up like mountains, and at the beginning, there seems to be a bit of a festive atmosphere. The girls were divided into groups, some cut the paper into squares of different sizes, some cut out petals of different shapes, and some glued green leaves with glue...... Methodical, each shows its magical powers.忙了一阵子之后，所需的花朵基本上备齐了。屋里花红柳绿的，对我们习惯了莹白冰雪颜色的眼睛来说，真是享受。

  After being busy for a while, the flowers you need are basically ready. The house is red and green, which is really enjoyable for our eyes that are accustomed to the color of white ice and snow.该往黝黑的钢环上绑花了。一圈红的，一圈蓝的……白花最多，像高原上万古不化的寒冰。

  It's time to tie flowers to the dark steel ring. A circle of red, a circle of blue...... The most white flowers, like the eternal ice on the plateau.花圈渐渐成形，女孩子们的嬉笑声渐渐沉寂。一朵朵的花是艳丽的，一圈圈的花就有了某种庄严。当一个个硕大的花环肃穆而凝重地矗立在我们面前时，一种被悲哀压榨的痛苦，像鸟一样降临在我们心头。

  The wreath gradually took shape, and the laughter of the girls gradually fell silent. The flowers are gorgeous, and the circles of flowers have a certain solemnity. When huge wreaths stand solemnly and solemnly in front of us, a kind of pain squeezed by sorrow comes to our hearts like birds.

  这是献给一个或一组年轻生命的祭品。

  This is an offering to one or a group of young lives.每次做花圈，都要整整干上一天。先给司令部做，再给政治部做，然后还有后勤部……人们认为女孩天生与花有缘，殊不知这凄冷的花卉，令人黯然神伤。

  Every time you make a wreath, you have to do it for a whole day. First for the headquarters, then for the political department, and then for the logistics department...... People think that girls are born with flowers, but they don't know that this cold flower is sad.有一天下午，我们为一位牺牲在边境线上的战友赶制花圈。因为第二天就要下葬，一直干到凌晨三点。倦意袭来，绑花时钢丝不停地扎手，有鲜血像红豆似的渗出。马上就要完工时，桌上的电话铃猛然响了。我揉着眼睛问，什么事啊？

  One afternoon, we rushed to make a wreath for a comrade who died on the border. Because he was going to be buried the next day, he worked until three o'clock in the morning. Fatigue hit, and the wire kept pricking his hands when tying flowers, and blood oozed out like red beans. Just as it was about to be completed, the phone on the table rang suddenly. I rubbed my eyes and asked, what's the matter?对方低沉着嗓音说，刚才夜间紧急集合时，一个战士翻身跃起，突然倒在地上死去了。请你们再赶制一副花圈。

  The other party said in a low voice that when they were urgently gathering at night, a soldier turned over and jumped up, suddenly fell to the ground and died. Please hurry up and make another wreath.那一瞬，我痛彻骨髓。那个不认识的男孩啊！当我们开始制那副花圈的时候，你还活着。当我们制完那副花圈的时候，就要为你制花圈了。

  At that moment, I was in pain. That boy I don't know! When we started making that wreath, you were alive. When we finish making that wreath, it's time to make a wreath for you.

  那一夜，女兵们彻夜无眠。当雪山上的朝阳莅临军营，大卡车把我们的产品运至墓地。

  That night, the female soldiers stayed awake all night. When the sun on the snowy mountains came to the barracks, big trucks transported our products to the cemetery.摄影干事们很忙。他们用最好的角度把墓前的花圈照下来，寄往内地的某处小村。那些牺牲了的士兵的父母，永远无法到达高原。他们会在无数个月夜，看着相片上的一丘黄土和伟岸辉煌的花圈，潸然泪下。
The camera officers are busy. They took the wreath in front of the tomb from the best angle and sent it to a small village in the mainland. The parents of those soldiers who died will never reach the plateau. They will cry on countless moon nights, looking at the mounds of loess and magnificent wreaths in the photo.

未知

  19.三块糖

  19. Three pieces of sugar

  远处的半山坡上，有一排独立的小房子。平日总是锁着大门，大锁锈迹斑斑，叫人怀疑能否打得开。人们走过的时候，总是绕得远远的，仿佛那里潜伏着瘟疫或猛兽。

  In the distance, halfway up the hillside, there is a row of independent small houses. The door is always locked on weekdays, and the big lock is rusty, making people wonder if it can be opened. When people walk by, they always go far away, as if there is a plague or a beast lurking there.那是医院的太平间。

  It was the morgue of the hospital.真想不通，汉语里为什么把和死亡有关的事，都叫作“太平”。比如，轮船上救生的太平斧，剧场里供大家逃难的太平门……好像一叫太平，再危急的事也可以化险为夷。

  I really can't figure out why everything related to death is called "peace" in Chinese. For example, the peace axe for life-saving on the ship, and the peace gate for everyone to escape in the theater...... It seems that when it is called peace, no matter how critical it is, it can turn danger into safety.但人一死，的的确确是太平了。不太平的，是活着的人。

  But when a person dies, it is indeed peaceful. What is not peaceful is the living people.太平间躺着病死的人，基本上是独往独来。高原地广人稀，死亡的事虽然经常发生，因为总的基数小，出现的频率就不很高。一般死了人，都由值班的医生、护士负责给死人更衣。要是轮到女兵上班，男卫生员们就会说，还是我们来吧，省得你们做噩梦。

  People lying sick and dying in morgues are basically alone. The plateau is vast and sparsely populated, and although deaths occur frequently, because the total base is small, the frequency of occurrence is not very high. Generally, when a person dies, the doctor and nurse on duty are responsible for changing the clothes of the dead. If it is the turn of the female soldiers to go to work, the male hygienists will say, let's do it, so that you don't have nightmares.一天，边境线上发生了激烈的战事，伤亡很大。医生们都在抢救伤员，活着的毕竟比牺牲了的更重要。但尸体从前线拉回，卧在太平间，久久地不处理，也于情理不容。

  One day, fierce fighting broke out on the border, with heavy casualties. Doctors are rescuing the wounded, and being alive is more important than sacrificing after all. But the body was pulled back from the front line and lay in the morgue, and it was unreasonable not to deal with it for a long time.领导找到我说，给女兵一个艰巨的任务。

  The leader approached me and said that he would give the female soldiers a difficult task.我说，您说吧。

  I say, you say.领导说，有一个年轻的班长，战死疆场。人手实在不够，要由你们给他更换尸衣，明晨下葬。

  The leader said that there was a young squad leader who died on the battlefield. There are really not enough manpower, so you will change his body clothes and bury him tomorrow morning.我说，还有谁参加？

  I said, who else is participating?领导说，还有政治部的一名干事，负责登记烈士的遗物等事宜。他以前处理过阵亡将士的事，有经验，你们听他的。但他身体不好，动嘴不动手，你们要多请示，多照顾他。

  The leader said that there is also an officer of the Political Department who is responsible for registering the relics of the martyrs. He has dealt with fallen soldiers before, and he has experience, so listen to him. But he is not in good health, and he doesn't move his mouth, so you have to ask for more instructions and take care of him.我咬着乱颤的牙关，说，是。心想，一个大男子汉，居然要女孩们在死人当前的时候照料他，真不知是他的耻辱还是我们的光荣。

  I gritted my trembling teeth and said, yes. I thought to myself, a manly man actually wants girls to take care of him when he is dead, I really don't know if it is his shame or our honor.我说，人在哪里？

  I said, where are the people?领导说，干事吗？

  The leader said, officer?我说，班长。

  I said, squad leader.领导说，在三号。

  The leader said, on the third.就是说，尸体在太平间的第三间屋子。我回到宿舍，向大家传达了这个前所未有的任务，全场先是静寂了三分钟。炉子里有一块烧得正热的煤，啪地裂开了小缝，火苗从一大朵分裂成两小朵，发出丝绸抖动的声音。

  That is, the body is in the third room of the morgue. I returned to the dormitory and conveyed this unprecedented task to everyone, and the audience was silent for three minutes. There was a piece of hot coal in the stove, which cracked open a small crack, and the flame split from one large flower to two small flowers, making the sound of silk shaking.我说，说话啊，现在又不是为烈士默哀的时间。

  I said, speak, now is not the time to observe a moment of silence for the martyrs.小鹿说，烈士是一位男的啦？

  Xiaolu said, is the martyr a man?我说，阿里高原上的女兵都在这间屋里了，你说他是男的还是女的？

  I said, all the female soldiers on the Ali Plateau are in this room, do you think he is a man or a woman?小鹿说，这个我知道。只是要给一个男青年从里到外换衣服，心里总有点那个，是不是连内裤都要换？

  Xiaolu said, I know this. Just to change clothes for a young man from the inside out, there is always a little bit of that in my heart, do I even have to change my underwear?我说，是。他是我们的兄弟……

  I said, yes. He is our brother......小鹿摆摆手说，大道理你就甭讲了，我都懂。我就权当他是一截木头好了。

  Xiaolu waved his hand and said, you don't have to talk about the big truth, I understand. I'll just treat him as a piece of wood.果平说，比木头还是可怕多了。要知道，他死了。

  Guo Ping said that it is still much more terrifying than wood. You know, he died.小如细声说，咱们平常也不是没有在临床上接触过死人，没什么不一样的。反正都是个死，大着胆子收殓就是了。

  Xiaoru said softly, it's not that we haven't been in contact with dead people in clinical practice, it's no different. Anyway, it's all a death, just have the courage to bury it.河莲说，我看，还是有原则上的不同。病死的人，浑身是囫囵的，就算瘦得只剩下几根大筋，用医学的话讲是恶液质，毕竟五官完整。战死的人，你知道致命伤在哪里？若是在脑袋上，跟关公大老爷似的，头都没有了，或者说头虽然有，但身首异处，需要我们用丝线把脖子和脑袋缝到一起，那咱们可就有得活儿干了。

  He Lian said, I think there are still differences in principle. People who die of illness are all over their bodies, even if they are so thin that only a few large tendons remain, in medical terms, they are cachexia, after all, their facial features are complete. Those who died in battle, do you know where the fatal wounds are? If it is on the head, like the eldest master of Guan Gong, the head is gone, or although the head is there, but the body and head are different, we need to use silk thread to sew the neck and head together, then we have to do the work.我本来胆子还大些，听河莲这样一说，毛骨悚然。可我是班长，三军不可夺帅，就狠狠地对河莲说，不得蛊惑军心！现在也不是冷兵器时代，不会出现一把大刀把头剁飞了的情况。就是战伤在头部，也不过是颅脑粉碎性骨折或大动脉断裂，头骨肯定还是在的。

  I was still bolder, but when I heard He Lian say this, I was creepy. But I am the squad leader, and the three armies cannot take the commander, so I said to He Lian fiercely, do not bewitch the morale of the army! Now is not the era of cold weapons, and there will be no situation where a big knife chops off the head. Even if the battle wound is in the head, it is just a comminuted fracture of the head or a rupture of the aorta, and the skull must still be there.果平说，哎呀我的妈呀，班长你就别讲了。血肉模糊脑浆迸裂，这比一个头叽里咕噜地滚到一边去了，还可怕。

  Guo Ping said, oh my mother, don't talk about it, squad leader. The flesh and blood were blurred and the brain was bursting, which was more terrifying than rolling to the side with a head grunting.我说，不管可怕不可怕，我们必须完成任务。最简单的一个道理就是，要是你阵亡在这荒无人烟远离亲人的地方，浑身上下沾满血和泥巴，到处是和敌人搏斗的痕迹，你愿意就这模样埋进烈士陵园吗？

  I said, whether it's scary or not, we have to get the job done. The simplest truth is that if you die in this deserted place far from your relatives, covered in blood and mud, and there are traces of fighting the enemy everywhere, would you be willing to be buried in the martyrs' cemetery like this?小鹿最先说，我不乐意。听我奶奶说，人死的时候穿着什么衣服，到阎王老子那儿就是什么打扮。所以，人的老衣都得是最好的。我们这么小岁数就不在阳间了，更得穿得像点样子，最好仪表堂堂。

  The deer was the first to say, "I'm not happy." I heard from my grandmother that what clothes people wear when they die is what they dress up when they go to Yama Laozi. Therefore, people's old clothes must be the best. We are not in the human world at such a young age, and we have to dress like that, and it is best to be dignified.果平说，你那是迷信啊。不过，活着的人会常常梦见死去的人。要是我们穿得太破烂，家里人在梦中相见的时候，心里会难过的。

  Guo Ping said, you are superstitious. However, living people often dream of dead people. If we are dressed too tattered, our family will feel sad when we meet in a dream.小如长叹一口气说，真到了为国捐躯的时候，别的我也顾不了，但我希望给我穿一套干净衣服，不一定是新的，但一定要有香皂味儿。

  Xiaoru sighed and said, when it is really time to sacrifice my life for the country, I can't take care of anything else, but I hope to wear a clean set of clothes, not necessarily new, but must have the smell of soap.河莲冷笑道，人都死了，还管那些。要是我啊，生是什么样，死也是什么样，无所谓，生死如一。也省得让别人心里起腻，在这里讨论来讨论去的。一把黄土埋了，大家清静。

  He Lian sneered, people are dead, and they don't care about those. If it were me, what life is like, what death is like, it doesn't matter, life and death are the same. It also saves others from getting tired of discussing and discussing it here. A handful of loess is buried, and everyone is quiet.

  你很难说河莲这番话是正说还是反说，但她刺激了我们，使大家脸上滚烫起来。是啊，都是为了保卫祖国，我们从各地聚集，来到这苍茫的世界第三极。现在有一个兄弟远行了，我们不能在他生前帮他击败敌人，难道在他死后，还不能伸出手去，为他的遗体做点什么，把他打扮得漂亮些吗？

  It's hard for you to tell whether Ha Lian's words are right or wrong, but she stimulated us and made everyone's faces hot. Yes, it is all to defend the motherland, we gathered from all over the world and came to the third pole of this vast world. Now that a brother has traveled far away, can't we help him defeat the enemy while he is alive, can't we reach out and do something for his body and dress him up more beautifully after his death?我们排着队，缓缓地向三号太平间走去。一位瘦得像竹子的干事蹲在太平间门口，低着头，好像在看蚂蚁爬。当然了，地上肯定没蚂蚁，这里高寒缺氧，蚂蚁都不肯做窝。

  We lined up and slowly walked towards Morgue No. 3. A bamboo-thin officer squatted at the door of the morgue, bowing his head as if watching ants crawl. Of course, there are definitely no ants on the ground, and the ants refuse to make nests in the cold and lack of oxygen here.你是小毕班长吧？我姓朱。他伸出手说。

  You are the squad leader of Xiao Bi, right? My surname is Zhu. He stretched out his hand and said.和朱干事握手的时候，有一种被根雕捏住的感觉。我把他左右一打量，决定称他竹干事。竹干事拿出一把钥匙，边缘粗糙锐利，几乎没人用过，递到我手里说，你把太平间的门打开。

  When I shook hands with Zhu Officer, I felt like I was pinched by the root carving. I looked him left and right and decided to call him a bamboo officer. The bamboo officer took out a key, the edges were rough and sharp, almost no one used it, handed it to me and said, you open the morgue door.我说，你怎么不开？

  I said, why don't you open it?他说，我胆小。

  He said, I am timid.一个男人当着一帮女孩子的面，公开承认他胆子小，你还有什么可说的？我原来只以为他是个病秧子，没想到脸皮还挺厚。我心里也吓得够呛，但当着一班人，只有挺身而出，奋勇向前。

  A man openly admits that he is timid in front of a group of girls, what else do you have to say? I just thought he was a sick seedling, but I didn't expect him to have a thick skin. I was scared enough, but in front of a group of people, I had no choice but to stand up and move forward bravely.门开了。太平间的屋子并不很大，但给人阴森森的空旷感觉。地中央水泥制成的停尸台上，直挺挺地仰卧着一堆白色物体，依稀看出人的轮廓。上覆一匹宽长的白布，四角垂地，笼罩地面。我们依次走进去，围着尸床站定，默不作声，好像在瞻仰一座雪丘。

  The door opened. The morgue room is not very large, but it gives an eerie feeling of emptiness. On the morgue made of cement in the center of the ground, there was a pile of white objects lying upright, and the outline of the person was vaguely visible. It is covered with a wide and long white cloth, and the corners hang down to the ground, covering the ground. We walked in in turn, stood still around the corpse bed, silent, as if looking at a snowy hill.竹干事贴墙站着，保持着和尸体最大的距离，对我说，你去把蒙尸布揭开。

  The bamboo officer stood against the wall, keeping the maximum distance from the corpse, and said to me, you go and uncover the corpse cloth.其实，从一进了太平间的门，我们已经没有退缩的余地了。无论如何都得把任务完成，这是铁的戒律。但是我讨厌一个男人临阵脱逃的胆怯，更甭提他还是我们之中，唯一处理过阵亡事宜的老手呢。

  In fact, from the moment we entered the morgue door, we had no room to retreat. No matter what, you have to complete the task, this is an iron commandment. But I hate the timidity of a man fleeing in battle, not to mention that he is the only veteran among us who has dealt with the death of a soldier.我反问，你干吗不去揭布？

  I asked rhetorically, why don't you expose it?竹干事很惊讶地说，你们领导没和你说过吗？

  Officer Zhu was surprised and said, didn't your leader tell you?我说，说了。说你有经验。

  I said, I said. Say you have experience.他说，除了这个，就没说别的了？

  He said, nothing else but this?我只好说，还说你动口不动手。

  I had to say, and said that you don't do anything.竹干事说，这就对了。那我现在动了口，你为什么还不动手？我说，你是老兵，应该给新兵做个榜样。你有经验嘛！

  The bamboo officer said, this is right. Then I've moved my mouth now, why haven't you done it yet? I said, you are a veteran and should be an example for new recruits. You have experience!竹干事苦笑着说，我有什么经验？不过就是处理过一次敌方死尸。那是一个三十多岁的大胡子，两条腿炸断了。原本想就那么连着衣服埋了。后来上级指示，出于革命的人道主义，还是收拾得体面些。第一步要把身上的血污洗了，开始我们用刷子刷，没想到血是刷掉了，但肉也跟着掉。不知是谁想出的法子，在尸体的脖子上套了一根绳子……

  The bamboo officer smiled bitterly and said, what experience do I have? However, it was only once disposed of the enemy's corpse. It was a bearded man in his thirties with two broken legs. I originally wanted to bury it with my clothes like that. Later, the superiors instructed that it was better to clean up decently for the sake of revolutionary humanitarianism. The first step is to wash off the blood stains on the body, and at first we brushed with a brush, but the blood was brushed off, but the flesh also fell off. I don't know who came up with the method, put a rope around the neck of the corpse......我们又怕听又想听，恐惧地盯着竹干事苍白的薄嘴唇。小鹿忍不住哆嗦着下巴问，你们是打算，把他，再吊死，一回吗？

  We were afraid to listen and wanted to hear, staring at the pale thin lips of the bamboo officer in fear. Xiaolu couldn't help but tremble and asked, are you planning to hang him again?竹干事不理这茬儿，接着说，我们在尸体的腰当间也拴了一道绳子……

  The bamboo officer ignored the stubble, and then said, we also tied a rope between the waist of the corpse......河莲说，我的天，该不是要五马分尸吧？

  He Lian said, my God, shouldn't I want to split my body into five horses?小如掩着半边嘴说，有革命的人道主义管着呢，别瞎猜，太吓人了。

  Xiaoru covered half of his mouth and said, there is a revolutionary humanitarianism in charge, don't guess, it's too scary.竹干事有个本事，就是你说破大天，他沉着镇定，一派大将风度，按自己的顺序走，一板一眼说下去。

  Zhu Officer has a ability, that is, you say the sky, he is calm and calm, with the demeanor of a general, in his own order, and he goes on one by one.我们把大胡子上下拴好，就把他沉到河里，拽着两道绳子在河岸上慢慢走。他躺在水里，被太阳晒热的水，从他身上缓缓流过，头发飘着，很悠闲的样子。我们累得够呛，像伏尔加河上苦难的纤夫。大胡子刚开始下水的时候，水是清的。过了一会儿，下游的水流渐渐地变脏了，那是大胡子身上的硝烟和火药末脱落下来。又过了一会儿，水流变红了，那是凝结的血块溶解了……

  We tied the beard up and down, sank him into the river, and walked slowly on the riverbank with two ropes. He was lying in the water, the water heated by the sun slowly flowed over him, his hair fluttering, and he looked very leisurely. We are tired enough to choke, like a thin man in suffering on the Volga. When the bearded man first started to enter the water, the water was clear. After a while, the water downstream gradually became dirty, and it was the smoke and powder powder from the bearded man's body falling off. After a while, the water turned red, and it was a clotted blood clot that dissolved......小如捂着耳朵说，竹干事，求求你，别讲了。我直恶心。

  Xiaoru covered his ears and said, Officer Bamboo, please, don't talk about it. I was disgusted.河莲兴致勃勃地说，讲，讲！真是新鲜事，从来没听过！

  He Lian said with great interest, speak, speak! It's really new, I've never heard of it before!我从骨子里是一点也不想听这种可怕的经历的。可我知道，当一个女兵，必要的时候要有铁石心肠。竹干事看起来瘦弱，意志却很顽强，才不在乎你是不是恶心欲吐，坚持按自己的想法行事。

  I don't want to hear this horrible experience at all. But I know that when a female soldier is necessary, she must have a heart of stone. The bamboo officer looks thin, but his will is very tenacious, so he doesn't care if you are nauseous or not, and insists on acting according to your own ideas.……等到河水再次变清的时候，我们就把大胡子拉到岸上，平放在岩石上……竹干事依旧平静地叙述着。

  …… When the river became clear again, we pulled the beard to the shore and laid it flat on the rocks...... The bamboo officer still narrated calmly.大胡子的肚子是不是胀得像个鼓？河莲嘟起自己的腮帮，好像自己也被人按到水里，淹了个半死。

  Is the bearded man's belly swollen like a drum? He Lian pouted her cheeks, as if she had been pressed into the water and drowned half-dead.没有。溺水的人腹胀如鼓，那是因为在水中挣扎，把太多的水灌入胃里。或死后尸身腐败，产生气体所致。大胡子是死后入水，牙关紧闭，肚子里没进水。再说，我们很快把他从水中拖出来，他也来不及腐败。竹干事很科学地解释。

  No. People who drown have bloated stomachs because they struggle in the water and pour too much water into their stomachs. Or it is caused by the decay of the body after death, which produces gas. The bearded man entered the water after death, his teeth were closed, and there was no water in his stomach. Besides, we quickly dragged him out of the water, and he didn't have time to corrupt. The bamboo officer explained very scientifically.可他总会有一点变化的。就像我们在水里洗衣服，时间长了，手指肚也会泡得发白。果平很有点打破砂锅问到底的英雄气概。女孩子好像有个通病，越可怕的东西越好奇。

  But he will always change a little. Just like when we wash clothes in water, after a long time, our fingers will turn white. Guo Ping is a bit heroic in breaking the casserole and asking to the end. Girls seem to have a common problem, and the more terrible things are, the more curious they are.竹干事有些惊异地说，你有经验，猜得很对。大胡子被流动的河水洗得很干净，皮肤稍微有一点肿，这使他看起来比我们刚认识他的时候，胖了一点。我和我的战友们坐在河滩的巨石上，谁也不说话，抽着烟，静静地等着呼啸的山风和西斜的太阳，把大胡子吹干。突然，我的战友站起来，走到大胡子身边，把一支点燃的香烟塞到他手里。我说，这是干什么？战友说，我刚才拖他的时候，看到他右手的食指和中指肤色很黄，说明他是一个老烟鬼。他躺着看着咱俩吸烟，一定眼红得不行。给他解解馋吧。

  Officer Bamboo said with some surprise, you have experience and guessed correctly. The beard was washed clean by the flowing river water, and his skin was slightly swollen, which made him look a little fatter than when we first met him. My comrades and I sat on the boulders on the river beach, no one spoke, smoked a cigarette, and quietly waited for the howling mountain wind and the westward sun to blow dry our beards. Suddenly, my comrade stood up, walked up to the bearded man and stuffed a lit cigarette into his hand. I said, what is this for? My comrades said that when I dragged him just now, I saw that the index and middle fingers of his right hand were very yellow, indicating that he was an old smoker. He was lying down and watching us smoke, he must be so jealous. Let's satisfy his cravings.我看着袅袅的烟气，像风车一样，在大胡子胸前绕啊绕……

  I looked at the smoke, like a windmill, circling around the bearded man's chest......后来呢？我们几乎异口同声地问。

  What happened later? We asked almost in unison.没有什么后来。竹干事说。后来大胡子被风吹干了，衣服和脸都很干净，只要不看他的膝盖以下，像一个旅游时睡着了的异国人。我们给他的遗体照了相，按照他们的风俗，用白布裹起来妥善地安葬了。每一步处理都照了相。听说这些相片都在外交部的铁匣子里放着，作为曾经发生的历史，保存着。

  Nothing came later. Zhu officer said. Later, the beard was dried by the wind, and his clothes and face were clean, as long as he didn't look below his knees, like a foreigner who fell asleep while traveling. We took pictures of his body and, according to their customs, wrapped it in white cloth and buried it properly. Every step of the process was photographed. I heard that these photos are placed in the iron box of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and they are preserved as a history of what happened.屋里很安静。好像大家都消失在空气里了。许久后，小如说，我以后再也不喝狮泉河的水了，它洗过死人。

  The house was quiet. It seems that everyone has disappeared into the air. After a long time, Xiaoru said, I will never drink the water of the Lion Spring River again, it has washed the dead.竹干事说，你尽管喝水就是。洗过死人的狮泉河水，早就流进印度洋，只怕现在都到北冰洋里打漩涡了。

  The bamboo officer said, you just drink water. The water of the Lion Spring River, which washed the dead, has long flowed into the Indian Ocean, and I am afraid that it has now swirled in the Arctic Ocean.河莲最先从故事中苏醒，说，竹干事，你既然这么有实践经验，为什么非要我们班长揭开盖布，何不身先士卒？

  He Lian was the first to wake up from the story and said, Zhu Officer, since you have such practical experience, why do you have to ask our squad leader to uncover the cover, why not take the lead?竹干事说，你以为我不想在女孩子面前表现英雄气概？只是从那次以后，一碰到和死人有关的事，我就骤发心动过速，吃什么药也不管事，真气死人。也不是害怕，我当时不害怕，以后也不害怕。但是我脑子不怕，心却不争气。战友们都知道我这毛病，凡是和后事沾边的活儿，一概不让我参加。这次战事较大，大家都很忙，是我主动要求处理尸首的。这会儿心跳已经像锣鼓点了。我就不亲自动手了，请诸位娘子军原谅。

  The bamboo officer said, do you think I don't want to be heroic in front of girls? It's just that since then, whenever I encountered something related to the dead, I would have a sudden tachycardia, and I didn't care what medicine I take, and I was really angry. I wasn't afraid, I wasn't afraid then, and I wasn't afraid in the future. But my mind is not afraid, but my heart is not competitive. My comrades-in-arms all know that I have a problem, and I will not be allowed to participate in any work related to the aftermath. This war was big, everyone was very busy, and I took the initiative to ask for the disposal of the corpses. At this moment, the heartbeat was already beating like a gong and drum. I won't do it myself, please forgive me.我们表示了充分的理解。只是河莲嘟囔了一句，竹干事，可惜了。你这个样子，恐怕当将军无望了。

  We express our full understanding. It's just that He Lian muttered, it's a pity for the bamboo officer. If you look like this, I'm afraid there is no hope of becoming a general.我义不容辞地走上前去，揭开了尸床上的盖布。我的动作很大，想象中，那布该是冷重如山。不想白布像云一般，飘然飞起，在半空中平平地伸展开，好像被一股神奇之气横托着，久久才悠然而落。一名年轻士兵的脸，像新月一样，洁白光滑地对着天花板，静静地躺在水泥床上，眼皮微睁，蝌蚪般漆黑的瞳仁，稍微倾斜地看着我们。

  I was obliged to step forward and uncover the cover on the corpse bed. My movements were very large, and in my imagination, the cloth should be as cold as a mountain. I don't want the white cloth to fly up like a cloud, stretching out flat in mid-air, as if it is held horizontally by a magical aura, and it takes a long time to fall leisurely. The face of a young soldier, like a crescent moon, white and smooth against the ceiling, lying quietly on the cement bed, with slightly open eyelids and tadpole-like black pupils, looked at us slightly at an angle.

  悚然震惊！

  Shocked!在揭开这块布之前，虽然他明明就在我们身边，我们下意识里以为他未必真的存在。揭开这块布以后，他以极大的威严君临一切，不存在的是我们。

  Before uncovering this cloth, although he was obviously by our side, we subconsciously thought that he might not really exist. After uncovering this cloth, he reigns over everything with great majesty, and we are the ones who do not exist.他穿着很整齐的棉军装，只是腰间有些臃肿，好像揣了几颗手雷。其他部位严谨利落，并无血迹，一时间竟看不出伤处所在。脸如同大理石雕刻，因为失去了热血灌注，就像高大的乔木在冬季落尽叶子，线条刚硬简洁。嘴唇的曲线因为死前的痛苦与坚忍，略有弯曲，好像有一句很重要的话，封闭在紧咬的牙关之后。他的手很规矩地半握着拳，紧贴着裤线安放着，似乎准备随时收起肘关节，取胸前半端位，唰唰摆动起来，应和着口令开始跑步。

  He was wearing a very neat cotton military uniform, but his waist was a little bloated, as if he was carrying a few grenades. The other parts were rigorous and neat, and there was no blood, and the wound could not be seen for a while. The face is like a marble carving, because it has lost its blood infusion, like a tall tree losing its leaves in winter, and the lines are rigid and simple. The curve of the lips was slightly curved because of the pain and perseverance before death, as if there was a very important sentence, closed behind the clenched teeth. His hands were half-clenched into fists in an orderly manner, placed close to the trouser line, as if ready to fold his elbow joints at any time, take the front half of his chest, swing it, and start running with the password.竹干事挤在墙角嘶哑着嗓子说，先找到伤口，然后清洗。然后给他穿上新军装。旧衣服里面的每一件遗物，都要告诉我，我好做登记。如果有钱什么的，更要保存好，以便交给家属。

  The bamboo officer squeezed into the corner and said in a hoarse voice, first find the wound, and then clean it. Then put on his new military uniform. Every relic in the old clothes, tell me, so that I can register it. If you have money or something, you must keep it so that it can be handed over to your family.我们无声地点点头，表示明白了。

  We nodded silently to show understanding.我轻轻地走到班长面前，解开了他棉衣的扣子。那些圆滑的塑料扣子，因为一直在冰冷的太平间里沉浸着，摸在手里，如同机器制造的冰雹。我的手指不一会儿就冻僵了，解得很慢，大家凑过来要给我帮忙。我说，河莲站对面，暂时有我们两人就够了。别的人听我指挥，需要什么东西，你们好去找。

  I gently walked up to the squad leader and unbuttoned his cotton coat. Those sleek plastic buttons, because they have been immersed in the cold morgue, are like machine-made hail in their hands. My fingers froze after a while, and they were very slow to untie, and everyone came over to help me. I said, opposite Ha Lian Station, it is enough for the two of us to have it for the time being. Others listen to my command, what you need, you can find it."我知道给死人脱衣穿衣，比给活人做这套动作麻烦多了。本来只以为他不会配合，操作者多费点力气就是，干起来才明白，生死这道分水岭，把简单的事变成了一道天大的难题。

  I know that undressing the dead is much more troublesome than doing this action for the living. I just thought that he would not cooperate, but the operator took a little more effort, but when he did it, he realized that the watershed of life and death turned a simple thing into a huge problem.上衣扣子解开后，局势开始明朗。腰间的膨出更加明显，暴露出白色的三角巾，那里必是致命的伤口所在。三角巾其实完全不能再称为白色，它被鲜血染成通红之后又凝结为深咖啡色，坚硬干燥，像一块巨大的巧克力板。

  After the shirt was unbuttoned, the situation began to become clear. The bulge on the waist is even more obvious, exposing a white triangular scarf, where the fatal wound must be. The triangular scarf can no longer be called white at all, it is dyed red with blood and then condensed into a dark coffee color, hard and dry, like a huge chocolate board.我企图把它解开，马上发现是痴心妄想。血液凝固再加冷冻，强度赛过钢板。我头也不抬地问，腹部缠着浸满陈血的三角巾，解不开，怎么办？

  I tried to untie it, but immediately found out that it was wishful thinking. Blood coagulation and freezing, the strength is more than the steel plate. I asked without raising my head, I had a triangular scarf soaked in old blood wrapped around my abdomen, and I couldn't untie it, what should I do?我知道竹干事在远处密切注视着事态的进程，以他的经验，随时准备答疑解难。

  I know that Officer Zhu is closely watching the development of the situation from a distance, and with his experience, he is always ready to answer questions and solve problems.先把情况搞清楚。竹干事指示。

  Let's figure out the situation first. Bamboo officer instructed.我观察了一下三角巾，因是战友匆忙包扎，不似专业医务人员规范，有的地方紧，有的地方松。我把手指探到血绷带之下，艰难地暗中摸索。先是在腹部正面触到半个圆滚滚的东西，好像是老式的台灯罩，然后又在它的四周摸到一摊腻滑的东西，好像是盘起来的电缆。经过卫生员训练，我对人的肚子部位大致该有什么，已是心里有数，但对这摊物件，实在想不出是什么，颇感莫名其妙。

  I observed the triangular scarf, because it was hastily bandaged by my comrades-in-arms, unlike the norms of professional medical staff, some places were tight, and some places were loose. I put my finger under the blood bandage and groped secretly with difficulty. First, I touched a half-round thing on the front of my abdomen, which seemed to be an old-fashioned lampshade, and then I felt a slippery thing around it, as if it was a coiled cable. After training as a hygienist, I already know what a person's stomach should have, but I really can't think of what it is for this stall of things, which is quite inexplicable.看我愣着发呆，竹干事说，摸着什么啦？

  Seeing me in a daze, the bamboo officer said, what are you touching?我说，不知道。硬，滑，圆，一缕一缕的……

  I said, I don't know. Hard, slippery, round, strands of ......那是肠子。竹干事说。

  That's the intestines. Zhu officer said.我结巴着说，在……哪儿？肠……子？

  I stammered, in ...... Where? Intestines...... Child?就在你手底下。竹干事把头扭向一侧，不看我，盯着太平间洁白无瑕的墙壁说。

  It's under your hands. The bamboo officer turned his head to the side, didn't look at me, and stared at the white and flawless walls of the morgue and said.我说，你也没见，怎么知道？

  I said, you haven't seen it either, how do you know?竹干事说，这就是老兵和新兵的不同、干部和战士的区别。咱们吃军粮的年头还不一样呢。子弹击中了这小伙子的肚子，肠子流了出来……就这样。很简单。

  Officer Zhu said that this is the difference between veterans and recruits, and between cadres and soldiers. The years when we eat military rations are different. The bullet hit the young man's stomach and his intestines flowed out...... That's it. Very simple.既然确定是腹部外伤，伤处就是清洁处理的主要部位。再像挖巷道那样，把手探进去作业肯定不成，需要把三角巾取下来。

  Since it is determined that it is an abdominal trauma, the wound is the main part of the cleaning treatment. Like digging a roadway, you will definitely not be able to do the work by sticking your hand in, and you need to take off the triangle towel.拿剪子。我吩咐道。

  Take scissors. I ordered.小鹿说，拿哪种剪子呢？

  The deer said, which kind of scissors to take?我们每个人只有巴掌大的旅行剪刀，平常剪个补丁什么的，还可凑合。对付这种血染的绷带，简直是头发丝系轮船，力不从心。炊事班还有几把抠鱼鳃破鱼肚的大铁剪刀，用于烈士身体显然不敬。我略一思索，转而对果平说，去，把手术室的剪刀拿来。

  Each of us only has a palm-sized travel scissors, and we usually cut a patch or something, and we can make do. Dealing with this blood-stained bandage is simply like a hair tied to a ship, and it is powerless. The cooking class also had several large iron scissors that cut the gills of fish and broke the belly of the fish, which were obviously disrespectful to the martyrs' bodies. I thought for a moment, then turned to Guo Ping and said, go, bring the scissors in the operating room.按说我一个小兵，没权私自把手术室的装备带到太平间。但县官不如现管，果平是手术室的护士，我是她的班长，调把剪刀出来，还不手到擒来？

  It is said that I am a small soldier and have no right to bring the equipment of the operating room to the morgue without permission. But the county official is not as good as the current management, Guo Ping is the nurse in the operating room, I am her squad leader, transfer the scissors out, and don't you get it?果平跑出又跑进，把锋利的手术剪刀递我说，给。

  Guo Ping ran out and ran in, handed me the sharp surgical scissors and said, give.我操刀就剪，原以为必然势如破竹，没想到，不锈钢的剪刀只把血纱布豁开一个小切口，就再也推不动了。好像用刮胡刀片切西瓜，深入不下去。

  I cut it with a knife, I thought it would be like a bamboo shoot, but I didn't expect that the stainless steel scissors only opened a small incision in the blood gauze, and I couldn't push it anymore. It seems to be cutting watermelon with a razor blade, and it can't go deep.我埋怨果平，你这剪刀也太钝了。

  I complained to Guo Ping, your scissors are too dull.果平委屈地说，我特地挑了把新的呀！

  Guo Ping said aggrievedly, I specially picked a new one!我说，那就换大号的手术刀。

  I said, then change to a large scalpel.果平刚要再跑，竹干事说，刀也不一定行。手术器械都是给活人准备的，自然以小巧精确为上。对付死人，又是血又是泥的，搅到一块儿，比混凝土还结实，好比是秀才遇见兵，没用。人已经死了，就不必考虑那么多了，用锯吧。

  Guo Ping was about to run again, but the bamboo officer said that the knife might not work. Surgical instruments are all prepared for living people, so naturally small and precise is the best. Dealing with the dead is both blood and mud, stirred together, stronger than concrete, like a scholar meeting a soldier, useless. People are already dead, so you don't have to think so much, just use a saw.我对小如说，你到木工房去一趟，借把锯来。

  I said to Xiaoru, you go to the carpentry room and borrow a saw.小如说，他们那儿正赶做棺材哪，不一定借得出来。

  Xiaoru said that they are rushing to make coffins there, and they may not be able to borrow them.我说，就一会儿，跟他们说点好话。再说了，咱们这儿要是不给烈士穿好衣服，他们的棺材里躺谁啊！

  I said, just say something nice to them in a while. Besides, if we don't dress the martyrs here, who will lie in their coffins!小如拔腿走，竹干事说，顺便再借个木匠来。

  Xiao Ru pulled out his legs and left, and the bamboo officer said, by the way, borrow another carpenter.小如说，干什么啊？

  Xiaoru said, what are you doing?竹干事说，谁能使锯子？你们还是我？我是会，可这会儿我的心跳已经一百八十下了，没法干活儿。也许我官僚，调查研究不够，你们这里还有女木匠？

  Bamboo officials say, who can use a saw? Are you or me? I will, but at this time my heart is already beating 180 beats, and I can't work. Maybe I'm a bureaucrat, I don't investigate enough, you still have female carpenters here?河莲鼓了鼓嘴巴。我知她老爹是将军，指挥打仗可能有遗传，但木匠肯定没练过，把嘴鼓成蛤蟆也没用。

  He Lian puffed out her mouth. I know that her father is a general, and commanding wars may have heredity, but the carpenter must not have practiced, and it is useless to puff out his mouth into a toad.小如说，借借试试。但锯子有百分之八十的准头，木匠只有百分之二十的把握。

  If you say it, please give it a try. But the saw has an eighty percent accuracy, and the carpenter is only twenty percent sure.竹干事说，你先去。木匠如果不来，我就带着枪去请。

  Officer Zhu said, you go first. If the carpenter doesn't come, I'll take a gun and invite him.这事就算商量妥了，没想到河莲说，用人工多慢啊，用电锯多好啊。

  Even if this matter was discussed, I didn't expect He Lian to say, how slow it is to use labor, how good it is to use a chainsaw.我没好气地说，到哪儿找电锯？

  I said angrily, where can I find a chainsaw?河莲胸有成竹，说手术室就有电动骨科锯。

  He Lian is confident and says that there is an electric orthopedic saw in the operating room.果平说，哎呀，我倒忘了，真是有的。只是平时极少用，只有截肢的时候才拿出来。河莲，你眼里真有东西，连我这个手术室护士都没想到。

  Guo Ping said, oh, I forgot, there really is. It's just that it's rarely used, and it's only taken out when amputated. He Lian, there is really something in your eyes, even I, the operating room nurse, didn't expect it.河莲说，你忘了我曾在手术室代过几天班？你的家当都印在我的脑瓜里了。随时留心地形地物和一切地面设施的分布与功能，是一个优秀军人必不可少的素养……

  He Lian said, have you forgotten how many days I worked in the operating room? Your belongings are all printed in my mind. Paying attention to the distribution and function of terrain and all ground facilities at any time is an essential quality for an excellent soldier......我打断她说，河莲，那你会用电锯吗？

  I interrupted her and said, Ha Lian, then you will use a chainsaw?河莲做出不好意思的模样说，真叫你猜着了，我偷着练过，还真能凑合着用。

  He Lian made an embarrassed look and said, I really guessed it, I practiced secretly, and I can really make do with it.果平惊道，你本事可真大，就差没偷着给自己开刀了吧？

  Guo Ping said in surprise, you are really capable, you almost didn't secretly open a knife on yourself, right?河莲惭愧地说，我用锯没有师傅指点，按照书上写的自己摸索，操作不一定正规，也算是自学成才。

  He Lian said ashamedly, I used the saw without the master's guidance, and I groped according to what was written in the book, and the operation was not necessarily formal, and it could be regarded as self-taught.果平取回骨科电锯，寒光闪闪，令人生畏。河莲接过来，对着烈士说了一句，大哥，我自知手艺不精，可事到临头，只有我为您做这件事了。您就多担待着点吧。我呢，手下也悠着点劲儿。好在您那么重的伤都忍了，这会儿感觉也不灵敏，熬一熬，马上就过去了。您要没什么意见，咱这就开始了。

  Guo Ping retrieved the orthopedic chainsaw, which was cold and frightening. He Lian took it and said to the martyr, big brother, I know that I am not good at my craft, but when things come to an end, only I will do this for you. Just wait a little longer. As for me, my subordinates are also a little more relaxed. Fortunately, you have endured such a serious injury, and you don't feel sensitive at this time. If you don't have any objections, let's get started."我们扭过头看看尸床上的班长。千真万确，我们都看见他眨了一下眼睛。

  We turned our heads to look at the squad leader on the corpse bed. It's true, we all saw him blink.河莲说完，操着电锯，接上电源，跃马横刀，就在血板上操练起来。电锯发出喑哑的噪音，像一头沉闷的野兽在呜咽。布三角巾的纤维应声断裂，沿着锯口的边缘卷曲起来，每根布毛的外周都是暗褐色的，但血未能浸透的内芯，还保持着布的本色，好像一种外红内白的奇异羊毛，被一根根扯断了。

  After He Lian finished speaking, she wielded a chainsaw, connected to the power supply, and practiced on the platelet. The chainsaw made a hoarse noise, like a dull beast whimpering. The fibers of the cloth triangular scarf broke and curled along the edge of the saw edge, and the outer periphery of each cloth hair was dark brown, but the inner core that was not soaked with blood still maintained the true color of the cloth, like a strange wool that was red on the outside and white on the inside, torn off one by one.机械化就是比手工快得多，片刻工夫，血板像断裂的盔甲，碎为两瓣。河莲放下电锯，用力一掰，血板就像散了桶箍的木板，向两侧打开。班长神秘的腹部，暴露在众人眼前。

  Mechanization is much faster than manual work, and in a moment, the platelets are like broken armor, shattered into two lobes. He Lian put down the chainsaw and broke it hard, and the blood plate opened to both sides like a wooden board with a loose bucket hoop. The squad leader's mysterious abdomen was exposed to everyone.真相大白。

  Truth.他的下腹部是一个触目惊心的大弹孔，肠子汹涌地流出来。急救时，战友们用一个大号军用饭碗扣在肠管上面。碗口罩不住，长长的肠子就盘在碗的四周，好像水泥管子上头盖了一顶小草帽。

  His lower abdomen was a shocking large bullet hole, and his intestines flowed out violently. During first aid, the comrades-in-arms used a large military rice bowl to buckle the intestinal tube. The bowl mask can't be held, and the long intestines are coiled around the bowl, like a small straw hat covered with a cement pipe.竹干事远远地看了一眼，闭着眼睛说，把碗取下来，把肠子塞回去。

  Zhu Officer glanced at it from a distance, closed his eyes and said, take off the bowl and stuff the intestines back.这无疑是正确的。但人的肠子流出来容易，塞回去可不那么简单。首先是碗取不下来。它和肠子紧密粘成牢不可破的一坨，好像埋藏了千万年的化石。

  This is undoubtedly true. But it is easy for people's intestines to flow out, and it is not so simple to stuff it back. The first is that the bowl cannot be removed. It is tightly glued to the intestines into an unbreakable lump, as if it has been buried for millions of years.

  当然，可以再用刀锯之类，强行把碗取下。但无论怎样小心，都会伤了班长的肠子。哪里能忍心让战友再受伤害！我们盯着竹干事，等他拿主意。

  Of course, you can use a knife or saw to forcibly remove the bowl. But no matter how careful you are, it will hurt the squad leader's intestines. How can you bear to let your comrades be hurt again! We stared at the bamboo officer and waited for him to make up his mind.竹干事眯缝着眼，似看非看地朝着这边，想必也在发愁。

  The bamboo officer squinted his eyes and looked this way, presumably worried as well.点火！竹干事说。

  Ignition! Zhu officer said.烧哪儿？我们齐声问。

  Where to burn? We asked in unison.当然是烧炉子！莫非你们还想把房给烧了？竹干事火了。

  Of course, burn the stove! Could it be that you still want to burn down the house? The bamboo officer is on fire.太平间里是没有炉子的。当初盖屋的时候，设计者一定想死人不需要保暖。今天为了让凝固的肠子和饭碗分开，必须加热太平间。

  There is no stove in the morgue. When building a house, the designer must have thought that the dead did not need to be warm. Today, in order to separate the solidified intestines from the rice bowl, the morgue must be heated.搬炉子架烟囱来不及，我们分头从别处找来几个炭盆，把燃烧的红柳根放进去，围着尸床摆了一圈。旗帜般的火苗在盆里欢快地跳跃着，由于冷热空气的剧烈对流，火舌会突然冲出盆子的上空，互相勾引着，在一个极短的瞬间，在空气中融成不规则的火环。然后又气急败坏地分开，独自很有弹性地跳动着，给屋里带来春天的气息。静卧着的班长的头发被气流吹开，惨白的脸庞反射着金粉色的光辉。

  It was too late to move the stove chimney, so we found a few charcoal basins from elsewhere, put the burning red willow roots in it, and placed them in a circle around the corpse bed. The flag-like flames jumped happily in the basin, and due to the violent convection of hot and cold air, the tongues of fire would suddenly rush out of the air above the basin, seducing each other, and in a very short moment, they would melt into an irregular ring of fire in the air. Then they separated angrily, beating alone and elasticly, bringing the breath of spring to the house. The hair of the squad leader who was lying still was blown away by the airflow, and his pale face reflected a golden pink brilliance.等待。等待铁和血的分离。许久，许久。我们默不作声，在死去的人周围架起火焰，让人有一种宗教般的感悟，说不出话来。竹干事似乎受不了压抑的气氛，到屋外换气。

  Await. Wait for the separation of iron and blood. For a long time, for a long time. We are silent and set up flames around the dead, giving people a religious sense that they are speechless. The bamboo officer seemed to be unable to stand the oppressive atmosphere and went outside to ventilate.有滴答的血水从尸床上流下。河莲用手轻轻一拔，碗就取掉了。

  There was dripping blood flowing down from the corpse bed. He Lian gently pulled it out with her hand, and the bowl was removed.我们都倒抽了一口冷气。没了饭碗的掩饰，致命的伤口更加狰狞可怖。血肉横飞不说，透过肠子的缝隙，依稀看得到尸床的水泥板。

  We all gasped. Without the cover of the job, the fatal wound is even more hideous. Not to mention the flesh and blood, through the gaps in the intestines, you can vaguely see the cement board of the corpse bed.腹部贯通伤！河莲叫起来。

  Abdominal penetration injury! He Lian screamed.更可怕的还在后面。班长正面的伤口很吓人，背部的枪眼却很小。敌人丧心病狂地使用了国际上禁用的汤姆弹，炸出了巨大的创面。

  More terrifying is yet to come. The squad leader's wound on the front was scary, but the gun hole on his back was very small. The enemy frantically used the internationally banned Tom bomb, causing huge wounds.河莲严峻地说，班长，你知道这说明了什么？

  He Lian said sternly, squad leader, do you know what this means?我茫然地说，说明了敌人很残暴。还说明什么呢？

  I said blankly, which showed that the enemy was brutal. What else does it mean?河莲愤怒地说，还说明了子弹是从背部射入的，说明在战斗中，这位班长是用脊梁骨对着敌人，也就是说，他是——逃兵！

  He Lian said angrily, and also explained that the bullet was shot from the back, indicating that in the battle, the squad leader was facing the enemy with his backbone, that is, he was a deserter!这怎么可能？一时间，我们呆若木鸡，赶快用眼睛搜寻竹干事，他领着一个圆圆脸的小兵，正好迈进门。

  How is this possible? For a while, we were stunned, and quickly searched for the bamboo officer with our eyes, and he led a round-faced soldier just into the door.这是和班长烈士一起参加战斗的战士，让他给你们讲讲经过吧。竹干事看着地面说。

  This is a soldier who participated in the battle with the squad leader martyr, let him tell you what happened. Officer Zhu looked at the ground and said.圆圆脸听到了河莲最后的话，怒火冲天地说，谁说我们班长是逃兵，谁就是敌人的奸细……

  Yuanyuan Face heard He Lian's last words, and said angrily, who said that our squad leader was a deserter, who was the enemy's spy......我们当然知道河莲不是奸细了，但圆圆脸的心情也可理解。听他讲完，我们才知道子弹为什么从背后击中年轻的班长。

  Of course we know that He Lian is not a spy, but the mood of the round face is also understandable. After listening to him, we knew why the bullet hit the young squad leader from behind.在边界上活动的叛匪，极端剽悍骁勇。他们奉行一种打得赢就抢、打不赢就跑的策略，经常从国境的那一端武装回窜，见了老百姓的牛羊就抢，然后一声呼哨，流窜回那边，围着篝火烤着抢来的羊腿，吃个一醉方休。待到羊腿吃光，舔舔嘴唇，他们又开始策划下一轮的抢劫了。

  The rebels operating on the border are extremely fierce and brave. They pursued a strategy of grabbing if they won and running away if they couldn't win, often fleeing back armed from the other end of the border, robbing the cattle and sheep of the common people when they saw them, and then whistling and wandering back there, roasting the stolen lamb legs around the bonfire, and eating drunk before resting. When the lamb leg was eaten and licked their lips, they began to plan the next round of robbery.老百姓遇难，首先想到的是找边防军。这一天，有人报告，叛匪又来了，抢了牛羊，正在向格乐山口逃窜。边防军兵分几路，向格乐方向飞驰，力争在国境线的这一面，把敌人堵截住，把老百姓的牛羊救下。

  When ordinary people are killed, the first thing they think of is to find border guards. On this day, someone reported that the rebels had come again, robbed cattle and sheep, and were fleeing towards Gele Pass. The border guards divided into several routes and galloped in the direction of Gele, striving to block the enemy on this side of the border and save the cattle and sheep of the common people.我和班长一路，我们跑得最快，班长做梦都想立功。圆圆脸说。

  The squad leader and I ran the fastest all the way, and the squad leader dreamed of making meritorious contributions. The round face said.前面是一座高山，有一个山口。我们骑着马，旋风一般向前冲去。马上就要到山顶了，按照常规，应该下马，匍匐前进，侦察好前面的情况，再继续追击。可是班长求胜心切，怕敌人赶在我们前面撤回国境那边，就大叫了一声，同志们，跟我冲啊！第一个飞上了山顶。叛匪多么老奸巨猾，他们算定了边防军一定会拼命堵截，就事先在路上埋伏好了，把枪口的准星和山顶对成了一条线，只待我们的人马一出现，就开枪阻击。在平常的电影和小说里，都是我们打鬼子的埋伏，其实，敌人也会这一套，也能给我们布个口袋阵。班长骑着马，冲上顶峰的那一瞬，我正好在班长旁边，稍靠后一点。班长英武极了，背后是雪原，像是天兵天将。没想到，就在这一秒钟，敌人的枪声响了……他们都是惯匪，加上又有准备，枪法很好，第一枪就击中了班长的马眼。那马眼珠迸裂，一声嘶鸣，痛得腾空跳了起来，疯狂地掉转了身子……正在这时，敌人的第二枪赶到了，他瞄的是班长的胸膛，由于战马飞腾而起，转了一百八十度的圈，这发子弹就从班长的背后射入，把肚子炸开了。

  In front is a high mountain with a mountain pass. We rode our horses and rushed forward like a whirlwind. We are about to reach the top of the mountain, and according to the usual practice, we should dismount, crawl forward, scout the situation ahead, and then continue the pursuit. But the squad leader was eager to win, afraid that the enemy would rush to withdraw to the border in front of us, so he shouted, comrades, rush with me! The first flew to the top of the mountain. How cunning the rebels were, they calculated that the border guards would desperately intercept them, so they ambushed them on the road in advance, aligned the crosshair of the muzzle of the gun with the top of the mountain, and only waited for our men and horses to appear, and then shot to block them. In ordinary movies and novels, it is our ambush to fight the devils, in fact, the enemy will also do this, and he can also set up a pocket formation for us. The moment the squad leader rode his horse and rushed to the top, I happened to be next to the squad leader, a little behind. The squad leader is extremely heroic, with a snowfield behind him, like a heavenly soldier and a general. Unexpectedly, at this second, the enemy's gunfire rang out...... They were all habitual bandits, and they were prepared, and their marksmanship was very good, and the first shot hit the squad leader's horse's eye. The horse's eyes burst, he let out a hiss, jumped up in pain and turned around frantically...... At this moment, the enemy's second shot arrived, he aimed at the squad leader's chest, and as the war horse soared, it turned 180 degrees, and the bullet shot in from the back of the squad leader, blowing his stomach open.我们慌了，眼见得班长的肠子像绳子一样地掉出来。我们喊，班长班长……班长说，喊什么，没见过人肠子，还没见过猪肠子吗！他一边把掉出来的肠子往伤口里送，一边说，别管我！快打敌人！我们立刻开始了还击，把子弹像泼凉水一般地洒过去。叛匪看势头不好，就甩下被打死的同伙和抢来的牛羊，缩回到国境那边。

  We panicked and saw the squad leader's intestines fall out like a rope. We shouted, squad leader...... The squad leader said, what are you shouting, I haven't seen human intestines, haven't I seen pig intestines yet! He sent the fallen intestine to the wound and said, leave me alone! Fight the enemy! We immediately began to fight back, spilling bullets like cold water. Seeing that the momentum was not good, the rebels threw away their killed accomplices and stolen cattle and sheep, and retreated to the other side of the border.我们围着班长，他的肠子送回去一部分，还剩一些塞不进去。人的肚子也像箱子似的，有的时候，你要是把东西都翻出来，再放就盛不下了。不知是谁想起，战地救护手册上写过，碰到肠子流出来，要用一个干净的碗扣在上面。我就把饭碗拿出来，那个碗就是我的……圆圆脸指指炭盆旁的大号军用饭碗。

  We surrounded the squad leader, and some of his intestines were sent back, and some of them couldn't be stuffed. A person's stomach is also like a box, sometimes, if you turn things out, you can't hold them again. I don't know who remembered that the field ambulance manual wrote that when the intestines flow out, you have to use a clean bowl to buckle it. I took out the rice bowl, and that bowl was mine...... The round face points to the large military rice bowl next to the charcoal basin.……一个战友撕开了急救包，把班长的肚子包扎起来。班长说，战斗很漂亮啊，除了我，你们都可以立功。我们说，班长，头功是你的。班长说，我口渴……到处都是雪，因为追击紧张，我们都没带水壶，这时就用嘴巴含了雪，化成水，喂给班长……班长的血流个不止，地下成了一片红雪。班长刚开始还能咽下我们的水，但过了一会儿，牙关就越来越紧，雪水也喂不进了。我们吓得不行，有几个人就掉眼泪。班长说，别哭，战士可以流血，不能流泪……我好想家里的人啊……话没完，人就不行了……

  …… A comrade-in-arms tore open the first aid kit and bandaged the squad leader's stomach. The squad leader said, the battle is beautiful, except for me, you can all make meritorious contributions. We said, squad leader, the first credit is yours. The monitor said, I'm thirsty...... There was snow everywhere, because the pursuit was tense, we didn't bring a water bottle, so we took the snow in our mouths, turned it into water, and fed it to the squad leader...... The squad leader's blood flowed continuously, and the ground turned into a piece of red snow. The squad leader was able to swallow our water at first, but after a while, his teeth became tighter and tighter, and he couldn't feed the snow water. We were so scared that a few people shed tears. The squad leader said, don't cry, soldiers can shed blood, not tears...... I miss my family so much...... If the words are not finished, people will not be able to do it......圆圆脸说到这儿，泪流满面。

  The round face burst into tears when he said this.河莲说，合着你们班长连一个敌人也没打死，整个是壮志未酬。没点军事头脑，死得没价值，冤枉啊。

  He Lian said, together with your squad leader, did not even kill an enemy, the whole ambition was unrewarded. Without military acumen, death is worthless, unjust.圆圆脸说，不许你这么说我们班长。他只比我大一岁，也没上过军事院校，看过唯一讲兵法的书，就是《水浒》。他用命告诉我们，让我们都记住了，打仗会流血。

  The round face said, you are not allowed to say that about our squad leader. He is only one year older than me, has never been to a military academy, and the only book that talks about the art of war is "Water Margin". He told us with his life that we all remember that there will be blood in war.河莲说，干什么都会流血。

  He Lian said that everything you do will bleed.圆圆脸愤愤地说，你们躲在后方，流什么血！

  Yuanyuan said indignantly, you are hiding in the rear, what kind of blood are you shedding!一句话把大家噎得哑口无言。竹干事有气无力地说，分工不同。你去让后勤部把新衣服送来，记着要比你们班长平日穿的大一号，帽子要大两号，鞋要大三号。

  One sentence left everyone speechless. Zhu Officer said weakly that the division of labor was different. You go and ask the logistics department to send you new clothes, remember to be one size larger than your squad leader usually wears, two sizes larger for hats, and three sizes larger for shoes.圆圆脸走了。大家说，下一步干什么？

  The round face left. Everyone said, what is the next step?我说，把班长全身的旧衣服都换下来。

  I said, change all the old clothes on the squad leader's body.竹干事说，对。可以用电锯，但记着别把衣服的兜锯破，一会儿还得清点遗物。

  The bamboo officer said, yes. You can use a chainsaw, but remember not to saw the belt of clothes, and you will have to count the relics later.河莲很乐意干这活儿，电锯忙碌不停，好像在锯一棵古树。棉衣锯开了，棉裤锯开了，绒衣锯开了，绒裤锯开了……卸下的衣服堆在墙角，支离破碎。

  He Lian was happy to do this job, and the chainsaw was busy non-stop, as if sawing an ancient tree. The cotton clothes were sawn open, the cotton pants were sawn open, the velvet clothes were sawn open, and the velvet pants were sawn open...... The unloaded clothes were piled up in the corner and shattered.班长现在像个婴儿一样无牵无挂地躺着，我们开始为他洗澡。我们用新的毛巾，泡在温水里，轻轻绞干，很仔细地给他洗脸擦身。

  The squad leader is now lying carefree like a baby, and we start bathing him. We used a new towel, soaked it in warm water, gently wrung it dry, and carefully washed his face and body.把班长像件瓷器一般洗干净，新衣服也送来了。穿衣的时候，我们遇到了今天以来最大的困难。新衣服不像旧衣服，可以一毁了事，必得整整齐齐、妥妥帖帖套在死人身上。人又不是木板，你说怎么穿？

  The squad leader was washed like a piece of porcelain, and new clothes were delivered. When it came time to get dressed, we encountered the biggest difficulty since today. New clothes are not like old clothes, they can ruin things, and they must be neatly and properly put on the dead. People are not wooden boards, how do you say to wear them?裤子还好说，我们搬起他的腿，托着他的腰，费了九牛二虎之力，总算穿上了。那一堆肠子不好处理，塞不进去又不能耷拉着。大家就把地上的瓷碗又捡了起来，盖在肠子上，用绷带绑好。除了小伙子的肚子看起来有些大腹便便，基本上说得过去。

  The pants are okay, we lifted his legs, supported his waist, and finally put them on. That pile of intestines is not easy to handle, and it can't be stuffed in or drooped. Everyone picked up the porcelain bowl on the ground again, covered it with intestines, and tied it with a bandage. Except that the young man's belly looks a little pot-bellied, which is basically reasonable.关键在上衣。好不容易穿上一只袖子，那一只无论如何都穿不上。班长的胳膊硬如铁棒，完全不会打弯。

  The key is in the top. Finally put on one sleeve, and that one couldn't be worn anyway. The squad leader's arm is as hard as an iron rod and will not bend at all.给死人穿衣服，是不能一只袖子单穿的，必须扶他坐起来，把他的两只胳膊一齐向后伸展，就像我们平日上双杠做预备动作似的，同时往后悠，两人齐努力，衣服才能穿上。竹干事萎靡不振，声音小得像马蜂嗡嗡，幸好还清楚。

  Dressing a dead person cannot be worn alone with one sleeve, and he must be helped to sit up, stretching his two arms back, just like we usually do preparatory movements on the parallel bars, and at the same time, walk backwards, and the two of them work together before the clothes can be put on. The bamboo officer was sluggish, and his voice was as small as a wasp buzzing, but fortunately it was clear.

  虽说我们和烈士班长相处已经有一段时间了，但一想到要扶他坐起，还是让人不寒而栗。小鹿说，我还是在前面压着他的腿吧，省得他一下坐不稳了，摔到床下。

  Although we have been with the martyr squad leader for a while, the thought of helping him sit up is still chilling. Xiaolu said, I'd better press his leg in front of him, so that he wouldn't be able to sit steadily and fall under the bed.大家都觉得她有点担子拣轻的挑的意思，可一想她最小，就拉倒了。

  Everyone thought she was a bit of a burden picking lightly, but when they thought that she was the smallest, they pulled it down.河莲主动说，我在后面扶着。你们给他穿衣服，动作要快点，时间长了，我可坚持不了。

  He Lian took the initiative to say, I was holding on from behind. You dress him, move faster, I can't hold on after a long time.竹干事有气无力地说，他怎么也是个小伙子，你是小姑娘。他的分量有你两个沉，要是撑不住了，我帮你。

  Zhu Officer said weakly, he is also a young man, you are a little girl. His weight is as heavy as yours, if you can't hold on, I'll help you."河莲说，没事。万一顶不住，我就坐到水泥台子上，和他背靠背。小时候玩翻饼烙饼的游戏，都这么来着。

  He Lian said, it's okay. In case I couldn't stand it, I sat on the cement platform and stood back to back with him. When I was a child, I played the game of flipping pancakes, and it was like this.竹干事叹道，好样的。你这丫头有勇有谋，以后能当团长。

  The bamboo officer sighed, good. You girl is brave and resourceful, and you can be the head of the regiment in the future."河莲说，团长算什么？官太小了，我起码要当到军长。

  He Lian said, what is the regiment commander? The official is too small, at least I want to be a military commander.大家说着，颤颤巍巍地把班长扶坐起来。那张原本已经看熟的脸，一旦从躺着变成立着，又使人震惊一次。班长的身后，由于积血形成大片尸斑，全是怪异的深蓝色。他的手向后伸的时候，胳膊也是半只白半只青，煞是恐怖。

  Everyone said, trembling and helping the squad leader to sit up. That face that was already familiar, once it changed from lying down, was shocking again. Behind the squad leader, a large area of corpse spots formed due to blood accumulation, all of which were strange dark blue. When his hand stretched back, his arm was also half white and half green, which was terrifying.我们给他穿上本白色的士兵衬衣，把不祥的蓝色遮盖住，然后是绒衣和棉衣。待到一切收拾完毕，我们已累得汗流浃背。

  We put on a white soldier's shirt that covered the ominous blue, followed by a velvet coat and a cotton coat. By the time everything was tidied up, we were sweating from exhaustion.班长重新睡下时，身着崭新的军装，除了腰带处有点窝囊，其余精干无比。但是我们在给他穿鞋子戴帽子的时候，困难重重。虽然竹干事未雨绸缪加大了尺码，但班长的头和脚都肿胀了，帽子戴不下，鞋子穿不上。

  When the squad leader went back to sleep, he was dressed in a brand new military uniform, except for a little sloppy belt, the rest were extremely capable. But we had a lot of difficulties when we put on his shoes and hats. Although the bamboo officer took precautions and increased the size, the squad leader's head and feet were swollen, and he couldn't wear his hat or shoes.怎么办？我们只有再次请示竹干事。

  What to do? We can only ask the bamboo officer again.用剪子。竹干事说。

  Use scissors. Zhu officer said.剪哪儿？我们不知底细。

  Where to cut? We don't know the details.剪帽子的后面和鞋的两侧，但要伪装好，让人从正面看不出来。竹干事捂着胸口，支撑着说。

  Cut the back of the hat and the sides of the shoe, but camouflage it so that it is not visible from the front. The bamboo officer covered his chest and said.我们照章办理，总算收拾就绪。现在，一个军容整齐的小伙子，微闭着眼，英俊潇洒地躺在我们面前，好似胜仗之后在树下小憩。

  We followed the rules and finally got ready. Now, a young man with a neat military appearance, with his eyes slightly closed, lies handsomely in front of us, as if he is taking a nap under a tree after winning a battle.啊啊，总算干完啦！我们小声欢呼起来。当然，当着烈士遗体欢呼，很不礼貌，但死亡既已无可挽回，年轻的士兵，此刻必然也满心希望以最整洁优雅的形象告别人间，大概也会原谅我们。

  Ahhhh, it's finally done! We cheered softly. Of course, it is very rude to cheer in front of the bodies of the martyrs, but since death is irreparable, young soldiers must also be full of hope to say goodbye to the world with the neat and elegant image at this moment, and they will probably forgive us.竹干事用眼光命令我们把白布蒙上。他认为只有和烈士隔开，我们才有权大声喧哗。我对他说，你要是不舒服，就去休息。剩下的事，我们能干。我冲着破碎的旧衣服努了努嘴，心想，不就是抱出去烧掉吗？

  The bamboo officer ordered us to cover the white cloth with our eyes. He believes that only by being separated from the martyrs can we have the right to make loud noises. I told him, if you are not feeling well, go and rest. We can do the rest. I pouted at the broken old clothes, thinking, isn't it just to take it out and burn it?竹干事说，剩下的事，你可干不了，那是我的正经项目。说完，他掏出一个文件夹，摊开后说，你们谁给我找个凳子来？

  Officer Zhu said, you can't do the rest, that's my serious project. After saying that, he took out a folder, spread it out and said, which of you will find me a stool?烈士躺着，竹干事坐着，我们开始清点并记录军衣兜里的遗物。

  The martyrs were lying down, the bamboo officers were sitting, and we began to count and record the relics in the pockets of our military uniforms.钢笔一支。英雄牌，黑色老式。河莲像饭馆里跑堂的小伙计，拉长嗓门儿报着。

  A pen. Hero card, black old-fashioned. He Lian was like a young man running a hall in a restaurant, stretching her voice to report.伤湿止痛膏两贴，啊，不对。是一贴半。有一面已经揭掉用了。小如轻声说，刚才我给他擦身的时候，在左膝盖看到那半贴了。想不到年纪轻轻的，就得了关节炎。

  Two patches of pain relief cream, ah, no. It's a sticker and a half. One side has been removed. Xiaoru said softly, when I wiped his body just now, I saw the half sticker on my left knee. Unexpectedly, at a young age, he got arthritis.竹干事不喜欢婆婆妈妈，说，关节炎是高原病，和年纪没关系。谁都能得，比如你，比如我。接着干活儿吧。

  Zhu Officer didn't like his mother-in-law, saying that arthritis is altitude sickness and has nothing to do with age. Anyone can get it, like you, like me. Let's get to work.小鹿高声叫起来，说，哈！你们猜，我在他兜里翻出了啥？

  The fawn shouted loudly and said, Ha! Guess what, what did I dig out of his pocket?竹干事说，大惊小怪什么？一个当兵的，能有啥？肯定没存折。

  Officer Zhu said, what are you fuss about? What can a soldier have? There is definitely no passbook.小鹿不理他，继续兴致勃勃地说，是糖啊。三块真正的水果糖，和发给我们的一模一样的水果糖。

  The deer ignored him and continued to say with great interest, it's sugar. Three pieces of real fruit candy, exactly the same fruit candy that was sent to us.小鹿的手心里，托着几块包着草绿色糖纸的水果糖。摩擦久了，翘起的糖纸几乎掉光，椭圆形的糖块沾着斑斑点点的绿色，好像池塘里的小乌龟。

  In the palm of the deer's hand, he held a few pieces of fruit candy wrapped in grass green sugar paper. After rubbing for a long time, the upturned sugar paper almost fell off, and the oval sugar cubes were stained with speckled green, like a little turtle in a pond.竹干事放下笔说，这就不必记了。都是军需发的大路货，没什么特别的价值。家属也不一定需要。

  The bamboo officer put down his pen and said, "I don't have to remember this." They are all big road goods issued by military supplies, and they have no special value. Dependents don't necessarily need it.看着那三块糖，我突然热泪盈眶。在这之前，我一直无法把死去的班长当成一个曾经活过的人，尽管他在我身边，我仍觉得他是幻影，一切都不真实。但这一瞬，我明白他曾是一个活生生的人，像我一样爱吃糖。我被刻骨的悲伤击中。

  Looking at the three pieces of candy, I suddenly burst into tears. Before this, I had never been able to regard the dead squad leader as a person who had lived, and even though he was by my side, I still felt that he was a phantom and that everything was not real. But at this moment, I understood that he was a living person who loved sugar like me. I was struck by bitter sadness.在高原上，凡是外出，可能遭遇种种意外。飓风、雪崩、饥饿、酷寒……要想生存下去，你必须要有热量。糖就是最好的热能，所以，每逢有人走进风雪，叮嘱的最后一句话定是——你带上几块糖了吗？

  On the plateau, whenever you go out, you may encounter all kinds of accidents. Hurricanes, avalanches, hunger, extreme cold...... To survive, you have to have calories. Sugar is the best heat energy, so whenever someone walks into the wind and snow, the last word of advice must be - have you brought a few pieces of sugar?糖，在某些时候，就是生命啊。

  Sugar, at some point, is life.这几块糖，是班长临出发的时候，装入口袋的。哦，也许不是这一次，从糖的磨损和任务的紧急程度看，估计是早已放在身边的陈物。糖，是高原的护身符，班长放入这糖的时候，一定是满怀生的渴望。此刻，糖仍在，生命已悄然远去。这几块糖，寄托了班长对生命的眷恋，怎能说没有特别的价值！

  These pieces of candy were put in the pocket of the squad leader when he was about to leave. Oh, maybe not this time, judging from the wear and tear of the sugar and the urgency of the task, it is estimated that it is an old thing that has been kept by my side for a long time. Sugar is the talisman of the plateau, and when the squad leader puts this sugar, he must be full of desire for life. At this moment, the sugar is still there, and life has quietly gone away. These pieces of candy pin on the squad leader's attachment to life, how can it be said that there is no special value!我对竹干事说，留着这几块糖吧。送给他的爸爸妈妈，这上面有烈士最后的手印。

  I said to the bamboo officer, keep these pieces of sugar. Given to his parents, it has the last handprint of the martyr on it.竹干事说，女孩子就是事多，多愁善感。

  Zhu Officer said that girls are more dominant and sentimental.但他还是很给我面子，在登记簿上歪歪扭扭地记下：军用水果糖三颗。

  But he still gave me face and wrote down crookedly in the register: three military fruit candies.还有吗？竹干事问。

  Is there anything else? The bamboo officer asked.没有了。我们齐声回答。

  Without. We answered in unison.没钱吗？竹干事追问。

  No money? The bamboo officer asked.没有。我们万分肯定地回答。

  No. We answer in the absolute affirmative.一分也没有吗？竹干事继续问。他倒不是不相信我们，因为事关烈士的遗产，必得一清二楚。

  Not a single cent? The bamboo officer continued to ask. It's not that he doesn't believe us, because it's about the legacy of the martyrs, and it must be clear.一分钱也没有。我们斩钉截铁地回答。河莲小声嘀咕，山上一千公里内没有人烟，哪儿有商店？倒是想用钱买氧气，可谁卖给你啊。

  Not a penny. We answer categorically. He Lian muttered softly, there is no one within a thousand kilometers of the mountain, where is the shop? I want to buy oxygen with money, but who will sell it to you?"竹干事假装什么都没听见，走到破烂的碎军衣堆前，说，我还得亲自检查一遍，这是规矩。他一块块碎布细细捏着，好像哨兵在搜查敌军的情报。最后拿起一件衬衣的残骸，说这里面有个小兜，你们看了没有？

  The bamboo officer pretended not to hear anything, walked to the pile of tattered military uniforms, and said, I have to check it myself, this is the rule. He squeezed the rags finely, as if a sentinel was searching for enemy intelligence. Finally, he picked up the remains of a shirt and said that there was a small pocket in it, have you seen it?果平说，没看。那个兜有什么用？装了东西，磨得胸前痛。

  Guo Ping said, I didn't see it. What is the use of that pocket? Loaded with things, grinding my chest painfully.竹干事冷冷地说，那是女人。男人总是把最心爱的东西藏在这里。说着，他从衬衣的布条里，抽出一个牛皮纸信封。

  The bamboo officer said coldly, it was a woman. Men always hide their most beloved things here. As he spoke, he pulled out a kraft paper envelope from the strip of his shirt.我们惊骇莫名，看着竹干事打开信封，他突然扑哧一声笑了。我们这才敢围拢过去，端详信封中的东西。

  We were shocked and inexplicable, watching the bamboo officer open the envelope, he suddenly burst into laughter. Only then did we dare to gather around and examine the contents of the envelope.一张四寸大小的彩色照片，花红柳绿一个乡下妞，露着不整齐的白牙，很忸怩地看着我们。

  A four-inch color photo, a country girl with red flowers and willows, showing untidy white teeth, looked at us very shyly.这是班长他姐吧？要不是他妹？可是怎么长得不大像？河莲自语着，顺手还掀开白布单，朝烈士脸上瞄了两眼。

  This is the squad leader's sister, right? If it weren't for his sister? But why don't they look alike? He Lian muttered to herself, lifted the white cloth sheet, and glanced at the martyr's face.竹干事说，你这个姑娘，一阵聪明一阵傻。有把姐妹的照片这么贴心摆着的吗？依我的经验，肯定是未婚妻。

  Officer Zhu said, you girl, you are smart and stupid. Is there a photo of the sisters so intimately? In my experience, it must be a fiancée.未婚妻？我们惊叫着，又像铁桶一般围过去，火眼金睛地将那女子看了个彻底。小鹿捂着嘴说，嘻嘻，长得可真难看！

  Fiancee? We screamed, surrounded like an iron bucket, and looked at the woman thoroughly with fiery eyes. The fawn covered his mouth and said, hehe, it's really ugly!不知是乡下的摄影师水平太差，还是这女子貌不上相，反正从照片上看：眉毛粗重，鼻梁塌扁，嘴唇阔大，牙列不齐。全脸唯一可夸奖的是眼睛，大而圆，有一种猫一般的灵光。

  I don't know if the level of the photographer in the countryside is too poor, or if this woman is not good-looking, anyway, from the photo: thick eyebrows, flattened nose bridge, wide lips, and uneven dentition. The only thing that can be praised on the whole face is the eyes, which are large and round, with a cat-like aura.我们之中相貌最好的小如，倒还比较宽容，说，她笑得挺开心啊。

  Xiao Ru, who is the best looking among us, is more tolerant, saying, she smiles very happily.果平说，这照相馆的手艺也太次了，把人脸涂得像猴脸。

  Guo Ping said that the craftsmanship of this photo studio is too secondary, painting the human face like a monkey face.照片原是黑白的，为了好看，那女子特地上了颜色。乡下的摄影师用水彩颜料乱涂一气，脸色赤若夕阳，红色还描到脸的轮廓以外，像打碎了红墨水瓶，洇得到处都是。

  The photo was originally black and white, but in order to look good, the woman specially colored it. The photographer in the countryside painted with watercolor paint in a breath, his face was as red as the sunset, and the red color was traced beyond the outline of the face, like breaking a red inkwell, and it was everywhere.小鹿说，我看班长挺漂亮的小伙儿，怎么找这么一个困难户啊？还把她当宝贝，揣在离心脏最近的地方。真是眼神不济啊！

  Xiaolu said, I think the squad leader is a very beautiful young man, how can he find such a difficult household? He also treated her as a treasure and carried her closest to his heart. What a bad look!放肆！竹干事火了，说，她是谁？你们以为是普通的乡下姑娘啊？她是烈士的心上人，是烈士的遗属。现在她还不知道班长的死讯。要是知道了，还不得哭得天昏地暗！你们拿她开心，对得起良心吗？

  Licentious! The bamboo officer was on fire and said, who is she? Do you think it's an ordinary country girl? She is the sweetheart of the martyrs and the bereaved family of the martyrs. Now she doesn't know the death of the squad leader. If you know, you can't cry in the dark!" Are you happy with her and worthy of your conscience?我们原也没想那么多，只是看着一张可笑的照片，就笑起来。女孩子总是这样的，一件并不可笑的事，只要有一个人开始笑，大家就跟着凑热闹，笑上半天。经竹干事这么一说，问题有些严重。想象那照片上的长着猫眼的姑娘，过不了多久就会悲痛欲绝，我们顿时抱愧无比，大家都低下了头。竹干事看我们蔫了，又安慰我们说，好了，总的说来，你们今天的表现还是不错的。班长虽说没轮上和自己的未婚妻告别，有你们这么多姑娘给他送行，心里也该知足了。

  We didn't think so much, we just looked at a ridiculous photo and laughed. Girls are always like this, a thing that is not funny, as long as one person starts laughing, everyone will join in the fun and laugh for a long time. When Jingzhu said this, the problem was a bit serious. Imagine the girl with cat's eyes in the photo, and it won't be long before she will be grief-stricken, and we are all so ashamed that everyone bows their heads. Officer Zhu saw that we were wilting, and comforted us and said, okay, in general, your performance today is still good. Although the squad leader didn't take his turn to say goodbye to his fiancée, he should be content with so many of you girls seeing him off.竹干事说着，在遗物登记簿上规规矩矩地写下：亲人照片一张。他又把堆在地上的碎衣物，像捡破烂的老汉一样，根根梢梢翻了个遍，每个衣角都用大拇指和食指对着捻一回，看藏没藏着东西，直到万无一失。

  The bamboo officer said, and wrote down in an orderly manner on the relic register: a photo of a relative. He turned over the broken clothes piled on the ground like an old man picking up rags, twisting each corner of his clothes with his thumb and index finger to see if there was anything hidden until it was foolproof.

  好了，我们可以撤了。竹干事合上登记簿，疲惫已极地说。他把钢笔和伤湿止痛膏细致地包好，照片也用白纸夹起来。只是把军用水果糖丢在墙角，说，这个就算了吧。转送家属，吃又吃不得，留着还挺伤心，不如眼不见为净。

  Okay, we can withdraw. The bamboo officer closed the registration book, exhausted and said. He carefully wrapped the pen and the pain relief ointment, and the photo was also clipped with white paper. Just throw the military fruit candy in the corner and say, forget it. Forwarding it to the family, it is not possible to eat it, and it is quite sad to keep it, it is better to be out of sight.糖块叽里咕噜地滚着，刚开始声音很脆，好像玻璃弹球在找坑，渐渐地就不怎么响了，太平间地上积满尘土，它们保证已脏得发不出动静了。

  The sugar cubes were rolling in the middle, and the sound was very crisp at first, as if a glass pinball was looking for a pit, and gradually it became less loud, and the morgue floor was covered with dust, and they were guaranteed to be too dirty to move.我们缓缓地往外走，小如突然停了脚，说，竹干事，有一句话，我不知当说不当说。

  We walked out slowly, and Xiaoru suddenly stopped and said, "Officer Bamboo, there is a sentence that I don't know whether to say or not."快走到门前的竹干事，简短地回答，说。

  The bamboo officer who walked to the door replied briefly and said.小如说，竹干事，把相片还给班长吧。

  Xiaoru said, bamboo officer, return the photo to the squad leader.我们一时没明白，但是我们马上就明白了。小如接着说，照片带回去，还给谁呢？给那个姑娘，她会难过死的。他的父母也会难过的，她本来会是他们的儿媳妇，可是以后永远不会是了。最难过的还是班长，他那么心爱的东西被拿走了，永不还他。照片被不认识的人传着看，代为保管，他会不乐意的……

  We didn't understand it for a while, but we understood it right away. Xiaoru continued, who will take the photo back? Give it to that girl, and she will die sadly. His parents will also be sad, she would have been their daughter-in-law, but she will never be. The saddest thing is the squad leader, what he loves so much has been taken away and will never be returned to him. If the photo is passed on to someone you don't know and keeps it on your behalf, he will not be happy......

  我们被小如的话感动，双脚牢牢地站在地上，用这个姿势告诉竹干事，要是他不答应小如的请求，我们就不离开太平间了。

  We were moved by Xiaoru's words, stood firmly on the ground with our feet, and told the bamboo officer in this posture that if he did not agree to Xiaoru's request, we would not leave the morgue.竹干事什么也没说，从纸夹里抽出红脸姑娘的照片，递到小如手里。我们一道走到白如雪峰的尸床前，小如轻轻地揭开白布。班长向上扬起的眉毛是微笑模样，好像在睡梦中赞同我们的主张。我们轻轻地把他的衣扣解开，把照片平平整整地插进他左胸前的衬衣口袋。我看到那张照片有节奏地起伏着，班长年轻的心在托着它跳动。

  Officer Zhu didn't say anything, took out a photo of the red-faced girl from the paper clip and handed it to Xiao Ru. We walked to Bai Ruxuefeng's corpse bed together, and Xiaoru gently lifted the white cloth. The squad leader raised his eyebrows with a smile, as if he agreed with our proposition in his sleep. We gently unbuttoned his clothes and inserted the photo flat into the shirt pocket on his left chest. I saw the photo rising and falling rhythmically, and the young heart of the squad leader was beating with it.我们走出太平间，好像在里面待了一百年，山川河流都有了很大的改变。天变低了，云变重了，太阳是多角形的，雪山也变黑了。竹干事冲我们扬扬细瘦的胳膊，说，再见了，女兵们。但愿有一天我阵亡的时候，还能由你们来为我换衣。

  When we walked out of the morgue, it seemed that after a hundred years in it, the mountains and rivers had changed a lot. The sky is getting lower, the clouds are getting heavier, the sun is polygonal, and the snow-capped mountains are getting darker. The bamboo officer raised his thin arm at us and said, goodbye, female soldiers. I hope that one day when I die, you will change my clothes.我们说，我们不给你换衣服，你还是好好活着，自己给自己换衣服吧。

  We said, we don't change your clothes, you should live well and change your own clothes.

  回到宿舍，我们都拼命讲其他的事情，再也不提一个“死”字。

  Back in the dormitory, we all desperately talked about other things, never mentioning the word "death" again.我趴在地上，从床底下翻自己的细软。找了半天，才从长筒靴后面找到我的宝贝盒。它是我求老兵用三个罐头盒子的铁皮，剪开打制而成。我专挑菠萝罐头盒，因为它的皮不仅结实耐用，而且都是金黄色的，精心砸制出来，好像纯金制成的万宝箱。我抱着它走到背人的角落，打开，里面是满满一盒军用水果糖。它们穿着草绿色的衣服，好像是饱满的小水雷。我一直想不通，高原部队发的糖，为什么是绿色的，难道糖纸也要伪装吗？如果战争打响了，你往嘴里塞进一块红糖纸的糖，就会被敌人发现，而绿糖纸就可安然无恙吗？

  I lay on the ground and turned my soft body under the bed. After searching for a long time, I found my baby box from behind the boots. It was made by me begging the veterans to cut and beat the iron sheets of three can boxes. I specifically chose pineapple canned boxes because their skin is not only strong and durable, but also golden yellow, carefully smashed out, like a treasure chest made of pure gold. I carried it to the corner of the person on my back, opened it, and found a box full of military fruit candy. They are dressed in grass green, like small mines full of mines. I have never been able to figure out why the sugar issued by the plateau troops is green, and does the sugar paper also have to be disguised? If the war starts, you put a piece of brown sugar paper in your mouth, and the enemy will find out, and will the green sugar paper be safe and sound?好了，不想这种节外生枝的问题了，正事要紧。我开始挑选水果糖。平日吃糖的时候，随便抓一块就是。但这一次，我苛刻已极。糖纸稍微有些残破的，颜色不鲜艳的，包括虽然外形完整，但由于被揉搓过，显出一副无精打采样子的水果糖，都毫不留情地淘汰。最后入选的种子选手，都像刚从生产流水线上跳下来的产品，容光焕发。糖块像石子一样坚硬，两端拧起的糖纸，好像小姑娘的刷子辫，舒展又漂亮。

  Okay, I don't want to have this kind of extraneous problem, it's important to get down to business. I started picking fruit candies. When you eat sugar on weekdays, just grab a piece. But this time, I was extremely harsh. The sugar paper is slightly broken and not brightly colored, including the fruit candy that is intact in appearance but shows a listless appearance due to being rubbed, all of which are mercilessly eliminated. The final selected seed contestants are all radiant like products that have just jumped off the production line. The sugar cubes are as hard as stones, and the sugar paper twisted at both ends is like a little girl's brush braid, stretched and beautiful.我揣着糖果，用那把锐利的钥匙开了门，再一次走进太平间。屋子里有一种新衣服浓重的桉叶味儿，混合着炭盆燃烧后的袅袅烟气，好像是一片被雷电击过的热带雨林。班长安详地睡着，我附在他的耳边，轻轻说，对不起啊，再打搅一次……

  I carried the candy, opened the door with the sharp key, and walked into the morgue again. There was a strong smell of eucalyptus leaves in the room, mixed with the smoke from the burning of the charcoal basin, like a tropical rainforest struck by thunder and lightning. The squad leader fell asleep peacefully, and I whispered in his ear, sorry, disturbing me again......我把三块水果糖小心翼翼地放在他的右裤兜里，我记得很清楚，我们正是从那个兜里取出了他的旧水果糖。我把班长的衣服重新抚平，让他睡得更舒适些，然后缓缓退出。

  I carefully placed three pieces of fruit candy in his right trouser pocket, and I remember very well that we took out his old fruit candy from that pocket. I smoothed out the squad leader's clothes again to make him sleep more comfortably, and then slowly exited.我感觉背后有凉风袭来。

  I felt a cool breeze blowing behind me.回头一看，是竹干事。

  Looking back, it was a bamboo officer.你又来干什么？竹干事问。

  What are you doing again? The bamboo officer asked.我……来看看……我支吾着说。我知道像竹干事这样的老兵，将生死看得淡如烟云。把糖的事如实说出，他会笑我的。

  I...... Let's take a look...... I hesitated. I know veterans like Zhu Officer who take life and death lightly. Tell me the truth about sugar, and he will laugh at me.生和死的区别，其实没有我们想象的那样大。不过是蚕蜕了一层皮。竹干事缓缓地说。

  The difference between life and death is actually not as big as we think. It's just a silkworm shedding a layer of skin. Zhu Officer said slowly.我转移话题说，那你来干什么？

  I changed the subject and said, what are you doing here?竹干事说，我领着木工来装棺。

  The bamboo officer said, I led the carpenter to load the coffin.经他一说，我才看到，在不远处，一座朱红色的棺木，在几个人的肩头，宫殿一般雄伟地矗立着。

  After he said this, I saw that not far away, a vermilion coffin stood majestically like a palace on the shoulders of several people.工人们开始装殓班长，棺里铺了松软的棉被。班长从水泥的台子上搬到木制的小屋，一定会感觉暖和些的。

  The workers began to bury the squad leader, and the coffin was covered with a soft quilt. The squad leader moved from the cement platform to the wooden hut, and he would definitely feel warmer.竹干事对我说，不必遮遮掩掩，我都看到了。他以后没有机会吃糖的。

  The bamboo officer said to me, no need to hide it, I saw it all. He won't have a chance to eat sugar in the future.我说，才不对呢。我相信在一个春天的晚上，天上有着圆圆的月亮，班长定会和他相片上的未婚妻，在烈士陵园的台阶上相会，每人嘴里含着一块糖。
I said, it's not right. I believe that on a spring night, when there is a full moon in the sky, the squad leader will meet his fiancée in the photo on the steps of the martyrs' cemetery, each with a piece of candy in their mouths.

未知

  20.最高的花生糖作坊

  20. The tallest peanut candy workshop

  有一天，我们之中年龄最大的河莲说，你们谁吃过花生糖？

  One day, Ha Lian, the oldest among us, said, Which of you has ever eaten peanut candy?大家一齐嚷起来，我吃过！

  Everyone shouted together, I ate it!是啊，哪个女孩子小时候没吃过香喷喷、甜蜜蜜的花生糖呢？只要一想起那滋味，舌头下面就储存了一包口水要流出来。

  Yes, what girl hasn't eaten fragrant and sweet peanut candy when she was a child? As soon as I thought of that taste, a packet of saliva was stored under my tongue to flow out.河莲说，那我们自己做花生糖来吃，开一间世界上最高的花生糖作坊，好不好？

  He Lian said, then let's make our own peanut candy to eat and open the world's tallest peanut candy workshop, okay?在我们这些女孩子里，果平是以吃肉闻名的，我们都说她的祖先一定不是从猴子变来的，而是一只老虎变的，所以，见了肉就没命；而河莲是以巧出名的，她说要办什么事，一定能办到。

  Among us girls, Guo Ping is famous for eating meat, and we all say that her ancestors must not have changed from monkeys, but from a tiger, so they died when they saw meat; And He Lian is famous for her skill, she said that if she wants to do something, she will definitely be able to do it.我们立刻大叫，开花生糖作坊，好哇！好哇！

  We immediately shouted, open a peanut sugar workshop, so wow! Wow!我们都吃过花生糖，可是，我们都没有做过花生糖，连脑子最聪明的河莲也没有做过。不过这难不倒我们，大家回忆起小时候吃过的花生糖，不就是一些炒熟了的花生米裹在琥珀色的糖稀里，放凉了就成了吗，没什么了不起的。

  We have all eaten peanut candy, but none of us have ever made peanut candy, not even He Lian, who has the smartest brain. But this is not difficult for us, everyone recalls the peanut candy they ate when they were children, isn't it just some fried peanuts wrapped in amber sugar thin, and it becomes when it cools down, nothing remarkable.我们开始筹措原料。

  We started raising raw materials.因为我不吃羊肉，炊事班长对我比较优待。在大家吃羊肉的日子里，允许我自己挑别的食品。这一回，我放弃了最爱吃的大红枣，要了满满一大碗生花生米。

  Because I don't eat mutton, the cooking squad leader treats me more favorably. On the days when everyone eats mutton, I am allowed to choose other foods by myself. This time, I gave up my favorite red dates and asked for a large bowl full of raw peanuts.还有必不可少的糖，这也很好办。为了给大家补充营养，每人每月可分到一茶缸白糖。现在大伙儿争着贡献出来，河莲忙说，够了够了，花生只有一碗，小马不能配大鞍子，要不就比例失调了。

  There is also essential sugar, which is also very good. In order to supplement nutrition for everyone, each person can get a teapot of sugar every month. Now everyone is scrambling to contribute, He Lian hurriedly said, enough, enough, there is only one bowl of peanuts, and the pony cannot be matched with a big saddle, or the proportion is out of balance.原料备好以后，发现没有锅；没有锅，就没法熬糖和炒花生。我们的花生糖作坊还没开张，就面临倒闭的危险。

  After the raw materials are prepared, it is found that there is no pot; Without a pot, you can't boil sugar and fry peanuts. Our peanut candy workshop was in danger of going out of business before it even opened.就在我的刷牙缸里熬糖吧，虽说它小了一点，多熬几缸子也就够了。果平挺身而出，解决了一半的难题。

  Just boil sugar in my toothbrushing tank, although it is a little smaller, a few more jars are enough. Guo Ping stepped forward and solved half of the problem.但总不能用刷牙缸炒花生米呀，它的底面积太小了，最下面的花生煳透了，表层的还没有热乎呢。

  But you can't fry peanuts with a toothbrush jar, its bottom area is too small, the bottom peanuts are cooked through, and the surface is not hot yet.于是，有人提议吃罐头，然后……

  So, someone suggested eating canned food, and then ......大家听了都说这个主意好，七手八脚地打开了一筒一公斤装的菠萝罐头，你一勺我一口地迅速吃光，接着操起剪子，把罐头盒剪开，真是好大一张洋铁皮。我们把洋铁皮的周边卷起来，一个简易的铁锅就做好了。摆在炉台上，还蛮像样的。

  Everyone said that this idea was good, and they opened a canned pineapple in a kilogram of each one, and I quickly ate it all in one bite, and then picked up the scissors and cut the canning box, which was really a big foreign iron sheet. We roll up the periphery of the iron sheet, and a simple iron pot is ready. Placed on the stove, it is quite decent.我们把花生米倒进自制的铁锅里，炉火在下面熊熊地燃烧着，花生米因为受热噼啪作响，有轻微的香气飘散出来。

  We poured the peanuts into a homemade iron pot, and the fire was burning below, and the peanuts crackled due to the heat, and a slight aroma wafted out.我们正想为自己的发明鼓掌叫好，可怕的事情发生了：那个马口铁做的锅子，受不了高温的熏烤，中央突然软塌塌地陷落，熔化出一个红色的裂口。半熟的花生米像滑雪运动员一样，沿着烧红了的锅壁，飞快地掉进炉膛里去了……

  We were about to applaud our invention when something terrible happened: the tinplate pot, unable to withstand the high temperature, suddenly collapsed in the center, and melted into a red crack. The half-cooked peanuts quickly fell into the hearth along the red-hot pot walls like skiers......一股焦煳味儿弥漫在空中，我们垂头丧气，作坊失败了。

  A smell of burnt air filled the air, and we were dejected, and the workshop failed.

  不要灰心，我们再想想办法。河莲一点不气馁，明亮的大眼睛四处搜寻，一眼落在门后铲煤的铁锨头上，说，就用这个当锅吧。说着，端起铁锨，洗净了煤灰，架在炉台上，比个真锅还神气。

  Don't be discouraged, let's think of a way. He Lian was not discouraged at all, her big bright eyes searched around, and her glance landed on the shovel head of the coal shovel behind the door, saying, just use this as a pot. Saying that, he picked up the shovel, washed off the coal ash, and put it on the stove, which was more energetic than a real pot.铁锨很厚，再也不会熔化掉。

  The shovel is thick and will never melt again.我们把花生米倒进去，用筷子不停地拨拉。当筷子头变得焦黑的时候，花生米也熟了，散发出扑鼻的香味。真想先吃几粒，但为了我们作坊的声誉，大家都耐心地忍着馋虫的煎熬。

  We pour the peanuts into it and pull it with chopsticks without stopping. When the chopsticks become charred, the peanuts are also cooked, emitting a pungent fragrance. I really wanted to eat a few first, but for the reputation of our workshop, everyone patiently endured the torment of gluttonous insects.花生凉了以后，我们小心地把花生衣搓掉，把白白胖胖的花生放在一个碟子里。

  After the peanuts were cold, we carefully rubbed off the peanut coat and put the white and fat peanuts in a plate.下一个步骤就是熬糖了。这是比较简单的活儿，把糖放进茶缸，用筷子搅啊搅，不一会儿白糖就融化成淡黄色的糖稀，冒出透明的气泡。当糖稀的颜色变成褐红色并闪出油漆一样的亮光时，河莲果断地喊了一声，好了！她飞快地把糖稀浇到碟子里的花生米上，并用筷子不停地搅拌，使它们混合得更均匀。一种属于真正的花生糖的甜香气，刺激得我们一个劲儿地咽唾沫。几次想尝尝正在冷却过程中的花生糖，都叫河莲给拦住了。她说，一定要等到花生糖完全做好了，用小刀割成一小条一小条的，像街上卖的一样，才分给我们吃。

  The next step is to boil the sugar. This is a relatively simple job, put the sugar into the teapot, stir and stir it with chopsticks, and after a while, the sugar will melt into a pale yellow sugar thin, and transparent bubbles will appear. When the color of the sugar thin turned brownish and flashed like paint, Ha Lian shouted decisively, okay! She quickly poured the sugar thin onto the peanuts in the saucer and stirred them with chopsticks to make them mix more evenly. A sweet aroma of real peanut candy that stimulates us to swallow saliva. Several times I wanted to taste the peanut candy that was in the process of cooling, but I was stopped by He Lian. She said that we must wait until the peanut candy is completely ready, cut it into small strips with a knife, like those sold on the street, before distributing it to us.为了那神圣的一刻，我们眼巴巴地盯着那个碟子，祈祷它快快变凉。

  For that sacred moment, we stared at the saucer eagerly, praying that it would cool down soon.等啊等，碟子终于冷却了。当河莲郑重地拿起小刀，分割花生糖的时候，我们听到了极清脆的响声。

  Wait, wait, the dish finally cooled down. When He Lian solemnly picked up the knife and divided the peanut candy, we heard a very crisp sound.花生糖已经凝固得像石头一样坚硬，无论怎么使劲儿，都不能使它和碟子分离，更无法把它变成一小条一小条的糖块。

  The peanut candy had solidified as hard as a stone, and no matter how hard it tried, it could not be separated from the plate, let alone turned into small pieces of sugar.河莲难过地说，我犯了一个大错误，应该在碟子里抹上油，这样花生糖就可以磕下来了。现在，我们的作坊出了废品。

  He Lian said sadly, I made a big mistake, I should have greased the plate so that the peanut candy could be knocked down. Now, our workshop is scrapped.我们都劝她放宽心，不要紧的。这不是废品，只不过吃起来稍微麻烦一点罢了。

  We all advised her to relax, it didn't matter. This is not a waste product, it's just a little more troublesome to eat.我们这座世界上最高的花生糖作坊，出产的第一批产品，吃的时候需用这种姿势——双手捧着碟子，像花猫洗脸一样，用舌头舔碟子。

  The first products produced by our world's tallest peanut candy workshop need to be in this posture when eating - holding the plate with both hands, licking the plate with its tongue like a cat washing its face.不过，说到味道，那可真是好极了！

  However, when it comes to taste, it's really good!

未知

  21.碗里的小太阳

  21. The little sun in a bowl

  我不吃羊肉，总觉得那肉里有一股青草味儿。小的时候，跟父母到北京的东来顺馆子里吃过一顿涮羊肉，回来后全身起了风疹。医生说是过敏，让我终生忌食羊肉。

  I don't eat mutton, I always feel that there is a grassy smell in the meat. When I was a child, I went to Donglaishun Restaurant in Beijing with my parents to eat a meal of lamb-shabu, and when I came back, I had rubella all over my body. The doctor said it was an allergy, which made me avoid eating mutton for the rest of my life.到了西藏，羊肉就成了主要菜肴。做法很粗犷，用斧子将整头羊劈成碗口大的坨子，连骨头带肉丢进高压锅，再塞入一块酱油膏，撒点作料，拧上锅盖急火猛攻。一个小时后，一道名为“大块羊肉”的高原菜就算烧得了。大家就拎着饭碗来打菜。

  In Tibet, mutton became the main dish. The method is very rough, use an axe to split the whole sheep into a lump with a bowl mouth, throw the bones and meat into the pressure cooker, then stuff a piece of soy sauce paste, sprinkle some ingredients, screw on the lid of the pot and attack rapidly. An hour later, a plateau dish called "big mutton" was cooked. Everyone came to cook with their rice bowls.我对同屋的果平说，你把我的那份儿菜打走好了。

  I said to Guo Ping in the same room, you can beat my share of the dishes away.果平说，那你吃什么呀？

  Guo Ping said, then what do you eat?我说，吃咸菜呀，我是宁肯吃咸菜也不吃羊肉的。

  I said, eat pickles, I would rather eat pickles than mutton.果平说，你好傻啊，会写美丽的‘美’字吗？

  Guo Ping said, you are so stupid, can you write the beautiful word 'beauty'?我说，会写呀！说完，就用勺子把儿在手心上写了一个大大的“美”字给她看。

  I said, I can write! After saying that, he used a spoon to write a big word "beauty" on the palm of his hand to show her.果平说，原来你还挺聪明的呀！那你为什么不吃羊肉呢？什么叫‘美’？‘大’‘羊’两个字摞起来就是‘美’啊，西藏的羊多大啊！

  Guo Ping said, it turns out that you are quite smart! So why don't you eat lamb? What is 'beauty'? The words 'big' and 'sheep' are stacked together to mean 'beautiful', how big are the sheep in Tibet!我便如实相告，吃羊肉过敏。

  I will tell you the truth, I am allergic to mutton.于是，在吃羊肉的日子里，只有我一个人孤零零地吃咸菜。时间长了，被炊事班长发现，他说，老吃咸菜怎么行？长久下去会得病的。

  So, on the days of eating mutton, I was the only one eating pickles. After a long time, he was discovered by the cooking squad leader, and he said, how can you eat pickles all the time? You will get sick in the long run.我说，那好啊，你给我做猪肉。可那些猪肉都是从平原运来的，数量不多，都让我吃了，就太对不起大家了。几次小灶以后，我对炊事班长说，我还是吃咸菜吧，这样心安。

  I said, okay, you make me pork. But those porks were all transported from the plains, and there were not many of them, so I was so sorry for everyone. After a few small stoves, I said to the cooking squad leader, I should eat pickles, so that I can rest assured.炊事班长见我很坚决，就说，要不这样吧，你跟我到食堂的库房里挑一挑，看你喜欢吃什么，就拿点什么；反正每个人都有一份儿伙食费，你不吃羊肉就吃别的好了。

  The cooking squad leader saw that I was very resolute, so he said, why don't you go to the warehouse of the canteen with me to pick and see what you like to eat, just take something; Anyway, everyone has a share of food expenses, so if you don't eat mutton, you can eat something else.

  我第一次走进库房。哇，好丰富！一箱箱的奶粉，成麻袋的红糖白糖，还有花生米、葡萄干、脱水菜、压缩饼干……真够琳琅满目的。可惜都是干菜坚果类，根本引不起人的食欲。

  I walked into the warehouse for the first time. Wow, so rich! Boxes of milk powder, brown sugar and white sugar in sacks, as well as peanuts, raisins, dehydrated vegetables, and compressed biscuits...... It's really dazzling. Unfortunately, they are all dried vegetables and nuts, which cannot arouse people's appetite at all.就没有蔬菜吗？比如红红的萝卜、绿绿的黄瓜？我实在太渴望吃青菜了，明知没有多少希望，还是试探着问。

  Is there no vegetables? For example, red radishes, green cucumbers? I was so eager to eat vegetables that I knew there was not much hope, so I still asked tentatively.有啊。炊事班长很肯定地说，随手拈出一筒罐头。三下五除二，打开来，倒真是有红红的萝卜、绿绿的黄瓜，只是它们强烈地冒出一股酸气。原来这是酸菜罐头。

  Yes. The cooking squad leader said with certainty that he casually took out a tube of cans. Three times five divided by two, when opened, there are really red radishes and green cucumbers, but they strongly emit a sour smell. It turns out that this is canned sauerkraut.吃了几次酸菜罐头，我就腻了。我跟在炊事班长的屁股后面转，突然发现一只神秘的小麻袋，袋口的线绳扎得紧紧的，灰头灰脑地缩在墙角。

  After eating canned sauerkraut a few times, I got tired of it. I followed behind the buttocks of the cooking squad leader, and suddenly found a mysterious little sack, the rope at the mouth of the bag was tied tightly, and it was huddled in the corner in disgrace.那是什么？可不可以吃？我问。

  What is that? Can you eat it? I asked.吃不得。那是一种虫子干儿，有怪味道。炊事班长说。

  I can't eat. It was a kind of bug dried with a strange smell. The cooking squad leader said.我好奇地解开绳子，出现在眼前的是满满的一麻袋红橙鼓胀的——大海米！

  I untied the rope curiously, and what appeared in front of me was a sack full of red and orange bulges - sea rice!噢！我今天就吃这种虫子干儿了！我快活地大叫着，要知道我们自打到了西藏，还没尝过海味儿呢！我顺手抓了一把海米填进嘴里，嚼得咯咯响，鲜香满口。

  Oh! I'm going to eat this kind of bug today!" I shouted happily, you know, we haven't tasted the sea since we arrived in Tibet! I grabbed a handful of sea rice and stuffed it into my mouth, chewing it until it was full of fresh flavor.

  炊事班长吃惊地瞪着我，因为，他自小生活在西北的山区，从没见过海里的生物。

  The cooking squad leader glared at me in surprise, because he had lived in the mountains of the northwest since he was a child and had never seen a creature in the sea.但连续吃了几次海米之后，我又腻了。这一回，我长了经验，不让炊事班长当向导，自己在库房里转呀转，想再发掘出点不同凡响的食品。

  But after eating sea rice several times in a row, I got tired of it again. This time, I gained experience, and I didn't let the cooking squad leader be a guide, and I walked around the warehouse by myself, wanting to discover some extraordinary food.果然，我又找到一只奇怪的麻袋。看起来鼓鼓囊囊，拎一下却很轻。打开一看，原来是又大又圆的山西红枣。

  Sure enough, I found another strange sack. It looks bulging, but it is very light when you pick it up. When I opened it, it turned out to be a big and round Shanxi red date.我立刻用随身带的饭盆舀了半盆，连蹦带跳地跑出库房，对等在外面的炊事班长说，我今天就吃这个喽！

  I immediately scooped half a basin with the rice bowl I brought with me, ran out of the warehouse with a bounce, and said to the cooking squad leader waiting outside, I'll eat this today!炊事班长说，这个当零食吃可以，当正经菜可不行。

  The cooking squad leader said that this can be eaten as a snack, but not as a serious dish.我说，能行能行，又能当菜又能当饭。说着就跑远了。

  I said, I can do it, I can do it, I can be a dish and a meal. As he spoke, he ran away.以后，我和我的朋友们就热切地盼着吃羊肉的日子。我进库房用来盛红枣的器皿越来越大，最后，简直变成了一只小脸盆。炊事班长吃惊地说，你一个女孩子，一顿吃得了这么多的红枣吗？小心别闹肚子。

  From then on, my friends and I eagerly looked forward to the day of eating mutton. The vessel I used to hold dates in the warehouse became bigger and bigger, and in the end, it turned into a small basin. The cooking squad leader said in surprise, are you a girl who can eat so many red dates in one meal? Be careful not to make a stomach upset.我说，当然吃得了，你就放心吧。

  I said, of course you can eat it, don't worry.他不知道，每次都是我们全屋的女孩子一块儿吃红枣。在那些最严寒的日子里，我们团团地围坐在火炉旁，把红枣洗净，撒上白糖，放在小锅里，慢慢地煮。

  He didn't know that every time the girls in our house ate red dates together. On those coldest days, we sat around the stove, washed the dates, sprinkled with sugar, put them in a small pot, and cooked them slowly.在呼啸的风雪声里，红枣渐渐地膨胀起来，好像一轮轮暖洋洋的小太阳，把我们的脸都映得红艳艳的。

  In the sound of the whistling wind and snow, the red dates gradually expanded, like warm little suns, making our faces bright red.女孩子吃红枣，是很补身体的。
Girls eat red dates, which is very nourishing for the body.

未知

  22.雪线上的蛋花汤

  22. Egg drop soup on the snow line

  鸡蛋在昆仑山上是很稀罕的东西。

  Eggs are a rare thing in Kunlun Mountain.你想啊，海拔五千多米，多么品种优良的母鸡也活不了。从平原到高原几千公里的路程，汽车一路上“跳迪斯科舞”，鸡蛋就是铁皮的，也会被颠出缝。

  You think, at an altitude of more than 5,000 meters, no matter how good a hen is, it can't survive. Thousands of kilometers from the plains to the plateau, cars "dance disco dances" along the way, and eggs are made of iron sheets, and they will also be stitched out.于是，军需部门就给我们运鸡蛋的代用品。其一是蛋黄粉，色泽像金皇后玉米面一样灿烂。掺上水，用油一煎，就成了金闪闪的蛋黄饼。可惜好看不好吃，根本没有鸡蛋味儿，曾噎得人直翻白眼儿。

  So, the quartermaster department gave us substitutes for transporting eggs. One is egg yolk powder, which is as brilliant as the golden queen cornmeal. Mix it with water and fry it in oil to make a golden egg yolk cake. It's a pity that it's not good-looking or delicious, it doesn't smell like eggs at all, and it made people roll their eyes at once.用鸡蛋黄养鱼都养不活，人要一天吃这个，能得黄疸病！有人说。

  Raising fish with egg yolk can't be raised, and people have to eat this a day to get jaundice! Some people say.食堂若吃蛋黄粉，准得剩一大盆，像漫天的迎春花。

  If you eat egg yolk powder in the canteen, you will have to leave a large pot, like spring flowers in the sky.其二是一种有清有黄的冻蛋，是把整个鸡蛋打进铁桶，速冻而成。说起来倒是全须全尾的原装，吃到嘴里，却比鲜蛋差得远。好像鸡蛋的魅力是一种很温暖的东西，一冻就丢了。

  The second is a kind of frozen-egg with clear and yellow, which is made by beating the whole egg into an iron bucket and freezing it quickly. Speaking of which, it is the original with all the beard and the tail, but when you eat it in your mouth, it is far worse than fresh eggs. It seems that the charm of eggs is a very warm thing, and it is lost as soon as it is frozen.其三就是鸡蛋罐头了。圆圆滚滚的球体卧在玻璃罐里，随浑黄的液体浮动。除了形状上还保持着基本轮廓，很难使人想到它是母鸡的产品。

  The third is canned eggs. The round sphere lies in a glass jar, floating with the yellowish liquid. In addition to maintaining the basic outline in the shape, it is difficult to imagine that it is a product of a hen.于是，我们这些远离家乡的年轻军人，就像思念绿色一样，思念白色的温暖的有着粗糙外壳的真正的鸡蛋。

  So, we, the young soldiers far from home, miss the green and the white warm real eggs with rough shells.有一年过节，炊事班长很神秘地叫我，喂，你是女娃，有个事要问你。

  One year during the holidays, the cooking squad leader called me mysteriously, hey, you are a girl, I have something to ask you.炊事班长很能吃苦，做饭的手艺可不敢恭维。

  The cooking squad leader is very good at enduring hardships, and his cooking skills are not complimentary.什么事？你说好了。我心不在焉地应道。

  What's up? You said it. I replied absentmindedly.喏，你看。他伸出蜷得像个鸟窝似的手掌——我看到在他皲裂的手指圈起的半圆形凹体中，有一个粉红色的鸡蛋。

  Look. He stretched out his palm curled up like a bird's nest—I saw a pink egg in the semicircular concave body circled by his cracked fingers.是真的吗？我惊喜地问。

  Is it true? I asked in surprise.当然是真的！要是有只老母鸡，也许能孵出鸡娃来！炊事班长得意地说。

  Of course it's true! If there is an old hen, it may be able to hatch a chicken baby! The cooking squad leader said proudly.这肯定不行。就算它原来是一颗有生命的种子，跋涉冰峰雪岭时也早冻死了。我顾不上反驳炊事班长，只一个劲儿地问，它为什么没被颠破呢？

  This certainly won't work. Even if it turned out to be a living seed, it would have frozen to death when trekking through the ice and snow mountains. I didn't care about refuting the cooking squad leader, so I kept asking, why hasn't it been broken?炊事班长不乐意了，说，瞧你这个样，好像巴不得它破了！这是我老乡特地从家乡带来的，一路上抱着纸盒，连个盹都没舍得打。

  The cooking squad leader was not happy and said, look at you like this, it seems that it is broken! This was specially brought by my fellow villagers from my hometown, holding the paper box along the way, and I was not even willing to take a nap.我说，这真是一个经历了长途拉练的鸡蛋。

  I said, this is really an egg that has gone through a long journey.炊事班长说，别废话，知道叫你来干什么吗？

  The cooking squad leader said, don't talk nonsense, do you know what you are asked to do?我说，把这个鸡蛋送给我。

  I said, give me this egg.吓！想得美！炊事班长晃着他的方脑袋说，老乡一共送我三个鸡蛋，三个鸡蛋够谁吃的？今天过节，我想用这三个鸡蛋给大伙儿做一锅真正的鸡蛋汤。你是城里人，你喝过那种片片缕缕像米汤似的鸡蛋汤吧？咱就做那样的。

  Scare! Think beautifully! The cooking squad leader shook his square head and said, the fellow gave me a total of three eggs, who can eat three eggs? Today is the holiday, and I want to use these three eggs to make a real pot of egg soup for everyone. You are from the city, have you ever drunk that kind of egg soup like rice soup? Let's do that.喝过。我说。

  drunk. I say.那好，你就给咱做。炊事班长说着，把我推到锅前。

  Okay, you can do it for us. The cooking squad leader said, pushing me to the pot.在呼呼的热水面前，我可傻了眼。不错，我是喝过那漂浮如丝带的甩袖汤，但我根本就不知道它是怎么做出来的！可我又不好意思对向我寄予了无限期望的炊事班长说“我不会”。在炊事班长的方头颅里，既是城里人，又是女人，就该天生会做鸡蛋汤。

  In front of the whirring hot water, I was dumbfounded. Yes, I have drunk the floating sleeve soup like a ribbon, but I have no idea how it is made! But I was embarrassed to say "I won't" to the cooking squad leader who had infinite expectations for me. In the square head of the cooking squad leader, he is both a city man and a woman, so he should be born to make egg soup.嘿！有什么了不起的！鸡蛋汤鸡蛋汤，顾名思义，把鸡蛋倒进水里就成汤！我痛下决心。

  Hey! What's so great! Egg soup Egg soup, as the name suggests, pours eggs into water and it becomes soup! I made up my mind.打蛋！我命令道。

  Beat the eggs! I ordered.炊事班长乖乖地拿出个大铝盆（可以当行军锅的那种，比一般脸盆要大和深），把三个鸡蛋打进去，用手指把蛋壳内的每一滴黏液都刮净。

  The cooking squad leader obediently took out a large aluminum basin (the kind that can be used as a marching pot, larger and deeper than an ordinary basin), beat three eggs into it, and scraped every drop of mucus in the eggshell with his fingers.三个鸡蛋像三颗金蚕豆，在空旷的盆底滚来滚去；没有了外壳的鸡蛋，更小更少。

  three eggs are like three golden broad beans, rolling around at the bottom of an empty basin; Eggs without a shell, smaller and less.一大锅水开了，冒着汹涌的白汽。我端起盆，正想把搅匀的蛋液倒进去，突然觉得它们太单薄了。

  A large pot of water boiled, steaming white steam. I picked up the basin and was about to pour the mixed egg liquid into it, but suddenly I felt that they were too thin.加水。我说。

  Add water. I say.往哪里加水？炊事班长谦虚地问。

  Where to add water? The cooking squad leader asked humbly.当然是往……鸡蛋里加水了。我胸有成竹地说。

  Of course...... Water is added to the egg. I said confidently.加多少？炊事班长小心翼翼地请教。

  How much to add? The cooking squad leader carefully asked for advice.就加……一大勺吧！我指挥若定。

  Add ...... A big spoonful! My command seems to be determined.现在盆里的景象好看多了，黄澄澄的半盆，再没有捉襟见肘的窘迫。好了，现在就把鸡蛋液倒进锅里，并且一个劲儿地用筷子搅拌。一会儿，我们就会有香喷喷的真正的鸡蛋汤喝了。我有条不紊地吩咐着。

  Now the scene in the basin is much better, and Huang Chengcheng's half basin is no longer stretched. Okay, now pour the egg mixture into the pot and stir it with chopsticks. In a moment, we will have fragrant real egg soup to drink. I ordered in an orderly manner.人高马大的炊事班长乖乖地听着指挥，三个珍贵的鸡蛋和一大勺凉水倾倒进沸锅……一时间，锅里锅外都很安静。

  The tall cooking squad leader obediently listened to the command, and three precious eggs and a large spoonful of cold water were poured into the boiling pot...... For a while, it was quiet inside and outside the pot.一个人只能喝一碗，多了就不够了。今天你辛苦，就给你喝两碗吧。炊事班长思谋着。

  One person can only drink one bowl, and more is not enough. You have worked hard today, so I'll give you two bowls. The cooking squad leader was thinking.鸡蛋是你的，你本该多吃多占点。我说。

  The eggs are yours, you should have eaten more. I say.想象中的鸡蛋汤该有仙女水袖般飘逸的蛋花，该有糯米般甜蜜的蛋丝，该有……

  The imaginary egg soup should have egg drops as flowing as fairy water sleeves, sweet shredded eggs like glutinous rice, and should have ......满满一大锅水再次开了。

  A large pot of water opened again.锅里什么也没有，只是云雾般地混浊。那三个鸡蛋神秘地失踪了，融化在一大锅雪水中。

  There was nothing in the pot, just cloudy clouds. The three eggs mysteriously disappeared and melted in a large pot of snow water.

  我和炊事班长面面相觑，目光在询问，鸡蛋呢？万里迢迢从家乡带来的鸡蛋哪儿去了？！

  The cooking squad leader and I looked at each other, our eyes asking, where are the eggs? Where did the eggs brought from my hometown go? !喝汤的时候，我对大家说，今天这汤是鸡蛋汤，真正的鸡蛋汤！

  When I was drinking the soup, I said to everyone, today this soup is egg soup, real egg soup!同伴们莞尔一笑，说，是吗？做梦吧！

  The companions smiled and said, yes? Dream!是真的！我亲眼看见三个鸡蛋的，它们就在这汤里，我不骗你们！我急得都要哭了。

  It's true! I saw three eggs with my own eyes, they are in this soup, I won't lie to you! I was so anxious that I was about to cry.大家还是半信半疑，因为，汤里实在是看不到鸡蛋的影子。

  Everyone is still skeptical, because there is really no shadow of eggs in the soup.不信，你们问炊事班长。我使出最后的撒手锏。

  If you don't believe me, ask the cooking squad leader. I made the last move.大家把脸转向炊事班长。炊事班长扶着他的大方脑袋，什么话也没说。

  Everyone turned their faces to the cooking squad leader. The cooking squad leader held his generous head and said nothing.于是，大家一哄而散，没有人相信我关于鸡蛋汤的神话。

  So, everyone dispersed, and no one believed my myth about egg soup.炊事班长，你为什么不说？为什么不说？我气愤地质问他。

  Cooking squad leader, why don't you say it? Why not say? I asked him angrily.大家没看见鸡蛋，你叫我说什么？炊事班长心平气和地说。

  Everyone didn't see the egg, what did you tell me to say? The cooking squad leader said calmly.那一天，我喝了好多鸡蛋汤，一边喝一边想，鸡蛋藏到哪儿去了呢？

  That day, I drank a lot of egg soup, and as I drank it, I thought, where did the eggs go?这个问题我一直想了好多年。我想，假如我不在鸡蛋里掺水，事情也许会好得多。当然，如果锅不是那么大，如果我们有许多鸡蛋，我们就一定会喝上美味的鸡蛋汤了。
I have been thinking about this question for many years. I thought that if I hadn't mixed water into the egg, things might have been much better. Of course, if the pot is not that big, if we have many eggs, we will surely have a delicious egg soup.

未知

  23.乘降落伞的西瓜

  23. Watermelon by parachute

  从平原到西藏高原，要坐六天的汽车。蔬菜水果都是很娇气的，哪里顶得住这样的颠簸？更不消说一路上雪花飘飘，气温在零摄氏度以下，再好的叶绿素也成冰激凌了。

  From the plains to the Tibetan plateau, it takes six days by car. Vegetables and fruits are very squeamish, how can they withstand such bumps? Not to mention the snowflakes along the way, the temperature is below zero degrees Celsius, and no matter how good the chlorophyll is, it becomes ice cream.但是，平原上的人还是挺关心高原上的人的，每年八九月份山下最热的时候，总要装上几卡车蔬菜，每车配备两个司机，昼夜兼程，把六天的旅程压缩成三天，赶上山来，想让吃了一年干菜和罐头的高原人享个口福。

  However, the people on the plains are still very concerned about the people on the plateau, and when it is the hottest time at the foot of the mountain in August and September every year, several trucks of vegetables must be loaded, each car is equipped with two drivers, day and night, compressing the six-day journey into three days, catching up with the mountain, hoping to let the plateau people who have eaten dried vegetables and canned food for a year enjoy a blessing.但再新鲜的蔬菜，经过几千公里的折磨，也面目全非了。茄子皱得像核桃，蒜苗黄得像京剧里奸臣的胡须，只有青椒还绿着，但绿得十分可疑，用手指轻轻一弹，皮就噗的一声破了，流出一包绿汪汪的清水，原来它早已冻烂了。

  But no matter how fresh the vegetables are, after thousands of kilometers of torture, they are unrecognizable. The eggplant is wrinkled like a walnut, the garlic sprouts are as yellow as the beard of a traitor in Peking Opera, only the green pepper is still green, but it is very suspicious, and with a flick of his finger, the skin will burst with a pop, and a bag of green water will flow out, and it turns out that it has long been frozen.有一次，运菜的车遇上了暴风雪。昆仑山是喜怒无常的，就是在最温暖的季节也会骤然翻脸，降下鸡蛋大的冰雹。菜车像破冰船似的抵达高原，通知大家去卸车。

  Once, the truck transporting vegetables encountered a snowstorm. Kunlun Mountain is moody, and even in the warmest season, it will suddenly turn its face and rain hail the size of eggs. The vegetable cart arrived at the plateau like an icebreaker and informed everyone to unload the truck.到了车跟前，吓了我们一大跳：这哪里是车，简直就是一座移动的小雪山。

  When we arrived at the car, we were shocked: where is this car, it is simply a moving snowy mountain.扒开篷布上厚厚的积雪，露出一个个装菜的纸箱。押车的人抱起一个箱子，砰地丢下车，咚的一声巨响，好像摔下来一箱炮弹。

  Peeling open the thick layer of snow on the tarpaulin, revealing cardboard boxes containing vegetables. The escort picked up a box and threw it off the car with a bang, as if a box of shells had fallen.你轻一点好不好？我们一齐冲他嚷。要知道，在高原上，蔬菜像黄金一样贵重，哪里容得他这般粗暴蹂躏！

  Can you be lighter? We shouted at him together. You know, on the plateau, vegetables are as precious as gold, where can he be so rudely ravaged!砸得再重些也不碍事。押车员大大咧咧地说。

  No matter how hard it is, it won't get in the way. The escort said carelessly.我们愤愤不平地打开箱子一看，才发现他说的是实情。这一箱里面装的是黄瓜，每一根都翠绿挺拔，像警棍一般笔直，用手一碰，发出清脆的玻璃器皿之声，好像翡翠雕成的工艺品。

  We opened the box indignantly and found that he was telling the truth. This box contains cucumbers, each of which is green and straight, straight like a baton, and when touched with your hand, it makes a crisp glassware sound, like a handicraft carved from jadeite.又打开一箱，是西红柿。每一颗果实都红润闪光，好像红玛瑙。手指稍不留意碰破了西红柿的皮，流出的不是红汁，而是橙色的冰晶。

  Another box was opened, and it was tomatoes. Each fruit is ruddy and shiny, like red agate. My fingers didn't pay attention to breaking the skin of the tomatoes, and instead of red juice, orange ice crystals came out.

  再打开一箱，是豆角。平日熟识的豆角显出一副陌生的模样，居然塑料似的半透明。透过朦胧的豆荚，依稀看到乳白色薄而软的豆粒，好像一只只惊讶的眼睛。

  Open another box and it is beans. The beans I am familiar with on weekdays show an unfamiliar appearance, and they are translucent like plastic. Through the hazy pods, I could vaguely see the milky white thin and soft beans, like surprised eyes.严寒使所有的蔬菜都改变了风味，吃到嘴里，都是雪花的味道。

  The severe cold has changed the flavor of all vegetables, and when you eat them, they taste like snowflakes.这种运输的艰难情况，几年后得到了一点改善。有一年快过春节的时候，接到通知，飞机将给我们空投报纸和蔬菜；还有一年降落伞运载的是西瓜。

  This difficult situation of transportation improved a little after a few years. One year, when the Spring Festival was approaching, we received a notice that the plane would airdrop newspapers and vegetables to us; Another year, the parachute carried watermelons.空投的日子到了，我们都眼巴巴地望着天空。冬天吃西瓜，就是在平原，也是很奢侈的事情。我们已经快忘了西瓜的滋味了，这是多么快活开心的节日！西瓜一落地就得马上收藏起来，千万不能在雪地里裸露时间太长了。要知道，当时的气温是零下几十摄氏度，要是把西瓜冻僵就糟了。

  The day of the airdrop has arrived, and we are all looking at the sky eagerly. Eating watermelon in winter, even in the plains, is also a luxury. We have almost forgotten the taste of watermelon, what a happy and happy festival it is! Watermelons must be collected as soon as they land, and they must not be exposed in the snow for too long. You know, the temperature at that time was minus tens of degrees Celsius, and it would be bad if the watermelon was frozen.

  飞机来了，因为周围都是狰狞的山峰，飞机不敢低飞就开始空投了。一朵朵洁白的降落伞像鸽群一般在高天浮动。

  The plane came, because it was surrounded by hideous mountain peaks, and the plane did not dare to fly low and began to drop. White parachutes float high in the sky like a flock of pigeons.天气很晴朗，但仍有看不见的气流在天穹穿行。突然有一只降落伞脱离了队伍，向远处的山谷翩翩飞去。

  The weather is clear, but there are still invisible air currents running through the sky. Suddenly a parachute broke away from the ranks and flew towards the valley in the distance.其他的降落伞都乖乖地落了地，久候的人们扑过去，迫不及待地打开伞下坠着的麻袋。打开一袋是报纸，打开另一袋是蔬菜，再打开一袋又是报纸……就是不见西瓜。

  The other parachutes fell to the ground obediently, and the people who had been waiting for a long time rushed over and couldn't wait to open the sacks that fell under the umbrellas. Open one bag is newspaper, open another bag is vegetables, and open another bag is newspaper...... I just don't see watermelons.赶快同飞机上联系，问是不是忘投西瓜了？

  Hurry up and contact the plane and ask if you forgot to throw a watermelon?飞机上回答，乘降落伞的西瓜，千真万确地空投下来了。

  The plane replied that the watermelon by parachute was really airdropped.完了！人们仰天长叹：那个飘往雪原深处的降落伞，装载的就是高原人望眼欲穿的西瓜啊！
Finished! People looked up to the sky and sighed: The parachute that floated into the depths of the snowfield was loaded with watermelons that plateau people wanted to wear!

未知

  24.第一次打针

  24. First injection

  打针是医务人员的基本功，每个医生护士都有给别人打第一针的经历。那滋味虽说比不上打第一枪惊心动魄，但也令人终生难忘。

  Injections are the basic skills of medical staff, and every doctor and nurse has the experience of giving the first injection to others. Although the taste is not as thrilling as the first shot, it is also unforgettable.在正式打针以前，我们先经历了短暂的画面学习。比如注射部位、神经的走向、针头与皮肤的角度等，都像背口诀似的谨记在心。

  Before the official injection, we first experienced a short period of picture learning. For example, the injection site, the direction of the nerve, the angle of the needle and the skin, etc., are all kept in mind like memorizing a mantra.终于有一天，我们要真刀真枪地在病人身上实习了。

  Finally, one day, we are going to practice on patients.我的老师是一位男护士，姓胡（我们是第一批分到藏北的女护士，在我们之前的护士，自然都是男的了）。胡护士让我复述了一遍肌肉注射的操作程序以后，就说，行，你出师了。推上治疗车，到病房打针去吧。

  My teacher is a male nurse surnamed Hu (we were the first female nurses assigned to northern Tibet, and the nurses before us were naturally all male). After Nurse Hu asked me to repeat the operation procedure of intramuscular injection, she said, okay, you are a teacher. Push the treatment car and go to the ward for injections.我听了很高兴，赶紧把打针的家伙准备好。推着车要走的时候，见胡护士揣着两只手，一副无动于衷的模样。

  I was very happy to hear this, and quickly prepared the guy who gave the injection. When I was about to leave with the cart, I saw Nurse Hu holding two hands, looking indifferent.我奇怪地说，咦，你怎么不同我一道走？

  I said strangely, hey, why don't you go with me?他说，这次你一个人去。打针又不是拔河，要那么多人干什么？

  He said, this time you go alone. Injections are not tug-of-war, why do so many people do it?我吓了一跳，乞求他说，你跟我一起去好吗？不用你动手，站在一边给我壮个胆就成。

  I was startled and begged him, can you go with me? You don't need to do it, just stand aside and give me courage.胡护士毫不通融，你错了，有人在旁袖手旁观，你才容易心慌。真到你独自面对病人，胆量自然就来了。

  Nurse Hu is not accommodating, you are wrong, someone is watching from the sidelines, you are easy to panic. When you face the patient alone, courage will naturally come.我还是不死心，就说，你要是不去，我打针有什么毛病，自己也发现不了，不是对病人不负责任吗？

  I still don't give up, just say, if you don't go, I can't find out what is wrong with my injection, isn't it irresponsible to the patient?胡护士想了想说，这样吧，你打完第一针就找个借口走回来，我去检查一下，问问病人的感觉，就能知道你的技术如何了。

  Nurse Hu thought for a while and said, let's do this, you will find an excuse to walk back after the first injection, I will go check it out, ask the patient how it feels, and you can know how your technique is.谁让胡护士是我师傅呢，只有照他的主意办。我一个人推着小治疗车，向幽深的病房走廊走去。那一瞬间，我好孤独，有一种独闯虎穴的忐忑。

  Who let Nurse Hu be my master, I can only do it according to his idea. I pushed the small treatment cart alone towards the deep corridor of the ward. At that moment, I was so lonely, and I felt a sense of apprehension about breaking into the tiger's den alone.进了病房，病人像往常一样微笑着迎接我，我的心略微安定了一点。我翻开了治疗簿，第一个接受我“治疗”的是一个名叫“黄金”的人，很高大威武的样子。

  When I entered the ward, the patient greeted me with a smile as usual, and my heart calmed down a little. I opened the treatment book, and the first person to receive my "treatment" was a man named "Gold", who looked very tall and powerful.我鼓足勇气，轻声地说了一句，黄金，打针。

  I mustered up the courage and said softly, gold, injection.我以为他一定会不放心地问我，怎么就你一个人来了？老护士呢？但实际上他什么也没说，乖乖地趴在床上，很自觉地做出了挨针扎的姿势。

  I thought he would ask me uneasily, why are you here alone? Where's the old nurse? But in fact, he didn't say anything, just lay on the bed obediently, and consciously made a stitch posture.

  我松了一口气，口中念念有词，都是注射的诀窍，左手绷紧了他的皮肤，右手笔直地竖起针管，一咬牙一闭眼，正要不管不顾地往下戳，心里突然打了一个哆嗦。我想平日里不小心手上扎了一根刺，都会疼得直吸冷气；金属针头可比竹刺粗多了，那还不得疼死？真不忍心下此毒手啊！要是我一针攮下去，病人痛得熬不住，一个跟头跳起来，会不会把我的针尖折断在肉里？那麻烦就大了！这样一想，手变得酥软，老捏着针管比画，针头刺了几下都没捅进肉里。

  I breathed a sigh of relief, there were words in my mouth, all the tips of injection, my left hand tightened his skin, my right hand straightened the needle, gritted my teeth and closed my eyes, and was about to poke down regardless, but my heart suddenly shivered. I think if I accidentally get a thorn in my hand on weekdays, it will hurt so much that I will inhale the cold air; The metal needle is much thicker than the bamboo thorn, so it can't hurt to death? I really can't bear to do this! If I put a needle on it, the patient can't stand the pain, and if he jumps up, will he break the tip of my needle in the flesh? That's a big problem! Thinking about it like this, his hands became soft, and he kept pinching the needle and drawing, and the needle was stabbed a few times without stabbing into the flesh.黄金动了动身子说，护士，你咋还不扎？我都冻得起鸡皮疙瘩了。

  Huang Jin moved his body and said, Nurse, why don't you prick yet? I can even afford to get goosebumps.再不能拖下去了，要不病人旧病没好，又添一个重感冒，索性豁出去了，长痛不如短痛。我说了一句，黄金，你可千万别动！说时迟那时快，手一抡，就把注射器像菜刀一样砍了下去……

  I can't drag it on any longer, or the patient will not get better from the old illness, and add another severe cold, so I will simply open up, and the long pain is not as good as the short pain. I said, gold, don't move! Saying that it was too late, he picked up his hand and cut the syringe like a kitchen knife......在此之前，我在萝卜和棉花团上练过打针，真的一试，才发现差别大了。人的皮肤比萝卜软得多，比棉花要瓷实得多，有一种很怪异的感觉。也许是我的劲儿用得太大了，几乎没有遇到任何抵挡，针头就顺畅地插进了黄金的身体。

  Before that, I had practiced injections on radish and cotton balls, and when I really tried it, I found that there was a big difference. Human skin is much softer than radishes and much more porcelain than cotton, which has a very strange feeling. Maybe I used too much energy, and without encountering any resistance, the needle was smoothly inserted into the golden body.俗话说，万事开头难。我进针的这个头儿开得不错，后面就容易得多了。我很均匀地推动着药液，拔针的动作也快捷麻利。黄金惊奇地说，我还没什么感觉，你的针就打完了。真是青出于蓝而胜于蓝啊！

  As the saying goes, everything is difficult at the beginning. The head of my needle opened well, and the back was much easier. I pushed the medicine evenly, and the needle pulling out was quick and quick. Gold said in surprise, I don't feel anything yet, your injection is finished. It's really better than blue!我很得意地回到护士值班室，对焦急地等在那里的胡护士说，你去验收好了。

  I proudly returned to the nurse's duty room and said to Nurse Hu, who was waiting there anxiously, that you go to the acceptance.胡护士从病房回来的时候，不像我想象的那么满面春风。他皱着眉对我说，病人对你打针的技术反映还是不错的，说你打针的时候一点也不疼……”

  When Nurse Hu came back from the ward, her face was not as full of spring breeze as I imagined. He frowned and said to me, the patient's response to your injection technique is still good, saying that it doesn't hurt at all when you inject......我不好意思地微笑着，很想说几句表示谦虚的话。可是，还没等我想出词句，就听胡护士话锋一转说，但是，我发现了一个很严重的问题……”

  I smiled embarrassedly, wanting to say a few words of humility. However, before I could come up with a word, I heard Nurse Hu change his words, but I found a very serious problem......"我赶紧检讨，我准备的时间太长了，把病人给冻坏了……”

  I hurriedly reviewed, I prepared for too long and froze the patient......"胡护士说，这还是小事，你的过失比这个可大多了。我在黄金的屁股上看了一下，根本就没有你消毒皮肤的痕迹……”

  Nurse Hu said, this is still a small matter, and your fault is much greater than this. I looked at the golden ass, and there was no trace of your disinfecting skin at all......"我一下子如同五雷轰顶。天哪，我忘了这件最重要的准备工作，没用碘酒、酒精消毒，就把针头捅到病人的身体里了。

  I was like five thunderbolts all of a sudden. Oh my God, I forgot about this most important preparation, and instead of sterilizing with iodine or alcohol, I stabbed the needle into the patient's body.

  我吓得几乎哭出来，说，病人不会得败血症吧？

  I was so scared that I almost cried and said, "The patient won't get sepsis, right?"胡护士说，我得赶快向医生报告，让他给病人吃点消炎药，但愿一切平安无事。

  Nurse Hu said, I have to report to the doctor quickly and ask him to give the patient some anti-inflammatory medicine, I hope everything is safe.从那天以后，好多日子我都抬不起头来，尤其是害怕见到黄金。幸好他的身体很健康，没留下什么后遗症。

  Since that day, I couldn't lift my head for many days, especially for fear of seeing gold. Fortunately, he was in good health and did not leave any sequelae.第一次打针的教训真是刻骨铭心，我以后再也不敢这样粗心大意了。
The lesson of the first injection was really unforgettable, and I will never dare to be so careless again.

未知

  25.女孩的纸

  25. Paper for girls

  女孩们用的纸比别人多。干净的柔软的洁白的纸，是伴随她们整个青春的朋友。

  Girls use more paper than others. Clean, soft and white paper is a friend who accompanies them throughout their youth.我们到了西藏，才发现这里的“毛伴”4，根本就没有卫生纸卖，更不要说卫生巾之类的东西了。大家开始并不着慌，因为刚从家里来不久，提包里都还有存货呢。

  When we arrived in Tibet, we found that the "Mao Ban" 4 here did not sell toilet paper at all, let alone sanitary napkins and the like. Everyone didn't panic at first, because they had just come from home, and there was still stock in their bags.高原的日子在寒冷中一天天过去。终于有一天，女孩们发现已无纸可用。

  The days of the plateau passed day by day in the cold. Finally one day, the girls find out that there is no paper left.这可怎么办？尤其是果平，已是等米下锅的局面。

  What can I do? Especially Guoping, it is already a situation where the rice is in the pot.这是一个绝对要回避男性的问题，我们缩在屋里苦思冥想。

  This is a question that we absolutely have to avoid men, and we huddle in the house and think hard.有人说，干脆给山下的商店发个电报，叫他们速运一大卡车卫生纸来。

  Some people said that they simply sent a telegram to the shop at the foot of the mountain and asked them to quickly transport a large truckload of toilet paper.河莲说，这是不可能的。山上只有我们这几个女孩，别人又不需用这东西。要是拉上一卡车，什么时候才能卖得完？毛伴才不会做这种赔本的生意呢。

  Ha Lian said that this is impossible. There are only a few girls like us on the mountain, and others don't need this thing. If you pull up a truck, when will it sell out? Mao Ban will not do this kind of loss-making business.大家愁眉苦脸地你看着我、我看着你。除了从毛伴那里买，想不出还有什么其他的途径搞到纸。

  Everyone frowned, you looked at me, I looked at you. I can't think of any other way to get paper except to buy it from my furry companion.我有办法了。果平突然胸有成竹。

  I have a way. Guo Ping suddenly felt confident.大家忙问她有何高招，她笑而不答，一副高深莫测的模样。大家见她不肯说，也就作罢。反正她的形势最紧急，她都不急了，别人乐得逍遥。

  Everyone hurriedly asked her what her tricks were, but she smiled and didn't answer, looking inscrutable. Everyone saw that she refused to speak, so they gave up. Anyway, her situation is the most urgent, she is not in a hurry, and others are happy to be free.过了几天，我的纸也用完了。我悄悄找到果平，说，把你的纸分我一点用。

  After a few days, I ran out of paper. I quietly found Guo Ping and said, give me a little bit of your paper.果平说，我哪里有纸？谁说我有纸了？

  Guo Ping said, where do I have paper? Who says I have paper?我说，你好坏呀！没纸的时候，要我们大家帮你想办法。你有纸了，就独自享用。真自私。

  I said, you are so bad! When you don't have paper, we all want to help you figure a way. You have paper, and enjoy it alone. Truly selfish.果平笑起来，说，我真的没有纸。不过你说我自私倒是对的。我要把我的办法告诉你，你也会自私起来。

  Guo Ping laughed and said, I really don't have paper. But you're right to say I'm selfish. I'm going to tell you my way, and you'll be selfish too.我说，不管是什么法子，我得先得到纸。我这里急等着用，你速速从实招来。

  I said, no matter what the method, I have to get the paper first. I'm waiting to use it here, you can quickly recruit it."果平附在我的耳朵上说，我用的不是纸，是包扎外科伤口用的止血绷带。

  Guo Ping attached to my ear and said, I am not using paper, but a hemostatic bandage to dress surgical wounds.我一听，这真是一个好办法。后来大家就你传我、我传你，都用止血绷带代替卫生纸。

  When I heard it, it was really a good idea. Later, everyone passed on me and I passed on you, and they all used hemostatic bandages instead of toilet paper.有一天，河莲对我们说，领导找她谈话了，说最近没有外伤病人，可止血物品消耗得太快。看来我们得想另外的法子。

  One day, He Lian told us that the leader had talked to her and said that there were no trauma patients recently, but the hemostatic items were consumed too quickly. It seems that we have to think of another way.我说，只有寄望于毛伴。毕竟它是我们和山下繁华地区之间唯一的通道。

  I said, I can only hope for my furry companion. After all, it is the only passage between us and the bustling area below the mountain.我和河莲就到毛伴，同卖货的藏族小伙子说，我们需要纸。

  He Lian and I went to Mao Ban and told the Tibetan boy who sold the goods that we needed paper.热情的小伙子为我们找出一箱信纸。

  The enthusiastic lad found a box of letters for us.不！不！不是这个纸！我和河莲一个劲儿摇头。

  No! No! Not this paper! He Lian and I shook our heads vigorously.小伙子又搬出了成捆的蜡光纸，五颜六色，煞是好看。

  The young man moved out the bundles of wax paper, which were colorful and very beautiful.不！更不对了！我们俩摆手跺脚加比画，总算让他明白了我们的意思：需要一种洁白柔软的大张纸。到底有没有？

  No! It's even more wrong! The two of us waved our hands and stomped our feet to paint, and finally let him understand what we meant: we needed a large piece of white and soft paper. Is there any?小伙子笑眯眯茅塞顿开的样子，连连说，那样的纸有！多得是！说着就到后面库房去找。

  The young man smiled and said again and again, there is such a piece of paper! How many! As he spoke, he went to the back warehouse to look for it.我和河莲相视而笑：真是踏破铁鞋无觅处，得来全不费工夫。

  He Lian and I looked at each other and laughed: It's really nowhere to find a place to step on iron shoes, and it takes no effort to get it.过了一会儿，小伙子满面尘灰地抱着一大卷纸，气喘吁吁而来。高原缺氧，任何动作都像剧烈运动一样费力。

  After a while, the young man came panting with a large roll of paper covered in dust. The plateau is hypoxic, and any movement is as strenuous as strenuous exercise.我和河莲赶紧迎过去，刚想谢他，细一看，不禁傻了眼。那不是什么细软的卫生纸，而是画国画的宣纸。

  He Lian and I hurriedly greeted him, just wanted to thank him, but when we looked closely, we couldn't help but be dumbfounded. It was not soft toilet paper, but rice paper for painting Chinese paintings.这个，是不是很好？像你们说的那样——白——软——大？小伙子的神情透着为别人做了好事之后的得意。

  Isn't this good? Like you said - white - soft - big? The young man's expression was full of pride after doing good deeds for others.那当然……是了……只是，这个……太可惜了……”我和河莲结结巴巴，不知如何答对他的好心。

  Of course...... Yes...... It's just that this ...... It's a pity...... "I stuttered with Ha Lian, not knowing how to answer his kindness.

  这个不可惜。已经运到这里好多年了，从来没有人要。你们买了吧，价钱很便宜……”藏族小伙子恳切地说。

  This is not a pity. It has been shipped here for many years and no one has ever asked for it. You buy it, the price is very cheap......" the Tibetan young man said earnestly.河莲和我商量，没有现成的卫生纸，止血绷带又不能再用了，我们就先买了这宣纸，回去救个急吧。

  He Lian discussed with me that there was no ready-made toilet paper, and the hemostatic bandage could no longer be used, so we bought this rice paper first and went back to save the emergency.我们把宣纸带回去，滴上水做了个试验。洁白的宣纸又柔韧又吸水。我们刚想欢呼，突然发现一个严重的问题：宣纸经过长途跋涉，纸缝里夹满尘沙。

  We took the rice paper back and dripped it with water to do an experiment. White rice paper is flexible and absorbent. We were just about to cheer when we suddenly discovered a serious problem: rice paper had traveled a long distance, and the gaps in the paper were full of dust and sand.这可怎么办？谁都知道，女孩子用的纸要很清洁的。

  What can I do? Everyone knows that the paper used by girls should be very clean.河莲说，我们把土抖干净，然后用高压锅消毒。这样有什么病菌也不怕了。

  Ha Lian said, we shake the soil clean and then disinfect it with a pressure cooker. In this way, there are no germs to be afraid of.大家就高高兴兴地把纸送去蒸，从此再也不用为纸着急了。

  Everyone happily sent the paper to be steamed, and they no longer had to worry about the paper.但我有时候想起来，真是为那些宣纸可惜啊。
But sometimes I think about it, it's really a pity for those rice papers.

未知

  26.藏族的花围裙

  26. Tibetan flower apron

  我小的时候在幼儿园表演藏族舞蹈，每个小姑娘都要扎一条花围裙，那是藏族女装最显著的标志，我们都喜欢得不得了。可那么多的小朋友，到哪里去找许多真正的藏族小围裙呢？幼儿园的阿姨很会想办法，买来白毛巾，贴上彩色蜡光纸的窄条，一条五光十色的藏族小围裙就做好了。

  When I was a child, I performed Tibetan dance in kindergarten, and every little girl had to wear a flower apron, which was the most obvious symbol of Tibetan women's clothing, and we all liked it very much. But so many children, where can they find many real Tibetan aprons? The kindergarten aunt is very good at finding a way, buying a white towel, pasting a narrow strip of colored wax paper, and a colorful Tibetan apron is ready.我把这条毛巾和纸做的围裙扎在腰间，对着落地的穿衣镜一照，哈！美丽极了。雪山上的仙女就是这个样子啊！

  I tied this apron made of towel and paper around my waist and looked at the dressing mirror on the floor, ha! It's beautiful. The fairy on the snowy mountain is like this!来到西藏，看到藏族女人果真围着同样的围裙。也许是扎在腰间的时间太久了，高原的紫外线把颜色晒褪了，它们没有我想象中的漂亮。

  When I came to Tibet, I saw Tibetan women wearing the same apron. Maybe it's because I've been wearing it around my waist for too long, and the ultraviolet rays of the plateau have faded the color, and they are not as beautiful as I imagined.离我们住的地方不远有一条小街，藏语称它为“毛伴”。一天，我在毛伴的小店里闲逛，突然在柜台里发现一条极鲜艳的藏族围裙，缝缀着七彩的绸条，好像把天上的彩虹剪来一段贴在上面了。

  Not far from where we live, there is a small street called "Mao Ban" in Tibetan. One day, I was wandering around Mao Ban's small shop, and suddenly found a very bright Tibetan apron in the counter, sewn with colorful silk strips, as if a piece of rainbow in the sky was cut and pasted on it.这条围裙多少钱？我迫不及待地问售货的藏族小姑娘。

  How much does this apron cost? I couldn't wait to ask the little Tibetan girl who was selling.她微笑着用不很熟练的汉语报出一个价钱，并不很贵，我一算，自己身上带的钱足够了，就一边忙着掏钱，一边连声说，我就要这条围裙了，请赶快给我包起来。

  She smiled and quoted a price in Chinese that she was not very proficient in, which was not very expensive, and when I calculated, I had enough money on me, so I was busy paying for it, and said repeatedly, I want this apron, please wrap it up for me quickly.藏族小姑娘数完了钱，却一动也不动，充满歉意地对我说，单有钱是买不了围裙的。

  The little Tibetan girl finished counting the money, but she didn't move, and said to me apologetically that money alone could not buy an apron.我吃了一惊说，买个围裙还需要什么证明吗？

  I was taken aback and said, do you need any proof to buy an apron?她说，还需要两尺布票。

  She said that two feet of cloth tickets are also needed.那个时候，每年都发一种布票，凭票才可以买布制品，我们的衣服因为都是统一发的，就没有布票。我一时抓了瞎。

  At that time, a kind of cloth ticket was issued every year, and cloth products could be bought with the ticket, and our clothes were issued uniformly, so there was no cloth ticket. I was blinded for a while.我不死心地说，这个围裙都是绸缎做的，为什么要布票呢？是不是有些没道理？

  I don't give up and say, this apron is made of satin, why do you need to cloth the ticket? Isn't it a bit unreasonable?小姑娘红着脸把围裙拿过来，翻过绸缎的背面让我看，那是一层淡紫色的布。她小声说，没有办法，这是规定。

  The little girl blushed and brought the apron over, turned over the back of the satin to show me, it was a layer of lilac cloth. She whispered, there is no way, this is the rule.我再不好说什么了，垂头丧气回到宿舍，把缘由一讲，大家七嘴八舌地帮着我想办法。

  I couldn't say anything anymore, so I returned to the dormitory dejectedly, told the reason, and everyone helped me figure out a way.果平说，让你妈妈给你寄几尺布票来吧。

  Guo Ping said, let your mother send you a few feet of cloth tickets.我撇着嘴说，我还以为你有什么好主意呢！就这个办法啊，我早想过了，不行的。我们家在北京，寄来的是北京布票，在西藏是不能用的。必须要有西藏布票才行。

  I curled my lips and said, I thought you had a good idea! I've thought about this way, it's not possible. Our family is in Beijing, and we sent Beijing cloth tickets, which cannot be used in Tibet. There must be a Tibetan cloth ticket.河莲说，我们同你一起再去找卖围裙的藏族小姑娘，大家一块儿为你说话，人多力量大，没准儿就把她的心说动了。

  He Lian said, let's go with you to find the Tibetan girl who sells aprons, everyone will speak for you together, there are many people and great power, maybe she will move her heart.我连说，不成不成。我看得出她是一个好心的小姑娘，我们要是不给布票就拿走了她的围裙，她会伤心的。要是那样，我情愿不要围裙了。

  I keep saying, no, no. I can see that she is a kind little girl, and she will be sad if we take away her apron without giving a cloth ticket. If that's the case, I'd rather not have an apron.正在大家一筹莫展的时候，一直没吭声的小如附在我的耳边说，我倒有一个办法，你可如此这般……不过要你一个人去，千万不可一大帮人凑热闹。这事能成最好，不成就算了，千万不要再为难小姑娘……”

  Just when everyone was at a loss, Xiaoru, who had been silent, whispered in my ear and said, I have a way, you can be like this...... But if you want to go alone, don't join in the fun with a large group of people. This can be the best, if it doesn't work, don't embarrass the little girl anymore......"我连连答应着，再次进了毛伴。

  I agreed again and again and entered Mao Ban again.

  藏族女孩依旧笑眯眯地看着我，不待我说话，就把那条精美的围裙拿了过来，用略带生硬的汉语说，布票，有了？你的？

  The Tibetan girl still looked at me with a smile, and before I could speak, she took the exquisite apron and said in slightly blunt Chinese, cloth ticket, do you have it? Yours?我记着小如的指示，不慌不忙地说，我没有布票。

  I remembered Xiaoru's instructions and said calmly, I don't have a cloth ticket.听了我的话，她脸上的笑容还在，但拿围裙的手就想往回缩了。

  After listening to my words, the smile on her face was still there, but the hand holding the apron wanted to retract back.我忙说，可是我有一张背心票啊。

  I hurriedly said, but I have a vest ticket.那时候，我们虽然不发布票，但每人每年有一张背心票，可以买一件背心。

  At that time, although we did not issue tickets, each person had a vest ticket every year, and they could buy a vest.她垂着睫毛说，可是，围裙和背心是不一样的。

  She said with her eyelashes down, but an apron and a vest are different.我说，是啊，是不一样。但是，如果我没有背心票，要买一件背心，就要给你两尺布票。对不对？

  I said, yes, it's different. However, if I don't have a vest ticket, if I want to buy a vest, I will give you a two-foot cloth ticket. Right?她又笑起来说，是这样规定的。

  She laughed again and said that it was stipulated.

  我说，那现在我用背心票换你的两尺布票，也说得过去啊。所以，我就可以用这个背心票买藏族围裙了。你说是不是啊？

  I said, now I will exchange the vest ticket for your two-foot cloth ticket, which makes sense. So, I can use this vest ticket to buy a Tibetan apron. Don't you think so?她开心地笑了，露出珍珠一样的牙齿说，这样的买卖，我以前从来没有做过。不过，你说得也有道理。就按你说的办吧，谁让你这样喜欢我们藏族的花围裙呢。

  She smiled happily, showed her pearl-like teeth and said, I have never done such a deal before. However, you have a point. Just do as you say, who made you like our Tibetan flower apron so much.我高高兴兴地抱着围裙回了家。伙伴们都开心极了，每人扎着围裙照了一张相。

  I happily happily hugged my apron and went home. The partners were so happy that each of them took a photo with an apron.只可惜那时的相片都是黑白的，不能充分显示出我的藏族围裙是多么光彩夺目。

  It's a pity that the photos at that time were all black and white, which did not fully show how dazzling my Tibetan apron was.

未知

  [1]本文发表于《作家》杂志1995年1期。这是当时的物价水平。

  [1] This article was published in Writer Magazine, No. 1, 1995. This was the price level at that time.[2]藏语的“医生”之意。

  [2] The Tibetan word for "doctor".[3]藏语，解放军。

  [3] Tibetan, People's Liberation Army.[4]藏语，此处指商店。
[4] Tibetan, here it refers to the store.

Cover

未知

    01.一个人就是一支骑兵 01. A person is a cavalryman

    02.你站在金字塔的第几层 02. You stand on the first floor of the pyramid

    03.人可以最大限度地逼近真实 03. People can get as close to the truth as possible

    04.盲人看 04. Blind people see

    05.柱子的弹性 05. Elasticity of columns

    06.失却四肢的泳者 06. A swimmer who has lost his limbs

    07.断臂的姐姐 07. The sister with a broken arm

    08.为富人担保的穷人 08. The poor who guarantee the rich

    09.保安是谁变的 09. Who changed the security guard

    10.心理学教授的弟子 10. A disciple of a psychology professor

    11.你是百分之三吗 11. Are you three percent?

    12.首选护林员 12. Preferred rangers

    13.第6000次回答 13. 6000th answer

    14.你的身体里必有一颗成功的种子 14. There must be a seed of success in your body

    15.仇人的显微镜 15. The microscope of the enemy

    16.布雷迪的猴子 16. Brady's Monkey

    17.比树更长久的 17. Those that last longer than trees

    18.教养的证据 18. Evidence of upbringing

    19.格子布上的花 19. Flowers on plaid

    20.溪水金沙 20. Stream Golden Sand

    21.拍卖你的生涯 21. Auction off your career

    22.风的青睐 22. The favor of the wind

    23.抵制“但是” 23. Resist the "but"

    24.指纹状的菌落 24. Fingerprint-like colonies

    25.腰线 25. Waistline

    26.你不能要求没有风暴的海洋 26. You can't ask for an ocean without storms

    27.第二志愿 27. Second choice

    28.莺鸟与铁星 28. Warbler and iron star

    29.魔术师的铁钉 29. The magician's iron nail

    30.美容师的作品 30. The work of a beautician

    31.闭阖星云之眼 31. Close the eye of the nebula

    32.没有一棵小草自惭形秽 32. Not a single grass is ashamed of its appearance

    33.机遇是心灵的阅兵 33. Opportunity is a parade of the soul

    34.每只小狗都有一个目标 34. Every puppy has a goal

    35.去学女儿拳 35. Go learn your daughter's boxing

    36.谁毁灭谁 36. Whoever destroys whom

    37.遮颜男子 37. The man who covers his face

    38.走出黑暗巷道 38. Get out of the dark alley

    39.再选你的父母 39. Choose your parents again

    40.虾红色情书 40. Shrimp red love letter

    41.红与黑的少女 41. The girl in red and black

    42.穿宝蓝绸衣的女子 42. A woman wearing royal blue silk

    43.你究竟说了些什么 43. What exactly did you say

    44.最重的咨询者 44. The heaviest consultant

    45.刺玫瑰依然开放 45. The thorny rose is still open

    46.轰毁你心中的魔床 46. Destroy the magic bed in your heart

    47.做一棵城市树需要勇气 47. It takes courage to be an urban tree

    48.拒绝分裂 48. Refuse to divide

    49.有一种笑，令人心碎 49. There is a kind of laughter that is heartbreaking

    50.苔藓绿西服 50. Moss green suit

未知

  01.一个人就是一支骑兵

  01. A person is a cavalryman

  我曾行进在漫天皆白的冰雪中，在一支骑兵的中段靠后部分，那时还不到17岁的年龄，在藏北边防线上。无比艰难的跋涉中，我往前看，是英勇攀缘的战友；向后看，也是英勇攀缘的战友。我明白自己是队列中的一员，只能做一件事，攀缘。那时的我很懦弱，高寒与缺氧像两把冰锥，揳入我的前胸后背。极端的苦乏，让我想到唯一解脱的方法就是自杀。我用仅存的气力做告别人世的准备，可是因为我在连绵不绝的队列中，队列的节奏感和完整性，让我找不到机会对自己下手，就这样拽着马尾翻过雪山，被迫保全了性命。

  I once marched in the white ice and snow, in the middle of a cavalry, at the back of the middle section, when I was not yet 17 years old, on the northern Tibetan border defense. In the extremely difficult trek, I looked forward and saw a heroic comrade-in-arms; Looking back, he is also a comrade-in-arms who climbed heroically. I understand that I am a member of the queue and can only do one thing, climb. At that time, I was very cowardly, and the cold and lack of oxygen were like two ice picks, digging into my chest and back. The extreme suffering made me think that the only way to be relieved was to commit suicide. I used my remaining strength to prepare to say goodbye to the world, but because I was in the endless queue, the rhythm and integrity of the queue made me unable to find a chance to attack myself, so I dragged my ponytail over the snowy mountains and was forced to save my life.之后，我对军队生出一种敬畏和崇拜。

  After that, I developed a sense of awe and admiration for the military.军队是有头有尾的，也有心脏。司令部就是军队的指挥中枢，而司令员就是至高无上的王。无论情况怎样危急，无论条件怎样恶劣，无论事态多么复杂，无论困难怎样重峦叠嶂，指挥机关总是镇定和胸有成竹的。它冷静而清醒，不出昏着儿，不忘乎所以。胜不骄败不馁，紧张地运筹帷幄。我私下里曾想，司令员永远是不可战胜的吗？他可有孤单无能的时刻？一次，司令员病了，卫生科长派我去给他输液。司令员虚弱地躺在白色被子里，须发杂乱，同寻常庄户老汉并无太大的区别。他的萎靡让在一旁看护他的我，有了发问的勇气。

  The army has a beginning and an end, and it also has a heart. The headquarters is the command center of the army, and the commander is the supreme king. No matter how critical the situation is, no matter how harsh the conditions, no matter how complex the situation is, no matter how difficult it is, the command organ is always calm and confident. It is calm and sober, not fainting, and not forgetting what is happening. Victory is not arrogant and defeated, and tense strategizing. I privately thought, is the commander always invincible? Does he have moments of loneliness and incompetence? Once, the commander fell ill, and the chief of the health section sent me to give him an infusion. The commander lay weakly in a white quilt, with messy hair and beard, not much different from an ordinary old man. His malaise gave me, who was watching over him, the courage to ask questions.趁他神志稍清，我说，司令员，你可有胆小的时候？

  While he was a little clearer, I said, Commander, are you timid when you are timid?他看着输液瓶里眼泪般溅落的药水说，有。

  He looked at the tear-like splashing of the potion in the infusion bottle and said, yes.我说，什么时候？

  I said, when?他说，就是现在。我不知道我还要躺多久，才能站起来指挥我的队伍。

  He said, now. I don't know how long I have to lie down before I can get up and command my team.在那时的我看来，这个回答同没回答差不多。

  At that time, it seemed to me that this answer was almost the same as not answering.一支军队是有政委有政治部的，它看起来有些儒雅气，虽说也佩着枪，杀气却不浓重。但你不可小觑，它坚硬如铁又心细如发。它的勇气是深藏不露的，永远知道最初的方向和最后的目的地。知道我们何时软弱，它会给予激励；知道我们何时轻敌，它会给予警示；知道我们何时灰心丧气举步不前，它会给予鞭策……政委经验丰富，处事老到，表面上不动声色，内里洞若观火。说起来我对于政委的好感，还来源于一份血缘。我的父亲曾是一位师政委，这使得我近水楼台先得月地敢于探询政委的内心世界。

  An army has a political commissar and a political department, and it looks a little elegant, although it also wears a gun, but it is not murderous. But you must not underestimate it, it is as hard as iron and as delicate as hair. Its courage is deeply hidden, always knowing the initial direction and the final destination. Knowing when we are weak will motivate us; knowing when we underestimate the enemy, it will give warning; Knowing when we are discouraged and staggering gives us a spur...... The political commissar is experienced and experienced in handling affairs, calm on the surface, and like watching a fire on the inside. Speaking of which, my good impression of the political commissar also comes from a blood relationship. My father was a political commissar of the division, which made me dare to explore the inner world of the political commissar first.您是什么时候变得像一个政委的？我问父亲。

  When did you become like a political commissar? I asked my father.这句话有很大的语病，如果问别的政委，可能会被批评。好在他是我的父亲，原谅我的好奇和冒犯。

  This sentence has a big language problem, and if you ask other political commissars, you may be criticized. Fortunately, he is my father and forgives my curiosity and offense.他说，嗯，政委是慢慢变成的。

  He said, well, the political commissar slowly became.我说，具体是什么时候呢？比如是您30多岁？40多岁？还是更老的时候？

  I said, when exactly is it? For example, are you in your 30s? 40s? Or when you are older?他说，很难找到一个具体的时间，总之变化是逐渐发生的。你先要做自己的政委，然后才能做大家的政委。

  He said that it is difficult to find a specific time, in short, changes occur gradually. You have to be your own political commissar first, and then you can be everyone's political commissar.

  这句话，我也不大懂。当时认为主要区别在于——当自己的政委不用任命，而成为一支军队的政委，是需要更高机构任命的。直到很久以后我才醒悟，一个当不好自己政委的人，不配给更多将士当政委。

  I don't understand this sentence either. At that time, it was believed that the main difference was that when one's own political commissar did not need to be appointed, but became a political commissar of an army, it was necessary to be appointed by a higher body. It wasn't until much later that I realized that a person who can't be his own political commissar is not worthy of being a political commissar for more soldiers.说完了一支军队的司令员和政委，就要说后勤部长了。通常我们想起后勤部长，总伴着食堂的烟火气。后勤部掌管的就是粮草之事，虽说有“兵马未动粮草先行”的古话罩着，但比较起来，后勤部的重要性还是稍逊一筹。比如破釜沉舟，砸坏的都是属于后勤部的设备，可见对于打胜仗来说，后勤部是可以暂时割舍的。起码离开几小时或是一天，没有太大的风险。

  After talking about the commander and political commissar of an army, let's talk about the Minister of Logistics. Usually we think of the Minister of Logistics, always accompanied by the fireworks of the canteen. Although there is an old saying that "soldiers and horses do not move grain and grass first", in comparison, the importance of the logistics department is still slightly inferior. For example, the equipment belonging to the logistics department is all destroyed, which shows that for winning the battle, the logistics department can be temporarily abandoned. At least leave for a few hours or a day, there is not much risk.我一回忆起当年阿里军分区的后勤部长就想笑，他有点邋里邋遢，单帽的檐总是捋不直，好像被特意发了一个伪劣品。我们是新兵，但帽檐笔直。后来才明白，只有极老的兵，才敢藐视军纪。发夏装的时候，他说，这几个女娃娃怎么能在雪山上穿单衣呢？快给基地打报告，把她们的夏装换成冬装，才不会落下病。

  As soon as I recalled that the logistics minister of the Ali Military Sub-district wanted to laugh, he was a little sloppy, and the brim of his hat was always not straightened, as if he had been deliberately sent a counterfeit product. We are recruits, but with a straight brim. Later, I realized that only extremely old soldiers dare to despise military discipline. When distributing summer clothes, he said, how can these female dolls wear single clothes on the snowy mountains? Quickly report to the base and change their summer clothes to winter clothes, so that they will not fall ill.那时候的藏北高原比现在要冷。在一个风和日丽的冬日，我随手拿了温度计到室外去测，得到的数据是零下38度。我有365天都没有脱下过棉裤的记录，膝关节还是如小虫噬咬。男兵的夏装和冬装式样相同，只是一个瘦些一个宽松些。男兵领夏装的时候故意放大一号，就可以把夏装罩在棉衣棉裤上。女式军服夏装有掐腰和小翻领，想要把它套在棉袄棉裤之上简直痴心妄想。

  At that time, the northern Tibetan plateau was colder than it is now. On a sunny winter day, I took a thermometer outdoors to measure it, and the data I got was minus 38 degrees. I haven't taken off my cotton pants for 365 days, and my knee joints are still bitten by insects. The male soldiers' summer clothes are the same as those of winter clothes, but one is thinner and the other is looser. When a male soldier wears a summer dress, he deliberately enlarges one size, so that he can cover the summer coat over the cotton clothes and pants. The women's military uniform summer coat has a pinched waist and small lapels, and it is simply wishful thinking to put it on top of a padded jacket and pants.那时年轻的我们，其实很想在严寒的风雪中，穿半开领的夏装窈窕过市，让众多的男性士兵侧目。至于久远的损害，我们完全顾及不到。后勤部长铁嘴断金，一句话毁了少女们扮俏的梦想。那时我们是愤愤的，便私下里骂他军阀作风。后勤部长似乎能掐会算，他说，你们现在骂我，将来会感激我，傻娃娃啊。女式夏装在严寒的高原，的确是没有用武之地的鸡肋。勉强穿戴，关节炎、气管炎一定会缠上我们。现在我已年逾花甲，还未曾骨折且没有大关节的红肿热痛，这和后勤部长的“军阀”作风密切相关。

  At that time, when we were young, we actually wanted to wear half-open collared summer clothes to pass through the city in the cold wind and snow, which made many male soldiers look sideways. As for the long-term damage, we can't take it into account at all. The Minister of Logistics broke the gold with an iron mouth, and one sentence ruined the girls' dream of dressing up. At that time, we were indignant, so we privately scolded him for his warlord style. The logistics minister seemed to be able to pinch and calculate, he said, you scold me now, and you will be grateful to me in the future, silly doll. Women's summer clothes are indeed useless on the cold plateau. Reluctantly wearing it, arthritis and tracheitis will definitely haunt us. Now that I am over sixty years old, I have not had a fracture and no redness, swelling, heat and pain in my large joints, which is closely related to the "warlord" style of the logistics minister.以上是我对一支作战军队基本配置的了解。

  The above is my understanding of the basic configuration of a combat army.也许你要说，哦，你忘了，还有武器。

  Maybe you're going to say, oh, you forgot, and weapons.是的，军队不能没有武器，骑兵不能没有马。但这对骁勇的军队来讲，并不是最重要的。

  Yes, the army cannot be without weapons, and the cavalry cannot do without horses. But this is not the most important thing for the brave army.那时我有一支步枪，我练到闭着眼睛能在几分钟之内迅速拆解组装，也用它打出了优秀的成绩。我一直以为配给我这种小兵的枪，一定是无名鼠辈。直到我退役很多年之后，才知道它是大名鼎鼎的AK-47的一个版本。枪械是不断改进的，武器是不断发展的，然而如果没有人来操控，枪就是钢铁的生冷拼装，无人机也不过是求婚时的玩具。虽然由于级别的不同，枪和无人机的性能也会有天壤之别，但骨子里，它们是没有生命的。马是骑兵的伴侣，但马服从人。

  I had a rifle at that time, and I practiced it to the point where I could quickly disassemble and assemble it in a matter of minutes with my eyes closed, and I also used it to achieve excellent results. I always thought that the gun given to me as a soldier must be a nameless rat. It wasn't until many years after I retired that I learned it was a version of the famous AK-47. Firearms are constantly improving, weapons are constantly evolving, but if no one controls them, guns are raw and cold assemblies of steel, and drones are just toys when proposing. Although the performance of guns and drones will be very different due to different levels, at the core, they are lifeless. The horse is the companion of the cavalry, but the horse obeys the man.一个人就是一支骑兵，你要有勇气。你能掌握什么技术，这并不是最关键的。普天下的本领千千万，归根结底，都是枪和无人机的远房亲戚。

  A person is a cavalryman, you have to be courageous. What technology you can master is not the most critical. There are thousands of skills in the world, and in the final analysis, they are all distant relatives of guns and drones.你之所以成为你，是因为你有你的司令员和政委，你有你的后勤部长，你是你自己的小兵，又是你自己的统帅。

  You become you because you have your commander and political commissar, you have your logistics minister, you are your own soldier, and you are your own commander.你要知道这支军队向何处去。你要在这支军队沮丧的时候给它打气。你要在这支军队迷路的时候，做它永不失灵的GPS。你要在这支军队忘乎所以的时候，适时地给它兜头一盆冷水。你要在这支军队重伤的时候，给它输血，给它包扎。你要在这支军队畏葸不前的时候，擂响战鼓。你要在它恬然酣睡的时候吹起冲锋号。你要给它以休养生息的机会，你要让它安然和健康，你要知道什么对它是真正的好，并要不懈地坚持。你要知道什么是可能伤害它的陷阱，早早地发出警报远离可能的危险。你要冷静要镇定要充满激情又能适可而止，你要令行禁止健步如飞，你要能帮他找到最相宜的伴侣……

  You need to know where this army is going. You have to cheer up this army when it is frustrated. You have to do the GPS that never fails when this army gets lost. You have to give this army a basin of cold water at the right time when it gets carried away. When this army is seriously injured, you have to give it blood transfusions and bandages it. You have to beat the war drums when this army is afraid of advancing. You have to blow the charge horn while it is sleeping. You have to give it a chance to recuperate, you have to make it safe and healthy, you have to know what is really good for it, and you have to persist unremittingly. You need to know what traps can harm it and alert early to stay away from possible dangers. You have to be calm, calm, passionate and moderate, you have to be able to walk like flying, and you have to be able to help him find the most suitable partner......想到虽是独自一人，但身后有一支军队。车辚辚马萧萧，罡风浩荡，旌旗猎猎，号角长鸣，司政后一应俱全指挥若定，真是令人豪情万丈的事情。

  I thought that although I was alone, there was an army behind me. The chariots and horses are rustling, the wind is mighty, the flags are hunting, the horn is sounding, and the chief minister is all commanded, which is really a proud thing.

未知

  02.你站在金字塔的第几层

  02. You stand on the first floor of the pyramid美国心理学家马斯洛有一段名言：“如果你有意地避重就轻，去做比你尽力所能做到的更小的事情，那么我警告你，在你今后的日子里，你将是很不幸的。因为你总是要逃避那些和你的能力相联系的各种机会和可能性。”每逢读到，我总是心怀战栗地感动。

  American psychologist Maslow famously said: "If you deliberately avoid the heavy and do less than you can do, then I warn you that you will be very unfortunate in your days to come." Because you always have to run away from the opportunities and possibilities that are connected to your abilities. "Whenever I read it, I am always moved with trembling.一个人就像是一粒种子，天生就有发芽的欲望。只要是一颗健康的种子，哪怕是在地下埋藏千年，哪怕是到太空遨游过一圈，哪怕被冰雪封盖，哪怕经过了鸟禽消化液的浸泡，哪怕被风刀霜剑连续斩杀……只要那宝贵的胚芽还在，一到时机成熟，它就会在阳光下探出头来，绽开勃勃的生机。

  A person is like a seed, born with the desire to germinate. As long as it is a healthy seed, even if it has been buried underground for thousands of years, even if it has traveled around space, even if it is covered by ice and snow, even if it has been soaked in the digestive juices of birds and birds, even if it is continuously killed by wind knives and frost swords...... As long as the precious germ is still there, when the time comes, it will poke its head out in the sun and bloom with vitality.现代心理学有很多精彩的论证，这些论证不能像实证的物理、化学，拿出若干铁一般的证据，心理学的很多假说建立在对人的行为的推断和研究之上，被千千万万的人所证实。

  Many hypotheses in psychology are based on the inference and study of human behavior, which have been confirmed by thousands of people.马斯洛先生所创建的人的基本需要的“金字塔”理论，就是这样一个伟大的学说。他研究了很多人的行为和动机，特别是那些自我实现程度很高的人，之后得出了一个结论。简言之，就是在我们人类的精神内核中存在着一个内在需要的金字塔，分成了五个台阶。

  The "pyramid" theory of the basic needs of man created by Mr. Maslow is such a great doctrine. He studied the behavior and motivations of many people, especially those with a high degree of self-actualization, and came to a conclusion. In short, there is a pyramid of intrinsic needs in the spiritual core of our human beings, divided into five steps.在第一个台阶上，是我们的温饱需要——最基本的生存之道。饥肠辘辘，你今晚吃什么饭？是人的第一考虑。寒冬腊月，你今夜睡在哪里？是火车站的长凳还是马路上的水泥管？这都是头等大事。

  On the first step, it is our food and clothing needs - the most basic way to survive. Hungry, what are you eating tonight? It is the first consideration of people. In the cold winter moon, where are you sleeping tonight? Is it a bench at a train station or a cement pipe on the road? This is all top priority.当这个需要满足之后，紧接着就是安全的需要了。你有了吃、有了住，你今天的生命有了保障，可是如果你被其他的人或动物或自然界的恶劣条件所侵犯，你远期的生命就陷在水深火热之中了。因此，一旦温饱不成问题，人马上就考虑安全系数。这一点，如果你不相信，尽可以放眼看去，马上能看到富人区森严的安保设施和世上风行的形形色色的自卫器械。当你从一个熟识的环境换到一个新环境，那种不安和紧张，与陌生人交谈时的畏葸和不自在，如此等等，都从另一个方面证实了安全对人的重要性。

  When this need is satisfied, the need for security is immediately followed. You have food and shelter, and your life today is guaranteed, but if you are violated by other people, animals, or the harsh conditions of nature, your long-term life will be in dire straits. Therefore, once food and clothing are not a problem, people immediately consider the safety factor. If you don't believe this, you can look around and immediately see the strict security facilities in the rich areas and all kinds of self-defense equipment that are popular in the world. When you change from a familiar environment to a new environment, the uneasiness and nervousness, the fear and discomfort when talking to strangers, and so on, all confirm the importance of safety for people from another aspect.现在我们已经到了金字塔的第三台阶。在这个台阶上大大地写着“爱”。这不仅是男女之爱、亲子之爱、手足之爱……这些源于血缘和繁衍的爱意，还有同伴之爱、集体之爱、祖国之爱、民族之爱、文化之爱……总之，这里所提到的“爱”，有着宽泛的含义，但它是那样不可或缺，是人类精神活动的高级需要。我们常常说，一个不懂得爱的人是灰暗和孤独的。也就是说，人的精神需要如果不能完成这种超越和提升，就是饱含瑕疵的半成品。

  Now we have reached the third step of the pyramid. On this step is written "love" in large letters. This is not only the love between men and women, parent-child love, and siblings...... These love stems from blood and reproduction, as well as companion love, collective love, motherland love, national love, and cultural love...... In short, the "love" mentioned here has a broad meaning, but it is so indispensable and a high-level need for human spiritual activities. We often say that a person who does not know how to love is gray and lonely. In other words, if human spiritual needs cannot complete this transcendence and improvement, it is a semi-finished product full of flaws.爱之高处，就是尊严感了。人是一种特殊的动物，人是有尊严感的。一只虫子可以没有尊严，一株树木可以没有尊严，但是一个人不是这样。如果丧失了尊严感，那就不是一个完整的人了。中国的古话里有“不吃嗟来之食”，有“士可杀不可辱”，有“君子一言，驷马难追”，等等，讲的都是尊严的问题。

  The height of love is the sense of dignity. Man is a special animal, and man has a sense of dignity. A bug can have no dignity, a tree can have no dignity, but a person is not like that. If you lose your sense of dignity, you are not a complete person. In the old Chinese saying, there are "don't eat the food that comes from sighing", there are "scholars can be killed but not humiliated", there are "a gentleman's words, it is difficult to chase a horse", etc., all of which talk about the issue of dignity.在金字塔的最高点，屹立着自我价值的体现和追求。什么是自我价值的最高体现——那就是充满了创造性的劳动。我以为劳动是有高下之分的，不是指在价值层面上，而是指在带给人的由衷喜悦程度上。你可以想象并同意，一个科学家在得不到任何报酬的情形下，不倦地研究某一个与现实相隔十万八千里的学术问题，比如“哥德巴赫猜想”，为自己换不到一块窝窝头，但毫无疑问陈景润乐在其中；你基本上不能同意一位老农在得知三年没有人收购麦子的情况下，除了自己够吃之外还会不辞劳苦地广撒麦种。在前者，创造性的劳动里面蕴含着极大的挑战和快乐；在后者，则充斥着重复性劳动的艰辛和疲惫。

  At the highest point of the pyramid, stands the embodiment and pursuit of self-worth. What is the highest manifestation of self-worth - that is, full of creative labor. I think that labor is different, not in terms of value, but in the degree of sincere joy it brings to people. You can imagine and agree that a scientist tirelessly studies an academic problem that is 108,000 miles away from reality without getting paid, such as the "Goldbach conjecture", and cannot exchange a piece of nest for himself, but there is no doubt that Chen Jingrun enjoys it; You basically can't agree with an old farmer who knows that no one has bought wheat for three years, and in addition to having enough to eat, he will tirelessly sow wheat seeds. In the former, creative labor contains great challenges and joys; in the latter, it is full of hardships and exhaustion of repetitive labor.

  人类精神需要的金字塔，在某种意义上讲，是一种铁律，几乎是不可逃避的。当然，我们不能想象一个人在自己的温饱都得不到保障的时候，能够像斯蒂芬·霍金那样去研究宇宙大爆炸这样的问题。这也就是鲁迅先生所说的：年轻人，一是要生存，二是要发展。有一个顺序，有孰先孰后的问题。在解决了温饱和安全这些最基本的生存需要之后，你必定要不满足，你必定要有新的追求。人类精神发育的法则，你是绕不过去的。你吃得饱了，你睡得暖了，你有大房子了，你安居乐业了，你很有安全的保障了……可是，我敢说，在心底最深邃的地方，你有火焰一样的躁动，你如果无法满足它，你就没有恒久的快乐。

  The pyramid of human spiritual needs is, in a sense, an iron law, almost inescapable. Of course, we cannot imagine a person being able to study such a problem as the Big Bang like Stephen Hawking when he is not guaranteed food and clothing. This is what Mr. Lu Xun said: young people, one is to survive, and the other is to develop. There is an order, and there is a question of who comes first. After solving the most basic survival needs such as food, clothing and security, you must be dissatisfied, you must have new pursuits. You can't get around the laws of human spiritual development. You have eaten enough, you have slept warmly, you have a big house, you live and work in peace and contentment, and you are very safe...... However, I dare to say that in the deepest part of your heart, you have a restlessness like a flame, and if you cannot satisfy it, you will not have permanent happiness.

  让我们回到本文开端所引用的马斯洛的那段话。你以为你逃避了风险，你以为你躲避了责任，你以为你成功地掩饰了自己的才华，你以为你心甘情愿地收敛包裹自己，你就可以在人们的艳羡之中安安稳稳地过一生了吗？我相信，你可以用奢华的装备和风流倜傥的举止成功地欺骗几乎所有的人，包括和你至亲至爱之人，但是，每每月朗星稀之时，你永远欺骗不了的一个人，就会在你独处的时候顽强地站在你的面前，拷问你、鞭挞你、谴责你、纠正你……这个人不是别人，正是你自己！由于每一个人都是那样与众不同，由于你所具有的内在生命力一直在熊熊燃烧，所以，当你完成了自己人生的台阶之后，你就要向上攀登。你只有在这种不倦的探索中才能丰富自己的人生，才能得到生命的欢愉，才能感觉到自己内在的充实和价值。

  Let's go back to the passage of Maslow quoted at the beginning of this article. Do you think you have avoided risks, you think you have avoided responsibility, you think you have successfully concealed your talent, you think you are willing to restrain and wrap yourself, and you can live your life peacefully in the envy of people? I believe that you can successfully deceive almost everyone, including your loved ones, with luxurious equipment and dashing demeanor, but every month when the stars are rare, a person you can never deceive will stand tenaciously in front of you when you are alone, torture you, whip you, condemn you, and correct you...... This person is none other than yourself! Because everyone is so different, because your inner vitality is always burning, you have to climb up when you have completed the steps of your life. Only in this tireless exploration can you enrich your life, get the joy of life, and feel your inner fulfillment and value.人是追求创造性快乐的动物，如同飞越大洋的候鸟脑内的罗盘，掌控着我们的一系列选择和决定。你一生将成为怎样的人？在你的价值体系里是怎样的顺序？这些看起来很浩大很空茫的标准，实际上很细致地决定着我们工作、学习、生活的各个层面。

  Humans are animals that pursue creative pleasure, like a compass in the brain of a migratory bird flying across the ocean, controlling a series of choices and decisions in our hearts. What kind of person will you be in your life? What is the order in your value system? These seemingly vast and empty standards actually determine all aspects of our work, study and life in great detail.记得我在北大讲演的时候，有同学递上来一张字条，上面写着：“我智商很高，从小到大一直是班干部，考上北大更证明了我的实力。只要我愿意，继续读硕士和博士都不成问题。你说，我选择金钱作为我一生奋斗的目标，你看怎样？”我把这张字条念了。我说，我很感谢这位同学对我的信任，人生的价值是多元的，以金钱为自己终生的奋斗目标，也大有人在。但我以为，金钱只是手段，在它之后，还有更为深远的目标在导引着你。如果你唯钱是图，那么，你的周围将没有真正的朋友。因为古往今来，已经无数次地证明了，在金钱的旗帜下会聚拢来很多无耻小人。同时，你很可能得不到真正的爱情。因为爱情可以被金钱出卖，却不可被金钱所购买。那个爱上你的人，有可能不是爱你本人，而是爱上了你的信用卡。如果你把金钱当成了证明你的自我价值的工具，我要说，除了单一和狭隘，还有一种盲从，你用世俗的标准代替了内在的准星。

  I remember when I was giving a speech at Peking University, a classmate handed me a note that read: "I have a high IQ and have been a class cadre since I was a child, and being admitted to Peking University proves my strength." As long as I want, it is not a problem to continue with my master's and doctorate. You say, I chose money as my life's goal, what do you think? I read this note. I said, I am very grateful to this classmate for his trust in me, the value of life is diverse, and there are many people who take money as their lifelong goal. But I think that money is just a means, and after it, there are more far-reaching goals guiding you. If you only want money, then you will have no real friends around you. Because throughout the ages, it has been proved countless times that many shameless villains will gather under the banner of money. At the same time, you will most likely not get true love. Because love can be sold by money, but it cannot be bought by money. The person who falls in love with you may not love you personally, but your credit card. If you use money as a tool to prove your self-worth, I would say that in addition to singleness and narrow-mindedness, there is also a kind of blind obedience in which you replace the inner crosshair with worldly standards.我翻阅了几期《华融之声》，看到华融人的志气和理想。谈到从工商银行调到华融来的理由，最主要的是期望自己的能力得到更好的发展。我觉得这是很好的理由，是内心和外在的统一，是朝着自我实现路上的迈进。当然了，自我实现的路，绝不会是一帆风顺的。我们常常会遭遇到挫折和失败，但人生的价值并不在于永远是胜利和成功，而在于这个过程当中我们得到了独一无二的属于自己的体验。在生存之道解决之后，在工作中得到乐趣，就是一个极好的选择。要知道，我们每个人，一生用于工作的时间大于七万小时。可不要小瞧了这七万小时，如果你是在快乐和创造中，你是在寻找自我价值的挑战中，你的人生就会过得很充实。如果你只是为了更多的钱、更宽敞的房子、更多的应酬和名声上的虚荣，你将在七万小时甚至更多的时间里委屈着自己，扼杀着自己，毁灭着自己的自由。

  I flipped through several issues of "The Voice of Huarong" and saw the ambition and ideals of Huarong people. When it comes to the reasons for transferring from ICBC to Huarong, the most important thing is to expect better development of their abilities. I think this is a good reason, it is the unity of the heart and the outside, and it is a step towards self-realization. Of course, the road to self-realization will never be smooth sailing. We often encounter setbacks and failures, but the value of life is not that it is always victory and success, but that we get a unique experience in the process. After the way of survival is solved, having fun at work is an excellent choice. You know, each of us spends more than 70,000 hours working in our lives. Don't underestimate these 70,000 hours, if you are in the joy and creation, you are in the challenge of finding self-worth, your life will be very fulfilling. If you just want more money, a more spacious house, more socializing, and vanity in fame, you will wronged yourself, strangled yourself, and destroyed your freedom for 70,000 hours or more.我在美国印第安人的保留地遇到一位印第安族的心理学家。她说，在我们古老的印第安人那里，有一个风俗，即使自己的温饱没有解决，我们也会用自己的食物拯救他人。因为，对我们来说，帮助别人是精神的传统。我并不是要挑战马斯洛，我只是说，精神有时比肉体更重要。

  I met an Indian psychologist on an American Indian reservation. She said that among our ancient Indians, there was a custom that even if our own food and clothing were not solved, we would use our own food to save others. Because, for us, helping others is a spiritual tradition. I'm not trying to challenge Maslow, I'm just saying that sometimes the spirit is more important than the body.这是那位印第安族心理学家最后留给我的话。

  These are the last words that the Indian psychologist left me.

未知

  03.人可以最大限度地逼近真实

  03. People can get as close to the truth as possible

  朋友给我讲过这样一个故事。

  A friend told me such a story.他祖父小的时候很聪明，也很有毅力，学业有成，正欲大展宏图之际，曾祖将他叫了去，拿出一个古匣，对他说，孩子，我有一件心事，终生未了。因为我得到它们的时候，一生的日子已经过了一半，剩下的时间不够我把它做完了。做学问，就要从年轻的时候着手，我要是交给你一件半成品，不如让你从头开始。

  When his grandfather was very smart, persevering, and academically successful, when he was about to make a big move, his great-grandfather called him there, took out an ancient box, and said to him, "Child, I have something on my mind that will not end for the rest of my life." Because by the time I got them, half of my life had passed, and there wasn't enough time left for me to finish it. To do learning, you must start from a young age, if I give you a semi-finished product, it is better to let you start from scratch.原委是这样的。早年间，江南有一家富豪，酷爱藏书。他家有两册古时传下的医书，集无数医家心血之大成，为杏林一绝。富豪视若珍宝，秘不传人，藏在书楼里，难得一见。后来，富豪出门遇险，一位壮士从强盗手里救了他的性命。富豪感恩不尽，欲以斗载的金银相谢。壮士说，财宝再多、再贵重，也是有价的。我救了你，你的命无价。富豪说，莫非壮士还要取了我的命去？壮士大笑说，我不是要你的命，是想用你的医书救普天下人的性命。富豪想了半天，说，我可以将医书借给你三天，但是三日后的正午，你必得完璧归赵。说罢，命人从嵯峨的木制书楼里，将饱含檀香气味的医书捧了出来。

  The whole story is like this. In the early years, there was a rich family in Jiangnan who loved to collect books. His family has two volumes of medical books passed down in ancient times, which are the culmination of countless doctors' hard work and are a unique in Xinglin. The rich regard it as a treasure, secret and hidden in the library, which is rare to see. Later, when the rich man went out in danger, a strong man saved his life from robbers. The rich man was grateful and wanted to thank him with a bucket of gold and silver. The strong man said that no matter how much treasure and how valuable it is, it is also valuable. I saved you, your life is priceless. The rich man said, could it be that the strong man is going to take my life? The strong man laughed and said, I don't want your life, I want to use your medical book to save the lives of people all over the world. The rich man thought for a long time and said, I can lend you the medical book for three days, but at noon three days later, you will have to return to Zhao completely. After saying that, he ordered someone to hold out the medical book full of sandalwood from the towering wooden library.壮士得了书后，快马加鞭急如星火地赶回家，请来乡下的诸位学子，连夜赶抄医书。书是孤本，时间又那样紧迫，荧荧灯火下，抄书人目眦尽裂，总算在规定时间之内依样画葫芦地描了下来。壮士把医书还了富豪，长出一口气，心想，从此以后便可以用这深锁在豪门的医学宝典造福于天下黎民了。

  After the strong man got the book, he hurried home like a spark, invited students from the countryside to copy medical books overnight. The book is a solitary book, and the time is so tight, under the flickering lights, the scribe's eyes are cracked, and he finally drew it down within the specified time. The strong man returned the medical book to the rich man, let out a sigh, and thought that from now on, he could use this medical treasure book locked in the wealthy family to benefit the people of the world.谁知，抄好的医书拿给医家一看，才知竟是不能用的。医家以人的性命为本，须严谨稳当。这种在匆忙之中由外行人抄下的医方，讹脱衍倒之处甚多，且错得离奇，漏得古怪，寻不出规律，谁敢用它在病人身上做试验呢？

  Who knows, when I took the copied medical book to the doctor, I found out that it was useless. Doctors are based on human life and must be rigorous and stable. This kind of medical prescription copied by laymen in a hurry has many errors, and it is bizarre, leaky, and cannot be found to be regular, who dares to use it to test on patients?壮士造福百姓之心不死，急急赶回富豪家，想晓以大义，再请富豪将医书出借一回，这一次，请行家高手来抄，定可以精当了。当他的马冷汗涔涔到达目的地时，迎接他的是冲天火光。富豪家因遭雷击燃起天火，藏书楼内所有的典籍已化为灰烬。

  The strong man's heart to benefit the people is not dead, and he hurried back to the rich man's house, wanting to know the righteousness, and then ask the rich man to lend the medical book once, this time, please ask the expert master to copy it, and you will be able to do it well. When his horse arrived at his destination in a cold sweat, he was greeted by sky-high fire. The rich man's house was struck by lightning and ignited a fire, and all the books in the library have been reduced to ashes.从此这两册抄录的医书，就像鸡肋，一代代流传了下来。没有人敢用上面的方剂，也没有人舍得丢弃它。书的纸张黄脆了，布面断裂了，后人就又精心地誊抄一遍。因为字句的文理不通，每一个抄写的人都依照自己的理解，将它订正改动一番，闹得愈加面目全非，几成天书。

  Since then, these two copied medical books have been passed down from generation to generation. No one dared to use the above prescription, and no one was willing to throw it away. The paper of the book was yellow and brittle, and the cloth surface was broken, so later generations carefully copied it again. Because the words and sentences are unreasonable, everyone who transcribes them corrects and changes them according to their own understanding, making it more and more unrecognizable, almost a book.曾祖的话说到这里，目光炯炯地看着祖父。

  When my great-grandfather said this, he looked at his grandfather with bright eyes.祖父说，您手里拿的就是这两册书吗？

  Grandfather said, are you holding these two books in your hand?曾祖说，正是。

  The great-grandfather said, exactly.祖父说，您是要我把它们校勘出来？

  Grandfather said, do you want me to proofread them?曾祖说，我希望你能穷毕生的精力让它死而复生。但你只说对了一半，不是它们，是它。工程浩大，你这一辈子，是无法同时改正两本书的。现在，你就从中挑一本吧。留下的那本，只有留待我们的后代子孙再来辨析正误了。

  The great-grandfather said, I hope you can spend your whole life trying to bring it back to life. But you're only half right, it's not them, it's it. The project is huge, and you can't correct two books at the same time in your life. Now, you can choose one of them. The book left behind can only be left for our descendants to distinguish right from wrong.祖父看着两本一模一样的宝蓝色布面古籍，费了斟酌，就像在两个陌生的美女之中挑选自己的终身伴侣，一时不知所措。

  My grandfather looked at two identical royal blue ancient books on canvas, and after much deliberation, it was like choosing his lifelong partner among two strange beauties, and he was at a loss for a while.随意吧。它们难度相同，济世救人的功用也是一样的。曾祖父催促。

  Feel free. They are the same in difficulty, and the function of saving the world is the same. Great-grandfather urged.祖父随手点了上面的那一部书。他知道从这一刻起，这一个动作，就把自己的一生同一方未知的领域，同一个事业，同一种缘分，牢牢地粘在一起。

  My grandfather casually ordered the book above. He knew that from this moment on, this action would firmly stick his life together in the same unknown field, the same career, and the same fate.好吧。曾祖把祖父选定的甲册交到他手里，把乙册收了起来，不让祖父再翻，怕祖父三心二意，最终一事无成。

  All right. The great-grandfather handed over the book A selected by his grandfather to him, put away the book B, and did not let his grandfather turn it over again, for fear that his grandfather would be half-hearted and eventually achieve nothing.祖父没有辜负曾祖的期望，皓首穷经，用了整整半个世纪的时间，将甲书所有的错漏之处更正一新。册页上临摹不清的药材图谱，他亲自到深山老林一一核查。无法判定成分正误的方剂，他采集百草熬药炼成汤，以身试药，几次昏厥在地。为了一句不知出处的引言，他查阅无数典籍……那册医书就像是一盘古老石磨的轴心，天文地理，古今中外，凡是书中涉及的知识，祖父都用全部心血一一验证，直至确凿无疑。祖父的一生围绕着这册古医书旋转，从翩翩少年一直变作鬓发如雪。

  My grandfather did not live up to his great-grandfather's expectations, and spent half a century correcting all the mistakes and omissions in the book. The unclear atlas of medicinal materials on the album page was personally checked by the deep mountains and old forests. Unable to determine the correct or wrong ingredients, he collected herbs to boil the medicine into soup, tested the medicine with his body, and fainted several times. For a quote of unknown origin, he consulted countless classics...... That medical book is like an axis of an ancient stone mill, astronomy and geography, ancient and modern, Chinese and foreign, all the knowledge involved in the book, my grandfather used all his efforts to verify it one by one until it was conclusive. My grandfather's life revolved around this ancient medical book, from a graceful boy to a snowy sideburn.按说祖父读了这许多医书，该能成为一代良医。但是，不。祖父的博学只为那一册医书服务，凡是验证正确的方剂，祖父就不再对它们有丝毫留恋，弃而转向新的领域探索。他只对未知事物和纠正谬误有兴趣，一生穷困艰窘，竟不曾用他验证过的神方医治过病人，获得过收益。

  It is said that my grandfather read so many medical books and should be able to become a good doctor of a generation. But, no. My grandfather's erudition only served that medical book, and whenever the correct prescriptions were verified, my grandfather no longer had the slightest nostalgia for them, and abandoned them to explore new fields. He was only interested in the unknown and correcting fallacies, and he was poor and difficult all his life, but he never used the divine formula he had verified to heal patients and obtain benefits.到了祖父垂垂老矣的时候，他终于将那册古书中的几百处谬误全部订正完了。祖父把眼睛从书上移开，目光苍茫，好像第一次发现自己已走到生命的尽头。

  When my grandfather was dying, he finally corrected all the hundreds of fallacies in the ancient book. My grandfather took his eyes off the book, his eyes blank, as if he had found himself at the end of his life for the first time.人们欢呼雀跃，毕竟从此这本伟大的济世良方可以造福无数百姓了。

  People cheered, after all, this great recipe for the world could benefit countless people.但敬佩之情只持续了极短的一段时间。远方发掘了一座古墓，里面埋藏了许多保存完好的古简，其中正有甲书的原件。人们迫不及待地将祖父校勘过的甲书和原件相比较，结果是那样令人震惊。

  But the admiration lasted only for a very short time. An ancient tomb was excavated in the distance, which contained many well-preserved ancient slips, among which there was the original of the Jia book. People can't wait to compare the book A proofread by their grandfather with the original, and the result is so shocking.祖父校勘过的甲书，同古简完全吻合。

  The book proofread by my grandfather is completely consistent with the ancient slips.也就是说，祖父凭借自己惊人的智慧和毅力，以广博的学识和缜密的思维，加之异乎寻常的直觉，像盲人摸象一般在黑暗中摸索，将甲书在漫长流传过程中产生的所有错误全改正过来了。

  In other words, with his amazing wisdom and perseverance, with his extensive knowledge and meticulous thinking, coupled with his extraordinary intuition, he groped in the dark like a blind man touching an elephant, and corrected all the mistakes made in the long circulation of Jia Shu.

  祖父用毕生的精力，创造了一个奇迹。

  My grandfather used his life's energy to create a miracle.但这个奇迹，又在瞬忽之间烟消灰灭，毫无价值。古书已经出土，正本清源，祖父的一切努力都化为劳而无功的泡沫。人们只记得古书，没有人再忆起祖父和他苦苦寻觅的一生。

  But this miracle disappeared in an instant and was worthless. The ancient books have been unearthed, the source has been cleared, and all my grandfather's efforts have turned into a bubble of futile efforts. People only remember ancient books, and no one remembers his grandfather and his hard search.讲到这里，朋友久久地沉默着。

  At this point, my friend was silent for a long time.古墓里出土了乙医书的真书吗？我问。

  Was the real book of Yiyshu unearthed in the ancient tomb? I asked.没有。朋友答。

  No. Friend answered.我深深地叹息说，如果你的祖父在当初选择的那一瞬间挑选了乙书，结果就完全不一样了啊。

  I sighed deeply and said that if your grandfather chose Book B at the moment of his original choice, the result would have been completely different.朋友说，我在祖父最后的时光也问过他这个问题。祖父说，对我来讲，甲书乙书是一样的。我用一生的时间说明了一个道理，人只要全力以赴地钻研某个问题，就有可能最大限度地逼近它的真实。

  My friend said that I had asked my grandfather this question in his final days. My grandfather said, for me, book A and book B are the same. I have spent my life illustrating a truth, as long as people study a problem with all their might, it is possible to get as close to its truth as possible.祖父在上天给予的两个谜语之中随手挑选了一个。他证明了人的努力可以将千古之谜猜透。

  My grandfather casually chose one of the two riddles given by God. He proved that human efforts can guess the mysteries of the ages.这已经足够。
That's enough.

未知

  04.盲人看

  04. Blind people see

  每逢下学的时候，附近的那所小学就有稠密的人群糊在铁门前，好似风暴前的蚁穴。那是家长等着接各自的孩童回家。

  Whenever school is over, there is a dense crowd in front of the iron gate at the nearby primary school, like an ant nest before a storm. It was parents waiting to pick up their children home.在远离人群的地方，有个人倚着毛白杨悄无声息地站着，从不张望校门口。直到有一个孩子飞快地跑过来，拉着他说，爸，咱们回家。他把左手交给孩子，右手拄起盲杖，一同横穿马路。

  Away from the crowd, there was a person standing quietly leaning on Mao Baiyang, never looking at the school gate. Until a child ran over quickly, pulled him and said, Dad, let's go home. He handed his left hand to the child, and with his right hand he picked up a blind cane, and crossed the road together.多年前，这个盲人常蹲在路边，用二胡拉很哀伤的曲调。他技艺不好，琴也质劣，音符断断续续地抽噎，叫人听了只想快快远离。他面前的盛着零钱的破罐头盒，永远看得到锈蚀的罐底。我偶尔放一点钱进去，也是堵着耳朵到近前。

  Many years ago, this blind man often squatted on the side of the road, playing a very sad tune with an erhu. His skills are not good, the piano is also of poor quality, and the notes are choking intermittently, making people just want to stay away when they hear it. The broken can box containing change in front of him can always see the rusted bottom of the can. I occasionally put a little money in it, but I also plug my ears to get closer.后来，他摆了一个小摊子，卖点手绢、袜子什么的，生意很淡。一天晚上，我回家，一下公共汽车，黑寂就包抄过来。原来这一片突然停电，连路灯都灭了，只有电线杆旁一束光柱如食指捅破星天。靠拢才见是那个盲人打了手电，在卖蜡烛、火柴，价钱很便宜。我赶紧买了一份，喜滋滋地觉着带回光明给亲人。

  Later, he set up a small stall selling handkerchiefs, socks, etc., and the business was very weak. One night, I went home, got off the bus, and Hei Ji outflanked me. It turned out that the power suddenly went out in this area, and even the street lights were extinguished, only a beam of light next to the telephone pole pierced the stars like an index finger. When I got closer, I saw that it was the blind man who had turned on a flashlight, selling candles and matches, and the price was very cheap. I quickly bought one and happily felt that I was bringing back the light to my relatives.之后的某个白日，我又在路旁看到盲人，就气哼哼地走过去，说，你也不能趁着停电发这种不义之财啊！那天你卖的蜡烛算什么货色啊？蜡烛油四下流，烫了我的手。烛捻儿一点也不亮，小得像个萤火虫尾巴。

  One day later, I saw a blind man on the side of the road, so I walked over angrily and said, you can't take advantage of the power outage to make such ill-gotten gains! What kind of candle did you sell that day? The candle oil flowed down and burned my hands. The candle twister is not bright at all, as small as a firefly tail.他愣愣地把塌陷的眼窝对着我，半天才说，对不住，我……不知道……蜡烛的光……该有多大，萤火虫的尾巴……是多亮。那天听说停电，就赶紧批了蜡烛来卖。我只知道……黑了，难受。

  He pointed his collapsed eye sockets at me in a daze, and said for a long time, I'm sorry, I...... I don't know...... The light of the candle...... How big should it be, the tail of a firefly...... How bright it is. When I heard about the power outage that day, I quickly approved candles to sell. I only know...... It's dark, it's uncomfortable.

  我呆住了。那个漆黑的夜晚，即便烛火如豆，还是比完全的黑暗好了不知几多。一个盲人在为明眼人操劳，我还不分青红皂白地指责他，我好悔。

  I was stunned. That dark night, even if the candlelight was like a bean, was still much better than complete darkness. A blind man is working for a sighted person, and I still accuse him indiscriminately, and I regret it.后来，我很长时间没到他的摊子买东西。确信他把我的声音忘掉之后，有一天，我买了一堆杂物，然后放下了五十块钱，对盲人说，不必找了。

  Later, I didn't go to his stall to buy anything for a long time. After being convinced that he had forgotten my voice, one day I bought a bunch of miscellaneous items, put down fifty dollars, and said to the blind man, no need to look for it.我抱着那些东西，走了没几步，被他叫住了。大姐，你给我的是多少钱啊？

  I held those things and walked a few steps when he stopped me. Sister, how much money did you give me?我说，是五十元。

  I said, it's fifty yuan.他说，我从来没拿过这么大的票子。

  He said, "I've never had such a big ticket."见他先是平着指肚，后是立起掌根，反复摩挲钞票的正反面。

  Seeing that he first flattened his fingers, then stood up the base of his palm, and repeatedly rubbed the front and back of the banknote.我说，这钱是真的。您放心。

  I said, the money is real. You can rest assured.他笑笑说，我从来没收到过假钱。谁要是欺负一个瞎子，他的心就先瞎了。我只是不能收您这么多钱，我是在做买卖啊。

  He smiled and said, "I've never received fake money." Whoever bullies a blind man will be blind first. I just can't charge you so much money, I'm doing business.我知道自己又一次错了。

  I know I was wrong again.不知他在哪里学了按摩，经济上渐渐有了起色，从乡下找了一个盲目的姑娘，成了亲。一天，我到公园去，忽然看到他们夫妻相跟着，沿着花径在走。四周湖光山色美若仙境，我想，这对他们来讲，真是一种残酷。

  I don't know where he learned massage, but his finances gradually improved, and he found a blind girl from the countryside and became a relative. One day, I went to the park and suddenly saw them following each other, walking along the flower path. The surrounding lakes and mountains are as beautiful as a fairyland, and I think this is really cruel to them.闪过他们身旁的时候，听到盲夫有些炫耀地问，怎么样？我领你来这儿，景色不错吧？好好看看吧。

  When I flashed past them, I heard the blind man asking a little ostentatiously, how is it? I brought you here, the scenery is good, right?" Take a good look.盲妻不服气地说，好像你看过似的。

  The blind wife said unconvincedly, as if you had seen it.盲夫很肯定地说，我看过，常来看的。

  The blind man said with certainty that I had seen it and often came to see it.听一个盲人连连响亮地说出“看”这个字，叫人顿生悲凉，也觉出一些滑稽。

  Hearing a blind man say the word "look" loudly again and again makes people feel sad and funny.盲妻反唇相讥道，介绍人不是说你胎里瞎吗？啥时看到这里好景色的呢？

  The blind wife retorted, didn't the introducer say that you are blind in the womb? When did you see the good scenery here?盲夫说，别人用眼看，咱可以用心看，用耳朵看，用手看，用鼻子看……加起来一点不比别人少啊。

  The blind man said, others see with their eyes, we can see with our hearts, with our ears, with our hands, and with our noses...... It adds up to nothing less than others.他说着，用手捉了妻子的指，沿着粗糙的树皮攀上去，停在一片极小的叶子上，说，你看到了吗？多老的树，芽子也是嫩的。

  He said, grabbed his wife's finger with his hand, climbed up the rough bark, stopped on a very small leaf, and said, "Do you see it?" The older the tree, the more tender the buds are.那一瞬，我凛然一惊。世上有很多东西，看了如同未看，我们眼在神不在。记住并真正懂得的东西，必得被心房茧住啊。

  At that moment, I was shocked. There are many things in the world, and seeing them is like not seeing them, and our eyes are not there. What you remember and really understand must be cocooned in the heart.后来盲夫妇有了果实，一个瞳仁亮如秋水的男孩。他渐渐长大，上了小学，盲人便天天接送。

  Later, the blind couple had fruit, a boy with eyes as bright as autumn water. He grew up and went to elementary school, and the blind picked him up every day.

  初起那个孩童躲在盲人背后，跟着杖子走。慢慢胆子壮了，绿灯一亮，他就跳着要越过去。父亲总是死死拽住他，用盲杖戳着柏油路说，让我再听听，近处没有车轮声，我们才可动……

  At first, the child hid behind the blind man and followed the cane. Slowly he became bolder, and as soon as the green light came on, he jumped to cross over. My father always dragged him tightly, poked the asphalt with his blind cane and said, "Let me listen again, there is no sound of wheels nearby, we can move......终有一天，孩子对父亲讲，爸，我给你带路吧。他拉起父亲，东张西望，然后一蹦一跳地越过地上的斑马线。于是盲人第一次提起他的盲杖，跟着目光如炬的孩子，无所顾忌地前行，脚步抬得高高，轻捷如飞。

  One day, the child said to his father, Dad, let me show you the way. He pulled his father up, looked around, and jumped over the zebra crossing on the ground. So the blind man lifted his blind staff for the first time, followed the child with torch-like eyes, and moved forward without scruples, his steps raised high and light.孩子越来越大了。当明眼人都不再接送这么高的孩子时，盲人依旧每天倚在校旁的杨树下，等待着。
The child is getting bigger. When the sighted people no longer pick up and drop off such tall children, the blind people still lean under the poplar trees next to the school every day, waiting.

未知

  05.柱子的弹性

  05. Elasticity of columns

  有一个故事，说的是一根柱子，一根三百年前的柱子。那根柱子很坚固，支撑着一座宏伟的大厅。那座大厅很大，大到修建的时候没有人相信一根柱子就能支撑起沉重的穹顶。年轻的建筑师用了种种科学方程式来证实他的这根柱子是何等牢靠和坚固，足够应用。人们虽然不能反对他的公式，却可以反对由他来担当这座市政大厅的总设计师。

  There is a story about a pillar, a pillar from three hundred years ago. The pillar was strong and supported a magnificent hall. The hall was so large that no one believed that a single pillar could support a heavy dome when it was built. The young architect used scientific equations to prove how solid and strong his pillar was to be applied. Although one cannot object to his formula, one can object to him as the chief designer of the municipal hall.年轻的设计师面临一个选择。如果他坚持他的设计，他的设计就永远停留在纸上了。如果他变更他的设计，人们就看不到这根独撑穹顶的柱子了。设计师沉吟再三，修改了他的图纸，又添加了四根柱子。人们对这个更加稳妥的设计拍手叫好，据此建起了壮丽的大厦。

  Young designers are faced with a choice. If he sticks to his design, his design stays on paper forever. If he had changed his design, people would not have seen the column that supported the dome alone. After much thought, the designer revised his drawings and added four more columns. People applauded this more secure design, and magnificent edifices were built accordingly.很多年过去了。年轻的设计师变成了墓碑，大地震袭击了城市。很多建筑都倒塌了。唯有具有五根柱子的市政大厅依然巍峨耸立。人们说，幸亏有五根柱子啊！

  Many years have passed. The young designer turned into a tombstone, and a big earthquake hit the city. Many buildings collapsed. Only the city hall with five columns still stands tall. People say, fortunately, there are five pillars!终于到了维修的时刻。人们惊讶地发现，除了最早设计的那根独撑天下的柱子，其余的四根柱子距离穹顶都有一道窄窄的间隙。也就是说，它们并不承接穹顶的重量，只是美丽的摆设。

  Finally, it's time for repairs. People were surprised to find that except for the first pillar designed to support the world alone, the other four pillars had a narrow gap from the dome. That is, they do not carry the weight of the dome, but are just beautiful decorations.于是人们惊叹这匪夷所思的设计，给予设计者以排山倒海的赞美。回答他们的只是墓草的摇曳。

  So people were amazed by this incredible design and gave the designer overwhelming praise. All they answered was the swaying of the grave grass.

  设计师没有收获生前的称誉，但他收获了一根柱子。设计师是可以怒发冲冠一走了之的，但为了他的柱子的诞生，他妥协和避让了。设计师是可以在事成之后即刻就公布他的计谋的，但为了他的柱子无可辩驳的质地，他保持了宁静的缄默。设计师是可以在一份遗嘱或一部著作中表达他的先见和果敢的，但为了他的柱子的荣誉，他不再贪恋丝毫的浮华。设计师为了他的柱子，隐没在历史的尘埃中。

  The designer did not reap the accolades of his lifetime, but he reaped a pillar. The designer could have been angry and left, but for the birth of his pillar, he compromised and avoided it. The designer could announce his plan as soon as it was done, but for the sake of the irrefutable texture of his columns, he maintained a quiet silence. The designer could express his foresight and courage in a will or a book, but for the honor of his pillars, he no longer coveted the slightest glitz. The designer hid in the dust of history for his columns.这是一根有弹性的柱子。它的设计者把自己的性格赋予了它，于是柱子比设计师活得更长久。

  This is a resilient post. Its designer gave it its own character, so the pillar lived longer than the designer.

未知

  06.失却四肢的泳者

  06. A swimmer who has lost his limbs

  一位外国女孩给我讲了这样一个故事。

  A foreign girl told me such a story.举办残障人运动会，报名的时候，来了一个失却双腿的人，说，我要参加游泳比赛。登记小姐很小心地询问，您在水里将怎样游呢？失却双腿的人说，我会用双手游泳。

  When I signed up for the Paralympic Games, a person who lost his legs came and said, "I want to participate in a swimming competition." The registration lady carefully asked, how will you swim in the water? The person who lost his legs said, I can swim with my hands.又来了一个失却双臂的人，也要报名参加游泳比赛。小姐问，您将如何游呢？失却双臂的人说，我会用双脚游泳。

  Another person who lost his arm also had to sign up for a swimming competition. The lady asked, how will you swim? The person who lost his arms said, "I can swim with my feet."小姐刚给他们登记完，又来了一个既没有双腿也没有双臂，也就是说，整个失却四肢的人，也要报名参加游泳比赛。小姐竭力保持镇静，小声问，您将怎样游泳？那人笑嘻嘻地答道：我将用耳朵游泳。

  As soon as the young lady finished registering them, another person came who had neither legs nor arms, that is, the entire person who had lost his limbs also had to sign up for the swimming competition. The young lady tried her best to stay calm and whispered, "How will you swim?" The man replied with a smile: I will swim with my ears.他失却四肢的躯体好似圆滚滚的梭。由于长久的努力，他的耳朵硕大而强健，能十分灵活地扑动向前。下水试游，如同一枚鱼雷出舱，速度比常人还快。于是，知道底细的人们暗暗传说，一个伟大的世界纪录即将诞生。

  His body was like a round shuttle. As a result of long-term efforts, his ears are large and strong, and he can flutter forward very flexibly. Launching into the water for a test swim, it is like a torpedo out of the cabin, faster than ordinary people. As a result, people who know the details secretly legend that a great world record is about to be born.正式比赛那天，人山人海。当失却四肢的人出现在跳台上的时候，简直山呼海啸。发令枪响了，运动员扑通扑通入水。一道道白箭推进，浪花迸溅，竟令人一时看不清英雄的所在。比赛的结果出来了，冠军是失却双臂的人，亚军是失却双腿的人，季军是……

  On the day of the official competition, there were crowds. When the person who lost his limbs appeared on the jumping platform, it was like a tsunami. The starting gun sounded, and the athlete plopped into the water. White arrows advanced one after another, and the waves splashed, making it impossible to see where the hero was for a while. The results of the competition are out, the champion is the one who has lost both arms, the runner-up is the one who has lost his legs, and the third place is ......英雄呢？没有人看到英雄在哪里，起码是在终点线的附近找不着英雄独特的身姿。真奇怪，大家分明看到失却四肢的游泳者跳进水里了啊！

  What about the heroes? No one saw where the hero was, at least not near the finish line. It's really strange, everyone clearly saw the swimmer who lost his limbs jumped into the water!于是更多的人开始寻找，终于在起点附近摸到了英雄。他沉入水底，已经淹死了。在他的头上，戴着一顶鲜艳的游泳帽，遮住了耳朵。那是根据泳场规则，在比赛前由一位美丽的姑娘给他戴上的。

  So more people began to look for it, and finally found the hero near the starting point. He sank to the bottom and was already drowning. On his head, he wears a bright swimming cap that covers his ears. It was put on by a beautiful girl before the competition, according to the rules of the swimming pool.我曾把这故事讲给旁人听。听完之后的反应，形形色色。

  I once told this story to others. The reaction after listening was varied.有人说，那是一个阴谋。可能是哪个想夺冠军的人出的损招，扼杀别人才能保住自己。

  Some people say that it was a conspiracy. It may be a loss move made by someone who wants to win the championship, and only by strangling others can he save himself.有人说，那个来送泳帽的人，如果不是一个漂亮的女孩子就好了，泳者就不会神魂颠倒。就算全世界的人都忘记了他的耳朵的功能，他也会保持清醒，拒绝戴那顶美丽却杀人的帽子。

  Some people say that the person who came to deliver the swimming cap would not have been fascinated if it weren't for a beautiful girl. Even if people all over the world forget the function of his ears, he will remain awake and refuse to wear that beautiful but murderous hat.有人说，既然没了手和脚，就该安守本分，游什么泳呢？要知道水火无情，孤注一掷的时候，风险随时会将你吞没。

  Some people say that since you have no hands and feet, you should keep your duty and swim? You must know that water and fire are ruthless, and when you are desperate, risk will engulf you at any time.有人说，为什么要有这么个混账的规则，游泳帽有什么作用？各行各业都有这种教条的规矩，不知害了多少人才，种种陋习何时才会终结？

  Some people say, why is there such a bastard rule, what is the function of a swimming cap? All walks of life have this dogmatic rule, I don't know how many talents have been harmed, and when will all kinds of bad habits end?我把这些议论告诉女孩。她说，干吗都是负面？这是一个笑话啊，虽然有一点深沉。当我们完整的时候，奋斗比较容易。当我们没有手的时候，我们可以用脚奋斗。当我们没有脚的时候，我们可以用手奋斗。当我们手和脚都没有的时候，我们可以用耳朵奋斗。

  I told the girl about these discussions. She said, why are they all negative? It's a joke, albeit a little deep. When we are whole, it is easier to struggle. When we don't have hands, we can fight with our feet. When we don't have feet, we can fight with our hands. When we have no hands and feet, we can fight with our ears.但是，即使在这时，我们依然有失败甚至完全毁灭的可能。很多英雄，在战胜了常人难以想象的艰难困苦后并没有得到最后的成功。

  But even then, we still have the possibility of failure or even complete destruction. Many heroes did not achieve final success after overcoming unimaginable hardships and hardships for ordinary people.凶手正是自己的耳朵——你最值得骄傲的本领。

  The murderer is your own ears - your proudest skill.

未知

  07.断臂的姐姐

  07. The sister with a broken arm

  我有一个妹妹，比我年轻（这是废话啦），聪慧机警。她在北大读完计算机专业，到一家工厂当工程师。多年来，她一直是我的作品的忠实读者，经常提出一些很尖锐、很中肯的意见，使我受益匪浅。

  I have a younger sister who is younger than me (this is nonsense) and is intelligent and alert. She graduated from Peking University with a computer major and worked as an engineer in a factory. She has been a loyal reader of my work for many years, often giving some very sharp and pertinent opinions that have benefited me a lot.原以为我俩一文一理，是两股道上跑的车，绝无聚头的日子。不想随着国门打开，洋货涌入，国产计算机的局势日见危急，妹妹所在的工厂濒临倒闭，最后竟到了只发微薄的生活费的境地。

  I thought that the two of us were the same thing, and we were two cars running on the road, and there would never be a day when we got together. I don't want to see the opening of the country, the influx of foreign goods, the situation of domestic computers is becoming more and more critical, and my sister's factory is on the verge of closure, and finally it has reached a situation where only meager living expenses are paid.一日，老母对我说，看你写些小文章，经常有淡绿色的汇款单寄来，虽说仨瓜俩枣的，管不了什么大事，终是可以让你贴补些家用，给孩子买只烧鸡的时候，手不至于哆嗦得太甚。你既有了这个本事，何不教你亲妹妹两招。她反正也闲得无事，试着写写，万一高中了，岂不也宽裕些？

  One day, my mother said to me, watching you write some small articles, there are often pale green remittance slips, although it is three melons and two dates, you can't control any major things, but in the end you can make up for some household expenses, and when you buy a roast chicken for your children, your hands will not tremble too much. Since you have this ability, why don't you teach your sister two tricks. She is idle anyway, try to write, in case she is in high school, wouldn't she be more generous?母亲这样一说，倒让我很不好意思起来，好像长久以来自己私藏了一件祖传的宝贝，只顾独享，怠慢了一奶同胞的妹妹。

  When my mother said this, I was very embarrassed, as if I had hidden an ancestral treasure for a long time, only focusing on it and neglecting my sister.我支吾着说，世界级的大文豪海明威先生说过，写作这种才能，是几百万人当中才能摊上一份的，不是谁想写都能写的。

  I hesitated to say that Mr. Hemingway, a world-class writer, said that the talent of writing can only be shared among millions of people, not anyone who wants to write can write.老母撇撇嘴说，她与你同父同母，我就不信只有你能写，她就写不得！

  My mother curled her lips and said, she is the same father and mother as you, I don't believe that only you can write, she can't write!话说到这份儿上，我只有对妹妹说，你写一篇，拿来给我看看。

  Speaking of this, I can only say to my sister, you write one and show it to me.妹妹很为难地说，写什么呢？我又不像你，到过人迹罕至的西藏。我是生在北京，长在北京，最远的旅行就是到了北大的未名湖畔。这样简单的人生经历，写出的文章，只怕小孩子都不会看的。

  My sister was very embarrassed and said, what should I write? I'm not like you, I've been to Tibet, which is inaccessible. I was born in Beijing, grew up in Beijing, and the farthest trip was to the unnamed lake of Peking University. Such a simple life experience, the articles written, I am afraid that children will not read them.我说，先不要想那么多吧。你就从你最熟悉最喜欢的事情写起，不要有任何顾虑和框框。写的时候也不要回头看，写作就像走夜路，一回头就会看到鬼影，失了写下去的勇气。你只管一门心思地写，一切等你写出来再说。

  I said, don't think so much yet. You start with what you are most familiar with and like, without any worries or frames. Don't look back when writing, writing is like walking at night, and when you look back, you will see ghosts and lose the courage to write. You just write with all your heart, and everything will be told when you write it.

  妹妹听完我的话，就回她自己的家去了。其后的很长一段时间无声无息。当我几乎把这件事忘记的时候，她很腼腆地交给我几张纸，说是小说稿写完了，请我指正。

  After listening to my words, my sister went back to her own home. It was silent for a long time afterwards. When I almost forgot about it, she shyly handed me a few pieces of paper, saying that the novel was finished and asked me to correct it.我拿着那几张纸，翻来覆去地看了好几遍，好像是在研究这纸是什么材料制成的。我知道妹妹很紧张地注视着我，等待着我的裁决。我故意把这段时间拉得很长——不是要折磨她，是在反复推敲自己的结论是否公正。

  I took those pieces of paper and looked at them over and over several times, as if I was studying what material the paper was made of. I know my sister is watching me nervously, waiting for my verdict. I deliberately lengthened this period - not to torture her, but to repeatedly deliberate on whether my conclusions were fair.我慢吞吞地说，你的文章，我看完了。我在这里看到了许多不成熟和粗疏的地方，但是，我要坦率地说，你的文字里面蕴含着一种才能……

  I said slowly, I've finished reading your article. I see a lot of immaturity and sloppy here, but I want to be honest that there is a talent in your words......妹妹吃惊地说，你不是骗我吧？不是故意在鼓励我吧？这是真的吗？我真的可以写一点东西吗？

  My sister was surprised and said, you didn't lie to me, did you? Isn't he trying to encourage me? Is this true? Can I really write a little thing?我说，我有什么必要骗你呢？写作是一件很辛苦的事情，说真的，我真不愿你加入这个行列，它比你做电脑工程师的成功概率要低得多。但是，如果你喜欢，可以一试，李白说过，天生我材必有用。如果你爱好用笔来传达你对人世间的感慨，就沿着这条路走下去好了。

  I said, why should I lie to you? Writing is a hard job, and seriously, I really don't want you to join the ranks, it's much lower than your chances of success as a computer engineer. However, if you like it, you can give it a try, Li Bai said, I am born to be useful. If you like to use a pen to convey your feelings about the world, just go down this path.妹妹的脸红起来，说，姐姐，我愿一试。

  My sister blushed and said, sister, I would like to try.我说，那好吧，回去再写十篇来。

  I said, okay, go back and write ten more articles.用了大约一年时间，妹妹的十篇文章才写好。我一次都没有催过她。我固执地认为，一个人如果真正热爱一个行当，不用人催，他也会努力的。若是不热爱，催也无用。

  It took about a year for my sister's ten articles to be written. I never urged her. I stubbornly believe that if a person really loves a profession and doesn't need to be urged, he will work hard. If you don't love it, it's useless to urge it.当我看到厚厚一沓用计算机打得眉清目秀的稿子时，知道妹妹下了大功夫。读稿的时候，我紧张地控制着表情肌，什么神态也不显露出来。看过之后，把稿子随手递还。

  When I saw a thick stack of manuscripts typed on a computer, I knew that my sister had put in a lot of effort. When I read the manuscript, I nervously controlled my facial muscles and didn't show any expression. After reading it, return the manuscript casually.怎么样呢？她焦灼地问。

  How? She asked anxiously.我淡淡地说，还好，起码比我想象的要好得多。有几篇甚至可以说是很不错的了。

  I said lightly, fortunately, at least it was much better than I thought. There are a few that can even be said to be very good.妹妹很明显地松了一口气，说，这下我就放心了。把稿件又塞给我。

  My sister was obviously relieved and said, now I am relieved. Stuff the manuscript into me again.想干什么？我陡然变色。

  What do you want to do? I suddenly changed color.妹妹说，我写好了，属于我的事就干完了，剩下的活儿就是你的了。你在文学界有那么多的朋友，帮我转一下稿子，该是轻而易举的啊。

  My sister said, I have written it, and my work will be done, and the rest will be yours. You have so many friends in the literary world, it should be easy to help me transfer the manuscript.我说，是啊是啊，举手之劳。但是，我不能给你做这件事。

  I said, yes, yes, thank you for raising your hand. However, I can't do this for you.

  在旁侧耳细听的老母搭了腔，你平常不是经常给素不相识的文学青年转稿子吗，怎么到了自己的亲妹妹头上反倒这样推三阻四？

  The old mother who was listening carefully on the side spoke, don't you usually transfer manuscripts to literary young people you don't know, why do you push it like this when it comes to your own sister?我把手压在妹妹的文稿之上，对她说，转稿子是很容易的事情，只是我想让你经历一个文学青年应该走的全部磨炼过程。正是因为你不仅仅是为了发一篇稿子，你是为了热爱，把写作当作终生喜爱的事业来看待的，所以我更不能帮你这个忙。为你转了稿，其实是害了你。经了我的手，你的稿子发了，你就弄不清到底是自己已到了能发表的水平还是沾了姐姐的光。况且我能帮你发一篇，我不能帮你发所有的篇目。就算我有力量帮你发了所有的作品，那究竟是你的能力还是我的能力呢？一个有志气的人，应该一针一线、一砖一瓦都由自己独立完成。

  I put my hand on my sister's manuscript and told her that it was easy to transfer the manuscript, but I wanted you to go through all the tempering processes that a literary youth should go through. It is precisely because you are not just for publishing a manuscript, you are for love, and you regard writing as a lifelong love, so I can't help you with this. Transferring the manuscript for you is actually harming you. After my hand, your manuscript is published, and you can't figure out whether you have reached the level of publication or if you are stained with your sister's light. Besides, I can help you post one, I can't help you post all the articles. Even if I have the strength to help you post all the works, is it your ability or mine? An ambitious person should complete every stitch and thread, brick by brick by himself.妹妹沉思良久后说，姐姐，这么说，你是不愿帮我的忙了？

  After thinking for a long time, my sister said, sister, if you say so, you don't want to help me?我说，妹妹，姐姐愿意帮你。只是如何帮法，要依我的主意。在这件事上，请你原谅，姐姐只肯出脑，不肯出手。我可以用嘴指出你的作品有何不足，但我不会伸出一根手指接触你的稿子。

  I said, sister, sister is willing to help you. It's just that how to help the law depends on my ideas. In this matter, please forgive me, my sister is only willing to think out and refuse to take action. I can point out what is lacking in your work, but I won't stick out a finger to touch your manuscript.老母在一旁说，是不是因你当初是单枪匹马走上文坛的，今天对自己的妹妹才这般冷面无情？

  My mother said on the side, is it because you entered the literary world single-handedly that you are so cold and ruthless to your sister today?我说，妈妈，我至今感谢你和父亲在文化圈子里没有一个熟人，感谢我写第一篇作品时的举目无亲。它激我努力，逼我向前。我不能因自己干了这一行，就剥夺了妹妹从零开始的努力过程。这对于一个作家是太重要的锻炼，犹如一个婴儿是吃母乳还是喝苞谷糊糊长大，体质绝不相同。

  I said, Mom, I am grateful that you and my father do not have a single acquaintance in the cultural circle, and thank you for not having a relative when I wrote my first work. It motivates me to work hard and pushes me forward. I can't deprive my sister of the process of working hard from scratch just because I did this business myself. This is too important an exercise for a writer, just like whether a baby grows up eating breast milk or drinking bud grains, the physique is by no means the same.妹妹说，姐姐于我，要做西西里岛上出土的维纳斯，不肯伸出双臂。

  My sister said, "My sister wants to be the Venus unearthed in Sicily, and she refuses to stretch out her arms."我说，错。维纳斯的胳膊是别人给她折断的，欲补不能。我是王佐，自断一臂。

  I said, wrong. Venus's arm was broken by someone else, and she couldn't make up for it. I am Wang Zuo, and I cut off an arm.妹妹说，我懂了。

  My sister said, I understand.在其后又是将近一年的时光中，妹妹像没头苍蝇似的，为她的文稿寻找编辑部。我在一旁冷眼旁观，这中间我有无数次机会举荐她的稿子，但我时时同自己想要帮她一把的念头，做着不懈的斗争。我替毫不相干的青年转稿子，殷勤地向编辑询问他们稿子的下落，竭尽全力地为他们的作品说好话……但我信守诺言，没有一个字提及妹妹的作品。

  For nearly a year after that, my sister looked for the editorial office for her manuscript like a headless fly. I watched coldly, and I had countless opportunities to recommend her manuscript, but I always fought unremittingly against my desire to help her. I transferred manuscripts for irrelevant young people, diligently asked the editor about the whereabouts of their manuscripts, and tried my best to say good things about their works...... But I kept my promise and didn't mention my sister's work in a single word.妹妹在图书馆找到各种编辑部的地址，忐忑不安地寄出她的稿子，然后是夜不能寐的、漫长焦灼的等待……终于，她的十篇文稿全部投中，在各种刊物上发表了。

  My sister found the addresses of various editorial offices in the library, sent her manuscript uneasily, and then waited a long and anxious wait that kept her awake at night...... Finally, all ten of her manuscripts were submitted and published in various publications.居然无一退稿！而且这都是我自己奋斗来的啊！妹妹喜极而泣，自信心空前地加强了。

  None of them were rejected! And this is all my own struggle! My sister cried with joy, and her self-confidence was strengthened like never before.老母对我说，想不到你这招儿居然很灵，只是为一服虎狼之药，药性凶猛了些。

  My mother said to me, I didn't expect that your trick was actually very effective, just to take the medicine of tigers and wolves, the medicinal properties were more ferocious.我说，哪里是什么虎狼之药，不过是平常人的正常遭遇罢了。我们现在凡做一事，总是先想到认识什么人，试图依靠他人的力量。其实，这世上最值得信赖的人正是你自己。尤其是那种成功概率比较低的事，更要凭自己的双手去做，以积累经验。过程掺了水分，不如不做。

  I said, where is the medicine of tigers and wolves, but it is just a normal experience for ordinary people. Whenever we do anything now, we always think of who we know and try to rely on the power of others. In fact, the most trustworthy person in this world is yourself. Especially for things with a low probability of success, you have to do it with your own hands to accumulate experience. The process is mixed with water, so it is better not to do it.老母笑吟吟地说，现如今两个女儿的文字都可换回些柴米油盐酱醋茶钱，喜煞人也。

  The mother said with a smile that now the words of the two daughters can be exchanged for some firewood, rice, oil, salt, sauce, vinegar, tea money, which is also very pleasant.我拉着妹妹的手说，革命尚未成功，你我仍须努力啊。

  I took my sister's hand and said, the revolution has not yet succeeded, you and I still have to work hard.

未知

  08.为富人担保的穷人

  08. The poor who guarantee the rich

  南方的一座小城。

  A small city in the south.瘦弱的女人，大约四十岁，朴素到陈旧的装束，使人很难把她和推销信用卡这种新潮行当联系起来。她业绩显赫，在很短的时间内就推销了上千张，每张卡一千元开户，且全部是个人购买。

  The thin woman, about forty years old, was plain to the point of old-fashioned attire, making it difficult to associate her with the trendy business of selling credit cards. She has a remarkable performance, selling thousands of cards in a short period of time, opening an account for 1,000 yuan per card, and all of them are purchased by individuals.你干得很出色啊，我说。

  You did a great job, I said.人到了没办法的时候，就给逼出主意来了……我原在工厂做工，后来不景气……银行给了我一大沓表，每张表相当于一张卡。要是我不能把这些卡推销出去，今后的工作就很难说……她淡淡地讲着，表情也像一张新的信用卡，平和而干净。

  When people have no choice, they force out ideas...... I used to work in a factory, but then it was sluggish...... The bank gave me a large stack of tables, each equivalent to a card. If I can't sell these cards, it's hard to say what I'm going to do in the future...... She spoke lightly, her expression like a new credit card, peaceful and clean.你的第一张卡卖给谁了呢？是不是很难？我小心地问，万事开头难，以她的年纪、长相和性格，第一步肯定布满荆棘。

  Who did you sell your first card to? Isn't it difficult? I asked carefully, everything is difficult at the beginning, with her age, appearance and personality, the first step must be full of thorns.没想到她笑起来，说，第一张是一点也不难的，我一下子就卖出去了。我自己买了我的第一张卡。虽然没那么多闲钱，但我得先学会用卡，要是我都稀里糊涂的，还能指望别人买卡吗？

  Unexpectedly, she laughed and said, the first one is not difficult at all, and I sold it all at once. I bought my first card myself. Although I don't have that much spare money, I have to learn to use the card first, if I am confused, can I still expect others to buy the card?说着，她从衣袋里掏出一个男用钱夹，里头小格子很多，好像盛不了多少钱，是人造革的。她一边说一边很亲切地抚摸着皮夹，好像它是一只有呼吸的小动物。它是我工作的帮手，用个文明词，就是道具。

  As she spoke, she took out a men's wallet from her pocket, which had a lot of small lattices in it, as if it couldn't hold much money, and it was leatherette. As she spoke, she stroked her wallet affectionately, as if it were a breathing little animal. It is a helper in my work, and to use a civilized word, it is a prop.她接着讲述卖第二张卡的经历。

  She went on to talk about her experience selling a second card.那是一户大款。我把来意说了，他连头也不抬地说，你给我出去，我不要什么卡。积我多少年的经验，没有什么比现钱更好使的东西了。

  That's a big deal. I told him what I meant, and he said without even raising his head, you go out for me, I don't want any cards. With so many years of experience, there is nothing better than cash.我说，您的生意越做越大，钱会越聚越多。总有一天，您带的现钱会使您走不动路。

  I said, the bigger your business gets, the more money you will accumulate. One day, the cash you bring will make you unable to walk.他把头抬起来一字一顿地说，那我会雇人给我扛着钱。

  He raised his head and said word by word, then I will hire someone to carry the money for me.我说，积我多少年的经验，钱放在谁的口袋里，也不如放在自己兜里保险。我请您看看这个国外最新式样的钱夹。

  I said, with how many years of experience I have, it is better to put the money in my own pocket than to put it in my own pocket. I invite you to take a look at this latest foreign style wallet.他注意地盯着我说，你是推销钱夹还是推销信用卡的？

  He stared at me attentively and said, are you selling wallets or credit cards?我不理他，把小格子一个个展示给他看。然后说，这些地方都是装信用卡的，真正有钱的人，随身带的是卡而不是钱。当然他们有时也带一点零钱，那是为了付小费和施舍乞丐。用卡是一种文明的方式，真正的大亨是不屑于用大拇指数钱的，他们只用食指把卡推过去。假如您到大饭店请朋友吃饭，当着客人的面数一大沓旧钞票，是一件煞风景的事。别的不说，就说钞票不干净，上面带着数不清的病菌，您跟别人握手，人家也许会嫌您脏……

  I ignored him and showed him the small grids one by one. Then he said that these places are all equipped with credit cards, and people who are really rich carry cards instead of money with them. Of course, they sometimes bring a little change, which is to tip and give alms to beggars. Using cards is a civilized way, and real tycoons disdain to count money with their thumbs, they only push the card with their index finger. If you go to a hotel to invite friends to dinner, it is a bad thing to count a large stack of old banknotes in front of the guests. If nothing else, just say that the banknotes are not clean, with countless germs on them, and if you shake hands with others, people may think you are dirty......他突然打断我的话，说，你还有完没完了？咒我啊？我买你的卡就是了！

  He suddenly interrupted me and said, are you still finished? Are you cursing me? I'll just buy your card!说完这段经历，她又安静地沉默下来。

  After talking about this experience, she fell silent again.我说，你对大款倒真是不卑不亢。但世上的大款终究是少数，对工薪阶层你说什么呢？

  I said, you are really not humble or arrogant about big money. But the big money in the world is a minority after all, what do you say to the working class?女人说，我对那些常常出差的人讲，你们出门在外，最怕的不就是丢钱吗？办事且不说，单是……咱们都这么大岁数了，我也不怕难为情，街上卖的带拉锁的裤头就是干这个使的。可夏天您就不出汗了？出了汗，您就不洗内衣了？那点钱像耗子搬家似的藏来藏去，烦不烦人？要是遇着临时用钱的事，你还得上厕所掏钱，着急不着急？

  The woman said, I tell those who often travel on business, isn't the most feared thing you are most afraid of when you go out? Don't talk about doing things, just ...... We are all so old, and I am not afraid of embarrassment, the trousers with zippers sold on the street are for this. But you don't sweat in summer? If you sweat, you won't wash your underwear? Is it annoying to hide that little money around like a mouse moving? If you encounter a temporary use of money, you have to go to the toilet to pay for it, are you in a hurry?听你这么一说，他们一定乐意买卡了。我说。

  Hearing you say this, they must be happy to buy a card. I say.也不一定。有的人是立马掏钱了。也有的人说，别把你的卡说得那么好，带钱会丢，带卡就不会丢了吗？小偷可不认这个理！

  Not necessarily. Some people paid for it immediately. Some people also say, don't say your card so well, you will lose it with money, but you won't lose it with your card? The thief doesn't admit this!那你怎么回答呢？我有些替她着急。

  So how do you answer? I'm a little anxious for her.我就说，使卡的时候，要和本人的身份证配合着用。您把卡装在左兜里，把身份证装在右兜里。单偷了卡，他也没法用。哪儿那么巧，小偷先掏了您左兜又掏您右兜，您就把卡和身份证一块儿都丢了呢？回来补个卡就是了，避免了损失。听我这么一说，那些出差的人就笑起来，说我们买你的卡了。

  I said that when using the card, it should be used in conjunction with my ID card. You put your card in your left pocket and your ID card in your right pocket. If he stole the card, he couldn't use it. Where is it so coincidental that the thief first took out your left pocket and then your right pocket, and you lost your card and ID card? Just come back and make up for the card to avoid losses. When I said this, those who were on business laughed and said we bought your card.

  我说，这座城市并不大，就算大款和出差的人都买了你的卡，离你要完成的数量也还差着呢。

  I said, the city is not big, even if the big money and business travelers buy your card, it is still far from the amount you want to complete.她叹了一口气说，是啊，我就是只有再想办法了。

  She sighed and said, yes, I just have to think of another way.比如碰到有人结婚，我就找到他的朋友们，说，你们正在想送给新人什么礼物吧？我给你们出个主意，凑钱送他们一张信用卡吧，这比送人家一大堆锅碗瓢盆、床单被面要好。一是小两口可以买自己心爱的东西，你们就尽了心意。二是什么时候人家用起这卡来，都会想起朋友的情意。哪怕卡上的钱用完了，他们自己往卡里续钱，也还记得你们开的这个头……

  For example, when someone gets married, I find his friends and say, what gift are you trying to give to the newlyweds? I'll give you an idea, pool money to give them a credit card, which is better than giving them a lot of pots and pans, sheets and quilts. First, the young couple can buy their favorite things, and you will do your best. Second, when people use this card, they will think of their friends' affection. Even if the money on the card runs out, they renew the money in the card themselves, and they still remember the head you opened......要是哪个单位效益好，预备表彰先进模范，我就去对领导说，给你们的先进人物送一张卡吧，这个礼物新颖……

  If any unit has good benefits and is ready to commend advanced models, I will go to the leaders and say, give a card to your advanced figures, this gift is novel......女人说，不过，一下子能奖励一千块钱的单位并不多。有的领导说，我们的胃口没有那么大。我就说，你只需奖二十块钱就行。轮到领导搞不懂了，我说，每张卡需要二十块钱的开户费，您把这个钱出了，剩下的钱由个人出，也可以啊。现在的二十块钱实在算不了什么，买只烧鸡还缺条腿呢。您要是单奖给谁二十块钱，保证拿不出手，可您奖了他这个开户的手续，礼轻情意重啊！中国人有时候挺怪的，心疼小钱，不心疼大钱。许多人不愿意让这个开户的资格作废，就买了卡……

  The woman said, however, there are not many units that can reward a thousand yuan at once. Some leaders say that our appetite is not so big. I said, you only need to give 20 yuan. When it was the leader's turn to understand, I said, each card needs an account opening fee of 20 yuan, you pay this money, and the rest of the money is paid by the individual, which is also acceptable. Twenty yuan now is really nothing, and I still lack a leg to buy a roast chicken. If you give a single prize of 20 yuan to someone, you guarantee that you won't be able to get it, but you reward him with this account opening procedure, which is light and affectionate! Chinese people are sometimes quite strange, they feel sorry for small money, not big money. Many people are unwilling to invalidate this qualification to open an account, so they buy a card......我说，看来你很顺利啊。

  I said, it seems that you are going well.她停顿了一下说，我光跟您说好的了，也有很为难的时候。

  She paused and said, I just told you that it was okay, but there were times when I was very embarrassed.我说，举一个你最为难的例子好吗？

  I said, can you give me a most difficult example?她低下头，短发遮没了半个脸庞，一种疲倦的沧桑浮上眼帘，眼角罩起银杏叶一般的纹路。

  She lowered her head, her short hair covered half of her face, a tired vicissitudes came to her eyes, and the corners of her eyes were covered with ginkgo biloba-like lines.

  有一次，我向一位总经理推销信用卡……她困难地说。

  Once, I pitched a credit card to a general manager...... She said with difficulty.无论在哪个部门，我都是从最大的头头开始推销。上行下效，中国人信这个。只要领导买了，底下的人就放心了，要不，你说破天，大家也不信你。

  No matter what department I am in, I start selling from the biggest beginning. Up and down, Chinese believe this. As long as the leader buys it, the people below will be relieved, otherwise, if you say it breaks the sky, everyone will not believe you.买卡是需要担保人的。也就是说，如果持卡人恶意透支的话，担保人要承担损失。因为银行是以天为单位结算的，如果有人在一天内快速支出巨额，不到晚上结算的时候，电脑是反映不出来的。假如这个人跑了，银行的损失就得找担保人了。

  A guarantor is required to buy a card. In other words, if the cardholder maliciously overdraws, the guarantor will bear the loss. Because banks settle on a daily basis, if someone spends a huge amount quickly in one day, the computer will not be able to reflect it until the evening settlement. If this person runs away, the bank's losses will have to find a guarantor.我请总经理代理单位为他的职员担保。

  I asked the general manager to act as an agent for his staff.他说，这年头，谁能担保得了谁呢？当父母的担保不了儿女，丈夫担保不了老婆。我不能为他们担保。

  He said, these days, who can guarantee whom? When parents can't guarantee their children, husbands can't guarantee their wives. I can't vouch for them.我说，如果你不能为所有的员工担保，只为您的高级职员担保吧。

  I said, if you can't vouch for all employees, only vouch for your senior staff.他说，那也不行，我信不过他们。

  He said, "That's not good, I can't trust them."我说，那您只为您的副总经理担保如何？

  I said, how about you only guarantee your deputy general manager?总经理说，除了我自己，我不相信这世界上的任何人。

  The general manager said that I don't trust anyone in this world except myself.我定定地看着他，一字一句地说，这个世界上总还是好人多。

  I looked at him steadily and said word by word that there are always many good people in this world.他似笑非笑地对我说，你真是这样认为吗？

  He said to me with a smile, do you really think so?我说，真的，我受过很多次骗，但我还是愿意相信别人。当我搞不清一个人该相信还是不该相信的时候，我只有相信他。

  I said, really, I've been deceived many times, but I'm still willing to trust others. When I can't figure out whether a person should believe or not, I can only believe him.他的脸色很难看，说，你的话算数吗？

  His face was ugly, and he said, do your words count?我说，我虽是一个女人，但比许多男人更守信用。

  I said, although I am a woman, I am more trustworthy than many men.他说，那好吧，我给你一个实践的机会。咱们两个素不相识，现在，你如果肯给我做担保人，我就买你的卡。而且，我为我的员工做担保。

  And he said, well, I'll give you a chance to practice. The two of us have never known each other, and now, if you are willing to be my guarantor, I will buy your card. Moreover, I vouch for my employees.我一下子愣在那里了。他是腰缠万贯的大富翁，我是一个下岗的女工。如果他要恶意透支，我就是砸锅卖铁也还不上他欠的钱啊！但我知道我不能退却，这已经不单是能不能推销出去一张卡的事情了，还关乎某种做人的原则。

  I was stunned there for a moment. He is a millionaire with a lot of money, and I am a laid-off female worker. If he wants to maliciously overdraw, I won't be able to pay back the money he owes even if I smash the pot and sell iron! But I know I can't retreat, it's not just about whether I can sell a card, it's about a certain principle of life.在他富丽堂皇的老板台前，我停顿了片刻。不是我迟疑，而是为了能让他更好地听清我的话。我再次一字一句地对他说——我是一个穷人，但我愿意为您担保。

  In front of his palatial boss, I paused for a moment. It's not that I'm hesitating, but that he can hear me better. I said to him word by word again - I am a poor man, but I am willing to vouch for you.女人说完这句话，久久地沉默了。

  After the woman said this, she was silent for a long time.我说，你以后害怕了吗？

  I said, are you afraid in the future?她说，是啊。不过，我不后悔。只是这事至今没跟我丈夫讲，他是个安分守己的人，若知道了，会吓得睡不着觉的。

  She said, yes. However, I don't regret it. It's just that I haven't told my husband about this so far, he is a person who keeps to himself, and if he finds out, he will be so scared that he can't sleep.

  停了许久，女人说，其实，这还不是最为难的。我最难过的是有一次碰到从前一起做工的姐妹。

  After a long pause, the woman said, in fact, this is not the most difficult. The saddest thing for me was that I once met a sister who used to work together.她们问我现在在做什么。我跟她们说起卡来，并不是要显摆什么，只是天天都和卡打交道，卡已经成了我生活中的一部分，不由自主地说起来了。单是说说卡是怎么回事也就罢了，千不该万不该，我不该在介绍完卡以后说了一句，卡有这么多的方便，你也买张卡吧……

  They asked me what I was doing. When I talk to them about cards, I don't mean to show anything, I just deal with cards every day, and cards have become a part of my life, and I can't help but talk about them. Just talk about what the card is about, it shouldn't be, I shouldn't have said after introducing the card, the card has so many conveniences, you can also buy a card......我真的不是故意要推销卡，只是一种习惯。

  I really didn't mean to sell the card, it was just a habit.以前的姐妹就说，你说的这个卡大概真是很好。我们信你的话。可对我们来说有什么用呢？能用这卡从自由市场买菜吗？能上小卖铺买酱油吗？能到煤店里买煤吗？能在学校里用它交孩子的学费吗……

  The previous sisters said, the card you said is probably really good. We believe your word. But what good is it for us? Can I use this card to buy groceries from the free market? Can I buy soy sauce at a small shop? Can you go to the coal store to buy coal? Can I use it to pay my child's tuition at school......我站在马路当央，一句话也说不出来……

  I stood on the road and couldn't say a word......推销卡的女人垂着眼帘，忽然，她睁开了眼睛，说，您知道什么样的人最不喜欢买卡了吗？

  The woman who was selling the card lowered her eyes, and suddenly, she opened her eyes and said, do you know what kind of people don't like to buy cards the most?我猜测着说，是收入比较窘迫的人吧？

  I guessed that he was a person with a more embarrassing income, right?她说，您错了。收入少的人不买卡，只是觉着卡和自己的关系不大，就像人们不关心火星上发生什么事一样。如果他们挣了钱，还是会买的。

  She said, you are wrong. People with low incomes don't buy cards, they just feel that cards have little to do with them, just like people don't care about what happens on Mars. If they make money, they will still buy it.最不喜欢买卡的人是那些有灰色收入的人，因为卡上的每一笔花费都有案可查，你什么时候在什么地点花了多少钱，电脑这只神眼都会忠实地记录下来。虽说是给用户保密，但心里有鬼的人不愿在世上留下任何痕迹，他们只愿意神不知鬼不觉地在暗处花钱。所以，有些人我是从来不动员他们买卡的。他们是卡的黑洞。

  The people who don't like to buy cards the most are those with gray income, because every expense on the card has a record, and the computer will faithfully record how much you spent when and where you spent. Although it is a secret for users, people with ghosts in their hearts do not want to leave any traces in the world, they are only willing to spend money in the shadows without knowing it. So, some people I never mobilize them to buy cards. They are the black holes of cards.她疲惫地一笑，说，卡是个新事物，是和世界接轨的东西。可有些简单的东西到了咱们这儿，就变得复杂起来。我现在只盼那个我做担保的富人，不要上了恶意透支的黑名单。

  She smiled tiredly and said that cards are a new thing, something that is in line with the world. But some simple things get complicated when they come to us. I only hope that the rich person I guarantee will not be blacklisted for malicious overdrafts.

未知

  09.保安是谁变的

  09. Who changed the security guard

  我跟保安的会面主要在小区的一出一进当中。看着那些年轻的面庞，我常常想，他们以前是做什么的呢？在进入城市之前，在穿上保安的制服之前，他们是什么人呢？蝴蝶是毛虫变的，蚊子是孑孓变的，青蛙是蝌蚪变的，保安是谁变的？

  My meetings with security guards were mainly in and out of the community. Looking at those young faces, I often wondered, what did they do before? Before entering the city, before putting on the uniform of the security guards, who are they? Butterflies are caterpillars, mosquitoes are mutated, frogs are tadpoles, and who is the security guard?和一些保安聊过天，他们都很谨慎，从不多说什么，至多只讲自己家在农村，上过或是初中或是小学，好像上过高中的不是很多，基本上是招工来的。用人单位的代表到了乡里，说有到北京干活儿的机会，需怎样的条件，谁愿意去？于是年轻人纷纷应征。有的是亲戚朋友介绍来的，滚雪球一般。总之，保安基本上来自农村。

  I talked to some security guards, they were very cautious, never said much, at most only said that their home was in the countryside, and they had gone to junior high school or elementary school, as if they had not been to high school much, and they were basically recruited. The representative of the employer went to the township and said that there was an opportunity to work in Beijing, what conditions were required, and who was willing to go? So young people applied one after another. Some were introduced by relatives and friends, and they snowballed. In short, security guards basically come from rural areas.一个农村的小伙子，冷不丁来到了繁华的大都市，他们的心地会发生怎样的变化呢？我没看到过针对保安的相关研究，设想一下，可能会有这样几种可能吧。

  How will a young man from the countryside suddenly come to a bustling metropolis, how will their hearts change? I haven't seen any research on security, but imagine that there may be several possibilities.一是惊讶。高楼大厦车水马龙，不夜的霓虹灯和袒胸露背的华衣……这些和寂静的山村简朴的民俗实在是天壤之别。人在震惊之后，很容易滋生出渺小和自卑的心理。能以平和之心对抗陌生的繁华，是一种再造的定力，而非人的本性轻易可以到达的高度。

  One is surprised. High-rise buildings are busy with neon lights and bare chests and backless clothes...... These are really different from the simple folklore of the silent mountain village. After people are shocked, it is easy to breed a sense of insignificance and inferiority. Being able to fight against the unfamiliar prosperity with a peaceful heart is a kind of reconstruction determination, not a height that human nature can easily reach.一天，我在西客站附近上了公共汽车，一位老者也上了车，因这周围有家医院，他佝偻着腰，几乎可以断定他有病。从他迅速扫视四周的眼神又可以觉出他的病并不是很重。他走到一位看守着行李的小伙子面前，很果断地说，你站起来。那个小伙子不知何故，带着乡下人的服从和退缩马上站了起来。老者很利落地坐在了小伙子的位置上，然后说，给老年人让座是应该的。进了城，以后学着点。那小伙子愣愣地、冷冷地站着，一言不发，让人无法猜测他的心事。

  One day, I got on the bus near the West Railway Station, and an old man also got on the bus, because there was a hospital around, and he was hunched over, and he could almost conclude that he was sick. From the way he quickly scanned his surroundings, he could tell that his illness was not very serious. He walked up to a young man guarding the luggage and said decisively, you stand up. The young man, somehow, immediately stood up with the obedience and retreat of a countryman. The old man sat neatly in the young man's seat, and then said that it was appropriate to give up his seat to the elderly. After entering the city, I will learn something in the future. The young man stood stunned and cold, without saying a word, making it impossible to guess what was on his mind.我看不过，就挤过去，对那位老人家说，他给你让座是应该的，可你也该说声谢谢啊，这也是应该的啊。说完之后，我就直勾勾地盯着他，表示自己的坚持。那位老人很不甘心，见周围也有人用目光支持我，才很不情愿地说了声，谢……

  I couldn't see it, so I squeezed over and said to the old man, he should give up his seat to you, but you should also say thank you, this is also what you should do. After saying that, I stared at him straight and expressed my persistence. The old man was very unwilling, and when he saw that there were people around him supporting me with their eyes, he said reluctantly, thank you......小伙子还是愣愣地站着，毫无表情。我不知道这个小伙子以后会不会变成保安，即使不是真正在册的正规保安，也许会摇身一变成了黑保安，看他那漠然的神情和高大的身板，这可能性还真不小。

  The young man still stood stunned, expressionless. I don't know if this young man will become a security guard in the future, even if he is not a real registered regular security guard, he may turn into a black security guard, looking at his indifferent expression and tall body, this possibility is really not small.曾经传得沸沸扬扬的“凶桥”的故事，说的是在北京健翔桥附近有一座过街天桥发生抢劫案，劫匪穷凶极恶，抢了钱还不说，临走时还在血肉模糊的事主腿上又刺了几刀，防着被害人爬起来追赶或报案。公安辛苦破案，最后查出凶手原来是附近灯具店的黑保安。

  The story of the "murderous bridge" that was once widely circulated tells of a robbery on a flyover near Jianxiang Bridge in Beijing, where the robbers were extremely vicious, not to mention robbing money, and stabbed the victim several more times in the leg of the bloody victim before leaving, preventing the victim from getting up to chase or report the case. The police worked hard to solve the case, and finally found out that the murderer turned out to be a black security guard from a nearby lamp store.又是保安！不管是黑是白，这几年，听到的保安打砸抢的案子，实在是不少了，还有屡屡发生的监守自盗。“保安”那在人们心中原本趋向暗淡的形象，如今干脆抹上了血痕。

  It's security again! Whether it is black or white, in recent years, I have heard a lot of cases of security guards smashing and robbing, as well as repeated self-thefts. The image of "security guard", which originally tended to be dull in people's minds, is now simply smeared with blood.扯远了，回到刚才的话题。于是在想，青年农民进了城，穿上保安的衣服，他们就真的变成了负有庄严使命的保安了吗？谁来帮助他们完成这个巨大的转变？不单是要训练他们走正步、敬礼和纠察、服从，更要教会他们敬业和尊重、忠诚和勇敢。

  Digression, back to the topic just now. So I was thinking, when young farmers entered the city and put on security guard clothes, did they really become security guards with solemn missions? Who will help them through this huge transformation? It is not only to train them to walk upright, salute and picket, and obey, but also to teach them dedication and respect, loyalty and bravery.

  比如那个被迫让座的小伙子，我敢说城市给他的第一课肯定是不愉快的。凭什么我的座位要让给你？凭什么你坐了我的座连个谢谢也不说？凭什么城里人就可以指令乡下人？

  For example, the young man who was forced to give up his seat, I dare say that the first lesson the city gave him must have been unpleasant. Why should I give up my seat to you? Why did you sit in my seat and not even say thank you? Why can city people command country people?我在报道中看到寻求保安杀人越货的动机时，总有一条是说这些年轻人一旦进入城市就会产生不平衡的心理，然后想找一条快速发财出人头地的路子。于是，抢劫偷盗就成了享乐的捷径。

  When I see in the report the motive of seeking security guards to kill people and override goods, there is always a saying that these young people will have an unbalanced psychology once they enter the city, and then want to find a way to get rich and get ahead quickly. As a result, robbery and theft became a shortcut to pleasure.原来那关键是不平衡。这就是变化的第二条。是啊，退一万步讲，同样是人，为什么你降生在城市，我就在农村？为什么你锦衣玉食，我却要风餐露宿？为什么你坐享其成，我却要白手起家？这一连串的问号如乌鸦盘旋在年轻的心的上空，如果没有疏导和讨论，那一时的偏颇就可能酿出滔天的惨祸。

  It turns out that the key is imbalance. This is the second point of change. Yes, taking 10,000 steps back, the same person, why were you born in the city, I am in the countryside? Why do you have fine clothes and food, but I have to sleep in the open? Why do you sit back and enjoy it, but I have to start from scratch? This series of question marks is like a crow hovering over the young heart, and if there is no guidance and discussion, that momentary bias may cause a monstrous disaster.不错，人间是有很多不平，这不平是与生俱来的，几乎是一种命定。我指出这一点，不是取消你的奋斗，而是请你的奋斗站在坚实的基础上。你不可以犯法，你不可以靠伤害他人以达到自己的目的。你不可以将道德和传统只维持在一个狭小的圈子里。比如在你的小村庄，你知情达理，是个好孩子，一旦到了城市的汪洋大海，你觉得什么人都不认识你了，你不必为口碑负责，你就可以空前地放肆起来。

  Yes, there are many injustices in the world, and this injustice is innate, almost a kind of fate. I point out that I do not cancel your struggle, but ask your struggle to stand on a solid foundation. You can't break the law, you can't hurt others to achieve your own goals. You cannot keep morality and tradition in a narrow circle. For example, in your small village, you are knowledgeable and a good boy, once you arrive at the vast sea of the city, you feel that no one knows you, you don't have to be responsible for word of mouth, you can be unpresumptuous.我认识一个乡村的女孩，她品行方正。到了城市不久，她就觉得当保姆挣钱太辛苦、太慢了，她要去当小姐。我说，你知道这小姐不是戏文里知书达理带着丫鬟的小姐，是有很多下流的东西在里面的。女孩说，阿姨，我都知道。可这又怎么样？就是下流了，也没有一个人认识我。我回家去，照样是一流的，起码也是个中上流吧。

  I know a girl from the countryside who has a good character. Soon after arriving in the city, she felt that being a nanny was too hard and too slow to earn money, and she was going to be a young lady. I said, you know that this young lady is not a well-educated young lady with a maid in the play, there are a lot of obscene things in it. The girl said, Auntie, I know everything. But so what? Even if it's obscene, no one knows me. When I go home, it's still first-class, at least it's an upper-middle class.我无言。淳朴的乡村以古老的方式约束之下的道德，一旦脱离了那个环境，就变得如同出土的丝绸，在一个极短暂的时间还能保持着绚烂，然而很快就褪色而灰飞烟灭了。因此，我对那些沙哑着嗓子颂扬乡村的歌唱始终心存疑虑，怕那只是理想中的眷恋，而非真正意义上的向往。

  I am speechless. The morality of the simple countryside under the constraints of the ancient way, once separated from that environment, becomes like unearthed silk, which can remain brilliant in a very short period of time, but soon fades and disappears. Therefore, I have always been suspicious of those songs that praise the countryside in a hoarse voice, fearing that it is just an ideal attachment, not a true yearning.一日，我和朋友约了在街头见面，为了醒目，地点就选在了一家银行大厦的前面。随着年龄渐长，我越来越像个没出过门的老太太，凡是同人约定的事，总要早早地上路，生怕晚了。北京这地方，堵起车来，谁都没有办法，无论你打出多少时间的富余，还是要迟到。若是顺利了，简直就提前到不可思议的地步。那一天，恰好是后面一种情况。我百无聊赖地流连在碧绿色的玻璃幕墙边，像个准备打劫银行的匪徒踱来踱去，这毫无疑问引来了一位年轻保安的询问。我如实禀告。他笑起来说，你和我妈有点像，她要是哪天出门，早早地就上路了，有时会提前好几个钟点就到了。

  One day, my friend and I made an appointment to meet on the street, and in order to stand out, the location was chosen in front of a bank building. As I get older, I become more and more like an old lady who has never been out, and I always have to go on the road early for fear of being late. In Beijing, there is no way to get stuck in traffic, no matter how much time you spend, you still have to be late. If it goes well, it will be unbelievably advanced. That day happened to be the latter situation. I lingered boredly by the turquoise glass curtain wall, pacing around like a bandit preparing to rob a bank, which undoubtedly attracted a young security guard's question. I will tell you the truth. He laughed and said, you are a bit like my mother, if she goes out one day, she will be on the road early, sometimes several hours early.

  我问，你妈妈现在在哪里呢？

  I asked, where is your mother now?聊天就这样开始了。他告诉我，他来自陕西的一个小村子，说他老妈以前是从来不看《新闻联播》的，因为那正是家中刷锅洗碗、喂猪的时间，老妈在灶台边忙得昏天黑地。可自从儿子到北京当了保安，老妈就雷打不动地开始看新闻了。老爹说，你不就着灶膛还是温和的，把猪食熬了，还关心什么国家大事？这都是老爷们儿的事，和你无关。老妈坐在小凳子上一动不动看着屏幕，说，我不是关心国家大事，我是关心我的儿子。他在北京做保安，新闻里播北京的事多，也许我会看到儿子。老爸说，哪儿有那么巧？就是有了，我叫你就是，你该干什么就干什么吧。老妈说，电视上如果有了儿子的影儿，那也是领导坐着车从他站岗的地方一晃就过去了，哪里等得及你叫我？还是我自己守着吧。

  The chat began. He told me that he was from a small village in Shaanxi and said that his mother had never watched "News Network" before, because it was the time at home to wash pots and dishes and feed pigs, and my mother was busy by the stove in the dark. But since her son went to Beijing to become a security guard, my mother began to watch the news without moving. Dad said, don't you just be gentle on the stove, boil the pig food, and care about what national affairs do you care about? This is all about the old men, and it has nothing to do with you. My mother sat motionless on a small stool and looked at the screen, saying, I don't care about national affairs, I care about my son. He works as a security guard in Beijing, and there are many things in Beijing on the news, maybe I will see my son. Dad said, where is such a coincidence? There is, I call you that, you can do whatever you need to do. My mother said that if there is a shadow of her son on TV, it is also the leader who passed by in a car from where he stood guard. I'll keep it myself."小伙子告诉我，他的父母就这样一直守着电视机，等着他在屏幕上以一个保安的姿态出现。他告诉过他们，自己穿上保安的衣服威风凛凛。

  The young man told me that his parents had been guarding the TV, waiting for him to appear on the screen as a security guard. He told them that he was majestic in the clothes of a security guard.其实保安这一行是很无聊的，天天守着一个地方。最初的新鲜劲儿过去之后，再好的风景也会看腻。以后年岁大了，不能老做保安啊，要有一技之长啊。可我的一技之长在哪里？雇你的人是不会想这些的，可你自己会想，几乎每天都在想，但光想又有什么用呢？要有行动。可我的行动目标在哪里呢？不知道。

  In fact, the security guard line is very boring, guarding a place every day. After the initial freshness passes, no matter how good the scenery is, you will get tired of it. When you get older, you can't be a security guard all the time, you have to have a skill. But where is my skill? The person who hires you won't think about this, but you will think about it yourself, almost every day, but what's the use of just thinking about it? Take action. But where is my goal? I don't know.我看到面前的小伙子眼神里露出散淡的光，完全没有焦点。正在这时，我的朋友来了，我就离开了这位年轻的保安，但他的目光让我久久难忘。我想，这就是保安进入城市之后面临的第三个挑战了，那就是——茫然。

  I saw a faint light in the eyes of the young man in front of me, completely out of focus. At this moment, my friend came, and I left the young security guard, but his gaze made me forget it for a long time. I think this is the third challenge that security guards face after entering the city, that is, they are at a loss.惊讶、不平衡和茫然，这三点变化带来的震动，其实也完全能从正面来解读。人为什么会惊奇？是因为我们离开了熟悉的环境，面临未曾有过的机遇和多种崭新的可能性。人为什么会不平衡？因为早先的稳定被打破了，一种变化的种子已经悄然发芽。当然了，不是每一粒种子都能开花，但播下种子就比荒芜的旷野强过百倍。面对不平衡，不怨天尤人，不妄自菲薄，沉下心来，细分短长，以自身的努力来补上命运的差异。至于说到茫然，我甚至以为，适当的茫然不单是一种可以接纳的阶段，而且几乎是年轻人的特权。你有权茫然，但是不可以茫然太久，太久的茫然就是思索的懒惰和行动的放弃。茫然的前提是要有向前一步寻找的动力，你须把茫然化作一种探寻的勇敢。茫然如同糯米，只有开阔的视野和不懈的学习，才能如同适宜的温度，将茫然的酒曲发酵成醇厚的甜酒。

  Surprise, imbalance and confusion, the shock brought about by these three changes can actually be interpreted from the front. Why are people surprised? It is because we are away from the familiar environment and face unprecedented opportunities and a variety of new possibilities. Why are people unbalanced? Because the earlier stability was broken, the seeds of change have quietly sprouted. Of course, not every seed can bloom, but sowing seeds is more than a hundred times better than a barren wilderness. In the face of imbalance, do not complain, do not belittle yourself, calm down, subdivide the short and long, and make up for the difference in fate with your own efforts. As for dazedness, I even think that appropriate dazedness is not only an acceptable stage, but also almost a privilege of young people. You have the right to be dazed, but you can't be at a loss for too long, too long is the laziness of thinking and the abandonment of action. The premise of being at a loss is that you must have the motivation to take a step forward and search, and you must turn the dazedness into a kind of courage to explore. Only a broad vision and unremitting learning can ferment the dazed koji into mellow sweet wine like the right temperature.你很难想象，在当今城市中有一位白发苍苍的保安在执行任务，保安已经从传统的打更老大爷或高尚别墅的女管家，变成了如今朝气蓬勃的年轻人的事业。无数青涩的果子将在这个行业中缓缓成熟，散发出活力的芳香和丰收的光彩。
It's hard to imagine that in today's city, there is a gray-haired security guard on a mission, and the security guard has changed from the traditional night watchman or the housekeeper of a noble villa to the career of today's energetic young people. Countless green fruits will slowly ripen in this industry, exuding a vibrant aroma and a bountiful harvest.

未知

  10.心理学教授的弟子

  10. A disciple of a psychology professor

  一位心理学教授在录取报考她的研究生时，勾掉了得分最高的学生，取了分数略低的第二名。有人问，你是不是徇私舞弊或屈服于什么压力，才舍高就低？

  A psychology professor ticked off the student with the highest score and took the second place with a slightly lower score when admitting her graduate school. Some people ask, are you cheating for personal gain or succumbing to some pressure to give up high and low?她说，否。我在进行一项心理追踪研究，或者说是吸取教训。

  She said, no. I'm doing a psychotracking study, or learning a lesson.她是位德高望重的学者，在专业范畴内颇有建树。别人一定要她讲讲录取标准。她缓缓地说，我已经招了多年的研究生，好像一个古老的匠人。我希望我所热爱的学科在我的学生手里发扬光大。老一辈毕竟要逝去，他们是渐渐暗淡下去的苍蓝。新的一辈一定要兴旺，他们是渐渐苏醒过来的嫩青。但选择什么样的接班人呢？我以前总是挑选那些得分最高、看起来兢兢业业、学习刻苦、埋头苦干，像鸡啄米一样片刻不闲的学生。我想，唯有因为热爱，他们才会如此努力取得优异的成绩，因此，他们应该是最好的。我在私下里称他们为“苦大仇深型”的学生。

  She is a highly respected scholar with considerable achievements in her professional field. Others must tell her about the admission criteria. She said slowly, I have been recruiting graduate students for many years, like an old craftsman. I hope that the subjects I love will flourish in the hands of my students. After all, the older generation is going to die, and they are a gradually fading blue. The new generation must prosper, they are young people who are gradually awakening. But what kind of successor to choose? I used to always select students with the highest scores, who seemed conscientious, studied hard, worked hard, and were like chickens pecking at rice. I think it is only because of love that they work so hard to achieve excellent results, so they should be the best. I privately call them "bitter and hateful" students.许多年过去了，我有从容的时间，以目为尺注视他们的脚步，考察他们的历史，以检验当年决定的命中率。

  Many years have passed, and I have time to calmly watch their footsteps and examine their history to test the hit rate decided that year.我发现自己错了。在未来的发展中最生龙活虎、最富有潜质并且宠辱不惊，成为真正的学科才俊的是那样一种人——他们表面上像狮子一样悠闲，甚至有点漫不经心和懒散；小的成绩并不能鼓励他们，反而让他们藐视般的淡漠；对于导师的指导和批评，往往是矜持而有保留地接受，使得他们看起来不很虚心；多少有些落落寡合，经常得不到众口一词的称赞；失败的时候难得气馁灰心，几乎不需要鼓励；辉煌的时候也显不出异样的高兴，仿佛对成就有天然的免疫力。他们的面部表情总是充满孩子般的好奇，洋溢着一种快乐，我称之为“欢喜型”。

  I realized I was wrong. In the future development, it is the kind of people who are the most alive, the most potential, and the ones who are not frightened, and become real academic talents - they are as leisurely as lions on the surface, and even a little careless and lazy; Small achievements do not encourage them, but make them contemptuous and indifferent; Teachers' guidance and criticism are often accepted with reserved and reserved attitudes, making them look not very humble; is somewhat uncompatible, and often does not get praise from everyone; It is rare to be discouraged and discouraged when you fail, and you hardly need encouragement; When it is brilliant, it does not show any unusual happiness, as if it has a natural immunity to achievement. Their facial expressions are always full of childlike curiosity and a kind of happiness, which I call the "joyful type".苦大仇深型的学习者，主要是为了改善自己的生存状态，追求科学知识给自身带来的优裕与好处。一旦达到目的，对于科学本身的挚爱就渐渐蒸发，代之以新的更敏捷的优化生存状态的努力。作为一种生活方式的选择，自然无可厚非，但作为学业继承者，则不是最好的人选。

  Learners who are bitter and hateful are mainly to improve their living conditions and pursue the benefits and benefits brought by scientific knowledge to themselves. Once the goal is achieved, the love for science itself gradually evaporates and is replaced by new and more agile efforts to optimize the state of existence. As a lifestyle choice, it is understandable, but as an academic successor, it is not the best candidate.欢喜型的学习者，也许一开始他们走得不快，脚力也并不显出格外的矫健，但心中的爱好犹如不断喷发的天然气，始终燃烧着熊熊的火焰，风暴无法将它吹熄。在火光的引导下，欢喜型的人边玩边走，兴趣盎然地不断攀登，绝不会因路边暂时的风景而停下脚步，直到高远的天际。

  Joyful learners, maybe they don't walk fast at first, and their legs are not particularly vigorous, but the hobby in their hearts is like a continuous eruption of natural gas, always burning with a raging flame, and the storm can't blow it out. Guided by the firelight, the joyful people play and walk, climbing with interest, never stopping because of the temporary scenery on the side of the road until the high sky.心理学教授说，几乎世上所有的事，都可以划分成“苦大仇深型”和“欢喜型”。比如读书，若是为了一个急切的目的而读，待事过境迁，就会与书形同路人。如果真是爱好喜欢，就会永远将书安放枕边，梦中与书相会。

  Psychology professors say that almost everything in the world can be divided into "bitter and hateful" and "joyful". For example, if you read a book for an urgent purpose, you will be like a passerby when things change. If you really like it, you will always put the book by your pillow and meet the book in your dreams.

未知

  11.你是百分之三吗

  11. Are you three percent?

  如果有一天，你说，这份工作给予我高峰体验，让我得到了很大的乐趣，更不可思议的是，还让我得到了金钱。那么，恭喜你。你把自己的兴趣和对公众的服务结合到了一起。据说，能够做到这一点的人，只占整个人口的百分之三。

  If one day, you say, this job gives me a peak experience, gives me a lot of fun, and even more incredibly, gives me money. So, congratulations. You combine your interests with service to the public. It is said that only three percent of the population is able to do this.不要小看了工作。工作是让我们觉得生命有意义的重要组成部分。如果你只把工作当成赚钱的工具，那么，你就丧失了人生极大的乐趣。一份喜爱的工作，让我们具体有了使命感，给了我们身份，是我们应答社会召唤的方式。我们的潜能得以在一个公众的平台上发挥，我们回报了社会，我们的内心收获了满足。

  Don't underestimate work. Work is an important part of making our lives feel meaningful. If you only use work as a tool to make money, then you will lose great joy in life. A job that we love gives us a sense of mission, gives us an identity, and is our way of responding to the call of society. Our potential is unleashed on a public platform, we give back to the society, and our hearts are satisfied.每样工作都有快乐，同理，每样工作也都有苦恼。现在的问题是——这快乐是否相宜于你？快乐也是有质量高下、持续长久之分的。有的快乐，只是好奇，当你知晓了其中的秘密，快乐就转变成了厌倦。有的快乐，却如醇酒，时间越长，你越感知到醉人的芳香。谈到苦恼，这可要认真琢磨一番。相比之下，苦恼比快乐更重要，因为这是你的底线。你是否可以接纳持之以恒的苦恼？你对苦恼的容忍程度到底怎样？你能容忍的时间是多久？你能为此做出多少改变呢？

  Every job has happiness, and in the same way, every job also has suffering. Now the question is – is this happiness suitable for you? Happiness is also of high quality and long-lasting. Some happiness is just curiosity, and when you know the secret, happiness turns into boredom. Some are happy, but like fine wine, the longer the time, the more you perceive the intoxicating aroma. When it comes to distress, you have to think about it carefully. In contrast, distress is more important than happiness because this is your bottom line. Can you accept persistent distress? How tolerant are you about distress? How long can you tolerate? How much can you change for this?人格对职业的影响力，远远不及兴趣。你要尽量拓展对某一行业的了解，它是什么？它做什么？它的行规是什么？这不是一项简单的功课，要知道，现在有超过两万种的职业在地球上开展。每一个行业都有行规，你如果不了解行规，贸然入行，很可能受不了。你不懂得游戏规则，游戏就会给人焦虑和压力。

  The influence of personality on the profession is far less than interest. You want to try to expand your understanding of a certain industry, what is it? What does it do? What are its rules? This is not a simple lesson, you know, there are now more than 20,000 professions on Earth. Every industry has its rules, and if you don't understand the rules and enter the industry rashly, you may not be able to stand it. If you don't understand the rules of the game, the game will give people anxiety and stress.行业里也有许多潜规则，你可曾知晓？我知道有一些潜规则是上不得台面的，但多少年来，他们一直在那个行业的激流之下存在着。如果你要接受这个行业，你就要了解它的全部：桌面上的和桌面下的。如果你有精神的需要，就要远离某种潜规则。你不可能一边控诉着，一边利用着，那你本人也成了潜在水面下的生物。

  There are also many unspoken rules in the industry, have you ever known? I know there are some unspoken rules that are not on the table, but they have existed under the torrent of that industry for many years. If you're going to embrace the industry, you need to know what it's all about: on the desktop and off-desktop. If you have spiritual needs, stay away from some kind of unspoken rule. You can't accuse and use it at the same time, then you yourself have become a potential creature under the surface.当你尝试着做一件充满了创造性的工作，应当更相信你无微不至的直觉，不必掺杂过多的理智。因为理智通常是通过已有的经验来做判断，但这一次，过多的理智会充当刺客。

  When you try to do a creative job, you should trust your meticulous intuition and not mix it with too much reason. Because reason is usually judged by existing experience, but this time, too much reason will act as an assassin.由于工作价值与生命意义的联系陷落和崩裂，现代的人们常常伸手不见五指地迷茫。工作占去了青葱岁月豆蔻年华，投入心血，殚精竭虑。当我们不再能从工作中找到快乐和意义的时候，负面的力量会来得如此之大，决然超过了你的预期。然而工作里越是找不到幸福感，我们越是要去寻找它。这就形成了最凶险的悖论。

  Due to the collapse and collapse of the connection between the value of work and the meaning of life, modern people often lose their hands and fingers. Work occupies the green years and cardamom years, and puts all his heart and soul into it. When we can no longer find joy and meaning in our work, the negative forces will come so much that they will definitely exceed your expectations. However, the more we can't find happiness at work, the more we have to look for it. This forms the most dangerous paradox.听过这样一句名言：世界上最幸运的人，是找到一份工，他不用工作。这话语有一点点拗口，说白了，就是你能把工作变成玩耍的一部分。在你工作的时候，完全不觉得这是被迫的事情，而是发自内心地喜爱。

  I have heard such a famous saying: The luckiest person in the world is to find a job, he does not have to work. This is a bit of a mouthful, to put it bluntly, you can turn work into a part of play. When you work, you don't feel forced at all, but love it from the bottom of your heart.

  工作就是爱自己、爱社会，是混合着生活素质和成就感的一杯鸡尾酒。如果你仅仅把工作变成了养家糊口的营生，那就不单对不起自己，也对不起工作。

  Work is to love oneself and society, and it is a cocktail of quality of life and a sense of accomplishment. If you just turn your work into a breadwinner, you're not only sorry for yourself, but also for your work.工作是可以换的，但事业不会。事业给生涯一个方向。事业是持续的，是和人生观、价值观挂在一起的。生涯更是一个宽广的概念。这就是工作和事业的不同。如果你能把工作和事业熔炼在一起，那就是天人合一了。

  Jobs can be changed, but careers cannot. Career gives a direction for career. Career is continuous and is linked to life outlook and values. Career is a broad concept. This is the difference between work and career. If you can smelt work and career together, it is the unity of heaven and man.所有的工作，都有它的神圣性，都有喜欢它的人存在。要力争把你的工作变成你的兴趣所在。这是一种纯美的境界。你做这件事，这件事让你快乐，让别人感到有帮助，人家还付酬金给你，你说这是不是多方共赢、皆大欢喜呢？这样的事，从天上掉下来的时候固然是有的，但肯定概率极低。所以，你要用心去寻找，以求达到幸福的高峰——有点像结婚。
All work has its sacredness, and there are people who like it. Strive to make your work your interest. This is a state of pure beauty. If you do this, this thing makes you happy, makes others feel helpful, and people pay you a reward, do you think this is a win-win situation for all parties and everyone is happy? Such things do happen when they fall from the sky, but the probability is extremely low. So, you have to look with your heart to reach the peak of happiness - a bit like getting married.

未知

  12.首选护林员

  12. Preferred rangers

  我有一套表格，是根据一个人的性格、爱好、才能、本领等特征预测职业选择趋向。当然，结果仅供参考。朋友们知道了，有时会说，嘿，把你那沓表借咱使使，看看天生是从事何种职业的料子，现在还有没有转轨变形的可能性。我嫌麻烦，就说，人家国外都是给大学毕业生或待业青年找工作时才做这种测验，您都七老八十的喽，不说事业有成，也算轻车熟路了，怎么着，还真想重打鼓另开张啊？再说啦，这种表格是外国人设计的，统计数据也是海外的，简单移植过来，不一定准的。

  I have a set of tables that predict the trend of career choices based on a person's personality, hobbies, talents, skills and other characteristics. Of course, the results are for reference only. When friends know about it, they sometimes say, hey, lend us your stack of watches to see what kind of profession you were born to work in, and whether there is still a possibility of deformation. I think it's troublesome, so I said, people abroad are only doing this kind of quiz when looking for jobs for college graduates or unemployed young people, you are all seventy or eighty, not to mention that you have a successful career, you are also familiar with the road, what's wrong, do you really want to beat the drum again and open another one? Besides, this kind of table is designed by foreigners, and the statistics are also overseas, and it is not necessarily accurate when simply transplanted.我劝阻。但是，几乎没有一个人收回他们的要求，坚持着，从请求到恳求，甚至……哀求（假装的），直到我答应。我从中得到很惊奇的发现——现今社会中，有把握确认所从事的工作，正是自己爱好和擅长的人，少得令人叹息。现代人对于职业，普遍在一种不肯定、不确信的状态中游弋，懵懂茫然，期待着来自外界的确认或改变。

  I dissuade him. However, hardly a single person took back their demands, persisted, from pleas to pleas, and even ...... begging (pretending) until I agreed. I was surprised to find that in today's society, there are very few people who are sure to confirm that the work they are engaged in is exactly what they like and are good at. Modern people generally swim in a state of uncertainty and uncertainty about their careers, ignorant and dazed, looking forward to confirmation or change from the outside world.测验结果，令人瞠目。

  The test results are eye-popping.一位优秀企业家，他的最佳职业选择应是动物学家。

  An excellent entrepreneur, his best career choice should be a zoologist.一位兢兢业业的公务员，所得结果是民间艺人。

  A conscientious civil servant who gets a folk artist.一位电脑工程师，竟是农场主。

  A computer engineer is actually a farmer.一位警察，干脆提示他可以试试做个神职人员。

  A policeman simply suggested that he could try to be a clergyman.……

  凡此种种，南辕北辙，有的还不符合国情，闹得我对该表很没几分信心了。朋友们的反应，更叫人难以捉摸。不摇头也不点头，讪讪的，淡淡的。更有甚者，神秘莫测地笑笑，一反当初的诚恳和迫切，王顾左右而言他，好似我辛辛苦苦做出的结果和他不相干。

  All of these things are in line with national conditions, and some of them are not in line with national conditions, which makes me have little confidence in the watch. The reaction of friends is even more elusive. Don't shake your head or nod, scornful, lightly. What's more, he smiled mysteriously, contrary to his original sincerity and urgency, Wang looked around and talked about him, as if the results I had worked hard to make had nothing to do with him.次数多了，我也意兴阑珊。一天，一位很要好的朋友又求做这个表。我懒懒地说，做，可以。只是我做完了之后，无论那个结果怎样出乎你的意料，你都得把真实想法告诉我。她想了有25秒，说，好！

  The more times I have it, the more I feel like it's going to be low. One day, a very good friend asked to make this watch again. I lazily said, do, yes. It's just that after I'm done, no matter how unexpected the result is, you have to tell me what you really think. She thought for 25 seconds and said, okay!她是一家律师楼的合伙人。早年我一听到“合伙人”这个词就想笑，觉得像开卖瓜子的小杂货店，这两年不敢笑了。朋友在业内已声名卓著，物质也大大丰富了，出入香车。我到她郊外巍峨的别墅看过银河（北京城里通常是看不到星星的）。

  She is a partner in a law firm. In the early years, I wanted to laugh when I heard the word "partner", and I felt like a small grocery store selling melon seeds, and I didn't dare to laugh in the past two years. Friends have become well-known in the industry, and their materials have been greatly enriched, and they have come and gone in and out of the fragrant car. I went to her majestic villa on the outskirts to see the Milky Way (you usually can't see the stars in Beijing).用处理法律文书的严谨和节奏，她填完了表格。我把测验完成之后，先检查了两遍，然后盯着她问，还记着咱俩的约定吧？

  With the rigor and pace of handling legal documents, she filled out the form. After I finished the test, I checked it twice, then stared at her and asked, remember our agreement, right?

  她敲敲自己的头说，律师的脑壳，是电脑加文件柜。

  She knocked on her head and said that the lawyer's brain is a computer and a filing cabinet.我说，你可以兑现了。

  I said, you can cash in.我把测验结果递给她。在职业选择的顺序表上赫然列着——首选护林员。

  I handed her the test results. On the order of career choices, it is prominently listed - the preferred ranger.寂静。在我和她之间，犹如隔着一片被烈火焚烧过的旷地，没有林涛，也没有鸟鸣。我说，反悔了，是不是？我也不明白怎么得出了这结果。你是多么出色的律师啊。我见过你出庭，唇枪舌剑胜似闲庭信步。最大的可能性，是这个表错了。

  Quiescence. Between me and her, it was like a vast land burned by fire, without Lin Tao or birdsong. I said, I regret it, right? I don't understand how this result came about. What a great lawyer you are. I have seen you appear in court, and your words are better than walking in the court. The biggest possibility is that this table is wrong.女律师看着我，目光好似看一个嫌犯。她用我从来没听过的声调缓缓说，哦，那表没错，错的是我曾经的选择。刚才那一刻，只有一个念头，就是想掉眼泪。滚滚红尘中，没人知道我的心，包括我的父母和我的丈夫。远远的异国，却有一张不知何人打造出的表格直穿我胸襟，让我和我的灵魂有了一个突然而痛楚的接触，才知道这一生的真爱在百般打压之下依然安在。我愿被遮天蔽日的绿色掩埋，喜欢与世隔绝的静谧和亘古不变的安详。在与人屏蔽的大自然里，听蚯蚓爬过蘑菇根和蝴蝶须子拍破露珠的声响……我从来没对任何人说过这个心愿，以为成功地将它谋杀在少年时代。没想到，它如此鲜活地蛰伏在我内心最幽暗的水塘里，直到这张表钓它到阳光下。我每天忙着，为了许许多多的利益和功名，至今没有机缘走入原始森林一步。我能为树木所做的唯一的事，就是节省几张复印纸。哦，护林员，多好听的名字啊！念起它的时候，喉头充满了松脂的爽滑，连肺也像白纱裙一样鼓胀开来，可惜，我吸进的依然是城市嗅过千百次的废气……

  The female lawyer looked at me as if she were looking at a suspect. She said slowly in a tone I had never heard before, oh, that watch is right, what was wrong was my choice. At that moment just now, there was only one thought, which was to shed tears. In the rolling world, no one knows my heart, including my parents and my husband. In a foreign country far away, there was a form created by someone that pierced my chest, giving me a sudden and painful contact with my soul, only to know that the true love of this life was still alive under all kinds of suppression. I would like to be buried by the green that obscures the sky, and I like the silence of isolation and the eternal tranquility. In the nature shielded from people, listen to the sound of earthworms crawling over mushroom roots and butterfly whiskers beating dewdrops...... I never said this wish to anyone, thinking that I had successfully murdered it as a teenager. I didn't expect it to lie so vividly in the darkest pond in my heart until this watch caught it into the sun. I am busy every day, for the sake of many benefits and fame, I have not had the opportunity to step into the primeval forest so far. The only thing I can do for the trees is to save a few sheets of copy paper. Oh, ranger, what a nice name! When I read it, my throat was full of pine resin, and even my lungs were swollen like a white gauze skirt, but unfortunately, I still inhaled the exhaust gas that the city had smelled thousands of times......轮到我不知如何回应，唯有沉思。方明白一个人的职业，如果能和爱好契合，将是怎样的幸福。如果背道而驰，不管他依仗智力的超拔和人格的卓绝，凭借外力的援送和机遇的佳美，到达怎样精彩的高度，他内心总不能无拘无束地快活。一个苦苦的祈盼，在沉沉掩埋下愈老弥坚。如同三千年的古莲子，在枯燥中黑暗地坚守，期待有朝一日冲决而出重绽花朵。

  I didn't know how to respond, so I could only ponder. Only then do you understand what kind of happiness a person's career will be if it can match his hobbies. If he goes against him, no matter how wonderful he reaches by relying on his intellectual superiority and outstanding personality, with the help of external forces and the beauty of opportunity, he will never be able to be unrestrained and happy in his heart. A bitter prayer is getting older and stronger under the heavy burial. Like a 3,000-year-old ancient lotus seed, it sticks to the darkness in boredom, looking forward to one day breaking through and blooming again.你何时回你的森林？分手时我问。特别用了“回”这个字眼。那儿是她心灵的家园。

  When will you return to your forest? I asked when we broke up. The word "return" is used in particular. It was the home of her soul.以眼前这个忙法，等退休以后了。她捋捋满头的青丝，苦笑着说。又补充一句，找的人这么多，只怕退了也安生不下来。只有一个办法，把骨灰撒在白桦树下。

  With the busy method in front of me, I will wait until I retire. She stroked the green silk on her head and said with a wry smile. I added that there are so many people looking for me, I am afraid that I will not be able to live in peace even if I retire. There is only one way, scatter the ashes under the birch tree.魂灵也要看守森林，上车时她说。

  The spirit also has to guard the forest, she said when she got into the car.

未知

  13.第6000次回答

  13. 6000th answer

  某机构驻北京办事处的首席代表，是一位外籍女华人。

  The chief representative of an institution's office in Beijing is a foreign Chinese.一次聊天，她说，本公司待遇优厚，事业发展很有前途，因此每次招聘白领，硕士、博士云集，真像一句北京土话形容的——可用簸箕论堆儿撮。好中选优，我的用人标准非常简单。开始阶段，完全唯文凭是举，而且一定要名牌大学的高才生。

  In a chat, she said that the company has a generous salary and a promising career development, so every time it recruits white-collar workers, masters and doctors gather, which is really like a Beijing dialect description - it can be used as a dustpan. My employment criteria are very simple. At the beginning, diplomas are completely the only ones, and they must be highly talented students from prestigious universities.我说，这样做是否有遗珠之憾？自学成才的也大有人在，俗话说包子有肉不在褶儿上，路遥知马力、日久见人心啊。

  I said, is there any regret in doing this? There are also many self-taught people, as the saying goes, the bun has meat and is not on the pleats, the road knows the horsepower, and the people see the hearts of the people over time.首席代表点头道，你讲得也有几分道理，但现代社会如此快节奏，哪儿有时间像个老农似的慢慢考察马的能力？我没有火眼金睛能看穿人的心肺，只有凭借他的历史。如果是匹千里马，早该穿云破雾战功赫赫。馅儿里藏着很多肉的包子，必会油汪汪、香气扑鼻，不能等咬了一口才知道。

  The chief representative nodded and said, you have some truth, but modern society is so fast-paced, where is the time to slowly examine the ability of horses like an old farmer? I don't have the golden eye to see through people's hearts and lungs, only by his history. If it was a thousand-mile horse, it should have broken through the clouds and fog long ago. Buns with a lot of meat hidden in the filling will be oily and fragrant, and you can't wait until you take a bite to know.名牌大学的学生，当然也非个个金刚不坏之身，但杰出人才的保险系数大一些。你想啊，重点大学的学生一般来自重点中学，重点中学来自重点小学……据说一个小学生大约要考500次试。念到博士毕业，便经历了成千上万次考试。都说现在学生压力大、精神负担重，能在大负荷下成绩优等，不曾考试昏倒，没有长期失眠，精神无分裂，身体未崩溃……不正说明了他毅力顽强、心理素质稳定，是可堪造就的人才吗？

  Of course, students from prestigious universities are not all indestructible, but the insurance coefficient of outstanding talents is larger. Do you think that students from key universities generally come from key middle schools, and key middle schools come from key primary schools...... It is said that an elementary school student takes about 500 exams. When I graduated with a doctorate, I went through thousands of exams. It is said that now students are under high pressure and mental burden, can achieve excellent grades under heavy loads, have never fainted in exams, have not suffered from long-term insomnia, have no schizophrenia, and have not collapsed...... Doesn't it mean that he has tenacious perseverance and stable psychological quality, and is a talent that can be cultivated?再者，我喜欢名牌大学学生的自信和优越感，那是一种从小积攒起来的雄厚功力和接受了某种训练培育出的虚张声势型自信，内在质量不一样。后面这种东西，一般的场合下还可凑合，但到关键时刻需要大胆魄、大气概时就易溃败瓦解。现代商战很残酷，谁能在气势上压倒对方，进退有度，坚持到最后一分钟，才能成为长远的赢家。当然，衡量人的整体素质，是综合指标，但我哪儿有那么多时间一一鉴定？只有忙中取巧，简化约分，把复杂的问题程式化。打仗时，大家挑选勇敢的人。和平年代，人们便用名牌大学这孔筛子，做用人的初步甄别。

  Furthermore, I like the self-confidence and superiority of students in prestigious universities, which is a kind of strong skills accumulated since childhood and bravado self-confidence cultivated by receiving some kind of training, and the inner quality is different. The latter kind of thing can be made do on ordinary occasions, but when it comes to critical moments, it is easy to collapse and collapse when boldness and grandiosity are needed. Modern business wars are cruel, who can overwhelm the opponent in momentum, advance and retreat, and persist until the last minute in order to become a long-term winner. Of course, measuring a person's overall quality is a comprehensive indicator, but where do I have so much time to identify them one by one? Only by taking advantage of the busyness, simplifying the division, and stylizing complex problems. When fighting, everyone chooses brave people. In peaceful times, people used the sieve of famous universities as a preliminary screening of people.我说，您的这套观点和现在的素质教育不符啊。人才应该是一个更广博的概念。

  I said, your set of views is inconsistent with the current quality education. Talent should be a broader concept.首席代表说，我也是无奈。除了分数，中国现在还有哪种比较公平公开而又负责任的评定指标可供用人单位参考？国外是有这种标准的。

  The chief representative said, I am also helpless. In addition to scores, what other fair, open and responsible evaluation indicators can employers refer to in China? There is such a standard abroad.我女儿和她的伙伴，都特别踊跃地参加志愿者服务队伍。工作是义务的，没有报酬，但登记处的表格摞得天高。孩子们要是得知申请获得接受，被指派了为公众服务的机会，会非常高兴。动机并不完全出于无私的爱心，关键在于活动结束后，用人部门会出示对志愿者能力和责任感的评语。此种经历和得分，对于就业极为重要。

  My daughter and her partner are particularly enthusiastic about participating in the volunteer service team. The work is compulsory and unpaid, but the registry is stacked with forms. The children will be happy to know that their applications have been accepted and that they have been assigned the opportunity to serve the public. The motivation is not entirely selfless, the key is that after the event, the employing department will show a comment on the volunteer's ability and sense of responsibility. This kind of experience and score is extremely important for employment.女儿领受任务回家，对着镜子不停咧着嘴笑。她平常性格内向，不大动表情。那一天，她直笑得腮帮上的肌肉都哆嗦起来，好像白天跑了太多的路，睡觉时小腿抽筋一样。我说，艾尼卡，你这是怎么啦？按照中国话说，是吃了笑婆婆的尿了吗？女儿说，妈妈，我被分到一家像迪士尼乐园样的游乐城，将穿着员工的制服站在一个岔路口为游人指路。经过测算，游人从进园玩到我所站立的地方，有三分之一的人会有需要方便的念头。虽然一路标有显著的卫生间指示牌，但仍有很多人会四处张望，向服务人员打听——洗手间在哪里？这个时候，我的工作，喏，就是一边打手势一边笑容满面地回答：请往这边走。

  The daughter received the task and went home, grinning in the mirror. She is usually introverted and doesn't move her expression. That day, she laughed so hard that the muscles on her cheeks trembled, as if she had run too much during the day and her calves cramped when she slept. I said, Anika, what's wrong with you? According to Chinese, did you eat the urine of the laughing mother-in-law? My daughter said, Mom, I was assigned to an amusement park like Disneyland, and I stood at a fork in the road in the uniform of an employee to show the way to the tourists. After calculation, one-third of the tourists will have the idea of convenience from entering the park to the place where I stand. Although there are prominent toilet signs along the way, there are still many people who will look around and ask the service staff - where is the toilet? At this time, my job, well, is to gesture and answer with a smile: Please go this way.

  工作基本就是如此，很简单，很单调，但是必不可少。今天，公园服务总管问我，你知道每天要说多少遍“请往这边走”吗？我说，不知道。总管说，要回答6000遍。这句话，我相信你在说第一遍的时候会亲切可人、温柔有加，说到1000次的时候也还算彬彬有礼，但你能保证在每天第6000次重复它时，脸上依旧是真切的笑意，口气中没有一丝厌倦的情绪吗？如果你做不到，现在离开还来得及。

  The work is basically like this, very simple, monotonous, but essential. Today, the park service manager asked me, do you know how many times a day you have to say "please go this way"? I said, I don't know. The manager said to answer 6,000 times. I believe you will be kind and gentle when you say this sentence the first time, and you will be polite when you say it 1,000 times, but can you guarantee that when you repeat it for the 6,000th time a day, there is still a real smile on your face and no trace of tiredness in your tone? If you can't do it, it's too late to leave.我心中一抽，女儿个性强，能承担如此乏味的工作和持续地善待他人吗？没有把握啊。忙问，艾尼卡，你怎样回答？女儿说，我想，这是一个培养爱心、锻炼耐力的好机会，再说为了得到一个就业参考的好分数，我就咬牙答应下来了。您没看我正在练习微笑吗？

  My heart twitched, can my daughter have a strong personality, take on such a tedious job and continue to be kind to others? I'm not sure. Busy asking, Anika, how do you answer? My daughter said, I think this is a good opportunity to cultivate love and exercise endurance, and in order to get a good score for employment reference, I gritted my teeth and agreed. Didn't you see that I was practicing smiling?艾尼卡真的说到做到了。我曾在游乐园快下班的时候偷窥过她，那大概已经是她当天的第5000多次微笑了，依旧纯真善良、举止到位，无一敷衍。以至义务劳动结束时，她说，妈妈，我已经忘记如何表示愤怒了。当然，她得到了很好的评语。

  Anika really did what he said. I once peeped at her when she was about to get off work at the amusement park, and it was probably her 5,000th smile that day, still innocent and kind, with good manners and no perfunctory. At the end of the volunteer labor, she said, Mom, I have forgotten how to express my anger. Of course, she got good reviews.听完首席代表的话，我说，您这样一讲，我是又明白又糊涂了。明白的是，艾尼卡是一个好孩子。糊涂的是，既然人的优良品质是培养出来的，这不又和您的天生自信学说矛盾了吗？

  After listening to the chief representative's words, I said, I understand and confused when you say this. What is clear is that Anika is a good boy. The confusing thing is that since people's good qualities are cultivated, isn't this contradictory to your natural self-confidence doctrine?首席代表笑起来说，不要钻我的空子啊。天生素质当然最好，如果不具备，就只好退而求其次。好比天然的大虾捕捞光了，人工养殖的也行啊。天才加上训练，就更棒啦！

  The chief representative laughed and said, don't take advantage of me. Of course, natural quality is the best, if you don't have it, you have to settle for the second. It's like natural prawns are caught, and artificially farmed ones are also fine. Genius plus training, it's even better!

未知

  14.你的身体里必有一颗成功的种子

  14. There must be a seed of success in your body

  在每个人的生命里，都有一个关于创造的秘密，等待着被发现。那将是你的第二次诞生。

  In everyone's life, there is a secret about creation, waiting to be discovered. That will be your second birth.你一定要相信，在你的身体里，有一颗种子，焦灼地盼望着阳光。至于它到底是一颗什么种子，在没有发芽之前，谁也不知道。

  You must believe that there is a seed in your body, anxiously looking forward to the sun. As for what kind of seed it is, no one knows until it germinates.你的责任就是给它浇水，保护它不被鸟雀啄食，不因为干渴而失去生机，不会被人偷走，也不会在你饥肠辘辘的时刻被你炒熟了充饥。如果那样做了，你虽可一时果腹，却丧失了长久发展的原动力。

  Your responsibility is to water it, protect it from being pecked by birds, not lose its vitality due to thirst, not be stolen by others, and not be cooked by you to satisfy your hunger when you are hungry. If you do that, you will be satisfied for a while, but you will lose the driving force for long-term development.那颗种子可能藏在你的耳朵里，你就有灵敏的听觉。可能藏在你的手指甲里，你就有非凡的触觉。也可能在你的眸子里，也可能在你的肌肉中。当然了，更可能在你的大脑中、心脏里、双手中……

  That seed may be hidden in your ears, and you have a keen sense of hearing. Probably hidden in your fingernails, you have an extraordinary sense of touch. It could be in your eyes, or it could be in your muscles. Of course, it is more likely to be in your brain, heart, and hands......每个人在属于个人的成长经历中，早已获得了解决问题的丰富宝藏。请信任我们的潜意识，它必定能在正确的时机产生恰当的回应。告诉你一句悄悄话——有时候，信息也将以非语言的方式揭露真相。

  Everyone has already obtained a rich treasure of solving problems in their personal growth experience. Trust our subconscious mind to respond appropriately at the right time. Whisper to you – sometimes, information will reveal the truth in a non-verbal way.找找吧。一定找得到！

  Look for it. You will definitely find it!身体里绝对有不少于一百种的功能，能保证你在浑然不觉中完成种种复杂的运作。但你不要以为功能们会一直老老实实地待在那里，它们是勤勤恳恳的，却不是任劳任怨的。如果你一直视它们的存在为理所当然，从来不照料它们，不维护和激励它们，或是过度使用，或置若罔闻，那么，它们不是反抗，就是消极怠工，也许集体突围，无声无息地溜走了，然而你误以为它们从来不曾居住在你的身体里。要知道，一辈子无意识地随波逐流，会导致你各种功能的退化。

  There are definitely no less than a hundred functions in the body, which can ensure that you can complete various complex operations without realizing it. But don't think that the functions will always stay there, they are diligent, but not hardworking. If you have always taken their existence for granted, never cared for them, not maintained and motivated them, or overused them, or turned a deaf ear, then they either resisted, or neglected their work, perhaps broke out collectively and slipped away silently, yet you mistakenly believe that they never inhabited your body. You know, unconsciously following the crowd all your life will lead to the degradation of your various functions.成功并不像想象的那样难。因为我们不敢做，它才变得难起来。

  Success is not as difficult as it seems. Because we don't dare to do it, it becomes difficult.

未知

  15.仇人的显微镜

  15. The microscope of the enemy

  人一生，会听到很多评价和意见，你不想听也不行。意见的来源，是个有趣的问题。

  In a person's life, you will hear a lot of evaluations and opinions, and you don't want to listen to them. The source of the opinion is an interesting question.说到意见的来源，最简单的可以分成两大类。一大类来自爱你的人，因为希望你进步，希望你好，希望你幸福，所以他们会指出你的不足。通常我们对这类意见，要么是重视过度，要么是过度地不重视。前者是因为亲人在我们眼中就是人间的上帝，句句是真理。后者也因为和凡间的上帝相处得太久了，反倒觉得老生常谈，把它当成了耳旁风。还有一大类意见，来自恨你的人。我说的这个“恨”，不是血海深仇，不是国恨家仇。在此文中，它统指对你印象不好的人、和你不对付的人、和你有过节儿且巴望着你倒霉的人。按时下年轻人的话讲，就是和你相克，也许是血型不符，也许是星座不合。那些和你暗中戗着茬儿的龌龊人，恕我简称为你的“仇人”。

  When it comes to the source of opinions, the simplest can be divided into two categories. A large category comes from people who love you because they want you to improve, want you to be good, and want you to be happy, so they will point out your shortcomings. Usually we either overvalue or do not attach too much importance to this kind of opinion. The former is because our relatives are the God of the world in our eyes, and every sentence is the truth. the latter also felt clichéd because he had been with the mortal god for too long, and took it as a deaf ear. There is also a large category of opinions from people who hate you. The "hatred" I am talking about is not a deep blood feud, not a national hatred and a family feud. In this text, it refers to people who have a bad impression of you, people who don't deal with you, and people who have a bad relationship with you and hope that you are unlucky. According to the words of young people nowadays, it is to be compatible with you, maybe it is a blood type that does not match, or it may be a constellation that does not match. Those filthy people who secretly quarrel with you, forgive me for simply calling you your "enemy".对待仇人的意见，有一句很经典的话，叫作“走自己的路，让别人说去吧”。这虽是一剂良药，但缺点是起效较慢。很多人试验过这法，有时好几个月甚至好几年之后，才能渐渐在想起仇人们的冷语时心境淡然。还有一个前提——你已经找到了一条路，正在走着，方向感明确，有主心骨，步履轻快。说这话的时候底气才较充足。倘若正在彷徨和苦闷中，雨雾迷蒙，路还不知在何方，或者干脆在路边崴了脚或被野兽啃伤了，创口流着血，那这句经典就稍嫌隔靴搔痒，有点近似精神胜利法了。

  There is a very classic saying about the opinions of enemies, called "Go your own way and let others tell you to go". Although this is a good medicine, the disadvantage is that it has a slower effect. Many people have tried this method, sometimes months or even years later, before they can gradually feel calm when they think of the cold words of their enemies. There is also a premise - you have found a path, you are walking, you have a clear sense of direction, you have a backbone, and you walk briskly. When he said this, he was more confident. If you are hesitating and distressed, in the rain and fog, and you don't know where the road is, or if you simply break your foot on the side of the road or be gnawed by a wild beast, and the wound is bleeding, then this classic is a little bit of an itch through the boots, a bit similar to the spiritual victory method.面对仇人的攻伐，如何是好？

  What should I do in the face of the enemy's attack?仇人的话，杀伤力之所以大，是因为那其中常常是有几分真实的。完全的谎话，其实倒并不可怕，因为除了极为弱智的人，一般都可识破。古语说“谣言止于智者”，现在资讯发达，人也吃了很多深海鱼油，智者可能比古时还要多些，所以对完全胡说八道的东西倒不必太过担心。如果仇人的话是完全的真实，我看是应该感激的，请你低下自己的头。这不是认输或领认了侮辱，而是真心实意地表达对真实的敬畏。只要他说得对，不必介意他的人品，只需看重他的意见。仇人的真知灼见，也许会让你因此得到终生受用的教诲，他在无意中就送了一个大礼给你，他就成了你的恩人。这就是很多人常常说，我最感激的是那些侮辱、攻击、放弃我的人，他们让我懂得了如何做人，才有了今天的成就云云……每逢我听到这种话，总觉得略微矫情了些。我不会感谢那些本来想侮辱我的人，他们不应该因为仇视和狭隘受到感激。仇恨和狭隘，常常是可以置人于死地的，你没有死，是因为你救了自己。你应该感谢的只有一个人，那就是你自己啊。

  The reason why the words of enemies are so lethal is because there is often some truth in them. A complete lie is actually not terrible, because except for extremely mentally retarded people, it can generally be seen. The old saying is that "rumors stop at the wise", now that information is developed, people have eaten a lot of deep-sea fish oil, and there may be more wise people than in ancient times, so there is no need to worry too much about complete nonsense. If the enemy's words are completely true, I think you should be grateful, please lower your head. This is not an admission of defeat or an insult, but a sincere expression of reverence for the truth. As long as he is right, don't mind his character, just value his opinion. The enemy's insight may give you a lifelong lesson, and he inadvertently gives you a big gift, and he becomes your benefactor. This is why many people often say that what I am most grateful for is those who insulted, attacked, and gave up on me, who taught me how to be a person, which is why I have achieved what I am today...... Whenever I hear this kind of thing, I always feel a little pretentious. I will not thank those who originally wanted to insult me, they should not be appreciated for hatred and narrow-mindedness. Hatred and narrow-mindedness can often put people to death, you didn't die because you saved yourself. There is only one person you should be thankful for, and that is yourself.

  即使你从仇人喷涌而来的污泥浊水中，荡涤出了金沙，你也可以依然保持你的仇恨，如同保持你脊骨的硬度，但这并不妨碍你思忖他们的意见。因为只有仇人，才会深深研究你的要害。因为他恨你，所以他时刻盯着你，对你观察得格外细致，思索得格外刻毒。试想一下，如果我们用显微镜看事物，那普天之下就没有一处洁净的地方了，到处都是繁殖的细菌、蠕动的螨虫……

  Even if you wash out the golden sand from the muddy water gushing out of your enemies, you can still maintain your hatred, as if you keep your spine hard, but this does not prevent you from thinking about their opinions. Because only enemies will study your key points deeply. Because he hates you, he always stares at you, observes you very carefully, and thinks particularly viciously. Just imagine, if we look at things with a microscope, there is no clean place in the world, full of breeding bacteria and wriggling mites......然而，依然有阳光。

  However, there is still sunshine.你的仇人，就是瞄准你的显微镜。

  Your enemy is aiming at your microscope.

未知

  16.布雷迪的猴子

  16. Brady's Monkey

  当心理医生的朋友给我讲过一个故事——布雷迪的猴子。

  When a friend of a psychiatrist told me a story - Brady's monkey.布雷迪不是一座山，也不是一片茂密的原始森林，而是一位科学家的名字。

  Brady is not a mountain or a dense primeval forest, but the name of a scientist.那是一个晴朗的日子，两只猴子各自坐在它们的椅子上，像平常一样开始了生活。但宁静仅仅维持了片刻，20秒钟后，它们猛地同时遭到一次电击。这当然是不愉快的感受了，猴子们惊叫起来。

  It was a sunny day, and the two monkeys each sat in their chairs and went about their lives as usual. But the silence lasted only a moment, and after 20 seconds, they were suddenly shocked at the same time. This was of course an unpleasant feeling, and the monkeys screamed.被仪器操纵的电源，毫不理睬猴子们的愤怒，均匀恒定地释放电流，每20秒钟准时击发一次。猴子们被紧紧地缚在约束椅上，藏没处藏，躲没处躲，只得逆来顺受。

  The power supply manipulated by the instrument ignored the anger of the monkeys and released current evenly and constantly, firing on time every 20 seconds. The monkeys were tightly tied to restraint chairs, hiding and hiding, and had to accept it.但猴子不愧为灵长目动物，开始转动脑筋。很快，它们发现各自的椅子上都有一根压杆。

  But the monkey, worthy of being a primate, began to turn its brain. Soon, they discover that each chair has a press bar.甲猴在电击即将来临的时候掀动压杆，电击就被神奇地取消了，它俩也就一同逃脱了一次痛苦的体验。

  The armored monkey lifted the pressure lever when the electric shock was about to come, and the electric shock was magically canceled, and they both escaped a painful experience together.乙猴也照样掀动压杆。很可惜，它手边的这件货色是摆样子的，压与不压，对电击没有任何影响。也就是说，乙猴在频频到来的打击面前束手无策。

  The B monkey also lifted the pressure rod in the same way. Unfortunately, the color of the goods it has at hand is in shape, pressed or not, and has no effect on electric shock. In other words, the Yi Monkey is helpless in the face of frequent blows.实验继续着。甲猴明白自己可以操纵命运，它紧张地估算着时间，在打击即将到来的前夕不失时机地掀动压杆，以避免灾难。当然，它有时成功，有时失败。成功的时候，它俩就有了短暂的休息；失败的时候，它们就一道忍受电流的折磨。

  The experiment continued. Knowing that it can manipulate fate, the armored monkey nervously estimates the time, and wastes no time in lifting the pressure rod on the eve of the imminent blow to avoid disaster. Of course, it sometimes succeeds, sometimes it fails. When they succeed, they have a short break; When they fail, they endure the torture of the current together.时间艰涩地流淌着，实验结果出来了。在同等频率、同等强度电流的打击下，那只不停掀动压杆、疲于奔命的甲猴，由于沉重的心理负担，得了胃溃疡。那只听天由命、无能为力的乙猴，安然无恙……

  Time flowed hard, and the results of the experiment came out. Under the blow of the same frequency and the same intensity of the current, the tired armored monkey kept lifting the pressure rod and suffered from a stomach ulcer due to the heavy psychological burden. The resigned and powerless Yi Monkey was safe and sound......假若是你，愿做布雷迪实验里的哪一只猴子？朋友问。

  If it were you, which monkey would you like to be in the Brady experiment? Friend asked.我说，我是人，我不是猴子。

  I said, I am a human, I am not a monkey.朋友说，这只是一个比方。其实，旋转的现代社会和这个实验有很多相同之处，频繁的刺激接踵而来，人们生活在目不暇接的紧张打击之中。大家拼命地在预防伤害，采取种种未雨绸缪的手段。殊不知，某些伤害正是在预防中发生，人为的干预常常弄巧成拙，适得其反……所以，人们有时需要无奈，需要阿Q，需要随波逐流，需要无动于衷、听其自然……

  Friends say it's just an analogy. In fact, the rotating modern society has many similarities with this experiment, with frequent stimuli and people living in a dizzying burst of tension. Everyone is desperately trying to prevent injuries and take all kinds of precautionary measures. As everyone knows, some injuries occur in prevention, and human intervention is often self-defeating and counterproductive...... Therefore, people sometimes need helplessness, need Ah Q, need to go with the flow, need to be indifferent and listen to nature......我说，我对于这个心理学经典的实验没有发言权。如果布雷迪先生只是借此证明强大的心理压力可以致病，无疑是正确的。

  I say that I have no say in this classic psychological experiment. If Mr. Brady simply uses this to prove that strong psychological stress can cause illness, he is undoubtedly right.停了一会儿，我对她说，你刚才问，假如是我，会在猴子中做怎样的选择。经过考虑，我可以回答你——我愿意做那只得了胃溃疡而仍在不断掀动压杆的猴子。

  After a pause, I said to her, you just asked, if it were me, what choice would you make among monkeys? After consideration, I can answer you - I am willing to be the monkey who has a stomach ulcer and is still constantly lifting the pressure bar.朋友惊讶地笑了，说为什么。她问过许多人，他们都愿做那只无助然而健康的猴子。

  The friend laughed in surprise and said why. She asked many people who would like to be the helpless but healthy monkey.我说，那只无助的猴子健康吗？每隔20秒钟准时到来的电击，是无法逃脱的、不以个人意志为转移的恶性刺激，日复一日，终有一天会瓦解意志和身体，让它精神失常或者干脆得上癌症。

  I said, is the helpless monkey healthy? The electric shock that comes on time every 20 seconds is an escapeable malignant stimulus that is not transferred by personal will, day after day, will one day disintegrate the will and body, making it insane or simply cancerous.它暂时还没有生病，那是因为它的同伴不断地掀动压杆，为它挡去了许多次打击。在别人的护翼下生活，把自己的幸运建筑在他人的辛苦与危险中，我无法安心与习惯。

  It is not sick yet, and that is because its companions keep lifting the lever, blocking many blows for it. Living under the protection of others, building my luck in the hardships and dangers of others, I can't feel at ease and get used to it.再说说那只无法逃避责任的甲猴，既然发现了可以取消一次电击的办法，它继续摸索下去，也许能寻找出更有效的法子，求得更长久的平安。压下去，拖延时间，也许那放电的机器会烧坏，通电的线路会折断，椅子会倒塌，地震会爆发……形形色色的意外都可能发生，只要坚持下去就有希望。

  Let's talk about the armored monkey that cannot escape responsibility, since it has found a way to cancel a shock, it continues to explore, and may be able to find a more effective way to seek longer-lasting peace. If you press down and delay time, maybe the discharging machine will burn out, the energized line will break, the chair will collapse, and the earthquake will break out...... All kinds of accidents can happen, as long as you persevere, there is hope.一百种可能性在远方闪光，避免一次电击，就积累了一次经验。也许实践会使它渐渐熟练起来，心情不再紧张、悲苦，把掀动压杆只当成简单的游戏……不管怎么说，行动比单纯的等待更有力量。一味地顺从与观望，办法绝不会从天上掉下来。

  A hundred possibilities flash in the distance, avoid a single electric shock, and accumulate an experience. Perhaps practice will make it gradually proficient, and the mood is no longer tense and sad, and the lifting of the lever is only a simple game...... In any case, action is more powerful than mere waiting. If you blindly obey and wait and see, the method will never fall from the sky.

  当然，最大的可能是无望，呕血的猴子无奈地掀动压杆到最后一刻……即使是这样，那我也绝不后悔。

  Of course, the biggest possibility is hopelessness, and the blood-vomiting monkey reluctantly lifts the press bar until the last moment...... Even so, I will never regret it.因为——

  Because——假如我和那只猴子是朋友，我愿意把背负的重担留给自己。

  If I were friends with that monkey, I would be willing to keep the burden to myself.假如我和那只猴子是路人，我遵照我喜爱探索的天性行事。

  If I and the monkey were passers-by, I would act according to my nature of exploration.假如我和那只猴子是敌手，我会傲然地处置自己的生命，不在对方的荫庇下苟活。

  If I and the monkey were enemies, I would proudly dispose of my life and not live under the shadow of the other person.所以，天造地设，我只能做那只得了胃溃疡的猴子。
Therefore, I can only be the monkey with stomach ulcers.

未知

  17.比树更长久的

  17. Those that last longer than trees

  人们对于生命比自己更长久的物件，通常抱以恭敬和仰慕；对于活得比自己短暂的东西，则多轻视和俯视。前者比如星空，比如河海，比如久远的庙宇和沙埋的古物。后者比如朝露，比如秋霜，比如瞬息即逝的流萤和轻风。甚至是对于动物和植物，也是比较尊崇那些寿命高的巨松和老龟，而轻慢浮游的孑孓和不知寒冬的秋虫。在这种厚此薄彼的好恶中，折射着人间对于时间的敬畏和对死亡的慑服。

  People usually have respect and admiration for objects that live longer than themselves; For things that live shorter than oneself, they despise and look down on them. The former is like the starry sky, such as rivers and seas, such as ancient temples and antiquities buried in the sand. The latter is like morning dew, autumn frost, like fleeting fireflies and light winds. Even for animals and plants, they also respect those giant pines and old turtles with high lifespans, while despise the floating lonely and autumn insects that do not know the cold winter. In this kind of love and dislike, it reflects the world's reverence for time and fear of death.妈妈说过，人是活不过一棵树的。所以我从小就决定种几棵树，等我死了以后，这些树还活着，替我晒太阳和给人阴凉，包括也养活几条虫子，让鸟在累的时候填饱肚子，然后歇脚和唱歌。我当少先队员的时候，种过白蜡和柳树。后来植树节的时候，又种过杨树和松树。当我在乡下有了几间小屋，有了一块属于自己的小园子之后，我种了玫瑰和玉兰，种了法国梧桐和迎春。有一天，我在路上走，看到一截干枯的树桩，所有的枝都被锯掉了，树根仅剩一些凌乱的须，仿佛一个倒竖的鸡毛掸子。我问老乡，这是什么？老乡说，柴火。我说，我知道它现在是柴火，想知道它以前是什么。老乡说，苹果树。我说，它能结苹果吗？老乡说，结过。我不禁愤然道，为什么要把开花结果的树伐掉？老乡说，修路。

  Mom said that people can't live a tree. So I decided to plant a few trees since I was a child, and when I died, these trees were still alive, basking in the sun and shading for me, including feeding a few insects so that the birds could fill their stomachs when they were tired, and then rest and sing. When I was a Young Pioneer, I planted ash and willow. Later, on Arbor Day, poplar and pine trees were planted. When I had a few cottages in the countryside and a small garden of my own, I planted roses and magnolias, French sycamore and Yingchun. One day, I was walking on the road and saw a dry stump, all the branches were sawn off, and only some messy whiskers were left at the roots, like an upside-down feather duster. I asked the fellow villagers, what is this? The fellow said firewood. I said, I know it's firewood now, wondering what it used to be. The fellow said that the apple tree. I said, can it produce apples? The fellow said that it was over. I couldn't help but say indignantly, why cut down the flowering and fruiting trees? The fellow said that the road was built.公路横穿果园，苹果树只好让路。人们把细的枝条锯下填了灶坑，剩下这拖泥带土的根，连生火的价值都打了折扣，弃在一边。

  The road crosses the orchard, and the apple trees have to give way. People sawed off the thin branches to fill the stove pit, leaving behind the roots that dragged the mud and soil, and even the value of starting a fire was reduced and abandoned.我说，我要是把这树根拿回去栽起来，它会活吗？老乡说，不知道。树的心事，谁知道呢？我惊，说，树也会想心事吗？老乡很肯定地说，会。如果它想活，它就会活。

  I said, if I take this root back and plant it, will it live? The fellow said he didn't know. Who knows what is on the tree's mind? I was shocked and said, does the tree also think about it? The fellow said with certainty, yes. If it wants to live, it will.我把“鸡毛掸子”种在了园子里，挖了一个很大的坑，浇了很多的水。先生说，根须已经折断了大部，根本就用不了这么大的坑，又不是要埋一个人，水也太多了，好像不是种树，是蓄洪。我说，坑就是它的家，水就是它的粮食。我希望它有一份好心情。

  I planted the "feather duster" in the garden, dug a big hole, and watered it a lot. The gentleman said that most of the roots had been broken, and there was no need for such a big pit, and there was no need to bury a person, and there was too much water, as if it was not planting trees, but flood storage. I said, the pit is its home, and the water is its food. I hope it has a good mood.种下苹果树之后的两个月，我一直四处忙，没时间到乡下去。当我再一次推开园子的小门，看到苹果树的时候，惊艳绝倒。苹果树抽出几十根长长短短的枝条，绿叶盈盈，在微风中如同千手观音一般舞着，曼妙多姿。

  For the first two months after planting the apple tree, I was busy and didn't have time to go to the countryside. When I opened the small door of the garden again and saw the apple tree, I was amazed. The apple tree pulls out dozens of long and short branches, with green leaves, dancing like a thousand-handed Guanyin in the breeze, graceful and colorful.我绕着苹果树转了又转，骇然于生命的强韧，甚至不敢去抚摸它紫青色的树干，唯恐惊扰了这欣欣向荣的轮回。此刻的苹果树在我眼中，非但有了心情，简直就有了灵性。

  I circled around the apple tree, amazed at the strength of life, and didn't even dare to touch its purple-blue trunk, for fear of disturbing this thriving reincarnation. At this moment, the apple tree is not only in the mood, but also in spirituality.当我看到云南个旧市老阴山上的文学林的时候，知道自己又碰上了一群有灵性的树。1983年的春天，丁玲、杨沫、白桦、茹志娟、王安忆等二十多位作家，在这里种下了树。21年过去了，我看到一棵高高的杉树，上面挂着一块铭牌，写着“李乔”。李乔是位彝族作家，已然仙逝。我没缘分见到他本人，但我看到了他栽下的树。以后当我想起他的时候，记不得他的音容笑貌，但会闪现出这棵高大的杉树。李乔已经把生命的一部分嫁接到杉树的枝叶里，这棵杉树从此有了自己的名姓。

  When I saw the literary forest on Laoyin Mountain in an old city in Yunnan, I knew that I had encountered a group of spiritual trees again. In the spring of 1983, more than 20 writers, including Ding Ling, Yang Mo, Bai Hua, Ru Zhijuan, and Wang Anyi, planted trees here. Twenty-one years later, I saw a tall fir tree with a nameplate hanging on it that read "Li Qiao". Li Qiao is a Yi writer who has passed away. I didn't have the chance to see him in person, but I saw the tree he planted. When I think of him in the future, I can't remember his voice and smile, but I will flash this tall fir tree. Li Qiao has grafted part of his life into the branches and leaves of the fir tree, and this fir tree has since had its own name.也许是考虑到每人一棵树，不一定能保证成活，也不一定能保证多少年后依然健在，这次聚会，栽树的仪式改为大家同栽一棵树。这是一棵很大的树，枝叶繁茂。我也挤在人群中扬了几锹土，然后悄悄问旁人，这是一棵什么树？

  Perhaps considering that each person's tree may not guarantee survival, nor may it guarantee that it will still be alive many years later, this gathering, the tree planting ceremony was changed to everyone planting a tree together. It is a large tree with lush branches and leaves. I also crowded into the crowd and raised a few shovels, and then quietly asked others, what kind of tree is this?是棕树的一种，国家二类保护树种呢！工作人员告诉我。

  It is a kind of palm tree, a national second-class protected tree species! The staff told me.这棵树能活多少年呢？我又追问。

  How many years can this tree live? I asked again.这个……不大清楚，想来，一百年总是有的吧。工作人员沉吟着。

  This one...... It's not clear, but if you think about it, there will always be a hundred years. The staff pondered.我看着那棵新栽下的棕树，心想不管它的寿命多么长久，总有凋亡的那一天。也许是被雷火劈中，也许是被山洪冲毁，也许是被冰霜压垮，也许是被盗木者砍伐……总之，一棵树也像一个人一样，有无数种死法，总之是不会永远长青的。

  I looked at the newly planted palm tree and thought to myself, no matter how long it lives, there will always be a day when it will die. Maybe it was struck by lightning, maybe it was washed away by flash floods, maybe it was crushed by frost, or maybe it was cut down by wood thieves...... In short, a tree is like a person, there are countless ways to die, in short, it will not be evergreen.在栽树的时候，去谋划一棵树的死亡，这近乎是刻毒了。我不想诅咒一棵树。鉴于一个人总是要死的，人们寄希望于那些比个体生命更悠远的事物。但一棵树也是会死的，即使像我捡来的苹果树那样顽强且有好心情的树，也是会死的。既然树木无望，我们只有寄托于精神的不灭。

  When planting a tree, planning the death of a tree is almost cruel. I don't want to curse a tree. Given that a person is always going to die, people hope for things that are farther than individual life. But a tree can die, even a tree as tenacious and in a good mood as the apple tree I picked up. Since trees are hopeless, we can only pin on the immortality of the spirit.一个人是活不过一棵树的，然而再古老的树也有尽头。在所有树的上面，飞翔着我们不灭的精神，而文学是精神之林的一片红叶。

  A person cannot live a tree, but no matter how old the tree is, there is an end. Above all the trees, our immortal spirit flies, and literature is a red leaf in the forest of spirits.

未知

  18.教养的证据

  18. Evidence of upbringing

  “教养”是个高频词。时下，如果说某人没教养，就是大批评大贬义了。如果说一个女人没教养，简直就如同说她是三陪小姐了。

  "Upbringing" is a high-frequency word. Nowadays, if someone is uneducated, it is a big criticism and a big derogatory meaning. If a woman is uneducated, it is like saying that she is a third escort lady.什么叫教养呢？词典上说是“文化和品德的修养”，但我更愿意理解为“因教育而养成的优良品质和习惯”。

  What is upbringing? The dictionary says "cultural and moral cultivation", but I prefer to understand it as "good qualities and habits developed through education".一个人可以受过教育，但他依然是没有教养的。就像一个人可以不停地吃东西，但他的肠胃不吸收，竹篮打水一场空，还是骨瘦如柴。不过，这话似乎不能反过来说——一个人没有受过系统的教育，他却能够很有教养。

  A person can be educated, but he is still uneducated. Just like a person can eat non-stop, but his stomach does not absorb it, and the bamboo basket is empty, and he is still skinny. However, it seems that this cannot be said the other way around - a person who is not systematically educated can be very educated.教养不是天生的。一个小孩子如果没有人教给他良好的习惯和有关的知识，他必定是愚昧和粗浅的。当然，这个“教”是广义的，除了指入学经师，也包括家长的言传身教和环境的耳濡目染。

  Upbringing is not innate. A child must be ignorant and superficial if no one teaches him good habits and knowledge. Of course, this "teaching" is broad, in addition to referring to the enrollment of the teacher, but also to the words and deeds of parents and the influence of the environment.教养和财富一样，是需要证据的。你说你有钱不成，得拿出一个资产证明。教养的证据不是你读过多少书，家庭背景如何显赫，也不是你通晓多少礼节规范，能够熟练使用刀叉，会穿晚礼服……这些仅仅是一些表面的气泡，最关键的证据可能有如下若干。

  Upbringing, like wealth, requires evidence. You say you can't make money if you have money, you have to show an asset certificate. The evidence of upbringing is not how many books you have read, how prominent your family background is, nor how much etiquette you know, how skillful you are in using knives and forks, and how to wear evening dresses...... These are just some superficial bubbles, and the most critical evidence may be as follows.热爱大自然。把它列为有教养的证据之首，是因为一个不懂得敬畏大自然、不知道人类渺小的人，必是井底之蛙，与教养谬之千里。这也许怪不得他，因为如果不经教育，一个人是很难自发地懂得宇宙之大和人类的微薄的。没有相应的自然科学知识，人除了显得蒙昧和狭隘以外，注定也是盲目傲慢的。之所以从小就教育孩子要爱护花草，正是这种伟大感悟的最基本的训练。若是看到一个成人野蛮地攀折林木，通常人们就会毫不迟疑地评判道：这个人太没有教养了。可见教养和绿色是紧密地联系在一起。懂得与自然协调地相处，懂得爱护无言的植物的人，推而广之，他多半也可能会爱惜更多的动物，爱护自己的同类。

  Love nature. It is listed as the first evidence of educated because a person who does not know how to revere nature and does not know the smallness of human beings must be a frog at the bottom of the well, a thousand miles away from the absurdity of upbringing. This may not be to blame him, because without education, it is difficult for a person to spontaneously understand the vastness of the universe and the meager nature of human beings. Without corresponding knowledge of natural sciences, in addition to appearing ignorant and narrow-minded, people are destined to be blind and arrogant. The reason why children should be taught to love flowers and plants from an early age is the most basic training of this great perception. If you see an adult climbing a tree savagely, people will usually judge without hesitation: This person is too uneducated. It can be seen that upbringing and green are closely linked. A person who knows how to live in harmony with nature and knows how to care for silent plants may also cherish more animals and love his own kind.一个有教养的人，应该能够自如地运用公共的语言，表达自己的内心和同他人交流，并能妥帖地付诸文字。我所说的公共语言，是指大家——从普通民众到知识分子都能理解的清洁和明亮的语言，而不是某种狭窄的土语俚语或者某特定情境下的专业语言。这个要求并非画蛇添足，在这个千帆竞发的时代，太多的人，只会说他那个行业的内部语言，只会说机器、仪器能听懂的语言，却不懂得和人亲密地交流。这不是一个批评，而是一个事实。和人的交流的掌握，特别是和陌生人的沟通，通常不是自发产生的，是要通过学习和练习来获得的。一个没有受过教育的人，他所掌握的词汇是有限的和贫乏的，除了描绘自己的生理感受，比如饿了、渴了、睡觉以及生殖的欲望之外，他们对于自己的内心感知甚为模糊，因为那些描述内心感受的词语，通常是抽象和长于比兴的。不通过学习，难以明确恰当地将它表达出来。那些虽然拥有一技之长但无法精彩地运用公共语言这种神圣的媒介来沟通和解读自我心灵的人，难以算是一个有教养的人。技术是用来谋生的，而仅仅具有谋生的本领是不够的。就像豺狼也会自发地猎取食物一样，那是近乎无须教育也可掌握的本能。而人，毫无疑问地应比豺狼更高一筹。

  An educated person should be able to use public language freely, express his heart and communicate with others, and be able to put it into words properly. By public language, I mean a clean and bright language that can be understood by everyone, from ordinary people to intellectuals, rather than some kind of narrow vernacular slang or professional language in a particular situation. In this era of thousands of sails, too many people can only speak the internal language of their industry, only the language that machines and instruments can understand, but they do not know how to communicate intimately with people. This is not a criticism, but a fact. Mastery of communication with people, especially with strangers, is usually not spontaneous, but is acquired through learning and practice. An uneducated person has a limited and poor vocabulary, and in addition to describing his physical feelings, such as hunger, thirst, sleep, and the desire to reproduce, they have a vague sense of their inner feelings, because the words that describe inner feelings are usually abstract and longer than Bixing. Without learning, it is difficult to express it clearly and appropriately. Those who have a skill but cannot use the sacred medium of public language to communicate and interpret their own minds are hardly educated. Technology is used to make a living, and it is not enough to have the ability to make a living. Just as jackals spontaneously hunt for food, it is an instinct that can be mastered almost without education. And man, without a doubt, should be a step higher than a jackal.一个有教养的人，对历史有恰如其分的了解，知道身而为人，我们走过了怎样曲折的道路。当然，教养并不能使每个人都像历史学家那样博古通今，但是教养能使一个有思考爱好的人知晓我们是从哪里来，要到哪里去。教养通过历史使我们不单活在此时此刻，也活在从前和以后，如同生活在一条奔腾的大河里，知道泉眼和海洋的方向。

  A well-educated person has a proper understanding of history and knows what kind of tortuous road we have gone through as human beings. Of course, education does not make everyone as knowledgeable as historians, but education can make a person with a hobby of thinking know where we come from and where we are going. Through history, we live not only in the present moment, but also in the past and in the future, as if we were living in a rushing river, knowing the direction of the spring and the ocean.一个有教养的人，除了眼前的事物和得失以外，他还会不由自主地想到他远大的目标。教养把人的注意力拓展了，变得宏大和光明。每一个个体都有沉没在黑暗峡谷的时刻，当你在跋涉和攀缘中，虽然伤痕累累，因为你具有的教养，确知时间是流动的，明了暂时与永久。相信在遥远的地方定有峡谷的出口，那里有瀑布在轰鸣。

  A well-educated person, in addition to the things in front of him and the gains and losses, will also involuntarily think of his lofty goals. Upbringing expands people's attention, becomes grand and bright. Every individual has a moment of sinking into a dark canyon, when you are trekking and climbing, although scarred, because of your upbringing, you know that time is flowing, and you know that it is temporary and permanent. It is believed that in the distance there must be an exit from the canyon, where a waterfall roars.

  一个有教养的人，特别是女人，对自己的身体有着亲切的了解和珍惜之情，知道它们各自独有的清晰的名称，明了它们是精致和洁净的，身体的每一部分都有着不可替代的功能，并无高低贵贱的区别。他知道自己的快乐和满足，有很大的一部分是建筑在这些功能灵敏的感知上和健全的完整上的。他也毫无疑义地知道，他的大脑是他的身体的主宰。他不会任由他的器官牵制他的所作所为，他是清醒和有驾驭力的。他在尊重自己身体的同时，也尊重他人的身体。在尊重自我的权利的同时，也尊重他人的权利。在驰骋自我意志的骏马时，也精心维护着他人的茵茵草地。

  A well-educated person, especially a woman, has a cordial understanding and cherishment of his own body, knows their own clear names, knows that they are delicate and clean, and that every part of the body has an irreplaceable function, and there is no difference between high and low. He knows that his happiness and satisfaction are largely built on the sensitive perception and sound integrity of these functions. He also knew without a doubt that his brain was the master of his body. He will not let his organs hold back what he does, he is sober and controlling. He respects his own body as well as the bodies of others. While respecting one's own rights, we also respect the rights of others. When galloping a horse of its own will, it also carefully maintains the grass of others.一个有教养的人，对人类种种优秀的品质，比如忠诚、勇敢、信任、勤勉、互助、舍己救人、临危不惧、吃苦耐劳、坚贞不屈……充满敬重、敬畏、敬仰之心。不一定每一个人都能够身体力行，但他们懂得爱戴和歌颂。人不是不可以怯懦和懒惰，但他不能把这些陋习伪装成高风亮节，不能由于自己做不到高尚，就诋毁所有做到了这些的人是伪善。你可以跪在泥里，但你不可以把污泥抹上整个世界的胸膛，并因此像煞有介事地说到处都是污垢。

  A well-educated person has all kinds of excellent qualities for human beings, such as loyalty, bravery, trust, diligence, mutual assistance, self-sacrifice to save others, fearlessness in the face of danger, hardship, and perseverance...... Full of respect, awe and admiration. Not everyone can do it themselves, but they know how to love and praise. It is not that man cannot be cowardly and lazy, but he cannot disguise these bad habits as noble and virtuous, and he cannot slander all those who have done these things as hypocrisy because they cannot be noble. You can kneel in the mud, but you can't smear the sludge on the chest of the whole world, and thus say that there is dirt everywhere.有教养的人知道害怕。知道害怕，是件有意义、有价值的事情。它表示明了自己的限制，知道世上有一些不可逾越的界限，知道世界上有阳光，阳光下有正义的惩罚。由于害怕正义的惩罚，因而约束自我，是意志力坚强的一种体现。

  Cultured people know to be afraid. Knowing that fear is a meaningful and valuable thing. It shows that there are some insurmountable boundaries in the world, that there is sunshine in the world, and that there is righteous punishment under the sun. Because of the fear of justice punishment, self-restraint is a manifestation of strong willpower.有教养的人知道仰视高山和宇宙，知道仰视那些伟大的发现和人格，知道对于自己无法企及的高度表达尊重，而不是糊涂地闭上眼睛或居心叵测地嘲讽。

  A well-educated person knows how to look up to the mountains and the universe, to those great discoveries and personalities, and to express respect for a high level beyond their reach, rather than closing their eyes in a daze or mocking with ulterior motives.

  教养是不可一蹴而就的。教养是细水长流的。教养是可以遗失也可以捡拾起来的。教养也具有某种坚定的流传和既定的轨道性。教养是一些习惯的总和，在某种程度上，教养不是活在我们的皮肤上，而是繁衍在我们的骨髓里。教养和遗传几乎是不相关的，是后天和社会的产物。教养必须有酵母，在潜移默化和条件反射的共同烘烤下，假以足够的时日，才能自然而然地散发出香气。教养是衡量一个民族整体素质的一张X光片子。脸面上可以依靠化妆繁花似锦，但只有内在的健硕才经得起冲刷和考验，才是力量的象征。
Upbringing cannot be achieved overnight. Upbringing is a long process. Upbringing can be lost or picked up. Education also has a certain firm circulation and established track. Upbringing is the sum of habits, and to some extent, upbringing does not live on our skin, but reproduces in our bone marrow. Upbringing and heredity are almost unrelated, acquired and social products. Upbringing must have yeast, and under the joint roasting of subtle and conditioned reflexes, it will naturally emit aroma with enough time. Education is an X-ray film to measure the overall quality of a nation. The face can rely on makeup to bloom, but only inner strength can withstand washing and testing, and is a symbol of strength.

未知

  19.格子布上的花

  19. Flowers on plaid

  好日子和坏日子，是有一定比例的。就是说，你的一生，不可能都是好日子——天天蜜里调油，也不可能都是坏日子——每时每刻黄连拌苦胆。必是好日子坏日子交叉着来，如同一块花格子布。如果算下来，你的好日子多，就如同布面上的红黄色多，亮堂鲜艳。如果你的坏日子多，那就是黑灰色多，阴云密布。

  There is a certain proportion of good days and bad days. That is to say, your life cannot be a good day - every day is mixed with honey, nor can it be a bad day - every moment is mixed with bitter gall. It must be a good day and a bad day intersect, like a flower plaid. If you count it, you have many good days, just like the red and yellow on the cloth, bright and bright. If you have a lot of bad days, it's a lot of black and gray and cloudy.什么是好坏日子的分水岭、试金石呢？钱吗？好像不是。有钱的人不一定承认他过的是好日子。钱少的人或者没钱的人，也不一定感觉他过的是坏日子。健康吗？好像也不是。无痛无灾的人不一定觉得他过的是好日子，罹病残疾的人也不一定承认他过的是坏日子。美丽和能力吗？似乎更不像了。看看周围，有多少漂亮能干的男人女人，锁着眉，苦着脸，抱怨着岁月的难熬啊……说了若干标准，都不是。那么，什么是好日子和坏日子的界限呢？

  What is the watershed and touchstone of good and bad days? Money? It doesn't seem to be the case. A rich person does not necessarily admit that he is living a good life. People with little money or no money may not necessarily feel that they are living a bad life. Is it healthy? It doesn't seem to be either. A painless person may not necessarily feel that he is living a good life, and a person with illness and disability may not necessarily admit that he is living a bad life. Beauty and ability? It seems even less like it. Look around, how many beautiful and capable men and women are locking their eyebrows, with bitter faces, complaining about the hardships of the years...... I said a few standards, but they are not. So, what is the line between good and bad days?不知他人的答案如何，我猜，是爱吧？

  I don't know what other people's answers are, I guess, it's love, right?有爱的日子，也许我们很穷，但每一分钱都能带给我们双倍的快乐。也许我们的身体坏了，每况愈下，但我们牵着相爱的人的手慢慢老去，旅途就不再孤独。也许我们是平凡和微小的，但我们竭尽全力做着喜欢的事，心中便充满温暖安宁。

  On days of love, maybe we are poor, but every penny can bring us double happiness. Maybe our bodies are broken and deteriorating, but we hold the hands of our loved ones and grow old, and the journey is no longer lonely. Maybe we are ordinary and small, but we do our best to do what we love, and our hearts are filled with warmth and peace.这是什么呢？这就是好日子了。你的那块花格子布上就绽开了鲜花。

  What is this? This is a good day. Flowers bloom on your flower plaid.

未知

  20.溪水金沙

  20. Stream Golden Sand

  人的天性如溪水，学习的本能就是金沙。它们潜伏在水中，浪花翻溅时一眼看不到它的颗粒，但因了它们的存在，水变得更有分量和价值。

  Human nature is like a stream, and the instinct to learn is golden sand. They lurk in the water, and their particles are not visible at a glance when the waves splash, but because of their presence, the water becomes more weighty and valuable.我相信那些不含有金沙的小溪已经干涸，因为人类生存的环境曾经并且还将是刺骨险恶，你一个人的经历是不丰富的，你同时代的借鉴是不全面的，你一个行业的规则是不完整的……如果不爱学习、不善于学习、不坚持学习的话，就会被层出不穷的打击和灾变来征伐与掩埋，这个人的遗传基因就昙花一现地湮灭了。

  I believe that those streams that do not contain golden sand have dried up, because the environment in which human beings live has been and will be bitterly sinister, your experience alone is not rich, your contemporaries are not comprehensive, and the rules of your industry are incomplete...... If you don't love to learn, are not good at learning, and don't persist in learning, you will be conquered and buried by endless blows and disasters, and this person's genetic genes will be wiped out in the pan.所以，乐观地说，我们每个人都是那些爱学习的人的后代，唯有这项潜藏在血液中的专擅，令我们比所有的动物都更繁荣递进。

  So, optimistically, each of us is a descendant of those who love to learn, and only this mastery hidden in our blood makes us more prosperous than all animals.学习是有很多种方法的，比如抬头望天，你可以学到星空的叙事是无与伦比的宏大，滋生出的渺小和畏惧感让你一生警醒、谦逊。比如低头俯地，你可以窥到万物葱茏、物竞天择、优胜劣汰、残酷、公平，激发出的紧迫和危机感让你不敢有一刻懈怠与放松。比如听妈妈讲那过去的事情，你会生出无限的柔情，不但绕指，更是绕心。比如看风光大片、科幻影像，你会惊骇莫名，有一种充满未知的狂喜和震撼……

  There are many ways to learn, such as looking up at the sky, you can learn that the narrative of the starry sky is incomparably grand, and the sense of insignificance and fear that breeds will make you vigilant and humble throughout your life. For example, bowing your head to the ground, you can see the lushness of everything, natural selection, survival of the fittest, cruelty, fairness, and the sense of urgency and crisis inspired by it makes you dare not slack and relax for a moment. For example, listening to your mother talk about the past, you will have infinite tenderness, not only around your fingers, but also around your heart. For example, when you watch a blockbuster or science fiction image, you will be shocked and inexplicable, and there is a kind of ecstasy and shock full of unknowns......然而，我以为最好的学习还是阅读。

  However, I thought the best learning was still reading.首先我们要感谢文字，因为有了文字，我们的情感血脉才有了附着的骨骼，我们的理论枝蔓才有了攀缘的篱笆，我们的科技成果才有了传袭的衣钵，我们的历史才有了一面面古镜矗立照耀。

  First of all, we must be grateful for words, because with words, our emotional bloodline has an attached bone, our theoretical branches have a climbing fence, our scientific and technological achievements have a mantle to be passed down, and our history has ancient mirrors standing and shining.时代进步，从布帛竹简到计算机液晶屏，书写变得越来越快，阅读变得越来越方便了。记得我小时候，看一本长篇小说要个把星期，那还算快的呢！借书给朋友，不过百八十页，半个月后要她还，她说，这才几天啊你就催，我还没看完呢，小气呀小气！

  With the progress of the times, from silk and bamboo slips to computer LCD screens, writing has become faster and faster, and reading has become more and more convenient. I remember when I was a child, it took me a week to read a novel, which was quite fast! Lending a book to a friend, but one hundred and eighty pages, half a month later asked her to pay it back, she said, it's only been a few days, you urge me, I haven't finished reading it yet, stingy, stingy!读书，一种是技艺之书，讲的是各行各业的特殊规则；还有一种是普遍的知识，比如文史哲。读行业之书的人多，读普遍知识的人少。有一年我到国内著名的一所医科大学授课，我说，你们这些未来中国最杰出的医生，有谁读过《红字》？有谁读过《罪与罚》？请举手。台下抬臂者寥寥。在感谢了这些博士生的诚实之后，我深表遗憾。一个医生，除了读医书以外，也要读艺术。因为你面对的不是一只装满了病痛脓血的破罐子，而是一个活生生的人。生死契阔啊，他们在最悲苦无助的时候和你狭路相逢，你要医治他，不仅仅是凭着你的精湛医术，而且要凭着你强大的人格和综合的力量。如果你想当一个名医而非庸医，请在读医书的同时也展读人文科学方面的书籍。提高了你的素养，是你的福气，是你爹妈、妻子、丈夫、孩子的福气，同时也造福了你的病患。

  Reading, one is a book of skills, which talks about the special rules of all walks of life; There is also a universal knowledge, such as literature, history, and philosophy. There are many people who read industry books and few people who read general knowledge. One year I went to a famous medical university in China to teach, and I said, who of you will read "The Red Letter"? Has anyone read Crime and Punishment? Please raise your hand. There are very few people in the audience who raise their arms. After thanking these doctoral students for their honesty, I deeply regret it. A doctor, in addition to reading medical books, also needs to read art. Because you are not facing a broken jar full of pain, pus and blood, but a living person. Life and death are at stake, they meet you in the most miserable and helpless time, and you have to heal him, not only with your superb medical skills, but also with your strong personality and comprehensive strength. If you want to be a famous doctor instead of a quack doctor, please read books on the humanities at the same time as reading medical books. Improving your literacy is your blessing, your parents, wife, husband, and children, and it also benefits your patients.我相信，一个读过很多专业以外书籍的建筑师盖出的楼房一定更漂亮和更实用。我相信，一个读过很多专业以外书籍的学者，授课传业的时候一定更风趣、更幽默、更旁征博引、口吐莲花。我相信，一个读过很多专业以外书籍的科学家，提出的设想和理论一定更曲径通幽、独树一帜。我相信，一个读过很多专业以外书籍的管理者，企业一定更具活力和创新精神。

  I believe that a building built by an architect who has read many books outside of his profession must be more beautiful and practical. I believe that a scholar who has read many books outside his profession must be more funny, humorous, more introductory, and more spitting lotus flowers when teaching. I believe that a scientist who has read many books outside his profession must put forward ideas and theories that are more convoluted and unique. I believe that a manager who has read many books outside of his profession must be more energetic and innovative.我们曾经有过阅读备感艰难的时代。高玉宝的“我要读书”就是明证。那时候的无法阅读，是因为贫困和压迫。后来又有过对知识的蔑视，阅读也被视为通向反动的阶梯。我上初中一年级的时候，正逢“文化大革命”。学校停课闹革命，图书馆也关闭了，任何人不得进入。得知可以不再读书的第一天，心情像焰火一样蓬松、绚烂。但日子一天天驰去，牙口徒长，知识却永远停留在十三岁的水平，那种渐进式的痛楚巨蚕噬桑般把意志镂空。后来，图书馆开了一道小小的门缝，说是可以借阅“毒草”了，代价是你看完一本之后要交出一篇大批判文章。还书的时候，批判稿须一并附上，如果审查合格，就可以继续借阅；如果你敷衍了事或者干脆交不出批判文章，便永久取消你的借阅资格。

  We have had times when reading was difficult. Gao Yubao's "I want to read" is proof of this. At that time, I couldn't read because of poverty and oppression. Later, there was a contempt for knowledge, and reading was also seen as a ladder to reaction. When I was in the first grade of junior high school, it coincided with the "Cultural Revolution". Schools were closed for revolution, and libraries were closed, and no one was allowed to enter. On the first day I learned that I could stop studying, my mood was as fluffy and brilliant as fireworks. But the days go by day by day, the teeth are long, but the knowledge will always stay at the level of thirteen years old, and the gradual pain of the giant silkworm devours the will like a mulberry. Later, the library opened a small crack in the door, saying that it was possible to borrow "poisonous weeds", but at the cost of handing over a big critical article after reading one. When returning the book, the critical manuscript must be attached, and if it passes the review, it can continue to be borrowed; If you are perfunctory or simply unable to submit a critical article, you will be permanently disqualified.大家蜂拥去借书。但几轮之下，就门可罗雀了。规则严苛，审查文稿者声色俱厉，拥有借阅资格的人越来越少。我面临一个悖论。我喜爱“毒草”的芬芳，可我不得不批判它们。为了能继续阅读，只有口是心非。记得我曾面对苍穹向大师们祷告，说，你们既然能创造出那么多心境复杂的人物，一定也能体谅一个中国女孩此时的难处，为了能亲近你们，就原谅我说你们的一点点坏话吧，请不要生气……

  Everyone flocked to borrow books. But after a few rounds, the door can be scattered. The rules are strict, the reviewers are fierce, and fewer and fewer people have the qualifications to borrow. I am faced with a paradox. I love the fragrance of "poisonous weeds", but I have to criticize them. In order to continue reading, there is only duplicity. I remember that I once prayed to the masters in front of the sky, saying, since you can create so many characters with complex feelings, you must also be considerate of the difficulties of a Chinese girl at this time, in order to get close to you, please forgive me for saying a little bad things about you, please don't be angry......

  现如今，很多人不再贫穷，也没有人压制阅读，可时间成了瓶颈，很多人苦恼的是总也找不到空闲来阅读。

  Nowadays, many people are no longer poor, and no one suppresses reading, but time has become a bottleneck, and many people are distressed that they can't find free time to read.那是因为有太多的诱惑。

  That's because there are too many temptations.阅读是没有香氛的，于是抵不过餐桌的美味。阅读是孤独的，于是没有觥筹交错的热闹。阅读是伴有思考和停顿的，于是没有游戏般的顺畅和惬意。阅读甚至是充满碰撞和痛楚的，因为有忏悔的顾盼和掘进的深入。

  Reading has no fragrance, so it cannot withstand the deliciousness of the table. Reading is lonely, so there is no staggered excitement. Reading is accompanied by thinking and pause, so there is no smoothness and comfort like a game. Reading is even full of collisions and pains, because there is a repentant and a deep digging.但是，优秀的阅读是有力量的，因为在阅读的时候，你不是一个人，而是和古今中外的先驱者们并行。
However, excellent reading is powerful, because when reading, you are not alone, but parallel to the pioneers of ancient and modern China and abroad.

未知

  21.拍卖你的生涯

  21. Auction off your career

  朋友参加过一堂很别致的讲座，对我详细地描绘了一番。

  A friend attended a very chic lecture and described it in detail.讲座叫作《拍卖你的生涯》。外籍老师发给每人一张纸，其上打印着数十行字。

  The lecture is called "Auction Your Career". The foreign teacher gave each person a piece of paper with dozens of lines printed on it.1.豪宅

  1. Mansion2.巨富

  2. Huge wealth3.一张取之不尽、用之不竭的信用卡

  3. An inexhaustible credit card4.美貌贤惠的妻子或英俊博学的丈夫

  4. A beautiful and virtuous wife or a handsome and learned husband5.一门精湛的技艺

  5. A superb skill6.一座小岛

  6. A small island7.一座宏大的图书馆

  7. A grand library8.和你的情人浪迹天涯

  8. Wander the world with your lover9.一个勤劳忠诚的仆人

  9. A hardworking and loyal servant10.三五个知心朋友

  10. Three or five close friends11.一份价值50万美元并每年可获得25%纯利收入的股票

  11. A stock worth $500,000 and a net profit income of 25% per year12.名垂青史

  12. Fame in history13.一张免费旅游世界的机票

  13. A free ticket to travel the world14.和家人共度周末

  14. Spend weekends with your family15.直言不讳的勇敢和百折不挠的真诚

  15. Outspoken bravery and indomitable sincerity……

  大家先是愣愣地看着这些项目，之后交头接耳地笑，感觉甚好。本来嘛，全世界的美事和优良品质差不多都集中在此了。

  Everyone looked at these projects in a daze, and then laughed at each other, which felt very good. Originally, the good things and good quality of the world were almost concentrated here.老师拿起一只小锤子，轻敲讲台，蜂房般的教室寂静下来。老师说（他能讲不很普通的普通话），我手里是一只旧锤子，但今天它有某种权威——暂时充当拍卖锤。我要拍卖的东西，就是在座诸位的生涯。

  The teacher picked up a small hammer and tapped the podium, and the beehive-like classroom fell silent. The teacher said (he can speak not very ordinary Mandarin) that I have an old hammer in my hand, but today it has some kind of authority - temporarily acting as an auction hammer. What I want to auction is the careers of all of you.课堂顿起混乱。生涯？一个叫人生出沧桑和迷茫的词语。我们大致明白什么是生存，什么是生活，但很不清楚什么是生涯。我们只是一天天随波逐流地过着，也许70岁的时候才恍然大悟，生涯已在朦胧中渐近尾声了。

  The classroom was in chaos. Career? A word that calls life vicissitudes and confusion. We roughly understand what survival is and what life is, but it is not clear what career is. We just go with the flow day by day, and maybe when we are 70 years old, we suddenly realize that our careers are coming to an end in a haze.老师说，一个人的生涯，就是你人生的追求和事业。它可以掌握在你自己手中。性格就是命运。生涯从属于你的价值观。通常当人们谈到生涯的时候，总觉得有太多的不可把握性埋藏在未知中。其实它并非想象中那般神秘莫测。今天，我想通过这个游戏，让大家比较清晰地看到自己的爱好，预测自己的生涯。

  The teacher said that a person's career is your life's pursuit and career. It can be in your own hands. Character is destiny. Career is subordinate to your values. Usually when people talk about career, they always feel that there is too much uncertainty buried in the unknown. In fact, it is not as mysterious as imagined. Today, I want to use this game to let everyone see their hobbies more clearly and predict their careers.大家听明白了，好奇地跃跃欲试。

  Everyone understood and was curious to try.我相信在每一个成人的内心深处，都潜伏着一个爱做游戏的天真孩童，只不过随着时光流逝，蒙上了世故的尘土。

  I believe that deep in the heart of every adult, there is a naïve child who loves to play games, but with the passage of time, it is covered with the dust of the world.成年以后的我们，远离游戏，以为那是幼稚可笑的玩闹。其实好的游戏，具有启蒙人的智慧，通达人的思维，启迪人的感悟，让人反省的力量。当我们做游戏的时候，就更接近了真我。

  As adults, we stay away from games and think it is a childish and ridiculous play. In fact, a good game has the power to enlighten people's wisdom, understand people's thinking, enlighten people's perceptions, and make people reflect. When we play games, we are closer to our true selves.老师说，我现在象征性地发给每人1000元钱，代表你一生的时间和精力。我会把这张纸上所列的诸项境况裁成片，一一举起，这就等于开始了拍卖。你们可以用自己手中的积蓄购买这些可能性。100元钱起叫，欢迎竞价。当我连喊三次，无人再出高价的时候，锤子就会落下，这项生涯就属于你了。注意，我说的是可能性，并非是真正的事实。它的意思就是——你用999元竞得了豪宅，但并不等于你真的拥有了仙境般的别墅，只是说你将穷尽一生的精力来为自己争取。相信只要你竭尽全力，把目标当成整个生涯的支撑点，实现的可能性甚大。

  The teacher said that I am now giving each person a symbolic 1,000 yuan, which represents your time and energy in your life. I will cut the situations listed on this paper into pieces and lift them up one by one, which is equivalent to starting the auction. You can buy these possibilities with your savings. 100 yuan is called, welcome to bid. When I shout three times in a row and no one pays a high price again, the hammer will fall, and this career will belong to you. Note that I am talking about possibilities, not real facts. What it means is that you bid for a mansion for 999 yuan, but it does not mean that you really own a fairyland-like villa, it just means that you will exhaust your life's energy to fight for yourself. I believe that as long as you do your best and take the goal as the support point of your entire career, it is very likely to be achieved.教室里的气氛，骚动之后有些沉重。这游戏的分量举轻若重，它把我们人生的繁杂目的约分并形象化了——拼此一生，你到底要什么？

  The atmosphere in the classroom was a little heavy after the commotion. The weight of this game is as light as ever, it divides and visualizes the complex purpose of our lives - what do you want for this life?

  老师举起了第一项拍卖品——拥有一座小岛。起价100元。

  The teacher held up the first auction item - owning a small island. Prices start at $100.全场寂静。一座小岛？它在哪里？南半球还是北半球？大西洋还是太平洋？面积多少？人口多少？有无石油和珊瑚礁？风光怎样？

  The audience was silent. An island? Where is it? Southern or Northern Hemisphere? Atlantic or Pacific? What is the area? What is the population? Is there oil and coral reefs? How is the scenery?疑声四起，大家迫切希望老师提供更详尽的资料，关于那座小岛，关于风土人情。老师一脸肃然，坚定地举着那个纸片，拒绝做更进一步的解说。

  Doubts arose, and everyone eagerly hoped that the teacher would provide more detailed information, about the island, about the customs. The teacher looked solemn, held the piece of paper firmly, and refused to give further explanations.于是，我们明白了。小岛，就是小小的、普普通通的一座无名岛。你愿不愿以一生作赌，去赢得这块海洋中的绿地？

  So, we get it. A small island is a small, ordinary nameless island. Would you rather gamble your life to win this green space in the ocean?终于，一个平日最爱探险、充满生命活力的女生大声地喊出了第一个竞价——我出200！

  Finally, a girl who loves adventure and is full of vitality shouted out loudly - I will pay 200!一个男生几乎是下意识地报出：500！他的心思在那一瞬很简单，买下荒凉岛屿这样的事就该是男子汉干的。

  A boy almost subconsciously reported: 500! His mind was very simple at that moment, buying a desolate island should be done by a man.但那名个子不高、意志顽强的女生志在必得，她涨红着脸，一下子喊出了……1000！

  But the girl who was not tall and tenacious was determined to win, and she blushed and shouted out all of a sudden...... 1000！这是天价了。每个人只有1000元钱的贮备，也就是说，她已下定以毕生的精力赢得这座小岛的决心，别的人只有望洋兴叹了。

  This is a sky-high price. Each person only has 1,000 yuan in reserve, that is, she has made up her mind to win this small island with her life's energy, and the others can only sigh at the ocean.那个男生有些悻悻地说，竞价应该一点点攀升，比如她要出600，我喊700……这样也可给别人一个机会。

  The boy said a little angrily that the bidding should rise little by little, for example, she wants to pay 600, I shout 700...... This can also give others a chance.老师淡然一笑说，我们只是象征性地拍卖，所以可能不合规矩。大家要记住，生涯也如战场，假如你已坚定地确认了自己的目标，就紧紧锁定它。机遇仿佛闪电。

  The teacher smiled indifferently and said that we were only auctioning symbolically, so it might not be in accordance with the rules. Remember, career is like a battlefield, if you have firmly confirmed your goal, lock it tightly. Opportunities are like lightning.大家明白了竞争的激烈，肃静中有了潜藏的紧迫感和若隐若现的敌意。

  Everyone understood the fierce competition, and there was a hidden sense of urgency and looming hostility in the silence.

  拍卖的第二项是美貌贤惠的妻子或英俊博学的丈夫。

  The second item in the auction is a beautiful and virtuous wife or a handsome and learned husband.我原以为此项会导致激烈的竞拍，没想到一时门可罗雀，也许因为它太传统和古板。被其他更刺激的生涯吸引，大伙儿不愿在刚开场不久就把自己的一生交付伴侣的怀抱。好在和美的家庭终对人有不衰的吸引力，在竞争不激烈的情形下，被一位性情温和的男子以700元买去。

  I thought this would lead to fierce bidding, but I didn't expect it to be a mess, maybe because it was too traditional and old-fashioned. Attracted by other, more exciting careers, everyone is reluctant to give their lives to their partners shortly after the opening. Fortunately, Hemei's family eventually had an enduring attraction to people, and in the case of fierce competition, it was bought by a gentle man for 700 yuan.我把指关节攥得紧紧，如果真有一沓钞票，大概会滴下浑浊的水来。到底用这唯一的机会买回怎样的生涯？扒拉一下诸样选择，自己属意的栏目有限，和同志们所见略同也说不准。定谋贵决，一旦确立了自己的真爱，便要直捣黄龙，万不可游移吝惜。要知道，拍的过程水涨船高步步为营。倘稍一迟缓，被他人横刀夺爱，就悔之莫及了。

  I clenched my knuckles tightly, and if there was really a stack of banknotes, it would probably drip murky water. What kind of career will you use this only opportunity to buy? Pulling out all the choices, the columns I like are limited, and I can't say for sure that they are similar to what my comrades see. Once you have established your true love, you must go straight to the yellow dragon and must not be stingy. You know, the process of filming is rising step by step. If you delay a little and are snatched away by others, you will regret it.拍到“取之不尽、用之不竭的信用卡”时，引起空前激烈的争抢。聪明人已发现，所列的诸项某些外延是交叉的，可互相替代。有同学小声嘀咕，有了信用卡，巨富不巨富的也不吃紧了，想干什么，还不如探囊取物？于是信用卡成了最具弹性和热度的饽饽。一时群情激昂，最后被一奋勇女将自重围中掳走。

  When the "inexhaustible and inexhaustible credit card" was photographed, it caused an unprecedented fierce competition. Wise people have discovered that some of the extensions listed are intersecting and can be substituted for each other. Some classmates muttered in a low voice, with a credit card, it doesn't matter if the rich are not rich, what do you want to do, why not reach into the bag to get something? As a result, credit cards have become the most flexible and popular treat. The crowd was excited for a while, and finally was abducted by a brave female general who was surrounded by him.其后的诸项拍卖，险象环生。有些简直可以说是个人价值取向甚至秘密的大曝光。一位众人眼中极腼腆内向的男同学，取走了免费旅游世界的机票，让人刮目相看。一位正在离婚风波中的女子选择了和情人浪迹天涯，于是有人暗中揣测，她是否已有了意中人？一位手脚麻利、助人为乐的同学，居然选了勤快忠诚的仆人，让全体大跌眼镜。细一琢磨，可能他总当一个勤快人已经厌烦，但又无力摆脱这约定俗成的形象，出于补偿的心理，干脆倾其所有买下对另一个人的指挥权吧。一旦咀嚼出这选择背后的意味，旁观者就有些许心酸。

  Subsequent auctions were full of dangers. Some can be said to be personal value orientation or even secret exposure. A very shy and introverted male classmate in the eyes of everyone took away a free air ticket to travel to the world, which was impressive. A woman in the midst of a divorce turmoil chose to wander the world with her lover, so some people secretly speculated whether she already had a lover? A student who is quick and helpful actually chose a diligent and loyal servant, which surprised everyone. If you think about it carefully, maybe he is always tired of being a diligent person, but he is unable to get rid of this conventional image, and out of the psychology of compensation, he simply gives everything he has to buy command over another person. Once the meaning behind this choice is chewed up, the onlookers are a little sad.一位爱喝酒的同人一锤定音买下了“三五个知心朋友”，让我在想象中立即狠狠掴了自己一掌。从前，我劝过他不要喝那么多的酒，他笑说，我喜欢和朋友在一起。我不死心，便再劝，他却一直不改。此番看了他的选择，我方晓得朋友在他的心中如此重要。我决定，该闭嘴时就闭嘴吧。

  A drinking fandom bought "three or five close friends" in one fell swoop, which made me slap myself immediately in my imagination. Once upon a time, I advised him not to drink so much, and he laughed and said, I like to be with friends. I didn't give up, so I persuaded him again, but he never changed. Looking at his choice this time, I know that friends are so important in his heart. I decided to shut up when it was time to shut up.光顾了看别人的收成，差点耽误了自己地里的活计。同桌悄悄问，你到底打算买何种生涯？

  patronizing other people's harvests, almost delaying his own work in the field. The tablemate quietly asked, what kind of career do you plan to buy?我说，没拿定主意啊。我想要那座图书馆。

  I said, I haven't made up my mind. I want that library.同桌说，傻了不是？我看你不妨要那份价值50万美元且年年递增25%的股票，要知道这可是一只会下金蛋的火鸡。只要有了钱，什么图书馆置办不出来呢？你要把图书馆换成别的资产就很困难了。如今信息时代，资料都储藏在光盘里，整个大英博物馆也不过是若干张碟的事。图书馆是落后的工业时代的遗物了……

  The tablemate said, stupid, aren't you? I think you might as well ask for that $500,000 stock that increases by 25% every year, you know that this is a turkey that lays golden eggs. As long as you have money, what library can't you buy? It's hard to trade your library for another asset. In today's information age, materials are stored on CDs, and the entire British Museum is just a matter of a few discs. Libraries are a relic of the backward industrial age......他话还没说完，老师举起了新的一张卡片。他见利忘友，立刻抛开我，大喊了一声，嘿，这个我要定了。1000！

  Before he finished speaking, the teacher held up a new card. When he saw that he forgot his friends, he immediately abandoned me and shouted, hey, I'm going to settle this. 1000！我定睛一看，他倾囊而出购买回来的是一门精湛的技艺。

  I took a closer look, and what he poured out to buy back was a superb skill.我窃笑道，你这才是游牧时代的遗物呢，整个一小农经济。

  I snickered, you are a relic of the nomadic era, the entire small peasant economy.他很认真地说，我总记着老爸的话，家有千金，不如一技在身。

  He said very seriously, I always remember my father's words, the family has a daughter, it is better to have a skill.我暗笑，哈，人啊，真是环境的产物。

  I laughed secretly, ha, people, it's really a product of the environment.好了，不管他人瓦上霜了，还是扫自己门前雪吧。同桌的话也不无道理。有了足够的钱，当然可以买下图书馆或是任何光碟。但你没有这些钱之前，你就干瞪眼。钱在前，还是图书馆在前，两者便有了原则的不同。我愿自己在两鬓油黑、耳聪目明之时，就拥有一座窗明几净、汗牛充栋、庭院深深、斗拱飞檐的图书馆。再说，光碟和图书馆哪能同日而语？我不仅想看到那些古往今来的智慧头脑留下的珍珠，还喜欢那种静谧幽深的空间和气氛，让弥漫在阳光中的纸张味道鼓胀自己的肺……这些，用钱买来的新书和光碟仿得出来吗？

  Okay, no matter how frosted the tiles are on others, it's better to sweep the snow in front of your own door. The words at the same table are not unreasonable. With enough money, of course, you can buy a library or any CD. But before you don't have the money, you just stare. Whether the money is in front or the library is in the front, there is a difference in principle between the two. I wish that when I had dark temples and clear ears, I would have a library with bright windows, sweaty cows, deep courtyards, and arched cornices. Besides, how can CDs and libraries be the same? I not only want to see the pearls left by the wise minds of the ages, but also like the quiet and deep space and atmosphere, which makes my lungs swell with the smell of paper filled with sunlight...... Can these new books and CDs bought with money be imitated?正这样想着，老师举起了“图书馆”，我也学同桌，破釜沉舟地大喊了一声，1000！

  Just thinking like this, the teacher raised the "library", and I also learned from my deskmates, and shouted in a hurry, 1000!于是，宏大的图书馆就落到了我的手中。那一刻，虽明知是个模拟的游戏，心中还是扩散起喜悦的涟漪。

  So, the grand library fell into my hands. At that moment, although I knew it was a simulation game, ripples of joy still spread in my heart.拍卖一项项进行下去，场上气氛热烈。我没有参加过实战，不知真正的拍卖是怎样的程序，但这一游戏对大家心灵的深层触动是不言而喻的。

  The auction went on one by one, and the atmosphere on the field was warm. I have not participated in actual combat, so I don't know what the real auction process is, but it is self-evident that this game has a deep touch on everyone's hearts.

  当老师说“游戏到此结束”时，教室一下静得不可思议，好像刚才闹哄哄的一干人都吞炭为哑或羽化成仙去了。

  When the teacher said, "The game is over here", the classroom was incredibly quiet, as if all the people who had been making a fuss just now had swallowed charcoal as dumb or became immortals.老师接着说，有人也许会在游戏之后，思索和检视自己，产生惊讶的发现和意外的收获。有一个现象，不知大家发现没有，有三项生涯，当我开价100元之后没有人应拍，也就是说不曾成交。这种卖不出去的物品，按规矩是要拍卖行收回的。但我决定还是把它们留下。也许你们想想之后，还会把它们选作自己的生涯目标。

  The teacher went on to say that some people may think and examine themselves after the game, and produce surprising discoveries and unexpected gains. There is a phenomenon, I don't know if you have found it, there are three careers, when I offered 100 yuan, no one responded to the auction, that is to say, there was no transaction. This kind of item that cannot be sold must be taken back by the auction house according to the rules. But I decided to leave them behind. Maybe after thinking about it, you will choose them as your career goals.这三项是：

  These three are:1.名垂青史

  1. Fame in history2.和家人共度周末

  2. Spend weekends with your family3.直言不讳的勇敢和百折不挠的真诚

  3. Outspoken bravery and indomitable sincerity同学大眼瞪小眼，刚才都只专注于购买各自的生涯，不曾注意被冷落的项目，听老师这样一说就都默然了。

  The classmates stared wide-eyed, just now they were only focused on buying their respective careers, and they didn't pay attention to the projects that were left out, and they were silent when they heard the teacher say this.我一一揣摩，在心中回答老师。

  I pondered them one by one and answered the teacher in my heart.和家人共度周末。

  Spend the weekend with your family.老师别恼。不曾购买它作为自己的生涯，原因可能是多方面的。有人以为这是很平淡的事，不必把它定作目标。凡夫俗子们估摸着自己就是不打算和家人共度周末也没有什么地方可去。一件被迫的、几乎命中注定的事，何必要选择？还有的人是一些不愿归巢的鸟，从心眼儿里不打算和家人共度周末。现今只有没本事的人才和家人共度周末，有本事的人是专要和外人度周末的。

  Teacher, don't be annoyed. The reasons for not buying it as your career may be manifold. Some people think this is a very ordinary thing, and there is no need to set it as a goal. Ordinary people guess that they just don't plan to spend weekends with their families, and there is nowhere to go. Why choose a forced and almost doomed thing? Others are birds that do not want to return to their nests and do not plan to spend weekends with their families from the bottom of their hearts. Nowadays, only those who have no ability spend weekends with their families, and those who have the ability are dedicated to spending weekends with outsiders.青史留名？

  Leaving a name in history?可叹现代人（当然也包括我）对史的概念已如此脆弱。仿佛站在一个修鞋摊子旁边，只在乎立等可取，只在乎急功近利。当我们连清洁的水源和绵延的绿色都不愿给子孙留下的时候，拥挤的大脑中如何还存得下一块森严的石壁，以反射青史遥远的回声？

  It is lamentable that modern people (including me, of course) have such a fragile concept of history. It seems to be standing next to a shoe repair stall, only caring about waiting for desirability, only caring about quick success. When we don't even want to leave clean water and green for our children and grandchildren, how can we still save a strict stone wall in our crowded brains to reflect the distant echoes of Qing history?勇敢和真诚？

  Brave and sincere?它固然曾经是人类骄傲的源泉，但如今怯懦和虚伪，更成了安身立命的通行证。预定了终生的勇敢和真诚，就把一把利刃悬在了颅顶，需要怎样的坚忍和稳定？我们表面的不屑是因为骨子里的不敢。我们没有承诺勇敢的勇气，我们没有面对真诚的真诚。

  Although it was once a source of human pride, cowardice and hypocrisy have now become a passport to settle down. After predestining a lifetime of bravery and sincerity, he hung a sharp blade on the top of his skull, what kind of perseverance and stability is needed? Our superficial disdain is because we don't dare in our bones. We do not have the courage to promise bravery, we do not face sincere sincerity.游戏结束了，不曾结束的是思考。

  The game is over, and what is not over is thinking.在弥漫着世俗气息的“我”之外，以一个“孩子”的视角重新剖析自己的价值观和生存质量，内心就有了激烈的碰撞和痛苦的反思。

  In addition to the "I" that is permeated with a secular atmosphere, re-analyzing one's own values and quality of life from the perspective of a "child", there is a fierce collision and painful reflection in my heart.在节奏纷繁的现代社会，我们一天忙得视丹成绿，很难得有这种省察自我的机会，这一瞬让我们返璞归真。

  In the fast-paced modern society, we are so busy that we see the elixir as green all day, and it is rare to have this opportunity to examine ourselves, and this moment allows us to return to the basics.人生的重大决定，是由心规划的，像一道预先计算好的轨道，等待着你的星座运行。如果期待改变我们的命运，请首先改变心的轨迹。
The major decisions in life are planned by the heart, like a pre-calculated track, waiting for your constellation to run. If expecting to change our destiny, change the trajectory of your heart first.

未知

  22.风的青睐

  22. The favor of the wind

  400年前的法国人蒙田，说过这样一句话——风不会对漫无目的者有所青睐。“青睐”是指一个人用黑眼珠子看着你。这是一句否定句，意思是假如你有了坚定的目标，整个大自然将帮助你。

  The Frenchman Montaigne 400 years ago said this - the wind will not favor the aimless. "Favor" is when a person looks at you with dark eyeballs. This is a negative sentence, meaning that if you have a firm goal, the whole of nature will help you.风是什么呢？风是一股看不见摸不着的力量。风吹的时候，影响着我们，逆风或是顺风，对我们的速度和方向都有强烈的影响。就连飞机的钢铁巨翅，也不敢对风等闲视之。

  What is wind? The wind is an invisible and intangible force. When the wind blows, it affects us, whether it is against the wind or downwind, it has a strong impact on our speed and direction. Even the steel giant wings of the plane did not dare to ignore the wind.人生的目的很重要。这个目的是谁给我们预定的呢？没有人。你的父母、你的师长、你的朋友，都可能参与你的目的的制定，但他们不是决定的力量。最后的赞成或是否决票，在你手里。如果你对自己说，我才不要什么人生的目的这种奇怪的东西，那么，你也是有一个目的了，那就是“虚无”。

  The purpose of life is very important. Who predestined this purpose for us? No one. Your parents, your teachers, and your friends may all be involved in the formulation of your purpose, but they are not the power of decision. The final yes or no vote is in your hands. If you say to yourself, "I don't want any strange thing like a purpose in life", then you also have a purpose, that is, "nothingness".一个没有方向感的人，如何行走呢？看看醉汉就明白了。踉踉跄跄、东倒西歪、昏乱嘟囔着，没有人知道他要到哪里去，更不知道他的归宿在何方……有着这种精神的吉卜赛人，终身流浪在灵魂的荒原。

  How can a person without a sense of direction walk? Just look at the drunkard. Staggering, stumbling, muttering in a daze, no one knows where he is going, let alone where he is going...... Gypsies with this spirit wandered the wasteland of the soul all their lives.还有一些人，把某种流行的腐朽说法或是误区当成了自己的目的。这种“镜花水月”的伪目标，只能引诱感官的堕落和本能的麻痹。

  There are also some people who regard some popular decadent sayings or misunderstandings as their own purposes. This kind of pseudo-goal of "mirror flowers and water moon" can only induce the degeneration of the senses and the paralysis of instincts.目的通常是阔大的、依稀的，但它确实存在着，一如晨曦。你从未摸到晨曦，但你每天都可以看到它。即使乌云蔽日的时候，你也坚忍不拔地确信，在高远之处，晨曦依然发出温暖的红色光芒。

  The purpose is usually broad and vague, but it does exist, like the morning light. You never touch the dawn, but you can see it every day. Even when the clouds obscure the sun, you are stoically sure that the morning light still emits a warm red light in the distance.一个有目的的人，走路的姿势是向前的。他们通常不会在跌倒之后太长久地抚摸伤痛，短暂的昏厥之后迅速清醒，用身边的树枝或是草叶捆扎好伤口，就蹒跚着上路了。他们走得慢，但很坚定，不会因为风险而避开既定的方向，也不会为路边一些小的花果而长时间地流连忘返。当然也有痴迷和混沌的时候，但他们能够重新恢复思考，从容向前……

  A purposeful person, the walking posture is forward. They usually don't touch the pain for too long after a fall, and after a short fainting, they quickly wake up, tie the wound with branches or blades of grass around them, and stagger. They walk slowly, but very determined, and will not avoid the established direction because of risks, nor will they linger for a long time for some small flowers and fruits on the side of the road. Of course, there are times of obsession and chaos, but they are able to regain their thinking and move forward calmly......风的青睐，是无价的礼物。只要你坚定地确立了自己的目标，努力下去，就会发现天地万物都来帮你了。

  The favor of the wind is a priceless gift. As long as you firmly establish your goals and work hard, you will find that everything in heaven and earth is coming to help you.

未知

  23.抵制“但是”

  23. Resist the "but"

  但是——是我们常常用到的一个词。我们原来有一个领导，就因为太爱使唤这个词了，外号就叫“老但”。

  But - is a word we often use. We originally had a leader, and because he loved to use the word too much, he was nicknamed "Lao Dan".“但是”的意思，主要是做连词，好像那把皮坎肩的碎皮子缀在一处的彩色丝线。多用在一句话的后半截，表示转折语气。

  The meaning of "but" is mainly to make conjunctions, like the colored silk thread that embellishes the broken skin of Pikan's shoulder in one place. It is mostly used in the second half of a sentence to indicate a turning tone.比方说：你这次的考试成绩不错，但是——不能骄傲自满。

  For example: you did well in this exam, but you can't be complacent.比方说：这地方的风景挺优美的，但是——离城里太远了点。

  For example: the scenery of this place is quite beautiful, but it is too far from the city.比方说：这女孩身材相当好，但是皮肤太黑了些。

  For example: this girl is in good shape, but her skin is too dark.等等。

  Wait a minute.我不知道“但是”这个词刚发明的时候，是不是对它的前半部和后半部的分量，一视同仁？也就是说，它只是一个公平的纽带，并不偏着谁向着谁。可惜在长期的运用过程中，“但是”这个词，成了类似音乐简谱中附点的标记，把后面半拍的节奏，挪到前面去了。当人们看到这个词的时候，无论在“但是”的前面，堆积了多少美好的说明，都像碰上盐酸的污垢，冒了些泡沫，就没了踪影。人们记住的总是“但是”后面的转折，如同好不容易爬上高坡，还没来得及喘口气，“但是”这个陡峭的下坡，不由分说把你掳住，一下就滑到了谷底。

  I don't know if when the word "but" was first invented, did it treat the weight of its first and second halves equally? In other words, it is just a fair bond, not biased towards whom. Unfortunately, in the long-term application process, the word "but" has become a mark similar to the dots in the music score, moving the rhythm of the last half beat to the front. When people see this word, no matter how many beautiful explanations are piled up in front of "but", it is like encountering the dirt of hydrochloric acid, bubbling up, and then disappearing. People always remember the turning point after the "but", as if they had finally climbed up a high slope and had not yet had time to catch their breath, "but" this steep downhill involuntarily captivated you and slipped to the bottom of the valley.于是，“但是”就几乎成了贬义的先兆。只要一出现，气氛就大变。它成了把人心捆成炸药包的细麻绳，成了马上有冷水泼面的前奏曲。“但是”让你打了个激灵，立马把“但是”前面的温暖忘了，只有抖擞起精神，准备迎击扑面而来的顿挫。

  As a result, "but" has almost become a precursor to derogatory connotations. As soon as it appears, the atmosphere changes drastically. It has become a thin hemp rope that binds people's hearts into explosive packs, and it has become a prelude to cold water splashing noodles immediately. "But" made you feel excited, and immediately forgot the warmth in front of "but", and only cheered up and prepared to face the setbacks that came to your face.“但是”便在这种频频警戒的气氛中，削减了平凡的联结之意，增添了沮丧的灰色意味。

  "But" cuts the meaning of ordinary connection and adds a gray meaning of frustration in this atmosphere of frequent vigilance.其实，所有的光明都有暗影，“但是”的本意不过是强调事情还有另一方面。可惜日积月累的负面暗示，使得“但是”这个预报一出现，就抹去了喜色，忽略了成绩，轻慢了进步，贬斥了攀升。

  In fact, all light has shadows, and the original meaning of "but" is just to emphasize that there is another side to things. Unfortunately, the accumulated negative hints have erased the joy, ignored the results, despised progress, and denigrated the climb as soon as the forecast of "but" appeared.

  一位心理学专家讲学时说，她主张大家从此不用“但是”，而改用“同时”。

  A psychology expert said in a lecture that she advocated that everyone should use "but" instead of "simultaneous" from now on.比如，我们形容天气的时候，早先是这样说：今天的太阳很好，但是风很大。

  For example, when we describe the weather, we said earlier: the sun is good today, but the wind is very strong.今后可以改成：今天的太阳很好，同时风很大。

  In the future, it can be changed to: the sun is good today, and the wind is strong.当你最初看这两句话的时候，好像没有多大的分别。你不要急，轻声地多念几遍，那分量和语气的差异，就体味出来了。

  When you first read these two sentences, there doesn't seem to be much difference. Don't be in a hurry, read it softly a few more times, and the difference in weight and tone will come out.但是风很大——会使人的情绪向糟糕那一面倾斜，注意力凝固在不利的因素上。觉着太阳好是件不值得太高兴的事情，风大才是关键。借助了“但是”的威力，风就把阳光打败了。

  But the wind is strong - it will tilt people's emotions to the bad side, and the attention will freeze on the unfavorable factors. Feeling that the sun is good is not worth being too happy about, and strong winds are the key. With the help of the power of "but", the wind defeats the sun.同时风很大——它更中性和客观，好似一个导游小姐，在指点我们注意了某一种情形之后，又把她手中的金属棒，向另一个方向示去。前言余音袅袅，后语也言之凿凿。不偏不倚，公允而平整。它使我们的心神安定，目光精准，两侧都观察得到，头脑中自有定夺。

  At the same time, the wind was strong - it was more neutral and objective, like a tour guide who, after pointing us to a certain situation, pointed the metal rod in her hand in the other direction. The aftermath of the prelude is lingering, and the latter is also clear. Impartial, fair and equitable. It makes our minds settled, our eyes are accurate, we can observe both sides, and our minds have their own decisions.一词之差，它的背后，是怎样看待世界和自身。

  The difference in one word, behind it, is how to see the world and oneself.我们绝不文过饰非，也不夸大其词。好比是花和虫子，一并存在。我们的眼光降落在哪里？

  We will never exaggerate or exaggerate. It's like flowers and bugs, which exist together. Where do our eyes land?降落在花丛中？降落在虫背上？

  Landing among the flowers? Landing on the back of a bug?

  “但是”，是一面偏光镜，把我们的目光聚焦在虫子上。花园里花朵很美丽，“但是”把虫子的影子放大。

  "But" is a polarizing mirror that focuses our eyes on the bug. The flowers in the garden are beautiful, "but" magnify the shadow of the bug.“同时”，是一个透明的水晶球，把我们均衡地分散在两方面。花园里花朵很美丽，“同时”，它也提示尚有虫子。

  "At the same time" is a transparent crystal ball that spreads us evenly between the two sides. The flowers in the garden are beautiful, and "at the same time", it also suggests that there are still insects.“但是”和“同时”，谁更持重和完整，更有利于我们对客观事物的评价和对主观判断的把持，想必会有公论。

  "But" and "at the same time", who is more cautious and complete, is more conducive to our evaluation of objective things and control of subjective judgments, there will surely be public opinion.如此讨论，仿佛和一个简单的连词过不去，有悖恕道。不过，这不单是如何连接上下两句话的问题，在词的背后隐伏着思维方式。

  Such a discussion seems to be incompatible with a simple conjunction, which is contrary to forgiveness. However, this is not only a question of how to connect the upper and lower sentences, but also the way of thinking hidden behind the words.当我尝试着用“同时”代替“但是”以后，一天两天，似也看不出多大的变化。可时间长了，我发现自己比较地多了勇气，因为我的精神得到了补给和呵护。我发现自己比较地对人友善，因为我更明确地发现了他人的长处和优异。我发现自己较为敏捷地从跌倒的地上爬起，因为我看到了沟坎也看到了辙印。我发现自己多了宽容和慈悲，因为每当我意识到不足的时刻，都同时给自己鼓励。
When I tried to replace "but" with "at the same time", I didn't seem to see much change in a day or two. But over time, I found that I had more courage because my spirit was replenished and cared for. I find myself being more kind to people because I have a clearer understanding of the strengths and strengths of others. I found myself getting up from the ground where I fell more agilely, because I saw the ditches and the ruts. I found myself more tolerant and compassionate, because whenever I realized my shortcomings, I encouraged myself at the same time.

未知

  24.指纹状的菌落

  24. Fingerprint-like colonies

  那时我是一个年轻的实习医生。在外科做手术的时候，最害怕的是当一切消毒都已完成，正准备戴上手套，穿上洁白的手术衣，开始在病人身上动刀操练的时候，突然从你的身后，递过来一只透明的培养皿。护士长不苟言笑地指示道，你留个培养吧。这是一句医学术语，解释成大众的语言就是——用你已经消完毒的手指，在培养基上抹一下。然后护士长把密闭的培养皿送到检验科，在暖箱里孵化培养。待到若干时日之后，打开培养皿，观察有无菌落生长，以检查你在给病人手术前，是否彻底消毒了你的手指。如果你的手不干净，就会在手术时把细菌带进腹腔、胸腔或是颅脑，引起感染。严重时会危及病人的生命。

  I was a young intern at the time. When performing surgery, the most fearful thing is that when all the disinfection has been completed, you are about to put on gloves, put on a white surgical gown, and start to practice on the patient, suddenly a transparent petri dish is handed over from behind you. The head nurse instructed unsmilingly, you can stay for training. This is a medical term, and the language interpreted by the masses is - use your disinfected finger and wipe it on the medium. Then the head nurse sent the airtight Petri dish to the laboratory department and hatched and cultured it in the warmer. After a certain period of time, open the petri dish and observe for any colony growth to check if you have completely sterilized your fingers before operating on the patient. If your hands are not clean, you can bring bacteria into the abdominal cavity, chest cavity or brain during surgery, causing infection. In severe cases, it can endanger the patient's life.我很讨厌这种抽查。要是万一查出你手指带菌，多没面子！于是我消毒的时候就格外认真。外科医生的刷手过程，真应了一句西谚：在碱水里洗三次。先要用硬毛刷子蘸着肥皂水，一丝不苟地直刷到腋下，直到皮肤红到发痛，再用清水反复冲洗，恨不能把你的胳膊收拾得像一根搓掉了皮、马上准备凉拌的生藕。然后整个双臂浸泡在百分之七十五的酒精桶里，度过难熬的五分钟。最烦人的是胳膊从酒精桶里拔出后，为了保持消过毒的无菌状态，不能用任何布巾或是纸张擦拭湿淋淋的皮肤，只有在空气中等待它们渐渐晾干。平日我们打针的时候，只涂一小坨酒精，皮肤就感到辛凉无比。因为酒精在挥发的时候，带走了体内的热能，是一种强大的物理降温过程。现在我们的上肢大面积裸露着，假若是冬天，不一会儿就冻得牙齿鼓点一般叩个不停。

  I hate this kind of spot check. If you find out that you have bacteria on your fingers, you will lose face! So I was extra careful when I disinfected. The surgeon's hand brushing process really corresponds to the Western proverb: wash it three times in lye water. First, use a stiff-bristled brush dipped in soapy water, meticulously brush straight to the armpits, until the skin is red to the point of pain, and then rinse repeatedly with water, wishing you could clean up your arms like a raw lotus root that has been rubbed off the skin and ready to be cold immediately. Then soak your entire arms in a 75% alcohol barrel for a difficult five minutes. The most annoying thing is that after the arm is pulled out of the alcohol barrel, in order to maintain the sterile state of disinfection, you cannot wipe the wet skin with any cloth or paper, but only wait for them to dry gradually in the air. When we inject on weekdays, we only apply a small amount of alcohol, and our skin feels extremely cold. Because when alcohol volatilizes, it takes away the heat energy in the body, which is a powerful physical cooling process. Now our upper limbs are exposed in large areas, and if it is winter, it will be cold and beat like a drumbeat in a short time.更严格的是在所有过程中，双臂都要像受刑一般高举着，无论多么累，都不能垂下手腕，更严禁用手指接触任何异物。简言之，从消毒过程一开始，你的手就不是你的手了，它成了一件有独立使命的无菌工具。

  More strictly, during all processes, both arms must be held high as if they were being tortured, no matter how tired they are, they cannot hang their wrists, and it is strictly forbidden to touch any foreign objects with their fingers. In short, from the very beginning of the disinfection process, your hand is not your hand, it becomes a sterile tool with an independent mission.我的同学是一位漂亮女孩，她的手很美，鸡蛋清一般柔嫩，但在猪毛刷子日复一日的残酷抚摸下，很快变得粗糙无光。由于酒精强烈的脱脂作用，手臂也像枯树干，失去了少女特有的润泽。单看上肢，我都像一个老太婆了。她愤愤地说。

  My classmate is a beautiful girl with beautiful hands, as soft as egg whites, but quickly becomes rough and dull under the cruel touch of the pig hair brush day after day. Due to the strong degreasing effect of alcohol, the arms are also like dead tree trunks, losing the unique moisture of girls. Just looking at the upper limbs, I look like an old woman. She said indignantly.以后的日子里，她洗手的时候开始偷工减料。比如该刷三遍，她一遍就草草过关。只要没人看见，她就把白皙的胳膊从酒精桶里解放出来，独自欣赏……有一天，我们正高擎双手，像俘虏兵投降一样傻站着，等着自己的臂膀风干时，她突然说，我的耳朵后边有点痒。

  In the days to come, she began to cut corners when she washed her hands. For example, when it was time to brush three times, she passed the test hastily once. As long as no one saw it, she freed her white arms from the alcohol barrel and admired it alone...... One day, when we were standing stupidly like captives surrendering with our hands held high, waiting for our arms to dry, she suddenly said, "The back of my ears is a little itchy."这是一件小事，但对于此时的我们来说，却是一件很难办的事。消过毒的手已被管制，我俩就像卸去双臂的木偶，无法接触自己的皮肤。按照惯例，只有呼唤护士，烦她代为搔痒。因手术尚未开始，护士还在别处忙，眼前一时无人。同学说痒得不行，忍不了。我说，要不咱们俩像山羊似的，脑袋抵着脑袋，互相蹭蹭？她说，我又不是额头痒，是脖子下面的凹处，哪里抵得着？我只好说，你就多想想邱少云吧。同学美丽的面孔在大口罩后面难受得扭歪了。突然，可能痒痛难熬，她电光石火地用消过毒的手，在自己耳朵后面抓了一把。

  This is a small thing, but it is a difficult thing for us at this time. The hands that have been disinfected have been controlled, and we are like puppets with our arms removed, unable to touch our own skin. According to the usual practice, you can only call the nurse and ask her to scratch the itch on her behalf. Because the operation had not yet begun, the nurse was still busy elsewhere, and there was no one in front of her for a while. The classmates said that it was so itchy that they couldn't bear it. I said, why don't we be like goats, head to head, rubbing each other? She said, it's not an itchy forehead, it's a hollow under the neck, where can I resist it? I have to say, just think more about Qiu Shaoyun. The beautiful faces of the classmates twisted uncomfortably behind the big masks. Suddenly, it may be itchy and painful, and she grabbed a handful behind her ear with her anti-poison hand with lightning speed.我惊愕得说不出话来，几乎不相信自己的眼睛。正在这时，护士长走了进来，向我和同学伸出了两个细菌培养皿……

  I was speechless in shock, almost believing my eyes. At this moment, the head nurse walked in and stretched out two bacterial petri dishes to me and my classmates......其实事情在这个份儿上，还是可以挽救的。同学可以直率地向护士长申明情况，说自己的手已经污染，不能接受检验。然后再重复烦琐的洗手过程，她依旧可以正常参加手术。但她什么也没有说，哆哆嗦嗦地探出手指，在培养基上捺了一下……那天是一个开腹手术，整个过程我都恍惚不安，好像自己参与了某种阴谋。

  In fact, things can still be saved in this regard. Students can bluntly declare the situation to the head nurse, saying that their hands are contaminated and cannot be tested. Then repeat the tedious handwashing process, and she can still participate in the operation normally. But she didn't say anything, trembling and sticking out her finger and pressing it on the medium...... It was an open surgery that day, and I was in a trance the whole time, as if I was involved in some kind of conspiracy.病人术后并发了严重的感染，刀口溃烂腐败，高烧不止，医护人员陷入紧张的治疗和抢救。经过化验，致病菌强大而独特。它是从哪里来的呢？老医生不止一次面对病历自言自语。过了几天，手术者的细菌培养结果出来了，我的同学抹过的培养基上，呈现出茂密的细菌丛，留下指纹状的菌落阴影，正是引致病人感染的险恶品种。

  The patient was seriously infected after the operation, the incision was ulcerated and rotten, and the fever was persistent, and the medical staff fell into intense treatment and rescue. After laboratory testing, the pathogenic bacteria are powerful and unique. Where did it come from? The old doctor said to himself more than once in the face of medical records. A few days later, the bacterial culture results of the surgeon came out, and the medium that my classmate wiped showed a dense bacterial flora, leaving a fingerprint-like colony shadow, which was the sinister variety that caused the patient's infection.那一刻，我的同学落下一串串眼泪。由于她的过失，病人承受了无妄之灾。她的手在搔痒的时候，沾染了病菌，又在手术过程中污染了腹腔，酿成他人巨大的痛苦。

  At that moment, my classmates shed strings of tears. Because of her fault, the patient suffered an unwarranted disaster. When her hands were itching, they were stained with germs and contaminated the abdominal cavity during the operation, causing great pain to others.病人的命总算挽救回来了，但这件事被我牢牢地记在心里，不敢忘怀。

  The patient's life was finally saved, but I kept this matter firmly in my heart and did not dare to forget it.随着年岁渐长，我从中悟出了许多年轻时忽略的道理。

  As I grew older, I realized many truths that I overlooked when I was young.

  首先是感染和腐败几乎是一种必然。牛奶放在那里，不加温不冷冻，随它去，就一定会变酸发臭。没有特殊的防腐措施，想在常温下保持牛奶的新鲜品质，是痴人说梦。铁会生锈，木头会腐烂，水面布满青苔，密闭的房屋长毛生霉，空气发出臭鸡蛋的味道……腐败几乎是无处不在，见缝下蛆。我那个同学只用手搔了一下耳后，千真万确，仅此一下，病菌潜伏到了她的手上，播种到手术刀口里，就引发了恶劣后果。细菌的生命力和感染力，真是不可思议的强大，任何侥幸心理都是万万要不得的。

  The first is that infection and corruption are almost inevitable. Milk is placed there, not warmed or frozen, and if it goes, it will definitely turn sour and smelly. Without special preservative measures, it is a fool's dream to maintain the fresh quality of milk at room temperature. Iron rusts, wood rots, water is covered with moss, closed houses are moldy, and the air smells like rotten eggs...... Corruption is almost everywhere, and maggots are sewn into the seams. My classmate only scratched the back of her ear with her hand, and it was true, and in this alone, the germs lurked in her hands and sowed into the scalpel mouth, which caused bad consequences. The vitality and infectivity of bacteria are really incredibly powerful, and any fluke mentality is absolutely necessary.二是防感染和腐败的措施，只要认真执行，是一定有效的。凡是认真执行了刷手要诀的人，每次细菌培养就都是阴性，他们的手术后感染率几乎是零。感染和腐败不是不可战胜的，只要有了切实可行、行之有效的措施，严格地执行用鲜血换来的经验教训，腐败和感染可以被制伏。

  Second, measures to prevent infection and corruption will be effective as long as they are carefully implemented. Anyone who carefully implements the brushing tips will be negative every time the bacterial culture is negative, and their infection rate after surgery is almost zero. Infection and corruption are not invincible, and corruption can be subdued as long as there are practical and effective measures and the lessons learned in exchange for blood are strictly enforced.三是同样的致病菌，每个人的抵抗力不同，结局也就有天壤之别。潜伏在同学耳朵旁的细菌，肯定已在她身上生存多时，相安无事。可是移植到了病人身上，就引发了骇人的后果，盖因彼此的素质不同，结果也就因人而异。同学是正常人，有良好的防御系统，所以病菌伤害不了她。但开刀的病人就不同了，自身抵抗力薄弱，雪上加霜，差点要了性命。当然我这样说，并不是要求病榻上的人要有运动健将一般的体魄，只是说加强自身的防御系统，是抵御病菌最有效的武器。一个人遭受细菌的感染不可避免，但有了足够的准备，即使敌人侵入，也可以在最短的时间内将其歼灭。

  Third, the same pathogenic bacteria, everyone's resistance is different, and the outcome is very different. The bacteria lurking next to her classmate's ears must have survived on her for a long time, and she was safe. However, transplanting to a patient causes terrible consequences, because the quality of each other is different, and the results vary from person to person. The classmate is a normal person and has a good defense system, so germs can't hurt her. But the patients who underwent surgery were different, their own resistance was weak, and to make matters worse, they almost lost their lives. Of course, when I say this, I do not require the people on the sickbed to have the physique of an athlete, but to strengthen their own defense system and be the most effective weapon against germs. It is inevitable that a person will suffer from a bacterial infection, but with adequate preparation, even if the enemy invades, it will be possible to annihilate it in the shortest possible time.最后是要找到一个黄金般的点。应该说抗感染的杀菌药物是十分有效的，医生把致病的细菌培养出来，它就成了靶子。把各种抗菌药物，以不同的浓度加到培养皿里，观察哪种药物杀菌最有效，然后对症下药，把病菌最敏感的药物压下去，力争在最短的时间里，取得胜利。记得老医生总是很仔细地计算用药的剂量，根据病情，反复测算。我看得不耐烦，说搞这么复杂干什么，不是治病救人吗，当然剂量越大效果越好。老医生说，任何药物都是有毒性的，正是为了治病救人，才要找到一个最恰当的剂量，既干净彻底地消灭了病菌，又最大限度地保护挽救病人，这是一门艺术。一个好医生的职责，就是要找到这个像黄金分割率一般宝贵的结合点……

  Finally, find a golden point. It should be said that anti-infective bactericidal drugs are very effective, and doctors cultivate disease-causing bacteria, and it becomes a target. Add various antibacterial drugs to the petri dish at different concentrations to observe which drug is the most effective in sterilization, and then prescribe the right medicine to suppress the most sensitive drugs of germs, and strive to win in the shortest possible time. I remember that the old doctor always carefully calculated the dosage of the medicine, and according to the condition, it was repeatedly calculated. I watched impatiently, saying why do you do such a complicated thing, isn't it to cure diseases and save people, of course, the higher the dose, the better the effect. The old doctor said that any drug is toxic, and it is precisely for the purpose of curing diseases and saving people that it is necessary to find the most appropriate dose, which not only cleanly and completely eliminates germs, but also protects and saves patients to the greatest extent, which is an art. The duty of a good doctor is to find this combination point as valuable as the golden ratio......我记住了他的话，但更深刻地领悟它，却是在年岁渐长，看到了许多医学领域以外的问题之后。

  I remembered his words, but realized it more deeply after I got older and saw many problems outside the medical field.病菌和微生物向我们撒下天罗地网，由它们引致的感染与腐败，每日每时都在发生。和形形色色的腐败菌做斗争，也许将贯穿经济和政治生活的整个历史。我们将会有更优秀的医生，我们将会有更强大的药品，我们将会有更严格的消毒手段，但加强自身的抵抗力，永远是最重要的。在旷日持久的战斗中，不断地完善自己、修复自己，人类才会保持蓬勃的生命力，欣欣向荣。
Germs and microorganisms are a net of infections and corruption that occur every day. The fight against all kinds of corruption will probably run through the entire history of economic and political life. We will have better doctors, we will have stronger drugs, we will have stricter disinfection methods, but strengthening our own resistance is always the most important. In the protracted battle, by constantly improving and repairing ourselves, human beings will maintain vigorous vitality and thrive.

未知

  25.腰线

  25. Waistline

  早年的卫生间只在壁上刷点白灰，像个从溪流里站起来的裸孩儿，斜披着毛巾。如今的房子，厨卫是重点，你再不讲究，也要贴上瓷砖才能说得过去。

  In the early years, the bathroom only painted the walls with white ash, like a naked child standing up from a stream, with a towel diagonally. In today's house, the kitchen and bathroom are the focus, no matter how much you don't pay attention to it, you have to put tiles on it to make sense.到建材市场挑选瓷砖，成了装修的必修课。砖铺像丝绸店，满眼花色闪闪烁烁，不知该挑哪一种好。顾图案更要看价钱，很快你就发现，精美瓷砖是没有止境的，但钱包是有大小的。到了最后，演变成先看价钱再定花色，流程进入量体裁衣看米下锅的局面。为了选瓷砖，我和丈夫甚至破了不当着外人争执的约定，不止一次吵得面红耳赤。一旁的店员漠然立着，连好奇的神色都不屑流露，想来因瓷砖而起的硝烟，她已见惯不怪。

  Choosing tiles in the building materials market has become a compulsory course for decoration. The brick shop is like a silk shop, full of sparkling colors, and I don't know which one to choose. Looking at the pattern, you should look at the price, and soon you will find that there is no end to exquisite tiles, but the wallet is of all sizes. In the end, it evolved into looking at the price first and then deciding on the color, and the process entered a situation of tailor-made rice and pot. In order to choose tiles, my husband and I even broke the agreement not to argue in front of outsiders, and we quarreled more than once. The clerk on the side stood indifferently, not even showing a curious look, thinking that she was used to seeing the smoke from the tiles.关于购买何种瓷砖，好不容易统一了意见，分歧又再接再厉地出现了。要不要花砖？要不要腰线？

  Opinions on what kind of tiles to buy finally came to a consensus, and disagreements continued to arise. Do you want to make tiles? Do you want a waistline?花砖是成套瓷砖的点睛之笔。瓷砖是淡绿调子的，花砖可能就是一丛披头散发的翠竹。瓷砖是棕黄调子的，如果是厨用，花砖上就有深驼色的咖啡杯盏，有袅袅的白气升起。如果是卫浴用，可能绘有几间木屋一丛野花，或许还有蜜蜂……有款砖叫作“海洋之心”，花砖镶着大朵的蔚蓝色椭圆形玻璃，假扮那块长眠在深海之下的无价钻石。

  Tiles are the finishing touch to a set of tiles. The tiles are light green, and the tiles may be a clump of green bamboo emitted by a disheveled. The tiles are brownish-yellow, and if they are for kitchen use, there are dark camel coffee cups on the tiles, and there is a lingering white gas rising. If it is for bathrooms, there may be a few wooden houses, a cluster of wildflowers, and maybe bees...... There is a brick called "Heart of the Ocean", which is inlaid with large azure oval glass, pretending to be a priceless diamond sleeping under the deep sea.更讲究的花砖像是一部有头有尾的小说呢。一款叫作“爱情鸟”的瓷砖，花砖就有几种格局。一块是两只水鸟相依为命，耳鬓厮磨的。这好理解，新婚宴尔啊。再一块就是三只鸟左顾右盼呼朋引伴的。这多出来的鸟，可不是什么非法闯入者，而是大鸟们辛辛苦苦孵出的小鸟。不知这两幅是不是全本，依此推下去，还可演变出多款情节。比如三只鸟展翅飞翔，比如四只鸟组成团队……

  The more elaborate tiles are like a novel with a beginning and an end. A tile called "lovebird", there are several patterns of flower tiles. One is two waterfowl dependent on each other, and their ears and temples are grinding. This is easy to understand, the wedding banquet. The other piece is the three birds looking left and right, looking for friends and companions. These extra birds are not illegal intruders, but small birds that the big birds have worked hard to hatch. I don't know if these two are the whole book, but if you push it forward, you can evolve into a variety of plots. For example, three birds spread their wings and fly, for example, four birds form a team......花砖之外，还有腰线。腰线并不像它的名字那样谦逊，它不是一条简单的线，而是由很多块精巧的长方形瓷砖连接而成的瓷砖带，缠绕在整壁瓷砖的中段。

  In addition to the tiles, there is also a waistline. The waistline is not as modest as its name, it is not a simple line, but a tile belt connected by many delicate rectangular tiles, wrapped around the middle of the entire wall of tiles.腰线是缩小了的花砖，有图案，甚至也有情节。比如上面说到的“爱情鸟”，腰线就是一只小鸟破壳而出，茸茸的羽毛和残缺的蛋壳，把爱情和繁衍拴在了一起。

  The waistline is a shrunken tile, with patterns and even plots. For example, the "lovebird" mentioned above, the waistline is a bird breaking out of its shell, with fluffy feathers and mutilated eggshells, tying love and reproduction together.

  腰线不便宜。瓷砖和瓷碗该是近邻吧？瓷碗是有曲线的，瓷砖却是完全不曾发育的平板，但一块腰线比一个普通的饭碗要值钱很多。腰线是很团结的，你不可能只贴一块，它们有着一荣皆荣一损俱损的气节。围着墙手拉手形成包围圈，统算下来，会吓得你的钱包一抖。若不镶，就一块都不能上，瓷砖的拼缝才能妥当。饭碗是生活的必需，而腰线则是锦上添花可有可无的，带着些许孤芳自赏的奢侈。

  The waistline is not cheap. Tiles and porcelain bowls should be close neighbors, right? The porcelain bowl is curved, but the tiles are completely undeveloped flat plates, but a waistline is much more valuable than an ordinary rice bowl. The waistline is very united, you can't just stick one piece, they have the integrity of glory and loss. Holding hands around the wall to form an encirclement, it will scare your wallet to shake. If it is not inlaid, it cannot be put on at all, and the tile seams can be properly jointed. The rice bowl is a necessity of life, and the waistline is the icing on the cake, with a little luxury of self-appreciation.母亲的新房子，割舍了所有的腰线。按说这点钱还是有的，但母亲坚决不肯，说有没有腰线是一样的，不花这个冤枉钱。

  My mother's new house gave up all her waistline. It is said that there is still this money, but the mother resolutely refused, saying that whether there is a waistline is the same and that it is not a waste of money.然而，有没有腰线是不一样的。就像上面说的“爱情鸟”，省去了雏鸟啄破蛋壳的那一幕，花砖上的两只鸟很突兀地变成了三只鸟，常常叫人疑心那小鸟的来历，甚至误会这是另外的一家了。“海洋之心”的腰线是一圈蓝白相间的小“钻石”，仿佛一挂悬垂的珠链。取消之后，墙壁上半截的莹白和下半截的蔚蓝，生硬地焊接在一起，丧失了柔和的过渡。孤零零的“巨钻”没来由地在白瓷板中闪烁，像一只莫名其妙的怪眼。

  However, it is not the same with or without a waistline. Just like the "love bird" mentioned above, the scene where the chick pecks through the eggshell is omitted, and the two birds on the tile suddenly turn into three birds, which often makes people doubt the origin of the bird, and even misunderstand that this is another family. The waistline of the "Heart of the Ocean" is a circle of small blue and white "diamonds", like a dangling bead chain. After the cancellation, the white of the upper half of the wall and the blue of the lower half were stiffly welded together, losing the soft transition. The lonely "giant diamond" flashed in the white porcelain plate for no reason, like an inexplicable strange eye.我觉得自己对不起母亲的新居，推而广之也对不起腰线。终于有一天，得了补偿的机会。我路过一家店铺，看到大肆甩卖腰线。

  I feel sorry for my mother's new home, and by extension, my waistline. Finally one day, I got the opportunity to compensate. I passed by a store and saw a big sale of waistlines.

  腰线的图案是很耀眼的玫瑰花蕾，夹杂着点点的金红，绮丽而烂漫。我不假思索地买了很多腰线，辛辛苦苦地搬回家，才面对一个严峻的问题——这些腰线嵌在哪里？

  The pattern of the waistline is a very dazzling rose bud, mixed with a little golden red, beautiful and gorgeous. I bought a lot of waistlines without thinking and moved home with great work before I was faced with a serious question - where are these waistlines embedded?腰线是美丽的，但许多腰线聚集在一起，除了让人眼花缭乱之外，就是安置它们的焦灼了。如同皮带是用最好的牛皮制造的，但你面对一堆皮带时，既不能把它们缝制成皮氅，也不能敲打成皮鞋。

  The waistline is beautiful, but many waistlines are gathered together, in addition to dazzling, it is the anxiety of placing them. Just as belts are made of the finest cowhide, but when you are faced with a pile of belts, you can neither sew them into a cloak nor beat them into leather shoes.失去了烘托和陪衬的腰线，也散失了精彩和雅致，剩下的是纷乱和拥挤。楼梯下有一间楔形的小房子，别家把它改造成了狗舍，我家堆积着杂物。早先一直是水泥墁地，如今我把腰线密集地砌在那里，闪闪花蕾只好在尘埃下皱缩。

  The waistline that sets off and foil has been lost, and the excitement and elegance have also been lost, and what remains is chaos and crowding. There is a small wedge-shaped house under the stairs, which has been converted into a kennel by other families, and my house is piled up with debris. In the past, it was a cement floor, but now I have densely built my waistline there, and the shining buds have to shrink under the dust.看到过一条关于人才的定律，说全由极高智商的人组成的团队，那效率和智慧却并非最高，反倒不如人才的阶梯状组合，方能发挥出最好的效力。仿佛腰线，顾名思义，只能是一面素墙美丽的统帅，而不能铺陈得漫山遍野。
I have seen a law about talents, saying that a team composed of people with extremely high IQs is not the highest, but it is not as good as the stepped combination of talents, so that it can exert its best effectiveness. It seems that the waistline, as the name suggests, can only be a beautiful commander with a plain wall, and cannot be spread all over the mountains.

未知

  26.你不能要求没有风暴的海洋

  26. You can't ask for an ocean without storms

  痛苦和磨难是人生不可分割的一部分。只有接受这一事实，我们才能超越它，更加看清生命的意义。

  Pain and suffering are an integral part of life. Only by accepting this fact can we transcend it and see the meaning of life more clearly.你说你不要这些苦难，那么生命也就失去了框架。很多自杀的人，就是因为没有理会这种意义，一厢情愿地认为生命是应该只有甘甜没有挫败的。特别是在恋爱早期，那种汹涌的荷尔蒙带来的欢愉，让人把激情当成了常态。生命的常态，其实就是平稳和深邃，还有暗流。在最深刻的层面，我们不单与别人是分离的，而且与世界也是分离的，兀自踯躅前行。

  If you say you don't want these sufferings, then life will lose its framework. Many people who commit suicide are because they ignore this meaning and wishfully believe that life should only be sweet and not frustrated. Especially in the early days of love, the joy brought by the surging hormones makes people take passion as the norm. The normal state of life is actually stable and profound, and there are undercurrents. At the deepest level, we are not only separated from others, but also from the world, and we move forward on our own.生命的每一步都带着人们向死亡之境跌落，不要存在幻想，这才让你比较持久稳定，安然地居住在孤独中，胸中如有千沟万壑、千军万马。只有接受这一事实，我们才能超越死亡，腾起在空中，看清生命的意义。

  Every step of life takes people to the realm of death, don't have illusions, so that you can be more lasting and stable, live in loneliness peacefully, and have thousands of ravines and thousands of troops in your chest. Only by accepting this fact can we rise above death, soar into the air, and see the meaning of life clearly.有一次，到沙漠中间的一个城市去，临行之前和当地的朋友联络。她不停地说，毕老师，你可要做好准备啊，我们这里经常是黄沙蔽日。不过，这几天天气很不错，只是不知道它能不能坚持到你到来的那一天。

  Once, I went to a city in the middle of the desert and contacted a local friend before leaving. She kept saying, Teacher Bi, you have to be prepared, we are often covered by yellow sand here. However, the weather has been very good these days, but I don't know if it will last until the day you arrive.我有点纳闷。虽然人们常常说，“您的到来带来了好天气”，或者说，“天气也在欢迎您呢”，谁都知道，这是典型的客套。个体的人是多么渺小啊，我们哪里能影响到天气！

  I was a little puzzled. Although it is often said that "your arrival brings good weather" or "the weather is welcoming you", everyone knows that this is typical politeness. How small individual people are, how can we affect the weather!不过这位朋友反复地提到天气，还是让我产生了好奇。我说，不管好天气还是坏天气，我们都不能挑选。天气是你们那里的一部分，就是黄沙蔽日，也是你们的特色啊。

  However, this friend's repeated mention of the weather still made me curious. I said, good weather or bad weather, we can't pick and choose. The weather is part of you, that is, the yellow sand covers the sun, and it is also your characteristic.说者无意，听者有心。后来，这位朋友对我说，她听了我的话，就放下心来。我很奇怪，因为自觉这番话里，并没有多少劝人安心的含义啊。她说，我们这里天气多变，经常有朋友一下飞机就抱怨，闹得主客都很尴尬。

  The speaker has no intention, but the listener has a heart. Later, this friend told me that she listened to me and felt relieved. I am very strange, because I feel that there is not much meaning of persuasion in these words. She said that the weather here is changeable, and friends often complain when they get off the plane, which makes the host and guests very embarrassed.我说，坏天气也是大自然的一部分，就像每个人的生命中都必定会下雨，某些日子势必黑暗又荒凉。就像你不可能总是吃细粮，那样你就会得大肠癌。你一定要吃粗纤维。坏天气、悲剧、死亡、生病，都是生命中的粗纤维，我们只有安然接纳。

  I said that bad weather is also a part of nature, just like it is bound to rain in everyone's life, and some days are bound to be dark and desolate. Just like you can't always eat small grains, then you will get colorectal cancer. You must eat crude fiber. Bad weather, tragedy, death, and illness are all the coarse fibers of life, and we can only accept them safely.你不可能要求一个没有风暴的海洋。那不是海，是泥潭。

  You can't ask for an ocean without storms. It's not the sea, it's a quagmire.

未知

  27.第二志愿

  27. Second choice

  人们常常把所有的注意力，都集中在第一志愿上。这些年，随着考试严酷性的不断升级，关于填报志愿的说法也越来越霸道了——那就是，全力以赴关注你的第一志愿。某些大学的录取人员公开宣布，我们是不会录取第二志愿的学生的。因为你的热爱不够专一，录来也学不好的。

  People often focus all their attention on their first choice. Over the years, with the continuous escalation of the severity of the exam, the statement about filling in the volunteer form has become more and more domineering - that is, go all out to pay attention to your first choice. Admissions officers at some universities have publicly announced that we will not admit students who are second choices. Because your love is not dedicated enough, you can't learn well when you record it.高考形势特殊，僧多粥少，对于学校的取舍，旁人不好议论是非。但我以为，如果把高考报志愿的经验推而广之，把第一志愿至上，扩展成人生选择的一大信条，就有商榷的必要了。

  The college entrance examination situation is special, there are more monks and less porridge, and it is not easy for others to discuss the trade-offs of schools. But I think that if we expand the experience of applying for the college entrance examination and apply for volunteering, and expand the first choice first into a major creed of life choices, it is necessary to discuss.人生的选择绝少是唯一的。

  Life choices are rarely the only one.听一位美国心理学家讲座，谈到男女青年挑选恋爱对象时，他说，如果你在读大学的时候，一眼扫去，本班级上的异性，有三分之一以上可以成为你的配偶候选人，那么……

  Listening to a lecture by an American psychologist, when talking about young men and women choosing a love partner, he said, if you scan at a glance when you are in college, more than one-third of the opposite sex in your class can become your spouse candidates, then......讲到这里，说是悬念也好，说是征询民意也好，他成心留出一个长长的停顿，用苍蓝色的眼珠扫视全场。台下发出汹涌的低语声，均说，那他就是一个神经病！

  At this point, whether it was suspense or public opinion, he made up his mind to leave a long pause and scan the audience with pale blue eyes. There were raging whispers from the audience, and they all said that he was a neurotic!异国的心理学家耸耸肩膀说，喏！那他或她，就是一个心理健康的人。

  The foreign psychologist shrugged his shoulders and said, "Hey! Then he or she is a mentally healthy person.这观点有点好玩，也有点耸人听闻，是不是？当然，他指的寻找伴侣，是在大学校园内，智商和背景有大的相仿，并不能波及整个社会，说某个男人觉得与世上三分之一的女人都可成为眷属，才属正常。

  This view is a bit funny and a bit sensational, isn't it? Of course, he was referring to finding a partner on a college campus, where IQ and background are very similar, and it cannot affect the whole society, and it is normal for a man to feel that he can be married to one-third of the women in the world.但这一论点也可以说明，既然结为夫妻这样严重的问题，都不妨有一手或是几手打算，那么，在其他场合的选择，当有更大的弹性。

  But this argument can also show that since there is such a serious problem as getting married, it is better to have one or several plans, so the choice on other occasions should be more flexible.

  当孤注一掷地把自己的命运押在某个“唯一”头上的时候，我们实际上是处于自我封闭和焦灼无序的状态。内心流淌的是自卑和虚弱。以为只有这狭窄的途径，才是抵达目的地的独木桥，无法设想在另外的情形下，还有道路尚可通行。某些人的信念虽执着但脆弱，难以容忍自己的不成功。由于太惧怕失败的阴影了，拒绝想象除胜利以外，事态还同时存有一千种以上暗淡的可能。他们能够采取的自卫措施，就是放下眼帘。以为只要不去想，不良的结果就可能像鬼魅，只能在暗夜中游走，不会真的在太阳下现身。

  When we desperately bet our fate on some "only" head, we are actually in a state of self-isolation and anxiety. What flows in the heart is low self-esteem and weakness. I thought that only this narrow path was the single-plank bridge to reach the destination, and I couldn't imagine that there would still be a road passable under other circumstances. Some people's beliefs are persistent but fragile, and they find it difficult to tolerate their own unsuccess. Afraid of the shadow of defeat, refusing to imagine that there are more than a thousand bleak possibilities in addition to victory. The self-defense measure they can take is to let go of their eyes. I thought that as long as I didn't think about it, the bad result might be like a ghost, I could only wander in the dark night, and I wouldn't really show up in the sun.于是每当选择的关头，我们可以看到那么多人鸵鸟似的奋不顾身、色厉内荏地跑跳着，到了没有退路的时候，就把小小的脑袋埋入沙荒。他们并不仅仅骗别人，首先的和更重要的，是用这种虚张的气势，为自己打气加力。他们拒不考虑第二志愿，觉着给自己留了退路，就是懦夫和逃兵。甚至以为那是一个不祥的兆头，好像夜啼的猫头鹰，早早赶走方平安。他们竭力不去前瞻那潜伏着的败笔和危险，好像不带粮草就杀入沙漠的孤军。即使为了应付局面多做准备，也是马马虎虎潦潦草草，虚与委蛇地写下第二、第三志愿……不走脑子，秋水无痕。不敢一针见血地问自己，假若第一志愿失守，能否依旧从容微笑？

  So whenever it comes to choosing, we can see so many people running and jumping like ostriches, and when there is no way out, they bury their small heads in the sand. They don't just lie to others, first and more importantly, they use this bravado to cheer themselves up. They refuse to consider a second choice, feeling that they have left a way out for themselves, that is, cowards and deserters. I even thought it was an ominous sign, like an owl crying at night, driving away Fang Ping'an early. They tried their best not to look forward to the lurking failures and dangers, as if they were a lone army entering the desert without food and grass. Even if you prepare more to cope with the situation, you are sloppy and write down your second and third choices...... It does not go to the brain, and there is no trace of autumn water. Don't dare to ask yourself to the point, if your first choice is lost, can you still smile calmly?可惜世上的事情，不如愿者十之八九。当冰冷的结局出现时，很多人就像遇到雪崩的攀缘者，一落千丈。

  Unfortunately, eight or nine out of ten things in the world are not as good as they want. When the icy ending appears, many people are like climbers who have encountered an avalanche and plummeted.此刻，你以前不经意间随手填写的第二志愿，就像保险绳一样，在你下坠的过程中，有力地拽住了你，还你一方风景。

  At this moment, the second choice you filled in inadvertently before is like a safety rope, which forcefully grabs you and gives you back the scenery in the process of your fall.惊魂未定的你，此时心中百感交集。被第一志愿抛弃的巨大失落，使百骸俱软，无暇顾及和珍视第二志愿的援手。你垂头丧气地望着崖下，第一志愿的游魂还在碎石中闪着虚光。有人恨不能纵身一跳，以七尺之躯殉了那未竟的理想。即便被亲人和世俗的利害劝得暂且委曲求全，那心中的苦郁悲凉，也经久不散。

  You are shocked, and you have mixed feelings in your heart at this time. The huge loss of being abandoned by the first choice makes all bones weak, and there is no time to take care of and cherish the help of the second choice. You look down the cliff dejectedly, and your first choice wandering spirit is still shining in the rubble. Some people wish they could jump and die for their unfinished ideals with their seven-foot bodies. Even if you are persuaded by relatives and worldly interests to compromise for the time being, the bitterness and sadness in your heart will last for a long time.第二志愿如同灰姑娘，龟缩在角落里，打扫尘埃，收拾残局，等待那不知何日才能莅临的金马车。

  The second choice is like Cinderella, huddled in the corner, cleaning up the dust, cleaning up the mess, and waiting for the golden carriage that will arrive when it doesn't know when it will come.其实人的才能是多方面的，守节般地效忠第一志愿，愚蠢不说，更是浪费。候鸟是在不断的迁徙当中，寻找自己的最佳栖息地，并在长途艰苦的跋涉中，锻炼了羽翼。在屋檐下盘旋的鸟，除了麻雀，还能想出谁。

  In fact, people's talents are multifaceted, and being loyal to their first choice is stupid and wasteful. Migratory birds are constantly migrating, looking for their best habitat, and exercising their wings during long and arduous treks. The bird hovering under the eaves, besides the sparrow, can you think of anyone.寻找第二志愿的过程，实质上是对自己的一次再发现。除了那最突出最显著的特点之外，我还有什么优长之处？第一志愿和第二志愿之间，可否像两位相得益彰的前锋，交互支援？我还有哪些潜藏着的特质，有待发掘和培养？平日疏忽的爱好，也许可在失落中渐渐显影？

  The process of finding a second choice is essentially a rediscovery of oneself. In addition to the most prominent and distinctive features, what other advantages do I have? Can the first choice and the second choice be mutually supported like two complementary strikers? What other latent traits do I have to discover and cultivate? Maybe the hobbies that are negligent on weekdays can gradually manifest in the loss?第二志愿的考虑和填写，也许比第一志愿更取舍艰难。惟妙惟肖地预想失败，直面败后的残局和补救的措施，绝非乐事，但却必须。尝试着在出征前就布置退却和迂回的路线，并在这种惨淡经营的设计当中，规划自己再一次崛起的蓝图，是一种经验，更是勇气。

  The consideration and filling of the second choice may be more difficult than the first choice. It is not a pleasure to vividly anticipate failure, face the endgame and remedy after defeat, but it is necessary. Trying to arrange retreats and detours before going out, and planning a blueprint for one's rise again in the design of this dismal operation, is an experience and courage.

  也许是因为害怕面对这种挫折的演习，有人敷衍了事般地拟下第二志愿，并不曾经历大脑深远的思考。他们以为这是勇往直前、背水一战的魄力，殊不知暴露的只是自己乏于坚忍和气血两虚。

  Perhaps because they are afraid of facing this setback exercise, some people perfunctory formulate a second choice without experiencing far-reaching thinking in the brain. They thought this was the courage to move forward bravely and fight with their backs to the water, but they didn't know that what was exposed was only their lack of perseverance and lack of qi and blood.

  不可搪塞第二志愿。它依旧是人生重要的选择，是你面对逆境的备份文件。它是进可以攻、退可以守的支撑点，它是无惧无悔的屏障，它是一个终结和起跑的双重底线。

  Don't prevaricate the second choice. It is still an important choice in life and a backup file for you in the face of adversity. It is a support point that can be attacked, retreated and defended, it is a barrier without fear and regret, and it is a double bottom line for finishing and starting.或许有人以为，有了第二志愿、第三志愿……人就易颓败，不进取。这是一个谬论。亡命之徒不可取，它使人铤而走险，一旦失利，便是绝望与死寂。不妨想想杂技演员。有了保险绳的时候，他们的表演会无后顾之忧，更精妙绝伦。

  Some people may think that there is a second choice, a third choice...... People are prone to decay and lack of progress. This is a fallacy. The outlaw is not advisable, it makes people take risks, and once they lose, they are despair and death. Think of acrobats. When they have a safety rope, their performances will be worry-free and more exquisite.在填写第一志愿的时候，把其后的每一个志愿也都认真地考虑，这是人生不屈不挠的法门之一。
When filling in the first choice, carefully consider every subsequent choice, which is one of the indomitable methods of life.

未知

  28.莺鸟与铁星

  28. Warbler and iron star

  在南太平洋的岛屿中，飞翔着一种有着动听鸣叫的美丽小鸟，叫作莺鸟，它们长着形色各异的喙。岛屿上物产丰富的日子，莺鸟们靠吃多种草籽为生，活得优哉游哉。

  On the islands of the South Pacific, there is a beautiful bird with a beautiful song, called the warbler, which has a beak of different shapes. On days when the islands were rich in products, the warblers lived by eating a variety of grass seeds and lived a leisurely life.但是，饥馑来了。干旱袭击了岛屿，整个大地好像是刚刚凝固的炽热火山，赤红的土地，看不到一丝绿色。

  However, famine came. Drought hit the island, and the whole land seemed to be a hot volcano that had just solidified, and the red land could not see a trace of green.科学家找到一些从前研究过的莺鸟，它们的腿上拴着铁环。观测结果，发现莺鸟们的体重大减，挣扎在死亡线上。原因是食物奇缺，能吃的都吃光了，唯一剩下的是一种叫作蒺藜的草籽。它浑身是锋利的硬刺，锐不可当。在深深的内核里隐藏的种仁，好像美味的巧克力封死在铁匣中。

  Scientists have found some warblers that have been studied before, with iron rings tied to their legs. As a result of the observations, it was found that the warblers lost a lot of weight and struggled on the death line. The reason is that food is scarce, and everything that can be eaten is eaten, and the only thing left is a grass seed called tribulus terrestris. It was covered in sharp thorns and was unstoppable. The kernels hidden in the deep core are like delicious chocolate sealed in an iron box.蒺藜还有一个名字叫作铁星，象征着难以攻克。拉丁文的意思是“挤压和疼痛”。

  Tribulus also has a name called Iron Star, which symbolizes difficulty in overcoming. The Latin word means "squeeze and pain".莺鸟用自己柔弱的喙，啄开一粒铁星，先要把它顶在地上，又咬又扭，然后顶住岩石，上喙发力，下喙挤压，直到精疲力竭才能把外壳拧掉，吃到活命的粮草。

  The warbler uses its weak beak to peck open an iron star, first push it to the ground, bite and twist, and then hold the rock, exert force with the upper beak, and squeeze the lower beak until it is exhausted before it can twist off the shell and eat the living food and grass.岛上开始了残酷的生存之战。没有刀光剑影，唯一的声音就是嗑碎蒺藜的噼啪声。很多莺鸟饿死了，有些顽强地生存下来。科学家想，生和死的区别在哪里呢？

  A brutal battle for survival begins on the island. There was no sword light and sword shadow, the only sound was the crackling sound of shattering thistles. Many warblers starved to death, and some survived tenaciously. Scientists wondered, what is the difference between life and death?经过详尽研究，喙长11毫米的莺鸟，就能够嗑开铁星，而喙长10.5毫米的莺鸟，就望“星”兴叹，无论如何都叩不开生命森严的大门。

  After detailed research, a warbler with a beak of 11 mm can eat the iron star, while a warbler with a beak of 10.5 mm can sigh at the "star", and no matter what, it cannot knock on the door of life.0.5毫米之差，就决定了莺鸟的生死存亡。在丰衣足食的时候，一切都被温柔地遮盖了，但月亮并不总是圆的，事物的规律跌宕起伏。

  The difference of 0.5 mm determines the life and death of the warbler. When you are well-fed, everything is gently covered, but the moon is not always round, and the laws of things are up and down.我猜想，那些饿死的莺鸟在最后时分，倘能思索，一定万分后悔自己为什么没能生就一枚长长的利喙！短喙的莺鸟，是天生的，它们遭到了大自然无情的淘汰。但人类的喙——我们思维的强度，历练的经验，广博的智慧，强健的体力，合作的风采，幽默的神韵……却是可以在日复一日的积累中，渐渐地磨炼增长，成为我们度过困厄的支柱。

  I guess that those starving warblers in the last moments, if they can think about it, they will regret why they couldn't give birth to a long beak! The short-beaked warbler is natural, and they have been ruthlessly eliminated by nature. But the beak of human beings - the strength of our thinking, the experience we have, the vast wisdom, the strong physical strength, the style of cooperation, the charm of humor...... However, it can gradually temper and grow in the accumulation day after day, and become the pillar for us to overcome difficulties.

未知

  29.魔术师的铁钉

  29. The magician's iron nail

  有一位非常有名的魔术师，当记者问起他成功的秘诀时，他带着记者，来到他平日演出的宏大剧场门口。记者以为他会走进富丽堂皇的大门，没想到，他领着记者来到了马路对面的一个下水道口。

  There was a very famous magician, and when the reporter asked about the secret of his success, he took the reporter to the door of the grand theater where he usually performed. The reporter thought he would walk into the magnificent gate, but unexpectedly, he led the reporter to a sewer outlet across the road.你躺在这里，假设自己是在冬天的夜晚饥寒交迫，试试你能看到些什么？魔术师很和气地说。

  You lie here, assuming you are hungry and cold on a winter night, and see what you can see? The magician said very kindly.记者曲身躺在地上，他闻到了下水道发出的恶臭，他看到了香喷喷的饭店和华美的商场，还看到无数的人腿在向着剧场走动。另外，有一截突出的窗台就在头顶侧方悬着，如同丑陋的屋檐。他边看边报告着，魔术师说，很好，你看得很全面。只是，在窗台的水泥上，请你看得再仔细一点。你还可以有所发现。

  The reporter lay on the ground, he smelled the stench coming from the sewers, he saw fragrant restaurants and gorgeous shopping malls, and saw countless human legs walking towards the theater. In addition, there is a protruding window sill hanging from the side above the head, like an ugly eaves. He reported as he watched, and the magician said, "Very good, you see it comprehensively." However, on the cement on the windowsill, please look more closely. You can also find something.在魔术师的一再提示下，记者看到了窗台的下方，有一行模糊的字迹。他拼命瞪大眼睛，才辨识出那是魔术师的名字。

  Under the magician's repeated prompting, the reporter saw a line of blurry writing under the windowsill. His eyes widened desperately before he recognized the magician's name.魔术师说，很多年前，我是一个乡下来的孩子。冬天，我蜷着身子躺在这里。你知道下水道口尽管恶臭，但比较暖和，从来不会结冰的。我看到了满天的星斗，知道明天更冷。我看到了食品和衣物，但我身无分文。我还看到了无数的人到对面的剧场去看演出。我萌生了一个梦想，有一天，我也要到这座辉煌的剧院里去，不是去看演出，是让别人看我的演出。这样想了之后，我就从地上捡起一根铁钉，用冻僵的手指，把自己的名字刻在水泥窗台上了……你问我为什么会成功，就这么简单。我用一根生锈的铁钉，把我的梦想刻在这里，每当我没有信心的时候，我就来到这里。当我离开的时候，勇气就重新灌满了胸膛。

  The magician said, many years ago, I was a country kid. In winter, I curled up here. You know that the sewer outlet is warm and never freezes despite its stench. I saw the sky full of stars and knew that tomorrow would be colder. I saw food and clothing, but I was penniless. I also saw countless people go to the theater opposite to see the show. I had a dream that one day, I would also go to this glorious theater, not to see the performance, but to let others see my performance. After thinking about it, I picked up an iron nail from the ground and carved my name on the cement windowsill with my frozen fingers...... You ask me why I succeed, it's that simple. I used a rusty iron nail to engrave my dream here, and whenever I had no faith, I came here. When I left, courage filled my chest again.分手的时候，记者对魔术师说，能否让我看看您那神奇的铁钉？魔术师说，可以。说完，他随手从地上捡起一根铁钉，说，喏，就是它了。铁钉并不重要，重要的是亲手刻下你的名字。

  When they broke up, the reporter said to the magician, can you show me your magical iron nail? The magician said, yes. After saying that, he casually picked up an iron nail from the ground and said, "Oh, that's it." It doesn't matter what the iron nails are, the important thing is to engrave your name with your own hands.

未知

  30.美容师的作品

  30. The work of a beautician

  一家很有名的制造商，产品从服装到化妆品到无数精美的饰品。

  A well-known manufacturer with products ranging from clothing to cosmetics to countless exquisite accessories.一天，商家召开盛大的产品推销会，其中最有趣的项目是——造就绅士。他们聘用的高级美容师，从城市最肮脏的角落，找到了一个身材高大的流浪汉，衣衫褴褛面容晦暗。美容师先给他拍了照片，存档以观后效。接着便用芬芳的洗液为他冲沐理发，用名牌剃须泡给他刮胡子，敷上一层又一层含有药物成分的润肤品、面霜和眼霜……打理完毕后，根据他的身高和肤色，选配了最适宜的衬衣、西装、领带，甚至还有一根很棒的手杖和一顶昂贵的帽子……

  One day, the merchant held a grand product promotion meeting, and the most interesting project was to make a gentleman. The high-end beautician they hired found a tall homeless man with a ragged face from the dirtiest corner of the city. The beautician first took a photo of him and archived it to see the aftermath. Then he washed and cut his hair with a fragrant lotion, shaved him with brand-name shaving soaks, and applied layer after layer of emollients, creams and eye creams containing medicinal ingredients...... After taking care of it, according to his height and skin color, he chose the most suitable shirt, suit, tie, and even a great cane and an expensive hat......于是，众目睽睽之下，这个穷困潦倒颓败已极的莽汉，被商家的产品包装一新，成了仪表堂堂的绅士。在场的人叹为观止，公司的销售额飙升。

  As a result, in full view, this impoverished and decadent reckless man was repackaged by the merchant's products and became a dignified gentleman. Those present were amazed, and the company's sales soared.会后，某经理决定雇用这名容光焕发的绅士，约他第二天早晨报到，绅士点头答应了。但是，第二天早上，绅士没有来。经理决定耐心等下去，第三天、第四天……绅士还是没来。经理就去流浪汉聚集的地方，终于找到了他。

  After the meeting, a manager decided to hire the radiant gentleman and asked him to report the next morning, and the gentleman nodded in agreement. However, the next morning, the gentleman did not come. The manager decided to wait patiently, on the third and fourth days...... The gentleman still didn't come. The manager went to the place where the homeless gathered and finally found him.

  绅士脸上长出了白而短的乱须，身上散发着恶浊的气味，西服、领带以及华美的帽子全不见了，或许被他换了酒喝。此刻，他醉醺醺地躺在垃圾箱旁，只有那根手杖还枕在头下。

  The gentleman's face grew white and short whiskers, his body exuded a foul smell, and his suit, tie and gorgeous hat were all gone, perhaps he had changed his wine to drink. At this moment, he was lying drunkenly next to the trash can, with only the cane still resting under his head.经理把他叫醒，说，美容师改变了你的外貌，但是他没有改变你的内心。所以，你还是你啊。现在，你乐意跟我走吗？

  The manager woke him up and said, "The beautician has changed your appearance, but he has not changed your heart." So, you are still you. Now, are you willing to come with me?流浪汉站起身，跟着经理走了。后来，他终于从里到外成了新人。

  The tramp stood up and followed the manager. Later, he finally became a newcomer from the inside out.改变一个人的外貌，也许几个小时就够了。美容师没有错，但改变一个人的精神，绝不是化妆品和纺织品能够胜任的。只有劳动和信仰，才能真正改变我们。
To change a person's appearance, maybe a few hours will be enough. There is nothing wrong with a beautician, but changing a person's spirit is by no means something that cosmetics and textiles can do. Only labor and faith can truly change us.

未知

  31.闭阖星云之眼

  31. Close the eye of the nebula

  青年时代，我曾经有一段时间是一个悲观主义者，这也许是和我在西藏高原的经历有关。高原太辽阔了，人力太渺小了。雪峰太久远了，人生太短暂了。有时真是生出无尽的悲哀，觉得奋斗有什么用呢？百年之后，不还是一抔黄土？一个人的力量太微薄了，太平洋不会因为一杯沸水的倾倒而升高温度，这杯水却永远地消失了。

  In my youth, I was a pessimist for a while, perhaps related to my experience on the Tibetan plateau. The plateau is too vast and the manpower is too small. The snow peak is too long, and life is too short. Sometimes I really feel endless sorrow, and I feel that what is the use of struggle? A hundred years later, isn't it still a handful of loess? The power of one person is too meager, and the Pacific Ocean does not raise the temperature by the pouring of a glass of boiling water, which is gone forever.后来，我知道这种看世界的角度，被哲学家称为“银河”或“星云之眼”。从这个位置来看，我们和目所能及的所有生物都是微不足道，一切奋斗都显得荒凉和愚蠢，结局和发展都充满了不可言说的荒谬。一个人，和一只蚂蚁、一条蛆虫没有任何分别。从星云和银河的角度来看，人类轻渺如烟、无足挂齿。

  Later, I learned that this perspective on the world is called the "Milky Way" or "Nebula Eye" by philosophers. From this position, we and all living beings as far as the eye can see are insignificant, all struggles seem desolate and stupid, and the ending and development are full of unspeakable absurdity. A person is no different from an ant or a maggot. From the perspective of nebulae and the Milky Way, human beings are as light as smoke and insignificant.这只眼振振有词，在逻辑上几乎是无懈可击的。你若真要遵循了这只眼的视角，会从根本上使生命枯萎凋落。

  This eye is trembling and logically almost unassailable. If you really follow the perspective of this eye, you will fundamentally wither and wither life.一些好高骛远的人，在遭受失败的时候，会拾起这只眼为自己开脱。因为所有的努力和不努力都混为一谈，他的失败也就顺理成章。一些胸无大志的人，在沉沦和荒靡的时刻，会躲在这只眼后面为自己寻找借口。因为一切都在虚无中，他的荒废光阴也就有了理论支点。一些游戏人生放弃光明的人，在黑暗中也眨巴着这只眼，似乎一切都是梦，清醒和昏迷并无分别……

  Some ambitious people, when they suffer failure, will pick up this eye to excuse themselves. Because all efforts and non-efforts are confused, his failure is logical. Some ambitious people, in moments of sinking and desolation, hide behind this eye to find excuses for themselves. Because everything is in nothingness, his wasted time also has a theoretical fulcrum. Some people who give up the light in their game life also blink their eyes in the dark, as if everything is a dream, and there is no difference between waking up and being unconscious......

  你不要小看了这看似遥远而又神秘的星云之眼，如果你长期用这只眼注视世界，就会不由自主地灰心丧志。持久地沉浸其中，还有可能放弃生命。当我们从生活中抽离，成为袖手旁观的旁观者时，所有世俗的欢快和目标，就变得轻如鸿毛。

  Don't underestimate this seemingly distant and mysterious nebula eye, if you look at the world with this eye for a long time, you will involuntarily become discouraged. Persistent immersion in it and the possibility of giving up life. When we withdraw from life and become spectators who stand by, all worldly joys and goals become as light as a feather.闭阖星云之眼吧。因为那不是你的位置，那是神的位置。摒弃那高处不胜寒的孤寂，回到充满生机又复杂多变的人间吧。僭越是危险的，我们今生为人，是一种福气。珍惜我们明察秋毫的双眼，可以仰视星空，却不要让自己轻飘飘地飞起来，到达星云的高度。那里，据说很冷，很黑，很荒凉。

  Close the eyes of the nebula. Because that's not your place, that's God's place. Abandon the loneliness of the high place and return to the world full of vitality and complexity. Transgression is dangerous, and it is a blessing for us to be human in this life. Cherish our discerning eyes, we can look up at the starry sky, but don't let ourselves fly lightly and reach the height of the nebula. There, it is said to be cold, dark, and desolate.那些让我们感到有内涵、有勇气、有坚持力的人，我坚信他们是有理想的。人很怪，只有理想这种东西，才能够提供源源不断的动力。

  Those who make us feel connotative, courageous, and persistent, I firmly believe that they have ideals. People are very strange, only ideals can provide a steady stream of power.

未知