Cover

未知

《汪曾祺全集》编辑工作委员会
主任/郭娟
Six Seven Eight Nine Ten Eleven twelve A baker's dozen fourteen fifteen sixteen seventeen eighteen nineteen twenty twenty-one twenty-two twenty-three twenty-four Editorial Working Committee of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi" Director/Guo Juan成员/季红真　汪朝　汪朗　汪明
　　徐强　李光荣　李建新　赵坤
　　刘伟　杨康　周墨西　李玉俐
（排名不分先后）

书名页

文前插图

文前插图

80年代末 在家中

1948年 与夫人施松卿在北京
Members/Ji Hongzhen, Wang Chao, Wang Lang, Wang Ming Xu Qiang, Li Guangrong, Li Jianxin, Zhao Kun Liu Wei, Yang Kang, Zhou Moxi, Li Yuli (in no particular order) Illustration before the text Late 80s at home 1948 With his wife Shi Songqing in Beijing
50年代后期 与中国民间文艺研究会的同事合影，左五为汪曾祺

画作

目录

诗歌卷诗歌卷说明Dialogue about Wang Zengqi's creation in the 40s Interview with Wang Zengqi "When I write, I am alive......" Poetry Scroll Poetry Scroll Description
新诗1941年
1942年Like a nun throwing down a flower arranged diagonally, The pine nuts fell like a beehive, Hide layers of self-made lies, listen In the deep valley, there are boulders that have weathered into sand. Insect Letter No. 2 It is planned to be completed on October 4th. Copies of the sixth draft on November 10. In 1942
1954年
1957年
1972年
1986年The dragon flies in the mulberry tree village, wanting to rain for the world. The scales and armor have been broken, and the sadness is so sudden. Ode to He Xiang He Men has many female heroes, and his texture is as pure as snow and frost. Blood flows across Sanghe Mountain, and the waves of the Li River rise in layers. (August 1984) In 1986
1991年
1993年
1998年
未编年

旧体诗、长短句1960年
1980年
1981年
1982年
1983年Avoiding longevity and concealing loneliness, the small cart only cares about the wandering around. Gift to Zong Pu {{id_0000}} Who can compare to Feng Zongpu on grand tours, holding an umbrella to shield himself from the sun and crossing Taihu Lake? Looking back at the vast blue waves, I have returned to the north and flowed into the letters I wrote by my pillow. In 1983
1984年After the meal, I brewed fresh tea and smoked, scratching my short hair to enjoy the warmth of the sun. The withered chrysanthemums on the branches bloom quite well, allowing for the spring and autumn to linger the New Year. Huaguo Mountain{{id_0000}} Carving a boat and a rubber pillar is really troublesome, and the legend is not a bad thing. Full of absurd "Journey to the West", the fantasy of the world Huaguo Mountain. In 1984
1986年The dragon flies in the mulberry tree village, wanting to rain for the world. The scales and armor have been broken, and the sadness is so sudden. Ode to He Xiang He Men has many female heroes, and his texture is as pure as snow and frost. Blood flows across Sanghe Mountain, and the waves of the Li River rise in layers. (August 1984) In 1986
1987年
1988年Title: Sichuan Xingwen Bamboo Sea Map{{id_0000}} The bamboo forest is like the sea, and everything is vast and desolate. The dense branches and dense birds chirp, the leaves hide the smoke from cooking. When people send magnolia slices, they still use green bamboo to carry them. Children chew bamboo shoots raw, and the taste is like sugarcane. In 1988
1989年
1990年
1991年
1992年
1993年
1994年Half a day of leisure in the fleeting world. (Late 1993) Five Absolutes: Traveling to Dongshan Island Entrance Occupation{{id_0000}} The beach is like jade chips, The islands are lined with green snails. Live up to the good landscape, Singing loudly in the wind. In 1994
1995年
1996年
1997年
1998年
未编年

杂著卷杂著卷说明[203] This article is compiled according to the handwriting. Miscellaneous Volumes Miscellaneous Volume Description
小传 书封小语《汪曾祺短篇小说选》所附小传
汪曾祺小传
小传附著作年表
《塔上随笔》所附小传
《中国当代名人随笔·汪曾祺卷》所附小传
《蒲桥集》书封小语

题词一
二Zeng Qijing greeted Dexi and Kong Jing for the New Year On February 2, 1984, he made a lotus painting and title for Zhu Dexi. Two
三On March 20, 1984, there was a strong wind that day, and I couldn't go out, Zeng Qi remembered On March 20, 1984, he made a cactus painting and title for Wu Ningkun. Three
四There is a wisteria stand in the back garden, which is not managed by anyone, allowing it to climb freely, and it is extremely lush. When the flowers are in full bloom, lying on their backs under the rack makes people feel drunk. On May 1, 1984, I occasionally remembered writing it. Today, I have painted nearly ten paintings, which is the end of the strong crossbow. Zeng Qi Kee On May 1, 1984, he painted a painting title for wisteria. Four
五In front of the Jade Tea Hall, morning and evening, who will continue to be sad at the Peony Pavilion? May 5, 1984 Zeng Qi On May 5, 1984, he painted a peony painting. Five
六
七In June 1984, he painted honeysuckle. Six On the evening of November 2, 1985, I made this uncooked hoof. I sent a smile to my brother Gu Jian. Wang Zengqi is sixty-four years old On November 2, 1985, he made a squirrel picture and title for the ancient sword. Seven
八
九
十In January 1986, he wrote a postscript for Fu Xuebin's "Hundred Ugly Pictures". Nine The autumn colors are selfless to the grass and flowers Written by Zeng Qi in September 1986 In September 1986, he wrote a picture of autumn flowers. Ten
十一The tea flowers of Huating Temple in Xishan bloom as big as a bowl, and the blue-headed mushrooms and porcini mushrooms are all stunners among vegetables. Write comforting political and moral brothers overseas homesickness. In October 1986, he painted Yunnan mushrooms and camellia for Li Zhengdao. Eleven
十二I planted orchids in Beijing, but none of them survived. My friend Xu Jun brought two types of orchids from Kunming and taught me how to make orchids, which were also very simple. The summer orchids in Guizhou actually bloomed in winter. I like to enjoy it for a month, and I think about it. December 10, 1986 Tsang Qizhi On December 10, 1986, it was the title of the orchid picture. twelve
十三
十四
十五
十六Song Huizong's thin gold book and Cai Jing's book are actually one. Whenever you make a thin gold book, you must hold the pen high, and you must not let the brush spread on the paper. In 1986, he was titled "Long Edge Wolf" In 1986, he wrote Han Yuefu "Jiangnan" in a thin gold style. sixteen
十七When I woke up, I still remembered that I thought this could be used in the novel as a place name for an ancient town. How could I have such a dream? Odd! Morning Diary of March 25 On March 25, 1987, he wrote a picture of rhododendrons. seventeen
十八In my hometown of Yincheng, amphora pottery pots were often unearthed in the past, and the villagers called them Han bottles, which are said to be the kettles used by Han Shizhong's soldiers. It can be soaked in plum blossoms to bear fruit. Zeng Qi wrote in October of '89 In October 1989, he wrote the title of the plum blossom picture of the Korean bottle. eighteen
十九
二十It is better to enter the new year, but it is not spring; the remaining paper is inked for the next year. On January 15, 1990, he was the subject of a daffodil goldfish nineteen The small courtyard of the locust flower is quiet and uninhabited. The painting was given to Wang Zengqi in May of the Gengwu year In May 1990, he made a picture of locust flowers for Cao Naiqian. twenty
二十一
二十二
二十三
二十四
二十五
二十六
二十七
二十八
二十九
三十
三十一
三十二
三十三
三十四
三十五In October 1991, the author visited the Gaoyou Silk Factory. thirty-four Article Sima Economy Wollong In November 1991, he was awarded to a cadre in Wenzhou. thirty-five
三十六
三十七
三十八
三十九
四十
四十一In the autumn of 1992, Guo Qiuliang was awarded. thirty-nine Human feelings are like weeds Poetic taste like fennel In October 1992, Du Wenhe was awarded. forty How could I dare to hold the door and wield an axe Why not pour wine with the winding water In October 1992, he wrote for Lanting in Shaoxing, Zhejiang. forty-one
四十二
四十三Mr. is a tragic figure The Three Kingdoms have no clear right or wrong In 1992, he wrote the Wuhou Shrine for Jin Shiqiu's book "Three Kingdoms Scenic Couplets". forty-two Looking back on the past like fine rain Rereading old books is like a spring tide On February 6, 1993, he celebrated his 73rd birthday. forty-three
四十四
四十五
四十六
四十七
四十八
四十九
五十
五十一
五十二
五十三fifty-one Divine Pearl Radiance New plan for the water country In June 1994, it was awarded to the Gaoyou Municipal Party Committee and Municipal Government. fifty-two The little lotus has just shown its sharp corners, waiting to see the prosperity full of oases In June 1994, he wrote a poem for Jiangsu Drama School. fifty-three
五十四
五十五
五十六
五十七
五十八
五十九
六十At the beginning of 1996, he gave away wheat wind. fifty-eight Travel or work in all weather conditions Including English Zuhua In March 1996, he was the commemorative topic of the 200th issue of "Novel Monthly". fifty-nine The sound of jade water Wenxiu Danshan In January 1997, he was the subject of Hongta Mountain TV. sixty
六十一
六十二
六十三
六十四
六十五Yanzhou is the most important place in the world The time is unknown, and it is a title for the Yanzhou Museum. Sixty-three People have lofty ambitions Smoke has a mellow aroma The time is unknown, and it is the title of the Yuxi Tobacco Factory. Sixty-four Qin Brick Chu Yun A rare treasure Wang Zengqi Guan The time is unknown, and it is given to the silence. Sixty-five

书画题跋Alas, you people, you are like ants. The wind and rain are out of season, and the sky is abandoned. The plains are low, and the earth is low. Only you ant people work endlessly. People have five aggregates, and you have joys and sorrows. Wandering eyes and cheeks, you write down it. What does it mean, it makes people think deeply. The time is unknown, and it is the title of Wang Mingyi's novel about Ant Bay. Calligraphy and painting inscription一
二Zeng Qijing greeted Dexi and Kong Jing for the New Year On February 2, 1984, he made a lotus painting and title for Zhu Dexi. Two
三On March 20, 1984, there was a strong wind that day, and I couldn't go out, Zeng Qi remembered On March 20, 1984, he made a cactus painting and title for Wu Ningkun. Three
四There is a wisteria stand in the back garden, which is not managed by anyone, allowing it to climb freely, and it is extremely lush. When the flowers are in full bloom, lying on their backs under the rack makes people feel drunk. On May 1, 1984, I occasionally remembered writing it. Today, I have painted nearly ten paintings, which is the end of the strong crossbow. Zeng Qi Kee On May 1, 1984, he painted a painting title for wisteria. Four
五In front of the Jade Tea Hall, morning and evening, who will continue to be sad at the Peony Pavilion? May 5, 1984 Zeng Qi On May 5, 1984, he painted a peony painting. Five
六
七In June 1984, he painted honeysuckle. Six On the evening of November 2, 1985, I made this uncooked hoof. I sent a smile to my brother Gu Jian. Wang Zengqi is sixty-four years old On November 2, 1985, he made a squirrel picture and title for the ancient sword. Seven
八
九
十In January 1986, he wrote a postscript for Fu Xuebin's "Hundred Ugly Pictures". Nine The autumn colors are selfless to the grass and flowers Written by Zeng Qi in September 1986 In September 1986, he wrote a picture of autumn flowers. Ten
十一The tea flowers of Huating Temple in Xishan bloom as big as a bowl, and the blue-headed mushrooms and porcini mushrooms are all stunners among vegetables. Write comforting political and moral brothers overseas homesickness. In October 1986, he painted Yunnan mushrooms and camellia for Li Zhengdao. Eleven
十二I planted orchids in Beijing, but none of them survived. My friend Xu Jun brought two types of orchids from Kunming and taught me how to make orchids, which were also very simple. The summer orchids in Guizhou actually bloomed in winter. I like to enjoy it for a month, and I think about it. December 10, 1986 Tsang Qizhi On December 10, 1986, it was the title of the orchid picture. twelve
十三
十四
十五
十六Song Huizong's thin gold book and Cai Jing's book are actually one. Whenever you make a thin gold book, you must hold the pen high, and you must not let the brush spread on the paper. In 1986, he was titled "Long Edge Wolf" In 1986, he wrote Han Yuefu "Jiangnan" in a thin gold style. sixteen
十七When I woke up, I still remembered that I thought this could be used in the novel as a place name for an ancient town. How could I have such a dream? Odd! Morning Diary of March 25 On March 25, 1987, he wrote a picture of rhododendrons. seventeen
十八In my hometown of Yincheng, amphora pottery pots were often unearthed in the past, and the villagers called them Han bottles, which are said to be the kettles used by Han Shizhong's soldiers. It can be soaked in plum blossoms to bear fruit. Zeng Qi wrote in October of '89 In October 1989, he wrote the title of the plum blossom picture of the Korean bottle. eighteen
十九
二十It is better to enter the new year, but it is not spring; the remaining paper is inked for the next year. On January 15, 1990, he was the subject of a daffodil goldfish nineteen The small courtyard of the locust flower is quiet and uninhabited. The painting was given to Wang Zengqi in May of the Gengwu year In May 1990, he made a picture of locust flowers for Cao Naiqian. twenty
二十一
二十二
二十三
二十四
二十五
二十六
二十七
二十八
二十九
三十
三十一
三十二
三十三
三十四
三十五In October 1991, the author visited the Gaoyou Silk Factory. thirty-four Article Sima Economy Wollong In November 1991, he was awarded to a cadre in Wenzhou. thirty-five
三十六
三十七
三十八
三十九
四十
四十一In the autumn of 1992, Guo Qiuliang was awarded. thirty-nine Human feelings are like weeds Poetic taste like fennel In October 1992, Du Wenhe was awarded. forty How could I dare to hold the door and wield an axe Why not pour wine with the winding water In October 1992, he wrote for Lanting in Shaoxing, Zhejiang. forty-one
四十二
四十三Mr. is a tragic figure The Three Kingdoms have no clear right or wrong In 1992, he wrote the Wuhou Shrine for Jin Shiqiu's book "Three Kingdoms Scenic Couplets". forty-two Looking back on the past like fine rain Rereading old books is like a spring tide On February 6, 1993, he celebrated his 73rd birthday. forty-three
四十四
四十五
四十六
四十七
四十八
四十九
五十
五十一
五十二
五十三fifty-one Divine Pearl Radiance New plan for the water country In June 1994, it was awarded to the Gaoyou Municipal Party Committee and Municipal Government. fifty-two The little lotus has just shown its sharp corners, waiting to see the prosperity full of oases In June 1994, he wrote a poem for Jiangsu Drama School. fifty-three
五十四
五十五
五十六
五十七
五十八
五十九
六十At the beginning of 1996, he gave away wheat wind. fifty-eight Travel or work in all weather conditions Including English Zuhua In March 1996, he was the commemorative topic of the 200th issue of "Novel Monthly". fifty-nine The sound of jade water Wenxiu Danshan In January 1997, he was the subject of Hongta Mountain TV. sixty
六十一

日常文书日常文书惶惑惶惑
思想汇报思想汇报
报告报告
推荐词二篇推荐词二篇

民间文学整理民间文学整理鲁班故事三篇
牛郎织女

释迦牟尼太子降生
出家
不成正觉，不离此座
降魔
成佛
初转法轮
祇树给孤独园
长生童子喻
摩登伽女
因人施教
涅槃
释迦牟尼大事年表Three stories of Lu Ban Cowherd and Weaver Girl Sakyamuni The Crown Prince was born Monk If you do not attain enlightenment, you will not leave this seat Subduing demons Attaining Buddhahood The first turn of the Dharma wheel Only trees for the garden of loneliness The metaphor of the longevity boy Moderna Girl Teaching according to the person Nirvana Chronology of Shakyamuni's major events

附录看书买书与写书
作为抒情诗的散文化小说
访汪曾祺实录
心地明净无杂质
关于“当代文学四十年”的回答
听沈从文上课
闲话散文
汪曾祺谈沈从文
与马原、张炜对谈appendix Reading and buying books and writing books Prose novels as lyric poems Interview with Wang Zengqi The heart is clear and free of impurities Answer to "Forty Years of Contemporary Literature" Listen to Shen Congwen's class Gossip Essay Wang Zengqi talks about Shen Congwen Conversation with Ma Yuan and Zhang Wei
关于汪曾祺40年代创作的对话
汪曾祺访谈录
“写作时，我才活着……”

诗歌卷

诗歌卷
诗歌卷说明
Dialogue about Wang Zengqi's creation in the 40s Interview with Wang Zengqi "When I write, I am alive......" Poetry Scroll Poetry Scroll Description本卷收入作者自1941年创作的新、旧体诗歌共计257首，除独立发表的诗作外，散文、书信、小说中的诗歌也一并收录。部分诗歌在题注中交代了必要的创作背景及由编者所拟诗题情况；除注①外，皆为作者原注。
This volume contains a total of 257 new and old poems written by the author since 1941, in addition to independently published poems, poems in essays, letters, and novels are also included. Some poems explain the necessary creative background and the poem title proposed by the editor in the caption; except for note (1), they are all original annotations by the author.人民文学出版社编辑部
This volume includes miscellaneous works created and organized by the author since the fifties of the last century, as well as daily documents, including short biographies, inscriptions, calligraphy and painting inscriptions, folk literature, book advertisements, ideological reports, etc. Articles on interviews and dialogues with others are also attached. Editorial Department of People's Literature Publishing House

新诗

新诗
1941年
自画像[1]
——给一切不认识我的和一个认识我的。我一手拿支笔，
一手捏一把刀，
把镇定与大胆集成了焦点，
Editorial Department of People's Literature Publishing House Poetry In 1941 Self-portrait {{id_0000}} - To all who do not know me and to one who knows me. I take a pen in one hand, Pinch a knife in one hand, Integrating calmness and boldness into focus,命令万种颜色皈依我的意向，
一口气吹散满室尘土，
教画布为我的眼睛心寒：

用绿色画成头发，再带点鹅儿黄，
好到故乡小溪的雾里摇摇，
听许多欲言又止的梦话，
也许有几丝被季候染白了的，
Command all colors to turn to My intentions, In one breath, blow away the dust of the room, Teach the canvas to be cold for my eyes: Paint the hair in green, and add a little goose yellow, It's so good that it sways in the fog of the creek in my hometown, Listen to many dream words that want to speak, Maybe there are a few traces of whitening by the season,摇摇欲坠，坠落波心，
更随流水流到天涯！
用浅红描两瓣修眉，
待开出恬静的馨香，
谁需要，我送给她，
随她爱簪在鬓边，
爱别在襟头，
到残谢的时候，
随意抛了也好。
Falling to the ground, falling into the heart of the waves, It flows with the flowing water to the ends of the earth! Use light red to draw two petals of eyebrows, Waiting for the quiet fragrance to bloom, Whoever needs it, I give it to her, With her love hairpin at her temples, Love is on the collar, When the time comes, It's okay to throw it at will.还有嘴唇呢，
那当然是淡淡的天青，
（谁知道那有甚么用，）
春日里，风飘着
带有蝶粉的头巾，
如果白云下有寂寞吹拂，我愿意厮伴着黄昏。
休要让霜雪铺满了空地，
还得涂上点背景，
And the lips, Of course, it was a faint azure, (Who knows what that would be for?) In spring, the wind is blowing A bandana with butterfly powder, If there is loneliness under the white clouds, I am willing to accompany the dusk. Don't let frost and snow cover the open space, I also have to paint some background,我抹遍所有的颜色，
织成了孩子的窗帘。
然后放下画笔，
抽口烟，看烟圈儿散入带雨的蓝天。

彗星辛辛苦苦地绕过一个大圈子。
太阳替自己造成了午夜。

拍地抛去烟蒂头，花，花，花，
I smeared all the colors, Woven into children's curtains. Then put down the paintbrush, Take a puff of smoke and watch the smoke ring disperse into the rainy blue sky. The comet struggled to get around a large circle. The sun created midnight for itself. Slap the ground and throw the cigarette butt head, flower, flower, flower.刮去了布上那片繁华，
散成碎屑，
飞舞在我的周身。
只留得一双眼睛，
涂过上千种颜色，
又大，又黑，盯着我，教我直寒噤。
也许，也许，
总有一个时候吧，
会凝成星星明灭的金光。
scraped off the prosperity on the cloth, Scattered into debris, Flying all over me. Only a pair of eyes remained, Painted in thousands of colors, It's big, it's black, staring at me, making me cold. Maybe, maybe, There will always be a time, It will condense into the golden light of the stars.
悬挂在甚么地方呢？
让风吹在天上吧。
附在萍藻的叶背，
在记忆之外闪着幽光？

但是，亲爱的，我担心，
天上也有冰河纪！
为纪念我的生日而作
三十年二月十六日晚草成。
Where is it hung? Let the wind blow in the sky. attached to the back of the leaves of the duckweed, A glimmer of light outside the memory? But, my dear, I am worried, There is also an ice age in the sky! Made in honor of my birthday On the evening of February 16 of the thirtieth year, the draft was completed.昆明小街景[2]
盲老人的竹杖，
毛驴儿的瘸腿，
量得尽么？
是一段荒唐的历史啊，唉，
这长街闹嚷得多么寂寞：

　走过了，又走过了，
　多少多少日子……
Kunming Street Scene{{id_0000}} The bamboo staff of the blind old man, The lame leg of a donkey, Can you measure it all? It's a ridiculous history, alas. How lonely this long street is: Walked through and walked again, How many days......
收旧货的叫唤
推开太史府深掩的门，
那面椭圆的镜子
多像老祖母的眼睛。
泡湿了的木柴
嘲笑着老挑夫的肩膀
吱吱地，吱吱地，
卖出了黄连甘草，
也卖出了一叠叠纸钱。
The call of the collector Push open the deeply closed door of the Taishi Mansion, The oval mirror It's like the eyes of an old grandmother. Soaked firewood Laughing at the old porter's shoulder Squeak, squeak, Sold coptis licorice, also sold a stack of paper money.少掌柜打得一手好算盘，
三下五除二
四下五落一……
唢呐儿吹着不同的调子
却一样是呜呜地，
有人走着，拖一大串泥草鞋
也活像牵着条哈叭狗儿，嗐，
你瞧瓦松长得那么肥绿了，
The young shopkeeper is very good at calculations. Three down five divided by two Four downs and one down...... Suona blows different tunes But it is also whining, Someone was walking, dragging a large string of mud straw sandals. It's like leading a dog, huh, Look at the vasson that grows so fat and green,才几天？
卖馄饨的敲着白日更，
吾神驾云去也……
　　乘风归去，
天门里有金色的花，
那直上云雾的十八盘哩，
喔，谁扔下一只烂橘子，
瘦狗儿夹起尾巴箭一般——哈哈，
怎么？新松菰？
It's only been a few days? The wonton seller knocks on the daytime shift, My spirit is driving...... Riding the wind back, There are golden flowers in the gate of heaven, The eighteen plates that go straight up to the clouds, Oh, who threw down a rotten orange, The skinny dog picks up its tail like an arrow - haha, How? New pine grass?空车子比千把斤石头还重，
老黄牛依旧得拖着，没辙。
邪门儿，邪门儿，
可不是吗！
“夕阳无限好
只是近黄昏”
瞧小三儿的帽顶多红！
归去也，凉了，哎，伙计，开水！
An empty car is heavier than a thousand pounds of stones, The old scalper still has to drag it, and there is no rut. Xiemen'er, Xiemen'er, Isn't it! "The sunset is infinitely good It's just near dusk." Look how red the top of the junior's hat is! Go back, it's cold, hey, man, boil water!有血的被单[3]
昨天得潜弟来信：说，四月中吐了三天血，其实，应当说是呕血：整块紫黑的血自喉间涌出。……他还太年青，他想做许多事，不应被衰弱磨折，他应该强健起来呵。祝福。
Bloody Sheets{{id_0000}} Yesterday, I received a letter from my brother Qian: saying that he vomited blood for three days in mid-April, in fact, it should be said that he vomited blood: a whole purple-black blood gushed out of his throat. …… He is still too young, he wants to do many things, he should not be weakened and broken, he should be strong. Blessing.年青人有年老人
卡在网孔上的咳嗽，
如鱼，跃起，又落到
印花布上看淡了的
油污。磁质的月光
摇落窗外盛开的
玫瑰深黑的瓣子，你的心
是空了旅客的海船。

不必痛哭你的强拗
Young people have old people cough stuck in the mesh, Like a fish, it jumps up and falls again. Bearish on the calico Greasy dirt. Magnetic moonlight Shake down the blooming outside the window Rose deep black petals, your heart It is a sea ship that empties passengers. Don't cry about your stubbornness如一个农夫哭他
走失了六月的耕牛。
想家的时候，你是
被秋千从云里带下来的
孩子，我知道。静静！
学一个白发的医生
告诉别人吧：我病了。……
五月九日
Like a farmer crying for him The plow ox in June was lost. When you feel homesick, you are Brought down from the clouds by a swing Child, I know. Quietly! Learn from a white-haired doctor Tell someone: I'm sick. …… May 9小茶馆[4]
小茶馆用了新字号，
顾客□□它的招牌，
掌柜的点头的姿势，
是一本厚流水帐薄。

喝茶的凭着自己的腿
带他们到坐惯的座上；

有人说故事像说着自己。
Little Teahouse{{id_0000}} The small teahouse used a new font, Customers □□ its sign, The shopkeeper's nodding gesture, It is a thick and flowing water tent. The tea drinker leans on his legs Take them to their accustomed seats; Some people tell stories like they are talking about themselves.有人说着自己像说故事。
有人甚么也不说，抽抽烟，
看着自己碗里颜色淡了，
又看别人碗里泛起新绿。

有人不是为喝茶来的
是小茶馆里有新装饰：

卖唱的嗓子
不估价笑容。
Some people say that they are like telling a story. Some people say nothing, smoke, Looking at the color in his bowl, I also saw the fresh green in someone else's bowl. Someone is not here for tea There is a new decoration in the small teahouse: The voice of singing An invaluable smile.看相的望不见自己
被人看熟了的脸。
采参的眼中颜色
真像是一座秋山。

石板路记下了，那
驮马的蹄子的滑蹶，
炉中的残炭里去了
温热，褪下艳紫深红，
掌柜的打扫一地瓜子壳
Those who look at the face can't see themselves A familiar face. The color of the ginseng's eyes It really looks like an autumn mountain. The stone road is recorded, that The slippage of the hooves of the pack horse, The remaining charcoal in the furnace went Warm, fading the bright purple and crimson, The shopkeeper's cleaning of a sweet potato seed shell把泡过的叶子烘干。

对联上的金字
游离在茶烟里，
小茶馆该已不是
第一回新张了吧。
有人设想掌柜的
每回怎么迟疑着
贴出了停业启事，
怎样扶头握着笔
想向自己说什么。
Dry the soaked leaves. Golden letters on couplets Wandering in the tea smoke, The small teahouse should not be The first time it's a new album. Someone envisions the shopkeeper's How to hesitate every time posted a notice of closure, How to hold the pen with your head Want to say something to yourself.被诬害者[5]
——赠劳瑞丽：你有没有这样的经验：我们小时常常捉蚱蜢玩，（尤其是年青的）当捏住它的胸部时，它会吐出赭色的咒骂。也有时我们便会释放了它的么？
Falsely accused {{id_0000}} - Gift to Laurie: Have you ever had the experience that when we were young, we used to catch grasshoppers, and when we pinched its chest (especially young ones), it would spit out ochre curses. Sometimes we release it?脏女孩子，多没听见过自己的姓，
镇日向垃圾堆上捡拾锈的残花，
而多油的笑声煮熟了愚蠢。

学学冈果的主人吧，
看亡国绿树鹧鸪天，
遗忘了已经会说的“为甚么”顶好。[6]
Dirty girl, how often have you never heard your surname, Picking up rusty flowers on the garbage heap, And oily laughter cooks stupidity. Learn from the master of the gang fruit, Look at the green trees of the fallen country and the partridge sky, Forget what you have already said "why". [6]
失眠夜的羊脂烛
有濡湿着情欲的眼睛呢，既然
得来波特莱尔的传染啊，

大叫最长的头发样的一声[7]
惊醒一群睡死的人，然后，
你不妨蒙着头舐你的笑。
Suet candle for insomnia night There are eyes that are wet with lust, since It's Baudelaire's contagion. The longest hair-looking shout {{id_0000}} wakes up a group of sleeping people, and then, You might as well lick your smile with your head covered.消息[8]
——童话的解说之一
亲爱的，你别这样，
别用含泪的眼睛对我，
我不愿意从静水里
看久已沉积的悲哀，
你看我如叙述一篇论文，
删去一般不必要的符号，
Message{{id_0000}} ——One of the explanations of fairy tales Don't be like this, my dear, Don't look at me with tearful eyes, I don't want to come out of still waters Look at the sorrow that has been deposited for a long time, You see me as narrating a thesis, Remove unnecessary symbols,告诉你，我老了……
如江南轻轻的有了秋天，

二月天在一朵淡白的杜鹃花上谢落了，
又飘向何方。我还未看清自己的颜色。

只是，我是个老人，
而你，你依旧年青，

我能想起第一回
Tell you, I'm old...... For example, there is autumn in Jiangnan, February day withered on a pale white rhododendron, Where did it drift again? I haven't seen my color yet. It's just that I'm an old man, And you, you are still young. I can remember the first time在我的嘴里有衰老的名字，
又甚么时候遗忘了诧异，
我也能在青灯前
为你说每一根白发的故事，
可是，我不能，
因为你有黑而大的眼睛。
当我辞退了形容词，
忙碌于解剖一具历史的标本
With the name of aging in my mouth, When did you forget your surprise, I can also be in front of the green light Tell you the story of every gray hair, But I can't, Because you have big black eyes. When I dismissed the adjective, Busy dissecting a historical specimen
是的，我也年青过，
那是你记得的，
我浪费了又尊敬了的。
而现在，我遥望它微笑。

玻璃瓦下的砖缝里种一颗燕麦，
不经摇曳便熟了，
一穗萎弱的年华
挂几片瘵死的希望，
Yes, I was young too, That's what you remember, I wasted and respected it. And now, I look at it and smile. Plant an oatmeal in the crack of the brick under the glass tile, It is ripe without swaying, A wilted year Hang a few pieces of hope for death,交付一把不说故事的竹帚
更向自己学会了原谅。

我年青过，
那多半是因为你。
但是衰老是无情的，
因为人们以无情对衰老。
我仍将干了的花朵还你，
再为你破例的说我自己。
Deliver a bamboo broom that doesn't tell a story I learned to forgive myself. I was younger, That's probably because of you. But aging is relentless. Because people are ruthless to aging. I will return the dried flowers to you, Let's make an exception for you and talk about myself.
在那边，在那边，……
哦，你别这样。

慢慢的，慢慢的……
我还能在心里
找出一点风化的温柔，
如破烂的调色板上
有变了色的颜色。
忘了你，也忘了我，
听我说一个笑话：
Over there, over there,...... Oh, don't be like that. Slowly, slowly...... I can still be in my heart Find a little weathered tenderness, Like a tattered palette There are colors that have changed color. Forget you and forget me, Listen to me a joke:
一个年青人
依照自己的意思，
（虽然仍得感谢上帝。）
在深黑的纸上画过自己，
一次，又一次，
说着崇高，说着美丽，
为一切好看的声音
校正了定义，
像一只北极的萤虫，
A young man According to his own will, (Thank God.) ） Drawing yourself on dark paper, Again and again, Talking about the sublime, talking about beauty, Sounds for everything good Corrected the definition, Like an arctic firefly,在嘶鸣的水上
记下了素洁。

为怕翻搅的浓腻的彩色，
给灵魂涂一层香油，
（永远柔润的滋液）
透明外有幽幻的虹光了，
可是，“防火水中”——
生于玉泉的香草也烂了根叶，
On the hissing water Write down the cleanliness. For fear of stirring the rich color, Put a layer of fragrant oil on the soul, (Forever soft moisturizer) There is a faint rainbow light outside the transparent, However, "fireproof water" - The herbs born in Yuquan also rotted their roots and leaves,看严冰也开出了紫焰呢，亲爱的……

你看过一滴深蓝
在清水里幻想
大理石的天空，
又怎样淡了记忆，

你看见过那胡桃
怎样结成了硬壳，
为自己摘下之后
在壳肉之间
Look at Yan Bing also opened the purple flame, dear...... You've seen a drop of deep blue Fantasy in clear water Marble sky, How to fade the memory, You've seen the walnut How it formed a hard shell, After taking it off for yourself Between the shell meat有多么奇异的空隙，

你看见过么，亲爱的，
一只秋蝇用昏晕的复眼
在黏湿的白热灯前
画成了迂回的航线，

破落的世第的女墙里
常常排开辉煌的夜宴，
折脚的螃蟹拼命挤出
What a strange gap, Have you seen it, my dear? An autumn fly uses dizzy compound eyes In front of a sticky incandescent lamp It was drawn into a roundabout route, In the parapet of the dilapidated world often arranged splendid night banquets, The crab with a broken leg desperately squeezed out镡口陈年的酒花，
落了香色的树木
绿照了不卷帘的窗子，

我老了，但我为我的疲倦
工作，而我的疲倦为我的
休息，所有的诳话
说得自己相信了
便成了别人崇服的真理。
Aged hops at the mouth of the mouth, Falling fragrant trees Green shines on the unrolling windows, I'm old, but I'm tired for my work, and my tiredness for my Rest, all the lies I believe it It became a truth that others admired.我学会宗教家可敬的卑劣。

我老了，你听我的声音，
平静得太可怕么，
你还很年青，不要
教眼角的神经太酸痛，
走，我们到幽邃的林子里
去散步，虽然你来的时候
已经经过艰苦的跋涉，
I learned the respectable meanness of a religious person. I'm old, you listen to my voice, Is it too terrifying? You're still young, don't The nerves in the corners of the eyes are too sore, Let's go, let's go to the deep forest Go for a walk, although when you come Having already gone through a difficult trek,你，朝山的行客，亲爱的，
连失望也不要带走。

像从前一样，
我伸给你一只手臂，
这是你的头巾，
这是你的斗篷，
像一个病愈的人
我再递给一根手杖。

我再也不会对无恒有恒，
You, traveler to the mountains, my dear, Don't even take disappointment with you. Just like before, I extend an arm to you, This is your bandana, This is your cloak, Like a person who has recovered from illness I handed him another cane. I will never be constantive again,你再来看我，当你
失去了所有的镜子的时候，
你来看我心上衰老的须根。
You come to see me again, when you When I lost all the mirrors, You come to see the aging beard roots in my heart.　  这是从日记里，从偶然留下的信札里，从读书时的眉批里，从一些没有名字的字片里集起来的破碎的句子，算是一个平凡人的文献，给一些常常问我为甚么不修剪头发的人，并谢谢他们。
卅年，昆明雨季的开始时候。
This is a collection of broken sentences from diaries, letters left by chance, eyebrows when reading, and some unnamed pieces, which are considered documents of ordinary people, to some people who often ask me why I don't trim my hair, and thank them. Thirty years, the beginning of the rainy season in Kunming.昆明的春天[9]
——不必朗诵的诗，给来自故都的人们打开明瓦窗，
看我的烟在一道阳光里幻想。
（那卖蒸饭的白汽啵。）
够多美，朋友又说了，
若是在北平啊，
Spring in Kunming{{id_0000}} ——Poems that do not need to be recited open the bright tile windows for people from the old capital, Watch my smoke fantasize in a ray of sunshine. (The white soda that sells steamed rice.) ） How beautiful enough, my friend said again, If it is in Peiping,北平的尘土比这儿多，
游鱼梦想着桃花瓣儿呢，
在家里呆不住，
三毛钱，颐和园去了，
自行车，自行车，自行车，
真个是车如流水马如龙，
嚇嚇，马如龙，
There is more dust in Peking than here, The swimming fish dreams of peach petals, I can't stay at home {{id_0000}}, Three cents, went to the Summer Palace, Bicycle, bicycle, bicycle, It's really like a car like a flowing water, and a horse like a dragon, Scared, Ma Rulong,有人赤脚穿木屐，过街心，
哪儿没有春光，您哪，
看烤饵块的脱下破皮袄，
（客气点好吧。）
尽翻着，尽翻着，
翻得直教人痒痒，
说真的，我真爱靴刀儿划起的冰花儿，
小粉蝶儿，纱头巾，
Some people crossed the street barefoot in clogs. Where is there no spring, you, Look at the roasted bait piece taking off the torn leather jacket, (You're welcome.) ） Turn it over, turn it over, It's so ticklish, Seriously, I really love the ice flowers scratched by the boot knife, Little pink butterfly, gauze headscarf,飞，飞，
 喝，看天染蓝了我的眼睛，
该不会有警报吧，今儿。

蒲桃[10]
一个长途上的轻荷
试赠虐待青春的人
第一个看到的有命定的不幸了

蒲桃熟的时候
Fly, fly, Drink, look at the sky dyeing my eyes blue, There should be no alarm, today. Grapes{{id_0000}} A light burden on a long distance Try to give to those who abuse youth The first thing I saw was a fateful misfortune When the grapefruits are ripe唇的味漂泊在
秋天的边城，
一朵白云溶散了，
是有人在唱一支古谣么？
你知道么？异国的蒲桃干里
湮有多少新鲜的回忆？

我不知道性急的酒徒
如何怀想宿年的封窖。
The taste of the lips drifts in Border city in autumn, A white cloud dissolved, Is someone singing an ancient ballad? You know what? Exotic dried grapes How many fresh memories are there in obliteration? I don't know about impatient drunkards How to reminisce about the sealed cellar of the past year.而我的蒲桃，我的蒲桃
成熟得过早了，你说过。

成熟的初夏流溢着，
当你的眼睛如金甲虫
飞落在酿成的夜的香花上，
你不知道，我有一个
不愿告诉自己的秘密。

我想送你一串蒲桃，
And my grapes, my grapes Mature too early, you said. Ripe early summer overflows, When your eyes are like a golden beetle Flying on the fragrant flowers of the brewed night, You don't know, I have a I don't want to tell myself a secret. I want to give you a bunch of grapes,（一串紫色的？一串白色的？）
你从来没有不经心的向我
要过，怕你要说一声谢谢。
我将悄悄的结在你一条
常不注意的衣带上，
直到你归去时也许
竟还不知道呢，也许，
也许到风干了，
(A string of purple? A string of white?) ） You never inadvertently told me If you want to pass, I'm afraid you have to say thank you. I will quietly tie a knot to you On the belt that is often not noticed, Until you return maybe I don't know yet, maybe, Maybe it's time to air dry,风干了枝叶和鬈须，
你会想起
有那么一回。
有那么一回么，
你到我的蒲桃园
荒落了之后
雪封了园前曲径的日子
再来问我吧，
那时我将说，
唔，也许有吧。
五月尾破灭拟作
The wind dried the branches and leaves and whiskers, You will think of There was a time. Did you ever have such a time? You go to my grapefruit orchard After the desolation The snow sealed the winding path in front of the garden Ask me again, Then I will say, Well, maybe there is. Proposed to be destroyed at the end of May封泥[11]
——童话的解说之二姐姐带着钥匙吧，
最长的季节来了，
去看看我们的园子，
虽然我记得
最初一次离开的时候
并未一动虚掩的园门，
可是有风呢，
Sealed mud {{id_0000}} ——The second sister of the fairy tale takes the key, The longest season is coming, Go and see our garden, Although I remember When I first left The garden gate that did not move and was not closed, But there is wind,动的风和静的风。

甚么也别带
连记忆和遗忘，
姐姊，我正要那块
石碑上的字也
教目光摩平了，
我们的园子最好
连荒芜也没有。

秋天常是又高又大的
它将在一切旧址上
The moving wind and the still wind. Don't bring anything Memory and forgetting, Sister, I was asking for that piece The characters on the stone tablet are also The teaching's gaze is smooth, Our garden is the best Not even barren. Autumn is often tall and large It will be on all the old sites平铺了明蓝的荫：

溶静静满园空间与时间，
把幻想压成一叠水成岩，让它作不伤舟客的暗礁，
怀想也像蒲公英的轻絮，
在睫毛飘忽的天涯
在一个空白里，散开了，
不给影子以重量。
Tied with bright blue shade: Quietly filling the space and time of the garden, Crush the fantasy into a stack of water and rock, let it be a reef that does not hurt the boatman, The nostalgia is also like the light fluff of a dandelion, At the end of the world where the eyelashes flutter In a blank space, spread out, The shadow is not given weight.
这是最深的一点，
从开端来的，又
引向最后去。
是淡的，还是淡的，
并且也不必计算
那个总和，姊姊，
我们说，即使苦，
即使苦，…………

冷水上流着的
是无主的梦么，
This is the deepest point, From the beginning, and Lead to the end. Is it light, or light, And you don't have to calculate "The sum, sister, We say that even if it is bitter, Even if it is bitter,............ Flowing in cold water Is it a dream without an owner?不去理那些铭记的
日月，用最大的
勇气与恒心
去嬾吧，姊姊，
更温和一点，
你知道这园子的邻近
有许多用希望栽花的。

不要漏出一点消息，
可是，我怕我是个
多话的孩子，姊姊，
Don't pay attention to those who remember The sun and the moon, with the largest Courage and perseverance Go ahead, sister. A little milder, You know the neighborhood of this garden There are many flowers planted with hope. Don't leak a little news, However, I am afraid that I am a Talkative child, sister,我说着牧羊人的
谎话，好不好，我说：
　我们园里的树上
　开满淡白的蝴蝶，
　（还有红的，还有金的，
　还有颜色以外的！）
　青的虔诚的梦
　有水红色的嫩根，
　我们的柳丝是，是，
I said the shepherd's Lie, okay, I said: On the trees in our garden Full of pale white butterflies, (There are red ones, and there are gold ones, There are also colors besides color! ） Qing's pious dream There are water-red tender roots, Our willow silk is, yes,　流着醉的睇视的
　柔发，流着许多
　甜的热度
我说得不美丽时
我们的园子会帮助我。

我有更多的祝福，施给
自己过的，该施给别人了，现在。
我们教那些
等待的去追求，
教那些沉默的
Watching drunkenly. soft hair, flowing many Sweet heat When I say it's not beautiful Our garden will help me. I have more blessings to give It's time to give it to others, now. We teach those Waiting to pursue, Teach the silent去唱歌，教薄待
青春的去学学
秋天以前的风。

我们以别人的欢乐
来娱悦自己吧，姊姊。

怎么，姊姊不说话了，
看露水湿了你的趾尖。
很凉呢，尤其是秋天。
回去了，轻轻的，
Go sing, teach me to be careless Youth to learn The wind before autumn. We use the joy of others Come and entertain yourself, sister. Why, sister stopped talking, Watch the dew wet your toes. It's cool, especially in autumn. Go back, gently,让虚掩的门仍旧
虚掩着，陌生的
孩子不会来的，
他们从未见过
一座不锁门的园子，
轻轻的走，并告诉自己
我们没有又来过一次。
六月十八日天雨
文明街[12]
Let the closed door still be False, unfamiliar The child won't come, They have never seen A garden with no locked doors, Walk gently and tell yourself We didn't come again. It rained on June 18 Civilization Street[12]先生，你从来没有看见过一条河吗？——莫洛亚

到文明街去吧？
　到文明街去！
流浪汉 单身汉
用业余游历家的眼睛
一颗不设防的心
（撤退了的荒街或者被占领了又）
去看自己的晚晌。
Have you never seen a river, sir? —Moloa Let's go to Civilization Street, right?" Go to Civilization Street! Tramp Bachelor With the eyes of an amateur traveler An undefended heart (Retreated deserted streets or occupied again) Go see your own evening.
在城市的中心
在乡村的边缘
在许多向心与离心的
圆弧交切的一点上
文明街铺开了，依照着
人的假想，又给假想
以迂回的路线。

这里是一个定期风暴的
根据与发源，像一个
In the heart of the city On the edge of the countryside In many centripetal and centrifugal At the point where the arc intersectes Civilization Street is spread, according to People's imagination gives the imaginary to take a roundabout route. Here is a regular storm According to and origin, like a苍白的酒徒又被
春酒灌溉了神经
稀薄的感情（激起）浪花。
过饱和的碳酸翻搅着，
四方的空气又向这里流换。
每天晚上，灯光
把黑阴压积在
柜台底下，
桌子底下，
木箱底下，
The pale drunkards were again Spring wine irrigates nerves thin feelings (stirred up) waves. The oversaturated carbonic acid is stirring, The air from all directions flowed here again. Every night, the lights Accumulate the black yin in Under the counter, Under the table, Under the wooden box,和残忍的脚步底下
（老鼠洞里有丰收的季节了。）
文明街在有人看星的地方，
——有水，有树，有蛤蟆叫的地方，
升起了烧炽的，
透明的梦。

一盏灯比一盏灯更亮，
and cruel footsteps. (There's a harvest season in the mouse hole.) ） Civilization Street is a place where people look at the stars, ——Where there is water, there are trees, where there are toads crying, The blazing one rises, Transparent dreams. A lamp shines brighter than a lamp,一块招牌比一块招牌更胡闹，
一个窗子比一个窗子更能
汲出眼睛的惊呼，
压倒了别人，
又压倒了自己，
通过沮丧的喜悦后面
幌动着预言家惨碧的呓语。
而古老的铺子
（满饰着残象的）
A sign is more nonsense than a signboard, A window is better than a window The exclamation that drew out the eyes, Overwhelming others, Overwhelmed himself again, Behind the joy of frustration The prophet's miserable murmur was stirred. And the old shop (full of afterimages)古老得更新奇了。
建设着破坏，
荒唐的统计数表
不断的产生
未立名称的职业。

有人笑了，
噙着两眼虹色的泪。
紫色的虹
酱色的虹
苍绿色的虹
深灰色的虹
闪烁着懔抖着的
It's so old that it's newer. Building destruction, Absurd Statistics Table Continuous generation Unnamed occupations. Someone laughed, With rainbow tears in his eyes. Purple rainbow Sauce-colored rainbow Pale green rainbow Dark gray rainbow Flashing and trembling虹的水灾啊！
过分诚实的脸
（训练了一生的）
太多的苦衷与术语，
每个人装点着自己
与别人的身份。
手握住袋内
轻微的本钱——失望，眼睛钉在
有生殖能力的满足，
噎下了欢呼
Rainbow flood! Overly honest face (Trained for a lifetime) Too many bitterness and terminology, Everyone decorates themselves with someone else's identity. Hold the bag in your hand Minor capital - disappointment, eyes nailed Satisfaction of having the ability to reproduce, choked cheers藏起了狼狈
（政治家的修养啊）
狂□□：
（你为甚么不慷慨一点）
顾客与商人
草拟着
新世纪的道德。
火烧着三月
分泌着油脂的松林的
大的声音
寂灭了，
一盏盏光与影子
Hidden embarrassment (The cultivation of a politician) Crazy □□: (Why aren't you generous?) Customers and Merchants Drafting Morality in the new century. The fire burns in March The grease-secreting pine forest Loud sound Silence, Light and shadow放弃了自己的封□，暂时
有一个互不侵犯的和平。

埋在古典时代的废墟的蛇，
寂寞使主妇在客散的
筵前咬着手指的时空。

一对毫不动心的狗
并着肩由巡警的
生活的边上踩过了。
Gave up his □, temporarily There is a non-aggression peace. The serpent buried in the ruins of classical times, Loneliness makes the housewife disperse in the guest Time and space in front of the banquet. A pair of unmoved dogs Shoulder to shoulder by patrol officer The edge of life has been stepped on.
浮肿的河，街，贫空的
职业荡妇一样的睡死了，
慈善的清道夫
红着红的眼睛
洗涤她浑身
兽性与无耻的重伤。
而一辆牛车
载满沉重的木石
又吱吱的碾过来了。

好一趟辽远的旅行啊！
Swollen rivers, streets, empty Sleeping to death like a professional slut, The Scavenger of Charity Red eyes Wash her whole body and shameless serious injury. And an ox cart Loaded with heavy wood and stone It squeaked over again. What a long trip!喝，这算得了甚么。
归去，窗前有一本
历史地图打开了
随你愿意画几条线。

落叶松[13]
树叶子落在下个斑斓的谎，
在浓夏树荫瞒过的旧处。
谁曾命永远的绿谷作主，
Drink, what is this? When I went back, there was a book in front of the window The historical map opens Draw as many lines as you like. Larch{{id_0000}} The leaves fall on the next colorful lie, In the old place hidden in the shade of the trees in the thick summer. Who has ever commanded the eternal Green Valley to be the master,又殷勤延纳早秋的晚凉。

要鳞瓣藏好秘密的馨香：
严阖着眼皮，风吹着白露。
如庙宇湮圮于落成之初，
无一人礼拜昨天的法相。

倦了鹰的翅野鸽的红爪。
一天，被静冷烧枯的枝柄，
He also diligently accepted the evening coolness of early autumn. To hide the secret fragrance of the scales: Tightly close your eyelids, and the wind blows the white dew. Just as a temple collapsed at the beginning of its completion, No one worships yesterday's Dharma Phase. Tired of the wings of the eagle and the red claws of the wild dove. One day, the branches that were burned by the quiet cold,如修道女扔下斜插的花，
落下了松实累累如蜂巢，
藏入层层自设的谎，作听
深谷里有巨石风化成沙。
昆虫书简之二
十月四日拟作。
十一月十日抄六稿。
1942年
Like a nun throwing down a flower arranged diagonally, The pine nuts fell like a beehive, Hide layers of self-made lies, listen In the deep valley, there are boulders that have weathered into sand. Insect Letter No. 2 It is planned to be completed on October 4th. Copies of the sixth draft on November 10. In 1942二秋辑[14]
私章
生如一条河，梦是一片水。
俯首于我半身恍惚的倒影。
窗帘上花朵木然萎谢了，
我像一张胶片摄两个风景。
落叶松
虫鸣声如轻雾，斑斓的谎，
2 Autumn Compilation {{id_0000}} Private Chapter Life is like a river, and dreams are a piece of water. He bowed his head to the trance-like reflection of half of my body. The flowers on the curtains withered, I photographed two landscapes like one film. larch The sound of insects is like a light mist, colorful lies,从容飘落又向浓荫旧处。
活该是豪华的青山作主，
一挥手延纳早秋的晚凉。

尽谟拜自己，庄严的法相，
愿宝殿湮圮于落成之初。
不睁的眼睛，雨夜的珠露，
不变的是你不散的馨香。
Calmly drifting back to the old place of the thick shade. deserves to be the master of the luxurious green mountains, With a wave of his hand, he accepted the evening coolness of early autumn. Worship yourself, the solemn Dharma, I hope the treasure hall will collapse at the beginning of its completion. Unopened eyes, pearl dew on a rainy night, What remains unchanged is your undispersed fragrance.
离绝绿染的紫啄的红爪，
鳞瓣上辉煌的黑色如火，
管春风又煽动下年的花。

终也落下，没有蜜的蜂巢，
而，积雪已抚育谎的坚果。
山头石烂，涧水流过轻沙。
旧诗[15]
The red claws of the green dyed purple peck, The brilliant black on the scales is like fire, Guan Chunfeng incited the flowers of the next year. Finally, it will fall, and there is no honeycomb, And the snow has nurtured the nuts of lies. The rocks on the mountain top are rotten, and the stream flows through the light sand. Old Poem[15]当月光浸透了小草的红根
一只粉蝶飞起自己的影子
夜栖息在我的肩上它已经
冻冷了自己又颤抖着薄翼

两排杨树裁成了道道小河
蒲公英散开了淡白的织絮
衰老的夜一天劳碌的星辰
When the moonlight soaks the red roots of the grass A butterfly flies up its own shadow The night perches on my shoulder, it has I was cold and trembled with thin wings Two rows of poplar trees are cut into small rivers The dandelion spread out the light white fluff The night of aging, the laborious stars of the day昂着头你不怕晒黑了眼睛
1954年
试译白居易《井底引银瓶》[16]
井底拉起银瓶，
银瓶将上时绳子断了。
石上磨着玉簪，
玉簪将成时折成两半了。
With your head held high, you're not afraid of tanning your eyes In 1954 Try to translate Bai Juyi's "Silver Bottle from the Bottom of the Well" {{id_0000}} Pull up the silver bottle from the bottom of the well, The rope broke when the silver vase was about to be put on. The stones are ground with hostas, The hosta was folded in half when it was formed.瓶沉、簪断，无法可想啊，
正像我跟你分别就在眼前了。

想从前在家做女儿时候，
人说我举动间比谁都美，
弯弯的长眉远山一样秀媚，
蝉翼般的两鬓在耳边轻垂。
我随着同伴在后园欢笑，
The bottle sinks, the hairpin is broken, it's unimaginable, It's like I'm about to part ways with you. When I was a daughter at home in the past, People say that my actions are more beautiful than anyone else, The curved long eyebrows are as beautiful as the distant mountains, The temples like cicada wings drooped lightly in the ears. I laughed with my companions in the back garden,这时候不知道你啊是谁。

我倚着短墙攀弄青梅枝桠，
你在垂柳旁骑着一匹白马，
我看见你远远地朝着我望，
知道你的心为爱情而忧伤。
我因此和你把真情吐露，
你发誓指着南山的松柏树。
At this time, I don't know who you are. I leaned against the short wall and climbed the green plum branches, You ride a white horse by the weeping willow, I saw you looking at me from afar, Know that your heart is sad for love. Therefore, I confide my true feelings with you, You swear that you point to the pine and cypress trees of Nanshan.你松柏树样的心肠使我感激，
暗合了双鬟我跟着你去。[17]

到你家住了五六年，
你父亲常有些难堪言语，
说聘来的是妻奔来的是妾，
见不得先人祭不得祖。
Your heart like a pine and cypress tree makes me grateful, I will follow you when I close the double buns. {{id_0000}} I have lived in your house for five or six years. Your father often speaks a little embarrassingly, It is said that the hired wife is the concubine, You cannot see your ancestors, you cannot worship your ancestors.终于我觉得你家没法再住，
可是出了门我没有地方可去！
难道我家里没有父母？
我偷偷出来后都不通消息，
又悲又羞我想回也回不去！

为了你一天的爱情，
葬送我整整一生。
Finally, I feel like you can't live in your house anymore. But I have nowhere to go when I go out!" Don't I have parents at home? I didn't know after I came out secretly, Sad and ashamed, I can't go back even if I want to go back! For your day of love, It buried me for the rest of my life.痴情的姑娘啊你们小心，
千万莫把爱情轻轻给人！
1957年
早春[18]（习作）
彩旗
当风的彩旗，
像一片被缚住的波浪。
杏花
杏花翻着碎碎的瓣子……
Infatuated girl, be careful, Don't give love to others gently! In 1957 Early Spring {{id_0000}} (Study) Bunting Colorful flags in the wind, Like a bound wave. Apricot The apricot blossoms turn over the broken petals......仿佛有人拿了一桶花瓣撒在树上。
早春
（新绿是朦胧的，飘浮在树梢，
完全不像是叶子……）

远树的绿色的呼吸。
黄昏
青灰色的黄昏，
下班的时候。
暗绿的道旁的柏树，
It was as if someone had taken a bucket of petals and scattered them on the tree. early spring (The fresh green is hazy, floating in the treetops, It doesn't look like a leaf at all...... ） The green breath of distant trees. twilight Blue-gray dusk, When you get off work. The cypress trees on the side of the dark green road,银红的骑车女郎的帽子，
橘黄色的电车灯。
忽然路灯亮了，
　（像是轻轻地拍了拍手……）
空气里扩散着早春的湿润。
火车
火车开过来了。
The silver-red biker's hat, Orange tram lights. Suddenly the street lights came on, (Like clapping your hands gently...... ） The humidity of early spring spreads in the air. train The train is coming.鲜洁，明亮，刷洗得清清爽爽，好像闻得到车厢里甘凉的空气。
这是餐车，窗纱整齐地挽着，每个窗口放着一盆鲜花。
火车是空的。火车正在调进车站，去接纳去往各地的旅客。
Fresh, bright, brushed refreshingly, as if you could smell the cool air in the carriage. This is a dining car with neatly drawn window screens and a pot of flowers placed on each window. The train is empty. The train is being transferred into the station to pick up travelers from all over the world.火车开过去了，突突突突，突突突突……
The train drove by, booming, booming......
火车喷出来的汽是灰蓝色的，蓝得那样深，简直走不过一个人去；但是，很快，在它经过你的面前的时候，它映出早已是眼睛看不出来的夕阳的余光，变成极其柔和的浅红色；终于撕成一片一片白色的碎片，正像正常的蒸汽的颜色，翻卷着，疾速地消灭在高空。于是，天色暗下来了。
The steam emitted by the train was gray-blue, so deep that it was almost impossible for a person to walk; but, soon, as it passed in front of you, it reflected the afterglow of the sunset, which was already invisible to the eye, and turned into an extremely soft light red; and finally it was torn into white fragments, just like the color of normal steam, rolling up and quickly disappearing high in the sky. So, the sky darkened.1972年
瞎虻[19]
In 1972 Blind Fly[19]牛虻，“虻”当读ménɡ，读做“牛忙”是错的。我的故乡叫它“牛蜢蜢”，是因为它的鸣声很低，与调值的上声相近。北方或谓之“瞎虻”，“虻”读阴平。这东西的眼神是真不好，老是瞎碰乱撞。有时竟会笔直地撞到人脸上来。至于头触玻璃窗，更是司空见惯，不是诬赖它。雄牛虻吸植物汁液，雌牛虻刺吸人畜血，都不是好东西。讽刺它们一下，是可以的。
Gadfly, "fly" should be pronounced ménɡ, and it is wrong to read it as "cow busy". My hometown calls it "gadfly" because its call is very low, which is close to the upper sound of the modulation. In the north, it is sometimes called "blind fly", and "fly" is pronounced yinping. The eyes of this thing are really bad, and they are always bumping around. Sometimes it hits people's faces straight. As for hitting the glass window with its head, it is even more commonplace, not to falsely accuse it. Bull gflies suck plant sap, female gadflies suck human and animal blood, which are not good things. It's okay to satirize them.
瞎虻笔直地飞向花丛，
却不料——咚！碰得脑袋生疼。
“唔？”它摸摸额角，鼓鼓眼睛，
“这是，这是怎么回事情？”

好天气，真带劲，香扑扑，热哄哄，
“再来，再来！”，打个转，鼓鼓劲，
The blind fly flies straight to the flowers, But unexpectedly - boom! It hurts my head. "Huh?" It touched the corner of its forehead, its eyes bulging. "This is, what's going on?" The weather is nice, it's really exciting, the fragrance is fluffing, and it's hot. "Come again, come again!" , spin around, cheer up,“一二，你看咱瞎虻飞得多冲！”——咚！
“嗯？这空气咋这么硬，这么平？”

捉摸不透是什么原因，
瞎虻可傻了眼了：
“我往日多么聪明，
今儿可成老赶了！”

接连几次向玻璃猛冲
"One, two, look how much our blind flies fly!" ——Dong! "Huh? Why is this air so hard and so flat? ” What is the reason for the uncertainty, The blind fly was dumbfounded: "How smart I used to be, Today, I can become an old man! ” Several times in succession slammed into the glass累得它腰酸腿软了。
越想越觉得气不平，
短短的触角更短了。
一九七二年十月写
十一月十六日改
水马儿[20]
It was so tired that its back was sore and its legs were weak. The more I think about it, the more I feel uneasy, The short antennae are shorter. Written in October 1972 Revised on November 16 Water Horse[20]水马，当我还是孩子的时候，我的故乡的孩子叫它“海里蹦”。一名水黾。《本草纲目·虫部四》引陈藏器曰：“水黾群游水上，水涸即飞，长寸许，四脚。”韩琦《凉榭池上二阕》：“游鳞惊触绿荷香，水马成群股脚长”。善状其外形特征。苏东坡《二虫诗》称之为“水马儿”，大概是四川的乡音了，今从之。苏东坡对它的习性观察得很精到，令人惊喜佩服。诗里还提到一种昆虫“鷃滥堆”，不知是何物。东坡诗录如下：
Water horse, when I was a child, the children in my hometown called it "jumping in the sea". A water strider. "Compendium of Materia Medica: Insect Department IV" quoted Chen Zangqi as saying: "Water striders swim on the water, fly when the water dries up, about an inch long, and have four legs." Han Qi's "Two Verses on the Liangxie Pond": "The swimming scales are startled by the fragrance of green lotus, and the water horses are long in groups." Good at its appearance characteristics. Su Dongpo's "Two Insect Poems" call it "Water Horse", which is probably the local dialect of Sichuan, and now it is followed. Su Dongpo observed its habits very well, which was surprising and admirable. The poem also mentions an insect "Wren Pile", which I don't know what it is. Dongpo's poems are as follows:
“君不见水马儿，
步步逆流水。
大江东去日千里。
此虫趯趯长在此。
君不见鷃滥堆，
决起随冲风，
随风一去宿何许？
逆风还落蓬蒿中。
二虫愚智皆莫测，
江边一笑无人识。”
"Don't you see the water horse, Step by step, against the flowing water. The great river stretches eastward for a thousand miles every day. This insect is always here. Don't you see the pile of wrens, The decision rises with the wind, Where do you stay with the wind? The wind blows against the wind, yet it still falls into the weeds. Both insects are foolish and wise, The smile by the river is unrecognizable. ”
雨后的小水沟多么平静，
水底下倒映着天光云影。
平静的沟中水可并不停留，
你看那水马儿在缓缓移动。

水马儿有一种天生的本领，
能够在水面上立足存身。
浑身铁黑，四脚伶仃，
How calm the small ditch after the rain is, The sky and clouds are reflected under the water. The water in the calm ditch does not stop, You see that the water horse is moving slowly. Water horses have a natural ability, Able to stand on the water. Covered in iron black, with four legs,不飞不舞，也没有声音。

它们全都是逆水栖息，
没一个倒站横行。
好半天一动不动，
听流水把它们带过了一程。

听流水把它们带过了一程，
量一量过不了七寸八寸，
可它们已觉得漂得太远，
No flight, no dance, and no sound. They all inhabit against the current, None of them ran rampant backwards. For a long time, I didn't move, Listening to the flowing water took them a long way. Listening to the flowing water took them a journey, A measure cannot exceed seven inches or eight inches, But they already feel that they have drifted too far,就赶紧向上游连蹦几蹦。

天上的白云变红云，
晌午过了到黄昏，
你看看这一群水马儿，
依然是停留在原地不动。

你们这是干什么？
漂一程，蹦几蹦，既不退，又不进。
Just jump upstream a few times. The white clouds in the sky turn into red clouds, From noon to dusk, Look at this group of water horses, Still stay still. What are you doing? Drifting for a while, bouncing a few times, neither retreating nor advancing.单调的反复有什么乐趣可言，
为什么白送走一天的光阴？

水马儿之一答曰：“你管得着吗？
这是我们水马儿的习俗秉性！”
说话间又漂过短短一程，
它赶忙向原地连蹦几蹦。
What is the fun of monotonous repetition, Why send away a day in vain? One of the water horses replied, "Can you control it? This is the custom of our water horses! ” After a short journey while speaking, It hurriedly jumped a few times in place.一九七二年十一月十六日
1986年
The dragon flies in the mulberry tree village, wanting to rain for the world. The scales and armor have been broken, and the sadness is so sudden. Ode to He Xiang He Men has many female heroes, and his texture is as pure as snow and frost. Blood flows across Sanghe Mountain, and the waves of the Li River rise in layers. (August 1984) In 1986旅途[21]（七首）
有一个长头发的青年
有一个长头发的青年，
他要离开草原。
Wear a white shirt. There was a young man with long hair, He was leaving the steppe. He felt that the grassland was too lonely, He went further and further. He went further and further, Wear a blue shirt. There was a young man with long hair, He was leaving the steppe.他觉得草原太单调，
他越走越远。
他越走越远，
穿一件白色的衬衫。

有一个长头发的青年，
他要离开草原。
Wear a white shirt. There was a young man with long hair, He was leaving the steppe. He felt that the grassland was too lonely, He went further and further. He went further and further, Wear a blue shirt. There was a young man with long hair, He was leaving the steppe.他觉得草原太寂寞，
他越走越远。
他越走越远，
穿一件蓝色的衬衫。

有一个长头发的青年，
他要离开草原。
Wear a white shirt. There was a young man with long hair, He was leaving the steppe. He felt that the grassland was too lonely, He went further and further. He went further and further, Wear a blue shirt. There was a young man with long hair, He was leaving the steppe.他蓦然回头一望，
草原一望无边。
他站着一动不动，
穿一件火红的衬衫。
三月十七日梦中作，醒来写定
赛里木
野苹果花开得像雪，
赛里木湖多么蓝哟！

塔松里飞出了白云，
He suddenly looked back, The grassland stretches endlessly. He stood motionless, Wear a fiery red shirt. March 17th in a dream, waking up to write it Sailimu Wild apple blossoms bloom like snow, How blue Sailimu Lake is! White clouds flew out of the tower,赛里木湖多么蓝哟！

牛羊在绿山上吃草，
赛里木湖多么蓝哟！

赛里木湖多么蓝哟，
你好吗？赛里木，赛里木[22]！
吐鲁番的联想
异国守城的士兵，
How blue Sailimu Lake is! Cattle and sheep graze on the green mountains, How blue Sailimu Lake is! How blue is Sailimu Lake, How are you? Sailimu, Sailimu{{id_0000}}! Turpan's association Soldiers guarding cities in foreign lands,一箭射穿了玄奘的水袋。
于是有了坎儿井。

有人在戈壁滩上，
捡到岑参的一纸马料账[23]。
什么时候咱们逛一逛纽约的唐人街。

安西都护一天比一天老了，
An arrow shot through Xuanzang's water bag. So there was a kanerwell. Someone is on the Gobi Desert, Picked up a paper horse material account {{id_0000}} from Cen Shen. When let's take a stroll through New York's Chinatown. The Protector of Anxi is getting older day by day,他的酒量一天比一天小了。
飞机上载的是无核葡萄干。

广州的孩子没见过下雪，
吐鲁番的孩子没见过下雨。
广州、吐鲁番都有邮局。
巴特尔要离开家乡
大雁飞在天上，
影子留在地上。
His drinking volume is getting smaller and smaller day by day. The plane was carrying seedless raisins. The children in Guangzhou have never seen snow, The children of Turpan have never seen it rain. Guangzhou and Turpan have post offices. Battle is leaving his hometown The wild geese fly in the sky, The shadow remains on the ground.巴特尔要离开家乡，
心里充满了忧伤。

巴特尔躺在圈儿河旁[24]，
闻着草原的清香。
圈儿河流了一前晌，
还没有流出家乡。
玉渊潭正月
汽车开过湖边，
Battle was leaving his hometown. My heart was full of sadness. Battle lies by the river {{id_0000}}, Smell the fragrance of the grassland. The circle of rivers has been around for a while, It has not yet flowed out of the hometown. Yuyuantan New Year The car drove past the lake,带起一群落叶。
落叶追着汽车，
一直追得很远。
终于没有劲了，
又纷纷地停下了。

“你神气什么，
还嘀嘀地叫！”
“甭理它，咱们讲故事：
秋天，
早晨的露水……”
坝上
Bring up a cluster of fallen leaves. Fallen leaves chase cars, Chasing far all the time. Finally there is no energy, They stopped again. "What are you doing? Still ticking! ” "Regardless of it, let's tell a story: autumn Morning dew ......" On the dam风梳着莜麦沙沙地响，
山药花翻滚着雪浪。
走半天看不到一个人，
这就是俺们的坝上。
歌声
他很少回他的家乡，
他的家乡是四川绵阳。
他每年收到家乡寄来的包裹，
The wind combs the rustling of wheat, The yam flowers roll in the snow waves. I can't see a single person for a long time, This is our dam. Song He rarely returned to his hometown, His hometown is Mianyang, Sichuan. He receives packages from his hometown every year.包裹里寄的是干辣椒，豆瓣酱。

他用四川话和我们交谈，
藏话说得很流畅。
他写的歌子很好听，
藏族的歌手都爱唱。

听说他已经死了，
我不禁想起他挺老实的模样。
The package sent dried chili peppers and bean paste. He spoke to us in Sichuan dialect, The Tibetan dialect speaks fluently. The songs he wrote were very beautiful, Tibetan singers love to sing. I heard that he was dead, I can't help but think of how honest he looks.收音机里有时还播他写的歌子，
歌声还是那样悠扬，那样明朗。
纪念一位入藏三十年的作曲家
1991年
题画[25]
一
万朵茶花似火
徘徊着
顾望着自己的影子
Sometimes the songs he wrote were played on the radio, The singing voice is still so melodious and clear. Commemorating a composer who has been in Tibet for 30 years In 1991 Title {{id_0000}} One Ten thousand camellias are like fire Wandering Looking at his own shadow孤独
乖巧的
黑凤
二
Zeng Qijing greeted Dexi and Kong Jing for the New Year On February 2, 1984, he made a lotus painting and title for Zhu Dexi. Two黑黑的龙潭
有太阳，有云
有雨，有星星

“大眼睛，
猫头鹰！”
三
On March 20, 1984, there was a strong wind that day, and I couldn't go out, Zeng Qi remembered On March 20, 1984, he made a cactus painting and title for Wu Ningkun. Three定定地看着人
又倏然垂下了睫毛
像一只敛翅的鸟
泄密的眼睛
1993年
我的家乡在高邮[26]
我的家乡在高邮，
风吹湖水浪悠悠。
岸上栽的是垂杨柳，
树下卧的是黑水牛。

我的家乡在高邮，
春是春来秋是秋。
八月十五连枝藕，
My hometown is in Gaoyou{{id_0000}} My hometown is in Gaoyou, The wind blows the lake and the waves are gentle. Weeping willows are planted on the shore, Lying under the tree is a black buffalo. My hometown is in Gaoyou, Spring is spring, autumn is autumn. On the fifteenth day of the eighth month, the lotus root branches,九月初九闷芋头。

我的家乡在高邮，
女伢子的眼睛乌溜溜。
不是人物长得秀，
怎会出一个风流才子秦少游？

我的家乡在高邮，
花团锦绣在前头。
百样的花儿都不丑，
On the ninth day of September, the taro is stuffy. My hometown is in Gaoyou, The woman's eyes were dark. It's not that the characters are beautiful, How could there be a romantic talent Qin Shaoyou? My hometown is in Gaoyou, The flowers are splendid. All kinds of flowers are not ugly,单要一朵五月端阳通红灼亮的红石榴！
（一九九三年十月中旬）
1998年
夏天[27]（散文诗）
早晨
露水。
露水湿了草叶，湿了马齿苋。
Just want a red pomegranate that is bright red and bright on the Dragon Boat Festival in May! (Mid-October 1993) In 1998 Summer{{id_0000}} (prose poem) Morning Dew. The dew soaked the blades of grass and soaked the purslane.一只螳螂在牵牛花上散步。精致的淡绿的薄纱的贴身轻装。
金针花开了。
真凉快。
井
凉意从井里丝丝地冒上来。
花
茉莉。素馨。珠兰。数珠兰清雅。
淡竹叶
A praying mantis walking on a morning glory. Delicate pale green tulle close-fitting lightness. The daylily is blooming. It's really cool. well The coolness rose from the well. flower Jasmine. Fangxin. Pearl orchid. Count pearl orchid elegant. Light bamboo leaves淡竹叶略似竹叶，半藏在草丛中，不高，开淡淡的天蓝色的小如指甲的简单的花。
蝈蝈和纺织娘
蝈蝈把天气叫得更燥热了。我们用番瓜花喂蝈蝈，用很辣的辣椒喂它。它就叫得更吵人了。
The light bamboo leaves are slightly similar to bamboo leaves, half hidden in the grass, not tall, and have simple flowers as small as fingernails with a faint sky blue color. Newts and textile girls The newt called the weather hotter. We fed the newt with sweet melon flowers and fed it with very hot peppers. It barked even louder.扁豆架的叶丛中有一只纺织娘，不知它是怎样飞来的。一到晚上，它就纺纱，沙沙沙……
萤火虫
萤火虫一亮一亮的，忽上，忽下。
秋冬[28]
爬山虎
沿街的爬山虎红了，
There is a weaver in the leaves of the lentil rack, and I don't know how it flew in. At night, it spins and rustles...... firefly The fireflies lit up and down. Autumn and Winter{{id_0000}} Creeper The creepers along the street are red,北京的秋意浓了。

爬山虎的叶子掉光了，
昨晚上下过一场霜了。
黄栌
香山的黄栌喝得烂醉。
下雪
雪花想下又不想下，
犹犹豫豫。

你们商量商量
自己拿个主意。
Autumn in Beijing is strong. The creeper's leaves have fallen out, There was a frost last night. Huang Yu Huang Yu of Xiangshan was drunk. snow Snowflake thinks but doesn't want to go down, Hesitatingly. You discuss and discuss Make an idea for yourself.
对面人家的房顶白了：
雪花拿定了主意了：下。
雪后
大吊车停留在空中，
一动不动。
听不到指挥运料的哨音。
异常的安静。
热汤面
擀面条的声音，
切白菜的声音，
The roof of the house opposite is white: Snowflake made up his mind: down. After the Snow The big crane stayed in the air, Not moving. I can't hear the whistle of the command of the transport. Unusually quiet. Hot noodle soup The sound of rolling noodles, The sound of chopping cabbage,下雪天的声音。
这种天气，怎么出去买菜？
卖菜的也不出摊。
楼上楼下，
好几家，
今天都吃热汤面。
“牛牛！牛牛！
到副食店去买两块臭豆腐！”
啄木鸟[29]
The sound of a snowy day. In this weather, how to go out to buy groceries? Vegetable sellers also don't go out to stalls. Upstairs and downstairs, Several, I eat hot noodle soup today. "Niu Niu! Niu Niu! Go to the non-staple food store to buy two pieces of stinky tofu! ” Woodpecker[29]啄木鸟追逐着雌鸟，
红胸脯发出无声的喊叫，
它们一翅飞出树林，
落在湖边的柳梢。
不知从哪里钻出一个孩子，
一声大叫。
啄木鸟吃了一惊，
他身边已经没有雌鸟。
The woodpecker chases the female, The red-breasted let out a silent cry, They flew out of the woods with one wing, The willow tips falling by the lake. I don't know where a child came from, A shout. The woodpecker was taken aback, There were no female birds by his side anymore.不一会树林里传出啄木的声音，
他已经忘记了刚才的烦恼。
梦[30]
给我一枝梦中的笔，
我会写出几首挺不错的诗。
可惜醒来全都忘了，
我算是白活了这一趟了。
未编年
鄂温克狩猎队员之歌[31]
从那浓绿浓绿的大兴安岭，
飘出了一阵阵轻脆的铃声。
在那万木参天的密林里，
鄂温克的驯鹿群在安详地游动。

我们是鄂温克的狩猎队员，
熟悉山里的每一条路径。
一阵阵枪响回荡在天边，
载回了丰收的犴肉和鹿茸。

从那金黄金黄的大兴安岭，
从那白雪皑皑的大兴安岭，
从那万木参天的密林里，
Bursts of gunshots echoed in the sky, Brought back the precious gray rat and flying dragon. We are the hunting party of Evenk, Familiarize yourself with every path in the mountains. From the twilight of the Great Xing'an Mountains, I can't hear the crisp ringtones, From the dense forest of towering trees,飘出了一阵阵轻脆的铃声。

一阵阵枪响回荡在天边，
载回了珍贵的灰鼠和飞龙。
我们是鄂温克的狩猎队员，
熟悉山里的每一条路径。

从那暮色苍茫的大兴安岭，
听不到一阵阵轻脆的铃声，
从那万木参天的密林里，
Bursts of gunshots echoed in the sky, Brought back the precious gray rat and flying dragon. We are the hunting party of Evenk, Familiarize yourself with every path in the mountains. From the twilight of the Great Xing'an Mountains, I can't hear the crisp ringtones, From the dense forest of towering trees,听不到一阵阵响亮的枪声。

勤劳勇敢的鄂温克，
这一夜你们在哪里活动？
踏着草叶上晶莹的露水，
狩猎队押来了入境的黑熊。

我们是鄂温克的狩猎队，
我们是无敌的英雄民兵。
There were no loud gunshots. The industrious and brave Evenk, Where are you active this night? Stepping on the crystal dew on the blades of grass, The hunting party escorted the black bear that entered the country. We are the hunting party of Evenk, We are the invincible heroic militia.守卫着祖国北方的边境，
守卫着亲爱的大兴安岭。

从那浓绿浓绿的大兴安岭，
飘出了一阵阵轻脆的铃声。
在那万木参天的密林里，
鄂温克狩猎队员在机警地游动。
guarding the northern border of the motherland, guarding the dear Great Xing'an Mountains. From the green and green Daxing'an Mountains, There were bursts of crisp bells. In the dense forest of thousands of trees, The Evenk hunting party swam alertly.桦皮船[32]
（男女声二重唱）

重：剥下洁白的桦树皮，
煮三遍，晾三遍。
放倒坚韧的樟子松，
砍长条，削薄板。
做成猎民的桦皮船，
多轻巧，多灵便。

啊——
Birch bark boat{{id_0000}} (Male and female duets) Heavy: Peel off the white birch bark, Boil three times and dry three times. Put down the tough Pinus sylvestris, Cut long strips and cut thin boards. Made birch bark boats for hunters, How light, how flexible. Ah——划动桨叶如展翅，
白鹤一样的桦皮船。
激流河里任翱翔，
Female: The more difficult and dangerous it is, the more forward it is. Male: Who will take care of the child? Female: Nursery, aunt management. Man: You originally had a plan in mind. Female: Of course. Male: Get on board! Heavy: paddling the blades like spreading wings, A birch bark boat like a white crane. Ling soar in the torrent river,哲理鱼一样的桦皮船。
两岸青山齐后退，
燕子一样的桦皮船。

女：你又要划船去夜猎，
去打鹿，去打犴？
激流河水平槽了，
Rowing the blades like spreading wings, A birch bark boat like a white crane. Ren Soaring in the torrent river, A birch bark boat like a philosophical fish. The green mountains on both sides of the river retreated, A birch bark boat like a swallow. Lady: You have to row for night hunting again. Go hunt deer, go to prison? The rapids are leveled and troughed.水多急，浪花翻。
今晚天气很不好，
云沼沼，雾漫漫。

重：啊——
划动桨叶如展翅，
白鹤一样的桦皮船。
激流河里任翱翔，
Female: The more difficult and dangerous it is, the more forward it is. Male: Who will take care of the child? Female: Nursery, aunt management. Man: You originally had a plan in mind. Female: Of course. Male: Get on board! Heavy: paddling the blades like spreading wings, A birch bark boat like a white crane. Ling soar in the torrent river,哲理鱼一样的桦皮船。
两岸青山齐后退，
燕子一样的桦皮船。

男：我不是划船去夜猎，
不打鹿，不打犴。
刚才护林员来报告，
密林里，冒青烟。
有一个越境特务进了山，
看情况，没走远。

重：划动桨叶如展翅，
白鹤一样的桦皮船。
激流河里任翱翔，
Female: The more difficult and dangerous it is, the more forward it is. Male: Who will take care of the child? Female: Nursery, aunt management. Man: You originally had a plan in mind. Female: Of course. Male: Get on board! Heavy: paddling the blades like spreading wings, A birch bark boat like a white crane. Ling soar in the torrent river,哲理鱼一样的桦皮船。
两岸青山齐后退，
燕子一样的桦皮船。

女：你要到下游蹲泡子，
啃干肉，嚼生烟。
等到特务来喝水，
鹿皮绳，把他栓。
A birch bark boat like a white crane. Ling Soaring in the torrent river, A philosophical fish-like birch bark boat. The green mountains on both sides of the strait retreated, A birch bark boat like a swallow. Female: You have to go downstream to squat in the bubble. Gnawing on dried meat and chewing raw smoke. Wait until the agent comes to drink water, Deerskin rope, bolt it.那我跟你去就伴，
你打枪，我划船。

重：划动桨叶如展翅，
白鹤一样的桦皮船。
激流河里任翱翔，
Female: The more difficult and dangerous it is, the more forward it is. Male: Who will take care of the child? Female: Nursery, aunt management. Man: You originally had a plan in mind. Female: Of course. Male: Get on board! Heavy: paddling the blades like spreading wings, A birch bark boat like a white crane. Ling soar in the torrent river,哲理鱼一样的桦皮船。
两岸青山齐后退，
燕子一样的桦皮船。

男：这趟任务很危险，
Then I'll go with you, You shoot, I row. Heavy: paddle the blades like spreading wings, A birch bark boat like a white crane. Ren Soaring in the torrent river, A birch bark boat like a philosophical fish. The green mountains on both sides of the river retreated, A birch bark boat like a swallow. Male: This mission is very dangerous.女：越艰险，越向前。
男：孩子交给谁照看？
女：托儿所，阿姨管。
男：你原来早就有打算，
女：那当然。
男：快上船！

重：划动桨叶如展翅，
白鹤一样的桦皮船。
激流河里任翱翔，
Female: The more difficult and dangerous it is, the more forward it is. Male: Who will take care of the child? Female: Nursery, aunt management. Man: You originally had a plan in mind. Female: Of course. Male: Get on board! Heavy: paddling the blades like spreading wings, A birch bark boat like a white crane. Ling soar in the torrent river,哲理鱼一样的桦皮船。
两岸青山齐后退，
燕子一样的桦皮船。

[1] 本篇原载1941年9月17日香港《大公报·文艺》第一一八四期。
A philosophical fish-like birch bark boat. The green mountains on both sides of the river retreated, A birch bark boat like a swallow. [1] This article was originally published in the 1184th issue of Hong Kong's Ta Kung Pao Literature and Art on September 17, 1941.[2] 本篇原载1941年3月3日香港《大公报·文艺》第一○四三期，又载1941年4月21日桂林《大公报·文艺》第十六期，文字略有改动。
[2] This article was originally published in the 1043rd issue of Hong Kong's "Ta Kung Pao Literature and Art" on March 3, 1941, and was also published in the sixteenth issue of Guilin "Ta Kung Pao Literature and Art" on April 21, 1941, with slight changes in the text.[3] 本篇原载1941年7月30日香港《大公报·文艺》第一一四九期。
[4] 本篇原载1941年5月26日桂林《大公报》。原稿漫漶处以“□”代替。
[3] This article was originally published in the 1149th issue of Hong Kong's Ta Kung Pao Literature and Art on July 30, 1941. [4] This article was originally published in the Guilin "Ta Kung Pao" on May 26, 1941. The original manuscript is replaced with "□".[5] 本篇原载1941年6月9日《贵州日报》“革命军诗刊”第二期。
[6] A.纪德在《冈果旅行》上说非洲土人大部不会说“为甚么”及其相类词句，而且连懂也不懂。
[5] This article was originally published in the second issue of the "Revolutionary Army Poetry Journal" of Guizhou Daily on June 9, 1941. [6] A. Gide said in "Gango Travel" that most of the indigenous people in Africa do not say "why" and similar words, and they do not even understand it.[7] 劳瑞丽有最长的头发。
[8] 本篇原载1941年6月12日昆明《中央日报·文艺》。
[9] 本篇原载1941年6月18日香港《大公报·文艺》第一一一九期。
[7] Laurie has the longest hair. [8] This article was originally published in Kunming's "Central Daily, Literature and Art" on June 12, 1941. [9] This article was originally published in the 1119th issue of Ta Kung Pao Literature and Art in Hong Kong on June 18, 1941.[10] 本篇原载1941年7月4日昆明《中央日报·文艺》第六十五期，署名“蓁歧”。
[11] 本篇原载1941年8月16日昆明《中央日报·文艺》。
[10] This article was originally published in the 65th issue of Kunming's "Central Daily, Literature and Art" on July 4, 1941, signed "Zhen Qi". [11] This article was originally published in Kunming's "Central Daily, Literature and Art" on August 16, 1941.[12] 本篇原载1941年11月16日昆明《中央日报·文艺》第九十五期，署名“汪若园”。原稿漫漶处以“□”代替。
[12] This article was originally published in the 95th issue of Kunming's "Central Daily, Literature and Art" on November 16, 1941, signed "Wang Ruoyuan". The original manuscript is replaced with "□".[13] 本篇原载1941年11月24日昆明《中央日报·文艺》第一百零一期“十四行特辑”，署名“汪若园”。1942年作者以同题重写这首诗，文字有较大改动，参见《二秋辑·落叶松》。
[13] This article was originally published in the 101st issue of Kunming's "Central Daily, Literature and Art" on November 24, 1941, "Fourteen Lines Special", signed "Wang Ruoyuan". In 1942, the author rewrote this poem with the same title, and the text was greatly changed, see "Erqiu Ji: Larch".[14] 本篇原载1942年11月13日昆明《生活导报》第一期。
[15] 本篇原载1942年12月8日桂林《大公报·文艺》。
[16] 本篇原载《说说唱唱》1954年第二期，署名“曾其”。
[14] This article was originally published in the first issue of Kunming's "Life Herald" on November 13, 1942. [15] This article was originally published in Guilin's Ta Kung Pao Literature and Art on December 8, 1942. [16] This article was originally published in the second issue of "Rap and Sing" in 1954, signed "Zeng Qi".[17] 双鬟是少女或婢女的妆束。这句诗的意思大概是说改了少女的妆束，变成了妇人的妆束，嫁给所钟情的人而去。
[17] The double bun is the makeup of a girl or maid. The meaning of this poem is probably that the girl's makeup is changed, and it becomes a woman's makeup, and she marries the person she loves.[18] 本篇原载《诗刊》1957年6月号；初收《汪曾祺自选集》，漓江出版社，1987年10月。
[18] This article was originally published in the June 1957 issue of "Poetry Journal"; "Wang Zengqi's Self-Selected Collection", Lijiang Publishing House, October 1987.[19] 本篇据1972年11月16日致朱德煕信编入；初收《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。
[19] This article is compiled from a letter to Zhu Dewei on November 16, 1972; Volume 8 of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998.[20] 本篇据1972年11月16日致朱德煕信编入；初收《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。
[20] This article is compiled from a letter to Zhu Dewei dated November 16, 1972; Volume 8 of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998.[21] 本组诗原载《中国作家》1986年第四期，原为八首，其中一首旧体诗《泊万县》另收入本卷“旧体诗”类，《玉渊潭正月》以《落叶》为题，见于散文《草木虫鱼鸟兽》，文字有改动；以《旅途》为题，初收《汪曾祺自选集》，漓江出版社，1987年10月。
[21] This group of poems was originally published in the fourth issue of "Chinese Writers" in 1986, originally eight poems, one of which was the old style poem "Bowan County", which was also included in the "old style poems" category of this volume, "Yuyuantan New Year" with the title of "Fallen Leaves", seen in the prose "Grass, Trees, Insects, Fish, Birds and Beasts", the text has been changed; with the title of "Journey", the first collection of "Wang Zengqi's Self-Selected Collection", Lijiang Publishing House, October 1987.[22] 赛里木湖在新疆，离伊犁不远。“赛里木”是突厥语，意为平安。旅人到了赛里木湖，都要俯首说一声：“赛里木！”
[23] 岑参马料账现藏乌鲁木齐新疆博物馆。
[22] Sailimu Lake is in Xinjiang, not far from Ili. "Sailimu" is a Turkic word that means peace. When travelers arrive at Sailimu Lake, they must bow their heads and say: "Sailimu!" ” [23] Cen Shenma's material account is now in the Xinjiang Museum in Urumqi.[24] 呼伦贝尔草原有一条河，叫圈儿河。圈儿河很奇怪，它不是径直地流去，而是不停地转着圈。牧民说，这河舍不得离开草原。
[25] 本篇原载《女声》1991年第七期。
[24] There is a river in the Hulunbuir grassland called the Quan'er River. The Quan'er River is very strange, it does not flow straight, but keeps spinning in circles. Herdsmen say that the river is reluctant to leave the grassland. [25] This article was originally published in the seventh issue of "Female Voice" in 1991.[26] 本篇系江苏电视台1994年播出的电视片《梦故乡》的主题歌歌词，原载《甓社珠光——高邮市文联十年成果集》，高邮市文联编印，1996年4月；后编入组诗《我的家乡在高邮——故乡诗吟》，初收《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。
[26] This article is the theme song lyrics of the TV film "Dream Hometown" broadcast by Jiangsu TV in 1994, originally published in "Brick Society Pearl Light - Gaoyou Federation of Literary and Art Circles Ten Years Achievement Collection", edited and printed by Gaoyou Federation of Literary and Art Circles, April 1996; later compiled into the group poem "My Hometown in Gaoyou - Hometown Poetry", first included in the eighth volume of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998.[27] 本组诗原载《中国作家》1998年第一期；初收《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。
[27] This group of poems was originally published in the first issue of "Chinese Writers", 1998; Volume 8 of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998.[28] 本组诗原载《中国作家》1998年第一期；初收《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。
[29] 本篇见于散文《草木虫鱼鸟兽》，参见散文卷。
[28] This group of poems was originally published in the first issue of "Chinese Writers", 1998; The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi, Volume 8, Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998. [29] This article is found in the prose "Plants, Trees, Insects, Fish, Birds and Beasts", see the prose volume.[30] 本篇见于小说《梦》，参见小说卷。
[31] 本篇据手迹编入。
[32] 本篇据手迹编入。

旧体诗、长短句

旧体诗、长短句
1960年
画马铃薯图谱感怀[1]
[30] This article is found in the novel "Dream", see the novel volume. [31] This article is compiled according to handwriting. [32] This article is compiled according to handwriting. Old-style poems, long and short sentences In 1960 Drawing potato atlas feelings[1]三十年前了了时，曾拟许身作画师。
何期出塞修芋谱，搔发临畦和胭脂。
1980年
六十岁生日散步玉渊潭[2]
冻云欲湿上元灯，漠漠春阴柳未青。
Thirty years ago, when I was done, I planned to become a painter. When did I expect to go to the frontier to repair the taro, scratching my hair and weeding the rouge in the fields? In 1980 60th birthday walk in Yuyuantan{{id_0000}} The cold clouds are about to dampen the Lantern of the Lantern Festival, and the spring scenery is hazy and gloomy, with the willows still not yet green.行过玉渊潭畔路，去年残叶太分明。
1981年
昆明莲花池小店坐雨[3]
莲花池外少行人，野店苔痕一寸深。
浊酒一杯天过午，木香花湿雨沉沉。
（一九八一年九月二十九日）
Walking along the path by the Jade Abyss Pool, last year's withered leaves are too distinct. In 1981 Kunming Lotus Pond Shop Sitting in the Rain{{id_0000}} Outside the lotus pond, there are few pedestrians, and the moss marks in the wilderness are an inch deep. After noon, I drink a cup of turbid wine, and the woody fragrance of flowers is damp and heavy in the rain. (September 29, 1981)送传捷外甥参军[4]
东海日升红杲杲，水兵搏浪起身早。
昂首浩歌飘然去，茫茫大陆一小岛。
一九八一年十月
陵纹小妹存玩[5]
Send the good news to my nephew [5] The sun rises in the East China Sea, and the sailors get up early to catch the waves. Holding my head high and singing, I drift away, leaving behind a vast island on the vast continent. October 1981 Lingwen Little Sister Save and Play[5]故乡存骨肉，有妹在安徽。
所适殊非偶，课儿心未灰。
力耕怜弱质，怀远问寒梅。
何日归欤赋，天崖暖气吹。
大哥哥曾祺
寿小姑爹八十[6]
There are relatives in my hometown, and I have a sister in Anhui. The place where I went was not accidental, and the child's heart was not discouraged. Working hard to cultivate the land and pitying the weak ones, I miss the distance and inquire about the cold plum blossoms. When will I return? Big brother Zeng Qi Eighty years old, my aunt and father [6]扁舟一棹入江湖，一笑灯前认故吾。
报国有心豪气在，未甘伏枥饱干刍。

胸中百丈黄河浪，眼底巫山一段云。
犹余老缶当年笔，归画淮南万木春。

抵掌剧谈天下事，挥毫闲书老少年。
A small boat sails into the rivers and lakes, smiling and recognizing the old self by the lamp. The heart of serving the country is still there, yet I am not willing to lie down and eat dry fodder. In my heart, I feel the waves of the Yellow River, and before me, I see a section of Wushan like clouds. I still have the old can of brush from the past, returning to paint the spring of thousands of trees in Huainan. Resist the drama to talk about the affairs of the world, and write about the old and the young.高龄八十健如此，熠熠珠光照夕烟。
小姑爹八十岁矣而精神矍铄豪迈健谈命作诗赋三绝为之寿 孙汪曾祺敬草
敬呈道仁夫子[7]
我爱张夫子，辛勤育后生。
At the age of eighty, he is so healthy, his pearls shimmering in the evening mist. My aunt and father are eighty years old, but they are in good spirits, heroic and talkative, and they are ordered to write poems and three unique poems for his birthday. Respectfully presenting Master Dao Ren {{id_0000}} I love Master Zhang, who works hard to raise the younger generation.汲源来大夏，播火到小城。
新文开道路，博学不求名。
白头甘淡泊，灼灼老人心。
八一年十一月受业汪曾祺
敬呈文英老师[8]
“小羊儿乖乖，把门儿开开，”
Jiyuan came to Daxia and sowed fire to small towns. New literature opens the way, erudite does not seek fame. The white-haired sweetness and indifference burn the heart of the old man. In November of '81, he studied under Wang Zengqi Respectfully Presented to Teacher Wenying{{id_0000}} "Lamb, be good, open the door,"歌声犹在，耳畔徘徊。
念平生美育，从此培栽。
我今亦老矣，白髭盈腮。
但师恩母爱，岂能忘怀。
愿吾师康健，长寿无灾。
五小幼稚园第一班学生汪曾祺
（一九八一年十一月）
The singing is still there, lingering in my ears. Thinking about the beauty education I have had in my life, I have cultivated it since then. I am old now, with a white beard and cheeks. But the teacher's kindness and mother's love cannot be forgotten. May my teacher be healthy and live a long life without disaster. Wang Zengqi, a student of the first class of the fifth primary school (November 1981)阴城[9]
莽莽阴城何代名，夜深鬼火恐人行。
故老传云古战场，儿童拾得旧韩瓶。
功名一世余荒冢，野土千年怨不平。
近闻拓地开工厂，从此阴城夜有灯。
Yin City{{id_0000}} In the middle of the night, ghostly fires intimidate people. The old legend says: On the battlefield of ancient times, children picked up old Korean bottles. Fame and fortune have been left in the desolate graves for a lifetime, and the wilderness has been filled with grievances for thousands of years. Recently, I heard that the land has been expanded and a factory has been opened, and since then, the dark city has been lit up at night.奉金鳌指正一九八一年十一月
文游台[10]（忆昔春游何处好）
忆昔春游何处好，
年年都上文游台。
树梢帆影轻轻过，
台下豆花漫漫开。
秦邮碑帖怀铅拓，
Directed by Jin Ao in November 1981 Wenyou Tai {{id_0000}} (Remembering where to go on a spring outing in the past) Remembering where the spring outing was good, Every year, I go to the literary tour platform. The shadow of the sail on the treetops passed gently, The bean flowers bloom in the audience. Qin post stele with lead rubbing,异代乡贤识姓来。
杰阁今犹存旧址，
流风余韵未曾衰。
新河[11]
晨兴寻旧邮，散步看新河。
舶垂金菊，机船载粪过。
水边开菊圃，岸上晒萝卜。
Different generations of local sages know their surnames. The Jie Pavilion still retains its old site, The lingering charm of the flowing wind has not faded. New River{{id_0000}} In the morning, I look for old mail, and I take a walk to see the new river. {{id_0000}} The ship droops golden chrysanthemums, and the machine ship carried manure through. A chrysanthemum garden is opened by the water, and radishes are dried on the shore.小鱼堪饭饱，积雨未伤禾。
一九八一年十一月八日新河散步写与汝祐
同学[12]
同学少年发已苍，四方犹记共明窗。
红栏紫竹小亭子，绿柳黄牛隔岸庄。
The small fish are well-fed, and the accumulated rain has not harmed the crops. November 8, 1981 New River Walk Written to Ruyou Classmate{{id_0000}} My classmates have turned gray in their youth, and people from all directions still remember the bright window. The red railing and purple bamboo pavilion stand tall, while the green willows and cattle on the other side of the river are the village.村梢烟悬东门塔，野花雪放玫瑰香。
散学课余何处好，跳河比赛爬城墙。
熙元属一九八一年十一月十八日
应小爷命书[13]
汪家宗族未凋零，奕奕犹存旧巷名。
The smoke hangs over the east gate tower at the end of the village, and the wildflowers bloom in the snow, fragrant with roses. What is the best place to do after school, jumping into the river and climbing the city wall. November 18, 1981 Responding to the young master's order{{id_0000}} The Wang family has not withered, and the old alley name still exists.独羡小爷真淡泊，临河闲读南华经。
赠汪曾荣[14]
开口谈宗族，五服情谊深。
寄身在市井，端是有心人。
（一九八一年十月）
贺孙殿娣新婚[15]
I envy the young master for his indifference, reading the Nanhua Sutra by the river. Gift to Wang Zengrong [15] Talking about the clan, the friendship between the five services is deep. Living in the market, it is a person with a heart. (October 1981) Congratulations on Sun Diandi's newlywed marriage[15]夜深烛影长，花气百合香。
珠湖三十六，处处宿鸳鸯。
1982年
季匋民自题《红莲花》图[16]
红花莲子白花藕，果贩叶三是我师。
惭愧画家少见识，为君破例著胭脂。
In the deep of night, the candlelight is long, and the fragrance of flowers and lilies is fragrant. There are thirty-six pearl lakes, and mandarin ducks roam everywhere. In 1982 Ji Kuomin self-inscribed "Red Lotus" picture {{id_0000}} The red lotus seeds and white lotus roots, the fruit vendor Ye San is my teacher. I am ashamed that the painter is rarely recognized, and I make an exception to wear rouge for you.川行杂诗[17]（五首）
川行杂诗[17]（五首）题记
题记今年四月，应作协四川分会及四川人民出版社之邀，往游四川；经川西、川南、川中、川东诸地。车中默数游踪，得若干首。聊记见闻而已，意不在诗。
今年四月，应作协四川分会及四川人民出版社之邀，往游四川；经川西、川南、川中、川东诸地。 车中默数游踪，得若干首。 聊记见闻而已，意不在诗。新都桂湖杨升庵祠
新都桂湖杨升庵祠杨慎升庵，新都人，状元及第，以议大礼流云南，死，以赭衣葬。桂湖其少年读书处也，今建升庵祠。
杨慎升庵，新都人，状元及第，以议大礼流云南，死，以赭衣葬。 桂湖其少年读书处也，今建升庵祠。老树婆娑弄旧枝，
老树婆娑弄旧枝，桂湖何代建新祠？
桂湖何代建新祠？一种风流人尚说，
一种风流人尚说，状元词曲罪臣诗。
状元词曲罪臣诗。新屋
新都、广汉、邛崃改变农村体制，农民富足，盖新屋者甚多，多为新式二层楼。新楼已成，旧草屋未拆，新旧对比画出一幅八十年代中国农村大转折的图画。
改体兼营工副农，
买砖户户盖新屋。
New Houses Xindu, Guanghan, and Qionglai have changed the rural system, and the peasants have become wealthy, and many new houses have been built, most of which are new two-story buildings. The new buildings have been completed, the old grass houses have not been demolished, and the contrast between the old and the new paints a picture of the great turning point in rural China in the 80s. Reform and construction and deputy agriculture, Buy brick houses to build new houses.且留旧屋看三年，
且留旧屋看三年，好画人间歌与哭。
好画人间歌与哭。眉山三苏祠
眉山三苏祠三苏祠本苏氏宅，以宅为祠，东坡文云，“家有五亩之园”，今略广，占地约八亩。祠中有井，云是苏氏旧物，今犹清凉可汲，东坡离家时，乡民植丹荔一株，欲待其归来共食。东坡远谪，日啖岭南荔枝三百枚，竟未及与乡人一尝其乡中佳果也。旧植丹荔已死，今所见者系明代补栽，亦枯萎，正在抢救。
三苏祠本苏氏宅，以宅为祠，东坡文云，“家有五亩之园”，今略广，占地约八亩。 祠中有井，云是苏氏旧物，今犹清凉可汲，东坡离家时，乡民植丹荔一株，欲待其归来共食。 东坡远谪，日啖岭南荔枝三百枚，竟未及与乡人一尝其乡中佳果也。 旧植丹荔已死，今所见者系明代补栽，亦枯萎，正在抢救。当日家园有五亩，
当日家园有五亩，至今文字重三苏。
至今文字重三苏。红栏旧井犹堪汲，
红栏旧井犹堪汲，丹荔重栽第几株？
丹荔重栽第几株？过郭沫若同志旧宅
过郭沫若同志旧宅宅在沙湾场。瓦屋五进，颇低小。后有小园，隔墙可望绥山。园有绥山馆，是郭氏私塾，郭老幼年读书于此。“风笛”“猿声”，郭老少年别母诗中词句。
风笛猿声里，
峨眉国士乡。
绥山香不足，
The house is in Shawanchang. The tile house is five in, quite low. There is a small garden behind, and Suishan can be seen across the wall. There is a Suishan Pavilion in the garden, which is Guo's private school, where Guo Lao studied when he was young. "Bagpipes" and "ape sounds", the words in Guo's poem about Guo's young mother. In the sound of bagpipes and apes, Emei National Scholar Township. Suishan insufficient fragrance,投笔叫羲皇。
北温泉夜步
又傍春江作夜行，
征尘洗尽一身轻。
叶密树高好月色，
竹闲风静让泉声。
一处杜鹃啼不歇，
何来桔柚散浓馨。
明朝又下渝州去，
此是川游第几程？
Throwing a pen is called Xihuang. North hot spring night walk And by the spring river for a night walk, The dust of the expedition has washed away my lightness. The leaves are dense and the trees are tall and the moonlight is good, The bamboo is quiet and the wind is quiet, allowing the spring water to sound. A cuckoo cries endlessly, Where does the orange and pomelo emit a strong fragrance? Tomorrow morning, he went to Yuzhou again. How long is this the first trip to Sichuan?诗四首[18]
诗四首[18]今年四月，应作协四川分会及四川人民出版社之邀，往游四川；经川西、川南、川中、川东诸地。车中默数游踪，得若干首。聊记见闻而已，意不在诗。
今年四月，应作协四川分会及四川人民出版社之邀，往游四川；经川西、川南、川中、川东诸地。 车中默数游踪，得若干首。 聊记见闻而已，意不在诗。初入峨眉道中所见
初入峨眉道中所见乱石丛中泉择路，悬崖脚底豆开花。
乱石丛中泉择路，悬崖脚底豆开花。红衣孺子牵黄犊，白发翁婆卖春茶。
红衣孺子牵黄犊，白发翁婆卖春茶。自清音阁至洪椿坪
自清音阁至洪椿坪路依山为栈，山以树为形。
路依山为栈，山以树为形。琴声十二里，泉水出山清。
琴声十二里，泉水出山清。宿洪椿坪夜雨早发
宿洪椿坪夜雨早发山中一夜雨，空翠湿人衣。
山中一夜雨，空翠湿人衣。鸣泉声愈壮，何处子规啼？
媚态观音
媚态观音，静美如好女子。
虽吴生手笔，难画其肌体。
像教度人，原有两种义。
或尚威慑，使人知所畏惧；
或尚感化，使人息其心意。
The sound of the spring water grows even more powerful; where is the cuckoo crying? Charming Guanyin The charming Guanyin is quiet and beautiful, like a good woman. Although Wu Sheng wrote in his handwriting, it is difficult to depict his body. Like teaching, there are two meanings. or deterrence, so that people know what to fear; Or it is still influenced to make people rest their minds.威猛慑人难，柔软感人易。
迩后佛像造形，
遂多取意于儿童少女。
少女无邪，儿童无虑，
即此便是佛意。我于是告天下人：
与其拜佛，不如膜拜少女！
哀皇城[19]
It is difficult to be powerful and intimidating, but it is easy to be soft and touching. Later Buddha statue shaping, So I took a lot of inspiration from children and girls. Girls are innocent, children are carefree, This is the Buddha's will. I then told the world: Instead of worshiping Buddha, it is better to worship a girl! Ai Imperial City[19]柳眠花重雨丝丝，劫后成都似旧时。
独有皇城今不见，刘张霸业使人思。
成都小吃[20]
十载成都无小吃，年丰次第尽重开。
麻辣酸甜滋味别，不醉无归好汉来。（皆餐馆名）
After the disaster, Chengdu remains as old as ever. Only the imperial city is now gone, and the hegemony of Liu and Zhang is nostalgic. Chengdu snacks{{id_0000}} For ten years, there has been no snack in Chengdu, and the harvest is gradually reopened. The spicy and sweet and sour taste is different, and the heroes who are not drunk and have no return are coming. (All restaurant names)离堆[21]
离堆[21]都江堰有离堆
都江堰有离堆乐山有离堆，
乐山有离堆，截断连山分江水。
截断连山分江水。江水安流，
江水安流，太守不归。
太守不归。江水萧萧如鼓吹，
江水萧萧如鼓吹，秦时明月照峨眉。
秦时明月照峨眉。宜宾流杯池[22]
宜宾流杯池[22]山谷在川南，流连多意趣。
山谷在川南，流连多意趣。谁是与宴人，今存流杯处？
谁是与宴人，今存流杯处？石刻化为风，传言难成据。
石刻化为风，传言难成据。迁谪亦佳哉，能行万里路。
迁谪亦佳哉，能行万里路。天泉洞[23]
天泉洞[23]泉来天外，天在地底。
泉来天外，天在地底。千奇百怪，岂有此理。
千奇百怪，岂有此理。兴文石海[24]
兴文石海[24]群峰如沸涌，石势欲滔天。
群峰如沸涌，石势欲滔天。造化钟神秀，平生此壮观。
造化钟神秀，平生此壮观。泊万县[25]
泊万县[25]岸上疏灯如倦眼，中天月色似怀人。
岸上疏灯如倦眼，中天月色似怀人。卧听舷边东逝水，江涛先我下夔门。
卧听舷边东逝水，江涛先我下夔门。天池雪水歌[26]
明月照天山，雪峰淡淡蓝。
春暖雪化水流澌，流入深谷为天池。
天池水如孔雀绿，水中森森万松覆。
有时倒映雪山影，雪山倒影名如玉。
Tianchi Snow Water Song{{id_0000}} The bright moon shines on the Tianshan Mountains, and the snow-capped peaks are faintly blue. The warm spring snow melts and flows into the deep valley to form Tianchi. The water in Tianchi is as green as peacocks, and the water is covered with dense pines. Sometimes the shadow of the snow-capped mountain is reflected, and the reflection of the snow-capped mountain is like jade.天池雪水下山来，快笑高歌不复回。
下山水如蓝玛瑙，卷沫喷花斗奇巧。
雪水流处长榆树，风吹白杨绿火炬。
雪水流处有人家，白白红红大丽花。
雪水流处小麦熟，新面打馕烤羊肉。
The snow-capped water of Tianchi flows down the mountain, laughing and singing joyfully, never to return. The mountains and rivers are like blue agate, and the foam sprays flowers are clever. Where the snow flows, the elm trees grow, and the wind blows the white poplars and green torches. Where the snow flows, there are houses, white and red dahlias. The wheat is ripe where the snow flows, and the new noodles are made with naan and roast lamb.雪水流经山北麓，长宜子孙聚国族。
天池雪水深几许？储量恰当一年雨。
我从燕山向天山，曾度苍茫戈壁滩。
万里西来终不悔，待饮天池一杯水。
早发乌苏望天山[27]
The snow flows through the northern foothills of the mountain, and the descendants of Changyi gather in the country. How deep is the snow water in Tianchi? The reserves are just right for a year of rain. I have crossed the vast Gobi Desert from Yanshan to the Tianshan Mountains. Coming from thousands of miles away from the west, I will never regret it; I will drink a cup of water from the heavenly pool. Early Wusu Wangtianshan[27]苍苍浮紫气，天山真雄伟。
陵谷分阴阳，不假皴擦美。
初阳照积雪，色如胭脂水。
往霍尔果斯途中望天山[28]
天山在天上，没在白云间。
色与云相似，微露数峰巅。
The azure purple mist floats in the sky, and the Tianshan Mountains are truly majestic. The valley is divided into yin and yang, and there is no need to rub the beauty. The first sun shines on the snow, its color resembling cousin water. On the way to Khorgos, I looked at the Tianshan Mountains{{id_0000}} The Tianshan Mountains are in the sky, disappearing among the white clouds. The color resembles that of the clouds, slightly revealing the peaks of several peaks.只从蓝襞褶，遥知这是山。
雨晴，自伊犁往尼勒克车中望乌孙山[29]
一痕界破地天间，浅绛依稀暗暗蓝。
夹道白杨无尽绿，殷红数点女郎衫。
尼勒克[30]
Just from the blue pleats, I know from a distance that this is a mountain. After the rain, I went from Ili to Nileke to look at Wusun Mountain id_0000 from the car A trace breaks the earth and the sky, the light crimson faintly faintly dark blue. The poplars on both sides of the road are endlessly green, and a few crimson dots are dotted with the girl's shirt. Nilek[30]山形依旧乌孙国，公主琵琶尚有声。
至今团聚十三族，不尽长河绕县行。
尼勒克赠赵林[31]
白杨摇绿，苹果垂红。
六畜繁息，五谷丰登。
自题菊花图[32]
The shape of the mountain remains the same as that of the Wusun Kingdom, and the princess's pipa still sounds. So far, thirteen tribes have been reunited, and the long river has not been exhausted around the county. Neilke gifted Zhao Lin[32] The poplar shakes green, and the apple is red. Livestock multiply, and the grains are abundant. Self-titled chrysanthemum picture [32]种菊不安篱，任它恣意长。
昨夜落秋霜，随风自俯仰。
一九八二年十一月不是七日就是八日汪曾祺
时女儿汪明在旁瞎出主意
游湖南桃花源[33]
一
红桃曾照秦时月，黄菊重开陶令花。
大乱十年成一梦，与君安坐吃擂茶。
二
Zeng Qijing greeted Dexi and Kong Jing for the New Year On February 2, 1984, he made a lotus painting and title for Zhu Dexi. Two修竹姗姗节子长，山中高树已经霜。
经霜竹子皆无语，小鸟啾啾为底忙？
三
On March 20, 1984, there was a strong wind that day, and I couldn't go out, Zeng Qi remembered On March 20, 1984, he made a cactus painting and title for Wu Ningkun. Three山下鸡鸣相应答，林间鸟语自高低。
The red peach blossoms once illuminated the moon of the Qin Dynasty, and the yellow chrysanthemums bloomed again. Ten years of chaos have become a dream, and I sit down with you to eat tea. Two The tall bamboo trees in the mountains have already been frosted. The bamboo that has endured frost is silent, and the birds are busy chirping. Three The rooster crowing in response at the foot of the mountain, and the birds in the forest chirp in unison.芭蕉叶响知来雨，已觉清流涨小溪。
芭蕉叶响知来雨，已觉清流涨小溪。寿沈从文先生八十[34]
寿沈从文先生八十[34]犹及回乡听楚声，此身虽在总堪惊。
犹及回乡听楚声，此身虽在总堪惊。海内文章谁是我，长河流水浊还清。
海内文章谁是我，长河流水浊还清。玩物从来非丧志，著书老去为抒情。
玩物从来非丧志，著书老去为抒情。避寿瞒人贪寂寞，小车只顾走辚辚。
戏赠宗璞[35]
壮游谁似冯宗璞，打伞遮阳过太湖。
却看碧波千万顷，北归流入枕边书。
1983年
Avoiding longevity and concealing loneliness, the small cart only cares about the wandering around. Gift to Zong Pu {{id_0000}} Who can compare to Feng Zongpu on grand tours, holding an umbrella to shield himself from the sun and crossing Taihu Lake? Looking back at the vast blue waves, I have returned to the north and flowed into the letters I wrote by my pillow. In 1983自题画作《偶写家乡楝实》[36]
轻花淡紫殿余春，结实离离秋已深。
倒挂西风鸦不食，绿珠一树雪封门。
菏泽牡丹[37]
造化师人意，春秋在畚锸。
Self-titled painting "Occasionally Writing Hometown Neem Fruit" {{id_0000}} The light flowers in the pale purple palace are still in spring, and the fruits are already deep in autumn. The west wind blows upside down, and the crows do not eat, while a tree of green pearls seals the door with snow. Heze Peony{{id_0000}} The will of the Creator is determined by the shovel in the spring and autumn.曹州天下奇，红粉黄金甲。
曹州天下奇，红粉黄金甲。梁山[38]
梁山[38]远闻钜野泽，来上宋江山。
远闻钜野泽，来上宋江山。马道横今古，寨墙积暮烟。
马道横今古，寨墙积暮烟。旧址颇茫渺，遗规尚俨然。
旧址颇茫渺，遗规尚俨然。何当觇杏帜，舟渡蓼花滩。
何当觇杏帜，舟渡蓼花滩。（一九八三年四月二十四日）
（一九八三年四月二十四日）登大境门[39]
登大境门[39]云涌张家口，
云涌张家口，风吹大境门。
风吹大境门。崇岭围南北，
崇岭围南北，边墙横古今。
边墙横古今。战守经千载，
战守经千载，丸泥塞万军。
丸泥塞万军。欲问兴亡意，
欲问兴亡意，烽台倚夕曛。
烽台倚夕曛。重来张家口，读《浪花》小说有感[40]
我昔为迁客，学稼兼学圃，
往来坝上下，曾历三寒暑。
或绑葡萄条，或锄玉蜀黍，
插秧及背稻，汗下如蒸煮。
偶或弄彩墨，谱画马铃薯，
Coming back to Zhangjiakou, reading the novel "Waves" has a feeling{{id_0000}} I used to be a migrant, studying crops and gardening. He traveled up and down the dam and experienced three winters and summers. Or tying grape strips, or hoeing jade millet, Planting seedlings and backing rice is like steaming. Occasionally, he plays with colored ink and paints potatoes,坐对一丛花，眸子炯如虎。
坐对一丛花，眸子炯如虎。人或谓饴甘，我不厌荼苦，
人或谓饴甘，我不厌荼苦，身虽在异乡，亲之如故土。
身虽在异乡，亲之如故土。唯恨文采输，佳作寥可数，
唯恨文采输，佳作寥可数，思之亦萦梦，浪花何日舞。
思之亦萦梦，浪花何日舞。今我来旧地，披读才三五。
今我来旧地，披读才三五。矍然喜且惊，篇半珠光吐。
矍然喜且惊，篇半珠光吐。如怀良苗新，已觉雏凤翥，
崛起期有日，太息肠可拊。
谁是育苗人，作此春风雨。
一九八三年六月廿一日走笔于张家口
重来张家口[41]
北国山河壮，
西窗客思深。
If you embrace a good seedling, you will already feel that the young phoenix is soaring. The rise is a day, and the sigh is heart-pounding. Who is the seedling-raising person who is doing this spring storm? On June 21, 1983, I wrote in Zhangjiakou Come back to Zhangjiakou{{id_0000}} The mountains and rivers of the northern country are strong, The guest in the west window thinks deeply.重来迁谪地，
转能觉相亲。
一九八三年六月廿二日
重过沙岭子[42]
二十三年弹指过，
悠悠临水过洋河。
风吹杨树加拿大，
雾湿葡萄波尔多。
白发故人还相识，
Come back to the place of exile, I can feel close to each other. June 22, 1983 Heavier than Shalingzi{{id_0000}} Twenty-three years have passed, Slowly crossing the Yang River by the water. The wind blows the poplar canada, The fog soaked the grapes Bordeaux. The white-haired old friends still know each other,谁家稚子学唱歌。
曾历沧桑增感慨，
相期更上一层坡。
离开此地已二十三年矣！晤诸旧识，深以为快。
一九八三年六月廿三日
题冬日菊花[43]
Whose child learns to sing? I have experienced the vicissitudes of life and sighed, We agreed to go up a slope. It's been 23 years since I left this place! I am very happy to meet some old acquaintances. June 23, 1983 Title: Winter Chrysanthemum[43]新沏清茶饭后烟，自搔短发负晴暄。
枝头残菊开还好，留得秋光过小年。
花果山[44]
刻舟胶柱真多事，传说何妨姑妄言。
满纸荒唐《西游记》，人间幻境花果山。
1984年
After the meal, I brewed fresh tea and smoked, scratching my short hair to enjoy the warmth of the sun. The withered chrysanthemums on the branches bloom quite well, allowing for the spring and autumn to linger the New Year. Huaguo Mountain{{id_0000}} Carving a boat and a rubber pillar is really troublesome, and the legend is not a bad thing. Full of absurd "Journey to the West", the fantasy of the world Huaguo Mountain. In 1984一九八三年除夕子时戏作[45]
六十三年辞我去，飘然消逝入苍微。
此夜欣逢双甲子，何曾惆怅一丁儿。
秋花不似春花落，黄鸟时兼白鸟飞。
One On New Year's Eve in 1983, I played a young Cambodian writer, and I recorded it with Dexi to see it, and I knew that I was old but not degraded. Sixty-three years later, I bid farewell to you, drifting away into the sky. Tonight, I am happy to meet the two Jiazi, and I have never been sad about a child. Autumn flowers do not fall like spring flowers, and sometimes the yellow birds fly alongside the white ones.敢与诸君争席地，从今泻酒戒深杯。
题《长篇小说报》[46]
久闻燕赵士，慷慨能悲歌。
花山花熠熠，硕果满青柯。
应花山出版社长篇小说报属汪曾祺
桑植[47]
咏贺龙
Title: "Novel Newspaper" {{id_0000}} I have long heard that the scholars of Yan and Zhao are generous and can sing sorrowful songs. The flowers are shining, and the fruits are full of green branches. Yinghuashan Publishing House's novel newspaper belongs to Wang Zengqi Sangzhi{{id_0000}} Singing He Long龙飞桑植乡，欲为天下雨。
鳞甲遭摧折，哀哉遽如弥。
咏贺湘
贺门多女杰，质比雪霜洁。
血飞桑鹤山，澧水浪千叠。
（一九八四年八月）
1986年
The dragon flies in the mulberry tree village, wanting to rain for the world. The scales and armor have been broken, and the sadness is so sudden. Ode to He Xiang He Men has many female heroes, and his texture is as pure as snow and frost. Blood flows across Sanghe Mountain, and the waves of the Li River rise in layers. (August 1984) In 1986为宗璞画牡丹并题[48]
人间存一角，聊放侧枝花。
临风亦自得，不共赤城霞。
北岳文艺出版社通俗文学讨论会
Painted peonies for Zong Pu and inscribed {{id_0000}} There is still a corner in the world, and I will let go of the side flowers. Standing in the wind is also at ease, unlike the glow of the red city. Beiyue Literature and Art Publishing House Popular Literature Seminar在常德召开，即席口占[49]北岳谈文到南岳，巴人也可唱阳春。
渔父屈原相视笑，两昆仑是一昆仑。
（一九八六年五月二十六日）
题黄龙洞[50]
Held in Changde, the impromptu oral occupation of [50] Beiyue talks to Nanyue, and the Ba people can also sing Yangchun. The fisherman Qu Yuan looked at each other and smiled, saying that two Kunlun Mountains are one Kunlun. (May 26, 1986) Title: Huanglong Cave [50]索溪峪自索溪峪，何必津津说桂林。
谁与风光评甲乙，黄龙石笋正生孙。
（一九八六年五月二十九日）
宝峰湖[51]
一鉴深藏锁翠微，移来三峡四周围。
Suoxiyu is from Suoxiyu, why talk about Guilin. Who can compare the scenery with the A and B, and the Huanglong stalagmite is giving birth to a grandson. (May 29, 1986) Baofeng Lake{{id_0000}} A mirror is hidden deep in the emerald moon, moving to the surroundings of the Three Gorges.游船驶入青山影，惊起鸳鸯对对飞。
（一九八六年五月三十日）
贺家乡文联成立[52]
风流千古说文游，烟柳隋堤一望收。
座上秦郎今在否，与卿同泛甓湖舟。
The boat sailed into the shadows of the green mountains, startling the mandarin ducks flying in pairs. (May 30, 1986) Congratulations on the establishment of the Hometown Federation of Literary and Art Circles{{id_0000}} The charm of the past is said to be a literary tour, and the misty willows and Sui embankment are all gone. Is Qin Lang still here? I wish to take a boat with you on the brick lake.（一九八六年六月）
自题水仙图[53]
玉作精神水作魂，一年春尽一年春。
写罢搔头无处寄，令人却忆赵王孙。
（一九八六年八月）
(June 1986) Self-titled Narcissus Picture {{id_0000}} Jade is the spirit of the water as the soul, and the spring of the year is the end of the spring. After writing this, I scratch my head and have nowhere else to send it, reminiscent of Zhao Wangsun. (August 1986)书贺《作家》创刊三十年[54]
清影珊珊小叶杨，繁花簇簇紫丁香。
卅年风雨春犹在，待看长春春更长。
长春昔日路边皆植小叶杨树，丁香花甚多，今犹如此否？
一九八六年七月北京
Letter to congratulate the 30th anniversary of the founding of "Writer"{{id_0000}} The clear shadow is a small poplar, and the flowers are clustered with lilacs. The stormy spring of thirty years is still there, waiting to see the long spring even longer. In the past, small-leaved poplar trees were planted along the roadside in Changchun, and there were many lilacs. Is it still the same today? July 1986 Beijing毓珉治印歌[55]
少年刻印换酒钱，润例高悬五华山。
非秦非汉非今古，放笔挥刀气如虎。
四十年来劳案牍，钢刀生锈铜生绿。
十年大乱幸苟全，谁复商量到管弦？
Yumin governs the seal song{{id_0000}} The young man carved the seal to exchange wine money, and the run-example hung high on Wuhua Mountain. Neither Qin nor Han, nor ancient or modern, put down the pen and wield the sword, like a tiger. Over the past forty years, the steel knives have rusted and the copper has turned green. After ten years of chaos, I was lucky enough to survive; who can discuss the orchestra again?即今宇内承平日，当年豪气未能遏。
即今宇内承平日，当年豪气未能遏。浪游迹遍江湖海，偶逢佳石倾囊买。
浪游迹遍江湖海，偶逢佳石倾囊买。少年积习未能消，老眼酒酣再奏刀。
少年积习未能消，老眼酒酣再奏刀。晚岁渐于诗律细，摹古时时出新意。
晚岁渐于诗律细，摹古时时出新意。亦秦亦汉亦文何，方寸青田大天地。
亦秦亦汉亦文何，方寸青田大天地。大巧若拙见精神，自古金石能寿人。
毓珉治印，自成一家，奔放蕴藉间有之。承画二方，均甚佳，戏作短歌为谢。
一九八六年十月
Great cleverness is like a clumsy spirit, and since ancient times, gold and stone can live longer. Yumin manages the seal and forms a family of its own, unrestrained and subtle. The two sides of the painting are very good, and the short song is a thank you. October 1986贺政道校友六十寿辰兼宇称 不守恒定律发现三十年[56]
三十年前三十岁，回头定不负滇池。
学承牛爱陈新意，梦绕巴黔忆故枝。
先墓犹存香雪海，儿孙解读宋唐诗。
Congratulations to Zhengdao alumni on their 60th birthday and the title of the discovery of the law of non-conservation for 30 years{{id_0000}} Thirty years ago, I was thirty years old, and I will definitely not live up to Dianchi Lake when I look back. Learn to inherit the new ideas of the cow, and dream around Baqian to remember the old branches. The ancestral tomb still has a sea of fragrant snow, and the children and grandchildren interpret the poems of the Song and Tang dynasties.即今宇内承平日，正待先生借箸时。
西南联大校友会贺汪曾祺缀句并书一九八六年十月北京
赠许荫章[57]
相交少年时，上课曾同桌。
君未出闾里，我则似萍泊。
Now is the time for the world to be peaceful, and it is time for you to borrow chopsticks. Southwest Associated University Alumni Association congratulations Wang Zengqi on the sentence and book October 1986 Beijing Gift of the Shade Medal{{id_0000}} When we were young, we used to be at the same table in class. You haven't left the countryside, and I am like a duckweed.君已为良医，我从事写作。
如今俱老矣，所幸犹矍铄。
何时一樽酒，与君细斟酌。
1987年
贺路翎重写小说[58]
劫灰深处拨寒灰，谁信人间二度梅。
You are already a good doctor, and I am engaged in writing. Now that they are all old, fortunately, they are still very strong. When will we have a cup of fine wine to carefully consider with you? In 1987 He Luling rewrote the novel{{id_0000}} In the depths of the calamity, the cold ashes are stirred up; who believes that the plum blossoms in the world are the second time?拨尽寒灰翻不说，枝头窈窕迎春晖。
（一九八七年一月十四日）
元宵[59]
一事胜人堪自笑，
年年生日上元灯。
春回地暖融新雪，
老去文思忆旧情。
欲动人心无小补，
Brushing aside the cold ashes, I can't help but turn them around, and the branches are graceful enough to welcome the spring glow. (January 14, 1987) Lantern Festival{{id_0000}} One thing is better than laughing at oneself, Every birthday, the Lantern Lantern. Spring returns to warm the ground and melt fresh snow, As I grow old, I reminisce about the past. It doesn't help to move people's hearts,不图海外博虚名。
清时独坐饶滋味，
幽草河边渐渐生。
六十七岁生日自寿[60]
尚有三年方七十，看花犹喜眼双明。
劳生且读闲居赋，少小曾谙陋室铭。
I didn't expect to be famous overseas. Sitting alone in the clear times is full of taste, The secluded grass by the river gradually grows. Sixty-seventh birthday self-id_0000}} There are still three years left to turn seventy, and I still enjoy the flowers, and my eyes are bright and bright. I am also familiar with the inscriptions of humble houses in my youth.弄笔偶成书四卷，浪游数得路千程。
至今仍作儿时梦，自在飞腾遍体轻。
（一九八七年二月十二日）
泼水归来[61]
泼水归来日未曛，散抛锥栗入深林。
Playing with the pen and occasionally writing four volumes, wandering thousands of miles away. To this day, it is still a childhood dream, flying freely and lightly. (February 12, 1987) Splashing Water Return{{id_0000}} After returning from splashing water, it was not yet dark, and I tossed the chestnut cones into the deep woods.铓锣象鼓声犹在，缅桂梢头晾筒裙。
铓锣象鼓声犹在，缅桂梢头晾筒裙。（一九八七年四月十二日）
（一九八七年四月十二日）赠韩映山[62]
赠韩映山[62]冀北淀中水，滇南山上花。
冀北淀中水，滇南山上花。研作一池墨，好图万里家。
研作一池墨，好图万里家。（一九八七年四月）
题赠[63]（本为燕赵客）
本为燕赵客，惯食凉州瓜。
朔风吹白草，高卧听鸣沙。
（一九八七年四月）
题腾冲和顺图书馆[64]
开轩迎碧岭，拾级觌文光。
Title gift {{id_0000}} (originally for Yan Zhao guest) Originally a guest from Yan and Zhao, I am accustomed to eating melons from Liangzhou. The north wind blows the white grass, and I lie high listening to the sound of sand. (April 1987) Ti Tengchong Heshun Library{{id_0000}} Open the window to welcome the green ridge, and climb the steps to see the literary light.海外千程路，楼中万卷书。
哲士何尝萎，余风在里闾。
（一九八七年四月十八日）
广西杂诗[65]
桂林（一）
山皆奇特如盆景，
水尽温柔似女郎。
山水真堪天下甲，
The journey overseas is a thousand miles, and there are thousands of books in the building. The wise have never withered, and the lingering wind lingers in the alleys. (April 18, 1987) Guangxi Miscellaneous Poems{{id_0000}} Guilin (1) The mountains are as peculiar as bonsai, When the water is gone, she is as gentle as a girl. The landscape is truly the best in the world,桂林小住不思乡。
桂林（二）
谁人叠出桂林山，
和尚石涛酒后禅。
大绿浓青都泼尽，
更余淡墨作云烟。
桂林（三）
漓江水似碧琉璃，
两岸连山处处奇。
如此风光谁道得，
I don't feel homesick when I live in Guilin. Guilin (2) Who stacked out of Guilin Mountain, Monk Shi Tao abdicated after drinking. The big green and thick green are all spilled, There is still a light ink left to make clouds and smoke. Guilin (3) The water of the Li River is like blue glass, The mountains on both sides of the river are strange everywhere. Who can say such a scenery,桂林虽好不吟诗。
桂林（四）
不到广西画石涛，
东涂西抹总皮毛。
并非和尚画山水，
乃是云山画石涛。
桂林（五）
描摹清景入新词，
烟雨漓江欲霁时。
待寄所思无一字，
Although Guilin is fond of poetry, he does not recite poetry. Guilin (4) When I arrived in Guangxi to paint Shi Tao, Paint the entire fur from east to west. It is not that monks paint landscapes, It is the clouds and mountains painted with stone waves. Guilin (5) Describing the clear scenery into new words, Just as the misty rain is about to clear the Lijiang River. When I send my thoughts without a word,桂林宜画不宜诗。
南宁（一）
遍地花开香豆蔻，
沿街树种蜜菠萝。
邕州人物何清雅，
日啖荔枝三百颗。
南宁（二）
芭蕉叶大荔枝红，
香惹晨岚向晚风。
绿树窗前多不识，
Guilin should be painted rather than poetry. Nanning (1) Flowers bloom everywhere, fragrant cardamom, Honey pineapples are planted along the street. He Qingya, a figure in Yongzhou, He ate three hundred lychees every day. Nanning (2) Banana leaves are large lychee red, The fragrance stirs the morning mist and the evening breeze. Many people don't recognize in front of the green tree window,去来只惜太匆匆。
一九八七年六月
桂林·南宁·北京
题赠[66]（山水甲天下）
山水甲天下，文章近若何？
会看挥椽笔，淋漓朱墨多。
（一九八七年六月）
广西[67]
广西[67]何年始开土，至今余铜鼓。
何年始开土，至今余铜鼓。炎方草木深，万物易孽乳。
炎方草木深，万物易孽乳。柳州文字奇，壮族娴歌舞。
柳州文字奇，壮族娴歌舞。流风岂消歇，十月花先吐。
流风岂消歇，十月花先吐。（一九八七年六月）
邕江[68]
邕江[68]桥上看邕江，园中识豆蔻。
北客到南疆，馨香盈两袖。
（一九八七年六月）
贺保罗·安格尔七十九岁生日[69]
From the bridge, I gaze at the Yong River, and in the garden, I can see cardamom. When a traveler from the north arrives in southern Xinjiang, the fragrance fills his sleeves. (June 1987) Congratulations on Paul Ingres' 79th birthday[69]安寓堪安寓（他家的门上钉了一块铜牌，刻字两行，上面一行是Engle，下面是中文的“安寓”），秋来万树红，此间何人住？天地一诗翁。此翁真健者，鹤发面如童。才思犹俊逸，步态不龙钟。心闲如静水，无事亦匆匆：弯腰拾山果，投食食浣熊。大笑时拍案，小饮自从容。何物同君寿？南山顶上松。
An Yu can An Yu (a bronze plaque is nailed to the door of his house, engraved with two lines, the top line is Engle, and the bottom is the Chinese "An Yu"), the autumn is red with thousands of trees, who lives here? A poet in heaven and earth. This old man is really strong, and his crane hair and face are like a child. The talent is still handsome, and the gait is not dragon bells. The heart is as leisurely as still water, and there is nothing to do: bend down to pick up mountain fruits and feed raccoons. When laughing, shoot the case and drink calmly. What is the same as Junshou? Pine on the top of Nanshan Mountain.题四川兴文竹海图[70]
竹林如大海，弥望皆苍然。
枝繁隔鸟语，叶密藏炊烟。
人输玉兰片，仍用青竹担。
儿童生嚼笋，滋味似蔗甘。
1988年
Title: Sichuan Xingwen Bamboo Sea Map{{id_0000}} The bamboo forest is like the sea, and everything is vast and desolate. The dense branches and dense birds chirp, the leaves hide the smoke from cooking. When people send magnolia slices, they still use green bamboo to carry them. Children chew bamboo shoots raw, and the taste is like sugarcane. In 1988田园庄[71]
田园庄[71]东北望，西北望，四望何空旷。莽苍苍，古战场，遥想铁铠飞锽，重营叠嶂。今俱往，韩昌六郎。但平芜尽处，柳梢青，春荡漾，杳杳见扶桑。
东北望，西北望，四望何空旷。 莽苍苍，古战场，遥想铁铠飞锽，重营叠嶂。 今俱往，韩昌六郎。 但平芜尽处，柳梢青，春荡漾，杳杳见扶桑。应田园庄属 一九八八年三月
应田园庄属 一九八八年三月寿马少波同志七十[72]
寿马少波同志七十[72]红花岁岁炫颜色，青史滔滔唱海桑。
红花岁岁炫颜色，青史滔滔唱海桑。信是明妍天下甲，西厢双至咏西厢。
信是明妍天下甲，西厢双至咏西厢。（一九八八年三月）
（一九八八年三月）自题小像[73]
自题小像[73]近事模糊远事真，双眸犹幸未全昏。
衰年变法谈何易，唱罢莲花又一春。
（一九八八年十二月二十五日）
1989年
呈范用[74]
忽忆童年春节，兼欲与友人述近况，权当拜年
The recent events are blurred, and the distant events are true; fortunately, my eyes are not completely dim. In my old age, I have changed my ways, and it is not easy to talk about it; after singing, it is another spring for the lotus flowers. (December 25, 1988) In 1989 {{id_0000}} Suddenly, he remembered the Spring Festival in his childhood and wanted to share the recent situation with his friends, so he temporarily paid his respects to the New Year
醒来惊觉纸窗明，雪后精神特地清。
瓦缶一枝天竹果，瓷瓶百沸去年冰。
似曾相识迎宾客，无可奈何罢酒钟。
咬得春盘心里美，题诗作画不称翁。
（一九八九年一月三十日）
Waking up to the paper window, I feel particularly refreshed after the snow. A clay pot is a branch of heavenly bamboo fruit, and the porcelain bottle boils a hundred times as ice as ice as last year. It seems familiar to welcome guests, but there is no way to stop drinking. Biting into the spring plate is beautiful in my heart, and I can't call myself an old man when writing poetry and painting. (January 30, 1989)我为什么写作[75]
我事写作，原因无他：
从小到大，数学不佳。
考入大学，成天“泡茶”，[76]
读中文系，看书很杂。
偶写诗文，幸蒙刊发。
Why I wrote {{id_0000}} I write for no other reason: From childhood to adulthood, I was not good at math. Admitted to university, "making tea" all day long, {{id_0000}} Reading Chinese department is very complicated. Occasionally, I write poetry and prose, and I am fortunate to be published.百无一用，乃成作家。
百无一用，乃成作家。弄笔半纪[77]，今已华发，
弄笔半纪[77]，今已华发，成就甚少，无可矜夸。
成就甚少，无可矜夸。有何思想？实近儒家。
有何思想？实近儒家。人道其里，抒情其华。
人道其里，抒情其华。有何风格？兼容并纳。
有何风格？兼容并纳。不今不古，文俗则雅。
不今不古，文俗则雅。与人无争，性颇通达。
如此而已，实在呒啥。
（一九八九年三月七日）
赠星云大师[78]
出家还在家，含笑指琼花。
慈悲千万户，天地一袈裟。
（一九八九年三月三十一日）
He had no quarrels with others and was very open-minded. That's all, what is it? (March 7, 1989) Gift to Master Nebula {{id_0000}} After becoming a monk, I still stay at home, smiling and pointing at the jade flowers. Compassion is for thousands of households, and heaven and earth are like a cassock. (March 31, 1989)秦少游读书台[79]
柳花帆影草如茵，遗踪苍茫尚可寻。
遥想凭栏把卷处，吟诗犹是旧乡音。
为《珠湖春汛》报告文学集题词[80]
Qin Shaoyou Reading Platform[80] The willow flowers and the shadows of the sails are like grass, and the traces of the remnants can still be found in the vastness. Leaning against the railing, I recall the place where I read the book, reciting poetry that still echoes the melody of my hometown. Inscription for the reportage collection of "Zhuhu Spring Flood"[80]珠湖春汛近如何，缩项鳊鱼价几多。
唯愿吾民堪鼓腹，百舟载货出漕河。
题漳州八宝印泥厂[81]
天外霞，石榴花。
古艳流千载，清芬入万家。
（一九八九年十二月）
How is the spring flood in Zhuhu Lake? How much is the price of shrinking bream? I only hope that my people can be filled with bellies, and hundreds of ships will carry goods out of the canal river. Title: Zhangzhou Babao Printing Clay Factory{{id_0000}} The sky is full of clouds, pomegranate flowers. The ancient beauty has been passed down for thousands of years, and the fragrance of the fragrance has entered thousands of households. (December 1989)1990年
七十书怀出律不改[82]
悠悠七十犹耽酒，唯觉登山步履迟。
书画萧萧余宿墨，文章淡淡忆儿时。
也写书评也作序，不开风气不为师。
In 1990 70 Books of Caribbean Law Unchanged {{id_0000}} At the age of seventy, I still indulge in wine, only to feel that my steps are slow while climbing the mountain. The calligraphy and painting are desolate, and the ink is left in the past, and the writing is faintly reminiscent of my childhood. I also write book reviews and prefaces, and I don't open the atmosphere and don't be a teacher.假我十年闲粥饭，未知留得几囊诗。
（一九九○年二月十日）
赠赵本夫[83]
人来人往桃叶渡，风停风起莫愁湖。
相逢屠狗毋相迓，依旧当年赵本夫。
If I have ten years of idle porridge and rice, I don't know how many bags of poetry I will keep. (February 10, 1990) Gift to Zhao Benfu {{id_0000}} People come and go at the Peach Leaf Ferry, and when the wind stops, the wind rises from Mochou Lake. When we meet, we meet and kill dogs, do not welcome each other, just like Zhao Benfu back then.题《百味斋日记》[84]
轻霜渐觉秋菘熟，细雨微间蒲笋滋。
日日清时皆有味，岂因租吏便无诗。
1991年
辛未新正打油[85]
Title: "Diary of a Baiweizhai" [85] A light frost gradually begins to speak, and the autumn herbs are ripe, while the fine rain drizzles and bamboo shoots are nourishing. Every day is clear and the time is delicious, how can it be that there are no poems because the rent officials do not have poetry? In 1991 Xinwei Xinzheng oil [85]宜入新春未是春，残笺宿墨隔年人。
屠苏已禁浮三白，生菜犹能簇五辛。
望断梅花无信息，看他桃偶长精神。
老夫亦有闲筹算，吃饭天天吃半斤。

旧体诗、长短句

七十一岁[86]
It is time to enter the new year, but it is not spring; the remaining letters are inked for the next year. Tusu has been banned from floating three whites, and lettuce can still be clustered with five spicy dishes. Gazing at the plum blossoms, there is no message, and the peach puppet is full of energy. I also have some free time, and I eat half a pound every day. Seventy-one years old[86]七十一岁弹指耳，苍苍来径已模糊。
深居未厌新感觉，老学闲抄旧读书。
百镒难求罪己诏，一钱不值升官图。
元宵节也休空过，尚有风鸡酒一壶。
昆明[87]
At the age of seventy-one, the path has become blurred. Living in the deep and not tired of the new feeling, the old school is idle copying old books. It is difficult to ask for a hundred dollars to blame one's own edict, and a penny is not worth a promotion. Don't let the Lantern Festival pass by empty-handed; there is still a pot of chicken wine in the wind. Kunming[87]羁旅天南久未还，故乡无此好湖山。
羁旅天南久未还，故乡无此好湖山。长堤柳色浓如许，觅我游踪五十年。
长堤柳色浓如许，觅我游踪五十年。（一九九一年四月初）
犹是云南朝暮云[88]
犹是云南朝暮云[88]犹是云南朝暮云，笳吹弦诵有余音。
犹是云南朝暮云，笳吹弦诵有余音。莲花池畔芊芊草，绿遍天涯几度春。
（一九九一年四月初）
红塔山[89]
玉溪好风日，兹土偏宜烟。
宁减十年寿，不忘红塔山。
（一九九一年四月八日）
The lush grass by the lotus pond is lush and green, and it has been a few springs in the world. (Early April 1991) Hongta Mountain{{id_0000}} The winds and sunshine of Yuxi are beautiful, and this land is particularly suitable for smoke. I would rather shorten my life by ten years than forget the Red Pagoda Mountain. (April 8, 1991)戏赠高伟[90]
湛湛两泓秋水眼，深深一片护胸毛。
沙滩自有安眠处，不逐滩头上下潮。
（一九九一年四月）
赠李林栋[91]
Drama gift to Gao Wei[91] The eyes of the two deep autumn waters are deep in the chest hair. The beach has its own place to sleep, and it does not chase the tide up and down on the beach. (April 1991) Gift to Li Lindong[91]踏破崎岖似坦途，论□结交满江湖。
唇如少女眼儿媚，固是昂藏一丈夫。
（一九九一年四月）
戏赠李迪[92]
草帽已成蕉叶坡，倭衫犹似菜花黄。
Stepping through the rugged road seems to be a smooth road, and the □ is full of friends. Her lips were like a girl's eyes, and she was a man. (April 1991) Gift to Li Di {{id_0000}} The straw hat has become a banana leaf slope, and the Japanese shirt still resembles the yellow color of a cauliflower.几度泼湿吉祥水，本性轻狂转更狂。
（一九九一年四月）
致朱德煕[93]
梦中喝得长江水，老去犹为孺子牛。
陌上花开今一度，翩然何日复归休？
Splashed with auspicious water several times, his nature turned frivolous and even more crazy. (April 1991) To Zhu Dehui{{id_0000}} In my dreams, I drink the waters of the Yangtze River, and in old age, I still feel like a cow in a child. The flowers on the path bloom once again; when will they return to their original state?戏柬斤澜[94]
编修罢去一身轻，愁听青词诵道经。
几度随时言好事，从今不再误苍生。
文章也读新潮浪，古董唯藏旧酒瓶。
且吃小葱拌豆腐，看他五鼠闹东京。
Drama Cambodia Jinlan{{id_0000}} After the editor's dismissal, I feel light, and I am troubled to listen to the green poems reciting Taoist scriptures. Several times at any time, good things will not be miserable from now on. The article also reads the new tide, and the antiques only hide old wine bottles. Let's eat shallots mixed with tofu, and watch his five rats make trouble in Tokyo.泰山归来[95]
我从泰山归，携归一片云。
开匣忽相视，化作雨霖霖。
（一九九一年七月）
为张抗抗画牡丹并题[96]
看朱成碧且由他，大道从来直似斜。
Return of Tarzan{{id_0000}} I returned from Mount Tai, bringing back a piece of clouds. When I opened the box, I suddenly looked at each other, and it turned into rain. (July 1991) For Zhang Kangkang to paint peonies and inscribe {{id_0000}} Look at Zhu Chengbi and let him go; the main road has always been as straight as a slanted road.见说洛阳春索寞，牡丹拒绝著繁花。
（一九九一年初秋）
赠张守仁[97]
独有慧心分品格，不随俗眼看文章。
归来多幸蒙闺宠，削得生梨浸齿凉。
（一九九一年秋）
高邮中学[98]
红亭紫竹觅遗踪，此是当年赞化宫。
绛帐风流今胜昔，一堂济济坐春风。
（一九九一年十月）
It is difficult to be unconventional in popular culture, and the first thing that is interesting is the article. After ten years of hard work and wind and rain, I have listened to the words of fishermen and woodcutters. The article may have a sense of mountains and forests, but how can I be a painter in other matters? I have no time to buy rouge. (October 1991)回乡书赠母校诸同学[99]
Gaoyou Middle School[99] The red pavilion and purple bamboo are searching for traces; this is the Zanhua Palace back then. The crimson tent is more charming than ever, and the hall is crowded and sits in the spring breeze. (October 1991) Letter to my alma mater [99]乡音已改发如蓬，梦里频年记故踪。
乡音已改发如蓬，梦里频年记故踪。疏钟隐隐承天寺，杨柳依依赞化宫。
疏钟隐隐承天寺，杨柳依依赞化宫。半世未忘来旧雨，一堂今日坐春风。
半世未忘来旧雨，一堂今日坐春风。高邮湖水深如许，待看长天万里鹏。
高邮湖水深如许，待看长天万里鹏。（一九九一年十月）
It is difficult to be unconventional in popular culture, and the first thing that is interesting is the article. After ten years of hard work and wind and rain, I have listened to the words of fishermen and woodcutters. The article may have a sense of mountains and forests, but how can I be a painter in other matters? I have no time to buy rouge. (October 1991)赠文联[100]
国士秦郎此故乡，西楼乐府曲中王。
江山代有才人出，不负神珠甓射光。
（一九九一年十月）
It is difficult to be unconventional in popular culture, and the first thing that is interesting is the article. After ten years of hard work and wind and rain, I have listened to the words of fishermen and woodcutters. The article may have a sense of mountains and forests, but how can I be a painter in other matters? I have no time to buy rouge. (October 1991)高邮王氏纪念馆[101]
皓首穷经眼欲枯，
Gift Couplet {{id_0000}} The national hero Qin Lang is the hometown of Qin Lang, and he is the king of the music in the West Tower. The country has talented individuals for generations, living up to the brilliance of divine pearls and bricks. (October 1991) Gaoyou Wang Memorial Hall{{id_0000}} The white head is exhausted, and the eyes are dry,自甘寂寞探龙珠。
清芬谁继王家学[102]，
此福高邮世所无。
（一九九一年十月）
It is difficult to be unconventional in popular culture, and the first thing that is interesting is the article. After ten years of hard work and wind and rain, I have listened to the words of fishermen and woodcutters. The article may have a sense of mountains and forests, but how can I be a painter in other matters? I have no time to buy rouge. (October 1991)北海谣[103]
——题北海大酒店[104]
I am willing to explore the dragon balls in loneliness. Qingfen who succeeded Wang Jiaxue[104], This kind of blessing is unprecedented in the Gaoyou era. (October 1991) North Sea Ballad [104] ——Title Beihai Hotel[104]家近傅公桥，
家近傅公桥，未闻有北海。
未闻有北海。突兀见此屋，
突兀见此屋，远视东塔矮。
远视东塔矮。（一九九一年十月）
It is difficult to be unconventional in popular culture, and the first thing that is interesting is the article. After ten years of hard work and wind and rain, I have listened to the words of fishermen and woodcutters. The article may have a sense of mountains and forests, but how can I be a painter in other matters? I have no time to buy rouge. (October 1991)虎头鲨歌[105]
虎头鲨歌[105]苏州嘉鱼号塘鳢，
苏州嘉鱼号塘鳢，苏人言之颜色喜。
苏人言之颜色喜。塘鳢果是何物耶？
塘鳢果是何物耶？却是高邮虎头鲨。
此物高邮视之贱，
杂鱼焉能登席面！
虎头鲨味固自佳，
嫩比河鲀鲜比虾。
最好清汤烹活火，
胡椒滴醋紫姜芽。
酒足饭饱真口福，
只在寻常百姓家。
But it is a Gaoyou tiger head shark. This thing is regarded as cheap in Gaoyou, How can the miscellaneous fish make it to the table? Steller's head shark tastes good, Tender plumbing is fresher than shrimp. It is best to cook the clear soup over a live fire, Pepper drop vinegar purple ginger buds. Drink and eat to the fullest, Only in the homes of ordinary people.（一九九一年十月）
It is difficult to be unconventional in popular culture, and the first thing that is interesting is the article. After ten years of hard work and wind and rain, I have listened to the words of fishermen and woodcutters. The article may have a sense of mountains and forests, but how can I be a painter in other matters? I have no time to buy rouge. (October 1991)为高邮市政协礼堂写六尺宣纸大字[106]
万家井灶，
十里垂杨。
有耆旧菁英，
促膝华堂。
茗碗谈笑间，
看政通人和，
物阜民康。
(October 1991) Write six-foot rice paper in large characters for the auditorium of the Gaoyou CPPCC{{id_0000}} Wanjiajing stove, Ten miles of weeping willows. There are old elites, Kneeling in the splendid hall. While chatting and laughing, Look at the political communication and people, Resources are prosperous, and the people are healthy.（一九九一年十月）
It is difficult to be unconventional in popular culture, and the first thing that is interesting is the article. After ten years of hard work and wind and rain, I have listened to the words of fishermen and woodcutters. The article may have a sense of mountains and forests, but how can I be a painter in other matters? I have no time to buy rouge. (October 1991)赠符宗乾[107]
赠符宗乾[107]喜二十四桥明月，桥下长流，不须骑鹤，便在扬州。
喜二十四桥明月，桥下长流，不须骑鹤，便在扬州。（一九九一年十月七日）
（一九九一年十月七日）赠黄扬[108]
赠黄扬[108]城外栽花城内柳，怕风狂雨骤，万家哀乐，都在心头。
（一九九一年十月七日）
（一九九一年十月七日）如梦令·赠黄石盘[109]
Flowers are planted outside the city, and willows are planted inside the city, fearing the storm and rain, and the sorrows and joys of thousands of families are all in their hearts. (October 7, 1991) Like a dream, give a yellowstone plate[109]二十四桥明月，二十三万人口，知否知否，不是旧日扬州。二分明月，四面杨柳，拼得此生终不悔，长住扬州。
二十四桥明月，二十三万人口，知否知否，不是旧日扬州。 二分明月，四面杨柳，拼得此生终不悔，长住扬州。（一九九一年十月七日）
（一九九一年十月七日）咏文两首[110]
咏文两首[110]通俗难能在脱俗，佳奇第一是文章。
十年辛苦风吹雨，听取渔樵话短长。

文章或有山林意，余事焉能作画师。
宿墨残笔遗兴耳，更无闲空买胭脂。
（一九九一年十月）
It is difficult to be unconventional in popular culture, and the first thing that is interesting is the article. After ten years of hard work and wind and rain, I have listened to the words of fishermen and woodcutters. The article may have a sense of mountains and forests, but how can I be a painter in other matters? I have no time to buy rouge. (October 1991)咏杭州赠正纶同志[111]
桃柳杭州无恙否，当年风物尚如初。
虎跑泉泡新龙井，楼外楼中带把鱼。
正纶同志嘱
（一九九一年秋）
九漈歌[112]
Hangzhou Tribute to Comrade Zhenglun[112] The peach and willow trees in Hangzhou are still unharmed; the scenery of those years remains the same as before. The tiger runs to the spring to soak in the new dragon well, and the building outside the building brings a handful of fish. Comrade Zhenglun instructed (Fall 1991) Nine Songs[112]漈水来天上，依山为九叠。
漈水来天上，依山为九叠。源流一脉通，风景各异域。
源流一脉通，风景各异域。或如匹练垂，万古流日夕。
或如匹练垂，万古流日夕。或分如燕尾，左右各一撇。
或分如燕尾，左右各一撇。或轻如雾毂，随风自摇曳。
或轻如雾毂，随风自摇曳。或泻入深潭，潭水湛然碧。
或泻入深潭，潭水湛然碧。或落石坝上，渹然喷玉屑。
或落石坝上，渹然喷玉屑。或藏岩隙中，窅如云中月。
或藏岩隙中，窅如云中月。信哉永嘉美，九漈皆奇绝。
信哉永嘉美，九漈皆奇绝。（一九九一年十一月二十日）
水仙洞歌[113]
水仙洞歌[113]往寻水仙洞，却在山之巅。
往寻水仙洞，却在山之巅。想是仙人慕虚静，幽居不欲近人寰。
想是仙人慕虚静，幽居不欲近人寰。朝出白云漫浩浩，暮归星月已皎然。
不识仙人真面目，只闻轻唱秋水篇。
（一九九一年十一月二十日）
石桅铭[114]
石桅停泊，历千万载。
阅几沧桑，青颜不改。
In the morning, white clouds rise in the sky, and by evening, the stars and moon have already shone brightly. I do not know the true face of the immortal, only to hear the gentle singing of the autumn water poem. (November 20, 1991) Stone Mast Inscription{{id_0000}} The stone mast has been anchored for thousands of years. After several vicissitudes, the green face has not changed.（一九九一年十一月）
赞苍坡村[115]
村古民朴，天然不俗。
秀外慧中，渔樵耕读。
（一九九一年十一月）
楠溪之水清[116]
楠溪之水清，欲濯我无缨。
(November 1991) Zancangpo Village{{id_0000}} The village is ancient and simple, natural and not vulgar. Xiu Wai was wise, fishing, woodcuttering, farming, and reading. (November 1991) The water of Nanxi is clear{{id_0000}} The water of Nanxi is clear, and I want to wash my clothes without tassels.虽则我无缨，亦不负尔情。
手持碧玉杓，分江入夜瓶。
三年开瓶看，化作青水晶。
（一九九一年十一月二十日）
送黑孩东渡[117]
燕市长歌酒未消，拂衣已渡海东潮。
Although I have no tassels, I will not disappoint your feelings. Holding a jade ladle, I drink the wine bottle into the river at night. Three years of opening the bottle and looking at it, it turns into a blue crystal. (November 20, 1991) Send the black child to the east{{id_0000}} The mayor of Yan sings and the wine has not yet dissipated, and in the blink of an eye, I have crossed the sea and the tide.何时亦有思归意，春雨楼头尺八箫。
（一九九一年冬）
When will I feel a sense of homesickness? (Winter 1991) Drawing a picture of wisteria for a black child and captioning it {{id_0000}} The wisteria blooms far away in spring, and the black child still feels free at the ends of the earth. Are the paper windows and wooden walls safe? Send me the wildflowers by the bridge. (Winter 1991)为黑孩画紫藤图并题[118]
开到紫藤春去远，黑孩犹自在天涯。
纸窗木壁平安否，寄我桥边上野花。
（一九九一年冬）
When will I feel a sense of homesickness? (Winter 1991) Drawing a picture of wisteria for a black child and captioning it {{id_0000}} The wisteria blooms far away in spring, and the black child still feels free at the ends of the earth. Are the paper windows and wooden walls safe? Send me the wildflowers by the bridge. (Winter 1991)1992年
书画自娱[119]
我有一好处，平生不整人。
写作颇勤快，人间送小温。
或时有佳兴，伸纸画青春。
草花随目见，鱼鸟略似真。
唯求俗可耐，宁计故为新。
In 1992 Calligraphy and painting entertain yourself{{id_0000}} I have a good thing, but I have never been a good person. Writing is very diligent, and the world sends Xiao Wen. Sometimes there is a good mood, stretching out the paper to draw youth. The flowers and grass are visible to the eye, and the fish and birds seem to be real. I only want to be tolerable in the world, and I would rather think of the old as the new.只可自愉悦，不可持赠君。
只可自愉悦，不可持赠君。君其真喜欢，携归尽一樽。
君其真喜欢，携归尽一樽。（一九九二年一月）
（一九九二年一月）岁交春[120]
岁交春[120]不觉七旬过二矣，何期幸遇岁交春。
不觉七旬过二矣，何期幸遇岁交春。鸡豚早办须兼味，生菜偏宜簇五辛。
鸡豚早办须兼味，生菜偏宜簇五辛。薄禄何如饼在手，浮名得似酒盈樽？
寻常一饱增惭愧，待看沿河柳色新。
（一九九二年一月初）
水乡[121]
少年橐笔走天涯，
赢得人称小说家。
How can a meager salary compare to having a cake in hand, while fame and fortune are like a wine cup filled with wine? Ordinary fullness only adds to my shame, waiting to see the willows along the river bloom in new color. (Early January 1992) Water Town{{id_0000}} The young man walked to the ends of the earth, Won the nickname novelist.怪底篇篇都是水[122]，
只因家住在高沙[123]。
镇国塔偈[124]
海水照壁倾不圮[125]，
高邮城西镇国寺。
The bottom of the monster is all water{{id_0000}}, Just because my family lives in Gaosha{{id_0000}}. Zhen Guo Pagoda verse{{id_0000}} The sea water does not collapse under the wall{{id_0000}}, Gaoyou City West Zhenguo Temple.至今留得方砖塔，
塔影河心流不去[126]。
宋城残迹[127]
城头吹角一天秋，
声落长河送客舟。
留得宋城墙一段[128]，
To this day, a square brick pagoda has been preserved. The heart of the Ta Ying River does not flow [128]. Remains of Song City[128] The horn blows at the head of the city for a day of autumn, The sound of the river echoes through the long river, sending off the passenger boat. left a section of the Song city wall[128],教人想见旧高邮。
文游台[129]（年年都上文游台）
年年都上文游台，
忆昔春游心尚孩。
台下柳烟经甲子[130]，
此翁精力未全衰。
It makes people want to see the old Gaoyou. Wenyoutai {{id_0000}} (Wenyoutai every year) Every year, I go to the literary tour platform, I remember the spring outings of the past, and my heart was still a child. The willow smoke under the stage is the Jiazi {{id_0000}}, This old man's energy is not completely weakened.盂城驿[131]
盂城驿建在何年？
廨宇遗规尚宛然。
遥想幡旗飘日夜，
南船北马何喧喧。
王家亭[132]
王家亭外晚荷香，
犹记明窗映夕阳。
Yucheng Station{{id_0000}} When was the Yucheng Post built? The legacy of the office is still intact. Thinking of the flags flying day and night, Why are the boats from the south and the horses from the north so noisy? Wangjiating{{id_0000}} Evening lotus fragrance outside Wangjiating, I still remember the bright window reflecting the setting sun.觞咏城东佳胜处，
只今飞蝶草荒荒。
佛寺[133]
吴生亲笔久朦胧[134]，
古刹声消夜半钟[135]。
Singing about the best places in the east of the city, Now the butterfly grass is desolate. Buddhist temple[135] Wu Sheng's handwriting has been hazy for a long time[135], The sound of the ancient temple disappears at midnight[135].欲问高邮余几寺[136]，
不妨留照夕阳红。
忆荷花亭吃茶[137]
骄阳不到柳丝长，
鸭唼浮萍水气香。
旋摘莲蓬花下藕，
浮生消得一天凉。
I want to inquire about the remaining temples in Gaoyou{{id_0000}}, You might as well leave a photo of the sunset red. Remembering the lotus pavilion for tea{{id_0000}} The scorching sun is not as long as the willow threads, The duckweed is fragrant. Picking lotus roots under the lotus flowers, The floating life is cool for a day.题盂城邮花[138]
题盂城邮花[138]以邮名地者，其唯我高邮。
以邮名地者，其唯我高邮。秦王亭何在，子婴水悠悠。
秦王亭何在，子婴水悠悠。降至盂城驿，车马乱行舟。
降至盂城驿，车马乱行舟。邮人爱邮事，同气乃相求。
邮人爱邮事，同气乃相求。玩物非丧志，方寸集千秋。
玩物非丧志，方寸集千秋。题赠《太原日报》“双塔”副刊[139]
彩塑晋祠传万古，散文谁过傅青主。
江山代有才人出，会看春芳满绿渚。
（一九九二年三月）
读史杂咏[140]（五首）
Title "Taiyuan Daily" "Twin Towers" supplement[140] The colorful sculpture of the Jin Dynasty has been passed down through the ages, and who can surpass Fu Qingzhu's prose? Talented individuals emerge from generation to generation, and they will see the spring fragrance blooming on the green islets. (March 1992) Reading History Miscellaneous Poems [140] (5 poems)（一）
鼙鼓声声动汉园，
书生掷笔赴烽烟。
何期何逊竟垂老，
留得人间画梦篇。
（二）
孤旅斜阳西直门，
禅心寂寂似童心。
人间消失莫须有，
谁识清诗满竹林。
（三）
窗子外边窗子外，
兰花烟味亦关情。
沙龙病卧犹高咏，
鼓瑟湘灵曲未终。
（四）
岂惯京华十丈尘，
寒星不察楚人心。
一刀切断长河水，
却向残红认绣针。
（五）
蛱蝶何能拣树栖，
千秋谁恕钱谦益。
赵州和尚一杯茶，
不是人人都吃得。
咏鲁智深[141]
五台山上剃光头，
一点胡髭也不留。
放火杀人难掐数，
忽闻潮信即归休。
How can butterflies choose arboreal dwellings, Who forgives Qian Qianyi? Monk Zhao Zhou has a cup of tea, Not everyone can eat it. Song Lu Zhishen{{id_0000}} shaved his head on Wutai Mountain, He didn't keep a beard at all. Arson and murder are hard to count, Suddenly hearing the news of the tide, I immediately returned to rest.读《水浒传》漫题[142]（七首）
（一）
街前紫石净无瑕，血染芳魂怨落花。
丽质天生难自弃，岂堪闭户弄琵琶。
（二）
六月初三下大雪，王婆卖得一杯茶。
Read the "Water Margin" comic title {{id_0000}} (seven songs) (a) The purple stones in front of the street are clean and flawless, and the blood-stained souls lament the fallen flowers. Beauty is inherently hard to give up; how can I endure playing the pipa behind closed doors? (two) On the third day of June, it snowed heavily, and Wang Po sold a cup of tea.平生第一修行事，不许高墙碍杏花。
（三）
黑云压境美人死，冤案千年几页纸。
侠义原来是野蛮，武松不是真男子。
（四）
枉教人称豹子头，忍随俗吏打军州。
The first thing I do in my life is to do not allow high walls to obstruct the apricot blossoms. (three) The black clouds overwhelm the beauty of the death, and the wrongful case has been a few pages for a thousand years. Chivalry turned out to be barbaric, and Wu Song was not a real man. (four) I have been wrongfully taught to call myself a leopard's head, and I cannot bear to follow the mundane officials to fight the military and state.当年风雪山神庙，弹指频磨丈八矛。
（五）
寿张县里静无哗，游戏何妨乔作衙。
非是是非凭我断，到来不吃一杯茶。
（六）
桃脸佳人一丈青，如何屈杀嫁王英。
In the wind and snow mountain temple back then, the eighteen spears were sharpened with the snap of his fingers. (5) The people of Shouzhang County are quiet and quiet; why not play games? It is not right or wrong that I judge, and I will not eat a cup of tea when I come. (6) The peach face beauty is a yard green; how can she be forced to marry Wang Ying?宋江有意摧春色，异代千年怨不平。
（七）
凤凰踏碎玉玲珑，发髻穿心一点红。
乞得赦书真浪子，吹箫直出五云中。
绍兴沈园[143]
拂袖依依新植柳，当年谁识红酥手。
The Song River intentionally destroys the spring color, and the millennium of different generations has been filled with grievances. (vii) The phoenix trampled the jade exquisite, and the bun pierced the heart with a little red. I beg for a pardon, a true prodigal son, who plays the flute straight out of the clouds. Shaoxing Shen Garden{{id_0000}} Brushing my sleeves, I gently planted a newly planted willow; who would have known the red crispy hand back then?临流照见凤头钗，此恨绵绵真不朽。
（一九九二年十月）
1993年
江湖满地一纯儒[144]
绿纱窗外树扶疏，长夏蝉鸣课楷书。
指点桐城申义法，江湖满地一纯儒。
Facing the river, I see the phoenix hairpin, and this sorrow is truly immortal. (October 1992) In 1993 The rivers and lakes are full of pure Confucianism{{id_0000}} The trees outside the green gauze window are sparse, and the cicadas are singing in regular script in the long summer. Pointing out the Tongcheng Shenyi Method, the rivers and lakes are full of pure Confucianism.小学毕业之暑假，我曾在三姑父孙石君家从韦鹤琴先生学。先生日授桐城派古文一篇，督临“多宝塔”一纸。我至今作文写字，实得力于先生之指授。忆我从学之时，弹指六十年矣，先生之声容态度，闲闲雅雅，犹在耳目。
During the summer vacation after graduating from elementary school, I studied with Mr. Wei Heqin at the home of my third uncle Sun Shijun. Mr. Teaching an ancient text of the Tongcheng School every day, and supervising a paper on the "Duobao Pagoda". I have been writing so far, thanks to the teacher's instructions. Remembering when I was studying, I have snapped my fingers for sixty years, and the teacher's voice, appearance and attitude, leisurely and elegant, are still in my ears and eyes.癸酉之春受业汪曾祺谨记
（一九九三年春）
年年岁岁一床书[145]
年年岁岁一床书，弄笔晴窗且自娱。
更有一般堪笑处，六平方米作郇厨。
In the spring of Guiyou, Wang Zengqi remembered (Spring 1993) A bed of books every year{{id_0000}} Year after year, I read a bed of books, playing with my pen and enjoying themselves under the sunny window. There is also a general funny place, six square meters as a kitchen.朱小平《画侠杜月涛》序诗[146]
我识杜月涛，
高逾一米八。
首发如飞蓬，
浓须乱双颊。
本是农家子，
耕种无伏腊。
却慕诗书画，
所亲在笔札。
单车行万里，
Zhu Xiaoping's "Painting Hero Du Yuetao" Preface Poem {{id_0000}} I know Du Yuetao. It is more than 1.8 meters high. The first hair is like a flying weed, Thick beard messes up cheeks. Originally a peasant child, There is no winter solstice in farming. But admiring poetry, calligraphy and painting, Those close to him are in writing. Bicycle travel thousands of miles,随身只一箧。
听鸟入深林，
描树到版纳。
归来展素纸，
凝神目不眨。
笔落惊风雨，
又似山洪发。
水墨色俱下，
勾抹扫相杂。
却又收拾细，
淋漓不邋沓。
There is only one box with me. Listen to the birds enter the deep forest, Trace the tree to Banna. Return to show the plain paper, Concentrate on your eyes without blinking. The pen falls in a storm, It also resembles a flash flood. Ink and color are all down, Mix and wipe. But he also packed up carefully, Drowning and not sloppy.或染孩儿面，[147]
可钤缶翁押。
或垂数穗藤，
真是青藤法。
粗豪兼娟秀，
臣书不是刷。[148]
精进二十年。
可为寰中甲。
画师名亦佳，
Or dye a child's face, {{id_0000}} You can bet on the can. or drooping a few ears of vines, It's really a green vine method. Rough and beautiful, My book is not a brush. {{id_0000}} Twenty years of diligence. He can be the best in the world. The name of the painter is also good,何必称画侠。
何必称画侠。（一九九三年十月四日）
（一九九三年十月四日）《西山客话》诗[149]（十一首）
《西山客话》诗[149]（十一首）西山
西山命车入市，
命车入市，瞬目可至，
瞬目可至，安步徐行，
安步徐行，亦是乐事。
亦是乐事。八大处
八大处驱车出京城，
驱车出京城，还见京城影。
举头八大处，
手揽十二景。
平地山居
结庐在人境，
性本爱丘山。
隔户闻鸡犬，
何似在人间。
五朝帝都
金瓦红墙紫禁城，
五朝宫阙尚峥嵘。
万方乐奏千条柳，
I can still see the shadow of the capital. Eight major places to look up, Holding twelve scenes in hand. Flat mountain dwelling Build a house in the human world, I have always loved the hills. Smelling chickens and dogs from the other door, How can it compare to being in the human world? The Imperial Capital of the Five Dynasties The Forbidden City with golden tiles and red walls, The palaces of the Five Dynasties were still magnificent. Thousands of willows are played in music from all directions,丽日和风唱太平。
文化古城
九城栉比列华屋，
处处书香与画轴。
卜宅西山山下住，
清谈不觉渐离俗。
风水宝地
青山排户入，
在山泉水清。
七碗风生腋，
饮之寿且宁。
The sun and wind sing peacefully. Ancient City of Culture Nine cities comb the splendid houses, Everywhere is the fragrance of books and paintings. Living at the foot of the western mountain, Engaging in conversation, I gradually detach myself from the mundane world. Feng Shui Treasure Land Qingshan rows in, The spring water in the mountains is clear. Seven bowls of wind under the armpits, Drink it to live long and be at peace.春花秋叶，鸟啭鱼乐
春花秋叶，鸟啭鱼乐静鸟投林宿，
静鸟投林宿，闲鱼出水游。
闲鱼出水游。尘飞不到处，
尘飞不到处，容我小淹留。
容我小淹留。皇帝行宫
皇帝行宫万机之暇且从容，
万机之暇且从容，窄袖轻衣射大弓。
窄袖轻衣射大弓。汉武秦皇俱往矣，
汉武秦皇俱往矣，尚余松韵入霜钟。
尚余松韵入霜钟。古钟和古松（两首）
（一）
长安寺里花木深，
松叶尖尖硬似针。
长乐钟声犹未尽，
悠悠余韵入禅心。

（二）
四百年前钟，
六百年前松。
手抚白皮松，
来听古铜钟。
Ancient Bell and Ancient Pine (two songs) (1) The flowers and trees in Chang'an Temple are deep, The tips of pine needles are as hard as needles. The bell of Changle is not yet finished, The lingering afterglow enters the Zen heart. (two) Four hundred years ago, Pines 600 years ago. Caressing the white bark pine, Come and listen to the ancient bronze bell.钟声犹似昔，
钟声犹似昔，松老不中空。
松老不中空。人生天地间，
人生天地间，当似钟与松。
当似钟与松。荣名以为宝，
荣名以为宝，勉立肤寸功。
勉立肤寸功。解得其中意，
解得其中意，物我皆不穷。
物我皆不穷。野餐
野餐野餐得野趣，
野餐得野趣，山果佐山泉。
山果佐山泉。人世一杯酒，
人世一杯酒，浮生半日闲。
（一九九三年末）
五绝·游东山岛口占[150]
沙滩如玉屑，
海屿列青螺。
不负佳山水，
临风发浩歌。
1994年
Half a day of leisure in the fleeting world. (Late 1993) Five Absolutes: Traveling to Dongshan Island Entrance Occupation{{id_0000}} The beach is like jade chips, The islands are lined with green snails. Live up to the good landscape, Singing loudly in the wind. In 1994题戴敦邦《金陵十二钗与宝玉图》[151]
十二金钗共一图，画师布局费工夫。
花前著个痴公子，讨得闲差候茗壶。
（一九九四年初春）
昆明食事[152]
Title: Dai Dunbang's "Twelve Hairpins and Precious Jade Pictures of Jinling" [152] Twelve gold hairpins are in one picture, and the artist takes a lot of time to lay out. In front of the flowers, there is a foolish young man, who is waiting for the teapot to be served. (Early spring 1994) Kunming Meal[152]重升肆里陶杯绿[153]，饵块摊来炭火红[154]。
正义路边养正气[155]，小西门外试撩青[156]。
The pottery cup in the shop is green[155], and the bait block is charcoal red [156]. Cultivate righteousness on the side of the righteous roadside [155], and try to tease the green [156] outside the small west gate.人间至味干巴菌[157]，世上馋人大学生。
尚有灰藋堪漫吃[158]，更循柏叶捉昆虫。
（一九九四年二月十五日）
（一九九四年二月十五日）昆明茶馆[159]
The world's most delicious dry fungus [159], the world's gluttonous college students. There are still ashes that can be eaten id_0000 casually, and insects are caught along the cypress leaves. (February 15, 1994) Kunming Teahouse[159]水厄囊空亦可赊[160]，枯肠三碗嗑葵花[161]。
水厄囊空亦可赊[160]，枯肠三碗嗑葵花[161]。昆明七载成何事？一半光阴付苦茶。
昆明七载成何事？一半光阴付苦茶。（一九九四年二月十五日）
（一九九四年二月十五日）为京西百望山“文化绿色碑林”作[162]
我昔到北京，松柏皆奇古。
只惜街树稀，无风三尺土。
何处可追凉，闷坐如蒸煮。
开国百废兴，案牍盈公府。
绿化乃急务，不负古城古。
For the "Cultural Green Stele Forest" of Baiwang Mountain in western Beijing{{id_0000}} When I first visited Beijing, the pines and cypresses were all extraordinary. It is a pity that the trees on the street are sparse, and there is no wind to soil three feet deep. Where can I catch up with the coolness? Sitting stuffily feels like steaming. The founding of the country has been revitalized, and the documents are full of public offices. Greening is an urgent matter, and it lives up to the ancient city.栽种数十年，嘉树渐如堵。
栽种数十年，嘉树渐如堵。杨叶春入户，柳丝清拂暑。
杨叶春入户，柳丝清拂暑。多谢园林工，树植良辛苦。
多谢园林工，树植良辛苦。一九九四年国庆前夕
一九九四年国庆前夕赠杨汝纶[163]
赠杨汝纶[163]杨家本望族，
杨家本望族，功名世泽长。
功名世泽长。子孙颇繁盛，
子孙颇繁盛，君是第几房。
君是第几房。几时辞旧宅，
几时辞旧宅，侨寓在他乡。
侨寓在他乡。与君未相识，
与君未相识，但可想清光。
但可想清光。葭莩亲非远，
葭莩亲非远，后当毋相忘。
后当毋相忘。（一九九四年十二月）
There is an old home in your hometown. The rain washes the stone drum in front of the door, The wind blows the woody flowers in the backyard. You can go to Shanghecheng for leisurely travel, The kitchen dish is freshly cooked water shrimp. If there is a chance to return to my hometown, Have a cup of tea with you on the stage. (December 1994)赠杨鼎川[164]
赠杨鼎川[164]高坡深井杨家巷，
高坡深井杨家巷，是处君家有老家。
雨洗门前石鼓子，
风吹后院木香花。
闲游可到上河埫，
厨馔新烹出水虾。
倘有机缘回故里，
与君台上吃杯茶。
（一九九四年十二月）
There is an old home in your hometown. The rain washes the stone drum in front of the door, The wind blows the woody flowers in the backyard. You can go to Shanghecheng for leisurely travel, The kitchen dish is freshly cooked water shrimp. If there is a chance to return to my hometown, Have a cup of tea with you on the stage. (December 1994)题丁聪画我[165]
我年七十四，已是日平西。
何为尚碌碌，不若且徐徐。
酒边泼墨画，茶后打油诗。
偶亦写序跋，为人作嫁衣。
生涯只如此，不叹食无鱼。
Title: Ding Cong painted me{{id_0000}} I am seventy-four years old, and it is already the day of peace. Why is it still mediocre? It's better to take it slow. Splash ink painting by the wine, and limerick after tea. Occasionally, I also write a preface and make wedding dresses for others. Life is like this, and I don't lament that there are no fish to eat.亦有蹙眉处，问君何所思。
1995年
题丁聪作范用漫画像[166]
往来多白丁，绕墙排酒瓮。
朋自远方来，顷刻肴馔供。
偶遇阴雨天，翻书温旧梦。
There is also a frown, asking what you are thinking. In 1995 Title Ding Cong's model uses cartoon images {{id_0000}} Many white men come and go, arranging wine jars around the wall. Friends came from afar, and in an instant, the food was served. On a rainy day, I flipped through the book to reminisce about old dreams.剪剪又贴贴，搬搬又弄弄。
非止为消遣，无用也是用。
赠高洪波[167]
洪波何澹澹，楼高可摘星。
堂堂过白日，静夜觅同心。
（一九九五年六月一日）
Cut and paste, move and play. Not only for entertainment, but also for uselessness. Gift to Gao Hongbo{{id_0000}} The waves are so calm, and the tower is high enough to pick up the stars. Spending the day dignified and quietly looking for a heart in the night. (June 1, 1995)题《裘盛戎影集》[168]
千秋一净裘盛戎，遗像宛然沐清风。
虎啸龙吟余事耳，难能最是得从容。
（一九九五年九月二日）
贺母校校庆[169]
Title: "Qiu Sheng Rong Film Collection" [169] A thousand autumns are a clean coat and a prosperous war, and the portrait seems to be bathed in the breeze. It's hard to be the most calm. (September 2, 1995) Congratulations on the celebration of the alma mater[169]当年县邮中，本是赞化宫。
城外柳如浪，处处野坟丛。
名师重严教，学子夜灯红。
年年小麦熟，人才郁葱葱。
传薪光潜德，瞩望在后生。
（一九九五年十月）
In the county post back then, it was originally the Zanhua Palace. Outside the city, the willows are like waves, and wild graves are everywhere. Famous teachers emphasize strict teaching, and the students are lit up at night. Every year the wheat is ripe, and the talents are lush. Pass on the light of the hidden virtue, and look forward to the younger generation. (October 1995)高邮中学校歌[170]
国土秦郎此故乡，湖山钟人杰。
笳吹弦诵九十年，嘉树喜成列。
改革开放乘长风，拓开千秋业。
且须珍重少年时，不负云和月。
Gaoyou Middle School Song{{id_0000}} The hometown of Qin Lang is the hometown, and the lake and mountain bells are heroes. The jia and strings have been recited for ninety years, and the beautiful trees are lined up. Reform and opening up take advantage of the long wind and open up a thousand autumn industries. Moreover, we must cherish the youth of our youth and live up to the clouds and the moon.瓯海修堤记[171]
瓯海修堤记[171]峨峨大堤，南天一柱。伊谁之力？瓯之百户。
峨峨大堤，南天一柱。 伊谁之力？瓯之百户。温人重商，无往不赴。不靡国力，同心自助。
温人重商，无往不赴。 不靡国力，同心自助。大堤之兴，速如飞渡。凿石移山，淘土为路。
大堤之兴，速如飞渡。 凿石移山，淘土为路。茵茵草绿，群莺栖树。人鱼同乐，仓廪足富。
茵茵草绿，群莺栖树。 人鱼同乐，仓廪足富。峨峨大堤，长安永固。前既彪炳，后当更著。
峨峨大堤，长安永固。 前既彪炳，后当更著。小莲子题扇[172]
小莲子题扇[172]三十六湖蒲荇香，侬家旧住在横塘。
三十六湖蒲荇香，侬家旧住在横塘。移舟已过琵琶闸，万点明灯影乱长。
移舟已过琵琶闸，万点明灯影乱长。1996年
题为褚时健画紫藤[173]
璎珞随风一院香，紫云到地日偏长。
倘能许我闲闲坐，不作天南烟草王。
（一九九六年夏）
偶感[174]
In 1996 Titled Chu Shijian's painting of wisteria[174] The pendants of the courtyard are fragrant with the wind, and the purple clouds rise to the ground, and the days are longer. If you allow me to sit idly by, I will not be the king of tobacco in the south. (Summer 1996) Occasional Feeling[174]大有大的难，群公忌投鼠。国事竟蜩螗，民声如沸煮。岂有万全策，难书一笔虎。只好向后看，差幸袴余五。非我羨闲适，寸心何可主。华发已盈颠，几番经猛雨。尚欲陈残愿，君其恕愚鲁：创作要自由，政治要民主。庶几读书人，免遭三遍苦。亦欲效余力，晨昏积寸楮。滋味究如何？麻婆烧豆腐。
There is a big problem, and the public is afraid of throwing mice. The state affairs are actually cicadas, and the people's voices are boiling. There is no foolproof plan, and it is difficult to write a tiger. I have to look back, and I am lucky to have five pants. I am not envious of leisure, and my heart is not in charge. The gray hair has been full of upside, and it has been raining heavily several times. If you still want to make a wish, please forgive the foolishness: creativity must be free, and politics must be democratic. Perhaps the scholars will not suffer three times. I also want to do my best, and accumulate an inch of paper in the morning and evening. How is the taste? Mapo roasted tofu.（一九九六年十一月）
慰中国作协第五次代表大会诸俊才[175]
生当作人杰，
死亦为鬼雄。
一尊湘泉酒，
万里楚江风。
（一九九六年十二月）
(November 1996) Consolation of the talents of the Fifth Congress of the China Writers Association{{id_0000}} To be born as a hero, Even after death, he became a ghost hero. A bottle of Xiangquan wine, The wind blows over the Chu River for thousands of miles. (December 1996)题《昆明猫》[176]
四十三年一梦中，美人黄土已成空。
龙钟一叟真痴绝，犹吊遗踪问晚风。
1997年
再访玉烟不遇褚时健[177]
Title "Kunming Cat" [177] In a dream of forty-three years, the beauty has become empty. The old man of Longzhong is truly infatuated, still mourning the traces of his whereabouts, asking about the evening breeze. In 1997 Revisiting Yuyan and not meeting Chu Shijian[177]大刀阔斧十余年，一柱南天岂等闲！
大刀阔斧十余年，一柱南天岂等闲！自古英雄多自用，故人何处讯平安？
自古英雄多自用，故人何处讯平安？（一九九七年一月六日）
（一九九七年一月六日）题云南玉溪烟[178]
题云南玉溪烟[178]客从远方来，衣上云南云。
客从远方来，衣上云南云。烟都留三日，举袂嗅余馨。
烟都留三日，举袂嗅余馨。（一九九七年一月）
贺《芒种》四十周年[179]
芒种好名字，
辛勤艺百谷。
佳作时时见，
陵树风。
好雨亦知时，
(January 1997) Celebrating the 40th anniversary of "Awn Seeds"{{id_0000}} A good name for awn seeds, Hard work to cultivate a hundred grains. Masterpieces are always seen, Ling Shu Feng {{id_0000}}{{id_00001}}. Good rain also knows the time,欣逢年不惑。
尊酒细谈文，
相期六月六。
石林二景[180]
牧童岩
牧童坐高岩，吹笛唤羊归。
一曲几千载，羊犹不下来。
夫妻岩
丈夫治行李，势将远别离。
I am happy to be in the New Year. Wine and Fine Talk, The date is June 6th. Two Views of the Stone Forest{{id_0000}} Shepherd Rock The shepherd boy sits on the high rock, playing the flute to call the sheep back. A song has been played for thousands of years, and the sheep still do not come down. Couples A man packs his luggage, and he is bound to be far away.叮咛千万语，何日是归期？
叮咛千万语，何日是归期？
十余年前曾游石林，见诸景皆酷肖，非出附会。今足力又衰，不复能登山矣，怅怅。一九九七年四月，汪曾祺
十余年前曾游石林，见诸景皆酷肖，非出附会。 今足力又衰，不复能登山矣，怅怅。 一九九七年四月，汪曾祺江阴漫忆[181]
江阴漫忆[181]忆旧
忆旧君山山上望江楼[182]，鹅鼻嘴[183]前黄叶稠。
最是墩逢急雨[184]，梅花入梦水悠悠。
樱花
The Wangjiang Tower on Junshan Mountain {{id_0000}}, the goose nose mouth {{id_00001}} in front of the yellow leaves are dense. The most {{id_0000}} pier encounters a sudden rain {{id_00001}}, and the plum blossoms enter the dream water leisurely. cherry blossom昔未识樱树，初识在南菁[185]。
昔未识樱树，初识在南菁[185]。一夜东风至，出户眼增明。
一夜东风至，出户眼增明。团团如绛雪，簇簇似朝云。
团团如绛雪，簇簇似朝云。寸池[186]水如染，甬道草更青。
寸池[186]水如染，甬道草更青。此非中土产，舶载自东瀛。
此非中土产，舶载自东瀛。谁为植此树，校长孙揆均。
一别六十载，皤然白发生。
攀条寻旧梦，三嗅有余馨。
河鲀
鱼脆鳝味无伦[187]，酒重百花清且醇[188]。
Who planted this tree? After sixty years of separation, the white hair has turned white. Climbing the branches to seek old dreams, I smell the lingering fragrance three times. Puffer fish  The fish is crispy and the eel tastes incomparable[187], and the wine is heavy and mellow[188].六十年来余一恨，不曾拼死吃河鲀。
（一九九七年四月八日至十日）
题赠李宏[189]
身中尚有西湖水，年年花发芙蓉城。
（一九九七年四月末或五月初）
题赠李佳[190]
奶奶是才女，孙女定如何？
临风开书卷，对月舞婆娑。
（一九九七年四月末或五月初）
题赠朝焜、杨扬、真真[191]
Title gift to Li Jia[191] Grandma is a talented woman, what about granddaughters? Open the book in the wind and dance to the moon. (Late April or early May 1997) Title gift to Chao Kun, Yang Yang, Zhen Zhen[191]同文能重译，笔下走龙蛇，
一事最堪喜，手擎二月花。
（一九九七年四月末或五月初）
1998年
豆腐[192]
淮南治丹砂，
偶然成豆腐。
馨香异兰麝，
色白如牛乳。
The same text can be retranslated, and the pen is full of dragons and snakes, The most joyful thing is holding the February flowers in my hand. (Late April or early May 1997) In 1998 Tofu{{id_0000}} Huainan Zhi Dansha, Accidentally turned into tofu. fragrant orchid musk, The color is as white as milk.迩来二千年，
流传遍州府。
南北滋味别，
老嫩随点卤。
肥鲜宜鱼肉，
亦可和菜煮。
陈婆重麻辣，
蜂窝沸砂。
食之好颜色，
长幼融脏腑。
遂令千万民，
In the past two thousand years, It spread throughout the state. The taste of the north and south is different, The old and tender are marinated with a little salt. fat and fresh fish meat, It can also be cooked with vegetables. Chen Po is heavy and spicy, Honeycomb boiling sand{{id_0000}}. Eat it with good color, Elders and juniors integrate internal organs. Thus, millions of people,丰年腹可鼓。
多谢种豆人，
汗滴萁下土。
钧瓷[193]
钧瓷天下奇，釉彩世无比。
雨湿海棠红，云开天缥碧。
茄皮葡萄紫，冰片鱼籽粒。
孰能为此巧，神工有人力。
The belly of the harvest can be inflated. Thank you, the bean grower, Sweat dripped into the soil. Jun porcelain{{id_0000}} Jun porcelain is strange in the world, and the glaze is incomparable in the world. The rain has dampened the red begonia trees, and the clouds part, creating a clear blue. Eggplant skin grape purple, borneol. Who can do such ingenuity?未编年
竹[194]
安得如椽笔，纵横写万竿。
岂能成个字，璱璱绿云寒。
凌霄[195]
凌霄不附树，无树也凌霄，
赫赫明如火，与天欲比高。
Unchronized Bamboo{{id_0000}} How can one write like a rafter's pen, writing thousands of poles in all directions? How can it be a word? Lingxiao{{id_0000}} Lingxiao does not attach itself to the tree, and without a tree, it soars into the sky, It shines brightly like fire, comparable to the desires of heaven.紫藤[196]
紫云拂地影参差，何处莺声时一啼。
弹指七十年间事，先生犹是老孩提。
题某杂志[197]
雅俗庄谐无不可，
春花秋月总相关。
Wisteria {{id_0000}} Purple clouds brush against the ground, and the shadows of the orioles are uneven; where is the call of the oriole? In the past seventy years, Mr. is still an old child. Title of a magazine {{id_0000}} Elegance and vulgarity are all solemn and harmonious, Spring flowers and autumn moons are always related.为人作嫁多情思，
深谢殷勤四十年。
宁喝二斗醋[198]
宁喝二斗醋，
莫逢三仙姑。
但愿脾胃都还好，
能吃麻婆烧豆腐。
Marrying is full of affection, Thank you very much for your 40 years of service. Rather drink two buckets of vinegar{{id_0000}} Better to drink two buckets of vinegar, Don't meet the three fairies. I hope the spleen and stomach are fine, Can eat mapo roasted tofu.无题[199]（北极寒流飞白絮）
北极寒流飞白絮，
泰西风雨落残花。
大山明灭地中海，
断钉铿鸣亚非拉。
还顾北京无限好，
旭日东升照万家。
Untitled {{id_0000}} (Arctic cold current flying white fluff) Arctic cold current flying white fluff, The wind and rain in Taixi have fallen the remaining flowers. The mountains flicker in the Mediterranean, The broken nails resonate in Asia, Africa, and Latina. Still taking care of Beijing's infinite goodness, The rising sun rises in the east, illuminating thousands of households.咏黑牡丹[200]
谁家洗砚池头水，浇出人间异种芽。
嫣红姹紫夸颜色，独立春风墨画花。
题五粮液[201]
长江江心水，
分明归春甕。
五粮适新熟，
Ode to the Black Peony{{id_0000}} Who washes the water from the inkstone pond and pours out the seeds of different species in the world? The beautiful red and purple boast of their colors, and the independent spring breeze ink paints the flowers. Title Wuliangye{{id_0000}} Yangtze River Heart Water, It is clearly a return to the spring urn. The five grains are suitable for new ripening,禾香飘秋梦。
禾香飘秋梦。酿之为醇醪，
酿之为醇醪，实乃天之供。
实乃天之供。至盛幸吴越，
至盛幸吴越，郎吟酒德颂。
郎吟酒德颂。无题[202]（一鉴深藏锁翠微）
无题[202]（一鉴深藏锁翠微）一鉴深藏锁翠微，
一鉴深藏锁翠微，移来三峡四周围。
移来三峡四周围。游船驶入青山影，
游船驶入青山影，惊起鸳鸯对对飞。
无题[203]（我家住近泰山庙）
我家住近泰山庙，
从小疏生淮海词。
白发只今搔更短，
不妨且读女郎诗。
Startled by the awakening of the mandarin ducks flying in pairs. Untitled {{id_0000}} (I live near Taishan Temple) My family lives near Taishan Temple. Since childhood, I have been sparse with the poems of Huaihai. The white hair is now scratched shorter, You might as well read the girl's poems.
[1] 本篇见于《新发现汪曾祺佚文一束·思想汇报》，原载《新文学史料》2017年第四期。1960年8月间，作者被派到沽源马铃薯研究站，画《中国马铃薯图谱》。诗题系编者所拟。
[1] This article is published in "New Discovery of Wang Zengqi's Collected Writings: Thought Report", originally published in the fourth issue of "New Literary and Historical Materials" in 2017. In August 1960, the author was sent to the Guyuan Potato Research Station to paint the "Chinese Potato Atlas". The title of the poem was prepared by the editor.[2] 本篇见于散文《七十书怀》，参见散文卷；初收《汪曾祺书画集》，汪朗、汪明、汪朝编，2000年2月。诗题据作者1996年自书手迹。
[2] This article is found in the essay "Seventy Books", see the prose volume; The first collection of "Wang Zengqi's Calligraphy and Painting Collection", edited by Wang Lang, Wang Ming and Wang Chao, February 2000. The title of the poem is based on the author's handwriting in 1996.[3] 本篇见于散文《昆明的雨》《花·木香花》，参见散文卷。诗题系编者所拟。
[3] This article is found in the essays "Rain in Kunming" and "Flowers and Woody Flowers", see the prose volume. The title of the poem was prepared by the editor.[4] 本篇原载《甓社珠光——高邮市文联十年成果集》，高邮市文联编印，1996年4月；后编入组诗《我的家乡在高邮——故乡诗吟》，初收《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。传捷，汪曾祺妹妹汪丽纹之子。
[4] This article was originally published in "The Pearl Light of the Brick Society - A Collection of Ten Years of Achievements of the Gaoyou Federation of Literary and Art Circles", edited and printed by the Gaoyou Federation of Literary and Art Circles, April 1996; Later, it was compiled into a group of poems "My Hometown is in Gaoyou - Hometown Poetry", the eighth volume of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998. Chuan Jie, the son of Wang Zengqi's sister Wang Liwen.[5] 本篇原载《甓社珠光——高邮市文联十年成果集》，高邮市文联编印，1996年4月；后编入组诗《我的家乡在高邮——故乡诗吟》，初收《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。汪陵纹，汪曾祺同父异母小妹。
[5] This article was originally published in "The Pearl Light of the Brick Society - A Collection of Ten Years of Achievements of the Gaoyou Federation of Literary and Art Circles", edited and printed by the Gaoyou Federation of Literary and Art Circles, April 1996; later compiled into the poem "My Hometown in Gaoyou - Hometown Poetry", first collected in the eighth volume of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998. Wang Lingwen, Wang Zengqi's half-sister.[6] 本篇见于陈其昌《崔锡麟和侄孙汪曾祺》，原载《走近汪曾祺》，汪曾祺文学馆编印，2003年8月。“小姑爹”指崔锡麟（1902—1987），汪曾祺祖父之妹婿。
[6] This article is published in Chen Qichang's "Cui Xilin and Nephew Wang Zengqi", originally published in "Approaching Wang Zengqi", edited and printed by Wang Zengqi Literature Museum, August 2003. "Little sister-in-law" refers to Cui Xilin (1902-1987), the brother-in-law of Wang Zengqi's grandfather.[7] 本篇原载《甓社珠光——高邮市文联十年成果集》，高邮市文联编印，1996年4月；后编入组诗《我的家乡在高邮——故乡诗吟》，初收《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。道仁，张道仁，作者幼稚园老师王文英的丈夫。
[7] This article was originally published in "The Pearl Light of the Brick Society - A Collection of Ten Years of Achievements of the Gaoyou Federation of Literary and Art Circles", edited and printed by the Gaoyou Federation of Literary and Art Circles, April 1996; Later included in the poem "My Hometown in Gaoyou - Hometown Poetry", first collected in the eighth volume of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998. Daoren, Zhang Daoren, the husband of the author's kindergarten teacher Wang Wenying.[8] 本篇原载《甓社珠光——高邮市文联十年成果集》，高邮市文联编印，1996年4月；又见于散文《师恩母爱》，文字略有改动，参见散文卷。后编入组诗《我的家乡在高邮——故乡诗吟》，初收《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。文英老师，即王文英（1906—1987），作者幼稚园时期的老师。
[8] This article was originally published in "The Pearl Light of the Brick Society - A Collection of Ten Years of Achievements of the Gaoyou Federation of Literary and Art Circles", edited and printed by the Gaoyou Federation of Literary and Art Circles, April 1996; It is also seen in the prose "Teacher's Grace and Mother's Love", with slight changes in the text, see the prose volume. Later compiled into the group poem "My Hometown in Gaoyou - Hometown Poetry", first included in the eighth volume of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998. Teacher Wenying, that is, Wang Wenying (1906-1987), the author's teacher in kindergarten.[9] 本篇原载《甓社珠光——高邮市文联十年成果集》，高邮市文联编印，1996年4月；后编入组诗《我的家乡在高邮——故乡诗吟》，初收《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。
[9] This article was originally published in "The Pearl Light of the Brick Society - A Collection of Ten Years of Achievements of the Gaoyou Federation of Literary and Art Circles", edited and printed by the Gaoyou Federation of Literary and Art Circles, April 1996; Later compiled into the poem "My Hometown in Gaoyou - Hometown Poetry", first collected in the eighth volume of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998.[10] 本篇据赠郭祖江手迹编入。
[10] This article is compiled according to Guo Zujiang's handwriting.[11] 本篇原载《甓社珠光——高邮市文联十年成果集》，高邮市文联编印，1996年4月；后编入组诗《我的家乡在高邮——故乡诗吟》，初收《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。杨汝祐，1938年生，汪曾祺的舅表弟，时供职于高邮自来水厂。
[11] This article was originally published in "The Pearl Light of the Brick Society - A Collection of Ten Years of Achievements of the Gaoyou Federation of Literary and Art Circles", edited and printed by the Gaoyou Federation of Literary and Art Circles, April 1996; later compiled into the poem "My Hometown in Gaoyou - Hometown Poetry", first collected in the eighth volume of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998. Yang Ruyou, born in 1938, was Wang Zengqi's uncle and cousin, and worked at the Gaoyou Waterworks.[12] 本篇原载《甓社珠光——高邮市文联十年成果集》，高邮市文联编印，1996年4月；后编入组诗《我的家乡在高邮——故乡诗吟》，初收《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。
[12] This article was originally published in "The Pearl Light of the Brick Society - A Collection of Ten Years of Achievements of the Gaoyou Federation of Literary and Art Circles", edited and printed by the Gaoyou Federation of Literary and Art Circles, April 1996; later compiled into the poem "My Hometown in Gaoyou - Hometown Poetry", first collected in the eighth volume of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998.[13] 本篇原载《甓社珠光——高邮市文联十年成果集》，高邮市文联编印，1996年4月；后编入组诗《我的家乡在高邮——故乡诗吟》，初收《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。小爷系曙光中学退休教师汪连生。
[13] This article was originally published in "The Pearl Light of the Brick Society - A Collection of Ten Years of Achievements of the Gaoyou Federation of Literary and Art Circles", edited and printed by the Gaoyou Federation of Literary and Art Circles, April 1996; Later, it was compiled into a group of poems "My Hometown is in Gaoyou - Hometown Poetry", the eighth volume of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998. The young master is Wang Liansheng, a retired teacher of Shuguang Middle School.[14] 本篇据手迹编入。汪曾荣，汪曾祺的同宗弟弟。
[15] 本篇见于苏北《汪曾祺的两首佚诗》，原载2013年4月30日《大公报》。孙殿娣，汪曾祺表弟的内弟。
[14] This article is compiled according to handwriting. Wang Zengrong, Wang Zengqi's younger brother. [15] This article was published in "Two Lost Poems of Wang Zengqi" in northern Jiangsu, originally published in Ta Kung Pao on April 30, 2013. Sun Diandi, the brother-in-law of Wang Zengqi's cousin.[16] 本篇见于小说《鉴赏家》，参见小说卷。诗题系编者所拟。
[16] This article is found in the novel "The Connoisseur", see the novel volume. The title of the poem was prepared by the editor.[17] 本组诗原载《四川文学》1982年第七期；初收《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。其中《新都桂湖杨升庵祠》一首，又见于散文《杜甫草堂·三苏祠·升庵祠》《四川杂忆》《北京的秋花》《杨慎在保山》，文字略有改动，参见散文卷。该诗在《杜甫草堂·三苏祠·升庵祠》中作：“桂湖老样弄新姿，湖上升庵旧有祠。一种风流谁得似？状元词曲罪臣诗。”；《四川杂忆》《杨慎在保山》中除首句中“老样”作“老桂”外，其余与《杜甫草堂·三苏祠·升庵祠》同；在《北京的秋花》中，首句作“桂湖老桂发新枝”，其余与另三篇散文中所引相同。
[17] This group of poems was originally published in the seventh issue of Sichuan Literature, 1982; The eighth volume of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998. Among them, the poem "Yang Sheng'an Shrine in Xindu Guihu" is also seen in the essays "Du Fu Thatched Cottage, Sansu Shrine, Sheng'an Shrine", "Sichuan Miscellaneous Memories", "Autumn Flowers in Beijing", "Yang Shen in Baoshan", the text has been slightly changed, see the prose volume. The poem is written in "Du Fu Thatched Cottage, Sansu Shrine, Sheng'an Shrine": "Guihu Lake is still in a new form, and Husheng'an has an old shrine. Who can be like a kind of romance? The champion's lyrics and sin poems. ”； In "Sichuan Miscellaneous Memories" and "Yang Shen in Baoshan", except for the "old style" in the first sentence as "Lao Gui", the rest are the same as "Du Fu Thatched Cottage, Sansu Ancestral Hall, Sheng'an Shrine"; in "Autumn Flowers in Beijing", the first sentence is "Guihu Lao Gui Fa New Branches", and the rest is the same as the other three essays.[18] 本组诗原载《海棠》1982年第三期；后编入《川行杂诗》，初收《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。
[18] This group of poems was originally published in the third issue of "Begonia" in 1982; later compiled into "Sichuan Miscellaneous Poems", first included in the eighth volume of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998.[19] 本篇见于散文《四川杂忆》，参见散文卷。诗题据1982年5月19日致朱德煕信，参见书信卷，皇城即成都；“刘张”，指“文革”期间掌握四川实权的省革委会副主任刘结挺、张西挺夫妇。
[19] This article is found in the essay "Miscellaneous Memories of Sichuan", see the prose volume. The title of the poem is based on a letter to Zhu Dewei on May 19, 1982, see the letter volume, the imperial city is Chengdu; "Liu Zhang" refers to Liu Jieting and Zhang Xiting, deputy directors of the Provincial Revolutionary Committee who held real power in Sichuan during the "Cultural Revolution".[20] 本篇见于1982年5月19日致朱德煕信，参见书信卷。
[21] 本篇见于1982年5月19日致朱德煕信，参见书信卷。
[22] 本篇见于1982年5月19日致朱德煕信，参见书信卷。
[20] This article is found in a letter to Zhu Dehui on May 19, 1982, see the letter volume. [21] This article is found in a letter to Zhu Dewei on May 19, 1982, see the letter volume. [22] This article is published in a letter to Zhu Dewei on May 19, 1982, see the letter volume.[23] 本篇见于刘大如《大山的呼唤——兴文石海开发纪实》，天马图书出版公司，2010年11月。天泉洞，四川宜宾兴文县著名溶洞景点，在石林镇。
[23] This article is published in Liu Daru's "The Call of the Mountains - A Documentary of the Development of Xingwen Shihai", Tianma Book Publishing Company, November 2010. Tianquan Cave, a famous karst cave attraction in Xingwen County, Yibin, Sichuan, in Shilin Town.[24] 本篇见于刘大如《大山的呼唤——兴文石海开发纪实》，天马图书出版公司，2010年11月。
[24] This article is published in Liu Daru, "The Call of the Mountains - A Documentary on the Development of Xingwen Shihai", Tianma Book Publishing Company, November 2010.[25] 本篇原载《中国作家》1986年第四期，又见于1982年5月19日致朱德熙信，文字略有改动；初收《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。
[25] This article was originally published in the fourth issue of "Chinese Writers" in 1986, and was also published in a letter to Zhu Dexi on May 19, 1982, with slight changes in the text; Volume 8 of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998.[26] 本篇见于散文《天山行色》，参见散文卷。
[27] 本篇见于散文《天山行色》，参见散文卷。
[28] 本篇见于散文《天山行色》，参见散文卷。
[26] This article is found in the prose "Tianshan Xingse", see the prose volume. [27] This article is found in the prose "Tianshan Xingse", see the prose volume. [28] This article is found in the prose "Tianshan Xingse", see the prose volume.[29] 本篇见于散文《天山行色》，参见散文卷；又见于张肇思《不尽长河绕县行》，载《汪曾祺文学馆馆刊》2001年10月20日第三期，文字略有改动。
[29] This article is found in the essay "Tianshan Xingse", see the prose volume; it is also seen in Zhang Zhaosi's "The Long River Goes Around the County", published in the third issue of "Wang Zengqi Literature Museum Journal" on October 20, 2001, with slight changes in the text.[30] 本篇见于散文《天山行色》，参见散文卷；又见于张肇思《不尽长河绕县行》，载《汪曾祺文学馆馆刊》2001年10月20日第三期。诗题系编者所拟。
[30] This article is found in the essay "Tianshan Xingse", see the prose volume; It is also seen in Zhang Zhaosi's "The Long River Goes Around the County", in the third issue of "Wang Zengqi Literature Museum Journal", October 20, 2001. The title of the poem was prepared by the editor.[31] 本篇见于张肇思《不尽长河绕县行》，载《汪曾祺文学馆馆刊》2001年10月20日第三期。赵林，时任奎屯广电局局长。
[31] This article is published in Zhang Zhaosi's "Walking Around the County", published in the third issue of Wang Zengqi Literature Museum, October 20, 2001. Zhao Lin, then director of Kuitun Radio and Television Bureau.[32] 本篇据手迹编入；初收《汪曾祺书画集》，汪朗、汪明、汪朝编，2000年2月。诗题系编者所拟。
[32] This article is compiled according to the handwriting; The first collection of "Wang Zengqi's Calligraphy and Painting Collection", edited by Wang Lang, Wang Ming, and Wang Chao, February 2000. The poem title was prepared by the editor.[33] 本组诗见于散文《湘行二记·桃花源记》，参见散文卷；初收《汪曾祺自选集》，漓江出版社，1987年10月，文字略有改动。诗题据1983年2月作者所作菊花图。
[33] This group of poems is found in the prose "Xiangxing Erji: Peach Blossom Spring", see the prose volume; The first collection of "Wang Zengqi's Self-Selected Collection", Lijiang Publishing House, October 1987, the text has been slightly changed. The title of the poem is based on the chrysanthemum picture made by the author in February 1983.[34] 本篇见于弘征《我与汪曾祺的诗缘》，原载1998年12月18日《解放日报》；初收《永远的汪曾祺》，上海远东出版社，2008年5月。
[34] This article is published in Hongzheng's "My Poetry Fate with Wang Zengqi", originally published in Liberation Daily, December 18, 1998; First Received "Eternal Wang Zengqi", Shanghai Far East Publishing House, May 2008.[35] 本篇见于宗璞散文《三幅画》，原载《钟山》1988年第五期。时汪曾祺与女作家宗璞共同参加《钟山》编辑部主办的太湖笔会。
[36] 本篇据手迹编入。画藏高邮汪曾祺故居。
[35] This article is found in Zong Pu's prose "Three Paintings", originally published in the fifth issue of "Zhongshan" in 1988. At that time, Wang Zengqi and the female writer Zong Pu jointly participated in the Taihu Lake Pen Club sponsored by the editorial department of "Zhongshan". [36] This article is compiled according to the handwriting. The painting is in the former residence of Wang Zengqi in Gaoyou.[37] 本篇见于散文《菏泽游记》，参见散文卷。诗题系编者所拟。
[38] 本篇见于散文《菏泽游记》，参见散文卷。诗题系编者所拟。
[37] This article is found in the prose "Heze Travels", see the prose volume. The title of the poem was prepared by the editor. [38] This article is found in the prose "Heze Travels", see the prose volume. The poem title was prepared by the editor.[39] 本篇原载《浪花》1983年第三期；初收《汪曾祺诗联品读》，金实秋编，大众文艺出版社，2009年4月。
[39] This article was originally published in the third issue of "Waves" in 1983; "Wang Zengqi's Poetry Joint Reading", edited by Jin Shiqiu, Popular Literature and Art Publishing House, April 2009.[40] 本篇原载《浪花》1983年第三期；初收《汪曾祺诗联品读》，金实秋编，大众文艺出版社，2009年4月。
[41] 本篇原载《汪曾祺诗联品读》，金实秋编，大众文艺出版社，2009年4月。
[40] This article was originally published in the third issue of "Waves" in 1983; The first collection of "Wang Zengqi's Poetry Joint Reading", edited by Jin Shiqiu, Popular Literature and Art Publishing House, April 2009. [41] This article was originally published in "Wang Zengqi's Poetry Joint Reading", edited by Jin Shiqiu, Dazhong Literature and Art Publishing House, April 2009.[42] 本篇原载《汪曾祺诗联品读》，金实秋编，大众文艺出版社，2009年4月。
[43] 本篇见于《〈晚饭花集〉自序》，又见于散文《自得其乐》，参见谈艺卷、散文卷。诗题系编者所拟。
[42] This article was originally published in "Wang Zengqi's Poetry Joint Reading", edited by Jin Shiqiu, Popular Literature and Art Publishing House, April 2009. [43] This article is found in the "Self-Preface to the Collection of Dinner Flowers", and also in the prose "Self-Satisfaction", see the Tan Yi Volume and the Prose Volume. The poem title was prepared by the editor.[44] 本篇见于散文《人间幻境花果山》，参见散文卷。诗题系编者所拟。
[44] This article is found in the essay "Huaguo Mountain in the Fantasy of the World", see the prose volume. The title of the poem was prepared by the editor.[45] 本篇作于1984年2月1日，次日（春节）自题于菊花图上，后曾多次题画、抄示好友，略有改动，第二句又作“随风飘逝入苍霏”；初收《汪曾祺书画集》，汪朗、汪明、汪朝编，2000年2月。
[45] This article was written on February 1, 1984, and the next day (Spring Festival) was self-inscribed on the chrysanthemum picture, and then inscribed and copied to friends many times, with slight changes, and the second sentence was written as "drifting into the sky with the wind"; The first collection of "Wang Zengqi's Calligraphy and Painting Collection", edited by Wang Lang, Wang Ming, and Wang Chao, February 2000.[46] 本篇原载《长篇小说报》1984年7月第一期封二。
[47] 这两首据手迹编入。诗题系编者所拟。
[46] This article was originally published in the first issue of "Novel Newspaper" in July 1984. [47] These two poems are compiled according to the handwriting. The title of the poem was prepared by the editor.[48] 本篇见于宗璞散文《三幅画》，原载《钟山》1988年第五期，又见散文《自得其乐》，文字略有改动，参见散文卷。诗题系编者所拟。
[48] This article is found in Zong Pu's prose "Three Paintings", originally published in the fifth issue of "Zhongshan" in 1988, and also in the essay "Self-Happiness", the text has been slightly changed, see the prose volume. The title of the poem was prepared by the editor.[49] 本篇见于散文《索溪峪》，参见散文卷。诗题系编者所拟。
[50] 本篇见于散文《索溪峪》，参见散文卷。诗题系编者所拟。
[51] 本篇见于散文《索溪峪》，参见散文卷。诗题系编者所拟。
[49] This article is found in the essay "Suoxiyu", see the prose volume. The title of the poem was prepared by the editor. [50] This article is found in the prose "Suoxiyu", see the prose volume. The title of the poem was prepared by the editor. [51] This article is found in the prose "Suoxiyu", see the prose volume. The title of the poem was prepared by the editor.[52] 本篇原载《甓社珠光——高邮市文联十年成果集》，高邮市文联编印，1996年4月；后编入组诗《我的家乡在高邮——故乡诗吟》，初收《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。
[52] This article was originally published in "The Pearl Light of the Brick Society - A Collection of Ten Years of Achievements of the Gaoyou Federation of Literary and Art Circles", edited and printed by the Gaoyou Federation of Literary and Art Circles, April 1996; later compiled into the group of poems "My Hometown in Gaoyou - Hometown Poetry", first collected in the eighth volume of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998.[53] 本篇原载《中国当代作家书画作品集》，海峡文艺出版社，1994年2月。
[54] 本篇原载《作家》1986年第十期；初收《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。
[53] This article was originally published in "Collection of Calligraphy and Painting Works of Contemporary Chinese Writers", Straits Literature and Art Publishing House, February 1994. [54] This article was originally published in Writer, No. 10, 1986; Volume 8 of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998.[55] 本篇原载《汪曾祺书画集》，汪朗、汪明、汪朝编，2000年2月；初收《汪曾祺诗联品读》，金实秋编，大众文艺出版社，2009年4月。毓珉，指杨毓珉（1919—1998），汪曾祺西南联大同学，在《芦荡火种》《沙家浜》《杜鹃山》创作过程中多次与汪曾祺合作，曾任《戏剧电影报》主编。
[55] This article was originally published in "Wang Zengqi's Calligraphy and Painting Collection", edited by Wang Lang, Wang Ming, and Wang Chao, February 2000; "Wang Zengqi's Poetry Association Reading", edited by Jin Shiqiu, Popular Literature and Art Publishing House, April 2009. Yumin, referring to Yang Yumin (1919-1998), Wang Zengqi's classmate of Southwest Associated University, cooperated with Wang Zengqi many times in the creation of "Ludang Tinder", "Shajiabang" and "Rhododendron Mountain", and was the editor-in-chief of "Drama and Film Newspaper".[56] 本篇原载《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。李政道，西南联大校友，美籍华人物理学家，1957年诺贝尔物理学奖获得者。1986年11月25日是其60岁生日。
[56] This article was originally published in the Complete Works of Wang Zengqi, Volume 8, Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998. Li Zhengdao, an alumnus of Southwest Associated University, is a Chinese-American physicist and winner of the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1957. November 25, 1986 is his 60th birthday.[57] 本篇见于许长生《我与汪曾祺》，原载《高邮文史资料》第十七期，高邮市政协文史和学习委员会编，2001年12月。许荫章（许长生），汪曾祺在高邮县立五小高年级时的同学，后从医。
[57] This article appears in Xu Changsheng's "Wang Zengqi and Me", originally published in the 17th issue of "Gaoyou Literature and History Materials", edited by the Literature, History and Study Committee of the Gaoyou CPPCC, December 2001. Xu Yinzhang (Xu Changsheng), Wang Zengqi's classmate in the upper grades of Gaoyou County No. 5 Primary School, later practiced medicine.[58] 本篇见于散文《贺路翎重写小说》，参见散文卷。诗题系编者所拟。路翎（1923—1994），“七月”派作家。1955年受“胡风案”牵连，身心遭严重摧残。1979年重返文坛，小说《钢琴学生》（载《人民文学》1987年第一、二期合刊），被认为是“恢复了艺术感觉”的作品。
[58] This article is found in the essay "He Luling Rewrites the Novel", see the prose volume. The title of the poem was drafted by the editor. Lu Ling (1923-1994), a writer of the "July" school. In 1955, he was implicated in the "Hu Feng Case" and was severely devastated physically and mentally. He returned to the literary world in 1979, and his novel "Piano Student" (published in the first and second issues of "People's Literature" in 1987) was considered to be a work that "restored the artistic sense".[59] 本篇原载1987年2月8日《光明日报》“东风”副刊；初收《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。
[59] This article was originally published in the "Dongfeng" supplement of Guangming Daily on February 8, 1987; Volume 8 of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998.[60] 本篇原载《汪曾祺书画集》，汪朗、汪明、汪朝编，2000年2月。
[60] This article was originally published in "Wang Zengqi's Calligraphy and Painting Collection", edited by Wang Lang, Wang Ming, and Wang Chao, February 2000.[61] 本篇见于散文《滇游新记·泼水节印象》，参见散文卷；又收《汪曾祺诗联品读》，金实秋编，大众文艺出版社，2009年4月。
[61] This article is found in the essay "New Records of Yunnan Travel: Impressions of the Songkran Festival", see the prose volume; also included "Wang Zengqi's Poetry Joint Reading", edited by Jin Shiqiu, Popular Literature and Art Publishing House, April 2009.[62] 本篇据手迹编入。诗题系编者所拟。受赠人可能系同为中国作协访滇代表团成员的河北“荷花淀”派代表韩映山（1933—1998）。
[62] This article is compiled according to the handwriting. The title of the poem was prepared by the editor. The recipient may be Han Yingshan (1933-1998), a representative of the Hebei "Lotus Lake" faction who was also a member of the China Writers Association's delegation to Yunnan.[63] 本篇据手迹编入。诗题系编者所拟。受赠人不详，似为某河北籍甘肃人士。
[63] This article is compiled according to the handwriting. The title of the poem was prepared by the editor. The recipient is unknown, and it seems to be a certain Hebei native Gansu.[64] 本篇据手迹编入。诗题系编者所拟。和顺图书馆建于1928年，是著名的乡村图书馆，也是腾冲文化景点，内有诸多文化名人题字。
[64] This article is compiled according to the handwriting. The poem title was prepared by the editor. Built in 1928, Heshun Library is a famous rural library and a cultural attraction in Tengchong, with inscriptions from many cultural celebrities.[65] 本组诗原载《广西文学》1987年第九期，其中《桂林（二）》又见于津子围《更余淡墨出烟岚——忆汪曾祺先生》，载1997年6月21日《大连日报》，文字略有改动；初收《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。
[65] This group of poems was originally published in the ninth issue of "Guangxi Literature" in 1987, of which "Guilin (II)" was also found in Jin Ziwei's "More Light Ink Out of the Smoke - Remembering Mr. Wang Zengqi", published in Dalian Daily, June 21, 1997, with slight changes; Volume 8 of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998.[66] 本篇据手迹编入。诗题系编者所拟。
[67] 本篇据手迹编入。诗题系编者所拟。
[68] 本篇据手迹编入。诗题系编者所拟。
[66] This article is compiled according to the handwriting. The title of the poem was prepared by the editor. [67] This article is compiled according to the handwriting. The title of the poem was prepared by the editor. [68] This article is compiled according to the handwriting. The title of the poem is prepared by the editor.[69] 本篇见于1987年10月12日致施松卿信，原载《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。保罗·安格尔（Paul Engle，1908—1991），美国诗人，美籍华裔女作家聂华苓的丈夫，爱荷华大学国际写作计划的创办者。
[69] This article appeared in a letter to Shi Songqing on October 12, 1987, originally published in the Complete Works of Wang Zengqi, Volume 8, Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998. Paul Engle (1908-1991), American poet, husband of Chinese-American female writer Nie Hualing, founder of the International Writing Program at the University of Iowa.[70] 本篇原载《汪曾祺书画集》，汪朗、汪明、汪朝编，2000年2月；初收《汪曾祺诗联品读》，金实秋编，大众文艺出版社，2009年4月。
[70] This article was originally published in "Wang Zengqi's Calligraphy and Painting Collection", edited by Wang Lang, Wang Ming, and Wang Chao, February 2000; "Wang Zengqi's Poetry Joint Reading", edited by Jin Shiqiu, Popular Literature and Art Publishing House, April 2009.[71] 本篇据手迹编入。田园庄，北京西北旺田园庄饭店。
[71] This article is compiled according to the handwriting. Pastoral Village, Beijing Northwest Wang Pastoral Village Hotel.[72] 本篇见于散文《退役老兵不“退役”》，参见散文卷。马少波（1918—2009），戏剧家，曾任中国戏曲研究院副院长、中国京剧院副院长等职。
[72] This article is found in the essay "Retired Veterans Do Not "Retire"", see the prose volume. Ma Shaobo (1918-2009), dramatist, served as vice president of the Chinese Academy of Opera and vice president of the Chinese Peking Opera House.[73] 本篇原载《三月风》1989年第一期；后编入《题丁聪画我》，初收《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。小像，丁聪为作者所画漫画头像。
[73] This article was originally published in the first issue of "March Wind" in 1989; later compiled into "Title Ding Cong Paints Me", the eighth volume of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998. Portrait, Ding Cong drew a cartoon avatar for the author.[74] 本篇见于范用《曾祺诗笺》，原载1999年3月27日《新民晚报》；初收《汪曾祺诗联品读》，金实秋编，大众文艺出版社，2009年4月。诗题系编者所拟。
[74] This article is found in Fan Yong's "Zeng Qi Poetry Notes", originally published in the "Xinmin Evening News" on March 27, 1999; The first collection of "Wang Zengqi's Poetry Joint Reading", edited by Jin Shiqiu, Dazhong Literature and Art Publishing House, April 2009. The poem title was prepared by the editor.[75] 本篇原载1989年4月11日《新民晚报》；初收《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。
[75] This article was originally published in the Xinmin Evening News, April 11, 1989; The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi, Volume 8, Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998.[76] 我在西南联大时，每天坐茶馆，当时叫做“泡茶馆”。我看的杂书，多半是在茶馆里看的。我这个作家，实是在茶馆里“泡”出来的。
[77] 我20岁开始发表作品，到现在差不多有半个世纪了。
[76] When I was at Southwest Associated University, I sat in a teahouse every day, which was called "tea house" at that time. Most of the miscellaneous books I read were read in teahouses. As a writer, I actually "bubbled" them in teahouses. [77] I started publishing at the age of 20, and it's been almost half a century now.[78] 本篇见于张培耕《大陆探亲弘法之旅》，原载《佛宗万里记游》，台湾佛光出版社，1992年；初收《汪曾祺诗联品读》，金实秋编，大众文艺出版社，2009年4月。释星云，台湾佛光山寺创始人、住持。
[78] This article is published in Zhang Peigeng's "Journey to Visit Relatives and Spread the Dharma in the Mainland", originally published in "Buddhist Sect's Journey of Ten Thousand Miles", Fo Guang Publishing House, Taiwan, 1992; Initial Collection of "Wang Zengqi's Poetry Joint Reading", edited by Jin Shiqiu, Dazhong Literature and Art Publishing House, April 2009. Shi Xingyun, founder and abbot of Fo Guang Shan Temple in Taiwan.[79] 本篇原载《甓社珠光——高邮市文联十年成果集》，高邮市文联编印，1996年4月；后编入组诗《我的家乡在高邮——故乡诗吟》，初收《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。
[79] This article was originally published in "The Pearl Light of the Brick Society - A Collection of Ten Years of Achievements of the Gaoyou Federation of Literary and Art Circles", edited and printed by the Gaoyou Federation of Literary and Art Circles, April 1996; Later compiled into the poem "My Hometown in Gaoyou - Hometown Poetry", first included in the eighth volume of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998.[80] 本篇原载《珠湖春汛》，高邮市文联编印，1989年7月，又载《甓社珠光——高邮市文联十年成果集》，高邮市文联编印，1996年4月；后编入组诗《我的家乡在高邮——故乡诗吟》，初收《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。
[80] This article was originally published in "Zhuhu Lake Spring Flood", edited and printed by Gaoyou Federation of Literary and Art Circles, July 1989, and also published in "Pearl Light of the Brick Society - A Collection of Ten Years of Achievements of Gaoyou Federation of Literary and Art Circles", edited and printed by Gaoyou Federation of Literary and Art Circles, April 1996; later compiled into the poem "My Hometown in Gaoyou - Hometown Poetry", first included in the eighth volume of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998.[81] 本篇见于散文《初访福建·漳州》，参见散文卷。
[81] 本篇见于散文《初访福建·漳州》，参见散文卷。[82] 本篇见于散文《七十书怀》，参见散文卷。
[82] 本篇见于散文《七十书怀》，参见散文卷。[83] 本篇见于赵本夫《汪先生》，原载1997年5月29日《扬子晚报》；初收《汪曾祺诗联品读》，金实秋编，大众文艺出版社，2009年4月。赵本夫，作家。
[83] This article was published in Zhao Benfu's "Mr. Wang", originally published in the Yangtze Evening News, May 29, 1997; "Wang Zengqi's Poetry Joint Reading", edited by Jin Shiqiu, Popular Literature and Art Publishing House, April 2009. Zhao Benfu, writer.[84] 本篇原载自牧《人生品录——百味斋日记》，山东文艺出版社，1993年10月；初收《汪曾祺诗联品读》，金实秋编，大众文艺出版社，2009年4月。
[84] This article was originally published in Zi Mu, "Life Record - Baiweizhai Diary", Shandong Literature and Art Publishing House, October 1993; The first collection of "Wang Zengqi's Poetry Joint Reading", edited by Jin Shiqiu, Dazhong Literature and Art Publishing House, April 2009.[85] 本篇见于1991年2月15日致范用信，原载《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。
[85] This article was published in a letter to Fan Yongxun dated February 15, 1991, originally published in the Complete Works of Wang Zengqi, Volume 8, Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998.[86] 本篇见于1991年2月底致范用信，原载《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。
[87] 本篇见于散文《觅我游踪五十年》，参见散文卷。诗题据手迹。
[86] This article was published in a letter to Fan Yongxi at the end of February 1991, originally published in the Complete Works of Wang Zengqi, Volume 8, Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998. [87] This article is found in the essay "Fifty Years of Searching for Me", see the prose volume. The title of the poem is based on handwriting.[88] 本篇见于先燕云《觅我游踪五十年——汪曾祺印象》，原载《那方山水》，云南人民出版社，1994年8月；初收《汪曾祺诗联品读》，金实秋编，大众文艺出版社，2009年4月。诗题系编者所拟。
[88] This article is published in Xian Yanyun, "Fifty Years of Searching for Me - Wang Zengqi's Impression", originally published in "That Landscape", Yunnan People's Publishing House, August 1994; "Wang Zengqi's Poetry Joint Reading", edited by Jin Shiqiu, Popular Literature and Art Publishing House, April 2009. The title of the poem was prepared by the editor.[89] 本篇见于散文《烟赋》，参见散文卷。诗题系编者所拟。红塔山，云南玉溪烟厂生产的名牌香烟。
[89] This article is found in the prose "Smoke Fu", see the prose volume. The title of the poem was prepared by the editor. Hongta Mountain, a brand-name cigarette produced by Yuxi Tobacco Factory in Yunnan.[90] 本篇见于李迪《红红的土地高高的山》，原载《十五日夜走滇境》，华龄出版社，1996年7月。诗题系编者所拟。高伟，时任中国作家协会创联部干事，与作者一同赴滇参加“红塔山笔会”。
[90] This article is published in Li Di's "Red Land High Mountains", originally published in "Walking in Yunnan on the Fifteenth Day and Night", Hualing Publishing House, July 1996. The poem title was drafted by the editor. Gao Wei, then an officer of the Creation Department of the Chinese Writers Association, went to Yunnan with the author to participate in the "Hongta Mountain Pen Club".[91] 本篇见于李迪《红红的土地高高的山》，原载《十五日夜走滇境》，华龄出版社，1996年7月。诗题系编者所拟，原稿漫漶处以“□”代替。李林栋，时任《中国企业家》杂志编辑，中国作协“红塔山笔会”活动策划人。
[91] This article is published in Li Di's "Red Land High Mountains", originally published in "Fifteen Days and Nights of Yunnan", Hualing Publishing House, July 1996. The title of the poem was drafted by the editor, and the original manuscript was replaced by "□". Li Lindong, then editor of "China Entrepreneur" magazine, was the planner of the "Hongta Mountain PEN Club" event of the China Writers Association.[92] 本篇见于先燕云《觅我游踪五十年——汪曾祺印象》，原载《那方山水》，云南人民出版社，1994年8月；又载《十五日夜走滇境》，华龄出版社，1996年7月，文字略有改动。初收《汪曾祺诗联品读》，金实秋编，大众文艺出版社，2009年4月。李迪，时任《商品与质量》周刊总编辑。
[92] This article is published in Xian Yanyun, "Fifty Years of Searching for Me - Wang Zengqi's Impression", originally published in "That Landscape", Yunnan People's Publishing House, August 1994; also published in "Fifteen Days and Nights in Yunnan", Hualing Publishing House, July 1996, with slight changes in the text. The first collection of "Wang Zengqi's Poetry Joint Reading", edited by Jin Shiqiu, Popular Literature and Art Publishing House, April 2009. Li Di, then editor-in-chief of "Commodity and Quality" weekly.[93] 本篇见于1991年5月4日致朱德煕信，原载何孔敬《长相思——朱德煕其人》；初收《汪曾祺诗联品读》，金实秋编，大众文艺出版社，2009年4月。朱德煕（1920—1992），古文字学家、语言学家，作者西南联大同学。
[93] This article was published in a letter to Zhu Dehui on May 4, 1991, originally published in He Kongjing's "Sauvignon Blanc - Zhu Dewei's People"; "Wang Zengqi's Poetry Joint Reading", edited by Jin Shiqiu, Popular Literature and Art Publishing House, April 2009. Zhu Dehui (1920-1992), paleographer, linguist, author, classmate of Southwest Associated University.[94] 本篇见于程绍国《林斤澜说》，人民文学出版社，2006年12月；初收《汪曾祺诗联品读》，金实秋编，大众文艺出版社，2009年4月。林斤澜（1923—2009），作家，1986年4月起担任《北京文学》主编，1990年6月卸任。
[94] This article is published in Cheng Shaoguo's "Lin Jinlan Said", People's Literature Publishing House, December 2006; "Wang Zengqi's Poetry Joint Reading", edited by Jin Shiqiu, Popular Literature and Art Publishing House, April 2009. Lin Jinlan (1923-2009), writer, served as the editor-in-chief of Beijing Literature from April 1986 and stepped down in June 1990.[95] 本篇见于散文《泰山片石》，参见散文卷。诗题系编者所拟。
[96] 本篇见于散文《自得其乐》，参见散文卷。女作家张抗抗曾作文《牡丹的拒绝》，由此引发作者作画题诗。
[95] This article is found in the prose "Taishan Stone", see the prose volume. The poem title was prepared by the editor. [96] This article is found in the essay "Self-Pleasure", see the prose volume. The female writer Zhang Kangkang once wrote "The Rejection of the Peony", which led to the author's painting and poem.[97] 本篇见于张守仁《最后一位文人作家汪曾祺》，原载《美文》2005年第五期；初收《汪曾祺诗联品读》，金实秋编，大众文艺出版社，2009年4月。诗题系编者所拟。张守仁，时任《十月》副主编。
[97] This article appeared in Zhang Shouren's "The Last Literati Writer Wang Zengqi", originally published in the fifth issue of "Meiwen" in 2005; The first collection of "Wang Zengqi's Poetry Association Reading", edited by Jin Shiqiu, Popular Literature and Art Publishing House, April 2009. The poem title was prepared by the editor. Zhang Shouren, then deputy editor-in-chief of "October".[98] 本篇原载《甓社珠光——高邮市文联十年成果集》，高邮市文联编印，1996年4月；后编入组诗《我的家乡在高邮——故乡诗吟》，初收《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。
[98] This article was originally published in "The Pearl Light of the Brick Society - A Collection of Ten Years of Achievements of the Gaoyou Federation of Literary and Art Circles", edited and printed by the Gaoyou Federation of Literary and Art Circles, April 1996; later compiled into the poem "My Hometown in Gaoyou - Hometown Poetry", first included in the eighth volume of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998.[99] 本篇原载《甓社珠光——高邮市文联十年成果集》，高邮市文联编印，1996年4月；后编入组诗《我的家乡在高邮——故乡诗吟》，初收《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。母校，指作者初中时曾就读的高邮中学。
[99] This article was originally published in "The Pearl Light of the Brick Society - A Collection of Ten Years of Achievements of the Gaoyou Federation of Literary and Art Circles", edited and printed by the Gaoyou Federation of Literary and Art Circles, April 1996; later compiled into the poem "My Hometown in Gaoyou - Hometown Poetry", the eighth volume of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998. Alma mater refers to the Gaoyou Middle School where the author studied in junior high school.[100] 本篇原载《甓社珠光——高邮市文联十年成果集》，高邮市文联编印，1996年4月；后编入组诗《我的家乡在高邮——故乡诗吟》，初收《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。文联，即高邮市文联。
[100] This article was originally published in "The Pearl Light of the Brick Society - A Collection of Ten Years of Achievements of the Gaoyou Federation of Literary and Art Circles", edited and printed by the Gaoyou Federation of Literary and Art Circles, April 1996; Later compiled into the group of poems "My Hometown in Gaoyou - Hometown Poetry", first included in the eighth volume of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998. The Federation of Literary and Art Circles, that is, the Gaoyou Federation of Literary and Art Circles.[101] 本篇与《北海谣》《虎头鲨歌》《为高邮市政协礼堂写六尺宣纸大字》《水乡》《镇国塔偈》《宋城残迹》《文游台》《盂城驿》《王家亭》《佛寺》《忆荷花亭吃茶》共十二首诗，以“回乡杂咏”为题，原载《雨花》1992年第二期；初收《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。本篇又载《甓社珠光——高邮市文联十年成果集》，高邮市文联编印，1996年4月，诗题有改动。
[101] This article is a total of twelve poems, including "The Ballad of the Beihai", "The Song of the Tiger Head Shark", "Writing Six-foot Rice Paper Characters for the Auditorium of the Gaoyou CPPCC", "Water Town", "Zhenguo Pagoda Verse", "Songcheng Ruins", "Wenyou Terrace", "Yucheng Station", "Wangjiating", "Buddhist Temple", and "Remembering the Lotus Pavilion Eating Tea", a total of twelve poems, titled "Returning to Hometown Miscellaneous Poems", originally published in the second issue of "Rain Flowers" in 1992; The eighth volume of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998. This article is also published in "The Pearl Light of the Brick Society - A Collection of Ten Years of Achievements of the Gaoyou Federation of Literary and Art Circles", edited and printed by the Gaoyou Federation of Literary and Art Circles, in April 1996, the title of the poem has been changed.[102] 高邮王念孙、引之父子为乾嘉大儒，精训诂小学，解经不循旧说，多新义。其家在高邮称为“独旗杆王家”。纪念馆乃因其旧第少加修葺，朴素无华，存王家风貌，可钦喜也。
[102] 高邮王念孙、引之父子为乾嘉大儒，精训诂小学，解经不循旧说，多新义。 其家在高邮称为“独旗杆王家”。 纪念馆乃因其旧第少加修葺，朴素无华，存王家风貌，可钦喜也。[103] 参见本卷《高邮王氏纪念馆》注①。
[104] 北海大酒店在傅公桥。我上初中时，来去均从桥上过，未闻有所谓北海也。傅公桥本为郊埛，今高邮向东拓展，北海已为市中心矣。
[103] See note (1) of this volume "Gaoyou Wang Memorial Hall". [104] The Beihai Hotel is in Fugong Bridge. When I was in junior high school, I passed through the bridge when I came and went, and I didn't hear of the so-called Beihai. Fugong Bridge was originally a suburb, but now Gaoyou has expanded eastward, and Beihai has become the city center.[105] 参见本卷《高邮王氏纪念馆》注①。
[106] 参见本卷《高邮王氏纪念馆》注①。
[105] See note (1) of this volume "Gaoyou Wang Memorial Hall". [106] See note (1) of this volume "Gaoyou Wang Memorial Hall".[107] 本篇见于朱延庆《汪曾祺在扬州》，原载《三立集（续集）》，大众文艺出版社，2006年9月；初收《汪曾祺诗联品读》，金实秋编，大众文艺出版社，2009年4月。符宗乾，时任扬州市政协主席。
[107] This article is published in Zhu Yanqing's "Wang Zengqi in Yangzhou", originally published in "Sanli Collection (Sequel)", Dazhong Literature and Art Publishing House, September 2006; "Wang Zengqi's Poetry Joint Reading", edited by Jin Shiqiu, Dazhong Literature and Art Publishing House, April 2009. Fu Zongqian, then chairman of the Yangzhou CPPCC.[108] 本篇见于朱延庆《汪曾祺在扬州》，原载《三立集（续集）》，大众文艺出版社，2006年9月；初收《汪曾祺诗联品读》，金实秋编，大众文艺出版社，2009年4月。黄扬，时任扬州市政协副主席。
[108] This article is published in Zhu Yanqing's "Wang Zengqi in Yangzhou", originally published in "Sanli Collection (Sequel)", Dazhong Literature and Art Publishing House, September 2006; "Wang Zengqi's Poetry Association Reading", edited by Jin Shiqiu, Dazhong Literature and Art Publishing House, April 2009. Huang Yang, then vice chairman of the Yangzhou CPPCC.[109] 本篇见于朱延庆《汪曾祺在扬州》，原载《三立集（续集）》，大众文艺出版社，2006年9月；初收《汪曾祺诗联品读》，金实秋编，大众文艺出版社，2009年4月。黄石盘，时任扬州市政协秘书长。
[109] This article is published in Zhu Yanqing's "Wang Zengqi in Yangzhou", originally published in "Sanli Collection (Sequel)", Dazhong Literature and Art Publishing House, September 2006; "Wang Zengqi's Poetry Association Reading", edited by Jin Shiqiu, Dazhong Literature and Art Publishing House, April 2009. Huang Shipan, then secretary-general of the Yangzhou CPPCC.[110] 本篇原载《甓社珠光——高邮市文联十年成果集》，高邮市文联编印，1996年4月；后编入组诗《我的家乡在高邮——故乡诗吟》，初收《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。
[110] This article was originally published in "The Pearl Light of the Brick Society - A Collection of Ten Years of Achievements of the Gaoyou Federation of Literary and Art Circles", edited and printed by the Gaoyou Federation of Literary and Art Circles, April 1996; later compiled into the group of poems "My Hometown in Gaoyou - Hometown Poetry", first collected in the eighth volume of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998.[111] 本篇原载2013年4月8日《钱江晚报》。诗题系编者所拟。徐正纶，时任浙江文艺出版社编辑，系《晚翠文谈》责任编辑。
[111] This article was originally published in the Qianjiang Evening News on April 8, 2013. The poem title was drafted by the editor. Xu Zhenglun, then editor of Zhejiang Literature and Art Publishing House, was the editor-in-charge editor of "Evening Cui Wen Tan".[112] 本篇见于散文《初识楠溪江·九级瀑》，参见散文卷。九漈瀑布，在永嘉楠溪江大若岩风景区。
[112] This article is found in the essay "First Acquaintance with the Nanxi River: Nine-Level Waterfall", see the prose volume. Jiuli Waterfall, in the Daruoyan Scenic Area of Nanxi River in Yongjia.[113] 本篇见于散文《初识楠溪江·永恒的船桅》，参见散文卷。水仙洞，在永嘉楠溪江石桅岩风景区。
[113] This article is found in the essay "First Acquaintance with the Nanxi River: The Eternal Mast", see the prose volume. Narcissus Cave, in the Yongjia Nanxi River Stone Mast Rock Scenic Area.[114] 本篇见于散文《初识楠溪江·永恒的船桅》，参见散文卷；又见于刘心武《石桅待发》、鲁虹《游走“浙南天柱”》，文字有改动，作：“石桅泊何时，卓立千万载。壁尽几沧桑，青颜怎不改。”（刘心武引文中“青颜”作“青春”，当为误植。）石桅，永嘉楠溪江一风景点。
[114] This article is found in the essay "First Acquaintance with the Nanxi River: The Eternal Mast", see the prose volume; It is also seen in Liu Xinwu's "Stone Mast Ready to Go" and Lu Hong's "Wandering the "Tianzhu in Southern Zhejiang", and the text has been changed, writing: "When will the stone mast be anchored, standing for thousands of years." The wall is full of vicissitudes, how can the green face not change. (Liu Xinwu's quotation of "Qingyan" is "youth", which is regarded as a misplant.) The stone mast is a scenic spot on the Nanxi River in Yongjia.[115] 本篇见于散文《初识楠溪江·传家耕读古村庄》，参见散文卷。苍坡村，永嘉楠溪江畔一古村，为民俗旅游景点。
[116] 本篇见于散文《初识楠溪江·清清楠溪水》，参见散文卷。
[115] This article is found in the essay "First Acquaintance with the Nanxi River: Heirloom Farming and Reading Ancient Villages", see the prose volume. Cangpo Village, an ancient village on the banks of the Nanxi River in Yongjia, is a folk tourist attraction. [116] This article is found in the essay "First Acquaintance with the Nanxi River, Qingqing Nanxi Water", see the prose volume.[117] 本篇据手迹编入。黑孩，女，作家，现旅居日本。
[118] 本篇据手迹编入。
[117] This article is compiled according to handwriting. Black child, female, writer, currently living in Japan. [118] This article is compiled according to handwriting.[119] 本篇原载《中国作家》1992年第二期封二；又见于散文《书画自娱》《〈草花集〉自序》，参见散文卷、谈艺卷，文字略有改动。“伸纸画青春”一句，《书画自娱》引文作“伸纸作芳春”。《〈草花集〉自序》引文作“伸纸画暮春”，且无“唯求俗可耐，宁计故为新”两句。“只可自愉悦，不可持赠君”两句，两次自引均作“只可自怡悦，不堪持赠君。”“君其真喜欢”一句，两次自引皆作“君若亦欢喜。”
[119] This article was originally published in the second issue of "Chinese Writers" in 1992; It is also seen in the prose "Calligraphy and Painting Self-Entertainment" and "Grass and Flower Collection" self-introduction, see the prose volume and the talk art volume, and the text has been slightly changed. The sentence "Stretching paper to paint youth", the quotation of "Calligraphy and Painting Self-Entertainment" is "stretching paper for spring". The quotation of "Grass and Flower Collection" is "stretching paper to paint late spring", and there are no two sentences "only seek the vulgar and endure, and prefer to be new". The two sentences "You can only be happy, not give to you", both self-quotations are "You can only be happy, and you can't bear to give it to you." The sentence "Junqi really likes", and both self-quotations are "Junruo is also happy". ”[120] 本篇见于散文《岁交春》，参见散文卷；又见于范用《曾祺诗笺》，载1999年3月27日《新民晚报》。
[121] 参见本卷《高邮王氏纪念馆》注①。
[120] This article is found in the prose "Spring of the Year", see the prose volume; also in Fan Yong's "Zeng Qi Poetry Notes", published in the "Xinmin Evening News" on March 27, 1999. [121] See note (1) of this volume "Gaoyou Wang Memorial Hall".[122] 法国安妮·居里安女士翻译了我的几篇小说，她发现我的小说里大都有水。
[123] 高邮旧亦称高沙。
[122] Ms. Anne Curian of France, who translated several of my novels, found that most of my novels contained water. [123] Gaoyou was also known as Gaosha in the past.[124] 参见本卷《高邮王氏纪念馆》注①。[124] See note (1) of this volume "Gaoyou Wang Memorial Hall". ② 镇国寺塔是方塔，南方少见。塔建于唐代，上半截毁于雷火，明清重修。(2) The Zhenguo Temple Pagoda is a square pagoda, which is rare in the south. The pagoda was built in the Tang Dynasty, and the upper half was destroyed by thunder and fire, and was rebuilt in the Ming and Qing dynasties.
[125] 镇国寺门前旧有照壁，是一整块的紫红砂石，上刻海水。多年向前倾斜，但不倒。后毁。
[125] There is an old wall in front of the Zhen Guo Temple, which is a whole piece of purple-red sand and stone, carved with seawater. It has been tilted forward for many years, but it does not fall. Later destroyed.[126] 镇国寺塔本在西门内。运河拓宽时为保存此塔，特意留出塔周围的土地，乃成一圆圆的小岛，在河中央。
[127] 参见本卷《高邮王氏纪念馆》注①。
[126] The pagoda of Zhen Quoc Temple was originally located inside the west gate. When the canal was widened, in order to preserve this pagoda, the land around the pagoda was deliberately set aside, forming a round island in the middle of the river. [127] See note (1) of this volume "Gaoyou Wang Memorial Hall".[128] 高邮城南有旧城墙一段，传是宋城。或有疑义，因为有些城砖是明清形制。近因水灾，危及墙址，乃分段检修，发现印有“高邮军城砖”字样的砖头，笔画清晰。高邮在北宋为高邮军，是则残墙为宋城无疑。高邮军在宋代为交通枢要，宋人诗文屡及。
[128] There is a section of the old city wall in the south of Gaoyou City, which is said to be Song City. There may be doubts, because some city bricks are in the shape of the Ming and Qing dynasties. Recently, due to floods, the wall site was endangered, and it was repaired in sections, and bricks printed with the words "Gaoyou Army City Bricks" were found, with clear strokes. Gaoyou was the Gaoyou Army in the Northern Song Dynasty, and the ruined wall was undoubtedly the Song City. The Gaoyou Army was a transportation hub in the Song Dynasty, and the Song people often wrote poetry and literature.[129] 参见本卷《高邮王氏纪念馆》注①。[129] See note (1) of this volume "Gaoyou Wang Memorial Hall". ② 文游台在泰山（一座土山）上，建于宋，是苏东坡、秦少游、王定国等人文酒觞咏之处。台有楼阁，不类宋制，似后修。敌伪时重修，甚恶俗。近又修，稍存旧制。(2) Wenyou Terrace is built on Mount Tai (an earthen hill), built in the Song Dynasty, and is the place where Su Dongpo, Qin Shaoyou, Wang Dingguo and other humanities drank and sang. The platform has pavilions, which are not like the Song system, but seem to be repaired. It was rebuilt during the enemy and puppet, and it was very vulgar. Recently, it was repaired, and the old system was preserved.
[130] 我读小学时，每年春游，都上文游台。台之西，本为一片烟柳。凭栏西眺，可见运河帆影，从柳梢轻轻移过。今台西多建工厂、宿舍，眼界不能空阔矣。
[130] When I was in elementary school, I went to Wenyou Tai every spring outing. To the west of Taiwan, it was originally a smoke willow. Looking west from the railing, you can see the shadow of the canal sails, gently moving past the willow tips. Nowadays, Taixi has built more factories and dormitories, and the horizon cannot be empty.[131] 参见本卷《高邮王氏纪念馆》注①。[131] See note (1) of this volume "Gaoyou Wang Memorial Hall". 高邮城外高内低，如盂。秦少游有诗云：“吾乡如覆盂”。盂城驿在高邮城南。据云，这是全国尚存的最完整的驿站之一。我去看过，是相当大的一片房子，有驿丞住的地方、投驿吏卒的宿舍、喂马的地方、关犯人的监狱……一应俱全。从建筑看似为明建清修。我以为这是高邮真正最具历史文物价值的景点之一。但以高邮一县之力，目前很难复其旧观。 Gaoyou City is high outside and low inside, like a bowl. Qin Shaoyou has a poem saying: "My hometown is like a bowl". Yucheng Post is in the south of Gaoyou City. According to the clouds, this is one of the most complete post stations in the country. I went to see it, and it was a fairly large house, with a place where the post officials lived, a dormitory for the post officials, a place to feed horses, and a prison for prisoners...... Everything but the kitchen sink. From the building, it seems to have been built and repaired by the Ming Dynasty. I thought this was one of the most historical and cultural relics in Gaoyou. However, with the strength of Gaoyou County, it is difficult to restore its old view at present.
[132] 参见本卷《高邮王氏纪念馆》注①。[132] See note (1) of this volume "Gaoyou Wang Memorial Hall". 王家亭为蝶园遗物，在东城根，我读初中时常往。所谓亭子者实为长方形的大厅，隔窗可见厅内炕榻几椅，厅前池塘野荷零乱，似已无人管理。后毁。蝶园本是高邮名园，今存其名而已。 Wangjiating is a relic of the Butterfly Garden, in Dongchenggen, I often went there when I was in junior high school. The so-called pavilion is actually a rectangular hall, and you can see the kang beds, tables and chairs in the hall through the window, and the pond in front of the hall is scattered and wild, as if no one is managing it. It was later destroyed. The butterfly garden was originally a famous garden in Gaoyou, but its name is still preserved.
[133] 参见本卷《高邮王氏纪念馆》注①。
[134] 天王寺旧有吴道子绘观音，后竟不知下落。
[135] 承天寺夜半撞钟，小说《幽冥钟》写此。
[133] See note (1) of this volume "Gaoyou Wang Memorial Hall". [134] Tianwang Temple used to have Wu Daozi painted Guanyin, but its whereabouts are unknown. [135] Chengtian Temple struck the bell in the middle of the night, and the novel "Nether Bell" wrote this.[136] 高邮城区旧有八大寺，均毁。今只保留少数庵堂。此次回乡，曾往看南城一庵，承住持长老接待。长老颇爱读小说，对我说：“你所写的小和尚的事是真的。我们年轻时都有过这样的事，只是不敢说。”小说《受戒》能得老和尚印可，殊感欣慰。
[136] There were eight major temples in Gaoyou City, all of which were destroyed. Only a few nunnery halls are left today. This time I returned to my hometown, I went to see a nunnery in Nancheng and was received by the abbot elder. The elder loves to read novels and said to me: "What you wrote about the little monk is true. We all had such things when we were young, but we didn't dare to say it." I am very pleased that the novel "Ordination" can be approved by the old monk.[137] 参见本卷《高邮王氏纪念馆》注①。[137] See note (1) of this volume "Gaoyou Wang Memorial Hall". 荷花亭在公园东北角，在一小岛上。四面皆水，有小桥可通。环岛皆植高大垂柳，日影不到。亭中有茶馆，卖极好龙井茶。是夏日纳凉去处。今公园布局已变，荷花亭不知尚存在否。 The lotus pavilion is in the northeast corner of the park, on a small island. There is water on all sides, and there is a small bridge to pass through. The island is planted with tall weeping willows, and the shadow of the sun cannot be reached. There is a tea house in the pavilion, which sells excellent Longjing tea. It is a place to cool off in summer. Now the layout of the park has changed, and I don't know if the lotus pavilion still exists.
[138] 本篇原载高邮市集邮协会会刊《盂城邮花》1992年第三期，又载《甓社珠光——高邮市文联十年成果集》，高邮市文联编印，1996年4月；后编入组诗《我的家乡在高邮——故乡诗吟》，初收《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。
[138] This article was originally published in the third issue of "Yucheng Mail Flowers", the journal of the Gaoyou Philatelic Association, 1992, and was also published in "The Pearl Light of the Brick Society - A Collection of Ten Years of Achievements of the Gaoyou Federation of Literary and Art Circles", edited and printed by the Gaoyou Federation of Literary and Art Circles, April 1996; Later, it was compiled into a group of poems "My Hometown is in Gaoyou - Hometown Poetry", first included in the eighth volume of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998.[139] 本篇见于燕治国《蒲黄榆畔藏文仙——访汪曾祺》，原载1992年3月30日《太原日报》；初收《汪曾祺诗联品读》，金实秋编，大众文艺出版社，2009年4月。
[139] This article is published in Yan Zhiguo's "Puhuang Yupan Tibetan Literary Immortal - Interview with Wang Zengqi", originally published in Taiyuan Daily, March 30, 1992; "Wang Zengqi's Poetry Joint Reading", edited by Jin Shiqiu, Popular Literature and Art Publishing House, April 2009.[140] 本篇原载《文学自由谈》1992年第二期；初收《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。这五首依次吟咏的是五位现代文人史事：何其芳、废名、林徽因、沈从文、周作人。
[140] This article was originally published in the second issue of "Literary Freedom Talk", 1992; The Eighth Volume of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998. These five poems are recited in turn by five modern literati: He Qifang, Abandoned Name, Lin Huiyin, Shen Congwen, and Zhou Zuoren.[141] 本篇见于1992年6月28日致范用信，原载《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。诗题系编者所拟。
[141] This article was published in a letter to Fan Yong, June 28, 1992, originally published in the Complete Works of Wang Zengqi, Volume 8, Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998. The poem title was prepared by the editor.[142] 本篇原载1992年7月6日《文汇报》，依次题咏《水浒传》中七位人物：潘金莲、王婆、武松、林冲、李逵、扈三娘、燕青，又见于1992年6月28日致范用信，无咏武松一首，有咏鲁智深一首；初收《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。
[142] This article was originally published in Wen Wei Po on July 6, 1992, and the seven characters in "Water Margin" are inscribed in turn: Pan Jinlian, Wang Po, Wu Song, Lin Chong, Li Kui, Hu Sanniang, Yan Qing, and also appeared in a letter to Fan Yongxiang on June 28, 1992, without a poem about Wu Song, and a poem about Lu Zhishen; The Eighth Volume of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998.[143] 本篇原载1993年3月4日《中国旅游报》；后编入组诗《随咏》，初收《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。
[143] This article was originally published in China Tourism News on March 4, 1993; later compiled into the poem "Sui Yong", first included in the eighth volume of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998.[144] 本篇原载《甓社珠光——高邮市文联十年成果集》，高邮市文联编印，1996年4月；后编入组诗《我的家乡在高邮——故乡诗吟》，初收《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。纯儒，即高邮名儒韦子廉（1892—1943），号鹤琴。为纪念他逝世五十周年，高邮市政协盂城诗社拟编文集，汪曾祺应邀题签并作此诗。
[144] This article was originally published in "The Pearl Light of the Brick Society - A Collection of Ten Years of Achievements of the Gaoyou Federation of Literary and Art Circles", edited and printed by the Gaoyou Federation of Literary and Art Circles, April 1996; later compiled into the group poem "My Hometown in Gaoyou - Hometown Poetry", first included in the eighth volume of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998. Chunru, that is, Wei Zilian (1892-1943), a famous Confucian scholar in Gaoyou, was known as Heqin. In order to commemorate the 50th anniversary of his death, the Yucheng Poetry Society of the Gaoyou CPPCC planned to compile a collection, and Wang Zengqi was invited to inscribe and write this poem.[145] 本篇见于散文《文章余事》，参见散文卷。
[145] 本篇见于散文《文章余事》，参见散文卷。[146] 本篇原载朱小平《画侠杜月涛》，新华出版社，1993年11月，为该书序；又载1994年1月26日《北京晚报》，诗题、注释略有改动。朱小平，作家。杜月涛，画家。
[146] This article was originally published in Zhu Xiaoping's "The Painter Du Yuetao", Xinhua Publishing House, November 1993, as the preface to the book; it was also published in the Beijing Evening News on January 26, 1994, with slight changes in the title and annotations of the poem. Zhu Xiaoping, writer. Du Yuetao, painter.[147] 孩儿面牡丹名，出菏泽。
[148] 米芾自称“臣书刷字”。
[147] The name of the peony on the child's face comes from Heze. [148] Mi Fu called himself "Chen Shu brushing words".[149] 本组诗见于散文《西山客话》，参见散文卷。其中第一首诗题“西山”系编者所拟。《平地山居》和《古钟和古松》中第二首编入组诗《随咏》，初收《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月，诗题有改动。
[149] This group of poems is found in the prose "Xishan Hakka", see the prose volume. The first poem titled "Xishan" was drafted by the editor. The second poem in "Flat Mountain Dwelling" and "Ancient Bells and Ancient Pines" was included in the group poem "Sui Yong", first included in the eighth volume of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998, the title of the poem was changed.[150] 本篇原载《东山文史资料》增刊《东山岛诗词选》，东山县政协文史资料委员会编，1999年10月。
[150] This article was originally published in the supplement "Selected Poems of Dongshan Island" by "Dongshan Literary and Historical Materials", edited by the Cultural and Historical Materials Committee of the Dongshan County CPPCC, October 1999.[151] 本篇原载《汪曾祺诗联品读》，金实秋编，大众文艺出版社，2009年4月。系应中国书画爱好者联谊会会员陈时风之请，为画家戴敦邦所绘《金陵十二钗与宝玉图》所题。
[151] This article was originally published in "Wang Zengqi's Poetry Joint Reading", edited by Jin Shiqiu, Popular Literature and Art Publishing House, April 2009. At the request of Chen Shifeng, a member of the Chinese Calligraphy and Painting Lovers Association, it was inscribed for the painter Dai Dunbang's painting "Twelve Hairpins and Precious Jade Pictures".[152] 本篇见于散文《七载云烟》，参见散文卷。诗题系编者所拟。
[152] This article is found in the essay "Seven Years of Clouds and Smoke", see the prose volume. The poem title was prepared by the editor.[153] 昆明的白酒分市酒和升酒。市酒是普通白酒，升酒大概是用市酒再蒸一次，谓之“玫瑰重升”，似乎有点玫瑰香气。昆明酒店都是盛在绿陶的小碗里，一碗可盛二小两。
[153] Kunming's liquor is divided into city wine and shengjiu. The city wine is ordinary liquor, and the shengjiu is probably steamed again with the city wine, which is called "rose re-rise", which seems to have a bit of a rose aroma. Kunming hotels are served in small bowls of green pottery, and one bowl can hold two small taels.[154] 饵块分两种，都是米面蒸熟了的。一种状如小枕头，可做汤饵块、炒饵块。一种是椭圆的饼，犹如鞋底，在炭火上烤得发泡，一面用竹片涂了芝麻酱、花生酱、甜酱油、油辣子，对合而食之，谓之“烧饵块”。
[154] There are two types of bait cubes, both of which are steamed with rice noodles. One is shaped like a small pillow, which can be used as soup bait cubes and fried bait cubes. The other is an oval cake, like a shoe sole, baked on charcoal until foamy, and the other side is coated with sesame paste, peanut butter, sweet soy sauce, and oil chili peppers with bamboo slices, and eaten together, which is called "burnt bait block".[155] 汽锅鸡以正义路牌楼旁一家最好。这家无字号，只有一块匾，上书大字：“培养正气”，昆明人想吃汽锅鸡，就说：“我们今天去培养一下正气。”
[155] The steam pot chicken is the best one next to the archway on Zhengyi Road. This one has no name, only a plaque, with large characters written on it: "Cultivate righteousness", Kunming people want to eat steam pot chicken, so they say: "Let's cultivate righteousness today." ”[156] 小西门马家牛肉极好。牛肉是蒸的或煮熟的，不炒菜，分部位，如“冷片”、“汤片”……有的名称很奇怪，如大筋（牛鞭）、“领肝”（牛肚）。最特别的是“撩青”（牛舌，牛的舌头可不是撩青草的么？但非懂行人觉得这很费解）。“撩青”很好吃。
[156] Xiao Ximen Ma's beef is excellent. Beef is steamed or cooked, not stir-fried, and divided into parts, such as "cold slices" and "soup slices"...... Some names are very strange, such as Dajin (bullwhip) and "collar liver" (tripe). The most special is "flirting" (beef tongue, isn't the cow's tongue teasing grass? But non-knowledgeable people find this very puzzling). "Teasing green" is delicious.[157] 昆明菌子种类甚多，如“鸡枞”，这是菌中之王。但有一点我至今不明白它为什么只在白蚁窝上长“牛肝菌”（色如牛肝，生时熟后都像牛肝，有小毒，不可多吃，且须加大量的蒜，否则会昏倒。有个女同学吃多了牛肝菌，竟至休克）。“青头菌”，菌盖青绿，菌丝白色，味较清雅。味道最为隽永深长，不可名状的是干巴菌。这东西中吃不中看，颜色紫褐，不成模样，简直像一堆牛屎，里面又夹杂了一些松毛、杂草。可是收拾干净了，撕成蟹腿状的小片，加青辣椒同炒，一箸入口，酒兴顿涨，饭量猛开。这真是人间至味！
[157] There are many types of Kunming mushrooms, such as "chicken fir", which is the king of mushrooms. But one thing I still don't understand why it only grows "porcini mushrooms" on termite nests (the color is like beef liver, it looks like beef liver when cooked, it is slightly poisonous, and you must add a lot of garlic, otherwise you will pass out. A female classmate ate too many porcini mushrooms and went into shock). "Green head mushroom", the cap is green, the hycelium is white, and the taste is more elegant. The taste is the most timeless and deep, and the indescribable is the dry fungus. This thing is not good to eat, the color is purple-brown, it doesn't look good, it looks like a pile of cow dung, and it is mixed with some pine needles and weeds. But after cleaning up, tearing it into small pieces in the shape of crab legs, adding green chili peppers and stir-frying together, with chopsticks in the mouth, the wine suddenly rises, and the amount of food suddenly opens. This is really the best taste in the world![158] “藋”字云南读平声。
[159] 本篇见于散文《七载云烟》，参见散文卷。诗题系编者所拟。
[158] The word "藋" is pronounced flat in Yunnan. [159] This article is found in the prose "Seven Years of Clouds and Smoke", see the prose volume. The title of the poem was prepared by the editor.[160] 我们和凤翥街几家茶馆很熟，不但喝茶，吃芙蓉糕可以欠账，甚至可以向老板借钱去看电影。
[161] 茶馆常有女孩子来卖炒葵花子，绕桌轻唤：“瓜子瓜，瓜子瓜。”
[160] We were very familiar with several teahouses on Fengzhu Street, not only drinking tea, eating hibiscus cake to get into debt, but even borrowing money from the boss to go to the movies. [161] Girls often come to sell fried sunflower seeds in teahouses, and call around the table: "Melon seed melon, melon seed melon." ”[162] 本篇据手迹编入。
[162] This article is compiled according to handwriting.[163] 本篇编入组诗《随咏》，原载《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。杨汝纶，1920年生，汪曾祺堂叔舅家表弟，长期在四川工作，曾任富顺县县长等职。
[163] This poem is compiled into the group poem "Sui Yong", originally published in the eighth volume of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998. Yang Rulun, born in 1920, is a cousin of Wang Zengqi's uncle, who has worked in Sichuan for a long time and served as the county magistrate of Fushun County.[164] 本篇编入组诗《随咏》，原载《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。杨鼎川，杨汝纶之子，佛山大学中文系教授，时在北京大学进修。
[164] This poem is compiled into the poem "Sui Yong", originally published in the Complete Works of Wang Zengqi, Volume 8, Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998. Yang Dingchuan, son of Yang Rulun, was a professor in the Department of Chinese at Foshan University, and was studying at Peking University.[165] 本篇原载1995年9月17日《文摘报》，又见于《我画你写——文化人肖像集》，丁聪编，1996年1月，文字略有改动；初收《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。丁聪（1916—2009），漫画家。
[165] This article was originally published in the "Digest" on September 17, 1995, and was also published in "I Draw You to Write - Portraits of Cultural People", edited by Ding Cong, January 1996, with slight changes in the text; Volume 8 of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998. Ding Cong (1916-2009), cartoonist.[166] 本篇原载1995年9月17日《文摘报》，又见于《我画你写——文化人肖像集》，丁聪编，1996年1月；初收《汪曾祺诗联品读》，金实秋编，大众文艺出版社，2009年4月。诗题系编者所拟。范用（1923—2010），出版家，曾任人民出版社副社长兼三联书店总经理。
[166] This article was originally published in the "Digest News" on September 17, 1995, and was also published in "I Paint You Write - Portrait Collection of Cultural People", edited by Ding Cong, January 1996; "Wang Zengqi's Poetry Joint Reading", edited by Jin Shiqiu, Popular Literature and Art Publishing House, April 2009. The poem title was prepared by the editor. Fan Yong (1923-2010), publisher, was the vice president of the People's Publishing House and the general manager of Sanlian Bookstore.[167] 本篇见于高洪波《星斗其文，赤子其人》，原载1997年6月6日《南方周末》；初收《汪曾祺诗联品读》，金实秋编，大众文艺出版社，2009年4月。
[167] This article appeared in Gao Hongbo's "Stars and Writings, Innocent People", originally published in "Southern Weekly" on June 6, 1997; The first collection of "Wang Zengqi's Poetry Union Reading", edited by Jin Shiqiu, Popular Literature and Art Publishing House, April 2009.[168] 本篇见于《难得最是得从容——〈裘盛戎影集〉前言》，参见谈艺卷；初收《汪曾祺诗联品读》，金实秋编，大众文艺出版社，2009年4月。诗题系编者所拟。
[168] This article is found in "Rare and Most Calm - Preface to 'Qiu Shengrong Collection'", see Tan Yi Volume; The first collection of "Wang Zengqi's Poetry Joint Reading", edited by Jin Shiqiu, Popular Literature and Art Publishing House, April 2009. The poem title was prepared by the editor.[169] 本篇原载《甓社珠光——高邮市文联十年成果集》，高邮市文联编印，1996年4月，又载《文教资料》1997年第四期，文字略有改动；后编入组诗《我的家乡在高邮——故乡诗吟》，初收《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。母校，作者初中时就读的高邮中学。
[169] This article was originally published in "The Pearl Light of the Brick Society - A Collection of Ten Years of Achievements of the Gaoyou Federation of Literary and Art Circles", edited and printed by the Gaoyou Federation of Literary and Art Circles, April 1996, and also published in the fourth issue of "Cultural and Educational Materials" in 1997, with slight changes in the text; later compiled into the group poem "My Hometown in Gaoyou - Hometown Poetry", first included in the eighth volume of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998. Alma mater, Gaoyou Middle School where the author studied in junior high school.[170] 本篇原载《百年邮中——江苏省高邮中学百年华诞》（2005年版，内部发行）；初收《汪曾祺诗联品读》，金实秋编，大众文艺出版社，2009年4月。
[170] This article was originally published in "Centennial Postal Middle School - The Centennial Birthday of Gaoyou Middle School in Jiangsu Province" (2005 edition, internally distributed); The first collection of "Wang Zengqi's Poetry Joint Reading", edited by Jin Shiqiu, Popular Literature and Art Publishing House, April 2009.[171] 本篇原载1997年1月1日《温州晚报》“池上楼”第一期。诗前有林斤澜序：“一九九四年十七号台风袭瓯海，肆虐为百年来所仅见。计死人一百七十五，坏屋一九五四五间，农田受淹十四万亩。风过，瓯海人无意逃灾外流，共商修治海堤事。不作修修补补，不作小打小闹；集资彻底修建，一劳永逸。投入土石三百多万方，技工民工六十多万人次，耗资近亿元。至一九九五年十月竣工，阅十一个月。顶宽六米，高九米多，长近二十公里的石头堤，如奇迹出现。温州人皆曰：如此壮举，合当勒石为铭，以勖后来者，众口同声，曰：“然！”乃为之铭曰：”
[171] This article was originally published in the first issue of "Chishang Building" of the Wenzhou Evening News on January 1, 1997. The poem is preceded by Lin Jinlan: "Typhoon No. 17 in 1994 hit Ouhai and raged for the first time in a hundred years. There were 175 deaths, 19545 damaged houses, and 140,000 acres of farmland were flooded. After the wind, the people of Ouhai had no intention of escaping the disaster and discussed repairing the seawall. No repairs, no small fights; raise funds to build it once and for all. More than 3 million square meters of soil and stone, more than 600,000 skilled workers and migrant workers, cost nearly 100 million yuan. By October 1995, it was completed in 11 months. The stone embankment with a top width of six meters, a height of more than nine meters, and a length of nearly 20 kilometers appeared like a miracle. The people of Wenzhou said: Such a feat should be engraved on a stone to encourage those who come later, and everyone said in unison, "Yes!" So he wrote an inscription for it:[172] 本篇见于小说《名士和狐仙》，参见小说卷。诗题系编者所拟。
[173] 本篇见于散文《玉烟杂记》，参见散文卷。褚时健，时任云南玉溪红塔烟草集团董事长、总裁。
[172] This article is found in the novel "Celebrities and Fox Fairies", see the novel volume. The title of the poem was drafted by the editor. [173] This article is found in the essay "Yuyan Miscellaneous Notes", see the prose volume. Chu Shijian, then chairman and president of Yunnan Yuxi Hongta Tobacco Group.[174] 本篇原载《时代文学》1997年第一期；初收《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。
[174] This article was originally published in the first issue of "Times Literature", 1997; Volume 8 of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998.[175] 本篇原载1997年7月10日《湘泉之友》（湘泉集团内刊）。系为赞助中国作协第五次代表大会的湘泉集团所题。
[175] This article was originally published in "Friends of Xiangquan" (Xiangquan Group's internal magazine) on July 10, 1997. It was written by Xiangquan Group, which sponsored the Fifth Congress of the China Writers Association.[176] 本篇见于苏北《呼吸的墨迹——两篇手稿》，原载《灵狐》，人民日报出版社，2004年7月；又见于苏北《关于〈昆明猫〉》，载《汪曾祺文学馆馆刊》2008年12月号。《昆明猫》，作者1996年画作，画有题款：“昆明猫不吃鱼，只吃猪肝。曾在一家见一小白猫蜷卧墨绿色软垫上，娇小可爱。女主人体颀长，斜卧睡榻上，甚美。今犹不忘，距今四十三年矣。”“四十三年”，如按从在昆明时期到作跋的1996年，实应为53年左右，或为作者笔误。初收《汪曾祺诗联品读》，金实秋编，大众文艺出版社，2009年4月。
[176] This article is published in "Breathing Ink - Two Manuscripts" in northern Jiangsu, originally published in "Linghu", People's Daily Publishing House, July 2004; also seen in "About 'Kunming Cat'" in northern Jiangsu, published in the December 2008 issue of "Wang Zengqi Literature Museum Journal". "Kunming Cat", the author's 1996 painting, has the title: "Kunming cat does not eat fish, only pork liver." I once saw a small white cat curled up on a dark green cushion in a family, petite and cute. The hostess is long and lying reclining on the couch, which is very beautiful. I still don't forget it, it has been forty-three years ago. "Forty-three years", if you say that from the Kunming period to 1996, it should actually be about 53 years, or it may be an author's clerical error. The first collection of "Wang Zengqi's Poetry Joint Reading", edited by Jin Shiqiu, Popular Literature and Art Publishing House, April 2009.[177] 本篇见于散文《玉烟杂记》，参见散文卷。
[178] 本篇见于崔篱《云南心红塔情》，原载《红塔时报》第七四一期。诗题系编者所拟。
[177] This article is found in the prose "Yuyan Miscellaneous Notes", see the prose volume. [178] This article is found in Cui Li's "Yunnan Heart Red Pagoda Love", originally published in the 741st issue of the Red Pagoda Times. The title of the poem was drafted by the editor.[179] 本篇原载《芒种》1997年第一期；初收《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。《芒种》，沈阳市文联主办的文学杂志，1957年1月创刊。
[179] This article was originally published in the first issue of "Awn Zhong" in 1997; the eighth volume of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998. "Awn Seed", a literary magazine sponsored by the Shenyang Federation of Literary and Art Circles, was founded in January 1957.[180] 本篇据手迹编入。
[180] This article is compiled according to the handwriting.[181] 本组诗为母校江苏南菁中学建校115周年而作，原载《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。作者1935年秋于高邮中学毕业后，考入位于江阴的南菁中学读高中。
[181] This group of poems was written for the 115th anniversary of the founding of his alma mater, Jiangsu Nanjing Middle School, originally published in the Complete Works of Wang Zengqi, Volume 8, Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998. After graduating from Gaoyou Middle School in the autumn of 1935, the author was admitted to Nanjing Middle School in Jiangyin to study high school.[182] 君山在城北，登望江楼可见隔岸靖江。
[182] 君山在城北，登望江楼可见隔岸靖江。[183] 鹅鼻嘴礁石突出江岸，形如鹅鼻，甚险要。
[183] 鹅鼻嘴礁石突出江岸，形如鹅鼻，甚险要。[184] “”即伞，江阴都写作“”，以地形似伞故。“”墩遍植梅花。1937年春，阖校春游，忽大雨，衣皆尽湿。路滑如油，皆仆跌。
[184] “”即伞，江阴都写作“”，以地形似伞故。 “”墩遍植梅花。 1937年春，阖校春游，忽大雨，衣皆尽湿。 路滑如油，皆仆跌。[185] 我1936—38年曾就读南菁中学。南菁历史悠久，创校至今已115年。
[186] 南菁校园有圆池，水极清而甚浅，云只一寸深，名“寸水池”。
[185] I studied at Nanjing Middle School from 1936 to 38. Nanjing has a long history and has been established for 115 years. [186] There is a round pond on the Nanjing campus, the water is extremely clear and very shallow, and the clouds are only one inch deep, called "inch pool".[187] 江阴产鱼，味美而价贱。
[187] 江阴产鱼，味美而价贱。[188] 江阴产百花酒，黄酒之属也。
[188] 江阴产百花酒，黄酒之属也。[189] 本篇据手迹编入。诗题系编者所拟。时作者赴成都、宜宾参加活动。李宏，汪曾祺堂姐汪华的外孙女，居成都。
[189] This article is compiled according to the handwriting. The poem title was prepared by the editor. At that time, the author went to Chengdu and Yibin to participate in activities. Li Hong, the granddaughter of Wang Zengqi's cousin Wang Hua, lives in Chengdu.[190] 本篇据手迹编入。诗题系编者所拟。时作者赴成都、宜宾参加活动。李佳，汪曾祺堂姐汪华的孙女，居成都。
[190] This article is compiled according to the handwriting. The title of the poem was prepared by the editor. At that time, the author went to Chengdu and Yibin to participate in the event. Li Jia, the granddaughter of Wang Zengqi's cousin Wang Hua, lives in Chengdu.[191] 本篇据手迹编入。诗题系编者所拟。时作者赴成都、宜宾参加活动。朝焜，即李朝焜，汪曾祺堂姐汪华的儿子，翻译家；其妻杨扬，成都市文联作家；真真（李真真）是他们的女儿，时尚幼，后为四川文艺出版社编辑。
[191] This article is compiled according to the handwriting. The poem title was prepared by the editor. At that time, the author went to Chengdu and Yibin to participate in activities. Chaokun, that is, Li Chaokun, the son of Wang Zengqi's cousin Wang Hua, translator; his wife Yang Yang, a writer of the Chengdu Federation of Literary and Art Circles; Zhenzhen (Li Zhenzhen) is their daughter, who is still young and later an editor of Sichuan Literature and Art Publishing House.[192] 本篇编入组诗《随咏》，原载《汪曾祺全集》第八卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。
[193] 本篇原载《诗话钧瓷》，黄河水利出版社，1998年9月。
[192] This poem is compiled into the group poem "Sui Yong", originally published in the Complete Works of Wang Zengqi, Volume 8, Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998. [193] This article was originally published in "Poetry and Jun Porcelain", Yellow River Water Conservancy Publishing House, September 1998.[194] 本篇据手迹编入。诗题系编者所拟。
[195] 本篇据手迹编入。诗题系编者所拟。
[196] 本篇据手迹编入。诗题系编者所拟。
[197] 本篇据手迹编入。诗题系编者所拟。
[194] This article is compiled according to the handwriting. The title of the poem was prepared by the editor. [195] This article is compiled according to the handwriting. The title of the poem is prepared by the editor. [196] This article is compiled according to the handwriting. The title of the poem was prepared by the editor. [197] This article is compiled according to the handwriting. The poem title is prepared by the editor.[198] 本篇据手迹编入。诗题系编者所拟。
[199] 本篇据手迹编入。
[200] 本篇据手迹编入。
[201] 本篇据手迹编入。
[202] 本篇据手迹编入。
[198] This article is compiled according to the handwriting. The title of the poem is prepared by the editor. [199] This article is compiled according to handwriting. [200] This article is compiled according to the handwriting. [201] This article is compiled according to handwriting. [202] This article is compiled according to handwriting.[203] 本篇据手迹编入。

杂著卷

杂著卷
杂著卷说明
[203] This article is compiled according to the handwriting. Miscellaneous Volumes Miscellaneous Volume Description本卷收入作者自上世纪五十年代创作、整理的杂著作品，以及日常文书等，包括小传、题词、书画题跋、民间文学、图书广告、思想汇报等。另附接受他人访谈、对谈的文章。
人民文学出版社编辑部
This volume includes miscellaneous works created and organized by the author since the fifties of the last century, as well as daily documents, including short biographies, inscriptions, calligraphy and painting inscriptions, folk literature, book advertisements, ideological reports, etc. Articles on interviews and dialogues with others are also attached. Editorial Department of People's Literature Publishing House

小传 书封小语

小传 书封小语
《汪曾祺短篇小说选》所附小传[1]
Biography Book cover whispers A short biography attached to "Selected Short Stories of Wang Zengqi"[1]一九二○年生。江苏高邮人。西南联大中国文学系肄业四年。解放前当过中学教员，历史博物馆职员。解放后长期担任编辑工作，曾编过《北京文艺》、《说说唱唱》、《民间文学》。近二十年在一个剧团搞京剧编剧。
Born in 1920. A native of Gaoyou, Jiangsu Province. Studied in the Department of Chinese Literature of Southwest Associated University for four years. Before liberation, he worked as a middle school teacher and a staff member of the History Museum. After liberation, he worked as an editor for a long time, and edited "Beijing Literature and Art", "Rap and Singing", and "Folk Literature". In the past 20 years, he has been engaged in Peking Opera screenwriting in a theater troupe.一九四七年曾出过短篇小说集《邂逅集》（文化生活出版社），一九六三年出过一本很薄的小说集《羊舍的夜晚》（少年儿童出版社）。写过一些散文，未结集。
In 1947, he published a collection of short stories "Encounter Collection" (Cultural Life Publishing House), and in 1963, he published a very thin collection of novels "Night in the Sheep House (Children's Publishing House"). He wrote some essays, but did not complete them.因为职务的需要，除了文学作品，我还写过京剧剧本、民间文学的和戏曲的杂论。学无专长，兴趣又杂，岁月蹉跎，成就甚小。
汪曾祺小传[2]
Because of the needs of my position, in addition to literary works, I have also written Peking Opera scripts, folk literature and opera essays. I have no expertise in learning, mixed interests, time is wasted, and my achievements are very small. Wang Zengqi's biography[2]汪曾祺，江苏高邮人，1920年生。童年和少年时期是在家乡度过的。1939年在昆明入西南联大读中国文学系。毕业后在昆明、上海教过中学，在北京历史博物馆当过职员。1949年在北京参加人民解放军南下工作团，以后在北京市文联、中国民间文艺研究会工作，编过《说说唱唱》、《民间文学》。1958年到张家口农村劳动了四年。1962年到北京京剧团（后改为院）担任编剧至今。
Wang Zengqi, a native of Gaoyou, Jiangsu Province, was born in 1920. Childhood and adolescence were spent in his hometown. In 1939, he entered the Department of Chinese Literature at Southwest Associated University in Kunming. After graduation, he taught middle school in Kunming and Shanghai, and worked as a staff member at the Beijing History Museum. In 1949, he joined the People's Liberation Army's southward work group in Beijing, and later worked in the Beijing Federation of Literary and Art Circles and the China Folk Literature Research Association, compiling "Rap and Singing" and "Folk Literature". In 1958, he worked in the countryside of Zhangjiakou for four years. In 1962, he worked as a screenwriter in the Beijing Peking Opera Troupe (later changed to the institute).开始写作颇早，1940年发表第一篇小说。1948年出版过一本小说集《邂逅集》。1963年出过一本薄薄的小说集《羊舍的夜晚》。写小说一直是时作时辍，断断续续的。
He started writing quite early and published his first novel in 1940. In 1948, he published a collection of novels "Encounter Collection". In 1963, he published a thin collection of novels "Night in the Sheep House". Writing novels has always been intermittent, intermittent.小时家住城外的一条接近农村的街上，接触的人多是挑夫、手艺人、做小买卖的、店铺里的学徒……我对他们的哀乐比较熟悉。一部分作品是反映他们的生活的。
When I was a child, I lived on a street close to the countryside outside the city, and most of the people I came into contact with were porters, craftsmen, small traders, and apprentices in shops...... I am familiar with their joys and sorrows. Some of the works reflect their lives.我父亲是个画家。我小时喜欢画画。高中毕业后曾想考美术学院，未果。现在还喜欢看画。偶尔还涂抹两笔遣兴。也许因此我的小说受了一些中国画的影响。
My father was a painter. I liked to draw when I was a child. After graduating from high school, I wanted to go to the Academy of Fine Arts, but I didn't succeed. I still like to look at painting. Occasionally, I paint two strokes. Maybe that's why my novels are influenced by some Chinese paintings.我是沈从文先生的学生。到现在还能看出我的某些风格和沈先生有些近似。
I am a student of Mr. Shen Congwen. I can still see that some of my styles are somewhat similar to Mr. Shen.我在大学读的是中国文学系，但是不大上课，大部分时间倒是读许多外国的翻译作品：契诃夫、阿莫林、纪德、海明威……因此我的小说有一点不今不古，不中不西。
I studied Chinese literature at university, but I didn't attend many classes, but most of the time I read many foreign translations: Chekhov, Amorim, Gide, Hemingway...... Therefore, my novels are neither modern nor ancient, neither Chinese nor Western.我最近对自己的要求是回到现实主义，回到民族传统。我所向往的现实主义和民族传统是能够包容一切流派的现实主义和可以吸收西方和东方影响的民族传统。
My recent demand for myself is to return to realism and national traditions. The realism and national traditions I yearn for are realism that can embrace all schools and national traditions that can absorb Western and Eastern influences.我比较熟悉旧社会，近年来发表的小说以反映旧社会生活的为多，但是小说中的感情是一个八十年代人的感情。我也愿意多写一点反映当前生活的作品，但是我对当前生活还缺乏自己的独特的观察与思考，还没有熟悉到可以从心所欲、挥洒自如的程度，我需要学习。
I am more familiar with the old society, and most of the novels published in recent years reflect the life of the old society, but the feelings in the novels are the feelings of people in the 80s. I would also like to write more works that reflect the current life, but I still lack my own unique observations and thoughts on the current life, and I am not familiar enough to do whatever I want, and I need to learn.小传附著作年表[3]
小传
Chronology of works with biography{{id_0000}} Biography汪曾祺，江苏高邮人，一九二○年生。一九三九年在昆明就读于西南联合大学中国文学系，为沈从文先生的及门弟子。约一九四○年开始发表散文及短篇小说，少作多已不存。大学时期受阿左林及茀金尼·沃尔芙的影响，文字飘逸。以后备尝艰难辛苦，作品现实感渐强，也更致力于吸收中国文学的传统。大学毕业后曾作过中学教员、历史博物馆的职员。一九四九年以后，作了多年文学期刊的编辑。曾编过《北京文艺》、《说说唱唱》、《民间文学》。一九六二年到北京京剧院担任编剧，至今犹未离职。
Wang Zengqi, a native of Gaoyou, Jiangsu Province, was born in 1920. In 1939, he studied in the Department of Chinese Literature of Southwest United University in Kunming and was a disciple of Mr. Shen Congwen. He began to publish essays and short stories around 1940. During his college years, he was influenced by Azuolin and Fu Jinny Wolfe, and his writing was elegant. In the future, he experienced hardships and hardships, and his works became more realistic, and he was more committed to absorbing the tradition of Chinese literature. After graduating from university, he worked as a middle school teacher and a staff member of the History Museum. After 1949, he worked as an editor of literary journals for many years. He has edited "Beijing Literature and Art", "Rap and Singing", and "Folk Literature". In 1962, he went to Beijing Peking Opera as a screenwriter and has not left his post.著作年表
一九四八年出版 《邂逅集》 上海文化生活出版社
一九六三年出版 《羊舍的夜晚》 北京中国少年儿童出版社
一九八二年出版 《汪曾祺短篇小说集》 北京出版社
Chronology of writings Published in 1948 "Encounter Collection" Shanghai Cultural Life Publishing House Published in 1963 "Night in the Sheep Lodge", Beijing China Children's Publishing House In 1982, he published "Wang Zengqi's Short Stories Collection", Beijing Publishing House.一九八五年出版 《晚饭花集》 人民文学出版社
即出 《汪曾祺自选集》 漓江出版社
即出 《晚翠文谈》（评论集） 浙江出版社
散文及戏曲剧本 尚未结集
Published in 1985 "Dinner Flower Collection" People's Literature Publishing House Immediately from "Wang Zengqi's Self-Selected Works" Lijiang Publishing House Immediately published "Evening Cui Wen Tan (Commentary Collection) Zhejiang Publishing House Prose and opera scripts have not yet been collected《塔上随笔》所附小传[4]
A short biography attached to "Essay on the Tower"[4]汪曾祺，江苏高邮人，1920年生。幼儿园（过去叫“幼稚园”）、小学、初中都在本乡度过。高中读于江阴的南菁中学。高二以后，江阴沦陷，在淮安、盐城转徙“借读”。1939年赴昆明，考入西南联大中文系，读了四年。
Wang Zengqi, a native of Gaoyou, Jiangsu Province, was born in 1920. Kindergarten (formerly called "kindergarten"), primary school, and junior high school were all spent in his hometown. High school was studied at Nanjing Middle School in Jiangyin. After the second year of high school, Jiangyin fell, and he moved to Huai'an and Yancheng to "borrow and study". In 1939, he went to Kunming and was admitted to the Chinese Department of Southwest Associated University, where he studied for four years.1940年开始发表小说、诗和散文诗。1949年曾在上海文化生活出版社出版《邂逅集》。1949年以后10年我没有写什么东西，是一段空白。1962年写了三篇小说。“文化大革命”期间搞了十多年样板戏，没有写散文、小说，又是一段空白。到70年代末、80年代初，忽然又写起小说、散文来。从此一发而不可收，直到现在，还在不断地写着。
In 1940, he began to publish novels, poems and prose poems. In 1949, he published "Encounter Collection" in Shanghai Cultural Life Publishing House. After 1949, I didn't write anything, it was a blank. In 1962, I wrote three novels. During the "Cultural Revolution", I engaged in model dramas for more than ten years, and I did not write prose or novels, and it was another blank. In the late 70s and early 80s, I suddenly started writing novels and essays again. Since then, I have been writing continuously.江苏文艺出版社将出版我的文集。估算一下，约有120万字。我一生所写的，大概也就是200多万字。
我出版过十几个集子。
《中国当代名人随笔·汪曾祺卷》所附小传[5]
Jiangsu Literature and Art Publishing House will publish my collection of essays. Estimate, about 1.2 million words. What I have written in my life is probably more than 2 million words. I have published more than a dozen collections. The biography attached to the "Essays of Contemporary Chinese Celebrities: Wang Zengqi Volume"[5]汪曾祺，江苏高邮人，1920年生。1939—1943就读于西南联合大学中国文学系。1940年开始发表作品。主要写作短篇小说及散文。写作时断时续。作品已结集者约十余部。
Wang Zengqi, a native of Gaoyou, Jiangsu Province, was born in 1920. From 1939 to 1943, he studied at the Department of Chinese Literature of Southwest United University. He began to publish works in 1940. He mainly writes short stories and essays. Writing intermittently. About ten works have been collected.年轻时曾受西方现代主义影响。年事渐长，阅世稍深，乃有意识地回到现实主义，回到民族传统。但认为现实主义要是能容纳各种流派的现实主义，民族传统是能吸收一切外来影响的民族传统。
When he was young, he was influenced by Western modernism. As he grew older and deeper, he consciously returned to realism and national traditions. However, he believed that if realism could accommodate realism of various schools, national traditions would be national traditions that could absorb all external influences.近二三年写小说较少，写散文较多。发现近年散文作者不少是老年人。以为老年人散文一般都是语言干净自然，较少做作；生活阅历较多，感慨较深，寄兴稍远；且读书较多，文章有较多的文化气息，有些老年人的散文可称为学者散文，这是老年散文作家的优势。但觉得有些老人散文比较枯瘦，过于平淡，不滋润，少才华，亦是一病。自己今亦老矣，当引此为戒。
In the past two or three years, I have written fewer novels and more prose. I found that many of the prose writers in recent years are elderly. I think that the prose of the elderly is generally clean and natural, less artificial; they have more life experience, deeper feelings, and a little more distant interest; and they read more, the articles have more cultural atmosphere, and some elderly people's prose can be called scholar's prose, which is the advantage of elderly prose writers. But I feel that some elderly prose is relatively thin, too bland, not nourishing, and less talented, which is also a disease. I am also old now, so I should take this as a warning.《蒲桥集》书封小语[6]
齐白石自称诗第一，字第二，画第三。有人说汪曾祺的散文比小说好，虽非定论，却有道理。
"Puqiao Collection" book cover small words {{id_0000}} Qi Baishi claimed to be the first in poetry, second in words, and third in painting. Some people say that Wang Zengqi's prose is better than novels, although it is not a conclusion, but it makes sense.此集诸篇，记人事、写风景、谈文化、述掌故，兼及草木虫鱼、瓜果食物，皆有情致。间作小考证，亦可喜。娓娓而淡，态度亲切，不矜持作态。文求雅洁，少雕饰，如行云流水。春初新韭，秋末晚菘，滋味近似。
The chapters in this collection record human affairs, write about scenery, talk about culture, tell stories, as well as plants, insects, fish, melons and fruits, and food, all of which are emotional. It is also gratifying to occasionally do small research. Eloquent and light, with a cordial attitude and no restraint. The text is elegant and clean, with little embellishment, like flowing clouds and water. New leeks in early spring and late in late autumn, the taste is similar.
[1] 本篇原载《汪曾祺短篇小说选》，北京出版社，1982年2月。
[2] 本篇写于上世纪八十年代初，见崔道怡《怀念汪曾祺》一文，1997年7月9日《北京晚报》。
[1] This article was originally published in "Selected Short Stories of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Publishing House, February 1982. [2] This article was written in the early 80s of the last century, see Cui Daoyi's article "Remembering Wang Zengqi", Beijing Evening News, July 9, 1997.[3] 本篇附于1987年9月7日致古剑信中，系为准备在台北新地出版社出版的作品集而作。
[4] 本篇原载《塔上随笔》，群众出版社，1993年11月。
[3] This article is attached to a letter to Gu Jian dated September 7, 1987, and is prepared for the publication of a collection of works in Taipei Xindi Publishing House. [4] This article was originally published in "Essays on the Tower", Mass Publishing House, November 1993.[5] 本篇原载《中国当代名人随笔·汪曾祺卷》，陕西人民出版社，1993年12月。
[6] 本篇原载《蒲桥集》，作家出版社，1989年3月。

题词

题词
一
指传于薪，不知其尽也；
[5] This article was originally published in "Essays on Contemporary Chinese Celebrities: Wang Zengqi Volume", Shaanxi People's Publishing House, December 1993. [6] This article was originally published in "Puqiao Collection", Writers Publishing House, March 1989. inscription One Refers to the salary, and I don't know the end;柴生乎守，有待而然耶？
1945年，昆明“一二·一”事件后，昆明中国建设中学送挽联以示悼念，作者集庄子句而成。
二
Zeng Qijing greeted Dexi and Kong Jing for the New Year On February 2, 1984, he made a lotus painting and title for Zhu Dexi. Two居不求安，食不择味，从来不搞特殊化
进无权欲，退无怨尤，到底是个老党员
Is it necessary to wait for the firewood to be conservative? In 1945, after the "12.1" incident in Kunming, Kunming China Construction Middle School sent an elegy to express condolences, and the author collected Zhuangzi sentences. Two Do not seek peace in your home, do not choose the taste of food, and never engage in specialization There is no desire for power in advance, no complaint in retreat, and he is an old party member after all1981年1月，挽薛恩厚。
三
On March 20, 1984, there was a strong wind that day, and I couldn't go out, Zeng Qi remembered On March 20, 1984, he made a cactus painting and title for Wu Ningkun. Three金罂密贮封缸酒
玉树双开迟桂花
1981年10月，为汪海珊题。
四
There is a wisteria stand in the back garden, which is not managed by anyone, allowing it to climb freely, and it is extremely lush. When the flowers are in full bloom, lying on their backs under the rack makes people feel drunk. On May 1, 1984, I occasionally remembered writing it. Today, I have painted nearly ten paintings, which is the end of the strong crossbow. Zeng Qi Kee On May 1, 1984, he painted a painting title for wisteria. Four灯火万家巷
笙歌一望江
1981年11月，为汪巧纹题。
五
In front of the Jade Tea Hall, morning and evening, who will continue to be sad at the Peony Pavilion? May 5, 1984 Zeng Qi On May 5, 1984, he painted a peony painting. Five万里风云来线外
In January 1981, he rescued Xue Enhou. Three The golden jar is secretly stored in a sealed jar The jade tree blooms in pairs, and the osmanthus flowers bloom late In October 1981, he wrote a poem for Wang Haishan. Four Lights of thousands of homes The sheng and song gaze out at the river In November 1981, he wrote a title for Wang Qiaowen. Five Thousands of miles of wind and clouds come from beyond the line千家春色在手中
1983年12月，于徐州即兴题。
六
一代宗师，千秋绝学
二王余韵，万里书声
1984年，为高邮王氏纪念馆题。
七
In June 1984, he painted honeysuckle. Six On the evening of November 2, 1985, I made this uncooked hoof. I sent a smile to my brother Gu Jian. Wang Zengqi is sixty-four years old On November 2, 1985, he made a squirrel picture and title for the ancient sword. Seven小小说如斗方册页，须以小见大，言近意远，笔精墨妙，以己少少许，胜人多多许。
写贺《小小说选刊》创刊 一九八四年十一月 汪曾祺
A small novel is like a square album page, it must be small to see the big, the words are close and the meaning is far, the pen is exquisite, and the little bit of oneself is much better than others. Writing congratulations on the launch of "Selected Short Novels" November 1984 Wang Zengqi载《小小说选刊》1985年第一期，系《小小说选刊》创刊号顾问贺词。
八
欹枕听雨
开门见山
1986年5月31日，为配黄永玉画作《索溪无尽山》题。
九
造化钟神秀
烟云起壮思
Published in the first issue of "Selected Short Novels" in 1985, it is a congratulatory message from the consultant of the first issue of "Selected Short Novels". Eight Leaning against the pillow and listening to the rain Come straight to the point On May 31, 1986, the title of Huang Yongyu's painting "Suoxi Endless Mountain". Nine Creation Zhong Shenxiu Smoke and clouds rise from grand thoughts1986年5月31日，为索溪峪管理处题。
十
In January 1986, he wrote a postscript for Fu Xuebin's "Hundred Ugly Pictures". Nine The autumn colors are selfless to the grass and flowers Written by Zeng Qi in September 1986 In September 1986, he wrote a picture of autumn flowers. Ten苍山画古存花壁
奇句情深忆柳州
1986年5月，赠彭匈。
十一
The tea flowers of Huating Temple in Xishan bloom as big as a bowl, and the blue-headed mushrooms and porcini mushrooms are all stunners among vegetables. Write comforting political and moral brothers overseas homesickness. In October 1986, he painted Yunnan mushrooms and camellia for Li Zhengdao. Eleven拾级重登，念崇台杰阁、几番兴废，千载风云归梦里
On May 31, 1986, he was appointed to the Suoxiyu Management Office. Ten Cangshan painting ancient flower wall The strange verses evoke deep memories of Liuzhou In May 1986, he was given Peng Xiong. Eleven Climbing the steps again, I reminisce about the rise and fall of the towering pavilions, and the thousand years of wind and clouds return to my dreams凭栏四望，问绿野平湖、何日腾飞，万家哀乐到心头
1986年9月，为重修高邮文游台题。
十二
I planted orchids in Beijing, but none of them survived. My friend Xu Jun brought two types of orchids from Kunming and taught me how to make orchids, which were also very simple. The summer orchids in Guizhou actually bloomed in winter. I like to enjoy it for a month, and I think about it. December 10, 1986 Tsang Qizhi On December 10, 1986, it was the title of the orchid picture. twelve苍山负雪，两国残梦
洱海流云，平生壮观
1987年4月22日，赠大理文联。
十三
皇权僧钵千年梦
大地山河一担装
1987年4月30日，为云南武定正续禅寺题。
十四
莫愁前路无知己
欲摘山花插满瓶
1987年4月题于昆明，见作者访滇期间笔记本，受赠人不详。
十五
眼空冀北野
笔秀滇南云
1987年4月题于昆明，见作者访滇期间笔记本，受赠人可能同为中国作协访滇代表团成员的作家韩映山。
十六
Song Huizong's thin gold book and Cai Jing's book are actually one. Whenever you make a thin gold book, you must hold the pen high, and you must not let the brush spread on the paper. In 1986, he was titled "Long Edge Wolf" In 1986, he wrote Han Yuefu "Jiangnan" in a thin gold style. sixteen凉风起天末
诗思在水边
1987年4月，赠晓雪。
Looking forward to the northern wilderness Pen Xiu Yunnan clouds In April 1987, it was inscribed in Kunming, and the author's notebook during his visit to Yunnan showed that the recipient may be Han Yingshan, a writer who was also a member of the delegation of the China Writers Association to Yunnan. sixteen A cool breeze blows from the end of the sky Poetry is by the water In April 1987, he was given Xiaoxue.十七
When I woke up, I still remembered that I thought this could be used in the novel as a place name for an ancient town. How could I have such a dream? Odd! Morning Diary of March 25 On March 25, 1987, he wrote a picture of rhododendrons. seventeen南国撷红豆
邕州闻壮歌
1987年6月题于昆明，见作者访滇期间笔记本，受赠人不详。
十八
In my hometown of Yincheng, amphora pottery pots were often unearthed in the past, and the villagers called them Han bottles, which are said to be the kettles used by Han Shizhong's soldiers. It can be soaked in plum blossoms to bear fruit. Zeng Qi wrote in October of '89 In October 1989, he wrote the title of the plum blossom picture of the Korean bottle. eighteen铜鼓声声犹在耳
槟榔叶叶不知秋
1987年6月，赠彭匈。
十九
岭梅十月开千萼
seventeen Picking red beans in the south Yongzhou heard the grand song In June 1987, it was inscribed in Kunming, and the author's notebook during his visit to Yunnan was unknown. eighteen The sound of the bronze drum is still in my ears The betel nut leaves do not know autumn In June 1987, he was given Peng Xiong. nineteen The plum blossoms bloom in October红豆春来发几枝
1987年6月题于昆明，见作者访滇期间笔记本，受赠人不详。
二十
It is better to enter the new year, but it is not spring; the remaining paper is inked for the next year. On January 15, 1990, he was the subject of a daffodil goldfish nineteen The small courtyard of the locust flower is quiet and uninhabited. The painting was given to Wang Zengqi in May of the Gengwu year In May 1990, he made a picture of locust flowers for Cao Naiqian. twenty春风拂拂灞桥柳
落照依依淡水河
1987年9月，赠蒋勋。
二十一
四围山色临窗秀
一夜溪声入梦清
A few branches of red beans have sprouted in spring In June 1987, it was inscribed in Kunming, and the author's notebook during his visit to Yunnan was unknown. twenty The spring breeze blows the willows of Baqiao The setting sun shines gently on the Tamsui River In September 1987, Jiang Xun was awarded. twenty-one The surrounding mountains are beautiful by the window One night, the sound of the stream was clear in my dreams1989年12月，为武夷山银河饭店题。
二十二
塔涌劫灰后
文雄边嶂南
1990年8月，为云南施甸重修文笔塔题。
二十三
技也进乎道
名者实之宾
In December 1989, he wrote the title for the Galaxy Hotel in Wuyishan. twenty-two After the Tower Surge Ashes Wenxiong Bianzhang South In August 1990, he rebuilt the Wenbi Tower for Shidian, Yunnan. twenty-three Technology is also advanced Fame is the object of reality1991年4月8日，为玉溪烟厂题。
二十四
溪流崇岭上
人在乱云中
1991年7月，为泰山中溪宾馆题。
二十五
风和嫩绿柳
雨润小红箫
1991年10月7日，赠扬州市政协。
On April 8, 1991, he wrote for Yuxi Tobacco Factory. twenty-four The stream flows high on the ridge People in the chaotic clouds In July 1991, he wrote the title for the Taishan Zhongxi Hotel. twenty-five The wind and tender green willows The rain moistens the little red flute On October 7, 1991, he was awarded the Yangzhou CPPCC.二十六
风传金羽捷
雨湿小梅红
1991年10月，贺金传捷、萧梅红成婚。
二十七
良苗亦怀新
素心常如故
1991年10月，赠史善成。
二十八
何物最玲珑
李花初拆候
twenty-six Rumors of the Golden Feather Victory The rain has dampened the plum blossoms In October 1991, He Jin Chuanjie and Xiao Meihong got married. twenty-seven Good seedlings also embrace new ones His heart remained the same as before In October 1991, he was awarded the title of Shi Shancheng. twenty-eight What is the most exquisite? Li Hua was just demolished1991年10月，赠李玲。
二十九
明月照积雪
猛雨暗高峰
1991年10月，赠许雪峰。
三十
大道唯实
小园有秋
1991年10月，赠金实秋。
三十一
文宗上党赵
In October 1991, it was given to Li Ling. twenty-nine The bright moon shines on the snow Heavy rain darkens the peaks In October 1991, Xu Xuefeng was given a gift. thirty The Great Way is Practical The small garden is in autumn In October 1991, he was awarded the Golden Autumn Award. thirty-one Wenzong Shangdang Zhao意满金陵春
1991年10月，赠成正和。
三十二
有雨丛林茂
无私天地宽
1991年10月，赠陈林宽。
三十三
春蚕到死何曾死
化作万民身上衣
Filled with the spring of Jinling In October 1991, he was awarded the title of Zhenghe. thirty-two There is rain, and the jungle is lush Selflessness In October 1991, Chen Linkuan was given a gift. thirty-three The spring silkworm dies, when will it ever die? Transformed into the robe of all nations1991年10月，作者参观高邮丝绸厂时所题。
三十四
文章司马
经济卧龙
1991年11月，赠温州某干部。
三十五
In October 1991, the author visited the Gaoyou Silk Factory. thirty-four Article Sima Economy Wollong In November 1991, he was awarded to a cadre in Wenzhou. thirty-five开卷有益，什么样的书都不妨找来看看。博览群书，但可以有所侧重，有所偏爱。
原载《中学生阅读》1992年第三期，为《中学生阅读》题词。
三十六
神似东方朔
家傍西柏坡
Opening books is beneficial, and you might as well find any kind of book. Read a wide range of books, but you can focus on and favor them. Originally published in the third issue of "Middle School Student Reading" in 1992, the inscription for "Middle School Student Reading". thirty-six He resembled Dongfang Shuo His home is near Xibaipo约1992年夏天，赠贾大山。
三十七
爱其所学，关怀后生。贤夫慈父，蔼然仁者。同学弟 汪曾祺书
约1992年9月，为朱德熙归葬北京万安公墓题写碑文。
三十八
眼空冀北
笔秀江南
Around the summer of 1992, it was given to Jia Dashan. thirty-seven Love what he learns and care for the younger generation. A virtuous husband and a loving father, a kind and benevolent person. Classmate Wang Zengqi Around September 1992, he inscribed an inscription for Zhu Dexi's burial in Wan'an Cemetery in Beijing. thirty-eight Empty eyes Pen show Jiangnan1992年秋，赠郭秋良。
三十九
人情若野草
诗味似茴香
1992年10月，赠杜文和。
四十
岂敢班门弄斧
何妨曲水流觞
1992年10月，为浙江绍兴兰亭题。
四十一
In the autumn of 1992, Guo Qiuliang was awarded. thirty-nine Human feelings are like weeds Poetic taste like fennel In October 1992, Du Wenhe was awarded. forty How could I dare to hold the door and wield an axe Why not pour wine with the winding water In October 1992, he wrote for Lanting in Shaoxing, Zhejiang. forty-one先生乃悲剧人物
三国无昭然是非
1992年，为金实秋《三国名胜楹联》一书题武侯祠。
四十二
往事回思如细雨
旧书重读似春潮
1993年2月6日，为七十三岁生日自寿题。
四十三
Mr. is a tragic figure The Three Kingdoms have no clear right or wrong In 1992, he wrote the Wuhou Shrine for Jin Shiqiu's book "Three Kingdoms Scenic Couplets". forty-two Looking back on the past like fine rain Rereading old books is like a spring tide On February 6, 1993, he celebrated his 73rd birthday. forty-three才名不枉称三绝
扣角何妨到五更
1993年，赠田原。
四十四
勤负轭不畏虎小牛勉之
1993年8月，赠张小牛。
四十五
不即不离
少功道兄正 癸酉汪曾祺
1993年，赠韩少功。
His talent and fame are worthy of being called the three absolutes Why not knock on the horn until the fifth watch In 1993, he was awarded the title of Tian Yuan. forty-four Carry the yoke diligently, not afraid of tigers, and encourage the calf In August 1993, Zhang Xiaoxuan was gifted. forty-five If you don't leave immediately, you won't leave Shao Gong Dao Brother Zheng Guiyou Wang Zengqi In 1993, he was awarded the title of Han Shaogong.四十六
断送一生唯有
清除万虑无过
1993年，赠汪海珊。
四十七
辩同盐铁论
文似金错刀
1994年3月，为《金融作家》创刊号题。
四十八
文章略似龚易简
处世当如文宣王
forty-six The only thing that ruins a lifetime is Eliminate all worries In 1993, he was awarded Wang Haishan. forty-seven The debate is the same as the salt and iron theory The writing resembles a golden sword In March 1994, he was the title of the first issue of "Financial Writer". forty-eight The article is somewhat similar to Gong Yijian One should handle the world like King Wenxuan1994年3月，赠龚文宣。
四十九
久有凌云志
常怀恋土情
1994年6月，赠女飞行员汪云。
五十
藏龟未失
遗泽长留
1994年6月，赠《铁云藏龟》作者刘鹗的孙女刘德棻。
In March 1994, Gong Wenxuan was awarded. forty-nine For a long time, he had ambitions to soar into the clouds Always nostalgic for the land In June 1994, it was given to female pilot Wang Yun. fifty The hidden turtle has not been lost The legacy will remain for a long time In June 1994, Liu Dezhen, the granddaughter of Liu E, the author of "Iron Cloud Hidden Turtle", was given to Liu Dezhen.五十一
神珠焕彩
水国新猷
1994年6月，赠高邮市委市政府。
五十二
小荷才露尖尖角 待看繁华满绿洲
1994年6月，为江苏省戏剧学校题。
五十三
fifty-one Divine Pearl Radiance New plan for the water country In June 1994, it was awarded to the Gaoyou Municipal Party Committee and Municipal Government. fifty-two The little lotus has just shown its sharp corners, waiting to see the prosperity full of oases In June 1994, he wrote a poem for Jiangsu Drama School. fifty-three檀板四十犹不惑 桃李三万不嫌多
1994年6月，为上海戏剧学校建校四十周年题。
五十四
以书兴人 亦是善施
1994年10月9日，为某公司题。
五十五
繁花此日成春祭
Twenty sandalwood boards are not confused, and peach and plum 30,000 are not too much In June 1994, he wrote the theme for the 40th anniversary of the founding of Shanghai Theater School. fifty-four Revitalizing people with books is also good charity On October 9, 1994, he wrote a question for a company. fifty-five Flowers bloom on this day, forming a spring festival云水他乡梦白鸥
1995年6月初，挽电影《沙鸥》导演张暖忻。
五十六
家居绿竹丛中
人在明月光里
1995年10月，赠林靓月。
五十七
子贡文辞如泻水
陶朱舞袖似飘风
In a foreign land, I dream of white gulls In early June 1995, Zhang Nuanxin, director of the movie "Sand Gull". fifty-six He lived in a thicket of green bamboo People in the bright moonlight In October 1995, Lin Liangyue was gifted. fifty-seven Zigong's writing is like pouring water Tao Zhu's sleeves dance like a drifting breeze1996年初，赠麦风。
五十八
栉风沐雨
含英咀华
1996年3月，为《小说月报》二百期纪念题。
五十九
声闻玉水
文绣丹山
1997年1月，为红塔山电视台题。
六十
At the beginning of 1996, he gave away wheat wind. fifty-eight Travel or work in all weather conditions Including English Zuhua In March 1996, he was the commemorative topic of the 200th issue of "Novel Monthly". fifty-nine The sound of jade water Wenxiu Danshan In January 1997, he was the subject of Hongta Mountain TV. sixty故国山河壮
各族俊才多
1997年4月17日，为《中国民族博览》杂志题。
六十一
任你读通四库书
不如且饮五粮液
1997年4月底，为五粮液酒厂题。
六十二
白也诗无敌
The mountains and rivers of the homeland are magnificent There are many talents from all ethnic groups On April 17, 1997, he wrote the title of "China National Expo" magazine. Sixty-one You can read through the four libraries Why not just drink Wuliangye for now? At the end of April 1997, he wrote a title for Wuliangye Distillery. Sixty-two Bai Ye poetry is invincible兖为天下宗
时间不详，为兖州博物馆题。
六十三
人具远志
烟有醇香
时间不详，为玉溪烟厂题。
六十四
秦砖楚韵
希世之珍
汪曾祺观
时间不详，赠自默。
六十五
Yanzhou is the most important place in the world The time is unknown, and it is a title for the Yanzhou Museum. Sixty-three People have lofty ambitions Smoke has a mellow aroma The time is unknown, and it is the title of the Yuxi Tobacco Factory. Sixty-four Qin Brick Chu Yun A rare treasure Wang Zengqi Guan The time is unknown, and it is given to the silence. Sixty-five嗟尔小民，微同蝼蚁。风雨违时，天之所弃。原隰卑下，地之所卑。唯尔蚁民，劳作不已。人具五蕴，尔有悲喜。游目支颐，乃为之记。于意云何，发人深虑。
时间不详，为王明义关于蚂蚁湾小说稿题。

书画题跋

书画题跋
Alas, you people, you are like ants. The wind and rain are out of season, and the sky is abandoned. The plains are low, and the earth is low. Only you ant people work endlessly. People have five aggregates, and you have joys and sorrows. Wandering eyes and cheeks, you write down it. What does it mean, it makes people think deeply. The time is unknown, and it is the title of Wang Mingyi's novel about Ant Bay. Calligraphy and painting inscription一
一九八三年除夜子时戏作柬后生作家，录与德熙一看，知我老境而不颓唐也。
六十三年辞我去，飘然消逝入苍微。
此夜欣逢双甲子，何曾惆怅一丁儿。
秋花不似春花落，黄鸟时兼白鸟飞。
One On New Year's Eve in 1983, I played a young Cambodian writer, and I recorded it with Dexi to see it, and I knew that I was old but not degraded. Sixty-three years later, I bid farewell to you, drifting away into the sky. Tonight, I am happy to meet the two Jiazi, and I have never been sad about a child. Autumn flowers do not fall like spring flowers, and sometimes the yellow birds fly alongside the white ones.敢与诸君争席地，从今泻酒戒深杯。
我已将近二年所作小说结为一集，名《晚饭花集》，交人民文学出版社，今年上半年可出版。今年不拟多外出，将啃一块硬骨头，历史小说《汉武帝》。
I dare to compete with you all for the seat, and from now on, I will pour wine and abstain from drinking too deeply. I have compiled the novels I have written in the past two years into a collection, called "Dinner Flower Collection", which will be handed over to the People's Literature Publishing House and published in the first half of this year. I don't plan to go out much this year, and I will gnaw on a hard bone, the historical novel "Emperor Wu of the Han Dynasty".曾祺敬问德熙、孔敬新春大吉
1984年2月2日，为朱德熙作荷花画并题。
二
Zeng Qijing greeted Dexi and Kong Jing for the New Year On February 2, 1984, he made a lotus painting and title for Zhu Dexi. Two昆明人家常于门头挂仙人掌一片以辟邪，仙人掌悬空倒挂，尚能存活开花。于此可见仙人掌生命之顽强，亦可见昆明雨季空气之湿润。雨季则有青头菌、牛肝菌，味极鲜美。宁坤属画，须有昆明特点，为作此图。
Kunming people often hang a cactus at the door to ward off evil spirits, and the cactus hangs upside down in the air and can still survive and bloom. Here we can see the tenacity of cactus life, and we can also see the humidity of the air in Kunming's rainy season. In the rainy season, there are blue-headed mushrooms and porcini mushrooms, which are extremely delicious. Ningkun belongs to painting, and it must have Kunming characteristics, so this picture is made.一九八四年三月廿日，是日大风，不能出户，曾祺记
1984年3月20日，为巫宁坤作仙人掌画并题。
三
On March 20, 1984, there was a strong wind that day, and I couldn't go out, Zeng Qi remembered On March 20, 1984, he made a cactus painting and title for Wu Ningkun. Three后园有紫藤一架，无人管理，任其恣意攀盘，而极旺茂。花盛时，仰卧架下，使人醺然有醉意。一九八四年五一偶忆写之。今日作画已近十幅，此为强弩之末矣。
曾祺记
1984年5月1日，为紫藤画题。
四
There is a wisteria stand in the back garden, which is not managed by anyone, allowing it to climb freely, and it is extremely lush. When the flowers are in full bloom, lying on their backs under the rack makes people feel drunk. On May 1, 1984, I occasionally remembered writing it. Today, I have painted nearly ten paintings, which is the end of the strong crossbow. Zeng Qi Kee On May 1, 1984, he painted a painting title for wisteria. Four玉茗堂前朝复暮，伤心谁续牡丹亭。
一九八四年五月五日曾祺
1984年5月5日，为牡丹画题。
五
In front of the Jade Tea Hall, morning and evening, who will continue to be sad at the Peony Pavilion? May 5, 1984 Zeng Qi On May 5, 1984, he painted a peony painting. Five故园有金银花一株，自我记事从不开花。小时不知此为何种植物，一年夏，忽开繁花无数，令人惊骇，亦不见其主何灾祥。此后每年开花，但花稍稀少耳。一九八四年六月偶忆往事，捉笔写此。
高邮汪曾祺记于北京
There is a honeysuckle in my hometown, which has never bloomed since I can remember. When I was young, I didn't know what kind of plant this was, but one summer, countless flowers suddenly bloomed, which was shocking, and I didn't see what the owner was. Since then, it has bloomed every year, but the flowers are a little rare. In June 1984, I happened to remember the past and took a pen to write this. Gaoyou Wang Zengqi recorded in Beijing1984年6月，为金银花画题。
六
一九八五年十一月二日晚炖蹄膀未熟作此。寄奉古剑兄一笑。
汪曾祺六十四岁
1985年11月2日，为古剑作松鼠图并题。
七
In June 1984, he painted honeysuckle. Six On the evening of November 2, 1985, I made this uncooked hoof. I sent a smile to my brother Gu Jian. Wang Zengqi is sixty-four years old On November 2, 1985, he made a squirrel picture and title for the ancient sword. Seven吾乡有红萝卜、白萝卜，无青萝卜。
八五年十一月廿二日记
1985年11月22日，为红萝卜画题。
八
《百丑图》跋
In my hometown, there are carrots and white radishes, but there are no green radishes. Diary of November 22, 85 On November 22, 1985, he painted a carrot title. Eight "Hundred Ugly Pictures" postscript傅君学斌，善画脸谱。近又绘《百丑图》，可谓别出心裁。谱法之后，附有说明。穿关插戴，翔实生动。可作为艺术品看，也是一项重要的戏曲资料。这是很有意义的工作。为缀数语，用志欣喜：人心不同，各如其面。图成百丑，须眉活现。狡诈颟顸，滑稽妩媚。君是何人，以此为鉴。
Fu Jun Xuebin is good at painting faces. Recently, he painted "Hundred Ugly Pictures", which can be described as ingenious. After the notation, there are explanations. Inserted through the gates, informative and vivid. It can be seen as a work of art, and it is also an important opera material. This is a very meaningful work. For the sake of a few words, use the will: people's hearts are different, each is like their face. The picture is a hundred ugliness, and the beard and eyebrows are vivid. Cunning and charming. Who are you, take this as a lesson.1986年1月，为傅学斌《百丑图》作跋。
九
秋色无私到草花
一九八六年九月曾祺写
1986年9月，为秋花图题。
十
In January 1986, he wrote a postscript for Fu Xuebin's "Hundred Ugly Pictures". Nine The autumn colors are selfless to the grass and flowers Written by Zeng Qi in September 1986 In September 1986, he wrote a picture of autumn flowers. Ten西山华亭寺滇茶花开如碗大，青头菌、牛肝菌皆蔬中尤物。写慰政道兄海外乡思。
1986年10月，为李政道画云南菌子、茶花并题。
十一
The tea flowers of Huating Temple in Xishan bloom as big as a bowl, and the blue-headed mushrooms and porcini mushrooms are all stunners among vegetables. Write comforting political and moral brothers overseas homesickness. In October 1986, he painted Yunnan mushrooms and camellia for Li Zhengdao. Eleven我于北京种兰，皆不活。友人许君自昆明致兰二种，并授以艺兰之法，亦皆简便。贵州夏蕙，竟于冬令著花。喜赏一月，图此为念。
一九八六年十二月十日曾祺志
1986年12月10日，为兰花图题。
十二
I planted orchids in Beijing, but none of them survived. My friend Xu Jun brought two types of orchids from Kunming and taught me how to make orchids, which were also very simple. The summer orchids in Guizhou actually bloomed in winter. I like to enjoy it for a month, and I think about it. December 10, 1986 Tsang Qizhi On December 10, 1986, it was the title of the orchid picture. twelve朱文公云：山谷诗云“对客挥毫秦少游”，盖少游只一笔写去，重意重字皆不问，然好处亦自是绝好。蔡正孙诗林广记后集
朱文公云：山谷诗云“对客挥毫秦少游”，盖少游只一笔写去，重意重字皆不问，然好处亦自是绝好。 蔡正孙诗林广记后集吾年六十六，书字转规矩，少逞意作姿态，当得少存韵致，不至枯拙如老经生。否耶？
吾年六十六，书字转规矩，少逞意作姿态，当得少存韵致，不至枯拙如老经生。 否耶？一九八六年十二月十七日，初雪，黄昏酒后，曾祺书
1986年12月17日，书《诗林广记》后集一则并跋。
十三
桑植天子山中有野果，曰舅舅粮，亦名救命粮。
一九八六年十二月曾祺写前年印象
On December 17, 1986, the first snow, after drinking at dusk, Zeng Qishu On December 17, 1986, the second volume of the book "Poetry Forest Guangji" was postscripted. A baker's dozen There is a wild fruit in the mountains of the Son of Heaven called Uncle Grain, also known as Life-Saving Grain. In December 1986, Zeng Qi wrote his impressions of the previous year1986年12月，为舅舅粮画题。
十四
此松鼠乃驯豢者。我的小舅舅结婚时，他的小内弟带来一只松鼠，系以银链，藏在袖筒里。有时爬出吃瓜子、嘬豆腐脑，心甚羡慕之。今忽忽近六十年矣，犹不能忘。
In December 1986, he painted a title for his uncle's grain. fourteen This squirrel is a tamer. When my uncle got married, his little brother-in-law brought a squirrel, tied it with a silver chain, and hid it in his sleeve. Sometimes he crawls out to eat melon seeds and tofu brains, and he is very envious. It has been nearly sixty years now, and I still can't forget it.一九八六年曾祺记
1986年，为松鼠图题。
十五
江南可采莲，鱼戏莲叶间。鱼戏莲叶东，鱼戏莲叶西；鱼戏莲叶南，鱼戏莲叶北。
1986 Zeng Qi Ji In 1986, he wrote a squirrel picture. fifteen You can pick lotus in Jiangnan, and the fish play between the lotus leaves. The fish play in the east of the lotus leaf, and the fish play in the west of the lotus leaf; the fish play in the south of the lotus leaf, and the fish play in the north of the lotus leaf.宋徽宗瘦金书与蔡京书实为一体。凡作瘦金书，须高捉笔，不可使毫铺纸上。
一九八六年以长锋狼毫题
1986年，瘦金体书汉乐府《江南》并跋。
十六
Song Huizong's thin gold book and Cai Jing's book are actually one. Whenever you make a thin gold book, you must hold the pen high, and you must not let the brush spread on the paper. In 1986, he was titled "Long Edge Wolf" In 1986, he wrote Han Yuefu "Jiangnan" in a thin gold style. sixteen井冈山有山花，极红艳，问老革命周文楷，云是杜鹃花。
一九八七年三月曾祺忆写
There are mountain flowers in Jinggang Mountain, very red, and when asked by the old revolutionary Zhou Wenkai, he said they were rhododendrons. In March 1987, Zeng Qi recalled writing今天早上做了一个梦，梦里有一个地名，叫佳集雧。当地人（梦里的当地人）念成“符集集”。“佳”字怎么能念做“符”呢？但跟梦中人无道理可讲。“雧”（上面三个佳，下面木字）是标在一张简明的地图上的。
This morning I had a dream in which there was a place name called Jiaji Jun. The locals (the locals in the dream) pronounced it as "Fu Jiji". How can the word "Jia" be pronounced as "Fu"? But there is no reason to talk to the person in the dream. "雧" (three good above, wooden characters below) is marked on a concise map.醒来还记得，觉得这可以用在小说里，作为一个古镇的地名。
怎么会做了这样一个梦呢？奇怪！
三月廿五日上午记
1987年3月25日，为杜鹃花图题。
十七
When I woke up, I still remembered that I thought this could be used in the novel as a place name for an ancient town. How could I have such a dream? Odd! Morning Diary of March 25 On March 25, 1987, he wrote a picture of rhododendrons. seventeen吾乡阴城，昔常常有双耳陶壶出土，乡人称之为韩瓶，谓此韩世忠士卒所用水壶。以浸梅花，可以结子。
曾祺八九年十月偶写
1989年10月，为韩瓶梅花图题。
十八
In my hometown of Yincheng, amphora pottery pots were often unearthed in the past, and the villagers called them Han bottles, which are said to be the kettles used by Han Shizhong's soldiers. It can be soaked in plum blossoms to bear fruit. Zeng Qi wrote in October of '89 In October 1989, he wrote the title of the plum blossom picture of the Korean bottle. eighteen宜入新春未是春，残笺宿墨隔年人。
1990年1月15日，为水仙金鱼图题
十九
槐花小院静无人。
画赠乃谦庚午五月汪曾祺
1990年5月，为曹乃谦作槐花图并题。
二十
It is better to enter the new year, but it is not spring; the remaining paper is inked for the next year. On January 15, 1990, he was the subject of a daffodil goldfish nineteen The small courtyard of the locust flower is quiet and uninhabited. The painting was given to Wang Zengqi in May of the Gengwu year In May 1990, he made a picture of locust flowers for Cao Naiqian. twenty江南雨足，梅多肥润；不似北地梅，只干枝也。
1991年春，为张景山作《红梅图》并题。
二十一
有镜藏眼，无地容鼻。
There is enough rain in Jiangnan, and the plum is more fat; unlike the plum in the north, only dry branches. In the spring of 1991, he wrote "Red Plum Picture" for Zhang Jingshan. twenty-one There is a mirror to hide the eyes, and there is no ground for the nose.李迪眼有宿疾，滇西日照甚烈，乃常戴墨镜。而其鼻准暴露在外，晒得艳若桃花。或有赞美其鼻者，李迪掩鼻俯首曰：无地自容，无地自容。席间偶作谐语，李迪甚喜，以为是其滇西之行之形象概括，属为书之。
李迪眼有宿疾，滇西日照甚烈，乃常戴墨镜。 而其鼻准暴露在外，晒得艳若桃花。 或有赞美其鼻者，李迪掩鼻俯首曰：无地自容，无地自容。 席间偶作谐语，李迪甚喜，以为是其滇西之行之形象概括，属为书之。1991年，书赠李迪联语并跋。
二十二
残荷不为雨声留。
辛未秋深
1991年秋，为残荷图题。
二十三
南风薰薰，唯吾德馨。
随笔随意，鼓瑟吹笙。
In 1991, the book gave Li Di a couplet and postscript. twenty-two The remnants of the lotus leaves are not retained by the sound of rain. In late autumn, In the fall of 1991, he wrote a picture of the remnants of the lotus. twenty-three The south wind blows fiercely, and only my virtue is fragrant. Casually write, play the zither and play the sheng.伟经先生一哂。一九九二年五月汪曾祺
1992年5月，为黄伟经作写意兰花图并题。
二十四
闻大青山人云：山丹丹开花，每历一年增加一朵。
一九九二年十一月汪曾祺记
Mr. Weijing laughed. May 1992 Wang Zengqi In May 1992, he made a freehand orchid picture and title for Huang Weijing. twenty-four I heard from the people of Daqingshan that the mountain is blooming, and every year it adds one flower. November 1992 Wang Zengqi Record1992年11月，为山丹丹图题。
In November 1992, he wrote the title of Shandandan Tu.