Cover

Cover

总目录

总目录
汪曾祺全集 1 小说 卷
汪曾祺全集 2 小说 卷 Three sisters get married Pi Feng Sanzhu House In 1982 Fishing Children Fishing Children Picking up gold Airline tickets connoisseur Wang Sihai's dusk General Catalog The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi 1 Novel Volume Wang Zengqi's Complete Works 2 Novels Volume
汪曾祺全集 3 小说 卷
汪曾祺全集 4 散文 卷
汪曾祺全集 5 散文 卷
汪曾祺全集 6 散文 卷
汪曾祺全集 7 戏剧 卷
汪曾祺全集 8 戏剧 卷
汪曾祺全集 9 谈艺 卷 Wang Zengqi's Complete Works 3 Novels Volume The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi 4 Essays Volume Wang Zengqi's Complete Works 5 Essays Volume The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi 6 Essays Volume Wang Zengqi's Complete Works 7 Drama Volume The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi 8 Drama Volume Wang Zengqi's Complete Works 9 Talking about Art Volume
汪曾祺全集 10 谈艺 卷
汪曾祺全集 11 诗歌、杂著 卷
汪曾祺全集 12 书信 卷

封面

《汪曾祺全集》编辑工作委员会

《汪曾祺全集》编辑工作委员会
主任/郭娟
[1] This article was originally published in Tianjin's "Yishi Daily" on November 1 and 8, 1948, and the end of the article was marked "unfinished, to be continued". Due to the final publication of the "Literary Weekly" in the newspaper, this article could not be continued. Editorial Committee of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi" Director/Guo Juan成员/季红真　汪朝　汪朗　汪明
　　徐强　李光荣　李建新　赵坤
　　刘伟　杨康　周墨西　李玉俐
（排名不分先后）

书名页

版权页

图书在版编目(CIP)数据
汪曾祺全集:全12册/汪曾祺著.—北京:人民文学出版社.2018
Xu Qiang, Li Guangrong, Li Jianxin, Zhao Kun Liu Wei, Yang Kang, Zhou Moxi, Li Yuli (In no particular order) Book in Edition (CIP) Data The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi: All 12 Volumes/By Wang Zengqi.—Beijing: People's Literature Publishing House.2018ISBN 978-7-02-014341-2
Ⅰ.①汪… Ⅱ.①汪… Ⅲ.①中国文学—当代文学—作品综合集 Ⅳ.①I217.2
中国版本图书馆CIP数据核字(2018)第121097号
ISBN 978-7-02-014341-2 I..(1)Wang... II..(1)Wang... III..(1)Chinese Literature—Contemporary Literature—A Collection of Works IV..(1)I217.2 China Version Library CIP Data Verification (2018) No. 121097责任编辑　郭娟　刘伟　杨康　李玉俐　周墨西
装帧设计　刘静
责任校对　杨益民　王筱盈　韩志慧　刘佳佳　王璐
责任印制　王重艺
出版发行　人民文学出版社
社　　址　北京市朝内大街166号
Editor-in-charge: Guo Juan, Liu Wei, Yang Kang, Li Yuli, Zhou Moxi Binding design Liu Jing Responsible proofreader Yang Yimin, Wang Xiaoying, Han Zhihui, Liu Jiajia, Wang Lu Responsible printing Wang Chongyi Published and distributed by People's Literature Publishing House Address: No. 166, Chao Nei Street, Beijing邮政编码　100705
网　　址　http://www.rw-cn.com
印　　刷　三河市西华印务有限公司
经　　销　全国新华书店等
字　　数　4010千字
Postal Code 100705 Website http://www.rw-cn.com Printing Sanhe Xihua Printing Co., Ltd. Distribution: Xinhua Bookstore, etc. Word Count: 4010,000 words开　　本　710毫米×1000毫米　1/16
印　　张　304　插页 48
印　　数　1—6000
版　　次　2019年1月北京第1版
印　　次　2019年1月第1次印刷
Open 710 mm × 1000 mm 1/16 Sheet 304 Insert 48 Yield 1—6000 Edition January 2019 Beijing 1st edition Printed January 2019 1st printing书　　号　978-7-02-014341-2
定　　价　1280.00元
如有印装质量问题.请与本社图书销售中心调换. 电话:010－65233595

文前插图

文前插图

1947年5月 上海
ISBN 978-7-02-014341-2 Price 1280.00 yuan If there is a problem with the quality of printing. Please exchange with the book sales center of our company. Phone: 010-65233595 Illustration before the text May 1947 Shanghai
1948年冬 与夫人施松卿

小说《白松糖浆》原载报纸

画作

出版说明

出版说明
Winter 1948 with his wife Shi Songqing The novel "White Pine Syrup" was originally published in the newspaper Paintings Publication Notes汪曾祺（1920—1997），江苏高邮人，中国现当代著名作家。他从1940年开始发表作品，其创作生涯历经半个世纪，跨越两个时代。他前承五四新文化传统、师从沈从文，后启寻根文学回归民族传统的思潮。他的创作，小说、散文、戏剧、文论、新旧体诗等诸体兼备，皆取得很高艺术成就，堪称文体家；又兼及书画，多有题跋，以博雅名世。他的作品，深受中外读者喜爱，也是文学研究者普遍关注的对象。为此，我们发动社会力量、组织专家学者，钩沉辑佚、考辨真伪、校勘注释、编辑出版这部《汪曾祺全集》。
Wang Zengqi (1920-1997), a native of Gaoyou, Jiangsu Province, is a famous modern and contemporary Chinese writer. He began publishing works in 1940, and his creative career spanned half a century and spanned two eras. He inherited the new cultural tradition of May Fourth, studied under Shen Congwen, and later initiated the idea of returning to national traditions in root-seeking literature. His creations, including novels, essays, dramas, essays, new and old poems, have achieved high artistic achievements, and can be called a stylist; he also has calligraphy and painting, and is famous for his liberal arts. His works are deeply loved by Chinese and foreign readers, and are also the object of general attention of literary researchers. To this end, we mobilized social forces, organized experts and scholars, hooked and compiled, examined the authenticity, proofread and annotated, edited and published this "Complete Works of Wang Zengqi".全集收入迄今为止发现的汪曾祺全部文学作品以及书信、题跋等日常文书，共分12卷:小说3卷，散文3卷，戏剧2卷，谈艺2卷，诗歌及杂著1卷，书信1卷，并附年表。
The complete collection contains all of Wang Zengqi's literary works found so far, as well as daily documents such as letters and inscriptions, and is divided into 12 volumes: 3 volumes of novels, 3 volumes of prose, 2 volumes of dramas, 2 volumes of talks, 1 volume of poetry and miscellaneous works, 1 volume of letters, and a chronology.按照学术惯例，全集中的文学作品，以最初发表的报刊版本为底本（少量未发表作品以手稿、油印本为底本），以作者生前自己或他人编订出版的、比较优良的作品集或手稿作为参照校本，进行校勘，改正文字的错、漏、衍、倒置及标点错误。少数不能判定正误而存疑处，予以标示：误字用[]，排仿宋体；漏字用〔〕，排仿宋体；原稿漫漶无法辨认的字，用□替代。保留异体字，保留带有作家个人风格与时代印记的用语。
According to academic practice, the literary works in the complete collection are based on the originally published newspaper editions (a small number of unpublished works are based on manuscripts and mimeographs), and the author's relatively excellent collections or manuscripts compiled and published by himself or others during his lifetime are used as reference proofreading, proofreading, and correcting errors, omissions, derivations, inversions and punctuation errors in the text. A few doubts that cannot be determined are marked: typos are used [], imitating Song style; omissions are used [], imitating Song style; Words that are unrecognizable in the original manuscript are replaced with □. Variant characters are retained, and words with the writer's personal style and the imprint of the times are retained.文学作品每篇皆有题注，交代原载及收入作品集、文本改动、笔名等版本信息。保留作者原注；其他少量必要的注释，皆标明“编者注”。书信题注，介绍收信人简况，信中注释力求简约。
Each literary work has a caption, explaining the original and included in the collection, text changes, pseudonyms and other version information. Retain the author's original notes; other small necessary annotations are marked with "editor's note". The caption of the letter introduces the brief information of the recipient, and the annotations in the letter strive to be simple.全集以写作时间排列文章顺序，写作时间不详则按发表时间排序。如写作时间与发表时间均不详，则编入“未编年”。文末写作时间如非作者自属，加括号以示区别。
The complete collection is arranged in the order of the articles according to the writing time, and if the writing time is unknown, it is sorted according to the publication time. If the writing time and publication time are unknown, it will be compiled as "unannounced". If the writing time at the end of the article is not the author's own, parentheses should be added to indicate the difference.出版全集不仅是一项艰巨的编辑工作，也是艰深的学术工作，我们倾力打造的全集，肯定还存在种种不足之处，敬请读者指正。
人民文学出版社编辑部
2018年6月

小说卷说明

小说卷说明
Publishing the complete works is not only a difficult editing work, but also a difficult academic work, and there must be various shortcomings in the complete works we have worked hard to create, so please correct readers. Editorial Department of People's Literature Publishing House June 2018 Description of the novel volume此三卷是汪曾祺小说总集，收入作者自1940年创作的小说162篇（《故里三陈》记为1篇，《虎二题》记为2篇，以此类推）。同题小说，如内容改动少，仅收入创作发表在先者，在题注中说明情况，如《最响的炮仗》；如内容改动大，则统统收入，题目以序号提示，如《职业》（二）。
These three volumes are a collection of Wang Zengqi's novels, including 162 novels written by the author since 1940 ("Hometown Three Chens" is recorded as 1 article, "Tiger Two Questions" is recorded as 2 articles, and so on). Novels with the same title, if the content has few changes, only those that are created and published first are included in the caption, such as "The Loudest Firecracker"; if the content changes are large, they will all be included, and the title will be prompted by a serial number, such as "Occupation" (2).人民文学出版社编辑部

目录

1940年1. Occupation Two years of red light down and out Green Cat winter Wearing a carriage Red Light (2) Toothache prisoner Heterogeneity In 1948 White pine syrup Met Trilobites and gladioli turtle dove Death of the locksmith Divine Gathering In 1940钓
翠子
悒郁

1941年寒夜
春天
复仇
灯下
猎猎
河上
匹夫一、太重的序跋
二、反刍的灵魂
三、不成文法的名义
四、方寸之木高于城楼"You must know how sad you are to others by defiling the word. Hum! ” The surname Xun was inexplicably angry, and he counted to himself without hesitation. The boy had already entered the room and calculated how much money he spent today. Fourth, the square inch of wood is higher than the city tower
五、图案生活Xun stopped standing on a wooden bridge and thought for a long time, and suddenly felt very ashamed. "I cried at the memorial, not knowing what to say." He embarked on the path of Mingmingde. 5. Pattern life
六、故事的主人公致作者的信

待车

1942年谁是错的
结婚
唤车

1943年除岁

1944年葡萄上的轻粉
序雨引子Wild roses are of course not the same as grapes. [1] This article was originally published in the Republic of China Daily on May 18, 1944. The handwriting of the original is scattered, and it is supplemented according to the meaning of the text to facilitate reading. Sequence of rain{{id_0000}} introduction
第一章Chapter 1

1945年膝行的人
小学校的钟声
老鲁

1946年[1] This article was originally published in Renaissance, Volume 3, Issue 2, 1947. The first collection of "Encounter Collection", Cultural Life Publishing House, April 1949, the text was slightly changed; and "Selected Short Stories of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Publishing House, February 1982, the text was greatly changed. In 1946复仇
前天
磨灭
庙与僧
最响的炮仗

1947年鸡鸭名家
醒来一Da Nao Records {{id_0000}} One
二

艺术家
驴
职业（外一篇） In 1945 Kneeling Elementary school bells Old Lu In 1946 revenge Day before yesterday Wear down Temple and monk The loudest firecracker In 1947 Chicken and duck master Wake up One Two artist donkey Occupation (Extra)一 职业[1] This article was originally published in the "Jingshi Daily" on June 15, 1947. Occupation (Outside Article) {{id_0000}} 1. Occupation
二 年红灯"Pretzels - sub-Western cakes." Listening to his voice pull out of a piece of thread, he said softly: "Pinch your nose - blow the foreign trumpet......" Two years of red light

落魄
绿猫
冬天
戴车匠
年红灯（二）
牙疼
囚犯
异秉

1948年[1] This article was originally published in Literary Magazine, Volume 2, No. 10, 1948. Originally collected in the first volume of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998. In 1980, the author rewrote the novel with the same title, see "Yi Bing" (2). In 1948白松糖浆
邂逅
三叶虫与剑兰花
斑鸠
锁匠之死
卦摊

1940年

1940年
1. Occupation Two years of red light down and out Green Cat winter Wearing a carriage Red Light (2) Toothache prisoner Heterogeneity In 1948 White pine syrup Met Trilobites and gladioli turtle dove Death of the locksmith Divine Gathering In 1940钓[1]
晓春，静静的日午。
为怕携归无端的烦忧，（梦乡的可怜的土产），不敢去寻访枕上的湖山。
Fishing{{id_0000}} Xiaochun, quiet noon. For fear of bringing back unwarranted worries, (the poor souvenir of the dreamland), I dare not visit the lake and mountain on my pillow.一个黑点，划成一道弧线，投向纸窗，“嗡”，是一只失路的蜜蜂。也许正惓怀于一支尚未萎落的残蕊，匆忙的小小的身躯撞去。习于播散温存的触须已经损折了，仍不肯终止这痴愚的试验，一次，两次，……“可怜虫亦可以休矣！”不耐烦替它计较了。
A black dot, drawn in an arc, thrown towards the paper window, "buzz", is a lost bee. Perhaps it is nostalgic for a stamens that have not yet withered, and its small body in a hurry crashes away. The tentacles that are accustomed to spreading warmth have been broken, and they still refuse to stop this foolish experiment, once or twice,...... "The poor insect can also rest!" Impatient to care for it.做些甚么呢？
打开旧卷，一片虞美人的轻瓣静睡在书页上。旧日的娇红已成了凝血的暗紫，边沿更镌了一圈恹恹的深黑。不想打开锈锢的记忆的键，掘出葬了的断梦，遂又悄然掩起。
What to do? Opening the old scroll, a light petal of a poppy was sleeping quietly on the page. The old red has become a dark purple of coagulated blood, and a circle of deep black is engraved on the edges. I didn't want to open the key of the rusty memory, and dug out the broken dream that had been buried, so I quietly hid it again.烟卷一分分的短了，珍惜的吐出最后一圈，掷了残蒂，一星红火，在灰烬里挣脱最后的呼吸。打开烟盒，已经空了，不禁怅然。
The cigarette roll was short, and he cherished the last circle, threw the residual stem, and broke free from his last breath in the ashes. When I opened the cigarette box, it was already empty, and I couldn't help but feel sad.提起瓷壶，斟了半天，还不见壶嘴吐出一滴，哦，还是昨晚冲的，嚼着被开水蚀去绿色的竹心，犹余清芬；想后园的竹子当抽了新篁，正好没渔竿，钓鱼去吧，别在寂寞里凝成了化石。
Lifting the porcelain pot, I poured it for a long time, and I didn't see a drop spit out of the spout, oh, it was still flushed last night, chewing the green bamboo heart eroded by boiling water, and there was still a clear fragrance; I think the bamboo in the back garden should be smoked with a new bamboo, and there is no fishing rod, go fishing, don't condense into fossils in loneliness.小时候，跟母亲纠缠了半天，以撒娇的一吻，换来一根绣花的小针，就灯火弯成钩子；到姐姐的匣内抽一根黑丝线，结系停当，捉几只蜻蝇；怀着不让人知道的喜悦，去作一次试验。学着别人的样，耐心的守着水面“浮子”（那也是请教许多先辈才晓用蒜茎做的最好）。起竿时不是太急，惊走了；便是太慢，白丢了一只蝇矢；经过了许多次的失望，终于钓得一尾鲢鱼，看它在钩上闪着银光，掀动鲜红的鳃，像发现了一件奇迹，慌乱的连手带脚的捉住，用柳枝穿了，忘了祖父的斥骂，一路叫着跳回去。
When I was a child, I was entangled with my mother for a long time, and in exchange for a coquettish kiss, I got a small embroidered needle, and the light was bent into a hook; I went to my sister's box to draw a black silk thread, tied it to a stop, and caught a few dragonflies; with the joy of not letting people know, I went to do an experiment. Learn from others and patiently guard the "float" on the water (that is also the best way to make it with garlic stems after consulting many ancestors). When I started the rod, I was not too hasty, and I was frightened away; it was too slow, and I lost a fly arrow in vain; After many disappointments, I finally caught a silver carp, watching it shine silver on the hook, lifting its bright red gills, as if I had found a miracle, I caught it in a panic, pierced it with willow branches, forgot my grandfather's scolding, and jumped back all the way.而今想来，分外亲切，不由得不跃跃欲试了。
Now that I think about it, it's so kind that I can't help but be eager to try.昨晚一定下过牛毛雨，看绵软的土径上，清晰的画出一个个脚印，一个守着油灯的盼待，拉快了这些脚步，脚掌的部分那么深，而脚跟的部分却如此轻浅，而且两个脚印的距离很长，想见归家时的急切了。你可没有要紧事，不必追迹这些脚印，尽管慢点儿。
It must have been drizzling last night, looking at the soft dirt path, clearly drawing footprints, a waiting for an oil lamp, speeding up these steps, the soles of the feet are so deep, but the heels are so light, and the distance between the two footprints is very long, I want to see the eagerness when I return home. You don't have to follow these footprints, just slow down.在往日，便是这样冷僻的小村，亦常有古旧的声音来造访的。如今，没有碎布烂铁换糖的唤卖；卖通草花的货郎的小鼓；走方郎中踉跄的串铃；即本村的瞎先生，也暂时收起算命小锣的，没有一个辛苦的命运来叩问了，正是农忙的时候呀！
In the past, such a remote village was often visited by ancient voices. Nowadays, there is no call for scraps of cloth and rotten iron for sugar; the small drum of the merchant who sells grass and flowers; the staggering string of bells among the walking doctors; Even the blind gentleman in this village has temporarily put away the fortune-telling gong, and there is no hard fate to inquire, it is the time when the farmers are busy!转过一架铺着带绿的柳条的小桥，有一棵老树，我只能叫它老树，因为它的虬干曾做过我儿时的骏马，它照料着我长大的乡下的替它起的名字，多是字典辞源上查不着的。顽皮的河水舔去覆土，露出隐秘的年青的一段，那羞涩的粉红的根须，真如一个蒲团，不妨坐下。
Turning around a small bridge covered with green willow, there is an old tree, I can only call it an old tree, because its dragon trunk used to be my childhood horse, and it took care of the name given to it by the countryside where I grew up, most of which cannot be found in the dictionary etymology. The naughty river licks off the covering soil, revealing a hidden youthful section, the shy pink roots, really like a futon, you might as well sit down.也得像个样儿理了钓丝，安上饵，轻轻的抛向水面。本不是为着鱼而来的，何必关心“浮子”的深浅。
You have to straighten the fishing line, put on the bait, and gently throw it to the water. It's not for the fish, so why care about the depth of the "float".河不宽，只消篙子一点，便可渡到彼岸了，但水这么蓝，蓝得有些神秘，你明白来往的船只为甚么不用篙子了吧！关于这河，乡下人还会告诉你一个神奇的故事，深恐你不相信，他们会急红了脸说：县里的志书上还载着。
The river is not wide, just a little pole, you can cross to the other side, but the water is so blue, blue a little mysterious, you understand why the boats don't need poles! About this river, the countrymen will also tell you a magical story, afraid that if you don't believe it, they will blush, and say: The chronicle of the county is still there.也不知是姓甚么的做皇帝的时候，——除了村馆里的先生，这村里的人都是只知道“民国”与“前清”的，顶多还晓得朱洪武是个放牛的野孩子，则“不知有汉，无论魏晋”何足为怪。这儿出了个画画的，一点不说谎，他画的玩意儿就跟真的一般，画个麻雀就会叫，画个乌龟就能爬，画个人，管少不了脸上一粒麻子。天下事都是这样，聪明人不会长寿的，他活不上三十岁，就让天老爷给收去了，临死的时候，跟他的新娶的媳妇说：“我一不耕田，二不种地，死后留给你的只有绵绵的相思……”取张素绢，画了几笔，密密卷好，叫她到城里交给他的师傅，送到京师的相爷家去，说相爷的老太太做寿，寿宴上甚么东西都有了，但是还缺少一样东西，心里很不快活，因此害了症候，若能如期送到，准可领到重赏，并且关照她千万不要拆开来看，他咽了最后的一口气，媳妇便上城去了。她心里想到底是个甚么呢？耐不住拆开来望望，一看是一片浓墨，当中有一块白的，以为丈夫骗了她，便坐在田岸上哀哀的哭起来。一阵大风，把这卷儿吹到河里去了，我的天，原来是一轮月亮啊！从此这月亮便不分日夜的在深蓝的水里放着凄冷的银光。
I don't know what the surname is,—— when he was the emperor, except for the gentleman in the village hall, the people in this village only knew the "Republic of China" and "Former Qing", and at most they knew that Zhu Hongwu was a wild child who herded cattle, so "I don't know if there is a Han Dynasty, no matter Wei and Jin", it is not surprising. There is a painter here, don't lie at all, the things he paints are like the real thing, draw a sparrow will call, draw a turtle can climb, draw a person, and care about a pockmark on the face. When he was dying, he said to his newly married daughter-in-law: "I don't farm, I don't farm, and after death, I only leave you with endless lovesickness......" Take Zhang Su silk, draw a few strokes, roll it tightly, and ask her to go to the city to hand it over to his master, and send it to Xiangye's house in the capital, saying that Xiangye's old lady is celebrating her birthday, and there is everything at the birthday banquet, but there is still one thing missing, and she is very unhappy, so she has caused symptoms, if it can be delivered as scheduled, she will receive a heavy reward, and take care of her not to take it apart and look at it, he swallowed his last breath, and his daughter-in-law went to the city. What was it in her heart? I couldn't bear to take it apart and look at it, and when I saw that it was a thick piece of ink, there was a white piece in it, thinking that her husband had deceived her, so she sat on the bank of the field and cried mournfully. A gust of wind blew this roll into the river, and my heaven turned out to be a moon! Since then, the moon has been shining a cold silver light in the deep blue water day and night.你好意思追问现在为甚么没有了？看前面那块石碑，三个斑驳的朱字“晓月津”，一个多么诗意的名儿。
“山外青山楼外楼，
我郎住在家后头，
Are you embarrassed to ask why there is no one now? Look at the stone stele in front of you, three mottled red characters "Xiaoyuejin", what a poetic name. "Outside the mountains, the green mountains and buildings outside the buildings, My husband lives behind the house,…………”
夹着槐花的香气，飘来清亮的山歌，想着甚么浪漫的佳话了？看水面上泛起一个微笑。她们都有永不凋谢的天真，一条压倒同伴们的嗓子的骄傲，常常在疲乏的梦里安排下笑的花蕾的。
With the fragrance of locust flowers and clear folk songs, what kind of romantic story are you thinking? Look at the water with a smile. They all have an innocence that never fades, a pride that overwhelms the throats of their companions, and a bud that often arranges laughter in tired dreams.一片叶子，落到钓竿上来，一翻身，跌到水面上，被微风推出了视野。还是一样的碧绿，闪耀着青春的光辉。你说，便这样无声的殒折，不比抖索着枯黄的灵魂，对残酷的西风作无望的泣求强些？且不浪费这些推求，你看这叶片绿得多么可人，若能以此为舟，浮家泛宅，浪迹江湖，比庄子那个大葫芦如何？
A leaf fell on the fishing rod, turned over, fell to the water, and was pushed out of view by the breeze. It's still the same turquoise, shining with the brilliance of youth. You say, is it better to die silently like this than to shake the withered yellow soul and cry hopelessly against the cruel west wind? Don't waste these requests, look at how lovely this leaf is, if you can use it as a boat, float the house, wander the rivers and lakes, how about Zhuangzi's big gourd?远林漏出落照的红，像藏在卷发里的被吻后的樱唇，丝丝炊烟在招手唤我回去了。咦，怎么钓竿上竟栖歇了一只蜻蜓，好吧，我把这枝绿竹插在土里承载你的年青的梦吧。
The red of the sunset leaked out of the distant forest, like the cherry lips after being kissed hidden in the curls, and the smoke of cooking beckoned me to go back. Hey, why is there a dragonfly resting on the fishing rod, okay, I'll stick this green bamboo in the soil to carry your youthful dream.把余下的饭粒，抛到水底，空着手走了。预料在归途中当可捡着许多诚朴的欢笑，将珍重的贮起。
我钓得些甚么？难得回答，然而我的确不是一无所得啊。
二十九年四月十二日昆明
Throw the remaining rice grains into the bottom of the water and leave empty-handed. It is expected that on the way back, you will be able to pick up a lot of honest laughter and store the precious ones. What did I catch? It was rare to answer, but I did not gain nothing. Kunming on April 12 of the twenty-ninth year
[1] 本篇原载1940年6月22日昆明《中央日报》。

翠子

翠子[1]
[1] This article was originally published in Kunming's Central Daily on June 22, 1940. Emerald [1]夜，像是踡藏在墙角的青苔深处，这时偷偷的溜了出来，占据了空空的庭院。天上黑郁郁的，星一个一个地挂起来，乍起的风摇动园里的竹叶，这里那里沙沙的响。
At night, it seemed to be hidden deep in the moss in the corner, and then it sneaked out and occupied the empty courtyard. The sky was dark and gloomy, the stars hung up one by one, and the sudden wind shook the bamboo leaves in the garden, rustling here and there.家里只有我和大丫头翠子，在屋中玩着，等待父亲回家。
翠子扬起头，凝望着远远的天边，抱在膝上的两手渐渐松了下来。
There were only me and the eldest girl Cuizi at home, playing in the house, waiting for my father to come home. Cuizi raised her head, staring at the sky in the distance, and her hands on her lap gradually loosened.“又来了！看你那呆样子。翠子，你跟我说个故事好不好？要拣顶顶美丽的。可是你不要再说磨子星和灯草星子，今儿晚上天河里没有多大的风，雾倒挺不少，你看哩，白朦朦的，甚么也看不出。我怕他们星子也都会迷了路。”
"Here we go again! Look at your stupid look. Cuizi, can you tell me a story? Choose the top and the beautiful. But don't talk about Mozi Star and Lancer Star Child, there is not much wind in the Tianhe River tonight, there is quite a lot of fog, you see, it is hazy, and you can't see anything. I'm afraid they will also get lost. ”像是没有听见似的，她的眼睛还是睁得那么大，但是我自己听得很清楚，连掠过檐前的蝙蝠一定已都偷听了一两句去了，在她的眼睛里，我看出我有点生气，默默地，我盯着廊下两个淡淡的影子，心里想：不理我，好！看我的比你的也短不了多少。
As if she hadn't heard, her eyes were still so wide, but I could hear it clearly, even the bats that skimmed in front of the eaves must have overheard a sentence or two, in her eyes, I could see that I was a little angry, silently, I stared at the two faint shadows in the corridor, thinking to myself: Ignore me, okay! Look at me not much shorter than yours.终于，她跟我讲和了。站起身来，伸手理一理被调皮的风披下来的几丝头发，（用黑夜纺织成的头发！）她说：
“不早了，我给你弄晚饭去。爷大概不会回来吃了。”
Finally, she made peace with me. She stood up and straightened her hair that had been draped by the mischievous wind. She said: "It's not early, I'll get you dinner. Master probably won't come back to eat. ”爷？爷又不是你的爷，为甚么你也这么叫呢？不害羞！叫人家的爷做爷。我心里笑过多少次了，不过我也没有说甚么，转进堂屋里去了。堂屋好像比那天都空洞，壁虎在板壁上水渍处慢慢的爬过，但我一点儿都不怕。母亲的棺柩停在这儿时，我还一个人守着一盏长明照路灯（怕被老鼠们喝干了，让妈在黑地里摸索），现在更不怕了；只是桌底下的大黑猫，咕噜咕噜的“念佛”叫人听得真不好受。我连声地喝：“去！去！”它像聋了个耳朵，睬也不睬。想叫声翠子，听厨房里铲子正响得紧，大概加点火，马上就要来了，便想起翠子来的时候黑黑的样子，还穿上双鲤鱼脸的花鞋，带个大红“舌头”，怯生生的，“锅边秀！”于是跟自己笑起来。
Father? Master is not your master, why do you call him that? Don't be shy! Call someone else's grandfather a master. How many times have I laughed in my heart, but I didn't say anything and turned into the main room. The main house seemed to be emptier than that day, and the gecko slowly crawled over the water stains on the board wall, but I was not afraid at all. When my mother's coffin was parked here, I was still guarding a long-light street lamp alone (for fear that the mice would drink it up and let my mother grope in the dark ground), but now I am even more afraid; it's just the big black cat under the table, and the purring "chanting Buddha" is really uncomfortable to hear. I shouted repeatedly: "Go!" Go! "It's like a deaf ear, and it doesn't pay attention. I wanted to call Cuizi, and I heard that the shovel in the kitchen was ringing tightly, probably with the ignition, and it was about to come, so I remembered the black appearance of Cuizi when she came, and put on flower shoes with a double carp face, with a big red "tongue", timidly, "Pot side show!" So he laughed to himself.吃饭时，我一手拿着筷子，一手拿根纸捻，蘸点儿水，又在灯盏里滚一滚，就火头上必必剥剥地烧起来，非常好玩。
“看油点子溅到眼里去，怎么这么皮！”
When eating, I hold chopsticks in one hand and a piece of paper in the other, dip it in some water, and roll it in the lamp, and it will burn on the fire, which is very fun. "Look at the oil splashing in your eyes, why are you so skinny!"“哟，真真像个妈？”我想着，小猫儿似的咕咕的笑着。
“爷一早就出去了，这会还不回来，老不肯呆在家里，把我一个人撇下！”
"Yo, really like a mother?" I thought, cooing like a kitten. "My father went out early in the morning, and he won't come back, and he won't stay at home and leave me alone!"其实我知道，爷疼一晚上比别人疼我一天都强。而且有翠子伴着我也并不寂寞，但我仍亟亟盼他回来。晚上的风专门往人颈子里钻，邻居王家的那条大花狗，一听到脚步声音就向黑中狂叫，爷难道不怕狗？不怕我因为担心他怕狗而怕狗？
In fact, I know that my grandfather hurts me more than others hurt me for a day. And I'm not lonely with Cuizi with me, but I still eagerly look forward to his return. The wind at night drilled into people's necks, and the big flower dog of the neighbor Wang family screamed into the dark as soon as he heard the sound of footsteps, isn't he afraid of dogs? Aren't you afraid that I'm afraid of dogs because I'm worried that he is afraid of dogs?我嘟起了嘴。
“……大白天爷一定又是到你娘的坟上去了。你这个人！看每天衣上都沾了些泥斑，早上的露水多重！”
I pouted. “…… In broad daylight, the master must have gone to your mother's grave again. You are the person! Look at the mud stains on my clothes every day, and how heavy the dew is in the morning! ”对了。父亲每晚回来都带着一支白色的花，这花城里是没有的。人家说是鬼种出来的。母亲的墓园里满开的全是这种花，听爷说过，“这坟地是你娘生前亲自看定的。”风水先生都说这不是吉地，但父亲可坚持要葬在这儿。只是这花是经不起霜打的，白菜渐渐甜了起来，怕这花也没多少日子好活了。我希望明天要父亲带我去看看，花叶的尖尖有没有发红，要是红了，那就快了。
That's right. My father came back every night with a white flower, which was not found in the city. People say it was planted by ghosts. My mother's cemetery is full of this kind of flower, and I heard my father say, "This cemetery was personally determined by your mother during her lifetime." Mr. Feng Shui said that this is not an auspicious place, but my father insisted on being buried here. It's just that this flower can't stand the frost, and the cabbage is gradually getting sweeter, and I'm afraid that this flower won't have many days to live. I hope my father will take me to see if the tips of the flowers and leaves are red tomorrow, and if they are, it will be soon.等花都完全憔悴死了，只挂上一些干叶子在风里摇，狗尾草也在风里摇，看父亲还再天天到坟上去不去？
When the flowers are completely haggard and dead, only some dry leaves are hung and shaken in the wind, and dogtail grass is also swaying in the wind.格格，一只褪了绿色的小蚂蚱，振翅向灯焰飞来，翠子一挥手把它赶去了。翠子嘴里咭咕着：“你为甚么不在青草窠里玩着，却迷在这亮亮的一团火里？”
Gege, a small grasshopper that had faded green, flapped its wings and flew towards the flames, and Cuizi waved his hand to drive it away. Cuizi muttered: "Why don't you play in the grass nest, but you are fascinated by this bright fire?" ”大家都不说话，风掀起壁上的条幅，划划地响，我想起父亲近来画也不画，字也不写，连话也不多说，便问翠子：
Everyone didn't speak, the wind lifted the banners on the wall, scratching the ground, I remembered that my father had not drawn recently, did not write, and didn't even say much, so he asked Cuizi:“爷近来是不是又老了些？下巴的须子长得那么长，刺在人脸上，痒痒的，嗯。怎么回事？想娘，娘不想他也不再想我，睡在地下安安静静。甚么也不想。”
"Is my father getting older lately? The beard on his chin is so long, it stings on people's faces, itchy, hmm. What's going on? I miss my mother, my mother doesn't want him to think about me anymore, and he sleeps quietly on the ground. I don't want anything. ”“你爹……哦，你明儿早上醒来，叫他莫出去。明儿是他的生日，今年三十了吧。……快吃，看菜都冷了！”
"Your father...... Oh, you wake up in the morning and tell him not to go out. Ming'er is his birthday, so it's Chinese New Year's Eve today. …… Eat quickly, it's cold to see the food! ”咦！我不是吃完了吗？她一定又想着甚么了。连我放下筷子都不晓得，痴痴的真好玩。今晚上我还要告诉父亲，翠子这两天像丢了魂。她的魂生了翅膀，把翅膀一举，就被风吹到远远的地方去。是一阵甚么风？我不知道，翠子也不知道。
Hey! Didn't I finish eating? She must be thinking about something again. I don't even know if I put down my chopsticks, it's so much fun. Tonight I also want to tell my father that Cuizi seems to have lost her soul in the past two days. Her soul gave birth to wings, and when she lifted her wings, she was blown far away by the wind. What kind of wind is it? I don't know, and Cuizi doesn't know either.翠子收了碗，把折好的爷的衣裳压在衣砖底下，便做起针线来。我倚在她身上，随着她胸前的起伏，我轻轻地唱：
“小白菜呀
点点黄啊，
小小年纪
没了亲娘。
……
……”
“翠子，底下是甚么的？”
Cuizi put away the bowl, pressed the folded master's clothes under the bricks, and started to make needlework. I leaned on her, and as the ups and downs of her chest, I sang softly: "Little cabbage! A little yellow. At a young age There is no mother. "Cuizi, what's underneath?"“——听，叫门，你爹回来了？”
翠子打了风雨灯，走到黑黑的过道里，我站在可以看到大门的地方等着，看烛火一步步的近了，却是父亲提着的。翠子静静的跟在后面。
"——Listen, call the door, your father is back?" Cuizi turned on the wind and rain lamp and walked to the dark aisle, I stood where I could see the gate and waited, watching the candle light get closer and closer, but it was my father who carried it. Cuizi followed quietly.父亲一把抱起了我，在颊上亲了我一下，问我为甚么还不睡。
“等你！你不疼我，只疼别人家的孩子！”
父亲轻轻叹了声，进到房间里去了。一进房门，便听见屋角矿、矿的声音，他问我：
My father picked me up, kissed me on the cheek, and asked me why I hadn't slept yet. "Waiting for you! You don't love me, you only love other people's children! ” My father sighed softly and went into the room. As soon as I entered the door, I heard the sound of the corner mine and the mine, and he asked me:“五更鸡上煮的甚么？”
“莲子。翠子在柜子里找出来的，说上好的建莲，再不吃要坏了。天也冷了，爷该吃点滋润清补东西，所以煨了它。让我关照爹，糖在条几上玻璃缸里。”
"What is cooked on the chicken at dawn?" "Lotus seeds. Cuizi found it in the cabinet, saying that if you don't eat a good Jianlian, it will be spoiled. It's also cold, and my father should eat something moisturizing and refreshing, so I simmered it. Let me take care of my father, and the sugar is in the glass jar on the table. ”“哦，——家里，几时还有莲子？”
“谁知几时的……”
“二宝，你睡吧！”
“你呢？”
“我也就要睡了。我很累。”
"Oh,—— when will there be lotus seeds at home?" "Who knows when it will ......" "Erbao, you go to sleep!" "What about you?" "I'm going to sleep. I'm tired. ”“我这么大了，自己还不会脱衣裳么？不要你，不要你！”当父亲要替我解纽子时，我连忙闪开。脱了衣裳，“进窝了，进窝了，进窝啰，”便往被窝里一钻，被盖是翠子新浆洗的，非常暖和，有一点太阳气味，一点米浆气味，和一点（极少一点点）香粉味。
"I'm so old, can't I take off my clothes? I don't want you, I don't want you!" When my father wanted to unbutton me, I quickly dodged away. I took off my clothes, "I'm in the nest, I'm in the nest, I'm in the nest," and I got into the bed, and the quilt cover was washed with Cuizi's new pulp, which was very warm, with a little smell of the sun, a little smell of rice milk, and a little (very little) smell of incense powder.爷只吃几颗莲子，其余的都给我吃了。他叫我不用起来，拿小银匙子一颗颗地喂我。我一边吃，一边看着他的瘦脸：黑了，更瘦了，头发长得那么长，下巴全是青的。这么大的人了，自己不晓得打扮，还要人来照应，呕……
My master only ate a few lotus seeds, and gave me the rest. He told me not to get up and to feed me one by one with a small silver spoon. As I ate, I looked at his thin face: dark, even thinner, his hair grew so long, and his chin was all blue. Such a big person, I don't know how to dress up, and I have to be taken care of and vomit......想起一件事，赶忙告诉爷：
I remembered something and hurriedly told my father:“高家伯伯今儿来过了，饭前，一个人坐在客房里等了你老半天，跟我谈了很多话：问我想不想妈？要是想，教爷替你再娶个妈。又把你那支挂着的笛子拿下来吹了半天，他说吹的叫甚么《汉宫秋》。爹爹，——你吹的好还是他好？后来翠子给他送上茶，他便不吹了，一个人走来走去的笑笑，还拿纸写了些甚么教我拿给你看，字那么草，它认识我，我可一个也不识得它。”
"Uncle Gao came today, before the meal, he sat alone in the guest room and waited for you for a long time, and talked to me a lot: Ask me if I want a mother? If you want to, the godfather will marry another mother for you. He took off your hanging flute and played it for a long time, and he said what it was called "Han Palace Autumn". Dad,—— Do you play it better or is it better for him? Later, Cuizi brought him tea, and he stopped blowing, walking around laughing alone, and wrote something on paper to teach me to show you. ”父亲看看那张字条，哈哈地笑起来。笑些甚么呢？还那么大的声音。
父亲随后也脱了衣裳睡下，点起一支烟，烟一丝丝的卷起来，满帐子里都是烟雾。
“二宝，你今儿晚上吃的甚么菜？”
“青菜虾圆汤。”
My father looked at the note and laughed. What are you laughing at? It's still such a loud voice. My father then took off his clothes and fell asleep, lit a cigarette, and rolled up the cigarette a little bit, and the tent was full of smoke. "Erbao, what did you eat tonight?" "Green vegetable and shrimp ball soup."“可好吃？”
"Is it delicious?"“好吃，好吃，虾子又新鲜。买来时还活蹦活跳，青菜是到园上现挑的，在薛大娘园上挑的。翠子说，这样有起水鲜。——，爹可晓得薛大娘？翠子新认了她做干妈。今儿大清早，我跟翠子上那儿去，草上露水还没有干，她把鞋都湿透了。我没有，我走道儿挺小心。到那儿薛大娘底儿子大驹子正在浇水，看见我们来了，便笑吟吟地把剩下的半桶水往埂上一搁，替我们下园挑菜去。翠子坐在埂上跟他谈话。薛大娘给了我两个新摘的沙胡桃，我便一个人去找蟋蟀儿去，我蹑着脚走了半天，连个油葫芦的叫声都没听见，才过了白露啊，难道它们就哑了翅子，不好意思再大胆的‘呼雌’？爹，你不是告诉过我，蟋蟀儿的叫是呼雌的？找不到，我便掐了几片，芦叶，编成个小船，把她们一只只的送到河中流水里，看那个流得最远。呜，一阵风把我的船全翻了，河下已经有人淘中饭米，我想已经来了老半天了，便回到园上找翠子去。
"It's delicious, it's delicious, and the shrimp is fresh. When I bought it, it was still alive, and the vegetables were picked in the garden, picked in Aunt Xue's garden. Cuizi said that this is fresh. ——, does Dad know Aunt Xue? Cuizi recognized her as her godmother. Early this morning, I went there with Cuizi, the dew on the grass had not yet dried, and she soaked her shoes. I didn't, I was very careful in the aisle. When he arrived there, Aunt Xue's son Dajuzi was watering, and when he saw us coming, he smiled and put the remaining half bucket of water on the ridge and went down to the garden to pick vegetables for us. Cuizi sat on the ridge and talked to him. Aunt Xue gave me two freshly picked sand walnuts, so I went to find the crickets alone, I tiptoed for a long time, and I didn't even hear the cry of an oil gourd, just after the white dew, could it be that they were dumb and embarrassed to 'call females' again? Dad, didn't you tell me that the crickets call females? I couldn't find it, so I pinched a few reed leaves, made a small boat, and sent them one by one into the flowing water in the river to see which one flowed the farthest. Ugh, a gust of wind overturned my boat, and there were already people looking for rice under the river, I thought I had been here for a long time, so I went back to the garden to find Cuizi.“我一去，他们都没看见，翠子还那么坐着，睁着大眼睛望着天，天上不见雁鹅：喏，就像我这样子，大驹子呢，站旁边，看定翠子的脸。菜篮子里只有两棵。我一叫翠子，他们都不看了，一块儿下园挑菜，大驹子还替我们下河把菜洗得干干净净。
"When I went, they didn't see it, Cuizi was still sitting like that, looking at the sky with big eyes open, and there were no geese and geese in the sky: Hey, just like me, where is the big foal, stand next to it, look at Cuizi's face. There are only two in the vegetable basket. As soon as I called Cuizi, they didn't look at it, and they went down to the garden to pick vegetables together, and Da Juzi also went down to the river for us to wash the vegetables.“，爹，你说翠子为甚么老呆呆的，望着天，天上有甚么？人家说，天上有时会开天门，心里想甚么，天门里就有甚么！可是这要有福气的人才看得见。翠子是不是个有福气的人？你说。看天门开要在七月初七的晚上，早过了时！翠子一发呆，便不爱说话，不跟我说故事，也不教我唱‘白果树，开白花，南面来了个小亲家’了，也不爱跟我来‘板凳板凳歪歪，菊花菊花开开’了。我想哭，又怕她笑我。爷，你说说她，要她同我玩玩，不许发呆。”
", Dad, why do you say Cuizi is so dumbfounded, looking at the sky, what is in the sky? People say that the heavenly gate sometimes opens in the sky, and what you think in your heart is what is in the heavenly gate! But this can only be seen by those who are blessed. Is Cuizi a blessed person? You said. The gate of heaven will open on the night of the seventh day of July, early in the morning! As soon as Cuizi was in a daze, she didn't like to talk, she didn't tell me stories, she didn't teach me to sing 'Ginkgo tree, white flowers, a little in-law came to the south', and she didn't like to come with me 'the bench is crooked, the chrysanthemum chrysanthemum is blooming'. I wanted to cry, but I was afraid that she would laugh at me. Master, talk about her, ask her to play with me, don't be in a daze. ”嗯，父亲不知为甚么，这时不理我了，也呆呆的，好像从帐顶可以透过屋顶，看到翠子白天发呆的那个。怎么回事？
Well, my father didn't know why, he ignored me at this time, and he was dumbfounded, as if he could see the one Cuizi was in a daze during the day through the roof from the top of the tent. What's going on?“，爹，你怎么的？看落了一枕的烟灰。你快睡在灰里了，翠子今天洗枕头时说你烧了那么大一个焦洞，赶明儿甚么烧了也不知道。”
父亲对我笑了笑，把灰拍去了些。
"{{id_0000}}, Dad, what's wrong with you? Look at the soot on the pillow. You are almost sleeping in the ashes, Cuizi said when you washed your pillow today that you burned such a big scorched hole, and you don't know what it burned tomorrow. ” My father smiled at me and patted the ashes off.“翠子真好，又好看，又待我好，跟妈一样。爹，我们再也不要让她走，教她永远在我们家里！”
"Cuizi is so good, good-looking, and treats me well, just like my mother. Dad, let's never let her go again, teach her to stay in our house forever! ”“……十九岁了；……明年四月……一个跛子男人……哦，二宝，让她回到自己的家里去吧，她妈就要来带她了，这件事，我不能管！”
“…… Nineteen years old; …… April next year...... A lame man...... Oh, Erbao, let her go back to her own home, her mother is about to come to take her, I can't care about this! ”爷又叼上一支烟，划了一根火柴，半天都不去点。等火把指头灼痛了，才把火柴扔了。我真不明白，为甚么父亲的魂也生了翅膀，向虚空飞。便记得要跟他说，先前翠子提起的话。
The master picked up another cigarette, drew a match, and didn't light it for a long time. When the torch burned his fingers, he threw the match. I really don't understand why my father's soul also gave wings and flew into the void. I remembered to tell him what Cuizi mentioned earlier.“爹，你是不是三十岁了？翠子让你明儿别出去，为你做生日，她办菜！”
"Dad, are you thirty years old? Cuizi asked you not to go out tomorrow, make your birthday, and she will cook! ”“三十了？三十了！为甚么是三十呢？管翠子甚么事？你也不用管，我不做生日了的。二宝你睡吧，明儿要早点起来，跟我到你妈坟上去拜坟。你记不记得，明儿是你妈的忌辰。我要翠子回家，她长大了，留不住。”
"Thirty? Thirty! Why thirty? What do you care about Cuizi? You don't have to worry about it, I won't be celebrating my birthday anymore. Erbao, you go to bed, Ming'er will get up early and follow me to your mother's grave to pay respects. Do you remember, Ming'er is your mother's death anniversary. I want Cuizi to go home, she has grown up and can't keep it. ”为甚么要让翠子走呢？我觉得鼻子很酸，忍受不住，我哭了。
父亲把我抱在怀中，脸贴着我的脸：“睡罢，半夜了！你听豺狗叫。……”
Why do you want Cuizi to go? I felt my nose was very sore, I couldn't stand it, and I cried. My father held me in his arms and pressed his face to mine: "Sleep, it's midnight! You listen to the jackals." ……”灯油尽了，火头跳动了几下，熄了。满屋漆黑，柝声敲过三更了。我不知道父亲甚么时候方睡。我醒来时，父亲已起了床出院中作深呼吸去了。翠子站在我床边，眼睛红红的。
十一月一日—二日，联大
The lamp oil ran out, and the fire beat a few times before going out. The room was dark, and the sound of the watchmon was past midnight. I don't know when my father went to sleep. When I woke up, my father had gotten out of bed and was discharged from the hospital to take a deep breath. Cuizi stood by my bed, her eyes red. November 1-2, United Nations General Assembly
[1] 本篇原载1941年1月23日昆明《中央日报》。

悒郁

悒郁[1]
秋天生长在淡淡的稻花香里，成熟于戟指的稻芒上。秋天总不免有些悒郁，成熟的稻穗也低垂了头！
[1] This article was originally published in Kunming's Central Daily on January 23, 1941. Melancholic{{id_0000}} In autumn, it grows in the faint fragrance of rice flowers and matures on the rice awns of the halberd fingers. Autumn is always a little depressing, and the ripe ears of rice also bow their heads!时近黄昏，夕阳在西天烧起篝火，地面一切都薄薄的镀了一层金。在卷发似的常青树梢上勾勒起一道金边，蓬松松的，静静的。
It was close to dusk, and the sunset burned a bonfire in the western sky, and everything on the ground was thinly plated with a layer of gold. A gold rim was outlined on the curly-haired evergreen treetops, fluffy and quiet.银子像是刚醒来，醒在重露的四更的枕上，飘飘的有点异样的安适，然而又似有点失悔，失悔蓦然丢舍了那些未圆的梦；甚么梦？没有的，只不过是些不可捕捉的迷离的幻想影子罢了。一个生物成熟的征象。
Yin Zi seemed to have just woken up, waking up on the pillow of the fourth watch, floating with a little strange comfort, but it seemed to be a little regretful, and regret suddenly abandoned those unfulfilled dreams; what kind of dream? No, it was just some uncatchable and confusing fantasy shadows. A sign of biological maturity.——青青的远树后冉冉的暮霭。
银子漫不经心的走着，沿着恬静的溪流，轻轻地叫唤着自己名字：
“银子，银子，……痴丫头！要真是宝贝，为甚么你娘不叫你做金子？”
——The twilight behind the green distant trees. Yin Zi walked carelessly, along the quiet stream, calling out his name softly: "Silver, silver,...... Foolish girl! If it's really a baby, why doesn't your mother call you gold? ”她心里藏着一点秘密的喜悦，不愿意给人知道。并且像连自己都不给知道似的，一涡浅笑镶上她的脸。
She hid a little secret joy in her heart and didn't want to let anyone know. And as if she didn't even know herself, a whirlpool of smiles fell on her face.她走着，眼睛跟着自己的脚尖。这脚尖，小小的，可以把她带得多远！究竟能走多远？她想问问自己，但是她不愿意自己回答，默默地，她又笑了。说了她怕人知道，也怕自己知道。还不是走到——那个坪里！
She walked, her eyes following her toes. How far can these toes, small, take her! How far can you go? She wanted to ask herself, but she didn't want to answer herself, and silently, she smiled again. She said that she was afraid that people would know, and she was afraid that she would know. It's not yet to the pingli!脚下是带绿的浅草，有的也已经红了心，茸茸的，被西风剪得平齐，朝露洗得很干净。
Under the feet are green light grass, some of which have been red-hearted, fluffy, cut evenly by the west wind, and washed very clean in the morning dew.她很耐心的寻找，看看有没有马齿咬过的印子。仿佛觉得有一匹浑身柔润如天鹅绒的长脚俊物，嚼着草，踢着前蹄，悠然拂着修齐的尾巴。马在那儿呢？她乐意有那么一匹马。
She searched patiently to see if there were any marks of horse teeth. It seemed to feel that there was a long-legged handsome creature as soft as velvet, chewing grass, kicking its front hooves, and leisurely brushing its trimmed tail. Where is the horse? She would be happy to have such a horse.陌头躺着一头倦刍的牛，她心里想：笨东西，我不欢喜看见你啰，你太笨，太懒，太……让你早上自己走出来，晚上再自己走进栏里去，甚至还想拾一块青鹅卵石扎它一下，因为牛角上正栖了两只八哥儿，那么从容自在，那么得意，竟想甜甜地做一个梦。但是她没有这么作。这草里一坦平，不会有石卵儿。也许有吧，可是她不再找了，多费事。
There was a tired cow lying on the stranger, and she thought to herself: Stupid thing, I don't like to see you, you are too stupid, too lazy, too ...... Let you walk out by yourself in the morning, and then walk into the pen by yourself at night, and even want to pick up a green pebble and prick it, because there are two starlings living on the horns, so calm and proud, and I want to dream sweetly. But she didn't do that. Once the grass is flat, there will be no pebbles. Maybe there is, but she doesn't look for it anymore, it's too much trouble.草坪四近都没有人影，洗净了泥腿的人早给高挑的酒旗儿招去了。咦，连马号的声音都不听见，世界这样清静，究竟是甚么意思？
There was no one around the lawn, and the person who washed his mud legs had already beckoned the tall wine flag. Hey, I didn't even hear the sound of the horse's trumpet, what does it mean that the world is so quiet?这已经出了庄了，银子左手在前，勒住缰，右手在后，抓住鞭儿，嘴里一声“哈—嘟”马来了，得得得……一气跑了不知多远。她停住了。唉，不像！怎么两脚总不腾空？
This has already left the bank, Yinzi is in front with his left hand, holding the reins, with his right hand behind, grabbing the whip, and a "ha-beep" horse is coming, and it is ...... I don't know how far I ran in one breath. She stopped. Alas, it doesn't look like it! Why don't your feet always be in the air?马累了后得息息，饮点水，于是她大步走下土坡，坐到最下一级，今儿这坡忽然像是嫌宽了些。比往常宽，也比往常静。
河水清极。水里一处有两只黑晶晶的大眼睛，怔怔的对着她。
The horse was tired and had to rest and drink some water, so she strode down the dirt slope and sat down to the lowest level, which suddenly seemed to be wider today. It was wider than usual and quieter than usual. The river is extremely clear. There were two big black eyes in the water, staring at her in a daze.嗨，这胸前为甚么起伏得这么剧，跳甚么？春天的花过去了，夏天的云过去了，秋天的一把白了头的狗尾草在风中摇，谁家葡萄园不采摘葡萄酿酒？无意又似有意的，她的手触到自己的胸脯边，忽然无端的红起脸来。心子飞到甚么天上去？人都说有三十三重天！飞去了怎么回来，多远的路！
Hi, why is this chest so undulating, why is it jumping? The spring flowers have passed, the summer clouds have passed, and a handful of white-haired dogtails in autumn are swaying in the wind. Unintentionally and intentionally, her hand touched her chest, and her face suddenly turned red for no reason. What heaven does my heart fly to? People say there are thirty-three heavens! How did you come back after flying, how far is it?——嗯，银子，很害羞的往坡上草里一伏。
“嚇，嚇，”一只青桩儿飞过去了，它笑银子。有甚么可笑的？银子知道。
——Well, silver, very shy to lie down in the grass on the slope. "Scared, scared," a green stake flew over, and it laughed at Silver. What's so ridiculous? Silver knows.银子回去了，她听得妈妈叫“银子，银子，——回—来—啵！”的声音，渐渐归去了，妈也晓得银子一定会听见的，她只是不答应罢了。其实她正心中想到好笑：一天银子银子的叫，应当发一百万财！可是一个金戒指还换掉了。
Yinzi went back, and she heard her mother shout, "Yinzi, Yinzi,—— come back-come-bo!" The voice gradually returned, and her mother knew that Yinzi would definitely hear it, but she just didn't agree. In fact, she was thinking funny: A day when Yinzi called Yinzi, he should make a million! But a gold ring was replaced.隔山有人吹着芦管，把声音拉长，把人的心也好像拉长了，她痴了一会儿，狠想唱唱歌，就曼曼的唱着：
第一香橼第二莲，
第三槟榔个个圆，
第四芙蓉五桂子，
送郎都要得郎怜。
Someone across the mountain was blowing a reed pipe, elongating the voice and making the person's heart seem to be elongated, she was obsessed with it for a while, and she wanted to sing hard, so she sang: The first citron, the second lotus, The third betel nut is round, The fourth hibiscus and five cinnamon seeds, I want to send you off, and you will be pityed.好像又有谁在接口唱：
天上起云云重云，
地下埋坟坟重坟，
娇妹洗碗碗重碗，
娇妹床上人重人。
“狗嘴里说人话，不像人。”
It seems that someone is singing at the interface: Clouds rise from the sky, Graves are buried underground, Jiao Mei washes the dishes and heavy dishes, The delicate sister in bed is very important. "Dogs speak human words, not like humans."门外场上被风儿扫得平平的，除了一两片落叶掠过留下的线条外，只有几个脚印，那是妈妈底，银铃儿将撷来一把狗尾草，不高兴似的恨恨的一撒。她高兴？她怎么不高兴？快吃饭了。
The field outside the door was swept flat by the wind, except for the lines left by one or two fallen leaves, there were only a few footprints, which were the bottom of the mother, and Yin Ling'er would pick up a handful of dogtail grass, and sprinkled it with hatred as if she was unhappy. She is happy? Why is she unhappy? It's time to eat.饭已经摆到矮桌上，爸爸喝着一小杯酒，银子呆呆的注视着爸喝一口酒，吮一吮胡子。她不说一句话，像是拿不动筷子。
The meal had been placed on the low table, Dad was drinking a small glass of wine, and Yinzi stared blankly at Dad taking a sip of wine and sucking his beard. She didn't say a word, as if she couldn't hold her chopsticks.“银子成人了。”爸跟妈看看，默默的笑笑。妈微攒一攒眉。若在往常，她非得往爸爸怀里一扑，问他“笑些甚么”不可。但是今天她不想问。她心里想：“你们笑我，不回来了，明儿！我会跑，跑到远远的天边，看妈再会不会叫‘银子——回—来—啵！’银子一走，你们找金子去。”
"Yinzi is an adult." Dad looked at Mom and smiled silently. Mom frowned slightly. If it were normal, she would have to throw herself into her father's arms and ask him "what are you laughing at". But today she didn't want to ask. She thought to herself: "You laugh at me, I won't come back, Ming'er! I will run, run to the far sky, and see if my mother will call 'Yinzi-come back-boo!' As soon as the silver is gone, you go looking for gold. ”突然，她把筷子往下一放，飞奔的跑出门外去了。外面的天宽宽的，罩着大地，地面一切都在成熟。
得得得……明明听见的呣？
Suddenly, she put her chopsticks down and ran out the door. The sky outside was wide, covering the earth, and everything on the ground was ripening. Got it...... Obviously heard?银子向林子里跑去，今天好像甚么都欺负她。她要去林子里哭一会儿。她要看看那匹马。
二十九年十一月二十一日草稿
Silver ran into the woods, and it seemed like she was bullying her today. She was going to go to the woods and cry for a while. She wanted to see the horse. Draft of November 21, 29
[1] 本篇原载《今日评论》1941年第五卷第三期；又载1947年2月16日天津《益世报》，文字有较大改动。

1941年

1941年
寒夜[1]
一个大车棚，靠近村子唯一通口的石桥。
[1] This article was originally published in the third issue of Volume 5 of Today's Review in 1941; it was also published in Tianjin's "Yishi Daily" on February 16, 1947, with major changes in the text. In 1941 Cold Night{{id_0000}} A large carport, near the only stone bridge leading to the village.车棚，在夏天，本是牛的天地，它在里面拉水车的轮子整天的转。现在，冬天来了，它该有一份休息，卧在温暖牛房的温暖稻草上咀嚼些往事去，（谁知道是些甚么事呢。）车棚到这时候也应该让流浪的西北风来寄寓了。但是今年，人们在它四周的带皮的弯扭的柱上络起草索，里里外外又涂上从河底搅起的稀泥，一切车水的设备，可以挪出去的也都没有了。于是车棚变了样子，我们还能再叫它车棚么，看它巍然独立的样子（车棚比普通茅房要高些走进去用不着低头。）在黄昏淡烟给人的眼睛以遐想的神力的时候，你要不以为那是一个藏着许多故事的墼楼才怪！然而乡下人长于保守，他们还是叫它车棚。
The carport, in summer, was originally a world of cattle, and it pulled the wheels of the waterwheel in it to spin all day long. Now, winter is coming, and it should have a rest, lying on the warm straw of the warm cowshed and chewing on the past (who knows what it is.) The carport should also let the wandering northwest wind come to take possession by this time. But this year, people have tied draft ropes around the twisted pillars with skin, and the mud stirred up from the bottom of the river has been smeared inside and out, and all the equipment for traffic has been removed. So the carport has changed, can we still call it a carport, look at its majestic and independent appearance (the carport is taller than an ordinary hut, and you don't have to bow your head when you walk in). When the faint smoke at dusk gives people's eyes the divine power of reverie, you don't think it's strange that it is a wall building that hides many stories! However, the countrymen are conservative, and they still call it the carport.夜，雪后，这儿没有大得嚇人的雪，但也足够遮去一切土黄苍青而有余了，一片银光在荡漾，因为是年底，没有月亮，要是有，那不知要亮成甚么样子。怕有窗子的人家也不容易知道天甚么时候明。风，从埋伏的芦叶间起了，雪结上一层膜子，又打着呼哨。茅檐下的冻铃子（冰箸）像钟乳石一样，僵成透明的，不分明的环节。狗也不大叫。在家的人一定把被角拉得更紧，也许还含含糊糊说两句甚么，马上又把头缩到被窝里去。
At night, after the snow, there was no frightening snow here, but it was enough to cover all the yellow and green soil, and a silver light was rippling, because it was the end of the year, and there was no moon. People who are afraid of windows do not easily know when it is bright. The wind rises from the ambushed reeds, and the snow is covered with a film, and it whistles. The frozen bells (ice chopsticks) under the thatched eaves are like stalactites, stiffened into transparent, indistinct links. The dog doesn't bark either. People at home must have pulled the corners of the quilt tighter, and maybe said something vaguely, and immediately shrank their heads back into the quilt.车棚中心烧了一大堆火，火领受人们的感谢，烧得更起劲了，木柴使足了力气，骨节儿毕毕直响。风用嫉妒的力量想摸进棚里，只能从泥草的隙缝间穿进一丝，且一进来便溶化在暖气里。棚边积雪绷得更紧，像生气。
A large fire was burned in the center of the carport, and the fire was thanked by the people, and it burned more vigorously, the firewood used enough strength, and the joints rattled. The wind tried to touch the shed with the power of jealousy, but it could only pass through the gaps in the mud and grass, and it melted in the heating as soon as it came in. The snow on the edge of the shed was tighter, like anger.火光照红了一棚，柱上挂枪。形式甚多，奇奇古怪的名目，听都没听见过。有的似乎只能嚇吓麻雀，却也像剑的闪着青光。除了枪，还有盛酒的葫芦，装锅巴的竹篮，及其他什物，都干净利落，好像日常必经过一只手摸抚过，拂拭过。
The fire lit a shed, and guns were hung on the pillars. There are many forms, strange names, I have never heard of them. Some seem to only scare sparrows, but they also shine like swords. In addition to guns, there are gourds for wine, bamboo baskets for pots, and other miscellaneous items, all of which are clean and neat, as if they must be touched and wiped by one hand every day.围着火，坐着几个汉子，他们的称呼是：老爹，二疙瘩，大炮，蛤蟆，海里蹦，这几位都是名不虚传的人物，在乡下，哪儿都听得到，我相信，如果他们有儿子，他们的儿子一定也如此叫唤。乡下人对于取名字这一道是另具天才的，这几位，不必去请教，看一眼便知道谁是谁，甚么名字属于甚么主人。年纪也不用问，因为他们各有一颗永远年青的心，死去时也还是带着青春走的。就是老爹除了有把胡子，哪点能说是老，不信比比手臂看，小伙子都敌不过，不过他已经没有被称为更好的名字的荣幸了。这是他大不愿意的。
Around the fire, there were a few men sitting, their names were: Daddy, the two pimples, the cannons, the toads, the sea jumps, these are all well-known figures, in the countryside, everywhere, I believe that if they have sons, their sons must be called like that. The countrymen have another genius for choosing names, these people, don't have to ask for advice, you can know who is who at a glance, what name belongs to what owner. There is no need to ask about age, because they each have an eternally young heart, and they still take their youth with them when they die. That is, in addition to having a beard, which point can be said to be old, if you don't believe it, the young man is no match for him, but he no longer has the honor of being called a better name. This is what he really doesn't want to do.火光照红了深浅颜色的脸，也照亮一样精神的眼睛，火边伸着七八只大脚（因有人只伸出了一只），大概还有两个人，睡熟了吧，只有哼声还随着火苗起落。
风更大了，把冻结的雪又撼起，飞起一天花。呜——呜。
The fire light illuminated the face of the red color, and also illuminated the eyes of the same spirit, with seven or eight big feet stretched out by the fire (because only one person stretched out), and there were probably two more people, who were asleep, only the hum was still rising and falling with the flames. The wind got stronger, shaking the frozen snow again, and flying up the day's flowers. Woo-woo.还有一个人，年青的，他是这里最出色的一个，他出去了。
And one person, young, he was the best one here, and he went out.啊，他回来了，推开门，带进一股逼人的寒气，又砰的把门带上了，扣上绳扣，摔摔脚下少少沾了一点的雪，搓搓手，坐到火边，又伸手抹一抹脸，掏出了竹柝子，拿出手枪（他有一支手枪的）端详了一下，又掖上了。他是巡更去的。巡更，谁高兴去，谁去，这里没有甚么指派的规矩，大家可心里明白，他不比任何人的次数少。“妈的，鸡巴都冻小了。”他伸手向火。
Ah, he came back, pushed open the door, brought in a compelling cold, slammed the door again, buckled the rope, threw a little snow under his feet, rubbed his hands, sat down by the fire, stretched out his hand to wipe his face, took out a bamboo watch, took out a pistol (he had a pistol) and looked at it, and put it back in. He went on patrol. Patrol watch, whoever is happy to go, who goes, there are no rules here, everyone knows in their hearts that he is no less than anyone else. "Damn, my cock is frozen small." He reached out to the fire.好家伙，异口同声，二疙瘩，蛤蟆，大炮，连海里蹦，都怕话给别人抢去似的：
“花儿不要你了！”
年青人正提起火上煮着的大紫泥壶，壶嘴送近嘴边，一听见，马上把壶嘴挪开，睁大了眼睛，向四面搜寻。
Good guys, in unison, two pimples, toads, cannons, even jumping in the sea, as if they were afraid that words would be snatched away by others: "Hua'er doesn't want you anymore!" The young man was lifting the big purple clay pot that was cooking on the fire, and the spout was brought close to his mouth, and when he heard it, he immediately moved the spout away, opened his eyes wide, and searched in all directions.“哈哈哈……她不要你，我要你！”老爹笑了，黑色的胡子飞起来了。他这笑，笑得真好。许多笑也跟着起来了，盖去老爹的话的尾声。壶嘴也便得了救，你听“骨都”，热水如愿以偿的下了他的喉咙。其实这也不过是闹着玩儿的。当真，他还好意思提起拳头打人？老爹一笑，更不能那个了。眼睛虽然还睁得不小（他的眼睛从来就没合过），可是那点不太真实的恼气都没有了，里面亮着满意与骄傲，——花儿是老爹的女儿呢！
"Hahaha...... She doesn't want you, I want you!" Dad laughed, and his black beard flew up. He smiled so well. Many laughs followed, covering the end of Dad's words. The spout was also saved, you listen to "Gudu", and the hot water went down his throat as he wished. In fact, this is just a joke. Seriously, he was embarrassed to raise his fist and hit someone? Dad smiled, let alone that. Although his eyes were still wide open (his eyes had never closed), the little unreal annoyance was gone, and there was satisfaction and pride in it,—— Hua'er was Dad's daughter!老爹带笑巴上烟，烟锅里闪着高兴的光。二疙瘩等带笑取下篮里的锅巴嚼着，年青人随手取了根木柴，拨拨火，又把它丢进火里，也带着笑，是不是想着花儿腻人的歌呢？火烧得更旺，紫泥壶已经重坐到火上去，冒着白色的水汽，颇颇的响。
Dad smoked with a smile, and the smoke pot flashed with joy. The second pimple waited with a smile to take off the pot in the basket and chewed it, and the young man casually took a piece of firewood, plucked the fire, and threw it into the fire, also with a smile, did he think of the song of the flowers and the tired? The fire burned even more, and the purple clay pot had already sat back on the fire, steaming white water, quite loud.年青人，是一个道道地地的年青人呢，年龄，是一生最美丽的，心恐怕比年龄更年青些的。他有不许人叫不好看的（即使好听的）名字的权利，再则别人也不好意思给这么一个茁壮漂亮的小伙子加上“二疙瘩”“蛤蟆”之类的封号。他叫太保并不是还拥有别的名字而被人忘了，从一生下来起，爹妈便如此叫他了。看，可不像个太保，就凭两道浓淡适中，长短合度的眉毛。这近处的年青的姑娘的心上，差不多都有太保的影子，姑娘们兜面遇到时，常常说“啊，我替苍蝇担心呢，这么光的头发，不滑闪闪了？”底下接着便是“是不是给太保看的？”照例这句是低低的，因为说话的人自己的头发也有点……而对方的回答，一例却是“呸！”和一个红脸。
A young man is an authentic young man, age is the most beautiful in life, and his heart is probably younger than his age. He has the right not to allow people to call names that are not good-looking (even if they are good), and others are embarrassed to give such a strong and beautiful young man titles such as "two pimples" and "toads". His name Taibao is not forgotten because he still has other names, and his parents have called him this since he was born. Look, it's not like a Taibao, just with two eyebrows of moderate shade and length. When the girls met each other, they often said, "Ah, I'm worried about the flies, such shiny hair, isn't it slippery?" The next line is "Is it for Taibao?" As usual, this sentence is low, because the speaker's own hair is also a little ...... And the other party's answer, in one case, is "Bah!" And a red face.火光熊熊，有人连衣扣都松了一两个。温暖会使人懒洋洋的，大伙儿的眼皮渐渐搭了下来。
“嗨，怎么都打盹了，这样还守甚么夜！”太保一呼叱，全睁开了眼。那两个本来就睡熟了的，仍旧睡的很香甜。
The fire was raging, and some people even loosened their clothes one or two. Warmth can make people lazy, and everyone's eyelids gradually closed. "Hey, why are you all napping, why are you staying at night like this!" Taibao shouted and opened his eyes. The two were already asleep, and they were still sleeping very sweetly.“他妈的，这么冷的天气，这么暖的火，抱着个精光的老婆，真不愁睡死过去。”二疙瘩“笃”的把一口不平吐到火里去。
大炮说：“你老婆在哪儿呐？别他妈不要脸了！”
蛤蟆说：“你呢？”
哈哈哈……
"Fuck, such cold weather, such a warm fire, holding a naked wife, I really don't have to worry about sleeping to death." The second pimple "spitted" into the fire. Cannon said, "Where's your wife? Don't be fucking shameless!" ” The toad said, "What about you? ” Hahaha......全是光棍。
“喽啰喽啰，闹些甚么！喝酒吧。”老爹摘下了葫芦。没有菜，嚼锅巴下酒。
大家就着葫芦嘴儿喝，一个一个的传下去。
All bachelors. "Minions, what's the fuss! Drink bar. "Dad took off the gourd. There is no food, chew the pot and drink it. Everyone drank it with a gourd mouth and passed it on one by one.突然，太保一回身，拉开门儿走去了。空气顿时紧张，大家都站起身来，有的已经拿住了枪。
门又开了，太保走进来，望望他们，把手里捧的一大团雪放进水壶里去，原来壶里水已经快光了。
Suddenly, Taibao turned around, opened the door and walked away. The air suddenly became tense, and everyone stood up, some of whom had already held guns. The door opened again, Taibao walked in, looked at them, and put a large ball of snow in his hand into the kettle, which turned out to be almost out of water.没事，天下太平，大家又坐到火边来。
“太保，你冷不冷，怎么出手去捧雪？快来喝喝酒，通通血脉，葫芦里剩得不多了。”老爹的话像是对儿子说的。
It's okay, the world is peaceful, and everyone sits by the fire again. "Taibao, are you cold, how can you hold the snow? Come and drink, all the blood, there is not much left in the gourd. Dad's words seemed to be addressed to his son.“不冷，”太保一手接过葫芦，“你们怎么解手都不讲规矩，看雪地画了一条条黄龙，回头——”底下的话随着酒咽下肚去了。
"It's not cold," Taibao took the gourd with one hand, "No matter how you solve your hands, you don't follow the rules, look at the snow and draw yellow dragons, and look back-" The words below swallowed with the wine.“回头怎么？这会儿谁还来。”这事大家都有份，所以也差不多是同时说。老爹笑笑，又巴上了烟，他心里想他们像是存心对付太保呢。
"What about turning back? Who will come back at this time." "Everyone has a share in this matter, so they say it almost at the same time. Dad smiled and smoked again, thinking that they seemed to be deliberately dealing with Taibao.太保拔出手枪，用手摸着微温的发着蓝光的枪壳子，把子弹一个一个的跳出了膛，又一个一个的装进匣里，然后再上了膛，保上险，看了又看，他自己也不知道一个庄稼人怎么爱上了这玩意。
Taibao pulled out his pistol, touched the slightly warm blue light casing with his hand, jumped out of the chamber one by one, put it into the box one by one, and then loaded it again, and kept it safe.“。蛤蟆，看老爹的眼睛都快笑成一条缝，真是丈人看女婿，越看越有趣。”海里蹦轻轻的说。
“。 Toad, looking at my father's eyes, I almost smiled into a slit, it was really the father-in-law looking at his son-in-law, the more he looked at it, the more interesting it became. Hai Li Jump said softly.“有趣，就有趣罢了，干我们鸟事？我们算是完了，你那，还年青，模样也还像个样子，怎么也不想娶一个标致媳妇儿，尽跟这些杆子成天胡闹！”
"It's funny, it's just fun, do our bird business? We're done, you, you're still young, you still look like you, you don't want to marry a Peugeot daughter-in-law, and you mess around with these poles all day long! ”“他要娶甚么媳妇，有嫂子欢喜他哩。他那痨病鬼的哥哥还不是早晚的事！”
"What kind of daughter-in-law is he going to marry, and his sister-in-law will be happy with him. It's not a matter of time before his tuberculosis brother is done! ”“你胡说，你胡说”，海里蹦贼人心虚似的，因为他的确常常想到这件事情。在乡下这是普通事！他一手抓过葫芦，把剩下的酒，一口喝完了，喝得太猛，都喷到火里去。火堆上了阵青光。
"You talk nonsense, you talk nonsense", the thief in the sea seemed to be guilty, because he did think about it often. This is a normal thing in the countryside! He grabbed the gourd with one hand and drank the rest of the wine in one gulp, drinking too much and spraying it into the fire. There was a blue light on the fire.“听！”二疙瘩手一摆，大家都屏住了气。嚼锅巴的停止了牙齿的运动，怕妨碍了听觉。老爹的烟锅里也不再丝丝的响。
静默。
"Listen!" The second pimple waved his hand, and everyone held their breath. Chewing the pot stopped the movement of the teeth, for fear of hindering hearing. Dad's smoke pot no longer made a sound. Silence.“见鬼，是雪压断了树干子，大概是桥那边的。”太保耸耸肩，把落在火外面的木柴踢进火里去。
“天该不早了，大家睡一下罢，有我一个人也够了！”老爹把烟又巴上了。
"Hell, it was the snow that broke the tree trunk, probably on the other side of the bridge." Taibao shrugged his shoulders and kicked the firewood that fell outside the fire into the fire. "It's getting late, let's all take a nap, it's enough for me to be alone!" Dad put the cigarette on again.“再出去走一下罢。”太保说着，便一手拉开了门，一脚跨出去，正跟一个人撞个满怀。
“冒——嗨。你还那里去啊，天都亮了！”花儿跨进了门，“爹，我来带你了。”
"Just go out for a walk again." Taibao said, then opened the door with one hand, stepped out with one foot, and was bumping into a person. "Mao-hi. Where are you going, it's dawn!" Hua'er stepped into the door, "Dad, I'm here to take you." ”“你是来带我的么？——花儿，人家说你不要太保了！”
“谁说的？”花儿冲冲的说出这句话，话一出口，便觉得很难为情，忙低头拾起地上的竹篮。
"Are you here to bring me? ——Hua'er, people say you don't want to be too safe! ” "Who said that?" Hua'er said this sentence rushfully, and as soon as the words came out, she felt embarrassed, and hurriedly lowered her head to pick up the bamboo basket on the ground.太保不让人看出他的脸上的颜色，便走到门外去。天虽然明了，也还很朦胧。
老爹连忙高声的说：“太保，你慢走，上我们家吃团子去。花儿走吧。回见，回见。”
“回见，回见。”
Taibao didn't let anyone see the color on his face, so he walked out the door. Although the sky was bright, it was still very hazy. Dad hurriedly said loudly: "Taibao, walk slowly and go to our house to eat dumplings. Let's go with the flowers. See you later, see you again." ” "See you again, see you again."“爹，我不依，——我做的团不给他吃。”花儿扭扭头，拉拉老爹的衣角，轻轻的说。
…………
“爹，你教花儿走慢些，你看她身上的雪，必是来的时候跌了一交。她生我的气呢。——把葫芦跟篮子都给我拿罢。”
"Dad, I don't follow ,—— don't give him the dumplings I made." Hua'er twisted her head, pulled the corner of her father's clothes, and said softly. "Dad, you teach Hua'er to walk slower, you see the snow on her body, she must have fallen when she came. She is angry with me. ——Take me the gourd and the basket. ”沙沙的步声远了，风掠着地面一切，只有人的心除外。——
火堆子的火已渐灭。
二疙瘩，大炮，蛤蟆，海里蹦，相互看看，嘴张得大大的，有点呆相。
“谁说的？”蛤蟆学舌学得倒很有几分像。
The rustling footsteps were far away, and the wind swept everything on the ground, except for the human heart. —— The fire in the fire pit has gradually extinguished. Two pimples, cannons, toads, jumping in the sea, looking at each other, their mouths wide open, a little dumbfounded. "Who said that?" The toad learned to learn a lot like it.睡熟了的两位，依旧睡得很香甜。

[1] 本篇原载1941年2月13日昆明《中央日报》。

春天

春天[1]
“故乡依旧有春天，杨柳又抽芽了，这一点生机是寂灭不了的。”
The two who were asleep were still sleeping very sweetly. [1] This article was originally published in Kunming's "Central Daily" on February 13, 1941. Spring{{id_0000}} "There is still spring in my hometown, and the willows have sprouted again, and this vitality cannot be extinguished."我慢慢地，有点迟疑，（谁知道这点迟疑如何生长的，）把一叠信纸投入拆开的信封里。
Slowly, a little hesitantly, (who knows how this hesitation grows,) I put a stack of letter paper into the unpacked envelope.“——又是春天来了，——春天。”遮住我的记忆的是一片明净的蓝色，是故乡的天，真的，我走过多少地方了，总觉得别的地方的天比不上故乡，也许有比故乡更蓝的天吧，然而蓝得不跟故乡一样。还有呢，那是许多得意的散落在蓝天里的风筝，带着一种轻柔，静静的。
"——It's spring again,—— spring." What covers my memory is a bright blue, the sky of my hometown, really, how many places have I traveled, I always feel that the sky in other places is not as good as my hometown, maybe there is a bluer sky than my hometown, but it is not as blue as my hometown. Also, it is many kites scattered proudly in the blue sky, with a softness and quietness.可不是春天了么：衣裳似更轻些，更暖些了。坐在太阳里，一闭眼，（很自然的闭上眼了，）一些带有奇异彩色的碎片便在倏忽变化的衬景上翻腾起来。——你没有这个经验么？我希望你试一试，在太阳里闭上眼睛，你就会明白我的话了，我决不弄甚么玄虚。而这些碎片，又幻出些黑而大的眼睛，晶晶发光，依旧在翻腾，使我有点昏晕了，不成，睁开了眼，更晕得厉害，怎么办呢？
Isn't it spring: the clothes seem to be lighter and warmer. Sitting in the sun, as soon as I closed my eyes, some fragments with strange colors churned over the suddenly changing background. ——Don't you have this experience? I hope you will try it, close your eyes in the sun, and you will understand my words, and I will never make any mysteries. And these fragments, and some black and big eyes, shining brightly, are still churning, making me a little dizzy, no, open my eyes, even more dizzy, what should I do?我不是告诉过你许多次了么，我的童年是不寂寞的？
许是在一个春假里罢，（不是春假也就算春假，何必顶真，春假是不是所有假期里最好的一个，你说？）我们两个，玉哥儿和我，——
“你是谁？”
Haven't I told you many times that my childhood is not lonely? Maybe it's in a spring break, (not spring break, even if it's spring break, why bother to be true, isn't spring break the best of all holidays, you say?) The two of us, Brother Yu and me,—— "Who are you?"“——嗯，别打岔，你听我说下去。好，我那时叫春哥儿。告诉你，又要不离口的叫了，还当着人。”
我们在梨树下用木板替白兔造一个新窠，它在我们身旁安闲的吃着菜叶。忽然我停住了，看看自己的手。
——Well, don't interrupt, listen to me. Okay, my name was Brother Chun at that time. Tell you, I have to call it again without leaving my mouth, and in front of people. ” We built a new nest for the white rabbit with wooden planks under the pear tree, and it was eating vegetable leaves next to us. Suddenly I stopped and looked at my hands.“怎么了，是不是，木刺戳了？”
"What's wrong, isn't it, is it a wooden thorn?"他把我的手拿起来看看，到香橼树上折到一根荆针，一挑，又对着吹吹气，虽然很疼，可是倒挑出来了。随着望一望那歪歪斜斜的未完成的建筑，拍地一脚踢倒了。我不觉得可惜，反而有点复了仇的快意。
He picked up my hand and looked at it, went to the citron tree to break a wattle needle, picked it up, and blew it on it. As I looked at the crooked unfinished building, I kicked it down with a slap on the ground. I didn't feel sorry for it, but I felt a little pleasure of revenge.“弄不好，还让它住住旧房子，等生了小兔子请伯伯给我们再做一个新的。走，我们上老败家那儿去。”
“胡说！上王大爹那儿去，你说老败家，教英子听见要生气。”
"If you can't do it well, let it live in the old house, and ask my uncle to make a new one for us when the little rabbit is born. Let's go, let's go to the old prodigal. ” "Nonsense! Go to Uncle Wang's place, you say that you are an old prodigal, teach Yingzi to be angry when he hears it. ”“老败家”就是王大爹。我们的姑姑说起他来总是预先摆下一付鄙夷的眉眼，“老败家”这名字也是她们给取的。说是他祖上很有钱，还做过大官，父亲也还好，到他手里，把家业糊里糊涂的就花光了。老了，还是不治生业。她们说起来还愤愤地，好像人家败去的是她们自己的家业似的。
The "old prodigal" is Uncle Wang. Our aunt always raised a contemptuous eyebrow in advance when talking about him, and the name "old prodigal" was also given by them. It is said that his ancestors were very rich and had been a high official, and his father was fine, but when he got into his hands, he spent all the family business in a daze. When he is old, he still can't make a living. They said it indignantly, as if it was their own family business that they had lost.哼，老败家？多刻薄的嘴！王大爹又不抽大烟，像大姑夫，又不成天赌钱，像二姑父，就算王大爹少年时候不正经罢，我想他也不会像三姑夫，把日子都耗在堂子里，说人家不会过日子，你们好，表弟要钱买丁丁糖，每回都挨一顿好骂，钱就是命，只恨钱没有眼，要有眼，你们早钻进去了，（我也不知道这是甚么意思，妈这样说过。）至少，至少，你们就修不到英子那样标致的女儿。
Hmph, old prodigal? What a mean mouth! Uncle Wang doesn't smoke a lot, like an eldest uncle, and doesn't gamble all day long, like the second uncle, even if Uncle Wang was not serious when he was young, I don't think he would be like the third uncle, spending all his days in the hall, saying that people will not live, hello, my cousin wants money to buy Tintin candy, every time he is scolded, money is life, I only hate money has no eyes, if you have eyes, you have already gotten in, (I don't know what this means, Mom said so.) At least, at least, you can't cultivate a Peugeot daughter like Yingzi.玉哥儿也学着说，说王大爹是败家子，我真想不理他了，我想替他告诉英子，不——回头英子要是哭了呢，——还是不告诉的好，她一哭就是老半天，把眼睛哭红了，王大爹会说我们欺负了她，而且，我想玉哥儿也是偶尔说一两回，他难道不爱王大爹么？
Brother Yu also learned to say, saying that Uncle Wang is a prodigal, I really want to ignore him, I want to tell Yingzi for him, no-- if Yingzi cries back,—— it's better not to tell, she cries for a long time, her eyes are red, Uncle Wang will say that we bullied her, and, I think Brother Yu also said once or twice occasionally, doesn't he love Uncle Wang?上王大爹那儿去，好，我眨眨眼，把手上灰土拍去一些。（我倒不怕别人笑话。只是因为英子非常爱干净，王大爹也看不下孩子们污黑的手，回头他会打水给你洗，还用胰子擦了半天才放手）我说：
“走。”
Go to Uncle Wang's place, okay, I blinked and patted some of the dust off my hands. (I'm not afraid of other people's jokes.) It's just that Yingzi loves cleanliness very much, and Uncle Wang can't look down on the children's dirty hands, and when he comes back, he will fetch water to wash you, and wipe it with his pancreas for a long time before letting go) I said: "Let's go."王大爹正在铺子里。
Uncle Wang is in the shop.这铺子是一个钱庄的旧址。从前也是王大爹开的。后来改开过酱坊，杂货铺，现在只卖一点香烟洋火，有时候，有人拿一点古玩字画来寄卖，（那是因为别人说王大爹眼睛好，甚么东西到他手里，都会订出个恰当的价钱，对于鉴赏书画，尤为精到。）铺面大，货物少，显得非常空阔，但空阔的地方又常被孩子们的欢笑填满，没有一点凄凉的意味，虽然椽子都黑了。柜台外面，被称为店堂的地方，太阳里睡着一只玳瑁猫，一条哈叭狗，哈叭狗正舔着玳瑁猫的颈毛。
This shop is the former site of a bank. It was also opened by Uncle Wang in the past. Later, it was changed to a sauce shop and a grocery store, and now it only sells a little cigarettes, and sometimes, some people take a little antique calligraphy and paintings to consign, (that's because others say that Uncle Wang has good eyes, and anything that comes to his hands will set an appropriate price, especially for appreciating calligraphy and painting.) The shop is large, the goods are small, and it looks very empty, but the empty place is often filled with children's laughter, without a bit of desolation, although the rafters are dark. Outside the counter, in the place known as the shop, there is a hawksbill turtle cat sleeping in the sun, a hawksbill dog, and the hawksbill dog is licking the neck hair of the hawksbill cat.王大爹在做甚么呢？他用一只架戥，在称着鸡毛的分量，聚精会神的觑着戥杆子轻微的上下。（那鸡毛是用来做蜈蚣的脚的，必须两边一样轻重放上天才稳，这，说也说不明白，顶好你去见识见识蜈蚣风筝就知道了。）一面不时拈一颗花生米做成的丸子，随手抛给架上的鹦鹉，虽然他眼睛看着戥子，但鹦鹉很准确的用红色的大嘴接了过去，每吃一颗，把嘴在架子上磨磨，振一振翅子。同时他嘴里还唧唧啾啾声的逗画眉叫，我觉得他的声音好像比画眉更好听些，因为画眉是跟他学的。
What is Uncle Wang doing? He used a rack to weigh the weight of the chicken feathers, and looked intently at the slight up and down of the pole. (The chicken feathers are used to make the feet of centipedes, and they must be placed equally lightly on both sides to stabilize them, which is incomprehensible, so you can just go and see the centipede kite.) From time to time, he picked up a ball made of peanuts and threw it to the parrot on the rack, although he looked at the peanut with his eyes, but the parrot took it with its big red mouth very accurately, and every time he ate one, he grinded his mouth on the rack and flapped his wings. At the same time, he was still chirping to tease the thrush, and I think his voice seemed to be better than the thrush, because the thrush was learned from him.他一扭头，看见两条影子映在店堂里，便高声说：“英子，别弄甚么宝宝人儿了，快出来。你的朋友来了，也不招待招待人家。”
He turned his head and saw two shadows reflected in the shop, so he said loudly: "Yingzi, don't make any baby, come out quickly. Your friends are here, and you don't entertain others. ”英子由那个挂着“聚珍”的扇匾的套房奔奔跳跳的出来，手里拿着根针，我想，刚刚手上的刺要是她给我挑，一定不疼。
Yingzi rushed out of the suite with the fan plaque hanging from "Juzhen", holding a needle in her hand, I thought, if she picked the thorn in her hand just now, it would not hurt.“，我昨天看见王老师了，她让我们三个人明天到她家去玩去，——，我昨天去上妈的坟去，蚕豆都开了花，紫微微的，还有一种花，乡下人叫做癞痢椀子，白的，还有几点红，跟你去年头上那块癣一样，哈哈。”
", I saw Teacher Wang yesterday, she asked the three of us to go to her house tomorrow to play,——, I went to my mother's grave yesterday, the broad beans all bloomed, purple micro, and there is a kind of flower, the countrymen call it a dysentery bowl, white, and a few points of red, the same as the ringworm on your head last year, haha."我真怕人提起我那块癣，尤其怕英子说，可是她专门借故提起，我脸又红了。
I'm really afraid that people will mention my ringworm, especially Yingzi, but she specifically mentioned it, and my face turned red again.“不作兴，不作兴。嗯，一毛六，——短二个铜板？没关系，没关系，”王大爹把一包香烟交给一个人。“春哥儿，你爸爸曾问我要黄雀，我这儿又下了一窠，有一个凤头，一个龙爪，毛色很好，回头你给带了回去。”
"Don't be interested, don't be interested. Well, a dime and six ,—— short two copper plates? It's okay, it's okay," Uncle Wang handed a pack of cigarettes to a person. "Brother Chun, your father once asked me for a yellow bird, I laid another nest here, there is a crested head, a dragon claw, the fur color is very good, you brought it back when you come back."“嗯。”我答应着，眼睛却望在墙上。
"Hmm." I agreed, but my eyes were on the wall.“你们呆在这儿干甚么呢？看着猫儿的眼睛，该有两点多钟了吧，去放风筝罢，就拿这‘四老爷打面缸’去，明儿等这蜈蚣糊好了，我跟你们一块去。”说着他给我们取下那名叫“四老爷打面缸”的风筝。“英子，线在第二个抽屉里，你跟他们一块去玩玩，不要再给宝宝做衣裳了，看把手指头戳破了。”
"What are you doing here? Looking at the cat's eyes, it should be more than two o'clock, go fly the kite, just take this 'Four Masters Noodle Tank', and tomorrow I will go with you when the centipede is pasted." As he spoke, he took down the kite called the "Fourth Master Noodle Bowl" for us. "Yingzi, the thread is in the second drawer, you go play with them, don't make clothes for the baby anymore, see if you poke your fingers."“回头我给你们煮桂花山芋吃。——春哥儿，跟你爸说，说我问他要点枫叶芦花[2]的枝儿，枫——叶——芦——花——记住呀。”
"I'll cook osmanthus potatoes for you when I get back. ——Brother Chun, tell your dad, say that I asked him to order the branches of maple leaf reed [2], maple - leaf - reed - flower - remember. ”我们接了风筝，头也不回，一直跑向“学田”里。玉哥儿拿着线棰子、风筝，我跟英子搀着手走在后头。
“春哥儿，我爸爸要你做他的儿子呢，你愿意么？”
We took the kite, didn't look back, and ran all the way to the "learning field". Brother Yu held the string stick and kite, and Yingzi and I walked behind with each other. "Brother Chun, my father wants you to be his son, are you willing?"“好，我爸也要你做他的女儿呢，你答应做我爸的女儿，我就给你爸做儿子。”
到“学田”了。遍野都绿透了，把河水映得红艳艳的，风吹到我们的身上，我觉得自己在长大。
"Okay, my dad also wants you to be his daughter, you promise to be my dad's daughter, and I will be your dad's son." It's time to "learn the field". The whole field is green, the river is bright red, and the wind blows on us, and I feel that I am growing up.“我放，你撮，英子，你在那边杨柳树下等着我们。”玉哥儿分排着。
丝，丝，丝，线棰子放开了，拖了几丈长。
"I'll let you go, you take it, Yingzi, you are waiting for us under the willow tree over there." Brother Yu lined up. Silk, silk, silk, thread stick let go and dragged several feet long.“就那个，，你站到那个坟顶上，那个，那个顶高的，举起来，举起来唦！”
“嗷，一，二，三——，我松了。跑，玉哥儿，跑，快跑啊。”
"That, {{id_0000}}, you stand on the top of that grave, that, that high, lift up, lift it up!" "Hey, one, two, three——, I'm relaxed. Run, Brother Yu, run, run. ”“呕——”风筝摇摇摆摆地升到天心里去了，我拍手大叫，英子远远的也拍手大叫。
天空飘着无数风筝，可是都没有我们的好看，所有放风筝的人，也没有我们快活。
"Vomit-" The kite swayed up to the heart of the sky, I clapped my hands and shouted, and Yingzi also clapped his hands and shouted from a distance. There are countless kites floating in the sky, but none of them are as good as ours, and all the kite flyers are not as happy as us.田塍上开了许多淡黄的花，那颜色跟爸爸的那种蜜色的月季花一样好，我采了不少，结成一个花球，想送给英子，结成了，便跑向了玉哥儿那边去。
“往上攒了，高，高，你把我拿一下，可以不可以？”我说。
There were many pale yellow flowers blooming on the fields, the color was as good as my father's honey-colored rose flowers, I picked a lot, formed a flower ball, wanted to give it to Yingzi, and ran to Brother Yu'er. "Save up, high, high, can you take me?" I say.“不行，劲太大。”
“给我拿一下。”
“不行，不行，你看，肚子都没有，线一直上去，你不能拿，不要把风筝走了。”
“给我拿一下！”我一边说，一边要去夺绕线的杆子。
"No, it's too strong." "Get it for me." "No, no, look, I don't have a belly, the line keeps going up, you can't take it, don't take the kite away." "Get it for me!" I said as I went to grab the pole of the winding line.“不行！”他用右手把我一推，我脚底下没有站得稳，跌了一个元宝翘，他反而哈哈的笑起来，我气极，他看不起我，地上抓一个砖头就掷过去，正丢在他腿上。
一场争斗开始了，我们连野话都骂了出来。
"No!" He pushed me with his right hand, I couldn't stand firm under my feet, I fell an ingot, he laughed instead, I was so angry, he looked down on me, grabbed a brick on the ground and threw it over, and threw it on his lap. A fight began, and we even cursed wild words.“喂，喂，怎么回事？打起来了！”英子由那边跑了过来。
我们一有纠纷，大概都是英子来解决，大家对于她的话总是听从的，谁教她是女孩子呢。
"Hey, hey, what's going on? It's a fight!" Yingzi ran over from there. When we have a dispute, it is probably Yingzi who solves it, everyone always obeys her words, who taught her to be a girl.“他用砖头扎了我，你看这块斑。”果然一大块青斑，英子看看那斑，又看看我。
“你先打我的。”
“…………”
“…………”
英子说：“他先打你，你就打人了？”
“当然，谁打我也不依他！”我理直气壮。
"He stabbed me with a brick, look at this spot." Sure enough, there was a large green spot, Yingzi looked at the spot, and then looked at me. "You hit me first." Yingzi said: "He hit you first, and you hit someone?" ” "Of course, I won't follow him if anyone hits me!" I am justified.“真的？”英子一伸手，拍，一掌打在我的脸上，“我打你，看你打我不？”
“哈哈哈”她和玉哥儿全笑了，玉哥儿尤其得意。
"Really?" Yingzi stretched out his hand, slapped me, and slapped me in the face, "I'll hit you, see if you hit me?" ” "Hahaha" She and Brother Yu all laughed, and Brother Yu was especially proud.我当然不能打她，可是鼻子一酸，好，你向着他！我两颗眼泪在眼眶里转了，不愿让她看见，一转身拔腿便跑，把刚才结的花球狠狠的一丢说：
“玉哥儿好，他还说你爹是老败家呢。”
Of course I can't hit her, but my nose is sore, okay, you face him! My two tears rolled in my eyes, I didn't want her to see it, so I turned around and ran away, threw the flower ball I had just tied and said: "Hello Brother Yu, he also said that your father is an old prodigal."一阵风把我的话吹散了，我头也不回，甚么也不管。
“之后？”
后来，后来，——
我一手捏着张照片，心不在焉地在信封上画成一个人脸，大大的眼睛，两条辫子，又斜斜的写上一行字：
A gust of wind blew my words away, and I didn't look back, I didn't care about anything. "After?" Later, later,—— I held a photo in one hand, and absentmindedly drew a human face on the envelope, with big eyes, two braids, and a line diagonally:“春风吹又生。”
——也是有大大的眼睛的，大大的，也黑黑的，不梳辫子，有个酒涡哩！我一回头，“怎么啦，瞪瞪的，一句话也不说。”
"The spring breeze blows and grows." ——There are also big eyes, big, and black, without braids, and there is a wine vortex! As soon as I turned around, I said, "What's wrong, staring, not saying a word." ”“这，——哈，你小时候不许有要好的男朋友么？长大了，又能不怀念么？”
“呸，我才不管你的事哩。”
“可是你的眼睛瞒不过我。好，你听我念：
"This ,—— ha, didn't you have a good boyfriend when you were a child? When you grow up, can you not miss it? ” "Bah, I don't care about you." "But your eyes can't hide it from me. Okay, listen to me:我们很好，英子已经喜欢吃酸东西了，她很记挂你，很希望见见你的夫人，这张照片是我们送给她和你的，希望你们能寄一张照给我们。
——人家都说我们已经结了婚呢。”
“啧——”一种声音遮没了话。
We are fine, Yingzi already likes to eat sour food, she misses you very much, she really wants to meet your wife, this photo is for us to give to her and you, I hope you can send us a photo. ——People say we are married. ” "Tsk-" A voice drowned out the words.春天，——我们明天也买个风筝去放放。
二月十七日初稿

[1] 本篇原载1941年3月13日昆明《中央日报》。
In the spring,—— we will also buy a kite tomorrow to fly. First draft on February 17 [1] This article was originally published in Kunming's "Central Daily" on March 13, 1941.[2] 是一种菊花的名字，菊花大都是春天插枝，枫叶芦花，紫色的长瓣子，上面洒有白色斑点。

复仇

复仇[1]
复仇[1]——给一个孩子讲的故事
一缶客茶，半支素烛，主人的深情。
[2] It is the name of a chrysanthemum, which is mostly spring cuttings, maple leaf reeds, long purple petals, sprinkled with white spots. Revenge{{id_0000}} ——A story for a child A can of guest tea, half a plain candle, the owner's affection.“今夜竟挂了单呢”，年青人想想颇自好笑。
"I actually hung up the bill tonight," the young man thought it was quite funny.他的周身结束告诉曾经长途行脚的人，这样的一个人，走到这样冷僻的地方，即使身上没有带着钱粮，也会自己设法寻找一点东西来慰劳一天的跋涉，山上多的是松鸡野兔子。所以只说一声：
At the end of his body, he told people who had traveled long distances that such a person, even if he did not carry money and food with him, would try to find something to comfort the day's trek, and there were many grouse and hares on the mountain. So just say:“对不起，庙中没有热水，施主不能洗脚了。”
接过土缶放下烛台，深深一稽首竟自翩然去了，这一稽首里有多少无言的祝福，他知道行路的人睡眠是多么香甜，这香甜谁也没有理由分沾一点去。
"I'm sorry, there is no hot water in the temple, and the benefactor can't wash his feet." He took the clay can and put down the candlestick, bowed deeply and went away, how many wordless blessings there were in this bow, he knew how sweet the sleep of passers-by was, and no one had any reason to share a little of this sweetness.然而出家人的长袖如黄昏蝙蝠的翅子，扑落一点神秘的迷惘，淡淡的却是永久的如陈年的檀香的烟。
However, the long sleeves of monks are like the wings of a bat at dusk, throwing down a little mysterious confusion, but faintly like the smoke of old sandalwood.“竟连谢谢也不容说一声，知道明早甚么时候便会上路了呢？——这烛该是信男善女们供奉的，蜜呢，大概庙后有不少蜂巢吧，那一定有不少野生的花了啊，花许是栀子花，金银花，……”
"I can't even say thank you, do you know when you will be on the road tomorrow morning? ——This candle should be worshipped by men and women, honey, there are probably a lot of beehives behind the temple, then there must be a lot of wild flowers, the flowers are gardenias, honeysuckle,......"他伸手一弹烛焰，其实烛花并没有长。
He stretched out his hand and flicked the candle flame, but in fact, the candle did not last long.“这和尚是住持？是知客？都不是！因为我进庙后就没看见过第二个人，连狗也不养一条，然而和尚决不像一个人住着，佛座前放着两卷经，木鱼旁还有一个磬，……他许有个徒弟，到远远的地方去乞食了吧……
"This monk is the abbot? Is he a guest? Not at all! Because I haven't seen a second person since I entered the temple, and I don't even have a dog, but the monk is by no means like living alone, there are two scrolls of scriptures in front of the Buddha's seat, and there is a chime next to the wooden fish,...... He may have an apprentice who went far away to beg for food......“这样一个地方，除了做和尚是甚么都不适合的。……”
何处有丁丁的声音，像一串散落的珠子，掉入静渚的水里，一圈一圈漾开来，他知道这决不是磬。他如同醒在一个淡淡的梦外。
"Such a place is not suitable for anything but to be a monk. ……” Where was the sound of Tintin, like a string of scattered beads, falling into the water of Jingzhu, rippling round by circle, he knew that this was by no means a chime. He seemed to wake up in a faint dream.集起涣散的眼光，回顾室内：沙地，白垩墙，矮桌旁一具草榻，草榻上一个小小的行囊，行囊虽然是小的，里面有萧萧的物事，但尽够他用了，他从未为里面缺少些甚么东西而给自己加上一点不幸。
Gathering his scattered eyes, he looked back at the room: the sand, the chalk wall, a straw couch next to the low table, a small bag on the straw couch, although the bag was small, there were Xiao Xiao things in it, but it was enough for him, and he never added a little misfortune to himself for the lack of something in it.霍的抽出腰间的宝剑，烛影下寒光逼人，墙上的影子大有起舞之意。
Huo drew out the sword from his waist, the cold light under the candlelight was compelling, and the shadow on the wall had a great intention of dancing.在先，有一种力量督促他，是他自己想使宝剑驯服，现在是这宝剑不甘一刻被冷落，他归降于他的剑了，宝剑有一种夺人的魅力，她逼出年青人应有的爱情。
Previously, there was a force that urged him, it was he who wanted to tame the sword, but now this sword is unwilling to be left out in the cold for a moment, he has surrendered to his sword, the sword has a seductive charm, and she forces out the love that young people deserve.他记起离家的前夕，母亲替他裹了行囊，抽出这剑跟他说了许多话，那些话是他已经背得烂熟了的，他一日不会忘记自己的家，也决不会忘记那些话。最后还让他再念一遍父亲临死的遗嘱：
He remembered that on the eve of leaving home, his mother wrapped his bag for him, pulled out the sword and said many words to him, those words he had memorized well, he would never forget his home for a day, and he would never forget those words. Finally, he asked him to read his father's dying will again:“这剑必须饮我底仇人的血！”
当他还在母亲的肚里的时候，父亲死了，滴尽了最后一滴血，只吐出这一句话，他未叫过一声父亲，可是他深深的记得父亲，如果父亲看着他长大，也许嵌在他心上的影子不会怎么深。
"This sword must drink the blood of my enemy!" When he was still in his mother's belly, his father died, dripping the last drop of blood, only spitting out this sentence, he never called out to his father, but he remembered his father deeply, if his father had watched him grow up, maybe the shadow embedded in his heart would not be so deep.他走过多少地方，一些在他幼年的幻想之外的地方，从未对粘天的烟波发过愁，对连绵的群山出过一声叹息，即使在荒凉的沙漠里也绝不对熠熠的星辰问过路。
How many places he has traveled, some places outside his childhood fantasies, he has never been worried about the sticky smoke waves, he has sighed at the rolling mountains, and he will never ask for directions to the shining stars even in the desolate desert.起先，燕子和雁子还告诉他一些春秋的消息，但是节令的更递对于一个永远以天涯为家的人是不必有所催促的，他渐渐忘记了自己的年岁，虽然还依旧晓得那天是生日。
At first, Yanzi and Yanzi also told him some news of spring and autumn, but the passage of the seasons did not need to be urged for a person who would always call the end of the world home, he gradually forgot his age, although he still knew that day was his birthday.“是有路的地方，我都要走遍，”他曾跟母亲承诺过。
"Where there is a road, I will go all the way," he once promised his mother.曾经跟年老的舵工学得风雨晴晦的智识，向江湖的术士处得来霜雪瘴疠的经验，更从荷箱的郎中的口里掏出许多神奇的秘方，但是这些似乎对他都没有用了，除了将它们再传授给别人。
He once learned the wisdom of ups and downs from the old helmsman, gained experience in frost and snow miasma from the warlocks of the rivers and lakes, and even took out many magical secret recipes from the mouth of the doctor in the trunk, but these seemed to be useless to him, except to teach them to others.一切全是熟悉了的，倒是有时故乡的事物会勾起他一点无可奈何的思念，苦竹的篱笆，络着许多藤萝的，晨汲的井，封在滑足的青苔旁的，……他有时有意使这些淡淡的记忆淡起来，但是这些纵然如秋来潮汐，仍旧要像潮汐一样的退下去，在他这样的名分下，不容有一点乡愁，而且年青的人多半不很承认自己为故土所萦系，即使是对自己。
Everything was familiar, but sometimes the things of his hometown would evoke a little helpless longing for him, the fence of bitter bamboo, the many vines, the well of the morning water, and the ,...... next to the slippery moss. He sometimes deliberately fades these faint memories, but even though these are like the tides of autumn, they still have to recede like the tides, and in his name, there is no room for a little nostalgia, and most young people do not admit that they are haunted by their homeland, even to themselves.甚么东西带在身上都会加上一点重量（那重量很不轻啊）。曾有一个女孩子想送他一个盛水的土瓶，但是他说：
“谢谢你，好心肠的姑娘，愿山风保佑你颊上的酡红，我不要，而且到要的时候自会有的。”
Anything you carry will add a little weight to your body (that weight is not very light). There was once a girl who wanted to give him a clay bottle of water, but he said: "Thank you, kind-hearted girl, may the mountain breeze bless the blush on your cheeks, I don't want it, and it will be there when you want it."所以他一身无长物，除了一个行囊，行囊也是不必要的，但没有行囊总不像个旅客啊。
当然，“这剑必须饮我仇人的血”他深深的记着。但是太深了，像已经溶化在血里，有时他觉得这事竟似与自己无关。
So he has nothing to wear, except for a bag, the bag is also unnecessary, but without a bag is always like a passenger. Of course, "this sword must drink the blood of my enemy" he remembered deeply. But it was too deep, as if it had been dissolved in blood, and sometimes he felt that it had nothing to do with him.今晚头上有瓦（也许是茅草吧）有草榻，还有蜡烛与蜜茶，这些都是在他希冀之外的，但是他除了感激之外只有一点很少的喜悦，因为他能在风露里照样做梦。
丁丁的声音紧追着夜风。
Tonight there are tiles (maybe thatch) on his head, straw couches, candles and honey tea, all of which he hopes for, but he has little joy except gratitude, because he can still dream in the wind and dew. Tintin's voice followed the night wind.他跨出房门，（这门是廊房）。殿上一柱红火，在郁黑里招着皈依的心，他从这一点静穆的发散着香气的光里走出。山门未闭，朦胧里看的很清楚。
山门外有一片平地，正是一个舞剑的场所。
He stepped out of the door, (this door is a corridor). A pillar of red fire on the hall beckoned the heart of refuge in the darkness, and he walked out of this quiet fragrant light. The mountain gate was not closed, and it was clear in the haze. There is a flat land outside the mountain gate, which is a place for sword dance.夜已深，星很少，但是有夜的光，夜的本身的光，也够照出他的剑花朵朵，他收住最后一着，很踌躇满志，一点轻狂围住他的周身，最后他把剑平地一挥，一些断草飞起来，落在他的襟上。和着溺爱与珍惜，在丁丁的声息中，他小心地把剑插入鞘里。
The night was late, there were few stars, but there was the light of the night, the light of the night itself, and it was enough to shine on his sword flowers, he put away the last one, very ambitious, a little frivolous around his body, and finally he swung the sword flat on the ground, and some broken grass flew up and fell on his collar. With doting and cherishing, in the sound of Tintin, he carefully inserted the sword into its sheath.“施主舞得好剑！”
“见笑，”他有一点失常的高兴，羞涩这和尚甚么时候来的？“师父还未睡，法兴不浅！”
“这时候，还有人带着剑。施主想于剑上别有因缘？不是想寻访着甚么吗，走了这么多路。”
"The benefactor dances the sword well!" Laughing, "He was a little abnormally happy, shy when did this monk come?" "Master hasn't slept yet, and the Dharma is not shallow!" At this time, there were still people with swords. The benefactor wants to have a different cause on the sword? Didn't you want to find something, and walked so much. ”和尚年事已大，秃头上隐隐有剃不去的白发，但是出家人有另外一副较难磨尽的健康，炯炯眸子在黑地里越教人认识他有许多经典以外的修行，而且似并不拒绝人来叩询。
“师父好精神，不想睡么？”
The monk is old, and there are faint white hair on his bald head that cannot be shaved, but the monk has another health that is difficult to wear, and his bright eyes teach people in the dark that he has many practices outside the scriptures, and he does not seem to refuse to ask questions. "Master is so energetic, don't you want to sleep?"“出家人坐坐禅，随时都可以养神，而且既无必做的日课，又没有经谶道场，格外清闲些，施主也意不想睡，何妨谈谈呢。”
"Monks sit in meditation, they can nourish their spirits at any time, and there is no daily class that must be done, and there is no prophecy dojo, which is particularly leisurely, and the benefactor does not want to sleep, so why not talk."他很诚实的，把自己的宿志告诉和尚，也知道和尚本是行脚来到的，靠一个人的力量，把这座久已颓圮的废庙修起来，便把漫漫的行程结束在这里，出家人照样有个家的，后来又来了个远方来的头陀，由挂单而常住了。
He was very honest, told the monk about his aspirations, and knew that the monk had come by foot, and relied on the strength of one person to repair this long-collapsed abandoned temple, and ended his long journey here.“怪不道，……那个师父在那儿呢？”他想问问。
“那边，”和尚手一指，“这人似乎比施主更高一些，他说他要走遍天下没有路的地方。”
“哦——”
"His eyes—" "Blind, blind." "Oh—"“那边有一座山，山那边从未有人踏过一个脚印，他一来便发愿打通一条隧道，你听那丁丁的声音，他日夜都在圆这件功德。”
他浮游在一层无端怅惘里，“竟有这样的苦心？”
"There is a mountain over there, no one has ever stepped on a footprint on the other side of the mountain, he vowed to open a tunnel as soon as he came, you listen to that Tintin's voice, he is fulfilling this merit day and night." He floated in a layer of unprovoked melancholy, "How can there be such painstaking efforts?" ”他恨不得立即走到那丁丁的地方去，但是和尚说“天就要发白了，等明儿吧。”
明天一早，踏着草上的露水，他走到那夜来向往的山下，行囊都没有带，只带着一口剑，剑是不能离弃须臾的。
He wanted to go to Tintin's place immediately, but the monk said, "The sky is about to turn white, wait for tomorrow." ” Early tomorrow morning, stepping on the dew on the grass, he walked to the foot of the mountain he longed for that night, without any bags, only a sword, and the sword could not be abandoned for a moment.一个破蒲团，一个瘦头陀。
头陀的长发披满了双肩，也遮去他的脸，只有两只眼睛，射出饿虎似的光芒，教人触到要打个寒噤。年青人的身材面貌打扮和一口剑都照入他的眼里。
A broken futon, a thin head. Tou Tuo's long hair covered his shoulders, covering his face, and he only had two eyes, emitting a hungry tiger-like light, making people shudder when touched. The young man's figure, appearance, and a sword all shone into his eyes.头陀的袖衣上的风霜，画出他走遍的天涯，年青人想这头陀一定知道许多事情，所以这地方比任何地方更无足留连，但他不想离开一步。
头陀的话像早干涸了，但几日相处他并不拒绝回答青年人按不住的问讯。
The wind and frost on the sleeves of the head painted the ends of the world he had traveled all over, and the young man thought that this head must know many things, so this place was more worthless than anywhere else, but he didn't want to leave. Tou Tuo's words seemed to have dried up early, but he did not refuse to answer the young man's uncontrollable inquiries after a few days of getting along.“师父知道这个人么？”一回头伸出左腕，左腕上有一个蓝色的人名，那是他父亲的仇人，这名字是母亲用针刺上去的。
头陀默不作声，也伸出自己的左腕，左腕上一样有一个蓝字的人名，是年青人的父亲底。
"Does Master know this person?" As soon as he turned around, he stretched out his left wrist, and there was a blue name on his left wrist, which was his father's enemy, and this name was pricked by his mother with a needle. Tou Tuo was silent, and also stretched out his left wrist, which also had a blue name on it, which was the father of the young man.一种异样的空气袭过年青人的心，他的眼睛扑在头陀的脸上，头陀的瘦削的脸上没有表情，悠然挥动手里的斧錾。
在一阵强烈的颤抖后，年青人手按到自己宝剑柄上。
——这剑必须饮我仇人的血。
A strange air hit the young man's heart, his eyes fell on Tou Tuo's face, Tou Tuo's thin face was expressionless, and he leisurely waved the axe in his hand. After a strong tremor, the young man pressed his hand to the hilt of his sword. - This sword must drink the blood of my enemies.“孝顺的孩子，你别急，我决不想逃避欠下自己的宿债——但是这还不是时候，须待我把这山凿通了！”
像骤然解得未悬疑问，他，年青人，接受了头陀底没有丝毫祈求的命令，从此他竟然一点轻微的激动都没有了。
"Filial child, don't worry, I don't want to escape my old debts - but this is not the time, I have to wait until I dig through this mountain!" As if the suspense was suddenly solved, he, the young man, accepted the order without the slightest prayer at the bottom of the head, and since then he has not had the slightest excitement.从此丁丁的声音有了和应，青年人也备得一副斧錾，服膺在走遍没路的地方的苦心下，但他似乎忘记身旁有个头陀，正如头陀忘记身旁有一个带剑的年青人。
日子和石头损蚀在丁丁的声里。
你还要问再后么？
From then on, Tintin's voice responded, and the young man also prepared a pair of axes and chisels, and he was obedient to the painstaking work of walking all over the road, but he seemed to have forgotten that there was a head next to him, just as the head forgot that there was a young man with a sword next to him. The days and stones are eroded in the sound of Tintin. Do you still want to ask later?"一天，錾子敲在空虚里，一线天光，第一次照入永恒的幽黑。
“呵”，他们齐声礼赞。
再后呢？
宝剑在冷落里自然生锈的，骨头也在世纪的内外也一定要腐烂或凝成了化石。
One day, the chisel struck in the void, and a ray of sky light shone into the eternal darkness for the first time. "Huh," they praised in unison. What about later? The sword rusts naturally in the cold, and the bones must also rot or solidify into fossils in the middle and outside of the century.不许再往下问了，你看北斗星已经高挂在窗子上了。
Don't ask any further, you see that the Big Dipper is already hanging high on the window.
[1] 本篇原载1941年3月2日、3日重庆《大公报》，署名“汪曾旗”。1944年作者以同题重写这篇小说，1946年改定，参见《复仇》。初收《汪曾祺全集》第一卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。
[1] This article was originally published in Chongqing's Ta Kung Pao on March 2 and 3, 1941, signed "Wang Zengqi". In 1944, the author rewrote this novel with the same title, and it was revised in 1946, see "Revenge". First received the first volume of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998.

灯下

灯下[1]
一天还是那么过去的。西天又烧过了金子一样的晚霞。
Under the light{{id_0000}} The day still passed. The western sky has burned the golden sunset again.陈相公（学徒的）在屏门后服伺着新买来的礼和银行师子牌汽油灯。近来城里非常盛行汽油灯，起初只一两家大铺子用，后来，大家计算计算，这比“扑子灯”贵不了多少，可是亮得多了，所以像样一点的铺子也都用了，除了根本没有晚市的。他像是跟灯赌了气，弓着个身子，东扒扒，西戳戳，眯起一只眼睛研究研究，又撮起嘴唇吹吹，鼻涕在鼻孔里，一上一下，使他不时要用油污的手去掠一掠。已经是秋凉了，可是小伙子阳气旺，汗兀自不住的滴着。
Chen Xianggong (apprentice's) was waiting behind the screen door for the newly bought Lihe Bank Lion brand gasoline lamp. Recently, gasoline lamps have been very popular in the city, and at first only one or two big shops used them, but later, everyone calculated that this was not much more expensive than the "flutter lamp", but it was much brighter, so all the decent shops were also used, except for the one that had no dinner market at all. He seemed to have gambled with the lamp, hunched over, poked in the west, squinted one eye to study, and puffed his lips and blew on it, snot in his nostrils, up and down, so that he had to sweep it with his oily hands from time to time. It was already cool in autumn, but the young man was full of yang, and his sweat couldn't help but drip.柜台里有三个人：姓陶的和姓苏的是“同事”身份，陶先生坐在靠“山架”的凳上翻阅从甚么报上剪集起来的章回小说，（也许丢掉了一页，不接头，找来找去找不着）。一面还摸着脸上酒刺，看来不是用手去摸脸，而是以脸去就手，似乎很专心，偶尔有一只苍蝇甚么的影子飞过眼前，他也只是随意用手一挥，不作理会。苏先生把肘部支在柜台上，两手捧着个肥大下巴，用收藏家欣赏书画的神情悠然的看着滴水檐下王二手里起落的刀光。王二摆一个熏烧卤味摊子，这时正忙得紧，一面把切好的牛肉香肠用荷叶包给人，一面用油腻腻的手接钱，只一瞥，即知道数目，随便又准确的往“钱笼”里一扔，嘴里还向另外一个主顾打招呼，“二百文，肚子？”又一瞥，哪样东西快完了，便叫儿子扣子去拿。扣子在写着账，（熟人可以暂赊），很用心的画着码子，要是甚么人的姓写得不大像，便歪着头，咬咬笔杆，很像一些文雅人作诗的样子。柜台里另一位，姓卢，在来往信札上被称为“执事先生”，若是在大公司之类当是经理，这里，是“管事”，所以常常坐在账桌边。正校核着“福食”，每看完一笔，用小木戳子印一个“过”。他叫了一声陈相公，陈相公没有答应，于是又大声叫“陈——相——公——”！这回不但陈相公听见，连苏陶二位也听见了，回头一看，都扑嗤笑了，陈相公一脸胡子，垂手侍立。“今天买了几个铜板酱油？”“五个。”又各归原位，各执其事，继续未竟的工作。
There were three people at the counter: the one surnamed Tao and the one surnamed Su were "colleagues", and Mr. Tao sat on a bench leaning against the "mountain shelf" to read the chapters and novels cut from the newspaper. On the one hand, he still touched the wine thorns on his face, it seemed that he did not touch his face with his hands, but with his face, and seemed to be very attentive. Mr. Su propped his elbows on the counter, held his fat chin in both hands, and leisurely watched the light of the knife in the hands of the king under the dripping eaves with the expression of a collector appreciating calligraphy and painting. Wang Er set up a smoked braised meat stall, and was busy at this time, while wrapping the cut beef sausages in lotus leaves, while taking the money with greasy hands, only glancing at it, that is, knowing the amount, casually and accurately throwing it into the "money cage", and greeting another patron in his mouth, "Two hundred wen, belly?" Another glance, which thing is almost finished, he asked his son to buckle it up. The button was writing the account, (acquaintances can temporarily credit), and drew the yard very carefully, if someone's surname was not written similarly, he tilted his head and bit the pen barrel, very much like some elegant people writing poetry. Another person at the counter, surnamed Lu, is called "Mr. Deacon" on the letters, and if he is a manager in a large company, he is a "steward" here, so he often sits at the account table. is checking the "blessing food", and every time he reads it, he prints a "pass" with a small wooden stamp. He called out to Mr. Chen, but Mr. Chen did not agree, so he shouted loudly "Mr. Chen-Xiang-Gong-"! This time, not only Mr. Chen heard it, but also Mr. Su Tao, and when he looked back, he all sneered. "How many copper plates of soy sauce did you buy today?" "Five." Then they returned to their original positions, each doing their own thing, and continuing the unfinished business.他们似乎都在等待着甚么。等待着甚么呢？
They seem to be waiting for something. What are they waiting for?多少声音汇集起来的声音向各处流着，听惯了的耳朵不会再觉得喧闹，连无线电嗡着鼻子的唱歌说话的声音及铁钉头狠狠的划在玻璃上的开关声，也都显得非常安静。叫卖的拼着自己的嗓子喊，如极深的颜色掺入浓浓的灰色里，一经搅混，甚么痕迹也留不下。你何必喊呢？不要买的你招不来，要买的自会来找你。这些声音都要到沉默之后才会有人觉得。
The sound of how many voices gathered flowed everywhere, and the ears that were used to hearing it would no longer feel noisy, and even the sound of the radio buzzing and talking and the sound of the iron nail head hitting the glass and switching it seemed very quiet. The hawker shouted in his own voice, like a very dark color mixed into the thick gray, and once mixed, no trace could be left. Why do you shout? If you don't want to buy it, you can't recruit it, and if you want to buy it, it will come to you. These voices will not be felt until there is silence.时间在人们的眼睛里过去了。
陈相公又有了点小小得意，汽油灯毕竟亮了。他站到柜台上挂了起来，灯咝咝的响着，许多小飞虫子便在光底下闹成一大团，哪里来的这许多啊？
Time passed in people's eyes. Chen Xianggong was a little proud again, after all, the gasoline lamp was on. He stood on the counter and hung up, the lights sizzled, and many small flying insects made a big mess under the light.一个顾客懒懒的走近了柜台。“要甚么？”“丝妈糖。”“没有。”“昨天还有的？”“十个铜板起码！”柜台外的人眨眨眼睛，只得向袋里又挖挖，柜台里的把钱接过手，一看，只有八个，不再说甚么，丢入“钜万”里，包了一包带丝带粉的甚么。八个铜板买不到十个铜板的，大家明白。可是倒教苏陶二位想起来晚上还有几个必到的主顾，知道他们要甚么，要多少，便一一包好，在纸上折角作了个记号，放在固定的处所，以便来拿。
A customer lazily approached the counter. "What do you want?" "Silk candy." "No." "Yesterday?" "At least ten copper plates!" The person outside the counter blinked his eyes, had to dig into the bag again, and the person at the counter took the money, and at a glance, there were only eight, not to say anything, thrown into the "Ju Wan", and wrapped a pack of ribbon powder. Eight copper plates can't buy ten copper plates, everyone understands. But Su Tao and the two remembered that there were still a few customers who would come at night, and knew what they wanted and how much, so they wrapped them one by one, folded the corners of the paper and made a mark, and put them in a fixed place so that they could get them.卢先生核完了账，把簿子挂到派定的钉上，伸了个懒腰，心里想：不早了。走到门口去看天天来往的人，站了一会。今天没有花轿子抬过，足供负手半天。天天下操回去的驻军，也早吹着号过去了。觉得生活乏味，便想回去，却一眼看见了一个人拄着拐杖走来了。这个人（不单这个人）是除了大风大雨，小病小痛，都要来铺子里坐坐谈点“新闻”的。
After Mr. Lu finished checking the accounts, he hung the book on the nail assigned, stretched his waist, and thought to himself: It's getting late. Walked to the door to see the people coming and going every day, and stood for a while. There was no sedan chair carried today, which was enough for half a day. The garrison that went back every day also blew the trumpet. I felt that life was boring, so I wanted to go back, but I saw a person walking with a cane at a glance. This person (not only this person) came to the shop to sit in the shop and talk about some "news" except for strong winds and rains, minor illnesses and pains.“哦，陆二先生，二舅太爷——呸，走呕，你怎么不打个灯笼要饭！”卢先生让一个叫化子哭丧着一副不变的脸等着，不去理他。“您怎么今儿来晚了？我打算您的小肠气又发了。”
"Oh, Mr. Lu Er, the second uncle - bah, vomit, why don't you make a lantern to ask for food!" Mr. Lu asked a man named Huazi to wait with an unchanging face and ignored him. "Why are you late today? I think your small intestine is angry again. ”“没有，没有，今儿放学放得晚一点，嗯——又拢焦家巷吃了碗划水面。”这算是他的解释，其实这解释该用在“如果晚了”之后，他自己明白，并不晚，虽然也不早。
"No, no, I'm going to get off school a little later today, well-- I went to Jiaojiaxiang to eat a bowl of paddling again." This is his explanation, in fact, this explanation should be used after "if it's late", he himself understands that it is not too late, although it is not too early.店堂里摆一张方桌，左右各放两把椅子，陆二先生拣了一把靠桌的坐下，（这是他的老地方，其余，应当留给别人）。放下拐杖，拧了拧鼻子，把手在鞋帮上抹抹，看看“真不二价”、“童叟无欺”心里有了点感慨：而今能写得这样一笔字的很少了，拿春联“抱柱”来一比，就分出个高下老嫩来。他是个蒙馆先生。——世界变了，就是写得这样字的也没用了，人家招牌上都画上红红绿绿的甚么美，美术字，从大学校学来的，看的不认识，写的也不认识，好处就是不像字，像画。
There was a square table in the shop, with two chairs on each side, and Mr. Lu Er chose a table to sit down (this is his old place, and the rest should be left to others). Put down the crutches, twisted his nose, wiped his hand on the upper, and looked at "It's really not the same price" and "Tong Sou is not deceived" and felt a little emotional in his heart: Now there are very few people who can write such a stroke. He is a Mr. Mengguan. ——The world has changed, even if it is useless to write such words, people's signboards are painted with red, red and green, what is beautiful, art words, learned from the university, you don't know what you see, you don't know what you write, the advantage is that it doesn't look like words, like paintings.“一蟹不如一蟹，全是甚么洋笔弄坏的，当先，我们的时候——，陶翁，你的花又开了两朵了，——”
"A crab is not as good as a crab, it's all broken by some foreign pen, first, when we - , Tao Weng, your flowers have bloomed two more,——"“啊？——也不过是随便插在盆子里玩玩的，我连水都不记得浇，还是厨房老朱天天挑水回来浇一点，不想他竟开了花。”陶先生说着，捧了水烟袋走了出来。
"Huh? ——It's just just a casual insertion into the basin for fun, I don't even remember to pour water, or the kitchen Lao Zhu brings water back every day to water a little, I don't want him to bloom." Mr. Tao said, holding the hookah and walking out.“——时人——不识——余心乐，——将谓偷闲——学——少——年——，风雅，风雅。”陆二先生素来很赞赏陶先生。
"——People of the time - I don't know - I am happy,—— will be called stealing leisure - learning - young - ——, elegant and elegant." Mr. Lu Er has always admired Mr. Tao.“二舅太爷，今儿在东家太太家吃了甚么来了？”又进来一个人，见了陆二先生就照例问这句话，他是店主的本家，每天到店里来吃饭，这时正是他该来的时候。
“虾子炒虾子！”
"Second uncle, what did you eat at the owner's wife's house today?" Another person came in, and when he saw Mr. Lu Er, he asked this sentence as usual, he was the owner's family, and he came to the store to eat every day, and this was the time for him to come. "Shrimp fried shrimp!"大家全笑了起来，连走过门口的也都带了一个笑走过。
进来的人有点驼背，大家都叫他虾二爷。
Everyone laughed, and even those who walked through the door walked by with a smile. The person who came in was a little hunched over, and everyone called him the second master of shrimp.陆二先生按俗例每天临着到一个学生家去吃饭，周而复始，所以常常夸说某东家太太人大方，铲子好，并且还说了些蒙馆先生不应当说的话，涉及大方铲子以外的事，供大家笑乐，无伤大雅。
According to the custom, Mr. Lu Er went to a student's house to eat every day, over and over again, so he often praised the wife of a certain owner as generous and good with a shovel, and also said some things that Mr. Mengguan should not say, involving things other than the generous shovel, for everyone to laugh and have fun, harmless.虾二爷装作姿势要拿拐杖打陆二先生，陆二先生说，“你来，你来，我有话告你！”虾二爷带笑骂了句甚么，也就算了。
张汉叼着旱烟袋进来，连声叫着“年兄，年兄！”这是一个老童生，曾往外县做过幕。
The second master of the shrimp pretended to be in a posture to hit Mr. Lu Er with a cane, and Mr. Lu Er said, "You come, you come, I have something to sue you!" The second master of the shrimp scolded with a smile, and forget it. Zhang Han came in with a dry tobacco bag in his mouth and shouted repeatedly, "Brother Nian, Brother Nian!" This is an old student who has done curtains in other counties.老炳到王二摊上拣了根卤得通红的猪尾巴，一条鞭似的舞着，到里去拿了个茶杯，又出去打酒去了。
卖鱼的疤眼收完了鱼钱，也走了进来。
Lao Bing went to Wang Er's stall and picked a marinated red pig's tail, danced like a whip, went inside to get a teacup, and went out to make wine. The fish seller Scareye finished collecting the fish money and walked in.还有些不上名姓的熟人，也都来了，坐的坐，站的站，各有各的风格，于是店堂里便热闹起来。
老炳打了酒，还没有进门，便嚷着，“我的尾巴，我的尾巴。”
There were also some acquaintances who were not named, and they all came, sitting and standing, each with their own style, so the shop became lively. Lao Bing drank wine, and before he entered the door, he shouted, "My tail, my tail." ”“你自己摸摸看！谁见过你的尾巴！我见到，倒想拿了喂狗呢。”
“卢三哩，你这个坏人，定是你藏了。你老婆又不在这儿，干甚么唦！”
“自己的尾巴都管不住，谁拿了，看，不还在着！”
"Touch it yourself! Who has ever seen your tail! I saw it, but I wanted to feed it to the dog. ” "Lu Sanli, you bad guy, you must have hidden it. Your wife is not here, what are you doing! ” "I can't control my own tail, who took it, look, it's not still there!"“——还就是万顺的好一点，掺的水不多，他妈的。”老炳坐到一旁自得其乐去了。他呷了一口酒，带着津液咽下了喉，忽然很严重的问：“他妈的陆二，你说，唐伯虎有几个太太？”
"——It's just a little better than Wan Shun, there isn't much water mixed in, fuck." Lao Bing sat aside and enjoyed himself. He took a sip of wine, swallowed it with his body fluids, and suddenly asked seriously: "Fuck Lu Er, you say, how many wives does Tang Bohu have?" ”陆二先生虽然不太满意他这个“他妈的”口风，可是对于别人的问题，只要能解答的，都很乐意解答，读书人第一要渊博。满腹经纶，才像个读书人。于是陆二先生不但告诉他九美的名姓，还原原本本的说起四杰传来。听过的，没听过的，都很诚心耐心的听着。陈相公本来在读着《应酬大全》，这时也放下了书，呆呆的听着，又想着。
Although Mr. Lu Er is not very satisfied with his "fucking" tone, he is happy to answer other people's questions as long as they can be answered, and scholars must be knowledgeable first. Full of economy, you are like a scholar. So Mr. Lu Er not only told him Jiumei's name, but also restored the original to talk about the Four Masters. Those who have heard it and those who have not heard it listen sincerely and patiently. Chen Xianggong was originally reading "The Complete Collection of Entertainment", but at this time he also put down the book, listened blankly, and thought about it.陶先生抽完一根纸媒子，把水烟袋递给虾二爷，态度很诚恳恭敬。
After Mr. Tao smoked a paper medium, he handed the hookah to the second master of the shrimp, and his attitude was very sincere and respectful.“好，垂头驴子会拐缰，你也跟我来起来了。”烟已经没有了，虾二爷掏了个空，但他到柜台里翻了半天，终于翻到了。“佛——笃”，笑笑的一口吹着了媒子。骨都骨都喝了一阵，哺的一吐，把烟灰远远吹去。
"Okay, the donkey will turn around, and you will come with me." The cigarette was gone, and the second master of the shrimp emptied it, but he went to the counter for a long time and finally turned it over. "Buddha-Du", he blew the medium with a smile. The bones drank for a while, and when he fed it, he spat it out and blew the ash far away.“烟啊，一共有几种？有五种：水，旱，鼻，雅，潮。这内中，唯有潮烟这一样，我们这带没有。我见过，香。”张汉把自己丢在回忆里，一面把自己的“超等”打开，装上一袋，闭上眼睛细细品味。
"Smoke, how many types are there? There are five types: water, drought, nose, elegance, and tide. Among them, there is only tide smoke, and we don't have it here. I've seen it, fragrant. Zhang Han threw himself into his memories, opened his "super" while putting it in a bag, closed his eyes and savored it.“，虾二爷，大太爷的田，买成了没有？听说水口庄屋全不坏，是旱潦不怕的，你不是已经下去看过了么？要不是死了老子，等着葬，肯卖，人家？这么块好田，哼！”
", the second master of the shrimp, the eldest grandfather's field, have you bought it? I heard that the Shuikou Manor house is not bad at all, it is not afraid of drought and floods, haven't you already gone down to see it? If it weren't for the death of Lao Tzu, waiting for burial and willing to sell, people? Such a good field, hum! ”“没有！那方面非草字头（萬）不卖，我们大太爷也忒辣点，晓得人家急等钱用，更有意‘拿桥’，别人家想这块田的多着哩，像孙家就等着买了好‘成方’，可是因为大太爷谈了，也不便再问津。”虾二爷言下殊不平，倒不是别的，成了，他少不了有点好处。别人也觉得大太爷太精明了。心想“难怪，越是有钱啊，——”
"No! In that regard, the non-cursive prefix (ten thousand) is not sold, our eldest grandfather is also a little spicy, knowing that people are anxious to wait for money to use, and they are more interested in 'taking the bridge', others want to have more of this field, like the Sun family is waiting to buy a good 'Chengfang', but because the eldest grandfather has talked, it is inconvenient to ask again. "The second master of shrimp is very unfair, but nothing else, he is indispensable. Others also think that the eldest grandfather is too shrewd. I thought to myself, "No wonder, the richer you are,——"“虾二爷，这几天打牌了没有？”
虾二爷大概是打了牌，并且还小小的进几个，得意的讲起牌经来，说到怎样在最后一圈做庄时拦和了下家一副不现面的清三番，真够紧张。
“婊子不害×，走局呕！”
"Second Master Shrimp, have you played cards these days?" The second master of the shrimp probably played cards, and he still entered a few small ones, and he proudly talked about the card classics, talking about how to stop the next family from showing up in the last circle of the banker, which was really nervous. "Bitches don't harm ×, they vomit!"陆二先生摇摇头“酒色财气，酒，色，财，气……”
喔——呜，一条野狗教柜台里的苏先生一棍子打了出去，好几个人抢着说“不孝，不孝，”苏先生打完狗，仍是支着两肘，不声不响。
Mr. Lu Er shook his head, "Wine, color, wealth, ......" Oh - woo, a wild dog taught Mr. Su in the counter to beat out with a stick, and several people rushed to say "unfilial, unfilial," Mr. Su still supported his elbows and was silent after beating the dog.“马家线店的寡妇媳妇，瞎子婆婆，——嘿，他妈的！”老炳吮完了最后一滴，捶了一下柜台，站起身子，走了，有人补了他的座位。陈相公望望他的背影，“啧！”了一声，把杯子收进去了，“老是拿了不放回去！”大家全笑了，老炳背上贴了个纸剪的乌龟。
"The widow and daughter-in-law of the Majiaxian store, the blind mother-in-law,—— Hey, fuck!" Lao Bing sucked the last drop, slammed the counter, stood up, and left, and someone made up for his seat. Chen Xianggong looked at his back, "Tsk!" With a sound, he put the cup in, "I always take it and don't put it back!" Everyone laughed, and Lao Bing put a paper-cut turtle on his back.谈话还是继续下去，不知是为何开头的，不知怎么又转换了话题，也不知到甚么时候才会停止，一切都极自然，谁也不肯想想。大家都尽可能的说别人的事情，不要牵涉到自己。（自己的甘苦，顶好留到在床上睡不着的时候一个人说说去。）各种姿势，各种声调，每个人都不被忽略，都有法子教别人知道自己的存在。
The conversation continued, I don't know why it started, I somehow changed the topic again, and I don't know when it will stop. Everyone tries to talk about other people's affairs as much as possible, and don't involve themselves. (Keep your own joys and sorrows until you can't fall asleep in bed.) All kinds of postures, all kinds of tones, everyone is not ignored, and there are ways to teach others to know their existence.卖鱼的一面听着，一面于点头楞眼之余计算着“二百四，四百八——”，算错了，又回头重算。有人叫了一声“疤眼——”是他的老婆。
“疤二娘，天还早呢！”店堂里又是一片哈哈。
While listening, the fish seller nodded and calculated "two hundred four, four hundred eight-", miscalculated, and then turned back and recalculated. Someone called "Scareye-" was his wife. "Scar Erniang, it's still early!" The shop hall was full of laughter again.“啐”疤二娘走过了，又回来：“吴老板找你哩！”
"Hey" Scar Erniang walked past and came back: "Boss Wu is looking for you!" ”疤眼本想也可以回去了，可是这一来倒不得不大声的说“等下！”等甚么呢？他等别人笑完之后！便走了。虾二爷连忙赶到门口“——，明儿送十斤蟹到大太爷宫（小公馆）里去，疤眼——！”
Scareye thought he could go back, but this time he had to say loudly, "Wait!" "What are you waiting for? After he waits for others to laugh! And left. The second master of shrimp hurried to the door, "——, Ming'er sent ten pounds of crabs to the Great Grandfather's Palace (Small Mansion), Scareye——! ”“晓——得！”
"Xiao-get!"大家都觉得该回去了。在“明儿见”，“明儿见”声中铺子里便清冷了一大半。张汉睁开眼睛，叫了一声“年兄”，伸手摘下帽顶上拖了好半天的花翎（也许是草制的，也许是纸制的）望了一望丢了。“嚇嚇”，也走了。王二本想来店堂里头坐坐，趁现在稍微闲一点的时候。他叫了一声“扣子”，可是回头一看，只好又说“没有甚么，你别打盹”。陆二先生也觉得很怅惘，大有“酒阑人散得愁多”的感味，望望若有其事的小飞虫子，心里哼出一句甚么，忽然四下一摸，不好，拐杖不见了，也不说甚么，明儿来拿好了，丢不了的。即使丢了，也不可惜，这拐杖越过越短了，快不能再用了。
Everyone felt it was time to go back. In the sound of "see you tomorrow" and "see you tomorrow", more than half of the shop was cold. Zhang Han opened his eyes, called "Brother Nian", reached out and took off the flower feathers (maybe grass, maybe paper) that had been dragging on the top of his hat for a long time. "Scared", and also left. Wang Er wanted to come to the shop hall to sit down, while he was a little free. He called "button", but when he looked back, he had to say again, "It's nothing, don't take a nap." Mr. Lu Er also felt very confused, with the feeling of "the wine is scattered a lot", looking at the little flying insect if there was something to do, humming something in his heart, suddenly touching around, not good, the crutch is gone, and he doesn't say anything, he will take it tomorrow, and he can't lose it. Even if it is lost, it is not a pity, this crutch is getting shorter and shorter, and it is almost impossible to use it anymore.说真的，这回街上可真寂静得可以，阴沟里的沉积畅畅快快的吐着泡沫，像鱼戏水。卖唱的背了松了弦子的二胡，踽踽走过。一天星斗。
To be honest, the street was really quiet this time, and the sediment in the gutter was spitting out foam happily, like a fish playing in the water. The singer carried the erhu with loose strings on his back and walked by. A day of stars.“二舅太爷，回去来”，一个小女孩子一手拿着个面捏的戏装小人，一手的食指含在嘴里。这个“二舅太爷”是真的，小女孩是他的外孙女。二舅太爷等着的是这一声，每天，这个柔嫩的声音都在叫他。二舅太爷不紧不慢的站起身来，可是身后有甚么拉住了他，不得不再回头，一看，衣角被谁用钱串子（小索）结在桌腿上，他恨恨的恨了一声。
"Second uncle, come back", a little girl held a noodle pinched costume villain in one hand, and held the index finger in her mouth in the other. This "second uncle" is real, and the little girl is his granddaughter. The second uncle was waiting for this sound, and every day, this soft voice was calling him. The second uncle stood up unhurriedly, but something behind him grabbed him, and he had to look back again.陈相公把行李卷放到柜台上来。苏先生擦擦肘部关节。陶先生打了个呵欠，卢先生也打了个呵欠。虾二爷看着自己架在左腿上的右腿，脚尖息息的颤动，心想怎么都倦了？又想想：怎么还不开晚饭啊？……
Mr. Chen put the luggage roll on the counter. Mr. Su wiped his elbow joint. Mr. Tao yawned, and Mr. Lu also yawned. The second master of shrimp looked at his right leg on his left leg, his toes trembling steadily, and he thought to himself, why are you tired? Think again: Why haven't you had dinner yet? ……三月十八日写成

[1] 本篇原载《国文月刊》1941年第一卷第十期。

猎猎

猎猎[1]
——寄珠湖
Written on March 18 [1] This article was originally published in the 10th issue of Volume 1 of "Chinese Monthly" in 1941. Hunting{{id_0000}} ——Jizhu Lake将暝的夕阳，把他的“问路”[2]在背河的土阶上折成一段段屈曲的影子，又一段段让它们伸直，引他慢步越过堤面，坐到临水的石级旁的土墩上，背向着长堤风尘中疏落的脚印；当牧羊人在空际振一声长鞭，驱饱食的羊群归去，一行雁字没入白头的芦丛的时候。
The sunset at dusk folded his "asking for directions" [2] into bent shadows on the earthen steps of the river, and let them straighten in one by one, leading him to walk slowly over the embankment, sitting on the mound next to the stone steps facing the water, with his back to the sparse footprints in the dust of the embankment; when the shepherd waved his long whip in the air to drive the well-fed sheep back, and a line of geese sank into the white-haired reeds.脚下，河水澌澌的流过：因为入秋，萍花藻叶早连影子也枯了，遂越显得清浏；多少年了，它永远平和又寂寞的轻轻唱着。隔河是一片茫茫的湖水，杳无边涯，遮断旅人底眼睛。
At my feet, the river flows gently: because of the autumn, the duckweed algae leaves have already withered and even the shadows, so they look more and more clear; how many years have passed, and it will always sing softly peacefully and lonely. Across the river is a vast lake, boundless, blocking the eyes of travelers.现在，暮色从烟水间合起，教人猛一转念，大为惊愕：怎么，天已经黑了！甚么时候开始的呢？像从终日相守的人底面上偶然发现一道衰老的皱纹一样，几乎是不能置信的，然而的确已经黑了，你看湖上已落了两点明灭的红光（是寒星？渔火？），而且幽冥钟声已经颤抖在渐浓的寒气里了。
Now, the twilight rose from the smoke and water, and people suddenly changed their thoughts, and they were greatly shocked: Why, it's already dark! When did it start? It was almost unbelievable, like accidentally finding an aging wrinkle on the underside of someone who had been with you all day, but it was indeed dark, you see, two flickering red lights had fallen on the lake (is it a cold star? Fishing fire?) ), and the bell of the underworld was already trembling in the thickening cold.——而他，仍以固定的姿势坐着，一任与夜同时生长的秋风在他疏疏的散发间吹出欲绝的尖音：两手抱膝，竹竿如一个入睡的孩子，欹倚在他的左肩；头微前仰，像是瞩望着辽远的，辽远的地方。
——And he still sat in a fixed posture, allowing the autumn wind that grew at the same time as the night to blow a desperate snark between his sparse hair: his hands were on his knees, and the bamboo pole was like a sleeping child, leaning on his left shoulder; his head was slightly tilted forward, as if looking at a distant, distant place.往常，当有一只小轮船泊在河下的，你看白杨的干上不是钉有一块铁皮的小牌子，那是码头的标记了。既泊船，岸边便不这般清冷，船上油灯的光从小窗铁条栏栅中漏出，会在岸上画出朦胧的，单调的黑白图案，风过处，撼得这些图案更昏晕了，一些被旅栈伙计从温热的梦中推醒的客人，打一盏灯笼，或燃一枝蘸着松脂的枯竹，缩着肩头，摇摇的走过搭在石级上的跳板（虽然永远是飘泊的，却有归家的那一点急切）。跨入舱中，随便又认真地拣一个位置，安排下行囊，然后亲热的向陌生的人点一点头（即使第一个进舱的人也必如是，尽管点头之后，一看，向自己点头的只是自己的影子，会寂寞的笑起来），我们不能诬蔑这一点头里的真诚，因为同舟人有同一的命运，而且这小舱是他们一夜的家。
Normally, when a small boat is moored at the bottom of the river, you can see that there is not a small sign nailed to the trunk of the poplar, it is a mark of the wharf. The light of the oil lamp on the boat leaks out from the iron bars of the small windows, and will draw hazy, monotonous black and white patterns on the shore, and the wind passes by, shaking these patterns even more dizzy, and some guests who are pushed awake by the innkeeper from their warm dreams play a lantern, or burn a branch of dead bamboo dipped in pine resin, shrink their shoulders, and walk staggering past the springboard on the stone steps (although they are always adrift, but there is a little eagerness to return home). Step into the cabin, choose a position casually and carefully, arrange your luggage, and then nod affectionately to the stranger (even the first person to enter the cabin must be like this, although after nodding, at first glance, it is only your own shadow who nods to yourself, and you will laugh lonely), we cannot slander the sincerity in this head, because the people in the same boat have the same fate, and this cabin is their home for the night.旅行人跨出乡土一步，便背上一份沉重的寂寞，每个人知道浮在水上的梦，不会流到亲人的枕边，所以他们都不睡觉，且不惜自己的言语，为了自己，也为了别人，话着故乡风物，船上是不容有一分拘执的。也许在奉一枝烟，借一个火中结下以后的因缘，然而这并不能把他们从寂寞中解脱出来：孤雁打更了，有人问“还有多少时候开船？”而答话大概是“快了吧？”并且，船开之后，寂寞也并不稍减，船的慢度会令年青人如夏天痱子痒起来一般的难受，于是你听：“下来多少里哩？”“还有几里？”旅行的人怀一分意料中的无聊。
Everyone knows that dreams floating on the water will not flow to the pillow of their relatives, so they do not sleep, and do not hesitate to speak their own words, for themselves, and for others, talking about the customs of their hometown, and there is no room for any restraint on the boat. Maybe they are serving a cigarette and borrowing a fire to form a cause and effect in the future, but this does not free them from loneliness: the lone goose is on the clock, and someone asks, "How long is it to sail?" And the answer is probably "It's fast?" Moreover, after the boat leaves, the loneliness does not decrease slightly, and the slowness of the boat will make young people as uncomfortable as itching in summer, so you listen: "How many miles down?" "How many miles are there?" The traveler was bored with a hint of unexpectedness.而他，便是清扫舱中堆积的寂寞者。
轮船上吹了催客的唢呐后，估量着客人大概都已要了一壶茶或四两酒，嚼着卤煮牛肉，嗑着葵花子了，他，影子似的走入舱里，寻找熟习的声音打着招呼，那语调稍带着一点卑谦：
And he is the lonely person who cleans up the cabin. After blowing the suona urging the guests on the ship, it was estimated that the guests had probably asked for a pot of tea or four taels of wine, chewing braised beef, and eating sunflower seeds, and he, like a shadow, walked into the cabin like a shadow, looking for a familiar voice to say hello, and the tone was a little humble:“李老板，近来发财！”
“哦，张先生，您还是上半月打这儿过的，这一向好哇！”
听着冲茶时的水声的徐急，辨出了那茶房是谁，于是亲狎的呼着他的小名，道一声辛苦。
人们，也都不冷落他。
"Boss Li, you've been making a fortune lately!" "Oh, Mr. Zhang, you still played here in the first half of the month, this has always been good!" Listening to the sound of water when making tea, Xu Ji recognized who the tea room was, so he called his nickname affectionately and said hard work. People did not snub him.然后，从大襟内摸出一面磁盘，两支竹筷，玎玎珰珰的敲起来。我不能说这声音怎么好听，但总不会教你讨厌就是了，在静夜里，尤能给你意外的感动。盘声乍歇，于是开始他的似白似唱的歌，他唱的沿河的景物，一些茁蔓在乡庄里的朴野又美丽的传说，他歌唱着自己，轻拍着船舷的流水，做他歌声的伴奏。
Then, he took out a disk from the placket, two bamboo chopsticks, and knocked them up. I can't say how good this sound is, but I won't teach you to hate it, in the quiet night, it can especially give you an unexpected touch. The sound of the plate suddenly stopped, so he began to sing his white songs, the scenery along the river he sang, some simple and beautiful legends that thrived in the village, he sang himself, patted the flowing water on the side of the boat, and served as an accompaniment to his singing.他的声音，清晰，但并不太响，使留连于梦的边界的人听起来，疑是来自远方的；但如果你浮游于声音之外，那你捕捉灯下醉人的呢语去，它不会惊破一分。
His voice is clear, but not too loud, so that those who linger on the border of dreams sound like they are from afar; but if you float beyond the sound, then you catch the intoxicating words under the lamp, and it will not be shocked at all.并且他会解答你许多未问出的问题，这些问题在生客是有趣味的，而老客人也决不会烦厌：
And he will answer many of your unasked questions, which are interesting to new guests and will never be annoyed by regular customers:“这儿啦，古时候不是这样的：湖在城那边，而城建立在现在湖的地方。前年旱荒时，湖水露了底，曾有人看见淤泥里有街路的痕迹，还有人拾到古瓶，说是当年城中一所大寺院的宝塔顶子。你瞧这堤面多高，哪有比城垛还高的堤？要不是刘伯温的九条铜牛镇住啊，湖水早想归到老家这边来了。”
"Here, it wasn't like this in ancient times: the lake was on the other side of the city, and the city was built where the lake is now. During the drought the year before last, the lake was exposed, and some people saw traces of streets in the silt, and some people found ancient bottles, saying that it was the top of the pagoda of a large temple in the city. Look at how high this embankment is, how can there be an embankment higher than the battlements? If it weren't for Liu Bowen's nine copper bulls, the lake would have wanted to return to his hometown. ”“这会大概是子下三刻了吧，白衣庵的钟声渐渐懒了。”
"This will be about three o'clock in the morning, and the bell of the White Clothes Monastery is gradually getting lazy."“船慢了，河面狭了呢。开快了伤了堤，两岸的庄稼人老不声不响的乱抡砖头石块儿，一回竟开枪伤了船上的客人，所以一到这段，不敢不放慢了，这年头……”
"The boat is slow, and the river is narrow. The farmers on both sides of the river were silently picking bricks and stones, and once they shot and injured the guests on the boat, so when they reached this point, they didn't dare not slow down, these days, ......."“不远便是二郎庙，你听，水声有点不同是吧，船正在拐弯儿呢。”
“船到清水潭要停的，那儿有上好的美酒，糟青鱼的味道就不用提，到万河一带的，可以往王家店一住，明儿雇个小驴儿上路。……”
"Not far away is Erlang Temple, listen, the sound of the water is a little different, right, the boat is turning." "The boat has to stop at Qingshuitan, there is good wine there, the smell of bad herring is needless to mention, to the Wanhe area, you can stay at Wangjiadian, and hire a little donkey to go on the road tomorrow. ……”船俯身过了桥洞，唢呐儿第二次响起，不管有无上下的客人，照例得停一下的，他收起盘子里零散的钱，掖了盘子，向客人们道一声珍重，上了岸了，踏上迢迢的归路。长堤对于每个脚履的亲抚都是感谢的，何况他还有一根忠实的竿儿，告诉他前面有新掘的小沟，昨天没有的土塚。夜对于他原是和白昼一样，龙王庙神龛下的草荐又在记忆中招诱着他，所以，虽然处处有秋风作被，他仍旧要返到他的“家”里去。他走着，如走在一段平凡的日子里。
The boat leaned over the bridge hole, and the suona sounded for the second time, regardless of whether there were guests up and down, as usual, he put away the scattered money on the plate, tucked the plate, said to the guests to cherish it, went ashore, and embarked on the long way home. The long embankment is grateful for the caress of every foot, not to mention that he still has a faithful pole, telling him that there is a newly dug ditch in front of him, and the mound that was not there yesterday. The night was the same for him as the day, and the grass under the shrine of the Dragon King Temple tempted him in his memory, so although there was an autumn wind everywhere, he still had to return to his "home". He walked as if he were walking in an ordinary day.他的生涯的另一方面是围在小孩们短短的手臂里：教他们唱歌，跟他们说故事，使他们澄澈的眼里梦寐着一些缥缈的事物，以换取一点安慰，点缀在他如霜的两鬓间。记得我小的时候，曾经跟他学会唱：
“巴根草，
Another aspect of his career was to surround himself with the short arms of children: to teach them to sing, to tell them stories, to make their clear eyes dream of some ethereal things, in exchange for a little comfort, to dot his frosty temples. I remember when I was a child, I used to learn to sing with him: "Bagan grass,绿，
唱个歌儿姐姐听。”
而“秋虎妈妈”的故事，还似一片落在静水里的花瓣，微风过有时会泛上一点鲜红（祝福它永远不要腐烂）。
green{{id_0000}}{{id_00001}}, Sing a song, sister. ” The story of "Autumn Tiger Mother" is like a petal falling into still water, and sometimes it will turn a little bright red after the breeze (bless it never rot).（如今怕要轮到我们的子侄辈来听他的了）。
(Now I'm afraid it's our turn to listen to him.)你要问他为甚么如此熟习于河上的风物，河又为甚么对他如此亲切吧？他是河之子，把年青的一段日子消磨在这只小轮上，那时他是个令同辈人羡嫉，老年人摇头的水手啊，而那时候，船也是年青的。
You have to ask him why he is so familiar with the scenery of the river, and why the river is so kind to him? He was a son of the river, and spent some of his youth on this small boat, when he was a sailor who was the envy of his peers and shook his head in old age, and at that time, the boat was also young.他本有一个女儿，死了，死在河那边的湖里（关于他女儿的事容我下回再告诉你吧）。
He had a daughter, who died, in the lake on the other side of the river (I will tell you about his daughter next time).他的眼睛是甚么时候瞎了的呢，我不知道，而且我们似乎忘了他是个瞎子，像他自己已经忘了不瞎的时候一样。但是他本来有一对善于问询与答话的美丽的眼睛，也许，也许他的瞎与眼睛的美丽有关系的吧？年青的人，凭自己想去吧！
I don't know when his eyes were blind, and we seem to have forgotten that he was blind, just as he himself had forgotten when he was not blind. But he originally had a pair of beautiful eyes that were good at asking and answering, perhaps, maybe his blindness had something to do with the beauty of his eyes, right? Young people, go as you wish!荒鸡在叫头遍了，被寒气一扑又把声音咽下，仍把头缩在翅膀里睡了，他还坐在猎猎的秋风里，比夜更静穆，比夜的颜色更深。
The wild chicken was crowing its head, swallowing its voice again by the cold, still shrunk its head in its wings and fell asleep, and he was still sitting in the hunting autumn wind, quieter than the night, darker than the night.轮船今夜还会来吗？它也如一个衰颓的老人，在阴天或节气时常常要闹闹筋骨酸痛甚么的。
你还等甚么呢，呵哟，你摸摸草叶子看，今夜的露水多重！
脚下，流水永远平和又寂寞的唱着，唱着。
Will the ship come again tonight? It is also like a declining old man, who often has to make a fuss on cloudy days or solar terms. What are you waiting for, hehe, you touch the grass leaves and see, how heavy is the dew tonight! Under my feet, the flowing water is always peaceful and lonely, singing.
[1] 本篇原载1941年1月6日重庆《大公报·文艺》，又载1941年4月25日桂林《大公报》。
[2] 盲人手中的竹杖。

河上

河上[1]
[1] This article was originally published in Chongqing's "Ta Kung Pao Literature and Art" on January 6, 1941, and was also published in Guilin's "Ta Kung Pao" on April 25, 1941. [2] Bamboo staff in the hands of a blind man. On the river[1]在乡下住了这些日子，甚么都惯了。在先有些不便，就原谅这是乡下，将就着过去，住了些时，连这些不便都觉不到了，对于乡下的爱慕则未稍减一分，而且变得更固执，他不断在掘发一些更美丽的。
After living in the countryside these days, I am used to everything. After living for a while, I didn't even feel these inconveniences, and my love for the countryside did not diminish at all, and I became more stubborn, and he kept digging for some more beautiful things.清晨真好，小小的风吹进鲜嫩的叶子里，在里面休息一下，又吹了出来，拂到人脸上，那么顽皮的，要想绷起脸，那简直是不可能，他把嘴唇这么舔了舔有点无可奈何的望着它们。
It's so nice in the morning, a little wind blew into the tender leaves, rested in it, blew it out again, brushed on people's faces, so naughty, if you want to stretch your face, it is simply impossible, he licked his lips like this and looked at them helplessly.田埂上干干净净的，但两旁的草常常想伸头到另一边去看看，带了累累的露珠，脚一碰到，便纷纷的落下来，那么嫩，沾到鞋上不肯再离身，他的脚全湿了，但他毫不注意，还有意去撩拨撩拨。
“山外青山楼外楼”，
The ridge was clean, but the grass on both sides often wanted to stretch out his head to the other side to take a look, with a lot of dewdrops, as soon as his feet touched them, they fell one after another, so tender, he got on his shoes and refused to leave his body, his feet were all wet, but he didn't pay attention, and he also intended to tease and tease. "Outside the mountains, the green mountains and buildings outside the buildings",他笑了，不知是为了这声音，还是因为这声音所唱出的歌，还是低着头也照样用假嗓子接唱下句：
“情郎哥哥住在村后头。”
“哈哈，李大爹，好嗓子，教你儿媳妇听见不怕笑话吗？”
He smiled, I don't know if it was for this voice, or because of the song sung by this voice, or he lowered his head and continued to sing the next sentence with a fake voice: "My lover's brother lives at the back of the village." "Haha, Uncle Li, good voice, teach your daughter-in-law not to be afraid of jokes when she hears them?"“城里人还唱这个呢。早，少爷，恁早，敢是？”
“一早上麻雀打架就醒了。下田？小秧子都绿得要滴了，今年年成好，该替你娶二媳妇了。”
"The people in the city still sing this. Morning, young master, you are early, dare you?" ” "I woke up in the morning when the sparrows fought. Go to the field? The little seedlings are so green that they are dripping, and this year is good, it's time to marry a second daughter-in-law for you. ”“我那二小子才十五哩，噢——，取笑取笑，嚇嚇，回见，少爷。昨晚上在秧池里又弄到两尾鲫鱼，过会儿跟你送来吧？”
"My second boy is only fifteen miles, oh——, make fun of him, scare, see you later, young master. I got two more crucian carp in the seedling pond last night, will I bring them to you later?" ”“今儿我上城去一趟，你养在水缸里吧，晚上我自己来拿。你要点甚么我给带来，怎么样，还是酒我知道！”
“不敢领，不敢领，谢谢了。”
"I'll go to the city today, you can keep it in the water tank, and I'll get it myself at night. I will bring you what you want, how about it, I know the wine!" ” "I don't dare to take it, I dare not take it, thank you."他回头看看，老头子笑着走了，还拾起一块石头往河里一丢，又撮起嘴吹起嘹亮的哨子，逗那歇在柳梢上逞能的画眉。
“老东西，你当心跌进河里去，水凉着哪。”
“你！”
He looked back, the old man walked away with a smile, picked up a stone and threw it into the river, picked up his mouth and blew a loud whistle to tease the thrush resting on the willow tips. "Old thing, be careful of falling into the river, where is the water cold." "You!"他放过老头子，在老头子笑着回头时转了湾。
He let go of the old man and turned around when the old man turned around with a smile.…………
“是甚么时候来的现在连那个瘫子王八都认识我了。要不是医生说我神经衰弱我怎么会来呢，这一住真不知到甚么时候才回去，我现在才知道乡下人为甚么那么看重他们的家。可是他们还一直叫我城里人，城里人城里人！”
"When did you come, and now even that paralyzed bastard knows me. If the doctor hadn't said that I had a nervous breakdown, how could I have come, I really don't know when I will go back to this stay, and now I know why the countrymen value their home so much. But they still keep calling me a city person, a city person, a city person! ”“蛇，蛇，蛇，一条大土谷蛇！”
他猛地嚇了一跳但很快的辨出这是谁的声音，便不怕了。
“你才是蛇，蛇会变个好看的女人迷人，三儿。”
“城里人怕蛇，喝喝，……”
三儿不理他，跳蹦着家去了。
"Snake, snake, snake, a big earth valley snake!" He was startled suddenly, but quickly recognized whose voice it was, and was not afraid. "You are the snake, the snake will become a good-looking woman and charming, San'er." "People in the city are afraid of snakes, drink ,......" San'er ignored him and jumped home.迎出来的是王大妈。
“早，少爷，我们马上就要下田了。早饭这就好了，吃了跟我们一块车水去。”
“谁跟他踩，笨手笨脚的，乡下生活他甚么也干不好，就学会了唱歌！”
It was Aunt Wang who greeted her. "Morning, young master, we are going to the field soon. Breakfast is fine, eat and go with us. ” "Whoever steps on him, clumsy, he can't do anything in the countryside, so he learned to sing!"三儿在里面摆着碗筷，大着声音说。
“不给你们去了，白做了一天，工钱也不给，还硬逼人吃豆油炒鸡蛋！王大妈，我今儿要上城去一趟呢。”
San'er put the dishes and chopsticks in it and said in a loud voice. "I won't go to you, I did it for nothing, I didn't pay wages, and I forced people to eat scrambled eggs with soybean oil! Aunt Wang, I'm going to go to the city today. ”早饭摆在桌上，两碗烫饭，一碗清汤蛋。三儿一听他说完那句话，便把鸡蛋抢过来吃。
“不吃蛋，我吃！”
“这死丫头，看噎住了。”
Breakfast was placed on the table, two bowls of hot rice and a bowl of clear soup eggs. As soon as San'er heard what he said, he snatched the eggs and ate them. "Don't eat eggs, I'll eat them!" "This dead girl, I choked on it."“王大妈，你藏着这么个大姑娘在家里，家神灶神都不得安宁。也不怕人恨你。”
王大妈笑着坐下了，她心里脸上有许多话。
“王大妈，我上城去，问你借两样东西，你把那条双舞剑借给我——”
"Aunt Wang, you are hiding such a big girl at home, and the family god and kitchen god are not at peace. I'm not afraid that people will hate you. ” Aunt Wang smiled and sat down, with many words on her face. "Aunt Wang, I'll go to the city and ask you to borrow two things, and you lend me that double dancing sword-"“不借，不借，船是妈的，妈是我的，我不借！”
“不借，我划了就走。”
“我叫乡长拿你。”
“乡长替你做媒呢。”
“呸！”三儿摔了筷子进她自己的房里去了。妈的早饭还没吃完，她又出来。
"Don't borrow, don't borrow, the boat is my mother, my mother is mine, I won't borrow it!" "Don't borrow it, I'll row and leave." "I'll ask the township chief to take you." "The township chief is a matchmaker for you." "Bah!" San'er dropped her chopsticks and went into her room. Mom's breakfast hadn't been finished yet, and she came out again.“妈，我先下田去了。”
“下田干吗要换身新衣裳，嗨。”
不理，一溜烟走了。
王大妈到屋后湾头找船，船不在了，岸上还有新渍的水。
“死丫头，把船划到哪儿去了。三儿——三——儿——”
"Mom, I'll go to the field first." "Why do you want to change into new clothes, hey." ignored it and walked away. Aunt Wang went to the bay behind the house to look for a boat, but the boat was gone, and there was still freshly stained water on the shore. "Dead girl, where did you row the boat? Three-three-son-"“三儿。”
转过村头，三儿在哩，一个人，把船摇在河中央，自由自在一身轻，头也不扭，只当甚么也没听见。
“我要到越娃沟去采野蔷薇去，不等到船上装不下时不回来！”
"Three sons." Turning around the village, San'er was there, alone, rocking the boat in the middle of the river, free and light, without twisting his head, just as if he didn't hear anything. "I'm going to Yuewagou to pick wild roses, and I won't come back until the boat can't fit it!"“三儿！再不划回来妈要生气了。”
三儿知道妈不会生气，如果妈会生气，三儿就不会把船划了走。
岸上人互相笑笑。
"San'er! If you don't row back, your mother will be angry. ” San'er knew that her mother would not be angry, and if her mother would be angry, San'er would not have rowed the boat away. The people on the shore laughed at each other.他一直由河岸上赶着，赶到快到越娃沟，才找个地方跳上了船。三儿托地把桨往下一搁，坐到船头上去了。他拾起荡在船尾的两支桨，噙着笑划起来。船渐渐平稳的前进了。
He kept chasing from the riverbank, and when he was about to reach Yuewagou, he found a place to jump on the boat. San'er put the oars down and sat on the bow of the boat. He picked up the two oars swinging at the stern of the boat and rowed with a smile. The boat gradually moved forward smoothly.两岸的柳树交拱着，在疏稀的地方漏出蓝天，都一桨一桨落到船后去了。野花的香气烟一样的飘过来飘过去，像烟一样的飞升，又沉入草里，溶进水里。水里有长长的发藻，不时缠住桨叶，轻轻一抖又散开了。
The willow trees on both sides arched together, leaking out of the blue sky in the sparse places, and they all fell behind the boat one by one. The aroma of wildflowers floated over like smoke, soared like smoke, sank into the grass, and dissolved into the water. There were long algae in the water, which entangled the paddles from time to time, and shook gently and dispersed.“三儿，你再不理我，我要跳河了。”
“跳河，跳河，你跳河我就理你。”
他真的跳了。
"San'er, if you ignore me, I'm going to jump into the river." "Jump into the river, jump into the river, I will pay attention to you if you jump into the river." He really jumped.三儿惊了一下，但记起他游水游得很好，便又安安稳稳的坐着。本来也并未生甚么气，不过略有点不高兴，像小小的雾一样，教风一吹早没有了，可是经他一说出生气，倒真不能不生气了。她装得不理他。他知道女孩子在这些事情上不必守信用。
San'er was startled, but remembered that he was swimming well, so he sat peacefully again. He wasn't angry at all, but he was a little unhappy, like a little fog, and the wind was gone as soon as he blew, but when he said that he was angry, he really couldn't help but be angry. She pretended to ignore him. He knew that girls didn't have to keep their promises in these things.她本想坐到后稍来划桨，但觉得船仍旧行着，知道有人在水里推着呢，于是又不动身。
She wanted to sit down and paddle for a while, but she felt that the boat was still moving, and she knew that someone was pushing in the water, so she didn't move.水轻轻的向东流，可是靠边的地方有一小股却被激得向西流，乡下人说那是“回溜”。三儿想着一些好笑的事情，她知道自己笑了。一些歌泛在她的心上，不自觉的，她竟轻轻的唱出声了。
The water flowed gently eastward, but there was a small stream on the side that was provoked to flow west, and the countrymen said it was "slipping back". San'er thought about something funny, and she knew she was laughing. Some songs were in her heart, and unconsciously, she sang softly.“三儿，让我上船吧，你唱得那么低，不靠近你的嘴简直就听不见。我浑身都湿透了，再不上来到城都晒不干。”
“我唱了么，我唱了么？不许上来，上来我拿桨打你。”
"San'er, let me get on the boat, you sing so low, you can't hear it if you don't get close to your mouth. I'm soaking wet, and I can't dry it if I don't come up to the city. ” "Did I sing, did I sing? Don't come up, I'll hit you with a paddle when you come up. ”她不免回头看看，他已经爬上船舷了，船身侧了过来。赶紧到后面来抵住他。
小船很调皮的翻了，两个人都落在水里。
再把船翻正了，谁也不上船。
在水里的人就忘了水上面的事情，三儿咬着嘴唇笑了。
She couldn't help but look back, he had climbed onto the side of the ship, and the hull of the boat came sideways. Hurry to the back to resist him. The boat capsized mischievously, and both of them fell into the water. If the boat is turned over again, no one will get on the boat. The people in the water forgot what was on the water, and San'er bit her lip and smiled.“你看！”
“你看！”
“我们到那边草滩上把衣服晒干了再走吧。”
“你把船拴在草窝里人家认得那是我家的船。”
"Look!" "Look!" "Let's go over there and dry our clothes on the grassy beach before leaving." "You tie the boat to the grass nest, and people recognize it as my boat."滩上的草长得齐齐的，脚踏下去惊起几只蚱，格格的飞了，露出绿翅里红的颜色。
衣裳都贴在身上了，三儿很着恼地用手挤出衣上的水，又抹平了。
“不行，你背过脸去，不许看我。”
The grass on the beach grew neatly, and when I stepped on it, I startled a few id_0000 grasshoppers, and they flew away, revealing the red color in the green wings. The clothes were all attached to his body, and San'er was very annoyed and squeezed out the water from his clothes with his hands, and smoothed them out again. "No, you turn your face away and don't look at me."“好。”
他折下一根蟋蟀草，把根儿咬在嘴里，有点甜，他知道嚼到完全绿的地方便有点苦，但是不嚼到那儿。一根一根的换着嚼，只嚼白里带红的地方。
“喂，你在那儿干甚么？”
“我在吃草。”
"Okay." He broke off a cricket grass and bit the root in his mouth, a little sweet, he knew that it would be a little bitter to chew the completely green part, but he didn't chew it there. Chew one by one, only chewing the white and red parts. "Hey, what are you doing there?" "I'm grazing."“吃草，哈，你有甚么病，大概是吃草吃出来的，那么粗的胳臂，夹得人直叫妈，脸也晒得跟乡下人一般黑，舞起锄头来比谁也不弱，还成天唱不长进的歌，你，你有病！”
"Eating grass, ha, what kind of illness do you have, probably from eating grass, such a thick arm, pinching people to call mom, and their face is as black as a country man, dancing with a hoe is no weaker than anyone else, and singing songs that can't grow all day long, you, you are sick!"“我本来没有甚么病。可是在乡下住了这些时倒真害上一些病，三儿，你不信摸摸我的胸脯，我的心跳得厉害呢。喝，一条大鱼，好大一个水花儿。”
"I didn't have any illness. But when I lived in the countryside, I really got sick, San'er, you don't believe touching my chest, my heart is beating hard. Drink, a big fish, what a big splash. ”“不早了罢，锣鼓声都找不到了，是午饭时候了。你饿不饿？我不饿。”
“我也不饿，因为你不饿。三儿，你说我这回上城干甚么，我几乎有点厌恶城里，既然？”
“我哪知道！”
“你知道！”
"It's not early, I can't find the sound of gongs and drums, it's lunchtime. Are you hungry? I'm not hungry. ” "I'm not hungry either, because you're not hungry. San'er, what do you think I'm going to the city this time, I almost hate the city, since? ” "How do I know!" "You know!"“你，哼，你是去看有没有信，那个人的！”
“谁的？”
“那个相信你那些傻话和谎话的人的！”
“谁？”
“谁！谁！谁！那个挂在你桌子前面的那个大照片的人的。”
“随你说罢！”
"You, hum, are you going to see if there is a letter, that person!" "Whose is it?" "The one who believes your stupid words and lies!" "Who?" "Who! Who! Who! The person with that big photo hanging in front of your desk. ” "Whatever you say!"三儿看他那平板板的脸像腌过一般，忍不住笑了，她的身子随转过的头转过来，用手指往他鼻子上一戳。又笑了。
San'er saw that his flat face seemed to have been pickled, and couldn't help but laugh, her body turned with her turned head and poked his nose with her finger. laughed again.“衣服都快干了，那一点湿也不要紧了。五月的太阳真够厉害的，上船罢，一会儿叉蛤蟆的该来了。再迟就赶不到城了，还有一半路呢。”
"The clothes are almost dry, so it doesn't matter if they are wet at all. The sun in May is really strong enough, get on the boat, and it's time for the toad to come in a while. If you don't make it to the city any later, you still have half a way to go. ”两个人都坐向船尾。互相望了望，坐在左边的用左手划右边的桨，坐在右边的用右手划左边的桨。桨的快慢随着大家呼吸的快慢。一路上非常安稳平静除了谁的头发拂上谁的脸，谁瞪一瞪眼，用自己的身体推一推别人的身体。推不开别人，却推近了自己。
Both of them sat towards the stern of the boat. Looking at each other, the one sitting on the left rowed the right paddle with his left hand, and the one sitting on the right rowed the left paddle with his right hand. The speed of the oars matched the speed of everyone's breathing. The road was very stable and calm, except for whose hair brushed against someone's face, who stared and pushed other people's bodies with his own body. I couldn't push others away, but I pushed myself closer.他们互相量着自己和旁人凸出的胸部的起伏也量着自己的。
绿柳，蓝天，锣鼓，歌声，风，云，船，桨，都知趣的让人忽视他们的存在。
嚇，城楼的影子展开了，青色。平凡又微丑的。
They measured each other and the ups and downs of their protruding breasts, as well as their own. Green willows, blue sky, gongs and drums, singing, wind, clouds, boats, oars, all make people ignore their existence. The shadow of the tower unfolded, blue. Ordinary and ugly.“三儿，到我家，我掐许多花给你。现在能开的花我家的园里都有。”
"San'er, come to my house, I will pinch many flowers for you. The flowers that can bloom now are all in my garden. ”“我不要，你家那条大黄狗也看不起乡下人我不去。小姐们会说我要是换上旗袍多好，我不愿而且你家里知道你成天跟我们乡下女孩儿玩，一定要骂你，他们会马上要你搬回去。啊，到码头了，你到前面去插上船桩。我的脸红不红？”
"I don't want it, your big yellow dog doesn't look down on country people, I won't go. The ladies will say how good it would be if I changed into a cheongsam, I don't want to, and your family knows that you play with our country girls all day long, and you must scold you, and they will ask you to move back immediately. Ah, when you get to the dock, you go to the front to plug in the stakes. Am I blushing? ”“不，不要插上船桩，划回去，我不要回家了。”
“唔？”
"No, don't plug in the stakes, row back, I don't want to go home." "Huh?" "Wait, I'll jump on it and buy some food." "Huh?"“你等等，我跳上去买一点吃的来。”
“唔？”
"No, don't plug in the stakes, row back, I don't want to go home." "Huh?" "Wait, I'll jump on it and buy some food." "Huh?"码头上有各色的颜面与计谋，有各种声音与手势，城里的阴沟汇集起来，成了不小的数股流入河里。一会儿是屠宰户的灰红色，一会是染布坊的紫色，还有许多夹杂物，这么源远深长的流着使其出口处不断堆积起白色的泡沫。三儿看着想这些污水会渐渐带到乡下去的，是的会带去……
There were all kinds of faces and schemes on the wharf, all kinds of voices and gestures, and the gutters in the city gathered together into a large number of streams flowing into the river. One moment it was the gray-red of the butcher, the other moment it was the purple of the dyeing workshop, and there were many inclusions, so long and deep that it kept accumulating white foam at its outlet. San'er looked at it and thought that this sewage would gradually be brought to the countryside, yes, it would be brought......“这是甜瓜，这不是你喜欢的牛角酥么？你划船，我替你剥去瓜子，剥了瓜皮。三儿，你看月亮已经上来。浮萍上有萤火虫在住家了。”
小船刺破了流银的梦。
“三儿，我将永远不回城里。”
"This is a melon, isn't this your favorite horn crisp? You row, I peel off the melon seeds and peel the melon for you. San'er, look at the moon has come up. There are fireflies on the duckweed at home. ” The boat pierced the quicksilver's dream. "San'er, I will never go back to the city."“永远住在乡下。妈会煮了新剥的茆豆等我们，还有茄子，还有虾，还有豆油炒鸡蛋哈哈。”
纳凉的扇子下有安逸。
拴上船，三儿奔向妈的怀里。
“三儿，你的新衣裳怎么皱成这样子？”
"Live in the countryside forever. Mom will cook freshly peeled beans and wait for us, as well as eggplant, shrimp, and scrambled eggs in soybean oil haha. ” There is comfort under the cool fan. Tied to the boat, the three children ran to their mother's arms. "San'er, why are your new clothes wrinkled like this?"“李老爹来过一趟，送来两条鲫鱼我给你们清炖了。”
“哦酒忘了。……”
"Father Li came here once, and I brought two crucian carp to stew for you." "Oh, I forgot the wine. ……”“王大妈，我明儿不再教三儿认字了。认了字要变坏的，变得和城里女人一样坏。她已经会逼人，逼得人差点儿想哭——啊，你看柳条，拖在水里，直扫得浮萍们不得安身呢。”
七月二十日
"Aunt Wang, I won't teach San'er to read tomorrow. If you recognize words, you will become as bad as the women in the city. She can already force people, making people almost want to cry - ah, look at the wicker, dragged into the water, and swept straight to the duckweed can't settle down. ” July 20
[1] 本篇原载1941年7月27日、29日昆明《中央日报》，署名“西门鱼”。

匹夫

匹夫[1]
一、太重的序跋
橙黄——深褐——新锻的生钢的颜色。
[1] This article was originally published in Kunming's "Central Daily" on July 27 and 29, 1941, signed "Ximen Fish". Ordinary {{id_0000}} 1. Too heavy preface Orange-yellow - dark brown - the color of freshly forged raw steel.星星，那些随意喷洒的淡白点子，如一个教早晨弄得有点晕晕的人刷牙的时候忽然想到一件甚么事（并没有想到甚么事，只是似乎想了一下）把正要送进嘴里的牙刷停住，或是手臂微慵的一颤动，或是从甚么方向吹来一点风，而牙刷上的牙粉飘落在潮湿的阶砌间了。
Stars, those random sprays of pale dots, like a person who teaches someone who is a little dizzy in the morning to brush his teeth, suddenly thinks of something (I don't think of anything, just seems to think about it) to stop the toothbrush that is about to be put into my mouth, or the slight trembling of my arm, or a little wind blowing from some direction, and the tooth powder on the toothbrush drifts down the damp steps.“我这一步踏进夜了，黄昏早已熟透，变了质，几乎全不承受遗传。但是时间的另一支脉。唔，但是清冷的，不同白天。白天，白天！”
今天晚上应该有点雾才好。有雾，可不是有雾么？
"I stepped into the night this time, and the dusk was already ripe, deteriorating, and almost not inherited. But another branch of time. Well, but cold, different from the day. Day, day! ” It should be a little foggy tonight. There is fog, isn't it fog?“——我？怎么像那些使用极旧的手法的小说家一样，最先想点明的是时间，那，索兴我再投效于懒的力量吧，让我想想境地，——夜，古怪的啊，如此清醒，自觉。但有精灵活动我独自行在这样的路上，恰是一个。我与夜都像是清池里升起的水泡一样破了的梦的外面。”
"——Me? Why, like those novelists who use very old techniques, the first thing I want to point out is time, then, Soxing, I will devote myself to the power of laziness, let me think about the situation ,—— night, strange, so sober, conscious. But there is an elf activity I am alone on such a road, just one. Both I and the night are outside the dream that has been broken like a blister rising in a clear pool. ”脚下是路。路的定义必须借脚来说明。细而有棱角的石子，沉默的，忍耐的，万变中依旧故我的神色，被藏蕴着饱满的风尘的铺到很远的东方，为拱起如古中国的楼一样的地方垂落到人的视野以外去。可怜的，初先受到再一个白天的蹂躏的还是它们。
Under the feet is the road. The definition of the road must be explained by the feet. The thin and angular stones, silent, patient, and still my expression in the ever-changing world, are laid far away in the east with full dust, and hang out of people's vision for arching a place like an ancient Chinese building. Poor thing, it was they who were ravaged by another day at first.辅助着说明路的是树，若是没有人，你可以从树来认明。两排有着怪癖的阔叶杨树笑着。
“树——”
It is the tree that assists in the way, and if there is no one, you can identify it from the tree. Two rows of broad-leaved poplar trees with quirks smiled. "Tree—"这一个字在他的思想上画了一条很长的延长虚线，渐渐淡去如一颗流星后面的光，如石板道上摔了一交的人的鞋钉留下的痕迹，直到他走了卅步才又记起他刚才想过树，于是觉得很抱歉，又继续想下去。
This word drew a long extended dotted line on his mind, gradually fading like the light behind a meteor, like the marks left by the shoelaces of a person who fell on the stone pavement, until he walked thirty steps and remembered that he had just thought about the tree, so he felt sorry and continued to think about it.（卅步够我们来认清一个人了，你可千万别看不起星光，它比你我的眼睛更该歌颂哩。）
(Thirty steps is enough for us to recognize a person, don't look down on the starlight, it deserves praise more than your eyes.) ）他走在路的脊梁骨上，（你可以想象一条钉在木板上的解剖了一半的灰色的无毒蛇。）步履教白天一些凡俗的人的嚣闹弄得惫懈了，于是他的影子在足够的黑阴中一上、一下，神秘有如像猫一样的侦探长，装腔作势也正如之。装作给人看，如果有人看；没人看，装给自己看。影子比人懂得享受的诀窍。（这一段敬献给时常烧掉新稿的诗人朋友某先生。）这种享受也许是自觉的，也许不，不过在道德上并无被说闲话的情由。
He walked on the spine of the road, (you can imagine a gray non-venomous snake nailed to a wooden board with half dissected.) The gait taught some ordinary people to be tired of the noise of the day, so his shadow went up and down in enough darkness, mysteriously like a cat-like detective, pretending to be just like that. Pretend to show others, if someone sees; if no one sees, pretend to show yourself. Shadows know the trick of enjoyment better than people. (This passage is dedicated to a poet friend who often burns new manuscripts.) This enjoyment may be conscious, maybe not, but there is no moral reason to gossip.他脸上有如挨了一个不能不挨的嘴巴的样子，但不久便转成一副笑脸，一个在笑的范围以外的笑，我的意思是说那个笑其实不能算是笑，然而又没法否认它是笑。他笑了，他如何笑，我简直无从形容了，于是我乃糊里糊涂的说他笑得很神秘，对，很神秘。
His face looked like he had been hit by a mouth that couldn't help but be beaten, but soon it turned into a smile, a smile outside the scope of laughter, I mean that the smile can't actually be considered a laugh, but I can't deny that it's a laugh. He laughed, how he laughed, I couldn't describe it, so I confused and said that he smiled very mysteriously, yes, very mysterious.他为甚么笑：
Why did he laugh:“我从那里归来，那个城，那个荫覆在淡白的光雾底下的城，那边，那就是我毫不计代价的出租了一天的地方。——我这么想，如果教每日市民思想检查官看见，岂不要误会我是个包身工？——如果给每人的脑子里装一付机器，这机器能自动记录下思想，如滚动气压计的涂黑油烟的纸表上的线纹，岂不好玩？——不，那定复杂紊乱得无从辨识恐怕辨识这线纹比发明那机器须要更多的聪明，——我不是说我做了一天工，是说与那些人厮混了一天。
"I came back from there, the city, the city that was shaded by the pale white mist, and over there, the place where I rented it for a day at no cost. ——I thought so, if I were to teach the Daily Citizen's Thought Inspector to see it, wouldn't it be misunderstood that I was a contractor? ——Wouldn't it be fun to put a machine in everyone's head that could automatically record thoughts, like the lines on a blackened paper watch of a rolling barometer? ——No, it must be too complex to discern, and I am afraid that it will take more intelligence to recognize the lines than to invent the machine,—— I don't mean that I worked for a day, I said that I spent a day with those people.“那些人，那些人，说话做事都那么可笑可笑可笑？我的朋友中有一个姓巫的曾慨乎言之‘万事万物都要具庄严感令人失笑便不妙。而今的人活着大都像一群非常下流的丑角一样，实在令人痛心’若是过后想想好笑比当时失笑如何呢；只怕也不好。然而谈笑的可能太多，时间会变了一切具体与抽象的东西。谁也不能设计一秒钟乃至千万年以后的事情。——毫无作用，然而每一次筋肉与神经的运动都有其注定的意义（我决非宿命论者。），何从追问起，真是！
"Those people, those people, are so ridiculous and ridiculous in their words and deeds? One of my friends surnamed Wu once said with emotion: 'Everything must have a sense of dignity, so it's not good to laugh. Most people today live like a group of very vulgar harlequins, which is really sad.' I'm afraid it's not good. However, there may be too much talk and laughter, and time will change everything concrete and abstract. No one can design what will happen in a second or even tens of millions of years. ——It has no effect, but every movement of muscles and nerves has its own destined meaning (I am by no means a fatalist). How to ask, really!且说风吹草动，叶落惊秋，谁能解其奥秘？我刚才想起那树来，看么，那树！总是哗啦的响真令我莫明其妙。要说风是向一个方向吹，叶子应当向一个方向动。哦，叶子承风有先后，而动得快慢之间受极复杂的意念的支配，于是乎摇摆碰击，许多原因构成一个事实，于是乎悉里哗啦。然而——
And it is said that the wind blows the grass, and the leaves fall in autumn, who can solve its mystery? I just thought of that tree, look, that tree! The sound that is always loud is really incomprehensible to me. To say that the wind blows in one direction, the leaves should move in one direction. Oh, the leaves have a sequence of winds, and the speed of movement is governed by extremely complex ideas, so they sway and collide, and many reasons constitute a fact, so there is a clamor. However——“然而我算懂了么？我这才是自讨苦吃。我认得一个可尊敬的人，他常常喜欢在看过的书上写‘某日，校读一遍，天如何，云如何，树如何，如有所悟’，这一悟真是可贵，我毕竟年事尚小，知识不够，曾记得写信给一个女孩子，也假装着说‘如有所悟，’回信来，骂下来了：‘悟些甚么，原来宝二哥哥一只大呆雁！’实在该骂。
"But do I understand? I'm asking for trouble. I know a respectable person, he often likes to write in the books he has read, 'One day, read it again, how is the sky, how is the cloud, how is the tree, if there is enlightenment', this realization is really precious, after all, I am still young, I don't have enough knowledge, I remember writing to a girl, and I also pretended to say, 'If you have realized,' I replied, and scolded: 'What do you understand, it turns out that Brother Bao is a big goose!' I really deserve to be scolded.“思想会使人古怪，我孤独的时候便是个疯子。我常说过人的最大用处在使别人不疯，不论疯是好是坏。
"Thoughts can make people weird, and I am a madman when I am lonely. I have often said that the greatest use of people is to keep others from going crazy, whether they are crazy or bad.“思想多半是浪费生命。你越是想推解，越觉得事实瞻之尚远。没有一件事实可以由人来找出一个最近的原因，虽然原因是存在的。循环小数九与整数一间的距离简直不可以道里计。”
"Thoughts are mostly wastes of life. The more you try to deduce, the more you feel that the facts are far away. There is no fact that can be found by a person to find out a recent cause, although the cause exists. The distance between a round decimal nine and an integer is simply incalculable. ”他的脑子有点疼了，他忽吝啬起来，不再想了。
——然而他还是要想的，生之行役啊！
路。细而有棱角的石子。
他的眼睛由醉而怒了。
二、反刍的灵魂
他继续走他的路。
His brain hurt a little, and he suddenly became stingy and stopped thinking about it. ——However, he still has to think, the journey of life! Road. Fine, angular stones. His eyes were drunk with anger. 2. The ruminated soul He continued his way.路总还是那一条，并且天下的路的分类也很简单，归纳起来开不了一篇流水账，这是不容捏造的事。而致成这些路的性格的无非是人，人惯于相同中现出不同，使纷歧复杂以填塞大而无外的日子。现在他是回去，于是这路在他的名下是短暂的归途了。
The road is always the same, and the classification of the roads in the world is also very simple, and it is impossible to open a running account, which is something that cannot be fabricated. And the character of these roads is nothing more than people, people are used to showing differences in the same, complicating differences to fill the big and outward days. Now that he is going back, this road is a short return in his name.——说到归途，你我便生出许多联想，而一些好言语便在记忆里流出一片鲜明的颜色！甚至使人动了感情，欲仙欲死。然而这很妨碍我的叙述，且一一搁过。你只须记着这是归途，留一个不生不灭完整的印象，待晚上没事睡到床上想着玩去，此刻请先听故事。不过我告诉你，你之所想者一定与事实无关，与归途二字亦非直系亲属，此亦犹山上白云，只堪自娱悦而已。我说句老实话，所谓联想也者多半归于制造，由于自然之势者甚少。（唉，你瞧我够多贫气！）
——When it comes to the way home, you and I have many associations, and some good words flow out of the memory with a bright color! It even makes people feel emotional, and they want to die. However, this hinders my narrative and puts it aside one by one. You just need to remember that this is the way home, leave a complete impression that is neither born nor destroyed, and when you go to bed at night and think about playing, please listen to the story first. But let me tell you, what you think must have nothing to do with the facts, and the word "return" is not an immediate relative, just like the white clouds on the mountain, just for self-pleasure. To be honest, most of the so-called associations are also made, and there are very few due to the power of nature. (Alas, look at how poor I am!) ）他，——我忽然觉得“他”字用得太多，得给我们这位主人公一个较为客气的称呼。于是我乃想了一想。我派定他姓荀，得他姓荀了。我居然能随便派定人家姓氏，这不免是太大的恣意。文章千古事，得失寸心知，你似乎没有理由来查问一个写写文章的为甚么拣这么一个姓来送给他灵府间的朋友吧。他就是姓荀了吗！而且，你大概也不反对这个荀字，山鸟自唤名，荀字的鸣声并不难听。唔，你有点鬼聪明，你会撇撇嘴，说我喜欢一个姓荀的女孩子，那实在是令人难以置答的一封信了。
He ,—— I suddenly felt that the word "he" was used too much, and I had to give our protagonist a more polite title. So I thought about it. I assigned him to be surnamed Xun, and he had to be surnamed Xun. I can actually assign other people's surnames casually, which is inevitably too arbitrary. Articles are eternal, gains and losses are known, you don't seem to have any reason to ask a writer why he chose such a surname to give to his friends in the spirit house. Is he surnamed Xun! Moreover, you probably don't object to the word Xun, the mountain bird calls its own name, and the sound of the word Xun is not ugly. Well, you are a bit smart, you will curl your lips and say that I like a girl with the surname Xun, which is really an unbelievable letter.在这里要顺便表一表姓荀的身份：
Here is a table of the identity of the surname Xun:姓荀的是个年青人，而且是个学生。（一个相当令人伤感的名词）他是吴越一带的人，却莫名其来源的染上一点北方气质，能说好几种方言，而自己又单独有一部《辞源》，所以说话时每令人费解，但那本《辞源》尚未到可以印刷的时候，有几个想到他的精神领域里去旅行的人也不难懂得说得。
The one surnamed Xun is a young man and a student. (A rather sad term) He is a person from the Wuyue area, but he is inexplicably stained with a little northern temperament, can speak several dialects, and he has a separate "Etymology", so it is often incomprehensible when he speaks, but when the "Etymology" is not yet ready to be printed, it is not difficult for a few people who think of traveling in his spiritual realm to know how to speak.在五年前他被人一口诬定是聪明人，这个罪名一直到如今还未洗刷干净，且有被投井下石，添枷落锁的危险，聪明大概也跟美一样，须得到老了，谢了，然后可得脱于籍中。
Five years ago, he was falsely accused of being a smart person, and this crime has not been cleared up until now, and there is a danger of being thrown into the well and added shackles.说了半天，姓荀的学生真有点遗世而独立的丰采了，他可以去做和尚。然而不然，他是一个非常入世的。
现在他就想到他这一天的交往酬酢了。
After talking for a long time, the student surnamed Xun is really a bit of a worldless and independent glorious person, and he can become a monk. However, otherwise, he is a very WTO. Now he thinks of his day's entertainment.他已经不容易记得他今天点过多少头，每一次点头垂到多深的感情里却大概知道。他未读过《交际大全》之类的书，但他几乎对这方面有很好的天才，他能在大商店里当一个得体的店员，若是他高兴，一般朋友都喜欢他，他们恭维他有调节客厅里的空气的本领，因为他以为和一个朋友在一块时只能留三分之一的自己给自己，和两个朋友在一块至多只能留下四分之一。用牺牲自己来制造友情，这是一句很值钱的话。诸位记得：
It is not easy for him to remember how many times he nodded today, but he probably knew how deep the nod was in his feelings. He had not read books such as "The Encyclopedia of Communication", but he was almost a good genius in this area, he could be a decent clerk in a big store, and if he was happy, his friends liked him, and they complimented him for his ability to regulate the air in the living room, because he thought that he could only leave a third of himself for himself when he was with a friend, and a quarter at most with two friends. Sacrificing oneself to create friendship is a very valuable saying. You remember:“我又出租了一天。”
你不要怀疑他这句话里有话，他只是叙述，并无批评的意思，恰如一个人说“我今天吃过三餐饭”的态度一样。
"I rented it out for another day." Don't doubt that there is something in his words, he is just narrating, not criticizing, just like a person who says, "I ate three meals today".风吹得很有意思，一个久未晤面的朋友称赞过姓荀的一句甚么“动的风，静的风”的诗，他忽然想起，觉得这事很有趣味，又自己欣赏了一阵子，认为诗其实没有甚么奥妙。作这句诗的一定不比发明甚么定理的科学家值钱。
The wind blew very interestingly, and a friend who hadn't seen each other for a long time praised a poem surnamed Xun that "moving wind, still wind", he suddenly remembered that he thought this matter was very interesting, and he admired it for a while, thinking that the poem was actually not mysterious. The person who wrote this poem must be no more valuable than the scientist who invented some theorem.一片树叶打在他的额上，逗起他的沉呻。他沉呻的与树叶子，与打，与额，与甚么也没有关系，这其实在化学作用的公式书找不出来的。正如一个人忽然为了一桩甚么事烦疼，也许是屋角一根蛛丝飘到他的脑膜上，也许是一个人鼻子上的一点麻子闪的光苫了他的睫毛，于是乎烦了，但这些外在原因与烦的事实并没有逻辑因果关系，既烦之后则只有烦而已矣。即使自己说，或者别人说出这原因，甚或除去了这原因，怕疼的人仍是烦，决不像小孩子跌了跟头随便打了附近的石头几下就完事的。而想象也大半是这样的。虽然这么就是要遭百科全书派的心理学家的不好看的眼色的，然而这实是透过经验的良心话。
A leaf hit his forehead, making him groan. His moaning has nothing to do with the leaves, the beating, or the forehead, which cannot be found in the formula book of chemical effects. Just as a person suddenly gets troubled by something, maybe a spider silk floats on his meninges in the corner of the house, or maybe a little pockmark on his nose shines on his eyelashes, so he is annoyed, but there is no logical causal relationship between these external causes and the fact of annoyance. Even if you say it yourself, or others say this reason, or even remove this reason, people who are afraid of pain are still annoyed, and it is never like a child who falls and hits a nearby stone a few times. And most of the imagination is like this. Although this is to be looked down upon by encyclopedic psychologists, this is really a word of conscience through experience.他现在想的大概是个人主义这个名词。
于是起先我们看见这四个字在他的眼睛里排开八卦了，转了又转，太极无极，弄得他晕了。他想：
He is probably thinking about the term individualism now. So at first we saw these four words gossip in his eyes, and they turned and turned, Tai Chi Wuji, which made him dizzy. He thought:“个人主义真也跟一切主义一样，是个带有妖性的呼唤，智者见智，愚者见愚，否认天才者见出沉闷的解释。一个姓耳的大学教授会大声疾呼的说自从五四以来个人主义毒害了中国的文化，有是乎，有是乎。诸子百家，各有千秋，王尔德话与纪德的话最有意思：
Individualism, like all doctrines, is a call with demonic nature, the wise see wisdom, the foolish see foolishness, and the denial of genius sees dull explanations. A university professor surnamed Er would say loudly that individualism has poisoned Chinese culture since May Fourth. The hundreds of schools of thought have their own merits, and Wilde's words and Gide's words are the most interesting:“——朋友，你可千万不要再写‘我’了。”
“风，你吹罢，只要是吹的，不论甚么风。”
"——Friend, don't write 'I' anymore." "Wind, you can blow it, as long as it is blowing, no matter what kind of wind it is."人家没有把你的心接受了去之前，费尽千言万语来证明也还是徒然，写文章者其庶几乎。然而写文章也大多是没有办法的办法，某外国批评家曾说过不是文章赶不上你，就是你落在文章的后面，读者作者很少有站在一条水平线上的。自然这是抽象的水平。要像寒暑表一样的刻下度数则要坑杀万把人。甚者，写文章不令人了解必会造成很大的误会，呜呼。而我们可敬的朋友荀遂深叙其眉了，他窘得比教员演不出算题立在黑板前面还难看。
Before people accept your heart, it is still futile to try thousands of words to prove it, and the writer is almost the same. However, most of the articles are also helpless, a foreign critic once said that either the article can't catch up with you, or you fall behind the article, and readers and authors rarely stand on a horizontal line. Naturally, this is an abstract level. If you want to engrave the degree like a temperature table, you will kill thousands of people. What's more, writing articles that are not understood will cause great misunderstandings, alas. And our esteemed friend Xun Sui recounted his eyebrows, he was more embarrassed than a teacher standing in front of the blackboard who couldn't perform arithmetic.“我还是看看风景吧，这夜，啊——”
当星光浸透；小草的红根。
一只粉蝶飞起太淡的影子，
夜栖息在我的肩上，它已经
冻冷了自己，又轻抖着薄翅。
两排杨树栽成了道道小河，
"I'd better take a look at the scenery, this night, ah-" When the starlight is soaked; the red roots of the grass. A butterfly flew up with a shadow that was too faint, The night perches on my shoulder, it has Frozen himself, and shook his thin wings lightly. Two rows of poplar trees are planted into a small river,蒲公英分散出深情的白絮……
Dandelion disperses affectionate white fluff......他又在做甚么诗了么，正是。底下想也想不出来，他又明明记得下面应该是甚么，只是想也想不上来，如一个小孩子在水缸里摸一尾鱼，摸也摸不到，而且越是摸不到越知道这缸里一定有一尾鱼的。
What kind of poem is he doing, exactly. He clearly remembered what should be below, but he couldn't think of it, just like a child touching a fish in a water tank, but he couldn't touch it, and the more he couldn't touch it, the more he knew that there must be a fish in this tank.他心里感到空栖栖的，有从一个翻得老高秋千上飞下来的感觉。像一个沉溺人想抓住一点东西得救。
三、不成文法的名义
“十七八，杀只鸭，十八九，且得走……唔，不对！”
He felt empty in his heart, feeling like he was flying down from a high swing. Like an addicted person who wants to grab something and be saved. 3. In the name of unwritten law "Seventeen or eighteen, kill a duck, eighteen or nineteen, and you have to leave...... No, that's not right! ”荀的故乡的小儿们对于月亮很有好的感情，十七八也者是他们在等月亮上来时拍着手唱的。不过十八九底下的词儿似乎不太靠得住，此地此时，无故乡人在，也无从对证，奈何他不得。其实也难怪，他离家不少年了。小时候的事情越是情切就越是辽远，令人愈是常想回去，但也许真的回去了，那些事又一古脑儿忘了，人真不乏许多令自己悲哀的材料，幸而会排遣，不然这世界上的林姑娘就太多了。且慢，方才说到月亮。为甚么说到月亮呢，因为现在月亮升上来了，他抬头望明月，大有即兴吟诗之恶兆了，荀先生说不定将来是个文学家哩。
The children in Xun's hometown have a good affection for the moon, and they clap their hands and sing while waiting for the moon to come up. However, the words under the eighteen or nineteen seem to be very reliable, and at this time, there is no hometown person, and there is no way to prove it, but he can't. In fact, it's no wonder that he has been away from home for many years. The more affectionate things are when I was a child, the more distant they are, and the more people want to go back, but maybe if they really go back, those things are forgotten again, people really have a lot of materials that make them sad, fortunately, they will be arranged, otherwise there are too many Lin girls in this world. Slow, just talked about the moon. Why talk about the moon, because now that the moon has risen, he looks up at the bright moon, there is a bad omen of improvised poetry, Mr. Xun may be a writer in the future.自从阴历废去原名改称农历，他的身份也只有从农人来证明，念书人没法断定今儿格是甚么日子，不过月亮上来这么迟，大概总是月半以后了。月半以后，月亮自然不圆，而且很不圆了，是个月牙儿。
Since the lunar calendar was abolished and renamed the lunar calendar, his identity can only be proved by farmers, and scholars cannot determine what day it is today, but the moon comes up so late, probably after the middle of the month. After the moon and a half, the moon is naturally not round, and it is very unround, it is a crescent moon.月牙儿真像一般俗人们说是挂着的呢，你入神一看，真不能不相信那两个尖儿上吊着一根线，不过那线如大晴天放得太高的风筝的线一样，明知是有，而越看越没有。（我们近来惯用这种语法，斯为抄袭自己，没出息其实与不脱他人窠臼一般。甚是可叹。）
The crescent moon is really like the ordinary laypeople say that it is hanging, you can't help but believe that there is a thread hanging from the two tips, but that line is like the thread of a kite that is flown too high on a sunny day, knowing that it exists, but the more you look at it, the more you don't have it. (We have been accustomed to this grammar recently, which is to plagiarize ourselves, and it is actually the same as not getting out of the rut of others.) It's very lamentable. ）——嗐，真菇蘑，你看有就是有，你看没有，就没有，谁也没有权利来干涉你呀。你说，你说。
——Hey, real mushrooms, you see that there is it, you see that there is none, there is none, no one has the right to interfere with you. You say, you say.月亮像风筝，我一提起风筝，就觉得它是个风筝，而且不许像别的。诸位几乎要怀疑我与姓荀的是个十七八岁的大姑娘，爱撒娇，这叫我们没法否认，不其然乎，男子汉大丈夫不免有时脱出甚么看不见的绳捆，要撒个娇，不过大都在没人的时候。
The moon is like a kite, and when I mention it, I think it is a kite, and it is not allowed to look like anything else. You almost suspect that I am a seventeen or eighteen-year-old girl with the surname Xun, who loves to act coquettishly, which makes us unable to deny it.月亮照出他的影子，很淡，又长得太不像话，他每走一步路，他的影子好像就伸长一点，如一小股水湿着平铺的沙一样，可是又似乎长了之后还缩回来，这么一伸一缩，犹如尺蠖毛毛虫走路一样。不太好看。
The moon shines on his shadow, very faint, and it looks too unreasonable, every time he walks, his shadow seems to stretch a little, like a small stream of water wet the tiled sand, but it seems to grow and then retract, so stretched and contracted, like an inchworm caterpillar walking. Not very good-looking.毛毛虫走路是先紧收身体后段的环节，次第向前，然后放开，慢慢挪动，那样子比一个唱不准音阶可又偏偏爱唱电影歌曲的学生一样令人没法喜欢。这个城里今年毛毛虫特多简直比做官做生意的还多，住的房子里满处都是，一踩一包汁，还颠动几下，难怪年青小姐们见了要尖声怪气的叫，这叫，一半是表明“我是个女孩子呢”，一半倒确是真怕，这东西会掉到颈领里，痒得令人寒噤。
The caterpillar walks by first tightening the back part of the body, moving forward one by one, then letting go, and moving slowly, which is as unlikable as a student who can't sing the scale but prefers to sing movie songs. There are more caterpillars in this city this year than officials doing business, and the house where they live is full of them, stepping on a pack of juice, and swaying a few times, no wonder the young ladies have to scream in a screaming when they see it, half of which is to show "I'm a girl", and half of them are really afraid that this thing will fall into the collar of the neck, and it is chillingly itchy.“呣。”
他真觉有一条毛毛虫掉到脖子里了，用手摸了又摸，掸了又掸，弄得一身鸡皮疙瘩，一个恐怖钻进他的静脉管里了。
"Hey." He really felt that a caterpillar had fallen into his neck, and he touched and touched it with his hands, dusted and dusted, making goosebumps, and a horror got into his venous duct.毛毛虫的风暴差不多已经过去了，他在衬衫领子上摸到一根头发，便不论青红皂白赶紧说“原来是这个！”这时又忽然前面有两条黑影闪过，尚未辨清是人是鬼，头上嗖嗖一冷，再定眼一看，摆摆手，摇摇头，“没有甚么，没有甚么，”再不自觉恐怕连“莫怕莫怕”都要说出来了。他想嘲笑嘲笑自己。
The caterpillar's storm was almost over, and he touched a hair on the collar of his shirt, so he hurriedly said, "So that's it!" At this time, two black shadows suddenly flashed in front of him, and before he could distinguish whether they were people or ghosts, his head was cold, and he looked at it again, waved his hand, shook his head, and said, "Nothing, nothing," and if he didn't realize it, he might even say "Don't be afraid, don't be afraid." He wanted to laugh at himself.“这路也实在够荒芜的。半年前这儿有的是野狗啃骷髅，晚上谁上这儿来呀，再有深秋凉夜往上一处，下点毛雨子，——”
说到这儿，他又不禁摇摇头，回头看看。
"This road is really barren enough. Half a year ago, there were wild dogs gnawing skeletons here, who came here at night, and then there was a cool night in late autumn to go up and drizzle,——" Speaking of this, he couldn't help but shake his head and look back.“是的，人常常越是怕就越是不断给自己再加点怕的材料，吓死自己的多半是自己。这条要命的路，若是冬天，下了雪，比夜还黑的黄昏，远近不时有大树倒下来，一个人握着一根铁棍子等着他的仇人从这里过，愈等愈不来，酒也完了，火又不能烧，雪有埋死人的恶意，大风。他倒宁愿他的仇人来大家一同走，忽然甚么声音，甚么影子重重的挑一下他的神经，他大叫一声，死了。”
"Yes, the more afraid people are, the more they keep adding more fearful materials to themselves, and most of them are themselves who scare themselves to death. This deadly road, if it is winter, it snows, and at dusk, it is darker than the night, and from time to time a big tree falls from near and far, and a man holds an iron rod waiting for his enemy to pass through here. He would rather his enemy come and walk with everyone, and suddenly some sound or shadow picked his nerves heavily, and he screamed and died. ”“这倒真是一篇写小说的好材料。”
他想到我得这个材料犹如拾得一般，觉得很高兴。这一高兴叫他不怕了，而且学校大门口的灯已经迎接着他了。
"This is really a good material for writing a novel." He was very happy to think that I had this material as if I had found it. This joy made him not afraid, and the lights at the school gate had already greeted him.时候还不太晚，学校的灯还没有灭呢，而且那边，一个人走进校门口。这人他是颇熟识的，但此时没有招呼他的必要，看他进去了，他有欣赏他一下的心情。
It's not too late, the school lights haven't gone out yet, and over there, a person walked into the school gate. He knew this person quite well, but there was no need to greet him at this time, and when he went in, he was in the mood to admire him.上下动着的是一个油头，唔，一天总得梳拢不少回。一面假做的方肩膀，笔挺三件头的西服，西服领子上别一个甚么章，左上角小口袋里有一条小花手绢，脸虽不合格，但刮得很勤，不失为一个小生，走路非常不“帅”，可是也瞒得过女孩子，单靠脚上那双鞋。自然，浑身的乡气是洗不了的。
There is an oily head moving up and down, well, I have to comb it many times a day. On one side, there is a fake square shoulder, a straight three-piece suit, a different chapter on the collar of the suit, a small flower handkerchief in the small pocket in the upper left corner, although the face is unqualified, but it is shaved very diligently, it is not a small student, walking is very not "handsome", but it can also be hidden from the girl, relying only on the shoes on the feet. Naturally, the rustic atmosphere of the whole body cannot be washed.“没有问题，是送你那位所谓爱人的回女生宿舍的了。”
他想到时嘴角没法抑止的浮上一点轻蔑的笑。
"No problem, I'm sending your so-called lover back to the girls' dormitory." When he thought about it, a little contemptuous smile appeared on the corner of his mouth.“这算爱上——不是你需要她，不是他不能没有你，是她需要一个男的，你需要一个女的，不，不，连这个需要也没有，是你们觉得在学校好像要成双作对的一个朦胧而近乎糊涂的意识塞住你们的耳朵，于是你们，你们这些混蛋，来做侮辱爱字的工作了！写两封自甚么萧伯纳的情书之类的纸上抄来的信，偷偷摸摸的一同吃吃饭，看看电影，慢慢地小家小气的成双作对的了，你们去暗就明，嗳赫！
"This is considered falling in love - it's not that you need her, it's not that he can't live without you, it's that she needs a man, you need a woman, no, no, you don't even need this, it's a hazy and almost confused consciousness that you feel like you're going to work in pairs at school to plug your ears, so you, you bastards, come to do the work of insulting the word love! Write two letters copied from paper like George Bernard Shaw's love letters, eat together secretly, watch movies, and slowly become stingy in pairs.“你们爱着的人必需每人想一想，我这是不是爱，《雷雨》里的周萍还有进天堂的资格。
“维系你们的是甚么？
“你们随时都可以拆散，而且应该拆散。”
"The people you love must think about each of you, whether I am love or not, Zhou Ping in "Thunderstorm" still has the qualifications to enter heaven. "What is it that sustains you? "You can break up at any time, and you should break up."“你说，你们的所谓爱是不是懒？懒！任何事情你们不往深处去，是可耻的下流！”
“维系你们的是一个不成文法的名义，这名义担住你们这些糊涂的罪犯。”
"You say, isn't your so-called love lazy? Lazy! If you don't go deep into anything, it's shameful and indecent! ” "What sustains you is an unwritten name, and this name bears you confused criminals."“你们必须知道，你们玷污了这个字令别人多么伤心？哼！”
姓荀的莫明其妙的动了肝火，不择词句的向自己数说一通。那位小生早已进了房间算他今天用了多少钱去了。
四、方寸之木高于城楼
"You must know how sad you are to others by defiling the word. Hum! ” The surname Xun was inexplicably angry, and he counted to himself without hesitation. The boy had already entered the room and calculated how much money he spent today. Fourth, the square inch of wood is higher than the city tower——谨以此章献与常以破落的贵族的心情娱乐自己（即别人）的郎化廊先生
——I would like to dedicate this chapter to Mr. Lang Hua Lang, who often entertains himself (i.e., others) in the mood of a broken aristocrat记得小时候在一张包花生米的外国杂志上看见过一幅照像，照像的样式于今已不大记得起来，只见那人是躺着的，头在远处，脚在近处，那脚掌全部看见，简直比整个身体还大，觉得非常奇怪。长大了些，中学时有美术课，看见先生画一张静物，一个板儿栗居然比一个花瓶大，盖前者在前而后者在后，忠实则有训练的眼睛便见出如此情景。见怪不怪，其怪自败，我似乎已经领会得，比读到庄子上的话也竟然与科学方法触类旁通起来，虽然知道庄生的意思大概不必与我所见略同。郎化廊先生是个颇有意思的人物，常画莫明其妙的画，总不外一个头发极长的人，那人不说话，于是让他嘴里有一只烟斗，免得他太寂寞。画来画去，只在头发的曲直，烟斗的方圆上来翻花样。说句良心话，画实在没有甚么奥妙，不过能令主客快乐，倒是人生里闪光的一点东西。郎化廊先生的功夫大半花在画题上，画只是可有可无的。画题真有好的，我那天陪荀先生到郎先生的残象的雅致的画室里去看郎先生的画展，我不明白他二人相识不，礼多人不怪，替他们介绍一番，大家似乎有点宿缘，一见就很投机，郎先生当场画了一张画送给荀先生，题曰“方寸之木，高于城楼”，不知是甚么道理，就一直记着，他咀嚼这两句话的声音简直如别人吃口香糖一样。并且一记起这两句话，就想起咫尺天涯的友人，就记起他吞食波特莱尔的样子。
I remember seeing a photo in a foreign magazine with a bag of peanuts when I was a child, and I don't remember much about the style of the photo now, but I saw that the person was lying down, with his head in the distance, his feet close, and the soles of his feet were all visible, which was bigger than his whole body, which I thought was very strange. When I grew up, I had an art class in middle school, and I saw my teacher painting a still life, and a chestnut was actually bigger than a vase, with the former in front and the latter behind. I seem to have understood that the words of Zhuangzi are actually similar to the scientific method, although I know that Zhuangsheng's meaning probably doesn't have to be the same as what I saw. Mr. Lang Hualong is a very interesting character, often painting incomprehensible paintings, always a person with extremely long hair, that person does not speak, so he has a pipe in his mouth, so that he will not be too lonely. Drawing and drawing, only in the curvature of the hair, the square and circle of the pipe. To be honest, there is really nothing mysterious about painting, but it can make the host and guest happy, but it is a little thing that shines in life. Most of Mr. Lang Hualang's kung fu is spent on the subject of the painting, and the painting is just dispensable. The title of the painting is really good, I accompanied Mr. Xun to the elegant studio of Mr. Lang's afterimage that day to see Mr. Lang's art exhibition, I don't understand whether the two of them know each other, the courtesy is not strange, introduce them to them, everyone seems to have a bit of fate, very speculative at first sight, Mr. Lang painted a painting on the spot for Mr. Xun, titled "Square inch of wood, higher than the city tower", I don't know what the truth is, I have always remembered that the sound of him chewing these two sentences is like someone else eating gum. And as soon as I remember these two sentences, I think of my friends at the end of the world, and I remember the way he swallowed Baudelaire.波特莱尔，一头披着黑毛的狮子。
诸位将说我有点神情恍惚，把前头的线索忘了，随便撩几句，又引导一条支流了，不然，荀现在的确又想到草木城楼了，这是眼前实物，是他走进校门后看见的。
Baudelaire, a lion with black fur. You will say that I am a little in a trance, I forgot the clues in front of me, and I casually flirted with a few words, and guided another tributary, otherwise, Xun did think of the grass and wood city tower again, this is the real thing in front of him, and he saw it after walking into the school gate.他们的学校在城外，每当夕阳无限好，北门的望京楼像一幅剪影的站在彩云上，气概犹如曹孟德。现在城楼不大看得见，摩擦他的知觉的是护城河的涛声。护城河老了，早就干枯了感情，如一个僵木的老人了。若是有一点流活的，那是园丁郝老老浇的：这城河如今改成农业改良所的苗圃了，下面种了不少树子秧，尤加利与马尾松都有，虽然年事不大感慨可特别多，一有风吹，便作涛吟，颇能振撼脆弱的人的心魂。
Their school is outside the city, and whenever the sunset is infinitely good, the Wangjing Tower at the north gate stands on the colorful clouds like a silhouette, and the spirit is like Cao Mengde. Now the city tower is not very visible, and what rubs against his perception is the sound of the waves of the moat. The moat is old, and it has long dried up its feelings, like a stiff old man. If there is a little live, it is watered by the gardener Hao Lao: this city river has now been changed to the nursery of the Agricultural Improvement Institute, and a lot of tree seedlings are planted below, eucalyptus and masson pine.说到草，他是随便想起，至于他为何想起，不知。
When it comes to grass, he thinks of it casually, but as for why he thinks of it, he doesn't know.这学校的草比甚么都多，青赭黄绿宣传着更递的季节。蓊蓊郁郁，生意盎茂得非常荒凉。“城春草木深，”这句好诗写在这里。狗尾草，竹节草，顽固得毫不在情理的巴根草，流浪天涯的王孙草，以不同的姓名籍贯在这里现形。一种没有悲哀与记忆的无枝无叶的草开着淡蓝的小星一样的花，令人想起小寡妇的发蓝耳环。秋蓼在孑孑的家乡栖侧，开了花，放了叶，全如营养不足的人失眠后的眼白与眼窝，叫一个假渔人放不下无钩的钓竿。紫藕在劣等遗传的蜘蛛的乱网间无望的等待自己的叶子发红。紫地丁，黄地丁，全是痨病。喇叭花永远也吹不出甚么希望。一个像糊涂打手的无礼貌的三尺高的植物的花简直是一些充脓的痂疤。还有一种叶片上有毒刺的蜂螫草，晨晚都发散一种怪气味。……
There is more grass in this school than anything else, and the green ochre yellow and green advertise the more desolate season. Lush and lush, the business is very desolate. "The grass and trees are deep in spring," this good poem is written here. Dogtail grass, bamboo grass, the unreasonable bagan grass, and the wandering grandson grass appear here with different names and origins. A branchless and leafless grass without sorrow and memory blooms like light blue stars, reminiscent of the little widow's blue earrings. Autumn smartweed blooms and leaves on the side of the lonely hometown, just like the whites and sockets of a malnourished person's eyes after insomnia, so that a fake fisherman can't put down the hookless fishing rod. Purple lotus hopelessly waits for its leaves to turn red among the tangled webs of inferior hereditary spiders. Purple and yellow are all tuberculosis. The trumpet flower can never blow any hope. The flowers of a three-foot-tall plant that resembles a confused thug are simply some pus-filled scabs. There is also a bee sting with poisonous stingers on its leaves, which emits a strange smell in the morning and evening. ……多着呢，说也说不清，这里像个收容所，不拒绝任何品性的来寄居。
There are many, and it is impossible to say, this place is like a shelter, and it does not refuse any character to come to sojourn.这里的草一小时以前与一小时之后不改甚么样子，但如果一个人离开这儿三天，再回来一看，你会记起一句沧桑的古话。旧的去了，新的来了，也总还是那个样子，它能盘踞了这么些日子了，想澈底芟夷又似乎不可能，管这片草的园工又是一个爱说空话毫无气力的人，他除了弄几个钱把自己打扮打扮（他的年纪并不大）外，甚么道理也不懂。其实真要这些草像样，必需草儿们自己来，它们似乎要记得这么一块广地不能让它们来平白糟蹋，连一朵像样的花都不生长！
The grass here doesn't change much an hour ago or an hour later, but if a person leaves here for three days and comes back to see it, you will remember an old saying of vicissitudes. The old is gone, the new is coming, and it is always the same, it can be entrenched for so many days, it seems impossible to completely eradicate it, and the gardener in charge of this grass is a person who loves to talk empty words and has no strength, he doesn't understand anything except to get a few money to dress himself up (he is not very old). In fact, if you really want these grasses to be decent, you must come by yourself, and they seem to remember that such a vast land cannot be wasted in vain, and not even a decent flower will grow!荀停立于一座木桥上想了不少时候，自己忽然觉得非常惭愧。
“临表涕泣，不知所云。”
他走上那条在明明德的路了。
五、图案生活
Xun stopped standing on a wooden bridge and thought for a long time, and suddenly felt very ashamed. "I cried at the memorial, not knowing what to say." He embarked on the path of Mingmingde. 5. Pattern life四堵长墙围住一块大地。八尺宽的大门开在两棵活了十年左右的大树下面。那门就是荀刚进去的了，门是极菲的木板钉成的，推敲的次数太多了，常有破滥摧散的情事发生：“关上，比开着看见的太多”在这门上写得非常自然现实。墙是土墙，砌法至为原始，就地取泥倒在四块活动的木板夹起来的方匣儿里捶压而成的，不淋雨，不吹风，而晒太阳就是天衣无缝，否则一倒四五丈。但是你打量打量进出其间的人脸，都染有点书香剑气，在战国时代当得起“士”的称呼。不是你重行看看那块黑地白字的招牌就不得不觉得黑的愈黑，白的愈白了。
Four long walls surround a piece of land. The eight-foot-wide gate opens under two big trees that have lived for about ten years. The door was nailed by Xun Gang in the door, and the door was nailed to extremely fei wooden boards, and there were too many scrutinies, and there were often broken and ruined situations: "Close, see more than open" is written on this door very naturally and realistically. The wall is an earthen wall, the masonry method is the most primitive, and the mud is poured into a square box sandwiched by four movable wooden boards, which is not rained or blown, and the sun is seamless, otherwise it will fall four or five feet. But if you look at the faces of the people in and out of it, they are all stained with a bit of scholarly sword-like energy, and they are worthy of the title of "scholar" in the Warring States Period. It's not that you have to feel that the blacker it is, the whiter it is, and the whiter it is.荀走进大门，看过那样“小生”，踏上正路，觉得心里有点甚么，小立半晌，令人无从会心，他自己也不明白了。回头看看那两棵树，很看不起的想：不开花，不结实，不能为栋梁，为车辐，倒长得扶疏挺拔的。生命给你们生存的理由。当下他似乎悲天悯人的原谅它们了。觉得自己平素气量太窄，很过意不去了。
Xun walked into the door, saw such a "little student", stepped on the right path, and felt something in his heart, Xiao Li for a long time, which made people unable to understand, and he himself didn't understand. Looking back at the two trees, I looked down on them and thought: they don't bloom, they don't bear fruit, they can't be pillars, they can't be spokes, but they grow slender and straight. Life gives you a reason to live. At the moment, he seemed to have forgiven them. I felt that my usual temperament was too narrow, and I was very sorry.这一想使他心里平衡清洁。再也拿不起屠刀，走在路上也文质彬彬，与草木虫鱼都和气。
This thought made his heart balanced and clean. He can no longer hold a butcher's knife, and he is polite when walking on the road, and he is friendly with plants, trees, insects and fish.眼前一黑，并非头晕，是熄灯号之后关灯之前的警号，再有明文上的十五分钟，表现上的卅分钟的时候便该真黑了。不过他用不着赶忙。现在距离他的床至多也没有三十步，而每步怎样也用不了一分钟是他不用想就知道的。
The darkness in front of his eyes was not dizziness, it was the warning signal before turning off the lights after the lights were turned off, and there were fifteen minutes in the text, and thirty minutes in the performance should be really dark. But he didn't need to hurry. Now he was less than thirty steps away from his bed at most, and he didn't have to think about it for a minute to take each step.刚打开被窝，一想，我今天有没有信，在尚未寻找与询问之前先想，还是先想没有的好。若真没有是意中事，若是有，岂不出乎意料之外。人常作如是想便免了许多失望的苦恼。想完了这一段话，着手找了。
As soon as I opened the bed, I thought, "Do I have any letters today, before looking for and asking, it's better to think about it first." If it really doesn't happen, if it is, wouldn't it be unexpected? People often think like this to avoid a lot of disappointment. After thinking about this paragraph, I started looking for it.“你没有信。”
说话的人竟不知道自己比一个报丧的更不讨喜。
“唔。”
"You don't believe it." The person who spoke did not know that he was more unpleasing than a mourner. "Hmm."摆摆两手，还耸耸肩，这一唔的含意数不清了。足见免得失望的方法不是放开希望。在这一唔的声音尚未完全播出窗子的时候，一个笑脸后面堆上许多笑脸了：
Waving his hands and shrugging his shoulders, the meaning of this misfortune is countless. It shows that the way to avoid disappointment is not to let go of hope. Before this sound was fully broadcast, many smiling faces piled up behind a smiling face:“荀，麻烦，大笔一挥。哪儿？就这儿，我给研墨，纸。”
“麻烦了，嚇。”
荀一皱眉。笑着的脸视而不见，不理会。
"Xun, trouble, with a big stroke of the pen. Where? Here, I give ink and paper. ” "Sorry for the trouble, scary." Xun Yi frowned. The smiling face turned a blind eye and ignored it.这几副笑脸的主人将于暑假中找事，现在已是暑假的前夜了。谁都知道，需要最多，薪津最多，事务最无支蔓的是会计人员。诸同学都有志会计，但学校里不发“该生已修会计，可以发卖”的证件，这是疏忽的地方。但他们都很聪明，有人找到四年前某上海私立会计学校的肄业证件，找熟铺子镌个印，照样发他几十张好了。而缮写证件是早就看上了荀的，荀的字不坏，且在他们眼里他是个极随和的人。
The owners of these smiling faces will be looking for trouble during the summer vacation, and now it is the eve of the summer vacation. Everyone knows that the accountants who need the most, have the most salaries, and have the most unsupported affairs. All the students aspire to be accountants, but the school does not issue certificates that "the student has completed accounting and can be sold", which is an oversight. But they are all very smart, someone found the graduation certificate of a private accounting school in Shanghai four years ago, found a familiar shop to engrave a seal, and sent him dozens of copies. And the copying of the certificate has long taken a fancy to Xun, Xun's handwriting is not bad, and in their eyes he is a very easy-going person.“放着，等下写。”
“蜡烛，谁有，捐一两根？火柴。你喝水？”
又皱一皱眉。抓起笔，在砚台上蘸了蘸又滚了滚，看看。
“还好？还好，还好。”笑脸其一自说自答。
“好！是有一手，这字，唉。”
"Put it down, wait for it to be written." "Candles, who has them, donate one or two? Match. Do you drink water? ” frowned again. Grabbed the pen, dipped it on the inkstone and rolled it again, and took a look. "It's okay? It's okay, it's okay." The smiling face answered himself. "Okay! There is a hand, this word, alas. ”“唉，这字，好！”
“大方。”
“唉。”
“唉。”
“谢谢。”
“谢谢。”
“明天请客，一人一块钱。”
“等我们找到事，请客，请客，没有问题。主任。股长。”
“主任，主任吗！”
"Alas, this word, good!" "Generous." "Alas." "Alas." "Thank you." "Thank you." "Tomorrow treat, one dollar per person." "When we find something, treat, treat, no problem. Director. Unit length. ” "Director, director!"…………
荀铺了床，想看点书，找了一本，是一本关于古墓的发掘的。这书是他喜欢的，但拿上手一会，巴——一下摔了。在没有觉得生气之前已经生气了。
Xun made the bed, wanted to read some books, and found one, which was about the excavation of ancient tombs. He liked this book, but after holding it for a while, Ba fell down. He was angry before he felt angry.他立在床前，两手叉腰，气势俨然，闭起上下唇，呼了几口气之后，用力一捺手，像在一个恐怖之前的镇静的跨开步子，很快的走出宿舍的门，他的步子又重又大，像是让人知道。
He stood in front of the bed, put his hands on his hips, with great momentum, closed his upper and lower lips, exhaled a few breaths, pressed his hand hard, like a calm step before a horror, and quickly walked out of the door of the dormitory, his steps were heavy and big, as if to let people know.踏着踏不乱的树影，（校舍里也有树，半是松树，当是昔日植在石马翁仲间的；半是榆槐，是新近栽的。）踢着踢不破的草上风，一路上没有理智情感只有动作的到了图书馆前的那片广坪上，往萋萋绿草上这么一睡，曲肱而枕之，并不颓唐。
stepping on the shadow of the tree that cannot be stepped on, (there are also trees in the school building, half of which are pine trees, which were planted in the Shima Wengzhong room in the past; half are elm locusts, which were newly planted.) Kicking the grass that could not be broken, there was no reason or emotion along the way to the wide flat in front of the library, and he slept on the lush green grass, bending his arms and pillowing his head, not degrading.他闭上眼睛又睁开，（也可能是睁开了又闭上，这个周期很难结算。）闪亮像一个大雷。
泻进他的襟子里，跟我们把小麦收进仓一样。
“唉图案呀。
He closed his eyes and opened them, (or maybe they opened and closed, this cycle is difficult to settle.) Shining like a big thunder. pour into his collar, just as we put the wheat into the barn. "Oh, the pattern.“我们这校舍，五六十个等量面积，日月星斗，三辰之光，投射一片等重的阴阳，马牛鸡犬乱不了角度方寸，它们只是一两滴不知趣的颜色而已。不依规矩，自成方圆。
"Our school building, fifty or sixty equal areas, the sun, moon and stars, the light of the three stars, projecting a piece of yin and yang of equal weight, horses, cattle, chickens and dogs can't mess up the angles, they are just one or two drops of uninteresting color. Don't follow the rules, make your own square circle.“我倒想掇拾一点昨天的呼哨，隔宿鞭声，不管是鞭石鞭羊。你说，难道是我扯且拍在电影上不是一个美国牧场么？风吹草动见牛羊，平凡的人不禁有胡风塞马之思，然而眼前没有，有，看也是令人伤心的事：被牧的是猪，牧之者其为牧猪奴？
"I want to pick up a little bit of yesterday's whistle, the sound of whipping every other night, whether it's whipping stone whipping sheep. You say, isn't it an American ranch that I pull and shoot in the movie? When the wind blows and the grass moves cattle and sheep, ordinary people can't help but think of the wind and horses, but there is no one in front of them, and it is also sad to see: it is a pig that is being raised, and the one who shepherds it is a pig slave?“图案，图案，不是织在布上的图案，不是印在纸上的图案，是一张刚着了第一遍颜色的成稿，匠心工具都不精良，图案之不美原是难怪的。
"Patterns, patterns, are not patterns woven on cloth, not patterns printed on paper, they are a finished draft that has just been colored for the first time, and the ingenuity tools are not sophisticated, so it is no wonder that the pattern is not beautiful.“现在，灯黑了，煤炉的烟囱飞出些无人理睬的神秘了。有人点蜡烛，日暮汉宫传蜡，青烟散入五侯家。呸！——
“谈生意经的该收拾起满口行话了。那些上海人。
"Now, the lights are dark, and the chimney of the coal stove flies out of some mystery that no one pays attention to. Someone lit a candle, and the Han Palace passed wax at dusk, and the green smoke dispersed into the house of the five marquises. Bah! —— "It's time for those who talk about business to clean up their jargon. Those Shanghainese.“姓徐的与姓卜的两个人的政论该急转直下的归于一点才好，不然他们要彼此难堪了。
"The political opinions of the two people surnamed Xu and Bu should take a sharp turn and return to a point, otherwise they will embarrass each other.“考会计员的诸兄也停止计算一百八加五十减六十元伙食尚余多少吧，真辛苦了。你们该在尚未来得及说‘我要睡了’之前便钻进梦里去。
"The brothers who took the accountant exam also stopped calculating how much food was left over from 108 plus 50 minus 60 yuan, it's really hard. You should get into a dream before you have time to say, 'I'm going to sleep.'“还有鲁先生，你年高书厚的，别人费灯油哇。我告诉你一个故事：从前有家农户，兄弟两个，一般谨慎，长大了各娶了妻子，也一样懂得尊敬钱钞，后来他们分了家，当然一切都上天平称过，公平得没法再公平了。几年之后，老大比老二多买了一条牛。为甚么，因为老大每晚点灯只用一根灯草，而老二则用二根。你想想吧，一根灯草，一条牛哩！
"And Mr. Lu, you are old and well-booked, and others spend lamp oil. Let me tell you a story: once upon a time, there was a farmer, two brothers, generally cautious, when they grew up, they married wives, and they also knew how to respect money and money, and then they separated, of course, everything was weighed on the scale, and it was so fair that it could not be fairer. A few years later, the eldest bought one more cow than the second child. Why, because the eldest only uses one lamp grass to light the lamp every night, while the second child uses two. Think about it, one lamp grass, one cow!“鲁先生，你该把你存的鸡蛋一个一个，仔仔细细检验一遍，再一个一个，仔仔细细放入坛子里，封好，藏好。你也该拿镜子照照脸，照照牙证明牙用盐刷的确比用牙粉更会白的快。而最后你该在床头下拿出一个罐子，端详端详，揭开盖子，用筷子在里拣了又拣，拣出一块方方正正的红烧肉，很惋惜的吞入口里，你煮了这肉是想吃进一块长出两块的。你该安排被褥睡了吧，哦，哦，我哪能忘了，你有件大事没做哩，你得出去，到四处走一遭，把墙上的日报，旧布告，一切可撕的纸撕下来，裁成小方块儿，用铁丝穿起来，挂在桌角，起草，揩鼻涕，都甚方便。鲁先生，我那位自命老牛皮条子（榨不出一点油水）的大伯父如果见了你也一定会佩服。你也该睡了吧。你梦到一条航空奖券捏在你手里，我祝你。
"Mr. Lu, you should carefully inspect the eggs you have saved one by one, and then put them into the jar carefully, seal them, and hide them. You should also look at your face in a mirror and look at your teeth to prove that using a salt brush for teeth will indeed turn white faster than using tooth powder. And finally you should take out a jar under the bedside, look at it carefully, open the lid, pick and pick it with chopsticks, pick out a square piece of braised pork, and swallow it in your mouth with regret. You should arrange the bedding to sleep, oh, oh, how can I forget, you have something big you haven't done, you have to go out, go around, tear off the daily newspaper, old bulletins, all the tearable paper on the wall, cut it into small squares, wear it with wire, hang it on the corner of the table, draft, wipe your nose, it's very convenient. Mr. Lu, my self-proclaimed old cowhide strip (who can't squeeze out a little oil and water) will definitely admire you if you see it. You should sleep too. You dream of an airline ticket in your hand, I wish you.“嗯。一个五颜六色奇臭奇熏的池子不断发酵了，你们的鼾声煮熟你们的志气了，煮，煮，一锅腐肉，一瓮陈糟，阿门！”
"Hmm. A colorful and smelly pool is constantly fermenting, and your snoring has cooked your ambitions, boiling, boiling, a pot of carrion, a jar of stale, amen! ”一只知更鸟衔来一声汽笛的嘶叫，枕木、钢轨咬着牙等待着，火车过去了，却又留给他们一片回音。
“火车，火车，火车过去了，沙宁，勇敢地，英雄，你跳下月台！
“可是，天还是黑朦朦，月亮只使它更黑了。
A robin came with a whistle, the sleepers and rails gritted their teeth and waited, and the train passed, but they were left with an echo. "Train, train, train passes, Shaning, bravely, hero, you jump off the platform! However, the sky was still dark and hazy, and the moon only made it darker.“天亮了。天亮了又怎么，更坏，更坏。
“没有一片金黄的草原来迎接我。我想点起火，一篝圣火。然而没有，没有，火在零下卅度的地方发不出光，火，在遥远的地方！”
"It's dawn. So what, it's worse, worse. "There is no golden grassland to greet me. I want to light a fire, a sacred fire. But no, no, the fire does not shine at minus thirty degrees, fire, in a distant place! ”荀疲倦了，他抓住一把野株兰合上了眼睛，一群小仙女用吻给他合了，从明天起，他只有一半活在时间与空间里了。
六、故事的主人公致作者的信
敬爱的朋友西门鱼先生：
Xun was tired, he grabbed a handful of wild orchids and closed his eyes, and a group of little fairies kissed him, and from tomorrow, he would only live half of time and space. 6. Letter from the protagonist of the story to the author Dear Friend Mr. Simon Yu,我仿佛是注定了要写这封信给你。不过在写下第一个字时便已知道我这信一定把我要说的话走了样。不论是较好或较坏，都不是原来的样子。有些话起初想说而没有说，有些话本不想说却又墙头草一样的不知是怎么风吹来了，有些话想说，也说出来，而且生理上起了变化令人有见了别离了二三十年的儿子的母亲的心情。这是动笔人的常事，我相信，先生写完了《匹夫》不能不与我有同感。
I seem to be destined to write this letter to you. But when I wrote the first word, I already knew that my letter must have taken what I was going to say out of shape. Whether it is better or worse, it is not the original form. Some things I wanted to say at first but didn't say, some things I didn't want to say but I don't know how the wind blew like a wallflower, some things I wanted to say and said them, and the physiological changes made people feel like a mother who had been separated from her son for twenty or thirty years. This is a common thing for people who write it, and I believe that my husband cannot help but feel the same way as me after writing "The Ordinary Man".我们谢谢你，你用我来做这个故事的连锁关节，虽然你无心为我作起居言行录，我也正不希望你那样。所以我不送我的日记给你作参考就无庸遗憾了。
We thank you for using me as the link of this story, although you have no intention of recording my daily life and deeds, I don't want you to do that. So I don't regret not sending you my diary for reference.前两月我认识一位“新诗”时代的老年青诗人，我们真有点一见如故，我很喜欢他的脾气。我们大家都会聊天，一聊就忘了时间的生灭。一回他谈起我的一位先生，说他人极可爱，却有一点不好，每每把相熟的人写到他的小说里去，一写进小说，虽然态度很好，总不免有点褒贬存在其间，令人不感快活。诗人的话我不同意。当时却也没有跟他辩论。
Two months ago, I met an old young poet in the era of "new poetry", and we really hit it off at first sight, and I liked his temper very much. We all chat, and we forget the life and death of time when we talk. Every time he talked about a gentleman of mine, he said that he was very cute, but there was a little bit of a bad thing, and every time he wrote acquaintances into his novels, as soon as he wrote them into the novel, although his attitude was very good, he couldn't help but feel a little praise and criticism in between, which made people feel unhappy. I didn't agree with the poet's words. I didn't debate with him at that time.我也感谢你不用太史公夹叙夹议的笔法，但如果你真这样，我并不反对。
I also thank you for not using the brushwork of Tai Shi Gong, but if you are like this, I am not opposed.第一，你动手描画那个人，必须对他了解，即使并不了解，也至少具有了解的勇气与诚心。这，还不值得感谢吗？对于一个人性的探险者我们必须慰问。因此写小说实在是个高贵的职业，如果写小说也算得是职业。我们这个国度的气候真不佳，了解的温情开不了花，多有几个想写小说的，哪怕，写小说的呢，我们的国度将会美丽些。
First, when you draw that person, you must understand him, and even if you don't know him, you must at least have the courage and sincerity to understand. Isn't this worth thanking? We must offer condolences to the explorers of human nature. Therefore, writing novels is really a noble profession, and if you write novels, it can be regarded as a profession. The climate in our country is really bad, and the warmth of understanding cannot bloom, and there are a few more people who want to write novels, even if they write novels, our country will be more beautiful.再说，写小说不在熟人里讨材料，难道倒去随便拉两个陌生人来吗！这一点起码是我们应该给一个作家的。
写得像，是你，忠实。写得不像，不是你，算他本领差。
Besides, if you don't ask for materials from acquaintances when writing novels, why don't you just bring two strangers! At least this is what we should give to a writer. Write like you, faithful. Write like it, not you, it's not his bad skills.恭维得当，聪明，奚落几句能恰到好处，大家应相视一笑方算得朋友。叫拍照的不要拍出脸上的麻疤那不免是乡下大姑娘的小气，不足取法。而且，对不起，正因为要使他像你，那个麻疤或许要夸大一点渲染一下。你要是计较这些，那是寻找错了人。
Compliments are appropriate, smart, and a few words of ridicule are just right, and everyone should look at each other and smile at each other to be considered friends. Tell the person who took the photo not to take pictures of the scars on his face, which is inevitably the stinginess of the big girl in the countryside, and it is not enough to take the law. And, I'm sorry, just because you want to make him look like you, that scar may have to be exaggerated a little more. If you care about this, you are looking for the wrong person.被写的人通常最怕人讽刺。关于讽刺，鲁宾孙的心理的改造上有一段说得极好，原文记不清，不具引，现在但说我一点意思。
The person who is written is usually the most afraid of sarcasm. Regarding irony, there is a passage in the transformation of Robinson's psychology that is very good, the original text is not remembered, and there is no quote, but now I will say a little meaning.有人说一切小说都是自传，这是真话，没有一个人物是不经过作者的自己的揉掺而会活在纸上的。作者愈尖刻，愈表示作者了解的深精，作者必先寄以同情，甚至喜欢，然后人物方会有人间烟火气，甚至，没有人间烟火气。字典上所以同时有骂人与讽刺两个词汇是不难明白的。
Some people say that all novels are autobiographies, this is the truth, and no character will live on paper without the author's own mixing. The more sharp the author, the more it means that the author understands deeply, and the author must first send sympathy or even like, and then the characters will have human fireworks, or even no human fireworks. It is not difficult to understand that there are two words in the dictionary at the same time: scolding and sarcasm.再者，若是有些人一直是以被讽刺为生活的，那更该感谢讽刺的人，因为你们必须依赖别人的讽刺才能活下来。他给你们一个生活的口实。不然你们必须自杀以谢人类的理由更大了。我教给你们，如果下次有人问你们就你们凭甚么也以人类的名分来吃这份粮食，“没有你们世界不更好些吗？”你们可以说：“我们可以给人讽刺。”
Furthermore, if some people have been living by being ridiculed, then you should thank the sarcastic person even more, because you have to rely on other people's sarcasm to survive. He gives you an excuse to live. Otherwise, you have to commit suicide to thank humanity. I teach you, if someone asks you next time why you eat this food as a human being, "Wouldn't the world be better without you?" You can say, "We can give irony." ”好了，我好像是知道你要将我的信发表乘机来宣教了，我知道这事瞒不过先生慧眼。
已经糟蹋了不少篇幅，有话也不能再说，何况没有话，所有的话都在题目里了。再见。
荀一二年八月底
Well, I seem to know that you are going to publish my letter and take the opportunity to preach, and I know that I can't hide this from my husband's discerning eyes. I have wasted a lot of space, and I can't say anything more, let alone if I have no words, all the words are in the title. Good bye. At the end of August 12, Xun
[1] 本篇原载1941年8月31日和9月6日、7日、8日、10日、25日昆明《中央日报》，署名“西门鱼”。

待车

待车[1]
[1] This article was originally published in Kunming's "Central Daily" on August 31 and September 6, 7, 8, 10 and 25, 1941, signed "Ximen Fish". Waiting for the car[1]书放在映着许多倒影的漆桌上。烫金字的书脊在桌面上造成一条低低的隧道。分在两边的纸叶形成一个完全的对称。不用甚么东西镇住，也不致把角上的单数号码变成双数的或把双数的变为单数。平平贴贴，如被一只美丽的手梳得极好的柔润的发。应当恰是半本的地方。
The book is placed on a lacquered table with many reflections. The gilded spine creates a low tunnel on the tabletop. The paper leaves on both sides form a perfect symmetry. There is no need to calm it down, and it does not turn the odd number on the corner into an even number or an even number into an odd number. It is flat and sticky, like soft hair combed by a beautiful hand. It should be exactly half a book.下午渐渐淡没了。如一杯冲过太多次的茶，即使叶子是极好的。
云自东方来，自西方来，南方来，北方来，云自四方来。云要向四方散去。
The afternoon fades away. Like a cup of tea that has been rinsed too many times, even if the leaves are excellent. The clouds come from the east, from the west, from the south, from the north, and from the four directions. The clouds are going to disperse in all directions.将晚的车上堆积的影子太多了，是的，将晚的车上堆积的烟灰太多了。风和太阳把两边的树绿尽向车上倾泼，弄得车里车外淋淋漓漓。因此，车拚着命跑。可不是，表的声息都弱了。如落花，表的声息积满一室，又飘着，上上下下，如柳絮呢。
There are too many shadows piled up on the late car, yes, there are too many soots piled up on the late car. The wind and the sun poured all the green on both sides of the car onto the car, making it drenched inside and outside the car. Therefore, the car ran desperately. No, the sound of the watch is weak. Like falling flowers, the sound of the watch accumulates in the room, and it floats again, up and down, like willow catkins.只要是吹的，不论是甚么风。
风吹着春天，好轻好轻。
车过了一站，又过了一站。
向自己说“先生，你请坐吧。你累了呢。是呀，你忙得很。你老是跑来跑去的，真是！”
As long as it is blowing, no matter what the wind is. The wind blows the spring, so light, so light. The car passed one stop, and then another. Say to yourself, "Sir, please sit down. You're tired. Yes, you're very busy. You're running around all the time, really! ”又咕咕的向自己笑了。且莫笑，好好儿坐着。椅子是一个好主人，它多么诚恳，多么殷勤。尤其对于一个单身的人，单身向天尽头走去的旅客。
Cooed and smiled at myself again. Don't laugh, sit well. The chair is a good host, how sincere and attentive it is. Especially for a single person, a single traveler walking to the end of the sky.像叶柄承托住树叶一样，用最舒泰最自然的姿势坐着。脚也离开地板。像坐在水上，坐在云上，云与水款款的流动在身下。
书，随便挑一本看看的，也竟似很用功了。一口气看了个大半本。
Like a petiole supporting a leaf, sit in the most comfortable and natural posture. The feet are also off the floor. It's like sitting on water, sitting on the clouds, and the clouds and water flow under you. Books, just pick one to read, it seems to be very hard. I read most of it in one go.书帮助我们过了多少日子，一叶又一叶的从手指头翻过去。
How many days have books helped us, leaf after leaf from finger to finger.我们常在灯下大声读书，从前。我的声音若是高出了你的，你看一看我，低头拂一拂头发便用更高的声音赶过了我。我们在草地上读书，在大树下读书，在冰湄，在花间，在火车上，还在待车室里。你看，云的影子从我的书上掠过去了，你看呐，它飞，飞过草场了。草场上有花牛刍料，流动云影的清风，洗了它的背，又洗了它项间的铃与铃的声音。
We used to read aloud under the lamp, once upon a time. If my voice is higher than yours, look at me, bow your head and brush your hair, and drive me over with a higher voice. We read on the grass, under the big trees, on the ice, among the flowers, on the train, and still in the waiting room. You see, the shadow of the cloud swept past my book, and you see, it flew over the pasture. There was fodder for flowers and cattle on the pasture, and the breeze of the shadow of the clouds washed its back, and washed the bells and the sound of the bells between its necks.我的舌头沿着唇边舔过了，刚才吃过的糖的残留的味道。
My tongue licked along my lips, the residual taste of the sugar I had just eaten.还早呢。啊，书上的字全没有了。它们飞出去了，像到室里来啄食的小雀一样飞出去了，剩得一方模糊的白色，怎么？一两分钟里天竟暗了。尾瓦上有羽毛的声音，窗外原来就下着雨。一天如玉屑般的小水珠。江南黄梅天气。火车前面的巨灯照在雨里一定好看极了。一声汽笛，火车压地驶过，天是那么灰灰的，看来却异样的白。火车喷出的白云怕也不是在丝质的蓝天下一般颜色了吧。车上人不会知道。窗子落下，玻璃上极微细的琮铮，像小雨吸进厚绒的帷子里了。
It's still early. Ah, the words in the book are all gone. They flew out, like little sparrows that came to the room to peck at food, leaving only a blurry white, what? It was dark in a minute or two. There was the sound of feathers on the tail tiles, and it was raining outside the window. A day is like a small droplet of water like jade shavings. Jiangnan Huangmei weather. The giant lights in front of the train must look great in the rain. With a whistle, the train drove past, the sky was so gray, but it looked strangely white. The white clouds ejected by the train are probably not the same color as the silky blue sky. The people on the train won't know. The window fell, and the very fine cang on the glass was sucked into the thick velvet curtain like a light rain.取下一个小皮包，想下站时要不要换一双鞋。打开箱子，箱子里的甚么东西衔着人的思想飞出去了。想着，小包又无端被关上，如一只乖巧的小猫，如一只团团的小猫一样的头，睡在主人的两膝间。车上已暗，一些箱笼如梦中的云海中的山树。有甚么事可作？抽一支烟吧。烟头的红火如萤火虫飞在五月的灌木林际。
Take off a small leather bag and wonder if you want to change a pair of shoes when you get off the station. When I opened the box, something in the box flew out with human thoughts. Thinking about it, the small bag was closed for no reason, like a well-behaved kitten, with a head like a kitten, sleeping between the owner's knees. It was dark in the car, and some boxes were like mountains and trees in a sea of clouds in a dream. What can I do? Let's smoke a cigarette. The red fire of cigarette butts flew like fireflies among the bushes in May.——车上开了灯，先生！——噢。
抽一支烟吧，烟头红火如萤火虫飞在五月的故乡。
“你在看书？天都黑了呢，又不许开灯，不爱惜眼睛。我开。”
- The lights are on in the car, sir! - Oh. Smoke a cigarette, the cigarette butt is red like fireflies flying in the hometown of May. "Are you reading? It's dark, and you are not allowed to turn on the lights, and you don't cherish your eyes. I turn it on. ”“你开你开，我不看了。莫开，你看蓝天边那颗大星！莫开莫开。”
“你看吧，让星星陪你，永远陪你。”
——拍地关上窗子，拉上帷子。
“笑甚么，我不是星！”
"You open it, you open it, I won't look at it. Don't open, look at the big star in the blue sky! Don't open it. ” "Look, let the stars accompany you, always accompany you." ——Slap the ground and close the windows and close the curtains. "What's the laughter, I'm not a star!"你不是星星。恒星有时也殒落，在太空中成一片火，一片灰，不留一屑屑甚么。不殒落的自然不是星。
车过了一站又过一站，车载得我们多远多远。
车上开灯了，小姐！——噢。
You are not a star. Stars sometimes fall, becoming a fire in space, a piece of ash, leaving no crumbs or anything. What does not die is naturally not a star. The car passed one stop after another, and the car carried us as far as we could. The lights are on in the car, miss! - Oh.车上的灯光从窗口射出来，过去了，多快！快到那些树木不知道自己被光照过。待一切车全过去，它们一回想，某个时刻我仿佛被照过的，对，“是”照过，不是“仿佛”。
The lights on the car shine out of the window, how fast! It's so fast that the trees don't know they've been illuminated. When all the cars passed, they thought that at some point I felt as if I had been illuminated, yes, "yes", not "as if".南方多灌木林，多火车，火车多窗。南方又多楼房，楼亦多窗。甚么时候我也该住到一间小楼里，那怕是一个旅馆也好，只要稍稍长久一点，有个安顿。难道我能一辈子在车上过日过夜么？
There are many shrubs and forests in the south, and there are many trains, and there are many windows on trains. There are many buildings in the south, and there are many windows in the buildings. When should I live in a small building, even if it is a hotel, as long as it lasts a little longer and has a settlement. Can I spend my whole life in the car day and night?“现在若是从一个窗户里有光照出来，我一定知道，一株灌木移植到另一个南方来了，我等待一个新的仿佛呢。”
"Now if there is light coming out of one window, I must know that a shrub has been transplanted to another south, and I am waiting for a new one."雨落着，落在一个小小院落里。室内静极，编织毛线是没有声音的。不但这时候，平日这小院落也是极静的。没有人大声说话。也没人像从前一样大声读书。这时候，画眉鸟的嘴也不是用来唱歌的。聪明在沉默中。
The rain is falling in a small courtyard. The room is extremely quiet, and there is no sound in weaving wool. Not only at this time, but this small courtyard is also extremely quiet on weekdays. No one speaks loudly. No one reads as loudly as before. At this time, the thrush's beak is not used to sing. Smart in silence.而现在，雨落着。瓦上有羽毛挂扫的声息和一种神秘的声息。青色的灯应当正照着青衣的人。
And now, the rain is falling. There is the sound of feathers hanging and sweeping on the tiles and a mysterious sound. The cyan lamp should be shining on the people in green clothes.车在雨中奔驶。鞋到底换上了。街石在灯光下发亮，一街的人都换了鞋，从火车上下来的脚多半湿了，换了鞋的觉得自己特别干松，于是走得比谁都快。
敲门了。
“谁？”——“我。”——“我么，我在家里！”
The car was running in the rain. The shoes were changed to the end. The street stones lit up in the light, everyone on the street changed their shoes, and most of the feet that got off the train were wet, and the people who changed their shoes felt that they were very dry and loose, so they walked faster than anyone else. There was a knock on the door. "Who?" ——"Me." "——"Me, I'm at home!" ”“你这人！我说把雨衣带在箱子里，才多重，‘没几天，不带！’不带！看看，头发上的水都滴到人脸上了。”
门开了，又关上，（假定没有仆人吧）开门的听敲门的关门。
"You guy! I said how much it would weigh to bring the raincoat in the box, 'In a few days, don't bring it!' 'Don't bring it! Look, the water on your hair is dripping on your face. ” The door opens and closes again, and the one who opens the door listens to the knock on the door.一个年轻，不懂事，一个年轻懂事太多。因此常受埋怨，为感谢报答这种埋怨，于是更不懂事。
雨落着，但江南正有极好的春天。
One is young and ignorant, and the other is too sensible. Therefore, he is often complained about, and in order to repay this complaint, he is even more ignorant. The rain is falling, but there is an excellent spring in Jiangnan.因为想不出甚么事情做，把买来准备在火车上看的书拿出来看看。一看，半本就翻过去了。“唉，怎么办呢，明天？”看看装订得那么好，印刷得那么好，简直是专为送人用的。一个人随随便便的竟看得一半本了，真不应该——阖起来，阖起来。躺到床上去胡思乱想一阵吧。时间多呢。
Because I couldn't think of anything to do, I took out the book I bought to read on the train. When I looked at it, half of the book was turned over. "Alas, what should I do, tomorrow?" Look at how well it is bound and printed so well, it is simply for gifts. A person casually reads half of the book, it really shouldn't be - close it, close it. Lie down on the bed and think about it for a while. There's a lot of time.春假一放，学校便显得特别大。宿舍，课室，连那个空场子，都放大了。假前一日，同学都走尽了。所有的床上全是光光的，只有一张床却好好的铺着。一个白绸的大枕头，满绣着花朵，我的头发埋在各种花朵里。花在放了。秘密的展开了瓣子。
As soon as spring break ended, the school became particularly big. The dormitory, classrooms, and even the empty space were enlarged. The day before the holiday, all the classmates were gone. All the beds were naked, but only one bed was well laid. A big white silk pillow, full of flowers, my hair was buried in all kinds of flowers. The flowers are blooming. The petals were secretly unfolded.我明天也要走了。但若是明天下雨，便可托辞不走。我真希望下雨。
雨落着，钢轨接榫处，有些地方一定已经锈起黄色的小斑。
I'm leaving tomorrow. But if it rains tomorrow, I can make excuses. I really hope it rains. The rain is falling, and there must be small yellow spots rusted in some places where the rails are joined.路警把身子藏在油布雨衣里，在水泥月台上踯躅，往来逡巡，发现了许多，只不曾发现过自己。
车站前小花圃里的美人蕉花朵红艳艳的，而枯的仍不减其枯。待车人抽着烟，只想着江南好春天，即使有风有细雨。
The road police hid themselves in oilcloth raincoats, staggered on the cement platform, wandered back and forth, and found a lot, but never found themselves. The canna flowers in the small flower garden in front of the station are bright red, but the withered ones are still withered. The people waiting for the bus smoked cigarettes, only thinking about the good spring in Jiangnan, even if there was wind and drizzle.校园里的鸟声像一缸蜜，越来越浓。鱼在池里唼喋水面浮萍，浮萍上有小小虫子。剪草的工役在草上睡得又香又甜，是梦见故乡秧田里的歌声，歌声像一片素色的大蝴蝶的影逗着他。
“就走么？”
The sound of birds on campus is like a jar of honey, getting stronger and stronger. Fish chirp duckweed on the surface of the water in the pond, and there are small insects on the duckweed. The lawn-cutting laborer slept soundly and sweetly on the grass, dreaming of singing in his hometown in the rice field, and the singing teased him like the shadow of a big plain butterfly. "Are you leaving?"见鬼！看看表，早着哩，又被自己捉弄了一次。笑了笑。干甚么呢？行李不须多带，小皮包里的东西理了又理，再没甚么可理的了。过的是种甚么日子，真令人发愁。
Damn it! Looking at my watch, I was early, and I was teased by myself again. smiled. What are you doing? You don't need to bring more luggage, the contents of the small leather bag are sorted out and sorted out, and there is nothing to take care of. What kind of life is really worrying.太阳自窗间照到白被单上，经过几度筛滤，浓淡斑驳不一，依稀可以辨认交疏的枝叶，重叠的瓣子。一只蜜蜂在上面画过一道青色的线，曲折纡迴，它是醉了。云一过，图画便模糊一两分钟。
——明天。
The sun shines from the window onto the white sheets, and after several sifts, the shades are mottled, and the sparse branches and leaves and overlapping petals can be vaguely distinguished. A bee drew a blue line on it, twisting and turning, it was drunk. As soon as the clouds passed, the picture blurred for a minute or two. ——Tomorrow.来回票几天期限？
“你来？”
“送人。”
Returning to the city from the river, at half past five, I arrived at the station for at least 25 minutes, forget it, could I catch the last train? In the sound of falling flowers, I finished reading the book. Tomorrow, the station in the morning. It's not waiting for the bus, it's waiting for people, but people come first. "What are you doing?" "Give it away."为甚么不好好的睡觉！好，我买票去，等下陪你送人。
How many days is the return ticket? "Are you coming?" "Give it away." Why don't you sleep well! Okay, I'll buy a ticket and I'll accompany you later."车站，月台，路警，上车，小小手绢，在空中摇着；间或有一点眼泪，也干了。车头吼着走了，上面和侧面同时喷出白云，白云，白云。……书放在桌上，分在两边的纸叶形成一个完全的对称。
Stations, platforms, road police, getting on the train, small handkerchiefs, shaking in the air; occasionally there were a little tears, and they also dried. The front of the train roared and left, and white clouds, white clouds, white clouds spewed out from above and on the side at the same time. …… The book is placed on the table, and the paper leaves divided on both sides form a perfect symmetry.云自东方来，云自四方来。云自心上来。
风吹着春天，好轻好轻。
风和太阳把两旁的树绿尽向车上倾泼，车里车外，淋淋漓漓。
我们这一月旅行，你说，到哪儿去好，我不说，有你的地方都好。
The clouds come from the east, and the clouds come from the four directions. The clouds come from the heart. The wind blows the spring, so light, so light. The wind and sun poured all the green on both sides of the car onto the car, and it was drenched in and out of the car. We traveled this month, you say, where to go, I don't say, it's good where you are.笑甚么，我不是星星。你是！星星被我摘来了。
花落在一个小小庭院里，绿纱窗，厚绒帷子，静极。
…………
“嗐大白天做梦！叫了两声都不听见。想甚么，告诉我，告诉我。”
“不告诉你。你想我应当想甚么？”
What's funny, I'm not a star. You are! The stars were picked by me. The flowers fall in a small courtyard, with green gauze windows and thick velvet curtains, which is extremely quiet. "Dreaming in broad daylight! I called twice and didn't hear it. What are you thinking, tell me, tell me. ” "I won't tell you. What do you think I should think? ”“不告诉我，谁希罕，我自己也会想，看谁想的美。——这就走？”
还是“这就走，”好笑，好笑，不告诉，这是个多美的秘密。
江南三月，莺飞草长，杂花生树……飞的是“莺”，是“心”？
"If you don't tell me, whoever is rare, I will think about it myself, and see who thinks of beauty. ——Let's go? ” Or "Let's go," it's funny, it's funny, don't tell me, what a beautiful secret this is. In March in Jiangnan, the warblers fly and the grass grows, and the peanut trees are ...... Is it a "warbler" that flies or a "heart"?仰面躺在软软的绿草上，听溪水活活，江水浩浩，那么有韵律的响着，就像流在草下面，隔岸野花一片，芳香如梦，不惮远迢迢飞过来。一只小小青色蚱蜢跳到胸上，毛手毛脚的搔得人怪痒痒的，一把捏住后腿，一松，看它飞过那边去，落在另一个胸脯上了。
Lying on my back on the soft green grass, listening to the stream flowing alive, the river is mighty, so rhythmic sounding, like flowing under the grass, a wildflower on the other side, fragrant like a dream, not afraid to fly over from afar. A small blue grasshopper jumped on its chest, scratched its hands and feet strangely, pinched its hind legs, loosened it, and watched it fly over there and land on another chest.“啊，甚么呀？人家正想着事情。”
“谁知道，春天的东西。你怎样不说话呢？”
“说甚么。你一早就走，明见？”
“在你未醒之前，也许，在你睡了之后。”
“今天夜车？”
"Ah, what? People are thinking about things. ” "Who knows, spring things. How can you not talk? ” "What did you say? You left early in the morning, do you see? ” "Before you wake up, maybe, after you fall asleep." "Tonight's train?"“到家正好天明，一家人都盼着我。哎，你看这鹁鸪鸪。”
“你听它们叫，若是双声，便要下雨了。雨天路很不好走。”
“如果一天白云是黑云。——谁知道鸟的眼睛！”
"It was dawn when I got home, and the whole family was looking forward to me. Hey, look at this partridge. ” "Listen to them crying, if it's a double voice, it's going to rain. The road is very difficult to walk on rainy days. ” "If one day the white clouds are black. – Who knows the eyes of a bird! ”远远有歌声，不知是山上的，是水上的，清亮绵缠，是有意唱给人听的，想想那个聪明的该挨骂挨嗔的眼睛，便折了几根狗尾巴草咬在牙唇间。狗尾巴草使人不得不笑。
“别躲，我看见你笑。”
There was a song in the distance, I don't know if it was on the mountain, it was on the water, it was clear and lingering, it was intentionally sung to others, thinking about the eyes that were smart and should be scolded, so I broke a few dogtail grass and bit it between my teeth and lips. Dogtail grass makes people have to laugh. "Don't hide, I see you laughing."“为甚么看我？我不喜欢。我笑甚么？知道了才许看。”
“我么，笑那作歌的人。”
“我只好笑听歌的人了。我笑火车，笑江水，笑鹁鸪鸪，还笑云。有意无心的飞，好个洒脱人生观！”
"Why are you looking at me? I don't like it. What am I laughing at? I only allowed myself to see it when I knew. ” "Me, laugh at the person who wrote the song." "I have no choice but to laugh at the people who listen to the song. I laugh at the train, laugh at the river, laugh at the partridge, and laugh at the clouds. Flying intentionally or unintentionally, what a free and easy outlook on life! ”“别笑云，云没有黑，天倒黑了。六点钟的车就快要大声说再见了，难道真赶最后一班车么？夜总是凉的。站上扫地的人多凄清，车走了，人走了，月台上的灯太亮。”
"Don't laugh at the clouds, the clouds are not dark, it's dark. The train at six o'clock is about to say goodbye loudly, is it really the last train? The night is always cold. The people on the station were so desolate, the cars were gone, the people were gone, and the lights on the platform were too bright. ”自江边回到城里，五点半，赶到车站至少二十五分钟，算了，难道赶最后一班车？落花声中，读完了那本书。
明天，一早上车站。不是等车，是等人，人却先来了。
“你来做甚么？”
“送人。”
Returning to the city from the river, at half past five, I arrived at the station for at least 25 minutes, forget it, could I catch the last train? In the sound of falling flowers, I finished reading the book. Tomorrow, the station in the morning. It's not waiting for the bus, it's waiting for people, but people come first. "What are you doing?" "Give it away."“好，我买票去，一会儿陪你送人。”
“票买好了，来回票限期十天，你一定来。车六点四十分开，第一班。
“这是一盒吃的糖，足够陪你到家。
“这是一本书，车上看。
"Okay, I'll buy a ticket and I'll accompany you to give it off later." "The ticket is bought, the round-trip ticket is limited to ten days, you must come. The train leaves at 6:40, the first shift. "This is a box of candy to eat, enough to accompany you home. "This is a book, read in the car.“刚才卖花的来，只有茉莉还有蕾子，可以养在汝窑盂子里。五朵排成一串，我买了十串，一天换一串簪着玩。噢，上车吧。还有五分钟。”
"The flower sellers just came, only jasmine and buds, which can be kept in the Ru kiln bowl. Five flowers are lined up in a bunch, I bought ten bunches, and I changed one string a day to play with. Oh, let's get in the car. There are still five minutes left. ”车快开时，忽然记起一件事，打开箱子，放进一本书，又拿出一本书，在两本书里各拿出一封信。忽然又一想，忙跳下车。
“你把茉莉花全扔了吧。”
“怎么？——噢。”
When the car was about to start, I suddenly remembered something, opened the box, put a book in, took out another book, and took out a letter from each of the two books. Suddenly thinking about it again, I hurriedly jumped out of the car. "You throw away all the jasmine." "What? - Oh. ”五年前在待车室里发了一个电报之后又写了一封快信：
“父亲：
Five years ago, after sending a telegram in the waiting room, I wrote another quick letter: "Father:这里有一种极美的花，每年只在这个时节开一次，开不了八九天，到春假完了时花也完了，容我盘玩几日吧。你愿意我有个好春天，所以我不回来了。”
“先生，车不开了。”
There is a very beautiful flower here, it only blooms once a year at this time of year, it can't bloom for eight or nine days, and the flowers are gone when the spring break is over, let me play for a few days. You want me to have a good spring, so I'm not coming back. ” "Sir, the car won't drive."“不开最好，好极了，——啊，不开了？为甚么？”
“不大清楚，谁知道为甚么呢！”
"It's best not to open it, it's great,—— oh, don't open it? Why? ” "I don't know, who knows why!"侍役说完了话，竟自走了。待车室玻璃窗上全是水，外间景物模糊，如一个满眼泪水的人所看见的天地一样。路警对于车辆太熟悉了，全不发生兴趣，在泥与水的月台上来往的走，黑色的雨衣沙沙的发声。
After the attendant finished speaking, he walked away. The glass window of the waiting room was full of water, and the scenery outside was blurred, just like the world seen by a person with tears in his eyes. The road police were too familiar with the vehicle and were not interested at all, walking back and forth on the mud and water platform, and the rustling of black raincoats.我怎么办呢。
回去。没有雨鞋，没有雨伞，头发里的水流到脖子里。好像回不去。
回去，用一张素纸写了“待车室”三字贴在墙上。
What should I do? Get back. No rain boots, no umbrella, water in my hair flows to my neck. It seems that there is no going back. Go back and write the words "waiting room" on a piece of plain paper and paste it on the wall.灯下大声读书。我的声音若是高出了你，你看一看我，低头拂一拂头发，便用更高的声音赶过了我。如今“我”也是我，“你”也是我，一个在镜子里，一个在镜子外。
Read aloud under the lamp. If my voice is higher than yours, you look at me, lower your head and brush your hair, and you will catch up with me with a higher voice. Now "I" is also me, and "you" is also me, one in the mirror and the other outside the mirror.书帮助我们过了多少日子，读着，又平放在桌上。
先生，你请坐坐吧。你累了呢。是呀，你忙得很。你一天到晚老是跑来跑去的，真是！椅子是多么好一个主人呀，它多么诚恳，多么殷勤。
十二月十二日改抄
Books help us live a lot of life, reading, and laying flat on the table. Sir, please sit down. You are tired. Yes, you are very busy. You run around all day long, really! What a good owner the chair is, how sincere and attentive it is. Revised December 12
[1] 本篇原载《文聚》1942年第一卷第一期。初收《汪曾祺全集》第一卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。

1942年

1942年
谁是错的[1]
[1] This article was originally published in the first issue of Volume 1 of "Wenju" in 1942. First received in the first volume of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998. In 1942 Who is wrong [1]生命的距离：因为这点距离，一个人会成为疯子。另一个呢，永远是好人。
The distance of life: Because of this distance, a person will become a madman. The other will always be a good person.我想，我必须去找一找路先生，向他详详细细的解释清楚。一下午来，我摆不开这件事。我像穿了双挤脚的鞋子，或系了条差不多就快断了的裤带。这樁事就如个影子，即使我不注视，它依然存在。像一根刺签在我心上，老拔不去。太阳照在窗前，一下午了！不，我一离开路先生，一说完那句话，便像雾淹住的山，那么张皇失措。原来我被自己不小心的几句话带到雾里来了。
I think I must go to Mr. Lu and explain it to him in detail. In the afternoon, I couldn't get rid of it. I was like wearing a pair of shoes that squeezed my feet, or a belt that was almost about to break. This thing is like a shadow, even if I don't look at it, it still exists. Like a thorn in my heart, I can't pull it out. The sun shone in front of the window, and it was an afternoon! No, as soon as I left Mr. Lu, as soon as I finished saying that, I was like a mountain flooded with fog, so panicked. It turned out that I was brought into the fog by a few words I accidentally said.一个下午我把自己关闭在小楼上。
One afternoon I closed myself in a small building.一个人做错了事再也没法补偿。路先生本是个十足好人，他那么善良的问我好，问我久无消息的弟弟的近况，问我毫不在意自己衰老的父亲半年来的生涯，而我，我是多么恶毒呀，我说了那几句话，更罪过的是，我说完了那几句话时，至少正说那几句话时，还很得意！有什么值得得意？为的是我的讽刺天才还是别的？想想真难受。我向自己说：“不要想吧，傻东西。”可是，不成，只有那么老想着，我好像才可以得救。只有令自己受点苦，才可以减少一点不安。年青人，年青人，就是这么一个心，没办法的事情！
A person can no longer compensate for what he has done wrong. Mr. Lu was a completely good person, he asked me so kindly, asked me about my brother's situation who had not been heard from for a long time, asked me about my aging father's career for half a year, and I, how vicious I was, I said those few words, and what was even more guilty was that when I finished saying those few words, at least when I was saying those words, I was still very proud! What is there to be proud of? Is it for my satirical genius or something else? It's hard to think about it. I said to myself, "Don't think about it, stupid thing." However, no, only by thinking so much can I seem to be saved. Only by making myself suffer a little can I reduce a little uneasiness. Young people, young people, are such a heart, there is nothing that can be helped!路先生实在是个好人。
Mr. Lu is really a good person.他那个白得透明的脸，同样半透明的细长手指，他的柔顺的头发，细致端正的前额，他的手杖，他的帽子，他的外衣，一切凑拢来便成一个完美和谐的慈祥。每个早晨他的轻呢外衣飘动在公园的柳树绿色小风中，令我想起许多生命成熟的正经人。他一切好，只有左耳下有个樱桃大的小瘤，好像和生命或身分不大调和，悬缀在那个地方。
His white and transparent face, his equally translucent slender fingers, his smooth hair, his delicate and upright forehead, his cane, his hat, his coat, everything came together into a perfect harmony of kindness. Every morning his duffle coat fluttered in the green breeze of the willow trees in the park, reminding me of many serious people with mature lives. All was well with him, except for a small lump the size of a cherry under his left ear, which seemed to be in harmony with life or identity, hanging in that place.他那么关心的问我父亲，“他一定很好，乡下的水流使他更平静，平静使他不想写甚么信，春天了，水涨了，没了那个小石阶的最下两级，石级在水里将隐居不少日子，直到秧针发黄。鲤鱼的肚皮已经白了，它们的眼睛也不那么显著了。已经大得会大胆来触动钩上的饵，会舔洗衣人的腿了，他可以看鱼，直到它们游到很远的河里，唵，他会沿着河边，走到开满的蒿花同菜园上，哦，马兰可以吃了，牛啃着芦芽，白蝴蝶打着圈子，蜜蜂呐，多呀，多，他可以在你那个最小的妹妹吃了饭都半点钟了才回家。”
He asked my father with such concern, "He must be very good, the current of the country makes him calmer, the calm makes him not want to write any letters, spring comes, the water rises, and the bottom two steps of the small stone steps are gone, and the stone steps will live in seclusion in the water for many days until the needles turn yellow." The bellies of the carp are white, and their eyes are not so prominent. Already big enough to touch the bait on the hook, to lick the legs of the washermen, he can watch the fish until they swim far into the river, om, he will walk along the river, to the full garden of mugwort flowers and vegetables, oh, Malan can eat, the cow gnaws on the reed buds, the white butterflies circle, the bees, many, many, he can go home after half an o'clock after your youngest sister has eaten. ”他慢慢的说，简直一沟水似的，春天的溪水，那会完结？不激动不用奢侈的词句，那么温蔼的说下去，我听着，看着他的脸，直到他说：“时候还早，你没有事吧？坐下，谈谈，石凳上，或草地里，年青人，随便一点，不用拘谨害出病来！白鹭，嗳，那个白鹭，——”我忙打断了他，一个字，一个字，丝毫不踟躇的如数把想了半天的句子说出，他才没有再说下去。因为不待他有开口机会，我扭头便走了。
He said slowly, it's like a ditch of water, the spring stream, will it end? Don't be excited, don't use extravagant words, so gently say, I listened, looked at his face, until he said, "It's still early, are you okay?" Sit down, talk, on the stone bench, or on the grass, young people, just a little bit, don't be restrained! Egret, hey, that egret,——" I hurriedly interrupted him, word by word, without hesitation, and said the sentence he had been thinking about for a long time without any hesitation, and he didn't say it again. Because before he had a chance to speak, I turned my head and left.我走得很快，根本没意识到草摩滑了我的鞋底，自然更不理会他如何处理自己。
我很快，轻飘而又严肃的走了。我说过，我很得意的走了。
I walked so fast that I didn't even realize that the grass mo had slipped on the soles of my shoes, and naturally I didn't care what he did with me. I left quickly, lightly and seriously. I said, I left proudly.他一定呆在那里，摇摇头，点着他的手杖，突然感到衰弱，全身依靠手杖扶他回去。半白的头发，原来梳得很好，一定会被手指搔得乱蓬蓬的。他一定想：年青人，还要革命，这就是“革命”，争的是自己说话动手机会。
He must have stayed there, shook his head, lit his cane, suddenly felt weak, and relied on the cane to help him back. Half-white hair, which turned out to be well combed, would definitely be scratched by his fingers. He must have thought: young people also want to revolution, this is the "revolution", what is fighting for the opportunity to speak and do it themselves.他会不知如何走进他的房间里去，若不是那些路已经太熟。
他的外衣垂下了，不再飘扬。
他半天忘记抽烟，直到手捉住烟斗。
He would not know how to get into his room, if it weren't for the familiar roads. His coat hung down and no longer fluttered. He forgot to smoke for a long time until he caught the pipe in his hand.他应当会油然而兴叹起：“老了，人老了，甚么都凝固在习惯上。”因此也还找个理由原谅年青人的冒失。
He should sigh spontaneously: "When you are old, people are old, and everything is frozen in habits." Therefore, he also found a reason to forgive the young man's recklessness.虽然我没有看见，这些全是我设想的。但我可以断定这些小小细微情节，甚么也不会错。我想来这是照例的，一切又都是命定的。
Although I didn't see it, it was all my idea. But I can conclude that these little details are not wrong. I think this is the usual, and everything is predestined.我能不难受么，使这样一个年高有德的父执如此难堪？我说的是甚么话呀，我一时之间真叫鬼迷住了。
Can I not feel uncomfortable to make such an old and virtuous father so embarrassed? What am I saying, I am really fascinated by ghosts for a while.我就那么幽闭在小楼中，小楼又幽闭在大树的风雨之声中。我看见一只细腰长脚蜂在檐口椽上营窠，看它飞了来，又飞了去，不知道多少次。
I was so claustrophobic in the small building, and the small building was claustrophobic in the sound of the wind and rain of the big trees. I saw a slender-waisted long-legged bee nesting on the rafters of the eaves, and I saw it fly over and over again, I don't know how many times.我想，我秉承父亲的遗传，二十几年来都是极良善的。我并不可惜这点良善的本真一朝被那几句傻话给毁了去，我只想，怎么办，使这个长者不怪我，不必因几句傻话见怪，一切还依旧照常，在老年人的梦里，还记起“东床坦腹”的故事。我的几句话也正出于无心！
I think that I have been extremely good for more than 20 years, inheriting my father's inheritance. I just think, what should I do, so that this elder doesn't blame me, I don't have to be surprised by a few stupid words, everything is still as usual, in the dream of the elderly, I still remember the story of "the east bed is open". A few of my words are also out of unintentionality!我上午出去本想买点樱桃的，琳的小几上有个大白盘子，装了千百颗水和唇的味合制的珊瑚珠子，该是多么好看，琳是路先生最小的女儿。但是，我没有买樱桃。我想，不成不成，这一切都完了，鬼教我犯了罪，于是，甚么都完了。一点不祥之感又一直把我送回来，送到这孤寂的小楼上，使我着急发疯。
I went out in the morning and wanted to buy some cherries, and there was a big white plate on Lin's small table, filled with thousands of coral beads made of water and lips, how beautiful it should be, Lin is Mr. Lu's youngest daughter. However, I didn't buy cherries. I thought, no, no, it's all over, the ghost taught me to sin, so everything is over. A little sense of foreboding kept sending me back, to this lonely little building, making me crazy in a hurry.樱桃在白色大盘子里，她一个一个的吃。甜东西吃得太多了，便泛酸，她忽然皱了皱眉毛，又柔声的笑了，露出两排白牙齿。她穿过一件樱桃色的上衣，走到甚么颜色里都极其鲜明，轮廓决不模糊。她有一把伞，底子颜色也像一盘樱桃。她是因此而喜欢吃樱桃，或因樱桃而挑上这种颜色，我没有问过；但我似乎从此便常惦记这种浑圆的果子。春天一来，我更等着。
The cherries were on a large white plate, and she ate them one by one. Eating too much sweet food, she became sour, and she suddenly frowned, smiled softly, and showed two rows of white teeth. She wore a cherry-colored blouse, and the color was extremely distinct in any color, and the outline was never blurred. She had an umbrella, and the color of the base was like a plate of cherries. I didn't ask whether she liked to eat cherries because of this, or because of the cherries; but I seem to have been thinking about this round fruit ever since. When spring comes, I wait even more.看她吃东西就是一种幸福。那是她人格的一部分，身分一部分，像路先生的外衣一样，那么优美。不过不相同的是或使人爱好，或使人尊敬。难道这是我的事？分别这个不同，有甚么意思！
Watching her eat is a kind of happiness. It is a part of her personality, a part of her identity, like Mr. Lu's coat, so beautiful. But the difference is that it is either likable or respected. Is this my business? What is the point of distinguishing this difference?小楼，该死的教育我的小楼啊。
Xiaolou, damn Xiaolou who educated me.我用左手支住额角，看着肘部，它渐渐瘦了。我的眼睛花了，拿开手，我的眼睛更花了。我怎么办？这时节若有个无线电收音器，上面说：“国货公司毛巾好，爱国的人应该买一条。”也许就救了我。宗教条规或政治信仰在世界上还能发生作用，就是为这种失去主意的心而预备的。
I supported the corner of my forehead with my left hand and looked at my elbow, and it gradually became thinner. My eyes were dizzy, and when I took my hand away, my eyes were even more dazzling. What should I do? If there is a radio radio at this time, it says, "The towel of the domestic company is good, patriots should buy one." Maybe it saved me. Religious rules or political beliefs can still play a role in the world, and they are prepared for this kind of lost mind.我想抽一支烟，拿起火柴。
I want to smoke a cigarette and pick up a match.暗蓝色和黑色，土红色，干枯或浓得像鼾声的笔触组成的饰画。骑士，狮子，一行图案字，火柴在我的手指间沉思了，不假思索的一画，紫石英一样的火烧在我的手指间，杨木棒上蜡脂翻着沫，我的烟毫无道理地点上了，我的嘴唇不置可否地含住它。浓烟从两个鼻孔里流出来。
Dark blue and black, earthy red, dry or thick brushstrokes like snoring. Knights, lions, a line of patterned words, matches contemplated between my fingers, a thoughtless painting, amethyst fire burned between my fingers, wax foaming on poplar sticks, my smoke was lit without reason, and my lips held it noncommittally. Smoke came out of both nostrils.一切都是那么单纯，那么简单。
Everything is so simple and simple.不行，我的苦痛快超过我的罪恶了，还得去，得去向路先生解释一切，请求他原谅。我需要这点勇气，我一向做事做人很果决，我拉开门，认真的走出去。并且，我还打量要带一包樱桃去，两磅重一包。
No, my pain is faster than my sin, and I have to go, I have to explain everything to Mr. Lu and ask him for forgiveness. I need this courage, I have always been very decisive in doing things, I opened the door and walked out seriously. Moreover, I also considered taking a pack of cherries, two pounds a pack.一路上，我直温诵我要说的话，又想着我要送琳的那个礼物，在吃那个时也正嚼到我一点过去的生命，过去的梦，我需要的正是这么一件事。
Along the way, I recited what I was going to say, and I thought about the gift I was going to give Lin, and when I ate that, I was chewing on a little bit of my past life, past dreams, and what I needed was just such a thing.我走得很快，比上午还快，以致一气走过六条街，伸手叩路先生的门环时，才知道是到了。可是我没有买好樱桃，我油然记起我从好几家水果店走过，红红的，都有一筐筐樱桃。
I walked very fast, faster than in the morning, so that I walked through six streets in one go, and when I reached out and knocked on Mr. Lu's doorknocker, I knew it was there. But I didn't buy cherries, and I vaguely remembered that I had walked through several fruit shops, all red and full of baskets of cherries.但我决不管它了，只要能向路先生解释清楚，樱桃生在树上，或放在筐里，或向一个人口中送去，对于我全是一样的。
But I don't care about it, as long as I can explain to Mr. Lu that cherries are born on a tree, or put in a basket, or sent to a person's mouth, it is all the same for me.路先生见我来了，一把就握住我的手，我不遑顾别的一切，只觉得他的手更较往日柔滑，也较往日温暖。我一直引他到那个小花园里。
我用力压下感情，平平静静的向他解释自己那点莽撞处。
When Mr. Lu saw me coming, he held my hand, and I didn't care about anything else, I just felt that his hands were smoother and warmer than before. I kept leading him to that little garden. I suppressed my feelings hard and calmly explained to him my recklessness.“今天上午，我心情很不好。夜来，我做了一个梦，梦见父亲用个大棒子打我一顿，又好像用米达尺，完全和我七岁受的处罚一样。他老了没有，打得重不重，我痛不痛，在甚么地方打的，当时有谁在场看见，我一概记不清楚，说不分明。只记得他打了我，梦也只是这么一点，那是一定的完全真的。我醒来又睡着了，这梦还又重复了一次，我很难过。我纳闷的是新做了甚么错事，犯了甚么罪，值得老人家处罚。”
"This morning, I was in a very bad mood. At night, I had a dream in which my father beat me with a big stick, as if he was using a ruler, exactly the same punishment I received when I was seven years old. Whether he was old or not, whether the beating was heavy, whether it hurt or not, where he was beaten, who was present at the time, I can't remember clearly, I can't say it clearly. I only remember that he hit me, and the dream was just like this, which must be completely true. I woke up and fell asleep again, and the dream repeated itself, and I was very sad. I wondered what wrong I had done and what crime I had committed that deserved to be punished by the old man. ”他似乎要说甚么，我用动作止住了他。
He seemed to say something, and I stopped him with a gesture.“我心里很难过。究竟不知道我为甚么要做这个梦。伯伯知道，父亲一生就打过我一次，在我七岁时，用一个紫檀牙板，我鼻子碰在桌沿上，出了血，嚇得他忙着替我止血，又忙用牛皮糖哄我。这事情一直当成母亲说笑的资料，一直到她死。此后这件事就不复有人提起了。
"I feel sad. I don't know why I had this dream. My uncle knew that my father had beaten me once in his life, and when I was seven years old, he used a rosewood toothboard, my nose touched the edge of the table, and bleeding, which scared him so much that he was busy stopping the bleeding for me and coaxing me with kraft candy. This matter was used as a joke for my mother until she died. Since then, no one has mentioned this matter.“我很难受。这个梦自然也莫明其妙，但我的难受无疑是从这里发源的，我很难受，您大概从我的衣裳上便看出来，所以您才拉住我说话，在公园里。”
"I'm very uncomfortable. This dream is naturally incomprehensible, but my discomfort undoubtedly originated from here, I was very uncomfortable, you could probably see it from my clothes, so you pulled me to talk, in the park. ”他以为我的话还很长，似乎纵不说也明白那是甚么，不愿让我说下去。他怕我把难受再上一次色，更难于消漠。他要我坐下来歇歇，我连忙接下去说，还提高了声音。
He thought my words were still long, and he seemed to understand what it was even if he didn't say it, and he didn't want me to continue. He was afraid that I would make the discomfort look worse again, and it would be even more difficult to dispel indifference. He asked me to sit down and rest, and I quickly continued, raising my voice.“我一整天都不知所措，伯伯您不明白，我心乱极了，但不是因为那个梦了。我难受到极点，而您偏偏不断的说我父亲，父亲，父亲！
"I'm at a loss all day, uncle, you don't understand, I'm very confused, but it's not because of that dream. I'm extremely embarrassed, and you keep saying my father, father, father!“我因此看着您，在您身上发现那个不必要的，您的左耳下的那个肉瘤，我说，这是多余的。”
"I therefore looked at you and found in you that unnecessary, that sarcoma under your left ear, and I said, it was superfluous."我真是错上加错。我也许想把这几个字轻一点说，含糊一点说。但终于又响亮又清晰的说出。我看看他有甚么反应。他一点都不为此有动于衷。但我不相信，他一定变了一下颜色，很快的，像天上一角扯个小闪。这可不是多余的。我说的话太多了。但怎么办，真正要说的一个字也还没有提起，我应当怎么说下去，就到那个题目上来？
I was really wrong. I might have wanted to say these words lightly, vaguely. But finally it came out loud and clear. I saw how he reacted. He wasn't indifferent to it at all. But I don't believe that he must have changed color, and soon, like a flash in the corner of the sky. It's not superfluous. I've said too much. But what should I do, I haven't even mentioned a word that I really want to say, how should I go on, to that topic?“您那个肉瘤不住的动。我越看，它越动。哦，您原谅我。您不知道我是多么厌恶。我的厌恶由此而生，但是像蒲公英的花，开足了便离开根，满天飞。我的厌恶已经脱离原因而散播。我全身都浸在颤抖里。我实在忍不住，才说了那几句话。”
"Your sarcoma can't keep moving. The more I look, the more it moves. Oh, you forgive me. You don't know how disgusted I am. My disgust is born from this, but like a dandelion flower, it leaves its roots and flies all over the sky. My disgust has spread out of the cause. My whole body is soaked in trembling. I couldn't help it before I said those words. ”他掏出烟斗，装好烟，抽上了。微笑着说：
“你说了些甚么呢？你实在并没有说甚么呀。”
“我好像说过，你耳朵后的那个东西，在你是多余的。”
“本来是多余的！”
He took out his pipe, filled it with cigarettes, and smoked it. He smiled and said: "What did you say? You really didn't say anything. ” "I seem to have said that the thing behind your ear is superfluous to you." "It was superfluous!"他的眼睛，他的烟，他的花白而柔软的头发，他的手杖，他的飘扬的外衣，一切都似乎在告诉我，他没有说谎。他和我一样，并不特别看重那个肉瘤，尽管相书上称这个东西主寿，还是多余的。我开始觉得脸上发热，喉头微痛，我不知怎么好了。可是我并不窘。在他面前的人决不会受窘。
His eyes, his smoke, his gray and soft hair, his cane, his fluttering coat, everything seemed to tell me that he was not lying. He, like me, did not particularly value the sarcoma, although the photo book said that this thing was the main longevity, it was still superfluous. I began to feel a heat in my face and a slight pain in my throat, and I didn't know how to get better. But I was not embarrassed. The person in front of him would never be embarrassed.我实在并没有说甚么错话吗？我是不是这时起始来说几句错话呢？
Didn't I really say anything wrong? Did I start by saying a few wrong words?在柳树的风雨之声中，在蓝天底下，我们一同喝茶，直到天黑。琳知道我来了，不一会便走了来，大盘子里高高堆着好看又好吃的樱桃。我们喝茶，抽烟，吃樱桃，我说了不知多少傻话，算算看，几几乎全说到了。
In the sound of the willow trees, under the blue sky, we drank tea together until dark. Lin knew I was coming, and after a while she walked over, with beautiful and delicious cherries piled high on a large plate. We drank tea, smoked, ate cherries, and I said an unknown number of stupid things.原来我并不是在路先生面前说错话难过，只是从无机会说一阵子傻话。
实在我从来没有这样愉快过。也许我有过比这更大的愉快，但不能像今天这样子。——虽然一点隽永深切的悲哀已经像水浸蚀河岸将要扩大开来。
It turned out that I was not sad to say the wrong thing in front of Mr. Lu, but I never had the opportunity to say stupid things for a while. I have never been so happy. Perhaps I have had greater pleasure than this, but not as it is today. ——Although a little eternal and deep sorrow has spread like water eroding the banks of a river.路先生谈起我父亲许多的事，有些我知道得极详细，有些我竟一点也不知道。他谈我们那个村庄，那条河，也是一样。
Mr. Lu talked about many things about my father, some of which I knew in great detail, and some of which I didn't know at all. He talked about our village and the river, and the same was true.临了，他跟我说，不要再一个人住在小楼上，最好搬个家，最好搬到他们那里去住，有一间小房子空着，只要装一盏灯就行了。等我想了半天，不知道为甚么要想，好像一定要弄清楚了他说这个话的用意，完全弄清楚了，才能够决定一样。末了，自然说“好”。他似乎还怕我有甚么事情可以带回去做成梦，拍拍我的肩膀，取下烟斗说：“明天我要去割这个瘤。十多年了，以前天天想割，近来似乎懒了下来，不常想了。明天，明天一定要割，舍不得也要想办法割去。你事情不忙，和琳儿陪我去。”
When he came, he told me that he should no longer live alone in a small building, it was best to move, it was better to move to them, there was a small house empty, just install a lamp. After thinking about it for a long time, I don't know why, it seems that I must figure out the meaning of what he said, and I can make a decision only after I have completely figured it out. In the end, I naturally said "okay". He seemed to be afraid that I would have something to take back and dream about, patted me on the shoulder, took off the pipe and said, "Tomorrow I will cut this tumor." For more than ten years, I used to want to cut it every day, but recently I seem to be lazy and don't think about it often. Tomorrow, tomorrow must be cut, and if you are reluctant, you must find a way to cut it. You are not busy, go with Lin'er with me. ”离开了路先生，父女两人也许要把我当个题目，说许久笑话，琳还是一面吃樱桃一面笑。这可不关我的事了。无意中我摸摸我的下巴，摸到一粒小小东西：是粒樱桃核儿，淡黄的隐隐还可以看出一点绿影子，一点遗迹，属于春天的。我的这一粒是琳吐的。她大概看我傻，把吃剩的樱桃核儿，大半吐到我身上脸上，别的都落下去，只这一粒还固执的干沾在下巴上。我简直能记起它们怎样落下去，一粒一粒的落到草窝里。脸上的感觉也一时忘不了。路先生一定明白看到，但他甚么也不说。父女两个都似无意又极有意！
After leaving Mr. Lu, the father and daughter may have to treat me as a topic and joke for a long time, but Lin still laughed while eating cherries. It's none of my business. Inadvertently, I touched my chin and touched a small thing: it was a cherry pit, and a little green shadow and a little relic could be seen in the pale yellow faintly, which belonged to spring. This one of mine was spit out by Lin. She probably thought I was stupid and spat out most of the leftover cherry pits on my face, and everything else fell, except for this one stubbornly stained on my chin. I can almost remember how they fell, one by one into the grass nest. I can't forget the feeling on my face for a while. Mr. Lu must have understood it, but he didn't say anything. Both father and daughter seemed unintentional and very intentional!我的心，似乎有个小小抽象的锚抛在抽象的石滩边，泊定了。我开始明白一个人发热时和神经病的关系。
三十一年四月十六日

[1] 本篇原载1942年6月8日桂林《大公报》。
My heart seemed to have a small abstract anchor left on the edge of the abstract pebble beach, anchored. I began to understand the relationship between a person's fever and neurosis. April 16, 31 [1] This article was originally published in the Ta Kung Pao in Guilin on June 8, 1942.

结婚

结婚[1]
Marriage[1]乱七八糟的忙了十多天，配窗纱，绣枕头，试鞋子，刚刚坐下，又忽然跳起来，拉了一个人上街。心更没有一刻闲静，心中有事，眼睛老似注视甚么，其实甚么也看不见，简直吃饭会落了筷子，连呼吸都差不多要忘记了。直到礼服看定后，头发也卷了起来，一切才仿佛有点眉目。觉得事情越做越多，越想越繁，便是这样，也似乎不少甚么了。宁宁可以斜斜的靠在新椅子上，看看这些天用腿脚眼睛的水磨功夫换来的东西，想自己便要生活在这些东西当中了，实在好玩得很！在一条定律未被打破以前，人总得遵从它：“动者恒动，静者恒静。”人的惰性与任何物体完全一样：她既那么一靠靠下来，便觉得真懒得动弹了。别人说她忙得像块掉在水里的干石灰，她自己明白石灰泡透了水倒真像她现在。觉得现在随便把她放在甚么地方都行，一切都已准备妥当了，只等待那个日子来到。
After more than ten days of messy work, with window screens, embroidered pillows, and trying on shoes, just sat down, suddenly jumped up and pulled a person onto the street. There is no moment of idleness in my heart, there is something in my heart, my eyes always seem to be staring at something, but in fact, I can't see anything, I will drop my chopsticks when I eat, and I almost forget to breathe. It wasn't until the dress was fixed that my hair was curled, and everything seemed to be a bit eyebrow-catching. I feel that the more things are done, the more I think about it, the more complicated it is, and it seems to be a lot. Ning Ning can lean on the new chair and look at the things that have been exchanged for the water grinding of her legs, feet, and eyes these days, thinking that she is going to live in these things, which is really fun! Before a law is broken, man must obey it: "He who moves is constant, and he who is still is still." Man's inertia is exactly the same as any object: she felt too lazy to move as soon as she leaned down. Others said she was as busy as a piece of dry lime that fell into the water, but she herself understood that the lime was soaked in water and it was like what she was now. She felt that she could be put anywhere now, that everything was ready, just waiting for that day to come.房中静静的，一无声息，记得那个座钟买来时曾上足了过，跟手表对对看，是快是慢，一看，长短针正指着昨天子夜！伸过手去想拿来上一上，只差半寸便可到手了，但她两个指头动了动，似乎想钟自己过来。钟既不来，也便无心再向前去，并连手也懒得抽回来了。长长的手臂，长长的指头，指甲上新涂淡白蔻丹，放着香蕉油气味的柔光，若是往常，便是生在别人身上，也会拿起来吻一下，挤挤眼睛说：“不知哪个有福！”还想起一首词中的冶艳句子，惹得自己也心动。如今却甘心冷淡它们。——这座钟的样子没有上回送表妹的好。这对花瓶也不是那天看中的那对，颜色深了，颈子太粗，连把两个瓶子缚在一处（像人与人的关系）的丝带也透着十分俗气，瞧那颜色，粉红的。插甚么花，放在哪个几上，衬甚么垫单，本来都有周密打算，（日本女孩子到相当年龄都交给艺妓教育，日文教员说过，那觉得大可不必；但父亲花五万银子买来的姨太太房中的布置摆设又实在为她佩服羡慕。）现在，花瓶不是那个，一切都不是白费？真是，晚了一天，就教人家抢先买了去，这个城里为甚么这许多人结婚？若是作女儿时，衣裳腰身大了，谁拿错了她的碗筷，小猫扑黑了绒线球，她都会大闹一场，即无一事不称心，春天生一片红叶子，也会惹她发一通脾气。年来虽改了不少，可是像今天那么不认真，居然把座钟花瓶轻轻饶过了，那实在是她自己应当觉得奇怪的。问问自己，这是为甚么，也说不出所以然。“人生是个谜，”这句大智若愚的话可以解说一切可疑，产生一切可能。
The room was quiet, silent, I remember that the table clock was bought when I bought it, and I looked at the watch, whether it was fast or slow, and at a glance, the long and short needles were pointing at yesterday's midnight! I stretched out my hand to take it up, and it was only half an inch away from getting it, but her two fingers moved, as if she wanted the bell to come over by herself. The bell didn't come, so she had no intention of moving forward anymore, and she didn't even bother to pull her hand back. Long arms, long fingers, and new white kodan on the nails, with the soft light of banana oil smell, if it were usual, it would be born on someone else, and it would pick it up and kiss it, squeeze its eyes and say, "I don't know which one is blessed!" I also remembered the beautiful sentence in a word, which made me feel excited. Now I am willing to cold them. ——The appearance of this clock is not as good as the last time I sent it back to my cousin. This pair of vases is not the pair I had my eye on that day, the color is dark, the neck is too thick, and even the ribbon that ties the two bottles in one place (like the relationship between people) is very tacky, look at that color, pink. What flowers to put in, which table to put on it, and what kind of mat to line it with, there was a careful plan, (Japanese girls are handed over to geisha education when they are quite old, and the Japanese teacher said that it is not necessary; but the decoration of the aunt's room that her father bought for 50,000 silver is really admired and envied by her. Now, the vase is not that, and everything is not in vain? Really, if you are a day late, you will teach people to buy it first, why are so many people getting married in this city? If when she was a daughter, her clothes and waist were big, and whoever took her dishes and chopsticks wrong, and the kitten blackened the pompom, she would make a big fuss, that is, everything was not satisfactory, and a red leaf was born in spring, which would also make her lose her temper. Although it has changed a lot over the years, it is really strange for her to be so unserious as today, and to gently spare the table clock vase. Ask yourself why this is, and you can't say why. "Life is a mystery," this wise and foolish sentence can explain everything suspicious and produce all possibilities.太阳光艳艳的，从西边半扇窗子照进来，正照着桌上一面小镜子上，镜面很厚，边缘的斜面把太阳分析出一圈虹彩。远远地方有一方白光，若是照在人脸上，不免令人生气，这时却照在那个墙上。（啊，镜面上已落了一层灰！）窗外一丛树，自以为跟天一样高了，便终日若有其事的乱响。百灵鸟在飞，在叫，又收了翅子，歇下舌子，怪难为情的用树叶影子遮住脸。蔷薇花开，在风里香，风里摇。青灰墙上，一叠影子，如水洒在上面，扫之不去，却又趁人不备时干了。一只松鼠，抖开长尾，拂着自己的小脑袋，终日被精力苦恼，无时不想知道自己活着，不肯在一根枝丫上耗过一分钟，现在正从宁宁窗口掠过去。她甚么也不理会。心想：这是我的事，我的事，不干你们甚么的，似乎自己也不必关心。
The sun was bright, shining in from half a window on the west side, shining on a small mirror on the table, the mirror was very thick, and the bevel on the edge analyzed the sun into a circle of iridescent. There was a white light in the distance, and if it shone on a person's face, it would inevitably make people angry, but now it was shining on the wall. (Ah, a layer of ash has fallen on the mirror!) A cluster of trees outside the window, thinking that it was as high as the sky, made a chaotic noise all day long. The lark was flying, calling, retracting its wings, resting its tongue, and covering its face with the shadow of the leaves in embarrassment. The roses bloomed, fragrant in the wind, swaying in the wind. On the green and gray wall, a stack of shadows, like water sprinkled on it, could not be swept away, but it was dried when people were unprepared. A squirrel, shaking its long tail, brushing its little head, was distressed by energy all day long, always wanted to know that it was alive, refused to spend a minute on a branch, and was now passing by the Ningning window. She ignored nothing. I thought: This is my business, my business, I don't do anything to you, it seems that I don't have to care.宁宁手臂有点酸，才知道已经休息了不少时候。抬起手臂看看，搁在椅背上的一处已经红了一片。天气热，荸荠紫漆桌面上，一时非常清楚的留下一条圆润的汗印，她的眉毛低了低又高了高，待房门一响便立刻放平了，脸上不留甚么痕迹，一如平日被人看到的温靖和斌媚。
Ning Ning's arm was a little sore, and she knew that she had rested for a long time. Raised his arm to look, and one of the places resting on the back of the chair was already red. The weather was hot, and the water chestnut purple lacquer tabletop left a round sweat mark very clearly for a while, her eyebrows were lowered and raised high, and when the door rang, it was immediately flattened, leaving no trace on her face, just like Wen Jing and Bin Mei who were seen on weekdays.进来的是他。一个做过“学生”，希望要做“学者”的年青人。
He is the one who came in. A young man who has been a "student" and hopes to be a "scholar".他学化学，学地质，还是学牛顿的符号或赫胥利的表格，外行人看不出。他也许会做一首诗，译个短篇小说，但并不因此即忽略了日常生活中应有的手艺，敷头油紧皮鞋带。也许长于理财，在客厅中可不至于尽对女孩子谈公债行情，既然能在这种年头结婚，必不肯穿破了领子的衬衫，破了，一定也把它翻过来穿，把纽子重钉一钉。虽然皮鞋可能也是车轮底，但领带总有十来种颜色。他应当能弹吉他琴，（调《风流寡妇》一类调子。）打网球，且会喝一点酒，抽一斗板烟。一切在他都有恰到好处时候，因之便常常窃笑善于自苦的人。（那不免有点骄傲了吧。）白脸上的笑证明他也很温和良善，上回学校七七献金他在大门口捐过五块钱，被新生活纪念义卖队的童子军拦住时，他马上就买了一朵鲜花。当着许多人，或甚至独自看书时都不致丢下那一点自觉的做作，那倒是，我们受教育原就是学习“做人”呀！曾有个未老先白头的朋友，差不多急红了脸说：“你们为甚么甘愿这么俗气？”“俗气”是个不好听的字眼，他心里沉了沉，在脸上尚未表现出甚么时赶先熟练的笑了笑说：“老兄，我问你，俗字是怎样写法？——对，人旁！你该明白，俗气也便是人气，人少不了它。没有它，失去人性一半了！你会孤寂古怪像那一半，像个谷！”
He studied chemistry, geology, Newton's symbols or Huxley's tables, which the layman could not see. He may write a poem or translate a short story, but he does not neglect the craft of daily life, and tighten his leather shoelaces. Maybe he is good at financial management, and he will not talk to girls about public debt in the living room, since he can get married at this age, he will not wear a shirt with a torn collar, and if it is broken, he must turn it inside out and nail the button again. Although leather shoes may also be wheel soles, there are always more than a dozen colors of ties. He should be able to play the guitar, (tune in a tune like "Merry Widow".) Play tennis, drink a little wine, and smoke a bucket of tobacco. When everything is just right, he often snickers at people who are good at self-suffering. (That's a little proud.) The smile on his white face proves that he is also very gentle and kind, and the last time he donated five yuan at the gate of the school 77 donation, he was stopped by the scouts of the New Life Memorial Charity Sale, and he immediately bought a flower. In front of many people, or even reading alone, we don't lose that little bit of conscious pretentiousness, but we are educated to learn to "be a person"! There was once a friend who was old before he was old, and he almost blushed and said, "Why are you willing to be so tacky?" "Tacky" is a bad word, his heart sank, and he smiled skillfully before he showed anything on his face and said, "Dude, let me ask you, how to write vulgar words?" ——Yes, beside people! You should understand that tacky is also popularity, and people cannot do without it. Without it, half of your humanity will be lost! You will be lonely and weird like that half, like a valley! ”他究竟是个甚么样的人，也许自己很明白。你若是听了他的话，可别因此判断他是甚么人，他读过许多书，你得记住。总之，他有点聪明，那是一定的。而且时刻不忘记自己的聪明。他善于观察人事与天时的气候。不仅能观察气候，还能适气调节，尽管人事多么复杂，那一天温度表是多么忙碌。他早上带大衣出门，预防天变，一进门，放下大衣，等待起风。虽然气候都是那个样子，变不到哪里去。从经验，尤其，从直觉上，他知道这屋子里发生过一点甚么事。
What kind of person he is, maybe you know very well. If you listen to him, don't judge him by that, he has read many books, you have to remember. In short, he is a little smart, that's for sure. And always remember his intelligence. He is good at observing people and the weather. Not only can he observe the climate, but he can also adjust the weather, no matter how complicated the person is, how busy the thermometer is that day. He took his coat out in the morning to prevent weather changes, and as soon as he entered the door, he put down his coat and waited for the wind to rise. Although the climate is the same, it doesn't change much. From experience, especially intuitively, he knew something was going on in this room.“哈，宁宁，你太累了吧。”
他把她拥到一张靠窗的沙发上，用感觉搜寻这房子的“过去”，他明白，她实在累了。
"Ha, Ningning, you're too tired." He hugged her to a sofa by the window and searched for the "past" of the house with his feelings, and he understood that she was really tired.“早知道，有这么些麻烦，真不想结婚。想帮帮忙，又笨手笨脚。这些事情上，一个粗男人还是呆呆的看着好。除了赞叹之外无事可做。”
他用新修过的脸偎着她的小脸，记起戏剧小说中曾有过的对话。
"I knew that there was such trouble, and I really didn't want to get married. I want to help, but I'm clumsy. In these things, a rough man still looks at it blankly. There is nothing to do but admire. ” He hugged her little face with his newly repaired face, remembering the dialogue in the dramatic novel.“真美，宁宁，你还不满意么，我简直没有做过梦，会有这样好的家。这么些东西，太多了，太美了，我舍得用么？
"It's so beautiful, Ningning, aren't you satisfied, I never dreamed that I would have such a good home. There are too many of these things, they are too beautiful, am I willing to use them?“宁宁，你得到这些东西，辛苦得正如我得到你一样，你不知道。你知道，我这些年来受了多少折磨！我像个打了胜仗的兵那么疲倦。可是，我如今休息到这个堡垒中了。”
"Ningning, you got these things, you worked as hard as I got you, you don't know. You know how much I have been tortured over the years! I am as tired as a soldier who has won a battle. However, I am now resting in this fortress. ”她知道由他一个人像做文章那么说下去好，便不插话，只静静的看着他，那么习惯的听着。想这些东西总要旧的，等不到那时，你便会知道这个仗打得有甚么意思。后来连这类带恐吓性的话也放过了。只看着他头上帽子，笑在心上：好个绅士，进门连帽子都不脱！你大概真有点兴奋，除了结婚，甚么都忘了。及至看到她的手两次触到帽沿，知道他必然已经发觉，或许在外面就已经想好了不脱，好让她明白他是多么爱她！她于是有点厌恶，又觉得这也平常。像这样的事她见得多了，反应已经模糊。且心里懒懒的，更不愿往深处想。像闻到他袖口上一点烟味一样，有一丝儿厌恶，“这是男子的习惯，世界上绅士都用这个证明他自己的身分。”那么意识到，过一刻儿工夫，自然便觉不出了。他的拥抱究竟还不单单是形式，而且也令人舒服的！
She knew that it would be better for him to talk like a fuss alone, so she didn't interject, just looked at him quietly, listening so accustomedly. Think that these things must be old, and before then, you will know what the meaning of this battle is. Later, even such threatening words were let go. Just looked at the hat on his head and smiled in his heart: What a gentleman, you don't even take off your hat when you enter the door! You are probably really excited, and you have forgotten everything except marriage. When he saw her hand touch the brim of his hat twice, he knew that he must have noticed, and maybe he had already thought about it outside, so that she could understand how much he loved her! She was a little disgusted and thought it was normal. She had seen a lot of things like this, and her reaction was vague. And she was lazy, and she didn't want to think deeper. As if smelling a little smoke on his cuffs, there was a hint of disgust, "This is a man's habit, and gentlemen in the world use it to prove their identity." Then I realized that after a while, I naturally couldn't feel it. His hug is not only a form, but also comfortable!宁宁忽然想他应当去演戏，一定可以演得很好，不论风流小生或世故老人，一切小动作都训练得够了。一个主妇，仿佛天生的，她并无感触，一切都订妥了，只想起报上的启事，千万不要有“国难时期一切从简”，她有点恨这几个字，像恨鼻窠里两个小小疤点，毫无用处，（又不是痣，可以使明白法国十八世纪风气的人欣赏，说自己像MADAME那个！）又像是去不掉，因为傍着一个“习惯”。
Ning Ning suddenly thought that he should act, he would definitely be able to act well, whether it was a romantic student or a sophisticated old man, all small movements were trained enough. A housewife, as if she was born, she didn't feel it, everything was settled, she only thought of the notice in the newspaper, don't have "everything is simple during the national crisis", she hated these words a little, like two small scars in the nose nest, useless, (not a mole, it can make people who understand the atmosphere of the eighteenth century in France appreciate, saying that they are like MADEM!) It seems that it can't be removed, because there is a "habit".婚礼很花簇。两个傧相都是这一行的惯家，一切全在行，这种人并且照例都是学校里漂亮的人，接到那种“美丽的卤莽”的信，立刻有应付办法，收到小别针小银十字架也会毫不在意的挂起来，如自己买的一样。行礼时不会闹笑话的。男客人说点笑话时，不至于板脸扫兴的。
The wedding is very flowery. This kind of person and as usual are beautiful people in school, and when they receive that kind of "beautiful reckless" letter, they immediately have a way to deal with it, and they will hang up the small pin and small silver cross without care, as if they bought it themselves. There will be no jokes when saluting. When a male guest tells a joke, he will not be disappointed.若是有人反对结婚，让他吃两趟喜酒就会不同了吧。好热闹，酒，美好的外形包着的野话，葡萄珠一样的笑。只要不离礼节太远，放肆一点，不会出乱子的！
If someone opposes marriage, it will be different to let him have two wedding wines. It's so lively, wine, beautiful appearance wrapped in wild words, laughing like grape beads. As long as you don't stray too far from etiquette and be presumptuous, there will be no trouble!宁宁被几个同学陪着，她们大都觉得自己美丽，能干，懂事，才够陪伴新娘，彼此相得益彰，人家看新娘时，一定也看到她们。而且还可以那么作一点不大端重的猜想：“几个人作新娘时候，一定更美艳。谁的主子？有了主子？教书的？经理？少爷？”
Ning Ning was accompanied by several classmates, most of whom felt that they were beautiful, capable, and sensible, enough to accompany the bride and complement each other, and when people looked at the bride, they must also see them. And you can also make a little unserious conjecture: "When a few people are brides, they must be more beautiful." Whose master? With a master? Teaching? Manger? Master? ”“宁宁，你今天真太美了。”
“你的披纱真好，我一向喜欢月白，你头发，你头发，哦，太好了，宁宁！在美学上说，这些波折都太和谐了。”
“呵，宁，你今天为甚么那么庄严，圣处女的光辉在你脸上。”
"Ningning, you are so beautiful today." "Your veil is so good, I have always liked the moon white, your hair, your hair, oh, great, Ningning! Aesthetically speaking, these twists and turns are too harmonious. ” "Heh, Ning, why are you so solemn today, the brilliance of the holy virgin is on your face."教会学校的教育，唱惯了赞美诗，说的自然不太美，也不太俗。
The education in the church school is used to singing hymns, and the words are naturally not very beautiful or vulgar.她第一次穿上这身衣服，有点异样感觉。但是她很平静，又觉得心里有一点儿小小骚乱，因为不习惯。她还可以限制这点骚乱，不使溶化开来，分散到眼睛里，到头发根，到指尖上。她还可以知道鼻尖有一点极细的汗珠，像从浓雾里带来的，脸是红红的。她稳稳坐着，听着这样即使真心的，也是笨拙的阿谀，只用微笑作答，微笑中表示：“这就叫作结婚！”
The first time she put on this dress, it felt a little strange. But she was very calm, and felt a little disturbance in her heart, because she was not used to it. She could also limit this disturbance, so that it would not dissolve and disperse into her eyes, to the roots of her hair, to her fingertips. She could also know that there was a very fine bead of sweat on the tip of her nose, as if it had been brought from a thick fog, and her face was red. She sat steadily, listening to this kind of clumsy flattery, even if she was sincere, and only replied with a smile, and said with a smile: "This is called marriage!" ”他呢，自也有一群人围着，趁人不注意时常常检阅自己的衣饰有没有甚么不大方，不合适。谨慎得如一个老练的演员明知出台必可博得掌声，仍旧反复在心里搬演着一些细枝末节，现在的笑一半是应酬，一半是预习。他抽起一支烟，又放下，态度显得有点矜持，在学校里一切书本，在社会上一切经验，都不能去掉那点矜持。他说话清楚，是做作出来的，微笑常在脸上嘴角，也是做作出来的。他稍微有点乱：不习惯！
As for him, there is also a group of people around, and when people are not paying attention, they often check whether their clothes are not generous and inappropriate. Cautious like a sophisticated actor knowing that he will win applause for his introduction, he still repeatedly plays out some details in his heart, and now his laughter is half socializing, half of which is a preview. He smoked a cigarette and put it down, his attitude seemed a little reserved, and he couldn't get rid of that bit of reserved in all the books in school and all the experience in society. He spoke clearly, it was made, and the smile was often on the corners of his face, and it was also made. He was a little confused: not used to it!婚礼极圆满的完成了，俗气的不高明的笑谑，和不动人的演说，甚么都不缺少。客人渐渐散了，她开始意识到今天作了些甚么事。桌上有份报纸，拿起来看看，找寻那个启事，但那个名字似乎不是她的，越看越不像，多了几笔，或少了几笔，在心里画了一次又一次，还是不能解决。她有点迷惘，好像丢了件甚么东西，好像从报纸上证明这是别人的事情，与自己不相干。
The wedding was completed very successfully, and there was no shortage of tacky and unclever jokes and unmoving speeches. The guests gradually dispersed, and she began to realize what had been done today. There was a newspaper on the table, picked it up and looked for the notice, but the name did not seem to be hers, and the more she looked at it, the more she looked at it, the more it looked like it, and she drew it in her heart again and again, but still couldn't solve it. She was a little confused, as if she had lost something, as if proving from the newspaper that it was someone else's business and had nothing to do with her.灯亮着，窗外天作钢蓝色，天上有星。
The lights are on, the sky outside the window is steel blue, and there are stars in the sky.宁宁手碰到衣服上，像触到冰上，忙拿开来，无事可作，把下唇送到上唇以外，又收了回来，一次，又一次，这种小动作使她的意识趋于集中，又易使停逗在某一点上。两唇都涂了一层唇膏，柔滑的接触能给她以舒适的快意。慢慢嘴唇接受这种刺激的感觉已经迟钝，快意渐渐消失。她随手掐了一个花瓣子，从花瓶内两大束玫瑰的一朵上。两个花瓶里都满满的插了花，一个里面是玫瑰，另一个则是红的与白的康乃馨。
Ning Ning's hand touched the clothes, as if touching the ice, hurriedly took it away, there was nothing to do, sent her lower lip outside the upper lip, and took it back, again and again, this small movement made her consciousness tend to be focused, and it was easy to stop at a certain point. Both lips were coated with a layer of lipstick, and the smooth touch could give her comfortable pleasure. Slowly, the feeling of her lips receiving this stimulation was dull, and the pleasure gradually disappeared. She casually pinched a petal and took one of the two large bouquets of roses in the vase. Both vases were full of flowers, one with roses and the other with red and white carnations.花瓣在手，不一会便烂了，于是重新换一片；一片，一片，直到一朵一朵揉碎在她的手指间，披落在膝头脚边，她忽然发觉了，“这是干甚么！”一点哀怜，一点惋惜，刚想收拾了去，又突然转了念头，抓过瓶子，把一束玫瑰都摘光了，用力揉，揉，红色的汁水浸透了她的掌心，滴到地上（她竟然不让它们溅在衣服上！）有些流到她指甲缝里，干了之后，使自己日后还要看到记起。看瓶里秃秃的枝子，秃秃的叶子，“看吧，我奈何不了你！”
The petals were in her hand, and they rotted after a while, so she changed them again; one by one, one by one, until they were crushed between her fingers and draped at the feet of her knees, she suddenly realized, "What is this for!" A little pity, a little regret, just wanted to clean it up, but suddenly changed her mind, grabbed the bottle, picked off a bouquet of roses, rubbed hard, kneaded hard, and the red juice soaked her palms and dripped to the ground (she didn't even let them splash on her clothes!) Some flowed into her nails, and after they dred, she would have to see and remember them in the future. Look at the bald branches and bald leaves in the bottle, "Look, I can't help you!" ”他们的婚姻完全像普通人的一样，说不出甚么道理，一切发展到后来，便是结婚。
Their marriage is completely like ordinary people, there is no truth, everything develops later, it is marriage.从前，两人在一个学校念书，上下差两班，不知在一个甚么场合认识起来的。他给自己选中了她，找机会多看见她，到后来便找更多机会与她在一起。她却不十分注意他，不十分理睬他，简直还不十分讨厌他。可是凡是这种事，结果总差不多要变得相离不开的，她回顾前尘，实在应当反省，那时为甚么不发现他一点甚么？后来呢，她当真发现了什么？她从来不使他失望，（小小的自然有过）也从不特别鼓励他。后来，一路同到内地，在路上，他服伺她，到内地后，他奉承她，在一个地方既不愿她有不如意事，又愿意她有不如意事，使自己有机会为她效力。他有时还希望她遇到一点小小危险，如落水，跌交，被狗咬，马惊，自己便好尽一个男子的责任来卫护她，援救她，（这点打算也许是看电影得来的暗示）以推动他们的关系。但上天心肠太好，让她平平安安的活，他的英雄表现便无机会成全。然而，她明白，渐渐的他神色举动稍稍改变了。他似乎有自信教她不能缺少他，无形中给自己加上某种名分。他口中虽不明说，却处处暗示别人：“朋友，你的举动言语似乎过分一点了。我虽很能欣赏，可是你是不必空费心计气力的好。”他似乎已经知道先前只是一只钩子搭进一只圜儿，现在却是两节链子连着了。她已极明白他的心理，心想：未免超过事实，水里的鱼哪能便是篓里的？她讨厌他自有把握的神情，那种不是喜欢而是满意的笑。想找个机会嘲弄他一回，扫扫他的兴。
Once upon a time, the two of them studied in the same school, and they went up and down in two shifts, and they met on some occasion. He chose her for himself, looked for opportunities to see her more, and later found more opportunities to be with her. But she didn't pay much attention to him, didn't pay much attention to him, and didn't hate him very much. But all these things always turned out to be inseparable, and she should look back on the past, why didn't she find anything about him at that time? Later, what did she really discover? She never disappointed him, and she never particularly encouraged him. Later, they went all the way to the mainland, and on the way, he served her, and after arriving in the mainland, he flattered her, and in a place he did not want her to have anything unsatisfactory, but also wanted her to have something unsatisfactory, so that he could have the opportunity to serve her. He sometimes hoped that when she encountered a little danger, such as falling into the water, falling, being bitten by a dog, or being frightened by a horse, he would do his duty as a man to protect her and rescue her (this intention may have been hinted at from watching a movie) to promote their relationship. But God was too kind-hearted to let her live in peace, and his heroic performance had no chance to be fulfilled. However, she understood that gradually his expression and behavior changed slightly. He seemed to have the confidence to teach her that she could not live without him, and invisibly added a certain title to himself. Although he did not say anything, he hinted at others everywhere: "Friend, your actions and words seem to be a little excessive. Although I appreciate it very much, you don't have to waste your efforts." He seemed to know that it was just a hook into a circle, but now it was two chains connected. She understood his psychology very well, and thought to herself: It is more than the truth, how can a fish in the water be in a basket? She hated his sure look, the kind of smile that was not like but satisfied. I wanted to find an opportunity to mock him once and ruin his interest.那一天，他邀她到小湖边上看鹭鸶去。她想鹭鸶未必有，看看湖倒好，便问他：“我要不要带大衣？虽然现在有两点钟，太阳也好。”他说“也好”。鹭鸶果然有，但他却一眼也没有看，只一次又一次的买米花喂鱼，一面用右脚根踏水边软土，土上渐渐都有了个小小洼了。起初，鱼来吃的很多，可是米花这东西虽然大的好看，味道却没有甚么，吃多了便厌了，大都吻一吻就丢下来，水面上于是漂着不少白点子，恰像菱花。他把最后买来的一捧，整个洒下去，拍拍两手，用手绢把手指头擦了又擦，把早经打好腹稿的话说出来。她怔了怔，可是早知有此一日，应付办法也存在心里许久了。掠了掠头发，稍稍挪动身子，很尖刻的，但并不望着他的脸说：“你左边脸为甚么那么红，右边那么白？”
That day, he invited her to see the egrets by the small lake. She thought that the egrets might not be there, so she asked him, "Do I want to bring a coat?" Although it's two o'clock now, the sun is good." He said, "It's okay." The egret did have it, but he didn't look at it, just bought popcorn again and again to feed the fish, while stepping on the soft soil by the water with his right foot, and the soil gradually became a small depression. At first, the fish came to eat a lot, but although the rice flowers were big and good-looking, they didn't taste much, and they got tired of eating too much, and most of them kissed and dropped them, and there were a lot of white dots floating on the water, just like water chestnuts. He sprinkled the last handful he bought, patted his hands, wiped his fingers again and again with a handkerchief, and said the words of the early menstruation. She was stunned, but if she had known that there would be such a day, the way to deal with it would have been in her heart for a long time. He swept his hair and moved his body slightly, very sharply, but he didn't look at his face and said, "Why is your left face so red and your right so white?" ”然而现在却明明结了婚，当着许多人，她不相信。
However, now she is obviously married, and in front of many people, she doesn't believe it.他那一次也许只是试一试，看果子虽到了节令，却不知熟了没有。果子并未熟，他失败了，没有告诉过一个人，自己也竭力忘记这回事。明天一切还是照常，陪她玩，陪她吃。有一天，他用不很漂亮，其实却非常艺术的方式说：“宁宁，我们为甚么不，结，婚？”她一时没说出甚么话，于是一切便算定规。
He may have just tried it that time, and although the fruit was in season, he didn't know if it was ripe. The fruit was not ripe, he failed, he didn't tell anyone, and he tried his best to forget about it. Tomorrow everything will be business as usual, play with her, eat with her. One day, he said in a not very beautiful but actually very artistic way: "Ningning, why don't we get married and get married?" She didn't say anything for a while, so everything was settled.他有甚么不好么？似乎找不出，一个很有做丈夫的天分的。
往后的日子大概是个甚么样子？一时想不了许多，但可以断定大概不至太坏。
What's wrong with him? It seems that he can't find a person who is very talented as a husband. What will the days to come look like? I can't think much about it for a while, but I can conclude that it is probably not too bad.然而她恨，这也许只叫着不高兴。一切都平淡无奇，想不到结婚便是这个样子。
However, she hated it, which may only be called unhappiness. Everything is unremarkable, and I didn't expect marriage to be like this.她想把这身衣裳撕成一片片的，听花花的声音。想摔破那个花瓶，那个钟。这灯光，讨厌；这镜架子，讨厌，讨厌！她想痛痛快快哭一场，披散涂了许多油的长发，解放那些小圈圈，拉直那些小波纹，奔出去。奔到山上，湖上，天上，随便哪里，只要不是这里。她想飞，她烦躁得如一个未燃放的烟火。
She wanted to tear this dress into pieces and listen to the sound of flowers. I wanted to break that vase, that bell. I hate this light; I hate this mirror shelf, I hate it! She wanted to cry happily, loosen her long hair with a lot of oil, free those small circles, straighten those small ripples, and run out. Run to the mountains, lakes, sky, anywhere, as long as it's not here. She wanted to fly, she was as irritable as an unlit firework.门开了，他进来了。
她忽然从沙发里跳起来了。
他为她的眼睛而停在门口。
“美，这房子，这墙，这门，这天花板，多美，这老鼠洞，美上天了！”
The door opened, and he entered. She suddenly jumped up from the sofa. He stopped at the door for her eyes. "Beautiful, this house, this wall, this door, this ceiling, how beautiful, this rat hole, beautiful to the sky!"这样的声音是他从来没有听见过的，一时几乎也烦乱起来，但马上很有把握的明白一切。
“噢，宁宁，你是太累了，你应当休息休息，明天，还有许多人要来！”
He had never heard such a voice before, and he was almost annoyed for a while, but he immediately understood everything with confidence. "Oh, Ningning, you are too tired, you should rest, tomorrow, many more people will come!"他很温柔，但相当用力的抱住她。她实在不明白，为甚么让他的嘴唇放到自己的上面来。
像一块布，虽然以后还会皱折，但现在至少已经熨平了。
于是，宁宁真的算结了婚。
He was gentle, but he hugged her quite hard. She really didn't understand why he let his lips on top of hers. Like a piece of cloth, although it will be wrinkled later, but now at least ironed. So, Ning Ning really got married.人的惰性完全和一切物体一样，没有惰性，世界当不是这个样子。
Human inertia is completely the same as all objects, without inertia, the world is not like this.再过两三年，她看了许多事，懂得许多事，对于人间风景，只抱个欣赏态度。心上也许有一点变动，从所在的地位上动一动，可是那只是梦里翻一翻身，左右离不开床沿。她明白人是生物，不是观念。明白既没有理由废掉结婚这个制度。结婚是生活的一个过程，生活在这边若是平地一样，那边也没有高山大水；那她也不必懊悔曾经结婚。虽然人一定非结婚不可，实在也同样没有理由觉自己真的成熟了。她把结论告诉人，却不说如何得来这个结论。她成熟了，因为她已生了个孩子。
In another two or three years, she saw many things, understood many things, and only had an appreciative attitude towards the scenery of the world. There may be a little change in her heart, a move from her position, but it is just a dream to turn over, and the left and right are inseparable from the edge of the bed. She understands that people are creatures, not concepts. She understands that there is no reason to abolish the institution of marriage. Marriage is a process of life, and if life here is flat, there are no mountains and rivers there; then she doesn't have to regret getting married. Although people must get married, there is really no reason to feel that they are really mature. She told people her conclusion, but she didn't say how she came to it. She is mature because she has given birth to a child.
[1] 本篇原载1942年7月27日、28日桂林《大公报》。

唤车

唤车[1]
[1] This article was originally published in the Ta Kung Pao of Guilin on July 27 and 28, 1942. Call for a car[1]朋友送我到门口，我们的话也说完了。“好，再见”，“再见”，他转身走进了门，大概他一时想着一件甚么事，于是我的一切已完全从他思想里让出一个地位，直到他碰上另一个熟人，因为说起某人今天来过时，才又于顷刻之间想起我的过访。我现刻已在门外了。曰生命仿佛一切重新起始。卖丁丁糖的敲过，卖羊肉的架子背过，空着两手的一个三十多岁的人的青布袍子也留过一路影子；对面高墙上的爬山虎正往下探头，太阳光漂着面前一片青石，巷子里有汲水声音溅泼；我又得走。我的疲倦油然醒了。今天一早上到现在，我差不多没住过脚，实在应当累了。当走过这朋友家时，我想，这可好了，今天的事算办完了，且进去坐下歇歇，喝一杯好好的茶。朋友房间布置雅洁而舒服，桌上案上小东小西，莫不有他的修养气度，渗入其间，令人生爱，忍不住摸摸这个，搬搬那个。浅米色楠木几前新挂一条墨竹，款识印章皆可引人入胜。随便谈谈事情，彼此意见极相投合，互有发明，一时把疲倦差不多都忘了。现在，我又得走！虽然是回家去，然而好长的一截路呀！我觉得肩膊酸起来，挺了挺腰，也振不起精神。总不成再进去坐一会。可是方才我说了家里等着我回去，而事实我再不回去，也必要耽误许多事情了。我终得走，我不走，时间依然从我身前身后悄悄的走了。
My friend sent me to the door, and our words were finished. "Okay, goodbye", "goodbye", he turned and walked into the door, probably thinking about something for a while, so everything about me had completely given up a place from his thoughts, until he met another acquaintance, because he remembered my visit again in an instant when he talked about someone coming today. I am now outside the door. Life seems to start anew. The knock of the candy seller, the shelf of mutton has been carried away, and the blue cloth robe of a man in his thirties with empty hands has also left a shadow all the way; the creeper on the high wall on the opposite side is peeking down, the sunlight is drifting on a bluestone in front of him, and the sound of water is splashing in the alley; I have to go again. My fatigue suddenly woke up. From this morning until now, I have almost never stopped on my feet, and I should be tired. When I walked past this friend's house, I thought, this is good, today's work is over, and I went in to sit down and rest, and drink a good cup of tea. The friend's room is elegantly and comfortably furnished, and the small east and west on the table all have his cultivated temperament, which penetrates into it, making people love, and they can't help but touch this and move that. A new ink bamboo is hung in front of the light beige nanmu table, and the seals are fascinating. Casually talking about things, we agree with each other very much, we have inventions, and we almost forget about fatigue for a while. Now, I have to leave again! Although it is going home, it is a long road! I felt my shoulders sore, my back straightened, and I couldn't cheer up. I can't go in and sit for a while. But just now I said that my family is waiting for me to go back, and the fact is that if I don't go back, I will have to delay many things. I finally have to leave, I don't leave, time still quietly passes from before and behind me.这个城真没有办法，街道都不知是哪一年修的。全城居民的鞋子，大概多因此比别地方人的更不经穿些。看他们鞋子式样的笨重结实，恐怕街道之坏已是很久远的事。而且坡路那么多，上上下下，真够麻烦！天未阴，地先阴，一下雨，脚就倒霉了。看今天满好的太阳，以为各处全去得了，然而前天下过雨，有点经验的一定都穿上套鞋，有几条街是活地狱！糟糕，想想沿路经过的几处泥淖，简直令人害怕手摔成个泥球儿可怎么好。而且，天哪，我手里这么些东东西西，瓶瓶罐罐，玎玎珰珰，不是我摔碎它就是它摔倒我，怎么办？那段众水之所归的巷子，通过时得从一块一块的摇摇晃晃的砖头石块上面踏过去，假如身体重心一歪，那笑话可大了。我看了看那些“不幸”一眼，它们全然不了解我，红的自红，绿的自绿，方的圆的依其形体存在，不想到全可能滚成一堆又脏又臭的泥团团，真是无可奈何；——还有，我带捧带抱的像个甚么样子啊，它们性质用途形貌全不一致，放在一处显得多么滑稽，皆远不如各自放在橱窗里，挂在货架上，铺陈于摊头讨喜了！刚才一路买来不大觉得，现在这些东西才真讨厌得要命！从三多巷到得胜门，多远一段路！
There is really no way to do it in this city, and I don't know what year the streets were built. The shoes of the residents of the city are probably more unworn than those in other places. Looking at the bulkiness and sturdiness of their shoes, I am afraid that the bad streets have been a long time ago. And there are so many slopes, up and down, it's really troublesome! The sky is not cloudy, the ground is cloudy first, and when it rains, my feet are unlucky. Looking at the sun today, I thought I could go everywhere, but it rained the day before yesterday, and those with some experience must wear galoshes, and a few streets are living hell! Oh no, thinking about the few muddy places along the road, it's just scary to fall into a mud ball. And, my God, what should I do if I break it or it will fall on me? The alley where all the water belongs, you have to step on the rickety bricks and stones one by one, if the center of gravity of the body is tilted, the joke is big. I glanced at those "misfortunes", they didn't understand me at all, the red ones were red, the green ones were green, and the square and round ones existed according to their shapes, and they didn't expect that they could all roll into a pile of dirty and smelly mud, which was really helpless; ——Also, what do I look like with my hugs, their nature, purpose and shape are all inconsistent, and how funny they look when placed in one place, they are far inferior to each of them in the window, hanging on the shelves, and spreading them on the stall! I didn't think much about it when I bought it all the way just now, but now these things are really hateful! How far is it from Sanduo Lane to Victory Gate?——我坐辆车吧，“车！”我已经叫出了口。巷口正有一辆空车。我的眼光，声音，思想像三个带白帽的浪头接着，前面的来了，后面的就推上来了。几乎难辨先后。
“哪里？”
“×××”
“请坐。”
- I'll take a car, "Car!" I had already shouted. There was an empty car at the entrance of the alley. My eyes, my voice, my thoughts were like three waves with white hats. Then, the front came, and the back pushed up. It was almost impossible to distinguish the order. "Where?" “×××” "Please sit down."车轮上还留下些水渍泥斑没有干去，车是才拉了客人来的。
There were still some water stains and mud spots on the wheels that had not dried, and the car had just pulled the guests.一早上，车夫拉了车出去。火车站，旅馆，人家，街，巷，全城到处跑。“车！”——“哪里？”——“×××”，立刻，他心上画出一条路线，从哪里，穿过哪里，拐弯，到了。“请坐！”车上是各样的人，各种东西。那是车夫所不计及的，他只是依自己的习惯，一拉起车杠就走，路上有人注意车座上一个女人的眼睛，或因为车板上一筐橘子，而想起已经秋深了，这样或那样都与他无关。他从不回过头来看一看，倒是此外从身边经过的事事物物，有时，画入他脑子里。留下个影子。
Early in the morning, the coachman pulled the car out. Train stations, hotels, people, streets, alleys, running all over the city. "Car!" ——"Where?" ——"×××", immediately, he drew a route in his mind, where to go, where to pass, to turn, and to arrive. "Please sit down!" There were all kinds of people and all kinds of things on the car. That was not the coachman's concern, he just followed his habit, as soon as he pulled up the lever, and someone on the road paid attention to the eyes of a woman on the seat, or because of a basket of oranges on the board, and remembered that it was late autumn, one way or another. He never looked back to take a look, but in addition to everything he passed by, sometimes, he drew into his mind. Leave a shadow.坐车客人有的要讲半天价钱，有的很大方给超过规定的钱，有人想真不得了，一个拉车的全月收入要抵两个大学教授，三个委任一级公务员，而公务员和教授就坐过这辆车，坐车的有的是赴宴去，有的赶回家，一切与他全都无关。不坐车时你在车下，坐了车他拉着走。他也从来不知字典上有个名词叫“人道主义”，一个大房子里正有人讨论这个问题，十分激烈。他知道一会有许多人出来，而那些人都一时心里必埋怨路道，他又可以有一个主顾。
Some of the guests in the car have to talk about the price for half a day, and some are very generous in giving more than the prescribed money, and some people think it's really amazing, the monthly income of a cart puller is equivalent to two university professors, three appointed first-class civil servants, and civil servants and professors have ridden in this car, some of them go to banquets, some rush home, everything has nothing to do with him. When you are not in the car, you are under the car, and when you get in the car, he pulls it away. He never knew that there was a term in the dictionary called "humanitarianism", and someone was discussing this issue in a big house, which was very intense. He knew that many people would come out in a while, and those people would complain about the road for a while, and he could have a patron.太阳走过人定认为“中”的那一点上，街右的影子铺到街左，这个时候，若是夏天，街左的人一定多些，眼下人的意识不常常花在太阳上。然而下午毕竟是下午了。向这个城里来的人比出城人多，拉车的路径不免变了一点。“嚼口末橄榄喝口水，橄榄回甜想情哥。”车夫心里有张嘴和耳朵，自己的声音自己听到。完全是忽然而来的他唱出这两句。现在，他的车闲着。他身后若没有两个轮子，此刻他的样子不是一个车夫。他正很有兴味的欣赏对面笔店里的那个老头子，架着一付眼镜，在修弄一支“七紫三羊”。不是七紫三羊，就是“夺锦标”。
At this time, if it is summer, there must be more people on the left side of the street, and people's consciousness is not often spent on the sun. However, afternoon is afternoon after all. There are more people coming to this city than going out of the city, and the path of pulling the cart is inevitably a little different. "Chew the olives and drink saliva, and the olives are sweet and think of your brother." The coachman had a mouth and ears in his heart, and he heard his own voice. It was completely sudden that he sang these two sentences. Now, his car is idle. If there were no two wheels behind him, he would not look like a coachman at this moment. He was admiring the old man in the pen shop opposite with great interest, holding up a pair of glasses and tinkering with a "Seven Purples and Three Sheep". It's not seven purple and three sheep, or "winning the championship".——五福子昨天去点痣，（他现在想起那个黑麻子脸上，一粒粒白点子，还忍不住自己与自己会心一笑）他说左眼底下那个最要不得，会克妻，我脸上也有几个痣，要去看看，不好就点掉它。
——Wu Fuzi went to get a mole yesterday, (he now thinks of the white dots on the face of the black pockmarks, and he can't help but smile with himself) He said that the one under his left eye is the most undesirable, he will kill his wife, and I also have a few moles on my face, I want to go and see it, and if it's not good, click it.他眼睛暗了，想着一点甚么。点了痣，他便会怎么样了。相命的都说不点会发生甚么事，谁知道呢。点了到那时看不见那事来，不点到时候也未见得记起来。
“车！”
好像车就是他的名字，这一叫，马上教他这些不凝固的想头散了。
“先生哪里？”
“三多巷。”
这个地方原来就靠着车夫的家。
It seemed that the car was his name, and this call immediately taught him these unsolidified thoughts. "Where is the sir?" "Sanduo Alley." This place used to be close to the coachman's house.客人下了车，走进了一个门，车夫拖起车把，慢慢走到巷口，他已经看见自己的家了。一近门，他知道老婆在门里井边上洗衣裳，背上背着孩子。老婆也看见他了，手下稍微慢了一点。
The guest got out of the car and walked into a door, the coachman dragged the handlebars and slowly walked to the entrance of the alley, where he already saw his home. As soon as he approached the door, he knew that his wife was washing clothes by the well in the door and carrying a child on her back. His wife also saw him, and his men slowed down a little.他解开包被，抱过孩子，孩子觉得舒服得多了。老婆背上也轻了不少。她用水淋淋的手理上披下来的头发，车夫很满足的看着她年青的身体，看着她脸上红。心中充满了怜惜。孩子嘴里咕噜甚么了，他指着门口的车。车夫想，来，抱你坐坐车。
He untied the quilt and hugged the child, who felt much more comfortable. My wife's back is also a lot lighter. She brushed her hair down with her watery hands, and the coachman looked at her young body with satisfaction, looking at her face red. My heart was full of pity. The child grunted something, and he pointed to the car at the door. The coachman thought, come, hug you and take a ride.孩子在车上玩得十分快活。笑得令大人不解。
一只白粉蝶飞过他眼睛边。云推过来又推过去了，一片影子从巷子这头卷到那头，车夫朦朦胧胧想起一些事情。
The child had a great time in the car. The laughter puzzled the adults. A white butterfly flew over his eyes. The clouds pushed over and over, and a shadow rolled from one end of the alley to the other, and the coachman vaguely remembered something.卖丁丁糖的敲过，卖羊肉的架子背过，空着两手的一个三十多岁的人的青布袍子也留过一路影子。
The person who sold Tintin candy knocked on it, the shelf that sold mutton was carried away, and the green cloth robe of a man in his thirties with empty hands also left a shadow all the way.今天一定记住。早就空了，茶籽油瓶。不要忘了，不要忘了，老是忘。她自己打去吧，偏又是南门庆来春的好。（他真喜欢那个油的气味，经验弄得他心里在狂）老子发财了，还要买香水精，香水精！还有，去看看，那个痣要不要点去了它。
I must remember it today. It's long empty, tea seed oil bottle. Don't forget, don't forget, always forget. She called it herself, but it was good for Nanmen to celebrate the spring. (He really likes the smell of that oil, and the experience makes him crazy) I'm rich, and I still have to buy perfume essence, perfume essence! Also, go and see if the mole wants to order it.“车！”
——我迟疑着，我坐不坐这辆车，等他一会儿，到他想走时再走还是……
“哪里？”
“得胜门。”
——我坐呢？不？等一等？
“请坐！”
"Che!" ——I hesitated, whether I would take this car, wait for him for a while, and then leave when he wanted to leave...... "Where?" "Victory Gate." ——Where am I sitting? No? Wait a minute? "Please sit down!"我被他命令坐上了。他依照习惯搓搓手，利落一下了，拉起就走。孩子被母亲接过时，还只是狂笑。
车轮上的泥水还没有干。
I was ordered to sit on by him. He rubbed his hands according to his habit, neatly lit it, pulled it up and left. When the child was taken over by his mother, he just laughed wildly. The muddy water on the wheels has not yet dried.坐在车上，我忘了疲倦，忘了那些瓶瓶罐罐，忘了朋友的家。车轮滚在不平衡的石路上，滚在气味不大好的泥淖里，滚过那条一汪积水的巷口。我没有想起我的家，我的静静的房间，我的靠背椅，茶，书。
Sitting in the car, I forgot my tiredness, those bottles and cans, and my friends' homes. The wheels rolled on the unbalanced stone road, rolled in the mud that didn't smell good, and rolled through the watery alley. I didn't think of my home, my quiet room, my back chair, tea, and books.（——嗐！茶籽油瓶，茶籽油瓶，又忘了，又忘了！）
“你怎么啦？哦，真不该让你买这么些东西，那么远的路，下回我陪你去。
“你来看看，××给你送来一本字帖。”
(——Hey! Tea seed oil bottle, tea seed oil bottle, forgot, forgot! ） "What's wrong with you? Oh, I really shouldn't let you buy such things, such a long way, I'll accompany you next time." "Come and take a look, ×× will send you a calligraphy."“那件毛衣给你赶起来了，要不要试试，不，不就晚上再试吧。
“咦，你忘了买一把花！”
我颓然，坐到靠背椅里，为遮掩我的不说话，低头尽翻那个字帖。
卅一年十一月廿二日完成初稿
"That sweater is for you to catch up, do you want to try it, no, let's try it again at night. "Hey, you forgot to buy a handful of flowers!" I slumped down, sat in the back chair, and lowered my head to flip through the poster to cover my silence. The first draft was completed on November 22, 31.
[1] 本篇原载《世界学生》1943年第二卷第三期。

1943年

1943年
除岁[1]
[1] This article was originally published in World Students, Volume 2, Issue 3, 1943. In 1943 Year of Tax[1]守岁烛的黑烟摇摇的，像一条小水蛇游进黑暗里。烛泪漓漓淋淋的流满了锡烛台的周身，发散着一种淡淡的气味，烛焰忽大忽小，四壁的光影也便静静的变化着。——说是守岁烛，其实也只是一只普通的赭红土烛而已，光秃秃的，没有甚么装饰。
The black smoke of the New Year's candle swayed, like a small water snake swimming into the darkness. Candle tears flowed all over the whole body of the tin candlestick, exuding a faint smell, the flame of the candle flickered and small, and the light and shadow on the four walls changed quietly. ——It is said to be a New Year's candle, but in fact it is just an ordinary ochre red clay candle, bare and without any decoration.窗纸上涂满了清油，房门被一面厚厚的棉帘子挡着，室内渚积的炭酸过多了，教人觉得心头沉重。
The window paper was covered with clear oil, the door was blocked by a thick cotton curtain, and there was too much carbonic acid in the room, which made people feel heavy.想不到适当的事情做，随意伸手拿起火箸子，看看烛花并没有长起来——才挟过呀，便又放下了，移移坐在椅子里的屁股，轻轻地嘘出一口气。父亲抬起头来看了我一眼。
I couldn't think of anything appropriate to do, so I casually reached out and picked up the fire chopsticks to see that the candle flowers had not grown - I just pinched it, so I put it down again, moved my butt in the chair, and let out a soft sigh. My father raised his head and looked at me.算盘珠子刷溜的响着，薄薄的关山纸一张一张的翻过。
过年了。……
The abacus beads sounded, and the thin Guanshan paper was turned over one by one. It's the New Year. ……收账的走遍千家门户，回来，摇摇头，说一声又长了不少见识便去睡了。在梦里，他还会看见自己一脸的无可奈何，和层层围着的灰白的眼睛，嗫嚅着的嘴唇吧。我看看桌上一堆散乱的角票和镍币，想起他的话：“我知道，我知道，我知道！”不由得鼻子里喷出一个没有声音的笑，便随即止住了，似乎想收回去。
The collector walked through thousands of doors, came back, shook his head, and went to sleep after saying that he had gained a lot of knowledge. In the dream, he would also see his helpless face, his gray eyes surrounded by layers, and his pursed lips. I looked at the scattered pile of corner tickets and nickel coins on the table, and remembered his words: "I know, I know, I know !" I couldn't help but let out a silent laugh from my nose, and then stopped, as if I wanted to take it back.真的，过年了。
Really, it's the New Year.天，也真有个意思，几天来，灰里透亮的瓦块云紧紧的压着动都不动，板滞滞的，像是冰结了，怕就要下雪了吧，想一些蒙馆先生捋抩着黄胡子说：“雪花六出，（是）丰年——之——兆——呵——。”
Heaven, it's really interesting, for a few days, the gray translucent tile clouds have been pressed tightly and motionless, the board is stagnant, as if it is frozen, I'm afraid it's going to snow, think about some Mr. Mengguan stroked his yellow beard and said: "Snowflakes come out of the six, (is) a good year-of-trillion-heh——。 ”风呼哨着，刮刷得几根军用电话线鬼一般叫，坐在家里会常常有泥粒掉到颈子里，这时节要出去走一趟是须用相当勇气与决心的，可是几天来街上行人不但不稀落，而且更多，更匆忙。
跟往年也没甚么不同呵，这些。
The wind whistled, scraping a few military telephone lines like ghosts, sitting at home would often have mud drops into the neck, and it took a lot of courage and determination to go out for a walk at this time, but in the past few days, the pedestrians on the street were not only not sparse, but also more, more hurried. It's no different from previous years, these.低郁的炮声破散在风声里，一阵子紧，一阵子松，大概还在老地方，总还隔有几十里地，也轰了不少日子了，今夜都不会过来吧。用这个代替花炮点缀点缀也好，免得教年以为自己来错了日子。
The low sound of the cannon was scattered in the wind, tight for a while, loose for a while, probably still in the old place, always dozens of miles away, and it has been bombarded for many days, and it won't come over tonight. It's good to use this instead of fireworks to embellish it, so as not to teach the year to think that you have come to the wrong day.一送了灶，果然竟有点过年气象了。其实，年自不许人忘记，不必甚么礼俗来装饰。老祖母白发上插上小心收藏的绒花，年青的姊姊修改着弟妹们不大上身的新衣裳，这些，会轻轻带来过年的心情和过年的感觉给驮着家的重量的人。
As soon as the stove was delivered, it was indeed a bit of a New Year's atmosphere. In fact, the New Year is not forgotten, and there is no need to decorate it with any etiquette. The old grandmother's white hair was inserted with carefully collected velvet flowers, and the young sister modified the new clothes of her younger siblings, which would gently bring the mood of the New Year and the feeling of the New Year to the people who carry the weight of the family.我若有所思的点上一支烟，目光停在学徒的细心抹拭过挂进来的招牌上。今年，很少店家把招牌加过油漆，飞过金，有大多数还在等着不可知的命运：也许要倚到幽黑的角落休息若干日子，也许在原来的某记上贴上一方红纸，从新改过字样，甚至还供出最后的用处，暖了人的身手，凉了人的心。谁知道呢？但是能挂到旧檐下让风雨吹打一些时的，仍旧要在熟人眼里闪耀着陈年的光辉，怎能不抹拭得干干净净的？
I thoughtfully lit a cigarette, and my eyes stopped on the sign that the apprentice had carefully wiped and hung up. This year, few stores have painted the signboard, and most of them are still waiting for an unknown fate: maybe they have to rest in a dark corner for a few days, maybe they will put a red paper on the original note, change the words from anew, and even provide the last use, warming people's skills and cooling people's hearts. Who knows? But when it can be hung under the old eaves and let the wind and rain blow some time, it still has to shine with the brilliance of the old in the eyes of acquaintances, how can it not be wiped clean?……这字，是祖父一个朋友写的，是个大名家，叫，叫甚么的？……
…… This word was written by a friend of my grandfather, and he was a famous master. ……“还好，亏不了多少，够开销的了。”父亲推开算盘，移开面前账簿叠起的小山，摘下黑布护袖，用双手狠狠的抹一下脸，像抹去许多细粉的数目，站起身来。
“不早了吧？”
“嗯？”
"Fortunately, I can't lose much, it's enough to spend." My father pushed aside the abacus, moved the hill of stacked account books in front of him, took off his black cloth sleeves, wiped his face with both hands, like erasing the number of fine powders, and stood up. "It's not early, is it?" "Huh?"他搓搓两手，把指头拉出声音，来回踱着，眉头皱起又放平，是在盘算着甚么。看他的神情，像一个坐了很多时候船的旅客到了家，还似在水上轻轻的摇着。
He rubbed his hands, pulled his fingers out of a sound, paced back and forth, his brows furrowed and flattened, what he was thinking. Looking at his expression, he was like a traveler who had been on the boat for a long time when he arrived home, and he seemed to be shaking gently on the water.父亲少年时节完全是个少爷，作得好诗，舞得好剑，能骑人不敢近身的劣马，春秋佳日常常大醉三天不醒，对于生业完全不经意。现在却变成一个老老实实的生意人，教人简直不能相信。我凝视壁上挂着他的照像，想寻出一点风流倜傥的痕迹。
When my father was a teenager, he was a young master, he wrote good poetry, danced with a good sword, could ride a bad horse that people did not dare to approach, and often got drunk for three days on the good days of spring and autumn, and was completely indifferent to his livelihood. Now he has become an honest businessman, and he can't believe it. I stared at his photo hanging on the wall, trying to find a trace of his charm.“你别笑，我知道你要笑的。”我本来一点都没有笑，经他一说倒真忍不住笑了。
"Don't laugh, I know you're going to laugh. I didn't laugh at all, but I couldn't help but laugh when he said it.“一到天明，你等着瞧吧，多少字号要在公会的名单上勾去了。广源，新丰，玉记，……往年倒一两家铺子，大家心里虽然早都有了个底，可是不能不当樁大事议论着，今年啊，多了，大家反而不大在意了，也不再关心生财铺面之类的事情，只是听到某家还想撑着，倒好像很奇怪。船多不碍港，客多不碍路，兔死狐悲，要是有点办法，谁不愿援之以手，然而自顾都不暇了，只好眼睁睁看着一爿一爿的不声不响的倒。我看有弄得米没地方买的日子。”
"As soon as dawn comes, wait and see, how many fonts will be ticked off the list of the guild. Guangyuan, Xinfeng, Yuji,...... In previous years, there were one or two shops, although everyone had a bottom in their hearts, but they couldn't not be discussed as a big deal, this year, there were more, everyone didn't care much, and they no longer cared about things like making money shops, but it seemed strange to hear that a certain family still wanted to hold on. If there is a way, who doesn't want to help, but they don't have time to take care of themselves, so they have to watch the rice fall silently. I see that there are days when there is no place to buy rice. ”说着一手抓起茶杯，把杯内的残茶往嘴里倒，大概茶早已凉透了，他用力打了个寒噤，把茶都泼在痰盂里。
As he spoke, he grabbed the teacup with one hand and poured the remaining tea in the cup into his mouth, probably the tea was already cold, he shivered hard and poured the tea into the spittoon.“你说，恁们许多铺子，就没有一个有眼光，有手腕的吗？有。可是这年头，有翻江倒海的本领也不行。就只有德太还好些，辅成的流年的确不坏，他今年心血来潮的忽然想代做陆陈[2]，谁知竟做上了，这样上下一扯，他大概还挣了点。上板上眼的都不成。一入秋，上河的早食子[3]全教个不见面的人给收了去，三十子，五十子，嚇一跳[4]，今年一担都没见，你说可怪不怪？那么只好在下河一带着眼了，冒了多大的危险，收到一点迟食子。路程远，水脚重，蚀斛大[5]，当然卖价也就水涨船高了。前天还有人说呢：米卖四千八，扒米店不放（犯）法，我看四万八的时候也不足怪，扒也扒不出甚么油水。说真的，能有法子啊，谁忍有一些小户人家半饥半饱的，天天量米的时候总是吵嘴。吃不起米当然只好带着杂粮吃了。这一来，倒成全了辅成。真的好笑，万安堂的陶老板前天还跟我说：‘别的行业不说，民贫则俭，可省的省了，不景气是意中事，你们这一业，食为民天，米都是要吃的，怎么也不行了？’我望他笑笑，说：‘甚么都可以省，病却省不了啊，有钱的或许参汤燕窝吃得少一点，穷人，摆子痢疾更较往年多些，今年吃了些不惯的东西，肠胃里免不了要闹闹，你们大黄芒硝都少不了，有人照顾，你却为甚么总是成天嚷着亏啊折的？’”
"You say, in your many shops, none of them have eyes and wrists? Yes. But these days, I can't have the ability to turn the river and the sea. Only Mrs. De is better, the passing years of Fucheng are indeed not bad, he suddenly wanted to be Lu Chen [2] on a whim this year, who knew that he did it, so he pulled up and down, he probably earned a little. None of the eyes on the board are done. As soon as autumn entered, the breakfast in the river [3] taught all the people who did not meet to accept it, thirty sons, fifty sons, shocked [4], I haven't seen a load this year, do you think it's strange? Then I had to go down the river with my eyes, how much risk I took and received a little late food. The distance is long, the water is heavy, and the erosion is large[5], of course, the selling price will rise. The day before yesterday, someone said: Rice sells for 4,008, and the rice shop does not let it (break) the law. Seriously, there is a way, who can bear to have some small families who are half hungry and half full, and they always quarrel when measuring rice every day. Of course, if you can't afford to eat rice, you have to eat it with grains. This time, it was completed. It's really funny, Boss Tao of Wan'an Hall also said to me the day before yesterday: 'Don't talk about other industries, the people are poor and frugal, but they can be saved, and the recession is a matter of mind, your industry, food is for the people, rice is to be eaten, why can't it be done?' I looked at him and smiled, and said: 'You can save everything, but you can't save on illness, the rich may eat less ginseng soup and bird's nest, the poor people, pendulum dysentery is more than in previous years, this year I ate some things that I am not used to, and it is inevitable that there will be trouble in the stomach. ’”恐怕今年材板铺子倒有点赚头，死都还是要死的，万字纹的棺材，三道紫金箍[6]究竟不大有人用。我沉吟着，把烧到指边的烟卷丢到痰盂里，咝——马上黑了。
I'm afraid that the lumber shop is a bit profitable this year, and I still have to die, and the coffin with a swastika pattern and three purple gold hoops [6] are not very useful for anyone. I pondered, threw the cigarette roll that had burned to my fingertip into the spittoon, and swished - it was dark immediately.炮声又紧了，纸窗沙沙的抖了一阵。也辨不清是敌人的，是我们的。夜来，炮声就没停过，不过到紧的时候才教人一惊。
The sound of the cannon tightened again, and the paper window rustled for a while. I couldn't tell if it was the enemy's or ours. At night, the sound of cannons did not stop, but it was shocking when it was tight.“这次是抗战，抗战，我们难道不明白吗？为了抗战，商人吃点苦是应该的，只是——”父亲的话说不下去了，沉沉的坐到椅子里，拨弄着算盘，好像那种轻快的声音能给他安慰，能平抑心里的骚乱。
"This time it's the War of Resistance, the War of Resistance, don't we understand? For the sake of the War of Resistance, businessmen should suffer a little, but-" My father's words couldn't continue, he sat down in his chair heavily, fiddling with the abacus, as if that brisk voice could comfort him and calm the turmoil in his heart.“前天商会慰劳团带了不少煮熟了的腌肉去，原想让弟兄们也知道过年了，也算一点意思，看这样，前线上一定紧张着哩，恐怕他们连这点腌肉也没工夫吃。唉，恐怕他们连在家怎样过年的心思都没空去想……”父亲摇摇头，眼睛看那支燃得正旺的守岁烛。
"The day before yesterday, the Chamber of Commerce comfort group brought a lot of cooked cured meat, originally wanted to let the brothers know that the New Year was coming, which was a bit interesting. Alas, I'm afraid they don't even have time to think about how to celebrate the New Year at home......" My father shook his head and looked at the burning New Year's candle.“写春联吧，年，总是要过的。墨已经研好了，在架子上茶杯里，你拿来渗点水，燉在脚炉上，写春联的墨要熟，才有光。炉里该还有火，三十夜，要彻夜火烈。纸——怎么‘万年红’买不到？这是本城出的啊！没有就将就省用吧。”父亲把心事推开了一点，想到过年了。
"Write Spring Festival couplets, the New Year, always have to pass. The ink has been studied, in the teacup on the shelf, you take it to seep some water, stew it on the foot stove, and the ink for writing the Spring Festival couplets must be cooked before it has light. There should still be fire in the furnace, and it will be hot all night for thirty nights. Paper - why can't you buy 'Ten Thousand Years Red'? This is from this city! If you don't have it, save it. My father pushed his mind a little away and thought of the New Year.“大门后的联字换换，就用‘频忧启瑞，多，——多福兴邦’。”
“福？”
“福。大年下，用个‘难’字让老太爷看见要不高兴。”
“那，‘忧’字为甚不换一个呢？”
"The couplet behind the gate is changed, and it is used to 'frequent worries and enlightenment, more ,—— and more blessings and prosperity'." "Fu?" "Fu. In the New Year, use the word 'difficult' to make the old lady unhappy. ” "Then, why don't you change the word 'worry'?"“忧总是忧的，难道不忧么？只要能启瑞就好。哈哈。”
夜深了，寒气愈重了，我拨拨火盆里的炭，炭烧得正炽，红得像是透明的，只是一拨之后，一些白灰飞了起来，落得我一身。
"Worry is always worry, isn't it worrying? As long as it can be enlightened. Ha ha. ” It was late at night, the cold was getting heavier, I stirred the charcoal in the brazier, the charcoal was burning, red as if it were transparent, but after a pluck, some white ash flew up and fell on me.“不行，一会儿就要支不住了，你去再搬点炭来加上去，，回来，索性拿壶酒来。”
炭火更旺了，我又撒了些柏叶，一室都是香气。
"No, it won't be able to hold on in a while, you go and move some charcoal to add it, {{id_0000}}, come back, just get a pot of wine." The charcoal fire was even more vigorous, and I sprinkled some cypress leaves, and the whole room was full of aroma.“喝，我久不同你喝了，今天不是个平常日子，我们爷儿俩守守岁，来，干！”
"Drink, I haven't been drinking with you for a long time, today is not an ordinary day, our grandfather and son are keeping the New Year, come on, do it!"我近几年都在外县，一年难得回来趟把，回来，也不正赶上过年，今年难得抽空回来，看看一切都变了，心中不知是甚么味道，难得看见父亲这样高兴，我自然是高兴的。
“干。”但是我的杯子停在一个声音里：
I have been in other counties in recent years, and it is rare to come back a year, and it is not just in time for the Chinese New Year, and this year I have rarely taken the time to come back to see that everything has changed, I don't know what it tastes like in my heart, and it is rare to see my father so happy, so I am naturally happy. "." But my cup stopped in a voice:“——嘡，睡醒些，屋上瓦响，莫疑猫狗，起来望望。……水缸上满，铜炉子丢远些，小心火烛啊，……嘡……嘡。”
渐近渐远渐渐走过深巷，铜锣的声音敲破了夜的深沉。
"——Hey, wake up, the roof is ringing, don't suspect cats and dogs, get up and look. …… The water tank is full, throw the copper stove away, be careful of the candles,...... Ugh...... Ugh. ” Getting closer and farther away and gradually walking through the deep alleys, the sound of the gong broke through the depths of the night.“这是敲岁尾更，每年腊月二十四以后都要敲的，怎么离家才几年，把故乡的风俗都忘了？不记得了吗，你小时候还常常学着叫呢。铜炉盖子不知被你敲破了多少，不晓得是甚么字眼，一定缠着要妈教你。听——”
"This is the end of the year, every year after the 24th day of the twelfth lunar month, why have you only been away from home for a few years, and you have forgotten all the customs of your hometown? Don't you remember, you used to learn to call when you were a child. I don't know how many copper furnace lids have been broken by you, I don't know what words they are, I must be pestering my mother to teach you. Listen—"“——笃，笃，笃，我看见了，看见啦，躲也没有用，我看见来，墙犄角的影子里，看见啰，别跑，别跑，笃，笃，笃，笃……”
"——Duke, duk, duk, I saw it, I saw it, it's useless to hide, I saw it, in the shadow of the corner of the wall, I saw it, don't run, don't run, duk, duk......"“这个我知道了，是冬防局敲梆子的，我还躲在门缝偷看过。他这么一叫，毛贼都吓跑了，会捉得到？”
“也就是嚇嚇罢了。”
“当……当，笃，笃，笃笃，笃，……当……”
“呃，抡二爷今儿——”
"I know this, it was the Winter Defense Bureau who knocked on the stick, and I hid in the crack of the door to peek. When he shouted like this, the thieves were scared away, will they be caught? ” "It's just scary." "Dang...... Dang, Du, Du,...... Dang ......" "Uh, the second master today-"“哦，抡二爷今儿来找过您一趟，说——”
"Oh, the second master came to you today and said-"“我知道了，抡二爷时运也太不济，今年景况很不好，又添了个孩子，真是要他来的，偏不来，不要他的，偏来，他，人又老实无用，一家大小全靠二娘一个人戳针头子戳出点钱来吃饭，这样，哪成？他心也太好，又专为别人的事东奔西走的。我已经跟大家商议，把慰劳团募来的棉衣交给二娘做了，这样也免得被人克扣棉花，你明儿帮忙到商会里取来。他还有甚么事吗？”
"I know, the luck of the second master is too bad, this year the situation is very bad, and he has added a child, I really want him to come, but I can't come, I don't want him, I don't want him, I'm coming, he, people are honest and useless, the whole family depends on the second mother to poke the needle and poke out some money to eat, so how can it be? He has a good heart, and he is running around for other people's affairs. I have discussed with everyone that I will hand over the cotton clothes collected by the comfort group to Erniang, so as not to be deducted from the cotton, and you can help me get it from the Chamber of Commerce tomorrow. Does he have anything else? ”“他说詹世善还有甚么事情要拜托您，说告诉您，您就知道，千万请您出点力。”
“哦，”父亲用手指把着桌面，一声，一声，很慢。
"He said that Zhan Shishan has something else to ask you, tell you, and you will know, please do your best." "Oh," my father held the table with his fingers, one sound, one sound, very slowly.“又是一个。詹世善这人也固执得可以。张远谋说要留他，他偏不肯，却又四处托人找事，人家这都要裁人呢，教我哪儿想法去。”
“是怎么回事呢？”
"Another one. Zhan Shishan is also stubborn. Zhang Yuanmou said that he wanted to keep him, but he refused, but he asked people to find trouble everywhere. ” "What's going on?"“是这样的，你知道张远谋是公会主席，今年弄得也不好，但是还不至于倒，他是为了做军米，把铺面没了，只留几个师傅和一个老桂[7]，别的人都辞了。去年因为军米的关系，大家受的影响也不小，他便代表同业去跟军用代办所交涉，说以后所有军米一概归他一家包做，不要临时摊派各家，耽误营业，两方面都省麻烦，这事原是克己利人的。詹世善原是张远谋信任的人，看他家累又重，便说我们是多年宾东，我仍旧留你，一切照旧，可是他啊，说是不能做事，于心不安，坚辞要走。真是个淳厚人。”
"That's right, you know that Zhang Yuanmou is the chairman of the guild, and he didn't do well this year, but he didn't fall yet, he lost the shop for the sake of making military rice, leaving only a few masters and an old gui id_0000, and everyone else resigned. Last year, because of the relationship with military rice, everyone was not smallly affected, so he went to negotiate with the military agency on behalf of his peers, saying that in the future, all military rice will be covered by his family, and do not temporarily apportioned each family, delaying business, and saving trouble in both aspects. Zhan Shishan was originally a person trusted by Zhang Yuanmou, seeing that his family was tired and heavy, he said that we were Bindong for many years, I will still keep you, everything is as usual, but he, he said that he couldn't do things, he was uneasy, and he insisted on leaving. What a simple person. ”“那怎么办呢？”
“只好跟辅成说说看了，只怕也没有大希望噢。——往年添个人，算得了甚么，今年守岁酒都吃过了，还没个分晓。”
“敲门。”
“哎？这会儿有谁来？”
"Then what should I do?" I had to talk to Fu Cheng about it, but I'm afraid there is no great hope. ——In previous years, I added someone, what is it, I have eaten all the New Year's wine this year, and I don't know yet. ” "Knock on the door." "Hey? Who is coming now? ”父亲掀开棉帘，一步跨了出去，我拿了蜡烛跟在后面。
我们站在门旁，屏着气听着，心里不免有点忐忑，等待着甚么事发生。门环又响。
“哪个？”
“是我。”
“哦，是远翁，有甚么事？进来坐吧？”
My father lifted the cotton curtain and stepped out, and I took the candle and followed behind. We stood by the door, listening with bated breath, feeling a little apprehensive, waiting for something to happen. The door knocker rang again. "Which?" "It's me." "Oh, it's Yuan Weng, what's the matter? Come in and sit down? ”“不，不，不，我这就要走，你门上封着元宝[8]，怎能开，你不用开，不用开。”
“有甚么要紧事吗？前线上怎样了？”
"No, no, no, I'm leaving, your door is sealed with ingots{{id_0000}}, how can you open it, you don't have to open it, you don't need to open it." "Is there anything important? What happened on the front line? ”“很好，前线上，冲过去二十几里，扎到小杨村了，小杨村离麒麟壩还有四十多。我就要去，跟王团附一块去，把慰劳品带到团部，一天亮就走。，你知道收上河一带稻子的是谁？”
"Very good, on the front line, rushed over for more than twenty miles, and stuck to Xiaoyang Village, which is still more than forty away from Qilin Dam. I'm going to go, go with Wang Tuan, bring the consolation to the regiment headquarters, and leave at dawn. , do you know who is collecting the rice in the river area? ”“谁？”
“陈国斌，全是替敌人收的。”
“陈国斌？是去年春上被驱逐出境的？”
“是他，汉奸！”
“现在怎样了？”
"Who?" "Chen Guobin, it's all collected for the enemy." "Chen Guobin? Was he deported last spring? ” "It's him, traitor!" "What's going on now?"“逮到了，他正想把稻子偷运过去，由湖里。在杨林溏就擒的。所有囤粮，全部搜到，明春是没大问题了。我已经在拜年片上写明叫同业能支持的还是支持，市面要紧。”
“对，市面要紧。”
"Caught, he was about to smuggle the rice over from the lake. He was caught in Yanglin. All the hoarded grain has been found, and there will be no big problem next spring. I have already written on the New Year's greeting card that what the industry can support is still supported, and the market is important. ” "Yes, the market is important."“我大概得过两天回来，这事得拜托您。”
“当然，当然，反正还有几天，大家到初六才会开门哩，明天一早我就去各家走走，商量个办法，单单是裁下这些人也没办法。”
"I will probably have to come back in two days, and I have to ask you about this." "Of course, of course, there are still a few days left anyway, everyone won't open until the sixth day of the new year, tomorrow morning I will go to each house to discuss a way, just laying off these people can't be helped."“是啊，教他们都拿甚么吃去。当然现在县里对于那批粮食还没有一个处置，不过我想是没多大问题的。开，老板们自然不会有好处，不过只好也看得轻些了。”
"Yes, teach them what to eat. Of course, the county has not yet disposed of that batch of grain, but I don't think it's a big problem. Open, the bosses will naturally not be beneficial, but they have to take it lightly. ”“谁也不忍心看先人遗下来的或是自己一手创置的生财器物生虫上锈，我想没多大问题，开。——你呢？”
"No one can bear to see the rust on the wealth-making utensils left by their ancestors or created by themselves, I don't think it's a big problem, open it. ——What about you? ”“我？自然还是做军米。哦，老詹的事情千万您得给帮忙，您把他的事看作我的事吧。我知道辅成差个内账，他想自己来，你跟他说，老詹做事，克实地道，再，我们坦坦白白的说，薪俸高低总好说。如何？只是这事您决不可告诉老詹，回头他又是不肯。拜托，拜托。”
"Me? Naturally, I still do military rice. Oh, you have to help Lao Zhan's affairs, you can treat his affairs as my business. I know that Fu Cheng has a bad account, he wants to do it himself, you tell him, Lao Zhan does things, honestly, and then, let's be honest, it's always easy to say whether the salary is high or low. How is it? It's just that you must not tell Lao Zhan about this, and he refuses to turn back. Please, please. ”“好，辅成大概也拗不过我的面子。”
“怎么样，你今年？”
“还好。”
“你是百节之虫，——”
“见笑，见笑。”
“哈哈哈哈”，门里门外一片笑声。一种压抑不住的真正的笑。
"Okay, Fucheng probably can't resist my face." "How is it, you this year?" "It's okay." "You are a worm of a hundred joints,——" "Laugh, laugh." "Hahahaha", there was laughter inside and outside the door. A real laugh that couldn't be suppressed.“就这么说，我走了，再见。”
“再见，好走。”沉着有力的脚步声渐渐远了。
“干。”
“干。”
父亲和我的眼睛全飘在墨瀋未干的春联上，春联非常的鲜艳。一片希望的颜色。
三月十三日草成
"Just say that, I'm leaving, goodbye." "Goodbye, good to go." The calm and powerful footsteps gradually faded away. "." "." My father's and my eyes were all floating on the undried Spring Festival couplets, which were very bright. A color of hope. The draft was completed on March 13
[1] 本篇原载《文学杂志》1943年第一卷第二期。
[2] 杂粮生意叫做陆陈。
[3] 早稻叫早食子。
[4] 稻。都是早食子。
[1] This article was originally published in Literary Magazine, Volume 1, Issue 2, 1943. [2] The miscellaneous grain business is called Lu Chen. [3] Early rice is called early food. [4] Rice. They are all early eaters.[5] 运费叫水脚。稻上下，屯晒，粜籴等事都有减损，谓之蚀斛。
[6] 以芦席裹尸，外束草索。
[7] 管理机器的人，故乡谓之“老桂”。老桂是甚么意思不得而知。这里的老桂是管轧米机的。
[5] The freight is called the water foot. Rice up and down, drying, selling and other things have been reduced, which is called erosion. [6] Wrap the body in a reed mat and tie a straw rope outside. [7] The person who manages the machine is called "Lao Gui" in his hometown. What Lao Gui means is unknown. Lao Gui here is in charge of the rice mill.[8] 故乡风俗，除夕以纸钱粘成元宝形以封门。

1944年

1944年
葡萄上的轻粉[1]
[8] Hometown customs, Chinese New Year's Eve to glue paper money into the shape of ingots to seal the door. In 1944 Light powder on grapes[1]“你在干甚么，仅向草丛里的黑暗深处看，又把烟喷在你所看的地方？跟别人在一起而沉默至一吾灵伪。”
"What are you doing, looking only into the dark depths of the grass, and spraying smoke where you look? Silence with others to the point of my spirit. ”“你看这种豆子，野生的，春天开的花是深紫色的，样子像麝香豌豆，整个的花还不及麝香豌豆一个瓣子大，它的卷须也就像一根须发。……”
"Look at this kind of bean, wild, the flowers that bloom in spring are dark purple, looking like musk peas, the whole flower is less than a petal of musk pea, and its tendrils are like a bearded hair. ……”“你的话把我仅有的一点植物学兴趣整个打消了！你看了半天豆子，就在半天当中已经有多少豆子在你眼前挣破荚子撒在地里了！”
“我从来没有一刻不说话。”
"Your words completely dispelled my only little interest in botany! You look at the beans for a long time, and in half a day, how many beans have broken the pods and scattered them in the ground in front of your eyes! ” "I never spoke for a moment."“这句话已经浸了过多唾液，碰一碰就发臭；沉默也是一种语言。”
“文到全篇都是警句时便不复有警句。”
This sentence has been soaked in too much saliva and stinks when touched; silence is also a language. ” "When the whole article is full of aphorisms, there are no more aphorisms."“一句合适的话，也许我真可从此缄口，可是，不成，我一闭口，一堆注解就等着我，像一堆难民等着最后的一列车，注解的后面，注解的注解。我是越走越离自己远了。所以我得不断的说，说我自己。知其不可而为之，我有点悲观。然而放开点悲观，转又不知如何活下去。我那么意识的寻找成语，期待隐喻，想如何够把飘游的凝住，从死灭里复生，我捕捉从水面的回文间反射在手指间的光，襄弟，一朵花在微风里的香气，可是，你看我的语言多么不准确！你知道铁杵磨针的故事，我简直把那根针也磨完了。落地的是雨，不是云，到手的是凉，不是风，我说的是话，不是我！……”
A suitable sentence, maybe I can really keep silent from now on, but no, as soon as I shut up, a bunch of annotations are waiting for me, like a bunch of refugees waiting for the last train, behind the annotations, annotations. I am getting farther and farther away from myself. So I have to keep talking, talking about myself. Knowing that I can't do it, I'm a little pessimistic. However, let go of a little pessimism, and I don't know how to live. I was so consciously looking for idioms, looking forward to metaphors, thinking about how to freeze the wandering and resurrect from death, I captured the light reflected between my fingers from the palindromes on the water, id_0000 the fragrance of a flower in the breeze, but you see how inaccurate my language is! You know the story of the iron pestle grinding the needle, and I simply finished grinding that needle. It is rain, not clouds, coolness, not wind, what I say is me! ……”“我们把开头弄得很拙。”
"We made the beginning very clumsy."“结尾一定更笨的可笑。我尝得及了，我不再失望。你知道我搁下好些费老大气力写成的信，都只为复看了一次。（当然你知道我没有写出来的更多。）但是寄出的信就让它寄出去了。流沙坠简好多片都是‘奉谨以琅矸一，致问’，驿丞之设置当是很古的事，山中人犹不免烦劳驮贵蘖者，荔枝也不过是种消息……”
"The ending must be even more stupid. I have tasted it, and I am no longer disappointed. You know that I put aside many letters that I wrote with great effort, just to read them again. (Of course, you know that I didn't write more.) But the letter sent was sent out. Many pieces of quicksand slips are 'Fengjin Yi Lang Yi, ask a question', the setting of Yi Cheng is a very ancient thing, and the people in the mountains still can't help but trouble the noble people, and lychee is just a kind of news......"然而与那些斑鸠都不注意的豆子有甚么关？我看你的样子专注不像看它，像听。
“葡萄的须卷了，秋天近了多好！”
“一日葡萄入汉家，中国的风变了样子了。”
“清水变葡萄酒终是神的奇迹。……”
But what does it have to do with the beans that the turtle doves don't pay attention to? I see that your attention is not like looking at it, like listening. "The grapes are curled, how good it is to be close to autumn!" "One day the grapes entered the Han family, and the wind in China changed." "Clear water into wine is a miracle of God. ……”“当然神是会行奇迹的，可是，你别那么急，你像我小时候辩论政治问题那样了，话撞伤你的喉咙，像水哑了河的声音，喝一点水。这是这条溪里取出来的。那边的鱼以为太阳是妃色的，太阳是甜的：那条溪上野蔷薇盖成了穹。如人饮水，冷暖自知，你觉得怎么样？”
"Of course, God can work miracles, but don't be so anxious, you are like when I was a child debating political issues, your words hit your throat, like the sound of the river hoarse, drink a little water. This is taken out of this stream. The fish over there think that the sun is concubine-colored, and the sun is sweet: the wild roses on that stream are covered with domes. Like a person drinking water, he knows whether it is cold or warm, what do you think? ”“谢谢，水清极了，甜得很，水甜使我忘了冷暖。你已经表示得到回答了。——我常常这样，越说越快，老是怕赶不上自己。”
“话说得慢些，无非是想省得重说一遍。”
"Thank you, the water is very clear, very sweet, and the sweetness of the water makes me forget the warmth and cold. You have already said that you have received an answer. ——I often do this, the faster I talk, the faster I am always afraid that I will not be able to catch up with myself. ” "Speak slower, it's just to save yourself from repeating it."日既夕矣，牛羊下来。金光敷在葡萄上。葡萄架上一张蜘蛛网透明如水。一只松鼠数着葡萄里的种粒。
睫毛的影子落向蓝色的眼珠上。
The sun is setting, and the cattle and sheep are coming down. The golden light is applied to the grapes. A spider web on the grape trellis is as transparent as water. A squirrel counts the seeds in the grapes. The shadow of the eyelashes fell on the blue eyeballs.“昨下午我躺在图书室后面的草地上。我在那里吃过一种草的花，略似燕麦。——我不知道它叫甚么，我不知道的多得很，但我喜欢它——昨天，这种草已经结了子且已坠垂了草茎，撒下自己，剩下的是由花萼发展成的薄薄的苞衣，呈干白色。但我终找到一粒种子，长可二分，褐色，周身有毛，发古银色绒光，形状恰如一个小小灯焰：蒂部浑元，渐渐逼尖。毛就依灯焰方向生长。……”
"Yesterday afternoon I lay on the grass behind the library. I ate there a flower of a grass, a little like oats. —I don't know what it's called, I don't know much, but I like it—yesterday the grass had borne fruit and had fallen its stems, and sprinkled itself, leaving only a thin bract of dry white color developed from the calyx. But at last I found a seed, about two minutes long, brown, with hair all over it, with an ancient silvery velvet, shaped like a small lamp: the stem is hunyuan, gradually pointed. The hair grows in the direction of the flame. ……”“我知道你要说明甚么，你钦佩它，钦它的精雅，它的高贵，它那么安静的等待，自己成熟它二月初便开花了，直到昨天，才由你发现的胜利，而且在你不知不觉之中，你更有不去那里躺着的可能比方说，昨天你也可以躺在今天，现在，所躺的地方。……”
"I know what you want to say, you admire it, you admire its elegance, its nobility, it waits so quietly, it matures on its own, it blooms in early February, until yesterday, it is a victory that you have discovered, and before you know it, you may not lie there, for example, yesterday you could also lie where you lie today, now. ……”“现在，性急的是你。”
“——当然你说的是对的，我钦佩它的一切，至少我还钦佩那些干白色的薄苞，钦佩它们的风里的轻松，在它们雨下的重负以后。……
"Now, it's you who are impatient." "—Of course you are right, I admire everything about it, at least I admire those dry white buds, and I admire their ease in the wind, after their heavy burden under the rain. ……“——我把它捏在中指与大指之间。它一点点向下面，向我的手心爬了，用它的毛顶我的手。我珍重的举它回来。你暂时别说话，听我说完这一段。
——I squeezed it between my middle and big fingers. It went down little by little, crawled towards my palm, and covered my hand with its hair. I lifted it back with my heart. Don't talk for a while, listen to me finish this paragraph.“我如式做给一个人看，看它爬，让他知道这个褐色发古银光的灯焰是如何把自己深埋到地下去，为的明年烧一把火。
“它在我手指上笑了。……”
"I showed it to a person as it was, watching it crawl, and let him know how this brown and silvery flame buried itself deep into the ground for next year. It smiled on my fingers. ……”“一些有花的种子都是这样栽种自己的。田里的小麦只要撒在松活的土面上就行了。”
“这种笑使我高兴极了。”
“你高兴别人知道你知道的。”
“是的，我高兴他从此更知道我一点。”
"Some seeds with flowers are planted in this way. The wheat in the field only needs to be sown on the loose soil. ” "This kind of laughter makes me very happy." "You're glad others know you know." "Yes, I'm glad he knows me better from now on."“他的笑有这样的意思。”
“任何笑。”
“有些笑使人受不了，有些表示懂得的笑，一滴浮在水上的草麻子油！”
"His smile means something like that." "Any laugh." "Some laughter is unbearable, some smile that shows understanding, a drop of grass sesame oil floating on the water!"“你一向反对刻薄的，这是一个字典问题，至多生理学或变态心理，你可以不承认它是笑。那种笑不是给两个人乘凉。”
“笑是一棵树。”
“也是树荫。”
“为你、为我？”
"You have always been against being mean, this is a dictionary problem, at most physiology or psychology, you can not admit that it is laughing. That kind of laughter is not for two people to cool off. ” "Laughter is a tree." "It's also the shade of the trees." "For you, for me?"“单有亚当时，亚当没有他自己。一条河有两道堤岸：每个人都为自己，自己存在于感受，河存在于水。”
“黄河有时是一片沙。”
“一片沙决不是河。”
“你用名词堆假山？”
"There was only Adam at that time, and Adam did not have himself. A river has two banks: everyone exists for himself, he exists in feeling, and the river exists in water. ” "The Yellow River is sometimes a piece of sand." "A piece of sand is definitely not a river." "You use nouns to build rockeries?"“定语是从形容词孽乳出来的。名词是人。——我有一句诗：
“‘树长在河堤上。’”
“树栽在河堤上？”
The attribution comes from the adjective sin milk. The noun is a person. ——I have a poem: "'Trees grow on the river embankment.' ” "Trees planted on the river embankment?"“你刚才说过，小麦只要撒在松活的土面上。人种不出自己，你看那边一道锦带，逶迤向东：你知道那边有清凉有甘暖，有泼剌，流活。”
“那边的太阳是妃色的，太阳是甜。”
“神存在于爱，不在爱人。”
"You just said that wheat only needs to be sprinkled on the loose soil. People can't grow themselves, look at a brocade ribbon over there, winding east: you know that there is coolness and sweetness over there, there is splashing, and there is life. ” "The sun over there is concubine-colored, and the sun is sweet." "God exists in love, not in loving people."“我才不赞成你的逻辑，因为你老在逻辑以外。你不断的说，说你自己，说的是你自己？”
“是的，甚至不是我自己的也是，不过你喝一点水，在我的杯子里，这是你刚才递给我的。”
"I don't agree with your logic, because you are always outside of logic. You keep saying, talking about yourself, talking about yourself? ” "Yes, not even my own, but you drink a little water, in my cup, which you just handed me."水从地下变成草，草在晚红中绿。
葡萄怕自己太像一串串小灯，分泌出一层轻粉，一片乳蓝色的薄雾，葡萄蒂子在风中嫣然，为得到自己而笑。睫毛的影子在紫色的眼珠中。
Water turns into grass from the ground, and the grass is green in the evening red. The grapes were afraid that they would be too much like a string of small lights, secreting a layer of light powder, a milky blue mist, and the grape stems were charming in the wind, laughing at themselves. The shadow of the eyelashes was in the purple eyeballs.“你已经把散步的习惯养成了，栽的，长的？”
“很早就有了。现在一个人时候多些。”
"Have you developed the habit of walking, planted, grown?" "It's been a long time. Now it's more time to be alone. ”一晌在圆湖边上，因为你在那边领了路而更迷了路。你报告我湖边路上已经没有一片枯叶子，报告我去年的雨季又是今年的雨季，报告我山上掘沙人少了，山下铁道上火车行驶时间改了；麻叶绣球开了又锈了，还倒了，那棵树……”
After a while, I was on the edge of the round lake, and I got even more lost because you led the way there. You reported that there was no dead leaf on the road by the lake, reported that there were fewer sand diggers on the mountain, and the train running time on the railway under the mountain had changed; the hemp leaf hydrangea bloomed and rusted, and it fell, and the tree ......"“别说树！”
“你的鞋底磨在石子路上。”
“路上多的是烂草鞋！”
“草鞋不烂在路上，烂在脚底上。你不配！”
“夜里你满城收获灯火。金色的灯在你是褐色的灯。鬼灯如漆照松花！
"Don't talk about trees!" "Your soles are grinding on the gravel road." "There are a lot of rotten straw sandals on the road!" "Straw sandals don't rot on the road, they rot on the soles of your feet. You don't deserve it! ” "At night, you harvest lights all over the city. The golden lamp is a brown lamp for you. The ghost lamp is like lacquer shining on the pine flowers!“一切为了述说自己，一切都是述说自己，水，神，你说了些甚么？”
“你有意忘记：连不是我自己的都是……”
“连违悖你自己的都是？”
“连违悖都是。”
"Everything is to tell about yourself, everything is about yourself, water, God, what did you say?" "You deliberately forget: even what is not my own is ......" "Even against your own?" "Even disobedience."“所以你听见声音而心跳，心跳了又脚下虚弱？遥瞻而他顾，让眼光折断像折断一朵花？你愈不著痕迹愈著痕迹！”
“我已经怎么做了便是应该怎样做的。我不矫饰；我的矫饰已是本色的。这是我的语言。”
"So you hear the sound and your heart beats, and your heart beats and your feet are weak? Look at him from a distance, let your eyes break like a flower? The less you have a trace, the more you have a trace! ” "What I have done is what I should do. I am not pretentious; my pretense is already my true color. This is my language. ”“你的语言全是一样：你那些不寄的和不写的信。”
“我的语言是一句，我自己是一句。”
“述说自己是痛苦的。”
“痛苦的是找不到合适的话。在于辞不达意。”
“你不疲倦？”
“疲倦引诱我。”
"Your language is all the same: your letters that you don't send and don't write." "My language is a sentence, and I myself am a sentence." "It's painful to talk about yourself." "The pain is not finding the right words. It lies in the inability to convey the meaning. ” "Aren't you tired?" "Tiredness tempts me."“你喉咙哑了，一手墨水！”
“我们走到那条溪，这个葡萄园尽了。到那边洗手。”
“清水变葡萄酒！”
睫毛的影子沉入黑色的眼珠里。
"Your throat is hoarse, a hand of ink!" "We went to that stream, and the vineyard was gone. Go over there and wash your hands. ” "Clear water turns into wine!" The shadow of the eyelashes sank into the black eyeballs.葡萄的轻粉在手指间摩净了，而葡萄在夜里不透明。溪水在夜里活活的流，不辨远近。
“你将死于晦涩！”
第一的德性：忍耐。
与单纯的等待满不相干。它宁与固执有一点相混。
The light powder of the grapes is rubbed between the fingers, and the grapes are opaque at night. The stream flows alive at night, and it is impossible to distinguish between near and far. "You will die in obscurity!" The first virtue: patience. It has nothing to do with simple waiting. It is better to be a little confused with stubbornness.野蔷薇与葡萄当然不同时。

[1] 本篇原载1944年5月18日《民国日报》。底本字迹漶漫处，依文意补入，以方便阅读。

序雨

序雨[1]
引子
Wild roses are of course not the same as grapes. [1] This article was originally published in the Republic of China Daily on May 18, 1944. The handwriting of the original is scattered, and it is supplemented according to the meaning of the text to facilitate reading. Sequence of rain{{id_0000}} introduction不要陪一个病后的人散步过那座白石桥，尽管前面引诱你。（桥微微拱起，意义即在遮断又不尽遮断。）不信，只要一上桥坡，你的胳臂上会忽然添了重负，他整个靠在你身上了。他一下子记起他逐渐遗忘的衰弱，像记起一朵开过的花，他的眼睛发黑。前面那一阵绿，多有分量多重。
Don't walk across that white stone bridge with a sick person, even though the front tempts you. (The bridge arches slightly, which means that it is blocking and not completely blocking.) If you don't believe it, as soon as you go up the slope of the bridge, your arms will suddenly be burdened, and he will lean on you completely. He suddenly remembered the weakness he had gradually forgotten, like remembering a flower that had bloomed, and his eyes turned black. The burst of green in front of you has a lot of weight and weight.谁支使的，谁纵容的，谁允许的？
Who supported it, who connived at it, and who allowed it?把裹在里面的都透到外面来了，小孩子！再没有枝子，干子，也不要花：这是你们的花，你们自己。黄莺的金点子深到海里去了，哪还有翠鸟呢？你们欲望本身，重涂苏合香油的头发。——这些树，没有结构，不容分析。
Bring everything wrapped inside outside, child! No more branches, no dried seeds, and no flowers: this is your flower, yourselves. The golden idea of the yellow warbler is deep into the sea, how can there be a kingfisher? Your desire itself, recoat your hair with suhe sesame oil. ——These trees have no structure and cannot be analyzed.“我没有病。”
所以他穿过杨树。他想：
“我倒像只青蛙。”
"I'm not sick." So he walked through the poplars. He thought: "I'm like a frog."他周身为感觉濡湿。一时仿佛大模大样坐在一片银绿荷叶上。水里各种香气，或甘甜，或微辛，或回旋如炉烟，当风如吴带，或稍重如杏花雨，因着若森林沼泽地带雾气，似极秘妙，又十分真实，他坐在个华盖宝座上了。眼中心中，满含喜悦。且当真用极顽皮样子呱呱叫了两声。（差一点，声音就出了喉咙。）最后是他的精力像一头小马跑过他的腿肚与足踝之间。
He felt wet all over. For a while, he seemed to be sitting on a silver-green lotus leaf. The various aromas in the water, whether sweet, or slightly spicy, swirling like smoke, when the wind is like Wu Belt, or slightly heavy like apricot blossom rain, because it is like a forest and swamp fog, it seems to be very secret and very real, and he sits on a canopy throne. In the center of his eyes, there was joy. And he really croaked twice in a very mischievous manner. (Almost the sound came out of his throat.) Finally, his energy ran between his legs and ankles like a pony.第一章
Chapter 1眼前正是五月天气，一种不成熟，未定型的天气。架子跟树叶完全是一样颜色，且发出气味，亦与树叶相近，苹果也才是稍涂一点嫩黄。红颜色还在太阳里，现在一个果树园主人的脸色全由他的天性作主，因为外来悲欢都还在未可知中。现在所看到的，多半还是往事感情遗迹。
In front of me is the weather in May, an immature and undetermined weather. The shelves are exactly the same color as the leaves, and they emit a smell, which is also similar to the leaves, and the apples are a little yellow. The red color is still in the sun, and now the face of an orchard owner is all determined by his nature, because the joys and sorrows of the outside are still unknown. Most of what I see now is still the relics of past feelings.这情形在学校也正相若，再有一个月，便放暑假。假期中生活应有个改变。比平日更热闹紧张或更消闲清冷，虽亦时有打算，究竟如何，诚未夺定。此时似乎非睿智哲人，无能为力。世间常多哲学而少哲人，也许从历史中还能稍得启发。自然，看历史照例常得一般人结论，即历史是否已经“翻过一页”。语虽俗气，却是行止去留转扭。
This situation is similar at school, and in another month, summer vacation will be over. Life should change during the holidays. It is more lively and tense than usual or more leisurely and cold, although there are plans from time to time, but it is not yet decided. At this time, it seems that there is nothing wise and philosophers can do. There are often more philosophies and few philosophers in the world, and perhaps we can get a little inspiration from history. Naturally, looking at history as usual often leads to the conclusion of ordinary people, that is, whether history has "turned a page". Although the language is tacky, it is a twist and turn.“学校各处显得非常空阔。围墙成了从轮盘卸下来的皮带，围墙一步步向外退：土和土之间的粘附力减小了，它们各向自己中心探缩。真的有了几处已经崩坏了，草爬上路，路不那么白了。操场一斑斑点点紫白色鸟粪，这些乌鸦鸽，全贪吃桑枣吃得泄肚了。图书馆前白铁梗海棠下小池塘中闹着野鸭子，野鹁鸪。旗杆上旗子别样的红，红得新鲜。好浮萍。小河是你的是水的：钟在晨雾里生锈，发莠浆小麦甜味。钟不响，龙头花也不响；可是它，不声不响的蔓延了一大片，白的，黄的，红的，朱红的，紫红的；龙头花沉默。不再有人捏它的嘴。一切有形无形在静里如在冰箱里：放假了。”
"The school looks very empty everywhere. The fence has become a belt removed from the wheel, and the wall has receded outward step by step: the adhesion between the soil has decreased, and they have shrunk towards their own centers. There are really a few places that have collapsed, and the grass has climbed onto the road, and the road is not so white. The playground is spotted with purple and white bird droppings, and these crows and pigeons are all greedy for mulberry dates. In the small pond under the white iron-stemmed begonia in front of the library, wild ducks and partridges are noisy. The flag on the flagpole is a different kind of red, red and fresh. Good duckweed. The river is yours is water: the bell rusts in the morning mist, and the wheat is sweet. The bell does not ring, and the dragon head flower does not ring; But it spread silently in a large area, white, yellow, red, vermilion, purple; the dragon head flower was silent. No one pinched its mouth anymore. Everything tangible and intangible is in the silence as in the refrigerator: it's a holiday. ”这是他的日记。日记妥妥的放在家里，在那张发黄的籐桌子上，从西边窗子照进来太阳，正映了几个窗花在上面。有太阳地方纸色会稍发黄么，一朵朵花，淡淡的，但日记上的字已经跟他来了，跟他沾得一身绿。它们像一些金铃子，不时展翅丁丁唱起来。这种情形年来常有；而从来不大有，正如他养金铃子一生中也只偶然一次。他写那些字时都像第一次写：一笔一笔，流出自己。
This is his diary. The diary was properly placed at home, on the yellowed rattan table, the sun came in from the west window, and a few window grilles were reflected on it. Where there is sun, the color of the paper will be slightly yellow, flowers are faint, but the words in the diary have already come with him, and they are green with him. They are like some golden bells, spreading their wings and singing from time to time. This situation has been common all over the years; and it is never common, just as it is only occasional once in his life when he raises golden bells. When he writes those words, it is like the first time: one stroke at a time, flowing out of himself.放假了。也下雨了。
It's a holiday. It's raining too.雨已经酝酿不少日子。究竟哪一天开始的，实在无法明白。一点一点密集起来，飘忽，舒卷，在月华里敷从，黄昏中压金，谁知道它是从哪里彩的，那个神秘的时间应当早在一点来树叶到树叶的幻动的金光中有所决定了像爱情。龙还是该相信的，像神。雨滴先到了秧池，到了小鹅的绒毛，到了庄稼人歌声里。其后，洗衣妇人竹竿上：她的熨斗用得更勤，一天用炭自然稍稍费些：而她的熨斗似乎不那么可恨了，不会烘得她的鼻子出血了。在学校里，起初不被注意。它隐没在颜色，声音，动作和思索里面。不久，它在一定秩序中得到它的势力，它驾凌颜色声音动作和思索之上，且臣服主有了这些。它足以败坏这个假期像败坏一只果子，且想败坏一些人，像败坏一棵树。“雨季”这个名词，像一个邻国，一件最后的衬衫。
The rain has been brewing for many days. It is really impossible to understand which day it started. Little by little it became dense, drifting, unwinding, applying in the moonlight, pressing gold in the dusk, who knows where it came from, that mysterious time should have been decided as early as a little in the illusion of golden light from leaf to leaf, like love. The dragon should still be believed, like a god. The raindrops first reached the seedlings, to the fluff of the goslings, to the singing of the farmers. Afterwards, on the bamboo pole of the laundry woman: her iron was used more frequently, and the charcoal was naturally a little more expensive: and her iron seemed less hateful, and would not make her nose bleed. At school, it went unnoticed at first. It was hidden in colors, sounds, movements, and thoughts. Soon it gained its power in a certain order, it overcame colors, sounds, movements, and thoughts, and it surrendered to the Lord. It was enough to corrupt the holiday like a fruit, and to corrupt some people, like a tree. The term "rainy season" is like a neighboring country, a last shirt.“干吗呢？四个雨季经过了，我得了本地人一样经验并未学得他们从容：我也并不想落籍，借此试验自己，我得走了。离开不了这块地方，得离开这个雨。我不能像一块糖在潮气里化了。”
"What are you doing? Four rainy seasons have passed, and I have the same experience as the locals and have not learned from them calmly: I don't want to be registered, so I have to test myself, I have to go. I can't leave this place, I have to leave this rain. I can't be like a piece of sugar in the moisture. ”一条牵牛花蔓探进木窗，摇呀摇的；它像是在水底摇，简直不在水面画一点痕迹，然而它撞散了他喷出的烟，乱了烟的意志。他下个决心挪开眼睛，但他的心却沿着那个柔和而挺拔线条画过去，且亦在空气中轻轻摇动。
A morning glory vine poked into the wooden window and swayed; it seemed to shake under the water, not at all drawing a trace on the water, but it broke away the smoke he spewed out, disturbing the will to smoke. He made up his mind to look away, but his heart followed the soft, straight line, and swayed gently in the air.“我得找点事情作，一点用手用脚，不太折磨脑子事情。得让我的眼睛有亮光，到它暗淡时立刻就可以合上，白天，我操纵自己；夜晚，让睡眠征服我，在一阵对抗之后。更多的牵牛花，更多的现实，朝生暮死的现实。”
"I have to find something to do, a little with my hands and feet, and not too much to torture my brain. I have to let my eyes shine, and when it is dim, I can close it immediately, during the day, I manipulate myself; at night, let sleep conquer me, after a period of confrontation. More morning glory, more reality, the reality of life and death. ”“壁虎和回声。墙的直线，如此公正的直线。地板上长长的光，一种为影子衬出来的光……
"Geckos and echoes. The straight line of the wall, such a straight line. The long light on the floor, a kind of light that sets off the shadows......“搬到一个大楼上住。整天在十四面大得像门一样的窗户中间。这些窗户本来是为供给五百人的空气而设的。太多的空气使人不想说话。人太少，一说话势必成为倾诉，在这么间大屋子里把自己倒出来，像倒出一篮果子，多么滑稽的事情！我一想到跟别人谈谈自己，便听到果子滚在地板上的声音。”
"Moved to a building. All day long in the middle of fourteen windows as big as doors. These windows were meant to supply air for five hundred people. Too much air makes one not want to talk. There are too few people, and one thing to talk about is bound to be a confidant, and to pour yourself out in such a big room is like pouring out a basket of fruit, what a funny thing! When I thought of talking to others, I heard the sound of the fruit rolling on the floor. ”因此他们只偶然交换一两句话，一两句没有意义无关宏旨的话。工作得展开，现在还只是计划，他们三五个，正计划如何把这间大屋子充满。一种默契存乎其间，要一个铅笔刀，一本笔记簿，稍动手势，对方便可明白，他们大都坐近窗子，或者简直坐在宽大窗桌上。而他一个人守着这座空堡时候更多，一个人从这个窗子移到那个窗子。
So they only occasionally exchanged one or two words, one or two words that had no meaning and had nothing to do with the grand purpose. The work had to begin, and now it was just a plan, and three or five of them were planning how to fill this big room. There was a tacit understanding in between, and they asked for a pencil sharpener, a notebook, and a little gesture, and they were very convenient, and most of them sat close to the window, or simply sat at the wide window table. And he spent more time guarding this empty fort alone, moving from one window to another.他们与其说是计划，无宁是等待。所以依然极闲空。因此他怀念许多故人，细字密行，工整干净写极长的信。时有蛾子飞进来，他便过细辨识蛾翅各种花纹，追踪这些花纹所表现的感情思想，像听一支曲子。一边一片一片削一个大桃子吃。“今年的桃子似乎有点酸。酸也是好的，只是怕伤牙。今年当有不少人的牙开始疼了。”
They are not so much planning as waiting. So it is still extremely idle. Therefore, he missed many old friends, wrote very long letters in fine handwriting, neatly and cleanly. Sometimes moths flew in, and he carefully identified the various patterns on the moth wings and traced the feelings and thoughts expressed by these patterns, like listening to a song. Peel a big peach one by piece and eat it. "This year's peaches seem to be a little sour. Acidity is also good, but I'm afraid of hurting my teeth. This year, many people's teeth started to hurt. ”他尽有时间出去走走。“山后石子小路洗得干干净净，石子白了，青了，红了，水恢复它们本来色泽，又助之以莹澈。”草绿如秧，秧青似草，“路旁小沟里，水在草下面流”。一群牛散落在山上，小牛独自走得很远很远，寻找最鲜嫩的食欲，忽然想起母亲来了，立刻跑回它身边。“它像是对母亲很抱歉，但母亲已经原谅它，且格外喜欢它。”放牛的人呢？“这一地的水，他不会就地睡了，他一定在一个屋子里，在附近人家。哼，他一定是找谁去。”于是他在泥土上找他的脚印。脚印那么多，哪个是他的。他只有在一列小小的，弯弯的，浅浅的旁边停住了。这列脚印引起他许多回忆，许多联想，许多温柔的可是伤人的感情。他独立苍茫，脚印如麻，可是在灰灰的天色下，不大看得出来。
He had time to go out for a walk. "The stone path behind the mountain was washed clean, the stones were white, green, and red, and the water returned to their original color, and helped them to be clear." The grass is as green as seedlings, and the seedlings are as green as grass, "in the ditch by the roadside, the water flows under the grass." A herd of cows was scattered on the mountain, and the calf walked far and wide alone, looking for the most tender appetite, and suddenly remembered that its mother was coming, and immediately ran back to it. "It seems to be sorry for its mother, but her mother has forgiven it and likes it very much." What about the cattle herder? "He won't sleep on the spot with the water in this place, he must be in a house, in a nearby house. Hmph, he must be looking for someone. So he looked for his footprints in the dirt. There were so many footprints, which one was his. He only stopped next to a row of small, crooked, and shallow ones. This row of footprints caused him many memories, many associations, and many tender but hurtful feelings. He was independent and vast, and his footprints were like hemp, but he couldn't see it in the gray sky.他整个为雨水淋湿。水从发根直流到脚踝。挨身马蹄激起的水溅到他手上脸上，全不觉得。雷电在天边。（他样子从容。）记得四年前常在大雨中各处奔走，且常骑马跑过一条积水大道到市郊湖畔去看水面飘浮的白色花。一时心中充满飞越感觉，而膝恰夹在马上。一种陶醉，一种庄严，他胸脯涨得鼓鼓的。
He was completely soaked by the rain. The water flowed from the roots of his hair to his ankles. The water stirred up by the horse's hooves splashed on his hands and face, and he didn't feel it at all. Thunder and lightning were on the horizon. (He looked calm.) I remember running around in the heavy rain four years ago, and often riding horses across a waterlogged avenue to the lakeside on the outskirts of the city to see the white  flowers floating on the water. For a while, my heart was filled with the feeling of flying, and my knees were clamped on the horse. A kind of intoxication, a kind of solemnity, his chest swelled.雨水流过那个涨的鼓鼓的胸脯上，一缕寒冷由两胸之间的洼里透进身体，但他已经感觉那一流水慢慢变热了。这种经验唤起他的年龄。火车，山，铁桥，炽赤的煤块落在深黑的隧道里，朱红的浪，深绿的深谷里一丛大得像向日葵一样的金色的花；海，月亮，船上的风，冷饮，新桂圆，吉他，灌木林，雨季接上黄梅天，他忽然想起家来，且想起他以前许多次想家，不同的想法。
The rain flowed over the swollen chest, and a wisp of cold penetrated into his body from the depression between his chests, but he could already feel the water slowly heating up. This experience evoked his age. Trains, mountains, iron bridges, blazing red coal blocks fell in the deep dark tunnel, vermilion waves, a cluster of golden flowers as big as sunflowers in the deep green valley; the sea, the moon, the wind on the boat, the cold drink, the new longan, the guitar, the shrubs, the rainy season connected to the Huangmei Day, he suddenly thought of home, and remembered his homesickness many times before, different thoughts.他已经到了家，到了那间大屋子。 一条毛巾，一件干净衬衫等着，他擦干身体，换上衣服，再一次认识身体每一部分。一面想他离家时情形。
He had arrived home, to the big room. A towel and a clean shirt were waiting, and he dried himself, changed his clothes, and got to know every part of his body again. Thinking about what happened when he left home.“这次远行是一件事。再大的事，它弥漫于各处能浸透一切。从任何动作言语中皆可觉到看出，父亲的约会和约会时间少了，他每天抽的烟则较向日增多。母亲说话时有点心不在焉，她居然把刚唤来的一把花忘记插到瓶里。弟妹放学似乎早了点，不是放学早，是他们走路快了。晚上时钟敲得特别响，胡妈毫无道理的要我和弟弟比比，究竟高多少。……”
"This trip is one thing. No matter how big it is, it permeates everywhere and can soak everything. It can be seen from any action and speech that my father has less time to date and date, and he smokes more every day than before. My mother was a little absent-minded when she spoke, and she actually forgot to put a handful of flowers she had just called into the bottle. The younger siblings seem to leave school a little early, not early in school, but because they are walking faster. The clock rang very loudly at night, and Hu's mother unreasonably asked me to compare with my brother, how much higher. ……”他套上衬衫。这件是从家里带出来的仅剩的一件了。他想起他的那口漆着石子的箱子。他想坐在箱子旁边点一支烟。
He put on his shirt. It was the only one left from home. He thought of his chest painted with stones. He wanted to sit next to the box and light a cigarette.……一拾掇行李，都来了，取舍决策各有见地。“你们加之于我的是一种自私，一种压迫，我行李要的是轻便！”可是，弟弟说一雨便成秋，秋雨中独自在江边散步，极有意思，长统胶鞋，必不可少。重虽重些，统子里可以装苹果，又不压伤，又不占地方，每顿饭后吃一个，到那里刚够。妹妹跑遍全城，挑得两副风镜，拿了一张拍了一排向一边弯的棕榈树照片，睁大眼睛，指指照片，又指指眼睛，用嚇人神气证明自己所做绝对合理。胡妈觑人不注意时把两盒万应八宝痧药塞在保险盒子里，又把仿单夹在他准备路上看的书里。其实他早知道仿单上印的有“专治瘴气毒疫气，行人但须口含一粒，可消百病。”且已事先尝过一粒，是和蜜调整的，略带檀香气味。路上想起时，可以当糖吃。在父亲和母亲为两条被窝的决定发生争执时，他偷偷吃了一个李子。他疟疾才好，李子本不许吃。“这种事情，多么可笑，哪天回去总得告诉他们大家笑笑。”
…… When I picked up my luggage, they all came, and they had their own opinions on the trade-offs. "What you add to me is a kind of selfishness, a kind of oppression, and my luggage wants to be light!" However, the younger brother said that a rain will turn into autumn, and walking alone by the river in the autumn rain is very interesting, and long-term rubber shoes are essential. Although it is heavier, it can be filled with apples in the tongzi, without crushing it, and it does not take up space, and eating one after each meal is just enough to get there. My sister ran all over the city, picked up two pairs of goggles, took a photo of a row of palm trees bent to one side, opened her eyes wide, pointed to the photo, pointed to her eyes, and proved that what she was doing was absolutely reasonable with a frightening look. When Hu Ma saw that people were not paying attention, she stuffed two boxes of Wanying Eight Treasures in the safety box, and sandwiched the imitation sheet in the book he was preparing to read on the road. In fact, he knew that the imitation sheet was printed with "Specializing in the treatment of miasma and poisonous plagues, pedestrians must hold one in their mouths, which can eliminate all diseases." And I have tasted one in advance, which is adjusted with honey and has a slight sandalwood smell. When you think of it on the road, you can eat it as sugar. When his father and mother argued over the decision to make two quilts, he secretly ate a plum. He was cured of malaria, and the plums were not allowed to be eaten. "This kind of thing, how ridiculous, one day I have to tell them to laugh when I go back."正是他笑时，楼下路上有人滑倒了。他赶到窗口时，人已经站直，一手略沾泥土，衣服全未弄脏，正在寻找一个东西。他伏在窗口上帮着找了半天，发现是一个发饰，在路左一个破瓦头旁边发光。“大概是那个伸出来的榆梅枝子绊掉了的。”他想告诉她“再过来一点，退后一步，它完好的在那里。”又怕她想起有人看见她跌倒样子，发现手上那点泥，她会红脸，捡起一个郁加利树果子，丢向那个路旁瓦头上，这是最好的办法。“自己掩过一边，让她以为是一只松鼠指示”。看她捡起发饰，十分珍视欢喜，他也高兴。“谁送她的？”人去了，地上有滑倒痕迹，一堆发棕色青苔推在一边，雨落在那个痕迹。
It was when he laughed that someone slipped on the road downstairs. When he arrived at the window, the man was already standing upright, with one hand slightly stained with dirt and his clothes not soiled, looking for something. He lay on the window to help find it for a long time, and found a hair accessory shining next to a broken tile on the left side of the road. "Probably the branch of the elm plum that stretched out tripped over." He wanted to tell her, "Come a little more, step back, it's there intact." "And I'm afraid that if she remembers that someone saw her fall and found the little mud in her hand, she would blush, pick up a tugali tree fruit, and throw it on the tiled head by the roadside, which was the best way." Cover it to the side, so that she thinks it is a squirrel instruction." Seeing her pick up her hair accessories, she cherished and rejoiced, and he was also happy. "Who gave her?" The person went, there were traces of slips on the ground, a pile of brown moss pushed aside, and rain fell on that trace.他摘了几朵晚香玉放在外面口袋里。一阵香气使他离开同行的人，离开身边一切，他的脚依然习惯，机械的移动。
“谢谢，我到了。”
He picked a few tuberoses and put them in his outside pocket. A burst of fragrance made him leave his companions, away from everything around him, and his feet were still used to moving mechanically. "Thank you, I'm here."更多的牵牛花更多的现实，这是现实，“到”。他看到一个门，关着的门。他不知道该做甚么，一点不算一回事的张皇。这点张皇若延续下去，便是“古怪”，但是一个动作足以解嘲。他把披在眼前的头发理到后面去，手势像个女孩子。他说了句当然要说的话。
More morning glory More reality, this is reality, "to". He saw a door, a closed door. He didn't know what to do, Zhang Huang was not a thing at all. If this Zhang Huang continued, it would be "weird", but one action was enough to ridicule. He straightened his hair in front of him back, gesturing like a girl. He said something of course he had to say.“你叫门。”
他收起伞，看看雨还下不下。抬头看天，天上漆黑，一个俗气比喻“丰富的沉默”，他上眼皮起了道盂折，雨点落在他脸上。谁扬脸，谁脸上有雨，不落空，一道灯光齐齐的如一爿墙，雨亮了。
"You call the door." He put away his umbrella and saw that the rain still couldn't fall. Looking up at the sky, the sky was dark, a tacky metaphor of "rich silence", his upper eyelid folded, and raindrops fell on his face. Whoever raises his face, whoever has rain on his face, does not fall into the sky, a light is like a wall, and the rain is lit.“进来坐一会？”
“不了，不早了，回去还有事。明天下午两点，到时候来接他。”
“不用了。”
"Come in and sit for a while?" "No, it's not early, there's something to do when you go back. Tomorrow at two o'clock in the afternoon, come and pick him up. ” "No need."他知道这是客气。然他要是信以为真那便是真的了。明天他会在那个矮矮的椅子上坐五分钟，看看小漆盒子上图案，看看瓶里的花，想他口袋里的花，看看照片，从这些东西里发现一点新的生疏。妈在里面梳头，一面想他在干甚么。所以他简直不敢挪动身体， 仿佛一挪动左右什物就会抗议，用一种毫不客气声音。
He knew it was polite. But if he believed it, it was true. Tomorrow he would sit in that low chair for five minutes, look at the patterns on the small lacquered box, look at the flowers in the bottle, think about the flowers in his pocket, look at the photos, and find a little new rustiness in these things. Mom was combing her hair in it, thinking about what he was doing. So he didn't dare to move his body, as if he would protest if he moved the things around him, in an unceremonious voice.“哎你干甚么，你是客人，可不许带一点主人样子。这里甚么都属于一个人，你所呼吸的空气也属于一个人。你来不过是为你们那点事情，你是个代表，是个使臣，这个椅子是你的公署，你动不得！”
"Hey, what are you doing, you are a guest, but you are not allowed to bring a little bit of master. Everything here belongs to one person, and the air you breathe also belongs to one person. You are here for your little things, you are a representative, you are an envoy, this chair is your office, you can't move!" ”他掏出一枝烟，叼在嘴上。
He took out a cigarette and put it in his mouth.“我这枝烟决不止抽五分钟，你不答应么？我要让你们都带上一点烟味！我是个使臣，但我还是我。你们知道为甚么我作了这个使臣？我本可以不管；我不管，自有别人来管。可是我要管，别人也觉得我管合适。西北城到南城，不算近，而且还下雨，我连活动活动都不许？”
"I will never smoke this cigarette for more than five minutes, won't you agree? I want you all to bring a little smell of smoke! I am an envoy, but I am still me. Do you know why I became this envoy? I could have ignored it; I don't care, someone else will take care of it. But I want to take care of it, and others think it's appropriate for me to take care of it. The northwest city to the south city is not close, and it is raining, so I am not even allowed to do activities? ”于是他翻动桌上一本小书，他看这是本甚么书，能够给人快乐，忧郁，美丽幻想；适宜于躺在床上看，坐在树下看它缚得人紧不紧？……
“随便买来的，还没有看不知道写些甚么。”
“总应当很好的。”
So he flipped through a small book on the table, and he saw what kind of book it was, which could give people happiness, melancholy, and beautiful fantasies; it is suitable to lie on the bed and read, sit under the tree to see if it binds people tightly? …… "I bought it casually, and I don't know what to write if I haven't read it yet." "It should always be good."“不看怎么知道？”
“看一点就知道了。”
“开头还不错。”
"How do you know if you don't see it?" "Just look at it." "The beginning is not bad."朦朦胧胧。它已经出来，剔着一个指甲。“你把外衣还是带着，晚上会冷。要不多加件毛衣。你昨天那件红的结好了么，我们一路走，看看，有甚么扣子好配。”
Hazy. It has come out, picking a fingernail. "You still have your coat with you, it will be cold at night. Why don't you add an extra sweater. Did you tie that red one yesterday, let's go all the way and see what buttons go well. ”他不说甚么，拿好件毛衣，让一列珊瑚扣子嘲笑他的饶舌。妈且又在桌上拿起个小冻石章，印在那本书上。
“你这是一种自私，一种压迫，我要的是轻便！”妈应这么说。可是她只说：
“你的烟怎么不点上？”
He didn't say anything, took his sweater, and let a row of coral buttons laugh at his rap. Mom picked up a small frozen stone stamp on the table and printed it on the book. "You are a kind of selfishness, a kind of oppression, what I want is lightness!" Mom should say so. But she only said: "Why don't you light your cigarette?"夜已经很深了。
The night is already very late.他走进那条很深的巷子。穿过这条巷子，便到家了。他在巷口停了一会，一种呼喊疾流过他的心，一种猎人在森林中发现俊秀小兽物时的呼喊，一头黄麂，一种斑鹿，巷子里静极了，但若是把他现在样子雕塑下来，便只有用这个题目：呼喊。高墙里金银花雨后的香气从芭蕉的整齐厚厚叶子透过来，充满了这个夹谷，他已经看见自己了；不是看见自己，是看见他的伞的圆圆的影子，从这个街面上（海面上）的圆影而知道自己了。这是说，他已经出了巷子，在门前路灯下了。
He walked into the deep alley. Through this alley, he was home. He stopped for a moment at the entrance of the alley, a kind of cry rushed through his heart, a hunter when he found a handsome little beast in the forest, a yellow deer, a spotted deer, the alley was very quiet, but if he were to sculpt him as he is now, he would only use this title: shouting. The fragrance of honeysuckle after the rain in the high wall came through the neat and thick leaves of the plantain, filling this valley, and he had already seen himself; he did not see himself, but saw the round shadow of his umbrella, and knew himself from the round shadow on the street (on the sea). This meant that he had already gone out of the alley and under the street lamp in front of the door.哎，你的伞早该歇下了！他向自己说。雨已经停了好一会。不下雨，打伞，正如下雨而淋着，在他一样是常有的事。
Hey, your umbrella should have rested long ago!" He said to himself. The rain had stopped for a while. It was common for him not to rain and to use an umbrella, just like raining.他撑着伞，用跳舞的步子翩翩的进了门，过一个甬道，一个厅堂，转入山路，直上石阶，在石阶上是打了个圈子，在楼下的磁砖上了。伞的圆影在磁砖古典的图案上。“嘘——”他快活的嘘出一口气，一手抓住楼梯黄铜柱顶，再用脸贴上去，用嘴唇贴上去。黄铜怪冷。
He held an umbrella and entered the door with dancing steps, crossed a corridor, a hall, turned into a mountain road, and went straight up the stone steps. The round shadow of the umbrella is on the classical pattern of the tiles. "Shh-" He let out a happy sigh, grabbed the top of the brass column of the stairs with one hand, and then pressed it with his face and lips. The brass is cold.“来一个池塘！”不是想游泳，他是要那个光着身子投入水里的感觉。想象一泓净水，月光斜照，他纵身而入，不出一点声音。他就那么游过去，游过去。……像那个在茵梦湖上去采睡莲的人。睡莲，……睡莲在他身后开放了，白的瓣子，鹅红的心，在月光下，……
"Come to a pond!" He didn't want to swim, he wanted the feeling of throwing himself naked into the water. Imagine a pool of pure water, the moonlight is slanting, and he jumps in without making a sound. He just swam over, swam over. …… Like the person who went to pick water lilies on Yinmeng Lake. Water lily...... Water lilies open behind him, white petals, goose-red hearts, in the moonlight,......“嚇”！他该上去了。他想一气登，登登，跑上去。但是他放脚步放得非常轻，他于是走在坚硬的楼板上，倒像走在厚厚的地毯上，因为空气从十四面大窗子进来，正拂着几个人起伏的胸脯，他们都睡得实实的了。
"Scary"! He should go up. He wanted to climb, climb, run up. But he was so light that he walked on the hard floor, as if he were walking on a thick carpet, because the air came in through the fourteen large windows, brushing against the undulating chests of several people, and they all slept soundly.他坐在一个窗桌上，支着头，靠着背。
他呼吸，他心跳。
他点上那根一直未点上的烟了，这说明他将在那个窗桌坐很多时候。莫惊动他。
He sat on a window table, with his head propped up and his back resting. He breathes, his heart beats. He lit the cigarette that had not been lit, which meant that he would sit at that window table for a long time. Don't alarm him.
[1] 本篇原载1944年12月24日、31日《自由论坛周报》。

1945年

1945年
膝行的人[1]
[1] This article was originally published in the Freedom Tribune Weekly on December 24 and 31, 1944. In 1945 Kneeling Man[1]企鹅因为翅膀而存在，否则，北极洋，一片白，分不开鸟与其他。企鹅的翅膀是黑的。——是黑的么？
我看了看桌上一本小书。企鹅丛书。
Penguins exist because of their wings, otherwise, the Arctic Ocean, a white patch, cannot be separated from birds and others. Penguins' wings are black. - Is it black? I looked at a small book on the table. Penguin Books.商标。谁定的。甚么意思。人都有个名字。雁过留声，企鹅不叫唤。不叫唤？我没听，——我没看见过，企鹅。（我又看了看封面蓝颜色上面那个鸟）。那个鸟其实整个是白的也自有它的地位。然而它可是比原来的鸟更有黑，更有轮廓。画！甚么叫忠实。企鹅大概不飞，是的，不。……
Trademark. Who decided. What does it mean? Everyone has a name. The geese pass by and the penguin does not call. Does not call? I didn't hear it,—— I didn't see it, penguin. (I looked at the bird on the blue cover again). The bird is actually white and has its own status. However, it is darker and more outline than the original bird. Draw! What is faithful? Penguins probably don't fly, yes or no. ……我忽然感到窒息，透不过气来。我像是粘了一身很粘很粘的蜘蛛网。我在心里十分狂野的喊了，“企——鹅——”这个声音形成了一句十分无礼的话：
“嗨，张，你为甚么带了这么一本书来，带来，不看？”
I suddenly felt suffocated and couldn't breathe. I felt like I was stuck to a very sticky spider web. I shouted very wildly in my heart, "Pen-goose-" This voice formed a very rude sentence: "Hi, Zhang, why did you bring such a book, bring it, and don't read it?"我话里充满恶意，充满一种复仇之感。我话未出口，张却用指头蘸了桌上茶写了一个字：“”。
“怎么读？”
My words were full of malice and a sense of revenge. Before I could say anything, Zhang dipped his finger in the tea on the table and wrote a word: "{{id_0000}}". "How to read?"“”很快干去，“月”汇成了一片，这个字可真不像，不像张的字。我恶意并未消去，我死死瞅定他那双微向外扇的耳朵，我知道只是微微的，然而我心里说“招风耳”！一片小小的笑映在我眉尖。我想起小时候常唱的一首谣歌，嘲弄招风耳的。这一笑笑得很好。它融开我，点亮我了。我想起一架紫藤花，我们在花下唱歌，摇着头，摇着头上的蝴蝶结。我几乎想问张“你们家也有紫藤花么？”而且我声音一定带点女孩子气。我告诉他那个字的读音。要是我稍微对那个字有点好感，我也许要用指头给他那个不成形的字描得好好的。我小时老和妹妹收拾零落的洋娃娃，用宽紧线连好洋娃娃胳臂腿。可是我一点都不喜欢这个字。
"" quickly dried up, and the "moon" merged into one, this word really didn't look like it, not like Zhang's word. My malice didn't disappear, I stared at his ears that flapped out slightly, I knew it was only slightly, but I said "wind ears" in my heart! A small smile was reflected on the tip of my eyebrows. I remembered a ballad I used to sing when I was a child, mocking the wind ear. This smile was very good. It melted me and lit me up. I thought of a wisteria flower, we sang under the flower, shaking our heads, shaking the bow on our heads. I almost wanted to ask Zhang, "Do you have wisteria flowers in your house?" And my voice must be a little girly. I told him the pronunciation of that word. If I had a little fondness for that word, I might have to draw it well with my fingers. When I was a child, my sister and I packed up the scattered dolls and connected the doll's arms and legs with a wide tight thread. But I didn't like this word at all.我晓得张为甚么忽然问起这个字，那个没有脚的人从门外经过了。
我和张在一家小茶馆泡茶，星期天下午。
I know why Zhang suddenly asked this word, and the person without feet passed by the door. Zhang and I were making tea in a small teahouse on Sunday afternoon.写历史的人将来会不漏掉这一笔。这几年大学生十有七八有泡茶馆的习惯，直到他们离开学校三五年后还保留这个生理习惯。即使不再进茶馆，许多影响还有在他们身上寻见。比如，他总喜欢找一个靠墙的座位，即使在一个宽大明亮的客厅中。他能半天不说话，周身发散一种懒散的骄傲一种深入肌理，难以捉摸的骄傲，即使在一个极其典重庄严的礼堂会场中。当然，他会嘲笑的，他不会放过你的招风耳朵，尽管你的耳朵招得并不难看：尽管他自己也是招风，尽管，根本招风的就是他的耳朵，尽管，他没有耳朵，两边光光的，一个西瓜或一个短冬瓜。他会一下子抛弃你，坐到一个云深不知处的地方。他多超越，回视下界，如苍蝇声。他可以直视你，如看一个碑。眯着眼睛，把你挤扁在睫毛之间那道缝里。我劝你别，如果你要，他立刻发现，立刻警告你：“像你这样自作聪明的人很多，你晓得一个名词，虚无主义，到处乱用！”
Those who write history will not miss this stroke in the future. In recent years, seven or eight out of ten college students have the habit of going to teahouses, and they still retain this physiological habit until three or five years after they leave school. Even if they no longer enter the teahouse, many influences can still be found in them. For example, he always likes to find a seat against the wall, even in a large and bright living room. He can remain silent for half a day, exuding a lazy pride, a deep-seated, elusive pride, even in an extremely dignified auditorium. Of course, he will laugh, he will not let go of your windy ears, although your ears are not ugly: although he himself is a wind, although it is his ears that attract the wind at all, although he has no ears, and the sides are shiny, a watermelon or a short winter melon. He will abandon you all at once and sit in a place where the clouds are deep and unknown. He goes beyond and looks back at the lower realm, like a fly. He can look directly at you like a monument. Squint your eyes and squeeze you into the gap between your eyelashes. I advise you not to, if you want to, he will immediately find out and warn you immediately: "There are many people like you who think they are smart, you know a term, nihilism, and abuse it everywhere!" ”先生，你背吧，阿Q，唐吉科德，沙宁，你甚连贝多芬和拿破仑多拉上，他会看着你，像一个教员对一个只记得结论的学生。
然而他会被融开与点亮的。只要一句谣歌，一瓣紫藤花，他会开向你，开向世界，整个的。
Sir, memorize it, Ah Q, Don Quixote, Shanin, you even Beethoven and Napoleon Dora, and he will look at you like a teacher to a student who only remembers conclusions. However, he will be melted and lit up. As long as a ballad, a wisteria flower, he will open to you, to the world, the whole thing.现在，天和企鹅丛书一样蓝。太阳明亮而鲜艳。野外蚕豆花发，麦色青青。小石板街上流着人马，草鞋，包谷，蜡烛，金堂烟，蒸米饭和炒保肉的气味。一架碾米机坚定的吞进去，吐出来。一条黑狗急急的奔过去，不为甚么，就只为告诉你他跑得多好。老槐树的影子高高的撒下来，一顶草帽的影子圆圆的撒下来。麻雀在簷前噪鸣。
Now, the sky is as blue as the penguin book. The sun is bright and bright. The broad beans in the wild are blooming, and the wheat is green. The small stone street smells of people and horses, straw sandals, grain, candles, golden hall smoke, steamed rice and fried meat. A rice mill swallowed it firmly and spit it out. A black dog ran over in a hurry, not for any reason, just to tell you how well he ran. The shadow of the old locust tree was scattered high, and the shadow of a straw hat was scattered round. Sparrows chirped in front of the eaves.我把张写的那个字描成一个小猫的头，两只耳朵，两只眼睛。我偏着头欣赏了一会如猫看人。
I described the word Zhang as a kitten's head, two ears, and two eyes. I tilted my head and admired it for a while, like a cat looking at people.那个没有脚的人膝行回家了，他走尽小石板街，走出那个赭绿斑驳的小牌坊，走在蚕豆花和麦鬣之间的田埂上，回到他神秘的草屋里去了。
一个大学生在日记上写道：
“这条街早晨走起来短，晚上长。”
The man without feet walked home on his knees, he walked all the small stone streets, walked out of the small ochre-green mottled archway, walked on the ridge between the broad bean flowers and the wheat mane, and returned to his mysterious grass hut. A college student wrote in his diary: "This street is short in the morning and long in the evening."早晨，晚上，……他迷胡了。他的眼镜片上落了许多灰尘，他擦了擦。他想得很多，直到他听见自己血在血管里流，汩汩的流。企鹅的轮廓没了。我抽一支烟，说那个膝行人，那个没有脚的人的故事。
Morning, evening,...... He was confused. A lot of dust fell on his glasses, and he wiped it. He thought about it until he heard his blood flowing in his veins, gurgling. The silhouette of the penguin was gone. I smoked a cigarette and told the story of the man who walked on his knees, the man who had no feet.他曾经是个无赖，流氓，土匪，杀人犯，……总之，一个无恶不作的人。
He used to be a scoundrel, a rogue, a bandit, a murderer,...... In short, a man who does all kinds of evil.因为他没有宗教，没有信仰，没有家，没有爱，没有春天，也没有坟，总之他没有一切“关系”，所以世界是一个。他孑然一身，无怙无恃，无姓无名。他活到十八岁，没掐过一朵花，也从未有人教他唱过，所以他眼睛漆黑，嘴唇侵闭，虽然没有一面镜子照过他。他不要甚么，但是他有一次哭了，因为甚么都不要他。
Because he has no religion, no faith, no home, no love, no spring, no grave, in short, he has no "relationship", so the world is one. He is alone, without support, without a name or name. He lived to be eighteen years old, never pinched a flower, and never taught him to sing, so his eyes were dark and his lips were closed, although no mirror looked at him. He didn't want anything, but he cried once because he didn't want anything.于是，他来了，像一场灾难。
So, he came, like a disaster.于是，这一带的香烛消耗增加了，慈善事业的捐款收入也增加了。太太更爱丈夫，县长不敢让小舅子做保安队长了。旅行人用毛巾在箱子上做甚么记号也没有用，他不懂一切江湖上规矩。敲洋琴的瞎子为他编起一支弹词，混和恐怖与美丽。听唱的人时常偷眼四下看看，说不定他就在纸莲花灯下听着，闭目抱膝如其他人。而忽然一下子不见了，在瞎子口袋里留下一束酬金。还有那句老话：“妇女用其名止小儿夜哭”。（现在他有了名字了，是别人给他的，也许出于一家小茶馆由一张嘴到一张嘴传了出去。）有一天一个女孩子到舅母家玩了一天，时候晏了，就和表妹一处睡了，两个人忽然谈起“假如那个人忽然来了？”真的他来了，怎么办呢？那时候，许多女孩子做了许多种奇怪诞的梦，醒来十分兴奋，又十分疲倦。他是一条龙，一只天鹅。
As a result, the consumption of incense candles in this area increased, and the income from charity donations also increased. The wife loved her husband more, and the county magistrate did not dare to let his brother-in-law be the security captain. It is useless for a traveler to mark the box with a towel, he does not understand all the rules of the world. The blind man who played the foreign piano made up a lyric for him, mixing horror and beauty. The person who listened to the singing often stole a glance around, maybe he was listening under the paper lotus lamp, closing his eyes and hugging his knees like everyone else. And suddenly disappeared, leaving a bundle of honorarium in the blind man's pocket. There is also the old saying: "Women use their names to stop children crying at night." (Now that he has a name, it was given to him by someone else, perhaps because it was passed from mouth to mouth in a small teahouse.) One day, a girl went to her aunt's house to play for a day, and when it was late, she slept with her cousin, and the two suddenly talked about "What if that person suddenly came?" "What if he really came? At that time, many girls had many strange and strange dreams, and woke up very excited and very tired. He was a dragon, a swan.那架碾米机忽然停住，天地一时静了许多，一队卸了鞍的驮马奔出小牌坊，在草场里滚，嘶叫，踢蹴，饮水。小茶馆门前晒的花生米也由紫红转成粉绛。“小老二，回家——。”老母鸡的眼睛昏花了。某处有音乐会开始，《蓝色的多瑙河》，忧愁而感激，一只凤头龙爪点子鸽子从麦垅间飞起，打了个回旋，落下来，咕咕的进了窠。
The rice mill suddenly stopped, and the world was much quieter for a while, and a team of unsaddled pack horses ran out of the small archway, rolling in the pasture, neighing, kicking, and drinking. The peanuts dried in front of the small teahouse also turned from purple to pink. "Little Two, go home——。" The old hen's eyes were dim. Somewhere a concert began, "The Blue Danube", sad and grateful, a crested dragon's claw pigeon flew up from the wheat ridge, made a circle, fell, and cooed into the nest.后来，有一次，他由于沉重的疲倦和酒，他把身边十四个同伴都杀了，可是留下一个十二岁的娃子。也许由于那孩子的眼睛，也许由于他自己的眼睛，他的胳臂再举不起来。而那孩子串通他的仇家，有一天，捉住他，砍去了他两只脚。
Later, on one occasion, because of heavy fatigue and wine, he killed all fourteen of his companions, but left a twelve-year-old child. Perhaps because of the child's eyes, perhaps because of his own eyes, his arms could no longer be lifted. And the child colluded with his enemies, and one day he caught him and cut off both of his feet.断去的部分长得尖尖的，圆圆的，光光滑滑的，如同两只红色茄子。他并不包扎起来，让他露在外面。他不像一般没有脚的人，要用木脚，拄杖，或以手代足，爬着走。他在膝盖包了一层薄薄的布，他跪着走。而他的上身，直立着。他决不比谁走得慢，也不让他的手改变样子，他仍是大摇大摆的，听说现在他上起屋来比常人还快捷的多。有一次有人家失火，有人看见他在火光中上下，不过火势稍息，就再也找不到他了。
The broken part grew pointed, round, smooth and smooth, like two red eggplants. He did not bandage it and let him be exposed. Unlike ordinary people who have no feet, he has to crawl with wooden feet, canes, or hands instead of feet. He wrapped a thin layer of cloth around his knees, and he walked on his knees. And his upper body stood upright. He never walked slower than anyone else, nor did he let his hands change his appearance, he was still swaggering, and I heard that now he gets up the house much faster than ordinary people. Once, a house caught fire, and someone saw him going up and down in the fire, but when the fire subsided, he could no longer be found.他每天到市里来，来一趟，买点东西，嘴还总是闭着，不说话，也没有人和他交谈。谁也没有走近他那所孤立的草屋旁边看过。于是那成了神秘的草屋。其实那间草屋决住不下两个人，容不下比一张床更大的东西。
He came to the city every day, came once, bought something, and always kept his mouth closed, did not speak, and no one talked to him. No one approached his isolated grass hut to look at it. So it became a mysterious grass hut. In fact, that grass hut could never accommodate two people, and it could not accommodate anything bigger than a bed.据说，他现在制一点纸糊的风车，泥捏的公鸡蛤蟆，鸢子和弹弓，一些孩子们化他们可得的钱可买得的玩意儿，给一些人满街吹着的卖。贩他东西的人说他卖得不比别人贵，也不便宜，此外，甚么也不知道。因为在街上卖那种玩意的常常是瞎子。
It is said that he now makes a little papier-mâché windmill, a clay rooster toad, an eagle and a slingshot, and some children turn their money into something they can buy and sell it to some people all over the street. The people who sell his things say that he sells no more expensive or cheaper than others, and they don't know anything else. Because the people who sell such things in the street are often blind.卖唱的瞎子该还有能唱他的故事。
一个中学生在作文本子上写他的游记：
“历来已万证家人矣。”
The blind man who sells singing should still be able to sing his story. A middle school student wrote his travelogue on the composition text: "There have been thousands of witnesses in the past.可真是，一盏一盏的灯点起来。点灯的手。我和张泡了一下午的茶！“这条街，早晨走起来短，晚上，长，”那个没有脚的人点不点灯？我画的那个小猫头已经干了。张忽然大声说，
“嗨汪！那是个个人主义者。”
But really, the lights are lit one by one. The hand that lights the lamp. Zhang and I have made tea all afternoon!" "This street is short in the morning, long in the evening," The person without feet lights up? The kitten's head I drew is already dry. Zhang suddenly said loudly, "Hi Wang! That's an individualist. ”“谁？”我几乎为他的声音嚇得仓皇失措。
“那个膝行的人。”
“哦”。我的眉毛抬起，在比原来地位高四分许处停住很久。额上皱纹往里刻。我脑子有点乱。胡里胡涂的，我说，
"Who?" I was almost startled by his voice. "The man who walks on his knees." "Oh". My eyebrows were raised, and I stopped for a long time about a quarter of a point higher than my original status. The wrinkles on my forehead were carved inward. My mind was a little confused. Sloppy, I said,“张，该回去了，这是你的书，你的企鹅丛书！”
我不知道我为甚么不高兴，在这句话里还洩出我的余愤如余烬。
张站起来，跟老板娘说了一句话，无疑的这句话早在他心头了，他语音平稳，决不旁顾。
"Zhang, it's time to go back, this is your book, your penguin series!" I don't know why I was unhappy, but in this sentence I also vented my lingering anger like embers. Zhang stood up and said a word to the proprietress of the house, no doubt this sentence was already in his heart, his voice was smooth, and he would never look aside.“老板娘，你的草鞋卖多少钱一双？”

[1] 本篇原载1945年3月17日第二十期《自由论坛周报》。

小学校的钟声

小学校的钟声[1]
——茱萸小集之一
"Proprietress lady, how much does your straw sandals sell for a pair?" [1] This article was originally published in the 20th issue of the Freedom Tribune Weekly on March 17, 1945. Elementary School Bells {{id_0000}} ——One of the small collections of dogwood瓶花收拾起台布上细碎的影子。磁瓶没有反光，温润而寂静，如一个人的品德。磁瓶此刻比它抱着的水要略微凉些。窗帘因为暮色浑染，沉沉静垂。我可以开灯。开开灯，灯光下的花另是一个颜色。开灯后，灯光下的香气会不会变样子？可作的事好像都已作过了，我望望两只手，我该如何处置这个？我把它藏在头发里么？我的头发里保存有各种气味，自然它必也吸取了一点花香。我的头发，黑的和白的。每一游尘都带一点香。我洗我的头发，我洗头发时也看见这瓶花。
The vase of flowers cleaned up the fine shadows on the tablecloth. The magnetic bottle has no reflection, warm and silent, like a person's character. The magnetic bottle is slightly colder than the water it is holding at the moment. The curtains are dark and quiet because of the twilight. I can turn on the light. Turn on the light, and the flowers under the light are of another color. After turning on the light, will the fragrance under the light change? It seems that everything that can be done has been done, I look at my hands, what should I do with this? Do I hide it in my hair? My hair has all kinds of smells, and naturally it must also absorb a little floral fragrance. My hair is black and white. Every dust has a little fragrance. I wash my hair, and I see this vase of flowers when I wash my hair.天黑了，我的头发是黑的。黑的头发倾泻在枕头上。我的手在我的胸上，我的呼吸振动我的手。我念了念我的名字，好像呼唤一个亲暱朋友。
It was dark, and my hair was black. Black hair fell on the pillow. My hands were on my chest, and my breath vibrated my hands. I recited my name as if calling a close friend.小学校里的欢声和校园里的花都溶解在静沉沉的夜气里。那种声音实在可见可触，可以供诸瓶儿，一簇，又一簇。我听见钟声，像一个比喻。我没有数，但我知道它的疾徐，轻重，我听出今天是西南风。这一下打在那块铸刻着校名年月的地方。校工老詹的汗把钟绳弄得容易发潮了，他换了一下手。挂钟的铁索把两棵大冬青树干拉近了点，因此我们更不明白地上的一片叶子是哪一棵上落下来的；它们的根鬍已经彼此要呵痒玩了吧。又一下，老詹的酒瓶没有塞好，他想他的猫已经看见他的五香牛肉了。可是又用力一下秋千索子有点动，他知道那不是风。他笑了，两个矮矮的影子分开了。这一下敲过一定完了，钟绳如一条蛇在空中摆动，老詹偷偷的到校园里去，看看校长寝室的灯，掐了一枝花，又小心又敏捷：今天有人因为爱这枝花而被罚清除花上的蚜虫。“韵律和生命合成一体，如钟声。”我活在钟声里。钟声同时在我生命里。天黑了。今年我二十五岁。一种荒唐继续荒唐的年龄。
The cheers in the elementary school and the flowers in the campus dissolved in the quiet night air. That sound was really visible and palpable, and it could be used for bottles, clusters, clusters. I heard the bell, like a metaphor. I didn't count, but I knew its speed, weight, and I could hear that it was a southwest wind today. This time it hit the place where the school name and the year were engraved. The sweat of the school worker Lao Zhan made the bell rope damp easily, and he changed his hand. The iron cord of the wall clock pulled the trunks of the two large holly trees a little closer, so we didn't know which leaf on the ground fell from it; their roots and whiskers were already tickling with each other. Again, Lao Zhan's wine bottle was not stuffed properly, and he thought that his cat had seen his spiced beef. But with a push of force, the swing rope moved a little, and he knew it was not the wind. He smiled, and the two short shadows separated. Lao Zhan secretly went to the campus, looked at the lights in the principal's dormitory, pinched a flower, and was careful and agile: today someone was punished to remove aphids from the flower because he loved this flower. "Rhythm and life are integrated, like a bell." I live in the bell. The bell is in my life at the same time. It's dark. I am twenty-five years old this year. An age that continues to be absurd.十九岁的生日热热闹闹的过了，可爱得像一种不成熟的文体，到处是希望。酒阑人散，厅堂里只剩余一枝红烛，在银烛台上。我应当挟一挟烛花，或是吹熄它，但我甚么也不做。一地明月。满宫明月梨花白，还早得很。甚么早得很，十二点多了！我简直像个女孩子。我的白围巾就像个女孩子的。该睡了，明天一早还得动身。我的行李已经打好了，今天我大概睡那条大红绫子被。
The nineteenth birthday has passed with excitement, as cute as an immature style, and there is hope everywhere. The wine was gone, and there was only one red candle left in the hall, on the silver candlestick. I should have held a candle or blown it out, but I didn't do anything. A bright moon in the ground. The bright moon in the palace is white and the pear blossoms are white, and it is still very early. What's so early, it's past twelve o'clock! I look like a girl. My white scarf is like a girl. It's time to sleep, and I have to leave tomorrow morning. My luggage has been packed, and I will probably sleep on that big red silk quilt today.一早我就上了船。
弟弟们该起来上学去了。我其实可以晚点来，跟他们一齐吃早点，即是送他们到学校也不误事。我可以听见打预备钟再走。
I got on the boat early in the morning. It's time for the younger brothers to get up and go to school. I can actually come later and have breakfast with them, even if I send them to school. I can hear the bell ringing before leaving.靠着舱窗，看得见码头。堤岸上白白的，特别干净，风吹起鞭爆纸。卖饼的铺子门板上错了，从春联上看得出来。谁，大清早骑驴子过去的？脸好熟。有人来了，这个人会多给挑夫一点钱，我想。这个提琴上流过多少音乐了，今天晚上它的主人会不会试一两支短曲子。夥，这个箱子出过国！旅馆老板应当在招纸上印一点诗，旅行人是应当读点诗的。这个，来时跟我一齐来的，他口袋里有一包胡桃糖，还认得我么？我记得我也有一大包胡桃糖，在箱子里，昨天大姑妈送的。我送一块糖到嘴里时，听见有人说话：
Leaning against the hatch, you can see the pier. The embankment is white and very clean, and the wind blows the whip and bursts the paper. The door panel of the shop selling cakes is wrong, as can be seen from the Spring Festival couplets. Who, rode a donkey early in the morning? The face is so familiar. Someone came, and this person would give the porter a little more money, I thought. How much music has been played on this violin, will its owner try a short tune or two tonight? Man, this box has gone abroad! The innkeeper should print some poems on the invitation paper, and the traveler should read some poems. This, when he came, he came with me, he had a bag of walnut candy in his pocket, do you still recognize me? I remember that I also had a large bag of walnut candy, in the box, which my aunt gave yesterday. When I brought a piece of candy to my mouth, I heard someone say:“好了，你回去吧，天冷，你还有第一堂课。”
“不要紧，赶得及；孩子们会等我。”
“老詹第一课还是常脱打五分钟么？”
“甚么？——是的。”
"Okay, you go back, it's cold, you still have your first class." "It doesn't matter, it's in time; the children will wait for me. ” "Lao Zhan's first lesson is still played for five minutes?" "What? - Yes. ”岸上的一个似乎还想说甚么，嘴动了动，风大，想还是留到写信时说。停了停，招招手说：
“好，我走了。”
“再见。啊呀！——”
“怎么？”
One of the people on the shore seemed to want to say something, his mouth moved, the wind was strong, and he thought he should leave it for writing a letter. He stopped, beckoned, and said: "Okay, I'm leaving." "Goodbye. Oh! ——” "What?"“没甚么。我的手套落到你那儿了。不要紧。大概在小茶几上，插梅花时忘了戴。我有这个！”
“找到了给你寄来。”
“当然寄来，不许昧了！”
“好小气！”
"Nothing. My gloves have fallen on you. It doesn't matter. Probably on the small coffee table, I forgot to wear it when inserting plum blossoms. I have this! ” "I found it and sent it to you." "Of course send it, don't be confused!" "So stingy!"岸上的笑笑，又扬扬手，当真走了。风披下她的一绺头发来了，她已经不好意思歪歪的戴一顶绒线帽子了。谁教她就当了老师！她在这个地方待不久的，多半到暑假就该含一汪眼泪向学生告别了，结果必是老校长安慰一堆小孩子，连这个小孩子。我可以写信问弟弟：“你们学校里有个女老师，脸白白的，有个酒涡，喜欢穿蓝衣服，手套是黑的，边口有灰色横纹，她是谁，叫甚么名字？声音那么好听，是不是教你们唱歌？——”我能问么？不能，父亲必会知道，他会亲自到学校里看看去。年纪大的人真没有办法！
The shore smiled, raised her hand again, and really left. A lock of her hair was draped by the wind, and she was embarrassed to wear a velvet hat crookedly. Whoever taught her became a teacher! She hadn't been in this place for a long time, and probably by the summer vacation she would have said goodbye to the students with tears in her eyes, and the result would be that the old principal would comfort a bunch of children, even this child. I can write to my brother: "There is a female teacher in your school, with a fair face, a wine vortex, who likes to wear blue clothes, black gloves, and gray horizontal stripes on the sides, who is she, and what is her name? The voice is so good, does it teach you to sing?" ——"Can I ask? No, my father will know, and he will go to the school to see it himself. Older people really can't help it!我要是送弟弟去，就会跟她们一路来。不好，老詹还认得我。跟她们一路来呢，就可以发现船上这位的手套忘了，哪有女孩子这时候不戴手套的。我会提醒她一句。就为那个颜色，那个花式，自己挑的，自己设计的，她也该戴。——“不要紧，我有这个！”甚么是“这个”，手笼？大概是她到伸出手来摇摇时才发现手里有一个甚么样的手笼，白的？我没看见，我甚么也没看见。只缘身在此山中，我在船上。梅花，梅花开了？是硃砂还是绿萼，校园里旧有两棵的。波——汽笛叫了。一个小轮船安了这么个大汽笛，岂有此理！我躺下吃我的糖。……
If I send my brother there, I will follow them all the way. No, Lao Zhan still recognizes me. If you come with them all the way, you will find that the gloves of this person on the boat have forgotten, how can there be a girl who doesn't wear gloves at this time. I will remind her. Just for that color, that style, she chose and designed herself, she should wear it too. ——"It doesn't matter, I have this!" What is "this", handcage? Probably when she stretched out her hand and shook it, she realized what kind of handcage was in her hand, white? I didn't see it, I didn't see anything. Just because I was in this mountain, I was on the boat. Plum blossoms, plum blossoms blooming? Is it cinnabar or green calyx, there used to be two on campus. Bo - the whistle sounded. How can a small steamer have such a big whistle! I lay down and ate my candy. ……“老师早。”
“小朋友早。”
"Teacher, it's early." "Early children."我们像一个个音符走进谱子里去。我多喜欢我那个棕色的书包。蜡笔上沾了些花生米皮子。小石子，半透明的，从河边拣来的。忽然摸到一块糖，早以为已经在我的嘴里甜过了呢。水泥台阶，干净得要我们想洗手去。“猫来了，猫来了，”“我的马儿好，不喝水，不吃草。”下课钟一敲，大家噪得那么野，像一簇花突然一齐开放了。第一次栖来这个园里的树上的鸟嚇得不加思索的便鼓翅飞了，看看别人都不动，才又飞回来，歪着脑袋向下面端详。我六岁上幼稚园。玩具橱里有个Joker至今还在那儿傻傻的笑。我在一张照片里骑木马，照片在粉墙上发黄。
We walked into the score like notes. How much I like my brown schoolbag. The crayons were stained with peanut skins. Pebbles, translucent, picked from the river. Suddenly I touched a piece of candy, and I thought it had been sweetened in my mouth. The cement steps were so clean that we wanted to wash our hands. "The cat is coming, the cat is coming," "My horse is good, he doesn't drink water, he doesn't eat grass." When the class bell rang, everyone was so noisy that it suddenly bloomed like a cluster of flowers. The birds on the trees that roosted in this garden for the first time flapped their wings without thinking, and when they saw that no one else was moving, they flew back and tilted their heads to look down. I was six years old and went to kindergarten. There's a Joker in the toy cabinet who is still laughing silly. I'm riding a wooden horse in a picture that is yellowed on a pink wall.百货店里我一眼就看出那是我们幼稚园的老师。她把头发梳成圣玛丽的样子。她一定看见我了，看见我的校服，看见我的受过军训的特有姿势。她装作专心在一堆纱手巾上。她的脸有点红，不单是因为低头。我想过去招呼，我怎么招呼呢？到她家里拜访一次？学校寒假后要开展览会吧，我可以帮她们剪纸花，扎蝴蝶。不好，我不会去的。暑假我就要考大学了。
I could tell at a glance in the department store that it was our kindergarten teacher. She combed her hair to look like St. Mary's. She must have seen me, my uniform, my military-trained posture. She pretended to be focused on a pile of gauze handkerchiefs. Her face was a little red, not just because she was bowing her head. I want to go over to say hello, how should I say hello? Visit her house once? There will be an exhibition after the winter vacation, and I can help them cut paper flowers and make butterflies. No, I won't go. I'm going to college during the summer.我走出舱门。
I walked out of the hatch.我想到船头看看。我要去的向我奔来了。我抱着胳臂，不然我就要张开了。我的眼睛跟船长看得一般远。但我改了主意。我走到船尾去。船头迎风，适于夏天，现在冬天还没有从我语言的惰性中失去。我看我是从哪里来的。
I wanted to look at the bow. The one I was going to come to me. I held my arms, or I would have opened them. My eyes were as far away as the captain. But I changed my mind. I went to the stern. The bow was windy, suitable for summer, and winter had not yet lost its inertia in my language. I saw where I came from.水面简直没有甚么船。一只鹭鸶用青色的脚试量水里的太阳。岸上柳树枯干子里似乎已经预备了充分的绿。左手珠湖笼着轻雾。一条狗追着小轮船跑。船到九道湾了，那座庙的朱门深闭在逶迤的黄墙间，黄墙上面是蓝天下的苍翠的柏树。冷冷的是宝塔檐角的铃声在风里摇。
There are no boats on the water. A heron uses its blue feet to measure the sun in the water. The willow trees on the shore seem to have prepared enough green. On the left hand, Zhuhu Lake is shrouded in light mist. A dog chased the boat. The boat arrived at Jiudao Bay, and the vermilion gate of the temple was closed between the winding yellow walls, and above the yellow walls were green cypress trees under the blue sky. The cold was the bell ringing at the corner of the pagoda eaves shaking in the wind.从呼吸里，从我的想象，从这些风景，我感觉我不是一个人。我觉得我不大自在，受了一点拘束。我不能吆喝那只鹭鸶，对那条狗招手，不能自作主张把那一堤烟柳移近庙旁，而把庙移在湖里的雾里。我甚至觉得我站着的姿势有点放肆，我不是太睥睨不可一世就是像不绝俯视自己的灵魂。我身后有双眼睛。这不行，我十九岁了，我得像个男人，这个局面应当由我来打破。我的胡桃糖在我手里。我转身跟人互相点点头。
From my breath, from my imagination, from these scenery, I felt that I was not alone. I felt that I was not at ease and a little restrained. I couldn't shout at the heron, wave to the dog, and move the temple to the fog in the lake. I even felt that my standing posture was a bit presumptuous, I was either too ignorant or constantly looking down at my soul. I have eyes behind me. This is not good, I am nineteen years old, I have to be like a man, and this situation should be broken by me. My walnut candy is in my hand. I turned around and nodded to each other.“生日好。”
“好，谢谢。——”生日好！我眨了眨眼睛。似乎有点明白。这个城太小了。我拈了一块糖放进嘴里，其实胡桃皮已经麻了我的舌头。如此，我才好说。
"Happy birthday." "Okay, thank you. ——"Happy birthday!" I blinked. It seemed to understand a little. This city is too small. I took a piece of candy and put it in my mouth, but the walnut skin had already numbed my tongue. That's how I can say it.“吃糖。”一来接糖，她就可走到栏杆边来，我们的地位得平行才行。我看到一个黑皮面的速写簿，它看来颇重，要从腋下滑下去的样子，她不该穿这么软的料子。黑的衬亮所有白的。
“画画？”
"Eat candy." As soon as she came to pick up the candy, she could walk to the railing, and our positions had to be parallel. I saw a sketchbook with a black leather surface, it looked quite heavy, and it looked like it was going to slide down from her armpit, and she shouldn't have worn such a soft material. The black lined up all the white. "Draw?"“当着人怎么动笔。”
当着人不好动笔，背着人倒好动笔？我倒真没见到把手笼在手笼里画画的，而且又是个白手笼！很可能你连笔都没有带。你事先晓得船尾上就有人？是的，船比城更小。
"How to write in front of people." It's hard to write in front of people, but it's good to write behind people's backs? I really don't see a handcage drawn in a handcage, and it's a white cage! Probably you didn't even have a pen with you. You knew in advance that there was someone at the stern? Yes, the ship is smaller than the city.“再过两三个月，画画就方便了。”
“那时候我们该拼命忙毕业考试了。”
"In another two or three months, it will be convenient to paint." "At that time, we should be desperately busy with the graduation exam."“噢呵，我是说树就都绿了。”她笑了笑，用脚尖踢踢甲板。我看见袜子上有一块油斑，一小块药水棉花凸起，既然敷得极薄，还是看得出。好，这可会让你不自在了，这块油斑会在你感觉中大起来，棉花会凸起，凸起如一个小山！
"Oh, I mean the trees are all green." She smiled and kicked the deck with her toes. I saw an oil spot on my sock, a small piece of potion cotton bulging, and I could still see it since it was applied very thinly. Okay, this will make you uncomfortable, this oil spot will grow in your feelings, the cotton will bulge, and the bulge will be like a hill!“你弟弟在学校里大家都喜欢。你弟弟像你，她们说。”
“我弟弟像我小时候。”
她又笑了笑。女孩子总爱笑。“此地实乃世上女子笑声最清脆之一隅。”我手里的一本书里印着这句话。我也笑了笑。她不懂。
"Everyone likes your brother at school. Your brother looks like you, they say. ” "My brother is like me when I was a child." She smiled again. Girls always love to laugh. "This is really one of the crispest corners of women's laughter in the world." This sentence is printed in a book in my hand. I smiled too. She didn't understand.我想起背乘数表的声音。现在那几棵大银杏树该是金黄的了吧。它吸收了多少这种背诵的声音。银杏树的木质是松的，松到可以透亮。我们从前的图画板就是用这种木头做的。风琴的声音属于一种过去的声音。灰尘落在教室里的皱纸饰物上。
I remembered the sound of reciting the multiplier table. The big ginkgo trees should be golden now. How much of this sound of recitation has it absorbed. The wood of the ginkgo tree is loose, so loose that it can be translucent. Our drawing boards were made of this wood in the past. The sound of the organ belongs to the sound of the past. Dust falls on the crumpled paper ornaments in the classroom.“敲钟的还是老詹？”
“剪校门口的冬青的也还是他。”
"Is it Lao Zhan who rings the bell?" "He is the one who cut the holly at the school gate."冬青细碎的花，淡绿色；小果子，深紫色。我们髣髴并肩从那条拱背的砖路上一齐走进去。夹道是平平的冬青，比我们的头高。不多久，快了吧，冬青会生出嫩红色的新枝叶，于是老詹用一把大剪子依次剪去，就像剪头发。我们并肩走进去，像两个音符。
holly finely flowers, pale green; small fruits, dark purple. We walked in side by side from the arched brick road. On both sides of the aisle was a flat holly, taller than our heads. Not long after, soon, the holly will give birth to new branches and leaves of tender red, so Lao Zhan used a pair of large scissors to cut them in turn, just like cutting hair. We walked in side by side, like two notes.我们都看着远远的地方，比那些树更远，比那群鸽子更远。水向后边流。
We all looked into the distance, farther than the trees, farther than the pigeons. The water flowed backwards.要弟弟为我拍一张照片。呵，得再等等，这两天他怎么能穿那种大翻领的海军服。学校旁边有一个铺子里挂着海军服。我去买的时候，店员心里想甚么，衣服寄回去时家里想甚么，他们都不懂我的意思。我买一个秘密，寄一个秘密。我坏得很。早得很，再等等，等树都绿了。现在还只是梅花开在灯下。疎影横斜于我的生日之中。早得很，早甚么，嗐，明天一早你得动身，别尽弄那花，看忘了事情，落了东西！听好，第一次钟是起身钟。
I want my brother to take a picture of me. Oh, I have to wait, how can he wear that kind of navy uniform with big lapels in the past two days. There is a shop next to the school with navy uniforms hanging in it. When I went to buy it, they didn't understand what the clerks were thinking and what they were thinking at home when they sent the clothes back. I bought a secret and sent a secret. I'm very bad. It's very early, wait a little longer, wait until the trees are green. Now it's just plum blossoms blooming under the lights. The sparse shadow is slanting in the middle of my birthday. It's very early, what's early, hey, you have to leave tomorrow morning, don't mess with the flowers, forget things, and drop something! Listen, the first bell is the wake-up bell.“你看，那是甚么？”
“乡下人接亲，花轿子。”——这个东西不认得？一团红吹吹打打的过去，像个太阳。我看着的是指着的手。修得这么尖的指甲，不会把手套戳破？我撮起嘴唇，河边芦苇嘘嘘响，我得警告她。
"Look, what is that?" "The countryman picks up the kiss, the sedan chair." ——Don't you recognize this thing? A red blow blew past, like a sun. I was looking at the hand that was pointing. Nails so sharp won't pierce the gloves? I pinch my lips, the reeds by the river are booing, and I have to warn her.“你的手冷了。”
“哪有这时候接亲的。——不要紧。”
“路远，不到晌午就发轿。拣定了日子。就像人过生日，不能改的。你的手套，咳，得三天样子才能寄到。——”
她想拿一块糖，想拿又不拿了。
"Your hands are cold." "How can you pick up a kiss at this time. ——It doesn't matter. ” "The road is long, and the sedan will be sent before noon. The date was chosen. It's like a person's birthday, which can't be changed. Your gloves, cough, will take three days to send. ——” She wanted to take a piece of sugar, but she wanted to take it but didn't.“用这个不方便，不好画画。”
她看了看指甲，一片月亮。
“冻疮是个讨厌东西。”讨厌得跟记忆一样。“一走多路，发热。”
"It's inconvenient to use this, it's not easy to draw." She looked at her nails, a moon. "Chilblains are a nasty thing." I hate it as much as I remember. "If you walk a lot, you will have a fever."她不说话，可是她不用一句话简直把所有的都说了：她把速写簿放在旁边的凳子上，把另一只手也褪出来，很不屑的把手笼放在速写簿上。手笼像一头小猫。
She didn't speak, but she simply said everything without a word: she put the sketchbook on the stool next to her, pulled out her other hand, and put the handcage on the sketchbook with disdain. The handcage was like a kitten.她用右手手指转正左手上一个石榴子的戒指，看了我一眼，这一眼的意思是：
看你还有甚么说的！
我若再说，只有说：
She turned the finger of her right hand to straighten a pomegranate ring on her left hand, and glanced at me, which meant: Let's see what else you have to say! If I say it again, I can only say:你看，你的左手就比右手红些，因为她受暖的时间长些。你的体温从你的戒指上慢慢消失了。李长吉说“腰围白玉冷”，你的戒指一会儿就显得硬得多！
You see, your left hand is redder than your right hand because she has been warmed for a longer time. Your body temperature slowly disappears from your ring. Li Changji said, "The waist circumference is white jade cold", and your ring will look much harder for a while!但是不成了，放下她的东西时她又稍稍占据比我后一点的地位了。我发见她的眼睛有一种跟人打赌的光，而且像邱比德一样有绝对的把握样子。她极不恭敬看着我的白围巾，我的围巾且是薰了一点香的。
But no, when I put down her things, she took a slightly behind me again. I noticed that her eyes had a light that made people bet, and she looked as absolutely sure as Cupid. She looked at my white scarf very disrespectfully, and my scarf was a little scented.来一阵大风，大风，大风吹得她的眼睛冻起来，哪怕也冻住我们的船。
她挪过她的眼睛，但原来在她眼睛里的立刻搬上她的嘴角。
万籁无声。
胡桃皮硝制我的舌头。
There was a strong wind, a strong wind, and the wind made her eyes freeze, even freezing our boat. She moved her eyes, but it turned out that the corners of her mouth were immediately moved to her eyes. There was no sound. Walnut bark nitrate makes my tongue.一放手，我把一包糖掉落到水里，有意甚于无意。糖衣从胡桃上解去。但胡桃里面也透了糖。胡桃本身也是甜的。胡桃皮是胡桃皮。
As soon as I let go, I dropped a packet of sugar into the water, intentionally than unintentionally. The icing is removed from the walnut. But the walnut is also permeated with sugar. The walnut itself is sweet. The walnut skin is the walnut skin.“走吧，验票了。”她说话了，说了话，她恢复不了原来的样子了。感谢船是那么小：
“到我舱里来坐坐。我有不少橘子，这么重，才真不方便。我这是请客了。”
"Let's go, the ticket is checked." She spoke, spoke, and she couldn't return to her original appearance. Thank you that the boat is so small: "Come and sit in my cabin. I have a lot of oranges, so heavy, it's really inconvenient. I'm treating. ”我的票子其实就在身上，不过我还是回去一下。我知道我是应当等一会才去赴约的。半个钟头，差不多了吧。当然我不能吹半点钟风，因为我已经吹了不止半点钟风。而且她一定预料我不会空了两手去，她知道我昨天过生日。（她能记得多少时候，到她自己过生日时会不会想起这一天？想到此，她会独自嫣然一笑，当她动手切生日糕时。她自有她的秘密。）现在，正是时候了：
My ticket is actually on me, but I'll go back. I know I'll have to wait a while before I get to my appointment. Half an hour, almost. Of course I can't blow half an o'clock of wind, because I've been blowing more than half a o'clock. And she must have expected me not to go empty-handed, she knows that I had a birthday yesterday. (How many times can she remember, and will she remember this day when she celebrates her own birthday?) Thinking of this, she smiles to herself when she cuts the birthday cake. She has her own secret. Now, it's time:弟弟放午课回家了，为折磨皮鞋一路踢着石子。河堤西侧的阴影洗去了。弟弟的音乐老师在梅瓶前入神，鸟声灌满了校园。她拿起花瓶后面一双手套，一时还没想到下午到邮局去寄。老詹的钟声颤动了阳光，像颤动了水，声音一半扩散，一半沉淀。
The younger brother came home from lunch class, kicking stones all the way to torture the leather shoes. The shadow on the west side of the river embankment washed away. The younger brother's music teacher was fascinated in front of the plum bottle, and the sound of birds filled the campus. She picked up a pair of gloves behind the vase, and didn't expect to go to the post office in the afternoon to send it. Lao Zhan's bell trembled the sun, like vibrating water, and the sound was half diffused and half precipitated.“好，当然来。我早闻见橘子香了。”
差点儿我说成橘子花。唢呐声音消失了，也消失了湖上的雾，一种消失于不知不觉中，而且使人知觉于消失之后。
"Okay, of course I'm coming. I have already smelled the fragrance of oranges. ” I almost said it was an orange flower. The sound of the suona disappeared, and the fog on the lake disappeared, a kind of disappearing unconsciously, and making people aware of it after disappearing.果然，半点钟之内，她换了袜子。一层轻绡从她的脚上褪去，和怜和爱她看看自己的脚尖，想起雨后在洁白的浅滩上印一湾苗条的痕迹，一种难以言说的温柔。怕太娇纵了自己，她赶快穿上一双。
Sure enough, within half an hour, she changed her socks. A layer of light silk faded from her feet, and Lian and Ai looked at her toes, remembering the slender traces on the white shallows after the rain, an indescribable gentleness. Afraid of pampering herself too much, she quickly put on a pair.小桌上两个剥了的橘子。橘子旁边是那头白猫。
“好，你是来做主人了。”
放下手里的一盒点心，一个开好的罐头，我的手指接触到白色的毛，又凉又滑。
“你是哪一班的？”
“比你低两班。”
Two peeled oranges on the small table. Next to the orange is the white cat. "Okay, you're here to be the master." Putting down a box of snacks in my hand, an open can, my fingers touched the white hair, cold and slippery. "Which class are you from?" "Two classes lower than you."“我怎么不认识你？”
“我是插班进去的，当中还又停了一年。”
她心里一定也笑，还不认识！
“你看过我弟弟？”
“昨天还在我表姐屋里玩来的。放学时逗他玩，不让他回去，急死了！”
"Why don't I know you?" "I was transferred to the shift, and I stopped for another year." She must be laughing in her heart, she doesn't know her yet! "Have you seen my brother?" "I was still playing in my cousin's house yesterday. Teasing him after school and not letting him go back, I was in a hurry! ”“欺负小孩子！你表姊是不是那里毕业的？”
“她生了一场病，不然比我早四班。”
"Bullying children! Did your cousin graduate there? ” "She got sick, otherwise she would have been four shifts earlier than me."“那她一定在那个教室上过课，窗户外头是池塘，坐在窗户台上可以把钓竿伸出去钓鱼。我钓过一条大乌鱼，想起祖母说，乌鱼头上有北斗七星，赶紧又放了。”
“池塘里有个小岛，大概本来是座坟。”
Then she must have been in that classroom, there was a pond outside the window, and she could stretch out her fishing rod to fish while sitting on the windowsill. I fished a big mullet, and I remembered that my grandmother said that the mullet had the Big Dipper on its head, so I quickly released it again. ” "There is a small island in the pond, probably originally a grave."“岛上可以拣野鸭蛋。”
“我没拣过。”
“你一定拣过，没有拣到！”
“你好像看见似的。要橘子，自己拿。那个和尚的石塔还好好的。你从前懂不懂刻在上头的字？”
“现在也未见得就懂。”
"You can pick wild duck eggs on the island." "I didn't pick it." "You must have picked it, but you didn't pick it!" "You seem to see it. If you want an orange, take it yourself. The monk's stone tower is still fine. Did you understand the words engraved on it before? ” "I don't know if I can understand it now."“你在校刊上老有文章。我喜欢塔上的莲花。”
“莲花还好好的。现在若能找到我那些大作，看看，倒非常好玩。”
“昨天我在她们那儿看到好些学生作文。”
“这个多吃点不会怎么，筍，怕甚么。”
"You always have articles in the school magazine. I like the lotus flower on the tower. ” "Lotus is fine. If you can find my masterpieces now, it's very fun. ” "Yesterday I saw many students' essays from them." "Eating more of this won't be a big deal, bamboo shoots, what are you afraid of."“你现在还画画么？”
“我没有速写簿子。你怎晓得我喜欢过？”
"Are you still painting?" "I don't have a sketchbook. How do you know I've liked it? ”我高兴有人提起我久不从事的东西。我实在应当及早学画，我老觉得我在这方面的成就会比我将要投入的工作可靠得多。我起身取了两个橘子，却拿过那个手笼尽抚弄。橘子还是人家拿了坐到对面去剥了。我身边空了一点，因此我觉得我有理由不放下那种柔滑的感觉。
I am glad that someone has mentioned something I haven't been doing for a long time. I should have learned to paint early, and I always felt that my achievements in this area would be much more reliable than the work I was about to put into. I got up and took two oranges, but took the handcage and stroked it. The oranges were still taken and sat down on the opposite side to peel them. There was a little emptiness around me, so I felt that I had a reason not to let go of that silky feeling.“我们在小学顶高兴野外写生。美术先生姓王，说话老是‘譬如’‘譬如’，——画来画去，大家老是一个拥在丛树之上的庙檐：一片帆，一片远景；一个茆草屋子，黑黑的窗子，烟囱里不问早晚都在冒烟。老去的地方是东门大窑墩子，泰山庙文游台，王家亭子……”
"We were happy to sketch in the wild at the top of the elementary school. The art teacher's surname is Wang, and he always speaks 'like' and 'like',—— drawing and painting, and everyone is always a temple eaves hugging the trees: a sail, a distant view; a straw house, black windows, and smoke in the chimney regardless of morning or night. The place where I grow old is the East Gate Kiln Mound, the Taishan Temple Wenyou Terrace, and the Wangjia Pavilion......"“傅公桥，东门和西门的宝塔，……”
“西门宝塔在河堤上，实在我们去得最多的地方是河堤上。老是问姓瞿的老太婆买荸荠吃。”
“就是这条河，水会流到那里。”
"Fu Gong Bridge, the pagoda of the east and west gates,......" "The Ximen Pagoda is on the river embankment, and the place we go to the most is on the river embankment. I always ask the old woman surnamed Qu to buy water chestnuts to eat. ” "It's this river where the water will flow."“你画过那个渡头，渡头左边尽是野蔷薇，香极了。”
“那个渡头，……渡过去是潭家坞子。坞子里树比人还多，画眉比鸭子还多……”
“可是那些树不尽是柳树，你画的全是一条一条的。”
"You painted that ferry, and the left side of the ferry is full of wild roses, which are very fragrant." "That ferry,...... The ferry is Tanjia Wuzi. There are more trees than people in the dock, and more thrushes than ducks...... "But those trees are not all willows, you paint them all one by one."“………………”
“那张画至今还在成绩室里。”
“不记得了，你还给人改了画，那天是全校春季远足，王老师忙不过来了，说大家可以请汪曾祺改，你改得很仔细，好些人都要你改。”
"That painting is still in the grades room." "I don't remember, you also changed the painting, that day was the spring hike of the whole school, Teacher Wang was too busy, saying that everyone can ask Wang Zengqi to change, you changed it very carefully, and many people want you to change it."“我的那张画也还在成绩室里，也是一条一条的。表姐昨天跟我去看过。……”
"My painting is still in the grades room, and it is also one by one. My cousin went to see it with me yesterday. ……”我咽下一小块停留在嘴里半天的蛋糕，想不起甚么话说，我的名字被人叫得如此自然。不自觉的把那个柔滑的感觉移到脸上，而且我的嘴唇也想埋在洁白的窝里。我的样子有点傻，我的年龄亮在我的眼睛里。我想一堆带露的蜜波花瓣拥在胸前。
I swallowed a small piece of cake that had been in my mouth for a long time, and I couldn't remember what I had said that my name was called so naturally. I unconsciously moved that smooth feeling to my face, and my lips wanted to be buried in the white nest. I looked a little silly, and my age was shining in my eyes. I wanted a bunch of honey wave petals with dew on my chest.一块橘子皮飞过来，刚好砸在我脸上，好像打中了我的眼睛。我用手掩住眼睛。我的手上感到百倍于那只猫的柔润，像一只招凉的猫，一点轻轻的抖，她的手。
A piece of orange peel flew over and hit me in the face, as if it hit my eye. I covered my eyes with my hand. My hand felt a hundred times softer than that cat, like a cat that was cold, shaking a little, her hand trembled slightly.波——，岂有此理，一只小小的船安这么大一个汽笛。随着人声喧沸，脚步忽乱。
“船靠岸了。”
“这是××，晚上才能到□□。”
“你还要赶夜车？”
“大概不，我尽可以在□□耽搁几天，玩玩。”
How can this be ——, a small boat with such a big whistle. With the noise of people, the footsteps are chaotic. "The ship has docked." "This is ××, and you can only get □□ at night." "You still have to catch the night train?" "Probably not, I can delay □□ for a few days and have fun."“甚么时候有兴给我画张画。——”
“我去看看，姑妈是不是来接我了，说好了的。”
“姑妈？你要上了？”
“她脾气不大好，其实很好，说叫去不能不去。”
"When are you interested in painting me? ——” "I'll go see if my aunt is here to pick me up, and I'll say it's okay." "Auntie? Are you going to get on? ” "She doesn't have a good temper, but she's actually very good, and she can't help but go."我揉了揉眼睛，把手笼交给她，看她把速写簿子放进箱子，扣好大衣领子，知道她说的是真的。
“箱子我来拿，你笼着这个不方便。”
“谢谢，是真不方便。”
I rubbed my eyes and handed her the handcage, watching her put her sketchbook into the box and fasten the collar of her coat, knowing that what she said was true. "I'll get the box, it's inconvenient for you to carry this." "Thank you, it's really inconvenient."当然，老詹的钟又敲起来了。风很大，船晃得厉害。每个教室里有一块黑板，黑板上写许多字，字与字之间产生一种神秘的交通，钟声作为接引。我不知道我在船上还是在水上，我是怎么活下来的。有时我不免稍微有点疯，先是人家说起后来是我自己想起。钟！……
Of course, Lao Zhan's bell rang again. The wind was strong and the boat shook violently. There was a blackboard in each classroom, and many words were written on it, and a mysterious traffic was created between the words, and the bell was used as a guide. I don't know if I was on the boat or on the water, how I survived. Sometimes I can't help but go a little crazy, first people talk about it, and then I remember it myself. Bell! ……四月廿七日夜写成
廿九日改易数处，添写最后两句
一月不熬夜，居然觉得疲倦。我的疲倦引诱我
纪念我的生日，纪念几句话
Written on the night of April 27. On the twenty-ninth, I made several changes and added the last two sentences I don't stay up late in January, and I actually feel tired. My tiredness tempts me In honor of my birthday, remember a few words
[1] 本篇原载《文艺复兴》1946年第一卷第二期；初收《茱萸集》，台湾联合文学出版社1988年9月。

老鲁

老鲁[1]
[1] This article was originally published in Renaissance, Volume 1, Issue 2, 1946; First Collected in "Zhuyu Collection", Taiwan United Literature Publishing House, September 1988. Lao Lu[1]去年夏天我们过的那一段日子实在是好玩。我想不起甚么恰当的词儿，只有说它好玩。学校里四个月发不出薪水，饭也是有一顿没一顿的吃。校长天天在外头跑，想法挪借。起先回来都还说哪儿能弄多少，甚么时候可以发一点钱。不知说了多少次，总未实现。有人于是说，他不说哪一天有，倒还有点希望，一说哪天有，那天准没有。大家颇不高兴，不免发牢骚，出怨言。然而生气的是他说谎，至于发不发薪水本身倒还其次。事实上我们已经穷到极限，再穷下去也不过如此，薪水发下来原无济于事，最多可以进城吃一顿。这个情形没有在内地，尤其是昆明，尤其是我们那个中学教过书的人，大概没法明白。好容易学校挨到暑假，没有中途关门。可是一到暑假，我们的日子就更特别了。钱，不用说，毫无指望。我们已好像把这件事忘了。校长能做到的事是给我们零零碎碎的弄一餐两餐米，买三二十斤柴。有时弄不到，就只有断炊。菜呢，对不起，校长实在想不到法。可我们不能吃白斋呀，嗨，有了，有人在学校荒草之间发现了很多野生苋菜。这个菜云南人管叫小米菜，不大吃，大都摘来喂猪，或在胡萝卜田堆锦积绣的丛绿之中留一两棵，到深秋时，夕阳光中晶晶的红，看着好玩。学校里的苋菜多肥大而嫩，自己去摘，半天可得一大口袋。借一二百元买点油，多加大蒜，炒它一锅，连锅子掇上桌，味道实在极好。能赊得到，有时还赊半斤本乡土制，未经漉滤的酒来，就土碗里轮流大口大口的喝！小米菜渐渐被我们几个人吃光了，有人又认出一种野菜，说也可以吃的。这种菜，或不如说这种草更恰当些，枝叶深绿色，叶如猫耳大小而有缺刻，有小毛如粉，放在舌头上拉拉的。这玩意儿北方也有，叫做“灰藋菜”，也有叫讹了成“回回菜”的，按即庄子“逃蓬藋者闻人足音则跫然喜”之藋也。若是裹了面，和以葱汁蒜泥，蒸了吃，也怪好吃的。可是我们买不起面粉，只有少施油盐如炒苋菜办法炒了吃吧。味道比起苋菜，可是差远了。另外还有一种菜，独茎直生，周附柳叶状而较软熟的叶子，如一根脱毛的鸡毛掸帚，在人家墙角阴湿处皆可看见的，也能吃，不知怎么似乎没有尝试过。大概灰藋菜还足够我们吃的。学校在观音寺，是一荒村，也没有甚么地方可去。我们眠起居食，皆无定时。一早起来，各在屋里看看书，到山上田里走走，看看时间差不多，就招呼招呼去“采薇”了。下午常在门外一家可以欠账的小茶棚中喝茶，看远山近草，看行人车马，看一阵风卷起大股黄土，映在太阳光中如轻霞薄绮，看黄土后面蓝得（真是）欲流下来的天空。到太阳一偏西，例当再去想法晚饭菜了。晚上无灯，——交不出电灯费教电灯公司把线给铰了，集资买一根土蜡烛，会在一个人屋里，在凌乱的衣物书籍之间各自躺下坐好，天南地北的乱聊一气。或忆述故乡风物，或臧否同学教授，清娓幽俏，百说不厌；有时谈及人生大事，析情讲理，亦颇严肃认真；至说到对于现实政治社会，各人主张不同，带骨有刺的话也有的，然而好像没有尖锐得真打起架来过。
The time we lived last summer was really fun. I can't think of any appropriate words, only to say it's fun. The school couldn't pay a salary for four months, and there was no meal at all. The principal ran outside every day, thinking about borrowing. At first, when I came back, I still said where I could get how much I could get and when I could give a little money. I don't know how many times I said it, but it never came true. Some people said that he didn't say which day it would be, but there was still some hope. Everyone was quite unhappy, and they couldn't help but complain and complain. However, what made him angry was that he lied, and whether or not he was paid was secondary. In fact, we have reached the limit, and no matter how poor we are, it will only be like this. This situation is not in the mainland, especially in Kunming, especially for those who have taught in our middle school, probably can't understand it. It's easy for the school to get through the summer vacation and not close midway. But when the summer vacation comes, our days are even more special. Money, needless to say, has no hope. We seem to have forgotten about it. What the principal can do is get us one or two meals of rice and buy thirty or twenty pounds of firewood. Sometimes if you can't get it, you can only cut off the cooking. As for the vegetables, I'm sorry, the principal really can't think of a way. But we can't eat white fast, hey, there is, someone found a lot of wild amaranth among the weeds in the school. This dish is called millet vegetables by Yunnan people, and they are not eaten much, most of them are picked to feed pigs, or leave one or two in the splendid greenery of the carrot fields, and in late autumn, they are bright red in the sunset, which is fun to watch. The amaranth in the school is so fat and tender that you can pick it yourself and get a big pocket in half a day. Borrow one or two hundred yuan to buy some oil, add more garlic, fry it in a pot, and even bring it to the table, it tastes really good. You can get it on credit, and sometimes you can get half a catty of locally made, unfiltered wine, and take turns drinking it in a dirt bowl! The millet vegetables were gradually eaten by a few of us, and some people recognized a wild vegetable and said that it could also be eaten. This kind of dish, or it is better to say that this kind of grass is more appropriate, the branches and leaves are dark green, the leaves are the size of cat's ears and have notches, and there are small hairs like powder, which are pulled on the tongue. This thing is also found in the north, called "gray cabbage", and there is also a misnomer called "Huihui vegetable", which is Zhuangzi's "those who escape from the grass hear the sound of people's footsteps and are happy". If it is wrapped in noodles, and steamed with green onion juice and garlic paste, it is also delicious. But we can't afford flour, so we can only fry it with less oil and salt such as fried amaranth. The taste is far worse than amaranth. There is also a kind of vegetable with a single stem straight, with willow-like and softer leaves, like a depilated chicken feather broom, which can be seen in the shady and damp places in the corners of people's walls, and can also be eaten, but somehow it seems that we have not tried it. Probably the gray lettuce is enough for us to eat. The school is in Guanyin Temple, which is a deserted village, and there is no place to go. We slept and ate at no fixed time. When we got up early in the morning, we read books in the house, walked around the fields on the mountain, and saw that the time was about the same, so we greeted each other and went to "pick weeds". In the afternoon, I often drink tea in a small tea shed outside the door where I can owe debts, look at the distant mountains and grass, watch the pedestrians and horses, watch a gust of wind roll up a large strand of loess, reflected in the sunlight like a light cloud, and look at the blue sky behind the loess that is (really) about to flow down. When the sun is in the west, it's time to think about dinner. At night,—— if there are no lights, I can't pay the electricity bill, teach the electric light company to hinge the wire, raise funds to buy an earthen candle, and I will lie down and sit in a person's house, between messy clothes and books, and chat all over the world. Or reminisce about the scenery of my hometown, or praise and criticize my classmates and professors, which are beautiful and charming, and never get tired of talking; sometimes when talking about major events in life, I am also quite serious and reasonable; When it comes to real politics and society, everyone has different opinions, and there are some words with bones and thorns, but they don't seem to be sharp enough to really fight.阿呀，题目是“老鲁”，我一开头就哩哩拉拉带上了这么些闲话做甚么？没有办法。——一个不会谈天的人才老是“我”怎么，“我们”怎么。我们（又来了！）那时在一处聊天时曾有戒条，不许老说自己的事。这本是针对一个太喜欢说自己的事的人而立的。但人大概总免不了有这点儿脾气。一个从来不说自己的事情的人，八成是个不近人情的怪物。我原想记一记老鲁是甚么时候来的，遂情不自禁的说了许多那时候的碎事。我还没有说得尽兴，但只得噎住了。再说多了，不但喧宾夺主，文章不成格局，（现在势必如此，已经如此；）且亦是不知趣了。
Ah, the title is "Lao Lu", why did I bring so much gossip at the beginning? There is no way. ——A person who can't talk is always "me" and "we". We (here again!) At that time, when we were chatting in a place, there was a precept not to talk about ourselves all the time. This was originally for a person who likes to talk about himself too much. But people probably have this little temper. A person who never talks about himself is 80% an impersonal monster. I wanted to remember when Lao Lu came, so I couldn't help but talk about a lot of trivial things at that time. I haven't had a good time talking yet, but I have to choke. Besides, not only is it noisy, but the article is not in a pattern, (it is bound to be like this now, it is already so;) And it is also boring.但这些事与老鲁实在有些关系。前已说过老鲁是那时候来的。学校弄成那样子，大家纷纷求去。真为校长担心，下学期不但请不到教员，即工役校警亦将无人敢来。而老鲁偏在这时会来了。没事在空落落的学校各处走走，有一天，似乎看见校警们所住房间热闹起来。看看，似乎多了两个人。想，大概是哪个来了从前队伍上的朋友了。（学校校警多是退伍的兵）。到吃晚饭时常听到那边有欢声。这个欢声一听即知道是烧酒翻搅出来的。嗷，这些校警有办法，还招待得起朋友阿？要不，是朋友自己花钱请客，翻作主人？走过门前，有人说“汪老师，来喝一杯”，我只说“你们喝，你们喝”，就过去了。是哪几个人也没看清。再过几天，我们在挑野菜时看见一个光头瘦长个子穿草绿色军服的人也在那儿低了头掐那种灰藋菜的嫩头。走过去，他歪了头似笑非笑的笑了一下。这是一种世故，也不失其淳朴。这个“校警的朋友”有五十了，额上一抬眉有细而密的皱纹。看他摘菜，极其内行。既迅速且“确实”。我们之中至今有一个还弄不大清楚，摘苋菜摘了些野菜莉叶子，摘灰藋菜则更不知道是甚么麻啦蓟啦的，都来了，总要别人更给鉴定一番。有时拣不胜拣，觉得麻烦，则不管三七二十一，花啦一齐倒下锅。这么在摘菜时每天都见面，即心仪神往起来，有点熟了。他就给我们指点指点，那些菜或草吃不得。照他说，简直可吃的太多了！他打着一嘴山东话，言语有神情趣味。
But these things really have something to do with Lao Lu. It has been said before that Lao Lu came at that time. The school became like that, and everyone begged to go. I am really worried about the principal, not only will not teachers be invited next semester, but no one will dare to come even if the working school police officers. And Lao Lu will come at this time. Walking around the empty school without anything, one day, it seems that the room where the school police lived became lively. Look, there seem to be two more people. I thought, probably which one came to the friends from the former team. (Most of the school police are retired soldiers). When I went to dinner, I often heard cheers over there. As soon as I heard this cheer, I knew it was stirred up by soju. Hey, these school police have a way and can still afford to entertain their friends? Or, is it the friend who spends money to treat the guests and becomes the host? Walking past the door, someone said, "Teacher Wang, come for a drink", I just said, "You drink, you drink", and it passed. No one saw it clearly. A few days later, when we were picking wild vegetables, we saw a bald and slender man in a grass-green military uniform also bowing his head and pinching the tender head of the gray cabbage. Walking over, he tilted his head and smiled as if smiling. This is a kind of sophistication, but it is also simple. This "school police friend" is fifty years old, and there are fine and dense wrinkles on his forehead. Watching him pick vegetables, he is extremely knowledgeable. Both fast and "indeed". One of us still can't figure it out, picking amaranth and picking some wild vegetables and leaves, and picking gray cabbage and not knowing what kind of thistle it is. Sometimes I can't pick too much and find it troublesome, so I don't care about three, seven, twenty-one, and the flowers fall into the pot together. So when we meet every day when picking vegetables, we are fascinated and a little familiar. He pointed out to us, those vegetables or grass were not edible. According to him, there is simply too much to eat! He spoke Shandong dialect, and his words were interesting.后来不但是蔬菜，即荤菜亦能随地找得到了。这大概可以说是老鲁发明的。——说发明，不对，应说甚么呢？在我看，那简直就是发明：是一种甲虫，形状略似金龟子，略长，微扁，有一粒蚕豆大，村子里人即管它叫蚕豆虫或豆壳虫。这东西自首夏至秋初从土里钻出来，黄昏时候，漫天飞，地下留下一个一个小圆洞。飞时鼓翅作声，声如黄蜂而微细，如蜜蜂而稍粗。走出门散步，满耳是这种营营的单调而温和的音乐。它们这样营营的忙碌的飞，是择配。这东西一出土即迫切的去完成它生物的义务。到一找到对象，俱就便在篱落枝头息下。或前或后于交合的是吃，极其起劲的吃。所吃的东西却只有柏叶一种。也许它并不太挑嘴，不过至少最喜欢吃柏叶是可断言的。学校后旁小山上一片柏林，向晚时无千带万。单就这点说，这东西是颇高雅的，有如吃果子狸或松鸡。老鲁上山挑水，回来说是这种虫子可吃。当晚他就捉了好多。这不费事，带个可以封盖东西，或瓶或罐，走到那里，随便一掳即可有三五七八个不等，它们毫不知逸避。老鲁笑嘻嘻的拿回来，掐了头，撕去甲翅，熟练得如同祖母她们挤虾仁一样。下锅用油一煠，（他说还有几种做法）洒上重重的花椒盐，搭起酒来了。“老师，请两个嘛！”有大胆的真尝了两个，说是不错。我们都是“有毛的不吃掸子，有腿的不吃板凳”的，经闭目咧嘴的尝了一个之后，“唔！好吃。”于是桌上多了一样菜，而外边小铺里的酒账就日渐其多起来了。这酒账直至下学期快开学时才由校长弄了一笔钱一总代付了的！豆壳虫味道略如清水河条米虾。可是我若有虾吃决不吃它。以后我大概即没有虾吃时也不会有吃这玩意的时候了。老鲁呢，则不可知了。不论会吃或不会吃，他想都当因之而念及观音寺那个地方的吧。
Later, not only vegetables, but also meat dishes could be found everywhere. This can probably be said to be invented by Lao Lu. ——Speaking of invention, no, what should I say? In my opinion, it is simply an invention: it is a beetle, slightly shaped like a scarab, slightly long, slightly flat, and the size of a broad bean. This thing came out of the soil from summer to early autumn, and at dusk, it flew all over the sky, leaving small round holes underground. When flying, it flapped its wings and made a sound, like a wasp and faint, like a bee and slightly thicker. When I went out for a walk, my ears were filled with this kind of monotonous and gentle music. Their busy flight like this is a choice of mates. As soon as this thing is unearthed, it is eager to fulfill its biological obligations. As soon as they found their partner, they all rested under the fence branches. Or before or after the intersection is eaten, eating extremely vigorously. There is only one kind of cypress leaf eaten. Maybe it's not too picky, but at least it can be asserted that it likes to eat cypress leaves the most. There is a piece of Berlin on the hill behind the school, and there are thousands of them in the evening. In this alone, this thing is quite elegant, like eating civets or grouse. Lao Lu went up the mountain to carry water and came back to say that this kind of insect was edible. He caught a lot that night. It doesn't bother to bring something that can be sealed, or a bottle or can, and when you go there, you can catch three, five, seven or eight at will, and they don't know how to escape. Lao Lu took it back with a smile, pinched his head, tore off the carapace wings, and was as skillful as his grandmother and the others squeezing shrimp. Simmer the pot with oil, sprinkle a lot of peppercorns and salt (he said there are several ways), and set up the wine. "Teacher, please two!" Some bold ones really tasted two, and they said it was good. We are all "hairy ones don't eat dusters, and legs don't eat benches", and after closing our eyes and grinning at one, "Hmm! Delicious. So there was one more dish on the table, and the wine account in the shop outside was getting more and more increasing. This wine account was not paid by the principal until the next semester was about to start! The bean shell worm tastes a bit like Qingshui river strip rice shrimp. But if I have shrimp, I will never eat it. In the future, even if I don't have shrimp to eat, I probably won't have the time to eat this thing. Lao Lu is unknown. Whether he can eat or not, he should think of the place of Guanyin Temple because of it.不久，老鲁即由一个姓刘的旧校警领着见了校长，在校警队补了个名字。校长说，饷是一两月内发不出的哩。老刘自然早知道，说不要紧的，他只想清清静静住下，在队伍上走久了，不想干了，能吃一口就像这样的饭就行。（他说到“这样的饭”时在场人都笑了一下。）他姓鲁，叫鲁庭胜，（究竟该怎么写，不知道，他有个领饷用的小木头图章，上头是这三个字）。我们都叫他老鲁，只有总务主任叫他姓名。济南府人氏。何县，不详。和他一起来的一个，也“补上”了，姓吴，河北人。
Soon, Lao Lu was led by an old school police officer surnamed Liu to meet the principal and made up a name in the school police team. The principal said that the salary could not be paid within a month or two. Lao Liu naturally knew that it didn't matter, he just wanted to live quietly, walk in the team for a long time, don't want to do it, just be able to eat a bite of a meal like this. (Everyone present laughed when he said "such a meal".) His surname is Lu, his name is Lu Tingsheng, (how to write it, I don't know, he has a small wooden stamp for receiving salaries, with these three words on it). We all call him Lao Lu, only the director of general affairs calls his name. Jinan Prefecture people. He County, unknown. The one who came with him was also "made up", surnamed Wu, a native of Hebei.学校之有校警，本是因为地方荒僻，弄几枝枪，找俩人背上，壮壮胆子的意思。年长日久，一向又没发生过甚么事情，这个队近于有名无实了。上班时他们抱着根老捷克式，坐在门口长凳上晒太阳，或看学生打球。事闲了则朵朵来米西的走来走去，嘴里咬了根狗尾巴草，与卖花生的老头搭讪，帮赶车的小孩钉蹄铁。日子过得极其从容。有些耐不住的，多说声“没意思”就走了。学校也觉得这么两枝老枪还是收起来吧，就一并搁在校长宿舍靠在墙角上锈生灰去了。有时忽然有谁端出来对准一只猫头鹰瞄了半天，当！的一声却打在一棵老栗树叶子最多的地方。校警呢，则留下来的两三个全屈才做了工友本来做的事了。留下来的大都是爱这里的生活方式的，做点杂事倒无所谓。你别说，有一件制服在身，多少有点羁束，现在能爱怎么穿怎么穿，就添了一分自在。可是他们要是太爱那种生活方式，我们就有点不大方便。你要喝水，（做教员的水多重要！）挑水的正在软草浅沙之中躺着看天上的云呢。没办法，这个学校上上下下全透着一种颇浓的老庄气味。自从老吴和老鲁来了，气象才不同起来。
There is a school police officer in the school, because the place is remote, get a few guns, find two people on their backs, and strengthen the courage. As time goes by, nothing has happened, and this team is almost nominal. When they go to work, they hold an old Czech style, sit on the bench at the door to bask in the sun, or watch the students play. When they were idle, they walked around in Missy, biting a dogtail grass in their mouths, chatting with the old man selling peanuts, and helping the children driving the car to nail the hoes. Life was extremely calm. I couldn't stand it anymore, so I said "it's boring" and left. The school also thought that these two old guns should be put away, so they were left together in the principal's dormitory and rusted against the corner. Sometimes someone suddenly came out and aimed at an owl for a long time, when! hit an old chestnut tree with the most leaves. As for the school police, the two or three who stayed did what the workers were supposed to do. Most of the people who stayed here loved the way of life here, and it didn't matter if they did some chores. Don't say it, having a uniform on your body is a bit restrained, but now you can wear it as you like, which adds a bit of freedom. But if they love that way of life too much, we will be a little inconvenient. You have to drink water, (how important is water as a teacher!) The person carrying the water is lying in the soft grass and shallow sand looking at the clouds in the sky. There is no way, there is a strong smell of Laozhuang all over this school. Since Lao Wu and Lao Lu came, the weather has changed.老吴留长发，向后梳，顶上秃了一块，看起来脑门子很高。高眉直鼻，瘦长身材，微微驼背。走路步子碎，稍急点就像跑了。这样的人让他穿件干干净净蓝布大衫比穿军服合适得多。学校里教书的多说国语，他那一口北京话，您啦您啦的就中意。他还颇识字，能读书报。甫来工作不久，有发愤做人之意，在自己床前贴了一副短联：
Lao Wu has long hair, combed back, and a bald piece on the top, looking very high. High eyebrows and straight nose, slender figure, and slightly hunchbacked. Walking is broken, and if you are a little hurried, it is like running. Such a person is much more suitable for him to wear a clean blue cloth shirt than a military uniform. The teachers in the school speak more Chinese, and he likes his Mandarin dialect. He is also quite literate and can read newspapers. Not long after he came to work, he had the intention of being angry and posted a short couplet in front of his bed:烟酒不戒哉
不可为人也
Smoking and drinking without abstinence One cannot be a person戒自然戒不了的，而且何必。老吴不比老鲁小多少，也望五十了，而有此志气，或有立志之兴趣，这在我们看起来，是难得的，而且不知怎么的有点教人难过。哎，我又要说不相干的话了。我说了这回事是证明他能写字耳。他管的事是进城送信送文书，在家时则有甚么做什么。他不让自己闲，哪里地不平，找把铲子弄平了；谁窗上皮纸破了，他给糊，而且出主意用清油抹一抹；地下一根草，一片纸屑，他见了，必要拾去；整天看见他在院子里不慌不忙而怏怏的走来走去。且脑子清楚，态度殷勤，我们每进城与熟人谈天，常提起新来了一个工友，“精彩！”有一天，须派人到一个甚么机关里交涉一宗事情，谁也不愿意去，有人说，让老吴去！校长把自己的一套旧西服取下来，说，行！真的老吴换了那身咖啡色西服，梳梳头，拿了张片子就去了。回来，结果自然满好，比我们哪个去都好。
Naturally, you can't quit, and why bother. Lao Wu is not much younger than Lao Lu, and he is fifty years old, but having this ambition or interest in ambition is rare in our opinion, and somehow it is a bit sad. Hey, I'm going to say something irrelevant again. I said this to prove that he could write. What he was in charge of was to go to the city to send letters and deliver documents, and what to do when he was at home. He didn't let himself be idle, and where the ground was uneven, he found a shovel to smooth it out; if the leather paper on the window was broken, he would paste it and come up with an idea to wipe it with clear oil; a piece of grass and a piece of paper in the ground, he would pick it up when he saw it; all day long, he was seen walking around the yard unhurriedly and unhappily. And with a clear mind and a diligent attitude, every time we go to the city to talk to our acquaintances, we often mention a new worker, "Wonderful!" "One day, I have to send someone to some organ to negotiate a matter, and no one wants to go, some people say, let Lao Wu go! The principal took off his old suit and said, okay! Lao Wu really changed into the coffee-colored suit, combed his hair, took a piece and went. When I came back, the result was naturally very good, better than any of us.一快放暑假时，大家说，完了，准备瘦吧。不是别的，每年春末之后，差不多全校要泻一次肚。在泻肚时大家眼睛必又一起通红发痒。是水的关系。这村子叫“观音寺”，可是这一带总属于“黄土坡”。昆明春天不下雨，是风季，或称干季，灰沙大得不得了，黄土坡尤其厉害。我们穿的衣服，在家里看看还过得去，一进城马上觉得脏得一塌胡涂。你即使新换了衣服进城也没用，人家一看就知道从哪里来的：我们的头发总是黄的！学校附近没有河，也没人家有井，食用的水大概是从两处挑来。一个是前面田地里一口塘，一是后面山顶上的一个“龙潭”。龙潭，昆明人叫泉叫龙潭。那也是一口塘，想是底下有水冒上来，故终年盈满，水清可鉴。若能往山上挑龙潭里水来吃用，自是好的。但我们平日不论饮用炊煮漱口洗面的水都是田地里的塘水。向学校抗议呀，是的，找事务主任！可是主任说，“我是管事务的，我也是×××呀”！这就是说他也是个人，不只是除事务之外就甚么也没有了的，他也有不耐烦的时候。跟工友三番二次说，“上山挑”！没用。说一次，挑两天。你不能每次跟着他去。而且，实在的，上山又远，路又不好走。也难怪，我们有时去散散步，来回一趟还怪累的。再加，山上风景不错，可是冷清得很，一个人挑个水桶，斤共斤共，有甚么意思？田里至少有两个娘们锄地插秧，漂衣洗菜，热闹得多。大家呢，不到眼红泻肚时也不记起来；等记起来则已经红都红了，泻也泻了。到时候六味地黄丸或者是甚么东西每人一包，要了一杯（还是塘里来的）水，相对吞食起来。这塘水倒是我们之间的一个契合，一种盟约。老鲁来了，从此我们肚子不大泻。眼睛是也红的，因为天干，吃得太坏，角膜炎，与水无关。胖自然也没胖起来。老鲁挑水都上山。也并没有哪个告诉他肚子眼睛的事，他往两处看了看，说底下那个水“要不的”。这全校三百多人连吃带用的水挑起来也够瞧的。老鲁一模糊亮就起来，来来回回不停的挑。有时来不及，则一担四桶，前两桶后两桶。水挑回来，还得劈柴。然后一个人关在茶炉间里烧。自此我们之中竟有人买了茶叶，颇讲究起来了。因为水实在太方便，一天来送好些回。
When the summer vacation is about to end, everyone says, it's over, get ready to lose weight. Nothing else, after the end of spring every year, almost the whole school has to have diarrhea. When you have diarrhea, everyone's eyes will be red and itchy again. It's the relationship of water. This village is called "Guanyin Temple", but this area always belongs to the "loess slope". It doesn't rain in Kunming in spring, it's the wind season, or dry season, the gray sand is very big, especially the loess slope. The clothes we wear are passable to look at at home, but as soon as we enter the city, we feel dirty. Even if you change your clothes and go to the city, it's useless, people will know where they come from: our hair is always yellow! There is no river near the school, and no one has a well, and the water for consumption is probably drawn from two places. One is a pond in the field in front, and the other is a "dragon pool" on the top of the mountain behind. Longtan, Kunming people call the spring Longtan. It is also a pond, I think there is water rising from the bottom, so it is full all year round, and the water is clear. If you can pick up water from the dragon pond on the mountain to eat, it is good. But whether we drink the water we drink for cooking, rinsing our mouths and washing faces, it is the pond water in the field. Protest to the school, yes, find the director of affairs! But the director said, "I am in charge of affairs, and I am also ×××"! This means that he is also a person, not only has nothing but affairs, but he also has impatient times. I told my workers again and again, "Go up the mountain to pick"! Useless. Say it once, choose two days. You can't follow him every time. Moreover, it is really far up the mountain and the road is not easy to walk. No wonder we sometimes go for a walk, and it's strange that we get tired going back and forth. In addition, the scenery on the mountain is good, but it is very deserted, what does it mean to pick a bucket by one person? There are at least two women in the field hoeing and planting rice, washing clothes and vegetables, which is much more lively. As for everyone, they don't remember until their eyes are red and their stomachs are red; when they remember, they are already red and diarrhea. When the time comes, each person will have a pack of Liuwei Dihuang pills or something, and they will ask for a glass of water (or from the pond) and swallow it relatively. This pond water is a fit between us, a kind of covenant. Lao Lu came, and our stomachs didn't have a lot of diarrhea from then on. The eyes are also red, because the weather is dry, eating too badly, keratitis, and it has nothing to do with water. Naturally, I didn't get fat. Lao Lu carried water up the mountain. No one told him about his stomach and eyes, he looked at two places and said that the water at the bottom was "no". More than 300 people in the school can even pick up the water they bring with them. Lao Lu got up as soon as it was blurred, and kept picking up back and forth. Sometimes it was too late, so he had to carry four buckets in one load, two buckets in the first and two buckets in the back. When the water comes back, you have to chop firewood. Then a person was locked in the tea stove room and burned. Since then, some of us have bought tea and become quite particular. Because water is so convenient, it is delivered several times a day.有人就穷过瘾了：昆明气候好，秋来无一点萧瑟严厉感觉，只稍为尝出百物似乎较为老熟深沉，（仍保留许多青春，不缺天真。）早晚岚雾重些，半夜读书写字时须多加一件衣裳。白天太阳照着，温暖平和，全像一个稍为删改过一番的春天。波斯菊依然未开尽，花小了点，绮丽如旧。美人蕉结了不少籽，而远看猩红一片，连籽儿也如花开。课余饭后在屋前小草坪上，各人搬张椅子，又聊开了。饭能像一顿饭那样的开出，有一件绒线衫在箱子里，还容许我们对未来做一点梦。我听过不止一个人说起过：一太平了，有个家，啊，要好好布置安排一下。让老吴，看门住在前院，管看门，管洒扫应对，出去时留下话，谁来找让他在客厅里等等，漆盒子里有铁观音，香烟在书桌左边抽屉里。老鲁呢，则住在后头小园子里最合适。当真再往下想：老吴要稍为懒一点才好，他得完全依他本性来，尽可借故到天桥落子馆坐坐，有事推给别人做。现在明明是过分“巴结”，不好。他应当有机会在主人工作的藤椅中坐坐，倒一杯好茶喝喝，开开抽屉取三四根烟。而让他去买东西，也必须跟铺子里要一个折扣才对。老鲁大概会把左右邻居的水都包下来。还给对面卖柿子的老太婆挑，有衣服可以让她补补。唔，老鲁多半还要回家种两年地，到田里粮食为蝗虫啃光了或大水冲完时又会坐在老吴门房里等主人回来的。自己想想，不免笑笑。觉得这告诉不得人。这是“落伍思想”，多少民族人类大事不思索，倒看到自己的暮年了，才二十几岁的人哩。而且或许引起人的剧烈批评，说这是布尔乔亚或甚么的。其实呢，想起来虽用第一人称，倒不失为客观，并无把老吴老鲁供自己役使之意。何必如此严重，想想好玩而已。你看老鲁刚刚冲了茶，茶正在你手里热热的。而老吴夹了一卷今天的报纸来了，另一手上是两封远地来的信。有人叫住他们俩，把这个好玩意思问他们，一个是“好唉，好唉，”一个“那敢情好，”都笑着走开了。我不知道人那么一问他们喜欢不喜欢。这两个四五十岁的人会不会因此而能靠得紧些，有一种微妙关系结在他们心上呢？我有时傻气得很，活在世界上恐怕不要这种东西。不过傻气的人也有。自老吴老鲁一来，学校俨然分为两派，一派拥护老吴，一派拥护老鲁。有时为他们的优劣（其实不好说优劣，优劣只能用在钢笔手表热水壶上！）竟辩论过。我很高兴，我愿意他们喜欢老鲁的人都喜欢老鲁了。至于别的人，我认为他们是根本无可不可，或完全由自己利害观点出发的，可以不予考虑。对于老鲁，有些人的感情可以说是“疼爱”。这好像有点近于滑稽了。可不！原是可笑的。哎，我问你，你是不是一个一点都不可笑的人？我们且问问：
Some people are poor: Kunming has a good climate, and there is no bleak and harsh feeling in autumn, only a little taste of everything seems to be more mature and deep, (still retains a lot of youth, not lacking innocence.) The fog is heavier in the morning and evening, and you have to add an extra piece of clothing when reading and writing in the middle of the night. The sun shines during the day, warm and peaceful, like a slightly modified spring. The cosmos is still not in bloom, the flowers are a little smaller, and they are as beautiful as before. The canna has a lot of seeds, and from a distance, it looks scarlet, and even the seeds are like flowers. After school, on the small lawn in front of the house, everyone moved a chair and chatted again. The meal can be served like a meal, and there is a velvet sweater in the box, which also allows us to dream a little about the future. I have heard more than one person say: It's peaceful, there is a home, ah, you have to arrange it well. Let Lao Wu, the gatekeeper live in the front yard, take care of the door, take care of the cleaning and response, leave a message when he goes out, who will come to let him wait in the living room, there is Tieguanyin in the lacquer box, and the cigarette is in the drawer on the left side of the desk. As for Lao Lu, it is most suitable to live in the small garden at the back. Seriously, I think about it again: Lao Wu should be a little lazy, he has to follow his nature, he can use the excuse to sit in the Tianqiao Luozi Pavilion, and push others to do something. Now it's obviously too "flattering", it's not good. He should have the opportunity to sit in the rattan chair where the master works, pour a good cup of tea and drink it, and open the drawer to get three or four cigarettes. And if he goes to buy something, he must ask for a discount from the shop. Lao Lu will probably wrap up the water from the neighbors on the left and right. Also pick it for the old woman selling persimmons opposite, and she can make up for it if she has clothes. Well, Lao Lu will probably have to go home to plant land for two years, and when the grain in the field is gnawed by locusts or the water is washed away, he will sit in Lao Wu's concierge and wait for the master to come back. Think about it yourself, I can't help but smile. I think this is untellable. This is "outdated thinking", how many nations and human affairs do not think about it, but see their twilight years, only in their twenties. And it may cause people to criticize violently, saying that this is bourgeois or something. In fact, although I think about it in the first person, it is objective, and I have no intention of using Lao Wu and Lao Lu for my own use. Why be so serious, just think about it. You see that Lao Lu has just brewed tea, and the tea is hot in your hand. And Lao Wu picked up a roll of today's newspaper, and in the other hand were two letters from afar. Someone stopped the two of them and asked them about this joke, one said, "Oh, oh, oh, the other dares to be good," and walked away with a smile. I don't know if people like it or not. Will these two people in their forties and fifties be able to rely on them because of this, and there is a delicate relationship in their hearts? I am sometimes very stupid, and I am afraid that I don't want this kind of thing in the world. But there are also stupid people. Since Lao Wu and Lao Lu came, the school seems to have been divided into two factions, one faction supports Lao Wu and the other supports Lao Lu. Sometimes for their advantages and disadvantages (in fact, it's hard to say whether it's good or bad, the good and bad can only be used on pens, watches, hot water bottles!) actually debated. I'm very happy, I hope that people who like Lao Lu like Lao Lu. As for others, I think they are completely unacceptable, or completely based on their own interests, and can be ignored. For Lao Lu, some people's feelings can be said to be "loved". This seems a bit funny. Don't! It was ridiculous. Hey, let me ask you, are you a person who is not ridiculous at all? Let's ask:“老鲁，你累不累？”
“累甚么，我的精神是顶年幼儿的来。”
"Lao Lu, are you tired?" "What's so tiring, my spirit is the best of the older."这个“顶年幼儿的”，好新鲜的词儿！我们起初简直不懂，一个山东同学（应说“同事”才对，可是我讨厌这个称呼，）含笑，他是懂的。老鲁说的对。老鲁并不高大。——人太高大一则容易令人叹惜，糟塌了材料；再，要不就是显得巍巍乎，不可亲近，不近人情。可是老鲁非常紧凑，非常经济。老鲁全身没有一块是因为要好看而练出来的肉。处处有来历，这是挑出来的，这是走出来的，这是为了加快血液循环，喘了气而涨出来的，这是吃苦吃出来的。而且，老鲁有一双微微向外的八字脚！这脚不是特别粗大肥厚，反之，倒是瘦瘦长长且薄薄的。老鲁是从有结晶的沙土里长出来的。一棵枣树，或，或甚么呢，想不起来了，就是一棵枣树吧，得。还要再往下说么，说他倔强的生根，风里吹，雨里打，严霜重露，荒旱大竭，困厄灾难，……那就贫气了，这你不知道！老鲁他倒是晒太阳喝水，该愁就愁，该喜就喜的活了下来。
This "top child's" is such a fresh word! We didn't understand at first, a Shandong classmate (who should say "colleague", but I hate this title) smiled, he understood. Lao Lu is right. Lao Lu is not tall. ——If a person is too tall, it is easy to sigh and ruin the material; again, it will either look majestic, unapproachable, or improper. But Lao Lu is very compact and very economical. There is not a piece of meat in Lao Lu's body that is cultivated because it is good-looking. There is a provenance everywhere, this is picked out, this is out, this is to speed up blood circulation, gasp and rise, this is eaten by hardship. Moreover, Lao Lu has a pair of figure-eight feet that are slightly outward! These feet are not particularly thick and fat, on the contrary, they are thin, long and thin. Lao Lu grew from crystallized sandy soil. A jujube tree, or, or what, I can't remember, it's a jujube tree, okay. Do you want to go further, say that he is stubborn and rooted, blowing in the wind, beating in the rain, severe frost and dew, drought and disaster,...... Then you are poor, you don't know this! Lao Lu basked in the sun and drank water, worried when he should be sad, and survived happily when he should be happy.老鲁十几岁即离家出来吃粮当兵。有一天，学校让我进城买米，我让老鲁一块去。老鲁挟了两个麻布口袋，活活泼泼的这抄一把那掏一撮的看来看去，跟一个掌柜的论了半天价。“不卖？好，不卖咱们走下家。”一会儿又回到原来铺子，偏着身子，（像是准备不成立刻就走）扬了头，（掌柜的高高爬在米垛子上，）“哎，胡子！卖不卖，就是那个数，二八，卖，咱就量来！”显然掌柜的极中意这个称呼，他有一嘴乌匝青密的牙刷胡子，他乐了乐，当真就卖了！太阳照得亮亮的，这两个人是一幅画。诸位，我这完全是题外之言。我是忘不了那天的情形。真要说的是那天进城的另外一件事。就是那天，我们在进城的马车上，马车（可没有南京上海或美国电影上的那么美）上是庄稼人，保长，小菜棚的老板娘进城办芝麻糖葵花籽，还有两个穿军装的小伙子。这两个小伙子，我想是机械士或师长勤务兵之类，一个手上一只不走的表，另一个左边犬齿镶了金包嵌绿桃子，他们谈他们的，无缘无故的大起声音来，“我们哪里没去过，甚么‘交通工具’没坐过！飞机火车坦克车；法国大菜，钢丝床！”老鲁不说话，抽他的烟。等他们下了马车，端着肩膀走了，老鲁说，“两个烧包子！”好！这简直是老鲁说的话。老鲁十几岁就当兵了。提起这个，令人惆怅：老是跟老鲁说，“老鲁，甚么时候你来，弄点酒，谈谈你自己的事我们听听。”老鲁则说：“有甚么可谈的，作孽受苦就是了。好唉，哪天。今儿不行，事多。”老说，老说，终没有个机会。
Lao Lu left home when he was a teenager and came out to eat food and serve as a soldier. One day, the school asked me to go to the city to buy rice, and I asked Lao Lu to go with me. Lao Lu took two burlap pockets, looked at a handful of them lively, and negotiated with a shopkeeper for a long time. "Don't sell? Okay, if you don't sell, let's go down." After a while, he returned to the original shop, leaned over, (as if he was not ready to leave) raised his head, (the shopkeeper climbed high on the rice stack), "Hey, beard! Sell or not, that's the number, twenty-eight, sell, let's measure it!" Obviously, the shopkeeper liked this title very much, he had a black toothbrush beard, and he was happy, and he really sold it! The sun was shining brightly, and these two people were a painting. Everyone, I am completely digressing. I can't forget what happened that day. What I really want to say is another thing that went into the city that day. On that day, we were in the carriage into the city, and on the carriage (not as beautiful as in Nanjing, Shanghai or American movies) were farmers, the security guard, the proprietress of the small vegetable shed went into the city to run sesame sugar and sunflower seeds, and two young men in military uniforms. These two young men, I think they are mechanics or division commander orderlies, one has a watch in his hand, and the other has a gold inlaid green peach on the left canine, and they talk about them, and they make a loud voice for no reason, "We haven't been anywhere, what 'transportation' has not been on!" Airplanes, trains, tanks; French dishes, wire beds! Lao Lu didn't speak, smoked his cigarette. When they got out of the carriage and left with their shoulders in their hands, Lao Lu said, "Two burnt buns!" "Okay! This is simply what Lao Lu said. Lao Lu became a soldier when he was a teenager. Mentioning this is melancholy: I always say to Lao Lu, "Lao Lu, when do you come, get some wine, and talk about your own affairs and we will listen." Lao Lu said: "If there is anything to talk about, just do evil and suffer." Alas, one day. It's not okay today, there are many things. "Always say, always say, there will never be a chance.我们就知道一点点。老鲁在张宗昌手下当过兵。“铳子队，”他说。“童子队？”有人不懂。“铳子队！喉，不懂，铳子队就是马弁。”有人懂。“马弁，噢，马弁。”都懂了。“铳子队，都挑些个年轻漂亮小伙子，才出头二十岁！”老鲁说。大家微笑。笑现在，也笑从前。大家自然相信老鲁曾是个年轻漂亮小伙子，盒子炮，两尺长鹅黄丝穗子！老鲁他不悲哀，仿佛那个铳子队是他弟弟似的看他自己。他说了一点大帅的事，也不妨说是他自己的事吧：“大帅烧窑子。北京，大帅走进胡同，一个最红的姐儿，窑姐儿刁了枝烟，（老鲁摆了个架势，起二郎腿，抬眉细目，眼角迤斜，）让大帅点火。大帅说，‘俺是个土暴子，俺不会点火。’豁呵，窑姐儿慌了，跪下咧，问你这位，是甚么官衔。大帅说‘俺是山东梗，梗，梗！’（老鲁翘起大姆指，圆睁两眼，嘴微张开半天。从他神情中，我们知道‘梗，梗，梗！’是一种甚么东西。这个字实在不知道怎么写。大帅的同乡们，你们贵处有此说法么？）窑姐儿说是你老开恩带我走吧。大帅说，‘好唉！’（大帅也说‘好唉’？）真凄惨，（老鲁用了一个形容词。）烧！大帅有令，十四岁以下，出来。十四岁过了的，一个不许走，烧！一烧烧了三条街，都烧死咧。”——老鲁叙述方法有点特别。你也许不大弄得清白。可不是，我也不知道大帅为甚么要烧窑子。我们就大概晓得那么一回事就是了。当然，老鲁也是点火烧的一个了。他是铳子队嚜。另外我们还知道一点老鲁吃过的东西。其一是猪食。军队到了一个地方，甚么都没有了，饿了好几天了，老百姓不见影子，粮食没有一颗。老鲁一看，咳！有个猪圈，猪是早没有了，猪食盆在呐，没办法，用手捧了一把。嗐，“还有两爿儿整个包谷一剖俩的呢，怪好吃！”老鲁说这比羊肉好吃多了。“比羊肉好吃？”有人奇怪，唉，甚么羊肉，白煮羊肉。“也是，老百姓都逃了，拖到一只羊，杀倒了，架上火烀烂了：没盐！”没盐的羊肉，你没有吃过，你就无法知道那多么难吃。何况又是瘪了多少日子的肚子。啧啧，老鲁吃过棉花。那年，（他都说得有时间有地方的，我都忘了。）败了，一阵一阵的退。饿的太凶了，都走不动，一步一步拖，有的，老鲁说，“像个空口袋似的就颓下去了。”昏昏糊糊的，“队伍像一根烂草绳穿了一绳子烂草鞋，一队鬼。”实在饿很了。老鲁他不觉得那是他自己。可是得走呀，在那个一眼看不到一棵矮树，一块石头的大平地上走。浑身没有一丝气力，光眼皮那还有点儿劲，不撑住，就搭拉下来了。老鲁看见前头一个人的衣服破了一块，白白的棉花绽出来，“吃棉花！前后肚皮都贴上了，”老鲁的脸上黑了一黑，“棉花啊，也就是填到肚里，有点儿东西。吃下去甚么样儿，拉出来还是个甚么样儿！”这，我们知道，纤维是不大溶解的。可是真没想到这点儿智识用到这上头来。这种事情于我们，还是不大“习惯”。生命到耗到最后一点点，居然又能回来。这教你想起小时候吹灯，眼看快灭了，松了口气，它又旺起来了，由青转红，马上就雪亮。此极不可思议。且说这些经验于老鲁本身是甚么意义呢？噫，这问题不大“普通”，我们且不必管他。然而，老鲁不经过这些事仍无损其为一个老鲁？老鲁呢，他是希望能够安安稳稳的过一辈子。
We know a little bit. Lao Lu served as a soldier under Zhang Zongchang. "Gun team," he said. "Boy team?" Some people don't understand. "Gun team! Throat, I don't understand, the gun team is Ma Bian. "Someone understands." Ma Bian, oh, Ma Bian. "I understand." The gun team all picks some young and beautiful young men, only in their early twenties! Lao Lu said. Everyone smiles. Laugh now, laugh at the past. Everyone naturally believes that Lao Lu was once a young and beautiful young man, a box cannon, a two-foot-long goose yellow silk ear! Lao Lu was not sad, as if the gun team was his younger brother. He said a little about the marshal, or he might as well say it was his own business: "The marshal burns the kiln." In Beijing, the marshal walked into the alley, a most popular sister, the kiln sister made a cigarette, (Lao Lu put on a posture,  raised his legs, raised his eyebrows and eyes, and the corners of his eyes were slanted,) and let the marshal light the fire. The marshal said, 'I'm a local thug, I can't ignite a fire.' 'Hehe, the kiln sister panicked, knelt down, and asked you what official title this is. The marshal said, 'I am a Shandong terrier, terrier, terrier!' (Lao Lu raised his thumb, opened his eyes wide, and opened his mouth slightly for a long time.) From his expression, we know what kind of thing it is. I really don't know how to write this word. Compatriots of the marshal, do you have this statement in your place? Sister Yao said that it was you who took me away. The marshal said, 'Okay! (The marshal also said 'okay'?) It's miserable, (Lao Lu used an adjective.) Burn! The marshal has an order, under the age of fourteen, come out. If you are over fourteen years old, one is not allowed to leave, burn! One burned three streets, and they were all burned to death. ——Lao Lu's narrative method is a bit special. You may not be clear. No, I don't know why the marshal wants to burn the kiln. We probably know that kind of thing. Of course, Lao Lu is also one of the ones who set fire. He is the gun team. In addition, we also know a little bit of what Lao Lu has eaten. One is pig food. When the army arrived at a place, there was nothing, they were hungry for several days, the people were gone, and there was no grain. Lao Lu looked, cough! There is a pigsty, the pigs are gone, the pig food basin is there, there is no way, I held it in my hand. Hey, "There are two whole grains cut into two, it's delicious!" "Lao Lu said this is much tastier than mutton." Better than mutton? "Some people are wondering, alas, what kind of mutton, boiled mutton." Also, the people fled, dragged a sheep, killed it, and burned it on the shelf: no salt! "If you haven't eaten mutton without salt, you can't know how bad it is. What's more, how many days have my stomach been deflated. Tsk, Lao Lu has eaten cotton. That year, (he said that he had time and place, I forgot.) Defeated, retreating one after another. I was so hungry that I couldn't walk, dragging step by step, and some, Lao Lu said, "It collapsed like an empty pocket." "Dazed," the team was like a rotten grass rope with rotten straw sandals, a team of ghosts. "I'm really hungry. Lao Lu didn't think it was himself. But I have to go, walking on the big flat ground where I can't see a low tree or a stone at a glance. There was no trace of strength in his body, and his eyelids were still a little strong, so he didn't hold on, so he pulled it down. Lao Lu saw that the clothes of the person in front of him were torn, and white cotton bloomed, "Eat cotton!" The front and back bellies were pasted," Lao Lu's face darkened, "Cotton, that is, stuffed into the belly, there is something something." What does it look like to eat it, and what does it look like to pull it out!" "This, we know, fiber is not very dissolvable. But I really didn't expect this little bit of wisdom to be used here. This kind of thing is still not a "habit" for us. Life is exhausted to the last bit, and it can actually come back. This reminds you of when you blew the lamp when you were a child, and when you saw that it was about to go out, you breathed a sigh of relief, and it became prosperous again, turning from green to red, and it was immediately bright. This is incredible. And what does this experience mean to Lao Lu itself? Oh, this problem is not very "ordinary", we don't have to worry about him. However, Lao Lu still does not hurt him as an old Lu without going through these things? As for Lao Lu, he hopes to live a stable life.老鲁这一辈子“下来”过好几次。他在上海南京都住过。下来时，大概都有了点钱。他说在上海曾有过两间房子，想来还开个小铺子的。南京他弄过一个磨坊。这是抗战以前的事。一打仗，他摔下就跑了。临走时磨坊里还有一百六十多担麦子。离开南京，他身上还有点钱，钱慢慢花完了，“又干上咧”。老鲁是“活过来的”了。他不大怀念那个过去。只有一次，我见他颇为惘然的样子。黄昏的时候，在那个茶棚前，一队驮马过去。赶马的是个小姑娘，呵叱一声，十头八匹马一起撒开步子，背上一个小木鞍桥郭搭郭搭敲着马脊背直响。老鲁细着眼睛，目送过去，兀立良久。他舌尖顶着牙龈肉打了个滚。但在他脱下军帽，抓一抓光头时，他已经笑了：“南京城外赶驴子的，都是十七八岁大姑娘，一根小鞭子，哈哧哈哧，不打站，不歇力，一劲儿三四十里地，一串几十个，光着脚巴鸭子，戴得一头的花！”这么一来，那一百六十担麦子不能折磨他了。老鲁在他的形容中似乎得到一点快乐。“戴得一头的花”，他说得真好。
Lao Lu has "come down" several times in his life. He lived in Shanghai and Nanjing. When he came down, he probably had some money. He said that he had two houses in Shanghai and wanted to open a small shop. He had a mill in Nanjing. This was before the Anti-Japanese War. As soon as the war fell, he fell and ran away. Before leaving, there were still more than 160 loads of wheat in the mill. After leaving Nanjing, he still had some money on him, and the money was slowly spent up, and he "did it again". Lao Lu is "alive". He doesn't miss the past much. Only once, I saw him look quite confused. At dusk, in front of the teahouse, a group of pack horses passed by. It was a little girl who was driving the horse, and with a scolding, ten heads and eight horses walked together, and Guo Da on a small wooden saddle bridge on his back knocked on the back of the horse. Lao Lu squinted his eyes, watched the past, and stood for a long time. He rolled around against the tip of his tongue. But when he took off his military hat and scratched his bald head, he was already laughing: "The people who drive donkeys outside Nanjing are all seventeen or eighteen-year-old girls, a small whip, ha, no standing, no rest, thirty or forty miles, a string of dozens, barefoot ducks, and flowers on one end!" In this way, the one hundred and sixty loads of wheat could not torture him. Lao Lu seemed to get a little happiness in his description. "A flower that wears a head", he said it so well.可是话说回来了，一百六十担麦子是一百六十担麦子呀，不是别的。一百六十担麦子比起一斗四升豆子，就显得更多了。也难怪老鲁要提起好多次。老鲁爱的是钱。他那么挑水，也一半为钱。“公家用的”水挑完了之后还给几个有家眷自己起火的，有孩子，衣服多，不能给人洗的，挑私用的水。多少可以得一点钱。有人问老鲁，“你要钱干甚么？”意思是“你这么样活了大半辈子，还对这个东西认识不清楚么？”有人且告诉他几个故事。某人某人，赤手起家，弄了三部卡车，来回跑缅甸仰光，几千万的家私，一炮也就完了。护国路有所大洋楼，黄铜窗槛绿绒帘子，颤呀颤的沙发椅子，住了一个“扁担”。这扁担挑了二十年，忽然时来运转发了一笔横财，钱是有了，可是人过的极无意思。到了大场面，大家因他是财主，另眼看待，可是他刘姥姥进大观园，手足无措，一身不自在。就是自己家里白磁澡盆都光滑冰冷用着不惯。从前的车站码头上一块吃猪耳朵闷小肠的朋友又没哪个敢来攀附他，实在孤独寞寂，整天摸他的大手。再说，三十年，一个马车夫得了法，房子盖得半条弄，又怎么呢，儿子整天为一块瓦片吵架，一家子鸡犬不宁。老鲁说不是这么说。“眼珠子是黑的，洋钱是白的。我家里挣下的几亩田，一定教叔叔舅舅占了卖了。我回去，我老娘不介意，欢欢喜喜的‘啊，我儿子回来了！’我就是光着屁股也不要紧。别人，我回来吃甚么？”是的。于是老鲁要攒钱，找钱。到我们这里来，第一着是买了一斗四升豆子。老鲁这回下来时本有几个钱，约十万多一点。（我们那学期的薪水一月二万五。）他一来的确作了不少次主人，请老校警喝酒的。连吃带用，又为一个朋友花了四万元。那个朋友队伍上下来，带了一枝枪，想卖，路上让人查到了，关起来，老鲁得为他花钱。剩下那点钱，他就买了豆子了。他这大概是世界上规模最小的屯积了。他想等着起价，不想甚么都涨，豆子直跌！没法，卖给拉马车的。自己常常看见那匹瘦骨嶙峋的白马，掀动大嘴格蹦格蹦的嚼他的豆子。可真气人，一脱手，价钱就俏起来了。
But then again, one hundred and sixty loads of wheat is one hundred and sixty loads of wheat, nothing else. One hundred and sixty loads of wheat is more than a bucket of four liters of beans. No wonder Lao Lu has mentioned it many times. Lao Lu loves money. He carries water so much, half for money. After picking up the "public household" water, it was also given to a few family members who started their own fires, had children, had a lot of clothes, could not be washed by others, and picked up water for personal use. You can get a little money. Someone asked Lao Lu, "What do you want money for?" It means, "You have lived like this for most of your life, and you still don't know this thing clearly?" Someone told him a few stories. Someone started with his bare hands, got three trucks, and ran back and forth to Yangon, Myanmar, tens of millions of furniture, and it was over in one shot. There is a large western-style building on Huguo Road, brass window sills, green velvet curtains, trembling sofas and chairs, and a "flat pole" lives. This flat pole has been picked up for twenty years, and suddenly a windfall has been made, and the money is there, but people live extremely boringly. When it came to the big scene, everyone looked at him differently because he was a rich man, but his grandmother Liu entered the Grand View Garden, at a loss, and felt uncomfortable. Even the white porcelain bathtub at home is smooth and cold, and I am not used to using it. In the past, no friend who ate pig ears and stuffy small intestines on the station wharf dared to cling to him, and he was really lonely and touched his big hands all day long. Besides, in thirty years, a coachman got the law, and the house was built halfway, so what, the son quarreled over a tile all day long, and the family was restless. Lao Lu said otherwise. "The eyeballs are black, and the foreign money is white. The few acres of land earned by my family must have been sold by my uncle and uncle. When I go back, my mother doesn't mind, and she happily says, 'Ah, my son is back!' It doesn't matter if I'm bare-assed. Others, what do I eat when I come back?" "Yes. So Lao Lu wanted to save money and find money. When he came to us, the first thing was to buy a bucket of four liters of beans. Lao Lu had a few money when he came back this time, about a little over 100,000 yuan. (Our salary for that semester was 25,000 yuan a month.) He did become a host many times when he came, inviting the old school police officer to drink. Even the food and use cost another 40,000 yuan for a friend. The friend came down from the team, brought a gun, and wanted to sell it, but someone found it on the way, locked it up, and Lao Lu had to spend money for him. With the remaining money, he bought beans. He is probably the smallest stockpile in the world. He wanted to wait for the price to rise, and he didn't want everything to go up, and the beans plummeted! No, sell it to the carriage. I often see the skinny white horse chewing on his beans. But it's really annoying, as soon as you get rid of it, the price becomes pretty.据我们所知，老鲁后来又把他攒积下来的一点钱“运用”过两次。那是在搬了家以后了。且说我们搬了家。从观音寺搬到白马庙。我是跟老鲁一车子去的。车子，马车。老鲁早已经到那边看过，远远就指给我们看，“那边，树郁郁的，，是了，旁边有个红红的大房子的。”他好像极欢喜，极兴奋。原因大半是那边“有一口大井，就在开水炉子旁边。”昆明的冬天也一点都不冷。老鲁那天可穿得整整齐齐。不知谁送了他一件旧青呢制服，想还是中学时候的东西，老鲁教洗衣老太婆翻了翻，和新的一样。就是小了点。自搬到那边，我住到另一地方，许多事都不大清楚了。过年了，（自然是阴历）一清早到学校看看，学校各处打扫得干干净净。房子算是洋房了，台阶上还有几盆花。老吴门上贴了副春联：
As far as we know, Lao Lu later "used" the little money he had saved twice. That was after we moved. Let's say we moved. Moved from Guanyin Temple to White Horse Temple. I went with Lao Lu in a car. Car, carriage. Lao Lu had already seen it over there, and pointed out to us from a distance, "Over there, the trees are lush, , yes, there is a big red house next to it." He seemed to be very happy and excited. Most of the reason is that there is a big well, right next to the boiling water stove. "Winter in Kunming is not cold at all. Lao Lu can be dressed neatly that day. I don't know who gave him an old green tweed uniform, I think it's still from middle school, Lao Lu taught the old laundry woman to turn it over, and it was the same as new. It's just a little smaller. Since I moved there, I have lived in another place, and many things are not very clear. It's the Chinese New Year, (naturally the lunar calendar) I went to school early in the morning to take a look, and the school was cleaned everywhere. The house is considered a bungalow, and there are still a few pots of flowers on the steps. A pair of Spring Festival couplets are posted on the door of Lao Wu:一夜连双岁
五更分二年
Overnight and two years The five watches are divided into two years是他自己手笔。我猛然想起从前在家里吃的莲子羹来。而老鲁来了，“汪先生来了！”给我作了个揖算拜年。我想起，掏了一千块钱给他。一会儿老吴也来了，我听说他现在地位高了，介乎工役与职员之间了，刚才见面已打了个招呼，怎么……老吴穿校长送他的咖啡色西服。我没等他表示甚么，又掏出一千，说“我昨天赢了钱，你打酒喝。”我心里一算，一共三千，留一千我自己，刚好！其时我身边有个人望着我笑。本说我请客看电影的，现在只有让她请我，一千元留着买一包吉士斐儿。——自此，老吴以“大总管”自居，常衔了个旧烟斗，各处看来看去。有时在办公室门口大叫“老——鲁！”“耳朵上哪去了！”“要关照多少次？”老鲁对老吴说得上是恨，除了老吴暴病死了，他才会忘记，且会拿出一点钱为他花一花的吧。而且有一个姓胡的校警写了封信给校长，说，“东西是新的好，人是旧的好，”也回来了。胡，二十几岁，派头很新，全是个学生样子，多少事情都由他办了。老鲁就显得更不重要。老鲁似乎很不快乐。——老鲁是因此而不快乐？我知道的，老鲁有一笔钱“陷住了”。老鲁攒积攒积也有卯二十万样子。这钱为一个事务员借去，合资托一个朋友买了谷子。事情不知怎么弄的，久久未有下文。常见老鲁在他的茶炉间独自吃饭，——这时他离群索居，校警之中只一个老刘还有时带了条大狗到他屋子玩玩，来跟他一处吃饭，老鲁是几乎顿顿喝酒。“吃了，喝了，都在我肚子里，谁也别想。”意思是有谁想他的钱似的。我还是不懂，老鲁哪里来的牢骚呢，这样一个人？后来且见他一来就一盘二三十个包子请客，请厨子，请一个女教员所雇女工。我想，这可不得了，老鲁这个花法！渐渐知道，喝，老鲁做了老板了。这包子是学校旁边一个小铺子来的，铺子有老鲁十几万股本。果然，老鲁常蹲在包子铺门前抽他的烟筒，呼噜呼噜。他拿那个新烟筒向我照了照：
It was his own handwriting. I suddenly remembered the lotus seed soup I used to eat at home. And Lao Lu came, "Mr. Wang is here!" "He gave me a bow and greetings. I remembered and paid him a thousand yuan. After a while, Lao Wu also came, I heard that he is now in a high position, between labor and staff, and he has said hello when we met just now...... Lao Wu wore a coffee-colored suit given to him by the principal. I didn't wait for him to say anything, took out another thousand, and said, "I won money yesterday, you drink and drink." I calculated in my heart, a total of three thousand, and I left one thousand for myself, just right! At that time, someone next to me looked at me and smiled. I originally said that I was treating guests to watch a movie, but now I can only ask her to invite me, and keep 1,000 yuan to buy a pack of Guisfield. ——Since then, Lao Wu has regarded himself as the "big manager", often holding an old pipe and looking around. Sometimes he shouted at the door of the office, "Lao-Lu!" "Where did the ears go!" "How many times do you want to take care of it?" Lao Lu can be said to hate Lao Wu, except for Lao Wu who died of a sudden illness, he will forget, and he will take out a little money to spend for him. And a school policeman surnamed Hu wrote a letter to the principal, saying, "Things are good when they are new, and people are good at old," and he also came back. Hu, in his twenties, is very new, looks like a student, and he does many things. Lao Lu is even less important. Lao Lu seems to be very unhappy. ——Is Lao Lu unhappy because of this? I know that Lao Lu has a sum of money "stuck". Lao Lu has saved up 200,000 yuan. The money was borrowed for a clerk and a joint venture was asked to buy millet by a friend. I don't know how things happened, and there has been no follow-up for a long time. It is common for Lao Lu to eat alone in his tea stove,—— at this time he lives alone, and only one of the school policemen, Lao Liu, sometimes brings a big dog to his house to play and come to eat with him, and Lao Lu almost drinks every time. "Eat, drink, it's all in my stomach, no one thinks." It means that anyone thinks about his money. I still don't understand, where did Lao Lu complain, such a person? Later, I saw that as soon as he came, he treated guests with a plate of twenty or thirty buns, invited the chef, and invited a female worker hired by a female teacher. I thought, this is amazing, Lao Lu's trick! Gradually I knew, drink, Lao Lu became the boss. This bun came from a small shop next to the school, and the shop had Lao Lu's more than 100,000 shares. Sure enough, Lao Lu often squatted in front of the bun shop and smoked his cigarette, purring. He took the new cigarette and took a picture of me:“我买了个高射炮！”
佛笃吹着纸媒，抽了一袋，非常满意的样子。
“到云南来，有钱的没钱的，带两样东西回去。有钱的，带斗鸡。云南出斗鸡。没钱，带个水筒，——高射炮！”
"I bought an anti-aircraft gun!" Buddha Du blew on the paper media and smoked a bag, looking very satisfied. "When you come to Yunnan, if you have money or not, bring two things back. If you have money, bring cockfighting. Yunnan produces cockfighting. If you don't have money, bring a water bottle ,—— anti-aircraft gun! ”我挪过一张小凳子，靠门坐下来。门前是一道河，河里汤汤流水，水上点点萍叶，一群小鸭子叱叱咤咤向东，而忽而折向南边水草丛中。呵，鸭子不能叫小鸭子了，颜色早已都黑了。一排尤加利树直直的伸上去。叶子从各种方向承受风吹，清脆有金石声。上头是云南特有的蓝天，圆圆的覆下来。牛哞，哪里有舂臼声音。八年了，我来到云南。胜利了也快十个月。一起吃灰藋菜豆壳虫的都差不多离去了。阿——契诃夫主张每一篇小说都该把开头与结尾砍去，有道理！（幸好我这不是小说。）我起来，检了块石头奋力一掷，看它跌在水里。
I moved a small stool and sat down against the door. In front of the door was a river, with flowing water, duckweed leaves on the water, and a flock of ducklings roaring eastward, and suddenly turning south into the water and grass. Oh, ducks can't be called ducklings anymore, the color has long been black. A row of eucalyptus trees stretched straight up. The leaves were blown by the wind from all directions, and there was a crisp sound of gold and stone. Above is the blue sky unique to Yunnan, which is round and covered. Cow moo, where is the sound of pounding mortars. Eight years later, I came to Yunnan. It's been almost ten months since I won. Those who eat gray shepherd and bean shell worms together are almost gone. Ah - Chekhov advocates that every novel should cut off the beginning and end, which makes sense! (Thankfully, I'm not fiction.) I got up, checked a stone, and threw it hard to see it fall into the water.现在，我离开云南将二个月了，好快！
Now, I've been away from Yunnan for almost two months, so fast!
[1] 本篇原载《文艺复兴》1947年第三卷第二期。初收《邂逅集》，文化生活出版社1949年4月，文字略有改动；又收《汪曾祺短篇小说选》，北京出版社1982年2月，文字有较大改动。

1946年

1946年
[1] This article was originally published in Renaissance, Volume 3, Issue 2, 1947. The first collection of "Encounter Collection", Cultural Life Publishing House, April 1949, the text was slightly changed; and "Selected Short Stories of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Publishing House, February 1982, the text was greatly changed. In 1946复仇[1]
复仇[1]复仇者不折镆干。
复仇者不折镆干。——庄子
——庄子一枝素烛，半罐野蜂蜜。他眼睛现在看不见蜜，蜜在罐里，罐子在桌上，他坐在榻子上。但他充满感觉，浓，稠。他嗓子里并不泛出酸味，他胃口很好。他常有好胃口，他一生没有呕吐过几次。说一生，他心里一盘算，一生该是多少呀，我这是一生了么？没有关系，这是个很普通的口头语。就像那和尚吧，——和尚是常常吃蜂蜜？他的眼睛眯了眯，因为烛火跳，跳着一大堆影子。他笑了一下：蜂蜜跟和尚连在一起，他心里有了一个称呼，“蜂蜜和尚”。这也难怪，蜂蜜，和尚，后面隐了“一生”两个字。然而他摇了摇头，这不行的，和尚是甚么和尚都行，真不该是蜂蜜和尚。明天我辞行时真的叫他一声，他该怎么样？和尚倒有个称呼了，我呢？他称呼我甚么客人，若真叫，该不是“宝剑客人”吧。（他看见和尚看见他的剑！）这蜂蜜——他想起来的时候似乎听见蜜蜂叫。是的，有蜜蜂叫。而且不少。（足以浮起一个人。）残余的声音在他耳朵里。（我这是怎么回事，这和尚我真的叫他一声倒好玩，我简直成了个孩子。这真的是不相干。这在人一生中有甚么意义！而从这里我开始我今天晚上，而明天又从这里连下去。人生真是好玩得说不清。）……他忽然觉得这是秋天，从蜜蜂的声音里。从声音里如此微妙的他感到一身轻爽。这可一点没有错，普天下此刻写满一个“秋”。他想哪里开了一大片山花，和尚，和尚摘花，实在是好看。殿上钵里有花，开得好，像是从钵里升起一蓬雾，那么冉冉的。猛一下子他非常喜欢那和尚。
A plain candle, half a jar of wild honey. His eyes can't see the honey now, the honey is in the jar, the jar is on the table, and he is sitting on the couch. But he is full of feelings, thick, thick. His throat does not smell sour, he has a good appetite. He often has a good appetite, and he has not vomited several times in his life. Speaking of life, he calculated in his heart, how much should a life be, am I a lifetime? It doesn't matter, this is a very ordinary colloquialism. Just like that monk,—— Does the monk often eat honey? His eyes narrowed, because the candlelight jumped, and a lot of shadows jumped. He smiled: Honey is connected to the monk, and he has a name in his heart, "Honey Monk". No wonder, honey, monk, the word "life" is hidden behind it. However, he shook his head, this is not good, the monk can be any monk, he really shouldn't be a honey monk. Tomorrow when I leave, I really call him, what should he do? The monk has a name, what about me? What kind of guest does he call me, if he does, it should not be a "sword guest". (He saw the monk see his sword!) This honey - when he remembered, he seemed to hear bees calling. Yes, there were bees. And quite a few. (Enough to float a person.) The remnants of the sound were in his ears. (What's going on with me, this monk I really call him fun, I have become a child.) This really has nothing to do with it. What does this mean in a person's life! And from here I start my tonight, and tomorrow I will continue from here. Life is so fun that I can't explain it clearly. ）…… He suddenly felt that it was autumn, from the sound of bees. From such a subtle sound, he felt light. There is nothing wrong with this, the whole world is full of "autumn" at this moment. He thought where a large area of mountain flowers had bloomed, monk, monk picking flowers, it was really beautiful. There are flowers in the bowl in the hall, blooming well, like a mist rising from the bowl, so gradually. All of a sudden, he liked the monk very much.和尚出去了，一稽首，随便而有情，教人舒服。和尚呀，你是行了无数次礼而无损于你的自然，是自然的行了这些礼？和尚放下蜡烛，说了几句话，不外是庙里没有甚么，山高，风大气候凉，早早安息。和尚不说，他也自听见。和尚说了，他可没有听。他是看着和尚，和尚直是招他爱。他起来一下，和尚的衣袖飘了飘。这像甚么，勉强说，一只纯黑的大蝴蝶。我知道这不像，这实在甚么也不像，只是和尚，我已经记住你飘一飘袖子的样子。——这蜡烛尽是跳。
The monk went out, bowed his head, casually and affectionately, and taught people to be comfortable. Monk, have you performed countless bows without harming your nature, or have you performed these salutes naturally? The monk put down the candle and said a few words, nothing but that there was nothing in the temple, the mountains were high, the wind was strong, the climate was cool, and he had a good night's rest. The monk didn't say anything, but he heard it himself. The monk said, but he didn't listen. He looked at the monk, and the monk's sleeves fluttered. What does this look like, barely say, a big pure black butterfly. I know it's not like it, it's really not like anything, it's just that monk, I already remember the way you fluttered your sleeves. ——This candle is all jumping.此刻他心里画不出一个和尚。他是想和尚若不把脑袋剃光，他该有一头多好的白头发。一头亮亮的白发闪了一下。和尚的头是光光的而露得出他的发的白。
白发的和尚啊，
他是想起他的白了发的母亲。
At this moment, he couldn't draw a monk in his heart. He was thinking about how good white hair the monk would have if he didn't shave his head. A bright white hair flashed. The monk's head was shiny and the white of his hair was exposed. O white-haired monk, He was thinking of his gray-haired mother.山间的夜来得快！这一下子多静。真是日入群动息。刚才他不就觉得一片异样的安定了，可是比起来这又迥然是一个样子。他走进那个村子，小蒙舍里有孩子读书，马有铃铛，桔槔敲，小路上新牛粪发散热气，白云从草垛上移过去，梳辫子的小姑娘穿银红褂子。一切描写着静的，这一会全代表一种动。他甚至想他可以作一个货郎来添一点声音的，在这一会可不能来万山间泼朗朗摇他的小鼓。
The night in the mountains is coming fast! How quiet it is all of a sudden. It's really a group of people. Just now he didn't feel strangely stable, but compared to this, it was very different. He walked into the village, there were children studying in the small Mengshe, horses had bells, oranges were ringing, new cow dung on the path was emitting heat, white clouds moved over from the haystack, and the little girl with braids was wearing a silver red coat. Everything is described as quiet, and this meeting all represents a kind of movement. He even thought that he could be a cargo man to add a little sound, and he couldn't come to the mountains to shake his little drum loudly at this meeting.货郎的泼朗鼓摇在小石桥前，那是他的家。
The merchant's drum shook in front of the small stone bridge, which was his home.这教他知道刚才他是想了他的母亲。而投在他母亲的线条里着了色的忽然又是他妹妹。他真愿意有那么一个妹妹，像他在这山村里见到的，穿银红褂子，干干净净，在门前井边打水。青石井栏，井边一架小红花。她想摘一朵，一听到母亲纺车声音，觉得该回家了，不早了。“我明天一早来摘你，你在那里，我记得。”她也可以指引人上山，说：“山上有个庙，庙里和尚好，会让你歇脚。”旅行人于是一看山，觉得还不高。小姑娘旅行人都走了。小姑娘提水，旅行人背包袱。剩下一口井。他们走了半天，井栏上余滴还丁丁东东落回井里。村边大乌柏树显得黑黑的，清清楚楚，夜开始向它合过来。磨麦子的骡子下了套，呼呼的石碾子停在一点上。所有的山村都一样。
This taught him that he was thinking of his mother just now. And the color cast in his mother's lines was suddenly his sister. He really wanted to have such a sister, like the one he saw in this mountain village, wearing a silver and red coat, clean and drawing water by the well in front of the door. Bluestone well railing, a small red flower by the well. She wanted to pick one, but when she heard the sound of her mother's spinning wheel, she thought it was time to go home, it was not too early. "I'll pick you early tomorrow morning, you're there, I remember." She can also guide people up the mountain, saying, "There is a temple on the mountain, and the monks in the temple are good, and they will let you rest." The traveler then looked at the mountain and felt that it was not high. The little girl and the travelers are gone. The little girl carried water, and the traveler carried his baggage. There was a well left. They walked for a long time, and the remaining drops on the well railing fell back into the well. The big black cypress tree on the edge of the village looked dark and clear, and it began to close to it at night. The mule grinding the wheat was set up, and the whirring stone mill stopped at one point. All mountain villages are the same.想起他妹妹时他母亲是一头乌青的头发。摘一朵花给母亲戴该是他多愿意的事。可是他没见过母亲戴一朵花。就这朵不戴的花决定他一个命运。
“母亲呀，多少年来我叫你这一声。
我没有看见你的老。”
When he thought of his sister, his mother had black hair. Picking a flower for his mother to wear should be something he would be willing to do. But he had never seen his mother wear a flower. This flower that he didn't wear decided his fate. "Mother, how many years have I called you this? I didn't see your old age. ”于是他母亲是一个年青的眉眼而戴着一头白发。多少年来这头白发在他心里亮。他真愿意有那么一个妹妹。
可是他没有妹妹，他没有！
So his mother was a young man with white hair. For many years, this white hair has been shining in his heart. He really wanted to have such a sister. But he doesn't have a sister, he doesn't!他在两幅相似的风景里作了不同的人物。“风景不殊”，他改变风景多少？他在画里，又不在。他现在是在山上；在许多山里的一座的一个小庙里，许多庙里的一个的小小禅房里。世上山很多，庙太少。他感到一种严肃。
He made different characters in two similar landscapes. "The scenery is not different", how much has he changed the scenery? He is in the painting, but he is not there. He is now on the mountain; in a small temple in many mountains, in a small meditation room in many temples. There are many mountains in the world, but there are too few temples. He felt a kind of seriousness.这些日子来，他向上，又向上；升高，降低一点，又升得更高。他爬的山太多了。山越来越高，越来越挤得紧。路，越来越细，越来越单调。坐在山顶上，他不难看到一个小小的人，向前倾侧着身体。一步一步，在苍青赭赤间的一条微微的白道上走，低头，又抬头；看一看天，又看一看路；路，画过去，画过去；云过来，他在影子里；云过去，他亮了；蒲公英的絮子沾在他衣服上，他带它们到更高的远处去；一开眼，只一只鸟横掠过视野；鸟越来越少，到后来就只有鹰；山把所有变化都留在身上，于是显得是亘古不变的。可是他不想回头。他看前面，前面甚么也没有，他将要经过那里。他想山呀，你们越来越快，我可是一劲儿那么一个速度走。可是有时候他有点发愁，及至他走进那个村子，抬头一望，他打算明天应该折回去了。这是一条线的最后一点，这些山作成一个尽头。
These days, he goes up and up; rises, lowers a little, and rises higher. He climbs too many mountains. The mountains are getting higher and tighter. The road is getting thinner and more monotonous. Sitting on the top of the mountain, it is not difficult for him to see a small person leaning forward. Step by step, walk on a faint white road between the green and ochre, bow your head, and look up again; look at the sky, and then look at the road; the road, draw the past, draw the past; the clouds come, he is in the shadow; the clouds pass, he lights up; the dandelion fluff stains his clothes, and he takes them to higher distances; as soon as he opens his eyes, only a bird crosses the field of vision; There were fewer and fewer birds, and then there were only eagles; the mountains left all the changes on him, so they seemed to be eternal. But he didn't want to look back. He looked ahead, there was nothing ahead, he was going there. He thought of the mountains, you were getting faster and faster, but I was walking at that speed. But sometimes he was a little worried, and when he walked into the village and looked up, he thought he should turn back tomorrow. This is the last point of a line, and these mountains come to an end.他阖眼了一会，他几乎睡着了，几乎做了一个梦。青苔的气味，干草的气味，风化的石头在他身下酥裂，发出声音，且发出气味。小草的叶子窸窣弹了一下，一个蚱蜢蹦出去。很远的地方飘来一只鸟毛，近了近了，为一根枸杞截住，从声音里他知道那是一根黑的。一块小卵石从山顶上滚下去，滚下去，更下去，落在山下深潭里。从极低的地方，一声牛鸣，反刍的声音，（它的下巴动，淡红的舌头，）升上来，为一阵风卷走。虫蛀着老楝树，一片叶子尝到苦味，它打了个寒噤。一个松球裂开了，寒气伸入鳞瓣。鱼呀，活在多高的水里，你还是不睡？再见，青苔的阴湿；再见，干草的松暖；再见，你搁在胛骨下，抵出一块酸的石头；老和尚敲着磬，现在旅行人要睡了，放松他的眉头，散开嘴边的纹，解开脸上的结，让肩头平摊，腿脚休息。
He closed his eyes for a while, and he was almost asleep, almost dreaming. The smell of moss, the smell of hay, the weathered stones cracked under him, making a sound and smelling. The leaves of the grass rustled, and a grasshopper jumped out. A bird feather floated far away, and when it got closer, it was intercepted by a wolfberry, and he knew from the sound that it was a black one. A small pebble rolled down from the top of the mountain, rolled down, and went down further, and fell into the deep pool below. From a very low place, a cow's neigh, the sound of rumination, (its jaw moved, its red tongue,) rose up and was swept away by a gust of wind. The insect ate the neem tree, and a leaf tasted bitterness, and it shivered. A pine ball cracked, and the cold air reached into the scales. Fish, how high is the water you live in, and you still don't sleep? Goodbye, the dampness of the moss; goodbye, the warmth of the hay; goodbye, you rest under the shoulder blade and hold out a sour stone; The old monk knocked the chime, now the traveler is going to sleep, relax his brows, loosen the lines on his mouth, untie the knots on his face, let his shoulders be flat, and his legs and feet rest.烛火甚么时候灭了，是他吹熄的？
他包在无边的夜的中心，如一枚果仁。老和尚敲着磬。
水上的梦是漂浮的，山顶的梦飞也飞不到哪里去。
When did the candle go out, and did he blow it out? He wrapped it in the center of the boundless night, like a nut. The old monk knocked on the chime. Dreams on the water are floating, and dreams on the top of the mountain can't fly anywhere.他梦见他在哪里，（这可真是一个“哪里”，）在他面前是一面壁直的黑暗，他自己也变细，变细，变长变长，他垂直于那块黑暗，黑暗无穷的高，看也看不尽的高呀！他转一个方向，仍是一样；再转，一样，再转，一样，一样，一样，一样是壁直而平，黑暗。他的梦缺少一面。转，转，转，他挫了下来，像一根长线落在地上。“你稍为圆一点软一点。”于是，黑暗成了一朵莲花，他在一层一层的瓣子里，他多小呀，他找不到自己，他贴着黑的莲花的里壁周游了一次，丁，不时莲花上一颗星，淡绿如磷光，旋起旋灭，余光霭霭，归于寂无。丁，又一声。
He dreamed where he was, (this is really a "where",) in front of him was a straight darkness, he himself became thinner, thinner, longer and longer, he was perpendicular to that darkness, the darkness was infinitely high, and it was inexhaustible! He turned in one direction, and it was still the same; again, again, again, same, same, same, the same wall, the same wall, flat, dark. His dream was missing a side. Turn, turn, turn, he frustrated, like a long line falling to the ground. "You are a little rounder, a little softer." So, the darkness became a lotus flower, he was in the petals layer by layer, how young he was, he couldn't find himself, he wandered around the inner wall of the black lotus flower once, Ding, from time to time a star on the lotus, pale green like phosphorescent light, swirling up and disappearing, the afterglow was hazy, and it returned to silence. Ding, another sound.他醒来。和尚正做晚课。蜡烛烟喷着细沫，蜜的香味如在花里时一样。
这半罐的蜜采自多少朵花！
He woke up. The monk was doing evening lessons. The candle smoke foamed and the scent of honey was the same as when it was in a flower. How many flowers are collected from this half jar of honey!和尚做晚课，一声一声敲他的磬。他追随，又等待，看看到底隔多久敲一次。渐渐的，和尚那里敲一声，他也敲一敲，自然应节，不紧不慢。“此时我若有磬，我也是一个和尚。”一盏即将熄灭，永不熄灭的灯，冉冉的钵里的花。香随烟，烟哪怕遇到一张薄纸就一碰散了，香却目之而透入一切。他很想去看看和尚。
The monk did evening classes, knocking on his chime one by one. He followed and waited to see how often he knocked. Gradually, the monk knocked there, and he also knocked, naturally in accordance with the rhythm and unhurriedly. "If I have a chime at this time, I am also a monk." A lamp that is about to go out, never go out, a flower in a rising bowl. The incense follows the smoke, and even if the smoke touches a piece of tissue paper and disperses, the incense penetrates everything. He really wanted to see the monk.和尚你想必是不寂寞？
你寂寞的意思是疲倦，客人，你也许还不疲倦？
Monk, you must not be lonely? You mean tired, guest, maybe you're not tired yet?这合了句古话：心问口，口问心。客人的手轻轻的触着他的剑。这口剑在他整天握着时他总觉得有一分生疏，他愈想免除生疏就愈觉得其不可能；而到他像是忘了它，才知道是如何之亲切。哪一天他簌的一下拔出来，好了，一切就有了交待。剑呀，不是你属于我，我其实是你的。这是甚么意思？我活了这一生就落得这一句话，多可怜的一句话。和尚你敲磬，谁也不能把你的磬声收集起来吧。于是客人枕手而眠，而他的眼睛张着。和尚，你的禅房本不是睡觉的。我算是在这里过了我的一夜。我过了各种各色的夜，我把这一夜算在里面还是外头？好了，太阳一出，就是白天，都等到有一天再说吧。到明天我要走。
This is in line with the old saying: the heart asks the mouth, the mouth asks the heart. The guest's hand gently touched his sword. He always felt a little rusty when he held this sword all day, and the more he wanted to avoid it, the more he felt that it was impossible; and when he seemed to have forgotten it, he realized how kind it was. One day he pulled it out with a bang, and okay, everything was explained. Sword, you don't belong to me, I am actually yours. What does this mean? I have lived this sentence in my life, what a pitiful sentence. Monk, you strike the chime, no one can collect your chime. So the guest slept with his hands on his pillow, and his eyes were open. Monk, your meditation room was not meant to sleep. I spent my night here. I have had all kinds of nights, should I count this night inside or outside? Okay, as soon as the sun comes out, it's daytime, let's wait until one day. I'm going to leave tomorrow.太阳晒着港口，把盐味敷到坞边杨树叶片上。
海是绿的，腥的，
一只不知名大果子，有头胪大，腐烂，巴掌大黑斑上攒满苍蝇。
贝壳在沙里逐渐变成石灰。
白沫上飞旋一只鸟，仅仅一只。太阳落下去，
The sun basked on the port, and the salt smell was applied to the leaves of the poplar trees by the dock. The sea is green and fishy, An unknown large fruit, with a large, rotten head, palm-sized black spot full of flies. The shells gradually turn into lime in the sand. A bird flew on the white foam, only one. The sun set,黄昏的光映在多少人额头上，涂了一半金。
多少人向三角洲尖上逼，又转身，散开去。生命如同：
一车子蛋，一个一个打破，倒出来，击碎了，
击碎又凝合。人看远处如烟，
自在烟里，看帆篷远去。
The light of dusk is reflected on the foreheads of many people, half painted with gold. How many people pushed up the tip of the delta, turned again, and dispersed. Life is like: A cart of eggs, one by one, broke out, shattered, Shattered and condensed. People look at the distance like smoke, In the smoke, watch the sails go away.来了一船瓜，一船颜色和欲望。
一船是石头，比赛着棱角。也许
一船鸟，一船百合花。
深巷卖杏花。有骆驼，
骆驼的铃声在柳烟中摇。鸭子叫，一只通红的蜻蜓。
惨绿的霜上的鬼火，
A boatload of melons, a boatload of colors and desires came. A boat is a stone, and it is angular. Maybe A boat of birds, a boat of lilies. Selling apricot blossoms in the deep alleys. There are camels, The camel's bell shook in the willow smoke. The duck crowed, a red dragonfly. Ghost fire on the pale green frost,一城灯。嗨客人！
客人，这只是一夜。
A city light. Hi guest! Guest, it's just one night.你的饿，你的渴，饿后的饱餐，渴中得饮，一天疲倦和疲倦的消除，各种床，各种方言，各种疾病，胜于记得，你一一把它们忘却。你知道没有失望，也没有希望，就该是甚么临到你了。你经过了哪里，将来到哪里，是的，山是高的。一个小小的人，向前倾侧着身体，一步一步，在苍青赭赤之间的一条微微的白道上走。你为自己感动不？
Your hunger, your thirst, the full meal after hunger, the drink in thirst, the elimination of the tiredness and fatigue of the day, all kinds of beds, all kinds of tongues, all kinds of diseases, better than remembering, you forget them one by one. You know that there is no disappointment, no hope, what should come to you. Where you have passed, where you will go, yes, the mountains are high. A small man, leaning forward, step by step, walks on a faint white path between the green and ochre. Are you moved by yourself?“我知道我并不想在这里出家！”
"I know I don't want to become a monk here!"他为自己的声音吓了一跳。随后，像瞒着自己他想了一想佛殿。这和尚好怪，和尚是一个，蒲团是两个。蒲团，谁在你上面拜过？这和尚，总像不是一个人。他拜一拜，像有一个人随着一起拜。翻开经卷，像有人同时翻开另一卷。而他现在所住这间禅房，分明本不是和尚住的。
He was startled by his voice. Then, as if hiding from himself, he thought about the Buddha temple. This monk is so strange, there is one monk and two futons. Futuan, who has worshipped on you? This monk always seems to be not alone. He bowed as if someone was worshipping with him. Opening the scriptures, it was like someone opening another volume at the same time. And the meditation room where he lives now is clearly not a monk's residence.这间屋，他一进来就有一种从未有过的感觉。墙非常非常的白，非常非常的平，一切方而且直，严厉逼人。（即此证明并非是老和尚的。）而在方与直之中有一件东西就显得非常非常的圆。不可移动，不能更改，白的嵌着黑的，白与黑之间划得分明。那是一顶大极了大极了的笠子。笠子本来不是这颜色，发黄，转褐，加深，最后乃是黑的。顶尖是一个宝塔形铜顶子，颜色也黑了，一两处锈出绿花。这笠子如今挂在这里，让旅行人觉得不舒服。拔出剑，他出门去。
In this room, as soon as he entered, he had a feeling he had never felt before. The walls were very, very white, very, very flat, everything was square and straight, and it was strict. (That is, this proves that it is not the old monk's.) And there is one thing in the square and straight that looks very, very round. It is immovable, cannot be changed, white is embedded with black, and the white and black are clearly separated. It was a very big, very big hat. The hat was not originally this color, yellow, brown, deepened, and finally black. At the top was a pagoda-shaped copper top, which was also black in color, and rusted green flowers in one or two places. This hat is now hanging here, making travelers feel uncomfortable. Drawing his sword, he went out.他舞他的剑。
他是舞他自己，他的爱和他的恨，最高的兴奋，最大的快乐，最汹涌的愤怒，他沉酣于他的舞弄。
把剑收住，他一惊，有人呼吸。
“是我，舞得好剑。”
He dances his sword. He dances himself, his love and his hatred, the highest excitement, the greatest joy, the most turbulent anger, and he indulges in his dance. Put away the sword, he was startled, and someone breathed. "It's me, a good sword."是和尚，他真是一惊，和尚站得好近，我差点没杀了他。
他一身都是力量，一直到指尖，一半骄傲，一半反抗，他大声说出：
“我要走遍所有的路。”
It's the monk, he was really surprised, the monk stood so close that I almost didn't kill him. He was full of strength, all the way to his fingertips, half proud, half resistant, and he said loudly: "I'm going to go all the way."他看看和尚，和尚的眼睛好亮，他看他眼睛有没有讥刺，和尚如果激怒他，他会杀了和尚！和尚好像并不为他的话，他的声音所撼动。半晌平平静静，清朗的说：
“很好。有人还要从没有路的地方走过去。
He looked at the monk, the monk's eyes were so bright, he saw if there was any sarcasm in his eyes, if the monk provoked him, he would kill the monk! The monk didn't seem to be shaken by his words, his voice was shaken. After a while, he was calm and said clearly: "Very good. Someone has to walk through a place where there is no road.听，就是他。”
万山百静之中有一种声音，丁丁的，坚决的，从容的，从一个深深的地方迸出来。
我几乎忘了，这旅行人，他是个遗腹子。
Listen, it's him. ” There is a voice in the silence of the mountains, dingding, resolute, calm, bursting out from a deep place. I almost forgot that this traveler, he was a posthumous child.他母亲怀着他时，他父亲教仇人杀了，抬回家来，只剩得一个气。说出仇人的名字，就死了。母亲解出他手里的剑。仇人的名字则经她用针刺在儿子手臂上，又涂了蓝。那口剑，在他手里。他到处找，按手臂上名字找那个人，为父亲报仇。
When his mother was pregnant with him, his father taught his enemy to kill him and brought him home, leaving only one breath. He said the name of his enemy and died. His mother untied the sword from his hand. The name of the enemy was pierced by her son with a needle and painted blue. The sword was in his hand. He searched everywhere, by name on his arm, to find the man to avenge his father.也许这是很重要的。
不过他一生中没有叫过一声父亲。
真的，有一天他找到那个仇人，他只有一剑把他杀了，他没有话跟他说。他怕自己说不出话来。
有时候他更愿意自己被那个仇人杀了。
Maybe that's important. But he never called his father in his life. Really, one day he found the enemy, and he killed him with only one sword, and he had nothing to say to him. He was afraid that he would not be able to speak. Sometimes he would rather be killed by that enemy.父亲与仇人，他一样想象不出是甚么样子。小时候有人说他像父亲。现在他连自己样子都不大清楚。
有时他对仇人很有好感，虽然他一点不认识他。
这确是一个问题，杀了那个人他干甚么？
He couldn't imagine what his father and his enemies were like. When he was a child, some people said he looked like his father. Now he doesn't even know what he looks like. Sometimes he has a good impression of his enemies, although he doesn't know him at all. This is indeed a question, what did he do when he killed that person?既然仇人的名字几乎代替他自己的名字，他可不是借了那个名字而存在的？仇人死了呢？
“我必是要报仇的！
“我跟你的距离一天天近了。
“我如果碰到，一看，我就知道是你。
Since the enemy's name almost replaces his own, doesn't he exist by borrowing that name? What about the enemy dead? "I will take revenge! "I'm getting closer to you day by day. "If I meet you, I will know it's you.“即使我一生找不到你，我这一生是找你的了。”
这末一句的声音啊。
"Even if I can't find you in my life, I'm looking for you in this life." The last sentence of the voice.第二天，一天亮，他跑近一个绝壁。这真是一个尽头，回身来，他才看见天，苍碧嶙峋，不可抗拒的力量压下来。他呼吸细而急，太阳穴跳动，脸色发青，两股贴紧，汗出如浆。剑在他背上，很重。而在绝壁的里面，像是从地心里，发出丁丁的声音，坚决而从容。
The next day, at dawn, he ran close to a cliff. This was really an end, and when he turned around, he saw the sky, green and irresistible, pressing down. He breathed thin and rapidly, his temples were beating, his face was blue, his legs were tight, and he was sweating like pulp. The sword was on his back, very heavy. And inside the cliff, it seemed to come from the center of the earth, making a tintin sound, resolute and calm.他走进绝壁。好黑，半天，他甚么也看不见。退出来？他像是浸在冰水里。而他的眼睛渐渐能看见前面一两尺地方，他站了一会，稳住自己。丁，一声，一个火花，赤红的。丁，又一个。风从洞口吹进来，吹在他背上。咽了一口唾液，他走进去。他听见自己跫跫足音，这个声音鼓励他，教他不踉跄，有样子。里面越走越窄，他得弓着身子。他直视前面，一个一个火花爆出来。好了，到了尽头。到尽头，是一堆长头发，一个人，匍匐，一手錾子，一手锤头，正开凿膝前的方寸。像是没有听见有人来，他不回头。渐渐的，他向上开凿，他的手举起，举起，旅行人看见两只僧衣的袖子，他披及腰下的长发抖动一下。他举起，举起，旅行人看见那一双手，奇瘦，露骨，全是筋。旅行人向后退一步。和尚把头回过来一下。只一双眼睛，从纷披的长发后面闪出来。旅行人木然。举起举起，火花，火花，再来一个，火花！他差点没晕过去：和尚的手臂上赫然是三个字，针刺的，涂蓝的，是他父亲的名字。一时，他甚么也不见，只有那三个字。一笔一划，他在心里描了那三个字。丁，一个火花，字一跳动。时间从洞外飞逝，一卷白云从洞口掠过。他简直忘记自己背上的剑了，或则是他自己整个消失就剩得这口剑。他缩小缩小，至于没有。然后又回来，回来，好了，他的脸色由青转红，他自己充满于躯体，剑！他拔剑在手。
He walked into the cliff. It was so dark, for a long time, he couldn't see anything. Exit? He seemed to be immersed in ice water. And his eyes gradually could see a foot or two ahead, and he stood for a while, steadying himself. Ding, a sound, a spark, red. Ding, another one. The wind blew in from the hole and blew on his back. Swallowing a mouthful of saliva, he walked in. He heard his own sarcastic footsteps, which encouraged him and taught him not to stumble, to look good. It got narrower and narrower, and he had to hunch. He looked straight ahead, and sparks burst out one by one. Okay, it's over. At the end, there was a pile of long hair, a person, crawling, chiseling in one hand and hammering in the other, chiseling an inch in front of his knees. As if he didn't hear anyone coming, he didn't look back. Gradually, he chiseled upwards, his hands were raised, raised, and the traveler saw the sleeves of the two monk's robes, and his long hair below his waist shook. He lifted it up, lifted it, and the traveler saw the hands, extremely thin, exposed, full of tendons. The traveler took a step back. The monk turned his head back. Only a pair of eyes flashed out from behind the long hair. The traveler was dumbfounded. Lift up, spark, spark, another one, spark! He almost didn't faint: there were three words on the monk's arm, needle pricked, blued, and his father's name. For a while, he saw nothing, only those three words. With one stroke, he drew those three words in his heart. Ding, a spark, a word jumped. Time flew outside the cave, and a white cloud passed by the cave. He simply forgot the sword on his back, or he disappeared completely, leaving this sword behind. He shrank and shrunk, as for nothing. Then he came back, came back, okay, his face turned from green to red, and he himself was full of body, sword! He drew his sword in his hand.从容的，坚决的，丁丁的声音；火花，紫赤晶明。
忽然他相信他母亲一定已经死了。
“铿”的一声。
他的剑落回鞘里。第一朵锈。
Calm, resolute, Tintin's voice; sparks, amethyst crystals. Suddenly he believed that his mother must have died. There was a "clang". His sword fell back into its sheath. The first rust.他看了看自己脚下，脚下是新凿的痕迹。而在他脚前，另一付锤錾摆着。他俯身，拾起来。和尚稍为往旁边挪过一点。
两滴眼泪闪在庙里白发的和尚的眼睛里。
He looked at his feet, and there were traces of new chisels under his feet. And in front of his feet, another hammer was swinging. He leaned over and picked it up. The monk moved slightly to the side. Two tears flashed in the eyes of the white-haired monk in the temple.有一天，两付錾子会同时凿在空里。第一线由另一面射进来的光。
廿九年初稿
卅四年底重写
卅五年一月又重写
One day, two chisels will be chiseled in the air at the same time. The first line of light coming in from the other side. Twenty-nine first drafts Rewritten at the end of the thirty-fourth year It was rewritten again in January of the thirty-fifth year.
[1] 本篇原载《文艺复兴》1946年第一卷第四期。初收《邂逅集》，文化生活出版社1949年4月，文字有较大改动；又收《汪曾祺短篇小说选》，北京出版社1982年2月，文字又有较大改动。
[1] This article was originally published in Renaissance, Volume 1, Issue 4, 1946. The first collection of "Encounter Collection", Cultural Life Publishing House, April 1949, the text has been greatly changed; "Selected Short Stories of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Publishing House, February 1982, the text has been greatly changed.

前天

前天[1]
前天，哦，我差一点送了命。
The day before yesterday{{id_0000}} The day before yesterday, oh, I almost lost my life.我很难计算这么一句话里的感情。我请你不把它看得太佻达，也不弄得太感伤，我意思本不如此。如果我说“差一点就死”，或“差点儿就送了命”，而且语气上更有点……那就不同了。
I have a hard time calculating the feelings in such a sentence. I ask you not to take it too frivolously or sentimentally, I don't mean that. If I say "almost die" or "almost die" and the tone is a little more ...... That's different.晚上，十点钟，天很黑，和一个人从城里坐马车回来。马老了，又跑了一整天，累了。车身太高，重心不稳，车夫吆喝，挥鞭，甚至说话看人都不大在行。“黄土坡！黄土坡。”他把惊叹号用错了！语气加在第一句话上。他走路时脚跟离地不多，拖里沓拉的。我断定他赶车时一定老在车下跑，不惯坐在“车夫座”上（后来证明我的观察极正确）。他不会扣点钱喝酒。或来两把“八点，十三！”他一定跟我一样，数票子数得也很慢。我对这个绝无近代生活中紧张气味的马车夫很有兴趣（倒不是说马车本身是个过去的东西。昆明一般马车夫都在农民的淳朴笨拙上盖上一层工人式的狡猾与机警，正充分象征这个暴发的都市）。高高的坐在前面，从城里的热风中回到乡下，回到清静，在星星底下，回去，睡眠等着我的疲倦。说不定我在床上还可以看一封信，……我有时严肃，有时轻扬，想及许多事情，在马蹄郭得郭得声中，柏油路上。路边杨树白天的浓荫，在星光下唤起一分沁人甘凉。
In the evening, at ten o'clock, it was very dark, and he came back in a carriage from the city with a person. The horse was old, ran all day, and was tired. The body was too high, the center of gravity was unstable, and the coachman shouted, waved his whip, and even looked at people who were not very good at talking. "Loess Slope! Loess. He used the exclamation mark wrong! The tone was added to the first sentence. He walked with his heels not much off the ground, and he dragged his feet. I concluded that he must have been running under the car all the time when he was in the car, and he was not used to sitting in the "coachman's seat" (my observation turned out to be very correct). He wouldn't deduct some money for drinking. Or two "Eight, thirteen!" He must have been like me, and he counted the votes very slowly. I am very interested in this coachman who has no smell of tension in modern life (not that the carriage itself is a thing of the past. The general coachmen in Kunming cover the simple clumsiness of the peasants with a layer of worker-like cunning and alertness, which fully symbolizes this outbreak city). Sitting high in front, returning to the countryside from the hot wind of the city, returning to the quiet, under the stars, going back, sleep waiting for my fatigue. Maybe I can read a letter in bed,...... Sometimes I am serious, sometimes light, thinking about many things, in the sound of horseshoes, on the asphalt. The thick shade of the poplars on the roadside during the day evokes a refreshing coolness under the starlight.路极熟，快了，通过铁道。我知道那个小宝塔立在右边小山上，为无边的夜色所淹没。过铁道了，车子跳一跳。跳出来我的微笑。带我向“过去”那条路走。我想起前年，是冬天，有一个时候，差不多每天早晨，和一个人沿着铁道走，向左，走得相当远。每次心里都觉得就这么走下去，多好。走下去，走到那里去呢？仿佛看到一幅画，远远的，两个人，那么一直走，一定还轻轻说点甚么，因为远了，听不见。也用不着听。这些话若从那里提出来必会失去颜色，那么娇嫩，摘不得。一直走下去，越走越远，走到那里去呢？想到那就是我，是她，于是笑了，我今天的笑就还有那种笑的记忆。但是，每次都相视一笑就回来了。而且都在差不多地方（给那里立个界碑吧）。回来时，照例在小车站上看看等火车的人。他们等车，我们等甚么，照例这些人天天改变，又总是如此就从未有印象留下。我常在站旁摊子上买一包烟。
The road is very familiar, fast, through the railway. I know that the small pagoda stands on the hill on the right, overwhelmed by the boundless night. After crossing the railway, the car jumped. Jumped out of my smile. Take me to the "past" road. I remembered the year before last, it was winter, and there was a time when I walked along the railway with a person almost every morning, to the left, quite far. Every time I feel in my heart, how good it is to just go on like this. Go down, where do you go? It's like seeing a painting, far away, two people, so if you keep walking, you must still say something softly, because you can't hear it because it's far away. You don't need to listen. If these words are brought up from there, they will lose their color, so delicate, and you can't pick them. Keep walking, go farther and farther, where do you go? I thought it was me, it was her, so I smiled, and I still have the memory of that smile today. However, every time I look at each other and smile, I come back. And they are all in the same place (let's put up a boundary marker there). When I came back, I looked at the people waiting for the train at the small station as usual. They waited for the train, what were we waiting for, as usual, these people changed every day, and they were always like this, and they never left an impression. I often buy a pack of cigarettes at the stall next to the station.“为甚么到那边买来，这不是有一个。”
“……怎么没看见？明天买这个的。”
“这个塔怎么上不去？”
"Why did you buy it over there, it's not one." “…… Why didn't you see it? I'll buy this tomorrow." ” "Why can't I go up to this tower?"这怎么回答？好像也无须回答。第一次经过塔时告诉她是个实心的。知道她不满意，塔能上去多好。一同凭塔窗眺望远景，青天，白云，一只鸟，翅膀尖蘸了点天上明蓝，……说到塔，是定得从公路右边，从我马车右边绕回去了。都在差不多时候。
How to answer this? It seems that there is no need to answer. The first time I passed the tower, I told her that she was a solid person. Knowing that she was not satisfied, it would be nice to go up to the tower. Looking at the distant view from the tower window, the blue sky, white clouds, a bird, the tips of its wings dipped in a little blue in the sky,...... Speaking of the tower, it must be from the right side of the road and back from the right side of my carriage. All at about the same time.有一天，我们看见一饼圆圆的冰，冰里开了一枝菜花，开得很好，黄黄的，楚楚可怜。结了冰，（昆明）难得的。“这无疑是曾经养在一个洋铁罐子里的。也许一时要用那个罐子，便倒在这里了。主人当是个洋车夫，或是打更的……”试捡起那块冰，拈在手里一会儿，走了一段，又好好放在路旁，事前事后都用眼睛征询她，她不说甚么，只看着我，心里似乎这么想：“他捡起这块冰，他放下。”她似乎总是用这种眼光看我作一切事情。我如果发出一声惊人的大叫？她一定也还是如此。我带了这块冰走了一段，又好好的放在路边。那天霜很大，太阳可极好，也没有甚么风。空气清新扑面，如早晨刚打开窗子。远近林树安静而清洁。她穿一件浅灰色大衣。……
One day, we saw a cake of round ice, and a cauliflower bloomed in the ice, blooming very well, yellow, and pitiful. Frozen, (Kunming) is rare. "This was undoubtedly kept in a foreign iron jar. Maybe I wanted to use that jar for a while, and it fell here. The owner should be a foreign coachman, or a night watchman...... "Try to pick up the ice, hold it in your hand for a while, walk for a while, put it on the side of the road, and ask her with her eyes before and after, she didn't say anything, just looked at me, and seemed to think in her heart: "He picked up this piece of ice, he put it down." She always seems to look at me with this kind of eyes. What if I let out a scream? She must still be like that. I took the ice for a while and put it on the side of the road. It was a very frosty day, the sun was excellent, and there was no wind. The air was fresh, as if the windows had just been opened in the morning. The trees near and far were quiet and clean. She wore a light gray coat. ……她的手非常非常软和，双手插在大衣袋里。我想我的手也应当插进去。应当的事办不到，自然是不出奇的。我不戴手套。
Her hands were very, very soft, and she was in her coat pocket. I thought my hands should be in them too. It was not surprising that things that should not be done. I don't wear gloves.忽然，全车人大叫起来。惊散了我所含的笑。等我澈底明白是怎么回事时，事情已经过去。一辆既瞎且疯的大卡车，撞在我们马车上了！车不开灯，行驶极快，又不靠左边走，司机想是个广东人，二十来岁。迎头冲原是一种广东作风！幸而车上人在撞到之前即大叫，那个司机急急转过驾驶盘，我们的外行车夫也出于本能急急向左一闪，全车人差点没给掀出来。结果碰在马车轮子上，汽车一溜烟不见了。像一个顽皮孩子扔石头扎了人脑袋，不敢看看究竟如何，头也不回，马上跑了。
Suddenly, the whole car screamed. It shattered my laughter. By the time I understood what was going on, it was over. A big truck that was blind and crazy crashed into our carriage! The car didn't turn on the lights, it was driving very fast, and it didn't go to the left, and the driver thought it was a Cantonese person, in his twenties. Head-on rushing is originally a Cantonese style! Fortunately, the person in the car shouted before hitting it, and the driver turned the steering wheel sharply, and our layman also flashed to the left out of instinct, and the whole car almost didn't lift it out. As a result, it hit the wheels of the carriage, and the car disappeared. Like a naughty child who threw a stone and stabbed someone's head, he didn't dare to see what was going on, and he ran away immediately without looking back.马车夫用外乡口音，不大得体的方式咕咕噜噜骂了几句，用意倒像是给自己听听，末了吼一声“走！”胡里胡涂老马又上了路，得郭，得郭，……
“看一看，那里坏了，能走么？”
The coachman grunted and cursed a few words in a foreign accent and in a not very decent way, but the intention was to listen to himself, and finally roared "Let's go!" The old horse of Huli Hutu went on the road again, got Guo, got Guo,...... "Take a look, it's broken there, can you leave?"“这不是走了，……”说话的人忽然也怀疑起来，车会不会一下子散了？
"Isn't this gone,......" The person who spoke suddenly wondered, will the car break up all of a sudden?轮轴转珠圈裂了，戛戛作响，单调而有节拍。车身更加摇晃。老马喘气声音更重浊。车夫简直不敢坐上来了，只在底下拢住缰辔拖。车上人忽然感到彼此间一种同船共渡的亲近。但是谁也没交谈。也许每个人都各自嚼着一串故事，呼吸声音，了了可闻。
The axle bead ring cracked, rattling, monotonous and beating. The body shook even more. The old horse's panting voice became heavier and muffler. The coachman didn't dare to sit on it, so he just grabbed the reins and dragged it underneath. The people in the car suddenly felt a sense of closeness to each other. But no one spoke. Maybe everyone chewed on a string of stories, breathed sounds, and could be heard.“算了，就慢点吧，莫打它了。”
“靠左边点，又有汽车来了。”
忽然有一个人叫“停了，不坐了，给你钱。”他给了点够到站的钱，大家看着他，不知为甚么。
"Forget it, just slow down, don't hit it." "Keep to the left, and another car is coming." Suddenly a person shouted, "Stop, don't sit down, give you money." He gave some money enough to stand, and everyone looked at him, not knowing why.下来一段路，我跟同伴说，“最多一秒钟，相差。”表声在我心里响了的答一声了。过一会，“如果把腿搁在（车厢）外边？”他说“胳臂也差不多。”
为幸运的偶然，我们笑得非常尽兴。笑得简直有点儿疯。
After a while, I said to my companion, "At most one second, the difference." The watch replied in my heart. After a while, "What if you put your legs outside (the carriage)?" He said, "The arms are about the same." ” By luck, we laughed heartily. We laughed a little crazy.到了家，同伴说，“奇怪，当时并不怕。”当然，这一点都不奇怪。他说“假如一下子……该开追悼会了。”当时似即已想到种种，看到自己遗像在许多花圈，许多零散的花上面。谁在花旁边默默站立，擦了眼泪。谁记起在那一桩事情上曾经有负于死者，一直想找个机会说开了，或不著痕迹的冰释了。谁听到一句他生前的口头语，寂寞的微笑。……我们的疲倦好像延误了，我们有些话要谈，虽然说出的话全不是要说的，他把口袋里东西清理一番，一一看过，又一一装进去，连今天的一点紧张一点笑，一点由于回忆而来的淡淡惆怅。装好时用手揣揣，似乎全都在里边。
When I got home, my companion said, "Strange, I wasn't afraid at the time." Of course, it was not surprising at all. He said, "If all of a sudden...... It's time for a memorial service." At that time, he seemed to have thought of all kinds of things, and saw his portrait on many wreaths and scattered flowers. Who stood silently next to the flowers and wiped away his tears. Who remembered that he had failed the deceased in that matter, and had always wanted to find an opportunity to open up, or the ice melted without a trace. Who heard a spoken word from his lifetime, a lonely smile. …… Our fatigue seemed to be delayed, we had something to talk about, although the words were not to be said, he cleaned up the things in his pockets, looked at them one by one, and put them in one by one, even a little nervous laughter today, a little bit of melancholy due to memories. When it was packed, it seemed that it was all inside.“昆明菜花冬天也开。冰结住了，冰在那里？”
好像没有谁听见我的话。（三月十九日记，夜二时。想起圣路易之稿。）
五月廿三日重抄增改数处

[1] 本篇原载1946年10月13日《经世日报》。
"Kunming cauliflower also blooms in winter. The ice has frozen, where is the ice? ” It seems that no one heard my words. (Diary of March 19, 2 p.m.) I remember the manuscript of St. Louis. ） May 23 Reprinted and added several changes [1] This article was originally published in the Jingshi Daily on October 13, 1946.

磨灭

磨灭[1]
苍蝇搓它的手，它的脚。
（不要打了，苍蝇搓它的手它的脚呢。）
苍蝇的翅膀上有虹彩，颜色如水面上的油花。嗡，飞起了。
天真闷。
Erase {{id_0000}} The fly rubs its hands, its feet. (Don't hit it, the fly rubs its hands and feet.) ） The wings of the fly have iridescent colors, the color is like oil on the water. Buzz, fly up. Innocent and boring.是的，天气真闷。一个乡下人买了一对蜡烛，蜡烛直滴落的油。他的鞋面上也滴了油，着油处加一层薄灰。
在路上，我走了一点二十分，天上的云没有一块变过样子，绝对没有。
Yes, the weather is so stuffy. A countryman bought a pair of candles, and the candles dripped with oil. He also dripped oil on the upper of his shoes, and added a thin layer of ash to the place where the oil was placed. On the way, I walked for a little twenty minutes, and none of the clouds in the sky had changed, absolutely not.好了，张先生大概又不在家。事情呢，本来也没有甚么，回去写信话更好说些。
他不会在家的，他常不在。
Okay, Mr. Zhang is probably not at home again. As for the matter, there was nothing in the first place, so it would be better to go back and write a letter. He won't be at home, he will always be away.我喝我的茶。不在文林街茶馆里喝茶将近两年了。我的头发里全是土！一看就知道从乡下来的。可是，我知道，没有人会注意到我的头。
门口，一个女人洗衣服，木盆里肥皂水着灰青色的泡沫。
I drink my tea. I haven't drunk tea in the Wenlin Street Teahouse for almost two years. My hair is full of dirt! At a glance, you can tell that I came from the countryside. However, I know that no one will notice my head. At the door, a woman washes clothes, and the soap water in the wooden basin is gray-blue foam.我好像喝了一口那样的水。
远远听见郭公鸟叫。
活，这家伙，——
他来了，他坐在我旁边一张桌子上。
“我在文林街看见一个人，好玩极了。”
I seemed to have taken a sip of that water. I heard Guo Gong's bird calling from a distance. Alive, this guy,—— He came, and he sat down at a table next to me. "I saw a person on Wenlin Street, it was fun."“这个人在裤带上拴一条狗，狗在他长袍摆下转来转去。人有人性，兽有兽性，人兽之间的关系，从这里看得出来。”
“噢，我看见过，除了那个打更的，这个人最怪。”
“怪，可是说人兽之间那点儿关系？”
"This man has a dog tied to his trouser belt, and the dog goes around under his robe. Man has human nature, beast has animal nature, and the relationship between man and animal can be seen from here. ” "Oh, I've seen it, except for the night watchman, this person is the weirdest." "Strange, but what about the relationship between humans and animals?"“这是个哲学问题！”
两年了，老李在广西，老张过上海，老陈，不知往那里去了，我们各有这个人一个影子，有如水手胳臂上刺一支锚，一种徽章，一个有箭头穿过的心形，温习起来时，即带来一些“过去”。
"This is a philosophical question!" It's been two years, Lao Li is in Guangxi, Lao Zhang has passed Shanghai, Lao Chen, I don't know where he went, we each have a shadow of this person, like a sailor's arm with an anchor, a kind of badge, a heart shape with an arrow through it, when reviewed, it brings some "past".这个人实在怪。
This person is really strange.那条狗，是条小狗。正是才可以啃动骨头，喜欢窜窜跳跳，对自己极有兴趣的时候。因为正在发育，行动中充满卖弄，富于表情。是一条地道中国种的狗。毛作浅灰色。有时，我想，一个画家想起它来时，大概会添上一点绿的。
That dog is a puppy. It is the time when you can gnaw on bones, like to jump, and are very interested in yourself. Because it is developing, it is full of showiness and expression. It is an authentic Chinese dog. The fur is light gray. Sometimes, I think, when a painter thinks of it, he will probably add a little green.这条狗居然长得极肥，圆头圆脑，毛茸茸的。
这是一种最省事，易成功的配色方法，那个人全身色调与那条狗都极相似。他的长袍，他的铜盆帽。
This dog is actually extremely fat, round-headed, and fluffy. This is the most trouble-free and easy to succeed color matching method, and the tones of that person's whole body are very similar to that dog. His robe, his copper basin hat.他的帽子微微掀在脑后，他的头因为帽子而显得向后扬。一饼紫酱色脸。他眉毛高举，眼角微睁，黑嘴，下唇向外略微突出。因此造成一种傲慢，一种旁若无人，玩世不恭的神情。可是这神情不会引起任何人反感愤怒。一种绝望的苦心，徒然的努力。你可以从下面看出难堪的折磨。无端的迫害与屈辱，一个逐渐疲老的灵魂不断的忍受。一个爱好花，月亮，感伤的音乐，喜欢把小孩子骑在肩上而按拍子跳舞的灵魂。细致的，敏感的灵魂。孤寂的灵魂。一个头等丑角最常有的表情。也正如一个丑角的表演，所望于人的是一阵哄笑。至少，他们许会欣赏他的为某种愿望所作的挣扎，挣扎爬出淹没他自己的愁苦和卑贱之感。哄笑吧，你们的哄笑，可以使他快乐。
His hat was slightly lifted behind his head, and his head was raised back because of the hat. A purple sauce-colored face. His eyebrows were raised high, the corners of his eyes were slightly open, his mouth was black, and his lower lip was slightly protruding outward. Thus it caused an arrogance, a look of ignorance and cynicism. But this look would not arouse anyone's anger. A desperate painstaking effort, a futile effort. You can see the embarrassing torture below. Unprovoked persecution and humiliation, a gradually tired soul endures. A soul who loves flowers, moons, sentimental music, and likes to dance to the beat with children on his shoulders. A delicate, sensitive soul. A lonely soul. The most common expression of a first-class harlequin. Just like a harlequin's performance, what is expected is a burst of laughter. At the very least, they will appreciate his struggle for a certain desire, and his struggle to climb out of the sorrow and lowliness that drowns out of him. Laugh, your laughter can make him happy.然而，没有，并没有哄笑。
天气实在闷。汗流在他颈后的皱纹里，汗沾湿他额前的头发。
他站在先生坡头，先生坡垂直于文林街。
However, no, there was no laughter. The weather was really stuffy. Sweat flowed in the wrinkles on the back of his neck, and sweat soaked the hair on his forehead. He stood at the head of Mr. Slope, which was perpendicular to Wenlin Street.文林街上人来，人往，人下先生坡，人上先生坡。他们画那个丁字，他们流汗。
一个挑水的。水桶里猪耳莲叶子一上一下。两朵淡紫色花在水里投下影子。
People come and go on Wenlin Street, people go down Mr. Slope, people go up Mr. Slope. They draw that T-shape, they sweat. One carries water. The leaves of the pig's ear lotus in the bucket go up and down. Two lilac flowers cast shadows in the water.卖白糖糕的。他的笼里落了不少灰。糕正在时间中变酸。他想吆唤一声“白糖糕，太平糕”，想叫又不叫。
Selling white sugar cakes. A lot of ash fell from his cage. The cake is turning sour in time. He wanted to shout "White sugar cake, Taiping cake", but he wanted to call but didn't.纸烟铺里一个秃头小伙计，睡着了。别睡着呀，别睡着呀，然而他睡着了。口涎沿手臂弯流到一本账簿上，红格子开来了。他笑了。一定是梦见他唯一的亲人，他的外祖母夸奖他真能干。而正在这时候，卖丁丁糖的震耳的敲过他的小小铁砧子！
A bald young man in the cigarette shop fell asleep. Don't fall asleep, don't fall asleep, but he fell asleep. Saliva flowed along his arm to an account book, and a red grid  opened. He laughed. It must have been a dream of his only relative, and his grandmother praised him for being really capable. And at this moment, the Tintin candy seller knocked on his little anvil with a deafening sound!郭公鸟在远远的地方叫。
The Guo Gong bird calls from a distance.那个人，像一朵花，开始萎了。他一切都变得模糊起来，他好像不在焦点上了。吹起他下摆的风在一个墙角撞碎了，散落了，不可收拾，他的酒气小了一点，他两颊陷进去，太阳穴发暗。他的眼睛里不是星，是云。简直，他要一滩一滩的落到地上来。
The man, like a flower, began to wither. Everything blurred in him, he seemed to be out of focus. The wind that blew up his hem shattered in a corner, scattered, out of control, his alcohol smelled a little less, his cheeks sunk, his temples darkened. His eyes were not stars, they were clouds. He was going to fall to the ground in puddles.一辆洋车过来，拐弯了，车夫大叫，声音中充满轻蔑：
“让开！”
他的小狗急急一纵跑出他脚前二尺多远。
于是，完了，一切都完了。
A foreign car came over, turned a corner, and the coachman shouted, his voice full of contempt: "Get out of the way!" His puppy hurriedly ran more than two feet away from his feet. So, it's over, it's all over.一个人若想为他做一点甚么事，最好送他的狗一个铃子，给他系上去。
如果，你要是一个画家，你画他，在背景上，在他的身后，你画许多鸽子么？你画吧。
If a man wants to do something for him, it is best to give his dog a bell and tie it to him. If you were a painter, would you paint him, on the background, behind him, many pigeons? You paint.当真他是饿了。他嘴里发苦。他咽他的唾沫。他的意识如井水的波纹。然而他说话像一个老朋友，不拘形迹，亲昵得近于玩笑，好像拍着别人肩膀说的。然而，声音洪大得不必要。
“老板，可有杂菜！”
He was really hungry. He was bitter in his mouth. He swallowed his saliva. His consciousness was like the ripples of well water. Yet he spoke like an old friend, informal, as if he were patting someone on the shoulder. However, the voice was unnecessarily loud. "Boss, can you have miscellaneous vegetables!"他的发音在他颈内周旋，像在一个坛子里。饿的人最容易为自己声音震动。他成了个音叉。他说杂菜就如同说锅贴鸟鱼五香鸽子糯米鸡。
His pronunciation swirled around his neck, like a jar. Hungry people are most likely to be shaken by their own voices. He became a tuning fork. He said that mixed vegetables are like potstickers, birds, fish, spiced pigeons, glutinous rice chicken.小馆子里几个吃饭的客人抬了一下眼睛。其中有一个为青辣椒气味所炝，打了一个极大的喷嚏。
老板炒他的菜。
半天寂静，寂静得如同一桶奶油。
一只麻雀“得”的一下飞进屋簷窠里。
阴沟里水冒气泡。
Several guests in the small restaurant raised their eyes. One of them was burned by the smell of green chili peppers and sneezed loudly. The boss fried his dishes. Silent for half a day, silent like a bucket of cream. A sparrow flew into the eaves. Water bubbles in the gutter.这老板并不胖，而且说得上是瘦。他的长颈子后面绷得很紧。他舀了一杓子油，用力倒到锅里去，几个油点溅在火里，哄的一声。他蹩足了气力，并不回头大声喷出来：
“没，得！”
This boss is not fat, and he can be said to be thin. The back of his long neck was tight. He scooped a spoonful of oil and poured it into the pot hard, and a few oil drops splashed into the fire, coaxing. He was exhausted and didn't look back and spit out loudly: "No, get it!"他挽了一挽袖子，把小粉拌好的牛肉向锅子里一兜。牛肉完了，又炒了一个番茄豆腐，锅里放上水，配了一个菠菜蛋花汤，鸡蛋打完了，水尚未开，他掏出一枝烟来，叼上，点着火，仍是不回头：
“出去。”
He rolled up his sleeves and pocketed the beef mixed with small powder into the pot. After the beef was finished, another tomato tofu was fried, water was put in the pot, and a spinach egg drop soup was served. "Get out."这两个字是他等着的，可是等得未免太久了，他本来预备好了，“是，是，是——”尾音拖长，提高。他以此娱乐自己，这十足赖皮相，满蓄一种对人世对自己的嘲笑意味。然而等得太久，这句话冷了。他显得很蠢，毫无表示，他出去，在老板的铁杓子下把一个白铁盘子承上去。
These two words were what he had been waiting for, but he had waited too long, and he had been prepared, "Yes, yes, yes—" The ending was prolonged and raised. He entertained himself with this, which was full of superficiality, full of mockery of the world and himself. However, after waiting too long, the sentence became cold. He looked stupid, without saying anything, and went out and took a white iron plate under the boss's ladle.唉，这个盘子实在太大了。
所谓杂菜，剩汁残羹倒在一个桶里准备给人的。
Alas, this plate is just too big. The so-called miscellaneous vegetables, the leftover juice is poured into a bucket and prepared for people.好老板，我看见你特为给他捞了一捞，一个几乎完整的鸡头呢。老板你自己一定也喝酒。你回过头来，你笑了一笑，你笑得好。一年来我还记得那个笑。你跟你家里一定过得不坏，她头上戴了一朵花，我看见。
Good boss, I saw that you specially fished for him, an almost complete chicken head. Boss, you must have drunk yourself. You turned around, you smiled, you smiled well. I still remember that smile for a year. You must be living well with your family, she has a flower on her head, I saw it.他来了。
He's coming.他从先生坡上来，像一只蝉蜕去皮爬出泥土。他一直向这个茶馆里来，好像并非他打定主意要来，而是注定了非来不可。像一根拉长的橡皮必须要缩短似的。那边是他的欲望；这边，他自己。他得过去，在一拥抱之间合而为一，他好像并未认清桌子椅子，像一个旅人倦游归来，甫一进门，即往床上一躺。他落在椅上，伏在桌上。他眼睛向茶馆里看了一下，像一个病人在昏睡中睁一睁眼睛，只觉一片光彩，不能构成任何印象或概念。他不戴帽子，他的头发如疾风中的草，倾倒在手臂上。他呼吸急促，气息嘘嘘。
He came up from the gentleman's slope and crawled out of the dirt like a cicada shedding its skin. He kept coming to this teahouse, as if he had not made up his mind to come, but destined to come. Like an elongated rubber that had to be shortened. Over there was his desire; this way, himself. He had to go over, and in a hug he became one, he seemed to not recognize the table and chair, like a traveler returning from a weary trip, and as soon as he entered the door, he lay down on the bed. He landed on the chair and lay down on the table. He looked into the teahouse like a patient in a coma, and felt only a brilliance that did not constitute any impression or concept. He did not wear a hat, and his hair fell on his arms like grass in a gust of wind. He was breathing rapidly, breathing heavily.“吃一碗茶来。”
"Eat a bowl of tea."他的眼已经不大撕得开，上下眼皮全紫了。一种刺痛，一种教人肌肉收紧，骨盘内缩，脚趾伸挺的煎熬从这两个发烧的球体分出去，注射及于全身。他鼻梁上抽得全是直纹。他鬓边息息跳动。他下唇拖在外面，像一种水果，为唾潄所能润泽的部分通红，熟透了，于是，画一道整齐的线，这一条线以外则不知沾了些甚么东西，全黑了。他下巴尖削，且向外卷，他胡髭已长，略形卷曲。
His eyes were not much open, and his upper and lower eyelids were purple. A tingling, a torment that taught the muscles to tighten, the bone discs to retract, and the toes to stick out, separated from these two feverish spheres and injected into the whole body. The bridge of his nose was full of straight lines. His sideburns were beating. His lower lip dragged outward, like a kind of fruit, red and ripe for the part that could be moistened by spit, so he drew a neat line, and I don't know what was on it outside this line, it was all black. His chin was sharp and curled, and his beard was long and slightly curly.“泡一碗茶。”
"Make a bowl of tea."他并不着急生气，仿佛那杯茶如果要泡来总会泡来的，他好像已经闻着那杯茶的香气，他口舌生津，喉头有点痛。于是他唱歌。他在鼻子里不知哼一种甚么调子，听起来既无节拍，又少高低，然而他浸没在他的歌里，像一只鸭子在泥水里。
He was not in a hurry to get angry, as if that cup of tea would always be brewed if it was to be brewed, he seemed to have smelled the aroma of that cup of tea, his mouth and tongue were drenched, and his throat hurt a little. So he sang. He hummed a tune in his nose, which sounded neither beat nor high, but he was immersed in his song, like a duck in muddy water.他的狗呢？
一个挑水的，你水桶里猪耳莲叶子晃动。
卖白糖糕的，你的糕发酸。
纸烟铺小伙计，打瞌睡。
苍蝇和洗衣女人！
What about his dog? A person carrying water, the leaves of the pig's ear lotus in your bucket are shaking. If you sell sugar cakes, your cakes will be sour. The cigarette shop guy dozed off. Flies and laundry women!你们都来看，看他的虱子。虱子在他的黑大衣（好热！）外面描画复杂的花纹，它们多忙碌！这个人，他干吗，他睡着了？没有没有，喝，哎哟，他把他的鼻子顶在桌上，起来，他的鼻涕流在鼻子与桌子之间，他抬起，俯下；拉长，又压扁；他吸进去又呼出来；快一点，又慢慢的。他专心一志于他的艺术，他扁嘴闭眼睛。
Come and see, look at his lice. The lice are drawing intricate patterns on the outside of his black coat (so hot!) How busy they are! This man, what is he doing, is he asleep? No, no, drink, ouch, he puts his nose on the table, gets up, his snot runs between his nose and the table, he lifts, leans down; lengthens, flattens; he sucks in and exhales; faster, and slower. He concentrates on his art, he flattens his mouth and closes his eyes.嗳嗳嗳，酒瓶酒瓶，他的酒瓶要为他的胳臂推倒了。——好，他扶住了，他一把抓住，他嘴角牵动，他大叫：
“泡，杯，茶！”
这回，真是哭。不是命令，是请求，是叫，他的欲望大叫，他的太浓的血大叫。
Hi beep, wine bottle, wine bottle, his wine bottle is going to be knocked down by his arm. ——Okay, he held on, he grabbed it, the corners of his mouth tugged, and he shouted: "Brew, cup, tea!" This time, I really cried. It was not an order, it was a request, it was a cry, his desire was screaming, his blood was too thick.郭公鸟在远远的地方叫。声音如两粒弹丸，掷过来，扔过去。令人渴望一片秧池，浅黄嫩绿，密密秧针之下看见徐徐流动的水。一片树荫。一阵好风。一条长长的丝带在风中飘。
天真是闷。
Guo Gongniao calls from afar. The sound is like two projectiles, thrown over, thrown over. It makes people yearn for a seedling pond, light yellow and green, and you can see the slowly flowing water under the dense seedling needles. A shade of trees. A good wind. A long ribbon fluttered in the wind. It's boring.
[1] 本篇原载1946年9月2日天津《大公报》。初收《汪曾祺全集》第一卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。

庙与僧

庙与僧[1]
[1] This article was originally published in Tianjin's Ta Kung Pao on September 2, 1946. First received the first volume of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998. Temple and monk[1]我的行李已经由人先放在我要住的房间里去了，我就一直走到方丈找“当家的”和尚。当家的早已经迎了出来。这个和尚整个可以用一个“黄”字括尽了。第一，他胖得很，说胖还不大对，应当说肉多得很。腮帮子坠坠的，脑后长平了又打了折，连上下眼睑都“厚夺夺的”，这么样，他不有个向外翻出的双料嘴唇，那就是不合理了。不过他的肉可不像一般胖子一样细软，似乎都割下来搁了几天再合到一块儿去的。这周身陈肉上一个一个毛孔都清清楚楚。于是，我想，你总不能再不想起你自己上菜场买小菜的那段生活了。这个胖和尚直在我面前发黄。他从头到脚都是黄的。和尚头刮过不久，直裰敞开，而脚下一双僧鞋是趿着的。僧鞋踏在脚跟的一块已经发一种深沉的油光。是夏天，他不穿袜子。说真的，最唤起我的黄的印象的是他那双肥脚，我一辈子没见过那么黄的脚。他就从肿肿的脚踵一直黄上去。黄，而发暗，不反光。没有办法，我相信，就把这个和尚切开了，里边的肉也都这种暗黄色。——我所说“黄”已经括尽了他，是主张胖也可以含在黄里的。不过人家是“当家的”，我们不应随便叫他个甚么，得称呼一声“当家”，尽管他胖而且黄，是吧？
My luggage had already been put in the room where I was going to stay, so I walked all the way to the abbot to find the "master" monk. The head of the house had already come out. This monk can be summarized with the word "yellow". First, he is very fat, and it is not right to say that he is fat, but it should be said that there is a lot of meat. The cheeks are falling, the back of the head is flattened and discounted, and even the upper and lower eyelids are "thick". However, his flesh is not as soft as that of ordinary fat people, and it seems that it was cut off and left for a few days before being put together. The pores on the meat all around the body are clear. So, I think, you can't help but think of your own life when you went to the vegetable market to buy side dishes. This fat monk turned yellow in front of me. He was yellow from head to toe. The monk's head was shaved shortly after, and his straight pants were open, and a pair of monk's shoes were lying on his feet. The part of the monk's shoes on his heels had a deep oily sheen. It was summer, and he didn't wear socks. To be honest, what evoked my yellow impression the most was his fat feet, which I had never seen in my life. He went from his swollen heels to the yellow. Yellow, but dark, not reflective. There was no way, I believe, so I cut the monk open, and the flesh inside was also this dark yellow. ——When I said "yellow", I already included him, and I advocated that fat people can also be contained in yellow. But people are "in charge", we shouldn't call him anything, we have to call him "master", even though he is fat and yellow, right?当家和尚领我进了方丈，把他两个猪眼睛摆在我面前。这真是一个“方丈”，不能更大。一张大床占去一半。床是乡下新娘子房里会可以见到的雕花大床，庙里这样床计有四张。床上粗夏布印花帐子，印的是梅兰竹菊蓝颜色的花。米缸，酒壶，咸菜罈子，一副“经担子”。后来一次当家的招呼一个老太婆“你怎么老不到庙里来坐坐，”老太婆说“你那个房子，哈叭狗都转不过身来！”她实在没有念过书，不知道有“厅事前不容旋马”这句话，她不是抄袭。当家的案上摊得一本草纸订的帐簿。一支笔正从左上角斜斜的滚过右下角。和尚请我抽一枝烟，他自己则呼呼噜噜吹起水烟袋。这个方丈里充满各种气味。这些气味我并不陌生。而当我想着如何送当家的一张香烟广告的美人图的时候，我实在不能不抬起头来看看，因为我又辨出一种气味来了；果然，一大块咸肉挂在梁上！天大概要变了，咸肉上全浸浸的发潮。地下是一块油渍，就在我椅子旁边。而一颗琥珀色油珠正凝在末端，要滴不滴的。我等着等着，半天半天，想等到听见答的一声就起身出来。——我希望你对这块咸肉不要大惊小怪，像我当初一样。庙里还养得三口小猪，准备过年时卖去两只，留一只自己杀了吃呢。
The head monk led me into the abbot and put his two pig eyes in front of me. This is really an "abbot", it can't be bigger. A big bed takes up half. The bed is a carved bed that can be seen in the bride's room in the countryside, and there are four such beds in the temple. The coarse summer cloth printed tent on the bed is printed with plum orchid, bamboo and chrysanthemum blue flowers. Rice jars, wine jugs, pickle jars, and a pair of "scripture burdens". Later, the head of the house greeted an old woman, "Why are you not old enough to sit in the temple," the old woman said, "You can't turn around in that house!" She really hadn't studied, and she didn't know that there was a saying "no horses are allowed in front of the hall", and she was not plagiarizing. On the head of the house, there was a cursive paper account book. A pen was rolling diagonally from the upper left corner to the lower right corner. The monk asked me to smoke a cigarette, and he himself snorted and blew on the hookah. This abbot is full of all kinds of smells. I am not unfamiliar with these smells. And when I thought about how to give the head of the house a picture of a beauty in a cigarette advertisement, I couldn't help but look up, because I recognized another smell; sure enough, a large piece of bacon was hanging on the beam! The sky was about to change, and the bacon was soaked in moisture. There was an oil stain on the ground, right next to my chair. And an amber oil bead was condensing at the end, trying to stop dripping. I waited for a long time, wanting to get up and come out when I heard the answer. ——I hope you don't make a fuss about this piece of salted meat, just like I did. There are also three piglets in the temple, and they are going to sell two during the Chinese New Year, and keep one to kill and eat.方丈在正殿的旁边。殿上一般供着三世佛，有鱼鼓磬钹。这殿上，在我住在庙里那么些日子之中，只有一次显得极其庄严，他们给一家拜梁王忏的那一次。庙里和尚一齐出动，还请来几个客僧，都披挂得整整齐齐，唱了好几天。屋上拖下长长的旙，炉里烧起降香，蒲团上遮了帔垫，和尚像个和尚，庙像个庙，其余的时候只是那三尊佛冷清清坐着。早晨黄昏，有个小和尚做功课。一个人矮矮的跪在长凳上，点了香，看了油，敲磬三声，含含糊糊的念起来，不知甚么道理，听来颇觉哀楚。
The abbot is next to the main hall. The hall generally enshrines the Third Buddha, with fish drums and cymbals. In this hall, in the days I lived in the temple, it was extremely solemn only once, and the time they worshipped King Liang to the family. The monks in the temple went out together, and several guest monks were invited, all neatly dressed and sang for several days. A long banner was dragged down from the roof, incense was burned in the stove, and the futon was covered with a shawl, the monk was like a monk, the temple was like a temple, and the rest of the time just the three Buddhas were sitting deserted. In the morning and dusk, a little monk was doing his homework. A man knelt on the bench in a short manner, lit incense, looked at the oil, knocked the chime three times, and read it vaguely, I don't know what the truth is, it sounds quite sad.小和尚十一二岁。虽穿了和尚衣服，可是赤着脚。坐在屋里总听见他赤脚的打在天井石板上拍拍的响。那是他跟一条狗闹着玩，或是他追黄狗，或让黄狗追他。这孩子不大见他上树捉知了，下河摸虾。比普通庄稼孩子文气得多，无野像。虽然当家和尚说他淘气得很，常常打他。一挨打，他就伏在门口布袋和尚脚下悠悠的哭，一哭半天。黄狗就扑在门槛旁边看着他。只有过年那几天我见他兴奋过一阵子。外面许多孩子跑到庙里来滚钱，他也参加了，而且似乎赢了几个。他告诉我以前还有一个小和尚，是他师兄。一天在门外河里洗澡，教水鬼拉下去了。半夜三更，现在，有时听见外面水车响动，那是他师兄踩着玩。门口那架车，他们以前老踩，河边田是庙里的。这小和尚，你知道你很懂得寂寞么？你一定想开门出去看看的。
The little monk was eleven or twelve years old. Although he was wearing monk's clothes, he was barefoot. Sitting in the house, I always heard him slapping his bare feet on the stone slabs in the courtyard. It was him playing with a dog, or he chased the yellow dog, or let the yellow dog chase him. This kid didn't see him go up the tree to catch him, and went down to the river to touch the shrimp. It is much more polite than an ordinary crop child, and there is no wild image. Although the head monk said that he was very naughty and often beat him. As soon as he was beaten, he lay at the feet of the cloth bag monk at the door and cried leisurely for a long time. The yellow dog threw himself by the threshold and looked at him. Only on the days of the Chinese New Year did I see him excited for a while. Many children outside ran to the temple to roll money, and he also participated, and he seemed to win a few. He told me that there used to be a little monk who was his senior brother. One day, he took a bath in the river outside the door and taught the water ghost to pull it down. In the middle of the night, now, sometimes I hear the sound of the water wheel outside, which is his senior brother stepping on it. The car at the door, they used to step on it, and the fields by the river were in the temple. This little monk, do you know that you know how lonely you are? You must want to open the door and go out to have a look.庙里大和尚一共三个。当家的，二师父，——乡下多叫他为二当家的，他的上下我不记得了，以小和尚口气，称之为二师父，还有一个，被称为能师父。所以有这么一个比较特别的称呼，是因为他不是在本庙出家的。
There are three great monks in the temple. The head of the house, the second master,—— the countryside often called him the second master, I don't remember his upper and lower ranks, in the tone of a little monk, he was called the second master, and there was another one, called Master Neng. So there is such a special title because he was not a monk in this temple.这能师父头上是否有疤，想不起了。我觉得他似乎尚未受戒，也许已经受过戒，我如此觉得是希望他可以随时还俗罢了。听小和尚说，他不是这里的人，虽然因为在这庙里住了很久，说话已经与别的和尚一样，听不出外乡口音。这家伙衣服总是挺挺括括，腰是腰，缝是缝，那怕是一件旧的，也称身合样。听说他还有个本领，是能够“飞铙”。这在盂兰会焰口中可以见到。是用两片大铙耍出许多花样，或让它在手指顶上的溜溜转；或哗喇喇掷向半天，用手或铙接住，反身背手，丢挡插腰，百无一失。这玩意城里大户人家不兴，大庙里和尚也不会。做盂兰会的多是湖西和尚。这能飞铙的和尚又必皆会吹笛拉胡琴，唱百种时调小曲。这在盂兰会人神共乐时用得着的。这和尚透着一股机灵鬼巧。若说他能不沾染甚么事情，教人不信。他如何会住到这么一个乡下小庙里来，就当有些缘故，决不是普通行脚挂单。能师父身材属于“三料个子”，不高不矮，薄薄的嘴唇，手上一个金戒指，袈裟多是绸的。真的，他要是留起来，一头好头发！当家的对于这么一个外客是否欢迎，不得而知。不过那些时候倒也相安无事。当家的对于能师父的爱憎只在牌桌上看得出来。
I can't remember if Master Neng has a scar on his head. I think he seems to have not been ordained yet, maybe he has already been ordained, and I think he just hopes that he can return to the secular world at any time. I heard from the little monk that he was not from here, although because he had lived in this temple for a long time, he spoke the same as other monks, and he couldn't hear a foreign accent. This guy's clothes are always quite crisp, the waist is waist, the seams are sewn, even if it is an old one, it fits well. I heard that he also has a skill, which is to be able to "fly cymbals". This can be seen in the mouth of the Yulan Society. It is to use two large cymbals to play many tricks, or make it slip on the top of the fingers; Or throw it into the sky for a long time, catch it with your hand or cymbal, turn your back on your hand, and throw it into your waist, without any mistakes. This thing is not popular in the city, and the monks in the temple will not either. Most of the monks who do the Yulan Festival are monks from Huxi. The monks who can fly cymbals must all be able to play the flute and play the huqin and sing a hundred seasonal tunes. This is useful when the people and gods of the Yulan Society have fun together. This monk has a clever and ingenious spirit. If he can say that he can not be tainted with anything, he will not believe it. How did he live in such a small rural temple, just for some reason, it is by no means an ordinary line. Master Neng's figure belongs to the "three materials", neither tall nor short, thin lips, a gold ring on his hand, and his robe is mostly silk. Really, if he keeps it, he will have good hair! It is unknown whether the head of the house welcomes such a foreign guest. But at that time, everything was fine. The master's love and hate for Master Neng can only be seen at the card table.乡下法事少，长日清闲。当家的把几天来旧账画一画，算算离收租尚远，到殿上扬声叫能师父。能师父正用修脚刀修他左边脚掌的一片老皮子，心里正想，到时候了，怎么还……，一听那个像闷在木桶里的叫唤，即放下小刀，拂去脚皮，枕头下抽出一卷票子，挑了两张破烂的，回答一声“来了。”大殿上现成有吃饭桌子，不用搭。好，打牌了。其实村上两个闲汉照例来得正巧，庙里有一副二十年老麻将，骨子面子虽有些地方脱了节，用糯米饭粘过，粘过又脱；一张二万是后补的，是张花；不过大家摸起来都顺手。也有时斗纸牌，可是簇新的江源记，三星都是加金的。我有时也到他们后头去看看，当家教我学学，说是“不难的。多用点脑筋就会了。”而正在这时他漏碰了一张绝七万。他们对于每一张牌都有一个特别称呼，这自然又多是“荤的”，与女人有关系。当家的跟我一样，不大了然。我看见能师父打了一张五索，说“女学生，花钱买不到的！”可怜当家的就只顾抽烟，把一副二五八平胡给错过了。大概除因特殊事故，上午十点到下午五六点，十六圈，闲汉散了。能师父回房，数数今天赢的，又连枕下的一齐掏出来，十块五块各放一处，叠好了锁到箱子里去。当家的则颇为不好的牌运弄得有点累了，不说话，独自坐在零乱的牌桌上，怅怅的鼓起眼睛，一副清一色，清一色，三条一张也没有现呀，……直到一个花脚大蚊子在他耳朵上狠狠的啄了一口，才找了半天，找到那双鞋子，捧了个水烟袋回方丈。
There are few rituals in the countryside, and the long days are leisurely. The head of the house drew a picture of the old account in the past few days, and it was still far from collecting rent, so he went to the hall and shouted Master Neng. Master Neng was using a pedicure knife to repair a piece of old skin on the sole of his left foot, thinking to himself, when the time came, how could he still ......, when he heard the call that seemed to be stuffy in a wooden barrel, he put down the knife, brushed off the skin of his feet, took out a roll of tickets from under the pillow, picked out two tattered ones, and replied, "Here it is." "There is a ready-made dining table in the hall, so you don't need to set it up. Okay, let's play cards. In fact, the two idlers in the village came just in time, and there was a pair of 20-year-old mahjong in the temple, although the bones and face were off in some places, glued with glutinous rice, glued and peeled off; "There is a ready-made dining table in the hall, no need to set it up. Okay, let's play cards. In fact, the two idlers in the village came just in time, there was a pair of 20-year-old mahjong in the temple, although the bones and face were out of knot in some places, they were glued with glutinous rice, glued and peeled off; A piece of 20,000 yuan is a supplement, a flower; but everyone feels comfortable with it. There are also times when playing cards, but the new Jiang Yuanji is three stars with gold. I sometimes go behind them to take a look, and the master teaches me to learn, saying, "It's not difficult. Just use more brains." And at this moment, he missed a card of 70,000. They have a special name for each card, which is naturally mostly "meaty" and has something to do with women. The master is the same as me, and he doesn't know much. I saw Master Neng play a five-rope and said, "Female student, you can't buy it with money!" Poor master just focused on smoking and missed a pair of two-five-eight flat beards. Probably except for special accidents, from ten a.m. to five or six o'clock in the afternoon, sixteen laps, the idlers dispersed. Master Neng went back to the room, counted the winners today, and took out all the ones under the pillow, put ten and five pieces in one place, folded them and locked them in the box. The master was a little tired from the bad card luck, didn't speak, sat alone at the messy card table, puffed out his eyes in melancholy, all colored, all colored, and none of the three showed up,...... It wasn't until a big mosquito pecked his ear hard that he searched for a long time, found the shoes, and took a hookah back to the abbot.二师父若是回来，则牌桌上三个光头，二师父圆圆的，眉眼口鼻都无棱角，而且一脸是笑。二师父比能师父高大，没有当家的肉多，面色红润，额门发光。他穿得整整齐齐，一个纽子都不缺，当胸一挂大念珠，鞋底都是白的。他身上东西多半是杭州货。二师父回来，一家，应当说一庙，不，还是说一家吧，一家都欢喜。小和尚第一个奔出去又奔进来，手上一个包袱，包袱里有他的芝麻饼。能师父，当家的，都上二师父屋里去了，连那个老香火道人都兴冲冲去打洗脸水，二师父那条雪白的毛巾招他爱。二师父难得回来住几天。二师父另外“有”个庙，弄得很“得法”，春上才募了一个殿子，又给菩萨开了光。有一次仿佛听说要给能师父也“弄”一个，结果不详。我与二师父见面多，因为我也有时不在庙里。
If the second master comes back, there will be three bald heads on the card table, the second master is round, the eyebrows, eyes, mouth and nose are not angular, and the face is smiling. The second master is taller than Master Neng, not as meaty as the master, his face is ruddy, and his forehead is shining. He is neatly dressed, there is no lack of buttons, and when he hangs a large rosary on his chest, the soles of his shoes are white. Most of the things on his body are Hangzhou goods. When the second master came back, a family, should be said to be a temple, no, let's say a family, the whole family is happy. The little monk was the first to run out and run in, with a baggage in his hand, and his sesame cake in the baggage. Master Neng, the head of the house, all went to the second master's house, and even the old incense Taoist rushed to wash his face, and the second master's snow-white towel attracted his love. The second master rarely came back to live for a few days. The second master "had" another temple, and it was very "lawful", so he raised a temple in the spring and opened the light to the bodhisattva. Once, it seemed that he heard that he was going to "get" one for Master Neng, but the result was unknown. I met the second master a lot because I was sometimes away from the temple.有一天，我正在庙后看小牛吃奶，小和尚来叫我。
“哎，去看，二师父回来了。”
二师父实在不比这个小牛好看，我说我不去。听说这回回来要住一阵，总要见到的。
“哎，二师父把师母接来了！”
One day, I was watching the calf nursing behind the temple, and the little monk came to call me. "Hey, go and see, the second master is back." The second master is really not as good-looking as this calf, I said I won't go. I heard that I will stay for a while when I come back this time, and I will always see it. "Hey, the second master has brought the master's wife!"这可实在有点出乎我意想之外。
This was a bit unexpected.这个，这个甚么呢？这倒真难称呼，……好吧，这个女人，这个女人高高的身材，穿一身黑香云拷纱衫裤，襟头挂一枝白兰花，脑门绞得齐齐的，长长的眼睛，有点吊，嘴里两个金牙，正坐在雕花木床前半低着头喝茶。二师父则用他的雪白的毛巾洗脸，一瓶双妹老牌花露水。——这女人我想是个寡妇。他一直住在庙里，到我走了她还没走。
This, what is this? It's really hard to call,...... Well, this woman, this woman is tall, wearing a black fragrant cloud gauze shirt and pants, a white orchid hanging from her collar, her head is twisted neatly, her eyes are a little hanging, she has two gold teeth in her mouth, and she is sitting in front of the carved wooden bed with her head down and drinking tea. The second master washed his face with his snow-white towel and a bottle of toilet water from the old brand of the two sisters. ——I think this woman is a widow. He has been living in the temple until I left.你奇怪，我怎么弄到那么一个庙里住了好几个月？你大概还想知道我终天做些甚么事情，这我一时都无从回答你。事情一晃就八九年了，我有时也想想。当家的大概总死掉了，我似乎看见他黄黄的坐在一口缸里。现在当家的应当是小和尚。能师父想是没有还俗，多半是离开到别处去了，我仿佛很能知道他打叠打叠东西，背上，跨下一只船时的心。至于二师父，他应该有两个儿子了。我还想知道那个小小院子如何了。院在殿后，迤东有两间屋，我住。有两个小门，可以关死，与外面隔绝，门上两行墨书：
You wonder, how did I get to live in such a temple for several months? You probably still want to know what I do all day long, and I can't answer you for a while. It's been eight or nine years in a flash, and I sometimes think about it. The head of the house is probably dead, and I seem to see him sitting in a jar. The little monk should be in charge now. I think Master Neng has not returned to the world, most likely he has left for another place, and I seem to know his heart when he folds things, puts them on his back, and crosses a boat. As for the second master, he should have two sons. I also want to know what happened to that small courtyard. The courtyard is behind the hall, and there are two houses in the east of Yunnan, where I live. There are two small doors that can be closed and isolated from the outside, and there are two lines of ink on the door:一人一世界
三邈三菩提
One person, one world Three Miao Three Bodhi我闲常出来走走，则从另外一个圆门回来，经过三个小石塔，那是和尚的坟。院中夏天绿杨中知了极多，现在该落满一院桐叶了吧。桐叶落在我的屋瓦上哗啦啦响。再我很怀念那个老香火道人，他须眉皆白，一腿筋疙瘩，终年在门前打草鞋，我没有听他说过一句话。若要坐船，招呼他，立刻给拿桨。船扁而小，通身漆成红色，坐到那里去，一望而知是庙里的。呵，才起水的鱼，多鲜的菱角。……
I often go out for a walk, and then I come back from another round gate, passing three small stone towers, which are the monk's grave. I know a lot about the green poplars in the courtyard in summer, and now it's time to fill the courtyard with paulownia leaves. The paulownia leaves fell on my roof tiles and rustled. I miss the old incense Taoist very much, he has white beard and eyebrows, a lump in his hamstrings, and wears straw sandals in front of the door all year round, and I haven't heard him say a word. If you want to take a boat, greet him and immediately get the oar. The boat is flat and small, painted red all over, and when you sit there, you can tell that it is from the temple. Oh, the fish that have just risen from the water, how fresh water chestnuts are. ……
[1] 本篇原载1946年10月14日上海《大公报》。初收《汪曾祺全集》第一卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。

最响的炮仗

最响的炮仗[1]
孟家炮仗店的孟老板，孟和，走出巷口。
[1] This article was originally published in Shanghai's Ta Kung Pao on October 14, 1946. First received the first volume of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998. Loudest firecracker{{id_0000}} Boss Meng of the Meng family firecracker shop, Meng He, walked out of the alley.唉，孟老板这一趟走出巷口跟哪一趟都不大同。
Alas, Boss Meng's trip out of the alley is not the same as any other trip.一切都还是差不多。一出他家的门，向北，一爿油烛店。砖头路。左边一堵人家的院墙，墙上两条南瓜藤，南瓜藤早枯透了。右边一堵墙，突出了肚子，上面一张红纸条：出卖重伤风。自然这是个公厕，一个老厕所。老厕所原有的味儿。孟老板在这里撒过几十年的尿。砖头路。一个破洋瓷脸盆半埋在垃圾堆中。一个小旅馆，黑洞洞的，黑洞洞的梁上还挂一个旧灯笼，灯笼上画了几个蝙蝠，五福迎门。路上到处是草屑，有人挑过草。两行水滴，有人挑过水。一个布招，孟老板多年习惯的从那个布招下低头而过。再过去，一个小小理发店，墙壁上是公安局冬防布告：“照得年关岁暮，宵小匪盗堪猖，……”白纸黑字，字是筋骨饱满的颜体，旁边还贴有个城隍大会建会疏启，黄表纸。凡多招贴处皆为巷口，这里正是个人来人往的巷口。
Everything is still the same. As soon as you walk out of his door, to the north, there is an oil candle shop. Brick road. On the left is a courtyard wall, and there are two pumpkin vines on the wall, and the pumpkin vines have long since withered. The wall on the right protrudes from the stomach, and there is a red note on it: Betray a severe cold. Naturally, this is a public toilet, an old toilet. The original smell of the old toilet. Boss Meng has been urinating here for decades. Brick road. A broken porcelain basin is half buried in the garbage heap. A small hotel, black, with an old lantern hanging on the beam, several bats painted on it, and five blessings greet the door. The road is full of grass clippings, and someone has picked grass. Two rows of water droplets, someone has carried water. A cloth move, Boss Meng has been accustomed to bowing his head from that cloth for many years. Further ahead, a small barbershop, on the wall is the winter prevention notice of the Public Security Bureau: "At the end of the year, the bandits are rampant,......" The words are full of muscles and bones, and there is also a city god meeting construction memorial next to it, and the yellow cover is pasted. All the posters are alleys, and this is the alley where people come and go.孟老板看了一眼“照得……”，一跳便至“中华民国”了。他搔搔头，似乎想弄清楚现在究竟是民国几年。巷口一亮。亮出那面老蓝布招子，上了年纪的蓝布招上三个大白字：古月楼。这才听见古月楼茶房老五一声“加蟹一笼——”阿，老五的嗓子，由尖锐到嘶哑，三十年了，一切那么熟悉。所以古月楼三个字终日也不见得有几个客人仰面一看，而大家却和孟老板一样，知道那是古月楼，一个茶楼。那是老五的嗓子，喊了近三十年。
Boss Meng glanced at "......" and jumped to "Republic of China". He scratched his head, as if he wanted to figure out how many years it was in the Republic of China. The entrance of the alley lit up. The old blue cloth trick was shown, and the old blue cloth was called with three big white characters: Gu Yuelou. Only then did I hear the fifth voice of the old man in the tea room of Gu Yuelou, "Add a cage of crabs-" Ah, the fifth child's voice, from sharp to hoarse, has been thirty years, and everything is so familiar. Therefore, there may not be a few guests looking up at the three words Gu Yuelou all day long, but everyone, like Boss Meng, knows that it is Gu Yuelou, a teahouse. That was Lao Wu's voice, shouting for nearly thirty years.太阳落在古月楼楼板上。一片阳光之中，尘埃野鸟浮动。
The sun fell on the floor of Guyue Building. In a piece of sunlight, dust and wild birds floated.孟老板从前是这里的老主顾，几乎每天必到。来喝喝茶，吃吃点心，跟几个熟人见见面，拱拱手，由天气时事谈下去。谈谈生意上事情，地方上事情。如何承办冬防，开济贫粥厂；河工，水龙，施药，摆渡船，通阴沟，挑公厕里的粪，无所不谈。照例凡有须孟老板出力处他没有不站出来的，有须出钱处，也从不肯后人。凡事有个面子，人是为人活下来的，对自己呢，面子得顾。
Boss Meng used to be an old patron here and came almost every day. Come and drink tea, eat snacks, meet a few acquaintances, bow your hands, and talk about the weather and current affairs. Talk about business and local affairs. How to undertake winter defense and open a porridge factory for poverty alleviation; river workers, water dragons, pesticides, ferry boats, gutters, picking up dung in public toilets, everything is discussed. As usual, he did not stand up wherever Boss Meng contributed, and he never refused to pay for himself. Everything has a face, people survive for others, and they have to take care of their face.孟老板在这条巷子有一个名字，在这个小城中，也有一块牌子。（北京的大树，南京沈万山，人的名儿，树的影儿。）
孟老板走到巷口，停了一停。他本应现在即坐到古月楼上等起来，但是他拐弯了。
Boss Meng has a name in this alley, and in this small city, there is also a sign. (The big tree in Beijing, Shen Wanshan in Nanjing, the name of the person, the shadow of the tree.) ） Boss Meng walked to the entrance of the alley and stopped. He should have sat upstairs in Gu Yue and waited now, but he turned the corner.这一趟走出巷口跟哪一趟可都不同。他要跟一个人接头关于嫁他的女儿的事去。
This trip out of the alley is different from any other trip. He wants to contact someone about marrying his daughter.孟老板拐了弯，便看见自己家的那个炮仗店。孟老板从他的炮仗店门前而过。关着门，像是静静的，过年似的。这是孟老板要嫁女儿的缘故。
Boss Meng turned a corner and saw the firecracker shop in his house. Boss Meng passed in front of his firecracker shop. The door was closed, as if it was quiet, as if it were the New Year. This is the reason why Boss Meng wants to marry his daughter.从前，从前孟家炮仗店门前总拥着一堆孩子，男孩子，女孩子，歪着脖子，吮着指头，看两个老师傅做炮仗。老师傅在三副木架子（多不平常的东西啊）之中的两个上车炮仗筒子。郭槖，一个，郭槖，一个。一簇小而明亮的眼睛随老师傅的手而动。炮仗店的地面特别的干，空气也特别的干。白木架子，干干净净。有的地方发亮，手摸得发亮。老师傅还向人说过，一辈子没有用过这么趁手的架子。这是天下最好的架子。天下有多大，多宽？老师傅自不明白，也不怎么想明白。
Once upon a time, there were always a bunch of children, boys, and girls in front of the Meng family's firecracker shop, tilting their necks, sucking their fingers, and watching the two masters make firecrackers. The master got on the car with two firecracker tubes in one of the three wooden shelves (what an unusual thing). Guo Mu, one, Guo Mu, one. A cluster of small, bright eyes moved with the master's hand. The floor of the firecracker shop is very dry, and the air is also very dry. The white wooden shelf is clean. Some places shine, and the hands are shiny to the touch. The master also told people that he had never used such a convenient shelf in his life. This is the best shelf in the world. How big and wide is the world? The master didn't understand it, and he didn't think much about it.这个城实在小，放一个炮仗全城都可听见！一到快吃午饭时候，这一带的人必听到“砰——訇！”照例十来声，都知道孟家试炮仗，试双响。双响在空中一声，落地一声，又名天地响。试炮仗有一定的地方，一片荒地，广阔无边，从巷口不拐弯，一直向北，一直下去就是了。你每天可以看到孟老板在一棵柳树旁边，有时带着他的孩子。把炮仗一个一个试放。这是这个小城市每天的招呼。保安队天一亮就练号，承天寺到晚上必撞钟，中午孟家放炮仗。这几种声音，在春天，在冬天，在远处近处，在风中雨中，继续存在，消失，而共同保留在一切人的印象中，记忆中。人都慢慢长大了。
This city is so small that the whole city can hear a firecracker! When it's almost lunchtime, people in this area will hear "Bang-boom!" As usual, there are more than ten sounds, and everyone knows that the Meng family tries firecrackers, trying double sounds. The double sound is in the air, and the sound is on the ground, also known as the sound of heaven and earth. There is a certain place to test firecrackers, a wasteland, vast and boundless, from the entrance of the alley to the north, all the way down. You can see Boss Meng next to a willow tree every day, sometimes with his children. Test the firecrackers one by one. This is the daily greeting of this small city. The security team practices the number at dawn, Chengtian Temple will ring the bell at night, and the Meng family will set off firecrackers at noon. These sounds, in spring, in winter, far and near, in the wind and rain, continue to exist and disappear, and together remain in everyone's impressions and memories. People are slowly growing up.全城不止三家炮仗店，而孟家三代以来比任何一家的炮仗都响。四乡八镇，甚至邻近县城，娶媳妇，嫁女儿，讲究人家，都讲究用孟家炮仗，好像才算是放炮仗。
There are more than three firecracker shops in the city, and the Meng family has been louder than any firecracker for three generations. Four townships and eight towns, and even neighboring counties, marry daughters, pay attention to others, and pay attention to the use of Meng family firecrackers, which seems to be regarded as firecrackers.香期，庙会，盂兰焰口，地藏王生日，清明，冬至，过年，孟家架上没有“连日货”。满堂红万点桃花一千八百响落在雪地上真是一种气象。这得先订。老师傅一个下半年总要打夜作，一面喝酒，一面工作到天明。还有著名的孟家烟火，全城没得第二家。
Incense period, temple fair, Yulan flame mouth, King Ksitigarbha's birthday, Qingming, winter solstice, Chinese New Year, there are no "daily goods" on the Meng family shelf. It is really a weather to have 1,800 red peach blossoms falling on the snow. This has to be ordered first. The master always has to work at night in the second half of the year, drinking and working until dawn. There is also the famous Meng family fireworks, and there is no second one in the city.烟火是秘传，孟老板自己配药串信子，老师傅都帮不了忙。一堂烟火抵一季鞭炮。一堂，或三套或五套不等。年丰岁月，迎灵出会，人神共乐，晚上少不了放烟火。放烟火在那片荒地上。荒地上两个高架子。不知道的人猜不出那是缢死囚用还是干甚么别的用的。就在烟火上，孟老板损了一只眼睛。
Fireworks are secret, Boss Meng prepares his own medicine and strings letters, and the master can't help. A fireworks is worth a season of firecrackers. One class, or three or five sets. In the abundant years, the spirits are welcomed, people and gods are happy, and fireworks are indispensable at night. Set off fireworks on that wasteland. Two high shelves on the wasteland. People who don't know can't guess whether it was for hanging prisoners or something else. Just on the fireworks, Boss Meng lost an eye.某年，城中大赛会，烟火共计有五堂之多，孟家所做，有外县一家所做。十年恰逢金满斗，不能白白放过！好，有得看了。烟火教这阖城的人有一个今天的晚上：老妈子洗碗洗得特别快，姑娘在灯前插一朵鬓边花。妈多给了孩子几个铜子儿，生意经纪坐在坟前吃一碗豆腐脑。杀猪的已穿上新羽绫马褂，花兜肚里装满了银钱，再不浑身油臭，泥水匠的手干干净净，卖鲜货的手里一串山里红，“来了？”“来了。刚来？”“三姨，三姨，——”“狗子你别乱跑呀！”各人占好地方，十番“锣鼓飞动”放了！“炮打泗州城”，“芦蜂追秃子”……遂看得人欢声雷动，尽力喝吼，如醉如狂，踏的野地里草都平了。——最后，两套“天下太平”牵上去，等着看高下了。孟家烟火放紫光绿光，黄色橘色，喷兰花珠子，落飞蛾雪花，具草木虫鱼百状情形。“好。”“好，是好！”而忽然，熄了。怎么回事？熄了？熄了。熄了！接火引信子嗤嗤有声，可是发不出火来。等！不着。等，不着！起先大众中还只吃吃喳喳，后来，大家那个叫呀，闹呀，吆喝呀，拍手吹哨呀。孟和那时年纪还小，咽得下这个吗？“拿梯子来！”攀上颤巍巍三十二档竹梯，看看到底是怎么回事。整了整信子，再看，正在他觑近时，一个“天鹅蛋”打出来，正中左眼，一脚摔了下来。左眼从此废去了，成为一个独眼龙。
In a certain year, there were as many as five fireworks in the city, made by the Meng family, and made by a family from another county. Ten years coincide with a golden bucket, and it can't be let go in vain! Okay, there is something to see. Fireworks taught the people of the city to have a tonight tonight: the old mother washed the dishes very quickly, and the girl inserted a flower at the temples in front of the lamp. Mom gave the child a few more coppers, and the business agent sat in front of the grave and ate a bowl of tofu brains. The pig killer has put on a new feather silk horse coat, the belly of the flower pocket is full of silver coins, and the smell of oil is no longer covered in oil, the plasterer's hands are clean, and the hand of the seller of fresh goods is a string of mountain red, "Coming?" "It's coming. Just came? "Third aunt, third aunt,——" "Dog, don't run around!" Everyone occupied a good place, and the "gongs and drums flew" ten times! "Bombardment of Sizhou City", "Reed bees chasing bald men"...... So I saw people cheering and shouting as much as they could, like drunkenness, and the grass in the field was flattened. ——In the end, two sets of "peace in the world" were pulled up, waiting to see the high. The fireworks of the Meng family emit purple and green light, yellow and orange, spraying orchid beads, falling moths and snowflakes, with plants, trees, insects and fish. "Okay." "Okay, it's good!" And suddenly, it went out. What's going on? Extinguished? Extinguished. Extinguished! The fire fuse snorted, but it couldn't get out of the fire. Wait! No. Wait, no! At first, the public only ate and chattered, but later, everyone shouted, made noise, shouted, clapped and whistled. Meng He was still young at the time, could he swallow this? "Get the ladder!" Climb up the trembling thirty-two bamboo ladders to see what is going on. After making a whole letter, looking again, just as he was looking closer, a "swan egg" came out, hit his left eye, and fell down. The left eye has since been abolished and has become a one-eyed dragon.大家看烟火。大家都认得孟老板这个人了！“这么一个人，这么一个人”，心里不由不感叹。一个小学生第二天作文“若孟君者，真乃一勇敢之人也”，先生给加了一个双圈。孟老板一只眼睛虽已废去，孟家烟火也从此站住了。五百里方圆，凡有死丧庆吊红白喜事，用烟火必找孟家。孟家炮仗店有个字号，但知道的不多，只晓得孟家炮仗店。一到过年，孟家炮仗店排挞门上贴上万年红春联，联上抹熟桐油，亮得个发欢，刘石庵体，八个大字：
Everyone watches the fireworks. Everyone recognizes Boss Meng! "Such a person, such a person", couldn't help but sigh in his heart. A primary school student wrote an essay the next day, "If Meng Jun is really a brave person", the teacher added a double circle. Although Boss Meng's eye has been abolished, the Meng family's fireworks have since stopped. Within a radius of five hundred miles, whenever there is a death or funeral, the Meng family must be found with fireworks. The Meng family firecracker shop has a font name, but I don't know much, only the Meng family firecracker shop. As soon as the Chinese New Year arrives, the door of the Meng family firecracker shop is pasted with 10,000-year-old red Spring Festival couplets, and the couplet is smeared with tung oil, which is bright and happy.生财大道 处世中和
The road to wealth is neutral in the world门边柱子上的那一条是全城最长的，从“自造”到“发客”计三十余字。孟老板手上一个汉玉扳指。孟老板旱烟袋上一个玻璃翠葫芦嘴子。孟老板每天在这个巷子里走好多回。从家里到店里，从店里到家里。“孟老板”这个称呼跟孟老板本人是一个。天下有若干姓孟的老板，然而天下只有这么一个孟老板。个子不高，方方正正的脸，走路慢慢的，说话慢慢的，坏了一只眼睛也并无人介意，小孩子看到那个脸上的笑也仍是一个极好的笑。在这个巷子里熟悉亲切的笑。
The one on the pillar by the door is the longest in the city, with more than 30 words from "self-made" to "sending guests". Boss Meng has a Hanyu finger in his hand. Boss Meng has a glass emerald gourd mouth on his dry tobacco bag. Boss Meng walks in this alley many times a day. From home to store, from store to home. The title "Boss Meng" is the same as Boss Meng himself. There are several bosses with the surname Meng in the world, but there is only such Boss Meng in the world. He is not tall, has a square face, walks slowly, speaks slowly, and no one cares if he breaks one eye, and the smile on the child's face is still an excellent smile. A familiar and friendly smile in this alley.孟老板差不多每天要到古月楼坐坐。喝喝茶，吃吃点心，跟几个熟人见见面，谈谈。古月楼中有他一个长定座儿。吃茶时老五还是个小孩子，来古月楼做学徒还由孟老板作的保。老五当年有个癞痢头，如今一头黑发，人走了运。
Boss Meng has to go to Guyue Tower almost every day to sit. Drink tea, eat snacks, meet and talk with a few acquaintances. He has a long seat in Guyue Building. When he was eating tea, the fifth child was still a child, and he came to Guyue Tower as an apprentice and was guaranteed by Boss Meng. The fifth child had a leprosy back then, but now he has black hair and is unlucky.但是孟老板这一趟走出巷口跟那一趟都不同。孟家炮仗店的门关上了。孟老板要把女儿嫁出去。
But Boss Meng's trip out of the alley was different from that one. The door of the Meng family's firecracker shop was closed. Boss Meng is going to marry his daughter out.北伐成功，破除了迷信，神像推倒，庙产充公，和尚尼姑还俗，鞭炮业自然大受影响。虽然“打倒列强，打倒列强”唱了一阵之后，委员们又都自称信士弟子，忙着给肉身菩萨披红上匾，可是地方连年水旱兵灾，百姓越来越苦，有兴致放鞭炮的究竟少了，烟火更是谈不上。二十年河堤决口，生意更淡。接着是硝磺缺售，成本高，货源少，一年卖不出几挂千子红。后来，保安队贴出大布告，不许民间燃放炮竹，风声鹤唳，容易引起误会云云！
The success of the Northern Expedition broke superstitions, the statues were torn down, the temple property was confiscated, and the monks and nuns were returned to the secular world, and the firecracker industry was naturally greatly affected. Although after singing "Defeat the great powers, defeat the great powers" for a while, the committee members all claimed to be believers and disciples, and were busy putting red plaques on the bodhisattvas in the flesh, but the local floods and droughts continued for years, and the people were becoming more and more suffering. Twenty years of river embankments have breached, and business is even weaker. Then there is the shortage of saltpeter, high cost, small supply, and it is impossible to sell a few thousand red a year. Later, the security team posted a big notice prohibiting the people from setting off firecrackers.渐渐的，孟老板简直不容易在古月楼茶客中见到了。
店开不下去。家里耗了个空。背得一身的债。
这一带的人多久已不听见试炮声音。
Gradually, Boss Meng was not easy to see among the tea guests of Guyue Tower. The store can't be opened. The house is empty. A debt. How long has the people in this area not heard the sound of test cannons?孟老板还在这条巷子里走出走进。所欠的债务多半是一个姓宋的做的中保。姓宋的专是一个说是打合，牵线接头，陪人家借字，吃白食，拿干钱角色！
Boss Meng is still walking in and out of this alley. Most of the debts owed are made by a person surnamed Song. The surname Song is said to be a match, matchmaking, accompanying others to borrow words, eating for nothing, and taking the role of dry money!今天，现在孟老板就是要碰这个姓宋的去，谈谈嫁女儿的事情。早先约好，在古月楼见面，再谈一趟，就定聘了。
Today, now Boss Meng is going to touch this man surnamed Song and talk about marrying his daughter. Earlier, we made an appointment to meet at Gu Yue Building, and after talking about it again, we were engaged.古月楼呀，孟老板像是从来没有上这个地方去过，完全是个陌生。孟老板出了巷口而拐弯了。他要上哪里去呢？是的，上哪儿去呢？他好像是在转了一会儿，也不问一问他自己。他只是信步而行，过了东街。数十年如一日，铺在这里的东街。烧饼店的烧饼，石灰店里的石灰，染坊师傅的蓝指甲，测字先生的缺嘴紫砂茶壶，……每一块砖头在左边一块的右边，右边一块的左边，孟老板从这里过去。这些东西要全撤去，孟老板仍是一个孟老板，他现在也没有一句话要向世人说。
Gu Yue Lou, Boss Meng seems to have never been to this place, he is completely unfamiliar. Boss Meng came out of the alley and turned a corner. Where is he going? Yes, where is he going? He seemed to be turning around for a while, without asking himself. He just walked past East Street. For decades, it has been paved on East Street here. The sesame cakes in the sesame cake shop, the lime in the lime shop, the blue nails of the dyeing master, and the missing purpur clay teapot of the word tester,...... Each brick is on the right side of the left piece and on the left of the right piece, and Boss Meng passes from here. All these things have to be removed, Boss Meng is still a Boss Meng, and he has nothing to say to the world now.一个糕饼店小伙计懒声懒气的唱，听声音他脸多黄：
“我好比……”这个声音孟老板必然也听到，却越走越远，混杂到人之中去了。
A bakery boy sang lazily, and his face was yellow when he heard the voice: "I'm like ......" Boss Meng must have heard this voice, but it went farther and farther away, mixed with people.约莫两个多钟头之后，孟老板下了楼来。脸上蜡渣黄，他身边是那个姓宋的，两人走到屋檐口，站了一站。姓宋的帽子取下来，搔了搔头，想说甚么，想想，又不说了。仍旧把帽子戴上。“回见。”“回见。”
After about two hours, Boss Meng went downstairs. With a yellow wax on his face, the man surnamed Song was beside him, and the two walked to the eaves and stood for a while. The hat surnamed Song was taken off, scratched his head, wanted to say something, think about it, and didn't say anything. Still put on the hat. "See you later." "See you later."孟老板看姓宋的走到巷口，立在那里欣赏公安局布告。他其实也没看进去。这布告贴了一星期，一共十二句，早都知道说的甚么。他是老看定那一行“照得年关岁暮”。他也看见最后“民国二十六”，“年”字上面一颗朱印，肥肥壮壮的假鹤铭体。孟老板忽然发现这家伙的头真小！一种说不出的厌恶，他想摸上去一口把他耳朵咬下来。孟老板一生不骂人，现在一句话停在他嘴边：
Boss Meng watched the man surnamed Song walk to the entrance of the alley and stood there admiring the announcement of the Public Security Bureau. He actually didn't look at it. This notice has been posted for a week, with a total of twelve sentences, and he already knows what it says. He always looked at the line "shining on the end of the year". He also saw the last "Twenty-Sixth of the Republic of China", a red seal on the word "year", a fat and strong fake id_0000 crane inscription. Boss Meng suddenly found that this guy's head was so small! An indescribable disgust, he wanted to touch it and bite off his ear. Boss Meng has never scolded anyone in his life, and now a sentence stops at his mouth:“我×你十八代祖宗！”他一肚子愤怒，他要狂叫，痛哭，要喊，要把头撞在墙上，要拔掉自己头发，要跳起脚来呼天抢地。
"I × your eighteenth generation ancestor!" He was full of anger, he wanted to scream, cry, shout, hit his head against the wall, pull out his hair, jump up and shout to the heavens and the earth.但这只是一霎眼之间的事，马上平息下去。他感到腿上有点冷，一个寒噤。年老了，快五十了。
But it was only a fleeting moment, and it calmed down immediately. He felt a little cold on his legs, a chill. Old, almost fifty.这时甚么地方突地来了一声，“孟老板！”孟老板遽然问“甚么事？”这才看出是挑水的老王。这人愣头愣脑。一对水桶摆呀摆的，扁担上挂了一条牛鞭子，一绺青蒜。自然是“没有事”。眼看着这人愣着眼睛过去后，自言自语，“没有事，没有事，有甚么事呢？”这教孟老板想起回家了。
At this time, there was a sudden sound from somewhere, "Boss Meng!" Boss Meng suddenly asked, "What's the matter?" Only then did I see that it was Lao Wang who was carrying water. The man was stunned. A pair of buckets were swinging, and a bullwhip was hung on the pole, and a bundle of green garlic was hung. Naturally, it was "nothing". Seeing this man pass by in a daze, he said to himself, "It's okay, it's okay, what's the matter?" This taught Boss Meng to remember going home.孟老板把女儿嫁给保安队一个班长。姓宋的做媒，明天过门。
“唉，老孟，老孟，你真狠心，实在是把女儿卖了。”
Boss Meng married his daughter to a squad leader of the security team. The matchmaker surnamed Song will pass the door tomorrow. "Alas, Lao Meng, Lao Meng, you are so cruel, you really sold your daughter."孟家的房子真黑。女儿的妈陪着女儿做点衣裳，用从“聘礼”中抽出来的钱，制两件衬衣，一件花布棉袍子。剪刀声中不时夹杂着母亲一声干咳。女儿不说话。孟老板也不说话。
The Meng family's house is so dark. The daughter's mother accompanied her daughter to make some clothes, and used the money withdrawn from the "bride price" to make two shirts and a floral cotton robe. The sound of scissors was mixed with a dry cough from the mother from time to time. The daughter didn't speak. Boss Meng didn't speak either.他这两天脾气非常的好。好得特别。两个小的孩子，也分外的乖，安安静静的。爸爸给他们还剪了剪指甲。
He has a very good temper these past two days. It's so good. The two small children are also very well-behaved and quiet. Dad also cut their nails.一个孩子找两个铜钱，剪纸做了个毽子，踢了两下，又靠着妈坐下来。一切都似乎给甚么冻着了，天气可还不太冷。
A child found two copper coins, cut paper to make a shuttlecock, kicked it twice, and sat down with his mother back. Everything seems to be frozen for something, and the weather is not too cold yet.过了三天，日子到了。妈还买了两支“牙寸”烛点上，黑黑的堂屋里烛火闪闪的跳跃。换上新式初上头的女儿来跟爸爸辞行：“爸爸，我走了。”
After three days, the day came. Mom also bought two "tooth inch" candles, and the candles jumped in the dark hall. The daughter who was just starting to wear a new style came to say goodbye to her father: "Dad, I'm leaving." ”爸爸看看女儿，圆圆的脸。新花布棉袍。眉毛新经收拾弯弯的。“走吧，好好的。到人家去要……你妈呢？”孟老板娘原躲在门后拉衣袖拭眼泪，忙走出来，“大妹你放心去喔，要听话喔！”
Dad looked at his daughter, her round face. New floral cotton robe. The eyebrows are newly cleaned up. "Let's go, okay. Go to someone's house to ask for ...... Where is your mother?" Boss Meng originally hid behind the door and pulled her sleeves to wipe her tears, and hurriedly walked out, "Big sister, don't worry, you have to be obedient!" ”大家都像再也无话可说，那么静了一会儿。一同听到街上卖油豆腐的声音。
Everyone was quiet for a while, as if they had nothing more to say. Together, we heard the sound of fried tofu being sold on the street.孟老板女儿的出门是坐洋车去的。遮了把伞送出大门。大门边站了两个看热闹的邻居。两个邻居老太太谈起这件事，叹一口气，“也罢了！”女儿一走，孟老板即出门去，一直向北。
Boss Meng's daughter went out by foreign car. Covered the umbrella and sent it out of the gate. There were two neighbors standing by the gate watching the excitement. The two old ladies of the neighbors talked about this and sighed, "That's it!" As soon as the daughter left, Boss Meng went out and went all the way north.这两天他找到一点废材料，一个人，做了三个特大双响，问他干甚么，他一声不说。现在他带了这三个大炮仗出去，一直走到荒地。
In the past two days, he found a little waste material, and one person made three extra-large double sounds, and asked him what he was doing, but he didn't say anything. Now he took these three firecrackers out and walked all the way to the wasteland.他一直走到荒地。荒地辽阔无边，一棵秃树，两个木架子，衰草斜阳，北风哀动。孟老板把三个双响一个一个点上，随即拼命把炮仗向天上扔。真是一个最响的炮仗。多少日子以来没有过的新鲜声音。这一带人全都听到了。没有一个人知道是怎么回事。
He walked all the way to the wasteland. The wasteland was vast, with a bald tree, two wooden shelves, withered grass in the setting sun, and the north wind mournful. Boss Meng lit the three double sounds one by one, and then desperately threw the firecrackers into the sky. It was really the loudest firecracker. A fresh sound that hasn't been heard in many days. Everyone in this area heard it. No one knew what was going on.你们贵处有没有这样的风俗：不作兴向炮仗店借火抽烟？这是犯忌讳的事。你去借，店里人跟你笑笑，“我们这里没有火。”你奇怪，他手上拿的正是一根水烟媒子。
三十五年十一月十九日初稿，二十日重写一过
Do you have such a custom in your place: don't borrow fire from a firecracker shop to smoke? This is a taboo thing. You go to borrow it, and the people in the store smile at you, "We don't have a fire here." You are strange, he is holding a hookah medium in his hand. First draft on November 19, 35, rewritten on the 20th
[1] 本篇原载1946年12月28日天津《益世报》；又载1947年1月5日上海《益世报》，文字略有改动。

1947年

1947年
鸡鸭名家[1]
刚才那两个老人是谁？
[1] This article was originally published in Tianjin's "Yishi Daily" on December 28, 1946; it was also published in Shanghai "Yishi Daily" on January 5, 1947, with slight changes in the text. In 1947 Chicken and duck master{{id_0000}} Who were those two old men just now?父亲在洗刮鸭掌，每个蹠蹼都撑开细细看过，是不是还有一丝泥垢，一片没有刮尽的皮，样子就像是作着一件精巧的手工似的。两付鸭掌，白白净净，一只一只，妥妥停停的一排。四个鸭翅，也白白净净，一只一只，妥妥停停一排。看起来简直绝对想不到那是从一只鸭子身上取下来的，仿佛天生成这么一种好吃东西，就这样生的就可以吃了，入口且一定爽糯鲜甜无比，漂亮极了，可爱极了。我忍不住伸手用指头去捏捏弄弄，觉得非常舒服。鸭翅尤其是血色和匀丰满而肉感。就是那个教我拿着简直无法下手的鸭肫，父亲也把它处理得极美，他握在手里，掂了一掂，“真不小，足有六两重！”用他那把角柄小刀从栗紫色当中闪着钢蓝色的那儿一个微微凹处轻轻一划，一翻，蓝黄色鱼子状的东西绽出来了。“你说脏，脏甚么！一点都不！”是不脏，他弄得教我觉得不脏，我甚至没有觉得臭味。洗涮了几次，往鸭掌鸭翅之间一放，样子名贵极了，一个甚么珍奇的果品似的。我看他作这一切，用他的洁白的，熨贴的，然而男性的，有精力，果断，可靠的手作这一切，看得很感动。王羲之论钟张书，“张精熟过人，”又曰“须得书意转深，点画之间皆有意，自有言所不得尽其妙者，事事皆然。”“精熟”，“有意”，说得真好。我追随他的每一动作，以心，以目，正如小时，看他作画。父亲一路来直称赞鸡鸭店那个伙计，说他拗折鸭掌鸭翅，准确极了，轻轻一来，毫不费事，毫不牵皮带肉，再三赞叹他得着了“诀窍”，所好者技，进乎道矣，相信父亲自己落到鸡鸭店作伙计，也一定能作到如此地步的！
My father was washing and scraping the duck paws, and each flipper was stretched out to see if there was still a trace of mud, a piece of skin that had not been scraped, and it looked like it was made by exquisite handiwork. Two duck paws, white and clean, one by one, in a row. The four duck wings are also white, one by one, and they stop in a row. It looks like it was taken from a duck, as if it was born with such a delicious thing, and it can be eaten raw like this. I couldn't help but reach out and pinch it with my fingers, and I felt very comfortable. Duck wings are especially blood-colored, uniform, plump and fleshy. It was the duck gizzard that taught me to hold it that I couldn't start, and my father also handled it beautifully, he held it in his hand and stroked it, "It's really not small, it's six taels heavy!" "With his horn-handled knife, he gently scratched a slight dent in the steel blue part of the chestnut purple, and when he turned it over, something blue and yellow caviar-like thing bloomed." You say dirty, what is dirty! Not at all!" "It's not dirty, he made me think it's not dirty, and I didn't even feel the smell. After washing it several times, I put it between the duck feet and wings, and it looked very precious, like some kind of rare fruit. I saw him do all this, using his white, ironed, but male, energetic, decisive, and reliable handiwork, and I was very moved. Wang Xizhi commented on Zhong Zhangshu, "Zhang Jing is extraordinary," and said, "You must have a deeper meaning of the book, and there is intention between the dots, and there are those who cannot do their best, and everything is the same." "Proficient", "intentional", it is really good. I followed his every movement, with my heart, with my eyes, just like when I was a child, watching him paint. My father praised the guy in the chicken and duck shop all the way, saying that he twisted the duck paw and duck wings, which was very accurate, and he came gently, effortlessly, without pulling the meat, and repeatedly praised him for getting the "know-how", and the skills he was good at were in the way, and he believed that his father himself would be able to do so much when he fell into the chicken and duck shop as a buddy!这个地方鸡鸭多，鸡鸭店多，教门馆子多，一定有不少回回。回回多，当有来历，是一颇有兴趣问题，我们家乡信回教的极少，数得出来的，鸡鸭店则全城似只一家。小小一间铺面，干净而寂寞，经过时总为一种深刻印象所袭，一种说不出来的东西与别人家截然不同。铺子在我舅舅家附近，出一个深巷高坡，上了大街，拐角上第一家就是。主人相貌奇古，一个非常的大鼻子，真大！鼻子上一个洞，一个洞，通红通红，十分鲜艳，一个酒糟鼻子。我从那一个鼻子上认得了什么叫酒糟鼻子。没有人告诉过我，我无师自通，一看见那个鼻子就知道了：“酒糟鼻子！”日后我在别处看见了类似而远比不上的鼻子，我就想到那个店主人。刚才在鸡鸭店我又想到那个鼻子！从来没有去买过鸡鸭，不知那个鼻子有没有那样的手段？现在那个人，那爿店，那条斜阳古柳的巷子不知如何了。……
There are many chickens and ducks in this place, many chicken and duck shops, and many restaurants, and there must be a lot of Huihui. There are very few Muslims in our hometown, and there are very few chicken and duck shops in the city. A small shop, clean and lonely, always struck by a deep impression when passing by, an indescribable thing that is completely different from other people's homes. The shop is near my uncle's house, out of a deep alley and high slope, up the street, and the first one on the corner. The owner has a strange appearance, a very big nose, really big! There is a hole in the nose, a hole, red and red, very bright, a rosacea nose. I recognized what a rosacea nose was from that nose. No one told me, I was self-taught, and I knew it as soon as I saw that nose: "Rosacea nose!" "In the future, I saw a nose that was similar but far inferior elsewhere, and I thought of the shopkeeper. I thought of that nose again at the chicken and duck shop just now! I have never been to buy chicken and duck, I wonder if that nose has such a method? Now that person, that shop, the alley of the ancient willows in the setting sun is gone. ……一串螃蟹在门后叽哩咕噜吐着泡沫。
打气炉子呼呼的响。这个机械文明在这个小院落里也发出一种古代的声音，仿佛是《天工开物》甚至《考工记》上的玩意了。
A string of crabs was purring and spitting foam behind the door. The gas stove whistled. This mechanical civilization also made an ancient sound in this small courtyard, as if it were a thing from "Tiangong Kaiwu" or even "Kao Gong Ji".一声鸡啼。一个金彩烂丽的大公鸡，一只很好的鸡，在小天井里徘徊顾盼，高傲冷清，架上两盆菊花，一盆晓色，一盆懒梳妆。——大概多数人一定欣赏懒梳妆名目，但那不免过于雕琢著意，太贴附事实，远不比晓色之得其神理，不落形象，妙手偶得，可遇不可求。看过又画过这种花的就可以晓得，再没有比这更难捉摸的颜色了，差一点就完全不是那回事！天晓的颜色是甚么样子呢，可是一看到这种花叆叆叇叇，清新醒活的劲儿，你就觉得一点不错，这正是“晓色”！心中所有，笔下所无的两个字。
A rooster crows. A big rooster with a golden color, a very good chicken, wandering around in the small patio, arrogant and deserted, with two pots of chrysanthemums, a pot of dawn color, and a pot of lazy dressing. ——Probably most people must appreciate the name of lazy dressing, but it is too carved and too close to the facts, far from being as good as the dawn color. Those who have seen and painted this kind of flower will know that there is no more elusive color than this, and it is almost not that kind of thing at all! What does the color of dawn look like, but when you see this kind of flower, fresh and awakening, you feel a little good, this is the "dawn color"! All in my heart, two words that I don't have in my pen.我们刚回来一会儿，买了鸭翅，鸭掌，鸭舌，鸭肫，八只蟹，青菜两棵，葱一小把，姜一块回来，我来看父亲，父亲整天请我吃，来了几天，吃了几天。昨天晚上隔了一层板壁，他睡在外面房间，我睡在里头，躺在床上商议明天不出去吃了，在家里自己作。不要多，菜只要两个，一个蟹，蒸一蒸，不费事，——喝酒；一个舌掌汤，放两个菜头烩一烩——吃饭。我父亲实在很会过日子，一个人在外头，一高兴就自己作饭，很会自得其乐！——那几只蟹买得好，在路上已经有两个人问过，好大蟹，甚么地方买的，多少钱一斤，很赞许的样子，一个老先生，一个女人，全都自然极了，亲切极了，可是我们一点也不认识，真有意思！大都市里恐怕很少这种情形了。
We just came back for a while, bought duck wings, duck feet, duck tongue, duck gizzards, eight crabs, two greens, a small handful of green onions, and a piece of ginger and came back, and I came to see my father, who invited me to eat all day long, and came for a few days, and ate for a few days. Last night, he slept in the outside room, and I slept inside, lying on the bed and discussing not going out to eat tomorrow, and making it myself at home. Don't have too much, only two dishes, one crab, steam it, and drink without ,—— trouble; a tongue palm soup, put two vegetable heads and stew them - eat. My father is really good at living, alone outside, when he is happy, he cooks by himself, and he is very good at enjoying himself! ——Those crabs were bought well, and two people on the road had already asked, what a big crab, where did you buy it, how much did it cost per pound, very approving, an old gentleman, a woman, all very natural and kind, but we didn't know each other at all, it's really interesting! I'm afraid this is rare in the big city.那两个老人是谁呢，父亲跟他们招呼的，在沙滩上？——
Who are those two old men, the one my father greeted them, on the beach? ——街上回来，行过沙滩。沙滩上有人分鸭子。三个，——后来又来了一个，四个，四个汉子站在一个大鸭圈里，在熙熙攘攘的鸭子里，一个一个，提起鸭脖子，看一看，分别丢在四边几个较小鸭圈里。看的甚么？——四个人都是短棉袄。有纽子扣得好好的，有的只掖上，下面皆系青布鱼裙，这一带江边湖边，荡口桥头，依水而住，靠水吃水的人，卖鱼的，贩菱藕的，收鸡头芡实，经营芦柴茭草生意的，类多有这么一条青布裙子。昨天在渡口市滩看见有这种裙子在那儿卖，我说我想买一条，父亲笑笑。我要当真去买，人家不卖，以为我是开玩笑的。真想看一个人走来讨价还价，说好说歹，这一定是很值得一看的。然而过去又过来，那两条裙子竟是原样放着，似乎没有人抖开前前后后看过！这种裙子穿在身上，有甚么好处，甚么方便，有甚么感情洋溢出来呢？这与其说是一种特别装束，不如说是一种特别装束的遗制，其由来盖当相当古远，似乎为了一点纪念的深心！他们才那么爱好这条裙子，和头上那种瓦块毡帽。这么一打扮，就“像”了，所有的身份就都出来了。“我与我周旋久，宁作我，”生养于水的，必将在水边死亡，他们从不梦想离开水，到另一处去过另外一种日子，他们简直自成一个族类，有他们不改的风教遗规。看的是鸭头，分别公鸭母鸭？母鸭下蛋，可能价钱卖得贵些？不对！鸭子上了市，多是卖给人吃，养老了下蛋的十只里没有一只。要单别公母，弄两个大圈就行了，把公的赶到一边，剩下不就全是母的了，无须这么麻烦。是公是母，一眼还不就看出来，得要那么捉起来放到眼前认一认么？那几个小圈里分明灰头绿头都有。——沙滩上悠悠窅窅，安静极了，然而万籁有声，江流浩浩，飘忽着一种广大深微的呼吁，一种半消沉半积极的神秘意向，极其悄怆感人。东北风。交过小雪了，真的入了冬了，可是江南地暖，虽已至“相逢不出手”时候，身体各处却还觉得舒舒服服，饶有清兴，不很肃杀。天有默阴，空气里潮润润的。新麦，旧柳，抽了卷须的豌豆苗，散过了絮的蒲公英，全都欣然接受这点水气，很久没有下雨。鸭子似乎也很满意这样的天气，显得比平常安静得多。脖子被提起来，并不表示抗议，——也由于那几个鸭贩子提得是地方，一提起，就势儿就摔了过去，不致令它们痛苦，甚至那一摔还会教它们得到筋肉伸张的快感，所以往来走动，煦煦然很自在的样子，一点也看不出悲惨。人多以为鸭子是很会唠叨的动物，其实鸭子也有默处的时候，不过这么一大群鸭子而能如此雍雍雅雅，我还从未见过！它们今天早上大都得到一顿饱餐了罢。——甚么地方来了一阵煮大麦芽的气味，香得很，一定有人用长柄大铲子慢慢的搅和着，就要出糖了。——是称称斤量，分开新鸭老鸭？也不对。这些鸭子全差不多大，没有问题，全是今年养的，生日不是四月就是五月初头，上下差也差不了几天。骡马看牙口，鸭子不是骡马。要看，也得叫鸭子张嘴，而鸭子嘴全闭得扁扁的！黄嘴也扁扁的，绿嘴也扁扁的。掰开来看全都是一圈细锯齿，它的板牙在肚子里，膆囊里那堆石粒子！嘴上看甚么呢？——我已经断定他们看的是鸭嘴。看甚么呢？哦，鸭嘴上有点东西！有一个一个印子，刻出来的。有的是一道，有的两道，有的一个十字叉叉，那个脸红通通的小伙子，（他棉袄是新的，鞋袜干干净净，他不喝酒，不赌钱，他是个好“儿子”，他有个很疼爱他的母亲。我并不嫉妒你！）尽挑那种嘴上两道的。这是记认。这一群鸭子不是一家养的，主人相熟，一伙运过江来，搅乱了，现在再分开各自出卖。对了，不会错的，这个记认作得实在有道理。
Coming back from the street, I walked across the beach. Someone was dividing ducks on the beach. Three ,—— later, one, four, four men stood in a big duck pen, among the bustling ducks, one by one, lifted the duck neck, took a look, and threw it into several smaller duck pens on the four sides. What are you looking at? ——All four of them are short cotton jackets. There are buttons that are well buttoned, some are only tucked up, and the bottom is all tied with green cloth fish skirts. Yesterday I saw this kind of skirt for sale there at the ferry beach, and I said I wanted to buy one, and my father smiled. I want to buy it seriously, but they don't sell it, thinking I'm joking. I really want to see a person come up and bargain, for better or worse, this must be worth seeing. However, when I came over in the past, the two skirts were left as they were, and no one seemed to have looked at them before and after! What are the benefits, conveniences, and emotions of this kind of skirt on the body? This is not so much a special costume as a legacy of a special costume, which has a very ancient origin, and seems to be a deep commemoration! That's why they love this skirt so much and the tile felt hat on their heads. When you dress up like this, you will be "like", and all identities will come out. "I have been dealing with me for a long time, and I would rather be myself," those who are born and raised in the water will die by the water, they never dream of leaving the water, going to another place to live another life, they are simply a race of their own, with their unchanging customs. Looking at the duck head, distinguish the male duck and the female duck? The female duck lays eggs, may the price be more expensive? Wrong! When the ducks are on the market, they are mostly sold to people to eat, and there is not one of the ten eggs that lay eggs in old age. If you want to say goodbye to the male and female, just make two big circles, drive the male aside, and the rest will be all female, so there is no need to be so troublesome. Whether it is male or female, you can see it at a glance, do you have to catch it like that and put it in front of you to recognize it? There are clearly gray and green heads in those small circles. ——The beach is leisurely and quiet, but there is a sound of everything, the river flows mighty, and there is a vast and deep appeal, a kind of mysterious intention that is half depressed and half positive, which is extremely quiet and touching. Northeast wind. After handing over the light snow, it is really winter, but the floor heating in Jiangnan, although it has reached the time of "meeting and not shooting", all parts of the body still feel comfortable, refreshing, and not very sullen. There is silent cloudiness in the sky, and the air is moist. New wheat, old willows, pea seedlings with tendrils, and dandelions that have scattered fluff all gladly accepted this moisture, and it hadn't rained for a long time. The ducks also seemed to be very satisfied with the weather, which was much quieter than usual. The neck was lifted, which did not indicate protest,—— and because the duck dealers were lifted to the place, they fell over as soon as they were mentioned, so as not to cause them pain, and even the fall would teach them the pleasure of stretching their muscles, so they walked back and forth, warm and comfortable, and there was no misery at all. Most people think that ducks are very nagging animals, but in fact, ducks also have times to be silent, but I have never seen such a large group of ducks so graceful! Most of them got a full meal this morning. ——Where did the smell of boiling barley malt come from, it was very fragrant, someone must be stirring it slowly with a long-handled shovel, and it was about to come out of sugar. ——Is it weighing the pounds and separating the new ducks and old ducks? Not right. These ducks are all about the same size, no problem, they are all raised this year, and their birthdays are either April or early May, and the difference is not a few days. Mules and horses look at their teeth, but ducks are not mules and horses. If you want to see, you have to ask the duck to open its mouth, and the duck's mouth is all closed! The yellow beak is also flat, and the green beak is also flat. When you break it open, it is all a circle of fine serrations, its teeth are in the belly, and the pile of stone particles in the pouch! What do you see in your mouth? ——I have concluded that they are looking at the duck beak. What are you looking at? Oh, there is something on the duck's beak! There is a mark, carved out. Some are one, some are two, some are cross-forked, the blushing young man, (his padded jacket is new, his shoes and socks are clean, he doesn't drink, he doesn't gamble, he is a good "son", he has a mother who loves him very much. I'm not jealous of you!) Pick the kind of two-mouthed one. This is a recognition. This group of ducks is not raised by a family, the owners are familiar, and they are transported across the river in a group, and they are messed up, and now they are sold separately. By the way, it can't be wrong, this recognition really makes sense.江边风大，立久了究竟有点冷，走罢。
The wind by the river is strong, and it is a little cold after standing for a long time, so let's go.刚才运那一车子鸡的夫妻俩不知到了那里。一板车的鸡，一笼一笼堆得高高的。这些鸡算不算他们自己的？算他们的，该不坏了，很值几文呢。看样子似不大像，他们穿得可大不齐整。这是作活，不是上庙烧香，不是回娘家过节，用不着打扮，也许。这付板车未免太笨重了一点，车本身比那些鸡一定重得多。——虽然空车子拉起来一定又觉得很轻松的。我起初真有点不平，这男人岂有此理，让女人在前头拉，自己提了两个看起来没有多大分量的蒲包在后头自自在在的踱方步，你就在后头推一把也不妨呀！父亲不说甚么，很关心的看他们过去。一直到了快拐弯的地方，我们一相视，心里有同样感动了。这一带地怎么那么不平，那么多的坑！车子拉动了之后，并不怎么费力的，陷在坑里要推上来才不容易。一下子歪倒了，赶紧上去救住，不但要气力，而且要机警灵活，压着撞着都不轻。这一下子，够受的！他抵住了，然而一个轮子还是上不来。我们走过来，两个老人也跑了过来。我上去推了一把，毫无用处，还是老人之一检了一块砖煞住一个老往后滑的轮子，那个男人（我现在觉得他很伟大，很敬佩他），发一声嘁，车子来了！不该走这条路的，该稍为绕绕，旁边不还稍为平点么。她是没有看到？是想一冲冲过去的？他要发脾气了，埋怨了！然而他没有，不但脸上没有，心里也没有。接过女人为他拾回来的落掉的瓦块帽子，掸一掸草屑，戴上，“难为了，”又走了，车子吱吱吜吜拉了过去。我这才听见，怎么刚才车轴似乎没有声音呢？加点油是否好些？他那两个蒲包里是甚么东西？鸡食？路上“歪掉”的鸡？两包盐？
The couple who transported the cart of chickens just now didn't know where they had arrived. A cart of chickens is stacked high in cages. Are these chickens their own? Count theirs, they should be bad, they are worth a few cents. They don't look like much, they are dressed neatly. This is work, not going to the temple to burn incense, not going back to my parents' house for the festival, no need to dress up, maybe. This pallet cart is a little too bulky, and the cart itself must be much heavier than those chickens. ——Although the empty cart must feel very easy to pull. I was really a little unfair at first, how could this man have this reason, let the woman pull in front, and he carried two cattails that didn't seem to have much weight and paced freely in the back, you might as well push it in the back! My father didn't say anything, but watched them pass with great concern. When we reached the corner, we looked at each other and were equally moved. Why is the ground so uneven in this area, so many pits! After the car pulled, it didn't take much effort, and it was not easy to push it up when stuck in the pit. It was tilted all of a sudden, so I quickly went up to save it, not only because of my strength, but also because I had to be alert and flexible, and it was not easy to press and hit. This time, it's enough! He resisted, but a wheel still couldn't come up. We came over, and the two old men also ran over. I went up and pushed it, but it was useless, or one of the old men checked a brick to brake an old wheel that was sliding backwards, and the man (I think he is great now and admire him very much) made a beep, the car is coming! If you shouldn't take this road, you should go around a little, and isn't it a little flatter next to it? Didn't she see it? Did she want to rush over? He was going to lose his temper and complain! However, he didn't, not only on his face, but also in his heart. He took the fallen tile hat that the woman had picked up for him, dusted off the grass clippings, put it on, and left, and the car creaked and pulled over. I just heard it, why did the axle seem to have no sound just now? Is it better to add some oil? What is in his two cattail bags? Chicken food? Chicken "crooked" on the road? Two packs of salt?我想起《打花鼓》，
恩爱的夫妻
槌不离锣
I think of "Playing the Flower Drum", Loving couple The hammer never leaves the gong这两句老在我心里唱，连底下那个“啊呃哎”。这个“啊呃哎”一声一声的弄得我心里很凄楚起来。小时杂在商贾负贩人中听过庙戏多回，不知怎么记得这么两句《一枝花》。后来翻查过戏谱，曾记诵过《打花鼓》全出，可是一有甚么感触时仍是这两句，没头没脑的尽是哼哼。
These two sentences are always sung in my heart, even the "ah, uh, hey" at the bottom. This "ah, uh, hey" made me feel very sad. When I was a child, I heard the temple opera many times among the merchants and traffickers, and I don't know how to remember these two sentences "A Branch of Flowers". Later, I checked the score and remembered that "Playing the Flower Drum" was all out, but when I felt something, it was still these two sentences, and the headless ones were all humming.这个记认作得实在很有道理。遍观鸭子全身，还有甚么其他地方可以作记认呢？不像鸡，鸡长大了毛色各各不同，养鸡人全都记得，在他们眼中世界上没有两只同样的鸡，（《王婆骂鸡》曲本中列鸡色目甚繁夥贴当，可惜背不全了！）偷去杀了吃掉，剥下一堆毛，他认也认得清，小鸡子则都给染了颜色，在肩翅之间，或红或绿。有老母鸡领着，也不大容易走失。染了颜色不大好看，我小时颇不赞成，但人家养鸡可不是为的给我看的！鸭子麻烦，身上不能染红绿颜色，它要下水，整天浸在水里颜色要褪。到一放大毛，普天之下的鸭子就只有两种样子了，公鸭，母鸭。所有的公鸭都一样，所有的母鸭也全一样。鸭子养在河里，你家养，他家养，在河里会面打伙时极多，虽然赶鸭人对自己的鸭有法调度，可是有时不免要混杂。可以作记认，一看就看出来的只有那张嘴。（沈石田画鸭，总是把鸭嘴画得比实际的要宽长些，看过他三幅有鸭子或专画鸭子的画，莫不如是。）上帝造鸭，没有想到鸭嘴有这么个用处罢。小鸭子，嘴嫩嫩的，刻起来大概很容易，用把小洋刀，钳子，钉头，或者随便甚么，甚至荆棘的刺，但没有问题，养鸭人家一定专有一个甚么东西，轻轻那么一划就成了。鸭嘴是角质，就像指甲似的没有神经，刻起来不痛。刻过的，没有刻过的，只要是一张嘴，一样的吃碎米，浮萍，蛆虫，虾虿，猫杀子罗汉狗子小鱼，鸭子们大概毫不在乎，不会有一只鸭子发现了，大叫出来，“咦，老哥，你嘴上怎么回事，雕了花？”想出这个主意的必然是个伶俐聪敏人。这四个汉子中那一个会发明出来，如果从前从未有过这么一个办法？那个红脸小伙子眼睛生得很美，很撩人的，他可以去演电影。——不，还是鱼裙瓦块帽做鸭子生意！
This recognition is really reasonable. Looking around the whole body of the duck, is there any other place to make a mark? Unlike chickens, chickens grow up with different coat colors, and chicken farmers all remember that there are no two identical chickens in the world in their eyes. Steal, kill and eat it, peel off a pile of hair, he recognizes it clearly, and the chicks are dyed in color, between the shoulders and wings, or red or green. There is an old hen leading it, and it is not easy to get lost. The dyeing color is not very good, I didn't approve of it when I was a child, but people don't raise chickens for me to see! Ducks are troublesome, they can't be dyed red and green, they have to go into the water, and the color will fade when they are immersed in the water all day long. When it comes to growing hair, there are only two types of ducks in the world, male ducks and female ducks. All male ducks are the same, and all female ducks are the same. Ducks are raised in the river, you raise them, they raise them, and there are a lot of meetings and gangs in the river. It can be recognized, and the only thing that can be seen at a glance is the mouth. (Shen Shitian painted ducks, always drawing the duck's beak wider and longer than the actual one, and I have seen his three paintings with ducks or ducks specializing in them, so it is not as good as this.) God made ducks, but he didn't expect the duck beak to be so useful. Ducklings, with tender mouths, are probably easy to carve, with a small foreign knife, pliers, nail heads, or whatever, even thorns, but there is no problem, duck farmers must have something special, just a slight stroke. The duck's beak is, like a fingernail without nerves, and it doesn't hurt to carve. Carved, not carved, as long as it is a mouth, it eats the same broken rice, duckweed, maggots, scorpions, cats kill children, Arhat dogs, small fish, ducks probably don't care, no duck will find out, and shout, "Hey, brother, what's going on with your mouth, carved flowers?" The person who came up with this idea must be a clever and intelligent person. Which of these four men will invent it, if there has never been such a method before? The red-faced young man has beautiful eyes and is very sultry, he can go to the movie. ——No, it's still a fish skirt and a tile hat to do duck business!然而那两个老人是谁呢？
But who are those two old men?父亲揭起煨罐盖子看看，闻了闻气味，“差不多了，”把一束葱放下去，掇到另一小火的炉上闷起来，打汽炉子空出来蒸蟹。碗筷摆出来，两个杯子里酌满了酒，就要吃饭了。酒真好，我十年来没有喝过这样好酒。父亲说我来了这几天，他比平常喝得要多些，我很喜欢。
My father lifted the lid of the simmering can and looked at it, smelled the smell, "It's almost over," put down a bunch of green onions, picked it up on another stove on a small fire and stuffed it up, and emptied the steam stove to steam the crabs. The bowls and chopsticks were laid out, and the two glasses were full of wine, and it was time to eat. The wine is so good, I haven't drunk such good wine in ten years. My father said that in the past few days since I came, he has been drinking more than usual, and I like it very much.“那两个年纪大的是谁？”
“怎么，——你不记得了？”
"Who are those two older?" "Why,—— you don't remember?"我还以为我的话问得突兀，我们今天看见过好几个老人，虽然同时看见，在一处的，只有那两个；虽然父亲跟他们招呼过，未必像我一样对他们有兴趣，一直存在心里罢。他这一反问教我很高兴，分明这是很值得记得的两个人，我的眼睛没有错，他们确是有吸引人的地方的！我以为父亲跟他们招呼时有种特殊的敬爱，也没有错，我一问，他即知道问的是谁。大概父亲也会谈起的。
I thought my words were abrupt, we have seen several old people today, although we saw them at the same time, only two of them were in one place; although my father greeted them, he may not be as interested in them as I am, and he has always been in my heart. I was very happy to hear his rhetorical question, it was clear that these were two people who were very memorable, my eyes were not wrong, they were indeed attractive! I thought that my father had a special love when he greeted them, and it was not wrong, but when I asked, he knew who he was asking. Probably my father would talk about it too.“一个是余老五。”
"One is Yu Laowu."余老五！这我立刻就知道了，是高大，广额方颡，一腮帮子白胡子根的那个。刚才我就觉得似曾相识，那里看见过的，想来想去，找不到那个名字，我还以为又是把在另一处看过的一个老人的影子错借来了。他是余老五，真不该忘记。近二十年了，我从前想过他，若是老了该是甚么样子，正是这个样子！难怪那么面熟。他不该上这里来，若在家乡街上，我能不认得？——那个瘦瘦小小，目光精利，一小撮山羊胡子，头老微微扬起，眼角微有嘲讽痕迹，行动不像是六十几的人，是——
Yu Laowu! I knew this immediately, it was the one with a tall, square forehead, and a white beard. Just now I felt familiar, I had seen it there, and after thinking about it, I couldn't find the name, and I thought I had borrowed the shadow of an old man I had seen elsewhere. He is Yu Laowu, and I really shouldn't forget it. Nearly twenty years later, I used to think about him, what he would be like when he was old, this is what it looks like! No wonder it's so familiar. He shouldn't have come up here, if he was on the street of his hometown, how could I not recognize him? ——That thin and small, sharp-eyed, a small goatee, the old man raised his head slightly, the corners of his eyes showed slight signs of ridicule, and his behavior did not look like a person in his sixties, yes——“陆长庚。”
“陆长庚。”
“陆鸭。”
陆鸭！不过我只能说是知道他，那时候我还小。——不像余老五那是天天见得到的老街坊。
"Lu Changgeng." "Lu Changgeng." "Lu Ya." Lu Ya! But I can only say that I knew him, I was still young at that time. ——Unlike Yu Laowu, who is an old neighbor who can be seen every day.说是老街坊，余大房离我们家很有一截子路，地名大溏，已经是附郭最外一圈，是这条街的尾闾了。余大房是一个炕，余老五在余大房炕房当师傅。他虽姓余，炕房可不是他开的，虽然他是这个炕房里顶重要的一个人。老板或者是他一宗，恐怕相当远，不大清楚了。大溏是一片大水，由此可至东北各乡及下河县城水道，而水边有人家处亦称大溏。这是个很动人的地方，风景人物皆极有佳胜处，产生故事极多。在这里出入的，多是那种戴瓦块毡帽系鱼裙朋友。用一个小船在河心里顺流而下，可以看到垂杨柳，脆皮榆，茅棚瓦屋之间高爽地段常有一座比较齐整的房子，两边墙上粉得雪白，几个黑漆大字，显明阅目，一望可见，夏天外头多用芦席搭一个凉棚，绿缸中渍着凉茶，冬天照例有卖花生薄脆的孩子在门口踢毽子，树顶常飘有做会的纸幡或红绿灯笼的那是“行”。一种是鲜货行，代客投牙买卖鱼虾水货，荸荠慈菇，芋艿山药，鸡头薏米，种种杂物。一种是鸡鸭蛋行。鸡鸭蛋行旁边常常是一爿炕房。炕房无字号，多称姓某几房，似颇有古意，而余大房声誉最著，一直是最大的一家。
It is said to be an old neighborhood, Yu Dafang is a long way from our house, the place name is Da Ling, which is already the outermost circle of the attached city, and it is the tail of this street. Yu Dafang is a kang, and Yu Laowu works as a master in Yu Dafang's kang room. Although his surname is Yu, he did not open the kang room, although he is the most important person in this kang house. The boss or his case, I'm afraid it's quite far away, it's not very clear. Da Wei is a large water, from which it can reach the waterways of the northeast townships and Xiahe County, and there are people by the water who are also called Da Yang. This is a very moving place, with beautiful scenery and characters, and a lot of stories. Most of the people who come and go here are the kind of friends who wear tile felt hats and fish skirts. Use a small boat to go down the river in the middle of the river, you can see weeping willows, crispy elms, and there is often a relatively neat house in the high area between the thatched sheds and tiled houses, with snow-white powder on both sides of the walls, a few large black paint characters, which are obvious and visible, and in summer, a pergola is built with reed mats outside, and herbal tea is soaked in the green tank. One is a fresh goods store, where valets buy and sell fish and shrimp parallel goods, water chestnuts and cici mushrooms, taro yams, chicken head barley, and all kinds of miscellaneous items. One is the chicken and duck egg shop. Next to the chicken and duck egg shop is often a kang house. The kang room has no name, and most of them are called a certain room, which seems to have a lot of ancient meaning, and Yu Dafang has the most reputation and has always been the largest one.余五整天没有甚么事情，老看他在街上逛来逛去，而且到哪里提了他那把紫沙茶壶，坐下来就聊，一聊一半天。而且好喝酒，一天两顿，一顿四两。而且好管闲事，跟他毫无关系的事，他也要挤上来说话。而且声音奇大，这条街上一爿茶馆里随时听见他的声音。有时炕房里差个小孩子来找他有事，问人看见没有。答话人常是“看没有看见，听倒听见的。再走过三家门面，你把耳朵竖起来，找不到，再回来问我。”他一年闲到头，吃，喝，穿，用，全不缺。余大房养他。只有春夏之间，不大看见他影子了。
Yu Wu had nothing to do all day, always watching him walk around the street, and where he mentioned his purple sand teapot, he would sit down and chat, chatting for half a day. And he is good at drinking, two meals a day, four taels a meal. And he is nosy, and he has to squeeze up to talk about things that have nothing to do with him. And the voice is so loud that his voice can be heard at any time in a teahouse on this street. Sometimes a child is sent to him in the kang room to ask if he has seen anything. The answerer is often "I didn't see it, I heard it." Walk through three more facades, you prick up your ears, you can't find it, and then come back and ask me. "He has been idle all year round, eating, drinking, wearing, and using, and there is no shortage of it. Yu Dafang raised him. Only in spring and summer, I don't see much of him.不知多少年没有吃那种“巧蛋”了。巧蛋是孵小鸡没有孵出来的蛋。不知甚么道理，常常有些小鸡长不全，多半是长了一个小头，下面还是个蛋，不过颜色已变，黄黄的，上面略有几根毛丝；有的甚至连翅膀也全了。只是出不了壳。出不了壳，是鸡生得笨，所以这种蛋也称为“拙蛋”，说是小孩吃不得的，吃了书念不好。可是通常反过来，称为“巧蛋”了，念书的孩子也就马马虎虎准许吃了，虽然并不因为带一个巧字而鼓励孩子吃。这东西很多人不吃的。因为看上去有点发酥发麻，想一想也怪不舒服。对于不吃的人，我并不反对。有人很爱，到时候千方百计的去找。很惭愧，我是吃过的，而且只好老实说，味道很不错。吃都吃过了，赖也赖不掉，想高雅也高雅不起来了。——吃巧蛋的时候，看不见余五了，清明前后，正是炕鸡子的时候。接着，又得炕小鸭子，四月。
I don't know how many years I haven't eaten that kind of "clever egg". A clever egg is an egg that has not hatched from a chick. For some reason, sometimes some chicks do not grow completely, most of them have a small head, and there is still an egg below, but the color has changed, yellow, and there are a few hairs on it; some even have wings. It's just that it can't get out of the shell. If you can't get out of the shell, the chicken is stupid, so this kind of egg is also called "clumsy egg", which means that children can't eat it, and they can't read well after eating. But usually on the contrary, it is called a "clever egg", and the children who study are allowed to eat it so-so, although they are not encouraged to eat it because they have a clever word. Many people don't eat this thing. Because it looks a little crispy and numb, it's strange to think about it. I have no objection to those who don't eat it. Some people love it very much, and they will do everything possible to find it when the time comes. I'm very ashamed, I've eaten it, and I have to be honest, it tastes very good. I've eaten everything, I can't get rid of it, and I can't be elegant if I want to be elegant. ——When I ate the egg, I couldn't see Yu Wu, and around Qingming, it was the time for kang chickens. Then, I got kang ducklings, April.蛋先得挑一挑，那多是蛋行里人责任，哪一路，哪一路收来的蛋，他们都分得好好的，鸡鸭也有“种口”，哪一种容易养，哪一种长得高大，哪一种下得蛋，他们全知道。分好了，剔一道，薄壳，过小，散黄，乱带，日久，全不要。再就是炕房师傅的事了。在一间暗屋子里，一扇门上开一个小圆洞，蛋放在洞上，闭一只眼睛，睁一只眼睛反覆映看，谓之“照蛋”。第一次叫“头照”。头照是照“珠子”，照蛋黄中的胚珠，看受过精没有，用他们说法，是看有过公鸡，或公鸭没有。没有过公鸡公鸭的，出不了小鸡小鸭。照完了，这就“下炕”了。下炕后三四天，（他们是论时辰的，不会这么含胡，三四天是我的印象，）取出来再照，名为“二照”，二照照珠子“发饱”没有。头照很简单，谁都作得来，不用在门洞上，用手轻握如筒，蛋放在底下，迎着亮，转来转去，就看得出有没有那么一点了。二照比较要点功夫，胚珠是否隆起了一点，常常不容易断定。二照剔下来的蛋拿到外头卖，还是一样，一点看不出是炕过的。二照之后，三照四照，隔几天一次，三四照之后的蛋就变了，到知道炕里蛋都在正常发育，就不再动它，静待出炕“上床”。
Eggs have to be picked first, which is mostly the responsibility of the people in the egg industry, which way, which way to collect the eggs, they are all well divided, chickens and ducks also have "seed mouths", which one is easy to raise, which one grows tall, which one lays eggs, they all know. Divide it, pick one, thin shell, too small, loose yellow, messy, over time, don't want it at all. Then it's about the kang room master. In a dark room, a small round hole is opened in a door, the egg is placed on the hole, one eye is closed, and one eye is opened to look at repeatedly, which is called "taking pictures of eggs". The first time is called "head photo". The head photo is to look at the "beads", look at the ovules in the egg yolk, to see if there has been fertilization, in their words, to see if there has been a rooster, or whether there is a male duck. If you have not had a rooster or duck, you can't produce chicks and ducklings. After taking the photo, this is "going down to the kang". Three or four days after the kang, (they are talking about the time, they won't be so bearded, three or four days is my impression,) take out the photo again, called "second photo", and the second photo shows whether the beads are "full". The head photo is very simple, anyone can make it, no need to be on the door opening, hold it lightly like a tube with your hand, put the egg under it, face the light, turn around, you can see if there is such a little bit. The second photo is more important, whether the ovule is bulging a little or not, it is often not easy to conclude. The eggs removed by the second photo are sold outside, and they are still the same, and they can't be seen at all that they have been kang. After the second photo, three photos and four photos, every few days, the eggs after three or four photos change, until they know that the eggs in the kang are developing normally, they stop moving it and wait for the kang to "go to bed".下了炕之后，不大随便让人去看。下炕那天照例三牲五事，大香大烛，燃鞭放炮，磕头拜敬祖师菩萨，很隆重庄严。炕一年就作一季生意，赚钱蚀本就看这几天。但跟余五熟识，尤其是跟父亲一起去，就可以走进炕边看看。所谓“炕”是一口一口缸，里头涂糊泥草，下面不断用火烘着。火要微微的，保持一定温度。太热了一炕蛋就都熟了，太小也透不进去。甚么时候加点糠或草，甚么时候去掉一点，这是余五职分。那两天他整天不离开一步。许多事情不用他下手，他只须不时看一看，吩咐两句话，有下手从头照着作。余五这可显得重要极了，尊贵极了，也谨慎极了，还温柔极了。他说话细声细气，走路也轻轻的，举止动作，全跟他这个人不相称。他神情很奇怪，像总在谛听着甚么似的，怕自己轻轻咳嗽也会惊散这点声音似的，聚精会神，身体各部全在一种沉湎，一种兴奋，一种极度敏感之中。熟悉炕房情形的人，都说这行饭不容易吃，一炕下来，人要瘦一套，吃饭睡觉也不能马虎一刻，这样前前后后半个多月！从前炕房里供余五抽烟的。他总是躺在屋角一张小床上抽烟，或者闭目假寐，不时就壶嘴喝一口茶，哑哑的说一句甚么话。一样借以量度的器械都没有，就凭他这个人，一个精细准确而复杂多方的“表”，不以形求，全以神遇，用他的下意识来判断一切。这才是目睹身验着一个一个生命怎么完成，多有意思事情！炕房里暗暗的，暖洋洋的，空气里潮濡濡的，笼着一度暧昧含隐的异样感觉，怔怔悸悸，缠绵持续，惶恐不安，一种怀春含情的感觉。余老五也真是有一种“母性”，虽然这两个字不管用在从前一腮帮子黑胡根子，现在一腮帮子白胡根子的余五身上都似颇为滑稽。
After getting off the kang, it is not easy for people to see it. On the day of the kang, as usual, three animals and five things, big incense and candles, firecrackers and cannons, kowtows to the ancestor and Bodhisattva, very grand and solemn. Kang does business for one season a year, and making money depends on these days. But if you are familiar with Yu Wu, especially with your father, you can walk into the kang and take a look. The so-called "kang" is a jar with mud and grass inside, and the bottom is constantly baked with fire. The fire should be slightly and maintain a certain temperature. If it is too hot, the eggs will be cooked, and if they are too small, they will not be able to penetrate. When to add some chaff or grass, and when to remove a little, this is the remaining five duties. He didn't leave a single step all day for those two days. He doesn't need to start many things, he just needs to take a look from time to time, order a couple of words, and start from the beginning. Yu Wu is very important, very noble, very cautious, and very gentle. He spoke softly, walked gently, and his demeanor and movements were all incommensurate with him. His expression was very strange, as if he was always listening to something, as if he was afraid that he would be startled by a gentle cough, and he was concentrating, and all parts of his body were in a kind of indulgence, excitement, and extreme sensitivity. People who are familiar with the situation in the kang room say that this line of food is not easy to eat, and after a kang, people have to lose a set, and they can't be sloppy when they eat and sleep, so they have been around for more than half a month! In the past, Yu Wu smoked in the kang room. He always lay on a small bed in the corner of the house to smoke, or closed his eyes and pretended to sleep, taking a sip of tea from the spout from time to time, and saying something dumbly. There is no instrument to measure, just rely on him, a fine, accurate and complex "table", not by form, but by divine experience, and with his subconscious. This is what interesting it is to witness how life is completed one by one! The kang room was dark, warm, and the air was wet, covered with a strange feeling that was once ambiguous and faint, stunned and palpitating, lingering and persistent, fearful and uneasy, a feeling of nostalgia and affection. Yu Laowu really has a kind of "motherhood", although these two words are not used in the past, but now they seem to be quite funny in Yu Wu, who has a white beard.蛋炕好了，放在一张一张木架上，那就是“床”。床上垫棉花，放上去，不多久，就“出”了，小鸡子一个一个啄破蛋壳，啾啾叫起来。听到这声音，老板心里就开了花，而余五眼皮一搭拉，已经沉沉睡去了，小鸡子在街上卖的时候，正是余五呼呼大睡的时候。——鸭子比较简单，连床也不用上，难的是鸡。
The egg kang is ready, placed on wooden racks one by one, that is the "bed". The bed is lined with cotton, put it on, and it doesn't take long for it to "come out", and the chicks peck the eggshells one by one and chirp. Hearing this sound, the boss's heart bloomed, and Yu Wu's eyelids were pulled, and he had fallen asleep, and when the chicks were sold on the street, it was when Yu Wu fell asleep. ——Ducks are relatively simple, and they don't even need to be on the bed, but the difficult thing is the chickens.卖小鸡小鸭是很有意思的行业。小鸡跟真正的春天一起来，气候也暖了，花也开了。而小鸭子接着就带来了夏天。“春江水暖鸭先知，”说的岂是老鸭？然而老鸭多半养在家里，在江水中游泳的似不甚多。画春江水暖诗意画出黄毛小鸭来，是极自然的，然而事实上大概是错的。小鸡小鸭都放在一个竹编浅沿有盖大圆盒子里卖，挑了各处走，似乎没有吆唤的。一路走，一路啾啾的叫，好玩极了。小鸡小鸭皆极可爱，小鸡娇弱伶仃，小鸭常傻气固执。看它们窜跑跳跃，感到生命的欢欣。提在手里，那点微微挣抗搔骚，令人心中砰砰然动，胸口痒痒的。
Selling chicks and ducklings is a very interesting industry. Chicks come with real spring, the climate is warmer, and the flowers are blooming. And the ducklings then brought summer. "Spring River Plumbing Duck Prophet," are you talking about old ducks? However, most of the old ducks are kept at home, and there don't seem to be many swimming in the river. It is very natural to draw yellow-haired ducklings poetically drawn in spring river plumbing, but in fact it is probably wrong. The chicks and ducklings are all sold in a large round box with a shallow edge of bamboo, and they go around, and there seems to be no shouting. Walking all the way, chirping all the way, it's fun. Chicks and ducklings are very cute, chicks are delicate, and ducklings are often stupid and stubborn. Watching them run and jump, I feel the joy of life. Holding it in his hand, the little bit of struggle to resist the scratching made people's hearts pound and their chests itched.余大房何以生意最好？因为有一个余老五，余老五是这一行的一个“状元”。余老五何以是状元？他炕出来的小鸡跟别人家的摆在一起，来买的人一定买余老五的鸡，他的小鸡特别大。刚刚出炕的小鸡，刚从蛋里出来的，照理是一样大小，不过是那么重一个，然而余五鸡就能大些。上戥子称，上下差不多，而看上去他的小鸡要大一套！那就好看多了，当然有人买。怎么能大一套呢？他让小鸡的绒毛都出足了。鸡蛋下了炕，比如要几十个时辰，可以出炕了，别的师傅都不敢到那个最后限度，小鸡子出得了，就取出来上床，生怕火功水气错了一点，一炕蛋整个的废了，还是稳点罢，没有胆量等。余五大概总比较多等一个半个时辰。那一个半个时辰是顶吃紧时候，半个多月功夫就在这一会现出交代，余五也疲倦到达到极限了，然而他比平常更觉醒，更敏锐。他那样子让我想起“火眼狻猊”，“金眼雕”之类绰号，完全变了一个人，眼睛陷下去，变了色，光彩近乎疯人狂人。脾气也大了，动辄激恼发威，简直碰他不得，专断极了，顽固极了。很奇怪的，他倒简直不走近火炕一步，半倚半靠在小床上抽烟，一句话也不说。木床绵絮准备得好好的，徒弟不放心，轻轻来问一句“起了罢？”摇摇头，“起了罢？”还是摇摇头，只管抽他的烟，这一会儿正是小鸡放绒毛的时候，忽而作然而起，“起！”徒弟们赶紧一窝蜂取出来，简直才放上床，就啾啾啾啾的纷纷出来了。余五自掌炕以来，从未误过一回事，同行中无不赞叹佩服，以为神乎其技。道理是简单的，可是人得不到他那种不移的信心。不是强作得来的，是天才，是学问，余五炕小鸭，亦类此出色。至于照蛋煨火等节目，是尤其余事了。
Why does Yu Dafang have the best business? Because there is a Yu Laowu, Yu Laowu is a "champion" in this industry. Why is Yu Laowu the champion? The chicks he came out of the kang were placed together with other people's, and those who came to buy them must buy Yu Laowu's chickens, and his chicks were very big. The chicks that have just come out of the kang are the same size as the eggs, but they are so heavy, but Yu Wu's chickens can be bigger. The upper and lower parts are about the same, and it looks like his chicks are one set bigger! Then it would be much better, of course someone would buy it. How can it be a big set? He made the chick's fluff come out. The eggs are put on the kang, for example, it takes dozens of hours, you can get out of the kang, other masters don't dare to reach that deadline, the chick can come out, so take it out and go to bed, for fear that the fire energy and moisture are a little wrong, a kang egg is useless, it's better to be stable, there is no guts, etc. Yu Wu probably always waits for an hour and a half. That half hour was the time when the top was tight, and more than half a month of kung fu was explained at this meeting, and Yu Wu was also tired to the limit, but he was more awake and sharper than usual. He reminded me of nicknames such as "Fire-Eyed Lion" and "Golden-eyed Eagle", and he was a completely different person, his eyes sank, changed color, and his brilliance was almost crazy. He also had a big temper, and he was so angry that he couldn't touch him, he was extremely arbitrary and stubborn. Strangely, he didn't even take a step closer to the fire kang, half leaning on the small bed and smoking, without saying a word. The wooden bed was well prepared, and the apprentice was not at ease, so he gently asked, "Are you up?" Shaking his head, "Get up?" Still shaking his head, just smoking his cigarette, this is the time for the chick to release the fluff, and suddenly it rises, "Get up!" The apprentices hurriedly took it out in a swarm, and as soon as they were put on the bed, they chirped out one after another. Since Yu Wu was in charge of the kang, he has never made a mistake, and his peers all admired and admired him, thinking that his skills were amazing. The truth is simple, but people can't get his unshakable confidence. It's not forced, it's genius, it's learning, Yu Wukang duckling, it's so good. As for programs such as simmering eggs and fires, it is especially extra.因此他才配提了紫砂壶到处闲聊，一事不管，人家说不是他吃老板，是老板吃着他，没有余老五，余大房就不成其为余大房了，没有余大房，余老五仍是一个余老五。甚么时候他前脚跨出那个大门，后脚就有人替他把那把紫砂壶接过去了，每一家炕房随时都在等着他。从前每年都有人来跟他谈的，他都用种种方法回绝了，后来实在麻烦不过，他开玩笑似的说“对不起，老板坟地都给我看好了！”
Therefore, he was worthy of mentioning the purple clay pot and chatting everywhere, regardless of anything, people said that it was not he who ate the boss, it was the boss who ate him, without Yu Laowu, Yu Dafang would not be Yu Dafang, without Yu Dafang, Yu Laowu was still a Yu Laowu. When he stepped out of the gate on his front foot, someone took the purple clay pot for him on the back foot, and every kang room was waiting for him at any time. In the past, people came to talk to him every year, and he refused in various ways, but then it was really troublesome, and he jokingly said, "I'm sorry, the boss's cemetery is good for me!" ”父亲说，后来余大房当真托人在泰山庙，就在炕房旁边，给他谈过一小块地，买成没有买成，可不知道了，附近有一片短松林，我们从前老上那儿放风筝，蚕豆花开得紫多多的，斑鸠在叫。
My father said that later, Yu Dafang really asked someone to be in the Taishan Temple, right next to the kang room, and talked to him about a small piece of land, whether he bought it or not, but I don't know, there is a short pine forest nearby, we used to fly kites there, broad bean flowers bloom a lot, and turtledoves are calling.照说，陆长庚是个更富故事性的人，他不像余五那么质实朴素。余五高高大大，方肩膀，方下巴，到处去，而陆长庚只能算是矮子里的高人，属于这一带所说“三料个子”一型，眉毛稍为有点倒，小小眼睛，不时眨动，眨动，嘴唇秀小微薄而柔软，透出机智灵巧，心窍极多，不过乍一看不大看得出来，不仅是他的装束，举止言词亦带着很重的农民气质，安分，卑怯，愿谨，虽然比一般农民要少一点惊惶，而绝望得似乎更深些。就是这点绝望掩盖而且涂改了他的轻盈便捷了。他不像余五那样有酒有饭，有保障有寄托，他受的折磨、伤害、压迫、饥饿都多，他脸小，可是纹路比余五杂驳，写出更多人性。他有太多没有说出来的俏皮笑话，太多没有浪费的风情，没有安慰没有吐气扬眉，没有——我看我说得太逞兴了，过了一点分！所以为此，只因为我有点气愤，气愤于他一定有太多故事没有让我知道。余五若是个为人所敬重的人，他应当是那一带茶坊酒座，瓜架豆棚的一个点缀，是一个为人所喜爱的角色，可是我父亲知道他那点事完全是偶然；他表演了那么一回，也是偶然！
It is said that Lu Changgeng is a more story-telling person, he is not as simple and simple as Yu Wu. Yu Wu is tall and big, square shoulders, square chin, and goes everywhere, and Lu Changgeng can only be regarded as a tall man among the short, belonging to the so-called "three materials" type in this area, the eyebrows are slightly downturned, small eyes, blinking, blinking, the lips are small and thin and soft, revealing wit and dexterity, and there are many hearts, but at first glance it is not very obvious, not only his clothes, but also his demeanor and words also have a heavy peasant temperament, peaceful, cowardly, and cautious, although he is a little less panicked than ordinary farmers, and despair seems to be deeper. It is this despair that covers up and alters his lightness and convenience. He is not like Yu Wu, who has wine and food, security and sustenance, he has suffered a lot of torture, injury, oppression, and hunger, and his face is small, but his lines are more miscellaneous than Yu Wu, and he writes more humanity. He has too many witty jokes that are not said, too many unsatisfying styles, no comfort, no exhalation, no—I think I am talking too pretentiously, a little too much! So for this reason, just because I am a little angry, angry that he must have too many stories that I haven't let me know. If Yu Wu is a respected person, he should be an embellishment of the tea house and tavern in that area, a bean shed, and a beloved character, but my father knew that his thing was completely accidental; he performed it once, and it was also accidental!母亲故世之后，父亲觉得很寂寞无聊。母亲葬在窑庄，窑庄我们有一块地，这块地一直没有收成，沙性很重，种稻种麦，都不适宜，那么一片地，每年只得两担荒草作租谷，父亲于是想辟成一个小小农场，试种棉花，种水果，种瓜。把庄房收回来，略事装修，他平日即住在那边，逢年过节，有甚么事情才回来。他年轻时体格极强，耐得劳苦，凡事都躬亲执役，用的两个长工也很勤勉，农场成绩还不错。试种的水蜜桃虽然只开好看的花，结了桃子还不够送人的，棉花则颇有盈余，颜色丝头都好，可是因为好得超过标准，不合那一路厂家机子用，后来就不再种了。至今政府物产统计表上产棉项下还列有窑庄地方，其实老早已经一朵都没有了。不过父亲一直还怀念那个地方，怀念那一段日子，他那几年身体弄得很好，知道了许多事情，忘记了许多事情，从来没有那么快乐满足过。我由一个女用人带着，在舅舅家过，也有时到窑庄住几天，或是父亲带我去或是我自己来了，事前连通知都不通知他！
After my mother passed away, my father felt very lonely and bored. My mother was buried in Yaozhuang, we had a piece of land in Yaozhuang, this land has not been harvested, the sand is very heavy, it is not suitable for planting rice and wheat, so a piece of land, only two loads of weeds for rent every year, my father wanted to open up a small farm, try to grow cotton, grow fruits, and grow melons. He took back the manor house and renovated it slightly, he lived there on weekdays, and came back only when there was something during the New Year's holidays. When he was young, he was extremely physique, tolerant of hard work, served in everything, and the two long-term workers he used were also very diligent, and the farm performance was not bad. Although the peaches planted in the trial only bloom beautiful flowers, and the peaches are not enough to give away, the cotton has a surplus, and the color is good, but because it is too good to exceed the standard, it is not suitable for the manufacturer's machine, and then it is no longer planted. So far, there are still kiln villages listed under the cotton production item on the government property statistics table, but in fact, there is no one for a long time. But my father has always missed that place, missed that period of time, he was in good health in those years, he knew many things, forgot many things, and was never so happy and satisfied. I was taken by a female servant to live at my uncle's house, and sometimes I went to the kiln village for a few days, or my father took me or I came by myself, without even notifying him in advance!那天我去，父亲正在屋后园子里给一棵礬杏接枝。这不是接枝的时候，不过是没有事情作，接了玩玩。接枝实在是很好玩，两种不同的树木会连在一起生长，生长而又起变化，本来涩的会变甜了，本来纽子大的会有拳头大，多神奇不可思议的事！他不知接了多少，简直看见树他就想接！手续很简单，接完了用稻草一缠就可以了。不过虽是一根稻草，却束得妥贴坚牢，不会松散。削切枝条的，正是这把角柄小刀，用了这么些年了，还是刀刃若新发于硎。我来是请他回家过节，问他我们要不就在这里过节好不好。而一个长工来了：
When I went that day, my father was grafting an alum apricot in the garden behind the house. This is not the time to graft, but there is nothing to do, just take it and play. Grafting is really fun, two different trees will grow together, grow and change, the original astringent will become sweeter, the original button will be the size of a fist, what a magical and incredible thing! He didn't know how much he picked, he wanted to catch it when he saw the tree! The procedure is very simple, just wrap it with straw. But although it is a straw, it is tied properly and firmly and will not be loose. It was this horn-handled knife that cut the branches, and after so many years, the blade was still new. I came to invite him home for the holiday and asked him if we should just celebrate the festival here. And a long-term worker came:“三爷，鸭都丢了！”
“怎样都丢了？”
"Third master, the ducks are lost!" "Why did you lose everything?"这一带多河沟港汊，出细鱼细虾，是很适于养鸭地方。这块地上老佃户倪二，父亲原说留他，可是他对种棉花不感兴趣，而且怎么样也不肯相信从来没有结过棉花地方会出棉花，这块地向来只长荞麦，胡萝卜，菉豆，红毛草！他要退租，退租怎么维生，他要养鸭；鸭从来没有养过怎么行，他说从前帮过人，多少懂一点，没有本钱，没有本钱想跟三爷借，父亲觉得不能让他再种红毛草了，很对不起他，应当借给他钱。为了好玩，父亲也托他，买了一百只小鸭，贴他一点钱，由他代养。事发生手，他居然把一趟鸭养得不坏，父亲高兴，说：
This area has many rivers and ditches and ports, producing fine fish and shrimp, which is a very suitable place for duck raising. Ni Er, an old tenant on this land, his father originally said to keep him, but he was not interested in growing cotton, and he refused to believe that cotton would be produced in a place that had never grown cotton. He wants to return the rent, how to make a living after returning the rent, he wants to raise ducks; he said that he had helped people in the past, he knew a little bit, he had no capital, no capital wanted to borrow from the third master, his father felt that he could not let him plant red grass again, and he was very sorry for him, and he should lend him money. For fun, his father also asked him to buy a hundred ducklings, put a little money on him, and let him raise them on his behalf. When the incident happened, he actually raised a duck without bad, and his father was happy and said:“倪二，你不相信我种棉花，我也不相信你养鸭子，可是现在田里是甚么，一朵一朵白的，那是甚么？”
“是棉花。河里一只一只肥的，是——鸭子！”
"Ni Er, you don't believe that I grow cotton, and I don't believe that you raise ducks, but what is it in the field now, one by one, what is it?" "It's cotton. The fat ones in the river are—ducks! ”“事在人为。明年我们换换手，你还是接这块地种，现在你相信它能出棉花了。我明年也来养鸭！”
"Things are man-made. Next year we will change hands, you still take over this land to plant, and now you believe it can produce cotton. I'll come to raise ducks next year too!" ”父亲是真有这样意思的，地土适于植棉，已经证实，父亲并没有打算一直在这里呆下去，总得有人接过。后来田还是交给倪二了。可是因为管理不善，结出来的朵子越来越伶仃了。鸭，父亲可没有自己去养，他是劝劝倪二也还是放弃水面，回到泥土，总觉得那不大适合他，与他的脾气个性，甚至血统都不相宜，这好像有一种命定安排似的，他离不开生长红毛草的这一片地，现在要来改行已经太晚了。人究竟不像树木，可以随便接枝。即树木，有些接枝也不能生长的。站在庄头场上，或早或晚，沉沉雾霭，淡淡金光中，可以看到倪二喳喳吃吃赶着一大阵鸭子经过荡口，父亲常常要摇头。
My father really has such an meaning, the soil is suitable for cotton planting, and it has been confirmed that my father does not plan to stay here forever, and someone must take over. Later, the field was handed over to Ni Er. But because of poor management, the flowers that bear fruit are getting more and more stiff. Ducks, my father didn't raise them himself, he persuaded Ni Er to give up the water and return to the soil, always feeling that it was not suitable for him, and his temperament, personality, and even bloodline were not suitable, as if there was a destined arrangement, he couldn't do without the land where the red grass grew, and it was too late to change his career. People are not like trees, they can be grafted at will. Even trees, some grafts cannot grow. Standing on the Zhuangtou field, morning or night, in the heavy fog and faint golden light, you can see Ni Er eating and driving a large group of ducks past the mouth, and his father often has to shake his head.“还是不成，不‘像’！他自己以为帮人喂过食，上过圈，一窝鸭子又养得肥壮，得意得了不得，仿佛是老行家了，可是样子总不大对。这些鸭子还没有很认得他，服他、依他，他跟鸭子不能那么完全是一家子似的。照理，都就要卖了，应当简直不用拘束，那根篙子轻易不大动了。我没有看见过赶鸭用这种神情赶鸭的！”
"It's still not possible, it's not 'like'! He thought that he had fed people, went to the circle, and raised a litter of ducks to be fat and strong, and he was very proud, as if he was an old expert, but he didn't look right. These ducks don't recognize him very well, obey him, rely on him, he can't be like a family like ducks. Logically speaking, they are all about to be sold, and there should be no restraint, and the pole is not easily moved. I have never seen a duck chase with this look! ”他把“神情”两个字说得很重，仿佛神情是个甚么可以拿在手里挥舞的东西似的。倪二老实一点，可是我父亲对他不能欣赏他是也可以感觉到的，倪二不服，他有他的话：
“三爷，您看！”
He said the word "expression" very heavily, as if the expression was something that could be held in his hand. Ni Er was honest, but my father could feel that he couldn't appreciate him, Ni Er was not convinced, he had his words: "Third Master, look!"他的意思是就要八月中秋，马上就可以赶到市上变钱，今年鸡鸭上好市面，到那个时候倪二再说他当初为甚么要改业，看看倪二眼光如何，手段如何。父亲想气他一气，说：
He meant that it was going to be the Mid-Autumn Festival in August, and he could rush to the market to make money immediately, and this year the chickens and ducks would be on the market, and at that time, Ni Er would say why he wanted to change his profession in the first place, to see what Ni Er's vision was and what the means were. His father wanted to be angry with him and said:“倪二，你知道你手里那根篙子有多重？人说篙子是四两拨千斤，是不是只有四两？”
这就非教倪二红脸不可了，伤了他的心，他那根篙子搦得实在不顶游刃得体，不够到家。不过父亲没有说，怕太损了他的尊严。
"Ni Er, do you know how much the pole in your hand weighs? People say that the pole is four or two thousand pounds, is it only four taels? ” This had to teach Ni Er to blush, it hurt his heart, and his pole was really not up to the task, and it was not enough to get home. But his father didn't say it, for fear that it would hurt his dignity too much.养鸭是很苦的事。种田也是很苦的事，但那是另外一种苦。问养鸭人顶苦是甚么，很奇怪的，他们回答“是寂寞”。这简直不能相信了，似乎寂寞只是坐得太久谈得太多，抽烟喝茶度日的人才有的感情，“乡下人”！会“寂寞”吗？也许寂寞是人的基本感情之一，怕寂寞是与生俱来的，襁褓中的孩子如果不是确知父母在留心着自己，他不肯一个人睡在一间屋子里。也可能这是穴居野处时对于不可知的一切来袭的恐惧心理的遗传，人总要知觉到自己不是孤身的面对整个自然。种地不是一个人的事情，车水、薅草、播种、插秧、打场、施肥，有歌声，有锣鼓，有打骂调笑，相慰相劳，热热闹闹，呼吸着人的气息。而养鸭是一种游离，一种放逐，一种流浪。一清早，天才露白，撑一个浅扁小船，才容一人起坐，叫作“鸭撇子”，手里一根竹篙，竹篙头上系一个稻草把子或破芭蕉蒲扇，用以指挥鸭子转弯入阵，也用以划水撑船，就冷冷清清的离了庄子，到一片茫茫的水里去了。一去一天，直到天压黑，才回来。下雨天穿蓑衣，太阳大戴笠子，凉了多带件衣裳，整个被人遗忘在这片水里。“连个说说话的人都没有”。这句话似极普通，可是你看看养鸭人的脸，听起来就有无比的悲愁。在那么空寥的地方，真是会引起一种原始的恐惧的，无助、无告、忍受着一种深入肌理，抽搐着腹肉，教人想呕吐的绝望，“简直要哭出来”！单那份厌气就无法排遣，只有拼命叭达旱烟。远远的可以听到一两声人声，可是眼前是这些扁毛畜生！牛羊，甚至猪，都与人切身相关，可以产生感情，要跟鸭子谈谈心实在是很困难。放鸭的如果不是特别有心性，会自己娱悦，能弄一点甚么东西在手上作作，心里想想的，很容易变成孤僻怪物之冷漠而褊窄。父亲觉得倪二旱烟瘾越来越大，行动虽还没看出甚么改变，可是有点甚么东西正在深重起来，无以名之，只有借用又是只通用于另一阶级的名词：犬儒主义。
Raising ducks is a very hard thing. Farming is also a very hard thing, but that is another kind of suffering. When I asked the duck farmers what they were suffering, they replied "loneliness". This is simply unbelievable, it seems that loneliness is just the feeling of people who sit for too long and talk too much, smoke and drink tea to live, "country people"! Will it be "lonely"? Perhaps loneliness is one of the basic feelings of people, fear of loneliness is innate, and an infant child refuses to sleep alone in a room if he does not know that his parents are paying attention to him. It may also be the inheritance of the fear of the unknowable when living in the wild, and people must always realize that they are not alone in facing the whole nature. Farming is not a matter of one person, there are cars, weeding, sowing, planting, fighting, fertilizing, singing, gongs and drums, beating and scolding, comforting each other, lively and lively, breathing the breath of people. And duck raising is a kind of wandering, a kind of exile, a kind of wandering. Early in the morning, the genius was exposed, and a shallow flat boat was propped up to allow one person to sit up, called "duck skimmer", with a bamboo pole in his hand, and a straw handle or broken banana cattail fan tied to the head of the bamboo pole, which was used to direct the ducks to turn into battle, and also used to paddle the boat, so he left Zhuangzi in the cold and went to a vast water. After a day, he didn't come back until it was dark. Wearing a raincoat on a rainy day, wearing a hat in the sun, and bringing more clothes when it is cold, the whole thing is forgotten in this water. "There is not even a single person to speak". This sentence seems very ordinary, but if you look at the face of the duck farmer, it sounds extremely sad. In such an empty place, it really causes a kind of primitive fear, helplessness, helplessness, endurance of a kind of despair that penetrates deep into the skin, twitches the belly flesh, and makes people want to vomit, "I almost cry"! The disgust alone cannot be relieved, only desperately shouting dry smoke. You can hear one or two voices in the distance, but these flat-haired beasts are in front of you! Cattle, sheep, and even pigs are closely related to people and can have feelings, and it is really difficult to talk to the ducks. If the duck herder is not particularly heartfelt, he will entertain himself, and if he can get something to do in his hands, what he thinks in his heart can easily become indifferent and narrow-minded like a solitary monster. My father felt that Ni Er's addiction to smoking was getting bigger and bigger, and although he hadn't seen any change in his actions, something was getting deeper, and there was no name for it, only borrowing a term that was only used for another class: cynicism.可是鸭子肥得倪二欢喜，他看完了好利钱，这支持着他。
But the duck was so fat that Ni Er was happy, and he finished watching the good money, which supported him.前两天倪二说，要把鸭子赶去卖了，已经谈好了，行用，卡钱，水脚，全算上，连底三倍利。就要赶，问父亲那一百只鸭怎么说，是不是一起卖。父亲关照他留三十只，送送人，也养几只下蛋，他要看自己家里鸭子下两个双黄玩玩。昨天晚上想起来，要多留二十只，今天叫长工去荡里跟倪二说一声。
Two days ago, Ni Er said that he was going to drive the ducks to sell, and it had been negotiated. I had to hurry up and asked my father what the hundred ducks said and whether they were sold together. My father took care of him and kept thirty of them, gave them away, and raised a few eggs, and he wanted to see the ducks at home lay two double yellows to play. I remembered last night that I wanted to keep twenty more, and today I asked the long-term worker to go to Dangli to tell Ni Er.“鸭都丢了！”
"The ducks are lost!"倪二说要去卖鸭，父亲问他要不要人帮一帮，怕他一个人对付不了。鸭子运起来，不像鸡装了笼子，仍是一只小船，船上准备人的粮食，简单行李，鸭圈一大卷，人在船，鸭在水，一路迤迤逶逶的走。鸭子路上要吃，还是鱼虾水虫，到了那头才不瘦膘减分量，精神好看。指挥拨反全靠那根篙子。有人可以在大江里赶十天半月，晚上找个沙洲歇一歇，这不是外行冒充得来的。
Ni Er said he was going to sell ducks, and his father asked him if he wanted someone to help, for fear that he would not be able to deal with it alone. The duck is transported, unlike a chicken in a cage, it is still a small boat, and the food for people is prepared on the boat, simple luggage, a large roll of duck pens, people are on the boat, ducks are in the water, all the way to the road. Ducks have to eat on the road, or fish and shrimp and water worms, and when they get there, they don't lose weight and lose weight, and they look good. The command reverses all depend on that pole. Someone can catch ten and a half days in the river and find a sandbar to rest at night, which is not something a layman can pretend to be.“不要！”
怕父亲还要说甚么，他偷偷准备准备，留下三十只，其余的一早赶过荡，过白莲湖，转到大湖里，到邻县城里去了。长工一到荡口，问人：
“倪二呢？”
"Don't!" Afraid that his father would say anything, he secretly prepared to prepare, leaving thirty of them, and the rest rushed through Dang early in the morning, crossed Bailian Lake, moved to the big lake, and went to the neighboring county. As soon as the long-term worker arrived at Dangkou, he asked: "Where is Ni Er?"“倪二在白莲湖里，你赶快去看看，叫三爷也去看看，——一趟鸭子全散了！”
"Ni Er is in White Lotus Lake, you go and take a look, ask the third master to take a look,—— all the ducks are scattered!"白莲湖是一口小湖，离窑庄不远，出菱，出藕，藕肥白少渣滓，荷花倒是红的多。或散步，或乘船赶二五八集期，我们也常去的，湖边港汊甚多，密密的长着芦苇。新芦苇长得很高了。莲蓬已经采过，荷叶颜色发了黑，多半全破了，人过时常有翡翠鸟冲起掠过，翠绿的一闪，疾速如箭，切断人的思绪或低低的唱歌。
White Lotus Lake is a small lake, not far from Yaozhuang, out of water chestnuts, lotus roots, lotus fat and white with less slag, and lotus flowers are more red. Or take a walk, or take a boat to catch the 258 collection period, we also often go, there are many harbors by the lake, densely covered with reeds. The new reeds have grown very tall. The lotus pod has been picked, the color of the lotus leaves is black, most of them are broken, and there are often emerald birds rushing up and skimming by, flashing emerald green, as fast as an arrow, cutting off people's thoughts or singing lowly.小船浮在岸边，竹篙横在船上，篙子头上的破蒲扇不知那里去了。倪二呢？坐在一个石辘轳上，手里团着他的瓦块帽子，额头上破了一块皮，在一个人家晒场上，为几个人围着，他好像老了十年。他疲倦了，一清早到现在，现在是下半天了，他一定还没有吃过饭，跟这些鸭子奋斗了半日。他的饭在船上一个布口袋里，一袋子老锅巴。他坐着不动，看不出他心里甚么滋味，不时头忽然抖一抖，好像受了震动。——他的脖子里的沟好深，一方格一方格的，颜色真红，烧焦了似的。那么坐着，脚恐怕要麻了，好傻相的脚！父亲叫他：
The boat floated on the shore, the bamboo pole lay across the boat, and the broken cattail fan on the head of the pole disappeared. Where is Ni Er? Sitting on a stone wheel, with his tile hat in his hand, a piece of skin on his forehead, surrounded by several people, he seemed to be ten years old. He was tired, early in the morning, and now it is the second half of the day, he must not have eaten, and he must have struggled with these ducks for a long time. His food was in a cloth pocket on the boat, a bag of old pots. He sat still, unable to see what he felt in his heart, and his head suddenly shook from time to time, as if he had been shaken. ——The groove in his neck was so deep, square and square, the color was really red, as if it was burnt. So sitting, my feet are probably going to be numb, what a silly foot! His father called him:“倪二。”
“三爷！”
他像个孩子似的哭起来了。——怎么办呢？
“去找陆长庚，他有法子。”
“哎，除非陆长庚。”
“只有老陆，陆鸭。”
陆长庚在那里？
“多半在桥头茶馆。”
"Ni Er." "Third Master!" He cried like a child. ——What to do? "Go find Lu Changgeng, he has a way." "Hey, unless Lu Changgeng." "Only Lao Lu, Lu Ya." Where is Lu Changgeng? "Most of them are in the Bridgehead Teahouse."桥头有个茶馆，为的鲜货行客人，蛋行客人，陆陈粮行客人，区里，县里，党部里来的人谈话讲生意而设的，卖清茶，代卖烟纸，洋杂，针线，香烛，鸡蛋糕，麻酥饼，七厘散，紫金锭，菜种，草鞋，契纸，小绿颖毛笔，金不换黑墨，何通记纸牌。这一带闲散无事人常借茶馆聚赌玩钱。有时纸牌，最为文雅。有时麻雀，那付牌有一张红中丢了，配了牌九上一张杂七，这杂七于是成为桌上最关心的一张牌了。有时推牌九，下旁注的比坐下来拿牌的要多，在后头呼幺喝六，帮别人呐喊助威的更多。船从桥边过，远远的就看到一堆兴奋忘形的人头人手，走过了一段，还听得到“七七八八——不要九！”“磨一点，再磨一点，天地遇牯牛，越大越封侯！”呼声。常在后头看斜头胡的，有人指点过，那就是陆长庚，这一带放鸭的第一手，诨号陆鸭，说他自己简直就是一只老鸭。——瘦瘦小小，神情总是在发愁的样子。他已经多年不养鸭了，见到鸭就怕了，运气不好，老是瘟。
There is a teahouse at the head of the bridge, which is set up for the guests of the fresh goods shop, the egg shop, the guests of Lu Chen Grain Shop, the people from the district, the county, and the party headquarters to talk about business, selling tea, selling tobacco paper, foreign miscellaneous, needle and thread, incense candles, chicken cakes, hemp shortbread, seven cents of powder, purple gold ingots, vegetable seeds, straw sandals, deed paper, small green brushes, gold is not exchanged for black ink, and He Tongji cards. People who are idle in this area often use teahouses to gamble and play money. Sometimes cards are the most elegant. Sometimes sparrows, the cards are lost in the red, and there is a miscellaneous seven on the card nine, which becomes the most concerned card on the table. Sometimes pushing a card nine, there are more side bets than sitting down to get cards, and shouting six in the back is more to help others shout and cheer. The boat passed by the bridge, and in the distance, I saw a bunch of excited heads and hands, and after walking for a while, I could hear "Seven, seven, eight, eight - not nine!" "Grind a little, grind a little more, heaven and earth meet yak, and the bigger it is, the more marquis!" Cries. I often look at the slanted beard in the back, and someone pointed out, that is Lu Changgeng, the first hand to release ducks in this area, nicknamed Lu Duck, saying that he himself is simply an old duck. ——Thin and small, his expression is always worried. He hasn't raised ducks for many years, and he is afraid when he sees ducks, bad luck, and always plague.“不要你多，十五块洋钱。”
十五块钱在从前很是一个数目了。许多人都因为这个数目而回了回头，看看倪二，看看陆长庚，桌面上顶大的注子是一吊钱三三四，天之九吃三道。
"I don't want you more, fifteen yuan." Fifteen yuan was a lot in the past. Many people turned back because of this number, looking at Ni Er and Lu Changgeng, the top bet on the table was three three or four for a hanging coin, and the nine of the sky ate three.说了半天，讲定了，十块钱。看一家地杠通吃，红了一庄，方去。
“把鸭圈全拿好，倪二你会赶鸭子进圈的？我吆上来，你就赶，鸭子在水里好弄，上了岸七零八落的不好捉。”
After talking for a long time, it was agreed that it would be ten yuan. Seeing a family eating all, it became a red village, and then went. "Take all the duck pens, Ni Er, will you drive the ducks into the pen? I shouted up, you chase it, the ducks are easy to get in the water, and they are not easy to catch when they go ashore. ”这十块钱太赚得不费力了！拈起那根篙子，撑到湖心，人仆在船上，把篙子平着在水上扑一气，嘴里啧啧咕咕不知叫点甚么，嚇——都来了！鸭子四面八方，从芦苇缝里像来争甚么东西似的，拼命的拍着翅膀，挺着脖子，一起奔到他那只小船的四围来。本来平静寥阔湖面，一时骤然热闹起来，全是鸭子，不知为甚么，高兴极了，喜欢极了，放开喉咙大叫，不停的把头没在水里，翻来翻去。岸上人看到这情形，都忍不住大笑起来，连倪二都笑了，他笑得尤其舒服。差不多都齐了，篙子一抬，嘴子曼声唱着，鸭子马上又安静起来，文文雅雅，摆摆摇摇，向岸边游来，舒闲整齐有致。兵法用兵第一贵“和”，这个字用来形容那些鸭子真恰切极了。他唱的不知是甚么，仿佛鸭子都很爱听，听得很入神似的，真怪！
These ten yuan are too effortless to earn! Picking up the pole, holding it to the center of the lake, the man fell on the boat, put the pole flat on the water and threw himself on the water, muttering in his mouth that he didn't know what to call, scared - it's all here! The ducks were in all directions, as if they were fighting for something from the cracks in the reeds, desperately flapping their wings, holding their necks, and running around his boat together. The lake, which was originally calm and wide, suddenly became lively, full of ducks, for some reason, very happy, very happy, very happy, so happy that they let go and screamed, kept putting their heads in the water, and turning around. When the people on the shore saw this, they couldn't help but laugh, even Ni Er laughed, and he smiled particularly comfortably. Almost all of them were together, the pole was raised, the mouth was singing, and the duck immediately became quiet again, elegant, swaying, swimming towards the shore, comfortable and neat. The most expensive word in the art of war is "and", and this word is really appropriate to describe those ducks. I don't know what he was singing, as if the ducks loved to listen to it, and it was very strange to listen to it!“一共多少只？”
“三千多。”
“三千多少？”
“三千零四十二。”
他拣一个高处，四面一望。
“你数数，大概不差了。——嗨！你这里头怎么来了一只老鸭！是那一家养的老鸭教你裹来了！”
"How many in total?" "More than three thousand." "How many three thousand?" "Three thousand and forty-two." He chose a high place and looked around. "You count, it's probably not bad. ——Hi! Why did you have an old duck here! It was the old duck raised by that family that taught you to wrap it! ”倪二分辩，分辩也没有用，他一伸手捞住了。
Ni Er's argument was useless, and he stretched out his hand to catch it.“它屁股一撅，就知道。新鸭子拉稀屎，过了一年的，才硬。鸭肠子鸭头的那里有个小箍道，老鸭子就长老了。吃新鸭子，不喝酒，容易拉肚，就因为鸭肠子不老。裹了人家鸭自己还不知道，只知道多了一只！”
"As soon as it pouts its butt, it knows. New ducks poop loose shit, and it will be hard after a year. There is a small hoop on the duck head, and the old duck will grow old. Eating new ducks, not drinking, is prone to diarrhea, just because the duck intestines are not old. I don't know if I wrapped someone else's duck, I only know that there is one more! ”“我不要你多，只要两只。送不送由你。”
怎么小气，也没法不送他，他已经到鸭圈里提了两只，一手一只，拎了一拎。
“多重？”
他问人。
“你说多重？”
有人问他。
"I don't want you more, just two. It's up to you to give it or not. ” No matter how stingy he was, he couldn't help but send him, he had already gone to the duck pen to carry two, one in each hand, and carried one. "How much?" He asked. "How much do you say?" Someone asked him.“六斤四，——这一只，多一两，六斤五。这一趟里顶壮的两只。”
不相信，那里一两也分得出，就凭手拎一拎？
“不相信，不相信拿秤来称。称得不对，两只鸭算你的；对了，今天晚上上你家里喝酒。”
"Six pounds and four ,—— this one, one tael more, six pounds and five. The two strongest in this trip. ” Don't believe it, you can distinguish one or two there, just carry it by hand? "I don't believe it, I don't believe it's weighed on a scale. If you weigh it wrong, two ducks count as yours; By the way, go to your house for a drink tonight. ”称出来，一点都不错。
“拎都用不着拎，凭眼睛看，说得出这一趟鸭一个一个多重。”
Weigh it, it's not bad at all. "You don't even need to carry it, just look at it with your eyes, you can tell how heavy this duck is one by one."不过先得大叫一声才看得出来。鸭身上有毛，毛蓬松着看不出来，得惊它一惊，一惊，鸭毛就紧了，贴在身上了，这就看得出那一个肥那一个瘦。
“晚上喝酒了，在茶馆里会。不让你费事，鸭先杀好。”
But you have to scream first to see it. There is hair on the duck's body, the hair is fluffy and you can't see it, you have to be startled, and when you are startled, the duck feathers are tight and stick to the body, which shows which one is fat and the other is thin. "Drink at night, meet in the teahouse. Don't let you bother, kill the duck first. ”他刀也不用，一个指头往鸭子三岔骨处一捣，两只鸭挣扎都不挣扎就死了。
“杀的鸭子不好吃，鸭子要吃呛血的，肉才不老。”
He didn't even use a knife, and one finger hit the duck's three bones, and the two ducks died without struggling. "The duck you kill is not delicious, the duck has to eat choking blood, and the meat is not old."甚么事他都是轻描淡写，毫不大惊小怪。说话自然露出得意，可是得意之中还是有一种对于自己的嘲讽，仿佛这是并不稀奇的事，而且正因为有这点本领，他才种种不如别人。他日子过得很不如意，种一点地，种的是豆子。“懒媳妇种豆，”豆子是顶不要花工夫气力的。从前放过鸭，可是本钱都蚀光了。鸭子瘟起来不得了，只要看见一个鸭摇一摇头，就完了。还不像鸡，鸡瘟起来比较慢，灌点胡椒香油，还可以有点救。鸭，一个摇头，个个摇头，马上，都不动了。比在三岔骨上捣一指头还快。常常一趟鸭子放到荡里，回来时只有自己一个人了。看着死，毫无办法。陆长庚吃的鸭可太多了，他发誓，从此决不再养。
He understated everything and made no fuss. He naturally showed pride when he spoke, but there was still a kind of ridicule of himself in his pride, as if this was not uncommon, and it was precisely because of this skill that he was inferior to others. He had a very unsatisfactory life, planting a little land and planting beans. "Lazy daughter-in-law plants beans," beans are the best to spend no effort. In the past, ducks were released, but the capital was gone. Ducks are so plagued that as long as they see a duck shake their heads, it's over. It's not like chickens, chickens are more slow to get sick, and adding some pepper sesame oil can save a little. Ducks, one shakes their heads, and they all shake their heads, and immediately, they don't move. It's faster than pounding a finger on a three-way bone. Often the ducks are put into the swing once, and when they come back, they are the only ones. Looking at death, there is no way. Lu Changgeng ate too many ducks, and he vowed never to raise them again.“倪老二，十块钱不白要你的，我给你送到。今天晚了，你把鸭圈起来过一夜，明天一早我来。三爷，十块钱赶一趟鸭，不算顶贵噢？”
他知道这十块钱将由谁来出。
"Ni Laoer, ten yuan is not for nothing, I will deliver it to you. It's late today, you put up the duck pen for the night, and I'll come early tomorrow morning. Third master, ten yuan to drive a duck is not the most expensive, right? ” He knew who would pay the ten dollars.当然，第二天大早他来时仍是一个陆长庚，一夜七戳五在手，输得光光的。
“没有！还剩一块！”
Of course, when he came early the next morning, he was still a Lu Changgeng, and he lost all the money in his hands with seven pokes and five in his hands all night. "No! There is still one piece left! ”这两个人都老了，时候过起来真快。两个老人怎么会到这里来了呢？现在在作甚么呢？父亲也不大清楚，我请父亲给我打听打听，可是一直还没有信来。——忽然想起来，那个分鸭子的年青小伙子一定是两老人之一的儿子，而且是另一老人的女婿。我得写封信去问问。也顺便问问父亲房东家养在院子里的那只大公鸡不知怎么了。——这只公鸡，他们说它有神经病，我看大概不是神经病。一窝小鸡买进来时本来是十只，次第都已死去，只剩下这个长命。不过很怪，常常它会曲起一只脚来乱蹦乱跳一气，就像发了疯似的。可能是抽筋，不过鸡会抽筋么？它左脚有点异样，脚趾全向里弯，有点内八字，最外一个而且好像短了一截，可能是小时教甚么重东西压的。是这影响他生理上有时不大平衡么？父亲说怕是受刺激太深，与它的同伴的死有关，那当然是开玩笑。——哎哟，一年了，该没有被杀掉风起来罢？这两天正是风鸡的时候。
Both of them are old, and time flies so fast. How did the two old men come here? What are they doing now? My father didn't know much, so I asked him to inquire about me, but he never wrote to me. ——Suddenly remembered, the young man who divided the ducks must be the son of one of the two old men, and the son-in-law of the other old man. I have to write a letter to ask. By the way, I also asked my father's landlord about the big rooster in the yard. ——This rooster, they said it had a mental illness, but I don't think it's a mental illness. When a litter of chicks was bought, there were originally ten chicks, but they all died one after another, leaving only this long life. But it's very strange, often it bends one foot and jumps around like crazy. It may be cramps, but do chickens cramp? Its left foot is a bit strange, its toes are all bent inward, a little inward, and the outermost one seems to be a bit shorter. Is this affecting his physiological sometimes unbalanced? My father said that he was afraid that it was stimulated too deeply and related to the death of his companion, which was of course a joke. ——Oh, it's been a year, shouldn't the wind rise? These two days are the time for the wind chicken.
[1] 本篇原载《文艺春秋》1948年第六卷第三期。初收《邂逅集》，文化生活出版社1949年4月，文字略有改动；又收《汪曾祺短篇小说选》，北京出版社1982年2月，文字有较大改动。
[1] This article was originally published in the third issue of Volume 6, Volume 3 of "Literature and Art Spring and Autumn", 1948. The first collection of "Encounter Collection", Cultural Life Publishing House, April 1949, the text was slightly changed; "Selected Short Stories of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Publishing House, February 1982, the text was greatly changed.

醒来

醒来[1]
一
Da Nao Records {{id_0000}} One我不知道我是怎么醒来的。既非突然，然而又不能是渐渐的。我不能分辨我的已经沉坠的生命甚么时候又开始浮了上来。仿佛从那边度到这边并不很难，那可以说是很“巧”，哪里轻轻拨动一下，有点像开一把锁，我重新活了。证实的是一个感觉：一缕风，像一角缎子，从我额上拂过，从我太阳穴下一条干去的汗渍间斜切过去，还旁及我的鼻翼，我相信，一定把我搭上眉端的两点头发带到耳边去。我光赤的上身上有一片蜻蜓翅子掠过的记忆，那是两根草。这风是贴地吹来的。这是我，这是我的手，我的左手，我的右手。我的右手按在水壶上。水壶外面一层毡子，毡子的毛。毡子上皮带，皮带的光滑。皮带上一个扣子，扣子上一点绿锈。锈斑正在我食指螺纹当中。我的左手平贴地面。胳臂弯着，肘尖靠近我的腰。我动了动左手，手掌下一个小石子儿。喔，手掌压出了一个小坑。我活了。我在这里躺着，我躺了多少时间？
I don't know how I woke up. It was neither sudden, nor gradual. I couldn't tell when my sunken life began to rise again. It seemed that it was not difficult to get from there to this side, it could be said to be very "coincidental", where I flicked it slightly, it was a bit like opening a lock, and I came back to life. What confirmed it was a feeling: a breeze, like a horn of satin, blew over my forehead, cut diagonally through a dried sweat stain under my temple, and also reached my nose, and I believed that it must bring the two strands of hair that had tied my eyebrows to my ears. There was a memory of a dragonfly's wings passing by on my bare upper body, and it was two blades of grass. The wind blew close to the ground. This is me, this is my hand, my left hand, my right hand. My right hand is pressed against the kettle. A layer of felt outside the kettle, the hair of the felt. The belt on the felt, the smoothness of the belt. A buckle on the belt, a little rust on the buckle. The rust spot is in the thread of my index finger. My left hand is flat on the ground. My arm is bent, the tip of my elbow is close to my waist. I move my left hand, a small pebble under my palm. Oh, a small hole is pressed out of my palm. I am alive. I am lying here, how long have I been lying down?我想看一看表。我的表还戴着。多少日子以来，我不想到时间上表只是习惯，现在我想看看。——我忽然想起一个弟弟生下来，午夜，我父亲用那么庄重的态度去看家里的一架老苏式钟。可是表停了，我听不见摆的声音。我没有看，我想见表针呆呆的止在那儿。然而我不知凭甚么肯定现在是八点二十分，不会错，八点二十。夜，月亮。月亮在我头的左边，好大好大。青色的光落在我身上，特别是胸上。我不知落在胸上的是夜，是月亮。我不能把月亮跟夜分开。我觉得夜是具体的，物质的。广漠的，澄清的天。泥土气味。一种山地植物的苦味。这种苦味多少日子以来充塞于我们的呼吸。噢，月亮真好，我从来没有见过这样好的月亮。不，我看见过许多次，无数次这样的月亮。这样大，这样不带浪漫气味，恬静，清澈，无私而坚定。这醒来的一刻真是奇妙。一种感兴，一种喜悦，一种纯粹，一种超乎理性和情欲的存在。一种和平。一种健康的衰弱，一种新。我逗留在一个不变的境地里，就这样，我躺了一会。
I want to look at the watch. My watch is still wearing. For many days, I didn't think that the time was just a habit, but now I want to see it. ——I suddenly remembered that at midnight when a younger brother was born, my father looked at an old Soviet-style clock in the house with such a solemn attitude. But the watch stopped, and I couldn't hear the sound of the pendulum. I didn't look, I wanted to see the watch hand stop there. But I was somehow sure it was 8:20, not wrong, 8:20. Night, moon. The moon was on the left side of my head, so big, so big. The blue light fell on me, especially on my chest. I didn't know that it was night on my chest, it was the moon. I couldn't separate the moon from the night. I thought the night was concrete, material. The desert, the clear sky. The smell of earth. The bitterness of a mountain plant. This bitterness has filled our breath for many days. Oh, the moon is so good, I have never seen such a good moon. No, I have seen such a moon many times, countless times. So big, so not romantic, quiet, clear, selfless and determined. This awakening moment is wonderful. A kind of excitement, a kind of joy, a kind of purity, a existence beyond reason and lust. A kind of peace. A kind of healthy weakness, a kind of newness. I stayed in an unchanging situation, and just like that, I lay down for a while.露水凝聚在荷叶上：我的生命在那么一个状态中停留。不知多少时候，（零与无限之间）于是，一切归向我，纷纷回来，开始充满弥漫在我之内。渐渐复合，成形，恢复我原来的样子，我的生活，我的历史，和我的渴。
The dew condensed on the lotus leaves: my life stayed in that state. I don't know how many times, (between zero and infinity), so everything came to me, came back, and began to fill me. Gradually, it came back to me, my life, my history, and my thirst.渴。整个占据了我，只有渴，更无其他。水，我要水，我要喝。我又要晕了，我连忙拿过水壶，拔了盖子，把壶口凑近我的嘴。所有动作全像一个酒醉人做的事，我以后全想不起怎么做的，可是做得满对，满敏捷。到壶嘴的锡边触到我的唇皮，我的唇皮颤缩了一下，闻到水，我的渴意一齐涌上来。我太阳穴跳动，我明白感觉身体里血液浓滞，我两眼恍惚，黑影齐眉压下来，喝，我急急喝了几口。清清楚楚知道水流入胃，立刻就注到肠子里。我应当喝得慢些，可是我的舌头急需沾湿。
Thirsty. The whole thing occupied me, only thirst, nothing else. Water, I want water, I want to drink. I was about to faint again, so I quickly took the kettle, pulled out the lid, and brought the mouth of the kettle close to my mouth. All the movements were like a drunken man's doing, and I couldn't remember how to do it later, but I did it right and agile. When I touched my lips on the tin edge of the spout, my lips trembled, and when I smelled the water, my thirst surged up. My temples were pounding, I knew that I felt the blood in my body, my eyes were in a trance, and the black shadow was suppressed down, and I drank a few sips. I knew clearly that the water flowed into my stomach and immediately poured into my intestines. I should have drunk slowly, but my tongue needed to be wet urgently.我记起，这是我们仅有的一壶水了。
I remember, this is the only pot of water we have.我支持自己的力量忽然消失了，我倒了下来。我想起，这是高黎贡山，高黎贡山。高黎贡山。高黎贡山。我记得一点事情发生过。我不是一个人。在我刚醒来不久，我思想的语言中即有“我们”两个字出现过了。……
My strength to support myself suddenly disappeared, and I collapsed. I remembered that this was Gaoligong Mountain, Gaoligong Mountain. Gaoligong Mountain. Gaoligong Mountain. I remember something happened. I am not alone. Shortly after I woke up, the word "we" appeared in the language of my thoughts. ……二
这只是两根线条，几个“笔触”。
Two These are just two lines, a few "brushstrokes".画画往往会“画过”了。一次又一次的描摹一个理想，怎么样也找不到合适的表现方法，（这自然是还未天然的成熟，）到后来越来越距初意远了，手下已全不是那么回事，看看糟塌了那么多纸，要不暂停下来也不可能了；却在一张乌黑一团，不成样子的稿子上看看有三数笔还似乎有一点意思；虽然也笨重流滑了，不忍一齐毁去，居然剪下来夹在那里。这至少是日后重新拾起的一个种子。这是把这段东西抄出来的一个理由。
Painting is often "painted". Repeatedly tracing an ideal, no matter how you can't find a suitable way to express it, (this is naturally not naturally mature,) and then it becomes more and more far from the original intention, and the subordinates are no longer like that. But it seems a little interesting to see three or a few strokes on a black and unsightly manuscript; although it is also bulky and slippery, I can't bear to destroy them all together, so I actually cut them out and put them there. This is at least a seed that I picked up again in the future. This is a reason to copy this thing out.自从我有了一个故事，三年来已经前后落笔试写了不下八次，愿意保留的只有这一点。日后再拿起来，我希望并不从这里走不下去。
Since I have a story, I have tried to write it no less than eight times in the past three years, and this is the only thing I am willing to keep. I hope to pick it up again in the future, and I hope it won't go on from here.我想讨论一点东西：（我自认现在已失去不少讨论的热情了，）一个军官在缅甸陷落战役中，（一次战役好了，）惠通桥断了，（随便一个桥吧，）失了归路，他得用平常不用的办法归来。只有一条路，爬过高黎贡山，一个人迹罕至，许多地方存留太古样子的大岭。在辛苦艰危的路程中部众或散落，或死去，最后剩下（假定）三个跟着他走。这是他们的绝路的最后一站的情形：吃的还不大愁，可喝的水很少了，就军官身上这一壶。他们四个一路来自然已经是“团结”在一起，不可分了。说“爱”，分量似觉太轻了。在疲困中，一齐倒下，晕去。第一个醒来的是军官，他。清醒之后，他想起一点事：他记得在昏糊中，那三个同伴一个一个向他滚过来，他就滚过去，避开。滚过来，躲过去，滚过来，躲过去。……
I would like to discuss something: (I think I have lost a lot of enthusiasm for discussion now,) An officer in the battle of the fall of Burma, (a battle was good,) the Huitong Bridge broke, (any bridge,) lost his way back, and he had to return in a way that he usually didn't use. There is only one road, climbing through Gaoligong Mountain, which is inaccessible, and in many places there are ancient mountains. In the middle of the hard and arduous journey, the people either scattered or died, and finally (assumed) three were left to follow him. This was the situation of their last stop: they didn't have much to eat, and there was very little water to drink, just the pot on the officer. The four of them were naturally "united" together along the way, and they were inseparable. Saying "love" seems to be too light. In exhaustion, they all fell down and fainted. The first to wake up was the officer, him. After waking up, he remembered something: he remembered that in a daze, the three companions rolled towards him one by one, and he rolled over and avoided them. Roll over, dodge, roll over, dodge. ……我对这样的事，没有办法。这是一个作者的苦。
也算是一个交待，我有一天如释重负，很高兴的告诉自己：喂，他醒来了啊，醒来，就好办了。醒了，醒了，我把这两个字越念越轻，我知道我的责任未尽。
I have no way to deal with such things. This is the author's suffering. It can be regarded as an explanation, I was relieved one day, and I happily told myself: Hey, he woke up, woke up, and it would be easy. Wake up, wake up, I read these two words lighter and lighter, and I know that my responsibility has not been fulfilled.我还不致就死，且活几年再说吧。啊唷，我可也有点累。

[1] 本篇原载1947年1月16日上海《大公报》。初收《汪曾祺全集》第一卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。
I'm not going to die yet, let's live a few years. Ah, I'm a little tired too. [1] This article was originally published in Shanghai's Ta Kung Pao on January 16, 1947. First received the first volume of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998.

艺术家

艺术家[1]
Artist[1]抽烟的多，少；悠缓，猛烈；可以作为我的灵魂状态的记录。在一个艺术品之前，我常是大口大口的抽，深深的吸进去，浓烟弥满全肺，然后吹灭烛火似的撮着嘴唇吹出来。夹着烟的手指这时也满带表情。抽烟的样子最足以显示体内潜微的变化，最是自己容易发觉的。
smoke more, less; slowly and violently; can be used as a record of my soul state. Before a work of art, I often smoked heavily, inhaled deeply, filled my lungs with thick smoke, and then blew it out with my lips like a candle. The fingers holding the cigarette were also full of expressions at this time. The appearance of smoking is the most sufficient to show the subtle changes in the body, and it is the easiest to notice.只有一次，我有一次近于“完全”的经验。在一个展览会中，我一下子没到很高的情绪里。我眼睛睁大，眯起；胸部开张，腹下收小，我的确感到我的踝骨细起来；我走近，退后一点，猿行虎步，意气扬扬；我想把衣服全脱了，平贴着卧在地下。沉酣了，直是“尔时觉一座无人。”我对艺术的要求是能给我一种高度的欢乐，一种仙意，一种狂：我想一下子砸碎在它面前，化为一阵青烟，想死，想“没有”了。这种感情只有恋爱可与之比拟，平常或多或少我也享受到一点，为有这点享受，我才愿意活下去，在那种时候我可以得到生命的实证；但“绝对的”经验只有那么一次。我常常为“不够”所苦，像爱喝酒的人喝得不痛快，不过瘾，或是酒里有水，或是才馋起来酒就完了。或是我不够，或是作品本身不够，真正笔笔都到了，作者处处惬意，真配（作者自愿）称为“杰作”的究竟不多；（一个艺术家不能张张都是杰作，真苦！）欣赏的人又不易适逢其会的升华到精纯的地步，所以狂欢难得完全。我最易在艺术品之前敏锐的感到灵魂中的杂质，沙泥，垃圾，感到不满足；我确确实实感觉到体内的石灰质。这个时候我想尖起嗓子来长叫一声，想发泄，想破坏；最后是一阵涣散，一阵空虚掩袭上来，归于平常，归于俗。
Only once, I had an experience that was close to "complete". In an exhibition, I was not in a very high mood at once. My eyes opened wide and narrowed; my chest opened and my abdomen was retracted, and I did feel my ankle bones thin; I approached, stepped back a little, and walked with great spirit; I wanted to take off all my clothes and lie flat on the ground. I was so drunk that I felt that there was no one at that time. My requirement for art is to give me a high degree of joy, a kind of fairy, a kind of madness: I want to smash it in front of it all at once, turn into a puff of smoke, want to die, think "no". This kind of relationship can only be compared with love, and I usually enjoy a little bit of it, and for this little enjoyment, I am willing to live, and at that time I can get the empirical evidence of life; but there is only one "absolute" experience. I often suffer from "not enough", like a person who loves to drink not happily, but is not addicted, or there is water in the wine, or just greedy and the wine is over. Or I am not enough, or the work itself is not enough, the real pen has arrived, the author is comfortable everywhere, and there are not many true matches (the author voluntarily) called "masterpieces"; (An artist can't be a masterpiece, it's really bitter!) It is not easy for those who appreciate it to sublimate to the point of purity at the right time, so the carnival is rarely complete. I am most likely to feel the impurities, sand, and garbage in my soul before the artwork, and feel dissatisfied; I do feel the calcareous matter in my body. At this time, I want to raise my voice and scream for a long time, wanting to vent and destroy; Finally, there is a burst of dispersion, a burst of emptiness covering up, returning to the ordinary, to the mundane.我想学音乐的人最有福，但我于此一无所知；我有时不甘隔靴搔痒，不甘用累赘笨重的文字来表达，我喜欢画。用颜色线条究竟比较直接得多，自由得多。我对于画没有天分；没有天分，我还是喜欢拿起笔来乱涂，虽不能至，心向往之。而结果都是愤然掷笔，想痛哭。要不就是“寄沉痛于悠闲”，我会很滑稽的唱两句流行歌曲，说一句下流粗话，摹仿舞台上的声调向自己说“可怜的，亲爱的××，你可以睡了。”我画画大都在深夜，（如果我有个白天可以练习的环境，也许我可以做一个“美术放大”的画师吧！）种种怪腔，无人窥见，尽管放心。
I want to be the most blessed to study music, but I don't know anything about it; I sometimes don't want to scratch the itch through my boots, I don't want to express it with cumbersome and bulky words, I like to draw. The use of color lines is much more direct and free. I have no talent for painting; I still like to pick up a pen and scribble, although I can't get there, I yearn for it. And the result is that I throw the pen angrily and want to cry bitterly. Otherwise, I would sing two popular songs very funny, say a vulgar word, and imitate the tone on the stage to say to myself, "Poor thing, dear ××, you can sleep." "I paint mostly late at night, (if I have an environment where I can practice during the day, maybe I can be a "art magnification" painter!) All kinds of strange tones, no one can see them, but don't worry.从我的作画看画（其实是一回事）的经验，我明白“忍耐”是个甚么东西；抽着烟，我想起米盖朗皆罗，——这个巨人，这个王八旦！我也想起白马庙，想起白马庙那个哑巴画家。
From my experience of painting and looking at painting (actually one thing), I understand what "patience" is; smoking a cigarette, I think of Miguelangelo,—— this giant, this bastard! I also think of the White Horse Temple, the mute painter of the White Horse Temple.白马庙是昆明城郊一小村镇，我在那里住了一些时候。
搬到白马庙半个多月我才走过那座桥。
The White Horse Temple is a small village on the outskirts of Kunming, where I lived for some time. It took more than half a month to move to the White Horse Temple before I walked across the bridge.在从前，对于我，白马庙即是这个桥，桥是镇的代表。——我们上西山回来，必经白马庙。爬了山，走了不少路；更因为这一回去，不爬山，不走路了，人感到累。回来了，又回到一成不变的生活，又将坐在那个办公桌前，又将吃那位“毫无想象”的大师傅烧出来的饭菜，又将与许多熟脸见面，招呼，（有几张脸现在即在你身边，在同一条船上！）一想到这个，真累。没有法子，还是乖乖的，帖然就范，不作徒然的反抗。但是，有点惘然了。这点惘然实在就是一点反抗，一点残余的野。于是抱头靠在船桅上，不说话，眼睛空落落看着前面。看样子，倒真好像十分怀念那张极有个性而颇体贴的跛脚椅子，想于一杯茶，一枝烟，一点“在家”之感中求得安慰似的。于是你急于想“到”，而专心一意于白马庙。到白马庙，就快了，到白马庙看得见城中的万家灯火。——但是看到白马庙者，你看到的是那座桥。除桥而外，一无所见，房屋，田畴，侧着的那棵树，全附属于桥，是桥的一部份。（自然，没有桥，这许多景物仍可集中于另一点上，而指出这是白马庙。然而有桥呀，用不着假设。）我搬来之时即冉冉升起一个欲望：从桥上走一走。既然这个桥曾经涂抹过我那么多感情，我一直从桥下过，（在桥洞里有一种特别感觉，一种安全感，有如在母亲怀里，在胎里，）我极想以新证旧，从桥上走一走。这么一点小事，也竟然搁了半个多月！我们的日子的浪费呀。——这一段都不太相干，是我在心里刷落了好多次，而姑息的准许自己又检了起来，趁笔而书的塞在这里的废话。
In the past, for me, the White Horse Temple was this bridge, and the bridge was the representative of the town. ——When we come back from the West Mountain, we must pass through the White Horse Temple. I climbed the mountain and walked a lot; and because of this return, I don't climb the mountain or walk, and people feel tired. When I come back, I will return to the same life, I will sit at that desk, eat the food cooked by the "unimaginable" master, and meet and greet many familiar faces (a few faces are now by your side, in the same boat!) Thinking about this is really tiring. There is no way, but I am still obedient, obedient, and do not resist in vain. However, I am a little confused. This feeling of confusion is really a little resistance, a little remnant. So he leaned on the mast with his head in his hands, did not speak, and looked forward with empty eyes. It seems that he really misses the lame chair that is very unique and considerate, and wants to find comfort in a cup of tea, a cigarette, and a little feeling of "home". So you are eager to "reach" and concentrate on the White Horse Temple. When you go to the White Horse Temple, you can see the lights of thousands of houses in the city. ——But when you see the White Horse Temple, you see the bridge. Except for the bridge, you see nothing, the houses, the fields, and the tree on the side are all attached to the bridge and are part of the bridge. (Naturally, without a bridge, many of these scenes can still be concentrated on another point and point out that this is the White Horse Temple.) However, there is a bridge, so there is no need to assume.) When I moved in, a desire arose: to take a walk from the bridge. Since this bridge has smeared so many feelings on me, I have been passing under the bridge, (there is a special feeling in the bridge hole, a sense of security, as if in my mother's arms, in the womb,) I really want to walk from the bridge with the new and the old. Such a small matter has been put on hold for more than half a month! It's a waste of our days. ——This paragraph has nothing to do with it, it was I who brushed it off in my heart many times, and I allowed myself to check it again and stuff it here with a pen and a pen.这一天我终于没有甚么“事情”了，我过了桥，我到一个小茶馆里去坐坐。我早知道那边有个小茶馆。我没有一直到茶馆里去，我在堤边走了半天，看了半天。我看麦叶飘动，看油菜花一片，看黄昏，看一只黑黑的水牯牛自己缓步回家，看它偏了头，好把它的美丽的长角顺进那口窄窄的门，我这才去“访”这家茶馆。
I finally had nothing "things" that day, I crossed the bridge, and I went to a small teahouse to sit down. I knew there was a small teahouse over there. I didn't go all the way to the teahouse, I walked by the embankment for a long time, looking at it for a long time. I watched the wheat leaves fluttering, the rape flowers, the dusk, and the black water yak walking home slowly, watching it tilt its head so that its beautiful long horns could enter the narrow door, and then I went to "visit" this teahouse.第一次去，我要各处看看。
The first time I go, I want to look everywhere.进一个有门框而无门的门是一个一头不通的短巷。巷子一头是一个半人高的小花坛。花坛上一盆茶花（和其他几色花木，杜鹃，黄杨，迎春，罗汉松）。我的心立刻落在茶花上了。我脚下走，我这不是为喝茶而走，是走去看茶花。我一路看到茶花面前。我爱了花。这是我见过的最好的茶花，（云南多茶花），仿佛从我心里搬出来放在那儿的。花并不出奇，地位好。暮色沉沉，朦胧之中，红焰焰的，份量刚对。我想用舌尖舔舔花，而我的眼睛像蝴蝶从花上起来时又向前伸了出去，定在那里了，花坛后面粉壁上有画，画教我不得不看。
Entering a door with a door frame but no door is a short alley that does not pass at one end. At one end of the alley is a small flower bed half a person high. There is a pot of camellia (and several other colors of flowers and trees, rhododendrons, boxwood, Yingchun, Luo Han pine). My heart immediately fell on the camellias. I walked under my feet, I didn't walk to drink tea, I walked to see the camellias. I saw the camellia all the way. I love the flowers. This is the best camellia I have ever seen, (there are many camellias in Yunnan), as if it was moved out of my heart and placed there. The flowers are not surprising and have a good status. The twilight is gloomy, hazy, red, and the portion is just right. I wanted to lick the flower with the tip of my tongue, but my eyes stretched forward like butterflies when they got up from the flowers, and they were there, and there were paintings on the powder wall behind the flower beds, and the paintings made me have to look at them.画以墨线勾勒而成，再敷了色的。装饰性很重，可以说是图案，（一切画原都是图案，）而取材自写实中出。画若须题目，题目是“茶花”。填的颜色是黑，翠绿，赭石和大红。作风倩巧而不卖弄；含浑，含浑中觉出一种安分，然而不凝滞。线条严紧匀直，无一处虚弱苟且，笔笔诚实，不笔在意先，无中生有，不虚妄。各部份平均，对称，显见一种深厚的农民趣味。
The painting is outlined with ink lines and then colored. It is very decorative, it can be said to be a pattern, (all paintings are original patterns), and the material is taken from realism. If the painting needs a title, the title is "Camellia". The colors of the filling are black, emerald green, ochre and bright red. The style is clever but not ostentatious; it is muddy, and there is a sense of peace in the muddy, but it is not stagnant. The lines are tight and straight, there is no weakness in any place, the pen is honest, the pen is not concerned first, out of nothing, and is not false. The parts are even, symmetrical, showing a deep peasant taste.谁在这里画了这么一壁画？我心里沉吟，沉吟中已转入花坛对面一小侧门，进了屋了。我靠窗坐下，窗外是河。我招呼给我泡茶。
Who painted such a mural here? I pondered in my heart, and in the midst of my contemplation, I turned into a small side door opposite the flower bed and entered the house. I sat down by the window, and outside the window was the river. I greeted me to make tea.——这是……这是一个细木作匠手笔；这个人曾在苏州或北平从名师学艺，熟习许多雕刻花式，熟能生巧，遂能自己出样；因为战争，辗转到了此地，或是回乡，回到自己老家，住的日子久了，无适当事情可作，才能跃动，偶尔兴作，来借这堵粉壁小试牛刀来了？……
——This is ...... This is a joinery; This person has learned from famous teachers in Suzhou or Peiping, and is familiar with many carving styles. Because of the war, he moved to this place, or returned to his hometown, returned to his hometown, lived for a long time, and had nothing to do, so he could jump, occasionally work, and come to borrow this pink wall to test the knife? ……这个假设看来亦近情理，然而我笑了，我笑那个为我修板壁的木匠。
This assumption seems reasonable, but I laugh, I laugh at the carpenter who repaired the walls for me.我一搬来，一看，房子还好，只是须做一个板壁隔一隔。我请人给我找个木匠来。找了三天，才来，说还是硬挪腾出时候来的。他鞋口里还嵌着锯屑，果然是很忙的样子。这位木匠师傅样子极像他自己脚上那双方方的厚底硬帮子青布鞋子。他钉钉刨刨，刨刨钉钉，整整弄了三天，一丈来长的壁子还是一块一块的稀着缝，他自己也觉得板壁好像不应当是这样的，看看板壁看看我，笑了：
As soon as I moved in, I saw that the house was fine, but I had to make a board wall to separate it. I asked someone to find me a carpenter. After looking for three days, he came, saying that he was still moving to make time. He also had sawdust embedded in the mouth of his shoe, and he looked very busy. The carpenter looked very much like the thick-soled hard-topped blue cloth shoes on both sides of his own feet. He nailed nails, planed nails, and worked on them for three days, and the wall that was about a foot long was still sparse piece by piece, and he himself felt that the board wall should not be like this, so he looked at the board wall and looked at me, and smiled:“像入伍新兵，不会看齐！”
"Like enlisted recruits, they won't be able to keep up!"我只有随着他说：“更像是壮丁队，才从乡下抓来，没有穿制服，颜色黑一块白一块。”而且，最后一块还是我自己钉上去的。他闺女来报信，说家里猪病了，看样子不大好，他撒下头就跑。我没有办法，只有追出去，请他把含在嘴里的洋钉吐出来给我，自己动手。这一去，不回来了，过了两天才来取回他的家私。不知是猪好了，还是连猪带病吃在他的肚子里了。这个人长于聊天，说话极有风趣，作活实在不大在行。——哦，我还欠他一顿酒呢，他老是东扯西拉的没个完，谈到得意处，把斧头凿子全撂在一边，尽顾伸手问我“美国烟可还有？”我说“烟有，可是你一边做事一边抽烟？先把板壁钉好，否则我要头痛伤风。有趣的话太多，二天我们打二斤升掺市，切一盘猪耳朵，咱们痛痛快快谈谈。”这个约不必真，却也不假，他想当记在心里。可别看这位大师傅呀！他说乡下生活本来只是修水车，钉船桨，板壁不大有人家有，所以弄得不顶理想；但是除了他，更没有人干得了；白马庙一带从来就是他家三代单传，泥木两作，所以他那么忙。
I only followed him and said, "It's more like a strong team, so I caught them from the countryside, not wearing uniforms, and the color is black and white." Moreover, I nailed the last piece myself. His daughter came to report that the pig at home was sick and didn't look good, so he threw his id_0000 head and ran away. I had no choice but to chase him out and ask him to spit out the nail in his mouth and do it himself. This time, he didn't come back, and it took two days to get his furniture back. I don't know if the pig is cured, or if the pig is sick and eaten in his stomach. This person is good at chatting, talking very funny, and is really not good at work. ——Oh, I still owe him a meal of wine, he always talks about it, talks about pride, puts aside all the axes and chisels, and stretches out his hand and asks me, "Are there still American cigarettes?" I said, "There are cigarettes, but you smoke while doing things? Nail the board wall first, otherwise I will have a headache and a cold." There are too many interesting words, in two days we will mix two pounds of mixed with the market, cut a plate of pig ears, and let's talk happily. "This appointment doesn't have to be true, but it's not false, he wants to keep it in mind. Don't look at this master! He said that life in the countryside was just repairing waterwheels, nailing boat oars, and not many people had board walls, so it was not ideal; But except him, no one can do it; The area around the White Horse Temple has always been his family's three generations of single heirloom, mud and wood work, so he is so busy.这个画当然不可能是他画的。
Of course, this painting could not have been painted by him.乡下房子暗，天又晚了，黑沉沉的，眼睛拣亮处看，外头还有光，所以我坐近窗口，来喝茶的目的还就是想来凭窗而看，河里船行，岸上人走，一切在逐渐深浓起来的烟雾中活动，脉脉含情，极其新鲜；又似曾相识，十分亲切。水草气味，淤泥气味，烧饭的豆秸烟微带忧郁的焦香，窗下几束新竹，给人一种雨意，人“远”了起来。我这样望了很久，直到在场上捉迷藏的孩子都回了家，田里的苜蓿消失了紫色，野火在远远的山头晶明的游动起来，我才回过身来。
The house in the country is dark, it's late again, it's dark, my eyes pick the bright place to look, and there is light outside, so I sat close to the window, and the purpose of drinking tea was to come and look at the window, the boats in the river, the people on the shore, everything was moving in the gradually thickening smoke, the pulse was affectionate, extremely fresh; it seemed familiar and very kind. The smell of aquatic plants, the smell of silt, the slight melancholic burnt aroma of the soybean straw smoke of the rice, a few bunches of new bamboo under the window, giving people a sense of rain, and people are "far away". I looked at it like this for a long time, until the children who were playing hide and seek on the field returned home, the alfalfa in the field disappeared purple, and the wildfire was swimming brightly on the distant hilltops, and I turned around.我想起口袋里的一本小书，一个朋友今天刚送我的。我想这本书想到多时，终于他给我找得一本了。我抽出书来，用手摸摸封面。这时我本没有看书的意，只是想摸摸它罢了，而坐在炉旁的老板看见了，他叫他的小老二拿灯。为了我拿灯，多不好意思；我想说，不要，不必，我倒愿意这么黑黑的坐着，这一说，更麻烦，老板必以为我是客气；好了，拿就拿吧。
I remembered a small book in my pocket that a friend just gave me today. I think this book has been thinking about it for a long time, and finally he found one for me. I took out the book and touched the cover with my hand. At this time, I didn't mean to read the book, I just wanted to touch it, but the boss sitting by the stove saw it, and he asked his second brother to take the lamp. I'm so sorry to take the lamp for me; I want to say, no, no, I would rather sit in the dark, this is even more troublesome, the boss must think that I am polite; okay, just take it.灯来了，好亮，是电石灯。有人喝住小老二：
“挂在那边得了，有臭气，先生闻不惯。”
The lamp is coming, so bright, it's a calcium carbide lamp. Someone drank the little two: "It's hung over there, it's stenchable, and you can't get used to it."我这才看见，这可不是我们三代单传，泥木两作的大师傅吗！久违了。刚才我似乎觉得角落上有人伏在桌上打瞌睡，黑影中看不清，他是甚么时候梦回莺转的醒来了？好极了，这个时候有人聊聊再好没有。他过来，我过去；我掏烟，他摸火柴，但是他火柴划着了时我不俯首去点烟；小老二灯挂在柱子上，灯光照出，墙上也有画！我搁下他，尽顾看画了。走到墙前，我自己点了烟。
Only then did I see that this is not our master of three generations of single heirloom and mud and wood! Long time no see. Just now I seemed to feel that someone in the corner was dozing off on the table, and I couldn't see clearly in the dark shadow, when did he wake up from a dream? Great, is it good for someone to talk about at this time? He came over, I went over; I took out a cigarette, he touched the match, but I didn't bow my head to light a cigarette when he drew the match; the little second lamp was hung on the pillar, the light was shining, and there were paintings on the wall! I put him down and looked at the paintings. When I walked to the wall, I lit a cigarette myself.一望而知与花坛后面的是同一手笔。画的仍是茶花，仍是墨线勾成，敷以朱黑赭绿，墙有三丈多长，高二丈许，满墙都是画，设计气魄大，笔画也更整饬。笔笔经过一番苦心，一番挣扎，多少割舍，一个决定；高度的自觉之下透出丰满的精力，纯澈的情欲；克己节制中成就了高贵的浪漫情趣，各部份安排得对极了，妥贴极了。干净，相当简单，但不缺少深度，真不容易，不说别的，四尺长的一条线从头到底在一个力量上，不踟躇，不衰竭！如果刚才花坛后面的还有稿样的意思，深浅出入多少有可以商量地方，这一幅则作者已做到至矣尽矣地步。他一边洗手，一边依依的看一看，又看一看自己作品，大概还几度把湿的手在衣服上随便那里擦一擦，拉起笔又过去描那么两下的，但那都只是细节，极不重要，是作者舍不得离开自己作品的表示而已，他此时“提刀却立，踌躇满志，”得意达于极点，真正是“虽南面王不与易也”。这点得意与这点不舍，是他下次作画的本钱。不信试再粉白一堵墙壁，他准立刻又会欣然命笔。他余勇可贾，灵感有余。但是一洗完手，他这才感到可真有点累了。他身体各部份松下来，由一个艺术家变为一个常人，好适宜普通生活，好休息。好老板，给他泡的茶在那里？他最好吃一点甜甜的，厚厚的，一咬满口的，软软的点心，像吉庆祥的重油蛋糕即很好。
At a glance, it is the same handwriting as behind the flower bed. The painting is still a camellia, still drawn by ink lines, applied with vermilion and ochre, the wall is more than three feet long, about two feet high, the wall is full of paintings, the design is bold, and the strokes are more neat. After a lot of painstaking work, some struggle, how many lets go, a decision; a high degree of consciousness reveals full energy and pure lust; in self-denial and self-restraint has achieved noble romantic interest, and all parts are arranged correctly and appropriately. Clean, quite simple, but not lacking depth, it's really not easy, not to mention anything else, a four-foot-long line from beginning to end in a strength, no hesitation, no exhaustion! If there is still the meaning of the manuscript behind the flower bed just now, and the depth and depth are more or less negotiable, this one has reached the point where the author has reached the end. While washing his hands, he looked at it reluctantly, and then looked at his work, and probably wiped his wet hands on his clothes a few times, pulled up the pen and went over to draw it twice, but those were just details, extremely unimportant, it was just a sign that the author was reluctant to leave his work. This pride and reluctance are the capital of his next painting. If you don't believe it, try to paint a wall again, and he will be happy to write again. He is brave and inspired. But as soon as he finished washing his hands, he felt really tired. All parts of his body loosened, and he changed from an artist to an ordinary person, so that he could live an ordinary life and rest. Good boss, where is the tea he made? He had better eat a little sweet, thick, bite-filled, soft snack, like auspicious heavy oil cake.Ladies and gentlemen，来！大家一齐来，为我们的艺术家欢呼，为艺术的产生欢呼！
Ladies and gentlemen, come on! Come together, cheer for our artists, cheer for the creation of art!我站着看，看了半天，我已经抽了三枝烟，而到第四根烟掏出来，叼上，点着时，我知道我身后站着的茶馆老板，木匠师傅，甚至小老二，会告诉我许多事，我把茶杯端到当中一张桌子上，请他们说。
I stood and watched, and after watching for a long time, I had already smoked three cigarettes, and when the fourth cigarette was taken out, picked up, and lit, I knew that the teahouse owner, the carpenter, and even the second child standing behind me would tell me many things, and I brought the teacup to one of the tables and asked them to speak.（啊，怎么半天不见一个人来喝茶？）
(Ah, why didn't I see a person come to drink tea for a long time?) ）茶馆老板一望而知是个阅历极深之人。他眼睛很黑，额上皱纹深，平，一丝不乱，唇上一抹整整齐齐的浓八字胡子，他声音深沉，而清亮，说得很慢，很有条理，有时为从记忆中汲取真切的印象，左眼皮常常搭一点下来，手频频抚摸下巴，——手上一个羊脂玉扳指。我两手搁在茶碗盖上，头落在手上，听他娓娓而说。
The owner of the teahouse can tell at a glance that he is a person with deep experience. His eyes are very dark, the wrinkles on his forehead are deep, flat, and unmessy, and his lips are a neat and tidy thick mustache, his voice is deep and clear, he speaks very slowly, very organized, and sometimes in order to draw a real impression from memory, his left eyelid often falls a little, and his hand frequently strokes his chin,—— and he has a mutton fat jade finger on his hand. I rested my hands on the lid of the teacup, my head rested on my hands, and listened to him talk.这是村子里一个哑巴画的。这个人出身农家，那不知为甚么的，自小就爱画，别的孩子捉田鸡，烧蚱蜢吃，他画画；别的孩子上树掏鸟蛋，下河摸螺蛳，他画画；人抽陀螺，放风筝，他画画；黄昏时候大家捉迷藏，他画画；别人干别的，他画画，有人教过他么？——没有。他简直没有见过一个人画之前自己就已经开始能把看到的东西留个样子下来了，他见甚么，画甚么；有甚么，在甚么上画，平常倒也一样，小时能吃饭，大了学种田，一画画，他就痴了：乡下人见得少，却并不大惊小怪，他爱画，随他画去吧。他是个哑子，不能唱花灯，歪连厢，画正好让他松松，乐乐。大家见他画得不比城里摆摊子画花样的老太太画得差，就有人拿鞋面，拿枕头帐簷之类东西让他画。一到有人家娶媳妇嫁女儿，他都要忙好几天。那个时候村子里姑娘人人心中搁着这个哑巴。
This was painted by a mute in the village. This man was born in a peasant family, and for some reason, he loved to paint since he was a child, other children caught frogs, roasted grasshoppers to eat, he painted; other children went up to trees to dig out bird eggs, went down to the river to touch snails, he painted; people smoked spinning tops, flew kites, he painted; at dusk, everyone played hide and seek, he painted; others did other things, he painted, did anyone teach him? ——Nope. He had never seen a person who had already begun to leave a picture of what he saw before painting, what he saw, what he painted; What is it, what to paint on, usually the same, he can eat when he is young, and when he grows up, he learns to farm, and when he paints, he is crazy: country people see little, but they don't make a fuss, he loves to paint, let him paint. He is a mute, he can't sing lanterns, crooked and connected, and painting just makes him relaxed and happy. Everyone saw that he painted no worse than the old lady who set up a stall in the city to draw patterns, so someone took shoe uppers, pillows, curtains, and other things for him to draw. When someone marries a daughter-in-law, he has to be busy for several days. At that time, everyone in the village had this mute in their hearts.“我出过门，南北东西也走过数省，见过些古城旧峰，大庙深山，帝王宫殿，我真真假假见过一点画，我一懂不懂，我喜欢看。我看哑巴画的跟画花样的老婆子的不一样，倒跟那些古画有些地方相同。我说不出来，……”
"I have been out, I have traveled through several provinces in the north, south, east, west, and west, and I have seen some ancient cities and old peaks, large temples and deep mountains, imperial palaces, I have seen a little painting, I don't understand, I like to look at it. I see that the mute paintings are different from those of the old woman who paints patterns, but they are the same in some places as those ancient paintings. I can't tell,......"老板逐字逐句的说，越慢，越沉。我连连点头，我试体会老板要说而迟疑着的意思：
“比如说，他画得‘活’，画里有一种东西，一种说不出来的东西，看久了，人会想，想哭？”
The boss said word by word, the slower, the heavier it is. I nodded repeatedly, and I tried to understand what the boss was hesitating to say: "For example, he paints 'alive', there is something in the painting, something that cannot be said, after watching it for a long time, people will think and cry?"老板点头，点得很郑重其事。我看到老板眼中有一点湿意。
The boss nodded and nodded very solemnly. I saw a little wetness in the boss's eyes.“从前他没事常来我这里坐坐，我早就有意思请他给我画点东西。他让我买了几样颜色，说画就画。外头那个画得快。里头这张画了好些时候。他老是对着墙端详，端详，比来比去的比，这么比那么比。……”
"In the past, he often came to me to sit and sit when he had nothing to do, and I was already interested in asking him to paint something for me. He asked me to buy a few colors and paint them as soon as I said they would. The one outside painted fast. This one inside has been painted for a long time. He always looked at the wall, looked at it, compared it back and forth, and compared it so much. ……”老板的话似乎想到此为止了。他坐了坐，大拇指摸他的扳指，摸来，摸去，眼睛看在扳指上，眉头锁了一点起来。水开了，漫出壶外，嗤嗤的响。老板起来，为我提水来冲，并通了通炉子。我对着墙，细起眼睛看，似乎墙已没有了，消失了：剩下画，画凸出来，凌空而在。水冲好了，我喝了一口茶，好酽，我问：
The boss's words seemed to end there. He sat down, touched his finger with his thumb, touched it, touched it, his eyes looked at the finger, and his brows locked a little. The water turned on and overflowed out of the pot, snorting. The boss got up, brought water for me, and turned on the stove. I looked at the wall, squinting my eyes, and it seemed that the wall was gone, disappearing: the painting remained, the painting protruded, and it was in the air. The water was washed, I took a sip of tea, it was so good, I asked:“现在？——”
老板知道我问甚么，水壶往桌上一顿：
“唉，死了还不到半年。”
"Now? ——” The boss knew what I was asking, and put the kettle on the table: "Alas, it's been less than half a year since he died."我不知如何接下去说了，而木匠忽然呵呵大笑起来，笑得上气不接下气，我愕然。他说出来，他笑的是哑巴喜欢看戏，看起怪有味。他以为听又听不见，红脸杀黑脸，看个甚么！
I didn't know how to continue, but the carpenter suddenly burst into laughter, laughing out of breath, and I was stunned. He said that he was laughing at a dumb man who liked to watch plays, and it looked weird. He thought he could hear but couldn't hear, and the red face killed the black face, what to see!灯光太亮，我还是挪近窗口坐坐。窗外已经全黑了，星星在天上。水草气更浓郁，竹声箫箫。水流，静静的流，流过桥桩，旋出一个一个小涡，转一转，顺流而下。我该回去了，我看见我所住的小楼上已有灯光，有人在等我。
The light was too bright, so I moved closer to the window and sat down. It was already dark outside the window, and the stars were in the sky. The smell of water and grass was more intense, and the sound of bamboo was flute. The water flowed, quietly flowing past the bridge piles, swirling out small vortices, turning around, and flowing down the river. I should go back, and I saw that there were lights on the small building where I lived, and someone was waiting for me.散步回来之后，我一直坐在这里，坐在这张临窗的藤椅里。早晨在一瓣一瓣的开放。露水在远处的草上濛濛的白，近处的晶莹透澈，空气鲜嫩，发香，好时间，无一点宿气，未遭败坏的时间，不显陈旧的时间。我一直坐在这里，坐在小楼的窗前。树林，小河，蔷薇色的云朵，路上行人轻捷的脚步，……一切很美，很美，我眼角有一滴泪。
After returning from a walk, I have been sitting here, sitting in this wicker chair by the window. The morning is opening one petal after another. The dew is hazy white on the grass in the distance, the near is crystal clear, the air is tender, fragrant, good time, there is no lingering smell, the time that has not been spoiled, and the time that does not look old. I have been sitting here, sitting in front of the window of the small building. Trees, rivers, rose-colored clouds, and the brisk footsteps of pedestrians on the road,...... Everything is beautiful, beautiful, and there is a tear in the corner of my eye.一清早，天才亮，我在庙前河边散步，一个汉子挑了两桶泔水跟我擦身而过，七成新的泔水桶周围画了一带极其细密缠绵的串枝莲，笔笔如同乌金嵌出的。
Early in the morning, when it was dawn, I was walking by the river in front of the temple, and a man picked up two buckets of swill and brushed past me, and 70% of the new swill buckets were painted around a stretch of extremely fine and lingering lotus, and the pen was like black gold.我坐了很久，很久。我随便拿起一本书，翻，翻，摊在我面前的是龚定庵的《记王隐君》：
于外王父段先生废簏中见一诗，不能忘。于西湖僧经箱中见书《心经》，蠹且半，如遇簏中诗，益不能忘。
I sat for a long time, for a long time. I casually picked up a book, flipped through it, flipped through it, and spread it in front of me was Gong Ding'an's "Remembering Wang Yinjun": I saw a poem in the abandoned basket of Mr. Duan, the father of the king, and I couldn't forget it. I saw the book "Heart Sutra" in the West Lake monk's scripture box, and it was half wormy, and if I encountered a poem in the box, I couldn't forget it.
[1] 本篇原载1947年5月10日、11日《经世日报》；初收《邂逅集》，文化生活出版社1949年4月，文字略有改动。

驴

驴[1]
[1] This article was originally published in the "Jingshi Daily" on May 10 and 11, 1947; The first collection of "Encounter Collection", Cultural Life Publishing House, April 1949, the text was slightly changed. Donkey[1]驴浅浅的青灰色，（我要称那种颜色为“驴色”！）背脊一抹黑，渐细成一条线，拖到尾根，眼皮鼻子白粉粉的。非常的像个驴，一点都不非驴非马。一个多么可笑而淘气的畜生！仿佛它娘生它一个就不再生似的，一付自以为是的独儿子脾气。
The donkey is light blue-gray, (I want to call that color "donkey color"!) The back is black, tapering into a line, dragging to the base of the tail, and the eyelids and nose are white and pink. It looks very much like a donkey, neither a donkey nor a horse at all. What a ridiculous and mischievous beast! It was as if its mother would never grow again, and it was a self-righteous only son's temper.一下套，它叱一口豆子，挨了顾老板一铜勺把子，（顾老板正舀豆花做干子，）偏着脑袋，一溜烟奔过了那条巷子，跳过大阴沟，来了，奔过来，还没有站定，就势儿即往地上一摔，翻身。这块地教它的驴皮磨得又光又滑了。（若是这里须一地名，可就本地风光名之为“驴打滚”。）翻，——翻不过；翻，——再来一个，好嘛，喔唷喔唷，这一下，——过瘾！我家老王说，驴子不睡觉，站一站就行了；挨了半天磨，累得王八蛋似的，也只须翻一个身即浑身通泰。我相信他。因此，看它翻不过，为之着急，好像我的腰眼里也酸溜溜的了。幸而它每次都一定翻得过的。滚完了，饮水，吃草，丁零当郎摇它的耳朵，忒尔噜噜打喷嚏。——这东西把两个招风耳那么摆来摆去的干甚么呢？世界上有没有一个蜜蜂曾经冒冒失失撞到一个驴耳朵里去过？小时候我老这么想，现在也还对此极有兴趣。唔，唔，唔！它把个软软的鼻子皱两皱，（多不雅观！）忽然惊天动地的呜哇呜哇大叫起来，问老王它干甚么叫，老王说“闻到驴奶奶气味了，好不要脸的东西！”说时神情好像有看不起它。我于是不好意思看看它自身挂下来的玩艺。晋人多奇怪嗜癖，好驴鸣其一也，有以善作驴鸣得大名者，甚至到新死的朋友坟上去，“鸣”，真是非常的玄了！驴它稳稳重重的时候不是没有，但发神经病时候很多，常常本来规规矩矩，潇潇洒洒的散着步，忽然中了邪似的，脖子一缩，伸开四蹄飞奔，跑过来又跑过去；跑过去，又跑过来。看它跑，最好是俯卧在地上，眼光与地平线齐，驴在蓝天白云草紫芦花之间飞，美极了。跑也听你跑去，没有人管你，侉奶奶细着眼睛看得很有趣呢，可你别去嚼人家种在那儿的豆子，那你就有罪受的！大和二和六丁六甲似的追过来，（你跑！个杂——种！）一把捞住绳头子，拴到那棵踞满了毛毛虫的瘦骨伶仃的榆树上去了。顾家也是，为甚么把绳子弄得那么长呢？散着，它要一脚一脚的，它会一圈一圈的绕着树转，（生成牵磨的命！）转到后来，摸不着来路了，于是把个驴子头吊了起来，上下不得，干瞪两眼，两眼翻白，斜睃着自己尾毛拂动。牛虻虻，麻苍蝇都来了。这就只有两条后腿还可以活动活动，方不致因为老站着而酥麻。腿膝里是两个黑疤疤就极其显眼的露了出来。老王说这是驴子的夜眼。驴子夜里能作事，瞎眼驴子一样骑，全靠这两个膏药心似的东西。然而他又说驴子生小毛病不吃药，用个小槌子在那里敲两下；重病也只须戳一勾被针，放出点紫血就行了。这就不对了：既是眼睛，则不能敲，不能戳。然而这到底是个甚么东西？很想去摸摸这个甲虫壳似的黑疤，用指头弹弹必会叭叭的响的。还是先把它解下来吧，它腿上肉一牵一牵的跳，筋都涨起来了。——这畜生真不知好歹！狗咬吕洞宾，驴要踢我。我不知搭救了它多少次了。
As soon as it was set, it took a bite of beans and was hit by Boss Gu's copper spoon, (Boss Gu was scooping tofu pudding to make dried rice,) tilted his head, ran through the alley, jumped over the big gutter, came, ran over, and before he could stand still, he immediately fell to the ground and turned over. This piece of land taught its donkey skin to be smooth and slippery. (If you need a place name here, you can call it "donkey rolling" based on the local scenery.) ,—— can't turn over; turn over ,—— another one, okay, oh oh, this time it's ,—— enjoyable! My old Wang said that the donkey doesn't sleep, just stand for a while; After being grinded for a long time, I was so tired that I was like a bastard, and I only had to turn over one to get my whole body smooth. I believe in him. Therefore, I can't see it over, and I'm anxious about it, as if my waist and eyes are also sore. Fortunately, it will definitely be able to turn over every time. After rolling, drinking water, eating grass, Ding Ling shook its ears and sneezed. ——What is this thing doing with two wind ears swinging around like this? Has there ever been a bee in the world that has ever taken the liberty of bumping into a donkey's ear? I always thought about it when I was a child, and I am still very interested in it. Hmm, hmm, hmm! It wrinkled its soft nose in two, (how unsightly!) Suddenly screamed earth-shatteringly, and asked Lao Wang what it was calling, Lao Wang said, "I smell the smell of grandma the donkey, what a shameless thing!" When he said that, he looked down on it. I was embarrassed to look at the play it hung up. The Jin people have a lot of strange habits, good donkeys are one of them, and there are people who are famous for being good at making donkeys, and even go to the graves of their recently deceased friends, "Ming", which is really very mysterious! The donkey is not without it when it is stable and heavy, but there are many times when it is crazy, often it is well-behaved, dashing and dashing, and suddenly it is like being struck by evil, its neck shrank, it stretched its four hooves and ran, running over and over; running over and running over. Watching it run, it is best to lie on the ground, with eyes at the horizon, and the donkey flying between the blue sky and white clouds and purple reeds, which is beautiful. Run and listen to you, no one cares about you, Grandma Neung looks very interesting with her squinting eyes, but don't chew the beans planted there, then you will be guilty! Yamato Er and Liu Ding Liujia chased after them like (You run! A miscellaneous - seed!) He grabbed the rope and tied it to the skinny elm tree full of caterpillars. The Gu family is too, why did they make the rope so long? It will go around the tree in circles, (generating the life of pulling!) When I turned to the back, I couldn't find the way out, so I hung up a donkey's head, couldn't go up and down, stared dryly, rolled my eyes, and squinted at my tail hair. Gadflies and hemp flies are coming. This means that only two hind legs can still move, so as not to be numb because of standing all the time. There are two black scars in the legs and knees, which are extremely conspicuous. Lao Wang said this is the donkey's night eye. Donkeys can do things at night, and they ride like blind donkeys, all relying on these two plaster-like things. However, he also said that donkeys do not take medicine when they have minor problems, and use a small mallet to knock there twice; even if you are seriously ill, you only need to poke a hook and a needle and release some purple blood. This is not right: since it is an eye, it cannot be knocked or poked. But what is this? I really want to touch this black scar like a beetle shell, and it will make a beeping sound when I flick it with my fingers. Let's take it off first, the flesh on its legs jumped and the tendons swelled. ——This beast really doesn't know what to do! The dog bit Lu Dongbin, and the donkey wanted to kick me. I don't know how many times I rescued it.而且家里一吃粽子，我即把箬叶跟小莲一齐来送给它吃，驴特别爱这东西。小莲告诉我，须仔细捡去裹粽子的麻丝，说吃下去要缠住肚肠子。我不信，（当然不通，难道会吃到肠子外头去吗？）小莲说“骗你干甚么！大和说的，不信你去问。”我才不问，捡去就是了！小莲一片一片的送在它的嘴里，看它吃。小莲喜欢这驴，她日后将忘不了这驴。小莲你嫁给大和得了，嫁过去整天用箬叶喂驴！我心里想，不敢说出来，我怕小莲哭。我看小莲，小莲一条辫子，越来越长了。我说：
And as soon as the family eats rice dumplings, I will give them to eat with Xiaolian, and the donkey loves this thing very much. Xiaolian told me that I had to carefully pick up the hemp threads wrapped in the rice dumplings, saying that if I ate it, it would entangle my stomach. I don't believe it, (of course not, will it eat outside the intestines?) Xiaolian said, "What are you lying to!" What Yamato said, if you don't believe it, ask. "I don't ask, just pick it up! Xiaolian put it in its mouth one by one and watched it eat. Xiaolian likes this donkey, and she will never forget this donkey in the future. Xiaolian, you can marry Yamato, marry and feed the donkey with bamboo leaves all day long! I thought to myself, I didn't dare to say it, I was afraid that Xiaolian would cry. I looked at Xiaolian, Xiaolian had a braid, and it was getting longer and longer. I say:“小莲，我给它吃。”
小莲把盛箬叶的柳条畚箕给我。我想驴一定更愿意我喂。一片一片的，着急死了，我一次就是五六片，塞得它满嘴都是。而远远的叫过来了：
“那是我家的驴，踢了你我不管！”
"Xiaolian, I'll give it to eat." Xiaolian gave me a wicker dustpan filled with bamboo leaves. I think the donkey must be more willing for me to feed. One by one, I died in a hurry, I made five or six pieces at a time, stuffing it all over my mouth. And called from afar: "That's my donkey, I don't care if I kick you!"“哎唷哎唷，甚么宝贝驴！快来看看，只有一只耳朵了！”
这是老王说的。老王总是帮着我。老王来了，老王来挑水，我们一齐看过去，老王，我，小莲，为老王的话逗笑了的侉奶奶——
"Ouch, what a precious donkey! Come and take a look, there is only one ear! ” This is what Lao Wang said. Lao Wang always helps me. Lao Wang came, Lao Wang came to carry water, we looked over together, Lao Wang, I, Xiao Lian, the grandmother who laughed at Lao Wang's words -那边大喜鹊巢的老柳树上呢，大和跟二和。
大和二和每天下午到这里来。老王一见他们总要说：
“怎么着，又来放驴了？”
On the old willow tree of the big magpie's nest over there, Yamato and Erhe. Yamato Erhe came here every afternoon. When Lao Wang saw them, he always said: "What's wrong, are you releasing the donkey again?"这是淘笑他们的话。只有放牛放羊叫“放”的，驴不能叫“放”。然而该怎么说呢？“看驴”，怕也没有这么说的。老王另有个说法，“陪驴”，这其实最对。他们实在是跟在驴后面也一溜烟跑出来玩玩而已。驴子比他们哥儿俩都懂事些，倒像顾大娘把儿子交给驴，驴子带头，领着他们到荒野里来一样。这时候他们累了半夜，一早上的爸爸要睡一会，他们在家一定闹得不得安生！
This is laughing at them. Only cattle and sheep are called "release", and donkeys cannot be called "release". But what should I say? "Look at the donkey", I'm afraid it doesn't say that. Lao Wang has another saying, "accompany the donkey", which is actually the most correct. They really just ran out to play after the donkey. The donkey is more sensible than both of their brothers, just like Aunt Gu handed over her son to the donkey, and the donkey took the lead and led them into the wilderness. At this time, they were tired in the middle of the night, and their father had to sleep for a while in the morning, and they must have a bad time at home!
[1] 本篇原载1947年6月15日《经世日报》。

职业（外一篇） 

职业（外一篇） [1]
一 职业
[1] This article was originally published in the "Jingshi Daily" on June 15, 1947. Occupation (Outside Article) {{id_0000}} 1. Occupation巷子里常有卖“椒盐饼子西洋糕”的走过。所卖皆平常食物，除了油条大饼豆菜包子之外便是那种椒盐饼子跟西洋糕。椒盐饼子是马蹄形面饼，弓处微厚，平处削薄，烘得软软的，因有椒盐，颜色淡黄如秋天的银杏叶子。西洋糕是一种菱形发面方糕，松松的，厚可寸许，当中夹两层薄薄的红糖浆。穿了洁白大布衣裳，抽了几袋糯米香金堂叶子烟，泛览周王传，流观山海图，到日影很明显的偏了西，有点微饿了，沏新茶一碗，买那么两块来慢慢的嚼，大概可以尝出其中的香美；否则味道是很平淡的。老太太常买了来哄好哭作闹的孩子，因为还大，而且在她们以为比吃糖豆杂食要“养人”些。车夫苦力们吃它则不过为了充饥罢了。糕饼和那种叫卖声音都是昆明僻静里巷间所特有。虽然不知道为甚么叫作“西洋糕”，或者正因为叫“西洋糕”吧，总使人觉得其“古”，跟这个已经在它上面建立出许多新事物来的老城极相谐合。早晨或黄昏，你听他们叫：
There are often people selling "pretzels and Western cakes" in the alleys. All the food sold is ordinary food, except for fried dough sticks, flatbreads, bean and vegetable buns, there are those pretzels and cakes. Pretzels are horseshoe-shaped dough cakes, slightly thick at the bow, thin at the flat point, baked soft, because of the salt and pepper, the color is pale yellow like autumn ginkgo biloba leaves. Western cake is a diamond-shaped hair noodle square cake, loose, about an inch thick, with two thin layers of brown sugar syrup in it. Wearing white cloth clothes, smoking a few bags of glutinous rice fragrant Jintang leaf tobacco, looking at the biography of the King of Zhou, looking at the mountains and seas, to the shadow of the sun is obviously to the west, a little hungry, make a bowl of new tea, buy so two pieces to chew slowly, you can probably taste the fragrance; Otherwise, the taste is very bland. The old lady often bought it to coax the crying children, because they were still old, and they thought it was more "nourishing" than eating jelly beans and omnivorous. The coachmen and coolies ate it just to satisfy their hunger. Cakes and the sound of selling are unique to the secluded alleys of Kunming. Although I don't know why it is called "Western cake", or just because it is called "Western cake", it always makes people feel that it is "ancient", and it is very much in harmony with this old city that has built many new things on it. In the morning or at dusk, you hear them call:“椒盐饼——子西洋糕……”
若是谱出来，其音调是：
so so la——la so mi rai
"Pretzels - Sub-Western Cakes......" If it is composed, its tone is: so so la——la so mi rai这跟那种“有旧衣烂衫抓来卖”同为古城悲哀的歌唱之最具表情者。收旧衣烂衫的是女人多，嗓音多尖脆高拔。卖椒盐饼子西洋糕的常为老人及小孩。老人声音苍沉，孩子稚嫩游转，（因为巷子深，人少，回声大，不必因拼命狂叫，以致嘶嘎，）在广大的沉寂与远细的市声之上升起，搅带出许多东西，闪一闪，又溅落下来。偶然也有年青青的小伙子挎一个竹篮叫卖，令人觉得可惜，谁都不会以为这是一个理想的职业的。他们多把“椒”念成“皆”，而“洋”字因为昆明话缺少真正的鼻音，听起来成了“牙”。“盐”读为“一”，“子”字常常吃了，只舌头微顶一顶，意思到了，“西洋”两字自然切成了一个音。所以留心了好一阵我才闹清楚他们叫的是甚么，知道了自然得意十分。——是谁第一个那么叫的？这几个字的唇齿开阖（特别是在昆明话里）配搭得恰到好处，听起来悲哀，悲哀之中有时又每透出一种谐趣。（这两样感情原是极相邻近的。）孩子们为之感动，极爱效学。有时一高兴就唱成了：
This is the most expressive song of the sad song of the ancient city as "there are old clothes and ragtened clothes to sell". There are many women who collect old clothes and rags, and their voices are sharp and high. The sellers of pretzels and Western cakes are often the elderly and children. The old man's voice is pale, and the children are immature and wandering, (because the alley is deep, there are few people, and the echo is loud, so there is no need to scream desperately and hissing,) in the vast silence and the rise of the distant sound of the city, stirring up many things, flashing and splashing down. Occasionally, there are young men carrying a bamboo basket to sell, which is a pity, no one will think that this is an ideal profession. They mostly pronounce "pepper" as "all", and the word "foreign" sounds like "tooth" because of the lack of real nasal sound in Kunming dialect. "Salt" is pronounced as "one", and the word "zi" is often eaten, only the tongue is slightly pushed up, and the meaning is reached, and the word "Western" is naturally cut into one sound. So I paid attention for a while before I made a clear idea of what they were calling, and I was naturally very proud to know it. ——Who was the first to call it that? The lips and teeth of these words (especially in Kunming dialect) are just right, sounding sad, and sometimes there is a kind of humor in the sadness. (These two feelings are originally very close.) The children were moved by it and loved to learn from it. Sometimes it is sung as soon as it is happy:“捏着鼻——子吹洋号！”
一定有孩子小时学叫，稍大当真就作此生涯了的。
"Pinch your nose - blow the foreign trumpet!" There must be children who learn to call when they are young, and they will do this career when they are a little older.老在我们巷子里叫卖的一个孩子，我已见他往来卖了几年，眼看着大起来了。他举动之间已经涂抹了许多人生经验。一望而知，不那么傻，不那么怯了，头上常涂油，学会在耳后夹一枝香烟，而且不再怕那些狗。他逐渐调皮刁恶，极会幸灾乐祸的说风凉话，捉弄乡下人，欺侮瞎子。可是，他还是不得不卖他的椒盐饼子西洋糕！声音可多少改变了一点，你可以听得出一点嘲讽，委屈，疲倦，或者还有寂寞，种种说不清，混在一起的东西。
A child who used to sell in our alley, I have seen him sell for several years, and he has grown up. He has smeared a lot of life experience between his actions. At a glance, he is not so stupid, less timid, often oiled on his head, learns to hold a cigarette behind his ear, and is no longer afraid of those dogs. He gradually became naughty and mischievous, and was very good at gloating, teasing country people, and bullying blind people. However, he still had to sell his pretzels and Western cakes! The voice has changed a little, and you can hear a little mockery, grievances, tiredness, or loneliness, all kinds of indescribable things mixed together.有一天，我在门前等一个人来，他来了。也许他今天得到休息，（大姨妈家老二接亲啦，帮老板去摇一会啦，反正这一类的喜事，）也许他竟已得到机会，改了行业，（不顶像，）他这会儿显然完全从职业中解放出来。你从他身上看出一个假期，一个自在之身。没有竹篮，而且新草鞋上红带子红得真鲜。他潇潇洒洒的走过去，轻松的脚步，令人一下子想起这是四月中的好天气。而，这小子！走近巷尾时他饱满充和的吆喝了一声：
One day, I was waiting for someone to come to the door, and he came. Maybe he got a rest today, (the second child of my aunt's family picked up the relatives, helped the boss shake for a while, anyway, this kind of happy event,), maybe he had actually gotten the opportunity to change his profession, (not like that,) he was obviously completely liberated from his profession at this time. You can see a holiday in him, a free body. There is no bamboo basket, and the red straps on the new straw sandals are so bright red. He walked over in a dashing manner, and his relaxed steps suddenly reminded people that it was a good weather in April. And, this kid! As he approached the end of the alley, he shouted full and full:“椒盐饼——子西洋糕。”
听自己声音像从一团线上抽一段似的抽出来，又轻轻的来了一句：
“捏着鼻——子吹洋号……”
二 年红灯
"Pretzels - sub-Western cakes." Listening to his voice pull out of a piece of thread, he said softly: "Pinch your nose - blow the foreign trumpet......" Two years of red light走出室门，总要抬头看看。为甚么要看看呢，看甚么？——不知道。也许是想看看天。下意识的习惯，我曾在一个地方住过，天蓝起来非常的蓝；有时却多雨，阴晴不定。然而看到的却是马路对面高楼屋顶上一个铁架子，广告铁架子。这东西，无话可说，很伟大！竖那么个架子的工程可以盖好几间屋子了吧。架子上几个大字，每个字比一间屋子还大。最近，天天有人搭了长梯子在上面工作。人在上头那么小，看他们在上头动，好像动得也很慢，很轻微。仿佛完全不是普普通通像我们一样的人，因为比例不对。知道，他们是在油漆那几个字。而且，这两天在装年红灯了。——是谁想起来装的？我坐在椅子里也可以看见，很高兴一抬头看见他们都在那里。有时还可以看见他们抽烟，谈话。我坐在椅子里抽烟，或喝着一杯茶，当手里工作告了一段落，常悠然而自窗口看出去。
When you walk out of the room, you always have to look up. Why do you want to look at it, what do you see? ——I don't know. Maybe I want to see the sky. Subconsciously, I once lived in a place where the sky was very blue; sometimes it was rainy and cloudy. However, what I saw was an iron shelf on the roof of a high-rise building across the road, an advertising iron shelf. This thing has nothing to say, it's great! The project to erect such a shelf can build several rooms. There are a few big characters on the shelf, each bigger than a room. Recently, people have built long ladders to work on it every day. People are so small on top, and when you see them moving on them, they seem to be moving very slowly and slightly. It seems that they are not ordinary people like us at all, because the proportions are wrong. I know they are painting those words. Moreover, they have been pretending to be red lights for the past two days. ——Who thought of pretending? I can see it when I sit in my chair, and I am happy to see them all there when I look up. Sometimes I can see them smoking and talking. I sit in my chair and smoke, or drink a cup of tea, and when the work at hand is over, I often look out the window leisurely.一天晚上，亮了，那些年红灯亮了。红光蓝光交递转换。先是小字，一个一个出来，一排，现齐了，于是划然而显出几个大字，又抹掉似的一齐消失；接着又从头来一遍。红光蓝光交递的落在我阶前，屋顶，我的书，我的纸，我的手指头上。
One night, it was lit, and the red light was on in those years. Red light and blue light conversion. First, the small characters came out one by one, lined up, and were now all there, so a few big characters appeared, and then disappeared all together as if erased; and then started over again. The red and blue lights fell on my steps, on the roof, on my books, on my paper, and on my fingers.这几个工人他们一定也看见了。他们一定看的。
They must have seen these workers. They must have seen it.而，我在马路上看见一个人，他看广告上那些灯。从他看的样子上，我毫不怀疑的相信他即是那些工人之一，白天他还在那个架子上工作的，那是他的作品。我看了他好一会。——他心里的是甚么感觉？
And I saw a man on the road, who looked at the lights on the advertisements. From the way he looked, I had no doubt that he was one of those workers, and that he was still working on that shelf during the day, and that was his work. I looked at him for a while. What did he feel?三十六年六月中
In mid-June of the thirty-sixth year
[1] 本篇原载1947年6月28日天津《益世报》。其中《职业》一文，作者于1982年重写并以同题发表，参见《职业》（二）；《年红灯》由作者续写，又载1947年8月18日《宁波日报》，参见《年红灯》（二）。初收《汪曾祺全集》第一卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。
[1] This article was originally published in Tianjin "Yishi Daily" on June 28, 1947. Among them, the article "Occupation" was rewritten by the author in 1982 and published under the same title, see "Occupation" (2); "The Red Light" was continued by the author, and was published in the "Ningbo Daily" on August 18, 1947, see "The Red Light" (2). The first volume of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998.

落魄

落魄[1]
Downfall [1]他为甚么要到“内地”来？不大可解，也没有人问过他。自然，你现在要是问我为甚么大远的跑到昆明过那么几年，我也答不上来。从前很说过一番大道理，经过一个时间，知道半是虚妄，不过就是那么股子冲动，年纪轻，总希望向远处跑；而且也是事实，我要读书，学校都往里搬了；大势所趋，顺着潮流一带，就把我带过了千山万水。总是偶然，我不强说我的行为是我的思想决定的。实在我那时也说不上有甚么思想。——我并没有说现在就有。这个人呢？似乎他的身边不会有甚么偶然，那个潮流不大可能波及到他。我很知道，我们那一带，就是像我这样的年纪也多还是安土重迁的。在家千日好，出外一时难，小时候我们听老人戒说行旅的艰险决不少于“万恶的社会”的时候。他近四十边上的人了，又是“做店”的。做店人跑上五七个县份照例就是了不起的老江湖，关于各地茶馆，浴室，窑姐儿，镇水铜牛，大火烧了的庙，就够他们向人聊一辈子；这种人见过世面，已经有资格称为百事通，为人出意见，拿主意，凡事皆有他一份，社会地位极高，再也不必跑到左不过是那样的生疏地方去。他还当真走上好几千里干甚么？好马不吃窝边草，憋了甚么气，要到个亲旧耳目不及的地方来创一番事业，等将来衣锦荣归，好向家里妻子说一声“我总算对得起你们”么？看他不像是那种咬牙发狠的人，他走路说话全表示他是个慢性子，是女人们称之为“三棍子打不出个闷屁来”的角色。再说，又何必用这么远，千里之内尽可以作个跨海征东薛仁贵，楚国为官的秋胡了。也许是他受了危言耸听的宣传，觉得日本人一来，可怕到不可想象程度，或者是他遭了甚么大不幸或难为情事情，本土存身不得，恰好有个亲戚，到内地来作事，须要个能写字算账的身边人，机缘凑巧，无路可走之中他勃然打定了主意来“玩玩”了？也只是“也许”。——反正，他就是来了，而且做了完全另外一种人。
Why did he come to the "mainland"? It is not very understandable, and no one has ever asked him. Naturally, if you ask me now why I went so far to Kunming for so many years, I would not be able to answer. I used to say a lot of great truths, but after a while, I knew that it was half false, but I was so impulsive, young and always wanted to run far away; and it is also a fact, I want to study, and the school has moved in; the general trend, following the trend, has taken me through thousands of mountains and rivers. It is always accidental, and I do not insist that my behavior is determined by my thoughts. I really couldn't say anything at that time. ——I didn't say that there is now. What about this person? It seems that there will be no coincidence around him, and it is unlikely that the trend will affect him. I know very well that in our area, even people of my age are still relocated. When we were children, we heard the old man say that the hardships and dangers of travel are no less than when the "evil society". He is nearly forty people on the side, and he is a "shopkeeper" again. The shopkeepers ran to five or seven counties as usual are amazing old rivers and lakes, about teahouses, bathrooms, kiln sisters, copper cattle in the town, and temples burned by fire, it is enough for them to talk to people for a lifetime; This kind of person has seen the world, and he is already qualified to be called a jack-of-all-trades, giving opinions and making ideas, and he has a share in everything, and his social status is extremely high, and he no longer has to go to such an unfamiliar place. Why did he really walk thousands of miles to do it? A good horse doesn't eat the grass by the nest, what is it to hold back his anger, and he wants to go to a place that his relatives and friends can't see to start a career, and when he returns in the future, he can say to his wife at home, "I'm finally worthy of you"? Seeing that he doesn't look like the kind of person who grits his teeth and is ruthless, he walks and speaks all because he is a chronic child, and he is a role that women call "three sticks can't make a stuffy fart". Besides, why bother to go so far, within a thousand miles, you can be a cross-sea conquest of the east, Xue Rengui, and the Chu state is an official. Maybe he was subjected to alarmist propaganda and felt that the Japanese were unimaginably terrible when they came, or that he had suffered some great misfortune or embarrassment, and he couldn't survive in the country, and he happened to have a relative who came to the mainland to do things, and he needed someone around him who could write and settle accounts. It's just "maybe". ——Anyway, he just came, and he became a completely different kind of person.到我们认识他时，他开了个小吃食铺子，在我们学校附近。
By the time we met him, he had opened a snack shop near our school.初时，大家还带得三个月至半年的用度，而且不时还可接到汇款，生活标准比在家时低不太多，稍有借口，或谁过生，或失物复得，或接到一封字迹娟秀的信，或没有理由，大家“通过”一下，即可有人作东请客。在某个限度内还可挑一挑地方。有人说，开了个扬州馆子，那就怎么样也得巧立名目的去吃他一顿。
At the beginning, everyone still had three months to half a year's expenses, and from time to time they could also receive remittances, and the standard of living was not much lower than when they were at home, and there was a little excuse, or who lived, or lost and found, or received a letter with beautiful handwriting, or there was no reason, everyone "passed", and someone could treat them. You can also pick a place within a certain limit. Some people say that if you open a Yangzhou restaurant, you have to make a clever name to eat him.学校附近还像从前学校附近一样，开了许多小馆子。开馆子的多是外乡人。湖南的，江西的，山东的，河北的，一种同在天涯之感把老板伙计跟学生接连起来，而且他们本来直接间接的就与学校有相当关系，学生吃饭，老板伙计就坐在旁边谈天说地；而学生也喜欢到锅灶旁边站着，一边听新闻故事，一边欣赏炒菜艺术。——这位扬州人老板，一看即与别人不同，他穿了一身铁机纺绸褂裤在那儿炒菜！盘花纽子，纽绊里拖出一段银表链。雪白的细麻纱袜，一双浅口千层底直贡呢鞋。细细软软的头发向后梳得一丝不乱。左手无名指上还套了个韭叶指环。这一切在他周身那股子斯文劲儿上配合得恰到好处。除了他那点流利合拍的翻锅子动铲子的手法，他无处像个大师傅，像个吃这一行饭的。这比他的鸡丝雪里蕻，炒假螃蟹，过油肉更令我们发生兴趣。这个馆子不大，除了他自己只用了个本地孩子招呼客座，摆筷子倒茶。可是收拾得干干净净，木架子上还搁了两盆花。就是足球队员，跳高选手来，看了墙上菜单上那一笔成亲王体的字，也不便太嚣张放肆了。
There are also many small restaurants near the school, just like near the school in the past. Most of the people who open restaurants are foreigners. Hunan, Jiangxi, Shandong, Hebei, a sense of being at the end of the world connects the boss and the students, and they are directly or indirectly related to the school. And students also like to stand next to the stove, listen to the news stories, and enjoy the art of stir-frying. ——This Yangzhou boss, who is different from others at first glance, is wearing an iron machine-spun silk jacket and stir-frying there! Coiled buttons, dragging a piece of silver watch chain from the button. Snow-white fine linen gauze socks, a pair of shallow mille-feuille soled Zhigong woolen shoes. The thin and soft hair is combed back neatly. There is also a leek ring on the ring finger of his left hand. All of this is just right in terms of the refined energy around him. Except for his fluent technique of turning the pot and moving the shovel, he is nowhere to be like a master, like a person who eats this line of food. This is more interesting to us than his shredded chicken, fried fake crabs, and oily meat. This restaurant is not big, except that he only used a local child to greet the guests and set up chopsticks to pour tea. But it was cleaned up, and there were two pots of flowers on the wooden shelf. It was a football player, a high jumper, and looked at the words on the menu on the wall, which was not too arrogant and presumptuous.有时，过了热市，吃饭的只有几个人，菜都上了桌，他洗洗手，会捧了把细瓷茶壶出来，客气两句，“菜炒得不好，这里的酱油不行”，“黄芽菜教孩子切坏了，谁叫他切的！——红烧才能横切，炒，要切直丝的”。有时也谈谈时事，说点故乡消息，问问这里的名胜特产，声音低缓而有感情。我们已经喜欢去坐茶馆了，有时在茶馆也可以碰到他，独自看一张报纸或支颐眺望街上行人。他还给我们付了几回茶钱，请我们抽烟。他抽烟也是那么慢慢的，一口一口的吸，仿佛有无穷滋味。有时事完了，不喝茶，他去蹓跶，两手反背在后面，一种说不出悠徐闲散。出门少远，则穿了灰色熟罗长衫，还带了把湘妃竹折扇。想见从前他一定喜欢养养鸟，听听书，常上富春坐坐的。他自己说原在辕门桥一个大绸缎庄作事，看样子极像。然而怎么到这儿来开一个小饭馆的呢？这当中必有一段故事，他不往下说，我们也不好究问。
Sometimes, after the hot market, there are only a few people eating, and the dishes are on the table, he washes his hands, and he will hold a fine porcelain teapot and say politely, "The vegetables are not fried well, the soy sauce here is not good", "Yellow sprouts teach children to cut badly, who told him to cut them!" ——Braised can only be cut horizontally, stir-fried, and cut straight wires." Sometimes he also talks about current affairs, talks about hometown news, and asks about the famous places here, his voice is low and emotional. We already like to go to the teahouse, and sometimes we can meet him in the teahouse, reading a newspaper alone or looking at the pedestrians on the street. He also paid us for tea a few times and invited us to smoke. He smoked so slowly, sucking it one by one, as if it had an infinite taste. Sometimes when things are over, he doesn't drink tea, he goes to stagger, his hands behind his back, a kind of indescribable leisurely leisure. When he went out a little far, he wore a gray robe and brought a Xiangfei bamboo folding fan. I think he must have liked to raise birds, listen to books, and often go to Fuchun to sit. He himself said that he used to work in a large silk farm in Yuanmen Bridge, and it looked very similar. But how did you come here to open a small restaurant? There must be a story in this, and if he doesn't tell it, it's not easy for us to ask.馆子菜甚么菜都是一个滋味，家家一样，只有他那儿虽然品色不多，却莫不精致有特色。或偶尔兴发，还可以跟他商量商量，请他表演几个道地扬州菜，狮子头，芙蓉鲫鱼，叉子烧鸭，他必不惜工夫，做得跟家里请客一样，有几个菜据说在扬州本地都很少有人做得好。这位绸缎店“同事”大概平日在家极讲究吃食，学会了烹调，想不到自己竟改行作了饭师傅。这不免是降低了一级，我们去吃饭，总似乎有点歉意。也许他看得比较高一层，所以态度上从未使我们不安。他自己好像已不顶在乎了。生意好，有钱剩，也还高高兴兴的。果然半年下来，店门关了几天，贴出了条子：修理炉灶，休业数天。
Everything in the restaurant is the same taste, only he has not had many tastes, but they are all exquisite and distinctive. Or occasionally, if you are interested, you can also discuss with him and ask him to perform a few authentic Yangzhou dishes, lion's head, hibiscus crucian carp, and char roast duck, he will spare no effort to do it as well as treating guests at home, and there are several dishes that are said to be rarely done well in Yangzhou. This "colleague" of the silk shop probably pays great attention to food at home on weekdays, and learned to cook, but he didn't expect that he would change his career to become a chef. This is inevitably a lower level, and we always seem to be a little apologetic when we go to eat. Maybe he sees it higher, so his attitude has never made us uneasy. He doesn't seem to care anymore. The business is good, there is money left, and I am still happy. Sure enough, after half a year, the store door was closed for a few days, and a note was posted: repair the stove and close for a few days.新万年红硃笺招纸贴出来，一早上就川流不息的坐满了人。老板听从有人的建议，请了个南京师傅来做包子煮面，带卖早晚市了。我一去，学着扬州话，跟他道一声：
“恭喜恭喜”。
The new Wannian red red paper invitation paper was posted, and it was full of people in the morning. The boss followed someone's advice and invited a Nanjing Fu to make steamed buns and cook noodles, and sell them in the morning and evening markets. As soon as I went, I learned Yangzhou dialect and said to him: "Congratulations, congratulations".恭喜他扩充营业，同时我已经看到后面小天井里一个女人坐着拣菜，发髻上一朵双喜绒花。老板拱拱手：
“托福托福，闹着玩的。”
Congratulations on his expansion, and at the same time, I have seen a woman sitting in the small patio in the back to pick vegetables, with a double happy velvet flower on her bun. The boss arched his hands: "TOEFL TOEFL, just kidding."女人不知是谁给说的媒，好像是这条街上一个烟鬼的女儿，时常也看她蓬着头出来买香油腌菜蚊烟香，脸色黄巴巴的，样子平平常常。可是因为年纪还不顶大，拢光了头发，搽了雪花膏，还敷了点胭脂，就像是完全换了一个人，以前没的好处全露了出来。老板看样子很喜欢，不时回头，走过去低低说几句话，让她偏了头，为拈去一片草屑尘丝，他那个手势就比一首情诗还值得一看。老板自己自然也年轻了不少，或者不如说一般人都不免，而实际上一个才四十的人不应便有的老态全借了一个年轻的身体而冲失了。要到这样的年龄大概才真知道如何爱惜女人。
The woman didn't know who was talking to the matchmaker, it seemed to be the daughter of a smoker on this street, and she often saw her coming out with her hair disheveled to buy sesame oil pickles and mosquito smoke, her face was yellow, and she looked ordinary. But because she was not old, she shaved her hair, applied alabaster paste, and applied some rouge, as if she was a completely different person, and all the benefits she didn't have before were exposed. The boss seemed to like it very much, and from time to time he turned around, walked over and said a few words in a low voice, making her tilt her head, and in order to pick off a piece of grass clippings and dust, his gesture was more worth seeing than a love poem. The boss himself is naturally a lot younger, or rather, ordinary people are inevitable, but in fact, the old age that a person who is only forty should not have has was lost by borrowing a young body. It is not until this age that you probably really know how to cherish a woman.灶下，那个南京师傅集中精神在做包子。他仿佛想把他的热心变成包子的滋味，摘蒂子，刮馅心，那么捏几下，一收嘴子，全按板中节，如一个熟练的舞蹈家或魔术师的手脚。今天是第一天。他忙，没甚么工夫想甚么，就这个“第一天”一定在他脑子里闪了好多次。这三个字包含的感情很多，他自己一时也分辨不清，大体上都结成了一团希望，就像那个蒸笼冒出来的一阵一阵子的热汽。听他拍打着包子皮，声音钝钝的，手掌一定很厚！他脑袋剃得光光的，后脑杓子挤成了三四叠，一用力，直扭动。他一身老蓝布衣裤，腰里一条洋面口袋改成的围裙。从上到下，无一处不像一个当行面食店师傅，跟扬州人老板相互映照，很有趣味。
Under the stove, the Nanjing Fu was concentrating on making steamed buns. He seemed to want to turn his enthusiasm into the taste of steamed buns, pick the stems, scrape the filling, pinch a few times, close his mouth, and press the middle of the board, like the hands and feet of a skilled dancer or magician. Today is the first day. He was busy and didn't have much time to think about anything, and this "first day" must have flashed in his mind many times. These three words contain a lot of emotions, and he himself couldn't tell them clearly for a while, and they were generally a ball of hope, just like the hot steam coming out of the steamer. Listening to him slapping the bun skin, his voice was dull, and his palms must be very thick! His head was shaved clean, and the back of his head was squeezed into three or four stacks, twisting with force. He was dressed in old blue cloth clothes and pants, and an apron with a foreign face pocket at his waist. From top to bottom, there is no place that does not look like a noodle shop master, which is very interesting to reflect each other with the Yangzhou boss.然而不知甚么道理，那一顿早点没有留给我甚么印象。等的时候太长，而吃的时候太短。我自己也不好，不爱吃猪肝，为甚么叫了碗猪肝面加菠菜西红柿！面是“机器面”，没有办法，生意太好，擀面来不及。——是谁给他题了那么几个艺术字？三个月之后这几个字一定浸透了油气的，活该！
However, for some reason, that breakfast didn't leave any impression on me. The waiting time is too long, and the eating time is too short. I'm not good myself, I don't like to eat pork liver, so why did I order a bowl of pork liver noodles with spinach and tomatoes! The noodles are "machine noodles", there is no way, the business is too good, and it is too late to roll the noodles. ——Who inscribed him so many words of art? After three months, these words must be soaked in oil and gas, they deserve it!不久滇越铁路断了，各处“转进”的战事使好多人的故乡随“我的家在东北松花江上”的伤感老歌一齐失去。Cynical的习气普遍的增高，而洗衣的钱付得少了，因为旧了破了，破旧了的衣服就去卖了。渺乎其远的希望造成许多浪子。有些人对书本有兴趣，抱残守拙，显得极其孤高。希望既远，他们可看到比希望还远的地方。因为形状褴褛，倒更刺激他们精神的高贵，以作为一种补偿。这是一种斗争，沉默而坚持，在日常的委屈悲愤的世俗感情的摆落中要引接山头地底水泉来灌溉一颗心的滋长，是困苦的。有些失了节，向现实投了降，做起生意起来了，由微渐著，虽无大手笔，但以玩票姿态转而下海，不失为一个“名家”局面。后一种人数目极少。正因为少，故在校中行动常一望而可指出。这才是一个开始，唯足以启发往后的不正常。本来战争的另一名词即不正常。这点不正常就直接影响绿杨饭店的营业。——现在，绿杨饭店已经为人耳熟，代替原来的“扬州人”。在它开张了，又扩充了时候，绿杨饭店是一个名词。一个名词仿佛可有可无的。而现在绿杨饭店成了一个实体，店的一切与它的招牌分不开了。
Soon the Yunnan-Vietnam Railway was cut off, and the wars everywhere caused many people's hometowns to be lost along with the sad old song "My home is on the Songhua River in the northeast". Cynical's habits generally increased, and the money for laundry was paid less, because the old and worn-out clothes were sold. The distant hope has led to many prodigal sons. Some people are interested in books, cling to clumsiness, and seem extremely lonely. Hope is far away, and they can see places farther than hope. Because of the ragged shape, it stimulates their spiritual nobility even more as a kind of compensation. This is a kind of struggle, silent and persistent, in the arrangement of daily grievances, sorrows and anger, to lead to the underground spring on the top of the mountain to irrigate the growth of a heart, which is difficult. Some lost their rhythm, surrendered to reality, and started doing business, gradually from a slight pace, although there was no big money, but turning to the sea with a ticket gesture is a "famous family" situation. The latter type of number is extremely small. Because of the small number, actions in the school can often be pointed out at a glance. This is a beginning, but it is enough to inspire future abnormalities. Another term for the original war is abnormal. This abnormality directly affects the business of the Green Poplar Hotel. ——Now, the Green Poplar Hotel has become familiar, replacing the original "Yangzhou people". When it opened and expanded, the Green Poplar Hotel was a term. A term seems dispensable. And now the Green Poplar Hotel has become an entity, and everything in the store is inseparable from its signboard.第一，扬州人已经不能代表一个店了；而且这个饭店已经非常的像一个饭店，有时简直还过了分！
First, Yangzhou people can no longer represent a store; and this restaurant is already very much like a restaurant, sometimes it is simply excessive!那个南京人，第一天，我从他的后脑杓子上即看出这是属于那种会堆砌“成功”的人。他实事求是，稳扎稳打，抓紧机会，他知道钱是好的，活下来多不容易，举手投足都要代价。为了那个代价，所以他肯努力。他一早晨冲寒冒露赶到小南门去买肉，因为每斤便宜多少钱；为了搬运两袋面粉，他可以跟挑夫说许多好话或骂许多难听话；他一边下面，一边瞟着门前过去的几驮子柴；他拣去一片发黄的菜叶子，拾起来又放到砧板上；他到别家铺子门前逛两转，看他们的包子蒸出来是甚么样儿，回来马上决定明天他自己的包子还可以掺点豆芽菜，而且放点豆腐干也是个可试的办法。……他的床是睡觉的，他的碗是吃饭的，他不幻想，不喜欢花，不上茶馆喝茶，而且老打狗，因为虽然他的肉在梁上他还是担心狗吃了。没有多少时候绿杨饭店即充满了他的“作风”。——我得声明虽然我感情上也许是另一回事，可是我没有公开的表示反对这样的作风的意思。而且四方东西南北中，（我们那儿都是这么说，自然也对，“中”不是一个方向，）南京人只是偏于那一方，不是像俾斯麦或希特勒那样绝对的人。这里只说他的一般上的特殊，向反的较强的一面，不单是作风，也因为从作风的改变上，你知道这个店的主权也变了。过了一个时候，不问可知，已经是合股开的。南京人攒了钱，红利工钱，再加上一点积蓄，也许还拉了点债，入了股。我可以跟你打赌，他在才有人来提生意时即已想到这一步。
That Nanjing native, on the first day, I could tell from the back of his head that this was the kind of person who would pile up "success". He seeks truth from facts, works steadily, seizes the opportunity, he knows that money is good, it is not easy to survive, and every move has a price. For that price, so he is willing to work hard. He rushed to Xiaonanmen in the morning to buy meat in the cold and dew, because it was cheaper per catty; in order to carry two bags of flour, he could say a lot of good things or scold many bad things to the porter; while he was down, he glanced at the few loads of firewood that passed in front of the door; he picked out a yellowed vegetable leaf, picked it up and put it on the cutting board; He went to another shop twice to see what their steamed buns looked like, and when he came back, he immediately decided that tomorrow his own buns could be mixed with some bean sprouts, and adding some dried tofu was also a try. …… His bed is for sleeping, his bowl is for eating, he does not fantasize, he does not like flowers, he does not go to the teahouse to drink tea, and he always fights dogs, because although his meat is on the beam, he is still worried that the dog will eat it. It is not long before the Green Poplar Hotel is filled with his "style". ——I have to declare that although I may be emotionally a different matter, I have not openly expressed my opposition to this style. Moreover, in the four directions, east, west, north, south, and middle, (we all say this there, and it is naturally true, "middle" is not a direction), and Nanjing people are just biased towards that side, not absolute people like Bismarck or Hitler. Here I only talk about his general specialness and strong side, not only his style, but also because of the change in style, you know that the sovereignty of this store has also changed. After a while, without asking, it was already opened as a joint venture. Nanjing people saved money, dividends, and a little savings, and maybe even pulled some debts and invested in shares. I can bet you that he thought of this step when someone came to raise business.南京人明白他们这个店应当为甚么人而开，声气相求，果然同学之中那个少数很快即为吸取进来，作为经常主顾。他们人数不多，但塞满这个小饭店却有余。而且他们周围照例有许多近乎谢希大应伯爵之人者流，有时还会等不着座儿。这时他们也并未“发迹”，不过手底下比较活动，他们的“社会”中，“同学”仍占一个重要位置，这里便成为他们“联络感情”所在，常在来吃一碗猪肝面的教授面前摆了一桌子菜哄饮大嚼起来。有的，在这里包了月饭，虽然吃一顿不吃一顿。——另一种同学，因为尚有衣物可卖，卖得钱，大都一天花光，豪爽脾气未改，（这也是一种抗卫），也常三个五个七八个一摊上街去吃喝一顿。有时他们在这里，有时到别处去。有时他们到别处去；有时还在这里。有些本来常在这里的不常在这里了。
Nanjing people understood who their store should be opened for, and they begged each other, and sure enough, the few of their classmates quickly absorbed it and became regular customers. There are not many of them, but it is more than enough to fill this small restaurant. And as usual, there are many people around them who are close to Count Xie Xi Daying, and sometimes they can't wait for a seat. At this time, they did not "make a fortune", but they were more active, and their "classmates" still occupied an important position in their "society", which became their "contact relationship", and they often set up a table of dishes in front of the professor who came to eat a bowl of pork liver noodles to drink and chew. Some of them wrap monthly meals here, although they don't eat one meal. ——Another type of classmate, because there are still clothes to sell, and most of the money they make from selling them is spent in a day, and their bold temper has not changed, (which is also a kind of resistance), and they often go to the street in groups of three, five, seven, or eight to eat and drink. Sometimes they are here, sometimes they go elsewhere. Sometimes they go elsewhere; sometimes they are still here. Some of the things that used to be here are not often here.绿杨饭店的生意好了一阵，好得足以使这一带所有的吃食铺子全都受了影响，而且也一齐对它非常关心。别以为他们都希望“绿杨”的生意坏，他们知道“绿杨”的生意要是坏，他们自己的也好不了。他们的命运既相妨，又相共。然而过了一个高潮，绿杨饭店眼看着豆芽菜豆腐干越掺得多，卖出去的包子就越少。“学校附近的包子”在壁报文章中成了一个新奇比喻，到后来而且这个比喻也毫不新奇了。绿杨饭店在将要为人忘记的那条路上走。——时间也下来两年了，好快！这时有钱活动的就活动得更远。有的还在这个城里，有的到了外县，甚至出了国，到仰光，到加尔各达，有的还选了几门课，有的干脆休了学，离开书本，离开学校，离开同学，也离开了绿杨饭店。大部分穷的，可卖衣物更少了，已经有人经验到饥饿时的心理活动。这也是一种活动，且正如那种活动到仰光加尔各达的人一样，留下许多痕迹在脸上，造成他们的哲学。绿杨饭店犹如一面镜子，扬州人南京人也如一面镜子。镜子里是风干的猪肝，暗淡的菠菜，不熟的或烂的西红柿，太阳如一匹布，阳光中游尘扬舞。江西人的山东人的湖南人河北人的新闻故事与好兴致全在猪肝菠菜西红柿前失了颜色。悄悄的，他们把这段日子撕下来，风流云散，不知所终。
The business of the Green Poplar Hotel has been good for a while, so good that all the food shops in the area have been affected, and they are also very concerned about it. Don't think that they all hope that the business of "Green Poplar" is bad, they know that if the business of "Green Poplar" is bad, their own will not be good. Their fates are both in the way and shared by each other. However, after a climax, the Green Poplar Hotel saw that the more dried bean sprouts and tofu were mixed, the fewer buns it sold. "Buns near the school" became a novel metaphor in the poster article, and later this metaphor was no longer new. The Green Poplar Hotel is walking on the road that will be forgotten. ——Time has also fallen for two years, so fast! At this time, those who have money will move further. Some are still in this city, some have gone to other counties, even abroad, to Yangon, to Calcutta, some have chosen a few courses, and some have simply dropped out of school, left books, left school, left classmates, and left the Green Poplar Hotel. Most of the poor have less clothes to sell, and some have already experienced the psychological activity of hunger. This is also an activity, and like those who go to Yangon and Calcutta, they leave many traces on their faces, causing their philosophy. The Green Poplar Hotel is like a mirror, and the people of Yangzhou and Nanjing are also like a mirror. In the mirror are air-dried pork liver, dull spinach, unripe or rotten tomatoes, the sun is like a piece of cloth, and the dust is dancing in the sun. The news stories and good interest of Jiangxi people, Shandong people, Hunan people, and Hebei people all lost their color in front of pork liver, spinach, and tomatoes. Quietly, they tore off this period of time, and the romance broke up, and they didn't know where it went.那个女人的脸又黄下来，头发又乱了，而且像是没有光亮过，没有红过白过。有一次街上开来了一队兵，马上就找到他们要徘徊逗留的地方，向绿杨饭店他们可没有多瞟几眼。多可惜，扬州人那个值得一看的动人手势！——这时候我才想起过他家里有太太没有？有孩子没有？
The woman's face turned yellow again, her hair was messy again, and it seemed that it had never been bright, never red or white. Once a group of soldiers drove on the street, and immediately found the place where they were going to linger, and they didn't glance at the Green Poplar Hotel. What a pity, the moving gesture of the Yangzhou people is worth seeing! ——At this time, I thought about whether he had a wife at home? Do you have children?绿杨饭店还是开着。
The Green Poplar Hotel is still open.这当中我因病休了学，病好了住在乡下一个朋友主持的学校里，帮他们教几个钟点课，就很少进城来。绿杨饭店的情形可以说不知道。一年之中只去了一次。一位小姐病了，我们去看她。有人从黑土洼带了一大把玉簪花来，看着把花插好了，她笑了笑，说是“如果再有一盘椒盐白煮鱼，我这个病就生得很像样子了。”从前的生病也是从前的谈天题目之一。她说过她从前生了病都吃白煮鱼，于是去跟扬州人老板商量，看能不能给我们像从前一样的配几个菜。他们回答得很慢，但当那个交涉代表说“要是费事，不方便，那就算了”，却立刻决定了，问“甚么时候”？南京人呢，不表示态度。出来，我半天没有话。朋友问是怎么回事，没有甚么，我在想那个饭店。
Among them, I took a leave of absence due to illness, and after recovering, I lived in a school run by a friend in the countryside, helping them teach them a few hourly classes, and rarely came to the city. I don't know about the situation of the Green Poplar Hotel. I only went there once a year. A young lady was sick, and we went to see her. Someone brought a large handful of hosta flowers from Heituwa, and when she saw that the flowers were arranged, she smiled and said, "If there is another plate of boiled fish with salt and pepper, my illness will look very good." "Illness in the past was also one of the topics of conversation in the past. She said that she used to eat boiled fish when she was sick, so she went to discuss with the owner of Yangzhou to see if she could give us a few dishes like before. They answered very slowly, but when the negotiating representative said, "If it's troublesome and inconvenient, then forget it," he immediately decided and asked "when"? Nanjing people don't show their attitude. When I came out, I didn't say anything for a long time. My friend asked what was going on, nothing, I was thinking about the hotel.那天真是怪，南京人一声不响，不动手，摸摸这，掇掇那。女人在灶下烧火。扬州人的头发白了几根。他似乎不复那么潇洒似乎颇像作这样的事情的一个人了。不仅是他的纺绸衣裤，好鞋袜，戒指，表链没有了；从他放作料，施油盐，用铲子抄起将好的菜来尝尝味，菜好了敲敲锅子，用抹布（好脏）擦擦盘子，刷锅水往泔水缸里一倒，扶着锅台的架势，偶尔回头向我们看一看的眼睛，用火钳夹起一片木柴吸烟，（扯歪了脸），小指搔搔发痒的眉毛，鼻子吸一吸吐出一口痰，……一切，全都变了。菜做完了，往我们桌边拉出一张凳子（接过腿的）上一坐，第一句即是：
It was really strange that day, the Nanjing people didn't make a sound, didn't do anything, touched this, picked up that. The woman was lighting a fire under the stove. The Yangzhou man's hair turned gray. He didn't seem to be so dashing anymore, and he seemed to be a person who did such a thing. Not only his silk clothes, good shoes and socks, rings, and bracelets were gone; From the time he put the ingredients, applied oil and salt, picked up the good dishes with a spatula to taste, knocked on the pot when the dishes were ready, wiped the plates with a rag (so dirty), brushed the pot water into the swill tank, held the posture of the pot, occasionally looked back at our eyes, picked up a piece of firewood with fire tongs to smoke, (pulled his face crooked), scratched his itchy eyebrows with his little finger, and sucked out a mouthful of phlegm with his nose,...... Everything has changed. When the dishes were finished, he pulled out a stool (which took the leg) to our table and sat down, and the first sentence was:“甚么都贵了，生意真不好做”。
"Everything is expensive, business is really not easy to do."这句话教南京人回过头来，向着我们这边。南京人是一点也没有走样！他那个扁扁的大鼻子教我想起我们前天应当跟他商量才对。我觉得出他们一定吵了一架。不一定是为我们的一顿饭而吵，希望不是因为我们而吵的。而且从扬州人脸上的皱纹阴影上看，开始吵架已经是颇久的事。照例大概是南京人嘀咕，扬州人不响。可能先是那个女人跟南京人为一点小事拌嘴，于是牵扯起一大堆，一直扯到这一次的不痛快跟前次的连接起来，追溯到很远；还有余不尽，种下下次相争的因子。事情很明显，南京人现在股本比扬州人只有多，决不少，而扬州人两口子穿吃开销，他们之间没有甚么会计制度，就是那么一篇胡涂账。他们为甚么不拆伙呢？隔了年的浆子，粘不起来，那就算了。可是不，看样子他们且要糊下去。从扬州人的衰颓萎败上看起来，我疑心他是不是有时也抽口把鸦片烟。唔，要是当真，那可！——我曾问过坐在我对面的同学。
This sentence taught Nanjing people to turn around and turn towards us. Nanjing people are not out of shape at all! His big flat nose reminded me that we should discuss it with him the day before yesterday. I think they must have had a fight. It doesn't have to be because of our meal, I hope it wasn't because of us. And judging from the wrinkles on the faces of Yangzhou people, it has been a long time since they started quarreling. As usual, it is probably the Nanjing people who mutter, but the Yangzhou people are silent. Maybe the woman first quarreled with the Nanjing people over a trivial matter, so she got involved in a lot of things, and until this time she was unhappy and connected with the last time, it went back a long way; there is still a lot to do, and plant the factors for the next dispute. The thing is obvious, Nanjing people now have more share capital than Yangzhou people, and there is no accounting system between them, which is just a nonsense. Why don't they break up the group? After a year, the pulp can't stick, so forget it. But no, it looks like they are going to paste it. Judging from the decline and decline of Yangzhou people, I wonder if he sometimes smokes opium. Well, if you take it seriously, that's fine! ——I once asked my classmate sitting across from me.“你是不是有把握绝对不会抽鸦片，假如有人说抽，或者你死？”回答是：
"Are you sure that you will never smoke opium, if someone says to smoke, or you die?" The answer is:“倒不是死。有许多东西比死更厉害。你要是信教，那就是魔鬼；或是不绝的‘偶然’。”我看看南京人的粗粗短短的手指，（果然，好厚的手掌！）忽然很同情他，似乎他的后脑杓子没有堆得更高全是扬州人的责任。
"It's not death. There are many things that are more powerful than death. If you believe in religion, you are the devil; or endless 'accidents'." "I looked at the thick and short fingers of the Nanjing people, (Sure enough, such thick palms!) Suddenly sympathized with him, it seemed that the back of his head was not piled higher, and it was all the responsibility of the Yangzhou people.到我复学时，一切全有点变动。或者不是变动，是层叠，深入，牢著，是不变。甚么都有一种随遇而安样子。图书馆指定参考书不够，可是要多少本才够呢？于是就够了。一间屋子住四十人太多，然而多少人住一屋或每人都有几间屋最合理？一个人每天需要多少时候的孤独？简直连问也没有人问。生物系的新生都得抄一个表，人正常消耗是多少卡罗里，而他们没有想到他自己也是一个实验对象；倒对一个教授研究出苗人常吃的刺梨和“云南橄榄”所含维他命工作极有兴趣。土产最烈的酒是五十三度，最坏的烟（烧完了灰都是黑的）叫鹦鹉牌。学校附近的荒货摊上你常看见一男一女在那个货摊讲价，所卖是女的一件曾经极时髦的衣服，反正那件衣服漂亮到她现在绝对无法穿出来了。而路边种的那些树都已长得很高，在月光中布下黑影，如梦如水。整个一个学校，一年中难得有几个人哭，也绝不会有人自杀。……而绿杨饭店已经搬了家，在学校门边搭一个永远像明天就会拆去的草棚子卖包子，卖猪肝面。
By the time I returned to school, everything had changed. Or it was not a change, it was cascading, deepening, firm, and unchanging. Everything has a kind of ease of going with the flow. The library specifies that there are not enough reference books, but how many books are enough? So it is enough. Forty people live in one room is too much, but how many people live in one room or how many rooms does each person have? How much loneliness does a person need every day? No one even asked. Freshmen in the Department of Biology have to read a table, how many calories do people normally consume, and they don't think that he is also an experimental subject; but he is very interested in a professor who has researched the prickly pear commonly eaten by Miao people and the vitamins contained in "Yunnan olives". The strongest local wine is 53 degrees, and the worst smoke (the ash is black after burning) is called parrot brand. You often see a man and a woman bargaining at the stall, selling a woman's once very fashionable dress, anyway, that dress is so beautiful that she can never wear it now. And the trees planted on the side of the road have grown very tall, casting dark shadows in the moonlight, like dreams and water. In the whole school, it is rare for a few people to cry in a year, and no one will commit suicide. …… The Green Poplar Hotel has moved and built a grass shed next to the school gate that will always be demolished tomorrow to sell steamed buns and pork liver noodles.（我已经对我的文章失去兴趣，平淡得教我直想故作惊人之笔而惊人不起来！这饭店，这扬州人与我有甚么关系呢？）
(I have lost interest in my articles, and they are so plain that I want to pretend to be amazing and not be amazing!) What does this hotel and this Yangzhou person have to do with me? ）一句话就说尽这个饭店了：毫无转机。没有人问它如何还能开下来，因为多少人怎么活下来就无从想象。当然，这时候完全是南京人在那儿撑持。但客观条件超出他所有经验。武松拿了打折了的半截哨棒，只好丢了，他也无计可施。然而他若是丢了这个坑人的绿杨饭店他只有死！他似乎有点自暴自弃起来，时常看他弄了一土碗市酒，闷闷的喝，（他的络腮胡子乌猛猛的），忽然拳头一擂桌子，大骂起来，也不知道骂谁才是。若是扬州人跟他一样的壮，他也许会跳上去，冲他鼻子就是一拳。然而扬州人一股子窝囊样子，折垂了脖子，木然看着哄在一块骨头上的苍蝇。这样子更让南京人生气，一股子邪火从脚底心直升上来。扬州人身体简直越来越不行了，背佝偻得厉害。他的嘴角老挂着一点，嘴唇老开着一点。最多的动作是用左手掳着右臂衣袖，上下推移。又不是搔痒，不知道是干甚么！他的头发早就不梳好了，有时居然梳了梳，那就更糟，用水湿了梳的，毫无光泽，令人难过。有人来了，他机械的站起来，机械的走，用个黑透了的抹布，骗人似的抹抹桌子，抹完了往肩头上一搭：
One sentence is all about this hotel: there is no turning point. No one asked how it could still survive, because it was impossible to imagine how many people survived. Of course, at this time, it was entirely Nanjing people who supported it. But the objective conditions exceeded all his experience. Wu Song took the discounted half of the whistle stick and had to throw it away, and he had nothing to do. However, if he loses this pitting Luyang Hotel, he will only die! He seemed to give up a little on himself, often watching him get a bowl of municipal wine, drinking it sullenly, (his beard was fierce), and suddenly he slammed his fist on the table and cursed, and he didn't know who he was scolding. If the Yangzhou man was as strong as him, he might jump on it and punch him in the nose. However, the Yangzhou people looked like they were in a cowardly state, broke their necks, and looked blankly at the flies coaxing on a bone. This made the Nanjing people even more angry, and an evil fire rose straight up from the soles of their feet. The Yangzhou people's bodies are getting worse and worse, and their backs are rickety. The corners of his mouth are always hanging a little, and his lips are always open. The most action is to grab the sleeve of the right arm with his left hand, moving up and down. It's not an itch, I don't know what it's doing! His hair has not been combed for a long time, and sometimes he actually combs it, which is even worse. When someone came, he stood up mechanically, walked mechanically, wiped the table with a black rag like a deceptive person, and put it on his shoulder after wiping:“吃甚么？有包子，有面。有牛肉面，炸酱面，菠菜猪肝面。……”声音空洞而冷漠。客人的食欲就教他那个神气，那个声音压低了一半。你就看看那个荒凉污黑的架子，看到西红柿上的黑斑，你知道黑斑那一块煮也煮不烂的；看到一个大而无当的盘子里三两个鸡蛋，鸡蛋会散黄；你还会想起扬州人跟你解释过的，“鸡蛋散黄是蚊子叮的”，你想起孑孓在水里翻跟斗。吃甚么呢，你简直没有主意。你就随便说一个，牛肉面吧。扬州人掳着他的袖子：
"What to eat? There are steamed buns and noodles. There are beef noodles, fried sauce noodles, spinach and pork liver noodles. ......" The voice was empty and indifferent. The guest's appetite taught him that look, and the voice was half lowered. Just look at the desolate and dirty black shelf, see the black spots on the tomatoes, you know that the black spot can't be cooked; you see three or two eggs on a large and inappropriate plate, and the eggs will turn yellow; You will also remember what the Yangzhou people explained to you, "Eggs are bitten by mosquitoes", and you think of somersaults in the water. What to eat, you have no idea. Just say anything, beef noodles. The Yangzhou people grabbed his sleeve:“嗷，——牛肉面一碗——。”
“牛肉早就没有了，要说多少次！”
“嗷，——牛肉没有了——”
那么随便吧。猪肝面吧。
“嗷，——猪肝面一碗——”
"Hey,—— a bowl of beef noodles——。" "Beef has long been gone, how many times do you have to say it!" "Hey,—— the beef is gone-" So whatever. Pork liver noodles. "Hey,—— a bowl of pork liver noodles—"而那个女人呢，分明已经属于南京人了。仿佛这也没有甚么奇怪。连他们晚上还同时睡在那个棚子底下也都并不奇怪。这当中应当又有一段故事的，但你也顶好别去打听，压根儿你就无法懂得他们是怎么回事，除非你能是他们本人。
And that woman clearly belonged to Nanjing. It seems that there is nothing strange about this. It is not surprising that they even slept under the shed at the same time at night. There should be another story in this, but you should not inquire, you will not be able to understand what they are doing at all, unless you can be them themselves.我已经知道，他们原来是表兄弟，而且南京人是扬州人的小舅子，这！……我不知道我应当学着去作一个小说家还是深幸自己不是。……
I already know that they turned out to be cousins, and Nanjing people are brothers-in-law of Yangzhou people, this! …… I don't know if I should learn to be a novelist or if I'm glad I'm not. ……过了好多好多时候，“炮仗响了”。云南老百姓管胜利，战争结束叫“炮仗响”。他们不说胜利，不说战争结束，而说是“炮仗响”。炮仗响那天我一点都没有想到扬州人。一直到我要离开昆明的前一天，出去买东西，偶然到一个铺子里吃东西，坐下，一抬头，哎，那不是扬州人吗。再往里看，果然南京人也在那儿，做包子，一身蓝布衣裤，面粉口袋围裙，工作得非常紧张，脑杓子直扭动，手掌敲着包子皮钝钝的响。他摘蒂子，刮馅心，那么捏几下，一收嘴子，全按板中节，仿佛想把他的热心也变成包子的滋味。他从上到下无一处不像个当行的面食店师傅。这个扬州人，你为甚么要到内地来？你是四十多岁的人了，你从前是做绸缎庄的，你要想回去向妻子儿女说一声“我总算对得起你们”？……然而仿佛他们全不成问题，成问题的倒是我！我教许多事情搅迷胡了。明天我要走了。车票在我口袋里，我不知道摸了多少次。我有个很不好的脾气，喜欢把口袋里随便甚么只捏在手里搓，搓搓就扔掉了。我丢过修表的单子，洗衣服收据，照相凭条，防疫证书，人家写给我的通信地址。每丢了一张纸，我就丢了好多东西。我真怕我把车票也丢了。我有点神经衰弱。我有点难过，想吐，这会儿饿过了火，我实在甚么也不想吃。我蠢蠢的问S说：
After many, many times, "the firecrackers sounded". The people of Yunnan are in charge of victory, and the end of the war is called "firecrackers". They don't say victory, they don't say the end of the war, but "firecrackers". On the day of the firecrackers, I didn't think of Yangzhou people at all. Until the day before I was about to leave Kunming, I went out to buy something, happened to eat in a shop, sat down, looked up, hey, isn't that a Yangzhou person? Looking inside, sure enough, Nanjing people were also there, making buns, wearing blue cloth clothes and aprons, working very nervously, twisting their brains, and tapping the bun skin with a dull sound in their palms. He picked the stem, scraped the filling, pinched it a few times, closed his mouth, and pressed the middle of the board, as if he wanted to turn his enthusiasm into the taste of steamed buns. From top to bottom, he didn't look like a noodle shop master. This Yangzhou native, why did you come to the mainland? You are in your forties, you used to be a silk shop, do you want to go back and say to your wife and children, "I am finally worthy of you"? …… However, it seems that they are not a problem at all, but I am the one who is the problem! I taught many things to confuse the nonsense. Tomorrow I am leaving. The ticket is in my pocket, I don't know how many times I touched it. I have a very bad temper, I like to rub whatever I have in my pocket in my hand, rub it and throw it away. I have lost the meter repair list, laundry receipts, photo receipts, epidemic prevention certificates, and the mailing address written to me by others. Every time I lose a piece of paper, I lose a lot of things. I'm really afraid I'll lose my ticket too. I'm a little nervous breakdown. I'm a little sad, I want to vomit, I'm too hungry at this time, I really don't want to eat anything. I asked S stupidly:“我们来了八年了？”而忽然问：
“哎，那罐火腿呢？”
S敲敲火腿罐头。在桌子下捏住我的手：
“你怎么了，D？——吃甚么？”
我振作了一下：
“猪肝面加菠菜西红柿！”
"We've been here for eight years?" And suddenly asked: "Hey, what about the can of ham?" S knock on the can of ham. Pinch my hand under the table: "What's wrong with you, D? —What do you eat? ” I cheered up: "Pork liver noodles with spinach and tomatoes!"扬州人放好筷子，坐在一张空着的桌子旁边凳上。他牙齿掉了不少，两颊好像老在吸气。而脸上又有点浮肿，一种暗淡的痴黄色。肩上一条抹布湿漉漉的。一件黑滋滋的汗衫，（还是麻纱的！）一条半长不半的裤子，像十二三岁的孩子穿的。衣裤上全有许多跳蚤血黑点。看他那个滑稽相的裤子，你想到他的肚皮一定一叠一叠的打了好多道折子！最后我的眼睛就毫不客气的死盯住他的那双脚。一双自己削成的大木屐，简直是长方形的。好脏的脚，仿佛污泥已经透入多裂纹的皮肤。十个趾甲都是灰趾甲，左脚的大拇趾极其不通的压在中趾底下，难看无比。对这个扬州人，我没有第二种感情，厌恶！我恨他，虽然没有理由。
The Yangzhou man put down his chopsticks and sat on a stool next to an empty table. He lost a lot of teeth, and his cheeks seemed to be inhaling all the time. And his face was a little swollen, a dull yellow. A rag on his shoulder was wet. A black undershirt, (still linen!) A pair of half-length pants, like a twelve or thirteen-year-old child. There are many flea blood black spots on his clothes. Looking at his funny pants, you think that his belly must have been folded layer by layer! In the end, my eyes stared at his feet unceremoniously. A pair of clogs carved by myself are simply rectangular. The feet are so dirty, as if the sludge has penetrated into the cracked skin. The ten toenails are all gray toenails, and the big toe of the left foot is extremely impassable under the middle toe, which is extremely ugly. I have no second feelings for this Yangzhou man, I hate it! I hate him, although there is no reason.去你的吧，这个人，和我这篇倒霉文章！
三十六年六月
you, this person, and my unlucky article! In June of the thirty-sixth year
[1] 本篇原载《文讯》1947年第七卷第五期。初收《邂逅集》，文化生活出版社1949年4月，文字略有改动；又收《汪曾祺短篇小说选》，北京出版社1982年2月，文字有较大改动。
[1] This article was originally published in Wenxun, Volume 7, Issue 5, 1947. The first collection of "Encounter Collection", Cultural Life Publishing House, April 1949, the text was slightly changed; and "Selected Short Stories of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Publishing House, February 1982, the text was greatly changed.

绿猫

绿猫[1]
山沓水匝，树杂云合，目既往还，心亦吐纳。
春日迟迟，秋风飒飒，情往似赠，兴来如答。
——《文心雕龙·物色篇》
Green Cat{{id_0000}} The mountains are overflowing, the trees are mixed with clouds, the eyes are flickering, and the heart is filled with breath. The spring days are slow, the autumn wind is rustling, the feelings are like gifts, and the excitement is like a response. ——"Wenxin Carving Dragon: Searching"刚才我想的甚么？——又一辆汽车飞驶而过，震得我好不难受。像甚么呢，像甚么呢，说不出像甚么。汽车回家，汽车们回家了。（汽车“们”？）这时候还有甚么叫卖声音？叫的是甚么？还有三轮车，白天怎么听不到三轮车轮轴吱吱吜吜的响？——我为甚么那么钝，为甚么一无所知，为甚么跟一切都隔了一层，为甚么不能掰开撕开所有的东西看？为甚么我毫无灵感，蠢溷麻木？为甚么我不是天才！——嗐，叫卖的，你叫的甚么？你说说你的故事看。你是个高的矮的？你不快乐？你没有希望？你今天晚上会作甚么梦？——你汽车，你“呜——”，你好无礼！两点一刻了。——我刚才想的甚么？香烟又涨了，（我抽了一枝烟，）——我想甚么来了？……喔，喔喔，我想过高尔基！
What was I thinking just now? ——Another car flew by, and I was so shocked. What is it like, what is it like, I can't tell what it looks like. The cars are going home, the cars are going home. (Cars "men"?) What is the sound of selling at this time? What is it calling? And tricycles, why can't you hear the creaking of tricycle axles during the day? ——Why am I so dull, why do I know nothing, why am I separated from everything, why can't I tear everything apart? Why am I uninspired and stupid? Why am I not a genius! ——Hey, hawker, what are you calling? Tell me your story. Are you a tall and short man? Are you unhappy? Are you hopeless? What are you dreaming about tonight? —Your car, you "woo-", you are so rude! It's two o'clock. - What was I just thinking? The cigarette went up again, (I smoked a cigarette,) - What did I think? …… Oh, oh, I thought about Gorky!我想起高尔基的样子，画上的高尔基，雕像上的高尔基的样子。（我现在是甚么样子？）也许不是高尔基，汤姆士·哈代，福楼拜，奥·亨利，……随便是谁。但我想的还是他，高尔基。我今天偶然翻了一本杂志，翻开来第一页就是他，他的像，（这个杂志不知刊登了多少次他的像，这位编辑也不在意？多少杂志报纸上印出过他的像了。不用写出，就知道是谁，一看就知道是谁，不看也就知道！）刻在白云石上，选了合宜光线角度而拍出来的。高尔基斜斜的坐在那儿，一脸的“高尔基”。画家雕刻家们对他那么熟悉，比对他自己工作室所在的那条街，他买纸烟的铺子，他的房东的女儿，他自己的领带还熟悉。他们用笔用斧凿在布上石头里找出一个东西，高尔基。高尔基总是穿着马靴的？他脸上都是那个样子，他从早到晚，今年到明年，无刻不是“高尔基”？如果不是那些像，我相信，如果与他差肩而过，没有人知道他是谁。没有多少人看过了还记得他。根本在路上就不会有人看他的，即使已经知道高尔基其人，知道他是个甚么样子。高尔基是甚么样子？两撇胡子——甚么样的胡子？有一回我们演戏，彩排的时候，化装室里，一个演员拿了皱纹笔，抹了底子油，问导演，“我来个甚么样的胡子？”导演一凝眸，看了看演员脸，竖出一个指头，十分有把握：“高尔基式！”——半搭拉着眼皮，作深思状。高尔基一年到头都在深思，都作深思状？——想想高尔基执笔抽烟的样子。——高尔基要是刚从理发店里出来，甚么样子？——是甚么意思呢？我怎么想起来这个？……
I think of Gorky, Gorky in the painting, Gorky in the statue. (What am I like now?) Maybe not Gorky, Thomas Hardy, Flaubert, O. Henry,...... Whoever it is. But I still think of him, Gorky. I happened to flip through a magazine today, and the first page was him, his portrait. How many magazines and newspapers have printed his portrait. You don't have to write it down, you know who it is, you know who it is at a glance, and you know it if you don't look at it! It was engraved on the dolomite and photographed at a suitable angle of light. Gorky sat there slanting, with a "Gorky" on his face. The painters and sculptors were so familiar with him, more familiar than the street where his own studio was located, the shop where he bought cigarettes, his landlord's daughter, and his own tie. They chiseled with their pens and axes in the stones on the cloth to find something, Gorky. Gorky always wore riding boots? He looked like that on his face, from morning to night, from this year to next year, he was not "Gorky"? If it weren't for those statues, I believe, if they passed by him, no one would know who he was. Not many people had seen him and remembered him. No one would have seen him on the road, even if they already knew Gorky and what he looked like. What was Gorky like? Two mustaches - what kind of beard? Once, when we were acting, during the rehearsal, in the dressing room, an actor took a crease pen, smeared the base oil, and asked the director, "What kind of beard should I have?" The director stared, looked at the actor's face, and held out a finger, very confident: "Gorky style!" - Half-twitched eyelids and made a deep thought. Gorky thinks deeply all year round, thinks deeply? - Think about Gorky smoking a pen. - What would Gorky look like if he had just come out of the barbershop? - What does it mean? How do I remember this? ……我是想起了绿猫。（高尔基，绿猫！）——现在又是叫卖的甚么？甚么地方有关窗声音，隔壁老头儿又咳嗽了。
I thought of the green cat. (Gorky, the green cat!) ——What is it selling now? There was a sound of windows somewhere, and the old man next door coughed again.我的朋友栢要写一篇小说，写绿猫，我就想起了高尔基。今天我刚好看见了高尔基。若是看到别人，我就会想到别人。
我去看我的朋友栢。
My friend Bai was going to write a novel, about the green cat, and I thought of Gorky. Today I happened to see Gorky. If I see others, I will think of others. I went to see my friend Park.黄梅天，总是那么闷。下雨。除了直接看到雨丝，你无法从别的东西上感觉到雨。声音是也有的，但那实在不能算是“雨声”。空气中极潮湿，香烟都变得软软的，抽到嘴里也没有味，但这与“雨意”这两个字的意味差得可多么远。天空淡淡漠漠，毫无感情可言。雨下到地上，就变成了水。那里是下甚么雨，“下水”而已。（赫哈，下水！）虽然这时念一声“八表同昏”，念一声“最难风雨故人来”，觉得滑稽，可是听巷子里那个苍白的孩子一边跑，一边用稚嫩的声音哀唤：
Huangmeitian is always so stuffy. Rain. You can't feel the rain from anything other than seeing the rain directly. There are sounds, but they really can't be considered "rain sounds". The air is extremely humid, the cigarettes become soft, and there is no smell in the mouth, but this is far from the meaning of the word "rain". The sky is faint and indifferent, and there is no emotion to speak of. When the rain falls to the ground, it becomes water. What kind of rain is it there, just "going into the water". (Hehe, go into the water!) Although it was funny to recite "Eight Tables and Eight Tables at the same time" and "The Most Difficult Wind and Rain Old Man Comes", I heard the pale child in the alley cry in a childish voice while running:“有破个烂个电灯泡撂出来，
有破个烂个电灯泡撂出来，”
我可没有电灯泡撂给他，披上雨衣，决定还是去看看栢。虽然毫不热烈，摇曳着，支持着那点意思。
"There's a broken light bulb thrown out. There is a broken light bulb and pull it out," I didn't have a light bulb to throw him away, put on a raincoat, and decided to go see Bai. Although it was not enthusiastic, it swayed, supporting that meaning.怎么样从我的住处就到了栢的住处了呢？说不上来，我就是已经到了栢的门前，伸手而敲了。“既然不是乘兴，你就不要来！”我心里自己嘀咕。王子猷呀王子猷，活在现在，你也毫不希奇！想到你的得意杰作，我是又悲哀又生气。——才不，悲甚么哀呢，生的甚么气。谁也不能真正画出一幅雪夜访戴图，他不过是自得其乐。这个年头，谈不到这些，卞之琳先生说是“最不风流的时候”，有这么一句话他就活得下去，仿佛不风流害不死他。人言阿龙超，阿龙固自超，那么咱们就超吧。也罢，我明知道这门里没有甚么新鲜事情，优美，崇高，陶醉迷人事情，我还是敲门。剥啄一声，我心欢喜。心里一阵子暖，我这才知道我为甚么要来，我该来。门里至少有我一个朋友，在茫茫人海之中可以跟我谈话。“我好比：南来的雁……”我简直要唱起来了。当然没有唱，一声“请进来”，门为我而开了。我真想说一声：
How did you get from my residence to Bai's residence? I can't say it, I just arrived at Bai's door and knocked on it. "Since it's not fun, don't come!" I muttered to myself. Wang Ziyou, Wang Ziyou, living now, you are not surprised! Thinking of your proud masterpiece, I am sad and angry. ——No, what is sad, what is angry. No one can really draw a picture of a snowy night visit, he is just enjoying himself. These days, I can't talk about this, Mr. Bian Zhilin said that it was "the least romantic time", and there was such a sentence that he could live, as if he could not be killed if he was not romantic. People say that Aaron is super, and Aaron is self-surpassing, so let's surpass. Anyway, I know that there is nothing new in this door, beautiful, sublime, intoxicating and charming things, I still knock on the door. Peeling and pecking, my heart was happy. My heart warmed up for a while, and then I knew why I was here, I should come. There is at least one friend of mine in the door who can talk to me in the vast sea of people. "I'm like: a goose from the south......" I'm about to sing. Of course I didn't sing, and with a "please come in", the door opened for me. I really want to say:“啊栢，我真喜欢你！”
"Ah Bai, I really like you!"现代人都受不了舞台上的大悲剧，受不了颤抖带泪的声音，受不了“太厉害”的动作，然而虽然止于礼义也，却未尝没有发乎情的时候，他只是不让她“出来”，活生生给掐死了，而且毫不觉其残酷。当然我也不说。我为甚么要怪，要不识时务，不顺应潮流。我的朋友栢是个热情人，虽然也给压得差不多坏了，但劲儿似乎还有一点。许多人加给他的评语是“天真”。当然他不是孩子似的。他天生来是个浪漫的底子，关起门来会升天入地，在现实中淘吸出点甚么玩意儿来。——任是这么一个人，我也不能跟他说那一句会令他莫明其妙的话吧。如果我说，他一定愕然，看我一眼，略一点头，心里明白了，上来扶住我，扶到他椅子里坐下，甚至扶到他床上，给我倒水，有钱则为我买水果。他以为我醉了！如果我醉了，我就会接下去说：
Modern people can't stand the great tragedy on the stage, the trembling and tearful sounds, and the "too powerful" action, but although it is only polite and righteous, there is no time when he is in heat, he just doesn't let her "come out", strangles her to death, and doesn't feel cruel. Of course I won't say it. Why should I blame him, he doesn't know the current affairs and doesn't follow the trend. My friend Bai is a warm person, although he is almost crushed, but he seems to have a little energy. Many people commented on him as "naïve". Of course he is not like a child. He was born with a romantic foundation, and he would ascend to heaven and earth behind closed doors, and he would suck up something in reality. ——Even if it was such a person, I couldn't tell him that sentence would make him puzzled. If I said it, he would be stunned, look at me, nod slightly, understand in his heart, come up and support me, help him sit down in his chair, or even help him to his bed, pour me water, and buy me fruit if he has money. He thinks I'm drunk! If I'm drunk, I'll continue:“啊栢，你不知道我多难受，多寂寞！这是甚么生活？甚么时候光明才能照到‘古罗马的城楼’？……”
"Ah Bai, you don't know how uncomfortable and lonely I am! What kind of life is this? When will the light shine on the 'ancient Roman tower'? ……”喝醉了还是忘不了开玩笑：栢的隔壁有一位青年，一天到晚唱他的夜半歌声，而且总把“城头”唱成“城楼”。——得，我这么哩哩拉拉的，倒像我真的喝醉了！我甚么都没有说，脸上微亮了一下，说了一句：
I still can't forget to joke when I'm drunk: there is a young man next door to Bai who sings his midnight song all day long, and always sings "city head" as "city tower". ——Well, I'm so lazy, it's like I'm really drunk! I didn't say anything, my face lit up slightly, and I said:“怎么样，栢？”
见面总是这么一句。毫无意义。——不，不能是毫无意义，这至少等于说“哈，又见面了。”
“怎么样？——哎，你来得正好！”
这一句话我爱听。
“怎么啦？”
"'Come out, come out!' The man stretched out his hand to pull the door, turned around: everyone looked at him with their eyes and shook their heads gently. Only then did this man remember, and his face turned pale with fright——" "What's wrong?"“我在写文章。”
"How is it, Bai?" Meeting is always like that. Meaningless. - No, it can't be meaningless, it's at least the same as saying "Ha, meet again." ” "How is it? - Hey, you came just in time! ” I love to hear this sentence. "What's wrong?" "I'm writing an article."“你写，我不搅你。我坐一会，看你那本书。”
“不，你来得正好，我写不出来。”
“噢，要我来打岔，好嘛！——写的甚么？”
“一个小说。”
“我看看。”
“别看！”
"You write, I don't mess with you. I'll sit for a while and read your book. ” "No, you came just in time, I can't write it." "Oh, let me interrupt, okay! ——What is written? ” "A novel." "Let me see." "Don't look!"我已经看见了！题目：《绿猫》；第一行是
“小时候……”
I have seen it! Title: "Green Cat"; The first line is "When I was a child......栢把稿子压在一本大字典底下，给我泡茶。接过茶杯，我不由得不扑嗤一笑，把茶都泼了出来，泼在裤子上。我掏手绢擦裤子。——并不是爱惜裤子，就是擦擦。——是爱惜裤子，下意识里还是爱惜的。这条裤子虽然普通到不能再普通，毫无特色之可言，但小时候总有穿鲜美新衣而喜悦，而爱惜的时候。
Bai pressed the manuscript under a large dictionary and made me tea. After taking the teacup, I couldn't help but smile, spilled all the tea, and splashed it on my pants. I took out a handkerchief to wipe my pants. ——It's not that I cherish my pants, it's that I wipe them. ——It's about cherishing pants, and subconsciously I still cherish them. Although these pants are so ordinary that they can't be ordinary anymore, they have no features to speak of, but when I was a child, I was always happy to wear delicious new clothes, and I cherished them.“笑甚么？”
当然，他看到我眼睛所看方向就已经明白我笑甚么。
"What are you laughing at?" Of course, he already understood what I was laughing when he saw the direction my eyes were looking.一只瘦骨伶仃的小猫蜷在桌子腿旁边。这两天正是换毛的时候，毛都一饼一饼的。毫无光泽，不能说不难看。又是下雨，更脏了。本来应当说是白地子淡黄花斑，在暗影里说不出是甚么颜色。栢也好好的看了它一眼，冲我皱鼻子，扁嘴，努目而用力点了点头，鼻子里哼出一股气：
A skinny kitten curled up next to the table leg. These two days are the time to molt, and the fur is cake by cake. It's not shiny, and it can't be said that it's not ugly. It's raining again, and it's even dirtier. It should have been said to be a white ground with pale yellow spots, but I couldn't tell what color it was in the shadows. Bai also took a good look at it, wrinkled his nose at me, flatted his mouth, and nodded vigorously, snorting from his nose:“我一定要把它染成一个绿的！”
我又笑，栢可急了，他以为我是笑他，笑他也就是说说，决不会当真把他的猫染成个绿的。他声音大，吐字切，两腿分开，作童子军操“少息”状，说：
"I must dye it green!" I laughed again, Bai Ke was anxious, he thought I was laughing at him, laughing at him, that is to say, he would never really dye his cat green. He was loud, spit out words, spread his legs apart, and did a Boy Scout exercise "take a breath", saying:“你瞧着！我一定染，染成个绿猫！我已经在一家理发店里问过了，有染绿的水。”
"Look! I must dye it, dye it into a green cat! I have already asked in a barbershop that there is water dyed green. ”果然不错，他也看了前天的那张报纸。——我看了看他的头，新剪的，“打三下”！理发匠是顶会把所有的人弄成一样，把所有的人的风格全毁了的，顶没有“趣味”的人。你看看，把我的诗人，我们的小说家，我们的希腊艺术的小专家，我们的长眉，大眼，直鼻，嘴唇的弧度合乎理想，脑门子宽窄中度，智慧，热情，蕴藉，潇洒的栢先生弄成了甚么样子！要是有画家画，有雕刻家刻，有人来喜欢，来爱，你教这些人何以为情，怎么办？这个头发式样！简直糟糕透顶，这是甚么世界！栢是有他的合适的发式的。有一回，在昆明，也是下雨，栢去看我；没有打伞，也没有戴帽子，他的头发长得很长了，雨淋过，有点湿；他一进门，掏出手绢，擦额头的水滴，一扬头，把披下来的长发甩到后面去，用手那么一撩，嗐！他一霎那他真是一个栢，真美，那才是栢的头发！简直可以说，我喜欢栢就因为他有那一霎，永恒的一霎。否则，现在，这一头光可鉴人的头发马路上到处都是，多没意思！栢看起来相当滑稽可笑，现在。因为这一头头发与他周身上下，与这间屋子的一切，全不相调和——栢一定是在理发店看的那张报纸。前天报纸副刊上有一块“文人怪癖”。似乎是文人就非有怪癖不可，是副刊就得刊载无数次那样的“珍闻”。把脚浸在温水里，闻烂苹果气味，穿红衣裳，染绿头发，……抄集的人照例又必加上许多按语。按语虽各有巧妙不同，然而有一点是大都要提到的，是“这是刺激灵感之方法。”——栢有几根白头发，少年白，他自己已经不大在意了，理发匠可不肯放过，常常在剪好了，吹风上油时就会问一句：
Sure enough, he also read the newspaper the day before yesterday. ——I looked at his head, newly cut, "three strokes"! The barber is the one who can make everyone the same, ruin everyone's style, and have no "interesting" person. Look at what my poet, our novelist, our little expert in Greek art, our long eyebrows, big eyes, straight nose, curvature of our lips, medium width of the head, wisdom, enthusiasm, subtlety, and dashing Mr. Bai have become! If there are painters' paintings, sculptors' carvings, and people who come to like and love, what if you teach these people how to be affectionate? This hair style! It's terrible, what kind of world is this! Bai has his suitable hairstyle. Once, in Kunming, it was also raining, and Bai went to see me; without an umbrella or a hat, his hair grew very long, rained, and a little wet; As soon as he entered the door, he took out a handkerchief, wiped the water droplets on his forehead, raised his head, threw his long hair behind him, and teased it with his hands, huh! He was really a Bai, so beautiful, that was Bai's hair! It can be said that I like Bai because he has that moment, an eternal moment. Otherwise, now, this shiny hair is everywhere on the road, how boring! Bai looked quite funny, now. Because this hair was not in harmony with everything around him and everything in this room - Bai must have read the newspaper in the barbershop. The day before yesterday, there was a piece of "literati quirks" in the newspaper supplement. It seems that literati must have quirks, and the supplement has to publish such "rare news" countless times. Dip your feet in warm water, smell the smell of rotten apples, wear red clothes, and dye your hair green,...... The person who copied the collection must add many notes as usual. Although the words are cleverly different, there is one thing that most of them have to mention, which is "This is a way to stimulate inspiration." ——Bai has a few white hairs, the young man is white, he himself doesn't care much, the barber refuses to let go, often when he cuts it, blows oil it, he will ask:“要不要染一染？三个月不会退的，尽管说。”
"Do you want to dye it? It won't go back in three months, even if you say it. ”栢自然有点不耐烦。如果他有甚么不高兴事情，比如，有那么一只不好看的猫这一类事情，他就会生一点气。一生气，刚好看到报上那段“文人怪癖”，他就装得极有兴趣，极关心的问：
“是不是甚么颜色都能染？”
Bai was naturally a little impatient. If he is unhappy about something, such as an unsightly cat, he will be a little angry. When he was angry, he happened to see the "literati quirk" in the newspaper, so he pretended to be very interested and asked with great concern: "Can it be dyed in any color?"“甚么颜色都能染！”
回答的不止一个人，不是那个劝他理发的理发匠，旁边好几个一起充满热情的回答。有一位女客为之神色飞舞，问其邻座另一女客：
“陈莉的头发是棕黄色的？”
"Any color can be dyed!" There was more than one person answering, not the barber who persuaded him to get a haircut, but several people next to him answered enthusiastically. A female customer looked at it and asked another female customer next to her: "Chen Li's hair is brownish-yellow?"陈莉是谁？看她们说话神气，大概是一个女“歌手”或是舞星吧？那位为栢理发的理发匠见自己的话为别人抢去代答，颇不高兴。栢想劝劝他，何必呢，凡事都宁可让着人些。然而似乎劝也无用，就问他一点别的，反正他就是要说说话。
Who is Chen Li? Judging from their demeanor, they are probably a female "singer" or a dancer, right? The barber who gave Bai a haircut was quite unhappy when he saw that his words were snatched up by others. Bai wanted to persuade him, why bother, he would rather let others do everything. However, it seemed that persuasion was useless, so he asked him something else, anyway, he just wanted to talk.“能不能染绿的？”
这就一时都答不上来了。过了一会，最远的一位理发匠说了：
"Can you dye it green?" This is not an answer for a while. After a while, one of the farthest barbers said:“可以的！我见过染绿的药水。有一回，洋行里发货发错了，有一箱，打开来，是绿颜色的。——没有人要染绿的吧？你先生当然不要染绿头发？”
"Yes! I've seen potions dyed green. Once, the shipment was sent to the wrong place in the foreign store, and there was a box that was opened and was green. ——No one wants to dye it green, right? Of course your husband doesn't want to dye his hair green? ”栢在镜子里点点头，那位刚才还似乎生了一点气的理发匠，正用一面镜子在后面照，问他满意不满意，自然总是满意，总点点头。一面，他回话：
“有人染的。不是我。我甚么颜色都不染。”
Bai nodded in the mirror, the barber who seemed to be a little angry just now was using a mirror to look behind him, asking him if he was satisfied, naturally always satisfied, and nodded. On the one hand, he replied: "Someone dyed it. Not me. I don't dye anything. ”大概那时他即想到染他的猫成绿色的了！
Probably then he thought of dyeing his cat green!大家都说栢喜欢猫。栢也当真是喜欢的。不过教他们，尤其是她们，那么一说，简直说得喜欢猫是件可笑的事，喜欢猫的也是一种可笑的人了。我极代为不平。一听到有人无话可谈的时候谈到他，我就说：“他喜欢很多东西，只要是好看的，有生命的；或是无生命而可以见出生命，见出生命之活动，之痕迹的，他无不喜欢。他从来也没有以为猫是世界上最美，最值得有的东西。”然而众口同声，我也没有工夫生那么些闲气。有时真气了，我就向栢说：
Everyone says that Bai likes cats. Bai really likes it. But teaching them, especially them, is a ridiculous thing to say that liking cats, and liking cats is also a ridiculous person. I am extremely unfair. As soon as I heard someone talk about him when he had nothing to say, I said: "He likes many things, as long as they are good-looking and alive; or inanimate things that can see life, the activities of life, and traces, he likes everything." He never thought that cats were the most beautiful and worthwhile thing in the world. However, everyone said in unison, and I didn't have the time to be so idle. Sometimes when I was really angry, I said to Bai:“栢，你就别喜欢猫吧！往后你甚么也别喜欢了。”
"Bai, don't like cats! Don't like anything from now on. ”可是大家非咬死了说他有猫癖不可。说这个话的，有的自己喜欢猫，援引之以壮声势。有的不喜欢猫，看不起喜欢猫的人，他们要找出这一点作为看不起栢的理由。有些，最多了，无所谓，无话可谈的时候谈谈。——都是栢那篇文章引出来的！
But everyone has to bite to death and say that he has a cat fetish. Some of those who say this like cats and cite them with great momentum. Some don't like cats and look down on people who like cats, and they have to find this as a reason to look down on Bai. Some, at most, it doesn't matter, talk about it when there is nothing to talk about. ——It's all led out of Bai's article!栢从小就与猫接近。他有个伯父，生性严刻，不苟言笑，对待任何人都是冷冷的，可是他爱猫，猫是他性命。他养了一大堆猫，最多时到过四十七头，平常也十头以上。一家之中他伯父就是对栢还有时和蔼慈祥，因为栢可以陪他一起养猫，喂猫饭，用发梳为猫梳毛，为猫捉跳蚤，找老猫在那里生小猫，更重要的是搬个小蒲团坐下陪他伯父一同欣赏那些名贵的猫。栢从之学会医猫病，配猫药，知道猫吃了甚么要长癞，甚么东西则可使猫毛丰长亮洁。他知道许多猫的名色。我只记得狸花，玳瑁，乌云盖雪，铁棒打三桃，玛瑙浆，大杏黄，小杏黄，几种最普通习见的，其余都记起来难，忘起来快。栢还说过许多如何偷接一个种，春夏间如何监视猫的交游，没有尾巴的猫与有尾巴的猫配合，生下来有几个可能有尾，几个无尾，狮子猫下小猫有几分把握能是狮子猫，等等，我说他很可以写一本《猫学》去，这样，他一开头写“小时候……”乃是自然不过的事。——不过，除了我他很少向人谈这些。——幸好没有谈！那篇关于猫的文章，别人看了不知道怎么样，我是颇喜欢的，因为亲切。他所说的那些我有不少知道，在场，所以印象很深。文章我这里有一份，有几处，我以为还可以一看：
Bai has been close to cats since he was a child. He has an uncle who is strict by nature, unsmiling, and treats anyone coldly, but he loves cats, and cats are his life. He raised a lot of cats, at most forty-seven, and usually more than ten. In the family, his uncle was sometimes kind and kind to Bai, because Bai could accompany him to raise cats, feed cats, comb cats with haircombs, catch fleas for cats, find old cats to give birth to kittens there, and more importantly, move a small futon to sit down with his uncle to admire those precious cats. Bai learned to treat cat diseases, prescribe cat medicine, and know what cats eat to make leprosy, and what can make cat hair long and shiny. He knows the names of many cats. I only remember raccoon flowers, hawksbill turtles, dark clouds covering snow, iron rods hitting three peaches, agate pulp, large apricot yellow, small apricot yellow, several of the most common and familiar, the rest are difficult to remember and quick to forget. Bai also said many ways to steal a species, how to monitor the mating of cats in spring and summer, cats without tails cooperate with cats with tails, how many may have tails when born, a few without tails, a lion cat kitten is somewhat sure that it can be a lion cat, etc., I said that he could write a book "Catology", so that it is natural for him to write "...... when he was a child" at the beginning. ——However, he rarely talks about this to anyone except me. ——Fortunately, I didn't talk about it! I don't know what to do with that article about cats, but I like it quite a bit because it is kind. I know a lot of what he said, and I was there, so I was very impressed. I have an article here, there are a few places, I thought I could still take a look:大雨忽然来了。一个青色的闪照在枫树上， 我赶紧跑到柴草房里去。那是距我所在处最近的房屋。我爬上堆近屋顶的芦柴上，听水从高处流下来，顺着瓦沟流下来，响极了。訇——空心老桑树倒了，往下一压，蒲桃架塌了；我的四周越来越黑了，雨点在我头上乱跳。忽然，一转身，墙角两个碧绿绿的东西在发光！——哦，那是老黑猫。老黑猫又生了一堆小猫了。原来它每次生养都在这里！我看它们吃奶，听着雨，雨慢慢小了。
Suddenly, heavy rain came. A cyan flash shone on the maple tree, and I hurried to the firewood house. It was the closest house to where I was. I climbed onto the pile of reeds near the roof and listened to the water flowing down the ditch from a high place, and it was very loud. The hollow old mulberry tree fell, pressed down, and the grape trellis collapsed; it was getting darker and darker around me, and raindrops were bouncing around my head. Suddenly, as soon as I turned around, two green things in the corner were glowing! ——Oh, that's the old black cat. The old black cat gave birth to a bunch of kittens again. It turns out that it is here every time it gives birth! I watched them suckle and listened to the rain, and the rain slowly decreased.栢谈起过他们家那个小花园，而从这头猫上我可以得到二十年前他的一个影子，在那个小花园中活动。
后来，说到在昆明时候，这时候我已经认识他了。
Bai talked about their small garden, and from this cat I can get a shadow of him twenty years ago, moving in that small garden. Later, when it came to Kunming, I already knew him at this time.……有一回我到一个人家去。主人不在，老妈子说：“就回来的，说怕您要来，请在屋里坐坐，等等。”开了房门让我进去。主人新婚，房里的一切是才置的，全部是两个人跑酸了四条腿，一件一件精心挑选来的。颜色配搭得真是好，有一种叆叇朦胧感觉，如梦如春。我在软椅中坐了一会。在我看完一本画报，想换第二本时，我的眼睛为一个东西吸住了：墨绿缎墩上栖着一只小猫。小极了小极了，头尾团在一起不到一本袖珍书那么大。白地子，背上米红色逐渐向四边晕晕的淡去，一个小黑鼻子，全身就那么一点黑。我想这么个小玩意儿不知给了女主人多少欢喜。怎么一来让她在橱窗里瞥见了，做得真好。真的，我一点不觉得那是个真猫！猫要是那么小，是没有大起来；还在吃奶的小猫毛是有一块没一块的，不会那么厚薄均匀，茸茸软软的。嘿，——我这一动换，嗖，它跳了下来，无声的落在地毯上，睁着两颗豆绿眼睛。它一点都不是假的！猫伸了个懒腰，走了。我看见那个墩子，想这团墨绿衬得实在好极了。我断信这个颜色是为了猫而选的。——这个猫是甚么种？一直就是这么大？……想着，朋友进来了，我冒冒失失的说“××，你真幸福！”朋友不知道我所称赞的是那一点，瞠目而视，直客气“那里，那里！”女主人微微一笑，给我拿来一个烟灰缸子过来。……
…… Once I went to a person's house. When the owner was not there, the old mother said, "I'll come back, say I'm afraid you will come, please sit in the house, and wait." He opened the door and let me in. The master is newlywed, and everything in the room is just placed, all of which are carefully selected by two people who have run four sore legs. The colors are really well matched, and there is a hazy feeling, like a dream. I sat in a soft chair for a while. After reading a pictorial and wanting to change to a second one, my eyes were drawn to something: a kitten perched on the dark green satin pier. It's so small, it's so small, it's less than the size of a pocket book. The white ground, the beige on the back gradually fades to the four sides, a small black nose, and the whole body is so dark. I don't know how much joy such a gadget gave the hostess. How did she catch a glimpse of it in the window, it was really well done. Really, I don't think it's a real cat at all! If the cat is so small, it won't grow bigger; the kitten's hair that is still nursing has a piece of hair, it won't be so thick and even, fluffy and soft. Hey,—— I changed, whoosh, it jumped down and landed silently on the carpet, with two green eyes open. It's not fake at all! The cat stretched out and left. I saw the pier and thought it was really good to be dark green. I firmly believe that this color was chosen for cats. ——What kind of cat is this? It has always been this big? …… Thinking about it, my friend came in, and I took the liberty of saying, "××, you are so happy!" My friend didn't know what I was praising about, so he stared at me and said politely, "There, there!" The hostess smiled slightly and brought me an ashtray. ……这里所说××我也认识。那个女主人呢，不少人暗暗的为她而写了诗。我们的栢兄大概也写过不止一首吧。想想他说“××，你真幸福”那股子傻楞劲儿？——这事说来也近十年了。没有十年，八年。而另外一段，我更熟习，那时我跟栢同住在一个地方，在大学里念书的时候：
I also know what is said here×× too. As for the hostess, many people secretly wrote poems for her. Our Brother Bai probably wrote more than one. Think about the silly energy when he said, "××, you are so happy"? ——This has been nearly ten years. Not ten years, eight years. And the other paragraph, which I am more familiar with, when I lived in the same place as Bai and was studying in college:……得要有一个忧郁得甜迷迷的小院子，深深细细，缠缠绵绵，湮浸于一种古意。……
…… There must be a small courtyard that is melancholic and sweet, deep and delicate, lingering, and immersed in an ancient meaning. ……昆明是个颇合乎理想地方。一方面许多高大洋楼连二接三的生长出来，真是如同雨后春笋。一方面有戴乌绒帽勒，饰以银红丝球缨络，青布衣上挑出葱绿花纹的苗女，从山里下来，青竹篮里衬着带露羊齿叶片，用工房中唱情歌嗓子在旧宅第下马石前长喝一声“卖杨梅——”
Kunming is a very ideal place. On the one hand, many tall western-style buildings have grown one after another, which is really like mushrooms after rain. On the one hand, there are Miao girls wearing black velvet hats, decorated with silver and red silk ball tassels, and green patterns picked out on green cloth clothes, coming down from the mountain, the green bamboo basket is lined with exposed sheep's tooth leaves, and singing love songs in the workshop in front of the stone of the old house.新与旧的渗和对照，充满浪漫感。去年沙嘴是江心，呼吸于梅礼美的“残象的雅致”之中，把无可托付的心倾注在狗呀猫呀的身上的，想想看，有多少人？……
The infiltration and contrast between the new and the old is full of romance. Last year's spit, the heart of the river, breathed in the "elegance of the afterimage" of Mei Limei, poured out the untrustworthy heart on the dogs and cats, think about it, how many people? ……我所寄住的那一家，没有一个男人，一个五十多岁的老姑娘带两个很难说是甚么身份的女孩子。他们都吃素，老姑娘念经奉佛。她们经年著一尘不染的青布衣，青布鞋，有时候忽然一齐换一天或银灰色，或藕合色的高领窄袖子，沿边盘花扣子的老式慕本缎子衫裙；到天黑，回房才褪尽簪珥，仍是老样子，髻子辫子上留一朵淡色的或艳色的花。不知道那一天有甚么事情。——不知是甚么道理，鱼磬声中，一点都不是先入为主，神经过敏之见，有一种执著的悲剧气味，一种安定的寂寞，又渗杂一种不可名状的挣扎。而这一切，为一头大猫点动出来。院中一棵大白兰花树，一进门即觉得满身是绿。浓香之中，金残碧旧，一头银狐色暹罗大猫伏在阶前蒲团上打盹，或凝视庭中微微漾动的树影，耳朵竖得尖尖的，无端紧张半天，忽然又懒涣下来；住久了，慢慢的，话就越来越少了，好像没有甚么可说的。……
In the house where I stayed, there was not a single man, an old girl in her fifties brought two girls whose identity was difficult to say. They were all vegetarians, and the old girl recited scriptures and worshipped Buddha. They wore spotless blue cloth clothes and blue cloth shoes all year round, and sometimes suddenly changed into silver-gray, or lotus-colored high-collared narrow sleeves, and old-fashioned Muben satin shirts and skirts with flower buttons along the edges; When it got dark, I returned to the room and lost all the hairpins, still the same, leaving a pale or bright flower on the bun and braid. I don't know what happened that day. ——I don't know what the reason is, in the sound of the fish chime, there is no preconceived notion at all, nervousness, there is a persistent tragic smell, a stable loneliness, and an indescribable struggle. And all this was stirred up by a big cat. A big white orchid tree in the courtyard felt green as soon as I entered the door. In the strong fragrance, the gold is remnant and green, a silver fox Siamese cat is lying on the futon in front of the steps to take a nap, or staring at the slightly rippling shadows of the trees in the courtyard, the ears are pointed, and they are nervous for no reason for a long time, and suddenly they are lazy again; After living for a long time, slowly, there are fewer and fewer words, as if there is nothing to say. ……这样的文章，即使栢是我的朋友，唯其是我的朋友，我不能说是怎么好，我不是说“可以看看么？”难道看也不能看么？我相信韩昌黎“气水也”的说法，把文章摘出这么两三段来看是很要不得的办法，因为只见浮物，不见水，也浮不起来。——我们所谓风格，大概指的就是那么股“劲儿”。是落花依草也好，回风映雪也好，你总得从头至尾的看下来才有个感觉。正如同要行了才算是船，砌死在那儿，那怕是颐和园的石舫，也呆板的。不过我把栢的文章抄在这里，他要是反对，不是反对因为失去层叠逶迤，翩翩盻顾而觉得有意跟他为难；是态度，是从切面中见出态度，从态度中有人，有好事人会提出他是怎么样一个人。从这三两段之中若是有人“唔”那么一声，“谈猫的！”他就没法奈他何。那位先生的意思当然是：猫不是猫，是很多东西，是大白兰花树，是银灰藕合，寂寞安定，是青竹篮带露羊齿叶，是如梦如春，叆叇朦胧，是枫树，青色闪，是浪漫感觉，……是不大壮健，是过了时的东西！有人说它晦涩，有人说它浅，都对。栢没法奈他何。是的，我可知道栢的苦。他自己比谁都明白，一天到晚的嚷着，为甚么没有时间给我读书，给我思索，给我观察，为甚么我不能深入于生活，平正于字句，为甚我贫弱，昏聩？看他用全力搏兔，从早到晚，天黑到天亮，（这样的时候不多，不是他不干，是时候没有，）结果颓然败阵下来，神色惨然，向我摊手，说“没有办法，你看见的，我尽了力，可是格格不入，一无是处。”我就劝他，“你就别写吧。”这他可忽然爆发起来了，仿佛我就是他弄不好的题目，冲到我面前：
Such an article, even if Bai is my friend, but he is my friend, I can't say how good it is, I don't say, "Can you take a look?" Can't you read it? I believe that Han Changli's statement of "qi and water" is a very important way to extract two or three paragraphs of the article, because you can only see floating things, not water, and you can't float. ——Our so-called style probably refers to such a "vigor". Whether it is falling flowers and grass, or returning wind and snow, you have to look at it from beginning to end to have a feeling. Just as it is a boat when it has to go, and it is built there, even if it is a stone boat in the Summer Palace, it is dull. But I copied Bai's article here, if he objected, not because he felt intentionally embarrassed with him because of the loss of cascading and graceful looking; it is the attitude, it is the attitude that can be seen from the face, and there are people in the attitude, and there are good people who will ask what kind of person he is. From these three or two paragraphs, if someone says "no", "Talk about cats!" He can't do anything about it. Of course, what the gentleman meant was: a cat is not a cat, it is a lot of things, it is a big white orchid tree, it is a silver and gray lotus flower, it is lonely and stable, it is a green bamboo basket with exposed sheep's tooth leaves, it is like a dream and spring, it is hazy, it is a maple tree, it is a blue flash, it is a romantic feeling,...... It's not strong, it's outdated! Some people say it's obscure, some people say it's shallow, it's all right. Bai can't do anything about it. Yes, I know Bai's suffering. He himself understands better than anyone else, shouting all day long, why don't he have time to read to me, give me thoughts, give me observations, why can't I go deep into life, be fair to words, why am I poor and faint? Seeing him fight the rabbit with all his might, from morning to night, from dark to dawn, (there are not many times like this, it's not that he doesn't do it, it's not time,) As a result, he was defeated, looked miserable, spread his hands to me, and said, "There is no way, what you see, I did my best, but I was out of place and useless." I persuaded him, "Don't write." He suddenly broke out, as if I was the topic he couldn't get right, and rushed in front of me:“我不写，我不写干甚么？”
他要是反对我抄，反对的是这个。但是反对过一会儿他就不反对了。他就说：“无所谓的。日光之下无新事，都要过时。”
就因为过时，我问栢：
"I don't write, why don't I write?" If he objected to my copying, he was against this. But after a while, he stopped objecting. He said, "It doesn't matter. Nothing new under the sun is obsolete." ” Just because it was outdated, I asked Bai:“哎栢，你为甚么写这么个题目？”
"Oh, why are you writing such a topic?"我这一问好叫栢不高兴。他大抽了一口烟，推出下唇而喷出来，那么斜着眼睛看了我一下。我知道这兜起了他的恨。当然他不能一直用那样的眼睛看我，把眼睛移过了，那么看着一幅梵诃的画，右手的大拇指无意识的拨弄他的衬衫扣子。渐渐的，他的表情之中透出一种悲怨，一种委屈。糟糕，我这么一句不经意的话闯了祸，我怕他要哭。你可以想象那一会儿的僵，那一会儿我的不安，我的无以自处。我吸吸鼻子，咳嗽两声，舌头舔舔嘴唇。要是这种情形一直持续下去，我只有怏怏的说，乞怜，抗拒，绝望，哀楚，恨毒：“我走了。”从此我就绝不再来。倒是栢，他或者是因为梵诃的燃烧的笔触而得到安慰，得到鼓舞，得到启迪，忘了，不计较我的话，他倒体谅起我的踧踖，他脸上的表情变得非常温柔，把手加在我的手背上，我就是怎么会嘲笑，甚么Cynical，我不能不为他感动，他缓缓的叹了一口气：
My question made Bai unhappy. He took a big puff of smoke, pushed out his lower lip and spat out, and looked at me with squinted eyes. I knew this made him hateful. Of course, he couldn't keep looking at me with that kind of eyes, so he looked at a painting by Brahma, and the thumb of his right hand unconsciously fiddled with the button of his shirt. Gradually, there was a kind of sadness and grievance in his expression. Oh no, I got into trouble with such a casual word, and I was afraid he would cry. You can imagine the stiffness at that moment, my uneasiness at that moment, and my inability to deal with myself. I sniffed, coughed twice, and licked my lips with my tongue. If this situation continues, I can only say unhappily, begging for pity, resistance, despair, sorrow, hatred: "I'm leaving." "I will never come again. On the contrary, he may have been comforted, encouraged, enlightened by the burning brushstrokes of Brahma, forgotten, and ignored my words, he forgot my hesitation, the expression on his face became very gentle, and he put his hand on the back of my hand, how could I laugh, what Cynical, I couldn't help but be moved by him, he sighed slowly:“我总在这儿写就是了，你知道的。——我这也并不是象征派，我有良心。”
"I always write here, you know. ——I'm not a symbolist, I have a conscience. ”栢为我拿烟，为我点火。这也有下场。否则，他的手一直加在我的手上，成何体统？在我们的恳挚未为俗情笑煞之前即把手取去，是聪明的。自然事亦大可哀。但还是这样好，含蓄些，古典些。空气既已缓和，且因为这么一来，我们就更亲近，更莫逆于心，我就问问栢：
Bai took a cigarette for me and lit a fire for me. This also has an end. Otherwise, his hand has been on mine, what kind of system is it? It is wise to take our hands away before we laugh at the worldly sentiment. Natural things are also very pitiful. But it is still good, more subtle, more classical. Since the air has eased, and because of this, we are closer, and there is no contradiction to our hearts, so I asked Park:“为甚么写不出来呢？”
"Why can't I write it?"栢苦笑，手那么一伸，把他的房间介绍给我看。不用说别的了，房间里有四张床！——比我的房间里还多一张。一张窄窄的小桌子，桌上又是肥皂，又是牙刷，又是换下来的衬衫，又是童子军哨子，又是算盘，又是绍兴戏说明书，又是甚么文艺杂志，杂，乱，多，不统一，不调和。这间屋子真暗，真湿，真霉，真——唉，臭！栢从云南带来的一个缅漆盒子被人撂在墙犄角，这个东西他曾经那么宝爱过。他画了好几年的一个画稿上一个热水壶印子，一堆香烟灰，而且缺了一角。雨越下越大了。幸亏有雨，他才能多单独一会。而隔壁雄壮的“古罗马的城楼”歌声认真其事的唱起来了。栢的眼睛落在一本书上：佛金尼·吴尔芙的《一间自己的屋子》，他表情极其幽默。
Bai smiled bitterly, stretched out his hand, and introduced his room to me. Needless to say, there are four beds in the room! ——One more than my room. A small narrow table, on the table is soap, toothbrushes, changed shirts, Boy Scout whistles, abacus, Shaoxing opera manuals, and some literary and art magazines, miscellaneous, messy, many, ununiform, and discordant. This room is so dark, really wet, really moldy, really—alas, it stinks! A Burmese lacquer box brought by Bai from Yunnan was left in the corner of the wall, and he used to cherish it so much. He had drawn a drawing for several years, a kettle print, a pile of cigarette ash, and a corner missing. The rain was getting heavier and heavier. Fortunately, it was raining so he could be alone for a while. And the majestic "ancient Roman tower" singing next door began to sing seriously. Parker's eyes fell on a book: "A House of His Own" by Fergini Woolf, and his expression was extremely humorous.我想问问他是不是还是那么几个钱薪水，得了，别问了。
栢翻他的抽屉。找甚么东西？
I want to ask him if he still has that much money in salary, come on, don't ask. He rummaged through his drawer. What are you looking for?“张先生有信来。身体比较好些了。得等再照一次X光再说。究竟怎么样了呢，也不知道。他写了二十年，不管怎么样吧，写了二十年，似乎总该得到一点报酬。——还骂他！这时候还骂他作甚么呢？在外国，这时早到了给他写传记的时候了。要批评他，就正正经经的批评也好，——那么轻佻，那么缺薄，当真他的文字有毒么？紧张热烈的在工作，在贫穷苦闷之中不放下笔来，这还不够伟大？——昨天见到李先生，他总是那么精神旺健，说：‘别骂！张某人比你们大家都穷，也比你们大家都用功，这是事实，这就够了！’何必呢？现在我们还有比麻木，比愚蠢，比庸碌更大的敌人么？为甚么不阔大些，不看远些？……
"Mr. Zhang has a letter. He is in better health. I have to wait for another X-ray. I don't know what happened. He wrote for twenty years, no matter what, after twenty years, it seems that he should always get paid a little. ——And scold him! What else do you scold him for at this time? In foreign countries, it is time to write a biography for him. If you want to criticize him, it is better to criticize him seriously,—— so frivolous and so lacking, is his writing really poisonous? Working intensely and enthusiastically, not putting down the pen in the midst of poverty and distress, is this not great enough? ——Yesterday I saw Mr. Li, he was always so energetic, and said: 'Don't scold!' Zhang is poorer than all of you, and he works harder than all of you, this is a fact, this is enough! 'Why bother? Do we still have an enemy bigger than numbness, stupidity, and mediocrity? Why not look wider and farther away? ……“他还是劝我换个方法写。你看么？”
我看信。一面还想了想“斗士”这两个字到底该是甚么意思？
“是怎么回事？”
He still advised me to write in a different way. Do you see? ” I read the letter. While thinking about it, what should the word "fighter" mean? "What's going on?"“我寄去一篇小论文，后来发现其中有一处很不妥贴，写信请他暂缓发稿，已经来不及了。后来想想，也无所谓，反正不是甚么不刊之论。我年纪还青，活着，谁也不知道里里外外要翻多少次身，要起多少次变化。你看我到了这儿一年，就在这儿变。——他这两句让我有一点感慨。你看：
"I sent a small paper, and later found that one of them was very inappropriate, and it was too late to write a letter asking him to postpone the publication. Thinking about it later, it doesn't matter, it's not something that is not published anyway. I am still young and alive, and no one knows how many times I have to turn inside and out, and how many times I will change. You see, I've been here for a year, and I've changed here. ——His two sentences made me feel a little emotional. You see:……其实一般读者无此细心。大凡作者用心深致处读者即恰恰容易忽略。事极自然，因作者所谓深致，即与作者不大用心时文笔不同。一人尚如此，何况诸读者？……”
“你感慨甚么呢？”
…… In fact, ordinary readers are not so careful. Generally speaking, the author's deep intentions are easy for readers to ignore. Things are very natural, because the author's so-called depth is different from the author's writing when he is not very attentive. One person is still like this, let alone readers? ……” "What are you feeling?"栢从字典下把那一叠《绿猫》原稿抽出来，拿起笔来写了一个“废”字，把桌上的笔套起来。
“不知道甚么时候才写得好，又‘错’了。
Bai took out the stack of original manuscripts of "Green Cat" from under the dictionary, picked up a pen and wrote the word "waste", and put the pen on the table. "I don't know when it was written well, and it was 'wrong' again.“就是缺少那点用心深致处！——在生活里‘出’不来。文章里‘进’不去。格格不入，不对劲儿，不对。
"It's just that there is a lack of that bit of depth! ——You can't 'come out' in life. You can't 'enter' in the article. Out of place, not right, not right.“瑞恰滋的说法已经很多人认为不能满意。我可是还没有见到更好的说法。——自然一切说法只是一种说法，它并不能就限制住写的人的笔。没有甚么说法，大家也还是要摸索着前进，写出许多东西再等有人来结说一句。
Many people think that Richards' statement is not satisfactory. I have not seen a better statement. ——Naturally, all statements are just one statement, and it does not limit the pen of the writer. There is nothing to say, and everyone still has to grope forward, write many things and wait for someone to conclude.“古往今来的文章当真有甚么用？说法国革命是一支《马赛进行曲》引出来的未免太天真，太乐观，有点倒因为果。而且《马赛曲》唱了出来多半也还是有点偶然。——为甚么写？为甚么读？最大理由还是要写，要读。可以得到一种‘快乐’，——你知道我所谓快乐即指一切比较精美，纯粹，高度的情绪。瑞恰滋叫它‘最丰富的生活’。你不是写过：写的时候要沉酣？我以为就是那样的意思。我自己的经验，只有在读在写的时候，我才觉得自己活得比较有价值，像回事。
"What is the use of articles throughout the ages? To say that the French Revolution was a "March of the Marseillaise" is too naïve, too optimistic, and a bit because of the result. And the "Marseillaise" was sung mostly by chance. ——Why write? Why read? The biggest reason is to write and read. You can get a kind of 'happiness',—— You know that by happiness, I mean all more exquisite, pure, and high emotions. Richards called it 'the richest life'. Didn't you write: When you write, you should be drunk? I thought that was what it meant. In my own experience, only when I read and write, do I feel that I am living a more valuable life, like that.“可是——难！纪德说：‘若是没有，放它进去！’说得多英勇！我看要生活里有诗，只有放它进去。——忽然想到这么一句，不大相干。
"But—difficult! Gide said: 'If not, let it in!' How heroic! I think if there is poetry in life, the only way to put it in is to put it in. ——Suddenly thinking of such a sentence, it doesn't matter.“我并不是要把读跟写从生活里独立出来。这当然也不可能，办不到。并不是把生活一刀两段，截然分开，这边是书，是艺术；那边是吃饭，睡觉，打哈哈，不是这样的意思。……我要的是甚么东西呢，不妨说就是‘灵感’吧。
"I don't want to separate reading and writing from life. Of course, this is impossible, it can't be done. It's not that life is completely separated, this side is books, it's art; it's eating, sleeping, and playing haha, that's not what it means. …… What do I want, I might as well say 'inspiration'.“就像等公共汽车，看着远远的来了，一脚跳上去，想它，想那点灵感，把我带到一个比较清爽莹澈，比较动人，有意义，有结构，有节拍的，境界里去。灵感，我的意思是若有所见，若有所解，若有所悟。吃着饭，走着路，甚至说着话，尤其是睡前，醒后，忽然心里那么触动了一下，最普通的比喻，像拨响了琴弦，这就仿佛活了起来，一把抓住，有时就得了救。我就写。——阅读，痛快的阅读，就是这个境界的复现，俯仰浮沉，随波逐浪，庄生化蝶，列子御风，味飘飘而轻举，情晔晔而更新。……”
"It's like waiting for a bus, watching it come from afar, jumping on it, thinking about it, thinking about that little inspiration, and taking me to a more refreshing, moving, meaningful, structured, and rhythmic realm. Inspiration, I mean seeing, understanding, understanding. Eating, walking, and even talking, especially before going to bed, after waking up, suddenly touched my heart, the most ordinary metaphor, like plucking a string, it seems to come to life, grab it, and sometimes be saved. I will write. ——Reading, happy reading, is the reproduction of this realm, ups and downs, chasing the waves, Zhuang Sheng transforms into a butterfly, Liezi resists the wind, the taste is fluttering and light, and the love is bright and renewed. ……”栢看了我一眼，看我确是在听，集中精神在听，听得很沉迷。其实不如说我在看，看他说，看那些其实没有甚么出奇，我也知道的词句如何从他的心里涌出来，具何颜色，作何波澜。我在听，在看，在鼓励击赏。栢高兴，这一会儿他嗓子也好听，情感流得自然中节。
Bai glanced at me, seeing that I was indeed listening, concentrating on listening, and listening very addictedly. In fact, it is better to say that I am watching, looking at him, looking at those words that are actually not surprising, and I also know how the words and phrases flow out of his heart, what color they have, and what waves they make. I am listening, watching, encouraging and rewarding. Bai was happy, his voice was also good at this moment, and his emotions flowed naturally.“给你背一段书：
"Memorize a book for you:“古人云：形在江海之上，心存魏阙之下，神思之谓也。文之思也，其神远矣！故寂然凝虑，思接千载；悄然动容，视通万里。吟咏之间，吐纳珠玉之声；眉睫之前，卷舒风云之色，其思理之致乎。’——珠玉，风云，这是六朝人滥调，不过‘寂然’，‘悄然’形容得好！……
“古人云：形在江海之上，心存魏阙之下，神思之谓也。 文之思也，其神远矣！故寂然凝虑，思接千载；悄然动容，视通万里。 吟咏之间，吐纳珠玉之声；眉睫之前，卷舒风云之色，其思理之致乎。 ’——珠玉，风云，这是六朝人滥调，不过‘寂然’，‘悄然’形容得好！……“‘故思理为妙，神与物游。神居胸臆之间，而志气统其关键；物沿耳目，而辞令管其枢机；枢机方通，则物无隐貌，关键将塞，则神有遁心。……’”
“‘故思理为妙，神与物游。 神居胸臆之间，而志气统其关键；物沿耳目，而辞令管其枢机；枢机方通，则物无隐貌，关键将塞，则神有遁心。 ……’”我点头：
我点头：“张载说：‘心中苟有所开，即便劄记，不思则还塞之矣。’非常同情他这个‘还塞之矣’，非常沉痛。”
Zhang Zai said: 'If you open your heart, even if you write it down, if you don't think about it, you will still stuff it.' I sympathize with him very much, and it is very painful. ”“‘是以陶钧文思，贵在虚静：疏瀹五藏，澡雪精神；积学以储宝，酌理以富才，研阅以穷照，驯致以怿辞。’——真好！
“‘是以陶钧文思，贵在虚静：疏瀹五藏，澡雪精神；积学以储宝，酌理以富才，研阅以穷照，驯致以怿辞。 ’——真好！“夫神思方运，万涂竞萌，规矩虚位，刻镂无形：登山则情满于山，观海则意溢于海，我才之多少，将与风云而并驱矣！……”
“夫神思方运，万涂竞萌，规矩虚位，刻镂无形：登山则情满于山，观海则意溢于海，我才之多少，将与风云而并驱矣！……”“你背得真熟。”
“你背得真熟。 ”“因为就像是我说的！——我还是赞成背书。就是太忙。我多久没有这么‘像煞有介事’过了？从前不相信甚么会闷出病来，现在想，大概真有那么回事。我母亲，他们就说是闷出病来，死的。”
"Because it's like I said it! ——I still agree with the endorsement. It's just too busy. How long has it been since I've been so 'like a big deal'? I didn't believe in anything that made me sick, but now I think it's probably true. My mother, they said she died of suffocation. ”栢这会儿神采焕发，眸子炯然。他在椅子把四肢伸得直直的，挺了挺腰，十分舒畅的样子，看起来他比平常也长大了些。我可以体会到他身体里丰满的快感。过了好一会，雨小些了，他走了两步，重重的叹了一声：
Bai was full of energy at this moment, and his eyes were bright. He stretched his limbs straight in the chair, straightened his waist, and looked very comfortable, looking like he was a little older than usual. I could feel the pleasure of fullness in his body. After a while, the rain became lighter, he took two steps, and sighed heavily:“四序纷迴，入兴贵闲；勤靡馀暇，心肖长闲，可是我怎么闲得起来？”
"The four sequences are complicated, and the interest is precious; diligence and leisure, and the heart is long leisure, but how can I be idle? ”他长吸一口，把烟蒂灭了。打开抽屉，放好他的断稿《绿猫》。这家伙太敏感自觉，虽然对我还有时这么淋漓尽致的抒说，但也不让自己太忘形。过于恣肆固恐使我难堪，漫无节制亦为他文章义法所不取。完了，即使我紧接着，用热望的眼睛注视他，说“说下去，”他也不说了。古罗马的城楼又唱起来，而且远远的已经听到他的同事们嚷着唱着来了。栢向我笑：
He took a long breath and extinguished the cigarette butt. He opened the drawer and put away his fragmented manuscript "Green Cat". This guy is too sensitive and conscious, and although he still expresses himself so vividly to me sometimes, he does not let himself get too carried away. Being too reckless may embarrass me, and being careless is not desirable for his writing. It was over, even if I immediately followed him, looking at him with eager eyes, and said, "Go on," he didn't say anything. The ancient Roman towers sang again, and his colleagues could be heard shouting from afar. Bai smiled at me:“满城风雨近重阳。——水之积也不厚，则其负大舟也无力，我其为芥之舟乎？——甚么时候，我才能有一个比较可以长时间思索，不被干扰的时候？——你也走吧，你也不善应酬，我实在怕看你装得很会应酬的样子；而且再有半点钟你们就要开饭，我也不留你。”
"The city is full of wind and rain near the Double Ninth Festival. ——The accumulation of water is not thick, so it is not strong to carry a big boat, am I a mustard boat? ——When can I have a time when I can think for a long time and not be disturbed? ——You can go too, you are not good at socializing, I am really afraid to see you pretend to be very good at socializing; and you will have dinner at half an o'clock, and I will not keep you. ”抱起他的小猫，栢送我到门口。我看着马路对面法国梧桐的绿叶，笑。
“又笑甚么？”
Picked up his kitten and sent me to the door. I looked at the green leaves of the French sycamore across the road and smiled. "What are you laughing at?"“我想你有句甚么话要说：‘感谢你让我痛痛快快说了半天话，胡说八道，毫无道理，不要笑我。’——把你的猫送还给人家去吧，多难看！”
"I think you have something to say: 'Thank you for letting me talk happily for a long time, nonsense, without reason, don't laugh at me.' ——Give your cat back, how ugly! ”“阁下聪明，倒是，算你猜着，不愧是小说家！——才不送，我要把它染绿了呢！别把我的话记下来，说我说的，我怕挨骂，除非等我把那篇了不起的大作，文学与人生，写出来之后。——哎，你上回说的道士请神情形很有意思。真是那样？是你诌出来的？”
"Your Excellency is smart, but, you guessed it, he is worthy of being a novelist! ——I won't give it away, I'm going to dye it green! Don't write down my words, say what I said, I'm afraid of being scolded, unless I write that great masterpiece, literature and life. ——Hey, the Taoist priest's invitation to God you mentioned last time is very interesting. Is that really the case? Did you come up with it? ”“诌甚么！回去吧。过两天来。希望你的《绿猫》也写好了，猫也染绿了。”
"What! Go back. Come in two days. I hope your "Green Cat" is also written, and the cat is dyed green. ”…………
风雨如晦，鸡鸣不已。——哎呀，我已经在这里坐了几个钟头了？天已经透蓝。咦，这里居然也听得到麻雀叫？——糟糕，我伤风了。刚才我放下笔歇了一会儿，抽了两枝烟，我想了些甚么？……我想起栢文章中提到的小院子，那时我们住在一起。想起那棵大白兰花树，现在正是开花的时候了。只有在云南那样的气候，白兰花才能长得那么大，罩满了整个一天井。花时，在巷子里即闻到香气，如招如唤。我们常搬了一张竹椅，在花树下看书，听老姑娘念经敲磬。偶然一抬头，绿叶缝隙间一朵白云正施施流过，闲静无比。一个老蜂窝又大了不少。一个蜘蛛结网，忙碌辛勤，忽然跌落下来，吊在半空；不知是偶然失足，还是有意如此，好等风来吹去，转换一个方向。我们有一个长耳绿匋水瓶，用匋瓶汲取井水来喝。——这时候！我们多半已经到了呈贡，骑马下乡了。道路都在栗树园中穿过，马奔驶于阔大的绿叶之下，草头全是露，风真轻快。我们大声呼喝，震动群山。村边或有个早起老人，或穿鲜红颜色女孩子，闻声回首，目送我们过去。此乐至不可忘。——一说，也十年了，好快！——而这里，就是汽车！汽车又一辆一辆的开出来了。……
The wind and rain were dark, and the rooster crowed. - Oh, I've been sitting here for hours? The sky is already blue. Oh, you can actually hear the sparrows crowing here? - Oh, I have a cold. I put down my pen and took a break for a while, smoked two cigarettes, what did I think? …… I think of the small yard mentioned in the article when we lived together. Thinking of the big white orchid tree, it's time to bloom. Only in a climate like Yunnan can white orchids grow so big and cover the entire patio. When it blooms, you can smell the fragrance in the alley, like a call. We often moved a bamboo chair to read under the flower tree and listen to the old girl chant scriptures and ring the bell. Occasionally, when I looked up, a white cloud was flowing through the gaps in the green leaves, extremely quiet. An old honeycomb is much bigger. A spider made a web, busy and hardworking, and suddenly fell down and hung in mid-air; I don't know if it was an accidental stumbling or intentional, so that the wind could blow and change direction. We have a long-eared green water bottle, which we use to draw well water to drink. ——At this time! Most of us have already arrived in Chenggong and rode to the countryside. The roads all passed through the chestnut orchard, the horses galloped under the wide green leaves, the grass was full of dew, and the wind was really brisk. We shouted loudly, shaking the mountains. There was an old man who got up early in the village, or a girl in bright red, who looked back and watched us pass. This joy is unforgettable. ——It's been ten years, so fast! ——And here, it's a car! The cars are driving out one by one. …………怎么会想到高尔基身上去的？……喔，是想到道士请神，于是想到高尔基。
…… How could you think of going to Gorky? …… Oh, I thought of the Taoist priest asking the gods, so I thought of Gorky.凡道士做法事道场，拜斗礼坛，既爇香，例须降神。降神，就是变成一个神。其实和尚也如此，当中坐的那个戴毘卢帽的大和尚是地藏王化身。不过道士降神过程，比较长，比较顶真。偷鞋骗食的道士，自然不过略具形式而已。有道理道士则必虔诚恭敬，收视返听，匍伏坛前，良久良久，庶可脱去自己，化为太乙。旁边的小道士，这时候由“掌鱼”的领头，摇铃击磬，高声赞美，退魔障，全真灵，参助其升超。据说内行人常常可以看出变到了如何程度，是快是慢，是易是难。据说，如果降请既毕，得到灵感，——他们也叫灵感，即凡俗人，若谛细观察，亦可以觉出与平常神色不烦，端正凝祥，具好容貌，有大威仪。这似乎与理学家的功夫有相似处。噫，鬼神之事，难言之矣，小时我不怎么相信，现在也还是一样。不过那个理却似乎有的。我有兴趣的是它可以借给我作一个比喻。
All Taoist priests perform rituals in the dojo and worship the altar, both burn incense and must descend the gods. To séance is to become a god. In fact, the same is true for monks, and the great monk wearing a Pilu hat sitting in the middle is the incarnation of King Ksitigarbha. However, the process of Taoist sending gods is relatively long and more real. Taoist priests who steal shoes and cheat food are naturally only slightly formal. If it makes sense, the Taoist priest will be devout and respectful, listen to it, and prostrate in front of the altar for a long time, so that he can take off himself and become Taiyi. The little Taoist priest next to him, at this time, led by the "palm fish", rang the bell and struck the chime, praised loudly, exorcised the demonic barrier, and the whole true spirit participated in his ascension. It is said that insiders can often see how much they have changed, whether it is fast or slow, easy or difficult. It is said that if they receive inspiration after the invitation,—— they are also called inspiration, that is, ordinary people, if they observe carefully, they can also feel that they are not annoyed with their usual expressions, are upright and dignified, have good appearances, and have great majesty. This seems to have similarities with the kung fu of Confucianism. Oh, it is difficult to say about ghosts and gods, I didn't believe much when I was a child, and it is still the same now. But that principle seems to exist. What interests me is that it can lend me an analogy.高尔基就像那个道士。我是说画布上的，白云石，青铜上的，诚然是高尔基，但那是高尔基的精华。平常时候，比如从理发店里出来的时候，（高尔基也要理理发，俄国的理发匠不见得高明到那里去！）高尔基未必常如是。高尔基一定也有很不像样的时候，如果人家一定要送他一个难看的小猫他怎么样呢，大概也没有办法；而高尔基大概也不喜欢听古罗马的城楼，不喜欢四个人住一屋，不喜欢汽车声音，不见得喜欢一点都没有雨的意思的下雨天也。——那种最高尔基式的时候，当然是他写得或者读得得意的时候。像果戈里所说，写不出来，在纸上乱画，写：
Gorky is like that Taoist priest. I mean on canvas, dolomite, bronze, it is true that it is Gorky, but that is the essence of Gorky. Usually, such as when coming out of the barbershop, (Gorky also has to get a haircut, Russian barbers are not necessarily brilliant to go there!) Gorky may not always be like this. Gorky must have been very unsightly, and if someone had to give him an ugly kitten, there was probably no way; And Gorky probably didn't like to listen to ancient Roman towers, four people living in one room, the sound of cars, and he didn't necessarily like rainy days without rain at all. ——That kind of most Ergian time, of course, is when he writes or reads with pride. As Gogol said, if you can't write it, scribble on the paper and write:我今天写不出来，
我今天写不出来，
我今天写不出来！
的时候，自也有一种可以令人感动之处。不过画家雕刻家似乎看不到；看不到所以他们画不出，刻不出。这怕倒还是写小说的可以来表演一下子了。
I can't write it today, I can't write it today, I can't write it today! At that time, there is also a kind of touching thing. But painters and sculptors don't seem to be able to see it; they can't see it, so they can't paint or carve. I'm afraid that those who write novels can perform for a while.因为栢写不出文章，我想到这些。我是说高尔基可能比栢稍为可以平和安定一些，有时间可以思索，不会那么要写而不能写。——我这想的有点怪么？
Because Bai can't write articles, I think of this. I mean Gorky may be a little more peaceful and stable than Bai, have time to think, and not write so much. ——Am I thinking a bit strange?栢的《绿猫》，要写的，是一个孩子，小时极爱画画 ，可是大家都反对他。反对他画画，也反对他画的画。有一回，他画了一个得意杰作，是一头猫。他满腔热望，高高兴兴的拿给父亲看，父亲看也不看。拿给母亲看，母亲说：“作算术去！”拿给图画老师看，图画老师不知道生了甚么气，打了他十个手心，大骂他一顿：“那有这样的猫？那有这样的猫！”他画的是个绿猫。画了轮廓，他要为猫著色，打开颜色盒子，一得意，他调了一种绿色，把他的猫涂成了绿的。长大了，他作公务员，不得意。也没有甚么朋友，大家说他乖僻。他还想画画，可是画不成，乱七八糟的涂得他自己伤心。他想想毛某的《月亮和六辨士》更伤心。到后来他就老了。人家送他一个猫。猫，人家不要养了，硬说他喜欢猫，非送给他不可，没有办法，他就收养了。他整天就是抱着他的猫。有一天，他忽然把他的猫染成了绿的。看到别人看到绿猫的惊奇样子，他笑了。没有两天，他就死了。
Bai's "Green Cat" is about a child who loves to draw when he was a child, but everyone is against him. Oppose his paintings, and also oppose his paintings. Once, he painted a proud masterpiece, which was a cat. He was full of enthusiasm and happily showed it to his father, but his father didn't look at it. Show it to his mother, and her mother said, "Go do arithmetic!" I showed it to the drawing teacher, who didn't know what was angry, so he slapped him ten palms and scolded him: "Is there such a cat? There is such a cat!" He drew a green cat. After drawing the outline, he wanted to color the cat, opened the color box, and when he was proud, he adjusted a green color and painted his cat green. When he grew up, he was a civil servant and was not proud. He didn't have any friends, and everyone said he was perverse. He still wanted to paint, but he couldn't, and he was sad to paint in a mess. He was even sadder when he thought about Mao's "The Moon and the Six Debaters". Later he got old. Someone gave him a cat. He didn't want to keep a cat, insisted that he liked cats, and he had to give them to him, so he adopted them. He held his cat all day long. One day, he suddenly dyed his cat green. He smiled when he saw the surprise of others seeing the green cat. Within two days, he died.虽然我曾经警告过他，说这样的小说我没有看见过。这算甚么呢，算心理小说？心理小说在中国还是个颇“危险”的东西。中国人大概都比较简单，也许我们的小说作家以为中国人很简单，反正，没有这个东西。我想劝他还是写写高尔基式的小说。不过，还是让他写下去吧。也许他有一天会写黑猫，白猫，狸花猫，玳瑁猫的。——你也知道的，他写的是他自己。
Although I once warned him that I had never seen such a novel. What is this, psychological novels? Psychological novels are still quite a "dangerous" thing in China. Chinese are probably relatively simple, maybe our novel writers think that Chinese are very simple, anyway, there is no such thing. I would like to advise him to write Gorky-style novels. However, let him write. Maybe one day he will write about black cats, white cats, civet cats, and hawksbill cats. ——You know, he wrote about himself.我担心的倒是，猫要是个绿的，他把猫眼睛弄成个甚么颜色呢？唔，我以为这很严重。
What I'm worried about is, if the cat is green, what color will he make the cat's eyes? Well, I thought it was serious.天倒是晴了。早晴，今天一定热得很。——隔壁那个老头子咳了整整一夜。——不得了，汽车都出来了，这个世界上充满了汽车！还有，那是无线电的流行歌曲，已经唱起来也！我想起那位乖戾的哲人叔本华的那一篇荒谬绝伦的文章：《论嘈杂》。
It's sunny. It's sunny, it must be very hot today. The old man next door coughed all night. - Oh no, cars are coming out, the world is full of cars! Also, it's a popular song on the radio, and it's already being sung! I think of the ridiculous article of the obedient philosopher Schopenhauer: "On Noise".三十六年七月二日，上海

[1] 本篇原载《文艺春秋》1947年第五卷第二期。初收《汪曾祺全集》第一卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。

冬天

冬天[1]
July 2, 36 years, Shanghai [1] This article was originally published in Volume 5, Issue 2 of "Literature and Art Spring and Autumn", 1947. Volume 1 of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998. Winter[1]——小说《豆腐店》之一片段
冬天，下雪。
——A fragment of the novel "Tofu Shop" In winter, it snows.冬天下雪，大和二和不大出来。冬天的孩子在家里。孩子在母亲膝头，小猫在我的膝头。孩子穿得厚厚的。冬天教人觉得冷，我是觉得不冷。孩子的眼睛圆溜溜，孩子想。想，看看雪，想。冬天，大和二和睡觉，——我就看见他们睡觉，不睡觉他们做甚么我不知道。我作不出一篇《大和跟二和的冬天》。冬天的荒野一片白，就只有一个字，雪。要那才叫雪，甚么都没有，都不重要，只有雪。天白亮白亮的，雪花绵绵的往下飘，没有一点声息。雪的轻，积雪的软，都无可比拟。雪天教人也不是想飞，也不是想骑（马），不是俯卧在上面，教人想怎么样呢，还是走走，一步一步的走。想又不顶想，又似乎想的也不是这个，都说不清。总而言之，一种兴奋，一种快乐，内在，飘举，轻。树皮好黑，乌鸦也好黑，水池子冻得像玻璃。庙也是雪，船也是雪。侉奶奶的门不开，门槛上都是雪。……下雪有时我们还是要出去的。或是冬天来得特别早，或是学校放寒假放得晚，还没有考大考就下了很像样子的雪了。新围巾，好质料的长统胶靴，这要到雪里去。我们要打那把大伞。为孩子们把伞造得轻便些是很要紧的事，不然他们就一心支持负担伞的笨重，再也无心做别的了。伞其实我们并不真要“打”它，雪很干，雪落在眉毛上化了也很好玩，要伞我们是要撑起来旋来旋去，伞把我们都罩了起来，这很好玩，很美。看见那把伞倚在犄角，就提了我一句：我要走。我要上学去。快点，快点，找铅笔，——想想看：昨天晚上……还没有想到如何搁下笔，即记起放在那里了，准备得停停当当，心里轻松；好了，现在，“小莲我跟你买豆腐浆去，我跟你一起去，噢！”豆腐店顾老板看了那个淡蓝瓷罐子，点一点头。——顾老板差不多每天都跟这个罐子点一点头。我们会意，那等于说，“就有，等一下”。我们照例就各处看看。两大锅白浆，咕噜咕噜，从锅底翻上来，向四边滚去。热气腾腾，一直腾到屋顶。（屋顶的雪呢？）顺着上望，黑沉沉的椽子，黑沉沉的望砖。顾老板手扶锅台，看看锅里。时而把一个大铜勺拿在手里，掂一掂，又放墙上一个木架子上。一切动作全极准确，合乎理想，熟练而不流滑。看见他的动作，心里就会感动。我注意到铜勺把子后头一根钉，刚好卡搁在架子上，顾老板大概站得太久了，时而把全身重心落在脚跟，时而落在脚掌往回移动，看得出他脚面上那根筋一起一落，你可以想见他的大姆趾时而伸直，时而屈起一点。他在等，等一会儿豆腐皮子结起来。皮子结起来，用一根一根的“皮棍”那么一撩，一张；一撩，一张，一张一张的挂在木架上。唿——噎，豆腐皮往上缩，皱起来了，皱得厉害！顾老板是个瘦子，高而瘦。稍为侧一点，从后面看过去，只见他的高颧骨。我们很少正面看顾老板，不知道为甚么。偶然他回过头来，他脸色青青的，眼球发浑，全是赤丝。他没有精神，好像他非常想睡觉而不得睡的样子。这时灶后一定有人烧火，脸熏得通红通红，皮肤发紧，是顾大娘。到灶后看看，顾大娘没有梳头。她每天不知道甚么时候梳头。（小莲是扫好地梳。）——一听顾老板喊“起！”我们知道那是叫顾大娘不要烧了，这就要给我们留豆浆了，我们就赶紧去看一看驴去。驴打喷嚏，跺他的小蹄子。驴养在后面一间小屋里。一屋子干草，够它吃的。驴看到这些草想必喜欢的。我们从门口把头伸进去（它的门只有半截）。喂！驴也看见我们了，它瞟了一眼。用一根柴棒把它的长耳朵按下去，再看它竖起来，一定很有意思。而顾老板叫了：“豆腐浆！”赶紧去拿！一把瓷罐提在手里，就非走不可了。
It snows in winter, and Yamato Erhe doesn't come out. The child is at home in winter. The child is on the mother's knee, and the kitten is on my knee. The child is thickly dressed. Winter makes people feel cold, but I don't feel cold. The child's eyes are round, the child thinks. Think, look at the snow, think. In winter, Yamato and Erwa sleep,—— I see them sleeping, and I don't know what they do if they don't sleep. I can't write a "Winter of Yamato and Erwa". The wilderness in winter is white, there is only one word, snow. If you want that to be called snow, there is nothing, it doesn't matter, only snow. The sky is white and bright, and the snowflakes are floating down, without any sound. The lightness of the snow and the softness of the snow are incomparable. Snow teaches people not to fly, not to ride (horses), not to lie on it, to teach people what to think, or to walk, step by step. I can't say it clearly. All in all, a kind of excitement, a kind of happiness, internal, floating, light. The bark is so dark, the crow is so black, and the pool is as frozen as glass. The temple is also snow, and the boat is also snow. Grandma's door is not open, and the threshold is full of snow. …… When it snows, we still have to go out. Or winter comes very early, or the school is late for winter vacation, and it snows very decently before the big exam. New scarves, long-term rubber boots made of good materials, this is going to the snow. We have to make that big umbrella. It is very important to make the umbrella lighter for the children, otherwise they will support the bulkiness of the umbrella and have no intention of doing anything else. The umbrella is actually not really going to "hit" it, the snow is very dry, and it is fun when the snow falls on the eyebrows. When I saw the umbrella leaning in the corner, he mentioned to me: I want to go. I want to go to school. Hurry up, hurry up, find a pencil,—— think about it: last night...... I haven't thought about how to put down the pen, that is, I remember that I put it there, and I have to stop and prepare it, and my heart is relaxed; Okay, now, "Xiao Lian, I'll buy tofu with you, I'll go with you, oh!" Boss Gu of the tofu shop looked at the light blue porcelain jar and nodded. ——Boss Gu nods to this jar almost every day. We care, that is equivalent to saying, "Yes, wait a minute." Let's look around as usual. Two large pots of white pulp, gurgling, turned over from the bottom of the pot and rolled to the sides. It was steaming and soared all the way to the roof. (What about the snow on the roof?) Looking up, the dark rafters and the dark bricks. Boss Gu held the pot table and looked into the pot. Sometimes he took a large copper spoon in his hand, shook it, and put it on a wooden shelf on the wall. All movements are extremely accurate, ideal, skillful and not slippery. When I see his movements, my heart will be moved. I noticed that a nail on the back of the copper spoon handle was just stuck on the shelf, and Boss Gu probably stood for too long, sometimes the center of gravity of his whole body fell on his heels, and sometimes he moved back on the soles of his feet. He was waiting, waiting for a while for the tofu skin to knot. The skin was knotted, and it was lifted one by one with a "leather stick", one by one; one by one, one by one, hung on the wooden frame. Choke, the tofu skin shrank upwards, wrinkled, and wrinkled! Boss Gu is a thin man, tall and thin. Slightly sideways, looking from behind, I only saw his high cheekbones. We rarely look at Boss Gu head-on, I don't know why. Accidentally he turned around, his face was blue, his eyeballs were cloudy, and he was all red. He had no energy, as if he wanted to sleep very much but couldn't. At this time, someone must have lit a fire behind the stove, his face was red and red, and his skin was tight, it was Aunt Gu. When I went to the stove to look at it, Aunt Gu didn't comb her hair. She doesn't know when she combs her hair every day. (Xiaolian is sweeping the floor.) ——As soon as I heard Boss Gu shout, "Get up!" We knew that it was telling Aunt Gu not to burn it, so we had to leave soy milk for us, so we hurried to see the donkey. The donkey sneezed and stomped his little hooves. The donkey was kept in a hut in the back. A room full of hay was enough for it to eat. The donkey must like it when he saw the grass. We stuck our heads in through the door (its door was only half half). Feed! The donkey also saw us, and it glanced at us. It must be interesting to press down its long ears with a firewood stick and then see it stand up. And Boss Gu shouted: "Tofu pulp!" "Hurry up and get it! If you hold a porcelain jar in your hand, you have to go.但是，提罐子的这个专注于罐子，专注于走路；闲上的那个却还可以四顾一下。看一看那个榨床，看一看磨石，看一看滤豆汁的夹布兜，看一看壁上百灵机瓶改成的油灯，油灯在壁上熏出一道烟黑，若定若动。“走啊！”慢，看顾大娘出来了。顾大娘没有梳头。有人没有梳头头还是那么整齐，简直可以不梳，顾大娘为甚么那么乱？从炽旺的火边走出来，出来一定全身一寒吧？顾大娘走出来，走到锅台旁边那张床前。小莲和我都驻足回头。床上一张帐子。顾大娘撩开帐子。帐子里睡的大和跟二和。看到一角被窝，顾大娘掖一掖被窝。大和二和睡得暖呵呵的，睡得像两条小狗。如果有一个醒了，睁着眼睛醒在那儿，他一定叫一声，“妈——”顾大娘就颔首，眼睛看眼睛。我们最后一眼是那个灰黄的帐子，帐子放下来，所有这个店里的一切好像全罩在帐子里了：灰黄的帐子，一个补丁很惹眼的一方。转过身来，门外一片白雪。
However, the one who carries the jar focuses on the jar and walks; the one who is idle can still look around. Take a look at the pressing table, look at the grinding stone, look at the cloth pocket for filtering soybean juice, and look at the oil lamp on the wall that has been converted into a lark machine bottle. "Let's go!" Slow, watch Aunt Gu come out. Aunt Gu didn't comb her hair. Some people are so neat without combing their hair, they can not comb it, why is Aunt Gu so messy? Walking out of the blazing fire, you must be cold all over your body, right? Aunt Gu walked out and walked to the bed next to the pot table. Xiaolian and I both stopped and looked back. A tent on the bed. Aunt Gu lifted the tent. Yamato and Erhe slept in the tent. Seeing a corner of the quilt, Aunt Gu tucked the quilt. Yamato Erhe slept warmly, sleeping like two puppies. If one of them wakes up and wakes up there with his eyes open, he will definitely scream, "Mom-" Aunt Gu nodded and looked at her eyes. The last time we saw was the gray and yellow tent, the tent was put down, and everything in this store seemed to be covered in the tent: the gray and yellow tent, a patch that was very eye-catching. Turning around, there was white snow outside the door.…………
虽然是冬天，白天我们仍然有许多事在手上好做，身体好动。到天黑下来，火红起来，（偶尔一掀窗布，灯光铺在雪上。雪住了，——雪又大了。）我们就真个就是想了；或者说话，说出自己想的，把自己想的跟别人联起来。我们想到荒野；想到雪下的小麦；小麦种在荒野的尽头，这时它们还绿？想到野兔子，獾狗；红毛草城头上赶野兔子；每回上坟，一路都要看到许多獾狗洞；想花胡不拉的野鸡冻在雪里，想冰底下的鱼，……李三酒醒了没有？一到冬天，李三总是满身酒气。谁要李三不喝酒，你大雪里来敲敲三更看！（冬天日子真短，夜真长。）李三的木棚子在雪下。木棚底下露一片砖地，雪所不及，还很干。老王吃过李三的狗肉，他说很香。侉奶奶的屋子这时真是孤，全世界一定都把它忘了。侉奶奶点不点灯？灯光在大雪的荒野上。这一冬天她衲了多少鞋底。她那个针拔子正好借人镊猪头上的毛！（猪眼皮上毛最多。）顾大娘一定跟她借过。借针拔子，顺便就在她小屋里谈谈，看她吃甚么，看看房子还结实不结实。——如果侉奶奶的小屋教雪压垮了，第一个一定是李三知道。李三去打更。一看，可了不得了！随后李三各处去说。——不至于，那间小屋看起来还好。——然而怎么说得定！——大和二和一定很快就会知道。他们要去看。他们很久没有看见侉奶奶了，自从下雪。二和紧握着大和的手……
Although it is winter, we still have many things to do during the day, and our bodies are active. When it gets dark, the fire turns red, (occasionally lifting the window curtains, and the lights are spread on the snow.) The snow stops,—— the snow gets heavier again.) We really just think; or talk, say what we think, and connect what we think with others. We think of the wilderness; think of wheat under the snow; wheat is planted at the end of the wilderness, and they are still green? think of hares and badger dogs; chase wild rabbits on the head of the red-haired grass city; every time I go to the grave, I have to see many badger dog holes along the way; I think of the pheasant frozen in the snow, I think of the fish under the ice,...... Is Li San sober? In winter, Li San is always full of alcohol. Who wants Li San not to drink, you come to knock on the third watch in the heavy snow! (The days are so short in winter, and the nights are so long.) Li San's wooden shed is under the snow. There is a brick floor under the wooden shed, which is out of reach of the snow and is still very dry. Lao Wang has eaten Li San's dog meat, and he said it is very fragrant. Grandma's house is really lonely at this time, and the whole world must have forgotten about it. Does Grandma light up the lights? The lights are in the wilderness of heavy snow. How many soles did she wear this winter? Her needle puller just borrowed the hair on the pig's head! (The pig has the most hair on its eyelids.) Aunt Gu must have borrowed it from her. Borrowing a needle puller, we talked in her hut by the way, saw what she ate, and saw if the house was still strong. ——If Grandma's hut teaches snow to be crushed, Li San must know first. Li San went to work the night watch. At first glance, it's amazing! Then Li San went everywhere to talk. ——No, that hut looks fine. ——But how can you say! ——Yamato Erwa will definitely know soon. They want to see it. They haven't seen Grandma Niewa for a long time, since it snowed. Erhe held Yamato's hand tightly......大和二和现在，他们一定也想。想许多百读不厌的事，除非他们有甚么新鲜事情好想。他们想野兔子，獾狗，野鸡，麦，李三，侉奶奶？他们那盏百灵机瓶子做的油灯点起来了，灯焰袅出一缕烟沫。石磨子冰冷冰冷，水缸里上冻了。顾大娘丢一块木柴在水缸里的，怕缸冻破了。顾大娘做鞋子。大和二和他爸爸，顾老板干甚么呢？——他的黑布棉袄上有许多皱折，里头落了许多灰，还有头皮。二和打盹了，他爸爸说：“不要睡！要睡上床睡！”他说不说？二和醒了，他才离开这一切，又被唤回来了，他睁开惺忪的眼睛，门外沙沙的正有个人走过。二和听，大和也听，他们妈妈也一响停针而听。那人一步一步的走，渐渐走远了。这是谁，这时候还在街上走？他们一起全有点寂寞，正在把寂寞注满，又有一种平安之感，一种谢意，他们排门缝里漏出一线一线的灯光。……
Yamato Erhe Now, they must also think. Think about many things that never get tired of reading, unless they have something new to think about. They think of hares, badger dogs, pheasants, Mai, Li San, and grandma? The oil lamp made of their lark machine bottle lit up, and a wisp of smoke and foam came out of the flame. The stone mill was cold and cold, and the water tank was frozen. Aunt Gu threw a piece of firewood in the water tank, afraid that the tank would freeze and break. Aunt Gu makes shoes. Yamato Er and his father, what is Boss Gu doing? ——There are many wrinkles on his black cloth cotton jacket, a lot of ash falling from it, and a scalp. Erhe took a nap, and his father said, "Don't sleep! Go to bed!" "Did he say it? Erhe woke up, he left all this, and was called back, he opened his eyes, and someone was rustling outside the door. Erhe listened, Yamato also listened, and their mother also stopped listening. The man walked step by step, gradually walking away. Who is this, still walking on the street at this time? They were all a little lonely together, filling the loneliness, and there was a sense of peace, a kind of gratitude, and a line of light leaked out of the cracks in their row doors. ……有时我做梦梦见大和二和，还有小莲；有时会梦见大和跟我打架，那是不可能的事。第二天起来我就告诉小莲听。小莲：“一起来说梦！”然而她还是听。

[1] 本篇原载1947年7月6日《经世日报》。
Sometimes I dream of Yamato Erhe and Xiaolian; sometimes I dream that Yamato fights with me, which is impossible. When I got up the next day, I told Xiaolian. Xiaolian: "Let's dream together!" However, she still listened. [1] This article was originally published in the "Jingshi Daily" on July 6, 1947.

戴车匠

戴车匠[1]
Dai Che Maker[1]“戴车匠”在我们不但是一个人，一间小店，还是一个地名。他住在东街与草巷相交地方。东街与草巷相交处大家称为草巷口。但对我们说起来这实在不够精确。虽然东街也还比不上别处的巷子大，但街与巷相交总就有四个“口”，左边右边，这边那边。大人们凡事都含胡，因为他们生活中只须这么含胡即可对付过去。我们可不成。比如：巷口街这边有个老太婆摆摊子，卖的是桃子，杏子，香瓜，柿饼，牙枣子，风荸荠，杨花萝卜，泥娃娃，啯啯鸡；对面也有一个老太婆，卖的是啯啯鸡，泥娃娃，（有好多种，）杨花萝卜，（我在别处虽亦见过这种水红色，粗长如指，杨花飞时挑出来卖，生嚼凉拌都脆爽细嫩无比的萝卜，可是没有吃过；我总觉不是我们故乡的那一种，仅仅略具形似而已，）风荸荠，牙枣子，桃子杏子，香瓜，还有柿饼子，完全一样！你说这怎么办？有时还好，可以随便；在她们生意都还不错，在有新货下市时候，她们彼此也都和颜悦色的时候，亲热得像对老姊妹的时候，那就无所谓，我们买谁的都觉得一样。这边那边，一样。有时，可就麻烦，又要处心积虑，又要临时见机，又要为自己利害打算，又要用自己几个钱和显明的倾向态度来打抱不平。而且我们之间意见常不一样。那就得辩论，甚至出恶言恶声，吵闹起来，要麻油拌芥菜，各有心中爱，各走各的路。完了，我们之间有一道鸿沟！要十分钟，或半点钟，或半天，甚至三两天，时间才填平了它，又志同道合，莫逆无间，不恨不轻视。这两个老太婆又有时这个显得比那个穷，有时那个显得比这个弱。有时这边得到姪儿一点支助，买了一堆骄傲的货色，盛气凌人，不可一世。有时那个的女儿给她作了件新毛蓝布褂子，她就觉得不屑与裤裆里都有补丁的人相较量。她们老是骂架，一骂一整天，老是那些话，骂骂，歇歇，又骂骂。作一笔买卖，数钱拣货；青菜汤送下一大碗干饭，这就有时间准备新的武器，聚了一堆她们自以为更泼剌淋漓的言语，投过去，抛回来，希望伤人要害。这对我们说起来，未免可厌，因为骂人都不好看。尤其她们相骂时，大都是坏天气，全世界都不舒服的时候。她们的生意都非常坏，摊子上尽是些陈旧干瘪的货品，又稀少可怜。她们的恨毒注在颓老之中，像下雨天城门口的泥泞。她们的肝火焚烧她们的太阳穴，她们的头发披下来，她们都无望无助，孤苦悽怆，哀哀欲绝。——为甚么没有人劝劝她们呢？你想想看，手放在口袋里，搓摩着温热的铜钱，我们何以为情？我们立着看了半天，渐渐已忘记了想买的东西；不想吃甚么，也不想玩甚么，为一种十分深沉黏著的痛楚所孕育，所教化。——有时，她们会扭住衣角和一点小小发髻打起来。一面低嘶诅咒一面打。她们都打不动了，然而她们用艰硬的瘦骨相冲撞，撕，咬，抓头发，拉破别人的衣服。一场心长力拙，松懈干枯的争斗。她们会有一天有一个打死的。不是死在人手上，自己站脚不稳，踉跄跄一交掼在石头角上碰破脑袋死去。……阿，不说这个吧。告诉你这些只是借此而告诉你虽是那么一街之隔可是距离多远。所以不能含胡。所以不能含胡的说是“草巷口”。草巷口一边是个旱烟店，另一边是戴车匠店。你看要是有个提小面人的来了，吹糖人的来了，耍木儡戏的来了，背负韦驮，化缘的游方僧人来了，走江湖挂水椀的来了，各种各样惊心动魄的人物事情在那里出现，我们飞奔着去看，你要是说“草巷口”，那多急人。你一说“戴车匠家”，就多省事明白。大家就一直去，不需东张西望。“戴车匠”，“戴车匠”，这在我们不是三个字，是相连不可分，成为一体的符号。戴车匠是一点，集聚许多东西，是一个中心，一个底子。这是我们生活中的一格，一区，一个本土和一个异国，我们的岁月的一个见证。我们说“戴车匠家”，不说“戴车匠家门前”。一则那么说太噜嗦，再我们似把门外这一切活动，一切景物情感都收纳到他的那间小店里去，似乎是属于它，为它所有；为他，为戴车匠所有了；虽然戴车匠的铺子那么那么小，戴车匠是不沾蘸甚么的那么一个人。戴车匠是一颗珠子，从水里拿出来，不留一滴。——正因为他是那么一个人吧。
"Dai Chejiang" is not only a person, a small shop, but also a place name. He lives at the intersection of East Street and Caoxiang. The intersection of East Street and Cao Lane is called Caoxiangkou. But for us, this is really not accurate enough. Although East Street is not as big as other alleys, there are always four "mouths" where streets intersect, left and right, here and there. Adults have beards in everything, because they only need to have beards like this in their lives to deal with the past. We can't. For example: there is an old woman on this side of Xiangkou Street, selling peaches, apricots, melons, persimmons, tooth dates, water chestnuts, poplar radish, mud dolls, and chicken; There is also an old woman opposite, selling chicken, mud dolls, (there are many kinds,) poplar radish, (although I have seen this kind of water red color elsewhere, thick and long as fingers, poplar flowers are picked out and sold when they fly, and the radishes are crisp and tender when chewed raw, but I have never eaten them; I always feel that it is not the one in our hometown, it is just slightly similar,) water chestnuts, tooth dates, peaches and apricots, melons, and persimmons, exactly the same! What do you think this should do? Sometimes it's okay, you can do whatever you want; When their business is not bad, when there are new goods on the market, when they are friendly with each other, and when they are affectionate like old sisters, it doesn't matter, we feel the same when we buy it. Here and there, the same. Sometimes, it can be troublesome, and you have to be deliberate, you have to wait for opportunities, you have to plan for your own interests, and you have to use your own money and obvious tendencies to fight injustice. And we often have different opinions. Then we have to debate, even speak ill, make noise, mix sesame oil with mustard greens, each have their own love, and go their own way. It's over, there is a gap between us! It takes ten minutes, or half an o'clock, or half a day, or even three or two days, for time to fill it, and they are like-minded, inseparable, and not hateful or despised. These two old women sometimes seem poorer than the other, and sometimes the other seems weaker than the other. Sometimes I get a little support from my nephew and buy a bunch of proud goods, domineering and invincible. Sometimes that daughter made her a new woolen blue cloth coat, and she felt disdainful of competing with people with patches in their crotches. They always scolded, scolded all day, and always scolded, scolded, rested, and scolded. Make a deal, count the money to pick the goods; The green vegetable soup sent a big bowl of dry rice, which gave them time to prepare new weapons, gathered a bunch of words that they thought were more splashy, threw them over, and threw them back, hoping to hurt people. This is annoying for us, because scolding people is not good-looking. Especially when they scold each other, most of them are bad weather and the whole world is uncomfortable. Their business is very bad, and the stalls are full of old and shriveled goods, and they are sparse and pitiful. Their hatred is poured into the old age, like mud at the gate of the city on a rainy day. Their liver fire burns their temples, their hair falls down, and they are hopeless, lonely and miserable, and mournful. ——Why didn't anyone persuade them? Think about it, with our hands in our pockets, rubbing warm copper coins, how can we feel sorry for them? We stood and watched for a long time, and gradually forgot what we wanted to buy; we didn't want to eat or play anything, but we were nurtured and educated by a very deep and sticky pain. ——Sometimes, they would twist the corners of their clothes and fight with a little bun. They whispered and cursed while fighting. They couldn't fight, but they clashed with hard and skinny bones, tearing, biting, scratching hair, and tearing other people's clothes. A long-hearted, clumsy, lax and dry fight. One of them will one day be killed. It's not that they die at the hands of others, they stand unsteadily, staggering and hitting their heads on the corners of stones and dying. …… Ah, let's not talk about this. I am telling you this just to tell you how far away it is even though it is so far apart. So you can't have a beard. So you can't say that it is "grass alley entrance". At the entrance of Caoxiang is a dry tobacco shop on one side, and on the other side is a car maker shop. You see, if a person with a small face comes, a sugar blower comes, a puppet performer comes, a wandering monk who carries a belt and alms, a person who hangs a water bowl on his back, and all kinds of thrilling characters and things appear there. As soon as you say "the car craftsman's house", you will understand how much trouble you have. Everyone just keeps going, no need to look around. "Dai Che Craftsman", "Dai Che Craftsman", these are not three words in us, they are inseparable and become a one. Dai Che Ji is a point, a gathering of many things, a center, a foundation. This is a testimony of our years, a grid, a district, a local and a foreign country. We say "Dai Che Maker's House", not "In front of Dai Che Cheng's house". One is too verbose, and then we seem to put all these activities outside the door, all the scenery and emotions into his small shop, which seems to belong to it and belong to it; for him, it is owned by Dai Che Shi; Although Dai Che Shi's shop is so small, Dai Che Shi is a person who is not involved in anything. Dai Chawler is a bead, taken out of the water without leaving a drop. ——Because he is such a person.（说这些毫无意思！既已说了，说了算数。）
我记得戴车匠的板壁上贴的一付小红春联，每年都是那么两句，极普通常见的两句：
室雅何须大
花香不在多
(It's meaningless to say this!) Since it has been said, it has been said. ） I remember the small red Spring Festival couplets pasted on the wall of the carmaker, which are two sentences every year, two very ordinary and common sentences: Why does the house need to be big The fragrance of flowers is not much虽是极普通常见，甚至教人觉得俗，俗得令人厌恶反感，可是贴在戴车匠家就有意义，合适，感人。虽然他那半间店面说不上雅不雅，而且除了过年插一枝山茶，端午菖蒲艾叶石榴花，八九月或者偶然一枝桂，一朵白荷以外，平常也极少插花。——插花的壶是总有一个的，老竹根，他自己车床上琢出来的，总供在一个极高的方几上。说是“供”，不是随便说，确是觉得那有一种恭敬，一种神圣，一种寄托和一种安慰，即使旁边没有那个小小的瓦香炉，后面不贴一小幅神像。我想我不是自以为然，确是如此。我想，你若是喜爱那个竹根壶，想花钱向他买来，戴车匠准是笑笑，“不卖的。”戴车匠一生没有遇过几个这样坚老奇怪的根节，一生也不会再为自己车旋一个竹壶。它供在那里已经多少年，拿去了你不是叫他那个家整个变了个样子？他没有想得太多，可是卖这个壶是他从来没有想到过的。他只有那么一句话，笑笑，“不卖的”。别的回答他不知道，他不考虑。你若是真的去要，他也高兴。因为有人喜爱他喜爱得成了习惯的东西，你就醅新了他的感情。他也感激你，但他只能说：“我给你留意吧，要再遇到这样的竹子，会留意的。”他当真会留意的，他忘不了。有了，他就作好，放在高高的地方，等你去发现，来拿。——你自然会发现，因为你天天经过，经过了总要看一看。他那个店面是真小。小，而充实。
Although it is very common and even makes people feel vulgar and disgusting, it is meaningful, appropriate and touching to stick it in the car craftsman's house. Although his half of the store is not elegant or indecent, and except for planting a branch of camellia during the New Year, a pomegranate flower with calamus and mugwort leaves during the Dragon Boat Festival, and occasionally a branch of osmanthus and a white lotus in August and September, there are usually very few flower arrangements. ——There is always a pot for flower arrangement, the old bamboo root, which he carved out from his lathe, and is always offered on a very high square table. When I say "offering", I don't mean casually, but I do feel that there is a kind of respect, a kind of sacredness, a kind of sustenance and a kind of comfort, even if there is no small tile incense burner next to it, and there is no small statue of a god attached to it. I don't think I'm self-righteous, it's true. I think if you love that bamboo root pot and want to spend money to buy it from him, Dai Cheshi must have smiled, "I won't sell it." "Dai Cheshi has never encountered a few such old and strange root joints in his life, and he will never spin a bamboo pot for himself again in his life. How many years has it been there for you, didn't you take it and make his home look different? He didn't think too much, but selling this pot was something he had never thought of. He only had one sentence, smiled, "I won't sell it." He didn't know anything else, and he didn't think about it. If you really want it, he will be happy. Because someone likes something that he has become accustomed to, you renew his feelings. He is also grateful to you, but he can only say, "Let me pay attention to you, if you encounter such bamboo again, you will pay attention." He really pays attention, he can't forget it. If he has it, he will make it and put it in a high place, waiting for you to find it and get it. ——You will naturally find it, because you pass by every day, and you always have to take a look when you pass by. His store is really small. Small, but full.小，而充实。堆着，架着，钉着，挂着，各种各样的东西。留出来的每一空间都是必须的。从这些空间里比从那些物件上更看出安排的细心，温情，思想，习惯，习惯的修改与新习惯的养成，你看出一个人怎么样过日子。
Small, but full. Piled up, framed, nailed, hanging, all kinds of things. Every space set aside is a must. From these spaces, you can see the care, warmth, thoughts, habits, modification of habits and the formation of new habits more than from those objects, and you can see how a person lives.当门是一具横放的榉木车床，又大又重，坚硬得无从想象可以用到甚么时候。它本身即代表了永远。那是永远也不会移动的，简直好像从地里长出来的，一个稳定而不表露的生命。这个车床没有问题比戴车匠岁数还要大，必是他父亲兼业师所传留下来的。超过需要的厚实是前代人制作法式。（我们看从前的许多东西老觉得一个可以改成两个三个用。）这个车床的形貌有些地方看起来不大讲究。有的因材就用，不拘小节，歪着扭着一点就听它歪着扭着一点，不削斫太多以求其平直，然而这无妨于它大体的俨然方正。用了这许多年了，许多不光致斧凿痕迹还摸得出来，可是接榫卡缝处吻投得真紧，真确切，仿佛天生的一个架子，不是一块块拼拢来的。多少年了，不摇，不晃，不走一点样！这个车床占了几乎二分之一的店堂，显然这是最重要的东西，其余一切全附属于它，且大半是从这个车床上作出来的。大车床里头是一个小车床。戴车匠作一点小巧东西则在小车床上。那就轻便得多，秀气得多，颜色也浅，常擦摩处呈牙黄色，光泽异常，木理依约可见，这是后来戴车匠自己手制的。再往里去，一伸手是那张供香炉竹壶高几。车床后面有仅容一人的走道。挨着靠墙而放的一条桌向里去，是内室了。想来是一床，一灯案，低梁小窗，紧凑而不过分杂乱。当有一小侧门，通出去是个狭长小天井。看见一点云，一点星光，下雨天雨水流在浅浅的阴沟里。天井中置水缸二口，一吃一用；煮饭烧茶风炉两只。墙阴凤仙花自开自落，砖缝里几丝草，在轻风中摇曳，贴地爬着几片马齿苋，有灰蓝色螟蛾飞息。凡此虽非目睹，但你见过许多这样格局的房子，原是极契熟的。其实即从外面情形，亦不难想象得知。——他吃饭用的碗筷放在那里呢？条桌上首墙上，他挖开了一块，四边钉板，安小门两扇，这就成了个柜子。分成几槅，不但碗筷，他自己的茶叶罐子烟荷包，重要小工具，祖传手绘的图样，订货的底子，跟他儿子的纸笔，女人的梳头家私，全都有了妥停放处。屈半膝在骨牌凳上，可以方便取得。我小时颇希望能有个房间有那样一个柜子，觉得非常有趣。他的白蜡杆子，黄杨段子，桑木枣木梨木材料则搁在高几上一个特制架上，堆得不十分整齐，然而有一种秩序，超乎整齐以上的秩序。（车匠所需木料不多，）架子的支脚翘出如壶嘴，就正好挂一个蝈蝈笼子！
When the door is a horizontal beech lathe, it is so big and heavy that it is impossible to imagine how long it can be used. It itself represents eternity. It will never move, it seems to have grown out of the ground, a stable and unrevealed life. There is no problem with this lathe, which is older than the age of the turner, and must have been passed down by his father and part-time master. Thickness that exceeds the need is the French style of previous generations. (We see that many things in the past always think that one can be changed to two or three.) The shape of this lathe seems to be not very particular in some places. Some are used according to the material, informal, twist a little and listen to it twist a little, and do not cut too much to make it straight, but this does not prevent it from being generally square. After using it for many years, many of the axe chisel marks can still be felt, but the kiss at the mortise and mortise is really tight, really accurate, as if it is a natural shelf, not pieced together. How many years, no shaking, no shaking, no going a little! This lathe occupies almost one-half of the shop, obviously this is the most important thing, everything else is attached to it, and most of it is made from this lathe. Inside the big lathe is a small lathe. The carmaker makes a little small thing on the small lathe. It is much lighter, much more delicate, the color is lighter, the place is often rubbed yellow, the luster is abnormal, and the wood grain is vaguely visible, which was later made by the carmaker himself. Further inside, when I stretched out my hand, I saw the bamboo pot for the incense burner. There is a walkway behind the lathe that can only accommodate one person. Next to a table placed against the wall, it is the inner room. I think it is a bed, a lamp table, and a small window with low beams, compact but not too cluttered. When there is a small side door, it leads out to a small narrow patio. I saw a little cloud, a little starlight, and rainwater flowed in a shallow gutter on a rainy day. There are two water tanks in the patio, one for eating and one for use; two stoves for cooking and tea. In the shade of the wall, impatiens bloom and fall by themselves, a few traces of grass in the cracks of the bricks, swaying in the breeze, crawling on the ground, and gray-blue borer moths flying. Although you have not witnessed this, you have seen many houses with this pattern, and they are very familiar. In fact, it is not difficult to imagine the situation from the outside. ——Where are the dishes and chopsticks he uses for eating? On the first wall of the table, he dug out a piece of nail boards on all four sides and two small doors, which became a cabinet. Divided into several buckets, not only bowls and chopsticks, but also his own tea jars, cigarette purses, important gadgets, ancestral hand-drawn patterns, order bases, his son's paper and pens, and women's hair combing furniture, all have a proper parking place. Bending half a knee on the domino stool is easily accessible. When I was a child, I wished there was a room with such a cabinet, which I found very interesting. His ash poles, boxwood segments, mulberry and jujube wood materials were placed on a special shelf on a high table, stacked not very neatly, but there was an order, beyond the order above neatness. (The carpenter doesn't need much wood,) The legs of the shelf are upright like a spout, just hanging a newt cage!戴车匠年纪还不顶大，如果他有时也想想老，想得还很昧暧，不管惨切安和，总离着他还远，不迫切。他不是那种一步即跌入老境的人，他只是缓缓的，从容的与他的时光厮守。是的，他已经过了人生的峰顶。有那么一点的，颤慄着，心沉着，急促的呼吸着，张张望望，徬徨不安，不知觉中就越过了那一点。这一点并不突出，闪耀，戴车匠也许纪念着，也许忽略了。这就是所谓中年。
Dai Cheshi is not yet old, if he sometimes thinks about old age, he is still very vague, no matter how tragic and peaceful he is, he is always far away from him, not urgent. He is not the kind of person who falls into old age in one step, he just slowly and calmly stays with his time. Yes, he has passed the peak of his life. There is a little bit of it, trembling, calm, breathing rapidly, looking around, hesitating, unconsciously passing that point. This point is not prominent, shining, Dai Cheshi may commemorate or ignore. This is the so-called middle age.吃过了早饭，看儿子夹了青布书包，（知道他的生书已经在油灯下读熟，为他欢喜，）拿了零用钱，跳下台阶，转身走了，戴车匠还在条桌边坐了一会。天气真好。街上扫过不久，还极干净。店铺开了门的不少，也还有没有开的。这就都要一家一家的全打开的。也许有一家从此就开不了那几块排门了，不过这样的事究竟不多。巷口卖烧饼油条的摊子热闹过一阵，又开始第二阵热闹了。烧饼槌子敲得极有精神，（槌子是从戴车匠家买去的，）油条锅里涌着金色泡沫。风吹着丁家绵线店的大布招卷来卷去。在公安局当书办的徐先生埋着头走来，匆忙的向准备好点头的戴车匠点一个头，过去了。一个党部工友提一桶浆子在对面墙上贴标语。戴车匠笑，因为有一张贴倒了。正看到知道一定有的那一张，“中华民国万岁”，他那把短嘴南瓜形老紫砂壶已经送了出来，茶泡好了，这他就要开始工作了。把茶壶带过去，放在大小车床之间的一个小几上，小几连在车床上。坐到与车床连在一起的高凳上，戴车匠也就与车床连在一起，是一体了。人走到他的工作之中去，是可感动的。先试试，踹两下踏板，看牛皮带活不活；迎亮看一看旋刀，装上去，敲两下；拿起一块材料，估量一下，眼睛细一细，这就起手。旋刀割削着木料，发出轻快柔驯的细细声音，狭狭长长，轻轻薄薄的木花吐出来。……
After breakfast, seeing my son pick up a green cloth schoolbag, (knowing that his book had been read under the oil lamp, rejoicing for him,) took his pocket money, jumped down the steps, turned around and left, and the carmaker was still sitting at the table for a while. The weather is so nice. The street has been swept for a while, and it is still very clean. Many shops have opened, and some have not. This has to be fully opened one by one. Maybe one of them will never be able to open those row doors, but there are not many such things. The stall selling sesame cakes and fritters in the alley was lively for a while, and then the second burst of excitement began. The sesame cake hammer was knocked very energetically, (the hammer was bought from the car craftsman's house), and the fried dough sticks pot was gushing with golden foam. The wind blew the large cloth of the Dingjia cotton thread shop rolling around. Mr. Xu, who works as a bookkeeper in the Public Security Bureau, walked over with his head buried, hurriedly nodded to the car maker who was ready to nod, and passed. A party worker carried a bucket of pulp and pasted a slogan on the opposite wall. The car maker laughed because one of the stickers fell. Just as he was looking at the one he knew must have, "Long live the Republic of China", his short-mouthed pumpkin-shaped old purple clay pot had been sent out, and the tea was brewed, and he was about to start working. Take the teapot over and place it on a small table between the large and small lathes, which are connected to the lathe. Sitting on the high stool connected to the lathe, the carmaker is also connected to the lathe, and they are one. It is touching when a person walks to his work. Try it first, kick the pedal twice to see if the cowhide belt is alive; Yingliang looked at the rotary knife, put it on, and knocked it twice; picked up a piece of material, measured it, and made a small eye, and then started. The rotary knife cut the wood, making a light and gentle sound, narrow and long, and gently and thin wood flowers were spit out. ……木花吐出来，车床的铁轴无声而精亮，滑滑润润转动，牛皮带往来牵动，戴车匠的两脚一上一下。木花吐出来，旋刀服从他的意志，受他多年经验的指导，旋成圆球，旋成瓶颈状，旋苗条的腰身，旋出一笔难以描画的弧线，一个悬胆，一个羊角弯，一个螺纹，一个杵脚，一个瓢状的，铲状的空槽，一个银锭元宝形，一个云头如意形。……狭狭长长轻轻薄薄木花吐出来，如兰叶，如书带草，如新韭，如番瓜瓤，戴车匠的背勾偻着，左眉低一点，右眉挑一点，嘴唇微微翕合，好像总在轻声吹着口哨。木花吐出来，挂一点在车床架子上，大部分从那个方洞里落下去，落在地板上，落在戴车匠的脚上。木花吐出来，宛转的，绵缠的，谐协的，安定的，不慌不忙的吐出来，随着旋刀悦耳的吟唱。……
Muhua spat out, the iron shaft of the lathe was silent and bright, smooth and smooth, the cowhide belt was pulled back and forth, and the two feet of the carmaker were up and down. Muhua spat out, the rotary knife obeyed his will, guided by his years of experience, spun into a ball, spirated into a bottleneck, rotated into a slender waist, and spun out an arc that was difficult to draw, a hanging gallbladder, a ram's horn bend, a thread, a pestle foot, a scoop-shaped, shovel-shaped empty groove, a silver ingot-shaped, and a cloud head ruyi-shaped. …… The narrow and long thin wooden flowers spit out, like orchid leaves, like books with grass, like new leeks, like gourd pulp, Dai Cheng's back hooked, his left eyebrow is lowered, his right eyebrow is raised a little, and his lips are slightly closed, as if he is always whistling softly. The wooden flowers spit out and hang a little on the lathe shelf, most of which fell from the square hole, fell on the floor, and landed on the feet of the carmaker. The wooden flowers spit out, winding, lingering, harmonious, stable, and unhurriedly spit out, accompanied by the pleasant chanting of the rotary knife. ……戴车匠上下午各连续工作两个时辰。其中稍稍中断几次，走下来拿点材料，翻翻图样，比较比较两批所作货色是否划一，给车轴加点油。作好了一个货色，握在手里，四方八面端详端详，再修一两刀，看看已经合乎理想，中规应矩了，就放在车床前一块狭狭板上，一个一个排起来。虽然他不赶急，但也十分盼待着把这块板上排得满满的吧。他笑他儿子写字总望一口气写满一张纸，他自己也未始不愿人知道他是个快手。这样的年纪也还有好胜心的。似乎他每天派给自己多少工作，把那点工作作好，即为满意。能分外多作几件就很按捺不住得意了。这点得意只有告诉他女人听，甚至想得到两句夸奖，一点慰劳，哈！他自然可以有时间抽一袋烟，喝两口茶，伸个懒腰；高兴，不怕难为情，也尽管哼两句朱买臣桃花宫老戏，他允许自己看半天洋老鼠踩车推磨，——他的洋老鼠越来越多，它们的住家也特别干净，曲折；逗逗檐前黄雀，用各种亲密陶侃言语。黄雀就竭其所能的唱起来，蓬松了脖子上的毛，耸耸肩，剔剔足，恣酣而矜庄的啭弄了半天，然后用珊瑚小嘴去啄一口食，饮一点水。戴车匠，可又认为它跟叫天子学了坏样，唱不成腔，——初学养鸟人注意：凡百鸟雀不可与叫天子结邻并挂，叫天子是个嗓子冲而无修养训练的野狐禅唱歌家，油腔滑调，乱用表情！在合唱时尤其只听到它的荒怪的逞喉极叫。——一面戴车匠又俯到他的工作上去，有的时候，忽然，他停下来，那就是想到了一点甚么事。或是记一记王老五请的一会甚么时候该他自己首会了；或是儿子塾师过生，该备一点礼物送去，今年是整五十；或是刘长福托他斡旋一件甚么事，那一头今天该给回话；或是澡堂里听来一个治风湿痛秘方，他麻二叔正用得着，可是六味药中有一味比较生疏，得去问问；或是，哦，老张呀，死了半年多，昨天夜里怎么梦见他了，还好好的，还是那样子，还说了几句话，话可一句也记不得了；老张儿子在湖西屠宰税上跑差，该没有甚么吧？这就教他大概筹计筹计下午该往那里走走，碰些甚么人，作点甚么事，怎么，说那些话。他的手就扶上了左额，眼睛眯，不时眨一眨。甚至有时等不及吃饭时再说，就大声唤女人出来商量。有时，甚至立刻进去换了件衣服，拿了扇子就出去了，临走时关照下来，等不等他吃饭；有谁来让候一候还是明天再来；船上人来把挂在门柱上那一串东西交给他拿去，钱或现交或下次转来再带来都可以。……他走了，与他的店，他的车床小别。
The carpenter worked for two hours in a row in the morning and afternoon. After a few breaks, he walked down to get some materials, flipped through the patterns, compared whether the two batches of goods were uniform, and added some oil to the axles. After making a cargo color, holding it in his hand, he looked at it carefully in all directions, repaired one or two knives, and put it on a narrow board in front of the lathe, lined up one by one. Although he was not in a hurry, he was also looking forward to filling the board to the brim. He laughed at his son's writing and always hoped to fill a piece of paper in one breath, and he himself didn't want people to know that he was a fast man. At such an age, there is still a competitive spirit. It seems that he is satisfied with how much work he assigns to himself every day, and if he does that work well. I can't help but be proud if I can make a few more things. This pride can only be told to tell him that women listen, and even want to get two compliments and a little comfort, ha! He can naturally have time to smoke a bag of cigarettes, drink two sips of tea, and stretch out; happy, not afraid of embarrassment, and even though he hummed a couple of old plays of Zhu Maichen's Peach Blossom Palace, he allowed himself to watch the foreign rats riding and grinding for a long time,—— His foreign rats are getting more and more numerous, and their homes are also very clean and tortuous; teasing the yellow bird in front of the eaves, using all kinds of intimate words. The yellow bird sang as best he could, fluffed the hair on his neck, shrugged his shoulders, picked his feet, and played with it drunkenly and solemnly for a long time, and then used his small coral mouth to peck at food and drink a little water. Dai Charioter, but he thinks that he has learned a bad way from calling the Son of Heaven and cannot sing well,—— Beginner bird keepers should pay attention: All birds and sparrows should not be neighbors with the Son of Heaven, and the Son of Heaven is a wild fox Zen singer with a flustered voice and no self-cultivation training, with a smooth tone, and abuses expressions! In particular, during the chorus, only its absurd throat screams were heard. ——While wearing the carpenter, he leaned over to his work, and sometimes, suddenly, he stopped, that is, he thought of something. Or remember when it was time for him to meet for the first time when Wang Laowu invited him; or when his son was born, he should prepare a gift to send it, and this year it is a full fifty; or Liu Changfu asked him to mediate something, and the other end should reply today; Or in the bathhouse, I heard a secret recipe for rheumatism and pain, and his second uncle Ma was using it, but one of the six herbs was relatively unfamiliar, so I had to ask; Or, oh, Lao Zhang, he has been dead for more than half a year, why did I dream of him last night, it's okay, it's still like that, and he said a few words, but I can't remember a word; Lao Zhang's son ran a bad job in the slaughter tax in Huxi, shouldn't there be anything? This taught him to plan where to go in the afternoon, what people to meet, what to do, how, and say those words. His hand rested on his left forehead, his eyes squinted id_0000, and he blinked from time to time. Sometimes he even couldn't wait to eat before talking, so he called the woman out loudly to discuss. Sometimes, he even went in immediately to change his clothes, took a fan and went out, took care of him before leaving, and waited for him to eat; who came to wait or come back tomorrow; the people on the boat came to hand over the string of things hanging on the doorpost to him, and the money could be handed over in cash or brought back next time. …… He left, saying goodbye to his shop and his lathe.平常日子，下午，戴车匠常常要出去跑跑，车匠店就空在那儿。但是看上去一点都不虚乏，不散漫，不寂寞，不无主。仍旧是小，而充实。若是时间稍久，一切，店堂，车床，黄雀，洋老鼠，蝈蝈，伸进来的一片阳光，阳光中浮尘飞舞，物件，空间；隔壁侯银匠的槌子声音与戴车匠车床声音是不解因缘，现在银匠槌子敲在砧子上像绳索少了一股；门外的行人，和屋后补着一件衣服的他的女人，都在等待，等待他回来，等待把缺了一点甚么似的变为完满。——戴车匠店的店身特别高，为了他的工作，（第一木料就怕潮）又垫了极厚的地板，微仰着头看上去有一种特别感觉。也许因为高，有点像个小戏台，所以有那种感觉吧。——自然不完全是。
On normal days, in the afternoon, the carmaker often has to go out for a run, and the carmaker's shop is empty there. But it doesn't seem to be empty at all, not scattered, not lonely, not ownerless. It is still small, but full. If it is a little longer, everything, the shop, the lathe, the yellow bird, the mouse, the newtle, a piece of sunlight that sticks in, the dust flying in the sun, the objects, the space; The sound of the silversmith's hammer next door and the sound of the carmaker's lathe are inextricably linked, and now the silversmith's hammer is like a rope missing on the anvil; the pedestrians outside the door, and his woman with a dress behind the house, are waiting, waiting for him to come back, waiting to make something seem to be missing. ——The shop of the Dai Maker shop is very tall, and for his work, (the first wood is afraid of moisture) has a very thick floor, and it looks like it has a special feeling when it tilts its head slightly. Maybe because it is high, it looks a bit like a small stage, so it feels like that. ——Naturally, not exactly.戴车匠所作东西我们好多叫不出名字，不知道干甚么用的。比如二尺长的大滑车，戴车匠告诉我是湖里粮船上用的，因为没有亲身验证，所以都无真切印象。——也许后来，我稍长大，有机会在江湖漂泛，看见过的，但因为悬结得那么高，又在那么大的帆前面，那么大的船，那么大的水，汪洋浩瀚之中，这么一个滑车看上去也算不得甚么了吧。人也大了，不复充满好奇，凡百事多失去惊愕兴趣了。——不过在大帆船上看那些复杂绳索在许多滑车之中溜动牵引，上上下下，想到它们在航行时所起作用，仍是极迷人的。我真希望向戴车匠询问各种滑车号数，好到船上混充内行！滑车真多，一串一串挂在梁上。也许戴车匠自己也没有看人怎么样用它吧？不过不要紧，有烧饼槌子，搓烧麦皮子小棒，擀面杖，之字形活动衣架，蝇拂上甘露子形状柄子，……他随处可以看见自己手里作出来的东西在人手里用。老太太们都有个捻线棰，早晚不离手的在巷口廊前搓，一面与人谈桑麻油米，儿女婚嫁。木椀木杓是小儿恩物，轻便，发脾气摔在地下不致挨打挨骂，敲着橐橐的响又可以想它是个甚么他就是个甚么，木鱼，更柝，取鱼梆子，还有你想也想不出的甚么声音的代表。——不过自从我有一次听说从前大牢里的囚犯是以木椀吃饭的，则不免对这个东西有了一种悲惨印象。自然这与戴车匠没有甚么关系，不该由他负责。看见有人卖放风筝绕线用的小车子，我们眼中盈盈的是羡慕的光。我们放的是酒坛，三尾，瓦片，不知甚么时候才能使用这么豪侈的器械。阿，我们是忘不了戴车匠的。秋天，他给我们作陀螺，作空钟。夏天，作水枪。春天，竹蜻蜓。过年糊兔儿灯，我们去买轱辘，戴车匠看着一个一个兔儿灯从街上牵过去，在结了一点冰的街上，在此起彼歇锣鼓声中，爆竹硝黄气味，影影沉沉纸灯柔光中。但我最喜欢的还是爬上高台阶向他买“螺蛳弓”。别处不知有无这样的风俗，清明，抹柳球，种荷秧，还吃螺蛳。家家悉煮五香螺蛳一锅，街上也有卖的。一人一碗，坐在门槛上一个一个掏出去吃。吃倒没有甚么，（自然也极鲜美）主要还是把螺蛳壳用螺蛳弓一个一个打出去。——这说起不易清楚，明年春天我给你作一个吧。戴车匠作螺蛳弓卖。我们看着他作，自己挑竹子，选麻线，交他一步一步作好，戴车匠自己在小几上蓝花大碗中拈一个螺蛳吃了，螺壳套在“箭”上，很用力的样子（其实毫不用力）拉开，射出去，半天，听得得的落在瓦沟里，（瓦匠扫屋，每年都要扫下好些螺壳来，）然后交给我们。——他自己儿子那一把弓特别大，有劲，射得远。戴车匠看着他儿子跟别人比射，细了眼睛，半晌，又没有甚么意义的摇摇头。
We can't name many of the things made by Dai Charioteer, and we don't know what they are used for. For example, the two-foot-long pulley, Dai Charioteer told me that it was used on a grain boat in the lake, but because I didn't personally verify it, I didn't have a real impression. ——Maybe later, when I grew up a little, I had the opportunity to float in the rivers and lakes, and I saw it, but because it was suspended so high, in front of such a big sail, in such a big boat, in such a big water, in the vastness of the ocean, such a pulley looked nothing. People are also bigger, no longer full of curiosity, and Pepsi has lost its interest in astonishment. ——But watching those complex ropes slip and pull in the many pulleys, up and down, and think about their function when sailing, is still very fascinating. I really hope to ask the cart maker about the number of various pulleys, so that the boat can be mixed with insiders! There are so many pulleys, one by one hanging on the beam. Maybe the cart maker himself didn't see how people used it, right? But it doesn't matter, there are sesame cake mallets, small sticks for rubbing wheat skin, rolling pins, zigzag hangers, and flies brushing with nectar-shaped handles,...... Everywhere he could see what he made in his hands being used in people's hands. The old ladies all had a twisting stick, and they rubbed it in front of the corridor at the entrance of the alley morning and evening, while talking about mulberry and sesame oil rice and the marriage of their children. The wooden bowl and wooden ladle are the gifts of children, light, and if you lose your temper and fall to the ground, you won't be beaten and scolded, and you can think of what it is and what it is. ——But since I once heard that prisoners in the prison used to eat in wooden bowls, I can't help but have a sad impression of this thing. Naturally, this has nothing to do with the cartmaker, and he should not be responsible. When we see someone selling a small cart for flying kites and winding lines, our eyes are filled with envy. We put wine jars, three tails, tiles, and we don't know when we will be able to use such extravagant equipment. Ah, we can't forget the carriage. In autumn, he makes us a spinning top and an empty clock. In summer, make a water gun. In spring, bamboo dragonflies. On the street with a little ice, here and there, in the sound of gongs and drums, the smell of firecrackers and the shadows of the paper lamps are gone. But my favorite is to climb the high steps to buy a "snail bow" from him. I don't know if there is such a custom elsewhere, Qingming, wiping willow balls, planting lotus seedlings, and eating snails. Every family cooks a pot of spiced snails, and they are also sold on the street. One bowl per person, sitting on the threshold and taking them out one by one. There is nothing to eat, (naturally it is also very delicious) The main thing is to beat the snail shells out one by one with a snail bow. ——This is not easy to say, I'll make one for you next spring. Dai Che Jiang made snail bows and sold them. We watched him make it, pick bamboo by ourselves, choose twine, and hand it over to him step by step, and Dai Che Shi himself picked a snail in a large blue and flower bowl on the small table and ate it, and the snail shell was put on the "arrow", and it was pulled away with great force (in fact, without any force), and it was shot out. ——His own son's bow was very big, powerful, and shot far. Dai Cheshi watched his son compete with others, squinted his eyes, and shook his head meaninglessly for a while.为甚么要摇摇头呢？也许他想到儿子一天天大起来了么？也许。我离开故乡日久，戴车匠如果还在，也颇老了。我不知因何而觉得他儿子不会再继续父亲这一行业。车匠的手艺从此也许竟成了绝学，因为世界上好像已经无须那许多东西，有别种东西替代了。我相信你们之中有很多人根本就无从知道车匠店到底是怎么回事，你们没有见过。或者戴车匠是最后的车匠了。那么他的儿子干甚么呢？也许可以到铁工厂里当一名练习生吧。他是不是像他父亲呢，就不知道了。——很抱歉，我跟你说了这么些平淡而不免沉闷的琐屑事情，又无起伏波澜，又无镕裁结构，逶逶迤迤，没一个完。真是对不起得很。真没有法子，我们那里就是这样的，一个平淡沉闷，无结构起伏的城，沉默的城；城里充满像戴车匠这样的人；如果那也算是活动，也不过就是这样的活动。——唔，不尽然，当然，下回我们可以说一点别的。我想想看。
Why did he shake his head? Maybe he thought that his son was getting bigger day by day? Maybe. I have been away from my hometown for a long time, and if the carmaker is still alive, he is quite old. I don't know why I think his son will not continue his father's business. The craft of a carmaker may have become a masterpiece from then on, because there seems to be no need for many things in the world, and there is something else to replace it. I believe many of you have no way of knowing what is going on with a carmaker's shop, and you have never seen it. Or Dai is the last carmaker. So what does his son do? Maybe he can go to the ironworks to be a trainee. I don't know if he is like his father. ——I'm sorry, but I told you about such a dull and dull trivial thing, without ups and downs, without any cutting structure, and none of them were finished. I'm really sorry. There is really no way, we are like this, a dull city, a city without structure, a silent city; the city is full of people like Dai Chawner; if that is considered an event, it is just such an event. ——Well, not necessarily, of course, next time we can say something else. I want to think about it.卅六年七月廿四日

[1] 本篇原载《文学杂志》1947年第二卷第五期；初收《邂逅集》，文化生活出版社1949年4月，文字略有改动。1985年作者以同题重写这篇小说，参见《故人往事·戴车匠》。
July 24, 36 years [1] This article was originally published in Literary Magazine, Volume 2, Issue 5, 1947; First received "Encounter Collection", Cultural Life Publishing House, April 1949, the text was slightly changed. In 1985, the author rewrote this novel with the same title, see "The Past of the Old People: The Car Maker".

年红灯（二）

年红灯（二）[1]
Red Light (2) [1]走出室门，总要抬头看看，为甚么要看呢，看甚么，——不知道，也许是想看看天，我曾经住过一个地方，天蓝起来非常的蓝，有的时候多雨。然而看到的却是马路对面高楼屋顶上一个铁架子，一个广告铁架子。这东西，无话可说，很伟大，竖那么一个铁架子的工程可以盖好我的屋子的罢。架子上本来有几个大字，每个字比一间房子都大，最近，天天有人搭了长梯子在上面工作。人在上头那么小，看他们在上头动，好像动得也很慢，很轻微，仿佛完全不是一个普普通通像我们一样的人，因为比例不对，知道，他们是在油漆那几个字，而且这两天在装年红灯了。——是谁想起来装的，我坐在椅子里，也可以看见，很高兴一抬头总看见他们在那里，有时竟然看得出他们在谈话，抽烟。我坐在椅子里，手里工作告一段落，抽烟，或喝一杯茶，悠然而自窗口看出去。
When I walk out of the door, I always have to look up, why do I want to look, what ,—— I don't know, maybe I want to see the sky, I once lived in a place, the sky was very blue, sometimes it was rainy. However, what I saw was an iron shelf on the roof of a high-rise building across the road, an advertising iron shelf. This thing, there is nothing to say, it is great, the project of erecting such an iron frame can build my house. There were originally a few big characters on the shelf, each word was bigger than a house, and recently, someone built a long ladder to work on it every day. The people are so small on top, looking at them moving on top, it seems that they are moving very slowly, very slightly, as if they are not ordinary people like us at all, because the proportions are wrong, you know, they are painting those words, and they have been installing red lights for the past two days. ——Who thought of it and pretended, I sat in the chair, and I could see it, and I was happy to see them there when I looked up, and sometimes I could see them talking and smoking. I sat in the chair, my work was over, smoking, or drinking a cup of tea, and I looked out the window leisurely.一天晚上，亮了，那些年红灯亮了，红光蓝光交流转换。先是小字一个一个生出来，一排排现齐了，于是划然而呈出几个大字，又抹掉似的不见了，又重新再来一遍，红光蓝光交流的落在我阶前，屋顶，我的书，我的纸，我的手指上。
One night, it was lit, the red light was on in those years, and the red light and blue light exchanged and converted. At first, the small characters were born one by one, and the rows appeared in rows, so a few big characters were suddenly presented, and then they disappeared as if they were erased, and then they did it again, and the red and blue lights fell in front of my steps, on the roof, my books, my paper, and my fingers.这几个工人他们一定也看见了，他们一定看的。
They must have seen these workers, they must have seen it.而我在马路上看见一个人，他看广告上那些灯，从他看的样子，我毫不怀疑的相信他即是那些工人之一，白天他还在那个架子上工作的。那是他的作品，我看了他一会，——他心里是甚么感觉？
And I saw a man on the road, he looked at the lights on the advertisement, and from the way he looked, I had no doubt that he was one of those workers, and he was still working on that shelf during the day. It was his work, and I looked at him for a while,—— what did he feel?“每天都喜欢到江边来玩吗？”
“是的，这里比较清净！”
“对热闹不感兴趣？”
“女孩子固然都喜欢热闹，可是我觉得只有静时候才是真正快乐！”
“这是各人的个性，也许你的心是喜欢幽静的。”
"Do you like to go to the river every day to play?" "Yes, it's relatively clean here!" "Not interested in the excitement?" "Of course, girls like to be lively, but I think only when it's quiet is really happy!" "This is everyone's personality, maybe your heart likes to be quiet."“你觉得这地方好吗？”
"Do you think this place is good?"“大概是因为市区的空气太浮嚣，每天总想到这里来看看不断地东流的水，在这里我总可以从凝静的心里认识到人生的真谛，譬如江心的浪罢！每个浪花都负有它底使命，一个接连一个，它们永远的没有止境，也永远的不需要后退！”
"Probably because the air in the city is too noisy, I always think of coming here every day to see the water flowing eastward, and here I can always realize the true meaning of life from my quiet heart, like the waves in the heart of the river! Every wave has its underlying mission, one after another, they are never endless, and they never need to retreat! ”“这就是你对于人生的认识吗？可是我们生在现代的社会里，我们所负的使命不是比浪花更重吗？”
“也可以这么说，哦！你觉得这畸形的社会，不太令人悲伤吗？”
Is this what you know about life? But we are born in a modern society, and our mission is not heavier than the waves? ” "You can also say that, oh! Do you think this deformed society is not too sad? ”“不，只有弱者才悲哀，我们是青年，应该给人类争取幸福，也就是为自己争取幸福！”她严肃地说。……
于是他和她从此构成了一段Romance。
"No, only the weak are sad, we are young people, we should strive for happiness for mankind, that is, for ourselves!" She said seriously. …… So he and she formed a Romance from then on.在江边芦花开得正茂盛的时候，他俩的爱情也正如花儿一样的浓厚而洁白。
When the reeds by the river were blooming, their love was as thick and white as the flowers.四个月后寒冷给他带来了不幸。她失踪了。没有一个字给他，并且事先也没有一点出走的破绽。他伤心，他为人心的无恒而痛哭，他格外地沉默了，连平常藉以解闷江边也不愿去，为的是免得引起自己的愁思而增加痛苦与悲哀。
Four months later, the cold brought him misfortune. She was missing. Not a word was given to him, and there was no flaw in advance. He was sad, he wept bitterly for the impermanence of the human heart, he was particularly silent, and he did not even want to go to the river to relieve his boredom, so as not to arouse his sorrow and increase his pain and sorrow.第二年的春天，春风带来了野蔷薇的气息，他意外地接到了她底来信，报告了她“旅途”的平安，他恢复了以前对她的敬爱而且更加地佩服她崇拜她了！但是他不能写一封信，去表示他对她的崇拜与佩服，因为她没有告诉他有一定的通讯地址。
In the spring of the following year, the spring breeze brought the scent of wild roses, and he unexpectedly received a letter from her reporting the safety of her "journey", and he regained his previous love for her and admired her even more! But he could not write a letter to express his admiration and admiration for her, because she did not tell him that he had a certain correspondence address.来信里有一段是这样的。
There is a paragraph in the letter that reads.“……朋友！生命就是创造，有创造才有快乐！我不愿做一朵鲜花供给人玩赏，我要像灿烂的旭日普照四方，我不愿做水上的浮萍，随波逐流，我要学自由的鸟儿，任意飞翔，人生不需要罗绮包裹，我要生命上有血泪的创伤，眼前的安乐是靠不住的，朋友！人生需要求永久的朗照，不要一时的彩异。
“…… Friend! Life is creation, there is happiness with creation! I don't want to be a flower for people to enjoy, I want to be like a brilliant rising sun shining in all directions, I don't want to be duckweed on the water, go with the flow, I want to learn to be a free bird, fly freely, life does not need to be wrapped in Luo Qi, I want to have the trauma of blood and tears in life, and the comfort in front of me is unreliable, friend! Life needs to seek permanent brightness, not temporary colors.“现在我已经获得了生命的真谛，实现了我理想的一部分，我要牺牲自己去为大众服务，自从去年别后，我就开始了我底实际工作，我加入了长征的队伍，向世界和平追求！
"Now that I have gained the true meaning of life and realized part of my ideals, I want to sacrifice myself to serve the public, since I parted last year, I have started my practical work, I joined the Long March, and pursued world peace!“朋友！努力你底学业吧！将来继我之后……”
一直到现在，他没有接到她第二封信，也更不知道她现在甚么地方。
这是一个梦么！
"Friend! Work your studies! ...... will succeed me in the future." Until now, he has not received a second letter from her, let alone where she is now. Is this a dream?每到秋临大地的时候，他总不免从记忆里拾回这一个美丽的慷慨的破碎了的梦！

[1] 本篇原载1947年8月18日《宁波日报》，是作者同题旧作续写。

牙疼

牙疼[1]
Every time autumn comes to the earth, he can't help but pick up this beautiful and generous broken dream from his memory! [1] This article was originally published in the Ningbo Daily on August 18, 1947, and is a continuation of the author's old work with the same title. Toothache[1]我的牙齿好几年前就开始龋蛀了。我知道它真的不一点都没有坏，是因为它时常要发炎作痛。“牙疼不是病，疼起来要人命，”说得一点不错。好家伙，真够瞧的。一直懒得去看医生，因为怕麻烦。说老实话，我这人胆子小，甚么事都怯得很。医牙，我没有经验，完全外行。这想必有许多邮局银行一样的极难搞得明白的手续吧。一临到这种现代文明的杰作的手续，我张皇失措，窘态毕露，十分可笑，无法遮掩。而且我从来没有对牙医院牙医士有过一分想象。他们用甚么样的眼睛看人？那个房间里飘忽着一种甚么感觉？我并不“怕”，我小时候生过一次对口，一个近视得很厉害的老医生给我开刀，他眼镜丢了好几年，眯朦胧之中，颤颤巍巍为我划了个口子；我不骗你，骗你干甚么，他没用麻药；我哼都没哼一声，只把口袋里带的大蜜枣赶紧塞一个到口里去，抬一抬头看看正用微湿泪光的眼睛看我的父亲。我不去医牙完全是不习惯，不惯到一个生地方，不惯去见一丝毫不清楚他底细的人。——这跟我不嫖妓实出于同一心理。我太拘谨，缺少一点产生一切浪漫故事的闯劲。轻重得失那么一权衡，我怎么样都还是宁愿一次又一次的让它疼下去。
My teeth started to decay several years ago. I know it's really not bad at all, because it is often inflamed and painful. "A toothache is not a disease, it hurts and kills," he said a little better. Good guy, it's worth seeing. I have been too lazy to go to the doctor for fear of trouble. To be honest, I am a timid person and afraid of everything. I have no experience in dentistry, and I am completely a layman. This must be a procedure that is very difficult to understand like many post offices and banks. When I came to the formalities of this masterpiece of modern civilization, I was panicked and embarrassed, very ridiculous and unable to hide it. And I had never imagined a dentist in a dental hospital. What kind of eyes do they look at? What kind of feeling is floating in that room? I am not "afraid", I gave birth to a counterpart when I was a child, an old doctor with severe myopia operated on me, he lost his glasses for several years, squinted in haze id_0000, trembling and made a hole for me; I don't lie to you, why are you lying to me, he didn't use anesthetics; I didn't snort, I just quickly stuffed a big date in my pocket into my mouth, and looked up to look at my father who was looking at me with slightly wet tears. I'm completely unused to not going to dentistry, I'm not used to going to a place of birth, and I'm not used to meeting people who don't know the slightest bit of his details. ——This is the same mentality as not prostituting me. I am too restrained and lack a little bit of enthusiasm to produce all romantic stories. With such a trade-off between gains and losses, I would rather let it hurt again and again.初初几次，沉不住气，颇严重了一下。因为看样子，一点把握都没有，不知道一疼要疼多少时候，疼到一个甚么程度。慢慢经过仗阵，觉得也不过如此。“既有价钱，总好讲话。”牙是生出来的，疼的是我自己，又不是我要它疼的，似乎无庸对任何人负责，因此心安理得。既然心安理得，就无所谓了。——我也还有几个熟人朋友，虽未必痛痒相关，眼看着我挤眼咧嘴，不能一点无动于衷。这容易，我不在他们面前，在他们面前少挤挤咧咧就是了。单就这点说，我很有绅士风度。事实上连这都不必。朋友中有的无牙疼经验，子非鱼他不明白其中滋味，看到的不过是我的眼睛在那儿挤，嘴在那儿咧而已，自无所用其恻隐之心。多数牙也疼过，（我们那两年吃的全差不多，）则大半也是用跟我一样的方法对付过去。忍过事则喜，于此有明证焉。他们自己也从未严重，当然不必婆婆妈妈的来同情慰问我。想来极为惋惜，那时为甚么不成立一个牙疼俱乐部，没事儿三数人聚一聚，集体牙疼一下呢，该是多好玩的事？当时也计划过，认为有事实上的困难。（牙疼呀，你是我们的誓约，我们的纹徽，我们的国，我们的城。）慰情聊胜无，我们就不时谈谈各人牙疼的风格。这也难得很。说来说去，不外是从发痒的小腹下升起一种狠，足够把桌上的砚台，自己的手指咬下一段来；腿那么踡曲起来，想起弟弟生下来几天被捺下澡盆洗身子，想起自己也那么着过；牙疼若是画出来，一个人头，半边惨绿，半爿炽红，头上密布古象牙的细裂纹，从脖子到太阳穴扭动一条斑斓的小蛇，蛇尾开一朵（甚么颜色好呢）的大花，牙疼可创为舞，以黑人祭天的音乐伴奏，哀楚欲绝，低抑之中透出狂野无可形容。……以此为题，谈话不够支持两小时。此可见我们既缺乏自我观照，又复拙于言词，不会表现。至于牙疼之饶有诗意，则同人等皆深领默会的。曾经写过两行，写的是春天：
At first, I couldn't calm down a few times, and it was quite serious. Because it seemed, I was not sure at all, and I didn't know how long it would hurt and how much it hurt. Slowly passing through the battle, I felt that it was nothing more than that. "It's always good to talk if there is a price." Teeth are born, and it hurts myself, not because I want it to hurt, so I don't seem to be responsible for anyone, so I feel at ease. Since I feel at ease, it doesn't matter. ——I also have a few acquaintances and friends, although they may not be related to pain and itch, and I can't be indifferent at all when they see me grinning. It's easy, I don't have to be in front of them, just squeeze less in front of them. In this alone, I am very gentlemanly. In fact, I don't even have to do this. Some of my friends have no experience of toothache, and Zi Feiyu doesn't understand the taste, all he sees is my eyes squeezing there and my mouth grinning there, and I don't need to use my compassion. Most of my teeth also hurt, and most of them used the same method as me to deal with them. If you endure it, you will be happy, and this is clearly proven. They themselves have never been serious, and of course they don't need my mother-in-law to sympathize with me. I think it's a pity that why didn't a toothache club be set up at that time, and how fun it would be to get together with three or more people to get together and have a collective toothache? At that time, I also planned that there were practical difficulties. (Toothache, you are our oath, our emblem, our country, our city.) Comforting and talking is better than nothing, we will talk about everyone's toothache style from time to time. This is also very rare. Speaking of which, it is nothing more than a kind of ruthlessness rising from under the itchy lower abdomen, enough to bite off the inkstone on the table and one's own fingers; the legs are so twisted, thinking of my brother being pressed down in the bathtub to wash his body a few days after he was born, and remembering that he was also so bad; If the toothache is drawn, a person's head, half of it is pale green, half red, the head is densely covered with fine cracks of ancient ivory, a colorful little snake twists from the neck to the temples, and the snake's tail blooms a big flower (what color is good), the toothache can be created into a dance, accompanied by the music of the black sacrifice to the sky, the sorrow is excruciating, and the wildness is indescribable in the depression. …… On this topic, the conversation is not enough to support two hours. This shows that we lack both self-observation and are clumsy in words, and we cannot express ourselves. As for the poetry of toothache, everyone deeply understands it. I once wrote two lines, about spring:看一个孩子放也放不上他的风筝，
独自玩弄着一半天的比喻和牙疼。
Look at a child who can't fly his kite, Playing with metaphors and toothaches for half a day alone.诗写得极坏，唯可作死心塌地的承认牙疼的艺术价值的明证耳。我们接受上天那么多东西，难道不能尽量学习欣赏这个可遇而不可求的奇境吗？嚇。
The poem is written extremely badly, but it can only be used as a clear proof of the artistic value of toothache with a dead heart. We accept so many things from heaven, can't we try to learn to appreciate this wonderland that can be encountered but not sought? Scared.但人不能尽在艺术中呼吸，也还有许多实际问题。首先，牙一疼影响作事。这个东西解又解不下来，摔又摔不掉，赶又赶不走像夏天黏在耳根的营营的蚊雷，有时会教人失去平和宁静的；想不得，坐不住，半天写不出两行。有一回一个先生教我做一篇文章，到了交卷限期，没有办法，我只有很惭愧的把一堆断稿和一个肿得不低的腮拿给他看。他一句话不说，出去为我买了四个大黄果，令我感动得像个小姑娘，想哭。——这回事情我那先生不知还记不记得？再有，牙疼了不好吃东西，要喝牛奶，买一点软和的点心，又颇有困难。顾此失彼，弄得半饱半饥，不大愉快。而且这也影响工作。最重要的，后来一到牙疼，我就不复心安理得，老是很抱歉似的了。因为这不复是我一个人的事情。有一个人要来干涉我的生活，我一疼，她好像比我还难过。她跟我那位先生一样好几个牙都是拔了又装过的。于是就老想，那一天一定去拔，去医。
But people can't breathe in art, and there are still many practical problems. First of all, a toothache affects work. This thing can't be solved, it can't be dropped, and it can't be driven away, like the mosquito thunder sticking to the base of the ear in summer, sometimes teaching people to lose peace and tranquility; I can't think of it, I can't sit still, and I can't write two lines in a long day. Once a gentleman taught me to write an article, and when the deadline came to submit the paper, there was no way, so I had to show him a bunch of broken manuscripts and a swollen cheek with shame. Without saying a word, he went out and bought four rhubarb fruits for me, which moved me like a little girl and wanted to cry. ——Does my husband remember this incident? Also, it is quite difficult to have a toothache and not eat good food, drink milk, and buy some soft snacks. Taking care of one thing and losing the other, I was half full and half hungry, and it was not very happy. And it also affects my work. The most important thing is that when I have a toothache, I don't feel at ease and always feel sorry. Because this is no longer my business. There is someone who wants to interfere in my life, and when I hurt, she seems to be even sadder than me. Like my husband, she had several teeth extracted and installed. So I always thought that I would definitely go to the doctor that day.这时两边的牙多已次第表演过，而左下第二臼齿则完全成了一口井。不时缤纷的崩下一片来，有的半透明，有的枯白色，有的发灰，吃汤团时常裹在米粉馅心之间，吐出来实不大雅观。而且因为一直不用左边的牙，右边嚼东西就格外著力，日子久了，我的脸慢慢显得歪起来。天天看见的不大觉着，我自己偶尔照镜，明白有数。到了有一次去照相馆拍照，照相技师让我偏一点坐，说明因为我的脸两边不大一样。我当时一想，这家伙不愧是个照相技师，对于脸有研究，有经验！而我的脸一定也歪到一个不容忽视的地步了。我真不愿意脸上有特色引人注意，而且也还有点爱漂亮的，这个牙既然总要收拾的，就早点吧。——当然我的脸歪或许另有原因。但我找得出来的“借口”是牙。
At this time, most of the teeth on both sides have been performed one after another, and the second molar on the lower left has completely become a well. From time to time, it collapses colorfully, some are translucent, some are withered white, and some are gray. And because I have not used my left tooth, I chew things on the right side with extra effort, and as time goes by, my face gradually looks crooked. I don't feel much about what I see every day, but I occasionally look in the mirror and understand it. When I went to the photo studio to take pictures, the photographer asked me to sit a little later, indicating that the two sides of my face were not the same. I thought at the time, this guy is worthy of being a photographer, with research and experience in faces! And my face must have been crooked to the point where it cannot be ignored. I really don't want to have a distinctive face that attracts attention, and I also love to be beautiful, since this tooth always needs to be cleaned, let's do it early. ——Of course, there may be another reason for my crooked face. But the "excuse" I can find is the teeth.那个时候，我在昆明。昆明有个三一圣堂，三一圣堂有个修女，为人看牙。都说她治得很好，不敲钉，人还满可爱的；联大同学去，她喜欢跟你聊，聊得很有意思。多有人劝我一试。我除了这里不晓得有别的地方，颇想去看看那个修女去了。不过我总觉得牙医不像别的医生。我很愿意我父亲或儿子是个医士，我喜欢医生的职业风度。可我不大愿意他们是牙医。一则医生有老的，有年轻的，而我所见的牙医好像总是那么大年纪，仿佛既不会大起来，也没有小过，富有矿物性。牙医生我总还以为不要学问，就动动家伙，是一种手艺人。我总忘不了撑个大布伞，挂个大葫芦，以一串血渍淋漓的（我小时疑心是从死人口里拔下来的）特别长大牙齿作招牌的江湖郎中。一个女的，尤其一个修道女做这种拿刀动钳子事情，我以为不大合适。“拔”，这是个多厉害的字！但这是她的事，我管不了。有时我脑子清醒，也把医牙与宗教放在一起想过，以为可以有连通地方。我记得很清楚，我曾经三次有叩那个颇为熟习的小门的可能。第一次，我痛了好几天，到了晚上，S陪着我，几乎是央求了，让我明天一定去看。我也下了决心。可第二天，天一亮，她来找我，我已经披了衣服坐在床上给她写信了。信里第一句是：
At that time, I was in Kunming. There is a Trinity Church in Kunming, and there is a nun in Trinity Church who takes care of people's teeth. They all say that she treats very well, does not hammer , and is very cute; she likes to talk to you and has a very interesting conversation. Many people advise me to give it a try. I don't know of any other place but here, and I really want to see the nun. But I always feel that dentists are not like other doctors. I would love that my father or son is a doctor, and I like the professional demeanor of doctors. But I don't want them to be dentists. One doctor is old and young, and the dentists I see always seem to be so old, as if they are neither big nor small, full of minerals. I always thought that dentists were a kind of craftsman who didn't want to learn, so they moved guys. I can't forget the charlatan who held a big cloth umbrella, hung a big gourd, and used a string of blood-stained (I suspected it was pulled out of a dead mouth) with specially grown teeth as a signboard. I don't think it's appropriate for a woman, especially a nun to do this kind of thing with a knife and pliers. "Pull", what a powerful word! But this is her business, I can't control it. Sometimes I have a clear mind, and I also think about medicine and dentistry together, thinking that there can be a connection. I remember very clearly that I knocked on that familiar door three times. The first time, I was in pain for several days, and at night, S was with me, almost begging me to go see it tomorrow. I also made up my mind. But the next day, at dawn, she came to me, and I had already put on my clothes and sat on the bed to write to her. The first sentence in the letter was:“赞美呀，一夜之间消褪于无形的牙疼。”
"Praise for the invisible toothache that disappeared overnight."她知道我脾气，既不疼了，决不肯再去医的，还是打主意给我弄点甚么喜欢吃的东西去。第二次，又疼了，肿得更高，那一块肉成了一粒樱桃色的葡萄。不等她说，我先开口，“去，一定去。”可是去了，门上一把锁，是个礼拜天。礼拜天照例不应诊。我拍掌而叫，“顶好！”吃了许多舒发药片，也逐渐落了下去如潮，那个疼。我们那时住在乡下，进城一趟不容易，趁便把准备医牙的钱去看了一场电影。我向她保证，一定看得很舒服，比医医牙更有益，果然。第三次，则教我决定了不再去了，那位修道女回了国，换了另一个人在那里挂牌。不单是我，S也是，一阵子惆怅。她比我还甚，因为修女给她看过牙，她们认得。她一直想去看看她，有一个小纪念礼物想在她临走之前送她带去的。人走了，只有回去了。回去第一件事是在许多书里翻出那个修女所送的法文书简集，想找出夹在里头的她的本国地址。可是找来，找去，找不着。这本书曾经教一个人拿去看过，想是那时遗落了。这比牙疼令人难过得多。我们说，一本精致一点的通讯册是不可少的，将来一定要买。战争已经结束了，人家都已返国了，我们也有一个时候会回乡的吧。
She knew that my temper was not painful, and she would never go to the doctor again, so she still made up her mind to get me something I liked to eat. The second time, it hurt again, the swelling was even higher, and the piece of meat became a cherry-colored grape. Without waiting for her to speak, I spoke first, "Go, I must go." But when I went, the door was locked, and it was Sunday. I didn't go to the doctor as usual. I clapped my hands and shouted, "Okay!" After taking a lot of hair relief pills, it gradually fell like a tide, and it hurt. We lived in the countryside at that time, and it was not easy to go to the city, so we took the money to prepare dental care to watch a movie. I promised her that it would be very comfortable to watch, and it would be more beneficial than medical treatment, sure enough. The third time I decided not to go, the nun returned to China and put up a sign there with another person. Not only me, but also S, I was sad for a while. She was even more than me, because the nun had seen her teeth and they recognized her. She had always wanted to see her, and there was a small souvenir that she wanted to give her before she left. People left, only went back. The first thing I did when I went back was to dig up the collection of French documents given by the nun among many books, trying to find her home address sandwiched in it. But I searched for it, I couldn't find it. This book was once taught to a person to read, and I think it was lost at that time. It was much sadder than a toothache. We said that a more refined communication book is indispensable, and we must buy it in the future. The war is over, people have returned to China, and we will return to our hometowns at some point.还好，又陆陆续续疼了半年，疼得没有超过记录，我们当真有机会离开云南了。S回福建省亲，我只身来到上海。上海既不是我的家乡，而且与我呆了前后七年的昆明不同。到上海来干甚么呢？你问我，我问谁去！找得出的理由是来医牙齿了。S临别，满目含泪从船上扔下一本书来，书里夹一纸条，写的是：
Fortunately, it hurt for another half a year, and the pain did not exceed the record, and we really had a chance to leave Yunnan. S returned to Fujian to visit relatives, and I came to Shanghai alone. Shanghai is not my hometown, and it is different from Kunming, where I stayed for seven years. What are you doing in Shanghai? You ask me, I ask who to go! The reason I found was that I came to treat my teeth. Before leaving, S threw a book from the boat with tears in his eyes, and a note was sandwiched in it, which read:“这一去，可该好好照顾自己了。找到事，借点薪水，第一是把牙治一治去。”
感激我的师友，他们奔走托付，（还不告诉我，）为我找到一个事。我已经做了半年多，而且我一个牙齿也拔掉了。
"It's time to take good care of yourself. Find something, borrow some salary, the first is to get rid of your teeth. ” I am grateful to my teachers and friends, who went to entrust me and found something for me. I have been doing it for more than half a year, and I have had one of my teeth removed.轻拈慢拨了几回，终于来了一个暴风式的旋律。我用舌头舔舔我那块肉，我摸不到我自己，肿把我自己跟自己隔开了。我看别人工作那么紧张，那么对得起那份薪水，我不好意思请假。我跟学生说，因为牙不大舒服，说话不大清楚，脑子也不顶灵活，请他们原谅我。下了课，想想，还是看医生。前些时我跟一个朋友的母亲谈起过我的牙疼，她说她认得一个牙医，去年给她治了好几回，人蛮好的，我想请她为我介绍一下。我支了二十万块钱理直气壮的去了。
After a few strokes, a stormy melody finally came. I licked my piece of flesh with my tongue, I couldn't touch myself, and the swelling separated me from myself. I saw that other people were so nervous at work, so worthy of that salary, I was embarrassed to ask for leave. I told the students that because their teeth were not very comfortable, they couldn't speak clearly, and their brains were not flexible, so I asked them to forgive me. After class, I thought about it, I still went to the doctor. Some time ago, I talked to a friend's mother about my toothache, she said that she knew a dentist, who treated her several times last year, and she was quite good, I wanted to ask her to introduce me to me. I paid 200,000 yuan and went confidently.哈，我终于正式做了个牙齿病人！也怪，怎么牙医都是广东人，不是姓梁就是姓麦，再不就姓甘！我这位姓梁。他虽然有一种职业的关心，职业的温和，职业的安静谦虚，职业的笑，但是人入世不很深，简直似乎比我还年轻些，一个小孩子。候诊室里挂几张画，看得过去。嗐！有一本纪德的书呢。我在沙发上坐了一会，看了几页书，叫我了。进去，首先我对那张披挂穿插得极其幽默的椅子有兴趣。我看他拉拉这，动动那，谨慎而“率”，我信任他。我才一点都不紧张。我告诉他我这个牙有多少年历史，现在已残败不可收拾，得一片一片的拈出来，恐怕相当麻烦吧。我微有歉意，仿佛我早该来让他医，就省事多了。他唯唯答应，细心的检视一遍之后，说“要拔，没有别的办法了。”那还用说！给我用药棉洗了洗，又说一句，两万块。别人要两万五，×老太太介绍，少一点。我简直有点欢喜又有点失望了，就这么点数目。我真想装得老一点，说“孩子，拔吧。”打了麻药针，他问我麻不麻。甚么叫“麻”呢，我没有麻过的经验，但觉得隔了一层，我就点头。他利利落落的动钳子了。没有费甚么事，一会儿工夫牙离了我，掉在盘子里。分两块，还相当大，看样子傻里瓜几，好像没睡醒。我看不出它有甚么调皮刁钻。我猜它已经一根一根的如为水腐蚀得精瘦的桥桩，是完全错误。于此种种，得一教训，即凡事不可全凭想象。梁医生让我看了牙，问我“要不要？”唔？要它干甚么？我笑了笑。我想起一个朋友在昆明医院割去盲肠，医生用个小玻璃瓶子装了酒精把割下来的一段东西养在里头，也问他“要不要？”他斜目一看，问医生“可以不可以炒了吃？”我这两块牙不见得可以装在锦盒里当摆设吧，我摇摇头。“当”的一声，牙扔在痰盂里了。我知道，这表示我身体中少了一点东西了，这是无法复原的。有人应当很痛惜，很有感触。我没有，我只觉得轻松。稍为优待自己一下，我坐了三轮车回来。车上我想，一切如此简单，下回再有人拔牙，我愿意为他去“把场”。
Ha, I finally officially became a dental patient! It's also strange, why are all dentists from Guangdong, either surnamed Liang or Mai, or even Gan! My surname is Liang. Although he has a professional concern, a gentle profession, a quiet and modest profession, and a professional smile, he is not very deep in the world, and he seems to be younger than me, a child. There are a few paintings hanging in the waiting room, which can be seen. Alas! There is a book by Gide. I sat on the sofa for a while, read a few pages, and called me. When I went in, first of all, I was interested in the chair with extremely humorous drapes. I watched him pull this, move that, be cautious and "rateful", and I trusted him. I wasn't nervous at all. I told him how old my tooth was, and now it was out of control, and it would be quite troublesome to pull it out piece by piece. I apologized slightly, as if I should have come to let him treat me a long time ago, which would have saved me a lot of trouble. He reluctantly agreed, and after carefully examining it, he said, "If you want to pull it out, there is no other way." "Needless to say! I washed it with medicinal cotton, and then said, 20,000 yuan. Others asked for 25,000 yuan, × the old lady introduced, a little less. I was a little happy and a little disappointed, just like that. I really wanted to pretend to be older and say, "Child, pull it out." After the anesthetic injection, he asked me if I was numb. What is "hemp", I have no experience with numbness, but I feel that there is a layer apart, so I nodded. He moved the tongs neatly. It didn't take much effort, and after a while, the teeth left me and fell on the plate. Divided into two pieces, it was quite large, and it looked like it was stupid, as if it hadn't woken up. I couldn't see anything naughty about it. I guess it was completely wrong to have a bridge pile that was corroded by water one by one. In all this, there is a lesson, that is, everything cannot be based on imagination. Dr. Liang asked me to look at my teeth and asked me, "Do you want it?" "Hmm? What do you want it for?" I smiled. I remembered a friend who had his appendix cut off in Kunming Hospital, and the doctor used a small glass bottle to fill the cut piece of alcohol in it, and asked him, "Do you want it?" He squinted and asked the doctor, "Can I fry it and eat it?" "My two teeth may not be able to be used as decorations in a brocade box, I shook my head." Dang", and the tooth was thrown into the spittoon. I know that this means that something is missing in my body, which cannot be restored. Someone should be very sorry and touched. I don't, I just feel relaxed. After giving myself a little favor, I took a tricycle back. In the car, I thought that everything was so simple, and the next time someone pulled out a tooth, I would be willing to "take care of it" for him.第二天第三天我又去换了换药，梁医生说，很好，没有事了。原来有点零碎牙的地方，用舌尖探了探，空空的，不大习惯。长出一块新肉，肉很软，很嫩，有如蛤蜊。肉长得那么快，我有点惊奇。我这个身体里还积蓄不少机能，可以供我挥霍，神妙不可思议，多美！我好像还舍不得离开那张躺着很舒服的椅子，这比理发店的椅子合乎理想得多。他这屋里的阳光真好，亮得很。我半年没见过好好的太阳，我那间屋子整天都是黄昏。看一看没有别的病人，静静的，瓶里花香，我问梁医生“你没有甚么事吧？我可以不可以抽一枝烟？”他不抽烟，给我找了个火。我点着烟，才抽了一口，我决不定是跟他谈纪德的《地粮》对于病人的影响还是问问他到上海来多少时候，有时是不是寂寞。而梁开口了：“你牙齿坏了不少，我给你检查检查看。”好嚜。他用一根长杆子拨拨弄弄，（一块不小的石粒子迸出来，）他说“你有八个牙须要收拾，一个要装，两个补；三个医一医，医了补；另外两个，因为补那个牙，须锉一锉，修一修。”他说得不错，这些牙全都表演过。他在一张纸上加加减减，改改涂涂，像个小学生做算术，凑得数凑不上来，我真想帮他一手。最后算出来了，等于24万。算着算着，我觉得真是不能再少了，而一面头皮有点痒起来。我既感激又抱歉。感激他没有用算盘，我最怕看人打算盘打得又快又准确。抱歉的是我一时没有那么多钱。我笑了笑，说“月底我再来吧。”我才抽了一口的那根香烟，因为他要检查牙，取下放在烟灰牒里的，已经全烧完了。看了它一眼，我可该走了。
The next day and the third day I went to change the dressing again, and Dr. Liang said, it's fine, it's okay. The place where there were a few broken teeth was probed with the tip of my tongue, empty, not used to it. A piece of new meat grew out, the meat was very soft and tender, like a clam. I was a little surprised that the meat grew so quickly. I still have a lot of functions in my body that can be squandered for me, it's incredible, how beautiful! I seem reluctant to leave the comfortable chair where I lie down, which is much more ideal than a barbershop chair. The sun in his room is so good and bright. I haven't seen a good sun in half a year, and my room is dusk all day. Seeing that there were no other patients, quietly, the fragrance of flowers in the bottle, I asked Dr. Liang, "Are you okay? Can I smoke a cigarette?" He didn't smoke and found me a fire. I lit a cigarette and took a puff, and I was sure whether I was talking to him about the impact of Gide's "Earth Grain" on patients or asking him how long he had been in Shanghai and whether he was lonely sometimes. And Liang spoke: "Your teeth are broken a lot, I'll check it for you." "Okay. He fiddled with a long pole, (a large stone particle burst out), and he said, "You have eight teeth to clean, one to install, two to repair; three doctors and one doctor, heal and repair; The other two, because of the patch of that tooth, must be filed and repaired. He was right, all these teeth were performed. He added and subtracted on a piece of paper, changed and scribbled, like a primary school student doing arithmetic, and couldn't make up the number, I really wanted to help him. Finally, it was calculated, which was equal to 240,000. After calculating, I think I really can't do less, and my scalp is a little itchy. I'm grateful and sorry. I'm grateful that he didn't use an abacus, and I'm most afraid of watching people plan to play quickly and accurately. I'm sorry I don't have that much money for a while. I smiled and said, "I'll come back at the end of the month." I had just taken a puff of the cigarette because he was going to check his teeth, and he took off the one in the ash sheet, and it was all burned. After a glance at it, I should go.出了门，我另外抽了根烟。梁说那个牙要是不装，两边的牙要松，要往缺口这儿倒；上头那个牙要长长。长长，唔，我想起小时看过些老太婆，一嘴牙落完了，留得孤仃仃的一个，长得伸出嘴唇外头，觉得又好玩又可怕。唔，我这个牙？……不至于。而且梁家孩子安慰我说短时间没有关系。我要是会吹口哨，这时我想一路吹回去。八年抗战，八颗牙齿，怎么这么巧！
When I went out, I smoked another cigarette. Liang said that if the tooth is not installed, the teeth on both sides should be loose and should be poured into the gap; the tooth on top should be long. Long, well, I remember seeing some old women when I was a child, one of the teeth fell out, leaving a lonely one, long enough to stick out of the lips, I thought it was fun and scary. Hmm, my teeth? …… Not. And the Liang family child comforted me and said that it doesn't matter for a short time. If I can whistle, then I want to blow all the way back. Eight years of anti-Japanese war, eight teeth, how can it be so coincidental!这又早过了好几个月底了，那个缺口已经没有甚么不惯，仿佛那里从来也没有过一个甚么牙齿。我渐渐忘了我有一件很伟大的志气须完成，这些牙须要拾掇一下。我没有理由把我安排得那么精美的经济设计为此而要经过一番大修改。我不去唱戏，脸歪不歪也不顶在意。我这人真懒得可以。只是这两天一向偏劳它的右臼齿又微有老熟之意，教我不得不吃得更斯文，更秀气，肚子因而容易饿了，不禁有时心里要动一动。我想起梁的话，牙齿顶好不要拔，可惜的，装上去总不是自己的了。但一切如在日光下进行的事，很平和，似有若无，不留痕迹，顺流而下。我离老还很远，不用老想到身体上有甚么东西在死去。
It was already several months earlier, and there was nothing unfamiliar about the gap, as if there had never been a tooth there. I gradually forgot that I had a great ambition to complete, and that these teeth had to be picked up. I had no reason to make such a beautifully arranged economic design so overhauled for this. I didn't sing, and I didn't care whether my face was crooked or not. I'm too lazy to do it. It's just that the right molar, which has been working hard for the past two days, is slightly mature, and I have to eat more elegantly and delicately, so my stomach is hungry easily, and I can't help but feel a stir sometimes. If I think of the beam, the teeth should not be pulled out, but unfortunately, it is not my own to install it. But everything that happens in the sun is very peaceful, as if there is nothing, leaving no trace, and flowing down the river. I'm still far from getting old, so I don't have to think about what is dying in my body.前天在路上碰着一个人，好面熟，我们点了点头，点得并不僵。——这是谁？走过好几步，我这才恍然想起，哦，是给我看牙齿的那个梁医生。我跟他约过，……不要紧，在他的职业上，这样的失信人是常常会碰到的。
The day before yesterday, I met a person on the road, so familiar, we nodded, and the noddes were not stiff. ——Who is this? After walking several steps, I suddenly remembered, oh, it's Dr. Liang who showed me my teeth. I made an appointment with him,...... It doesn't matter, in his profession, such dishonest people are often encountered.战争到甚么时候才会结束？战争如海。哼，我这是说到那里去了，殆乎篇成，半折心始，我没想到会说了这么多。真不希望这让S看见，她要难过的。
When will the war end? War is like the sea. Hmph, I'm talking about where I went, almost finished, half-hearted, I didn't expect to say so much. I really don't want S to see this, she will be sad.
[1] 本篇原载《文学杂志》1947年第二卷第四期。初收《汪曾祺全集》第一卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。

囚犯

囚犯[1]
[1] This article was originally published in Literary Magazine, Volume 2, Issue 4, 1947. First received in the first volume of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998. Prisoner [1]我们在河堤上站了一下，让跟我们一齐出城的犯人先过浮桥。是因为某种忌讳，不愿跟他们一夥走，还是对他们有一种尊重，（对于不幸的人，受苦难的人，或比较接近死亡的人的尊重？）觉得该让他们走在前头呢？两者都有一点吧。这说不清，并无明白的意识，只是父亲跟我都自然而然的停下来了。没有说一句话，觉得要停一停。既停之后，我们才相互看了一眼。父亲和我离隔近十年，重相接处，几乎随时要忖度对方举止的意义。但是含浑而不刻露，因为契切，不求甚解。体贴之中有时不免杂一丝轻微嘲讽的，（不可药救的病症；嘲讽于那一段时间？）但像刚才那么偶然一相视却是骨肉之情的微波，风中之风，水中之水。这瞬间一小过程使我们彼此有不孤零之感，似乎我们全可从一个距离外看得到这里，父亲和儿子，差肩而立，凡此皆微妙不可具说。——看来自自然然，好像甚么都不为的站一站，好像要看一看对河长途汽车开来了没有，好像我要把提着的箱子放下来息一息力，我于此发现自己性格与父亲相似之处，纤细而含蓄。
We stood on the river embankment for a moment and let the prisoners who went out of the city with us cross the pontoon bridge first. Is it because of some kind of taboo, reluctant to go with them, or because of a respect for the unfortunate, the suffering, or those who are closer to death?) Do you think you should let them go ahead? A little bit of both. I can't explain it clearly, I don't have a clear awareness, but my father and I both stopped naturally. I didn't say a word, and I felt like I had to stop. After stopping, we looked at each other. My father and I have been separated for nearly ten years, and when we meet again, we have to think about the meaning of each other's behavior almost at any time. But it is vague and unrevealed, because it is urgent and does not seek much understanding. Thoughtfulness is sometimes mixed with a slight mockery, (an incurable disease; ridicule at that time?) But when we look at each other by chance like just now, it is the microwave of flesh and blood, the wind in the wind, and the water in the water. This small process of this moment makes us feel that we are not alone with each other, and it seems that we can all see here from a distance, father and son, standing shoulder to shoulder, all of which are subtle and indescribable. ——Seeing it comes naturally, as if standing for nothing, as if to see if the long-distance bus is coming to the river, as if I want to put down the box I am carrying to take a breather, and here I find that my personality is similar to that of my father, slender and subtle.我们差肩而立，看犯人过浮桥。
We stood shoulder to shoulder and watched the prisoners cross the pontoon bridge.犯人三个，由两个兵押着。他们本来都是兵，现在一是兵，一是犯人了。一个兵荷老七九步枪，一个则腰里一根三号左轮，模样是个副班长。——凡曾度营伍生活者皆一眼可以看出副班长与班长举动神情之间有多大差异。班长是官，副班长则常顾此失彼的要维持他的官与兵之间的两难地位，有治人的责任感，有治于人的委曲，欲仰承，欲俯就，在矛盾挣扎之中他总站不稳，而显得窝囊可笑。犯人皆交叉着绑着肩胛，背后各有长绳一根牵出，捏在后面荷枪的兵的手里。犯人也都穿着灰布军服，不过破旧污脏得多。但兵与犯人的分别还在于一个有小皮带，一个没有皮带约束而更无可假借的显出衣服的不合身。——不合身的衣服比破烂衣服更可悲悯。我忽然想起一个朋友怎么样也不肯换医院的“制服”。人格一半是衣服造成的，随便给你一件衣服就忽视了你是怎么一个人了。人要人尊重。两个犯人有帽子，但全戴得不是地方。一个还好，帽舌子歪在一边，虽然这个滑稽样子与他全身大不相称，但总算包住了他的头。另一个则没有戴实在，风一吹，或一根树枝挂一下即会落去的，看着很不舒服，令人有焦躁着急感，极想给他往下拉一拉。还有一个，则是科头，头发长得极蓊郁，（小时懒于理发，常被骂为“像个囚犯”，）很黑很黑，跟他的络腮胡子连为一片。倒是他还有点生气。他比较矮，但看起来还壮，虽经过折磨，还不是一下子即打得倒的人。（他们看样子不是新犯，已在大牢里关了不少日子，移案到甚么地方，提出来的。）他脚步较重，一步一步还照着自己意志走，似乎浮桥因为他的脚步而有看得出的起伏。他眼睛张得大大的，坦率而稚气的，农民的眼睛，不很瞀乱惊惶，健康正常的眼睛，从粗粗的眉毛下看出去。他似乎不大忧伤，不大想他作过的事和明天的运命。他简直不大想着他是个犯人。他甚么都不大想。一个简单淳朴的人。他现在若是想，想的是：我过浮桥。也许他还晓得到了对岸，坐一段汽车，过江，解到一个甚么地方去，其余他就不知道了，也不大想知道。这段路好像他曾经走过几次，很熟，也许就是生长于这一带的，所以他很有自信的走着。要是除去绳索和罪名，他像个带路人，很好的带路人。他平日一定有走在第一个的习惯。现在他们让他走在第一个也非偶然。但形式上他得服从身边那个副班长的指挥，正如平日在部队受指挥一样。副班长与他之间并无敌意，好像都是按照规矩来，你押人，我被押，大家作着一件人家派下来的事情，无从拒绝，全非得已。他们要共走一段路，共同忍受颠簸，耽误，种种不快，（到任何地方去总望能早点到达，）也许还有点同伴之谊。——他们常默默，话沉得很深，但一路上来，总有时候要谈两句甚么的吧。副班长没有一般下级军官的金牙，也没有那种可笑的狂傲。看样子他是个厚道人，他不时回头看看后面的犯人和那个荷枪的兵的眼色是可感的，好像问：走得动吗？哦，这两个犯人可不成了！他们面色灰败，一个惨白，一个蜡渣黄，折倒他们的细脖子，（领圈显得特别宽大，）已经撑不起他们的头。衰弱，虚乏，半透明，像是已经死过一次。他们机械的迁动脚步，踏不稳，不能调节快慢，每一脚都不知踏在甚么地方。恐怕用怎么节奏明显的音乐也无法让他们走得合拍，他们已经不能受感染。他们已经忘了走路的方法。他们脑子里布满破碎的，阴暗的意象，这些意象永不会结构成一串完整思想，就一直搅动，摧残，腐蚀他们淡薄的生命。他们现在并不在恐怖中，但恐怖已经把他们腌透，而留下杂乱的痕迹。脸上永远是那个样子，嘴角挂下来，像总要呕吐，眼睛茫茫瞆瞆，缩缩怯怯。一切全惨淡，没有一个形体能在他们眼睛里留一鲜明印象。除了皮肉上的痛痒之外，似乎他们已经没有感觉；而且即是痛痒也模糊昏暗了。帽子歪戴的那一个，衣服上有一大片血渍，暗赤，如铁锈，已经不少日子。荷枪的兵也瘦蒿蒿的。虽然他打着绑腿，但凄哀的神情使他跟那两个戴帽子犯人成了一组。他不时把枪往上提一提，显然不大背得动，枪托子常常要敲着他的腿。因为那个络腮胡子犯人比较吸引我，所以对后面三个人没有能细看。
There are three prisoners, escorted by two soldiers. They were all soldiers, but now one is a soldier and the other is a prisoner. One soldier carries an old 79 rifle, and the other has a No. 3 revolver at his waist, looking like a deputy squad leader. ——Anyone who has lived in the camp can see at a glance how much difference there is between the deputy squad leader and the squad leader's expression. The squad leader is an official, and the deputy squad leader often cares about one thing and the other to maintain the dilemma between his officers and soldiers. The prisoners were all crossed and tied with shoulder blades, and a long rope was pulled out behind their backs, which was pinched in the hands of the soldiers carrying guns behind. The prisoners were also wearing gray cloth uniforms, but they were much more shabby and dirty. But the difference between soldiers and prisoners is that one has a small belt, and the other has no belt restraints, and the other shows the misfit of the clothes. ——Ill-fitting clothes are more pitiful than tattered clothes. I suddenly remembered a friend who refused to change into a hospital "uniform". Half of your personality is caused by clothes, and just giving you a piece of clothing ignores how you are. People want respect. Two prisoners had hats, but they were all worn out of place. One was okay, the tongue of the hat was crooked to the side, although this funny appearance was not commensurate with his whole body, but it finally covered his head. The other one didn't wear it, it would fall when the wind blew, or a branch would fall when it was hung, which looked very uncomfortable and made people feel anxious and anxious, and they wanted to pull him down. The other is Ketou, whose hair is extremely lush, (he was lazy to get a haircut when he was a child, and was often scolded as "like a prisoner"), very dark and dark, and his beard was connected to it. But he was still a little angry. He was relatively short, but he looked strong, and although he had been tortured, he was not a person who could be defeated at once. (They didn't seem to be new criminals, they had been in prison for many days, and they moved the case somewhere and brought it up.) His steps were heavy, and he walked according to his own will, as if the pontoon had ups and downs because of his footsteps. His eyes were wide open, frank and childish, and the peasant's eyes were not very confused and panicked, and his healthy and normal eyes could be seen from under his thick eyebrows. He didn't seem to be very sad, he didn't think much about what he had done or his fate tomorrow. He didn't think much about him as a prisoner. He didn't think much about anything. A simple and simple person. If he thinks now, what he thinks: I will cross the pontoon bridge. Maybe he still knows the other side, takes a car, crosses the river, and goes to a certain place, but he doesn't know the rest, and he doesn't want to know much. He seems to have walked this road several times, he is very familiar with it, maybe he grew up in this area, so he walks with confidence. If you remove the rope and charges, he is like a guide, a good guide. He must have a habit of walking first. It is no accident that they let him walk first. But formally, he has to obey the command of the deputy squad leader next to him, just like he is usually commanded in the army. There is no hostility between the deputy squad leader and him, it seems that they all follow the rules, you detain people, I am detained, everyone is doing something sent by others, there is no way to refuse, it is completely unavoidable. They have to walk a long way together, endure bumps, delays, all kinds of unhappiness together, (wherever you go, you always hope to arrive early), and maybe there is a bit of companionship. ——They are often silent and their words are deep, but along the way, there are always times when they have to talk about something. The deputy squad leader does not have the golden teeth of ordinary junior officers, nor does he have that ridiculous arrogance. It seems that he is a kind person, and he looks back at the prisoner behind him and the soldier with the gun from time to time, and the eyes are palpable, as if asking: Can you walk? Oh, these two prisoners can't be! Their faces were gray, one pale, the other waxy, and their thin necks were broken, and they could no longer support their heads. Weak, weak, translucent, as if they had died once. Their steps were mechanically moving, unsteady, unable to adjust their speed and slowness, and they did not know where each foot was stepping. I am afraid that no rhythmic music can make them walk in sync, they can no longer be infected. They have forgotten how to walk. Their minds are full of broken, dark images that will never be structured into a complete string of thoughts, and continue to stir, destroy, and corrode their thin lives. They are not in terror now, but terror has pickled them and left a messy trace. The face was always like that, the corners of the mouth hung down, as if he was always about to vomit, his eyes were blank, and he was timid and timid. Everything was bleak, and no body could leave a clear impression in their eyes. Except for the pain and itch on the flesh, they seemed to have no feeling; and even the pain and itch were blurred and dim. The one who wore the hat crookedly had a large blood stain on his clothes, dark red, like rust, for many days. The soldier with the gun was also thin. Although he was wearing leggings, his sad expression made him a group with the two prisoners in the hat. He lifted his gun up from time to time, obviously not moving his back, and the butt of the gun often had to hit his leg. Because the bearded prisoner was more attractive to me, I couldn't take a closer look at the three people behind me.岸上人多注目于这个悲惨的队列。
他们已经过了河。
我忽然记了记今天是甚么日子。
People on the shore are paying attention to this tragic queue. They have already crossed the river. I suddenly remembered what day it was.初春，但到处仍极荒凉。泥土暗。河水为天空染得如同铅汁，泛着冷冷的光。东北风一起，也许就要飘雪。汽车路在黑色的平野上。有两三只乌鸦飞。
It was early spring, but it was still very desolate everywhere. The soil was dark. The river dyed the sky like lead juice, glowing with a cold light. With the northeast wind, it might snow. The car road was on the black plain. Two or three crows flew.城在我们后面，细碎的市声起落绸缪。好几批人从我们身边走下河堤。
父亲跟我看了一眼，不说话，我们过浮桥。
The city is behind us, and the sound of the city rises and falls. Several groups of people walked down the river embankment from us. My father glanced at me, didn't speak, and we crossed the pontoon.大家抢着上汽车。车站码头上顶容易教人悲观，大家尽量争夺一点方便舒服。但这样的场面见得也多了，已经不大有感触。等都上去了，父亲上去，然后是我。看父亲得到一个比较安稳站处，我看看有甚么地方可以拉一拉我的手。而在我后面上来了那几个犯人。他们简直弄不清楚人家怎么把他们弄上来的。车门关上，车上人窜窜动动，我被挤到一个人缝里，勉强把一只脚放平，那一只则怎么摆都不是地方，我只有伸手捞着上面的杠子，把全身重量用一只胳臂吊起来。我想把腰伸伸直，可是实在不可能。好吧，无所谓，半个多钟头就到江边。我试一回头，勉强可以看到父亲半面，他的颧骨跟一只肩膀。父亲点点头，答说：我很好，管你自己吧。我想，在人群中你无法跟要在一起的人在一起，一冲一撞，拉得多牢的手也只有撒开。我就我的头可以转动的方向一巡视，那个矮壮犯人不知在甚么地方。副班长好像没有上来，大概跟司机坐到一处去了，这点门槛他懂。那个荷枪的兵笔直的贴在车门犄角，一个乡下人的笠子刚刚顶在他的脸前面，不时要擦着他的鼻子，而逼得他一脸尴尬相。两个有帽子犯人，我知道，都在我身边。他们那里也不要在，既然已经关上了车，总就得有块地方，毫无主意的他们就被挤到这儿来了。甚么地方对他们全一样，他们没有求舒服的心，他们现在根本不知道在甚么地方。我面前是两个女客，她们是甚么模样我才不在乎，有一个好像是个老太太。我尝试怎么样可以把肋骨放平正一点，而车子剧烈的摇晃了一下，一个身体往我背上一靠，他的手拉了一下我的衣服。是我身后那个犯人。甚么样的一只手！又生满了疥疮，我皮肤一紧，这感觉是不快的。我本能的有一点避让之意。似乎我的不快立刻传过给他，拉了一下，他就放开了。他站不稳，我知道。他的胳臂无法伸直，伸直了也够不到杠子，而且这样英勇的生的争取的姿势根本就是他不会有的。他攀扶不到甚么东西，习于被播弄了。我正想我是不是不该避让，一面又向右顾看那另一个犯人的手无意识的画动了两下，第二下更大的晃动又来了，我蓦然有了个决定，像赌徒下出一注，把我的身体迎给他！他懂得，接受了我的意思，一把抓住了。这不难，在生活的不断的抉择之中，这样的事情是比较易于成就的，因为没有时间让你掂斤播两的思索。我并没有太用力激励自己。请恕我，当时我对自己是有一点满意的。我如此作并非因为全车人都嫌弃他们，在这么紧密的地方还远之唯恐不及，而我愤怒，我要反抗。我是个不大会愤怒的人，我也能知道人没有理由把不愉快事情往身上拉，现在是甚么时代！我知道他身后必尚有一点空隙，我跟他说：“你蹲下来”。蹲下来他可以舒服些。我叫右边那一个也蹲下来。这只是半点钟的事，但如果可能，我想不太伤劳我的那一只胳臂，他们一蹲下来，好像松动了一点，我可以挪一挪脚步了。可是当我偏了偏腰时，一只手上来拉住了我的袖子。我这才看了看我面前那个女客，二十大几，也许三十出头，一个粉白大团脸。她皱着眉头用两个指头拉我，我看了看那两个指头，不大方的指头，肉很多，秃秃的，一个鸡心形赤金戒指。好像这两个指头要我生了一点气，我想不理她，我凭甚么要给你遮隔住这两个囚犯，一下了车你把早上吃的稀饭吐出来也不干我的事。然而我略扁了扁嘴，不大甘愿的决定了，就这么斜吊着身子吧，好在就是半个钟头的事。这才真是牺牲！我看了看那个老太太，真可怜，她偎在座位里，耗子似的眼睛看我的脸。那个梳着在她以为很时式的头发的女人（她一定用双妹老牌生发油！）这才算放了心，努力看着窗外。
Everyone rushed to get into the car. The top of the station pier is easy to make people pessimistic, so everyone tries to compete for a little convenience and comfort. But I have seen many such scenes, and I don't feel much anymore. When everyone went up, my father went up, and then I was there. Seeing that my father got a more stable place to stand, I saw where I could pull my hand. And the prisoners came up behind me. They couldn't figure out how they got them up. The door was closed, the people in the car were moving, I was squeezed into a crack in a person, barely flattening one foot, and the other was not a place. I wanted to straighten my waist, but it was impossible. Well, it doesn't matter, it will take more than half an hour to reach the river. I tried to turn around and could barely see half of my father's face, his cheekbones and one shoulder. My father nodded and replied: I'm fine, just take care of yourself. I think you can't be with the person you want to be with in the crowd. I looked in the direction my head could turn, and the short prisoner didn't know where he was. The deputy squad leader didn't seem to come up, and probably sat in the same place with the driver, and he understood this threshold. The soldier with the gun was straight in the corner of the car door, and a countryman's hat had just been put in front of his face, brushing his nose from time to time, forcing him to look embarrassed. Two prisoners with hats, I know, are by my side. They don't want to be there, since the car has been closed, there must be a place, and they are squeezed here without any idea. What kind of place is the same for them, they don't have a comfortable heart, they don't know where they are now. There were two female guests in front of me, I didn't care what they looked like, one of them seemed to be an old lady. I tried to flatten my ribs a little, and the car shook violently, and a body leaned against my back, and his hand pulled my clothes. It was the prisoner behind me. What kind of hand! It was covered with scabies again, and my skin was tight, which was unpleasant. I instinctively had a little sense of avoidance. It seemed that my displeasure was immediately transmitted to him, and after a pull, he let go. He couldn't stand steadily, I knew. His arms couldn't be straightened, and he couldn't reach the bar even if he was straight, and he wouldn't have such a heroic posture at all. He couldn't climb anything, and he was used to being played. I was wondering if I shouldn't have avoided it, and while looking to the right, the other prisoner's hand unconsciously moved twice, and the second bigger shaking came, and I suddenly made a decision, like a gambler, to welcome my body to him! He understood, accepted my meaning, and grabbed it. This is not difficult, in the constant choice of life, such things are relatively easy to achieve, because there is no time for you to think about it. I didn't push myself too hard. Please forgive me, I was a little satisfied with myself at the time. I didn't do this because everyone in the car disliked them, and I was afraid that they would be too far away in such a close place, and I was angry, and I wanted to resist. I am not a very angry person, and I know that people have no reason to pull unpleasant things on their bodies, what kind of era it is! I knew there must be a little gap behind him, so I said to him, "You squat down." He would be more comfortable to squat. I asked the one on the right to squat down too. It was only half an o'clock, but if possible, I thought it wouldn't hurt my arm too much, and as soon as they squatted down, it seemed to loosen a little, and I could move my steps. But when I tilted my back, a hand came up and grabbed my sleeve. Only then did I look at the female guest in front of me, in her twenties, maybe in her early thirties, with a big pink and white face. She frowned and pulled me with two fingers, and I looked at those two fingers, not generous fingers, a lot of meat, bald, a chicken heart-shaped red gold ring. It seemed that these two fingers made me a little angry, I wanted to ignore her, why should I cover these two prisoners for you, and you spit out the porridge you ate in the morning and don't do my business. However, I flattened my mouth a little, and I decided not to be willing, just hang myself like this, fortunately, it was only half an hour. This is what a sacrifice! I looked at the old lady, how pitiful, she was snuggled up in the seat, looking at my face like a mouse. The woman who was combing her hair in what she thought was very fashionable (she must use her sister's old hair tonic oil!) This was considered relieved, and I tried to look out the window.这个倒楣女人叫我嘲笑自己起来。这半点钟你好伟大，又帮助犯人，又保护妇女，你成了英难！你不怕虱子，不怕疥疮，而且不怕那张俗气的粉脸，小市民的，涂了廉价雪花膏的胖脸！（老实说对着这样的脸比两个犯人靠在身上更不好受，更不幸。）——借了这半点钟你成了托尔斯泰之徒，觉得自己有资格活下去，但你这不是偷巧么？要是半点钟延长为一辈子，且瞧你怎么样吧。而且这很重要的，这两个犯人在你后面；面对面还能是一样么？好小子，你能够在他们之间睡下来么？……
This unlucky woman told me to laugh at myself. You are so great at this half o'clock, helping prisoners and protecting women, you have become a hero! You are not afraid of lice, you are not afraid of scabies, and you are not afraid of that tacky pink face, of a petty townsman, with a fat face smeared with cheap alabaster paste! (To be honest, it is more uncomfortable and unfortunate to have such a face than two prisoners.) —Borrowing this half o'clock you have become a Tolstoy disciple and feel worthy of living, but are you not a cunning? If half an o'clock is extended for a lifetime, and see how you do. And it is very important, these two prisoners are behind you; can they be the same face to face? Good boy, can you sleep between them? ……我相信这个车里有一个魔鬼。不过幸好我得用力挂住自己，我的胳臂的酸麻给解了一点围，我不陷在这些挑拨性的思索之中。我希望时间快点过去。
I believe there is a devil in this car. But fortunately, I had to hang myself hard, and the numbness in my arm was relieved a little, and I didn't get caught up in these provocative thoughts. I hope time passes quickly.好了，果然快，车停了。我一心下去取那只箱子，我们得赶上这一班过江轮渡。
一切都已过去，女人，犯人，我的胳臂的酸麻，那些无用的嘲讽，全过去了！外面的空气新鲜得多。我跟父亲又在一起。
Okay, sure enough, the car stopped. I'm focused on going down to get that box, and we have to catch this river ferry. Everything is gone, the woman, the prisoner, the numbness in my arms, those useless ridicule, all passed! The air outside is much fresher. My father and I are together again.在船上，父亲要了个小房舱。是的，我们要舒舒服服坐一坐，还可以在铺上歪一歪。父亲递给我烟，划了火，那一壶茶已经泡开了，他洗了洗杯子，给我倒了一杯。我看着他用他的从容雍与的风度作这一切，但不想起来叫他让我来。我的背上不快之感又爬上来，虽不厚重，可有黏性，有似涂了一层油。喝了一口茶，忽然我心里涌起了一股真情。我想刚才在车上，父亲一定不时看一看我。我非常喜慰于我有一个父亲，一个这样的父亲。我觉得有了攀泊，有了依靠。我在冥冥蠢蠢之中所作事情似乎全可向一个人交一笔账，他则看也不看，即收下搁起了。他不迫胁我，不挑剔，不讥刺我，不用锋利的或钝缺的是非锯解我。他不希望，指导我作甚么，但在他饱阅世故的眼睛，温和得几乎是淡漠的眼睛（我得坦白说，有时我为这种类似的淡漠所激恼，）远远的关注下，我成了一个人。我不过分胡涂，尤其重要的是也不太清楚，而且只能虽然有点伤心的捐弃了我的夸张，使我的行为不是文字，使我平凡。——虽然，我还不知道到底该怎么活下去。今天晚上，我就要离开我的父亲，到一个大城市中去。
On the boat, my father asked for a small cabin. Yes, we want to sit comfortably and crouch on the bunk. My father handed me a cigarette, struck the fire, the pot of tea was already brewed, he washed the cup, and poured me a cup. I watched him do all this with his calm demeanor, but I didn't want to get up and ask him to let me come. The feeling of discomfort climbed up my back again, although it was not heavy, but it was sticky, as if it had been coated with a layer of oil. After taking a sip of tea, a surge of true feelings suddenly welled up in my heart. I think my father must have looked at me from time to time in the car just now. I am very happy that I have a father, such a father. I feel that I have a climb and a support. It seemed that everything I had done in my ignorance could be accounted for to a person, but he didn't look at it, and he accepted it and put it aside. He didn't threaten me, he didn't criticize me, he didn't mock me, he didn't use sharp or blunt right and wrong to see me away. He didn't want to instruct me on anything, but under the distant attention of his well-read eyes, which were almost indifferent (I have to confess, sometimes I am annoyed by this kind of indifference), I became a person. I was not too foolish, and especially importantly, I didn't know very well, and I could only abandon my exaggeration, albeit a little sadly, so that my behavior was not a word, and made me ordinary. —Although, I don't know how to live yet. Tonight I am leaving my father and going to a big city.那几个犯人现在不知在那里了，也许也在这只船上吧。我管不着了。那个科头犯人的样子我记在心里，大概因为他有一种美，一种吸力。我想他会在一个甚么地方忽然逃跑了。他跑不了，那个副班长会拔出左轮枪不加思索的向他放射。犯人会死于枪下。我仿佛已经看到那幅图像。这是注定的，没有办法的悲剧。我心里乱起来。想起一个举世都说他对于人，对于人生没有兴趣，到末了躲到禅悟中去的诗人的话：
Those prisoners don't know where they are now, maybe they're on this boat too. I can't control it anymore. I remember the appearance of the head prisoner in my heart, probably because he has a kind of beauty, a kind of suction. I think he will suddenly run away somewhere. He can't escape, and the deputy squad leader will pull out his revolver and shoot it at him without thinking. The prisoner will die under the gun. I think I have seen that image. This is a doomed, unavoidable tragedy. My heart was in turmoil. I remembered the words of a poet who said that he had no interest in people or life, and eventually hid in Zen enlightenment:“世间还有笔啊，我把你藏起来吧。”

[1] 本篇原载《人世间》1947年第二卷第一期；初收《邂逅集》，文化生活出版社1949年4月，文字略有改动。

异秉

异秉[1]
"There are still pens in the world, I'll hide you." [1] This article was originally published in "The World", Volume 2, Issue 1, 1947; First received "Encounter Collection", Cultural Life Publishing House, April 1949, with slight changes in the text. Heterogeneous [1]一天已经过去了。不管用甚么语气把这句话说出来，反正这一天从此不会再有。然而新的一页尚未盖上来，就像火车到了站，在那儿喷气呢，现在是晚上。晚上，那架老挂钟敲过了八下，到它敲十下则一定还有老大半天。对于许多人，至少在这地的几个人说起来，这是好的时候。可以说是最好的时候，如果把这也算在一天里头。更合适的是让这一段时候独立自足，离第二天还远，也不挂在第一天后头。
The day has passed. No matter what tone you use to say this, this day will never come again. However, a new page has not yet been covered, just like a train has arrived at the station, where it is spraying, and it is night. In the evening, the old wall clock has struck eight times, and by the time it strikes ten, it must be a long time. For many people, at least a few people here, this is a good time. It can be said that it is the best time, if you count it in one day. It is more appropriate to let this period be independent, far from the next day, and not hang behind the first day.晚饭已经开过了。
“用过了？”
“偏过偏过，你老？”
“吃了，吃了。”
Dinner has already been served. "Have you used it?" "Biased, are you old?" "Eat, eat."照例的，须跟某几个人交换这么两句问询。说是毫无意思自然也可以，然而这也与吃饭不可分，是一件事，非如此不能算是吃过似的。
这是一个结束，也是一个开始。
As usual, you have to exchange such two inquiries with a few people. It's natural to say that it's meaningless, but this is also inseparable from eating, it's one thing, otherwise it can't be regarded as eaten. This is an end and a beginning.账簿都已一本一本挂在账桌旁边“钜万”斗子后头一溜钉子上，按照多少年来的老次序。算盘收在柜台抽屉里，手那么抓起来一振，梁上的珠子，梁下的珠子，都归到两边去，算盘珠上没有一个数字，每一个珠子只是一个珠子。该盖上的盖了，该关好的关好。（鸟都栖定了，雁落在沙洲上。）只有一个学徒的在“真不二价”底下拣一堆货，算是做着事情。但那也是晚上才做的事情。而且他的鼻涕分明已经吸得大有一种自得其乐的意趣，与白天挨骂时吸得全然两样。其余的人或捧了个茶杯，茶色的茶带烟火气；或托了个水烟袋，钱板子反过来才搓了的两根新媒子；坐着靠着，踱那么两步，搓一搓手，都透着一种安徐自在。一句话，把自己还给自己了。白天他们属于这个店，现在这个店里有这么几个人。
The account books have been hung one by one on the nails behind the "Juwan" bucket next to the account table, according to the old order of many years. The abacus was put away in the counter drawer, and the beads on the beam and the beads under the beam all went to both sides, and there was no number on the abacus beads, and each bead was just a bead. It's time to put the lid on, and it's time to close it. (The birds are settled, and the geese land on the sandbar.) There is only one apprentice picking a bunch of goods under the "true price", which is considered to be doing something. But that's also something I do at night. And his snot was clearly sucking a lot of self-pleasure, which was completely different from sucking when he was scolded during the day. The rest of the people either held a teacup, and the brown tea had fireworks; or held a hookah, and the money board was rubbed in turn with two new mediums; Sitting and leaning, pacing two steps, rubbing your hands, all exuding a sense of ease. In a word, give yourself back. During the day, they belonged to this store, and now there are so many people in this store.每天必到的两个客人早已来了，他们把他们的一切都带了来，他们的声音笑貌，委屈嘲讪，他们的胃气疼和老刀牌香烟都带来了。像小孩子玩“做人家”，各携瓜皮菜叶来入了股。一来，马上就合为一体，一齐渡过这个“晚上”像上了一条船。他们已经聊了半天，换了几次题目。他们唏嘘感叹，啧啧慕响，讥刺的鼻音里有酸味，鄙夷时披披嘴，混和一种猥亵的刺激，舒放的快感，他们哗然大笑。这个小店堂里洋溢感情，如风如水，如店中货物气味。
The two guests who must come every day have already arrived, and they have brought everything about them, their voices and laughter, grievances and ridicule, their stomach aches and old knife cigarettes have been brought. Like children playing "being a family", each brought melon peels and vegetable leaves to enter the shares. As soon as it came, it immediately became one, and it was like getting on a boat through this "night" together. They have been chatting for a long time and changed the topic several times. They sighed, tsk, there was a sour taste in their sarcastic nasal voices, and when they were contemptuous, they put on their shawls, mixed with an obscene stimulation and relaxed pleasure, and they laughed loudly. This small shop is full of emotions, like wind and water, like the smell of goods in the store.而大家心里空了一块。真是虚应以待，等着，等王二来，这才齐全。王二一来，这个晚上，这个八点到十点就甚么都不缺了。
今天的等待更是清楚，热切。
王二呢，王二这就来了。
And everyone felt empty in their hearts. It's really a virtual wait, wait, wait for Wang Er to come, and then it's complete. As soon as Wang Er came, this night, there was nothing missing from eight o'clock to ten o'clock. Today's wait is even clearer and eager. Where is Wang Er, Wang Er is here.王二在这个店前廊下摆一个摊子，一个甚么摊子，这就难一句话说了。实在，那已经不能叫摊子，应当算得一个小店。摊子是习惯说法。王二他有那么一套架子，板子；每天支上架子，搁上板子：板上上一排平放着的七八个玻璃盒子，一排直立着的玻璃盒子，也七八个；再有许多大大小小搪瓷盆子，钵子。玻璃盒子里是瓜子，花生米，葵花籽儿，盐豌豆，……洋烛，火柴，茶叶，八卦丹，万金油，各牌香烟，……盆子钵子里是卤肚，薰鱼，香肠，煠虾，牛腱，猪头肉，口条，咸鸭蛋，酱豆瓣儿，盐水百叶结，回肠豆腐干。……一交冬，一个朱红蜡笺底下洒金字小长方镜框子挂出来了，“正月初一日起新增美味羊羔五香兔腿”。先生，你说这该叫个甚么名堂？这一带人呢，就省事了，只一句“王二的摊子”，谁都明白。话是一句，十数年如一日，意义可逐渐不同起来。
Wang Er set up a stall under the front porch of this store, what kind of stall it is, which is difficult to say in one sentence. In fact, it can no longer be called a stall, it should be regarded as a small shop. Stalls are customary sayings. Wang Er has such a set of shelves and boards; every day he sets up shelves and boards: a row of seven or eight glass boxes lying flat on the board, and a row of upright glass boxes, also seven or eight; there are also many large and small enamel pots and bowls. The glass box is filled with melon seeds, peanuts, sunflower seeds, and salted peas,...... Candles, matches, tea, gossip pills, balm, and various brands of cigarettes,...... The basin bowl is braised tripe, smoked fish, sausage, shrimp, beef tendon, pig's head meat, mouth strips, salted duck eggs, sauce watercress, brine louver knots, ileal dried tofu. …… As soon as winter fell, a small rectangular mirror frame sprinkled with gold letters under a vermilion wax paper was hung up, "From the first day of the first lunar month, a delicious lamb and spiced rabbit leg will be added." Sir, what kind of hall do you think this should be called? As for the people in this area, it is easy to worry, and everyone understands just one sentence "Wang Er's stall". The words are a sentence, and the meaning can gradually change for more than ten years.晚饭前后是王二生意最盛时候。冬天，喝酒的人多，王二就更忙了。王二忙得喜欢。随便抄一抄，一张纸包了；（试数一数看，两包相差不作兴在五粒以上，）抓起刀来（新刀，才用趁手），刷刷刷切了一堆；（薄可透亮，）当的一声拍碎了两根骨头：花椒盐，辣椒酱，来点儿葱花。好，葱花！王二的两只手简直像做着一种熟练的游戏，流转轻利，可又笔笔送到，不苟且，不油滑，像一个名角儿。五寸盘子七寸盘子，寿字碗，青花碗，没带东西的用荷叶一包，路远的扎一根麻线。王二的钱龙里一阵阵响，像下雹子。钱龙满了时，王二面前的东西也稀疎了：搪磁盆子这才现出他的白，王二这才看见那两盏高罩子美孚灯，灯上加了一截纸套子。于是王二才想起刚才原就一阵一阵的西北风，到他脖子里是一个冷。一说冷，王二可就觉得他的脚有点麻木了，他掇过一张凳子坐下来，膝碰膝摇他的两条腿。手一不用，就想往袖子里笼，可是不行，一手油！倒也是油才不皴。王二回头，看见儿子扣子。扣子伏在板上记账，弯腰曲背，窝成一团。这孩子！一定又是“姜陈韩杨”的韩字弄不对了，多一划少一划在那里一个人商量呢。
Before and after dinner is the peak of Wang Er's business. In winter, there are more people drinking, and Wang Er is even busier. Wang Er is busy and likes it. Just copy it, a piece of paper is wrapped; (try to count it, the difference between the two packs is more than five,) grabbed a knife (a new knife, only used handy), brushed and cut a bunch; (thin and translucent,) smashed two bones with a bang: peppercorn salt, chili sauce, and some chopped green onions. Okay, chopped green onions! Wang Er's two hands are like playing a skillful game, the flow is light, but it is delivered with a pen, not scrupulous, not slippery, like a famous character. Five-inch plates, seven-inch plates, longevity bowls, blue and white bowls, a pack of lotus leaves for those who didn't bring anything, and a twine for those who were far away. There was a burst of noise in Wang Er's money dragon, like hail. When the money dragon was full, the things in front of Wang Er were also sparse: the magnetic basin showed his white, and Wang Er saw the two high-cover Mobil lamps, and a piece of paper cover was added to the lamp. So Wang Er remembered that the northwest wind had been blowing just now, and it was cold in his neck. As soon as he said it was cold, Wang Er felt that his feet were a little numb, so he picked up a stool and sat down, shook his legs with his knees. As soon as he didn't use his hands, he wanted to put them in his sleeves, but no, he had oil! It's also oil. Wang Er turned around and saw his son's button. The button lay on the board to keep accounts, bent over, and nestled in a ball. This kid! It must be the Korean character "Jiang Chen Han Yang" that is wrong again, one more stroke and one less stroke to discuss it there.里边谈笑声音他听得见，他入神，皱眉，张目结舌，笑。他们说雷打泰山庙旗杆，这事他清楚，他很想插一句，脚下有欲动之势。还是留在凳子上吧！他不愿留下扣子一个人，零碎生意却还有几个的。
He could hear the sound of laughter inside, he was fascinated, frowned, tongue-tied, and laughed. They said that the thunder hit the flagpole of Taishan Temple, and he knew this, and he really wanted to interject, and there was a momentum to move under his feet. It's better to stay on the stool! He didn't want to leave the button alone, but there were a few pieces of business.到承天寺幽冥钟声音越来越清楚，拉洋车的徐大虎子，一路在人家墙上印过走马灯似的影子，王二把他老婆送来的晚饭打开，父子两个吃起来。照例他们吃晚饭时抽大烟的烤鸭架子挟了个酒瓶来切搧风。放下碗，打更的李三买去羊尿泡。再，大概就不会有人来了。王二又坐了一会，今天早一点吧，趁三碗饭的暖气未消，把摊子收拾了，一件一件放到店堂后头过道里来。
When they arrived at Chengtian Temple, the sound of the underworld bell became clearer and clearer, Xu Dahuzi, who pulled the foreign car, printed a marquee-like shadow on the wall of the house all the way, Wang Er opened the dinner sent by his wife, and the father and son ate it. As usual, they had a wine bottle on the roast duck rack that smoked a lot during dinner to cut the wind. Put down the bowl and buy sheep urine bubbles from Li San, who was on the night shift. Again, probably no one will come. Wang Er sat for a while again, let's do it a little earlier today, while the heating of the three bowls of rice was not gone, he cleaned up the stall and put it in the aisle at the back of the store one by one.王二东西多，他跟他扣子两个人还得搬三四趟。店堂里这几位是每天看熟了，然而他们还是看，看他过来，过去，像姑娘看人家发嫁妆。用手用脚的是这两个人，然而好像大家全来合作似的。自然这其间淡漠热烈程度不同。最后至那块镜框子摘下来，王二从过道里带出一捆白天买好的葱。王二把他的葱放在两脚之间而坐下了。坐在那张空着的椅子上。
Wang Er has a lot of things, and he and his buttons have to move three or four times. These people in the store are familiar every day, but they still look at him, watch him come over, and go over, like a girl watching someone give a dowry. It was these two people who used their hands and feet, but it seemed that everyone was cooperating. Naturally, the degree of indifference and enthusiasm is different. Finally, when the frame was removed, Wang Er took out a bundle of green onions bought during the day from the aisle. Wang Er put his green onions between his feet and sat down. Sit on the empty chair.“二老板！生意好？”
“托福托福，甚么话，‘二老板！’不要开玩笑好不好！”
"Second boss! Good business? ” "TOEFL TOEFL, what are you talking about, 'Second boss!' Don't joke about it, okay? ”王二这一坐下，大家重新换了一遍烟茶：王二一坐下，表示全城再没有甚么活动了。灯火照在人家槅子纸上，河边园上乌青菜叶子已抹了薄霜。阻风的船到了港，旅馆子茶房送完了洗脚汤。知道所有人都已得到舒休，这教自己的轻松就更完全。
Wang Er sat down, and everyone changed the smoke and tea again: Wang Er sat down, indicating that there was no more activity in the city. The lights shone on the paper of people's barrels, and the leaves of the black cabbage on the riverside garden had been lightly frosted. The wind-blocking boat arrived at the port, and the tea room of the hotel finished delivering the foot soup. Knowing that everyone has been comforted, this teaches oneself to be more relaxed.谈话承前启后的接下来。
The conversation continues from the past.这里并未“多”这么一个王二。无庸为王二而把一套话收起来，或特为搬出一套。而且王二来，说话的人高兴，高兴多了一个人听。不止多了一个人听，是来了个听话的人。王二从不打断别人的话，跟人抬杠，抢别人的话说。他简直没有甚么话，听别人的。王二总像知道得那么少，虚怀若谷的听，听得津津有味，“唉”，“噢”，诚诚恳恳的惊奇动色，像个小孩子。最多，比方说像雷打泰山庙旗杆，他知道，他也让你说，末了他补充发挥几句，而已。王二他大概不知道谦虚这两个字到底该怎么讲，于是他就谦虚得到了家了。
There is not "many" such a Wang Er here. There is no need to put away a set of words for Wang Er, or move out a set of words. And when Wang Er came, the person who spoke was happy, and he was happy that one more person listened. There was more than one person listening, but an obedient person came. Wang Er never interrupted other people's words, raised the bar with others, and robbed other people's words. He simply didn't have anything to say, listening to others. Wang Er always seemed to know so little, listened humbly, listened with relish, "Alas", "Oh", sincerely surprised, like a child. At most, for example, like thunder hitting the flagpole of Taishan Temple, he knows, he also let you say, and at the end he adds a few words, that's all. Wang Er probably didn't know how to say the word modesty, so he got a home with humility.这里的人，自然不会有甚么优越感。王二呢，他自己要自己懂得分寸。这里几位，都是店里的“先生”，两个客人，一个在外地做过师爷，看过琼花观的琼花；一个教蒙馆，他儿子扣子都曾经是他学生。王二知道自己决写不出一封“某某仁翁台电”的信，用他自己的话说，“不敢乱来。”
The people here naturally do not have any sense of superiority. As for Wang Er, he himself has to know how to measure himself. Here are the "gentlemen" in the store, two guests, one has been a master in other places and has seen Qionghua Qionghua; one is a teaching hall, and his son Buckle was once his student. Wang Er knew that he would never be able to write a letter from "so-and-so Renweng Taipower", and in his own words, "I dare not mess around." ”叫一声“二老板”的，当然有一种调侃的意思在。不过这实在全非恶意，叫这么一声真是欢欢喜喜的。为王二欢喜，简直连嫉妬的意思都没有。那个学徒的这时把货拣完了，一齐掳到一张大匾子里。他看看老《申报》，晓得一个新名词，他心里念“王二是个‘幸运儿’。”他笑，笑王二是个幸运儿，笑他自己知道这三个字。
Calling "Second Boss" certainly has a kind of ridicule. But this is really not malicious at all, and it is really joyful to call it like this. Rejoicing for Wang Er didn't even mean jealousy. The apprentice finished picking the goods at this time and took them all into a large plaque. He looked at the old "Declaration" and knew a new term, and he read in his heart, "Wang Er is a 'lucky man'." He laughed, laughing that Wang Er was a lucky man, laughing that he knew these three words.王二真的是不敢当。他红了若干次脸才能不红。（他是为“二老板”而红脸。）
Wang Er really didn't dare to be. He blushed several times before he couldn't blush. (He blushed for the "second boss".) ）王二随时像做官的见上司一样，不落落实实的坐，虽然还不至于“斜签着”。即是跟他儿子，他老婆在一处，甚至一个人，他也从不往椅子背上一靠，两条腿伸得挺挺的。他的胳臂总是贴着他的肋骨。他说话时也兴奋，激动，鼓舞，但动跳的是他的肌肉，他的心，他不指手画脚，有为加重语气而来一个响榧子。他吃饭，尽管甚么事都没有，也是赶活儿一样急急吃了。喝茶，到后头大锡壶里倒得一杯，咕噜噜灌下去，不会一口一口的呷，更不会一边呷，一边把茶杯口在牙齿上轻轻的叩。就说那捆葱，他不会到临走时再去拿吗，可他不，随手就带了来。王二从不缺薄，谢三秀才就是谢三秀才，不是甚么“黑漆皮灯笼谢三秀才”。他也叫烤鸭架子为烤鸭架子，那是因为烤鸭架子姓名久经湮没，王二无法觅访也。
Wang Er sat down like an official to meet his boss at any time, although he was not "obliquely signed". Even with his son, his wife in the same place, even alone, he never leaned against the back of the chair, and his legs were stretched straight. His arms were always close to his ribs. He was also excited, excited, and encouraged when he spoke, but it was his muscles that were beating, his heart, he did not point fingers, and he came with a rattle to aggravate the tone. He ate, even though there was nothing to do, he ate in a hurry as if he were in a hurry. Drinking tea, pouring a cup into the big tin pot at the back, gurgling it down, not sipping it one by one, let alone gently tapping the mouth of the teacup on his teeth while sipping. Let's just say that the bundle of green onions, won't he go to get it before leaving, but he didn't, he brought it casually. Wang Er is never lacking, Xie San Xiucai is Xie San Xiucai, not "black patent leather lantern Xie San Xiucai". He also called the roast duck rack a roast duck rack, because the name of the roast duck rack has been obscured for a long time, and Wang Er cannot find it.“王二的摊子”虽然已经像一个小店了，还是“王二的摊子”。
今天实在是王二的摊子最后一天了。明天起世界上就没有王二的摊子。
Although "Wang Er's Stall" is already like a small shop, it is still "Wang Er's Stall". Today is really the last day of Wang Er's stall. From tomorrow, there will be no Wang Er's stall in the world.王二赁定了隔壁旱烟店半间门面。旱烟店虽还开着门，这两年来实在生意清淡，本钱又少，只能养两个刨烟师傅，一个站柜的火食，王二来，自然欢迎。老板且想到不出一年，自己要收生意，一齐顶给王二。王二的哥哥王大是个挑箩的，也对付着能做一点木匠活，（王大王二原不住在一齐，这以后，王二叫他搬到他家里来住。）已经丁丁东东的弄了两天，一个小柜台即将完成。王二又买了十几个带盖子的洋油铁箱，一口玻璃橱子，一张小桌子，扣子可以记记账。准备准备，三天之后即可搬了过去。
Wang Er rented half of the façade of the dry tobacco shop next door. Although the dry tobacco shop is still open, the business has been light in the past two years, and the capital is small. The boss thought that within a year, he would take over the business and give it to Wang Er. Wang Er's brother Wang Da is a picky basket, and he also deals with being able to do a little carpenter work. It has been two days, and a small counter is about to be completed. Wang Er bought more than a dozen foreign oil iron boxes with lids, a glass cabinet, a small table, and buttons for accounting. Ready to prepare, you can move in three days.能不搬，王二决不搬。王二在这个檐下吹过十几个冬天的西北风，他没有想到要舒服舒服。这么一丈来长，四尺宽的地方他爱得很。十几年来他在一定时候，依一定步骤在这里支开架子，搁上板子，那里地上一个坑，该垫一个砖片，那里一根椽子特别粗，他熟得很。春天燕子在对面电话线上唧唧呱呱，夏天瓦沟里长瓦松，蜘蛛结网，壁虎吃苍蝇，他记得清清楚楚。晚上听里边说话已成了个习惯。要他离开这里简直是从画儿上剪下一朵花来。而且就这个十几年里头，他娶了老婆生了扣子，扣子还有个妹妹。他这些盒子盆子一年一年多起来，满起来，可是就因为多起来满起来，他要搬家了。这么点地方实在挤得很。这些东西每天搬进搬出，在人家那儿堆了一大堆也过意不去。风沙大，雨大，下雪的时候，化雪的时候，就别提多不方便了。还有，他不愿意他的扣子像他一样在这个檐下坐一辈子。扣子也不小了。
If you don't move, Wang Er will never move. Wang Er had blown more than a dozen winter northwest winds under this eaves, and he didn't expect to be comfortable. He loves such a place that is about a foot long and four feet wide. For more than ten years, he has set up shelves and boards here according to certain steps, and there is a pit on the ground, a brick should be cushioned, and a rafter there is particularly thick, and he is very familiar. He remembers the swallows chirping on the opposite phone line in spring, the pines growing in the tile ditches in summer, the spiders weaving webs, and the geckos eating flies. It has become a habit to listen to the talk inside at night. Asking him to leave here is like cutting a flower from a painting. And in the past ten years, he married his wife and gave birth to Button, who also has a sister. His boxes and basins are full more than a year ago, but because they are full, he has to move. Such a place is really crowded. These things are moved in and out every day, and it is not easy to pile up a lot of them there. The wind and sand are heavy, the rain is heavy, and when it snows, when the snow melts, not to mention how inconvenient it is. Also, he doesn't want his buttons to sit under this eaves for the rest of his life like him. The buttons are not small either.你不难明白王二听到“二老板”时心里一些综错感情。
于是王二搬家了。王二这就不再在店前摆摊子了。
It is not difficult for you to understand that Wang Er had some mixed feelings in his heart when he heard the "second boss". So Wang Er moved. Wang Er no longer set up a stall in front of the store.虽然只隔一层墙，究竟是个分别。王二没事时当然会来坐坐，晚上尤其情不自禁的要溜过来的，但彼此将终不免有一分冷清。王二现在来，是来辞行了。他们没有想到这四个字：依依不舍，但说出来就无法否认，虽然只一点点，一点点，埋在他们心里。人情，是不可免的。只缺少一个倾吐罢了。然而一定要倾吐么？
Although it is only separated by a wall, it is a difference. Of course, Wang Er will come to sit down when he is fine, especially at night, and he can't help but slip over, but each other will inevitably be a little deserted. Wang Er is here now, to say goodbye. They didn't think of these four words: reluctant, but they couldn't deny it when they said it, although it was only a little bit, a little bit, buried in their hearts. Human favors are inevitable. There is only one thing missing. But do you have to pour out?王二呢，他是说来谈谈的。“谈谈”的意思是商量一点事情，甚么事情王二肯听听别人意见。今天更有须要向人请教的。他过三天。大小开了一爿店。是店得有个字号。这事前些日子大家早就提到过。
As for Wang Er, he is here to talk. "Talk" means to discuss a little thing, and Wang Er is willing to listen to other people's opinions on something. Today, I need to ask someone for advice. He will be in three days. A large and small shop has been opened. The store must have a name. This has been mentioned a few days ago.“二老板！黑漆招牌金漆字，如意头子上扎红彩。写魏碑的有崔老夫子，王二太爷石门颂。四个吹鼓手，两根杠子，嗨唷嗨唷，南门抬到北门！从此青云直上，恭喜恭喜！”
"Second boss! The black lacquer sign is painted with gold lacquer, and the ruyi head is tied with red color. The Wei monument was written by Old Master Cui, and the second grandfather of Wang Shimen Song. Four drummers, two bars, hi hi hi, the south gate is lifted to the north gate! From now on, congratulations! ”王二又是“托福托福，莫开玩笑。”自然心里也有些东西闪闪烁烁翻动。招牌他不想做，但他少不了有些往来账务，收条发单，上头得有个图章。他已经到市场逛了逛，买了两本蓝油夏布面子的新账本，一个青花方瓷印色盒子。他一想到扣子把一方万胜边枣木戳子蘸上印色，呵两口气，盖在一张粉莲纸上，他的心扑通扑通直跳，他一直想问问他们可给他斟酌定了，不好意思。现在，他正在盘算着怎么出口。他嘀咕着：“明天，后天，大后天，哎呀！——”他着急要来不及了。刻图章的陈老三认识，赶是可以赶的，总不能弄到最后一天去。他心里有事，别人说甚么事，那么起劲，他没听到。他脸上发热，耳朵都红了。
Wang Er is "TOEFL TOEFL, don't joke." Naturally, there were also some things in his heart that were flickering. He didn't want to do the signboard, but he had to do some accounting, receipt and issuance, and there had to be a stamp on it. He had already gone to the market and bought two new ledgers with blue oil summer cloth faces, and a blue and white square porcelain printing box. When he thought of the button dipping the jujube wood poke on the side of Wansheng, he took two breaths and covered it on a piece of pink lotus paper, his heart was pounding, he had always wanted to ask them, but he could give him a decision, sorry. Now, he was thinking about how to export it. He muttered: "Tomorrow, the day after tomorrow, the day after tomorrow, oh!" ——" He was in a hurry to be too late. Chen Laosan, who carved the stamp, knew that it was possible to catch up, but he couldn't get it to the last day. He had something in his heart, what others said, so excited, he didn't hear it. His face was hot and his ears were red.教蒙馆的陆先生叫了一声，
“王老二！”
“，甚么事陆先生？”
“你的那个字号啊，——”
“咹。”
“我们大家推敲过了。”
“承情承情！”
Mr. Lu of the Teaching Mongolian Hall shouted, "Wang Laoer!" "{{id_0000}}, what is Mr. Lu?" "Your font size,——" "Huh." "We have all scrutinized." "Accept the affection!"“乾啦，泰啦，丰啦，隆啦，昌啦，……都不大合适，这个，这个，你那个店不大，怕不大称。（王二正想到这个。）你末，叫王义成，你儿子叫王坤和，你不是想日后把店传给儿子吗，我们觉得还是从你们两个名字当中各取一个字，就叫王义和好了。你这个生意路子宽，不限甚么都可以做，也不必底下再赘甚么字，就叫‘王义和号’好了。如何，你以为？”
"Dry, Taila, Fengla, Longla, Changla,...... It's not very suitable, this, this, your store is not big, I'm afraid it won't be big. (Wang Er was thinking of this.) Don't you want to pass on the store to your son in the future, we think it's better to take a word from each of your two names, and call it Wang Yihe. Your business is wide, you can do anything, and you don't have to add any words below, just call it 'Wang Yihe'. How, what do you think? ”王二一句一句的听进去，他听王少堂说“武十回”打虎杀嫂也没这么经心，他一辈子没听过这么好听的声音，陆先生点火吃烟，他连忙：
“好极了，好极了。”
陆先生还有话：
Wang Er listened to it sentence by sentence, he heard Wang Shaotang say that "Wu Shihui" beat the tiger and killed his sister-in-law and didn't pay so much attention, he had never heard such a beautiful voice in his life, Mr. Lu lit a fire and smoked, he hurriedly: "Great, great." Mr. Lu also said:“图章呢，已经给你刻好了，在卢先生那儿。”
"The stamp has been engraved for you, at Mr. Lu's place."王二嘴里一声“啊——”他说不出话来。这他实在没有想到！王二如果还能哭，这时他一定哭。别人呢，这时也都应当唱起来。他们究竟是那么样的人，感情表达在他们的声音里，话说得快些，高些，活泼些。他们忘记了时间，用他们一生之中少有的狂兴往下谈。扣子已经把一盏马灯点好，靠在屏门上等了半天，又撑开罩子吹熄了。
Wang Er said "Ah-" He couldn't speak. He really didn't expect this! If Wang Er could still cry, he would definitely cry at this time. As for others, they should all sing at this time. What kind of people are they, their feelings are expressed in their voices, and they speak faster, higher, and more lively. They forgot about time and talked about it with the rare excitement in their lives. The button had already lit a lantern, leaned against the screen door and waited for a long time, and then opened the cover and blew it out.自然先谈了许多往事。这里有几个老辈子，事情记得真清楚。王二父亲甚么时候死的，那时候他怎么瘦得像个猴子，到粥厂拾个粮子打粥去。怎么那年跌了一交，额角至今有个疤，怎么挎了个篮子卖花生，卖梨，卖柿饼子，卖荸荠；怎么开始摆熏烧摊子；……王二痛定思痛，简直伤心，伤心又快乐，总结起来心里满是感激。他手里一方木戳子不歇的掂来掂去。
Naturally, we talked about a lot of past events first. There are a few old people here, and I remember things really clearly. When did Wang Er's father die, and how thin he was like a monkey at that time, and went to the porridge factory to pick up grain and make porridge. Why did he fall that year, and there is still a scar on his forehead, how did he carry a basket to sell peanuts, pears, persimmons, and water chestnuts; how to start setting up a smoked stall; …… Wang Er was painfully sad, sad and happy, and his heart was full of gratitude in summary. A wooden poke in his hand kept going back and forth.“一切是命。八个字注得定定的。抬头朱洪武，低头沈万山，猴一猴是个穷范单。除了命，是相。耸肩成山字，可以麒麟阁上画图。朱洪武生来一副五岳朝天的脸！汉高祖屁股上有七十二颗黑痣，少一颗坐不了金銮宝殿！一个人多少有点异像，才能发。”
"Everything is fate. Eight words are destined. Look up at Zhu Hongwu, bow your head to Shen Wanshan, monkey is a poor model. In addition to fate, it is a phase. Shrugged into a mountain character, you can draw a picture on the Qilin Pavilion. Zhu Hongwu was born with a face facing the sky! There are seventy-two black moles on the buttocks of Han Gaozu, and one less cannot sit in the Golden Luan Treasure Hall! A person has a little vision before he can send it. ”于是谈了古往今来，远山近水的穷达故事。
最后自然推求王二如何能有今天了。
王二这回很勇敢，用一种非常严重的声音，声音几乎有点抖，说：
So he talked about the story of poverty throughout the ages, distant mountains and rivers. Finally, I naturally asked how Wang Er could be today. Wang Er was very brave this time, and in a very serious voice, his voice almost trembled a little, and said:“我呀，我有一个好处：大小解分清。大便时不小便。喏，上毛房时，不是大便小便一齐来。”
他是坐着说的，但听声音是笔直的站着。
大家肃然。随后是一片低低的感叹。
这时门外一声：
"Me, I have an advantage: the size is clear. Don't urinate when you poop. Well, when you go to the hairy room, you don't pee at the same time. ” He speaks while sitting, but he stands straight when listening to the voice. Everyone was awe-inspiring. This was followed by a low sigh. At this time, there was a sound outside the door:“爹！你怎么还不回去？”
来的是王二女儿，瘦瘦小小，像他爹，她手里一张灯笼，女儿后面是他哥哥王大，王大又高又大，一脸络腮胡子，瞪着两眼。
"Dad! Why haven't you gone back yet? ” It was Wang Er's daughter, thin and small, like his father, she had a lantern in her hand, and behind the daughter was his brother Wang Da, who was tall and big, with a beard and staring at each other.那架老钟抖抖的一声一声的敲，那个生锈的钢簧一圈一圈振动，仿佛声音也是一个圈一个圈扩散开来，像投石子水，颤颤巍巍。数。铛，——铛，——铛，——铛，……一共十下。
The old clock shook id_00001 id_0000 one by one, and the rusty steel spring vibrated round by circle, as if the sound was spreading circle by circle, like throwing stones of water, trembling and majestic. Number. Pan ,—— pan,—— pan ,—— pan,...... A total of ten strokes.王二起来。
“来了来了。这么冷的天，谁教你来的！”
“妈！”
忽然哄堂大笑。
“少陪少陪。”
王二走了一步，又站着：
Wang Er got up. "It's coming. On such a cold day, who taught you to come! ” "Mom!" Suddenly burst into laughter. "Less companionship, less companionship." Wang Er took a step and stood again:“大后儿，在对面聚兴楼，给个脸，一定到，早到，没有甚么菜，喝一杯，意思意思，那天一早晨我来邀。
“少陪你老。少陪，卢先生。少陪，陆先生，……
"Da Hou'er, in the opposite Juxing Building, give a face, you must arrive, arrive early, there is no food, have a drink, meaning, I will invite you one morning that day. "Stay with you for a long time. Stay with me, Mr. Lu. Stay with me, Mr. Lu,......“扣子！把妹妹手上灯笼接过来！马灯不用点了，我拿着。”
大家目送王二一家出门。
"Button! Take the lantern in my sister's hand! I don't need to light the lantern, I'll hold it. ” Everyone watched Wang Er's family go out.街上这时已断行人，家家店门都已上了。门缝里有的尚有一线光透出来。王二一家稍为参差一点的并排而行。王大在旁，过来是扣子，王二护定他女儿走在另一边。灯笼的光圈幌，幌，幌过去。更锣声音远远的在一段高高的地方敲，狗吠如豹，霜已经很重了。
At this time, the street was cut off, and the doors of every store were open. There is still a ray of light shining through the cracks of the door. Wang Er's family walked side by side with a little unevenness. Wang Da was on the side, and it was a button when he came, and Wang Er escorted his daughter to walk on the other side. The aperture of the lantern is covered, covered, covered. The sound of the gong struck far away in a high place, the dog barked like a leopard, and the frost was already very heavy.“聋子放炮仗，我们也散了。”师爷与学究连袂出去，这家店门也阖起来。
学徒的上茅房。
十二月三日写成。上海
"The deaf set off firecrackers, and we dispersed." The master and the pedant went out hand in hand, and the door of the shop closed. The apprentice's hut. Written on December 3rd. Shanghai
[1] 本篇原载《文学杂志》1948年第二卷第十期。初收《汪曾祺全集》第一卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。1980年作者以同题重写这篇小说，参见《异秉》（二）。

1948年

1948年
[1] This article was originally published in Literary Magazine, Volume 2, No. 10, 1948. Originally collected in the first volume of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998. In 1980, the author rewrote the novel with the same title, see "Yi Bing" (2). In 1948白松糖浆[1]
White Pine Syrup[1]船开了，离岸已有一截子路。想下去的无法再下去，要上来的也上不来，岸边人看着船，船上人都已找到地方坐定了。人并不太多，空处尽有，不过半个多钟头即到对岸，随便哪里都行，又不是坐一辈子；常来常往的，谁说得出这船上最好的椅子是哪一张，只要没有别的原因，对于自己所占坐处都很容易满足。茶房沏茶水，打手巾，小贩叫卖吆喝，人一安定，他们开始活动起来。——进来了一个孩子。
The boat sailed, and there was a section of road offshore. Those who wanted to go down could no longer go down, and those who wanted to come up couldn't come up, and the people on the shore looked at the boat, and the people on the boat had found a place to sit. There are not too many people, there are all kinds of empty spaces, but it takes more than half an hour to reach the other side, anywhere, not for a lifetime; who can tell which chair is the best on this boat, as long as there is no other reason, it is easy to be satisfied with the place they occupy. The tea room made tea, beat handkerchiefs, vendors shouted, and as soon as the people settled down, they began to move. ——A child came in.他一身青布学生装，一顶学生常戴的军帽，青布的，不脏，也不是顶干净，大概是一星期前新洗的，但收拾得极见细心爱惜，每天晚上脱下时都好好的摺起挂好，绝不是随便往椅子上一团或顺手一撂盖在脚头被上。显然这是他最好的一件衣裳，他的一点荣光，他的财产，他的“资格”。帽舌子当然没有折断，戴得很正，比普通孩子戴得稍高一点，不扣在额头上。帽子不大挺括，好像淋过一场雨，这两天天阴，今天才放太阳。他大概……十三四岁，——不像——十六……，不，只有十三四岁！他发育得还正常，身材不高也不矮。只是样子早熟，他走进舱来的几步绝不像个十三四岁的孩子，不怯也不野，老老到到，沉沉稳稳，仿佛颇能独立，很有主意，然而实在毕竟还是个孩子，稍一注意就知道那点早熟的皮层实在很微薄，轻轻不费事即可揭去，一个孩子，一个小学六年级或者初中一二年级的太守规矩，太世故一点的好学生，一个小道学家，并不是没有调皮淘气的时候，但明白得失利害，不致闯祸犯法。若在学校里，同学多半不大会喜欢他的，也许受先生的暗示而不得不对他表示一分敬重；但先生自己尽管表面奖励，心里未尝不想他把真的一面拿出来，只是先生似乎不可以劝学生调皮淘气！幸亏有这点调皮淘气处，也许他才不致孤单离索罢。他眉目颇清秀，浅浅一个酒涡。——他进来了，走到舱中那根柱子前头，在放茶壶的那条长桌上放下皮箱，（似乎这根柱子，这张桌子给他一点依傍，让他不悬在空中似的，）站定了，鞠了一个躬，用一种虚伪做作的，文明戏式的，有腔有调，然而孩子的声音，高声朗诵起来：
He was dressed in a blue cloth student uniform, a military hat often worn by students, green cloth, not dirty, not clean, about a week ago, but it was cleaned up very carefully, and when he took it off every night, he folded it up and hung it well. Obviously this is his best dress, his little glory, his property, his "qualifications". Of course, the tongue of the hat is not broken, it is worn very properly, slightly higher than that of ordinary children, and is not buckled on the forehead. The hat is not very crisp, as if it has been drenched in a rain, and the sun has only been shining today on the cloudy sky. He probably ...... Thirteen or fourteen years old,—— not like sixteen ......, no, only thirteen or fourteen years old! He is still developing normally, neither tall nor short. It's just that he looks precocious, he walks into the cabin a few steps like a thirteen or fourteen-year-old child, neither timid nor wild, old to the extreme, calm and steady, as if he can be quite independent, very ideas, but after all, he is still a child, a little attention knows that the precocious cortex is really very thin, and it can be removed gently and without trouble. If in school, most of his classmates will not like him, maybe he will have to show some respect to him by the hint of his teacher; But although the gentleman himself was rewarded on the surface, he didn't want him to take out the real side in his heart, but the teacher didn't seem to be able to persuade the students to be naughty and naughty! Fortunately, with this bit of mischief, maybe he wouldn't be alone. His eyebrows were quite delicate, and he was a light wine vortex. ——He came in, walked to the pillar in the cabin, and put down the suitcase on the long table where the teapot was placed, (as if this pillar, this table, gave him a little support, so that he would not hang in the air,) stood still, bowed, and recited in a hypocritical and contrived, civilized drama, with a tone, but the child's voice recited loudly:“各位，我们中国人，最爱咳嗽。中国人体质衰弱，营养不良，动辄容易咳嗽吐痰。中山先生说，随便吐痰是我国人的不良习惯。吐痰固然是不良习惯，咳嗽也有伤身体，如若一时不治，难免养病成灾，影响气管肺脏，在在都极其危险可畏。咳嗽有好多种。有新咳；有老咳。有伤风外感；有五劳七伤。有干咳；有痰咳。有吐白痰；有吐黄痰。有妇人胎咳；有小儿夜咳。有五更咳；有百日咳。有年青断伤，痰中时见血丝；有老年气弱，咳时痰难吐出。有呛咳，有喘咳。……”
"Everyone, we Chinese love to cough the most. Chinese people are weak, malnourished, and prone to coughing and spitting at every turn. Mr. Sun Yat-sen said that spitting casually is a bad habit of our country. Spitting is a bad habit, and coughing can also hurt the body. There are many kinds of coughs. There is a new cough; there is an old cough. There is a cold; there is a five-labor and seven injuries. There is a dry cough; there is a phlegm cough. There is a spitting white sputum; there is spitting up yellow sputum. There is a woman's fetal cough; there is a child's night cough. There is a five-watch cough; there is whooping cough. There are young people who are broken, and blood is often seen in the phlegm; There is old age who is weak and difficult to spit out phlegm when coughing. There is choking and wheezing. ……”他说了不止五分钟，口齿十分清楚，换气，提头，顿逗呼应的地方也没有错甚么。用的是带淮安味的扬州话，有几个字是国音，阴平特别高显，入声则一律还是保留，可是那些咳嗽他多半并未见过遇过，有些字句意义他不大懂得，说起来很难动情，很难声色俱茂。他一定没有落了一句，可听起来总觉得生，腔调中如有裂缝，不是倾瓶泻水，一气呵成，不够流利。背的次数该还不顶多，也不少了，他还得老是想着背，除了一点淡漠，一点困惑，我听不出里面真的或是假的感情。就像这样，学校演说竞赛会上他可以稳稳的得个第二了，假如第一为一个圆脸大眼睛女同学拿去。在评判单上他得分最少的当是“姿势”一项，级任先生应当多教他的手臂怎么运动，伸出去，举起来，摊开手掌，一个一个竖起指头，……他这五分钟甚至脚底下都没有移动几回，就是笔直的站着说的，这未免太僵了。——唉，怯场倒不怯场了，对着这么些人，还看不出畏缩不安，可是并不吸引人，没有那种抓住听众的力量，他不是个讲演的天才，而且嗓音太高，太窄，太直，太干，有点左。
He spoke for more than five minutes, his speech was very clear, and there was nothing wrong with ventilating, raising his head, and teasing him. He used the Yangzhou dialect with Huai'an flavor, and a few words were national accents, the yin was particularly high, and the sound was still retained, but most of those coughs he had never met, and he didn't understand the meaning of some words, and it was difficult to be emotional, and it was difficult to be full of voice. He must not have dropped a sentence, but he always felt raw, and if there was a crack in the tone, it was not pouring water in one go, not fluent enough. The number of times he memorized should not be at most, not a lot, he still has to think about memorizing it, except for a little indifference, a little confusion, I can't hear the real or false feelings in it. Just like this, he can definitely get second in the school speech competition, if the first place is taken by a female classmate with a round face and big eyes. In the judging list, he scored the least in the "posture" item, and Mr. Ren should teach him how to move his arms, stretch them out, raise them, spread his palms, and raise his fingers one by one,...... He didn't even move a few times under his feet in the past five minutes, he just stood up straight and spoke, which was too stiff. ——Alas, stage fright is not stage fright, in front of such people, I can't see the cowering, but it is not attractive, without the power to grasp the audience, he is not a genius at speaking, and his voice is too high, too narrow, too straight, too dry, a little left.“……现在，敝公司精制一种白松糖浆，专治各种咳嗽。白松糖浆是以纯白的松子炼制而成的糖浆，它能化痰止咳，滋补润肺。不论久咳新咳，小儿咳，妇人咳，……有病可以治病，无病可以预防。……”
“…… Now, our company refines a kind of white pine syrup to treat all kinds of coughs. White pine syrup is a syrup made from pure white pine nuts, which can dissolve phlegm and relieve cough, nourish and moisten the lungs. Whether it is a long-term cough or a new cough, a child's cough, or a woman's cough,...... Diseases can be cured, and diseases can be prevented without diseases. ……”于是把小皮箱打开，手里拿着一瓶，摇着，走到各人面前。
“白松糖浆在上海本公司门市部售价二万六千元，镇江药房卖三万。这是广告性质，只收回清本，无非是推广介绍，只卖两万，有哪位先生要一瓶罢？……”
So he opened the small suitcase, held a bottle in his hand, shook it, and walked to everyone. "Baisong syrup is sold for 26,000 yuan in the Shanghai company's store department, and 30,000 yuan in Zhenjiang Pharmacy. This is an advertisement in nature, only the clearance is recovered, it is nothing more than a promotional introduction, only 20,000 yuan, which gentleman wants a bottle? ……”“带一瓶罢，送送人也好的。”
“要罢？……”
可是怪，这船舱里竟然没有一个咳嗽的！至少这会儿没有一个人咳一声。
"Just bring a bottle, and it's good to give it away." "Forget it? ……” But strangely, there was no one coughing in this cabin! At least no one coughed at this time.他还在一个一个问过去，态度彬彬有礼，熟习一切失望，都很含蓄，极其耐烦的一面摇着手中的瓶子，一面“劳驾”，“得罪”，从人前走过去。从演讲一变而为说话了，语调之中颇多了一点江湖习气，但确确实实更看出他真还是一个孩子，一个十三四岁的孩子，一个小学初中之间的学生！
He also asked one by one, with a polite attitude, familiar with all disappointments, very subtle, extremely impatient while shaking the bottle in his hand, while "working" and "offending", walking in front of people. From speech to speech, there is a little more jianghu habit in the tone, but it is true that he is really still a child, a thirteen or fourteen-year-old child, a student between elementary school and junior high school!当然他不单纯是为公司做广告，推销一瓶货，一定有若干好处的，公司另外还给不给报酬呢？批一批货，要不要先付一点钱？有一个什么折扣可打？他就是单在这只船上还有别的地方可去么？一天能卖多少瓶？要是一瓶也卖不出去？他趁船，不用票罢？要不要常常送船上人一点钱，或是送一瓶白松糖浆？没有病也能吃的，船上人是否因此不伤风也得咳两声？他怎么爱惜他的钱，他的货，又怎样表示大方，漂亮？要是遇到莽撞冒失人一头碰撒了他的小皮箱呢？上公司里批货，总有些手续，得说好些话？没有问题，二万绝对不是最低的价钱，一定可以讲价的，他怎样跟人讲价，怎么察言观色，见风使舵，趁热打铁？总有许多许多麻烦他得应付的，许多许多意外逼得他要哭！自负和自卑熬炼得他长大起来。他有一身衣帽——他的新鞋，家制青布鞋，鞋底还很白！
Of course, he is not just advertising for the company, promoting a bottle of goods, there must be some benefits, and the company will not pay for it? Do you want to pay a little money first? What discount is there? Is there anywhere else he can go on this ship alone? How many bottles can he sell in a day? If he can't sell a bottle? He takes advantage of the boat and doesn't need a ticket? Do you want to often give a little money to the people on the ship, or a bottle of white pine syrup? You can eat without illness, do the people on the ship have to cough twice without catching a cold? How can he cherish his money, his goods, and how can he show generosity and beauty? What if he encounters a reckless person and scatters his small suitcase? There are always some procedures in the company, and you have to say a lot of things? No problem, 20,000 yuan is definitely not the lowest price, you can definitely bargain, how does he bargain with others, how do he observe words and expressions, see the wind and steer, and strike while the iron is hot? There are always many, many troubles that he has to deal with, and many, many accidents force him to cry! Conceit and low self-esteem have made him grow up. He has a coat and hat - his new shoes, homemade blue cloth shoes, and the soles are still very white!“哎，白松糖浆，哎，纯白松子精炼所成，哎男女老幼通用，哎春夏秋冬咸宜，——”
"Hey, white pine syrup, hey, pure white pine nut refining, hey, men, women, old and young, hey, spring, summer, autumn and winter are suitable for ,——"什么时候果然进来了另外一个！一看脑袋就知道他的脚背一定很高，——高鼻梁高颧骨，高牙床，前额到后脑长极了，而左眼跟右眼距离得很近，他的屁股当然很小很小，可是声音倒是扁的，仿佛是从小腹处发出来的。
When did another one really come in! As soon as you look at your head, you know that the instep of his foot must be very high,—— high nose bridge, high cheekbones, high gums, forehead to back of the head is very long, and the left eye and right eye are very close, of course his buttocks are very small, but the sound is flat, as if it comes from the lower abdomen.他前年或是去年过了三十岁。他一百磅左右，有时他愿意自己胖一点。他胡子碴黄黄的，那倒没有甚么关系。脸上雀斑不少，似乎没有甚么办法可治。他认得字，会写信，他很喜欢“专此奉达敬请钧安”这一句，尤其是“钧安”，很能感动人。他读过千家诗，很羡慕解学士，自己也想能做做诗，他能看报，知道马歇尔杜鲁门，DDT，原子弹。他不抽烟，可是有时肯买一包，放在口袋里，到必须时拿出来请人，联络联络，他不会跟人打架，但可能有挨当兵的或甚么粗野人莫明其妙的打两个耳刮子的时候，他有时做梦得到一支自来水笔并且当了保长，眼前希望得最迫切的是有一个不管甚么样子的徽章别在身上，还有袜子后跟不要破得太大。不过公司虽然不发徽章，他现在的这个职业仍然是可感谢的，教他觉得屈辱的时候不比觉得矜骄的时候多。他老跟这个孩子搭挡，虽然当真遇到甚么事，他也不见得有办法，他没有能力，也没有胆量。不过他总以为他在提挈指导着他，他非他不可，一有机会他就训练他怎么做人，怎么处世，怎么怎么一篇大道理。他跟孩子只是职业上的关系？——有一点亲？像表兄弟？——堂兄弟？——都不像——是街坊？——是街坊？——大概。——哦，他想——孩子一定有一个寡母一个适年待字的姐姐，为他做脚上这双新鞋的姐姐，这个尖身子扁嗓子的人一定常往他家走动，看看老伯母，逢年过节还买一点礼物送去！看孩子面相他姐姐长得必不难看。她一点都不喜欢他，但当真以为弟弟会受到他好处也许——究竟她会不会嫁给他呢？
He was over thirty the year before last or last year. He weighed about a hundred pounds, and sometimes he was willing to gain a little fat himself. His beard is yellow, but it doesn't matter. There are a lot of freckles on his face, and there seems to be no way to treat it. He recognizes words, can write letters, and he likes the sentence "I specially ask Jun'an", especially "Jun'an", which is very touching. He has read thousands of poems, envied Scholar Xie, and wanted to be able to write poetry, he could read newspapers, and knew about Marshall Truman, DDT, and the atomic bomb. He doesn't smoke, but sometimes he is willing to buy a pack, put it in his pocket, take it out when necessary, contact someone, he will not fight with people, but there may be soldiers or some rough people who inexplicably scratch two ears, he sometimes dreams of getting a tap pen and becoming a security guard, and the most urgent thing in front of him is to have a badge pinned to his body no matter what it looks like, and the heel of his socks should not be too broken. However, although the company does not issue badges, he is still grateful for his current profession, teaching him that he feels humiliated no more often than when he feels proud. He always partners with this child, although he does not have a way when something happens, he has no ability, and he has no courage. But he always thought that he was guiding him, he had to be him, and whenever he had the opportunity, he would train him how to behave, how to behave, and how to make a big truth. Is he just a professional relationship with his children? - A little relative? Like a cousin? - Cousins? - Not like - are they neighbors? - Are they neighbors? - Probably. - Oh, he thought - the child must have a widow and a sister who is suitable for words, and the sister who makes these new shoes for him, this person with a pointed body and a flat voice must often walk to his house, see the old aunt, and buy some gifts for the holidays! Looking at the child's face, his sister must not be ugly. She didn't like him at all, but she really thought that her brother would benefit from him, maybe—would she marry him?孩子也并不喜欢他，他有时甚至从心底觉得他讨厌，但他还不能看清楚他，反抗他，为了自己的利益，他宁可对他服从。也许这样的依仗是虚空的，然而一点朦胧的信任使他自己可以更坚强些，在没有遇到打击之前。
The child didn't like him either, and sometimes he even felt that he hated him from the bottom of his heart, but he couldn't see him clearly, rebelled against him, and would rather obey him for his own benefit. Perhaps such a reliance is futile, but a little vague trust allows him to be stronger before he encounters a blow.“要罢？”
“有哪位先生要，带一瓶送送人？”
"Do you want it?" "Which gentleman wants to bring a bottle to give away?"然而客人兴趣更低，他手上那个瓶子反面正面都没有人再要看一眼了，阖起两只箱子，他们走出去。虽然这也许是最后一个舱了，可是他们的样子总像是还要赶到甚么地方去，匆匆忙忙，毫不颓唐懒散。只有出门的那一会他们倒极像是息息相关，合作无间的同伴，他们用同样的，经过配演的姿势走出去甚至脚步的起落都是同时的。
However, the customer's interest was even lower, and no one wanted to look at the reverse side of the bottle in his hand, so they closed the two boxes and walked out. Although this may be the last cabin, they always looked like they were going somewhere, in a hurry, not lazy. Only when they went out did they seem to be closely related and cooperative companions, and they used the same posture to walk out and even the ups and downs of their steps at the same time.一个客人，——两个，咳起来，倒不定是有病，因为要想憋着憋着，于是憋不住了。另一个伏在窗口看对岸青山的客人正抽着烟，听到咳声，忍不住一笑，往里流的烟倒呛出来，也几乎咳出声音。
There are two guests in the ,——, and when they cough, they may be sick, because they want to hold back, so they can't hold back. Another guest who was lying in the window looking at the green mountains on the other side was smoking, and when he heard the cough, he couldn't help but laugh, choking on the smoke flowing in, and almost coughed up.
[1] 本篇原载1948年4月12日天津《民国日报》。

邂逅

邂逅[1]
[1] This article was originally published in Tianjin's Republic of China Daily on April 12, 1948. Encounter[1]船开了一会，大家坐定下来。理理包箧，接起刚才中断的思绪，回味正在进行中的事务已过的一段的若干细节，想一想下一步骤可能发生的情形；没有目的的擒纵一些飘忽意象；漫然看着窗外江水；接过茶房递上来的手巾擦脸；掀开壶盖给茶房沏茶；口袋里摸出一张什么字条，看一看，又搁了回去；抽烟；打盹；看报；尝味着透入脏腑的机器的浑沉的震颤，——震得身体里的水起了波纹，一小圈，一小圈；暗数着身下靠背椅的一根一根木条；什么也不干，听而不闻，视而不见，近乎是虚设的“在”那里；观察，感觉，思索着这些，……各种生活式样摆设在船舱座椅上，展放出来；若真实，又若空幻，各自为政，没有章法，然而为一种什么东西范围概括起来，赋之以相同的一点颜色。——那也许是“生活”本身。在现在，则是“过江”，大家同在一条“船”上。
The boat sailed for a while, and everyone sat down. Sorting out the box, picking up the thoughts that had just been interrupted, recalling some details of the passage of the ongoing affairs, and thinking about what might happen in the next step; aimlessly escape some wandering images; looking at the river outside the window casually; taking the handkerchief handed over by the tea room to wipe his face; lifting the lid of the pot to make tea in the tea room; taking out a note from his pocket, looking at it, and putting it back; Smoke; Doze; Newspaper; tasting the heavy tremor of the machine that penetrated into the internal organs,—— the water in the body rippled, a small circle, a small circle; secretly counting the wooden strips of the backrest chair under him; do nothing, listen and do not hear, turn a blind eye, almost in a virtual "being"; observe, feel, think about these,...... All kinds of life styles are displayed on the cabin seats; if it is real, or if it is empty, it is governed separately, without rules, but it is summarized in the scope of something and given the same color. ——That may be "life" itself. Now, it is "crossing the river", and everyone is on the same "boat".在分割了的空间之中，在相忘于江湖的漠然之中，他被发现了，像从一棵树下过，忽然而发现了这里有一棵树。他是什么时候进来的呢？他一定是刚刚进来。虽没有人注视着舱门如何进来了一个人，然而全舱都已经意识到他，在他由动之静，迈步之间有停止之意而终于果然站立下来的时候，他的进来完全成为了一个事实。好像接到了一个通知似的，你向他看。
In the divided space, in the indifference of forgetting the rivers and lakes, he was found, as if passing under a tree, and suddenly found that there was a tree here. When did he come in? He must have just come in. Although no one was watching how a person came in through the hatch, the whole cabin was already aware of him, and when he finally stood up from the stillness of movement and the intention of stopping between steps, his entry became a complete fact. As if you had received a notice, you look at him.你觉得若有所见了。
活在世上，你好像随时都在期待着，期待着有甚么可以看一看的事。有时你疲疲困困，你的心休息，你的生命匍伏着像一条假寐的狗，而一到有甚么事情来了，你醒豁过来，白日里闪来了清晨。
You think it's vague. Living in the world, you seem to be looking forward to something at any time, looking forward to something to see. Sometimes you are tired and sleepy, your heart rests, your life lies like a dog sleeping, and when something comes, you wake up, and the morning flashes in the daytime.常常也是一涉即过，清新的后面是沉滞，像一缕风。
It is often a wade through, and the fresh is followed by stagnation, like a wisp of wind.他停立在两个舱门之间的过道当中，正好是大家都放弃而又为大家所共有的一个自由地带。——他为什么不坐？有的是空座位。——他不准备坐，没有坐的意思，他没有从这边到那边看一看，他不是在挑选那一张椅子比较舒服。他好像有所等待的样子。——动人的是他的等待么？
He stopped in the aisle between the two hatches, which happened to be a free area that everyone had given up and shared for everyone. ——Why didn't he sit? Some were empty seats. ——He was not ready to sit, he had no intention of sitting, he did not look from here to there, he was not choosing which chair was more comfortable. He seemed to be waiting. ——Is it his waiting that is moving?他脉脉的站在那里。在等待中总是有一种孤危无助的神情的，然而他不放纵自己的情绪，不强迫人怜恤注意他。他意态悠远，肤体清和，目色沉静，不纷乱，没有一点焦躁不安，没有忍耐。——你疑心他也许并不等待着甚么，只是他的神情总像在等待着甚么似的而已。
He stood there with a pulse. There was always a look of loneliness and helplessness in waiting, but he did not indulge his emotions, nor did he force others to pity and pay attention to him. He had a distant demeanor, a clear complexion, calm eyes, no confusion, no restlessness, no patience. ——You may not be waiting for anything, but his expression is always as if he is waiting for something.他整洁，漂亮，颀长，而且非常的文雅，身体的态度，可欣可感，都好极了。难得的，遇到这样一个人。
He is neat, beautiful, long, and very elegant, and his physical attitude is gratifying and palpable, all of which are very good. It's rare to meet such a person.，——他是个瞎子，——他来卖唱，——他是等着这个女孩子进来，那是他女儿，他等着茶房沏了茶打了手巾出去，（茶房从他面前经过时他略为往后退了退，让他过去，）等着人定，等着一个适当的机会开口。
,—— He was a blind man,—— he came to sing,—— he was waiting for this girl to come in, it was his daughter, he waited for the tea room to make tea and make a handkerchief and go out, (he stepped back slightly when the tea room passed in front of him, let him pass), waiting for someone to settle, waiting for a proper opportunity to speak.她本来在那里的？是等在舱门外头？她也进来得正是时候，像她父亲一样，没有人说得出她怎么进来的，而她已经在那里了，毫不突兀，那么自然，那么恰到好处，刚刚在点儿上。他们永远找得到那个千载一时的成熟的机缘，一点都不费力。他已经又在许多纷纭褶曲的心绪的空隙间插进他的声音，不知道甚么时候，说了一句简单的开场白，唱下去了。没有跳踉呼喝，振足拍手，没有给任何旅客一点惊动，一点刺激，仿佛一切都是预先安排，这支曲子本然的已经伏在那里，应当有的，而且简直不可或缺，不是改变，是完成；不是反，是正；不是二，是一。……
Where was she? Waiting outside the hatch? She also came in at the right time, like her father, no one could tell how she got in, and she was already there, unobtrusive, so natural, so just right, just on the spot. They could always find that once-in-a-lifetime opportunity of maturity, without any effort. He had already inserted his voice in the gaps of many folded moods, and at some point, he said a simple opening sentence and sang it. There was no staggering shouting, no clapping of hands, no alarm or excitement to any passenger, as if everything had been prearranged, and the piece was already there, as it should be, and it was simply indispensable, not a change, but a completion; not reverse, but positive; not two, but one. ……一切有点出乎意外。
Everything was a bit unexpected.我高兴我已经十年不经过这一带，十年没有坐这种过江的渡轮了，我才不认识他。如果我已经知道他，情形会不会不同？一切令我欣感的印象会不存在？——也不，总有个第一次的。在我设想他是一种甚么人的时候我没有想出，没有想到他是卖唱的。他的职业特征并不明显，不是一眼可见，也许我全心倾注在他的另一种气质，而这种气质不是，或不全是生成于他的职业，我还没有兴趣也没有时间来判断，甚至设想他是何以为生的？如果我起初就发现——为什么刚才没有，一直到他举出来轻轻拍击的时候我才发现他手里有一付檀板呢？
I am glad that I have not passed through this area for ten years, and I have not taken such a ferry across the river for ten years, so I do not know him. If I had known him, would it have been different? Would all the impressions that pleased me not exist? - No, there is always a first. I did not think of what kind of person he was, I did not think that he was a singer. His professional characteristics are not obvious, not visible at a glance, and perhaps I have poured my heart into his other temperament, which is not, or not all produced in his vocation, and I have not yet had the interest or time to judge, or even imagine what he makes for a living? If I had found out at first—why not, until he held it up and slapped it lightly, that I found that he had a sandalwood board in his hand?从前这一带轮船上两个卖唱的，一个鸦片鬼，瘦极了，嗓子哑得简直发不出声音，咤咤的如敲破竹子；一个女人，又黑又肥，满脸麻子。——他样子不像是卖唱的？其实要说，也像，——卖唱的样子是一个甚么样子呢？——他不满身是那种气味。腐烂了的果子气味才更强烈，他还完完整整，好好的。他样子真是好极了。这是他女儿，没有问题。
In the past, there were two singers on the steamer in this area, an opium ghost, extremely thin, hoarse and unable to make a sound, like knocking through bamboo; a woman, dark, fat, with a face full of pockmarks. ——Does he look like a singer? In fact, what does it look like to be a ,—— singer? ——He was dissatisfied with the smell of his body. The smell of rotten fruit was stronger, and he was still intact and good. He looked really good. This is his daughter, no problem.他唱的甚么？
What is he singing?有一回，那年冬天特别冷，雪下得大极了，河封住了，船没法子开，我因事须赶回家去，只有起早走，过湖，湖都冻得实实的，船没法子过去，冰面上倒能走。大风中结了几个伴在茫茫一片冰上走，心里感动极了，抽一枝烟划一枝洋火好费事！一个人划洋火成了全队人的事情。……（我掏了一枝烟抽，）远远看见那只轮船冻在湖边，一点活意都没有，被遗弃在那儿，红的，黑的，都是可怜的颜色。我们坐过它很多次，天不这么冷，现在我们就要坐它的。忽然想起那两个卖唱的。他们在那里了呢，雪下了这么多天了。沿河堤有许多小客栈，本来没有甚么人知道的，都有了生意了，近年下，起早走路的客人多，都有事。他们大概可以一站一站的赶，十多里，二三十里，赶到小客栈里给客人解闷去，他们多半会这么着的。封了河不是第一次，路真不好走。一个人走起来更苦，他们其实可以结成伴。——哈，他们可以结婚！
Once, that winter was very cold, the snow fell so heavily, the river was blocked, and the boat couldn't sail, I had to rush home for something, only to get up early and cross the lake, the lake was really frozen, the boat couldn't pass, but I could walk on the ice. In the strong wind, I formed a few companions to walk on the vast ice, and I was very moved, and it was so troublesome to smoke a cigarette and draw a fire! One person rowing a fire has become a matter for the whole team. …… (I took out a cigarette) I saw the steamer frozen by the lake from a distance, without any vitality, abandoned there, red and black, all pitiful colors. We have sat on it many times, it was not so cold, and now we are going to sit on it. Suddenly I remembered the two singers. They are there, it has been snowing for so many days. There are many small inns along the river embankment, and no one knew about it, but they all have business, and in recent years, there are many guests who get up early and walk, and they have problems. They can probably rush one stop at a time, more than ten miles, twenty or thirty miles, and rush to the small inn to relieve the guests' boredom, and they will most likely do this. It's not the first time the river has been blocked, and the road is really not easy to walk. It's harder to walk alone, and they can actually form a partner. ——Ha, they can get married!这我想过不止一次了，我颇有为他们做媒之意。“结婚”，哈！但是他们一起过日子很不错，同是天涯沦落人，彼此有个照应。可是怪，同在一路，同在一条船上卖唱，他们好像并没有同类意识，见了面没有看他们招呼过，谈话中也未见彼此提起过，简直不认识似的。不会，认识是当然认识的。利害相妨，同行妒忌？未必罢，他们之间没有竞争。
I've thought about this more than once, and I have the intention of being a matchmaker for them. "Get married", ha! But they live a very good life together, they are both fallen people at the ends of the earth, and they take care of each other. But strangely, they don't seem to have the same kind of consciousness all the way, they don't see them greet each other when they meet, and they don't mention each other in the conversation, as if they don't know each other. No, of course you know each other. Interests are in the way, peers are jealous? Not necessarily, there is no competition between them.男的鸦片抽成了精，没有几年好活了，但是他机灵，活络得多，也皮赖，一定得的钱较多。女的可以送他葬，到时候有个人哭他，买一陌纸钱烧给他。——你是不是想男的可以戒烟，戒了烟身体好起来，不喝酒，不赌钱，做两件新蓝布大褂，成个家，立个业，好好过日子，同偕到老？小孩子！小孩子！——不，就是在一个土地庙神龛鬼脚下安身也行，总有一点温暖的，——说不定他们还会生个孩子。
The man's opium has been extracted into essence, and he has not been able to live well for a few years, but he is clever, much more active, and he must get more money. The woman can send him to the funeral, and when the time comes, someone will cry for him and buy a piece of paper money to burn for him. ——Do you think that men can quit smoking, get better after quitting smoking, don't drink, don't gamble, make two new blue cloth coats, start a family, start a business, live a good life, and grow old together? Child! Child! ——No, even if it's under the feet of a ghost in a land temple shrine, there is always a little warmth,—— maybe they will have a child.现在，他们一定结伴而行了，在大风雪中挨着冻饿，挨着鸦片烟，十里二十里的往前赶一家一家的小客栈了。小客栈里咸菜辣椒煮小鲫鱼一盘一盘的冒着热气，冒着香，锅里一锅白米饭。——今天米价是多少？一百八？
Now, they must have traveled together, facing cold and hunger in the wind and snow, next to opium smoke, and rushing forward to the small inn one by one. In the small inn, the pickles and peppers boiled small crucian carp were steaming and fragrant one by one, and there was a pot of white rice in the pot. ——What is the price of rice today? One hundred and eight?下来一半（路程）了罢？天气好，风平浪静。
Halfway down? The weather is good and the wind is calm.他们不会结婚，从来没有想到这个上头去过。这个鸦片鬼不需要女人，这个女人没有人要。别看这个鸦片鬼，他要也才不要这个女人！他骨干肢体毁蚀了，走了样，可是本来还不错的，还起原来很有股子潇洒劲儿。那样的身段是能欣赏女人的身段，懂得风情的身段。这个女人没有女人味儿！鸦片鬼老是一段《活捉张三郎》，挤眉瞪眼，伸头缩脖子，夸张，恶俗，猥亵，下流极了。没法子。他要抽鸦片。可是要是没法子不听还是宁可听他罢。他聪明，他用两枝竹筷丁丁当当敲一个青花五寸盘子，敲得可是神极了，溅跳洒泼，快慢自如，有声有势，活的一样。他很有点才气，适于干这一行的，他懂。那个黑麻子女人拖把胡琴唱“你把那，冤枉事勒欧欧欧欧欧欧欧……”实在不敢领教。或者，更坏，不知那里学来的一段《黑风帕》。这个该死的蠢女人！
They won't get married, and they never thought of going to this place. This opium ghost doesn't need a woman, and no one wants this woman. Don't look at this opium ghost, he wants and doesn't want this woman! His backbone and limbs were damaged and out of shape, but he was not bad, and he was very dashing. That kind of figure is a figure that can appreciate a woman's figure and understand style. This woman is not feminine! The opium ghost is always a piece of "Catching Zhang Sanlang Alive", squeezing his eyebrows and staring, stretching his head and shrinking his neck, exaggerated, vulgar, obscene, and extremely obscene. There is no way. He wants to smoke opium. But if you can't help it, you'd rather listen to him. He is smart, he uses two bamboo chopsticks to knock on a blue and white five-inch plate, and the knocking is amazing, splashing, fast and slow, loud and powerful, and alive. He is very talented, suitable for this line of work, he understands. The black hemp woman mopped the huqin and sang "You put that, wronged things are ......" and really didn't dare to learn it. Or, worse, I don't know where I learned a piece of "Black Wind Pa". This damn stupid woman!他们秉赋各异，玩意儿不同，凑不到一起去。
真不大像是——这女孩子配不上他父亲，——还不错，不算难看，气派好，庄静稳重，不轻浮，现在她接她父亲的口唱了。
They have different poems and different things, and they can't get together. It's really not like - this girl is not worthy of his father,—— not bad, not ugly, imposing, solemn and steady, not frivolous, and now she has taken over her father's singing.有熟人懂得各种曲子的要问问他，他们唱的这种叫甚么调子。这其实应当说是一种戏文，用的是代言体。上台彩扮大概不成罢，声调过于逶迤曼长了。虽是两人递接着唱，但并非对口，唱了半天，仍是一个人口吻。全是抒情，没有情节。事实自《红楼梦》敷衍而出，黛玉委委屈屈向宝玉倾诉心事。每一段末尾长呼“我的宝哥哥儿来”，可是唱得含蓄低宛，居然并不觉得刺耳。颇有人细细的听，凝着神，安安静静，脸上恻恻的，身体各部松弛解放下来，气息深深，偶然舒一舒胸，长长透一口气，纸烟灰烧出一长段，跌落在衣襟上，碎了，这才霍然如梦初醒。有人低语：
If you have acquaintances who know all kinds of songs, ask him what tune they are singing. This should actually be said to be a kind of play, using a spokesperson. The stage dress is probably not enough, and the tone is too long. Although the two sang one after another, they were not the same person, and after singing for a long time, they were still kissing each other. It's all lyrical, no plot. The facts came out perfunctory from "Dream of Red Mansions", and Daiyu confided her feelings to Baoyu about her grievances. At the end of each paragraph, he shouted "My brother Bao is coming", but he sang it subtly and lowly, and it didn't feel harsh. There are quite a few people who listen carefully, concentrated, quiet, sympathetic on their faces, all parts of the body are relaxed and liberated, the breath is deep, occasionally relaxed their chests, took a long breath, and the paper soot burned out a long section, fell on the collar, and broke, and then woke up like a dream. Someone whispered:“他的眼睛——”
“瞎子，雀盲。”
“哦——”
"His eyes—" "Blind, blind." "Oh—"进门站下来的时候就觉得，他眼睛有点特别，空空落落，不大有光彩，不流动。可是他女儿没有进来之先他向舱门外望了一眼，他一扬头，样子不像瞎眼的人。瞎眼人脸上都有一种焦急愤恨，眼角嘴角大都要变形的，雀盲尤其自卑，扭扭捏捏，藏藏躲躲，他没有，他脸上恬静平和极了。他应当是生下来就双眼不通，不会是半途上瞎的。
When he entered the door and stood down, he felt that his eyes were a little special, empty, not very bright, and not flowing. But before his daughter came in, he glanced out of the hatch, and when he raised his head, he didn't look like a blind person. The blind man has a kind of anxiety and resentment on his face, and most of the corners of his eyes and mouth are about to be deformed, and the blind man is especially inferior, twisting, hiding and hiding, he doesn't, his face is very quiet and peaceful. He should have been blind at birth, and he wouldn't be blind halfway.女孩子唱的还不如她父亲。——听是还可以听。
The girl sings not as well as her father. ——Listen to it.这段曲子本来跟多数民间流行曲子一样，除了感伤，剩下就没有什么东西了，可是他唱得感伤也感伤，一点都不厉害。唱得深极了，远极了，素雅极了，醇极了，细运轻输，不枝不蔓，舒服极了。他唱的时候没有一处摇摆动幌，脸上都不大变样子，只有眉眼间略略有点凄愁，像是在深深思念之中，不像在唱。——啊不，是在唱，他全身都在低唱，没有那一处是散涣叛离的。他唱得真低，然而不枯，不弱，声声匀调，字字透达，听得清楚分明极了。每一句，轻轻的拍一板，一段，连拍三四下。女儿所唱，格韵虽较一般为高，但是听起来薄，松，含糊，的，她是受她父亲的影响，摹仿父亲而没有得其精华神髓，她尽量压减洗涤她的嗓音里的野性和俗气，可是她的生命不能与那个形式蕴合，她年纪究竟轻，而且性格不够。她不能沉缅，她心不专，她唱，她自己不听。她没有想跳出这个生活，她是个老实孩子。老实孩子，但不是没有一些片片段段的事情足以教她分心，教她不能全神贯注，入乎其中。
This piece was originally like most folk pop songs, except for sentimentality, there was nothing left, but he sang sentimentally and sentimentally, not great at all. The singing is very deep, far-reaching, elegant, mellow, delicate and light, not branching or spreading, and very comfortable. When he sang, there was no swaying curtain, his face did not change much, only a little sadness between his eyebrows and eyes, as if he was in deep longing, not like singing. ——Ah no, he was singing, he was singing low all over, and there was no part that was scattered and rebellious. He sang really low, but not withered, not weak, his voice was even, the words were transparent, and he could hear it very clearly. Each sentence, gently pat a board, a paragraph, three or four times in a row. The daughter sings, although the rhyme is higher than the average, but it sounds thin, loose, vague, , she is influenced by her father, imitating her father without getting the essence of it, she tries to reduce and wash the wildness and tackiness in her voice, but her life cannot be combined with that form, she is young, and her personality is not enough. She can't be deeply immersed, she is not focused, she sings, she doesn't listen herself. She didn't want to jump out of this life, she was an honest child. Honest child, but not without some fragments of things that are enough to teach her to be distracted, to teach her not to be fully engrossed, to be in it.她有十七八岁了罢？有啰，可能还要大一点。样子还不难看。脸宽宽的，鼻子有一点塌，眼睛分得很开。搽了一点脂粉，胭脂颜色不好，桃红的。头发修得很齐，梳得光光的，稍为平板了一点，前面一个发卷于是显得像个筒子，跟后面头发有点不相连属。腰身粗粗的，眼前还不要紧，千万不能再胖。站着能够稳稳的，腿分得不太开，脚不乱动，上身不扭，然而不僵，就算难得的了。她的态度救了她的相貌不少。她神色间有点疲倦，一种心理的疲倦。——她有了人家没有？一件黑底小红碎花布棉袍，青鞋，线袜，干干净净。——又是父亲了，他们轮着来。她唱得比较少，大概是父亲唱两段，女儿唱一段。
She's seventeen or eighteen years old, right? Yes, maybe a little older. It doesn't look ugly. The face is wide, the nose is a little collapsed, and the eyes are very separated. I applied a little powder, the rouge color was not good, and it was peach. The hair is very neat, combed clean, and a little flat, and the front hair curl looks like a tube, which is a little unconnected to the hair at the back. The waist is thick, it doesn't matter in front of you, you must not be fat again. Standing steadily, the legs are not too far apart, the feet are not moving, the upper body is not twisted, but not stiff, even if it is rare. Her attitude saved her appearance a lot. Her expression was a little tired, a kind of psychological fatigue. ——Does she have anyone? A small red floral cotton robe with a black background, blue shoes, and socks, all clean. ——It's the father again, they take turns. She sings less, probably two times the father sings and the daughter sings one.天气真好，简直没有甚么风。船行得稳极了。
The weather was so nice that there was no wind. The boat was very steady.谁把茶壶跟茶杯挨近着放，船震，轻轻的碜出瓷的声音，细细的，像个金铃子叫。——嗳呀，叫得有点烦人！心里不舒服，觉得恶心。——好了，平息了，心上一点霉斑。——让它叫去罢，不去管它。
Whoever puts the teapot and the teacup close to each other, the boat shakes, and the sound of porcelain is soft, thin, like a golden bell. ——Oh, it's a bit annoying! I feel uncomfortable and sick. ——Okay, it's calmed down, and there is a little mild spot in my heart. ——Let it call it and leave it alone.是不是这么分的，一个两段，一个一段？这么分法有甚么理由？要是倒过来，——现在这么听着挺合适，要是女儿唱两段父亲唱一段呢，这个布局想象得出么？打个比方，就像两种花色编结起来的连续花边，两朵蓝的，间有一朵绿的，（紫的，黄的，银红的，杂色的，）如果改成两朵绿的一朵蓝的呢？……甚么蓝的绿的，不像！干甚么用比喻呢，比喻不伦！——有没有女儿两段父亲一段的时候？——分开来唱四段比连着唱三段省力。——两个人比一个人唱好，有变化，不单调，起来复舒卷感，像花边。——比喻是个陷阱，还是摔不开！——接口接得真好，一点不露痕迹，没有夺占，没有缝隙，水流云驻，叶落花开，相契莫逆，自自在在，当他末一声的有余将尽，她的第一字恰恰出口，不颔首，不送目，不轻轻咳嗽，看不出一点点暗示和预备的动作。
Is it divided like this, one two paragraphs, one paragraph? What is the reason for this division? If it is reversed,—— it sounds quite appropriate now, if the daughter sings two paragraphs and the father sings one paragraph, can you imagine this layout? For example, it is like a continuous lace woven from two colors, two blue and one green in between, (purple, yellow, silver-red, variegated,) What if it is changed to two green and one blue? …… What blue and green are not like that! Why use metaphors, metaphors! ——Is there a time when a daughter has two fathers? ——It saves effort to sing four sections separately than to sing three paragraphs in a row. ——Two people sing better than one person, there are changes, not monotonous, and the feeling of rolling up is like lace. ——The metaphor is a trap, but it still can't be broken! ——The interface is really well connected, there is no trace at all, there is no seizure, there is no gap, the water flows and the clouds are stationary, the leaves fall and flowers bloom, they are invincible, and they are at ease, when his last voice is about to end, her first word is just spoken, not nodding, not sending eyes, not coughing gently, and there is no hint and preparatory action.他们并排站着，稍有一段距离。他们是父女，是师徒，也还是同伴。她唱得比较少，可是并不就是附属陪衬。她并不多余，在她唱的时候她也是独当一面，她有她的机会，他并不完全笼罩了她，他们之间有的是平等，合作时不可少的平等。这种平等不是力求，故不露暴，于是更圆满了。——真的平等不包含争取。父亲唱的时候女儿闲着，她手里没有一样东西，可是她能那么安详！她垂手直身，大方窈窕，有时稍稍回首，看她父亲一眼，看他的侧面，他的手，他的下颚，他的檀板，她的眼睛是一个合作的女儿的眼睛。——她脚下不动。
They stood side by side, a little distance. They were father and daughter, master and apprentice, and companions. She sang less, but she was not an auxiliary foil. She was not superfluous, she was also on her own when she sang, she had her opportunity, he did not completely envelop her, there was equality between them, and there was equality that was indispensable when cooperating. This kind of equality is not striving for, so it is not exposed, so it is more complete. ——True equality does not include fighting. When the father sings, the daughter is idle, she has nothing in her hand, but she can be so peaceful! She hangs her hands straight, generous and slender, sometimes looking back slightly, looking at her father, looking at his side, his hands, his jaw, his sandalwood, her eyes are the eyes of a cooperative daughter. ——She does not move under her feet.他自己唱的时候他拍板，女儿唱的时候他为女儿拍板，他从头没有离开过曲子一步。他为女儿拍板时也跟为自己拍板时一样。好像他女儿唱的时候有两起声音，一起直接散出去，一起流过他，再出去。不，这两条路亦分亦合，还是一条路，不管是他和她所发的声音都似乎不是从这里，不是由这两个人，不是在我们眼前这个方寸之地传来的，不复是一个现实，这两个声音本身已经连成一个单位。——不是连成，本是一体，如藕于花，如花于镜，无所凭藉，亦无落著，在虚空中，在天地水土之间。……
When he sang by himself, he made a clap for his daughter, and when his daughter sang, he made a clap for his daughter, and he never left the song from the beginning. When he clapped for his daughter, he was the same as when he was clapping for himself. It seems that when his daughter sings, there are two sounds that disperse directly, flow through him together, and then go out. No, these two roads are also separated and merged, or the same road, whether it is the voice of him or her, it does not seem to come from here, not from these two people, not from this square inch of land in front of our eyes, it is no longer a reality, and the two voices themselves have been connected into a unit. ——It is not connected, it is one, like a lotus root in a flower, like a flower in a mirror, without a basis, and without a place, in the void, between heaven, earth, water and soil. ……女孩子眼睛里看见甚么了？一个客人袖子带翻了—只茶杯，残茶流出来，渐成一线，伸过去，伸过去，快要到那个纸包了，——纸包里头是甚么东西？——嘻，好了，桌子有一条缝，茶透到缝里去了。——还没有，——还没有——滴下来了！这种茶杯底子太小，不稳，轻轻一偏就倒了。她一边看，一边唱，唱完了，还在看，不知是不是觉得有人看出了，有点不好意思，微低了头，面色肃然。——有人悄悄的把放在桌上的香烟火柴放回口袋里，快到了罢？对岸山浅浅的一抹。他唱完了这一段大概还有一段，由他开头，也由他收尾。
What did the girl see in her eyes? A guest's sleeve was turned over - a teacup, the remaining tea flowed out, gradually formed a line, stretched out, stretched out, almost reached the paper bag,—— What was in the paper bag? ——Hey, okay, there is a crack in the table, and the tea has penetrated into the crack. ——Not yet,—— not yet - dripping! The bottom of this teacup is too small and unstable, and it will fall down with a slight tilt. She watched, sang, finished singing, and was still watching, I don't know if she felt that someone had seen it, a little embarrassed, she lowered her head slightly, and her face was solemn. ——Someone quietly put the cigarette match on the table back in his pocket, is it almost there? A shallow touch of the mountain on the other side. After he finished singing, there was probably another paragraph, which began and ended by him.完了，可是这次好像只有一段？女儿走下来收钱，他还是等在那儿。他收起檀板，敛手垂袖而立，温文恭谨，含情脉脉，跟进来时候一样。
It's over, but this time it seems to be only one paragraph? His daughter walked down to collect the money, and he was still waiting there. He put away the sandalwood board, stood with his hands down and his sleeves, gentle and respectful, affectionate, just like when he followed up.他样子真好极了。人高高的，各部分都称配，均衡，可是并不伟岸，周身一种说不出来的优雅高贵。稍稍有点衰弱，还好，还看不出有病苦的痕迹。总五十左右岁了。……今天是……十三，过了年才这么几天，风吹着已经似乎不同了。——他是理了发过的年罢，发根长短正合适。梳得妥妥贴贴，大大方方。头发还看不出有白的。——他不能自己修脸罢？也还好，并不惨厉，而且稍为有点阴翳于他正相宜，这是他的本来面目，太光滑了就不大像他了。他脸上轮廓清晰而固定，不易为光暗影响改变。手指白白晳晳，指甲修得齐齐的。——干净极了！一眼看去就觉得他的干净。可是干净得近人情，干净得教人舒服，不萧索，不干燥，不冷，不那么兢兢翼翼，时刻提防，觉得到处都脏，碰不得似的。一件灰色棉袍，剪裁得合身极了。布的。——看上去料子像很好？——是布的。不单是袍子，里面衬的每一件衣裤也一定都舒舒齐齐，不破，不脏，没有气味，不窝囊着，不扯起来，口袋纽子都不残缺，一件套着一件，一层投着一层，袖口一样长短，领子差不多高低，边对边，缝对缝。……还很新，是去年冬天做的。——袍子似乎太厚了一点，有点臃肿，减少了他的挺拔。——不，你看他的腮，他真该穿得暖些啊。他的胸，他的背，他的腰胁，都暖洋洋的，他全身正在领受着一重丰厚的暖意，——一脉近于叹息的柔情在他的脸上。
He looks so good. He is tall, all parts are well-matched and balanced, but he is not majestic, and his whole body has an indescribable elegance and nobility. A little weak, but fortunately, there are no signs of illness or suffering. He is about fifty years old. …… Today is ...... Thirteen, it's only been a few days since the New Year, and the wind seems to be different. ——He got a haircut, and the length of the hair roots is just right. Combed properly and generously. The hair is still white. ——Can't he fix his face by himself? It's okay, it's not miserable, and it's a little gloomy for him, this is his original face, too smooth to look like him. The contours of his face are clear and fixed, and it is not easy to change due to the influence of light and darkness. His fingers are white and his nails are neatly trimmed. ——Very clean! At a glance, I think he is clean. But it is so clean that it is close to human feelings, so clean that it is comfortable, not desolate, not dry, not cold, not so conscientious, always on guard, and I feel that it is dirty everywhere, as if it cannot be touched. A gray cotton robe is cut very well. Cloth. ——Does it look like a good material? ——It's cloth. Not only the robe, but also every piece of clothing and pants lined inside must be comfortable and neat, not broken, not dirty, no smell, not cowardly, not pulled up, and the pocket buttons are not incomplete. …… It's still very new, it was made last winter. ——The robe seemed to be a little too thick, a little bloated, reducing his straightness. ——No, look at his cheeks, he really should be dressed warmer. His chest, his back, his waist and sides are all warm, and his whole body is receiving a thick warmth,—— a vein of tenderness that is almost a sigh on his face.她顺着次序走过一个一个旅客，不说一句话，伸出她的手，坦率，无邪，不局促，不忸怩，不争多较少，不泼剌，不蘑菇，规规矩矩老老实实。——这女孩子实在不怎么好看，她鼻子底下有颗痣。都给的。——有一两个，她没有走近，看样子他也许没有，然而她态度中并无轻蔑之意，不让人不安。有的脸背着，或低头扣好皮箱的锁，她轻轻在袖子上拉一拉。——真怪，这样一个动作中居然都不包含一点卖弄风情，没有一点冒昧。被拉的并不嗔怪，不声不响，掏出钱来给她。——有人看着他，他脸一红，想分辩，我不是——是的，你忙着有事，不是规避，谁说你小器的呢，瞧瞧你这样的人，像么，——于是两人脸上似笑非笑了一下，眼光各向一个方向挪去。——这两个人说不定有机会认识，他们老早谈过话了。——在澡堂里，饭馆里，街上，隔若干日子，碰着了，他们有招呼之意，可是匆匆错过了，回来，也许他们会想，这个人好面熟，那里见过的？——大概想不出究竟是那里见过的了罢？——人应当记日记。——给的钱上下都差不多，这也好像有个行情，有个适当得体的数目，切合自己生活，也不触犯整个社会。这玩意儿真不易，够学的！过到老，学不了，学的就是这种东西？这是老练，是人生经验，是贾宝玉反对的学问文章，我的老天爷！——这一位，没有零的，掏出来一张两万关金券，一时张皇极了，没有主意，连忙往她手里一搁，心直跳，转过身来伏在船窗上看江水，他简直像大街上摔了一大跤。——哎，别急，没有关系。——差不多全给的。然而送给舱里任何一位一定没有人要，一点不是一个可羡慕的数目。——上海正发行房屋奖券，这里头一定有人买的，就快开奖了。你见过设计图样么？——从前用铜子，卖唱的多用一个小藤册子接钱，投进去磬磬的响。
She walked past passengers one by one in order, without saying a word, stretched out her hand, frank, innocent, not cramped, not cowardly, not arrogant, not frustrated, not mushroom, well-behaved and honest. ——This girl is really not very good-looking, she has a mole under her nose. All given. ——There were one or two, she didn't approach, it seemed that he might not have it, but there was no contempt in her attitude, and it was not unsettling. Some of them had their faces on their backs, or lowered their heads to buckle the lock of the suitcase, and she gently pulled it on her sleeve. ——It's strange, such an action doesn't contain a little show-off, no presumptuousness. The one who was pulled was not angry, silent, and took out the money to her. ——Someone looked at him, he blushed, trying to distinguish, I am not—Yes, you are busy with something, not avoiding, who said you are a petty person, look at a person like you, what do you look like,—— So the two of them smiled as if they were smiling, and their eyes moved in one direction. ——These two people may have a chance to get to know each other, they have talked a long time ago. ——In the bathhouse, in the restaurant, on the street, every few days, they met, they had the intention of greeting, but they missed it in a hurry, and when they came back, maybe they would think, this person is familiar, have you seen him there? ——You probably can't think of a place where you saw it? ——People should keep a diary. ——The money given is about the same, and it seems that there is a market, an appropriate and decent amount, which is suitable for one's own life and does not offend the whole society. This thing is really not easy, enough to learn! When you get old, you can't learn, is this kind of thing you learn? This is sophistication, life experience, and Jia Baoyu's opposition to the academic article, my God! ——This person, without zero, took out a 20,000-thousand gold coupon, and was extremely angry for a while, had no idea, and hurriedly put it in her hand, his heart beat, turned around and leaned on the boat window to look at the river, he was like a big fall on the street. ——Hey, don't worry, it doesn't matter. ——Almost all of them are given. However, no one in the cabin must want it, which is not an enviable amount at all. ——Shanghai is issuing housing lottery tickets, and someone here must have bought it, and the lottery is about to be drawn. Have you ever seen the design pattern? ——In the past, copper was used, and the singers used a small rattan booklet to receive money, and they put it in to make a chime.都收了，她回去，走近她父亲，——她第一次靠着她父亲，伸一个手给他，拉着他，她在前，他在后，一步一步走出去了。他是个瞎子。——我这才真正的觉得他瞎，看到他眼睛看不见，十分的动了心。他的一切声容动静都归纳摄收在这最后的一瞥，造成一个印象，完足，简赅，具体。他走了，可是印象留下来。——他们是父女，无条件的，永远的，没有一丝缝隙的亲骨肉。不，她简直是他的母亲啊！他们走了。……
After collecting everything, she went back and approached her father,—— she leaned on her father for the first time, stretched out a hand to him, pulled him, she was in front, he was behind, step by step. He was blind. ——Only then did I really think he was blind, and I was very moved to see that his eyes could not see. All his voices, expressions, and movements were summarized in this last glance, creating an impression, complete, simple, and concrete. He left, but the impression remained. ——They are father and daughter, unconditional, forever, without a trace of flesh and blood. No, she is simply his mother! They are gone. ……“他们一天能得多少钱？”
“也不多——轮渡一天来回才开几趟。夏天好，夏天晚上还有人叫到家里唱。”
“那他们穿的？”
“嗳——”
"How much money do they get a day?" "Not much - the ferry only runs a few times a day. Good summer, summer nights still call people to sing at home. ” "Then what are they wearing?" "Hey-"船平平稳稳的行进，太阳光照在船上，照在柔软的江水上。机器的震动均匀而有力，充满健康，充满自信。舱壁上几道水影的反光幌荡。船上安静极了，有秩序极了。——忽然乱起来，像一个灾难，一个麻袋挣裂了，滚出各种果实。一个脚夫像天神似的跳到舱里。——到了，下午两点钟。
The ship moved smoothly, the sun shining on the boat, shining on the soft river. The vibration of the machine was even and powerful, full of health and confidence. The reflection of several water shadows on the bulkhead. The ship was extremely quiet and orderly. ——Suddenly there was chaos, like a disaster, a sack broke, and various fruits rolled out. A footman jumped into the cabin like a god. ——It arrived, two o'clock in the afternoon.
[1] 本篇原载1948年5月2日《华北日报》。初收《邂逅集》，文化生活出版社，1949年4月；文字略有改动。

三叶虫与剑兰花

三叶虫与剑兰花[1]
[1] This article was originally published in the North China Daily on May 2, 1948. First received "Encounter Collection", Cultural Life Publishing House, April 1949; The text has been slightly changed. Trilobites and gladioli[1]把那一部份图书仪器送走了，心里空了好一大块。有一点感触，含浑，有重量，但是一点一点的加上来的，心理有个准备，知道总有这么一天，这么一刻，到底来了！仿佛倒很满意。怎么说，总完了一件事。相信徐之所觉所受跟我差不多。不过他似乎比我更深沉些。不敢说，这全是揣测。看一看他的眼睛，很暗，有一点纷乱。不过给我纷乱印象的也许是他的头发。今天事情忙，有几个箱子须要拆开重装，我们都没有好好梳头；公路上风也大。他的头发分开，向后。很后，好像总是逆风而行，像每根头发发根细而近末端处越来越粗，到发尖才又微收一点，好作一归宿。看起来他的脑门子就比实在的更高些了，而且头好像总向后扬一点的样子。我相当喜欢这样的头发，这至少比飞机头那种纨袴气有骨子得多，有一股子俊拔坚毅劲儿。不过头没有好好梳，刚才帮着搬抬那些箱子，无心顾到头发，忙乱中弄得他更乱，而且风把他的头发披下一片在额前了。风从我们身后吹来。——然而，大体上说，无损于他的深沉稳重。啊，我似乎太注意他的头发，我的眼睛那么巡视探究是非礼的。只因为我稍为觉得有点与平常不一样，有一点惊异。人到底不能天天是一样的！从他的密闭的嘴角上掠下来，我看看脚边车轮印子。
I sent away that part of the books and equipment, and a lot of emptiness in my heart. There is a little feeling, muddy, and weighty, but little by little, I am mentally prepared, knowing that there will always be such a day, such a moment, and it will come! It seems to be very satisfied. How to say, one thing is over. I believe that Xu Zhi felt the same as me. But he seems to be deeper than me. I dare not say, this is all speculation. Looking at his eyes, they are very dark and a little chaotic. But what gave me the impression of chaos might be his hair. Today I was busy, there were a few boxes that needed to be unpacked and repacked, and we didn't comb our hair properly; the wind was also strong on the road. His hair was parted and backwards. Later, it seemed to always go against the wind, like each hair was thin at the roots and thicker near the ends, and only slightly retracted at the tips of the hair, so that it could be a destination. It seemed that his head was higher than it really was, and his head always seemed to be raised a little back. I quite like this kind of hair, at least much more bone-in than the pants at the head of an airplane, and there is a handsome and resolute spirit. But my hair was not combed properly, and I just helped carry the boxes, and I didn't care about my hair, which made him even more messy in the chaos, and the wind draped a piece of his hair in front of his forehead. The wind blew from behind us. ——However, on the whole, it did not detract from his deep and steady. Ah, I seemed to pay too much attention to his hair, and it was rude for my eyes to search so much. Just because I felt a little different from usual, I was a little surprised. People can't be the same every day! Skimming down from the corners of his closed mouth, I looked at the wheel prints at my feet.“走吧。”
“走吧。”
我们就向来的那条石子公路上走回去。
"Let's go." "Let's go." We walked back on the gravel road we came.九月了，这个地方还是那么暖和。下雨天，早晚，凉些，晌午的太阳照在身上跟夏天差不多。多少做了点事，有点汗了。我把外衣脱了，搭在肩上。风吹得又真的和蔼殷勤，不尖不酸。徐额头也有点潮润，我看他掏出手绢擦过不止一次。也许这是他的习惯，有许多人做完了事总要擦擦的，即使不出汗。然而这会儿实在热了，十点多了。徐为甚么不脱衣服？他想着甚么，不大在意。这个人好像经常的想着甚么的，所以他的研究工作做得那么精细实在。这样的性格跟他的工作真合适。他做一切事总是那么从容不迫，有条不紊。我这会儿可是想说说话。我们所有的研究室也空了，许多习性真该随那些图书仪器一块运走了。我们有一段时间过另外一种日子，我们要旅行不少地方，回一趟家，见许多东西，吃吃，谈谈，……我有跟人说点儿甚么的欲望，几次要开口了，想不到说甚么好。得了，随便，随便最好，抬一抬头：
It's September, and this place is still so warm. On rainy days, morning and evening, it's cooler, and the noon sun shines on my body almost like summer. I did something and sweated a little. I took off my coat and put it on my shoulder. The wind blows really kindly and attentively, not sharp or sour. Xu's forehead was also a little damp, and I saw him take out his handkerchief and wipe it more than once. Maybe this is his habit, many people always wipe after doing things, even if they don't sweat. However, it was really hot at this time, after ten o'clock. Why didn't Xu take off his clothes? He didn't care much about what he was thinking. This person seems to be thinking about something often, so his research work is so meticulous and practical. This kind of personality is really suitable for his work. He always does everything so calmly and methodically. I want to talk at this moment. All our laboratories are empty, and many habits should really be transported away with those books and instruments. We have a different kind of life for a while, we have to travel a lot of places, go home, see many things, eat, talk,...... I have a desire to say something to people, and I have to say something several times, but I can't think of anything to say. Okay, whatever, whatever, it's best, raise your head:“天是真蓝！”
“哎，真蓝。”
"The sky is really blue!" "Hey, it's really blue."他看也没看，他低头走他的路。除非他由地上明亮的太阳知道，由路边黑白分明的尤加利树阴知道。不过他这两个字里有甚么感情？——我觉不出。他不想说话？——他应当看看这个天！
“真蓝！”
He didn't look, he lowered his head and walked his way. Unless he knew it from the bright sun on the ground, from the black and white shade of the eucalyptus trees by the roadside. But what was the emotion in his two words? —I don't feel it. He didn't want to talk? —He should look at the sky! "True blue!"我微微叫喊，想把我的热烈传给他。
“哎，这样的蓝天真难得。”
I shouted slightly, wanting to convey my enthusiasm to him. "Hey, such a blue sky is really rare."他说这句话时我正点火抽烟，我没把全力集中在他声音高低上，不过从字面，从“真”，“难得”，我以为他也颇有动于衷了。他一向不大说话，平日讲解时也是一个字一个字，清楚明白。不像我，我在指导实验时老是说了些不相干的话。说当初完成这个实验费多少日子，困难，艰苦，失望，终于来了个成功，一切的坚忍有了交待，说这多美，这些步骤是多好一个对称，有节奏的形式，这这，这那；即正经分析图解时也带了许多不必要的感情，分摄了学生的精神兴趣，使他们对过程重点，工具应用，计算较差反不能有深刻印象。我老是节制，节制，可想做到像他一样的不枝不蔓，简洁鲜明，绝无希望。——现在，把这些他跟我的分别全扔开吧。（试试看，也许办得到。）谈谈天，为了我们最后一趟从这条路上走回来！我不管徐是否需要说话，不管他，反正他听着就行。我们说话机会也不多了，我久有跟他多谈谈的愿望，看样子，他不大讨厌我，这就成。
I was lighting a cigarette when he said this, and I didn't concentrate all my energy on the pitch of his voice, but literally, from "true" and "rare", I thought he was also quite moved. He has never spoken much, and when he explains it on weekdays, he understands it word by word. Unlike me, I always said irrelevant things when guiding experiments. Saying how many days it took to complete this experiment, difficulties, hardships, disappointments, and finally a success, all the perseverance has been explained, saying how beautiful it is, how good these steps are a symmetrical, rhythmic form, this, this, that; that is, when seriously analyzing the diagram, it also brings a lot of unnecessary feelings, which divides the students' spiritual interest, so that they cannot be deeply impressed by the focus of the process, the application of tools, and poor calculations. I am always tempered, restrained, but I want to be like him, concise and distinct, and hopeless. ——Now, throw away all these differences between him and me. (Try, maybe you can.) Talk about the sky, for our last trip back from this road! I don't care if Xu needs to talk or not, I don't care about him, he just listens anyway. We don't have many opportunities to talk, and I have long wanted to talk to him more, and it seems that he doesn't hate me very much, and this is it.这个地方的天真是蓝得怪！我们一来，首先看到这个，临走了时也都带着这片明丽颜色作一切辛酸喜悦回忆底子。想想看，我们在这里生活了七八年，人生中最精彩、最值得活、最有决定性的几年！战争把我们一下子掀翻了，泼出来，从原有设计中一丝一丝拆散，让你再换个样子编去。学校搬了家，落脚在这么个梦也没梦到过的山城里来，以一种特殊方式完成教育，吃些甚么离奇饮食，而且说得一口地道本地话，清清楚楚为从外县四乡来的人指路，小巷僻坡，莫不了如指掌；听他们听的戏，喝他们喝的酒，害他们害的病，种他们种的花；日常如此，不以为意，战争前途一片昏雾，从来渐渐，越来越没有想到甚么时候“回去”，而忽然惊天动地来了个消息，一个战争戛然收了梢，眼前一片明亮蓝天，不免楞住了。越来越是真的，越来越具体，路虽淤滞迴长，到底通了，布告贴出来，迁校有了日子。大家忙着整理。零落变卖，所余无几，收拾起来说快也快，甚么时候有车，扎了个小包就走。然而搁下甚么，捎点儿甚么，难起来真也难。问题是有个限制，你不能把舍不得的，挂肚牵肠的一股脑装上车。尽管是破烂寒伧，那怕是伤过你的心的也就有它的意义。……
The sky in this place is so blue! When we came, we saw this first, and when we left, we all carried this bright color as the basis for all the bitterness and joy. Think about it, we have lived here for seven or eight years, the most exciting, worth living, and decisive years of our lives! The war overturned us all at once, splashed out, and broke apart from the original design bit by bit, allowing you to make it up in a different way. The school moved and settled in such a mountain town that I had never dreamed of, completed my education in a special way, ate some bizarre food, and spoke in an authentic local dialect, clearly showing the way for people from other counties and townships. Listen to the plays they listen to, drink the wine they drink, harm their diseases, and plant the flowers they plant; The future of the war is foggy, gradually, less and less I don't think when to "go back", but suddenly there is earth-shattering news, a war has come to an abrupt end, and a bright blue sky in front of me can't help but freeze. It's getting more and more true, more and more specific, although the road is stagnant and long, it's finally opened, the notice is posted, and the school has a day. Everyone is busy sorting out. Sold scattered, there is not much left, pack up quickly, when you have a car, tie a small bag and leave. However, what to put aside and what to carry is really difficult. The problem is that there is a limit, you can't put what you are reluctant to put on the car. Even if it hurts your heart, it has its meaning. ……好了，明天我们也走！一批一批的上了路，留一部照管着装箱。别人怎么样我不知道，我本来是很乐意的接了这个差使的。可以多留一阵子，而且有个名目。事情有点忙，可因为与平常职务不一样，做的是告一结束工作，觉得有特殊意思，并不疲累。工夫尽有，不用太赶。把一本书从架上取下来，在放到箱子里去之前，可以翻开看看，也许里头有点甚么标记符号，夹个小条子，甚至一瓣干花，一点痕迹，或不可知，或可想象，令人一晌猜疑，半天微笑，全极好玩。一个一个玻璃瓶子包扎起来，摇一摇，幌一幌，亮处照一照；那些是后来添置的，那些还是从前带来的，自己尽可做一记认。这一盒子甚么？龙虾！豁噫，这个标本怎么还是光绪年间剥制的？我这几年都没见过，恐怕系主任也忘了。这一大套仪器从美国订来，到了海防，刚好滇越路断了，绕了个大弯儿，整整三年六个月才运到！都检点完了，记下名称、数目，叫木匠来钉上，贴了封条。抽那一根烟，说不出是一个甚么味儿。我觉得人比较敏锐深细，比较精致，比较更能触到若干事物的内容含蕴，掂得着时间生命的意义价值，虽然比较孤单，但不寂寞。这个木匠这一阵就跟我混得极好，我们一处工作，同喝茶谈天，有时我还请他吃豆花米线，来一碟生拌螺蛳，椒盐芽豆下玫瑰重升。而且我也跟徐稍为熟一点了。……
Okay, let's go tomorrow too! Batch by batch on the road, leaving one to take care of and pack the box. I don't know what others are like, I was happy to take on this errand. You can stay for a while, and there is a name. Things are a little busy, but because it is different from my usual position, what I do is to finish my work, and I feel that it has a special meaning and is not tired. There is all the time, don't rush too much. Take a book off the shelf, before putting it in the box, you can open it and take a look, maybe there is some marking symbol in it, a small strip, or even a dried flower, a little trace, or unknowable, or imaginable, it makes people suspicious for a while, smile for a long time, and it is all very fun. One by one, the glass bottles were wrapped up, shaken, covered, and illuminated in bright places; those were added later, and those were still brought in the past, so you can make a mark yourself. What is this box? Lobster! Oh, why was this specimen still taxidermed during the Guangxu period? I haven't seen it in the past few years, and I'm afraid the head of the department has forgotten. This large set of instruments was ordered from the United States, and when it arrived in Haiphong, it happened that the Yunnan and Vietnam roads were cut off, and it took three years and six months to arrive! After checking everything, write down the name and number, ask the carpenter to nail it and affix the seal. Smoking that cigarette, I can't tell what it smells like. I think people are more sensitive and delicate, more delicate, more able to touch the content and connotation of some things, and can grasp the meaning and value of time and life, although they are more lonely, but not lonely. This carpenter has been very good with me for a while, we work together, drink tea and talk together, and sometimes I treat him to eat tofu pudding rice noodles, a plate of raw snails, and roses under salt and pepper sprouts. And I am also a little more familiar with Xu. ……明天，明天我们走了。我跟徐才稍为熟一点。我在生物系装箱，他在地质系。两个办公室相对，当中隔一个院子。院子里美人蕉正红，牛目菊白，种的竹子都高大得不认得了，人去了，路上草滋蔓起来，闲静之中充满生机，这在我看起来就是一分别意。派给生物系地质系钉箱的木匠是一个。有时他那边拾掇好了，就过来叫。有时我这儿已经没有事，就帮他做一点不紧要的小手续。我学的虽然是生物，但兴趣极广，（这个倒楣脾气害了我！）碰到甚么都要问问。他不爱说话，但一一为我解释。不敷衍，不不耐烦。扼要，清楚，但跟上课讲授时不大同，不那么硬性。而且他有时说得得了意，会把手里工作放下，翻书，检找同类标本，拿粉笔在地上画，说得兴奋动容。我看着他的眼睛，觉得这里头也燃烧，不过更深，不顶亮，但是热。有时，他也用手势，用手点着桌面划出语言的节拍。（自然不致像我一样简直要一把拉住学生的手了。）他说得时间比较长了，就会向我抱歉，说他忘形了。抱歉甚么，我真该感谢，我一点三叶虫的智识全是他传授的，他介绍了一堆书，送了我几件标本，直到现在我还搜集一批化石，作为我的本行以外的研究，可以增广我的天地，全是他之所赐。这个人作学问笃实恳切真是少见。不管怎么样有那么几天，我认识了一个值得认识的人。以前我看他坐在窗前工作，或在堂上讲书，我对他敬重，这一阵下来，我对他极有兴趣。……
Tomorrow, tomorrow we will leave. I am a little familiar with Xu Cai. I am packing boxes in the Department of Biology, and he is in the Department of Geology. The two offices are opposite each other, separated by a yard. The canna in the yard is red, the bull's eye chrysanthemum is white, and the bamboo planted is so tall that I can't recognize it. The carpenter assigned to the Department of Biology and Geology is one. Sometimes he picks it up over there and comes over to call. Sometimes I have nothing to do here, so I help him with some minor procedures. Although I studied biology, I had a wide range of interests (this unlucky temper hurt me!) I had to ask about anything. He didn't like to talk, but he explained it to me one by one. Not perfunctory, not impatient. Concise and clear, but not the same as when teaching in class, not so hard. And sometimes he is good at talking, he will put down the work in his hand, turn through books, look for similar specimens, draw on the ground with chalk, and talk excitedly. I looked into his eyes and felt that there was also a fire here, but deeper, not bright, but hot. Sometimes, he also used gestures and touched the table with his hand to draw the beat of the language. (Naturally, he wouldn't have to hold the student's hand like me.) If he spoke for a long time, he would apologize to me and say that he had forgotten. Sorry for what, I really should be grateful, my little bit of trilobite wisdom is all taught by him, he introduced a bunch of books, gave me a few specimens, and until now I have collected a batch of fossils as research outside my profession, which can expand my world, all thanks to him. It is rare for this person to be honest and sincere in his studies. Anyway, for a few days, I met someone worth knowing. I used to see him sitting in front of the window or lecturing in the hall, and I respected him, but after a while, I was very interested in him. ……我们还可以同一段路。到了长沙分手，他向北，我向东。这一路我们会同起居，同饮食，同车同渡。我希望更多了解他一点，他是怎么一个人，有些甚么事情。也怪，他简直没有甚么朋友。他毕业较早，得了地质调查所一笔津贴，一向一个人在滇西一带山里找寒武纪化石。去年一个教授因事去美，缺下一门功课没有人来讲，电邀他来，以研究助教名义代了那一个课程，还兼了一班普通实验。他上课，读书，开会也到，只是不大说话。系里人说他有点怪僻，很少跟他接近。我所知道的，起初，他有时下乡去，相当远的乡下，去看他唯一的朋友陈去，陈在一个地方性的研究室负责，与徐是同班同学，我也认得的，他太太是我的同乡。后来他们搬到外省去了，他有甚么地方可去呢？……
We can still go the same way. When we broke up in Changsha, he went north and I went east. We will live together, eat together, and cross the same car along the way. I want to know more about him, how he is alone, and what is going on. It's strange that he doesn't have any friends at all. He graduated early, received a stipend from the Geological Survey, and has always been looking for Cambrian fossils in the mountains of western Yunnan. Last year, a professor went to the United States for some reason, and no one came to talk about a homework, so he invited him to take over the course in the name of a research assistant, and also did a general experiment. He attended classes, read, and meetings, but he didn't talk much. People in the department said he was a bit eccentric and rarely approached him. As far as I know, at first, he sometimes went to the countryside, quite far away, to see his only friend, Chen Qu, who was in charge of a local research room, was a classmate of Xu, and I also recognized him, and his wife was my fellow townsman. Later, they moved to other provinces, where did he go? ……一个高大，坚实，强壮而孤独的人……
A tall, solid, strong and lonely person......这一条路我们一齐走了多少次！学校车子一批一批开，一批带走一部份箱子。他们急于想走，有些把箱装好，托别人代交，反正每次都有押运的。我们带送了不少箱，物理系化学系都有，甚至还有一箱中国文学系的，而且连钉都由我代钉。我反正不着急，家乡回不去，学校开学早得很，不如在这里多搜几件缅漆盒子，烤茶罐子，老式陶器，便宜银器，钱要是够，还想买一把古宗人的刀！徐是甚么原因则不知道了。每回，我们送箱子上车，也送一批人走，回来，学校里就空得多了。一溜二十几辆卡车，一排，坐满了人，脸上全带情感，心中一串话，（这一早晨他们表现得最完全，最精粹，最有轮廓，）哨子一吹，开了。若在从前，小姐们定有流泪的。我跟徐就成了个送行专使，一次又一次，抬手，扬巾。虽然熟人很少，有时简直一个也无，但是车上人齐声说“再见，”你能把手埋在袋子里吗？一阵雷声，一阵烟，远了，留下黄土里一片车轮印子。一种浅的，算是浅的伤感，但是你不能否认伤感这个东西。这叫人心软。心一软，人就稍稍善良，那怕是一点点，是暂时的。徐每次也都招手。这是最末一次了，我似乎看见他没有。他拿着一张封条，黏得不结实，落了下来，封条上印着学校名称。也许，这是偶然。
How many times have we walked this road together! The school buses drove in batches and took away some of the boxes. They were eager to leave, and some packed the boxes and asked others to hand them over, anyway, there were escorts every time. We brought a lot of boxes, including the Department of Physics and Chemistry, and even a box from the Department of Chinese Literature, and even the nails were nailed by me. I am not in a hurry anyway, I can't go back to my hometown, the school starts very early, so why not search for a few more Burmese lacquer boxes, roasted tea jars, old-fashioned pottery, cheap silverware, if you have enough money, you want to buy a knife of the ancient sect! I don't know what the reason is. Every time, we sent boxes to the car, and also sent a group of people away, and when we came back, the school was much empty. A slip of more than twenty trucks, a row, full of people, their faces full of emotion, a string of words in their hearts, (this morning they performed the most completely, the most essence, the most outlined,) The whistle blew and opened. If it were in the past, the ladies would have shed tears. Xu and I became a send-off envoy, raising our hands and raising our towels again and again. Although there were few acquaintances, sometimes there were none, but the people in the car said in unison, "Goodbye," can you bury your hands in the bag? A burst of thunder, a burst of smoke, far away, leaving a wheel mark in the loess. A shallow, shallow sadness, but you can't deny sadness. This is called soft-hearted. When the heart softens, people become a little kinder, even if it's just a little, it's temporary. Xu waved every time. This is the last time, and I don't seem to see him. He was holding a seal, which was not strong and fell, and the name of the school was printed on it. Perhaps, this is accidental.我越是对徐不大清楚，就越想探究。他分明不是个无足轻重的人，我放不开他，何况又没有第三个人！我没有太大耐性，又不专注，甚么事上都未免浅尝，且又留连，顾盼，旁涉，断续，对于这样一个“整块”的人简直无所施其技。瞻之在前，忽焉在后，可是他就是那样，动也不动，不避让，不遮饰，不狡诡，不装模作样，不耍你逗你，甚至没有在意你在窥伺他。我的时候不多了，我的急于下结论的老毛病就更厉害起来。我喜欢投机取巧，走捷径，老想用一两句话说尽了一件事，一个人，我简直想把人生也笼括在几个整整齐齐的排句里。——我这份鬼聪明！当然，有时没有话找话说，为的应急。我像小孩子用帽子扣麻雀似的那么抓了几句：
The more I didn't know much about Xu, the more I wanted to explore. He is clearly not an insignificant person, I can't let him go, let alone a third person! I don't have much patience, I don't concentrate, I can't help but taste everything, and I linger, look back, intervene, and intermittently, and I have no skills for such a "whole piece" person. Looking at it in front and suddenly behind, but he is like that, he doesn't move, doesn't give in, doesn't hide, doesn't cunning, doesn't pretend, doesn't play tricks on you, and doesn't even care that you are spying on him. My time is running out, and my old problem of being eager to draw conclusions has become even worse. I like to be opportunistic, take shortcuts, and always want to say one thing in one or two sentences, and alone, I simply want to wrap my life in a few neat sentences. ——I'm smart! Of course, sometimes I have nothing to say, just in case of emergency. I grabbed a few sentences like a child buckling a sparrow with a hat:这个人，他真是来“送行”了，他就是来做这么一回事，送是送了，可是不是送“人”。好像送行这回事可以单独存在，无借于行的人，即使有人吧，人是行的一部份，所有的人格只在行这一点上才有意义，或者说，一个象征。……
This person, he really came to "see off", he just came to do such a thing, to send is to send, but is it not to send "people"? It seems that the send-off can exist alone, without borrowing from the person who does it, even if there are people, people are a part of the line, and all personalities are meaningful only in this point of doing things, or in other words, a symbol. ……这一串字才成胚，我就知道不是我要的样子。我只是借题发挥。这倒是说了我自己。说出我的好高骛远的妄想。我从来不肯一步一步的走，不肯剥茧抽丝的拆开一个东西看，（我连一个表都修不好！）我记起有一次跟徐谈法布尔，我不能不承认他对这位孩子的朋友，昆虫的爱好者，比我知道得多得多，我跟他辩论过，（唯一的一次辩论；其实不是辩论，在他面前，我好像随时放弃一切我已持意见，尽找一块可以托足地位站一站，好跟他抗衡，他则以静待动的借了我而一层一层的往里说，）他说法布尔怎么样只好算个诗人，（“孩子的朋友”，“昆虫的爱好者”是他用的字，）要说他是个科学家也可以，看你对科学家下的定义如何。他说，想象是好的，那也是另一种智慧。好吧，他说我也应当去学诗，连念生物都不顶合适。——幸好我学的是植物分类，我自以为与某些性格尚相调协。我说起这些，为的是表示他和我不同；为的是我因此而对他“没有办法”。因此，我有时有一种潜沉的愤怒。我刚才那么抓了几句满不相干的话，也是借以宣泄一点我的抗议。……
This string of words just became an embryo, and I knew it wasn't what I wanted. I just borrowed the topic to play. This is about myself. Tell me my lofty delusions. I never want to go step by step, I refuse to peel off the cocoon and take apart something to look at, (I can't even fix a watch!) I remember talking to Xu about Fabre once, and I can't help but admit that he knew much more about this child's friend, an insect lover, than I knew, and I debated with him, (the only debate; In fact, it is not a debate, in front of him, I seem to give up everything I have at any time, and find a place where I can stand up to compete with him, and he borrows me in a static way and says layer by layer, he says that Fabre is a poet, ("friend of children", "lover of insects" are the words he uses), and it is okay to say that he is a scientist, depending on how you define a scientist. He said that imagination is good, and that is another kind of wisdom. Well, he said that I should also study poetry, and I am not even suitable for biology. ——Fortunately, I studied plant classification, and I thought I was still in tune with some personalities. I say this to show that he is different from me; because I have "no way" for him because of this. Therefore, I sometimes have a kind of latent anger. I just grabbed a few irrelevant words to vent my protests. ……我说他不是送“人”，是我简直怀疑他对于“人”没有兴趣。我的抗议又表示我当然并不相信如此，而且当真并不如此的。正如同我固然不是诗，他也不就是科学，人不是那么单纯的。我抗议是因为不知道他究竟对人是怎么一个看法，然而我相信他有一个看法；因为已经有，就不用说，倒好像我说了便表示实在少得很，近于没有。他又决非那种说说俏皮话自以为真轻蔑否定得了一切的人，或者许多口口声声说“一无所知”，而表示自己真知道得清楚的人。我就是想象？我的家庭，我的朋友，我的如醉如狂感情，全是想象？……不知道为甚么，我因为他简直烦恼起来，好像我活得全不值得似的，特别是我看过他的黑的，大的，不动的，真不秀气而实在有热度的眼睛。……
I said that he was not giving "people" because I simply suspected that he had no interest in "people". My protest also said that I certainly did not believe this, and that it was not so. Just as I am not a poet, he is not a science, and people are not so simple. I protest because I don't know what he thinks of people, but I believe he has an opinion; because there is already one, needless to say, but it seems that if I say it, it is really very little, close to nothing. He is by no means the kind of person who thinks that he can deny everything with witty words, or a person who says "I know nothing" and says that he really knows clearly. Am I just imagining? My family, my friends, my drunken feelings are all imaginations? …… I don't know why, but I was so annoyed by him, as if I wasn't worth living at all, especially my black, big, immoving, really undelicate and really hot eyes. ……我抗议，因为他是孤独的。我抗议，他们说他，“怪僻！”……
I protest because he is lonely. I protest, they say he, "Weird! ”……我因为我不能是他而困恼。他总是那么一整个，我真想把他拆开，搅得乱七八糟，再一点一点的凑起来。今天，我有点得意，因为他格外明显的露出他的纷乱了。当我一揭出，他就更可怜。他显得跟平常不大同。他显得矮了一点，肩膀也不那么方，不那么硬，脸上不那么一是一，二是二，不那么齐整，我甚至觉得他的腿有点虚软，大体上他好像萎了一点，皱了一点，雕刻性减少了一点，光和影含胡暧昧些。我曾经说“无损于他的深沉稳重”，是的，他仍旧是深沉稳重，但你感觉得到他在那儿支撑。虽然只是一点点剥蚀，一点裂缝，正因为本来是那么坚固，你觉得这个石像不复像平日一样在座子上立得那么泰然了。走下一段路来，说了一阵子话，我相信不是错觉。因为虽然我明天要走，我没有觉得自己有甚么剧显的变。我相信，不是“想象”！我得意，因为我居然对他有一种从未有过的感情，怜悯。不知道为甚么，我觉得他今天比我弱，至少，跟我一样的弱。
I was troubled that I couldn't be him. He was always so whole, and I really wanted to take him apart, make a mess, and put him together little by little. Today, I was a little proud because he showed his chaos very clearly. When I exposed him, he was even more pitiful. He looked different from usual. He looked a little shorter, his shoulders were not so square, not so hard, his face was not so one, two was two, not so neat, and I even felt that his legs were a little weak, and in general he seemed to be a little wilted, a little wrinkled, a little less sculptural, and the light and shadow were a little more ambiguous. I used to say that "it doesn't hurt his depth and stability", and yes, he is still deep and steady, but you can feel that he is there to support him. Although it is only a little bit of erosion and a little crack, because it is so strong, you feel that this stone statue is no longer so calm on its seat as usual. After walking for a while and talking for a while, I believe it is not an illusion. Because although I am leaving tomorrow, I do not feel that I have changed dramatically. I believe that it is not "imagination"! I am proud because I actually have a feeling for him that I have never had before, pity. I don't know why, but I feel that he is weaker than me today, at least, as weak as I am.我并不一直咬着他不放，我之所感远较我写出来的要朦胧得多，零碎，起落，正反，拾起又扔掉，迟疑中已为他事所乱，我的兴趣仍是在说说话。从车站到学校有一段路，又静又平，一棵一棵的尤加利，一粒一粒的石头，一步一步的走，脚下踹起萨萨的声音，间或一队从山里来的驮马摇着它们项下生铜铃，缓慢悠远，忽然紧碎起来，当那些马洒开四蹄飞奔的时候。我说得很多，说这里的风物，说这几年的生活，说书，说人，同学，教授。不知是甚么道理，我居然把这些东西牵连得起来，似乎还首尾相应，可以引出一个甚么来龙去脉来似的。我得到一种自由，不像平日一样的逡巡荡漾，因势利导，得心应手，时有神来之笔。直到我觉察徐原来那么听着是只须要我的声音，至于我说了些甚么，他没有在意，我于是骤然冷了下来，一种难堪的冷漠因为彼此乞求援手的旗语而更暴露了。于是话枯了，像泉水一旦见了底，我们闷着头走路我看到几次他的太阳穴耳下至颚骨颤动了一下，他想说话，这就更糟。这情形他以前极少有。我们走在这儿，像两条平行线，永不会相交。这是怎么回事？我们两个人都走得快起来，步子迈得大了，都感觉这最后一截太长。好了，前面就是墙，门，房子，我松了一口气，我简直是用了长途竞走到达终点的步子窜上了石阶，而且生怕他抢在我前头。——
I didn't keep biting him, my feelings were far more hazy than what I wrote, fragmented, up and down, up and down, up and down, picked up and thrown away, hesitating and being disturbed by other things, my interest was still talking. There is a road from the station to the school, quiet and flat, eucalyptus one by one, stone by stone, step by step, kicking the sound of sassa under my feet, occasionally a group of pack horses from the mountains shake the bronze bells under their necks, slow and far, suddenly shattered, when the horses spread their hooves and galloped. I talked a lot, about the scenery here, about the life of the past few years, about stories, about people, classmates, professors. I don't know what the reason is, but I actually implicated these things, and they seemed to correspond to each other, as if they could lead to some kind of ins and outs. I got a kind of freedom, not like the usual wandering, guided by the situation, handy, and sometimes with a genius pen. Until I realized that Xu Yuan only wanted my voice, and as for what I said, he didn't care, so I suddenly cooled down, and an embarrassing indifference was exposed even more by the banners of begging for help from each other. So the words dried up, like once the spring water had bottomed out, we walked with our heads down. I saw his temples trembling from ears to jawbones several times, and he wanted to speak, which was even worse. This situation had rarely happened to him before. We walked here, like two parallel lines, never intersecting. What's going on? Both of us walked fast, taking big steps, and both felt that this last section was too long. Well, there were walls, doors, and houses in front of me, and I breathed a sigh of relief, I simply jumped up the stone steps with a long race walk to the finish line, and I was afraid that he would get ahead of me. ——忽然他从我肩后奔跑过去，这使我的心登登一阵跳。怎么回事！坐在校医室门口的一个乡下女人一团火似的向他扑了过来？他慌忙急促的开他的锁，越乱，锁一时越弄不开，于是我一面开自己的门一面可以回头看他的样子。两个门同时开了，他的门立刻关上，两个人消失；我轻轻推，推了一半，也用力一送。——
Suddenly he ran over my shoulder, which made my heart skip a beat. What's going on! A country woman sitting at the door of the school doctor's office pounced on him like a fire? He hurriedly opened his lock, the more chaotic it was, the more difficult it was to open the lock for a while, so I could look back at him while opening my door. The two doors opened at the same time, his door closed immediately, and the two disappeared; I pushed gently, halfway, and sent hard. ——第一个思想：刚才我真不该那么看！然而我怎么办呢？立刻我好像完全明白这是怎么回事。我心里昏茫了一阵，不一会即恢复清醒。今天我所观测是确凿的，而且这一阵子我飘忽感觉原来都不该放过。我倒没有全神设想对面屋里的情形，只嚼着自己的孤单，因为无法助人。我不知道如何安排自己，我焦躁，不安，像一匹等待上鞍的马，忽然一下子我对他的印象全变了，而且根本没有印象。我构不出他的面容，只有他那对眉毛，平平黑黑的两道，在虚空中。我不晓得我现在对他感情是甚么，好像小孩子玩积木，从底下抽去一块，哗啦啦整个倒了下来！这回事情来得太突兀，超乎我的经验。最后我只有锁了门出去，我还有许多东西要买，而且我已经饿了。我原来想约徐一齐到一个本地饭馆里去吃一顿饭的，我现在决定仍是去那一家，我一个人。我看了看对面那个门，看了看那些花，明红亮白，太阳好旺。
The first thought: I really shouldn't have looked that way just now! But what should I do? Immediately I seemed to fully understand what was going on. I was confused for a while, and after a while I came back to my senses. What I observed today was conclusive, and I felt that I shouldn't have let it go for a while. I didn't think about the situation in the opposite room with all my heart, I only chewed on my loneliness because I couldn't help others. I didn't know how to arrange myself, I was restless, uneasy, like a horse waiting to be saddled, and suddenly my impression of him changed, and I had no impression at all. I couldn't make out his face, only his eyebrows, two plain and black lines, in the void. I don't know what my feelings for him are now, like a child playing with blocks, pulling a piece from the bottom, and falling down! This time it came too abruptly, beyond my experience. In the end, I had to lock the door and go out, I still had a lot of things to buy, and I was already hungry. I originally wanted to ask Xu to go to a local restaurant for a meal, but now I decided to go to that one, alone. I looked at the door opposite, looked at the flowers, bright red and white, and the sun was so bright.我睡得很晚，我有事担搁，而且也有意逗留。回来时满地月光，四处极静，看看对面屋子，没有灯。我在自己门前停了停，决定不走过去。东西都已经理好，房间里空空落落，把一本打算在车上看的小说看了三分之一，睡了，我想起前一个月一个展览会中的一幅油画，一个肥硕的女人，睡在猩红的毯子上。虽然没有衣服，正因为没有衣服，你一望而知是个乡下女人，一个夏娃一样的女人。……
I went to bed late, I had something to do, and I wanted to stay. When I came back, the ground was full of moonlight, and it was very quiet, and I looked at the room opposite, but there was no light. I stopped in front of my door and decided not to walk over. Everything was sorted out, the room was empty, I read a third of a novel I was going to read in the car, and I fell asleep, thinking of an oil painting from an exhibition the month before, a fat woman sleeping on a scarlet blanket. Although there were no clothes, it was because there were no clothes that you could tell at a glance that she was a country woman, an Eve-like woman. ……第二天起来，推开窗户一看，木匠用两个木条子交叉着钉对面房间的门。我好像并不觉得惊异，好像这正合乎理想。我过去看看，好像去看一个老炮台，旧堡垒。没有甚么，地下几张废纸，一个耗子洞很清楚的露在墙角。时候还早，我各处去看看，关照木匠把数学系的门钉了再给我钉，请他把“生物系办公室”那块小木头牌子取下来，我想带了去。我得去把那几棵美国种的剑兰块根挖出来，我是否该带一点原地的土去？……
When I got up the next day, I opened the window and saw that the carpenter had nailed the door of the opposite room with two wooden strips crossed. I didn't seem surprised, as if it was ideal. I went over to take a look, as if I was going to see an old fort, an old fortress. There was nothing, a few pieces of waste paper in the ground, and a mouse hole was clearly exposed in the corner. It was still early, so I went everywhere to look around, took care of the carpenter to nail the door of the mathematics department and then nailed it to me, and asked him to take down the small wooden sign of the "Department of Biology Office", which I wanted to take with me. I have to dig up the roots of those gladioli plants planted in the United States, should I bring some soil in place? ……我一个人上了路没有人跟我招手。再见，我们住了八年的地方！
I went on the road alone and no one waved to me. Goodbye, where we lived for eight years!陈夫妇同时去美，未及一见，也许他们知道那个女人是怎么回事。那一门功课因为原教授已经回来，照样开班。学校已经上了半年课了，迁回战前的原址。我继续教我的书，而且我的剑兰又开花了，一天一天的记载花的发育生长的日记，今天，我用一种极其庄严的态度写下：——第一朵花。
Chen and his wife went to the United States at the same time, but before they could see it, maybe they knew what was going on with that woman. That homework was still open because the original professor had returned. The school has been in class for half a year, and it has been moved back to its original location before the war. I continue to teach my books, and my gladioli blooms again, and today I write in an extremely solemn attitude: - The first flower.
[1] 本篇原载《文艺工作》1948年第一期。初收《汪曾祺全集》第一卷，北京师范大学出版社，1998年8月。

斑鸠

斑鸠[1]
[1] This article was originally published in the first issue of "Literary and Art Work" in 1948. The first volume of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Normal University Press, August 1998. Turtledove[1]我们都还小，我们在荒野上徜徉。我们从来没有过那样的精致的，深刻的秋的感觉。
秋天像一首歌，溶溶的把我们浸透。
We are all young, and we are wandering in the wilderness. We have never had such a delicate and deep autumn feeling. Autumn is like a song, soaking us meltingly.我们享受着身体的优美的运动，用使自己永远记得的轻飘的姿势，跳过了小溪，听着风流过淡白的发光的柔软的草叶，平滑而丰盈，像一点帆影，航过了一大片平地。我们到一个地方去，一个没有人去的秘密的地方，——那个林子，我们急于投身到里面而消失了。——我们的眼睛同时闪过一道深红，像听到一声出奇的高音的喊叫，一起切断了脚步。多猛厉的颜色，——一个猎人！猎人缠了那么一道深红的绑腿，移动着脚步，在外面一片阳光，里面朦朦胧胧的树林里。我们不知道我们那里也有猎人，——从来没有看见过，然而一看见我们就知道他是，非常确切的拍出了我们的梦想，即使他没有——他有一根枪。太意外又太真实，他像一个传说里的妖精出现在我们面前，我们怕。我忘不了我们的强烈的经验，忘不了——他为甚么要缠那么一道深红色的绑腿呢？他一步一步的走，秋天的树林，苍苍莽莽，重叠阴影筛下，细碎的黄金的阳光的点子，斑斑斓斓，游动，幻变，他踏着，踏着微干的草，枯叶，酥酥的压出声音，走过来，——走过去了。红绑腿，青布贴身衣裤。他长得瘦，全身收束得紧紧的。好骨干，瘦而有劲，腰股腿脚，处处结实利落，充满弹性。看他走路，不管甚么时候有一根棍子剧速的扫过来，他一定能跳起来避过去的。小脑袋，骨角停匀而显露，高鼻梁，薄嘴唇，眼目深陷，炯炯有光，锐利且坚定。——动人的是他的忧郁，一个一天难得说几句话的孤独的生活着的人才可能有的那种阴暗，美丽的，不刺痛，不是病态的幽深。冷酷么？——是的。我们从来没有见过一个这样的不动声色的人，这样不动声色对付着一个东西。一看就看出来，他所有的眼睛都向外看，所有耳朵都听，所有的知觉都集中起来，所有的肌肉都警醒，然而并不太用力，从从容容的，一步一步的走。树不密，他的路径没有太多折曲歪斜。他走着，时而略微向上看一看，简直像没有甚么目的。用不着看，他也确定的知道它在哪里。上头，一只斑鸠。我们毫不困难的就找到了那只斑鸠，他的身体给我们指了出来，这只鸟像有一根线接在他身上似的。是的，我们像猎人一样的在这整个林子里只看得见一只斑鸠了，除此之外一无所见了。斑鸠飞不高，在参差的树丛里找路，时而从枝叶的后面漏出瓦青色的肚子，灰红的胸，浅白的翅胛，甚至颈上的锦带，片段的一瞥。但是不管它怎么想不暴露它自己，它在我们眼睛里还是一个全身，从任何一点颜色我们复现得出一个完整的斑鸠。它逃不出它的形体。它也不叫唤，不出一声，只轻轻的听到一点鼓翅声音，听得出也是尽量压低的。这只鸟，它已经很知道它在甚么样的境遇里了。它在避免一个一个随时抽生出来的弹道，摆脱紧跟着它的危机，它摆脱，同时引导他走入歧途，想让他疲倦，让他废然离去。它在猎人的前面飞，又折转来，把前面变后面，叫刚才的险恶变为安全。过去，又过来，一个守着一个，谁也不放弃谁。这个林子充满一种紧张的，迫人的空气，我们都为这场无声的战斗吸住了，都屏着气，紧闭嘴唇，眼睛集中在最致命的一点上而随之转动。勇敢的鸟！它飞得镇定极了，严重，可是一点没有失了主意，它每一翅都飞得用心，有目的，有作用，煽动得匀净，调和，渐渐的，五六次来回之后，看出来飞得不大稳了，它有点慌乱，有点踉跄了。——阿呀，不行，它发抖，它怕得厉害，它的血流得失了常规，要糟！——好快！我们简直没有来得及看他怎么一抬枪，一声响，喨极了，完了，整个林子一时非常的静，非常的空，完全松了下来。和平了，只有空气里微微有点火药气味，——草里有甚么小花开了？香得很。
We enjoyed the graceful movement of our bodies, and with a light posture that we would always remember, we jumped over the stream, listening to the wind flowing through the soft blades of grass that glowed pale white, smooth and plump, like a little sail shadow, and sailed over a large flat land. We went to a place, a secret place where no one goes,—— that forest, and we hurriedly threw ourselves into it and disappeared. ——Our eyes flashed a crimson at the same time, and we cut off our steps together as if we heard a strangely high-pitched cry. What a fierce color,—— a hunter! The hunter wrapped his feet in such a crimson leggings, moving his steps, in the sun outside and the hazy woods inside. We didn't know that we had hunters there,—— we had never seen them, but as soon as we saw them, we knew he was a very accurate picture of our dreams, even if he didn't have a gun. Too unexpected and too real, he appeared in front of us like a legendary fairy, we were afraid. I can't forget our strong experience, I can't forget - why did he wrap such a crimson leggings? He walked step by step, the autumn woods, the wilderness, under the overlapping shadows, the fine golden sunlight, colorful, swimming, transforming, he stepped, stepped on the slightly dry grass, dead leaves, crisply pressed out the sound, came and ,—— walked over. Red leggings, green cloth undergarments. He is thin, and his whole body is tightly restricted. Good backbone, thin and strong, waist, legs, legs and feet, strong and neat everywhere, full of elasticity. Watching him walk, no matter when a stick swept over at high speed, he would definitely be able to jump up and avoid it. The small head, the bones are evenly revealed, the bridge of the nose is high, the lips are thin, the eyes are sunken, shining, sharp and firm. ——What is moving is his melancholy, the kind of dark, beautiful, non-stinging, not morbid depthness that a lonely person who rarely says a few words a day may have. Is it cold? ——Yes. We have never seen such a quiet person, so quiet to deal with something. At a glance, it was clear that all his eyes were looking outward, all his ears were listening, all his senses were concentrated, and all his muscles were alert, but he didn't try too hard, and he walked calmly, step by step. The trees were not dense, and his path was not too crooked. He walked, sometimes looking up slightly, as if he had no purpose. He didn't need to look, he knew for sure where it was. Up there, a turtledove. We found the turtledove without difficulty, and his body pointed out to us, and the bird seemed to have a thread attached to him. Yes, we could only see one turtledove in this whole forest like hunters, and nothing else. The turtle dove does not fly high, looking for its way through the jagged trees, and sometimes leaks out from behind the branches and leaves with a tile-blue belly, a gray-red chest, a pale white wing blade, and even a brocade band on its neck, a glimpse of it. But no matter how much it thinks not to expose itself, it is still a whole body in our eyes, and we can reproduce a complete turtledove from any color. It cannot escape its form. It does not call, does not make a sound, only hears a little sound of flapping its wings, and it can be heard as low as possible. This bird, it already knows very well what kind of situation it is in. It is avoiding the trajectory that is pumped out at any time, getting rid of the crisis that follows it, it gets rid of it, and at the same time leads him astray, trying to tire him and let him leave in vain. It flew in front of the hunter, turned again, turned the front into the back, and turned the sinister thing just now into safety. Passed, came again, one guarded the other, and no one gave up on the other. The forest was filled with a tense, compelling air, and we were all sucked in by this silent battle, holding our breath, closing our lips, and focusing our eyes on the deadliest point and turning with it. Brave bird! It flew very calmly, seriously, but did not lose its mind at all, every wing of it flew carefully, purposefully, effectively, evenly stirred and harmonious, gradually, after five or six times back and forth, it was seen that it was not flying very steadily, it was a little flustered, a little staggered. ——Oh, no, it was shaking, it was terribly scared, and its bleeding was out of order, worse! ——So fast! We didn't even have time to see how he raised his gun, and it rang out, and it was over, and the whole forest was very quiet and empty for a while, and it was completely relaxed. It was peaceful, only the air smelled of gunpowder,—— What little flowers bloomed in the grass? It was very fragrant.猎人走过去，捡了死鸟，（握在手里一定还是热的）拈去沾在毛上的一小片草叶子。斑鸠的脖子挂了下来，在他手里微微晃动，肚皮上一小块毛倒流了过来，大概是着地时擦的。他理顺了那点毛，手指温柔抚摸过去，似乎软滑的羽毛给了他一种快感。枪弹从哪里进去的呢？看不出来。小小头，精致的脚，瓦灰肚皮，锈色的肩，正是那一只啊，甚么地方都还完完整整的，好好的，“死”在甚么地方呢？他不动声色的，然而忧郁的看了它一会，一回头把斑鸠放进胁下一个布袋子里，——袋子里已经有了一只野鸡，毛色灿烂的一照。装了一粒新的子弹，背上枪，向北，他走出了这个林子，红色的绑腿到很远很远还看得见。秋天真是辽阔。
The hunter walked over, picked up the dead bird, and (it must still be hot in his hand) picked up a small blade of grass that was on the fur. The turtledove's neck hung down, swaying slightly in his hand, and a small piece of hair flowed back on his belly, probably rubbing it when he landed. He straightened out the hair, and his fingers gently stroked it, as if the soft feathers gave him a sense of pleasure. Where did the bullet come from? I can't tell it. The small head, delicate feet, gray belly, rusty shoulders, is exactly that one, it is still intact in any place, well, where is the "dead"? He looked at it calmly, but melancholy for a while, then turned around and put the turtledove into a cloth bag under his armpit,—— which already had a pheasant in it, with a brilliant coat. Loaded with a new bullet, with a gun on his back, heading north, he walked out of the forest, and the red leggings were still visible far and wide. Autumn is really vast.现在我们干甚么呢，在这个寂寞的树林里？

[1] 本篇原载《新路周刊》1948年第一卷第九期。

锁匠之死

锁匠之死[1]
What are we doing now, in this lonely woods? [1] This article was originally published in Xinlu Weekly, Volume 1, Issue 9, 1948. Death of the Locksmith[1]我们城里总是铳人。“铳”就是枪毙。不说是枪毙，说铳。你如果不说铳而说枪毙，城里人就觉得你要不是外边来的，“外路码子”；要不，假如知道你的底细，知道你的祖宗三代，你的“骨头渣子”，你是本乡人而（他们以为）故意不说本乡话，撇“官腔”，哈呀，了不起！你这两个字触犯了他们，他们一定对你侧之以目，嗤之以鼻，努之以嘴，歧视你，恨你，对你有一种敌意。小城里的人都敏感得出奇，多疑善忌，脆弱的自尊心一来就碰伤了。他们随时听得出你声音里有些甚么意思，随时觉得你笑他，看不起他，为了跟你对抗，他们在他们的城垣上增了更多的石头，把他们的固执堆积得更高。如你往大街上一看，随便问一句，“甚么事情？——是不是又枪毙人？”人丛之中一定有一个十分严厉的声音直撞撞的发出来“铳人”！你没法奈何，你觉得他像是寻事找碴儿罢，他又可以说这是好意跟你答话。你皱一皱眉毛，他那儿心里可笑开了。准保事后他一定跟人添油加醋的讲一气，把你形容得狼狈不堪。……好罢，就说是铳人。我们城里是个铳人铳得最多的地方，这简直是她的最大的特色。要是把这个特色取去，我想不不出有甚么可以代替他的。每年要是没有那么些人枪毙，我们的城是甚么样子呢？我怕我要不认得她了。我的那些尊贵的同乡们的一部分情感当然要没有搁处了。于是我们的城加给我一层阴暗。说“最多”不无有点问题，但无论如何比别的地方要“重要”，影响要大。如果说我的印象不大准确，我告诉你，我的初级中学在县城东门城脚，东门外即是杀场。出东门有一木桥，桥下的水呼呼的流得很悲惨，本来叫做东门桥，但一般都称之为“掉魂桥”，言死囚过此桥上魂即掉去也。我们在上课，忽然远远听见许多人奔跑的声音，听见那种凄厉的单调的号声，一会儿汹汹涌涌的过去了。我们的心就沉下来，沉沉的撞击，紧紧的压得难受。枪响了，听得清楚是几个人，一人挨了几枪。冲起一阵喝采的声音，再又是一阵杂沓的脚步，当中夹着一串整齐的，一队保卫团的兵，跑步，吹的号是凯旋号。有时适在下课时候，同学多随着去看。年纪都还小，很多在枪声一响的那一霎回过头来的。我则从未亲自去看过。不过有时进出东门，殷红的白，发了一点黑，破烂的尸首总会映到你眼晴里来。东门外有一个非常好的乘凉看书吹口琴放风筝的地方，有一棵极大的桑树，结了一树大紫桑椹，在摘下来要放进嘴的时候一想到枪一拨响的景象就会老大不自在，眼晴里涌出了恐怖。有一次，我刚从外面回到学校，要进校门，校门进不去了，全是人，堵得死死的，后面有人还拿了凳子爬上来看，就要来了，——又铳人。没有办法，只好站在前头。既然非看不可，我就好好的看一看。一共五个。我一个一个看过去。全是土匪。向来枪毙都是土匪。有一个，我认得！那是南门的一个锁匠。
There are always gunmen in our city. "Gun" means shooting. Don't say it's a shooting, say a gun. If you don't talk about guns but gunshot, the people in the city will think that if you are not from outside, you are a "foreign yard"; otherwise, if you know your details, know your ancestors for three generations, your "bone scum", you are from your hometown and (they think) deliberately don't speak your hometown dialect, skip the "official accent", haha, it's amazing! If you offend them with the word "you", they will definitely look at you sideways, scoff at you, try to talk to you, discriminate against you, hate you, and have a kind of hostility towards you. The people in the small town are surprisingly sensitive, suspicious, and their fragile self-esteem is hurt at the moment they come. They can hear something in your voice at any time, and at any time they feel that you laugh at him and look down on him, and in order to fight you, they add more stones to their walls and pile up their stubbornness higher. If you look down on the street and ask casually, "What's the matter?" ——Did you shoot someone again?" There must be a very stern voice in the crowd that came out of the crowd! You can't help it, you think he's just looking for something to do, and he can say that he is kind enough to answer you. You frown, and he laughs in his heart. After the incident, he will definitely talk to people and describe you in a terrible way. …… Okay, let's just say gunmen. Our city is a place with the most gunmen, and this is simply her greatest feature. If this characteristic were removed, I can't think of anything that could replace him. If there were no so many people shot every year, what would our city look like? I'm afraid I wouldn't recognize her. Of course, some of the emotions of my noble fellow villagers would have to be left unchecked. So our city added a layer of darkness to me. It is a bit problematic to say "at most", but in any case, it is more "important" than other places, and the impact is greater. If my impression is not very accurate, let me tell you that my junior high school is at the foot of the east gate of the county seat, and outside the east gate is the killing field. There is a wooden bridge outside the east gate, and the water under the bridge flows miserably, originally called the East Gate Bridge, but it is generally called the "Soul Bridge Falling Bridge", which means that the soul of a death row prisoner will fall off when he crosses this bridge. We were in class, and suddenly we heard the sound of many people running in the distance, and we heard the mournful and monotonous trumpet sound, which passed violently for a while. Our hearts sank, and the heavy impact was uncomfortable. The gunshots rang out, and I could clearly hear several people, one of whom was shot several times. There was a burst of cheers, and then a burst of chaotic footsteps, sandwiched between a neat string of soldiers from the defense regiment, running, blowing the trumpet of triumph. Sometimes at the end of class, the students mostly went to see it. They are still young, and many of them turned around the moment the gunshots rang out. I have never seen it in person. But sometimes when you go in and out of the east gate, the crimson white is a little black, and the tattered corpse will always be reflected in your eyes. There is a very good place outside the east gate to enjoy the shade, read books, play harmonica, and fly kites, there is a very large mulberry tree, a big purple mulberry, when you pick it and put it in your mouth, you will be uncomfortable at the thought of the gun ringing, and horror wells up in your eyes. Once, I just returned to school from outside, and I was about to enter the school gate, but the school gate couldn't get in, it was full of people, it was blocked, and someone behind me climbed up with a stool to look at it, and it was about to come,—— and there was a gunman. There was no way, so I had to stand in front. Since I have to see it, I will take a good look. There are five in total. I looked over one by one. All bandits. Bandits have always been shot. There is one, I recognize! It was a locksmith at the south gate.这个锁匠有一个很好的百灵。我每次经过他门前时都要看一看。我记得他那个铺子的整个的样子。我记得他的样子。他有妻子老婆，有一个孩子。他家后头有个小院子，有一棵树，树长过屋脊，在外头就看得见。……现在，这是他。他就要去枪毙了。他坐在一个柳条篮子里，被两个扛夫抬着，这样子很滑稽。滑稽得教人痛苦。是他！他没有变样子，不，这不是他。他怎么会，怎么会。是这个样子呢。你猜我当时想的甚么？我想做皇帝。我想九更天，闻太师，——我想我一点也不能救他。我白着脸站在那里。等门口人滚滚的插进跟在后面的队伍里去，松了，露出了大门，我走进去。我一个人坐在空空的学校里的空空的教室里，半天半天。一直到听见有人在隔壁弹风琴。我是个孩子！但是别笑我，那个锁匠是个了不得的人，了不得的锁匠。他的铺子，我傍晚经过时特为看了一看，果然，知道是，关上了。当然一定是关了多少日子了，我早就知道，早就听说，早就看见的。然而以前好像这是不可靠的，不真实，不明明白白的，现在，完了，划然的摆在我面前。排门上两道封条，十字交叉，白纸黑字，县政府封，月日，一颗大朱印。有一根柱子有点歪。
This locksmith had a good lark. I had to look at it every time I passed by his door. I remember the whole thing of his shop. I remember what he looked like. He had a wife and a child. There was a small yard behind his house, and there was a tree that grew over the ridge and was visible from the outside. …… Now, this is him. He's going to be shot. He's sitting in a wicker basket, carried by two porters, and it's funny. It's painful. It's him! He didn't change, no, it's not him. How could he, how could he? That's what it looks like. Guess what I was thinking at that time? I want to be emperor. I think it's the ninth watch, Wen Taishi,—— I don't think I can save him at all. I stood there with a white face. When the people at the door rolled in and into the line following me, I relaxed, revealing the door, and I walked in. I sat alone in an empty classroom in an empty school for half a day. Until I heard someone playing the organ next door. I'm a child! But don't laugh at me, that locksmith is a great person, a great locksmith. I took a look at his shop when I passed by in the evening, and sure enough, I knew it was closed. Of course, it must have been closed for a long time, I knew it for a long time, I had heard about it, and I had seen it for a long time. However, it used to seem unreliable, untrue, and unclear, but now, it's over, it's clearly in front of me. There are two seals on the row door, crossed, black and white on paper, sealed by the county government, month and day, and a large red seal. There is a pillar that is a little crooked.他的罪名是跟匪有来往，通匪。跟匪有来往不一定就是通匪。但在我们地方上人看起来没有甚么两样。至少愿意他没有两样。他的情形也比较特别一点。……主要是因为他住的地方。他住在简直是城中心，往南往北都没有几步即是闹市和富宅。这简直不得了，给他们的威胁太大了，不等于是匪都住在家里来了？随时就有危险，嘿！他们容不得这么一个大胆的人，而且那么一个聪明人，那么有心眼，机伶。而且，他倒真稳呐，一点都看不出来。看他那样子，哪里像个通匪的人，像个匪呢？（直截指之为匪了。）还怪和气的，怪规规矩矩，说话，待人，哪一样不好好的？天天还都见面呢！——个王八旦！谁料得到他里头是这么样的险！奸！他们气愤了，他们觉得他顶可恨的是他们被他蒙住了，他们像个三岁孩子似的被人欺负了，他们冤！于是从前对他的好感漫无节制的增高起来，他们简直把他说成了神，甚么不可能的，平常决不有人相信的事情大家全都相信了，临时现抓，越编越多，越编越长，越编越有声有色，委委曲曲，原原本本，一大套变成理由和证据，——杀他！因为，他们不为甚么也希望他被杀，希望有人被杀，他们要创造出这么一个人。这回花样翻新，异于往常，有趣。
His crime is to have dealings with bandits and collude with bandits. Having dealings with bandits does not necessarily mean colluding with bandits. But in our place, people seem to be no different. At least I hope he is not different. His situation is also a little more special. …… Mainly because of where he lives. He lives in the center of the city, just a few steps south and north of the downtown area and rich houses. This is simply amazing, the threat to them is too great, doesn't it mean that the bandits all live in the house? There is danger at any time, hey! They can't tolerate such a bold person, and such a smart person, so thoughtful, and clever. Moreover, he is really stable, he can't see it at all. Look at him like that, how can he look like a bandit, like a bandit? (Straight up as a bandit.) It's weird to be kind, weird to be well-behaved, to speak, to treat people, which one is not good? We still see each other every day! ——A bastard! Who would have thought that he would be so dangerous! Traitor! They were angry, they felt that what they hated was that they were blindfolded by him, they were bullied like a three-year-old child, they were wronged! So the good impression of him in the past increased uncontrollably, they simply called him a god, what is impossible, everyone believed in things that no one would believe in normally, temporarily arrested, the more they made up, the longer they were, the more they made up, the more colorful they became, the more they were complicated, the original text, a large set of reasons and evidence,—— kill him! Because, they don't want him to be killed, they want someone to be killed, they want to create such a person. This time the pattern is renovated, different from usual, and interesting.他是个锁匠。姓王，一般称之为王锁匠，或锁匠小王。从前，他是个挑锁匠担子的。但锁匠担子常常也称为铜匠担子，锁匠也是一种铜匠，而且与真正的铜匠有一部分的工作是相同的简直大部是相同的。所以王锁匠未始不可以称为王铜匠。比如北平市口角有一个矮子铜匠，职业性质与王锁匠全无二致，而人不称之为矮子锁匠称之为矮子铜匠。王锁匠的“锁”字有一点标榜的意思，因为他配锁配得特别好。你见过那种锁匠担子么？长方的两个木箱子，底微阔大，渐上渐小，四边都是梯形。一边一个，挑着时咔——咔，咔——咔的响声，箱子上头有个架子，横挂一长串钥匙之类，互相擦击，发出声音，极有节奏。这种担子跟修洋灯洋伞的，补锅的，锡匠的担子都如同兄弟，有一种渊源，一种亲切的关系，都是小时候常常会让我把急切的脚步放缓，让我嗒焉如有所失，毫无目的跟着他看着他半天的。“补锅，——”丁达达丁，丁达达丁，丁达达丁达达丁达达丁，……有一种特殊响器，很多的精铁长片串在一起，撒开来一齐花喇喇放出去，又趁手一带收回来，折成一叠，这有个名字的，叫做甚么甚么子，……哎呀，我怎么会又想不起来呢，我都闹不清究竟该往谁的手上搁了。不过锁匠担子常常有的是固定的顿在一处，等人来就教。木箱的一头各有许多小抽屉。我多想把那些小抽屉一个一个的抽出来看看啊。这些小库房里简直是包罗万象，用之不竭。并不乱搁的，每一格都是一定有东西。那每一个锁匠担子都是完全一样的。这一个锁匠跟那个锁匠若是换一付担子用一两天绝对没有问题，没有甚么不方便。不，一两天是可以的，多了不成，器物各有不同性格，用惯了自己的用别人的不顺手，不如意。——都是这样，所有的这种担子都有一定的秩序。甚至皮匠担子。我从前以为皮匠担子总是砧子木板乱搁的，才不，刀是刀的地方，锤是锤的地方，麻线，黄蜡猪鬃都占一定角落，甚至篮子上竹架子上夹的上底的牛皮马皮，大大小小，都挨着差不多的层次！顶要紧的是一把大锉。大。锉身有二尺多长，四四方方。一头一个木柄，抓在手上。一头是锉头，木制，圆的，顶头饱出，作球状，套在一个固钉在木箱上的铁环里。锁匠坐在一个马扎子上，坑蚩坑蚩拉那锁。锉钥匙，锁匠，锉别的东西。磨锉金属的声音本来是不大好听的声音，但如果那个锁匠，我不讨厌，我听惯了，而且可以毫不勉强的说，我喜欢。是的，那是沉着痛快，锲而不舍，坚决而持实的声音，一锉下去，拉回来往下再一推，铜屑子灿烂的撒下来，那边，那个东西上一道糟子，生新的一条一条痕迹。锉高一点，低一点，偏一点，侧一点。手里控着的东西转着方向，嘎兹嘎兹，嘎兹嘎兹成了。这是最诚实的，最好的广告。“喂，拿过来试一试。”一把死了的锁，郭达，开了。再试试，锁起来，郭达，开了；郭达，开了。好。因此有多少人少做许多着急的梦了。一年丢了钥匙的倒也不少噢？这些钥匙都到哪里去了呢？锁匠有许多旧钥匙是哪里来的呢？只见人拿了锁来配钥匙，拿了钥匙来配锁的不多罢？锁匠开得的锁多，不一定钥匙，有一根铁丝弯。来弯去的大多数锁都不费事。据说一个小偷学习他的行业之前必先学作木匠，瓦匠，懂得房屋路径构造，撬椽子挖洞，爬高走险，还得，学两年锁匠。而捉到过好多小偷，说是都是由锁匠出身的。所以，王锁匠的事犯以后，有人说，他在没有“大做”之前一定还摸过几家子。偶尔捞一点外水，并不长做，不在地保面前挂号，手脚紧密，不露破绽，没有人知道。有两笔肥的呢，不然，就坑蚩坑蚩，他就开得起铺子来了？这么多锁匠呢，为什么他们都拉一辈子大锉？——害，你，你叫王锁匠给你配过钥匙没有？哈！你运气！你知道你担了多大的风险啊，他是，甚么锁到他手里就听他的话的啊，见过一把锁就忘不了的啊，弹簧弹子德国钢锁都开得开的啊！啧！你他妈的婊子不害×，——走局。你丢过东西？——没有？—— 可惜。
He is a locksmith. The surname is Wang, generally called Wang Locksmith, or Locksmith Xiao Wang. Once upon a time, he was a locksmith's burden. But the locksmith's burden is often called the coppersmith's burden, and the locksmith is also a kind of coppersmith, and some of the work of the real coppersmith is the same, and most of them are the same. Therefore, the king locksmith cannot be called the king coppersmith. For example, there is a short coppersmith in the corner of Peiping City, whose professional nature is no different from that of the king locksmith, and people do not call it a short locksmith, but call it a short coppersmith. The word "lock" of the king locksmith has a bit of a flamboyant meaning, because he is very good at matching locks. Have you ever seen that kind of locksmith's burden? Two rectangular wooden boxes have a slightly wide bottom, gradually getting smaller and smaller, and are trapezoidal on all sides. One on one side, when picking it, there is a click-click, click-click, there is a shelf on the box, hanging a long string of keys and the like, rubbing against each other, making a sound, very rhythmic. This kind of burden is like a brother who repairs foreign lamps and umbrellas, mends pots, and tinsmiths, and has a kind of relationship, a kind of relationship, which often makes me slow down my eager pace when I was a child, making me feel like I have lost something, and I followed him to look at him for a long time without purpose. "Mending pot ,——" Ding Da Da Ding, Ding Da Da Ding, Ding Da Ding,...... There is a special ringer, many long pieces of fine iron are strung together, spread out and put out together, and then take them back and fold them into a stack,...... Oh, how could I not remember again, I can't figure out whose hand to put it into. However, the locksmith's burden is often fixed in one place, and he will teach it when someone comes. There are many small drawers at each end of the wooden box. I really want to take out those small drawers one by one to take a look. These small warehouses are simply all-encompassing and inexhaustible. There is no mess in it, there must be something in every compartment. Every locksmith's burden is exactly the same. If this locksmith and that locksmith exchange burdens for a day or two, there is absolutely no problem, and there is no inconvenience. No, it's okay for a day or two, but it's not possible to do more, the utensils have different personalities, and they are used to using their own and others' inconveniences, and they are not satisfactory. ——It's all like this, all this kind of burden has a certain order. Even the cobbler's burden. I used to think that the cobbler's burden was always lying on the anvil board, but no, the knife is the knife, the hammer is the place of the hammer, the twine and yellow wax pig's bristles occupy a certain corner, and even the cowhide horsehide on the bamboo rack on the basket, large and small, are all next to each other! The most important thing is a big file. Big. The file body is more than two feet long and square. One end has a wooden handle, held in the hand. One end is a file, wooden, round, the top is full, in the shape of a ball, set in an iron ring nailed to a wooden box. The locksmith sits on a horse, pitting the lock. File keys, locksmiths, files and other things. The sound of grinding metal was not very pleasant, but if the locksmith, I don't hate it, I'm used to hearing it, and I can say without reluctance, I like it. Yes, it was a calm, persevering, resolute and steadfast voice, filing down, pulling it back and pushing it down again, and the copper shavings were sprinkled brilliantly. File a little higher, lower, a little off, and a little sideways. The things in my hand turned in the direction, and it became a gazi gazi, a gazi gazi. This is the most honest and best advertisement. "Hey, bring it over and give it a try." A dead lock, Guo Da, open. Try again, lock it, Guo Da, open; Guo Da, open. Good. Therefore, how many people have less anxious dreams. There are quite a few people who lose their keys in a year? Where did all these keys go? Where did the locksmith get many old keys? I saw that people took locks to match keys, and not many people took keys to match locks. Locksmiths open many locks, not necessarily keys, and there is a wire bend. Most of the locks that come and go are troublesome. It is said that a thief must first learn to be a carpenter, a bricklayer, understand the structure of house paths, pry rafters to dig holes, climb high and take risks, and have to learn locksmithing for two years. And many thieves have been caught, saying that they are all from locksmiths. Therefore, after the king's locksmith committed the crime, some people said that he must have touched a few houses before he "did a big job". Occasionally fishing for a little extra water, not doing it for a long time, not registering in front of the land protector, with tight hands and feet, no flaws, no one knows. There are two fat ones, otherwise, if you dig a pit, he can afford to open a shop? There are so many locksmiths, why do they all pull big files all their lives? ——Harm, you, have you asked the king locksmith to give you the key? Ha! Your luck! You know how much risk you take, he listens to him when he locks it in his hand, he can't forget it when he sees a lock, he can open a spring marble German steel lock! Tut! You fucking bitch doesn't hurt ×,—— get out of the game. Have you ever lost something? ——Nothing? —— It's a pity.王锁匠后来开了个铺子。一个正式的铜匠铺子。这就是说他有三根铜苗子坐镇在橱架上。铜匠店总得有这个东西，也有一种义务，到附近邻居，这一坊一保有火灾，得把这几根铜苗子借出来，扛出去，帮同救火。铜苗子看见过没有？跟个大望远镜似的，构造原理与小孩子玩的水唧子同。这东西的威力当然不如水龙大，但有时小火，专对一个近身方向也甚有用。而且，轻，方便，灵活，火头转到哪里马上就迎得上去。铜匠店不知是不是因为整天丁丁东东吵扰了街坊，故做了这个东西，防其不测，作为补报？城里熟习掌故的不但说得出各坊老龙的性格，且亦能历历说出一家一家铜匠店的水苗子的历史，说得出他们的样子，说得出某次某天他所尽的力，建的功。跟那些龙一样，有些苗子都渐渐有了神性，供放在家里轻易不触动，甚至也烧香叩头，隔一个相当时候须“请”出来校验校验。王锁匠家的一根特长苗子，一两次之后即显出不凡。更值得感谢的是他亲自出没火场施救时的勇敢和机敏。对面那一家豆腐店，母女两个，不是他，不是那根苗子，早完了。……从此王锁匠的工作不是，不单是锉，而是打了。一块紫铜板，登登登登，能够打成一把水吊子，简直是不可想象的事！一个铁砧子，铜板放在上头，一锤子，一锤子，一锤子下去，红粉粉的铜上一个光溜溜的紫麻子。登，一锤；登，一锤。不是死命的砍，巧巧的，一着到立刻就反弹了回来，耍耍停停。手下铜板渐渐转移得每两点之间，距离一定，麻子都是整整齐齐的。转着转着圆了，转着转着窝过来，有意思！打水吊子，打铜盆，打水镟子，酒镟子，打脚炉，打五更鸡，莲子井。水吊子一把一把吊在屋梁上，水镟底朝外倚在架子上，又光又圆。他也做福禄寿喜字，立鹤芝鹿烛台。也磨松鼠葡萄双鲤鱼，赛银帐钩。做的油灯盏。做铜笔帽，做墨盒。我的墨盒，笔帽都是他家买的。笔帽是玉山号笔店买的，但是他家做的，他也还做锁，大大小小，各种各样的锁。还配钥匙，到他那里配钥匙的人多。他生意很好。可是新开的店也并不光鲜，老房子，比一般大铜匠铺子小，说正式也并不大正式，还是一样“小本营生”，只有两个小徒弟，另外就是他自己，店也没有什么陈设，暗暗的，墙上砖块的印子在薄薄一层石灰水后里骨露出来，木头上并未髹漆，碎砖地，招牌是纸写的，正面墙上有一个红福字。廊簷台阶有一两块砖头常常是缺的。我们一次一次从他的廊簷下走，一次一次脚下的路线为这个缺口一绊。一遇到这种缺口我们就想跺他两脚再跺下两块来的，可是王锁匠家的廊簷台阶总是缺那么两块。他那个百灵笼子在头子，鸭嘴铜钩，百灵在台子上珠子似的唱。一只好百灵。王锁匠一大早起来添食换水，铺沙，到东门外学田上溜一转。
The king locksmith later opened a shop. A formal coppersmith shop. This means that he has three copper seedlings sitting on the cabinet shelf. The coppersmith shop must have this thing, and there is also an obligation to go to the nearby neighbors, and as soon as there is a fire in this workshop, they have to lend these copper seedlings and carry them out to help put out the fire. Have you ever seen the copper seedlings? Like a large telescope, the construction principle is the same as that of a child playing with water. Of course, this thing is not as powerful as a water dragon, but sometimes a small fire is also very useful for a close direction. Moreover, it is light, convenient, and flexible, and the fire head can be greeted immediately wherever it turns. I don't know if the coppersmith shop made this thing because it disturbed the neighbors all day long, to prevent accidents, as a supplement? The people who are familiar with the story in the city can not only tell the character of the old dragons in each neighborhood, but also clearly tell the history of the water seedlings of each coppersmith shop, what they look like, and tell them what they have done and what they have done on a certain day. Like those dragons, some seedlings have gradually become divine, and they are not easily touched when they are placed at home, and they even burn incense and bow their heads, and they have to be "invited" to come out for verification every other time. A special seedling of Wang Suo's family showed extraordinary after one or two times. What is even more worthy of gratitude is his bravery and agility when he personally went to the fire to rescue. In the tofu shop opposite, the mother and daughter, not him, not the seedlings, were already over. …… From then on, the king's locksmith's job was not just to file, but to beat. A purple copper plate, Deng Deng Deng, can be made into a water hanger, it is simply unthinkable! An anvil, a copper plate is placed on top, a hammer, a hammer, a hammer down, a smooth purple pockmark on the red and pink copper. Deng, a hammer; Deng, a hammer. It's not a desperate cut, it's coincidental, it bounces back immediately when it arrives, and it stops. The copper plates under his hands gradually moved to every two points, the distance was fixed, and the pockmarks were neatly arranged. Turning and turning, turning and turning, interesting! Hitting the water hanger, hitting the copper basin, hitting the water arrowhead, the wine arrowhead, hitting the foot stove, hitting the five-watch chicken, and the lotus seed well. The water hangers are hung on the beams one by one, and the bottom of the water arrowhead is leaning on the shelf facing outward, which is bright and round. He also made the character Fu Lu Shouxi and the standing crane Zhi deer candlestick. Also grind squirrel grape double carp, race silver tent hook. Make oil lamps. Make copper pen caps and ink cartridges. My ink cartridges and pen caps are all bought by his family. The pen cap was bought by the Yushan pen shop, but he also made locks, large and small, all kinds of locks. He also gave keys, and many people came to him to give keys. He is doing a good business. But the newly opened shop is not glamorous, the old house, smaller than the average big coppersmith shop, it is not very formal to say that it is formal, it is still the same "small base to make a living", there are only two little apprentices, the other is himself, the store has no furnishings, it is dark, the brick prints on the wall are exposed after a thin layer of lime water, the wood is not painted, the brick floor is broken, the sign is written on paper, and there is a red blessing character on the front wall. One or two bricks are often missing on the eaves of the corridor. We walked under his eaves one by one, and the route under our feet tripped for this gap again and again. When we encountered this kind of gap, we wanted to stomp on his feet and stomp down two more pieces, but the eaves of Wang Locksmith's house were always missing two pieces. His lark cage is at the head, the duck beak is a copper hook, and the lark sings like beads on the stage. A good lark. Wang locksmith got up early in the morning to add food and water, spread sand, and slipped around the school field outside the east gate.门关着。有缝，往里看，黑曲曲的。台阶上还是缺那么两块。好像比平常高，可是狭了，得歪着一点肩膀走。门槛是个两截的。一点声音都没有。一个蜘蛛在上头结网，风吹得网鼓鼓的。
The door is closed. There is a crack, looking inside, it is black. There are still two pieces missing from the steps. It seems to be higher than usual, but it is narrower, and you have to walk with your shoulders a little crooked. The threshold is two-section. There is no sound at all. A spider is weaving a web on it, and the wind blows the net.我们城里后来来了好些机器，抽水机，榨油机，碾米机。来了好些“老桂”，不知道为甚么管理机器的工头叫老桂。老桂也管修理机器。王锁匠斜对是一家米店，本来用骡子拉，后来改了，用机器。兴中公司三十二匹马力，很好。本来叫碾坊，改了名字叫了米厂了。老石碾子也在，不用了。起了一间房子，洋灰地。皮带盘，钢轴，车床，老虎钳，电磨石，螺丝洗，钢锯子，……王锁匠有兴趣极了。没有事他就溜到后头去看。老桂跟他混得很熟。老桂一个人，机器买了的时候由公司介绍跟了机器一起来的，没有一个朋友。他那一口话就没有人完全懂。他无聊极了，脾气大，动不动大发，要跟老板辞生意了。王锁匠听呀听的，他的话懂得八九成了。他试着撇着一点腔跟他攀谈，知道他许多事情，懂得他喜欢甚么，讨厌什么。米厂里人多奇怪，嘻，这个机器人跟小王聊得挺好，不晓得说些甚么，一聊一半天，指手画脚，点头磕脑！畜生也服一个人管，好了，这以后他要是再发脾气要小王跟他讲讲看。一讲，行！没事。于是只要老桂一毛了，赶紧，着人到对过叫小王。百试百验。小王把那些钳子锯子螺丝老虎渐渐的摸熟了。有时他在架子上拧，转，推，捺，老桂刁根烟卷笑眯眯的在一边看，“呱呱叫！呱呱叫！”店里哪一个人都学得像他那个“呱呱叫”。有时，机器出了毛病，老桂修，小王也挨肩跟他蹲着弄得两手黑油，一鼻子灰。机器开着，他也能拿个油壶添添油，抓一把纱衣这里那里擦擦。甚至他也在耳朵上夹一根铅笔，能够用半尺画简单的图。他有些东西借老桂的家伙做。老桂有些零件还得请他照样子配。托老桂他还订了几件简单工具，在店堂里装了起来。有一天老桂跟老板说想请假。老板慌了，赶紧叫小王来，没有甚么事情他不高兴，这一阵子他样样都满意，不是胖了吗？他说他谢谢老板，他说店里上上下下他也知道，都是好人。不过他要请假，人家家里有事情。甚么事情？——人家有个太太呀，来你们这儿两年多了，太太一个人睡！他说，回去看看，两个礼拜，就来。决不误你的事，说哪一天来就哪一天来。他的脾气，你们还不都知道？板板六十四，说一句是一句，准保，不会错。“那怎么行，怎么行！机器谁管，机器谁管！这玩意又不是骡子，不通人情，他要是发起蹶子来你又不能打他。不行，不行！”“老王呱呱叫，老王可以管，老王跟我一样的一样的。”试验了一两天，老桂只看，不动手，老王果然弄得妥妥当当。好了，老王管！王锁匠管了两个礼拜，——果然老桂说一是一，一点没有出事。从此，老桂请假的回数就多起来，老板越来越答应得容易。他太太给他一年生一个孩子。
Many machines came to our city later, pumping machines, oil presses, and rice mills. There were many "Lao Gui", and I don't know why the foreman who managed the machine was called Lao Gui. Lao Gui is also in charge of repairing machines. Wang Locksmith is a rice shop diagonally, originally pulled by mules, but later changed to use machines. Xingzhong Company has 32 horsepower, which is very good. It was originally called a mill, but it was renamed a rice factory. The old stone mill is also there, no need it. A house was built, gray land. Belt discs, steel shafts, lathes, vises, electric grinding stones, screw washes, hacksaws,...... Wang Locksmith was very interested. He slipped behind to see if there was nothing to do. Lao Gui is very familiar with him. Lao Gui was alone, and when the machine was bought, he was introduced by the company and came with the machine, and he didn't have a friend. No one fully understood his words. He was extremely bored, had a big temper, and was going to quit business with his boss. The locksmith Wang listened and listened, and he understood eighty or ninety percent of his words. He tried to talk to him with a little tone, knowing many things about him, knowing what he liked and hated. How strange are the people in the rice factory, hey, this robot has a good conversation with Xiao Wang, I don't know what to say, I chat for half a day, pointing fingers, nodding my head! The beast is also under the control of one person, okay, if he loses his temper again in the future, he asks Xiao Wang to talk to him. Talk, okay! It's okay. So as long as Lao Gui is a dime, hurry up and call Xiao Wang. A hundred trials. Xiao Wang gradually became familiar with those pliers, saws, screws, and tigers. Sometimes he twisted, turned, pushed, and pressed on the shelf, and Lao Gui looked at the cigarette roll with a smile, "Croak!" Croak! Everyone in the store learned to be like his "croaking". Sometimes, the machine went wrong, and Lao Guixiu and Xiao Wang also squatted with him shoulder to shoulder, making his hands black and his nose gray. With the machine on, he can also take an oil jug to add oil, grab a handful of gauze clothes and wipe them here and there. Even he has a pencil in his ear and can draw a simple picture with half a foot. He borrowed some things from Lao Gui's guy. Lao Gui has some parts that he still has to match. He also ordered a few simple tools and installed them in the store. One day Lao Gui told the boss that he wanted to ask for leave. The boss panicked and quickly called Xiao Wang, he was not happy about anything, he was satisfied with everything for a while, wasn't he fat? He said he thanked the boss, and he said that he knew that the whole store was a good person. But he wants to ask for leave, and he has something to do at home. What's the matter? ——They have a wife, who has been with you for more than two years, and she sleeps alone! He said, go back and take a look, and come in two weeks. Don't miss your business, say whatever day you come. Don't you all know his temper? Sixty-four, one sentence is a sentence, quasi-guarantee, it will not be wrong. "How can it work, how can it work! Who cares about the machine, who cares about the machine! This thing is not a mule, it is not humane, and if he starts to kick, you can't beat him. No, no!" "Lao Wang croaked, Lao Wang can take care of it, Lao Wang is the same as me." After testing for a day or two, Lao Gui only looked at it and didn't do it, and Lao Wang really did it properly. Okay, Lao Wang managed! Wang locksmith managed it for two weeks,—— and sure enough, Lao Gui said that it was one, and nothing happened at all. Since then, Lao Gui has asked for leave more and more, and it has become easier and easier for the boss to agree. His wife gave him a child a year.王锁匠实际上把他那爿铜匠店已经变成一个小工场。陆陆续续老桂帮他买。他自己也四处去踅摸，日增月累的，简直很像个样子了。他也装了一个小柴油马达，一根钢轴，小皮带，咕噜咕噜，八答八答见天的转。城里城外的老桂常上他那里坐，简直成了他们聚会的中心。他们有生意也多照顾他，要配个甚么零件，他的许多老法子老工具倒还补这个城里机械实件不足。有的地方机器发生故障也来叫他去修。他忙得很，好精神。也有不少人不叫他王锁匠，叫他“老桂”了，“王老桂”。这是一个为很多人谈论的人物了，识与不识，都羡慕他。他那两个铜苗子还放在那里，放在老地方。大大的出了名则是在那一次。保卫团的一个连长的二膛盒子不知哪里坏了，不知怎么有一次在他店里喝茶谈起来，说可惜极了，这根枪还是徐大文的。——徐大文是这一带著匪，作案之多，枪法之准，子孙徒弟之广遍，在他死后近十年还常有人谈起。王锁匠好奇，说看怎么样？他也不知道怎么给他拆开来，七锉八挫配好了！那个连长兴喜若狂，无以为谢，当场在他店前放了三枪！且让王锁匠也放三枪玩玩。这六枪！
The king locksmith has actually turned his coppersmith shop into a small workshop. One after another, Lao Gui helped him buy it. He himself also wandered around, getting tired day by day, and it looked like it. He also installed a small diesel motor, a steel shaft, a small belt, gurgling, and turning the sky. Lao Gui in and out of the city often sat with him, and it simply became the center of their gathering. They have business and take care of him more, and many of his old methods and tools make up for the lack of mechanical parts in the city. In some places, when the machine breaks down, he comes to ask him to repair it. He is very busy and in good spirits. There are also many people who don't call him Wang Locksmith, but call him "Lao Gui" or "Wang Lao Gui". This is a character that many people talk about, and whether they know him or not, they envy him. His two copper seedlings are still there, in the old place. The big name was that time. The double-chambered box of a company commander of the security regiment broke somewhere, and somehow he once drank tea in his shop and talked about it, saying that it was a pity that this gun still belonged to Xu Dawen. ——Xu Dawen is a bandit in this area, with many crimes, accurate marksmanship, and a wide range of descendants and apprentices, and it is often talked about in the past ten years after his death. Wang Locksmith was curious and said how about it? He didn't know how to disassemble it, and the seven files and eight setbacks were matched! The company commander was ecstatic and had no thanks, and fired three shots in front of his shop on the spot! And let the locksmith Wang also play with three shots. These six shots!王锁匠有一阵忽然不见了几天，后来又回来了还是一样，一样作他的事情。问他，说是乡下请他去修抽水帮浦的。后来隔这么三两个月就要出一次门。据说，哪里是下乡修水帮浦去了！乡下有水帮浦的不过是那么几处，也不能挨着个儿啊。坏，也不能尽来找他啊。正正经经的宅老桂有的是，要你……你个半路出家，似通不通的冒牌老桂！他啊是叫土匪摇去的，给他们修枪去了！听说他还会造。既能修，就能制！还会造砲，迫击砲！有那广大本领么？人倒是真鬼巧。嗐，用到歪路上去了？人不能聪明，聪明人就不安份，再不，难保他不会造反。这种人，甚么事情做不出来？天地君亲师，仁义理智信，一样都没有。既有今日，何必当初。当初挑个小铜匠担子，恍仓恍仓，也就不会有些朝了。人啊……真是：愚而安愚。既与土匪有来往，他就是匪，你能说他没有作过案？财迷心窍，心都横过来了，跟个挑子似的，放在桌上，嘴子朝着一边。——说起来，这几个匪也不义气，不值价，怎么就把他攀出来呢？既做了这事，怎么也不避一避？几个保卫团弟兄，走了去一搭就搭住了。没有话说，五花大绑，扎起来就走。
The locksmith Wang suddenly disappeared for a few days, and then came back to do the same thing. When I asked him, he said that the countryside asked him to repair the pump. Later, he had to go out every three or two months. It is said that he went to the countryside to repair the water pump! There are only a few places in the countryside with water pumps, and they can't be next to each other. Bad, you can't come to him. The serious house Lao Gui wants you to ...... You are a halfway monk, and it seems that you are a fake old Gui! He asked the bandits to shake it and repair their guns! I heard that he can also make it. If you can repair it, you can make it! You can also make cannons and mortars! Do you have that vast skills? People are really clever. Hey, are you using it on a crooked road? If a person can't be smart, a smart person will be restless, and if not, it is difficult to guarantee that he will not rebel. What can't this kind of person do? The king of heaven and earth is a teacher, benevolence, righteousness, reason, and faith, and there is nothing. Since there is today, why bother in the beginning. When I picked a small coppersmith's burden, I was in a daze, and I wouldn't have been in a hurry. People...... It's true: foolish and stupid. Since he has dealings with bandits, he is a bandit, can you say that he has not committed a crime? The heart is turned sideways, like a pick, placed on the table, with his mouth facing to the side. ——Speaking of which, these bandits are not loyal and not worth the price, why did they climb him out? Since you have done this, why don't you avoid it? A few brothers in the security regiment walked away and caught up. There was nothing to say, tied up, tied up and left.有的人又说，这件事内里有一桩风流案子，豆腐店那个女儿，进门寡，嫁过去没有几天，丈夫死了，在家里，哼，好不了。小王跟她有一手，米店老板也跟她有一腿子，一个钱，一个人。这就……
Some people also said that there was a romantic case in this matter, the daughter of the tofu shop, who was widowed and married a few days ago, her husband died, at home, hum, it's not good. Xiao Wang has a hand with her, and the owner of the rice shop also has a leg, a money, and a person with her. This is ......他那个百灵挂在保卫团团部里，只听见叫，看不见。

[1] 本篇原载1948年7月18日《平明日报》。

卦摊

卦摊[1]
——阙下杂记之一
His lark hung in the headquarters of the defense regiment, and he could only hear the call, but he couldn't see it. [1] This article was originally published in the Pingming Daily on July 18, 1948. Hexagram stall{{id_0000}} ——One of the miscellaneous notes of the palace初到北平，哪儿都不认识——充满了新鲜。从东安市场到沙滩不是最普普通通的一条路么？住在沙滩的人都熟，我后来也都熟透了。可是刚到的那一天，他们带我上市场吃晚饭，晚上回来，那天没有灯，黑黑的，我觉得这条路上充满了东西，全都感动我，我有点恍恍惚惚，我心里不停的有一个声音：我到了一个地方，我到了一个地方。我一点不认识，而且我根本没有要去认识路，他们告诉我“哎，转弯。”“哎，哎，曾祺。”……全都殷勤极了，我像一个空船，一点担负都没有。……我们上公园去。从沙滩坐三轮。我在三轮车上不觉路之远近，我放开眼睛看，觉得这条路很好。车子一转，“这条路好！”从街市转入冷巷，像从第一页（书）到了第二页，前面的多方的印象流入统一的，细致的叙述。车在城墙下平路上走，城墙，河水，树，柏树，胶皮轮子丝丝的响，天气好，爽快，经过一个地方，又是城墙，河水，柏树，稍为杂乱一点，一点人工，一点俗，——到了。很难找到甚么话说出我对公园的初次印象。很像一个公园。——这就是说很难产生一个印象，一个比较具体的，完整的，肯定，毫不犹豫，不由理智整理过的印象。公园总有点乱，一点俗，一点人为的痕迹。回来，我倒是记得那条路。城下的路。我记得那条路上有好些测字摊子。那条路我说不出来，我说“那条路上有好些测字摊子”，就代表了我对路的感情了，我觉得很表达出来了，听着，看到我说话的样子，他们也都懂了。这条路是一个喜悦。
When I first arrived in Peiping, I didn't know anywhere - it was full of freshness. Isn't it the most ordinary road from Dong'an Market to the beach? Everyone who lives on the beach is familiar with it, and I am familiar with it later. But on the day I first arrived, they took me to the market for dinner, and when I came back in the evening, there were no lights that day, it was dark, I felt that the road was full of things, all of them moved me, I was a little dazed, and there was a voice in my heart: I arrived at a place, I arrived at a place. I didn't know him at all, and I didn't want to know the road at all, they told me, "Hey, turn." "Hey, hey, Zeng Qi." …… They were all very attentive, I was like an empty boat, with no burden at all. …… Let's go to the park. Take a tricycle from the beach. I didn't notice the distance of the road on the tricycle, and I let go of my eyes and thought that this road was good. As soon as the car turned, "This road is good!" Turning from the market to the cold alley, it was like from the first page (book) to the second page, and the impressions of many parties in front flowed into a unified and detailed narrative. The car walked on the flat road under the city wall, the city wall, the river, the trees, the cypress trees, the rubber wheels made a slight sound, the weather was good, refreshing, passing through a place, and the city wall, river, cypress trees, a little messy, a little artificial, a little vulgar ,——. It's hard to find words to say my first impression of the park. It's like a park. ——This means that it is difficult to produce an impression, a more specific, complete, affirmative, unhesitating, and irrational impression. The park is always a bit messy, a little vulgar, a little artificial. When I came back, I remembered that road. The road under the city. I remember there were many word stalls on that road. I can't tell that road, I said "there are many word stalls on that road", which represents my feelings for the road, I think it's very expressive, listen, see the way I speak, they all understand. This road is a joy.那条路是东华门至西华门，太庙后河沿至公园后门的路，紫禁城下的路，当中所经过的那“一个地方”是午门的前面，阙左门与阙右门之间，即我现在所在的地方。我对于这个地方，这条路可以说是很熟的了。我现要说那些测字摊，卦摊。——这种摊子我一直都称之为测字摊，这也许是我的家乡土话，或者是因为我们那里这种摊子乃是以测字为主，虽其所业类皆不以测字为限，且或有根本就不给人测字者，我们则一律名之为“测字摊子”了。按测字当作拆字，拆析字画，加以添减，附会阴阳时日之数为说，为人剖置疑信灾祥之术也，但小时看测字先生放置字卷的铜制或木制小斗的正面所写的正是“测字”这两个字，遂深深的记下了。“测”自较“拆”字更深一筹。“测”者猜测之谓，许多事情本就是猜测猜测而已，哪能就当得真呢，拆字若是直白，测字似更宛转，各有所长，难可抑扬之也。我唯在昆明翠湖公园昆华图书馆前的石凳上看到过一个，那真是“拆（！）字”的。一个老头子，一个普普通通的老头子，他坐在石凳上你以为他就是坐在那里而已，是个坐在那里休息休息的人，不以为他是干甚么的。他没有布匾桌帷，没有桌子，没有八卦太极之类东西，没有一点神秘的，巫术的，没有神秘与巫术被否定了之后的漂泊的存在的嘲笑空气，使人相信的热心已经失去，但不得不对自己的热心作无望的乞怜的难堪的无力的挣扎，没有那种露出了难看的裸体，希望人家不必细看的悲哀的声音，没有“混碗饭吃吃”的最卑下的生活态度，没有“江湖气”，他有一个墨盒一枝笔，你甚至连一个墨盒一枝笔都不觉得他有，一点都不惹你注意。
That road is from Donghua Gate to Xihua Gate, along the river behind the Taimiao Temple to the back gate of the park, and the road under the Forbidden City. I am very familiar with this place, this road. Now I want to talk about those word testing stalls, hexagram stalls. ——I have always called this kind of word testing stall, this may be my hometown dialect, or because our kind of stall is mainly word testing, although its business is not limited to word testing, and there are people who do not test words at all, we all call it "word testing stall". According to the word measurement as dismantling, disassembling the calligraphy and painting, adding and subtracting, and attaching the number of yin and yang time and days, it is also the art of dissecting people's doubts and beliefs, but when I was a child, I looked at the front of the copper or wooden bucket where Mr. Meizi placed the word scroll and wrote the word "measuring" deeply. "Testing" is deeper than the word "demolition". "Testing" means guessing, many things are just guessing and guessing, how can it be taken seriously, if the word is straightforward, the word measurement seems to be more winding, each has its own strengths, and it is difficult to suppress it. I have only seen one on the stone bench in front of the Kunhua Library in Cuihu Park, Kunming, and it is really a "dismantling (!) word". An old man, an ordinary old man, he sits on a stone bench and you think he is just sitting there, a person who sits there resting and resting, and you don't think he is doing anything. He has no plaques, tables, tables, gossip and Tai Chi and the like, no mystery, no mystery, no mystery and the ridicule of the existence of wandering after the witchcraft is denied, the enthusiasm to believe has been lost, but he has to make a hopeless begging for pity for his enthusiasm, there is no kind of sad voice that shows an ugly nakedness, there is no sad voice that shows an ugly nakedness, there is no humble attitude towards life of "mixing a bowl of rice to eat", there is no "jianghu atmosphere", he has an ink cartridge and a pen, you don't even think he has a cartridge or a pen, and he doesn't attract your attention at all.他的唯一的特点是：质朴。质朴是他的一切。我们不知道怎么知道他是个测字的，事实上我至今仍找不出甚么理由能够断定他是，除非是我们看见过他拆过。我们很少看见过。我们都看见过，但是都很少，仿佛每个人都有机会看到一次，不同的一次，那简直是滑稽！他根本不“会”，不像，不是那么一回事。如果有最不适于作这样的事的，那是他。我们任何一个人都可以比他作得更好的。简单到不能再简单，写一个字，三五句话就完了，来拆字的还不走，等着，看看他：完了吗？——完了！看他样子，不想再说一句话，也没有一句话说了。他也没有觉察到他的顾主还没有满足，还在等。像从一个瓶子里倒出一粒豆子，没有了。给下钱，不走还干甚么呢？走，这位先生心里实在莫名其妙。测字算卦也者，本来就是把你心里的话给你说出来，把你的路理一理，给你的纷纭一个暂时的秩序，把某些话颜色加深，加深而且联系起来，让原有的趋势成为一个趋势，淤滞的流得更畅，刷带两岸泥沙，成为欢乐的奔赴，叫你听见你的声音，你的颤摇的，吃吃的，钟情的语言，你的泪和你的笑，让你甜蜜的作一次梦。是的，作一次梦，让你得到安慰于是有勇气。温暖的，抒情的职业，体贴，想象，动人的语言，诗人啊，不是甚么“哲学家”！可是他是质朴的，他一点没有说“到”他的心里去；他没有得着他想要的：感动。他走在林荫路上，他的脸对着风景，他觉得渴，他为一种东西燃烧起来了，他的虚有所待的肉体满是欠缺，一窝嗷嗷的黄口（的鸟）。他质朴的穿着青布衣服，质朴的坐着，毫无所“动”。从从事职业到从职业里退出来没有分别，没有界线，没有过程。说话的多少有甚么关系呢，他没有说话，没有话，除了一句：他是永久的质朴。他坐在那儿，不想。他不是空洞的，他有他的存在，一个本然的，先于思想的存在，一个没有语言的形象。我们觉得很奇怪，我们奇怪他怎么会是一个拆字的。这是不可能的，正如我不可能“是”你。他之能够继续在那里，是因为他已经在那里很多年了。（这也不是个拆字的地方。）我们常常有一阵，天天，看见他，从石桥上下来，他一定“在”。有一天不在，比如下了大雨之后，我们一定会觉得他的不在的。——可是北平不叫拆字摊子也不叫测字摊子，北平叫“卦摊”，“卦——摊儿”，我听白书痴先生说，“我们这个卦摊（儿）……”好的，“卦摊（儿）！”我们照他念。
His only characteristic is: simplicity. Simplicity is everything to him. We don't know how to know that he is a word tester, in fact, I still can't find any reason to conclude that he is, unless we have seen him dismantled. We rarely see it. We have all seen it, but very little, as if everyone has the opportunity to see it once, a different time, which is simply funny! He doesn't "will" at all, no, not like that. If there is anyone who is most unsuitable for such a thing, it is him. Any of us can do better than him. It is so simple that it cannot be simpler, write a word, three or five sentences are over, and the one who comes to disassemble the word does not leave, wait, look at him: Is it over? - Finished! Looking at his appearance, he didn't want to say another word, and he didn't say a word. He also didn't realize that his patron was not satisfied and was still waiting. It's like pouring a bean out of a bottle, it's gone. Give money, what are you doing if you don't leave? Go, this gentleman is really inexplicable. Measuring words and divination is originally to tell you what is in your heart, to organize your way, to give you a temporary order, to deepen, deepen and connect the color of certain words, so that the original trend becomes a trend, the stagnant flow is smoother, brushing away the sediment on both sides of the river, becoming a joyful rush, so that you can hear your voice, your trembling, eating, loving language, your tears and your laughter, let you have a sweet dream. Yes, having a dream gives you comfort and courage. Warm, lyrical profession, thoughtful, imaginative, moving language, poet, not a "philosopher"! But he is simple, he does not say "to" his heart at all; he does not get what he wants: to be moved. He walked on the boulevard, his face facing the scenery, he felt thirsty, he burned for something, his body was full of deficiencies, a nest of yellow mouths (birds). He was rustically dressed in blue cloth clothes, sitting simply, and did not "move" at all. There is no difference from engaging in a profession to withdrawing from a profession, there is no boundary, no process. What does it matter how much he talks, he doesn't speak, he doesn't speak, except for one sentence: he is permanently simple. He sits there, he doesn't want to. He is not empty, he has his existence, an inherent, preceding thought, an image without words. We think it's strange, we wonder how he can be a word-breaker. It's impossible, just as I can't be you. He can stay there because he's been there for many years. (It's not a place to break words either.) We often see him every day, coming down from the stone bridge, and he must be "there." One day when he is not there, like after a heavy rain, we will definitely feel that he is not there. ——But Peiping is not called a word dismantling stall or a word testing stall, Peiping is called "hexagram stall", "hexagram - stall", I heard Mr. Bai Shuzhi say, "Our hexagram stall (son) ...... "Okay," "Hexagram stall (child)!" We read it as he said.翠湖的雨后。那些树，树在路上的影子，水的光。东边那条堤，郁塞的，披纷的水草，过饱的欲望，忧愁。有时一只白鹭把一切照亮了。昆华图书馆后面盈盈的水上的一所空空的，轩敞的，四边是窗户的，将要欹圮的楼……
After the rain in the emerald lake. Those trees, the shadows of trees on the road, the light of the water. The embankment to the east is congested, covered with aquatic plants, over-satiety, sorrow. Sometimes a egret illuminates everything. An empty, spacious building on the overflowing water behind the Kunhua Library, surrounded by windows, about to collapse......昆明的卦摊都是在晚上出来。是的，“出来”了。这是两个再好没有的字。白天都没有的。白天有的是另一种。白天的多半是外来的。所谓外来是因为抗战而从本来与云南没有密切的关系的外省地方而来的术士。这些术士本来大多在南京上海汉口长沙等大都市为往来客商，达官贵人，姨太太，军官看相算命的。——否则来不了，也不来昆明。多半可以住在旅馆里，在街上贴了贴子，某日起在某大旅舍候教，旅馆外面挂一长方镜框，白纸黑字，浓墨大书甚么居士，甚么甚么子，字体多为颜柳，用笔必重。虽有于名号上冠以“峨眉”字者，实以江南与湖北人为多。阔的很阔，且势所必然，与政治（！）与走私运鸦片等类事有关系，盖已是一“要人”，不可复以命相家目之也。可是也有潦倒下来，只能借半开半闭的店肆檐下一角地摆一个卦摊子的。护国路护国门内有一个“奇门遁甲”。我们都对这个“奇门遁甲”有颇深的印象。一者，云南没有奇门遁甲，那么复杂的家具好些本地人或许还没有见过。一个大木盘，堆着简直有两三百小茶杯口大的象棋子样的刻着各样的字的木饼子，劈劈帕帕搬来搬去，实在是很了不得的样子。我们认得他，不知道他叫甚么名字，名之为“奇门遁甲”。再者，我们所以为他吸引，主要是因为他的感情，因为他的综杂的客意。他不得意，他有屈辱之感，他的艰难的衣食反激他本来有的优越之感时时高张。初到云南的外省人都有一种固执的优越感对着他同等级的本省人。工人对工人，学生对学生，算卦的对算卦的以及与算卦有关甚至无关的人。他的屈辱与优越不停的解结造成他的冷淡。这在他的白白的瘦脸上表现得很清楚，在他的瘦白的脸上发一点黄，在他的眼珠里发紫，在他的削薄的悲苦的上唇上生几根根淡淡的胡子。他终日笼着手，淡淡的对着长街。他不跟人说话，因为他的下江口音和他的扁扁的干燥的嗓子。有时有一个生意，他劈劈帕帕搬动木饼子，他有点急切，一点兴奋，他的指头又瘦又长，神经质的伸出去，翘起来。没有人，有时，他也忽然热心的，念念有词，目光灼烁的搬动一阵，于是又是冷冷的了。也许因为他的了不得的，教人猜不透，不知道是怎么回事，因而总觉得它一定有道理的那套家具；更可能就因为他那种神情，那种失败的，怨懑的，冷冷淡淡，呼求然而又蔑视的不平衡的，戏剧的情绪的泄露，最有力的或者是蔑视，人会向蔑视走过去的，他的生意一天一天的好，后来简直非常的好起来了。他使这条街改了样子。他阔了。对面一家湖南馆子常给他送一碗面作点心。他本来虽然一直是整洁，（整洁是他的标帜，他的骄傲）可是不可掩饰的寒微的灰布长衫换成了好质料的裌袍、棉袍，……是二手货，从拍卖行里买来的，都有点旧，然而是化了细心挑来的，料子好，除了一两处（可惜的一两处）不完全合身之外，全都妥帖，他很在意衣服，包含爱美的与功利的目的。是旧货，但是别忙，他就要新起来，卖旧的，买新的，他会穿得到哪里都走得出去的，到他那些要到的地方！于是他说话了，他跟街坊邻舍男男女女搭讪了，他笑了，他脸上好看多了，他发了一点胖，虽然指头仍是瘦长瘦长的。我不再看他，我对他已经完全失去兴趣。……他年纪不大，三十多岁，至多不过四十，头发留得很长，总是梳得很整齐，有点女人气，像个唱旦角的票友。
Kunming's hexagram stalls all come out at night. Yes, "out". These are two words that are not good. There is no one during the day. There is another one during the day. Most of the daytime is foreign. The so-called foreigners are sorcerers from other provinces that originally had no close relationship with Yunnan because of the Anti-Japanese War. Most of these sorcerers were originally fortune-tellers in Nanjing, Shanghai, Hankou, Changsha and other metropolises for merchants, dignitaries, wives, and military officers. ——Otherwise, they can't come, and they won't come to Kunming. Most of them can live in a hotel, put up a post on the street, and wait for a teacher in a large hostel from one day on. Although there are people who have the word "Emei" on their names, they are actually mostly from Jiangnan and Hubei. It is very wide, and it is inevitable, and it is related to politics (!) It has something to do with smuggling opium and other things, and it is already an "important person", and it can no longer be regarded as a fortune teller. However, there are also those who have fallen down and can only borrow a corner of the eaves of the half-open and half-closed shop to set up a hexagram stall. There is a "Qimen Dunjia" in the Huguo Gate of Huguo Road. We all have a deep impression of this "Qimen Dunjia". First, there is no Qimen Dunjia in Yunnan, and many locals may not have seen such complex furniture. A large wooden plate is piled with wooden cakes engraved with various characters like chess pieces the size of two or three hundred small teacups, and it looks really amazing to move it around. We recognize him, but we don't know what his name is, and his name is "Qimen Dunjia". Furthermore, we are attracted to him mainly because of his feelings and his mixed politeness. He is not proud, he has a sense of humiliation, and his difficult food and clothing provoke his original sense of superiority. People from other provinces who have just arrived in Yunnan have a stubborn sense of superiority towards people of the same level as him. Workers to workers, students to students, fortune-tellers to fortune-tellers, and people related to or even unrelated to fortune-telling. His humiliation and superiority are constantly unknotted, causing him to be cold. This was clearly shown on his pale and thin face, a little yellow on his thin white face, purple in his eyes, and a few faint beards on his thin and miserable upper lip. He coiled his hands all day long, faintly facing the long street. He didn't talk to anyone, because of his lower river accent and his flat, dry voice. Sometimes there was a business, he chopped Papa to move the wooden cake, he was a little eager, a little excited, his fingers were thin and long, nervously stretched out, and curled. No one, sometimes, he was suddenly enthusiastic, muttering words, and his eyes moved for a while, and then he was cold again. Perhaps because of his greatness, people can't guess what is going on, so they always feel that it must make sense; It is more likely that it is because of his expression, that kind of failure, resentment, coldness, pleading but contempt of the unbalanced, the leakage of dramatic emotions, the most powerful or contempt, people will walk towards contempt, his business is getting better day by day, and then it is simply very good. He changed the look of this street. He is wide. A Hunan restaurant opposite often gave him a bowl of noodles as a snack. Although he had always been neat, (neatness was his trademark, his pride), the unconcealable humble gray cloth robe was replaced with a robe and cotton robe made of good material,...... It's second-hand goods, bought from the auction house, they are a little old, but they are carefully picked, the material is good, except for one or two places (unfortunately one or two places) that don't fit perfectly, everything is in place, he cares a lot about clothes, including beauty and utilitarian purposes. It's an old item, but don't be busy, he has to be new, sell the old, buy the new, he will wear it anywhere and go out, to the places he wants to go! So he spoke, he talked to the men and women in the neighborhood, he smiled, his face looked much better, he gained a little fat, although his fingers were still long and slender. I don't look at him anymore, I have completely lost interest in him. …… He is not very old, in his thirties, no more than forty at most, his hair is very long, he is always neatly combed, a little feminine, like a ticket mate who sings the horn.树挪死，人挪活，抗战八年，多少人到内地活了一遭过来了。现在我们要说那些本土旧有的，那些老卦摊子。像一切乡土的东西一样，时间对他们没有多大的影响，从我们来，到我们走，他们简直没有变动，第一次看见跟最后一次看见没有甚么两样，完全是那“一个”，八年在他身上不过是两天，没有意义的两天。甚么都已经定了，就像茶杯已经是茶杯，除非唯一的变，是死，——没有了。世间没有永恒，永恒常近于虚设。这种土卦摊有的规模较大，设肆挂牌，栽花养猫，是卦铺不是卦摊了。我们说卦摊。我们晚上出来蹓街，在大光明影戏牌前头，青年会外面，崇仁街新亚酒店的不像是酒店，像仓库，像从小山脚下旷野之中移来的朴拙的石砌建筑的外面，在繁华的夜市的旁边，在铁匠铺，麻绳水桶铺，卖宝石顶子珊瑚朝珠，老光水晶眼镜的小古董铺子的檐前人行道上；在光华街云瑞公园对面，我们就看见这些卦摊了。——是的，有卦铺，卦铺多有玻璃槅扇，玻璃擦得很亮，充满太阳，白粉墙，各种照片，菊花。……卦铺属于白天，卦摊属于夜。白天也有卦摊，但至若存若亡，无足轻重，没有颜色，没有生命，犹如道旁一张废纸。晚上来了，星星在都市的长街上空亮起来，天上有一点淡淡的，不动的，发光的云，底下，——人；慢慢的洄转着，发出水的声音，泡沫的声音，绸缪而轻软，酝酿着一种不可知的，微带喜剧气味的朦胧的意义，卦摊一个一个点起了它们的灯。于是，这才醒了，“充满”了，是的，“出来”了。六七点钟以后，云瑞公园前头描写一个失去的时代，一章温柔的，无力的，晚期的历史，一个梦。云瑞公园对面是甬道街，路的交口形成半月形，留出一块不小的场子。当中一圈冬青围着一个水池，最初也许是伞一样的喷着水的，现在则总是不断的汩汩的涌出不到半尺高。晚上喷泉只汩汩的响，跟场子后面许多地方都被灯光遮没了，看不见了。一个梦，梦一样的灯。水池前面，路边，摆满了一长列摊子，卖烟，卖蜜饯，卖米花，铁豆，葵瓜子，卖麦粑粑，卖糖，卖羊血豆花米线，卖猫菜（牛马碎肉切之为末），卖煠鱼，卖甘蔗，梨，橘，或柿子，柿饼子，卖馄饨，卖烧饵块，……或为男，或为女，或为满面辛劳的脸，或为稚嫩柔软的脸，衣着姿势，各有不同，吆喝着，敲击着锅瓢或特有的响器，嘈嘈切切，热闹非常，然而又合成一种无比的静意。声音并不堆积起来，一面升起，一面失去，所以总维持一定的密度，如鱼在水，各不相及。他们大都点着灯，有不带灯的则把货物摆在别人有余的光底下。一盏一盏的灯。电石灯，丝丝的响，——管子别塞住了。一打开就不得了，甚么样的气味呀！没有一个闻不到；锡座子高罩的煤油灯，桅灯——或曰马灯，诸葛灯，鸦片烟灯。——烟灯拿来拿去以作各种用处，此地独多。我住在民强巷每天在外面游荡到很晚回去，每天为我开门的驼背老头子手上拿的正是这种灯。他拿着这个灯就跟拿着一个象征似的。这些灯都有足够的亮，而且彼此融合起来，造成一段连绵的辉映，不停的有一点摇移。有时一阵风，麦浪似的往一边一涌，每个灯焰都拉长了一点，然后又回来，恢复不变的多情的看望。然而这一段光永远既不能高，也不能远，为天，为影子，为更强的光封锁在地面上，每天一度，到十二点，逐渐阑珊失去。在这片灯的沟蒿中，在微黄，雪白，昏瞀，皓洁的流汇之中历历的点出一朵一朵红光来的是卦摊的纸灯。木制为架，作长方形，高可一尺，四边糊以梅红纸，纸上写字，不外文王神课之类，注明卦金若干，或兼带写家信，里面点的是甚么呢，看不出来，但可以知道一定有的是烟灯，亮是不怎么亮的，但也一样的是“足够”了。十分鲜明的，热心的，有精神的，安定甚至快乐的照满了方寸之地。灯的后面，测字先生低着头在工作，他兴致很好，脑筋灵活，身体不疲倦，心地平和，不为甚么焦虑煎急，不为绝望所苦，他简直是幸福的。一切像梦，他唯在梦里真实，唯在梦里是“醒”的。——喔，我的老天爷，他的长衫里没有衬褂，他的裤子没有屁股，他的脚直接的接触着大地，他既没有穿袜子也没有穿鞋呀！一切在充满感情的红灯下面，在桌帷底下。风摇动着灯，摇动着桌帷。
Trees move dead, people move alive, and in the eight years of the Anti-Japanese War, how many people have lived in the mainland. Now we want to talk about those old local ones, those old hexagram stalls. Like all local things, time has not had much impact on them, from the time we came, to the time we left, they have not changed at all, the first time they saw it is no different from the last time they saw it, it was completely the "one", eight years on him was only two days, two meaningless days. Everything has been decided, just like a teacup is already a teacup, unless the only change is death, ,—— is gone. There is no eternity in the world, eternity is always close to nothing. This kind of hexagram stall is large-scale, setting up shops, planting flowers and raising cats, it is a hexagram shop is not a hexagram stall. We say hexagram stalls. We came out to the street at night, in front of the big bright shadow theater, outside the Youth Association, the New Asia Hotel on Chongren Street is not like a hotel, like a warehouse, like the outside of a simple stone building moved from the wilderness at the foot of the hill, next to the bustling night market, on the sidewalk in front of the eaves of the small antique shop selling gemstone top coral beads, and old crystal glasses; Opposite Yunrui Park on Guanghua Street, we saw these hexagram stalls. ——Yes, there are hexagram shops, and the hexagram shops have glass barrel fans, the glass is polished very brightly, full of sun, white powder walls, all kinds of photos, chrysanthemums. …… The hexagram shop belongs to the day, and the hexagram stall belongs to the night. There are also hexagram stalls during the day, but they are insignificant, colorless, lifeless, like a piece of waste paper on the side of the road. When night came, the stars lit up over the long streets of the city, and there were a faint, motionless, glowing clouds in the sky, and ,—— people below; slowly wandering, making the sound of water, the sound of foam, silky and soft, brewing an unknowable, slightly comedic hazy meaning, and the hexagram stalls lit their lights one by one. So, this is awake, "full", yes, "out". After six or seven o'clock, Yunrui Park describes a lost era, a gentle, powerless, late history, and a dream. Opposite Yunrui Park is Yongdao Street, and the intersection of the road forms a half-moon shape, leaving a large field. A circle of holly surrounds a pool, which may have sprayed water like an umbrella at first, but now it is always gushing out less than half a foot high. At night, the fountain only gurgled, and many places behind the field were obscured by lights and could not be seen. A dream, a dream-like lamp. In front of the pool, on the side of the road, there is a long row of stalls, selling cigarettes, selling candied fruits, selling rice crackers, iron beans, sunflower seeds, selling wheat cakes, selling sugar, selling sheep's blood and bean flower rice noodles, selling cat vegetables (minced meat from cattle and horses), selling stewed fish, selling sugarcane, pears, oranges, or persimmons, persimmon cakes, selling wontons, selling roasted bait cubes,...... Or for men, or for women, or for hard faces, or for immature and soft faces, dressed in different postures, shouting, tapping pots and ladles or unique ringing instruments, noisy and lively, but also synthesizing an incomparable stillness. Sounds do not accumulate, they rise and lose, so they always maintain a certain density, like fish in water, each is not related. Most of them light lamps, and some without lights put their goods under the light that others have surplus. One lamp by one. Calcium carbide lamp, the sound of the ,—— tube is not blocked. When you turn it on, it's terrible, what kind of smell! None of them can't be smelled; kerosene lamps and mast lamps with high tin seats - or horse lamps, Zhuge lamps, opium smoke lamps. ——Smoke lamps are taken back and forth for various purposes, and this place is unique. I live in Minqiang Lane and wander outside every day until late when I return, and the hunchbacked old man who opens the door for me every day holds this kind of lamp in his hand. He holds this lamp as if he is holding a symbol. These lamps were bright enough, and they merged with each other, creating a continuous reflection, constantly shaking. Sometimes a gust of wind surged to one side like a wheat wave, and each flame lengthened a little, and then came back, resuming the unchanging amorous visit. However, this period of light can never be neither high nor far, for the sky, for the shadow, for the stronger light blocked on the ground, once a day, until twelve o'clock, gradually fading away. In the ditches of this lamp, in the slightly yellow, snow-white, dim, and pure flow, a red light is clearly lit by the paper lamp of the hexagram stall. Wooden frame, rectangular, about a foot high, pasted with plum red paper on all sides, writing on the paper, no more than Wen Wang's divine class, indicating a certain amount of hexagram gold, or writing a letter from home, what is lit in it, you can't see it, but you can know that there must be a smoke lamp, the light is not very bright, but it is also "enough". Very distinct, enthusiastic, spirited, stable and even happy shine all over the place. Behind the lamp, Mr. Word Test is working with his head down, he is in good spirits, his brain is flexible, his body is not tired, his heart is peaceful, he is not anxious and anxious, he is not suffering from despair, he is simply happy. Everything is like a dream, he is only real in the dream, only in the dream is "awake". - Oh my God, he has no liner in his robe, no buttocks in his pants, his feet are in direct contact with the earth, and he is neither wearing socks nor shoes! Everything is under the red light full of emotion, under the curtain of the table. The wind shakes the lamp and shakes the curtain.这些卦摊是本土旧有的，但他们几乎全数是四川人。云南在某个意义上是四川的殖民地。有好些行业完全是川人包办，如在茶馆里“送看手相不要钱”的，蹲踞在凳子上放鞭似的拍着醒木，也放鞭似的用高亢尖锐的声音说书的，卖“白糖糕，太平糕”，卖粉蒸牛肉，牛肉面，担担面的，……他们构成了一部分“四川”，也成了“云南”的一部分，他们从一个土地生长，而是另一个土地的颜色。像一切侨居多年的人，他们早已把“家”“搬”到这里来了。他们没有那种客意。——啊，他们的客意是多少年前的，这种客意已经混入他的人格，不会退落，于是也不浮现，他们的固定是他们的漂泊。他们漂泊，且使土地漂泊。——四川人是很容易看出来的，个子大都矮一点，腮没有云南一般人宽厚，嘴比较尖，脑门子稍稍高出，比较精利，比较倔强；而摆卦摊的四川人眼睛常常比较黑一点，因为他们的眼窝子深，因为他们瘦。
These hexagram stalls are old local, but almost all of them are Sichuan. Yunnan is a colony of Sichuan in a sense. There are many industries completely arranged by Sichuan people, such as those who "send palm readings for no money" in teahouses, squatting on stools and patting the wood like a whip, and telling stories in a high-pitched and sharp voice like a whip, selling "sugar cakes, Taiping cakes", steamed beef, beef noodles, and dandan noodles,...... They form a part of "Sichuan" and become part of "Yunnan", they grow from one land, but the color of another. Like all people who have lived in the country for many years, they have already "moved" their "home" here. They don't have that kind of politeness. ——Ah, how many years ago did their politeness be, this politeness has been mixed into his personality, and will not retreat, so it does not emerge, and their fixation is their wandering. They wander, and make the land drift. ——Sichuan people are easy to see, most of them are a little shorter, their cheeks are not as thick as those of Yunnan, their mouths are more pointed, their heads are slightly higher, they are more sharp, and they are more stubborn; and the Sichuan people who set up hexagram stalls often have darker eyes because their eye sockets are deep, because they are thin.……不得不说这一个。这个“云大的老头子”。——语言的价值在它的共通性，同样有价值的是它的区别性。有些话在某些人之间通行，对另一些人则完全没有意义。这些特别的，而在那一些人是极其普通的说法是他们的一个连锁。他们在跟别人说不通的时候，于是，想起从前，想起他们的共通的生活来了。是的，有些说法是独创的，有意的，比如绰号，暗语，简称，……多少经过一种努力，为了一种目的，多少是一种契约的行为。这是一种标榜，是倒因为果，不因说法而产生连锁，倒是为了企图缔结连锁而“采取”某些说法的；当日或可予那个“团体”一种快感，但比起那些未经意识，自然而然，不知不觉中产生的在日后所引起的惆怅，实在轻浮多了，楚人以虎为“於菟”，非知於菟者虎也，而别为之说；於菟是於菟，虎是虎，楚人是楚人也。于是乎楚之人出于楚之国，其怀乡之情是无可假借的是真的。我说这个“云大的老头子”你们怎么会懂得呢？云大是云南大学。但这个“云南大学”并非是一个教育机构，或一堆建筑，或其他甚么。我们从文林街下来，过玉龙堆，于是是“云大”了。我们的身体降下来，走斜坡，履平地，下雨时水流的声音，避让汽车的姿态，逶迤的墙，夜行的星，我们的饥饿和口袋有钱时的平安感，……这都是“云大”。云大向南，翠湖东路，一棵大尤加利树沙沙的响。有时我们焦急的在云大门口等公共汽车，我们一个约会也许会误了时刻了，好些晚上我们在云大学唱昆曲，我们从柏树下面走过，借着一点远处来的灯光。我们在冬天的时候，去看花，看看那些麻叶绣球，我们认定的迎春花第二年开了。一个很好的女孩子，他们叫她“无所谓”，被人砍了一刀，因为衰弱，TB菌猖獗起来，死了。……我们用一种不愿意提起的，痛苦的心情，不得不想起闻一多先生。……但是我不想在现在哭。
…… I have to say this one. This "old man of the clouds". ——The value of language lies in its commonality, and what is also valuable is its distinction. Some words are common among some people, and for others they are completely meaningless. These special and extremely ordinary words for those people are a chain of theirs. When they can't make sense to others, they think of the past, and think of their common life. Yes, some sayings are original and intentional, such as nicknames, code words, abbreviations,...... After a certain effort, for a purpose, a contractual act. This is a kind of flamm, it is a kind of effect, not because of the statement, but because of the "take" of certain statements in an attempt to conclude a chain; That day may give that "group" a kind of pleasure, but compared to those who are unconscious, naturally, unconsciously caused in the future, it is really much frivolous. Yu Tu is Yu Tu, the tiger is a tiger, and the Chu people are Chu people. So the people of Chu came from the country of Chu, and their nostalgia for home was unexaggerated. I said how do you understand this "old man of Yunda"? Yunda is Yunnan University. But this "Yunnan University" is not an educational institution, or a bunch of buildings, or anything else. We came down from Wenlin Street, passed the Yulongdui, and it was "Yunda". Our bodies descend, walk on slopes, walk on flat ground, the sound of water when it rains, avoid the posture of cars, the winding walls, the stars walking at night, our hunger and the sense of peace when we have money in our pockets,...... This is all "Yun Da". Yun Da to the south, Cuihu East Road, a big eucalyptus tree rustles. Sometimes we anxiously wait for the bus at the gate of Yun Da, we may miss the moment on a date, and many nights we sing Kunqu opera at Yun University, and we walk under the cypress trees, through a little light from afar. In winter, we go to see the flowers, look at the hemp-leaved hydrangeas, and the spring flowers we believe will bloom the following year. A very good girl, they called her "it doesn't matter", was slashed, because of weakness, TB bacteria became rampant, and she died. …… With a painful mood that we don't want to mention, we have to think of Mr. Wen Yiduo. …… But I don't want to cry now.“云大”是我们的生活，要把它下一个定义正如同一个盆子里把漆抓出来一样的不可能。——云大门口，左边，有一个小茶馆，我们叫它“老板娘”，因为管理业务的是一个女人，一个白胖白胖的像一个煮熟的果子一样的，虽然已经超过了年龄，然而极其富于母性的女人。——母性过多有时叫人难过，好像已经很饱了去吃一种黏黏的甜食一样。她的儿子，在茶馆的一角开一个雕字铺，用一种奇怪的兴趣，奇怪的笑容从事工作，用浓墨在虎皮宣上描了好些各种篆隶字体屏条，贴得一墙都是，……我们在这里用高高的，印着福禄寿喜图的粉白粉白的瓷杯子喝过好些时候茶。但是对我们的年龄，对我们的浪子凄怆的心与对于凄怆的热爱不相容，我们在对面，右边，那个很知道甚么是生活，从来没有对任何事物，任何语言表示过兴趣的老头子开设的茶馆里喝茶的时候更多。一个老的，最富地方色彩的，下等的茶馆。墙上一边贴一张红纸告白，我们每次都要这边看看，那边看看的，一边吃着南瓜子，葵瓜子。记不全了：
"Yun Da" is our life, and it is impossible to define it as if it were caught in the same basin. ——At the entrance of Yun Damen, on the left, there is a small teahouse, we call it "Proprietress Lady", because the person who manages the business is a woman, a white fat and fat woman like a cooked fruit, although she is over her age, but she is extremely maternal. ——Too much motherhood sometimes makes people sad, as if they are already full to eat a sticky sweet. Her son, who opened a carving shop in a corner of the teahouse, worked with a strange interest and a strange smile, and used thick ink to draw many kinds of seal and clerical fonts on the tiger skin propaganda, and pasted them all over the wall,...... We have been drinking tea here for a long time in a high, pink and white porcelain cup printed with a picture of Fulu Shouxi. But our age, our prodigal son's sad heart is incompatible with our love for sadness, and we drink tea more often in the teahouse opened by the old man who knows what life is and has never expressed interest in anything or any language. An old, the most local, low-grade teahouse. There is a red paper confession on the wall, and we have to look here and there every time we look at it, while eating pumpkin seeds and sunflower seeds. I can't remember completely:“走进来……
一坐下桃园结义，
……
要账时三请孔明。”
“……
……
任你说得莲花现，
不赊不赊硬不赊！”
"Walk in...... As soon as he sat down in the peach orchard to form a bond, When asking for accounts, please be clear three times. ” Whatever you say, No credit, no credit, no credit! ”好的，不赊！我们没有想到要他赊过。我们中意他的“无情”，他的无牵挂，中意他不给我们一点负担。如果这个茶馆失火烧掉了，我们的惋惜也不致成为是痛苦的，不致使我们“哀毁”。我们记得的是我们自己而已。我们“信步”而来喝茶，有时很早很早，有时时间很长，迟到晚间十一二点，一点，到我们不得不回去的时候。我们用空洞又恳切的，懒散之中溶有不安的眼睛看看这，看看那。看我们知道的，认得的，很熟很熟的人一个一个走过来或走过去。有时沈××先生挟了一大堆书呼拉呼拉的往青云街走，李××先生高高的从对面丁字坡下来了；如果他是赶去吃饭，匆匆的一点头；如果不是，点头用另外一个微微不同的方式，而蟹螯似的举起两只手，来了。……就在这里，我们看见那个老头子。不是看见，是“在他的里面”，就像在一棵树底下一样。
Okay, no credit! We didn't expect to ask him to give us credit. We like his "ruthlessness", his carelessness, and his lack of burden. If the teahouse catches fire and burns down, our regret will not become painful, and it will not cause us to "mourn". We only remember ourselves. We "stroll" to drink tea, sometimes very early, sometimes very early, sometimes very long, late at eleven or twelve o'clock in the evening, one o'clock, when we have to go back. We look at this and that with empty and earnest, lazy eyes that dissolve in uneasiness. Look at what we know, what we know, and who are very familiar and familiar people come over or walk past one by one. Sometimes Mr. Shen ×× walked to Qingyun Street with a lot of books, and Mr. Li ×× came down from the opposite T-shaped slope; if he was rushing to eat, he nodded hurriedly; if not, he nodded in another slightly different way, and raised his hands like crab claws and came. …… Here we see the old man. Not seeing, but "in him", like under a tree.他本来在云大，在云大当女生宿舍的门房。——他当另有个名字，或许有人不叫他门房，叫另外的叫法。但也许所有的人都叫他“门房”，人以他为一个门房而已，老门房了。他不知在云大当了多少年的女生宿舍的门房了。可是云大的女生都怕他。他对她们都很不客气。很严厉。他说：“我是熊校长派我来管她们的！”于是他就管她们，小姐们对他一点办法都没有，他根本不懂得现实。我们对一个猴子，对一只公鸡，对耗子，对金鱼，我们有一些尽管是错误的了解，但是照着这点了解我们可以用一种方法让它怎么怎么，我们可以训练它，有一个结果。我们不必懂得它的性，但可以处理它，或加给它一个性。可是一个人，在没有把他说通之前你绝不可能使他有所改变。说不通！你可以想得到的，比如有一位先生来找一位小姐来了，他觉得这是不应当的事，于是……他按照他自己的办法处理这些事，把自己参加到里头去，不但态度离奇，且因此误了许多事，造成许多麻烦纠纷，添出许多不必要的痛苦折磨。他没有甚么过错，但是他这么忠实于自己可是不行的。这个人在意识上多少是一个疯子，于是他只有离开了。这种疯狂我们是可以了解的，他要不是当了这么多年女生宿舍的门房也许不致如此。这个人的身体里有些东西塞住了，是的，不通了，扭结起来，拧了。我们的身体里有一个深埋的，不可测的危险，每个人有一个危险的老年。——这是可怕的，这种惧怕属于一种原始情绪。也许他的离开云大不是为了这个，也许他根本不是甚么“门房”，与云大一点关系也没有，不过我听到的故事是如此，而且我相信。
He was originally a concierge in the girls' dormitory at Yunda University. ——He should have another name, maybe some people don't call him a concierge, but a different name. But maybe everyone calls him "concierge", and people think of him as just a concierge, an old concierge. I don't know how many years he has been a concierge in the girls' dormitory at Yunda University. But the girls of Yunda are afraid of him. He is very rude to them. Very strict. He said, "I was sent by Principal Xiong to take care of them!" So he took care of them, and the ladies had no way to deal with him, he didn't understand reality at all. We have some wrong understanding of a monkey, a rooster, a mouse, and a goldfish, but according to this understanding, we can use a method to make it do what it does, we can train it, and there is a result. We don't have to know its sex, but we can deal with it, or give it a sex. But a man can never change him until he makes sense. It doesn't make sense! You can imagine, for example, a gentleman came to a young lady, and he thought it was not right, so he ...... He handled these things in his own way, and he participated in them, not only in a strange manner, but also in a strange manner, and because of this, he made many mistakes, caused many troubles, and added a lot of unnecessary suffering. He was not at fault, but he could not be so faithful to himself. This man was more or less a madman in consciousness, so he had to leave. We can understand this madness, and if he had not been a concierge in the girls' dormitory for so many years, he might not have been like this. Something is stuck in this person's body, yes, it doesn't work, it is twisted, it is twisted. There is a deeply buried, unfathomable danger in our body, and everyone has a dangerous old age. ——This is terrible, this fear belongs to a primitive emotion. Maybe he didn't leave Yun Da for this, maybe he wasn't a "concierge" at all, and he had nothing to do with Yun Da, but the story I heard was like this, and I believed it.于是他就出来摆了一个摊子。我们叫他“云大的老头子”。他需要一个名字，于是有了一个。我们自然而然的，不约而同的这么称呼他，在提起他的时候。不用一点说明，毫无困难的就在我们之间通行起来了。这是他的唯一的，当然的名字，我们共有的印象的名字。我们从来没有想到这里头有甚么意义，于是他保全了所有的意义。
So he came out and set up a stall. We called him "the old man of Yunda". He needed a name, so he had one. We called him that naturally, when we mentioned him. Without a single explanation, it became common between us without difficulty. This is his only, of course, the name of our common impression. We never thought of any meaning here, so he preserved all the meaning.他最初在茶馆的檐下摆了个摊子，卖书。我们很难想象得到这两个老头子，这个云大的老头子和茶馆的老头子怎么商谈这件事，商谈关于他把摊子摆在他门前这件事的。也许没有谈过，他想到这里好摆，就摆了。第一天摆了来，他也许想：你怎么摆到我这里来了呢？一个人嘀嘀咕咕，嘀嘀咕咕着就出了声音：你个老狗×的，你那点不好摆，你要摆来我这点！他想象自己跟他吵起来了，声音很大，还想象他们扭打起来，旁边围了好些人，狗在叫，巡警穿了黑衣服赶来了。他做了个梦……他笑了，他发现他其实已经同意他了，他没有想把他从自己的身边逐开。老人都很爱自己，于是爱其余的老人。这是真的老吾老以及人之老。可是两老人的关系是很微妙，是超于语言的，他们从不交谈，他们都不爱说话。他们从不孩子似的坐在一排。永远一个屋里，一个门外。两个都曾经是固执的生命！他们一定认识了多年，是“发孩”了。他们小的时候，大了的时候一定同吃过酒，在月夜下同过路，他们相骂，相轻蔑过，他们有过恩也有过仇，都曾是火喇喇的，而在一切全都硬化，全都枯槁的时候，他们在一个屋顶之下来消耗他们的余生。一个说：这是我的，而满意了；一个说：是你的，我不进去！这所房子不正跟他们相合适么？一座老房子。椽子都黑了，木料要是劈开来颜色一直到里头都是烟黄烟黄的，这些墙，这些石头，一一全是时间的痕迹。这里的声音，这里的光线都似乎经过揉和，经过过滤了。这里的地土（云南普通房屋多不铺砖）已经踏实了，下雨天不易起泥；板凳的角都圆溜溜的，碰着了也不痛。东西随着人一起老下来了。——常来喝茶的多是那几个老客人，在一定的时候聚散。……这两个老头子有极相似的地方。有时外边一个席地坐在草垫子上，里边的曲脚坐在炉边，他们所表现的实在是同一个意象，不是一个合影，是一个影子里走出来的。随便找一个地方，比方他们的嘴，一样是那么柔软，那么休息着——那么天真，不带情感的痕迹，细细的看一半天，实在是很有意思的事。有时，茶馆的老头子提茶倒水，张罗生意，有时他把一张桌子翻过来，有点摇晃了，用一把斧子，钉钉敲敲，塞进一片楔子，有时他吃东西，嚅嚅的嚼动，……而云大的老头子则总是坐着，晒着太阳。太阳仿佛一直透到他的身体里，溶解于他的血，带一点极细极细的沙，缓缓的流过他的全身，周而复始；时间在进行。
He initially set up a stall under the eaves of the teahouse to sell books. It is difficult for us to imagine how these two old men, this old man from Yunda and the old man of the teahouse, discussed this matter, about him setting up the stall in front of his door. Maybe he didn't talk about it, but he thought it would be easy to set it up here, so he set it up. On the first day, he might have thought: How did you put it here to me? A person muttered, muttering, and then made a sound: You old dog ×, you can't put it on that point, you want to put me here! He imagined that he was arguing with him, the sound was very loud, and he imagined that they were scuffling, there were many people around him, the dog was barking, and the patrol officer came in black clothes. He had a dream...... He smiled, and he realized that he had actually agreed with him, and he didn't want to drive him away from him. The old man loves himself very much, so he loves the rest of the old people. This is really the old man and the old man. But the relationship between the two old people is very delicate, beyond words, they never talk, they don't like to talk. They never sit in a row like children. Always in the same house, outside the door. Both were once stubborn lives! They must have known each other for many years, and they must have been "children". When they were young, when they were old, they must have drunk together, passed by together on moonlit nights, they scolded each other, despised each other, they had both grace and hatred, they were all on fire, and when everything was hardened and all withered, they consumed the rest of their lives under one roof. One said: This is mine, and I am satisfied; the other said: It's yours, I won't go in! Isn't this house suitable for them? An old house. The rafters are black, and if the wood is split, the color will be smoky yellow all the way to the inside, and these walls and stones are all traces of time. The sound here and the light here seem to have been kneaded and filtered. The soil here (most ordinary houses in Yunnan are not bricked) is already solid, and it is not easy to mud on rainy days; the corners of the benches are round, and it doesn't hurt to touch them. Things grow old with people. ——Most of the people who often come to drink tea are those old guests, who gather and disperse at a certain time. …… The two old men have very similarities. Sometimes a seat outside sits on a straw mat, and the crooked feet inside sit by the fire, and what they show is really the same image, not a group photo, but a shadow that comes out. Just find a place, for example, their mouths, which are so soft and so resting - so innocent, without traces of emotion, looking at it carefully for half a day, it is really interesting. Sometimes, the old man in the teahouse carries tea and pours water, and the business is open, sometimes he turns a table over, shakes a little, uses an axe, nails to knock on, stuffs a wedge, sometimes he eats, chews and chews,...... The old man of Yun Da always sits and basks in the sun. The sun seemed to penetrate all the way into his body, dissolved in his blood, with a little very fine sand, slowly flowing through his whole body, and repeatedly; time is progressing.隔壁烟纸店墙壁上钉一只大凤蝶，乌黑乌黑的一身，尾部碧绿碧绿两块翠斑，一点极细绿点子，光色炎炎，如在燃烧，如在轻轻抖颤，而又非常的，非常的安静。我哭了。我很少有这样的剧烈的经验，这样为美所感动过，我觉得冷，我一身缩得紧紧的，不晓得从甚么地方涌出一股痛楚的眼泪。我一生从未见过这么美的蝴蝶。一个奇迹！生命的奇迹！掌柜的说出在广南，他女婿从广南带回来的。
A big phoenix butterfly was nailed to the wall of the tobacco paper shop next door, with a black body, two emerald spots on the tail, a very fine green dot, the light was hot, as if burning, as if trembling gently, and very, very quiet. I cried. I have rarely had such a violent experience, I have never been so moved by beauty, I felt cold, my body shrank tightly, and I don't know where a painful tear welled up. I have never seen such a beautiful butterfly in my life. A miracle! A miracle of life! The shopkeeper said that in Guangnan, his son-in-law brought it back from Guangnan.啊不，这两个老头子自有不同的地方。茶馆掌柜有他的茶馆，茶馆有客人。有广黄烟，有羊血豆花米线。有买，有卖。有挑水的来挑水，泥水匠抹炉子，虽然难得，偶尔也换一两把锡壶，有城防捐，营业执照，有晚上的数钱，月终的结帐，有摇会，有作保，有断续零落的老花灯调，有飘忽绰约的新闻，有过节空气，有纪念日警察就来叫挂上的国旗，有亲戚的生死，甚至有一两天他居然不在茶馆里！茶馆或者关了起来，或者由别人代管。老头子哪里去了？——做客去了！……总之，他有操作，有经营，有生活，有人事。在生活，在人事中他变得柔软了，温和了，他有时颇是陶然自得的样子了。他有个儿子！整天甚么事情不管，平常不大在家，在家则多坐在里面堂屋里，三朋四友，脚搁在板凳上，泡几碗茶，吸着烟筒，大声的说笑，装扮神色，一如帮会中人。有时在里面喝酒，则声音格外高大，把小屋的空气都震动起来，叫每个喝茶的人都觉得不安。最近结了婚。茶馆热闹了一天，扎了彩，两个鼓手吹着唢呐。可是外面茶座上还照样卖茶，喝茶的少了一点，喝茶的多做了客人了。于是多了个年青女人，穿了绿缎子鞋子，一只眼睛通红的，时常格格的笑，摇摆着新烫的头发，一头油，不停的走进走出，扭着腰，不停的吃东西，花生，铁豆，葵瓜子……可是，以为老头子要不高兴的，不，高兴着呢！这种年青的，妖荡的空气给老头子一种兴奋，他不那么霉霉懂懂的了，他活泼起来了。而云大的老头子不久就搬了家。
Ah no, these two old men have their own differences. The shopkeeper of the teahouse has his teahouse, and the teahouse has guests. There is Guanghuang smoke, sheep's blood and bean curd rice noodles. There are buys, there are sales. There are people who carry water to carry water, plasterers wipe the stoves, although it is rare, occasionally change a tin pot or two, there are city defense donations, business licenses, there are evening counting money, month-end checkouts, shakes, guarantees, intermittent old flower lights, fluttering news, holiday air, anniversaries The police come to call the national flag to hang, there are relatives' life and death, and even one or two days he is not in the teahouse! The teahouse is either closed or managed by someone else. Where did the old man go? ——I went as a guest! …… In short, he has operations, management, life, and personnel. In life, in personnel, he has become softer and gentler, and he sometimes looks quite complacent. He has a son! I don't care about anything all day long, usually I don't stay at home, but at home I sit in the hall of the house, three friends and four friends, put my feet on the bench, make a few bowls of tea, smoke a cigarette, talk and laugh loudly, and dress up, just like a gang member. Sometimes when drinking inside, the voice is particularly high, shaking the air in the hut and making everyone who drinks tea feel uneasy. Recently married. The teahouse was lively all day, and the two drummers played suona. But tea is still sold on the tea table outside, and there are fewer tea drinkers, and more tea drinkers are customers. So there was a young woman, wearing green satin shoes, with red eyes, smiling from time to time, swaying her freshly permed hair, and an oily head, constantly walking in and out, twisting her waist, and constantly eating, peanuts, iron beans, sunflower seeds...... However, I thought the old man was going to be unhappy, no, he was happy! This kind of young, enchanting air gave the old man an excitement, he was not so musty and understood, and he became lively. And the old man of Yunda moved home soon.为甚么来了，为甚么又走了？怎么走的？怎么完成这一个决定的？怎么发了誓，怎么拿起刀来，不可救药的那么一割？是偶然么？像我们做许多事一样，无所谓，说不出甚么理由，高兴怎么样，便怎么样了？可是宁可是荒谬吧，我知道他跟我们不同。他可以被歪曲，不可以被抹杀。我们既不能像他那样一直枯坐在那一个地方，我们就不当把这件事说得那么轻易。是这个羽翼已成的储君说了甚么话，用他的眼角，他的鞋尖，他吐的痰，泼的水对他示了意？不会。一个缝穷的老女人，一个卖山林果的孩子也许早被威严的手势赶开了，可是没有人可以赶他。他是强大的，坚持的，不可侵犯的。与其说他被排斥了不如说他排斥了这个地方，排斥了这个空间。
Why did he come, why did he leave again? How did he leave? How did he accomplish this decision? Why did he swear, how did he take up the knife, how did he cut it so hopelessly? Was it accidental? Like many things we do, it doesn't matter, there is no reason to say anything, how happy is it? But it is rather ridiculous, I know that he is different from us. He can be distorted, he cannot be erased. Since we cannot sit in that place like he did, we should not speak so lightly. What did this fledgled prince say, signaling to him with the corners of his eyes, the tips of his shoes, the phlegm he spat out, and the water he splashed? No. An old woman who is poor in seam, a child who sells mountain fruits may have been driven away by majestic gestures, but no one can drive him away. He is powerful, persistent, and inviolable. It is not so much that he is rejected, but that he rejects this place, rejects this space.后来我们才对他的摊子有比较真切的认识，不是书摊是卦摊。他的摊子也卖书，也卖卦。但起初实在很不“正式”，大概有一个样子，一个雏形而已。几本本书，疎疎的排成两列。书也很不像是一个书，都非常破旧了，不单是纸色黄暗，失去浆性，脆了硬了，卷了边，缺了角，短了书皮，失去遮护；不单是外貌，它们已经失去那种可以称之为书的本质。里面的语言已经死了，哑了，干涸了，而且也完全失去交易价值。既不是可读的，不是读物，也不可以买卖，不是商品，是我们不知道把它丢到这个世界的哪一个地方是好的“废物”、一些陈旧的形式而已。是的，形式，这是他所需要的。这个摊子就是一种形式，他的形式。他的目的不在买卖，他只须要摆那么几本书在身边，他可以靠它下来。——也不知道从哪里捡来的这么几本破纸！不是职业，是玩具。他另外一种玩具是一枝笔。——偶尔居然有人为了对于这个“形式”的兴趣，对于向“他”买，买他这个形式的一部份的兴趣而来，试一问价钱，——大得惊人！我还从未看他开过张。而且讲价都很少，多半只站着看一看而已。看一看的也很少。他整天没有事，木然的坐着而已。除了木然的坐着，他有时伏在地上写字。用纸，用拆开的香烟盒子，用薄薄的小版，因材就用，各取所宜，长短大小不一，都把它写得满满的。字体很怪，虽然是一个一个的字，而且是很认真的写，但送带之间，不依常法，扭来扭去，有如蛇行，实近乎是一种符箓。字与字连缀起来，既无语气，也无文法，牵牵挂挂，不可了解。然而似乎自有一种意义，不可了解，超乎了解的意义。——他后来搬到云大墙外，公共汽车站的后面一块空地上去了。日积月累，惨淡经营，渐渐的很有规模了，很是那么一回事，很不可忽略，很“丰富”了。书多了，占了不小一块地方。还是写字，每本书皮上都题了极大的字，题字的纸板木片已经积了好些好些，而且都用硃笔密密圈点起来，依照一种奇怪排列，有的插在地上，有的拉了好些绳子挂起来。从前本有的一个小木盒子也供得高高的了。从前不知道这是干甚么用的，现在则很明显了，这里头有一个神或一个魔。听说他会算卦。
Later, we had a more real understanding of his stall, not a book stall but a hexagram stall. His stall also sells books and hexagrams. But at first it was really not "formal", probably just a look, a prototype. Several books are sparsely arranged in two columns. The book is also very dilapidated, not only the paper is yellow and dark, losing its pulp, brittle and hard, curled edges, missing corners, short book cover, and losing its cover; not only in appearance, but also in terms of appearance, they have lost the essence of what can be called a book. The language inside is dead, dumb, dry, and completely loses its trading value. It is neither readable, nor readable, nor can it be bought or sold, it is not a commodity, it is just some old form that we don't know where in the world it is good "waste". Yes, form, this is what he needs. This stall is a form, his form. His purpose is not to buy or sell, he just needs to keep a few books around, and he can rely on it to come down. ——I don't know where I picked up these torn papers! It's not a profession, it's a toy. His other toy is a pen. ——Occasionally, someone actually comes to him for the interest in this "form", for the interest in buying from "him", about buying a part of his form, and asking for a price,—— is amazing! I have never seen him open. And there are very few bargains, most of them just stand and look at it. There are very few people to look at. He has nothing to do all day, just sitting blankly. In addition to sitting blankly, he sometimes lies on the ground to write. Use paper, use open cigarette boxes, use thin small plates, use them according to the material, each suitable, different lengths and sizes, all of which are full of writing. The font is very strange, although it is written one by one, and it is written very seriously, but between the belts, it is not according to the usual law, twisting and turning, like a snake, almost a kind of talisman. The words are connected to each other, there is neither tone nor grammar, and there is no concern, and it is incomprehensible. However, it seems to have its own meaning, which cannot be understood, and the meaning is beyond understanding. ——He later moved to an open space behind the bus stop outside the cloud wall. Over time, the business was bleak, and gradually it became very large-scale, very something, very negligible, and very "rich". There are many books, which take up a lot of space. I still write, each book cover is inscribed with very large characters, and the cardboard pieces of inscription have accumulated quite a bit, and they are all tightly circled with red pens, arranged according to a strange arrangement, some are inserted on the ground, and some are hung with many ropes. A small wooden box that used to be used was also provided high. I didn't know what it was used for before, but now it is obvious that there is a god or a demon here. I heard that he can tell fortunes.日本飞机把钱局街的一段炸成一片瓦砾，渐渐成了一块荒地，黄土堆得高高的，长了好些草。于是有耍猴子的来敲锣，玩傀儡戏的吹哨子，春天搭台唱了几天花灯，平常则经常有一个“套圈子”的摊子，有一两个人耐心的拿一把竹圈子一个一个的往地上排列着的瓷碗，泥娃娃，香烟，水果糖上投掷。才不到半年的事，简直都认不出来了，认不出当初有房屋时是甚么样了，倒塌时是甚么样子的了。有一棵小石榴树，居然开花，一个孤立的门框附了几块砖头居然还在，不知道为甚么没有推倒。而门里的一块地非常的平整，平整得令人哀伤。甚么时候老头子看上了这块地，于是把他的摊子，他的道场，他的坛，他的庙，搬了过来。他的龛子供得更高，字写得更多，布置得更繁复，而且插了一些小红旗子，他完全围在一种神秘的，妖黑的，——而凄厉悲惨的空气之中了。他完全疯了，他可以走到水里去火里去。大家知道有这么一个老头子，在那儿给人算卦。他用一种甚么方式给人家算卦呢？——喔，没有关系，他甚么都不用，凭他自己，这就够了。是的，这也还是一种玩具。可是我们还是玩点别的罢，这实在玩不起。——他大概会在那里住定下来，一直到死。
Japanese planes blew up a section of Qianju Street into rubble, and gradually became a wasteland, with loess piled high and a lot of grass. So there were monkey players who came to beat gongs, played puppet play whistles, set up a stage to sing lanterns for a few days in spring, and usually there was often a "circle" stall, and one or two people patiently took a handful of bamboo rings and threw them at the porcelain bowls, clay dolls, cigarettes, and fruit candies lined up on the ground one by one. It's been less than half a year, and I can't recognize what the house was like when it was there and what it looked like when it collapsed. There was a small pomegranate tree, which actually bloomed, and a few bricks attached to an isolated door frame were still there, I don't know why it was not knocked down. And the piece of land in the door was very flat, sadly flat. When the old man took a fancy to this land, he moved his stall, his ashram, his altar, and his temple. His niche was taller, more writing, more elaborate, and some small red flags were planted, and he was completely surrounded by a mysterious, dark,—— and miserable air. He was completely crazy, he could go into the water and go into the fire. Everyone knows that there is such an old man who gives people fortune-telling. In what way does he tell fortunes for people? --Oh, it doesn't matter, he doesn't need anything, it's enough for himself. Yes, it's still a toy. But let's play something else, which is really unaffordable. - He will probably live there until he dies.
[1] 本篇原载1948年11月1日、8日天津《益世报》，文末标有“未完，待续”。因报上的《文学周刊》终刊，本篇未能再续。

封底

封面

《汪曾祺全集》编辑工作委员会

《汪曾祺全集》编辑工作委员会
主任/郭娟
[1] This article was originally published in Tianjin's "Yishi Daily" on November 1 and 8, 1948, and the end of the article was marked "unfinished, to be continued". Due to the final publication of the "Literary Weekly" in the newspaper, this article could not be continued. Editorial Committee of "The Complete Works of Wang Zengqi" Director/Guo Juan成员/季红真　汪朝　汪朗　汪明
　　徐强　李光荣　李建新　赵坤
　　刘伟　杨康　周墨西　李玉俐
（排名不分先后）

书名页

文前插图

文前插图

80年代末 在家中写作

《羊舍一夕》手稿
Members/Ji Hongzhen, Wang Chao, Wang Lang, Wang Ming Xu Qiang, Li Guangrong, Li Jianxin, Zhao Kun Liu Wei, Yang Kang, Zhou Moxi, Li Yuli (in no particular order) Illustration before the text Late 80s Writing at home Manuscript of "A Night in the Sheep House"
1961年 与老师沈从文在北京中山公园

1961年 全家在北京中山公园

目录

1961年In 1983 Eight thousand years old Rain Get lost The earthworm seller tail Yun Zhi Qiu Xing Sunday Hometown of Sanchen Chen Xiaoshu Chen Si Chen Loach Ephemeral flowers, cranes, and ghost fires Golden Winter Heart In 1961羊舍一夕一、夜晚
二、小吕2. Xiao Lu
三、老九3. Lao Jiu
四、留孩和丁贵甲4. Leaving children and Ding Guijia
五、夜，正在深浓起来In the evening, he burned a hedgehog that Xiao Lu picked up in the orchard, and the four of them ate it, and after playing for a while, he hurried to wait for his grandfather and marshal, and he knew that his wet brother would not blame him. I won't come back until now! 5. The night is getting deeper
六、明天They ate, drank, talked and talked, laughed and laughed. In the middle of them were pressing, boxing, laughing, hugging, performing, gesturing. They were so happy, so happy that they almost overturned this cabin, they broke it, these little devils! They completely forgot that it was a very deep night. 6. Tomorrow

1962年王全
看水

1979年[1] This article was originally published in Beijing Literature and Art, No. 10, 1962. The first collection was "Night in the Sheep House", China Children's Publishing House, January 1963; and "Selected Short Stories of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Publishing House, February 1982, with slight changes in the text. In 1979骑兵列传

1980年塞下人物记一、陈银娃
二、王大力2. Wang Dali
三、说话押韵的人3. People who speak rhymes
四、乡下的阿基米德This person doesn't like to be funny, and he usually doesn't even talk much, but he rhymes when he speaks, which is really strange! 4. Archimedes in the countryside
五、俩老头It is said that he is enough to be a model worker. At the selection meeting for several years, the workers mentioned him. But the leader disagreed. The reason is simple: he is not a party member. 5. Two old men

黄油烙饼
异秉（二）In 1962 Wang Quan Watch the water In 1979 Cavalry Biography In 1980 Character Records 1. Chen Yinwa 2. Wang Dali 3. People who speak rhymes 4. Archimedes in the countryside 5. Two old men Butter pancakes Heterogeneity (2)
受戒
岁寒三友
寂寞和温暖
天鹅之死

1981年Their tears flew to the sky and became stars in the sky. Early morning of December 29, 1980 [1] This article was originally published in Beijing Daily, April 14, 1981; First received "Wang Zengqi's Self-Selected Collection", Lijiang Publishing House, October 1987. In 1981大淖记事一Da Nao Records {{id_0000}} One
二
三The old tinsmith often warned the eleventh son not to pull and pull with the girls and daughters-in-law here, especially not to hook up with the girls and daughters-in-law in the east: "They are not the same people as us!" ” Three
四Therefore, people on the street say that the atmosphere here is "not good". Where is the atmosphere better? Hard. Four
五Five
六After a while, Eleven Zi swam to the sandbar. They stayed in the thatched thickets of the sandbar until the middle of the month. The moon is so good! Six

七里茶坊
鸡毛
故里杂记李三The forest is big, and there are all kinds of birds. June 6, 1981 [1] This article was originally published in the ninth issue of "Wenhui Monthly" in 1981; "Dinner Flower Collection", People's Literature Publishing House, March 1985. Hometown Miscellaneous Notes {{id_0000}} Li San
榆树Li San always fined the countrymen money. Whoever picked up dung on the street splashed a little, "Penalty! Two hundred dollars!" Who urinated where he shouldn't, "Penalty! Two hundred dollars!" I didn't expect to be punished by others this time. Li San was punished, which was the first time in history. elm
鱼Boss Yang peeled the bark of the eight elm trees and sold the trunks to the woodwork shop. It is understood that the money he sold for eight tree trunks was more than the money he paid to the cattle. He got eight elm barks for nothing and made another sum of money. fish

晚饭后的故事
徙
故乡人Ordained Three friends Loneliness and warmth The death of the swan In 1981 Da Nao Records One Two Three Four Five Six Qili Tea House Feather Hometown Miscellaneous Notes Li San elm fish The story after dinner shift Hometown people打鱼的
金大力She must have felt that this wet cowhide cover was very heavy, the water was already very cold in autumn, and her father was talking less and less. Jin Dali
钓鱼的医生

晚饭花When female employers sweep the floor, they often sweep one or two dozen scattered beads. She lay like this for ten years. She's dead. Her door was locked. From the locked room, the sound of loose glass beads ticking on the floor was often heard. Dinner flowers珠子灯——Wu Qijun: "Illustrated Examination of Botanical Names and Facts" Bead Lamp
晚饭花When female employers sweep the floor, they often sweep one or two dozen scattered beads. She lay like this for ten years. She's dead. Her door was locked. From the locked room, the sound of loose glass beads ticking on the floor was often heard. Dinner flowers
三姊妹出嫁

皮凤三楦房子

1982年钓人的孩子December 25, 1981 [1] This article was originally published in the third issue of "Shanghai Literature" in 1982; "Dinner Flower Collection", People's Literature Publishing House, March 1985. In 1982 Fisherman's Child {{id_0000}} Fishing Children钓人的孩子December 25, 1981 [1] This article was originally published in the third issue of "Shanghai Literature" in 1982; "Dinner Flower Collection", People's Literature Publishing House, March 1985. In 1982 Fisherman's Child {{id_0000}} Fishing Children
捡金子Who will this child become when he grows up? If someone mentions his pranks in the future, he will most likely deny it. - Maybe he has really forgotten. Picking up gold
航空奖券This person later disappeared. Some people say that when he arrived in Chongqing, he wrote an editorial for the Central Daily and scolded the Communist Party. Airline Tickets

鉴赏家
王四海的黄昏
职业（二）Fishing Jin Dali Fishing doctor Dinner flowers Bead Lamp Dinner flowers Three sisters get married Pi Feng Sanzhu House In 1982 Children of fishermen Fishing Children Picking up gold Airline tickets connoisseur Wang Sihai's dusk Occupation (2)

1983年八千岁
求雨
迷路
卖蚯蚓的人
尾巴
云致秋行状
星期天
故里三陈陈小手
陈四
陈泥鳅

昙花、鹤和鬼火
金冬心

1961年

1961年
In 1983 Eight thousand years old Rain Get lost The earthworm seller tail Yun Zhi Qiu Xing Sunday Hometown of Sanchen Chen Xiaoshu Chen Si Chen Loach Ephemeral flowers, cranes, and ghost fires Golden Winter Heart In 1961羊舍一夕[1]
——又名：四个孩子和一个夜晚
一、夜晚
火车过来了。
“216！往北京的上行车。”老九说。
One night in the sheep barn{{id_0000}} ——Also known as: Four Kids and a Night 1. Night The train is coming. “216！ Upbound train to Beijing. Lao Jiu said.于是他们放下手里的工作，一起听火车。老九和小吕都好像看见：先是一个雪亮的大灯，亮得叫人眼睛发胀。大灯好像在拼命地往外冒光，而且冒着汽，嗤嗤地响。乌黑的铁，铮黄的铜。然后是绿色的车身，排山倒海地冲过来。车窗蜜黄色的灯光连续地映在果园东边的树墙子上，一方块，一方块，川流不息地追赶着……每回看到灯光那样猛烈地从树墙子上刮过去，你总觉得会刮下满地枝叶来似的。可是火车一过，还是那样：树墙子显得格外的安详，格外的绿。真怪。
So they put down their work and listened to the train together. Lao Jiu and Xiao Lu both seemed to see: first a snowy headlight, so bright that it made people's eyes swell. The headlights seemed to be desperately emitting light, and they were steaming and snorting. Black iron, yellow copper. Then there was the green body, rushing over. The honey-yellow light from the car window was continuously reflected on the tree wall on the east side of the orchard, and the river was chasing endlessly...... Every time you see the light scraping violently from the tree wall, you always feel as if it will scrape off the branches and leaves all over the ground. But once the train passed, it was still like that: the tree wall looked particularly peaceful and green. It's really strange.这些，老九和小吕都太熟悉了。夏天，他们睡得晚，老是到路口去看火车。可现在是冬天了。那么，现在是什么样子呢？小吕想象，灯光一定会从树墙子的枝叶空隙处漏进来，落到果园的地面上来吧。可能！他想象着那灯光映在大梨树地间作的葱地里，照着一地的大葱蓬松的，干的，发白的叶子……
These are all too familiar to Lao Jiu and Xiao Lu. In the summer, they go to bed late and always go to the intersection to see the train. But it's winter now. So, what does it look like now? Xiao Lu imagined that the light would definitely leak in through the gaps in the branches and leaves of the tree wall and fall on the ground of the orchard. Possible! He imagined the light reflected in the green onions planted between the big pear trees, shining on the fluffy, dry, and whitish leaves of the green onions all over the place......车轮的声音逐渐模糊成为一片，像刮过一阵大风一样，过去了。
“十点四十七。”老九说。老九在附近山头上放了好几年羊了，他知道每一趟火车的时刻。
留孩说：“贵甲哥怎么还不回来？”
The sound of the wheels gradually became blurred, like a gust of wind, and passed. "Ten forty-seven." Lao Jiu said. Lao Jiu has been herding sheep on the nearby hills for several years, and he knows the moment of every train. Liu Hai said: "Why hasn't Brother Guijia come back yet? ”老九说：“他又排戏去了，一定回来得晚。”
小吕说：“这是什么奶哥！奶弟来了也不陪着，昨天是找羊，今天又去排戏！”
留孩说：“没关系，以后我们就常在一起了。”
Lao Jiu said: "He went to rehearse again, and he must come back late." ” Xiao Lu said: "What kind of milk brother is this! The milk brother didn't accompany him when he came, yesterday he was looking for sheep, and today he went to rehearse again!" ” Liu Hai said: "It's okay, we will be together often in the future." ”老九说：“咱们烧山药吃，一边说话，一边等他。小吕，不是还有一包高山顶[2]吗？坐上！外屋缸里还有没有水？”
“有！”
于是三个人一起动手：小吕拿沙锅舀了多半锅水，抓起一把高山顶来撮在里面。这是老九放羊时摘来的。老九从麻袋里掏山药——他们在山坡上自己种的。留孩把炉子通了通，又加了点煤。
So the three of them started together: Xiao Lu scooped more than half of the pot of water from the casserole, grabbed a handful of high mountain tops and pinched them inside. This was picked by Lao Jiu when he was herding sheep. Lao Jiu took out yam from the sack - they planted it themselves on the hillside. The child turned on the stove and added some coal.屋里一顺排了五张木床，联成一个大炕。一张是张士林的，他到狼山给场里去买果树苗子去了。隔壁还有一间小屋，锅灶俱全，是老羊倌住的。老羊倌请了假，看他的孙子去了。今天这里只剩下四个孩子：他们三个，和那个正在排戏的。
There are five wooden beds lined up in the house, connected into a large kang. One belonged to Zhang Shilin, who went to Wolf Mountain to buy fruit tree seedlings. There is also a hut next door, complete with pots and stoves, where the old sheep lives. The old sheep man took leave to see his grandson. There are only four children left here today: three of them, and the one who is rehearsing.屋里有一盏自造的煤油灯——老九用墨水瓶子改造的，一个炉子。外边还有一间空屋，是个农具仓库，放着硫铵、石灰、DDT、铁桶、木叉、喷雾器……外屋门插着。门外，右边是羊圈，里边卧着四百只羊；前边是果园，什么都没有了，只剩下一点葱，还有一堆没有窖好的蔓菁。现在什么也看不见，外边是无边的昏黑。方圆左近，就只有这个半山坡上有一点点亮光。夜，正在深浓起来。
There was a self-made kerosene lamp in the house—a stove transformed by Lao Jiu from ink bottles. There was also an empty house outside, a warehouse of agricultural tools, with ammonium sulfide, lime, DDT, iron barrels, wooden forks, and sprayers...... The door of the outer house was inserted. Outside the door, on the right was the sheepfold, and there were four hundred sheep lying inside; in front was the orchard, there was nothing left, only a little green onion, and a bunch of turnips that had not been cellared. Now nothing can be seen, and it is boundless darkness outside. Close to the left and right, there is only a little light on this hillside. The night is getting deeper.二、小吕
2. Xiao Lu小吕是果园的小工。这孩子长得清清秀秀的。原在本堡念小学。念到六年级了，忽然跟他爹说不想念了，要到农场做活去。他爹想：农场里能学技术，也能学文化，就同意了。后来才知道，他还有个心思。他有个哥哥，在念高中，还有个妹妹，也在上学。他爹在一个医院里当炊事员。他见他爹张罗着给他们交费，买书，有时要去跟工会借钱，他就决定了：我去作活，这样就是两个人养活五个人，我哥能够念多高就让他念多高。
Xiao Lu is a small worker in the orchard. This child is beautiful. Originally in elementary school in Benbao. When he reached the sixth grade, he suddenly told his father that he didn't want to miss it and wanted to work on the farm. His father thought: You can learn technology and culture on the farm, so he agreed. Later I found out that he still had a thought. He has an older brother who is in high school and a younger sister who is also in school. His father works as a cook in a hospital. When he saw that his father was paying them fees, buying books, and sometimes borrowing money from the trade union, he decided: I will work, so that two people can support five people, and my brother can read as high as he can.这样，他就到农场里来做活了。他用一个牙刷把子，截断了，一头磨平，刻了一个小手章：吕志国。每回领了工资，除了伙食、零用（买个学习本，配两节电池……），全部交给他爹。有一次，不知怎么弄的（其实是因为他从场里给家里买了不少东西：菜，果子），拿回去的只有一块五毛钱。他爹接过来，笑笑说：
In this way, he went to work on the farm. He used a toothbrush handle, cut it off, smoothed it at one end, and engraved a small handstamp: Lu Zhiguo. Every time he received his salary, except for food and pocket money (buy a study book with two batteries...... ), all handed over to his father. Once, somehow (actually because he bought a lot of things for the family from the field: vegetables and fruits), he only got one fifty cents. His father took it and said with a smile:“这就是两个人养活五个人吗？”
"Is this two people feeding five people?"吕志国的脸红了。他知道他偶然跟同志们说过的话传到他爹那里去了。他爹并不是责怪他，这句嘲笑的话里含着疼爱。他爹想：困难是有一点的，哪里就过不去呢？这孩子！究竟走怎样一条路好：继续上学？还是让他在这个农场里长大起来？
Lu Zhiguo's face blushed. He knew that what he had said to his comrades by chance had reached his father. His father didn't blame him, and there was love in this mocking word. His father thought: There is a little bit of difficulty, where can you not get through it? This child! What is the best way to go: continue to go to school? Or let him grow up on this farm?小吕已经在农场里长大起来了。在菜园干了半年，后来调到果园，也都半年了。
Xiao Lu has grown up on the farm. He worked in the vegetable garden for half a year, and then transferred to the orchard, and it has been half a year.在菜园里，他干得不坏，组长说他学得很快，就是有点贪玩。调他来果园时，征求过他本人的意见，他像一个成年的大工一样，很爽快地说：“行！在哪里干活还不是一样。”乍一到果园时，他什么都不摸头，不大插得上手，有点别扭。但没过多久，他就发现，原来果园对他说来是个更合适的地方。果园里有许多活，大工来做有点窝工，一般女工又做不了，正需要一个伶俐的小工。登上高凳，爬上树顶，绑老架的葡萄条，果树摘心，套纸袋，捉金龟子，用一个小铁丝钩疏虫果，接了长长的竿子喷射天蓝色的波尔多液……在明丽的阳光和葱笼的绿叶当中做这些事，既是严肃的工作，又是轻松的游戏，既“起了作用”，又很好玩，实在叫人快乐。这样的活，对于一个十四岁的孩子，不论在身体上、情绪上，都非常相投。
In the vegetable garden, he did not do badly, and the team leader said that he learned quickly, but he was a little playful. When he was transferred to the orchard, he asked for his own opinion, and he said cheerfully, like an adult carpenter: "Okay! Where to work is not the same." When he first arrived at the orchard, he didn't touch his head at all, he didn't get his hands on it, and it was a little awkward. But it didn't take long for him to find that the orchard was a more suitable place for him. There are many jobs in the orchard, and the carpenter comes to do a bit of nest work, and the average female worker can't do it, so he needs a clever little worker. Climb on a high bench, climb to the top of a tree, tie up old grape sticks, pick fruit trees, put paper bags, catch scarabs, hook insect fruits with a small wire, and spray sky blue Bordeaux liquid with a long pole...... Doing these things in the bright sunshine and green leaves is both serious work and a relaxing game, which "works" and is very fun, which is really happy. This kind of work is very similar to a fourteen-year-old child, both physically and emotionally.小吕很快就对果园的角角落落都熟悉了。他知道所有果木品种的名字：金冠、黄奎、元帅、国光、红玉、祝；烟台梨、明月、二十世纪；蜜肠、日面红、秋梨、鸭梨、木头梨；白香蕉、柔丁香、老虎眼、大粒白、秋紫、金铃、玫瑰香、沙巴尔、黑汗、巴勒斯坦、白拿破仑……而且准确地知道每一棵果树的位置。有时组长给一个调来不久的工人布置一件工作，一下子不容易说清那地方，小吕在旁边，就说：“去！小吕，你带他去，告诉他！”小吕有一件大红的球衣，干活时他喜欢把外面的衣裳脱去，于是，在果园里就经常看见通红的一团，轻快地、兴冲冲地弹跳出没于高高低低、深深浅浅的丛绿之中，惹得过路的人看了，眼睛里也不由得漾出笑意，觉得天色也明朗，风吹得也舒服。
Xiao Lu quickly became familiar with the corners and corners of the orchard. He knew the names of all the fruit tree varieties: Jin Guan, Huang Kui, Marshal, Guoguang, Hongyu, Zhu; Yantai pear, bright moon, twentieth century; honey sausage, sun red, autumn pear, duck pear, wood pear; white banana, soft lilac, tiger's eye, large white, autumn purple, golden bell, rose fragrance, shabal, black sweat, Palestine, white Napoleon...... And know exactly where each fruit tree is. Sometimes the team leader assigns a job to a recently transferred worker, and it is not easy to tell the place at once, and Xiao Lu is next to him, so he says: "Go! Xiao Lu, you take him and tell him!" Xiao Lu has a big red jersey, and he likes to take off his clothes when he works, so he often sees a bright red ball in the orchard, bounced briskly and excitedly in the high and low, deep and shallow greenery, which made passers-by look at it, and they couldn't help but smile in their eyes, feeling that the sky was clear and the wind was blowing comfortably.小吕这就真算是果园的人了。他一回家就是说他的果园。他娘、他妹妹都知道，果园有了多少年了，有多少棵树，单葡萄就有八十多种，好多都是外国来的。葡萄还给毛主席送去过。有个大干部要路过这里，毛主席跟他说：“你要过沙岭子，那里葡萄很好啊！”毛主席都知道的。果园里有些什么人，她们也都清清楚楚的了，大老张、二老张、大老刘、陈素花、恽美兰……还有个张士林！连这些人的家里的情形，他们有什么能耐，她们也都明明白白。连他爹对果园熟悉得也不下于他所在的医院了。他爹还特为上农场来看过他儿子常常叨念的那个年轻人张士林。他哥放暑假回来，第二天，他就拉他哥爬到孤山顶上去，指给他哥看：
Xiao Lu is really a person from the orchard. As soon as he came home, he said his orchard. His mother and his sister both know how many years the orchard has been, how many trees there are, and there are more than 80 kinds of grapes alone, many of which are from abroad. Grapes were also sent to Chairman Mao. A big cadre was passing by here, and Chairman Mao said to him: "You want to cross Shalingzi, the grapes are very good there!" Chairman Mao knew everything. They all knew who was in the orchard, eldest Zhang, second lao Zhang, eldest Liu, Chen Suhua, and Yun Meilan...... There is also Zhang Shilin! Even the situation at home of these people, what they are capable of, they are clear. Even his father is no less familiar with the orchard than the hospital where he is. His father also went to the farm to see Zhang Shilin, the young man his son often talked about. His brother came back from summer vacation, and the next day, he pulled his brother to climb to the top of the lonely mountain and pointed it out to his brother:“你看，你看！我们的果园多好看！一行一行的果树，一架一架的葡萄，整整齐齐，那么大一片，就跟画报上的一样，电影上的一样！”
"Look, look! How beautiful our orchard is! Rows of fruit trees, grapes one by one, neatly and so big, just like in the pictorial, the same as in the movie! ”小吕原来在家里住。七月，果子大起来了，需要有人下夜护秋。组长照例开个会，征求大家的意见。小吕说，他愿意搬来住。一来夏天到秋天是果园最好的时候。满树满挂的果子，都着了色，发出香气，弄得果园的空气都是甜甜的，闻着都醉人。这时节小吕总是那么兴奋，话也多，说话的声音也大，好像家里在办喜事似的。二来是，下夜，睡在窝棚里，铺着稻草，星星，又大又蓝的天，野兔子窜来窜去，鸹鸹悠[3]叫，还可能有狼！这非常有趣。张士林曾经笑他：“这小子，浪漫主义！”还有，搬过来，他可以和张士林在一起，日夜都在一起。
Xiao Lu used to live at home. In July, the fruits grew bigger, and someone needed to stay up all night to protect the autumn. The team leader held a meeting as usual to ask for everyone's opinions. Xiao Lu said he was willing to move in. First, summer to autumn is the best time for the orchard. The fruits all hanging on the trees are colored and fragrant, making the air in the orchard sweet and intoxicating. At this time of year, Xiao Lu is always so excited, talks a lot, and speaks loudly, as if there is a happy event at home. Second, at night, sleeping in a shack, covered with straw, stars, a big blue sky, wild hares running around, emus barking id_0000, and maybe wolves! It's very interesting. Zhang Shilin once laughed at him: "This kid, romanticism!" Also, moving here, he can be with Zhang Shilin, day and night.他很佩服张士林。曾经特为去照了一张相，送给张士林，在背面写道：“给敬爱的士林同志！”他用的字眼是充满真实的意思的。他佩服张士林那么年轻，才十九岁，就对果树懂得那么多。不论是修剪，是嫁接，都拿得起来，而且能讲一套。有一次林业学校的学生来参观，由他领着给他们讲，讲的那些学生一楞一楞的，不停地拿笔记本子记。领队的教员后来问张士林：“同志，你在什么学校学习过？”张士林说：“我上过高小。我们家世代都是果农，我是在果树林里长大的。”他佩服张士林说玩就玩，说看书就看书，看那么厚的，比一块城砖还厚的《果树栽培学各论》。佩服张士林能文能武，正跟场里的技术员合作搞试验，培养葡萄抗寒品种，每天拿个讲义夹子记载。佩服张士林能“代表”场里出去办事。采花粉呀，交换苗木呀……每逢张士林从场长办公室拿了介绍信，背上他的挎包，由宿舍走到火车站去，他就在心里非常羡慕。他说张士林是去当“大使”去了。小张一回来，他看见了，总是连蹦带跳地跑到路口去，一面接过小张的挎包，一面说：“嗬！大使回来了！”
He admired Zhang Shilin very much. He once took a photo and gave it to Zhang Shilin, writing on the back: "To my beloved Comrade Shilin!" The words he used were full of true meaning. He admired Zhang Shilin for being so young, only nineteen years old, and knowing so much about fruit trees. Whether it is pruning or grafting, he can pick it up and speak one thing. Once the students of the forestry school came to visit, and he led them to tell them, and the students who spoke kept taking notebooks. The instructor who led the team later asked Zhang Shilin: "Comrade, what school did you study?" Zhang Shilin said: "I went to high school. Our family has been fruit farmers for generations, and I grew up in the fruit groves. He admired Zhang Shilin for playing, reading books when he said he was reading, and reading so thick, thicker than a city brick. He admired Zhang Shilin's literary and martial arts, and was cooperating with the technicians in the field to conduct experiments, cultivate cold-resistant varieties of grapes, and record them with a handout clip every day. I admire Zhang Shilin for being able to "represent" the field to go out to do business. Pick pollen and exchange seedlings...... Whenever Zhang Shilin took a letter of introduction from the director's office, carried his satchel, and walked from the dormitory to the train station, he was very envious in his heart. He said that Zhang Shilin went to be an "ambassador". As soon as Xiao Zhang came back, he saw it, and always ran to the intersection with a bounce, taking Xiao Zhang's satchel and saying, "Ho! The ambassador is back!" ”他愿意自己也像一个真正的果园技工。可是自己觉得不像。缺少两样东西：一样是树剪子。这里凡是固定在果园做活的，每人都有一把树剪子，装在皮套子里，挎在裤腰带后面，远看像支伯朗宁手枪。他多希望也有一把呀，走出走进——赫！可是他没有。他也有使树剪子的时候。大的手术他不敢动，比如矫正树形，把一个茶杯口粗细的枝丫截掉，他没有那么大的胆子。像是丁个头什么的，这他可不含糊，拿起剪子叭叭地剪。只是他并不老使树剪子，因此没有他专用的，要用就到小仓库架子上去拿“官中”剪子。这不带劲！“官中”的玩意儿总是那么没味道，而且，当然总是，不那么好使。净“塞牙”，不快，费那么大劲，还剪不断。看起来倒像是你不会使剪子似的！气人。
He was willing to be like a real orchard mechanic. But he didn't feel like it. Two things were missing: the other was tree shears. Everyone who worked in the orchard here had a pair of tree shears, put in a leather case, carried behind his belt, and looked like a Browning pistol from a distance. How he wished there was one, so he walked out and walked in—heh! But he didn't. He also had times to cut tree shears. He didn't dare to do major operations, such as correcting the shape of the tree and cutting off a branch with the thickness of the mouth of a teacup, but he didn't have that much courage. Like a small head or something, he was unambiguous, and picked up the scissors and cut them. It's just that he doesn't always use tree shears, so he doesn't have his special ones, so if he wants to use them, he goes to the shelf of the small warehouse to get the "official" scissors. This is not exciting! The "official" stuff is always so tasteless, and, of course, always, not so easy to use. The net "stuffing" is not fast, it takes so much effort, and it keeps cutting. It looks like you can't use scissors! Irritating.组长大老张见小吕剪两下看看他那剪子，剪两下看看他那剪子，心里发笑。有一天，从他的锁着的柜子里拿出一把全新的苏式树剪，叫：“小吕！过来！这把剪子交给你，由你自己使：钝了自己磨，坏了自己修，绷簧掉了——跟公家领，可别老把绷簧搞丢了。小人小马小刀枪，正合适！”周围的人都笑了：因为这把剪子特别轻巧，特别小。小吕这可高了兴了，十分得意地说：“做啥像啥，卖啥吆喝啥嘛！”这算了了一桩心事。
The leader of the group, Lao Zhang, saw Xiao Lu cut twice to look at his scissors and cut them twice to see his scissors, and laughed in his heart. One day, he took out a brand new Soviet-style tree shear from his locked cabinet and called: "Xiao Lu! Come here! This scissor is handed over to you, and you can use it yourself: if it is dull, you will grind it yourself, if it is broken, you will repair it yourself, and the spring will fall off - with the public collar, don't always lose the spring. The little man pony and the small knife and gun are just right!" The people around laughed: Because this scissor is very light and small. Xiao Lu was very happy and said very proudly: "What do you do, what do you sell!" This is a matter of concern.自从有了这把剪子，他真是一日三摩挲。除了晚上脱衣服上床才解下来，一天不离身。没事就把剪子拆开来，用砂纸打磨得铮亮，拿在手里都是精滑的。
Since he had this pair of scissors, he really rubbed it all day long. Except for taking off his clothes at night and going to bed, he never leaves his body for a day. If you have nothing to do, take apart the scissors and polish them with sandpaper to make them shiny, and they are smooth in your hands.今天晚上没事，他又打磨他的剪子了，在216次火车过去以前，一直在细细地磨。磨完了，涂上一层凡士林，用一块布包起来——明年再用。葡萄条已经铰完，今年不再有使剪子的活了。
Tonight he was fine, and he had sanded his scissors again, and had been grinding them finely until the 216 train passed. When they were done, they were coated with a layer of petroleum jelly and wrapped in a piece of cloth—and they would be used again next year. The grape strips were hinged, and there was no more work to use the scissors this year.另外一样，是嫁接刀。他想明年自己就先练习削树码子，练得熟熟的，像大老刘一样！也不用公家的刀，自己买。用惯了，趁手。他合计好了：把那把双箭牌塑料把的小刀卖去，已经说好了，猪倌小白要。打一个八折。原价一块六，六八四十八，八得八，一块二毛八。再贴一块钱，就可以买一把上等的角柄嫁接刀！他准备明天就去托黄技师，黄技师两三天就要上北京。
Another thing is a grafting knife. He wants to practice cutting trees next year, and he is familiar with it, like Da Lao Liu! Don't use a public knife, buy it yourself. Get used to it, take advantage of it. He summed it up: sell the knife with the double Wrigley plastic handle, and it has been agreed that the pig herd Xiaobai wants it. Get an 80% discount. The original price is one piece for six, six eight forty-eight, eight for eight, and one piece for two cents and eight. If you stick another dollar, you can buy a high-quality horn handle grafting knife! He is going to ask for Huang Technician tomorrow, and Huang Technician will go to Beijing in two or three days.三、老九
3. Lao Jiu老九用四根油浸过的细皮条编一条一根葱的鞭子。这是一种很难的编法，四股皮条，这么绕来绕去的，一走神，就错了花，就拧成麻花要子了。老九就这么聚精会神地绕着，一面舔着他的舌头。绕一下，把舌头用力向嘴唇外边舔一下，绕一下，舔一下。有时忽然“唔！”的一声，那就是绕错了花了，于是拆掉重来。他的确是用的劲儿不小，一根鞭子，道道花一般紧，地道活计！编完了，从墙上把那根旧鞭子取下来，拆掉皮哨，把新鞭哨结在那个楸子木刨出来的又重又硬又光滑的鞭杆子上，还挂在原来的地方。
Lao Jiu used four thin strips of leather soaked in oil to weave a whip of green onions. This is a very difficult weaving method, four strips of leather, so much so that when you go around, you will get the wrong flower and twist it into a twist. Lao Jiu just circled intently while licking his tongue. Wrap it around and lick your tongue hard to the outside of your lips, around it, lick it. Sometimes suddenly "Hmm!" That is, the wrong flower was wrapped, so it was removed and restarted. He did use a lot of energy, a whip, as tight as a flower, and he did authentic work! After weaving, the old whip was removed from the wall, the leather whistle was removed, and the new whip whistle was tied to the heavy, hard and smooth whip pole planed from the catalpa wood, and hung in its original place.可是这根鞭子他自己是用不成了。
But he couldn't use this whip himself.老九算是这个场子里的世袭工人。他爹在场里赶大车，又是个扶耧的好手。他穿着开裆裤的时候，就在场里到处乱钻。使砖头砸杏儿、摘果子、偷萝卜、刨甜菜，都有他。稍大一点，能做点事了，就什么也做，放鸭子，喂小牛，搓玉米，锄豆埂……最近三年正式固定在羊舍，当“羊伴子”——小羊倌。老九是土生土长（小吕家是从外地搬来的），这一带地方，不论是哪个山豁豁，渠坳坳，他都去过，用他自己的说法是“尿尿都尿遍了”。这一带的人，不问老少男女，也无不知道有个秦老九。每天早起，日头上来，露水稍干的时候，只要听见：
Lao Jiu is a hereditary worker in this field. His father drove a big cart in the field and was a good hand at helping the rake. When he was wearing open-crotch pants, he was drilling around the field. He made bricks smash apricots, pick fruits, steal radishes, and shave beets. When you are a little older, you can do something, just do anything, let duck, feed calves, rub corn, and hoe the bean ridges...... In the past three years, he has been officially fixed in the sheep house as a "sheep companion" - a lamb herdder. Lao Jiu is a native (Xiao Lu's family moved from out of town), and he has been to this area, no matter which mountain is open or canal, he has been there, in his own words, "pee all over the place". People in this area, regardless of age or gender, all know that there is a Qin Laojiu. Get up early every day, when the sun comes up and the dew dries a little, as long as you hear:蓝蓝的天上白云飘，
白云下边马儿跑……
就知是老九来了。——这孩子，生了一副上低音的宽嗓子！他每天把羊从圈里放出来，上了路，走在羊群前面，一定是唱这一支歌。一挥鞭子：
挥动鞭儿响四方——
The white clouds float in the blue sky, The horses galloped under the white clouds...... I knew it was Lao Jiu who was coming. ——This child gave birth to a wide voice with a bass! He released the sheep out of the pen every day, went on the road, and walked in front of the sheep, and must have sung this song. A wave of the whip: Waving the whip sounded in all directions——百鸟齐飞翔……
Birds fly together......矮粗矮粗的个子，方头大脸，黑眉毛大眼睛，大嘴，大脚。老九这双鞋也是奇怪，实纳帮，厚布底，满底钉了扁头铁钉，还特别大，走起来忒楞忒楞地响。一摇一晃的，来了！后面是四百只白花花的，挨挨挤挤，颤颤游游的羊，无数的小蹄子踏在地上，走过去像下了一阵暴雨。
Short and stocky, with a square head and a big face, black eyebrows, big eyes, a big mouth, and big feet. Lao Jiu's shoes are also strange, with a real gang, a thick cloth bottom, and flat-headed iron nails nailed all over the bottom, and they are very big, and they make a loud sound when they walk. Shaking and shaking, here it is! Behind were four hundred white flowers, crowded and trembling, with countless small hooves stepping on the ground, walking over like a heavy rainstorm.老九发育得快，看样子比小吕魁伟壮实得多，像个小大人了。可是，有一次，他拿了家里的碗去食堂买饭，那碗可跟食堂的碗一样，恰好食堂里这两天丢了几个碗，管理员看见了，就说是食堂的，并且大声宣告“秦老九偷了食堂的碗！”老九把脸涨得通红，一句话说不出，忽然嚎叫起来：
Lao Jiu developed quickly, and he looked much stronger than Xiao Lu Kuiwei, like a little adult. However, once, he took the bowl from home to the canteen to buy food, which was the same as the canteen bowl, and it happened that a few bowls were lost in the canteen in the past two days, and the administrator saw it, so he said it was from the canteen, and loudly announced "Qin Laojiu stole the canteen bowl!" Lao Jiu's face turned red, and he couldn't say a word, and suddenly howled:“我×你妈！”
一面毫不克制地咧开大嘴哇哇地哭起来，使得一食堂的人都喝吼起来：
“噫，不兴骂人！”
“有话慢慢说，别哭！”
"I × your mother!" On the other hand, he grinned unrestrainedly and cried, causing everyone in the canteen to shout: "{{id_0000}}Oh, don't curse!" "Speak slowly if you have something to say, don't cry!"老九要是到了一个新地方，在一个新单位，做了真正的“工人”，若是又受了点委屈，觉得自尊心受了损伤，还会这样哭，这样破口骂人么？
If Lao Jiu arrives in a new place, in a new unit, and becomes a real "worker", if he is wronged and feels that his self-esteem has been damaged, will he cry like this and curse like this?老九真的要走了，要去当炼钢工人去了。他有个舅舅，在第二炼钢厂当工人，早就设法让老九进厂去学徒，他爹也愿意。有人问老九：
“老九，你咋啦，你不放羊了么？”
Lao Jiu is really leaving, going to be a steelmaker. He has an uncle who works as a worker in the second steel mill, and he has long tried to get Lao Jiu to enter the factory to apprentice, and his father is also willing. Someone asked Lao Jiu: "Lao Jiu, what's wrong with you, don't you herd sheep?"这叫老九很难回答。谁都知道炼钢好，光荣，工人阶级是老大哥。但是放羊呢？他就说：
“我爹不愿意我放羊，他说放羊不好。”
他也竭力想同意他爹的看法，说：
“放羊不好，把人都放懒了，啥也不会！”
This is called Lao Jiu is difficult to answer. Everyone knows that steelmaking is good and glorious, and the working class is the big brother. But what about sheep herding? He said: "My father didn't want me to herd sheep, he said it was not good to herd sheep." He also tried his best to agree with his father, saying: "Sheep herding is not good, people are lazy, and nothing will happen!"其实他心里一点也不同意！如果这话要是别人说的，他会第一个起来大声反驳：“你瞎说！你凭什么！”
放羊？嘿——
In fact, he didn't agree at all in his heart! If this was said by someone else, he would be the first to stand up and retort loudly: "You are talking nonsense! Why are you!" ” Sheep? Hey——每天早起，打开羊圈门，把羊放出来。挥着鞭子，打着唿哨，嘴里“嗄！嗄！”地喝唤着，赶着羊上了路。按照老羊倌的嘱咐，上哪一座山。到了坡上，把羊打开，一放一个满天星——都匀匀地撒开；或者凤凰单展翅——顺着山坡，斜斜地上去，走成一长溜。羊安安驯驯地吃开草，就不用操什么心了。羊群缓缓地往前推移，远看，像一片云彩在坡上流动。天也蓝，山也绿，洋河的水在树林子后面白亮白亮的。农场的房屋、果树，都看得清清楚楚。一列一列的火车过来过去，看起来又精巧又灵活，简直不像是那么大的玩意。真好呀，你觉得心都轻飘飘的。
Get up early every day, open the door of the sheepfold, and let the sheep out. Waving a whip, whistling, and saying "Hoo!" Hoarse! The ground shouted and drove the sheep on the road. According to the old shepherd's instructions, which mountain to go to. When you reach the slope, open the sheep and put a baby's breath - all spread evenly; or the phoenix spreads its wings alone - along the hillside, slanting up, and walking in a long slip. The sheep eat the grass tamely, so they don't have to worry about anything. The sheep slowly moved forward, and from a distance, it looked like a cloud flowing on the slope. The sky is blue, the mountains are green, and the water of the Yanghe River is white and bright behind the trees. The houses and fruit trees on the farm can be seen clearly. Trains come and go, looking exquisite and flexible, and they don't look like such a big thing. It's so good, you feel that your heart is light.“放羊不是艺，笨工子下不地！[4]”不会放羊的，打都打不开。羊老是恋成一疙瘩，挤成一堆，走不成阵势，吃不好草。老九刚放羊时，也是这样。老九蹦过来，追过去，累得满头大汗，心里急咚咚地跳，还是弄不好！有一次，老羊倌病了，就他跟丁贵甲两个人上山，丁贵甲也还没什么经验，竟至弄得羊散了群，几乎下不了山。现在，老羊倌根本不怎么上山了，他俩也满对付得了这四百只羊了。问老九：“放羊是咋放法？”他也说不出，但是他会告诉你老羊倌说过的：看羊群一走，就知道这羊倌放了几年羊了。
"Sheep herding is not an art, stupid workers can't get off the ground! [4]"If you can't herd sheep, you can't even open it. Sheep are always in love with a lump, crowded into a pile, unable to walk in formation, and unable to eat grass. When Lao Jiu first herded sheep, it was the same. Lao Jiu jumped over and chased after him, sweating profusely from exhaustion, and his heart was pounding, but he still couldn't do it well! Once, the old sheep herd was sick, and he and Ding Guijia went up the mountain with just him, and Ding Guijia had no experience, so he caused the sheep to scatter and could hardly go down the mountain. Now, the old sheep herd doesn't go up the mountain much at all, and they can deal with these four hundred sheep. Ask Lao Jiu: "How to herd sheep?" He can't say it, but he will tell you what the old shepherd said: As soon as you see the sheep leave, you will know that the sheep herd has been herding sheep for several years.放羊的能吃到好东西。山上有野兔子，一个有六七斤重。有石鸡子，有半子。石鸡子跟小野鸡似的，一个准有十两肉。半子一个准是半斤。你听：“呱格丹，呱格丹！呱格丹！”那是母石鸡子唤她汉子了。你不要忙，等着，不大一会，就听见对面山上“呱呱呱呱呱呱……”，你轻手轻脚地去，一捉就是一对。山上还有鸬鸬，就是野鸽子。“天鹅、地，鸽子肉、黄鼠”，这是上讲究的。鸬鸬肉比鸽子还好吃。黄鼠也有，不过滩里更多。放羊的吃肉，只有一种办法：和点泥，把打住的野物糊起来，拾一把柴架起火来，烧熟。真香！山上有酸枣，有榛子，有林，有红姑蔫，有酸溜溜，有梭瓜瓜，有各色各样的野果。大北滩有一片大桑树林子，夏天结了满树的大桑椹，也没有人去采，落在地下，把地皮都染紫了。每回放羊回来经过，一定是“饱餐一顿”，吃得嘴唇、牙齿、舌头，都是紫的，真过瘾！……
Sheep herders can eat good things. There are wild rabbits on the mountain, one weighing six or seven pounds. There are stone eggs, and there are half  eggs. Stone chickens are like little pheasants, each must have ten taels of meat. Half  is half a catty. Listen: "Quagdan, quagdan! Quagdan!" That's the female stone chicken calling her a man. Don't be busy, wait, after a while, you will hear "quack quack" ......on the opposite mountain, you go lightly, and you catch a pair. There are also cormorants on the mountain, which are wild pigeons. "Swan, ground , pigeon meat, weasel", this is the most particular. Cormorant meat is better than pigeons. There are also weasels, but there are more in the beach. There is only one way for sheep herders to eat meat: mix some mud, paste up the wild animals, pick up a handful of firewood and set it on fire, and burn it. It's so fragrant! There are sour dates, hazelnuts,  forests on the mountain, red wilting, sour sour, shuttle melons, and all kinds of wild fruits. There is a forest of large mulberry trees in Dabeitan, and in summer, there are big mulberries, and no one goes to pick them, falling on the ground, dyeing the land purple. Every time the sheep come back from herding, it must be a "full meal", and the lips, teeth, and tongue are all purple, which is really enjoyable! ……放羊苦么？
Is it hard to herd sheep?咋不苦！最苦是夏天。羊一年上不上膘，全看夏天吃草吃得好不好。夏天放羊，又全靠晌午。“打柴一日，放羊一晌”。早起的露水草，羊吃了不好。要上膘，要不得病，就得吃太阳晒过的蔫筋草。可是这时正是最热的时候。不好找个荫凉地方躲着么？不行啊！你怕热，羊也怕热哩，它不给你好好地吃！它也躲荫凉。你看：都把头埋下来，挤成一疙瘩，净想躲在别的羊的影子里，往别个的肚子底下钻。这你就得不停地打。打散了，它就吃草了。可是打散了，一会会，它又挤到一块去！打散了，一会会，它又挤到一块去了。你想休息？甭想。一夏天这么大太阳晒着，烧得你嘴唇、上颚都是烂的！
Why isn't it bitter! The most bitter is summer. Sheep can't get fat all year round, it all depends on whether they eat grass well in summer. Sheep herding in summer all depends on noon. "Gather firewood for a day, and sheep for a while". The early dew grass, the sheep are not good to eat. If you want to gain fat or get sick, you have to eat wilted grass that has been exposed to the sun. But this is the hottest time. Isn't it hard to find a shady place to hide? No! You are afraid of heat, and sheep are also afraid of heat, and it won't give you a good meal! It also hides from the shade. You see: they all bury their heads and squeeze them into a lump, just wanting to hide in the shadow of other sheep and get under the belly of others. You have to keep beating. If it breaks up, it will graze. But if it breaks up, it will squeeze together again! After a while, it will squeeze together again. Do you want to rest? Don't think about it. In such a summer, the sun is shining so hard that your lips and palate are rotten!真渴呀。这会，农场里给预备了行军壶，自然是好了。若是在旧社会，给地主家放羊，他不给你带水。给你一袋炒面，你就上山吧！你一个人，又不敢走远了去弄水，狼把羊吃了怎办？渴急了，就只好自己喝自己的尿。这在放羊的不是稀罕事。老羊倌就喝过，丁贵甲小时当小羊伴子，也喝过，老九没喝过。不过他知道这些事。就是有行军壶，你也不敢多喝。若是敞开来，由着性儿喝，好家伙，那得多少水？只好抿一点儿，抿一点儿，叫嗓子眼潮润一下就行。
I'm really thirsty. At this time, the farm has prepared a marching pot, which is naturally good. If it was in the old society, if you herd sheep for the landlord's house, he would not bring you water. Give you a bag of fried noodles, and you can go up the mountain! You are alone, and you don't dare to go far to get water, what if the wolf eats the sheep? Thirsty, you have to drink your own urine. This is not uncommon in sheep herding. The old shepherd drank it, Ding Guijia was a lamb companion when he was a child, and he also drank it, but the ninth child did not drink it. But he knows these things. Even if there is a marching pot, you don't dare to drink more. If you open it up and drink it by yourself, good guy, how much water will you get? I had to squeeze a little, a little, and let my throat and eyes moisten.好天还好说，就怕刮风下雨。刮风下雨也好说，就怕下雹子。老九就遇上过。有一回，在马脊梁山，遇了一场大雹子！下了足有二十分钟，足有鸡蛋大。砸得一群羊惊惶失措，满山乱跑，咩咩地叫成一片。砸坏了二三十只，跛了腿，起不来了。后来是老羊倌、丁贵甲和老九一趟一趟地抱回来的。吓得老九那天沉不住了，脸上一阵白，一阵紫，他觉得透不出气来。不是老羊倌把他那个竹皮大斗笠给他盖住，又给他喝了几口他带在身上的白酒，说不定就回不来啦。
It's good to say that it's a good day, but I'm afraid of wind and rain. It's easy to say it's windy and rainy, but I'm afraid of hail. Lao Jiu has encountered it. Once, in Majiliang Mountain, there was a big hail! It fell for twenty minutes, the size of an egg. The smashed a group of sheep panicked, running all over the mountain, and bleating. Smashed twenty or thirty of them, limped and couldn't get up. Later, the old shepherd, Ding Guijia and Lao Jiu brought them back one by one. Lao Jiu was so frightened that he couldn't calm down that day, his face was white and purple, and he felt that he couldn't breathe. If it weren't for the old sheep herder covering him with his bamboo leather hat and giving him a few sips of the liquor he had brought with him, maybe he wouldn't be able to come back.但是这些，从来也没有使老九告过孬，发过怵。他现在回想起来倒都觉得很痛快，很甜蜜，很幸福。他甚至觉得遇上那场雹子是运气。这使他觉得生活丰富、充实，使他觉得自己能够算得上是一个有资格，有经验的羊倌了，是个见识过的，干过一点事情的人了，不再是只知道要窝窝吃的毛孩子了。这些，苦热、苦渴、风雨、冷雹，将和那些蓝天、白云、绿山、白羊、石鸡、野兔、酸枣、桑椹互相融和调合起来，变成一幅浓郁鲜明的图画，永远记述着秦老九的十五岁的少年的光阴，日后使他在不同的环境中还会常常回想。他从这里得到多少有用的生活的技能和知识，受了多好的陶冶和锻炼啊。这些，在他将来炼钢的时候，或者履行着别样的职务时，都还会在他的血液里涌洑，给予他持续的力量。
But these have never made Lao Jiu complain or be frightened. Looking back now, he feels very happy, sweet, and happy. He even felt that it was luck to encounter that hail. This made him feel that his life was rich and fulfilling, and made him feel that he could be regarded as a qualified and experienced shepherd, a person who had seen and done a little thing, and was no longer a furry child who only knew how to eat in a nest. These, bitter heat, bitter thirst, wind and rain, and cold hail, will blend with those blue skies, white clouds, green mountains, white sheep, stone chickens, hares, sour dates, and mulberries, and become a rich and vivid picture, forever recording the time of Qin Laojiu's fifteen-year-old boy, and he will often think about it in different environments in the future. How many useful life skills and knowledge he has gained from this, and how well he has been cultivated and trained. These, when he makes steel in the future, or when he performs other duties, will still flow in his blood, giving him continuous strength.但是他的情绪日渐向往于炼钢了。他在电影里，在招贴画上，看过不少炼钢的工人，他的关于炼钢的知识和印象也就限于这些。他不止一次设想自己下一个阶段的样子——一个炼钢工人：戴一顶大八角鸭舌帽，帽舌下有一副蓝颜色的像两扇小窗户一样的眼镜，穿着水龙布的工作服——他不知那是什么布，只觉得很厚，很粗，场子里有水泵，水泵上用的管子也是用布做的，也很厚，很粗，他以为工作服就是那种布——戴了很大很大的手套，拿着一个很长的后面有个大圈的铁家伙……没人的时候，他站在床上，拿着小吕护秋用的标枪，比划着，比划着。他觉得前面，偏左一点，是炼钢的炉子，轰隆轰隆的熊熊的大火。他觉得火光灼着他的眼睛，甚至感觉得到他左边的额头和脸颊上明明有火的热度。他的眼睛眯细起来，眯细起来……他出神地体验着，半天，半天，一动也不动。果园的大老张一头闯进来，看见老九脸上的古怪表情（姿势赶快就改了，标枪也撂了，可是脸上没有来得及变样——他这么眯细着太久了，肌肉一下子也变不过来），忍不住问：“老九，你在干啥呢？你是怎么啦？”
But his mood is increasingly yearning for steelmaking. He has seen many steelmaking workers in movies and posters, and his knowledge and impressions of steelmaking are limited to these. He imagined more than once what he would look like in the next stage - a steelmaker: wearing a large octagonal peaked hat, a pair of blue glasses like two small windows under the tongue, wearing water faucet overalls - he didn't know what kind of cloth it was, he just felt that it was very thick and thick, there was a pump in the field, and the pipe used on the pump was also made of cloth, which was also very thick and thick, he thought that the work clothes were that kind of cloth - wearing big, big gloves, holding a very long iron guy with a big circle behind him...... When no one was around, he stood on the bed, holding the javelin used by Xiao Lu Huqiu, gesturing, gesturing. He felt that in front, a little to the left, was a steelmaking furnace, a roaring fire. He felt the fire burning his eyes, and he could even feel the heat of fire on his left forehead and cheek. His eyes narrowed and narrowed...... He experienced it in a daze, for a long time, for half a day, without moving. Zhang, the eldest man in the orchard, broke in and saw the strange expression on Lao Jiu's face (his posture was quickly changed, and the javelin was also thrown, but his face didn't have time to change - he had been squinting so long that his muscles couldn't change all of a sudden), and couldn't help but ask: "Lao Jiu, what are you doing? What's wrong with you?" ”今天晚上，老九可是专心致意地打了一晚上鞭子。你已经要去炼钢了，还编什么鞭子呢？
Tonight, Lao Jiu was whipping all night with concentration. You're already going to make steel, so what kind of whip do you have?一来是习惯。他不还没有走吗？他明天把行李搬回去，叫他娘拆洗拆洗，三天后才动身呢。那么，既在这里，总要找点事做。这根鞭子早就想到要编了。编起来，他不用，总有人用。何况，他本来已经想好，在编着的时候又更确实地重复了一遍他的决定：这根鞭子送给留孩，明天走的时候送给他。
First, it is a habit. Isn't he leaving yet? He will move his luggage back tomorrow, ask his mother to dismantle and wash it, and will not leave until three days later. Then, since you are here, you always have to find something to do. This whip has long thought of knitting. He doesn't use it, but someone always uses it. What's more, he had already thought about it, and when he was weaving, he repeated his decision more certainly: this whip was given to the child, and when he left tomorrow, he would give it to him.四、留孩和丁贵甲
4. Leaving children and Ding Guijia留孩和丁贵甲是奶兄弟。这一带风俗，对奶亲看得很重。结婚时先给奶爹奶母磕头；奶爹奶母死了，像给自己的爹妈一样的戴孝。奶兄弟，奶姊妹，比姨姑兄弟姊妹都亲。丁贵甲的亲娘还没有出月子就死了，丁贵甲从小在留孩娘跟前寄奶。后来丁贵甲的爹得了腰疼病，终于也死了。他在给人家当小羊伴子以前，一直就在留孩家长大。丁贵甲有时请假说回家看看，就指的是留孩的家。除此之外，他的家便是这个场了。
Liuhui and Ding Guijia are milk brothers. The customs in this area attach great importance to wet relatives. When you get married, you first kowtow to your parents and wet nurse; when your parents and mothers die, they are filial piety like your own parents. Milk brothers, milk sisters, are closer than aunts and brothers and sisters. Ding Guijia's mother died before confinement, and Ding Guijia had been sending milk to her since she was a child. Later, Ding Guijia's father suffered from back pain and finally died. Before he was a lamb companion for others, he had always grown up in a family with children. Ding Guijia sometimes took leave to go home and see, referring to the home of the child. In addition, his home is this place.留孩一年也短不了来看他奶哥。过去大都是他爹带他来，这回是他自己来的——他爹在生产队里事忙，三五天内分不开身；而且他这回来和往回不同：他是来谈工作的。他要来顶老九的手。留孩早就想过这个场里来工作。他奶哥也早跟场领导提了。这回谈妥了，老九一走，留孩就搬过来住。
It is not short to stay with the child for a year to see his brother. In the past, most of his father brought him here, but this time he came by himself - his father was busy in the production team and couldn't be separated within three to five days; and his return is different from the back-and-forth: he is here to talk about work. He wants to take Lao Jiu's hand. Liuhai has long thought about working in this field. His brother also mentioned it to the field leader early. This time the negotiations were settled, and as soon as Lao Jiu left, Liuhai moved in.留孩，你为什么想到场子里来呢？这儿有你奶哥；还有？——“这里好。”这里怎么好？——“说不上来。”
…………
这里有火车。
这里有电影，两个星期就放映一回，常演打仗片子，捉特务。
Leaving a child, why did you think of coming to the field? There is your brother here; And also? ——"It's good here." "What's good here? ——" I can't say. ” There are trains here. There are movies here, which are shown once every two weeks, often acting in war films and catching spies.这里有很多小人书。图书馆里有一大柜子。
这里有很多机器。播种机、收割机、脱粒机……张牙舞爪，排成一大片。
这里庄稼都长得整齐。先用个大三齿耙似的家伙在地里划出线，长出来，笔直。
There are a lot of villain books here. There is a large cabinet in the library. There are many machines here. Planters, harvesters, threshers...... Teeth and claws, lined up in a large area. The crops here are all growing neatly. First, use a big three-toothed rake to draw a line in the ground, and it will grow straight.这里有花生、芝麻、红白薯……这一带都没有种过，也长得挺好。
有果园，有菜园。
有玻璃房子，好几排，亮堂堂的，冬天也结西红柿，结黄瓜。黄瓜那么绿，西红柿那么红，跟上了颜色一样。
There are peanuts, sesame seeds, red and white potatoes here...... None of them have been planted in this area, and they grow very well. There is an orchard and a vegetable garden. There are glass houses, several rows, bright, and they also bear tomatoes and cucumbers in winter. Cucumbers are so green, tomatoes are so red, and they are the same color.有很多鸡，都一色是白的；有很多鸭，也一色是白的。风一吹，白毛儿忒勒勒飘翻起来，真好看。有很多很多猪，都是短嘴头子，大腮帮子，巴克夏，约克夏。这里还有养鱼池，看得见一条一条的鱼在水里游……
There are many chickens, all of which are white; there are many ducks, and they are also white. When the wind blows, the white-haired Telele floats up, which is really beautiful. There are many, many pigs, all short-billed, big-cheeked, Berkshire and Yorkshire. There is also a fish pond here, and you can see fish swimming in the water one by one......这里还有羊。这里的羊也不一样。留孩第一次来，一眼就看到：这里的羊都长了个狗尾巴。不是像那样扁不塌塌的沉甸甸颤巍巍的坠着，遮住屁股蛋子，而是很细很长的一条，当郎着。他先初以为这不像样子，怪寒伧的。后来当然知道，这不是本地羊，是本地羊和高加索绵羊的杂交种。这种羊，一把都抓不透的毛子，作一件皮袄，三九天你尽管躺到洋河冰上去睡觉吧！既是这样，那么尾巴长得不大体面，也就可以原谅了。
There are also sheep here. The sheep here are also different. The first time I came here, I saw at a glance that the sheep here all had dog tails. It was not a flat and heavy trembling falling like that, covering the buttocks and balls, but a very thin and long one, which was a lang. He thought it didn't look like it at first, and it was strange. Of course, I later learned that this was not a local sheep, but a hybrid of a local sheep and a Caucasian sheep. This kind of sheep, a handful of hair that can't be caught, make a leather jacket, you can lie down on the ice of the Yanghe River to sleep for three or nine days! If that's the case, then the tail doesn't look very decent, and it can be forgiven.那两头“高加索”，好家伙，比毛驴还大。那么大个脑袋（老羊倌说一个脑袋有十三斤肉），两盘大角，不知绕了多少圈，最后还旋扭着向两边支出来。脖子下的皮皱成数不清的折子，鼓鼓囊囊的，像围了一个大花领子。老是慢吞吞地，稳稳重重地在草地上踱着步。时不时地，停下来，斜着眼，这边看看，那边看看，样子很威严，很尊贵。留孩觉得它很像张士林的一本游记书上画的盛装的非洲老酋长。老九叫他骑一骑。留孩说：“羊嘛，咋骑得！”老九说：“行！”留孩当真骑上去，不想它立刻围着羊舍的场子开起小跑来，步子又匀，身子又稳！原来这两只羊已经叫老九训练得很善于做本来是驴应做的事了。
Those two "Caucasians", good guys, are bigger than donkeys. Such a big head (the old shepherd said that one head has thirteen pounds of meat), two plates of big horns, I don't know how many times it has been circled, and finally it twists and turns to both sides. The skin under the neck is wrinkled into countless folds, bulging, like a big flower collar. Always slow, pacing steadily on the grass. From time to time, stop, squint, look here, look there, look very majestic and noble. Liuhai felt that it was very much like the costumed old African chieftain painted in one of Zhang Shilin's travelogues. Lao Jiu asked him to ride. Liuhai said: "Sheep, how can you ride!" Lao Jiu said, "Okay!" Liu Ai really rode on it, not wanting it to immediately trot around the sheep shed, with an even step and a steady body! It turned out that these two sheep had already trained Lao Jiu to be very good at doing what a donkey should do.留孩，你过两天就是这个场子里的一个农业工人了。就要一天和这两个老酋长，还有那四百只狗尾巴的羊作伴了，你觉得怎么样，好呢还是不好？——“好。”
Leave the child, you will be an agricultural worker in this field in two days. I will be with these two old chiefs and the four hundred dog-tailed sheep in one day, what do you think, good or bad?" ——"Okay. ”场子里老一点的工人都还记得丁贵甲刚来的时候的样子。又干又瘦，披了件丁令当郎的老羊皮，一卷行李还没个枕头粗。问他多大了，说是十二，谁也不相信。待问过他属什么，算一算，却又不错。不论什么时候，都是那么寒簌簌的；见了人，总是那么怯生生的。有的工人家属见他走过，私下担心：这孩子怕活不出来。场子里支部书记有一天远远地看了他半天，说，这孩子怎么的呢，别是有病吧，送医院里检查检查吧。一检查：是肺结核。在医院整整住了一年，好了，人也好像变了一个。接着，这小子，好像遭了掐脖旱的小苗子，一朝得着足量的肥水，飕飕地飞长起来，三四年工夫，长成了一个肩阔胸高腰细腿长的，非常匀称挺拔的小伙子。一身肌肉，晒得紫黑紫黑的。照一个当饲养员的王全老汉的说法：像个小马驹子。
The older workers in the field still remember what Ding Guijia looked like when he first came. Dry and thin, wearing an old sheepskin of Ding Ling, a roll of luggage is not as thick as a pillow. When I asked him how old he was, he said it was twelve, but no one believed it. When I asked him what he belonged to, he did the math, but it was good. No matter when, it is so cold; when I see people, I am always so timid. Some workers' families saw him walking by and were privately worried: This child is afraid that he will not survive. One day the branch secretary looked at him from a distance for a long time and said, what's wrong with this child, don't be sick, send him to the hospital for examination. One check: tuberculosis. After staying in the hospital for a whole year, well, the person seems to have changed. Then, this kid, like a little seedling who had suffered from a choking drought, once he got enough fertilizer and water, he flew up and grew up, and in three or four years, he grew into a very well-proportioned and straight young man with broad shoulders, a high waist and thin legs. All the muscles are tanned purple and black. According to an old man named Wang Quan, who is a breeder: like a foal.这马驹子如今是个无事忙，什么事都有他一份。只要是球，他都愿意摸一摸。放了一天羊，爬了一天山，走了那么远的路，回来扒拉两大碗饭，放下碗就到球场上去。逢到节日，有球赛，连打两场，完了还不休息。别人都已经走净了，他一个人在月亮地里还绷楞绷楞地射篮。摸鱼，捉蛇，掏雀，撵兔子，只要一声吆唤，马上就跟你走。哪里有夜战，临时突击一件什么工作，挑渠啦，挖沙啦，不用招呼，他扛着铁锨就来了。也不问青红皂白，吭吭就干起来。冬天刨冻粪，这是个最费劲的活，常言说：“刨过个冻粪哪！作过个怕梦哪！”他最愿意揽这个活。使尖镐对准一个口子，别足了劲：“许一个猪头——开！许一个羊头——开！开——开！狗头也不许了[5]！”这小伙子好像有太多过剩的精力，不找点什么重实点的活消耗消耗，就觉得不舒服似的。
This foal is busy now, and he has a share in everything. As long as it's a ball, he's willing to touch it. After a day of sheep herding, climbing a mountain for a day, walking so far, he came back to pick up two big bowls of rice, put down the bowl and went to the court. On festivals, there are ball games, and two games in a row are played without rest. Everyone else has already left, and he is still shooting baskets in the moon alone. Fishing, catching snakes, digging sparrows, catching rabbits, as long as you shout, I will follow you immediately. Where is there a night battle, what kind of work is temporarily assaulted, digging sand, no need to say hello, he came with a shovel. Don't ask about the blue and white, just do it. In winter, it is the most laborious work, as the saying goes: "Plane a frozen manure! Have a fearful dream!" He was most willing to take this job. Aim the pickaxe at an opening, and don't be too strong: "Promise a pig's head - open! Promise a sheep's head - open! Open - open! The dog head is not allowed [5]! This young man seems to have too much excess energy, and he feels uncomfortable if he doesn't find something to do more to consume.小伙子一天无忧无虑，不大有心眼。什么也不盘算。开会很少发言，学习也不大好，在场里陆续认下的两个字还没有留孩认得的多。整天就知道干活、玩。也喜欢看电影。他把所有的电影分成两大类：一类是打仗的，一类是找媳妇的。凡是打仗的，就都“好！”凡是找媳妇的，就“唩噫，不看不看！”找媳妇的电影尚且不看，真的找媳妇那更是想都不想了。他奶母早就想张罗着给他寻一个对象了。每次他回家，他奶母都问他场子里有没有好看的姑娘，他总是回答得不得要领。他说林凤梅长得好，五四也长得好。问了问，原来林凤梅是场里生产队长的爱人，已经生过三个孩子；五四是个幼儿园的孩子，一九五四年生的！好像恰恰是和他这个年龄相当的，他都没有留心过。奶母没法，只好摇头。其实场子里这个年龄的，很有几个，也有几个长得不难看的。她们有时谈悄悄话的时候，也常提到他。有一个念过一年初中的菜园组长的女儿，给他做了个鉴定，说：“他长得像周炳，有一个名字正好送给他：《三家巷》第一章的题目！”其余几个没有看过《三家巷》的，就找了这本小说来看。一看，原来是：“长得很俊的傻孩子”，她们格格格地笑了一晚上。于是每次在丁贵甲走过时，她们就更加留神看他，一面看，一面想想这个名字，便格格格地笑。这很快就固定下来，成为她们私下对于他的专用的称呼，后来又简化、缩短，由“长得很俊的傻孩子”变成“很俊的——”。正在做活，有人轻轻一嘀咕：“嗨！很俊的来了！”于是都偷眼看他，于是又格格格的笑。
The young man is carefree all day and doesn't have much of a mind. Don't think about anything. He rarely speaks in meetings, and his studies are not very good, and the two words he recognizes in the field are not as good as those recognized by children. I know how to work and play all day long. I also like to watch movies. He divides all movies into two categories: one is about fighting, and the other is about finding a daughter-in-law. Anyone who fights is "good!" "Anyone who is looking for a daughter-in-law, just "Oh, don't watch it!" I don't watch movies looking for a daughter-in-law, and I don't even think about looking for a daughter-in-law. His wet nurse has long wanted to find a partner for him. Every time he came home, his wet nurse asked him if there were any good-looking girls in the field, and he always answered to the point. He said that Lin Fengmei is good-looking, and May Fourth is also good-looking. After asking, it turned out that Lin Fengmei was the lover of the production captain in the field and had given birth to three children; May Fourth is a kindergarten child, born in 1954! It seems that he is exactly the same age as him, and he has not paid attention to it. The wet nurse couldn't help it, so she had to shake her head. In fact, there are a few people of this age in the field, and a few are not ugly. They sometimes mention him when they talk quietly. A daughter who had been in junior high school for a year gave him an appraisal and said: "He looks like Zhou Bing, and there is a name that is just given to him: the title of the first chapter of "Sanjia Alley"! The rest of the people who had not read "Sanjia Alley" looked for this novel to read. At first glance, it turned out to be: "A very handsome silly boy", and they laughed all night. So every time Ding Guijia walked by, they looked at him more carefully, and while looking at him, they thought about the name, and they laughed. This was quickly fixed and became their exclusive name for him in private, and later simplified and shortened, from "handsome silly boy" to "very handsome-". While working, someone muttered softly: "Hi! Very handsome is here!" So they all stole glances at him, and then smiled again.这些，丁贵甲全不理会。他一点也不知道他有这么一个名字。起先两回，有人在他身后格格地笑，笑得他也疑惑，怕是老九和小吕在他歇晌时给他在脸上画了眼镜或者胡子。后来听惯了，也不以为意，只是在心里说：丫头们，事多！
Ding Guijia ignored these. He didn't know he had such a name at all. At first two times, someone laughed behind him, and he was puzzled, afraid that Lao Jiu and Xiao Lu painted glasses or beards on his face when he was resting. Later, I got used to hearing it, and I didn't care, I just said in my heart: Girls, there are many things!其实，丁贵甲因为从小失去爹娘，多受苦难，在情绪上智慧上所受的启发诱导不多；后来在这样一个集体的环境中成长，接触的人事单纯，又缺少一点文化，以致形成他思想单纯，有时甚至显得有点楞，不那么精伶。这是一块璞，如果在一个更坚利精微的沙轮上磨洗一回，就会放出更晶莹的光润。理想的沙轮，是部队。丁贵甲正是日夜念念不忘地想去参军。他之所以一点也不理会“丫头们”的事，也和他的立志做解放军战士有关。他现在正是服役适龄。上个月底，刚满十八足岁。
In fact, Ding Guijia suffered a lot because he lost his parents since he was a child, and he did not receive much inspiration and induction emotionally and intellectually; Later, growing up in such a collective environment, the personnel he came into contact with were simple, and he lacked a little culture, so that he was simple in thinking, and sometimes even seemed a little sloppy, not so smart. This is a piece of pu, if you grind it on a harder and more subtle sand wheel, it will release a more crystal luster. The ideal sand wheel is the army. Ding Guijia wants to join the army day and night. The reason why he doesn't pay attention to the "girls" at all is also related to his determination to be a soldier of the People's Liberation Army. He is now of service age. At the end of last month, he just turned eighteen.丁贵甲这会儿正在演戏。他演戏，本来不合适，嗓子不好，唱起来不搭调。而且他也未必是对演戏本身真有兴趣。真要派他一个重要一点的角色，他会以记词为苦事，背锣经为麻烦。他的角色也不好派，导演每次都考虑很久，结果总是派他演家院。就是演家院，他也不像个家院。照一个天才鼓师（这鼓师即猪倌小白，比丁贵甲还小两岁，可是打得一手好鼓）说：“你根本就一点都不像一个古人！”可不是，他直直地站在台上，太健康，太英俊，实在不像那么一回事，虽则是穿了老斗衣，还挂了一副白满。但是他还是非常热心地去。他大概不过是觉得排戏人多，好玩，红火，热闹，大锣大鼓地一敲，哇哇地吼几嗓子，这对他的蓬勃炽旺的生命，是能起鼓扬疏导作用的。他觉得这么闹一阵，舒服。不然，这么长的黑夜，你叫他干什么去呢，难道像王全似的摊开盖窝睡觉？
Ding Guijia is acting at this time. He was not suitable for acting, his voice was not good, and he sang out of tune. And he may not be really interested in acting itself. If he really wants to play an important role, he will take memorizing words as a chore and memorizing gongs as trouble. His role is not easy to assign, and the director thinks about it for a long time every time, but always sends him to play a family courtyard. Even if he plays a family courtyard, he doesn't look like a family courtyard. According to a genius drummer (this drummer is a pig boy Xiaobai, who is two years younger than Ding Guijia, but he plays a good drum hand) said: "You don't look like an ancients at all!" "No, he stood straight on the stage, too healthy, too handsome, really not like that, although he was wearing an old fighting suit, and he hung a pair of white man. But he was still very enthusiastic to go. He probably just felt that there were many people rehearsing the opera, it was fun, it was prosperous, lively, and he knocked on the gongs and drums, and roared a few voices, which could play a role in encouraging and guiding his vigorous life. He felt comfortable making such a fuss for a while. Otherwise, what do you ask him to do in such a long night, is he like Wang Quan spreading out the cover and sleeping?现在秋收工作已经彻底结束，地了场光，粮食入库，冬季学习却还没有开始，所以场里决定让业余剧团演两晚上戏，劳逸结合。新排和重排的三个戏里都有他，两个是家院，一个是中军。以前已经拉了几场了，最近连排三个晚上，可是他不能去，这把他着急坏了。
Now that the autumn harvest work has been completely over, the ground is light, the grain is stored, and the winter study has not yet begun, so the venue decided to let the amateur troupe perform two nights of plays, combining work and rest. He is in the three plays of the new and rearranged rows, two are in the home courtyard and one is in the Chinese army. He has been pulled a few times before, and recently he has been rehearsed for three nights in a row, but he can't go, which makes him anxious.因为丢了一只半大羊羔子。大前天，老九舅舅来了，早起老九和丁贵甲一起把羊放上山，晌午他先回一步，丁贵甲一个人把羊赶回家的。入圈的时候，一数，少了一只。丁贵甲连饭也没吃，告诉小吕，叫他请大老张去跟生产队说一声，转身就返回去找了。找了一晚上，十二点了，也没找到。前天，叫老九把羊赶回来，给他留点饭，他又一个人找了一晚上，还是没找到。回来，老九给他把饭热好了，他吃了多半碗就睡了。这两天老羊倌又没在，也没个人讨主意！昨天，生产队说：找不到就算了，算是个事故，以后不要麻痹。看样子是找不到了，两夜了，不是叫人拉走，也要叫野物吃了。但是他不死心，还要找。他上山时就带了一点干粮，对老九说：“我准备找一通夜！找不到不回来。若是人拉走了，就不说了；若是野物吃了，骨头我也要找它回来，它总不能连皮带骨头全都咽下去。不过就是这么几座山，几片滩，它不能土遁了，我一个脚印一个脚印地把你盖遍了，我看你跑到哪里去！”老九说他把羊赶回去也来，还可以叫小吕一起来帮助找，丁贵甲说：“不。家里没有人怎么行？晚上谁起来看羊圈？还要闷料——玉黍在老羊倌屋里，先用那个小麻袋里的。小吕子不行，他路不熟，胆子也小，黑夜没有在山野里呆过。”正说着，他奶弟来了。他知道他这天来的，就跟奶弟说：“我今天要找羊。事情都说好了，你请小吕陪你到办公室，填一个表，我跟他说了。晚上你先睡吧，甭等我。我叫小吕给你借了几本小人书，你看。要是有什么问题，你先找一下大老张，让他告给你。”
Because I lost a half-big lamb. The day before yesterday, Lao Jiu's uncle came, and Lao Jiu and Ding Guijia put the sheep up the mountain together. When he entered the circle, he counted and one was missing. Ding Guijia didn't even eat, told Xiao Lu, told him to ask Da Lao Zhang to talk to the production team, turned around and went back to find it. I searched all night, and at twelve o'clock, I couldn't find it. The day before yesterday, I asked Lao Jiu to drive the sheep back and leave him some food, but he searched for another night, but still couldn't find it. When he came back, Lao Jiu heated up the food for him, and he ate more than half a bowl and went to sleep. The old sheep herd was not there for the past two days, and no one asked for an idea! Yesterday, the production team said: If you can't find it, it's an accident, don't be paralyzed in the future. It seems that it can't be found, it's been two nights, not to be pulled away, but to be eaten by wild animals. But he didn't give up, he still had to look for it. When he went up the mountain, he brought some dry food and said to Lao Jiu: "I'm going to look for it all night! If you can't find it, you won't come back. If someone pulls it away, I won't say anything; if the wild animal eats it, I will find the bones back, and it can't swallow all the bones on the belt. But it's just a few mountains and a few beaches, it can't escape, I cover you one footprint at a time, I see where you go! Lao Jiu said that he would drive the sheep back and come, and he could also ask Xiao Lu to help find it, Ding Guijia said: "No. What can I do if there is no one at home? Who gets up at night to look at the sheepfold? I also have to stuff - the jade millet is in the old sheep house, so use the small sack first. Xiao Luzi can't do it, he is not familiar with the road, he is timid, and he has never stayed in the mountains at night. As he was talking, his wet brother came. He knew that he was here that day, so he said to his wet brother: "I'm looking for sheep today." Everything is settled, you ask Xiao Lu to accompany you to the office, fill out a form, and I told him. You go to bed first at night, don't wait for me. I asked Xiao Lu to borrow you a few villain books, you see. If there is any problem, you should find the eldest boss Zhang first and ask him to sue you. ”晚上，老九和留孩都已经睡实了，小吕也都正在迷糊着了——他们等着等着都困了，忽然听见他连笑带嚷地来了：
At night, Lao Jiu and Liuhai were already asleep, and Xiao Lu was also confused - they were sleepy while waiting, and suddenly heard him come with a smile:“哎！找到啦！找到啦！还活着哩！哎！快都起来！都起来！找到啦！我说它能跑到哪里去呢？哎——”
"Hey! Found it! Found it! Still alive! Ay! Get up quickly! Get up! Found it! I said where can it go? Hey—"这三个人赶紧一骨碌都起来，小吕还穿衣裳，老九是光着屁股就跳下床来了。留孩根本没脱——他原想等他奶哥的，不想就这么睡着了，身上的被子也不知是谁给搭上的。
“找到啦？”
“找到啦！”
These three people quickly got up, Xiao Lu was still wearing clothes, and Lao Jiu jumped out of bed with his buttocks bare. The child didn't take off at all - he wanted to wait for his brother, but he didn't want to fall asleep like this, and he didn't know who put on the quilt on his body. "Found it?" "I found it!"“在哪儿哪？”
“在这儿哪。”
原来他把自己的皮袄脱下来给羊包上了，所以看不见。大家于是七手八脚地给羊舀一点水，又倒了点精料让它吃。这羔子，饿得够呛，乏得不行啦。一面又问：
"Where is it?" "Where is it?" It turned out that he took off his leather jacket and wrapped it up for the sheep, so he couldn't see it. Everyone then scooped a little water for the sheep and poured some concentrate for it to eat. This lamb is hungry enough and so tired. He asked again:“在哪里找到的？”
“怎么找到的？”
“黑咕咚咚的，你咋看见啦？”
丁贵甲嚼着干粮（他干粮还没吃哩），一面喝水，一面说：
"Where did you find it?" "How did you find it?" "Hei Gu Dong Dong, how did you see it?" Ding Guijia chewed dry food (he hadn't eaten dry food yet), and said while drinking water:“我哪儿哪儿都找了。沿着我们那天放羊走过的地方，来回走了三个过儿——前两天我都来回地找过了：没有！我心想：哪儿去了呢？我一边找，一边捉摸它的个头、长相，想着它的叫声，忽然，我想起：叫叫看，怎么样？试试！我就叫！满山遍野地叫。不见答音。四外静悄悄的，只有宁远铁厂的吹风机好像远远地呼呼地响，也听不大真切，就我一个人的声音。我还叫。忽然，——‘咩……’我说，别是我耳朵听差了音，想的？我又叫——‘咩……咩……’这回我听真了，没错！这还能错？我天天听惯了的，娇声娇气的！我赶紧奔过去——看我磕膝上摔的这大块青，——破了！路上有棵新伐树桩子，我一喜欢，忘了，叭叉摔出去丈把远，喔唷，真他妈的！肿了没有？老九，给我拿点碘酒——不要二百二，要碘酒，妈的，辣辣的，有劲！——把我帽子都摔丢了！我找了羊，又找帽子。找帽子又找了半天！真他妈缺德！他早不伐树晚不伐树，赶爷要找羊了，他伐树！
"I looked everywhere. Along the place where we had herded sheep that day, I walked back and forth three times - I looked back and forth two days ago: No! I thought to myself: Where did it go? As I searched, I figured out its size and appearance, thinking about its cry, and suddenly, I remembered: How about it? Try! I will scream! Calling all over the mountains. There was no answer. It was quiet outside, only the hair dryer of the Ningyuan Iron Works seemed to be whirring in the distance, and I couldn't hear it very clearly, just my voice. I still screamed. Suddenly ,—— 'what......' I said, don't my ears hear the wrong sound, what do you think? I shouted again—'What...... What......' This time I heard it seriously, that's right! Can this still be wrong? I'm used to hearing it every day, it's squeamish! I hurried over - and saw that the big green ,—— I fell on my knees was broken! There was a newly cut tree stump on the road, I liked it, I forgot, the fork fell out a yard away, oh, it's fucking! Is it swollen? Lao Jiu, get me some iodine - not two hundred two, I want iodine, damn it, spicy, strong! - Dropped my hat! I looked for a sheep and a hat. I searched for a hat for a long time! What a lack of morality! He didn't cut down trees early, he didn't cut down trees late, he was looking for sheep, he cut down trees!“你说在哪儿找到的？太史弯不有个荒沙梁子吗？拐弯那儿不是叫山洪冲了个豁子吗？笔陡的？那底下不是坟滩吗？前天，老九，我们不是看见人家迁坟吗，刨了一半，露了棺材，不知为什么又不刨了！这毬东西，爷要打你！它不是老爱走外手边[6]吗，大概是豁口那儿沙软了，往下塌，别的羊一挤，它就滚下去了！有那么巧，可可掉在坟窟窿里！掉在烂棺材里！出不来了！棺材在土里埋了有日子了，糟朽了，它一砸，就折了，它站在一堆死人骨头里，——那里头倒不冷！不然饿不杀你也冻杀你！外边挺黑。可我在黑里头久了，有点把星星的光就能瞅见。我又叫一声——‘咩……’不错！就在这里。它是白的，我模模糊糊看见有一点白晃晃的，下面一摸，正是它！小东西！可把爷担心得够呛！累得够呛！明天就叫伙房宰了你！我看你还爱走外手边！还爱走外手边？唔？”
"Where did you find it? Isn't there a barren sand beam in Taishi Bend? Isn't there a flash flood at the corner? The pen is steep? Isn't that a grave beach underneath? The day before yesterday, Lao Jiu, didn't we see people moving graves, half of them were planed, and the coffin was exposed, and for some reason they didn't dig again! This thing, my lord wants to beat you! Isn't it always a love to go outside[6], probably because the sand at the opening is soft and collapses, and when other sheep squeeze it, it rolls down! Coco fell into the grave hole! Fell in a rotten coffin! Can't get out! The coffin has been buried in the soil for a long time, it is rotten, it is broken when it is smashed, it stands in a pile of dead bones,—— it is not cold there! Otherwise, if you don't starve, you will freeze to death! It's quite dark outside. But I've been in the dark for a long time, and I can see the light of the stars. I shouted again - 'Bah......' good! It's here. It's white, I vaguely see a little white swaying, and when I touch it, it's it! Dot! But the master is worried enough! Tired enough! Tomorrow I will ask the kitchen to kill you! I see that you still like to go out! Do you still like to go outside? Not? ”等羊缓过一点来，有了精神，把它抱回羊圈里去，收拾睡下，已经是后半夜了。
When the sheep calmed down a little and had energy, I took it back to the sheepfold and packed it up to sleep, it was already the second half of the night.今天，白天他带着留孩上山放了一天羊，告诉他什么地方的草好，什么地方有毒草。几月里放阳坡，上什么山；几月里放阴坡，上什么山；什么山是半椅子臂[7]，该什么时候放。哪里蛇多，哪里有个暖泉，哪里地里有碱。看见大栅栏落下来了，千万不能过——火车要来了。片石山每天十一点五十要放炮崩山，不能去那里……其实日子长着呢，非得赶今天都告诉你奶弟干什么？
Today, during the day, he took his children up the mountain to herd sheep for a day, telling him where the grass is good and where the grass is poisonous. In a few months, put a sunny slope and go up a mountain; put a shady slope in a few months, what mountain to go to; what mountain is a half-chair arm[7], when to put it. Where there are many snakes, where there is a warm spring, where there is alkali in the ground. Seeing the big fence falling, you must not pass - the train is coming. Pian Shi Mountain has to set off cannons at 11:50 every day, and you can't go there...... In fact, the days are long, I have to tell you what your brother is doing today?晚上，烧了一个小吕在果园里拾来的刺猬，四个人吃了，玩了一会，他就急急忙忙去侍候他的家爷和元帅去了，他知道奶弟不会怪他的。到这会还不回来！
五、夜，正在深浓起来
In the evening, he burned a hedgehog that Xiao Lu picked up in the orchard, and the four of them ate it, and after playing for a while, he hurried to wait for his grandfather and marshal, and he knew that his wet brother would not blame him. I won't come back until now! 5. The night is getting deeper小吕从来没放过羊，他觉得很奇怪，就问老九和留孩：
“你们每天放羊，都数么？”
留孩和老九同声回答：
“当然数，不数还行哩？早起出圈，晚上回来进圈，都数。不数，丢了你怎么知道？”
Xiao Lu had never let a sheep go, he thought it was strange, so he asked Lao Jiu and Liuhai: "Do you count all the sheep you herd every day?" Liu Hai and Lao Jiu replied in unison: "Of course you count, it's okay if you don't count? Get up early to get out of the circle, come back in the evening, and count. If you don't count, how do you know if you lose it? ”“那咋数法？”
咋数法？留孩和老九不懂他的意思，两个人互相看看。老九想了想，哦！
“也有两个一数的，也有三个一数的，数得过来五个一数也行，数不过来一个一个地数！”
"Then how to count?" How to count? Liu Hai and Lao Jiu didn't understand what he meant, and the two looked at each other. Lao Jiu thought for a while, oh! "There are also two ones, and there are three ones, and if you can count them, you can count them five by one, but you can't count them one by one!"“不是这意思！羊是活的嘛！它要跑，这么窜着蹦着挨着挤着，又不是数一笸箩梨，一把树码子，摆着。这你怎么数？”
"That's not what I mean! Sheep are alive! It's going to run, so it's jumping and squeezing next to each other, and it's not counting a basket of pears, a handful of tree yards, and putting it down. How do you count this? ”老九和留孩想一想，笑起来。是倒也是，可是他们小时候放羊用不着他们数，到用到自己数的时候，自然就会了。从来没发生这样的问题。老九又想了想，说：
Lao Jiu and Liuhai thought about it and laughed. Yes, yes, but when they were young, they didn't need them to count sheep, and when they used to count themselves, they naturally did. Such a problem has never happened. Lao Jiu thought for a while and said:“看熟了。羊你都认得了，不会看花了眼的。过过眼就行。猪舍那么多猪，我看都是一样。小白就全都认得，小猪娃子跑出来了，他一把抱住，就知往哪个圈里送。也是熟了，一样的。”
"I'm familiar. You can recognize the sheep, but you won't be dazzled. Just take a look. There are so many pigs in the pigsty, I think they are all the same. Xiaobai recognized them all, the little pig ran out, and he hugged it, and he knew which circle to send it to. It's also familiar, the same. ”小吕想象，若叫自己数，一定不行，非数乱了不可！数着数着，乱了——重来；数着数着，乱了——重来！那，一天早上也出不了圈，晚上也进不了家，净来回数了！他想着那情景，不由得嘿嘿地笑起来，下结论说：
Xiao Lu imagined that if he asked himself to count, he would definitely not be able to do it, and the number must be messed up! Counting and counting, messing up - start over! Then, you can't get out of the circle in the morning, and you can't enter the house at night, so you have to count back and forth! Thinking about that scene, he couldn't help but laugh and concluded:“真是隔行如隔山。”
老九说：
“我看你给葡萄花去雄授粉，也怪麻烦的！那么小的花须，要用镊子夹掉，还不许蹭着柱头！我那天夹了几个，把眼都看酸了！”
"It's really like a mountain." Lao Jiu said: "I think it's troublesome for you to male pollinate the grape flowers! Such a small flower whisker should be pinched off with tweezers, and it is not allowed to rub against the stigma! I pinched a few that day, and my eyes were sore! ”小吕又想起昨天晚上丁贵甲一个人满山叫小羊的情形，想起那么黑，那么静，就只听见自己的声音，想起坟窟窿，棺材，对留孩说：
“你奶哥胆真大！”
留孩说：“他现在胆大，人大了。”
Xiao Lu remembered the situation of Ding Guijia calling the lamb alone all over the mountain last night, thinking of being so dark and quiet, he only heard his own voice, thinking of the grave hole and the coffin, and said to the child: "Your grandmother is so bold!" Liu Hai said: "He is bold now, and he is bigger." ”小吕问留孩和老九：
“要叫你们去，一个人，敢么？”
老九和留孩都没有肯定地回答。老九说：
Xiao Lu asked the child and the ninth: "I want to call you to go, alone, do you dare?" Neither Lao Jiu nor Liu Hai answered affirmatively. Lao Jiu said:“丁贵甲叫羊急的，就是怕，也顾不上了。事到临头，就得去。这一带他也走熟了。他晚上排戏还不老是十一二点回来。也就是解放后。我爹说，十多年头里，过了扬旗，晚上就没人敢走了。那里不清静，劫过人，还把人杀了。”
Ding Guijia told the sheep to be anxious, even if he was afraid, he couldn't take care of it. When things come to an end, you have to go. He is also familiar with this area. He doesn't always come back at eleven or twelve o'clock in the evening rehearsals. That is, after liberation. My father said that for more than ten years, after raising the flag, no one dared to leave at night. It was not quiet there, robbed people, and killed people. ”“在哪里？”
“过了扬旗。准地方我也不知道。”
…………
“——这里有狼么？”小吕想到狼了。
“有！”
“河南[8]狼多，”留孩说，“这两年也少了。”
"Where?" "Passed the flag. I don't know where it is. ” "——Is there a wolf here?" Xiao Lu thought of the wolf. "Yes!" "id_0000 There are many wolves in Henan," Liuhai said, "and there have been fewer in the past two years." ”“他们说是五八年大炼钢铁炼的，到处都是火，烘烘烘，狼都吓得进了大山了。有还是有的。老郑黑夜浇地还碰上过。”
“那我怎么下了好几个月夜，也没碰上过？”
"They said that it was made of steel in five or eight years, and there was fire everywhere, and the wolves were so scared that they entered the mountains. There are still some. Lao Zheng also ran into it when he watered the ground at night. ” "Then why have I been going down for several months and haven't encountered it?"“有！你没有碰上就是了。要是谁都碰上，那成了口外的狼窝沟了！这附近就有，还来果园。你问大老刘，他还打死过一只——一肚子都是葡萄。”
小吕很有兴趣了，留孩也奇怪，怎么都是葡萄，就都一起问：
"Yes! You just didn't encounter it. If everyone encounters it, it will become a wolf's den outside the mouth! There is one around here, and it is also an orchard. If you ask the eldest Liu, he also killed one - his belly was full of grapes. ” Xiao Lu was very interested, and it was strange to keep a child, why were they all grapes, so they all asked together:“咋回事？咋回事？”
"What's going on? What's going on? ”“那年，还是李场长在的时候哩！葡萄老是丢，而且总是丢白香蕉。大老刘就夜夜守着，原来不是人偷的，是一只狼。李场长说：‘老刘，你敢打么？’老刘说，‘敢！’老刘就对着它每天来回走的那条车路，挖了一道壕子，趴在里面，拿上枪，上好子弹，等着——”
"That year, it was still when Director Li was there! Grapes are always lost, and white bananas are always lost. The eldest Liu guarded every night, and it turned out that it was not stolen, it was a wolf. Director Li said: 'Lao Liu, do you dare to fight?' Lao Liu said, 'Dare!' Lao Liu dug a trench against the road it walked back and forth every day, lay in it, took a gun, loaded a good bullet, and waited-"“什么枪，是这支火枪么？”
"What gun, is it this musket?"“不是，”老九把羊舍的火枪往身边靠了靠，说，“是老陈守夜的快枪——等了它三夜，来了！一枪就给撂倒了。打开膛：一肚子都是葡萄，还都是白香蕉！这老家伙可会挑嘴哩，它也知道白香蕉葡萄好吃！”
"No," Lao Jiu leaned the musket from the sheep shed to his side and said, "It's Lao Chen's fast gun - after waiting for it for three nights, it's here!" One shot knocked it down. Open the chamber: the belly is full of grapes and white bananas! This old guy can pick his mouth, and he also knows that white banana grapes are delicious! ”留孩说：“狼吃葡萄么？狼吃肉，不是说‘狼行千里吃肉’么？”
老九说：“吃。狼也吃葡萄。”
小吕说：“这狼大概是个吃素的，是个把斋的老道！”
说得留孩和老九都笑起来。
The child said: "Do wolves eat grapes? Wolves eat meat, doesn't it mean 'wolves travel thousands of miles to eat meat'? ” Lao Jiu said: "Eat." Wolves also eat grapes. ” Xiao Lu said: "This wolf is probably a vegetarian, and he is an old Taoist who is fasting!" ” Both Liuhai and Lao Jiu laughed.“都说狼会赶羊，是真的么？狼要吃哪只羊，就拿尾巴拍拍它，像哄孩子一样，羊就乖乖地在前头走，是真的么？”
“哪有这回事！”
“没有！”
“那人怎么都这么说？”
"It is said that wolves will drive sheep, is it true? If a wolf wants to eat a sheep, it will pat it with its tail, like coaxing a child, and the sheep will obediently walk in front, is it true? ” "How can this happen!" "No!" "Why did that person say that?"“是这样——狼一口咬住羊的脖子，拖着羊，羊疼哩，就走，狼又用尾巴抽它，——哪是拍它！唿擞——唿擞——唿擞，看起来轻轻的，你看不清楚，就像狼赶羊，其实还是狼拖羊。它要不咬住它，它跟你走才怪哩！”
That's how it is - the wolf bites the sheep's neck and drags the sheep, the sheep hurts, so it goes, and the wolf whips it with its tail,—— which is to slap it! It looks light, you can't see clearly, it's like a wolf chasing a sheep, but in fact, it's still a wolf dragging a sheep. If it doesn't bite it, it's strange if it goes with you! ”“你们看见过么？留孩，你见过么？”
“我没见过，我是在家听贵甲哥说过的。贵甲哥在家给人当羊伴子时候，可没少见过狼。他还叫狼吓出过毛病，这会不知好了没有，我也没问他。”
这连老九也不知道，问：
"Have you seen it? Have you seen it? ” "I haven't seen it, I heard Brother Guijia say it at home. When Brother Guijia was a sheep companion at home, he had seen wolves a lot. He also scared the wolf out of trouble, and I didn't ask him if it would get better. ” Even Lao Jiu didn't know this, and asked:“咋回事？”
"What's going on?"“那年，他跟上羊倌上山了。我们那里的山高，又陡，差不多的人连羊路都找不到。羊倌到沟里找水去了，叫贵甲哥一个人看一会。贵甲哥一看，一群羊都惊起来了，一个一个哆里哆嗦的，又低低地叫唤。贵甲哥心里唿通一下——狼！一看，灰黄灰黄的，毛茸茸的，挺大，就在前面山杏丛里。旁边有棵树，吓得贵甲哥一窜就上了树。狼叼了一只大羔子，使尾巴赶着，啦一下子就从树下过去了，吓得贵甲哥尿了一裤子。后来，只要有点着急事，下面就会津津地漏出尿来。这会他胆大了，小时候，——也怕。”
That year, he followed the sheep herd up the mountain. The mountains we have there are high and steep, and almost no one can even find the sheep road. The sheep herder went to the ditch to find water and asked Brother Guijia to watch alone for a while. When Brother Guijia saw it, a group of sheep were startled, trembling one by one, and calling in a low voice. Brother Guijia said in his heart - wolf! At first glance, it was gray and yellow, hairy, and quite large, right in the apricot bush in front of it. There was a tree next to it, and Brother Guijia was so frightened that he jumped up the tree. The wolf took a big lamb and drove its tail, and id_0000 it passed under the tree all of a sudden, which frightened Brother Guijia to pee his pants. Later, as long as there was a little urgency, urine would leak out from below. This will make him bold, and he was afraid ,—— when he was a child. ”“前两天丢了羊，也着急了，咱们问问他尿了没有！”
“对！问他！不说就扒他的裤子检查！”
"I lost the sheep two days ago, and I was also anxious, let's ask him if he peeed!" "Yes! Ask him! If you don't say anything, pick up his pants to check! ”茶开了。小吕把沙锅端下来，把火边的山药翻了翻。老九在挎包里摸了摸，昨天吃剩的朝阳瓜子还有一把，就兜底倒出来，一边喝着高山顶，一边嗑瓜子。
“你们说，有鬼没有？”这回是老九提出问题。
The tea is on. Xiao Lu took down the casserole and turned over the yam by the fire. Lao Jiu touched in his satchel, and there was still a handful of Chaoyang melon seeds left over from yesterday, so he poured them out of his pocket and ate melon seeds while drinking from the top of the mountain. "You say, is there a ghost?" This time it was Lao Jiu who asked the question.留孩说：“有。”
小吕说：“没有。”
“有来，”老九自己说，“就在咱们西南边，不很远，从前是个鬼市，还有鬼饭馆。人们常去听，半夜里，乒乒乓乓地炒菜，杓子铲子响，可热闹啦！”
Liuhai said, "Yes." ” Xiao Lu said: "No." ” "Yes," Lao Jiu said himself, "It's just in our southwest, not far away, it used to be a ghost market and a ghost restaurant." People often go to listen, in the middle of the night, ping pong pong stir-frying, ladles and shovels ring, it is lively! ”“在哪里？”这小吕倒很想去听听，这又不可怕。
“现在没有了。现在那边是兽医学校的牛棚。”
“哎噫——”小吕失望了，“我不相信，这不知是谁造出来的！鬼还炒菜？！”
"Where?" This Xiao Lu really wanted to hear it, and it wasn't scary. "Not anymore. Now over there is the cowshed of the veterinary school. ” "Ouch-" Xiao Lu was disappointed, "I don't believe it, I don't know who made this! The ghost is still cooking?!" ”留孩说：“怎么没有鬼？我听我大爷说过：
Liu Ai said: "Why are there no ghosts? I heard my uncle say:“有一帮河南人，到口外去割莜麦。走到半路上，前不巴村，后不巴店，天也黑夜了，有一个旧马棚，空着，也还有个门，能插上，他们就住进去了。在一个大草滩子里，没有一点人烟。都睡下了。有一个汉子烟瘾大，点了个蜡头在抽烟。听到外面有人说：
"There was a group of Henan people who went outside the mouth to cut wheat. Halfway through, there was an old horse shed, empty, and a door, which could be plugged in, so they lived in. In a big grassy beach, there was no human habitation. Everyone fell asleep. There was a man who was addicted to smoking and lit a wax head and was smoking. I heard someone outside say:“‘你老们，起来解手时多走两步噢，别尿湿了我这疙瘩毡子，我就这么一块毡子啊！’
“这汉子也没理会，就答了一声：
“‘知道啦。’
“一会儿，又是：
"'You old men, take two more steps when you get up and relieve your hands, don't wet my pimple felt, I'm just such a felt!' The man ignored it and replied: "'Got it.' After a while, it was again:“‘你老们，起来解手时多走两步噢，别尿湿了我这疙瘩毡子，我就这么一块毡子啊！’
“‘知道啦。’
“一会会，又来啦：
“‘你老们，起来解手时多走两步噢，我就这么一块疙瘩毡子！’
"'You old men, take two more steps when you get up and relieve your hands, don't wet my pimple felt, I'm just such a felt!' "'Got it.' "After a while, here it is again: "'You old men, take two more steps when you get up and relieve your hands, I'm just such a lump felt!'“‘知道啦！你怎么这么噜苏啊！’
“‘我怎么噜苏啦？’
“‘你就是噜苏！’
“‘我怎么噜苏！’
“‘你噜苏！’
“两个就隔着门吵起来，越吵越凶。外面说：
“‘你敢给爷出来！’
"'Got it! Why are you so sultry! ’ "'Why am I sucking?' "'You are Lusu!' "'How can I suck!' "'You're going to be a good girl!' The two quarreled across the door, and the more they quarreled, the more fierce they became. Outside said: "'You dare to come out for my master!'“‘出来就出来！’
“那汉子伸手就要拉门，回身一看：所有的人都拿眼睛看住他，一起轻轻地摇头。这汉子这才想起来，吓得脸煞白——”
“怎么啦？”
"'Come out, come out!' The man stretched out his hand to pull the door, turned around: everyone looked at him with their eyes and shook their heads gently. Only then did this man remember, and his face turned pale with fright——" "What's wrong?"“外边怎么可能有人啊，这么个大草滩子里？撒尿怎么会尿湿了他的毡子啊？他们都想，来的时候仿佛离墙不远有一疙瘩土，像是一个坟。这是鬼，是也是像他们一样背了一块毡子来割莜麦的，死在这里了。这大概还是一个同乡。
"How can there be someone outside, in such a big grassy beach? How could peeing wet his felt? They all thought that when they came, it seemed that there was a lump of soil not far from the wall, like a grave. This is a ghost, and it is also the one who carried a felt to cut the wheat like them, and died here. This is probably still a fellow townsman.“第二天，他们起来看，果然有一座新坟。他们给他加加土，就走了。”
The next day they got up and saw that there was a new tomb. They added soil to him, and they left. ”这故事倒不怎么可怕，只是说得老九和小吕心里都为这个客死在野地里的只有一块毡子的河南人很不好受。夜已经很深了，他们也不想喝茶了，瓜子还剩一小撮，也不想吃了。
过了一会，忽然，老九的脸色一沉：
This story is not very scary, but it makes Lao Jiu and Xiao Lu feel very uncomfortable for this Henan man who died in the wilderness with only a piece of felt. It was already very late at night, and they didn't want to drink tea anymore, and there was still a handful of melon seeds left, and they didn't want to eat it. After a while, suddenly, Lao Jiu's face darkened:“什么声音？”
是的！轻轻的，但是听得很清楚，有点像羊叫，又不太像。老九一把抓起火枪：
“走！”
"What's the sound?" Yes! It was soft, but I heard it clearly, a bit like a sheep's cry, but not very like. Lao Jiu grabbed the musket: "Let's go!"留孩立刻理解：羊半夜里从来不叫，这是有人偷羊了！他跟着老九就出来。两个人直奔羊圈。小吕抓起他的标枪，也三步抢出门来，说：“你们去羊圈看看，我在这里，家里还有东西。”
The child immediately understood: The sheep never bark in the middle of the night, this is someone stealing the sheep! He followed Lao Jiu out. The two went straight to the sheepfold. Xiao Lu grabbed his javelin, snatched out the door in three steps, and said, "You go to the sheepfold to take a look, I'm here, and there are still things at home." ”老九、留孩用手电照了照几个羊圈，都好好的，羊都安安静静地卧着，门、窗户，都没有动。正察看着，听见小吕喊：
“在这里了！”
他们飞跑回来，小吕正闪在门边，握着标枪，瞄着屋门：
“在屋里！”
The ninth child shone a few sheepfolds with a flashlight, and they were all fine, the sheep were lying quietly, and the doors and windows did not move. I was watching and heard Xiao Lu shouting: "Here it is!" They flew back, and Xiao Lu was flashing by the door, holding a javelin, aiming at the door: "In the house!"他们略一停顿，就一齐踢开门进去。外屋一照，没有。上里屋。里屋灯还亮着，没有。床底下！老九的手电光刚向下一扫，听见床下面“扑嗤”的一声——
“他妈的，是你！”
“好！你可吓了我们一跳！”
They paused slightly, and then kicked open the door together. The outer room shone, no. Go up to the back room. The back room lights are still on, no. Under the bed! As soon as Lao Jiu's flashlight swept down, he heard a "fluttering" sound under the bed—— "Fuck, it's you!" "Okay! You scared us! ”丁贵甲从床底下爬出来，一边爬，一边笑得捂着肚子。
“好！耍我们！打他！”
Ding Guijia crawled out from under the bed, and while crawling, he covered his stomach with a smile. "Okay! Play with us! Hit him! ”于是小吕、老九一齐扑上去，把丁贵甲按倒，一个压住脖子，一个骑住腰，使劲打起来。连留孩也上了手，拽住他企图往上翻拗的腿。一边打，一边说，骂；丁贵甲在下面一边招架，一边笑，说。
So Xiao Lu and Lao Jiu pounced on them together, pressed Ding Guijia down, one pressed his neck, the other rode his waist, and fought hard. Even Liuhai got into his hands and grabbed his leg as he tried to turn up. While fighting, he said and scolded; Ding Guijia parried below, laughed, and said.“我看见灯……还亮着……我说，试试这几个小鬼！……我早就进屋了！拨开门划，躲在外屋……我嘻嘻嘻……叫了一声，听见老九，嘻嘻嘻嘻——”
"I saw the light...... It was still on...... I said, try these little ghosts! …… I entered the house a long time ago! Push open the door and hide in the outhouse...... I giggled...... I shouted, and I heard Lao Jiu, hehe-hee-"“妈的！我听见‘呣——咩’的一声，像是只老公羊！是你！这小子！这小子！”
"Damn! I heard a 'bah-ba', like an old ram! It's you! This kid! This kid! ”“老九……拿了手电嘻嘻就……走！还拿着你娘的……火枪嘻嘻，呜噫，别打头！小吕嘻嘻嘻拿他妈一根破标……枪嘻嘻，你们只好……去吓鸟！”
"Lao Jiu...... Take a flashlight and hee...... Walk! Still holding your mother's ...... Musk hehe, woo, don't hit the head! Xiao Lu hehehe, take a fucking breaking standard...... Gun hee, you have to ...... Go scare the birds! ”这么一边说着，打着，笑着，滚着，闹了半天，直到丁贵甲在下面说：
“好香！了……山药……了！哎哟……我可饿了！”
While saying this, fighting, laughing, rolling, and making trouble for a long time, until Ding Guijia said below: "It smells so good! ...... Yam...... ! Ouch...... I'm hungry! ”他们才放他起来。留孩又去捅了捅炉子，把高山顶又坐热了，大家一边吃山药，一边喝茶，一边又重复地演述着刚才的经过。
They let him go. Liu Hai went to poke the stove again, and the top of the mountain was hot again, and everyone ate yam and drank tea while repeatedly recounting what had just happened.他们吃着，喝着，说了又说，笑了又笑。当中又夹着按倒，拳击，捧腹，搂抱，表演，比划。他们高兴极了，快乐极了，简直把这间小屋要闹翻了，涨破了，这几个小鬼！他们完全忘记了现在是很深的黑夜。
六、明天
They ate, drank, talked and talked, laughed and laughed. In the middle of them were pressing, boxing, laughing, hugging, performing, gesturing. They were so happy, so happy that they almost overturned this cabin, they broke it, these little devils! They completely forgot that it was a very deep night. 6. Tomorrow明天，他们还会要回味这回事，还会说、学、表演、大笑，而且等张士林回来一定会告诉张士林，会告诉陈素花、恽美兰，并且也会说给大老张听的。将来有一天，他们聚在一起，还会谈起这一晚上的事，还会觉得非常愉快。今夜，他们笑够了，闹够了，现在都安静了，睡下了。起先，隔不一会还有人含含糊糊地说一句什么，不知是醒着还是在梦里，后来就听不到一点声息了。这间在昏黑中哗闹过、明亮过的半坡上的羊舍屋子，沉静下来，在拥抱着四山的广阔、丰美、充盈的暗夜中消融。一天就这样的过去了。夜在进行着，夜和昼在渗入，交递，开往北京的216次列车也正在轨路上奔驶。
Tomorrow, they will reminisce about this matter, talk, learn, perform, laugh, and when Zhang Shilin comes back, he will definitely tell Zhang Shilin, he will tell Chen Suhua and Yun Meilan, and he will also tell Da Lao Zhang. One day in the future, when they get together, they will talk about this night, and they will feel very happy. Tonight, they laughed enough, made enough noise, and now they are all quiet and asleep. At first, there were people who said something vaguely every now and then, whether they were awake or in a dream, and then they couldn't hear a sound. This sheep house on the half-slope, which had been noisy and bright in the dark, calmed down and melted in the vast, beautiful, and full dark night that embraced the four mountains. The day passed like this. The night is in progress, night and day are infiltrating, handing over, and the 216 train to Beijing is also running on the tracks.明天，就又是一天了。小吕将会去找黄技师，置办他的心爱的嫁接刀。老九在大家的帮助下，会把行李结束起来，走上他当一个钢铁工人的路。当然，他会把他新编得的羊鞭交给留孩。留孩将要来这个“很好的”农场里当一名新一代的牧羊工。征兵的消息已经传开，说不定场子里明天就接到通知，叫丁贵甲到曾经医好他肺结核的医院去参加体格检查，准备入伍、受训，在他所没有接触过的山水风物之间，在蓝天或绿海上，戴起一顶缀着星徽的军帽。这些，都在夜间趋变为事实。
Tomorrow, it's another day. Xiao Lu will go to Technician Huang to buy his beloved grafting knife. With everyone's help, Lao Jiu will end his luggage and embark on his path to becoming a steelworker. Of course, he will give his newly woven sheep whip to Liuhai. Liuhai will come to this "good" farm as a new generation of shepherds. The news of the conscription has spread, and maybe tomorrow he will receive a notice in the field to ask Ding Guijia to go to the hospital where he was once cured of tuberculosis to participate in a physical examination, prepare to enlist in the army, receive training, and wear a military hat decorated with star emblems between the landscapes and scenery he has not been exposed to, in the blue sky or on the green sea. These all tend to become facts at night.这也只是一个平常的夜。但是人就是这样一天一天，一黑夜一黑夜地长起来的。正如同庄稼，每天观察，差异也都不太明显，然而它发芽了，出叶了，拔节了，孕穗了，抽穗了，灌浆了，终于成熟了。这四个现在在一排并睡着的孩子（四个枕头各托着一个蓬蓬松松的脑袋），他们也将这样发育起来。在党无远弗及的阳光照煦下，经历一些必要的风风雨雨，都将迅速、结实、精壮地成长起来。
This is just an ordinary night. But this is how people grow day by day, night by night. Just like a crop, the difference is not very obvious when observed every day, but it germinates, leaves emerges, joints, boots, heads, fills, and finally matures. These four children who are now asleep in a row (each of the four pillows holds a fluffy head), they will also develop in this way. Under the sunshine of the party, through some necessary ups and downs, they will grow rapidly, strongly, and strongly.现在，他们都睡了。灯已经灭了。炉火也封住了。但是从煤块的缝隙里，有隐隐的火光在泄漏，而映得这间小屋充溢着薄薄的，十分柔和的，蔼然的红晖。
睡吧，亲爱的孩子。
一九六一年十一月二十五日写成
Now they were all asleep. The lights were out. The fire was sealed. But from the gaps in the coals, there was a faint light leaking out, and the hut was filled with a thin, very soft, bright red light. Go to sleep, dear child. Written on November 25, 1961
[1] 本篇原载《人民文学》1962年六月号。初收《羊舍的夜晚》，中国少年儿童出版社，1963年1月；又收《汪曾祺短篇小说选》，北京出版社，1982年2月，文字有较大改动。
[1] This article was originally published in the June 1962 issue of People's Literature. The first collection was "Night in the Sheep Lodge", China Children's Publishing House, January 1963; and "Selected Short Stories of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Publishing House, February 1982, the text was greatly changed.[2] 一种野生植物，可以当茶喝。
[3] 鸹鸹悠即猫头鹰。
[4] “笨工子”是外行。“下不地”是说应付不了。
[2] A wild plant that can be drunk as tea. [3] The emu is an owl. [4] "Stupid workers" are laymen. "I can't get off the ground" means that I can't cope with it.[5] 这本来是开山的石匠的习语。在石头未破开前许愿：如果开了，则用一个羊头、猪头作贡献；但当真开了，即什么也不许了。
[5] This was originally an idiom of the stonemason who opened the mountain. Make a wish before the stone is broken: if it is opened, it will be contributed with a sheep's head or a pig's head; but if it is opened, it will not allow anything.[6] 外手边是右边。这本来是赶车人的说法。赶车人都习惯于跨坐在左辕，所以称左边为里手边或里边，右边为外手边或外边。
[7] 南北方向的小岭，两边坡上都常见阳光，形状略似椅臂者。
[6] The outer hand side is the right side. This was originally the saying of the car driver. The car driver is used to sitting on the left side, so the left side is called the inside hand or inside, and the right side is the outside hand or outside. [7] The small ridges in the north-south direction are often sunny on both slopes, and the shape is slightly like a chair arm.[8] 洋河以南。

1962年

1962年
王全[1]
马号今天晚上开会。原来会的主要内容是批评王升，但是临时不得不改变一下，因为王全把王升打了。
[8] South of the Yang River. In 1962 Wang Quan{{id_0000}} Ma Hao has a meeting tonight. The main content of the meeting was to criticize Wang Sheng, but it had to be changed temporarily, because Wang Quan beat Wang Sheng.我到这个农业科学研究所没有几天，就听说了王全这个名字。业余剧团的小张写了一个快板，叫做《果园奇事》，说的是所里单株培育的各种瓜果“大王”，说道有一颗大牛心葡萄掉在路边，一个眼睛不好的工人走过，以为是一只马的眼珠子掉下来了，大惊小怪起来。他把这个快板拿给我看。我说最好能写一个具体的人，眼睛当真不好的，这样会更有效果。大家一起哄叫起来：“有！有！瞎王全！他又是饲养员，跟马搭得上的！”我说这得问问他本人，别到时候上台数起来，惹得本人不高兴。正说着，有一个很粗的，好像吵架似的声音在后面叫起来：
I heard the name Wang Quan within a few days of arriving at the Institute of Agricultural Sciences. Xiao Zhang of the amateur theater troupe wrote an allegro called "Strange Things in the Orchard", which talked about the "king" of various melons and fruits cultivated by a single plant in the institute, saying that a big cow heart grape fell on the side of the road, and a worker with bad eyesight walked by, thinking that it was a horse's eyeball falling off, and made a fuss. He showed me this allegro. I said that it would be better to write about a specific person whose eyes are really bad, so that it would be more effective. Everyone shouted together: "Yes! Yes! Blind king! He is a breeder again, and he can catch up with horses! "I said I have to ask him personally, don't go on stage and count it when the time comes, and make me unhappy. As he was talking, a very thick, quarrel-like voice shouted from behind:“没意见！”
原来他就是王全。听别人介绍，他叫王全，又叫瞎王全，又叫偢六。叫他什么都行，他都答应的。
"No problem!" It turned out that he was Wang Quan. Listening to others' introductions, his name is Wang Quan, also known as Blind Wang Quan, and also called Wei Liu. He can do anything to him, and he agrees.他并不瞎。只是有非常严重的砂眼，已经到了睫毛内倒的地步。他身上经常带着把镊子，见谁都叫人给他拔眼睫毛。这自然也会影响视力的。他的眼睛整天眯缝着，成了一条线。这已经有好些年了。因此落下一个瞎王全的名字。
He is not blind. He just has very serious trachoma, which has reached the point where his eyelashes fall inward. He often carries tweezers on his body, and when he sees everyone, he asks someone to pull out his eyelashes. This naturally affects his eyesight. His eyes squinted all day long, becoming a line. This has been going on for many years. Therefore, the name of a blind king was dropped.这地方管缺个心眼叫“偢”，读作“俏”。王全行六，据说有点缺心眼，故名“偢六”。说是，你到他的家乡去，打听王全，也许有人不知道，若说是偢六，就谁都知道的。
This place lacks a heart and eye is called "偢", which is pronounced "pretty". Wang Quan is said to be a little lacking in heart, so it is called "Si Liu". It is said that if you go to his hometown and inquire about Wang Quan, maybe some people don't know, if it is Yi Liu, everyone knows.这话不假。我就听他自己向新来的刘所长介绍过自己：
This is true. I heard him introduce himself to the new Director Liu:“我从小当长工。挑水，垫圈，烧火，扫院。长大了还是当长工。十三吊大钱，五石小米！解放军打下姑姑洼，是我带的路。解放军还没站稳脚，成立了区政府，我当通讯员：区长在家，我去站岗；区长下乡，我就是区长。就咱俩人。我不识字，还是当我的长工。我这会不给地主当长工，我是所里的长工。李所长说我是国家的长工。我说不来话。你到姑姑洼去打听，一问偢六，他们都知道！”
"I have been a long-term worker since I was a child. Carrying water, washers, lighting fires, and sweeping the courtyard. When I grow up, I still work as a long-term worker. Thirteen big money, five stones of millet! The People's Liberation Army has laid down Guguwa, which is the road I led. The People's Liberation Army has not yet gained a foothold, and the district government has been established, and I am a correspondent: the district chief is at home, I go to stand guard; the district chief goes to the countryside, and I am the district chief. It's just the two of us. I can't read, but I still work as my long-term worker. I won't be able to do anything. ”这人很有意思。在农闲排戏的时候，每天晚上他都跑到业余剧团来。有时也帮忙抬桌子，挂幕布，大半时间都没事，就定定地守着看，嗬嗬地笑，而且不管妨碍不妨碍排戏，还要一个人大声地议论。那议论大都非常简短：“有劲！”“不差！”最常用的是含义极其丰富的两个字：“看看！”
This person is very interesting. When he was rehearsing plays, he went to the amateur troupe every night. Sometimes he also helped carry the table and hang the curtains, and most of the time he was fine, so he watched fixedly, laughed hoho, and talked loudly regardless of whether it interfered or did not hinder the rehearsal. Most of the discussions were very brief: "Energetic!" "Not bad!" The most commonly used words are extremely rich in meaning: "Look! ”最妙的是，我在台上演戏，正在非常焦灼，激动，全场的空气也都很紧张，他在台下叫我：“老汪，给我个火！”（我手里捏着一支烟。）我只好作势暗示他“不行！”不料他竟然把他的手伸上来了。他就坐在第一排——他看戏向来是第一排，因为他来得最早。所谓第一排，就是台口。我的地位就在台角，所以咱俩离得非常近。他一面嘴里还要说：“给我点个火嘛！”真要命！我只好小声地说：“嗐！”他这才明白过来，又独自嗬嗬地笑起来。
The best thing is that I was acting on stage, I was very anxious and excited, and the air in the audience was also very tense, and he called me offstage: "Lao Wang, give me a fire!" (I was holding a cigarette in my hand.) I had to pretend to hint to him, "No!" Unexpectedly, he actually stretched out his hand. He sat in the first row - he always watched the play in the first row because he came the earliest. The so-called first row is the stage. My position is in the corner, so we are very close. He also said, "Light a fire for me!" "It's terrible! I had to whisper: "Hey! Only then did he understand, and laughed alone.王全是个老光棍，已经四十六岁了，有许多地方还跟个孩子似的。也许因为如此，大家说他偢。
Wang Quan is an old bachelor, forty-six years old, and in many places he is still like a child. Maybe because of this, everyone says he is a child.不知道究竟为什么，他不当饲养员了。这人是很固执的，说不当就不当，而且也不说理由。他跑到生产队去，说：“哎！我不喂牲口了，给我个单套车，我赶车呀！”马号的组长跟他说，没用；生产队长跟他说，也没用。队长去找所长，所长说：“大概是有情绪，一时是说不通的。有这样的人。先换一个人吧！”于是就如他所愿，让他去赶车，把原来在大田劳动的王升调进马号喂马。
I don't know why, he is not a breeder. This person is very stubborn, and he doesn't say anything wrong, and he doesn't say a reason. He ran to the production team and said, "Hey! I won't feed the animals, give me a single set of cars, and I'll drive the car!" The team leader of the horse number told him that it was useless; the production captain told him that it was useless. The captain went to the director, and the director said: "Probably there is emotion, and it doesn't make sense for a while. There is such a person. Let's change someone first!" So as he wished, he asked him to catch the car and transferred Wang Sheng, who had been working in Datian, to the horse to feed the horses.这样我们有时就搭了伙计。我参加劳动，有时去跟车，常常跟他的车。他嘴上是不留情的。我上车，敛土，装粪，他老是回过头来眯着眼睛看我。有时索性就停下他的铁锨，拄着，把下巴搁在锨把上，歪着头，看。而且还非常压抑和气愤地从胸膛里发出声音：“嗯！”忽然又变得非常温和起来，很耐心地教我怎么使家伙。“敛土嘛，左手胳膊肘子要靠住肐膝，肐膝往里一顶，借着这个劲，胳膊就起来了。嗳！嗳！对了！这样多省劲！是省劲不是？像你那么似的，架空着，单凭胳膊那点劲，我问你：你有多少劲？一天下来，不把你累乏了？真笨！你就是会演戏！要不是因为你会演戏呀，嗯！——”慢慢地，我干活有点像那么一回事了，他又言过其实地夸奖起我来：“不赖！不赖！像不像，三分样！你能服苦，能咬牙。不光是会演戏了，能文能武！你是个好样儿的！毛主席的办法就是高，——叫你们下来锻炼！”于是叫我休息，他一个人干。“我多上十多锨，就有了你的了！当真指着你来干活哪！”这是不错的。他的铁锨是全所闻名的，特别大，原来铲煤用的洋锨，而且是个大号的，他拿来上车了。一锨能顶我四锨。他叫它“跃进锨”。他那车也有点特别。这地方的大车，底板有四块是活的，前两块，后两块。装粪装沙，到了地，铲去一些，把这四块板一抽，就由这里往下拨拉。他把他的车底板全部拆成活的，到了地，一抽，哗啦——整个就漏下去了。这也有了名儿，叫“跃进车”。靠了他的跃进车和跃进锨，每天我们比别人都能多拉两趟。因此，他就觉得有权力叫我休息。我不肯。他说：“！这人！叫你休息就休息！怕人家看见，说你？你们啊，老是怕人说你！不怕得！该咋的就是咋的！”他这个批评实在相当尖刻，我就只好听他。在一旁坐下来，等他三下五除二把车装满，下了，随他一路唱着：“老王全在大街扬鞭走马！”回去。
In this way, we sometimes got a buddy. I participated in labor, sometimes I went to follow the car, and often followed his car. He was merciless. I got into the car, collected the soil, and loaded the dung, and he always turned around and squinted at me. Sometimes he simply stopped his shovel, held it, rested his chin on the handle of the shovel, tilted his head, and looked. And he was very depressed and angry and made a sound from his chest: "Hmm!" "Suddenly he became very gentle again, and patiently taught me how to use the guy." The elbow of the left hand should be against the knee, and the knee should be pushed inward, and with this strength, the arm will rise. Well! Well! That's right! How much effort is saved! Is it energy-saving? Like you, overhead, with the strength of your arm alone, I ask you: How much energy do you have? At the end of the day, don't you get tired? So stupid! You just know how to act! If it weren't for the fact that you can act, hmm! ——"Slowly, I worked a bit like that, and he praised me excessively: "Not bad! Good! Like no, three points! You can endure hardship and grit your teeth. Not only can you act, but you can also be literate and martial! You are a good look! Chairman Mao's method is to ,—— and ask you to come down and exercise!" "So he told me to rest, and he did it alone." I have more than ten shovels, and I have yours! Seriously, I want you to work!" "This is good. His shovel is well-known, very large, it turned out to be a shovel used for shoveling coal, and it was a large one, and he brought it to the car. One shovel can withstand four shovels for me. He called it "leaping into the shovel". His car is also a bit special. The bottom plate of the big car in this place is alive, the first two and the back two. Load the dung and sand, when you reach the ground, shovel some away, pull these four boards down, and pull them down from here. He dismantled all the underplates of his car alive, and when he got to the ground, he pulled it out, and the whole thing leaked out. This also got its name, called "Leap into the Car". With his Leap into the Car and the Leap into the Shovel, we were able to pull two more trips every day than others. Therefore, he felt empowered to tell me to rest. I refused. He said, "! This person! If you are told to rest, you will rest! Are you afraid that people will see you and talk about you? You are always afraid of people talking about you! Don't be afraid! That's what you should do!" His criticism was so harsh that I had to listen to him. Sit down on the side, wait for him to fill the car by three strokes, get off, and sing with him all the way: "Lao Wang is all on the street!" Go back.他的车来了，老远就听见！不是听见车，是听见他嚷。他不大使唤鞭子，除非上到高坡顶上，马实在需要抽一下，才上得去，他是不打马的。不使鞭子，于是就老嚷：
“喔喝！喔喝！咦喔喝！”
Once, he pulled green manure up from the fertilizer pit. He was happy again, jumped into the shovel a few more shovels, and the slope of the pit was announced again, and the horse couldn't pull it up. He shouted desperately: "Oh drink! Oh drink! Hey, oh drink! ”还要不停地跟马说话，他说是马都懂的。絮絮叨叨，没完没了。本来是一些只能小声说的话，他可是都是放足了嗓子喊出来的。——这人不会小声说话。这当中照例插进许多短短的亲热的野话。
He also kept talking to the horse, and he said that the horse understood. The chatter is endless. It was originally something that could only be said in a low voice, but he shouted it out with his voice full. ——This person can't speak in a low voice. As usual, there are many short intimate wild words.有一回，从积肥坑里往上拉绿肥。他又高了兴，跃进锨多来了几锨，上坑的坡又是宣的，马怎么也拉不上去。他拼命地嚷：
“喔喝！喔喝！咦喔喝！”
Once, he pulled green manure up from the fertilizer pit. He was happy again, jumped into the shovel a few more shovels, and the slope of the pit was announced again, and the horse couldn't pull it up. He shouted desperately: "Oh drink! Oh drink! Hey, oh drink! ”他生气了，拿起鞭子。可忽然又跳在一边，非常有趣地端详起他那匹马来，说：
“笑了！咦！笑了！笑啥来？”
He was angry and picked up the whip. But suddenly he jumped aside again, looked at his horse very interestingly, and said: "Laughed! Hey! Laughed! What are you laughing at? ”这可叫我忍不住噗嗤笑了。马哪里是笑哩！它是叫嚼子拽的在那里咧嘴哩！这么着“笑”了三次，到了也没上得去。最后只得把装到车上去的绿肥，又挖出一小半来，他在前头领着，我在后面扛着，才算上来了。
This made me can't help but sneer. Where is the horse laughing! It's called chewing and grinning there! I "laughed" like this three times, and I couldn't go up when I arrived. In the end, I had to dig out a small half of the green manure that was loaded into the car, he led it in the front, and I carried it in the back, so it was counted.他这匹马，实在不怎么样！他们都叫它青马，可实在是灰不灰白不白的。他说原来是青的，可好看着哪！后来就变了。灰白的马，再搭上红红的眼皮和嘴唇，总叫我想起吉诃德先生，虽然我也不知道吉诃德先生的马到底是什么样子的。他说这是一匹好马，干活虽不是太顶事，可是每年准下一个驹。
His horse is really not good! They all call it a green horse, but it is really gray and not gray. He said it was originally green, but it was good-looking! Then it changed. The gray horse, with its red eyelids and lips, always reminds me of Mr. Quixote, although I don't know what Mr. Quixote's horse looks like. He said that this is a good horse, and although it is not too much to work, he allows the next foal every year.“你想想，每年一个！一个骡子一万二，一个马，八千！它比你和我给国家挣的钱都多！”
"Think about it, one a year! A mule is twelve thousand, a horse, eight thousand! It is more money than you and I earn for the country!" ”他说它所以上不了坡，是因为又“有”了。于是走一截，他就要停下来，看看马肚子。用手摸，用耳朵贴上去听。他叫我也用手放在马的后胯上部，摸，——我说要摸也是摸肚子底下，马怀驹子怎么会怀到大腿上头来呢？他大笑起来，说：“你真是外行！外行！”好吧，我就摸。
He said that it couldn't go uphill because it was "there" again. So after walking for a while, he was about to stop and look at the horse's belly. Touch it with your hands and listen with your ears. He told me to put my hand on the upper part of the horse's back crotch and touch it,—— I said that if I wanted to touch it, I would also touch the belly, how could the horse bear the foal be pregnant on the thigh? He laughed and said, "You are really a layman! Layman! "Okay, I'll touch it.“怎么样？”
“热的。”
“见你的鬼！还能是凉的吗？凉的不是死啦！叫你摸，——小驹子在里面动哪！动不动？动不动？”
我只好说：“——动。”
"How is it?" "It's hot." "See your ghost! Can it still be cold? It's not cold enough! I told you to touch ,—— foal in it! Can you move? Do you move? ” I had to say, "——Move." ”后来的确连看也看出小驹子在动了，他说得不错。可是他最初让我摸的时候，我实在不能断定到底摸出动来没有；并且连他是不是摸出来了，我也怀疑。
Later, I could indeed see that the foal was moving, and he said it well. But when he first asked me to touch it, I really couldn't tell if it had moved; and I even doubted whether he had touched it.我问过他为什么不当饲养员了，他不说，说了些别的话，片片段段的，当中又似乎不大连得起来。
他说马号组的组长不好。旗杆再高，还得有两块石头夹着；一个人再能，当不了四堵墙。
I asked him why he didn't become a breeder anymore, but he didn't say anything, he said something else, and it didn't seem to be connected. He said that the leader of the horse trumpet group is not good. No matter how high the flagpole is, it must be sandwiched by two stones; no matter how high a person is, he can't stand four walls.可是另一时候，我又听他说过组长很好，使牲口是数得着的，这一带地方也找不出来。又会修车，小小不言的毛病，就不用拿出去，省了多少钱！又说他很辛苦，晚上还老加班，还会修电灯，修水泵……
But at another time, I heard him say that the team leader is very good, so that the livestock can be counted, and there is no place in this area. He can repair cars again, and if there is a small unspoken problem, he doesn't have to take it out, how much money has been saved! He also said that he is very hard, and he works overtime at night, and he can repair lights and water pumps......他说，每回评先进工作者，红旗手，光凭嘴，净评会说的，评那会做在人面前的。他就是看不惯这号人！
He said that every time he evaluates advanced workers and red flag bearers, he will only comment on what he will say and what he will do in front of others. He just can't get used to this person!他说，喂牲口是件操心事情。要熬眼。马无夜草不肥。要把草把料——勤倒勤添，一把草一把料地喂。搁上一把草，洒上一层料，有菜有饭地，它吃着香。你要是不管它，哗啦一倒，它就先尽料吃，完了再吃草，就不想了！牲口嘛！跟孩子似的，它懂个屁事！得一点一点添。这样它吃完了还想吃，吃完了还想吃。跟你似的，给你三大碗饭，十二个馒头，都堆在你面前！还是得吃了一碗再添一碗。马这东西也刁得很。也难怪。少搁，草总是脆的，一嚼，就酥了。你要是搁多了，它的鼻子喷气，把草疙节都弄得蔫筋了，它嚼不动。就像是脆锅巴，你一咬就酥了；要是蔫了，你咬得动么，——咬得你牙疼！嚼不动，它就不吃！一黑夜你就老得守着侍候它，甭打算睡一点觉。
He said that feeding animals is a worrying thing. You have to boil your eyes. Horses are not fat without night. You have to feed the grass - diligently, and feed it one handful of grass at a time. Put a handful of grass on it, sprinkle a layer of material, there are vegetables and food, and it eats fragrant. If you don't care about it and it falls, it will eat all the ingredients first, and then eat grass after it's over, and it won't want to! Animals! Like a child, it knows a fart! It has to be added little by little. In this way, it still wants to eat after eating, and it still wants to eat after eating. Just like you, I will give you three bowls of rice and twelve steamed buns, all piled up in front of you! You still have to eat one bowl and add another. The horse is also very tricky. No wonder. If you put it on a little, the grass will always be crispy, and when you chew it, it will be crispy. If you put it on too much, its nose will blow and wilt the knots, and it won't be able to chew. It's like a crispy pot, and it will be crispy when you bite it; if it wilts, can you bite it,—— it will make your teeth hurt! If you can't chew, it won't eat! You will have to wait for it all night, and you don't plan to sleep a little.说，咱们农科所的牲口，走出去，不管是哪里，人们都得说：“还是人家农科所的牲口！”毛色发亮，屁股蛋蛋都是圆的。你当这是简单的事哩！
Say, our animals from the Institute of Agricultural Sciences, no matter where they are, people have to say: "It's still the animals of the Institute of Agricultural Sciences!" "The fur color is shiny, and the buttocks and balls are round. You think this is a simple thing!他说得最激动的是关于黑豆，他说得这东西简直像是具有神奇的效力似的。说是什么东西也没有黑豆好。三斗黄豆也抵不上一斗黑豆。不管什么乏牲口，拿上黑豆一催，一成黑豆，三成高粱，包管就能吃起来。可是就是没有黑豆。
What he said most excitedly was about black beans, and he said that this thing seemed to have magical effects. It's not as good as black beans. Three buckets of soybeans are not worth a bucket of black beans. No matter what kind of livestock you lack, if you take black beans, 10% black beans and 30% sorghum, you can eat them. But there are no black beans.“每年我都说，俺们种些黑豆，种些黑豆。——不顶！”
我说：“你提意见嘛！”
“提意见？哪里我没有提过个意见？——不顶！马号的组长！生产队！大田组！都提了——不顶！提意见？提意见还不是个白！”
"Every year I say, let's plant some black beans, plant some black beans. ——No top! ” I said, "You have an opinion!" ” "Give an opinion? Where haven't I mentioned an opinion? - No top! The leader of the horse number! The production team! The Ota group! All mentioned - no top! Opinion? Opinion is not in vain! ”“你是怎么提意见的？一定是也不管时候，也不管地方，提的也不像是个意见。也不管人家是不是在开会，在算账，在商量别的事，只要你猛然想起来了，推门就进去：‘哎！俺们种点黑豆啊！’没头没脑，说这么一句，抹头就走！”
"How did you make your opinion? It must be regardless of the time or place, and it doesn't seem like an opinion. It doesn't matter if people are in a meeting, settling accounts, or discussing other things, as long as you suddenly remember, push the door and go in: 'Hey! Let's plant some black beans!' 'No head and no brain, say this, wipe your head and leave! ”“咦！咋的？你看见啦？”
“我没看见，可想得出来。”
"Huh! What's wrong? Did you see it?" ” "I didn't see it, but I can imagine it."他笑了。说他就是不知道提意见还有个什么方法。他说，其实，黑豆牲口吃了好，他们都知道，生产队，大田组，他们谁没有养活过个牲口？可是他们要算账。黄豆比黑豆价钱高，收入大。他很不同意他们这种算账法。
He smiled. He just didn't know what other way to give his opinion. He said, in fact, the black bean livestock are well eaten, and they all know that the production team, the field group, who has not fed an animal? But they have to settle the score. Soybeans are more expensive than black beans and have a lot of income. He disagrees with their method of settling accounts.“我问你，是种了黄豆，多收入个几百元——嗯，你就说是多收入千数元，上算？还是种了黑豆，牲口吃上长膘、长劲，上算？一个骡子一万二！一个马八千！我就是算不来这种账！嗯！哼，我可知道，增加了收入，这笔账算在他们组上；喂胖了牲口，算不到他们头上！就是这个鬼心眼！我偢，这个我可比谁都明白！”
"Let me ask you, did you plant soybeans and earn a few hundred yuan more - well, you said that you earned a few thousand yuan more, which is the calculation? Or planted black beans, and the livestock ate fat and strength, which is the calculation? A mule is twelve thousand! A horse is eight thousand! I just can't calculate this kind of account! Well! Hmph, I know that the increase in income is counted in their group; feeding fat animals can't be counted on their heads! It's this ghostly eye! I know, I understand this better than anyone else! ”他越说越气愤，简直像要打人的样子。是不是他的不当饲养员，主要的原因就是不种黑豆？看他那认真、执着的神情，好像就是的。我对于黄豆、黑豆，实在一无所知，插不上嘴，只好说：“你要是真有意见，可以去跟刘所长提。”
The more he spoke, the more angry he became, as if he was going to hit someone. Is it his improper breeder, the main reason is not to plant black beans? Looking at his serious and persistent expression, it seems to be it. I really didn't know anything about soybeans and black beans, so I couldn't interject, so I had to say: "If you really have an opinion, you can mention it to Director Liu." ”“他会管么？这么芝麻大的事？”
“我想会。”
"Will he take care of it? Such a big thing? ” "I think so."过了一些时，他真的去跟刘所长去提意见了。这可真是一个十分新鲜、奇特、出人意表的意见。不是关于黄豆、黑豆的，要大得多。那天我正在刘所长那里。他一推门，进来了：
“所长，我提个意见。”
Saying that, he grabbed Wang Sheng, and everyone hurriedly came up to grab and untie it, so that they didn't fight again. This meeting has to be here for the time being. Two days later, I met him again at Director Liu's place. Still like that, as soon as I pushed the door, I came in, without a head: "Director, let me give you an opinion."“好啊，什么意见呢？”
"Okay, what opinion?"“我给你找几个人，把你所里这点地包了！三年，我包你再买这样一片地。说的！过去地主手里要是有这点地，几年工夫就能再滚出来一片。咱们今天不是给地主作活，大伙全泼上命！俺们为什么还老是赔钱，要国家十万八万的往里贴？不服这口气。你叫他们别搞什么试验研究了，赔钱就赔在试验研究上！不顶！俺们祖祖辈辈种地，也没听说过什么试验研究。没听说过，种下去庄稼，过些时候，拔起来看看，过些时拔起来看看。可倒好，到收割的时候倒省事，地里全都光了！没听说过，还给谷子盖一座小房！你就是试验成了，谁家能像你这么种地啊？嗯！都跑到谷地里盖上小房？瞎白嘛！你要真能研究，你给咱家所里多挣两个，嗯！不要国家贴钱！嗯！我就不信技师啦，又是技术员啦，能弄出个什么名堂来！上一次我看见咱们邵技师锄地啦，哈哈，老人家倒退着锄！就凭这，一个月拿一百多，小二百？赔钱就赔在他们身上！正经！你把地包给我，莫让他们胡糟践！就这个意见，没啦！”
"I'll find you a few people and take care of this piece of land in your office! In three years, I will guarantee you to buy another piece of land. Said! In the past, if the landlord had this little land in his hands, he could roll out another piece in a few years. We are not working for the landlord today, everyone is pouring their lives! Why do we keep losing money and asking the state to post 100,000 or 80,000 yuan? I don't accept this breath. You tell them not to engage in any experimental research, and if you lose money, you will lose money on experimental research! No top! Our ancestors have farmed for generations, and we have never heard of any experimental research. I have never heard of planting crops, and after a while, I will pull them up and take a look, and after a while, I will pull them up and take a look. But fortunately, when it comes time to harvest, the land is all empty! I haven't heard of it, and build a small house for millet! You just experimented, who can farm like you?" Well! All ran to the valley to build a small house? It's nonsense! If you can really research, you can earn two more for our family, hmm! Don't want the state to subsidize money! Well! I don't believe in technicians, I'm a technician again, what kind of fame can I make! The last time I saw our technician Shao hoeing the ground, haha, the old man was hoeing backwards! Just based on this, take more than 100 a month, small 200? If you lose money, you will lose to them! Serious! You give me the land, don't let them mess around!" That's all there is to it! ”刘所长尽他说完，一面听，一面笑，一直到“没啦”，才说：
Director Liu finished speaking, listening and laughing, until "no", before saying:“你这个意见我不能接受。我这个所里不要买地。——你上哪儿去给我买去啊？咱们这个所叫什么？——叫农业科学研究所。国家是拿定主意要往里赔钱的，——如果能少赔一点，自然很好。咱们的任务不是挣钱。倒退着锄地，自然不大好。不过你不要光看人家这一点，人家还是有学问的。把庄稼拔起来看，给谷子盖房子，这些道理一下子跟你说不清。农业研究，没有十年八年，是见不出效果的。但是要是有一项试验成功了，值的钱就多啦，你算都算不过来。我问你，咱们那一号谷比你们原来的小白苗是不是要打得多？”
"I can't accept your opinion. I don't want to buy land in my institute. ——Where do you go to buy it for me? What is our institute called? ——It's called the Institute of Agricultural Sciences. The state is determined to lose money,—— if it can lose a little less, it will naturally be good. Our task is not to make money. Hoeing backwards is naturally not good. But don't just look at others, they are still knowledgeable. Pulling up crops and building houses for millet, these principles are not clear to you at once. Agricultural research, without ten or eight years, will not be effective. But if an experiment is successful, it will be worth a lot of money, and you can't calculate it. Let me ask you, is our No. 1 grain more than your original little white seedlings? ”“敢是！”
"Dare to be!"“八个县原来都种小白苗，现在都改种了一号谷，你算算，每年能多收多少粮食？这值到多少钱？咱们要是不赔钱呢，就挣不出这个钱来。当然，道理还不只是赔钱、挣钱。我要到前头开会去，就是讨论你说的拔起庄稼来看，给谷子盖小房这些事。你是个好人，是个‘忠臣’，你提意见是好心。可是意见不对。我不能听你的。你回去想想吧。王全，你也该学习学习啦。听说你是咱们所里的老文盲了。去年李所长叫你去上业余文化班，你跟他说：‘我给你去拉一车粪吧！’是不是？叫你去上课，你宁愿套车去拉一车粪！今年冬天不许再溜号啦，从‘一’字学起，从‘王全’两个字学起！”
"The eight counties used to plant small white seedlings, but now they have been planted with No. 1 Valley. How much is this worth? If we don't lose money, we won't be able to earn this money. Of course, the truth is not just about losing money and making money. I'm going to have a meeting at the front, which is to discuss what you said about pulling up crops and building small houses for millet. You are a good person, a 'loyal minister', and your opinion is well-intentioned. But the opinion is wrong. I can't listen to you. Go back and think about it. Wang Quan, you should also learn to study. I heard that you are an old illiterate person in our institute. Last year, Director Li asked you to go to an amateur culture class, and you told him: 'I'll pull a cart of dung for you!' 'Isn't it? If you are told to go to class, you would rather take a car to pull a truckload of dung! Don't slip the number again this winter, start with the word 'one', learn from the word 'Wang Quan'!" ”刘所长走了，他指指他的背影，说：
“看看！”
Wang Quan wears a small red flag on his chest, which is the symbol of the newly elected red flag bearer. "Look!"一缩脑袋，跑了。
Director Liu left, he pointed to his back and said: "Look!" Shrink your head and run away.这是春天的事。这以后我调到果园去劳动，果园不在所部，和王全见面说话的机会就不多了。知道他一直还是在赶单套车，因为他来果园送过几回粪。等到冬天，我从果园回来，看见王全眼睛上蒙着白纱布，由那个顶替他原来职务的王升领着。我问他是怎么了，原来他到医院开刀了。他的砂眼已经非常严重，是刘所长逼着他去的，说公家不怕花这几个钱，救他的眼睛要紧。手术很成功。现在每天去换药。因为王升喂马是夜班，白天没事，他俩都住在马号，所以每天由王升领着他去。
This is a spring thing. After that, I was transferred to the orchard to work, and the orchard was not in the department, so there were not many opportunities to meet and talk with Wang Quan. I know that he has been catching a single set of cars, because he has come to the orchard to deliver manure several times. When winter came, I came back from the orchard and saw Wang Quan's eyes covered with white gauze, led by Wang Sheng, who replaced him in his original position. I asked him what was wrong, and it turned out that he had gone to the hospital for surgery. His trachoma was already very serious, and Director Liu forced him to go, saying that the public was not afraid of spending this money and that it was important to save his eyes. The operation was successful. Now I go to change the dressing every day. Because Wang Sheng was on the night shift feeding the horses, he was fine during the day, and they both lived in Mahao, so Wang Sheng led him every day.过了两天，纱布拆除了，王全有了一双能够睁得大大的眼睛！可是很奇怪，他见了人就抿着个大嘴笑，好像为了眼睛能够睁开而怪不好意思似的。他整个脸也似乎清亮多了，简直是年轻了。王全一定照过镜子，很为自己的面容改变而惊奇，所以觉得不好意思。不等人问，他就先回答了：
Two days later, the gauze was removed, and Wang Quan had a pair of eyes that could be opened wide! But it was very strange, he pursed his mouth and smiled when he saw someone, as if he was embarrassed to open his eyes. His whole face also seemed to be much clearer, and he was simply younger. Wang Quan must have looked in the mirror and was surprised by the change in his face, so he felt embarrassed. Without waiting for anyone to ask, he replied first:“敢是，可爽快多了，啥都看得见！这是一双眼睛了。”
他又说他这眼不是大夫给他治的，是刘所长给他治的，共产党给他治的。逢人就说。
"Dare to be, it's much more refreshing, you can see everything! This is a pair of eyes. ” He also said that his eyes were not treated by the doctor, but by Director Liu, and by the Communist Party. Say it when you meet someone.拆了纱布，他眼球还有点发浑，刘所长叫他再休息两天，暂时不要出车。就在这两天里，发生了这么一场事，他把王升打了。
After removing the gauze, his eyeballs were still a little cloudy, and Director Liu told him to rest for two more days and not to get out of the car for the time being. In these two days, such an incident happened, and he beat Wang Sheng.王升到所里还不到三年。这人是个“老闷”，平常一句话也不说。他也没个朋友，也没有亲近一点人。虽然和大家住在一个宿舍里，却跟谁也不来往。工人们有时在一起喝喝酒，没有他的事。大家在一起聊天，他也不说，也不听，就是在一边坐着。他也有他的事，下了班也不闲着。一件事是鼓捣吃的。他食量奇大，一顿饭能吃三斤干面。而且不论什么时候，吃过了还能再吃。甜菜、胡萝卜、蔓菁疙瘩、西葫芦，什么都弄来吃。这些东西当然来路都不大正大。另一件事是整理他的包袱。他床头有个大包袱。他每天必要把它打开，一件一件地反复看过，折好，——这得用两个钟头，因此他每天晚上一点都不空得慌。整理完了，包扎好，挂起来，老是看着它，一直到一闭眼睛，立刻睡着。他真能置东西！全所没一个能比得上。别人给他算得出来，他买了几床盖窝，一块什么样的毛毯，一块什么线毯，一块多大的雨布……他这包袱逐渐增大。大到一定程度，他就请假回家一次。然后带了一张空包袱皮来，再从头攒起。他最近做了件叫全所干部工人都非常吃惊的事：一次买进了两件老羊皮袄，一件八十，另一件一百七！当然，那天立刻就请了假，甚至没等到二十八号。
Wang Sheng has been in the institute for less than three years. This person is an "old boredom" and usually doesn't say a word. He doesn't have any friends or close people. Although he lives in a dormitory with everyone, he doesn't interact with anyone. Workers sometimes drink together, and there is nothing to do with him. When everyone chats together, he doesn't say or listen, just sits on the side. He also has his own business, and he is not idle after get off work. One thing is to eat drums. He eats a lot of food, and can eat three pounds of dry noodles in one meal. And no matter when, you can eat it again after eating. Beets, carrots, turnip pimples, zucchini, everything is eaten. Of course, these things don't come from a very good source. Another thing is to sort out his baggage. He has a big baggage at the head of his bed. He had to open it every day, look at it repeatedly, and fold it one by one,—— which took two hours, so he was not empty at all every night. After sorting it out, bandaging it, hanging it up, looking at it all the time until he closed his eyes and fell asleep immediately. He can really put things! None of them can compare. Others could calculate for him, he bought a few beds, what kind of blanket, what kind of thread blanket, and how big a raincloth...... His burden gradually increased. When it was too big to a certain extent, he took leave to go home once. Then he brought an empty bag and saved it from scratch. He recently did something that surprised all the cadres and workers of the institute: he bought two old sheepskin jackets at once, one for eighty and one for one hundred and seven! Of course, he immediately took leave that day, and did not even wait until the twenty-eighth.二十八号，这有个故事。这个所里是工资制，双周休息，每两周是一个“大礼拜”。但是不少工人不愿意休息，有时农忙，也不能休息。大礼拜不休息，除了工资照发外，另加一天工资，习惯叫做“双工资”。但如果这一个月请假超过两天，即大礼拜上班，双工资也不发。一般工人一年难得回家一两次，一来一去，总得四五天，回去了就准备不要这双工资了。大家逐渐发现，觉得非常奇怪：王升常常请假，一去就是四天，可是他一次也没扣过双工资。有人再三问他，他嘻嘻地笑着，说，“你们别去告诉领导，我就告诉你。”原来：他每次请假都在二十八号（若是大尽就是二十九）！这样，四天头里，两天算在上月，两天算在下月，哪个月也扣不着他的双工资。这事当然就传开了。凡听到的，没有个不摇头叹息：你说他一句话不说，他可有这个心眼！——全所也没有比他更精的了！
On the 28th, there is a story. This institute is a wage system, with biweekly rest, and every two weeks is a "big salary". However, many workers are unwilling to rest, and sometimes they are busy with farming and cannot rest. There is no rest during the big salary, and in addition to the salary, an additional day's salary is added, which is customarily called "double salary". But if you take more than two days off this month, even if you go to work during the big salary, the double salary will not be paid. Ordinary workers rarely go home once or twice a year, and it takes four or five days to come and go, and when they go back, they are ready to not want this double salary. Everyone gradually found it very strange: Wang Sheng often took leave, and it was four days at a time, but he never deducted double salary. When someone asked him repeatedly, he smiled and said, "Don't tell the leader, I'll tell you." It turns out: Every time he asks for leave, he is on the twenty-eighth (if it is a big end, it is twenty-nine)! In this way, out of four days, two days are counted as the previous month, and two days are counted in the next month, and none of the months can deduct his double salary. Of course, this matter spread. Everyone who heard it did not shake his head and sigh: If you don't say a word about him, he has this mind! ——There is no one more sophisticated than him in the whole office!他吃得多，有一把子傻力气，庄稼活也是都拿得起的。要是看着他，他干活不比别人少多少。可是你哪能老看着他呢？他呆过几个组，哪组也不要他。他在过试验组。有一天试验组的组长跟他说，叫他去锄锄山药秋播留种的地，——那块地不大，一个人就够了。晌午组长去检查工作，发现他在路边坐着，问他，他说他找不到那块地！组长气得七窍生烟，直接跑到所长那里，说：“国家拿了那么多粮食，养活这号后生！在我组里干了半年活，连哪块地在哪里他都不知道！吃粮不管闲事，要他作啥哩！叫他走！”他在稻田组呆过。插秧的时候，近晌午，快收工了，组长一看进度，都差不多。他那一畦，也快到头了，就说钢厂一拉汽笛，就都上来吧。过了一会，拉汽笛了，他见别人上了，也立刻就上来到河边去洗了腿。过了两天，组长去一看，他那一畦齐刷刷地缺了八仙桌那么大一块！稻田组长气得直哼哼。“请吧，你老！”谁也不要，大田组长说：“给我！”这大田组长出名地手快，他在地里干活，就是庄户人走过，都要停下脚来看一会的。真是风一样的！他就老让王升跟他一块干活。王升也真有两下子，不论是锄地、撒粪……拉不下多远。
He eats a lot, has a handful of stupid strength, and can afford to do crop work. If you look at him, he works no less than others. But how can you always look at him? He has stayed in several groups, and no group wants him. He has been in the experimental group. One day, the leader of the test team told him to go to the land where yam was sown in autumn,—— that land was not big, and one person was enough. At noon, the team leader went to inspect the work and found him sitting on the side of the road, and asked him, and he said he couldn't find the land! The team leader was so angry that he ran directly to the director and said, "The country has taken so much food to feed this young man!" He worked in my group for half a year, and he didn't even know which land was where! Eating food doesn't matter what you want him to do! Tell him to go!" He stayed in the rice field group. When planting rice, it was almost noon, and the team leader looked at the progress and saw that it was almost the same. His field was almost over, so he said that as soon as the steel mill pulled the whistle, they would all come up. After a while, when he pulled the whistle, he saw others getting up, and immediately went up to the river to wash his legs. Two days later, the team leader went to see that his field was missing a piece as big as the Eight Immortals Table! The rice field team leader snorted angrily. "Please, you're old!" No one wanted it, the field team leader said, "Give it to me!" "This team leader is notoriously fast, he works in the field, even if the villagers walk by, they have to stop and watch for a while. It's really like the wind! He always asked Wang Sheng to work with him. Wang Sheng really had two strokes, whether it was hoeing or spreading manure...... I can't pull it far.一晃，也多半年了，大田组长说这后生不赖。大家对他印象也有点改变。这回王全不愿喂牲口了，不知怎么就想到他了。想是因为他是老闷，不需要跟人说话，白天睡觉，夜里整夜守着哑巴牲口，有这个耐性。
In a flash, it has been more than half a year, and Team Leader Datian said that this young man is not bad. Everyone's impression of him has also changed a little. This time Wang Quan didn't want to feed the animals, and somehow thought of him. I think it's because he is old and boring, he doesn't need to talk to anyone, he sleeps during the day, and guards the mute animals all night at night, and he has this patience.初时也好。慢慢地，车倌就有了意见，因为牲口都瘦了。他们发现他白天搞吃的，夜里老睡觉。喂牲口根本谈不上把草把料，大碗儿端！最近，甚至在马槽里发现了一根钉子！于是，生产队决定，去马号开一个会，批评批评他。
It was good at first. Slowly, the cart driver had an opinion, because the animals were thin. They found that he was eating during the day and sleeping at night. Feeding the livestock is not at all about bringing grass and feeding in big bowls! Recently, a nail was even found in the manger! So, the production team decided to go to the horse number for a meeting and criticize him.这钉子是在青马的槽里发现的！是王全发现的。王全的眼睛整天蒙着，但是半夜里他还要瞎戳戳地摸到马圈里去，伸手到槽里摸，把蔫筋的草节拨出去。摸着摸着，他摸到一根冰凉铁硬的，——放在嘴里，拿牙咬咬：是根钉子！这王全浑身冒火了，但是，居然很快就心平气和下来。——人家每天领着他上医院，这不能不起点作用。他拿了这根钉子，摸着去找到生产队长，说是无论如何得“批批”他，这不是玩的！往后筛草、打料一定要过细一点。
This nail was found in Qingma's trough! It was Wang Quan who found it. Wang Quan's eyes were blindfolded all day long, but in the middle of the night he had to poke blindly into the horse pen, reach into the trough to touch it, and push out the wilted grass knots. Touching and touching, he touched a cold iron ,—— and put it in his mouth, and bit it with his teeth: It's a nail! Wang Quan was on fire, but he quickly calmed down. ——People lead him to the hospital every day, which can't help but work. He took the nail and touched it to find the production captain, saying that he had to "criticize" him anyway, this is not a joke! In the future, the grass and feed must be too fine.前天早上反映的情况，连着两天所里有事，决定今天晚上开会。不料，今天上午，王全把王升打了，打得相当重。
The situation reported the day before yesterday morning, and after two consecutive days, it was decided to hold a meeting tonight. Unexpectedly, this morning, Wang Quan beat Wang Sheng quite hard.原来王全发现，王升偷马料！他早就有点疑心，没敢肯定。这一阵他眼睛开刀，老在马号里呆着，仿佛听到一点动响。不过也还不能肯定。这两天他的纱布拆除了，他整天不出去，原来他随时都在盯着王升哩。果然，昨天夜里，他看见王升在门背后端了一大碗煮熟的料豆在吃！他居然沉住了气，没有发作。因为他想：单是吃，问题还不太大。今天早上，他乘王升出去弄甜菜的时候，把王升的枕头拆开：——里面不是塞的糠皮稻草，是料豆！一不做二不休，翻开他那包袱，里边还有一个枕头，也是一枕头的料豆。——本来他带了两个特大的枕头，却只枕一个；每回回去又都把枕头带回去，这就奇怪。“嗯！”王全把他的外衣脱了，等着。王升从外面回来，一看包袱里东西摊得一床，枕头拆开了；再一看王全那神情，连忙回头就跑。王全一步追上，大拳头没头没脑地砸下来，打得王升孩子似地哭，爹呀妈的乱叫，一直到别人闻声赶来，剪住王全的两手，才算住。——王升还没命地嚎哭了半天。
It turned out that Wang Quan found out that Wang Sheng stole horse feed! He had long been a little suspicious and wasn't sure. This time, his eyes were opened, and he stayed in the horse trumpet, as if he heard a little noise. But I'm not sure yet. In the past two days, his gauze has been removed, and he hasn't gone out all day, it turns out that he is staring at Wang Sheng at any time. Sure enough, last night, he saw Wang Sheng eating a large bowl of cooked beans behind the door! He actually calmed down and didn't have a seizure. Because he thought: Just eating, it's not too much of a problem. This morning, when he took Wang Sheng out to get beets, he took apart Wang Sheng's pillow: - It is not stuffed chaff straw, it is beans! If you don't do anything, you will open his baggage, and there is a pillow inside, which is also a pillow of beans. ——Originally, he brought two extra-large pillows, but only one; every time he went back, he brought the pillow back, which was strange. "Hmm!" Wang Quan took off his coat and waited. Wang Sheng came back from outside, and saw that the things in his baggage were spread out on a bed, and the pillow was disassembled; looking at Wang Quan's expression again, he quickly turned around and ran away. Wang Quan caught up with him, smashed his big fist headlessly, beating Wang Sheng like a child, and his father and mother screamed until others heard the sound and cut off Wang Quan's hands. ——Wang Sheng cried for a long time.这样，今天的会的内容不得不变一下，至少得增加一点。
In this way, the content of today's meeting has to be changed, at least a little more.但是改变得也不多。这次会是一个扩大的会，除了马号全体参加外，还有曾经领导过王升的各个组的组长，和跟他在一起干过活的老工人。大家批评了王升，也说了王全。重点还是在王升，说到王全，大都是带上一句：——“不过打人总是不对的，有什么情况，什么意见，应当向领导反映，由领导来处理。”有的说：“牛不知力大，你要是把他打坏了怎办？”也有人联系到年初王全坚决不愿喂马，这就不对！关于王升，可就说起来没完了。他撒下一大块秧来就走这一类的事原来多着哩，每个人一说就是小半点钟！因此这个会一直开到深夜。最后让王升说说。王升还是那样，一句话没有，“说不上来”。再三催促，还是“说不上来”。大家有点急了，问他：“你偷料豆，对不对？”——“不对。”“马草里混进了钉子，对不对？”——“不对。”……看来实在挤不出什么话来了，天又实在太晚，明天还要上班，只好让王全先说说。
But not much has changed. This will be an enlarged meeting, in addition to the participation of all the horses, there are also the leaders of various groups that have led Wang Sheng, and the old workers who have worked with him. Everyone criticized Wang Sheng and also said Wang Quan. The focus is still on Wang Sheng, and when it comes to Wang Quan, most of them have a sentence: ——"But it is always wrong to beat people, what is the situation, what opinions, should be reported to the leader, and the leader will deal with it." Some said: "The cow doesn't know how to be strong, what if you break him?" Some people also contacted Wang Quan at the beginning of the year and resolutely refused to feed the horse, which is not right! About Wang Sheng, but it's not over. There are many things like this kind of thing when he sows a large piece of seedling, and everyone says it is half an o'clock! So this meeting was held until late at night. Finally, let Wang Sheng talk. Wang Sheng was still like that, without saying a word, "I can't say it". Repeatedly urged, but still "can't say it". Everyone was a little anxious and asked him: "You stole beans, right?" ——"No." "There are nails mixed in the horse grass, right?" ——"No. ”…… It seems that there is really nothing to say, it is too late, and I have to go to work tomorrow, so I have to let Wang Quan talk first.“嗯！我打了他，不对！嗯！解放军不兴打人，打人是国民党。嗯！你偷吃料豆，还要往家里拿！你克扣牲口。它是哑巴，不会说话，它要是会说话，要告你！你剥削它，你是资本家！是地主！你！你故意拿钉子往马槽里放，你安心要害所里的牲口，国家的牲口！×你娘的！你看看，你把俩牲口喂成啥样了？”
"Hmm! I hit him, no! Well! The People's Liberation Army is not interested in beating people, but the Kuomintang is beating people. Well! You steal the beans and take them home! You detain the animal. It is mute and cannot speak, if it can speak, it will sue you! You exploit it, you are a capitalist! It is a landlord! You! You deliberately put nails in the manger, and you can rest assured that you will harm the animals in the institute and the livestock of the country! × damn it! Look, what did you feed the two animals? ”说着，一把揪住王升，大家赶紧上来拉住，解开，才没有又打起来。这个会暂时只好就这样开到这里了。
过了两天，我又在刘所长那里碰见他。还是那样，一推门，进来了，没头没脑：
“所长，我提个意见。”
Saying that, he grabbed Wang Sheng, and everyone hurriedly came up to grab and untie it, so that they didn't fight again. This meeting has to be here for the time being. Two days later, I met him again at Director Liu's place. Still like that, as soon as I pushed the door, I came in, without a head: "Director, let me give you an opinion."“好啊。”
“你是个好人！是个庄户佬出身！赶过个车，养活过个牲口！你是好人！是个共产党！你如今又领导这些技师啦技术员的，他们都服你——”
看见有我在座，又回过头来跟我说：
“看看！”
Wang Quan wears a small red flag on his chest, which is the symbol of the newly elected red flag bearer. "Look!"这是怎么一回事呢？原来所里在拟定明年的种植计划，让大家都来讨论，这里边有一条，是旱地一号地六十亩全部复种黑豆！
一边说着，一边把他的衣兜往桌上一掀，倒得一桌子都是花生。非常腼腆地说：
What's going on? It turned out that the institute was drawing up a planting plan for next year, so that everyone could discuss it, and there was one here, which was that all 60 acres of dry land No. 1 land were replanted with black beans! As he spoke, he lifted his pocket to the table, and the table was full of peanuts. said very shyly:“我侄儿子给我捎来五斤花生。”
说完了抹头就走。
刘所长叫住他：
“别走。你把人家打了，怎么办呢？”
“我去喂牲口呀。”
“好。把你的花生拿去，——我不‘剥削’你，人家是给你送来的！”
"My nephew brought me five pounds of peanuts." After saying that, wipe your head and leave. Director Liu stopped him: "Don't go. You beat someone, what should you do? ” "I'm going to feed the animals." "Okay. Take your peanuts,—— I don't 'exploit' you, they sent it to you! ”王全赶紧拉开门就跑，头都不回，生怕刘所长会追上来似的。——后来，这花生还是刘所长叫他的孩子给他送回去了。
Wang Quan hurriedly opened the door and ran away, not looking back, for fear that Director Liu would catch up. ——Later, Director Liu asked his child to send it back to him.过了一个多月，所里的冬季文化学习班办起来，王全来报了名，是刘所长亲自送他来上学的。我有幸当了他的启蒙老师。可是我要说老实话，这个学生真不好教，真也难怪他宁可套车去拉一车粪。他又不肯照着课本学，一定先要教会他学会四个字。他用铅笔写了无数遍，终于有了把握了，就把我写对子用的大抓笔借去，在马圈粉墙上写下四个斗大的黑字：
After more than a month, the winter cultural study class in the institute was set up, and Wang Quan came to sign up, and Director Liu personally sent him to school. I was fortunate to be his enlightenment teacher. But I have to be honest, this student is really hard to teach, and it's no wonder that he would rather take a car to pull a truck of dung. He refused to learn according to the textbook, so he must teach him four words first. He wrote countless times with a pencil, and finally got sure, so he borrowed the big pen I used to write pairs and wrote four large black characters on the pink wall of the horse pen:“王全喂马”。
字的笔划虽然很幼稚，但是写得恭恭正正，一笔不苟。谁都可以看出来，这四个字包含很多意思，这是一个人一辈子的誓约。
王全喂了牲口，生产队就热闹了。三天两头就见他进去：
"Wang Quan feeds the horse". Although the strokes of the words are very naïve, they are written respectfully and meticulously. Anyone can see that these four words contain a lot of meaning, and this is a lifelong oath. Wang Quan fed the animals, and the production team became lively. I saw him go in at both ends of the three days:“人家孩子回来，也不吃，也不喝，就是卧着，这是使狠了，累乏了！告他们，不能这样！”
“人家孩子快下了，别叫它驾辕了！”
“人家孩子”怎样怎样了……
"When the children come back, they don't eat or drink, they just lie down, which is ruthless and tired! Tell them that they can't do this! ” "The child is about to get off, don't call it a ride!" What happened to "other people's children"......我在这个地方呆了一些时候了，知道这是这一带的口头语，管小猫小狗、小鸡小鸭，甚至是小板凳，都叫做“孩子”。但是这无论如何是一种爱称。尤其是王全说起来，有一种特殊的味道。那么高大粗壮的汉子，说起牲口来，却是那么温柔。
I have been in this place for a while, and I know that this is the colloquial language in this area, whether it is kittens and puppies, chickens and ducklings, or even small benches, they are all called "children". But this is a nickname anyway. Especially Wang Quan has a special taste. Such a tall and stout man, when it comes to livestock, is so gentle.我离开这个农业科学研究所已经好几个月了，王全一直在喂马。现在，在我写这篇文章的时候，他就正在喂着马。夜已经很深了。这会，全所的灯都一定已经陆续关去，连照例关得最晚的刘所长和邵技师的屋里的灯也都关了。只有两处的灯还是亮着的。一处是大门外植保研究室的诱捕灯，这是通夜不灭的，现在正有各种虫蛾围绕着飞舞。一处是马圈。灯光照见槽头一个一个马的脑袋。它们正在安静地、严肃地咀嚼着草料。时不时的，喷一个响鼻，摇摇耳朵，顿一顿蹄子。偢六——王全，正在夹着料笸箩，弯着腰，无声地忙碌着，或者停下来，用满怀慈爱的、喜悦的眼色，看看这些贵重的牲口。
I have been away from this Institute of Agricultural Sciences for several months, and Wang Quan has been feeding the horses. Now, as I write this article, he is feeding the horses. It's already late at night. At this time, the lights in the whole institute must have been turned off one after another, even the lights in the rooms of Director Liu and Technician Shao, who were the last to turn off as usual. Only two lights are still on. One is the trapping light of the plant protection laboratory outside the gate, which is not extinguished all night, and now all kinds of insects and moths are flying around. One is the horse pen. The lights shine on the heads of horses at the troughs. They are chewing the forage quietly and seriously. From time to time, spray a snort, shake its ears, and pause its hooves. Yi Liu, Wang Quan, was holding a basket of materials, bending over, busy silently, or stopping, looking at these precious animals with loving and joyful eyes.王全的胸前佩着一枚小小的红旗，这是新选的红旗手的标志。
“看看！”
Wang Quan wears a small red flag on his chest, which is the symbol of the newly elected red flag bearer. "Look!"
[1] 本篇原载《人民文学》1962年十一月号。初收《羊舍的夜晚》，中国少年儿童出版社，1963年1月；又收《汪曾祺短篇小说选》，北京出版社，1982年2月，文字略有改动。
[1] This article was originally published in the November 1962 issue of People's Literature. The first collection was "Night in the Sheep Lodge", China Children's Publishing House, January 1963; and "Selected Short Stories of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Publishing House, February 1982, with slight changes in the text.

看水

看水[1]
下班了。小吕把擦得干干净净的铁锨搁到“小仓库”里，正在脚蹬着一个旧辘轴系鞋带，组长大老张走过来，跟他说：
“小吕，你今天看一夜水。”
Look at the water{{id_0000}} It's off work. Xiao Lu put the clean-wiped shovel in the "small warehouse", and was tying his shoelaces with an old roller on his feet. "Xiao Lu, you watched the water all night today."小吕的心略为沉了一沉。他没有这种准备。今天一天的活不轻松，小吕身上有点累。收工之前，他就想过：吃了晚饭，打一会百分，看两节《水浒》，洗一个脚，睡觉！他身上好像已经尝到伸腰展腿地躺在床上的那股舒服劲。看一夜水，甭打算睡了！这倒还没有什么。主要的是，他没有看过水，他不知道看水是怎么个看法。一个人，黑夜里，万一要是渠塌了，水跑了，淹了庄稼，灌了房子，……那他可招架不了！一种沉重的，超过他的能力和体力的责任感压迫着他。
Xiao Lu's heart sank slightly. He was not prepared for this. Today's work is not easy, and Xiao Lu is a little tired. Before finishing work, he thought: have dinner, play 100 points for a while, watch two verses of "Water Margin", wash your feet, and sleep! He seemed to have tasted the comfort of lying on the bed stretching his waist and legs. Looking at the water all night, don't plan to sleep! This is nothing yet. The main thing is that he has never looked at water, and he doesn't know what to think about water. A person, in the dark night, if the canal collapses, the water runs away, floods the crops, and floods the house,...... Then he can't resist! A heavy sense of responsibility that exceeds his ability and physical strength oppresses him.但是大老张说话的声音、语气，叫他不能拒绝。果园接连浇了三天三夜地了。各处的地都要浇，就这几天能够给果园使水，果园也非乘这几天抓紧了透透的浇一阵水不可，果子正在膨大，非常需要水。偏偏这一阵别的活又忙，葡萄绑条、山丁子喷药、西瓜除腻虫、倒栽疙瘩白、垅葱……全都挤在一起了。几个大工白日黑夜轮班倒，一天休息不了几小时，一个个眼睛红红的，全都熬得上了火。再派谁呢？派谁都不大合适。这样大老张才会想到小吕的头上来。小吕知道，大老张是想叫小吕在上头守守闸，看看水，他自己再坚持在果园浇一夜，这点地就差不多了。小吕是个小工，往小里说还是个孩子，一定不去，谁也不能说什么。过去也没有派过他干过这种活。但是小吕觉得不能这样。自己是果园的人，若是遇到紧张关头，自己总是逍遥自在，在一边作个没事人，心里也觉说不过去。看来也还就是叫自己去比较合适。无论如何，小吕也是个男子汉，——你总不能叫两个女工黑夜里在野地里看水！大老张既然叫自己去，他说咱能行，咱就试巴试巴！而且，看水，这也挺新鲜，挺有意思！小吕就说：
But the voice and tone of the big man Zhang spoke made him unable to refuse. The orchard has been watered for three days and three nights in a row. The land everywhere has to be watered, and the orchard can be watered in the past few days, and the orchard must take advantage of the past few days to water thoroughly, the fruit is expanding and needs water very much. But this time I was busy with other work, such as tying grape strips, spraying mountain dings, watermelon removing greasy insects, planting pimples white, green onions...... They were all crowded together. Several carpenters worked in shifts day and night, and they couldn't rest for a few hours a day, and their eyes were red, and they were all on fire. Who else to send? It's not suitable to send anyone. Only then will Da Lao Zhang think of Xiao Lu's head. Xiao Lu knew that Da Lao Zhang wanted Xiao Lu to guard the gate above and see the water, and he would insist on watering the orchard overnight, which was almost the same. Xiao Lu is a small worker, and he is still a child, so he must not go, and no one can say anything. He has never been sent to do this kind of work in the past. But Xiao Lu felt that it couldn't be like this. I am a person in the orchard, and if I encounter a tense moment, I am always at ease, and I feel that it is unreasonable to be a normal person on the side. It seems that it is more appropriate to ask yourself to go. In any case, Xiao Lu is also a man,—— you can't ask two female workers to watch the water in the field at night! Since Da Lao Zhang asked himself to go, he said that we can do it, so let's try it! Moreover, looking at the water, this is also quite fresh and interesting! Xiao Lu said:“好吧！”
小吕把搁进去的铁锨又拿出来，大老张又嘱咐了他几句话，他扛上铁锨就走了。
吃了晚饭，小吕早早地就上了渠。
"Okay!" Xiao Lu took out the shovel that had been put in again, and the eldest man Zhang instructed him a few more words, and he carried the shovel and left. After dinner, Xiao Lu went to the canal early.一来，小吕就去找大老张留下的两个志子。大老张告诉他，他给他在渠沿里面横插两根树枝，当作志子，一处在大闸进水处不远，一处在支渠拐弯处小石桥下。大老张说：
As soon as he came, Xiao Lu went to find the two Zhizi left by Da Lao Zhang. Da Lao Zhang told him that he inserted two branches horizontally in the canal as a will, one not far from the water inlet of the gate, and the other under the small stone bridge at the bend of the branch canal. Da Lao Zhang said:“你只要常常去看看这两根树枝。水只要不漫过志子，就不要紧，尽它浇好了！若是水把它漫下去了，就去搬闸，——拉起一块闸板，把水放掉一些，——水太大了怕渠要吃不住。若是水太小了，就放下两块闸板，让它憋一憋。没有什么，这几天水势都很平稳，不会有什么问题！”
"You just need to look at these two branches often. As long as the water doesn't overflow the will, it doesn't matter, water it as much as you can! If the water overflows it, go to the gate,—— pull up a gate, and let the water out some ,—— if the water is too big, I am afraid that the canal will not be able to eat. If the water is too small, put down the two gates and let it hold it for a while. Nothing, the water has been very stable these days, there will be no problems! ”小吕走近去，没怎么费事，就找到了。也很奇怪，这只是两根普普通通的细细的树枝，半掩半露在蒙翳披纷的杂草之间，并不特别引人注意，然而小吕用眼睛滤过去，很快就发现了，而且肯定就是它，毫不怀疑。一看见了这两根树枝，小吕心里一喜，好像找到了一件失去的心爱的东西似的。有了这两个志子，他心里有了一点底。不然，他一定会一会儿觉得，水太大了吧；一会儿又觉得，水太小了吧，搞得心里七上八下，没有主意。看看这两根插得很端正牢实的树枝，小吕从心里涌起一股对于大老张的感谢，觉得大老张真好，对他真体贴，——虽然小吕也知道大老张这样做，在他根本不算什么，一个组长，第一回叫一个没有经验的小工看水，可能都会这样。
Xiao Lu approached and found it without much trouble. It is also very strange, these are just two ordinary thin branches, half hidden and half exposed among the weeds, which is not particularly eye-catching, but Xiao Lu filtered it with his eyes and quickly found it, and it must be it, no doubt. As soon as he saw these two branches, Xiao Lu felt happy, as if he had found a lost beloved. With these two aspirations, he had a little bottom in his heart. Otherwise, he would definitely feel that the water was too big for a while; for a while, he would feel that the water was too small, and he had no idea in his heart. Looking at these two branches that were inserted very neatly and firmly, Xiao Lu felt a surge of gratitude to Da Lao Zhang from his heart, feeling that Da Lao Zhang was really good and considerate to him,—— although Xiao Lu also knew that Da Lao Zhang did this, he was nothing at all, a team leader, the first time he called an inexperienced worker to watch the water, it might be like this.小吕又到大闸上试了一下。看看水，看看闸，又看看逐渐稀少的来往行人，小吕暗暗地鼓了鼓劲，拿起抓钩（他还没有使唤过这种工具），走下闸下的石梁。拉了一次闸板，——用抓钩套住了闸板的铁环，拽了两下，活动了，使劲往上一提，起来了！行！又放了一次闸板，——两手平提着，觑准了两边的闸槽，——觑准了！不然，水就把它冲跑了！一撒手，下去了！再用抓钩捣了两下，严丝合缝，挺好！第一回，这是在横跨在大渠上的窄窄的石梁子上，满眼是汤汤洄洄、浩浩荡荡的大水，充耳是渹鸣的水声，小吕心里不免有点怯，有点晃荡。他手上深切地感觉到水的雄浑、强大的力量，——水扑击着套在抓钩上的闸板，好像有人使劲踢它似的。但是小吕屏住了气，站稳了脚，把注意力完全集中在闸板上酒杯大的铁环和两个窄窄的闸槽上，还是相当顺利地做成了他要做的事。
Xiao Lu went to the gate again to try. Looking at the water, looking at the gate, and then looking at the gradually sparse number of pedestrians, Xiao Lu secretly encouraged himself, picked up the grappling hook (he had not yet used this tool), and walked down the stone beam under the gate. Pulled the gate once,—— wrapped the iron ring of the gate with the grappling hook, pulled it twice, moved, lifted it up hard, and got up! Yes! I put the gate again,—— held it flat with both hands, and looked at the sluice grooves on both sides,—— I was accurate! Otherwise, the water will wash it away! Let go, go down! I pounded it twice with the grappling hook, and it was tight, it was good! The first time, this was on the narrow stone beam spanning the canal, full of surging and mighty water, and the sound of the water was full of ears, Xiao Lu couldn't help but feel a little timid and a little shaky. He deeply felt the majestic and powerful power of the water in his hand,—— the water rushed against the gate on the grappling hook, as if someone was kicking it hard. But Xiao Lu held his breath, stood firm, and focused his attention completely on the iron ring the size of a wine glass and the two narrow sluice slots on the gate, and still did what he wanted to do quite smoothly.小吕深信大工们拉闸、安闸，也就是这样的。许多事都得自己来亲自试一下才成，别人没法跟他说，也说不清楚。
Xiao Lu is convinced that the carpenters pull and secure the gates, which is like this. Many things have to be done by yourself, and others can't tell him or say it clearly.行！他觉得自己能够胜任。水势即使猛涨起来，情况紧急，他大概还能应付。他觉得轻松了一点，刚才那一阵压着他的严重的感觉开始廓散。
Yes! He felt that he was up to the task. Even if the water rose sharply and the situation was urgent, he would probably be able to handle it. He felt a little more relaxed, and the serious feeling that had weighed on him just now began to dissipate.小吕沿着渠岸巡视了一遍。走着走着，又有点紧张起来。渠沿有好几处渗水，沁得堤土湿了老大一片，黑黑的。有不少地方有蚯蚓和蝼蛄穿的小眼，汩汩地冒水。小吕觉得这不祥得很。越看越担心，越想越害怕，觉得险象丛生，到处都有倒塌的可能！他不知道怎么办，就选定了一处，用手电照着（天已经擦黑了，月亮刚上来），定定地守着它看，看看它有什么变化没有。看了半天，似乎没有什么变化，还是那样。他又换了几处，还是拿不准。这时恰好有一个晚归的工人老李远远地走过来，——小吕听得出他咳嗽的声音，他问：
Xiao Lu inspected along the canal bank. As I walked, I became a little nervous again. There were several seepage along the canal, and the embankment soil was wet and black. There are many places with small eyes worn by earthworms and mole crickets, gurgling water. Xiao Lu thought this was very ominous. The more I looked, the more worried I became, and the more I thought about it, the more scared I became, and I felt that there were dangers and the possibility of collapse everywhere! He didn't know what to do, so he chose a place, shone it with a flashlight (the sky was already dark, and the moon had just come up), and watched it to see if anything had changed. After looking at it for a long time, it seemed that nothing had changed, but it was still like that. He changed a few more places, but he still couldn't be sure. At this time, a late worker Lao Li happened to come over from a distance,—— Xiao Lu could hear his coughing, and he asked:“小吕？你在干啥呢？——看水？”
小吕连忙拉住他：
“老李！这要紧不要紧？”
老李看了看：
"Xiao Lu? What are you doing? ——Looking at the water? ” Xiao Lu hurriedly grabbed him: "Lao Li! Does this matter?" ” Lao Li looked at it:“嗐！没关系！这水流了几天了，渠沉住气了，不碍事！你不要老是这样跑来跑去。一黑夜哩，老这么跑，不把你累死啦！找个地方坐下歇歇！隔一阵起来看看就行了！哎！”
"Hey! Never mind! The water has been flowing for a few days, and the canal has calmed down, so it's not in the way! Don't run around like this all the time. In the dark of night, running like this all the time, I won't tire you to death! Find a place to sit and rest! Just get up and take a look every now and then! Ay! ”小吕就像他正在看着的《水浒传》上的英雄一样，在心里暗道了一声“惭愧”；同时又念了一声“阿弥陀佛！”——小吕这一阵不知从哪里学了这么一句佛号，一来就是：“阿弥陀佛！”
Xiao Lu was like the hero on "Water Margin" he was watching, and secretly said "ashamed" in his heart; at the same time, he recited "Amitabha!" ——Xiao Lu learned such a Buddha's name somewhere for a while, and it came: "Amitabha! ”小吕并没有坐下歇歇，他还是沿着支渠来回蹓跶着，不过心里安详多了。他走在月光照泻的渠岸上，走在斑驳的树影里，风吹着，渠根的绿草幽幽地摇拂着。他脚下是一渠流水……他觉得看水很有味道。
Xiao Lu didn't sit down to rest, he still staggered back and forth along the tributary canal, but he felt much more peaceful. He walked on the moonlit bank of the canal, in the shadow of the mottled trees, the wind blew, and the green grass at the root of the canal swayed faintly. There was a stream of running water under his feet...... He felt that looking at the water was very flavorful.半夜里，大概十二点来钟（根据开过去不久的上行客车判断），出了一点事。小石桥上面一截渠，从庄稼地里穿过，渠身高，地势低，春汇地的时候挖断过，填起来的地方土浮，叫水涮开了一个洞。小吕巡看到这里，用手电一照，已经涮得很深了，钻了水！小吕的心唿嗵一声往下一掉。怎么办？这时候哪里都没法去找人……小吕留心看过大工们怎么堵洞，想了一想，就依法干起来。先用稻草填进去，（他早就背来好些稻草预备着了，背得太多了！）用铁锨立着，塞紧；然后从渠底敛起湿泥来，一锨一锨扔上去，——小吕深深感觉自己的胳臂太细，气力太小，一锨只能起那么一点泥，心里直着急。但是，还好，洞总算渐渐小了，终于填满了。他又仿照大工的样子，使铁锨拍实，抹平，好了！小吕这才觉得自己一身都是汗，两只腿甚至有点发颤了。水是不往外钻了，看起来也满像那么一回事，——然而，这牢靠么？
In the middle of the night, around twelve o'clock (judging by the upbound bus that drove not long ago), something happened. A section of the canal on the small stone bridge passed through the crop field, the canal was tall, the terrain was low, and it was dug up when the spring gathered, and the soil floated in the place where it was filled, so that the water shabu opened a hole. Xiao Lu Xun saw this, shone with a flashlight, and it was already very deep, and it drilled water! Xiao Lu's heart fell down with a rumble. What to do? At this time, there was no way to find someone anywhere...... Xiao Lu paid attention to how the carpenters blocked the holes, thought about it, and started doing it according to the law. Fill it with straw first, (he has already carried a lot of straw on his back, and he has carried too much!) Stand with a shovel and plug it tightly; Then collect the wet mud from the bottom of the canal and throw it up one by one,—— Xiao Lu deeply felt that his arms were too thin and his strength was too small, and he could only id_0000 lift up a little mud with a shovel, and he was anxious. But, fortunately, the hole finally got smaller and smaller, and it was finally filled. He imitated the carpenter's appearance again, slapped the shovel firmly, smoothed it, and okay! Xiao Lu then felt that he was covered in sweat, and his legs were even a little shaky. The water doesn't drill out, and it looks like that,—— However, is this reliable?小吕守着它半天，一会儿拿手电照照，一会儿拿手电照照。好像是没有问题，得！小吕准备转到别处再看看。可是刚一转身，他就觉得新填的泥土像抹房的稀泥一样哗啦一下在他的身后瘫溃了，口子重新涮开，扩大，不可收拾！赶紧又回来。拿手电一照：没有！还是挺好的！
Xiao Lu guarded it for a long time, taking a flashlight for a while, and shining with a flashlight for a while. It seems that there is no problem, okay! Xiao Lu was going to turn elsewhere and take a look. But as soon as he turned around, he felt that the newly filled soil collapsed behind him like the mud of the house, and the mouth opened again, enlarged, and was out of control! Hurry up and come back. Take a flashlight and shine: No! It's still good!他走开了。
过了一会，又来看看，——没问题。
又过了一会，又来看看，——挺好！
He walked away. After a while, come and see if ,—— is okay. After a while, it's good to come and see ,—— again!小吕的心塌了下来。不但是这个口子挺完好，而且，他相信，再有别处钻开，他也一样能够招呼，——虽然干起来不如大工那样从容利索。原来这并不是那样困难，这比想象的要简单得多。小吕有了信心，在黑暗中很有意味地点了点头，对自己颇为满意。
Xiao Lu's heart collapsed. Not only was this opening quite intact, but he believed that if there was another hole, he would be able to greet him,—— although it was not as calm and neat as a big worker. It turned out that it was not that difficult, it was much simpler than imagined. Xiao Lu had confidence and nodded meaningfully in the darkness, quite satisfied with himself.所谓看水，不外就是这样一些事。不知不觉地，半夜过去了。水一直流得很稳，不但没有涨，反倒落了一点，那两个志子都离开水面有一寸了。小吕觉得大局仿佛已定。他知道，过了十二点以后，一般就不会有什么大水下来，这一夜可以平安度过。现在他一点都不觉得紧张了，觉得很轻松，很愉快。
The so-called looking at the water is nothing more than such things. Unknowingly, midnight passed. The water has been flowing steadily, not only did it not rise, but it fell a little, and the two Zhizi were an inch off the water. Xiao Lu felt that the overall situation seemed to be decided. He knew that after twelve o'clock, there would generally be no big water down, and the night could be spent safely. Now he didn't feel nervous at all, he felt very relaxed and happy.现在，真可以休息休息了，他开始感觉有点疲倦了。他爬上小石桥头的一棵四杈糖槭树上，半躺半坐下来。他一来时就选定了这个地方。这棵树，在不到一人高的地方岔出了四个枝杈，坐上去，正好又有靠背，又可以舒舒服服地伸开腿脚。而且坐在树上就能看得见那一根志子。月亮照在水上，水光晃晃荡荡，水面上隐隐有一根黑影。用手电一射，就更加看得清清楚楚。
Now, he can really rest and rest, and he is starting to feel a little tired. He climbed up to a four-branched sugar maple tree at the head of the small stone bridge and sat down half-lying down. He chose this place as soon as he came. This tree has four branches branched out at a height of less than one person, and when you sit on it, you just have a backrest and can stretch your legs and feet comfortably. And you can see that aspiration when you sit on the tree. The moon shines on the water, the water is swaying, and there is a faint black shadow on the water. With a flashlight, you can see it more clearly.今天月亮真好，——快要月半了。（幸好赶上个大月亮的好天，若是阴雨天，黑月头，看起水来，就麻烦多了！）天上真干净，透明透明、蔚蓝蔚蓝的，一点渣滓都没有，像一块大水晶。小吕还很少看到过这样渊深、宁静而又无比温柔的夜空。说不出什么道理，天就是这样，老是这样，什么东西都没有，就是一片蓝，可是天上似乎隐隐地有一股什么磁力吸着你的眼睛，你的眼睛觉得很舒服，很受用，你愿意一直对着它看下去，看下去。真好看，真美，美得叫你的心感动起来。小吕看着看着，心里总像要想起一点什么很远很远的，叫人快乐的事情。他想了几件，似乎都不是他要想的，他就在心里轻轻地唱：
The moon is so nice today,—— it's almost half a month. (Fortunately, it's a good day to catch up with a big moon, if it's a rainy day, the moon is dark, and it looks like water, it's a lot of trouble!) The sky is so clean, transparent, blue and blue, without any dregs, like a big crystal. Xiao Lu has rarely seen such a deep, quiet and extremely gentle night sky. I can't tell you what the reason is, the sky is like this, it's always like this, there is nothing, it's just a blue, but there seems to be a faint magnetic force in the sky attracting your eyes, your eyes feel very comfortable and useful, and you are willing to keep looking at it, looking at it. It's so beautiful, so beautiful, so beautiful that it moves your heart. Xiao Lu looked at it, and his heart always seemed to think of something far, far away, that made people happy. He thought about a few things, but they didn't seem to be what he wanted to think about, so he sang softly in his heart:哎——
月亮出来亮汪汪，亮汪汪，
照见我的阿哥在他乡……
Hey—— The moon came out brightly, brightly, Seeing my brother in a foreign land......这好像有点文不对题。但是说不出为什么，这一支产生在几千里外的高山里的有点伤感的歌子，倒是他所需要的。这和眼前情景在某些地方似乎相通，能够宣泄他心里的快乐。
This seems a bit off-topic. But I can't tell why, this somewhat sad song produced in the mountains thousands of miles away is what he needs. This seems to be connected to the scene in front of him in some places, and can vent the happiness in his heart.四周围安静极了。远远听见大闸的水响，好像很远很远，有一群人一齐在喊：“啊——”。支渠里的水温静地，生气勃勃地流着，“活——活——活——”。风吹着庄稼的宽大的叶片，沙拉，沙拉。远远有一点灯火，在密密的丛林后面闪耀，那是他父亲工作的医院。母亲和妹妹现在一定都睡了。他那些同屋的工人一定也都睡了。（小吕想了想现在宿舍里的样子，大家都睡得很熟，月亮照着他自己的那张空床……）一村子里的人现在都睡了（隐隐地好像听见鼾声）。露水下来了（他想起刚才堵口子时脚下所踩的草），到处都是一片滋润的，浓郁的青草的气味，庄稼的气味，夜气真凉爽。小吕在心里想：“我在看水……”过了一会，不知为什么，又在心里想道：“真好！”而且说出声来了。
It was very quiet around. The sound of water from the gate was heard in the distance, as if it were far away, and a group of people were shouting together: "Ah-". The water in the branch canal flowed quietly and vigorously, "live-live-live-". The wind blew the wide leaves of the crops, salads, salads. In the distance, there was a little light shining behind the dense jungle, the hospital where his father worked. Mother and sister must have slept now. The workers in his room must have also fallen asleep. (Xiao Lu thought about what it was like in the dormitory now, everyone was sleeping soundly, and the moon was shining on his own empty bed...... The people in the village were now asleep (faintly as if they could hear snoring). The dew came down (he remembered the grass he stepped on when he blocked the mouth just now), and there was a moist, rich smell of grass, the smell of crops, and the night air was really cool. Xiao Lu thought to himself: "I'm looking at the water......" After a while, for some reason, he thought to himself: "That's good!" And said it out loud.小吕在树上坐了一阵，想要下来走走。他想起该到石桥底下一段渠上看看。这一段二里半长的渠，春天才挑过，渠岸又很结实，没有什么问题。但是渠水要穿过兽医学校后墙的涵洞，洞口有一个铁篦子，可能会挂住一些顺水冲下来的枯枝乱草，叫水流得不畅快。小吕翻身跳下来，扛起插在树下的铁锨，向桥下走去。
Xiao Lu sat on the tree for a while, wanting to come down and take a walk. He remembered that it was time to take a look at the section of the canal under the stone bridge. This section of the two-and-a-half-mile-long canal was only picked up in the spring, and the canal bank was very strong, so there was no problem. But the canal water has to pass through the culvert on the back wall of the veterinary school, and there is an iron grate at the entrance of the hole, which may hang some dead branches and weeds washed down the water, making the water flow not smoothly. Xiao Lu turned over and jumped down, picked up the shovel stuck in the tree, and walked under the bridge.下了石桥，渠水两边都是玉米地。玉米已经高过他的头了，那么大一片，叶子那么密，黑森森的，小吕忽然被浓重的阴影包围起来，身上有点紧张。但是，一会儿，就好了。
After getting off the stone bridge, there were cornfields on both sides of the canal. The corn was already higher than his head, so big, the leaves were so dense, and he was a little nervous. However, after a while, it will be fine.小吕一边走着，一边顺着渠水看过去。他看见小鱼秧子抢着往水上窜；看见泥鳅翻跟斗；看见渠岸上一个小圆洞里有一个知了爬出来，脊背上闪着金绿色的光，翅膀还没有伸展，还是湿的，软的，乳白色的。看见虾蟆叫。虾蟆叫原来是这样的！下颏底下鼓起一个白色的气泡，气泡一息：——“咶！”鼓一鼓，——“咶”鼓一鼓，——“咶！”这家伙，那么专心致意地在叫，好像天塌下来也挡不住它似的。小吕索性蹲下来，用手电直照着它，端详它老半天。赫嗨，全不理会！这一片地里，多少虾蟆，都是这么叫着？小吕想想它们那种认真的、滑稽的样子，不禁失笑。——那是什么？是蛇？（小吕有点怕蛇）渠面上，月光下，一道弯弯的水纹，前面昂着一个小脑袋。走近去，定睛看看，不是蛇，是耗子！这小东西，游到对岸，爬上来，摇摇它的湿漉漉的，光光滑滑的小脑袋，跑了！……
Xiao Lu walked while looking along the canal. He saw the small fish seedlings rushing to the water; he saw the loach somersaulting; he saw a knight crawling out of a small round hole on the bank of the canal, with a golden green light shining on his back, and his wings had not yet been extended, but still wet, soft, and milky. I saw a toad crying. The toad barked like this! A white bubble bulged up under the lower jaw, and the bubble breathed: - "Bah! "Drum beat,—— "Boom" drum ,—— "Boom!" This guy was screaming so intently, as if the sky couldn't stop it even if it fell. Xiao Lu simply squatted down, shined a flashlight directly on it, and looked at it for a long time. Hehe, ignore it all! How many toads in this field are all calling like this? Xiao Lu couldn't help but laugh when he thought about their serious and funny appearance. ——What is that? Is it a snake? (Xiao Lu is a little afraid of snakes) On the surface of the canal, under the moonlight, there is a curved water pattern, and a small head is held high in front. Approach and take a closer look, it's not a snake, it's a mouse! This little thing, swimming to the other side, climbed up, shook its wet, smooth little head, and ran away! ……小吕一路迤逦行来，已经到了涵洞前面。铁篦子上果然壅了一堆烂柴禾，——大工们都管这叫“渣积”，不少！小吕使铁锨推散，再一锨一锨地捞上来，好大一堆！渣积清理了，水好像流得快一些了，看得见涵洞口旋起小小的旋涡。
Xiao Lu walked all the way and had already arrived in front of the culvert. There was indeed a pile of rotten firewood on the iron grate,—— the carpenters called this "slag accumulation", a lot! Xiao Lu pushed the shovel apart, and then scooped it up one by one, which was a big pile! The slag accumulation was cleaned up, and the water seemed to flow faster, and a small whirlpool could be seen swirling at the mouth of the culvert.没什么事了。小吕顺着玉米地里一条近便的田埂，走回小石桥。用手电照了照志子，水好像又落了一点。
It's okay. Xiao Lu walked back to the small stone bridge along a nearby ridge in the cornfield. I shone a flashlight on Zhizi, and the water seemed to drop a little more.小吕觉得，月光暗了。抬起头来看看。好快！它怎么一下子就跑到西边去了？什么时候跑过去的？而且，好像灯尽油干，快要熄了似的，变得很薄了，红红的，简直不亮了，好像它疲倦得不得了，在勉强支撑着。小吕知道，快了，它就要落下去了。现在大概是夜里三点钟，大老张告诉过他，这几天月亮都是这时候落。说着说着，月亮落了，好像是唿噜一下子掉下去似的。立刻，眼前一片昏黑。
Xiao Lu felt that the moonlight was dark. Look up. So fast! Why did it run to the west all of a sudden? When did it run over? Moreover, as if the light was running out and about to go out, it became very thin, red, and not lit at all, as if it was extremely tired and barely holding on. Xiao Lu knew that it was about to fall. It's about three o'clock in the night, and Da Lao Zhang told him that the moon has been setting at this time these days. As he spoke, the moon fell, as if it was falling all of a sudden. Immediately, it was dark in front of me.真黑！这是一夜里最黑的时候。小吕一时什么也看不见了，过了一会，才勉强看得见一点模模糊糊的影子。小吕忽然觉得自己也疲倦得不行，有点恶心，就靠着糖槭树坐下来，铁锨斜倚在树干上。他的头沉重起来，眼皮直往下搭拉。心里好像很明白，不要睡！不要睡！但是不由自主。他觉得自己直往一个深深的、黑黑的地方掉下去，就跟那月亮似的，拽都拽不住，他睡着了那么一小会。人有时不知道自己怎么睡着了的。
It's so dark! This is the darkest time of the night. Xiao Lu couldn't see anything for a while, and after a while, he could barely see a vague shadow. Xiao Lu suddenly felt that he was too tired and a little nauseous, so he sat down against the sugar maple tree, leaning on the trunk with the shovel. His head became heavy, and his eyelids were pulled down. I seemed to understand it very well, don't sleep! Don't sleep! But involuntarily. He felt that he was falling straight into a deep, dark place, just like the moon, he couldn't pull it, and he fell asleep for a while. People sometimes don't know how they fell asleep.忽然，他惊醒了！他觉得眼前有一道黑影子过去，他在昏糊之中异常敏锐明确地断定：——狼！一挺身站起来，抄起铁锨，按开手电一照（这一切也都做得非常迅速而准确）：已经走过去了，过了小石桥。（小吕想了想！刚才从他面前走过时，离他只有四五步！）小吕听说过，遇见狼，不能怕，不能跑，——越怕越糟；狼怕光，怕手电，怕手电一圈一圈的光，怕那些圈儿套它，狼性多疑。他想了想，就开着手电，尾随着它走，现在，看得更清楚了。狼像一只大狗，深深地低着脑袋（狗很少这样低着脑袋），搭拉着毛茸茸的挺长的尾巴（狗的尾巴也不是这样）。奇怪，它不管身边的亮光，还是那样慢吞吞地，不慌不忙地走，既不像要回过头来，也不像要拔脚飞跑，就是这样不声不响地，低着头走，像一个心事重重，哀伤憔悴的人一样。——它知道身后有人么？它在想些什么呢？小吕正在想：要不要追上去 ，揍它？它走过前面的路边小杨树丛子，拐了弯，叫杨树遮住了，手电的光照不着它了。小吕忖了忖手里的铁锨：算了！那可实在是很危险！
Suddenly, he woke up! He felt a dark shadow passing in front of him, and he concluded extremely keenly and clearly in his coma: - Wolf! Stand up, picked up the shovel, and pressed the flashlight to shine (all this was done very quickly and accurately): he had already walked past and crossed the small stone bridge. (Xiao Lu thought about it!) When I walked in front of him just now, I was only four or five steps away from him!) Xiao Lu has heard that when you meet a wolf, you can't be afraid, you can't run,—— the more you are afraid, the worse it gets; the wolf is afraid of light, the flashlight, the light of the flashlight circle after circle, and the wolf is suspicious. He thought for a while, turned on the flashlight, and followed it, and now, he could see it more clearly. The wolf is like a big dog, with its head deeply lowered (dogs rarely bow its head like this), and it has a furry long tail (the dog's tail is not like that). Strangely, regardless of the bright light around it, it still walks so slowly and unhurriedly, neither as if it wants to turn around or run away, just like this, silently, with its head down, like a worried, sad and haggard person. ——Does it know that there is someone behind it? What is it thinking? Xiao Lu was thinking: Should I chase after it and beat it? It walked past the small poplar bushes on the side of the road in front of it, turned a corner, and asked the poplar trees to cover it, and the light of the flashlight could not shine on it. Xiao Lu thought about the shovel in his hand: Forget it! That's really dangerous!小吕在石桥顶上站了一会，又回到糖槭树下。他很奇怪，他并不怎么怕。他很清醒，很理智。他到糖槭树下，采取的是守势。小吕这才想起，他选择了这个地方休息，原来就是想到狼的。这个地方很保险：后面是渠水，狼不可能泅水过来；他可以监视着前面的马路；万一不行，——上树！
Xiao Lu stood on the top of the stone bridge for a while, and then returned to the sugar maple tree. He was strange, he was not very afraid. He was very sober and sensible. He went under the sugar maple tree and took a defensive stance. Xiao Lu then remembered that he chose this place to rest, and it turned out that he was thinking of wolves. This place is very safe: there is canal water behind, and the wolf cannot swim over; he can monitor the road in front of him; if it doesn't work,—— go up the tree!小吕用手电频频向狼的去路照射。没有，狼没有回来。
Xiao Lu frequently shone the wolf's way with a flashlight. No, the wolf didn't come back.无论如何，可不敢再睡觉了！小吕在糖槭树下来回地走着。走了一会，甚至还跑到刚才决开过，经他修复了的缺口那里看了看。——一边走，一边不停地用手电四处照射。他相信狼是不会再回来了；再有别的狼，这也不大可能，但是究竟不能放心到底。
Anyway, I don't dare to sleep anymore! Xiao Lu walked back and forth under the sugar maple tree. After walking for a while, he even ran to the gap that had just been opened and repaired by him to take a look. ——As he walked, he kept shining a flashlight around with a flashlight. He believed that the wolf would not come back; it was unlikely that there would be other wolves, but he couldn't rest assured to the end.可是他越来越困。他并不怎么害怕。狼的形象没有给他十分可怕的印象。他不大因为遇见狼而得意，也不因为没有追上去打它而失悔，他现在就是困，困压倒一切。他的意识昏木起来，脑子的活动变得缓慢而淡薄了。他在竭力抵抗着沉重的、酸楚的、深入骨髓的困劲。他觉得身上很难受，而且，很冷。他迷迷糊糊地想：我要是会抽烟，这时候抽一枝烟就好了！……
But he was getting more and more sleepy. He was not very afraid. The image of the wolf did not give him a very scary impression. He was not very proud of the wolf, nor did he regret not chasing after it and hitting it, he was now sleepy, sleepy overwhelming. His consciousness was dim, and the activity of his brain became slow and weak. He was trying his best to resist the heavy, sour, deep to the bone marrow. He felt very uncomfortable, and it was cold. He thought in a daze: If I could smoke, I would smoke a cigarette at this time! ……好容易，天模糊亮了。
更亮了。
It was easy, and the sky was bright. brighter.亮了！远远近近，一片青苍苍的，灰白灰白的颜色，好像天和地也熬过了一夜，还不大有精神似的。看得清房屋，看得清树，看得清庄稼了。小吕看看他看过一夜的水，水发清了，小多了，还不到半渠，露出来一截淤泥的痕迹，流势很弱，好像也很疲倦。小吕知道，现在已经流的是“空渠水”，上游的拦河坝又封起了，不到一个小时，这渠里的水就会流完了的。——得再过几个钟头，才会又有新的水下来。果园的地大概浇完了，这点水该够用了吧？……一串铜铃声，有人了！一个早出的社员，赶着一头毛驴，驴背上驮着一个线口袋，里边鼓鼓囊囊，好像是装的西葫芦。老大爷，您早哇！好了，这真正是白天了，不会再有狼，再有漫长的、难熬的黑夜了！小吕振作一点起来。——不过他还是很困，觉得心里发虚。
It's bright! Far and near, a green, grayish-gray color, as if the sky and the earth had survived all night, and they didn't have much energy. I can see the houses, the trees, and the crops clearly. Xiao Lu looked at the water he had seen all night, and the water was clear, much smaller, less than half of the channel, revealing a trace of silt, the flow was very weak, and it seemed to be very tired. Xiao Lu knew that now it was "empty canal water", and the upstream barrage was sealed again, and in less than an hour, the water in the canal would run out. ——It will take a few more hours for new water to come down. The land in the orchard is probably watered, this water should be enough, right? …… A string of copper bells, there is someone! An early member was driving a donkey, and the donkey carried a thread pocket on its back, which was bulging, as if it were zucchini. Old man, you are early! Okay, it's really daytime, there will be no more wolves, and there will be long, difficult nights! Xiao Lu cheered up a little. ——But he was still very sleepy and felt weak.远远看见果园的两个女工，陈素花和恽美兰来了。她们这么早就出来了！小吕知道，她们是因为惦着他，特为来看他来了。小吕在心里很感激她们，但是他自己觉得那感激的劲头很不足，他困得连感激也感激不动了。
From a distance, I saw two female workers in the orchard, Chen Suhua and Yun Meilan, coming. They came out so early! Xiao Lu knew that they came to see him because they were worried about him. Xiao Lu was very grateful to them in his heart, but he himself felt that the energy of gratitude was very insufficient, and he was so sleepy that he couldn't even be grateful.陈素花给他带来了两个闷得烂烂的，滚热的甜菜。小吕一边吃甜菜，一边告诉她们，他看见狼了。他说了遇狼的经过，狼的样子。他自己都有点奇怪，他说得很平淡，一点不像他平常说话那么活灵活现的。但是陈素花和恽美兰都很惊奇，很为他的平淡的叙述所感动。她们催他赶快去睡觉，说是大老张嘱咐的：叫小吕天一亮就去睡，大闸不用管了，会有人来接。
Chen Suhua brought him two stuffy, hot beets. While eating beets, Xiao Lu told them that he saw a wolf. He told him what happened to the wolf and what the wolf looked like. He himself was a little strange, he spoke very plainly, not at all as vivid as he usually spoke. But Chen Suhua and Yun Meilan were both surprised and moved by his plain narrative. They urged him to go to bed quickly, saying that it was instructed by Da Lao Zhang: tell Xiao Lu to go to bed as soon as dawn breaks, don't worry about the gate, someone will come to pick him up.小吕喝了两碗稀饭，爬到床上，就睡着了。睡了两个钟头，醒了。他觉得浑身都很舒服，懒懒的。他只要翻一翻身，合上眼，会立刻就睡着的。但是他看了看墙上挂的一个马蹄表，不睡了。起来，到井边用凉水洗洗脸，他向果园走去。——他到果园去干什么？
Xiao Lu drank two bowls of porridge, climbed onto the bed, and fell asleep. After sleeping for two hours, he woke up. He felt comfortable and lazy. As long as he turned over and closed his eyes, he would fall asleep immediately. But he looked at a horseshoe watch hanging on the wall and stopped sleeping. He got up, went to the well to wash his face with cold water, and walked towards the orchard. ——What is he going to do in the orchard?果园还是那样。小吕昨天下午还在果园的，但是不知道为什么，他好像有好久没有来了似的。似乎果园一夜之间有了一些什么重大的变化似的。什么变化呢？也难说。满园一片浓绿，绿得过了量，绿得迫人。静悄悄的。绿叶把什么都遮隔了，一眼看不出五步远。若不是远远听见有人说话，你会以为果园一个人都没有。小吕听见大老张的声音，他知道，他正在西南拐角指挥几个人锄果树行子。小吕想：他浇了一夜地，又熬了一夜了，还不休息，真辛苦。好了，今天把这点活赶完，明天大家就可以休息一天，大老张说了：全体休息！过了这阵，就可以细水长流地干活了，一年就这么几槎紧活。小吕想：下午我就来上班。大粒白的枝叶在动，是陈素花和恽美兰领着几个参加劳动的学生在捆葡萄条。恽美兰看见小吕了，就叫：
The orchard is still like that. Xiao Lu was still in the orchard yesterday afternoon, but for some reason, he seemed to have not been here for a long time. It seems that there have been some major changes in the orchard overnight. What changes? It's hard to say. The garden is full of green, too green, too green. Quiet. The green leaves block everything, and you can't see five steps away at a glance. If you hadn't heard someone talking from a distance, you would think there was no one in the orchard. Xiao Lu heard the voice of Da Lao Zhang, and he knew that he was directing a few people to hoe the fruit trees in the southwest corner. Xiao Lu thought: He watered the ground all night, stayed up all night, and still didn't rest, it's really hard. Okay, finish this work today, everyone can rest for a day tomorrow, Da Lao Zhang said: Everyone rests! After this while, you can work in a long stream, and you can work hard a few times a year. Xiao Lu thought: I'll come to work in the afternoon. The large white branches and leaves were moving, and it was Chen Suhua and Yun Meilan leading several students who participated in the labor to tie grape sticks. When Yun Meilan saw Xiao Lu, she shouted:“小吕！你来干什么？不睡觉！”
小吕说：“我来看看！”
“看什么？快回去睡！地都浇完了。”
"Xiao Lu! What are you doing here? Don't sleep! ” Xiao Lu said: "Let me take a look!" ” "What are you looking at? Go back to sleep! The ground is all watered. ”小吕穿过葡萄丛，四边看看，果园的地果然都浇了，到处都是湿湿的，一片清凉泽润、汪汪泱泱的水气直透他的脏腑。似乎葡萄的叶子都更水淋，更绿了，葡萄蔓子和皮色也更深了。小吕挺一挺胸脯，深深地吸了两口气，舒服极了。小吕想：下回我就有经验了，可以单独地看水，顶一个大工来使了，果园就等于多了半个人。看水，没有什么。狼不狼的，问题也不大。许多事都不像想象起来那么可怕……
Xiao Lu walked through the grape bushes and looked around, and the ground in the orchard was indeed watered, it was wet everywhere, and a cool and moist water vapor penetrated his internal organs. It seems that the leaves of the grapes are more watery and greener, and the vines and skin of the grapes are darker. Xiao Lu straightened his chest and took two deep breaths, which was very comfortable. Xiao Lu thought: Next time I will have experience, I can look at the water alone, and if a big worker comes to work, the orchard will be equivalent to half an extra person. Looking at the water, there is nothing. Wolves are not wolves, and the problem is not big. Many things are not as scary as imagined......走过一棵老葡萄架下，小吕想坐一坐。一坐下，就想躺下。躺下来，看着头顶的浓密的，鲜嫩清新的，半透明的绿叶，绿叶轻轻摇晃，变软，溶成一片，好像把小吕也溶到里面了。他眼皮一麻搭，不知不觉，睡着了。小吕头枕在一根暴出地面的老葡萄蔓上，满身绿影，睡得真沉，十四岁的正在发育的年轻的胸脯均匀地起伏着。葡萄，正在恣酣地，用力地从地里吸着水，经过皮层下的导管，一直输送到梢顶，输送到每一片伸张着的绿叶，和累累的，已经有指头顶大小的淡绿色的果粒之中。——这时候，不论割破葡萄枝蔓的任何一处，都可以看出有清清的白水流出来，嗒嗒地往下滴……
Walking under an old grape trellis, Xiao Lu wanted to sit down. As soon as he sat down, he wanted to lie down. Lying down, looking at the dense, tender and fresh, translucent green leaves above his head, the green leaves swayed gently, became soft, and dissolved into one, as if Xiao Lu had also melted into it. His eyelids were numb, and before he knew it, he fell asleep. Xiao Lu's head rested on an old grape vine that protruded from the ground, covered in green shadows, sleeping soundly, and the fourteen-year-old developing young chest was rising and falling evenly. The grapes are sucking water from the ground vigorously, through the duct under the cortex, all the way to the top of the tip, to every stretched green leaf, and to the pale green fruit grains that are already the size of fingers. ——At this time, no matter where the grape branches and vines are cut, you can see that clear white water flows out and drips down......一九六二年七月二十日改成
Revised on July 20, 1962
[1] 本篇原载《北京文艺》1962年第十期。初收《羊舍的夜晚》，中国少年儿童出版社，1963年1月；又收《汪曾祺短篇小说选》，北京出版社，1982年2月，文字略有改动。

1979年

1979年
[1] This article was originally published in Beijing Literature and Art, No. 10, 1962. The first collection was "Night in the Sheep House", China Children's Publishing House, January 1963; and "Selected Short Stories of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Publishing House, February 1982, with slight changes in the text. In 1979骑兵列传[1]
Biography of Cavalry [1]我们为了了解抗日战争时期威震后山的骑兵营的情况，访问了黄司令员——当年的黄营长。“后山”是呼和浩特人习惯的说法，泛指大青山以北地区。感谢老曹同志为我们安排了这次会见。这位老曹同志是个“红火人”，非常健谈，记性极好，生活知识非常丰富，热情好客，好饭量，好酒量。他年轻时拉过骆驼，从呼市到新疆。“阿格头子灰背青[2]，四十五天到旧城”，他现在还常唱当年唱过的爬山调。后来在大青山打过多年游击，晚上下山活动，天亮回山。“狼下山，我下山；狼回山，我回山”。他熟悉大青山的每一条路，大青山的群众熟悉他这个人。他打过很多仗，也挨过多次整。文化大革命中被薅掉一大片头发，打断过踝骨，到现在头皮上还秃了一块，走起路来一瘸一拐。可是他说起这些事，兴高采烈，眉飞色舞，好像是一场热闹有趣的戏剧。他现在还在靠边站，所以有时间陪我们。
In order to understand the situation of the cavalry battalion in Weizhen Houshan during the War of Resistance Against Japanese Aggression, we interviewed Commander Huang, the battalion commander of the Huang regiment at that time. "Back mountain" is a common saying of Hohhot people, which generally refers to the area north of Daqingshan. Thank you to Comrade Lao Cao for arranging this meeting for us. This old Comrade Cao is a "red man", very talkative, has an excellent memory, is very rich in life knowledge, is hospitable, good at food, and good drink. When he was young, he pulled camels from Hushi to Xinjiang. "Age Touzi gray-backed green [2], forty-five days to the old city", he still often sings the mountain climbing tune he sang back then. Later, he fought guerrilla warfare in Daqing Mountain for many years, went down the mountain at night, and returned to the mountain at dawn. "The wolf goes down the mountain, I go down the mountain; The wolf goes back to the mountain, I go back to the mountain." He is familiar with every road in Daqingshan, and the people of Daqingshan are familiar with him as a person. He has fought many battles and suffered many times. During the Cultural Revolution, he lost a large piece of hair, broke his ankle bone, and now he is bald on his scalp and limps when he walks. But when he talked about these things, he was elated and his eyebrows were dancing, as if it was a lively and interesting drama. He is still standing aside, so he has time to accompany us.约定会见的地点在大青山坝口子底下一家当年多次掩护过八路军的老堡垒户的家里。不是老曹代约，黄司令员大概不会同意见我们。不是这地方，大概他也不会去。黄司令员的问题还没有做结论。他现在每天除了背了一枝半自动到山里去打猎，就是各处去看望那些老堡垒户。几十里，上百里，不算一回事。老曹说，约他上这家来吃一顿油糕，估计他能来。
The agreed meeting place was at the home of an old fortress household that had covered the Eighth Route Army many times under the dam entrance of Daqingshan. If it weren't for Lao Cao's appointment, Commander Huang probably wouldn't agree to see us. If it weren't for this place, he probably wouldn't have gone there. Commander Huang's question has not yet been concluded. In addition to carrying a semi-automatic to the mountains to hunt every day, he also visits those old fortress households everywhere. Dozens of miles, hundreds of miles, is not the same thing. Lao Cao said that he asked him to come to this house to eat oil cake, and it was estimated that he could come.果然，他早已就到了。没想到，这位妇孺皆知，叱咤风云的将军竟是这样一个人：中等以下的身材，长眉秀眼，高高的额头。近六十的人了，一头乌黑的头发，一嘴整齐的白牙。衬衫，军裤，青鞋，白袜。他说话的口音很特别。照老曹的说法是：他讲的话内蒙人听得懂，但是觉得很古怪；他的家乡人听起来很熟悉，但是听不懂。原来他说话的语调是江西语调，所用的字眼却全部是内蒙字眼。这位将军非常寡言。他是永新人。去年我刚刚去过永新，就跟他谈起永新的见闻，自以为这可以引起他谈话的兴趣。不料他听了半天，只答了一句：“内蒙好。”我觉得这有点文不对题。这天，他一共没有说几句话，只是抽烟，喝茶，点头，微笑。胃口却很好。油糕端上来了，在他面前堆起了高高的一盘。他不放筷子，一气吃了十四个。油糕这东西很不好消化。常言说：“三十里的莜面四十里的糕，二十里的荞面饿断腰。”他这样的身材，这样的岁数，肚子里装下十四个油糕，受得了吗？然而他若无其事。
Sure enough, he had already arrived. Unexpectedly, women and children know that this powerful general is such a person: below average build, long eyebrows and beautiful eyes, and a high forehead. Nearly sixty years old, with black hair and neat white teeth. Shirt, military pants, green shoes, white socks. His accent is very special. According to Lao Cao, what he said was understood by Inner Mongolians, but he felt very strange; his hometown people sounded familiar, but they couldn't understand it. It turned out that his tone was Jiangxi accent, but the words he used were all Inner Mongolian words. This general is very taciturn. He is a Yongxin person. I just went to Yongxin last year, and I talked to him about Yongxin's experiences, thinking that this could arouse his interest in talking. Unexpectedly, he listened for a long time and only replied: "Inner Mongolia is good." I think this is a bit off. On this day, he didn't say a few words, just smoked, drank tea, nodded, and smiled. The appetite is very good. The oil cake was served, and a high plate was piled up in front of him. He didn't put down his chopsticks and ate fourteen in one go. Oil cake is very difficult to digest. As the saying goes: "Thirty miles of noodles and forty miles of cakes, twenty miles of buckwheat noodles starve and break your waist." "With such a figure and such an age, can he stand fourteen oil cakes in his stomach? However, he was nothing.老曹这天没有吃足了油糕，他喝了很多酒，说了很多笑话。他这天专门说狼。说老母猪斗狼，小狼出疹子，说狼咬红狗子。——红狗子是大青山特有的野兽，很凶猛。老曹说它们每天一起来就要到河边去喝水，喝完水就撒尿，一泡尿要撒一个多钟头。这样没完没了地撒尿，是走不快的。狼就专在这时去咬它。……他夹说带比划，脸上的表情一会是母猪，一会是红狗子，一会是狼，把老堡垒户的两个女儿笑得趴在床上起不来。说着说着，他忽然想起来：“哎，老黄，人家找的是你，你给人家讲讲呀！”老黄说：“你讲！你讲！”——“我讲什么！我在前山多，你在后山多，我替不了你！”黄营长到了也没有给我们讲什么。最后，他说：“你们要了解骑兵营，去找找杨如意吧。他还活着。”
Lao Cao didn't eat enough oil cake that day, he drank a lot of wine and told a lot of jokes. He specifically talked about wolves that day. It is said that the old sow fights wolves, the little wolf has a rash, and the wolf bites the red dog. ——The red dog is a beast unique to Daqingshan and is very ferocious. Lao Cao said that they have to go to the river to drink water every day, and they pee after drinking water, and it takes more than an hour to pee in a bubble. Peeing endlessly like this is not fast. The wolf bites it at this time. …… He said with a gesture, and the expression on his face was a sow, a red dog, and a wolf, making the two daughters of the old fortress laugh so hard that they couldn't get up on the bed. As he spoke, he suddenly remembered: "Hey, Lao Huang, people are looking for you, you tell them!" Lao Huang said: "You speak! You speak!" ——"What am I talking about! I have a lot of front mountains, you have many back mountains, I can't replace you!" Battalion Commander Huang didn't tell us anything when he arrived. Finally, he said: "You want to know about the cavalry battalion, go find Yang Ruyi." He's alive. ”从呼和浩特出发，当天就到杨如意所在的那个旗。旗革委会的一个年轻同志向我们介绍：“他家很好找，下了灰腾梁，听见哪里哗啦哗啦地响，那就是他的家。”
Departing from Hohhot, we went to the banner where Yang Ruyi was on the same day. A young comrade of the Flag Revolutionary Committee introduced to us: "His house is easy to find, and when he got off the gray beam, he heard a clatter somewhere, that was his home." ”车过灰腾梁，我们禁不住要下来看看。这地方的景色真是特别。汽车在大山之间盘旋，走了半天，还是这座山。上了山顶，竟是一片一望无际的大平地。那么大，那么平！有的地开垦了，种了莜麦，麦穗正在成熟，随风摇摆，一片闪着银光的翠绿的海。有的地方还荒着，长着茎叶都很坚硬的劲草，草丛里开着高寒地区特有的紫蓝色的野花。昨天下过雨，纵横的拖拉机履带的辙印里存着积水。一辆装满柴草的牛车在天边缓缓地移动。除此之外，寂无一人。天还没有放晴，灰色的云层压下来，显得这片高山顶上的大野说不出的苍莽荒寒。听说“灰腾儿”蒙语的意思是寒冷。这个地方是够冷的。我们在山下穿的是衬衫，在山顶立了一会，就都披起预先借来的棉大衣。风，真硬。
The car passed the gray beam, and we couldn't help but come down and take a look. The scenery of this place is really special. The car circled between the mountains, and after walking for a long time, it was still this mountain. When I reached the top of the mountain, it was an endless flat land. So big, so flat! Some land has been cultivated and planted with wheat, and the ears of wheat are ripening, swaying in the wind, a green sea shining with silver light. Some places are still barren, with strong grass with hard stems and leaves, and purple-blue wildflowers unique to alpine regions bloom in the grass. It rained yesterday, and there was water in the ruts of the tractor tracks. An ox cart full of firewood moved slowly on the edge of the sky. Other than that, there was no one there. The sky has not yet cleared, and the gray clouds have pressed down, making it look indescribably wild and cold on the top of this high mountain. I heard that "gray tengger" means cold in Mongolian. This place is cold enough. We wore shirts at the bottom of the mountain, and after standing on the top of the mountain for a while, we all put on our pre-borrowed cotton coats. The wind is really hard.下了梁，我们的吉普车一直开进了一个发出哗啦哗啦的响声的院子。
Off the beam, our jeep drove into a yard that made a loud noise.这哗啦哗啦的声音是一个风车弄出来的。这院子里竖着一根高高的杆子，上面装了一个用铁片做成，有脸盆大小的铁风车。风稍大一点，它就高昂急促地喧闹起来。这玩意是干什么用的？
The clattering sound was made by a windmill. There was a tall pole erected in the yard, on which was an iron windmill the size of a basin made of iron sheets. When the wind was a little stronger, it became noisy and loud. What is this thing for?我们推开门，一个长着一对鹰眼的中年人斜着眼睛把我打量了一遍。我们说明是黄司令员介绍来的，他立刻改变了态度：“请进！上炕吧！”
We pushed open the door, and a middle-aged man with a pair of eagle eyes squinted at me. We explained that it was introduced by Commander Huang, and he immediately changed his attitude: "Please come in! Let's go to the kang!" ”我们知道他爱喝酒，给他带来了两瓶二锅头。他用牙咬开瓶盖，倒了几碗，又从酸菜缸里捞出几个蔓菁。这地方的蔓菁很有名。别处的蔓菁是青皮的，这里的蔓菁的皮是大红的，——里面的肉雪白，非常鲜嫩。他掏出蒙古人吃肉用的刀，把蔓菁切成碎块：“本来应该给你们搞一点手抓羊肉，我现在这个处境……来，喝！”
We know that he loves to drink, so we brought him two bottles of Erguotou. He bit open the bottle cap with his teeth, poured a few bowls, and fished out a few more turnips from the sauerkraut jar. The turnips in this place are famous. The turnips elsewhere are green-skinned, and the skin of the turnips here is bright red,—— and the meat inside is snow-white and very tender. He took out the knife used by Mongolians for eating meat and cut the turnips into pieces: "I should have made you some hand-grabbed mutton, but I'm in this situation now...... Come on, drink! ”我们说明了来意，他放下酒碗，皱起眉头：“你们要了解骑兵营？了解这干什么？这都成了俺们的‘严重罪行’了。人家说俺们不是干革命，是反革命。
We explained our intentions, and he put down his wine bowl and frowned: "You want to know about the cavalry battalion? What are you doing here? This has become our 'serious crime'. People say that we are not doing revolution, we are counter-revolutionary.“三十多年的事了，从哪儿说起？这样吧，过两天我要到呼市去，我去找你们。今天咱们先见见面。我想起什么，说什么；说到哪儿，算哪儿。”说着，他点起一盏灯，——铜制的，有普通电池粗细，三寸来高，当中灌煤油，上面安个捻子的灯，找出一根巴掌长的羊肩骨烟袋，就着火抽起烟来。这种烟，一次只能装一小撮，吸一口，就吹掉，叫做“一口香”。他一边抽烟，一边用一块羊皮不停地擦那盏灯。
"It's been more than thirty years, where to start? Well, I'm going to Hushi in two days, and I'll go to you. Let's meet first today. What do I remember, what do I say; where I say, where is it?" As he spoke, he lit a lamp,—— made of copper, with the thickness of an ordinary battery, about three inches high, filled with kerosene, placed a twister lamp on it, found a palm-length sheep's shoulder bone cigarette bag, and lit it and smoked. This kind of cigarette can only be filled with a small pinch at a time, and after one puff, it is blown away, which is called "a mouthful of incense". While smoking, he kept wiping the lamp with a piece of sheepskin.“你们问我是怎样参加革命的？——我小名叫个如意，从小可不如意。我父亲生我们哥儿七个。我虚岁十五上就揽了工。给汉人种地，给蒙古人放马。白天干，晚上还要找点零活。那年来了八路军。俺们这儿也成立了抗联会。有一天晚上，有人叫我。我以为是找我干点零活。原来是抗联会敛了一批军鞋，要送给八路军去。他们问我敢不敢去，——那会儿遍地是鬼子、汉奸，八路军没个准地方。我说：‘咋不敢！’八路军挺和气，还给好的吃。我说：‘下回再有这事，我还去！’去了几次，就熟了。有一次，他们走失了一匹军马，找了几天了。我问了问是哪天走失的，那天刮的是什么风，第二天，就给他们找回来了。走失的马，总是顺着风向走去的。骑兵营原本都是南方人，都是步兵。步兵改骑兵，可得有个过程。那个时候，有的人从鞍子这边跨上去，从那边就掉下来了。他们问我愿不愿留下来。我想，这比揽工好，这就参了军。
"You ask me how I joined the revolution? ——My nickname is Ruyi, and I have been unhappy since I was a child. My father gave birth to seven of our brothers. I got a job when I was fifteen years old. Farm for the Han people and herd horses for the Mongols. Work during the day and find some odd jobs at night. That year came the Eighth Route Army. We also set up the Anti-Japanese Federation here. One night, someone called me. I thought they were looking for me to do odd jobs. It turned out that the Anti-Japanese Federation had collected a batch of military shoes and wanted to give them to the Eighth Route Army. They asked me if I dared to go,—— At that time, there were devils and traitors everywhere, and the Eighth Route Army had no right place. I said, 'Why don't you dare!' The Eighth Route Army was very kind and gave me good food. I said, 'Next time this happens, I'll go!' I went a few times, and I was familiar. Once, they lost a military horse and searched for it for a few days. I asked them what day they were lost, what the wind was blowing that day, and the next day, they found them back. Lost horses always follow the direction of the wind. The cavalry battalion was originally Southerners, all infantry. There must be a process for infantry to cavalry. At that time, some people stepped on the side of the saddle and fell from there. They asked me if I wanted to stay. I thought it was better than recruiting, so I joined the army.“参军后调到山西训练了一年，我这才知道有个礼拜天。一到礼拜天，睡一天。
"After joining the army, I was transferred to Shanxi for a year of training, and then I knew that there was a Sunday. On Sunday, I slept for a day.“分配我当司务长。我可是个漂亮的司务长！怎么能搞到吃的，跟群众一商量，全解决了。大家伙表扬我，我可不安心。当司务长，打不了枪，打仗时只能管马桩子。——骑兵并不老是骑在马上打仗。特别是偷袭，离敌人十几里就得下马。不然，一片马蹄子声音，敌人早发现了！马，得有人管，这就叫马桩子。我老往班里跑。后来就调成排长。当时伤亡大，提升快，七转八转，我就成了连长，在三连。”
"Assign me to be the chief of staff. I'm a beautiful secretary! How can I get food, discuss it with the masses, and solve it all. The big guy praised me, and I didn't feel at ease. When you are the chief of staff, you can't shoot guns, and you can only manage horse stakes when fighting. ——Cavalry don't always fight on horseback. Especially in sneak attacks, you have to dismount more than ten miles away from the enemy. Otherwise, the enemy would have discovered the sound of horses' hooves! Horses have to be taken care of, which is called horse stakes. I always run to the squad. Later, I was transferred to the platoon leader. At that time, there were heavy casualties, and the promotion was fast, and I became the company commander, in the third company. ”“三连是白马连？”
“对。”
“你就是白马连的连长？”
“对。——你们是不是听过一些白马连的故事？群众那么传，有些是夸大了的。”
“有个萨克亚你认识不？”
“那还不认识！”
"The third company is the White Horse Company?" "Yes." "You are the company commander of the White Horse Company?" "Yes. ——Have you heard some stories about the White Horse Company? The masses spread it, and some of it was exaggerated. ” "Do you know a Sarkya?" "I don't know that yet!"“这是个传奇人物？”
他对“传奇人物”这个名词有点耳生，但马上就明白是什么意思，连连点头：“对对对，传奇人物，传奇人物……
"This is a legend?" He was a little familiar with the term "legend", but immediately understood what it meant, and nodded repeatedly: "Yes, yes, legend, legend......“转山子有个汉奸，叫个道尔吉。——他是蒙古人，应该叫蒙奸才对，可是群众都叫他汉奸。他儿子当日本翻译，他就到处欺负人。群众叫惯了道尔吉，再叫他，他举手就是一鞭子：‘什么道尔吉，道尔吉！’大人小孩都得叫他一声爷爷。他骑一头毛驴。到了哪儿，一下驴：‘去，给爷爷蹓蹓驴去！’从来只有蹓马，谁听说过有蹓驴的？他就要摆这个谱。他带着鬼子、汉奸到处搞牛羊，搞粮食。他是本地人，谁家有没有，瞒不过他。西山有个小煤窑，有几个地下工作人员在那里活动。他去向鬼子告了密。鬼子来了大批人马，把窑下几十户烧得光光的。萨克亚约了六个人，一天晚上，拿石头把他砸死了。这就拉起了一支游击队。
"There is a traitor in Zhuanshanzi, called Dorji. ——He is a Mongolian, so he should be called a traitor, but the masses call him a traitor. When his son became a Japanese translator, he bullied people everywhere. The crowd was used to calling Dorji, and when he called him again, he raised his hand and whipped: 'What Dorji, Dorji!' Adults and children have to call him grandpa. He rides a donkey. Wherever he goes, he gets a donkey: 'Go, give grandpa a donkey!' 'There have always been horses, who has ever heard of a donkey? He is going to set up this score. He took devils and traitors everywhere to engage in cattle and sheep and grain. He is a local, and no one can hide it from him. There was a small coal kiln in Xishan, where several underground workers were active. He went to tell the devil. The devils came with a large number of people and burned dozens of households under the kiln. Sakya made an appointment with six people and one night smashed him to death with a stone. This pulled up a guerrilla team.“他这支游击队是吓唬出来的。他跟这六个人说：‘乱子是趸下了，你们的名声在灰腾梁是染下了。不干，也是个死！’这七个人扶香拜了把子：‘有饭同吃，有马同骑，同心抗日，永不翻悔，若有三心二意，关老爷大刀一刀两断！’这就成立了一支一共七个人的游击队。”
"His guerrilla team was scared. He said to these six people: 'The trouble is down, and your reputation is stained in the ashes. If you don't do it, you will die!" These seven people supported the incense and worshipped: 'There is food to eat together, horses to ride together, fight against Japan with one heart, never regret, if you are half-hearted, Master Guan will cut the big knife in two!' This established a guerrilla team of seven people. ”“听说他打枪打得很准？”
“很准！他能骑在马上把枪拆开，再装上。耍得太多了。叫他总结打枪的经验，他说只有一条：‘只要你不害怕，枪就跟你走。’这话是不错的。
"I heard that he shot very accurately?" "Very accurate! He can ride a horse and disassemble the gun and reload it. It's too much. When asked to sum up his experience in shooting a gun, he said there was only one thing: 'As long as you are not afraid, the gun will go with you.' This is a good thing.“鬼子想尽办法要捉他，就是捉不住。他主要也是靠了换马。”
“换马？”
"The devil tried his best to catch him, but he couldn't catch him. He mainly relied on changing horses. ” "Change horses?"“骑兵，马乏了，你有多大能耐也不行。那时蒙古人都有马，就拴在蒙古包外面的杆子上。他一觉着马乏了，扔了他的马，跳上别人的马，骑了就走。来得及，解开缰绳；来不及，在马上拿刀子从前面把缰绳一刀截断。
"Cavalry, if the horse is tired, you can't do it. At that time, the Mongols had horses, so they were tied to the pole outside the yurt. When he felt that the horse was tired, he threw away his horse, jumped on someone else's horse, rode and left. In time, untie the reins; when it is too late, take a knife on the horse and cut the reins from the front.“这家伙真是个傻大胆。他经常一个人跟鬼子干。有一回，他骑了一匹驳花马[3]，把鬼子的骑兵队冲得稀里花拉，砍下鬼子好些胳臂。后来鬼子一看见骑驳花马的就害怕。
"This guy is really stupid and bold. He often fought with the devils alone. Once, he rode a flower horse, id_0000 rushed the devil's cavalry to the brink and cut off many of the devil's arms. Later, the devil was frightened when he saw the horse riding the flower horse.“他觉得带着这么一支六个人的游击队不是长久之计，就带着他的把兄弟来投奔黄营长。黄营长说：‘你把你的驳花马跟老乡换换。我这里只有白马连、红马连、黑马连，没有花马连！’他去换了。不知从哪里弄了一匹白骡子！骡子就骡子吧，总是白的。就这样，别人骑马，他骑骡子！他这头骡子真是个神物，不说是日行千里，一天走五百里没问题。”
He felt that it was not a long-term solution to bring such a six-man guerrilla team, so he took his brother to join Battalion Commander Huang. Battalion Commander Huang said: 'You exchange your flower horse with your fellow villagers. I only have a white horse company, a red horse company, and a black horse company here, and there is no flower horse company!' He went to change it. I don't know where I got a white mule! A mule is a mule, it's always white. In this way, others ride horses, and he rides mules! His mule is really a mythical object, not to mention that he travels thousands of miles a day, and it is no problem to walk five hundred miles a day. ”“这人还在么？”
“在！他能够活下来，真是想不到的事。不过，完了！”
“怎么完了？”
"Is this person still here?" "In! It's unexpected that he can survive. But, it's over! ” "What's over?"“他原来在一个水库工地上负责。这些年，很多事看不惯，整天发牢骚，说怪话，骂人。上面发来了文件，他不看。原来重要一点的文件都是汉文、蒙文两种，后来不知谁规定的，只发汉文的。他收到就扔在一边：‘我不认识汉字！’从粮店买来了炒米，他全给喂了牛：‘炒米是糜子炒的，谁出的这主意，用高粱炒，这嚼得动吗！’文化大革命，有两个造反派来外调，叫他写黄营长的材料。他说：‘我不会写汉字，用蒙文写吧。我还不会新蒙文，只会写旧蒙文。’他用一张大纸，只写了一句话。这两个造反派拿回去请人翻译出来，是一句很难听的骂人的话。他把党籍搞丢了，工作也搞丢了。现在就是到处找熟人喝酒。蒙古人大都爱喝酒。‘骆驼见了柳，蒙古人见了酒’。不过像他那样喝法的人也少。他年轻时能喝五瓶，现在也还能喝三瓶。去年我见过他一次。他一见到酒，右手就哆嗦。两盅下去，就不哆嗦了。我问过大夫，大夫说，这种症状叫酒精中毒。他总有一天会醉死。这人，完了。过去，是个英雄。这怪谁呢？……”
"He was originally in charge of a reservoir construction site. Over the years, many things have been unaccustomed to it, complaining all day long, saying strange things, and scolding people. Documents were sent on it, but he didn't read them. It turned out that the more important documents were in Chinese and Mongolian, but later I don't know who stipulated them, and only sent them in Chinese. When he received it, he threw it aside: 'I don't know Chinese characters!' 'Fried rice was bought from the grain store, and he fed it all: 'Fried rice is fried with millet, who came up with this idea, fried with sorghum, can this be chewed!' During the Cultural Revolution, two rebels came to transfer him and asked him to write materials for Battalion Commander Huang. He said: 'I can't write Chinese characters, write in Mongolian. I don't know new Mongolian yet, I can only write old Mongolian. He used a large piece of paper and wrote only one sentence. The two rebels took it back and asked someone to translate it, which was an unpleasant scolding. He lost his party membership and his job. Now he is looking for acquaintances to drink everywhere. Most Mongolians love to drink. 'The camel saw the willow, and the Mongols saw the wine'. But there are few people who drink like him. He could drink five bottles when he was young, and he can drink three bottles now. I saw him once last year. As soon as he saw the wine, his right hand trembled. After two cups, he stopped shivering. I asked the doctor, and the doctor said that this symptom is called alcoholism. He will die of drunkenness one day. This person is over. In the past, he was a hero. Who is to blame for this? ……”“白马连像萨克亚一样的人还有吗？”
“你是说枪法还是胆量？”
“都算上。”
“俺们连特等射手有二十个，一等射手四十个。不过称得神枪手的，只有三个人。”
“都是谁？”
“一个是王振东。”
"Are there still people like Sarkya in the White Horse Company?" "Are you talking about marksmanship or guts?" "It's all counted." "We have twenty special shooters and forty first-class shooters. However, there are only three people who can be called sharpshooters. ” "Who are they?" "One is Wang Zhendong."“王振东，我听老曹说过。”
"Wang Zhendong, I heard Lao Cao say it."“对，他是武川县人，和老曹是同乡。原本是个普通农民，在家给人种地。有一天，他在耕地，有个熟人叫白秀山的在地边叫他：‘嗐，振东，我去当八路军去，你去不去？’——‘去！’他把犁铧插在地里，把牛解下来，跟一个过路的老乡说：‘咳，你跟主人家说一声，他的地我不给他种了呀！’就这么走了。
"Yes, he is from Wuchuan County, and he is from the same hometown as Lao Cao. He was originally an ordinary farmer who farmed land for people at home. One day, while he was plowing the field, an acquaintance named Bai Xiushan called him on the edge of the field: 'Hey, Zhendong, I'm going to be the Eighth Route Army, can you go?' '——'Go!' He put the plow in the ground, untied the ox, and said to a fellow passing by: 'Cough, tell the master, I won't plant his land for him!' And he left.“他的打法和萨克亚不一样。萨克亚是横冲直撞，越乱越准。他不。他总是选择好有利地形，趴下来一枪一枪地打。这人在战场上打仗，好像在屋里摆象棋似的，多会也没见他慌乱过。他还有个毛病，打枪时爱抽烟。有一回，给他一个任务，保护电台。——俺们营有过一部电台。忽然，鬼子围上来了。他叫所有的人都往下撤，他一个人顶在那里打。鬼子呜呜啦啦地上来了，他不慌不忙，点起了烟灯。‘咈——’，吸一口；‘砰——’，撂倒一个鬼子。黄营长冲他喊：‘王振东！把那个拿小旗的鬼子打掉，他是指挥！’振东一口气吹灭了烟灯，那个鬼子就从马上掉下来了。……这人死了。”
"His style of play is different from Sacya. Sakia is rampant, and the more chaotic he is, the more accurate he is. He doesn't. He always chooses favorable terrain and fights one shot after another. This man fights on the battlefield, as if he is playing chess in the house, and he has never seen him panic. He also has a problem, he likes to smoke when shooting. Once, I gave him a task to protect the radio. ——There was a radio station in our battalion. Suddenly, the devils came around. He told everyone to withdraw, and he fought there alone. The devil came up with a whine, and he was unhurried and lit the smoke lamp. 'Boom-', take a breath; 'Bang-', knock down a devil. Battalion Commander Huang shouted at him: 'Wang Zhendong! Kill the devil with the small flag, he is the commander!' Zhendong blew out the smoke lamp in one breath, and the devil fell off his horse. …… The man died. ”“怎么死的？”
“有一次他去执行侦察任务，叫鬼子咬住了。他骑着马，一边还枪，一边还唱。唱了半句爬山调，‘吃了一颗麻籽……’一颗子弹钻进了他的后脑勺。”
"How did you die?" "Once he went on a reconnaissance mission and asked the devil to bite him. He rode a horse, returning the gun and singing at the same time. After singing half a mountain climbing tune, 'eat a hemp seed......' a bullet went into the back of his head. ”杨如意接连抽了好几口烟，用羊皮擦着烟灯，说：“我这盏灯就是他的遗物。”
他说的第三个神枪手呢？不用问，就是他自己。
Yang Ruyi smoked several puffs of smoke one after another, wiped the smoke lamp with sheepskin, and said, "This lamp of mine is his relic." ” What about the third sharpshooter he said? No need to ask, it's himself.“……胆子这东西是锻炼出来的。我跟你们说一个人罢。这人叫杨玉山。也是俺们营的，也不是俺们营的。这人见汉人说汉话，见蒙古人说蒙古话。有的时候又在汉人面前装着他不懂汉话，在蒙古人面前装着不懂蒙古话。他还会说西藏话，会念喇嘛经。他真在一个庙里当过二年喇嘛。行军的时候，马褡子里一边是军服，一边是喇嘛服。一高兴，就穿戴起来：‘我是活佛，来来来，磕头磕头！’他不是这一带的人，是伊克昭盟的。原是王爷的奴隶，后来逃到陕北，住过延安的民族学院。那年，他从山西给俺们送一部电台来，一时还没有新的任务，就跟着部队打了一年多的仗。
“…… Courage is exercised. Let me tell you about a person. This person's name is Yang Yushan. It is also from our camp, not from our camp. This person sees Han people speaking Chinese and Mongolians speaking Mongolian. Sometimes he pretends that he doesn't understand Chinese in front of the Han people, and pretends not to understand Mongolian in front of the Mongols. He can also speak Tibetan and recite lama sutras. He really served as a lama in a temple for two years. When marching, one side of the horse jacket was a military uniform and the other side was a lama uniform. As soon as he was happy, he put it on: 'I am a living Buddha, come on, kowtow!' He is not from this area, he is from Yike Zhao Meng. Originally a slave of the prince, he later fled to northern Shaanxi and lived in the Nationalities College in Yan'an. That year, he sent us a radio station from Shanxi, and there was no new task for a while, so he fought with the army for more than a year.“忽然，他不见了。有一回部队行军，在一个山沟里休息，看见他，他成了个货郎。我问他这货郎干得咋样，他说：‘嗐！你别小看了这货郎担。人家挑起来，一汪水似的。到了我这儿，前仰后合，不成个样子。还有这玩意——’他指指手里的泼郎鼓，‘日他个娘，总摇不响！我走到旷野荒郊，没人的地方，就使劲地练！’——‘买卖好吗？’——‘别提了！我上回把价钱卖低了，一下子全卖完了，害得我还得上丰镇去办货。我这货郎，希望最好别有人买我的货。’……
"Suddenly, he was gone. Once the troops were marching, resting in a ravine, and when they saw him, he became a cargo man. I asked him how this cargo man was doing, and he said: 'Hey! Don't underestimate this cargo man's burden. People pick it up, like a pool of water. When I came to me, it was back and forth, and it didn't look like it. And this thing-' He pointed to the drum in his hand, 'He's a mother, he can't shake it! I went to the wilderness, where there was no one, and I practiced hard! '——'Is it good to trade?' '——'Don't mention it!' I sold it low last time, and it was all sold out all at once, so I had to go to Fengzhen to do goods. I, a salesman, hope that no one will buy my goods. ’……“他后来在卓资山开过粮店，做过裁缝，打过铁，还在警察局长家里住过。对门就是伪军的营部，他就这样大摇大摆，进进出出。
He later opened a grain store in Zhuozi Mountain, worked as a tailor, forged iron, and lived in the police chief's house. Opposite the door was the battalion headquarters of the puppet army, and he swaggered in and out like this.“我最后一次跟杨玉山打交道，是带一个班护送他过四子王旗。他这次的任务，一个字也不漏。我只知道他要通过北草原，过国境线去。护送到预定地点，下马抽了两根烟。‘行了！’他跟我们每人握了握手。那天好月亮，照得见人脸。他就这样一个人，带了一个指北针，骑着马，往北去了。那天我觉得草原真大。
"The last time I dealt with Yang Yushan was to take a squad to escort him across the Four Sons King Banner. He didn't miss a word about his mission this time. I only knew that he was going through the northern grassland and crossing the border. Escorted to the predetermined location, dismounted and smoked two cigarettes. 'Okay! He shook hands with each of us. The moon was good that day, and I could see people's faces. He was just like that, with a compass, rode his horse and went north. I thought the grassland was so big that day.“解放后我遇到他，谈起那天的事，他才说，是去送一封重要的信。以前去过两起人，都没有走到。他也没想到还能回来。白天不能走。‘哎呀，那叫一个心焦呀，太阳简直不动！’他说他骑了一辈子马，没有那么累过。因为上了马就老得骑着，只有看见一块石头，才能下来站一会。不能留下脚印。草原上留下马蹄印，是不算什么的；留下人的脚印，敌人很容易发现。也没个地图，不知道国境在哪里。后来判断快到了，是根据牲口粪判断的。草原上只有狼粪、狐狸粪、兔子粪。后来发现牛粪、羊粪，好了，快到了！
"After liberation, I met him and talked about what happened that day, and he said that he was going to deliver an important letter. I have been to two cases before, but neither of them has arrived. He didn't expect to come back. You can't leave during the day. 'Oh, that's called a heartache, the sun doesn't move!' He said he had ridden a horse all his life and was not so tired. Because he was old when he got on the horse, he could only come down and stand for a while when he saw a stone. You can't leave footprints. Leaving horseshoe prints on the grassland is nothing; leaving human footprints is easy for the enemy to find. There is no map, and I don't know where the border is. Later, it was judged that it was about to arrive, based on animal dung. There are only wolf dung, fox dung, and rabbit dung on the grassland. Later, I found cow dung and sheep dung, okay, it's almost here!“这位副旗长——解放后他当过几个旗的副旗长，要算是个见过世面的人了。可是就是这位老兄，头一回在延安看电影，又是人又是马，还打炮，把他吓得个不行，还跑到银幕后面去看。晚上想了一晚上，‘这是咋回事呢？——’一晚上都没有睡着。
"This deputy flag chief, who served as the deputy flag chief of several flags after liberation, can be regarded as a person who has seen the world. But it was this old man, the first time he watched a movie in Yan'an, he was both a man and a horse, and he also fired cannons, which scared him so much that he ran behind the screen to watch. I thought about it all night, 'What's going on?' ——'I didn't sleep all night.“这个杨玉山算是个神出鬼没，胆大包天的角色。就是他，他自己说，头一次参加战斗，浑身发抖，怎么也上不去马，尿不停地流出来，洋相大了！所以说，胆子这东西是锻炼出来的。——哎呀，我这是说到哪里去了，真是离题太远了！”
"This Yang Yushan is an elusive and bold character. It was him, he himself said, the first time he participated in the battle, he was trembling, he couldn't get on the horse, and his urine kept flowing out, and he looked big! So, courage is exercised. ——Oh, where am I going, it's really too far from the topic! ”“不离题！不离题！”
“这些同志，多好的同志啊！……”
“你们那时经常遇到危险？”
"Don't digress! Don't digress! ” "These comrades, what good comrades! ……” "You were often in danger at that time?"“危险，那还不危险！俺们经常和敌人只隔三五里。有时他们行军过去，俺们又来，他们留下的马粪还冒热气。……你就说黄营长，他要死，也不知道死了多少次了。有一次，就在我这间屋子里，——这间屋子翻盖过了，地方还是这地方，天刚刚亮，鬼子捂上来了。黄营长还在炕上。他的马又不在。我一脚踢开后窗户，叫他骑上我的马快走。他跳上马，一只脚穿鞋，一只脚只穿了袜子。那次是真险！黄营长后来对我说，那次不是我，他就完了。唉，说这干什么。你替我死，我替你死，都一样。俺们那会有一句话形容同志之间的关系，就叫做‘替生替死’。
"Danger, that's not dangerous! We are often only three or five miles away from the enemy. Sometimes they march past and we come again, and the horse manure they leave behind is still steaming. …… You just say Battalion Commander Huang, he is going to die, and I don't know how many times he has died. Once, in my room,—— this room was overturned, and the place was still this place. Battalion Commander Huang was still on the kang. His horse was not there. I kicked open the back window and told him to get on my horse and go. He jumped on his horse, wearing shoes on one foot and socks on the other. That time was really dangerous! Battalion Commander Huang later told me that if it weren't for me, he would be done. Alas, what are you talking about? You die for me, I die for you, it's the same. We have a sentence to describe the relationship between comrades, which is called 'life for death'.“骑兵之间的感情，是很深的。战友牺牲了，他留下的马，谁也不忍骑，每天还是照样喂、饮、蹓、刷。你看看一队骑兵，都有几匹马备着空鞍在队里走。
"The feelings between the cavalrymen are very deep. The comrade-in-arms sacrificed, and no one could bear to ride the horses he left behind, and they still fed, drank, trampled, and brushed them every day. Look at a team of cavalrymen, there are several horses walking in the team with empty saddles.“那会儿牺牲比请个假还要简单。杨玉山说，他是随时作好牺牲的准备的。两条：一是不当俘虏；一是一枪完事，不要挂彩，——就像王振东那样死法。那会儿挂彩可麻烦了，主要是拖累同志。我有一次胳臂上打了个对穿，是萨克亚给我治好了的。”
"At that time, sacrifice was simpler than taking a leave. Yang Yushan said that he was ready to sacrifice at any time. Two things: one is to be a prisoner; one is to finish the matter with one shot, don't hang the lottery,—— just like Wang Zhendong died. At that time, it was troublesome to hang the lottery, mainly to drag down the comrades. I once had a piercing on my arm, and it was Sacya who cured me. ”“萨克亚还会治伤？”
"Sarkya will still heal the injury?"“他不知道从哪里学来的，用两块光洋堵住伤口，拿布一扎，——就这么，好了！后来我问过大夫，大夫说：‘没听说过！这种治法，任何医书里也没有记载过！’你爱记载不记载吧，它就是好了嘛！”
"He didn't know where he learned it, so he blocked the wound with two pieces of light, took a cloth,—— and that's it, okay! Later, I asked the doctor, and the doctor said: 'I've never heard of it! This kind of treatment has never been recorded in any medical book!' 'You like to record it or not, it's good!' ”“你们的生活一定很艰苦？”
"Your life must be hard?"“三九年不错。四〇年是黄金时代，要什么有什么。四一年以后就惨啰。日本人搞他娘的铁壁合围，敌情很紧张。有时饭刚做得，敌人来了，盛了一碗，骑在马上吃，碗边嗑得上下牙齿直响。有一阵老吃黑豆。马料、人的粮食一块发下来。‘人吃黑豆爬场[4]，马吃黑豆跳墙。’吃得人一点劲都没有，黑豆犹自可。有一阵发的是霉过的包米子，煮不熟。老是吃生子粥，吃得人人的胃像个酸罐子，很多人得了胃病。黄营长说：‘杀一匹马吧！’骑兵不能杀马，就把马推了崖。没有盐，就淡吃。没想到，所有人的胃病都好了！我又问过大夫，他说：‘没听说过！你们净干些科学上讲不通的事。光洋治红伤，淡吃马肉治疗酸性胃病！’没听说过，没听说过的事多着呢！你听说过一根棉线能当帽子戴的吗？”
"Thirty-nine years are good. Forty years is the golden age, what you want. After forty-one years, it was miserable. The Japanese were fucking ironclad encirclement, and the enemy situation was very tense. Sometimes as soon as the rice was cooked, the enemy came, served a bowl, rode on a horse to eat, and ate it on the edge of the bowl. There was a burst of eating black beans. Horse feed and human grain are sent down together. 'People eat black beans to climb the field id_0000, and horses eat black beans and jump over the wall. 'People don't have any energy to eat, but black beans are still acceptable. There was a burst of moldy rice , which was not cooked. I always eat raw  porridge, and everyone's stomach is like a sour jar, and many people have stomach problems. Battalion Commander Huang said: 'Kill a horse!' The cavalryman couldn't kill the horse, so he pushed the horse off the cliff. If there is no salt, eat lightly. Unexpectedly, everyone's stomach problems are cured! I asked the doctor again, and he said: 'I haven't heard of it! You just do things that don't make sense scientifically. Guangyang treats red injuries and eats horse meat to treat acidic stomach disease! 'I haven't heard of it, there are many things I haven't heard of! Have you ever heard that a cotton thread can be worn as a hat? ”“一根棉线当帽子戴？”
"A cotton thread to wear as a hat?"“俺们的服装，原来还不错，是缴获的日本太阳布。后来只能就地解决。转山子有个供给部，给俺们做服装。莜麦秸烧灰染布面，羊毛絮里。袖子和前后身是分开两个地方做的。有一年，伪军把袖子全抢走了，俺们一冬天就穿着没有袖子的棉衣。帽子是羊绒擀的。初戴上，很像个样子，还是三块瓦。羊绒这玩意，不经搓揉，戴不几天，就不成个形了。萨克亚还把帽子搞丢了。灰腾梁这地方，没有帽子咋行呀？他可真有办法，搞了一根棉线，在脑袋上系了一圈，把耳朵贴着后脑勺系紧。就这样过了好几天。萨克亚说，他不是第一次这样干。不这样系上，耳朵就掉了。
"Our costumes turned out to be good, they were captured Japanese sun cloth. Later, it could only be solved on the spot. There is a supply department in Zhuanshanzi to make clothes for us. Wheat straw is burned ash to dye the cloth surface, in the wool wool. The sleeves and the front and back are made in two separate places. One year, the puppet army snatched all the sleeves, and we wore cotton clothes without sleeves all winter. The hat is rolled out of cashmere. When I first put it on, it looked very similar, but it was still three tiles. Cashmere, without rubbing, will not be shaped after a few days of wearing. Saqya also lost his hat. In this place of Huitengliang, how can you do without a hat? He really had a way, got a cotton thread, tied a circle around his head, and tied his ears close to the back of his head. Several days passed like this. Saqya said that this was not the first time he had done this. If you don't tie it like this, your ears will fall out.“灰腾梁，灰腾梁，你可真是个灰腾儿的梁呀！这个灰地方，五六月就能下一场白毛糊糊。我们有时在山沟里宿营，烧火做饭，完了就把热灰摊开，大家挤在一起睡。睡到半夜，冷得不行，就起来再烧。第二天起来，可就都成了‘灰人’[5]了！有时连火也不能烧，就只好抱着枪露宿。哈拉子流到枪上，结成一根冰练子。一醒来，得慢慢摇脑袋。摇快了，下嘴唇就没了，——至少扽下一块肉来。
"Gray beam, gray beam, you are really a gray beam! In this gray place, you can have a white hair in May and June. We sometimes camp in the ravine, light a fire to cook, and when we are done, we spread out the hot ashes and everyone huddles together to sleep. I slept until midnight, and it was so cold that I got up and burned again. When I got up the next day, I became a 'gray man'[5]! Sometimes you can't even burn the fire, so you have to sleep in the open air with a gun. Harazi flows onto the gun and forms an ice train. When you wake up, you have to shake your head slowly. If you shake it too fast, your lower lip will be gone,—— at least pick out a piece of meat.“可我们那时整天都是嘻嘻哈哈，快快活活的。从灰腾梁上一个马冲锋下去，冲到敌人阵子，抡开马刀，把敌人连胳臂带胸脯削下来，那叫一个痛快！打开一个地方，把大桶大桶的油，成袋成袋的面，分给群众。妇女、小孩站在路边给俺们一鼓掌，就觉得什么也值了。能活多久，没想过。黄营长常说：‘打不死就革敏（命）；打死了就不革敏（命）’。
"But we were laughing and laughing all day long. A horse charged down from the gray beam, rushed to the enemy's formation, opened the saber, and cut off the enemy's arms and chests, which was called a pleasure! Open a place and distribute large barrels of oil, bags into bags of noodles, to the masses. Women and children stood on the side of the road and applauded us, and they felt that everything was worth it. I never thought about how long I could live. Battalion Commander Huang often said: 'If you can't kill you, you will be sensitive (life); if you can't kill you, you won't be sensitive (life)'.“一九四三年，真是困难到了茶壶盖上了。以后就好转了。部队里流传一句话：‘今年打败希特勒，明年打败小日本。’我们有时也在一起谈论，仗打完了，俺们的日子会是个啥样。当时还总结了三条，以为大概是：上下班，拿现钱，娶老婆。不过，都说，这样的日子俺们是过不上了，俺们就为了二茬人吧。”
"In 1943, it was really difficult to put on the lid of the teapot. It got better after that. There is a saying in the army: 'Defeat Hitler this year, defeat Little Japan next year.' We sometimes talk together about what our days will be like when the war is over. At that time, I also summed up three points, thinking that it was roughly: commuting to and from work, getting cash, and marrying a wife. However, it is said that we can't live such a day, so let's just do it for the sake of the second stubble. ”雷声隆隆，大雨要下来了。司机又在外面按喇叭。他已经按了几次，催我们快走。我们只得告辞了。杨如意说：“本该给你们弄点山韭菜包饺子吃，让你们尝尝我这司务长的手艺，今天是不行了。”我跟他要两个蔓菁。他说：“行，送你一缸也行！”我说：“一缸我可搬不动。我只想带两个回北京，让人们见识见识这种红皮的蔓菁。”
The thunder rumbled, and the heavy rain was about to fall. The driver honked his horn outside again. He had already honked several times to urge us to leave. We had to take our leave. Yang Ruyi said: "I should have gotten you some mountain leeks to make dumplings to eat, so that you could taste my craftsmanship as a secretary, but today it won't work." I asked him for two turnips. He said, "Okay, I can give you a jar!" I said, "I can't move a jar." I just want to bring two back to Beijing so that people can see this red-skinned turnip. ”杨如意原来在灰腾梁一个金矿上负责。文化大革命曾被打断两根肋骨，现在还穿着钢马甲。
这两个蔓菁我带回了呼和浩特，装在一个塑料口袋里。没想到，过两天，都发黏了。
Yang Ruyi was originally in charge of a gold mine in Huitengliang. During the Cultural Revolution, two ribs were broken, and he still wears a steel vest. I brought these two turnips back to Hohhot and put them in a plastic bag. Unexpectedly, after two days, they were all sticky.回呼市，见了老曹，我问他：“杨如意院里装了那么一个铁风车干什么？”——“嗐！这人！那会斗得他不行，气得他整宵整宵睡不着觉。弄了那么个哗啦哗啦响的东西，就岔乎开了，不再想那些沤心的事了。你知道这哗啦哗啦响的是什么声音么？这是暴风一样的马蹄的声音，丁丁当当的马刀声音，千军万马喊杀的声音。这人！”
When I called back to the city and saw Lao Cao, I asked him: "Why is there such an iron windmill installed in Yang Ruyi's courtyard?" ——"Hey! This person! That would make him so angry that he couldn't sleep all night. After making such a loud noise, it opened up, and I no longer thought about those heart-wrenching things. Do you know what the sound of this clattering sound is? This is the sound of horses' hooves like a storm, the sound of sabers dangding, and the sound of thousands of troops shouting to kill. This person! ”“他有什么问题？”
“屁的个问题！——跟老黄的关系。”
“黄司令员是什么问题？”
"What's wrong with him?" "A fart problem! ——Relationship with Lao Huang. ” "What is the problem with Commander Huang?"“什么问题？——反党，反社会主义，反毛泽东思想！真是见他妈的鬼了！他十四岁就当了红军！他到内蒙三十五年了。从离开家乡，一直没有回去过。你听听他那一口不三不四的江西内蒙话！上次你跟他谈永新，他说‘内蒙好’，你觉得文不对题，你不懂。你不懂他和内蒙人民有多深的血肉关系。他从血里火里救出过多少群众，群众又从冰里雪里给了他多少支援啊！
"What's the problem? - Anti-party, anti-socialist, anti-Mao Zedong Thought! What a fucking ghost! He became a Red Army at the age of fourteen! He has been in Inner Mongolia for thirty-five years. Since leaving his hometown, he has never gone back. Listen to his indisputable Jiangxi Inner Mongolian dialect! Last time you talked to him about Yongxin, he said 'Inner Mongolia is good', you think the text is wrong, you don't understand. You don't understand how deep his flesh-and-blood relationship is with the people of Inner Mongolia. How many people he has rescued from the fire and blood, and how much support the masses have given him from the ice and snow!“这些整人的人，你们不了解，你们问问群众嘛！有两个造反派到金盆公社去调查老黄的材料，找到一个八十岁的老牧民。这个老牧民没说一句话。他捧出了一个镜框，里面是一张毛主席的像，毛主席的像下面压着一张他从报上剪下来的老黄的照片。他们到红台去调查，一个老太太带着一伙妇女拿苕帚把他们赶回来了。老黄还在关着的时候，他的老伴死了，只有一个女儿。他们要把她送到一个很远的地方去接受贫下中农再教育。从固阳来了十多个农民，找到有关部门，问：‘俺们是不是贫下中农？俺们能不能教育她？你把她交给俺们！’
"You don't understand these whole people, ask the masses! Two rebels went to Jinpen Commune to investigate Lao Huang's materials and found an eighty-year-old herdsman. The old herdsman didn't say a word. He held out a frame with a portrait of Chairman Mao, and under Chairman Mao's portrait was a photo of Lao Huang that he had cut out of the newspaper. They went to Hongtai to investigate, and an old lady drove them back with a broom. While Lao Huang was still in prison, his wife died and he had only one daughter. They were going to send her to a far away place to receive re-education from the poor and lower middle peasants. More than a dozen peasants came from Guyang, found the relevant departments, and asked: 'Are we poor and middle peasants? Can we educate her? You give her to us!' ’“老黄的家是个贫下中农招待所。他当年打过仗的地方的群众什么事都找他。哪里想打一口井，要买一台拖拉机，想把电线延长到他们村；谁家的房子漏了，想搞一点砖瓦；谁想到呼市就医，要找一个信得过的医生动手术；他们的子女升学就业，婚丧嫁娶，他都管。他每月工资不少，生活很简单，但是没有一个存款。
"Lao Huang's home is a poor and middle-class peasant guest house. The people in the places where he fought back then came to him for everything. Where do you want to dig a well, buy a tractor, and want to extend the wire to their village; whose house is leaking and wants to make some bricks; who wants to seek medical treatment in Hushi and find a trustworthy doctor to perform surgery; he takes care of their children's education, employment, marriage, funeral, and marriage. He has a lot of monthly salary, and his life is very simple, but he has no savings.“这些情况，谁都知道。整他的那些人也都知道。他们不是不知道啊。可是他们就是要整你，非把你整倒不可！这是什么道理呢？这次运动为什么要这样搞法呢？我真是不懂！不懂啊！……”
Everyone knows these situations. Those who him also know about it. It's not that they don't know. But they just want to punish you, and they have to punish you! What is the reasoning behind this? Why is this movement doing this? I really don't understand! I don't understand! ……”我访问这几位老同志，是在一九七四年。这篇文章是追记的，——当时也不可能写出这样的文章。因为我的记忆还停留在那个时期，所用的语气也是那时的语气。文中所有的“现在”本来都应改为“那时”才对。一时来不及逐一改正，就先这样吧。
I interviewed these old comrades in 1974. This article is postscripted,—— it was impossible to write such an article at that time. Because my memory is still stuck in that period, the tone used is also the tone of that time. All the "now" in the text should have been changed to "then". There is no time to correct them one by one, so let's do it for now.现在，——这个“现在”是真的现在，这些老同志的问题都得到令人满意的解决了，他们重返工作岗位，继续为“二茬人”在献出他们的余生。当黄司令员得到解决他的问题的通知那天，很多人到他家里去祝贺，可是找不到他。他又到坝口子那家老堡垒户家吃油糕去了。据老曹来信告诉我，那天他吃了十五个。
Now,—— this "now" is true Now, the problems of these old comrades have been satisfactorily solved, and they have returned to work and continue to dedicate the rest of their lives to the "second crop people". When Commander Huang was notified that his problem had been solved, many people went to his house to congratulate him, but they could not find him. He went to the old fortress household in Bakouzi to eat oil cakes again. According to Lao Cao's letter, he ate fifteen that day.但愿这些老同志平平安安的。但愿以后永远不搞那样的运动了。但愿不再有那么多人的肋骨、踝骨被打断。
I hope these old comrades are safe. I hope I will never engage in such sports again. I hope that so many people's ribs and ankles will not be broken.
[1] 本篇原载《人民文学》1979年第十一期；初收《汪曾祺短篇小说选》，北京出版社，1982年2月，文中注释略有改动。
[2] 阿格和灰背青是草原上的两种牧草，牲口爱吃。
[1] This article was originally published in the eleventh issue of "People's Literature" in 1979; "Selected Short Stories of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Publishing House, February 1982, with slight changes in the annotations. [2] Ager and gray-backed green are two types of grassland that livestock love to eat.[3] 驳花马是黑白相间的马。驳，读如豹。这种马古书上叫“忽雷驳”。有的旧小说和戏曲剧本里写成“呼雷豹”，是不对的。
[4] 爬场是倒楣要饭的意思。
[5] 灰人是无赖或胆大妄为的人。
[3] The flower horse is a black and white horse. Barge, read like a leopard. This kind of horse is called "Hulei Bo" in ancient books. Some old novels and opera scripts write "Hu Lei Leopard", which is not right. [4] Climbing the field means to be unlucky and ask for food. [5] Gray people are scoundrels or daredevils.

1980年

1980年
塞下人物记[1]
一、陈银娃
农民大都能赶车，但不是所有的农民都能当一个出色的车倌。
In 1980 Character Records {{id_0000}} 1. Chen Yinwa Most farmers can drive a car, but not all farmers can be an excellent driver.星期天，有三辆马车要到片石山去拉石头。我那天没有什么事，就提出跟他们的车到片石山看看。我在这个地方住了一年多了，每天上午十一点半，下午五点半，都听见片石山放炮。风雨无阻，准时不误。一直想去看看。片石山就是采石场。不知道为什么本地人都叫它片石山。
On Sunday, three carriages were going to Pianshi Mountain to pull stones. I had nothing to do that day, so I proposed to go to Pianshi Mountain with their car. I have lived in this place for more than a year, and every day at half past eleven in the morning and half past five in the afternoon, I hear the cannons fired at Pian Shishan. Rain or shine, on time. I have always wanted to see it. Pian Shi Mountain is a quarry. I don't know why the locals call it Pian Shi Mountain.马车一进山，不由得人要挺挺胸脯，深吸一口气。这是个雄壮的地方。采石的山头已经劈去了半个，露出扇面一样的青灰色的石骨，间或有几条铁锈色蜿蜒的纹道。这石骨是第一次接触空气呀。人，是了不起的。一个老把式正在清除残石。放了炮，并不是所有的石头都崩落下来，有一些仍粘连在石壁上。老把式在腰里系了一根粗绳，绳头固定在山顶，他悬在半空，拿了一根钢钎，这里捅一下，那里戳一下，——轰隆！门板大的石块就从四五层楼那样的高处落到地面。
As soon as the carriage entered the mountain, people couldn't help but straighten their chests and take a deep breath. This is a magnificent place. The top of the quarry has been cut in half, revealing a fan-like bluish-gray stone bone, with a few rust-colored winding lines occasionally. This stone bone is the first time it has come into contact with air. People are amazing. An old man is clearing the remaining stones. After firing, not all the stones collapsed, some were still stuck to the stone walls. The old man tied a thick rope around his waist, the rope was fixed to the top of the mountain, he hung in mid-air, took a steel shovel, poked here, poked there,—— boom! The stone as large as the door panel fell from a height of four or five stories to the ground.这是个石头的世界。到处是石头。
It's a world of stones. Stones everywhere.好些人在干活，搬运石头。他们把石头按大小块分别堆放。这些石头各有不同用处。大的可制碾盘、磨扇，重量都在千斤以上。有两个已经斲好的石磨就在旁边搁着。中等的有四五百斤，可做阶石、刻墓碑。小块的二三十斤、四五十斤不等，砌墙，垒堤坝。搬运石头，没有工具。四五百斤，就是搁在后腰上背着，——有的垫一条麻袋。他们都是不出声地，慢慢地，一步一步地走着。不唱歌，也不喊号子。那么多的人在活动，可是山里静悄悄的。
Many people are working, carrying stones. They stack the stones in large and small pieces. These stones have different uses. Large mills and grinding fans weigh more than 1,000 pounds. There are two stone mills that have been cut next to them. The medium ones are four or five hundred pounds, which can be used as step stones and tombstones. Small pieces range from twenty or thirty pounds to forty or fifty pounds, building walls and embankments. There are no tools to carry stones. Four or five hundred pounds are placed on the back of the waist and some ,—— carry a sack. They all walk silently, slowly, step by step. They don't sing, they don't shout. So many people are moving, but the mountains are quiet.三辆大车装满了石头，——都是小块的。下山的路，车走得很快。三辆三套大车，前后相跟，九匹马，三十六只马蹄，郭答郭答响成一片，很威风，很气派。忽然，头一辆车“误”住了。快到平地时，有一个坑。前天下过雨，积水未干。不知道是谁，拿浮土把它垫了。上山是空车，不觉得。下山是重载，一下子崴在里面了。
The three big carts were full of stones,—— all of which were small pieces. On the way down the mountain, the car went very fast. Three sets of three large carts, front and back, nine horses, thirty-six horses' hooves, Guo Da Guo Da sounded in one piece, very majestic and magnificent. Suddenly, the first car "mistakenly". When I was about to reach the flat ground, there was a pit. It rained the day before yesterday, and the water was not dry. I don't know who it was, but I took the floating soil and cushioned it. It was an empty car going up the mountain, I didn't think so. Going down the mountain was a heavy load, and it was suddenly buried in it.车倌是个很精干，也很要强的小伙子。叭——叭！接连抽了几鞭子，——没上来。他跳下车，拿铁锨把胶皮轱辘前面的土铲去一些，上车又是几鞭子。“哦嗬！——咦哦嗬！”不顶！车倌的脸通红，“咳！我日你妈！”手里的鞭子抽得山响，辕马和拉套的马一齐努力，马蹄子乱响，噼哩叭啦！噼哩叭啦！还是不顶！越陷越深，车身歪得厉害，眼见得这辆车要“扣”。第二辆车上的是个老车倌，跳下来，到前面看了看，说：“卸吧！”
The driver is a very capable and strong young man. Boom-boom! He whipped a few whips in succession,—— but he didn't come up. He jumped out of the car, took a shovel to shovel off some of the soil in front of the rubber roller, and got into the car with a few more whips. "Oh ho! ——Hey oh ho! "No top! The coachman's face turned red, "Cough! My mother!" The whip in his hand was whipped with a mountain sound, and the yoke horse and the horse in the pull worked together, and the horse's hooves were chaotic and crackling! Crackle! Still not top! The deeper it sinks, the more crooked the body is, and I see that the car is going to be "buckled". The second car was an old driver, jumped down, looked at the front, and said, "Unload!" ”这一车石头，卸下来，再装上，得多少时候？正在这时，第三辆上的车倌高声喊道：“陈银娃来啦！”
我听人们说起过陈银娃，没见过。
How long does it take to unload and reload this cart of stones? At this moment, the driver on the third car shouted loudly: "Chen Yinwa is here! ” I've heard people talk about Chen Yinwa, but I've never seen it.陈银娃是个二十五六的小伙子，眉清目秀，穿了一副大红牡丹花的“腰子”，布衫搭在肩头。——这一带夏天一天温差很大，“早穿皮袄午穿纱”，男人们兴穿一种薄棉的紧身背心，叫做“腰子”。“腰子”的布料都很鲜艳。六七十岁的老汉也穿红的，年轻人就不用提了。像陈银娃穿的这件大红牡丹花的“腰子”，并非罕见。
Chen Yinwa is a young man of twenty-five or six, with clear eyebrows and beautiful eyebrows, wearing a pair of "waists" of big red peony flowers, and a cloth shirt is worn on his shoulders. ——The temperature difference in this area is very large in summer, "wearing a leather jacket in the morning and gauze in the afternoon", and men wear a thin cotton tight vest called "waist". The fabric of the "waist" is very bright. Old men in their sixties and seventies also wear red, so young people don't need to mention it. It is not uncommon to see the "waist" of the big red peony flower worn by Chen Yinwa.老车倌跟银娃说了几句话。银娃看了看车上的石头，说：“你们真敢装！这一车够四千八百斤！”又看了看三匹马，称赞道：“好牲口！”然后掏出烟袋，点了一锅烟，说：“牲口打毛了，它不知道往哪里使劲，让它缓一缓。”
The old coachman said a few words to Yinwa. Yinwa looked at the stones on the car and said, "You really dare to pretend! This cart is enough for 4,800 pounds!" He looked at the three horses again and praised: "Good animal!" Then he took out a cigarette pouch, lit a pot of cigarettes, and said, "The animal is hairy, it doesn't know where to work, let it slow down." ”三锅烟抽罢，他接过鞭子，腾地跳上车辕，甩了一个响鞭，“叭——！”三匹牲口的耳朵都竖得直直的。“喔嗬！”辕马的肌肉直颤。紧接着，他照着辕马的两肩之间狠抽了一鞭，辕马全身力量都集中在两只前腿上，往前猛力一蹬，挽套的马就势往前一冲，——车上来了。
After smoking three pots of cigarettes, he took the whip, jumped on the yoke, and threw a whip, "Boom——! "The ears of the three animals are all straight." Oh! The yoke horse's muscles trembled. Immediately afterwards, he whipped the yoke between the shoulders of the yoke horse, and the yoke horse's whole body was concentrated on the two front legs, and with a sharp push forward, the harness horse rushed forward ,—— the cart.他跳下车，把鞭子还给车倌。
三个车倌同声向他道谢，“嗳！谢啥咧！”他已经走进了高粱地。只见他的黑黑的头发和大红牡丹花的“腰子”在油绿油绿的高粱丛中一闪一闪，走远了。
He jumped out of the car and returned the whip to the driver. The three drivers thanked him in unison, "Hey! Thank you!" He had already walked into the sorghum field. I saw his black hair and the "waist" of the big red peony flower flashing in the green sorghum bushes and walking away.老车倌告诉我，陈银娃赶车是家传，他父亲就是一个有名的车倌。有人曾经跟他打赌：那人戴了一顶毡帽，银娃的父亲一鞭子抽过去，毡帽劈成了两半，那人的头皮却纹丝未动。
也有人说，没有那么回事。
The old driver told me that Chen Yinwa's drive was a family heirloom, and his father was a famous driver. Someone once bet with him: the man was wearing a felt hat, and Yinwa's father whipped it, and the felt hat was split in half, but the man's scalp did not move. Some people say that this is not the case.二、王大力
2. Wang Dali小车站有个搬运队，有二十几个人。他们搬运的东西主要是片石山下来的石头。车站两边的月台上经常堆满了石料。他们每天要把四五百斤一块的石头，一块一块地背上火车去。他们也是那样不声不响地工作着，迈着稳稳的步子，一步一步走上月台和车厢之间的跳板。
There is a porting team at the small station, with more than 20 people. The things they carry are mainly stones from the stone mountain. The platforms on both sides of the station are often piled up with stones. They have to carry four or five hundred pounds of stones on the train one by one every day. They also worked silently, taking steady steps, step by step on the springboard between the platform and the carriage.他们的宿舍就在离车站不远的路边。夏天中午路过时，可以看到他们半躺在铺上休息，有的在抽烟。他们似乎在休息时也是不声不响的。
Their dormitory is on the side of the road not far from the station. When passing by at noon in the summer, they can be seen half-lying on the bunk resting, some smoking. They also seem to be silent when resting.有时有一个女人上他们宿舍来。她带着一个包袱，打开来，把拆洗缝补好的衣服分送给几个人；又收走一些换下来的衣服。这个女人也不说话，也是那么不声不响的。搬运工人对她好像很尊重。她来了，躺着的就都坐起来。这女人有五十上下年纪。
Sometimes a woman came to their dormitory. She took a baggage, opened it, and distributed the clothes that had been disassembled, washed, and mended to several people; and took away some of the clothes that had been changed. The woman did not speak, and she was so quiet. The porters seemed to respect her. When she came, everyone who was lying down sat up. The woman was about fifty years old.有人告诉我，这是王大力的媳妇。
王大力也是个搬运工，前五年死了。
大家都叫他王大力，没有多少人知道他的真名字。
Someone told me that this is Wang Dali's daughter-in-law. Wang Dali was also a porter and died five years ago. Everyone calls him Wang Dali, and not many people know his real name.离车站二里有一个扬旗。扬旗对面有一座孤山头，人们就叫它孤山。——这一带的山都是当地人依山的形貌取的名字，如孤山、红山、马脊梁山。孤山不算很高，不过爬到山顶，周围几十里都看得清清楚楚。我曾经上去过。空着手也不能一口气走到山顶，当中总得歇一会。有人跟王大力打赌，问他能不能扛三麻袋绿豆一口气上山。粮食里最重的是绿豆。一麻袋绿豆二百七十斤。三麻袋，八百多斤。王大力一口气扛上去了，跟没事似的。
There is a flag raising two miles from the station. There is a solitary mountain opposite the flag, and people call it Lonely Mountain. ——The mountains in this area are named by the locals based on the shape of the mountains, such as Gushan, Hongshan, and Majiliang Mountain. The solitary mountain is not very high, but when you climb to the top, you can see it clearly for dozens of miles. I have been up once. You can't walk to the top of the mountain empty-handed, and you have to rest for a while. Someone made a bet with Wang Dali and asked him if he could carry three sacks of mung beans up the mountain in one go. The heaviest food is mung beans. A sack of mung beans weighs 270 pounds. Three sacks, more than 800 pounds. Wang Dali carried it up in one go, as if nothing had happened.他吃两个人的饭，干三个人的活。
He eats for two people and does the work of three.有一次，火车过了扬旗，已经拉了汽笛，王大力发现，轨道上有一堆杉篙，——不知道这是谁干的事。他二话没说，跳下月台，一手抓起一根，乒乒乓乓往月台上扔。最后一根杉篙扔上去，火车到了。他爬上月台，脱了力，瘫下来，死了。
Once, when the train passed the flag and had already sounded the whistle, Wang Dali found that there were a bunch of fir poles on the track,—— he didn't know who did it. Without saying a word, he jumped off the platform, grabbed one in one hand, and threw it on the platform. The last fir pole was thrown up, and the train arrived. He climbed onto the platform, lost his strength, collapsed, and died.火车一阵风似的开过去了，谁也不知道车站上发生过什么事。
他留下一个媳妇，一个儿子。现在，他原先的同伴共同养活着他的家属。他们按月凑齐了钱，给他的老伴送去。她就给这些搬运工缝缝补补，洗洗涮涮。
The train drove by like a gust of wind, and no one knew what had happened at the station. He left behind a daughter-in-law and a son. Now, his former companions support his family together. They collected the money every month and sent it to his wife. She sewed and mended the porters and washed them.孤山下有两间矮矮的房子，碱土抹墙，青瓦盖顶，房顶上爬着瓜藤。有人指给我看：“那就是王大力的家。”
人们每年都要念叨：“王大力死了三年了”，“王大力死了四年了”，“王大力死了五年了”……
There are two low houses at the foot of the lonely mountain, with alkaline soil walls, green tiles covering the roof, and melon vines climbing on the roofs. Someone pointed out to me: "That's Wang Dali's home." ” Every year, people have to chant: "Wang Dali has been dead for three years", "Wang Dali has been dead for four years", "Wang Dali has been dead for five years"......三、说话押韵的人
3. People who speak rhymes我要到宁远铁厂的仓库去办一点事，找一个捡粪的老人问路。他告诉我：起这里一直往东，穿过一片大叶桑树。多会看见地皮通红，不远就是铁厂仓库。我道了谢，往前走。忽然发现：嗯？这人说话是押韵的？
I was going to the warehouse of Ningyuan Iron Works to do some errands and find an old man picking up dung and ask for directions. He told me: From here to the east, through a large-leaved mulberry tree. You will see the ground red, and not far away is the iron factory warehouse. I thanked him and walked forward. Suddenly I realized: Huh? Does this person rhyme?这人有六十开外年纪，还一点不显衰老。他是一个退休的工人，现在的任务是看守着一堆焦炭。这堆焦炭是大炼钢铁的时候存下来的。不老少，像一座小山。不知道为什么，一直不处理，也不运走，一直就在一片空地上放着。从夏天到冬天，一直放着。
This man is sixty years old, and he doesn't look old at all. He is a retired worker, and his current task is to guard a pile of coke. This pile of coke was saved when steel was smelted. Not old or young, like a hill. I don't know why, it has not been disposed of, nor has it been transported, and it has been left in an open space. From summer to winter, it has been there.他就在路边一间泥墙瓦顶的房子里住着，一个人。这间房子原是大炼钢铁时的指挥所，现在还可以看到贴在墙上的褪了色的标语。
He lived alone in a mud-walled and tiled house on the side of the road. This house was originally a command post when steel was smelted, and now you can still see the faded slogans pasted on the walls.他是个不安于闲坐的人，不常在家。但是你可以走进去，一切自便。门锁着，熟人都知道钥匙藏在什么地方。口渴了，喝水。他随时都温着一大锅开水。天气冷，可以烧一把豆秸火烤烤。甚至还可以掏出几个山药放在火里烤熟了吃。山药就在麻袋里放着，放在一个显眼的地方，敞着口。
He is a restless person who does not sit idly and is not often at home. But you can go in and do everything you want. The door is locked, and acquaintances know where the key is hidden. Thirsty, drink water. He always keeps a large pot of boiling water warm. When it's cold, you can burn a handful of bean straw and roast it. You can even take out a few yams and roast them in the fire. The yam is placed in a sack, in a conspicuous place, with its mouth open.他每天出去巡视几遍，看看那一堆焦炭。其余时间，多半是去捡粪。
He went out to inspect several times a day to see the pile of coke. The rest of the time, he mostly went to pick up dung.不远的田地上矗立着一排一排土高炉，整整齐齐，四四方方。再过三五年，没有见过大炼钢铁的盛景的年轻人将会不知道这些黄土筑成的方形建筑物是干什么用的。也许会以为这是古代一场什么战争留下的遗物。——这地方是李克用的故乡，说不定有一个考古学家会考证出这跟沙陀国有关。当年，这个地方曾经是炉火通红，照亮了半个天，——吓得几十里之内的狼都把家搬进深山里去了。现在呢，这些土高炉已经无声无息。里面毫无例外，全都结了一层厚厚的焦子。焦子结实得很。刨不动，凿不开。除非用炸药才能把它炸碎。可是谁也没想起用炸药来炸它。因此，在这片本来是好地的田野上就一直保留着一群古迹。这些古迹有一个很大的优点，既避风，走进去外面又看不见，于是就变成过往行人的一个合乎理想的厕所。这个退休工人每天就到高炉里去捡粪，在那座焦炭山旁边堆成了另一座山。这座粪山高到一定程度，他就通知公社套车来把它拉走。
Not far away stood rows of earthen blast furnaces, neat and square. In three or five years, young people who have not seen the grand scene of steelmaking will not know what these square buildings made of loess are for. You may think that this is a relic left over from some ancient war. ——This place is Li Keyong's hometown, and maybe an archaeologist will verify that this is related to the Shatuo Kingdom. Back then, this place used to be red, illuminating half the sky,—— frightening wolves within dozens of miles to move their homes into the mountains. Now, these earthen blast furnaces are silent. Without exception, they all have a thick layer of char. The coke is very strong. It can't be planed, it can't be chiseled. It can only be blown up with explosives. But no one thought of using explosives to blow it up. Therefore, a group of monuments have always been preserved on this field that was originally a good land. These monuments have a great advantage, they are sheltered from the wind and cannot be seen when you walk in, so they become an ideal toilet for passers-by. The retired worker went to the blast furnace every day to pick up dung, and piled up another mountain next to the coke mountain. When the dung mountain was high to a certain extent, he notified the commune to pull it away.我和别人到他的小屋里去过几次，喝过水，烤过火，都没有见到他。人们告诉我，他只有三顿饭时在家。
I went to his hut a few times with others, drank water, roasted the fire, but never saw him. I was told that he was only home for three meals.冬天，我又和别人路过他的家，他在。那是前半晌，他已经在做饭了。我说：“这么早就做饭？”别人说：“他到冬天都是吃两顿。”他把小米饭焖上，说：
三顿饭一顿吃两碗；
两顿饭一顿吃三碗。
In winter, I passed by his house again with others, and he was there. It was half an hour ago, and he was already cooking. I said, "Cooking so early?" Others said, "He eats two meals in winter." He stewed the small rice and said: eat two bowls of three meals at a time; Eat three bowls of two meals at a time.算来算去一边儿多，
就是少抓一遍儿锅。[2]
There are too many sides, It's just to grab the pot less. [2]人们告诉过我，这人说话从来就是这样，张口就押韵。我活到这么大，还没有遇见过一个说话全部押韵的人。莫里哀喜剧里的汝尔丹说了四十年散文，此人说了六十年韵文！
People have told me that this man has always spoken like this, rhyming when he opens his mouth. I have never met a person who rhymes with all his words in my life. Jourdan in Molière's comedy spoke prose for forty years, and this man spoke rhyme for sixty years!他的韵押得还很精巧。不是一韵到底，是转韵的。而且很复杂。除了两个“碗”字互押，“多”与“锅”押；“一边儿”、“一遍儿”也是相押的。节奏也很灵活，不是像快板或是戏曲，倒像是口语化的新诗。他说话还有个特点，很形象。结构方法也和一般人不一样。
His rhyme is still very exquisite. It is not a rhyme to the end, it is a rhyme. And it is very complicated. In addition to the two words "bowl", "more" and "pot" are rhymed together; "one side" and "once" are also rhymed together. The rhythm is also very flexible, not like allegro or opera, but like colloquial new poetry. He also has a characteristic of speaking, which is very vivid. The structure method is also different from ordinary people.这个人并不爱滑稽逗乐，平常连话也不多，就是说起话来就押韵，真怪！
四、乡下的阿基米德
This person doesn't like to be funny, and he usually doesn't even talk much, but he rhymes when he speaks, which is really strange! 4. Archimedes in the countryside阿基米德，古希腊学者。生于叙拉古。曾发现杠杆定律和阿基米德定律，确定许多物体的表面积和体积的计算方法，并设计了多种机械和建筑物。罗马进犯叙拉古时，他应用机械技术来帮助防御，城破时被害。
Archimedes, ancient Greek scholar. Born in Syracuse. He discovered the law of leverage and Archimedes' law, determined the calculation method of the surface area and volume of many objects, and designed a variety of machinery and buildings. When Rome invaded Syracuse, he applied mechanical technology to help defend, and was killed when the city was breached.——《辞海》
——"Cihai"此人可以说是其貌不扬。长脸，很长。鼻子下面的人中也特别的长。他有两个特点。一个是脾气好。多会也没见他和人红过脸嚷嚷过。不论是开会，是私底下，他总是慢条斯理的说话，脸上带着笑，眯缝着眼，有一点结巴，不厉害。他不是随风倒的人，凡事自有主见。但是表达的方式很含蓄，很简短。对某人的行为不以为然，只是说：“看看！——这人！”对某种意见不同意，只是说：“嗯！——说的！”因此得了个外号：老蔫。另一个特点是：内秀。
This person can be said to be unattractive. Long face, very long. The person under the nose is also particularly long. He has two characteristics. One is good-tempered. I haven't seen him blushing and shouting with people for a long time. Whether in meetings or in private, he always speaks slowly, with a smile on his face, squinting his eyes, and a little stuttering. He is not a person who falls with the wind, he has his own opinions on everything. But the way he expressed it was very subtle and brief. Disagree with someone's behavior, just say: "Look! ——This person!" Disagree with a certain opinion, just say: "Hmm! ——That's right!" Hence the nickname: Old Wilt. Another feature is: inner show.他是这个农业科学研究所的老工人了。主要工作是管理马铃薯试验田。但这只是相对固定。哪里需要人，他就被调去。大田、果园、菜园都干过。粉房的师傅请假回家探亲，他去漏几天粉。酒厂的师傅病了，他去烧两锅。过年杀猪，那是他的活。骡马得了小病，不用送兽医院，他会扎针。他是个好木匠，能开料，能算工。什么地方开农具革新展览会，所里总是派他去。回来后，不用图纸，两三天内，他就能照样鼓捣出几件。
He is an old worker at this Institute of Agricultural Sciences. His main job is to manage the potato experimental field. But this is only relatively fixed. Wherever people are needed, he is transferred. He has worked in fields, orchards, and vegetable gardens. The master of the powder room took leave to visit relatives, and he went to leak powder for a few days. The master of the winery was sick, so he went to burn two pots. Killing pigs for the New Year is his job. Mules and horses have minor illnesses, and they don't need to be sent to the veterinary hospital, they will prick needles. He is a good carpenter, can cut materials, and can calculate work. Wherever there is an agricultural tool innovation exhibition, the institute always sends him there. After coming back, he can still make a few pieces within two or three days without drawings.他有一对好耳朵，一个好记性。不论什么乐器，凡是他见过的，他都能摆弄，甭管是横的，竖的，吹的，拉的，弹的。他不识谱，一般的曲子，他听两遍，就能背下来。所里有个李技师，业余爱拉小提琴。这玩意工人们没有见过，给它起了个名儿，叫“歪脖拉”。他很爱这洋乐器，常常到李技师屋里去看他拉，听他拉。有一次李技师被所长请去研究问题。回来时听见有人在他屋下拉他常拉的练习曲。心想：这是谁呀？推门一看，是他！李技师当时目瞪口呆了半天。
He has a good ear and a good memory. No matter what instrument he has ever seen, he can fiddle with it, whether horizontal, vertical, blown, pulled, or played. He doesn't know music, and he can memorize ordinary songs by listening to them twice. There is a technician Li in the institute, who loves to play the violin in his spare time. The workers had never seen this thing, so they gave it a name, called "Crooked Neck La". He loved this foreign instrument very much, and often went to Technician Li's house to see him play and listen to him play. Once Technician Li was invited by the director to study the problem. When he came back, he heard someone playing the etude he often played under his house. I thought: Who is this? I pushed the door and saw that it was him! Technician Li was stunned for a long time.为了旱涝保收，所里决定冬天打井。没有人会。派他到公社打井队住了一个星期，回来，支起架子就开工了。两个冬天，打出了八口井。再打两口，就完成了计划。打井不能打打停停，因此得三班倒。为了提高效率，搞了竞赛，逐日公布各班进度。在手的这口井已经打穿了沙层，打到石层了，一两天就能出水了。井筒、油毡都已经准备好，净等着敲锣打鼓报喜了。打到石层，可就费劲了。一班出不了多少活。夜班的带班的是个干部。他搞了点物质刺激，说是拿下多少进度，他买五包牡丹烟请客。这一下，哥儿几个玩了命，而且违反了操作规程，该起锥时不起锥，该灌泥浆时不灌，一个劲地把井锥往下砸。——一下把个井锥夹住了，起不出来了。全班十二个棒小伙子鼓楸了多半夜，人人汗透了棉袄，这井锥像是生了根，动都不动，他娘的！
In order to protect the harvest from drought and flooding, the institute decided to drill wells in winter. No one will. He was sent to the commune well drilling team for a week, and when he came back, he set up a rack and started work. In two winters, eight wells were drilled. Two more wells were drilled, and the plan was completed. Drilling wells cannot be stopped, so they have to work in three shifts. In order to improve efficiency, a competition was held to announce the progress of each shift day by day. The well in hand has penetrated the sand layer and hit the stone layer, and the water can be released in a day or two. The wellbore and linoleum are ready, just waiting for the gongs and drums to announce the good news. When it reaches the stone layer, it will be difficult. There is not much work in one shift. The night shift leader is a cadre. He did some material stimulation, saying how much progress he had won, and he bought five packs of peony cigarettes to entertain guests. This time, the brothers played with their lives, and violated the operating procedures, not cone when it should be raised, not poured when it should be filled with mud, and smashed the well cone down. ——I clamped a well cone and couldn't get it out. The twelve stick boys in the class played for more than half the night, everyone was sweating through their padded jackets, and the well cone seemed to have taken root, and it didn't move, damn it!天亮了，全所的干部、工人轮流来看过，出了很多主意，全都不解决问题，锥还是一动不动。大家都很丧气。得！费了半个月，四百四十个工，还扔了一个崭新的火箭锥，这口井报废了。
When dawn broke, the cadres and workers of the whole institute took turns to come to see it, and came up with many ideas, but none of them solved the problem, and the cone remained motionless. Everyone was very dejected. Get! It took half a month, 440 labor, and a brand new rocket cone was thrown, and the well was scrapped.老蔫来看了看，围着井转了几圈，坐下来愣了半天神。后晌，他找了几个工人，扛来三十来根杉篙，一大捆粗铁丝。先在井架四角立了四根柱子，然后把杉篙横一根竖一根用铁丝绑紧，一头绑在锥杆上，一头坠了一块千数来斤重的大石头。都弄完了，天已经擦黑了。他拍拍手，对几个伙计说：“走！吃饭！饿了！”工人们走来，看看这个奇形怪状的杉木架子，都纳闷：“这是闹啥咧？”我也来看了看，心里有点明白。凭我那点物理学常识，我知道这是一套相当复杂的杠杆。
Lao Wei came to see it, circled around the well a few times, sat down and was stunned for a long time. After a while, he found a few workers and carried about 30 fir poles and a large bundle of thick iron wire. First, four pillars were erected at the four corners of the derrick, and then the fir poles were tied horizontally and vertically, one was tied to the cone rod, and a large stone weighing thousands of pounds fell at the other. It's all done, and it's already dark. He clapped his hands and said to a few guys: "Let's go! Dine! I'm hungry!" The workers came over and looked at the bizarre fir shelf, and they all wondered: "What's going on?" I also came to see it, and I understood a little. With my little knowledge of physics, I know it's a pretty complex set of levers.天刚刚亮，一个工人起来解手，大声嚷嚷起来：“嗨！起来啦！井锥起来啦！”
老蔫来看看，没有说什么话。还跟平常一样，扛着铁锨下地，脸上笑眯眯的。
Just as dawn broke, a worker got up and shouted: "Hi! Get up! The well cone is up!" ” Lao Wei came to take a look and didn't say anything. As usual, he carried the shovel to the ground with a smile on his face.按说，他够当一个劳模。几年来的评选会上，工人们都提了他。但是领导不同意。原因很简单：他不是党员。
五、俩老头
It is said that he is enough to be a model worker. At the selection meeting for several years, the workers mentioned him. But the leader disagreed. The reason is simple: he is not a party member. 5. Two old men郭老头、耿老头，俩老头。这两个老头，从前面看，像五十岁；从后面看像三十岁，他们今年都已经做过七十整寿了。身体真好！郭老头能吃饭。斤半烙饼卷成一卷，攥在手里，蘸一点汁，几口就下去了。他这辈子没有牙疼过。耿老头能喝酒。他拿了茶碗上供销社去打酒，一手接酒，一手交钱。售货员找了钱给他，他亮着个空碗：“酒呢？”售货员有点恍惚：记得是打给他了呀？——售货员低头数钱的功夫，二两酒已经进了他的肚了。俩老头非常“要好”，——这地方的方言，“要好”是爱干净爱整齐的意思。不论什么时候，上唇的胡子平斩乌黑，下巴的胡子刮得溜光。浑身的衣服，袖子是袖子，领子是领子，一个纽扣也不短。俩老头还都爱穿撒鞋，斜十字实纳帮，皮梁、薄底，是托人在北京步云斋买的。这种鞋过去是专门卖给抬轿的轿夫穿的，后来拉包月车的车夫也爱穿，抱脚，精神！俩老头焦不离孟，孟不离焦。年下办年货，一起去；四月十八奶奶庙庙会，一起去；开会，一起到场；送人情出份子，一起进门。生产队有事找他们，队长总是说：“去！找找俩老头！”“俩老头”不是“两个老头”的意思，是说他们特别亲密的关系。类似“哥俩”、“姐俩”。按说应该叫他们“老头俩”，不过没有这么说话的，所以人们只能叫他们“俩老头”。
Old man Guo, old man Geng, two old men. These two old men, looking like fifty years old from the front; looking like thirty years old from the back, they have all celebrated their seventies this year. I'm in good health! Old man Guo can eat. Roll the pancakes into a roll, hold them in your hand, dip them in a little juice, and go down in a few bites. He has never had a toothache in his life. Old man Geng can drink. He took the tea bowl to the supply and marketing cooperative to make wine, received the wine with one hand and paid the money with the other. The salesman found money for him, and he lit an empty bowl: "Where's the wine?" The salesman was a little in a trance: Do you remember calling him? ——The salesman lowered his head and counted the money, and two taels of wine had already entered his stomach. The two old men are very "good",—— the dialect of this place, "good" means to love cleanliness and tidyness. No matter when, the beard on the upper lip is flat and black, and the beard on the chin is shaved off. The clothes all over the body, the sleeves are sleeves, the collar is the collar, and a button is not short. The two old men also love to wear scattered shoes, diagonal crosses, leather beams, and thin soles, which were bought by people in Beijing Buyunzhai. In the past, this kind of shoes were specially sold to the bearers of the sedan chairs, and later the coachmen who pulled the lunar cart also loved to wear them, hugging their feet, and being energetic! The two old men are not separated from Meng, and Meng is not out of focus. New Year's goods at the end of the year, go together; April 18th, go to the temple fair of grandma; hold a meeting, and be there together; Send favors and enter the door together. When the production team came to them for something, the captain always said: "Go! Find two old men!" "Two old men" does not mean "two old men", it means that they have a very close relationship. Similar to "brothers" and "sisters". It is said that they should be called "old men", but they don't speak like that, so people can only call them "two old men".两个老头现在都是生产队的技术顾问。郭老头精通瓜菜，也懂大田；耿老头精通大田，也懂瓜菜。
两个人的身世可不一样。
The two old men are now technical consultants to the production team. Old man Guo is proficient in melons and vegetables, and also understands the fields; Old man Geng is proficient in the fields and understands melons and vegetables. The life experience of the two people is different.我第一次遇见郭老头是在一个卖老豆腐的小饭铺里。他坐在我对面，我对他看了又看，总觉得他脸上有点什么地方和别人不大一样。他看着我，知道我心里琢磨什么，搭了碴：“耳朵”。可不是！他的耳朵没有耳轮。“你拿牙咬咬！”那可不行，哪能咬人的耳朵呢！“那你用手撕撕！”我也没有撕，倒真用手指头捏了捏：他的耳朵是棒硬的！——“这是摔跤的褡膊磨出来的。”
The first time I met Old Man Guo was in a small restaurant selling old tofu. He was sitting across from me, and I looked at him again and again, always feeling that there was something on his face that was not very different from others. He looked at me, knew what I was thinking in my heart, and put on ballast: "ears". Isn't! His ears have no earrings. "You bite with your teeth!" That's not good, how can you bite people's ears! "Then you tear it with your hands!" I didn't tear it either, but really pinched it with my fingers: his ears are hard! ——"This is the wrestling arm. ”他告诉我，他不是此地人，是北京人，——他说的是一口地道北京话。安定门外住家，就在桥根底下。种一片小菜园子，自种自卖。从小爱摔跤。那会摔跤，新手初下场子，对方上来就用褡膊蹭你的耳朵。那会的褡膊都是粗帆布纳的，两下，血就下来了。他的耳朵就这么磨出来了。
He told me that he was not from here, he was from Beijing,—— and he spoke authentic Beijing. The house outside Anding Gate is under the bridge root. Plant a small vegetable garden and grow and sell yourself. I have loved wrestling since I was a child. When you are a novice and you just get off the field, the other party will rub your ears with his arms. The arms of that meeting were all made of thick canvas, and after two strokes, the blood came down. His ears were ground out like this.怎么会到这里来了呢？那年大旱，河净井干。种菜没水哪行呀？逃荒吧。逃到张家口，人地两生。怎么吃饭呢？就撂了地摔跤。不是表演，是陪人摔。那会有那么一帮阔公子，学了一招两式，喜欢下场显示显示。他陪着摔，摔完了人家给钱。这在阔公子们叫做“耗财买脸”。他说：“不能摔着他，还不能让他摔着了。让他摔着了，倒了牌子；摔着他，那哪成呀！——这跤摔的！”混了两年，觉得陪着人家“耗财买脸”，太没意思了！遇到一个熟人，在这里落了户，他也就搬了过来。一晃，四十年了。
How did you come here? That year there was a severe drought, and the river was clean and the well was dry. How can you grow vegetables without water? Flee the famine. Escape to Zhangjiakou, two lives. How to eat? Just wrestled on the ground. It's not a performance, it's a wrestling with others. There will be a group of young men who have learned a trick and two styles, and they like to show their ends. He wrestled with him, and after the fall, people gave him money. This is called "spending money to buy face" among the young masters. He said: "You can't throw him, and you can't let him fall. Let him fall, pour the sign; if you fall him, how can it be! ——This fall! After two years of mixing, I feel that it is too boring to accompany others to "spend money to buy face"! I met an acquaintance and settled here, and he moved over. In a flash, it's been forty years.我有一天傍晚从城里回来，那天是八月中秋，远远听见大队的大谷仓里有个小姑娘唱《五哥放羊》。真是好嗓子，又甜，又脆，又亮。哪来这么个小姑娘呀？去看看！走进门，是耿老头！
I came back from the city one evening, it was the Mid-Autumn Festival in August, and I heard a little girl singing "Fifth Brother Herding Sheep" in the big barn of the brigade from a distance. What a good voice, sweet, crisp, and bright. Where did such a little girl come from? Go and take a look! When I walked in the door, it was Old Man Geng!耿老头唱过二人台。艺名骆驼旦。“骆驼”和“旦”怎么能联在一起呢？再说，他哪儿也不像骆驼呀？既不驼背，也不是庞然大物，——他是个瘦瘦小小的身材，本地人所谓“三料个子”，据说年轻的扮相俊着呢。也许他小名叫个骆驼。这一点我到现在还没弄清楚。他这个“旦”是半业余的。逢年过节，成个小班子，七八个人，赶集趁庙，火红几天。平常还是在家种地。
Old man Geng sang a two-person stage. Stage name Camel Dan. How can "camel" and "dan" be connected? Besides, he doesn't look like a camel anywhere? Neither hunchbacked nor behemoth,—— he is a thin and small figure, the locals call him a "three-material man", and it is said that he is young and handsome. Maybe his nickname is a camel. I haven't figured this out yet. His "Dan" is semi-amateur. During the New Year's holidays, a small team, seven or eight people, rushed to the market to take advantage of the temple, and it was popular for a few days. I usually farm at home.俩老头都是在江湖上闯过的人，可是他们在作务庄稼上，都是一把好手。
他们现在不常下地干活了，每天只是到处转转，看看，问问，说说。
The two old men are both people who have broken through the rivers and lakes, but they are both good hands in working and farming. They don't often go to work in the fields now, they just go around every day, look, ask, and talk.俩老头转到一块瓜地。西瓜才窜出苗来，长了几片蓝绿蓝绿的叶子，水灵灵的，好看得很。俩老头围着瓜地转了一圈，咬了一会耳朵，发了话：“把这片瓜都刨了吧，种别的庄稼，种小叶芥菜吧，还能落点猪食。”——“咋啦？”——“你们把瓜籽安得太浅了，这一片瓜秧全都吊死了！”瓜籽安浅了，扎下根，够不着下面的底肥，长不大，这叫“吊死”。“看你俩说的！青苗绿叶的，就能吊死啦！你们的眼睛能看穿了沙层土板啦！真是神了！不信！”——“不信？不信，看吧！”过了两天，蓝绿蓝绿的瓜叶果然全都黄了，蔫了。刨开来看看，果然，吊死了！
The two old men turned to a melon field. The watermelon just came out of the seedlings, and a few blue, green and blue-green leaves grew, which were watery and beautiful. The two old men circled around the melon field, bit their ears for a while, and said: "Plane all this melon, plant other crops, plant small-leaved mustard, and you can also put some pig food." ——"What's wrong?" "——"You put the melon seeds too shallowly, and all the melon seedlings are hanged!" "The melon seeds are shallow, take root, can't reach the bottom fertilizer below, and don't grow big, this is called "hanging". "Look at what you two said! If the seedlings are green and leafy, you can hang yourself! Your eyes can see through the sand and soil! It's really a god! Unbelief! ——"Don't believe it? If you don't believe it, look!" After two days, the blue, green and blue-green melon leaves were all yellow and wilted. Dig it open and take a look, and sure enough, it was hanged!也许因为俩老头闯过江湖，他们不怕官。
Maybe because the two old men have broken through the rivers and lakes, they are not afraid of officials.“大跃进”那年月，市里下来一个书记，到大队蹲点。在预报产量的会上，他要求一再加码。有人害怕，有人拍马，产量高得不像个话。耿老头说：“这是种庄稼？是起哄哪？你们当官的，起了哄，一走！俺们秋后咋办呢？拿什么往上交，拿什么吃呀？”书记有点恼火，说：“你这是秋后算账派。”郭老头说：“秋后算账派有什么不好呀？就是要秋后算账嘛！秋后算账比春前瞎闹强！”胳膊拧不过大腿，产量还是按照书记要求的天文数字报上去了。措施呢？主要是密植。小麦试验田一亩下了二百斤麦种！高粱、玉米、谷子，一律缩小株行距，下种超过往年三倍。郭老头、耿老头坚决不同意，书记下不来台，又不能拍桌子，气得他说：“啊呀！你就做一次社会主义的冒失鬼行不行？”
In the year of the "Great Leap Forward", a secretary came down from the city and went to the brigade to squat. At the meeting to forecast the yield, he repeatedly asked for an increase. Some people are afraid, some people pat the horse, and the yield is too high to say. Old man Geng said: "This is growing crops? Where is it coaxing? You officials, coax, go! What should we do after autumn? What do you take to hand in and what to eat?" The secretary was a little annoyed and said, "You are a post-autumn settler." Old man Guo said: "What's wrong with settling accounts after autumn? It's just to settle accounts after autumn! Settle accounts after autumn is better than fooling around before spring!" "I couldn't twist my thigh, and the yield was still reported according to the astronomical figures required by the secretary. What about the measures? Mainly dense planting. Two hundred pounds of wheat seeds were planted per acre in the wheat test field! Sorghum, corn, and millet were all reduced to reduce the row spacing and plant more than three times as much as in previous years. Old man Guo and old man Geng resolutely disagreed, and the secretary couldn't come down to the stage, nor could he slap the table, so angry that he said: "Ah! Can you be a socialist daredevil once?" ”到了锄地时，俩老头拿着小锄，下地干起活来。他们把谷子地过密的小苗全给锄掉了。锄一棵，骂一句：“去你娘的！”——锄一棵，骂一句：“去你娘的！”队长知道了，赶紧来拦住：“啊呀！你们这是干啥呢！这是反领导呀！”俩老头一起说：“怕啥！他打不了我反革命！”
When they arrived at the hoe, the two old men took the small hoe and went to the field to work. They hoed all the seedlings that were too dense in the millet field. Hoe one and scold: "Fuck you!" - Hoe one and scold: "Fuck your mother!" The captain found out and quickly came to stop him: "Ah! What are you doing! This is an anti-leader!" The two old men said together: "What are you afraid of! He can't beat me against the revolution!" ”秋后，大田全部减产，有的地根本没有秀穗，只能割了喂老牛。只有俩老头锄过的地获得了大丰收。
After autumn, the production of all the fields was reduced, and some of the land had no spikes at all, so they could only be cut and fed to the old cows. Only the land hoeed by the two old men had a bumper harvest.在市里召开的丰产经验交流会上，俩老头当了代表，发了言，题目是：《要当老实庄稼人，不当社会主义的冒失鬼》。主持会议的就是来蹲过点的那位书记。书记致过开幕词，郭老头头一个发言，头一句话就是：“×书记叫俺们做社会主义冒失鬼……”
At the abundant experience exchange meeting held in the city, the two old men became representatives and made speeches, entitled: "To be an honest farmer, not a socialist daredevil". The person who presided over the meeting was the secretary who came to squat a point. The secretary gave an opening speech, and the first sentence of the old man Guo was: "Secretary × told us to be socialist daredevils......俩老头后来一见这位书记，当面就叫他“社会主义的冒失鬼”。书记一点办法没有。看来他这顶“冒失鬼”的帽子得戴几年。
一九八〇年一月五日写成
五月廿九日修改
When the two old men later saw the secretary, they called him a "socialist daredevil" in person. The secretary had no way at all. It seems that his "daredevil" hat will have to be worn for several years. Written on January 5, 1980 Revised on May 29
[1] 本篇原载《北京文艺》1980年第九期；初收《汪曾祺短篇小说选》，北京出版社，1982年2月。
[2] 此地方言，把锅烧热了做饭，叫做“抓”。

黄油烙饼

黄油烙饼[1]
[1] This article was originally published in Beijing Literature and Art, No. 9, 1980; First received "Selected Short Stories of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Publishing House, February 1982. [2] In this dialect, heating a pot and cooking is called "catching". Butter pancakes[1]萧胜跟着爸爸到口外去。
Xiao Sheng followed his father out of the mouth.萧胜满七岁，进八岁了。他这些年一直跟着奶奶过。他爸的工作一直不固定。一会儿修水库啦，一会儿大炼钢铁啦。他妈也是调来调去。奶奶一个人在家乡，说是冷清得很。他三岁那年，就被送回老家来了。他在家乡吃了好些萝卜白菜，小米面饼子，玉米面饼子，长高了。
Xiao Sheng is seven years old and has entered eight. He has been following his grandmother all these years. His father's job has been irregular. Build a reservoir for a while, and make steel a lot later. His mother also moved around. Grandma was alone in her hometown, and she said it was very deserted. When he was three years old, he was sent back to his hometown. He ate a lot of radishes and cabbage, millet flour cakes, cornmeal cakes in his hometown, and grew taller.奶奶不怎么管他。奶奶有事。她老是找出一些零碎料子给他接衣裳，接褂子，接裤子，接棉袄，接棉裤。他的衣服都是接成一道一道的，一道青，一道蓝。倒是挺干净的。奶奶还给他做鞋。自己打袼褙，剪样子，纳底子，自己绱。奶奶老是说：“你的脚上有牙，有嘴？”“你的脚是铁打的！”再就是给他做吃的。小米面饼子，玉米面饼子，萝卜白菜——炒鸡蛋，熬小鱼。他整天在外面玩。奶奶把饭做得了，就在门口嚷：“胜儿！回来吃饭咧！——”
Grandma doesn't care much about him. Grandma has something to do. She always finds some bits and pieces to pick up clothes, coats, pants, jackets, and pants for him. His clothes are all made one by one, one green and one blue. It's quite clean. Grandma also made shoes for him. Make your own coat, cut your look, put on the bottom, and tie it yourself. Grandma always said: "You have teeth on your feet and a mouth?" "Your feet are made of iron!" Then I made food for him. Millet flour cakes, cornmeal cakes, radish cabbage - scrambled eggs, boiled fish. He played outside all day. Grandma finished the meal and shouted at the door: "Sheng'er! Come back for dinner!" ——”后来办了食堂。奶奶把家里的两口锅交上去，从食堂里打饭回来吃。真不赖！白面馒头，大烙饼，卤虾酱炒豆腐，闷茄子，猪头肉！食堂的大师傅穿着白衣服，戴着白帽子，在蒸笼的白蒙蒙的热气中晃来晃去，拿铲子敲着锅边，还大声嚷叫。人也胖了，猪也肥了。真不赖！
Later, a canteen was set up. Grandma handed over the two pots at home and came back from the canteen to eat. It's not bad! White noodle steamed buns, big pancakes, fried tofu with marinated shrimp paste, stuffed eggplant, pig's head meat! The master of the canteen was wearing white clothes and a white hat, dangling in the white heat of the steamer, tapping the edge of the pot with a shovel, and shouting loudly. People are fat, and pigs are fat. It's not bad!后来就不行了。还是小米面饼子，玉米面饼子。
Then it won't work. Or millet flour cakes, cornmeal cakes.后来小米面饼子里有糠，玉米面饼子里有玉米核磨出的碴子，拉嗓子。人也瘦了，猪也瘦了。往年，撵个猪可费劲哪。今年，一伸手就把猪后腿攥住了。挺大一个克郎，一挤它，咕咚就倒了。掺假的饼子不好吃，可是萧胜还是吃得挺香。他饿。
Later, there was bran in the millet flour cake, and there was ballast from corn kernels in the cornmeal cake, which pulled the throat. People have lost weight, and so have pigs. In previous years, it was difficult to catch a pig. This year, he stretched out his hand and grabbed the pig's hind legs. It's quite a klang, and as soon as you squeeze it, it collapses. The adulterated cakes are not delicious, but Xiao Sheng still eats them very deliciously. He was hungry.奶奶吃得不香。她从食堂打回饭来，掰半块饼子，嚼半天。其余的，都归了萧胜。
Grandma didn't eat well. She came back from the cafeteria, broke half a cake, and chewed it for a long time. The rest belonged to Xiao Sheng.奶奶的身体原来就不好。她有个气喘的病。每年冬天都犯。白天还好，晚上难熬。萧胜躺在炕上，听奶奶喝喽喝喽地喘。睡醒了，还听她喝喽喝喽。他想，奶奶喝喽了一夜。可是奶奶还是喝喽着起来了，喝喽着给他到食堂去打早饭，打掺了假的小米饼子，玉米饼子。
Grandma's health turned out to be bad. She has asthma. Every winter. It's okay during the day, but hard at night. Xiao Sheng lay on the kang and listened to his grandmother drinking and panting. When I woke up, I heard her drinking. He thought, grandma drank all night. But grandma still drank and got up, and went to the cafeteria to make breakfast for him, mixed with fake millet cakes and corn cakes.爸爸去年冬天回来看过奶奶。他每年回来，都是冬天。爸爸带回来半麻袋土豆，一串口蘑，还有两瓶黄油。爸爸说，土豆是他分的；口蘑是他自己采，自己晾的；黄油是“走后门”搞来的。爸爸说，黄油是牛奶炼的，很“营养”，叫奶奶抹饼子吃。土豆，奶奶借锅来蒸了，煮了，放在灶火里烤了，给萧胜吃了。口蘑过年时打了一次卤。黄油，奶奶叫爸爸拿回去：“你们吃吧。这么贵重的东西！”爸爸一定要给奶奶留下。奶奶把黄油留下了，可是一直没有吃。奶奶把两瓶黄油放在躺柜上，时不时地拿抹布擦擦。黄油是个啥东西？牛奶炼的？隔着玻璃，看得见它的颜色是嫩黄嫩黄的。去年小三家生了小四，他看见小三他妈给小四用松花粉扑痱子。黄油的颜色就像松花粉。油汪汪的，很好看。奶奶说，这是能吃的。萧胜不想吃。他没有吃过，不馋。
Dad came back to see grandma last winter. He comes back every winter. Dad brought back half a sack of potatoes, a bunch of mushrooms, and two bottles of butter. Dad said that he shared the potatoes; he picked the mushrooms himself and dried them himself; the butter was obtained "through the back door". Dad said that butter is made from milk, which is very "nutritious", and asked grandma to spread cakes to eat. Potatoes, grandma borrowed a pot to steam, boiled, roasted in the stove, and ate them to Xiao Sheng. The mushrooms were marinated once during the Chinese New Year. Butter, grandma asked Dad to take it back: "You can eat it. Such a valuable thing!" "Dad must leave it for grandma. Grandma left the butter, but she never ate it. Grandma put two bottles of butter on the bed cabinet and wiped it with a rag from time to time. What is butter? Milk is refined? Through the glass, you can see that its color is tender yellow and yellow. Last year, the mistress's family gave birth to a mistress, and he saw the mistress the mistress using pine pollen to pinch prickly heat. The color of the butter is like pine pollen. It's oily and beautiful. Grandma said, it's edible. Xiao Sheng didn't want to eat it. He didn't eat it, he didn't eat it.奶奶的身体越来越不好。她从前从食堂打回饼子，能一气走到家。现在不行了，走到歪脖柳树那儿就得歇一会。奶奶跟上了年纪的爷爷、奶奶们说：“只怕是过得了冬，过不得春呀。”萧胜知道这不是好话。这是一句骂牲口的话。“嗳！看你这乏样儿！过得了冬过不得春！”果然，春天不好过。村里的老头老太太接二连三地死了。镇上有个木业生产合作社，原来打家具、修犁耙，都停了，改了打棺材。村外添了好些新坟，好些白幡。奶奶不行了，她浑身都肿。用手指按一按，老大一个坑，半天不起来。她求人写信叫儿子回来。
Grandma's health is getting worse and worse. She used to beat back cakes from the cafeteria and could walk home in one go. Now it's not possible, and I have to rest for a while when I walk to the crooked willow tree. Grandma kept up with the elderly grandfathers and grandmothers: "I'm afraid I can survive the winter and not the spring." Xiao Sheng knew that this was not a good thing. This is a scolding sentence. "Hey! Look at how boring you are! You can survive the winter and not the spring!" "Sure enough, spring is not easy. The old men and women in the village died one after another. There is a wood production cooperative in the town, which used to make furniture and repair plows, but they have stopped and changed to coffins. Many new graves and white flags have been added outside the village. Grandma was gone, she was swollen all over. Pressing it with my fingers, the boss was a pit and couldn't get up for a long time. She begged someone to write a letter to call her son back.爸爸赶回来，奶奶已经咽了气了。
爸爸求木业社把奶奶屋里的躺柜改成一口棺材，把奶奶埋了。晚上，坐在奶奶的炕上流了一夜眼泪。
Dad rushed back, and grandma was already out of breath. Dad begged the wood industry to change the cabinet in grandma's house into a coffin and bury grandma. In the evening, I sat on grandma's kang and shed tears all night.萧胜一生第一次经验什么是“死”。他知道“死”就是“没有”了。他没有奶奶了。他躺在枕头上，枕头上还有奶奶的头发的气味。他哭了。
Xiao Sheng experienced what "death" is for the first time in his life. He knew that "death" was "nothing". He had no grandma. He was lying on the pillow, and there was still the smell of grandma's hair on the pillow. He cried.奶奶给他做了两双鞋。做得了，说：“来试试！”——“等会儿！”吱溜，他跑了。萧胜醒来，光着脚把两双鞋都试了试。一双正合脚，一双大一些。他的赤脚接触了搪底布，感觉到奶奶纳的底线，他叫了一声“奶奶！”又哭了一气。
Grandma made him two pairs of shoes. Done, he said, "Come and try!" "Wait a moment!" "Squeak, he ran away. Xiao Sheng woke up and tried both pairs of shoes barefoot. One pair fits, the other is bigger. His bare feet touched the underlining, and when he felt his grandma's bottom line, he called out "Grandma!" He cried again.爸爸拜望了村里的长辈，把家里的东西收拾收拾，把一些能应用的锅碗瓢盆都装在一个大网篮里。把奶奶给萧胜做的两双鞋也装在网篮里。把两瓶动都没有动过的黄油也装在网篮里。锁了门，就带着萧胜上路了。
Dad visited the elders in the village, packed up the things at home, and put some pots and pans that could be used in a large net basket. The two pairs of shoes that grandma made for Xiao Sheng were also put in the net basket. The two bottles of butter that had not been moved were also put in the net basket. Locked the door and took Xiao Sheng on the road.萧胜跟爸爸不熟。他跟奶奶过惯了。他起先不说话。他想家，想奶奶，想那棵歪脖柳树，想小三家的一对大白鹅，想蜻蜓，想蝈蝈，想挂大扁飞起来格格地响，露出绿色硬翅膀底下的桃红色的翅膜……后来跟爸爸熟了。他是爸爸呀！他们坐了汽车，坐火车，后来又坐汽车。爸爸很好。爸爸老是引他说话，告诉他许多口外的事。他的话越来越多，问这问那。他对“口外”产生了很浓厚的兴趣。
Xiao Sheng is not familiar with his father. He is used to living with his grandmother. He didn't speak at first. He missed home, his grandmother, the crooked-necked willow tree, the pair of big white geese in the mistress's family, the dragonfly, the newtle, and the big flat flying up, revealing the peach wing membrane under the green hard wings...... Later, I became acquainted with my father. He is my father! They took the car, the train, and then the car. Dad is very good. Dad always led him to talk and told him many things outside his mouth. He talked more and more, asking this and that. He became very interested in "outside the mouth".他问爸爸啥叫“口外”。爸爸说“口外”就是张家口以外，又叫“坝上”。“为啥叫坝上？”他以为“坝”是一个水坝。爸爸说到了就知道了。
He asked his father what "outside the mouth" was. Dad said that "outside the mouth" means outside Zhangjiakou, also called "dam". "Why is it called on the dam?" He thought "dam" was a dam. Dad knew when he said it.敢情“坝”是一溜大山。山顶齐齐的，倒像个坝。可是真大！汽车一个劲地往上爬。汽车爬得很累，好像气都喘不过来，不停地哼哼。上了大山，嘿，一片大平地！真是平呀！又平又大。像是擀过的一样。怎么可以这样平呢！汽车一上坝，就撒开欢了。它不哼哼了，“刷——”一直往前开。一上了坝，气候忽然变了。坝下是夏天，一上坝就像秋天。忽然，就凉了。坝上坝下，刀切的一样。真平呀！远远有几个小山包，圆圆的。一棵树也没有。他的家乡有很多树。榆树，柳树，槐树。这是个什么地方！不长一棵树！就是一大片大平地，碧绿的，长满了草。有地。这地块真大。从这个小山包一匹布似的一直扯到了那个小山包。爸爸告诉他：有一个农民牵了一头母牛去犁地，犁了一趟，回来时候母牛带回来一个新下的小牛犊，已经三岁了！
Dare to love "dam" is a big mountain. The top of the mountain is all together, like a dam. But it's so big! The car kept climbing up. The car was so tired that it seemed to be out of breath and kept humming. Up the mountain, hey, a big flat land! It's so flat! It's flat and big. It's like it's rolled. How can it be so flat! As soon as the car got on the dam, it was happy. It stopped humming, and "brush-" kept moving forward. As soon as I got on the dam, the climate suddenly changed. It's summer under the dam, and it's like autumn when you go up to the dam. Suddenly, it's cold. On and off the dam, it's like a knife. It's so flat! There are a few small hills in the distance, round. There is not a single tree. There are many trees in his hometown. Elms, willows, locust trees. What is this place! Not a single tree! It's just a large flat land, turquoise and overgrown with grass. There is land. This plot is really big. From this hill bag to that hill bag like a piece of cloth. Dad told him: There was a farmer who took a cow to plow the field, plowed once, and when he came back, the cow brought back a new calf, which was three years old!汽车到了一个叫沽源的县城，这是他们的最后一站。一辆牛车来接他们。这车的样子真可笑，车轱辘是两个木头饼子，还不怎么圆，骨鲁鲁，骨鲁鲁，往前滚。他就仰面躺在牛车上，上面是一个很大的蓝天。牛车真慢，还没有他走得快。他有时下来掐两朵野花，走一截，又爬上车。
The car arrived at a county town called Guyuan, which was their last stop. An ox cart came to pick them up. The look of this cart is really ridiculous, the wheels are two wooden cakes, not very round, Gululu, Gululu, roll forward. He lay on his back on the ox cart, with a big blue sky above it. The ox cart is so slow, not as fast as he can. Sometimes he came down to pinch two wildflowers, walked a section, and climbed into the car again.这地方的庄稼跟口里也不一样。没有高粱，也没有老玉米，种莜麦，胡麻。莜麦干净得很，好像用水洗过，梳过。胡麻打着把小蓝伞，秀秀气气，不像是庄稼，倒像是种着看的花。
The crops in this place are also different from those in the mouth. There is no sorghum, no old corn, planting barley, sesame. The barley is very clean, as if it has been washed and combed with water. Sesame holds a small blue umbrella, showing off its delicate spirit, not like a crop, but like a flower planted to look at.喝，这一大片马兰！马兰他们家乡也有，可没有这里的高大。长齐大人的腰那么高，开着巴掌大的蓝蝴蝶一样的花。一眼望不到边。这一大片马兰！他这辈子也忘不了。他像是在一个梦里。
Drink, this large piece of Malan! Malan and their hometown also have it, but they are not as tall as here. It is as high as an adult's waist and blooms like a palm-sized blue butterfly. You can't see the edge at a glance. This large piece of Malan! He will never forget it in his life. He was like in a dream.牛车走着走着。爸爸说：到了！他坐起来一看，一大片马铃薯，都开着花，粉的、浅紫蓝的、白的，一眼望不到边，像是下了一场大雪。花雪随风摇摆着，他有点晕。不远有一排房子，土墙、玻璃窗。这就是爸爸工作的“马铃薯研究站”。土豆——山药蛋——马铃薯。马铃薯是学名，爸说的。
The ox cart walked along. Dad said: It's here! He sat up and saw a large patch of potatoes, all in bloom, pink, light purple blue, and white, out of sight, as if it was snowing heavily. The snow swayed in the wind, and he was a little dizzy. Not far away is a row of houses with earthen walls and glass windows. This is the "potato research station" where my father works. Potatoes - yam eggs - potatoes. Potatoes are the scientific name, Dad said.从房子里跑出来一个人。“妈妈——！”他一眼就认出来了！妈妈跑上来，把他一把抱了起来。
萧胜就要住在这里了，跟他的爸爸、妈妈住在一起了。
奶奶要是一起来，多好。
A man ran out of the house. "Mom——!" He recognized it at a glance! Mom ran up and picked him up. Xiao Sheng is about to live here, with his father and mother. It would be great if grandma came with me.萧胜的爸爸是学农业的，这几年老是干别的。奶奶问他：“为什么总是把你调来调去的？”爸说：“我好欺负。”马铃薯研究站别人都不愿来，嫌远。爸愿意。妈是学画画的，前几年老画两个娃娃拉不动的大萝卜啦，上面张个帆可以当作小船的豆荚啦。她也愿意跟爸爸一起来，画“马铃薯图谱”。
Xiao Sheng's father studied agriculture and has been doing other things in recent years. Grandma asked him: "Why do you always transfer you around?" Dad said, "I'm so bullied." "Others don't want to come to the potato research station, it's too far. Dad is willing. Mom learned to draw, and a few years ago, she used to draw two big radishes that the dolls couldn't pull, and a sail on them could be used as pods for small boats. She is also willing to come with her father and draw a "potato map".妈给他们端来饭。真正的玉米面饼子，两大碗粥。妈说这粥是草籽熬的。有点像小米，比小米小，绿盈盈的挺稠，挺香。还有一大盘鲫鱼，好大。爸说别处的鲫鱼很少有过一斤的，这儿“淖”里的鲫鱼有一斤二两的，鲫鱼吃草籽，长得肥。草籽熟了，风把草籽刮到淖里，鱼就吃草籽。萧胜吃得很饱。
Mom brought them rice. Real cornmeal cakes, two large bowls of porridge. Mom said that this porridge is made from grass seeds. It's a bit like millet, smaller than millet, green and thick, very fragrant. There is also a large plate of crucian carp, so big. Dad said that crucian carp elsewhere rarely has a pound, and the crucian carp in the "nao" here has one pound and two taels, and the crucian carp eats grass seeds and grows fat. When the grass seeds are ripe, the wind blows the grass seeds into the mud, and the fish eat the grass seeds. Xiao Sheng was very full.爸说把萧胜接来有三个原因。一是奶奶死了，老家没有人了。二是萧胜该上学了，暑假后就到不远的一个完小去报名。三是这里吃得好一些。口外地广人稀，总好办一些。这里的自留地一个人有五亩！随便刨一块地就能种点东西。爸爸和妈妈就在“研究站”旁边开了一块地，种了山药，南瓜。山药开花了，南瓜长了骨朵了。用不了多久，就能吃了。
Dad said there were three reasons for bringing Xiao Sheng here. First, grandma died and there was no one in his hometown. Second, Xiao Sheng should go to school, and after the summer vacation, he will go to a small school not far to sign up. Third, eat better here. The outside of the mouth is sparsely populated, so it's always easier to do. There are five acres of private land here! You can plant something by digging a piece of land. Dad and Mom opened a piece of land next to the "research station" and planted yams and pumpkins. The yam bloomed and the pumpkin grew bones. It won't take long to be able to eat it.马铃薯研究站很清静，一共没有几个人。就是爸爸、妈妈，还有几个工人。工人都有家。站里就是萧胜一家。这地方，真安静。成天听不到声音，除了风吹莜麦穗子，沙沙地像下小雨；有时有小燕吱喳地叫。
The potato research station is very quiet, there are few people in total. It's my father, my mother, and a few workers. The workers all have homes. The station is Xiao Sheng's family. This place is really quiet. I can't hear any sound all day long, except for the wind blowing the ears of wheat, which rustle like light rain; sometimes there are small swallows chirping.爸爸每天戴个草帽下地跟工人一起去干活，锄山药。有时查资料，看书。妈一早起来到地里掐一大把山药花，一大把叶子，回来插在瓶子里，聚精会神地对着它看，一笔一笔地画。画的花和真的花一样！萧胜每天跟妈一同下地去，回来鞋和裤脚沾得都是露水。奶奶做的两双新鞋还没有上脚，妈把鞋和两瓶黄油都锁在柜子里。
Dad wore a straw hat every day to work with the workers and hoe yams. Sometimes I check information and read books. Mom got up early in the morning and went to the field to pinch a large handful of yam flowers and a large handful of leaves, came back and inserted them into the bottle, looked at it attentively, and drew stroke by stroke. The flowers painted are the same as real flowers! Xiao Sheng went to the field with his mother every day, and when he came back, his shoes and trousers were stained with dew. The two new pairs of shoes made by grandma had not yet been put on their feet, and Mom locked the shoes and two bottles of butter in the cabinet.白天没有事，他就到处去玩，去瞎跑。这地方大得很，没遮没挡，跑多远，一回头还能看到研究站的那排房子，迷不了路。他到草地里去看牛、看马、看羊。
During the day, when he had nothing to do, he would go around playing and running around. This place is very big, uncovered, no matter how far you run, you can still see the row of houses at the research station when you turn around, and you can't get lost. He went to the grass to see the cows, horses, and sheep.他有时也去莳弄莳弄他家的南瓜、山药地。锄一锄，从机井里打半桶水浇浇。这不是为了玩。萧胜是等着要吃它们。他们家不起火，在大队食堂打饭，食堂里的饭越来越不好。草籽粥没有了，玉米面饼子也没有了。现在吃红高粱饼子，喝甜菜叶子做的汤。再下去大概还要坏。萧胜有点饿怕了。
He sometimes goes to the pumpkin and yam fields at his house. Hoe a hoe and pour half a bucket of water from the machine well to water. It's not for fun. Xiao Sheng was waiting to eat them. Their family was not on fire, and they were eating in the brigade canteen, and the food in the canteen was getting worse and worse. The grass seed porridge is gone, and the cornmeal cakes are gone. Now eat red sorghum cakes and drink soup made of beet leaves. If you go down, it will probably be bad. Xiao Sheng was a little hungry and scared.他学会了采蘑菇。起先是妈妈带着他采了两回，后来，他自己也会了。下了雨，太阳一晒，空气潮乎乎的，闷闷的，蘑菇就出来了。蘑菇这玩意很怪，都长在“蘑菇圈”里。你低下头，侧着眼睛一看，草地上远远的有一圈草，颜色特别深，黑绿黑绿的，隐隐约约看到几个白点，那就是蘑菇圈。的溜圆。蘑菇就长在这一圈深颜色的草里。圈里面没有，圈外面也没有。蘑菇圈是固定的。今年长，明年还长。哪里有蘑菇圈，老乡们都知道。
He learned to pick mushrooms. At first, his mother took him to pick twice, and later, he did it himself. When it rains, the sun shines, the air is humid and stuffy, and the mushrooms come out. Mushrooms are very strange, they all grow in "mushroom circles". You look down and look sideways, there is a circle of grass in the distance on the grass, the color is very dark, black, green, black and green, and you can vaguely see a few white spots, which is the mushroom circle. The circle. Mushrooms grow in this circle of dark grass. There is no inside the circle, and there is no outside the circle. The mushroom circle is fixed. This year is long, and next year it will be long. Where there is a mushroom circle, the fellow villagers know.有一个蘑菇圈发了疯。它不停地长蘑菇，呼呼地长，三天三夜一个劲地长，好像是有鬼，看着都怕人。附近七八家都来采，用线穿起来，挂在房檐底下。家家都挂了三四串，挺老长的三四串。老乡们说，这个圈明年就不会再长蘑菇了，它死了。萧胜也采了好些。他兴奋极了，心里直跳。“好家伙！好家伙！这么多！这么多！”他发了财了。
There was a mushroom circle that went crazy. It kept growing mushrooms, whirring and growing, growing continuously for three days and three nights, as if there were ghosts, and it looked scary. Seven or eight nearby families came to pick it, threaded it with thread, and hung it under the eaves. Every family hung three or four strings, three or four strings that were quite old. The villagers said that this circle will not grow mushrooms again next year, it is dead. Xiao Sheng also picked a lot. He was so excited that his heart was pounding. "Good guy! Boy! So much! So much! "He made a fortune.他为什么这样兴奋？蘑菇是可以吃的呀！
他一边用线穿蘑菇，一边流出了眼泪。他想起奶奶，他要给奶奶送两串蘑菇去。他现在知道，奶奶是饿死的。人不是一下饿死的，是慢慢地饿死的。
Why is he so excited? Mushrooms are edible! He shed tears as he threaded the mushrooms with threads. He thought of his grandmother, and he was going to send her two strings of mushrooms. He now knows that grandma starved to death. People don't starve to death all at once, they starve to death slowly.食堂的红高粱饼子越来越不好吃，因为掺了糠。甜菜叶子汤也越来越不好喝，因为一点油也不放了。他恨这种掺糠的红高粱饼子，恨这种不放油的甜菜叶子汤！
他还是到处去玩，去瞎跑。
The red sorghum cakes in the cafeteria are getting worse and worse because they are mixed with bran. The beet leaf soup is also getting worse and worse because there is no oil at all. He hates this kind of red sorghum cake mixed with chaff, and he hates this beet leaf soup without oil! He still goes around to play and run around.大队食堂外面忽然热闹起来。起先是拉了一牛车的羊砖来。他问爸爸这是什么，爸爸说：“羊砖。”——“羊砖是啥？”——“羊粪压紧了，切成一块一块。”——“干啥用？”——“烧。”——“这能烧吗？”——“好烧着呢！火顶旺。”后来盘了个大灶。后来杀了十来只羊。萧胜就站在旁边看杀羊。他还没有见过杀羊。嘿，一点血都流不到外面，完完整整就把一张羊皮剥下来了！
The outside of the brigade canteen suddenly became lively. At first, a sheep brick from an ox cart was pulled. He asked his father what it was, and his father said, "Sheep brick." "——"What is a sheep brick?" "——" Sheep manure was pressed tightly and cut into pieces. "——"What is it for? "——" Burning. "——"Can this be burned?" "——"It's so burning! The fire is booming." "Later, a big stove was set up. Later, more than ten sheep were killed. Xiao Sheng stood next to him and watched the sheep being killed. He has never seen a sheep killed. Hey, no blood flowed outside, and a sheepskin was completely peeled off!这是要干啥呢？
爸爸说，要开三级干部会。
“啥叫三级干部会？”
“等你长大了就知道了！”
三级干部会就是三级干部吃饭。
What is this for? Dad said that he would hold a three-level cadre meeting. "What is a three-level cadre meeting?" "You'll know when you grow up!" The third-level cadres will eat at the third-level cadres.大队原来有两个食堂，南食堂，北食堂，当中隔一个院子，院子里还搭了个小棚，下雨天也可以两个食堂来回串。原来“社员”们分在两个食堂吃饭。开三级干部会，就都挤到北食堂来。南食堂空出来给开会干部用。
The brigade originally had two canteens, the south canteen and the north canteen, separated by a yard, and a small shed was built in the yard, and the two canteens could also go back and forth on rainy days. It turned out that the "members" ate in two canteens. When the three-level cadre meeting was held, they all crowded into the north canteen. The south canteen was vacated for the cadres at the meeting.三级干部会开了三天，吃了三天饭。头一天中午，羊肉口蘑臊子蘸莜面。第二天炖肉大米饭。第三天，黄油烙饼。晚饭倒是马马虎虎的。
The third-level cadre meeting was held for three days and ate for three days. At noon on the first day, mutton mushrooms dipped in noodles. The second day stewed meat and rice. On the third day, butter pancakes. Dinner was so-so.“社员”和“干部”同时开饭。社员在北食堂，干部在南食堂。北食堂还是红高粱饼子，甜菜叶子汤。北食堂的人闻到南食堂里飘过来的香味，就说：“羊肉口蘑臊子蘸莜面，好香好香！”“炖肉大米饭，好香好香！”“黄油烙饼，好香好香！”
"Members" and "cadres" eat at the same time. Members are in the north canteen, and cadres are in the south canteen. The north canteen is still red sorghum cakes and beet leaf soup. The people in the north canteen smelled the fragrance floating from the south canteen and said, "Mutton mushroom soup dipped in noodles, so fragrant!" "Stewed meat and rice, so fragrant!" "Butter pancakes, so fragrant!"萧胜每天去打饭，也闻到南食堂的香味。羊肉、米饭，他倒不稀罕；他见过，也吃过。黄油烙饼他连闻都没闻过。是香，闻着这种香味，真想吃一口。
回家，吃着红高粱饼子，他问爸爸：“他们为什么吃黄油烙饼？”
Xiao Sheng goes to eat every day, and he also smells the fragrance of the South Canteen. Lamb and rice are not uncommon to him; he has seen and eaten them. He has never even smelled butter pancakes. It's fragrant, smelling this fragrance, I really want to take a bite. When he got home and ate red sorghum pancakes, he asked his father, "Why do they eat butter pancakes?" ”“他们开会。”
“开会干嘛吃黄油烙饼？”
“他们是干部。”
“干部为啥吃黄油烙饼？”
“哎呀！你问得太多了！吃你的红高粱饼子吧！”
"They have a meeting." "Why are you eating butter pancakes in a meeting?" "They are cadres." "Why do cadres eat butter pancakes?" "Oops! You're asking too much! Eat your red sorghum cakes! ”正在咽着红饼子的萧胜的妈忽然站起来，把缸里的一点白面倒出来，又从柜子里取出一瓶奶奶没有动过的黄油，启开瓶盖，挖了一大块，抓了一把白糖，兑点起子，擀了两张黄油发面饼。抓了一把莜麦秸塞进灶火，烙熟了。黄油烙饼发出香味，和南食堂里的一样。妈把黄油烙饼放在萧胜面前，说：
Xiao Sheng's mother, who was swallowing red cakes, suddenly stood up, poured out a little white noodles from the jar, took out a bottle of butter that grandma hadn't touched from the cabinet, opened the bottle cap, dug a large piece, grabbed a handful of sugar, mixed it with a screwdriver, and rolled out two butter breads. Grabbed a handful of barley straw and stuffed it into the stove fire, and it was cooked. The butter pancakes emit a fragrance, just like the ones in the South Canteen. Mom put the butter pancakes in front of Xiao Sheng and said:“吃吧，儿子，别问了。”
萧胜吃了两口，真好吃。他忽然咧开嘴痛哭起来，高叫了一声：“奶奶！”
妈妈的眼睛里都是泪。
爸爸说：“别哭了，吃吧。”
"Eat, son, don't ask." Xiao Sheng took two bites, it was delicious. He suddenly grinned and cried bitterly, shouting, "Grandma! ” Mom's eyes were full of tears. Dad said, "Don't cry, eat." ”萧胜一边流着一串一串的眼泪，一边吃黄油烙饼。他的眼泪流进了嘴里。黄油烙饼是甜的，眼泪是咸的。
Xiao Sheng ate butter pancakes while shedding strings of tears. His tears flowed into his mouth. Butter pancakes are sweet, and tears are salty.
[1] 本篇原载《新观察》1980年第二期；初收《汪曾祺短篇小说选》，北京出版社，1982年2月，略有改动。

异秉（二）

异秉（二）[1]
王二是这条街的人看着他发达起来的。
[1] This article was originally published in the second issue of "New Observation" in 1980; "Selected Short Stories of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Publishing House, February 1982, with slight changes. Heterogeneity (2){{id_0000}} Wang Er is the people on this street who watched him develop.不知从什么时候起，他就在保全堂药店廊檐下摆一个熏烧摊子。“熏烧”就是卤味。他下午来，上午在家里。
I don't know when he set up a smoked stall under the eaves of the pharmacy of the Baoban Hall. "Fumigation" is braised meat. He came in the afternoon and was at home in the morning.他家在后街濒河的高坡上，四面不挨人家。房子很旧了，碎砖墙，草顶泥地，倒是不仄逼，也很干净，夏天很凉快。一共三间。正中是堂屋，在“天地君亲师”的下面便是一具石磨。一边是厨房，也就是作坊。一边是卧房，住着王二的一家。他上无父母，嫡亲的只有四口人，一个媳妇，一儿一女。这家总是那么安静，从外面听不到什么声音。后街的人家总是吵吵闹闹的。男人揪着头发打老婆，女人拿火叉打孩子，老太婆用菜刀剁着砧板诅咒偷了她的下蛋鸡的贼。王家从来没有这些声音。他们家起得很早。天不亮王二就起来备料，然后就烧煮。他媳妇梳好头就推磨磨豆腐。——王二的熏烧摊每天要卖出很多回卤豆腐干，这豆腐干是自家做的。磨得了豆腐，就帮王二烧火。火光照得她的圆盘脸红红的。（附近的空气里弥漫着王二家飘出的五香味。）后来王二喂了一头小毛驴，她就不用围着磨盘转了，只要把小驴牵上磨，不时往磨眼里倒半碗豆子，注一点水就行了。省出时间，好做针线。一家四口，大裁小剪，很费功夫。两个孩子，大儿子长得像妈，圆乎乎的脸，两个眼睛笑起来一道缝。小女儿像父亲，瘦长脸，眼睛挺大。儿子念了几年私塾，能记账了，就不念了。他一天就是牵了小驴去饮，放它到草地上去打滚。到大了一点，就帮父亲洗料备料做生意，放驴的差事就归了妹妹了。
His house is on a high slope near the river in the back street, and it is not close to anyone on all sides. The house is very old, with broken brick walls and grass roofs and mud floors, but it is not cramped, very clean, and very cool in summer. There are three rooms in total. In the middle is the main house, and under the "Heaven and Earth Lord Teacher" is a stone mill. On one side is the kitchen, which is the workshop. On the other side is the bedroom, where Wang Er's family lives. He has no parents, only four relatives, a daughter-in-law, a son and a daughter. The house is always so quiet that no sound can be heard from outside. The houses in the back street are always noisy. Men beat their wives by the hair, women beat their children with fire forks, and the old woman chops the cutting board with a kitchen knife to curse the thief who stole her laying hens. The Wang family has never had these sounds. Their family gets up very early. Before dawn, Wang Er got up to prepare the ingredients and then cooked. His daughter-in-law combed her hair and grinded the tofu. ——Wang Er's smoked stall sells a lot of marinated dried tofu every day, which is made by himself. If you can grind the tofu, you will help Wang Er light the fire. The fire made her disc blush. (The nearby air was filled with the fragrance of Wang Er's family.) Later, Wang Er fed a little donkey, so she didn't have to go around the grinding disc, just lead the little donkey to the mill, pour half a bowl of beans into the grinding eye from time to time, and pour a little water. Save time and make needlework. A family of four, big cutting and cutting, is very laborious. Two children, the eldest son looks like his mother, with a round face, and his eyes smile and slit. The youngest daughter is like her father, with a slender face and big eyes. My son went to a private school for a few years, and when he could keep accounts, he stopped reading. He took the little donkey to drink one day and let it roll on the grass. When he was a little older, he helped his father wash and prepare materials for business, and the errand of releasing the donkey belonged to his sister.每天下午，在上学的孩子放学，人家淘晚饭米的时候，他就来摆他的摊子。他为什么选中保全堂来摆他的摊子呢？是因为这地点好，东街西街和附近几条巷子到这里都不远；因为保全堂的廊檐宽，柜台到铺门有相当的余地；还是因为这是一家药店，药店到晚上生意就比较清淡，——很少人晚上上药铺抓药的，他摆个摊子碍不着人家的买卖，都说不清。当初还一定是请人向药店的东家说了好话，亲自登门叩谢过的。反正，有年头了。他的摊子的全副“生财”——这地方把做买卖的用具叫做“生财”，就寄放在药店店堂的后面过道里，挨墙放着，上面就是悬在二梁上的赵公元帅的神龛。这些“生财”包括两块长板，两条三条腿的高板凳，以及好几个一面装了玻璃的匣子。他把板凳支好，长板放平，玻璃匣子排开。这些玻璃匣子里装的是黑瓜子、白瓜子、盐炒豌豆、油炸豌豆、兰花豆、五香花生米。长板的一头摆开“熏烧”。“熏烧”除回卤豆腐干之外，主要是牛肉、蒲包肉和猪头肉。这地方一般人家是不大吃牛肉的。吃，也极少红烧、清炖，只是到熏烧摊子去买。这种牛肉是五香加盐煮好，外面染了通红的红曲，一大块一大块的堆在那里。买多少，现切，放在送过来的盘子里，抓一把清蒜，浇一勺辣椒糊。蒲包肉似乎是这个县里特有的。用一个三寸来长直径寸半的蒲包，里面衬上豆腐皮，塞满了加了粉子的碎肉，封了口，拦腰用一道麻绳系紧，成一个葫芦形。煮熟以后，倒出来，也是一个带有蒲包印迹的葫芦。切成片，很香。猪头肉则分门别类的卖，拱嘴、耳朵、脸子，——脸子有个专门名词，叫“大肥”。要什么，切什么。到了上灯以后，王二的生意就到了高潮。只见他拿了刀不停地切，一面还忙着收钱，包油炸的、盐炒的豌豆、瓜子，很少有歇一歇的时候。一直忙到九点多钟，在他的两盏高罩的煤油灯里煤油已经点去了一多半，装熏烧的盘子和装豌豆的匣子都已经见了底的时候，他媳妇给他送饭来了，他才用热水擦一把脸，吃晚饭。吃完晚饭，总还有一些零零星星的生意，他不忙收摊子，就端了一杯热茶，坐到保全堂店堂里的椅子上，听人聊天，一面拿眼睛瞟着他的摊子，见有人走来，就起身切一盘，包两包。他的主顾都是熟人，谁什么时候来，买什么，他心里都是有数的。
Every afternoon, when the children who go to school are out of school and people are looking for dinner rice, he comes to set up his stall. Why did he choose the security hall to set up his stall? Because of the good location, East Street and West Street and several nearby alleys are not far from here; because the eaves of the security hall are wide, there is quite a bit of room from the counter to the shop door; or because this is a pharmacy, the business of the pharmacy is relatively light at night,—— few people go to the pharmacy at night to grab medicine, and he can't tell if he sets up a stall that can't hinder other people's business. At the beginning, he must have asked someone to say good things to the owner of the pharmacy and personally came to thank him. Anyway, it's been a year. The whole set of "wealth" of his stall - this place calls the tools for buying and selling "wealth", and it is stored in the back aisle of the pharmacy, next to the wall, and above is the shrine of Marshal Zhao Yuan hanging on the second beam. These "wealth" include two longboards, two high benches with three legs, and several boxes with glass on one side. He propped up the benches, flattened the boards, and lined up the glass boxes. These glass boxes contain black melon seeds, white melon seeds, fried peas with salt, fried peas, orchid beans, and spiced peanuts. One end of the longboard is set up for "fumigation". In addition to braised dried tofu, "fumigation" is mainly beef, cattail meat and pig's head meat. Most people in this place don't eat much beef. Eat, there are very few braised and stewed, just go to the smoked stall to buy it. This kind of beef is cooked with spices and salt, and the outside is dyed red yeast rice, and large pieces are piled up there. How much to buy, cut it fresh, put it on the plate that was delivered, grab a handful of garlic, and pour a spoonful of chili paste. Pubao meat seems to be unique to this county. Use a cattail bag with a diameter of three inches to an inch and a half, lined with tofu skin, stuffed with minced meat with flour, sealed, and tied with a hemp rope to form a gourd shape. After cooking, pour it out, and it is also a gourd with cattail imprints. Cut into slices, very fragrant. Pig's head meat is sold in different categories, and there is a special term for arching the mouth, ears, face,—— and face, called "big fat". What you want, what you cut. After the lights were turned on, Wang Er's business reached its climax. I saw him taking a knife and cutting non-stop, while still busy collecting money, including fried and salt-fried peas and melon seeds, and rarely took a break. He was busy until more than nine o'clock, when the kerosene had been lit more than half of his two high-cover kerosene lamps, and the smoked plate and the box containing the peas had bottomed out, his daughter-in-law brought him food, and he wiped his face with hot water and had dinner. After dinner, there was always some sporadic business, he was not busy closing the stall, so he brought a cup of hot tea, sat on the chair in the shop hall of the security hall, listened to people chatting, and glanced at his stall with his eyes, and when he saw someone coming, he got up to cut a plate and wrapped two packs. His customers are all acquaintances, and he knows who comes and when and what he buys.这一条街上的店铺、摆摊的，生意如何，彼此都很清楚。近几年，景况都不大好。有几家好一些，但也只是能维持。有的是逐渐地败落下来了。先是货架上的东西越来越空，只出不进，最后就出让“生财”，关门歇业。只有王二的生意却越做越兴旺。他的摊子越摆越大，装炒货的匣子，装熏烧的洋磁盘子，越来越多。每天晚上到了买卖高潮的时候，摊子外面有时会拥着好些人。好天气还好，遇上下雨下雪（下雨下雪买他的东西的比平常更多），叫主顾在当街打伞站着，实在很不过意。于是经人说合，出了租钱，他就把他的摊子搬到隔壁源昌烟店的店堂里去了。
The shops and stalls on this street know each other very well what the business is. In recent years, the situation has not been very good. A few are better, but they can only be maintained. Some are gradually declining. First, the things on the shelves became more and more empty, and they could not get in and out, and finally they sold them to "make money" and closed their doors. Only Wang Er's business is getting bigger and bigger. His stall is getting bigger and bigger, with more and more boxes for fried goods and fumigated disks. Every night when the climax of trading comes, there are sometimes many people outside the stall. The weather is good, but when it rains and snows (more people buy his things than usual when it rains and snows), it is really unpleasant to ask the patron to stand on the street with an umbrella. So after being negotiated and paying the rent, he moved his stall to the shop hall of the Yuanchang tobacco shop next door.源昌烟店是个老字号，专卖旱烟，做门市，也做批发。一边是柜台，一边是刨烟的作坊。这一带抽的旱烟是刨成丝的。刨烟师傅把烟叶子一张一张立着迭在一个特制的木床子上，用皮绳木楔卡紧，两腿夹着床子，用一个刨刃有半尺宽的大刨子刨。烟是黄的。他们都穿了白布套裤。这套裤也都变黄了。下了工，脱了套裤，他们身上也到处是黄的。头发也是黄的。——手艺人都带着他那个行业特有的颜色。染坊师傅的指甲缝里都是蓝的，碾米师傅的眉毛总是白蒙蒙的。原来，源昌号每天有四个师傅、四副床子刨烟。每天总有一些大人孩子站在旁边看。后来减成三个，两个，一个。最后连这一个也辞了。这家的东家就靠卖一点纸烟、火柴、零包的茶叶维持生活，也还卖一点趸来的旱烟、皮丝烟。不知道为什么，原来挺敞亮的店堂变得黑暗了，牌匾上的金字也都无精打采了。那座柜台显得特别的大。大，而空。
Yuanchang Tobacco Shop is a time-honored brand, specializing in dry tobacco, a store, and also a wholesale. On one side is the counter, and on the other side is the tobacco workshop. The dry tobacco smoked in this area is shaved into shreds. The tobacco planer stacked the tobacco leaves one by one on a special wooden bed, clamped them with leather rope wooden wedges, clamped the bed between his legs, and used a large planer with a blade half a foot wide. The smoke is yellow. They all wore white cloth pants. The pants also turned yellow. After work, they took off their pants, and their bodies were yellow everywhere. The hair is also yellow. ——The craftsmen all wear the unique colors of his industry. The nails of the dyeing master are all blue, and the eyebrows of the rice milling master are always white. It turned out that Yuanchang had four masters and four sets of beds every day. There are always some adults and children standing by every day to watch. Later, it was reduced to three, two, one. In the end, even this one quit. The owner of this house makes a living by selling a little cigarettes, matches, and a small package of tea, as well as a little dry tobacco and leather tobacco. I don't know why, the originally bright shop hall has become dark, and the gold letters on the plaque are listless. The counter looks very big. Big, but empty.王二来了，就占了半边店堂，就是原来刨烟师傅刨烟的地方。他的摊子原来在保全堂廊檐是东西向横放着的，迁到源昌，就改成南北向，直放了。所以，已经不能算是一个摊子，而是半个店铺了。他在原有的板子之外增加了一块，摆成一个曲尺形，俨然也就是一个柜台。他所卖的东西的品种也增加了。即以熏烧而论，除了原有的回卤豆腐干、牛肉、猪头肉、蒲包肉之外，春天，卖一种叫做“”的野味，——这是一种候鸟，长嘴长脚，因为是桃花开时来的，不知是哪位文人雅士给它起了一个名称叫“桃花”；卖鹌鹑；入冬以后，他就挂起一个长条形的玻璃镜框，里面用大红蜡笺写了泥金字：“即日起新添美味羊糕五香兔肉”。这地方人没有自己家里做羊肉的，都是从熏烧摊上买。只有一种吃法：带皮白煮，冻实，切片，加青蒜、辣椒糊，还有一把必不可少的胡萝卜丝（据说这是最能解膻气的）。酱油、醋，买回来自己加。兔肉，也像牛肉似的加盐和五香煮，染了通红的红曲。
When Wang Er came, he occupied half of the shop, which was the place where the original tobacco planer shaved the tobacco. His stall was originally placed horizontally in the east-west direction of the eaves of the security hall, but when it was moved to Yuanchang, it was changed to a north-south direction and placed vertically. Therefore, it can no longer be regarded as a stall, but half a store. He added a piece to the original board and arranged it in a curved ruler, just like a counter. The variety of things he sells has also increased. That is, in terms of fumigation, in addition to the original marinated dried tofu, beef, pig's head meat, and cattail meat, in spring, a game called "" is sold,—— This is a migratory bird with a long beak and long legs, because it came when the peach blossoms bloomed, I don't know which literati gave it a name called "Peach Blossom "; selling quails; After winter, he hung a long glass frame, which was written in large red wax paper: "From now on, new delicious sheep cake and spiced rabbit meat will be added". People in this place do not make mutton at home, so they buy it from smoked stalls. There is only one way to eat it: boil it with the skin, freeze it, slice it, add green garlic, chili paste, and a handful of essential shredded carrots (it is said to be the most deodorant). Soy sauce and vinegar, buy it and add it yourself. Rabbit meat, also like beef, is salted and spiced, dyed red yeast rice.这条街上过年时的春联是各式各样的。有的是特制嵌了字号的。比如保全堂，就是由该店拔贡出身的东家拟制的“保我黎民，全登寿域”；有些大字号，比如布店，口气很大，贴的是“生涯宗子贡，贸易效陶朱”，最常见的是“生意兴隆通四海，财源茂盛达三江”；小本经营的买卖的则很谦虚地写出：“生意三春草，财源雨后花”。这末一副春联，用于王二的超摊子准铺子，真是再贴切不过了，虽然王二并没有想到贴这样一副春联，——他也没处贴呀，这铺面的字号还是“源昌”。他的生意真是三春草、雨后花一样的起来了。“起来”最显眼的标志是他把长罩煤油灯撤掉，挂起一盏呼呼作响的汽灯。须知，汽灯这东西只有钱庄、绸缎庄才用，而王二，居然在一个熏烧摊子的上面，挂起来了。这白亮白亮的汽灯，越显得源昌柜台里的一盏煤油灯十分的暗淡了。
There are various Spring Festival couplets during the Chinese New Year on this street. Some are specially embedded with font sizes. For example, the Baoan Hall is the "Protect My Li Min, All Deng Shou Yu" proposed by the owner of the store; Some large fonts, such as cloth shops, have a very large tone, and the post is "Career Zongzi Gong, trade imitates Tao Zhu", the most common is "business is prosperous all over the world, and the wealth is prosperous to the three rivers"; the small business business is very modestly written: "Business is three spring grass, and wealth is flowered after the rain". Although Wang Er didn't expect to post such a pair of Spring Festival couplets,—— he had nowhere to post it, and the font number of this shop was still "Yuanchang". His business is really like spring grass and flowers after the rain. The most conspicuous sign of "getting up" is that he removed the long-cover kerosene lamp and hung up a whirring steam lamp. It should be noted that the steam lamp is only used in the money bank and the silk shop, and Wang Er actually hung it on top of a smoked stall. This bright white steam lamp makes it look very dim that a kerosene lamp in the Yuanchang counter is very dim.王二的发达，是从他的生活也看得出来的。第一，他可以自由地去听书。王二最爱听书。走到街上，在形形色色招贴告示中间，他最注意的是说书的报条。那是三寸宽，四尺来长的一条黄颜色的纸，浓墨写道：“特聘维扬×××先生在×××（茶馆）开讲××（三国、水浒、岳传……）是月×日起风雨无阻”。以前去听书都要经过考虑。一是花钱，二是费时间，更主要的是考虑这于他的身份不大相称：一个卖熏烧的，常常听书，怕人议论。近年来，他觉得可以了，想听就去。小蓬莱、五柳园（这都是说书的茶馆），都去，三国、水浒、岳传，都听。尤其是夏天，天长，穿了竹布的或夏布的长衫，拿了一吊钱，就去了。下午的书一点开书，不到四点钟就“明日请早”了（这里说书的规矩是在说书先生说到预定的地方，留下一个扣子，跑堂的茶房高喝一声“明日请早——！”听客们就纷纷起身散场），这耽误不了他的生意。他一天忙到晚，只有这一段时间得空。第二，过年推牌九，他在下注时不犹豫。王二平常绝不赌钱，只有过年赌五天。过年赌钱不犯禁，家家店铺里都可赌钱。初一起，不做生意，铺门关起来，里面黑洞洞的。保全堂柜台里身，有一个小穿堂，是供神农祖师的地方，上面有个天窗，比较亮堂。拉开神农画像前的一张方桌，哗啦一声，骨牌和骰子就倒出来了。打麻将多是社会地位相近的，推牌九则不论。谁都可以来。保全堂的“同仁”（除了陶先生和陈相公），替人家收房钱的抡元，卖活鱼的疤眼——他曾得外症，治愈后左眼留一大疤，小学生给他起了个外号叫“巴颜喀拉山”，这外号竟传开了，一街人都叫他巴颜喀拉山，虽然有人不知道这是什么意思，——王二。输赢说大不大，说小可也不小。十吊钱推一庄。十吊钱相当于三块洋钱。下注稍大的是一吊钱三三四。一吊钱分三道：三百、三百、四百。七点赢一道，八点赢两道，若是抓到一副九点或是天地杠，庄家赔一吊钱。王二下“三三四”是常事。有时竟会下到五吊钱一注孤丁，把五吊钱稳稳地推出去，心不跳，手不抖。（收房钱的抡元下到五百钱一注时手就抖个不住。）赢得多了，他也能上去推两庄。推牌九这玩意，财越大，气越粗，王二输的时候竟不多。
Wang Er's development can also be seen from his life. First, he is free to listen to books. Wang Er loves to listen to books. Walking on the street, among all kinds of posters and notices, he paid the most attention to the storytelling reports. It was a yellow paper three inches wide and four feet long, and it was written in thick ink: "Mr. Wei Yang××× gave a lecture in ××× (teahouse×× (Three Kingdoms, Water Margin, Yue Chuan...... It is rain or shine from the × of the month." In the past, you had to think about listening to books. One is to spend money, the other is to spend time, and more importantly, it is considered that this is not very commensurate with his status: a smoked and burned man, often listens to books, and is afraid of being talked about. In recent years, he thinks it's okay and can listen if he wants. Xiao Penglai, Wuliuyuan (these are all storytelling teahouses), all go, Three Kingdoms, Water Margin, Yue Chuan, all listen. Especially in summer, the days are long, wearing bamboo cloth or summer cloth robes, taking a hanging of money, and going. The afternoon book opens at one o'clock, and before four o'clock, it is "please come early tomorrow" (the rule of storytelling here is that the storyteller says that when he reaches the predetermined place, he leaves a button, and the tea room in the hall shouts "Please come early tomorrow——! The listeners got up and left), which could not delay his business. He was busy all day long, and only this period of time was free. Second, he did not hesitate to bet on Pai Gow during the New Year. Wang Er usually never gambles, only for five days during the Chinese New Year. Gambling during the New Year is not prohibited, and you can gamble in every store. At the beginning of the new year, if you don't do business, the shop door is closed, and the inside is black. Inside the counter of the security hall, there is a small hall, which is a place for the patriarch of Shennong, and there is a skylight on it, which is relatively bright. Pull open a square table in front of the portrait of Shennong, and with a bang, dominoes and dice are poured out. Most of the people who play mahjong are of similar social status, and it doesn't matter if you push the nine. Anyone can come. The "colleagues" of the security hall (except for Mr. Tao and Chen Xianggong), who collect money for the house for others, the scar eye of selling live fish - he once had an external disease, and after healing, he left a large scar on his left eye, and the primary school student gave him a nickname called "Bayan Karashan", which spread, and people on the street called him Bayan Karashan, although some people don't know what this means,—— Wang Er. Winning or losing is not big, but it is not small. Ten hanging money pushes a bank. Ten hanging money is equivalent to three foreign coins. The bet is slightly larger than one hanging money, three three or four. There are three ways to hang money: three hundred, three hundred, and four hundred. Seven o'clock wins one, eight o'clock wins two, if you catch a pair of nine points or heaven and earth bars, the dealer will lose a hanging money. It is common for Wang Er to play "three, three, four". Sometimes he will go down to five hanging coins and one bet, and push out the five hanging money steadily, without beating his heart and shaking his hands. (The money collected from the house money goes down to five hundred yuan, and the hand can't shake.) If he wins more, he can also go up and push the two banks. Pushing Pai Gow, the bigger the money, the thicker the anger, and Wang Er doesn't lose much.王二把他的买卖乔迁到隔壁源昌去了，但是每天九点以后他一定还是端了一杯茶到保全堂店堂里来坐个点把钟。儿子大了，晚上再来的零星生意，他一个人就可以应付了。
且说保全堂。
Wang Er moved his business to Yuanchang next door, but after nine o'clock every day, he must still bring a cup of tea to the security hall to sit for a while. When his son is older, he can handle the sporadic business that comes at night by himself. Let's talk about the preservation hall.这是一家门面不大的药店。不知为什么，这药店的东家用人，不用本地人，从上到下，从管事的到挑水的，一律是淮城人。他们每年有一个月的假期，轮流回家，去干传宗接代的事。其余十一个月，都住在店里。他们的老婆就守十一个月的寡。药店的“同仁”，一律称为“先生”。先生里分为几等。一等的是“管事”，即经理。当了管事就是终身职务，很少听说过有东家把管事辞了的。除非老管事病故，才会延聘一位新管事。当了管事，就有“身股”，或称“人股”，到了年底可以按股分红。因此，他对生意是兢兢业业，忠心耿耿的。东家从不到店，管事负责一切。他照例一个人单独睡在神农像后面的一间屋子里，名叫“后柜”。总账、银钱，贵重的药材如犀角、羚羊、麝香，都锁在这间屋子里，钥匙在他身上，——人参、鹿茸不算什么贵重东西。吃饭的时候，管事总是坐在横头末席，以示代表东家奉陪诸位先生。熬到“管事”能有几人？全城一共才有那么几家药店。保全堂的管事姓卢。二等的叫“刀上”，管切药和“跌”丸药。药店每天都有很多药要切。“饮片”切得整齐不整齐，漂亮不漂亮，直接影响生意好坏。内行人一看，就知道这药是什么人切出来的。“刀上”是个技术人员，薪金最高，在店中地位也最尊。吃饭时他照例坐在上首的二席，——除了有客，头席总是虚着的。逢年过节，药王生日（药王不是神农氏，却是孙思邈），有酒，管事的举杯，必得“刀上”先喝一口，大家才喝。保全堂的“刀上”是全县头一把刀，他要是闹脾气辞职，马上就有别家抢着请他去。好在此人虽有点高傲，有点倔，却轻易不发脾气。他姓许。其余的都叫“同事”。那读法却有点特别，重音在“同”字上。他们的职务就是抓药，写账。“同事”是没有什么了不起的，每年都有被辞退的可能。辞退时“管事”并不说话，只是在腊月有一桌辞年酒，算是东家向“同仁”道一年的辛苦，只要是把哪位“同事”请到上席去，该“同事”就二话不说，客客气气地卷起铺盖另谋高就。当然，事前就从旁漏出一点风声的，并不当真是打一闷棍。该辞退“同事”在八月节后就有预感。有的早就和别家谈好，很潇洒地走了；有的则请人斡旋，留一年再看。后一种，总要作一点“检讨”，下一点“保证”。“回炉的烧饼不香”，辞而不去，面上无光，身价就低了。保全堂的陶先生，就已经有三次要被请到上席了。他咳嗽痰喘，人也不精明。终于没有坐上席，一则是同行店伙纷纷来说情；辞了他，他上谁家去呢？谁家会要这样一个痰篓子呢？这岂非绝了他的生计？二则，他还有一点好处，即不回家。他四十多岁了，却没有传宗接代的任务，因为他没有娶过亲。这样，陶先生就只有更加勤勉，更加谨慎了。每逢他的喘病发作时，有人问：“陶先生，你这两天又不大好吧？”他就一面喘嗽着一面说：“啊不，很好，很（呼噜呼噜）好！”
This is a small pharmacy. For some reason, the owners of this pharmacy, not locals, from top to bottom, from stewards to water carriers, are all from Huaicheng. They have a month off every year, taking turns going home to do the work of passing on the lineage. The remaining eleven months live in the store. Their wives are widowed for eleven months. The "colleagues" of the pharmacy are all called "Mr. "Sir". Mr. is divided into several levels. The first class is the "steward", that is, the manager. Being a steward is a lifelong position, and I have rarely heard of an owner resigning from the steward. Unless the old steward dies of illness, a new steward will be hired. When you become a steward, you have "body shares", or "human shares", and you can pay dividends according to shares at the end of the year. Therefore, he is conscientious and loyal to business. The owner never comes to the store, and the steward is responsible for everything. He slept alone in a room behind the statue of Shennong as usual, called the "back cabinet". The general ledger, silver coins, and valuable medicinal materials such as rhinoceros horn, antelope, and musk are all locked in this room, and the key is on him,—— ginseng and deer antler are not valuable things. When eating, the steward always sits at the end of the table to show that he represents the owner to accompany the gentlemen. How many people can survive to the "steward"? There are only a few pharmacies in the city. The steward of the security hall is surnamed Lu. The second-class is called "on the knife", which is responsible for cutting medicine and "falling" pills. There are many medicines to cut in pharmacies every day. Whether the "decoction pieces" are cut neatly or not, whether they are beautiful or not, directly affects the quality of business. Insiders can tell who cut this medicine at a glance. "On the knife" is a technician with the highest salary and the most respected status in the store. During meals, he sat at the top two seats as usual,—— except for guests, the first seat was always empty. During the New Year's holidays, the birthday of the medicine king (the medicine king is not Shennong, but Sun Simiao), there is wine, and the steward raises a glass, and he must take a sip "on the knife" first, and everyone will drink it. The "knife" of the security hall is the first knife in the county, and if he resigns in a tantrum, someone else will immediately rush to invite him. Fortunately, although this person is a little arrogant and a little stubborn, he does not lose his temper easily. His surname is Xu. The rest are called "colleagues". The reading is a bit special, with an emphasis on the word "same". Their job is to catch medicine and write accounts. There is nothing great about "colleagues", and they can be fired every year. When dismissed, the "steward" did not speak, but there was a table of resignation wine in the twelfth lunar month, which was regarded as the owner telling the "colleagues" about a year's hard work. Of course, those who leaked a little rumor from the side in advance are not really slapped up. The "colleagues" who should be dismissed have a premonition after the August Festival. Some have already negotiated with other families and left very chicly; some ask someone to mediate and stay for a year before looking at it. The latter always requires a little "review" and a little "guarantee". "The sesame cakes that return to the oven are not fragrant", he resigned, his face was dull, and his worth was low. Mr. Tao of the security hall has been invited to the table three times. He coughs and wheezes, and people are not shrewd. Finally, he didn't sit at the table, and one was that the fellow shopkeepers interceded one after another; If he quit him, who would he go to? Who would want such a phlegm basket? Isn't this ruining his livelihood? Second, he has another advantage, that is, he does not go home. He is in his forties, but he has no task of passing on the family line, because he has not married. In this way, Mr. Tao can only be more diligent and cautious. Whenever he had an asthma attack, someone asked, "Mr. Tao, how have you been these past two days?" He said while panting, "Ah no, it's good, it's very good!" ”以上，是“先生”一级。“先生”以下，是学生意的。药店管学生意的却有一个奇怪称呼，叫做“相公”。
因此，这药店除煮饭挑水的之外，实有四等人：“管事”、“刀上”、“同事”、“相公”。
The above is the first level of "Mr. "Sir". Below "Mr.", it is the meaning of the student. The pharmacy manages the student but has a strange name, called "Xianggong". Therefore, in addition to those who cook and carry water, this pharmacy actually has four people: "steward", "knife", "colleague", and "husband".保全堂的几位“相公”都已经过了三年零一节，满师走了。现有的“相公”姓陈。
陈相公脑袋大大的，眼睛圆圆的，嘴唇厚厚的，说话声气粗粗的——呜噜呜噜地说不清楚。
Several "Xianggong" in the security hall have passed three years and one section, and the full division has left. The existing "Xianggong" is surnamed Chen. Chen Xianggong has a big head, round eyes, thick lips, and a coarse voice - whining and not being able to explain clearly.他一天的生活如下：起得比谁都早。起来就把“先生”们的尿壶都倒了涮干净控在厕所里。扫地。擦桌椅、擦柜台。到处掸土。开门。这地方的店铺大都是“铺闼子门”，——一列宽可一尺的厚厚的门板嵌在门框和门槛的槽子里。陈相公就一块一块卸出来，按“东一”、“东二”、“东三”、“东四”，“西一”、“西二”、“西三”、“西四”次序，靠墙竖好。晒药，收药。太阳出来时，把许先生切好的“饮片”、“跌”好的丸药，——都放在匾筛里，用头顶着，爬上梯子，到屋顶的晒台上放好；傍晚时再收下来。这是他一天最快乐的时候。他可以登高四望。看得见许多店铺和人家的房顶，都是黑黑的。看得见远处的绿树，绿树后面缓缓移动的帆。看得见鸽子，看得见飘动摇摆的风筝。到了七月，傍晚，还可以看巧云。七月的云多变幻，当地叫做“巧云”。那是真好看呀：灰的、白的、黄的、橘红的，镶着金边，一会一个样，像狮子的，像老虎的，像马、像狗的。此时的陈相公，真是古人所说的“心旷神怡”。其余的时候，就很刻板枯燥了。碾药。两脚踏着木板，在一个船形的铁碾槽子里碾。倘若碾的是胡椒，就要不停地打嚏喷。裁纸。用一个大弯刀，把一沓一沓的白粉连纸裁成大小不等的方块，包药用。刷印包装纸。他每天还有两项例行的公事。上午，要搓很多抽水烟用的纸枚子。把装铜钱的钱板翻过来，用“表心纸”一根一根地搓。保全堂没有人抽水烟，但不知什么道理每天都要搓许多纸枚子，谁来都可取几根，这已经成了一种“传统”。下午，擦灯罩。药店里里外外，要用十来盏煤油灯。所有灯罩，每天都要擦一遍。晚上，摊膏药。从上灯起，直到王二过店堂里来闲坐，他一直都在摊膏药。到十点多钟，把先生们的尿壶都放到他们的床下，该吹灭的灯都吹灭了，上了门，他就可以准备睡觉了。先生们都睡在后面的厢屋里，陈相公睡在店堂里。把铺板一放，铺盖摊开，这就是他一个人的天地了。临睡前他总要背两篇《汤头歌诀》，——药店的先生总要懂一点医道。小户人家有病不求医，到药店来说明病状，先生们随口就要说出：“吃一剂小柴胡汤吧”，“服三服藿香正气丸”，“上一点七厘散”。有时，坐在被窝里想一会家，想想他的多年守寡的母亲，想想他家房门背后的一张贴了多年的麒麟送子的年画。想不一会，困了，把脑袋放倒，立刻就响起了很大的鼾声。
His life is as follows: Get up earlier than anyone else. When he got up, he poured out the urinals of the "gentlemen" and put them in the toilet. Sweeping. Wipe tables and chairs, wipe counters. Dust everywhere. Open the door. Most of the shops in this place are "doors",—— a row of thick door panels about a foot wide are embedded in the slots of the door frame and threshold. Chen Xianggong unloaded them one by one, and erected them against the wall in the order of "East One", "East Two", "East Three", "East Four", "West One", "West Two", "West Three", and "West Four". Drying medicine and collecting medicine. When the sun comes out, put Mr. Xu's cut "decoction pieces" and "dropped" pills,—— in a plaque sieve, hold them on your head, climb up the ladder, and put them on the sundeck on the roof; take them away in the evening. This is the happiest time of his day. He can climb high and look around. You can see many shops and roofs, all black. You can see the green trees in the distance, and the sails slowly moving behind the green trees. You can see pigeons and swaying kites. In July, in the evening, you can still see Qiaoyun. The clouds in July are changeable, and the local area is called "Qiaoyun". That's really beautiful: gray, white, yellow, orange-red, inlaid with gold edges, like lions, tigers, horses, and dogs. At this time, Chen Xianggong is really what the ancients called "cheerful". The rest of the time, it is very rigid and boring. Grinding medicine. Step on the wooden board with both feet and grind in a boat-shaped iron milling trough. If you grind pepper, you have to keep sneezing. Cut paper. Use a large scimitar to cut stacks of white powder and paper into squares of different sizes for medicinal purposes. Brush and print wrapping paper. He also has two routine errands a day. In the morning, he has to rub a lot of paper for smoking hookahs. Turn over the money plate containing the copper coins and rub them one by one with the "heart paper". No one smokes hookah in the security hall, but for some reason, many pieces of paper are rubbed every day, and anyone who comes can take a few, which has become a "tradition". In the afternoon, wipe the lampshade. The pharmacy uses about a dozen kerosene lamps inside and out. All lampshades must be wiped every day. In the evening, spread the plaster. From the time the lamp was turned on until Wang Er came to sit idly in the shop, he was spreading the plaster all the time. At more than ten o'clock, the gentlemen's urinals were put under their beds, the lights that should be blown out were blown out, and when he went to the door, he was ready to go to bed. The gentlemen slept in the back room, and Chen Xianggong slept in the shop. Put the paving board and spread the cover, this is his world alone. Before going to bed, he always has to memorize two "Soup Songs",—— the gentleman in the pharmacy always has to understand a little medical way. When a small family is sick and does not seek medical treatment, they go to the pharmacy to explain the condition, and the gentlemen casually say: "Take a dose of Xiao Chai Hu Soup", "Take three doses of Huoxiang Zhengqi Pills", "Go to one point and seven cents". Sometimes, sitting in bed and thinking about home for a while, thinking about his mother who has been widowed for many years, thinking about a New Year's painting of a qilin sending a son behind the door of his house for many years. After thinking about it for a while, I was sleepy, put my head down, and immediately heard a loud snoring.陈相公已经学了一年多生意了。他已经给赵公元帅和神农爷烧了三十次香。初一、十五，都要给这二位烧香，这照例是陈相公的事。赵公元帅手执金鞭，身骑黑虎，两旁有一副八寸长的小对联：“手执金鞭驱宝至，身骑黑虎送财来”。神农爷虬髯披发，赤身露体，腰里围着一圈很大的树叶，手指甲、脚指甲都很长，一只手捏着一棵灵芝草，坐在一块石头上。陈相公对这二位看得很熟，烧香的时候很虔敬。
Chen Xianggong has been studying business for more than a year. He has burned incense for Marshal Zhao and Shennong thirty times. On the first and fifteenth days of the new year, incense must be burned for these two, which is Chen Xianggong's business as usual. Marshal Zhao held a golden whip in his hand and rode a black tiger, with a pair of small eight-inch-long couplets on both sides: "Holding a golden whip to drive treasures, riding a black tiger to send wealth." Shennong Ye had a beard and hair, naked, a circle of large leaves around his waist, long fingernails and toenails, and one hand pinched a Ganoderma lucidum grass and sat on a stone. Chen Xianggong was very familiar with these two and was very reverent when burning incense.陈相公老是挨打。学生意没有不挨打的，陈相公挨打的次数也似稍多了一点。挨打的原因大都是因为做错了事：纸裁歪了，灯罩擦破了。这孩子也好像不大聪明，记性不好，做事迟钝。打他的多是卢先生。卢先生不是暴脾气，打他是为他好，要他成人。有一次可挨了大打。他收药，下梯一脚踩空了，把一匾筛泽泻翻到了阴沟里。这回打他的是许先生。他用一根闩门的木棍没头没脸的把他痛打了一顿，打得这孩子哇哇地乱叫：“哎呀！哎呀！我下回不了！下回不了！哎呀！哎呀！我错了！哎呀！哎呀！”谁也不能去劝，因为知道许先生的脾气，越劝越打得凶，何况他这回的错是不小。后来还是煮饭的老朱来劝住了。这老朱来得比谁都早，人又出名的忠诚梗直。他从来没有正经吃过一顿饭，都是把大家吃剩的残汤剩水泡一点锅巴吃。因此，一店人都对他很敬畏。他一把夺过许先生手里的门闩，说了一句话：“他也是人生父母养的！”
Chen Xianggong is always beaten. The student did not mean not to be beaten, and Chen Xianggong seemed to be beaten a little more. Most of the reasons for being beaten were because of doing something wrong: the paper was crooked, and the lampshade was scratched. This child also doesn't seem to be very smart, has a bad memory, and is slow to do things. Most of the people who beat him were Mr. Lu. Mr. Lu was not a violent temper, he beat him for his own good, and he wanted him to be an adult. Once he was beaten. He collected the medicine, stepped on the air when he went down the stairs, and poured a plaque into the gutter. This time it was Mr. Xu who hit him. He beat him headlessly and shamelessly with a wooden stick that latched the door, causing the child to scream: "Oh! Ah! I can't go back next time! I can't go back next time! Ah! Ah! I was wrong! Ah! Ah! No one can persuade him, because he knows Mr. Xu's temper, and the more he persuades him, the more fierce he becomes, not to mention that his mistake this time is not small. Later, Lao Zhu, who was still cooking, came to persuade him. This Lao Zhu came earlier than anyone else, and he was famous for his loyalty and straightforwardness. He has never had a serious meal, and he has soaked the leftover soup and leftovers from everyone's food in a pot. Therefore, everyone in the shop was in awe of him. He snatched the door latch from Mr. Xu's hand and said, "He was also raised by his parents!" ”陈相公挨了打，当时没敢哭。到了晚上，上了门，一个人呜呜地哭了半天。他向他远在故乡的母亲说：“妈妈，我又挨打了！妈妈，不要紧的，再挨两年打，我就能养活你老人家了！”
Chen Xianggong was beaten and didn't dare to cry at that time. At night, when he came to the door, he cried alone for a long time. He said to his mother in his hometown: "Mom, I'm beaten again! Mom, it doesn't matter, if you get beaten for another two years, I will be able to support your old man!" ”王二每天到保全堂店堂里来，是因为这里热闹。别的店铺到九点多钟，就没有什么人，往往只有一个管事在算账，一个学徒在打盹。保全堂正是高朋满座的时候。这些先生都是无家可归的光棍，这时都聚集到店堂里来。还有几个常客，收房钱的抡元，卖活鱼的巴颜喀拉山，给人家熬鸦片烟的老炳，还有一个张汉。这张汉是对门万顺酱园连家的一个亲戚兼食客，全名是张汉轩，大家却都叫他张汉。此人有七十岁了，长得活脱像一个伏尔泰，一个尖尖的鼻子。他年轻时在外地做过幕，走过很多地方，见多识广，什么都知道，是个百事通。比如说抽烟，他就告诉你烟有五种：水、旱、鼻、雅、潮，“雅”是鸦片。“潮”是潮烟，这地方谁也没见过。说喝酒，他就能说出山东黄、状元红、莲花白……说喝茶，他就告诉你狮峰龙井、苏州的碧螺春，云南的“烤茶”是在怎样一个罐里烤的，福建的功夫茶的茶杯比酒盅还小，就是吃了一只炖肘子，也只能喝三杯，这茶太酽了。他熟读《子不语》、《夜雨秋灯录》，能讲许多鬼狐故事。他还知道云南怎样放蛊，湘西怎样赶尸。他还亲眼见到过旱魃、僵尸、狐狸精，有时间，有地点，有鼻子有眼。三教九流，医、卜、星、相，他全知道。他读过《麻衣神相》、《柳庄神相》，会算“奇门遁甲”、“六壬课”、“灵棋经”。他总要到快九点钟时才出现（白天不知道他干什么），他一来，大家精神为之一振，这一晚上就全听他一个人话。他很会讲，起承转合，抑扬顿挫，有声有色。他也像说书先生一样，说到筋节处就停住了，慢慢地抽烟，急得大家一劲地催他：“后来呢？后来呢？”这也是陈相公一天比较快乐的时候。他一边摊着膏药，一边听着。有时，听得太入神了，摊膏药的扦子停留在油纸上，会废掉一张膏药。他一发现，赶紧偷偷塞进口袋里。这时也不会被发现，不会挨打。
Wang Er comes to the security hall every day because it is lively. In other shops, there is no one until more than nine o'clock, often only one steward is settling accounts and an apprentice is taking a nap. The security hall is full of friends. These gentlemen are all homeless bachelors, and they all gather in the store at this time. There are also a few regular customers, the yuan that collects the house money, Bayan Karashan, who sells live fish, Lao Bing, who boils opium smoke for others, and Zhang Han. This Han is a relative and diner of the Wanshun Sauce Garden across the street, his full name is Zhang Hanxuan, but everyone calls him Zhang Han. This man is seventy years old, looks like a Voltaire, with a pointed nose. When he was young, he worked in other places, traveled to many places, was well-informed, knew everything, and was a jack-of-all-trades. For example, when it comes to smoking, he tells you that there are five types of cigarettes: water, drought, nose, elegance, and tide, and "Ya" is opium. "Tide" is tide smoke, and no one has ever seen it in this place. When it comes to drinking, he can tell you Shandong yellow, Zhuangyuan red, and lotus white...... When it comes to drinking tea, he will tell you Shifeng Longjing, Suzhou's Biluochun, Yunnan's "roasted tea" in what kind of jar is roasted, and the teacup of Fujian's kung fu tea is smaller than a wine cup. He is familiar with "Zi Buyu" and "Night Rain Autumn Lantern Record", and can tell many ghost fox stories. He also knows how to release Gu in Yunnan and how to drive corpses in Xiangxi. He has also seen drought demons, zombies, and vixens with his own eyes, with time, place, nose and eyes. He knows all the three teachings and nine streams, medicine, divination, astrology, and physiognomy. He has read "Ma Yi Shen Xiang" and "Liuzhuang Shen Xiang", and can count "Qimen Dunjia", "Liu Ren Class", and "Ling Qi Jing". He always didn't appear until almost nine o'clock (I don't know what he was doing during the day), and as soon as he came, everyone was cheered up, and they all listened to him alone id_0000 that night. He is very good at speaking, starting and changing, intonation and frustration, sound and color. He was also like a storyteller, stopping when he talked about the tendons, smoking slowly, and everyone was so anxious that everyone urged him: "What happened later? What about later?" This is also the time when Chen Xianggong is happier in the day. He listened while spreading the plaster. Sometimes, if you listen too attentively, the skewer that spreads the plaster will stay on the oil paper and scrap a plaster. As soon as he found out, he quickly stuffed it into his pocket. At this time, he will not be discovered or beaten.有一天，张汉谈起人生有命。说朱洪武、沈万山、范丹是同年同月同日同时，都是丑时建生，鸡鸣头遍。但是一声鸡叫，可就命分三等了：抬头朱洪武，低头沈万山，勾一勾就是穷范丹。朱洪武贵为天子，沈万山富甲天下，穷范丹冻饿而死。他又说凡是成大事业，有大作为，兴旺发达的，都有异相，或有特殊的秉赋。汉高祖刘邦，股有七十二黑子，——就是屁股上有七十二颗黑痣，谁有过？明太祖朱元璋，生就是五岳朝天，——两额、两颧、下巴，都突出，状如五岳，谁有过？樊哙能把一个整猪腿生吃下去，燕人张翼德，睡着了也睁着眼睛。就是市井之人，凡有走了一步好运的，也莫不有与众不同之处。必有非常之人，乃成非常之事。大家听了，不禁暗暗点头。
One day, Zhang Han talked about life and fate. It is said that Zhu Hongwu, Shen Wanshan, and Fan Dan were born at the same time in the same year, month, and day. But a rooster crows, but life is divided into three classes: look up at Zhu Hongwu, bow your head to Shen Wanshan, and tick the poor Fan Dan. Zhu Hongwu is the Son of Heaven, Shen Wanshan is the richest in the world, and poor Fan Dan died of freezing and starvation. He also said that all those who have great causes, great achievements, and prosperity have different appearances or special endowments. Liu Bang, the ancestor of the Han Dynasty, had seventy-two black moles on his buttocks,—— who had them? Zhu Yuanzhang, the founder of the Ming Dynasty, was born with five mountains,—— two foreheads, two cheeks, and chin, all protruding, like the five mountains, who has ever had one? Fan Kuai can eat a whole pig's leg raw, and the Yan people Zhang Yide opened his eyes even when he fell asleep. Even the people in the market, anyone who has taken a step of good luck, is also different. There must be extraordinary people, and it will be an extraordinary thing. Everyone listened and couldn't help but nod secretly.张汉猛吸了几口旱烟，忽然话锋一转，向王二道：
“即以王二而论，他这些年飞黄腾达，财源茂盛，也必有其异秉。”
“……？”
"Okay, I'll catch it tonight." "No need to rush, you don't go to the ground tomorrow." "Okay." "From tomorrow, you don't want to work in the fields." “……？”王二不解何为“异秉”。
Zhang Han took a few puffs of dry smoke, and suddenly changed his mind and said to Wang Er: "That is, in terms of Wang Er, he has been prosperous over the years and has abundant financial resources, and he must also have his own unique talents." “……？” Wang Er didn't understand what "Yi Bing" was.“就是与众不同，和别人不一样的地方。你说说，你说说！”
大家也都怂恿王二：“说说！说说！”
王二虽然发了一点财，却随时不忘自己的身份，从不僭越自大，在大家敦促之下，只有很诚恳地欠一欠身说：
"It's what makes you different, different from others. Tell me, tell me! ” Everyone also encouraged Wang Er: "Tell me! Tell me!" ” Although Wang Er made a little rich, he never forgot his identity at any time, never overstepped his arrogance, and under everyone's urging, he only sincerely owed a yawn and said:“我呀，有那么一点：大小解分清。”他怕大家不懂，又解释道：“我解手时，总是先解小手，后解大手。”
张汉一听，拍了一下手，说：“就是说，不是屎尿一起来，难得！”
"I, there is a little bit: the big and small are clear." He was afraid that everyone would not understand, so he explained: "When I solve my hands, I always solve the small hands first, and then the big hands." ” When Zhang Han heard this, he clapped his hands and said, "That is to say, it is rare to come with feces and urine!" ”说着，已经过了十点半了，大家起身道别。该上门了。卢先生向柜台里一看，陈相公不见了，就大声喊：“陈相公！”
喊了几声，没人应声。
Saying that, it was already past half past ten, and everyone got up to say goodbye. It's time to come to the door. Mr. Lu looked into the counter and saw that Mr. Chen was gone, so he shouted loudly: "Mr. Chen!" ” shouted a few times, but no one answered.原来陈相公在厕所里。这是陶先生发现的。他一头走进厕所，发现陈相公已经蹲在那里。本来，这时候都不是他们俩解大手的时候。
一九四八年旧稿
一九八〇年五月二十日重写
It turned out that Chen Xianggong was in the toilet. This was discovered by Mr. Tao. He walked into the toilet and found that Chen Xianggong was already squatting there. Originally, this was not the time for the two of them to solve their big hands. 1948 old draft Reprinted on May 20, 1980
[1] 本篇原载《雨花》1981年第一期，是同题旧作重写；初收《汪曾祺短篇小说选》，北京出版社，1982年2月。

受戒

受戒[1]
明海出家已经四年了。
他是十三岁来的。
[1] This article was originally published in the first issue of "Rain Flowers" in 1981, which is a rewrite of an old work with the same title; First received "Selected Short Stories of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Publishing House, February 1982. Ordination{{id_0000}} Minghai has been a monk for four years. He came at the age of thirteen.这个地方的地名有点怪，叫庵赵庄。赵，是因为庄上大都姓赵。叫做庄，可是人家住得很分散，这里两三家，那里两三家。一出门，远远可以看到，走起来得走一会，因为没有大路，都是弯弯曲曲的田埂。庵，是因为有一个庵。庵叫菩提庵，可是大家叫讹了，叫成荸荠庵。连庵里的和尚也这样叫。“宝刹何处？”——“荸荠庵。”庵本来是住尼姑的。“和尚庙”、“尼姑庵”嘛。可是荸荠庵住的是和尚。也许因为荸荠庵不大，大者为庙，小者为庵。
The place name of this place is a bit strange, it is called An Zhao Zhuang. Zhao, because most of the villages are surnamed Zhao. It's called Zhuang, but people live very scattered, two or three here, two or three there. As soon as you go out, you can see from a distance that you have to walk for a while, because there is no road, and it is all winding ridges. The nunnery is because there is a nunnery. The nunnery is called Bodhi Monastery, but everyone calls it a water chestnut monastery. Even the monks in the nunnery are called that. "Where is the treasure temple?" ——"Water chestnut hermitage. "The nunnery originally lived in nuns." Monk temple", "nunnery nunnery". But water chestnut monastery lives in monks. Perhaps because the water chestnut hermitage is not big, the big one is a temple, and the small one is a temple.明海在家叫小明子。他是从小就确定要出家的。他的家乡不叫“出家”，叫“当和尚”。他的家乡出和尚。就像有的地方出劁猪的，有的地方出织席子的，有的地方出箍桶的，有的地方出弹棉花的，有的地方出画匠，有的地方出婊子，他的家乡出和尚。人家弟兄多，就派一个出去当和尚。当和尚也要通过关系，也有帮。这地方的和尚有的走得很远。有到杭州灵隐寺的、上海静安寺的、镇江金山寺的、扬州天宁寺的。一般的就在本县的寺庙。明海家田少，老大、老二、老三，就足够种的了。他是老四。他七岁那年，他当和尚的舅舅回家，他爹、他娘就和舅舅商议，决定叫他当和尚。他当时在旁边，觉得这实在是在情在理，没有理由反对。当和尚有很多好处。一是可以吃现成饭。哪个庙里都是管饭的。二是可以攒钱。只要学会了放瑜伽焰口，拜梁皇忏，可以按例分到辛苦钱。积攒起来，将来还俗娶亲也可以；不想还俗，买几亩田也可以。当和尚也不容易，一要面如朗月，二要声如钟磬，三要聪明记性好。他舅舅给他相了相面，叫他前走几步，后走几步，又叫他喊了一声赶牛打场的号子：“格当嘚——”，说是“明子准能当个好和尚，我包了！”要当和尚，得下点本，——念几年书。哪有不认字的和尚呢！于是明子就开蒙入学，读了《三字经》、《百家姓》、《四言杂字》、《幼学琼林》、《上论、下论》、《上孟、下孟》，每天还写一张仿。村里都夸他字写得好，很黑。
Minghai is called Xiao Mingzi at home. He has been determined to become a monk since he was a child. His hometown is not called "monk", but "being a monk". His hometown produces monks. Just like some places produce pigs, some places produce mats, some places produce hoops and buckets, some places produce cotton, some places produce painters, some places produce bitches, and his hometown produces monks. If there are many brothers, send one out to be a monk. Being a monk also has to be through relationships and help. Some monks in this place have gone far. Some went to Lingyin Temple in Hangzhou, Jing'an Temple in Shanghai, Jinshan Temple in Zhenjiang, and Tianning Temple in Yangzhou. Generally it is a temple in this county. Minghai's family has few fields, and the eldest, second, and third are enough to plant. He is the fourth child. When he was seven years old, his uncle who was a monk came home, and his father and mother discussed with his uncle and decided to make him a monk. He was next to him at the time, and felt that this was really reasonable and there was no reason to object. There are many benefits to being a monk. First, you can eat ready-made meals. Every temple is in charge of food. Second, you can save money. As long as you learn to put on yoga flames and worship Liang Huang, you can get the hard-earned money according to the rules. If you accumulate it, you can marry a commoner in the future; if you don't want to return to the world, you can buy a few acres of land. It is not easy to be a monk, one must have a face like a bright moon, the second must be like a bell and chime, and the third must be smart and have a good memory. His uncle gave him a face-to-face, told him to take a few steps forward and a few steps back, and asked him to shout the number of the cattle to fight: "Gedang-", saying, "Mingzi can definitely be a good monk, I will take care of it!" "If you want to be a monk, you have to study for a few years ,—— a few years. How can there be a monk who doesn't read! So Mingzi enlightened and enrolled, read the "Three Character Classic", "Hundred Family Surnames", "Four Words and Miscellaneous Characters", "Preschool Qionglin", "Shanglun, Xia Lun", "Shangmeng, Xia Meng", and wrote a copy every day. The village praised him for his good writing and very dark.舅舅按照约定的日期又回了家，带了一件他自己穿的和尚领的短衫，叫明子娘改小一点，给明子穿上。明子穿了这件和尚短衫，下身还是在家穿的紫花裤子，赤脚穿了一双新布鞋，跟他爹、他娘磕了一个头，就随舅舅走了。
The uncle went home according to the agreed date, brought a short shirt with a monk's collar that he wore, and asked Mingzi's mother to change it to a little smaller and put it on Mingzi. Mingzi wore this monk's short shirt, the purple flower pants he wore at home, a pair of new cloth shoes barefoot, kowtowed to his father and mother, and left with his uncle.他上学时起了个学名，叫明海。舅舅说，不用改了。于是“明海”就从学名变成了法名。
When he was in school, he had a scientific name, Minghai. My uncle said, no need to change it. So "Minghai" changed from a scientific name to a Dharma name.过了一个湖。好大一个湖！穿过一个县城。县城真热闹：官盐店，税务局，肉铺里挂着成边的猪，一个驴子在磨芝麻，满街都是小磨香油的香味，布店，卖茉莉粉、梳头油的什么斋，卖绒花的，卖丝线的，打把式卖膏药的，吹糖人的，耍蛇的，……他什么都想看看。舅舅一劲地推他：“快走！快走！”
Crossed a lake. What a big lake! Passing through a county seat. The county seat is really lively: the official salt shop, the tax bureau, the butcher shop is hanging with pigs on the edges, a donkey is grinding sesame seeds, the streets are full of the fragrance of small grinding sesame oil, cloth shops, what fasts sell jasmine powder, comb oil and other vegetarians, velvet flowers, silk threads, plasters, sugar blowers, snake tricks,...... He wants to see everything. My uncle pushed him vigorously: "Let's go!" Come on! ”到了一个河边，有一只船在等着他们。船上有一个五十来岁的瘦长瘦长的大伯，船头蹲着一个跟明子差不多大的女孩子，在剥一个莲蓬吃。明子和舅舅坐到舱里，船就开了。
明子听见有人跟他说话，是那个女孩子。
When they arrived at a river, there was a boat waiting for them. There was a slender and slender uncle in his fifties on the boat, and a girl about the same age as Mingzi was squatting at the bow of the boat, peeling a lotus pod to eat. Akiko and her uncle sat in the cabin, and the boat sailed. Akiko heard someone talking to him, it was the girl.“是你要到荸荠庵当和尚吗？”
明子点点头。
“当和尚要烧戒疤呕！你不怕？”
明子不知道怎么回答，就含含糊糊地摇了摇头。
“你叫什么？”
“明海。”
“在家的时候？”
“叫明子。”
"Are you going to be a monk in the water chestnut hermitage?" Akiko nodded. "When a monk wants to burn scars and vomit! Aren't you afraid? ” Akiko didn't know how to answer, so she shook her head vaguely. "What's your name?" "Minghai." "When you're at home?" "My name is Mingzi."“明子！我叫小英子！我们是邻居。我家挨着荸荠庵。——给你！”
小英子把吃剩的半个莲蓬扔给明海，小明子就剥开莲蓬壳，一颗一颗吃起来。
大伯一桨一桨地划着，只听见船桨泼水的声音：
"Mingzi! My name is Xiao Yingzi! We are neighbors. My house is next to the water chestnut hermitage. ——Here you go! ” Xiao Yingzi threw the leftover half of the lotus pod to Minghai, and Xiao Mingzi peeled off the lotus shell and ate it one by one. The uncle rowed paddle by oar, only to hear the sound of the oars splashing water:“哔——许！哔——许！”
"Beep-Xu! Beep-Xu! ”…………
荸荠庵的地势很好，在一片高地上。这一带就数这片地高，当初建庵的人很会选地方。门前是一条河。门外是一片很大的打谷场。三面都是高大的柳树。山门里是一个穿堂。迎门供着弥勒佛。不知是哪一位名士撰写了一副对联：
The terrain of the water chestnut hermitage is very good, on a high ground. This area is counted as high in this area, and the people who built the hermitage are very good at choosing a place. In front of the door is a river. Outside the door is a large threshing field. There are tall willow trees on three sides. Inside the mountain gate is a hall. The door is dedicated to Maitreya Buddha. I don't know which celebrity wrote a couplet:大肚能容容天下难容之事
开颜一笑笑世间可笑之人
A big belly can tolerate the unbearable things in the world Smile and laugh at the ridiculous people in the world弥勒佛背后，是韦驮。过穿堂，是一个不小的天井，种着两棵白果树。天井两边各有三间厢房。走过天井，便是大殿，供着三世佛。佛像连龛才四尺来高。大殿东边是方丈，西边是库房。大殿东侧，有一个小小的六角门，白门绿字，刻着一副对联：
Behind Maitreya Buddha is Wei Tuo. Passing through the hall, there is a large patio with two ginkgo trees. There are three side rooms on each side of the courtyard. Walking through the courtyard, there is the main hall, which is dedicated to the Third Buddha. The Buddha statue is only four feet high. The east side of the hall is the abbot, and the west side is the warehouse. On the east side of the hall, there is a small hexagonal door, with green characters on the white door, engraved with a couplet:一花一世界
三藐三菩提
进门有一个狭长的天井，几块假山石，几盆花，有三间小房。
One flower, one world Perfect and perfect enlightenment There is a long and narrow patio at the entrance, a few rockeries, a few pots of flowers, and three small rooms.小和尚的日子清闲得很。一早起来，开山门，扫地。庵里的地铺的都是箩底方砖，好扫得很，给弥勒佛、韦驮烧一炷香，正殿的三世佛面前也烧一炷香、磕三个头，念三声“南无阿弥陀佛”，敲三声磬。这庵里的和尚不兴做什么早课、晚课，明子这三声磬就全都代替了。然后，挑水，喂猪。然后，等当家和尚，即明子的舅舅起来，教他念经。
The little monk's life is very leisurely. Get up early in the morning, open the mountain gate, and sweep the floor. The floor in the nunnery is paved with square bricks at the bottom of the basket, which is easy to sweep, burn a stick of incense for Maitreya Buddha and Wei Tuo, and also burn a stick of incense in front of the third Buddha in the main hall, kowtow three heads, recite "Namo Amitabha Buddha" three times, and knock the chime three times. The monks in this nunnery are not interested in doing morning and evening classes, so Mingzi's three chimes are all replaced. Then, carry water and feed the pigs. Then, wait for the head monk, Mingzi's uncle, to get up and teach him to chant.教念经也跟教书一样，师父面前一本经，徒弟面前一本经，师父唱一句，徒弟跟着唱一句。是唱哎。舅舅一边唱，一边还用手在桌上拍板。一板一眼，拍得很响，就跟教唱戏一样。是跟教唱戏一样，完全一样哎。连用的名词都一样。舅舅说，念经：一要板眼准，二要合工尺。说：当一个好和尚，得有条好嗓子。说：民国二十年闹大水，运河倒了堤，最后在清水潭合龙，因为大水淹死的人很多，放了一台大焰口，十三大师——十三个正座和尚，各大庙的方丈都来了，下面的和尚上百。谁当这个首座？推来推去，还是石桥——善因寺的方丈！他往上一坐，就跟地藏王菩萨一样，这就不用说了；那一声“开香赞”，围看的上千人立时鸦雀无声。说：嗓子要练，夏练三伏，冬练三九，要练丹田气！说：要吃得苦中苦，方为人上人！说：和尚里也有状元、榜眼、探花！要用心，不要贪玩！舅舅这一番大法说得明海和尚实在是五体投地，于是就一板一眼地跟着舅舅唱起来：
Teaching chanting is the same as teaching, a sutra in front of the master, a sutra in front of the apprentice, the master sings a sentence, and the apprentice sings along. It's singing. While singing, my uncle also clapped the board on the table with his hands. One board at a glance, the shot is very loud, just like teaching opera. It's the same as teaching singing, exactly the same. Even the nouns used are the same. Uncle said that chanting: one must be accurate, and the other must be accurate. Said: To be a good monk, you must have a good voice. Said: In the twenty years of the Republic of China, there was a great flood, the canal collapsed, and finally the dragon was closed in Qingshuitan, because many people drowned in the flood, and a large flame mouth was placed, and the thirteen masters - thirteen monks, the abbots of the major temples came, and the monks below were hundreds. Who will be the first of this? Push around, or the stone bridge - the abbot of the Good Cause Temple! As soon as he sat up, he was just like Ksitigarbha Bodhisattva, needless to say; that "opening incense praise" immediately silenced thousands of people watching. Said: The throat should be practiced, summer practice three dog days, winter practice three nines, and practice dantian qi! Said: You have to endure hardships to be a master! Said: There are also champions, lists, and flowers in the monks! Be attentive and don't be playful! Uncle's Dafa made Monk Minghai really fall to the ground, so he sang along with his uncle one by one:“炉香乍爇——”
“炉香乍爇——”
“法界蒙薰——”
“法界蒙薰——”
“诸佛现金身……”
"The incense burns-" "The incense burns-" "The Dharma Realm is intoxicated-" "The Dharma Realm is intoxicated-" "Buddha cash ......" "Buddha cash ......"“诸佛现金身……”
"The incense burns-" "The incense burns-" "The Dharma Realm is intoxicated-" "The Dharma Realm is intoxicated-" "Buddha cash ......" "Buddha cash ......"…………
等明海学完了早经，——他晚上临睡前还要学一段，叫做晚经，——荸荠庵的师父们就都陆续起床了。
这庵里人口简单，一共六个人。连明海在内，五个和尚。
When Minghai finished studying the morning sutra,—— he had to learn a section before going to bed at night, called the evening sutra,—— and the masters of the water chestnut monastery got up one after another. The population of this nunnery is simple, a total of six people. Including Minghai, there are five monks.有一个老和尚，六十几了，是舅舅的师叔，法名普照，但是知道的人很少，因为很少人叫他法名，都称之为老和尚或老师父，明海叫他师爷爷。这是个很枯寂的人，一天关在房里，就是那“一花一世界”里。也看不见他念佛，只是那么一声不响地坐着。他是吃斋的，过年时除外。
There is an old monk, in his sixties, who is his uncle's uncle, and his Dharma name is universal, but few people know about it, because few people call him by his Dharma name, and they all call him the old monk or the master, and Minghai calls him Master Grandpa. This is a very lonely person, locked in the room one day, in the "one flower, one world". I can't see him chanting Buddha, just sitting silently. He eats fasting, except during the Chinese New Year.下面就是师兄弟三个，仁字排行：仁山、仁海、仁渡。庵里庵外，有的称他们为大师父、二师父；有的称之为山师父、海师父。只有仁渡，没有叫他“渡师父”的，因为听起来不像话，大都直呼之为仁渡。他也只配如此，因为他还年轻，才二十多岁。
The following are the three brothers, ranked by the word Ren: Renshan, Renhai, and Rendu. Inside and outside the nunnery, some call them Master Father and Second Master; some call them Master Shan and Master Hai. Only Rendu did not call him "Master Du", because it didn't sound like words, and most of them called him Rendu. He is only worthy of this, because he is still young, only in his twenties.仁山，即明子的舅舅，是当家的。不叫“方丈”，也不叫“住持”，却叫“当家的”，是很有道理的，因为他确确实实干的是当家的职务。他屋里摆的是一张账桌，桌子上放的是账簿和算盘。账簿共有三本。一本是经账，一本是租账，一本是债账。和尚要做法事，做法事要收钱，——要不，当和尚干什么？常做的法事是放焰口。正规的焰口是十个人。一个正座，一个敲鼓的，两边一边四个。人少了，八个，一边三个，也凑合了。荸荠庵只有四个和尚，要放整焰口就得和别的庙里合伙。这样的时候也有过。通常只是放半台焰口。一个正座，一个敲鼓，另外一边一个。一来找别的庙里合伙费事；二来这一带放得起整焰口的人家也不多。有的时候，谁家死了人，就只请两个，甚至一个和尚咕噜咕噜念一通经，敲打几声法器就算完事。很多人家的经钱不是当时就给，往往要等秋后才还。这就得记账。另外，和尚放焰口的辛苦钱不是一样的。就像唱戏一样，有份子。正座第一份。因为他要领唱，而且还要独唱。当中有一大段“叹骷髅”，别的和尚都放下法器休息，只有首座一个人有板有眼地曼声吟唱。第二份是敲鼓的。你以为这容易呀？哼，单是一开头的“发擂”，手上没功夫就敲不出迟疾顿挫！其余的，就一样了。这也得记上：某月某日、谁家焰口半台，谁正座，谁敲鼓……省得到年底结账时赌咒骂娘。……这庵里有几十亩庙产，租给人种，到时候要收租。庵里还放债。租、债一向倒很少亏欠，因为租佃借钱的人怕菩萨不高兴。这三本账就够仁山忙的了。另外香烛灯火、油盐“福食”，这也得随时记记账呀。除了账簿之外，山师父的方丈的墙上还挂着一块水牌，上漆四个红字：“勤笔免思”。
Renshan, Mingzi's uncle, is the head of the house. It makes sense to call him "head of the house" instead of "abbot" or "abbot", because he did do his job as head of the house. There was an account table in his house, and on the table were account books and abacus. There are three account books. One is the account, the other is the rent, and the other is the debt account. Monks have to do rituals, and they have to collect money for rituals,—— or, what do monks do? The common ritual is to set off a flame. The regular flame mouth is ten people. One is sitting, one beating the drum, and there are four on each side. There are fewer people, eight, three on each side, and they make do. There are only four monks in the water chestnut hermitage, and if you want to put a flame mouth, you have to partner with other temples. There have been times like this. Usually only half a flame mouth is placed. One is the main seat, one beats the drum, and one on the other side. First, it is troublesome to find a partner in another temple; second, there are not many people in this area who can afford to fix the flame mouth. Sometimes, when someone dies, only two people are invited, or even a monk to recite a sutra and beat the magic instrument a few times. Many people's money is not given at that time, and often has to wait until after autumn to repay. This has to be accounted for. In addition, the hard money of the monk is not the same. Just like singing, there is a part. The first seat. Because he has to lead the singer, and he also has to sing solo. There is a large section of "sighing skeletons", and the other monks put down their magic weapons to rest, and only the first one sang loudly. The second one is drumming. Do you think it's easy? Hmph, just the "hair ring" at the beginning, you can't knock out the slow setback without kung fu! The rest is just the same. This also has to be remembered: on a certain day of a certain month, whose flame mouth is half a stage, who is sitting upright, who is beating the drum...... You can save yourself from swearing at the end of the year. …… There are dozens of acres of temple property in this nunnery, which are rented to people and will be rented when the time comes. The nunnery also lends money. Rent and debt have always been rarely owed, because the tenants are afraid that the Bodhisattva will be unhappy. These three accounts are enough for Renshan to be busy. In addition, incense candles, lamps, oil and salt "blessing food", which also have to be kept accounted for at any time. In addition to the account book, there is also a water sign hanging on the wall of Master Shan's abbot, painted with four red characters: "Diligent pen and no thought".仁山所说当一个好和尚的三个条件，他自己其实一条也不具备。他的相貌只要用两个字就说清楚了：黄，胖。声音也不像钟磬，倒像母猪。聪明么？难说，打牌老输。他在庵里从不穿袈裟，连海青直裰也免了。经常是披着件短僧衣，袒露着一个黄色的肚子。下面是光脚趿拉着一双僧鞋，——新鞋他也是趿拉着。他一天就是这样不衫不履地这里走走，那里走走，发出母猪一样的声音：“呣——呣——”。
The three conditions for being a good monk mentioned by Renshan are actually not one of them. His appearance can be made clear in just two words: yellow, fat. The voice is not like a bell or chime, but like a sow. Are you smart? It's hard to say, playing cards always loses. He never wears a robe in the nunnery, and even Haiqing is exempt from straight clothes. He is often wearing a short monk's robe, exposing a yellow belly. Below is a pair of monk's shoes barefoot,—— and he is also pulling on the new shoes. He walked here and there like this all day without clothes, making a sow-like sound: "Ugh-oh-"二师父仁海。他是有老婆的。他老婆每年夏秋之间来住几个月，因为庵里凉快。庵里有六个人，其中之一，就是这位和尚的家眷。仁山、仁渡叫她嫂子，明海叫她师娘。这两口子都很爱干净，整天的洗涮。傍晚的时候，坐在天井里乘凉。白天，闷在屋里不出来。
The second master Renhai. He has a wife. His wife comes to live for a few months every summer and autumn because the nunnery is cool. There are six people in the nunnery, one of whom is the monk's family. Renshan and Rendu call her sister-in-law, and Minghai calls her master's wife. Both of them love to be clean and wash all day long. In the evening, sit in the patio to enjoy the coolness. During the day, I don't come out of the house.三师父是个很聪明精干的人。有时一笔账大师兄扒了半天算盘也算不清，他眼珠子转两转，早算得一清二楚。他打牌赢的时候多，二三十张牌落地，上下家手里有些什么牌，他就差不多都知道了。他打牌时，总有人爱在他后面看歪头胡。谁家约他打牌，就说“想送两个钱给你。”他不但经忏俱通（小庙的和尚能够拜忏的不多），而且身怀绝技，会“飞铙”。七月间有些地方做盂兰会，在旷地上放大焰口，几十个和尚，穿绣花袈裟，飞铙。飞铙就是把十多斤重的大铙钹飞起来。到了一定的时候，全部法器皆停，只几十副大铙紧张急促地敲起来。忽然起手，大铙向半空中飞去，一面飞，一面旋转。然后，又落下来，接住。接住不是平平常常地接住，有各种架势，“犀牛望月”、“苏秦背剑”……这哪是念经，这是耍杂技。也许是地藏王菩萨爱看这个，但真正因此快乐起来的是人，尤其是妇女和孩子。这是年轻漂亮的和尚出风头的机会。一场大焰口过后，也像一个好戏班子过后一样，会有一个两个大姑娘、小媳妇失踪，——跟和尚跑了。他还会放“花焰口”。有的人家，亲戚中多风流子弟，在不是很哀伤的佛事——如做冥寿时，就会提出放花焰口。所谓“花焰口”就是在正焰口之后，叫和尚唱小调，拉丝弦，吹管笛，敲鼓板，而且可以点唱。仁渡一个人可以唱一夜不重头。仁渡前几年一直在外面，近二年才常住在庵里。据说他有相好的，而且不止一个。他平常可是很规矩，看到姑娘媳妇总是老老实实的，连一句玩笑话都不说，一句小调山歌都不唱。有一回，在打谷场上乘凉的时候，一伙人把他围起来，非叫他唱两个不可。他却情不过，说：“好，唱一个。不唱家乡的。家乡的你们都熟。唱个安徽的。”
The third master is a very smart and capable person. Sometimes the senior brother couldn't calculate the abacus for a long time, and his eyes rolled twice, and he had already calculated clearly. He often won when he played cards, twenty or thirty cards landed, and he almost knew what cards were in his hands. When he plays cards, there are always people who like to look at the beard behind him. Whoever asked him to play cards said, "I want to give you two money." Not only is he professed through repentance (there are not many monks in the small temple who can repent), but he also has unique skills and can "fly cymbals". In July, some places held Yulan meetings, enlarging flames on the open ground, dozens of monks, wearing embroidered cassocks and flying cymbals. The flying cymbal is to fly up a large cymbal weighing more than ten pounds. At a certain time, all the magic weapons stopped, and only dozens of large cymbals were struck nervously and hurriedly. Suddenly started, the big cymbal flew into the air, flying and spinning. Then, it fell down again and caught it. Catching is not ordinary catching, there are various postures, "Rhino looking at the moon", "Su Qin back sword"...... This is not chanting, this is acrobatics. Maybe Ksitigarbha Bodhisattva loves to watch this, but it is people, especially women and children, who are really happy because of it. This is an opportunity for young and beautiful monks to be in the limelight. After a big flame, just like after a good performance team, one or two eldest girls and little daughters-in-law will disappear ,—— run away with the monk. He will also put a "flower flame mouth". Some people, many of their relatives have romantic children, and when they are not very sad Buddhist activities, such as doing longevity, they will propose to put flower flames. The so-called "flower flame mouth" is to ask the monk to sing a minor tune, pull strings, play the flute, beat the drum board, and sing a song after the flame mouth. Rendu can sing alone all night without repeating it. Rendu has been outside for a few years and has only lived in the nunnery for the past two years. It is said that he has a good relationship, and there is more than one. He is usually very disciplined, and when he sees his daughter-in-law and daughter-in-law, he is always honest, not even saying a joke or singing a minor folk song. Once, when he was enjoying the shade on the threshing floor, a group of people surrounded him and had to ask him to sing two. He couldn't help but say, "Okay, sing one." Don't sing from your hometown. You are all familiar with your hometown. Sing an Anhui one. ”姐和小郎打大麦，
一转子讲得听不得。
听不得就听不得，
打完了大麦打小麦。
唱完了，大家还嫌不够，他就又唱了一个：
姐儿生得漂漂的，
两个奶子翘翘的。
有心上去摸一把，
Sister and Xiao Lang beat barley, One rotor is inaudible. If you can't hear, you can't hear, After beating the barley and wheat. After singing, everyone thought it wasn't enough, so he sang another one: My sister was born drifting, The two tits are upright. If you have the heart to touch it,心里有点跳跳的。
…………
这个庵里无所谓清规，连这两个字也没人提起。
仁山吃水烟，连出门做法事也带着他的水烟袋。
My heart was a little beating. There is no need to worry about Qing rules in this nunnery, and no one even mentions these two words. Renshan eats hookah, and even goes out to perform rituals with his hookah.他们经常打牌。这是个打牌的好地方。把大殿上吃饭的方桌往门口一搭，斜放着，就是牌桌。桌子一放好，仁山就从他的方丈里把筹码拿出来，哗啦一声倒在桌上。斗纸牌的时候多，搓麻将的时候少。牌客除了师兄弟三人，常来的是一个收鸭毛的，一个打兔子兼偷鸡的，都是正经人。收鸭毛的担一副竹筐，串乡串镇，拉长了沙哑的声音喊叫：
They often play cards. This is a good place to play cards. Put the square table for eating in the hall towards the door and place it diagonally, which is the card table. As soon as the table was set, Renshan took out the chips from his abbot and poured them on the table with a bang. There are more times to fight cards, less time to play mahjong. In addition to the three brothers, the card guests often come to collect duck feathers, and one is a rabbit and a chicken stealer, all of whom are serious people. The duck feathers collector carried a pair of bamboo baskets, stringed the townships and towns, and shouted in a hoarse voice:“鸭毛卖钱——！”
偷鸡的有一件家什——铜蜻蜓。看准了一只老母鸡，把铜蜻蜓一丢，鸡婆子上去就是一口。这一啄，铜蜻蜓的硬簧绷开，鸡嘴撑住了，叫不出来了。正在这鸡十分纳闷的时候，上去一把薅住。
"Duck feathers sell money——! The thief has one piece of furniture - a copper dragonfly. Seeing an old hen, he threw the copper dragonfly, and the chicken woman went up and took a bite. With this peck, the copper dragonfly's hard spring was stretched, and the chicken's mouth was supported, and it couldn't be screamed. When the chicken was very puzzled, he went up and grabbed it.明子曾经跟这位正经人要过铜蜻蜓看看。他拿到小英子家门前试了一试，果然！小英子的娘知道了，骂明子：
“要死了！儿子！你怎么到我家来玩铜蜻蜓了！”
小英子跑过来：
“给我！给我！”
Mingzi once asked this serious person for a bronze dragonfly to see. He took it to Xiao Yingzi's house and tried it, and sure enough! Xiao Yingzi's mother found out and scolded Mingzi: "I'm going to die! Son! Why did you come to my house to play with copper dragonflies! ” Xiao Yingzi ran over: "Give it to me! Give me! ”她也试了试，真灵，一个黑母鸡一下子就把嘴撑住，傻了眼了！
下雨阴天，这二位就光临荸荠庵，消磨一天。
She also tried, really smart, a black hen held her mouth all of a sudden, dumbfounded! On a rainy and cloudy day, these two visited the Water Chestnut Monastery to spend the day.有时没有外客，就把老师叔也拉出来，打牌的结局，大都是当家和尚气得鼓鼓的：“×妈妈的！又输了！下回不来了！”
Sometimes when there are no outsiders, the teacher and uncle are also pulled out, and most of the ending of playing cards is the monk in charge angry: "× mother's! I lost again! I can't come back next time!" ”他们吃肉不瞒人。年下也杀猪。杀猪就在大殿上。一切都和在家人一样，开水、木桶、尖刀。捆猪的时候，猪也是没命地叫。跟在家人不同的，是多一道仪式，要给即将升天的猪念一道“往生咒”，并且总是老师叔念，神情很庄重：
They eat meat without hiding it. Pigs are also killed in the year. Killing pigs is in the main hall. Everything is the same as in lay people, boiling water, wooden barrels, and sharp knives. When tying pigs, pigs also bark desperately. Different from lay people, there is one more ceremony, to recite a "death spell" to the pig that is about to ascend to heaven, and it is always recited by the teacher and uncle, with a very solemn expression:“……一切胎生、卵生、息生，来从虚空来，还归虚空去。往生再世，皆当欢喜。南无阿弥陀佛！”
三师父仁渡一刀子下去，鲜红的猪血就带着很多沫子喷出来。
…………
明子老往小英子家里跑。
“…… All viviparous, oviparous, and breathing births come from the void and return to the void. In the second life, everyone should rejoice. Namo Amitabha! ” The third master Rendu went down with a knife, and the bright red pig blood sprayed out with a lot of foam. Mingzi ran to Xiao Yingzi's house.小英子的家像一个小岛，三面都是河，西面有一条小路通到荸荠庵。独门独户，岛上只有这一家。岛上有六棵大桑树，夏天都结大桑椹，三棵结白的，三棵结紫的；一个菜园子，瓜豆蔬菜，四时不缺。院墙下半截是砖砌的，上半截是泥夯的。大门是桐油油过的，贴着一副万年红的春联：
Xiao Yingzi's home is like a small island, surrounded by rivers on three sides, and there is a path leading to Water Chestnut Monastery on the west side. There is only one family on the island. There are six large mulberry trees on the island, all of which bear big mulberries in summer, three white and three purple; a vegetable garden, melons, beans and vegetables, are not lacking in all seasons. The lower half of the courtyard wall is made of bricks, and the upper half is rammed with mud. The gate is made of tung oil, and there is a pair of Spring Festival couplets in perennial red:向阳门第春常在
积善人家庆有余
Spring is always present at the Xiangyang Gate Accumulated good deeds are more than enough to celebrate门里是一个很宽的院子。院子里一边是牛屋、碓棚；一边是猪圈、鸡窠，还有个关鸭子的栅栏。露天地放着一具石磨。正北面是住房，也是砖基土筑，上面盖的一半是瓦，一半是草。房子翻修了才三年，木料还露着白茬。正中是堂屋，家神菩萨的画像上贴的金还没有发黑。两边是卧房。隔扇窗上各嵌了一块一尺见方的玻璃，明亮亮的，——这在乡下是不多见的。房檐下一边种着一棵石榴树，一边种着一棵栀子花，都齐房檐高了。夏天开了花，一红一白，好看得很。栀子花香得冲鼻子。顺风的时候，在荸荠庵都闻得见。
Inside the door is a very wide yard. On one side of the yard are cow houses and mortar sheds; on the other side are pigsty, chicken coops, and a fence for ducks. There is a stone mill in the open air. To the north is a house, which is also built of brick foundation, half of which is tiles and half grass. The house has only been renovated for three years, and the wood is still showing white stubble. In the middle is the main house, and the gold pasted on the portrait of the family god and bodhisattva has not yet turned black. On both sides are bedrooms. A piece of glass is embedded in each window, which is bright and bright,—— which is rare in the countryside. There is a pomegranate tree planted under the eaves and a gardenia on the other, all of which are as high as the eaves. In summer, the flowers bloom, red and white, very beautiful. Gardenia flowers are so fragrant that they rush to the nose. When the wind is favorable, you can smell it in the water chestnut hermitage.这家人口不多。他家当然是姓赵。一共四口人：赵大伯、赵大妈，两个女儿，大英子、小英子。老两口没有儿子。因为这些年人不得病，牛不生灾，也没有大旱大水闹蝗虫，日子过得很兴旺。他们家自己有田，本来够吃的了，又租种了庵上的十亩田。自己的田里，一亩种了荸荠，——这一半是小英子的主意，她爱吃荸荠，一亩种了茨菇。家里喂了一大群鸡鸭，单是鸡蛋鸭毛就够一年的油盐了。赵大伯是个能干人。他是一个“全把式”，不但田里场上样样精通，还会罩鱼、洗磨、凿砻、修水车、修船、砌墙、烧砖、箍桶、劈篾、绞麻绳。他不咳嗽，不腰疼，结结实实，像一棵榆树。人很和气，一天不声不响。赵大伯是一棵摇钱树，赵大娘就是个聚宝盆。大娘精神得出奇。五十岁了，两个眼睛还是清亮亮的。不论什么时候，头都是梳得滑滴滴的，身上衣服都是格挣挣的。像老头子一样，她一天不闲着。煮猪食，喂猪，腌咸菜，——她腌的咸萝卜干非常好吃，舂粉子，磨小豆腐，编蓑衣，织芦篚。她还会剪花样子。这里嫁闺女，陪嫁妆，磁坛子、锡罐子，都要用梅红纸剪出吉祥花样，贴在上面，讨个吉利，也才好看：“丹凤朝阳”呀、“白头到老”呀、“子孙万代”呀、“福寿绵长”呀。二三十里的人家都来请她：“大娘，好日子是十六，你哪天去呀？”——“十五，我一大清早就来！”
This family is not very populous. Of course, his family is surnamed Zhao. There are four people in total: Uncle Zhao, Aunt Zhao, two daughters, Dayingzi and Xiao Yingzi. The old couple has no sons. Because people have not been sick in recent years, cattle have not suffered disasters, and there have been no droughts and floods with locusts, and life has been very prosperous. Their family has their own land, which was enough to eat, and rented ten acres of land on the nunnery. In her own field, one acre of water chestnuts was planted,—— half of which was Xiao Yingzi's idea, she loved to eat water chestnuts, and planted mushrooms on an acre. The family fed a large group of chickens and ducks, and eggs and duck feathers alone were enough for a year's worth of oil and salt. Uncle Zhao is a capable person. He is a "full-handled style", not only proficient in everything in the field, but also covers fish, washes and grinds, chisels, repairs waterwheels, repairs boats, builds walls, burns bricks, hoops barrels, splits bamboo, and twists hemp ropes. He doesn't cough, doesn't have back pain, and is strong, like an elm tree. People are very kind and silent all day. Uncle Zhao is a cash cow, and Aunt Zhao is a cornucopia. Auntie is surprisingly energetic. At the age of fifty, her eyes are still bright. No matter when, her hair is combed smoothly and her clothes are hard. Like an old man, she is not idle all day. Cooking pig food, feeding pigs, pickling pickles,—— and her pickled dried radish are very delicious, pounding flour, grinding small tofu, weaving raincoats, and weaving reed baskets. She also cuts flowers. Here, marrying a girl, dowry, magnetic jar, tin jar, you have to use plum red paper to cut out auspicious patterns, paste them on them, and ask for good luck, so that it looks good: "Danfeng Chaoyang", "White Head to Old Age", "Descendants", "Long Blessings". People in twenty or thirty miles came to invite her: "Auntie, the good day is sixteen, when are you going?" ——"Fifteen, I'll come early in the morning!" ”“一定呀！”——“一定！一定！”
"Definitely!" ——"Definitely! Certain! ”两个女儿，长得跟她娘像一个模子里托出来的。眼睛长得尤其像，白眼珠鸭蛋青，黑眼珠棋子黑，定神时如清水，闪动时像星星。浑身上下，头是头，脚是脚。头发滑滴滴的，衣服格挣挣的。——这里的风俗，十五六岁的姑娘就都梳上头了。这两个丫头，这一头的好头发！通红的发根，雪白的簪子！娘女三个去赶集，一集的人都朝她们望。
The two daughters look like their mother in a mold. The eyes look particularly similar, the white eyes are green and the black eyeballs are black, like clear water when you are calm, and like stars when you flash. The whole body is up and down, the head is the head, and the feet are the feet. The hair is slippery and the clothes are tight. ——The custom here is that girls aged fifteen or sixteen comb their hair. These two girls, this one has good hair! Red hair roots, snow-white hairpins! The three of them went to the market, and everyone in the episode looked at them.姐妹俩长得很像，性格不同。大姑娘很文静，话很少，像父亲。小英子比她娘还会说，一天咭咭呱呱地不停。大姐说：
“你一天到晚咭咭呱呱——”
“像个喜鹊！”
“你自己说的！——吵得人心乱！”
The sisters look very similar and have different personalities. The eldest girl is very quiet, talks little, and is like her father. Xiao Yingzi can say more than her mother, and she keeps babbling all day long. The eldest sister said: "You are a card all day long-" "Like a magpie!" "You said it yourself! - It's disturbing! ”“心乱？”
“心乱！”
“你心乱怪我呀！”
"Disturbed?" "Disturbed!" "You blame me for being confused!"二姑娘话里有话。大英子已经有了人家。小人她偷偷地看过，人很敦厚，也不难看，家道也殷实，她满意。已经下过小定，日子还没有定下来。她这二年，很少出房门，整天赶她的嫁妆。大裁大剪，她都会。挑花绣花，不如娘。她可又嫌娘出的样子太老了。她到城里看过新娘子，说人家现在绣的都是活花活草。这可把娘难住了。最后是喜鹊忽然一拍屁股：“我给你保举一个人！”
The second girl has something in her words. Dayingzi already has someone. She secretly saw the villain, she was very honest and not ugly, and her family was also well-organized, and she was satisfied. has made a small decision, and the day has not yet been decided. In the past two years, she has rarely left the house and chased her dowry all day long. She can cut and cut big things. Picking flowers and embroidering flowers is not as good as her mother. She thought her mother looked too old. She went to the city to see the bride and said that they were embroidering live flowers and grass now. This stumped my mother. Finally, the magpie suddenly patted his buttocks: "I'll sponsor you someone!" ”这人是谁？是明子。明子念“上孟下孟”的时候，不知怎么得了半套《芥子园》，他喜欢得很。到了荸荠庵，他还常翻出来看，有时还把旧账簿子翻过来，照着描。小英子说：
“他会画！画得跟活的一样！”
Who is this person? It's Mingzi. When Mingzi read "Shang Meng Xia Meng", he somehow got half a set of "Mustard Seed Garden", and he liked it very much. When he arrived at Water Chestnut Monastery, he often turned it out to read, and sometimes turned over the old account book and drew it as he wrote. Xiao Yingzi said: "He can draw! Draw as if he were alive! ”小英子把明海请到家里来，给他磨墨铺纸，小和尚画了几张，大英子喜欢得了不得：
Xiao Yingzi invited Minghai to his house, grinded ink and laid paper for him, and the little monk drew a few pictures, and Dayingzi liked it very much:“就是这样！就是这样！这就可以乱孱！”——所谓“乱孱”是绣花的一种针法：绣了第一层，第二层的针脚插进第一层的针缝，这样颜色就可由深到淡，不露痕迹，不像娘那一代绣的花是平针，深浅之间，界限分明，一道一道的。小英子就像个书僮，又像个参谋：
"That's it! That's it! This can be messed up!" ——The so-called "messy" is a stitch of embroidery: the first layer is embroidered, and the stitches of the second layer are inserted into the needle seam of the first layer, so that the color can be from dark to light, without showing any traces, unlike the flowers embroidered by the mother's generation are flat needles, and the boundaries between the shades are clear, one by one. Xiao Yingzi is like a book boy and a staff officer:“画一朵石榴花！”
“画一朵栀子花！”
她把花掐来，明海就照着画。
到后来，凤仙花、石竹子、水蓼、淡竹叶、天竺果子、腊梅花，他都能画。
大娘看着也喜欢，搂住明海的和尚头：
"Draw a pomegranate flower!" "Draw a gardenia!" She pinched the flowers, and Minghai followed the painting. Later, he could paint impatiens, dianthus, smartweed, light bamboo leaves, Tianzhu fruits, and plum blossoms. The aunt looked at it and liked it, and hugged Minghai's monk's head:“你真聪明！你给我当一个干儿子吧！”
小英子捺住他的肩膀，说：
“快叫！快叫！”
小明子跪在地下磕了一个头，从此就叫小英子的娘做干娘。
"You're so smart! Be me a godson! ” Xiao Yingzi put his shoulders on his shoulders and said: "Scream! Scream! ” Xiao Mingzi knelt on the ground and kowtowed, and from then on she called Xiao Yingzi's mother a godmother.大英子绣的三双鞋，三十里方圆都传遍了。很多姑娘都走路坐船来看。看完了，就说：“啧啧啧，真好看！这哪是绣的，这是一朵鲜花！”她们就拿了纸来央大娘求了小和尚来画。有求画帐檐的，有求画门帘飘带的，有求画鞋头花的。每回明子来画花，小英子就给他做点好吃的，煮两个鸡蛋，蒸一碗芋头，煎几个藕团子。
The three pairs of shoes embroidered by Dayingzi spread all over the thirty miles. Many girls walked and took boats to watch. After reading it, he said, "Tsk tsk, it's so beautiful! This is not embroidered, this is a flower!" They took the paper and asked Aunt Yang to ask the little monk to paint it. Some asked to paint the eaves, some asked to paint the curtain streamers, and some asked to paint the toe flowers. Every time Mingzi came to paint flowers, Xiao Yingzi would make him something delicious, boil two eggs, steam a bowl of taro, and fry a few lotus root dumplings.因为照顾姐姐赶嫁妆，田里的零碎生活小英子就全包了。她的帮手，是明子。
Because she took care of her sister's dowry, Xiao Yingzi took care of all the fragmentary life in the field. Her helper is Akiko.这地方的忙活是栽秧、车高田水、薅头遍草，再就是割稻子、打场了。这几茬重活，自己一家是忙不过来的。这地方兴换工。排好了日期，几家顾一家，轮流转。不收工钱，但是吃好的。一天吃六顿，两头见肉，顿顿有酒。干活时，敲着锣鼓，唱着歌，热闹得很。其余的时候，各顾各，不显得紧张。
The busy work in this place is planting seedlings, washing high fields, weeding grass, and then cutting rice and fighting. These few stubbles are heavy work, and my family is too busy. This place is changing jobs. The date is arranged, and several families take turns taking turns. No wages, but good food. Eat six meals a day, see meat at both ends, and drink wine at every turn. When working, beating gongs and drums, singing, and very lively. The rest of the time, take care of each other and don't seem nervous.薅三遍草的时候，秧已经很高了，低下头看不见人。一听见非常脆亮的嗓子在一片浓绿里唱：
栀子哎开花哎六瓣头哎……
姐家哎门前哎一道桥哎……
When the grass was plowed three times, the seedlings were already very tall, and no one could be seen when they lowered their heads. As soon as I heard a very crisp and bright voice singing in a thick green: Gardenia blooms, six-petal heads...... Sister's house shouts a bridge in front of the door......明海就知道小英子在哪里，三步两步就赶到，赶到就低头薅起草来。傍晚牵牛“打汪”，是明子的事。——水牛怕蚊子。这里的习惯，牛卸了轭，饮了水，就牵到一口和好泥水的“汪”里，由它自己打滚扑腾，弄得全身都是泥浆，这样蚊子就咬不透了。低田上水，只要一挂十四轧的水车，两个人车半天就够了。明子和小英子就伏在车杠上，不紧不慢地踩着车轴上的拐子，轻轻地唱着明海向三师父学来的各处山歌。打场的时候，明子能替赵大伯一会，让他回家吃饭。——赵家自己没有场，每年都在荸荠庵外面的场上打谷子。他一扬鞭子，喊起了打场号子：
Minghai knew where Xiao Yingzi was, and he arrived in two or three steps, and when he arrived, he lowered his head and drafted. In the evening, the cow "fights" is Mingzi's business. ——Buffaloes are afraid of mosquitoes. The habit here is that when the cow unyokes and drinks water, it is led into a mouthful of muddy water, and it rolls and flutters on its own, making the whole body covered in mud, so that the mosquitoes cannot bite through. As long as a fourteen-roll waterwheel is hung, it is enough for two people to drive for half a day. Mingzi and Xiao Yingzi lay on the bar, stepping on the crutches on the axle unhurriedly, and gently singing the folk songs that Minghai learned from the third master. During the fight, Mingzi could help Uncle Zhao for a while and let him go home for dinner. ——The Zhao family does not have a field of their own, and they threw millet on the field outside the water chestnut hermitage every year. He raised his whip and shouted the number of the fight:“格当嘚——”
这打场号子有音无字，可是九转十三弯，比什么山歌号子都好听。赵大娘在家，听见明子的号子，就侧起耳朵：
“这孩子这条嗓子！”
连大英子也停下针线：
“真好听！”
"Gedang-" This fight number has no sound, but it is better than any folk song number. Aunt Zhao was at home, and when she heard Mingzi's trumpet, she tilted her ears: "This kid's voice!" Even Da Yingzi stopped needlework: "It's so nice!"小英子非常骄傲地说：
“一十三省数第一！”
Xiao Yingzi said very proudly: "Thirteen provinces are the best!"晚上，他们一起看场。——荸荠庵收来的租稻也晒在场上。他们并肩坐在一个石磙子上，听青蛙打鼓，听寒蛇唱歌，——这个地方以为蝼蛄叫是蚯蚓叫，而且叫蚯蚓叫“寒蛇”，听纺纱婆子不停地纺纱，“唦——”，看萤火虫飞来飞去，看天上的流星。
In the evening, they watched the field together. ——The rented rice collected by the water chestnut hermitage was also dried on the field. They sat side by side on a stone pile, listening to frogs beating drums and cold snakes singing,—— This place thinks that the call of mole crickets is the cry of earthworms, and the earthworm is called "cold snake", listening to the spinning woman spinning non-stop, "Oh-", watching fireflies fly around, watching the meteors in the sky.“呀！我忘了在裤带上打一个结！”小英子说。
这里的人相信，在流星掉下来的时候在裤带上打一个结，心里想什么好事，就能如愿。
"Ah! I forgot to tie a knot on my trouser belt!" Xiao Yingzi said. People here believe that when a meteor falls, tie a knot on your trouser belt and think of something good in your heart, and you can get your wish.…………
“”荸荠，这是小英子最爱干的生活。秋天过去了，地净场光，荸荠的叶子枯了，——荸荠的笔直的小葱一样的圆叶子里是一格一格的，用手一捋，哔哔地响，小英子最爱捋着玩，——荸荠藏在烂泥里。赤了脚，在凉浸浸滑溜溜的泥里踩着，——哎，一个硬疙瘩！伸手下去，一个红紫红紫的荸荠。她自己爱干这生活，还拉了明子一起去。她老是故意用自己的光脚去踩明子的脚。
"" Water chestnuts, this is Xiao Yingzi's favorite life. Autumn has passed, the ground is clear, the leaves of water chestnuts have withered,—— the straight shallot-like round leaves of water chestnuts are grid by grid, with a touch of hands, beeping, Xiao Yingzi loves to play with ,—— water chestnuts are hidden in the mud. Barefoot, stepping on the cool soaked and slippery mud,——Hey, a hard pimple! Reach out, a red, purple, and purple water chestnut. She loves to do this life herself, and she also took Mingzi with her. She always deliberately used her bare feet to step on Mingzi's feet.她挎着一篮子荸荠回去了，在柔软的田埂上留了一串脚印。明海看着她的脚印，傻了。五个小小的趾头，脚掌平平的，脚跟细细的，脚弓部分缺了一块。明海身上有一种从来没有过的感觉，他觉得心里痒痒的。这一串美丽的脚印把小和尚的心搞乱了。
She went back with a basket of water chestnuts on her back, leaving a string of footprints on the soft ridges. Minghai looked at her footprints and was dumbfounded. Five small toes, the soles of the feet are flat, the heels are thin, and the arch part is missing. Minghai had a feeling he had never felt before, and he felt itchy in his heart. This beautiful string of footprints messed up the little monk's heart.…………
明子常搭赵家的船进城，给庵里买香烛，买油盐。闲时是赵大伯划船；忙时是小英子去，划船的是明子。
Mingzi often took the Zhao family's boat into the city to buy incense candles and oil and salt for the nunnery. In his spare time, Uncle Zhao rows; when he is busy, Xiao Yingzi goes, and Mingzi rows.从庵赵庄到县城，当中要经过一片很大的芦花荡子。芦苇长得密密的，当中一条水路，四边不见人。划到这里，明子总是无端端地觉得心里很紧张，他就使劲地划桨。
小英子喊起来：
From Anzhao Village to the county seat, you have to pass through a large reed swing in the middle. The reeds grew densely, and there was a waterway in the middle, and there were no people on all sides. When he rowed here, Mingzi always felt very nervous for no reason, so he paddled hard. Xiao Yingzi shouted:“明子！明子！你怎么啦？你发疯啦？为什么划得这么快？”
…………
明海到善因寺去受戒。
“你真的要去烧戒疤呀？”
“真的。”
“好好的头皮上烧八个洞，那不疼死啦？”
"Mingzi! Mingzi! What's wrong with you? Are you crazy? Why are you rowing so fast?" ” Minghai went to Shanyin Temple to receive ordination. "Are you really going to burn the scar?" "Really." "If you burn eight holes in your scalp, won't it hurt to death?"“咬咬牙。舅舅说这是当和尚的一大关，总要过的。”
“不受戒不行吗？”
“不受戒的是野和尚。”
“受了戒有啥好处？”
“受了戒就可以到处云游，逢寺挂褡。”
“什么叫‘挂褡’？”
Gritted his teeth. My uncle said that this is a big hurdle to be a monk, and it must be passed. ” "Can't you not be ordained?" "It is the wild monk who is not ordained." "What are the benefits of taking precepts?" "After receiving the precepts, you can travel everywhere and hang up your clothes in the temple." "What is a 'hanging coat'?"“就是在庙里住。有斋就吃。”
“不把钱？”
“不把钱。有法事，还得先尽外来的师父。”
“怪不得都说‘远来的和尚会念经’。就凭头上这几个戒疤？”
“还要有一份戒牒。”
"It is to live in the temple. If there is fasting, eat it. ” "Don't give money?" "Don't give money. If there is a Dharma, you have to do it first. ” "No wonder they all say, 'Monks from afar can chant scriptures'. Just by virtue of these few ring scars on your head? ” "There must also be a warning."“闹半天，受戒就是领一张和尚的合格文凭呀！”
“就是！”
“我划船送你去。”
“好。”
小英子早早就把船划到荸荠庵门前。不知是什么道理，她兴奋得很。她充满了好奇心，想去看看善因寺这座大庙，看看受戒是个啥样子。
Xiao Yingzi rowed the boat to the door of the Water Chestnut Monastery early. I don't know why, she was very excited. She was full of curiosity and wanted to see the big temple of Shanyin Temple and see what it was like to be ordained.善因寺是全县第一大庙，在东门外，面临一条水很深的护城河，三面都是大树，寺在树林子里，远处只能隐隐约约看到一点金碧辉煌的屋顶，不知道有多大。树上到处挂着“谨防恶犬”的牌子。这寺里的狗出名的厉害。平常不大有人进去。放戒期间，任人游看，恶狗都锁起来了。
Shanyin Temple is the largest temple in the county, outside the east gate, facing a very deep moat, surrounded by big trees on three sides, the temple is in the woods, and you can only faintly see a little resplendent roof in the distance, I don't know how big it is. There are signs on the trees that say "Beware of vicious dogs". The dogs in this temple are notoriously powerful. Usually not many people go in. During the precepts, people were allowed to watch, and the vicious dogs were locked.好大一座庙！庙门的门坎比小英子的肐膝都高。迎门矗着两块大牌，一边一块，一块写着斗大两个大字：“放戒”，一块是：“禁止喧哗”。这庙里果然是气象庄严，到了这里谁也不敢大声咳嗽。明海自去报名办事，小英子就到处看看。好家伙，这哼哈二将、四大天王，有三丈多高，都是簇新的，才装修了不久。天井有二亩地大，铺着青石，种着苍松翠柏。“大雄宝殿”，这才真是个“大殿”！一进去，凉嗖嗖的。到处都是金光耀眼。释迦牟尼佛坐在一个莲花座上。单是莲座，就比小英子还高。抬起头来也看不全他的脸，只看到一个微微闭着的嘴唇和胖敦敦的下巴。两边的两根大红蜡烛，一搂多粗。佛像前的大供桌上供着鲜花、绒花、绢花，还有珊瑚树、玉如意、整棵的大象牙。香炉里烧着檀香。小英子出了庙，闻着自己的衣服都是香的。挂了好些幡。这些幡不知是什么缎子的，那么厚重，绣的花真细。这么大一口磬，里头能装五担水！这么大一个木鱼，有一头牛大，漆得通红的。她又去转了转罗汉堂，爬到千佛楼上看了看。真有一千个小佛！她还跟着一些人去看了看藏经楼。藏经楼没有什么看头，都是经书！妈吔！逛了这么一圈，腿都酸了。小英子想起还要给家里打油，替姐姐配丝线，给娘买鞋面布，给自己买两个坠围裙飘带的银蝴蝶，给爹买旱烟，就出庙了。
What a big temple! The threshold of the temple gate is higher than Xiao Yingzi's knees. There are two big signs standing at the door, one on one side and the other with the words "Put the Ring" written on it: "Release the ring", and the other is: "No noise". The weather in this temple is really solemn, and no one dares to cough loudly here. Since Minghai went to sign up for errands, Xiao Yingzi looked around. Good guy, this second general and the four heavenly kings are more than three feet high, all of which are new and have only been renovated for a long time. The courtyard is two acres large, paved with bluestone, and planted with green pines and cypresses. "Daxiong Treasure Hall", this is really a "hall"! As soon as you enter, it was cool. Golden light dazzled everywhere. Shakyamuni Buddha sat on a lotus seat. The rosette alone is taller than Xiao Yingzi. When I raised my head, I couldn't see his face, only a slightly closed lip and a fat chin. The two big red candles on both sides are thick together. The large offering table in front of the Buddha statue is filled with flowers, velvet flowers, silk flowers, as well as coral trees, jade ruyi, and whole elephant tusks. Sandalwood burns in the incense burner. Xiaoyingzi left the temple and smelled that her clothes were incense. Hang many flags. I don't know what kind of satin these flags are, they are so thick, and the embroidered flowers are really fine. Such a big chime can hold five loads of water in it! Such a big wooden fish, the size of a cow, painted red. She went around the Luohan Hall again and climbed to the Thousand Buddha Tower to take a look. There are really a thousand little Buddhas! She also followed some people to see the scripture building. There is nothing to see in the scripture building, it's all scriptures! Mom! After walking around like this, my legs were sore. Xiao Yingzi remembered that she still had to oil the family, match silk thread for her sister, buy upper cloth for her mother, buy two silver butterflies with apron streamers for herself, and buy dry tobacco for her father, and left the temple.等把事情办齐，晌午了。她又到庙里看了看，和尚正在吃粥。好大一个“膳堂”，坐得下八百个和尚。吃粥也有这样多讲究：正面法座上摆着两个锡胆瓶，里面插着红绒花，后面盘膝坐着一个穿了大红满金绣袈裟的和尚，手里拿了戒尺。这戒尺是要打人的。哪个和尚吃粥吃出了声音，他下来就是一戒尺。不过他并不真的打人，只是做个样子。真稀奇，那么多的和尚吃粥，竟然不出一点声音！她看见明子也坐在里面，想跟他打个招呼又不好打。想了想，管他禁止不禁止喧哗，就大声喊了一句：“我走啦！”她看见明子目不斜视地微微点了点头，就不管很多人都朝自己看，大摇大摆地走了。
When things are done, it's noon. She went to the temple again to see that the monk was eating porridge. What a big "dining hall" that can seat 800 monks. There are also so many particularities about eating porridge: there are two tin bottles on the front seat, with red velvet flowers inserted in them, and a monk wearing a bright red and gold embroidered cassock sitting cross-legged behind him, holding a ruler in his hand. This ruler is meant to hit people. Which monk eats porridge and makes a sound, he comes down with a ruler. But he didn't really hit people, he just pretended to be. It's really strange that so many monks eat porridge without making a sound! She saw that Mingzi was also sitting inside, and wanted to say hello to him, but it was not easy to fight. After thinking about it, regardless of whether he forbade the noise or not, he shouted loudly: "I'm leaving!" She saw Akiko nodding slightly without squinting, so she swaggered away regardless of how many people looked at her.第四天一大清早小英子就去看明子。她知道明子受戒是第三天半夜，——烧戒疤是不许人看的。她知道要请老剃头师傅剃头，要剃得横摸顺摸都摸不出头发茬子，要不然一烧，就会“走”了戒，烧成了一片。她知道是用枣泥子先点在头皮上，然后用香头子点着。她知道烧了戒疤就喝一碗蘑菇汤，让它“发”，还不能躺下，要不停地走动，叫做“散戒”。这些都是明子告诉她的。明子是听舅舅说的。
Early in the morning of the fourth day, Xiao Yingzi went to see Mingzi. She knew that Mingzi was ordained in the middle of the night on the third day,—— and the burning scar was not allowed to be seen. She knew that if she had to ask the old shaving master to shave her head, she would not be able to find the hair stubble even if she shaved it horizontally, otherwise she would "leave" the ring and burn into pieces. She knew that she would use jujube mud to light the scalp first, and then light it with incense heads. She knew that after burning the ring scar, she drank a bowl of mushroom soup to let it "hair", and she couldn't lie down, she had to keep walking, which was called "loose precepts". These are all things Mingzi told her. Mingzi listened to her uncle.她一看，和尚真在那里“散戒”，在城墙根底下的荒地里。一个一个，穿了新海青，光光的头皮上都有八个黑点子。——这黑疤掉了，才会露出白白的、圆圆的“戒疤”。和尚都笑嘻嘻的，好像很高兴。她一眼就看见了明子。隔着一条护城河，就喊他：
When she saw it, the monk was really "loosening the rings" there, in the wasteland under the base of the city wall. One by one, wearing new sea green, there were eight black dots on the shiny scalp. ——When this black scar falls off, the white and round "ring scar" will be revealed. The monks were all smiling, as if they were very happy. She saw Akiko at a glance. Across a moat, he called him:“明子！”
“小英子！”
“你受了戒啦？”
“受了。”
“疼吗？”
“疼。”
“现在还疼吗？”
“现在疼过去了。”
“你哪天回去？”
“后天。”
“上午？下午？”
"Mingzi!" "Little Yingzi!" "Are you ordained?" "Suffer." "Does it hurt?" "It hurts." "Does it still hurt now?" "It hurts now." "When will you go back?" "The day after tomorrow." "Morning? Afternoon? ”“下午。”
“我来接你！”
“好！”
…………
小英子把明海接上船。
"Afternoon." "I'll pick you up!" "Okay!" Xiao Yingzi took Minghai onto the boat.小英子这天穿了一件细白夏布上衣，下边是黑洋纱的裤子，赤脚穿了一双龙须草的细草鞋，头上一边插着一朵栀子花，一边插着一朵石榴花。她看见明子穿了新海青，里面露出短褂子的白领子，就说：“把你那外面的一件脱了，你不热呀！”
Xiaoyingzi wore a thin white summer cloth top that day, black gauze pants underneath, a pair of dragon beard straw sandals barefoot, and a gardenia flower on one side and a pomegranate flower on the other. She saw that Mingzi was wearing a new sea green, and the white collar with a short coat was exposed inside, so she said, "Take off your outer one, you're not hot!" ”他们一人一把桨。小英子在中舱，明子扳艄，在船尾。
她一路问了明子很多话，好像一年没有看见了。
她问，烧戒疤的时候，有人哭吗？喊吗？
明子说，没有人哭。有个山东和尚骂人：
Each of them has an oar. Xiao Yingzi is in the middle cabin, and Mingzi is in the stern of the boat. She asked Akiko a lot of words along the way, as if she hadn't seen her for a year. She asked, when the ring scar was burned, did anyone cry? Shout? Mingzi said, no one cried. A Shandong monk scolded:“俺日你奶奶！俺不烧了！”
她问善因寺的方丈石桥是相貌和声音都很出众吗？
“是的。”
“说他的方丈比小姐的绣房还讲究？”
“讲究。什么东西都是绣花的。”
“他屋里很香？”
"My day, your grandma! I won't burn anymore!" ” She asked the abbot of Shanyin Temple, Shiqiao, if he had outstanding appearance and voice? "Yes." "Say that his abbot is more particular than the young lady's embroidery room?" "Particular. Everything is embroidered. ” "His house smells good?"“很香。他烧的是伽楠香，贵得很。”
“听说他会做诗。会画画，会写字？”
“会。庙里走廊两头的砖额上，都刻着他写的大字。”
“他是有个小老婆吗？”
“有一个。”
“才十九岁？”
"It's very fragrant. He burned ganan incense, which was very expensive. ” "I heard that he can write poetry. Can draw, can write? ” "Yes. The bricks at both ends of the corridor in the temple are engraved with the big characters he wrote. ” "Does he have a little wife?" "There is one." "Only nineteen years old?"“听说。”
“好看吗？”
“都说好看。”
“你没看见？”
“我怎么会看见？我关在庙里。”
明子告诉她，善因寺一个老和尚告诉他，寺里有意选他当沙弥尾，不过还没有定，要等主事的和尚商议。
"I heard." "Does it look good?" "They all say it's good-looking." "Didn't you see it?" "How could I see it? I'm locked up in the temple. ” Akiko told her that an old monk from the Zenyin Temple told him that the temple intended to choose him as a novice, but it had not yet been decided, and he had to wait for the monk in charge to discuss.“什么叫‘沙弥尾’？”
“放一堂戒，要选出一个沙弥头，一个沙弥尾。沙弥头要老成，要会念很多经。沙弥尾要年轻，聪明，相貌好。”
“当了沙弥尾跟别的和尚有什么不同？”
"What is 'novice tail'?" "To put a precept, you must choose a novice head and a novice tail. The novice head must be mature and able to recite many scriptures. The novice tail should be young, smart, and good-looking. ” "What is the difference between being a novice tail and other monks?"“沙弥头，沙弥尾，将来都能当方丈。现在的方丈退居了，就当。石桥原来就是沙弥尾。”
“你当沙弥尾吗？”
“还不一定哪。”
“你当方丈，管善因寺？管这么大一个庙？！”
“还早呐！”
"The head of the novice, the tail of the novice, can be an abbot in the future. The current abbot has retired, just be. The stone bridge turned out to be the tail of the novice. ” "Are you a novice tail?" "Not necessarily." "You are the abbot, in charge of the Good Cause Temple? Take care of such a big temple?! ” "It's still early!"划了一气，小英子说：“你不要当方丈！”
“好，不当。”
“你也不要当沙弥尾！”
“好，不当。”
又划了一气，看见那一片芦花荡子了。
After a stroke, Xiao Yingzi said: "Don't be an abbot!" ” "Okay, no." "Don't be a novice tail either!" "Okay, not right." I took another breath and saw the reed flower prodigal.小英子忽然把桨放下，走到船尾，趴在明子的耳朵旁边，小声地说：
“我给你当老婆，你要不要？”
明子眼睛鼓得大大的。
“你说话呀！”
明子说：“嗯。”
“什么叫‘嗯’呀！要不要，要不要？”
Xiao Yingzi suddenly put down the oar, walked to the stern of the boat, lay down next to Mingzi's ear, and whispered: "I'll be your wife, do you want it?" Mingzi's eyes bulged wide. "You talk!" Akiko said, "Hmm." ” "What do you mean by 'um'! Do you want it, do you want it? ”明子大声地说：“要！”
“你喊什么！”
明子小小声说：“要——！”
“快点划！”
英子跳到中舱，两只桨飞快地划起来，划进了芦花荡。
Akiko said loudly: "Yes! ” "What are you shouting!" Mingzi whispered, "I want to ——! ” "Hurry up and row!" Yingzi jumped to the middle cabin, and the two oars quickly rowed up and rowed into Luhuadang.芦花才吐新穗。紫灰色的芦穗，发着银光，软软的，滑溜溜的，像一串丝线。有的地方结了蒲棒，通红的，像一枝一枝小蜡烛。青浮萍，紫浮萍。长脚蚊子，水蜘蛛。野菱角开着四瓣的小白花。惊起一只青桩（一种水鸟），擦着芦穗，扑鲁鲁鲁飞远了。
The reeds spit out new ears. The purple-gray reed ears glow silvery, soft, slippery, like a string of silk threads. In some places, cattails are tied, bright red, like small candles. Green duckweed, purple duckweed. Long-legged mosquitoes, water spiders. Wild water chestnuts bloom with four-petaled small white flowers. Startled a green stake (a kind of water bird), rubbed the reed ears, and flew away.…………
一九八〇年八月十二日，写四十三年前的一个梦

[1] 本篇原载《北京文学》1980年第十期；初收《汪曾祺短篇小说选》，北京出版社，1982年2月。

岁寒三友

岁寒三友[1]
On August 12, 1980, I wrote a dream from forty-three years ago [1] This article was originally published in Beijing Literature, No. 10, 1980; First received "Selected Short Stories of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Publishing House, February 1982. Three friends [1]这三个人是：王瘦吾、陶虎臣、靳彝甫。王瘦吾原先开绒线店，陶虎臣开炮仗店，靳彝甫是个画画的。他们是从小一块长大的。这是三个说上不上，说下不下的人。既不是缙绅先生，也不是引车卖浆者流。他们的日子时好时坏。好的时候桌上有两个菜，一荤一素，还能烫二两酒；坏的时候，喝粥，甚至断炊。三个人的名声倒都是好的。他们都没有做过伤天害理的事，对人从不尖酸刻薄，对地方的公益，从不袖手旁观。某处的桥坍了，要修一修；哪里发现一名“路倒”，要掩埋起来；闹时疫的时候，在码头路口设一口瓷缸，内装药茶，施给来往行人；一场大火之后，请道士打醮禳灾……遇有这一类的事，需要捐款，首事者把捐簿伸到他们的面前时，他们都会提笔写下一个谁看了也会点头的数目。因此，他们走在街上，一街的熟人都跟他们很客气地点头打招呼。
These three people are: Wang Shouwu, Tao Huchen, and Jin Yifu. Wang Shouwu originally opened a velvet thread shop, Tao Huchen opened a firecracker shop, and Jin Yifu was a painter. They grew up together. These are three people who can't talk about it. They are neither gentlemen nor pulp sellers. Their lives are good and bad. When it's good, there are two dishes on the table, one meat and one vegetarian, and you can scald two or two taels of wine; when it's bad, you drink porridge and even stop cooking. The reputation of all three is good. None of them have done anything harmful to nature, they are never bitter to people, and they never stand by for local public welfare. A bridge somewhere collapsed and needs to be repaired; If you find a "road fall", you have to bury it; when there is an epidemic, set up a porcelain jar at the intersection of the wharf, which contains medicinal tea and give it to pedestrians; after a fire, ask a Taoist priest to pray for disaster...... When the first person in charge stretches the donation book in front of them, they will write down a number that will nod if they see it. Therefore, they walked on the street, and their acquaintances on the street nodded politely to greet them.“早！”
“早！”
“吃过了？”
“偏过了，偏过了！”
"Good morning!" "Good morning!" "Have you eaten?" "It's off, it's off!"王瘦吾真瘦。瘦得两个肩胛骨从长衫的外面都看得清清楚楚。他年轻时很风雅过几天。他小时开蒙的塾师是邑中名士谈甓渔，谈先生教会了他做诗。那时，绒线店由父亲经营着，生意不错，这样他就有机会追随一些阔的和不太阔的名士，春秋佳日，文酒雅集。遇有什么张母吴太夫人八十寿辰征诗，也会送去两首七律。瘦吾就是那时落下的一个别号。自从父亲一死，他挑起全家的生活，就不再做一句诗，和那些诗人们也再无来往。
Wang Shouwu is really thin. He was so thin that his two shoulder blades could be clearly seen from the outside of the robe. He was very elegant when he was young. His enlightened tutor when he was a child was a famous man in the city, and Mr. Tan taught him to write poetry. At that time, the velvet thread shop was run by his father, and the business was good, so that he had the opportunity to follow some wide and not too wide celebrities. If there is a poem on the 80th birthday of Mrs. Wu, Zhang's mother, she will also send two seven laws. Thin Wu was a nickname that fell at that time. Since his father's death, he provoked the life of the whole family, and he no longer wrote a single poem, and he had no contact with those poets.他家的绒线店是一个不大的连家店。店面的招牌上虽写着“京广洋货，零趸批发”，所卖的却只是：丝线、绦子、头号针、二号针、女人钳眉毛的镊子、刨花[2]、抿子（涂刨花水用的小刷子）、品青、煮蓝、僧帽牌洋蜡烛、太阳牌肥皂、美孚灯罩……种类很多，但都值不了几个钱。每天晚上结账时都是一堆铜板和一角两角的零碎的小票，难得看见一块洋钱。
His fleece shop is a small connected store. Although the signboard of the store reads "Beijing and Guangzhou foreign goods, zero wholesale", what is sold is only: silk thread, ribbon, number one needle, number two needle, tweezers for women's eyebrows, shavings[2], spoons (small brushes for applying shavings water), pinnas, boiled blue, monk's hat brand candles, sun brand soap, Mobil lampshades...... There are many types, but they are not worth a few dollars. Every night at the checkout, there are a pile of copper plates and fragmentary receipts, and it is rare to see a piece of foreign money.这样一个小店，维持一家生活，是困难的。王瘦吾家的人口日渐增多了。他上有老母，自己又有了三个孩子。小的还在娘怀里抱着。两个大的，一儿一女，已经都在上小学了。不用说穿衣，就是穿鞋也是个愁人的事。
It is difficult for such a small shop to maintain a family's life. The population of Wang Shouwu's family is increasing day by day. He has an old mother and three children of his own. The younger one is still in his mother's arms. The two eldest, a son and a daughter, are already in elementary school. Needless to say, dressing, even wearing shoes is a sad thing.儿子最恨下雨。小学的同学几乎全部在下雨天都穿了胶鞋来上学，只有他穿了还是他父亲穿过的钉鞋[3]。钉鞋很笨，很重，走起来还嘎啦嘎啦的响。他一进学校的大门，同学们就都朝他看，看他那双鞋。他闹了好多回。每回下雨，他就说：“我不去上学了！”妈都给他说好话：“明年，明年就买胶鞋。一定！”——“明年！您都说了几年了！”最后还是嘟着嘴，挟了一把补过的旧伞，走了。王瘦吾听见街石上儿子的钉鞋愤怒的声音，半天都没有说话。
My son hates rain the most. Almost all of his elementary school classmates wore rubber shoes to school on rainy days, and he was the only one who wore the spikes that his father wore[3]. The spikes were stupid, heavy, and rattled when walking. As soon as he entered the school gate, his classmates looked at him and looked at his shoes. He made trouble many times. Every time it rained, he said, "I'm not going to school!" Mom always said good things to him: "Next year, next year, I will buy rubber shoes." Certain! ——"Next year! You've been talking about it for a few years!" In the end, he pouted, grabbed an old umbrella that had been repaired, and left. Wang Shouwu heard the angry voice of his son's spikes on the street stone, and did not speak for a long time.女儿要参加全县小学秋季运动会，表演团体操，要穿规定的服装：白上衣、黑短裙。这都还好办。难的是鞋，——要一律穿白球鞋。女儿跟妈要。妈说：“一双球鞋，要好几块钱。咱们不去参加了。就说生病了，叫你爸写个请假条。”女儿不像她哥发脾气，闹，她只是一声不响，眼泪不停地往下滴。到底还是去了。这位能干的妈跟邻居家借来一双球鞋，比着样子，用一块白帆布连夜赶做了一双。除了底子是布的，别处跟买来的完全一样。天亮的时候，做妈的轻轻地叫：“妞子，起来！”女儿一睁眼，看见床前摆着一双白鞋，趴在妈胸前哭了。王瘦吾看见妻子疲乏而凄然的笑容，他的心酸。
My daughter wants to participate in the county's primary school autumn games, perform team gymnastics, and wear the prescribed costumes: white tops and black skirts. It's all easy to do. The difficult thing is that ,—— shoes must be worn with white sneakers. The daughter asked her mother for it. Mom said: "A pair of sneakers costs several dollars. Let's not participate. Just say you're sick and ask your dad to write a leave note. "My daughter didn't lose her temper like her brother, she just didn't make a sound, and tears kept dripping. In the end, I went. The capable mother borrowed a pair of sneakers from a neighbor, and compared them with a white canvas to make a pair overnight. Except that the bottom is cloth, everything else is exactly the same as the one I bought. When dawn broke, the mother called softly: "Girl, get up!" When the daughter opened her eyes, she saw a pair of white shoes in front of the bed, lying on her mother's chest and crying. Wang Shouwu saw his wife's tired and sad smile, and his heart was sad.因此，王瘦吾老想发财。
Therefore, Wang Shouwu always wanted to make a fortune.这财，是怎么个发法呢？靠这个小绒线店，是不可能有什么出息的。他得另外想办法。这城里的街，好像是傍晚时的码头，各种船只，都靠满了。各行各业，都有个固定的地盘，想往里面再插一只手，很难。他得把眼睛看到这个县城以外，这些行业以外。他做过许多不同性质的生意。他做过虾籽生意，醉蟹生意，腌制过双黄鸭蛋。张家庄出一种木瓜酒，他运销过。本地出一种药材，叫做豨莶，他收过，用木船装到上海（他自己就坐在一船高高的药草上），卖给药材行。三叉河出一种水仙鱼，他曾想过做罐头……他做的生意都有点别出心裁，甚至是想入非非。他隔个把月就要出一次门，四乡八镇，到处跑。像一只饥饿的鸟，到处飞，想给儿女们找一口食。回来时总带着满身的草屑灰尘；人，越来越瘦。
How does this money be distributed? It is impossible to make any progress by relying on this small velvet thread shop. He had to find another way. The streets in this city seem to be piers in the evening, and all kinds of boats are full. All walks of life have a fixed territory, and it is difficult to insert another hand into it. He has to look beyond this county, outside these industries. He has done many businesses of different natures. He has done shrimp roe business, drunken crab business, and pickled double yellow duck eggs. Zhangjiazhuang produces a kind of papaya wine, which he has shipped. He collected a local medicinal material called Xi Yan, loaded it into a wooden boat (he himself sat on a boat of tall herbs), and sold it to the herbal medicine shop. The Three Forks River produces a kind of daffodil, and he once thought about making canned food...... The business he does is a bit ingenious, even thoughtful. He goes out every other month, running everywhere. Like a hungry bird, flying everywhere, trying to find a bite to eat for his children. When he comes back, he always comes with grass clippings and dust all over his body; people are getting thinner and thinner.后来他想起开工厂。他的这个工厂是个绳厂，做草绳和钱串子。蓑衣草两股，绞成细绳，过去是穿制钱用的，所以叫做钱串子。现在不使制钱了，店铺里却离不开它。茶食店用来包扎点心，席子店捆席子，卖鱼的穿鱼鳃。绞这种细绳，本来是湖西农民冬闲时的副业，一大捆一大捆挑进城来兜售。因为没有准人，准时，准数，有时需用，却遇不着。有了这么个厂，对于用户方便多了。王瘦吾这个厂站住了。他就不再四处奔跑。
Later, he remembered to open a factory. His factory is a rope factory, making straw ropes and money strings. Two strands of raincoat grass, twisted into a thin rope, used to be worn for money, so it was called money skewers. Now that money is not used, the store cannot do without it. Tea shops use it to wrap snacks, mat shops to tie mats, and fish sellers to wear gills. This kind of string was originally a side job of farmers in Huxi during their winter leisure, and they were picked up in large bundles into the city to sell. Because there is no accurate person, on time, on time, sometimes it is needed, but it is not encountered. With such a factory, it is much more convenient for users. Wang Shouwu's factory stopped. He stopped running around.这家工厂，连王瘦吾在内，一共四个人。一个伙计搬运，两个做活。有两架“机器”，倒是铁的，只是都要用手摇。这两架机器，摇起来嘎嘎的响，给这条街增添了一种新的声音，和捶铜器、打烧饼、算命瞎子的铜铛的声音混和在一起。不久，人们就习惯了，仿佛这声音本来就有。
In this factory, there are a total of four people, including Wang Shouwu. One guy carries and two do the work. There are two "machines", but they are made of iron, but they have to be cranked by hand. These two machines, shaking and rattling, added a new sound to the street, mixed with the sound of beating copper utensils, beating sesame cakes, and copper bells of fortune-tellers. Soon, people got used to it, as if this sound was already there.初二、十六[4]的傍晚，常常看到王瘦吾拎了半斤肉或一条鱼从街上走回家。
每到天气晴朗，上午十来点钟，在这条街上，就可以听到从阴城方向传来爆裂的巨响：
“砰——磅！”
大家就知道，这是陶虎臣在试炮仗了。孩子们就提着裤子向阴城飞跑。
Everyone knows that this is Tao Huchen testing firecrackers. The children flew towards Yin City with their pants.阴城是一片古战场。相传韩信在这里打过仗。现在还能挖到一种有耳的尖底陶瓶，当地叫做“韩瓶”，据说是韩信的部队所用的行军水壶。说是这种陶瓶冬天插了梅花，能结出梅子来。现在这里是乱葬冈，不知道从什么时候起叫做“阴城”。到处是坟头、野树、荒草、芦荻。草里有蛤蟆、野兔子、大极了的蚂蚱、油葫芦、蟋蟀。早晨和黄昏，有许多白颈老鸦。人走过，就哑哑地叫着飞起来。不一会，又都纷纷地落下了。
Yin City is an ancient battlefield. It is said that Han Xin fought here. Now you can also dig up a pointed pottery bottle with ears, locally called "Han Bottle", which is said to be a marching kettle used by Han Xin's troops. It is said that this kind of pottery bottle is inserted with plum blossoms in winter and can produce plums. Now this is a mass grave, and I don't know when it was called "Yin City". There are graves, wild trees, wild grass, and reeds everywhere. There are toads, hares, very large grasshoppers, oil gourds, and crickets in the grass. In the morning and dusk, there are many white-necked old crows. When people walked by, they flew up with a hoarse cry. After a while, they all fell down one after another.这里没有住户人家。只有一个破财神庙。里面住着一个侉子。这侉子不知是什么来历。他杀狗，吃肉，——阴城里野狗多的是，还喝酒。
There are no households here. There is only a temple of broken wealth. There lives a nephew in it. This nephew does not know where he came from. He killed dogs, ate meat,—— There were many wild dogs in Yincheng, and he also drank.这地方很少有人来。只有孩子们结伴来放风筝，掏蟋蟀。再就是陶虎臣来试炮仗。
Few people come to this place. Only the children came together to fly kites and take out crickets. Then Tao Huchen came to try the firecrackers.试的是“天地响”。这地方把双响的大炮仗叫“天地响”，因为地下响一声，飞到半空中，又响一声，炸得粉碎，纸屑飘飘地落下来。陶家的“天地响”一听就听得出来，特别响。两响之间的距离也大——蹿得高。
The test is the "sound of heaven and earth". This place calls the double-sound cannon "heaven and earth sound", because there is a sound from the ground, it flies into mid-air, and it sounds again, exploding to pieces, and confetti falls down. The Tao family's "sound of heaven and earth" can be heard as soon as you hear it, which is very loud. The distance between the two sounds is also large - it jumps high.“砰——磅！”
“砰——磅！”
他走一二十步，放一个，身后跟着一大群孩子。孩子里有胆大的。要求放一个，陶虎臣就给他一个：
“点着了快跑！——崩疼了可别哭！”
"Bang-pound!" "Bang-pound!" He walked one or twenty steps, put one, and was followed by a large group of children. There are bold children. When he asked to put one, Tao Huchen gave him one: "Light it and run! ——Don't cry if it hurts! ”其实是崩不着的。陶虎臣每次试炮仗，特意把其中的几个的捻子加长，就是专为这些孩子预备的。捻子着了，嗤嗤地冒火，半天，才听见响呢。
In fact, it can't collapse. Every time Tao Huchen tried firecrackers, he deliberately lengthened the twists of several of them, which were specially prepared for these children. The twist was on, and it took a long time to hear the sound.陶家炮仗店的门口也是经常围着一堆孩子，看炮仗师傅做炮仗。两张白木的床子，有两块很光滑的木板。把一张粗草纸裹在一个钢钎上，两块木板一搓，吱溜——，就是一个炮仗筒子。
At the door of the Tao family's firecracker shop, there are often a bunch of children around to watch the firecracker master make firecrackers. Two white wooden beds with two very smooth wooden boards. Wrap a piece of coarse grass paper on a steel braze, and when the two wooden boards are rubbed, they squeak ——, is a firecracker tube.孩子们看师傅做炮仗，陶虎臣就伏在柜台上很有兴趣地看这些孩子。有时问他们几句话：
“你爸爸在家吗？干嘛呢？”
“你的痄腮好了吗？”
孩子们都知道陶老板人很和气，很喜欢孩子，见面都很愿意叫他：
The children watched the master make firecrackers, and Tao Huchen lay on the counter and looked at the children with great interest. Sometimes ask them a few words: "Is your dad at home? What are you doing? ” "Are your cheeks healed?" The children all know that Boss Tao is very kind and likes children very much, and they are very willing to call him when they meet:“陶大爷！”
“陶伯伯！”
“哎，哎。”
陶家炮仗店的生意本来是不错的。
"Uncle Tao!" "Uncle Tao!" "Hey, hey." The business of the Tao family firecracker shop was originally good.他家的货色齐全。除了一般的鞭炮，还出一种别家不做的鞭，叫做“遍地桃花”。不但外皮，连里面的筒子都一色是梅红纸卷的。放了之后，地下一片红，真像是一地的桃花瓣子。如果是过年，下过雪，花瓣落在雪地上，红是红，白是白，好看极了。
His family has a complete range of goods. In addition to ordinary firecrackers, there is also a kind of whip that other families don't make, called "peach blossoms everywhere". Not only the outer skin, but also the tube inside is rolled in plum red paper. After putting it, the ground is red, really like peach petals all over the place. If it is the Chinese New Year, it has snowed, and the petals fall on the snow, red is red, white is white, it is very beautiful.这种鞭，成本很贵，除非有人定做，平常是不预备的。
This kind of whip is very expensive, unless someone makes it, and it is usually not prepared.一般的鞭炮，陶虎臣自己是不动手的。他会做花炮。一筒大花炮，能放好几分钟。他还会做一种很特别的花，叫做“酒梅”。一棵弯曲横斜的枯树，埋在一个磁盆里，上面串结了许多各色的小花炮，点着之后，满树喷花。火花射尽，树枝上还留下一朵一朵梅花，蓝荧荧的，静悄悄地开着，经久不熄。这是棉花浸了高粱酒做的。
Ordinary firecrackers, Tao Huchen himself does not do it. He can make fireworks. A large fireworks cannon can be left for several minutes. He also makes a very special flower called "wine plum". A curved and horizontal dead tree is buried in a magnetic basin with many small fireworks of various colors strung on it. The sparks are gone, and there are still plum blossoms left on the branches, blue and blooming quietly, and they will not go out for a long time. This is made of cotton soaked in sorghum wine.他还有一项绝技，是做焰火。一种老式的焰火，有的地方叫做花盒子。
酒梅、焰火，他都不在店里做，在家里做。因为这有许多秘方，不能外传。
He also has a unique skill, which is to make fireworks. An old-fashioned firework, in some places it is called a flower box. He doesn't make wine plums and fireworks in the store, but at home. Because there are many secret recipes that cannot be passed on.做焰火，除了配料，关键是串捻子。串得不对，会轰隆一声，烧成一团火。弄不好，还会出事。陶虎臣的一只左眼坏了，就是因为有一次放焰火，出了故障，不着了，他搭了梯子爬到架上去看，不想焰火忽然又响了，一个火球迸进了瞳孔。
To make fireworks, in addition to the ingredients, the key is to string the twist. If you string it wrong, it will rumble and burn into a fire. If you don't do it well, something will happen. One of Tao Huchen's left eyes was broken, because there was a firework, there was a malfunction, and it was gone, he climbed up a ladder to the rack to see, and he didn't want the fireworks to suddenly sound again, and a fireball burst into his pupil.陶虎臣坏了一只眼睛，还看不出太大的破相，不像一般有残疾的人往往显得很凶狠。他依然随时是和颜悦色的，带着宽厚而慈祥的笑容。这种笑容，只有与世无争，生活上容易满足的人才会有。
Tao Huchen broke one of his eyes, and he couldn't see much of a broken appearance, unlike ordinary people with disabilities who often look very fierce. He is still pleasant at all times, with a generous and kind smile. This kind of smile can only be seen by those who are indisputable and easy to satisfy in life.但是他的这种心满意足的神情逐年在消退。鞭炮生意，是随着年成走的。什么时候风调雨顺，国泰民安，什么时候炮仗店就生意兴隆。这样的年头，能够老是有么？
But his satisfied expression is fading year by year. The firecracker business goes with the years. When the weather is good, Guotai and Min'an, when the firecracker shop is prosperous. Can you always have such a year?“遍地桃花”近年很少人家来定货了。地方上多年未放焰火，有的孩子已经忘记放焰火是什么样子了。
陶虎臣长得很敦实，跟他的名字很相称。
"Peach blossoms everywhere" In recent years, few people have come to order. There have been no fireworks in the place for many years, and some children have forgotten what fireworks look like. Tao Huchen is very solid and very worthy of his name.靳彝甫和陶虎臣住在一条巷子里，相隔只有七八家。谁家的火灭了，孩子拿了一块劈柴，就能从另一家引了火来。他家很好认，门口钉着一块铁皮的牌子，红地黑字：“靳彝甫画寓”。
这城里画画的，有三种人。
Jin Yifu and Tao Huchen live in an alley, only seven or eight families apart. Whoever has a fire is extinguished, and the child takes a piece of chopping wood to start a fire from another house. His house is easy to recognize, and there is a tin sign nailed to the door, with black characters on a red background: "Jin Yifu Painting Residence". There are three types of people who paint in this city.一种是画家。这种人大都有田有地，不愁衣食，作画只是自己消遣，或作为应酬的工具。他们的画是不卖钱的。求画的人只是送几件很高雅的礼物。或一坛绍兴花雕，或火腿、鲥鱼、白沙枇杷，或一套讲究的宜兴紫砂茶具，或两大盆正在茁箭子的建兰。他们的画，多半是大写意，或半工半写。工笔画他们是不耐烦画的，也不会。
One is a painter. Most of these people have land and land, do not worry about food and clothing, and paint only for their own entertainment or as a tool for entertainment. Their paintings are not sold for money. People who ask for paintings just give a few elegant gifts. Or a jar of Shaoxing flower carvings, or ham, shad, white sand loquat, or a set of exquisite Yixing purple sand tea sets, or two large pots of Jianlan that are thriving. Most of their paintings are freehand, or half-work-and-half-writing. They are impatient to paint gongbi paintings, and they won't.一种是画匠。他们所画的，是神像。画得最多的是“家神菩萨”。这“家神菩萨”是一个大家族：头一层是南海观音的一伙，第二层是玉皇大帝和他的朝臣，第三层是关帝老爷和周仓、关平，最下一层是财神爷。他们也在玻璃的反面用油漆画福禄寿三星（这种画美术史家称之为“玻璃油画”），作插屏。他们是在制造一种商品，不是作画。而且是流水作业，描衣纹的是一个人（照着底子描），“开脸”的是一个人，着色的是另一个人。他们的作坊，叫做“画匠店”。一个画匠店里常有七八个人同时做活，却听不到一点声音，因为画匠多半是哑巴。
One is the painter. What they paint is a statue. The most painted is the "Family God Bodhisattva". This "Family God Bodhisattva" is a big family: the first floor is the group of Guanyin in the South Sea, the second layer is the Jade Emperor and his courtiers, the third layer is Emperor Guan and Zhou Cang and Guan Ping, and the bottom layer is the God of Wealth. They also painted the three stars of Fu Lushou (this kind of painting art historian calls it "glass oil painting") on the reverse side of the glass as an interstitial screen. They are making a commodity, not painting. And it is a flowing operation, one person is tracing the clothes (according to the bottom), one person is "opening the face", and the other is coloring. Their workshop is called the "painter's shop". There are often seven or eight people working at the same time in a painter's shop, but they can't hear a sound, because most of the painters are mute.靳彝甫两者都不是。也可以说是介乎两者之间的那么一种人。比较贴切些，应该称之为“画师”，不过本地无此说法，只是说“画画的”。他是靠卖画吃饭的，但不像画匠店那样在门口设摊或批发给卖门神“欢乐”的纸店[5]，他是等人登门求画的（所以挂“画寓”的招牌）。他的画按尺论价，大青大绿另加，可以点题。来求画的，多半是茶馆酒肆、茶叶店、参行、钱庄的老板或管事。也有那些闲钱不多，送不起重礼，攀不上高门第的画家，又不甘于家里只有四堵素壁的中等人家。他们往往喜欢看着他画，靳彝甫也就欣然对客挥毫。主客双方，都很满意。他的画署名（画匠的作品是从不署名的），但都不题上款，因为不好称呼，深了不是，浅了不是，题了，人家也未必高兴，所以只是简单地写四个字：“彝甫靳铭”。若是佛像，则题“靳铭沐手敬绘”。
Jin Yifu is neither. It can also be said that he is a kind of person in between. It is more appropriate to call him a "painter", but there is no such term in the local area, just "painter". He made a living by selling paintings, but unlike the painter's shop, he set up a stall at the door or wholesaled paper shops that sold the "joy" of the door god [5], he waited for people to come to ask for paintings (so he hung the sign of "Painting Residence"). His paintings are priced according to the ruler, and the big green and green are added, and you can click on the title. Most of the people who come to ask for paintings are the owners or stewards of teahouses, taverns, tea shops, canxing, and banks. There are also painters who don't have much spare money, can't afford to give heavy gifts, and can't climb to a high family, and are not willing to be a middle-aged family with only four plain walls at home. They often like to watch him paint, and Jin Yifu is happy to wave to the guests. Both the host and the guest are very satisfied. His paintings are signed (the painter's works are never signed), but they are not inscribed, because they are not easy to call, they are not deep, not shallow, and people may not be happy if they are asked, so they simply write four words: "Yifu Jin Ming". If it is a Buddha statue, it is inscribed with "Jin Ming Mu Shu Respectful Painting".靳家三代都是画画的。家里积存的画稿很多。因为要投合不同的兴趣，山水、人物、翎毛、花卉，什么都画。工笔、写意、浅绛、重彩不拘。
Three generations of the Jin family have been painting. There are many paintings accumulated at home. Because it is necessary to combine different interests, landscapes, figures, feathers, flowers, everything is painted. Gongbi, freehand, light crimson, heavy color is not restrained.他家家传会写真，都能画行乐图（生活像）和喜神图（遗像）。中国的画像是有诀窍的。画师家都藏有一套历代相传的“百脸图”。把人的头面五官加以分析，定出一百种类型。画时端详着对象，确定属于哪一类，然后在此基础上加减，画出来总是有几分像的。靳彝甫多年不画喜神了。因为画这种像，经常是在死人刚刚断气时，被请了去，在床前对着勾描。他不愿看死人。因此，除了至亲好友，这种活计，一概不应。有来求的，就说不会。行乐图，自从有了照相馆之后，也很少有人来要画了。
His family will take pictures, and he can draw pictures of joy (life portraits) and happy gods (posthumous portraits). Chinese portraits have a trick. Painters have a set of "hundred face pictures" passed down through the ages. Analyze the facial features of a person's head and face to determine a hundred types. When painting, look at the object to determine which category it belongs to, and then add or subtract on this basis. Jin Yifu has not painted a happy god for many years. Because this kind of portrait is often drawn when the dead have just passed away, they are invited to sketch in front of the bed. He doesn't want to look at the dead. Therefore, except for close relatives and friends, this kind of work should not be done. If you come to ask, say no. Since the establishment of the photo studio, few people have come to draw pictures.靳彝甫自己喜欢画的，是青绿山水和工笔人物。青绿山水、工笔人物，一年能收几件呢？因此，除了每年端午，他画几十张各式各样的钟馗，挂在巷口如意楼酒馆标价出售，能够有较多的收入，其余的时候，全家都是半饥半饱。
What Jin Yifu likes to paint is green landscapes and gongbi figures. How many green landscapes and gongbi figures can you receive a year? Therefore, in addition to the Dragon Boat Festival every year, he painted dozens of various Zhong Kui and hung them on the Ruyi Building Tavern at the entrance of the alley to sell them at a price, which could have a lot of income, and the rest of the time, the whole family was half hungry and half full.虽然是半饥半饱，他可是活得有滋有味。他的画室里挂着一块小匾，上书“四时佳兴”。画室前有一个很小的天井。靠墙种了几竿玉屏箫竹。石条上摆着茶花、月季。一个很大的均窑平盘里养着一块玲珑剔透的上水石，蒙了半寸厚的绿苔，长着虎耳草和铁线草。冬天，他总要养几头单瓣的水仙。不到三寸长的碧绿的叶子，开着白玉一样的繁花。春天，放风筝。他会那样耐烦地用一个称金子用的小戥子约着蜈蚣风筝两边脚上的鸡毛（鸡毛分量稍差，蜈蚣上天就会打滚）。夏天，用莲子种出荷花。不大的荷叶，直径三寸的花，下面养了一二分长的小鱼。秋天，养蟋蟀。他家藏有一本托名贾似道撰写的《秋虫谱》。养蟋蟀的泥罐还是他祖父留下来的旧物。每天晚上，他点一个灯笼，到阴城去掏蟋蟀。财神庙的那个侉子，常常一边喝酒、吃狗肉，一边看这位大胆的画师的灯笼走走，停停，忽上，忽下。
Although he was half hungry and half full, he lived a good life. There is a small plaque hanging in his studio with the inscription "Four Seasons of Jiaxing". There is a small patio in front of the studio. A few jade screen bamboo poles are planted against the wall. Camellias and roses are placed on the stone strips. A large flat plate of the kiln has a delicate and transparent water stone, covered with half an inch of green moss, and grows saxifrage and clematis. In winter, he always has to raise a few single-petaled daffodils. The turquoise leaves are less than three inches long and bloom like white jade. In spring, fly a kite. He would patiently use a small bamboo stick called gold to make an appointment with the chicken feathers on both sides of the centipede's feet (if the weight of the chicken feathers is slightly worse, the centipede will roll in the sky). In summer, use lotus seeds to plant flowers. The small lotus leaves, flowers with a diameter of three inches, and small fish that are one or two minutes long are raised below. In autumn, raise crickets. His family has a copy of the "Autumn Insect Genealogy" written by Jia Sidao. The clay pot for raising crickets is still an old thing left by his grandfather. Every night, he lit a lantern and went to Yincheng to dig out crickets. The nephew in the Temple of Wealth often drank and ate dog meat while watching the bold painter's lantern walk, stopping, going up and down.他有一盒爱若性命的东西，是三块田黄石章。这三块田黄都不大，可是跟三块鸡油一样！一块是方的，一块略长，还有一块不成形。数这块不成形的值钱，它有文三桥[6]刻的边款（篆文不知叫一个什么无知的人磨去了）。文三桥呀，可着全中国，你能找出几块？有一次，邻居家失火，他什么也没拿，只抢了这三块图章往外走。吃不饱的时候，只要把这三块图章拿出来看看，他就觉得对这个世界没有什么可抱怨的了。
He has a box of things that he loves like life, which are three pieces of Tian Huang Shizhang. These three pieces of Tian Huang are not big, but they are the same as three pieces of chanterelle! One piece is square, one is slightly longer, and the other is shapeless. Counting the value of this shapeless piece, it has the edge of Wen Sanqiao [6] engraved (I don't know what kind of ignorant person grinded it down). Wen Sanqiao, but all over China, how many can you find? Once, when a neighbor's house caught fire, he didn't take anything, only grabbed the three stamps and walked out. When he couldn't get enough to eat, as long as he took out these three stamps and looked at them, he felt that he had nothing to complain about the world.这一年，这三个人忽然都交了好运。
This year, all three of them suddenly had good luck.王瘦吾的绳厂赚了钱。他可又觉得这个买卖货源、销路都有限，他早就想好了另外一宗生意。这个县北乡高田多种麦，出极好的麦秸，当地农民多以掐草帽辫为副业。每年有外地行商来，以极便宜的价钱收去。稍经加工，就成了草帽，又以高价卖给农民。王瘦吾想：为什么不能就地制成草帽呢？这钱为什么要给外地人赚去呢？主意已定，他就把两台绞绳机盘出去，买了四架扎草帽的机子，请了一个师傅，教出三个徒弟，就在原来绳厂的旧址，办起了一个草帽厂。城里的买卖人都说：王瘦吾这步棋看得准，必赚无疑！草帽厂开张的那天，来道喜和看热闹的人很多。一盘草帽辫，在师傅手里，通过机针一扎，哒哒地响，一会儿功夫，哎，草帽盔出来了！——又一会，草帽边！——成了！一顶一顶草帽，顷刻之间，摞得很高。这不是草帽，这是大洋钱呀！这一天，靳彝甫送来一张“得利图”，画着一个白须的渔翁，背着鱼篓，提着两尾金鳞赤尾的大鲤鱼。凡看了这张画的，无不大笑：这渔翁的长相，活脱就是王瘦吾！陶虎臣特地送来一挂遍地桃花满堂红的一千头的大鞭，砰砰磅磅响了好半天！
Wang Shouwu's rope factory made money. He felt that the source of goods and sales was limited, and he had already thought of another business. In this county, Beixiang Gaotian, there are many varieties of wheat and excellent wheat straw, and most local farmers use straw hat braiding as a side business. Every year, foreign merchants come and collect them at a very cheap price. After a little processing, it becomes a straw hat and sells it to farmers at a high price. Wang Shouwu thought: Why can't straw hats be made on the spot? Why should this money be earned by outsiders? With the idea made, he took out two rope twisting machines, bought four straw hat machines, hired a master, taught three apprentices, and set up a straw hat factory on the site of the original rope factory. The buyers and sellers in the city all said: Wang Shouwu's move is accurate, and he will definitely make money! On the day the straw hat factory opened, there were many people who came to celebrate and watch the excitement. A plate of straw hat braids, in the hands of the master, was pierced through a machine needle, and it clicked, and after a while, hey, the straw hat helmet came out! ——Another moment, the edge of the straw hat! ——It's done! One straw hat after another, in an instant, stacked very high. This is not a straw hat, this is a big foreign money! On this day, Jin Yifu sent a "profit map", depicting a white-bearded fisherman, carrying a fish basket and carrying two big carp with golden scales and red tails. Everyone who looked at this painting laughed: This fisherman's appearance is that of Wang Shouwu! Tao Huchen specially sent a thousand big whips with peach blossoms all over the place, and they rang for a long time!陶虎臣从来没有做过这么大的焰火生意。这一年闹大水。运河平了漕。西北风一起，大浪头翻上来，把河堤上丈把长的青石都卷了起来。看来，非破堤不可。很多人家扎了筏子，预备了大澡盆，天天晚上不敢睡，只等堤决水下来时逃命。不料，河水从下游泻出，伏汛安然度过，保住了无数人畜。秋收在望，市面繁荣，城乡一片喜气。有好事者倡议：今年放放焰火！东西南北四城，都放！一台七套，四七二十八套。陶家独家承做了十四套，——其余的，他匀给别的同行了。
Tao Huchen has never done such a big fireworks business. There was a big flood this year. The canal is flat. With the northwest wind, the big waves rolled up and rolled up the long bluestones on the river embankment. It seems that the embankment must be broken. Many people built rafts and prepared large bathtubs, and did not dare to sleep every night, just waiting for the embankment to break and flee for their lives. Unexpectedly, the river water poured out from downstream, and the flood was safely saved, saving countless people and animals. The autumn harvest is in sight, the market is prosperous, and the urban and rural areas are full of joy. Some good people proposed: set off fireworks this year! The four cities in the east, west, south, north, and south, all are set off! One set of seven, four seven and twenty-eight sets. The Tao family exclusively undertook to make fourteen sets,—— and the rest were given to other peers.四城的焰火错开了日子，——为的是人们可以轮流赶着去看。东城定在七月十五。地点：阴城。
The fireworks in the four cities are staggered so that people can take turns to see them,—— The East City is scheduled for July 15th. Location: Yin City.这天天气特别好。万里无云，一天皓月。阴城的正中，立起一个四丈多高的架子。有人早早吃了晚饭，就扛了板凳来等着了。各种卖小吃的都来了。卖牛肉高粱酒的，卖回卤豆腐干的，卖五香花生米的，芝麻灌香糖的，卖豆腐脑的，卖煮荸荠的，还有卖河鲜——卖紫皮鲜菱角和新剥鸡头米的……到处是“气死风”的四角玻璃灯，到处是白蒙蒙的热气、香喷喷的茴香八角气味。人们寻亲访友，说短道长，来来往往，亲亲热热。阴城的草都被踏倒了。人们的鞋底也叫秋草的浓汁磨得滑溜溜的。
The weather was particularly good that day. Cloudless, a bright moon. In the middle of Yin City, a shelf more than four feet high was erected. Someone had dinner early and came to wait. All kinds of snacks are here. Those who sell beef and sorghum wine, those who sell braised tofu, those who sell spiced peanuts, those who fill sesame with gum, those who sell tofu brain, boiled water chestnuts, and those who sell river fresh - purple-skinned water chestnuts and freshly peeled chicken head rice...... There are four-corner glass lamps everywhere, white heat, and fragrant fennel and star anise. People are looking for relatives and friends, saying that the road is short, coming and going, and making out. The grass in Yincheng has been trampled down. People's soles are also called the thick juice of autumn grass and grind smoothly.忽然，上万双眼睛一齐朝着一个方向看。人们的眼睛一会儿睁大，一会儿眯细；人们的嘴一会儿张开，一会儿又合上；一阵阵叫喊，一阵阵欢笑，一阵阵掌声。——陶虎臣点着了焰火了！
Suddenly, tens of thousands of pairs of eyes looked in one direction together. People's eyes opened wide for a while and squinted for a while; people's mouths opened for a while, and closed again for a while; bursts of shouting, bursts of laughter, bursts of applause. ——Tao Huchen lit fireworks!这种花盒子是有一点简单的故事情节的。最热闹的是“炮打泗州城”。起先是梅、兰、竹、菊四种花，接着是万花齐放。万花齐放之后，有一个间歇，木架子下面黑黑的，有人以为这一套已经放完了。不料一声炮响，花盒子又落下一层，照眼的灯球之中有一座四方的城，眼睛好的还能看见城门上“泗州”两个字（不知道为什么是泗州而不是别的城）。城外向里打炮，城里向外打，灯球飞舞，砰磅有声。最有趣的是“芦蜂追瘌子”，这是一个喜剧性的焰火。一阵火花之后，出现一个人，——一个泥头的纸人，这人是个瘌痢头，手里拿着一把破芭蕉扇。霎时间飞来了许多马蜂，这些马蜂——火花，纷纷扑向瘌痢头，瘌痢头四面躲闪，手里的芭蕉扇不停地挥舞起来。看到这里，满场大笑。这些辛苦得近于麻木的人，是难得这样开怀一笑的呀。最后一套是平平常常的，只是一阵火花之后，扑鲁扑鲁吊下四个大字：“天下太平”。字是灯球组成的。虽然平淡，人们还是舍不得离开。火光炎炎，逐渐消隐，这时才听到人们呼唤：
This kind of flower box has a bit of a simple storyline. The most lively is "bombarding Sizhou City". At first, there were four kinds of flowers: plum, orchid, bamboo, and chrysanthemum, and then there were thousands of flowers. After the flowers bloomed, there was a break, and the wooden shelf was dark, and some people thought that this set had been put out. Unexpectedly, there was a cannon sound, and the flower box fell to the next floor, and there was a square city in the light bulb, and the word "Sizhou" on the city gate with good eyes could also be seen (I don't know why it was Sizhou and not other cities). Cannons are fired outside the city, and the city is outward, and the light balls are flying and banging. The most interesting thing is "Reed Bee Chasing Lepers", which is a comedic firework. After a burst of sparks, a person appeared ,—— a muddy paper man, this person was a leprosy head holding a broken banana fan in his hand. In an instant, many wasps flew in, and these wasps - sparks pounced on the leprosy head, which dodged on all sides, and the banana fan in his hand kept waving. Seeing this, the audience laughed. These people who have worked so hard that they are almost numb are rare to laugh like this. The last set is ordinary, but after a burst of sparks, four big characters are hung: "The world is peaceful". The words are made up of light balls. Although it is flat, people are still reluctant to leave. The fire was blazing and gradually disappeared, and then people were called:“二丫头，回家咧！”
“四儿，你在哪儿哪？”
“奶奶，等等我，我鞋掉了！”
人们摸摸板凳，才知道：呀，露水下来了。
"Second girl, go home!" "Si'er, where are you?" "Grandma, wait for me, my shoes fell off!" People touched the bench and realized: Ah, the dew is coming down.靳彝甫捉到一只蟹壳青蟋蟀。消息很快就传开了。每天有人提了几罐蟋蟀来斗。都不是对手，而且都只是一个回合就分胜负。这只蟹壳青的打法很特别。它轻易不开牙，只是不动声色，稳稳地站着。突然扑上去，一口就咬破对方的肚子（据说蟋蟀的打法各有自己的风格，这种咬肚子的打法是最厉害的）。它瞿瞿地叫起来，上下摆动它的触须，就像戏台上的武生耍翎子。负伤的败将，怎么下“探子”[7]，也再不敢回头。于是有人怂恿他到兴化去。兴化养蟋蟀之风很盛，每年秋天有一个斗蟋蟀的集会。靳彝甫被人们说得心动了。王瘦吾、陶虎臣给他凑了一笔路费和赌本，他就带了几罐蟋蟀，搭船走了。
Jin Yifu caught a crab shell green cricket. The news spread quickly. Someone brought a few cans of crickets to fight every day. None of them are opponents, and they all win or lose in just one round. This crab shell green has a very special way of playing. It doesn't open its teeth easily, but stands quietly and steadily. Suddenly pounced on it and bit the opponent's stomach in one bite (it is said that crickets have their own styles of play, and this style of biting the stomach is the most powerful). It screamed and swayed its tentacles up and down, like a martial artist playing feathers on the stage. The wounded defeated general, how to "spy" [7], never dared to look back. So someone encouraged him to go to Xinghua. Xinghua has a very strong trend of raising crickets, and there is a cricket fighting rally every autumn. Jin Yifu was moved by people's words. Wang Shouwu and Tao Huchen collected a sum of travel expenses and gambling money for him, so he took a few cans of crickets and took a boat away.斗蟋蟀也像摔跤、击拳一样，先要约约运动员的体重。分量相等，才能入盘开斗。如分量低于对方而自愿下场者，听便。
Cricket fighting, like wrestling and boxing, first ask about the weight of the athlete. Only when the weight is equal can the game be started. If the weight is lower than the opponent and voluntarily leaves, listen to it.没想到，这只蟋蟀给他赢了四十块钱。——四十块钱相当于一个小学教员两个月的薪水！靳彝甫很高兴，在如意楼定了几个菜，约王瘦吾、陶虎臣来喝酒。
Unexpectedly, the cricket won him forty yuan. ——Forty yuan is equivalent to two months' salary of a primary school teacher! Jin Yifu was very happy, ordered a few dishes in Ruyi Building, and invited Wang Shouwu and Tao Huchen to drink.（这只身经百战的蟋蟀后来在冬至那天寿终了，靳彝甫特地打了一个小小的银棺材，送到阴城埋了。）
没喝几杯，靳彝甫的孩子拿了一张名片，说是家里来了客。靳彝甫接过名片一看：“季匋民”！
(This battle-hardened cricket later died on the day of the winter solstice, and Jin Yifu specially made a small silver coffin and sent it to Yincheng for burial.) ） After a few drinks, Jin Yifu's child took a business card and said that there was a guest at home. Jin Yifu took the business card and looked at it: "Ji Kuomin"!“他怎么会来找我呢？”
季匋民是一县人引为骄傲的大人物。他是个名闻全国的大画家，同时又是大收藏家，大财主，家里有好田好地，宋元名迹。他在上海一个艺术专科大学当教授，平常难得回家。
"How could he come to me?" Ji Kuimin is a big man who is proud of the people of the county. He is a famous painter all over the country, but also a big collector, a big rich man, and his family has good fields and land, and the famous sites of the Song and Yuan dynasties. He works as a professor at an art college in Shanghai, and it is rare to go home.“你回去看看。”
“我少陪一会。”
季匋民和靳彝甫都是画画的，可是气色很不一样。此人面色红润，双眼有光，浓黑的长髯，声音很洪亮。衣着很随便，但质料很讲究。
“我冒造宝府，唐突得很。”
"You go back and take a look." "I'll stay with you for a while." Ji Kuomin and Jin Yifu both painted, but their complexions were very different. This person has a ruddy complexion, bright eyes, a long thick black beard, and a very loud voice. The clothes are very casual, but the materials are very particular. "I pretended to be a treasure mansion, and it was very abrupt."“哪里哪里。只是我这寒舍，实在太小了。”
“小，而雅，比大而无当好！”
"Where, where. It's just that my humble house is too small. ” "Small, and elegant, better than big and nothing!"寒暄之后，季匋民说明来意：听说彝甫有几块好田黄，特地来看看。靳彝甫捧了出来，他托在手里，一块一块，仔仔细细看了。“好，——好，——好。匋民平生所见田黄多矣，像这样润的，少。”他估了估价，说按时下行情，值二百洋。有文三桥边款的一块就值一百。他很直率地问靳彝甫肯不肯割爱。靳彝甫也很直率地回答：“不到山穷水尽，不能舍此性命。”
After exchanging pleasantries, Ji Kuomin explained his intentions: I heard that Yifu had a few pieces of good field yellow, so I came to take a look. Jin Yifu held it out, he held it in his hand, piece by piece, and looked at it carefully. "Okay,—— good,—— good. There are many yellows in the field that I have seen in my life, and there are few moist ones like this. He estimated the valuation and said that the market was on time, worth two hundred oceans. A piece of the side of the three bridges is worth one hundred. He asked Jin Yifu very bluntly if he would give up his love. Jin Yifu also replied bluntly: "If you don't run out of mountains and rivers, you can't give up your life." ”“好！这像个弄笔墨的人说的话！既然如此，匋民绝不夺人之所爱。不过，如果你有一天想出手，得先尽我。”
“那可以。”
“一言为定。”
"Okay! This is like what a person who uses pen and ink says! In this case, the people will never take away people's love. However, if you want to make a move one day, you have to do my best first. ” "That's fine." "One word is a deal." "One word is a deal."“一言为定。”
"Okay! This is like what a person who uses pen and ink says! In this case, the people will never take away people's love. However, if you want to make a move one day, you have to do my best first. ” "That's fine." "One word is a deal." "One word is a deal."买卖不成，季匋民倒也没有不高兴。他又提出想看看靳彝甫家藏的画稿。靳彝甫祖父的，父亲的。——靳彝甫本人的，他也想看看。他看得很入神，拍着画案说：
The deal failed, and Ji Kuomin was not unhappy. He also proposed to see the manuscripts in Jin Yifu's family collection. Jin Yifu's grandfather's, father's. ——Jin Yifu's own, he also wants to see it. He looked at it very attentively, patted the case and said:“令祖，令尊，都被埋没了啊！吾乡固多才俊之士，而皆困居于蓬牖之中，声名不出于里巷，悲哉！悲哉！”
他看了靳彝甫的画，说：
“彝甫兄，我有几句话……”
“您请指教。”
"Ling Zu, Ling Zun, are all buried! There are many talented people in my township, but they are all trapped in the windows, and their reputation is not out of the alleys, how sad! How sad! ” He looked at Jin Yifu's painting and said: "Brother Yifu, I have a few words......" "Please advise."“你的画，家学渊源。但是，有功力，而少境界。要变！山水，暂时不要画。你见过多少真山真水？人物，不要跟在改七芗、费晓楼后面跑。倪墨耕尤为甜俗。要越过唐伯虎，直追两宋南唐。我奉赠你两个字：古，艳。比如这张杨妃出浴，披纱用洋红，就俗。用朱红，加一点紫！把颜色搞得重重的！脸上也不要这样干净，给她贴几个花子！——你是打算就这样在家乡困着呢？还是想出去闯闯呢？出去，走走，结识一些大家，见见世面！到上海，那里人才多！”
"Your paintings have family origins. However, there is skill, but there is little realm. Change! Landscape, don't paint for the time being. How many real mountains and rivers have you seen? Characters, don't run behind Gai Qixian and Fei Xiaolou. Ni Mogeng is particularly sweet and vulgar. To cross Tang Bohu and catch up with the two Song and Southern Tang dynasties. I give you two words: ancient, beautiful. For example, this Yang Fei went out to take a bath, and the veil was dressed in magenta, which was vulgar. Use vermilion and add a little purple! Make the color heavy! Don't be so clean on your face, put a few flowers on her! ——Are you planning to be trapped in your hometown like this? Or do you want to go out? Go out, take a walk, meet some people, and see the world! When you go to Shanghai, there are many talents there! ”他建议靳彝甫选出百十件画，到上海去开一个展览会。他认识朵云轩，可以借他们的地方。他还可以写几封信给上海名流，请他们为靳彝甫吹嘘吹嘘。他还嘱咐靳彝甫，卖了画，有了一点钱，要做两件事：读万卷书，行万里路。最后说：
He suggested that Jin Yifu select a hundred and ten paintings and go to Shanghai to hold an exhibition. He knew Duo Yunxuan and could borrow their place. He could also write a few letters to Shanghai celebrities and ask them to brag about Jin Yifu. He also instructed Jin Yifu to sell the paintings, and with a little money, he had to do two things: read ten thousand books and travel ten thousand miles. Finally:“我今天很高兴。看了令祖、令尊的画稿，偷到不少东西。——我把它化一化，就是杰作！哈哈哈哈……”
这位大画家就这样疯疯癫癫、哈哈大笑着，提了他的筇竹杖，一阵风似的走了。
"I'm very happy today. I read the drawings of Ling Zu and Ling Zun, and stole a lot of things. ——I turned it into a masterpiece! Hahahaha......" The great painter was crazy and laughing, lifted his bamboo staff, and walked away like a gust of wind.靳彝甫一边卷着画，一边想：季匋民是见得多。他对自己的指点，很有道理，很令人佩服。但是，到上海、开展览会，结识名流……唉，有钱的名士的话怎么能当得真呢！他笑了。
Jin Yifu rolled up the painting while thinking: Ji Kuimin has seen a lot. His guidance to himself is very reasonable and admirable. However, go to Shanghai, hold exhibitions, and meet celebrities...... Alas, how can the words of rich celebrities be taken seriously! He smiled.没想到，三天之后，季匋民真的派人送来了七八封朱丝栏玉版宣的八行书。
Unexpectedly, three days later, Ji Kuimin really sent seven or eight eight-line letters of Zhu Silan jade banxuan.靳彝甫的画展不算轰动，但是卖出去几十张画。那张在季匋民授意之下重画的杨妃出浴，一再有人重订。报上发了消息，一家画刊还选了他两幅画。这都是他没有想到的。王瘦吾和陶虎臣在家乡看到报，很替他高兴：“彝甫出了名了！”
Jin Yifu's painting exhibition was not a sensation, but dozens of paintings were sold. The Yang Fei, who was repainted at the behest of Ji Kumin, took a bath, and was repeatedly reordered. The newspaper sent a message, and an art magazine also selected two of his paintings. This is what he didn't expect. Wang Shouwu and Tao Huchen saw the newspaper in their hometown and were very happy for him: "Yifu is famous!" ”卖了画，靳彝甫真的按照季匋民的建议，“行万里路”去了。一去三年，很少来信。
这三年啊！
After selling the painting, Jin Yifu really followed Ji Kumin's suggestion and "traveled thousands of miles". After three years, there were few letters. These three years!王瘦吾的草帽厂生意很好。草帽没个什么讲究，买的人只是一图个结实，二图个便宜。他家出的草帽是就地产销，省了来回运费，自然比外地来的便宜得多。牌子闯出去了，买卖就好做。全城并无第二家，那四台哒哒作响的机子，把带着钱想买草帽的客人老远地就吸过来了。
Wang Shouwu's straw hat factory is doing very well. Straw hats are not particular, and the buyers are just strong and cheap. The straw hats produced by his family are produced and sold locally, saving round-trip freight, and are naturally much cheaper than those from other places. The brand broke out, and it was easy to do business. There is no second one in the city, and the four clicking machines suck in customers who want to buy straw hats with money from afar.不想遇见一个王伯韬。
I don't want to meet a Wang Botao.这王伯韬是个开陆陈行的。这地方把买卖豆麦杂粮的行叫做陆陈行。人们提起陆陈行，都暗暗摇头。做这一行的，有两大特点：其一，是资本雄厚，大都兼营别的生意，什么买卖赚钱，他们就开什么买卖，眼尖手快。其二，都是流氓——都在帮。这城里发生过几起大规模的斗殴，都是陆陈行挑起的。打架的原因，都是抢行霸市。这种人一看就看得出来。他们的衣著和一般的生意人就不一样。不论什么时候，长衫里面的小褂的袖子总翻出很长的一截。料子也是老实商人所不用的。夏天是格子纺，冬天是法兰绒。脚底下是黑丝袜，方口的黑纹皮面的硬底便鞋。王伯韬和王瘦吾是同宗，见面总是“瘦吾兄”长，“瘦吾兄”短。王瘦吾不爱搭理他，尽可能地躲着他。
This Wang Botao is a Lu Chenxing. This place calls the line of buying and selling beans and wheat grains Lu Chenxing. When people mention Lu Chenxing, they all shake their heads secretly. There are two major characteristics of those who do this business: First, they have strong capital, and most of them also operate other businesses. Second, they are all gangsters - they are all helping. There have been several large-scale fights in this city, all of which were provoked by Lu Chenxing. The reason for the fight is to rob the market. This kind of person can be seen at a glance. Their clothes are different from those of ordinary businessmen. At any time, the sleeves of the coat inside the caftan always turn out a long section. The material is also not used by honest businessmen. In summer, it is plaid, and in winter, it is flannel. Under the soles of the feet are black stockings, and hard-soled slip-ons with black striped leather surfaces on the square mouth. Wang Botao and Wang Shouwu are of the same clan, and when they meet, they are always "thin brother" long and "thin brother" short. Wang Shouwu didn't like to pay attention to him and avoided him as much as possible.谁知偏偏躲不开，而且天天要见面。王伯韬也开了一家草帽厂，就在王瘦吾的草帽厂的对门！他新开的草帽厂有八台机子，八个师傅，门面、柜台，一切都比王瘦吾的大一倍。
Who knew that he couldn't avoid it, and he had to meet every day. Wang Botao also opened a straw hat factory, right across from Wang Shouwu's straw hat factory! His newly opened straw hat factory has eight machines, eight masters, facades, counters, everything is twice as big as Wang Shouwu's.王伯韬真是不顾血本，把批发、零售价都压得极低。王瘦吾算算，这样的定价，简直无利可图。他不服这口气，也随着把价钱落下来。
王伯韬坐在对面柜台里，还是满脸带笑，“瘦吾兄”长，“瘦吾兄”短。
Wang Botao really disregarded the blood cost and kept the wholesale and retail prices extremely low. Wang Shouwu calculated that such a pricing was simply unprofitable. He refused to accept this breath and lowered the price. Wang Botao sat at the counter opposite, still smiling, "thin brother" is long, "thin brother" is short.王瘦吾撑了一年，实在撑不住了。
王伯韬放出话来：“瘦吾要是愿意把四台机子让给我，他多少钱买的，我多少钱要！”
Wang Shouwu lasted for a year, but he really couldn't hold on. Wang Botao said: "If Thin Wu is willing to give me four machines, how much money does he buy, how much do I want!" ”四台机子，连同库存的现货，辫子，全部倒给了王伯韬。王瘦吾气得生了一场重病。一病一年多。卖机子的钱、连同小绒线店的底本，全变成了药渣子，倒在门外的街上了。
The four machines, along with the stock and braids, were all poured to Wang Botao. Wang Shouwu was so angry that he fell seriously ill. One illness for more than a year. The money from selling the machine, along with the base of the small velvet thread shop, all turned into drug residue and fell on the street outside the door.好不容易，能起来坐一坐，出门走几步了。可是人瘦得像一张纸，一阵风吹过，就能倒下。
陶虎臣呢？
Finally, I was able to get up and sit down and take a few steps out. But people are as thin as a piece of paper, and when a gust of wind blows, they can fall. Where is Tao Huchen?头一年，因为四乡闹土匪，连城里都出了几起抢案，县政府和当地驻军联名出了一张布告：“冬防期间，严禁燃放鞭炮。”炮仗店平时生意有限，全指着年下。这一冬防，可把陶虎臣防苦了。且熬着，等明年吧。
In the first year, because of the bandits in the four townships, there were several robberies in the city, and the county government and the local garrison jointly issued a notice: "During the winter defense period, it is strictly forbidden to set off firecrackers." "The firecracker shop usually has limited business, and it all points to the year. This winter defense can prevent Tao Huchen from suffering. Wait for next year.明年！蒋介石搞他娘的“新生活”[8]，根本取缔了鞭炮。城里几家炮仗店统统关了张。陶虎臣别无产业，只好做一点“黄烟子”和蚊烟混日子。“黄烟子”也像是个炮仗，只是里面装的不是火药而是雄黄，外皮也是黄的。点了捻子，不响，只是从屁股上冒出一股黄烟，能冒半天。这种东西，端午节人家买来，点着了扔在床脚柜底熏五毒；孩子们把黄烟屁股抵在板壁上写“虎”字。蚊烟是在一个皮纸的空套里装上锯末，加一点芒硝和鳝鱼骨头，盘成一盘，像一条蛇。这东西点起来味道很呛，人和蚊子都受不了。这两种东西，本来是炮仗店附带做做的，靠它赚钱吃饭，养家活口，怎么行呢？——一年有几个端午节？蚊子也不是四季都有啊！
Next year! Chiang Kai-shek engaged in his fucking "new life" [8] and banned firecrackers at all. Several firecracker shops in the city were all closed. Tao Huchen had no other property, so he had to make a little "yellow smoke" and mosquito smoke. "Yellow smoke" is also like a firecracker, but it is not gunpowder but realgar, and the skin is also yellow. I lit a twister, but it didn't make a sound, but a puff of yellow smoke came out of my buttocks, which could be smoked for a long time. This kind of thing was bought by people during the Dragon Boat Festival, lit and thrown under the bedside cabinet to smoke the five poisons; the children pressed the yellow cigarette buttocks against the board wall and wrote the word "tiger". Mosquito smoke is made by filling an empty sleeve of leather paper with sawdust, adding a little mirabilite and eel bones, and coiling it into a plate, like a snake. This thing tastes very choking when lit, and both people and mosquitoes can't stand it. These two things were originally made by the firecracker shop, and how can they make money to eat and support their families? ——How many Dragon Boat Festivals are there a year? Mosquitoes don't exist in all seasons!第三年，陶家炮仗店的铺闼子门[9]下了一把牛鼻子铁锁，再也打不开了。陶家的锅，也揭不开了。起先是喝粥，——喝稀粥，后来连稀粥也喝不成了。陶虎臣全家，已经饿了一天半。
In the third year, the door of the Tao family's firecracker shop [9] was locked with a bull's nose, and it could no longer be opened. The pot of the Tao family could not be opened either. At first,—— I drank porridge, but then I couldn't even drink porridge. Tao Huchen's family has been hungry for a day and a half.有那么一个缺德的人敲开了陶家的门。这人姓宋，人称宋保长，他是什么事都干得出来，什么钱也敢拿的。他来做媒了。二十块钱，陶虎臣把女儿嫁给了一个驻军的连长。这连长第二天就开拔。他倒什么也不挑，只要是一个黄花闺女。陶虎臣跳着脚大叫：“不要说得那么好听！这不是嫁！这是卖！你们到大街去打锣喊叫：我陶虎臣卖女儿！你们喊去！我不害臊！陶虎臣！你是个什么东西！陶虎臣！我操你八辈祖奶奶！你就这样没有能耐呀！”女儿的妈和弟弟都哭。女儿倒不哭，反过来劝爹：“爹！爹！您别这样！我愿意！——真的！爹！我真的愿意！”她朝上给爹妈磕了头，又趴在弟弟的耳边说了一句话。这一句话是：“饿的时候，忍着，别哭。”弟弟直点头。女儿走到爹床前，说了声：“爹！我走啦！您保重！”陶虎臣脸对墙躺着，连头都没有回。他的眼泪花花地往下淌。
There was such an immoral person who knocked on the door of the Tao family. This man's surname is Song, known as Song Baochang, he can do anything, and he dares to take any money. He came to be a matchmaker. For twenty yuan, Tao Huchen married his daughter to a company commander of the garrison. The company commander was promoted the next day. He didn't pick anything, as long as it was a yellow flower girl. Tao Huchen jumped and shouted: "Don't say it so nicely! This is not marriage! This is for sale! You go to the street and shout: I, Tao Huchen, sell my daughter! You shout! I'm not ashamed! Tao Huchen! What are you! Tao Huchen! I'll fuck your eighth grandmother! You're so incompetent! The daughter's mother and brother both cried. The daughter didn't cry, but persuaded her father in turn: "Dad! Father! Don't be like this! I do! - Really! Father! I really do!" She kowtowed to her parents upwards, and then lay down in her brother's ear and said a word. This sentence is: "When you are hungry, endure it, don't cry." The younger brother nodded. The daughter walked to her father's bed and said, "Dad! I'm leaving! Take care!" Tao Huchen lay face to the wall and didn't even look back. His tears flowed down.两个半月过去了。陶家一直就花这二十块钱。二十块钱剩得不多了，女儿回来了。妈脱下女儿的衣服一看，什么都明白了：这连长天天打她。女儿跟妈妈偷偷地说：“妈，我过上了他的脏病。”
Two and a half months have passed. The Tao family has been spending the twenty yuan. There is not much left of twenty yuan, and the daughter is back. When the mother took off her daughter's clothes and looked at it, she understood everything: the company beat her every day. The daughter secretly said to her mother: "Mom, I have lived his dirty life." ”岁暮天寒，彤云酿雪，陶虎臣无路可走，他到阴城去上吊。
他没有死成。他刚把腰带拴在一棵树上，把头伸进去，一个人拦腰把他抱住，一刀砍断了腰带。这人是住在财神庙的那个侉子。
At the end of the year, the weather was cold, the red clouds were snowing, and Tao Huchen had nowhere to go, so he went to Yincheng to hang himself. He didn't die. He had just tied his belt to a tree, put his head in it, and a man stopped him and hugged him, cutting off his belt with a knife. This man was the nephew who lived in the Temple of Wealth.靳彝甫回来了。他一到家，听说陶虎臣的事，连脸都没洗，拔脚就往陶家去。陶虎臣躺在一领破芦席上，拥着一条破棉絮。靳彝甫掏出五块钱来，说：“虎臣，我才回来，带的钱不多，你等我一天！”
Jin Yifu is back. As soon as he arrived home, when he heard about Tao Huchen, he didn't even wash his face, and went to Tao's house with his feet. Tao Huchen was lying on a broken reed mat, holding a piece of torn cotton wool. Jin Yifu took out five yuan and said, "Huchen, I just came back, I don't have much money with me, you wait for me for a day!" ”跟脚，他又奔王瘦吾家。瘦吾也是家徒四壁了。他正在对着空屋发呆。靳彝甫也掏出五块钱，说：“瘦吾，你等我一天！”
Following his feet, he went to Wang Shouwu's house again. Shouwu is also a family empty. He was in a daze at the empty house. Jin Yifu also took out five yuan and said, "Thin Wu, you wait for me for a day!" ”第三天，靳彝甫约王瘦吾、陶虎臣到如意楼喝酒。他从内衣口袋里掏出两封洋钱，外面裹着红纸。一看就知道，一封是一百。他在两位老友面前，各放了一封。
“先用着。”
“这钱——？”
靳彝甫笑了笑。
On the third day, Jin Yifu invited Wang Shouwu and Tao Huchen to drink at Ruyi Building. He took out two foreign coins from his underwear pocket, wrapped in red paper. At a glance, you can tell that one is a hundred. He put one in front of his two old friends. "Use it first." "This money ——?" Jin Yifu smiled.那两个都明白了：彝甫把三块田黄给季匋民送去了。
靳彝甫端起酒杯说：“咱们今天醉一次。”
那两个同意。
“好，醉一次！”
Those two understood: Yifu sent three pieces of Tianhuang to Ji Kumin. Jin Yifu picked up his wine glass and said, "Let's get drunk today." ” The two agreed. "Okay, get drunk once!"这天是腊月三十。这样的时候，是不会有人上酒馆喝酒的。如意楼空荡荡的，就只有这三个人。
外面，正下着大雪。
一九八〇年八月二十日初稿
十一月二十日二稿
This day is the 30th day of the twelfth lunar month. At times like this, no one will go to the tavern to drink. The Ruyi Building was empty, only these three people. Outside, it was snowing heavily. First draft on August 20, 1980 November 20 Draft
[1] 本篇原载《十月》1981年第三期；初收《汪曾祺短篇小说选》，北京出版社，1982年2月。
[2] 桐木刨出来的薄薄的长条。泡在水里，稍带黏性。过去女人梳头掠鬓，离不开它。
[1] This article was originally published in the third issue of "October" in 1981; "Selected Short Stories of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Publishing House, February 1982. [2] Thin strips shaved out of paulownia wood. Soaked in water, slightly sticky. In the past, women combed their hair and sideburns, and they couldn't do without it.[3] 现在的年轻人连钉鞋也不知道了！钉鞋是一双纳帮很结实的布鞋，也有用生牛皮做的，在桐油里浸过，鞋底钉了很多奶头大的铁钉。在未有胶鞋之前，这便是雨鞋。
[4] 这是店铺里打牙祭的日子。
[3] Today's young people don't even know about spikes! Spikes are a pair of very strong cloth shoes, also made of raw cowhide, soaked in tung oil, and the soles are nailed with many nipple-sized iron nails. Before there were rubber shoes, these were rain boots. [4] This is the day of the tooth festival in the shop.[5] 在梅红纸上用刻刀镂刻出透空的细致的吉祥花纹，贴在门头上，小的叫“吊钱”，大的叫“欢乐”。有的地方叫“吊挂”。
[6] 文徵明的长子，名彭，字寿承，三桥是他的别号。
[5] On the plum red paper, carve a hollow and delicate auspicious pattern with a carving knife and stick it on the door, the small one is called "hanging money", and the large one is called "joy". In some places, it is called "hanging". [6] Wen Zhengming's eldest son, named Peng, courtesy name Shoucheng, and Sanqiao was his nickname.[7] 探子是刺激蟋蟀的斗志用的。北方多用猪鬃；南方多用四杈草掰成细须，九蒸九晒。
[7] The spy is used to stimulate the fighting spirit of crickets. In the north, pig bristles are mostly used; in the south, four-branched grass is mostly used to break into fine whiskers, steamed and dried nine times.[8] “新生活”是蒋介石搞的“新生活”运动，提倡“礼义廉耻”，到处刷写着“礼义廉耻，国之四维。四维不张，国乃灭亡”；限制行人靠左边走；废除作揖，改行握手；禁止燃放鞭炮等等。总之，大家都过新生活，不许过旧生活！
[8] "New Life" is the "New Life" movement launched by Chiang Kai-shek, advocating "propriety, righteousness and shame", and sprinting "propriety, righteousness and shame, the four dimensions of the country". If the four dimensions are not open, the country will perish"; restrict pedestrians from walking on the left; abolish the bow and change to shaking hands; prohibit the setting off of firecrackers, etc. In short, everyone lives a new life, and is not allowed to live an old life![9] 这地方店铺的门一般都是一块一块狭长的门板，上在门坎的槽里，称为“铺闼子”。

寂寞和温暖

寂寞和温暖[1]
[9] The doors of the shops in this place are generally long and narrow door panels, which are placed in the grooves of the thresholds, called "shops". Loneliness and warmth[1]这个女同志在这个农业科学研究所的科研人员当中显得有点特别。她有很多文学书。屠格涅夫的、契诃夫的、梅里美的。都保存得很干净。她的衣着、用物都很素净。白床单、白枕套，连洗脸盆都是白的。她住在一间四白落地的狭长的单身宿舍里，只有一面墙上一个四方块里有一点颜色。那是一个相当精致的画框，里面经常更换画片：列宾的《伏尔加纤夫》、列维坦的风景……
This lesbian is a bit special among the researchers of this Institute of Agricultural Sciences. She has a lot of literary books. Turgenev's, Chekhov's, Merimi's. They are all very well preserved. Her clothes and utensils are very simple. White sheets, white pillowcases, and even the washbasin are all white. She lived in a long, narrow single dormitory with four white floors, with only a little color in a square on one wall. It was a rather delicate frame, in which the pictures were often changed: Repin's "Volga Fiber", Levitan's landscape......她叫沈沅，却不是湖南人。
Her name is Shen Yuan, but she is not from Hunan.她的家乡是福建的一个侨乡。她生在马来西亚的一个滨海的小城里。母亲死得早，她是跟父亲长大的。父亲开机帆船，往来运货，早出晚归。她从小就常常一个人过一天，坐在门外的海滩上，望着海，等着父亲回来。她后来想起父亲，首先想起的是父亲身上很咸的海水气味和他的五个趾头一般齐，几乎是长方形的脚。——常年在海船上生活的人的脚，大都是这样。
Her hometown is an overseas Chinese hometown in Fujian. She was born in a small coastal town in Malaysia. Her mother died early, and she grew up with her father. My father started a sailboat, transported goods back and forth, and left early and returned late. Since she was a child, she often spent a day alone, sitting on the beach outside the door, looking at the sea, waiting for her father to come back. Later, when she thought of her father, the first thing she thought of was that the smell of salty seawater on her father was as level as his five toes, almost rectangular feet. ——Most of the feet of people who live on sea boats all year round are like this.她在南洋读了小学，以后回国来上学。父亲还留在南洋。她从初中到大学，都是在学校的宿舍里度过的。她在国内没有亲人，只有一个舅舅。上初中时，放暑假，她还到舅舅家住一阵。舅舅家很穷。他们家炒什么菜都放虾油。多少年后，她还记得舅舅家自渍的虾油的气味。高中以后，就是寒暑假，也是在学校里过了。一到节假日、星期天，她总是打一盆水洗洗头，然后拿一本小说，一边看小说，一边等风把头发吹干，嘴里咬着一个鲜橄榄。
She went to elementary school in Nanyang and returned to China to go to school. My father still stayed in Nanyang. She spent her time in the school dormitory from junior high school to college. She has no relatives in China, only one uncle. When she was in junior high school, during the summer vacation, she also lived at her uncle's house for a while. My uncle's family is very poor. They put shrimp oil in everything they fry. Many years later, she still remembers the smell of her uncle's self-soaked shrimp oil. After high school, even the winter and summer vacations, I spent it in school. On holidays and Sundays, she always washes her hair with a basin of water, then takes a novel, reads the novel, waits for the wind to dry her hair, and bites a fresh olive in her mouth.她父亲是被贫瘠而狭小的土地抛到海外去的。他没有一寸土，却希望他的家乡人能吃到饱饭。她在高中毕业后，就按照父亲的天真而善良的愿望，考进了北京的农业大学。
Her father was thrown overseas by the barren and small land. He didn't have an inch of land, but he hoped that the people in his hometown could eat as much as they wanted. After graduating from high school, she was admitted to the Agricultural University in Beijing in accordance with her father's innocent and kind wishes.大学毕业，就分配到了这个农业科学研究所。那年她二十五岁。
After graduating from university, she was assigned to this Institute of Agricultural Sciences. She was twenty-five years old that year.二十五岁，过得很平静。既没有生老病死（母亲死的时候，她还不大记事），也没有柴米油盐。她在学习上从来没有感到过吃力，从来没有做过因为考外文、考数学答不出题来而急得浑身出汗的那种梦。
At the age of twenty-five, she lived a very peaceful life. There was neither birth, old age, illness or death (she didn't remember much when her mother died), nor firewood, rice, oil and salt. She never felt difficult in her studies, and she never had the kind of dream that she was sweating because she couldn't answer the questions in foreign languages and mathematics.她长得很高。在学校站队时，从来是女生的第一名。这个所里的女工、女干部，也没有一个她那样高的。
她长得很清秀。
这个所的农业工人有一个风气，爱给干部和科研人员起外号。
She is tall. When standing in line at school, she has always been the first among girls. None of the female workers and cadres in this institute are as tall as her. She is very beautiful. The agricultural workers of this institute have a culture of loving to give nicknames to cadres and scientific researchers.有一个年轻的技术员叫王作祜，工人们叫他王咋唬。
There was a young technician named Wang Zuohu, and the workers called him Wang Hui.有一个中年的技师，叫俊哥儿李。有一个时期，所里有三个技师都姓李。为怕混淆，工人们就把他们区别为黑李、白李、俊哥儿李。黑李、白李，因为肤色不同（这二李后来都调走了）。俊哥儿李是因为他长得端正，衣着整齐，还因为他冬天也不戴帽子。这地方冬天有时冷到零下三十七八度，工人们花多少钱，也愿意置一顶狐皮的或者貉绒的皮帽。至不济，也要戴一顶山羊头的。俊哥儿李是不论什么天气也是光着脑袋，头发梳得一丝不乱。
There is a middle-aged technician named Jun Geer Li. There was a period when there were three technicians in the institute whose surname was Li. For fear of confusion, the workers distinguished them as Black Li, White Li, and Jun Geer Li. Black Li and White Li have different skin colors (these two Li were later transferred). Jun Ge Li is because he is well-looked, neatly dressed, and because he doesn't wear a hat in winter. It is sometimes as cold as minus 37 or 8 degrees Celsius in winter, and the workers are willing to buy a fox skin or raccoon wool fur hat no matter how much it costs. If it doesn't work, you have to wear a goat's head. Jun Ge Li has a bare head no matter what the weather is, and his hair is combed neatly.有一个技师姓张，在所里年岁最大，资历也最老。工人们当面叫他张老，背后叫他早稻田。他是个水稻专家，每天起得最早，一起来就到水稻试验田去。他是日本留学生。这个所的历史很久了，有一些老工人敌伪时期就来了，他们多少知道一点日本的事。他们听说日本有个早稻田大学，就不管他是不是这个大学毕业的，派给他一个“早稻田”的外号。
There is a technician surnamed Zhang, who is the oldest and the oldest in the institute. The workers call him Zhang Lao in front and Waseda behind his back. He is a rice expert, and he gets up early every day and goes to the rice test field together. He is a Japanese student. This institute has a long history, and some old workers came during the period of enemy and puppetry, and they knew a little about Japan. They heard that there was a Waseda University in Japan, so they gave him the nickname "Waseda", regardless of whether he graduated from this university or not.沈沅来了不久，工人们也给她起了外号，叫沈三元。这是因为她刚来的时候，所里一个姓胡的支部书记在大会上把她的名字念错了，把“沅”字拆成了两个字，念成“沈三元”。工人们想起老年间的吉利话：“连中三元”，就说“沈三元”，这名字不赖！他们还听说她在学校时先是团员，后是党员，刚来了又是技术员，于是又叫她“沈三员”。“沈三元”也罢，“沈三员”也罢，含意都差不多：少年得志，前程万里。
Not long after Shen Yuan came, the workers also gave her a nickname, Shen Sanyuan. This is because when she first came, a branch secretary surnamed Hu in the institute mispronounced her name at the conference, split the word "Yuan" into two words, and pronounced it as "Shen Sanyuan". The workers remembered the auspicious saying in old age: "Even if they hit three yuan", they said "Shen Sanyuan", this name is not bad! They also heard that she was a member of the league when she was in school, then a party member, and a technician when she first came, so they called her "Shen Sanyuan" again. Whether it is "Shen Sanyuan" or "Shen Sanyuan", the meaning is the same: the young man is ambitious and has a long future.有一些年轻的技术员背后也叫她沈三员，那意味就不一样了。他们知道沈沅在政治条件上、业务能力上，都比他们优越，他们在提到“沈三员”时，就流露出相当复杂的情绪：嫉妒、羨慕，又有点讽刺。
Some young technicians also call her Shen Sanyuan behind her back, which means a different thing. They knew that Shen Yuan was superior to them in terms of political conditions and business ability, and when they mentioned "Shen Sanyuan", they showed quite mixed emotions: jealousy, envy, and a little irony.沈沅来了之后，引起一些人的注目，也引起一些人侧目。
这些，沈沅自己都不知道。
After Shen Yuan came, it attracted the attention of some people and also caused some people to look sideways. Shen Yuan himself didn't know these.她一直清清楚楚地记得第一天到这里时的情景。天刚刚亮，在一个小火车站下了车，空气很清凉。所里派了一个老工人赶了一辆单套车来接她。这老工人叫王栓。出了站，是一条很平整的碎石马路，两旁种着高高的加拿大白杨。她觉得这条路很美。不到半个钟头，王栓用鞭子一指：“到了。过了石桥，就是农科所。”她放眼一望：整齐而结实的房屋，高大明亮的玻璃窗。一匹马在什么地方喷着响鼻。大树下原来亮着的植保研究室的诱捕灯忽然灭掉了。她心里非常感动。
She always clearly remembers the first day she arrived here. It was just dawn, and I got off at a small train station, and the air was cool. The institute sent an old worker to pick her up in a single car. The old worker's name is Wang Shuo. Outside the station, there is a very smooth gravel road lined with tall Canadian poplars. She thought the road was beautiful. In less than half an hour, Wang Shuo pointed with his whip: "It's here." After crossing the stone bridge, there is the Institute of Agricultural Sciences. She looked around: neat and sturdy houses, tall and bright glass windows. A horse was snorting somewhere. The trapping light of the plant protection laboratory that was originally on under the big tree suddenly went out. She was very moved.这是一个地区一级的农科所，但是历史很久，积累的资料多，研究人员的水平也比较高，是全省的先进单位，全华北也是有数的。
This is a regional-level agricultural science institute, but it has a long history, accumulated a lot of information, and the level of researchers is relatively high.她到各处看了看。大田、果园、菜园、苗圃、温室、种籽仓库、水闸、马号、羊舍、猪场……这些东西她是熟悉的。她参观过好几个这样的农科所，大体上都差不多。不过，过去，这对她说起来好像是一幅一幅画；现在，她走到画里来了。晚上，一个人躺在床上，想：我也许会在这里生活一辈子。
She looked everywhere. Fields, orchards, vegetable gardens, nurseries, greenhouses, seed warehouses, sluices, horses, sheep houses, pig farms...... She was familiar with these things. She had visited several of these agricultural institutes, and they were generally the same. In the past, however, it seemed like a painting to her; now, she came to the paintings. At night, she lay alone in bed and thought: I might live here for the rest of my life.她的工作分配在大田作物研究组，主要是作早稻田的助手。她很高兴。她在学校时就读过张老的论文，对他很钦佩。
她到早稻田的研究室去见他。
Her work was assigned to the field crop research group, mainly as an assistant in the early rice fields. She was very happy. She had read Zhang Lao's papers in school and admired him very much. She went to Waseda's laboratory to meet him.张老摘下眼镜，站起来跟她握手。他的握手的姿态特别恳挚，有点像日本人。
“你的学习成绩我看过了，很好。你写的《京西水稻调查》，我读过，很好。我摘录了一部分。”
Zhang Lao took off his glasses and stood up to shake hands with her. His handshake gesture was very sincere, a bit like a Japanese. "I have seen your academic performance, and it is very good. I have read the "Rice Survey in Western Beijing" written by you, and it is very good. I have excerpted a part. ”早稻田抽出几张卡片和沈沅写的调查报告的铅印本。报告上有几处用红铅笔划了道。
沈沅不知说什么好，只好说：“很幼稚。”
“你很年轻，是个女同志。”
沈沅正捉摸着他这句话是什么意思，他说：
Waseda took out a few cards and a lead print of the investigation report written by Shen Yuan. There were several places on the report that were marked with a red pencil. Shen Yuan didn't know what to say, so he had to say: "Very naïve." ” "You're young, you're a lesbian." Shen Yuan was figuring out what he meant by this sentence, and he said:“搞农业科学研究，是寂寞的。要安于寂寞。——一个水稻良种培育成功，到真正确定它的种性，要几年？”
“正常的情况下，要八年。”
"Engaging in agricultural scientific research is lonely. Be content with loneliness. ——How many years does it take for a rice variety to be successfully cultivated to truly determine its germ characteristics? ” "Under normal circumstances, it takes eight years."“八年。以后会缩短。作物一年只生长一次。不能性急。搞农业，不要想一鸣惊人。农业研究，有很大的连续性。路，是很长的。在这条漫长的路上，没有敲锣打鼓，也没有欢呼。是的，很寂寞。但是乐在其中。”
"Eight years. It will be shortened in the future. Crops only grow once a year. Don't be impatient. Engage in agriculture, don't think about blockbusters. Agricultural research has a lot of continuity. The road is very long. On this long road, there is no gong or drum, no cheering. Yes, it's lonely. But enjoy it. ”张老的话给她留下很深刻的印象。
从此以后，她每天一早起来，就跟着早稻田到稻田去观察、记录。白天整理资料。晚上看书，或者翻译一点外文资料。
除了早稻田，她比较接近的人是俊哥儿李。
Zhang Lao's words left a deep impression on her. From then on, she got up early every morning and followed the rice fields to observe and record. Organize information during the day. Read books at night, or translate some foreign materials. In addition to Waseda, the person she is closer to is Jun Ge Li.俊哥儿李她早就认识了。老李也是农大的，比沈沅早好几年。沈沅进校时，老李早就毕业走了。但是他的爱人留在农大搞研究，沈沅跟她很熟。她姓褚，沈沅叫她褚大姐。沈沅在褚大姐那里见过俊哥儿李好多次。
Brother Jun Li has known her for a long time. Lao Li is also from Agricultural University, several years earlier than Shen Yuan. When Shen Yuan entered the school, Lao Li had already graduated and left. But his lover stayed at Agricultural University to do research, and Shen Yuan was very familiar with her. Her surname is Chu, and Shen Yuan calls her Sister Chu. Shen Yuan has seen Brother Jun Li many times at Sister Chu's place.俊哥儿李是个谷子专家。他认识好几个县的种谷能手。谷子是低产作物。他们的共同愿望，就是想摘掉谷子的低产帽子。俊哥儿李经常下乡。这些种谷能手也常来找他。一来，就坐满了一屋子。看看俊哥儿李那样一个衣履整齐，衬衫的领口、袖口雪白，头发一丝不乱的人，坐在一些戴皮帽的、戴毡帽的、系着羊肚子手巾的、长着黑胡子、白胡子、花白胡子的老农之间，彼此却是那样的自然，那样的亲热，是很有趣的。
Jun Geer Li is a millet expert. He knows grain farmers in several counties. Millet is a low-yielding crop. Their common wish is to take off the low-yield hat of millet. Jun Geer Li often goes to the countryside. These grain planting experts also often come to him. As soon as he came, the room was full. It is very interesting to see Jun Geer Li, a person with neat clothes, snow-white collar and cuffs of his shirt, and unkempt hair, sitting among some old farmers wearing leather hats, felt hats, sheep's belly handkerchiefs, and blackbeards, white beards, and white beards.这些种谷能手来的时候，沈沅就到俊哥儿李屋里去。听他们谈话，同时也帮着做做记录。
When these grain planting experts came, Shen Yuan went to Brother Jun's Li house. Listen to their conversation and help make records.老李离不开他的谷子；褚大姐离开了农大的设备，她的研究工作就无法进行。因此，他们多年来一直过着两地生活。有时褚大姐带着孩子来这里住几天，沈沅一定去看她。
Lao Li can't do without his millet; Sister Chu left the equipment of the Agricultural University, and her research work could not be carried out. Therefore, they have been living in two places for many years. Sometimes Sister Chu brings her children to live here for a few days, and Shen Yuan must go to see her.她和工人的关系很好。在地里干活休息的时候，女工们都愿意和她挤在一起。——这些女工不愿和别的女技术员接近，说她们“很酸”[2]。放羊的、锄豆埂的“半工子”[3]也常来找她，掰两根不结玉米的“甜杆”，拔一把叫做酸苗的草根来叫她尝尝。“甜杆”真甜。酸苗酸得像醋，吃得人眼睛、眉毛都皱在一起。下了工，从地里回来，工人的家属正在做饭，孩子缠着，绊手绊脚，她就把满脸鼻涕的娃娃抱过来，逗他玩半天。
She has a good relationship with the workers. When she is working in the fields and resting, the female workers are willing to huddle with her. ——These female workers are reluctant to approach other female technicians, saying that they are "very sour"{{id_00001 id_0000}}. The "half-workers" who herd sheep and hoe bean ridges also often come to her, break two "sweet poles" that do not produce corn, and pull out a handful of grass roots called sour seedlings to ask her to taste them. The "sweet pole" is so sweet. The sour seedlings are as sour as vinegar, and the eyes and eyebrows of people who eat them are wrinkled. After work, when she came back from the field, the worker's family was cooking, and the child was entangled and stumbled, so she picked up the doll with a snot face and played with him for a long time.她和那个赶单套车接她到所的老车倌王栓很谈得来。王栓没事时常上她屋里来，一聊半天。人们都奇怪：他俩有什么可聊的呢？这两个人有什么共同语言呢？主要是王栓说，她听着。王栓聊他过去的生活，这个所的历史，聊他和工人对这个所的干部和科研人员的评价。“早稻田”、“俊哥儿李”、“王咋唬”，包括她自己的外号“沈三元”，都是王栓告诉她的。沈沅听到“早稻田”、“俊哥儿李”，哈哈大笑了半天。
She had a good conversation with Wang Shuo, the old car driver who picked her up in a single car. Wang Shuo often came to her house and chatted for a long time. People are wondering: What do they have to talk about? What language do these two people have in common? Mainly Wang Shuo said, she listened. Wang Shuo talked about his past life, the history of this institute, and his and the workers' evaluation of the cadres and researchers of this institute. "Waseda Field", "Jun Geer Li", "Wang Huo Bluff", including her own nickname "Shen Sanyuan", were all told by Wang Shuo. Shen Yuan heard "Waseda Richard" and "Jun Geer Li" and laughed for a long time.王栓走了，沈沅屋里好长时间还留着他身上带来的马汗的酸味。她一点也不讨厌这种气味。
Wang Shuo was gone, and Shen Yuan's house still had the sour smell of horse sweat brought by him for a long time. She didn't hate the smell at all.稻子收割了，羊羔子抓了秋膘了，葡萄下了窖了，雪下来了。雪化了，茵陈蒿在乌黑的地里绿了，羊角葱露了嘴了，稻田的冻土翻了，葡萄出了窖了，母羊接了春羔了，育苗了，插秧了。沈沅在这个农科所生活了快一年了。
The rice is harvested, the lambs are grabbing autumn fat, the grapes are in the cellar, and the snow is falling. The snow melted, the artemisia green in the black ground, the horns and green onions showed their mouths, the frozen soil in the rice fields turned over, the grapes came out of the cellar, and the ewes took the spring lambs, raised seedlings, and planted rice seedlings. Shen Yuan has lived in this agricultural science institute for almost a year.她不得不和他们接触的，还有一些人。一个是胡支书，一个是王作祜。胡支书是支部书记，王作祜是她们党小组的组长。
There were some people she had to contact with them. One is Hu Zhishu and the other is Wang Zuohu. Hu Zhishu is the secretary of the branch, and Wang Zuohu is the leader of their party group.胡支书是个专职的支书。多少年来干部、工人，都称之为胡支书。他整天无所事事，想干点什么就干点什么。夏锄的时候，他高兴起来，会扛着大锄来锄两趟高粱；扬场的时候，扬几锨；下了西瓜、果子，他去过磅；春节包饺子，各人自己动手，他会系了个白围裙很热心地去分肉馅，分白面。他也可以什么都不干，和一个和他关系很亲密的老工人、老伙伴，在树林子里砍土圪垃，你追我躲、嘴里还笑着，骂着：“我操你妈！”一玩半天，像两个孩子。他的本职工作，是给工人们开会讲话。他不读书，不看报，讲起话来没有准稿子。可以由国际形势讲到秋收要颗粒归仓，然后对一个爱披着衣服到处走的工人训斥半天：“这是什么样子！你给我把两个袖子捅上！”此人身材瘦削，嗓音奇高。他有个口头语：“如论无何”。不知道为什么，他总把“无论如何”说成“如论无何”，而且很爱说这句话。在他的高亢刺耳，语无伦次的讲话中，总要出现无数次“如论无何”。
Hu Zhishu is a full-time party secretary. For many years, cadres and workers have called him Hu Zhishu. He has nothing to do all day long, and he can do whatever he wants. When he was hoeing in the summer, he was happy and would carry a big hoe to hoe the sorghum twice; when he raised the field, he raised a few shovels; he went to pound watermelon and fruit; when he made dumplings during the Spring Festival, everyone did it themselves, and he would wear a white apron and enthusiastically divide the meat filling and white noodles. He can also do nothing, with an old worker and old partner who is very close to him, cutting dirt in the woods, chasing me and hiding, laughing in his mouth, scolding: "Fuck your mother!" "Playing for a long time, like two children. His job is to give speeches to workers. He doesn't read, doesn't read newspapers, and doesn't have a standard manuscript when he speaks. You can talk about the international situation to the autumn harvest to return to the warehouse, and then reprimand a worker who loves to walk around in clothes for a long time: "What does this look like! You poke my two sleeves!" This man is thin and has a very high voice. He has a saying: "If you say nothing". I don't know why, but he always says "no matter what" as "if nothing happens", and he loves to say this sentence. In his high-pitched and incoherent speeches, there are always countless times "if nothing is said".他在所里威信很高，因为他可以盖一个图章就把一个工人送进劳改队。这一年里，经他的手，已经送了两个。一个因为打架，一个是查出了历史问题——参加过一贯道。这两个工人的家属还在所里劳动，拖着两个孩子。
He has a high prestige in the institute because he can send a worker to the labor camp with a stamp. In this year, two have been sent by his hands. One was because of a fight, and the other was because of a historical problem - he participated in Yiguandao. The families of the two workers are still working in the institute, dragging their two children.他是个酒仙，顿顿饭离不开酒。这所里有一个酒厂。每天出酒之后，就看见他端着两壶新出淋的原汁烧酒，一手一壶，一壶四两，从酒厂走向他的宿舍，徜徉而过，旁若无人。
胡支书的得力助手是王作祜。
He is a wine immortal, and every meal is inseparable from wine. There is a winery in this house. After serving wine every day, I saw him holding two pots of newly poured original soju, one pot in one hand, and four taels in one pot, walking from the winery to his dormitory, wandering by, as if no one was around. Hu Zhishu's right-hand man was Wang Zuohu.王作祜有两件本事，一是打扑克，一是做文章。
Wang Zuohu has two skills, one is to play poker, and the other is to make a fuss.他是个百分大王，所向无敌。他的屋里随时都摆着一张空桌、四把椅子。拉开抽屉就是扑克牌和记分用的白纸、铅笔。每天晚上都能凑一点，烟茶自备，一直打到十一二点。
He is a 100% king and invincible. There is an empty table and four chairs in his house at any time. When you open the drawer, you will find playing cards, white paper and pencils for scoring. Every night, you can make up a little, bring your own cigarettes and tea, and play until eleven or twelve o'clock.他是所里的笔杆子，人称“一秘”。年轻的科技人员的语文一般都不太通顺。他是在中学时就靠搞宣传、编板报起家的，笔下很快。因此，所里的总结、报告、介绍经验的稿子，多年由他起草。
He is the pen holder of the institute, known as "the first secret". The language of young scientific and technological personnel is generally not very fluent. He started by engaging in propaganda and compiling board newspapers in middle school, and his pen was very fast. Therefore, the manuscripts of the institute's summary, report, and introduction of experience have been drafted by him for many years.他尤其擅长于写批判稿。不管给他一个什么题目，他从胡支书屋里抱了一堆报纸，东翻翻，西找找，不到两个小时，就能写出一篇文情并茂的批判发言。
He is especially good at writing critical manuscripts. No matter what topic he was given, he picked up a bunch of newspapers from Hu Zhi's bookstore, flipped through the east and west, and in less than two hours, he was able to write a critical speech full of literary emotion.所里有一个老木匠，说了一句怪话。有人问他一个月挣多少钱，他说：“咳，挣一壶醋钱。”有人反映给支部，王作祜认为这是反党言论，建议开大会批判。王作祜作了长篇发言，引经据典，慷慨激昂。会开完了，老木匠回到宿舍，说：“王作祜咋唬点啥咧？”王咋唬的名字，就是这么来的。
There was an old carpenter in the institute who said something strange. Someone asked him how much money he earned a month, and he said, "Cough, earn a pot of vinegar money." Someone reported to the branch, and Wang Zuohu thought it was an anti-party remark and suggested holding a meeting to criticize it. Wang Zuohu made a long speech, quoting classics and impassioned. After the meeting, the old carpenter returned to the dormitory and said, "Why is Wang Zuohu bluffing?" This is how Wang Zuohu's name came from.沈沅忽然被打成了右派。
究竟是因为什么呢？
因为她在整风的时候，在党内的会议上提了意见，批评了领导？
Shen Yuan was suddenly branded as a rightist. What is the reason? Because she made opinions at the party meeting and criticized the leader during the rectification?因为她提出所领导对科研人员不够关心，张老需要一个资料柜，就是不给，他的大量资料都堆在地下？
因为她提出对送去劳改的两个工人都处理过重，这样下去，是会使党脱离群众的？
Because she proposed that the leaders of the institute did not care enough about scientific researchers, Zhang Lao needed a data cabinet, but he didn't give it, and a lot of his information was piled up on the ground? Because she proposed that the two workers sent to labor camp were dealt with too heavily, would this lead to the party being separated from the masses?因为她提出群众对胡支书从酒厂灌酒，公私不分，有反映？
Because she proposed that the masses were reluctant to pour wine from Hu Zhishu from the winery, regardless of public or private, did they respond?因为她提出一个管农业的书记向所里要了一块韭菜皮[4]，铺在他的院子里，这值不了多少钱，但是传开了很不好听，工人说：“这不真成了刮地皮了？”
Because she proposed that a secretary in charge of agriculture asked the institute for a piece of leek peel [4] and spread it in his yard, which was not worth much, but it spread very badly, and the worker said: "Isn't this really scraping the ground?" ”也许什么都不为，就因为她在这个农业科学研究所。研究所，是知识分子成堆的地方，怎么也得抓出一两个右派，才能完成“指标”。经过领导上研究，认为派她当右派合适。
Maybe she did nothing because she was in this Institute of Agricultural Sciences. The institute is a place where intellectuals are piled up, and one or two rightists must be caught in order to complete the "indicators". After research by the leadership, it is believed that it is appropriate to send her as a rightist.主要的问题，据以定性的主要根据，是她的一篇日记。
这是一篇七年以前写的日记。
The main problem, on which the main basis for the characterization is based is one of her diaries. This is a diary written seven years ago.她的父亲半生漂泊在异国的海上，他一直想有一小片自己的土地。他把历年攒下的钱寄回国，托沈沅的舅舅买了一点田，还盖了一座一楼一底的房子。他想晚年回家乡住几年，然后就埋在这块土地上，有一个坟头，坟头立一块小小的石碑，让后人知道他曾经辛苦了一辈子。一九五一年土改。土改的工作队长是个南下的干部，对侨乡情况不太了解；又因为当地干部想征用他那座房子，把他划成了地主。沈沅那年还在读高中。她不相信他的被海风吹得脸色紫黑，五个脚趾一般齐的父亲是地主，就在日记里写下了她的困惑与不满。
Her father had been wandering on the seas of a foreign country for half his life, and he had always wanted to have a small piece of land of his own. He sent the money he had saved over the years back to China, asked Shen Yuan's uncle to buy a little land, and built a house with one floor and one floor. He wanted to return to his hometown to live for a few years in his later years, and then bury it on this land, with a grave, and a small stone monument erected on the grave to let future generations know that he had worked hard all his life. Land reform in 1951. The leader of the land reform team was a cadre who went south and didn't know much about the situation in his hometown; and because the local cadres wanted to requisition his house, he was designated as a landlord. Shen Yuan was still in high school that year. She didn't believe that his father, whose face was purple and black by the sea breeze, and his five toes were the same, was a landlord, so she wrote down her confusion and dissatisfaction in her diary.问题本来已经解决了。在农大入党的时候，农大党组织为了核实她的家庭出身，曾经两次到她的家乡外调，认为她的父亲最多能划一个小土地出租者，她的成分没有问题，批准了她的入党要求。她对自己当时的困惑和不满也作了检查，认为是立场不稳，和党离心离德。
The problem had already been solved. When she joined the party at Agricultural University, in order to verify her family background, the party organization of the Agricultural University went to her hometown twice to transfer out, believing that her father could allocate a small land lessor at most, and that there was no problem with her composition, and approved her request to join the party. She also checked her confusion and dissatisfaction at the time, believing that it was an unstable position and a centrifugal departure from the party.没想到……
Unexpectedly......这些天，有的干部和工人就觉得所里的空气有点不大对。胡支书屋里坐了一屋子人在开会，屋门从里面倒插着。王作祜晚上不打牌了。他屋里的灯十二点以后还亮着。党团员和积极分子的脸上都异样的紧张而严肃。他们知道，要出什么事了。
These days, some cadres and workers feel that the air in the institute is a bit wrong. There was a room sitting in Hu Zhishu's house where people were meeting, and the door was inserted upside down from inside. Wang Zuohu stopped playing cards at night. The lights in his room were still on after twelve o'clock. The faces of party members and activists were strangely nervous and serious. They knew something was going to happen.一个早上，安静平和的农科所变了样。居于全所中心的种籽仓库外面的墙上贴满了大字报：“击退反党分子沈沅的猖狂进攻”，“不许沈沅污蔑党的领导”，“一个阶级异己分子的自供状——沈沅日记摘抄”，“一定要把农科所的一面白旗拔掉”，“剥下沈沅清高纯洁的外衣”，“铲除蒋介石反攻大陆的社会基础”。有文字，还有漫画。有一张漫画，画着一个少女向蒋介石低头屈膝。这个少女竟然只穿了乳罩和三角裤衩！这是王作祜的手笔。
One morning, the quiet and peaceful Agricultural Science Institute changed. The wall outside the seed warehouse in the center of the institute is covered with big-character posters: "Repel the rampant attack of the anti-party element Shen Yuan", "Shen Yuan is not allowed to slander the party leadership", "Confession of a class dissident - excerpt from Shen Yuan's diary", "A white flag of the Institute of Agricultural Sciences must be pulled out", "Peel off Shen Yuan's noble and pure coat", "Eradicate the social foundation of Chiang Kai-shek's counterattack on the mainland". There is text and comics. There is a cartoon depicting a girl bowing her head and kneeling to Chiang Kai-shek. This girl was wearing only a bra and briefs! This is Wang Zuohu's handwriting.沈沅一点思想准备都没有。她一早起来，要到稻田去。一看这么多大字报，她懵了。她硬着头皮把这些大字报看下去。她脸色煞白，带着一种奇怪的微笑。有两个女工迎面看见她，吓了一跳。她们小声说：“坏了！她要疯！”看到那张戴着乳罩穿三角裤衩的漫画，她眼前一黑，几乎栽倒。一只大手从后面扶住了她。她定了定神，听见一个声音：“真不像话！”那是王栓。她觉得干哕，恶心，头晕。她摇摇晃晃地走向自己的宿舍。
Shen Yuan was not prepared at all. She got up early in the morning to go to the rice fields. When she saw so many big-character posters, she was stunned. She bit the bullet and read these big-character posters. She was pale with a strange smile. Two female workers were startled when they saw her head-on. They whispered, "It's broken! She's going crazy!" Seeing the cartoon wearing a bra and briefs, her eyes went black and she almost fell. A big hand supported her from behind. She calmed down and heard a voice: "It's really unreasonable!" "That's Wang Shuo. She felt dry, nauseous, and dizzy. She staggered to her dormitory.她对于运动的突出的感觉是：莫名其妙。她也参加过几次政治运动，但是整到自己的头上，这还是第一次。她坐在会场里，听着、记着别人的批判发言，她始终觉得这不是真事，这是荒唐的，不可能的，她会忽然想起《格列佛游记》，想起大人国、小人国。
Her outstanding feeling about the movement is: inexplicable. She has also participated in several political movements, but this is the first time it has been put on her own head. She sat in the venue, listening to and remembering the critical speeches of others, she always felt that this was not true, this was absurd, it was impossible, she would suddenly think of "Gulliver's Travels", think of the country of adults, and the country of villains.发言是各式各样的，大家分题作文。王作祜带着强烈的仇恨，用炸弹一样的语言和充满戏剧性的姿态大喊大叫。有一些发言把一些不相干的小事和一些本人平时没有觉察到的个人恩怨拉扯成了很长的一篇，而且都说成是严重的政治问题、世界观问题、立场问题。屠格涅夫、列宾和她的白脸盆都受到牵连，连她的长相、走路的姿势都受到批判。
The speeches were varied, and everyone composed on different topics. Wang Zuohu shouted with strong hatred, bomb-like language and dramatic gestures. Some speeches pulled up some unrelated trivial matters and some personal grievances that I was not usually aware of into a long article, and they all said that they were serious political issues, worldview issues, and position issues. Turgenev, Repin and her white basin were all implicated, and even her appearance and walking posture were criticized.写了无数次检查，听了无数次批判，在毫无自卫能力的情况下，忍受着各种离奇而难堪的侮辱，沈沅的精神完全垮了。她的神经麻木了。她听着那些锋利尖刻的语言，会不明白那是什么意思。她的脑子会出现一片空白，一点思想都没有，像是曝了光的底片。她有时一动不动地坐着，像一块石头。她不再觉得痛苦，只是非常的疲倦。她想：怎么都行，定一个什么罪名，给一个什么处分都行，只求快一点，快一点过去，不要再开会，不要再写检查。
After writing countless examinations, listening to countless criticisms, and enduring all kinds of bizarre and embarrassing insults without the ability to defend herself, Shen Yuan's spirit completely collapsed. Her nerves were numb. She listened to those sharp and sharp words and couldn't understand what they meant. Her mind would go blank, with no thoughts at all, like exposed negatives. She sometimes sat motionless, like a stone. She no longer felt pain, just very tired. She thought: Whatever the charge, any punishment can be given, just ask for a hurry, go over quickly, don't have any more meetings, don't write any more checks.总算，一个高亢尖厉的声音宣布：“批判大会暂时开到这里。”
Finally, a high-pitched and sharp voice announced: "The criticism meeting is here for the time being." ”沈沅回到屋里，用一盆冷水洗了洗头，躺下来，立刻就睡着了。她睡得非常实在，连一个梦都没有。她好像消失了。什么也不知道。太阳偏西了，她不知道。卸了套、饮过水的骡马从她的窗外郭答郭答地走过，她不知道。晚归的麻雀在她的檐前吱喳吵闹着回窠了，她不知道。天黑了，她不知道。
Shen Yuan returned to the house, washed his hair with a basin of cold water, lay down, and fell asleep immediately. She slept very soundly, not even a dream. She seemed to have disappeared. I don't know anything. The sun is in the west, and she doesn't know. The mules and horses that had taken off their sleeves and drank water walked past her window, and she didn't know. The sparrows who returned late squeaked noisily in front of her eaves and returned to their nests, she didn't know. It was dark, and she didn't know.她朦朦胧胧闻到一阵一阵马汗的酸味，感觉到床前坐着一个人。她拉开床头的灯，床前坐着王栓，泪流满面。
She vaguely smelled the sour smell of horse sweat and felt a person sitting in front of the bed. She turned on the light at the head of the bed, and Wang Shuo sat in front of the bed, bursting into tears.沈沅每天下班都到井边去洗脸，王栓也每天这时去饮马。马饮着水，得一会，他们就站着闲聊。马饮完了，王栓牵着马，沈沅端着一盆明天早上用的水，一同往回走（沈沅的宿舍离马号很近）。自从挨了批斗，她就改在天黑人静之后才去洗脸，因为那张恶劣的漫画就贴在井边的墙上。过了两天，沈沅发现她的门外有一个木桶，里面有半桶清水。她用了。第二天，水桶提走了。不到傍晚，水桶又送来了。她知道，这是王栓。她想：一个“粗人”，感情却是这样的细！
Shen Yuan goes to the well to wash his face every day after get off work, and Wang Shuo also goes to drink horses at this time every day. The horse drank water, and after a while, they stood and chatted. After the horse finished drinking, Wang Shuo led the horse, and Shen Yuan walked back together with a basin of water for tomorrow morning (Shen Yuan's dormitory is very close to Ma Hao). Since being criticized, she changed to wash her face after it was dark, because the bad cartoon was pasted on the wall by the well. Two days later, Shen Yuan found a wooden bucket outside her door with half a bucket of clean water inside. She used it. The next day, the bucket was taken away. Before evening, the bucket was delivered again. She knew that this was Wang Shuo. She thought: A "rough man", but his feelings are so thin!现在，王栓泪流满面地坐在她的面前。她觉得心里热烘烘的。
Now, Wang Shuo sat in front of her with tears in his eyes. She felt warm in her heart.“我来看看你。你睡着了，睡得好实在！你受委屈了！他们为什么要这样整你，折磨你？听见他们说的那些话，我的心疼。他们欺负人！你不要难过。你要好好的。俺们，庄户人，知道什么是谷子，什么是秕子。俺们心里有杆秤。他们不要你，俺们要你！你要好好的，一定要好好的！你看你两眼塌成个啥样了！要好好的！你的光阴多得很，你要好好的。你还要做很多事，你要好好的！”
"Let me see you. You are asleep, you are sleeping well! You are wronged! Why do they torture you like this? I feel distressed when I hear what they say. They bully people! Don't be sad. You have to be good. We, the farmers, know what millet is and what is chaff. We have a scale in our hearts. They don't want you, we want you! You have to be good, you must be good! Look at what your eyes look like! Be good! You have a lot of time, you have to be good. You have a lot of things to do, you have to be good! ”沈沅的眼泪流下来了。她一边流泪，一边点头。
“我走了。”
沈沅站起来送他。王栓走了两步，又停住，回头。
“你不要想死。千万不要想走那条路。”
沈沅点点头。
“你答应我。”
Shen Yuan's tears flowed. She nodded while shedding tears. "I'm leaving." Shen Yuan stood up and sent him off. Wang Shuo took two steps, stopped again, and turned around. "Don't think about dying. Don't want to go that way. ” Shen Yuan nodded. "You promise me."“我答应你，王栓，我不死。”
王栓走后，沈沅躺在床上，眼泪不断地涌出来。她听见自己的眼泪大滴大滴地落在枕头上，叭哒——叭哒……
沈沅的结论批下来了，定为一般右派，就在本所劳动。
"I promise you, Wang Shuo, I won't die." After Wang Shuo left, Shen Yuan lay on the bed, tears pouring out. She heard her tears falling on the pillow, bang-bang...... Shen Yuan's conclusion was approved, and he was designated as a general rightist and worked in this institute.她很镇定，甚至觉得轻松。她觉得这没有什么。就像一个人从水里的踏石上过河，原来怕湿了鞋袜；后来掉在河里，衣裤全湿了，觉得也不过就是这样，心里反而踏实了。
She was very calm and even relaxed. She felt that it was nothing. It's like a person crossing the river from a stepping stone in the water, and he was afraid of getting his shoes and socks wet; and then fell into the river, his clothes and pants were all wet, and he felt that it was just like that, but he felt at ease.只有一次，她在火车站的墙上看到一条大标语：把“地富反坏右”列在一起，她才觉得心里很不好受。国庆节前夕，胡支书特地通知她这两天不要进城，她的心往下一沉。
她跟周围人的关系变了。
Only once did she see a big sign on the wall of the train station: "The rich are listed together against the bad right", and she felt very uncomfortable. On the eve of the National Day, Hu Zhishu specially told her not to go into the city for the next two days, and her heart sank. Her relationship with the people around her has changed.在路上碰到所里的人，她都是把头一低。
When she met people in the institute on the road, she always lowered her head.在地里干活休息时，她一个人远远地坐着。原来爱跟她挤在一起的女工故意找话跟她说，她只是简单地回答一两个字。收工的时候，她都是晚走一会，不和这些女工一同走进所里的大门。
When she was working and resting in the fields, she sat alone at a distance. It turned out that the female worker who loved to huddle with her deliberately looked for something to talk to her, and she simply answered a word or two. When she finished work, she walked a little late and did not walk into the door of the institute with these female workers.她到稻田去拔草，看见早稻田站在一个小木板桥上。这是必经之路，她只好走过去。早稻田只对她说了一句话：“沈沅，要注意身体。”她没有说话，点了点头。早稻田走了，沈沅望着他的背影，在心里说：“谢谢您！”
She went to the rice field to pull weeds and saw Waseda standing on a small wooden bridge. This was the only way, so she had to walk over. Waseda only said one word to her: "Shen Yuan, pay attention to your body." She didn't speak, nodded. Waseda left, Shen Yuan looked at his back and said in his heart: "Thank you!" ”她看见俊哥儿李的女儿在渠沿上玩，知道褚大姐来了。收工的时候，褚大姐在离所门很远的路边等着沈沅，一把抓住她的手：“你为什么不来看我？”沈沅只是凄然一笑，摇摇头。——“你要什么书？我给你寄来。”沈沅想了一想，说：“不要。”
She saw Jun Ge'er Li's daughter playing on the edge of the canal and knew that Sister Chu was coming. At the end of work, Sister Chu waited for Shen Yuan on the side of the road far from the office, and grabbed her hand: "Why don't you come to see me?" Shen Yuan just smiled sadly and shook his head. ——"What book do you want? I'll send it to you." Shen Yuan thought for a while and said, "No." ”但是她每天好像过得挺好。她喜欢干活。在田野里，晒着太阳，吹着风，呼吸着带着青草和庄稼的气味的空气，她觉得很舒畅。她使劲地干活，累得满脸通红，全身是汗，以至使跟她一块干活的女工喊叫起来：“沈沅！沈沅！你干什么！”她这才醒悟过来：“哦！”把手脚放慢一些。
But she seems to be doing well every day. She likes to work. In the fields, basking in the sun, blowing the wind, and breathing the air with the smell of grass and crops, she felt very comfortable. She worked hard, her face was flushed from exhaustion, and her whole body was sweaty, so much so that the female worker who worked with her shouted: "Shen Yuan! Shen Yuan!" What are you doing! Only then did she come to her senses: "Oh!" Slow down your hands and feet.她还能看书，每天晚上，走过她的窗前，都可以看到她坐在临窗的小桌上看书，精神很集中，脸上极其平静。
过了三年。
这三年真是热闹。
She can still read, and every night, walking past her window, you can see her sitting on the small table by the window reading, her spirit is very concentrated, and her face is extremely calm. Three years passed. These three years have been really lively.五八、五九，搞了两年大跃进。深翻地，翻到一丈二。用贵重的农药培养出二尺七寸长的大黄瓜，装在一个特制的玻璃匣子里，用福尔马林泡着。把两穗“大粒白”葡萄“靠接”起来当作一串，给葡萄注射葡萄糖。把牛的精子给母猪授上，希望能下一个麒麟一样的东西，——牛大的猪。“卫星”上天，“大王”升帐，敢想敢干，敲锣打鼓，天天像过年。
58 and 59, it took two years of great leap forward. Turn the ground deeply and turn it to one foot and twelve. Use valuable pesticides to cultivate two-foot-seven-inch-long cucumbers, put them in a special glass box, and soak them in formalin. The two ears of "large white" grapes are "connected" as a bunch, and glucose is injected into the grapes. Give the sperm of the cow to the sow, hoping to ,—— something like a unicorn to a pig the size of a cow. The "satellite" goes to the sky, the "king" rises the tent, dares to think and do, beats gongs and drums, and every day is like the New Year.后来又闹了一阵“超声波”。什么东西都“超”一下。农、林、牧、副、渔，只要一“超”，就会奇迹一样地增长起来。“超”得鸡飞狗跳，小猪仔的鬃毛直竖，山丁子小树苗前仰后合。
Later, there was a burst of "ultrasound". Everything is "super". Agriculture, forestry, animal husbandry, deputy, and fishery, as long as they are "super", they will grow miraculously. The mane of the piglets is erect, and the saplings of the mountain lily tilt forward and backward.胡支书、王咋唬忙得很，报喜，介绍经验，开展览会……
最后是大家都来研究代食品，研究小球藻和人造肉，因为大家都挨了饿了。
Hu Zhishu and Wang were very busy, reporting good news, introducing experience, and holding exhibitions...... Finally, everyone came to study food substitutes, chlorella and artificial meat, because everyone was starving.只有早稻田还是每天一早到稻田，俊哥儿李还是经常下乡，沈沅还是劳动、看书。
Only Waseda still goes to the rice field early every morning, Jun Ge Li still often goes to the countryside, and Shen Yuan still works and reads.一九六一年夏天，调来一位新所长（原来的所长是个长期病号，很少到所里来），姓赵。所里很多工人都知道他。他在抗日战争期间是一个武工队长，常在这一带活动。老人们都说他“低头有计”，传诵着关于他的一些传奇性的故事。他的左太阳穴有一块圆形的伤疤，一咬东西就闪闪发亮。这是当年的枪伤。他在抗日战争时期就是县委一级的干部，现在还是县委一级。原因是：一贯右倾，犯了几次错误。
In the summer of 1961, a new director was transferred (the original director was a long-term patient and rarely came to the institute), surnamed Zhao. Many workers in the institute know him. He was a military captain during the War of Resistance Against Japanese Aggression and often worked in this area. The old people said that he "bowed his head and had a plan" and recited some legendary stories about him. He had a round scar on his left temple that glistened when he bit something. This is a gunshot wound from that year. He was a cadre at the county party committee level during the War of Resistance Against Japanese Aggression, and he is still at the county party committee level. The reason is: he has always leaned to the right and made several mistakes.他是骑了一辆自己装了马达的自行车来上任的，还不失当年武工队长的风度。他来之后，所里就添了一种新的声音。只要听见马达突突的声音，人们就知道赵所长奔什么方向去了。
He rode a bicycle with his own motor to take office, and he did not lose the demeanor of the martial arts captain back then. After he came, a new sound was added to the institute. As long as they hear the sound of the motor, people will know which direction Director Zhao is running.他一来，就下地干活。在大田、果园、菜园、苗圃，都干了几天。他一边干活，工人一边拿眼睛瞄着他。结论是：“赵所长的农活——啧啧啧！”他跟工人在一起，说说笑笑，不分彼此。工人跟他也无拘无束，无话不谈。工人们背后议论：“新来的赵所长，这人——不赖！”王栓说：“敢是！这人心里没假。他的心是一块阳泉炭，划根火柴就能点着。烧完了是一堆白灰。”
As soon as he came, he went to work in the fields. He worked in the fields, orchards, vegetable gardens, and nurseries for several days. As he worked, the workers looked at him with their eyes. The conclusion was: "Director Zhao's farm work - tsk!" He was with the workers, talking and laughing, regardless of each other. The workers were also unrestrained and talked about everything. The workers talked behind their backs: "The new Director Zhao, this person is not bad!" Wang Shuo said: "Dare to be! There is no fake in this person's heart. His heart is a piece of Yangquan charcoal, which can be lit by a match. After burning, it was a pile of white ash. ”干了差不多一个月的活，他把所里历年的总结，重要的会议记录都找来，关起门来看了十几天，校出了不少错字。
然后，到科研人员的家里挨门拜访。
访问了俊哥儿李。
After working for almost a month, he found the summary of the past years and important meeting minutes in the institute, and looked at it behind closed doors for more than ten days, and there were many typos. Then, visit the homes of the researchers. Interviewed Jun Geer Li.“老褚的事，要解决。老是鹊桥相会，那怎么行！我们想把她的研究项目接过来。这个项目，我们地区需要。农大肯交给我们最好。不行的话，我们搞一套设备。我了解了一下，地区还有这个钱。等我和地委研究一下。”
"Lao Chu's matter needs to be solved. We always meet at the magpie bridge, so how can it work! We want to take over her research project. This project is needed by our region. It is best for the agricultural university to hand it over to us. If it doesn't work, let's get a set of equipment. I found out that the region still has this money. Let me study it with the prefectural committee. ”看见老李屋里摆了好些凳子，知道他那些攻谷子低产关的农民朋友要来，老赵就留下来听了半天他们的座谈会。中午，他捧了一个串门大碗，盛了一碗高粱米饭，夹了几个腌辣椒和大家一同吃了饭。饭后，他问：“他们的饭钱是怎么算的？”老李说：“他们是我请来的客人。”——“这怎么行！”他转身就跑到总务处：“这钱以后由公家报。出在什么项目里，你们研究！”
Seeing that there were many stools in Lao Li's house, and knowing that his farmer friends who were attacking the low-yield of millet were coming, Lao Zhao stayed and listened to their symposium for a long time. At noon, he held a large bowl of sorghum rice, and ate with everyone with a few pickled peppers. After the meal, he asked, "How do you calculate their meal money?" Lao Li said: "They are guests I invited." ——"How can this work!" He turned around and ran to the general affairs office: "This money will be reported by the public in the future. What project is in, you study!" ”访问了早稻田。
“张老，张老！我来看看您，不打搅吗？”
“欢迎，欢迎！不打搅，不打搅！”
“我来拜师了。”
“不敢当！如果有什么关于水稻的普通的问题……”
Visited Waseda. "Old Zhang, Old Zhang! Let me see you, won't you disturb me?" ” "Welcome, welcome! Don't disturb, don't disturb! ” "I'm here to apprentice." "I don't dare to be! If there are any ordinary questions about rice......"“水稻我也想学。我是想来向您学日语。抗日战争时期，因为工作需要，我学了点日语，——那时要经常跟鬼子打交道嘛，现在几乎全忘光了。我想拾起来，就来找您这位早稻田了！”
“我不是早稻田毕业的。”
"I want to learn rice too. I want to learn Japanese from you. During the War of Resistance Against Japanese Aggression, I learned some Japanese because of work needs,—— At that time, I had to deal with the devils a lot, but now I have almost forgotten about it. I want to pick it up and come to you, Waseda! ” "I didn't graduate from Waseda."赵所长把“早稻田”的来由告诉早稻田，这位老科学家第一次知道他有这样一个外号，他哈哈大笑：
“我乐于接受这个外号。我认为这是对我个人工作的很高的评价。”
Director Zhao told Waseda the origin of "Waseda", and the old scientist knew for the first time that he had such a nickname, and he laughed: "I am happy to accept this nickname. I think it is a high evaluation of my personal work. ”赵所长问张老工作中有什么困难，什么要求。
“我需要一个助手。”
“您看谁合适？”
“沈沅。”
“还需要什么？——需要一个柜子。”
“对！您看看我的这些资料！”
Director Zhao asked Zhang what difficulties and requirements he had in his work. "I need an assistant." "Who do you think is suitable?" "Shen Yuan." "What else is needed? – A cabinet is needed. ” "Yes! Look at these information of mine! ”“柜子，马上可以解决，半个小时之内就给您送来。沈沅的问题，等我了解一下。”
“这里有一份俄文资料。我的俄文是自修的，恐怕理解得不准确，想请沈沅翻译一下，能吗？”
“交给我！”
"The cabinet can be solved immediately, and it will be delivered to you within half an hour. Shen Yuan's question, wait for me to understand. ” "There is a Russian material here. My Russian is self-studying, I'm afraid I don't understand it accurately, I want to ask Shen Yuan to translate, can you? ” "Leave it to me!"沈沅正在菜地里收蔓菁，王栓赶着车下地，远远地就喊：
“哎，沈沅！”
沈沅抬起头来。
“叫我？什么事？”
“赵所长叫你上他屋里去一趟。”
“知道啦。”
Shen Yuan was harvesting turnips in the vegetable field, Wang Shuo drove the car down the ground, and shouted from a distance: "Hey, Shen Yuan!" Shen Yuan raised his head. "Call me? What's up? ” "Director Zhao asked you to go to his house." "Got it."什么事呢？她微微觉得有点不安。她听见女工们谈论过新来的所长，也知道王栓说这人的心是一块阳泉炭，她有点奇怪，这个人真有这么大的魅力么？
What's the matter? She felt a little uneasy. She heard the female workers talk about the new director, and she also knew that Wang Shuo said that this person's heart was a piece of Yangquan charcoal, she was a little strange, does this person really have such a great charm?前几天，她从地里回来，迎面碰着这位所长推了自行车出门。赵所长扶着车把，问：
“你是沈沅吗？”
“是的。”
“你怎么这么瘦？”
沈沅心里一酸。好久了，没有人问她胖啦瘦的之类的话了。
A few days ago, she came back from the field and ran into the director head-on and pushed the bicycle out. Director Zhao held the handlebars and asked: "Are you Shen Yuan?" "Yes." "Why are you so thin?" Shen Yuan's heart was sour. It's been a long time, and no one asked her if she was fat or thin.“我要进城去。过两天你来找找我。”
说罢，他踩响了自行车的马达，上车走了。
现在，他找她，什么事呢？
沈沅在大渠里慢慢地洗了手，慢慢地往回走。
"I'm going into the city. You'll come to me in two days." ” After that, he stepped on the motor of the bicycle, got on the car and left. Now, he is looking for her, what's the matter? Shen Yuan slowly washed his hands in the canal and walked back slowly.赵所长不在屋。门开着，一个五六岁的女孩子趴在桌上画小人。
孩子听见有人进屋，并不回头，还是继续画小人。
“您是沈阿姨吗？爸爸说：他去接一个电话，请您等一等，他一会儿就回来，您请坐。”
Director Zhao was not in the house. The door was open, and a five- or six-year-old girl was lying on the table drawing a villain. When the child heard someone enter the house, he did not look back, but continued to draw the villain. "Are you Aunt Shen? Dad said: He is going to answer a call, please wait a moment, he will be back in a while, please sit down. ”孩子的声音像花瓣。她的有点紧张的心情完全松弛了下来。她看了看新所长的屋子。
墙上挂着一把剑，——一件真正的古代的兵器，不是舞台上和杂技团用的那种镀镍的道具。鲨鱼皮的剑鞘，剑柄和吞口都镂着细花。
The child's voice was like a petal. Her slightly nervous mood completely relaxed. She looked at the new director's room. A sword hung on the wall,—— a real ancient weapon, not the nickel-plated props used on stage and in acrobatic troupes. The sharkskin scabbard, hilt and swallow were carved with fine flowers.一张书桌。桌上有好些书。一套《毛选》、很多农业科技书：作物栽培书、土壤、植保、果树栽培各论、马铃薯晚疫病……两本《古文观止》、一套《唐诗别裁》、一函装在蓝布套里的影印的《楚辞集注》、一本崭新的《日语初阶》。桌角放着一摞杂志，面上盖着一本《农大学报》的油印本：《京西水稻调查——沈沅》。
A desk. There are many books on the table. A set of "Mao Xuan", many agricultural science and technology books: crop cultivation books, soil, plant protection, fruit tree cultivation, potato late blight...... Two copies of "Ancient Texts and Observations", a set of "Tang Poems and Other Cuts", a photocopied "Chuci Collected Notes" in a blue cloth cover, and a brand new "Beginner Japanese". There is a stack of magazines in the corner of the table, covered with a mimeographed copy of the "Agricultural University Newspaper": "Rice Survey in Western Beijing - Shen Yuan".一个深深的紫红砂盆，里面养着一块拳头大的上水石，盖着毛茸茸的一层厚厚的绿苔，长出一棵一点点大，只有七八个叶子的虎耳草。紫红的盆，碧绿的苔，墨绿色的虎耳草的圆叶，淡白的叶纹。沈沅不禁失声赞叹：
A deep purple-red sand pot contains a fist-sized stone of water, covered with a thick layer of hairy green moss, and grows a little bit of saxifrage, with only seven or eight leaves. Purple-red pot, turquoise moss, dark green saxifrage round leaves, pale white leaf patterns. Shen Yuan couldn't help but exclaim:“真好看！”
“好看吗？——送你！”
“……赵所长，您找我？”
"It's so beautiful!" "Is it good-looking? - I'll send you!" ” “…… Director Zhao, are you looking for me? ”“你这篇《京西水稻调查》，写得不错呀！有材料，有见解，文笔也好。科学论文，也要讲究一点文笔嘛！——文如其人！朴素，准确，清秀。——你这样看着我，是说我这个打仗出身的人不该谈论文章风格吗？”
"Your "Rice Survey in Western Beijing" is well written! There are materials, opinions, and good writing. Scientific papers should also pay attention to a little writing! ——The article is like a person! Simple, accurate and elegant. ——When you look at me like this, do you mean that I, a person from a war background, shouldn't talk about the style of writing? ”“……您不像个所长。”
“所长？所长是什么？——大概是从七品！——这是一篇俄文资料，张老想请你翻译出来。”
沈沅接过一本俄文杂志，说：
“我现在能做这样的事吗？”
“为什么不能？”
“…… You don't look like a director. ” "Director? What is the director?" ——Probably from the seventh grade! ——This is a Russian material, Zhang Lao would like to ask you to translate it. ” Shen Yuan took a Russian-language magazine and said: "Can I do something like this now?" "Why not?"“好，我今天晚上赶一赶。”
“不用赶，你明天不要下地了。”
“好。”
“从明天起，你不要下地干活了。”
“……？”
"Okay, I'll catch it tonight." "No need to rush, you don't go to the ground tomorrow." "Okay." "From tomorrow, you don't want to work in the fields." “……？”“我这个人，存不住话。告诉你，准备给你摘掉右派的帽子。报告已经写上去了，估计不会有问题。本来可以晚几天告诉你，何必呢？早一天告诉你，让你高兴高兴，不好吗？有的同志，办事总是那么拖拉。他不知道，人家是度日如年呀！——祝贺你！”
"I'm a person who can't hold back my words. I tell you, I'm going to take off your rightist hat. The report has been written, and it is estimated that there will be no problem. I could have told you a few days later, why bother? Tell you a day earlier to make you happy, isn't it? Some comrades always procrastinate so much. He doesn't know that people live like years! ——Congratulations! ”他伸出手来。沈沅握着他的温暖的手，眼睛湿了。
“谢谢您！”
He stretched out his hand. Shen Yuan held his warm hand, his eyes wet. "Thank you!"“谢我干什么？我们需要人，我们迫切地需要人！你是党培养出来的知识分子。种地的，哪有把自己种出来的好苗锄掉的呢？没这个道理嘛！你有什么想法，什么打算？”
“这事来得太突然了。”
"What are you thanking me for? We need people, we urgently need people! You are an intellectual cultivated by the party. How can a farmer hoe out the good seedlings he has planted? There is no reason for this! What are your thoughts and plans? ” "This came too suddenly."“不突然。事情总要有一个过程。有的过程，付出的代价太大了！我这人，老犯错误。我这些话，叫别人听见，大概又是错误。有一些话，我现在不能跟你讲呀！——我看，你先回去一趟。”
“回去？”
"Not suddenly. There must be a process in things. Some processes are too costly! I always make mistakes. My words are probably mistakes for others to hear. There are some things I can't tell you now! ——I see, you go back first. ” "Go back?"“对。回一趟你的老家。”
“我家里没有人了。”
“我知道。”
"Yes. Go back to your hometown. ” "I have no one in my house anymore." "I know."三个多月前，沈沅接到舅舅一封信，说她父亲得了严重的肺气肿，回国来了，想看看他的女儿。沈沅拿了信去找胡支书，问她能不能请假。胡支书说：“……你现在这个情况。好吧，等我们研究研究。”过了一个星期。舅舅来了一封电报，她的父亲已经死了。她拿了电报去向胡支书汇报。胡支书说：
More than three months ago, Shen Yuan received a letter from her uncle, saying that her father had severe emphysema and had returned to China to see his daughter. Shen Yuan took the letter to Hu Zhishu and asked her if she could ask for leave. Hu Zhishu said: "...... You are in this situation now. Okay, wait for us to study it." "A week passed. My uncle sent a telegram that her father was dead. She took the telegram to report to Hu Zhishu Hu Zhishu said:“死了。死了也好嘛！你可以少背一点包袱。——埋了吗？”
“埋了。”
“埋了就得了。——好好劳动。”
"Dead. It's okay to be dead! You can carry less baggage." - Buried? ” "Buried." "Just bury it. ——Work hard. ”沈沅没有哭，也没有戴孝。白天还是下地干活，晚上一个人坐着。她想看书，看不下去。她觉得非常对不起她的父亲。父亲劳苦了一生，现在，他死了。她觉得父亲的病和死都是她所招致的。她没有把自己这些年的遭遇告诉父亲。但是她觉得他好像知道了，她觉得父亲的晚景和她划成右派有着直接的关系。好几天，她不停地胡思乱想。她觉得她的命不好。她自己也觉得很奇怪，一个年轻的，受过大学教育的共产党员，怎么会相信起命来呢？——人到了无可奈何的时候是很容易想起“命”这个东西来的。
Shen Yuan did not cry or wear filial piety. She still worked in the fields during the day and sat alone at night. She wanted to read but couldn't stand it. She felt very sorry for her father. My father worked hard all his life, and now, he is dead. She felt that her father's illness and death were caused by her. She didn't tell her father what had happened to her over the years. But she felt that he seemed to know, and she felt that her father's evening scene was directly related to her classification as a rightist. For several days, she kept thinking about it. She felt that her life was not good. She herself felt very strange, how could a young, college-educated Communist Party member believe in life? ——When people have no choice, it is easy to think of the word "life".好容易，她的伤痛才渐渐平息。
赵所长怎么会知道她家里已经没有人了呢？
“你还是回去看看。人死了，看看他的坟。我看可以给他立一块石碑。”
“您怎么知道我父亲想在坟头立一块石碑的？”
It was easy for her pain to subside. How could Director Zhao know that there was no one in her family? "You should go back and take a look. When a man dies, look at his grave. I think we can erect a stone monument for him." ” "How do you know that my father wants to erect a stone monument on the grave?"“你的档案材料里有嘛！你的右派结论里不也写着吗？——‘一心为其地主父亲树碑立传’。这都是什么话呢！一个老船工，在海外漂泊多年，这样一点心愿为什么不能满足他呢？我们是无鬼论者，我们并不真的相信泉下有知。但是人总是人嘛，人总有一颗心嘛。共产党员也是人，也有心嘛。共产党员不是没有感情的。无情的人，不是共产党员！——我有点激动了！你大概也知道我为什么激动。本来，你没有直系亲属了，没有探亲假。我可以批准你这次例外的探亲假。如果有人说这不合制度，我负责！你明天把资料翻译出来，——不长。后天就走。我送你。叫王栓套车。”
"You have it in your archives! Isn't it also written in your rightist conclusions? ——'Wholeheartedly erecting a monument for his landlord's father'. What are these words! An old boatman who has been wandering overseas for many years, why can't such a wish be fulfilled? We are anarchists, and we don't really believe in knowledge. But people are always people, and they always have a heart. Communist Party members are also people and have hearts. Communist Party members are not emotionless. Ruthless people are not Communist Party members! ——I'm a little excited! You probably know why I'm excited. Originally, you had no immediate family members and no family leave. I can approve your exceptional family visit leave this time. If someone says it's not in accordance with the system, I'll be responsible! It won't take long for you to translate the information tomorrow,—— I'll leave the day after tomorrow. I'll see you off. Call Wang Shuo to set up the car. ”沈沅哭了。
“哭什么？我们是同志嘛！”
沈沅哭得更厉害了。
“不要这样。你的工作，回来再谈。这盆虎耳草，我替你养着。你回来，就端走。你那屋里，太素了！年轻人，需要一点颜色。”
Shen Yuan cried. "Why cry? We are comrades! ” Shen Yuan cried even harder. "Don't do this. We'll talk about your work when you come back. I'll keep this pot of saxifrage for you. When you come back, take it away. Your house is too plain! Young people, you need a little color. ”一只绿豆大的通红的七星瓢虫飞进来，收起它的黑色的膜翅，落在虎耳草墨绿色的圆叶上。赵所长的眼睛一亮，说：
“真美！”
不到假满，沈沅就回来了。
她的工作，和原先一样，还是做早稻田的助手。
A reddish seven-star ladybug the size of a mung bean flew in, put away its black membrane wings, and landed on the dark green round leaves of saxifrage. Director Zhao's eyes lit up and said: "It's so beautiful!" Before the holiday was over, Shen Yuan came back. Her job, as before, is still an assistant to Waseda.很快到年底了。又开一年一度的先进工作者评比会了。赵所长叫沈沅也参加。
沈沅走进大田作物研究组的大办公室。她已经五年没有走进这间屋子了。俊哥儿李主持会议。他拉着一张椅子，亲切地让沈沅坐下。
It's almost the end of the year. The annual advanced worker evaluation meeting is held again. Director Zhao asked Shen Yuan to also participate. Shen Yuan walked into the large office of the field crop research group. She hadn't walked into this room for five years. Brother Jun Li presided over the meeting. He pulled a chair and kindly asked Shen Yuan to sit down.“这还是你的那张椅子。”
沈沅坐下，跟所有的人都打了招呼。别人也向她点头致意。王作祜装着低头削铅笔。
在酝酿候选人名单时，一向很少说话的早稻田头一个发言。
“我提一个人。”
“……谁？”
"This is still your chair." Shen Yuan sat down and greeted everyone. Others also nodded to her. Wang Zuohu lowered his head to sharpen his pencil. When the list of candidates was being drafted, Waseda, who has always rarely spoken, was the first to speak. "I'll mention someone." “…… Who? ”“沈沅。”
大家先是一愣，接着，都笑了。连沈沅自己也笑了。早稻田是很严肃的，他没有笑。
"Shen Yuan." Everyone was stunned for a moment, and then they all laughed. Even Shen Yuan himself laughed. Waseda was very serious, he didn't laugh.会议进行得很热烈。赵所长靠窗坐着，一面很注意地听着发言，一面好像想着什么事。会议快结束时，下雪了。好雪！赵所长半眯着眼睛，看着窗外大片大片的雪花无声地落在广阔的田野上。他是在赏雪么？
The meeting was very lively. Director Zhao sat by the window, listening attentively to the speech as if he was thinking about something. Towards the end of the meeting, it was snowing. Good snow! Director Zhao half-squinted his eyes and watched the large snowflakes outside the window fall silently on the vast field. Was he enjoying the snow?俊哥儿李叫他：“赵所长，您讲讲吧！”
早稻田也说：“是呀，您有什么指示呀？”
Brother Jun Li called him: "Director Zhao, tell me!" ” Waseda also said, "Yes, what instructions do you have?" ”“指示？——没有。我在想：我，能不能附张老的议，投她——沈沅一票。好像不能。刚才张老提出来，大家不是都笑了吗？是呀，我们毕竟都还生活在现实的世界里，还不能摆脱世俗的习惯和观念。那，就等一年吧。”
"Instructions? ——No. I was thinking: Can I agree with Zhang Lao's proposal and vote for her - Shen Yuan. It seems that it can't. Didn't everyone laugh when Zhang Lao brought it up just now? Yes, after all, we are still living in the real world, and we can't get rid of worldly habits and concepts. Then, just wait a year. ”他念了两句龚定盦的诗：
我劝天公重抖擞，
不拘一格降人才。
接着，又用沉重的声音，念了两句《离骚》：
亦余心之所善兮，
虽九死其犹未悔！
沈沅在心里想：
“你真不像个所长。”
He read two poems by Gong Dingxi: I urge the heavens to shake it again, Eclectic talent. Then, in a heavy voice, he read two sentences of "Li Sao": This is also what I love in my heart, Even if I die nine times, I still have no regrets! Shen Yuan thought to himself: "You really don't look like a director."一九八〇年十二月十一日六稿

[1] 本篇原载《北京文学》1981年第二期；初收《汪曾祺短篇小说选》，北京出版社，1982年2月。
[2] “很酸”是很高傲的意思。
December 11, 1980, 6 drafts [1] This article was originally published in the second issue of "Beijing Literature" in 1981; "Selected Short Stories of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Publishing House, February 1982. [2] "Very sour" means very arrogant.[3] 半工子，即未成年的小工。
[4] 韭菜是宿根生长，连根铲起一块土皮，移在别处，即可源源收割。这块土皮，就叫“韭菜皮”。

天鹅之死

天鹅之死[1]
[3] Part-time workers, that is, minor workers. [4] Leeks grow from perennial roots, and if you shovel up a piece of soil from the roots and move it elsewhere, you can harvest it steadily. This piece of soil is called "leek skin". Death of the Swan[1]“阿姨，都白天了，怎么还有月亮呀？
“阿姨，月亮是白色的，跟云的颜色一样。
“阿姨，天真蓝呀。
“蓝色的天，白色的月亮，月亮里有蓝色的云，真好看呀！”
“真好看！”
“阿姨，树叶都落光了。树是紫色的。树干是紫色的。树枝也是紫色的。树上的风也是紫色的。真好看！”
“真好看！”
“阿姨，你好看！”
“我从前好看。”
"Auntie, the leaves are all gone. The tree is purple. The trunk is purple. The branches are also purple. The wind on the tree is also purple. It's so beautiful! ” "It's so beautiful!" "Auntie, you look good!" "I used to look good."“不！你现在也好看。你的眼睛好看。你的脖子，你的肩，你的腰，你的手，都好看。你的腿好看。你的腿多长呀。阿姨，我们爱你！”
“小朋友，我也爱你们！”
“阿姨，你的腿这两天疼了吗？”
"No! You look good now. Your eyes are good. Your neck, your shoulders, your waist, your hands are all good. Your legs are beautiful. How long are your legs. Auntie, we love you! ” "Children, I love you too!" "Auntie, has your leg hurt in the past two days?"“没有。要上坡了，小朋友，小心！”
“哦！看见玉渊潭了！”
“玉渊潭的水真清呀！”
“阿姨，那是什么？雪白雪白的，像花一样的发亮，一，二，三，四。”
白蕤从心里发出一声惊呼：
"Nope. It's going uphill, kids, be careful!" ” "Oh! I saw Yuyuantan! ” "The water in Yuyuantan is so clear!" "Auntie, what is that? Snow white, shiny like a flower, one, two, three, four. ” Bai Rui let out an exclamation from his heart:“是天鹅！”
“是天鹅？”
“冬泳的叔叔，那是天鹅吗？”
“是的，小朋友。”
“它们是怎么来的？”
“它们自己飞来的。”
“它们从哪儿飞来？”
“从很远很远的北方。”
"It's a swan!" "Is it a swan?" "Uncle Dongyong, is that a swan?" "Yes, little friend." "How did they come about?" "They flew by themselves." "Where did they fly from?" "From far, far north."“是吗？——欢迎你，白天鹅！”
“欢迎你到我们这儿来作客！”
天鹅在天上飞翔，
去寻找温暖的地方。
飞过了大兴安岭，
雪压的落叶松的密林里，闪动着鄂温克族狩猎队篝火的红光。
"Really? - Welcome, white swan! ” "Welcome to our guest!" Swans fly in the sky, Go in search of warm places. flew over the Great Xing'an Mountains, In the dense forest of snow-pressed larch, the red light of the Evenk hunting team's bonfire flashed.白蕤去看乌兰诺娃，去看天鹅。
大提琴的柔风托起了乌兰诺娃的双臂，钢琴的露珠从她的指尖流出。
她的柔弱的双臂伏下了。
又轻轻地挣扎着，抬起了脖颈。
钢琴流尽了最后的露滴，再也没有声音了。
Bai Rui went to see Ulanova, went to see the swan. The gentle breeze of the cello lifted up Ulanova's arms, and the dew of the piano flowed from her fingertips. Her weak arms bowed. Struggling gently, he lifted his neck. The piano flowed the last drops of dew and there was no sound anymore.天鹅死了。
白蕤像是在一个梦里。
她的眼睛里都是泪水。
她的眼泪流进了她的梦。
天鹅在天上飞翔，
去寻找温暖的地方。
飞过了呼伦贝尔草原，
草原一片白茫茫。
圈儿河依恋着家乡，
The swan is dead. Bai Rui seemed to be in a dream. Her eyes were full of tears. Her tears flowed into her dreams. Swans fly in the sky, Go find a warm place. flew over the Hulunbuir grassland, The grassland is vast and white. The Circle River is attached to its hometown,它流去又回头。
在雪白的草原上，
画出了一个又一个铁青色的圆圈。
白蕤考进了芭蕾舞校。经过刻苦的训练，她的全身都变成了音乐。
她跳《天鹅之死》。
大提琴和钢琴的旋律吹动着她的肢体，她的手指和足尖都在想象。
天鹅在天上飞翔，
去寻找温暖的地方。
某某去看了芭蕾。
他用猥亵的声音说：
The melodies of the cello and piano blew her limbs, her fingers and toes were imagined. Swans fly in the sky, Go find a warm place. So-and-so went to see ballet. He said in an obscene voice:“这他妈的小妞儿！那胸脯，那小腰，那么好看的大腿！……”
他满嘴喷着酒气。
他做了一个淫荡的梦。
天鹅在天上飞翔，
去寻找温暖的地方。
“文化大革命”。中国的森林起了火了。
"This fucking chick! That breasts, that small waist, such good-looking thighs! ……” He was full of alcohol. He had a lewd dream. Swans fly in the sky, Go find a warm place. "Cultural Revolution". China's forests are on fire.白蕤被打成了现行反革命。因为她说：
“《天鹅之死》就是美！乌兰诺娃就是美！”
天鹅在天上飞翔。
某某成了“宣传队员”。他每天晚上都想出一种折磨演员的花样。
他叫她们背着床板在大街上跑步。
Bai Rui was branded as a current counter-revolutionary. Because she said: "The Death of the Swan is beautiful! Ulanova is beautiful! ” Swans fly in the sky. So-and-so became a "propaganda team member". He came up with a trick to torture actors every night. He told them to run on the street with their backs on their backs.他叫她们做折损骨骼的苦工。
他命令白蕤跳《天鹅之死》。
“你不是说《天鹅之死》就是美吗？你给我跳，跳一夜！”
录音机放出了音乐。音乐使她忘记了眼前的一切。她快乐。
她跳《天鹅之死》。
她看看某某，发现他的下牙突出在上牙之外。北京人管这种长相叫“地包天”。
她跳《天鹅之死》。
她羞耻。
她跳《天鹅之死》。
她愤怒。
她跳《天鹅之死》。
她摔倒了。
She looked at so-and-so and found that his lower teeth protruded from the upper teeth. Beijingers call this appearance "the earth covers the sky". She danced "Death of a Swan". She was ashamed. She danced "The Death of a Swan". She was furious. She danced "The Death of a Swan". She fell.她跳《天鹅之死》。
天鹅在天上飞翔，
去寻找温暖的地方。
飞过太阳岛，
飞过松花江。
飞过华北平原，
越冬的麦粒在松软的泥土里睡得正香。
She danced "Death of the Swan". Swans fly in the sky, Go in search of warm places. Flying over the Isle of the Sun, Fly over the Songhua River. Flying over the North China Plain, The overwintered wheat grains slept soundly in the soft soil.经过长途飞行，天鹅的体重减轻了，但是翅膀上增添了力量。
天鹅在天上飞翔，
在天上飞翔，
玉渊潭在月光下发亮。
“这儿真好呀！这儿的水不冻，这儿暖和，咱们就在这儿过冬，好吗？”
After a long flight, the swan lost weight, but added strength to the wings. Swans fly in the sky, Soaring in the sky, Yuyuantan shines in the moonlight. "It's so nice here! The water here is not frozen, it's warm here, let's spend the winter here, okay? ”四只天鹅翩然落在玉渊潭上。
白蕤转业了。她当了保育员。她还是那样美，只是因为左腿曾经骨折，每到阴天下雨，就隐隐发痛。
自从玉渊潭来了天鹅，她隔两三天就带着孩子们去看一次。
孩子们对天鹅说：
Four swans landed on the Yuyuan Pool. Bai Rui changed jobs. She became a nursery teacher. She is still so beautiful, just because her left leg was broken, and every time it rained on a cloudy day, she felt a faint pain. Since the swans came to Yuyuantan, she took her children to see them every two or three days. The children said to the swan:“天鹅天鹅你真美！”
“天鹅天鹅我爱你！”
“天鹅天鹅真好看，”
“我们和你来作伴！”
甲、乙两青年，带了一枝猎枪，偷偷走近玉渊潭。
天已经黑了。
"Swan, swan, you are so beautiful!" "Swan Swan I love you!" "Swans and swans are so beautiful," "We're with you!" Two young men, A and B, brought a shotgun and secretly approached Yuyuantan. It was already dark.一声枪响，一只天鹅毙命。其余的三只，惊恐万状，一夜哀鸣。
被打死的天鹅的伴侣第二天一天不鸣不食。
傍晚七点钟时还看见它。
半夜里，它飞走了。
A gunshot rang out, and a swan was killed. The other three, terrified, wailed all night. The partner of the killed swan did not cry or eat for a day the next day. I saw it at seven o'clock in the evening. In the middle of the night, it flew away.白蕤看着报纸，她的眼前浮现出一张“地包天”的脸。
“阿姨，咱们去看天鹅。”
“今天不去了，今天风大，要感冒的。”
“不嘛！去！”
天鹅还在吗？
在！
在那儿，在靠近南岸的水面上。
Bai Rui looked at the newspaper, and a "earth-to-earth" face appeared in front of her eyes. "Auntie, let's go see the swans." "I'm not going today, it's windy today, I'm going to catch a cold." "No! Go! ” Are the swans still there? At! There, on the water near the southern shore.“天鹅天鹅你害怕吗？”
“天鹅天鹅你别怕！”
湖岸上有好多人来看天鹅。
他们在议论。
“这个家伙，这么好看的东西，你打它干什么？”
“想吃天鹅肉。”
"Swan, swan, are you afraid?" "Swan, swan, don't be afraid!" There are many people on the shore of the lake who come to see the swans. They are talking. "This guy, such a good-looking thing, why are you hitting it?" "I want to eat swan meat." "I want to eat swan meat."“想吃天鹅肉。”
"Swan, swan, are you afraid?" "Swan, swan, don't be afraid!" There are many people on the shore of the lake who come to see the swans. They are talking. "This guy, such a good-looking thing, why are you hitting it?" "I want to eat swan meat." "I want to eat swan meat."“都是这场‘文化大革命’闹的！把一些人变坏了，变得心狠了！不知爱惜美好的东西了！”
"It's all caused by this 'Cultural Revolution'! It has made some people bad and ruthless! I don't know how to cherish beautiful things! ”有人说，那一只也活不成。天鹅是非常恩爱的。死了一只，那一只就寻找一片结实的冰面，从高高的空中摔下来，把自己的胸脯在坚冰上撞碎。
Some people say that the other one can't survive. Swans are very affectionate. When one dies, the other one looks for a solid piece of ice, falls from high in the air, and smashes its chest on the ice.孩子们听着大人的议论，他们好像是懂了，又像是没有懂。他们对着湖面呼喊：
“天鹅天鹅你在哪儿？”
“天鹅天鹅你快回来！”
孩子们的眼睛里有泪。
他们的眼睛发光，像钻石。
The children listened to the adults' discussions, and they seemed to understand, but they didn't. They shouted to the lake: "Swan, where are you, Swan?" "Swan, swan, come back quickly!" There were tears in the eyes of the children. Their eyes glow, like diamonds.他们的眼泪飞到天上，变成了天上的星。
一九八〇年十二月二十九日清晨

[1] 本篇原载1981年4月14日《北京日报》；初收《汪曾祺自选集》，漓江出版社，1987年10月。

1981年

1981年
Their tears flew to the sky and became stars in the sky. Early morning of December 29, 1980 [1] This article was originally published in Beijing Daily, April 14, 1981; First received "Wang Zengqi's Self-Selected Collection", Lijiang Publishing House, October 1987. In 1981大淖记事[1]
一
Da Nao Records {{id_0000}} One这地方的地名很奇怪，叫做大淖。全县没有几个人认得这个淖字。县境之内，也再没有别的叫做什么淖的地方。据说这是蒙古话。那么这地名大概是元朝留下的。元朝以前这地方有没有，叫做什么，就无从查考了。
The place name of this place is very strange, it is called Dana. Few people in the county recognize this word. There is no other place called Nao within the county. It is said that this is Mongolian. So this place name was probably left by the Yuan Dynasty. Whether this place existed before the Yuan Dynasty and what it was called, there is no way to find out.淖，是一片大水。说是湖泊，似还不够，比一个池塘可要大得多，春夏水盛时，是颇为浩淼的。这是两条水道的河源。淖中央有一条狭长的沙洲。沙洲上长满茅草和芦荻。春初水暖，沙洲上冒出很多紫红色的芦芽和灰绿色的蒌蒿[2]，很快就是一片翠绿了。夏天，茅草、芦荻都吐出雪白的丝穗，在微风中不住地点头。秋天，全都枯黄了，就被人割去，加到自己的屋顶上去了。冬天，下雪，这里总比别处先白。化雪的时候，也比别处化得慢。河水解冻了，发绿了，沙洲上的残雪还亮晶晶地堆积着。这条沙洲是两条河水的分界处。从淖里坐船沿沙洲西面北行，可以看到高阜上的几家炕房。绿柳丛中，露出雪白的粉墙，黑漆大书四个字：“鸡鸭炕房”，非常显眼。炕房门外，照例都有一块小小土坪，有几个人坐在树桩上负曝闲谈。不时有人从门里挑出一副很大的扁圆的竹笼，笼口络着绳网，里面是松花黄色的，毛茸茸，挨挨挤挤，啾啾乱叫的小鸡小鸭。由沙洲往东，要经过一座浆坊。浆是浆衣服用的。这里的人，衣服被里洗过后，都要浆一浆。浆过的衣服，穿在身上沙沙作响。浆是芡实水磨，加一点明矾，澄去水分，晒干而成。这东西是不值什么钱的。一大盆衣被，只要到杂货店花两三个铜板，买一小块，用热水冲开，就足够用了。但是全县浆粉都由这家供应（这东西是家家用得着的），所以规模也不算小。浆坊有四五个师傅忙碌着。喂着两头毛驴，轮流上磨。浆坊门外，有一片平场，太阳好的时候，每天晒着浆块，白得叫人眼睛都睁不开。炕房、浆坊附近还有几家买卖荸荠、茨菇、菱角、鲜藕的鲜货行，集散鱼蟹的鱼行和收购青草的草行。过了炕房和浆坊，就都是田畴麦垅，牛棚水车，人家的墙上贴着黑黄色的牛屎粑粑，——牛粪和水，拍成饼状，直径半尺，整齐地贴在墙上晾干，作燃料，已经完全是农村的景色了。由大淖北去，可至北乡各村。东去可至一沟、二沟、三垛、樊川、界首，直达邻县兴化。
Nao is a big water. It seems that it is not enough, it is much larger than a pond, and it is quite vast in spring and summer. This is the source of two waterways. There is a long and narrow sandbar in the center of the marsh. The sandbar is overgrown with thatch and reeds. In early spring, when the water is warm, many purple-red reed buds and gray-green Artemisia id_0000 emerge from the sandbar, and soon it will be emerald green. In summer, the thatch and reeds spit out snow-white silk ears and nod incessantly in the breeze. In autumn, when they are all withered and yellow, they are cut off and added to their roofs. In winter, when it snows, it is always whiter here than elsewhere. When the snow melts, it melts more slowly than elsewhere. The river has thawed and turned green, and the remaining snow on the sandbar is still piled up. This sandbar is the boundary between two rivers. Take a boat north along the west side of the sandbar from the mud, and you can see several kang houses on the high hills. In the green willows, a snow-white pink wall is exposed, and the four words "chicken and duck kang room" are written in black paint, which is very conspicuous. Outside the door of the kang house, there is a small earthen flat as usual, and a few people are sitting on the stump and chatting. From time to time, someone picks out a pair of large flat bamboo cages from the door, with a rope net wrapped around the cage, which is pine yellow, hairy, crowded, chirping. From the sandbar to the east, you have to pass a pulp mill. The pulp is used for pulp clothes. People here have to pulp their clothes after they are washed. The pulped clothes rustle on the body. The pulp is made by grinding gourd, adding a little alum, clarifying the water, and drying it. This thing is worthless. A large pot of clothes and quilts, as long as you go to the grocery store to spend two or three copper plates, buy a small piece, and rinse it with hot water, it is enough. But the pulp powder in the county is supplied by this one (this thing is used by every family), so the scale is not small. There are four or five masters busy in the pulp mill. Feed two donkeys and take turns grinding. Outside the door of the pulp mill, there is a flat field, when the sun is good, the pulp blocks are sunbathed every day, so white that people can't open their eyes. There are also several fresh goods shops near the kang house and pulp mill, which buy and sell water chestnuts, mushrooms, water chestnuts, and fresh lotus roots, as well as fish shops that distribute fish and crabs, and grass shops that buy grass. After the kang house and the pulp mill, there are fields and wheat ridges, cattle sheds, and cow dung and water are pasted on the walls of people's houses,—— and black and yellow cow dung baba, cow dung and water, slapped into cake shapes, half a foot in diameter, neatly pasted on the wall to dry, and used as fuel, which is already a completely rural scenery. From the north of Danao, you can go to the villages of Beixiang. To the east, you can go to Yigou, Ergou, Sanduo, Fanchuan, Jieshou, and go directly to Xinghua, a neighboring county.大淖的南岸，有一座漆成绿色的木板房，房顶、地面，都是木板的。这原是一个轮船公司。靠外手是候船的休息室。往里去，临水，就是码头。原来曾有一只小轮船，往来本城和兴化，隔日一班，单日开走，双日返回。小轮船漆得花花绿绿的，飘着万国旗，机器突突地响，烟筒冒着黑烟，装货、卸货，上客、下客，也有卖牛肉、高粱酒、花生瓜子、芝麻灌香糖的小贩，喝喝，是热闹过一阵的。后来因为公司赔了本，股东无意继续经营，就卖船停业了。这间木板房子倒没有拆去。现在里面空荡荡、冷清清，只有附近的野孩子到候船室来唱戏玩，棍棍棒棒，乱打一气；或到码头上比赛撒尿。七八个小家伙，齐齐地站成一排，把一泡泡骚尿哗哗地撒到水里，看谁尿得最远。
On the south bank of the big marsh, there is a wooden house painted green, and the roof and floor are all made of wood. This was originally a steamship company. On the outside hand is the lounge for waiting for ships. Go inside, near the water, is the wharf. It turned out that there was a small steamer that ran between the city and Xinghua, every other day, sailed away on a single day, and returned on two days. The steamer was painted green, with the flag of all nations fluttering, the machine rattled suddenly, the chimney was emitting black smoke, loading and unloading, picking up and unloading passengers, and there were also vendors selling beef, sorghum wine, peanuts, melon seeds, and sesame sugar id_00001 id_0000. Later, because the company lost its capital, the shareholders had no intention of continuing to operate, so they sold the boat and closed down. This wooden house was not demolished. Now it is empty and deserted, and only nearby wild children come to the waiting room to sing and play, stick sticks, and beat up indiscriminately; or go to the dock to compete and pee. Seven or eight little guys stood in a row and sprinkled a bubble of pee into the water to see who peed the farthest.大淖指的是这片水，也指水边的陆地。这里是城区和乡下的交界处。从轮船公司往南，穿过一条深巷，就是北门外东大街了。坐在大淖的水边，可以听到远远地一阵一阵朦朦胧胧的市声，但是这里的一切和街里不一样。这里没有一家店铺。这里的颜色、声音、气味和街里不一样。这里的人也不一样。他们的生活，他们的风俗，他们的是非标准、伦理道德观念和街里的穿长衣念过“子曰”的人完全不同。
Danao refers to this water, and also refers to the land by the water. This is the junction between the city and the countryside. From the steamship company to the south, through a deep alley, is the East Street outside the North Gate. Sitting by the water, you can hear the hazy sound of the city in the distance, but everything here is different from the street. There is not a single shop here. The colors, sounds, and smells here are different from those on the street. The people here are also different. Their lives, their customs, their standards of right and wrong, ethics and morality are completely different from the people on the street who wear long clothes and read "Ziyue".二
由轮船公司往东往西，各距一箭之遥，有两丛住户人家。这两丛人家，也是互不相同的，各是各乡风。
Two From the steamship company to the east and west, each a stone's throw away, there are two clusters of households. These two clusters of households are also different from each other, each with its own local style.西边是几排错错落落的低矮的瓦屋。这里住的是做小生意的。他们大都不是本地人，是从里下河一带，兴化、泰州、东台等处来的客户。卖紫萝卜的（紫萝卜是比荸荠略大的扁圆形的萝卜，外皮染成深蓝紫色，极甜脆），卖风菱的（风菱是很大的两角的菱角，壳极硬），卖山里红的，卖熟藕（藕孔里塞了糯米煮熟）的。还有一个从宝应来的卖眼镜的，一个从杭州来的卖天竺筷的。他们像一些候鸟，来去都有定时。来时，向相熟的人家租一间半间屋子，住上一阵，有的住得长一些，有的短一些，到生意做完，就走了。他们都是日出而作，日入而息。吃罢早饭，各自背着、扛着、挎着、举着自己的货色，用不同的乡音，不同的腔调，吟唱、唤着上街了。到太阳落山，又都像鸟似的回到自己的窝里。于是从这些低矮的屋檐下就都飘出带点甜味而又呛人的炊烟（所烧的柴草都是半干不湿的）。他们做的都是小本生意，赚钱不大。因为是在客边，对人很和气，凡事忍让，所以这一带平常总是安安静静的，很少有吵嘴打架的事情发生。
To the west are several rows of low tiled houses. People live here in small businesses. Most of them are not locals, but customers from the Lixiahe area, Xinghua, Taizhou, Dongtai and other places. Those who sell purple radishes (purple radishes are flat and round radishes slightly larger than water chestnuts, the skin is dyed dark blue and purple, extremely sweet and crispy), those who sell Fengling (Fengling is a large two-cornered water chestnut, the shell is extremely hard), the red one in the mountains, and the cooked lotus root (the lotus root hole is stuffed with glutinous rice and cooked). There is also a person who sells glasses from Baoying and a seller of Tianzhu chopsticks from Hangzhou. They are like some migratory birds, and they come and go regularly. When they came, they rented a half-room room from a familiar family and lived for a while, some lived longer, some shorter, and left when the business was done. They all work at sunrise and rest at sunset. After breakfast, each of them carried it on their backs, carried it, carried it on their shoulders, and held their own goods, singing and calling out to the street in different dialects and id_0000 different tones. When the sun sets, they all return to their nests like birds. So from under these low eaves, a little sweet and choking smoke wafted out (the firewood burned was half dry). They are all small businesses and don't make much money. Because it is on the side of guests, it is very kind to people and tolerant of everything, so this area is usually quiet, and there are few quarrels and fights.这里还住着二十来个锡匠，都是兴化帮。这地方兴用锡器，家家都有几件锡制的家伙。香炉、蜡台、痰盂、茶叶罐、水壶、茶壶、酒壶，甚至尿壶，都是锡的。嫁闺女时都要赔送一套锡器。最少也要有两个能容四五升米的大锡罐，摆在柜顶上，否则就不成其为嫁妆。出阁的闺女生了孩子，娘家要送两大罐糯米粥（另外还要有两只老母鸡，一百鸡蛋），装粥用的就是娘柜顶上的这两个锡罐。因此，二十来个锡匠并不显多。
There are also more than 20 tinsmiths living here, all of whom are from the Xinghua Gang. Pewter is used in this place, and every family has a few pieces of tin. Incense burners, wax tables, spittoons, tea jars, kettles, teapots, wine pots, and even urinals are all made of tin. When marrying a daughter, you have to give a set of pewterware. At least two large tin cans that can hold four or five liters of rice must be placed on the top of the cabinet, otherwise they will not be considered dowry. When a girl who goes out of the cabinet gives birth to a child, her mother's family will send two large cans of glutinous rice porridge (in addition to two old hens and one hundred eggs), and the porridge is used for these two tin cans on the top of the mother's cabinet. Therefore, there are not many tinsmiths in their twenties.锡匠的手艺不算费事，所用的家什也较简单。一副锡匠担子，一头是风箱，绳系里夹着几块锡板；一头是炭炉和两块二尺见方，一面裱着好几层表芯纸的方砖。锡器是打出来的，不是铸出来的。人家叫锡匠来打锡器，一般都是自己备料，——把几件残旧的锡器回炉重打。锡匠在人家门道里或是街边空地上，支起担子，拉动风箱，在锅里把旧锡化成锡水，——锡的熔点很低，不大一会就化了；然后把两块方砖对合着（裱纸的一面朝里），在两砖之间压一条绳子，绳子按照要打的锡器圈成近似的形状，绳头留在砖外，把锡水由绳口倾倒过去，两砖一压，就成了锡片；然后，用一个大剪子剪剪，用一个木棰在铁砧上敲敲打打，大约一两顿饭工夫就成型了。锡是软的，打锡器不像打铜器那样费劲，也不那样吵人。粗使的锡器，就这样就能交活。若是细巧的，就还要用刮刀刮一遍，用砂纸打一打，用竹节草（这种草中药店有卖的）磨得锃亮。
The tinsmith's craftsmanship is not laborious, and the furniture used is relatively simple. A pair of tinsmith's burden, one end is a bellows, and a few tin plates are sandwiched in the rope; one end is a charcoal furnace and two square bricks with several layers of core paper mounted on the other. The tinware is made, not cast. When people call tinsmiths to make tinware, they usually prepare their own materials ,—— return a few pieces of old tinware to the furnace to re-beat them. In the doorway or in the open space on the street, the tinsmith props up the burden, pulls the bellows, and turns the old tin into tin water in the pot,—— the melting point of the tin is very low, and it will melt after a while; Then the two square bricks are paired together (the side of the mounting paper is facing inward), and a rope is pressed between the two bricks, and the rope is circled into a similar shape according to the pewter to be beaten, the rope head is left outside the brick, and the tin water is poured out of the rope mouth. Then, use a large pair of scissors to cut and use a wooden stick to beat on the anvil, and it will take about one or two meals to form. Tin is soft, and tinware is not as strenuous and noisy as copper ware. Rough tinware can be handed over in this way. If it is delicate, it must be scraped with a scraper, beaten with sandpaper, and ground with bamboo grass (this herb is sold in Chinese medicine stores) to make it shiny.这一帮锡匠很讲义气。他们扶持疾病，互通有无，从不抢生意。若是合伙做活，工钱也分得很公道。这帮锡匠有一个头领，是个老锡匠，他说话没有人不听。老锡匠人很耿直，对其余的锡匠（不是他的晚辈就是他的徒弟）管教得很紧。他不许他们赌钱喝酒；嘱咐他们出外做活，要童叟无欺，手脚要干净；不许和妇道嬉皮笑脸。他教他们不要怕事，也绝不要惹事。除了上市应活，平常不让到处闲游乱窜。
This group of tinsmiths is very loyal. They support the disease, communicate with each other, and never rob business. If you work in partnership, the wages are also fairly divided. This gang of tinsmiths has a leader, an old tinsmith, and no one listens to him. The old tinsmith is very upright and disciplines the rest of the tinsmiths (either his juniors or his apprentices) very tightly. He did not allow them to gamble and drink; instructed them to go out to work, to be free from bullying, and to keep their hands and feet clean; they were not allowed to smile with women. He taught them not to be afraid of things and never cause trouble. In addition to going public, he is usually not allowed to wander around.老锡匠会打拳，别的锡匠也跟着练武。他屋里有好些白蜡杆，三节棍，没事便搬到外面场地上打对儿。老锡匠说：这是消遣，也可以防身，出门在外，会几手拳脚不吃亏。除此之外，锡匠们的娱乐便是唱唱戏。他们唱的这种戏叫做“小开口”，是一种地方小戏，唱腔本是萨满教的香火（巫师）请神唱的调子，所以又叫“香火戏”。这些锡匠并不信萨满教，但大都会唱香火戏。戏的曲调虽简单，内容却是成本大套，李三娘挑水推磨，生下咬脐郎；白娘子水漫金山；刘金定招亲；方卿唱道情……可以坐唱，也可以化了装彩唱。遇到阴天下雨，不能出街，他们能吹打弹唱一整天。附近的姑娘媳妇都挤过来看，——听。
The old tinsmith can punch, and other tinsmiths also practice martial arts. He has a lot of ash sticks and three-section sticks in his house, so he moves to the outside field to fight right. The old tinsmith said: This is a pastime, but also for self-defense, and when you go out, you will not suffer a few punches and feet. In addition, the entertainment of the tinsmiths is singing. The play they sing is called "small opening", which is a kind of local drama, and the singing is originally the tune of the shamanic incense (sorcerer) to invite the gods to sing, so it is also called "incense play". These tinsmiths do not believe in shamanism, but most of them sing incense operas. Although the tune of the play is simple, the content is a large cost, Li Sanniang carries water and grinds, giving birth to a navel-biting man; the white lady is full of golden mountains; Liu Jinding recruited relatives; Fang Qing sang love ...... You can sit and sing, or you can sing in color. When it rains on a cloudy day, they can't go out on the street, so they can play and sing all day. Nearby girls and daughters-in-law all squeezed over to watch ,—— listen.老锡匠有个徒弟，也是他的侄儿，在家大排行第十一，小名就叫个十一子，外人都只叫他小锡匠。这十一子是老锡匠的一件心事。因为他太聪明，长得又太好看了。他长得挺拔厮称，肩宽腰细，唇红齿白，浓眉大眼，头戴遮阳草帽，青鞋净袜，全身衣服整齐合体。天热的时候，敞开衣扣，露出扇面也似的胸脯，五寸宽的雪白的板带煞得很紧。走起路来，高抬脚，轻着地，麻溜利索。锡匠里出了这样一个一表人才，真是鸡窝里飞出了金凤凰。老锡匠心里明白：唱“小开口”的时候，那些挤过来的姑娘媳妇，其实都是来看这位十一郎的。
The old tinsmith has an apprentice, who is also his nephew, ranking eleventh in the family, and his nickname is Eleventh Son, and outsiders only call him the little tinsmith. This eleventh son is a concern of the old tinsmith. Because he is too smart and so good-looking. He is tall and tall, with broad shoulders and thin waist, red lips and white teeth, thick eyebrows and big eyes, wearing a sunshade straw hat, green shoes and clean socks, and his whole body is neatly fitted. When it's hot, open the buttons to reveal the chest that looks like a fan, and the snow-white ribbon five inches wide is very tight. Walk up, raise your feet high, land lightly, and be neat. There is such a talent in the tinsmith, it is really a golden phoenix flying out of the chicken coop. Lao Xi Jiang understood in his heart: When singing "Little Opening", those girls and daughters-in-law who squeezed over actually came to see this Shiyilang.老锡匠经常告诫十一子，不要和此地的姑娘媳妇拉拉扯扯，尤其不要和东头的姑娘媳妇有什么勾搭：“她们和我们不是一样的人！”
三
The old tinsmith often warned the eleventh son not to pull and pull with the girls and daughters-in-law here, especially not to hook up with the girls and daughters-in-law in the east: "They are not the same people as us!" ” Three轮船公司东头都是草房，茅草盖顶，黄土打墙，房顶两头多盖着半片破缸破瓮，防止大风时把茅草刮走。这里的人，世代相传，都是挑夫。男人、女人、大人、孩子，都靠肩膀吃饭。
The east end of the steamship company is full of thatched houses, thatched roofs, loess walls, and more than half of the broken tanks and urns are covered at both ends of the roof to prevent the thatch from being scraped away when the wind blows away. The people here, for generations, are porters. Men, women, adults, and children all eat on their shoulders.挑得最多的是稻子。东乡、北乡的稻船，都在大淖靠岸。满船的稻子，都由这些挑夫挑走。或送到米店，或送进哪家大户的廒仓，或挑到南门外琵琶闸的大船上，沿运河外运。有时还会一直挑到车逻、马棚湾这样很远的码头上。单程一趟，或五六里，或七八里、十多里不等。一二十人走成一串，步子走得很匀，很快。一担稻子二百斤，中途不歇肩。一路不停地打着号子。换肩时一齐换肩。打头的一个，手往扁担上一搭，一二十副担子就同时由右肩转到左肩上来了。每挑一担，领一根“筹子”，——尺半长，一寸宽的竹牌，上涂白漆，一头是红的。到傍晚凭筹领钱。
The most picked is rice. The rice boats in Dongxiang and Beixiang are all docked at Danao. The boats full of rice are all picked up by these porters. Or sent to the rice shop, or sent to the warehouse of a large family, or to the big ship at the Pipa Gate outside the south gate, and transported along the canal. Sometimes it is carried all the way to a far wharf such as Cheluo and Mapeng Bay. One way, five or six miles, or seven or eight miles, or more than ten miles. Twenty people walk in a string, walking very evenly and quickly. A load of two hundred pounds of rice, without resting on the shoulder. Keep trumpeting all the way. Change shoulders when changing shoulders. The one who hit the head put his hand on the flat pole, and one or twenty sets of burdens turned from the right shoulder to the left shoulder at the same time. For each load, he received a "chip" ,—— foot and a half long and one inch wide bamboo card, painted with white paint and red at one end. In the evening, the money was received by chipping.稻谷之外，什么都挑。砖瓦、石灰、竹子（挑竹子一头拖在地上，在砖铺的街面上擦得刷刷地响）、桐油（桐油很重，使扁担不行，得用木杠，两人抬一桶）……因此，一年三百六十天，天天有活干，饿不着。
Pick everything except rice. Bricks, lime, bamboo (pick bamboo and drag it on the ground and rub it on the brick street), tung oil (tung oil is very heavy, so you can't do it, you have to use a wooden pole, and two people carry a bucket)...... Therefore, three hundred and sixty days a year, there is work to do every day, and you can't starve.十三四岁的孩子就开始挑了。起初挑半担，用两个柳条笆斗。练上一二年，人长高了，力气也够了，就挑整担，像大人一样的挣钱了。
Thirteen or fourteen-year-old children started picking. At first, I carried half a load and used two wicker fences. After practicing for a year or two, when people grow taller and have enough strength, they pick up the whole load and earn money like adults.挑夫们的生活很简单：卖力气，吃饭。一天三顿，都是干饭。这些人家都不盘灶，烧的是“锅腔子”——黄土烧成的矮瓮，一面开口烧火。烧柴是不花钱的。淖边常有草船，乡下人挑芦柴入街去卖，一路总要撒下一些。凡是尚未挑担挣钱的孩子，就一人一把竹筢，到处去搂。因此，这些顽童得到一个稍带侮辱性的称呼，叫做“筢草鬼子”。有时懒得费事，就从乡下人的草担上猛力拽出一把，拔腿就溜。等乡下人撂下担子叫骂时，他们早就没影儿了。锅腔子无处出烟，烟子就横溢出来，飘到大淖水面上，平铺开来，停留不散。这些人家无隔宿之粮，都是当天买，当天吃。吃的都是脱粟的糙米。一到饭时，就看见这些茅草房子的门口蹲着一些男子汉，捧着一个蓝花大海碗，碗里是骨堆堆的一碗紫红紫红的米饭，一边堆着青菜小鱼、臭豆腐、腌辣椒，大口大口地在吞食。他们吃饭不怎么嚼，只在嘴里打一个滚，咕咚一声就咽下去了。看他们吃得那样香，你会觉得世界上再没有比这个饭更好吃的饭了。
The life of porters is very simple: work hard and eat. Three meals a day, all dry food. These people don't have a stove, they burn a "pot cavity" - a low urn made of loess, and they open their mouths to burn fire. Burning firewood does not cost money. There are often grass boats on the edge of the marsh, and the countrymen carry reeds into the street to sell, and they always have to scatter some along the way. All the children who have not yet carried the burden to earn money will hug each person with a bamboo basket and hug it everywhere. Therefore, these urchins are given a slightly insulting title, called "bamboo devils". Sometimes they are too lazy to bother, so they pull out a handful from the grass burden of the countrymen and slip away. By the time the countrymen put down their burdens and scolded, they were long gone. The pot cavity has nowhere to smoke, and the smoke overflows, floats to the surface of the muddy water, spreads flat, and stays there. These people don't have overnight food, they buy it on the same day and eat it on the same day. They eat all brown rice that has been stripped of corn. As soon as it was time to eat, I saw some men squatting at the door of these thatched houses, holding a blue flower bowl, which was a bowl of purple and red rice piled up with bones, while piled with small vegetables, stinky tofu, and pickled peppers, and they were devouring it with big mouths. They didn't chew much, they just rolled in their mouths and swallowed it with a gurgling sound. Seeing how delicious they eat, you will feel that there is no better meal in the world than this one.他们也有年，也有节。逢年过节，除了换一件干净衣裳，吃得好一些，就是聚在一起赌钱。赌具，也是钱。打钱，滚钱。打钱：各人拿出一二十铜元，叠成很高的一摞。参与者远远地用一个钱向这摞铜钱砸去，砸倒多少取多少。滚钱又叫“滚五七寸”。在一片空场上，各人放一摞钱；一块整砖支起一个斜坡，用一个铜元由砖面落下，向钱注密处滚去，钱停住后，用事前备好的两根草棍量一量，如距钱注五寸，滚钱者即可吃掉这一注；距离七寸，反赔出与此注相同之数。这种古老的博法使挑夫们得到极大的快乐。旁观的闲人也不时大声喝采，为他们助兴。
They also have years and festivals. During the New Year's holidays, in addition to changing into clean clothes and eating better, they get together to gamble. Gambling tools are also money. Play money, roll money. Money: Each person takes out one or two copper dollars and stacks them into a very high stack. Participants smash a coin at the stack of copper coins from a distance, and take as much as they knock. Rolling money is also called "rolling five or seven inches". On an empty field, each person puts a stack of money; a whole brick supports a slope, uses a copper dollar to fall from the brick surface, rolls to the money injection secret place, after the money stops, use the two straw sticks prepared in advance to measure it, such as five inches away from the money bet, the money roller can eat the bet; seven inches away, the same amount as this bet is lost. This ancient game of game brought great joy to the porters. The idlers on the sidelines also cheered loudly from time to time to cheer them up.这里的姑娘媳妇也都能挑。她们挑得不比男人少，走得不比男人慢。挑鲜货是她们的专业。大概是觉得这种水淋淋的东西对女人更相宜，男人们是不屑于去挑的。这些“女将”都生得颀长俊俏，浓黑的头发上涂了很多梳头油，梳得油光水滑（照当地说法是：苍蝇站上去都会闪了腿）。脑后的发髻都极大。发髻的大红头绳的发根长到二寸，老远就看到通红的一截。她们的发髻的一侧总要插一点什么东西。清明插一个柳球（杨柳的嫩枝，一头拿牙咬着，把柳枝的外皮连同鹅黄的柳叶使劲往下一抹，成一个小小球形），端午插一丛艾叶，有鲜花时插一朵栀子、一朵夹竹桃，无鲜花时插一朵大红剪绒花。因为常年挑担，衣服的肩膀处易破，她们的托肩多半是换过的。旧衣服，新托肩，颜色不一样，这几乎成了大淖妇女的特有的服饰。一二十个姑娘媳妇，挑着一担担紫红的荸荠、碧绿的菱角、雪白的连枝藕，走成一长串，风摆柳似的嚓嚓地走过，好看得很！
The girls and daughters-in-law here can also pick. They pick no less than men, and they walk no slower than men. Picking fresh goods is their specialty. Probably think that this kind of watery thing is more suitable for women, and men disdain to pick it. These "female generals" are all tall and handsome, and their thick black hair is coated with a lot of comb oil, which is shiny and smooth (according to the local parlance: flies will flash their legs when they stand up). The buns on the back of the head are extremely large. The roots of the big red headband in the bun grow to two inches, and you can see a red section from afar. There is always something inserted on one side of their bun. Insert a willow ball (the young branches of the willow, bite with teeth at one end, and wipe the outer skin of the willow branches together with the goose-yellow willow leaves to form a small spherical shape), insert a clump of mugwort leaves during the Dragon Boat Festival, insert a gardenia and an oleander when there are flowers, and insert a big red velvet flower when there are no flowers. Because they carry burdens all year round, the shoulders of their clothes are easy to break, and most of their shoulders are replaced. Old clothes, new shoulders, and different colors, have almost become the unique costumes of Da Nao women. Twenty girls and daughters-in-law, carrying loads of purple and red water chestnuts, turquoise water chestnuts, and snow-white lotus roots, walked in a long string, walking like willows in the wind, which is very beautiful!她们像男人一样的挣钱，走相、坐相也像男人。走起来一阵风，坐下来两条腿叉得很开。她们像男人一样赤脚穿草鞋（脚指甲却用凤仙花染红）。她们嘴里不忌生冷，男人怎么说话她们怎么说话，她们也用男人骂人的话骂人。打起号子来也是“好大娘个歪歪子咧！”——“歪歪子咧……”
They earn money like men, and they walk and sit like men. There was a gust of wind when he walked, and when he sat down, his legs were spread wide. They wear straw sandals barefoot like men (their toenails are dyed red with impatiens). They don't avoid being cold in their mouths, and how they talk when men speak, they also scold people with men's scolding words. When I started calling it, it was also "What a crooked lady!" ——"Crooked ......"没出门子的姑娘还文雅一点，一做了媳妇就简直是“姜太公在此百无禁忌”，要多野有多野。有一个老光棍黄海龙，年轻时也是挑夫，后来腿脚有了点毛病，就在码头上看看稻船，收收筹子。这老头儿老没正经，一把胡子了，还喜欢在媳妇们的胸前屁股上摸一把，拧一下。按辈份，他应当被这些媳妇称呼一声叔公，可是谁都管他叫“老骚胡子”。有一天，他又动手动脚的，几个媳妇一咬耳朵，一二三，一齐上手，眨眼之间叔公的裤子就挂在大树顶上了。有一回，叔公听见卖饺面[3]的挑着担子，敲着竹梆走来，他又来劲了：“你们敢不敢到淖里洗个澡？——敢，我一个人输你们两碗饺面！”——“真的？”——“真的！”——“好！”几个媳妇脱了衣服跳到淖里扑通扑通洗了一会。爬上岸就大声喊叫：
The girl who didn't go out was more elegant, and as soon as she became a daughter-in-law, she was simply "Jiang Taigong has no taboos here", and she wanted to be wild. There was an old bachelor Huang Hailong, who was also a porter when he was young, but later had some problems with his legs and feet, so he looked at the rice boats on the pier and collected the chips. This old man is old and unserious, he has a beard, and he likes to touch and twist the chest and buttocks of his daughters-in-law. According to seniority, he should be called uncle by these daughters-in-law, but everyone calls him "old beard". One day, he moved his hands and feet again, and several daughters-in-law bit their ears, one, two, three, and started together, and in the blink of an eye, his uncle's pants were hanging on the top of the big tree. Once, my uncle heard the dumpling noodle seller [3] carrying a burden and knocking on the bamboo stick, and he was energetic again: "Do you dare to take a bath in the mud? ——Dare, I will lose you two bowls of dumplings by myself!" ——"Really?" ——"Really!" ——"Okay!" Several daughters-in-law took off their clothes and jumped into the mud to wash for a while. Climbing ashore, he shouted loudly:“下面！”
"Below!"这里人家的婚嫁极少明媒正娶，花轿吹鼓手是挣不着他们的钱的。媳妇，多是自己跑来的；姑娘，一般是自己找人。她们在男女关系上是比较随便的。姑娘在家生私孩子；一个媳妇，在丈夫之外，再“靠”一个，不是稀奇事。这里的女人和男人好，还是恼，只有一个标准：情愿。有的姑娘、媳妇相与了一个男人，自然也跟他要钱买花戴，但是有的不但不要他们的钱，反而把钱给他花，叫做“倒贴”。
There are very few marriages here that the bright media are marrying, and the sedan chair drummers can't earn their money. Daughters-in-law mostly come by themselves; girls usually find someone by themselves. They are relatively casual in the relationship between men and women. Girls give birth to private children at home; it is not uncommon for a daughter-in-law to "rely on" another other than her husband. Women here are good with men, or they are annoyed, and there is only one criterion: willingness. Some girls and daughters-in-law are with a man, and naturally ask him for money to buy flowers and wear them, but some not only don't want their money, but spend the money on him, which is called "upside down".因此，街里的人说这里“风气不好”。
到底是哪里的风气更好一些呢？难说。
四
Therefore, people on the street say that the atmosphere here is "not good". Where is the atmosphere better? Hard. Four大淖东头有一户人家。这一家只有两口人，父亲和女儿。父亲名叫黄海蛟，是黄海龙的堂弟（挑夫里姓黄的多）。原来是挑夫里的一把好手。他专能上高跳。这地方大粮行的“窝积”（长条芦席围成的粮囤），高到三四丈，只支一只单跳，很陡。上高跳要提着气一口气窜上去，中途不能停留。遇到上了一点岁数的或者“女将”，抬头看看高跳，有点含胡，他就走过去接过二百斤的担子，一支箭似的上到跳顶，两手一提，把两箩稻子倒在“窝积”里，随即三五步就下到平地。因为为人忠诚老实，二十五岁了，还没有成亲。那年在车逻挑粮食，遇到一个姑娘向他问路。这姑娘留着长长的刘海，梳了一个“苏州俏”的发髻，还抹了一点胭脂，眼色张皇，神情焦急，她问路，可是连一个准地名都说不清，一看就知道是大户人家逃出来的使女。黄海蛟和她攀谈了一会，这姑娘就表示愿意跟着他过。她叫莲子。——这地方丫头、使女多叫莲子。
There is a family at the east end of Danao. There are only two people in this family, father and daughter. His father's name is Huang Haijiao, and he is Huang Hailong's cousin (there are many porters with the surname Huang). It turned out to be a good hand in the porter. He can jump high. The "nest" (grain hoard surrounded by long reed mats) in this place is three or four feet high, and only one single jump is very steep. The high jump has to be carried up in one breath, and you can't stop halfway. When he met a little old or a "female general", he looked up at the high jump, a little bearded, he walked over and took the burden of 200 pounds, went up to the top of the jump like an arrow, lifted it with both hands, poured two baskets of rice into the "nest", and then went down to the flat ground in three or five steps. Because he is loyal and honest, he is twenty-five years old and has not yet married. That year, while picking up grain in Cheluo, he met a girl who asked him for directions. The girl had long bangs, combed a "Suzhou pretty" bun, and smeared a little rouge, her eyes were open, and she looked anxious, she asked for directions, but she couldn't even tell a quasi-place name, and at a glance she knew that she was a maid who escaped from a large family. Huang Haijiao chatted with her for a while, and the girl expressed her willingness to follow him. Her name is Lianzi. ——The girls and maids in this place are often called Lianzi.莲子和黄海蛟过了一年，给他生了个女儿。七月生的，生下的时候满天都是五色云彩，就取名叫做巧云。
Lianzi and Huang Haijiao gave birth to a daughter to him after a year. Born in July, the sky was full of five-colored clouds when he was born, so he was named Qiaoyun.莲子的手很巧，也勤快，只是爱穿件华丝葛的裤子，爱吃点瓜子零食，还爱唱“打牙牌”之类的小调：“凉月子一出照楼梢，打个呵欠伸懒腰，瞌睡子又上来了。哎哟，哎哟，瞌睡子又上来了……”这和大淖的乡风不大一样。
Lianzi's hands are very skillful and diligent, but she just likes to wear a pair of flower kudzu pants, eat some melon seed snacks, and love to sing tunes such as "playing tooth cards": "As soon as Liang Yuezi came out of the building, he yawned and stretched, and the sleepy man came up again. Ouch, ouch, the sleepy man came up again......" This is not very different from the rural style of Danao.巧云三岁那年，她的妈莲子，终于和一个过路戏班子的一个唱小生的跑了。那天，黄海蛟正在马棚湾。莲子把黄海蛟的衣裳都浆洗了一遍，巧云的小衣裳也收拾在一起，焖了一锅饭，还给老黄打了半斤酒，把孩子托给邻居，说是她出门有点事，锁了门，从此就不知去向了。
When Qiaoyun was three years old, her mother Lianzi finally ran away with a singer from a passing troupe. That day, Huang Haijiao was in Mapeng Bay. Lianzi washed Huang Haijiao's clothes, and Qiaoyun's small clothes were also packed together, stewed a pot of rice, and gave Lao Huang half a catty of wine, entrusting the child to the neighbors, saying that she had something to do when she went out, locked the door, and disappeared since.巧云的妈跑了，黄海蛟倒没有怎么伤心难过。这种事情在大淖这个地方也值不得大惊小怪。养熟的鸟还有飞走的时候呢，何况是一个人！只是她留下的这块肉，黄海蛟实在是疼得不行。他不愿巧云在后娘的眼皮底下委委屈屈地生活，因此发心不再续娶。他就又当爹又当妈，和女儿巧云在一起过了十几年。他不愿巧云去挑扁担，巧云从十四岁就学会结鱼网和打芦席。
Qiaoyun's mother ran away, but Huang Haijiao was not very sad. This kind of thing is not worth the fuss in this place of Danao. There are times when a cooked bird flies away, let alone alone! It's just that the piece of meat she left behind, Huang Haijiao really hurts. He didn't want Qiaoyun to live aggrieved under his stepmother's nose, so he decided not to remarry. He became a father and a mother again, and spent more than ten years with his daughter Qiaoyun. He didn't want Qiaoyun to carry a flat pole, and Qiaoyun learned to make fishing nets and reed mats since he was fourteen years old.巧云十五岁，长成了一朵花。身材、脸盘都像妈。瓜子脸，一边有个很深的酒窝。眉毛黑如鸦翅，长入鬓角。眼角有点吊，是一双凤眼。睫毛很长，因此显得眼睛经常是眯睎着；忽然回头，睁得大大的，带点吃惊而专注的神情，好像听到远处有人叫她似的。她在门外的两棵树杈之间结网，在淖边平地上织席，就有一些少年人装着有事的样子来来去去。她上街买东西，甭管是买肉、买菜，打油、打酒，撕布、量头绳，买梳头油、雪花膏，买石碱、浆块，同样的钱，她买回来，份量都比别人多，东西都比别人的好。这个奥秘早被大娘、大婶们发现，她们都托她买东西。只要巧云一上街，都挎了好几个竹篮，回来时压得两个胳臂酸疼酸疼。泰山庙唱戏，人家都自己扛了板凳去。巧云散着手就去了。一去了，总有人给她找一个得看的好座。台上的戏唱得正热闹，但是没有多少人叫好。因为好些人不是在看戏，是看她。
Qiaoyun was fifteen years old and grew into a flower. The figure and face are like mothers. The melon seed face has a deep dimple on one side. The eyebrows are as black as crow's wings, growing into the sideburns. The corners of the eyes are a little hanging, and they are a pair of phoenix eyes. The eyelashes are very long, so it seems that the eyes are often squinting; suddenly turned around, wide open, with a slightly surprised and focused expression, as if she heard someone calling her in the distance. She weaved a net between the two branches outside the door, weaving mats on the flat ground by the mud, and there were some young people coming and going pretending to be something. She went to the street to buy things, whether it was buying meat, vegetables, oil, wine, tearing cloth, measuring ropes, combing oil, alabaster paste, stone alkali, pulp, the same money, she bought back, the amount was more than others, and the things were better than others. This mystery was already discovered by the aunts and aunts, and they all asked her to buy things. As long as Qiaoyun went to the street, she carried several bamboo baskets, and when she came back, her arms were sore and sore. When Qiaoyun sang in Taishan Temple, everyone carried the bench by themselves. Qiaoyun left with his hands. As soon as she went, someone always found her a good seat to see. The play on the stage was singing lively, but not many people applauded. Because many people are not watching the play, but watching her.巧云十六了，该张罗着自己的事了。谁家会把这朵花迎走呢？炕房的老大？浆坊的老二？鲜货行的老三？他们都有这意思。这点意思黄海蛟知道了，巧云也知道。不然他们老到淖东头来回晃摇是干什么呢？但是巧云没怎么往心里去。
Qiaoyun is sixteen years old, and it's time to take care of his own business. Who will welcome this flower away? The boss of the kang room? The second child of the pulp mill? The third child of the fresh goods store? They all mean this. Huang Haijiao knows this meaning, and Qiaoyun also knows it. Otherwise, what are they doing when they are old and swaying back and forth in Naodongtou? But Qiaoyun didn't take it to heart.巧云十七岁，命运发生了一个急转直下的变化。她的父亲黄海蛟在一次挑重担上高跳时，一脚踏空，从三丈高的跳板上摔下来，摔断了腰。起初以为不要紧，养养就好了。不想喝了好多药酒，贴了好多膏药，还不见效。她爹半瘫了，他的腰再也直不起来了。他有时下床，扶着一个剃头担子上用的高板凳，格登格登地走一截，平常就只好半躺下靠在一摞被窝上。他不能用自己的肩膀为女儿挣几件新衣裳，买两枝花，却只能由女儿用一双手养活自己了。还不到五十岁的男子汉，只能做一点老太婆做的事：绩了一捆又一捆的供女儿结网用的麻线。事情很清楚：巧云不会撇下她这个老实可怜的残废爹。谁要愿意，只能上这家来当一个倒插门的养老女婿。谁愿意呢？这家的全部家产只有三间草屋（巧云和爹各住一间，当中是一个小小的堂屋）。老大、老二、老三时不时走来走去，拿眼睛瞟着隔着一层鱼网或者坐在雪白的芦席上的一个苗条的身子。他们的眼睛依然不缺乏爱慕，但是减少了几分急切。
Qiaoyun was seventeen years old, and his fate took a sharp turn. Her father, Huang Haijiao, broke his waist when he jumped high on a heavy burden, fell off a three-foot-high springboard, and broke his waist. At first, I thought it didn't matter, just raise it. I didn't want to drink a lot of medicinal wine and put a lot of plasters on it, but it didn't work. Her father was half paralyzed, and his waist could no longer be straightened. Sometimes he got out of bed, held on to a high bench for shaving his head, and walked for a while, usually lying down and leaning on a stack of quilts. He couldn't use his shoulders to buy a few new clothes for his daughter and buy two flowers, but he could only support himself with his daughter's hands. A man who is not yet fifty years old can only do a little of what an old woman does: bundles of twine for his daughter to weave nets. Things are clear: Qiaoyun will not leave her honest and poor crippled father. Whoever wants to do so can only go to this house to be a pensioner's son-in-law with an upside-down door. Who wants to? There are only three thatched houses in this family (Qiaoyun and his father each live in one, and one of them is a small hall). The eldest, second, and third children walked around from time to time, glancing at a slender body through a layer of fishing nets or sitting on a snow-white reed mat. Their eyes were still not lacking in admiration, but they were a little less eager.老锡匠告诫十一子不要老往淖东头跑，但是小锡匠还短不了要来。大娘、大婶、姑娘、媳妇有旧壶翻新，总喜欢叫小锡匠来；从大淖过深巷上大街也要经过这里，巧云家门前的柳阴是一个等待雇主的好地方。巧云织席，十一子化锡，正好做伴。有时巧云停下活计，帮小锡匠拉风箱。有时巧云要回家看看她的残废爹，问他想不想吃烟喝水，小锡匠就压住炉里的火，帮她织一气席。巧云的手指划破了（织席很容易划破手，压扁的芦苇薄片，刀一样地锋快），十一子就帮她吮吸指头肚子上的血。巧云从十一子口里知道他家里的事：他是个独子，没有兄弟姐妹。他有一个老娘，守寡多年了。他娘在家给人家做针线，眼睛越来越不好，他很担心她有一天会瞎……
The old tinsmith warned the eleventh son not to run to the east of the nao all the time, but the little tinsmith was not long in coming. Aunts, aunts, girls, and daughters-in-law have old pots renovated and always like to call the little tinsmith; from the big nao to the deep alley to the street, you also have to pass here, and the willow shade in front of Qiaoyun's house is a good place to wait for the employer. Qiaoyun weaves mats, and the eleventh son turns tin, just as a companion. Sometimes Qiaoyun stops working and helps the little tinsmith pull the bellows. Sometimes Qiaoyun wanted to go home to see her crippled father and ask him if he wanted to smoke and drink water, and the little tinsmith would suppress the fire in the stove and help her weave a mat. Qiaoyun's fingers were cut (the mat was easy to scratch her hands, the flattened reeds were as sharp as a knife), and Eleven helped her suck the blood on her fingers and stomach. Qiaoyun knew about his family from the mouth of the eleventh son: he was an only son and had no brothers or sisters. He has an old mother who has been widowed for many years. His mother was doing needlework for others at home, and her eyes were getting worse and worse, and he was very worried that she would be blind one day......好心的大人路过时会想：这倒真是两只鸳鸯，可是配不成对。一家要招一个养老女婿，一家要接一个当家媳妇，弄不到一起。他们俩呢，只是很愿意在一处谈谈坐坐。都到岁数了，心里不是没有。只是像一片薄薄的云，飘过来，飘过去，下不成雨。
Kind-hearted adults will think when passing by: These are really two mandarin ducks, but they are not a match. A family wants to recruit a son-in-law for the elderly, and a family wants to pick up a daughter-in-law, but they can't get it together. As for the two of them, they are just willing to talk and sit in one place. It's all about the age of sitting, and it's not that I don't have it. It's just like a thin cloud, floating over, floating over, and it can't rain.有一天晚上，好月亮，巧云到淖边一只空船上去洗衣裳（这里的船泊定后，把浆拖到岸上，寄放在熟人家，船就拴在这里，无人看管，谁都可以上去）。她正在船头把身子往前倾着，用力涮着一件大衣裳，一个不知轻重的顽皮野孩子轻轻走到她身后，伸出两手咯吱她的腰。她冷不妨，一头栽进了水里。她本会一点水，但是一下子懵了。这几天水又大，流很急。她挣扎了两下，喊救人，接连喝了几口水。她被水冲走了！正赶上十一子在炕房门外土坪上打拳，看见一个人冲了过来，头发在水上漂着。他褪下鞋子，一猛子扎到水底，从水里把她托了起来。
One night, on the good moon, Qiaoyun went to an empty boat by the mud to wash clothes (after the boat here was anchored, the pulp was dragged to the shore and stored at an acquaintance's house, and the boat was tied here, unattended, and anyone could go up). She was leaning forward at the bow of the boat, soaking up a coat, and a naughty wild child who didn't know the weight walked behind her gently and stretched out his hands to squeak her waist. She was cold and plunged headlong into the water. She would have had a little water, but she was stunned. The water has been heavy and fast these days. She struggled twice, shouted for help, and drank a few sips of water in succession. She was swept away by the water! Just as he was catching up with Shiyi Zi punching on the dirt flat outside the kang room, he saw a person rushing over, his hair floating on the water. He took off his shoes, and Yi Meng Zi plunged to the bottom of the water and lifted her up from the water.十一子把她肚子里的水控了出来，巧云还是昏迷不醒。十一子只好把她横抱着，像抱一个婴儿似的，把她送回去。她浑身是湿的，软绵绵，热乎乎的。十一子觉得巧云紧紧挨着他，越挨越紧。十一子的心怦怦地跳。
Eleven Zi controlled the water in her stomach, but Qiaoyun was still unconscious. Eleven Zi had to hug her horizontally, like a baby, and send her back. She was wet, soft, and hot. Eleven Zi felt that Qiaoyun was close to him, getting tighter and tighter. Eleven Son's heart was pounding.到了家，巧云醒来了。（她早就醒来了！）十一子把她放在床上。巧云换了湿衣裳（月光照出她的美丽的少女的身体）。十一子抓一把草，给她熬了半铞子姜糖水，让她喝下去，就走了。
When she got home, Qiaoyun woke up. (She woke up a long time ago!) Eleven Zi put her on the bed. Qiaoyun changed into wet clothes (the moonlight shone on her beautiful girl's body). Shiyi Zi grabbed a handful of grass, boiled half a ginger syrup for her, asked her to drink it, and left.巧云起来关了门，躺下。她好像看见自己躺在床上的样子。月亮真好。
巧云在心里说：“你是个呆子！”
她说出声来了。
不大一会，她也就睡死了。
就在这一天夜里，另外一个人，拨开了巧云家的门。
Qiaoyun got up, closed the door, and lay down. She seemed to see herself lying on the bed. The moon is so good. Qiaoyun said in his heart: "You are a fool! ” She spoke up. After a while, she fell asleep. On this night, another person opened the door of Qiaoyun's house.五
Five由轮船公司对面的巷子转东大街，往西不远，有一个道士观，叫做炼阳观。现在没有道士了，里面住了不到一营水上保安队。这水上保安队是地方武装。他们名义上归县政府官辖，饷银却由县商会开销，水上保安队的任务是下乡剿土匪。这一带土匪很多，他们抢了人，绑了票，大都藏匿在芦荡湖泊中的船上（这地方到处是水），如遇追捕，便于脱逃。因此，地方绅商觉得很需要成立一个特殊的武装力量来对付这些成帮结伙的土匪。水上保安队装备是很好的。他们乘的船是“铁板划子”——船的三面都有半人高、三四分厚的铁板，子弹是打不透的。铁板划子就停在大淖岸边，样子很高傲。一有任务，就看见大兵们扛着两挺水机关，用箩筐抬着多半筐子弹（子弹不用箱装，却使箩抬，颇奇怪），上了船，开走了。
From the alley opposite the steamship company to East Street, not far to the west, there is a Taoist temple called Lianyang Temple. Now there are no Taoist priests, and there is less than a battalion of water security teams living inside. This water security team is a local armed force. They are nominally under the jurisdiction of the county government, but the salary is paid by the county chamber of commerce, and the task of the water security team is to go to the countryside to suppress bandits. There are many bandits in this area, they rob people, tie up tickets, and hide in boats in Ludang Lake (this place is full of water). Therefore, local gentry and merchants felt the need to set up a special armed force to deal with these gangs of bandits. The water security team is very well equipped. The boat they ride on is an "iron plate paddle" - there are iron plates half a person high and three or four points thick on three sides of the boat, and bullets cannot penetrate. The iron plate paddle was parked on the shore of the big mud, looking very arrogant. As soon as there was a task, I saw the soldiers carrying two water mechanisms, carrying most of the baskets of bullets in baskets (bullets are not boxed, but they are carried by baskets, which is quite strange), got on the boat, and drove away.或七八天，或十天半月，他们得胜回来了（他们有铁板划子，又有水机关，对土匪有压倒优势，很少有伤亡）。铁板划子靠了岸，上岸列队，由深巷，上大街，直奔县政府。这队伍是四列纵队。前面是号队。这不到一营的人，却有十二支号。一上大街，就“打打打滴打大打滴大打”，齐齐整整地吹起来。后面是全队弟兄，一律荷枪实弹。号队之后，大队之前的正中，是捉来的土匪。有时三个五个，有时只有一个，都是五花大绑。这队伍是很神气的。最妙的是被绑着的土匪也一律都合着号音，步伐整齐，雄赳赳气昂昂地走着。甚至值日官喊“一、二、三、四”，他们也随着大声地喊。大队上街之前，要由地保事先通知沿街店铺，凡有鸟笼的（有的店铺是养八哥、画眉的），都要收起来，因为土匪大哥看见不高兴，这是他们忌讳的（他们到了县政府，都下在大狱里，看见笼中鸟，就无出狱希望了）。看看这样的铜号放光，刺刀雪亮，还夹着几个带有传奇色彩的土匪英雄的威武雄壮的队伍，是这条街上的民众的一件快乐事情。其快乐程度不下于看狮子、龙灯、高跷、抬阁和僧道齐全、六十四杠的大出丧。
Or seven or eight days, or ten and a half days, they came back victorious (they had iron plate paddles and water mechanisms, and had an overwhelming advantage over bandits, and there were few casualties). The iron plate paddles docked on the shore, went ashore and lined up, from the deep alleys to the streets, and went straight to the county government. This team is a four-column column. In front is the trumpet team. This is less than a battalion, but there are twelve trumpets. As soon as they went on the street, they "beat and beat big and beat", and they blew up neatly. Behind them were the brothers of the whole team, all armed with live ammunition. After the trumpet team, in the middle of the front of the brigade were the captured bandits. Sometimes there are three or five, sometimes only one, all tied together. This team is very spirited. The best thing is that the tied bandits also all chose the trumpet, walking neatly and majestically with high spirits. Even the officers on duty shouted "one, two, three, four", and they shouted loudly. Before the brigade goes to the street, the land security must notify the shops along the street in advance, and all those with bird cages (some shops raise starlings and thrushes) must be put away, because the bandit brother is unhappy when he sees it, which is taboo for them (when they arrive at the county government, they are all in prison, and when they see the caged bird, they have no hope of being released from prison). Looking at such a brass trumpet shining, the bayonets are shining, and there are several legendary bandit heroes in the majestic and majestic team, it is a happy thing for the people on this street. Its happiness is no less than watching lions, dragon lanterns, stilts, pavilions and monks and Taoists, and the sixty-four bars.除了下乡办差，保安队的弟兄们没有什么事。他们除了把两挺水机关扛到大淖边突突地打两梭（把淖岸上的泥土打得簌簌地往下掉），平常是难得出操、打野外的。使人们感觉到这营把人的存在的，是这十二个号兵早晚练号。早晨八九点钟，下午四五点钟，他们就到大淖边来了。先是拔长音，然后各自吹几段，最后是合吹进行曲、三环号（他们吹三环号只是吹着玩，因为从来没有接受检阅的时候）。吹完号，就解散，想干什么干什么。有的，就轻手轻脚，走进一家的门外，咳嗽一声，随着，走了进去，门就关起来了。
Except for going to the countryside to do errands, the brothers in the security team had nothing to do. In addition to carrying two water mechanisms to the edge of the marsh and suddenly hitting two shuttles (beating the soil on the mud bank down with a rustle), it is usually difficult to practice and fight in the wild. What makes people feel the existence of this battalion is that these twelve trumpeters practice horns in the morning and evening. At eight or nine o'clock in the morning and four or five o'clock in the afternoon, they came to the edge of the marsh. First, they played a long note, then each played a few sections, and finally played the march and the three-ring horn together (they played the three-ring horn just for fun, because they were never reviewed). After blowing the horn, they disbanded and did whatever they wanted. Some, they walked into the door of a house, coughed, and then walked in, and the door closed.这些号兵大都衣着整齐，干净爱俏。他们除了吹吹号，整天无事干，有的是闲空。他们的钱来得容易，——饷钱倒不多，但每次下乡，总有犒赏；有时与土匪遭遇，双方谈条件，也常从对方手中得到一笔钱，手面很大方，花钱不在乎。他们是保护地方绅商的军人，身后有靠山，即或出一点什么事，谁也无奈他何。因此，这些大爷就觉得不风流风流，实在对不起自己，也辜负了别人。
Most of these trumpeters are neatly dressed, clean and pretty. They have nothing to do all day except blowing the trumpet, and some are idle. Their money comes easily,—— and the salary is not much, but every time they go to the countryside, there is always a reward; sometimes when encountering bandits, the two sides negotiate conditions, and often get a sum of money from each other, and they are very generous and don't care about spending money. They are soldiers who protect local gentry and businessmen, and they have backers behind them, even if something happens, no one can do anything about it. Therefore, these uncles feel that they are not romantic, and they are really sorry for themselves and have let others down.十二个号兵，有一个号长，姓刘，大家都叫他刘号长。这刘号长前后跟大淖几家的媳妇都很熟。
拨开巧云家的门的，就是这个号长！
号长走的时候留下十块钱。
Twelve soldiers, one of whom is surnamed Liu, and everyone calls him Captain Liu. This captain Liu is very familiar with the daughters-in-law of the Danao family. The one who opened the door of Qiaoyun's house was this captain! When the captain left, he left ten yuan.这种事在大淖不是第一次发生。巧云的残废爹当时就知道了。他拿着这十块钱，只是长长地叹了一口气。邻居们知道了，姑娘、媳妇并未多议论，只骂了一句：“这个该死的！”
This is not the first time this kind of thing has happened in Danao. Qiaoyun's crippled father knew at the time. He took the ten yuan and just let out a long sigh. The neighbors found out, but the girl and daughter-in-law didn't talk much, only scolded: "This damn it!" ”巧云破了身子，她没有淌眼泪，更没有想到跳到淖里淹死。人生在世，总有这么一遭！只是为什么是这个人？真不该是这个人！怎么办？拿把菜刀杀了他？放火烧了炼阳观？不行！她还有个残废爹。她怔怔地坐在床上，心里乱糟糟的。她想起该起来烧早饭了。她还得结网，织席，还得上街。她想起小时候上人家看新娘子，新娘子穿了一双粉红的缎子花鞋。她想起她的远在天边的妈。她记不得妈的样子，只记得妈用一个筷子头蘸了胭脂给她点了一点眉心红。她拿起镜子照照，她好像第一次看清楚自己的模样。她想起十一子给她吮手指上的血，这血一定是咸的。她觉得对不起十一子，好像自己做错了什么事。她非常失悔：没有把自己给了十一子！
Qiaoyun broke her body, she didn't shed tears, let alone jump into the mud and drown. In life, there is always such a thing! But why is this person? It really shouldn't be this person! What to do? Kill him with a kitchen knife? Set fire to the Lianyang Temple? No way! She also has a crippled father. She sat on the bed in a daze, her heart in a mess. She remembered that it was time to get up and cook breakfast. She still had to weave nets, weave mats, and go to the streets. She remembered that when she was a child, she went to see the bride, and the bride wore a pair of pink satin flower shoes. She thought of her mother who was far away. She couldn't remember what her mother looked like, only that her mother dipped a chopstick tip in rouge and gave her a little eyebrow blush. She picked up the mirror and looked at it, as if she was seeing her appearance clearly for the first time. She remembered that Eleven Son sucked the blood on her finger, and the blood must be salty. She felt sorry for Eleven Son, as if she had done something wrong. She was very regretful: she didn't give herself to Eleven Son!她的这个念头越来越强烈。这个号长来一次，她的念头就更强烈一分。
水上保安队又下乡了。
一天，巧云找到十一子，说：“晚上你到大淖东边来，我有话跟你说。”
Her thought became stronger and stronger. Once this captain came, her thoughts became even stronger. The water security team went to the countryside again. One day, Qiaoyun found Eleven Son and said, "You come to the east of Danao in the evening, I have something to tell you." ”十一子到了淖边。巧云踏在一只“鸭撇子”上（放鸭子用的小船，极小，仅容一人。这是一只公船，平常就拴在淖边。大淖人谁都可以撑着它到沙洲上挑蒌蒿，割茅草，拣野鸭蛋），把篙子一点，撑向淖中央的沙洲，对十一子说：“你来！”
Eleven Sons arrived at the edge of the marsh. Qiaoyun stepped on a "duck skimmer" (a small boat for ducks, extremely small, only for one person. This is a public boat, usually tied to the edge of the marsh. Anyone in the big nao can carry it to the sandbar to pick mugwort, cut thatch, and pick wild duck eggs), put a pole on the sandbar, prop it up to the sandbar in the center of the marsh, and say to Eleven Son: "You come!" ”过了一会，十一子泅水到了沙洲上。
他们在沙洲的茅草丛里一直呆到月到中天。
月亮真好啊！
六
After a while, Eleven Zi swam to the sandbar. They stayed in the thatched thickets of the sandbar until the middle of the month. The moon is so good! Six十一子和巧云的事，师兄们都知道，只瞒着老锡匠一个人。他们偷偷地给他留着门，在门窝子里倒了水（这样推门进来没有声音）。十一子常常到天快亮的时候才回来。有一天，又是这时候才推开门。刚刚要钻被窝，听见老锡匠说：
The senior brothers knew about the eleventh son and Qiaoyun, and they only hid it from the old tinsmith. They secretly kept the door for him and poured water into the door socket (so that there was no sound when the door was pushed in). Eleven often didn't come back until dawn. One day, it was at this time that the door was pushed open again. Just as he was about to get into the bed, he heard the old tinsmith say:“你不要命啦！”
"You don't want to die!"这种事情怎么瞒得住人呢？终于，传到刘号长的耳朵里。其实没有人跟他嚼舌头，刘号长自己还不知道？巧云看见他都讨厌，她的全身都是冷淡的。刘号长咽不下这口气。本来，他跟巧云又没有拜过堂，完过花烛，闲花野草，断了就断了。可是一个小锡匠，夺走了他的人，这丢了当兵的脸。太岁头上动土，这还行！这种事从来没有发生过。连保安队的弟兄也都觉得面上无光，在人前矬了一截。他是只许自己在别人头上拉屎撒尿，不许别人在他脸上溅一星唾沫的。若是闭着眼过去，往后，保安队的人还混不混了？
How can this kind of thing be hidden from others? Finally, it reached the ears of Captain Liu. In fact, no one chewed his tongue with him, and Captain Liu himself didn't know? Qiaoyun hated him when she saw him, and her whole body was cold. Commander Liu couldn't swallow this breath. Originally, he and Qiaoyun had never worshipped in court, and they had finished the candles, idle flowers and weeds, and they would break if they were broken. But a little tinsmith took away his people, which was a disgrace to be a soldier. Tai Sui broke ground on his head, which is okay! This kind of thing has never happened. Even the brothers in the security team felt dull on their faces and scolded in front of others. He only allowed himself to poop and pee on other people's heads, and did not allow others to spit on his face. If you go over with your eyes closed, will the security team still mix in the future?有一天，天还没亮，刘号长带了几个弟兄，踢开巧云家的门，从被窝里拉起了小锡匠，把他捆了起来。把黄海蛟、巧云的手脚也都捆了，怕他们去叫人。
One day, before dawn, Liu Haochang took a few brothers, kicked open the door of Qiaoyun's house, pulled the little tinsmith out of the bed, and tied him up. Huang Haijiao and Qiaoyun's hands and feet were also tied, for fear that they would call someone.他们把小锡匠弄到泰山庙后面的坟地里，一人一根棍子，搂头盖脸地打他。
他们要小锡匠卷铺盖走人，回他的兴化，不许再留在大淖。
小锡匠不说话。
他们要小锡匠答应不再走进黄家的门，不挨巧云的身子。
They took the little tinsmith to the cemetery behind the Taishan Temple, and beat him with a stick and covered his head. They asked the little tinsmith to roll up and leave, return to his Xinghua, and not stay in Danao anymore. The little tinsmith didn't speak. They asked the little tinsmith to promise not to walk into the door of the Huang family again, and not to be close to Qiaoyun's body.小锡匠还是不说话。
他们要小锡匠告一声饶，认一个错。
小锡匠的牙咬得紧紧的。
The little tinsmith still didn't speak. They asked the little tinsmith to say forgiveness and admit a mistake. The little tinsmith's teeth were clenched.小锡匠的硬铮把这些向来是横着膀子走路的家伙惹怒了，“你这样硬！打不死你！”——“打”，七八根棍子风一样、雨一样打在小锡匠的身子。
小锡匠被他们打死了。
The little tinsmith's stiffness angered these guys who had always walked cross-armed, "You are so hard! I can't beat you to death!" ——"Hit", seven or eight sticks hit the little tinsmith's body like wind and rain. The little tinsmith was beaten to death by them.锡匠们听说十一子被保安队的人绑走了，他们四处找，找到了泰山庙。
The tinsmiths heard that Eleven Son had been kidnapped by the security team, and they searched around and found the Taishan Temple.老锡匠用手一探，十一子还有一丝悠悠气。老锡匠叫人赶紧去找陈年的尿桶。他经验过这种事，打死的人，只有喝了从桶里刮出来的尿碱，才有救。
十一子的牙关咬得很紧，灌不进去。
The old tinsmith reached out with his hand, and there was still a trace of leisure in the eleventh son. The old tinsmith asked people to hurry up and find the old urine bucket. He had experienced this kind of thing, and the person who killed him could only be saved if he drank the urine alkali scraped out of the bucket. Eleven's teeth were very tight and could not be inserted.巧云捧了一碗尿碱汤，在十一子的耳边说：“十一子，十一子，你喝了！”
十一子微微听见一点声音，他睁了睁眼。巧云把一碗尿碱汤灌进了十一子的喉咙。
不知道为什么，她自己也尝了一口。
Qiaoyun held a bowl of urine-alkali soup and said in Eleven's ear: "Eleven, Eleven, you drink it!" ” Eleven Son heard a slight sound, and he opened his eyes. Qiaoyun poured a bowl of urine-alkali soup into Eleven's throat. I don't know why, but she took a bite herself.锡匠们摘了一块门板，把十一子放在门板上，往家里抬。
他们抬着十一子，到了大淖东头，还要往西走。巧云拦住了：
“不要。抬到我家里。”
老锡匠点点头。
The tinsmiths took off a door panel, put the eleventh son on the door panel, and carried it home. They carried the eleventh son to the east end of the big nao, and they had to go west. Qiaoyun stopped: "Don't. Carry it to my house. ” The old tinsmith nodded.巧云把屋里存着的鱼网和芦席都拿到街上卖了，买了七厘散，医治十一子身子里的瘀血。
东头的几家大娘、大婶杀了下蛋的老母鸡，给巧云送来了。
锡匠们凑了钱，买了人参，熬了参汤。
Qiaoyun took the fish nets and reed mats stored in the house to the street and sold them, bought seven cents, and healed the blood stasis in the body of the eleventh son. Several aunts and aunts in the east killed the old hen that laid eggs and sent them to Qiaoyun. The tinsmiths pooled money, bought ginseng, and boiled ginseng soup.挑夫，锡匠，姑娘，媳妇，川流不息地来看望十一子。他们把平时在辛苦而单调的生活中不常表现的热情和好心都拿出来了。他们觉得十一子和巧云做的事都很应该，很对。大淖出了这样一对年轻人，使他们觉得骄傲。大家的心喜洋洋，热乎乎的，好像在过年。
Porters, tinsmiths, girls, daughters-in-law, and the river flowed endlessly to visit Eleven. They took out the enthusiasm and kindness that they usually don't often show in their hard and monotonous lives. They felt that what Eleven Son and Qiaoyun did was very appropriate and right. Da Nao produced such a pair of young people, which made them feel proud. Everyone's hearts were overjoyed and warm, as if they were celebrating the New Year.刘号长打了人，不敢再露面。他那几个弟兄也都躲在保安队的队部里不出来。保安队的门口加了双岗。这些好汉原来都是一窝“草鸡”！
锡匠们开了会。他们向县政府递了呈子，要求保安队把姓刘的交出来。
Liu Haochang beat someone and did not dare to show up again. His brothers also hid in the headquarters of the security team and did not come out. A double post was added to the door of the security team. These heroes turned out to be a nest of "grass chickens"! The tinsmiths held a meeting. They handed over a petition to the county government and asked the security team to hand over the one surnamed Liu.县政府没有答复。
The county government did not respond.锡匠们上街游行。这个游行队伍是很多人从未见过的。没有旗子，没有标语，就是二十来个锡匠挑着二十来副锡匠担子，在全城的大街上慢慢地走。这是个沉默的队伍，但是非常严肃。他们表现出不可侵犯的威严和不可动摇的决心。这个带有中世纪行帮色彩的游行队伍十分动人。
The tinsmiths marched through the streets. This procession was something many people had never seen before. There were no flags, no slogans, just about 20 tinsmiths carrying more than 20 pairs of tinsmiths' burdens and walking slowly on the streets of the city. This was a silent procession, but very serious. They showed inviolable majesty and unshakable determination. This parade with medieval gang colors is very moving.游行继续了三天。
The march continued for three days.第三天，他们举行了“顶香请愿”。二十来个锡匠，在县政府照壁前坐着，每人头上用木盘顶着一炉炽旺的香。这是一个古老的风俗：民有沉冤，官不受理，被逼急了的百姓可以用香火把县大堂烧了，据说这不算犯法。
On the third day, they held a "petition for incense". More than 20 tinsmiths sat in front of the county government, each holding a burning incense burner on a wooden plate on their heads. This is an ancient custom: if the people have grievances, the officials will not accept them, and the people who are forced can burn the county lobby with incense, which is said to be not illegal.这条规矩不载于《六法全书》，现在不是大清国，县政府可以不理会这种“陋习”。但是这些锡匠是横了心的，他们当真干起来，后果是严重的。县长邀请县里的绅商商议，一致认为这件事不能再不管。于是由商会会长出面，约请了有关的人：一个承审——作为县长代表，保安队的副官，老锡匠和另外两个年长的锡匠，还有代表挑夫的黄海龙，四邻见证，——卖眼镜的宝应人，卖天竺筷的杭州人，在一家大茶馆里举行会谈，来“了”这件事。
This rule is not contained in the "Complete Book of Six Laws", and now it is not the Qing Dynasty, and the county government can ignore this "bad habit". But these tinsmiths were cross-hearted, and if they really did it, the consequences would be serious. The county magistrate invited the gentry and businessmen in the county to discuss, and agreed that this matter could no longer be ignored. So the president of the Chamber of Commerce came forward and invited the relevant people: a judge - as a representative of the county magistrate, the adjutant of the security team, the old tinsmith and two other older tinsmiths, as well as Huang Hailong, who represented the porters, and the neighbors witnessed the ,——Baoying people who sold glasses and Hangzhou people who sold Tianzhu chopsticks, held talks in a large teahouse and "came" about this matter.会谈的结果是：小锡匠养伤的药钱由保安队负担（实际是商会拿钱），刘号长驱逐出境。由刘号长画押具结。老锡匠觉得这样就给锡匠和挑夫都挣了面子，可以见好就收了。只是要求在刘某人的甘结上写上一条：如果他再踏进县城一步，任凭老锡匠一个人把他收拾了！
The result of the talks was that the medicine money for the little tinsmith's healing was borne by the security team (in fact, the Chamber of Commerce took the money), and Liu was expelled. Liu Haochang drew the escort knot. The old tinsmith felt that this would earn face for both the tinsmith and the porter, and he could accept it when he saw it. Just asked to write a piece on Liu's sweet knot: If he takes another step into the county seat, let the old tinsmith clean him up alone!过了两天，刘号长就由两个弟兄持枪护送，悄悄地走了。他被调到三垛去当了税警。
十一子能进一点饮食，能说话了。巧云问他：
Two days later, Captain Liu was escorted by two brothers with guns and left quietly. He was transferred to Sanduo to become a tax policeman. Eleven can eat a little and can talk. Qiaoyun asked him:“他们打你，你只要说不再进我家的门，就不打你了，你就不会吃这样大的苦了。你为什么不说？”
“你要我说么？”
“不要。”
“我知道你不要。”
“你值么？”
“我值。”
"If they beat you, as long as you say that you won't enter my house again, they won't beat you, and you won't suffer so much. Why don't you say it? ” "Do you want me to say it?" "Don't." "I know you don't." "Are you worth it?" "I'm worth it."“十一子，你真好！我喜欢你！你快点好。”
“你亲我一下，我就好得快。”
“好，亲你！”
"Eleven Son, you are so good! I like you! Hurry up. ” "You kiss me, and I'll get better quickly." "Okay, kiss you!"巧云一家有了三张嘴。两个男的不能挣钱，但要吃饭。大淖东头的人家都没有积蓄，也没有什么东西可以变卖典押。结鱼网，打芦席，都不能当时见钱。十一子的伤一时半会不会好，日子长了，怎么过呢？巧云没有经过太多考虑，把爹用过的箩筐找出来，磕磕尘土，就去挑担挣“活钱”去了。姑娘媳妇都很佩服她。起初她们怕她挑不惯，后来看她脚下很快，很匀，也就放心了。从此，巧云就和邻居的姑娘媳妇在一起，挑着紫红的荸荠、碧绿的菱角、雪白的连枝藕，风摆柳似地穿街过市，发髻的一侧插着大红花。她的眼睛还是那么亮，长睫毛忽扇忽扇的。但是眼神显得更深沉，更坚定了。她从一个姑娘变成了一个很能干的小媳妇。
Qiaoyun's family has three mouths. The two men can't make money, but they have to eat. The people in the east end of Danao have no savings, and they have nothing to sell and pawn. Tie fish nets and play reed mats, but you can't see the money at that time. Will the eleventh son's injury heal for a while, how will he live after a long time? Qiaoyun didn't think too much, found out the basket his father used, knocked dust, and went to pick up the burden to earn "living money". The girl and daughter-in-law admired her very much. At first, they were afraid that she would not be used to picking, but later they saw that her feet were fast and even, so they were relieved. Since then, Qiaoyun has been with the neighbor's girl and daughter-in-law, picking purple and red water chestnuts, turquoise water chestnuts, and snow-white lotus roots, and walking through the streets like willows, with big red flowers inserted on one side of her bun. Her eyes are still so bright, and her long eyelashes are flapping. But the eyes look deeper and more determined. She has changed from a girl to a very capable little daughter-in-law.十一子的伤会好么？
会。
当然会！
一九八一年二月四日，旧历大年三十

[1] 本篇原载《北京文学》1981年第四期；初收《汪曾祺短篇小说选》，北京出版社，1982年2月。
Will the eleventh son's injury heal? Yes. Of course it will! February 4, 1981, the old Chinese New Year's Eve [1] This article was originally published in the fourth issue of "Beijing Literature" in 1981; "Selected Short Stories of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Publishing House, February 1982.[2] 蒌蒿是生于水边的野草，粗如笔管，有节，生狭长的小叶，初生二寸来高，叫做“蒌蒿薹子”，加肉炒食极清香。苏东坡诗：“竹外桃花三两枝，春江水暖鸭先知。蒌蒿满地芦芽短，正是河豚欲上时。”蒌蒿见之于诗，这大概是第一次。他很能写出节令风物之美。
[2] Artemisia is a weed that grows by the water, as thick as a pen tube, knotted, with narrow and long leaves, two inches high when it first grows, called "Artemisia sprouts", and it is fried with meat and is very fragrant. Su Dongpo's poem: "Three or two branches of peach blossoms outside the bamboo, the prophet of the spring river plumbing ducks." Artemisia is full of short reed buds, which is when the puffer fish is about to go up. "Artemisia is seen in poetry, and this is probably the first time. He is very good at writing about the beauty of seasonal scenery.[3] 一半馄饨一半面下在一起，当地叫做饺面。

七里茶坊

七里茶坊[1]
我在七里茶坊住过几天。
[3] Half wonton and half noodles together, locally called dumpling noodles. Qili Tea House {{id_0000}} I stayed at Qili Tea House for a few days.我很喜欢七里茶坊这个地名。这地方在张家口东南七里，当初想必是有一些茶坊的。中国的许多计里的地名，大都是行路人给取的。如三里河、二里沟、三十里铺。七里茶坊大概也是这样。远来的行人到了这里，说：“快到了，还有七里，到茶坊里喝一口再走。”送客上路的，到了这里，客人就说：“已经送出七里了，请回吧！”主客到茶坊又喝了一壶茶，说了些话，出门一揖，就此分别了。七里茶坊一定萦系过很多人的感情。不过现在却并无一家茶坊。我去找了找，连遗址也无人知道。“茶坊”是古语，在《清明上河图》、《东京梦华录》、《水浒传》里还能见到。现在一般都叫“茶馆”了。可见，这地名的由来已久。
I like the place name Qili Tea House very much. This place is seven miles southeast of Zhangjiakou, and there must have been some tea houses at the beginning. Most of the place names in China are given by passers-by. Such as Sanli River, Erligou, and Thirty Lipu. The same is probably true for Qili Tea House. Pedestrians from afar arrived here and said, "It's almost here, there are still seven miles left, go to the tea house for a sip before leaving." The guest sent the guest on the road, and when he arrived here, the guest said, "Seven miles have been sent out, please go back!" The host went to the teahouse and drank another pot of tea, said some words, bowed when he went out, and parted. Qili Tea House must have haunted many people's feelings. But there is no tea house now. I went to look for it, and no one even knew the ruins. "Tea house" is an ancient saying, which can still be seen in "Qingming River Map", "Tokyo Menghualu", and "Water Margin". Now it is generally called "teahouse". It can be seen that this place name has a long history.这是一个中国北方的普通的市镇。有一个供销社，货架上空空的，只有几包火柴、一堆杮饼。两只乌金釉的酒坛子擦得很亮，放在旁边的酒提子却是干的。柜台上放着一盆麦麸子做的大酱。有一个理发店，两张椅子，没有理发的，理发员坐着打瞌睡。有一个邮局。一个新华书店，只有几套毛选和一些小册子。路口矗着一面黑板，写着鼓动冬季积肥的快板，文后署名“文化馆宣”，说明这里还有个文化馆。快板里写道：“天寒地冻百不咋[2]，心里装着全天下。”轰轰烈烈的大跃进已经过去，这种豪言壮语已经失去热力。前两天下过一场小雨，雨点在黑板上抽打出一条一条斜道。路很宽，是土路。两旁的住户人家，也都是土墙土顶（这地方风雪大，房顶多是平的）。连路边的树也都带着黄土的颜色。这个长城以外的土色的冬天的市镇，使人起悲凉的感觉。
This is an ordinary town in northern China. There is a supply and marketing cooperative, and the shelves are empty, with only a few packs of matches and a bunch of cakes. The two black-glazed wine jars are polished brightly, but the wine grapes placed next to them are dry. On the counter is a pot of miso made from wheat bran. There is a barbershop, two chairs, no haircuts, and the barber sits and dozes off. There is a post office. A Xinhua bookstore, with only a few sets of wool selections and some pamphlets. At the intersection, there is a blackboard with the words "Allegro encouraging winter fertilizer", and the text is signed "Cultural Center Propaganda", indicating that there is also a cultural center here. The allegro reads: "It's cold and freezing id_0000, and I have the whole world in my heart." "The vigorous Great Leap Forward has passed, and this rhetoric has lost its heat. There was a light rain two days ago, and the raindrops hit the blackboard with ramps. The road is very wide and dirt. The households on both sides are also mud walls and roofs (the wind and snow here are heavy, and the roofs are mostly flat). Even the trees on the side of the road have the color of loess. This earthy winter town outside the Great Wall makes people feel sad.除了店铺人家，这里有几家车马大店。我就住在一家车马大店里。
In addition to the shops, there are several carriage and horse shops here. I live in a carriage and horse shop.我头一回住这种车马大店。这种店是一看就看出来的，街门都特别宽大，成天敞开着，为的好进出车马。进门是一个很宽大的空院子。院里停着几辆大车，车辕向上，斜立着，像几尊高射炮。靠院墙是一个长长的马槽，几匹马面墙拴在槽头吃料，不停地甩着尾巴。院里照例喂着十多只鸡。因为地上有撒落的黑豆、高粱，草里有稗子，这些母鸡都长得极肥大。有两间房，是住人的。都是大炕。想住单间，可没有。谁又会上车马大店里来住一个单间呢？“碗大炕热”，就成了这类大店招徕顾客的口碑。
This is the first time I have lived in this kind of carriage and horse shop. This kind of shop is obvious at a glance, and the street gates are very wide and open all day long, so that cars and horses can enter and exit. Entering the door is a very wide empty yard. There are several large cars parked in the courtyard, with the yoke upwards and standing diagonally, like several anti-aircraft guns. Against the courtyard wall is a long manger, and several horses are tied to the trough head to eat, constantly wagging their tails. More than ten chickens are fed in the courtyard as usual. Because there are black beans and sorghum scattered on the ground, and barnyard seeds in the grass, these hens are extremely fat. There are two rooms, which are inhabited. Both are big kangs. I want to live in a single room, but I don't. Who would go up to the carriage and horse shop to live in a single room? "Bowl big kang heat" has become the reputation of this kind of big store to attract customers.我是点名住到这种大店里来的呢？
Why did I come to live in such a big store by name?我在一个农业科学研究所下放劳动，已经两年了。有一天生产队长找我，说要派几个人到张家口去掏公共厕所，叫我领着他们去。为什么找到我头上呢？说是以前去了两拨人，都闹了意见回来了。我是个下放干部，在工人中还有一点威信，可以管得住他们，云云。究竟为什么，我一直也不太明白。但是我欣然接受了这个任务。
I have been working in a research institute of agricultural sciences for two years. One day, the production captain came to me and said that he would send a few people to Zhangjiakou to dig out the public toilet and asked me to lead them. Why did you find me? He said that he had gone to two groups of people before, and they all came back after making trouble. I am a delegated cadre, and I still have a little prestige among the workers, and I can control them. I have never understood why. But I gladly accepted the task.我打好行李，挎包里除了洗漱用具，带了一枝大号的3B烟斗，一袋掺了一半榆树叶的烟草，两本四部丛刊本《分类集注杜工部集》，坐上单套马车，就出发了。
I packed my luggage, in addition to the toiletries, I brought a large 3B pipe, a bag of tobacco mixed with half of elm leaves, two four-part series of publications "Classification Collection Notes on Du Gongbu Collection", got into a single set of carriages, and set off.我带去的三个人，一个老刘、一个小王，还有一个老乔，连我四个。
我拿了介绍信去找市公共卫生局的一位“负责同志”。他住在一个粪场子里。一进门，就闻到一股奇特的酸味。我交了介绍信，这位同志问我：
The three people I brought with me, one Lao Liu, one Xiao Wang, and one Lao Qiao, including the four of us. I took a letter of introduction to a "responsible comrade" from the Municipal Public Health Bureau. He lived in a manure dump. As soon as I entered the door, I smelled a peculiar sour smell. I handed over the letter of introduction, and the comrade asked me:“你带来的人，咋样？”
“咋样？”
“他们，啊，啊，啊……”
"How about the people you brought?" "How's it going?" "They, ah, ah, ah......"他“啊”了半天，还是找不到合适的词句。这位负责同志大概不大认识字。他的意思我其实很明白，他是问他们政治上可靠不可靠。他怕万一我带来的人会在公共厕所的粪池子里放一颗定时炸弹。虽然他也知道这种可能性极小，但还是问一问好。可是他词不达意，说不出这种报纸语言。最后还是用一句不很切题的老百姓话说：
He "ah" for a long time, but still couldn't find the right words. This comrade in charge probably didn't know the words. I actually understand what he means, he is asking them whether they are politically reliable. He was afraid that if the people I brought would put a time bomb in the cesspool of the public toilet. Although he knew that this was extremely unlikely, he still asked hello. But he couldn't get the word and couldn't speak this newspaper language. Finally, he said in a common people's sentence that was not very relevant:“他们的人性咋样？”
“人性挺好！”
“那好。”
"What is their humanity?" "Human nature is very good!" "That's good."他很放心了，把介绍信夹到一个卷宗里，给我指定了桥东区的几个公厕。事情办完，他送我出“办公室”，顺便带我参观了一下这座粪场。一边堆着好几垛晒好的粪干，平地上还晒着许多薄饼一样的粪片。
He was very relieved, put the letter of introduction into a dossier, and designated me several public toilets in Qiaodong District. After the matter was done, he sent me out of the "office" and took me on a tour of the manure dump. On the side, there were stacks of dried manure, and there were many pancake-like dung flakes on the flat ground.“这都是好粪，不掺假。”
“粪还掺假？”
“掺！”
“掺什么？土？”
“哪能掺土！”
“掺什么？”
“酱渣子。”
“酱渣子？”
“酱渣子，味道、颜色跟大粪一个样，也是酸的。”
"This is all good dung, not adulterated." "Is the dung still adulterated?" "Mix!" "Mixed with what? Earth? ” "How can you mix soil!" "Mixed with what?" "Sauce scum." "Sauce scum?" "Sauce residue, the taste and color are the same as dung, and it is also sour."“粪是酸的？”
“发了酵。”
我于是猛吸了一口气，品味着货真价实、毫不掺假的粪干的独特的、不能代替的、余韵悠长的酸味。
"Is the dung sour?" "Fermented." I took a deep breath and savored the unique, irreplaceable, and lingering sourness of the genuine, unadulterated dried manure.据老乔告诉我，这位负责同志原来包掏公私粪便，手下用了很多人，是一个小财主。后来成了卫生局的工作人员，成了“公家人”，管理公厕。他现在经营的两个粪场，还是很来钱。这人紫棠脸，阔嘴岔，方下巴，眼睛很亮，虽然没有文化，但是看起来很精干。他虽不大长于说“字儿话”，但是当初在指挥粪工、洽谈生意时，所用语言一定是很清楚畅达，很有力量的。
According to Lao Qiao, this responsible comrade used to take out public and private feces, and he used many people under his command, and he was a small rich man. Later, he became a staff member of the Health Bureau and became a "public family" to manage public toilets. The two manure dumps he runs now are still very profitable. This man has a purple tang face, a wide mouth, a square chin, and bright eyes. Although he is not very good at speaking "words", when he was directing the manure workers and negotiating business, the language he used must have been very clear and powerful.掏公共厕所，实际上不是掏，而是凿。天这么冷，粪池里的粪都冻得实实的，得用冰镩凿开，破成一二尺见方大小不等的冰块，用铁锹起出来，装在单套车上，运到七里茶坊，堆积在街外的空场上。池底总有些没有冻实的稀粪，就刮出来，倒在事先铺好的干土里，像和泥似的和好。一夜工夫，就冻实了。第二天，运走。隔三四天，所里车得空，就派一辆三套大车把积存的粪冰运回所里。
Digging out the public toilet is actually not digging, but chiseling. It was so cold that the dung in the septic tank was frozen, so it had to be chiseled with an ice shovel, broken into ice cubes of one or two square sizes, picked up with a shovel, loaded on a single set of vehicles, transported to the Qili Tea House, and piled up in the empty field outside the street. There is always some thin manure at the bottom of the pond that has not been frozen, so it is scraped out and poured into the dry soil laid in advance, reconciled like mud. After a night of work, it froze. The next day, it was transported away. After three or four days, when the car in the institute was empty, a large truck of three sets was sent to transport the accumulated manure and ice back to the station.看车把式装车，真有个看头。那么沉的、滑滑溜溜的冰块，照样装得整整齐齐，严严实实，拿绊绳一煞，纹丝不动。走个百八十里，不兴掉下一块。这才真叫“把式”！
Looking at the handlebar loading, it's really interesting. Such a heavy, slippery ice cube is still neatly packed, tight, and the tripwire is braked, and the pattern does not move. Walk one hundred and eighty miles, and don't be interested in dropping a piece. This is really called "handlebar"!“叭——”的一鞭，三套大车走了。我心里是高兴的。我们给所里做了一点事了。我不说我思想改造得如何好，对粪便产生了多深的感情，但是我知道这东西很贵。我并没有做多少，只是在地面上挖一点干土，和粪。为了照顾我，不让我下池子凿冰。老乔呢，说好了他是来玩的，只是招招架架，跑跑颠颠。活，主要是老刘和小王干的。老刘是个使冰镩的行家，小王有的是力气。
With a whip of "Bah-", the three sets of carts left. I was happy in my heart. We did a little for the institute. I don't say how well I reformed my mind and how deeply I had feelings for feces, but I knew that this thing was expensive. I didn't do much, just dug a little dry soil and manure on the ground. In order to take care of me, he didn't let me go down to the pond to dig ice. As for Lao Qiao, he said he was here to play, just parrying and running around. The work is mainly done by Lao Liu and Xiao Wang. Lao Liu is an expert in making ice trowels, and Xiao Wang has strength.这活脏一点，倒不累，还挺自由。
This is a little dirty, not tired, and quite free.骡马大店的东房，——正房是掌柜的一家人自己住的。南北相对，各有一铺能睡七八个人的炕，——挤一点，十个人也睡下了。快到春节了，没有别的客人，我们四个人占据了靠北的一张炕，很宽绰。老乔岁数大，睡炕头。小王火力壮，把门靠边。我和老刘睡当间。我那位置很好，靠近电灯，可以看书。两铺炕中间，是一口锅灶。
The east room ,—— main room of the mule and horse shop are occupied by the shopkeeper's family. Facing north and south, there is a kang that can sleep seven or eight people,—— squeeze a little, and ten people also sleep. It's almost the Spring Festival, and there are no other guests, and the four of us occupy a kang in the north, which is very spacious. Lao Qiao is old and sleeps on the kang. Xiao Wang has strong firepower and pulls the door aside. Lao Liu and I sleep in the middle. My location is very good, close to the light, and I can read a book. In the middle of the two kangs, there is a pot stove.天一亮，年轻的掌柜的就推门进来，点火添水，为我们作饭，——推莜面窝窝。我们带来一口袋莜面，顿顿饭吃莜面，而且都是推窝窝。——莜面吃完了，三套大车会又给我们捎来的。小王跳到地下帮掌柜的拉风箱，我们仨就拥着被窝坐着，欣赏他推窝窝的手艺。——这么冷的天，一大清早就让他从内掌柜的热被窝里爬出来为我们作饭，我心里实在有些歉然。不大一会，莜面蒸上了，屋里弥漫着白蒙蒙的蒸汽，很暖和，叫人懒洋洋的。可是热腾腾的窝窝已经端到炕上了。刚出屉的莜面，真香！用蒸莜面的水，洗了脸，我们就蘸着麦麸子做的大酱吃起来。没有油，没有醋，尤其是没有辣椒！可是你得相信我说的是真话：我一辈子很少吃过这么好吃的东西。那是什么时候呀？——一九六〇年！
As soon as dawn broke, the young shopkeeper pushed the door in, lit the fire and added water, cooked for us,—— pushed the noodles. We brought a bag of noodles and ate noodles for every meal, and they were all pushing the noodles. ——After the noodles are finished, the three sets of carts will bring us again. Xiao Wang jumped underground to help the shopkeeper pull the bellows, and the three of us sat with the quilt and admired his skill in pushing the nest. ——On such a cold day, I was really sorry for letting him crawl out of the hot quilt of the inner shopkeeper early in the morning to cook for us. After a while, the noodles were steamed, and the room was filled with white steam, which was very warm and lazy. But the hot nest has been brought to the kang. The noodles that have just come out of the drawer are so fragrant! After washing our faces with the water from steaming the noodles, we dipped them in miso made from wheat bran and ate them. No oil, no vinegar, especially no chili peppers! But you have to believe the truth: I have never eaten such delicious food in my life. When was that? ——1960!我们出工比较晚。天太冷。而且得让过人家上厕所的高潮。八点多了，才赶着单套车到市里去。中午不回来。有时由我掏钱请客，去买一包“高价点心”，找个背风的角落，蹲下来，各人抓了几块嚼一气。老乔、我、小王拿一副老掉了牙的扑克牌接龙、蹩七。老刘在呼呼的风声里居然敢把脑袋缩在老羊皮袄里睡一觉，还挺香！下午接着干。四点钟装车，五点多就回到七里茶坊了。
We went to work late. It's too cold. And I have to let people go to the toilet. After eight o'clock, I drove a single car to the city. I don't come back at noon. Sometimes I pay for a treat, go to buy a pack of "high-priced snacks", find a leeward corner, squat down, and each grab a few pieces and chew it. Lao Qiao, me, and Xiao Wang took a pair of old playing cards to solitaire and lame seven. Lao Liu actually dared to curl his head into the old sheepskin jacket and sleep in the whistling wind, which was quite fragrant! Continue to dry in the afternoon. Load the car at four o'clock and return to Qili Tea House at five o'clock.一进门，掌柜的已经拉动风箱，往灶火里添着块煤，为我们作晚饭了。
As soon as we entered the door, the shopkeeper had already pulled the bellows, added a piece of coal to the stove, and made dinner for us.吃了晚饭，各人干各人的事。老乔看他的《啼笑因缘》。他这本《啼笑因缘》是个古本了， 封面封底都没有了，书角都打了卷，当中还有不少缺页。可是他还是戴着老花镜津津有味地看，而且老看不完。小王写信，或是躺着想心事。老刘盘着腿一声不响地坐着。他这样一声不响地坐着，能够坐半天。在所里我就见过他到生产队请一天假，哪儿也不去，什么也不干，就是坐着。我发现不止一个人有这个习惯。一年到头的劳累，坐一天是很大的享受，也是他们迫切的需要。人，有时需要休息。他们不叫休息，就叫“坐一天”。他们去请假的理由， 也是：“我要坐一天。”中国的农民，对于生活的要求真是太小了。我，就靠在被窝上读杜诗。杜诗读完，就压在枕头底下。这铺炕，炕沿的缝隙跑烟，把我的《杜工部集》的一册的封面薰成了褐黄色，留下一个难忘的、美好的纪念。
After dinner, everyone did their own thing. Lao Qiao read his "Laughing Cause". His "Laughing Cause" is an ancient book, the front and back covers are gone, the corners of the book are rolled, and there are still many missing pages. But he still wears reading glasses and reads them with relish, and he can't finish reading them. Xiao Wang writes letters, or lies down and thinks about his thoughts. Lao Liu sat cross-legged and silent. He sat silently like this and was able to sit for half a day. I have seen him take a day off from work in the production team, not going anywhere, doing nothing, just sitting. I found that more than one person has this habit. Sitting for a day is a great enjoyment and an urgent need for them all year round. People sometimes need to rest. They don't call it rest, they call it "sit for a day." The reason they asked for leave was: "I want to sit for a day." Chinese farmers have too little requirements for life. I just leaned on the bed and read Du's poems. After reading Du's poems, he pressed them under the pillow. This kang, the gaps along the kang ran out of smoke, and the cover of a volume of my "Du Gongbu Collection" was smoked brownish-yellow, leaving an unforgettable and beautiful memory.有时，就有一句没一句，东拉西扯地瞎聊天。吃着杮饼子，喝着蒸锅水，抽着掺了榆树叶子的烟。这烟是农民用包袱包着私卖的，颜色是灰绿的，劲头很不足，抽烟的人叫它“半口烟”。榆树叶子点着了，发出一种焦糊的，然而分明地辨得出是榆树的气味。这种气味使我多少年后还难于忘却。
Sometimes, there is a sentence without a word, chatting nonsense. Eating pancakes, drinking steamer water, and smoking cigarettes mixed with elm leaves. This cigarette is privately sold by farmers in baggage, the color is gray-green, and the energy is very lacking, and the smokers call it "half a puff of smoke". The leaves of the elm tree are lit, emitting a burnt smell, but it is clearly distinguishable that it is the smell of elm. This smell makes it difficult for me to forget many years later.小王和老刘都是“合同工”，是所里和公社订了合同，招来的。他们都是柴沟堡的人。
Xiao Wang and Lao Liu are both "contract workers", who signed a contract with the commune and were recruited. They are all from Chaigou Fort.老刘是个老长工，老光棍。他在张家口专区几个县都打过长工，年轻时年年到坝上割莜麦。因为打了多年长工，庄稼活他样样精通。他有过老婆，跑了，因为他养不活她。从此他就不再找女人， 对女人很有成见，认为女人是个累赘。他就这样背着一卷行李——一块毡子、一床“盖窝”（即被）、一个方顶的枕头，到处漂流。看他捆行李的利索劲儿和背行李的姿势，就知道是一个常年出门在外的老长工。他真也是自由自在，也不置什么衣服，有两个钱全喝了。他不大爱说话，但有时也能说一气，在他高兴的时候，或者不高兴的时候。这二年他常发牢骚，原因之一，是喝不到酒。他老是说：“这是咋搞的？咋搞的？”——“过去，七里茶坊，啥都有：驴肉、猪头肉、炖牛蹄子、茶鸡蛋……，卖一黑夜。酒！现在！咋搞的！咋搞的！”——“‘楼上楼下，电灯电话’！做梦娶媳妇，净慕好事！多会儿？”[3]他年轻时曾给八路军送过信，带过路。“俺们那阵，有什好吃的，都给八路军留着！早知这样，哼！……”他说的话常常出了圈，老乔就喝住他：“你瞎说点啥！没喝酒，你就醉了！你是想‘进去’住几天是怎么的？嘴上没个把门的，亏你活了这么大！”
Lao Liu is an old long-term worker, an old bachelor. He has worked as a long-term worker in several counties in Zhangjiakou District, and when he was young, he went to the dam to cut wheat every year. Because he has been a long-term worker for many years, he is proficient in all crop work. He had a wife and ran away because he couldn't support her. Since then, he has stopped looking for women, and has a prejudice against women, thinking that women are a burden. He just carried a roll of luggage like this—a felt, a bed of "covered nests" (that is, quilts), and a pillow with a square top, drifting around. Looking at his neatness in tying up his luggage and his posture of carrying his luggage, you know that he is an old long-term worker who has been away from home all year round. He was really free, and he didn't buy any clothes, and he drank all the money he had. He doesn't like to talk, but sometimes he can talk in one breath, when he is happy, or when he is unhappy. In the past two years, he often complained, one of the reasons was that he couldn't drink alcohol. He always said, "What's going on? What's going on?" ——"In the past, Qili Tea House had everything: donkey meat, pig's head meat, stewed cow hooves, tea eggs, ......, sold all night. Wine! Right now! What's going on! What's going on!" "——"'Upstairs and downstairs, electric light and telephone'! Dream of marrying a daughter-in-law, pure admiration for good things! How long? "[3] When he was young, he sent letters to the Eighth Route Army and took them on the road. At that time, everything was delicious for the Eighth Route Army! If I had known this, hum! ......" What he said often went out of the circle, and Lao Qiao drank him: "What are you talking about! If you don't drink, you're drunk! What's wrong with you wanting to 'go in' and stay for a few days? There is no one to keep the door on your lips, but you have lived so much!" ”小王也有些不平之气。他是念过高小的。他给自己编了一口顺口溜：“高小毕业生，白费六年工。想去当教员，学生管我叫老兄。想去当会计，珠算又不通！”他现在一个月挣二十九块六毛四，要交社里一部分，刨去吃饭，所剩无几。他才二十五岁，对老刘那样的自由自在的生活并不羡慕。
Xiao Wang was also a little unhappy. He has studied high school. He made up a jingle for himself: "A high school graduate, six years of work are in vain. I want to be a teacher, but the students call me brother. I want to be an accountant, but I can't do abacus!" He now earns twenty-nine yuan and six cents a month, and he has to pay part of the club and go to eat, and there is little left. He is only twenty-five years old and does not envy Lao Liu's free life.老乔，所里多数人称之为乔师傅。这是个走南闯北，见多识广，老于世故的工人。他是怀来人。年轻时在天津学修理汽车。抗日战争时跑到大后方，在资源委员会的运输队当了司机，跑仰光、腊戌。抗战胜利后，他回张家口来开车，经常跑坝上各县。后来岁数大了，五十多了，血压高，不想再跑长途，他和农科所的所长是亲戚，所里新调来一辆拖拉机，他就来开拖拉机，顺便修修农业机械。他工资高，没负担。农科所附近一个小镇上有一家饭馆，他是常客。什么贵菜、新鲜菜，饭馆都给他留着。他血压高，还是爱喝酒。饭馆外面有一棵大槐树，夏天一地浓荫。他到休息日，喝了酒，就睡在树荫里。树荫在东，他睡在东面；树荫在西，他睡到西面，围着大树睡一圈！这是前二年的事了。现在，他也很少喝了。因为那个饭馆的酒提潮湿的时候很少了。他在昆明住过，我也在昆明呆过七八年，因此他老愿意找我聊天，抽着榆叶烟在一起怀旧。他是个技工，掏粪不是他的事，但是他自愿报了名。冬天，没什么事，他要来玩两天。来就来吧。
Lao Qiao, most people in the institute call him Master Qiao. This is a worker who travels south and north, is well-informed, and is old in the world. He is from Huailai. When he was young, he learned to repair cars in Tianjin. During the War of Resistance Against Japanese Aggression, he ran to the rear and worked as a driver in the transport team of the Resources Committee, running in Yangon and Lashio. After the victory of the Anti-Japanese War, he returned to Zhangjiakou to drive, often running to various counties on the dam. He was a relative of the director of the Institute of Agricultural Sciences. He has a high salary and no burden. There is a restaurant in a small town near the Institute of Agricultural Sciences, and he is a regular customer. All expensive and fresh dishes are reserved for him. He has high blood pressure and still loves to drink. There is a big locust tree outside the restaurant, which is full of shade in summer. On his day off, he drank wine and slept in the shade. The shade of the tree is in the east, he sleeps in the east; the shade of the tree is in the west, he sleeps in the west, sleeping around the big tree! This was the first two years. Now, he rarely drinks. Because the wine in that restaurant is rarely damp. He lived in Kunming, and I stayed in Kunming for seven or eight years, so he was always willing to chat with me and smoke elm leaf cigarettes together. He is a mechanic, and it is not his business to dig out dung, but he volunteered to sign up. In winter, there is nothing to do, he wants to come to play for two days. Come on.这天，我们收工特别早，下了大雪，好大的雪啊！
这样的天，凡是爱喝酒的都应该喝两盅，可是上哪儿找酒去呢？
吃了莜面，看了一会书，坐了一会，想了一会心事，照例聊天。
On this day, we finished work very early, and it snowed heavily, what a heavy snow! On such a day, anyone who loves to drink should drink two cups, but where to find wine? I ate noodles, read a book for a while, sat for a while, thought about my thoughts for a while, and chatted as usual.像往常一样，总是老乔开头。因为想喝酒，他就谈起云南的酒。市酒、玫瑰重升、开远的杂果酒、杨林肥酒……
“肥酒？酒还有肥瘦？”老刘问。
As usual, it always starts with Lao Qiao. Because he wanted to drink, he talked about Yunnan's wine. City wine, rose resurrection, Kaiyuan's mixed fruit wine, Yanglin fat wine...... "Fat wine? Is wine still fat and thin?" Lao Liu asked.“蒸酒的时候，上面吊着一大块肥肉，肥油一滴一滴地滴在酒里。这酒是碧绿的。”
“像你们怀来的青梅煮酒？”
“不像。那是烧酒，不是甜酒。”
过了一会，又说：“有点像……”
"When steaming wine, there is a large piece of fat hanging on it, and the fat oil drips into the wine drop by drop. The wine is turquoise. ” "Like the green plums you brought to cook wine?" "Not like. That's soju, not sweet wine. ” After a while, he said, "It's a bit like ......"接着，又谈起昆明的吃食。这老乔的记性真好，他可以从华山南路、正义路，一直到金碧路，数出一家一家大小饭馆，又岔到护国路和甬道街，哪一家有什么名菜，说得非常详细。他说到金钱片腿、牛干巴、锅贴乌鱼、过桥米线……
Then, he talked about food in Kunming. This old Qiao has a really good memory, he can count the restaurants from Huashan South Road, Zhengyi Road, all the way to Jinbi Road, and then branch to Huguo Road and Yongdao Street, which one has a famous dish, and explains in great detail. He talked about money sliced legs, beef dried rice, potsticker mullet, and rice noodles across the bridge......“一碗鸡汤，上面一层油，看起来连热气都没有，可是超过一百度。一盘子鸡片、腰片、肉片，都是生的。往鸡汤里一推，就熟了。”
“那就能熟了？”
“熟了！”
"A bowl of chicken soup, with a layer of oil on top, doesn't even seem to have heat, but it's over 100 degrees. A plate of chicken slices, loin slices, and meat slices are all raw. Push it into the chicken soup and it is cooked. ” "Then it will be cooked?" "It's cooked!"他又谈起汽锅鸡。描写了汽锅是什么样子，锅里不放水，全凭蒸汽把鸡蒸熟了，这鸡怎么嫩，汤怎么鲜……
老刘很注意地听着，可是怎么也想象不出这汽锅是啥样子，这道菜是啥滋味。
He talked about steam pot chicken again. Describing what the steam pot looks like, there is no water in the pot, the chicken is steamed by steam, how tender the chicken is, how fresh is the soup...... Lao Liu listened carefully, but he couldn't imagine what this steam pot looked like or what this dish tasted like.后来他又谈到昆明的菌子：牛肝菌、青头菌、鸡[4]，把鸡夸赞了又夸赞。
“鸡？有咱这儿的口蘑好吃吗？”
Later, he talked about Kunming's mushrooms: porcini mushrooms, green head mushrooms, chicken , and praised and praised the chicken {{id_00002}}. "Chicken ? Are our mushrooms delicious? ”“各是各的味儿。”
…………
老乔话的时候，小王一直似听不听，躺着，张眼看着房顶。忽然，他问我：
“老汪，你一个月挣多少钱？”
"Each has its own taste." When Lao Qiao {{id_0000}} spoke, Xiao Wang seemed to not listen, lying down, looking at the roof with his eyes open. Suddenly, he asked me: "Lao Wang, how much do you earn a month?"我下放的时候，曾经有人劝告过我，最好不要告诉农民自己的工资数目，但是我跟小王认识不止一天了，我不想骗他，便老实说了。小王没有说话，还是张眼躺着。过了好一会，他看着房顶说：
When I was delegated, someone advised me that it was best not to tell the farmers their wages, but I had known Xiao Wang for more than a day, and I didn't want to lie to him, so I told him honestly. Xiao Wang didn't speak, but still lay with his eyes open. After a while, he looked at the roof and said:“你也是一个人，我也是一个人，为什么你就挣那么多？”
他并没有要我回答，这问题也不好回答。
沉默了一会。
老刘说：“怨你爹没供你书[5]。人家老汪是大学毕业！”
"You are also a person, I am also a person, why do you earn so much?" He didn't ask me to answer, and this question was not easy to answer. There was silence for a while. Lao Liu said: "Blame your father for not providing you with a book[5]." Lao Wang graduated from college! ”老乔是个人情练达的人，他捉摸出小王为什么这两天老是发呆，为什么会提出这样的问题，说：
“小王，你收到一封什么信，拿出来我看看！”
前天三套大车来拉粪冰的时候，给小王捎来一封寄到所里的信。
Lao Qiao is a person with a good personality, and he figured out why Xiao Wang was always in a daze these two days, and why he asked such a question, saying: "Xiao Wang, what letter did you receive, take it out and let me take a look!" When three sets of carts came to pull dung ice the day before yesterday, they brought a letter to Xiao Wang and sent it to the office.事情原来是这样的：小王搞了一个对象。这对象搞得稍为有点离奇：小王有个表姐，嫁到邻村李家。李家有个姑娘，和小王年貌相当，也是高小毕业。这表姐就想给小姑子和表弟撮合撮合，写信来让小王寄张照片去。照片寄到了，李家姑娘看了，不满意。恰好李家姑娘的一个同学陈家姑娘来串门，她看了照片，对小王的表姐说：“晓得人家要俺们不要？”表姐跟陈家姑娘要了一张照片，寄给小王，小王满意。后来表姐带了陈家姑娘到农科所来，两人当面相了一相，事情就算定了。农村的婚姻，往往就是这样简单，不像城里人有逛公园、轧马路、看电影、写情书这一套。
It turned out that this was the case: Xiao Wang had an object. This object is a little bizarre: Xiao Wang has a cousin who married into the Li family in the neighboring village. There is a girl in the Li family who is about the same age as Xiao Wang and graduated from high school. The cousin wanted to match her sister-in-law and cousin, and wrote a letter to ask Xiao Wang to send a photo. The photo arrived, and the girl from the Li family looked at it and was not satisfied. It happened that one of the classmates of the Li family, the Chen girl, came to visit, she looked at the photo and said to Xiao Wang's cousin: "Do you know that people want us not to do it?" The cousin asked the Chen girl for a photo and sent it to Xiao Wang, who was satisfied. Later, the cousin brought the Chen girl to the Institute of Agricultural Sciences, and the two met face to face, and the matter was settled. Marriage in the countryside is often so simple, unlike people in the city who go to the park, roll the road, watch movies, and write love letters.陈家姑娘的照片我们都见过，挺好看的，大眼睛，两条大辫子。
小王收到的信是表姐寄来的，催他办事。说人家姑娘一天一天大了，等不起。那意思是说，过了春节，再拖下去，恐怕就要吹。
We have all seen the photos of the Chen family girl, she is very good-looking, with big eyes and two big braids. The letter Xiao Wang received was sent by his cousin, urging him to do something. said that the girl is getting older day by day and can't afford to wait. That means that after the Spring Festival, if you drag it on, I'm afraid you will have to blow.小王发愁的是：春节他还办不成事！柴沟堡一带办喜事倒不尚铺张，但是一床里面三新的盖窝、一套花直贡呢的棉衣、一身灯芯绒裤袄、绒衣绒裤、皮鞋、球鞋、尼龙袜子……总是要有的。陈家姑娘没有额外提什么要求，只希望要一支金星牌钢笔。这条件提得不俗，小王倒因此很喜欢。小王已经作了长期的储备，可是算来算去还差五六十块钱。
What Xiao Wang is worried about is: he can't do anything during the Spring Festival! The wedding event in the Chaigou Fort area is not extravagant, but there are three new covers in a bed, a set of cotton clothes made of direct tribute, a corduroy jacket, velvet jackets, velvet pants, leather shoes, sneakers, and nylon socks...... There is always to have. The Chen family girl didn't ask for anything extra, she just wanted a gold star pen. This condition is good, and Xiao Wang likes it very much. Xiao Wang has made long-term reserves, but there is still fifty or sixty yuan short of it.老乔看完信，说：
“就这个事吗？值得把你愁得直眉瞪眼的！叫老汪给你拿二十，我给你拿二十！”
老刘说：“我给你拿上十块！现在就给！”说着从红布肚兜里就摸出一张十圆的新票子。
After reading the letter, Lao Qiao said: "Is this the matter? It's worth worrying about you! Ask Lao Wang to give you twenty, and I will give you twenty! ” Lao Liu said: "I'll get you ten yuan! Give it now!" As he spoke, he took out a new ticket of ten yuan from the red cloth belly pocket.问题解决了，小王高兴了，活泼起来了。
于是接着瞎聊。
从云南的鸡聊到内蒙古的口蘑。说到口蘑，老刘可是个专家。黑片蘑、白蘑、鸡腿子、青腿子……
The problem was solved, and Xiao Wang was happy and lively. So we continued to chat. From Yunnan's chickens  to mushrooms in Inner Mongolia. When it comes to mushrooms, Lao Liu is an expert. Black mushrooms, white mushrooms, chicken legs, green legs......“过了正蓝旗，捡口蘑都是赶了个驴车去。一天能捡一车！”
不知怎么又说到独石口。老刘说他走过的地方没有比独石口再冷的了，那是个风窝。
"After the blue flag, picking up mushrooms is all about driving a donkey cart. You can pick up a cart a day! ” Somehow it came to Dushikou again. Lao Liu said that there was no place he walked colder than Dushikou, it was a wind nest.“独石口我住过，冷！”老乔说，“那年我们在独石口吃了一洞子羊。”
“一洞子羊？”小王很有兴趣了。
"I lived in Dushikou, cold!" Lao Qiao said, "That year we ate a hole of sheep at Dushikou. ” "A hole of sheep?" Xiao Wang was very interested.“风太大了，公路边有一个涵洞，去避一会风吧。一看，涵洞里白糊糊的，都是羊。不知道是谁的羊，大概是被风赶到这里的，挤在涵洞里，全冻死了。这倒好，这是个天然冷藏库！俺们想吃，就进去拖一只，吃了整整一个冬天！”
"It's too windy, there's a culvert on the side of the road, let's avoid the wind for a while. At first glance, the culvert was all white and full of sheep. I don't know whose sheep were, probably driven here by the wind, crowded into the culvert, and froze to death. That's good, this is a natural cold storage! We want to eat it, so we go in and drag one and eat it all winter! ”老刘说：“肥羊肉炖口蘑，那叫香！四家子的莜面，比白面还白。坝上是个好地方。”
话题转到了坝上。老乔、老刘轮流说，我和小王听着。
Lao Liu said: "Fat mutton stewed mushrooms, that's called fragrant!" The noodles of Sijiazi are whiter than white noodles. The dam is a good place. ” The topic turned to the dam. Lao Qiao and Lao Liu took turns saying, and Xiao Wang and I listened.老乔说：坝上地广人稀，只要收一季莜麦，吃不完。过去山东人到口外打把势卖艺，不收钱。散了场子，拿一个大海碗挨家要莜面，“给！”一给就是一海碗。说坝上没果子。怀来人赶一个小驴车，装一车山里红到坝上，下来时驴车换成了三套大马车，车上满满地装的是莜面。坝上人都豪爽，大方。吃起肉来不是论斤，而是放开肚子吃。他说坝上人看见坝下人吃肉，一小碗，都奇怪：“这吃个什么劲儿呢？”他说，他们要是看见江苏人、广东人炒菜：青菜加两三片肉，更会奇怪了。他还说坝上女人长得很好看。他说，都说水多的地方女人好看，坝上没水，怎么女人都长得白白净净？那么大风沙，皮色都很好。他说他在崇礼县看过两姐妹，长得像傅全香。
Lao Qiao said: The land on the dam is vast and sparsely populated, and as long as you harvest a season of wheat, you can't finish it. In the past, Shandong people went out to show off their skills and did not charge money. After the field, he took a big bowl and went from house to house asking for noodles, "Give!" "One give is a sea bowl. It is said that there is no fruit on the dam. When the people came down, the donkey cart was replaced with three sets of large carriages, and the car was full of noodles. The people on the dam are bold and generous. Eating meat is not about pounds, but about letting go of the stomach to eat. He said that when the people on the dam saw the people under the dam eating meat, a small bowl, they were all strange: "What kind of energy is this?" He said that if they saw Jiangsu and Cantonese people stir-frying: greens and two or three slices of meat, it would be even more strange. He also said that the women on the dam looked very good. He said that women look good in places with a lot of water, but there is no water on the dam, so why do women look white? With such a strong wind and sand, the skin color is very good. He said he had seen two sisters in Chongli County, who looked like Fu Quanxiang.傅全香是谁，老刘、小王可都不知道。
老刘说：坝上地大，风大，雪大，雹子也大。他说有一年沽源下了一场大雪，西门外的雪跟城墙一般高。也是沽源，有一年下了一场雹子，有一个雹子有马大。
Who is Fu Quanxiang, Lao Liu and Xiao Wang don't know. Lao Liu said: The land on the dam is big, the wind is strong, the snow is big, and the hail is also big. He said that one year there was a heavy snowfall in Guyuan, and the snow outside the west gate was as high as the city wall. It was also Guyuan, and one year there was a hailstorm, and there was a hail the size of a horse.“有马大？那掉在头上不砸死了？”小王不相信有这样大的雹子！
"There is a big horse? Then it fell on the head and didn't smash it to death?" "Xiao Wang doesn't believe there is such a big hail!老刘还说，坝上人养鸡，没鸡窝。白天开了门，把鸡放出去。鸡到处吃草籽，到处下蛋。他们也不每天去捡。隔十天半月，挑了一副筐，到处捡蛋，捡满了算。他说坝上的山都是一个一个馒头样的山包。山上没石头。有些山很奇怪，只长一样东西。有一个山叫韭菜山，一山都是韭菜；还有一座芍药山，夏天开了满满一山的芍药花……
Lao Liu also said that people on the dam raise chickens and have no chicken nests. During the day, the door was opened and the chickens were released. Chickens eat grass seeds everywhere and lay eggs everywhere. They don't pick up every day. Every ten and a half days, I picked up a basket and picked up eggs everywhere, and I picked them up. He said that the mountains on the dam are all steamed bun-like mountain bags. There are no stones on the mountain. Some mountains are very strange, only one thing grows. There is a mountain called Leek Mountain, and the whole mountain is full of leeks; there is also a Peony Mountain, which blooms with a mountain full of peony flowers in summer......老乔、老刘把坝上说得那样好，使小王和我都觉得这是个奇妙的、美丽的天地。
芍药山，满山芍药花，这是什么景象？
“咱们到韭菜山上掐两把韭菜，拿盐腌腌，明天蘸莜面吃吧。”小王说。
Lao Qiao and Lao Liu said so well that Xiao Wang and I felt that this was a wonderful and beautiful world. Peony Mountain, full of peony flowers, what is this scene? "Let's go to the leek mountain and pinch two handfuls of leeks, salt them, and dip them in noodles tomorrow." Xiao Wang said.“见你的鬼！这会儿会有韭菜？满山大雪！——把钱收好了！”
聊天虽然有趣，终有意兴阑珊的时候。天已经很黑了，房顶上的雪一定已经堆了四五寸厚了，摊开被窝，我们该睡了。
"See your ghost! Will there be leeks at this time? Snow! - Put the money away! ” Although chatting is fun, there is a time when the interest is waning. It's already dark, the snow on the roof must have been four or five inches thick, spread out the bed, it's time for us to sleep.正在这时，屋门开处，掌柜的领进三个人来。这三个人都反穿着白茬老羊皮袄，齐膝的毡疙瘩。为头是一个大高个儿，五十来岁，长方脸，戴一顶火红的狐皮帽。一个四十来岁，是个矮胖子，脸上有几颗很大的痘疤，戴一顶狗皮帽子。另一个是和小王岁数仿佛的后生，雪白的山羊头的帽子遮齐了眼睛，使他看起来像一个女孩子。——他脸色红润，眼睛太好看了！他们手里都拿着一根六道木二尺多长的短棍。虽然刚才在门外已经拍打了半天，帽子上、身上，还粘着不少雪花。
At this moment, when the door of the house opened, the shopkeeper led three people in. All three of them were wearing white stubble old sheepskin jackets with knee-length felt bumps. The head was a tall man, in his fifties, with a rectangular face and a fiery red fox skin hat. One was in his forties, a short and fat man with several large acne scars on his face and a dogskin hat. The other was a young man who was about the same age as Xiao Wang, and his snow-white goat-headed hat covered his eyes, making him look like a girl. ——His face was rosy, and his eyes were so good-looking! They were all holding a short stick more than two feet long with six wooden sticks. Although he had been beating outside the door for a long time just now, there were still a lot of snowflakes stuck to his hat and body.掌柜的说：“给你们作饭？——带着面了吗？”
“带着哩。”
后生解开老羊皮袄， 取出一口面口袋。——他把面口袋系在腰带上，怪不道他看起来身上鼓鼓囊囊的。
“推窝窝？”
The shopkeeper said, "Cook for you? ——Did you bring noodles?" ” "With it." The young man unbuttoned his old sheepskin jacket and took out a face pocket. ——He tied the face pocket to his belt, no wonder he looked bulging. "Push the nest?"高个儿把面口袋交给掌柜的：
“不吃莜面！一天吃莜面。你给俺们到老乡家换几个粑粑头[6]吃。多时不吃粑粑头，想吃个粑粑头。把火弄得旺旺的，烧点水，俺们喝一口。——没酒？”
The tall man handed the face pocket to the shopkeeper: "Don't eat noodles! Eat noodles a day. You go to our fellow villagers to exchange for a few baba heads [6] to eat. I don't eat baba tou for a long time, I want to eat a baba head. Make the fire vigorous, boil some water, and let's take a sip. ——No wine? ”“没。”
“没咸菜？”
“没。”
“那就甜[7]吃！”
"Nothing." "No pickles?" "Nothing." "Then eat sweet [7]!"老刘小声跟我说：“是坝上来的。坝上人管窝窝头叫粑粑头。是赶牲口的，——赶牛的。你看他们拿的六道木的棍子。”随即，他和这三个坝上人搭起来：
“今天一早从张北动的身？”
Lao Liu whispered to me: "It's from the dam." The people on the dam call the head of the nest called Ba Ba Tou. It is the one who drives the livestock ,—— the cattle. Look at the six wooden sticks they are holding. Immediately, he and the three people on the dam got up {{id_0000}}: "Moved from Zhang Bei early this morning?"“是。——这天气！”
“就你们仨？”
“还有仨。”
“那仨呢？”
“在十多里外，两头牛掉进雪窟窿里了。他们仨在往上弄。俺们把其余的牛先送到食品公司屠宰场，到店里等他们。”
"Yes. - This weather! ” "Just the three of you?" "There are still three." "What about the three?" "More than ten miles away, two cows fell into a snow hole. The three of them are going up. We sent the rest of the cows to the food company's slaughterhouse first and waited for them in the store. ”“这样天气，你们还往下送牛？”
“没法子。快过年了。过年，怎么也得叫坝下人吃上一口肉！”
"In such weather, are you still sending cattle down?" "No way. It's almost the New Year. During the New Year, you have to ask the people under the dam to eat a bite of meat! ”不大一会，掌柜的搞了粑粑头和几个腌蔓菁来。他们把粑粑头放在火里烧，水开了，把烧焦的粑粑头拍打拍打，就吃喝起来。
老乔就把我们的酱碗给他们送过去。
“你们那里今年年景咋样？”
After a while, the shopkeeper brought baba heads and a few pickled turnips. They put the baba head in the fire and boiled it, and when the water boiled, they slapped the burnt baba head and ate and drank. Lao Qiao sent our sauce bowl to them. "How is the New Year's Eve there this year?"“好！”高个儿回答得斩钉截铁。显然这是反话，因为痘疤脸和后生都噗嗤一声笑了。
“不是说去年你们已经过了‘黄河’了？”
“过了！那还不过！”
老乔知道他话里有话，就问：
“也是假的？”
"Okay!" The tall man replied categorically. Obviously this is the opposite, because the acne scar face and the young man both laughed. "Didn't you say that you crossed the 'Yellow River' last year?" "It's over! That's not enough! ” Lao Qiao knew that there was something in his words, so he asked: "It's also fake?"“不假。搞了‘标准田’。”
“啥叫‘标准田’？”
“把几块地里打的粮算在一起。”
“其余的地？”
“不算产量。”
"That's right. Engaged in 'standard fields'. ” "What is a 'standard field'?" "Count the grain in several fields together." "The rest of the land?" "It doesn't count as production."“坝上过‘黄河’？不用什么‘科学家’，我就知道，不行！”老刘用了一个很不文雅的字眼说：“过‘黄河’，过毬的个河吧！”
"Crossing the 'Yellow River' on the dam? I don't need any 'scientists', I know, no!" Lao Liu used a very inelegant word and said: "Cross the 'Yellow River', cross the river!" ”老乔解释：“老刘说的对。坝上的土层只有五寸，下面全是石头。坝上一向是广种薄收，要求单位面积产量，是主观主义。”
Lao Qiao explained: "Lao Liu is right. The soil layer on the dam is only five inches, and the bottom is full of stones. The dam has always been widely planted and harvested, and the yield per unit area is required, which is subjectivism. ”痘疤脸说：“就是！俺们和公社的书记说，这产量是虚的。但人家说：有了虚的，就会带来实的。”
后生说：“还说这是：以虚带实。”
我还从来没有听说过“以虚带实”是这样的解释的。
Acne Scarface said: "That's it! We told the secretary of the commune that this output is virtual. But people say: If there is a virtual one, it will bring real things. ” The young man said: "It is also said that this is: with the virtual with the real." ” I have never heard of such an explanation of "bringing reality with falsehood".高个儿沉重地叹了一口气：“这年月！当官的都说谎！”
老刘接口说：“当官的说谎，老百姓遭殃！”
老乔把烟口袋递给他们：
“牲畜不错？”
The tall man sighed heavily: "These years! Officials lie!" ” Lao Liu said: "If an official lies, the people will suffer!" ” Old Joe handed them the cigarette bag: "Good livestock?"“不错！也经不起胡糟践。头二年，大跃进，大炼钢铁，夜战，把牛牵到地里，杀了，在地头架起了大锅，大块大块地煮烂，大伙儿，吃！那会儿吃了个痛快；这会儿，想去吧！——他们仨咋还不来？去看看。”
"Not bad! I can't stand the bad practice. In the first two years, the Great Leap Forward, the Great Leap Forward, the Great Smelting of Steel, the night battle, the cattle were led into the ground, killed, a cauldron was set up on the ground, and the large pieces were boiled, everyone, eat! I had a good meal at that time; at this moment, I want to go! ——Why haven't they come yet? Go and take a look. ”高个儿说着又把老羊皮袄又系紧了。
痘疤脸说：“我们俩去。你啦就甭去了。”
“去！”
他们和掌柜的借了两根木杠，把我们车上的钢绳也借去了，拉开门，就走了。
The tall man said and fastened the old sheepskin jacket again. Acne scarface said, "Let's go. You just don't go." ” "Go!" They borrowed two wooden poles from the shopkeeper, borrowed the steel rope from our car, opened the door, and left.听见后生在门外大声说：“雪更大了！”
老刘起来解手，把地下三根六道木的棍子归在一起，上了炕，说：
“他们真辛苦！”
过了一会，又自言自语地说：
“咱们也很辛苦。”
I heard the young man shouting outside the door: "The snow is bigger!" ” Lao Liu got up to relieve himself, put the three wooden sticks in the ground together, got on the kang, and said: "They are so hard!" After a while, he said to himself: "We are also very hard."老乔一面钻被窝，一面说：
“中国人都很辛苦啊！”
小王已经睡着了。
“过年，怎么也得叫坝下人吃上一口肉！”我老是想着大个儿的这句话，心里很感动，很久未能入睡。这是一句朴素、美丽的话。
Old Joe said while getting into the bed: "Chinese are very hard!" Xiao Wang was already asleep. "For the New Year, you have to ask the people under the dam to eat a bite of meat!" I always thought about this sentence of the big man, and I was very moved, and I couldn't sleep for a long time. This is a simple and beautiful sentence.半夜，朦朦胧胧地听到几个人轻手轻脚走进来，我睁开眼，问：
“牛弄上来了？”
高个儿轻轻地说：
“弄上来了。把你吵醒了！睡吧！”
他们睡在对面的炕上。
In the middle of the night, I vaguely heard a few people walking in lightly, I opened my eyes and asked: "The cow is here?" The tall man said softly: "Get it up. Wake you up!" Go to sleep! ” They slept on the kang opposite.第二天，我们起得很晚。醒来时，这六个赶牛的坝上人已经走了。
一九八一年五月十一日写成

[1] 本篇原载《收获》1981年第五期；初收《汪曾祺短篇小说选》，北京出版社，1982年2月。
The next day, we got up late. When we woke up, the six people on the dam who were driving cattle had already left. Written on May 11, 1981 [1] This article was originally published in the fifth issue of "Harvest" in 1981; "Selected Short Stories of Wang Zengqi", Beijing Publishing House, February 1982.[2] “百不咋”是无所谓、没关系的意思。
[3] 那时农村宣传“共产主义”，都说是“楼上楼下，电灯电话”。慕，是思量、向往的意思。这是很古的语言，元曲中常见。张家口地区保留了很多宋元古语。
[2] "Bai Bu Wei" means indifferent and okay. [3] At that time, the rural propaganda of "communism" was said to be "upstairs and downstairs, electric lights and telephones". Mu means contemplation and yearning. This is a very ancient language, common in Yuan songs. The Zhangjiakou area retains many ancient Song and Yuan languages.[4] 鸡是一种菌，长在白蚁窝上，味极腴美。
[5] “供书”是拿钱供学生读书的意思。
[6] 他们说“粑粑头”，“粑粑”作入声。
[4] Chicken {{id_0000}} is a fungus that grows on termite nests and tastes very delicious. [5] "Offering books" means taking money for students to study. [6] They say "baba head" and "baba" as the sound.[7] 张家口一带不说“淡”，说“甜”。

鸡毛

鸡毛[1]
西南联大有一个文嫂。
[7] The Zhangjiakou area does not say "light", but "sweet". Chicken feathers{{id_0000}} Southwest Associated University has a literary sister-in-law.她不是西南联大的人。她不属于教职员工，更不是学生。西南联大的各种名册上都没有“文嫂”这个名字。她只是在西南联大里住着，是一个住在联大里的校外的人。然而她又的的确确是“西南联大”的一个组成部分。她住在西南联大的新校舍。
She is not from Southwest Associated University. She is not a faculty member, let alone a student. There is no name "Wen Sao" on the various rosters of Southwest Associated University. She just lives in Southwest Associated University, and she is an off-campus person who lives in the United University. However, she is indeed an integral part of "Southwest Associated University". She lives in the new campus of Southwest Associated University.西南联大有许多部分：新校舍、昆中南院、昆中北院、昆华师范、工学院……其他部分都是借用的原有的房屋，新校舍是新建的，也是联大的主要部分。图书馆、大部分教室、各系的办公室、男生宿舍……都在新校舍。
Southwest Associated University has many parts: the new campus, Kunzhong South Campus, Kunzhong North Campus, Kunhua Normal University, and the School of Engineering...... The other parts are borrowed from the original houses, and the new campus building is newly built and is also the main part of the United University. The library, most of the classrooms, the offices of various departments, and the boys' dormitory...... are all in the new campus.新校舍在昆明大西门外，原是一片荒地。有很多坟，几户零零落落的人家。坟多无主。有的坟主大概已经绝了后，不难处理。有一个很大的坟头，一直还留着，四面环水，如一小岛，春夏之交，开满了野玫瑰，香气袭人，成了一处风景。其余的，都平了。坟前的墓碑，有的相当高大，都搭在几条水沟上，成了小桥。碑上显考显妣的姓名分明可见，全都平躺着了。每天有许多名师大儒、莘莘学子从上面走过。住户呢，由学校出几个钱，都搬迁了。文嫂也是这里的住户。她不搬。说什么也不搬。她说她在这里住惯了。联大的当局是很讲人道主义的，人家不愿搬，不能逼人家走。可是她这两间破破烂烂的草屋，不当不间地戳在那里，实在也不成个样子。新校舍建筑虽然极其简陋，但是是经过土木工程系的名教授设计过的，房屋安排疏密有致，空间利用十分合理。那怎么办呢？主其事者跟文嫂商量，把她两间草房拆了，另外给她盖一间，质料比她原来的要好一些。她同意了，只要求再给她盖一个鸡窝。那好办。
The new school building is outside the west gate of Kunming, which was originally a wasteland. There are many graves and a few scattered families. There are many graves without owners. Some grave owners are probably extinct, so it is not difficult to deal with them. There is a large grave, which has always been preserved, surrounded by water, like a small island, at the turn of spring and summer, full of wild roses, fragrant, and has become a landscape. The rest are flat. The tombstones in front of the graves, some of which are quite tall, are built on several ditches and become small bridges. The names of Xiankao Xianyu are clearly visible on the stele, and they are all lying flat. Many famous teachers and students walk through it every day. As for the residents, the school paid a few dollars and relocated. Wen's sister-in-law is also a resident here. She doesn't move. Say nothing to move. She said she was used to living here. The authorities of the United Nations University are very humanitarian, and people are unwilling to move and cannot force them to leave. But her two dilapidated grass houses are inappropriately poked there, and they really don't look like them. Although the new school building is extremely simple, it was designed by a famous professor from the Department of Civil Engineering, and the housing arrangement is dense and the space is very reasonable. So what should I do? The person in charge discussed with Sister Wen to demolish her two grass houses and build another one for her, which was made of better materials than her original. She agreed, only asking to build her another chicken coop. That's easy to do.她这间小屋，土墙草顶，有两个窗户（没有窗扇，只有一个窗洞，有几根直立着的带皮的树棍），一扇板门。紧靠西面围墙，离二十五号宿舍不远。
Her hut, with earthen walls and a grass roof, had two windows (no sashes, only a window opening, and a few upright barked sticks), and a panel door. It was close to the west wall, not far from dormitory No. 25.宿舍旁边住着这样一户人家，学生们倒也没有人觉得奇怪。学生叫她文嫂。她管这些学生叫“先生”。时间长了，也能分得出张先生、李先生、金先生、朱先生……但是，相处这些年了，竟没有一个先生知道文嫂的身世，只知道她是一个寡妇，有一个女儿。人很老实。虽然没有知识，但是洁身自好，不贪小便宜。除非你给她，她从不伸手要东西。学生丢了牙膏肥皂、小东小西，从来不会怀疑是她顺手牵羊拿了去。学生洗了衬衫，晾在外面，被风吹跑了，她必为捡了，等学生回来时交出：“金先生，你的衣服。”除了下雨，她一天都是在屋外呆着。她的屋门也都是敞开着的。她的所作所为，都在天日之下，人人可以看到。
There is such a family living next to the dormitory, and no one among the students finds it strange. The student called her Wen's sister-in-law. She called these students "Mr. Wen". After a long time, you can also tell Mr. Zhang, Mr. Li, Mr. Jin, and Mr. Zhu...... However, after all these years of getting along, no gentleman knows about Wen's life experience, only that she is a widow and has a daughter. People are very honest. Although she has no knowledge, she is clean and not greedy. She never reaches out for something unless you give it to her. The student lost toothpaste and soap, and she never suspected that she took it by the hand. The student washed his shirt, hung it outside, and was blown away by the wind, she would pick it up and hand it over when the student came back: "Mr. Jin, your clothes." "Except for the rain, she stays outside the house all day. Her doors are also open. Everything she does is under the sun, and everyone can see it.她靠给学生洗衣服、拆被窝维持生活。每天大盆大盆地洗。她在门前的两棵半大榆树之间拴了两根棕绳，拧成了麻花。洗得的衣服，夹紧在两绳之间。风把这些衣服吹得来回摆动，霍霍作响。大太阳的天气，常常看见她坐在草地上（昆明的草多丰茸齐整而极干净）做被窝，一针一针，专心致意。衣服被窝洗好做得了，为了避免嫌疑，她从不送到学生宿舍里去，只是叫女儿隔着窗户喊：“张先生，来取衣服。”——“李先生，取被窝。”
She makes a living by washing clothes for students and dismantling quilts. Wash in large basins every day. She tied two brown ropes between two and a half elm trees in front of the door and twisted them into twists. The washed clothes are clamped between the two ropes. The wind blows these clothes back and forth, making a whirlwind. In the sunny weather, she is often seen sitting on the grass (the grass in Kunming is lush and neat and extremely clean) to make a quilt, stitch by stitch, concentrating. In order to avoid suspicion, she never sent it to the student dormitory, but asked her daughter to shout through the window: "Mr. Zhang, come and get the clothes." ——"Mr. Li, get the quilt." ”她的女儿能帮上忙了，能到井边去提水，踮着脚往绳子上晾衣服，在床上把衣服抹煞平整了，叠起来。
Her daughter can help, she can go to the well to carry water, tiptoe to dry clothes on the rope, and wipe the clothes flat and fold them on the bed.文嫂养了二十来只鸡（也许她原是靠喂鸡过日子的）。联大到处是青草，草里有昆虫蚱蜢种种活食，这些鸡都长得极肥大，很肯下蛋。隔多半个月，文嫂就挎了半篮鸡蛋，领着女儿，上市去卖。蛋大，也红润好看，卖得很快。回来时，带了盐巴、辣子，有时还用马兰草提着一块够一个猫吃的肉。
Sister-in-law Wen raised more than 20 chickens (maybe she originally lived by feeding chickens). The United University is full of grass, and there are insects and grasshoppers in the grass, and these chickens are extremely fat and willing to lay eggs. After more than half a month, Sister-in-law Wen carried half a basket of eggs, took her daughter, and went to the market to sell. The eggs are big, rosy and good-looking, and sell quickly. When I came back, I brought salt, chili peppers, and sometimes used maran grass to carry a piece of meat enough for a cat.每天一早，文嫂打开鸡窝门，这些鸡就急急忙忙，迫不及待地奔出来，散到草丛中去，不停地啄食。有时又抬起头来，把一个小脑袋很有节奏地转来转去，顾盼自若，——鸡转头不是一下子转过来，都是一顿一顿地那么转动。到觉得肚子里那个蛋快要坠下时，就赶紧跑回来，红着脸把一个蛋下在鸡窝里。随即得意非凡地高唱起来：“郭格答！郭格答！”文嫂或她的女儿伸手到鸡窝里取出一颗热烘烘的蛋，顺手赏了母鸡一块土坷垃：“去去去！先生要用功，莫吵！”这鸡婆子就只好咕咕地叫着，很不平地走到丛草里去了。到了傍晚，文嫂抓了一把碎米，一面撒着，一面“啯啯，啯啯”叫着，这些母鸡就都即即足足地回来了。它们把碎米啄尽，就鱼贯进入鸡窝。进窝时还故意把脑袋低一低，把尾巴向下耷拉一下，以示雍容文雅，很有鸡教。鸡窝门有一道小坎，这些鸡还都一定两脚并齐，站在门坎上，然后向前一跳。这种礼节，其实大可不必。进窝以后，咕咕囔囔一会，就寂然了。于是夜色就降临抗战时期最高学府之一，国立西南联合大学的新校舍了。阿门。
Every morning, when Sister-in-law Wen opened the door of the chicken coop, these chickens hurriedly ran out, scattered into the grass, and kept pecking. Sometimes he raised his head and turned his little head around rhythmically, looking at it freely,—— the chickens did not turn their heads all at once, but turned them one by one. When he felt that the egg in his stomach was about to fall, he hurriedly ran back and put an egg in the chicken coop with a red face. Then he sang proudly: "Guo Ge answered! Guo Ge answered!" Sister-in-law Wen or her daughter reached out to the chicken coop and took out a hot egg, and rewarded the hen with a piece of dirt: "Go, go! Sir, you have to work hard, don't make noise!" The chicken woman had no choice but to coo and walk into the grass very unevenly. In the evening, Sister-in-law Wen grabbed a handful of broken rice, sprinkled it, and screamed "chirp, chirp", and these hens came back immediately. They pecked all the broken rice and entered the chicken coop. When entering the nest, he deliberately lowered his head and drooped his tail down to show grace and elegance, and he was very educated. There is a small hurdle in the door of the chicken nest, and these chickens must stand on the threshold with their feet together, and then jump forward. This kind of etiquette is actually unnecessary. After entering the nest, it muttered for a while, and then it was silent. So night fell on the new campus of the National Southwest United University, one of the highest institutions during the Anti-Japanese War. Amen.文嫂虽然生活在大学的环境里，但是大学是什么，这有什么用，为什么要办它，这些，她可一点都不知道。只知道有许多“先生”，还有许多小姐，或按昆明当时的说法，有很多“摩登”，来来去去；或在一个洋铁皮房顶的屋子（她知道那叫“教室”）里，坐在木椅子上，呆呆地听一个“老倌”讲话。这些“老倌”讲话的神气有点像耶稣堂卖福音书的教士（她见过这种教士）。但是她隐隐约约地知道，先生们将来都是要做大事，赚大钱的。
Although Wen Sister-in-law lived in a university environment, she didn't know anything about what a university was, what was its use, and why it was run. She only knew that there were many "gentlemen" and many young ladies, or according to Kunming at that time, there were many "moderns", coming and going; or in a room with a tin roof (she knew it was called a "classroom"), sitting on a wooden chair and listening blankly to an "old man" speaking. The demeanor of these "old men" was a bit like the priests selling the Gospels in Jesus Church (she had seen such a priest). But she vaguely knew that gentlemen would do great things and make a lot of money in the future.先生们现在可没有赚大钱，做大事，而且越来越穷，找文嫂洗衣服、做被子的越来越少了。大部分先生非到万不得已，不拆被子。一年也不定拆洗一回。有的先生虽然看起来衣冠齐楚，西服皮鞋，但是皮鞋底下有洞。有一位先生还为此制了一则谜语：“天不知地知，你不知我知。”他们的袜子没有后跟，穿的时候就把袜尖往前拽拽，窝在脚心里，这样后跟的破洞就露不出来了。他们的衬衫穿脏了，脱下来换一件。过两天新换的又脏了，看看还是原先脱下的一件干净些，于是又换回来。有时要去参加Party，没有一件洁白的衬衫，灵机一动：有了！把衬衫反过来穿！打一条领带，把钮扣遮住，这样就看不出正反了。就这样，还很优美地跳着《蓝色的多瑙河》。有一些，就完全不修边幅，衣衫褴褛，囚首垢面，跟一个叫花子差不多了。他们的裤子破了，就用一根麻绳把破处系紧。文嫂看到这些先生，常常跟女儿说：“可怜！”
Gentlemen are not making a lot of money now, doing big things, and they are getting poorer and poorer, and there are fewer and fewer people looking for Sister-in-law Wen to wash clothes and make quilts. Most gentlemen do not remove the quilt as a last resort. It may not be dismantled and washed once a year. Although some gentlemen look well-dressed and wearing leather shoes, there are holes under the soles of their leather shoes. One gentleman also made a riddle for this: "God doesn't know, you don't know I know." Their socks have no heels, and when they wear them, they pull the tips of the socks forward and nest them in the soles of their feet, so that the holes in the heels cannot be exposed. Their shirts are dirty, so take them off and change them to another one. After two days, the new one was dirty again, and I saw that the one I had taken off was cleaner, so I changed it back. Sometimes when I go to a party, I don't have a white shirt, and I have an idea: Yes! Wear the shirt in reverse! Tie a tie and cover the buttons, so that you can't see the right or wrong. In this way, they also danced "Blue Danube" very beautifully. Some of them were completely sloppy, ragged, and dirty, almost like a flower boy. When their pants were torn, they used a hemp rope to tie the torn place. When Wen's sister-in-law saw these gentlemen, she often said to her daughter: "Poor thing! ”来找文嫂洗衣的少了，她还有鸡，而且她的女儿已经大了。
There are fewer laundry people who come to Sister-in-law, she still has chickens, and her daughter is already older.女儿经人介绍，嫁了一个司机。这司机是下江人，除了他学着说云南话：“为哪样”、“咋个整”，其余的话，她听不懂。但她觉得这女婿人很好。他来看过老丈母，穿了麂皮夹克，大皮鞋，头上抹了发蜡。女儿按月给妈送钱。女婿跑仰光、腊戌，也跑贵州、重庆。每趟回来，还给文嫂带点曲靖韭菜花，贵州盐酸菜，甚至宣威火腿。有一次还带了一盒遵义板桥的化风丹，她不知道这有什么用。他还带来一些奇形怪状的果子。有一种果子，香得她的头都疼。下江人女婿答应养她一辈子。
The daughter was introduced and married a driver. The driver was from Xiajiang, and she couldn't understand the rest of the words except that he learned to speak Yunnan dialect: "For what?" and "What is the whole thing". But she thought the son-in-law was very good. He came to see his mother-in-law, wearing a suede jacket, big leather shoes, and hair wax on his head. The daughter sends money to her mother every month. The son-in-law ran to Yangon, Lashio, and also to Guizhou and Chongqing. Every time he came back, he also brought some Qujing leek flowers, Guizhou hydrochloric sauerkraut, and even Xuanwei ham to Wen's sister-in-law. Once she also brought a box of Huafeng Dan from Banqiao in Zunyi, she didn't know what it was for. He also brought some bizarre fruits. There was a fruit that was so fragrant that her head hurt. The son-in-law of the Xiajiang people promised to support her for the rest of her life.文嫂胖了。
Sister-in-law Wen is fat.男生宿舍全都一样，是一个窄长的大屋子，土墼墙，房顶铺着木板，木板都没有刨过，留着锯齿的痕迹，上盖稻草；两面的墙上开着一列像文嫂的窗洞一样的窗洞。每间宿舍里摆着二十张双层木床。这些床很笨重结实，一个大学生可以在上面放放心心地睡四年，一直睡到毕业，无须修理。床本来都是规规矩矩地靠墙排列着的，一边十张。可是这些大学生需要自己的单独的环境，于是把它们重新调动了一下，有的两张床摆成一个曲尺形，有的三张床摆成一个凹字形，就成了一个一个小天地。按规定，每一间住四十人，实际都住不满。有人占了一个铺位，或由别人替他占了一个铺位而根本不来住；也有不是铺主却长期睡在这张铺上的；有根本不是联大学生，却在新校舍住了好几年的。这些曲尺形或凹字形的单元里，大都只有两三个人。个别的，只有一个。一间宿舍住的学生，各系的都有。有一些互相熟悉，白天一同进出，晚上联床夜话；也有些老死不相往来，连贵姓都不打听。二十五号南头一张双层床上住着一个历史系学生，一个中文系学生，一个上铺，一个下铺，两个人合住了一年，彼此连面都没有见过：因为这二位的作息时间完全不同。中文系学生是个夜猫子，每晚在系图书馆夜读，天亮才回来；而历史系学生却是个早起早睡的正常的人。因此，上铺的铺主睡觉时，下铺是空的；下铺在酣睡时，上铺没有人。
The boys' dormitories are all the same, a large narrow room, with earthen walls, wooden planks on the roof, which have not been planed, leaving jagged marks, and covered with straw; on both sides of the walls are a row of window openings like Wen's window holes. There are twenty double-decker wooden beds in each dormitory. These beds are bulky and sturdy, and a college student can sleep comfortably on them for four years until graduation without repair. The beds were originally arranged neatly against the wall, ten on each side. However, these college students needed their own separate environment, so they were redeployed, some two beds were arranged in a curved ruler, and some three beds were arranged in a concave shape, becoming a small world. According to the regulations, each room has forty people, and the actual living is not satisfied. some people occupy a bunk, or someone else occupies a bunk for him and does not come to live at all; there are also those who are not shop owners but sleep on this bunk for a long time; there are those who are not students at all, but have lived in the new school building for several years. In these curved ruler or concave units, most of them have only two or three people. Individual, there is only one. Students living in a dormitory are from all departments. Some are familiar with each other, going in and out together during the day, and talking at night in the same bed; there are also some old and dead who do not even inquire about your surname. On a bunk bed at the south end of No. 25 lived a history student and a Chinese student, one on the upper bunk and the other on the lower bunk. The Chinese student is a night owl, reading at night in the department library every night and coming back at dawn; while the history student is a normal person who gets up early and goes to bed early. Therefore, when the owner of the upper bunk sleeps, the lower bunk is empty; when the lower bunk is asleep, there is no one in the upper bunk.联大的人都有点怪。“正常”在联大不是一个褒词。一个人很正常，就会被其余的怪人认为“很怪”。即以二十五号宿舍而论，如果把这些先生的事情写下来，将会是一部很长的小说。如今且说一个人。
The people at the United Nations University are a little strange. "Normal" is not a compliment in the United Nations. If a person is normal, he will be considered "very strange" by the rest of the weirdos. That is, in the case of dormitory No. 25, if you write about these gentlemen, it will be a long novel. Now let's talk about one person.此人姓金，名昌焕，是经济系的。他独占北边的一个凹字形的单元。他不欢迎别人来住，别人也不想和他搭伙。他不知从哪里弄来一些木板，把双层床的一边都钉了木板，就成了一间屋中之屋，成了他的一统天下。凹字形的当中，摞着几个装肥皂的木箱——昆明这种木箱很多，到处有得卖，这就是他的书桌。他是相当正常的。一二年级时，按时听讲，从不缺课。联大的学生大都很狂，讥弹时事，品藻人物，语带酸咸，辞锋很锐。金先生全不这样。他不发狂论。事实上他很少跟人说话。其特异处有以下几点：一是他所有的东西都挂着，二是从不买纸，三是每天吃一块肉。他在他的床上拉了几根铁丝，什么都挂在这些铁丝上，领带、袜子、针线包、墨水瓶……他每天就睡在这些丁丁当当的东西的下面。学生离不开纸。怎么穷的学生，也得买一点纸。联大的学生时兴用一种布制的夹子，里面夹着一叠白片艳纸，用来记笔记，做习题。金先生从不花这个钱。为什么要花钱买呢？纸有的是！联大大门两侧墙上贴了许多壁报，学术演讲的通告，寻找失物、出让衣鞋的启事，形形色色，琳琅满目。这些启事、告白总不是顶天立地满满写着字，总有一些空白的地方。金先生每天晚上就带了一把剪刀，把这些空白的地方剪下来。他还把这些纸片，按大小纸质、颜色，分门别类，裁剪整齐，留作不同用处。他大概是相当笨的，因此每晚都开夜车。开夜车伤神，需要补一补。他按期买了猪肉，切成大小相等的方块，借了文嫂的鼎罐（他借用了鼎罐，都是洗都不洗就还给人家了），在学校茶水炉上炖熟了，密封在一个有盖的瓷坛里。每夜用完了功，就打开坛盖，用一只一头削尖了的筷子，瞅准了，扎出一块，闭目而食之。然后，躺在丁丁当当的什物之下，酣然睡去。
This person's surname is Jin, his name is Changhuan, and he is from the Department of Economics. He monopolizes a concave zigzag unit in the north. He doesn't welcome others to live in, and others don't want to partner with him. He got some wooden boards from somewhere and nailed them to one side of the bunk bed, and it became a house within a house and his dominance over the world. In the concave shape, there are several wooden boxes with soap - there are many wooden boxes like this in Kunming, which are sold everywhere, and this is his desk. He is quite normal. In the first and second grades, he listened to lectures on time and never missed class. Most of the students at the United Nations University are very crazy, ridiculing current affairs, appreciating characters, and speaking with sour and salty words. Mr. Jin is not like this at all. He doesn't talk crazy. In fact, he rarely talks to people. Its peculiarities are as follows: first, he hangs all his things, second, he never buys paper, and third, he eats a piece of meat every day. He pulled a few wires on his bed, and everything hung on them, ties, socks, sewing kits, inkwells...... He slept under these tinky things every day. Students can't do without paper. No matter how poor students are, they have to buy a little paper. Students of the United Nations University often use a kind of cloth clip with a stack of white paper in it to take notes and do exercises. Mr. Jin never spends this money. Why spend money to buy it? There is paper! There are many posters on the walls on both sides of the entrance of the United Nations, notices of academic speeches, notices of finding lost items and giving away clothes and shoes, all kinds of colorful and dazzling. These notices and confessions are not always full of writing, and there are always some blank spots. Mr. Jin brought a pair of scissors every night to cut out these blank places. He also divided these pieces of paper into categories according to size and color, cut them neatly, and left them for different uses. He was probably quite stupid, so he drove the night train every night. Driving at night is sad and needs to be patched. He bought pork on schedule, cut it into cubes of equal size, borrowed Wen's cauldron (he borrowed the cauldron, and returned it to others without washing it), stewed it on the school tea stove, and sealed it in a covered porcelain jar. Every night, when I finished my work, I opened the lid of the altar, used a sharpened chopstick, looked at it, pricked a piece, closed my eyes and ate it. Then, lie down under the things and fall asleep.这样过了三年。到了四年级，他在聚兴诚银行里兼了职，当会计。其时他已经学了簿记、普通会计、成本会计、银行会计、统计……这些学问当一个银行职员，已是足用的了。至于经济思想史、经济地理……这些空空洞洞的课程，他觉得没有什么用处，只要能混上学分就行，不必苦苦攻读，可以缺课。他上午还在学校听课，下午上班。晚上仍是开夜车，搜罗纸片，吃肉。自从当了会计，他添了两样毛病。一是每天提了一把黑布阳伞进出，无论冬夏，天天如此。二是穿两件衬衫，打两条领带。穿好了衬衫，打好领带；又加一件衬衫，再打一条领带。这是干什么呢？若说是显示他有不止一件衬衫、一条领带吧，里面的衬衫和领带别人又看不见；再说这鼓鼓囊囊的，舒服吗？真是令人百思不得其解。因此，同屋的那位中文系夜游神送给他一个外号，这外号很长：“二十年目睹之怪现状”。
Three years passed like this. In the fourth grade, he worked part-time as an accountant at Juxingcheng Bank. At that time, he had already learned bookkeeping, general accounting, cost accounting, bank accounting, and statistics...... These knowledge are enough for a bank clerk. As for the history of economic thought and economic geography...... He felt that these empty courses were useless, as long as he could mix in credits, he didn't have to study hard, and he could miss classes. He still attended classes at school in the morning and went to work in the afternoon. At night, he still drove night trains, collecting paper and eating meat. Since becoming an accountant, he has added two problems. First, he carries a black cloth parasol in and out every day, whether in winter or summer, every day. The second is to wear two shirts and two ties. put on the shirt and tie it; add another shirt and tie another tie. What is this for? If it shows that he has more than one shirt and a tie, the shirt and tie inside are invisible to others; besides, is this bulging comfortable? It's really puzzling. Therefore, the Chinese night owl in the same room gave him a nickname, which was very long: "The strange status quo I have witnessed in twenty years".金先生很快就要毕业了。毕业以前，他想到要做两件事。一件是加入国民党，这已经着手办了；一件是追求一个女同学，这可难。他在学校里进进出出，一向像马二先生逛西湖：他也不看女人，女人也不看他。
Mr. Jin is about to graduate. Before graduation, he thought of doing two things. One is to join the Kuomintang, which has already begun; the other is to pursue a female classmate, which is difficult. He went in and out of the school, always visiting West Lake like Mr. Ma Er: he didn't look at women, and women didn't look at him.谁知天缘凑巧，金昌焕先生竟有了一段风流韵事。一天，他正提着阳伞到聚兴诚去上班，前面走着两个女同学，她们交头接耳地谈着话。一个告诉另一个：这人穿两件衬衫，打两条领带，而且介绍他有一个很长的外号：“二十年目睹之怪现状”。听话的那个不禁回头看了金昌焕一眼，嫣然一笑。金昌焕误会了：谁知一段姻缘却落在这里。当晚，他给这女同学写了一封情书。开头写道：“××女士芳鉴，径启者……”接着说了很多仰慕的话，最后直截了当地提出：“倘蒙慧眼垂青，允订白首之约，不胜荣幸之至。随函附赠金戒指一枚，务祈笑纳为荷。”在“金戒指”三字的旁边还加了一个括弧，括弧里注明：“重一钱五”。这封情书把金先生累得够呛，到他套起钢笔，吃下一块肉时，文嫂的鸡都已经即即足足地发出声音了。
Unexpectedly, by coincidence, Mr. Kim Chang-hwan actually had an affair. One day, he was carrying a parasol to Juxingcheng to work, and there were two female classmates walking in front of him, and they were talking to each other. One told the other: This man wore two shirts and two ties, and introduced him with a long nickname: "The strange status quo that I have witnessed in twenty years". The obedient one couldn't help but look back at Kim Chang-hwan and smiled sweetly. Kim Chang-hwan misunderstood: Who knew that a marriage would fall here. That night, he wrote a love letter to this female classmate. At the beginning, it was written: "×× Ms. Fangjian, the one who opened the path ......" Then said a lot of admiration, and finally put forward bluntly: "If you are favored by the discerning eye, you will be honored to make a promise with a white head." A gold ring is attached to the letter, and you must smile as a lot. A parenthesis was added next to the word "gold ring", which read: "It weighs one pen and five coins". This love letter made Mr. Jin so tired that by the time he put up the pen and ate a piece of meat, Wen's sister-in-law's chicken was already making a sound.这封情书是当面递交的。
这位女同学很对得起金昌焕。她把这封信公布在校长办公室外面的布告栏里，把这枚金戒指也用一枚大头针钉在布告栏的墨绿色的绒布上。于是金昌焕一下子出了大名了。
The love letter was submitted in person. This female classmate is very worthy of Kim Chang-hwan. She posted the letter on the bulletin board outside the principal's office, and nailed the gold ring to the dark green flannel of the bulletin board with a pin. So Kim Chang-hwan suddenly became famous.金昌焕倒不在乎。他当着很多人，把信和戒指都取下来，收回了。
你们爱谈论，谈论去吧！爱当笑话说，说去吧！于金昌焕何有哉！金昌焕已经在重庆找好了事，过两天就要离开西南联大，上任去了。
Kim Chang-hwan didn't care. In front of many people, he took off the letter and the ring and took it back. You love to talk, talk about going! Love to say it as a joke, let's go! What does it have to do with Jin Changhuan! Jin Changhuan has already found something in Chongqing, and he will leave Southwest Associated University in two days and take office.文嫂丢了三只鸡，一只笋壳鸡，一只黑母鸡，一只芦花鸡。这三只鸡不是一次丢的，而是隔一个多星期丢一只。不知怎么丢的。早上开鸡窝放鸡时还在，晚上回窝时就少了。文嫂到处找，也找不着。她又不能像王婆骂鸡那样坐在门口骂——她知道这种泼辣作法在一个大学里很不合适，只是一个人叨叨：“我（的）鸡呢？我鸡呢？……”
Sister-in-law Wen lost three chickens, a bamboo shell chicken, a black hen, and a reed chicken. These three chickens were not lost at once, but one every other week. I don't know how I lost it. When I opened the chicken coop in the morning, the chickens were still there, but when I returned to the nest at night, there were few. Sister-in-law Wen searched everywhere but couldn't find it. She couldn't sit at the door and scold like Wang Po scolded the chicken - she knew that this kind of spicy practice was very inappropriate in a university, but she just nagged alone: "Where is my (the) chicken? Where is my  chicken? ……”文嫂的女儿回来了。文嫂吓了一跳：女儿戴得一头重孝。她明白出了大事了。她的女婿从重庆回来，车过贵州的十八盘，翻到山沟里了。女婿的同事带了信来。母女俩顾不上抱头痛哭，女儿还得赶紧搭便车到十八盘去收尸。
Sister-in-law Wen's daughter is back. Sister-in-law Wen was startled: her daughter wore a heavy filial piety. She understood that something big had happened. Her son-in-law came back from Chongqing, drove through Eighteen Plates in Guizhou, and overturned into a ravine. The son-in-law's colleague brought a letter. The mother and daughter couldn't care about hugging their heads and crying, and their daughter had to hurry up and hitchhike to Shibapan to collect the body.女儿走了，文嫂失魂落魄，有点傻了。但是她还得活下去，还得过日子，还得吃饭，还得每天把鸡放出去，关鸡窝。还得洗衣服，做被子。有很多先生都毕业了，要离开昆明，临走总得干净干净，来找文嫂洗衣服、拆被子的多了。
When her daughter left, Sister-in-law Wen was devastated and a little stupid. But she still has to live, she has to live, she has to eat, and she has to let the chickens out and close the chicken coop every day. I also have to wash clothes and make quilts. There are many gentlemen who have graduated and want to leave Kunming, and they have to be clean before leaving, and there are many people who come to Sister-in-law Wen to wash clothes and dismantle quilts.这几天文嫂常上先生们的宿舍里去。有的先生要走了，行李收拾好了，总还有一些带不了的破旧衣物，一件鱼网似的毛衣，一个压扁了的脸盆，几只配不成对的皮鞋——那有洞的鞋底至少掌鞋还有用……这些先生就把文嫂叫了来，随她自己去挑拣。挑完了，文嫂必让先生看一看，然后就替他们把曲尺形或凹字形的单元打扫一下。
These days, Sister-in-law Wen often goes to the gentlemen's dormitory. Some gentlemen are leaving, their luggage is packed, and there are always some worn-out clothes that they can't bring, a sweater like a fishnet, a flattened basin, and a few mismatched leather shoes - the soles with holes are at least useful...... These gentlemen called Sister-in-law Wen over and let her pick them herself. After picking, Sister-in-law Wen would let her take a look, and then clean the ruler-shaped or concave glyph units for them.因为洗衣服、拣破烂，文嫂还能岔乎岔乎，心里不至太乱。不过她明显地瘦了。
金昌焕不声不响地走了。二十五号的朱先生叫文嫂也来看看，这位“怪现状”是不是也留下一些还值得一拣的东西。
Because of washing clothes and picking rags, Sister-in-law Wen can still be confused, and her heart is not too chaotic. But she has lost weight obviously. Jin Changhuan left silently. Mr. Zhu on the 25th asked Sister Wen to also come and see if this "strange status quo" also left something worth picking up.什么都没有。金先生把一根布丝都带走了。他的凹形王国里空空如也，只留下一个跟文嫂借用的鼎罐。文嫂毫无所得，然而她也照样替金先生打扫了一下。她的笤帚扫到床下，失声惊叫了起来：床底下有三堆鸡毛，一堆笋壳色的，一堆黑的，一堆芦花的！
Nothing. Mr. Jin took away a piece of cloth silk. His concave kingdom was empty, leaving only a cauldron that he borrowed from Sister-in-law. Sister-in-law Wen gained nothing, but she also cleaned Mr. Jin as well. Her broom swept under the bed and screamed: There were three piles of chicken feathers under the bed, a pile of bamboo shoots, a pile of black, and a bunch of reeds!文嫂把三堆鸡毛抱出来，一屁股坐在地下，大哭起来。
Sister-in-law Wen took out three piles of chicken feathers, sat on the ground, and cried.“啊呀天呐，这是我鸡呀！我笋壳鸡呀！我黑母鸡，我芦花鸡呀！……”
"Oh my God, this is my  chicken! My  bamboo shell chicken! My  black hen, my  reed chicken! ……”“我寡妇失业几十年哪，你咋个要偷我鸡呀！……”
“我风里来雨里去呀，我的命多苦，多艰难呀，你咋个要偷我鸡呀！……”
"My widow has been unemployed for decades, why are you stealing my  chicken! ……” "I'm in the wind and rain, how hard my life is, how difficult it is, why do you want to steal my  chicken! ……”“你先生是要做大事，赚大钱的呀，你咋个要偷我鸡呀！……”
"Your husband is going to do big things and make a lot of money, why are you stealing my  chicken! ……”“我女婿死在贵州十八盘，连尸都还没有收呀，你咋个要偷我鸡呀！……”
"My  son-in-law died in Guizhou Shibapan, and even the body has not been collected, why are you stealing my  chicken! ……”她哭得很伤心，很悲痛。好像要把一辈子所受的委屈、不幸、孤单和无告全都哭了出来。
这金昌焕真是缺德，偷了文嫂的鸡，还借了文嫂的鼎罐来炖了。至于他怎么偷的鸡，怎样宰了，怎样退的鸡毛，谁都无从想象。
She cried very sadly and sadly. It was as if she wanted to cry out all the grievances, misfortunes, loneliness and helplessness she had suffered all her life. This Jin Changhuan was really immoral, he stole Sister-in-law's chicken, and borrowed Sister-in-law's cauldron to stew. As for how he stole the chicken, how he slaughtered it, and how he returned the chicken feathers, no one could imagine.林子大了，什么鸟都有。
一九八一年六月六日

[1] 本篇原载《文汇月刊》1981年第九期；初收《晚饭花集》，人民文学出版社，1985年3月。

故里杂记

故里杂记[1]
李三
The forest is big, and there are all kinds of birds. June 6, 1981 [1] This article was originally published in the ninth issue of "Wenhui Monthly" in 1981; "Dinner Flower Collection", People's Literature Publishing House, March 1985. Hometown Miscellaneous Notes {{id_0000}} Li San李三是地保，又是更夫。他住在土地祠。土地祠每坊都有一个。“坊”后来改称为保了。只有死了人，和尚放焰口，写疏文，写明死者籍贯，还沿用旧称：“南赡部洲中华民国某省某县某坊信士某某……”云云。疏文是写给阴间的公事。大概阴间还没有改过来。土地是阴间的保长。其职权范围与阳间的保长相等，不能越界理事，故称“当坊土地”。李三所管的，也只是这一坊之事。出了本坊，哪怕只差一步，不论出了什么事，死人失火，他都不问。一个坊或一个保的疆界，保长清楚，李三也清楚。
Li San is the land protector and the watchman. He lives in the land temple. There is one in each square of the land temple. "Fang" was later renamed Bao. Only the dead man, the monk set off the flames, wrote a memorial, wrote the place of origin of the deceased, and still used the old name: "Nanshanbu Zhou, a certain province and county of the Republic of China...... The memorial is written to the underworld. Probably the underworld has not changed. The land is the protector of the underworld. Its scope of reference is equal to that of the protector of the underworld, and it cannot cross the boundary of the director, so it is called "the land of the square". What Li San is in charge of is only the affairs of this workshop. Out of the workshop, even if it is only one step away, no matter what happens, the dead are on fire, he does not ask. The boundaries of a square or a guarantee are clear to the chief, and Li San is also clear.土地祠是俗称，正名是“福德神祠”。这四个字刻在庙门的砖额上，蓝地金字。这是个很小的庙。外面原有两根旗杆。西边的一根有一年教雷劈了（这雷也真怪，把旗杆劈得粉碎，劈成了一片一片一尺来长的细木条），只剩东边的一根了。进门有一个门道，两边各有一间耳房。东边的，住着李三。西边的一间，租给了一个卖糜饭饼子的。——糜饭饼子是米粥捣成糜，发酵后在一个平锅上烙成的，一面焦黄，一面是白的，有一点酸酸的甜味。再往里，过一个两步就跨过的天井，便是神殿。迎面塑着土地老爷的神像。神像不大，比一个常人还小一些。这土地老爷是单身，——不像乡下的土地庙里给他配一个土地奶奶。是一个笑眯眯的老头，一嘴的白胡子。头戴员外巾，身穿蓝色道袍。神像前是一个很狭的神案。神案上有一具铁制蜡烛架，横列一排烛钎，能插二十来根蜡烛。一个瓦香炉。神案前是一个收香钱的木柜。木柜前留着几尺可供磕头的砖地。如此而已。
The land shrine is commonly known as the "Shrine of Virtue". These four words are engraved on the brick forehead of the temple door, with gold letters on a blue background. This is a very small temple. There were originally two flagpoles outside. The one on the west side was struck by lightning one year (this thunder was really strange, it smashed the flagpole into pieces of thin wooden strips about a foot long), and only the one on the east side remained. There is a doorway at the entrance, and there is an ear room on each side. On the east side, Li San lives. The one on the west side is rented to a seller of rice cakes. ——Rice cakes are made from rice porridge pounded into porridge, fermented and baked on a flat pot, browned on one side and white on the other, with a little sour sweetness. Further inside, crossing a patio in two steps is the temple. In front of him is a statue of the land master. The statue is not big, smaller than an ordinary person. This land master is single,—— unlike the land temple in the countryside that gives him a land grandmother. It is a smiling old man with a white beard. He wears a headscarf and a blue Taoist robe. In front of the statue is a very narrow altar. There is an iron candle holder on the altar, with a row of candle brakers lined up, which can hold more than 20 candles. A tile incense burner. In front of the altar is a wooden cabinet for collecting incense money. In front of the wooden cabinet, there is a brick floor for kowtowing. So much for.李三同时又是庙祝。庙祝也没有多少事。初一、十五，把土地祠里外打扫一下，准备有人来进香。过年的时候，把两个“灯对子”找出来，挂在庙门两边。灯对子是长方形的纸灯，里面是木条钉成的框子，外糊白纸，上书大字，一边是“风调雨顺”，一边是“国泰民安”。灯对子里有横隔，可以点蜡烛。从正月初一，一直点到灯节。这半个多月，土地祠门前明晃晃的，很有点节日气氛。这半个月，进香的也多。每逢香期，到了晚上，李三就把收香钱的柜子打开，把香钱倒出来，一五一十地数一数。
Li San is also a temple priest. There is not much to do with the temple priest. On the first and fifteenth days of the first month, clean the land temple inside and out, and prepare for someone to come to incense. During the Chinese New Year, find out the two "lamp pairs" and hang them on both sides of the temple door. The lamp pair is a rectangular paper lamp, with a frame nailed to wooden strips inside, pasted with white paper, and written in large characters, with "Good Weather and Rain" on one side and "Guotai Min'an" on the other. There is a horizontal partition in the lamp pair, and candles can be lit. From the first day of the first lunar month, it is lit until the Lantern Festival. For more than half a month, the front of the land temple is bright, and it has a bit of a festive atmosphere. In the past half month, there have been many incense offerings. Every incense period, at night, Li San would open the cabinet for collecting incense money, pour out the incense money, and count it one by one.偶尔有人来赌咒。两家为一件事分辩不清，——常见的是东家丢了东西，怀疑是西家偷了，两家对骂了一阵，就各备一份香烛到土地祠来赌咒。两个人同时磕了头，一个说：“土地老爷在上，若是某某偷了我的东西，就叫他现世现报！”另一个说：“土地老爷在上，我若做了此事，就叫我家死人失天火！他诬赖我，也一样！”咒已赌完，各自回家。李三就把只点了小半截的蜡烛吹灭，拔下，收好，备用。
Occasionally, someone comes to gamble. The two families couldn't distinguish between one thing,—— it was common for the owner to lose something, suspecting that the west family had stolen it, and the two families scolded each other for a while, so they each prepared an incense candle to the land shrine to gamble on the curse. The two people kowtowed at the same time, and one said: "The land master is above, if so-and-so steals my things, he will be called to report in this world!" The other said: "The land master is on top, if I do this, I will make my dead family lose the fire! He lied to me, too!" The curse was over, and they went home. Li San blew out the candle that was only lit in small halves, pulled it out, put it away, and set it aside.李三最高兴的事，是有人来还愿。坊里有人家出了事，例如老人病重，或是孩子出了天花，就到土地祠来许愿。老人病好了，孩子天花出过了，就来还愿。仪式很隆重：给菩萨“挂匾”——送一块横宽二三尺的红布匾，上写四字：“有求必应”。满炉的香，红蜡烛把铁架都插满了（这种蜡烛很小，只二寸长，叫做“小牙”）。最重要的是：供一个猪头。因此，谁家许了愿，李三就很关心，随时打听。这是很容易打听到的。老人病好，会出来扶杖而行。孩子出了天花，在衣领的后面就会缝一条二指宽三寸长的红布，上写“天花已过”。于是李三就满怀希望地等着。这猪头到了晚上，就进了李三的砂罐了。一个七斤半重的猪头，够李三消受好几天。这几天，李三的脸上随时都是红喷喷的。
The happiest thing about Li San is that someone comes to make a wish. If something happens to someone in the neighborhood, such as an old man who is seriously ill or a child has smallpox, he goes to the land temple to make a wish. When the old man is cured and the child has smallpox, he comes to make a wish. The ceremony is very grand: "hang a plaque" for the bodhisattva - give a red cloth plaque two or three feet wide with four words written on it: "Respond to requests". The incense is full, and the red candle fills the iron frame (this candle is very small, only two inches long, called "small teeth"). The most important thing is to offer a pig's head. Therefore, whoever makes a wish, Li San is very concerned and inquires at any time. This is easy to find. When the old man is sick, he will come out and walk with a cane. When the child has smallpox, he will sew a red cloth three inches wide and three inches wide on the back of the collar, with the words "Smallpox has passed". So Li San waited hopefully. At night, the pig's head entered Li San's sand jar. A pig's head weighing seven and a half pounds is enough for Li San to endure for several days. In the past few days, Li San's face has been red at any time.地保所管的事，主要的就是死人失火。一般人家死了人，他是不管的，他管的是无后的孤寡和“路倒”。一个孤寡老人死在床上，或是哪里发现一具无名男尸，在本坊地界，李三就有事了：拿了一个捐簿，到几家殷实店铺去化钱。然后买一口薄皮棺材装殓起来；省事一点，就用芦席一卷，草绳一捆（这有个名堂，叫做“万字纹的棺材，三道紫金箍”），用一把锄头背着，送到乱葬冈去埋掉。因此本地流传一句骂人的话：“叫李三把你背出去吧！”李三很愿意本坊常发生这样的事，因为募化得来的钱怎样花销，是谁也不来查账的。李三拿埋葬费用的余数来喝酒，实在也在情在理，没有什么说不过去。这种事，谁愿承揽，就请来试试！哼，你以为这几杯酒喝到肚里容易呀！不过，为了心安理得，无愧于神鬼，他在埋了死人后，照例还为他烧一陌纸钱，磕三个头。
The main thing that the land protection is in charge of is the fire of the dead. Ordinary people don't care about the dead, he cares about the lonely widow and the "road fall". A lonely old man died in bed, or an unknown male corpse was found somewhere, and Li San had something to do in this area: he took a donation book and went to a few prosperous shops to make money. Then buy a thin coffin and put it for burial; to save a little trouble, use a roll of reed mats and a bundle of straw rope (this has a name, called "a coffin with a swastika pattern, three purple gold hoops"), carry it with a hoe, and send it to the mass grave to be buried. Therefore, there is a curse in the local area: "Ask Li San to carry you out!" Li San is very willing to do this kind of thing often in this workshop, because no one will come to check how the money raised is spent. Li San took the balance of the burial fee to drink, which is really reasonable, and there is nothing that cannot be said. Whoever wants to undertake this kind of thing, please try it! Hmph, do you think it's easy to drink these glasses of wine in your stomach! However, in order to have peace of mind and be worthy of the gods and ghosts, after burying the dead, he burned a piece of paper money for him as usual and kowtowed three times.李三瘦小干枯，精神不足，拖拖沓沓，迷迷瞪瞪，随时总像没有睡醒，——他夜晚打更，白天办事，睡觉也是断断续续的，看见他时他也真是刚从床上爬起来一会，想不到有时他竟能跑得那样快！那是本坊有了火警的时候。这地方把失火叫成“走水”，大概是讳言火字，所以反说着了。一有人家走水，李三就拿起他的更锣，用一个锣棒使劲地敲着，没命地飞跑，嘴里还大声地嚷叫：“××巷×家走水啦！××巷×家走水啦！”一坊失火，各坊的水龙都要来救，所以李三这回就跑出坊界，绕遍全城。
Li San was thin and dry, lacking energy, procrastinating, staring in a daze, always as if he hadn't woken up at any time,——, he worked the night watch, did errands during the day, and slept intermittently, and when he saw him, he really just got up from the bed for a while, and he didn't expect that sometimes he could run so fast! That was when there was a fire in the workshop. This place calls the fire "walking water", probably because it is a taboo word for fire, so it is said the other way around. As soon as someone went out of the water, Li San picked up his more gong, struck it hard with a gong stick, flew away lifelessly, and shouted loudly: "×× alley × the water is gone!" ×× alley × the water is gone! "There was a fire in the first square, and the water dragons in each neighborhood had to come to save it, so Li San ran out of the neighborhood this time and went around the city.李三希望人家失火么？哎，话怎么能这样说呢！换一个说法：他希望火不成灾，及时救灭。火灭之后，如果这一家损失不大，他就跑去道喜：“恭喜恭喜，越烧越旺！”如果这家烧得片瓦无存，他就去向幸免殃及的四邻去道喜：“恭喜恭喜，土地菩萨保佑！”他还会说：火势没有蔓延，也多亏水龙来得快。言下之意也很清楚：水龙来得快，是因为他没命的飞跑。听话的人并不是傻子。他飞跑着敲锣报警，不会白跑，总是能拿到相当可观的酒钱的。
Does Li San want someone to catch fire? Hey, how can you say that! In other words: he hopes that the fire will not become a disaster and be extinguished in time. After the fire was extinguished, if the family did not suffer much damage, he would run to say goodbye: "Congratulations, congratulations, the more it burns, the more it burns!" If the house burned to the ground, he would go to the neighbors who survived the disaster: "Congratulations, congratulations, the Bodhisattva of the land blesses!" He would also say: The fire did not spread, thanks to the water dragon coming quickly. The implication is also very clear: the water dragon came fast because he flew away without his life. Obedient people are not fools. He runs and beats the gong to call the police, he will not run in vain, and he can always get a considerable amount of wine money.地保的另一项职务是管叫花子。这里的花子有两种，一种是专赶各庙的香期的。初一、十五，各庙都有人进香。逢到菩萨生日（这些菩萨都有一个生日，不知是怎么查考出来的），香火尤盛。这些花子就从庙门、甬道，一直到大殿，密密地跪了两排。有的装做瞎子，有的用蜡烛油画成烂腿（画得很像），“老爷太太”不住地喊叫。进香的信女们就很自觉地把铜钱丢在他们面前破瓢里，她们认为把钱给花子，是进香仪式的一部分，不如此便显得不虔诚。因此，这些花子要到的钱是不少的。这些虔诚的香客大概不知道花子的黑话。花子彼此相遇，不是问要了多少钱，而说是“唤了多少狗！”这种花子是有帮的，他们都住在船上。每年还做花子会，很多花子船都集中在一起，也很热闹。这一种在帮的花子李三惹不起，他们也不碍李三的事，井水不犯河水。李三能管的是串街的花子。串街要钱的，他也只管那种只会伸着手赖着不走的软弱疲赖角色。李三提了一根竹棍，看见了，就举起竹棍大喝一声：“去去去！”有三等串街的他不管。一等是唱道情的。这是斯文一脉，穿着破旧长衫，念过两句书，又和吕洞宾、郑板桥有些瓜葛。店铺里等他唱了几句“老渔翁，一钓竿”，就会往柜台上丢一个铜板。他们是很清高的，取钱都不用手，只是用两片简板一夹，咚的一声丢在渔鼓筒里。另外两等，一是耍青龙（即耍蛇）的，一是吹筒子的。耍青龙的弄两条菜花蛇盘在脖子里，蛇信子簌簌地直探。吹筒子的吹一个外面包了火赤练蛇皮的竹筒，“布——呜！”声音很难听，样子也难看。他们之一要是往店堂一站，半天不走，这家店铺就甭打算做生意了：女人、孩子都吓得远远地绕开走了。照规矩（不知是谁定的规矩），这两等，李三是有权赶他们走的。然而他偏不赶，只是在一个背人处把他们拦住，向他们索要例规。讨价还价，照例要争执半天。双方会谈的地方，最多的是官茅房——公共厕所。
Another job of the land protector is to call the flowers. There are two kinds of flowers here, one is dedicated to the incense period of each temple. On the first and fifteenth days of the new year, people in each temple offer incense. On the birthday of the Bodhisattva (these bodhisattvas all have a birthday, I don't know how to find out), the incense is particularly prosperous. These flowers knelt in two rows from the temple gate, the corridor, and all the way to the main hall. Some pretended to be blind, some painted rotten legs with candle oil (very similar), and the "old lady" kept shouting. They thought that giving the money to the flowers was part of the incense ceremony, otherwise it would be unreligious. Therefore, these flowers ask for a lot of money. These devout pilgrims probably don't know Hanako's black words. When Hanako met each other, they didn't ask how much money they asked, but said, "How many dogs were called!" This kind of flower is helpful, and they all live on boats. Every year, there is also a flower party, and many flower boats are gathered together, which is also very lively. This kind of flower child Li San can't afford to mess with Li San, and they don't interfere with Li San's business, and the well water does not violate the river water. Li San can manage the flowers of the street. If the street asks for money, he only cares about the kind of weak and tired character who will only stretch out his hand and not leave. Li San lifted a bamboo stick, and when he saw it, he raised the bamboo stick and shouted: "Go, go!" He doesn't care if there are third-class streets. The first class is to sing love. This is a Sven lineage, wearing a shabby long gown, reading two sentences, and having some relationship with Lu Dongbin and Zheng Banqiao. When he sang a few words in the store, "Old fisherman, a fishing rod", he would throw a copper plate on the counter. They are very noble, and they don't use their hands to withdraw money, they just use two simple boards and throw them into the fishing drum tube with a bang. The other two classes, one is playing the green dragon (that is, playing the snake), and the other is the one blowing the tube. The green dragon player got two cauliflower snakes coiled around his neck, and the snake letter poked straight out. The one who blew the tube blew a bamboo tube with a fire red snake skin on the outside, "Cloth-woo!" The sound is ugly, and the appearance is ugly. If one of them stopped at the store and didn't leave for half a day, the store didn't plan to do business: the women and children were so frightened that they walked away. According to the rules (I don't know who set the rules), Li San had the right to drive them away. However, he didn't rush, he just stopped them at a back place and asked them for rules. Bargaining, arguing for a long time as usual. The most common place for the two sides to talk is the official thatched house - the public toilet.地保当然还要管缉盗。谁家失窃，首先得叫李三来。李三先看看小偷进出的路径。是撬门，是挖洞，还是爬墙。按律（哪朝的律呢）：如果案发，撬门罪最重，只下明火执仗一等。挖洞次之。爬墙又次之。然后，叫本家写一份失单。事情就完了。如果是爬墙进去偷的，他还不会忘了把小偷爬墙用的一根船篙带走。——小偷爬墙没有带梯子的，只是从河边船上抽一根竹篙，上面绑十来个稻草疙瘩，戗在墙边，踩着草瘩疙就进去了。偷完了，照例把这根竹篙靠在墙外。这根船篙不一会就会有失主到土地祠来赎。——“交二百钱，拿走！”
Of course, the land protector also has to take care of the theft. Whoever steals must first call Li San. Li San first looked at the path of the thief in and out. Is it to pry the door, dig a hole, or climb the wall. According to the law (which dynasty's law): If a crime occurs, the crime of prying the door is the heaviest, and only open fire is the first. Digging a hole is secondary. Climbing the wall is secondary. Then, ask the family to write a lost order. It's over. If he climbed the wall to steal, he would not forget to take away a boat pole used by the thief to climb the wall. ——The thief climbed the wall without a ladder, but just pulled a bamboo pole from the boat by the river, tied a dozen straw pimples to it, tied it to the wall, and stepped on the lump to go in. After stealing, lean the bamboo pole against the wall as usual. After a while, the owner of this pole will go to the land temple to redeem it. ——"Pay two hundred coins and take it!" ”丢失衣物的人家，如果对李三说，有几件重要的东西，本家愿出钱赎回，过些日子，李三真能把这些赃物追回来。但是是怎样追回来的，是什么人偷的，这些事是不作兴问的。这也是规矩。
If the family of the lost clothes tells Li San that there are a few important things, the family is willing to pay to redeem them, and in a few days, Li San will really be able to recover these stolen goods. But how it was recovered, who stole it, these things are not asked. This is also a rule.李三打更。左手拿着竹梆，吊着锣，右手锣槌。
笃，铛。定更。
笃，笃；铛——铛。二更。
笃，笃，笃；铛铛——铛。三更。
三更以后，就不打了。
Li San watches. He holds a bamboo stick in his left hand, hangs a gong, and a gong hammer in his right hand. Steady, bell. Fixed. Du, Du; Bell - Bell. Second watch. Du, Du, Du; Bell bell - bell. Midnight. After the third watch, I stopped fighting.打更是为了防盗。但是人家失窃，多在四更左右，这时天最黑，人也睡得最死。李三打更，时常也装腔作势吓唬人：“看见了，看见了！往哪里躲！树后头！墙旮旯！……”其实他什么也没看见。
The night watch is to prevent theft. But people steal mostly around the fourth watch, when it is the darkest and the people sleep the most. Li San often pretended to scare people: "I saw it, I saw it! Where to hide! Behind the tree! The wall is dark!" ...... "In fact, he didn't see anything."一进腊月，李三在打更时添了一个新项目，喊：“小心火烛”[2]：
“岁尾年关，——小心火烛！——
“火塘扑熄，——水缸上满！——
As soon as the twelfth lunar month arrived, Li San added a new project during the night watch, shouting: "Beware of the fire" {{id_0000}}: "At the end of the year,—— be careful of the fire! —— "The fire pond is extinguished,—— the water tank is full! ——“老头子老太太，铜炉子撂远些[3]——！
“屋上瓦响，莫疑猫狗，起来望望——！
“岁尾年关，小心火烛……”
"Old man and old lady, keep the copper stove away id_0000——! "The roof is clattering, don't suspect cats and dogs, get up and look——! "At the end of the year, be careful of the ...... of fire."店铺上了板，人家关了门，外面很黑，西北风呜呜地叫着，李三一个人，腰里别着一个白纸灯笼，大街小巷，拉长了声音，有板有眼，有腔有调的喊着，听起来有点凄惨。人们想到：一年又要过去了。又想：李三也不容易，怪难为他。
The store was on the board, people were closed, it was very dark outside, the northwest wind was howling, Li San was alone, with a white paper lantern pinned to his waist, the streets and alleys, the voice was elongated, there was a board and eyes, and there was a tone and a tone, it sounded a bit miserable. People thought: Another year is about to pass. I thought again: Li San is not easy, it's hard for him.没有死人，没有失火，没人还愿，没人家挨偷，李三这几天的日子委实过得有些清淡。他拿着锣、梆，很无聊地敲着三更：
“笃，笃，笃；铛，铛——铛！”
Knocking, walking as he walked, he walked to the river. There was a very strong pole on a boat pinned outside the gang, and as soon as he stretched out his hand, pulled it out, sandwiched it in his arm socket and turned around and left. He was still knocking unhurriedly: "Du, du, du; bell, bell—bell! ”一边敲，一边走，走到了河边。一只船上有一枝很结实的船篙在船帮外面别着，他一伸手，抽了出来，夹在胳肢窝里回身便走。他还不紧不慢地敲着：
“笃，笃，笃；铛，铛——铛！”
Knocking, walking as he walked, he walked to the river. There was a very strong pole on a boat pinned outside the gang, and as soon as he stretched out his hand, pulled it out, sandwiched it in his arm socket and turned around and left. He was still knocking unhurriedly: "Du, du, du; bell, bell—bell! ”不想船篙带不动了，篙子的后梢被一只很有劲的大手攥住了。
I didn't want the pole to be immovable, and the back of the pole was grabbed by a very strong big hand.李三原想把船篙带到土地祠，明天等这个弄船的拿钱来赎。能弄二百钱，也能喝四两。不想这船家刚刚起来撒过尿，躺下还没有睡着。他听到有人抽篙子，爬出舱口一看，是李三！
“好，李三！你偷篙子！”
Li San originally wanted to take the boat pole to the land temple, and tomorrow he would wait for this boat builder to take the money to redeem it. You can get two hundred coins, and you can drink four taels. I don't want this boatman to get up and pee just now, and he has not fallen asleep yet. He heard someone smoking the pole, climbed out of the hatch and saw that it was Li San! "Okay, Li San! You steal the pole! ”“莫喊！莫喊！”
李三不是很要脸面的人，但是一个地保偷东西，而且叫人当场捉住，总不大好看。
“你认打认罚？”
“认罚！认罚！罚多少？”
“罚二百钱！”
"Don't shout! Don't shout! ” Li San is not a very face-saving person, but he is a local security guard who steals things and asks people to catch them on the spot, which is not good-looking. "Do you admit to punishment?" "Admit punishment! Admit punishment! How much is the penalty?" ” "A fine of two hundred dollars!"李三老是罚乡下人的钱。谁在街上挑粪，溅出了一点，“罚！二百钱！”谁在不该撒尿的地方撒了尿，“罚！二百钱！”没有想到这回被别人罚了。李三挨罚，这是有史以来第一次。
榆树
Li San always fined the countrymen money. Whoever picked up dung on the street splashed a little, "Penalty! Two hundred dollars!" Who urinated where he shouldn't, "Penalty! Two hundred dollars!" I didn't expect to be punished by others this time. Li San was punished, which was the first time in history. elm侉奶奶住到这里一定已经好多年了，她种的八棵榆树已经很大了。
Grandma must have lived here for many years, and the eight elm trees she planted were already very large.这地方把徐州以北说话带山东口音的人都叫做侉子。这县里有不少侉子。他们大都住在运河堤下，拉，推独轮车运货（运得最多的是河工所用石头），碾石头粉（石头碾细，供修大船的和麻丝桐油和在一起填塞船缝），烙锅盔（这种干厚棒硬的面饼也主要是卖给侉子吃），卖牛杂碎汤（本地人也有专门跑到运河堤上去尝尝这种异味的）……
In this place, people who speak with a Shandong accent north of Xuzhou are called nephews. There are many nephews in this county. Most of them live under the canal embankment, pulling , pushing wheelbarrows to transport goods (the most transported are stones used by river workers), grinding stone powder (the stones are finely ground, and the hemp tung oil used for repairing large ships is mixed with hemp tung oil to fill the gaps of the boats), baking pot helmets (this kind of dry, thick and hard dough cake is also mainly sold to nephews), and beef offal soup (locals also specially run to the canal embankment to taste this smell......侉奶奶想必本是一个侉子的家属，她应当有过一个丈夫，一个侉老爹。她的丈夫哪里去了呢？死了？还是“贩了桃子”——扔下她跑了？不知道。她丈夫姓什么？她姓什么？很少人知道。大家都叫她侉奶奶。大人、小孩，穷苦人、有钱的，都这样叫。倒好像她就姓侉似的。
Grandma must have been a family member of a nephew, and she should have had a husband and a father. Where did her husband go? He's dead? Or "sold peaches" - left her and ran away? I don't know. What is her husband's surname? What is her surname? Few people know. Everyone calls her grandma. Adults, children, poor people, and rich people are all called like this. It seems that her surname is Nei.侉奶奶怎么会住到这样一个地方来呢？（这附近住的都是本地人，没有另外一家侉子）她是哪年搬来的呢？你问附近的住户，他们都回答不出，只是说：“啊，她一直就在这里住。”好像自从盘古开天地，这里就有一个侉奶奶。
How did Grandma live in such a place? (The people living around here are all locals, and there is no other nephew) When did she move here? When you ask the nearby residents, they can't answer, just say, "Ah, she has always lived here." It seems that since Pangu opened the world, there has been a grandmother here.侉奶奶住在一个巷子的外面。这巷口有一座门，大概就是所谓里门。出里门，有一条砖铺的街，伸向越塘，转过螺蛳坝，奔臭河边，是所谓后街。后街边有人家。侉奶奶却又住在后街以外。巷口外，后街边，有一条很宽的阴沟，正街的阴沟水都流到这里，水色深黑，发出各种气味，蓝靛的气味、豆腐水的气味、做草纸的纸浆气味。不知道为什么，闻到这些气味，叫人感到忧郁。经常有乡下人，用一个接了长柄的洋铁罐，把阴沟水一罐一罐刮起来，倒在木桶里（这是很好的肥料），刮得沟底嘎啦嘎啦地响。跳过这条大阴沟，有一片空地。侉奶奶就住在这片空地里。
Grandma lives outside an alley. There is a door at the entrance of this alley, which is probably the so-called inner door. Out of the inner door, there is a brick street that stretches out to Yuetang, turns around the snail dam, and runs to the stinky river, which is the so-called back street. There are houses on the back street. Grandma lives outside the back street. Outside the alley, on the back street, there is a very wide gutter, and the gutter water on the main street flows here, the water is dark and emits various odors, the smell of indigo, the smell of tofu water, and the smell of pulp for making grass paper. I don't know why, smelling these smells makes people feel melancholy. There are often country people who use a foreign iron can with a long handle to scrape up the gutter water one by one, pour it into a wooden bucket (this is a good fertilizer), and scrape the bottom of the ditch to rattle. Jump over this big gutter and there is an open space. Grandma lives in this open space.侉奶奶的家是两间草房。独门独户，四边不靠人家，孤零零的。她家的后面，是一带围墙。围墙里面，是一家香店的作坊，香店老板姓杨。香是像压饸饹似的挤出来的。挤的时候还会发出“蓬——”的一声。侉奶奶没有去看过师傅做香，不明白这声音是怎样弄出来的。但是她从早到晚就一直听着这种很深沉的声音。隔几分钟一声，“蓬——蓬——蓬——”。围墙有个门，从门口往里看，便可看到一扇一扇像铁纱窗似的晒香的棕绷子，上面整整齐齐平铺着两排黄色的线香。侉奶奶门前，一眼望去，有一个海潮庵。原来不知是住和尚还是住尼姑的，多年来没有人住，废了。再往前，便是从越塘流下来的一条河。河上有一座小桥。侉奶奶家的左右都是空地。左边长了很高的草。右边是侉奶奶种的八棵榆树。
Grandma's home is two thatched cottages. Alone, not surrounded by others, alone. Behind her house is a wall. Inside the wall, there is a workshop of an incense shop, and the owner of the incense shop is surnamed Yang. The incense is squeezed out like pressed dumplings. When squeezing, it will also make a "peng-" sound. Grandma Nee has never seen the master make incense, and she doesn't understand how this sound is made. But she has been listening to this deep sound from morning to night. Every few minutes, "Peng-Peng-Peng-". There is a door on the wall, and if you look in from the door, you can see brown bandages that are like iron screen windows, and two rows of yellow incense sticks are neatly and flatly laid on them. In front of Grandma's door, at a glance, there is a Haichao Monastery. It turned out that I don't know if it was a monk or a nun, but no one lived there for many years and it was abandoned. Further ahead, there is a river flowing down from Yuetang. There is a small bridge on the river. There are open spaces on both sides of Grandma's house. There is very tall grass on the left. On the right are eight elm trees planted by Grandma Nee.侉奶奶靠给人家纳鞋底过日子。附近几条巷子的人家都来找她，拿了旧布（间或也有新布）、袼褙（本地叫做“骨子”）和一张纸剪的鞋底样。侉奶奶就按底样把旧布、袼褙剪好，“做”一“做”（粗缝几针），然后就坐在门口小板凳上纳。扎一锥子，纳一针，“哧啦——哧啦”。有时把锥子插在头发里“光”一“光”（读去声）。侉奶奶手劲很大，纳的针脚很紧，她纳的底子很结实，大家都愿找她纳。也不讲个价钱。给多，给少，她从不争。多少人穿过她纳的鞋底啊！
Grandma made a living by giving people soles. People from several nearby alleys came to her and took old cloth (sometimes new cloth), robes (locally called "bones") and a paper-cut sole sample. Grandma cut the old cloth and robe according to the bottom pattern, "do" one" (a few stitches roughly), and then sat on the small bench at the door to put it in. Prick an awl, put a needle, "Wow-huh". Sometimes the awl is inserted into the hair to "light" and "light" (read aloud). Grandma Neung's hands are very strong, the stitches are very tight, and the foundation of her is very strong, and everyone is willing to find her. Don't negotiate a price. Give more, give less, she never fights. How many people wear the soles of her shoes!侉奶奶一清早就坐在门口纳鞋底。她不点灯。灯碗是有一个的，房顶上也挂着一束灯草。但是灯碗是干的，那束灯草都发黄了。她睡得早，天上一见星星，她就睡了。起得也早。别人家的烟筒才冒出烧早饭的炊烟，侉奶奶已经纳好半只鞋底。除了下雨下雪，她很少在屋里（她那屋里很黑），整天都坐在门外扎锥子，抽麻线。有时眼痠了，手困了，就停下来四面看看。
Grandma sat at the door early in the morning and put on the soles of her shoes. She doesn't light the light. There is a lamp bowl, and there is a bunch of lamp grass hanging on the roof. But the lamp bowl is dry, and the lamp grass is yellow. She went to bed early, and as soon as she saw the stars in the sky, she went to bed. I also got up early. The smoke from other people's cigarettes came out of the smoke of breakfast, and Grandma had already put half of the soles in it. Except for rain and snow, she rarely was in the house (it was very dark in her room), and she sat outside the door all day long, tying awls and smoking twine. Sometimes my eyes were sore and my hands were sleepy, so I stopped and looked around.正街上有一家豆腐店，有一头牵磨的驴。每天上下午，豆腐店的一个孩子总牵驴到侉奶奶的榆树下打滚。驴乏了，一滚，再滚，总是翻不过去。滚了四五回，哎，翻过去了。驴打着响鼻，浑身都轻松了。侉奶奶原来直替这驴在心里攒劲；驴翻过了，侉奶奶也替它觉得轻松。
There is a tofu shop on the main street, with a donkey that is grinding. Every morning and afternoon, a child in the tofu shop always leads the donkey to roll under the elm tree of Grandma. The donkey is tired, rolling, rolling again, and always can't turn over. Rolled four or five times, hey, turned over. The donkey snorted, and his whole body was relaxed. Grandma turned out to be working hard for this donkey; the donkey overturned, and Grandma also felt relaxed for it.街上的，巷子里的孩子常上侉奶奶门前的空地上来玩。他们在草窝里捉蚂蚱，捉油葫芦。捉到了，就拿给侉奶奶看。“侉奶奶，你看！大不大？”侉奶奶必很认真地看一看，说：“大。真大！”孩子玩一回，又转到别处去玩了，或沿河走下去，或过桥到对岸远远的一个道士观去看放生的乌龟。孩子的妈妈有时来找孩子（或家里来了亲戚，或做得了一件新衣要他回家试试），就问侉奶奶：“看见我家毛毛了么？”侉奶奶就说：“看见咧，往东咧。”或“看见咧，过河咧。”……
On the street, children in the alleys often go to the open space in front of Grandma's door to play. They catch grasshoppers and oil gourds in the grass nest. If you catch it, show it to your grandmother. "Grandma, look! Is it big?" Grandma must look at it very seriously and say, "It's big. It's so big!" The child played once, and then went elsewhere to play, or walked down the river, or crossed the bridge to a Taoist temple on the other side to see the released turtles. The child's mother sometimes came to the child (or a relative came to the house, or made a new piece of clothing for him to try at home), and asked the grandmother: "Do you see my hair?" Grandma said, "See it, go east." Or "See it, cross the river." ”……侉奶奶吃得真是苦。她一年到头喝粥。三顿都是粥。平常是她到米店买了最糙最糙的米来煮。逢到粥厂放粥（这粥厂是官办的，门口还挂一块牌：××县粥厂），她就提了一个“子”（小水桶）去打粥。这一天，她就自己不开火仓了，喝这粥。粥厂里打来的粥比侉奶奶自己煮的要白得多。侉奶奶也吃菜。她的“菜”是她自己腌的红胡萝卜。啊呀，那叫咸，比盐还咸，咸得发苦！——不信你去尝一口看！
Grandma eats really hard. She drinks porridge all year round. Three meals are porridge. Usually she goes to the rice shop to buy the roughest and roughest rice to cook. Whenever the porridge factory puts porridge (this porridge factory is government-run and there is a sign hanging at the door: ×× County Porridge Factory), she brings a "" (small bucket) to make porridge. On this day, she stopped opening the fire warehouse and drank the porridge. The porridge from the porridge factory is much whiter than the one cooked by her grandmother herself. Grandma also eats vegetables. Her "dish" is her own pickled red carrots. Ah, that's called salty, saltier than salt, salty and bitter! ——If you don't believe me, take a bite!只有她的侄儿来的那一天，才变一变花样。
Only on the day her nephew came, did she change her tricks.侉奶奶有一个亲人，是她的侄儿。过继给她了，也可说是她的儿子。名字只有一个字，叫个“牛”。牛在运河堤上卖力气，也拉，也推车，也碾石头。他隔个十天半月来看看他的过继的娘。他的家口多，不能给娘带什么，只带了三斤重的一块锅盔。娘看见牛来了，就上街，到卖熏烧的王二的摊子上切二百钱猪头肉，用半张荷叶托着。另外，还忘不了买几根大葱，半碗酱。娘俩就结结实实地吃了一顿山东饱饭。
Grandma has a relative who is her nephew. Adopted by her, it can also be said to be her son. The name has only one word, called "cow". The cow worked the canal embankment, pulled , pushed carts, and crushed stones. He came to see his adopted mother every ten and a half days. He had a lot of people and couldn't bring anything to his mother, only a pot helmet weighing three pounds. When my mother saw the cow coming, she went to the street and went to the stall of Wang Er, who sold smoked meat, to cut two hundred yuan of pig's head meat, and held it with half a lotus leaf. In addition, I can't forget to buy a few green onions and half a bowl of sauce. The two of them had a solid meal in Shandong.侉奶奶的八棵榆树一年一年地长大了。香店的杨老板几次托甲长丁裁缝来探过侉奶奶的口风，问她卖不卖。榆皮，是做香的原料。——这种事由买主亲自出面，总不合适。老街旧邻的，总得有个居间的人出来说话。这样要价、还价，才有余地。丁裁缝来一趟，侉奶奶总是说：“树还小咧，叫它再长长。”
Grandma's eight elm trees have grown year by year. Boss Yang of the incense shop came to visit Grandma Ding several times and asked her if she could sell it. Elm bark is the raw material for making incense. ——It is always inappropriate for the buyer to come forward in person. The old neighbors of the old street must have an intermediary to come out and talk. In this way, there is room for asking and counter-offering. When Tailor Ding came, Grandma Ding always said: "The tree is still small, let it grow longer." ”人们私下议论：侉奶奶不卖榆树，她是指着它当棺材本哪。
榆树一年一年地长。侉奶奶一年一年地活着，一年一年地纳鞋底。
People privately discussed: Grandma doesn't sell elm trees, she points to it as a coffin. The elm tree grows year after year. Grandma lives year after year, and puts in the soles of her shoes year after year.侉奶奶的生活实在是平淡之至。除了看驴打滚，看孩子捉蚂蚱、捉油葫芦，还有些什么值得一提的事呢？——这些捉蚂蚱的孩子一年比一年大。侉奶奶纳他们穿的鞋底，尺码一年比一年放出来了。
值得一提的有：
Grandma's life is really ordinary. In addition to watching the donkey roll, watching the children catch grasshoppers and oil gourds, what else is worth mentioning? ——These children who catch grasshoppers are getting older and older year by year. Grandma accepted the soles of the shoes they wore, and the size was released year by year. It is worth mentioning that:有一年，杨家香店的作坊接连着了三次火，查不出起火原因。人说这是“狐火”，是狐狸用尾巴蹭出来的。于是在香店作坊的墙外盖了一个三尺高的“狐仙庙”，常常有人来烧香。着火的时候，满天通红，乌鸦乱飞乱叫，火光照着侉奶奶的八棵榆树也是通红的，像是火树一样。
One year, the workshop of Yangjiaxiangdian caught fire three times in a row, and the cause of the fire could not be found. People say that this is a "fox fire", which was rubbed out by a fox with its tail. So a three-foot-high "Fox Fairy Temple" was built outside the wall of the incense shop workshop, and people often came to burn incense. When the fire broke out, the sky was red, crows were flying and screaming, and the eight elm trees where the fire shone on the grandmother were also red, like fire trees.有一天，不知怎么发现了海潮庵里藏着一窝土匪。地方保安队来捉他们。里面往外打枪，外面往里打枪，乒乒乓乓。最后是有人献计用火攻，——在庵外墙根堆了稻草，放火烧！土匪吃不住劲，只好把枪丢出，举着手出来就擒了。海潮庵就在侉奶奶家前面不远，两边开仗的情形，她看得清清楚楚。她很奇怪，离得这么近，她怎么就不知道庵里藏着土匪呢？
One day, I somehow found a nest of bandits hiding in Haichao Monastery. The local security team came to catch them. Shooting outside inside, shooting inside outside, ping pong bong. In the end, someone suggested attacking with fire,—— piled straw at the base of the outer wall of the nunnery and set it on fire! The bandits couldn't stand it, so they had to throw their guns out, raise their hands and come out to capture them. Haichao'an is not far from Grandma's house, and she can clearly see the situation of the war on both sides. She was very strange, so close, why didn't she know that there were bandits hiding in the nunnery?这些，使侉奶奶留下深刻印象，然而与她的生活无关。
使她的生活发生一点变化的是：——
These left a deep impression on Grandma Neighbour, but it had nothing to do with her life. What changed her life a little was:——有一个乡下人赶了一头水牛进城，牛老了，他要把它卖给屠宰场去。这牛走到越塘边，说什么也不肯走了，跪着，眼睛里叭哒叭哒直往下掉泪。围了好些人看。有人报给甲长丁裁缝。这是发生在本甲之内的事，丁甲长要是不管，将为人神不喜。他出面求告了几家吃斋念佛的老太太，凑了牛价，把这头老牛买了下来，作为老太太们的放生牛。这牛谁来养呢？大家都觉得交侉奶奶养合适。丁甲长对侉奶奶说，这是一甲人信得过她，侉奶奶就答应下了。这养老牛还有一笔基金（牛总要吃点干草呀），就交给侉奶奶放印子。从此侉奶奶就多了几件事：早起把牛放出来，尽它到草地上去吃青草。青草没有了，就喂它吃干草。一早一晚，牵到河边去饮。傍晚拿了收印子钱的摺子，沿街串乡去收印子。晚上，牛就和她睡在一个屋里。牛卧着，安安静静地倒嚼，侉奶奶可觉得比往常累得多。她觉得骨头疼，半夜了，还没有睡着。
A countryman drove a buffalo into the city, and when the cow was old, he wanted to sell it to the slaughterhouse. The cow walked to the edge of Yuetang, said nothing, and refused to leave, kneeling, tears streaming down from his eyes. There were many people around. Someone reported it to the tailor Ding. This is what happened within this armor, and if Ding Jia Chang doesn't care, he will be disliked by the gods. He came forward to ask several old ladies who were fasting and chanting Buddha, collected the price of the cow, and bought the old cow as a release cow for the old ladies. Who will raise this cow? Everyone thought it was suitable to raise Grandma Nie. Ding Jiachang said to Grandma that this was a person who could trust her, and Grandma agreed. The old cow still has a fund (the cow always needs to eat some hay), so it is handed over to the grandmother to put the seal. Since then, the grandmother has had a few more things: get up early and let the cow out and let it go to the grass to eat grass. The grass is gone, so feed it hay. Morning and night, take it to the river to drink. In the evening, I took the fold to collect the seal money and went along the street to collect the seal. At night, the cow slept in the same room with her. The cow lay down, chewing quietly, and Grandma felt much more tired than usual. She felt a pain in her bones, and it was midnight and she hadn't fallen asleep yet.不到半年，这头牛老死了。侉奶奶把放印子的摺子交还丁甲长，还是整天坐在门外纳鞋底。
In less than half a year, the cow died of old age. Grandma returned the fold with the seal to Ding Jiachang, and still sat outside the door all day to put in the soles of her shoes.牛一死。侉奶奶也像老了好多。她时常病病歪歪的，连粥都不想吃，在她的黑洞洞的草屋里躺着。有时出来坐坐，扶着门框往外走。
As soon as the cow died. Grandma also seems to be much older. She was often sick and crooked, didn't even want to eat porridge, and lay in her black grass hut. Sometimes I came out to sit and walked out holding on to the door frame.一天夜里下大雨。瓢泼大雨不停地下了一夜。很多人家都进了水。丁裁缝怕侉奶奶家也进了水了，她屋外的榆树都浸在水里了。他赤着脚走过去，推开侉奶奶的门一看：侉奶奶死了。
丁裁缝派人把她的侄子牛叫了来。
It rained heavily one night. The pouring rain kept falling all night. Many families were in the water. Tailor Ding was afraid that Grandma's house would also be flooded, and the elm trees outside her house were submerged in water. He walked over barefoot, pushed open Grandma's door, and looked: Grandma was dead. Tailor Ding sent someone to call her nephew Niu.得给侉奶奶办后事呀。侉奶奶没有留下什么钱，牛也拿不出钱，只有卖榆树。
I have to do the funeral for my grandmother. Grandma didn't leave any money, and the cows couldn't take out any money, so they could only sell elms.丁甲长找到杨老板。杨老板倒很仁义，说是先不忙谈榆树的事，这都好说，由他先垫出一笔钱来，给侉奶奶买一身老衣，一副杉木棺材，把侉奶奶埋了。
Ding Jiachang found Boss Yang. Boss Yang was very benevolent, saying that he was not busy talking about the elm tree first, which was easy to say, and he first advanced a sum of money to buy an old clothes and a pair of fir coffins for Grandma Neung, and buried Grandma Neung.侉奶奶安葬以后，榆树生意也就谈妥了。杨老板雇了人来，咯嗤咯嗤，把八棵榆树都放倒了。新锯倒的榆树，发出很浓的香味。
After Grandma was buried, the elm business was negotiated. Boss Yang hired someone, snorted, and put down all eight elm trees. The freshly sawn elm trees emit a strong fragrance.杨老板把八棵榆树的树皮剥了，把树干卖给了木器店。据人了解，他卖的八棵树干的钱就比他垫出和付给牛的钱还要多。他等于白得了八张榆树皮，又捞了一笔钱。
鱼
Boss Yang peeled the bark of the eight elm trees and sold the trunks to the woodwork shop. It is understood that the money he sold for eight tree trunks was more than the money he paid to the cattle. He got eight elm barks for nothing and made another sum of money. fish臭水河和越塘原是连着的。不知从哪年起，螺蛳坝以下淤塞了，就隔断了。风和人一年一年把干土烂草往河槽里填，河槽变成很浅了。不过旧日的河槽依然可以看得出来。两旁的柳树还能标出原来河的宽度。这还是一条河，一条没有水的干河。
The stinky water river and Yuetang were originally connected. I don't know from when, the bottom of the snail dam was silted up and cut off. The wind and people fill the dry soil and grass into the river trough year by year, and the trough becomes very shallow. However, the old river trough can still be seen. The willow trees on both sides can also mark the width of the original river. This is still a river, a dry river without water.干河的北岸种了菜。南岸有几户人家。这几家都是做嫁妆的，主要是做嫁妆之中的各种盆桶，脚盆、马桶、子。这些盆桶是街上嫁妆店的订货，他们并不卖门市。这几家只是本钱不大，材料不多的作坊。这几家的大人、孩子，都是做盆桶的工人。他们整天在门外柳树下锯、刨。他们使用的刨子很特别。木匠使刨子是往前推，桶匠使刨子是往后拉。因为盆桶是圆的，这么使才方便。这种刨子叫做刮刨。盆桶成型后，要用砂纸打一遍，然后上漆。上漆之前，先要用猪血打一道底子。刷了猪血，得晾干。因此老远地就看见干河南岸，绿柳荫中排列着好些通红的盆盆桶桶，看起来很热闹，画出了这几家作坊的一种忙碌的兴旺气象。
Vegetables are planted on the north bank of the dry river. There are several families on the south bank. These families are all dowries, mainly for dowries, foot basins, toilets, and . These pots and buckets are ordered by dowry shops on the street, and they do not sell stores. These are just workshops with little capital and few materials. The adults and children of these families are all workers who make pots and buckets. They sawed and planed under the willow trees outside the door all day long. The planers they use are very special. The carpenter pushes the planer forward, and the barrel maker pulls the planer back. Because the pot and bucket are round, it is convenient to use. This kind of planer is called a scraper. After the pot and bucket are formed, they must be beaten with sandpaper and then painted. Before painting, a base must be made with pig's blood. Brushed with pig blood, it has to be dried. Therefore, I saw from afar on the south bank of the Ganhe River, with many bright red pots and buckets lined up in the shade of green willows, which looked very lively, painting a busy and prosperous atmosphere of these workshops.桶匠有本钱，有手艺，在越塘一带，比起那些完全靠力气吃饭的挑夫、轿夫要富足一些。和杀猪的庞家就不能相比了。
The cooper maker has capital and craftsmanship, and in the Yuetang area, he is richer than those porters and bearers who rely entirely on their strength to eat. It cannot be compared with the Pang family who killed pigs.从侉奶奶家旁边向南伸出的后街到往螺蛳坝方向，拐了一个直角。庞家就在这拐角处，门朝南，正对越塘。他家的地势很高，从街面到屋基，要上七八层台阶。房屋在这一片算是最高大的。房屋盖起的时间不久，砖瓦木料都还很新。檩粗板厚，瓦密砖齐。两边各有两间卧房，正中是一个很宽敞的穿堂。坐在穿堂里，可以清清楚楚看到越塘边和淤塞的旧河交接处的一条从南到北的土路，看到越塘的水，和越塘对岸的一切，眼界很开阔。这前面的新房子是住人的。养猪的猪圈，烧水、杀猪的场屋都在后面。
From the back street extending south next to my grandmother's house to the direction of Luoshiba, there is a right corner. The Pang family is at this corner, with the door facing south, directly facing Yuetang. The terrain of his house is very high, and it takes seven or eight steps from the street to the foundation. The house is the tallest in this area. The house was built not long ago, and the bricks and timber were still very new. The purlins are thick and the tiles are dense. There are two bedrooms on each side, and in the middle is a very spacious hall. Sitting in the hall, you can clearly see a dirt road from south to north at the junction of the edge of Yuetang and the silted old river, and see the water of Yuetang and everything on the other side of Yuetang. The new house in front of this is inhabited. The pigsty for raising pigs, the farm house for boiling water and killing pigs are all behind.庞家兄弟三个，各有分工。老大经营擘划，总管一切。老二专管各处收买生猪。他们家不买现成的肥猪，都是买半大猪回来自养。老二带一个伙计，一趟能赶二三十头猪回来。因为杀的猪多，他经常要外出。杀猪是老三的事，——当然要有两个下手伙计。每天五更头，东方才现一点鱼肚白，这一带人家就听到猪尖声嚎叫，知道庞家杀猪了。猪杀得了，放了血，在杀猪盆里用开水烫透，吹气，刮毛。杀猪盆是一种特制的长圆形的木盆，盆帮很高。二百来斤的猪躺在里面，富富有余。杀几头猪，没有一定，按时令不同。少则两头，多则三头四头，到年下人家腌肉时就杀得更多了。因此庞家有四个极大的木盆，几个伙计同时动手洗刮。
The three brothers of the Pang family each have their own division of labor. The eldest manages and manages everything. The second child is in charge of buying pigs everywhere. Their family does not buy ready-made fat pigs, they buy half a large pig to raise themselves. The second child brought a guy and could drive twenty or thirty pigs back in one trip. Because he kills a lot of pigs, he often has to go out. Killing pigs is the third child's business,—— of course there must be two partners. At the beginning of the fifth watch every day, a little fish belly white appeared in the east, and people in this area heard the sharp howl of pigs and knew that the Pang family had killed pigs. The pig can be killed, bleed, scalded with boiling water, blown, and shaved. The pig killing basin is a special oblong wooden basin with a very high basin. About 200 pounds of pigs lie in it, rich and rich. Killing a few pigs is not certain, depending on the season. As few as two, as many as three or four, and more when people cure meat. Therefore, the Pang family has four extremely large wooden basins, and several guys wash and scrape them at the same time.这地方不兴叫屠户，也不叫杀猪的，大概嫌这种叫法不好听，大都叫“开肉案子的”。“开”肉案子，就是掌柜老板一流，显得身份高了。庞家肉案子生意很好，因为一条东大街上只有这一家肉案子。早起人进人出，剁刀响，铜钱响，票子响。不到晌午，几片猪就卖得差不多了。这里人一天吃的肉都是上午一次买齐，很少下午来割肉的。庞家肉案到午饭后，只留一两块后臀硬肋等待某些家临时来了客人的主顾，留一个人照顾着。一天的生意已经做完，店堂闲下来了。
This place is not called a butcher, nor is it called a pig slaughterer, probably because this name is not good, and most of them are called "meat cases". "Opening" a meat case means that the shopkeeper and boss are first-class, and they seem to have a high status. The business of the Pang family meat case is very good, because there is only this meat case on an east street. People come in and out early, chopping knives, copper coins, and tickets. Before noon, a few pieces of pigs were almost sold. The meat that people eat here in a day is bought once in the morning, and they rarely come to cut the meat in the afternoon. After lunch, only one or two pieces of the back buttocks are left to wait for some customers to come temporarily, leaving one person to take care of them. The day's business has been done, and the shop hall is idle.店堂闲下来了。别的肉案子，闲着就闲着吧。庞家的人可真会想法子。他们在肉案子的对面，设了一道拦柜，卖茶叶。茶叶和猪肉是两码事，怎么能卖到一起去呢？——可是，又为什么一定不能卖到一起去呢？东大街没有一家茶叶店，要买茶叶就得走一趟北市口。有了这样一个卖茶叶的地方，省走好多路。卖茶叶，有一个人盯着就行了。有时叫一个小伙计来支应。有时老大或老三来看一会。有时，庞家的三妯娌之一，也来店堂里坐着，包包茶叶，收收钱。这半间店堂的茶叶店生意很好。
The shop is idle. Other meat cases, just be idle. The people of the Pang family really know how to think. They set up a locker opposite the meat case to sell tea. Tea and pork are two different things, how can they be sold together? ——But why can't they be sold together? There is no tea shop on East Street, and you have to go to Beishikou to buy tea. With such a place to sell tea, you have to walk a lot of roads. When selling tea, just have one person watching. Sometimes a young man is called to support. Sometimes the eldest or third child comes to see for a while. Sometimes, one of the three sisters of the Pang family also came to sit in the shop, wrapping tea and collecting money. The tea shop in this half of the shop is doing very well.庞家三弟兄一个是一个。老大稳重，老二干练，老三是个文武全才。他们长得比别人高出一头。老三尤其肥白高大。他下午没事，常在越塘高空场上练石担子、石锁。他还会写字，写刘石庵体的行书。这里店铺都兴装着花槅子。槅子留出一方空白，可以贴字画。别家都是请人写画的。庞家肉案子是庞老三自己写的字。他大概很崇拜赵子龙。别人家槅心里写的是“春眠不觉晓，处处闻啼鸟”，“夫天地者万物之逆旅，光阴者百代之过客”之类，他写的都是《三国演义》里赞赵子龙的诗。
One of the three brothers of the Pang family is one. The eldest is stable, the second is capable, and the third is an all-rounder. They look taller than others. The third is especially fat and tall. He has nothing to do in the afternoon, and often practices stone burdens and stone locks on the Yuetang high-altitude field. He can also write, writing Liu Shi'an's running script. The shops here are all equipped with flower barrels. The barrel leaves a blank space where calligraphy and painting can be pasted. Other families ask people to paint. The Pang family meat case was written by Pang Laosan himself. He probably admires Zhao Zilong very much. In other people's hearts, he wrote "Spring sleep without realizing dawn, hearing birds singing everywhere", "Heaven and earth are the inn of all things, and time is a passerby for a hundred generations", etc., and he wrote poems praising Zhao Zilong in "Romance of the Three Kingdoms".庞家这三个妯娌：一个赛似一个的漂亮，一个赛似一个的能干。她们都非常勤快。天不亮就起来，烧水，煮猪食，喂猪。白天就坐在穿堂里做针线。都是光梳头，净洗脸，穿得整整齐齐，头上戴着金簪子，手上戴着麻花银镯。人们走到庞家门前，就觉得跟前一亮。
The three sisters of the Pang family: one is as beautiful as the other, and the other is as capable as the other. They are all very diligent. Get up before dawn, boil water, cook pig food, and feed pigs. During the day, they sit in the hall and do needlework. They all comb their hair, wash their faces, dress neatly, wear gold hairpins on their heads, and wear twist silver bracelets on their hands. When people walk to the door of the Pang family, they feel that they are shining in front of them.到粥厂放粥，她们就一人拎一个子去打粥。
When they go to the porridge factory to put porridge, they each carry a  to make porridge.这不免会引起人们议论：“戴着金簪子去打粥！——侉奶奶打粥，你庞家也打粥？！”大家都知道，她们打了粥来是不吃的，——喂猪！因此，越塘、螺蛳坝一带人对庞家虽很羡慕并不亲近。都觉得庞家的人太精了。庞家的人缘不算好。别人也知道，庞家人从心里看不起别人，尤其是这三个女的。
This will inevitably cause people to talk: "Wear a gold hairpin to make porridge!" ——Grandma makes porridge, and your Pang family also makes porridge?!" Everyone knows that they don't eat porridge ,—— feed the pigs! Therefore, although the people in Yuetang and Luoshiba are very envious of the Pang family, they are not close to them. They all think that the people of the Pang family are too smart. The Pang family's popularity is not good. Others also know that the Pang family looks down on others from the bottom of their hearts, especially these three women.越塘边发生了从未见过的奇事。
A strange thing happened that I had never seen before.这一年雨水特别大，臭水河的水平了岸，水都漫到后街街面上来了。地方上的居民铺户共同商议，决定挖开螺蛳坝，在淤塞的旧河槽挖一道沟，把臭水河的水引到越塘河里去。这道沟只两尺宽。臭水河的水位比越塘高得多。水在沟里流得像一枝箭。
This year, the rain was particularly heavy, and the stinky water river was leveled, and the water overflowed to the back street. The local residents and shopkeepers discussed together and decided to dig a snail dam and dig a ditch in the silted old river trough to divert the water from the stinky water river into the Yuetang River. The ditch is only two feet wide. The water level of the stinky water river is much higher than that of Yuetang. The water flows like an arrow in the ditch.流着，流着，一个在岸边做桶的孩子忽然惊叫起来：
“鱼！”
一条长有尺半的大鲤鱼叭的一声蹦到岸上来了。接着，一条，一条，又一条，鲤鱼！鲤鱼！鲤鱼！
Flowing, flowing, a child making a bucket on the shore suddenly exclaimed: "Fish!" A large carp about a foot and a half long jumped to the shore with a sound. Then, one, one, another, carp! Carp! Carp!不知从哪里来的那么多的鲤鱼。它们戗着急水往上窜，不断地蹦到岸上。桶店家的男人、女人、大人、小孩，都奔到沟边来捉鱼。有人搬了脚盆放在沟边，等鲤鱼往里跳。大家约定，每家的盆，放在自己家门口，鱼跳进谁家的盆算谁的。
So many carp came from nowhere. They rushed up through the rushing water and kept jumping to the shore. The men, women, adults, and children of the bucket shop all ran to the edge of the ditch to catch fish. Someone moved the foot basin and placed it on the edge of the ditch, waiting for the carp to jump in. Everyone agreed that each family's basin would be placed at their doorstep, and whose pot the fish jumped into would be whose own.他们正在商议，庞家的几个人搬了四个大杀猪盆，在水沟流入越塘入口处挨排放好了。人们小声嘟囔：“真是手尖眼快啊！”但也没有办法。不是说谁家的盆放在谁家门口么？庞家的盆是放在庞家的门口（当然他家门口到河槽还有一个距离），庞家杀猪盆又大，放的地方又好，鱼直往里跳。人们不满意，但是好在家家的盆里都不断跳进鱼来，人们不断地欢呼，狂叫，简直好像做着一个欢喜而又荒唐的梦，高兴压过了不平。
They were discussing that several people from the Pang family moved four large pig killing basins and discharged them at the entrance of the ditch into the Yuetang. People muttered in a low voice: "It's really sharp-eyed!" But there is no way. Isn't it about whose pot is placed at whose doorstep? The Pang family's basin was placed at the door of the Pang family (of course, there is still a distance from his door to the river trough), the Pang family's pig killing basin was big, the place to put it was good, and the fish jumped straight in. People were not satisfied, but fortunately, the fish kept jumping into the basins of the family, and people kept cheering and screaming, as if they were having a happy and absurd dream, and the joy overwhelmed the injustice.这两天，桶匠家家家吃鱼，喝酒。这一辈子没有这样痛快地吃过鱼。一面开怀地嚼着鱼肉，一面还觉得天地间竟有这等怪事：鱼往盆里跳，实在不可思议。
In the past two days, every cooper eats fish and drinks. I have never eaten fish so happily in my life. While chewing fish happily, I also felt that there was such a strange thing in heaven and earth: fish jumping into the basin, which was incredible.两天后，臭水河的积水流泄得差不多了，螺蛳坝重新堵上，沟里没有水了，也没有鱼了，岸上到处是鱼鳞。
Two days later, the stagnant water of the Stinky Water River was almost drained, and the snail dam was re-blocked, there was no water in the ditch, no fish, and the shore was full of fish scales.庞家桶里的鱼最多。但是庞家这两天没有吃鱼。他家吃的是鱼籽、鱼脏。鱼呢？这妯娌三个都把来用盐揉了，肚皮里撑一根芦柴棍，一条一条挂在门口的檐下晾着，挂了一溜。
The Pang family has the most fish in the bucket. But the Pang family has not eaten fish in the past two days. His family eats fish roe and fish dirt. Where is the fish? The three of them rubbed it with salt, and put a reed stick in their belly, hanging it one by one under the eaves at the door, and hung it for a while.把鱼已经通通吃光了的桶匠走到庞家门前，一个对一个说：“真是鱼有眼睛，谁家兴旺，它就往谁家盆里跳啊！”
The cooper who had eaten all the fish walked to the door of the Pang family and said to the other one by one: "Fish really have eyes, whoever prospers, it will jump into whose basin!" ”正在穿堂里做针线的妯娌三个都听见了。三嫂子抬头看了二嫂子一眼，二嫂子看了大嫂子一眼，大嫂子又向两个弟媳妇都看了一眼。她们低下头来继续做针线。她们的嘴角都挂着一种说不清的表情。是对自己的得意？是对别人的鄙夷？
The three sisters-in-law who were doing needlework in the hall all heard it. The third sister-in-law looked up at the second sister-in-law, the second sister-in-law glanced at the eldest sister-in-law, and the eldest sister-in-law glanced at both sisters-in-law. They lowered their heads and continued to do needlework. The corners of their mouths all had an indescribable expression. Is it pride in yourself? Is it contempt for others?一九八一年六月十八日承德避暑山庄

[1] 本篇原载《北京文学》1982年第二期；初收《晚饭花集》，人民文学出版社，1985年3月。
June 18, 1981 Chengde Summer Resort [1] This article was originally published in the second issue of "Beijing Literature", 1982; First Received "Dinner Flower Collection", People's Literature Publishing House, March 1985.[2] 清末邑人谈人格有《警火》诗即咏此事，诗有小序，并录如下：警火送灶后里胥沿街鸣锣于黄昏时，呼“小心火烛”。岁除即叩户乞赏。烛双辉，香一炷，敬惟司命朝天去。云车风马未归来，连宵灯火谁持护。铜钲入耳警黄昏，侧耳有语还重申：“缸注水，灶徙薪”，沿街一一呼之频。唇干舌燥诚苦辛，不谋而告君何人？烹羊酌醴欢除夕，司命归来醉一得。今宵无用更鸣钲，一笑敲门索酒值。从谈的诗中我们知道两件事。一是这种习俗原来由来已久，敲锣喊叫的正是李三这样的“里胥”。二是为什么在那样日子喊叫。原来是因为那时灶王爷上天去了，火烛没人管了。这实在是很有意思。不过，真实的原因还是岁暮风高，容易失火，与灶王的上天去汇报工作关系不大。
[2] At the end of the Qing Dynasty, the townspeople talked about the personality of the poem "Police Fire", which sang about this matter, and the poem had a small preface, and it was recorded as follows:  After sending the stove id_00001, the neighbor sounded the gong along the street at dusk, shouting "Be careful of the fire". At the end of the year, knock on the door and beg for rewards.  candles are twinked, a stick of incense, and respectfully go to the sky. The cloud car and the wind horse have not returned, and who will protect the lights all night. The copper gong enters the ear to warn of dusk, and there is a word in the ear: "The tank is filled with water, and the stove moves firewood", and the call is frequent along the street. Dry lips and dry tongue are bitter and bitter, who will you tell you? Cook lamb and drink sweet Chinese New Year's Eve, and get drunk when you return. Tonight, it's useless to ring the gong, and knock on the door with a smile to ask for the value of the wine. From the poem discussed, we know two things. First, this custom has been around for a long time, and it is Li San who shouts the gong. The second is why he shouted on such a day. It turned out that it was because the Stove King went to heaven at that time, and no one took care of the fire. This is really interesting. However, the real reason is that the wind is high at the end of the year, and it is easy to catch fire, which has little to do with the Kitchen King's heaven to report the work.[3] “撂远些”是说不要挨床太近，以免炉中残火烧着被褥。

晚饭后的故事

晚饭后的故事[1]
[3] "Stay away" means not to get too close to the bed, so as not to burn the bedding in the residual fire in the stove. Stories After Dinner[1]京剧导演郭庆春就着一碟猪耳朵喝了二两酒，咬着一条顶花带刺的黄瓜吃了半斤过了凉水的麻酱面，叼着前门烟，捏了一把芭蕉扇，坐在阳台上的竹躺椅上乘凉。他脱了个光脊梁，露出半身白肉。天渐渐黑下来了。楼下的马缨花散发着一阵一阵的清香。衡水老白干的饮后回甘和马缨花的香味，使得郭导演有点醺醺然了……
Peking Opera director Guo Qingchun drank two taels of wine with a plate of pig ears, ate half a pound of sesame sauce noodles with thorny cucumbers on the top flower, held a cigarette at the front door, pinched a banana fan, and sat on a bamboo lounge chair on the balcony to enjoy the coolness. He took off his bare spine and exposed half of his white flesh. It's getting dark. The lantana flowers downstairs exude bursts of fragrance. The sweetness of Hengshui Lao Baigan and the fragrance of lantana made Director Guo a little drunk......郭庆春小时候，家里很穷苦。父亲死得早，母亲靠缝穷维持一家三口的生活，——郭庆春还有个弟弟，比他小四岁。每天早上，母亲蒸好一屉窝头，留给他们哥俩，就夹着一个针线笸箩，上市去了。地点没有定准，哪里穿破衣服的人多就奔哪里。但总也不出那几个地方。郭庆春就留在家里看着弟弟。他有时也领着弟弟出去玩，去看过妈给人缝穷。妈靠墙坐在街边的一个马扎子上，在闹市之中，在车尘马足之间，在人们的腿脚之下，挣着他们明天要吃的杂和面儿。穷人家的孩子懂事早。冬天，郭庆春知道妈一定很冷；夏天，妈一定很热，很渴，很困。缝穷的冬天和夏天都特别长。郭庆春的街坊、亲戚都比较贫苦，但是郭庆春从小就知道缝穷的比许多人更卑屈，更低贱。他跟着大人和比他大些的孩子学会了说许多北京的俏皮话、歇后语：“武大郎盘杠子，——上下够不着”，“户不拉喂饭，——不正经玩儿”等等，有一句歇后语他绝对不说，小时候不说，长大以后也不说：“缝穷的撒尿，——瞅不冷子”。有一回一个大孩子当他面说了一句，他满脸通红，跟他打了一架。那孩子其实是无心说的，他不明白郭庆春为什么生那么大的气。
When Guo Qingchun was a child, his family was very poor. His father died early, and his mother relied on sewing to support the family of three,—— Guo Qingchun also had a younger brother, four years younger than him. Every morning, my mother steamed a drawer of nests, left them to their brothers, and went to the market with a needle and thread basket. The location is not fixed, and there are many people wearing torn clothes. But there are always those places. Guo Qingchun stayed at home to watch his brother. He sometimes took his younger brother out to play and saw his mother sew poorly. Mom sat against the wall on a horse on the street, in the busy city, between the dust of cars, under people's legs and feet, earning the mixed noodles they would eat tomorrow. Children from poor families are sensible early. In winter, Guo Qingchun knew that his mother must be cold; In summer, my mother must be very hot, thirsty, and sleepy. The winter and summer of poor sewing are particularly long. Guo Qingchun's neighbors and relatives are relatively poor, but Guo Qingchun has known since he was a child that the poor are more humble and lowly than many people. He learned to say a lot of Beijing witticism and afterwords from adults and children older than him: "Wu Dalang is a pole,—— you can't reach it", "Don't feed the household,——,—— it's not a serious game", etc. Once an older child said something in front of him, his face turned red and he got into a fight with him. The child actually said it unintentionally, he didn't understand why Guo Qingchun was so angry.这个穷苦的出身，日后给他带来了无限的好处。
郭庆春十二三岁就开始出去奔自己的衣食了。
This poor birth brought him infinite benefits in the future. Guo Qingchun began to go out to run for his own food and clothing when he was twelve or thirteen years old.他有个舅舅，是在剧场（那会不叫剧场，叫戏园子，或者更古老一些，叫戏馆子）里“写字”的。写字是写剧场门口的海报，和由失业的闲汉扛着走遍九城的海报牌。那会已有报纸，剧场都在报上登了广告，可是很多人还是看了海报牌，知道哪家剧场今天演什么戏，才去买票的。舅舅的光景比郭家好些，也好不到哪里去。他时常来瞧瞧他的唯一的妹妹。他提出，庆春长得快齐他的肩膀高了（舅舅是个矮子），能把自己吃的窝头挣出来了。舅舅出面向放印子的借了一笔本钱，趸了一担西瓜。郭庆春在陕西巷口外摆了一个西瓜摊，把瓜切成块，卖西瓜。
He had an uncle who "wrote" in the theater (which would not be called a theater, called a theater, or more anciently, called a theater). Writing was to write posters at the entrance of the theater and posters carried by unemployed idlers all over the nine cities. There were already newspapers and theaters advertised in the newspapers, but many people still looked at the posters and knew which theater was performing what play today before buying tickets. My uncle's situation was better than the Guo family, but not much better. He often came to see his only sister. He proposed that Qingchun was almost as tall as his shoulders (his uncle was a short man) and could earn his own food. My uncle borrowed a sum of capital from the printer and took a load of watermelon. Guo Qingchun set up a watermelon stall outside the entrance of Shaanxi Alley, cut melons into pieces, and sold watermelons.他穿了条大裤衩，腰里插着一把芭蕉扇，学着吆唤：
“唉，闹块来！
脆沙瓤，
赛水糖，
唉，闹块来！……”
He wore a pair of big pants and a banana fan in his waist, learning to shout: "Alas, make trouble! Crispy sand pulp{{id_0000}}, Sai Shui Sugar{{id_0000}}, Alas, come on! ……”他头一回听见自己吆唤，有一种说不出来的新鲜感。他竟能吆唤得那样像。这不是学着玩，这是真事！他的弟弟坐在小板凳上看哥哥做买卖，也觉得很新鲜。他佩服哥哥。晚上，哥俩收了摊子，飞跑回家，把卖得的钱往妈面前一放：
The first time he heard himself shouting, there was an indescribable freshness. He could actually shout like that. It's not about learning to play, it's true! His younger brother sat on a small bench and watched his brother do business, and he also felt very fresh. He admired his brother. In the evening, the brothers closed the stall, flew home, and put the money they sold in front of their mother:“妈！钱！我挣的！”
妈这天给他们炒了个麻豆腐吃。
这种新鲜感很快就消失了。西瓜生意并不那样好。尤其是下雨天。他恨下雨。
"Mom! Money! I earned it! ” Mom fried a hemp tofu for them that day. The freshness quickly disappeared. The watermelon business was not so good. Especially on rainy days. He hated rain.有一天，倒是大太阳，卖了不少钱。从陕西巷里面开出一辆军用卡车，一下子把他的西瓜摊带翻了，西瓜滚了一地。他顾不上看摔破了、压烂了多少，纵起身来一把抓住卡车挡板后面的铁把手，哭喊着：
One day, it was a big sun and sold a lot of money. A military truck drove out of the Shaanxi alley, overturned his watermelon stall all at once, and the watermelon rolled all over the ground. He didn't care about how much it was broken and crushed, so he stood up and grabbed the iron handle behind the truck baffle and cried:“你赔我！你赔我瓜！你赔我！”
卡车不理碴，尽快地往前开。
“你赔我！你赔我瓜！”
他的小弟弟迈着小腿在后面追：
“哥哥！哥哥！”
路旁行人大声喊：
"You pay me! You compensate me! You compensate me!" ” The truck ignored the ballast and drove forward as soon as possible. "You compensate me! You compensate me! ” His little brother chased after him with his calves: "Brother! Brother! ” Pedestrians on the side of the road shouted loudly:“孩子，你撒手！他们不会赔你的！他们不讲理！孩子，撒手！快撒手！”
"Child, you let go! They won't pay you! They are unreasonable! Child, let go! Let go!" ”卡车飞快的开着，快开到珠市口了。郭庆春的胳臂吃不住劲了。他一松手，面朝下平拍在马路上。缓了半天，才坐起来。脸上、胸脯拉了好些的道道。围了好些人看。弟弟直哭：“哥哥！唔，哥哥！”郭庆春拉着弟弟的手往回走，一面回头向卡车开去的方向骂：“我操你妈！操你臭大兵的妈！”
The truck drove fast and was about to drive to the entrance of the pearl market. Guo Qingchun's arm couldn't hold back. As soon as he let go, he slapped the road face down. After a long time, he sat up. The face and chest were stretched a lot. Surrounded by many people. The younger brother cried: "Brother! Hmm, brother!" Guo Qingchun took his brother's hand and walked back, while turning back and scolding in the direction of the truck: "Fuck your mother! Fuck your stinky soldier's mother!" ”在水管龙头上冲了冲，用擦西瓜刀的布擦擦脸，他还得做买卖。——他的滚散了的瓜已经有好心的大爷给他捡回来了。他接着吆唤：
“唉，闹块来！
我操你妈！
闹块来！
我操你臭大兵的妈！
He rushed on the water pipe faucet and wiped his face with a watermelon knife cloth, and he still had to do business. ——His scattered melon had already been picked up by a kind uncle for him. He then shouted: "Alas, make trouble! I'm fucking you! Trouble! I'm fucking you stinky soldier's mother!闹块来！”
Trouble! ”…………
舅舅又来了。舅舅听说外甥摔了的事了。他跟妹妹说：“庆春到底还小，在街面上混饭吃，还早了点。我看叫他学戏吧。没准儿将来有个出息。这孩长相不错，有个人缘儿，扮上了，不难看。我听他的吆唤，有点膛音。马连良家原先不也是挺苦的吗？你瞧人家这会儿，净吃蹦虾仁！”
Uncle is here again. Uncle heard about his nephew's fall. He said to his sister: "Qingchun is still young, and it is a little early to eat on the street. I think I will ask him to learn opera. Maybe he will have a future in the future. This child is good-looking, popular, dressed up, not ugly. I listened to his shout, a little muzzled. Wasn't Ma Lianliang's family quite bitter before? Look at people now, they only eat shrimp! ”妈知道学戏很苦，有点舍不得。经舅舅再三开导，同意了。舅舅带他到华春社科班报了名，立了“关书”。舅舅是常常写关书的，写完了，念给妹妹听听。郭庆春的妈听到：“生死由命，概不负责。若有逃亡，两家寻找。”她听懂了，眼泪直往下掉。她说：“孩子，你要肚里长牙，千万可不能半途而废！我就指着你了。你还有个弟弟！”郭庆春点头，说：“妈，您放心！”
Mom knew that learning opera was very hard, and she was a little reluctant. After repeated enlightenment, my uncle agreed. My uncle took him to Huachun Social Science Class to sign up and set up a "Guanshu". My uncle often writes books, and after writing them, he reads them to his sister. Guo Qingchun's mother heard: "Life and death are up to fate, and I am not responsible. If there is an escape, the two families will look for it." She understood, and tears fell. She said, "Child, you have teeth in your belly, you must not give up halfway! I'm pointing at you. You still have a younger brother!" Guo Qingchun nodded and said, "Mom, don't worry!" ”学戏比卖西瓜有意思！
Learning to play is more interesting than selling watermelons!耗顶，撕腿。耗顶得耗一炷香，大汗珠子叭叭地往下滴，滴得地下湿了一片。撕腿，单这个“撕”字就叫人肝颤。把腿楞给撕开，撕得能伸到常人达不到的角度。学生疼得真掉眼泪，抄功的董老师还是使劲地把孩子们的两只小腿往两边掰，毫不怜惜，一面嘴里说：“若要人前显贵，必得人后受罪，小子，忍着点！”
Consume the top, tear the legs. It took a stick of incense to consume, and the sweat beads dripped down, and the ground was wet. Tearing the legs, the word "tearing" alone makes people tremble. Tear the leg opens and tear them so that they can reach an angle that ordinary people can't reach. The students were in tears in pain, and Teacher Dong, who was copying the work, still broke the children's two calves to both sides without pity, and said in his mouth: "If you want to be noble in front of others, you will suffer later, boy, bear with it!" ”接着，开小翻、开虎跳、前扑、蹿毛、倒插虎、乌龙搅柱、拧旋子、练云里翻……
这比卖西瓜有意思。
Then, open a small flip, open a tiger jump, pounce forward, jump the hair, insert the tiger upside down, stir the oolong pillar, twist the rotator, and practice the cloud flip...... It's more interesting than selling watermelons.吃的是棒子面窝头、“三合油”，——韭菜花、青椒糊、酱油，倒在一个木桶里，拿开水一沏，这就是菜。学生们都吃得很香。郭庆春在出科以后多少年，在大城市的大旅馆里，甚至在国外，还会有时忽然想起三合油的香味，非常想喝一碗。大白菜下来的时候，就顿顿都是大白菜。有的时候，师父——班主忽然高了兴，在他的生日，或是买了几件得意的古董玉器，就吩咐厨子：“给他们炒蛋炒饭！”蛋炒饭油汪汪的，装在一个大缸里，管饱！撑得这些孩子一个一个挺腰凸肚。
Eat stick noodles, "triple oil",—— leek flowers, green pepper paste, soy sauce, pour it into a wooden bucket, take boiling water, and this is the dish. The students all ate very well. Many years after Guo Qingchun left the department, in big hotels in big cities, and even abroad, he would sometimes suddenly think of the fragrance of triple oil and wanted to drink a bowl. When the Chinese cabbage came down, it was all Chinese cabbage. Sometimes, the master, the class leader, suddenly became happy, and on his birthday, or bought a few pieces of proud antique jade, he ordered the chef: "Give them scrambled eggs and fried rice!" The egg fried rice is oily and packed in a large vat, and it is full! These children were supported one by one.师父是个喜怒无常的人。高了兴，给蛋炒饭吃，稍不高兴，就“打通堂”。全科学生，每人五板子，平均对待，无一幸免。这板子平常就供在祖师爷龛子的旁边，谁也不许碰，神圣得很。到要用的时候，“请”下来。掌刑的，就是抄功的董老师。他打学生很有功夫，节奏分明，不紧不慢，轻重如一，不偏不向。师父说一声“搬板凳！”董老师在鼻孔里塞两撮鼻烟，抹了个蝴蝶，用一块大手绢把右手腕子缠住（防止闪了腕子），学生就很自觉地从大到小挨着个儿撩起衣服，趴到板凳上，老老实实，规规矩矩，挨那份内应得的重重的五下。
Master is a moody person. If you are happy, give the egg fried rice to eat, and if you are a little unhappy, you will "open up the hall". All students, each with five boards, are treated evenly, and none of them are spared. This board is usually placed next to the ancestral master's shrine, and no one is allowed to touch it, which is very sacred. When it is time to use it, "please" come down. The person in charge of the punishment is Teacher Dong, who is copying the skills. He beats the students very well, with a clear rhythm, unhurried, light and heavy, and unbiased. Master said, "Move the bench!" Teacher Dong stuffed two pinches of snuff into his nostrils, smeared a butterfly, and wrapped his right wrist with a large handkerchief (to prevent flashing his wrist), and the students consciously lifted their clothes from the oldest to the smallest, lay down on the bench, honestly and well-behaved, and received the heavy five strokes they deserved.“打通堂”的原因很多。几个馋嘴师哥把师父买回来放在冰箱里准备第二天吃的熏鸡偷出来分吃了；一个调皮捣蛋的学生在董老师的鼻烟壶里倒进了胡椒面了；一个小学生在台上尿了裤子了……都可以连累大家挨一顿打。
There are many reasons for "opening up the hall". A few gluttonous brothers bought the master back and put it in the refrigerator, stole the smoked chicken to be eaten the next day, and shared it; a mischievous student poured pepper noodles into Teacher Dong's snuff bottle; a primary school student urinated his pants on the stage...... can affect everyone and be beaten.“打通堂”给同科的师兄师弟留下极其甘美的回忆。他们日后聚在一起，常常谈起某一次“打通堂”的经过，彼此互相补充，谈得津津有味。“打通堂”使他们的同学意识变得非常深刻，非常坚实。这对于维系他们的感情，作用比一册印刷精美的同学录要大得多。
"Opening up the hall" left extremely sweet memories for the brothers and brothers in the same subject. They got together in the future and often talked about the process of "opening up the hall", complementing each other and talking with relish. "Opening up the hall" made their classmates' consciousness very deep and very solid. This plays a much greater role in maintaining their relationship than a beautifully printed classmate record.一同喝三合油，一同挨“打通堂”，还一同生虱子，一同长疥，三四年很快过去了。孩子们都学会了几出戏，能应堂会，能上戏园子演出了。郭庆春学的是武生，能唱《哪吒闹海》、《蜈蚣岭》、《恶虎村》……（后来他当了教师，给学生开蒙，也是这几出）。因为他是个小白胖子（吃那种伙食也能长胖，真也是奇迹），长得挺好玩，在节日应景戏《天河配》里又总扮一个洗澡的小仙女，因此到他已经四十几岁，有儿有女的时候，旧日的同学还动不动以此事来取笑：“你得了吧！到天河里洗你的澡去吧！”
Drinking three cups of oil together, being "open to the hall" together, and having lice and scabies together, three or four years passed quickly. The children have learned a few plays, can attend hall meetings, and can perform in the theater garden. Guo Qingchun studied martial arts and could sing "Nezha Troubled Sea", "Centipede Ridge", and "Evil Tiger Village"...... (Later, he became a teacher and enlightened students, which were also these shows). Because he is a little white fat man (eating that kind of food can also make you gain weight, it is really a miracle), he looks very fun, and he always pretends to be a little fairy taking a bath in the festival drama "Tianhe Match", so when he is in his forties and has children, his old classmates still make fun of this matter at every turn: "You have it! Go to the Tianhe River to take your bath! ”他们每天排着队上剧场。都穿的长衫、棉袍，冬天戴着小帽头，夏天露着刮得发青的光脑袋。从科班到剧场，要经过一个胡同。胡同里有一家卖炒疙疸的，掌柜的是个跟郭庆春的妈差不多岁数的大娘，姓许。许大娘特别喜欢孩子，——男孩子。科班的孩子经过胡同时，她总站在门口一个一个地看他们。孩子们也知道许大娘喜欢他们，一个一个嘴很甜，走过跟前，都叫她：
They line up to go to the theater every day. They all wear long gowns and cotton robes, small hats in winter, and blue-shaved heads in summer. From the class to the theater, you have to pass through an alley. There is a shopkeeper in the alley who sells fried pimples, and the shopkeeper is an aunt who is about the same age as Guo Qingchun's mother, surnamed Xu. Aunt Xu especially likes children ,—— boys. When the children of the class passed through the alley, she always stood at the door and looked at them one by one. The children also knew that Aunt Xu liked them, and they all said that they were very sweet, and when they walked in front of them, they all called her:“大娘！”
“哎！”
"Auntie!" "Hey!" "Auntie!" "Hey!"“大娘！”
“哎！”
"Auntie!" "Hey!" "Auntie!" "Hey!"许大娘知道科班里吃得很苦，就常常抓机会拉一两个孩子上她铺子里吃一盘炒疙疸。轮流请。华春社的学生几乎全吃过她的炒疙疸。以后他们只要吃炒疙疸，就会想起许大娘。吃的次数最多的是郭庆春。科班学生排队从许大娘铺子门前走过，大娘常常扬声叫庆春：“庆春哪，你放假回家的时候，到大娘这儿弯一下。”——“哎。”
Aunt Xu knew that the class was very hard, so she often took the opportunity to pull one or two children to her shop to eat a plate of fried lumps. Take turns, please. Almost all the students of Huachun Club have eaten her fried lumps. In the future, as long as they eat fried rice balls, they will think of Aunt Xu. The one who eats the most is Guo Qingchun. The students lined up to walk past Aunt Xu's shop, and the aunt often shouted Qingchun: "Qingchun, when you go home from vacation, bend over to Auntie." ——"Hey." ”许大娘有个女儿，叫招弟，比郭庆春小两岁。她很爱和庆春一块玩。许大娘家后面有一个很小的院子，院里有一棵马缨花，两盆茉莉，还有几盆草花。郭庆春吃完了炒疙疸（许大娘在疙疸里放了好些牛肉，加了半勺油），他们就在小院里玩。郭庆春陪她玩女孩子玩的抓子儿，跳房子；招弟也陪庆春玩男孩子玩的弹球。谁输了，就让赢家弹一下脑绷，或是拧一下耳朵，刮一下鼻子，或是亲一下。庆春赢了，招弟歪着脑袋等他来亲。庆春只是尖着嘴，在她脸上碰一下。
Aunt Xu has a daughter named Zhao Di, who is two years younger than Guo Qingchun. She loves to play with Qingchun. There is a small yard behind Aunt Xu's house, with a lantana, two pots of jasmine, and a few pots of grass flowers. After Guo Qingchun finished stir-fried pimples (Aunt Xu put a lot of beef in the pimples and added half a spoonful of oil), they played in the small courtyard. Guo Qingchun accompanied her to play girls' catches and hopscotch; Zhao Di also accompanied Qingchun to play boys' pinball. Whoever loses will let the winner bounce his brain, or twist his ears, scratch his nose, or kiss him. Qingchun won, and Zhao Di tilted his head and waited for him to kiss. Qingchun just pointed his mouth and touched her face.“亲都不会！饶你一下，重来！”
郭庆春看见招弟耳垂后面有一颗红痣（他头二年就看到了），就在那个地方使劲地亲了一下。招弟格格地笑个不停：
“痒痒！”
"I won't do it! Spare you, do it again!" ” Guo Qingchun saw a red mole behind Zhao Di's earlobe (he had seen it in the first two years), so he kissed it hard in that place. Zhao Di laughed non-stop: "Tickle!"从此每次庆春赢了，就亲那儿。招弟也愿意让他亲这儿。每次都格格地笑，都说“痒痒”。
有一次许大娘看见郭庆春亲招弟，说：“哪有这样玩的！”许大娘心里一沉：孩子们自己不知道，他们一天一天大了哇！
From then on, every time Qingchun won, he would kiss there. Zhao Di is also willing to let him kiss here. Every time he smiled, he said "itchy". Once Aunt Xu saw Guo Qingchun recruiting her brother and said, "How can you play like this!" Aunt Xu's heart sank: The children themselves didn't know, they were getting older day by day!渐渐的，他们也知道自己大了，就不再这么玩了。招弟爱瞧戏。她家离戏园子近，跟戏园子的人都很熟，她可以随时钻进去看一会。她看郭庆春的《恶虎村》，也看别人的戏，尤其爱看旦角戏。看得多了，她自己也能唱两段。郭庆春会拉一点胡琴。后两年吃完了炒疙疸，就是庆春拉胡琴，招弟唱“苏三离了洪洞县”、“儿的父去投军无音信”……招弟嗓子很好。郭庆春松了琴弦，合上弓，常说：“你该唱戏去的，耽误了，可惜！”
Gradually, they also knew that they were older and stopped playing like this. Zhao brother loves to watch plays. Her home is close to the theater and she is very familiar with the people in the theater, so she can go in and watch it for a while at any time. She watches Guo Qingchun's "Evil Tiger Village" and other people's plays, especially Danjiao operas. After watching a lot, she can sing two pieces herself. Guo Qingchun can play a little huqin. In the next two years, after eating fried lumps, Qingchun played the huqin, and Zhao Di sang "Su San left Hongdong County" and "My father went to join the army without news"...... Zhao Di's voice is very good. Guo Qingchun loosened the strings, closed the bow, and often said: "You should go singing, it's a pity!" ”人大了，懂事了。他们有时眼对眼看着，看半天，不说话。马缨花一阵一阵地散发着清香。
People are older and more sensible. They sometimes look at each other, look at each other for a long time, and don't speak. Lantana exudes fragrance one by one.许大娘也有了点心事。她很喜欢庆春。她也知道，如果由她做主把招弟许给庆春，招弟是愿意的。可是，庆春日后能成气候么？唱戏这玩意，唱红了，荣华富贵；唱不红，流落街头。等二年再说吧！
Aunt Xu also has something on her mind. She likes Qingchun very much. She also knew that if she made the decision to promise Qingchun, she would be willing. However, can Qingchun become a climate in the future? Singing is popular, glorious and rich; if you can't sing it, you will live on the streets. Let's talk about it in two years!残酷的现实把许大娘的这点淡淡的梦砸得粉碎：庆春在快毕业的那年倒了仓，倒得很苦，——一字不出！“子弟无音客无本”，郭庆春见过多少师哥，在科班里是好角儿，一旦倒了仓，倒不过来，拉洋车，卖落花生，卖大碗茶。他惊恐万状，一身一身地出汗。他天不亮就到窑台喊嗓子，他听见自己那一点点病猫一样的嘶哑的声音，心都凉了。夜里做梦，念了一整出《连环套》，“愚下保镖，路过马兰关口……”脆亮响堂，高兴得从床上跳起来。一醒来，仍然是一字不出。祖师爷把他的饭碗收去了，他该怎么办呢？许大娘也知道庆春倒仓没倒过来了。招弟也知道了。她们也反反复复想了许多。
The cruel reality smashed Aunt Xu's faint dream: Qingchun collapsed the warehouse in the year he was about to graduate, and he was very bitter ,—— couldn't say a word! "Children have no sound and no book", how many senior brothers have Guo Qingchun seen, he is a good character in the class, once he collapses, he can't pour it, pull a foreign car, sell peanuts, and sell a big bowl of tea. He was terrified and sweating all over. He went to the kiln before dawn to shout his voice, and when he heard his hoarse voice like a sick cat, his heart was cold. In a dream at night, he read a whole "Serial Set", "Foolish bodyguard, passing by Malan Pass......" crisp and bright, jumped up from the bed with joy. When I woke up, I still couldn't say a word. The ancestor took away his job, what should he do? Aunt Xu also knew that Qingchun had not turned upside down. Zhao Di also knew. They also thought about it a lot.郭庆春只有两条路可走：当底包龙套，或是改行。
Guo Qingchun has only two ways to go: take advantage of the situation, or change careers.郭庆春坐科学戏是在敌伪时期，到他该出科时已经是抗战胜利，国民党中央军来了。“想中央，盼中央，中央来了更遭殃。”物价飞涨，剧场不上座。很多人连赶两包（在两处剧场赶两个角色），也奔不出一天的嚼裹儿。有人唱了一天戏，开的份儿只够买两个茄子，一家几口，就只好吃这两个熬茄子。满街都是伤兵，开口就是“老子抗战八年！”动不动就举起双拐打人。没开戏，他们就坐满了戏园子。没法子，就只好唱一出极其寡淡无味的戏，把他们唱走。有一出戏，叫《老道游山》，就一个角色——老道，拿着云帚，游山。游到哪里，“真好景致也”，唱一段，接着再游。没有别的人物，也没有一点故事情节，要唱多长唱多长。这出戏本来是评剧唱，后来京剧也唱。唱得这些兵大爷不耐烦了：“他妈的，这叫什么戏！”一哄而去。等他们走了，再开正戏。
Guo Qingchun sat in science drama during the enemy and puppet period, and by the time he was about to go out, it was already the victory of the Anti-Japanese War, and the Kuomintang Central Army came. "Thinking about the central government, looking forward to the central government, the central government will suffer even more." Prices are soaring, and the theater is not seated. Many people can't even catch two packs (two roles in two theaters) and can't chew for a day. Some people sang a play for a day, and the portion was only enough to buy two eggplants, and a few families had to eat these two boiled eggplants. The streets were full of wounded soldiers, and the opening was "Lao Tzu's eight years of anti-Japanese war!" "Raise crutches and beat people at every turn. Before the play started, they were full of theaters. There was no way, so I had to sing an extremely dull and boring play and sing them away. There is a play called "Lao Dao Traveling the Mountain", just one character - Lao Dao, holding a cloud broom, traveling the mountain. Wherever you swim, "It's a good scene", sing a song, and then swim again. There are no other characters, and there is no storyline, how long and long you have to sing. This play was originally sung by Pingju, and later it was also sung by Peking Opera. The singing made these soldiers impatient: "Fuck, what is this called!" Coaxed away. When they leave, the main play will begin.很多戏曲演员都改了行了。郭庆春的前几科的师哥，有的到保定、石家庄贩鸡蛋，有的在北海管租船，有的卖了糊盐，——盐炒糊了，北京还有极少数人家用它来刷牙，可是这能卖几个钱？……
Many opera actors have changed their careers. Guo Qingchun's senior brothers in the first few subjects, some went to Baoding and Shijiazhuang to sell eggs, some rented boats in Beihai, and some sold paste salt ,—— salt stir-fried, and there are still a very small number of people in Beijing who use it to brush their teeth, but how much can this sell for? ……有嗓子的都没了辙了，何况他这没嗓子的？他在科班虽然不是数一数二的好角儿，可是是能唱一出的。当底包龙套，他不甘心！再说，当底包龙套也吃不饱呀！郭庆春把心一横：干脆，改行！
Those who have a voice are gone, let alone he has no voice? Although he is not one of the best actors in the class, he can sing. He is unwilling to do it! Besides, I can't eat enough at the bottom! Guo Qingchun put his heart aside: Simply, change your career!春秋两季，拉菜车，从广渠门外拉到城里。夏天，卖西瓜。冬天，卖柿子。一车青菜，两千多斤。头几回拉，累得他要吐血。咬咬牙，也就挺过来了。卖西瓜，是他的老行当。西瓜摊还是摆在陕西巷口外。因为嗓子没音，他很少吆唤。但是人大了，有了经验，隔皮知瓤，挑来的瓜个个熟。西瓜片切得很薄，显得块儿大。木板上铺了蓝布，潲了水，显着这些瓜鲜亮水淋，咝咝地往外冒着凉气。卖柿子没有三天的“力笨”，人家咋卖咱咋卖。找个背风的旮旯儿，把柿子挨个儿排在地上，就着路灯的光，照得柿子一个一个黄澄澄的，饱满鼓立，精神好看，谁看了都想到围着火炉嚼着带着冰碴的凉柿子的那股舒服劲儿。卖柿子的怕回暖，尤其怕刮风。一刮风，冻柿子就流了汤了。风再把尘土涂在柿子皮上，又脏又黑，满完！因此，郭庆春就盼着一冬天都是那么干冷干冷的。
In spring and autumn, pull the vegetable cart from outside the Guangqu Gate to the city. In summer, sell watermelons. In winter, sell persimmons. A cart of greens, more than 2,000 catties. The first few times he pulled, he was so tired that he wanted to vomit blood. gritted his teeth and survived. Selling watermelons is his old business. The watermelon stall is still outside the alleys of Shaanxi. Because his voice was silent, he rarely shouted. But when he is older, he has experience, and the melons he picks are all ripe. The watermelon slices are cut very thinly and look big. The wooden board was covered with blue cloth and soaked in water, and it was obvious that these melons were bright and drenched in water, sizzling and sizzling. Selling persimmons does not have three days of "stupidity", how can people sell us. Find a leeward man, line the persimmons on the ground one by one, and under the light of the street lamps, the persimmons are yellow and clear, full and bulging, and the spirit is good-looking. Persimmon sellers are afraid of warming up, especially wind. As soon as the wind blows, the frozen persimmons will run soup. The wind then applies dust to the persimmon skin, which is dirty, black, and full! Therefore, Guo Qingchun is looking forward to being so dry and cold all winter.卖力气，做小买卖，不丢人！街坊邻居不笑话他。他的还在唱戏和已经改了行的师兄弟有时路过，还停下来跟他聊一会。有的师哥劝他别把功撂下，早上起来也到陶然亭喊两嗓子。说是有人倒仓好几年，后来又缓过来的。没准儿，有那一天，还能归到梨园行来。郭庆春听了师哥的话，间长不短的，耗耗腿，拉拉山膀，无非是解闷而已。
Sell your strength, do small business, don't be ashamed! The neighbors don't laugh at him. His brothers who are still singing sometimes pass by and stop to chat with him for a while. Some brothers advised him not to give up his skills, and he also went to Taoranting in the morning to shout two voices. It is said that someone has been out of business for several years, and then it has eased up. Maybe, one day, he will be able to return to the pear garden. Guo Qingchun listened to his brother's words, and the interval was not short, consuming his legs and pulling the mountain, which was nothing more than relieving his boredom.郭庆春没有再去看许大娘。他拉菜车、卖西瓜、卖柿子，不怕碰见别的熟人，可就怕碰见许大娘母女。听说，许大娘搬了家了，搬到哪里，他也没打听。北京城那样大，人一分开，就像树上落下两片叶子，风一吹，各自西东了。
Guo Qingchun didn't go to see Aunt Xu again. He pulled a vegetable cart, sold watermelons, and sold persimmons, and was not afraid of meeting other acquaintances, but he was afraid of meeting Aunt Xu's mother and daughter. I heard that Aunt Xu had moved, and he didn't inquire where she was moving. The city of Beijing is so big, when people are separated, it is like two leaves falling from a tree, and when the wind blows, they go west and east.北京城并不大。
一天晚上，干冷干冷的。郭庆春穿了件小棉袄，蹲在墙旮旯。地面上的冷气从裆下一直透进他的后脊梁。一辆三轮车蹬了过来，车上坐了一个女的。
“三轮，停停。”
Beijing is not big. One night, it was cold and dry. Guo Qingchun wore a small padded jacket and squatted on the wall. The cold air on the ground penetrated from under his crotch into his back spine. A tricycle pedaled over, and a woman sat in the car. "Three rounds, stop."女的揭开盖在腿上的毛毯，下了车。
“这柿子不错，给我包四个。”
她扔下一条手绢，郭庆春挑了四个大的，包上了。他抬起头来，把手绢往上递：是许招弟！穿了一件长毛绒大衣。
许招弟一看，是郭庆春。
The woman lifted the blanket on her leg and got out of the car. "This persimmon is good, give me four." She threw down a handkerchief, and Guo Qingchun picked four large ones and wrapped them. He raised his head and handed the handkerchief up: It's Xu Zhaodi! Wearing a plush coat. Xu Zhaodi took a look and saw that it was Guo Qingchun.“你……这样了！”
郭庆春把脑袋低了下去。
许招弟把柿子钱丢在地下，坐上车，走了。
转过年来，夏天，郭庆春在陕西巷口卖西瓜，正吆唤着（他嗓子有了一点音了），巷里走出一个人来：
"You...... That's it! ” Guo Qingchun lowered his head. Xu Zhaodi threw the persimmon money on the ground, got into the car, and left. In the past year, in the summer, Guo Qingchun was selling watermelons at the entrance of Shaanxi Alley, shouting (his voice had a little sound), and a person came out of the alley:“卖西瓜的，递两个瓜来。——要好的。”
“没错！”
"Sell watermelons, hand over two melons. ——Okay. ” "That's right!"郭庆春挑了两个大黑皮瓜，对旁边的纸烟阁子的掌柜说：“劳您驾，给照看一下瓜摊。”——“你走吧。”郭庆春跟着要瓜的那人走，到了一家，这家正办喜事。堂屋正面挂着大红双喜幔帐，屋里屋外一股炮仗硝烟气味。两边摆着两桌酒。已经行过礼，客人入席了。郭庆春一看，新娘子是许招弟！她烫了发，抹了胭脂口红，耳朵下垂着水钻坠子。郭庆春把两个瓜放在旁边的小方桌上，拔腿就跑。听到后面有人喊：
Guo Qingchun picked two big black skin melons and said to the shopkeeper of the paper cigarette pavilion next to him: "Thank you for driving, take care of the melon stall." ——"You go." Guo Qingchun followed the man who asked for melons and arrived at a house where the house was having a happy event. There is a big red double happiness curtain hanging on the front of the hall, and there is a smell of firecrackers inside and outside the house. There are two tables of wine on both sides. The salute has been given and the guests are seated. Guo Qingchun saw that the bride was Xu Zhaodi! She permed her hair, smeared rouge lipstick, and had rhinestone pendants hanging down her ears. Guo Qingchun put the two melons on the small square table next to him, pulled out his legs and ran away. I heard someone shouting from behind:“卖西瓜的，给你瓜钱！”
这是一个张恨水式的故事，一点小市民的悲欢离合。这样的故事在北京城每天都有。
北京解放了。
"Watermelon sellers, give you melon money!" This is a story of hatred, a little bit of the joys and sorrows of the little citizens. Such stories happen every day in Beijing. Beijing was liberated.解放，使许多人的生活发生了急转直下的变化。许多故事产生了一个原来意想不到的结尾。
郭庆春万万没有想到，他会和一个老干部，一个科长结了婚，并且在结婚以后变成现在的郭导演。
Liberation has brought about a sharp change in the lives of many people. Many stories have produced an originally unexpected ending. Guo Qingchun never expected that he would marry an old cadre and a section chief, and after getting married, he would become the current Director Guo.北京解放以后，物价稳定，没有伤兵，剧场上座很好。很多改了行的演员又纷纷搭班唱戏了。他到他曾经唱过多次戏的剧场去听过几次蹭戏，紧锣密鼓，使他兴奋激动，筋肉伸张。随着锣经，他直替台上的同行使劲。
After the liberation of Beijing, prices were stable, there were no injured soldiers, and the theater was very good. Many actors who have changed their careers have joined classes to sing again. He went to the theater where he had sung many times to listen to the play, and the gong was in full swing, which made him excited and stretched. With the gong scripture, he worked hard for his peers on stage.一个外地剧经到北京来约人。那个贩卖鸡蛋的师哥来找郭庆春：
A foreign drama came to Beijing to make an appointment. The senior brother who sold eggs came to Guo Qingchun:“庆春，他们来找了我。我想去。我提了你。北京的戏不好唱。咱先到外地转转。你的功底我知道，这些年没有全撂下，稍稍练练，能捡回来。听你吆唤，嗓子出来了。咱们一块去吧。学了那些年，能就扔下吗？就你那几出戏，管保能震他们一下子。”
"Qingchun, they came to me. I want to go. I mentioned you. Beijing opera is not easy to sing. Let's go to other places first. I know your skills, I haven't left them all behind over the years, and with a little practice, I can pick them up. Listen to your shout, my voice comes out. Let's go together. After studying for so many years, can you throw it away? Just your few plays, the management and security can shock them all at once. ”郭庆春沉吟了一会，说：“去！”
Guo Qingchun pondered for a while and said, "Go!" ”到了那儿，安顿下了，剧团团长领他们几个新从北京约来的演员去见见当地文化局的领导。戏改科的杨科长接见了他们。杨科长很忙，一会儿接电话，一会在秘书送来的文件收文簿上签字，显得很果断，很有气魄。杨科长勉励了他们几句，说他们是剧团的“新血液”，希望他们发挥自己的专长，为人民服务。郭庆春连连称是。他对杨科长油然产生一种敬重之情。一个女的，能当科长，了不起！他觉得杨科长的举止动作，言谈话语，都像一个男人，不像是个女的。
When they arrived there, they settled down, and the head of the troupe led several of their newly invited actors from Beijing to meet the leaders of the local cultural bureau. Section Chief Yang of the Drama Reform Department received them. Section Chief Yang was very busy, answering the phone for a while, and signing the documents sent by the secretary for a while, looking very decisive and courageous. Section Chief Yang encouraged them a few words, saying that they were the "new blood" of the troupe, and hoped that they would give full play to their expertise and serve the people. Guo Qingchun said yes again and again. He had a sense of respect for Section Chief Yang. A woman can be a section chief, it's amazing! He felt that Section Chief Yang's demeanor, speech, and speech were like a man, not like a woman.重返舞台，心情紧张。一生成败，在此一举。三天“打炮”，提心吊胆。没有想到，一“炮”而红。他第一次听到台下的掌声，好像在做梦。第三天《恶虎村》，出来就有碰头好。以后“四记头”亮相，都有掌声。他扮相好，身上规矩，在台上很有人缘。他也的确是“卯上”了。经过了生活上的一番波折，他这才真正懂得在进科班时他妈跟他说的话：“要肚里长牙”。他在台上从不偷工惜力，他深深知道把戏唱砸了，出溜下来，会有什么后果。他的戏码逐渐往后挪，从开场头一二出挪到中间，又挪到了倒第二。他很知足了，这就到了头。在科班时他就知道自己唱不了大轴，不是那材料。一个人能吃几碗干饭，自己清楚，别人也清楚。
Back on stage, nervous. A lifetime of failure, in this move. Three days of "cannon", fear. Unexpectedly, a "cannon" became popular. He heard the applause from the audience for the first time, as if he was dreaming. On the third day of "Evil Tiger Village", there was a good meeting when he came out. In the future, the "four heads" will appear, and there will be applause. He looks good, has rules, and is very popular on stage. He is indeed "on the rabbit". After some twists and turns in life, he really understood what his mother told him when he entered the class: "You want teeth in your belly". He never cut corners on stage, and he knows what the consequences will be if he smashes the opera and slips out. His drama gradually moved backward, from the first and second outs of the opening scene to the middle, and then to the second to the bottom. He was very content, and this was the end. When he was in the professional class, he knew that he couldn't sing the big axis, not the material. A person can eat a few bowls of dry rice, he knows it himself, and others know it too.杨科长常去看京剧团的戏。一半由于职务，一半出于爱好。他万万没有想到，她后来竟成了他的爱人。
郭庆春在阳台上忽然一个人失声笑了出来。他的女儿在屋里问：“爸爸，你笑什么？”
Section Chief Yang often goes to see the plays of the Peking Opera Troupe. Half because of his position, half out of hobbies. He never expected that she would later become his lover. Guo Qingchun suddenly burst out laughing alone on the balcony. His daughter asked in the house: "Dad, what are you laughing at?" ”他笑他们那个讲习会。市里举办了第一届全市旧艺人讲习会。局长是主任，杨科长是副主任。讲《新民主主义论》、社会发展史、政治经济学。小组讨论，真是笑话百出。杨科长一次在讲课时说：“列宁说过……”一个拉胡琴的老艺人问：“列宁是唱什么的？”——“列宁不是唱戏的。”——“哦，不是唱戏的，那咱们不知道。”又有一次，杨科长鼓励大家要有主人翁思想，这位老艺人没有听明白前言后语，站起来说：“咱们是从旧社会来的，什么坏思想都有，就这主人翁思想，咱没有！”原来他以为主人翁思想就是想当班主的思想。
He laughed at their workshop. The city held the first city-wide workshop on old artists. The director is the director, and Section Chief Yang is the deputy director. He talks about "New Democracy", the history of social development, and political economy. The group discussion is really full of jokes. Section Chief Yang once said during a lecture: "Lenin said......" An old artist playing the huqin asked: "What did Lenin sing?" ——"Lenin didn't sing." ——"Oh, it's not a singer, then we don't know." The old artist did not understand the preface and afterword, stood up and said: "We are from the old society, we have all bad ideas, just this master idea, we don't have it!" It turned out that he thought that the idea of being the owner was the idea of wanting to be the class leader.讲习会要发展一批党员。郭庆春被列为培养对象。杨科长时常找他个别谈话。鼓励他建立革命人生观，提高阶级觉悟，提高政治水平，要在政治上有表现，会上积极发言。郭庆春很认真也很诚恳地照办了。他大小会都发言。讲的最多的是新旧社会对比。他有切身感受，无须准备，讲得很真实，很生动。同行的艺人多有类似经历，容易产生共鸣。讲的人、听的人个个热泪盈眶，效果很好。讲习班结业时，讨论发展党员名单，他因为出身好，政治表现突出，很顺利地通过了。他的入党介绍人是杨科长和局长。
The workshop should develop a group of party members. Guo Qingchun was listed as a training target. Section Chief Yang often talked to him individually. He was encouraged to establish a revolutionary outlook on life, improve class consciousness, improve political level, perform politically, and speak actively at the meeting. Guo Qingchun complied very seriously and sincerely. He spoke at both large and small meetings. What he talked about most was the comparison between old and new society. He had a personal feeling, no preparation, and spoke very truthfully and vividly. Many of the artists in the same industry have similar experiences and are easy to resonate with. The speakers and listeners all had tears in their eyes, and the effect was very good. At the end of the workshop, the list of party members was discussed, and he passed smoothly because of his good background and outstanding political performance. His introduction to the party was Section Chief Yang and Director Yang.第一批发展的党员，回到剧团，全都成了剧团的骨干。郭庆春被提升为副团长、艺委会主任。
The first batch of party members who developed returned to the troupe and all became the backbone of the troupe. Guo Qingchun was promoted to deputy head of the troupe and director of the art committee.因为时常要到局里请示汇报工作，他和杨科长接触的机会就更多了。熟了，就不那么拘谨了，有时也说点笑话，聊点闲天。局里很多人叫杨科长叫杨大姐或大姐，郭庆春也随着叫。虽然叫大姐，他还是觉得大姐很有男子气。
Because he often has to go to the bureau to ask for instructions and report on work, he has more opportunities to contact Section Chief Yang. When you are familiar, you will be less restrained, and sometimes you will tell some jokes and chat about your idle days. Many people in the bureau call Section Chief Yang Sister Yang or Big Sister, and Guo Qingchun also calls him. Although he was called eldest sister, he still felt that the eldest sister was very manly.没想到，大姐提出要跟他结婚。他目瞪口呆，结结巴巴，不知说什么好。他觉得和一个领导结婚，简直有点乱伦的味道，他想也没有想过。天地良心，他在大姐面前从来没有起过邪念。他当然同意。
Unexpectedly, the eldest sister proposed to marry him. He was stunned, stammered, and didn't know what to say. He felt that marrying a leader was a bit incest, and he never thought about it. The conscience of heaven and earth, he has never had evil thoughts in front of his eldest sister. Of course he agreed.杨科长的老战友们听说她结了婚，很诧异。听说是和一个京剧演员结婚，尤其诧异。她们想：她这是图什么呢？她喜欢他什么？
Section Chief Yang's old comrades-in-arms were surprised to hear that she was married. They were especially surprised to hear that she was married to a Peking Opera actor. They thought: What is she trying to do? What does she like about him?虽然结了婚，他们的关系还是上下级。不论是在工作上，在家里，她是领导，他是被领导。他习惯于“服从命令听指挥”，觉得这样很舒服，很幸福。
Although they are married, their relationship is still between superiors and subordinates. Whether at work or at home, she is the leader, and he is the leader. He is used to "obeying orders and listening to commands", and he feels very comfortable and happy.杨科长是个目光远大的人，她得给庆春（和她自己）安排一个远景规划的蓝图。庆春目前一切都很顺利，但要看到下一步。唱武生的，能在台上蹦跶多少年呢？照戏班里的说法，要找一个“落劲”。中央戏剧学院举办导演训练班，学员由各省推荐。市里分到一个名额，杨科长提出给郭庆春，科里、局里都同意。郭庆春在导演训练班学了两年，听过苏联专家的课，比较系统的知道斯坦尼斯拉夫斯基体系。毕业之后，回到剧团，大家自然刮目相看。这个剧团原来没有导演，要排新戏，排《三打祝家庄》、《红娘子》，不是向外地剧团学，“刻模子”，就是请话剧团的导演来排。郭庆春学成归来，就成了专职导演。剧团里的人，有人希望他露两手，有人等着看他的笑话。接连排了两个戏，他全“拿”下来了。他并没有用一些斯坦尼的术语去唬人，他知道那样会招人反感。他用一些戏曲演员所熟悉，所能接受的行话临场指挥。比如，他不说“交流”，却说“过电”，——“你们俩得过电哪！”他不说什么“情绪的记忆”这样很玄妙的词儿，他只说是“神气”。“你要长神气。——长一点，再长一点！”他用的舞台调度也无非还是斜胡同、蛇蜕皮……但是变了一下，就使得演员既“过得去”、“走得上来”，又觉得新鲜。郭导演的威信建立起来了。从此，他不上舞台了。有时，有演员病了，他上去顶一角，人们就要竖大拇指：“瞧人家郭导演，不拿导演架子！好样儿的！”
Section Chief Yang is a big-sighted person, and she has to arrange a blueprint for long-term planning for Qingchun (and herself). Everything is going well for Qingchun so far, but we need to see the next step. How many years can a martial artist jump on stage? According to the opera class, you need to find a "down". The Central Academy of Drama holds a director training class, and the students are recommended by the provinces. The city allocated a place, and Section Chief Yang proposed it to Guo Qingchun, and Corey and the bureau agreed. Guo Qingchun studied in the director training class for two years, listened to the classes of Soviet experts, and knew the Stanislavsky system more systematically. After graduation, when he returned to the troupe, everyone was naturally impressed. This troupe originally had no director, and it had to rehearse new plays, such as "Three Dozen Zhujiazhuang" and "Red Lady", either to learn from foreign theater troupes, "carving molds", or to invite the director of the repertory troupe to rehearse. When Guo Qingchun returned from his studies, he became a full-time director. Some people in the troupe wanted him to show his hands, and some people waited to see his jokes. After rehearsing two plays in a row, he "took" them all. He didn't bluff people with some Stani terms, he knew it would be off-putting. He used some jargon that opera actors were familiar with and acceptable. For example, he didn't say "communication", but said "electricity",—— "You two have electricity!" He didn't say anything like a very mysterious word like "emotional memory", he only said "spirit". "You have to be spirited. ——Longer, longer!" The stage scheduling he used was nothing more than a slanted alley and a snake shedding ...... But after a change, the actors are both "passable" and "walkable", and they feel fresh. Director Guo's prestige has been established. Since then, he has not been on stage. Sometimes, when an actor is sick, he goes up to the top corner, and people have to give a thumbs up: "Look at Director Guo, don't take the director's shelf!" Looks good! ”不但在本剧团，外剧团也常请他。京剧、评剧、梆子，他全导过。一通百通，应付裕如。他导的戏，已经不止一出拍成了戏曲艺术片。郭庆春三个字印在影片的片头，街头的广告上。
他不会再卖西瓜，卖柿子了。
Not only in this troupe, but also in foreign troupes. Peking Opera, Pingju, Bangzi, he has directed them all. One is all about getting to the top. More than one of the plays he directed has been made into opera art films. Guo Qingchun's three words are printed at the beginning of the film, on the street advertisements. He won't sell watermelons or persimmons anymore.他曾经两次参加戏剧代表团出国，到过东欧、苏联，到过朝鲜。他听了曾经出过国的师哥的建议，带了一包五香粉，一瓶酱油，于是什么高加索烤羊肉、带血的煎牛排，他都能对付。他很想带一罐臭豆腐，经同行团员的劝阻，才没有带。量服装的时候，问他大衣要什么料子，他毫不迟疑地说：“长毛绒！”服装厂的同志说在外国，男人没有穿长毛绒的，这才改为海军呢。
He has participated in two theater delegations abroad, to Eastern Europe, the Soviet Union, and North Korea. He listened to the advice of his brother who had gone abroad, and brought a pack of five-spice powder and a bottle of soy sauce, so he could deal with any Caucasian roast lamb or bloody fried steak. He really wanted to bring a can of stinky tofu, but after being dissuaded by his fellow troupe members, he didn't bring it. When measuring clothes, he asked him what material he wanted for his coat, and he said without hesitation: "Plush!" The comrades in the garment factory said that in foreign countries, men did not wear plush, so they changed to the navy.他在国外照了好多照片，黑白的，还有彩色的。他的爱人一张一张地贴在仿古缎面的相册上。这些照片上的郭庆春全都是器宇轩昂，很像个大导演。
He took a lot of photos abroad, black and white, and color. His lover was pasted on antique satin albums one by one. Guo Qingchun in these photos is all magnificent, very much like a big director.由于爱人的活动（通过各种“老战友”的关系），他已经调到北京的剧团里来了。他的母亲还健在。他的弟弟由于他的资助，上了学，现在在一家工厂当出纳。他有了一个女儿，已经上小学了。他有一套三居室的单元。他在剧团里自然也有气儿不顺的时候：为一个戏置景置装的费用，演员的“人位”，和领导争得面红耳赤，摔门，拍桌子；偶尔有很“葛”的演员调皮捣蛋“吊腰子”，当面顶撞，出言不逊，气得他要休克，但是这样的时候不多，一年也只是七八次。总的说来，一切都很顺利。他对自己的生活很满意。因为满意，就没有理由不发胖，于是就发胖了。
Due to his lover's activities (through various "old comrades-in-arms"), he has been transferred to a troupe in Beijing. His mother is still alive. His younger brother went to school thanks to his financial support and is now working as a cashier in a factory. He has a daughter who is already in elementary school. He has a three-bedroom unit. He naturally had times when he was unhappy in the troupe: the cost of setting up the scenery for a play, the "position" of the actors, and the leader blushing, slamming doors, and slamming tables; Occasionally, there were very "Ge" actors who were mischievous and "hanging their waists", confronting them in person, speaking rudely, and being so angry that he was about to go into shock, but there were not many times like this, only seven or eight times a year. Overall, everything went well. He was very satisfied with his life. Because of satisfaction, there is no reason not to gain weight, so you get fat.他的感情是平稳的、柔软的、滑润的，像一块奶油（从国外回来，他养成爱吃奶油的习惯）。
今天遇见了一件事，使他的情绪有一点小小的波动。
His feelings are smooth, soft, and smooth, like a piece of cream (returning from abroad, he developed the habit of eating cream). Today I encountered something that made his mood fluctuate a little.剧团招收学员，他是主考。排练厅里摆了一张乒乓案子，几把椅子。他坐在正中的一把上。像当初他进科班时被教师考察一样，一个一个考察着来应试的男孩子、女孩子。看看他们的相貌，体格，叫他们唱两句，拉一个山膀，踢踢腿，——来应试的孩子多半在家里请人教过，都能唱几句，走几个“身上”。然后在名单上用铅笔做一些记号。来应试的女孩子里有一个叫于小玲。这孩子一走出来，郭庆春就一愣，这孩长得太像一个人了。他有点走神。于小玲的唱（她唱的是“苏三离了洪洞县”），所走的“身子”，他都没有认真地听，看，名单上于小玲的名字底下，什么记号也没有做。
The troupe recruits students, and he is the chief examiner. There was a table tennis table and a few chairs in the rehearsal hall. He sat on the middle one. Just like when he was inspected by teachers when he entered the class, he inspected the boys and girls who came to take the exam one by one. Look at their appearance and physique, ask them to sing a couple of sentences, pull a mountain, kick their legs,—— Most of the children who come to take the exam have been taught at home, and they can sing a few sentences and walk a few "bodies". Then make some marks with a pencil on the list. Among the girls who came to take the exam, there was a girl named Yu Xiaoling. As soon as this child came out, Guo Qingchun was stunned, this child looked too much like a person. He was a little distracted. Yu Xiaoling's singing (she sang "Su San left Hongdong County"), he didn't listen carefully to the "body" he walked, look, under Yu Xiaoling's name on the list, he didn't make any marks.学员都考完了，于小玲往外走。郭庆春叫住她：
“于小玲。”
于小玲站住：
“您叫我？”
“……你妈姓什么？”
“姓许。”
没错，是许招弟的女儿。
“你爸爸……对，姓于。他还好吗？”
The students finished the exam, and Yu Xiaoling walked out. Guo Qingchun stopped her: "Yu Xiaoling." Yu Xiaoling stopped: "You call me?" “…… What is your mother's last name? ” "My surname is Xu." That's right, it's Xu Zhaodi's daughter. "Your father...... Yes, surname Yu. Is he okay? ”“我爸死了，有五年了。”
“你妈挺好？”
“还可以。”
“……她还是那样吗？”
“您认得我妈？”
“认得。”
“我妈就在外面。妈——！”
于小玲走出排练厅，郭庆春也跟着走出来。
"My dad has been dead for five years." "Your mother is good?" "It's okay." “…… Is she still like that? ” "Do you recognize my mother?" "I recognize it." "My mom is outside. Mom——! ” Yu Xiaoling walked out of the rehearsal hall, and Guo Qingchun also walked out.迎面走过来许招弟。
许招弟还那样，只是憔悴瘦削，显老了。
“妈，这是郭导演。”
许招弟看着郭庆春，很客气地称呼一声：
“郭导演！”
Xu Zhaodi walked over to him. Xu Zhaodi is still like that, but he is haggard and thin, looking old. "Mom, this is Director Guo." Xu Zhaodi looked at Guo Qingchun and called out very politely: "Director Guo!"郭庆春不知怎么称呼她好，也不能像小时候一样叫她招弟，只好含含糊糊地应了一声，问道：
“您倒好？”
“还凑合。”
“多年不见了。”
“有年头了。——这孩子，您多关照。”
Guo Qingchun didn't know how to call her good, and he couldn't call her a brother like he did when he was a child, so he had to respond vaguely and asked: "Are you okay?" "It's still a good deal." "I haven't seen you for many years." "It's been a year. ——Take care of this child. ”“她不错。条件挺好。”
“回见啦。”
“回见！”
许招弟领着女儿转身走了。郭庆春看见她耳垂后面那颗红痣，有些怅惘。
"She's good. It's good. ” "See you again." "See you later!" Xu Zhaodi led his daughter to turn around and leave. Guo Qingchun saw the red mole behind her earlobe and was a little confused.以上，是京剧导演郭庆春在晚饭之后，微醺之中，闻着一阵一阵的马缨花的香味时所想的一些事。想的时候自然是飘飘忽忽，断断续续的。如果用意识流方法照实地记录下来，将会很长。为省篇幅，只能挑挑拣拣，加以剪裁，简单地勾出一个轮廓。
The above are some of the things that Peking Opera director Guo Qingchun thought when he was slightly drunk after dinner and smelled the fragrance of lantana. When I think about it, it is naturally floating and intermittent. If you use the stream-of-consciousness method to record it on the spot, it will be very long. In order to save space, you can only pick and choose, cut it, and simply outline an outline.郭导演想：……一个人走过的路真是很难预料。如果不是解放了，他会是什么样子呢？也许还是卖西瓜、卖柿子、拉菜车？……如果他出科时不倒仓，又会是什么样子呢？也许他就唱红了，也许就会和许招弟结了婚。那么于小玲就会是他的女儿，她会不姓于，而姓郭？……
Director Guo thought: ...... The road a person has traveled is really difficult to predict. If he hadn't been liberated, what would he be like? Maybe still selling watermelons, persimmons, and pulling food trucks? …… What would it be like if he didn't go out of school when he went out of the department? Maybe he will become popular, or maybe he will marry Xu Zhaodi. Then Yu Xiaoling will be his daughter, will she not be surnamed Yu, but surnamed Guo? ……他正在这样漫无边际地想下去，他的女儿在屋里娇声喊道：
“爸，你进来，我要你！”
正好夹在手里的大前门已经吸完，烟头烧痛了他的手指，他把烟头往楼下的马缨花树帽上一扔，进屋去了。
He was thinking about it so casually, and his daughter cried softly in the house: "Dad, come in, I want you!" The big front door that happened to be clamped in his hand had already finished smoking, and the cigarette butt burned his fingers, so he threw the cigarette butt downstairs on the lantana tree hat and went into the house.第二天，郭导演上午导了一场戏，中午，几个小青年拉他去挑西瓜。
“郭导演，给我们挑一个瓜。”
“去一边去！当导演的还管挑西瓜呀！”
The next day, Director Guo directed a scene in the morning, and at noon, several young people pulled him to pick watermelons. "Director Guo, pick a melon for us." "Go aside! As a director, you still have to pick watermelons! ”但还是被他们连推带拽地去了。他站在一堆西瓜前面巡视一下，挑了一个，用右手大拇指按在瓜皮上，用力往前一蹭，放在耳朵边听一听，轻轻拍一下：
“就这个！保证脆沙瓤。生了，瘘了，我给钱！”
But they still pushed and dragged him to the ground. He stood in front of a pile of watermelons and looked around, picked one, pressed his right thumb on the melon skin, rubbed it forward, put it next to his ear to listen, and patted it gently: "That's it! Guaranteed to be crisp sand. Born, fistula, I'll give you money!" ”他抄起案子上的西瓜刀，一刀切过去，只听见咯喳一声，瓜裂开了：薄皮、红瓤、黑籽。
卖瓜的惊奇地问：
“您卖过瓜？”
“我卖瓜的那阵，还没有你哪！哈哈哈哈……”
He picked up the watermelon knife on the case, cut it with a knife, and only heard a clucking sound, and the melon cracked: thin skin, red pulp, black seeds. The melon seller asked in surprise: "Have you ever sold melons?" "When I sold melons, I didn't have you! Hahahaha......"他大笑着走回剧团。谁也不知道他的笑声里包含了多少东西。
过了几天，招考学员发了榜，于小玲考取了。人们都说，是郭导演给她使了劲。
He laughed and walked back to the troupe. No one knew how much was in his laughter. A few days later, the recruitment students were announced, and Yu Xiaoling was admitted. People said that it was Director Guo who worked hard for her.
[1] 本篇原载《人民文学》1981年第八期；初收《晚饭花集》，人民文学出版社，1985年3月。

徙

徙[1]
[1] This article was originally published in the eighth issue of "People's Literature", 1981; "Dinner Flower Collection", People's Literature Publishing House, March 1985. Move [1]北溟有鱼，其名为鲲。鲲之大，不知其几千里也；化而为鸟，其名为鹏，鹏之背，不知其几千里也。怒而飞，其翼若垂天之云。是鸟也，海运则将徙于南溟。
《庄子·逍遥游》
很多歌消失了。
There is a fish in the North Sea, and its name is Kun. The size of the kun is unknown for thousands of miles; it turns into a bird, its name is Peng, and the back of the peng is thousands of miles away. It flies angrily, and its wings are like clouds hanging in the sky. It is a bird, and the sea will migrate to the South Sea. "Zhuangzi Xiaoyaoyou" Many songs disappeared.许多歌的词、曲的作者没有人知道。
有些歌只有极少数的人唱，别人都不知道。比如一些学校的校歌。
The lyrics of many songs and the author of the song are unknown. Some songs are only sung by a very small number of people, and others don't know about them. For example, some school songs.县立第五小学历年毕业了不少学生。他们多数已经是过六十的人了。他们之中不少人还记得母校的校歌，有人能够一字不差地唱出来。
西挹神山爽气，
东来邻寺疏钟，
看吾校巍巍峻峻，
连云栉比列其中。
Many students have graduated from the county fifth primary school over the years. Most of them are already over sixty. Many of them still remember the school song of their alma mater, and some of them can sing it word for word. Xiyi Shenshan refreshing, The sparse bell of the neighboring temple from the east, Look at the majesty of our school, The clouds are lined up in the middle.半城半郭成调元，
无女无男教育同。
桃红李白，
芬芳馥郁，
一堂济济坐春风。
愿少年，
乘风破浪，
他日毋忘化雨功！
Half city and half city into a tune yuan, No girls or boys are educated the same. Peach red and plum white, fragrant and fragrant, The hall is full of people sitting in the spring breeze. May the youth, Plough the waves Don't forget the rain in the future!每逢“纪念周”，每天上课前的“朝会”，放学前的“晚会”，开头照例是唱“党歌”，最后是唱校歌。一个担任司仪的高年级同学高声喊道：“唱——校——歌！”全校学生，三百来个孩子，就用玻璃一样脆亮的童音，拼足了力气，高唱起来。好像屋上的瓦片、树上的树叶都在唱。他们接连唱了六年，直到毕业离校，真是深深地印在脑子里了。说不定临死的时候还会想起这支歌。
Every "commemorative week", the "morning meeting" before class every day, and the "evening party" before school, as usual, start with singing the "party song" and finally sing the school song. A senior student who served as the emcee shouted loudly: "Sing - school - song!" The whole school, more than 300 children, used a child's voice as crisp as glass to sing with all their strength. It seemed that the tiles on the house and the leaves on the trees were singing. They sang for six years in a row until they graduated and left school, which was really deeply imprinted in their minds. Maybe you will remember this song when you are dying.歌词的意思是没有人解释过的。低年级的学生几乎完全不懂它说的是什么。他们只是使劲地唱，并且倾注了全部感情。到了四五年级，就逐渐明白了，因为唱的次数太多，天天就生活在这首歌里，慢慢地自己就琢磨出来了。最先懂得的是第二句。学校的东边紧挨一个寺，叫做承天寺。承天寺有一口钟。钟撞起来嗡嗡地响。“神山爽气”是这个县的“八景”之一。神山在哪里，“爽气”是什么样的“气”，小学生不知道，只是无端地觉得很美，而且有一种神秘感。下面的歌词也朦朦胧胧地理解了：是说学校有很多房屋，在城外，是个男女合校，有很多同学。总的说来是说这个学校很好。十来岁的孩子很为自己的学校骄傲，觉得它很了不起，并且相信别的学校一定没有这样一首歌。到了六年级，他们才真正理解了这首歌。毕业典礼上（这是他们第一次“毕业”），几位老师们讲过了话，司仪高声喊道：“唱——校——歌！”这是他们最后一次大家聚在一起唱这支歌了。他们唱得异常庄重，异常激动。玻璃一样的童声高唱起来：
The meaning of the lyrics has not been explained by anyone. The younger students almost completely did not understand what it was talking about. They just sang hard and poured all their emotions into it. In the fourth or fifth grade, I gradually understood, because I sang too many times, I lived in this song every day, and slowly figured it out by myself. The first thing I understood was the second sentence. There is a temple next to the east of the school called Chengtian Temple. Chengtian Temple has a bell. The bell buzzes when it strikes. "Shenshan Refreshing" is one of the "Eight Views" of this county. Elementary school students don't know where the sacred mountain is and what kind of "refreshing air" is, but they just think it is beautiful for no reason, and there is a sense of mystery. The lyrics below are also vaguely understood: It means that the school has many houses, outside the city, it is a coeducational school, and there are many classmates. In general, it means that this school is very good. The teenagers are very proud of their school, think it is amazing, and believe that other schools must not have such a song. It wasn't until the sixth grade that they really understood the song. At the graduation ceremony (this was their first "graduation"), several teachers spoke, and the emcee shouted, "Sing-school-song!" This was the last time they got together to sing this song. They sang extremely solemnly and excitedly. The glass-like children's voices sang:西挹神山爽气，
东来邻寺疏钟……
唱到“愿少年，乘风破浪，他日毋忘化雨功”，大家的心里都是酸酸的。眼泪在乌黑的眼睛里发光。这是这首歌的立意所在，点睛之笔，其余的，不过是敷陈其事。从语气看，像是少年对自己的勗勉，同时又像是学校老师对教了六年的学生的嘱咐，一种遗憾、悲哀而酸苦的嘱咐。他们知道，毕业出去的学生，日后多半是会把他们忘记的。
Singing "May the young man, ride the wind and waves, and don't forget the rain in the future", everyone's hearts were sour. Tears glowed in the dark eyes. This is the idea of this song, the finishing touch, and the rest is just a story. Judging from the tone, it seems to be a teenager's encouragement to himself, and at the same time, it is like a school teacher's instruction to the students he has taught for six years, a regretful, sad and bitter instruction. They know that most of the students who graduate will forget them in the future.毕业生中有一些是乘风破浪，做了一番事业的；有的离校后就成为泯然众人，为衣食奔走了一生；有的，死掉了。
Some of the graduates have ridden the wind and waves and made a career; some have become disappeared after leaving school and have worked for food and clothing all their lives; some have died.这不是一支了不起的歌，但很贴切。朴朴实实，平平常常，和学校很相称。一个在寺庙的废基上改建成的普通的六年制小学，又能写出多少诗情画意呢？人们有时想起，只是为了从干枯的记忆里找回一点淡淡的童年，在歌声中想起那些校园里的蔷薇花，冬青树，擦了无数次的教室的玻璃，上课下课的钟声，和球场上像烟火一样升到空中的一阵一阵的明亮的欢笑……
It's not a great song, but it's very appropriate. Simple, ordinary, and very suitable for school. How much poetry can an ordinary six-year primary school converted from the ruins of a temple write? People sometimes think of it just to find a little bit of childhood from dry memories, and in the song, they think of the roses and holly trees on the campus, the glass of the classroom that has been wiped countless times, the bells of class and class, and the bursts of bright laughter that rise into the air like fireworks on the court......校歌的作者是高先生，有些人知道，有些人不知道。
The author of the school song is Mr. Gao, some people know it, some people don't.先生名鹏，字北溟，三十后，以字行。家世业儒。祖父、父亲都没有考取功名，靠当塾师、教蒙学，以维生计。三代都住在东街租来的一所百年老屋之中，临街有两扇白木的板门，真是所谓寒门。先生少孤。尝受业于邑中名士谈甓渔，为谈先生之高足。
Mr. Peng's name is Peng, the word Beiming, after thirty, with the word line. Family Confucianism. Neither grandfather nor father achieved fame, and relied on being a private school teacher and teaching Mongolian studies to make a living. Three generations lived in a century-old house rented on East Street, with two white wooden board doors facing the street, which was really a so-called cold door. Mr. was lonely at a young age. He once studied brick fishing under the famous scholar in the town, and was Mr. Tan's high foot.这谈甓渔是个诗人，也是个怪人。他功名不高，只中过举人，名气却很大。中举之后，累考不进，无意仕途，就在江南江北，沭阳溧阳等地就馆。他教出来的学生，有不少中了进士，谈先生于是身价百倍，高门大族，争相延致。晚年惮于舟车，就用学生谢师的银子，回乡盖了一处很大的房子，闭户著书。书是著了，门却是大开着的。他家门楼特别高大。为什么盖得这样高大？据说是盖窄了怕碰了他的那些做了大官的学生的纱帽翅儿。其实，哪会呢？清朝的官戴的都是顶子，缨帽花翎，没有帽翅。地方上人这样的口传，无非是说谈老先生的阔学生很多。这座大门里每年进出的知县、知府，确实不在少数。门楼宽大，是为了供轿夫休息用的。往年，两边放了极其宽长的条凳，柏木的凳面都被人的屁股磨得光光滑滑的了。谈家门楼巍然突出，老远的就能看见，成了指明方位的一个标志，一个地名。一说“谈家门楼”东边，“谈家门楼”斜对过，人们就立刻明白了。谈甓渔的故事很多。他念了很多书，学问很大，可是不识数，不会数钱。他家里什么都有，可是他愿意到处闲逛，到茶馆里喝茶，到酒馆里喝酒，烟馆里抽烟。每天出门，家里都要把他需用的烟钱、茶钱、酒钱分别装在布口袋里，给他挂在拐杖上，成了名副其实的“杖头钱”。他常常傍花随柳，信步所之，喝得半醉，找不到自己的家。他爱吃螃蟹，可是自己不会剥，得由家里人把蟹肉剥好，又装回蟹壳里，原样摆成一个完整的螃蟹。两个螃蟹能吃三四个小时，热了凉，凉了又热。他一边吃蟹，一边喝酒，一边看书。他没有架子，没大没小，无分贵贱，三教九流，贩夫走卒，都谈得来，是个很通达的人。然而，品望很高。就是点过翰林的李三麻子远远从轿帘里看见谈老先生曳杖而来，也要赶紧下轿，避立道侧。他教学生，教时文八股，也教古文词赋，经史百家。他说：“我不愿谈甓渔教出来的学生，如郑板桥所说，对案至不能就一札！”他大概很会教书，经他教过的学生，不通的很少。
This Tan Piyu is a poet and a strange person. He is not famous, he has only passed the examination, but he is very famous. After passing the examination, he failed to pass the exam and had no intention of career, so he went to the library in Jiangnan and Jiangbei, Shuyang, Liyang and other places. Many of the students he taught won the Jinshi, so Mr. Tan was worth a hundred times more than a hundred times, and the noble family competed to extend it. In his later years, he was afraid of boats and cars, so he used the money from the student Xie Shi to return to his hometown to build a big house and write books behind closed doors. The book is on, but the door is wide open. His gatehouse is very tall. Why is it so tall? It is said that the cover is narrow for fear of touching the wings of his students who have become high officials. Actually, how could it be? Officials in the Qing Dynasty wore hats, tassels and hats, and no hat wings. Such an oral tradition from local masters is nothing more than saying that there are many students of Mr. Tan. There are indeed not a few county magistrates and prefects who enter and exit this gate every year. The gatehouse is wide and is for the palanquin bearers to rest. In previous years, extremely wide and long benches were placed on both sides, and the cypress stools were polished smooth and smooth by people's buttocks. The Tanjia Gate Tower stands out majestically and can be seen from afar, becoming a sign and a place name indicating the direction. As soon as it is said that the east side of the "Tanjia Gate Tower" and the "Tanjia Gate Tower" are diagonally opposite, people immediately understand. There are many stories about Tan Brick Fishing. He read a lot of books and was very knowledgeable, but he couldn't count and couldn't count money. He has everything at home, but he is willing to wander around, drink tea in teahouses, drink in taverns, and smoke in tobacco shops. Every day when he goes out, his family has to put the cigarette money, tea money, and wine money he needs in a cloth pocket and hang it on his crutches, which has become a veritable "cane money". He often followed the flowers and willows, strolled around, drunk half-drunk, and couldn't find his home. He loves to eat crabs, but he can't peel them himself, so he has to have his family peel the crab meat, put it back in the crab shell, and put it back into the crab shell, and put it back into a complete crab as it is. Two crabs can eat for three or four hours, hot and cold, cold and hot. He ate crabs and drank while reading. He has no shelf, no big or small, no distinction between rich and lowly, three teachings and nine streams, peddlers and pawns, all of which can be talked about, and he is a very knowledgeable person. However, the reputation is very high. It was Li Sanmazi, who had ordered the Hanlin Academy, to see Mr. Tan coming with a cane from a distance from the curtain of the sedan chair, and he had to quickly get out of the sedan chair and avoid the side of the road. He taught students, taught the eight strands of poetry, ancient literature, and classics and history. He said: "I don't want to talk about the students taught by the brick fish, as Zheng Banqiao said, I can't just write a letter to the case!" He is probably very good at teaching, and there are very few students he has taught.谈老先生知道高家很穷，他教高先生书，不受修金。每回高先生的母亲封了节敬送去，谈老先生必亲自上门退回，说：
Mr. Tan knew that the Gao family was very poor, and he taught Mr. Gao to read, but he did not accept repairs. Every time Mr. Gao's mother sealed the festival and sent it away, Mr. Tan would personally come to the door to return it, saying:“老嫂子，我与高鹏的父亲是贫贱之交，总角之交，你千万不要这样！我一定格外用心地教他，不负故人。高鹏的天资，虽只是中上，但很知发愤。他深知先人为他取的名、字的用意。他的诗文都很有可观，高氏有子矣。北溟之鹏终将徙于南溟。高了，不敢说。青一衿，我看，如拾芥耳。我好歹要让他中一名秀才。”
"Old sister-in-law, Gao Peng's father and I are poor friends, and we are friends of the general angle, so don't be like this! I will definitely teach him with extra care and live up to his old friends. Gao Peng's talent, although he is only in the upper middle, knows how to be angry. He knows the intention of the name and words his ancestors gave him. His poems are very impressive, and Gao has a son. The Peng of the North Sea will eventually move to the South Sea. It's high, I dare not say it. Qing Yijin, I see, is like picking up mustard. I want him to be a scholar anyway. ”果然，高先生在十六岁的时候，高高地中了一名秀才。众人说：高家的风水转了。
不想，第二年就停了科举。
Sure enough, when Mr. Gao was sixteen years old, he won a scholar in Gao Gao. Everyone said: The feng shui of the Gao family has changed. I didn't want to, so I stopped the imperial examination the following year.废科举，兴学校，这个小县城里增添了几个疯子。有人投河跳井，有人跑到明伦堂[2]去痛哭。就在高先生所住的东街的最东头，有一姓徐的呆子。这人不知应考了多少次，到头来还是一个白丁。平常就有点迂迂磨磨，颠颠倒倒。说起话满嘴之乎者也。他老婆骂他：“晚饭米都没得一颗，还你妈的之乎——者也！”徐呆子全然不顾，朗吟道：“之乎者也矣焉哉，七字安排好秀才！”自从停了科举，他又添了一宗新花样。每逢初一、十五，或不是正日，而受了老婆的气，邻居的奚落，他就双手捧了一个木盘，盘中置一香炉，点了几根香，到大街上去背诵他的八股窗稿。穿着油腻的长衫，靸着破鞋，一边走，一边念。随着文气的起承转合，步履忽快忽慢；词句的抑扬顿挫，声音时高时低。念到曾经业师浓圈密点的得意之处，摇头晃脑，昂首向天，面带微笑，如醉如痴，仿佛大街上没有一个人，天地间只有他的字字珠玑的好文章。一直念到两颊绯红，双眼出火，口沫横飞，声嘶气竭。长歌当哭，其声冤苦。街上人给他这种举动起了一个名字，叫做“哭圣人”。
Abolished the imperial examination and built a school, adding a few madmen to this small county. Some people jumped into the river and jumped into the well, and some ran to Minglun Hall [2] to cry bitterly. At the easternmost end of East Street where Mr. Gao lived, there was a fool surnamed Xu. I don't know how many times this person has taken the exam, but in the end he is still a white man. Usually a little roundabout and upside down. He is also full of words. His wife scolded him: "I didn't get a single rice for dinner, and I will give you back the fuck!" Xu Fool ignored it completely and recited: "It's a good thing, the seven characters are arranged to be a scholar!" Since the imperial examination was stopped, he has added a new trick. Every time on the first and fifteenth days of the new year, or not the first day, and he was angry with his wife and ridiculed by his neighbors, he held a wooden plate in both hands, put an incense burner in the plate, lit a few sticks of incense, and went to the street to recite his eight-strand window manuscript. Wearing a greasy robe and tattered shoes, he walked and read at the same time. With the rise and fall of the literary style, the steps are fast and slow; the intonation of the words is faltering, and the voice is high and low. Thinking of the pride of the former teacher, he shook his head, held his head high to the sky, smiled, and was drunk, as if there was no one on the street, and there was only his good articles in the world. I read it until my cheeks were crimson, my eyes were on fire, my mouth was foaming, and my voice was hoarse. The long song should cry, and its voice will be bitter. The people on the street gave him a name for this action, called "Crying Saint".他这样哭了几年，一口气上不来，死在街上了。
高北溟坐在百年老屋之中，常常听到徐呆子从门外哭过来，哭过去。他恍恍惚惚觉得，哭的是他自己。
功名道断，高北溟怎么办呢？
He cried like this for several years, couldn't get up in one breath, and died on the street. Gao Beiming sat in a century-old house and often heard Xu Duzi crying from outside the door. He felt in a trance that he was crying. Fame is broken, what should Gao Beiming do?头二年，他还能靠笔耕生活。谈先生还没有死。有人求谈先生的文字，碑文墓志，寿序挽联，谈先生都推给了高先生。所得润笔，尚可粥。谈先生寿终，高北溟缌麻服孝，尽礼致哀，写了一篇长长的祭文，泣读之后，忧心如焚。
In the first two years, he was still able to live on his pen. Mr. Tan is not dead yet. Someone asked Mr. Tan for his words, epitaphs, and life prefaces, and Mr. Tan pushed them to Mr. Gao. The pen obtained is still  porridge. When Mr. Tan died, Gao Beiming wore filial piety, mourned with courtesy, and wrote a long memorial text.他也曾像他的祖父和父亲一样，开设私塾教几个小小蒙童，教他们读三（字经）、百（家姓）、千（字文），《幼学琼林》、《龙文鞭影》。然而除了少数极其守旧的人家，都已经把孩子送进学校了。他也曾挂牌行医看眼科。谈甓渔老先生的祖上本是眼科医生。他中举之后，还偶尔为人看眼疾。他劝高鹏也看看眼科医书，给他讲过平热泻肝之道。万一功名不就，也有一技之长，能够糊口。可是城里近年害眼的不多。有患赤红火眼的，多半到药店里买一副鹅翎眼药（装在一根鹅毛翎管里的红色的眼药），清水化开，用灯草点进眼内，就好了。眼科，不像“男妇内外大小方脉”那样有“走时”的时候。文章不能锅里煮，百无一用是书生，一家四口，每天至少要升半米下锅，如之何？如之何？
Like his grandfather and father, he also opened a private school to teach a few little Meng children, teaching them to read three (character scriptures), hundred (family surname), thousand (character text), "Preschool Qionglin", and "Longwen Whip Shadow". However, except for a few extremely conservative families, they have already sent their children to school. He has also been listed to practice ophthalmology. Mr. Tan Piyu's ancestors were ophthalmologists. After he passed the examination, he occasionally saw eye diseases. He persuaded Gao Peng to also read the ophthalmologist's book and told him how to calm the heat and drain the liver. In case you don't get fame, you also have a skill and can make a living. However, there are not many eye harm in the city in recent years. If you have red eyes, most of them will go to the pharmacy to buy a pair of goose feather eye drops (red eye drops in a goose feather tube), dissolve the water, and use lamp grass to light into the eyes. Ophthalmology, unlike "men and women's internal and external square veins", has a "time". The article can't be cooked in a pot, it's useless It's a scholar, a family of four, at least half a meter a day to put it in the pot, what should I do? What to do?正在书空咄咄，百无聊赖，有一个平素很少来往的世交沈石君来看他。沈石君比高北溟大几岁，也曾跟谈甓渔读过书，开笔成篇以后，到苏州进了书院。书院改成学堂，革命、“光复”……他就成了新派，多年在外边做事。他有志办教育，在省里当督学。回乡视察了几个小学之后，拍开了高家的白木板门。他劝高北溟去读两年简易师范，取得一个资格，教书。
He was bored and bored, and a friend Shen Shijun, who rarely interacted with him, came to see him. Shen Shijun was a few years older than Gao Beiming, and he had also read books with Tan Piyu, and after writing a book, he went to Suzhou to enter the academy. The academy was changed to a school, revolution, "restoration"...... He became a new school and worked outside for many years. He aspires to run education and work as an inspector in the province. After returning to his hometown to inspect several primary schools, he opened the white wooden door of the Gao family. He persuaded Gao Beiming to study at a simple normal school for two years, obtain a qualification, and teach.读师范是被人看不起的。师范不收学费，每月还可有伙食津贴，师范生被人称为“师范花子”，但这在高北溟是一条可行的路，虽然现在还来入学读书，岁数实在太大些了。好在同学中年纪差近的也还有，而且“简师”只有两年，一晃也就过去了。
Studying in normal is looked down upon. Normal students are called "normal flowers", but this is a feasible way in Gao Beiming, although they are still coming to school to study, and the age is too old. Fortunately, there are still some classmates who are close in age, and the "Jian Shi" is only two years, and it has passed in a flash.简师毕业，高先生在“五小”任教。
高先生有了职业，有了虽不丰厚但却可靠的收入，可以免于冻饿，不致像徐呆子似的死在街上了。
After graduating from Jian Shi, Mr. Gao taught in the "Five Primary Schools". Mr. Gao has a career and a reliable income, which is not rich but reliable, so he can avoid freezing and starvation, and he will not die on the street like Xu Idio.按规定，简师毕业，只能教初、中年级，因为高先生是谈甓渔的高足，中过秀才，声名籍籍，叫他去教“大狗跳，小狗叫，大狗跳一跳，小狗叫一叫”，实在说不过去，因此，破格担任了五、六年级的国文。即使是这样，当然也还不能展其所长，尽其所学。高先生并不意满志得。然而高先生教书是认真的。讲课、改作文，郑重其事，一丝不苟。
According to the regulations, after graduating, Master Jian can only teach junior and middle grades, because Mr. Gao is a master of talking about brick fishing, a scholar, and a famous person, so he asked him to teach "big dog jumping, puppy barking, big dog jumping, puppy barking", which is really unreasonable, so he served as the fifth and sixth grade Chinese. Even so, of course, he still can't show his strengths and learn to the best of his ability. Mr. Gao is not satisfied. However, Mr. Gao is serious about teaching. Lectures, revised compositions, solemn and meticulous.同事起初对他很敬重，渐渐地在背后议论起来，说这个人的脾气很“方”。是这样。高先生落落寡合，不苟言笑，不爱闲谈，不喜交际。他按时到校，到教务处和大家略点一点头，拿了粉笔、点名册就上教室。下了课就走。有时当中一节没有课，就坐在教务处看书。小学教师的品类也很杂。有正派的教师；也有头上涂着司丹康、脸上搽着雪花膏的纨绔子弟；戴着瓜皮秋帽、留着小胡子，琵琶襟坎肩的纽子挂着青天白日徽章，一说话不停地挤鼓眼的幕僚式的人物。他们时常凑在一起谈牌经，评“花榜”[3]，交换庸俗无聊的社会新闻，说猥亵下流的荤笑话。高先生总是正襟危坐，不作一声。同事之间为了“联络感情”，时常轮流做东，约好了在星期天早上“吃早茶”。这地方“吃早茶”不是喝茶，主要是吃各种点心——蟹肉包子、火腿烧麦、冬笋蒸馒、脂油千层糕。还可叫一个三鲜煮干丝，小酌两杯。这种聚会，高先生概不参加。小学校的人事说简单也简单，说复杂也挺复杂。教员当中也有派别，为了一点小小私利，排挤倾轧，勾心斗角，飞短流长，造谣中伤。这些派别之间的明暗斗争，又与地方上的党政权势息息相关，且和省中当局遥相呼应。千丝万缕，变幻无常。高先生对这种派别之争，从不介入。有人曾试图对他笼络（高先生素负文名，受人景仰，拉过来是个“实力”），被高先生冷冷地拒绝了。他教学生，也是因材施教，无所阿私，只看品学，不问家庭。每一班都有一两个他特别心爱的学生。高先生看来是个冷面寡情的人，其实不是这样，只是他对得意的学生的喜爱不形于色，不像有些婆婆妈妈的教员，时常摸着学生的头，拉着他的手，满脸含笑，问长问短。他只是把他的热情倾注在教学之中。他讲书，眼睛首先看着这一两个学生，看他们领会了没有。改作文，改得特别仔细。听这一两个学生回讲课文，批改他们的作文课卷，是他的一大乐事。只有在这样的时候，他觉得不负此生，做了一点有意义的事。对于平常的学生，他亦以平常的精力对待之。对于资质顽劣，不守校规的学生，他常常痛加训斥，不管他的爸爸是什么局长还是什么党部委员。有些话说得比较厉害，甚至侵及他们的家长。因这些，校中同事不喜欢他，又有点怕他。他们为他和自己的不同处而忿忿不平，说他是自命清高，沽名钓誉，不近人情，有的干脆说：“这是绝户脾气！”
At first, his colleagues respected him very much, but gradually talked behind his back, saying that this person's temper was very "square". That's right. Mr. Gao is sloppy, unsmiling, not fond of small talk, and not sociable. He arrived at school on time, nodded slightly to the Academic Affairs Office, took the chalk and roll call list and went to the classroom. Leave after class. Sometimes there is no class in one class, so I sit in the academic affairs office and read. The categories of primary school teachers are also very mixed. There are decent teachers; there are also gentle children with Stankang on their heads and alabaster paste on their faces; Wearing a melon skin hat, a mustache, a blue sky and white sun badge hanging from the button on the shoulder of the pipa, and a staff-like figure who keeps squeezing his eyes as he speaks. They often get together to talk about card classics, comment on the "flower list" [3], exchange vulgar and boring social news, and say obscene meat jokes. Mr. Gao always sits upright and does not say a word. In order to "connect feelings", colleagues often take turns to do things and make an appointment to "have morning tea" on Sunday mornings. "Morning tea" in this place is not tea, but mainly a variety of snacks - crab buns, ham roasted wheat, steamed buns with winter bamboo shoots, and mille-feuille cakes with fat and oil. You can also order a three-fresh boiled dried shreds and have two drinks. Mr. Gao does not participate in this kind of party. The personnel of the primary school are simple and complicated. There are also factions among the faculty members, who, for a little selfish gain, exclude and squeeze, intrigue, fly short and long, and spread rumors and slander. The light and dark struggle between these factions is closely related to the local party and government power, and echoes the provincial authorities. Inextricable and changeable. Mr. Gao never intervened in this kind of factional dispute. Someone tried to win him over (Mr. Gao was famous for his literary talent, admired, and pulled over as a "strength"), but Mr. Gao coldly refused. He taught students according to their aptitude, without selfishness, only looking at character and learning, and not asking about their families. Each class has one or two students he particularly loves. Mr. Gao seems to be a cold-faced and heartless person, but his love for proud students is not visible, unlike some mothers-in-law's teachers, who often touch students' heads, hold his hands, smile on their faces, and ask long and short questions. He just poured his enthusiasm into teaching. When he lectured, he first looked at these two students to see if they understood. Change the composition, change it very carefully. Listening to these two students give back to the text and correct their composition papers is a great pleasure for him. Only at times like this did he feel that he lived up to this life and did something meaningful. He also treats ordinary students with ordinary energy. He often reprimands students who are stubborn and do not abide by school rules, no matter what director or party committee member his father is. Some of them said more violently, even invading their parents. Because of this, his colleagues in the school didn't like him and were a little afraid of him. They were indignant about the differences between him and themselves, saying that he was pretentious, seeking fame and reputation, and was unkind, and some simply said: "This is a desperate temper!" ”高先生没有儿子，只有两个女儿。
Mr. Gao has no sons, only two daughters.高先生性子很急，爱生气。生起气来不说话，满脸通红，脑袋不停地剧烈地摇动。他家世寒微，资格不高，故多疑。有时别人说了一两句不中听的话，或有意，或无意，高先生都会多心。比如有的教员为一点不顺心的事而牢骚，说：“家有三担粮，不当孩子王！我祖上还有几亩薄田，饿不死。不为五斗米折腰，我辞职，不干了！”——“老子不是那不花钱的学校毕业的，我不受这份窝囊气！”高先生都以为这是敲打他，他气得太阳穴的青筋都绷起来了。看样子他就会拍桌大骂，和人吵一架，然而他强忍下了，他只是不停地剧烈地摇着脑袋。
Mr. Gao is very impatient and loves to get angry. When he was angry, he didn't speak, his face was red, and his head kept shaking violently. His family background is humble and his qualifications are not high, so he is suspicious. Sometimes others say something unpleasant, either intentionally or unintentionally, and Mr. Gao will be careful. For example, some teachers complained about something unsatisfactory, saying: "The family has three loads of grain, and it is not the king of children!" My ancestors still have a few acres of thin fields, and they will not starve. If I don't bend my waist for five buckets of rice, I will resign and quit!" ——"I didn't graduate from that school that didn't cost money, and I don't feel like I'm angry!" Mr. Gao thought it was a beating to him, and he was so angry that the veins on his temples were tense. It seemed that he would slap the table and curse and quarrel with people, but he endured it, he just kept shaking his head violently.高先生很孤僻，不出人情，不随份子，几乎与人不通庆吊。他家从不请客，他也从不赴宴。他教书之外，也还为人写寿序，撰挽联，委托的人家照例都得请请他。知单[4]送到，他照例都在自己的名字下书一“谢”字。久而久之，都知道他这脾气，也就不来多此一举了。
Mr. Gao is very withdrawn, unkind, unobedient, and almost never communicates with others. His family never treats guests, and he never goes to banquets. In addition to teaching, he also wrote birthday prefaces and elegies for people, and the people he entrusted had to invite him as usual. When the notice sheet [4] was delivered, he wrote the word "thank you" under his name as usual. Over time, everyone knew his temper, so he didn't do more.他不吃烟，不饮酒，不打牌，不看戏。除了学校和自己的家，哪里也不去。每天他清早出门，傍晚回家。拍拍白木的板门，过了一会，门开了。进门是一条狭长的过道，砖缝里长着扫帚苗，苦艾，和一种名叫“七里香”其实是闻不出什么气味，开着蓝色的碎花的野草，有两个黄蝴蝶寂寞地飞着。高先生就从这些野草丛中踏着沉重的步子走进去，走进里面一个小门，好像走进了一个深深的洞穴，高大的背影消失了。木板门又关了，把门上的一副春联关在外面。
He doesn't smoke, drink, play cards, or watch plays. He doesn't go anywhere except school and his own home. Every day he goes out early in the morning and returns home in the evening. He patted the white wooden wooden door, and after a while, the door opened. Entering the door is a long and narrow aisle, with broom seedlings, absinthe, and a weed called "Qili Xiang" actually smelling nothing, blooming blue flowers, and two yellow butterflies flying lonely. Mr. Gao walked in with heavy steps from these weeds, and walked into a small door inside, as if he had walked into a deep cave, and his tall back disappeared. The wooden door closed again, and a pair of Spring Festival couplets on the door were closed outside.高先生家的春联都是自撰的，逐年更换。不像一般人家是迎祥纳福的吉利话，都是述怀抱、舒愤懑的词句，全城少见。
这年是辛未年，板门上贴的春联嵌了高先生自己的名、字：
辛夸高岭桂
未徙北溟鹏
The old house where Mr. Gao lived on East Street has collapsed, and the walls and white wooden doors facing the street have not yet collapsed. The Spring Festival couplets written by Mr. Gao on the board door are still there. The big red red paper has been blown almost white by the wind and rain, but the handwriting in ink is still very thick and black. Singkwa Gaoling Gui He had not yet been transferred to the North Sea Peng也许这是一个好兆，“未徙”者“将徙”也。第二年，即壬申年，高北溟竟真的“徙”了。
Perhaps this is a good sign, and those who have not moved are "about to move". The second year, that is, the year of Renshen, Gao Beiming really "moved".这县里有一个初级中学。除了初中，还有一所初级师范，一所女子师范，都是为了培养小学师资的。只有初中生，是准备将来出外升学的，因此这初中俨然是本县的最高学府。可是一向办得很糟。名义上的校长是李三麻子，根本不来视事。教导主任张维谷（这个名字很怪）是个出名的吃白食的人。他有几句名言：“不愿我请人，不愿人请我，只愿人请人，当中有个我”。人品如此，学问可知。数学教员外号“杨半本”，他讲代数、几何，从来没有把一本书讲完过，大概后半本他自己也不甚了了。历史教员姓居，是个律师，学问还不如高尔础。他讲唐代的艺术一节，教科书上说唐代的书法分“方笔”和“圆笔”，他竟然望文生义，说方笔的笔杆是方的，圆笔的笔杆是圆的。连初中的孩子略想一想，也觉得无此道理。一个学生当时就站起来问：“笔杆是方的，那么笔头是不是也是方的呢？”这帮学混子简直是在误人子弟。学生家长，意见很大。到了暑假，学生闹了一次风潮（这是他们第一次参加的“学潮”）。事情还是从居大律师那里引起的。平日，学生在课堂上有什么不明白的问题问他，他的回答总是“书上有”。到学期考试时，学生搞了一次变相的罢考。卷子发下来，不到五分钟，一个学生以关窗为号，大家一起把卷子交了上去，每道试题下面一律写了三个字：“书上有”！张维谷及其一伙，实在有点“维谷”，混不下去了。
There is a junior high school in this county. In addition to junior high school, there is also a junior normal school and a women's normal school, all of which are aimed at training primary school teachers. Only junior high school students are preparing to go out to study in the future, so this junior high school is like the highest institution in the county. But it has always been done very poorly. The nominal principal is Li Sanmazi, who doesn't come to see things at all. The director of teaching, Zhang Weigu (this name is very strange), is a famous person who eats for nothing. He has a few famous sayings: "I don't want people to invite me, I don't want people to invite me, I just want people to invite people, and there is one of them in it." The character is like this, and the knowledge can be known. The mathematics teacher is nicknamed "Yang Banben", he talks about algebra and geometry, and he has never finished a book, and probably he doesn't know much about the second half of the book. The history teacher's surname is Ju, a lawyer, and his knowledge is not as good as that of Gao Erzha. He talked about the art of the Tang Dynasty, and the textbook said that the calligraphy of the Tang Dynasty was divided into "square pen" and "round pen". Even the junior high school children thought about it for a moment and felt that there was no such reason. A student stood up and asked, "The pen barrel is square, so is the pen tip also square?" These bastards are simply misleading their children. The parents of the students have a lot of opinions. During the summer vacation, the students had a trend (this was the first time they participated in the "student tide"). The incident still happened from the barrister. On weekdays, when students ask him questions they don't understand in class, his answer is always "in the book". When it came time for the semester exam, the students engaged in a disguised strike. The papers were sent, and in less than five minutes, a student closed the window, and everyone handed over the papers together, and three words were written under each test question: "On the book"! Zhang Weigu and his gang are really a bit "Weigu" and can't get along.教育局长不得不下决心对这个学校进行改组，——否则只怕连他这个局长也坐不稳。
The director of education had to make up his mind to reorganize the school,—— otherwise he would not be able to sit still.恰好沈石君因和厅里一个科长意见不合，愤而辞职，回家闲居，正在四处写信，托人找事，地方上人挽他出山来长初中。沈石君再三推辞，禁不住不断有人踵门劝说，也就答应了。他只提出一个条件：所有教员，由他决定。教育局长沉吟了一会，说：“可以。”
It happened that Shen Shijun resigned angrily because he disagreed with a section chief in the hall, went home to live idly, and was writing letters everywhere, asking people to find trouble, and the local superiors pulled him out of the mountains to grow junior high school. Shen Shijun repeatedly declined, and couldn't help but be persuaded by people who kept coming to the door, so he agreed. He only put forward one condition: all teachers are up to him. The director of education pondered for a while and said, "Yes." ”沈石君是想有一番作为的。他自然要考虑各种关系，也明知局长的口袋里装了几个人，想往初中里塞，不得不适当照顾，但是几门主要课程的教员绝对不能迁就。
国文教员，他聘了高北溟。许多人都感到意外。
Shen Shijun wanted to make a difference. He naturally had to consider various relationships, and he knew that the director had a few people in his pocket, and he wanted to stuff it into the junior high school, so he had to take proper care of it, but the teachers of several major courses must not be accommodated. Chinese language teacher, he hired Gao Beiming. Many people were surprised.高先生自然欣然同意。他谈了一些他对教学的想法。沈石君认为很有道理。
Mr. Gao naturally agreed. He talked about some of his ideas for teaching. Shen Shijun thought it made sense.高先生要求“随班走”。教一班学生，从初一教到初三，一直到送他们毕业，考上高中。他说别人教过的学生让他来教，如垦生荒，重头来起，事倍功半。教书教人，要了解学生，知己知彼。不管学生的程度，照本宣科，是为瞎教。学生已经懂得的，再来教他，是白费；暂时不能接受的，勉强教他，是徒劳。他要看着、守着他的学生，看到他是不是一月有一月的进步，一年有一年的进步。如同注水入瓶，随时知其深浅。他说当初谈老先生就是这样教他的。
Mr. Gao asked to "go with the class". Teach a class of students from the first to the third year of junior high school, until they graduate and are admitted to high school. He said that the students he has taught by others are asked to teach, such as reclaiming wasteland and starting over, and getting twice the result with half the effort. Teaching and teaching people must understand the students, know oneself and know the enemy. Regardless of the level of the student, teaching according to the script is blind teaching. What the student already understands, it is in vain to teach him again; if it is temporarily unacceptable, it is futile to teach him. He wants to watch and guard his students to see if he has made progress in January and January, and has made progress year by year. It's like pouring water into a bottle, knowing its depth at any time. He said that this is how Mr. Tan taught him at the beginning.他要求在部定课本之外，自选教材。他说教的是书，教书是高北溟。“只有我自己熟读，真懂，我所喜爱的文章，我自己为之感动过的，我才讲得好。”他强调教材要有一定的系统性，要有重点。他也讲《苛政猛于虎》、《晏子使楚》、《项羽本纪》、《出师表》、《陈情表》、韩、柳、欧、苏。集中地讲的是白居易、归有光、郑板桥。最后一学期讲的是朱自清的《背影》、都德的《磨坊文札》。他好像特别喜欢归有光的文章。一个学期内把《先妣事略》、《项脊轩志》、《寒花葬志》都讲了。他要把课堂讲授和课外阅读结合起来。课上讲了《卖炭翁》、《新丰折臂翁》，同时把白居易的新乐府全部印发给学生。讲了一篇《潍县署中寄弟墨》，把郑板桥的几封主要的家书、道情和一些题画的诗也都印发下去。学生看了，很有兴趣。这种做法，在当时的初中国文教员中极为少见。他选的文章看来有一个标准：有感慨，有性情，平易自然。这些文章有一个贯串性的思想倾向，这种倾向大体上可以归结为：人道主义。
He asked to choose his own textbooks in addition to the textbooks. He taught books, and taught Gao Beiming. "Only when I read and really understand the articles I like, and I have been moved by them, can I speak well." He emphasized that textbooks should be systematic and focused. He also talked about "Harsh Politics is Fiercer than a Tiger", "Yan Zi Envoy Chu", "Xiang Yu's Biography", "Teacher's Table", "Chen Qing Table", Han, Liu, Ou, and Su. He focused on Bai Juyi, Gui Youguang, and Zheng Banqiao. The last semester was Zhu Ziqing's "Back" and Dude's "Mill Paper". He seems to like Gui Youguang's articles. In one semester, he talked about "The Story of the First Mother", "Xiang Ji Xuan Zhi", and "Hanhua Funeral". He wants to combine classroom teaching with extracurricular reading. In class, he talked about "Charcoal Seller" and "Xinfeng Broken Arm Weng", and at the same time printed and distributed all of Bai Juyi's new Yuefu to students. He gave a lecture on "Weixian Office Sending Brother Ink", and printed and distributed several major family letters, Taoist feelings and some inscribed poems by Zheng Banqiao. The students read it and were very interested. This practice was extremely rare among the early Chinese teachers at that time. The articles he chose seemed to have a criterion: emotional, temperamental, plain and natural. These articles have a coherent ideological tendency, which can be roughly attributed to: humanitarianism.他非常重视作文。他说学国文的最终的目的，是把文章写通。学生作文他先眉批一道，指出好处和不好处，发下去由学生自己改一遍，或同学间互相改；交上来，他再改一遍，加点批，再发给学生，让学生自己誊一遍，留起来；要学生随时回过头来看看自己的文章。他说，作文要如使船，撑一篙是一篙，作一篇是一篇。不能像驴转磨，走了三年，只在磨道里转。
He attaches great importance to composition. He said that the ultimate goal of learning Chinese is to write the article through. He first commented on the student's composition, pointing out the advantages and disadvantages, and then sent it to the students themselves to correct it, or the classmates changed it to each other; when it was handed over, he changed it again, added some comments, and then sent it to the students, so that the students could transcribe it themselves and keep it; students were asked to look back at their articles at any time. He said that composition should be like a boat, one pole is a pole, and one pole is one article. You can't be like a donkey, walking for three years, only turning in the grinding road.为了帮助学生将来升学，他还自编了三种辅助教材。一年级是《字形音义辨》，二年级是《成语运用》，三年级是《国学常识》。
In order to help students go on to higher education in the future, he also compiled three auxiliary textbooks. The first grade is "Glyph Sound Meaning Discrimination", the second grade is "Idiom Use", and the third grade is "Common Sense of Chinese Studies".在县立初中读了三年的学生，大部分文字清通，知识丰富，他们在考高中，甚至日后在考大学时，国文分数都比较高，是高先生给他们打下的底子。更重要的是他们学会了欣赏文学——高先生讲过的文章的若干片段，许多学生过了三十年还背得；他们接受了高先生通过那些选文所传播的思想——人道主义，影响到他们一生的立身为人。呜呼，先生之泽远矣！
Most of the students who have studied in the county junior high school for three years are clear and knowledgeable, and their Chinese scores are relatively high when they take the high school entrance examination and even the university entrance examination in the future, which is the foundation laid for them by Mr. Gao. More importantly, they have learned to appreciate literature - several fragments of Mr. Gao's articles, and many students can still memorize them after thirty years; they accepted the ideas spread by Mr. Gao through those selected essays, humanism, which influenced their lifelong standing. Alas, Mr. Gao's grace is far away!（玻璃一样脆亮的童声高唱着。瓦片和树叶都在唱。）
(A child's voice as crisp as glass sings.) The tiles and leaves are singing. ）高先生的家也搬了。搬到老屋对面的一条巷子里。高先生用历年的积蓄，买了一所小小的四合院。房屋虽也旧了，但间架砖木都还结实。天井里花木扶疏，苔痕上阶，草色入帘，很是幽静。
Mr. Gao's house also moved. Moved to an alley opposite the old house. Mr. Gao used his savings over the years to buy a small courtyard house. Although the house is old, the bricks and wood are still strong. The flowers and trees in the courtyard are sparse, the moss traces go up the steps, and the grass is colorful, which is very quiet.高先生这几年心境很好，人也变随和了一些。他和沈石君以及一般同事相处甚得。沈石君每年暑假要请一次客，对校中同仁表示慰劳，席间也谈谈校务。高先生是不须催请，早早就到的。他还备了几样便菜，约几个志同道合的教员，在家里赏荷小聚。（五小的那位师爷式的教员听到此事，编了一条歇后语：“高北溟请客——破天荒”。）这几年，很少看到高先生气得脑袋不停的剧烈地摇动。
Mr. Gao has been in a good mood in recent years, and he has become a little more easy-going. He gets along well with Shen Shijun and ordinary colleagues. Shen Shijun invites guests once a year during the summer vacation to express his condolences to his colleagues in the school, and also talks about school affairs during the banquet. Mr. Gao arrived early without urging. He also prepared a few side dishes and invited a few like-minded teachers to enjoy the lotus at home. (The master-like teacher of the fifth primary school heard about this and made up a postscript: "Gao Beiming treats - unprecedented".) In recent years, it has been rare to see Mr. Gao shaking his head violently with anger.高先生有两件心事。
一件是想把谈老师的诗文刻印出来。
Mr. Gao has two things on his mind. One is to engrave Teacher Tan's poems.谈老先生死后，后人很没出息，游手好闲，坐吃山空，几年工夫，把谈先生挣下的家业败得精光，最后竟至靠拆卖房屋的破瓦维持生活。谈老先生的宅第几乎变成一片瓦砾，旧池乔木，荡然无存。门楼倒还在，也破落不堪了。供轿夫休息的长凳早没有了，剩了一个空空的架子。里面有一算卦的摆了一个卦摊。条桌上放着签筒。桌前系着桌帷，白色的圆“光”里写了四个字：“文王神课”。算卦的伏在桌上打盹。这地方还叫做“谈家门楼”。过路人走过，都有不胜今昔之感，觉得沧海桑田，人生如梦。
After Mr. Tan's death, the descendants were very unpromising, idle, sitting and eating, and after a few years of work, Mr. Tan's family business was completely ruined, and finally he relied on the broken tiles of the house to make a living. Mr. Tan's mansion was almost in rubble, and the old pond trees were gone. The gatehouse is still there, and it is also dilapidated. The bench for the palanquin driver to rest is long gone, leaving an empty shelf. There is a fortune teller set up a hexagram stall inside. There is a sign tube on the table. There is a table curtain tied in front of the table, and four words are written in the white circle "light": "King Wen's Divine Class". The fortune teller lay on the table and took a nap. This place is also called "Tan Jia Gate Tower". Passers-by have a sense of the past and the present, and feel that life is like a dream.谈老先生的哲嗣名叫幼渔。到无米下锅时，就到谈先生的学生家去打秋风。到了高北溟家，高先生总要周济他一块、两块、三块、五块。总不让他空着手回去。每年腊月，还得为他准备几斗米，一方腌肉，两条风鱼，否则这个年幼渔师弟过不去。
Mr. Tan's heir is named Youyu. When there is no rice to be cooked, he goes to Mr. Tan's student's house to fight the autumn breeze. When he arrived at Gao Beiming's house, Mr. Gao always had to help him with one, two, three, or five pieces. Don't let him go back empty-handed. Every year, in the twelfth lunar month, he has to prepare a few buckets of rice, one side of cured meat, and two wind fish, otherwise this young fisherman brother will not be able to get by.高北溟和谈先生的学生周济谈幼渔，是为了不忘师恩，是怕他把谈先生的文稿卖了。他已经几次要卖这部文稿。买主是有的，就是李三麻子（此人老而不死）。高先生知道，李三麻子买到文稿，改头换面，就成了他的著作。李三麻子惯于欺世盗名，这种事干得出。李三麻子出价一百，告诉幼渔，稿到即付。
Gao Beiming and Mr. Tan's student Zhou Jitan Youyu were afraid that he would sell Mr. Tan's manuscript in order not to forget his teacher's kindness. He has sold this manuscript several times. There is a buyer, that is, Li Sanmazi (this person is old but not dead). Mr. Gao knew that Li Sanmazi bought the manuscript and changed it, and it became his book. Li Sanmazi is used to deceiving the world and stealing his name, and this kind of thing can be done. Li Sanmazi bid 100 and told Youyu that the manuscript would be paid as soon as it arrived.高先生狠了狠心，拿出一百块钱，跟谈幼渔把稿子买了。
Mr. Gao was ruthless, took out a hundred yuan, and bought the manuscript with Tan Youyu.想刻印，却很难。松华斋可以铅印，尚古房可以雕板。问了问价钱，都贵得吓人，为高北溟力所不及。稿子放在架上，逐年摊晒。高先生觉得对不起老师，心里很不安。
另一件心事是女儿高雪的前途和婚事。
I want to engrave it, but it's difficult. Songhuazhai can be printed with lead, and Shanggufang can be carved with boards. When I asked about the price, it was terribly expensive, and Gao Beiming couldn't afford it. The manuscript is placed on the shelf and spread out year by year. Mr. Gao felt sorry for the teacher and felt very uneasy. Another thing on my mind is the future and marriage of my daughter Gao Xue.高先生的两个女儿，长名高水，次名高雪。
Mr. Gao's two daughters, the eldest named Gao Shui and the second named Gao Xue.高雪从小很受宠，一家子都惯她，很娇。她用的东西都和姐姐不一样。姐姐夏天穿的衣是府绸的，她穿的是湖纺。姐姐穿白麻纱袜，她却有两条长筒丝袜。姐姐穿自己做的布鞋，她却一会是“千底一带”，一会是白网球鞋，并且在初中二年级就穿了从上海买回来的皮鞋。姐姐不嫉妒，倒说：“你的脚好看，应该穿好鞋。”姐姐冬天烘黄铜的手炉，她的手炉是白铜的。姐姐扇细芭蕉扇，她扇檀香扇。东西也一样。吃鱼，脊梁、肚皮是她的（姐姐吃鱼头、鱼尾，且说她爱吃），吃鸡，一只鸡腿归她（另一只是高先生的）。她还爱吃陈皮梅、嘉应子、橄榄。她一个人吃。家务事也不管。扫地、抹桌、买菜、煮饭，都是姐姐。高起兴来，打了井水，把家里什么都洗一遍，砖地也洗一遍，大门也洗一遍，弄得家里水漫金山，人人只好缩着脚坐在凳子上。除了自己的衣服，她不洗别人的。被褥帐子，都是姐姐洗。姐姐在天井里一大盆一大盆，洗得汗马淋漓，她却躺在高先生的藤椅上看《茵梦湖》。高先生的藤椅，除了她，谁也不坐，这是一家之主的象征。只有一件事，她乐意做：浇花。这是她的特权，别人不许浇。
Gao Xue has been favored since she was a child, and the family is used to her and is very delicate. The things she uses are different from her sister's. My sister wears poplin clothes in summer, and she wears lake spinning. My sister wears white linen gauze socks, but she has two stockings. My sister wears her own cloth shoes, but she will wear white tennis shoes for a while, and she will wear leather shoes bought from Shanghai in the second grade of junior high school. My sister was not jealous, but said: "Your feet look good, you should wear good shoes." My sister bakes brass stoves in winter, and her hand stoves are made of cupronickel. My sister fanned a fine banana fan, and she fan a sandalwood fan. The same goes for things. Eating fish, the backbone and belly are hers (my sister eats fish heads and tails, and says she loves to eat), eat chicken, and one chicken leg belongs to her (the other is Mr. Gao's). She also loves to eat tangerine peel, Jiayingzi, and olives. She eats alone. I don't care about housework. Sweeping the floor, wiping the table, buying vegetables, and cooking are all sisters. Excitedly, he dug well water, washed everything in the house, washed the brick floor, and washed the door. She doesn't wash other people's clothes except for her own clothes. The bedding and tents are all washed by my sister. My sister was washing a large basin in the patio, but she was lying on Mr. Gao's rattan chair watching "Yinmeng Lake". Mr. Gao's rattan chair, no one sits on it except her, which is a symbol of the head of the family. There is only one thing she is willing to do: water the flowers. This is her privilege, and others are not allowed to water it.高先生治家很严，高师母、高水都怕他。只有对高雪，从未碰过一指头。在外面生了一点气，回来看看这个“欢喜团”，气也就消了。她要什么，高先生都依她。只有一次例外。
Mr. Gao is very strict in managing the house, and Mrs. Gao and Gao Shui are afraid of him. Only to Gao Xue, he has never touched a finger. I was a little angry outside, and when I came back to see this "happy group", the anger disappeared. Whatever she wants, Mr. Gao depends on her. There is only one exception.高雪初三毕业，要升学（高水没有读中学，小学毕业，就在本城读了女师，已经在教书）。她要考高中，将来到北平上大学。高先生不同意，只许她报师范。高雪哭，不吃饭。妈妈和姐姐坐在床前轮流劝她。
Gao Xue graduated from junior high school and wanted to go on to higher education (Gao Shui did not go to middle school, graduated from elementary school, and studied as a female teacher in the city and was already teaching). She wants to take the high school entrance examination and will go to college in Peking. Mr. Gao disagreed and only allowed her to apply for normal school. Gao Xue cried and did not eat. Her mother and sister sat in front of the bed and took turns persuading her.“不要这样。多不好。爸爸不是不想让你向高处飞，爸爸没有钱。三年高中，四年大学，路费、学费、膳费、宿费，得好一笔钱。”
“他有钱！”
“他哪有钱呀！”
“在柜子里锁着！”
"Don't do this. It's not good. Dad doesn't want you to fly high, Dad has no money. Three years of high school, four years of college, travel expenses, tuition, meals, and accommodation, you have to pay a good amount of money. ” "He's rich!" "How can he be rich!" "Lock it in the cabinet!"“那是攒起来要给谈老先生刻文集的。”
“干嘛要给他刻！”
“这孩子，没有谈老先生，爸爸就没有本事。上大学呢！你连小学也上不了。知恩必报，人不能无情无义。”
"That's what I saved up to engrave a collection of essays for Mr. Tan." "Why do you want to engrave it for him!" "This child, if he doesn't talk about the old gentleman, his father will have no ability. Go to college! You can't even go to elementary school. Kindness must be reciprocated, and people cannot be ruthless and unrighteous. ”“再说那笔钱也不够你上大学。好妹妹，想开一点。师范毕业，教两年，不是还可以考大学吗？你自己攒一点，没准爸爸这时候收入会更多一些。我跟爸爸说说，我挣的薪水，一半交家里，一半给你存起来，三四年下来，也是个数目。”
"Besides, that money is not enough for you to go to college. Good sister, I want to open a little. After graduating from normal school and teaching for two years, can't you still go to college? Save a little for yourself, maybe your father will earn more at this time. I told my dad that half of the salary I earn will be paid to my family, and half will be saved for you, and it will be a certain amount in three or four years. ”“你不用？”
“我？——不用！”
高雪被姐姐的真诚感动了，眼泪晶晶的。
"You don't need it?" "Me? - No! ” Gao Xue was moved by her sister's sincerity, and tears streamed down her face.姐姐说得也有理。国民党教育部有个规定，师范毕业，教两年小学，算是补偿了师范三年的学杂费，然后可以考大学。那时大学生里岁数大，老成持重的，多半曾是师范生。
My sister also makes sense. The Kuomintang Ministry of Education has a rule that graduating from normal school and teaching primary school for two years can be regarded as compensating for the tuition and miscellaneous expenses of normal school for three years, and then you can take the university entrance examination. At that time, most of the college students were old and mature, and most of them were normal students.“快起来吧！不要叫爸爸心里难过。你看看他：整天不说话，脑袋又不停地摇了。”
高雪虽然娇纵任性，这点清清楚楚的事理她是明白的。她起来洗洗脸，走到书房里，叫了一声：
“爸爸！”
"Get up quickly! Don't make Dad sad. Look at him: he doesn't speak all day, and his head keeps shaking again. ” Although Gao Xue was pampered and willful, she understood this clear reason. She got up to wash her face, walked to the study, and shouted: "Dad!"并盛了一碗饭，用茶水淘淘，就着榨菜，吃了。好像吃得很香。
高先生知道女儿回心转意了，他心里倒酸渍渍的，很不好受。
高雪考了苏州师范。
And put a bowl of rice, scooped it with tea, and ate it with mustard. It seems to be very delicious. Mr. Gao knew that his daughter had changed his mind, and he felt sour and uncomfortable. Gao Xue was admitted to Suzhou Normal University.高雪小时候没有显出怎么好看。没有想到，女大十八变，两三年工夫，变成了一个美人。每年暑假回家，一身白。白旗袍（在学校只能穿制服：白上衣，黑短裙），漂白细草帽，白纱手套，白丁字平跟皮鞋。丰姿楚楚，行步婀娜，态度安静，顾盼有光。不论在火车站月台上，轮船甲板上，男人女人都朝她看。男人看了她，敞开法兰绒西服上衣的扣，露出新买的时式领带，频频回首，自作多情。女的看了她，从手提包里取出小圆镜照照自己。各依年貌，生出不同的轻轻感触。
Gao Xue didn't look good when she was a child. Unexpectedly, the female university changed eighteen times, and after two or three years, she became a beauty. Every summer vacation, I go home dressed in white. White cheongsam (you can only wear a uniform at school: white top, black skirt), bleached straw hat, white gauze gloves, and white T-heeled leather shoes. Graceful, graceful, quiet, and light. Whether on the train station platform or on the deck of a ship, men and women look at her. The man looked at her, opened the button of his flannel suit top, revealed his newly bought fashionable tie, looked back frequently, and was amorous. The woman looked at her and took out a small round mirror from her handbag to look at herself. Each has a different gentle feeling according to their age and appearance.她在学校里唱歌、弹琴，都很出色。唱的歌是《茶花女》的《饮酒歌》，弹的是肖邦的小夜曲。
她一回本城，城里的女孩子都觉得自己很土。她们说高雪有一种说不出来的派头。
She sang and played the piano in school, and she was very good. The song she sang was "Drinking Song" from "La Traviata", and she played Chopin's serenade. As soon as she returned to the city, the girls in the city felt very earthy. They said that Gao Xue had an indescribable style.有女儿的人说：“高北溟生了这样一个女儿，这个爸爸当得过！”
A person with a daughter said: "Gao Beiming gave birth to such a daughter, this father is worthy of it!" ”任何小城都是有风波的。因为省长易人，直接影响到这个小县的人事。县长、党部、各局，统统来了一个大换班。公职人员，凡靠领薪水吃饭的，无不人心惶惶。
一县的人事更代，自然会波及到县立初中。
Any small town has turmoil. Because the governor has changed people, it directly affects the personnel of this small county. The county magistrate, the party department, and various bureaus have all come to a big shift change. Public officials, all who rely on salaries to eat, are all panicked. The personnel change of a county will naturally affect the county junior high school.三十几个教育界人士，联名写信告了沈石君。一式两份，分送厅、局。执笔起草的就是居大律师。他虽分不清方笔、圆笔，却颇善于刀笔。主要的罪名是：“把持学政，任用私人，倡导民主，宣传赤化”。后两条是初中图书馆里买了鲁迅、高尔基的书，订了《生活周刊》，“纪念周”上讲时事。“任用私人”牵涉到高北溟。信中说：“简师毕业，而教中学，纵观全国，无此特例。只为同门受业，不惜破格躐等，遂使寰城父老疾首，而令方帽学士寒心。”指摘高北溟的教学是“不依规矩，自作主张，藐视部厅，搅乱学制”。
More than 30 people in the education sector jointly wrote a letter to Shen Shijun. In duplicate, it was distributed to the hall and the bureau. The drafter was Lawyer Ju. Although he can't distinguish between a square pen and a round pen, he is quite good at knives and pens. The main charges are: "controlling academic politics, appointing private individuals, advocating democracy, and propagating redification." The last two are buying books by Lu Xun and Gorky in the junior high school library, subscribing to "Life Weekly", and talking about current affairs at the "Commemorative Week". "Appointing private individuals" involves Gao Beiming. The letter said: "Master Jian graduated, and taught middle school, there is no such special case throughout the country. Only for the sake of the same school, he did not hesitate to make an exception, which made the fathers and elders of the city sick and chilled the square hat scholar. He accused Gao Beiming's teaching of "not following the rules, making his own decisions, contemptuous of departments and departments, and disrupting the school system."有人把这封信的底稿抄了一份送给沈石君。沈石君看了，置之一笑。他知道这个初中校长的位置，早已有人觊觎，自厅至局，已经内定。这封控告信，不过是制造一个查办的口实。此种官场小伎俩，是三岁小儿都知道的。和这些人纠缠，味同嚼蜡。何况他已在安徽找到事，毫无恋栈之心。为了给当局一个下马台阶，彼此不伤和气，他自己主动递了一封辞职书。不两天，批复照准。继任校长，叫尹同霖，原是办党务的。——新换上的各局首脑也都是清一色，是县党部的委员。这一调整充分体现了“以党治国”精神。没有等办理交代，尹同霖先来拜会了沈石君，这是给他一个很大的面子，免得彼此心存芥蒂。尹同霖问沈石君有什么托咐，沈石君只希望他能留高北溟。尹同霖满口答应。
Someone copied a copy of the letter and sent it to Shen Shijun. Shen Shijun read it and laughed. He knew that the position of the principal of this junior high school had long been coveted, and it had been decided from the hall to the bureau. This letter of accusation is just an excuse for investigation. This kind of officialdom trick is known to three-year-olds. Entangled with these people, it tastes like chewing wax. What's more, he has found something in Anhui and has no love for the stack. In order to give the authorities a step down and not hurt each other, he took the initiative to hand over a letter of resignation. In less than two days, the approval was approved. The successor principal, named Yin Tonglin, was originally in charge of party affairs. ——The newly replaced heads of bureaus are also all members of the county party committee. This adjustment fully reflects the spirit of "governing the country with the party". Without waiting for the explanation, Yin Tonglin came to visit Shen Shijun first, which was to give him a lot of face, so as not to have a grudge against each other. Yin Tonglin asked Shen Shijun what he wanted, and Shen Shijun only hoped that he could stay in Gao Beiming. Yin Tonglin agreed.沈石君束装就道之前，来看了高北溟，说他已和同霖提了，这点面子料想他会给的，他叫高北溟不要另外找事，安心在家等聘书。
Before Shen Shijun dressed up and said, he came to see Gao Beiming and said that he had mentioned it to Tonglin, and he thought he would give this little face, so he told Gao Beiming not to look for trouble and wait for the letter of appointment at home.不料，快开学了，聘书还不下来。同时，却收到第五小学的聘书。聘书后盖着五小新校长的签名章：张维谷。这是怎么回事呢？他并未向张维谷谋过职呀。
高先生只得再回五小去教书。
Unexpectedly, school is about to start, and the letter of appointment has not yet come down. At the same time, I received a letter of appointment from the fifth primary school. The letter of appointment is stamped with the signature of the new principal of the fifth primary school: Zhang Weigu. What's going on? He didn't ask Zhang Weigu for a job. Mr. Gao had to go back to Wuxiao to teach.高先生到教务处看看，教员大半还是熟人。他和大家点点头，拿了粉笔、点名册往教室里走。纨绔子弟和幕僚在他身后努努嘴，演了一出双簧。一个说：“好马不吃回头草”，一个说：“前度刘郎今又来”。高北溟只当没有听见。
Mr. Gao went to the Academic Affairs Office to take a look, and most of the faculty members were still acquaintances. He nodded with everyone, took the chalk and roll call and walked into the classroom. The young men and staff nodded behind him and performed a double reed. One said: "Good horses don't eat back grass", and the other said: "Liu Lang is here again today." Gao Beiming just pretended not to hear.五年级有一个学生叫申潜，是现任教育局长的儿子，异常顽劣，上课时常捣乱。有一次他乘高先生回身写黑板时，用弹弓纸弹打人，一弹打在高先生的后脑勺上。高先生勃然大怒，把他训斥了一顿。不想申潜毫不认错，反而睖着眼睛看着高先生，眼睛里充满了鄙视。他没有说一句话，但是高先生从他的眼睛里清清楚楚听得到：“你有什么了不起！我爸爸动一动手指头，你们的饭碗就完蛋！”高先生狂吼起来：“你仗你老子的势！你们！你们这些党棍子，你们欺人太甚！”他的脑袋剧烈地摇动起来。一堂学生被高先生的神气吓呆了，鸦雀无声。
There is a fifth-grade student named Shen Qian, the son of the current director of the Education Bureau, who is extremely stubborn and often makes trouble in class. Once when he took Mr. Gao back to write on the blackboard, he hit someone with a slingshot paper and hit Mr. Gao on the back of the head. Mr. Gao was furious and reprimanded him. I didn't want Shen Qian to admit his mistake, but looked at Mr. Gao with his eyes full of contempt. He didn't say a word, but Mr. Gao could clearly hear it from his eyes: "What's so great about you! My dad moves his fingers, and your job will be over!" Mr. Gao roared: "You rely on your old power!" You guys! You party sticks, you are bullying people too much!" His head shook violently. A student in the class was stunned by Mr. Gao's spirit and was silent.谈甓渔的文稿没有刻印出来。永远也没有刻印出来的希望了。
高雪病了。
Tan Piyu's manuscript was not engraved. There will never be hope of being engraved. Gao Xue is sick.按规定，师范毕业，还要实习一年，才能正式任教。高雪在实习一年的下学期，发现自己下午潮热（同学们都看出她到下午两颊微红，特别好看），夜间盗汗，浑身没有力气。撑到学期终了，回了家，高师母知道女儿病状，说是：“可了不得！”这地方讳言这种病的病名，但是大家心里都明白。高先生请了汪厚基来给高雪看病。
According to regulations, after graduating from normal school, you will have to practice for one year before you can officially teach. In the second semester of the internship year, Gao Xue found that she had hot flashes in the afternoon (her classmates saw that her cheeks were slightly red in the afternoon, which was particularly beautiful), night sweats, and no strength all over her body. After lasting until the end of the semester and returning home, Mrs. Gao knew her daughter's condition and said, "It's amazing!" The name of this disease is taboo in this place, but everyone understands it in their hearts. Mr. Gao invited Wang Houji to see Gao Xue.汪厚基是高先生最喜欢的学生，说他“绝顶聪明”。他从一年级到六年级，各门功课都是全班第一。全县的作文比赛，书法比赛，他都是第一名。他临毕业的那年，高先生为人撰了一篇寿序。经寿翁的亲友过目之后，大家商量请谁来写。高先生一时高兴，推荐了他这个得意的学生。大家觉得叫一个孩子来写，倒很别致，而且可以沾一沾返老还童的喜气，就说不妨一试。汪厚基用多宝塔体写了十六幅寿屏，字径二寸，笔力饱满。张挂起来，满座宾客，无不诧为神童。高先生满以为这个学生一定会升学，将来一定会出人头地。他家里开爿米店，家道小康，升学没有多大困难。不想他家里决定叫他学医——学中医。高先生听说，废书而叹，连声说：“可惜，可惜！”
Wang Houji is Mr. Gao's favorite student, saying he is "extremely smart". From the first grade to the sixth grade, he was the first in the class in all subjects. He won first place in the county's essay competition and calligraphy competition. The year he was about to graduate, Mr. Gao wrote a life preface. After reviewing Shou Weng's relatives and friends, everyone discussed who to write. Mr. Gao was happy for a moment and recommended him as a proud student. Everyone thought it was very chic to ask a child to write, and it could be touched with the joy of rejuvenation, so they said they might as well give it a try. Wang Houji wrote sixteen birthday screens in the style of Duobao Pagoda, with a two-inch diameter and full of pen power. When it was hung up, the guests were all surprised as prodigies. Mr. Gao was full of thoughts that this student would definitely go on to higher education and get ahead in the future. His family opened a rice shop, and his family was well-off, so there was no difficulty in going to school. I don't want his family to decide to let him study medicine - learn Chinese medicine. When Mr. Gao heard this, he sighed and said repeatedly: "It's a pity, it's a pity!" ”汪厚基跟一个姓刘的老先生学了几年，在东街赁了一间房，挂牌行医了。他看起来完全不像个中医。中医宜老不宜少，而且最好是行动蹒跚，相貌奇古，这样病家才相信。东街有一个老中医就是这样。此人外号李花脸，满脸的红记，一年多半穿着紫红色的哆啰呢夹袍，黑羽纱马褂，说话是个囔鼻儿，浑身发出樟木气味，好像才从樟木箱子里拿出来。汪厚基全不是这样，既不弯腰，也不驼背，英俊倜傥，衣着入时，像一个大学毕业生。他开了方子，总把笔套上。——中医开方之后，照例不套笔，这是一种迷信，套了笔以后就不再有人找他看病了。汪厚基不管这一套，他会写字，爱笔。他这个中医还订了好几份杂志，并且还看屠格涅夫的小说。这些都是对行医不利的。但是也许沾了“神童”的名誉的光，请他看病的不少，收入颇为可观。他家里觉得叫他学医这一步走对了。
Wang Houji studied with an old gentleman surnamed Liu for several years, rented a room on East Street, and listed himself to practice medicine. He doesn't look like a Chinese medicine doctor at all. Traditional Chinese medicine is suitable for the elderly, and it is best to be faltering and looking ancient, so that the patient can believe it. There is an old Chinese medicine doctor on East Street who is like this. This person is nicknamed Li Hua face, his face is full of red marks, he has been wearing a purple doroni robe and a black feather gauze robe for more than a year, and he speaks with a snort, and his whole body smells of camphor wood, as if he has just taken it out of the camphor box. Wang Houji is not like this at all, neither bending over nor hunched over, handsome and dashing, dressed in fashion, like a college graduate. He prescribed a prescription and always put a pen on it. ——After the prescription of traditional Chinese medicine, he did not put a pen on as usual, which is a kind of superstition, and no one will come to see him after the pen is put on. Wang Houji doesn't care about this, he can write and loves to write. He is a Chinese medicine practitioner who has subscribed to several magazines and also reads Turgenev's novels. These are all bad for practicing medicine. But perhaps he was stained with the light of the reputation of a "prodigy", and he was invited to see a doctor a lot, and his income was considerable. His family felt that it was the right step to ask him to study medicine.他该成家了。来保媒的一年都有几起。汪厚基看不上。他私心爱慕着高雪。
It's time for him to start a family. There are several cases a year to protect the media. Wang Houji doesn't like it. He privately admires Gao Xue.他和高雪小学同班。两家住得不远。上学，放学，天天一起走，小时候感情很好。街上的野孩子有时欺负高雪，向她扔土坷垃，汪厚基就给她当保镖。他还时常做高雪掉在河里，他跳下去把她救起来这样的英雄的梦。高雪读了初中，师范，他看她一天比一天长得漂亮起来。隔几天看见她，都使他觉得惊奇。高雪上师范三年级时，他曾托人到高家去说媒。
He is in the same class as Gao Xue Primary School. The two families live not far away. Go to school, go to school, walk together every day, and have a good relationship when you were a child. The wild children on the street sometimes bullied Gao Xue and threw dirt at her, and Wang Houji acted as a bodyguard for her. He also often dreamed of a hero who fell into the river and jumped down to save her. Gao Xue went to junior high school, a normal school, and he saw her growing more beautiful day by day. Seeing her every few days surprised him. When Gao Xue was in the third grade of normal school, he asked someone to go to Gao's house to talk about matchmaking.高师母是很喜欢汪厚基的。高水说：“不行！妹妹是个心高的人，她要飞到很远的地方去。她要上大学。她不会嫁一个中医。妈，您别跟妹妹说！”高北溟想了一天，对媒人说：“高雪还小。她还有一年实习，再说吧。”媒人自然知道，这是一种委婉的推托。
Mrs. Gao likes Wang Houji very much. Gao Shui said: "No! My sister is a high-minded person, and she wants to fly far away. She wants to go to college. She won't marry a Chinese medicine doctor. Mom, don't tell your sister!" Gao Beiming thought for a day and said to the matchmaker: "Gao Xue is still young. She still has a year of internship, let's talk about it." The matchmaker naturally knew that this was a euphemistic excuse.汪厚基每天来给高雪看病。汪厚基觉得这是一种福。高雪也很感激他。看了病，汪厚基常坐在床前，陪高雪闲谈。他们谈了好多小时候的事，彼此都记得那么清楚。高雪一天一天地好起来了。
Wang Houji came to see Gao Xue every day. Wang Houji felt that this was a blessing. Gao Xue was also very grateful to him. After seeing a doctor, Wang Houji often sat in front of the bed and chatted with Gao Xue. They talked a lot about their childhood, and they remembered each other so clearly. Gao Xue got better day by day.高雪病愈之后，就在本县一小教书，——她没有能在外地找到事。她一面补习功课，准备考大学。
接连考了两年，没有考取。
After Gao Xue recovered from her illness, she taught at a primary school in the county,—— she couldn't find anything else. While she was tutoring her homework, she was preparing to take the university entrance exam. I took the exam for two years in a row, but I didn't get it.第三年，七七事变、抗日战争爆发，她所向往的大学，都迁到了四川、云南。日本人占领了江南，本县外出的交通断了。她想冒险通过敌占区，往云南、四川去。全家人都激烈反对。她只好在这个小城里困着。
In the third year, the 77 Incident and the War of Resistance Against Japanese Aggression broke out, and the universities she longed for moved to Sichuan and Yunnan. The Japanese occupied Jiangnan, and the traffic out of the county was cut off. She wanted to take the risk through the enemy-occupied areas to Yunnan and Sichuan. The whole family was fiercely opposed. She had to stay in this small town.高雪的岁数一年比一年大，该嫁人了。多少双眼睛都看着她。她老不结婚，大家就都觉得奇怪。城里渐渐有了一些流言。轻嘴薄舌的人很多。对一个漂亮的少女，有人特别爱用自己肮脏的舌头来糟蹋她，话说得很难听，说她外面有人，还说……唉，别提这些了吧。
Gao Xue's age is getting older and older year by year, and it's time to get married. How many pairs of eyes are looking at her. Everyone finds it strange that she is not married. There are gradually some rumors in the city. There are many people who are light-tongued and thin-tongued. For a beautiful girl, some people especially love to use their dirty tongues to ruin her, and the words are very ugly, saying that there are people outside her, and saying ...... Alas, don't mention this.高雪在学校是经常收到情书。有的摘录了李后主、秦少游的词，满纸伤感惆怅。有的抄了一些外国诗。有一位抄了一大段拜伦的情诗的原文，害得她还得查字典。这些信大都也有一点感情，但又都不像很认真。高雪有时也回信，写的也是一些虚无缥缈的话。她并没有一个真正的情人。
Gao Xue often received love letters at school. Some excerpted the words of Li Houzhu and Qin Shaoyou, and the paper was full of sadness and melancholy. Some copied some foreign poems. There was a person who copied a large number of original texts of Byron's love poems, which caused her to have to look up the dictionary. Most of these letters also have a little emotion, but they don't seem to be very serious. Gao Xue sometimes replied, writing some ethereal words. She doesn't have a real lover.本县的小学里不断有人向她献殷勤，她一个也看不上，觉得他们讨厌。
汪厚基又托媒人来说了几次媒， 都被用不同的委婉言词拒绝了。——每次家里问高雪，她都是摇摇头。
There are constantly people in the primary schools in this county who are courteous to her, but she doesn't like any of them and thinks they hate them. Wang Houji asked the matchmaker to talk to the matchmaker several times, but was rejected with different euphemistic words. ——Every time the family asked Gao Xue, she shook her head.一次又一次，高家全家的心都活了，连高水也改变了态度。她和高雪谈了半夜。
Again and again, the hearts of the Gao family were alive, and even Gao Shui changed his attitude. She talked with Gao Xue in the middle of the night.“行了吧。汪厚基对你是真心。他说他非你不娶，是实话。他脾气好，一定会对你很体贴。人也不俗。你们不是也还谈得来么？你还挑什么呢？你想要一个什么人？你想要的，这个县城里没有！妹妹，你不小了。听姐姐话，再拖下去，你真要留在家里当老姑娘？这是命，你心高命薄。退一步看，想宽一点。花开堪折直须折，莫待无花空折枝呀……”
"Okay. Wang Houji is sincere to you. He said he would not marry you, which was the truth. He has a good temper and will definitely be considerate to you. People are not bad either. Aren't you still able to talk? What else do you choose? Who do you want? What do you want, there is no one in this county! Sister, you are not young anymore. Listen to your sister, and if you drag it on, do you really want to stay at home as an old girl? This is fate, you have a high heart. Take a step back and want to be wider. Flowers can be broken, don't wait for flowers to break branches......高雪一直没有说话。
Gao Xue never spoke.高雪同意和汪厚基结婚了。婚后的生活是平静的。汪厚基待高雪，真是含在口里怕她化了，体贴到不能再体贴。每天下床，都是厚基给她穿袜子，穿鞋。她梳头，厚基在后面捧着镜子。天凉了，天热了，厚基早给她把该换的衣服找出来放着。嫂子们常常偷偷在窗外看这小两口的无穷无尽的蜜月新婚，抿着嘴笑。
Gao Xue agreed to marry Wang Houji. Life after marriage is peaceful. Wang Houji treated Gao Xue in his mouth, really afraid that she would melt, and he was so considerate that he could no longer be considerate. Every day when he got out of bed, Houji put socks and shoes on her. She combed her hair, and Houji held the mirror in the back. It was cold and hot, and Houji had already found out the clothes she needed to change and put them away. The sisters-in-law often secretly watched the endless honeymoon newlyweds of the young couple outside the window, pursing their lips and laughing.然而高雪并不快乐，她的笑总有点凄凉。半年之后，她病了。
However, Gao Xue was not happy, and her smile was always a little desolate. Half a year later, she fell ill.汪厚基自己给她看病，亲自到药店去抓药，亲自煎药，还亲自尝一尝。他把全部学识都拿了出来了。然而高雪的病没有起色。他把全城同行名医，包括几个西医，都请来给高雪看病。可是大家都说不出一个所以然，连一个准病名都说不出，一人一个说法。一个西医说了一个很长的拉丁病名，汪厚基请教是什么意思，这位西医说：“忧郁症”。
Wang Houji saw her himself, went to the pharmacy to grab the medicine, decocted the medicine himself, and tasted it himself. He took out all his knowledge. However, Gao Xue's illness did not improve. He invited famous doctors from all over the city, including several Western doctors, to see Gao Xue. But no one could say a reason, not even a quasi-disease name, one for each person. A Western doctor said a long Latin disease name, Wang Houji asked what it meant, and the Western doctor said: "Depression".病了半年，百药罔效，高雪瘦得剩了一把骨头。厚基抱她起来，轻得像一个孩子。高雪觉得自己不行了，叫厚基给她穿衣裳。衣裳穿好了，袜子也穿好了，高雪微微皱了皱眉，说左边的袜跟没有拉平。厚基给她把袜跟拉平了，她用非常温柔的眼光看着厚基，说：“厚基，你真好！”随即闭了眼睛。
After being sick for half a year, all medicines were ineffective, and Gao Xue was so thin that only a handful of bones remained. Houji hugged her up, as light as a child. Gao Xue felt that she couldn't do it anymore, so she asked Houji to dress her. The clothes were put on, and the socks were also put on, Gao Xue frowned slightly, saying that the heel of the sock on the left was not flattened. Houji flattened the heel of the sock for her, and she looked at Houji with very gentle eyes and said, "Houji, you are so good!" Then he closed his eyes.汪厚基到高先生家去报信。他详详细细叙说了高雪临死的情形，说她到最后还很清醒，“我给她穿袜子，她还说左边的袜跟没有拉平。”高师母忍不住，到房里坐在床上痛哭。高水的眼泪不断流出来，喊了一声：“妹妹，你想飞，你没有飞出去呀！”高先生捶着书桌说：“怪我！怪我！怪我！”他的脑袋不停地摇动起来。——高先生近年不只在生气的时候，只要感情一激动，就摇脑袋。
Wang Houji went to Mr. Gao's house to report the news. He described Gao Xue's dying situation in detail, saying that she was still very sober in the end, "I put socks on her, and she also said that the heel of the left sock was not leveled." Mrs. Gao couldn't help but go to the room and sit on the bed and cry bitterly. Gao Shui's tears kept flowing out, and he shouted: "Sister, you want to fly, you didn't fly out!" Mr. Gao pounded on the desk and said, "Blame me! Blame me! Blame me!" His head kept shaking. ——In recent years, Mr. Gao has not only shaken his head when he is angry, but as long as he is emotionally excited, he will shake his head.汪厚基把牌子摘了下来，他不再行医了。“我连高雪的病都看不好，我还给别人看什么？”这位医生对医药彻底发生怀疑：“医道，没有用！——骗人！”他变得有点傻了，遇见熟人就说：“她到最后还很清醒，我给她穿袜子，她还说左边袜跟没有拉平……”他不知道，他已经跟这人说过几次了。他的眼光呆滞，反应也很迟钝了。他的那点聪明灵气已经全部消失。他整天无所事事，一起来就到处乱走。家里人等他吃饭，每回看不见他，一找，他都在高雪的坟旁坐着。
Wang Houji took off the sign, and he stopped practicing medicine. "I can't even see Gao Xue's illness well, what else can I show others?" The doctor was completely suspicious of medicine: "Medicine is useless! ——Liar!" He became a little stupid, and when he met an acquaintance, he said: "She was still awake in the end, I put socks on her, and she also said that the left sock heel was not leveled......" He didn't know, he had told this person several times. His eyes were dull and his reaction was slow. His little bit of intelligence and aura have all disappeared. He had nothing to do all day, and he wandered around when he came together. The family waited for him to eat, and every time they couldn't see him, they found him, and when they looked for him, he was sitting next to Gao Xue's grave.高先生已经死了几年了。
五小的学生还在唱：
西挹神山爽气，
东来邻寺疏钟……
墓草萋萋，落照昏黄，歌声犹在，斯人邈矣。
Mr. Gao has been dead for several years. The students of the fifth primary school are still singing: The refreshing air of the Xiyi Sacred Mountain, A sparse bell from the neighboring temple came from the east...... The grave is overgrown with grass, the setting sun is dim, and the singing is still there.高先生在东街住过的老屋倒塌了，临街的墙壁和白木板门倒还没有倒。板门上高先生写的春联也还在。大红朱笺被风雨漂得几乎是白色的了，墨写的字迹却还很浓，很黑。
辛夸高岭桂
未徙北溟鹏
The old house where Mr. Gao lived on East Street has collapsed, and the walls and white wooden doors facing the street have not yet collapsed. The Spring Festival couplets written by Mr. Gao on the board door are still there. The big red red paper has been blown almost white by the wind and rain, but the handwriting in ink is still very thick and black. Singkwa Gaoling Gui He had not yet been transferred to the North Sea Peng一九八一年八月四日于青岛黄岛

[1] 本篇原载《北京文学》1981年第十期；初收《晚饭花集》，人民文学出版社，1985年3月。
[2] 明伦堂是孔庙的正殿，供着至圣先师的牌位。
August 4, 1981 in Huangdao, Qingdao [1] This article was originally published in Beijing Literature, No. 10, 1981; First Received "Dinner Flower Collection", People's Literature Publishing House, March 1985. [2] Minglun Hall is the main hall of the Confucius Temple, which houses the tablets of the Most Holy Teacher.[3] 把城中妓女加以品评，定出状元、榜眼、探花、一甲、二甲，在小报上公布，谓之“花榜”。嫖客中的才子同时还写了一些很香艳的诗来咏这些“花”。
[3] The prostitutes in the city were evaluated, and the champions, lists, flowers, first and second grades were determined, and published in tabloids, called "flower lists". The talents among the prostitutes also wrote some very fragrant poems to sing about these "flowers".[4] 请客的单子，上面开列了要请的客。被请的人如在自己的姓名下写“敬陪末座”或一“知”字，即表示准时赴席；写一“谢”字是表示不到。

故乡人

故乡人[1]
打鱼的
女人很少打鱼。
[4] The list of invitations lists the guests to be invited. If the invited person writes the word "accompany the last seat" or a "know" under his name, it means that he will be on time; if he writes the word "thank you", it means that he cannot do it. Hometown people{{id_0000}} Fishing Women rarely fish.打鱼的有几种。
There are several types of fishing.一种用两只三桅大船，乘着大西北风，张了满帆，在大湖的激浪中并排前进，船行如飞，两船之间挂了极大的拖网，一网上来，能打上千斤鱼。而且都是大鱼。一条大铜头鱼（这种鱼头部尖锐，颜色如新擦的黄铜，肉细味美，有的地方叫做黄段），一条大青鱼，往往长达七八尺。较小的，也都在五斤以上。起网的时候，如果觉得分量太沉，会把鱼放掉一些，否则有把船拽翻了的危险。这种豪迈壮观的打鱼，只能在严寒的冬天进行，一年只能打几次。鱼船的船主都是个小财主，虽然他们也随船下湖，驾船拉网，勇敢麻利处不比雇来的水性极好的伙计差到哪里去。
One uses two three-masted boats, riding the strong northwest wind, with full sails, and moving side by side in the waves of the great lake, the boat travels like flying, and there is a huge trawl between the two boats, and a net can catch a thousand pounds of fish. And they are all big fish. A large copperhead (this fish has a sharp head, the color is like freshly polished brass, the meat is fine and delicious, and in some places it is called the yellow section), a large herring, often seven or eight feet long. The smaller ones are also more than five pounds. When raising the net, if you feel that the weight is too heavy, you will release some fish, otherwise there is a risk of dragging the boat over. This kind of heroic and spectacular fishing can only be carried out in the harsh winter, only a few times a year. The owners of the fishing boats were all small rich men, although they also went down to the lake with the boat, pulled the net, and were no worse than the hired men with excellent water quality.一种是放鱼鹰的。鱼鹰分清水、浑水两种。浑水鹰比清水鹰值钱得多。浑水鹰能在浑水里睁眼，清水鹰不能。湍急的浑水里才有大鱼，名贵的鱼。清水里只有普通的鱼，不肥大，味道也差。站在高高的运河堤上，看人放鹰捉鱼，真是一件快事。一般是两个人，一个撑船，一个管鹰。一船鱼鹰，多的可到二十只。这些鱼鹰歇在木架上，一个一个都好像很兴奋，不停地鼓膆子，扇翅膀，有点迫不及待的样子。管鹰的把篙子一摆，二十只鱼鹰扑通扑通一齐钻进水里，不大一会，接二连三的上来了。嘴里都叼着一条一尺多长的鳜鱼，鱼尾不停地搏动。没有一只落空。有时两只鱼鹰合抬着一条大鱼。喝！这条大鳜鱼！烧出来以后，哪里去找这样大的鱼盘来盛它呢？
One is to release ospreys. Ospreys are divided into two types: clear water and muddy water. Muddy water eagles are much more valuable than clear water eagles. Muddy water eagles can open their eyes in muddy water, but clear water eagles cannot. Only in turbulent muddy water can there be big fish, precious fish. There are only ordinary fish in clear water, not fat, and the taste is poor. Standing on the high canal embankment and watching people release eagles to catch fish, it's really a pleasure. Usually two people, one holding the boat and the other managing the eagle. A boat of ospreys can be as many as twenty. These ospreys rested on wooden frames, and each one seemed to be very excited, constantly puffing their chests and flapping their wings, looking a little impatient. The eagle swung the pole, and the twenty ospreys fluttered into the water together, and after a while, they came up one after another. There was a mandarin fish more than a foot long in its mouth, and the tail kept beating. None of them missed. Sometimes two ospreys carry a big fish together. Drink! This big mandarin fish! After it is burned, where can I find such a big fish plate to hold it?一种是扳罾的。
一种是撒网的。……
One is the pulling net. One is to cast a net. ……还有一种打鱼的：两个人，都穿了牛皮缝制的连鞋子、裤子带上衣的罩衣，颜色白黄白黄的，站在齐腰的水里。一个张着一面八尺来宽的兜网；另一个按着一个下宽上窄的梯形的竹架，从一个距离之外，对面走来，一边一步一步地走，一边把竹架在水底一戳一戳地戳着，把鱼赶进网里。这样的打鱼的，只有在静止的浅水里，或者在虽然流动但水不深，流不急的河里，如护城河这样的地方，才能见到。这种打鱼的，每天打不了多少，而且没有很大的，很好的鱼。大都是不到半斤的鲤鱼拐子、鲫瓜子、鲶鱼。连不到二寸的“罗汉狗子”，薄得无肉的“猫杀子”，他们也都要。他们时常会打到乌龟。
There is also a kind of fishing: two people, both wearing cowhide sewn with shoes, pants and tops, white, yellow, and yellow in color, standing in waist-length water. One has a net about eight feet wide; the other presses a trapezoidal bamboo frame with a wide bottom and narrow top, walking from a distance away, on the opposite side, walking step by step, while poking the bamboo rack at the bottom of the water and poking it one by one, driving the fish into the net. Such fishermen can only be seen in still shallow water, or in rivers that are flowing but not deep and not rushed, such as moats. This kind of fisherman can't catch much every day, and there are no big, very good fish. Most of them are carp abductors, crucian melon seeds, and catfish less than half a catty. They also want to have a "Luohan dog" that is less than two inches long and a "cat killing children" that is so thin that it has no meat. They often hit turtles.在小学校后面的苇塘里，臭水河，常常可以看到两个这样的打鱼的。一男一女。他们是两口子。男的张网，女的赶鱼。奇怪的是，他们打了一天的鱼，却听不到他们说一句话。他们的脸上既看不出高兴，也看不出失望、忧愁，总是那样平平淡淡的，平淡得近于木然。除了举网时听到歘的一声，和梯形的竹架间或搅动出一点水声，听不到一点声音。就是举网和搅水的声音，也很轻。
In the reed pond behind the primary school, in the stinky river, you can often see two such fishermen. A man and a woman. They are a couple. The man sets the net, and the woman catches the fish. Strangely, they have been fishing for a day, but they can't hear them say a word. Their faces showed neither happiness, nor disappointment or sorrow, and they were always so plain, almost dull. Except for the sound of a crackle when lifting the net, and the sound of water stirring between the trapezoidal bamboo frames, there is no sound to be heard. Even the sound of lifting the net and stirring the water is also very light.有几天不看见这两个穿着黄白黄白的牛皮罩衣的打鱼的了。又过了几天，他们又来了。按着梯形竹架赶鱼的换了一个人，一个十五六岁的小姑娘。辫根缠了白头绳。一看就知道，是打鱼人的女儿。她妈死了，得的是伤寒。她来顶替妈的职务了。她穿着妈穿过的皮罩衣，太大了，腰里窝着一块，更加显得臃肿。她也像妈一样，按着梯形竹架，一戳一戳地戳着，一步一步地往前走。
For a few days, I didn't see these two fishermen wearing yellow, white, yellow and white cowhide overcoats. A few days later, they came again. The person who chased the fish according to the trapezoidal bamboo frame was replaced by another person, a fifteen or sixteen-year-old girl. The braid root was wrapped in a white rope. At a glance, you can tell that it is the daughter of a fisherman. Her mother died and got typhoid fever. She came to take over her mother's position. She was wearing the leather overcoat worn by her mother, which was too big, and she had a piece nested in her waist, making her look even more bloated. Like her mother, she pressed the trapezoidal bamboo frame, poking it one by one, and walked forward step by step.她一定觉得：这身湿了水的牛皮罩衣很重，秋天的水已经很凉，父亲的话越来越少了。
金大力
She must have felt that this wet cowhide cover was very heavy, the water was already very cold in autumn, and her father was talking less and less. Jin Dali金大力想必是有个大名的，但大家都叫他金大力，当面也这样叫。为什么叫他金大力，已经无从查考。他姓金，块头倒是很大。他家放剩饭的淘箩，年下腌制的风鱼咸肉，都挂得很高，别人够不着，他一伸手就能取下来，不用使竹竿叉棍去挑，也不用垫一张凳子。 身大力不亏。但是他是不是有很大的力气，没法证明。关于他的大力，没有什么传说的故事，他没有表演过一次，也没有人和他较量过。他这人是不会当众表演，更不会和任何人较量的。因此，大力只是想当然耳。是不是和戏里的金大力有什么关系呢？也说不定。也许有。他很老实，也没有什么本事，这一点倒和戏里的金大力有点像。戏里的金大力只是个傻大个儿，哪次打架都有他，有黄天霸就有他，但哪回他也没有打得很出色。人们在提起金大力时，并不和戏台上那个戴着红缨帽或盘着一条大辫子，拿着一根可笑的武器，——一根红漆的木棍的那个金大力的形象联系起来。这个金大力和那个金大力不大相干。这个金大力只是一个块头很大的，家里开着一爿茶水炉子，本人是个瓦匠头儿的老实人。
Jin Dali must have a big name, but everyone calls him Jin Dali, and he calls him that way in person. Why he was called Jin Dali is no longer available. His surname is Jin, and he is very big. His family's leftover basket and the marinated wind fish and salted meat are all hung very high, and others can't reach them, so he can take them off as soon as he reaches out, without using bamboo poles and forks to pick them up, and he doesn't need to put a stool on them. There is no loss of strength. But whether he has a lot of strength cannot be proven. There is no legendary story about his Dali, he has never performed once, and no one has competed with him. He will not perform in public, let alone compete with anyone. Therefore, Dali just takes it for granted. Does it have anything to do with Jin Dali in the play? Maybe. Maybe. He is very honest and has no ability, which is a bit similar to Jin Dali in the play. Jin Dali in the play is just a stupid big man, he has him in every fight, and there is Huang Tianba, but he has not fought very well every time. When people mention Jin Dali, they do not associate it with the image of Jin Dali on the stage wearing a red tassel hat or a big braid, holding a ridiculous weapon ,—— a red lacquered wooden stick. This Jin Dali has nothing to do with that Jin Dali. This Jin Dali is just a big man, with a tea stove at home, and he is an honest man who is a bricklayer.他怎么会当了瓦匠头儿呢？
How did he become the head bricklayer?按说，瓦匠里当头儿的，得要年高望重，手艺好，有两手绝活，能压众，有口才，会讲话，能应付场面，还得有个好人缘儿。前面几条，金大力都不沾。金大力是个很不够格的瓦匠，他的手艺比一个刚刚学徒的小工强不了多少，什么活也拿不起来。一般老师傅会做的活，不用说相地定基，估工算料，砌墙时挂线，布瓦时堆瓦脊两边翘起的山尖，用一把瓦刀舀起半桶青灰在瓦脊正中塑出花开四面的浮雕……这些他统统不会，他连砌墙都砌不直！当了一辈子瓦匠，砌墙会砌出一个鼓肚子，真也是少有。他是一个瓦匠头，只能干一些小工活，和灰送料，传砖递瓦。这人很拙于言词，一天说不了几句话，老是闷声不响，他不会说几句恭喜发财，大吉大利的应酬门面话讨主人家喜欢；也不会说几句夸赞奉承，道劳致谢的漂亮话叫同行高兴；更不会长篇大套地训教小工以显示一个头儿的身份。他说的只是几句实实在在的大实话。说话很慢，声音很低，跟他那副大骨架很不相符。只有一条，他倒是具备的：他有一个好人缘儿。不知道为什么，他的人缘儿会那么好。
It is said that the head of the bricklayer must be old, respected, good in craftsmanship, have two unique skills, be able to overwhelm the crowd, be eloquent, be able to speak, be able to cope with the scene, and have a good popularity. The first few ones, Jin Dali is not touched. Jin Dali is a very unqualified bricklayer, his craftsmanship is not much better than that of a small worker who has just apprenticed, and he can't pick up any work. The work that ordinary masters will do, not to mention the determination of the foundation, estimation of the work, hanging lines when building walls, piling up the raised mountain peaks on both sides of the tile ridge when closing, and using a brick knife to scoop up half a bucket of green ash to create reliefs on all sides of the tile ridge...... He can't do any of this, he can't even build a wall straight! Being a bricklayer all his life, it is really rare to build a bulge belly when building a wall. He is a bricklayer, and he can only do some small work, feed ash, and pass bricks and tiles. This person is very clumsy in words, he can't say a few words a day, he is always muffled, he can't say a few words Wishing you prosperity, and he can't say a few words to please the owner; he won't say a few words of praise and flattery, and beautiful words of gratitude to make his peers happy; he will not train small workers in a long way to show the identity of a leader. He only said a few real truths. He speaks very slowly and his voice is very low, which is very inconsistent with his big skeleton. There is only one thing, but he has it: he has a good popularity. I don't know why, his popularity is so good.这一带人家，凡有较大的泥工瓦活，都愿意找他。一般的零活，比如检个漏，修补一下被雨水冲坍的山墙，这些，直接雇两个瓦匠来就行了，不必通过金大力。若是新建房屋，或翻盖旧房，就会把金大力叫来。金大力听明白了是一个多大的工程，就告辞出来。他算不来所需工料、完工日期，就去找有经验的同行商议。第二天，带了一个木匠头儿，一个瓦匠老师傅，拿着工料单子，向主人家据实复告。主人家点了头，他就去约人、备料。到窑上订砖、订瓦，到石灰行去订石灰、麻刀、纸脚。他一辈子经手了数不清的砖瓦石灰，可是没有得过一手钱的好处。
People in this area are willing to find him for any larger masonry tile work. General odd jobs, such as checking for leaks and repairing gables washed away by rain, can be done directly by hiring two bricklayers without going through Jin Dali. If it is a new house or an old house, Jin Dali will be called. Jin Dali understood how big the project was, so he took his leave. He couldn't calculate the required materials and completion date, so he went to discuss with an experienced peer. The next day, he brought a carpenter and a bricklayer master, took the bill of materials, and replied to the owner based on the facts. The master nodded, and he went to make an appointment and prepare materials. Go to the kiln to order bricks and tiles, and go to the lime shop to order lime, sacks, and paper feet. He has handled countless bricks and tiles and lime in his life, but he has not received the benefit of a handful of money.这里兴建动工有许多风俗。先得“破土”。由金大力用铁锨挖起一小块土，铲得四方四正，用红纸包好，供在神像前面。——这一方土要到完工时才撤去。然后，主人家要请一桌酒。这桌酒有两点特别处，一是席面所用器皿都十分粗糙，红漆筷子，蓝花粗瓷大碗；二是，菜除了猪肉、豆腐外，必有一道泥鳅。这好像有一点是和泥瓦匠开玩笑，但瓦匠都不见怪，因为这是规矩。这桌酒，主人是不陪的，只是出来道一声“诸位多辛苦”，然后就委托金大力：“金师傅，你陪陪吧！”金大力就代替了主人，举起酒杯，喝下一口淡酒。这时木匠已经把房架立好，到了择定吉日的五更头，上了梁，——梁柱上贴了一副大红对子：“登柱喜逢黄道日，上梁正遇紫微星”，两边各立了一面筛子，筛子里斜贴了大红斗方，斗方的四角写着“吉星高照”，金大力点起一挂鞭，泥瓦工程就开始了。
There are many customs for construction here. First of all, you have to "break the ground". Jin Dali dug up a small piece of soil with a shovel, shoveled it squarely, wrapped it in red paper, and offered it in front of the statue. ——This square of soil will not be removed until it is completed. Then, the host wants to invite a table of wine. There are two special features about this table of wine, one is that the utensils used on the table are very rough, red lacquer chopsticks, and blue and floral porcelain bowls; second, in addition to pork and tofu, there must be a loach. This seems to be a joke with the mason, but the bricklayer is not surprised, because this is the rule. The master did not accompany this table of wine, but just came out and said, "How hard you all worked", and then entrusted Jin Dali: "Master Jin, you accompany me!" Jin Dali took the place of the master, raised his wine glass, and took a sip of light wine. At this time, the carpenter had already set up the house, and at the beginning of the fifth watch on the auspicious day, he went to the beam,—— and a pair of big red pairs were pasted on the beam pillars: "The pillar is happy to meet the zodiac day, and the beam is meeting the purple star", a sieve was set up on both sides, and a big red bucket square was diagonally pasted in the sieve, and the four corners of the bucket square were written "Jixing Gaozhao", Jin Dali lit a whip, and the brick project began.每天，金大力都是头一个来，比别人要早半小时。来了，把孩子们搬下来搭桥、搭鸡窝玩的砖头捡回砖堆上去，把碍手碍脚的棍棍棒棒归置归置，清除“脚手”板子上昨天滴下的灰泥，把“脚手”往上提一提，捆“脚手”的麻绳紧一紧，扫扫地，然后，挑了两担水来，用铁锹抓钩和青灰，——石灰里兑了锅烟；和黄泥。灰泥和好，伙计们也就来上工了。他是个瓦匠，上工时照例也在腰带里掖一把瓦刀，手里提着一个抿子。可是他的瓦刀抿子几乎随时都是干的。他一天使的家伙就是铁锹抓钩，他老是在和灰、和泥。他只能干这种小工活，也就甘心干小工活。他从来不想去露一手，去逞能卖嘴，指手画脚，到了半前晌和半后晌，伙计们照例要下来歇一会，金大力看看太阳，提起两把极大的紫砂壶就走。在壶里撮了两大把茶叶梗子，到他自己家的茶水炉上，灌了两壶水，把茶水筛在大碗里，就抬头叫嚷：“哎，下来喝茶来！”傍晚收工时，他总是最后一个走。他要各处看看，看看今天的进度、质量（他的手艺不高，这些都还是会看的），也看看有没有留下火星 （木匠熬胶要点火，瓦匠里有抽烟的）。然后，解下腰带，从头到脚，抽打一遍。走到主人家窗下，扬声告别：“明儿见啦！晚上你们照看着点！”——“好来，我们会照看。明儿见，金师傅！”
Every day, Jin Dali is the first to come, half an hour earlier than others. When he came, he moved down the bricks from the children to build bridges and build chicken coops to play with, picked up the bricks and put them on the brick pile, put the sticks and sticks in the way of his hands and feet, removed the plaster dripping yesterday on the "scaffolding" board, lifted the "scaffolding" up, tightened the hemp rope to tie the "scaffolding", swept the floor, and then, picked up two loads of water, and mixed the pot of smoke with a shovel grappling hook and green ash ,—— lime; and yellow mud. The plaster was reconciled, and the guys came to work. He was a bricklayer, and as usual, he tucked a brick knife in his belt and carried a clay in his hand. But his brick knife was dry almost all the time. His angel guy is a shovel grappling hook, and he is always mixing ash and mud. He can only do this kind of small work, and he is willing to do small work. He never wanted to show his hands, show off his words, point fingers, and when he was halfway up and half, the guys wanted to come down to rest for a while as usual, Jin Dali looked at the sun, picked up two very large purple clay pots and left. He took two large tea stems from the pot, went to his own tea stove, poured two pots of water, sifted the tea into a large bowl, and shouted, "Hey, come down and have tea!" At the end of the evening, he was always the last to go. He wants to look everywhere to see today's progress and quality (his skills are not high, but he will still look at these things), and see if there are any sparks left (carpenters need to light a fire when boiling glue, and bricklayers smoke). Then, untie the belt and beat it from head to toe. Walk to the window of the master's house and say goodbye: "See you tomorrow! You will take care of it at night!" ——"Okay, we will take care of it. See you tomorrow, Master Jin!" ”金大力是个瓦匠头儿，可是拿的工钱很低，比一个小工多不多少。同行师傅们过意不去，几次提出要给金头儿涨涨工钱。金大力说：“不。干什么活，拿什么钱。再说，我家里还开着一爿茶水炉子，我不比你们指身为业。这我就知足。”
Jin Dali is a bricklayer, but the wages he receives are very low, not much more than a small worker. The fellow masters were unhappy and proposed to increase the wages for Jin Tou'er several times. Jin Dali said: "No. What work do you do, what money do you get?" Besides, I still have a tea stove at home, and I am no more than you. I am content with this. ”金家茶炉子生意很好。一早、晌午、傍黑，来打开水的人很多，提着木子的，提着洋铁壶、暖壶、茶壶的，川流不息。这一带店铺人家一般不烧开水，要用开水，多到茶炉子上去买，这比自己家烧方便。茶水炉子，是一个砖砌的长方形的台子，四角安四个很深很大的铁罐，当中有一个火口。这玩意，有的地方叫做“老虎灶”。烧的是稻糠。稻糠着得快，火力也猛。但这东西不经烧，要不断地往里续。烧火的是金大力的老婆。这是个很结实也很利索的女人。只见她用一个小铁簸箕，一簸箕一簸箕地往火口里倒糠。火光轰轰地一阵一阵往上冒，照得她满脸通红。半箩稻糠烧完，四个铁罐里的水就哗哗地开了，她就等着人来买水，一舀子一舀子往各种容器里倒。到罐里水快见底时，再烧。一天也不见她闲着。（稻糠的灰堆在墙角，是很好的肥料，卖给乡下人垩田，一个月能卖不少钱。）
The business of the Jin family tea stove is very good. Early in the morning, at noon, and in the dark, there are many people who come to turn on the water, carrying wooden id_0000 pots, iron kettles, warm pots, and teapots, and the river flows endlessly. Shops in this area generally do not boil water, but use boiling water, and go to the tea stove to buy more, which is more convenient than burning at home. The tea stove is a brick rectangular platform with four deep and large iron cans placed in the corners, and there is a fire pit in the middle. This thing is called "tiger stove" in some places. It burns rice bran. The rice bran burns quickly and the firepower is fierce. But this thing is not burned, it has to be continued. The one who burns the fire is Jin Dali's wife. This is a very strong and neat woman. I saw her using a small iron dustpan to pour chaff into the fire with a dustpan and a dustpan. The fire rose up one after another, making her face flushed. After half a basket of rice chaff was burned, the water in the four iron cans opened with a loud noise, and she waited for someone to buy water, scooping and pouring it into various containers. When the water in the jar is about to bottom, burn it again. I didn't see her idle for a day. (The ash of rice bran is piled up in the corner, which is a good fertilizer, and it can be sold to the countrymen in the chalk fields, and it can be sold for a lot of money a month.) ）茶炉子用水很多。金家茶炉的一半地方是三口大水缸。因为缸很深，一半埋在地里。一口缸容水八担，金家一天至少要用二十四担水。这二十四担水都是金大力挑的。有活时，他早晚挑；没活时（瓦匠不能每天有活）白天挑。因为经常挑水，总要撒泼出一些，金家茶炉一边的地总是湿漉漉的，铺地的砖发深黑色（另一边的砖地是浅黑色）。你要是路过金家茶炉子，常常可以看见金大力坐在一根搭在两只水桶的扁担上休息，好像随时就会站起身来去挑一担水。
The tea stove uses a lot of water. Half of the Jin family's tea stove is three large water tanks. Because the tank is very deep, half of it is buried in the ground. A jar can hold eight loads of water, and the Jin family uses at least 24 loads of water a day. These 24 loads of water are all picked by Jin Dali. When there is work, he picks it up morning and evening; when he is not active (bricklayers cannot work every day), he picks it during the day. Because I often carry water, I always have to spill some, and the ground on one side of the Jin family tea stove is always wet, and the bricks on the floor are dark black (the brick floor on the other side is light black). If you pass by the Jin family tea stove, you can often see Jin Dali sitting on a flat pole resting on two buckets, as if he will stand up and pick up a load of water at any time.金大力不变样，多少年都是那个样子。高大结实，沉默寡言。
不，他也老了。他的头发已经有了几根白的了，虽然还不大显，墨里藏针。
钓鱼的医生
这个医生几乎每天钓鱼。
Jin Dali has not changed, and he has been like that for many years. Tall and strong, taciturn. No, he is old too. His hair already has a few white strands, although it is not very obvious, and there are needles hidden in the ink. Fishing doctor This doctor fishes almost every day.他家挨着一条河。出门走几步，就到了河边。这条河不宽。会打水撇子（有的地方叫打水飘，有的地方叫打水片）的孩子，检一片薄薄的破瓦，一扬手忒忒忒忒，打出二十多个，瓦片贴水飘过河面，还能蹦到对面的岸上。这条河下游淤塞了，水几乎是不流动的。河里没有船。也很少有孩子到这里来游水，因为河里淹死过人，都说有水鬼。这条河没有什么用处。因为水不流，也没有人挑来吃。只有南岸的种菜园的每天挑了浇菜。再就是有人家把鸭子赶到河里来放。河南岸都是大柳树。有的欹侧着，柳叶都拖到了水里。河里鱼不少，是个钓鱼的好地方。
His house is next to a river. A few steps out of the house, you will reach the river. The river is not wide. Children who can play water skimming (in some places it is called water floating, in some places it is called water padding), check a thin broken tile, raise their hand, and hit more than 20 tiles. The lower reaches of this river are silted up, and the water is almost immobile. There are no boats in the river. There are few children who come here to swim, because people have drowned in the river, and they say there are water ghosts. This river is of no use. Because the water does not flow, no one picks it to eat. Only the vegetable garden on the south bank picks and waters every day. Then some people drive ducks into the river to release them. The south bank of the river is full of big willow trees. Some were tilted, and the willow leaves were dragged into the water. There are a lot of fish in the river, and it is a good place for fishing.你大概没有见过这样的钓鱼的。
You probably haven't seen fishing like this.他搬了一把小竹椅，坐着。随身带着一个白泥小炭炉子，一口小锅，提盒里葱姜作料俱全，还有一瓶酒。他钓鱼很有经验。钓竿很短，鱼线也不长，而且不用漂子，就这样把钓线甩在水里，看到线头动了，提起来就是一条。都是三四寸长的鲫鱼。——这条河里的鱼以白条子和鲫鱼为多。白条子他是不钓的，他这种钓法，是钓鲫鱼的。钓上来一条，刮刮鳞洗净了，就手就放到锅里。不大一会，鱼就熟了。他就一边吃鱼，一边喝酒，一边甩钩再钓。这种出水就烹制的鱼味美无比，叫做“起水鲜”。到听见女儿在门口喊：“爸——！”知道是有人来看病了，就把火盖上，把鱼竿插在岸边湿泥里，起身往家里走。不一会，就有一只钢蓝色的蜻蜓落在他的鱼竿上了。
He moved a small bamboo chair and sat down. He carried a small charcoal stove with white mud, a small pot, a box with green onions and ginger, and a bottle of wine. He is very experienced in fishing. The fishing rod is very short, the line is not long, and there is no drifter, so I threw the fishing line into the water, and when I saw the line moving, I lifted it and it was one. They are all crucian carp three or four inches long. ——The fish in this river are mostly white strips and crucian carp. He doesn't fish for white strips, his fishing method is for crucian carp. Catch one, scrape the scales and wash it, and put it in the pot. After a while, the fish was cooked. He ate fish, drank alcohol, and fished again with a hook. This kind of fish cooked out of the water is extremely delicious, called "fresh water". Until I heard my daughter shouting at the door: "Dad——! Knowing that someone was coming to see a doctor, he covered the fire, inserted the fishing rod into the wet mud on the shore, got up and walked home. After a while, a steel-blue dragonfly landed on his fishing rod.这位老兄姓王，字淡人。中国以淡人为字的好像特别多，而且多半姓王。他们大都是阴历九月生的，大名里一定还带一个菊字。古人的一句“人淡如菊”的诗，造就了多少人的名字。
This old man's surname is Wang, and the word is Danren. There seem to be a lot of people in China who use Danren as the word, and most of them have the surname Wang. Most of them were born in the ninth month of the lunar calendar, and there must be a chrysanthemum in their names. A poem by the ancients that "people are as light as chrysanthemums" has created many people's names.王淡人的家很好认。门口倒没有特别的标志。大门总是开着的，望里一看，就看到通道里挂了好几块大匾。匾上写的是“功同良相”、“济世救人”、“仁心仁术”、“术绍岐黄”、“杏林春暖”、“橘井流芳”、“妙手回春”、“起我沉疴”……医生家的匾都是这一套。这是亲友或病家送给王淡人的祖父和父亲的。匾都有年头了，匾上的金字都已经发暗。到王淡人的时候，就不大兴送匾了。送给王淡人的只有一块，匾很新，漆地乌亮，匾字发光，是去年才送的。这块匾与医术无关，或关系不大，匾上写的是“急公好义”，字是颜体。
Wang Danren's home is easy to recognize. There is no special sign at the door. The gate is always open, and when you look inside, you can see several large plaques hanging in the passage. The plaques are written as "Meritorious Goodness", "Saving the World", "Benevolence and Benevolence", "Shu Shao Qihuang", "Xinglin Spring Warmth", "Tachibana Well Liufang", "Wonderful Hands Rejuvenation", "Rising My Illness"...... The doctor's plaque is all like this. This is a gift from relatives, friends or patients to Wang Danren's grandfather and father. The plaques are all old, and the gold letters on the plaques have darkened. When Wang Danren arrived, he was not very interested in giving away plaques. There is only one piece given to Wang Danren, the plaque is very new, the lacquer is shiny, and the plaque is shiny, which was only given last year. This plaque has nothing to do with medical skills, or has little to do with it, and the plaque reads "Urgent Public and Good Righteousness", and the words are Yan Ti.进了过道，是一个小院子。院里种着鸡冠、秋葵、凤仙一类既不花钱，又不费事的草花。有一架扁豆。还有一畦瓢菜。这地方不吃瓢菜，也没有人种。这一畦瓢菜是王淡人从外地找了种子，特为种来和扁豆配对的。王淡人的医室里挂着一副郑板桥写的（木板刻印的）对子：“一庭春雨瓢儿菜，满架秋风扁豆花。”他很喜欢这副对子。这点淡泊的风雅，和一个不求闻达的寒士是非常配称的。其实呢？何必一定是瓢儿菜，种什么别的菜也不是一样吗？王淡人花费心思去找了瓢菜的菜种来种，也可看出其天真处。自从他种了瓢菜，他的一些穷朋友在来喝酒的时候，除了吃王淡人自己钓的鱼，就还能尝到这种清苦清苦的菜蔬了。
Entering the aisle, it is a small yard. The courtyard is planted with chicken combs, okra, impatiens and other flowers that cost neither money nor trouble. There is a lentil. There is also a field of gourd. There is no gourd in this place, and no one grows it. This field of gourd was found by Wang Danren from other places and specially planted to pair with lentils. In Wang Danren's doctor's office, there is a pair written by Zheng Banqiao (carved on a wooden board): "A courtyard of spring rain ladle vegetables, full of autumn wind lentil flowers." He liked this pair very much. This indifferent elegance is very suitable for a humble scholar who does not seek fame. Actually? Why must it be a gourd dish, isn't it the same to plant other vegetables? Wang Danren spent a lot of time to find the seeds of gourd to plant, and his innocence can also be seen. Since he planted gourd vegetables, some of his poor friends can taste this kind of bitter and bitter vegetables in addition to eating the fish that Wang Danren caught himself.过了小院，是三间正房，当中是堂屋，一边是卧房，一边是他的医室。
After passing the small courtyard, there were three main rooms, one of which was the main room, one side was the bedroom, and the other was his doctor's room.他的医室和别的医生的不一样，像一个小药铺。架子上摆着许多青花小磁坛，坛口塞了棉纸卷紧的塞子，坛肚子上贴着浅黄蜡笺的签子，写着“九一丹”、“珍珠散”、“冰片散”……到处还有一些大大小小的乳钵，药碾子、药臼、嘴刀、剪子、镊子、钳子、钎子、往耳朵和喉咙里吹药用的铜鼓……他这个医生是“男妇内外大小方脉”，就是说内科、外科、妇科、儿科，什么病都看。王家三代都是如此。外科用的药，大都是“散”——药面子。“神仙难识丸散”，多有经验的医生和药铺的店伙也鉴定不出散的真假成色，都是一些粉红的或雪白的粉末。虽然每一家药铺都挂着一块小匾“修合存心”，但是王淡人还是不相信。外科散药里有许多贵重药：麝香、珍珠、冰片……哪家的药铺能用足？因此，他自己炮制。他的老婆、儿女，都是他的助手，经常看到他们抱着一个乳钵，握着乳锤，一圈一圈慢慢地磨研（散要研得极细，都是加了水“乳”的）。另外，找他看病的多一半是乡下来的，即使是看内科，他们也不愿上药铺去抓药，希望先生开了方子就给配一服，因此，他还得预备一些常用的内科药。
His clinic is different from other doctors, like a small pharmacy. There are many small blue and white magnetic jars on the shelves, the mouth of the jar is stuffed with a tight cotton paper stopper, and the belly of the jar is pasted with sticks of light yellow wax paper, which reads "Jiuyi Dan", "Pearl Powder", and "Ice Flake Powder"...... There are also some large and small nipples everywhere, medicine mills, mortars, mouth knives, scissors, tweezers, pliers, brazers, and copper drums for blowing medicine into the ears and throat...... His doctor is "inside and outside the man's and women's internal and external squares", that is, internal medicine, surgery, gynecology, pediatrics, all diseases. This is the case for all three generations of the Wang family. Most of the drugs used in surgery are "loose" - medicine face. "Immortals are difficult to recognize pill powder", and many experienced doctors and pharmacy shop staff cannot identify the true or false quality of the powder, all of which are pink or snow-white powders. Although every pharmacy hangs a small plaque "Repairing the Heart", Wang Danren still doesn't believe it. There are many valuable drugs in surgical powders: musk, pearls, ice flakes...... Which pharmacy can use enough? Therefore, he concocted it himself. His wife and children are all his assistants, and he is often seen holding a nipple bowl, holding a nipple hammer, and slowly grinding it round by circle (the powder must be ground very finely, all of which are added with water "milk"). In addition, more than half of the people who came to see him were from the countryside, and even if they saw internal medicine, they were reluctant to go to the pharmacy to grab medicine, hoping that the husband would prescribe a prescription and give him a dose, so he had to prepare some commonly used internal medicine medicines.城里外科医生不多，——不知道为什么，大家对外科医生都不大看得起，觉得都有点“江湖”，不如内科清高，因此，王淡人看外科的时间比较多。一年也看不了几起痈疽重症，多半是生疮长疖子，而且大都是七八岁狗都嫌的半大小子。常常看见一个大人带着生瘌痢头的瘦小子，或一个长痄腮的胖小子走进王淡人家的大门；不多一会，就又看见领着出来了。生瘌痢的涂了一头青黛，把一个秃光光的脑袋涂成了蓝的；生痄腮的腮帮上画着一个乌黑的大圆饼子，——是用掺了冰片研出的陈墨画的。
There are not many surgeons in the city,—— I don't know why, everyone doesn't think highly of surgeons, and they feel that they are a bit "rivers and lakes", not as high as internal medicine, so Wang Danren spends more time seeing surgery. I can't see a few severe carbuncles a year, most of them are sores and boils, and most of them are half-sized children that even seven or eight-year-old dogs dislike. I often see an adult with a thin boy with a leprosy head, or a fat boy with leprosy walking into the door of Wang Dan's house; after a while, I saw him led out again. The leprosy was painted with a green daisy, and a bald head was painted blue; a large black round cake was painted on the cheeks of the scabies,—— which was painted with Chen Mo mixed with ice flakes.这些生疮长疖子的小病症，是不好意思多收钱的，——那时还没有挂号收费这一说。而且本地规矩，熟人看病，很少当下交款，都得要等“三节算账”，——端午、中秋、过年。忘倒不会忘的，多少可就“各凭良心”了。有的也许为了高雅，其实为了省钱，不送现钱，却送来一些华而不实的礼物：枇杷、扇子、月饼、莲蓬、天竺果子、腊梅花。乡下来人看病，一般倒是当时付酬，但常常不是现钞，或是二十个鸡蛋、或一升芝麻、或一只鸡、或半布袋鹌鹑！遇有实在困难，什么也拿不出来的，就由病人的儿女趴下来磕一个头。王淡人看看病人身上盖着的破被，鼻子一酸，就不但诊费免收，连药钱也白送了。王淡人家吃饭不致断顿，——吃扁豆、瓢菜、小鱼、糙米——和炸鹑鹌！穿衣可就很紧了。淡人夫妇，十多年没添置过衣裳。只有儿子女儿一年一年长高，不得不给他们换换季。有人说：王淡人很傻。
These minor diseases with sores and boils are embarrassing to charge more money,—— there was no such thing as a registered fee at that time. Moreover, according to local rules, acquaintances rarely pay at the moment when they see a doctor, and they have to wait for the "three festivals" ,—— Dragon Boat Festival, Mid-Autumn Festival, and Chinese New Year. If you don't forget it, you can "rely on your conscience". Some may be for elegance, but in fact, in order to save money, they do not give cash, but send some flashy gifts: loquats, fans, mooncakes, lotus pods, Tianzhu fruits, and wax plum blossoms. People in the countryside usually pay at that time to see a doctor, but often it is not cash, or twenty eggs, or a liter of sesame seeds, or a chicken, or a half-cloth bag quail! When there is a real difficulty and nothing can be taken out, the patient's children will lie down and kowtow. Wang Danren looked at the torn quilt covered by the patient, and when his nose was sore, not only was the consultation fee waived, but even the medicine money was given away in vain. Wang Danren eats without interruption,—— eat lentils, gourd vegetables, small fish, brown rice - and fried quail! Dressing is very tight. The Danren couple has not bought clothes for more than ten years. Only the son and daughter grow taller year by year, and they have to change the seasons. Some people say: Wang Danren is stupid.王淡人是有点傻。去年、今年，就办了两件傻事。
Wang Danren is a bit stupid. Last year and this year, I did two stupid things.去年闹大水。这个县的地势，四边高，当中低，像一个水壶，别名就叫做盂城。城西的运河河底，比城里的南北大街的街面还要高。站在运河堤上，可以俯瞰城中鳞次栉比的瓦屋的屋顶；城里小孩放的风筝，在河堤游人的脚底下飘着。因此，这地方常闹水灾。水灾好像有周期，十年大闹一次。去年闹了一次大水。王淡人在河边钓鱼，傍晚听见蛤蟆爬在柳树顶上叫，叫得他心惊肉跳，他知道这是不祥之兆。蛤蟆有一种特殊的灵感，水涨多高，他就在多高处叫。十年前大水灾就是这样。果然，连天暴雨，一夜西风，运河决了口，浊黄色的洪水倒灌下来，平地水深丈二，大街上成了大河。大河里流着箱子、柜子、死牛、死人。这一年死于大水的，有上万人。大水十多天未退，有很多人困在房顶、树顶和孤岛一样的高岗子上挨饿；还有许多人生病：上吐下泻，痢疾伤寒。王淡人就用了一根结结实实的撑船用的长竹篙拄着，在齐胸的大水里来往奔波，为人治病。他会水，在水特深的地方，就横执着这根竹篙，泅水过去。他听说泰山庙北边有一个被大水围着的孤村子，一村子人都病倒了。但是泰山庙那里正是洪水的出口，水流很急，不能容舟，过不去！他和四个水性极好的专在救生船上救人的水手商量，弄了一只船，在他的腰上系了四根铁链，每一根又分在一个水手的腰里，这样，即使是船翻了，他们之中也可能有一个人把他救起来。船开了，看着的人的眼睛里都蒙了一层眼泪。眼看这只船在惊涛骇浪里颠簸出没，终于靠到了那个孤村，大家发出了雷鸣一样的欢呼。这真是玩儿命的事！
There was a big flood last year. The terrain of this county is high on all sides and low in the middle, like a kettle, and is also called Yucheng. The bottom of the canal in the west of the city is higher than the street surface of the north and south streets in the city. Standing on the canal embankment, you can overlook the roofs of the rows of tiled houses in the city; kites flown by children in the city float under the feet of tourists on the river embankment. Therefore, there are frequent floods in this place. Floods seem to have a cycle, once every ten years. There was a big flood last year. Wang Danren was fishing by the river, and in the evening he heard a toad climbing on the top of a willow tree and calling, which made him tremble, and he knew it was a bad omen. The toad has a special inspiration, no matter how high the water rises, he calls at any height. This was the case with the great flood ten years ago. Sure enough, heavy rain for days, west wind overnight, the canal burst, the turbid yellow flood poured back, the water on the flat ground was twelve feet deep, and the street became a big river. The river flowed with boxes, cabinets, dead cattle, and dead people. Tens of thousands of people died in the flood this year. The flood did not recede for more than ten days, and many people were trapped on the rooftops, treetops, and high hills like islands and starved; many people were sick: vomiting and diarrhea, dysentery and typhoid fever. Wang Danren used a strong long bamboo pole to support the boat, running back and forth in the chest-high water to treat people. He knew water, and in the deep water, he held on to this bamboo pole and swam over. He heard that there was a lonely village surrounded by floods to the north of the Taishan Temple, and the whole village fell ill. But the Taishan Temple was the outlet of the flood, and the water was so fast that it could not accommodate the boat, and it was impossible to pass! He discussed with four sailors who specialized in saving people on lifeboats with excellent water conditions, and got a boat, tied four iron chains around his waist, each of which was divided into a sailor's waist, so that even if the boat capsized, one of them might save him. The boat sailed, and the eyes of the onlookers were covered with tears. Seeing that the boat was bumping and haunting in the stormy waves, and finally approached the lonely village, everyone cheered like thunder. This is really a matter of life!水退之后，那个村里的人合送了他一块匾，就是那块“急公好义”。
拿一条命换一块匾，这是一件傻事。
另一件傻事是给汪炳治搭背，今年。
After the water receded, the people in the village gave him a plaque, which was the "urgent public and righteousness". It's a stupid thing to exchange a life for a plaque. Another stupid thing is to give Wang Bingzhi a back, this year.汪炳是和他小时候一块掏蛐蛐，放风筝的朋友。这人原先很阔。这一街的老人到现在还常常谈起他娶亲的时候，新娘子花鞋上缀的八颗珍珠，每一颗都有指头顶子那样大！这家伙，吃喝嫖赌抽大烟，把家业败得精光，连一片瓦都没有，最后只好在几家亲戚家寄食。这一家住三个月，那一家住两个月。就这样，他还抽鸦片！他给人家熬大烟，报酬是烟灰和一点膏子。他一天夜里觉得背上疼痛，浑身发烧，早上歪歪倒倒地来找王淡人。
Wang Bing was a friend of him who played crickets and flew kites when he was a child. This man was originally very wide. The old people on this street still often talk about the eight pearls embellished on the bride's flower shoes when he got married, each of which was as big as the top of his finger! This guy, eating, drinking, gambling, and smoking, ruined the family business, and didn't even have a single tile, so he had to live in a few relatives' houses. This family lived for three months, and that family lived for two months. In this way, he also smoked opium! He made a big cigarette for others, and the reward was soot and a little ointment. He felt pain in his back and fever all over his body one night, and fell to Wang Danren in the morning.王淡人一看，这是个有名有姓的外症：搭背。说：“你不用走了！”
Wang Danren saw that this was a famous external disease: backing. Said: "You don't have to go!" ”王淡人把汪炳留在家里住，管吃、管喝，还管他抽鸦片，——他把王淡人留着配药的一块云土抽去了一半。王淡人祖上传下来的麝香、冰片也为他用去了三分之一。一个多月以后，汪炳的搭背收口生肌，好了。
Wang Danren left Wang Bing at home, taking care of eating, drinking, and smoking opium,—— he took away half of the cloud soil that Wang Danren kept dispensing medicine. Wang Danren's ancestors also used one-third of the musk and ice flakes passed down for him. More than a month later, Wang Bing's back closed his mouth and became muscle, and it was okay.有人问王淡人：“你干吗为他治病？”王淡人倒对这话有点不解，说：“我不给他治，他会死的呀。”
Someone asked Wang Danren: "Why are you treating him?" Wang Danren was a little puzzled by this, and said, "If I don't treat him, he will die." ”汪炳没有一个钱。白吃，白喝，白治病。病好后，他只能写了很多鸣谢的帖子，贴在满城的街上，为王淡人传名。帖子上的言词倒真是淋漓尽致，充满感情。
Wang Bing didn't have a single money. Eat for nothing, drink for nothing, and treat for nothing. After recovering from his illness, he could only write a lot of posts of praise and post them on the streets of the city to spread his name for Wang Danren. The words on the post are really vivid and full of emotion.王淡人的老婆是很贤惠的，对王淡人所做的事没有说过一个不字。但是她忍不住要问问淡人：“你给汪炳用掉的麝香、冰片，值多少钱？”王淡人笑一笑，说：“没有多少钱。——我还有。”他老婆也只好笑一笑，摇摇头。
Wang Danren's wife is very virtuous and has never said a word about what Wang Danren did. But she couldn't help but ask Danren: "How much is the musk and ice flakes you used up for Wang Bing worth?" Wang Danren smiled and said, "Not much money. ——I still have it." His wife had no choice but to smile and shake her head.王淡人就是这样，给人看病，看“男女内外大小方脉”，做傻事，每天钓鱼。一庭春雨，满架秋风。
你好，王淡人先生！
一九八一年八月十九日
Wang Danren is like this, treating people, looking at "men and women's internal and external veins", doing stupid things, and fishing every day. A courtyard of spring rain and autumn wind. Hello, Mr. Wang Danren! August 19, 1981
[1] 本篇原载《雨花》1981年第十期；初收《晚饭花集》，人民文学出版社，1985年3月。

晚饭花

晚饭花[1]
[1] This article was originally published in the tenth issue of "Rain Flowers" in 1981; First Received "Dinner Flower Collection", People's Literature Publishing House, March 1985. Dinner Flowers [1]晚饭花就是野茉莉。因为是在黄昏时开花，晚饭前后开得最为闹哄，故又名晚饭花。
The dinner flower is wild jasmine. Because it blooms at dusk, it blooms the most noisily before and after dinner, so it is also called dinner flower.野茉莉，处处有之，极易繁衍。高二三尺，枝叶披纷，肥者可荫五六尺。花如茉莉而长大，其色多种易变。子如豆，深黑有细纹。中有瓤，白色，可作粉，故又名粉豆花。曝干作蔬，与马兰头相类。根大者如拳、黑硬，俚医以治吐血。
野茉莉，处处有之，极易繁衍。 高二三尺，枝叶披纷，肥者可荫五六尺。 花如茉莉而长大，其色多种易变。 子如豆，深黑有细纹。 中有瓤，白色，可作粉，故又名粉豆花。 曝干作蔬，与马兰头相类。 根大者如拳、黑硬，俚医以治吐血。——吴其濬：《植物名实图考》
珠子灯
——Wu Qijun: "Illustrated Examination of Botanical Names and Facts" Bead Lamp这里的风俗，有钱人家的小姐出嫁的第二年，娘家要送灯。送灯的用意是祈求多子。元宵节前几天，街上常常可以看到送灯的队伍。几个女用人，穿了干净的衣服，头梳得光光的，戴着双喜字大红绒花，一人手里提着一盏灯；前面有几个吹鼓手吹着细乐。远远听到送灯的箫笛，很多人家的门就开了。姑娘、媳妇走出来，倚门而看，且指指点点，悄悄评论。这也是一年的元宵节景。
The custom here is that in the second year of the marriage of a wealthy lady, her mother's family wants to send lanterns. The intention of sending lanterns is to pray for more children. A few days before the Lantern Festival, you can often see lantern queues on the streets. Several female servants wore clean clothes, their hair was combed, they wore big red velvet flowers with the word double happiness, and one person was holding a lamp in their hands; there were several drummers playing soft music in front. Hearing the flute of the lanterns in the distance, the doors of many houses opened. The girl and daughter-in-law came out, leaned against the door and looked, pointed and commented quietly. This is also the Lantern Festival of the year.一堂灯一般是六盏。四盏较小，大都是染成红色或白色，而且画了红花的羊角琉璃泡子。一盏是麒麟送子：一个染色的琉璃角片扎成的娃娃骑在一匹麒麟上。还有一盏是珠子灯：绿色的玻璃珠子穿扎成的很大的宫灯。灯体是八扇玻璃，漆着红色的各体寿字，其余部分都是珠子，顶盖上伸出八个珠子的凤头，凤嘴里衔着珠子的小幡，下缀珠子的流苏。这盏灯分量相当的重，送来的时候，得两个人用一根扁担抬着。这是一盏主灯，挂在房间的正中。旁边是麒麟送子，琉璃泡子挂在四角。
There are generally six lamps in a hall. Four are smaller, most of them are dyed red or white, and are painted with red flowers. One is a unicorn sending a child: a doll made of dyed glazed horns riding on a unicorn. Another is a bead lamp: a large palace lamp made of green glass beads. The lamp body is eight pieces of glass, painted with red shou characters, and the rest are beads, with a crested head with eight beads sticking out on the top cover, a small flag with beads in its mouth, and tassels with beads below. This lamp is quite heavy, and when it is delivered, it has to be carried by two people on a flat pole. This is a main lamp hanging in the middle of the room. Next to it is a unicorn sending a child, and the glass bubbles are hanging in the four corners.到了“灯节”的晚上，这些灯里就插了红蜡烛，点亮了。从十三“上灯”到十八“落灯”，接连点几个晚上。平常这些灯是不点的。
On the night of the "Lantern Festival", red candles were inserted into these lamps and lit. From the thirteenth "lights" to the eighteenth "down", they were lit for several nights in succession. Usually these lights are not lit.屋里点了灯，气氛就很不一样了。这些灯都不怎么亮（点灯的目的原不是为了照明），但很柔和。尤其是那盏珠子灯，洒下一片淡绿的光。绿光中珠幡的影子轻轻地摇曳，如梦如水，显得异常安静。元宵的灯光扩散着吉祥、幸福和朦胧暧昧的希望。
When the lights are lit in the house, the atmosphere is very different. These lights are not very bright (the purpose of lighting is not for lighting), but they are very soft. Especially the bead lamp, which sprinkles a pale green light. The shadow of the bead flag in the green light sways gently, like a dream and water, and it seems extremely quiet. The lights of the Lantern Festival spread auspiciousness, happiness and hazy hope.孙家的大小姐孙淑芸嫁给了王家的二少爷王常生。她屋里就挂了这样六盏灯。不过这六盏灯只点过一次。
Sun Shuyun, the eldest lady of the Sun family, married Wang Changsheng, the second young master of the Wang family. There are six lamps hanging in her house. However, these six lamps were only lit once.王常生在南京读书，秘密地加入了革命党，思想很新。订婚以后，他请媒人捎话过去：请孙小姐把脚放了。孙小姐的脚当真放得很好，看起来就不像裹过的。
Wang Changsheng studied in Nanjing and secretly joined the Revolutionary Party, and his ideas were very new. After getting engaged, he asked the matchmaker to carry the message: ask Miss Sun to put her feet down. Miss Sun's feet are really well placed, and they don't look like they have been wrapped.孙小姐是个才女。孙家对女儿的教育很特别，教女儿读诗词。除了《长恨歌》、《琵琶行》，孙小姐能背全本《西厢记》。嫁过来以后，她也看王常生带回来的黄遵宪的《日本国志》和林译小说《迦茵小传》、《茶花女遗事》……
Miss Sun is a talented woman. The Sun family has a special education for their daughter, teaching them to read poetry. In addition to "Song of Everlasting Hatred" and "Pipa Xing", Miss Sun can memorize the entire "West Chamber". After getting married, she also read Huang Zunxian's "Chronicles of Japan" brought back by Wang Changsheng and Lin Yi's novels "The Biography of Jia Yin" and "The Legacy of the Camellia Girl"......两口子琴瑟和谐，感情很好。
不料王常生在南京得了重病，抬回来不到半个月，就死了。
王常生临死对夫人留下遗言：“不要守节”。
The couple is harmonious and has a good relationship. Unexpectedly, Wang Changsheng fell seriously ill in Nanjing and died less than half a month after being carried back. Wang Changsheng left his last words to his wife before his death: "Don't keep the festival".但是说了也无用。孙王二家都是书香门第，从无再婚之女。改嫁，这种念头就不曾在孙小姐的思想里出现过。这是绝不可能的事。
从此，孙小姐就一个人过日子。这六盏灯也再没有点过了。
But it's useless to say it. The two families of Sun and Wang are both scholarly families and have never remarried daughters. Remarrying, this idea has never appeared in Miss Sun's thoughts. This is absolutely impossible. Since then, Miss Sun has lived alone. These six lights have never been lit again.她变得有点古怪了，她屋里的东西都不许人动。王常生活着的时候是什么样子，永远是什么样子，不许挪动一点。王常生用过的手表、座钟、文具，还有他养的一盆雨花石，都放在原来的位置。孙小姐原是个爱洁成癖的人，屋里的桌子椅子、茶壶茶杯，每天都要用清水洗三遍。自从王常生死后，除了过年之前，她亲自监督着一个从娘家陪嫁过来的女用人大洗一天之外，平常不许擦拭。里屋炕几上有一套茶具：一个白瓷的茶盘，一把茶壶，四个茶杯。茶杯倒扣着，上面落了细细的尘土。茶壶是荸荠形的扁圆的，茶壶的鼓肚子下面落不着尘土，茶盘里就清清楚楚留下一个干净的圆印子。
She became a little weird, and no one was allowed to move anything in her house. What Wang Chang looked like when he lived, what he always looked like, and he was not allowed to move it a little. Wang Changsheng's watches, table clocks, stationery, and a pot of rain flower stones he raised were all in their original places. Miss Sun was originally a person who loved cleanliness, and the tables, chairs, teapots and teacups in the house had to be washed with water three times a day. Since Wang Changsheng's death, except for the Chinese New Year, she personally supervised a female servant who was married from her parents' family for a day. There is a set of tea sets on the kang table in the back room: a white porcelain tea tray, a teapot, and four teacups. The teacup was buckled upside down, and fine dust fell on it. The teapot is flat and round in the shape of water chestnuts, and there is no dust under the drum belly of the teapot, and a clean round mark is clearly left in the tea tray.她病了，说不清是什么病。除了逢年过节起来几天，其余的时间都在床上躺着，整天地躺着。除了那个女用人，没有人上她屋里去。
She was sick and couldn't tell what kind of illness it was. Except for a few days during the New Year's holidays, the rest of the time she lay in bed, lying all day long. Except for the female servant, no one went into her house.她就这么躺着，也不看书，也很少说话，屋里一点声音没有。她躺着，听着天上的风筝响，斑鸠在远远的树上叫着双声，“鹁鸪鸪——咕，鹁鸪鸪——咕”，听着麻雀在檐前打闹，听着一个大蜻蜓振动着透明的翅膀，听着老鼠咬啮着木器，还不时听到一串滴滴答答的声音，那是珠子灯的某一处流苏散了线，珠子落在地上了。
She just lay like this, didn't read a book, and rarely spoke, and there was no sound in the room. She lay down, listening to the sound of kites in the sky, and the turtle dove called in the trees in the distance, "Partridge-coo, partridge-coo", listening to sparrows flickering in front of the eaves, listening to a big dragonfly vibrating its transparent wings, listening to the rat gnawing on wooden tools, and hearing a string of ticking sounds from time to time, it was a tassel of bead lamps that had loosened, and the beads had fallen to the ground.女用人在扫地时，常常扫到一二十颗散碎的珠子。
她这样躺了十年。
她死了。
她的房门锁了起来。
从锁着的房间里，时常还听见散线的玻璃珠子滴滴答答落在地板上的声音。
晚饭花
When female employers sweep the floor, they often sweep one or two dozen scattered beads. She lay like this for ten years. She's dead. Her door was locked. From the locked room, the sound of loose glass beads ticking on the floor was often heard. Dinner flowers李小龙的家在李家巷。
这是一条南北向的巷子，相当宽，可以并排走两辆黄包车。但是不长，巷子里只有几户人家。
Bruce Lee's home is in Lijia Lane. This is a north-south alley, quite wide, and two rickshaws can walk side by side. But it is not long, and there are only a few households in the alley.西边的北口一家姓陈。这家好像特别的潮湿，门口总飘出一股湿布的气味，人的身上也带着这种气味。他家有好几棵大石榴，比房檐还高，开花的时候，一院子都是红通通的。结的石榴很大，垂在树枝上，一直到过年下雪时才剪下来。
The family in the north of the west is surnamed Chen. This house seems to be particularly humid, and there is always a smell of wet cloth floating out of the door, and people also carry this smell on their bodies. There are several large pomegranates in his house, higher than the eaves, and when they bloom, the whole yard is red. The pomegranates are very large, hanging on the branches, and are not cut off until the New Year's snow.陈家往南，直到巷子的南口，都是李家的房子。
东边，靠北是一个油坊的堆栈，粉白的照壁上黑漆八个大字：“双窨香油，照庄发客”。
The Chen family went south, until the south entrance of the alley, and it was the Li family's house. To the east, to the north is a stack of oil mills, with eight big characters painted black on the pink and white walls: "Double sesame oil, Zhaozhuang Fake".靠南一家姓夏。这家进门就是锅灶，往里是一个不小的院子。这家特别重视过中秋。每年的中秋节，附近的孩子就上他们家去玩，去看院子里还在开着的荷花，几盆大桂花，缸里养的鱼；看他家在院子里摆好了的矮脚的方桌，放了毛豆、芋头、月饼、酒壶，准备一家赏月。
The family in the south is surnamed Xia. This house is a pot stove when you enter the door, and there is a large yard inside. This family attaches special importance to the Mid-Autumn Festival. Every Mid-Autumn Festival, the children in the neighborhood go to their house to play, to see the lotus flowers that are still blooming in the yard, a few pots of large osmanthus, and the fish raised in the tank; look at the short square table set up by his family in the yard, put edamame, taro, mooncakes, and wine pots, and prepare a family to enjoy the moon.在油坊堆栈和夏家之间，是王玉英的家。
Between the oil mill stack and the Xia family is Wang Yuying's home.王家人很少，一共三口。王玉英的父亲在县政府当录事，每天一早便提着一个蓝布笔袋，一个铜墨盒去上班。王玉英的弟弟上小学。王玉英整天一个人在家。她老是在她家的门道里做针线。
The Wang family is very small, a total of three. Wang Yuying's father works as a clerk in the county government, carrying a blue cloth pen bag and a copper ink cartridge to work every morning. Wang Yuying's younger brother goes to elementary school. Wang Yuying is alone at home all day. She always does needlework in the doorway of her house.王玉英家进门有一个狭长的门道。三面是墙：一面是油坊堆栈的墙，一面是夏家的墙，一面是她家房子的山墙。南墙尽头有一个小房门，里面才是她家的房屋。从外面是看不见她家的房屋的。这是一个长方形的天井，一年四季，照不进太阳。夏天很凉快，上面是高高的蓝天，正面的山墙脚下密密地长了一排晚饭花。王玉英就坐在这个狭长的天井里，坐在晚饭花前面做针线。
There is a long and narrow doorway at the entrance of Wang Yuying's house. There are walls on three sides: one is the wall of the oil mill stack, the other is the wall of the Xia family, and the other is the gable of her house. There is a small door at the end of the south wall, and inside is her house. Her house is not visible from the outside. This is a rectangular patio that does not shine into the sun all year round. The summer is cool, with a high blue sky above, and a row of dinner flowers densely growing at the foot of the front gable. Wang Yuying sat in this narrow patio, sitting in front of the evening flowers to do needlework.李小龙每天放学，都经过王玉英家的门外。他都看见王玉英（他看了陈家的石榴，又看了“双窨香油，照庄发客”，还会看看夏家的花木）。晚饭花开得很旺盛，它们使劲地往外开，发疯一样，喊叫着，把自己开在傍晚的空气里。浓绿的，多得不得了的绿叶子；殷红的，胭脂一样的，多得不得了的红花；非常热闹，但又很凄清。没有一点声音。在浓绿浓绿的叶子和乱乱纷纷的红花之前，坐着一个王玉英。
Bruce Lee passed by Wang Yuying's house every day after school. He saw Wang Yuying (he looked at the pomegranates of the Chen family, then looked at the "double kiln sesame oil, Zhaozhuang Fa Ke", and also looked at the flowers and trees of the Xia family). The dinner flowers bloomed vigorously, and they opened vigorously, like crazy, shouting, and opening themselves into the evening air. Thick green, with a lot of green leaves; crimson, rouge-like, with a lot of red flowers; very lively, but very desolate. There was no sound. In front of the thick green leaves and the chaotic red flowers, there was a Wang Yuying sitting.这是李小龙的黄昏。要是没有王玉英，黄昏就不成其为黄昏了。
李小龙很喜欢看王玉英，因为王玉英好看。王玉英长得很黑，但是两只眼睛很亮，牙很白。王玉英有一个很好看的身子。
This is Bruce Lee's dusk. If it weren't for Wang Yuying, dusk wouldn't be dusk. Bruce Lee likes to watch Wang Yuying very much, because Wang Yuying is good-looking. Wang Yuying is very dark, but her eyes are very bright and her teeth are very white. Wang Yuying has a very good-looking body.红花、绿叶、黑黑的脸、明亮的眼睛、白的牙，这是李小龙天天看的一张画。
王玉英一边做针线，一边等着她的父亲。她已经焖好饭了，等父亲一进门就好炒菜。
Red flowers, green leaves, black face, bright eyes, white teeth, this is a painting that Bruce Lee looks at every day. Wang Yuying was doing needlework while waiting for her father. She had already cooked the rice, and when her father entered the door, she would be ready to cook.王玉英已经许了人家。她的未婚夫是钱老五。大家都叫他钱老五。不叫他的名字，而叫钱老五，有轻视之意。老人们说他“不学好”。人很聪明，会画两笔画，也能刻刻图章，但做事没有长性。教两天小学，又到报馆里当两天记者。他手头并不宽裕，却打扮得像个阔少爷，穿着细毛料子的衣裳，梳着油光光的分头，还戴了一副金丝眼镜。他交了许多“三朋四友”，风流浪荡，不务正业。都传说他和一个寡妇相好，有时就住在那个寡妇家里，还花寡妇的钱。
Wang Yuying has already made a promise. Her fiancé is Qian Laowu. Everyone calls him Qian Laowu. Not calling him by name, but calling him Qian Laowu, has the meaning of contempt. The old people say that he "doesn't learn well". People are very smart, can draw two strokes, and can also carve stamps, but they do not have a long way to do things. He taught elementary school for two days and worked as a reporter in the newspaper for two days. He didn't have a lot of money, but he dressed like a broad young master, wearing fine wool clothes, shiny parting, and a pair of gold wire glasses. He made many "three friends and four friends", wandered around, and did not do his job. It is said that he got along well with a widow, and sometimes lived in the widow's house and spent the widow's money.这些事也传到了王玉英的耳朵里。连李小龙也都听说了嘛，王玉英还能不知道？不过王玉英倒不怎么难过。她有点半信半疑。而且她相信她嫁过去，他就会改好的。她看见过钱老五，她很喜欢他的人才。
These things also reached Wang Yuying's ears. Even Bruce Lee has heard of it, how can Wang Yuying not know? But Wang Yuying is not very sad. She was a little skeptical. And she believed that if she married, he would change it. She had seen Qian Laowu, and she liked his talent very much.钱老五不跟他的哥哥住。他有一所小房，在臭河边。他成天不在家，门老是锁着。
李小龙知道钱老五在哪里住。他放学每天经过。他有时扒在门缝上往里看：里面有三间房，一个小院子，有几棵树。
Qian Laowu doesn't live with his brother. He has a small house by the stinky river. He is away from home all day, and the door is always locked. Bruce Lee knew where Qian Laowu lived. He passed by every day after school. He sometimes looked inside the crack of the door: there were three rooms, a small yard, and a few trees.王玉英也知道钱老五的住处。她路过时，看看两边没有人，也曾经扒在门缝上往里看过。
有一天，一顶花轿把王玉英抬走了。
从此，这条巷子里就看不见王玉英了。
晚饭花还在开着。
Wang Yuying also knew where Qian Laowu lived. When she passed by, she saw that there was no one on either side, and she had also looked in through the crack of the door. One day, a sedan chair carried Wang Yuying away. Since then, Wang Yuying has not been seen in this alley. The dinner flowers are still blooming.李小龙放学回家，路过臭河边，看见王玉英在钱老五家门前的河边淘米。只看见一个背影。她头上戴着红花。
李小龙觉得王玉英不该出嫁，不该嫁给钱老五。他很气愤。
这世界上再也没有原来的王玉英了。
Bruce Lee came home from school, passed by the stinky river, and saw Wang Yuying washing rice by the river in front of Qian Laowu's house. I only saw a back. She wears a red flower on her head. Bruce Lee felt that Wang Yuying should not marry or marry Qian Laowu. He was very angry. There is no longer the original Wang Yuying in this world.三姊妹出嫁
秦老吉是个挑担子卖馄饨的。他的馄饨担子是全城独一份，他的馄饨也是全城独一份。
Three sisters get married Qin Laoji is a burden seller of wontons. His wonton burden is unique in the city, and his wontons are also unique in the city.这副担子非常特别。一头是一个木柜，上面有七八个扁扁的抽屉；一头是安放在木柜里的烧松柴的小缸灶，上面支一口紫铜浅锅。铜锅分两格，一格是骨头汤，一格是下馄饨的清水。扁担不是套在两头的柜子上，而是打的时候就安在柜子上，和两个柜子成一体。扁担不是直的，是弯的，像一个罗锅桥。这副担子是楠木的，雕着花，细巧玲珑，很好看。这好像是《东京梦华录》时期的东西，李嵩笔下画出来的玩艺儿。秦老吉老远地来了，他挑的不像是馄饨担子，倒好像挑着一件什么文物。这副担子不知道传了多少代了，因为材料结实，做工精细，到现在还很完好。
This burden is very special. One end is a wooden cabinet with seven or eight flat drawers on it; one end is a small jar stove for burning pine wood placed in a wooden cabinet, and a copper shallow pot is supported on top. The copper pot is divided into two compartments, one is bone soup and the other is the water for wontons. The pole is not put on the cabinet at both ends, but is installed on the cabinet when it is beaten, and it is integrated with the two cabinets. The pole is not straight, it is curved, like a Luo pot bridge. This burden is made of nanmu, carved with flowers, delicate and exquisite, and very beautiful. This seems to be something from the period of "Tokyo Menghualu", a play painted by Li Song. Qin Laoji came all the way, he didn't pick a wonton burden, but seemed to be carrying some kind of cultural relic. I don't know how many generations of this burden has been passed down, because the material is strong and the workmanship is fine, and it is still very intact.别人卖的馄饨只有一种，葱花水打猪肉馅。他的馄饨除了猪肉馅的，还有鸡肉馅的、螃蟹馅的，最讲究的是荠菜冬笋肉末馅的，——这种肉馅不是用刀刃而是用刀背剁的！作料也特别齐全，除了酱油、醋，还有花椒油、辣椒油、虾皮、紫菜、葱末、蒜泥、韭花、芹菜和本地人一般不吃的芫荽。馄饨分别放在几个抽屉里，作料敞放在外面，任凭顾客各按口味调配。
There is only one kind of wonton sold by others, chopped pork stuffed with chopped green onion. In addition to pork filling, his wontons also have chicken stuffing, crab stuffing, and the most particular is the minced meat stuffing with shepherd's purse and winter bamboo shoots,—— which is chopped not with a knife blade but with the back of a knife! The ingredients are also very complete, in addition to soy sauce and vinegar, there are peppercorn oil, chili oil, shrimp skin, seaweed, minced green onion, garlic paste, leeks, celery and coriander that locals generally don't eat. The wontons are placed in several drawers, and the ingredients are left outside, allowing customers to mix them according to their tastes.他的器皿用具也特别精洁——他有一个拌馅用的深口大盘，是雍正青花！
笃——笃笃，秦老吉敲着竹梆，走来了。找一个柳荫，把担子歇下，竹梆敲出一串花点，立刻就围满了人。
His utensils are also very exquisite - he has a deep plate for mixing fillings, which is Yongzheng blue and white! Duk - Tuk tuk, Qin Laoji knocked on the bamboo stick and came over. Find a willow shade, rest the burden, and the bamboo stick knocked out a string of flowers, and it was immediately surrounded by people.秦老吉就用这副担子，把三个女儿养大了。
Qin Laoji used this burden to raise his three daughters.秦老吉的老婆死得早，给他留下三个女儿。大凤、二凤和小凤。三个女儿，一个比一个小一岁，梯子蹬似的。三个丫头一个模样，像一个模子脱出来的。三个姑娘，像三张画。有人跟秦老吉说：“应该叫你老婆再生一个的，好凑成一套四扇屏儿！”
Qin Laoji's wife died early, leaving him with three daughters. Dafeng, Erfeng and Xiaofeng. Three daughters, one is one year younger than the other, like a ladder pedal. The three girls look like a mold coming out. Three girls, like three paintings. Someone said to Qin Laoji: "You should ask your wife to have another one, so that it can be made into a set of four screens!" ”姊妹三个，从小没娘，彼此提挈，感情很好。一家人都很勤快。一进门，清清爽爽，干净得像明矾澄过的清水。谁家娶了邋遢婆娘，丈夫气急了，就说：“你到秦老吉家看看去！”三姊妹各有所长，分工负责。大裁大剪，单夹皮棉——秦老吉冬天穿一件山羊皮的背心，是大姐的；锅前灶后，热水烧汤，是二姐的；小妹妹小，又娇，两个姐姐惯着她，不叫她做重活，她就成天地挑花绣朵。她把两个姐姐绣得全身都是花。围裙上、鞋尖上、手帕上、包头布上，都是花。这些花里有一样必不可少的东西，是凤。
The three sisters, who have not had a mother since childhood, support each other and have a good relationship. The family is very diligent. As soon as I entered the door, it was refreshing and clean as clear water after alum. Whoever marries a sloppy woman, the husband is angry, so he says, "You go to Qin Laoji's house and take a look!" The three sisters have their own strengths and are responsible for the division of labor. Big cut and cut, single lint - Qin Laoji wears a goatskin vest in winter, which belongs to the eldest sister; in front of the pot and behind the stove, the hot water boils the soup, which belongs to the second sister; the little sister is small and delicate, and the two sisters are used to her, and if she doesn't ask her to do heavy work, she will pick flowers and embroider flowers all over the world. She embroidered her two sisters all over her body with flowers. On the apron, on the tip of the shoe, on the handkerchief, and on the headcloth, there are flowers. There is one essential thing in these flowers, which is the phoenix.姊妹三个都大了。一个十八，一个十七，一个十六。该嫁了。这三只凤要飞到哪棵梧桐树上去呢？
三姊妹都有了人家了。大姐许了一个皮匠，二姐许了一个剃头的，小妹许的是一个卖糖的。
The three sisters are all older. One is eighteen, one is seventeen, and the other is sixteen. It's time to marry. Which sycamore tree are these three phoenixes going to fly to? The three sisters all have a family. The eldest sister promised a cobbler, the second sister promised a hairshave, and the younger sister promised a sugar seller.皮匠的脸上有几颗麻子，一街人都叫他麻皮匠。他在东街的“乾陞和”茶食店廊檐下摆一副皮匠担子。“乾陞和”的门面很宽大，除了一个柜台，两边竖着的两块碎白石底子堆刻黑漆大字的木牌——一块写着“应时糕点”，一块写着“满汉饽饽”。这之外，没有什么东西，放一副皮匠担子一点不碍事。麻皮匠每天一早，“乾陞和”才开了门，就拿起一把长柄的笤帚把店堂打扫干净，然后就在“满汉饽饽”下面支起担子，开始绱鞋。他是个手脚很快的人。走起路来腿快，绱起鞋来手快。只见他把锥子在头发里“光”两下，一锥子扎过鞋帮鞋底，把两根用猪鬃引着的蜡线对穿过去，噌——噌，两把就绱了一针。流利合拍，均匀紧凑。他绱鞋的时候，常有人歪着头看。绱鞋，本来没有看头，但是麻皮匠绱鞋就能吸引人。大概什么事做得很精熟，就很美了。因为手快，麻皮匠一天能比别的皮匠多绱好几双鞋。不但快，绱得也好。针脚细密，楦得也到家，穿在脚上，不易走样。因此，他生意很好。也因此，落下“麻皮匠”这样一个称号。人家做好了鞋，叫佣人或孩子送去绱，总要叮嘱一句：“送到麻皮匠那里去。”这街上还有几个别的皮匠。怕送错了。他脸上的那几颗麻子就成了他的标志。他姓什么呢？好像是姓马。
The cobbler had a few pockmarks on his face, and people on the street called him a cobbler. He placed a pair of cobbler's burden under the eaves of the "Qianshenghe" tea shop on East Street. The façade of "Qianshenghe" is very wide, except for a counter, and two wooden signs with large black lacquer characters on the base of two broken stones erected on both sides - one says "Pastry in Time" and the other says "Manchu Han Dumplings". Other than that, there is nothing to put a pair of cobbler's burden in the way. Every morning, when the cobbler opens the door, he picks up a long-handled broom to clean the shop, and then puts up the burden under the "Manchu Han dumplings" and begins to tie his shoes. He is a person with fast hands and feet. He walks quickly with his legs and quick with his shoes. I saw him "light" the awl in his hair twice, one awl through the sole of the upper, and threaded two wax threads led by pig's bristles through each other. Fluent and compatible, even and compact. When he wears shoes, people often tilt their heads to look. Silk shoes are not worth looking at, but sack shoes can attract people. Probably if you do something very skillfully, it will be beautiful. Because of his quick hands, the hemp cobbler can tie several pairs of shoes a day than other cobblers. Not only is it fast, but it is also good. The stitches are fine, and the last is also home, and it is not easy to get out of shape when worn on the feet. Therefore, his business is very good. Therefore, he has the title of "hemp cobbler". When people make shoes and ask servants or children to send them to the shoes, they always have to say: "Send them to the hemp cobbler." There are several other cobblers on this street. I'm afraid I sent it wrong. The pockmarks on his face became his trademark. What is his surname? It seems to be Ma's surname.二姑娘的婆家姓时。老公公名叫时福海。他开了一爿剃头店，字号也就是“时福海记”。剃头的本属于“下九流”，他的店铺每年贴的春联却是：“头等事业，顶上生涯”。自从满清推翻，建立民国，人们剪了辫子，他的店铺主要是剃光头，以“水热刀快”为号召。时福海像所有的老剃头待诏一样，还擅长向阳取耳（掏耳朵），捶背拿筋。剃完头，用两只拳头给顾客哔哔剥剥地捶背（捶出各种节奏和清浊阴阳的脆响），噔噔地揪肩胛后的“懒筋”——捶、揪之后，真是“浑身通泰”。他还专会治“落枕”。睡落了枕，歪着脖子走进去，时福海把你的脑袋搁在他躬起的大腿上，两手扶着下颚，轻试两下，“咔叭”——就扳正了！老年间，剃头匠是半个跌打医生。
The second girl's in-laws' surname is Shi. The husband's name is Shi Fuhai. He opened a shaving shop, and the font name is "Shi Fuhai Ji". The head shaving originally belongs to the "lower ninth stream", but the Spring Festival couplets posted by his shop every year are: "First-class career, top career". Since the overthrow of the Manchu Qing Dynasty and the establishment of the Republic of China, people have cut their braids, and his shop is mainly shaved heads, with the call of "water and hot knives are fast". Shi Fuhai, like all old shaved heads, is also good at taking ears (picking out ears) from the sun and beating the back to get tendons. After shaving his head, he used two fists to beat the customer's back peeling (beating out various rhythms and crisp sounds of clear and turbid yin and yang), and grabbed the "lazy tendons" behind the shoulder blades - after beating and pulling, it was really "full of peace". He also specializes in treating "stiff neck". Fell asleep on the pillow and walked in with a crooked neck, Shi Fuhai put your head on his bowed thigh, held his chin with both hands, tried twice, and "clicked" - and it was straight! In old age, the shaving was half a doctor.这地方不知怎么会有这么一个传统，剃头的多半也是吹鼓手（不是所有的剃头匠都是吹鼓手，也不是所有的吹鼓手都是剃头匠）。时福海就也是一个吹鼓手。他吹唢呐，两腮鼓起两个圆圆的鼓包，憋得满脸通红。他还会“进曲”。好像一城的吹鼓手里只有他会，或只有他擅长于这个玩艺儿。人家办丧事，“六七”开吊，在“初献”、“亚献”之后，有“进曲”这个项目。赞礼的礼生喝道“进——曲！”时福海就拿了一面荸荠鼓，由两个鼓手双笛伴奏，唱一段曲子。曲词比昆曲还要古，内容是“神仙道化”，感叹人生无常，有《薤露》、《蒿里》遗意，很可能是元代的散曲。时福海自己也不知道唱的是什么，但还是唱得感慨唏嘘，自己心里都酸溜溜的。
I don't know how there is such a tradition in this place, and most of the people who shave their heads are also drummers (not all shavers are drummers, and not all drummers are shavers). Shi Fuhai is also a drummer. He played the suona, and his cheeks bulged two round drum bags, and his face was flushed. He can also "enter the song". It seems that he is the only drummer in the city, or he is the only one who is good at this game. People hold funerals, "June and Seven" hang, and after the "first offering" and "second offering", there is the project of "entering the song". The praising Lisheng shouted, "Enter-song!" Shi Fuhai took a water chestnut drum, accompanied by two drummers and two flutes, and sang a song. The lyrics are older than Kunqu Opera, and the content is "immortal Taoism", lamenting the impermanence of life, with the will of "Garlic Dew" and "Artemisia Li", which is likely to be a loose song of the Yuan Dynasty. Shi Fuhai himself didn't know what he was singing, but he still sang with emotion and sighed, and his heart was sour.时代变迁，时福海的这一套有点吃不开了。剃光头的人少了，“水热刀快”不那么有号召力了。卫生部门天天宣传挖鼻孔、挖耳朵不卫生。懂得享受捶背揪懒筋的乐趣的人也不多了。时福海忽然变成一个举动迟钝的老头。
Times have changed, and Shi Fuhai's set is a bit unintable. There are fewer people shaving their heads, and "water hot knife fast" is not so appealing. The health department advertises that nose picking and ear picking are unhygienic every day. There are not many people who know how to enjoy the fun of beating their backs and lazy tendons. Shi Fuhai suddenly became a slow old man.时福海有两个儿子。下等人不避父讳，大儿子叫大福子，小儿子叫小福子。
Shi Fuhai had two sons. The lower class did not shy away from their fathers, the eldest son was called Dafuzi, and the youngest son was called Xiao Fuzi.大福子很能赶潮流。他把逐渐暗淡下去的“时福海记”重新装修了一下，门窗柱壁，油漆一新，全都是奶油色，添了三面四尺高、二尺宽的大玻璃镜子。三面大镜之间挂了两个狭长的镜框，里面嵌了磁青砑银的蜡笺对联，请一个擅长书法的医生汪厚基浓墨写了一副对子：
Dafuzi is very good at catching up with the trend. He redecorated the gradually fading "Shifu Haiji", the doors, windows, columns, and walls, all painted, all cream, and added three large glass mirrors four feet high and two feet wide. Two long and narrow frames were hung between the three large mirrors, and a wax paper couplet with magnetic blue silver was embedded inside, and a doctor who was good at calligraphy was asked to write a pair of thick ink:不教白发催人老
更喜春风满面生
Don't let gray hair hasten you to age I am even more delighted with the spring breeze他还置办了“夜巴黎”的香水，“司丹康”的发蜡。顶棚上安了一面白布制成的“风扇”，有滑车牵引，叫小福子坐着，一下一下地拉“风扇”的绳子，使理发的人觉得“清风徐来”，十分爽快。这样，“时福海记”就又兴旺起来了。
He also bought the perfume of "Night Paris" and the hair wax of "Stankang". A "fan" made of white cloth was installed on the ceiling, pulled by a pulley, and Xiao Fuzi was asked to sit on it, pulling the rope of the "fan" one by one, so that the barber felt that "the breeze was blowing" and was very refreshing. In this way, "Shifu Haiji" prospered again.大福子也学了吹鼓手。笙箫管笛，无不精通。
Dafuzi also learned to play the drummer. Shengxiao and flute are all proficient.这地方不知怎么会流传“倒扳桨”、“跌断桥”、“剪靛花”之类的《霓裳续谱》、《白雪遗音》时期的小曲。平常人不唱，唱的多是理发的、搓澡的、修脚的、裁缝、做豆腐的年轻子弟。他们晚上常常聚在“时福海记”唱，大福子弹琵琶。“时福海记”外面站了好些人在听。
I don't know how to spread small songs from the period of "Rewind Paddle", "Broken Bridge", "Cutting Indigo", etc. from the period of "Continuation of the Rainbow Dress" and "White Snow Legacy". Ordinary people don't sing, and most of them are young people who get haircuts, scrub baths, get pedicures, tailors, and make tofu. They often gather at the "Shifu Haiji" at night to sing, and the Dafu bullet plays the pipa. There were many people standing outside the "Shifu Haiji" listening.二凤要嫁的就是大福子。
The one Erfeng wants to marry is Dafuzi.三姑娘许的这家苦一点，姓吴，小人叫吴顺福，是个遗腹子。家里只有两个人，一个老母亲，是个踮脚，走起路来一踮一踮的。母子二人，相依为命。妈妈很慈祥，儿子很孝顺。吴顺福是个很聪明的人，十五岁上就开始卖糖。卖糖和卖糖可不一样。他卖的不是普通的芝麻糖、花生糖，他卖的是“样糖”。他跟一个师叔学会了一宗手艺：能把白糖化了，倒在模子里，做成大小不等的福禄寿三星、财神爷、麒麟送子。高的二尺，矮的五寸，衣纹生动，须眉清楚；还能把糖里加了色，不用模子，随手吹出各种瓜果，桃、梨、苹果、佛手，跟真的一样，最好看的是南瓜：金黄的瓜，碧绿的蒂子，还开着一朵淡黄的瓜花。这种糖，人家买去，都是当摆设，不吃。——吃起来有什么意思呢，还不是都是糖的甜味！卖得最多的是糖兔子。白糖加麦芽糖熬了，切成梭子形的一块一块，两头用剪刀剪开，一头窝进腹下，是脚；一头便是耳朵。耳朵下捏一下，便是兔子脸，两边嵌进两粒马料豆，一个兔子就成了！马料豆有绿豆大，一头是通红的，一头是漆黑的。这种豆药店里卖，平常配药很少用它，好像是天生就为了做糖兔的眼睛用的！这种糖兔子很便宜，一般的孩子都买得起。也吃了，也玩了。
The third girl's family is a little bitter, surnamed Wu, the villain's name is Wu Shunfu, and he is a posthumous child. There are only two people in the family, an old mother, who is a tiptoe and walks on tiptoe. Mother and son depend on each other. The mother is very kind and the son is very filial. Wu Shunfu is a very smart person who started selling sugar at the age of fifteen. Selling sugar is not the same as selling sugar. He doesn't sell ordinary sesame candy or peanut candy, he sells "sample sugar". He learned a craft from an uncle: he can sugar it, pour it into molds, and make it into three stars of different sizes, God of Wealth, and Qilin to send children. Two feet high, five inches short, with vivid clothing patterns and clear eyebrows; You can also add color to the sugar, without a mold, you can blow out all kinds of melons and fruits, peaches, pears, apples, bergamot, just like the real thing, the best thing to look at is the pumpkin: golden melon, turquoise stem, and a pale yellow melon flower. This kind of sugar, people buy it, they are all decorations, not eaten. ——What's the point of eating it, it's not all the sweetness of sugar! The most sold is the sugar rabbit. White sugar and maltose are boiled, cut into shuttle-shaped pieces one by one, cut with scissors at both ends, and nested under the abdomen at one end, which is the foot; one end is the ear. Pinch under the ear, it is a rabbit face, two horse beans embedded on both sides, and a rabbit will be! Horse beans are the size of mung beans, one end is bright red and the other end is pitch black. This kind of bean is sold in pharmacies, and it is rarely used in medicine, as if it was born for the eyes of sugar rabbits! This kind of sugar rabbit is very cheap and ordinary children can afford it. I also ate and played.师叔死后，这门手艺成了绝活儿，全城只有吴顺福一个人会，因此，他的生意是不错的。
他做的这些艺术品都放在擦得晶亮的玻璃橱子里，在肩上挑着。他的糖担子好像一个小型的展览会，歇在哪里，都有人看。
After the death of his uncle, this craft became a unique skill, and only Wu Shunfu knew it in the city, so his business was good. The works of art he made were placed in polished glass cabinets and carried on his shoulders. His sugar burden was like a small exhibition, and wherever he rested, people looked at it.麻皮匠、大福子、吴顺福，都住得离秦老吉家不远。大姑娘、二姑娘、三姑娘几乎每天都能看到她们的女婿。姐儿仨有时在一起互相嘲戏。三姑娘小凤是个镴嘴子[2]，咭咭呱呱，对大姐姐说：
The hemp cobbler, Dafuzi, and Wu Shunfu all live not far from Qin Laoji's house. The eldest girl, the second girl, and the third girl can see their son-in-law almost every day. The three sisters sometimes laugh at each other together. The third girl, Xiao Feng, is a mouthful [2], and said to the eldest sister:“十个麻子九个俏，不是麻子没人要！”
大姐啐了她一口。
她又对二姐姐说：
“姑娘姑娘真不丑，一嫁嫁个吹鼓手。吃冷饭，喝冷酒，坐人家大门口！”[3]
二姐也啐了她一口。
"Ten pockmarks and nine pretty ones, no one wants them unless they are pockmarks!" The eldest sister took a bite of her. She said to the second sister again: "Girl, girl is really not ugly, marry a drummer. Eat cold food, drink cold wine, and sit at the gate of someone's house! ”{{id_0000}} The second sister also took a bite of her.两个姐姐容不得小凤如此放肆，就一齐反唇相讥：
“敲锣卖糖，各干各行！”
小妹妹不干了，用拳头捶两个姐姐：
“卖糖怎么啦！卖糖怎么啦！”
秦老吉正在外面拌馅儿，听见女儿打闹，就厉声训斥道：
The two sisters couldn't tolerate Xiao Feng being so presumptuous, so they mocked each other together: "Knock gongs and sell sugar, do your own thing!" The little sister stopped and punched the two sisters with her fists: "What's wrong with selling sugar! What's wrong with selling sugar! ” Qin Laoji was mixing stuffing outside, and when he heard his daughter fighting, he reprimanded sharply:“靠本事吃饭，比谁也不低。麻油拌芥菜，各有心中爱，谁也不许笑话谁！”
三姊妹听了，都吐了舌头。
"Eating by ability is not lower than anyone else. Sesame oil mixed with mustard greens, each has their own love, no one is allowed to laugh at anyone! ” When the three sisters heard this, they all stuck out their tongues.姐儿仨同一天出门子，都是腊月二十三。一顶花轿接连送了三个人。时辰倒是错开了。头一个是小凤，日落酉时。第二个是大凤，戌时。最后才是二凤。因为大福子要吹唢呐送小姨子，又要吹唢呐送大姨子。轮到他拜堂时已是亥时。给他吹唢呐的是他的爸爸时福海。时福海吹了一气，又坐到喜堂去受礼。
The three sisters went out on the same day, all on the 23rd day of the twelfth lunar month. A sedan chair sent three people one after another. The time is staggered. The first one is Xiao Feng, at sunset at the hour of You. The second is Da Feng, at the hour of the dog. The last is the second phoenix. Because Da Fuzi wants to blow suona to send his sister-in-law, and he wants to blow suona to send his sister-in-law. It was already Hai hour when it was his turn to worship. It was his father Shi Fuhai who blew the suona. Shi Fuhai blew on it and sat in the wedding hall to receive the gift.三天回门。三个姑爷，三个女儿都到了。秦老吉办了一桌酒，除了鸡鸭鱼肉，他特意包了加料三鲜馅的绉纱馄饨，让姑爷尝尝他的手艺。鲜美清香，自不必说。
Three days back. Three uncles and three daughters have arrived. Qin Laoji held a table of wine, in addition to chicken, duck and fish, he specially wrapped crepe wontons with three fresh fillings for his uncle to taste his craftsmanship. Delicious and fragrant, needless to say.三个女儿的婆家，都住得不远，两三步就能回来看看父亲。炊煮扫除，浆洗缝补，一如往日。有点小灾小病，头疼脑热，三个女儿抢着来伺候，比没出门时还殷勤。秦老吉心满意足，毫无遗憾。他只是有点发愁：他一朝撒手，谁来传下他的这副馄饨担子呢？
The three daughters' in-laws all live not far away, and they can come back to see their father in two or three steps. Cooking, cleaning, washing and sewing, as usual. A little sick, headache and brain fever, the three daughters rushed to serve, more attentive than when they didn't go out. Qin Laoji was satisfied and had no regrets. He was just a little worried: once he passed away, who would pass on his wonton burden?笃——笃笃，秦老吉还是挑着担子卖馄饨。
真格的，谁来继承他的这副古典的，南宋时期的，楠木的馄饨担子呢？
一九八一年九月十日
Du - Tuk Du, Qin Laoji still carries the burden to sell wontons. Really, who will inherit his classical, Southern Song Dynasty, Nanmu's wonton burden? September 10, 1981
[1] 本篇原载《十月》1982年第一期；初收《晚饭花集》，人民文学出版社，1985年3月。
[2] 镴嘴子是一种鸟，喙大而硬。此地说嘴尖舌巧的姑娘为镴嘴子，其实镴嘴子哑着的时候多，不善鸣叫。
[1] This article was originally published in the first issue of "October" in 1982; First received "Dinner Flower Collection", People's Literature Publishing House, March 1985. [2] The beak is a bird with a large and hard beak. It is said here that the girl with a sharp mouth is a beak, but in fact, the beak is often dumb and not good at chirping.[3] 这是当地童谣。“吃冷饭，喝冷酒”也有说成“吃人家饭，喝人家酒”的。

皮凤三楦房子

皮凤三楦房子[1]
[3] This is a local nursery rhyme. "Eat cold rice, drink cold wine" is also said to be "eat other people's food and drink other people's wine". Pi Feng Sanzhu House[1]皮凤三是清代评书《清风闸》里的人物。《清风闸》现在好像没有人说了，在当时，乾隆年间，在扬州一带，可是曾经风行过一时的。这是一部很奇特的书。既不是朴刀棒杖、长枪大马，也不是倚翠偷期、烟粉灵怪。《珍珠塔》、《玉蜻蜓》、《绿牡丹》、《八窍珠》，统统不是。它说的是一个市井无赖的故事。这部书虽有几个大关目，但都无关紧要。主要是一个一个的小故事。这些故事也不太连贯。其间也没有多少“扣子”，或北方评书艺人所谓“拴马桩”——即新文学家所谓“悬念”。然而人们还是津津有味地一回一回接着听下去。龚午亭是个擅说《清风闸》的说书先生，时人为之语曰：“要听龚午亭，吃饭莫打停”。为什么它能那样吸引人呢？大概是因为通过这些故事，淋漓尽致地刻画了扬州一带的世态人情，说出一些人们心中想说的话。
Pi Fengsan is a character in the Qing Dynasty storytelling "Qingfeng Gate". "Qingfeng Gate" seems to be said by no one now, at that time, during the Qianlong period, in the Yangzhou area, but it was once popular. This is a very peculiar book. It is neither a simple knife or a stick, nor a horse with a spear, nor a smoke powder monster. "Pearl Tower", "Jade Dragonfly", "Green Peony", "Eight Orifice Pearls", all not. It tells the story of a scoundrel. Although this book has several major points, they are irrelevant. Mainly small stories. These stories are also not very coherent. There are not many "buttons" in between, or the so-called "horse stakes" of northern storytellers - that is, the so-called "suspense" of new writers. However, people still listen to it again and again with relish. Gong Wuting is a storyteller who is good at talking about "Qingfeng Gate", and people at the time said: "If you want to listen to Gong Wuting, don't stop eating." Why is it so attractive? Probably because through these stories, the world and human feelings in Yangzhou are vividly portrayed, and some people want to say what they want to say.这个无赖即皮凤三，行五，而，故又名皮五子。这个人说好也好，说坏也坏。他也仗义疏财，打抱不平。对于倚财仗势欺负人的人，尤其是欺负到他头上来的人，他常常用一些很促狭的办法整得该人（按：“该人”一词见之于政工干部在外调材料之类后面所加的附注中，他们如认为被调查的人本身有问题，就提笔写道：“该人”如何如何，“所提供情况，仅供参考”云云）狼狈不堪，哭笑不得。“促狭”一词原来倒是全国各地皆有的。《红楼梦》第二十六回就有这个词。但后来在北方似乎失传了。在吴语和苏北官话里是还存在的。其意思很难翻译。刁、赖、阴、损、缺德……庶几近之。此外还有使人意想不到的含意。他有时也为了自己，使一些无辜的或并不太坏的人蒙受一点不大的损失，“楦房子”即是一例。皮凤三家的房子太紧了，他声言要把房子楦一楦，左右四邻都没有意见。心想：房子不是鞋，怎么个楦法呢？办法很简单：他把他的三面墙向邻居家扩展了一尺。因为事前已经打了招呼，邻居只好没得话说。
This scoundrel is Pi Fengsan, Xing Wu, and , so he is also known as Pi Wu . This person is good or bad. He also relied on righteousness and wealth and fought injustice. For people who rely on money and power to bully others, especially those who bully him, he often uses some very narrow methods to get rid of that person (note: the word "person" is seen in the notes added by political cadres after external transfer materials, etc., if they think that the person being investigated has a problem with themselves, they will write "how is the person", "the information provided is for reference only") The word "narrow" turned out to be found all over the country. This word is found in the twenty-sixth episode of "Dream of Red Mansions". But later it seems to have been lost in the north. It still exists in Wu and northern Jiangsu Mandarin. Its meaning is difficult to translate. Diao, Lai, Yin, Damage, Lack of Virtue...... Almost close. In addition, there are unexpected meanings. He sometimes caused some innocent or not too bad people to suffer a little loss for himself, and the "last house" is an example. The house of the three Pi Feng families was too tight, and he claimed to make the house last, and the neighbors on the left and right had no objections. I thought: The house is not a shoe, how to make a last? The method is very simple: he extended his three walls to the neighbor's house by one foot. Because he had already said hello beforehand, the neighbor had nothing to say.对皮凤三其人不宜评价过高。他的所作所为，即使是打抱不平，也都不能触动那个社会的本质。他的促狭只能施之于市民中的暴发户。对于真正的达官巨贾，是连一个指头也不敢碰的。
It is not appropriate to overestimate Pi Fengsan. What he does, even if he fights injustice, cannot touch the essence of that society. His narrow-mindedness can only be applied to the nouveau riche among the citizens. For real dignitaries and tycoons, they don't even dare to touch a finger.为什么在那个时代（那个时代即扬州八怪产生的时代）会产生《清风闸》这样的评书和皮凤三这样的人物？产生这样的评书、这样的人物的社会背景是什么？喔，这样的问题过于严肃，还是留给文学史家去研究吧。如今却说一个人因为一件事，在原来的外号之外又得了一个皮凤三这样的外号的故事。
Why did there be a storytelling like "Qingfeng Gate" and characters like Pi Fengsan in that era (that era was the era when the Eight Monsters of Yangzhou was born)? What is the social background that produced such storytelling and such characters? Oh, such a question is too serious, so let's leave it to literary historians to study. Now it is said that a person got a nickname like Pi Fengsan in addition to his original nickname because of one thing.此人名叫高大头。这当然是个外号。他当然是有个大名的。大名也不难查考，他家的户口本上“户主”一栏里就写着。但是他的大名很少有人叫。在他有挂号信的时候，邮递员会在老远的地方就扬声高叫：“高××，拿图章！”但是他这些年似乎很少收到挂号信。在换购粮本的时候，他的老婆去领，街道办事处的负责人喊了几声“高××”，他老婆也不应声，直到该负责人怒喝了一声“高大头！”他老婆才恍然大悟，连忙答应：“有！有！有！”就是在“文化大革命”被批斗的时候，他挂的牌子上写的也是：
This person's name is Gao Datou. Of course this is a nickname. Of course he has a big name. The name is not difficult to check, and it is written in the "head of household" column in his family's household registration book. But his name is rarely called. When he had a registered letter, the postman would shout from afar: "××, get a stamp!" But he seems to have rarely received registered letters over the years. When exchanging the grain book, his wife went to collect it, and the person in charge of the sub-district office shouted "high ××" a few times, but his wife did not respond, until the person in charge shouted angrily, "Gaotou!" His wife suddenly realized and quickly agreed: "Yes! Yes! Yes! It was when the "Cultural Revolution" was criticized, and the sign he hung also read:
“高大头”三字上照式用红笔打了叉子，因为排版不便，故从略。
The three words "tall head" were forked with a red pen according to the style, because the typesetting was inconvenient, so it was omitted.（谨按：在人的姓名上打叉，是个由来已久的古法。封建时代，刑人的布告上，照例要在犯人的姓名上用红笔打叉，以示此人即将于人世中注销。这办法似已失传有年矣，不知怎么被造反派考查出来，沿用了。其实，这倒是货真价实的“四旧”。至于把人的姓名中的字倒过来写，横过来写，以为这就可以产生一种诅咒的力量、可以置人于死地，于残忍中带有游戏成分，这手段可以上推到巫术时代，其来历可求之于马道婆。总而言之，“文化大革命”的许多恶作剧都是变态心理学所不得不研究的材料。）
(Note: Crossing a person's name is an ancient law with a long history.) In the feudal era, the prisoner's name was crossed with a red pen as usual to indicate that the person was about to be canceled from the world. This method seems to have been lost for many years, and somehow it was discovered by the rebels and used. In fact, this is the real "four olds". As for writing the words in a person's name upside down and horizontally, thinking that this can produce a cursing power, can put people to death, and has a game element in cruelty, this method can be pushed up to the age of witchcraft, and its origin can be traced back to Ma Dao Po. All in all, many of the pranks of the "Cultural Revolution" are materials that perverted psychology has to study. ）“高大头”不只是说姓高而头大，意思要更丰富一些，是说此人姓高，人很高大，而又有一个大头。他生得很魁梧，虎背熊腰。他的脑袋和身材很厮称。通体看来，并不显得特别的大。只有单看脑袋，才觉得大得有点异乎常人。这个脑袋长得很好。既不是四方四楞，像一个老式的装茶叶的锡罐；也不是圆圆乎乎的像一个冬瓜，而是上额宽广，下颚微狭，有一点像一只倒放着的鸭梨。这样的脑袋和体格，如果陪同外宾，一同步入宴会厅，拍下一张照片，是会很有气派的。但详考高大头的一生，似乎没有和外宾干过一次杯。他只是整天坐在门前的马扎子上，用一把木锉锉着一只胶鞋的磨歪了的后跟，用毛笔饱蘸了白色的乳胶涂在上面，选一块大小厚薄合适的胶皮贴上去，用他的厚厚实实的手掌按紧，连头也不大抬。只当有什么值得注意的人从他面前二三尺远的地方走过，他才从眼镜框上面看一眼。他家在南市口，是个热闹去处，但往来的大都是熟人。卖青菜的、卖麻团的、箍桶的、拉板车的、吹糖人的……他从他们的吆唤声、说话声、脚步声、喘气声，甚至从他们身上的气味，就能辨别出来，无须抬头一看。他的隔着一条巷子的紧邻针灸医生朱雪桥下班回家，他老远就听见他的苍老的咳嗽声，于是放下手里的活计，等着跟他打个招呼。朱雪桥走过，仍旧做活。一天就是这样，动作从容不迫，神色安静平和。他戴着一副黑框窄片的花镜，有点像个教授，不像个修鞋的手艺人。但是这个小县城里来了什么生人，他是立刻就会发现的，不会放过。而且只要那样看一眼，大体上就能判断这是省里来的，还是地区来的，是粮食部门的，还是水产部门的，是作家，还是来作专题报道的新闻记者。他那从眼镜框上面露出来的眼睛是彬彬有礼的，含蓄的，不露声色的，但又是机警的，而且相当的锋利。
"Tall head" is not just a surname high and a big head, the meaning is richer, it means that this person's surname is high, he is very tall, and he has a big head. He was born very burly, with a tiger back and a bear waist. His head and figure are very good. The whole body does not look particularly big. Only by looking at the head does it feel a little different from ordinary people. This head grows very well. It is neither square nor four-edged, like an old-fashioned tin can for tea; it is not round like a winter melon, but has a wide forehead and a slightly narrow jaw, a bit like an upside-down duck pear. Such a head and physique, if you accompany foreign guests, enter the banquet hall at the same time and take a photo, it will be very imposing. But a detailed examination of the tall head's life, it seems that he has never had a drink with a foreign guest. He just sat on the maza in front of the door all day, filed the crooked heel of a rubber shoe with a wooden file, dipped a brush in white latex and applied it to it, chose a piece of rubber of the right size and thickness to paste on it, and pressed it tightly with his thick palm, without even raising his head. Only when something noteworthy walked two or three feet away in front of him did he take a look at the frame of his glasses. His home is in Nanshikou, which is a lively place, but most of the people who come and go are acquaintances. Selling vegetables, selling hemp balls, hooping buckets, pulling carts, and blowing sugar...... He could tell from their shouts, talking, footsteps, panting, and even the smell on their bodies, without looking up. When Zhu Xueqiao, an acupuncturist next to his neighbor across an alley, came home from get off work, he heard his old cough from afar, so he put down his work and waited to say hello to him. Zhu Xueqiao walked past and still worked. The day was like this, his movements were calm and his expression was quiet and peaceful. He wore a pair of black-framed narrow-bladed flower glasses, a bit like a professor, not like a shoe repairer. But if there are any strangers in this small county, he will find out immediately and will not let them go. And just by looking at it like that, you can generally judge whether it is from the province, from the region, from the grain department, from the fisheries department, whether it is a writer, or a journalist who has come to make a special report. His eyes peeking out of the frames of his glasses are polite, subtle, quiet, but alert and quite sharp.高大头是个修鞋的，是个平头百姓，并无一官半职，虽有点走资本主义道路，却不当权，“文化大革命”怎么会触及到他，会把他也拿来挂牌、游街、批斗呢？答曰：因为他是牛鬼蛇神，故在横扫之列。此“文化大革命”之所以为“大”也。
Although he took the capitalist road, he was not in power, how could the "Cultural Revolution" touch him, and he would also be used to list, parade the streets, and criticize? Answer: Because he is a bull, ghost and snake god, he is among the sweepers. This is the reason why the "Cultural Revolution" is "big".小地方的人有一种传奇癖，爱听异闻。对一个生活经历稍为复杂一点的人，他们往往对他的历史添油加醋，任意夸张，说得神乎其神。这种捕风捉影的事，茶余酒后，巷议街谈，倒也无伤大雅。就是本人听到，也不暇去一一订正。有喜欢吹牛说大话的，还可能随声附和，补充细节，自高身价。一到运动，严肃地进行审查，可就惹了麻烦，跳进黄河也洗不清了。高大头就是这样。
People in small places have a habit of legends and love to hear strange stories. For a person with a slightly more complex life experience, they often add fuel to his history, exaggerate arbitrarily, and say it to the gods. This kind of chasing the wind and shadows, after tea and drink, it doesn't hurt to talk in the streets. Even if I hear it, I don't have time to correct it one by one. Some people like to brag and talk big, and they may echo along with the voice, add details, and raise their own value. As soon as it comes to sports, serious censorship will cause trouble, and jumping into the Yellow River will not be washed away. That's how tall heads are.高大头的简历如下：小时在家学铜匠。后到外地学开汽车，当了多年司机。解放前夕，因亲戚介绍，在一家营造厂“跑外”——当采购员。三五反后，营造厂停办，他又到专区一个师范学校当了几年总务。以后，即回乡从事补鞋。他走的地方多，认识的人多，在走出五里坝就要修家书的本地人看来，的确很不简单。
The resume of the tall head is as follows: He learned to be a coppersmith at home when he was a child. Later, he went to other places to learn to drive a car and worked as a driver for many years. On the eve of liberation, due to the introduction of relatives, he "ran out" in a construction factory - as a buyer. After the three-five rebellion, the construction factory was closed, and he went to a normal school in the special area to work as a general manager for several years. After that, he returned to his hometown to engage in shoe repair. He has traveled many places and met many people, and it is indeed not easy for the locals who want to repair their family letters when they walk out of Wuliba.但是本地很多人相信他进过黄埔军校，当过土匪，坐过日本人的牢，坐过国民党的牢，也坐过新四军的牢。
But many local people believe that he entered the Whampoa Military Academy, worked as a bandit, sat in the prison of the Japanese, the Kuomintang, and the New Fourth Army.事出有因，查无实据。黄埔军校早就不存在，他那样的年龄不可能进去过，而且他从来也没有到过广东。所以有此“疑点”，是因为他年轻时为了好玩，曾跟一个朋友借了一身军服照过一张照片，还佩了一柄“军人魂”的短剑。他大概曾经跟人吹过，说这种剑只有军校毕业生才有。这张照片早已不存在，但确有不止一个人见过，写有旁证材料。说他当过土匪，是因为他学铜匠的时候，有一师父会修枪。过去地方商会所办“保卫团”有枪坏了，曾拿给他去修过。于是就传成他会造枪，说他给乡下的土匪造过枪。于是就联系到高大头：他师父给土匪造枪，他师父就是土匪；他是土匪的徒弟，所以也是土匪。这种逻辑，颇为谨严。至于坐牢，倒是确有其事。他是司机，难免夹带一点私货，跑跑单帮。抗日战争时期从敌占区运到国统区；解放战争时期从国统区运到解放区。的确有两次被伪军和国民党军队查抄出来，关押了几天。关押的目的是敲竹杠。他花了一笔钱，托了朋友，也就保释出来了。所运的私货无非是日用所需，洋广杂货。其中也有违禁物资，如西药、煤油。但是很多人说他运的是枪枝弹药。就算是枪枝弹药吧：抗日战争时期，国共还在合作，由日本人那里偷运给国民党军队，不是坏事；解放战争时期由国民党军队那里偷运给新四军，这岂不是好事？然而不，这都是反革命行为。他确也被新四军扣留审查过几天，那是因为不清楚他的来历。后来已有新四军当时的负责人写了证明，说这是出于误会。以上诸问题，本不难澄清，但是有关部门一直未作明确结论，作为悬案挂在那里。他之所以被专区的师范解职，就是因为：历史复杂。
There is a reason for the incident, and there is no evidence. The Whampoa Military Academy has long since existed, it is impossible for him to go in at that age, and he has never been to Guangdong. So there is this "suspicion" because when he was young, he borrowed a military uniform from a friend to take a photo, and also wore a short sword with a "soldier's soul". He probably once blew to someone that this kind of sword is only available to military academy graduates. This photo no longer exists, but more than one person has seen it, and there is circumstantial evidence written on it. He said that he was a bandit because when he was studying coppersmithing, there was a master who could repair guns. In the past, the "security group" run by the local chamber of commerce had a broken gun and was given to him to repair. So it was rumored that he could make guns, saying that he had made guns for bandits in the countryside. So he contacted the tall head: his master made guns for the bandits, and his master was a bandit; he was a bandit's apprentice, so he was also a bandit. This logic is quite rigorous. As for going to jail, it is true. He is a driver, so it is inevitable that he will carry a little private goods and run around alone. During the War of Resistance Against Japanese Aggression, it was transported from the enemy-occupied area to the Kuomintang area; during the War of Liberation, it was transported from the Kuomintang area to the liberated area. It was indeed raided twice by the puppet army and the Kuomintang army, and was imprisoned for several days. The purpose of the detention was to rob the bamboo bar. He spent a sum of money, entrusted a friend, and was released on bail. The private goods transported were nothing more than daily necessities, foreign groceries. There are also prohibited materials, such as Western medicine and kerosene. But many people say that he was transporting guns and ammunition. Even if it is guns and ammunition: during the War of Resistance Against Japanese Aggression, the Kuomintang and the Communist Party were still cooperating, and it was not a bad thing to be smuggled to the Kuomintang army by the Japanese; Wouldn't it be a good thing to be smuggled from the Kuomintang army to the New Fourth Army during the War of Liberation? However, no, this is all counter-revolutionary acts. He was indeed detained by the New Fourth Army for a few days because his origin was unknown. Later, the person in charge of the New Fourth Army at the time wrote a certificate, saying that this was due to a misunderstanding. The above issues are not difficult to clarify, but the relevant departments have not made a clear conclusion and are hanging there as an unsolved case. The reason why he was dismissed from the normal school of the special district is because: the history is complicated.“文化大革命”，旧案重提，他被揪了出来。地方上的造反派为之成立了专案。专案组的组长是当时造反派的头头，后来的财政局长谭凌霄，专案组成员之一是后来的房产管理处主任高宗汉。因为有此因缘，就逼得高大头终于不得不把他的房子楦一楦。此是后话。
"Cultural Revolution", the old case was brought up again, and he was caught. The local rebels set up a special case for it. The leader of the task force was Tan Lingxiao, the leader of the rebels at that time, and the later director of the Finance Bureau, and one of the members of the task force was Gao Zonghan, the later director of the real estate management office. Because of this reason, the tall head finally had to close his house. This is a later story.“文化大革命”山呼海啸，席卷全国。高大头算个什么呢，真是沧海之一粟。不过他在本地却是出足了风头，因为案情复杂而且严重。南市口离县革会不远，县革会门前有一面大照壁。照壁上贴得满满一壁关于高大头的大字报，还有漫画插图。谭凌霄原来在文化馆工作，高宗汉原是电影院的美工，他们都能写会画，把高大头画得很像。他的形象特征很好掌握，一个鸭梨形的比身体还要大的头。在批斗他的时候，喊的口号也特别热闹：
The "Cultural Revolution" screamed and swept across the country. What is a tall head, it is really a drop in the ocean. However, he was in the limelight locally because the case was complex and serious. Nanshikou is not far from the county revolutionary committee, and there is a large photo wall in front of the county revolutionary committee. The wall is full of big-character posters about tall heads, as well as comic illustrations. Tan Lingxiao used to work in the cultural center, and Gao Zonghan was originally an artist in the cinema, and they could both write and paint, and the tall head was very similar. His image characteristics are easy to grasp, a duck pear-shaped head that is larger than the body. When criticizing him, the slogans shouted were also very lively: “打倒反动军官高大头！”
“打倒土匪高大头！”
“打倒军火商高大头！”
“打倒三开分子高大头！”
剃头、画脸、游街、抄家、挨打、罚跪，应有尽有，不必细说。
"Down with the reactionary officer Tall!" "Down with the bandits!" "Down with the arms dealer!" "Down with the big head of the three-opening molecule!" Shaving heads, painting faces, parading the streets, raiding houses, being beaten, punishing kneeling, there are everything, no need to go into details.高大头是个曾经沧海的人，“文化大革命”虽然是史无前例，他却以一种古已有之的态度对待之：逆来顺受。批斗、游街，随叫随到。低头的角度很低，时间很长。挨打挨踢，面无愠色。他身体结实，这些都经受得住。检查材料交了一大摞，写得很详细，很工整。时间、地点、经过、证明人，清清楚楚。一次一次，不厌其烦。但是这种检查越看越叫人生气。
Although the "Cultural Revolution" is unprecedented, he treats it with an ancient attitude: obedience. Criticize, parade the streets, and be on call. The angle of bowing his head is very low and the time is very long. He was beaten and kicked, and his face was not angry. He has a strong body, and he can withstand all of this. A large stack of inspection materials was handed over, written in detail and neatly. The time, place, process, and testimony are clear. Time and time, tirelessly. But the more you look at this kind of inspection, the more angry it becomes.谭凌霄亲自出马，带人外调。登了泰山，上了黄山，吃过西湖醋鱼、南京板鸭、苏州的三虾面，乘兴而去，兴尽而归，材料虽有，价值不大。（全国用于外调的钱，一共有多少？）
Tan Lingxiao personally took the horse and led people to be transferred. Climbed Mount Tai, went up to Huangshan, ate West Lake vinegar fish, Nanjing plate duck, Suzhou three shrimp noodles, and went on a leap of interest, and returned with great enthusiasm. (How much money is there in the country for external transfer?) ）他们于是又回过头来把希望寄托在高大头本人身上，希望他自己说出一些谁也不知道的罪行，三番两次，交待政策：“坦白从宽，抗拒从严”，“态度很重要。态度好，可以从轻；态度不好，问题性质就会升级！”苦口婆心，仁至义尽。高大头唯唯，然而交待材料仍然是那些车轱辘话。对于“反动军官”、“土匪”、“军火商”，字面上决不硬顶，事实上寸步不让。于是谭凌霄给了他一嘴巴子，骂道：“你真是一块滚刀肉！”
They then turned around and pinned their hopes on the tall head himself, hoping that he would say some crimes that no one knew, and repeatedly explained the policy: "Be lenient in confession, strict in resistance", and "Attitude is very important. If you have a good attitude, you can be lenient; if you have a bad attitude, the nature of the problem will escalate!" "Bitter words, benevolence and righteousness. The tall head is submissive, but the confession materials are still those cart wheels. For "reactionary officers", "bandits", and "arms dealers", they will never be their heads, and in fact they will not give an inch. So Tan Lingxiao gave him a mouthful and scolded: "You are really a piece of hob meat!" ”只有对于“三开分子”，高大头却无法否认。
Only for the "three-opening elements", the tall head cannot deny it.“三开分子”别处似不曾听说过，可以算得是这个小县的土特产。何谓“三开”？就是在敌伪时期、国民党时期、共产党时期都吃得开。这个界限可很难划定。当过维持会长、国大代表、政协委员，这可以说是“三开”。这些，高大头都够不上。但是他在上述三个时期都活下来了，有一口饭吃，有时还吃得不错，且能娶妻生子，成家立业，要说是“吃得开”，也未尝不可。
The "three openings" seem to have never been heard of anywhere else, and they can be regarded as the local specialties of this small county. What is "three openings"? It is that you can eat during the enemy and puppet periods, the Kuomintang period, and the Communist Party period. This line is difficult to delineate. Having served as the chairman of the maintenance committee, a deputy to the National Congress, and a member of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference, this can be said to be "three openings". These are not enough for tall heads. But he survived the above three periods, had a bite to eat, sometimes ate well, and was able to marry and have children, start a family, and say that it was "eaten".轰轰轰轰，“文化大革命”过去了。
Boom boom, the "Cultural Revolution" has passed.高大头还是高大头。“三开分子”算个什么名目呢？什么文件上也未见过。因此也就谈不上什么改正落实。抄家的时候，他把所有的箱笼橱柜都打开，任凭搜查。除了他的那些修鞋用具之外，还有他当司机时用过的扳子、钳子、螺丝刀，他在营造厂跑外时留下的一卷皮尺……这些都不值一顾。有两块桃源石的图章，高宗汉以为是玉的，上面还有龟纽，说这是“四旧”，没收了（高大头当时想：真是没有见过世面，这值不了几个钱）。因此，除了皮肉吃了一点苦，高大头在这场开玩笑似的浩劫中没有多大损失。他没有什么抱怨，对谁也不记仇。
A tall head or a tall head. What is the name of the "Three Open Molecules"? I haven't seen it on any documents. Therefore, there is no talk of any correction and implementation. When raiding the house, he opened all the boxes and cabinets and let them be searched. In addition to his shoe repair tools, there were wrenches, pliers, screwdrivers, and a roll of leather rulers he left behind when he ran out of the construction factory...... None of this is worth it. There are two Taoyuan stone stamps, which Gao Zonghan thought were jade, and there were turtle buttons on them, saying that they were the "four olds", and they were confiscated (the tall head thought at the time: I really haven't seen the world, it's not worth a few dollars). Therefore, except for a little bitterness in his flesh and blood, the tall head did not lose much in this jokingly catastrophe. He had no complaints and held no grudges against anyone.倒是谭凌霄、高宗汉因为白整了高大头几年，没有整出个名堂来，觉得很不甘心。世界上竟有这等怪事：挨整的已经觉得无所谓，整人的人倒耿耿于怀，总想跟挨整的人过不去，好像挨整的对不起他。
However, Tan Lingxiao and Gao Zonghan felt very unwilling because they had been tall for a few years and did not make a name for themselves. There are such strange things in the world: the person who is punished already feels that it doesn't matter, but the person who is punished is worried, and he always wants to get along with the person who is punished, as if he is sorry for him.然而高大头从此得了教训，他很少跟人来往了，他不串门访友，也不愿说他那些天南地北的山海经。他整天只是埋头做活。
However, the tall head has learned a lesson since then, he rarely interacts with people, he does not visit friends, and he does not want to talk about his mountains and seas. He just immersed himself in work all day long.高大头高大魁伟，然而心灵手巧，多能鄙事。他会修汽车，修收音机、照相机，修表，当然主要是修鞋。他会修球鞋、胶鞋。他收的钱比谁家都贵，但是大家都愿多花几个钱送到他那里去修，因为他修得又结实又好看。他有一台火补的“机器”，补好后放在模子里加热一压，鞋底的纹印和新的一样。在刚兴塑料鞋时，全城只有他一家会修塑料凉鞋，于是门庭若市（最初修塑料鞋，他都是拿到后面去修，怕别人看到学去）。就是在“文化大革命”期间，在他不挨批斗的日子，生意也很好（“文化大革命”期间人们好像特别费鞋，因为又要游行，又要开会，又要跳忠字舞）。他还会补自行车胎、板车胎，甚至汽车外胎。因此，他的收入很可观。三中全会以后，允许单干，他带着一儿一女，一同做活，生意兴隆，真是很吃得开了。
He is tall and majestic, but he is clever and can do many things. He can repair cars, radios, cameras, watches, and of course, mainly shoes. He can repair sneakers and rubber shoes. The money he collects is more expensive than anyone else's, but everyone is willing to spend a few more money to send it to him to repair it, because he repairs it strong and good-looking. He has a "machine" for repairing fire, and after repairing, he puts it in a mold and heats it up, and the pattern on the sole is the same as new. When plastic shoes were first developed, he was the only one in the city who could repair plastic sandals, so the door was crowded (at first, he took it to repair plastic shoes later, for fear that others would see and learn). Even during the "Cultural Revolution", when he was not criticized, business was also very good (during the "Cultural Revolution", people seemed to be particularly expensive because they had to march, hold meetings, and dance the loyalty dance). He would also mend bicycle tires, scooter tires, and even car tires. Therefore, his income was considerable. After the Third Plenary Session, he was allowed to work alone, and he took a son and a daughter to work together, and his business was prosperous, which was really very good.他现在常在一起谈谈的，只有一个朱雪桥。
一来，他们是邻居。
二来，“文化大革命”期间，他们经常同台挨斗，同病相怜。
朱雪桥的罪名是美国特务。
He often talks about it now, and there is only one Zhu Xueqiao. First, they are neighbors. Second, during the "Cultural Revolution", they often fought on the same stage and sympathized with each other. Zhu Xueqiao was charged with being a U.S. spy.朱雪桥是个针灸医生，为人老实本分，足迹未出县城一步，他怎么会成了美国特务呢？原来他有个哥哥朱雨桥，在美国，也是给人扎针，听说混得很不错。解放后，兄弟俩一直不通音信。但这总是个海外关系。这个县城里有海外关系的不多，凤毛麟角，很是珍贵。原来在档案里定的是“特嫌”，到了“文化大革命”，就直截了当，定成了美国特务。
Zhu Xueqiao is an acupuncture doctor, honest and dutiful, how could he become an American spy before leaving the county? It turned out that he had an older brother Zhu Yuqiao, who also pricked people with needles in the United States, and I heard that he got along very well. After liberation, the brothers have not communicated. But this is always an overseas relationship. There are not many overseas relationships in this county, and it is very precious. It turned out that it was designated as a "special suspect" in the file, but when it came to the "Cultural Revolution", it was straightforward and designated as an American spy.这样，他们就时常一同挨斗。在接到批斗通知后，挂了牌子一同出门，斗完之后又挟了牌子一同回来。到了巷口，点一点头：“明天见！”——“会上见！”各自回家。
In this way, they often fight together. After receiving the notice of criticism, they hung up the sign and went out together, and came back together with the sign after the fight. When he arrived at the entrance of the alley, he nodded: "See you tomorrow!" ——"See you at the meeting!" "Each goes home.朱雪桥胆子小，原来很害怕，以为可能要枪毙。高大头暗中给他递话：“你是特务吗？——不是。不是你怕什么？沉住气，没事。光棍不吃眼前亏，注意态度。”朱雪桥于是仿效高大头，软磨穷泡，少挨了不少打。朱雪桥写的检查稿子，还偷偷送给高大头看过。高大头用铅笔轻轻做了记号，朱雪桥心领神会，都照改了。高大头每回挨斗，回来总要吃点好的。他前脚挂了牌子出门，他老婆后脚就绕过几条街去买肉。肉炖得了，高大头就叫女儿乘天黑人乱，给朱雪桥送一碗过去。朱雪桥起初不受，说：“这，这，这不行！”高大头知道他害怕，就走过去说：“吃吧！不吃好一点顶不住！”于是朱雪桥就吃了。他们有时斗罢归来，分手的时候，还偷偷用手指圈成一个圈儿，比划一下，表示今天晚上可以喝两盅。
Zhu Xueqiao was timid, and he was very scared, thinking that he might be shot. The tall head secretly handed him a message: "Are you a spy?" ——No. What are you afraid of? Calm down, it's okay. Bachelors don't suffer immediate losses, pay attention to your attitude. Zhu Xueqiao then imitated the tall head, grinded the bubbles, and suffered a lot of beatings. The inspection manuscript written by Zhu Xueqiao was secretly sent to the tall head to read. The tall head lightly marked it with a pencil, and Zhu Xueqiao understood it and changed it. Every time the tall head is fighting, he always has to eat something good when he comes back. He hung a sign on his front foot and went out, and his wife went around a few streets to buy meat on the back foot. The meat was stewed, and the tall head asked his daughter to take advantage of the chaos and send a bowl to Zhu Xueqiao. Zhu Xueqiao didn't accept it at first, saying, "This, this, this won't work!" The tall head knew that he was afraid, so he walked over and said, "Eat! If you don't eat, you can't stand it!" So Zhu Xueqiao ate. Sometimes they came back from fighting, and when they broke up, they secretly circled their fingers in a circle and gestured, saying that they could drink two cups tonight.中国有不少人的友谊是在一同挨斗中结成的，这可称为“文革”佳话。
三来，他们两家的房子都非常紧，这就容易产生一种同类意识。
两家的房子原来都不算窄，是在挨斗的同时被挤小了的。
The friendship of many people in China was formed in the fight together, which can be called a good story of the "Cultural Revolution". Third, the houses of both of them are very tight, which is easy to produce a sense of the same kind. The houses of both families were not originally narrow, and they were squeezed out at the same time as they were fighting.朱雪桥家原来住得相当宽敞，有三大间，旁边还有一间堆放杂物的厢房。朱雨桥在的时候，两家住；朱雨桥走了，朱雪桥一家三代六口人住着。朱雪桥不但在家里可以有地方给人扎针治病，还有个小天井，可以养十几盆菊花。——高大头养菊花就是受了朱雪桥的影响，他的菊花秧子大都是从朱雪桥那里分来的。
Zhu Xueqiao's family used to live quite spaciously, with three rooms, and a side room next to it for piling up miscellaneous items. When Zhu Yuqiao was there, two families lived; Zhu Yuqiao left, and Zhu Xueqiao's family lived with three generations and six people. Zhu Xueqiao not only has a place to prick needles and treat people at home, but also has a small patio where he can raise more than a dozen pots of chrysanthemums. ——The tall head raising chrysanthemums was influenced by Zhu Xueqiao, and most of his chrysanthemum seedlings were distributed from Zhu Xueqiao.谭凌霄和高宗汉带着一伙造反派到朱雪桥家去抄家。叫高大头也一同去，因为他身体好，力气大，作为劳力，可以帮着搬东西。朱家的“四旧”不少。霁红胆瓶，摔了；康熙青花全套餐具，砸了；铜器锡器，踹扁了；硬木家具，劈了；朱雪桥的父母睡的一张红木宁式大床，是传了几代的东西，谭凌霄说：“抬走！”堂屋板壁上有四幅徐子兼画的猴。徐子兼是邻县的一位画家，已故，画花鸟，宗法华新罗，笔致秀润飘逸，尤长画猴。他画猴有定价，两块大洋一只。这四幅屏上的大大小小的猴真不老少。一个造反派跳上去扯了下来就要撕。高大头在旁插了一句嘴，说：“别撕。‘金猴奋起千钧棒’，猴是革命的。”谭凌霄一想，说：“对！卷起来，先放到我那里保存！”他属猴，对猴有感情。
Tan Lingxiao and Gao Zonghan took a group of rebels to Zhu Xueqiao's house to raid the house. Ask Gao Datou to go with him, because he is in good health and has great strength, and as a laborer, he can help move things. There are many "four olds" of the Zhu family. Ji red gall bottle, fell; Kangxi blue and white full set of utensils, smashed; copper and pewterware, kicked flat; hardwood furniture, split; Zhu Xueqiao's parents slept on a mahogany Ning-style bed, which has been passed down for generations, Tan Lingxiao said: "Carry it away!" There are four monkeys painted by Xu Zijian on the wall of the hall house. Xu Zijian is a painter in a neighboring county, deceased, painting flowers and birds, patriarchal Hua Silla, the brushwork is beautiful and elegant, especially long painting monkeys. He painted monkeys with a price, one for two oceans. The large and small monkeys on these four screens are really old. A rebel jumped on it and was about to tear it off. The tall head interjected and said, "Don't tear it." 'The golden monkey rises up with a thousand pounds', the monkey is revolutionary. Tan Lingxiao thought about it and said, "Yes! Roll it up and put it with me to save it first!" "He is a monkey and has feelings for monkeys.抄家完毕，谭凌霄说：“你家的房子这样多？不行！”于是下令叫朱雪桥全家搬到厢房里住，当街另外开门出入。这三间封起来。在正屋与厢屋之间砌起了一堵墙，隔开。
After the raid, Tan Lingxiao said: "There are so many houses in your family? No way! So he ordered Zhu Xueqiao's family to move to the side room and open another door on the street. These three rooms were sealed. A wall was built between the main house and the side room to separate them.高大头家原来是个连家店，前面是铺面，或者也可以叫做车间，后面是住家。抄家的时候（前文已表，他家是没有多少东西可抄的），高宗汉说：“你家的房子也太宽，不行！”于是在他的住家前面也砌了一堵墙，只给他留下一间铺面。
The tall head house turned out to be a connected store, with a shop in front, or a workshop, and a home in the back. When raiding the house (as mentioned above, there are not many things to copy in his house), Gao Zonghan said: "Your house is too wide, no!" So a wall was also built in front of his house, leaving only one shop for him.这样，高、朱两家的房屋面积都是一样大小了：九平米。
In this way, the area of the houses of Gao and Zhu is the same size: nine square meters.朱家六口人，这九平米怎么住法呢？白天还好办。朱雪桥上班，——他原来是私人开业，后来加入联合诊所，联合诊所撤销后，他进了卫生局所属的城镇医院，算是“国家干部”了。两个孩子（一儿一女）上学。家里只剩下朱雪桥的父亲母亲和他的老婆。到了晚上，三代人，九平米，怎么个睡法呢？高大头给他出了个主意，打了一张三层床。由下往上数：老两口睡下层，朱雪桥夫妇睡中层，两个孩子睡在最上层。一人翻身，全家震动。两个孩子倒很高兴，觉得爬上爬下，非常好玩。只是有时夜里要滚下来，这一跤可摔得不轻。小弟弟有时还要尿床，这个热闹可就大了！
The Zhu family of six, how to live in these nine square meters? It's easy to do during the day. Zhu Xueqiao went to work,—— he originally opened a private business, and later joined the joint clinic, and after the joint clinic was abolished, he entered the town hospital under the Health Bureau, which was regarded as a "state cadre". Two children (one son and one daughter) go to school. Only Zhu Xueqiao's father and mother and his wife are left in the family. At night, three generations, nine square meters, how to sleep? The tall head gave him an idea and made a three-bunk bed. Counting from bottom to top: the old couple slept on the lower floor, Zhu Xueqiao and his wife slept on the middle floor, and the two children slept on the top floor. One person turned over and the whole family vibrated. The two children were very happy and felt that climbing up and down was very fun. It's just that sometimes I have to roll down at night, and this fall can be a big fall. The little brother sometimes has to wet the bed, which is a big excitement!高大头怎么办呢？他总得有个家呀。他有老婆，女儿也大了，到了快找对象的时候了，女人总有些女人的事情，不能大敞四开，什么都展览着呀。于是他找了点纤维板，打了半截板壁，把这九平米隔成了两半，两个狭条，各占四米半。后面是他老婆和女儿的卧房；前面白天是车间，到了晚上，临时搭铺，父子二人抵足而眠。后面一半外面看不见。前面的四米半可真是热闹。一架火补烘烤机器就占了三分之一。其余地方还要放工具、材料。他把能利用的空间都利用了。他敲敲靠巷子一边的山墙，还结实，于是把它抽掉一些砖头，挖成一格一格的，成了四层壁橱。酱油瓶子、醋瓶子、油瓶子、酒瓶子，扳子、钳子、乳胶罐子、钢锉、木锉，书籍（高大头文化不低，前已说过，他的字写得很工整）、报纸（高大头关心世界、国家大事，随时研究政策，订得一份省报，看后保存，以备查检，逐月逐年，一张不缺），全都放在“橱”里。层次分明，有条不紊。他修好的鞋没处放，就在板壁上钉了许多钉子，全都挂起来。面朝里，底朝外，鞋底上都贴着白纸条，写明鞋主姓名和取鞋日期。这样倒好，好找，省得一双一双去翻。他还养菊花（朱雪桥已经无此雅兴）！没有地方放，他就养了四盆悬崖菊，把它们全部在房檐口挂起来。这四个盆子很大。来修鞋的人走到门口都要迟疑一下，向上看看。高大头总要解释：“不碍事，挂得很结实，砸不了脑袋！”这四盆悬崖菊披披纷纷地倒挂下来，好看得很。高大头就在菊花影中运锉补鞋，自得其乐。
What should I do with a tall head? He must have a home. He has a wife, his daughter is also older, and when it's time to find a partner, women always have some women's things, they can't be open and everything is on display. So he found some fiberboard, made half a board wall, and divided the nine square meters into two halves, two narrow strips, each occupying four and a half meters. Behind is the bedroom of his wife and daughter; the front is a workshop during the day, and at night, a temporary bunk is set up, and the father and son sleep on their feet. The back half is invisible from the outside. The front four and a half meters is really lively. A fire replenishment baking machine accounts for one-third. The rest of the place also needs tools and materials. He used all the space he could. He knocked on the gable on the side of the alley, and it was still strong, so he pulled out some bricks and dug them into a four-story closet. Soy sauce bottles, vinegar bottles, oil bottles, wine bottles, wrenches, tongs, latex jars, steel files, wooden files, books (the tall head culture is not low, as I have said before, his handwriting is very neat), newspapers (the tall head cares about world and national affairs, studies policies at any time, orders a provincial newspaper, reads it and saves it for inspection, month by month and year, one is not missing), all of them are placed in the "cabinet". Layered and orderly. He had nowhere to put his repaired shoes, so he drove many nails to the board wall, and hung them all up. Facing inward, the bottom facing outward, and the soles are pasted with white paper strips indicating the name of the shoe owner and the date of picking up the shoes. This is good, easy to find, and saves you to rummage through pairs. He also raises chrysanthemums (Zhu Xueqiao no longer has this elegance)! There was no place to put it, so he raised four pots of cliff chrysanthemums and hung them all on the cornice. These four pots are very large. People who come to repair shoes have to hesitate when they walk to the door and look up. The tall head always has to explain: "It's not in the way, it's hung very strongly, and you can't hit your head!" These four pots of cliff chrysanthemums are hung upside down, which is very beautiful. The tall head is in the shadow of the chrysanthemums to file and mend the shoes, enjoying themselves.“四人帮”倒了之后，高大头和朱雪桥迭次向房产管理处和财政局写报告，请求解决他们的住房困难。这个县的房管处是财政局的下属单位，是一码事。也就是说，向高宗汉和谭凌霄写报告（至于谭、高二人怎么由造反派变成局长和主任，又怎样安然度过清查运动，一直掌权，以与本文无关，不表）。他们还迭次请求面见谭局长和高主任。高大头还给谭局长家修过收音机、照相机，都是白尽义务，分文不取。高主任很客气地接待他们，说：“你们的困难我是知道的，这是‘文化大革命’的后遗症嘛，一定，一定设法解决。”谭凌霄对高宗汉说：“这两个家伙，不能给他们房子！”
After the fall of the "Gang of Four", Gao Datou and Zhu Xueqiao repeatedly wrote reports to the Real Estate Management Office and the Finance Bureau, requesting to solve their housing difficulties. The housing management office of this county is a subordinate unit of the Finance Bureau, which is the same thing. In other words, write a report to Gao Zonghan and Tan Lingxiao (as for how Tan and Gao changed from rebels to directors and directors, and how they safely survived the inventory movement and have been in power, so that it has nothing to do with this article, it will not be expressed). They also repeatedly requested to meet with Director Tan and Director Gao. Gao Datou also repaired radios and cameras for Director Tan's house, but they were all obligations in vain and did not take a penny. Director Gao received them very politely and said: "I know your difficulties, this is the aftermath of the 'Cultural Revolution', I will definitely try to solve it." Tan Lingxiao said to Gao Zonghan: "These two guys, you can't give them a house!" ”中美建交。
The establishment of diplomatic relations between China and the United States.朱雪桥忽然接到他哥哥朱雨桥的信，说他很想回乡探望双亲大人。信中除了详述他到美的经过，现在的生活，倾诉了思亲怀旧之情，文白夹杂，不今不古。之外，附带还问了问他花了五十块大洋请徐子兼画的四幅画，今犹在否。
Zhu Xueqiao suddenly received a letter from his brother Zhu Yuqiao, saying that he really wanted to return to his hometown to visit his parents. In addition to detailing his journey to the United States, the letter confided in his nostalgia for his family and nostalgia, mixed with literature and white, neither modern nor ancient. In addition, he also asked if the four paintings he spent fifty yuan to ask Xu Zijian to paint are still there.朱雪桥把这封信交给了奚县长。
Zhu Xueqiao handed the letter to County Magistrate Xi.奚县长“文化大革命”前就是县长。“文化大革命”中被谭凌霄等一伙造反派打倒了。“四人帮”垮台后，经过选举，是副县长。不过大家还叫他奚县长。他主管文教卫生，兼管民政统战。朱雪桥接到朱雨桥的信，这件事，从哪方面说起来，都正该他管。
County Magistrate Xi was a county magistrate before the "Cultural Revolution". During the "Cultural Revolution", he was overthrown by Tan Lingxiao and a group of rebels. After the collapse of the "Gang of Four", after election, he was the deputy county magistrate. But everyone still calls him County Magistrate Xi. He is in charge of culture, education and health, and is also in charge of the civil affairs united front. Zhu Xueqiao received a letter from Zhu Yuqiao, and this matter, in every way, should be in charge of him.第一件事，应该表示欢迎。这是国家政策。
第二件事，应该赶紧解决朱雪桥的住房问题。朱雨桥回来，这九平米，怎么住？难道在三层床上再加一层吗？
The first thing should be welcomed. This is a national policy. The second thing is to quickly solve Zhu Xueqiao's housing problem. Zhu Yuqiao came back, how to live in this nine square meters? Is there another layer on top of the three-layer bed?事有凑巧，朱家原来的三间祖屋，在被没收后，由一个下放干部住着。恰好在朱雪桥接到朱雨桥来信前不久，这位下放干部病故了，家属回乡，这三间房还空着。这事好解决。奚县长亲自带了朱雪桥去找谭凌霄，叫他把那三间房还给朱家。谭凌霄当时没有话说，叫高宗汉填写了一张住房证发给了朱雪桥。朱雪桥随奚县长到县人民政府，又研究了一下怎样接待朱雨桥的问题。奚县长嘱咐他对“文化大革命”的情况尽量不要多谈，还批了条子，让他到水产公司去订购一点鲜鱼活虾，到蔬菜公司订购一点菱藕，到糖烟酒公司订几瓶原装洋河大曲。朱雪桥对县领导的工作这样深入细致，深表感谢。
Coincidentally, the original three ancestral houses of the Zhu family were occupied by a delegated cadre after they were confiscated. Not long before Zhu Xueqiao received a letter from Zhu Yuqiao, the delegated cadre died of illness, and his family returned to his hometown, and the three rooms were still empty. This matter is easy to solve. County Magistrate Xi personally took Zhu Xueqiao to Tan Lingxiao and asked him to return the three rooms to the Zhu family. Tan Lingxiao had nothing to say at the time, so he asked Gao Zonghan to fill out a housing permit and send it to Zhu Xueqiao. Zhu Xueqiao followed County Magistrate Xi to the county people's government and studied how to receive Zhu Yuqiao. County Magistrate Xi instructed him not to talk too much about the situation of the "Cultural Revolution", and also approved a note asking him to go to the aquatic products company to order some fresh fish and live shrimp, to the vegetable company to order some water chestnuts, and to order a few bottles of original Yanghe Daqu from the sugar, tobacco and liquor company. Zhu Xueqiao expressed his deep gratitude to the county leaders for their in-depth and meticulous work.不想他到了旧居门口，却发现门上新加了一把锁。
I didn't want him to arrive at the door of his old house, but found a new lock on the door.原来谭凌霄在发给朱雪桥住房证之后，立刻叫房管处签发了另一份住房证，派人送到湖东公社，交给公社书记的儿子，叫他先把门锁起来。一所房子同时发两张居住证，他这是存心叫两家闹纠纷，叫朱雪桥搬不进去。
It turned out that after Tan Lingxiao issued Zhu Xueqiao's housing permit, he immediately asked the housing management office to issue another housing certificate, sent someone to send it to Hudong Commune, handed it to the son of the commune secretary, and told him to lock the door first. A house issued two residence permits at the same time, and he deliberately caused a dispute between the two families and made Zhu Xueqiao unable to move in.朱雪桥不能撬人家的锁。
怎么办呢？高大头给他出了个主意，从隔开厢房与正屋的墙上打一个洞，先把东西搬进去再说。高大头身强力壮，心灵手巧，呼朋引类，七手八脚，不大一会，就办成了。
Zhu Xueqiao can't pick other people's locks. What to do? The tall head gave him an idea, made a hole in the wall separating the side room from the main house, and moved the things in first. The tall head is strong and strong, the mind is skillful, and the friends are introduced, and it will be done in a short time.朱雨桥来信，行期在即。
I have received a letter from the red rain bridge, and my departure date is just around the corner.奚县长了解了朱雪桥在墙上打了一个洞，说：“这成个什么样子！”于是打电话给财政局、房管处，请他们给朱家修一个门，并把朱家原来的三间正屋修理一下。谭凌霄、高宗汉“相应不理”。
County Magistrate Xi learned that Zhu Xueqiao had made a hole in the wall and said, "What does this look like!" So he called the Finance Bureau and the Housing Management Office and asked them to repair a door for the Zhu family and repair the original three main houses of the Zhu family. Tan Lingxiao and Gao Zonghan "ignored it accordingly".县官不如现管，奚县长毫无办法。
奚县长打电话给卫生局，卫生局没有人工材料。
最后只得打电话给城镇医院。城镇医院倒有一点钱，雇工置料，给朱雪桥把房子修了。
The county officials are not as good as the current management, and County Magistrate Xi has no way. County Magistrate Xi called the Health Bureau, but the Health Bureau did not have artificial materials. In the end, I had to call the town hospital. The town hospital had a little money, so they hired workers to buy materials and repair the house for Zhu Xueqiao.徐子兼画的四幅画也还回来了。这四幅画在谭凌霄家里。朱雪桥拿着县人民政府的信，指名索要，谭凌霄抵赖不得，只好从柜子里拿出来给他。朱家的宁式大床其实也在谭凌霄家里，朱雪桥听从了高大头的意见，暂时不提。
The four paintings painted by Xu Zijian have also been returned. These four paintings are at Tan Lingxiao's house. Zhu Xueqiao took the letter from the county people's government and asked for it by name, but Tan Lingxiao couldn't deny it, so he had to take it out of the cabinet and give it to him. The Zhu family's Ning-style bed was actually at Tan Lingxiao's house, and Zhu Xueqiao listened to the advice of the tall head and did not mention it for the time being.朱雨桥回来，地方上盛大接待。朱雨桥吃了家乡的卡缝鳊、翘嘴白、槟榔芋、雪花藕、炝活虾、野鸭烧咸菜；给双亲大人磕了头，看看他的祖传旧屋，端详了徐子兼的画猴，满意得不得了。热闹了几天，告别各界领导。临去依依，一再握手。弟兄二人，洒泪而别，自不必说。
Zhu Yuqiao came back and received a grand reception at the local level. Zhu Yuqiao ate his hometown's stuck bream, beaked white, betel nut taro, snowflake lotus, braised live shrimp, and wild duck roasted pickles; kowtowed to his parents, looked at his ancestral old house, and looked at Xu Zijian's painting of monkeys, and was very satisfied. After a few days of excitement, I bid farewell to leaders from all walks of life. Before leaving, I shook hands again and again. The two brothers said goodbye in tears, needless to say.地方上为朱雨桥举行的几次宴会，谭局长一概称病不赴。高主任因为还不够格，也未奉陪。谭凌霄骂了一句国骂，说：“海外关系倒跩起来了！”
Several banquets held for Zhu Yuqiao in the local area, Director Tan said he was ill and did not attend. Director Gao was not accompanied because he was not qualified enough. Tan Lingxiao scolded the country and said: "Overseas relations are upside down! ”谭凌霄当然知道朱雪桥在墙上打洞，先发制人，造成既成事实，这主意是高大头出的。朱雪桥是个老实人，想不出这种招儿。徐子兼的画在他手里，也是高大头告发的。这四幅画他平常不大拿出来挂。有一天“晒伏”，他摊在地上。那天正好高大头来送修好了的收音机。这小子眼睛很贼，瞅见过。除了他，没有别人！批给朱家三间房子，丢了四张画，事情不大，但是他谭凌霄没有栽过这个跟头。这使他丢了面子，在本城群众面前矮了一截。这些草民，一定会在他背后指手划脚，嘁嘁喳喳地议论的。谭凌霄非常窝火，在心里恨道：“好小子，你就等着我的吧！”他引用了一句慈禧太后的话：“谁要是叫我不痛快，我就叫谁不痛快一辈子！”
Of course, Tan Lingxiao knew that Zhu Xueqiao made a hole in the wall, preemptively attacked people, and caused a fait accompli, and this idea came up with a tall head. Zhu Xueqiao is an honest person and can't think of such a trick. Xu Zijian's painting was in his hand, and it was also reported by the tall head. He usually doesn't take out these four paintings and hang them. One day, he spread it on the ground. That day, the tall man happened to come to deliver the repaired radio. This kid has very thief eyes, and he has seen it. No one but him! Three houses were given to the Zhu family and four paintings were lost, which was not a big deal, but he Tan Lingxiao did not plant this somersault. This made him lose face and shorten in front of the people in the city. These grass people will definitely point fingers behind his back and chatter. Tan Lingxiao was very angry and hated in his heart: "Good boy, just wait for me!" He quoted the words of Empress Dowager Cixi: "Whoever makes me unhappy, I will tell whoever is unhappy for the rest of my life!" ”高大头知道事情不大妙，但是他还是据理力争，几次找房管处要房子。高宗汉接见了他。这回态度变了，干脆说：“没有！”高大头还是软软和和地说：“没有房子，给我一块地皮也行，我自己盖。”——“你自己盖？你有钱？是你说过：你有八千块钱存款，只要给你一块地皮，盖一所一万块钱的房子，不费事？你说过这话没有？”高大头是曾经夸过这个海口，不知是哪个嘴快的给传到高宗汉耳朵里去了，但是他还是赔着笑脸，说：“那是酒后狂言。”高宗汉板着脸说：“有本事你就盖。地皮没有。就这九平米。你就在这九平米上盖！只要你不多占一分地，你怎么盖都行。盖一座摩天大楼我也不管，随便！就这个话！往后你还别老找我来啰嗦！你有意见？你有本事告我去！告我和谭局长去！我还有事，你请便！”
Gao Datou knew that things were not good, but he still argued for reason, and asked the housing management office for a house several times. Gao Zonghan met him. This time his attitude changed, and he simply said, "No!" The tall head still said softly and kindly: "If you don't have a house, you can give me a piece of land, and I will build it myself." ——"You build it yourself? Do you have money?" You said: You have 8,000 yuan in deposit, as long as you are given a piece of land and build a house for 10,000 yuan, it will not be troublesome? Have you ever said this?" The tall head once praised this Haikou, and I don't know which mouth quickly reached Gao Zonghan's ears, but he still lost his smile and said, "That's drunken rhetoric." Gaozonghan said with a straight face: "If you have the ability, you can build it. There is no land. Just this nine square meters. You build on these nine square meters! As long as you don't occupy more land, you can build it however you want. I don't care if you build a skyscraper, whatever! That's it! Don't keep looking for me to be verbose in the future! Do you have any opinions? You have the ability to sue me! Sue me and Director Tan! I still have something to do, please do it! ”高大头这一天半宵都没有睡着觉，一支接一支地抽烟，抽了多半盒“大运河”。
与此同时，谭凌霄利用盖集体宿舍的名义给自己盖了一所私人住宅。
Gao Datou didn't sleep in the middle of the night that day, smoking one after another, and smoked more than half a box of "Grand Canal". At the same time, Tan Lingxiao used the name of building a collective dormitory to build a private residence for himself.谭凌霄盖住宅的时候，高大头天天到邮局去买报纸，《人民日报》、《文汇报》、《解放日报》、《新华日报》，能买到的都买了来，戴着他的黑边窄片老花镜一张一张地看，用红铅笔划道、剪贴、研究。
When Tan Lingxiao built a house, the tall head went to the post office every day to buy newspapers, "People's Daily", "Wen Wei Po", "Liberation Daily", "Xinhua Daily", and bought everything he could buy, wearing his black-edged narrow-flap reading glasses to read them one by one, drawing, cutting, and studying them with a red pencil.谭凌霄的住宅盖成了。且不说他这所住宅有多大，单说房前的庭院：有一架葡萄、一丛竹子、几块太湖石，还修了一座阶梯式的花台，放得下百多盆菊花。这在本城县一级领导里是少有的。
Tan Lingxiao's residence was built. Not to mention how big his house is, just talk about the courtyard in front of the house: there are grapes, a clump of bamboo, a few Taihu Lake stones, and a stepped flower bed has been built to hold more than 100 pots of chrysanthemums. This is rare among the first-level leaders of this city and county.这一天，谭局长备了三桌酒，邀请熟朋友来聚聚。一来是暖暖他的新居，二来是酬谢这些朋友帮忙出力，提供材料。杯筷已经摆好，凉菜尚未上桌，谭局长正陪同客人在庭前欣赏他的名种菊花，高大头敲门，一头闯了进来。谭凌霄问：“你来干什么？”高大头拿出一卷皮尺，说：“对不起，我量量你们家的房子。”说罢就动起手来。谭凌霄一时不知如何是好，客人也都莫名其妙。高大头非常麻溜利索，眨眼的工夫就量完了。前文交待，他在营造厂干过，干这种事情，是个内行。他收了皮尺，还负手站在一边，陪主人客人一同看了一会菊花。这菊花才真叫菊花！一盆墨菊，乌黑的，花头有高大头的脑袋大！一盆狮子头，花瓣旋拧着，像一团发亮的金黄色的云彩！一盆十丈珠帘，花瓣垂下有一尺多长！高大头知道，这都是从公园里搬来的。这几盆菊花，原来放在公园的暖房里，旁边插着牌子，写着：“非卖品”。等闲人只能隔着玻璃看看。高大头自从菊花开始放瓣的时候，天天去看，太眼熟了。
On this day, Director Tan prepared three tables of wine and invited acquaintances to gather. One is to warm his new home, and the other is to thank these friends for their help and provide materials. The cups and chopsticks had been set up, and the cold dishes had not yet been served, and Director Tan was accompanying the guests to admire his famous chrysanthemums in front of the court. Tan Lingxiao asked, "What are you here for?" The tall head took out a roll of tape measure and said, "I'm sorry, I'll measure your house." After saying that, he started to move. Tan Lingxiao didn't know what to do for a while, and the guests were inexplicable. The tall head was very neat, and he finished measuring in the blink of an eye. As mentioned earlier, he has worked in a construction factory, and he is an expert in doing this kind of thing. He put away the ruler, stood aside with his hands on his back, and looked at the chrysanthemums with the host and guests for a while. This chrysanthemum is really called a chrysanthemum! A pot of ink chrysanthemums, jet black, with a big head and a big head! A pot of lion's head, the petals are twisted, like a shiny golden cloud! A pot of ten-zhang bead curtains, the petals hang down more than a foot long! The tall head knows that this is all moved from the park. These pots of chrysanthemums were originally placed in the warm room of the park, with a sign next to them that read: "Not for sale". Idle people can only look through the glass. The tall head has been looking at it every day since the chrysanthemums began to bloom, and it is so familiar.高大头看完菊花，道了一声“谢谢，饱了眼福”，转身自去。
谭局长这顿饭可没吃好。他心里很不踏实：高大头这小子，量了我的房子，不会有什么好事！
After looking at the chrysanthemums, the tall head said "Thank you, I'm full of eyes", and turned around and left. Director Tan didn't eat this meal well. He felt very uneasy: This tall kid, if he measures my house, nothing good will happen!高大头当晚借了朱雪桥家的堂屋，把谭凌霄假借名义，修盖私人住宅的情况，写了一封群众来信。信中详细描叙了谭宅的尺寸、规格，并和本县许多住房困难的人家作了对比。连夜抄得，天亮付邮，寄给省报。
Gao Datou borrowed the hall of Zhu Xueqiao's family that night, and wrote a letter from the masses about Tan Lingxiao's construction of a private house under the pretense of a name. The letter described in detail the size and specifications of Tan's house, and compared it with many families in the county with housing difficulties. It was copied overnight, mailed at dawn, and sent to the provincial newspaper.过了几天，省报下来了一个记者。
记者住在招待所。
A few days later, a reporter came down from the provincial newspaper. The journalist stayed in the guest house.他本来是来了解本县今年秋收分配情况的，没想到，才打开旅行包，洗了脸，就有人来找他。这些人反映的都是一件事：谭局长修盖私人住宅，没有那回事，这是房管局分配给他的宿舍；高大头是个三开分子，品质恶劣，专门造谣中伤，破坏领导威信。接二连三，络绎不绝（这些人都是谭凌霄在“文化大革命”中的老战友）。记者在编辑部本知道有这样一封群众来信，不过他的任务不是了解此事。这样一来，倒引起了他的注意。他找了本县的几个通讯员和一些群众做了调查，他们都说有这回事。他请高大头到招待所来谈谈，高大头带来了他的那封信的底稿和一张谭凌霄住宅平面图。
He originally came to find out about the distribution of this year's autumn harvest in the county, but he didn't expect that someone came to him after opening his travel bag and washing his face. These people all reflected one thing: Director Tan repaired a private house, there was no such thing, this was the dormitory assigned to him by the housing authority; the tall head is a three-way element, of poor quality, specializing in spreading rumors and slandering and destroying the prestige of the leader. One after another, there was an endless stream (these people were Tan Lingxiao's old comrades-in-arms in the "Cultural Revolution"). The reporter knew that there was such a letter from the masses in the editorial office, but his task was not to understand the matter. In this way, it attracted his attention. He found several correspondents and some people in the county to investigate, and they all said that there was such a thing. He asked Gao Datou to come to the guest house to talk, and Gao Datou brought the draft of his letter and a floor plan of Tan Lingxiao's house.记者把这件事用“本报记者”名义写了一篇报道，带回了报社。
The reporter wrote a report on this matter in the name of "reporter of this newspaper" and brought it back to the newspaper.也活该谭凌霄倒楣，他赶到坎上了，现在正是大抓不正之风的时候。报社决定用这篇稿子。打了清样，寄到本县县委，征求他们的意见，是否同意发表。县委书记看了清样，正在考虑，奚县长正在旁边，说：“这件事你要是压下来，将来问题深化了，你也会被牵扯进去，这是一；如果不同意发表这篇报道，那将来本县的消息要见省报，可就困难了，这是二。”县委书记击案说：“好！同意！”奚县长抓起笔就写了一封复信：
He also deserved Tan Lingxiao's misfortune, he rushed to the hurdle, and now is the time to catch the unhealthy trend. The newspaper decided to use this manuscript. After making a clear sample, it was sent to the county party committee of the county to ask for their opinions and whether to agree to publish it. The secretary of the county party committee looked at the sample and was considering it, and County Magistrate Xi was next to him, and said: "If you suppress this matter, the problem will deepen in the future, and you will also be involved, this is one; if you don't agree to publish this report, then it will be difficult to see the provincial newspaper in the future, this is two." The secretary of the county party committee said: "Okay! Agree! County Magistrate Xi grabbed a pen and wrote a reply:此稿报道情况完全属实，同意发表。这对我们整顿党政作风，很有帮助，特此表示感谢。
报道在省报发表后，全城轰动。很多居民买了鞭炮到大街上来放，好像过年一样。
This report is completely true, and I agree to publish it. This is very helpful to us in rectifying the party and government style, and I would like to express my gratitude. After the report was published in the provincial newspaper, it caused a sensation in the city. Many residents bought firecrackers and put them on the street, as if they were Chinese New Year.高大头当真在他的九平米的地基上盖起了一所新房子（在修建新房时，他借住了朱雪桥原来住的厢房）。这座房子一共三十六平米。他盖了个两楼一底。底层还是九米。上面一层却有十二米。他把上层的楼板向下层的檐外伸出了一截，突出在街面上。紧挨上层，他又向南伸展，盖了一间过街楼，那一头接到朱雪桥家厢房房顶。这间过街楼相当高，楼下可过车辆行人，不碍交通。过街楼有十五平米。这样，高大头家四口人，每人就有九平米，很宽绰了。高大头的儿子就是要结婚，也完全有地方。这两楼一底是高大头自己设计的。他干过营造厂嘛。来来往往的人看了高大头的这所十分别致的房子，都说：“这家伙真是个皮凤三，他硬把九平方米楦成了三十六平方米，神了！”
The tall head really built a new house on his nine-square-meter foundation (when building the new house, he borrowed the wing room where Zhu Xueqiao originally lived). The house has a total of 36 square meters. He built two floors and one bottom. The ground floor is still nine meters. The upper floor is twelve meters. He extended the upper floor slab out of the eaves of the lower floor and protruded on the street. Next to the upper floor, he stretched south and built a crossing building, which connected to the roof of Zhu Xueqiao's wing room. This crossing building is quite high, and vehicles and pedestrians can pass downstairs without obstructing traffic. The crossing building is fifteen square meters. In this way, the tall family of four has nine square meters each, which is very spacious. The tall son is getting married and has a place to go. The bottom of these two floors was designed by the tall head himself. He has worked in a construction factory. People who came and went looked at this very chic house with a tall head, and they all said: "This guy is really a Pi Fengsan, he forced the last of nine square meters into thirty-six square meters, god!" ”谭凌霄、高宗汉忽然在同一天被撤了职。这消息可靠。据财政局的人说，他们自己已接到通知，只是还没有公开宣布。他们这两天已经不到机关上班了。因为要是再去，别人叫他们“局长”、“主任”，答应也不好，不答应也不好。
Tan Lingxiao and Gao Zonghan were suddenly dismissed on the same day. This news is reliable. According to people from the Finance Bureau, they themselves have been notified, but they have not yet announced it publicly. They have not gone to work at the agency in the past two days. Because if they go again, others will call them "director" and "director", and it is not good to agree or not agree.在听到他们俩撤职的消息后，城里人有没有放鞭炮呢？没有。他们是很讲恕道的。
After hearing the news of their dismissal, did the people in the city set off firecrackers? No. They are very forgiving.这二位到底为什么被撤职呢？众说纷纭。有人说是他们在住房问题上对群众刁难勒索，太招恨了；有人说是他们通同作弊，修盖私人住宅；有人说：因为他们是造反派！究竟如何，且听下回分解。
Why were these two dismissed? Accounts differ and opinions vary. Some people say that they are making things difficult and blackmailing the masses on housing issues, which is too hateful; some people say that they cheat and build private houses; some people say: Because they are rebels! How is it, and listen to the next breakdown.一九八一年十二月二十五日

[1] 本篇原载《上海文学》1982年第三期；初收《晚饭花集》，人民文学出版社，1985年3月。

1982年

1982年
钓人的孩子[1]
钓人的孩子
December 25, 1981 [1] This article was originally published in the third issue of "Shanghai Literature" in 1982; "Dinner Flower Collection", People's Literature Publishing House, March 1985. In 1982 Fisherman's Child {{id_0000}} Fishing Children抗日战争时期。昆明大西门外。
米市，菜市，肉市。柴驮子，炭驮子。马粪。粗细瓷碗，砂锅铁锅。焖鸡米线，烧饵块。金钱片腿，牛干巴。炒菜的油烟，炸辣子的呛人的气味。红黄蓝白黑，酸甜苦辣咸。
During the War of Resistance Against Japanese Aggression. Outside the West Gate of Kunming. Rice market, vegetable market, meat market. Firewood pack, charcoal pack. Horse manure. Thick and thin porcelain bowls, casseroles and iron pots. Braised chicken rice noodles, roasted bait cubes. Money sliced legs, beef dry. The fumes of stir-frying, the choking smell of fried peppers. Red, yellow, blue, white, black, sweet, sour, bitter, spicy and salty.每个人带着一生的历史，半个月的哀乐，在街上走。栖栖惶惶，忙忙碌碌。谁都希望意外地发一笔小财，在路上捡到一笔钱。
一张对摺着的钞票躺在人行道上。
Everyone walks on the street with a lifetime of history and half a month of sorrow and joy. Qiqi is panicked and busy. Everyone hopes to make a small fortune unexpectedly and pick up a sum of money on the road. A bill folded in half lies on the sidewalk.用这张钞票可以量五升米，割三斤肉，或扯六尺细白布，——够做一件汗褂，或到大西门里牛肉馆要一盘冷片、一碗汤片、一大碗饭、四两酒，美美地吃一顿。
一个人弯腰去捡钞票。
With this banknote, you can measure five liters of rice, cut three pounds of meat, or pull a six-foot fine white cloth ,—— enough to make a sweat coat, or go to the Daximenli Beef Restaurant to ask for a plate of cold slices, a bowl of soup slices, a large bowl of rice, four taels of wine, and eat a beautiful meal. A man bends over to pick up the bill.噌——，钞票飞进了一家店铺的门里。
一个胖胖的孩子坐在门背后。他把钞票丢在人行道上，钞票上拴了一根黑线，线头捏在他的手里。他偷眼看着钞票，只等有人弯腰来拾，他就猛地一抽线头。
——, money flew into the door of a store. A chubby child sat behind the door. He threw the bill on the sidewalk, and a black thread was tied to the bill, and the thread was pinched in his hand. He stole a glance at the banknote, and when someone bent down to pick it up, he suddenly pulled the thread.他玩着这种捉弄人的游戏，已经玩了半天。上当的已经有好几个人了。
胖孩子满脸是狡猾的笑容。
这是一个小魔鬼。
He has been playing this kind of tricky game for a long time. There are already several people who have been fooled. The fat boy's face was full of sly smiles. This is a little devil.这孩子长大了，将会变成一个什么人呢？日后如果有人提起他的恶作剧，他多半会否认。——也许他真的已经忘了。
捡金子
Who will this child become when he grows up? If someone mentions his pranks in the future, he will most likely deny it. - Maybe he has really forgotten. Picking up gold这是一个怪人，很孤傲，跟谁也不来往，尤其是女同学。他是哲学系的研究生。他只有两个“听众”，都是中文系四年级的学生。他们每天一起坐茶馆，在茶馆里喝清茶，磕葵花子，看书，谈天，骂人。哲学研究生高谈阔论的时候多，那两位只有插话的份儿，所以是“听众”。他们都有点玩世不恭。哲学研究生的玩世不恭是真的，那两位有点是装出来的。他们说话很尖刻，动不动骂人是“卑劣的动物”。他们有一套独特的语言。他们把漂亮的女同学叫做“虎”，把谈恋爱叫做“杀虎”，把钱叫做“刀”。有刀则可以杀虎，无刀则不能。诸如此类。他们都没有杀过一次虎。
This is a strange person, very arrogant, and does not associate with anyone, especially female classmates. He is a graduate student in the Department of Philosophy. He only has two "listeners", both of whom are fourth-year students in the Chinese Department. They sit together in the teahouse every day, drink tea in the teahouse, knock on sunflower seeds, read books, talk about the sky, and scold people. Philosophy graduate students often talk about it, but those two only interject, so they are "listeners". They are both a bit cynical. The cynicism of philosophy graduate students is real, but those two are a bit pretending. They speak very sharply and call people "despicable animals" at every turn. They have a unique set of language. They call beautiful female classmates "tigers", fall in love "killing tigers", and money "knives". If you have a knife, you can kill a tiger, but if you don't have a knife, you can't. Etcetera. None of them have killed a tiger once.这个怪人做过一件怪事，捡金子。昆明经常有日本飞机来空袭。一有空袭就拉警报。一有警报人们就都跑到城外的山野里躲避，叫做“逃警报”。哲学研究生推论：逃警报的人一定会把值钱的东西带在身边，包括金子；有人带金子，就会有人丢掉金子；有人丢掉金子，一定会有人捡到；人会捡到金子；我是人，故我可以捡到金子。这一套逻辑推理实在是无懈可击。于是在逃警报时他就沿路注意。他当真捡到金戒指，而且不止一次，不止一枚。
This strange man did a strange thing, picking up gold. Japanese planes often come to Kunming to carry air raids. As soon as there is an air raid, the alarm is raised. As soon as there is an alarm, people run to the mountains outside the city to hide, which is called "escaping the alarm". The philosophy graduate student reasoned: People who escape the alarm will definitely take valuable things with them, including gold; if someone brings gold, someone will throw away the gold; if someone loses gold, someone will definitely pick it up; people will pick up gold; I am a human being, so I can pick up gold. This set of logical reasoning is really impeccable. So when he was fleeing the alarm, he paid attention along the way. He really picked up a gold ring, and more than once, more than one.此人后来不知所终。
有人说他到了重庆，给《中央日报》写社论，骂共产党。
航空奖券
This person later disappeared. Some people say that when he arrived in Chongqing, he wrote an editorial for the Central Daily and scolded the Communist Party. Airline Tickets国民党的中央政府发行了一种航空救国奖券，头奖二百五十万元，月月开奖。虽然通货膨胀，钞票贬值，这二百五十万元一直还是一个相当大的数目。这就是说，在国民党统治范围的中国，每个月要凭空出现一个财主。花不多的钱，买一个很大的希望，因此人们趋之若鹜，代卖奖券的店铺的生意很兴隆。
The central government of the Kuomintang issued an aviation national salvation lottery ticket, with a jackpot of 2.5 million yuan, which was drawn every month. Although inflation and banknotes depreciated, the 2.5 million yuan has always been a considerable amount. This means that in China, which is ruled by the Kuomintang, a rich man appears out of thin air every month. Spend a little money to buy a big hope, so people flock to it, and the business of the shops selling lottery tickets is very prosperous.中文系学生彭振铎高中毕业后曾教过两年小学，岁数比同班同学都大。他相貌平常，衣装朴素，为人端谨。他除了每月领助学金（当时叫做“贷金”），还在中学兼课，有一点微薄的薪水。他过得很俭省，除了买买书，买肥皂牙膏，从不乱花钱。不抽烟，不饮酒。只有他的一个表哥来的时候，他的生活才有一点变化。这位表哥往来重庆、贵阳、昆明，跑买卖。虽是做生意的人，却不忘情诗书，谈吐不俗。他来了，总是住在爱群旅社，必把彭振铎邀去，洗洗澡，吃吃馆子，然后在旅馆里长谈一夜。谈家乡往事，物价行情，也谈诗。平常，彭振铎总是吃食堂，吃有耗子屎的发霉的红米饭，吃炒芸豆，还有一种叫做芋磨豆腐的紫灰色的烂糊糊的东西。他读书很用功，但是没有一个教授特别赏识他，没有人把他当作才子来看。然而他在内心深处却是一个诗人，一个忠实的浪漫主义者。在中国诗人里他喜欢李商隐，外国诗人里喜欢雪莱，现代作家里喜欢何其芳。他把《预言》和《画梦录》读得几乎能背下来。他自己也不断地写一些格律严谨的诗和满纸烟云的散文。定稿后抄在一个黑漆布面的厚练习本里，抄得很工整。这些作品，偶尔也拿出来给人看，但只限于少数他所钦服而嘴又不太损的同学。同班同学中有一个写小说的，他就请他看过。这位小说家认真地看了一遍，说：“很像何其芳。”
Peng Zhenduo, a Chinese student, taught elementary school for two years after graduating from high school, and was older than his classmates. He has an ordinary appearance, simple clothes, and is dignified. In addition to receiving monthly bursaries (called "loans" at the time), he also taught part-time in middle school and had a meager salary. He lived a frugal life, except for buying books and soap and toothpaste, and never spent money indiscriminately. Don't smoke, don't drink. Only when one of his cousins came, his life changed a little. This cousin travels between Chongqing, Guiyang, and Kunming, running business. Although he is a businessman, he does not forget to love poetry and books, and he talks well. When he came, he always stayed at the Aiqun Hotel, and he would invite Peng Zhenduo to take a bath, eat in a restaurant, and then talk for a long time in the hotel. Talk about the past of his hometown, price quotes, and poetry. Usually, Peng Zhenduo always eats in the cafeteria, eating moldy red rice with rat droppings, fried kidney beans, and a purple-gray mushy thing called taro ground tofu. He studied very hard, but no professor particularly appreciated him, and no one regarded him as a talent. However, deep down he is a poet, a loyal romantic. Among Chinese poets, he likes Li Shangyin, among foreign poets he likes Shelley, and among modern writers, he likes He Qifang. He read "Prophecy" and "Painting Dreams" almost by memory. He himself continued to write some metrical poems and prose full of smoke. After finalizing, it was copied in a thick exercise book with a black lacquer cloth surface, and it was copied very neatly. These works are occasionally taken out for people to see, but only to a few classmates who admire them and whose mouths are not too bad. One of his classmates wrote a novel, and he asked him to read it. The novelist read it carefully and said, "It's very similar to He Qifang." ”然而这位浪漫主义诗人却干了一件不大有诗意的事：他按月购买一条航空奖券。
他买航空奖券不是为了自己。
However, the romantic poet did something not very poetic: he bought an airline ticket per month. He didn't buy airline tickets for himself.系里有个女同学名叫柳曦，长得很漂亮。然而天然不俗，落落大方，不像那些漂亮的或自以为漂亮的女同学整天浓妆艳抹，有明星气、少奶奶气或教会气。她并不怎样着意打扮，总是一件蓝阴丹士林旗袍，——天凉了则加一件玫瑰红的毛衣。她走起路来微微偏着一点脑袋，两只脚几乎走在一条线上，有一种说不出来的风致，真是一株风前柳，不枉了小名儿唤做柳曦。彭振铎和她一同上创作课。她写的散文也极清秀，文如其人，彭振铎自愧弗如。
There is a female classmate in the department named Liu Xi, who is very beautiful. However, she is natural and generous, unlike those female students who are beautiful or think they are beautiful and wear heavy makeup all day long, with a star, a young grandmother or a church spirit. She doesn't pay much attention to dressing up, she always wears a blue yin Dan Shilin cheongsam,—— and a rose red sweater when it's cold. She walked with her head slightly tilted, her feet were almost in a line, and she had an indescribable style. Peng Zhenduo took a creative class with her. The prose she wrote was also very beautiful, and the writing was as good as she was, and Peng Zhenduo was ashamed of herself.尤其使彭振铎动心的是她有一段不幸的身世。有一个男的时常来找她。这个男的比柳曦要大五六岁，有时穿一件藏青哔叽的中山装，有时穿一套咖啡色西服。这是柳曦的未婚夫，在资源委员会当科长。柳曦的婚姻是勉强的。她的父亲早故，家境贫寒。这个男人看上了柳曦，拿钱供柳曦读了中学，又读了大学，还负担她的母亲和弟妹的生活。柳曦在高中一年级就跟他订婚了。她实际上是卖给了这个男人。怪不道彭振铎觉得柳曦的眉头总有点蹙着（虽然这更增加了她的美的深度），而且那位未婚夫来找她，两人一同往外走她总是和他离得远远的。
What particularly touched Peng Zhenduo was that she had an unfortunate life experience. There is a man who often comes to her. This man is five or six years older than Liu Xi, sometimes wearing a navy blue beeping tunic, and sometimes a coffee-colored suit. This is Liu Xi's fiancé, who works as a section chief in the Resources Committee. Liu Xi's marriage was reluctant. Her father died early and her family was poor. This man took a fancy to Liu Xi and took money for Liu Xi to go to middle school, college, and burden her mother and younger siblings. Liu Xi got engaged to him in his first year of high school. She actually sold it to this man. No wonder Peng Zhenduo felt that Liu Xi's brows were always a little frowned (although this added depth to her beauty), and the fiancé came to her, and the two went out together, and she was always far away from him.这是那位写小说的同学告诉彭振铎的。小说家和柳曦是小同乡，中学同学。
This is what the classmate who wrote the novel told Peng Zhenduo. The novelist and Liu Xi are childhood classmates, middle school classmates.彭振铎很不平了。他要搞一笔钱，让柳曦把那个男人在她身上花的钱全部还清，把自己赎出来，恢复自由。于是他就按月购买航空奖券。他老是梦想他中了头奖，把二百五十万元连同那一册诗文一起捧给柳曦。这些诗文都是写给柳曦的。柳曦感动了，流了眼泪。投在他的怀里。
Peng Zhenduo was very upset. He wanted to get a sum of money and ask Liu Xi to pay off all the money the man had spent on her, redeem himself, and restore his freedom. So he bought airline tickets on a monthly basis. He always dreamed that he had won the jackpot and gave 2.5 million yuan to Liu Xi along with that volume of poems. These poems were all written to Liu Xi. Liu Xi was moved and shed tears. Throw it into his arms.彭振铎的表哥又来了。彭振铎去看表哥，顺便买了一条航空奖券。到了爱群旅社，适逢表哥因事外出，留字请他少候。彭振铎躺在床上看书。房门开着。
Peng Zhenduo's cousin is here again. Peng Zhenduo went to see his cousin and bought an airline ticket by the way. When he arrived at the Aiqun Hotel, his cousin was out for some business, so he left a message asking him to wait. Peng Zhenduo was lying on the bed reading. The door was open.彭振铎看见两个人从门外走过，是柳曦和她的未婚夫！他们走进隔壁的房间。不大一会儿，就听见柳曦的放浪的笑声。
彭振铎如遭电殛。
他觉得心里很不是滋味。
Peng Zhenduo saw two people walking outside the door, it was Liu Xi and her fiancé! They walked into the next room. After a while, I heard Liu Xi's unbridled laughter. Peng Zhenduo felt as if he had been struck by lightning. He felt very uncomfortable.而且他渐渐觉得柳曦的不幸的身世、勉强的婚姻，都是那个写小说的同学编出来的。这个玩笑开得可太大了！
他怎么坐得住呢？只有走。
And he gradually felt that Liu Xi's unfortunate life experience and reluctant marriage were all made up by the classmate who wrote the novel. This joke is too big! How can he sit still? Only go.他回到宿舍，把那一册诗文翻出来看看。他并没有把它们烧掉。这些诗文虽然几乎篇篇都有柳，柳风、柳影、柳絮、杨花、浮萍……但并未点出柳曦的名字。留着，将来有机会献给另外一个人，也还是可以的。
He returned to the dormitory and turned out the poems to read. He didn't burn them. Although almost all of these poems have willows, willow wind, willow shadows, willow catkins, poplars, and duckweed...... But Liu Xi's name was not named. If you keep it, you will have the opportunity to dedicate it to another person in the future, and it is still possible.航空奖券，他还是按月买，因为已经成了习惯。
一九八二年二月二日

[1] 本篇原载《海燕》1982年第四期；初收《晚饭花集》，人民文学出版社，1985年3月。

鉴赏家

鉴赏家[1]
He still buys airline tickets on a monthly basis because it has become a habit. February 2, 1982 [1] This article was originally published in the fourth issue of "Haiyan" in 1982; First received "Dinner Flower Collection", People's Literature Publishing House, March 1985. Connoisseur[1]全县第一个大画家是季匋民，第一个鉴赏家是叶三。
The first great painter in the county was Ji Kuimin, and the first connoisseur was Ye San.叶三是个卖果子的。他这个卖果子的和别的卖果子的不一样。不是开铺子的，不是摆摊的，也不是挑着担子走街串巷的。他专给大宅门送果子。也就是给二三十家送。这些人家他走得很熟，看门的和狗都认识他。到了一定的日子，他就来了。里面听到他敲门的声音，就知道：是叶三。挎着一个金丝篾篮，篮子上插一把小秤，他走进堂屋，扬声称呼主人。主人有时走出来跟他见见面，有时就隔着房门说话。“给您称——？”——“五斤”。什么果子，是看也不用看的，因为到了什么节令送什么果子都是一定的。叶三卖果子从不说价。买果子的人家也总不会亏待他。有的人家当时就给钱，大多数是到节下（端节、中秋、新年）再说。叶三把果子称好，放在八仙桌上，道一声“得罪”，就走了。他的果子不用挑，个个都是好的。他的果子的好处，第一是得四时之先。市上还没有见这种果子，他的篮子里已经有了。第二是都很大，都均匀，很香，很甜，很好看。他的果子全都从他手里过过，有疤的、有虫眼的、挤筐、破皮、变色、过小的全都剔下来，贱价卖给别的果贩。他的果子都是原装；有些是直接到产地采办来的，都是“树熟”，——不是在米糠里闷熟了的。他经常出外，出去买果子比他卖果子的时间要多得多。他也很喜欢到处跑。四乡八镇，哪个园子里，什么人家，有一棵什么出名的好果树，他都知道，而且和园主打了多年交道，熟得像是亲家一样了。——别的卖果子的下不了这样的功夫，也不知道这些路道。到处走，能看很多好景致，知道各地乡风，可资谈助，对身体也好。他很少得病，就是因为路走得多。
Ye San is a fruit seller. He is a fruit seller and other fruit sellers. He is not a shopkeeper, a stall, or a burden walking through the streets. He specializes in delivering fruit to the door of the mansion. That is, to twenty or thirty families. He was very familiar with these people, and the gatekeepers and dogs knew him. On a certain day, he came. When he heard him knocking on the door, he knew: It was Ye San. Carrying a gold silk basket and a small scale stuck in the basket, he walked into the hall and claimed to be the master. Sometimes the master came out to meet him, and sometimes he spoke through the door. "Weigh ——? you" ——"Five pounds". You don't have to look at any fruit, because what fruit is given in any season. Ye San never bargains when selling fruit. People who buy fruit will never treat him badly. Some people give money at that time, and most of them talk about it after the festival (Dragon Festival, Mid-Autumn Festival, New Year). Ye San weighed the fruit, put it on the table of the Eight Immortals, said "offended", and left. His fruits don't need to be picked, they are all good. The first advantage of his fruit is that it has to be four seasons ahead. I haven't seen this kind of fruit on the market yet, but he already has it in his basket. The second is that they are all very large, uniform, fragrant, sweet, and beautiful. All his fruits have passed through his hands, and those with scars, insect eyes, squeezed baskets, broken skins, discoloration, and small ones are all removed and sold to other fruit vendors at a low price. His fruits are all original; some are purchased directly from the place of origin, and they are all "ripe",—— not stuffed in the rice bran. He often goes out and spends much more time buying fruit than he sells fruit. He also likes to run around. He knows all the four towns and eight towns, which garden, what kind of person, and what good fruit tree is famous, and he has dealt with the owner for many years, and he is as ripe as his in-laws. ——Other fruit sellers can't do such effort, and they don't know these roads. Walking around, you can see a lot of good scenery, know the local customs of various places, and you can talk about help, which is good for your health. He rarely gets sick because he walks a lot.立春前后，卖青萝卜。“棒打萝卜”，摔在地下就裂开了。杏子、桃子下来时卖鸡蛋大的香白杏，白得像一团雪，只嘴儿以下有一根红线的“一线红”蜜桃。再下来是樱桃，红的像珊瑚，白的像玛瑙。端午前后，枇杷。夏天卖瓜。七八月卖河鲜：鲜菱、鸡头、莲蓬、花下藕。卖马牙枣，卖葡萄。重阳近了，卖梨：河间府的鸭梨、莱阳的半斤酥，还有一种叫做“黄金坠子”的香气扑人个儿不大的甜梨。菊花开过了，卖金橘，卖蒂部起脐子的福州蜜橘。入冬以后，卖栗子、卖山药（粗如小儿臂）、卖百合（大如拳）、卖碧绿生鲜的檀香橄榄。
Before and after the beginning of spring, sell green radish. "Stick the radish" and crack when it falls to the ground. When apricots and peaches come down, they sell egg-sized fragrant white apricots, as white as a ball of snow, and a "line of red" peaches with a red line below their mouths. Then there are cherries, red like coral, white like agate. Before and after the Dragon Boat Festival, loquats. Sell melons in summer. Sell river fresh in July and August: fresh water chestnuts, chicken heads, lotus pods, and lotus roots. Sell horse tooth dates and grapes. The Double Ninth Festival is approaching, selling pears: duck pears in Hejian Prefecture, half a pound of crisps in Laiyang, and a sweet pear with a small aroma called "golden pendant". Chrysanthemums have bloomed, selling kumquats, and Fuzhou tangerines with navels. After winter, chestnuts, yam (as thick as a child's arm), lilies (as big as a fist), and green and fresh sandalwood olives are sold.他还卖佛手、香橼。人家买去，配架装盘，书斋清供，闻香观赏。
不少深居简出的人，是看到叶三送来的果子，才想起现在是什么节令了的。
He also sells bergamot and citron. People buy them, put them on a rack, and offer them in the study, smell the fragrance and enjoy it. Many people who live in seclusion remember what season it is now when they see the fruit sent by Ye San.叶三卖了三十多年果子，他的两个儿子都成人了。他们都是学布店的，都出了师了。老二是三柜，老大已经升为二柜了。谁都认为老大将来是会升为头柜，并且会当管事的。他天生是一块好材料。他是店里头一把算盘，年终结总时总得由他坐在账房里哔哔剥剥打好几天。接待厂家的客人，研究进货（进货是个大学问，是一年的大计，下年多进哪路货，少进哪路货，哪些必须常备，哪些可以试销，关系全年的盈亏），都少不了他。老二也很能干。量尺、撕布（撕布不用剪子开口，两手的两个指头夹着，借一点巧劲，嗤——的一声，布就撕到头了），干净利落。店伙的动作快慢，也是一个布店的招牌。顾客总愿意从手脚麻利的店伙手里买布。这是天分，也靠练习。有人就一辈子都是迟钝笨拙，改不过来。不管干哪一行，都是人比人，这是没有办法的事。弟兄俩都长得很神气，眉清目秀，不高不矮。布店的店伙穿得都很好。什么料子时新，他们就穿什么料子。他们的衣料当然是价廉物美的。他们买衣料是按进货价算的，不加利润；若是零头，还有折扣。这是布店的规矩，也是老板乐为之的。因为店伙穿得时髦，也是给店里装门面的事。有的顾客来买布，常常指着店伙的长衫或翻在外面的短衫的袖子：“照你这样的，给我来一件。”
Ye San has been selling fruit for more than 30 years, and his two sons are adults. They are all from the cloth shop and have all gone out of school. The second child is the third cabinet, and the eldest has been promoted to the second cabinet. Everyone thinks that the boss will be promoted to the head cabinet in the future and will be a steward. He is a good material by nature. He is the first abacus in the store, and at the end of the year, he always has to sit in the account room and beep for several days. He is indispensable for receiving customers from manufacturers and studying purchases (purchasing goods is a university question, it is a year's plan, which goods to buy more next year, which goods to buy less, which must be prepared, which can be tested and sold, and which are related to the profit and loss of the whole year). The second child is also very capable. Measuring tape and tearing cloth (tearing cloth does not need to be opened with scissors, two fingers of both hands are clamped, borrow a little skill, snort, and the cloth will be torn to the head), clean and neat. The fast and slow movements of the shopkeeper are also the signature of a cloth shop. Customers are always willing to buy cloth from the hands of the shopkeeper who is quick-witted. This is talent and practice. Some people are dull and clumsy all their lives and cannot be changed. No matter which line of work you do, you are better than others, and there is nothing you can do. Both brothers are very spirited, with clear eyebrows and handsome eyebrows, neither tall nor short. The shopkeepers in the cloth shop are all very well-dressed. They wear whatever material is new. Of course, their clothing is cheap and high-quality. They buy clothes based on the purchase price, without adding profit; If it is a fraction, there is a discount. This is the rule of the cloth shop, and it is also the boss who is happy to do it. Because the shopkeeper is dressed fashionably, it is also a matter of decorating the store. Some customers come to buy cloth, often pointing to the sleeves of the shopkeeper's long shirt or short shirt turned out: "If you are like this, give me one." ”弟兄俩都已经成了家，老大已经有一个孩子，——叶三抱孙子了。
这年是叶三五十岁整生日，一家子商量怎么给老爷子做寿。老大老二都提出爹不要走宅门卖果子了，他们养得起他。
叶三有点生气了：
Both brothers have become a family, and the eldest already has a child,—— Ye San has a grandson. This year is Ye San's fiftieth birthday, and the family discussed how to celebrate the old man's birthday. The eldest and second brothers both proposed that their father should not go to the house to sell fruit, and they could afford to support him. Ye San was a little angry:“嫌我给你们丢人？两位大布店的‘先生’，有一个卖果子的老爹，不好看？”
儿子连忙解释：
“不是的。你老人家岁数大了，老在外面跑，风里雨里，水路旱路，做儿子的心里不安。”
"Do you think I'm embarrassing for you? The two 'gentlemen' of the big cloth shop have a father who sells fruit, not good-looking? ” The son quickly explained: "No. Your old man is old, always running outside, in the wind and rain, on the dry road, and the heart of a son is uneasy. ”“我跑惯了。我给这些人家送惯了果子。就为了季四太爷一个人，我也得卖果子。”
季四太爷即季匋民。他大排行是老四，城里人都称之为四太爷。
"I'm used to running. I'm used to giving fruit to these people. Just for Mr. Ji Si alone, I also have to sell fruit. ” Ji Si Taiye is Ji Kuimin. He is the fourth oldest, and the people in the city call him the fourth grandfather.“你们也不用给我做什么寿。你们要是有孝心，把四太爷送我的画拿出去裱了，再给我打一口寿材。”这里有这样一种风俗，早早就把寿材准备下了，为的讨个吉利：添福添寿。于是就都依了他。
叶三还是卖果子。
"You don't have to give me any longevity. If you are filial, take out the painting given to me by the fourth grandfather and frame it, and give me a mouthful of longevity materials. "There is such a custom here that the longevity materials are prepared early in order to seek good luck: blessings and longevity. So they all followed him. Ye San still sells fruit.他真是为了季匋民一个人卖果子的。他给别人家送果子是为了挣钱，他给季匋民送果子是为了爱他的画。
He really sold fruit for Ji Kumin alone. He gave fruit to other people's families to make money, and he gave fruit to Ji Kuomin to love his paintings.季匋民有一个脾气，一边画画，一边喝酒。喝酒不就菜，就水果。画两笔，凑着壶嘴喝一大口酒，左手拈一片水果，右手执笔接着画。画一张画要喝二斤花雕，吃斤半水果。
Ji Kuomin has a temper, painting and drinking at the same time. Drinking is not about food, it's about fruit. Draw two strokes, take a big sip of wine with the spout of the pot, hold a piece of fruit in your left hand, and continue drawing with a pen in your right hand. To draw a painting, you need to drink two pounds of flower carvings and eat a pound and a half of fruit.叶三搜罗到最好的水果，总是首先给季匋民送去。
Ye San collected the best fruits and always sent them to Ji Kuimin first.季匋民每天一起来就走进他的小书房——画室。叶三不须通报，由一个小六角门进去，走过一条碎石铺成的冰花曲径，隔窗看见季匋民，就提着、捧着他的鲜果走进去。
“四太爷，枇杷，白沙的！”
Ji Kuomin came together every day and walked into his small study, the studio. Ye San didn't need to report, he entered through a small hexagonal door, walked through a gravel ice flower winding path, and saw Ji Kumin through the window, so he carried and held his fresh fruit in. "Fourth grandfather, loquat, white sand!"“四太爷，东墩的西瓜，三白！——这种三白瓜有点梨花香味，别处没有！”
"Fourth grandfather, the watermelon of Dongdun, three whites! ——This kind of three white melons have a bit of pear blossom fragrance, and there is no other place! ”他给季匋民送果子，一来就是半天。他给季匋民磨墨、漂朱膘、研石青石绿，抻纸。季匋民画的时候，他站在旁边很入神地看，专心致意，连大气都不出。有时看到精采处，就情不自禁的深深吸一口气，甚至小声地惊呼起来。凡是叶三吸气、惊呼的地方，也正是季匋民的得意之笔。季匋民从不当众作画，他画画有时是把书房门锁起来的。对叶三可例外，他很愿意有这样一个人在旁边看着，他认为叶三真懂，叶三的赞赏是出于肺腑，不是假充内行，也不是谀媚。
He gave Ji Kumin fruit, and it took half a day. He grinded ink, bleached vermilion, ground stone bluestone, and twisted paper. When Ji Kuimin painted, he stood next to him and looked at it very attentively, concentrating on it, and didn't even let out the atmosphere. Sometimes when I see the highlights, I can't help but take a deep breath, and even exclaim in a low voice. Wherever Ye San inhales and exclaims, it is also Ji Kuimin's proud brush. Ji Kuomin never paints in public, and he sometimes locks the door of his study when he paints. He thinks that Ye San really understands, Ye San's appreciation comes from the heart, not pretending to be an expert, nor flattering.季匋民最讨厌听人谈画。他很少到亲戚家应酬。实在不得不去的，他也是到一到，喝半盏茶就道别。因为席间必有一些假名士高谈阔论。因为季匋民是大画家，这些名士就特别爱在他面前评书论画，借以卖弄自己高雅博学。这种议论全都是道听途说，似通不通。季匋民听了，实在难受。他还知道，他如果随声答音，应付几句，某一名士就会在别的应酬场所重贩他的高论，且说：“兄弟此言，季匋民亦深为首肯。”
Ji Kuimin hates listening to people talk about paintings. He rarely goes to relatives' houses to socialize. He really had to go, and he also said goodbye after drinking half a cup of tea when he arrived. Because there must be some pseudo-celebrities talking about it during the banquet. Because Ji Kuimin is a great painter, these celebrities especially love to comment on books and paintings in front of him to show off their elegance and erudition. This kind of discussion is all hearsay and seems to make sense. Ji Kuimin was really uncomfortable when he heard it. He also knew that if he answered with the sound and responded to a few words, a certain scholar would resell his high theories in other entertainment venues, and said: "Brother, Ji Kuomin also deeply agreed. ”但是他对叶三另眼相看。
But he looked at Ye San differently.季匋民最佩服李复堂[2]。他认为扬州八怪里李复堂功力最深，大幅小品都好，有笔有墨，也奔放，也严谨，也浑厚，也秀润，而且不装模作样，没有江湖气。有一天叶三给他送来四开李复堂的册页，使季匋民大吃一惊：这四开册页是真的！季匋民问他是多少钱买的，叶三说没花钱。他到三垛贩果子，看见一家的橱柜的玻璃里镶了四幅画，——他在四太爷这里看过不少李复堂的画，能辨认，他用四张“苏州片”[3]跟那家换了。“苏州片”花花绿绿的，又是簇新的，那家还很高兴。
Ji Kuomin admired Li Futang the most[2]. He believes that Li Futang has the deepest skills among the Eight Monsters in Yangzhou, and the large sketches are good, with pen and ink, unrestrained, rigorous, thick, and beautiful, and not pretending, no jianghu atmosphere. One day, Ye San sent him four pages of Li Futang, which surprised Ji Futang: These four pages are real! Ji Kuimin asked him how much he bought it, and Ye San said that he didn't spend any money. He went to the three stacks to sell fruit and saw four paintings inlaid in the glass of a cabinet,—— he had seen a lot of Li Futang's paintings from the fourth grandfather, and he could recognize it, and he exchanged four "Suzhou pieces" [3] with that one. The "Suzhou film" is colorful and new, and the family is still very happy.叶三只是从心里喜欢画，他从不瞎评论。季匋民画完了画，钉在壁上，自己负手远看，有时会问叶三：
“好不好？”
“好！”
“好在哪里？”
叶三大都能一句话说出好在何处。
Ye San just likes to paint from the bottom of his heart, and he never comments blindly. After Ji Kuomin finished painting, he nailed it to the wall, looked at it from a distance, and sometimes asked Ye San: "Is it okay?" "Okay!" "What's good?" Ye San can tell what is good in one sentence.季匋民画了一幅紫藤，问叶三。
叶三说：“紫藤里有风。”
“唔！你怎么知道？”
“花是乱的。”
“对极了！”
季匋民提笔题了两句词：
“深院悄无人，风拂紫藤花乱。”
Ji Kuomin drew a wisteria and asked Ye San. Ye San said: "There is wind in the wisteria. ” "Hmm! How do you know? ” "Flowers are messy." "That's right!" Ji Kuomin wrote two sentences: "The deep courtyard is quiet and uninhabited, and the wind blows the wisteria flowers."季匋民画了一张小品，老鼠上灯台。叶三说：“这是一只小老鼠。”
“何以见得。”
“老鼠把尾巴卷在灯台柱上。它很顽皮。”
“对！”
Ji Kuomin drew a sketch of a mouse on the lampstand. Ye San said: "This is a little mouse." ” "How can I see it?" "The mouse curled its tail on the lampstand post. It was naughty. ” "Yes!"季匋民最爱画荷花。他画的都是墨荷。他佩服李复堂，但是画风和复堂不似。李画多凝重，季匋民飘逸。李画多用中锋，季匋民微用侧笔，——他写字写的是章草。李复堂有时水墨淋漓，粗头乱眼，意在笔先；季匋民没有那样的恣悍，他的画是大写意，但总是笔意俱到，收拾得很干净，而且笔致疏朗，善于利用空白。他的墨荷参用了张大千，但更为舒展。他画的荷叶不勾筋，荷梗不点刺，且喜作长幅，荷梗甚长，一笔到底。
Ji Kuomin loves to paint lotus flowers. He paints ink lotus. He admires Li Futang, but his painting style is not similar to Futang. Li painting is more dignified, and Ji Kuomin is elegant. Li Huimin mostly uses the center, Ji Kuimin uses a side pen,—— he writes in zhangcao. Li Futang sometimes has dripping ink, thick heads and eyes, and the intention is to write first; Ji Kuimin is not so arrogant, his paintings are freehand, but they are always well-thought-out, clean, and the brushwork is sparse, and he is good at using blanks. His ink lotus refers to Zhang Daqian, but it is more stretched. The lotus leaves he paints do not hook the tendons, the lotus stems do not thorn, and he likes to make long paintings, with long lotus stems, and he is good at using blank spaces.有一天，叶三送了一大把莲蓬来，季匋民一高兴，画了一幅墨荷，好些莲蓬。画完了，问叶三：“如何？”
叶三说：“四太爷，你这画不对。”
“不对？”
One day, Ye San sent a large handful of lotus pods, and Ji Kuomin was so happy that he painted a picture of ink lotus and lotus pods. After painting, he asked Ye San: "How?" ” Ye San said: "Fourth Master, your painting is not right." ” "Isn't it?"“‘红花莲子白花藕’。你画的是白荷花，莲蓬却这样大，莲子饱，墨色也深，这是红荷花的莲子。”
“是吗？我头一回听见！”
季匋民于是展开一张八尺生宣，画了一张红莲花，题了一首诗：
"'Red lotus seed white lotus'. You are painting a white lotus, but the lotus pod is so big, the lotus seeds are full, and the ink is dark, this is the lotus seeds of the red lotus. ” "Really? This is the first time I've heard it! ” Ji Kuomin then unfolded an eight-foot proclamation, drew a red lotus, and inscribed a poem:“红花莲子白花藕，
“红花莲子白花藕，果贩叶三是我师。
果贩叶三是我师。惭愧画家少见识，
惭愧画家少见识，为君破例著胭脂。”
为君破例著胭脂。 ”季匋民送了叶三很多画。——有时季匋民画了一张画，不满意，团掉了。叶三捡起来，过些日子送给季匋民看看，季匋民觉得也还不错，就略改改，加了题，又送给了叶三。季匋民送给叶三的画都是题了上款的。叶三也有个学名。他五行缺水，起名润生。季匋民给他起了个字，叫泽之。送给叶三的画上，常题“泽之三兄雅正”。有时径题“画与叶三”。季匋民还向他解释：以排行称呼，是古人风气，不是看不起他。
Ji Kuomin gave Ye San a lot of paintings. ——Sometimes Ji Kuomin painted a painting, was not satisfied, and the group fell. Ye San picked it up and gave it to Ji Kuomin to see it in a few days, Ji Kuomin thought it was not bad, so he changed it slightly, added a title, and gave it to Ye San. The paintings that Ji Kuimin gave to Ye San were all inscribed with the above paragraph. Ye San also has a scientific name. He lacked water in the five elements and was named Runsheng. Ji Kuimin gave him a word, called Zezhi. The painting given to Ye San is often inscribed "Zezhi Third Brother Yazheng". Sometimes the title is "Painting and Ye San". Ji Kuomin also explained to him: Calling him by ranking is the custom of the ancients, not looking down on him.有时季匋民给叶三画了画，说：“这张不题上款吧，你可以拿去卖钱，——有上款不好卖。”
叶三说：“题不题上款都行。不过您的画我不卖。”
“不卖？”
“一张也不卖！”
Sometimes Ji Kuomin drew a picture for Ye San and said, "This one is not inscribed, you can use it to sell for money,—— it is not easy to sell if there is a payment." ” Ye San said: "It's okay to write or not. But I won't sell your paintings." ” "Don't sell?" "Don't sell a single one!"他把季匋民送他的画都放在他的棺材里。
十多年过去了。
季匋民死了。叶三已经不卖果子，但是他四季八节，还四处寻觅鲜果，到季匋民坟上供一供。
He put all the paintings Ji Kuomin gave him in his coffin. More than ten years have passed. Ji Kuimin died. Ye San no longer sells fruit, but he still looks for fresh fruit in all seasons and eight festivals, and goes to Ji Kuimin's grave to make a offering.季匋民死后，他的画价大增。日本有人专门收藏他的画。大家知道叶三手里有很多季匋民的画，都是精品。很多人想买叶三的藏画。叶三说：
“不卖。”
有一天有一个外地人来拜望叶三，叶三看了他的名片，这人的姓很奇怪，姓“辻”，叫“辻听涛”。一问，是日本人。辻听涛说他是专程来看他收藏的季匋民的画的。
One day, a foreigner came to visit Ye San, Ye San looked at his business card, this person's surname was very strange, his surname was "Tsuji", his name was "Tsuji Tingtao". When asked, it was Japanese. Tsuji heard Tao say that he made a special trip to see his collection of Ji Kuimin's paintings.因为是远道来的，叶三只得把画拿出来。辻听涛非常虔诚，要了清水洗了手，焚了一炷香，还先对画轴拜了三拜，然后才展开。他一边看，一边不停地赞叹：
“喔！喔！真好！真是神品！”
Because he came from afar, Ye San had to take out the painting. Tsuji Tingtao was very religious, asked for water to wash his hands, burned a stick of incense, and bowed three times to the scroll before unfolding. As he watched, he kept praising: "Oh! Oh! That's nice! What a divine product! ”辻听涛要买这些画，要多少钱都行。
叶三说：
“不卖。”
辻听涛只好怅然而去。
叶三死了。他的儿子遵照父亲的遗嘱，把季匋民的画和父亲一起装在棺材里，埋了。
一九八二年二月二十八日
Tsuji Tingtao wants to buy these paintings, no matter how much he wants. Ye San said: "Not for sale." Tsuji listened to Tao and had no choice but to leave. Ye San died. His son followed his father's will and put Ji Kumin's painting in a coffin with his father and buried it. February 28, 1982
[1] 本篇原载《北京文学》1982年第五期；初收《晚饭花集》，人民文学出版社，1985年3月。
[1] This article was originally published in the fifth issue of "Beijing Literature" in 1982; "Dinner Flower Collection", People's Literature Publishing House, March 1985.[2] 李复堂，名，字宗扬，复堂是他的号，又号懊道人。他是康熙年间的举人，当过滕县知县，因为得罪上级，功名和官都被革掉了，终年只作画师。他作画有时得向郑板桥去借纸，大概是相当穷困的。他本画工笔，是宫廷画家蒋廷锡的高足。后到扬州，改画写意，师法高其佩，受徐青藤、八大、石涛的影响，风度大变，自成一家。
[2] Li Futang, named , the character Zongyang, Futang is his number, also known as the Taoist priest. He was a scholar during the Kangxi period, and he was the magistrate of Teng County, but because he offended his superiors, his fame and official were dismissed, and he only worked as a painter all year round. He sometimes had to borrow paper from Zheng Banqiao to paint, and he was probably quite poor. He is a painter and a court painter Jiang Tingxi. Later, he went to Yangzhou, changed his painting freehand, and his teacher was highly respected, influenced by Xu Qingteng, Bada, and Shi Tao, his demeanor changed greatly, and he became a family of his own.[3] 仿旧的画，多为工笔花鸟，设色娇艳，旧时多为苏州画工所作，行销各地，故称“苏州片”。苏州片也有仿制得很好的，并不俗气。

王四海的黄昏

王四海的黄昏[1]
[3] The distressed paintings are mostly gongbi flowers and birds, with delicate colors, and in the old days, they were mostly made by Suzhou painters and sold all over the world, so they were called "Suzhou films". Suzhou films are also well imitated and not tacky. Wang Sihai's Twilight[1]北门外有一条承志河。承志河上有一道承志桥，是南北的通道，每天往来行人很多。这是座木桥，相当的宽。这桥的特别处是上面有个顶子，不方不圆而长，形状有点像一个船篷。桥两边有栏杆，栏杆下有宽可一尺的长板，就形成两排靠背椅。夏天，常有人坐在上面歇脚、吃瓜；下雨天，躲雨。人们很喜欢这座桥。
There is a Chengzhi River outside the north gate. There is a Chengzhi Bridge on the Chengzhi River, which is a north-south passage, and there are many pedestrians coming and going every day. This is a wooden bridge, quite wide. The special thing about this bridge is that there is a top on it, which is neither square nor round but long, and the shape is a bit like a canopy. There are railings on both sides of the bridge, and there are long boards about a foot wide under the railing, forming two rows of back chairs. In summer, people often sit on it to rest and eat melons; on rainy days, take shelter from the rain. People like this bridge very much.桥南是一片旷地。据说早先这里是有人家的，后来一把火烧得精光，就再也没有人来盖房子。这不知是哪一年的事了。现在只是一片平地，有一点像一个校场。这就成了放风筝、踢毽子的好地方。小学生放了学，常到这里来踢皮球。把几个书包往两边一放，这就是球门。奔跑叫喊了一气，滚得一身都是土。不知是谁喊了一声：“回家吃饭啰！”于是提着书包，紧紧裤子，一窝蜂散去。
The south of the bridge is an open land. It is said that there were houses here earlier, but later a fire burned out, and no one came to build a house again. I don't know what year it was. Now it's just a flat land, a bit like a school field. This has become a good place to fly kites and kick shuttlecocks. After school, elementary school students often come here to play ball. Put a few schoolbags on both sides, and this is the goal. ran and shouted, rolling all over the ground. I don't know who shouted: "Go home for dinner!" So he carried his schoolbag, tightened his pants, and dispersed in a swarm.这又是各种卖艺人作场的地方。耍猴的。猴能爬旗杆，还能串戏——自己打开箱子盖，自己戴帽子，戴胡子。最好看的是猴子戴了“鬼脸”——面具，穿一件红袄，帽子上还有两根野鸡毛，骑羊。老绵羊围着场子飞跑，颈项里挂了一串铜铃，哗稜稜稜地响。耍木头人戏的，老是那一出：《王香打虎》。王香的父亲上山砍柴，被老虎吃了。王香赶去，把老虎打死，从老虎的肚子里把父亲拉出来。父亲活了。父子两人抱在一起——完了。王香知道父亲被老虎吃了，感情很激动。那表达的方式却颇为特别：把一个木头脑袋在“台”口的栏杆上磕碰，碰得笃笃地响，“嘴”里“呜丢丢，呜丢丢”地哭诉着。这大概是所谓“呼天抢地”吧。围看的大人和小孩也不知看了多少次《王香打虎》了（王香已经打了八百年的老虎了，——从宋朝算起），但当看到王香那样激烈地磕碰木头脑袋，还是会很有兴趣地哄笑起来。耍把戏。……——！铜锣声切住。“在家靠父母，出外靠朋友。有钱的帮个钱场子，没钱的帮着人场子。”——“小把戏！玩几套？”——“玩三套！”于是一个瘦骨伶仃的孩子，脱光了上衣（耍把戏多是冬天），两手握着一根小棍，把两臂从后面撅——撅——撅，直到有人“哗叉哗叉”——投出铜钱，这才撅过来。一到要表演“大卸八块”了，有的妇女就急忙丢下几个钱，神色紧张地掉头走了。有时，腊月送灶以后，旷场上立起两根三丈长的杉篙，当中又横搭一根，人们就知道这是来了耍“大把戏”的，大年初一，要表演“三上吊”了。所谓“三上吊”，是把一个女孩的头发（长发，原来梳着辫子），用烧酒打湿，在头顶心攥紧，系得实实的；头发挽扣，一根长绳，掏进发扣，用滑车拉上去，这女孩就吊在半空中了。下面的大人，把这女孩来回推晃，女孩子就在半空中悠动起来。除了做寒鸭凫水、童子拜观音等等动作外，还要做脱裤子、穿裤子的动作。这女孩子穿了八条裤子，在空中把七条裤子一条一条脱下，又一条一条穿上。这女孩子悠过来，悠过去，就是她那一把头发拴在绳子上……
This is also a place where all kinds of artists work. Monkey. Monkeys can climb flagpoles and play - open the lid of the box by themselves, wear a hat and a beard. The best thing to see is that the monkey wears a "grimace" - a mask, wears a red jacket, and has two pheasant feathers on the hat, riding a sheep. The old sheep flew around the field, with a string of bronze bells hanging around their necks, ringing loudly. The wooden man play is always the one: "Wang Xiang Fights the Tiger". Wang Xiang's father went up the mountain to chop wood and was eaten by a tiger. Wang Xiang rushed over, beat the tiger to death, and pulled his father out of the tiger's belly. The father is alive. The father and son hugged each other - it's over. Wang Xiang knew that his father was eaten by a tiger, and he was very excited. The way of expression is quite special: bumping a wooden head on the railing at the entrance of the "stage", making a bang, crying in the "mouth". This is probably the so-called "crying out to the sky and grabbing the earth". The adults and children watching don't know how many times they have watched "Wang Xiang Fights the Tiger" (Wang Xiang has been fighting tigers for 800 years,—— counting from the Song Dynasty), but when they see Wang Xiang bumping on the wooden head so violently, they will still laugh with great interest. Tricks.    ……   ——！ The sound of the gong cuts. "Rely on your parents at home and rely on your friends when you go out. Those who have money help the money, and those who don't have money help others." ——"Little tricks! How many sets to play?" ——"Play three sets!" So a skinny child, stripped off his shirt (most of the tricks were played in winter), held a small stick in both hands, and pouted his arms from behind, until someone "pouted" - threw out copper coins, and then pouted. When it was time to perform "unloading eight yuan", some women hurriedly dropped a few coins and turned around and left nervously. Sometimes, after the stove is sent in the twelfth lunar month, two three-foot-long fir poles are erected in the open field, and one is placed horizontally in the middle, and people know that this is a "big trick", and on the first day of the Lunar New Year, it is going to perform "three hangings". The so-called "three hangings" is to wet a girl's hair (long hair, originally braided), squeeze it tightly on the top of her head, and tie it tightly; the hair is buttoned, a long rope, pulled into the hair buckle, pulled up with a pulley, and the girl is hanging in mid-air. The adults below pushed the girl back and forth, and the girl moved leisurely in mid-air. In addition to doing actions such as cold ducks and duck water, and children worshiping Guanyin, they also had to take off their pants and put them on. The girl wore eight pairs of pants, took off the seven pants one by one in the air, and put them on one by one. The girl came over, and it was her hair tied to the rope......到了有卖艺人作场，承志桥南的旷场周围就来了许多卖吃食的。卖烂藕的，卖煮荸荠的，卖牛肉高粱酒，卖回卤豆腐干，卖豆腐脑的，吆吆喝喝，异常热闹。还有卖梨膏糖的。梨膏糖是糖稀、白砂糖，加一点从药店里买来的梨膏熬制成的，有一点梨香。一块有半个火柴盒大，一分厚，一块一块在一方木板上摆列着。卖梨膏糖的总有个四脚交叉的架子，上铺木板，还装饰着一些绒球、干电池小灯泡。卖梨膏糖全凭唱。他有那么一个六角形的小手风琴。本地人不识手风琴，管那玩意叫“呜哩哇”，因为这东西只能发出这样三个声音。卖梨膏糖的把木架支好，就拉起“呜哩哇”唱起来：
When there were artists selling the field, there were many people selling food around the open field south of Chengzhi Bridge. Those who sell rotten lotus root, boiled water chestnuts, beef and sorghum wine, braised dried tofu, and tofu brains are shouting and drinking, which is extremely lively. There are also those who sell pear paste candy. Pear paste candy is made of thin sugar and white sugar, with a little pear paste bought from a pharmacy, which has a little pear aroma. One piece is the size of half a matchbox, one point thick, and is arranged one by one on a wooden board. The pear paste candy seller always has a four-legged shelf with wooden boards on top, and is decorated with some pompoms and small light bulbs with dry batteries. Selling pear paste candy is all about singing. He has such a small hexagonal accordion. The locals don't know the accordion, so they call it "woo wow", because this thing can only make such three sounds. The pear candy seller set up the wooden frame and pulled up the "woo wow" and sang:“太阳出来一点（呐）红，
秦琼卖马下山（的）东。
秦琼卖了他的黄骠（的）马啊，
五湖四海就访（啦）宾（的）朋！”
“呜哩呜哩哇，
呜哩呜哩哇……”
"The sun comes out a little red, Qin Qiong sold his horse down the mountain (of) the east. Qin Qiong sold his yellow horse, Visit guests from all over the world! ” "Whoa, whoa, Whoa......这些玩艺，年复一年，都是那一套，大家不免有点看厌了，虽则到时还会哄然大笑，会神色紧张。终于有一天，来了王四海。
有人跟卖梨膏糖的说：
“嗨，卖梨膏糖的，你的嘴还真灵，你把王四海给唱来了！”
These tricks, year after year, are all the same, everyone can't help but get a little tired of it, although they will laugh and look nervous. Finally one day, Wang Sihai came. Someone said to the pear paste candy seller: "Hi, the pear paste candy seller, your mouth is really smart, you sang Wang Sihai!"“我？”
“你不是唱‘五湖四海访宾朋’吗？王四海来啦！”
“王四海？”
卖梨膏糖的不知王四海是何许人。
"Me?" "Didn't you sing 'Visiting Guests and Friends from All Over the World'? Wang Sihai is here! ” "Wang Sihai?" I don't know who Wang Sihai is who sells pear paste.王四海一行人下了船，走在大街上，就引起城里人的注意。一共七个人。走在前面的是一个小小子，一个小姑娘，一个瘦小但很精神的年轻人，一个四十开外的彪形大汉。他们都是短打扮，但是衣服的式样、颜色都很时髦。他们各自背着行李，提着皮箱。皮箱上贴满了轮船、汽车和旅馆的圆形的或椭圆形的标记。虽然是走了长路，但并不显得风尘仆仆。脚步矫健，气色很好。后面是王四海。他戴了一顶兔灰色的呢帽，穿了一件酱紫色烤花呢的大衣，——虽然大衣已经旧了，可能是在哪个大城市的拍卖行里买来的。他空着手，什么也不拿。他一边走，一边时时抱拳向路旁伫看的人们致意。后面两个看来是伙计，穿着就和一般耍把戏的差不多了。他们一个挑着一对木箱，一个扛着一捆兵器，——枪尖刀刃都用布套套着，一只手里牵着一头水牛。他们走进了五湖居客栈。
Wang Sihai and his party got off the boat and walked on the street, attracting the attention of the city. There were seven people in total. Walking in front was a little boy, a little girl, a thin but energetic young man, and a burly man in his forties. They were all dressed short, but the styles and colors of their clothes were very fashionable. They each carried their luggage and suitcases. The suitcases were covered with round or oval markings of ships, cars and hotels. Although it was a long walk, it did not look dusty. His steps were vigorous and his complexion was good. Behind him was Wang Sihai. He wore a rabbit-gray woolen hat and a sauce-purple tweed coat,—— although the coat was old, it might have been bought at an auction house in some big city. He was empty-handed and took nothing. As he walked, he clenched his fists and greeted the people watching on the side of the road. The last two seemed to be guys, dressed almost like ordinary tricks. One of them carried a pair of wooden boxes, the other carried a bundle of weapons,—— the tip of the gun was covered with a cloth sheath, and one hand held a buffalo. They walked into the Wuhuju Inn.卖艺的住客栈，少有。——一般耍把戏卖艺的都是住庙，有的就住在船上。有人议论：“五湖四海，这倒真应了典了。”
There are very few inns that sell art. ——Generally, those who play tricks live in temples, and some live on boats. Some people discussed: "All over the world, this is really a classic." ”这地方把住人的旅店分为两大类：房间“高尚”，设备新颖，软缎被窝，雪白毛巾，带点洋气的，叫旅馆，门外的招牌上则写作“××旅社”；较小的仍保留古老的习惯，叫客栈，甚至更古老一点，还有称之为“下处”的。客栈的格局大都是这样：两进房屋，当中有个天井，有十来个房间。砖墙、矮窗。不知什么道理，客栈的房间哪一间都见不着太阳。一进了客栈，除了觉得空气潮湿，还闻到一股长期造成的洗脸水和小便的气味。这种气味一下子就抓住了旅客，使他们觉得非常亲切。对！这就是他们住惯了的那种客栈！他们就好像到了家了。客栈房金低廉，若是长住，还可打个八折、七折。住客栈的大都是办货收账的行商、细批流年的命相家、卖字画的、看风水的、走方郎中、草台班子“重金礼聘”的名角、寻亲不遇的落魄才子……一到晚上，客栈门口就挂出一个很大的灯笼。灯笼两侧贴着扁宋体的红字，一侧写道：“招商客栈”，一侧是“近悦远来”。
This place divides the inns into two categories: the rooms are "noble", the equipment is novel, the soft satin quilts, the snow-white towels, the ones with a bit of foreign style, are called hotels, and the sign outside the door reads "×× Hotel"; the smaller ones still retain the old habits, called inns, or even more ancient, and there are also called "lower places". The layout of inns is mostly like this: two houses, a patio in the middle, and more than a dozen rooms. Brick walls and low windows. For some reason, none of the rooms in the inn could see the sun. As soon as I entered the inn, in addition to feeling that the air was humid, I also smelled the smell of long-term washing water and urine. This smell immediately caught the passengers and made them feel very kind. Right! This is the kind of inn they are used to staying in! They feel like they have arrived at home. The inn is cheap, and if you stay for a long time, you can get an 80% or 70% discount. Most of the inns are merchants who handle goods and collect accounts, fortune tellers who carefully criticize the passing years, those who sell calligraphy and paintings, those who read feng shui, the doctors who go to the square, the famous characters of the grass platform team who "pay a lot of money", and the down-and-out talents who are looking for relatives...... At night, a large lantern is hung at the door of the inn. On both sides of the lantern are plaid red letters in the Song style, one side is written: "Merchants Inn", and on the other side is "Near and Come from Far".五湖居就是这样一个客栈。这家客栈的生意很好，为同行所艳羨。人们说，这是因为五湖居有一块活招牌，就是这家的掌柜的内眷，外号叫貂蝉。叫她貂蝉，一是因为她长得俊俏；二是因为她丈夫比她大得太多。她二十四五，丈夫已经五十大几，俨然是个董卓。这董卓的肚脐可点不得灯，他瘦得只剩一把骨头，是个痨病胎子。除了天气好的时候，他起来坐坐，平常老是在后面一个小单间里躺着。栈里的大小事务，就都是貂蝉一个人张罗着。其实也没有多少事。客人来了，登店簿，收押金，开房门；客人走时，算房钱，退押金，收钥匙。她识字，能写会算，这些事都在行。泡茶、灌水、扫地、抹桌子、替客人跑腿买东西，这些事有一个老店伙和一个小孩子支应，她用不着管。春夏天长，她成天坐在门边的一张旧躺椅上磕瓜子，有时轻轻地哼着小调：
Wuhuju is such an inn. The business of this inn is very good and is envied by its peers. People say that this is because Wuhuju has a living signboard, which is the family of the shopkeeper of this house, nicknamed Diao Chan. Calling her Diao Chan, firstly because she is handsome; secondly, because her husband is too older than her. She is twenty-four or fifty, and her husband is already in his fifties, just like a Dong Zhuo. Dong Zhuo's navel can't be lit, he is so thin that he only has a handful of bones left, and he is a tuberculosis fetus. Except when the weather is good, he gets up and sits down, and usually lies in a small single room in the back. The big and small affairs in the stack are all handled by Diao Chan alone. In fact, there is not much to do. When the guests come, register in the store book, collect the deposit, and open the door; When the guests leave, they calculate the room money, refund the deposit, and collect the keys. She can read, write and calculate, and she is good at these things. Making tea, pouring water, sweeping the floor, wiping the table, running errands and buying things for guests, these things are supported by an old shopkeeper and a child, and she doesn't need to worry about them. In the long spring and summer, she sits on an old recliner by the door all day to knock melon seeds, sometimes humming softly:一把扇子七寸长，
一个人扇风二人凉……
或拿一面镜子，用一把小镊子对着镜子挟眉毛。觉得门前有人走过，就放下镜子看一眼，似有情，又似无意。
A fan is seven inches long, One person fanning the wind and two people cool down...... Or take a mirror and pinch your eyebrows at the mirror with a small pair of tweezers. If you feel that someone is walking by the door, you put down the mirror and take a look, as if you are affectionate and unintentional.街上人对这个女店主颇有议论。有人说，她是可以陪宿的，还说过夜的钱和房钱一块结算，账单上写得明明白白：房金多少，陪宿几次。有人说：“别瞎说！你嘴上留德。人家也怪难为，嫁了个痨病壳子，说不定到现在还是个黄花闺女！”
People on the street have a lot of discussion about this female shopkeeper. Some people said that she could stay with her, and also said that the money for the overnight stay and the room money were settled together, and the bill was clearly written: how much money is the house, how many times to stay with the house. Someone said: "Don't talk nonsense! You are talking about virtue. People are also blamed for being embarrassed, marrying a tuberculosis shell, maybe she is still a yellow flower girl! ”这且不言。却说王四海一住进五湖居，下午就在全城的通衢要道，热闹市口贴了很多海报。打武卖艺的贴海报，这也少有。海报的全文上一行是：“历下王四海献艺”；下行小字：“每日下午承志桥”。语意颇似《老残游记》白妞黑妞说书的招贴。大抵齐鲁人情古朴，文风也简练如此。
This goes without saying. However, it is said that as soon as Wang Sihai lived in Wuhuju, he posted many posters on the main thoroughfares of the city in the afternoon. Posters of martial arts are also rare. The first line of the full text of the poster is: "Wang Sihai presents art under the calendar"; the downward small print: "Chengzhi Bridge every afternoon". The semantics are quite similar to the posters of white girls and black girls storytelling in "Old Disabled Travels". Generally speaking, Qilu people are simple and simple, and the writing style is so concise.第二天，王四海拿了名片到处拜客。这在县城，也是颇为新鲜的事。商会会长、重要的钱庄、布店、染坊、药铺，他都投了片子，进去说了几句话，无非是：“初到宝地，请多关照。”随即留下一份红帖。凭帖入场，可以免费。他的名片上印的是：
The next day, Wang Sihai took his business card to visit guests everywhere. This is also quite a new thing in the county seat. The president of the Chamber of Commerce, important banks, cloth shops, dyeing shops, and pharmacies, he all threw in the film, went in and said a few words, nothing more than "New to the treasure land, please take care of me." Then left a red post. Admission with the post is free. His business card is printed with:
他到德寿堂药铺特别找管事的苏先生多谈了一会。原来王四海除了“献艺”，还卖膏药。熬膏药需要膏药黐子，——这东西有的地方叫做“膏药粘”，状如沥青，是一切膏药之母。叙谈结果，德寿堂的管事同意八折优惠，先货后款——可以赊账。王四海当即留下十多张红帖。
He went to the Deshou Tang pharmacy to talk to Mr. Su, who was in charge, for a while. It turned out that in addition to "performing arts", Wang Sihai also sold plasters. Boiling plasters requires plaster glue,—— This thing is called "plaster sticking" in some places, which is like asphalt and is the mother of all plasters. As a result of the discussion, the steward of Deshou Hall agreed to a discount of 80% off, and the goods were sold first and then paid - you can pay on credit. Wang Sihai immediately left more than ten red posts.至于他给女店主送去几份请帖，自不待说。
王四海献艺的头几天，真是万人空巷。
As for how many invitations he sent to the female shopkeeper, it goes without saying. The first few days of Wang Sihai's performance were really empty.打虎亲兄弟，上阵父子兵。王四海的这个武术班子，都姓王，都是叔伯兄弟，侄儿侄女。他们走南闯北，搭过很多班社，走过很多码头。大概五省联军总司令孙传芳到过的地方，他们也都到过。他们在上海大世界、南京夫子庙、汉口民众乐园、苏州玄妙观，都表演过。他们原来在一个相当大的马戏杂技团，后来这个杂技团散了，方由王四海带着，来跑小码头。
Fighting tiger brothers, father and son soldiers. Wang Sihai's martial arts team is surnamed Wang, all uncles, brothers, nephews and nieces. They traveled south and north, took many class clubs, and walked through many docks. Probably the places where Sun Chuanfang, the commander-in-chief of the five-province coalition army, have been, have also been there. They have performed in Shanghai Great World, Nanjing Confucius Temple, Hankou People's Paradise, and Suzhou Xuanmiao Temple. They were originally in a fairly large circus acrobatic troupe, but later this acrobatic troupe dispersed, and Wang Sihai took them to run the small pier.锣鼓声紧张热烈。虎音大锣，高腔南堂鼓，听着就不一样。老远就看见铁脚高杆上飘着四面大旗，红字黑字，绣得分明：“以武会友”、“南北武术”、“力胜牯牛”、“祖传膏药”。场子也和别人不一样，不是在土地上用锣槌棒画一个圆圈就算事，而是有一圈深灰色的帆布帷子。入门一次收费，中场不再零打钱。这气派就很“高尚”。
The sound of gongs and drums is tense and warm. The tiger sound is loud and the drum is high-pitched, and it sounds different. From afar, I saw four large flags floating on the iron-footed high pole, with red and black letters, clearly embroidered: "Meet friends with martial arts", "Martial arts from the north and south", "Strength beats yak", and "Ancestral plaster". The field is also different from others, not to draw a circle with a gong and mallet stick on the land, but to have a dark gray canvas curtain. There is a fee for entry, and there is no more zero money in the middle of the field. This style is very "noble".玩艺也很地道。真刀真枪，真功夫，很干净，很漂亮，很文明，——没有一点野蛮、恐怖、残忍。
The play is also very authentic. Real knives and guns, real kung fu, very clean, beautiful, very civilized,—— without any savagery, horror, cruelty.彪形大汉、精干青年、小小子、小姑娘，依次表演。或单人，或对打。三节棍、九节鞭、双手带单刀破花枪、双刀进枪、九节鞭破三节棍……
掌声，叫好。
Burly men, capable young people, little boys, and little girls perform in turn. Or alone, or sparring. Three-section sticks, nine-section whips, two-handed single-blade broken spears, double-knife guns, and nine-section whips break three-section sticks...... Applause, applause.王四海在前面表演了两个节目：护手钩对单刀、花枪，单人猴拳。他这猴拳是南派。服装就很摄人。一身白。下边是白绸肥腿大档的灯笼裤，上身是白紧身衣，腰系白铜大扣的宽皮带，脉门上戴着两个黑皮护腕，护腕上两圈雪亮的泡钉。果是身手矫捷，状如猿猴。他这猴拳是带叫唤的，当他尖声长啸时，尤显得猴气十足。到他手搭凉棚，东张西望，或缩颈曲爪搔痒时，周围就发出赞赏的笑声。——自从王四海来了后，原来在旷场上踢皮球的皮孩子就都一边走路，一边模仿他的猴头猴脑的动作，尖声长啸。
Wang Sihai performed two shows in front: gauntlet hook against single knife, flower gun, and single monkey fist. His monkey fist is a southern school. The costume is very impressive. All white. Underneath are bloomers with white silk fat legs, white tights on the upper body, a wide belt with a large cupronickel buckle around the waist, two black leather wrist guards on the vein gate, and two rings of shiny bubble nails on the wrist guards. It is agile and looks like an ape. His monkey fist is called, and when he screams and howls, he is especially full of monkey energy. When he set up a pergola in his hand, looked around, or curled his neck and bent his claws to scratch the itch, there was appreciative laughter around him. ——Since Wang Sihai came, the leather children who used to play ball in the open field have been walking while imitating the movements of his monkey head and monkey brain, screaming and howling.猴拳打完，彪形大汉和精干青年就卖一气膏药。一搭一档，一问一答。他们的膏药，就像上海的黄楚九大药房的“百灵机”一样，“有意想不到之效力”，什么病都治：五痨七伤、筋骨疼痛、四肢麻木、半身不遂、臌胀噎嗝、吐血流红、对口搭背、无名肿毒、梦遗盗汗、小便频数……甚至肾囊阴湿都能包好。
After the monkey fist was over, the burly man and the capable young man sold a breath of plaster. One by one, one question and one answer. Their plasters, like the "lark machine" of the nine major pharmacies of Huang Chu in Shanghai, have "unexpected effects" and cure any disease: five tuberculosis and seven injuries, muscle and bone pain, numbness of limbs, hemiplegia, bloating and choking, vomiting blood and redness, mouth to back, nameless swelling, night sweats, frequent urination...... Even the kidney sac can be wrapped.“那位说了，我这是臊裆——”
“对，俺的性大！”
“恁要是这么说，可就把自己的病耽误了！”
“这是病？”
“这是阳弱阴虚，肾不养水！”
“这是肾亏？！”
"That one said, I'm a crotch-" "Yes, my sex is big!" "If you say so, you will delay your illness!" "Is this a disease?" "This is weak yang and yin deficiency, and the kidneys do not nourish water!" "This is kidney loss?!"“对了！一天两天不要紧。一月两月也不要紧。一年两年，可就坏了事了！”
“坏了啥事？”
“妨碍恁生儿育女。不孝有三，无后为大。全凭一句话，提醒懵懂人。买几帖试试！”
“能见效？”
"That's right! It doesn't matter if it's a day or two. It doesn't matter if it's a month or two. A year or two, but it's bad! ” "What's wrong?" "Hinder you from having children. There are three unfilial pieties, and no descendants are the greatest. It's all a word to remind ignorant people. Buy a few posts and try them! ” "Can it be effective?"“能见效！一帖见好，两帖去病，三帖除根！三帖之后，包管恁身强力壮，就跟王四海似的，能跟水牛摔跤。买两帖，买两帖。不多卖！就这二三十张膏药，卖完了请看王四海力胜牯牛，——跟水牛摔跤！”
"It can be effective! One post is good, two posts are good, three posts are removed! After three posts, you will be strong and strong, just like Wang Sihai, you can wrestle with the buffalo. Buy two posts, buy two posts. Don't sell more! Just these twenty or thirty plasters, after selling out, please see Wang Sihai beat the yak,—— wrestle with the buffalo! ”这两位绕场走了几圈，人们因为等着看王四海和水牛摔跤，膏药也不算太贵，而且膏药黐乌黑发亮，非同寻常，疑若有效，不大一会，也就卖完了。这时一个伙计已经把水牛牵到场地当中。
The two walked around the field a few times, and because people were waiting to watch Wang Sihai and the buffalo wrestle, the plaster was not too expensive, and the plaster was black and shiny, extraordinary, and if it was suspected to be effective, it would be sold out after a while. At this time, a guy had already led the buffalo into the field.王四海再次上场，换了一身装束，斗牛士不像斗牛士，摔跤手不像摔跤手。只见他上身穿了一件黑大绒的褡膊，上绣金花，下身穿了一条紫红库缎的裤子，足蹬黑羊皮软靴。上场来，双手抱拳，作了一个罗圈揖，随即走向水牛，双手扳住牛犄角，浑身使劲。牛也不瓤，它挺着犄角往前顶，差一点把王四海顶出场外。王四海双脚一跺，钉在地上，牛顶不动他了。等王四海拿出手来，拉了一个山膀，再度攥住牛角，水牛又拼命往后退，好赖不让王四海把它扳倒。王四海把牛拽到场中，运了运气。当他又一次抓到牛角时，这水牯牛猛一扬头，把王四海扔出去好远。王四海并没有摔倒在地，而是就势翻了一串小翻，身轻如燕，落地无声。
Wang Sihai played again, changed his outfit, the matador did not look like a matador, and the wrestler did not look like a wrestler. I saw that he was wearing a black velvet sleeve on his upper body, embroidered with gold flowers, a pair of purple and red kusatin pants on his lower body, and black sheepskin soft boots. When he came on the field, he clenched his fists with both hands, made a circle bow, and then walked towards the buffalo, grabbed the horns of the cow with both hands, and worked hard. The cow was not a bull, it pushed forward with its horns, almost pushing Wang Sihai out of the field. Wang Sihai stomped his feet and nailed them to the ground, and the cow couldn't move him. When Wang Sihai took out his hand, pulled a mountain arm, and grabbed the horn again, the buffalo desperately retreated again, but fortunately, Wang Sihai did not let Wang Sihai pull it down. Wang Sihai dragged the cow into the field and lucky. When he grabbed the horn again, the water yak raised its head and threw Wang Sihai far away. Wang Sihai did not fall to the ground, but flipped over a string of small turns, as light as a swallow, and landed silently.“好！”
王四海绕场一周，又运了运气。老牛也哞哞地叫了几声。
"Okay!" Wang Sihai went around the field and lucked again. The old cow also mooed a few times.正在这牛颇为得意的时候，王四海突然从它的背后蹿到前面，手扳牛角，用尽两膀神力，大喝一声：“嗨咿！”说时迟，那时快，只听见“吭腾”一声，水牛已被摔翻在地。
“好！！”
Just when the cow was quite proud, Wang Sihai suddenly jumped from behind it to the front, grabbed the bull's horns with his hands, used all his divine strength, and shouted: "Hi!" It was too late, it was fast, and I only heard a "clatter", and the buffalo had been thrown to the ground. "Okay!!"全场爆发出炸雷一样的采声。
The audience erupted in thunderous sounds.王四海抬起身来，向四面八方鞠躬行礼，表示感谢。他这回行的不是中国式的礼，而是颇像西班牙的斗牛士行的那种洋礼，姿势优美，风度颇似泰隆宝华，越显得飒爽英俊，一表非凡。全场男女观众纷纷起立，报以掌声。观众中的女士还不懂洋规矩，否则她们是很愿意把一把一把鲜花扔给他的。他在很多观众的心目中成了一位英雄。他们以为天下英雄第一是黄天霸，第二便是王四海。有一个挨着貂蝉坐的油嘴滑舌的角色大声说：“这倒真是一位吕布！”
Wang Sihai raised his head, bowed in all directions, and expressed his gratitude. This time he did not perform a Chinese-style salute, but a foreign ceremony that resembled the Spanish matadors, with a beautiful posture and a demeanor similar to Tailong Baohua, which made him look more sassy and handsome, and extraordinary. The male and female audience members stood up and applauded. The ladies in the audience didn't understand the rules yet, otherwise they would be willing to throw a handful of flowers to him. He became a hero in the minds of many viewers. They thought that the first hero in the world was Huang Tianba, and the second was Wang Sihai. A greasy character sitting next to Diao Chan said loudly: "This is really a Lu Bu!" ”貂蝉白了他一眼，没有说话。
Diao Chan rolled his eyes and didn't speak.观众散场。老牛这时已经起来。一个伙计扔给它一捆干草，它就半卧着吃了起来。它知道，收拾刀枪、拆帆布帷子，总得有一会，它尽可安安静静地咀嚼。——它一天只有到了这会才能吃一顿饱饭呀。这一捆干草就是它摔了一跤得到的报酬。
The audience dispersed. The old cow was already up at this time. A man threw it a bundle of hay, and it ate it half-lying down. It knew that it would take a while to pack up the knives and guns and remove the canvas curtains, and it could chew quietly as much as possible. ——It can only eat a full meal a day. This bundle of hay is the reward it gets for falling.不几天，王四海在离承志桥不远的北门外大街上租了两间门面，卖膏药。他下午和水牛摔跤，上午坐在膏药店里卖膏药。王四海为人很“四海”，善于应酬交际。膏药店开张前一天，他把附近较大店铺的管事的都请到五柳园吃了一次早茶，请大家捧场。果然到开张那天，王四海的铺子里就挂满了同街店铺送来的大红蜡笺对子、大红洋绉的幛子。对子大部分都写的是：“生意兴隆通四海，财源茂盛达三江”。幛子上的金字则是“名扬四海”、“四海名扬”，一碗豆腐，豆腐一碗。红通通的一片，映着兵器架上明晃晃的刀枪剑戟，显得非常火炽热闹。王四海有一架RCA老式留声机，就搬到门口唱起来。不过他只有三张唱片，一张《毛毛雨》、一张《枪毙阎瑞生》、一张《洋人大笑》，只能翻来覆去地调换。一群男女洋人在北门外大街笑了一天，笑得前仰后合，上气不接下气。
Within a few days, Wang Sihai rented two facades on the street outside the North Gate not far from Chengzhi Bridge to sell plasters. He wrestled with buffaloes in the afternoon and sat in the plaster shop in the morning selling plasters. Wang Sihai is very "four-sea" and good at socializing. The day before the plaster shop opened, he invited the stewards of the larger nearby stores to Wuliuyuan for morning tea and invited everyone to cheer them on. Sure enough, on the day of opening, Wang Sihai's shop was filled with big red wax paper pairs and red crepe curtains sent by shops on the same street. Most of the pairs read: "Business is prosperous all over the world, and wealth is prosperous to the three rivers." The golden characters on the curtain are "famous all over the world" and "famous all over the world", a bowl of tofu, a bowl of tofu. The red one reflects the bright swords, guns, swords and halberds on the weapon rack, which looks very lively. Wang Sihai had an RCA old-fashioned gramophone, so he moved to the door and sang. However, he only has three records, one "Drizzle", one "Shooting Yan Ruisheng", and one "Foreigner Laughing", which can only be changed over and over again. A group of male and female foreigners laughed on the street outside the North Gate for a day, laughing so much that they leaned back and forth, out of breath.承志河涨了春水，柳条儿绿了，不知不觉，王四海来了快两个月了。花无百日红，王四海卖艺的高潮已经过去了。看客逐渐减少。城里有不少人看“力胜水牛”已经看了七八次，乡下人进城则看了一次就不想再看了，——他们可怜那条牛。
The spring water of the Chengzhi River has risen, the willow branches have turned green, and before you know it, Wang Sihai has been here for almost two months. The flowers are not red for a hundred days, and the climax of Wang Sihai's performance has passed. The number of spectators is gradually decreasing. Many people in the city have seen "Lisheng Buffalo" seven or eight times, and the countrymen have seen it once and don't want to watch it again,—— they feel sorry for the cow.这天晚上，老大（彪形大汉）、老六（精干青年）找老四（王四海）说“事”。他们劝老四见好就收。他们走了那么多码头，都是十天半拉月，顶多一个“号头”（一个月，这是上海话），像这样连演四十多场（刨去下雨下雪），还没有过。葱烧海参，也不能天天吃。就是海京伯来了，也不能连满仨月。要是“瞎”在这儿，败了名声，下个码头都不好走。
That night, the eldest (burly man) and the sixth (capable young man) went to the fourth (Wang Sihai) to talk about "things". They advised the fourth child to accept it when he saw it. They have walked so many docks, all of which are ten and a half days and a month, at most one "trumpet" (a month, this is Shanghainese), and they have performed more than forty times like this (planing to rain and snow), but they have not yet passed. Roasted sea cucumbers with green onions cannot be eaten every day. Even if Haijingbo comes, he can't stay for three months. If you are "blind" here and lose your reputation, it will not be easy to go to the next pier.王四海不说话。
他们知道四海为什么留恋这个屁帘子大的小城市，就干脆把话挑明了。
Wang Sihai didn't speak. They knew why the whole world was nostalgic for this small city with a big fart curtain, so they simply made it clear.“俺们走江湖卖艺的，最怕在娘们身上栽了跟头。寻欢作乐，露水夫妻，那不碍。过去，哥没问过你。你三十往外了，还没成家，不能老叫花猫吃豆腐。可是这种事，认不得真，着不得迷。你这回，是认了真，着了迷了！你打算怎么着？难道真要在这儿当个吕布？你正是好时候，功夫、卖相，都在那儿摆着。有多少白花花的大洋钱等着你去挣。你可别把一片锦绣前程自己白白地葬送了！俺们老王家，可就指望着你啦！”
"We who go to the rivers and lakes to perform their tricks, and we are most afraid of planting somersaults on our daughters. Seeking pleasure, dew couples, that's not a problem. In the past, my brother never asked you. You are thirty years old, and you haven't started a family yet, so you can't always ask the cat to eat tofu. But this kind of thing is not true, and you can't be fascinated. This time, you are serious and fascinated! What are you going to do? Do you really want to be a Lu Bu here? You are in a good time, kung fu and appearance, are all there. How many white flowers are waiting for you to earn. Don't bury a splendid future in vain! Our old Wang family is counting on you! ”“好事不出门，坏事传千里，没有不透风的墙。你听到这儿人的闲言碎语了么？别看这小地方的人，不是好欺的。墙里开花墙外香，他们不服这口气。要是叫人家堵住了，敲一笔竹杠是小事；绳捆索绑，押送出境，可就现了大眼了。一世英名，付之流水。四哥，听兄弟一句话，走吧！”
"Good things don't go out, bad things spread thousands of miles, and there is no impermeable wall. Did you hear the gossip of the people here? Don't look at the people in this small place, it's not easy to bully. Flowers bloom inside the wall and fragrance outside the wall, and they don't accept this breath. If you block it, knocking on a bamboo pole is a trivial matter; tie it with a rope and escort it out of the country, but you will have big eyes. A lifetime of fame will be wasted. Fourth brother, listen to your brother's words, let's go! ”王四海还是不说话。
“你说话，说一句话呀！”
王四海说：“再续半个月，再说。”
老大、老六摇头。
Wang Sihai still didn't speak. "You speak, say a word!" Wang Sihai said: "Continue for another half month, and let's talk about it." ” The eldest and the sixth shook their heads.王四海的武术班子真是走了下坡路了，一天不如一天。老大、老六、侄儿、侄女都不卖力气。就是两个伙计敲打的锣鼓，也是没精打采的。王四海怪不得他们，只有自己格外“卯上”。山膀拉得更足，小翻多翻了三个，“嗨咿”一声也喊得更为威武。就是这样，也还是没有多少人叫好。
Wang Sihai's martial arts team has really gone downhill, and it is not as good as day by day. The eldest brother, the sixth child, the nephew, and the niece are not working hard. Even the gongs and drums beaten by the two guys are listless. Wang Sihai can't blame them, only he is extra "up". The mountain arms were pulled more tightly, the small flip was turned over three more, and the "hi" shouted more powerfully. That's it, and there are still not many people applauding.这一天，王四海和老牛摔了几个回合，到最后由牛的身后蹿出，扳住牛角，大喝一声，牛竟没有倒。
On this day, Wang Sihai and the old cow wrestled for a few rounds, and finally jumped out from behind the cow, grabbed the cow's horns, and shouted, but the cow did not fall.观众议论起来。有人说王四海的力气不行了，有人说他的力气已经用在别处了。这两人就对了对眼光，哈哈一笑。有人说：“不然，这是故意卖关子。王四海今天准有更精采的表演。——瞧！”
The audience started talking. Some people say that Wang Sihai's strength is no longer good, and some people say that his strength has been used elsewhere. The two looked at each other and laughed. Someone said: "Otherwise, this is deliberately selling guanzi." Wang Sihai must have a more exciting performance today. ——Look! ”王四海有点沉不住气，寻思：这牛今天是怎么了？一面又绕场一周，运气，准备再摔。不料，在他绕场、运气的时候，还没有接近老牛，离牛还有八丈远，这牛“吭腾”一声，自己倒了！
Wang Sihai couldn't hold his breath and thought: What happened to this cow today? On the other hand, he circled the field again, lucky, ready to fall again. Unexpectedly, when he went around the field and luck, he had not yet approached the old cow, and he was still eight feet away from the cow.观众哗然，他们大笑起来。他们明白了：“力胜牯牛”原来是假的。这牛是驯好了的。每回它都是自己倒下，王四海不过是在那里装腔作势做做样子。这回不知怎么出了岔子，露了馅了。也许是这牛犯了牛脾气，再不就是它老了，反应迟钝了……大家一哄而散。
The audience was in an uproar and they burst into laughter. They understood: "Strength over the yak" turned out to be fake. This cow is tamed. Every time it fell by itself, Wang Sihai was just pretending to be there. This time something went wrong and the filling was revealed. Maybe the cow had a bad temper, or it was old and slow to react...... Everyone dispersed.王家班开了一个全体会议，连侄儿、侄女都参加。一致决议：走！明天就走！
王四海说，他不走。
Wang Jiaban held a plenary meeting, and even his nephews and nieces participated. Unanimous resolution: Let's go! Let's go tomorrow! Wang Sihai said that he would not leave.“还不走？！你真是害了花疯啦！那好，将军不下马，各自奔前程。你不走，俺们走，可别怪自己弟兄不义气！栽到这份上，还有脸再在这城里呆下去吗？”
"Don't leave yet?! You're really crazy! Well, the general doesn't dismount and goes his own way. If you don't leave, we will go, don't blame your brothers for being unrighteous! If you are planted in this, do you still have the face to stay in this city again? ”王四海觉得对不起叔伯兄弟，他什么也不要，只留下一对护手钩，其余的，什么都叫他们带走。他们走了，连那条老牛也牵走了。王四海把他们送到码头上。
Wang Sihai felt sorry for his uncle and brother, he didn't want anything, only a pair of handguards, and the rest, they were asked to take everything away. They left, and even the old cow was taken away. Wang Sihai sent them to the dock.老大说：“四兄弟，我们这就分手了。到了那儿，给你来信。你要是还想回来，啥时候都行。”
王四海点点头。
The boss said: "Four brothers, we will break up. When we get there, I will write to you. If you still want to come back, you can do it anytime." ” Wang Sihai nodded. The sixth said: "Fourth brother, take care." ——Be careful! ” Wang Sihai nodded.老六说：“四哥，多保重。——小心着点！”
王四海点点头。
The boss said: "Four brothers, we will break up. When we get there, I will write to you. If you still want to come back, you can do it anytime." ” Wang Sihai nodded. The sixth said: "Fourth brother, take care." ——Be careful! ” Wang Sihai nodded.侄儿侄女给王四海行了礼，说：“四叔，俺们走了！”说着，这两个孩子的眼泪就下来了。王四海的心里也是酸酸的。
王四海一个人留下来，卖膏药。
The nephew and niece saluted Wang Sihai and said, "Fourth uncle, we are leaving!" As he spoke, the tears of the two children fell. Wang Sihai's heart was also sour. Wang Sihai stayed alone and sold plasters.他到德寿堂找了管事苏先生。苏先生以为他又要来赊膏药黐子，问他这回要多少。王四海说：
“苏先生，我来求恁一件事。”
“什么事？”
“能不能给我几个膏药的方子？”
He went to Deshou Hall to find Mr. Su, the steward. Mr. Su thought he was going to come to the plaster on credit again, so he asked him how much he wanted this time. Wang Sihai said: "Mr. Su, I'm here to ask you for something." "What's the matter?" "Can you give me a few plaster recipes?"“膏药方子？你以前卖的膏药都放了什么药？”
“什么也没有，就是恁这儿的膏药黐子。”
“那怎么摊出来乌黑雪亮的？”
“掺了点松香。”
“那你还卖那种膏药不行吗？”
"Plaster prescription? What kind of medicine did you put in the plasters you sold before? ” "Nothing, it's just your plaster here." "Then how did you spread out the black and snowy?" "Mixed with some rosin." "Then can't you still sell that kind of plaster?"“苏先生！要是过路卖艺，日子短，卖点假膏药，不要紧。这治不了病，可也送不了命。等买的主发现膏药不灵，我已经走了，他也找不到我。我想在贵宝地长住下去，不能老这么骗人。往后我就指着这吃饭，得卖点真东西。”
"Mr. Su! If you are passing by and your days are short, it doesn't matter if you sell some fake plasters. This can't cure the disease, but it can't save your life. When the buyer finds that the plaster is not working, I have already left, and he can't find me. I want to live in the precious land for a long time, and I can't keep deceiving people like this. From now on, I will point to this place to eat, and I have to sell some real things. ”苏先生觉得这是几句有良心的话，说得也很恳切；德寿堂是个大药店，不靠卖膏药赚钱，就答应了。
Mr. Su felt that these were a few words of conscience, and he said it very sincerely; Deshou Tang is a big pharmacy, and he didn't make money by selling plasters, so he agreed.苏先生还把王四海的这番话传了出去，大家都知道王四海如今卖的是真膏药。大家还议论，这个走江湖的人品不错。王四海膏药店的生意颇为不恶。
Mr. Su also spread Wang Sihai's words, and everyone knows that Wang Sihai is now selling real plasters. Everyone also talks about the good character of this person who goes to the rivers and lakes. The business of Wang Sihai's plaster shop is quite good.不久，五湖居害痨病的掌柜死了，王四海就和貂蝉名正言顺地在一起过了。
他不愿人议论他是贪图五湖居的产业而要了貂蝉的，五湖居的店务他一概不问。他还是开他的膏药店。
Soon, the shopkeeper of Wuhu Ju died, and Wang Sihai and Diao Chan lived together justifiably. He didn't want anyone to talk about him because he wanted Diao Chan for the property of Wuhuju, and he didn't care about the store affairs of Wuhuju. He still opened his plaster shop.光阴荏苒，眨眼的工夫，几年过去了。貂蝉生了个白胖小子，已经满地里跑了。
Time flies, and in the blink of an eye, a few years have passed. Diao Chan gave birth to a white fat boy and had already run all over the ground.王四海穿起了长衫，戴了罗宋帽，看起来和一般生意人差不多，除了他走路抓地（练武的人走路都是这个走法，脚趾头抓着地），已经不像个打把势卖艺的了。他的语声也变了。腔调还是山东腔，所用的字眼很多却是地道的本地话。头顶有点秃，而且发胖了。
Wang Sihai wore a long shirt and a borscht hat, looking similar to an ordinary businessman, except that he walked and grabbed the ground (people who practice martial arts walk in this way, and grab the ground with their toes), he no longer looks like a showman. His tone has also changed. The tone is still Shandong, and many of the words used are authentic local dialects. The top of his head is a little bald and fat.他还保留一点练过武艺人的习惯，每天清早黄昏要出去蹓蹓弯，在承志桥上坐坐，看看来往行人。
He also retained a little habit of practicing martial arts, and every morning and dusk he would go out to stroll around, sit on the Chengzhi Bridge, and watch the pedestrians passing by.这天他收到老大、老六的信，看完了，放在信插子里，依旧去蹓弯。他坐在承志桥的靠背椅上，听见远处有什么地方在吹奏“得胜令”，他忽然想起大世界、民众乐园，想起霓虹灯、马戏团的音乐。他好像有点惆怅。他很想把那对护手钩取来耍一会。不大一会，连这点意兴也消失了。
On this day, he received letters from the eldest and the sixth, and after reading them, he put them in the letter insert and still went to the bend. He sat on the back chair of the Chengzhi Bridge, and heard something playing "Victory Order" in the distance, and he suddenly thought of the big world, the people's paradise, the neon lights, and the music of the circus. He seemed a little melancholic. He really wanted to take the pair of handguards and play with them for a while. After a while, even this interest disappeared.王四海站起来，沿着承志河，漫无目的地走着。夕阳把他的影子拉得很长。

[1] 本篇原载《小说界》1982年第二期；初收《晚饭花集》，人民文学出版社，1985年3月。
Wang Sihai stood up and walked aimlessly along the Chengzhi River. The setting sun stretched his shadow very long. [1] This article was originally published in the second issue of "Novel World", 1982; First Received "Dinner Flower Collection", People's Literature Publishing House, March 1985.