Cover

            @page {padding: 0pt; margin:0pt}
            body { text-align: center; padding:0pt; margin: 0pt; }

Table of Contents

总目录

Table of Contents

General Catalog鲁迅自编文集-呐喊 Lu Xun's self-edited anthology - Scream
鲁迅自编文集-彷徨 Lu Xun's self-edited anthology - hesitation
鲁迅自编文集-故事新编 Lu Xun's self-edited anthology - new story compilation
鲁迅自编文集-朝花夕拾 Lu Xun's self-edited anthology - morning flowers and evening pickups
鲁迅自编文集-坟 Lu Xun's self-compiled anthology - grave
鲁迅自编文集-热风 Lu Xun's self-edited anthology - hot wind
鲁迅自编文集-野草 Lu Xun's self-edited anthology - weeds
鲁迅自编文集-华盖集 Lu Xun's self-edited collection of essays - Huagai Collection
鲁迅自编文集-华盖集续编 Lu Xun's self-edited collection - the sequel to the canopy collection
鲁迅自编文集-而已集 Lu Xun's own collection of essays - a collection
鲁迅自编文集-三闲集 Lu Xun's self-edited collection of essays - three leisure collections
鲁迅自编文集-二心集 Lu Xun's self-edited collection of essays - Erxin Collection
鲁迅自编文集-南腔北调集 Lu Xun's self-edited collection of essays - Southern Accent and North Dialect Collection
鲁迅自编文集-伪自由书 Lu Xun's self-edited anthology - pseudo-free book
鲁迅自编文集-准风月谈 Lu Xun's self-edited anthology - quasi-wind and moon talk
鲁迅自编文集-花边文学 Lu Xun's self-compiled anthology - lace literature
鲁迅自编文集-且介亭杂文 Lu Xun's own collection of essays - and Jieting essays
鲁迅自编文集-且介亭杂文二集 Lu Xun's self-edited anthology - and two collections of essays from Jieting
鲁迅自编文集-且介亭杂文末编 Lu Xun's self-edited anthology - and the end of Jieting's miscellaneous essays
鲁迅自编文集-集外集 Lu Xun's self-edited anthology - a collection of external collections
鲁迅自编文集-中国小说史略 Lu Xun's self-edited anthology - A Brief History of Chinese Novels
鲁迅自编文集-汉文学史纲要 Lu Xun's self-edited collection - Outline of the History of Chinese Literature

封面

书名页

版权信息

图书在版编目（CIP）数据
Books in Print (CIP) data呐喊/鲁迅著．—南京：译林出版社，2013.11
Scream/Lu Xun.—Nanjing: Yilin Publishing House, 2013.11（鲁迅自编文集）
(Lu Xun's self-edited anthology)ISBN 978-7-5447-4382-2
ISBN 978-7-5447-4382-2Ⅰ．①呐…　Ⅱ．①鲁…　Ⅲ．鲁迅小说－小说集　Ⅳ．①I210.6
I..(1)Now... II..(1) Lu... III. Lu Xun's Novels - Novels IV. (1) I210.6中国版本图书馆CIP数据核字（2013）第211081号
China Version Library CIP Data Verification (2013) No. 211081
书　　名　呐　喊
Book title shout作　　者　鲁　迅
Author: Lu Xun责任编辑　王振华
Editor-in-charge: Wang Zhenhua特约编辑　邓　敏
Special editor Deng Min出版发行　凤凰出版传媒股份有限公司
Published and distributed by Phoenix Publishing and Media Co., Ltd译林出版社
Yilin Publishing House出版社地址　南京市湖南路1号A楼，邮编：210009
Publisher's address Building A, No. 1 Hunan Road, Nanjing, Zip Code: 210009电子邮箱　yilin@yilin.com
Email yilin@yilin.com出版社网址　http://www.yilin.com
Publisher website http://www.yilin.com印　　刷　北京凯达印务有限公司
Printing Beijing Kaida Printing Co., Ltd开　　本　787×1092毫米　1/32
Volume 787×1092 mm 1/32印　　张　5.125
Print 5.125字　　数　98千字
Word count: 98,000 words版　　次　2013年11月第1版　2013年11月第1次印刷
Edition November 2013 1st edition November 2013 1st printing书　　号　ISBN 978-7-5447-4382-2
ISBN 978-7-5447-4382-2定　　价　10.80元
The price is 10.80 yuan译林版图书若有印装错误可向承印厂调换

If there are printing errors in the translated version of the book, it can be exchanged with the printing factory

Table of Contents

目录

Table of Contents

directory自序 Self-introduction
狂人日记 Diary of a madman
孔乙己 Kong Yiji
药 medicine
明天 Tomorrow
一件小事 A small thing
头发的故事 The story of hair
风波 Storm
故乡 hometown
阿Q正传 The main story of Ah Q
端午节 dragon boat festival
白光 white light
兔和猫 Rabbit and cat
鸭的喜剧 Duck comedy
社戏 Social drama
返回总目录 Return to the General Directory

自序

自序

自序

Self-introduction我在年青时候也曾经做过许多梦，后来大半忘却了，但自己也并不以为可惜。所谓回忆者，虽说可以使人欢欣，有时也不免使人寂寞，使精神的丝缕还牵着已逝的寂寞的时光，又有什么意味呢，而我偏苦于不能全忘却，这不能全忘的一部分，到现在便成了《呐喊》的来由。
I also had many dreams when I was young, and then most of them were forgotten, but I didn't think it was a pity. The so-called reminiscence, although it can make people happy, sometimes it is inevitable to make people lonely, so that the threads of the spirit still lead to the lonely time that has passed, what is the meaning, and I am suffering from not being able to forget it all, this part of which cannot be completely forgotten has now become the origin of "The Scream".我有四年多，曾经常常，——几乎是每天，出入于质铺和药店里，年纪可是忘却了，总之是药店的柜台正和我一样高，质铺的是比我高一倍，我从一倍高的柜台外送上衣服或首饰去，在侮蔑里接了钱，再到一样高的柜台上给我久病的父亲去买药。回家之后，又须忙别的事了，因为开方的医生是最有名的，以此所用的药引也奇特：冬天的芦根，经霜三年的甘蔗，蟋蟀要原对的，结子的平地木，……多不是容易办到的东西。然而我的父亲终于日重一日的亡故了。
I have been in and out of the pawn shop and pharmacy almost every ,——day for more than four years, and I have forgotten my age, in short, the counter of the pharmacy is as high as me, and the pawn shop is twice as tall as me, I send clothes or jewelry from the counter that is twice as high, take the money in the insult, and then go to the counter at the same height to buy medicine for my long-term sick father. After returning home, I have to be busy with other things, because the doctor who prescribes the prescription is the most famous, and the medicine used in this is also peculiar: reed root in winter, sugarcane after three years of frost, crickets should be right, and flat wood with knots,...... It's not easy to do. However, my father finally died day by day.有谁从小康人家而坠入困顿的么，我以为在这途路中，大概可以看见世人的真面目；我要到N进K学堂去了，仿佛是想走异路，逃异地，去寻求别样的人们。我的母亲没有法，办了八元的川资，说是由我的自便；然而伊哭了，这正是情理中的事，因为那时读书应试是正路，所谓学洋务，社会上便以为是一种走投无路的人，只得将灵魂卖给鬼子，要加倍的奚落而且排斥的，而况伊又看不见自己的儿子了。然而我也顾不得这些事，终于到N去进了K学堂了，在这学堂里，我才知道世上还有所谓格致，算学，地理，历史，绘图和体操。生理学并不教，但我们却看到些木版的《全体新论》和《化学卫生论》之类了。我还记得先前的医生的议论和方药，和现在所知道的比较起来，便渐渐的悟得中医不过是一种有意的或无意的骗子，同时又很起了对于被骗的病人和他的家族的同情；而且从译出的历史上，又知道了日本维新是大半发端于西方医学的事实。
Who has fallen into hardship from a well-off family, I thought that on this road, I could probably see the true face of the world; I was going to N into K School, as if I wanted to take a different path, escape to a different place, and seek other people. My mother had no way to do it, so she paid eight yuan of Sichuan capital, saying that it was at my own discretion; However, Yi cried, which was reasonable, because at that time, studying and taking exams was the right way, and the so-called learning foreign affairs, the society thought that it was a desperate person, so he had to sell his soul to the devils, and he was doubly ridiculed and rejected, and he couldn't see his son. However, I didn't care about these things, and finally went to N to enter the K school, where I learned that there are still so-called styles, arithmetic, geography, history, drawing and gymnastics in the world. Physiology is not taught, but we have seen woodblock versions of "New Theory of All" and "Theory of Chemistry and Hygiene". I still remember the previous doctor's discussions and prescriptions, and compared with what I know now, I gradually realized that Chinese medicine is just an intentional or unintentional liar, and at the same time, I have a lot of sympathy for the deceived patient and his family; Moreover, from the translated history, we know that most of the Japanese Restoration originated from Western medicine.因为这些幼稚的知识，后来便使我的学籍列在日本一个乡间的医学专门学校里了。我的梦很美满，预备卒业回来，救治像我父亲似的被误的病人的疾苦，战争时候便去当军医，一面又促进了国人对于维新的信仰。我已不知道教授微生物学的方法，现在又有了怎样的进步了，总之那时是用了电影，来显示微生物的形状的，因此有时讲义的一段落已完，而时间还没有到，教师便映些风景或时事的画片给学生看，以用去这多余的光阴。其时正当日俄战争的时候，关于战事的画片自然也就比较的多了，我在这一个讲堂中，便须常常随喜我那同学们的拍手和喝采。有一回，我竟在画片上忽然会见我久违的许多中国人了，一个绑在中间，许多站在左右，一样是强壮的体格，而显出麻木的神情。据解说，则绑着的是替俄国做了军事上的侦探，正要被日军砍下头颅来示众，而围着的便是来赏鉴这示众的盛举的人们。
Because of this naïve knowledge, my student status was later listed in a medical school in the countryside of Japan. My dream was very happy, preparing to come back from graduation, treat the suffering of misplaced patients like my father, and become a military doctor during the war, which also promoted the Chinese people's belief in the Restoration. I don't know how to teach microbiology, but what kind of progress has been made now, in short, at that time movies were used to show the shape of microorganisms, so sometimes the handout was over, and before the time was up, the teacher showed some pictures of landscapes or current events to the students to use this extra time. At that time, during the Russo-Japanese War, there were naturally more pictures about the war, and I had to often applaud and applaud my classmates in this lecture hall. Once, I suddenly met many Chinese people I hadn't seen for a long time on the painting, one was tied in the middle, and many were standing on the left and right, all with strong physiques, and showed a numb look. According to the commentary, the people who were tied up were military detectives who had been military detectives for Russia, and were about to be beheaded by the Japanese army to show the public, and surrounded by people who came to appreciate this grand event.这一学年没有完毕，我已经到了东京了，因为从那一回以后，我便觉得医学并非一件紧要事，凡是愚弱的国民，即使体格如何健全，如何茁壮，也只能做毫无意义的示众的材料和看客，病死多少是不必以为不幸的。所以我们的第一要著，是在改变他们的精神，而善于改变精神的是，我那时以为当然要推文艺，于是想提倡文艺运动了。在东京的留学生很有学法政理化以至警察工业的，但没有人治文学和美术；可是在冷淡的空气中，也幸而寻到几个同志了，此外又邀集了必须的几个人，商量之后，第一步当然是出杂志，名目是取“新的生命”的意思，因为我们那时大抵带些复古的倾向，所以只谓之《新生》。
This academic year is not over, and I have already arrived in Tokyo, because since that time, I have felt that medicine is not an important matter, and all foolish and weak citizens, no matter how sound their physiques and how strong they are, can only be meaningless materials and spectators, and there is no need to think that death from illness is unfortunate. So our first priority is to change their spirit, and what is good at changing the spirit is that I thought that of course I had to tweet art, so I wanted to promote the literary and artistic movement. The international students in Tokyo are very knowledgeable in law, politics, and even the police industry, but there is no literature or art in the human world. But in the cold air, fortunately, I found a few comrades, and invited a few necessary people, and after discussion, the first step was of course to publish a magazine, which was named after "new life", because we probably had some retro tendencies at that time, so it was only called "New Life".《新生》的出版之期接近了，但最先就隐去了若干担当文字的人，接着又逃走了资本，结果只剩下不名一钱的三个人。创始时候既已背时，失败时候当然无可告语，而其后却连这三个人也都为各自的运命所驱策，不能在一处纵谈将来的好梦了，这就是我们的并未产生的《新生》的结局。
The publication date of "New Life" was approaching, but a few people in charge of the text were hidden first, and then the capital fled, leaving only three people who were not named. At the beginning of the beginning, there was no time to speak of it, and of course there was nothing to say when it failed, but then even these three people were driven by their own destinies and could not talk about the good dreams of the future in one place, which was the ending of our "New Life".我感到未尝经验的无聊，是自此以后的事。我当初是不知其所以然的；后来想，凡有一人的主张，得了赞和，是促其前进的，得了反对，是促其奋斗的，独有叫喊于生人中，而生人并无反应，既非赞同，也无反对，如置身毫无边际的荒原，无可措手的了，这是怎样的悲哀呵，我于是以我所感到者为寂寞。
I feel bored like I have never experienced before, and it has been since then. I didn't know why; Later, I thought that wherever a person's proposition is agreed upon, it is to promote it to move forward, to be opposed, to promote its struggle, and it is only shouted among the living, and the living does not react, neither agrees nor opposes, as if in an boundless wasteland, there is no way to do anything, what kind of sadness is this, so I think what I feel is loneliness.这寂寞又一天一天的长大起来，如大毒蛇，缠住了我的灵魂了。
This loneliness grew up day by day, like a poisonous snake, entangled my soul.然而我虽然自有无端的悲哀，却也并不愤懑，因为这经验使我反省，看见自己了：就是我决不是一个振臂一呼应者云集的英雄。
However, although I have my own unwarranted sorrow, I am not resentful, because this experience has made me reflect and see myself: that is, I am by no means a hero who raises my arms and responds.只是我自己的寂寞是不可不驱除的，因为这于我太痛苦。我于是用了种种法，来麻醉自己的灵魂，使我沉入于国民中，使我回到古代去，后来也亲历或旁观过几样更寂寞更悲哀的事，都为我所不愿追怀，甘心使他们和我的脑一同消灭在泥土里的，但我的麻醉法却也似乎已经奏了功，再没有青年时候的慷慨激昂的意思了。
It's just that my own loneliness must be dispelled, because it is too painful for me. I then used all kinds of methods to anesthetize my soul, so that I sank into the people, and made me return to ancient times, and later I also experienced or watched several more lonely and sad things, all of which I did not want to remember, and I was willing to let them be destroyed in the soil with my brain, but my anesthesia method seemed to have worked, and I no longer had the impassioned meaning of my youth.
S会馆里有三间屋，相传是往昔曾在院子里的槐树上缢死过一个女人的，现在槐树已经高不可攀了，而这屋还没有人住；许多年，我便寓在这屋里钞古碑。客中少有人来，古碑中也遇不到什么问题和主义，而我的生命却居然暗暗的消去了，这也就是我惟一的愿望。夏夜，蚊子多了，便摇着蒲扇坐在槐树下，从密叶缝里看那一点一点的青天，晚出的槐蚕又每每冰冷的落在头颈上。
There are three rooms in the S Hall, which are said to have strangled a woman on the locust tree in the yard in the past, and now the locust tree is unattainable, and this house is not yet inhabited; For many years, I have lived in this house to pay for the ancient monument. Few people came among the guests, and there were no problems and doctrines in the ancient monuments, but my life was actually secretly erased, which was my only wish. On summer nights, there were too many mosquitoes, so I sat under the locust tree shaking a cattail fan, looking at the blue sky little by little from the cracks in the dense leaves, and the late-emerging locust silkworms often fell coldly on their heads and necks.那时偶或来谈的是一个老朋友金心异，将手提的大皮夹放在破桌上，脱下长衫，对面坐下了，因为怕狗，似乎心房还在怦怦的跳动。
At that time, it was an old friend Jin Xinyi who put the big wallet he was carrying on the broken table, took off his robe, and sat down opposite, because he was afraid of dogs, and it seemed that his heart was still beating.“你钞了这些有什么用？”有一夜，他翻着我那古碑的钞本，发了研究的质问了。
"What's the use of you banknote?" One night, he flipped through the banknotes of my ancient stele and asked questions about research.“没有什么用。”
"It's useless."“那么，你钞他是什么意思呢？”
"So, what do you mean by banknote?"“没有什么意思。”
"It's not interesting."“我想，你可以做点文章……”
"I think you can do something about it......"我懂得他的意思了，他们正办《新青年》，然而那时仿佛不特没有人来赞同，并且也还没有人来反对，我想，他们许是感到寂寞了，但是说：
I understand what he means, they are running "New Youth", but at that time it seemed that not only did no one agree, but no one objected, I think they may have felt lonely, but they said:“假如一间铁屋子，是绝无窗户而万难破毁的，里面有许多熟睡的人们，不久都要闷死了，然而是从昏睡入死灭，并不感到就死的悲哀。现在你大嚷起来，惊起了较为清醒的几个人，使这不幸的少数者来受无可挽救的临终的苦楚，你倒以为对得起他们么？”
"If an iron house is windowless and is difficult to destroy, and there are many sleeping people in it, they will soon suffocate, but they will go from slumber to death, and they will not feel the sorrow of death. Now that you have shouted loudly, startled a few more sober people, and caused this unfortunate few to suffer irredeemably dying, do you think you are worthy of them? ”“然而几个人既然起来，你不能说决没有毁坏这铁屋的希望。”
"However, since a few people have risen, you can't say that there is no hope of destroying this iron house."是的，我虽然自有我的确信，然而说到希望，却是不能抹杀的，因为希望是在于将来，决不能以我之必无的证明，来折服了他之所谓可有，于是我终于答应他也做文章了，这便是最初的一篇《狂人日记》。从此以后，便一发而不可收，每写些小说模样的文章，以敷衍朋友们的嘱托，积久就有了十余篇。
Yes, although I have my own convictions, when it comes to hope, it cannot be erased, because hope lies in the future, and I must not be convinced by his so-called proof of what I must not have, so I finally agreed to him to make a fuss, which was the original "Diary of a Madman". Since then, it has been unacceptable, and every time I write some novel-like articles to perfunctory the instructions of my friends, there have been more than ten articles over time.在我自己，本以为现在是已经并非一个切迫而不能已于言的人了，但或者也还未能忘怀于当日自己的寂寞的悲哀罢，所以有时候仍不免呐喊几声，聊以慰藉那在寂寞里奔驰的猛士，使他不惮于前驱。至于我的喊声是勇猛或是悲哀，是可憎或是可笑，那倒是不暇顾及的；但既然是呐喊，则当然须听将令的了，所以我往往不恤用了曲笔，在《药》的瑜儿的坟上平空添上一个花环，在《明天》里也不叙单四嫂子竟没有做到看见儿子的梦，因为那时的主将是不主张消极的。至于自己，却也并不愿将自以为苦的寂寞，再来传染给也如我那年青时候似的正做着好梦的青年。
In myself, I thought that I was no longer a person who was urgent and could not speak, but perhaps I had not forgotten the sadness of my loneliness that day, so sometimes I still couldn't help but shout a few times to comfort the warrior who was running in loneliness, so that he was not afraid of the front. As for whether my cry is brave or sorrowful, abominable or ridiculous, it is beyond my consideration; But since it is a shout, of course I have to obey the order, so I often use a curved pen to add a wreath to the grave of Yu'er in "Medicine", and in "Tomorrow", I do not mention that the fourth sister-in-law did not achieve the dream of seeing her son, because the lord at that time did not advocate negativity. As for myself, I don't want to infect the loneliness I think is bitter to young people who are dreaming like I did when I was young.这样说来，我的小说和艺术的距离之远，也就可想而知了，然而到今日还能蒙着小说的名，甚而至于且有成集的机会，无论如何总不能不说是一件侥幸的事，但侥幸虽使我不安于心，而悬揣人间暂时还有读者，则究竟也仍然是高兴的。
In this way, the distance between my novels and art can be imagined, but to this day, I can still be covered with the name of novels, and even have the opportunity to complete an episode, in any case, I cannot help but say that it is a fluke, but although the fluke makes me uneasy, I am still happy to think that there are still readers in the world for the time being.所以我竟将我的短篇小说结集起来，而且付印了，又因为上面所说的缘由，便称之为《呐喊》。
So I actually collected my short stories and printed them, and because of the reasons mentioned above, I called them "The Scream".一九二二年十二月三日，鲁迅记于北京。
On December 3, 1922, Lu Xun recorded in Beijing.

狂人日记

狂人日记

狂人日记

Diary of a madman某君昆仲，今隐其名，皆余昔日在中学时良友；分隔多年，消息渐阙。日前偶闻其一大病；适归故乡，迂道往访，则仅晤一人，言病者其弟也。劳君远道来视，然已早愈，赴某地候补矣。因大笑，出示日记二册，谓可见当日病状，不妨献诸旧友。持归阅一过，知所患盖“迫害狂”之类。语颇错杂无伦次，又多荒唐之言；亦不著月日，惟墨色字体不一，知非一时所书。间亦有略具联络者，今撮录一篇，以供医家研究。记中语误，一字不易；惟人名虽皆村人，不为世间所知，无关大体，然亦悉易去。至于书名，则本人愈后所题，不复改也。七年四月二日识。
某君昆仲，今隐其名，皆余昔日在中学时良友；分隔多年，消息渐阙。 日前偶闻其一大病；适归故乡，迂道往访，则仅晤一人，言病者其弟也。 劳君远道来视，然已早愈，赴某地候补矣。 因大笑，出示日记二册，谓可见当日病状，不妨献诸旧友。 持归阅一过，知所患盖“迫害狂”之类。 语颇错杂无伦次，又多荒唐之言；亦不著月日，惟墨色字体不一，知非一时所书。 间亦有略具联络者，今撮录一篇，以供医家研究。 记中语误，一字不易；惟人名虽皆村人，不为世间所知，无关大体，然亦悉易去。 至于书名，则本人愈后所题，不复改也。 七年四月二日识。

狂人日记

一

狂人日记

One今天晚上，很好的月光。
Good moonshine tonight.我不见他，已是三十多年；今天见了，精神分外爽快。才知道以前的三十多年，全是发昏；然而须十分小心。不然，那赵家的狗，何以看我两眼呢？
I haven't seen him for more than 30 years; See you today, and I am very refreshed. Only then did I realize that the previous thirty years or so were all fainting; However, you have to be very careful. Otherwise, why would the Zhao family's dog look at me?我怕得有理。
I'm justified.

狂人日记

二

狂人日记

Two今天全没月光，我知道不妙。早上小心出门，赵贵翁的眼色便怪：似乎怕我，似乎想害我。还有七八个人，交头接耳的议论我，又怕我看见。一路上的人，都是如此。其中最凶的一个人，张着嘴，对我笑了一笑；我便从头直冷到脚跟，晓得他们布置，都已妥当了。
There is no moonlight today, I know it's not good. When he went out carefully in the morning, Zhao Guiweng's eyes were strange: he seemed to be afraid of me, and he seemed to want to harm me. There were also seven or eight people talking about me in their ears, but they were afraid that I would see them. This is true for people along the way. One of the most fierce of them, with his mouth open, smiled at me; I was cold from head to heel, knowing that they had arranged it properly.我可不怕，仍旧走我的路。前面一伙小孩子，也在那里议论我；眼色也同赵贵翁一样，脸色也铁青。我想我同小孩子有什么仇，他也这样。忍不住大声说，“你告诉我！”他们可就跑了。
I am not afraid, I still walk my way. A group of children in front of me were also talking about me; His eyes were the same as Zhao Guiweng's, and his face was also blue. I think I have a grudge against the child, and so does he. I can't help but say out loud, "You tell me!" "They just ran away.我想：我同赵贵翁有什么仇，同路上的人又有什么仇；只有廿年以前，把古久先生的陈年流水簿子，踹了一脚，古久先生很不高兴。赵贵翁虽然不认识他，一定也听到风声，代抱不平；约定路上的人，同我作冤对。但是小孩子呢？那时候，他们还没有出世，何以今天也睁着怪眼睛，似乎怕我，似乎想害我。这真教我怕，教我纳罕而且伤心。
I thought: What hatred do I have with Zhao Guiweng, and what hatred do I have with people on the same road; Only twenty years ago, Mr. Gu Jiu kicked Mr. Gu Jiu's old running water book, and Mr. Gu Jiu was very unhappy. Although Zhao Guiweng did not know him, he must have heard the news and was upset; The people on the road agreed to fight against me. But what about the little ones? At that time, they had not yet been born, so why did they open their eyes today, as if they were afraid of me and wanted to harm me. This really taught me to be afraid, taught me to be nahan and sad.我明白了。这是他们娘老子教的！
I understand. This is what their mother Lao Tzu taught!

狂人日记

三

狂人日记

Three晚上总是睡不着。凡事须得研究，才会明白。
I can't sleep at night. Everything must be studied to understand.他们——也有给知县打枷过的，也有给绅士掌过嘴的，也有衙役占了他妻子的，也有老子娘被债主逼死的；他们那时候的脸色，全没有昨天这么怕，也没有这么凶。
They - some have been shackled by the county magistrate, some have been slapped by the gentleman, some have taken his wife, and some have been forced to death by creditors; Their faces at that time were not as scary as yesterday, nor were they so fierce.最奇怪的是昨天街上的那个女人，打他儿子，嘴里说道，“老子呀！我要咬你几口才出气！”他眼睛却看着我。我出了一惊，遮掩不住；那青面獠牙的一伙人，便都哄笑起来。陈老五赶上前，硬把我拖回家中了。
The strangest thing is that the woman on the street yesterday beat his son and said, "Lao Tzu! I want to bite you a few bites before I get angry!" But his eyes looked at me. I was surprised and couldn't hide it; The group of people with green faces and fangs all laughed. Chen Laowu caught up and dragged me home.拖我回家，家里的人都装作不认识我；他们的眼色，也全同别人一样。进了书房，便反扣上门，宛然是关了一只鸡鸭。这一件事，越教我猜不出底细。
Drag me home, and everyone in the family pretends not to know me; Their eyes are all the same as others. When I entered the study, I knocked on the door, as if I was locked up with a chicken and duck. This matter, the more I teach me, the more I can't guess the details.前几天，狼子村的佃户来告荒，对我大哥说，他们村里的一个大恶人，给大家打死了；几个人便挖出他的心肝来，用油煎炒了吃，可以壮壮胆子。我插了一句嘴，佃户和大哥便都看我几眼。今天才晓得他们的眼光，全同外面的那伙人一模一样。
A few days ago, the tenants of Langzi Village came to report the famine and told my eldest brother that a big villain in their village had killed everyone; A few people dug out his heart and liver, fried it in oil, and ate it, which could strengthen his courage. I interjected, and the tenant and the eldest brother looked at me a few times. Only today did I know that their vision was exactly the same as the group outside.想起来，我从顶上直冷到脚跟。
Thinking about it, I was cold from top to heel.他们会吃人，就未必不会吃我。
They can eat people, so they may not eat me.你看那女人“咬你几口”的话，和一伙青面獠牙人的笑，和前天佃户的话，明明是暗号。我看出他话中全是毒，笑中全是刀。他们的牙齿，全是白厉厉的排着，这就是吃人的家伙。
Look at the woman's words of "biting you a few times", the smiles of a group of green-faced fanged people, and the words of the tenants the day before yesterday, they are obviously codes. I could see that his words were full of poison and his smile was full of knives. Their teeth are all lined up, this is the cannibal guy.照我自己想，虽然不是恶人，自从踹了古家的簿子，可就难说了。他们似乎别有心思，我全猜不出。况且他们一翻脸，便说人是恶人。我还记得大哥教我做论，无论怎样好人，翻他几句，他便打上几个圈；原谅坏人几句，他便说“翻天妙手，与众不同”。我那里猜得到他们的心思，究竟怎样；况且是要吃的时候。
In my own opinion, although he is not a villain, it is difficult to say since he kicked the ancient family's book. They seem to have other thoughts, I can't guess at all. Moreover, as soon as they turn their faces, they say that people are evil. I still remember that my eldest brother taught me to make a theory, no matter how good a person is, he will make a few circles after reading a few sentences from him; Forgive the bad guy for a few words, and he said, "It's a great way to turn the world around, and it's different." I can guess what their minds are doing; Besides, it's time to eat.凡事总须研究，才会明白。古来时常吃人，我也还记得，可是不甚清楚。我翻开历史一查，这历史没有年代，歪歪斜斜的每叶上都写着“仁义道德”几个字。我横竖睡不着，仔细看了半夜，才从字缝里看出字来，满本都写着两个字是“吃人”！
Everything must be studied to understand. Since ancient times, people have often been eaten, and I still remember it, but I don't know very well. I opened the history and found that this history has no age, and the words "benevolence, righteousness and morality" are written on each crooked leaf. I couldn't sleep horizontally and vertically, and after looking carefully in the middle of the night, I saw the words from the cracks, and the whole book was written with two words "cannibalism"!书上写着这许多字，佃户说了这许多话，却都笑吟吟的睁着怪眼睛看我。
There were so many words written in the book, and the tenants said so many words, but they all looked at me with strange eyes open with a smile.我也是人，他们想要吃我了！
I'm also human, and they want to eat me!

狂人日记

四

狂人日记

Four早上，我静坐了一会。陈老五送进饭来，一碗菜，一碗蒸鱼；这鱼的眼睛，白而且硬，张着嘴，同那一伙想吃人的人一样。吃了几筷，滑溜溜的不知是鱼是人，便把他兜肚连肠的吐出。
In the morning, I sat quietly for a while. Chen Laowu sent in rice, a bowl of vegetables, a bowl of steamed fish; The eyes of this fish are white and hard, and their mouths are open, just like the group of people who want to eat people. After eating a few chopsticks, he didn't know if it was a fish or a person, so he spit it out with his stomach and intestines.我说“老五，对大哥说，我闷得慌，想到园里走走。”老五不答应，走了；停一会，可就来开了门。
I said, "Fifth child, tell the eldest brother, I was so bored that I wanted to walk in the garden." The fifth child did not agree and left; After stopping for a while, he came to open the door.我也不动，研究他们如何摆布我；知道他们一定不肯放松。果然！我大哥引了一个老头子，慢慢走来；他满眼凶光，怕我看出，只是低头向着地，从眼镜横边暗暗看我。大哥说，“今天你仿佛很好。”我说“是的。”大哥说，“今天请何先生来，给你诊一诊。”我说“可以！”其实我岂不知道这老头子是刽子手扮的！无非借了看脉这名目，揣一揣肥瘠：因这功劳，也分一片肉吃。我也不怕；虽然不吃人，胆子却比他们还壮。伸出两个拳头，看他如何下手。老头子坐着，闭了眼睛，摸了好一会，呆了好一会；便张开他鬼眼睛说，“不要乱想。静静的养几天，就好了。”
I don't move, studying how they manipulate me; Knowing that they must not relax. Really! My eldest brother led an old man and walked slowly; His eyes were full of fierce light, afraid that I would see it, so he just lowered his head to the ground and secretly looked at me from the side of his glasses. The eldest brother said, "You seem to be very good today." I said, "Yes." The eldest brother said, "Please invite Mr. He to come today and give you a diagnosis." I said, "Yes!" "Actually, I don't know that this old man is dressed as an executioner! It is nothing more than borrowing the name of looking at the pulse to take a look at the fat: because of this credit, I also share a piece of meat to eat. I'm not afraid; Although they don't eat people, they are stronger than them. Stretch out two fists to see how he starts. The old man sat down, closed his eyes, touched for a while, and stayed for a while; Then he opened his ghost eyes and said, "Don't think about it." Just keep it quietly for a few days. ”不要乱想，静静的养！养肥了，他们是自然可以多吃；我有什么好处，怎么会“好了”？他们这群人，又想吃人，又是鬼鬼祟祟，想法子遮掩，不敢直捷下手，真要令我笑死。我忍不住，便放声大笑起来，十分快活。自己晓得这笑声里面，有的是义勇和正气。老头子和大哥，都失了色，被我这勇气正气镇压住了。
Don't think about it, raise it quietly! After fattening, they can naturally eat more; What good is it for me, how can it be "good"? Their group of people, who want to eat people, are sneaky, and don't dare to attack directly, which really makes me laugh to death. I couldn't help it, so I laughed out loud, very happy. I know that in this laughter, there is righteousness and righteousness. The old man and the eldest brother were both pale and suppressed by my courage and righteousness.但是我有勇气，他们便越想吃我，沾光一点这勇气。老头子跨出门，走不多远，便低声对大哥说道，“赶紧吃罢！”大哥点点头。原来也有你！这一件大发见，虽似意外，也在意中：合伙吃我的人，便是我的哥哥！
But I have the courage, and the more they want to eat me, the more they will stain this courage. The old man stepped out the door and didn't go far, so he whispered to the eldest brother, "Hurry up and eat!" The eldest brother nodded. So you too! This big discovery, although it seems to be an accident, is also in mind: the person who partners in eating me is my brother!吃人的是我哥哥！
It's my brother who cannibalizes people!我是吃人的人的兄弟！
I am the brother of the cannibal!我自己被人吃了，可仍然是吃人的人的兄弟！
I myself was eaten, but I am still the brother of the cannibal!

狂人日记

五

狂人日记

Five这几天是退一步想：假使那老头子不是刽子手扮的，真是医生，也仍然是吃人的人。他们的祖师李时珍做的“本草什么”上，明明写着人肉可以煎吃；他还能说自己不吃人么？
These days, I took a step back and thought: if the old man was not an executioner, he was really a doctor, and he was still a cannibal. On the "Materia Medica" made by their ancestor Li Shizhen, it is clearly written that human flesh can be fried; Can he still say that he doesn't eat people?至于我家大哥，也毫不冤枉他。他对我讲书的时候，亲口说过可以“易子而食”；又一回偶然议论起一个不好的人，他便说不但该杀，还当“食肉寝皮”。我那时年纪还小，心跳了好半天。前天狼子村佃户来说吃心肝的事，他也毫不奇怪，不住的点头。可见心思是同从前一样狠。既然可以“易子而食”，便什么都易得，什么人都吃得。我从前单听他讲道理，也胡涂过去；现在晓得他讲道理的时候，不但唇边还抹着人油，而且心里满装着吃人的意思。
As for my eldest brother, he did not wrongfully accuse him. When he told me, he personally said that he could "change his son and eat"; Another time he accidentally talked about a bad person, he said that he should not only be killed, but also "eat meat and sleep". I was still young at the time, and my heart beat for a long time. The tenants of Tianlangzi Village said that he was not surprised and nodded incessantly. It can be seen that the mind is as ruthless as before. Since it is possible to "change the child and eat", everything is easy to get and anyone can eat. I used to listen to him reason, and I also scribbled it up; Now I know that when he is reasoning, not only does he have human oil on his lips, but his heart is full of cannibalism.

狂人日记

六

狂人日记

Six黑漆漆的，不知是日是夜。赵家的狗又叫起来了。
It was pitch black, and I didn't know if it was day or night. The Zhao family's dog barked again.狮子似的凶心，兔子的怯弱，狐狸的狡猾，……
The fierceness of a lion, the cowardice of a rabbit, and the cunning of a fox,......

狂人日记

七

狂人日记

Seven我晓得他们的方法，直捷杀了，是不肯的，而且也不敢，怕有祸祟。所以他们大家连络，布满了罗网，逼我自戕。试看前几天街上男女的样子，和这几天我大哥的作为，便足可悟出八九分了。最好是解下腰带，挂在梁上，自己紧紧勒死；他们没有杀人的罪名，又偿了心愿，自然都欢天喜地的发出一种呜呜咽咽的笑声。否则惊吓忧愁死了，虽则略瘦，也还可以首肯几下。
I know their method, Zhijie killed, but he refused, and he didn't dare, for fear of disaster. So they all connected, covered with nets, and forced me to kill myself. Just look at the appearance of men and women on the street a few days ago, and what my eldest brother has done in the past few days, and you can realize eight or nine points. It is best to untie the belt, hang it on the beam, and strangle it tightly; They were not charged with murder, and they fulfilled their wishes, so naturally they all let out a whimpering laugh with joy. Otherwise, I will die of fright and sorrow, and although I am slightly thinner, I can still agree a few times.他们是只会吃死肉的！——记得什么书上说，有一种东西，叫“海乙那”的，眼光和样子都很难看；时常吃死肉，连极大的骨头，都细细嚼烂，咽下肚子去，想起来也教人害怕。“海乙那”是狼的亲眷，狼是狗的本家。前天赵家的狗，看我几眼，可见他也同谋，早已接洽。老头子眼看着地，岂能瞒得我过。
They will only eat dead meat! ——I remember what book said that there was a thing called "Hai Yina", which was ugly in terms of vision and appearance; He often eats dead meat, even the very large bones, chews them carefully, swallows them, and is scared when he thinks about them. "Hai Yina" is the wolf's relative, and the wolf is the dog's home. The day before yesterday, the Zhao family's dog looked at me a few times, and it showed that he was also complicit and had already contacted me. The old man looked at the ground, how could he hide it from me.最可怜的是我的大哥，他也是人，何以毫不害怕；而且合伙吃我呢？还是历来惯了，不以为非呢？还是丧了良心，明知故犯呢？
The most pitiful thing is my eldest brother, he is also a human being, why is he not afraid; And what about partnering to eat me? Or have you always been used to it and don't think it's wrong? Or do you lose your conscience and commit it knowingly?我诅咒吃人的人，先从他起头；要劝转吃人的人，也先从他下手。
I curse the cannibals, starting with him; If you want to persuade the cannibal, you should also start with him first.

狂人日记

八

狂人日记

Eight其实这种道理，到了现在，他们也该早已懂得，……
In fact, by now, they should have understood this truth,......忽然来了一个人；年纪不过二十左右，相貌是不很看得清楚，满面笑容，对了我点头，他的笑也不像真笑。我便问他，“吃人的事，对么？”他仍然笑着说，“不是荒年，怎么会吃人。”我立刻就晓得，他也是一伙，喜欢吃人的；便自勇气百倍，偏要问他。
Suddenly a person came; He is only about twenty years old, his appearance is not very clear, his face is full of smiles, and he nodded to me, and his smile didn't look like a real smile. I asked him, "Cannibalism, right?" He still smiled and said, "It's not a famine year, how can you eat people." "I knew at once that he was also a gang and liked to eat people; I was a hundred times more courageous, but I wanted to ask him.“对么？”
"Right?"“这等事问他什么。你真会……说笑话。……今天天气很好。”
"What do you ask him about this? You really ...... Tell jokes. …… The weather is good today. ”天气是好，月色也很亮了。可是我要问你，“对么？”
The weather is good and the moonlight is bright. But I want to ask you, "Right? ”他不以为然了。含含胡胡的答道，“不……”
He didn't think so. replied with a hint, "No......"“不对？他们何以竟吃？！”
"Isn't it? Why do they eat it?! ”“没有的事……”
"Nothing......"“没有的事？狼子村现吃；还有书上都写着，通红斩新！”
"Nothing? Wolf Village eats now; There are also books that say that it is red and new! ”他便变了脸，铁一般青。睁着眼说，“有许有的，这是从来如此……”
His face changed, as blue as iron. He opened his eyes and said, "Yes, this has never been ......"“从来如此，便对么？”
"It's always been like this, right?"“我不同你讲这些道理；总之你不该说，你说便是你错！”
"I don't agree with you these things; In short, you shouldn't say it, it's your fault if you say it! ”我直跳起来，张开眼，这人便不见了。全身出了一大片汗。他的年纪，比我大哥小得远，居然也是一伙；这一定是他娘老子先教的。还怕已经教给他儿子了；所以连小孩子，也都恶狠狠的看我。
I jumped up, opened my eyes, and the man was gone. There was a lot of sweat all over his body. He is much younger than my eldest brother, and he is actually a gang; This must have been taught by his mother Lao Tzu first. I am afraid that I have already taught it to his son; So even the children looked at me viciously.

狂人日记

九

狂人日记

Nine自己想吃人，又怕被别人吃了，都用着疑心极深的眼光，面面相觑。……
They want to eat people, but they are afraid of being eaten by others, so they all look at each other with extremely suspicious eyes. ……去了这心思，放心做事走路吃饭睡觉，何等舒服。这只是一条门槛，一个关头。他们可是父子兄弟夫妇朋友师生仇敌和各不相识的人，都结成一伙，互相劝勉，互相牵掣，死也不肯跨过这一步。
Go to this mind, rest assured to do things, walk, eat and sleep, how comfortable. It's just a threshold, a juncture. They are fathers, sons, brothers, husbands and wives, friends, teachers, students, enemies, and strangers, all of whom form a group, exhort each other, pull each other, and refuse to take this step even if they die.

狂人日记

十

狂人日记

Ten大清早，去寻我大哥；他立在堂门外看天，我便走到他背后，拦住门，格外沉静，格外和气的对他说，
early in the morning, go find my eldest brother; He stood outside the hall door looking at the sky, so I walked behind him, stopped the door, and said to him very quietly and kindly,“大哥，我有话告诉你。”
"Big brother, I have something to tell you."“你说就是，”他赶紧回过脸来，点点头。
"You said so," he quickly turned his face around and nodded.“我只有几句话，可是说不出来。大哥，大约当初野蛮的人，都吃过一点人。后来因为心思不同，有的不吃人了，一味要好，便变了人，变了真的人。有的却还吃，——也同虫子一样，有的变了鱼鸟猴子，一直变到人。有的不要好，至今还是虫子。这吃人的人比不吃人的人，何等惭愧。怕比虫子的惭愧猴子，还差得很远很远。
I only have a few words, but I can't say it. Big brother, about the barbaric people at the beginning, have eaten a little people. Later, because of different minds, some stopped eating people, and blindly wanted to be good, so they changed into people and real people. Some still eat ,—— are the same as insects, and some have changed into fish, birds and monkeys, all the way to people. Some are not good, they are still bugs. How ashamed this cannibal is compared to the non-cannibal. I'm afraid that the monkey is more ashamed than the bug, and it's far away.“易牙蒸了他儿子，给桀纣吃，还是一直从前的事。谁晓得从盘古开辟天地以后，一直吃到易牙的儿子；从易牙的儿子，一直吃到徐锡林；从徐锡林，又一直吃到狼子村捉住的人。去年城里杀了犯人，还有一个生痨病的人，用馒头蘸血舐。
Yi Ya steamed his son and gave it to Jie Zhou, which was still the same thing as before. Who knows that since Pangu opened up the world, he has been eating until Yi Ya's son; From Yi Ya's son, all the way to Xu Xilin; From Xu Xilin, he ate all the way to the people caught in Wolf Village. Last year, a prisoner was killed in the city, and there was a man with tuberculosis who dipped steamed buns in blood and licked them.“他们要吃我，你一个人，原也无法可想；然而又何必去入伙。吃人的人，什么事做不出；他们会吃我，也会吃你，一伙里面，也会自吃。但只要转一步，只要立刻改了，也就人人太平。虽然从来如此，我们今天也可以格外要好，说是不能！大哥，我相信你能说，前天佃户要减租，你说过不能。”
"They want to eat me, you alone, you can't imagine; However, why go to the team? Cannibals can't do anything; They will eat me, they will eat you, and they will eat themselves in a group. But as long as you take a step back, as long as you change it immediately, everyone will be peaceful. Although this has always been the case, we can also be extra good today, saying no! Big brother, I believe you can say that the tenant wanted to reduce the rent the day before yesterday, but you said no. ”当初，他还只是冷笑，随后眼光便凶狠起来，一到说破他们的隐情，那就满脸都变成青色了。大门外立着一伙人，赵贵翁和他的狗，也在里面，都探头探脑的挨进来。有的是看不出面貌，似乎用布蒙着；有的是仍旧青面獠牙，抿着嘴笑。我认识他们是一伙，都是吃人的人。可是也晓得他们心思很不一样，一种是以为从来如此，应该吃的；一种是知道不该吃，可是仍然要吃，又怕别人说破他，所以听了我的话，越发气愤不过，可是抿着嘴冷笑。
At first, he just sneered, and then his eyes became fierce, and when he revealed their secrets, his face turned blue. There was a group of people standing outside the gate, and Zhao Guiweng and his dog were also inside, all poking their heads in. some are invisible and seem to be covered with cloth; Some are still with blue faces and fangs, pursing their mouths and smiling. I know them as a gang, and they are all cannibals. But I also know that their minds are very different, one is to think that it has always been like this, and it should be eaten; One is that he knows he shouldn't eat, but he still wants to eat, and he is afraid that others will tell him out, so after listening to my words, he became more and more angry, but he pursed his lips and sneered.这时候，大哥也忽然显出凶相，高声喝道，
At this time, the eldest brother also suddenly showed a fierce appearance and shouted loudly,“都出去！疯子有什么好看！”
"Get out! What's so good about a madman! ”这时候，我又懂得一件他们的巧妙了。他们岂但不肯改，而且早已布置；预备下一个疯子的名目罩上我。将来吃了，不但太平无事，怕还会有人见情。佃户说的大家吃了一个恶人，正是这方法。这是他们的老谱！
At this time, I understood one of their ingenuity again. Not only do they refuse to change, but they have already arranged it; Prepare the name of the next madman to cover me. If you eat it in the future, not only will it be peaceful, but you may also be in love. The tenant said that everyone ate a wicked person, and this is exactly the method. This is their old score!陈老五也气愤愤的直走进来。如何按得住我的口，我偏要对这伙人说，
Chen Laowu also walked in angrily. How to hold my mouth, I want to say to this group,“你们可以改了，从真心改起！要晓得将来容不得吃人的人，活在世上。
"You can change, start from the heart! We must know that in the future, cannibals will not be allowed to live in the world.“你们要不改，自己也会吃尽。即使生得多，也会给真的人除灭了，同猎人打完狼子一样！——同虫子一样！”
"If you don't change, you will eat it all. Even if you give birth to a lot, you will be exterminated by real people, just like a hunter who kills a wolf! - Like a bug! ”那一伙人，都被陈老五赶走了。大哥也不知那里去了。陈老五劝我回屋子里去。屋里面全是黑沉沉的。横梁和椽子都在头上发抖；抖了一会，就大起来，堆在我身上。
That group of people was all driven away by Chen Laowu. The eldest brother didn't know where he went. Chen Laowu persuaded me to go back to the house. The inside of the house was all dark. The beams and rafters tremble on their heads; After shaking for a while, it grew big and piled up on me.万分沉重，动弹不得；他的意思是要我死。我晓得他的沉重是假的，便挣扎出来，出了一身汗。可是偏要说，
extremely heavy and unable to move; He meant to die. I knew that his heaviness was fake, so I struggled out and sweated. But I want to say,“你们立刻改了，从真心改起！你们要晓得将来是容不得吃人的人，……”
"You changed immediately, from the bottom of your heart! You must know that in the future you will not tolerate cannibalism,......"

狂人日记

十一

狂人日记

Eleven太阳也不出，门也不开，日日是两顿饭。
The sun doesn't come out, the door doesn't open, and it's two meals a day.我捏起筷子，便想起我大哥；晓得妹子死掉的缘故，也全在他。那时我妹子才五岁，可爱可怜的样子，还在眼前。母亲哭个不住，他却劝母亲不要哭；大约因为自己吃了，哭起来不免有点过意不去。如果还能过意不去，……
I picked up my chopsticks and thought of my eldest brother; Knowing that the reason for the girl's death is all due to him. At that time, my sister was only five years old, and her cute and pitiful appearance was still in front of me. his mother couldn't stop crying, but he advised her not to cry; Probably because I ate it, I couldn't help but feel a little sorry when I cried. If you can still live without going,......妹子是被大哥吃了，母亲知道没有，我可不得而知。
The girl was eaten by her eldest brother, and my mother knew whether it was true, I don't know.母亲想也知道；不过哭的时候，却并没有说明，大约也以为应当的了。记得我四五岁时，坐在堂前乘凉，大哥说爷娘生病，做儿子的须割下一片肉来，煮熟了请他吃，才算好人；母亲也没有说不行。一片吃得，整个的自然也吃得。但是那天的哭法，现在想起来，实在还教人伤心，这真是奇极的事！
Mother wants to know; But when I cried, I didn't explain it, and I probably thought it was right. I remember when I was four or five years old, sitting in front of the hall to enjoy the shade, my eldest brother said that my grandparents were sick, and I had to cut off a piece of meat to be a son, and when it was cooked, I would treat him to eat, so that I could be considered a good person; My mother didn't say no. If you eat one piece, you can naturally eat the whole thing. But the way I cried that day, now that I think about it, it's really sad, which is really a strange thing!

狂人日记

十二

狂人日记

twelve不能想了。
I can't think about it anymore.四千年来时时吃人的地方，今天才明白，我也在其中混了多年；大哥正管着家务，妹子恰恰死了，他未必不和在饭菜里，暗暗给我们吃。
A place that has been eating people for 4,000 years, and today I understand that I have also been in it for many years; The eldest brother is in charge of the housework, and the sister just died, and he may not be in the meal, secretly giving us food.我未必无意之中，不吃了我妹子的几片肉，现在也轮到我自己，……
I may not have accidentally stopped eating a few slices of my sister's meat, and now it's my turn,......有了四千年吃人履历的我，当初虽然不知道，现在明白，难见真的人！
With 4,000 years of cannibalism, although I didn't know it at the beginning, I now understand that it is difficult to see real people!

狂人日记

十三

狂人日记

A baker's dozen没有吃过人的孩子，或者还有？
Children who have never eaten people, or are there others?救救孩子……
Save the child......一九一八年四月。
April 1918.

孔乙己

孔乙己

孔乙己

Kong Yiji鲁镇的酒店的格局，是和别处不同的：都是当街一个曲尺形的大柜台，柜里面预备着热水，可以随时温酒。做工的人，傍午傍晚散了工，每每花四文铜钱，买一碗酒，——这是二十多年前的事，现在每碗要涨到十文，——靠柜外站着，热热的喝了休息；倘肯多花一文，便可以买一碟盐煮笋，或者茴香豆，做下酒物了，如果出到十几文，那就能买一样荤菜，但这些顾客，多是短衣帮，大抵没有这样阔绰。只有穿长衫的，才踱进店面隔壁的房子里，要酒要菜，慢慢地坐喝。
The layout of the hotel in Luzhen is different from other places: they are all large counters in the shape of a curved ruler on the street, and hot water is prepared in the cabinet, which can warm wine at any time. The worker, after working in the afternoon and evening, spent four copper coins to buy a bowl of wine,—— which was more than 20 years ago, and now each bowl has risen to ten cents,—— standing outside the cabinet, drinking hot and resting; If you are willing to spend a penny more, you can buy a plate of salt-boiled bamboo shoots, or fennel beans, and make wine, if you pay more than a dozen cents, then you can buy a meat dish, but these customers, most of them are short clothes, and they are probably not so generous. Only those wearing long gowns paced into the house next to the store, asked for wine and food, and sat down and drank slowly.我从十二岁起，便在镇口的咸亨酒店里当伙计，掌柜说，样子太傻，怕侍候不了长衫主顾，就在外面做点事罢。外面的短衣主顾，虽然容易说话，但唠唠叨叨缠夹不清的也很不少。他们往往要亲眼看着黄酒从坛子里舀出，看过壶子底里有水没有，又亲看将壶子放在热水里，然后放心：在这严重监督下，羼水也很为难。所以过了几天，掌柜又说我干不了这事。幸亏荐头的情面大，辞退不得，便改为专管温酒的一种无聊职务了。
Since I was twelve years old, I have been working as a clerk at the Xianheng Hotel in the town, and the shopkeeper said that he looked too stupid, and he was afraid that he would not be able to serve the patrons of the long gown, so he just did something outside. Although the short-clad patrons outside are easy to talk to, there are also a lot of nagging and entanglements. They often have to watch the rice wine scooped out of the jar, see if there is water at the bottom of the pot, and see if the pot is put in hot water, and then rest assured: under this serious supervision, the water is also very difficult. So a few days later, the shopkeeper said that I couldn't do this. Fortunately, the recommendation was so strong that he couldn't be dismissed, so he changed to a boring position in charge of warm wine.我从此便整天的站在柜台里，专管我的职务。虽然没有什么失职，但总觉得有些单调，有些无聊。掌柜是一副凶脸孔，主顾也没有好声气，教人活泼不得；只有孔乙己到店，才可以笑几声，所以至今还记得。
Since then, I have been standing at the counter all day long, in charge of my duties. Although there is no dereliction of duty, I always feel a little monotonous and boring. The shopkeeper has a fierce face, and the customer has no good voice, which makes people lively; Only when Kong Yiji arrived at the store could he laugh a few times, so he still remembers it.孔乙己是站着喝酒而穿长衫的唯一的人。他身材很高大；青白脸色，皱纹间时常夹些伤痕；一部乱蓬蓬的花白的胡子。穿的虽然是长衫，可是又脏又破，似乎十多年没有补，也没有洗。他对人说话，总是满口之乎者也，教人半懂不懂的。因为他姓孔，别人便从描红纸上的“上大人孔乙己”这半懂不懂的话里，替他取下一个绰号，叫作孔乙己。孔乙己一到店，所有喝酒的人便都看着他笑，有的叫道，“孔乙己，你脸上又添上新伤疤了！”他不回答，对柜里说，“温两碗酒，要一碟茴香豆。”便排出九文大钱。他们又故意的高声嚷道，“你一定又偷了人家的东西了！”孔乙己睁大眼睛说，“你怎么这样凭空污人清白……”“什么清白？我前天亲眼见你偷了何家的书，吊着打。”孔乙己便涨红了脸，额上的青筋条条绽出，争辩道，“窃书不能算偷……窃书！……读书人的事，能算偷么？”接连便是难懂的话，什么“君子固穷”，什么“者乎”之类，引得众人都哄笑起来：店内外充满了快活的空气。
Kong Yiji is the only person who stands and drinks and wears a long gown. He was very tall; pale face, often with some scars between wrinkles; A disheveled gray beard. Although he was wearing a long gown, it was dirty and torn, and it seemed that he had not been mended or washed for more than ten years. He speaks to people, always full of mouthfuls, teaching people who don't understand what they don't understand. Because his surname was Kong, others took a nickname for him from the half-incomprehensible words of "Master Kong Yiji" on the red paper, called Kong Yiji. As soon as Kong Yiji arrived at the store, everyone who drank looked at him and smiled, and some shouted, "Kong Yiji, you have a new scar on your face!" He didn't answer, and said to the cabinet, "Warm two bowls of wine and ask for a plate of fennel beans." Then he discharged nine cents of money. They deliberately shouted loudly, "You must have stolen something from someone else again!" Kong Yiji opened his eyes wide and said, "Why are you so innocent out of thin air...... "What innocence?" I saw with my own eyes the day before yesterday that you stole the He family's book and beat it up. Kong Yiji's face turned red, and the green veins on his forehead bloomed, and he argued, "Stealing books cannot be considered stealing...... Stealing books! …… Can the affairs of scholars be considered stealing? One after another, difficult words, such as "a gentleman is poor", "a gentleman", etc., caused everyone to laugh: the store was full of happy air inside and outside.听人家背地里谈论，孔乙己原来也读过书，但终于没有进学，又不会营生；于是愈过愈穷，弄到将要讨饭了。幸而写得一笔好字，便替人家钞钞书，换一碗饭吃。可惜他又有一样坏脾气，便是好喝懒做。坐不到几天，便连人和书籍纸张笔砚，一齐失踪。如是几次，叫他钞书的人也没有了。孔乙己没有法，便免不了偶然做些偷窃的事。但他在我们店里，品行却比别人都好，就是从不拖欠；虽然间或没有现钱，暂时记在粉板上，但不出一月，定然还清，从粉板上拭去了孔乙己的名字。
Listening to people talking behind their backs, Kong Yiji had also studied, but in the end he did not go to school, and he would not make a living; So I got poorer and poorer, and I was about to beg for food. Fortunately, if you write a good word, you will exchange money for others and exchange it for a bowl of rice. It's a pity that he has another bad temper, that is, he is lazy to drink. After sitting for a few days, people disappeared along with books, paper, pens and inkstones. After doing this several times, there was no one to call him a banknote. Kong Yiji has no way, so he will inevitably do some stealing by chance. But in our store, his conduct is better than others, that is, he never defaults; Although there was no cash from time to time, it was temporarily recorded on the powder board, but within a month, it was definitely paid off, and Kong Yiji's name was wiped off the powder board.孔乙己喝过半碗酒，涨红的脸色渐渐复了原，旁人便又问道，“孔乙己，你当真认识字么？”孔乙己看着问他的人，显出不屑置辩的神气。他们便接着说道，“你怎的连半个秀才也捞不到呢？”孔乙己立刻显出颓唐不安模样，脸上笼上了一层灰色，嘴里说些话；这回可是全是之乎者也之类，一些不懂了。在这时候，众人也都哄笑起来：店内外充满了快活的空气。
Kong Yiji drank half a bowl of wine, and his flushed face gradually returned to its original state, and others asked again, "Kong Yiji, do you really know words?" Kong Yiji looked at the person who asked him, showing a look of disdain. They continued, "Why can't you even get half a scholar?" Kong Yiji immediately showed a decadent and uneasy appearance, his face was covered with a layer of gray, and he said something in his mouth; This time it's all about the like, some don't understand. At this time, everyone also burst into laughter: the store was filled with a happy atmosphere inside and outside.在这些时候，我可以附和着笑，掌柜是决不责备的。而且掌柜见了孔乙己，也每每这样问他，引人发笑。孔乙己自己知道不能和他们谈天，便只好向孩子说话。有一回对我说道，“你读过书么？”我略略点一点头。他说，“读过书，……我便考你一考。茴香豆的茴字，怎样写的？”我想，讨饭一样的人，也配考我么？便回过脸去，不再理会。孔乙己等了许久，很恳切的说道，“不能写罢？……我教给你，记着！这些字应该记着。将来做掌柜的时候，写账要用。”我暗想我和掌柜的等级还很远呢，而且我们掌柜也从不将茴香豆上账；又好笑，又不耐烦，懒懒的答他道，“谁要你教，不是草头底下一个来回的回字么？”孔乙己显出极高兴的样子，将两个指头的长指甲敲着柜台，点头说，“对呀对呀！……回字有四样写法，你知道么？”我愈不耐烦了，努着嘴走远。孔乙己刚用指甲蘸了酒，想在柜上写字，见我毫不热心，便又叹一口气，显出极惋惜的样子。
At these times, I can echo and laugh, and the shopkeeper will never blame. And when the shopkeeper saw Kong Yiji, he often asked him like this, which made people laugh. Kong Yiji knew that he couldn't talk to them, so he had to talk to the children. Once he said to me, "Have you ever read a book? I nodded slightly. He said, "I have read books,...... I'll test you. How is the word fennel written for fennel beans? "I think, is a person like begging for food worthy of me? Then he turned his face and ignored it. Kong Yiji waited for a long time and said very earnestly, "Can't write?" …… I'll teach you, remember! These words should be remembered. When you become a shopkeeper in the future, you need to use it for accounting. "I thought to myself that I was still far from the shopkeeper's level, and our shopkeeper never listed fennel beans on the account; Funny and impatient, he replied lazily, "Who wants you to teach, isn't it a back-and-forth reply under the grass?" Kong Yiji looked extremely happy, knocked the long nails of his two fingers on the counter, nodded and said, "Yes, yes! …… There are four ways to write the word "reply", do you know? I became more and more impatient, and walked away with my mouth open. Kong Yiji had just dipped his fingernails in wine and wanted to write on the cabinet, but when he saw that I was not enthusiastic, he sighed again, showing a very regretful look.有几回，邻居孩子听得笑声，也赶热闹，围住了孔乙己。他便给他们茴香豆吃，一人一颗。孩子吃完豆，仍然不散，眼睛都望着碟子。孔乙己着了慌，伸开五指将碟子罩住，弯腰下去说道，“不多了，我已经不多了。”直起身又看一看豆，自己摇头说，“不多不多！多乎哉？不多也。”于是这一群孩子都在笑声里走散了。
A few times, the neighbor's children heard the laughter and rushed to the excitement and surrounded Kong Yiji. He gave them fennel beans to eat, one for each person. After the child finished eating the beans, he still didn't disperse, his eyes were looking at the plate. Kong Yiji panicked, stretched out his five fingers to cover the plate, bent down and said, "Not much, I don't have much left." He straightened up and looked at the beans again, shook his head and said, "No more, no more!" Is it too much? Not much. So the group of children was separated in laughter.孔乙己是这样的使人快活，可是没有他，别人也便这么过。
Kong Yiji is so happy, but without him, others live like this.有一天，大约是中秋前的两三天，掌柜正在慢慢的结账，取下粉板，忽然说，“孔乙己长久没有来了。还欠十九个钱呢！”我才也觉得他的确长久没有来了。一个喝酒的人说道，“他怎么会来？……他打折了腿了。”掌柜说，“哦！”“他总仍旧是偷。这一回，是自己发昏，竟偷到丁举人家里去了。他家的东西，偷得的么？”“后来怎么样？”“怎么样？先写服辩，后来是打，打了大半夜，再打折了腿。”“后来呢？”“后来打折了腿了。”“打折了怎样呢？”“怎样？……谁晓得？许是死了。”掌柜也不再问，仍然慢慢的算他的账。
One day, about two or three days before the Mid-Autumn Festival, the shopkeeper was slowly checking out, taking off the powder board, and suddenly said, "Kong Yiji hasn't been here for a long time." I still owe nineteen money! "I also feel that he hasn't been here for a long time. A drinker said, "How could he come?" …… He discounted his legs. The shopkeeper said, "Oh! "He is still stealing. This time, he fainted and stole to Ding Juren's house. Did you steal his things? "What happened later?" "How is it? First wrote a defense of the service, then beaten, fought for most of the night, and then discounted the leg. "What happened later?" "Later, I discounted my legs." "How about the discount?" "How? …… Who knows? Xu is dead. The shopkeeper stopped asking, and still slowly settled his accounts.中秋之后，秋风是一天凉比一天，看看将近初冬；我整天的靠着火，也须穿上棉袄了。一天的下半天，没有一个顾客，我正合了眼坐着。忽然间听得一个声音，“温一碗酒。”这声音虽然极低，却很耳熟。看时又全没有人。站起来向外一望，那孔乙己便在柜台下对了门槛坐着。他脸上黑而且瘦，已经不成样子；穿一件破夹袄，盘着两腿，下面垫一个蒲包，用草绳在肩上挂住；见了我，又说道，“温一碗酒。”掌柜也伸出头去，一面说，“孔乙己么？你还欠十九个钱呢！”孔乙己很颓唐的仰面答道，“这……下回还清罢。这一回是现钱，酒要好。”掌柜仍然同平常一样，笑着对他说，“孔乙己，你又偷了东西了！”但他这回却不十分分辩，单说了一句“不要取笑！”“取笑？要是不偷，怎么会打断腿？”孔乙己低声说道，“跌断，跌，跌……”他的眼色，很像恳求掌柜，不要再提。此时已经聚集了几个人，便和掌柜都笑了。我温了酒，端出去，放在门槛上。他从破衣袋里摸出四文大钱，放在我手里，见他满手是泥，原来他便用这手走来的。不一会，他喝完酒，便又在旁人的说笑声中，坐着用这手慢慢走去了。
After the Mid-Autumn Festival, the autumn wind is getting cooler day by day, looking at the early winter; I rely on the fire all day long, and I have to put on a padded jacket. In the second half of the day, there was not a single customer, and I was sitting with my eyes closed. Suddenly I heard a voice, "Warm a bowl of wine." Although this voice is extremely low, it is very familiar. When I looked at it, there was no one at all. Stand up and look out, and Kong Yiji sat under the counter facing the threshold. His face was dark and thin, and he didn't look like it anymore; Wear a torn jacket, cross your legs, put a cattail bag underneath, and hang it on your shoulders with a straw rope; When he saw me, he said, "Warm a bowl of wine." The shopkeeper also stretched out his head and said, "Kong Yiji? You still owe nineteen money!" Kong Yiji replied on his back very dejectedly, "This ...... Next time I will pay it off. This time it's cash, and the wine should be good. The shopkeeper was still the same as usual, and said to him with a smile, "Kong Yiji, you have stolen something again!" But this time he was not very discerning, and only said "Don't make fun of me!" "Make fun of me? If you don't steal, how can you break your leg? Kong Yiji said in a low voice, "Break, fall, fall......" His eyes were very much like begging the shopkeeper not to mention it again. At this time, several people had already gathered, and both the shopkeeper and the shopkeeper laughed. I warmed the wine, took it out, and put it on the threshold. He took out four cents of money from his tattered pocket and put it in my hand, and saw that his hands were full of mud, so it turned out that he had walked with this hand. After a while, he finished drinking, and then sat down and walked slowly with this hand amidst the laughter of others.自此以后，又长久没有看见孔乙己。到了年关，掌柜取下粉板说，“孔乙己还欠十九个钱呢！”到第二年的端午，又说“孔乙己还欠十九个钱呢！”到中秋可是没有说，再到年关也没有看见他。
Since then, I haven't seen Kong Yiji for a long time. At the end of the year, the shopkeeper took off the powder board and said, "Kong Yiji still owes nineteen money!" By the Dragon Boat Festival of the second year, he said, "Kong Yiji still owes nineteen money!" "I didn't say anything about it during the Mid-Autumn Festival, and I didn't see him at the end of the year.我到现在终于没有见——大约孔乙己的确死了。
I haven't seen him until now - probably Kong Yiji is indeed dead.一九一九年三月。
March 1919.

药

药

药

medicine一
One秋天的后半夜，月亮下去了，太阳还没有出，只剩下一片乌蓝的天；除了夜游的东西，什么都睡着。华老栓忽然坐起身，擦着火柴，点上遍身油腻的灯盏，茶馆的两间屋子里，便弥满了青白的光。
In the second half of autumn, the moon went down, the sun had not yet risen, and only a black blue sky remained; Fall asleep with everything except night trips. Hua Laoshuo suddenly sat up, wiped a match, lit a greasy lamp all over his body, and the two rooms of the teahouse were filled with blue and white light.“小栓的爹，你就去么？”是一个老女人的声音。里边的小屋子里，也发出一阵咳嗽。
"Xiao Shuo's father, are you going?" It was the voice of an old woman. In the small room inside, there was also a cough.“唔。”老栓一面听，一面应，一面扣上衣服；伸手过去说，“你给我罢。”
"Hmm." Lao Shuan listened, responded, and buttoned his clothes; Reach out and say, "You give it to me." ”华大妈在枕头底下掏了半天，掏出一包洋钱，交给老栓，老栓接了，抖抖的装入衣袋，又在外面按了两下；便点上灯笼，吹熄灯盏，走向里屋子去了。那屋子里面，正在窸窸窣窣的响，接着便是一通咳嗽。老栓候他平静下去，才低低的叫道，“小栓……你不要起来。……店么？你娘会安排的。”
Aunt Hua took out under the pillow for a long time, took out a bag of foreign money, and handed it to Lao Shuo, who took it, put it in his pocket tremblingly, and pressed it twice outside; Then he lit the lantern, blew out the lamp, and walked to the inner room. Inside the room, there was a rustling sound, followed by a cough. Lao Shuan waited for him to calm down before shouting in a low voice, "Little Shuo...... Don't get up. …… Shop? Your mother will arrange it. ”老栓听得儿子不再说话，料他安心睡了；便出了门，走到街上。街上黑沉沉的一无所有，只有一条灰白的路，看得分明。灯光照着他的两脚，一前一后的走。有时也遇到几只狗，可是一只也没有叫。天气比屋子里冷得多了；老栓倒觉爽快，仿佛一旦变了少年，得了神通，有给人生命的本领似的，跨步格外高远。而且路也愈走愈分明，天也愈走愈亮了。
Lao Suo heard that his son stopped talking, and he expected him to sleep peacefully; Then he went out and walked out into the street. The street is dark and empty, only a gray and white road, which can be seen clearly. The lights shone on his feet, walking forward and backward. Sometimes I met a few dogs, but none of them barked. It was much colder than in the house; Lao Shuo felt refreshed, as if once he became a teenager, gained supernatural powers, and had the ability to give people life, his strides were particularly high. And the road is getting clearer and clearer, and the sky is getting brighter and brighter.老栓正在专心走路，忽然吃了一惊，远远里看见一条丁字街，明明白白横着。他便退了几步，寻到一家关着门的铺子，蹩进檐下，靠门立住了。好一会，身上觉得有些发冷。
Lao Shuo was concentrating on walking, and suddenly he was surprised, and saw a T-shaped street in the distance, clearly horizontal. He took a few steps back, found a shop with the door closed, crawled under the eaves, and stood by the door. After a while, I felt a little chilly.“哼，老头子。”
"Hmph, old man."“倒高兴……。”
"I'm happy......老栓又吃一惊，睁眼看时，几个人从他面前过去了。一个还回头看他，样子不甚分明，但很像久饿的人见了食物一般，眼里闪出一种攫取的光。老栓看看灯笼，已经熄了。按一按衣袋，硬硬的还在。仰起头两面一望，只见许多古怪的人，三三两两，鬼似的在那里徘徊；定睛再看，却也看不出什么别的奇怪。
Lao Shuo was surprised again, and when he opened his eyes, several people passed in front of him. One looked back at him, his appearance was not very clear, but it was very much like a long-hungry person who saw food, and a kind of grabbing light flashed in his eyes. The old bolt looked at the lantern, it was extinguished. Press the pocket, and the hard one is still there. When I looked up, I saw many strange people, wandering there like ghosts; I looked at it again, but I couldn't see anything else.没有多久，又见几个兵，在那边走动；衣服前后的一个大白圆圈，远地里也看得清楚，走过面前的，并且看出号衣上暗红色的镶边。——一阵脚步声响，一眨眼，已经拥过了一大簇人。那三三两两的人，也忽然合作一堆，潮一般向前赶；将到丁字街口，便突然立住，簇成一个半圆。
Not long after, I saw a few more soldiers walking over there; A big white circle in front and behind the clothes can be seen clearly from a distance, walking in front of you, and you can see the dark red trim on the shirt. ——There was a sound of footsteps, and in the blink of an eye, a large group of people had already passed. Those people in twos and threes suddenly cooperated with a bunch of people, rushing forward like a tide; When they reached the intersection of T-shaped street, they suddenly stood up and clustered into a semicircle.老栓也向那边看，却只见一堆人的后背；颈项都伸得很长，仿佛许多鸭，被无形的手捏住了的，向上提着。静了一会，似乎有点声音，便又动摇起来，轰的一声，都向后退；一直散到老栓立着的地方，几乎将他挤倒了。
Lao Shuo also looked over there, but saw a bunch of people's backs; The necks are stretched out very long, like many ducks, pinched by invisible hands, and lifted upwards. After a while, there seemed to be some sound, and then it shook again, and with a bang, they all retreated; It scattered all the way to the place where the old bolt stood, almost squeezing him down.“喂！一手交钱，一手交货！”一个浑身黑色的人，站在老栓面前，眼光正像两把刀，刺得老栓缩小了一半。那人一只大手，向他摊着；一只手却撮着一个鲜红的馒头，那红的还是一点一点的往下滴。
"Hey! Pay with one hand and deliver with the other! A man all black, standing in front of Lao Shuo, his eyes were like two knives, stabbing Lao Shuo in half. The man spread out his big hand to him; One hand was holding a bright red steamed bun, and the red one was still dripping down little by little.老栓慌忙摸出洋钱，抖抖的想交给他，却又不敢去接他的东西。那人便焦急起来，嚷道，“怕什么？怎的不拿！”老栓还踌躇着；黑的人便抢过灯笼，一把扯下纸罩，裹了馒头，塞与老栓；一手抓过洋钱，捏一捏，转身去了。嘴里哼着说，“这老东西……。”
Lao Shuo hurriedly took out the foreign money and trembled and wanted to give it to him, but he didn't dare to take his things. The man became anxious and shouted, "What are you afraid of? Why don't you take it! Lao Shuo was still hesitating; The black man snatched the lantern, tore off the paper cover, wrapped the steamed bun, and stuffed it with the old bolt; He grabbed the foreign money with one hand, pinched it, and turned around. He hummed, "This old thing ......." ”“这给谁治病的呀？”老栓也似乎听得有人问他，但他并不答应；他的精神，现在只在一个包上，仿佛抱着一个十世单传的婴儿，别的事情，都已置之度外了。他现在要将这包里的新生命，移植到他家里，收获许多幸福。太阳也出来了；在他面前，显出一条大道，直到他家中，后面也照见丁字街头破匾上“古□亭口”这四个黯淡的金字。
"Who is this treating for?" Lao Shuo also seemed to hear someone asking him, but he didn't agree; His spirit is now only in a bag, as if holding a baby with a single transmission of ten generations, and everything else has been put aside. He is now going to transplant the new life in this bag into his home and reap a lot of happiness. The sun also came out; In front of him, a main road was shown until his home, and behind him was also seen the four dim golden characters "Ancient □ Pavilion Entrance" on the broken plaque on the T-shaped street.

药

二

药

Two老栓走到家，店面早经收拾干净，一排一排的茶桌，滑溜溜的发光。但是没有客人；只有小栓坐在里排的桌前吃饭，大粒的汗，从额上滚下，夹袄也帖住了脊心，两块肩胛骨高高凸出，印成一个阳文的“八”字。老栓见这样子，不免皱一皱展开的眉心。他的女人，从灶下急急走出，睁着眼睛，嘴唇有些发抖。
When Lao Shuo walked home, the store had already been cleaned up, and the rows of tea tables were slippery and glowing. But there are no guests; Only Xiao Shuo sat at the table in the back row to eat, sweat rolled down his forehead, and the jacket also pressed against the spine, and the two shoulder blades protruded high, printed into a yang character "eight". Seeing this, Lao Shuo couldn't help but frown his outstretched eyebrows. His woman hurriedly walked out from under the stove, her eyes open, her lips trembling a little.“得了么？”
"Is it okay?"“得了。”
"Got it."两个人一齐走进灶下，商量了一会；华大妈便出去了，不多时，拿着一片老荷叶回来，摊在桌上。老栓也打开灯笼罩，用荷叶重新包了那红的馒头。小栓也吃完饭，他的母亲慌忙说：
The two walked into the stove together and discussed for a while; Aunt Hua went out, and not long after, she came back with an old lotus leaf and spread it on the table. Lao Shuo also opened the lantern cover and rewrapped the red steamed buns with lotus leaves. Xiao Shuo also finished eating, and his mother hurriedly said:“小栓——你坐着，不要到这里来。”
"Xiao Shuo - you sit, don't come here."一面整顿了灶火，老栓便把一个碧绿的包，一个红红白白的破灯笼，一同塞在灶里；一阵红黑的火焰过去时，店屋里散满了一种奇怪的香味。
While rectifying the stove, Lao Shuo stuffed a turquoise bag and a red and white broken lantern into the stove together; A burst of red and black flames passed, and a strange fragrance filled the shophouse.“好香！你们吃什么点心呀？”这是驼背五少爷到了。这人每天总在茶馆里过日，来得最早，去得最迟，此时恰恰蹩到临街的壁角的桌边，便坐下问话，然而没有人答应他。“炒米粥么？”仍然没有人应。老栓匆匆走出，给他泡上茶。
"So fragrant! What snacks do you eat? "This is the arrival of the fifth young master with a hunchback. This man always spent his days in the teahouse every day, coming the earliest and going the latest, and at this time he just went to the table in the corner facing the street, so he sat down to ask questions, but no one agreed to him. "Fried rice porridge?" Still no one answered. Lao Shuo hurriedly walked out and made him tea.“小栓进来罢！”华大妈叫小栓进了里面的屋子，中间放好一条凳，小栓坐了。他的母亲端过一碟乌黑的圆东西，轻轻说：
"Come in!" Aunt Hua asked Xiao Shuo to enter the room inside, put a stool in the middle, and Xiao Shuo sat down. His mother took a plate of black round things and said softly:“吃下去罢，——病便好了。”
"Just eat it,—— and the disease will be cured."小栓撮起这黑东西，看了一会，似乎拿着自己的性命一般，心里说不出的奇怪。十分小心的拗开了，焦皮里面窜出一道白气，白气散了，是两半个白面的馒头。——不多工夫，已经全在肚里了，却全忘了什么味；面前只剩下一张空盘。他的旁边，一面立着他的父亲，一面立着他的母亲，两人的眼光，都仿佛要在他身里注进什么又要取出什么似的；便禁不住心跳起来，按着胸膛，又是一阵咳嗽。
Xiao Shuo picked up this black thing and looked at it for a while, as if he was holding his own life, and he felt indescribably strange in his heart. Very carefully twisted open, a white gas came out of the charred skin, and the white gas dissipated, it was two halves of white noodle steamed buns. ——Not much effort, it is all in the stomach, but it has forgotten what it tastes like; There was only one empty disk left in front of him. Beside him, on one side stood his father and his mother on the other, and their eyes seemed to be pouring into him and taking out something; I couldn't help but my heart beat, pressed my chest, and coughed again.“睡一会罢，——便好了。”
"Just sleep for a while,—— and it's fine."小栓依他母亲的话，咳着睡了。华大妈候他喘气平静，才轻轻的给他盖上了满幅补钉的夹被。
Xiao Suo followed his mother's words and coughed and fell asleep. Aunt Hua waited for him to breathe calmly, and then gently covered him with a quilt full of patches.

药

三

药

Three店里坐着许多人，老栓也忙了，提着大铜壶，一趟一趟的给客人冲茶；两个眼眶，都围着一圈黑线。
There were many people sitting in the store, and Lao Shuo was also busy, carrying a large copper pot to make tea for the guests one by one; Both eye sockets are surrounded by a circle of black lines.“老栓，你有些不舒服么？——你生病么？”一个花白胡子的人说。
"Lao Shuo, are you a little uncomfortable? ——Are you sick? A man with a white beard said.“没有。”
"No."“没有？——我想笑嘻嘻的，原也不像……”花白胡子便取消了自己的话。
"No? ——I want to smile, but it's not like ......" Hua Baiqiu canceled his words.“老栓只是忙。要是他的儿子……”驼背五少爷话还未完，突然闯进了一个满脸横肉的人，披一件玄色布衫，散着纽扣，用很宽的玄色腰带，胡乱捆在腰间。刚进门，便对老栓嚷道：
"Lao Shuo is just busy. If his son had ......" Before the hunchbacked fifth young master finished speaking, he suddenly broke into a man with a face full of flesh, wearing a dark cloth shirt with loose buttons, and tied it around his waist with a wide black belt. As soon as he entered the door, he shouted to the old bolt:“吃了么？好了么？老栓，就是运气了你！你运气，要不是我信息灵……。”
"Did you eat it? Okay? Lao Shuo, it's luck for you! If it weren't for my luck, I would ...... the message. ”老栓一手提了茶壶，一手恭恭敬敬的垂着；笑嘻嘻的听。满座的人，也都恭恭敬敬的听。华大妈也黑着眼眶，笑嘻嘻的送出茶碗茶叶来，加上一个橄榄，老栓便去冲了水。
Lao Shuo held the teapot in one hand and hung it respectfully with the other; Listen with a smile. The people in the room also listened respectfully. Aunt Hua also had dark eyes, smiled and sent out a tea bowl of tea leaves, plus an olive, and Lao Shuo went to flush the water.“这是包好！这是与众不同的。你想，趁热的拿来，趁热吃下。”横肉的人只是嚷。
"This is wrapped! It's different. You want to bring it while it's hot and eat it while it's hot. "The people with the flesh just shouted.“真的呢，要没有康大叔照顾，怎么会这样……”华大妈也很感激的谢他。
"Really, if it weren't for Uncle Kang's care, how could this be like this...... Aunt Hua also thanked him gratefully.“包好，包好！这样的趁热吃下。这样的人血馒头，什么痨病都包好！”
"Wrap it up, wrap it up! Eat it while it's hot. Such a person's blood steamed buns cover all tuberculosis! ”华大妈听到“痨病”这两个字，变了一点脸色，似乎有些不高兴；但又立刻堆上笑，搭赸着走开了。这康大叔却没有觉察，仍然提高了喉咙只是嚷，嚷得里面睡着的小栓也合伙咳嗽起来。
When Aunt Hua heard the word "tuberculosis", her face changed a little, and she seemed to be a little unhappy; But he immediately laughed and walked away. This Uncle Kang didn't notice, he still raised his throat and just shouted, so that the little bolt that was sleeping inside also coughed together.“原来你家小栓碰到了这样的好运气了。这病自然一定全好；怪不得老栓整天的笑着呢。”花白胡子一面说，一面走到康大叔面前，低声下气的问道，“康大叔——听说今天结果的一个犯人，便是夏家的孩子，那是谁的孩子？究竟是什么事？”
"It turns out that your little bolt has encountered such good luck. This disease must be cured; No wonder Lao Shuo smiled all day long. As the white-bearded man said, he walked up to Uncle Kang and asked in a low voice, "Uncle Kang - I heard that one of the prisoners who heard today's result is the child of the Xia family, whose child is that?" What is it? ”“谁的？不就是夏四奶奶的儿子么？那个小家伙！”康大叔见众人都耸起耳朵听他，便格外高兴，横肉块块饱绽，越发大声说，“这小东西不要命，不要就是了。我可是这一回一点没有得到好处；连剥下来的衣服，都给管牢的红眼睛阿义拿去了。——第一要算我们栓叔运气；第二是夏三爷赏了二十五两雪白的银子，独自落腰包，一文不花。”
"Whose it's? Isn't it Grandma Xia Si's son? That little guy! Uncle Kang was very happy when he saw that everyone was listening to him, and the horizontal meat was full, and he said louder and louder, "This little thing doesn't want to die, just don't want it." I didn't get any benefit this time; Even the clothes stripped off were taken away by the red-eyed Ayi, who was in charge. ——The first is to count our Uncle Shuo's luck; The second is that Xia Sanye rewarded twenty-five taels of snow-white silver, and he fell into his pocket alone and spent nothing. ”小栓慢慢的从小屋子里走出，两手按了胸口，不住的咳嗽；走到灶下，盛出一碗冷饭，泡上热水，坐下便吃。华大妈跟着他走，轻轻的问道，“小栓，你好些么？——你仍旧只是肚饿？……”
Xiao Shuo slowly walked out of the small house, pressed his chest with both hands, and coughed incessantly; Go to the stove, serve a bowl of cold rice, soak it in hot water, sit down and eat. Aunt Hua followed him and asked softly, "Xiao Shuo, are you okay?" - Are you still just hungry? ……”“包好，包好！”康大叔瞥了小栓一眼，仍然回过脸，对众人说，“夏三爷真是乖角儿，要是他不先告官，连他满门抄斩。现在怎样？银子！——这小东西也真不成东西！关在牢里，还要劝牢头造反。”
"Wrap it up, wrap it up!" Uncle Kang glanced at Xiao Shuo, still turned his face, and said to everyone, "Xia Sanye is really a good man, if he doesn't sue the authorities first, even he will be cut down all over the house." How now? Silver! ——This little thing is really not a thing! In prison, he also persuaded the prison head to rebel. ”“阿呀，那还了得。”坐在后排的一个二十多岁的人，很现出气愤模样。
"Ah, that's fine." A man in his twenties sitting in the back row looked very angry.“你要晓得红眼睛阿义是去盘盘底细的，他却和他攀谈了。他说：这大清的天下是我们大家的。你想：这是人话么？红眼睛原知道他家里只有一个老娘，可是没有料到他竟会那么穷，榨不出一点油水，已经气破肚皮了。他还要老虎头上搔痒，便给他两个嘴巴！”
You have to know that the red-eyed Ah Yi went to the bottom of the plate, but he talked to him. He said: The world of the Qing Dynasty belongs to all of us. You think: Is this human language? Red Eyes knew that there was only one old lady in his family, but he didn't expect him to be so poor, unable to squeeze out a little oil and water, and he was already angry. He also wanted the tiger to tickle his head, so he gave him two mouths! ”“义哥是一手好拳棒，这两下，一定够他受用了。”壁角的驼背忽然高兴起来。
"Brother Yi is a good fist, these two blows must be enough for him." The hunchback in the corner suddenly became happy.“他这贱骨头打不怕，还要说可怜可怜哩。”
"He's not afraid of this cheap bone, and he has to say it's pitiful."花白胡子的人说，“打了这种东西，有什么可怜呢？”
The white-bearded man said, "What's so pitiful about beating this kind of thing? ”康大叔显出看他不上的样子，冷笑着说，“你没有听清我的话；看他神气，是说阿义可怜哩！”
Uncle Kang showed that he couldn't see him, and sneered, "You didn't hear me clearly; Look at his spirit, it means that Ayi is pitiful! ”听着的人的眼光，忽然有些板滞；话也停顿了。小栓已经吃完饭，吃得满头流汗，头上都冒出蒸气来。
The eyes of the listeners suddenly became a little stagnant; The words also paused. Xiao Shuo had already finished eating, sweating profusely, and steam was coming out of his head.“阿义可怜——疯话，简直是发了疯了。”花白胡子恍然大悟似的说。
"Ah Yi is pitiful - crazy, it's crazy." The whitebeard said as if he suddenly realized.“发了疯了。”二十多岁的人也恍然大悟的说。
"Crazy." People in their twenties also suddenly realized.店里的坐客，便又现出活气，谈笑起来。小栓也趁着热闹，拚命咳嗽；康大叔走上前，拍他肩膀说：
The customers in the store became lively again and started talking and laughing. Xiao Shuo also took advantage of the excitement and coughed desperately; Uncle Kang stepped forward, patted him on the shoulder and said:“包好！小栓——你不要这么咳。包好！”
"Wrap it up! Xiao Shuo - don't cough like this. Wrap it up! ”“疯了。”驼背五少爷点着头说。
"Crazy." The hunchbacked fifth young master nodded and said.

药

四

药

Four西关外靠着城根的地面，本是一块官地；中间歪歪斜斜一条细路，是贪走便道的人，用鞋底造成的，但却成了自然的界限。路的左边，都埋着死刑和瘐毙的人，右边是穷人的丛冢。两面都已埋到层层叠叠，宛然阔人家里祝寿时候的馒头。
The ground outside the west gate against the root of the city was originally an official land; In the middle is a crooked path, a greedy walker, made by the sole of a shoe, but it becomes a natural boundary. On the left side of the road, there are people who have been executed and imprisoned, and on the right are the graves of the poor. Both sides have been buried layer by layer, just like the steamed buns when celebrating the birthday of a wide person.这一年的清明，分外寒冷；杨柳才吐出半粒米大的新芽。天明未久，华大妈已在右边的一坐新坟前面，排出四碟菜，一碗饭，哭了一场。化过纸，呆呆的坐在地上；仿佛等候什么似的，但自己也说不出等候什么。微风起来，吹动他短发，确乎比去年白得多了。
This year's Qingming was extremely cold; The willow spits out new shoots the size of half a grain of rice. Not long after dawn, Aunt Hua was already in front of a new grave on the right, serving four plates of dishes and a bowl of rice, and crying. Turn into paper and sit on the ground blankly; It was as if he was waiting for something, but he couldn't say what he was waiting for. The breeze rose and blew his short hair, which was indeed much whiter than last year.小路上又来了一个女人，也是半白头发，褴褛的衣裙；提一个破旧的朱漆圆篮，外挂一串纸锭，三步一歇的走。忽然见华大妈坐在地上看他，便有些踌躇，惨白的脸上，现出些羞愧的颜色；但终于硬着头皮，走到左边的一坐坟前，放下了篮子。
Another woman came on the path, also with half white hair and ragged clothes; Carry a worn-out red lacquer basket, hang a string of paper ingots, and walk in three steps. Suddenly seeing Aunt Hua sitting on the ground looking at him, she hesitated, and her pale face showed some shame; But finally bit the bullet, walked to a grave on the left, and put down the basket.那坟与小栓的坟，一字儿排着，中间只隔一条小路。华大妈看他排好四碟菜，一碗饭，立着哭了一通，化过纸锭；心里暗暗地想，“这坟里的也是儿子了。”那老女人徘徊观望了一回，忽然手脚有些发抖，跄跄踉踉退下几步，瞪着眼只是发怔。
The grave and the tomb of the small bolt are lined up, and there is only a path in between. Aunt Hua saw that he had arranged four dishes, a bowl of rice, stood and cried, and turned into paper ingots; I thought secretly in my heart, "The son is also in this grave." The old woman wandered around and watched for a while, and suddenly her hands and feet trembled a little, staggered back a few steps, staring and just stunned.华大妈见这样子，生怕他伤心到快要发狂了；便忍不住立起身，跨过小路，低声对他说，“你这位老奶奶不要伤心了，——我们还是回去罢。”
Aunt Hua saw this, for fear that he would be so sad that he was about to go crazy; He couldn't help but stand up, crossed the path, and whispered to him, "Don't be sad as your grandmother,—— let's go back." ”那人点一点头，眼睛仍然向上瞪着；也低声吃吃的说道，“你看，——看这是什么呢？”
The man nodded, his eyes still glaring upwards; He also whispered, "Look,—— what is this? ”华大妈跟了他指头看去，眼光便到了前面的坟，这坟上草根还没有全合，露出一块一块的黄土，煞是难看。再往上仔细看时，却不觉也吃一惊；——分明有一圈红白的花，围着那尖圆的坟顶。
Aunt Hua followed his finger and looked at it, and her eyes went to the grave in front of her, which had not yet been fully closed, exposing pieces of loess, which was really ugly. When I looked up closely, I was surprised; ——There was clearly a circle of red and white flowers surrounding the pointed and round top of the grave.他们的眼睛都已老花多年了，但望这红白的花，却还能明白看见。花也不很多，圆圆的排成一个圈，不很精神，倒也整齐。华大妈忙看他儿子和别人的坟，却只有不怕冷的几点青白小花，零星开着；便觉得心里忽然感到一种不足和空虚，不愿意根究。那老女人又走进几步，细看了一遍，自言自语的说，“这没有根，不像自己开的。——这地方有谁来呢？孩子不会来玩；——亲戚本家早不来了。——这是怎么一回事呢？”他想了又想，忽又流下泪来，大声说道：
Their eyes have been old for many years, but when they look at this red and white flower, they can still see clearly. There are not many flowers, they are arranged in a circle, not very energetic, but neat. Aunt Hua was busy looking at the graves of his son and others, but there were only a few small green and white flowers that were not afraid of the cold, blooming sporadically; I felt a sudden sense of inadequacy and emptiness in my heart, and I didn't want to get to the root of it. The old woman took a few more steps, looked at it carefully, and said to herself, "This has no roots, it doesn't look like it was opened by herself." ——Who is coming to this place? Children don't come to play; ——Relatives have long since stopped coming. ——What's going on? He thought about it again and again, and suddenly shed tears and said loudly:“瑜儿，他们都冤枉了你，你还是忘不了，伤心不过，今天特意显点灵，要我知道么？”他四面一看，只见一只乌鸦，站在一株没有叶的树上，便接着说，“我知道了。——瑜儿，可怜他们坑了你，他们将来总有报应，天都知道；你闭了眼睛就是了。——你如果真在这里，听到我的话，——便教这乌鸦飞上你的坟顶，给我看罢。”
"Yu'er, they have all wronged you, you still can't forget, sad, today I deliberately show some spirit, do you want me to know?" He looked around and saw a crow standing on a tree without leaves, and then said, "I know." ——Yu'er, pity them for pitying you, they will always have retribution in the future, God knows; Just close your eyes. ——If you are really here and hear my words,—— teach this crow to fly to the top of your grave and show me. ”微风早经停息了；枯草支支直立，有如铜丝。一丝发抖的声音，在空气中愈颤愈细，细到没有，周围便都是死一般静。两人站在枯草丛里，仰面看那乌鸦；那乌鸦也在笔直的树枝间，缩着头，铁铸一般站着。
The breeze has stopped early; The withered grass stood upright, resembling copper wire. A trembling sound trembled in the air more and more thinner, so thin that there was none, and the surroundings were as quiet as death. The two stood in the dry grass, looking up at the crow; The crow was also standing between the straight branches, shrinking its head and casting iron.许多的工夫过去了；上坟的人渐渐增多，几个老的小的，在土坟间出没。
A lot of work has passed; The number of people going to the grave gradually increased, and several old and young people appeared among the graves.华大妈不知怎的，似乎卸下了一挑重担，便想到要走；一面劝着说，“我们还是回去罢。”
Aunt Hua somehow seemed to have unloaded a heavy burden and thought of leaving; While persuading, "Let's go back." ”那老女人叹一口气，无精打采的收起饭菜；又迟疑了一刻，终于慢慢地走了。嘴里自言自语的说，“这是怎么一回事呢？……”
The old woman sighed and put away the food listlessly; After hesitating for a moment, he finally walked slowly. He said to himself, "What's going on? ……”他们走不上二三十步远，忽听得背后“哑——”的一声大叫；两个人都竦然的回过头，只见那乌鸦张开两翅，一挫身，直向着远处的天空，箭也似的飞去了。
They couldn't walk twenty or thirty steps away, and suddenly heard a shout of "dumb-" behind them; Both of them turned their heads in shock, only to see the crow spread its wings, faltered, and flew straight to the sky in the distance, and the arrow also flew away.一九一九年四月。
April 1919.

明天

明天

明天

Tomorrow“没有声音，——小东西怎了？”
"What's wrong with the little thing ,—— no sound?"红鼻子老拱手里擎了一碗黄酒，说着，向间壁努一努嘴。蓝皮阿五便放下酒碗，在他脊梁上用死劲的打了一掌，含含糊糊嚷道：
The red-nosed old arch held a bowl of rice wine in his hand and said, pouting to the wall. Lanpi Ah Wu put down the wine bowl, slapped him on the spine with a dead slap, and said vaguely:“你……你你又在想心思……。”
"You...... You are thinking about ...... again. ”原来鲁镇是僻静地方，还有些古风：不上一更，大家便都关门睡觉。深更半夜没有睡的只有两家：一家是咸亨酒店，几个酒肉朋友围着柜台，吃喝得正高兴；一家便是间壁的单四嫂子，他自从前年守了寡，便须专靠着自己的一双手纺出棉纱来，养活他自己和他三岁的儿子，所以睡的也迟。
It turns out that Luzhen is a secluded place, and there is a bit of an ancient style: before the first watch, everyone closes the door and goes to bed. There are only two houses that did not sleep in the middle of the night: one is the Xianheng Hotel, and several wine and meat friends gather around the counter, eating and drinking happily; Since he was widowed the year before last, he had to rely on his own hands to spin cotton yarn to support himself and his three-year-old son, so he slept late.这几天，确凿没有纺纱的声音了。但夜深没有睡的既然只有两家，这单四嫂子家有声音，便自然只有老拱们听到，没有声音，也只有老拱们听到。
In the past few days, there has been no sound of spinning. But since there are only two families who don't sleep late at night, this single fourth sister-in-law's family has a voice, so naturally only the old arches can hear it, and there is no sound, and only the old arches can hear it.老拱挨了打，仿佛很舒服似的喝了一大口酒，呜呜的唱起小曲来。
Lao Gong was beaten, took a big sip of wine as if he was very comfortable, and sang a little song.这时候，单四嫂子正抱着他的宝儿，坐在床沿上，纺车静静的立在地上。黑沉沉的灯光，照着宝儿的脸，绯红里带一点青。单四嫂子心里计算：神签也求过了，愿心也许过了，单方也吃过了，要是还不见效，怎么好？——那只有去诊何小仙了。但宝儿也许是日轻夜重，到了明天，太阳一出，热也会退，气喘也会平的：这实在是病人常有的事。
At this time, Shan Si's sister-in-law was holding his baby, sitting on the edge of the bed, and the spinning wheel was standing quietly on the ground. The dark light shone on Bao'er's face, with a little blue in the crimson. Shan Si's sister-in-law calculated in her heart: The divine sign has also been begged, the wish may have passed, and the unilateral party has also eaten, if it still does not work, what is the good? ——Then I had to go to see He Xiaoxian. But Bao'er may be light day and night, and tomorrow, as soon as the sun comes out, the fever will subside and the asthma will subside: this is really a common thing for patients.单四嫂子是一个粗笨女人，不明白这“但”字的可怕：许多坏事固然幸亏有了他才变好，许多好事却也因为有了他都弄糟。夏天夜短，老拱们呜呜的唱完了不多时，东方已经发白；不一会，窗缝里透进了银白色的曙光。
Shan Si's sister-in-law is a rough and stupid woman who doesn't understand the horror of the word "but": many bad things are fortunate to be better because of him, but many good things are also ruined because of him. The summer nights are short, and not long after the old archers have finished singing, the east has turned white; After a while, a silver-white dawn came through the crack in the window.
单四嫂子等候天明，却不像别人这样容易，觉得非常之慢，宝儿的一呼吸，几乎长过一年。现在居然明亮了；天的明亮，压倒了灯光，——看见宝儿的鼻翼，已经一放一收的扇动。
Shan Si's sister-in-law waited for dawn, but it was not as easy as others, and she felt very slow, and Bao'er's breath was almost longer than a year. Now it's actually bright; The brightness of the sky overwhelmed the light,—— I saw Bao'er's nose, which had been fanned one by one.单四嫂子知道不妙，暗暗叫一声“阿呀！”心里计算：怎么好？只有去诊何小仙这一条路了。他虽然是粗笨女人，心里却有决断，便站起身，从木柜子里掏出每天节省下来的十三个小银元和一百八十铜钱，都装在衣袋里，锁上门，抱着宝儿直向何家奔过去。
Shan Si's sister-in-law knew that something was wrong, and secretly shouted, "Ah! "Calculate in your heart: How is it? There is only one way to see He Xiaoxian. Although he was a stupid woman, he had a decision in his heart, so he stood up, took out the thirteen small silver dollars and one hundred and eighty copper coins he had saved every day from the wooden cabinet, put them in his pocket, locked the door, and ran straight to the He family with Bao'er in his arms.天气还早，何家已经坐着四个病人了。他摸出四角银元，买了号签，第五个便轮到宝儿。何小仙伸开两个指头按脉，指甲足有四寸多长，单四嫂子暗地纳罕，心里计算：宝儿该有活命了。但总免不了着急，忍不住要问，便局局促促的说：
It was still early, and there were already four patients sitting in the He family. He took out the four silver dollars, bought the number sign, and the fifth was Bao'er's turn. He Xiaoxian stretched out two fingers to press the pulse, the nail feet were more than four inches long, and the fourth sister-in-law secretly accepted it, calculating in her heart: Bao'er should be alive. But I couldn't help but ask, so I said crampedly:“先生，——我家的宝儿什么病呀？”
"Sir,—— what's wrong with my baby?"“他中焦塞着。”
"He was stuck in the middle."“不妨事么？他……”
"Is it okay? He ......"“先去吃两帖。”
"Let's go eat two pieces first."“他喘不过气来，鼻翅子都扇着呢。”
"He was out of breath, and his nose and wings were fanned."“这是火克金……”
"This is Huo Ke Jin ......"何小仙说了半句话，便闭上眼睛；单四嫂子也不好意思再问。在何小仙对面坐着的一个三十多岁的人，此时已经开好一张药方，指着纸角上的几个字说道：
He Xiaoxian said half a sentence, then closed his eyes; Sister-in-law Shan Si was also embarrassed to ask again. A man in his thirties sitting opposite He Xiaoxian had already prescribed a prescription at this time, pointed to a few words on the corner of the paper and said:“这第一味保婴活命丸，须是贾家济世老店才有！”
"This first baby-saving pill must be available in the old store of the Jia family!"单四嫂子接过药方，一面走，一面想。他虽是粗笨女人，却知道何家与济世老店与自己的家，正是一个三角点；自然是买了药回去便宜了。于是又径向济世老店奔过去。店伙也翘了长指甲慢慢的看方，慢慢的包药。单四嫂子抱了宝儿等着；宝儿忽然擎起小手来，用力拔他散乱着的一绺头发，这是从来没有的举动，单四嫂子怕得发怔。
Shan Si's sister-in-law took the prescription and thought as she walked. Although he is a rough woman, he knows that the He family and Jishi's old shop and his own home are a triangular point; Naturally, it is cheaper to buy medicine and go back. So he ran straight to the old store of Jishi. The shop guy also raised his long nails and slowly looked at the prescription and slowly wrapped the medicine. Shan Si's sister-in-law hugged Bao'er and waited; Bao'er suddenly raised her little hand and pulled out a lock of his scattered hair hard, which was a move that had never been done before, and Shan Si's sister-in-law was frightened.太阳早出了。单四嫂子抱了孩子，带着药包，越走觉得越重；孩子又不住的挣扎，路也觉得越长。没奈何坐在路旁一家公馆的门槛上，休息了一会，衣服渐渐的冰着肌肤，才知道自己出了一身汗；宝儿却仿佛睡着了。他再起来慢慢地走，仍然支撑不得，耳朵边忽然听得人说：
The sun came out early. Shan Si's sister-in-law hugged the child, carried a medicine bag, and felt heavier and heavier as she walked; The child struggled incessantly, and the road felt longer. I had no choice but to sit on the threshold of a mansion on the side of the road, rest for a while, and my clothes gradually froze on my skin, only to realize that I was sweating; Bao'er seemed to be asleep. He got up again and walked slowly, still unable to support it, and suddenly heard someone in his ear:“单四嫂子，我替你抱勃罗！”似乎是蓝皮阿五的声音。
"Sister-in-law Shansi, I'll hug Boluo for you!" It seems to be the voice of Blue Pia Wu.他抬头看时，正是蓝皮阿五，睡眼朦胧的跟着他走。
When he looked up, it was Lanpi Ah Wu, who followed him with sleepy eyes.单四嫂子在这时候，虽然很希望降下一员天将，助他一臂之力，却不愿是阿五。但阿五有些侠气，无论如何，总是偏要帮忙，所以推让了一会，终于得了许可了。他便伸开臂膊，从单四嫂子的乳房和孩子之间，直伸下去，抱去了孩子。单四嫂子便觉乳房上发了一条热，刹时间直热到脸上和耳根。
At this time, although Shan Si's sister-in-law hoped to send down a heavenly general to help him, she didn't want to be Ah Wu. But Ah Wu was a little chivalrous, no matter what, he always wanted to help, so he gave in for a while and finally got permission. He stretched out his arms, stretched down from between the breast of the fourth sister-in-law and the child, and hugged the child. The fourth sister-in-law felt a heat on her breasts, which instantly reached her face and ears.他们两人离开了二尺五寸多地，一同走着。阿五说些话，单四嫂子却大半没有答。走了不多时候，阿五又将孩子还给他，说是昨天与朋友约定的吃饭时候到了；单四嫂子便接了孩子。幸而不远便是家，早看见对门的王九妈在街边坐着，远远地说话：
The two of them left more than two feet and five inches and walked together. Ah Wu said something, but most of Shan Si's sister-in-law did not answer. Not long after leaving, Ah Wu returned the child to him, saying that it was time to eat as agreed with his friend yesterday; The fourth sister-in-law took the child. Fortunately, it was not far from home, and I saw Wang Jiuma sitting on the street opposite the door, talking from a distance:“单四嫂子，孩子怎了？——看过先生了么？”
"Sister-in-law Shansi, what's wrong with the child? ——Have you seen Mr. ”“看是看了。——王九妈，你有年纪，见的多，不如请你老法眼看一看，怎样……”
"I saw it. ——Wang Jiuma, you are old and have seen a lot, why don't you ask your old law to take a look, how about ......"“唔……”
"No......"“怎样……？”
"How ......?"“唔……”王九妈端详了一番，把头点了两点，摇了两摇。
"Hmm......" Wang Jiuma looked at it carefully, nodded her head twice, and shook it twice.宝儿吃下药，已经是午后了。单四嫂子留心看他神情，似乎仿佛平稳了不少；到得下午，忽然睁开眼叫一声“妈！”又仍然合上眼，像是睡去了。他睡了一刻，额上鼻尖都沁出一粒一粒的汗珠，单四嫂子轻轻一摸，胶水般粘着手；慌忙去摸胸口，便禁不住呜咽起来。
Bao'er took the medicine, and it was already afternoon. Shan Si's sister-in-law paid attention to his expression, and it seemed to have stabilized a lot; In the afternoon, he suddenly opened his eyes and shouted, "Mom! He still closed his eyes, as if he had fallen asleep. He slept for a moment, and beads of sweat came out of his forehead and the tip of his nose, and Shan Si's sister-in-law touched it lightly, sticking to his hands like glue; I hurriedly touched my chest, and I couldn't help but whimper.宝儿的呼吸从平稳变到没有，单四嫂子的声音也就从呜咽变成号咷。这时聚集了几堆人：门内是王九妈蓝皮阿五之类，门外是咸亨的掌柜和红鼻子老拱之类。王九妈便发命令，烧了一串纸钱；又将两条板凳和五件衣服作抵，替单四嫂子借了两块洋钱，给帮忙的人备饭。
Bao'er's breathing changed from steady to nothing, and Sister-in-law Shan Si's voice changed from whimpering to crying. At this time, several piles of people gathered: inside the door were Wang Jiuma's blue skin A Wu and the like, and outside the door were Xian Heng's shopkeeper and the red-nosed old arch. Wang Jiuma issued an order and burned a string of paper money; He also used two benches and five pieces of clothing as offset, borrowed two yuan of foreign money for Shan Si's sister-in-law, and prepared meals for the helpers.第一个问题是棺木。单四嫂子还有一副银耳环和一支裹金的银簪，都交给了咸亨的掌柜，托他作一个保，半现半赊的买一具棺木。蓝皮阿五也伸出手来，很愿意自告奋勇；王九妈却不许他，只准他明天抬棺材的差使，阿五骂了一声“老畜生”，怏怏的努了嘴站着。掌柜便自去了；晚上回来，说棺木须得现做，后半夜才成功。
The first problem is the coffin. Shan Si's sister-in-law also had a pair of silver earrings and a silver hairpin wrapped in gold, all of which were handed over to Xian Heng's shopkeeper, who asked him to buy a coffin with half cash and half credit. Lanpia Wu also stretched out his hand and was willing to volunteer; Wang Jiu's mother did not allow him, only allowed him to carry the coffin tomorrow, Ah Wu scolded the "old beast" and stood with his mouth pouted unhappily. The shopkeeper went by himself; When he came back in the evening, he said that the coffin had to be made fresh, and it was only successful in the second half of the night.掌柜回来的时候，帮忙的人早吃过饭；因为鲁镇还有些古风，所以不上一更，便都回家睡觉了。只有阿五还靠着咸亨的柜台喝酒，老拱也呜呜的唱。
When the shopkeeper came back, the helper had already eaten; Because Lu Zhen still has some ancient style, they all went home to sleep without one watch. Only Ah Wu was still drinking at Xian Heng's counter, and Lao Gong also sang whining.这时候，单四嫂子坐在床沿上哭着，宝儿在床上躺着，纺车静静的在地上立着。许多工夫，单四嫂子的眼泪宣告完结了，眼睛张得很大，看看四面的情形，觉得奇怪：所有的都是不会有的事。他心里计算：不过是梦罢了，这些事都是梦。明天醒过来，自己好好的睡在床上，宝儿也好好的睡在自己身边。他也醒过来，叫一声“妈”，生龙活虎似的跳去玩了。
At this time, Shan Si's sister-in-law was sitting on the edge of the bed crying, Bao'er was lying on the bed, and the spinning wheel was standing quietly on the ground. After a lot of effort, Shan Si's sister-in-law's tears were over, her eyes were wide open, and she looked at the situation on all sides, and she felt strange: everything would not happen. He calculated in his heart: It's just a dream, these things are all dreams. When I wake up tomorrow, I will sleep well in bed, and Bao'er will sleep well next to me. He also woke up, called "Mom", and jumped to play like a dragon.老拱的歌声早经寂静，咸亨也熄了灯。单四嫂子张着眼，总不信所有的事。——鸡也叫了；东方渐渐发白，窗缝里透进了银白色的曙光。
Lao Gong's singing voice had long been silent, and Xian Heng also turned off the lights. Sister-in-law Shan Si opened her eyes and didn't believe in everything. - The chicken also crowed; The east gradually turned white, and a silvery-white dawn came through the window cracks.银白的曙光又渐渐显出绯红，太阳光接着照到屋脊。单四嫂子张着眼，呆呆坐着；听得打门声音，才吃了一吓，跑出去开门。门外一个不认识的人，背了一件东西；后面站着王九妈。
The silver-white dawn gradually turned crimson again, and the sunlight then shone on the roof. Shan Si's sister-in-law sat dumbfounded; Hearing the sound of knocking on the door, he was startled and ran out to open the door. An unknown person outside the door carried something; Standing behind Wang Jiuma.哦，他们背了棺材来了。
Oh, they came with a coffin.
下半天，棺木才合上盖：因为单四嫂子哭一回，看一回，总不肯死心塌地的盖上；幸亏王九妈等得不耐烦，气愤愤的跑上前，一把拖开他，才七手八脚的盖上了。
In the second half of the day, the coffin was closed: because Shan Si's sister-in-law cried once and looked at it, she always refused to give up on the lid; Fortunately, Wang Jiuma waited impatiently, ran forward angrily, dragged him away, and covered it with all her hands.但单四嫂子待他的宝儿，实在已经尽了心，再没有什么缺陷。昨天烧过一串纸钱，上午又烧了四十九卷《大悲咒》；收敛的时候，给他穿上顶新的衣裳，平日喜欢的玩意儿，——一个泥人，两个小木碗，两个玻璃瓶，——都放在枕头旁边。后来王九妈掐着指头仔细推敲，也终于想不出一些什么缺陷。
But Shan Si's sister-in-law has really done her best to treat him, and there are no flaws. Yesterday I burned a string of paper money, and in the morning I burned forty-nine volumes of "The Great Compassion Mantra"; When he was restrained, he put on new clothes, and his favorite things ,—— a clay figure, two small wooden bowls, and two glass bottles,—— all of which were placed next to his pillow. Later, Wang Jiuma pinched her fingers and scrutinized carefully, but finally couldn't think of any flaws.这一日里，蓝皮阿五简直整天没有到；咸亨掌柜便替单四嫂子雇了两名脚夫，每名二百另十个大钱，抬棺木到义冢地上安放。王九妈又帮他煮了饭，凡是动过手开过口的人都吃了饭。太阳渐渐显出要落山的颜色；吃过饭的人也不觉都显出要回家的颜色，——于是他们终于都回了家。
On this day, Lanpia Wu simply didn't arrive all day; The shopkeeper Xian Heng hired two porters for Shan Si's sister-in-law, each with two hundred and ten large coins, and carried the coffin to the ground of the righteous tomb to be placed. Wang Jiuma helped him cook again, and everyone who had done it ate eat. The sun gradually showed the color of going down; Everyone who had eaten didn't feel like they were going home,—— so they all went home.单四嫂子很觉得头眩，歇息了一会，倒居然有点平稳了。但他接连着便觉得很异样：遇到了平生没有遇到过的事，不像会有的事，然而的确出现了。他越想越奇，又感到一件异样的事——这屋子忽然太静了。
Shan Si's sister-in-law felt dizzy and rested for a while, but it was actually a little stable. But he felt very strange one after another: he encountered something he had never encountered in his life, unlike something that would happen, but it did appear. The more he thought about it, the more strange he felt, and felt something strange - the room was suddenly too quiet.他站起身，点上灯火，屋子越显得静。他昏昏的走去关上门，回来坐在床沿上，纺车静静的立在地上。他定一定神，四面一看，更觉得坐立不得，屋子不但太静，而且也太大了，东西也太空了。太大的屋子四面包围着他，太空的东西四面压着他，叫他喘气不得。
He stood up, lit the light, and the room became quieter. He walked dazedly to close the door, came back and sat on the edge of the bed, and the spinning wheel stood quietly on the ground. He was so focused that he looked around, and felt even more restless, the room was not only too quiet, but also too big, and the things were empty. The room was too big to surround him on all sides, and the things in space pressed him on all sides, making him unable to breathe.他现在知道他的宝儿确乎死了；不愿意见这屋子，吹熄了灯，躺着。他一面哭，一面想：想那时候，自己纺着棉纱，宝儿坐在身边吃茴香豆，瞪着一双小黑眼睛想了一刻，便说，“妈！爹卖馄饨，我大了也卖馄饨，卖许多许多钱，——我都给你。”那时候，真是连纺出的棉纱，也仿佛寸寸都有意思，寸寸都活着。但现在怎么了？现在的事，单四嫂子却实在没有想到什么。——我早经说过：他是粗笨女人。他能想出什么呢？他单觉得这屋子太静，太大，太空罢了。
He now knew that his baby was dead; I didn't want to see this room, so I blew out the lights and lay down. While crying, he thought: At that time, he was spinning cotton yarn, Bao'er sat next to him eating fennel beans, stared at a pair of small black eyes and thought for a moment, and then said, "Mom! Dad sells wontons, and when I grow up, I also sell wontons, and I will give it to you for a lot of money,—— "At that time, even the cotton yarn spun out seemed to be interesting every inch, and every inch was alive. But what's going on now? What happened now, Shan Si's sister-in-law really didn't think of anything. ——I have long said: he is a stupid woman. What could he come up with? He just felt that this room was too quiet, too big, and spacey.但单四嫂子虽然粗笨，却知道还魂是不能有的事，他的宝儿也的确不能再见了。叹一口气，自言自语的说，“宝儿，你该还在这里，你给我梦里见见罢。”于是合上眼，想赶快睡去，会他的宝儿，苦苦的呼吸通过了静和大和空虚，自己听得明白。
But although Shan Si's sister-in-law was stupid, she knew that it was impossible to return her soul, and her treasure could indeed not be seen again. He sighed and said to himself, "Bao'er, you should still be here, you can see me in my dreams." So he closed his eyes and wanted to fall asleep quickly, meeting his treasure, and his bitter breathing passed through the silence and the emptiness, and he could hear it clearly.单四嫂子终于朦朦胧胧的走入睡乡，全屋子都很静。这时红鼻子老拱的小曲，也早经唱完；跄跄踉踉出了咸亨，却又提尖了喉咙，唱道：
The fourth sister-in-law finally walked into the sleeping country hazily, and the whole house was very quiet. At this time, the little song of the old arch with a red nose had already been sung; staggered out of Xianheng, but raised his throat again and sang:“我的冤家呀！——可怜你，——孤另另的……”
"My enemy! ——Pity you,—— lonely ......."蓝皮阿五便伸手揪住了老拱的肩头，两个人七歪八斜的笑着挤着走去。
Lan Pia Wu stretched out his hand and grabbed Lao Gong's shoulder, and the two of them squeezed away with a crooked smile.单四嫂子早睡着了，老拱们也走了，咸亨也关上门了。这时的鲁镇，便完全落在寂静里。只有那暗夜为想变成明天，却仍在这寂静里奔波；另有几条狗，也躲在暗地里呜呜的叫。
Shan Si's sister-in-law fell asleep early, the old arches also left, and Xian Heng also closed the door. At this time, Lu Zhen fell into complete silence. Only the dark night wants to become tomorrow, but it is still running in this silence; There were also several dogs hiding in the dark and whining.一九二〇年六月。
June 1920.

一件小事

一件小事

一件小事

A small thing我从乡下跑到京城里，一转眼已经六年了。其间耳闻目睹的所谓国家大事，算起来也很不少；但在我心里，都不留什么痕迹，倘要我寻出这些事的影响来说，便只是增长了我的坏脾气，——老实说，便是教我一天比一天的看不起人。
It has been six years since I ran from the countryside to the capital in the blink of an eye. During this period, I heard and witnessed a lot of so-called national events; But in my heart, there is no trace left, if I find the impact of these things, it will only increase my bad temper,—— to be honest, it is to teach me to look down on people day by day.但有一件小事，却于我有意义，将我从坏脾气里拖开，使我至今忘记不得。
But there was one small thing that meant something to me, dragged me away from my bad temper, and I still can't forget it.这是民国六年的冬天，大北风刮得正猛，我因为生计关系，不得不一早在路上走。一路几乎遇不见人，好容易才雇定了一辆人力车，教他拉到S门去。不一会，北风小了，路上浮尘早已刮净，剩下一条洁白的大道来，车夫也跑得更快。刚近S门，忽而车把上带着一个人，慢慢地倒了。
This is the winter of the sixth year of the Republic of China, the north wind is blowing fiercely, and I have to walk on the road early in the morning because of my livelihood. I almost didn't meet anyone along the way, so I hired a rickshaw and taught him to pull to the S door. After a while, the north wind was light, the dust on the road had already been blown away, and there was only a white avenue left, and the coachman ran faster. Just as I approached the S door, suddenly there was a person on the handlebar, and it slowly fell.跌倒的是一个女人，花白头发，衣服都很破烂。伊从马路边上突然向车前横截过来；车夫已经让开道，但伊的破棉背心没有上扣，微风吹着，向外展开，所以终于兜着车把。幸而车夫早有点停步，否则伊定要栽一个大斗，跌到头破血出了。
The one who fell was a woman with gray hair and tattered clothes. Yi suddenly crossed the road from the side of the road in front of the car; The coachman had already given way, but Yi's tattered cotton vest was not buttoned up, and the breeze was blowing, unfolding outward, so he finally put on the handlebars. Fortunately, the coachman had already stopped a little, otherwise Yi Ding would have planted a big bucket and fell to the point where he broke his head and bled.伊伏在地上；车夫便也立住脚。我料定这老女人并没有伤，又没有别人看见，便很怪他多事，要自己惹出是非，也误了我的路。
Ivo is on the ground; The coachman also stood still. I expected that this old woman was not injured, and no one else saw it, so I blamed him for being troublesome, wanting to cause trouble and misleading me.我便对他说，“没有什么的。走你的罢！”
I said to him, "Nothing." Let's go yours!" ”车夫毫不理会，——或者并没有听到，——却放下车子，扶那老女人慢慢起来，搀着臂膊立定，问伊说：
The coachman ignored ,—— or didn't hear it,—— but put down the car, helped the old woman to get up slowly, stood still with his arms crossed, and asked Yi:“您怎么啦？”
"What's wrong with you?"“我摔坏了。”
"I broke it."我想，我眼见你慢慢倒地，怎么会摔坏呢，装腔作势罢了，这真可憎恶。车夫多事，也正是自讨苦吃，现在你自己想法去。
I thought, I saw you slowly fall to the ground, how could it be broken, just pretending, this is really hateful. The coachman is troublesome, and he is asking for trouble, and now you think about it yourself.车夫听了这老女人的话，却毫不踌躇，仍然搀着伊的臂膊，便一步一步的向前走。我有些诧异，忙看前面，是一所巡警分驻所，大风之后，外面也不见人。这车夫扶着那老女人，便正是向那大门走去。
The coachman listened to the old woman's words, but did not hesitate, still held Yi's arm, and walked forward step by step. I was a little surprised, and I hurriedly looked ahead, it was a patrol police station, and after the strong wind, there was no one outside. The coachman helped the old woman and walked towards the gate.我这时突然感到一种异样的感觉，觉得他满身灰尘的后影，刹时高大了，而且愈走愈大，须仰视才见。而且他对于我，渐渐的又几乎变成一种威压，甚而至于要榨出皮袍下面藏着的“小”来。
At this time, I suddenly felt a strange feeling, feeling that his dusty shadow suddenly grew taller, and it got bigger and bigger, and I had to look up to see it. And he gradually became almost a kind of coercion towards me, even to the point of squeezing out the "small" hidden under the leather robe.我的活力这时大约有些凝滞了，坐着没有动，也没有想，直到看见分驻所里走出一个巡警，才下了车。
My vitality was about a little stagnant at this time, I sat without moving or thinking, until I saw a patrol officer walking out of the sub-station, and then I got out of the car.巡警走近我说，“你自己雇车罢，他不能拉你了。”
The patrol officer approached me and said, "You can hire a car yourself, he can't pull you anymore." ”我没有思索的从外套袋里抓出一大把铜元，交给巡警，说，“请你给他……”
Without thinking, I grabbed a large handful of copper dollars from my coat bag, handed it to the patrolman, and said, "Please give him ......."风全住了，路上还很静。我走着，一面想，几乎怕敢想到我自己。以前的事姑且搁起，这一大把铜元又是什么意思？奖他么？我还能裁判车夫么？我不能回答自己。
The wind has stopped, and the road is still very quiet. As I walked, I thought, almost afraid to think of myself. Putting aside the past, what does this big copper dollar mean? Reward him? Can I still judge the coachman? I can't answer myself.这事到了现在，还是时时记起。我因此也时时熬了苦痛，努力的要想到我自己。几年来的文治武力，在我早如幼小时候所读过的“子曰诗云”一般，背不上半句了。独有这一件小事，却总是浮在我眼前，有时反更分明，教我惭愧，催我自新，并且增长我的勇气和希望。
I still remember this incident from time to time. Because of this, I also endured pain from time to time, and I tried to think of myself. In the past few years, I have been able to memorize half a sentence, just like the "Ziyue Shiyun" I read when I was a child. This small thing is unique, but it always floats in front of my eyes, sometimes more clearly, teaches me shame, urges me to reform, and increases my courage and hope.一九二〇年七月。
July 1920.

头发的故事

头发的故事

头发的故事

The story of hair星期日的早晨，我揭去一张隔夜的日历，向着新的那一张上看了又看的说：
On Sunday morning, I took off an overnight calendar, looked at the new one again and again, and said:“阿，十月十日，——今天原来正是双十节。这里却一点没有记载！”
"Ah, October 10th,—— today turns out to be the Double Tenth Festival. There is no record here! ”我的一位前辈先生N，正走到我的寓里来谈闲天，一听这话，便很不高兴的对我说：
One of my senior gentlemen, Mr. N, was walking to my apartment to talk about leisure, and when he heard this, he said to me very unhappily:“他们对！他们不记得，你怎样他；你记得，又怎样呢？”
"They are right! They don't remember what you did to him; So what, you remember? ”这位N先生本来脾气有点乖张，时常生些无谓的气，说些不通世故的话。当这时候，我大抵任他自言自语，不赞一辞；他独自发完议论，也就算了。
This Mr. N was originally a bit perverse, often getting angry and saying things that didn't make sense. At this time, I mostly let him talk to himself and not say a word; He finished the discussion alone, and it was okay.他说：
He said:“我最佩服北京双十节的情形。早晨，警察到门，吩咐道‘挂旗！’‘是，挂旗！’各家大半懒洋洋的踱出一个国民来，撅起一块斑驳陆离的洋布。这样一直到夜，——收了旗关门；几家偶然忘却的，便挂到第二天的上午。
"I admire the situation of Beijing's Double Tenth Festival the most. In the morning, the police arrived at the door and ordered, 'Hang up the flag!' ''Yes, hang the flag!'' Most of the families lazily paced out a national, pouting up a mottled piece of foreign cloth. This continued until the night ,—— closed the flag; A few forgot by chance and hung it up until the next morning.“他们忘却了纪念，纪念也忘却了他们！
"They have forgotten the memorial, and the memorial has forgotten them!“我也是忘却了纪念的一个人。倘使纪念起来，那第一个双十节前后的事，便都上我的心头，使我坐立不稳了。
"I am also a person who has forgotten the commemoration. If I commemorate it, the events before and after the first Double Tenth Festival will come to my mind and make me uneasy.“多少故人的脸，都浮在我眼前。几个少年辛苦奔走了十多年，暗地里一颗弹丸要了他的性命；几个少年一击不中，在监牢里身受一个多月的苦刑；几个少年怀着远志，忽然踪影全无，连尸首也不知那里去了。——
"How many old faces are floating in front of my eyes. Several teenagers worked hard for more than ten years, and secretly a projectile killed him; Several teenagers missed a blow and suffered torture in prison for more than a month; A few young people had lofty ambitions, and suddenly there was no trace, and even the corpse did not know where it went. ——“他们都在社会的冷笑恶骂迫害倾陷里过了一生；现在他们的坟墓也早在忘却里渐渐平塌下去了。
"They all lived their lives in the sneering, persecution, and trap of society; Now their graves have gradually collapsed in oblivion.“我不堪纪念这些事。
"I can't bear to remember these things.“我们还是记起一点得意的事来谈谈罢。”
"Let's remember something proud to talk about."N忽然现出笑容，伸手在自己头上一摸，高声说：
N suddenly smiled, reached out and touched his head, and said loudly:“我最得意的是自从第一个双十节以后，我在路上走，不再被人笑骂了。
"What I am most proud of is that since the first Double Tenth Festival, I have been walking on the road and no longer being laughed at.“老兄，你可知道头发是我们中国人的宝贝和冤家，古今来多少人在这上头吃些毫无价值的苦呵！
"Dude, do you know that hair is the treasure and enemy of our Chinese, and how many people have suffered worthless suffering on it throughout history!“我们的很古的古人，对于头发似乎也还看轻。据刑法看来，最要紧的自然是脑袋，所以大辟是上刑；次要便是生殖器了，所以宫刑和幽闭也是一件吓人的罚；至于髡，那是微乎其微了，然而推想起来，正不知道曾有多少人们因为光着头皮便被社会践踏了一生世。
"Our very ancient people seem to take hair lightly. According to criminal law, the most important thing is naturally the head, so the death penalty is the punishment; the secondary is the genitals, so castration and confinement are also a terrifying punishment; As for the shaved head, it is very small, but when I think about it, I don't know how many people have been trampled by society for the rest of their lives because they are bare-scalped.“我们讲革命的时候，大谈什么扬州十日，嘉定屠城，其实也不过一种手段；老实说：那时中国人的反抗，何尝因为亡国，只是因为拖辫子。
"When we talk about the revolution, we talk about the ten days in Yangzhou and the massacre of Jiading, which is actually just a means; To be honest: At that time, the Chinese resistance was not because of the fall of the country, but only because of dragging braids.“顽民杀尽了，遗老都寿终了，辫子早留定了，洪杨又闹起来了。我的祖母曾对我说，那时做百姓才难哩，全留着头发的被官兵杀，还是辫子的便被长毛杀！
"The stubborn people have been killed, the old people have died, the braids have long been kept, and Hong Yang has made trouble again. My grandmother once told me that it was difficult to be a commoner at that time, and those with hair were killed by officers and soldiers, and those with braids were killed by long hair!“我不知道有多少中国人只因为这不痛不痒的头发而吃苦，受难，灭亡。”
"I don't know how many Chinese people have suffered, suffered, and perished just because of this painless hair."N两眼望着屋梁，似乎想些事，仍然说：
N looked at the beams, as if thinking about something, and still said:“谁知道头发的苦轮到我了。
"Who knows if it's my turn to suffer from hair.“我出去留学，便剪掉了辫子，这并没有别的奥妙，只为他不太便当罢了。不料有几位辫子盘在头顶上的同学们便很厌恶我；监督也大怒，说要停了我的官费，送回中国去。
"When I went out to study, I cut off my braids, which was not very mysterious, just because it was not convenient for him. Unexpectedly, a few students with braids coiled on top of their heads hated me; The supervisor was also furious, saying that he would stop my official fees and send me back to China.“不几天，这位监督却自己被人剪去辫子逃走了。去剪的人们里面，一个便是做《革命军》的邹容，这人也因此不能再留学，回到上海来，后来死在西牢里。你也早已忘却了罢？
A few days later, the supervisor was cut off and escaped. Among the people who went to cut it, one was Zou Rong, who did "Revolutionary Army", who could no longer study abroad, returned to Shanghai, and later died in the Western Prison. You have long forgotten?“过了几年，我的家景大不如前了，非谋点事做便要受饿，只得也回到中国来。我一到上海，便买定一条假辫子，那时是二元的市价，带着回家。我的母亲倒也不说什么，然而旁人一见面，便都首先研究这辫子，待到知道是假，就一声冷笑，将我拟为杀头的罪名；有一位本家，还预备去告官，但后来因为恐怕革命党的造反或者要成功，这才中止了。
"After a few years, my family situation was not as good as before, and I had to go hungry if I didn't do something, so I had to return to China. As soon as I arrived in Shanghai, I bought a fake braid, which was the market price of two yuan at that time, and took it home. My mother didn't say anything, but as soon as others met, they first studied the braid, and when they knew it was false, they sneered and accused me of beheading; There was a family member who was also ready to sue the officials, but later it was suspended because he was afraid that the revolutionary party would rebel or succeed.“我想，假的不如真的直截爽快，我便索性废了假辫子，穿着西装在街上走。
I thought that the fake was not as straightforward and refreshing as the real one, so I simply abandoned the fake braid and walked down the street in a suit.“一路走去，一路便是笑骂的声音，有的还跟在后面骂：‘这冒失鬼！’‘假洋鬼子！’
"All the way, there were laughter and scolding all the way, and some followed behind and scolded: 'This daredevil!' 'Fake foreign devil! ’“我于是不穿洋服了，改了大衫，他们骂得更利害。
"So I stopped wearing clothes and changed to big shirts, and they scolded even more.“在这日暮途穷的时候，我的手里才添出一支手杖来，拚命的打了几回，他们渐渐的不骂了。只是走到没有打过的生地方还是骂。
"At the end of this day, I only added a cane to my hand, and after beating it desperately a few times, they gradually stopped scolding. Just go to a raw place where you haven't been beaten or scold.“这件事很使我悲哀，至今还时时记得哩。我在留学的时候，曾经看见日报上登载一个游历南洋和中国的本多博士的事；这位博士是不懂中国和马来语的，人问他，你不懂话，怎么走路呢？他拿起手杖来说，这便是他们的话，他们都懂！我因此气愤了好几天，谁知道我竟不知不觉的自己也做了，而且那些人都懂了。……
"This incident made me very sad, and I still remember it from time to time. When I was studying abroad, I once saw a story in the daily newspaper about Dr. Hondo, who traveled to Nanyang and China; This doctor doesn't understand Chinese and Malay, and people ask him, how do you walk if you don't understand the language? He picked up his cane and said, these are their words, they all understand! I was angry for several days, but who knew that I did it myself without realizing it, and those people understood. ……“宣统初年，我在本地的中学校做监学，同事是避之惟恐不远，官僚是防之惟恐不严，我终日如坐在冰窖子里，如站在刑场旁边，其实并非别的，只因为缺少了一条辫子！
"In the early years of Xuantong, I was working as a supervisor in a local middle school, my colleagues were afraid that they would not be far away, and the bureaucrats were afraid of being lax in their defenses.“有一日，几个学生忽然走到我的房里来，说，‘先生，我们要剪辫子了。’我说，‘不行！’‘有辫子好呢，没有辫子好呢？’‘没有辫子好……’‘你怎么说不行呢？’‘犯不上，你们还是不剪上算，——等一等罢。’他们不说什么，撅着嘴唇走出房去；然而终于剪掉了。
"One day, a few students suddenly came into my room and said, 'Sir, we're going to cut our braids.' I said, 'No! ''What about having braids, but not having braids? ''It's good to have no braids......' ''How can you say no?'' ''If you can't commit it, you still don't cut it,—— just wait a minute. They said nothing, and went out of the room with their lips pursed; However, it was finally cut off.“呵！不得了了，人言啧啧了；我却只装作不知道，一任他们光着头皮，和许多辫子一齐上讲堂。
"Huh! It's amazing, people are talking; I just pretended not to know, and let them go to the lecture hall with many braids with their bare scalps.“然而这剪辫病传染了；第三天，师范学堂的学生忽然也剪下了六条辫子，晚上便开除了六个学生。这六个人，留校不能，回家不得，一直挨到第一个双十节之后又一个多月，才消去了犯罪的火烙印。
"But this braiding disease is contagious; On the third day, the students of the normal school suddenly cut off six braids, and six students were expelled in the evening. These six people could not stay in school or go home, and they suffered until more than a month after the first Double Tenth Festival, before erasing the fire brand of crime.“我呢？也一样，只是元年冬天到北京，还被人骂过几次，后来骂我的人也被警察剪去了辫子，我就不再被人辱骂了；但我没有到乡间去。”
"What about me? It's the same, it's just that when I went to Beijing in the winter of the first year, I was scolded a few times, and the person who scolded me later was also cut off by the police, so I was no longer insulted; But I didn't go to the countryside. ”N显出非常得意模样，忽而又沉下脸来：
N looked very proud, and suddenly sank his face again:“现在你们这些理想家，又在那里嚷什么女子剪发了，又要造出许多毫无所得而痛苦的人！
"Now you idealists, what kind of women are there to cut their hair, and you want to create many people who suffer without gaining!“现在不是已经有剪掉头发的女人，因此考不进学校去，或者被学校除了名么？
"Aren't there women who have cut their hair now, so they can't get into school, or are they removed from school?“改革么，武器在那里？工读么，工厂在那里？
"Reform, where are the weapons? Is it work-study, where is the factory?“仍然留起，嫁给人家做媳妇去：忘却了一切还是幸福，倘使伊记着些平等自由的话，便要苦痛一生世！
"Still keep it, marry someone else as a daughter-in-law: forget everything or be happy, if you remember some equality and freedom, you will suffer for the rest of your life!“我要借了阿尔志跋绥夫的话问你们：你们将黄金时代的出现豫约给这些人们的子孙了，但有什么给这些人们自己呢？
"I would like to borrow the words of Alzhiba Suifu to ask you: You have made a promise for the emergence of the Golden Age to the descendants of these people, but what do you give to these people themselves?“阿，造物的皮鞭没有到中国的脊梁上时，中国便永远是这一样的中国，决不肯自己改变一支毫毛！
"Ah, when the leather whip of creation does not reach the backbone of China, China will always be the same China, and it will never change a single hair by itself!“你们的嘴里既然并无毒牙，何以偏要在额上帖起‘蝮蛇’两个大字，引乞丐来打杀？……”
"Since you don't have poisonous fangs in your mouths, why do you want to put the word 'viper' on your forehead and lure beggars to kill you? ……”N愈说愈离奇了，但一见到我不很愿听的神情，便立刻闭了口，站起来取帽子。
The more N said, the more bizarre it became, but as soon as he saw my unwillingness to listen, he immediately closed his mouth and stood up to take his hat.我说，“回去么？”
I said, "Go back?" ”他答道，“是的，天要下雨了。”
He replied, "Yes, it's going to rain." ”我默默的送他到门口。
I silently sent him to the door.他戴上帽子说：
He put on his hat and said:“再见！请你恕我打搅，好在明天便不是双十节，我们统可以忘却了。”
"Goodbye! Please forgive me for disturbing me, but fortunately, tomorrow is not the Double Tenth Festival, and we can all forget about it. ”一九二〇年十月。
October 1920.

风波

风波

风波

Storm临河的土场上，太阳渐渐的收了他通黄的光线了。场边靠河的乌桕树叶，干巴巴的才喘过气来，几个花脚蚊子在下面哼着飞舞。面河的农家的烟突里，逐渐减少了炊烟，女人孩子们都在自己门口的土场上泼些水，放下小桌子和矮凳；人知道，这已经是晚饭的时候了。
On the earthen field near the river, the sun gradually took away his yellow light. The leaves of the black trees near the river on the sidelines were dry before they caught their breath, and a few flower-footed mosquitoes hummed and flew below. In the chimneys of the farmhouses facing the river, the smoke gradually decreased, and the women and children splashed some water on the dirt field in front of their doors, put down small tables and low stools; People know that it is already time for dinner.老人男人坐在矮凳上，摇着大芭蕉扇闲谈，孩子飞也似的跑，或者蹲在乌桕树下赌玩石子。女人端出乌黑的蒸干菜和松花黄的米饭，热蓬蓬冒烟。河里驶过文人的酒船，文豪见了，大发诗兴，说，“无思无虑，这真是田家乐呵！”
The old man sat on a low stool, shaking a big banana fan and chatting, and the child ran as if he were flying, or squatted under the black tree to gamble and play with stones. The woman brought out black steamed dried vegetables and pine flower yellow rice, hot and smoking. The literati's wine boat sailed past the river, and the literary hero saw it, and he was very excited and said, "Thoughtless, this is really a rural family!" ”但文豪的话有些不合事实，就因为他们没有听到九斤老太的话。这时候，九斤老太正在大怒，拿破芭蕉扇敲着凳脚说：
But the literary master's words were a bit untrue, because they didn't hear the words of the old lady Jiujin. At this time, the old lady of Jiujin was furious, and took a banana fan and knocked on the foot of the stool and said:“我活到七十九岁了，活够了，不愿意眼见这些败家相，——还是死的好。立刻就要吃饭了，还吃炒豆子，吃穷了一家子！”
"I have lived to be seventy-nine years old, I have lived enough, and I don't want to see these prodigal figures,—— or it is better to die. I'm going to eat right away, and I also eat fried beans, and I eat a poor family! ”伊的曾孙女儿六斤捏着一把豆，正从对面跑来，见这情形，便直奔河边，藏在乌桕树后，伸出双丫角的小头，大声说，“这老不死的！”
Yi's great-granddaughter Liu Jin was holding a handful of beans and was running from the opposite side, and when she saw this situation, she went straight to the river, hid behind the black tree, stretched out her small head with two corners, and said loudly, "This old man is not dead!" ”九斤老太虽然高寿，耳朵却还不很聋，但也没有听到孩子的话，仍旧自己说，“这真是一代不如一代！”
Although the old lady of Jiujin lived a long life, her ears were not very deaf, but she did not hear the child's words, and still said to herself, "This is really not as good as a generation!" ”这村庄的习惯有点特别，女人生下孩子，多喜欢用秤称了轻重，便用斤数当作小名。九斤老太自从庆祝了五十大寿以后，便渐渐的变了不平家，常说伊年青的时候，天气没有现在这般热，豆子也没有现在这般硬：总之现在的时世是不对了。何况六斤比伊的曾祖，少了三斤，比伊父亲七斤，又少了一斤，这真是一条颠扑不破的实例。所以伊又用劲说，“这真是一代不如一代！”
The habits of this village are a bit special, women give birth to children, and they like to weigh them with scales, so they use the number of pounds as a nickname. Since the old lady Jiujin celebrated her 50th birthday, she has gradually changed into an unhappy family, often saying that when Yi was young, the weather was not as hot as it is now, and the beans were not as hard as they are now: in short, the current times are not right. What's more, six pounds is three pounds less than Yi's great-grandfather, and seven pounds less than Yi's father, and one pound less, this is really an unbreakable example. So Yi said vigorously, "This is really not as good as a generation!" ”伊的儿媳七斤嫂子正捧着饭篮走到桌边，便将饭篮在桌上一摔，愤愤的说，“你老人家又这么说了。六斤生下来的时候，不是六斤五两么？你家的秤又是私秤，加重称，十八两秤；用了准十六，我们的六斤该有七斤多哩。我想便是太公和公公，也不见得正是九斤八斤十足，用的秤也许是十四两……”
Yi's daughter-in-law, Qijin's sister-in-law, was walking to the table with a rice basket, so she threw the rice basket on the table and said indignantly, "Your old man said that again." When Liu Jin was born, wasn't it six pounds and five taels? Your scale is also a private scale, weighted scale, eighteen taels of scale; Using sixteen, our six pounds should be more than seven pounds. I think it's Taigong and father-in-law, and it's not necessarily nine pounds and eight pounds, and the scale used may be fourteen taels......"“一代不如一代！”
"A generation is not as good as a generation!"七斤嫂还没有答话，忽然看见七斤从小巷口转出，便移了方向，对他嚷道，“你这死尸怎么这时候才回来，死到那里去了！不管人家等着你开饭！”
Qijin's sister-in-law hadn't answered yet, and suddenly saw Qijin turning out of the alley, so she moved her direction and shouted to him, "Why did you come back at this time, and you died there!" No matter what people are waiting for you to eat! ”七斤虽然住在农村，却早有些飞黄腾达的意思。从他的祖父到他，三代不捏锄头柄了；他也照例的帮人撑着航船，每日一回，早晨从鲁镇进城，傍晚又回到鲁镇，因此很知道些时事：例如什么地方，雷公劈死了蜈蚣精；什么地方，闺女生了一个夜叉之类。他在村人里面，的确已经是一名出场人物了。但夏天吃饭不点灯，却还守着农家习惯，所以回家太迟，是该骂的。
Although Qijin lives in the countryside, he has already had some meaning of prosperity. From his grandfather to him, three generations have not pinched the handle of the hoe; He also helped people to support the ship as usual, once a day, from Luzhen in the morning to the city, and returned to Luzhen in the evening, so he knew some current affairs very well: for example, where the thunder god killed the centipede spirit; Where is the girl giving birth to a yaksha or something? He is indeed a character among the villagers. But in summer, they don't light up when eating, but they still keep the habits of farmers, so they go home too late, and they should be scolded.七斤一手捏着象牙嘴白铜斗六尺多长的湘妃竹烟管，低着头，慢慢地走来，坐在矮凳上。六斤也趁势溜出，坐在他身边，叫他爹爹。七斤没有应。
Qijin held the ivory-mouthed cupronickel bucket of Xiangfei bamboo pipe more than six feet long in one hand, lowered his head, walked slowly, and sat on a low stool. Liu Jin also took advantage of the situation to slip out, sat next to him, and called him Daddy. Seven pounds did not respond.“一代不如一代！”九斤老太说。
"A generation is not as good as a generation!" Mrs. Jiujin said.七斤慢慢地抬起头来，叹一口气说，“皇帝坐了龙庭了。”
Qijin slowly raised his head, sighed and said, "The emperor has sat in the dragon court." ”七斤嫂呆了一刻，忽而恍然大悟的道，“这可好了，这不是又要皇恩大赦了么！”
Qijin's sister-in-law was stunned for a moment, and suddenly realized, "This is good, isn't this going to be amnesty by the emperor again!" ”七斤又叹一口气，说，“我没有辫子。”
Qijin sighed again and said, "I don't have braids." ”“皇帝要辫子么？”
"Does the emperor want braids?"“皇帝要辫子。”
"The emperor wants braids."“你怎么知道呢？”七斤嫂有些着急，赶忙的问。
"How do you know?" Qijin's sister-in-law was a little anxious and hurriedly asked.“咸亨酒店里的人，都说要的。”
"The people in the Xianheng Hotel all said they wanted it."七斤嫂这时从直觉上觉得事情似乎有些不妙了，因为咸亨酒店是消息灵通的所在。伊一转眼瞥见七斤的光头，便忍不住动怒，怪他恨他怨他；忽然又绝望起来，装好一碗饭，搡在七斤的面前道，“还是赶快吃你的饭罢！哭丧着脸，就会长出辫子来么？”
Qijin's sister-in-law intuitively felt that something seemed to be wrong at this time, because the Xianheng Hotel was well-informed. When he caught a glimpse of Qijin's bald head in a blink of an eye, he couldn't help but get angry, blaming him for hating him and blaming him; Suddenly desperate again, he packed a bowl of rice, put it in front of Qi Jin and said, "Hurry up and eat your meal!" If you cry and lose your face, will you grow braids? ”
太阳收尽了他最末的光线了，水面暗暗地回复过凉气来；土场上一片碗筷声响，人人的脊梁上又都吐出汗粒。七斤嫂吃完三碗饭，偶然抬起头，心坎里便禁不住突突地发跳。伊透过乌桕叶，看见又矮又胖的赵七爷正从独木桥上走来，而且穿着宝蓝色竹布的长衫。
The sun has exhausted its last rays, and the water surface has quietly returned to coolness; There was a sound of bowls and chopsticks on the dirt field, and everyone spat out sweat on their backs. After eating three bowls of rice, Qijin's sister-in-law accidentally raised her head, and her heart couldn't help but jump suddenly. Through the black leaves, Yi saw the short and fat Zhao Qiye walking from the single-plank bridge, wearing a royal blue bamboo cloth robe.赵七爷是邻村茂源酒店的主人，又是这三十里方圆以内的唯一的出色人物兼学问家；因为有学问，所以又有些遗老的臭味。他有十多本金圣叹批评的《三国志》，时常坐着一个字一个字的读；他不但能说出五虎将姓名，甚而至于还知道黄忠表字汉升和马超表字孟起。革命以后，他便将辫子盘在顶上，像道士一般；常常叹息说，倘若赵子龙在世，天下便不会乱到这地步了。七斤嫂眼睛好，早望见今天的赵七爷已经不是道士，却变成光滑头皮，乌黑发顶；伊便知道这一定是皇帝坐了龙庭，而且一定须有辫子，而且七斤一定是非常危险。因为赵七爷的这件竹布长衫，轻易是不常穿的，三年以来，只穿过两次：一次是和他呕气的麻子阿四病了的时候，一次是曾经砸烂他酒店的鲁大爷死了的时候；现在是第三次了，这一定又是于他有庆，于他的仇家有殃了。
Zhao Qiye is the owner of the Maoyuan Hotel in the neighboring village, and he is the only outstanding person and scholar within a radius of thirty miles; Because of his knowledge, he has a bit of the smell of the elderly. He has more than ten copies of the "Romance of the Three Kingdoms" criticized by Jin Shengsi, and he often sits and reads word by word; Not only can he name the five tiger generals, but he even knows Huang Zhong's name Hansheng and Ma Chao's table name Mengqi. After the revolution, he put his braids on the top, like a Taoist priest; He often sighed and said that if Zhao Zilong were alive, the world would not be so chaotic. Qijin's sister-in-law has good eyes, and she has seen that today's Zhao Qiye is no longer a Taoist priest, but she has become a smooth scalp and black hair; Yi knew that this must be the emperor sitting in the dragon court, and he must have braids, and seven pounds must be very dangerous. Because Zhao Qiye's bamboo cloth robe is not easily worn often, it has only been worn twice in the past three years: once when Mazi Ah Si, who vomited with him, fell ill, and once when Uncle Lu, who had smashed his hotel, died; Now is the third time, and this must be a blessing for him and a disaster for his enemies.七斤嫂记得，两年前七斤喝醉了酒，曾经骂过赵七爷是“贱胎”，所以这时便立刻直觉到七斤的危险，心坎里突突地发起跳来。
Qijin's sister-in-law remembers that two years ago, Qijin was drunk and once scolded Zhao Qiye as a "cheap fetus", so at this time she immediately intuitively sensed the danger of Qijin, and her heart suddenly jumped.赵七爷一路走来，坐着吃饭的人都站起身，拿筷子点着自己的饭碗说，“七爷，请在我们这里用饭！”七爷也一路点头，说道“请请”，却一径走到七斤家的桌旁。七斤们连忙招呼，七爷也微笑着说“请请”，一面细细的研究他们的饭菜。
Zhao Qiye walked all the way, and the people who were sitting and eating stood up, lit their rice bowls with chopsticks and said, "Seventh Master, please eat with us!" The seventh master also nodded all the way and said, "Please", but walked straight to the table of Qijin's house. The seven catties hurriedly greeted each other, and the seventh master also smiled and said "please", while studying their meals carefully.“好香的干菜，——听到了风声了么？”赵七爷站在七斤的后面七斤嫂的对面说。
"Did you hear the wind ,—— the fragrant dried vegetables?" Zhao Qiye stood behind Qijin and opposite Qijin's sister-in-law and said.“皇帝坐了龙庭了。”七斤说。
"The emperor has sat in the Dragon Court." Qijin said.七斤嫂看着七爷的脸，竭力陪笑道，“皇帝已经坐了龙庭，几时皇恩大赦呢？”
Qijin's sister-in-law looked at the face of the seventh master and tried her best to smile, "The emperor has already sat in the dragon court, when will the emperor's grace be granted?" ”“皇恩大赦？——大赦是慢慢的总要大赦罢。”七爷说到这里，声色忽然严厉起来，“但是你家七斤的辫子呢，辫子？这倒是要紧的事。你们知道：长毛时候，留发不留头，留头不留发，……”
"Imperial amnesty? ——Amnesty is slow, always amnesty. When the seventh master said this, his voice suddenly became stern, "But what about your seven-pound braids, braids?" This is important. You know: when you have long hair, you keep your hair without your head, and you don't keep your hair,......"七斤和他的女人没有读过书，不很懂得这古典的奥妙，但觉得有学问的七爷这么说，事情自然非常重大，无可挽回，便仿佛受了死刑宣告似的，耳朵里嗡的一声，再也说不出一句话。
Qijin and his woman had never read a book, and they didn't understand the mystery of this classic very well, but they felt that the learned Qiye said this, the matter was naturally very important and irreparable, so it was as if he had been sentenced to death.“一代不如一代，——”九斤老太正在不平，趁这机会，便对赵七爷说，“现在的长毛，只是剪人家的辫子，僧不僧，道不道的。从前的长毛，这样的么？我活到七十九岁了，活够了。从前的长毛是——整匹的红缎子裹头，拖下去，拖下去，一直拖到脚跟；王爷是黄缎子，拖下去，黄缎子；红缎子，黄缎子，——我活够了，七十九岁了。”
"A generation is not as good as a generation,——" The old lady of Jiujin was complaining, and took this opportunity to say to Zhao Qiye, "The current long hair is just cutting other people's braids, monks are not monks, and they are not moral." Is this the long hair of the past? I lived to be seventy-nine years old, and I lived enough. In the past, the long hair was - the whole red satin wrapped in the head, dragged down, dragged down, all the way to the heels; The prince is yellow satin, drag it down, yellow satin; Red satin, yellow satin,—— I have lived enough, seventy-nine years old. ”七斤嫂站起身，自言自语的说，“这怎么好呢？这样的一班老小，都靠他养活的人，……”
Sister-in-law Qijin stood up and said to herself, "How good is this?" Such a group of people rely on him to feed,......"赵七爷摇头道，“那也没法。没有辫子，该当何罪，书上都一条一条明明白白写着的。不管他家里有些什么人。”
Zhao Qiye shook his head and said, "That's not possible." If there are no braids, what crime should be committed, the book is clearly written one by one. No matter who is in his family. ”七斤嫂听到书上写着，可真是完全绝望了；自己急得没法，便忽然又恨到七斤。伊用筷子指着他的鼻尖说，“这死尸自作自受！造反的时候，我本来说，不要撑船了，不要上城了。他偏要死进城去，滚进城去，进城便被人剪去了辫子。从前是绢光乌黑的辫子，现在弄得僧不僧道不道的。这囚徒自作自受，带累了我们又怎么说呢？这活死尸的囚徒……”
Qijin's sister-in-law heard what was written in the book, but she was really completely desperate; I was so anxious that I suddenly hated seven pounds again. Yi pointed to the tip of his nose with his chopsticks and said, "This dead body is self-inflicted!" When I rebelled, I originally said, don't support the boat, don't go to the city. He wanted to die and go into the city, roll into the city, and when he entered the city, his braids were cut off. In the past, it was a silk black braid, but now it makes monks and monks and monks. This prisoner is self-inflicted, what can we say if we are tired? This prisoner of the living dead......"村人看见赵七爷到村，都赶紧吃完饭，聚在七斤家饭桌的周围。七斤自己知道是出场人物，被女人当大众这样辱骂，很不雅观，便只得抬起头，慢慢地说道：
When the villagers saw Zhao Qiye arrive in the village, they all hurriedly finished eating and gathered around the dinner table of Qijin's house. Qijin knew that he was a character who appeared, and it was very unsightly to be insulted by a woman as a public, so he had to raise his head and say slowly:“你今天说现成话，那时你……”
"You say ready-made words today, and you ...... then"“你这活死尸的囚徒……”
"You prisoner of the living dead......"看客中间，八一嫂是心肠最好的人，抱着伊的两周岁的遗腹子，正在七斤嫂身边看热闹；这时过意不去，连忙解劝说，“七斤嫂，算了罢。人不是神仙，谁知道未来事呢？便是七斤嫂，那时不也说，没有辫子倒也没有什么丑么？况且衙门里的大老爷也还没有告示，……”
Among the spectators, Sister-in-law Bayi is the best-hearted person, holding Yi's two-year-old posthumous child, and is watching the excitement next to Sister-in-law Qijin; At this time, he couldn't go away, and hurriedly persuaded, "Sister-in-law Qijin, forget it." People are not immortals, who knows what the future holds? It's Qijin's sister-in-law, didn't she say at that time, isn't there anything ugly without braids? Besides, the eldest master in the yamen has not yet announced it,......"七斤嫂没有听完，两个耳朵早通红了；便将筷子转过向来，指着八一嫂的鼻子，说，“阿呀，这是什么话呵！八一嫂，我自己看来倒还是一个人，会说出这样昏诞胡涂话么？那时我是，整整哭了三天，谁都看见；连六斤这小鬼也都哭，……”六斤刚吃完一大碗饭，拿了空碗，伸手去嚷着要添。七斤嫂正没好气，便用筷子在伊的双丫角中间，直扎下去，大喝道，“谁要你来多嘴！你这偷汉的小寡妇！”
Qijin's sister-in-law didn't finish listening, and her ears were already red; Then he turned his chopsticks around, pointed to Sister-in-law Bayi's nose, and said, "Ah, what is this!" Sister-in-law Bayi, I think I'm still alone, would I say such absurd nonsense? At that time, I cried for three days, and everyone saw it; Even the little ghost Liujin cried,...... "Liujin just finished a big bowl of rice, took the empty bowl, and reached out to shout for more." Qijin's sister-in-law was not angry, so she used chopsticks in the middle of Yi's double corners, pricked it straight, and shouted, "Who wants you to talk more!" You little widow of a thief! ”扑的一声，六斤手里的空碗落在地上了，恰巧又碰着一块砖角，立刻破成一个很大的缺口。七斤直跳起来，检起破碗，合上了检查一回，也喝道，“入娘的！”一巴掌打倒了六斤。六斤躺着哭，九斤老太拉了伊的手，连说着“一代不如一代”，一同走了。
With a thud, the empty bowl in Liu Jin's hand fell to the ground, and it happened to touch a brick corner again, which immediately broke into a big gap. Qijin jumped up, picked up the broken bowl, closed it for inspection, and shouted, "Mother! A slap knocked down six pounds. Liu Jin lay down and cried, and the old lady Jiu Jin took Yi's hand, and even said "one generation is not as good as a generation", and left together.八一嫂也发怒，大声说，“七斤嫂，你‘恨棒打人’……”
Bayi's sister-in-law was also angry and said loudly, "Sister-in-law Qijin, you 'hate beating people'......"赵七爷本来是笑着旁观的；但自从八一嫂说了“衙门里的大老爷没有告示”这话以后，却有些生气了。这时他已经绕出桌旁，接着说，“‘恨棒打人’，算什么呢。大兵是就要到的。你可知道，这回保驾的是张大帅，张大帅就是燕人张翼德的后代，他一支丈八蛇矛，就有万夫不当之勇，谁能抵挡他，”他两手同时捏起空拳，仿佛握着无形的蛇矛模样，向八一嫂抢进几步道，“你能抵挡他么！”
Zhao Qiye was originally smiling and watching; But since Bayi's sister-in-law said that "the eldest master in the yamen has no notice", she has been a little angry. At this time, he had already walked around the table, and then said, "What is 'hating sticks and beating people'?" The soldiers are coming. Do you know that this time it is Zhang Dashuai, Zhang Dashai is the descendant of Zhang Yide, he has a Zhangba snake spear, and he has the courage of ten thousand men, who can resist him," he clenched his empty fist with both hands at the same time, as if holding an invisible snake spear, and grabbed a few trails to Bayi's sister-in-law, "Can you resist him!" ”八一嫂正气得抱着孩子发抖，忽然见赵七爷满脸油汗，瞪着眼，准对伊冲过来，便十分害怕，不敢说完话，回身走了。赵七爷也跟着走去，众人一面怪八一嫂多事，一面让开路，几个剪过辫子重新留起的便赶快躲在人丛后面，怕他看见。赵七爷也不细心察访，通过人丛，忽然转入乌桕树后，说道“你能抵挡他么！”跨上独木桥，扬长去了。
Sister-in-law Bayi was trembling with anger while holding the child, and suddenly saw Zhao Qiye's face full of oil and sweat, staring, and rushing over to Yi, she was very scared, did not dare to finish speaking, and turned around and left. Zhao Qiye also followed, and while everyone blamed Bayi's sister-in-law for being meddlesome, they got out of the way, and a few people who had cut their braids and put them back quickly hid behind the crowd, for fear that he would see them. Zhao Qiye did not visit carefully, and through the crowd, he suddenly turned behind the black tree and said, "Can you resist him!" "Cross the single-plank bridge and go long.村人们呆呆站着，心里计算，都觉得自己确乎抵不住张翼德，因此也决定七斤便要没有性命。七斤既然犯了皇法，想起他往常对人谈论城中的新闻的时候，就不该含着长烟管显出那般骄傲模样，所以对于七斤的犯法，也觉得有些畅快。他们也仿佛想发些议论，却又觉得没有什么议论可发。嗡嗡的一阵乱嚷，蚊子都撞过赤膊身子，闯到乌桕树下去做市；他们也就慢慢地走散回家，关上门去睡觉。七斤嫂咕哝着，也收了家伙和桌子矮凳回家，关上门睡觉了。
The villagers stood in a daze, calculating in their hearts, and felt that they really couldn't resist Zhang Yide, so they also decided that Seven Pounds would lose their lives. Since Qijin had violated the imperial law, he remembered that when he usually talked about the news in the city to people, he shouldn't have shown such a proud appearance with a long cigarette in his mouth, so he also felt a little happy about Qijin's crime. They also seemed to want to make some discussions, but they felt that there was nothing to discuss. There was a buzzing chaos, and the mosquitoes bumped into the shirtless body and broke into the black tree to make a market; They slowly dispersed home, closed the door and went to sleep. Qijin's sister-in-law muttered, took the guy and the table and stool home, closed the door and went to sleep.七斤将破碗拿回家里，坐在门槛上吸烟；但非常忧愁，忘却了吸烟，象牙嘴六尺多长湘妃竹烟管的白铜斗里的火光，渐渐发黑了。他心里但觉得事情似乎十分危急，也想想些方法，想些计画，但总是非常模糊，贯穿不得：“辫子呢辫子？丈八蛇矛。一代不如一代！皇帝坐龙庭。破的碗须得上城去钉好。谁能抵挡他？书上一条一条写着。入娘的！……”
Qi Jin took the broken bowl home and sat on the threshold to smoke; But I was very sad and forgot to smoke, and the fire in the cupronickel bucket of the six-foot-long Xiangfei bamboo pipe with an ivory mouth gradually turned black. He felt that things seemed very critical in his heart, and he thought of some methods and plans, but he was always very vague and couldn't penetrate: "What about braids? Eighteen snake spears. A generation is not as good as a generation! The emperor sits in the dragon court. The broken bowl must go to the city to nail it. Who can resist him? The book reads one by one. Mother! ……”
第二日清晨，七斤依旧从鲁镇撑航船进城，傍晚回到鲁镇，又拿着六尺多长的湘妃竹烟管和一个饭碗回村。他在晚饭席上，对九斤老太说，这碗是在城内钉合的，因为缺口大，所以要十六个铜钉，三文一个，一总用了四十八文小钱。
In the early morning of the next day, Qijin still sailed into the city from Lu Town, and returned to Lu Town in the evening, and returned to the village with a Xiangfei bamboo pipe more than six feet long and a rice bowl. At the dinner table, he said to the old lady of Jiujin that this bowl was nailed in the city, because the gap was large, so it took sixteen copper nails, one for three cents, and forty-eight small coins were used for a total of forty-eight cents.九斤老太很不高兴的说，“一代不如一代，我是活够了。三文钱一个钉；从前的钉，这样的么？从前的钉是……我活了七十九岁了，——”
The old lady Jiujin said very unhappily, "One generation is not as good as a generation, I have lived enough." a nail for a sandwich; Is this the old nail? Once upon a time, the nail was ...... I have lived seventy-nine years,——"此后七斤虽然是照例日日进城，但家景总有些黯淡，村人大抵回避着，不再来听他从城内得来的新闻。七斤嫂也没有好声气，还时常叫他“囚徒”。
After that, although Qijin went to the city every day as usual, the family scene was always a little bleak, and the villagers mostly avoided it and no longer came to listen to the news he got from the city. Qijin's sister-in-law also had no good voice, and often called him a "prisoner".过了十多日，七斤从城内回家，看见他的女人非常高兴，问他说，“你在城里可听到些什么？”
After more than ten days, Qijin returned home from the city, and the woman who saw him was very happy and asked him, "What can you hear in the city?" ”“没有听到些什么。”
"I didn't hear anything."“皇帝坐了龙庭没有呢？”
"Did the emperor sit in the Dragon Court?"“他们没有说。”
"They didn't say it."“咸亨酒店里也没有人说么？”
"Didn't anyone say it in the Xianheng Hotel?"“也没人说。”
"No one said it."“我想皇帝一定是不坐龙庭了。我今天走过赵七爷的店前，看见他又坐着念书了，辫子又盘在顶上了，也没有穿长衫。”
"I think the emperor must not be sitting in the Dragon Court. I walked past Zhao Qiye's shop today and saw him sitting and studying again, with his braids coiled on top again, and he was not wearing a long gown. ”“…………”
“你想，不坐龙庭了罢？”
"Do you want to stop sitting in the Dragon Court?"“我想，不坐了罢。”
"I think, don't sit down."现在的七斤，是七斤嫂和村人又都早给他相当的尊敬，相当的待遇了。到夏天，他们仍旧在自家门口的土场上吃饭；大家见了，都笑嘻嘻的招呼。九斤老太早已做过八十大寿，仍然不平而且康健。六斤的双丫角，已经变成一支大辫子了；伊虽然新近裹脚，却还能帮同七斤嫂做事，捧着十八个铜钉的饭碗，在土场上一瘸一拐的往来。
Now Qijin, Qijin's sister-in-law and the villagers have already given him considerable respect and treatment. In the summer, they still eat on the dirt field in front of their house; When everyone saw it, they all greeted with a smile. The old lady of Jiujin has already celebrated her 80th birthday, and she is still unfair and healthy. The six-pound double horn has become a big braid; Although Yi has recently wrapped his feet, he can still help his sister-in-law with seven pounds, holding a rice bowl of eighteen copper nails, limping back and forth on the dirt field.一九二〇年十月。
October 1920.

故乡

故乡

故乡

hometown我冒了严寒，回到相隔二千余里，别了二十余年的故乡去。
I braved the cold and returned to my hometown, which was more than 2,000 miles away, after more than 20 years.时候既然是深冬；渐近故乡时，天气又阴晦了，冷风吹进船舱中，呜呜的响，从篷隙向外一望，苍黄的天底下，远近横着几个萧索的荒村，没有一些活气。我的心禁不住悲凉起来了。
Since it is the depths of winter; As we approached our hometown, the weather was gloomy again, the cold wind blew into the cabin, whining, looking out from the gap in the canopy, under the pale sky, there were several desolate deserted villages near and far, and there was no vitality. My heart couldn't help but feel sad.阿！这不是我二十年来时时记得的故乡？
Pander to! Isn't this the hometown I have always remembered for the past 20 years?我所记得的故乡全不如此。我的故乡好得多了。但要我记起他的美丽，说出他的佳处来，却又没有影像，没有言辞了。仿佛也就如此。于是我自己解释说：故乡本也如此，——虽然没有进步，也未必有如我所感的悲凉，这只是我自己心情的改变罢了，因为我这次回乡，本没有什么好心绪。
The hometown I remember is not like this at all. My hometown is much better. But if I remember his beauty and say his good points, there is no image, no words. It seems that this is the case. So I explained myself: This is true for my hometown,—— although there is no progress, it may not be as sad as I feel, this is just a change in my own mood, because I have no good mood when I return to my hometown this time.我这次是专为了别他而来的。我们多年聚族而居的老屋，已经公同卖给别姓了，交屋的期限，只在本年，所以必须赶在正月初一以前，永别了熟识的老屋，而且远离了熟识的故乡，搬家到我在谋食的异地去。
I came this time just to say goodbye to him. The deadline for handing over the house is only this year, so we must hurry up before the first day of the first lunar month, say goodbye to the familiar old house, and stay away from the familiar hometown, and move to a different place where I am making a living.第二日清早晨我到了我家的门口了。瓦楞上许多枯草的断茎当风抖着，正在说明这老屋难免易主的原因。几房的本家大约已经搬走了，所以很寂静。我到了自家的房外，我的母亲早已迎着出来了，接着便飞出了八岁的侄儿宏儿。
The next morning, I arrived at my door. The broken stems of many dry grass on the corrugated tiles trembled in the wind, which explained the reason why this old house inevitably changed hands. The main house of the few rooms has probably moved away, so it is very quiet. When I arrived outside my house, my mother had already come out, and then my eight-year-old nephew Hong'er flew out.我的母亲很高兴，但也藏着许多凄凉的神情，教我坐下，歇息，喝茶，且不谈搬家的事。宏儿没有见过我，远远的对面站着只是看。
My mother was very happy, but also hid a lot of desolate looks, teaching me to sit, rest, drink tea, and not talk about moving. Hong'er had never seen me, and stood across from me just watching.但我们终于谈到搬家的事。我说外间的寓所已经租定了，又买了几件家具，此外须将家里所有的木器卖去，再去增添。母亲也说好，而且行李也略已齐集，木器不便搬运的，也小半卖去了，只是收不起钱来。
But we finally talked about moving. I said that the apartment outside had been rented, and I had bought a few pieces of furniture, and I had to sell all the wooden furniture in the house and add more. My mother also said yes, and the luggage was slightly collected, and the wooden items that were inconvenient to carry were sold in small quantities, but they couldn't collect the money.“你休息一两天，去拜望亲戚本家一回，我们便可以走了。”母亲说。
"You rest for a day or two, visit your relatives' homes, and we can go." Mother said.“是的。”
"Yes."“还有闰土，他每到我家来时，总问起你，很想见你一回面。我已经将你到家的大约日期通知他，他也许就要来了。”
"And Runtu, every time he comes to my house, he always asks about you and wants to see you again. I have informed him of the approximate date of your arrival, and he may be coming. ”这时候，我的脑里忽然闪出一幅神异的图画来：深蓝的天空中挂着一轮金黄的圆月，下面是海边的沙地，都种着一望无际的碧绿的西瓜，其间有一个十一二岁的少年，项带银圈，手捏一柄钢叉，向一匹猹尽力的刺去，那猹却将身一扭，反从他的胯下逃走了。
At this time, a mysterious picture suddenly flashed in my mind: a golden full moon hung in the deep blue sky, and below was the sand by the sea, all planted with endless turquoise watermelons, among which was an eleven or twelve-year-old boy, with a silver ring around his neck, holding a steel fork in his hand, and stabbing a monkey as hard as he could, but the monkey twisted his body and escaped from under his crotch.这少年便是闰土。我认识他时，也不过十多岁，离现在将有三十年了；那时我的父亲还在世，家景也好，我正是一个少爷。那一年，我家是一件大祭祀的值年。这祭祀，说是三十多年才能轮到一回，所以很郑重；正月里供祖像，供品很多，祭器很讲究，拜的人也很多，祭器也很要防偷去。我家只有一个忙月（我们这里给人做工的分三种：整年给一定人家做工的叫长年；按日给人做工的叫短工；自己也种地，只在过年过节以及收租时候来给一定人家做工的称忙月），忙不过来，他便对父亲说，可以叫他的儿子闰土来管祭器的。
This young man is Runtu. When I met him, he was only in his teens, and it will be thirty years from now; At that time, my father was still alive, and the family situation was good, and I was a young master. That year, my family was on the occasion of a big sacrifice. This sacrifice is said to be more than thirty years and can only be done once, so it is very solemn; In the first month, there are many offerings to the ancestral statues, the sacrificial vessels are very particular, and there are many people who worship them, and the sacrificial vessels are also very important to prevent theft. My family only has one busy month (we have three types of work here: those who work for a certain number of people all year round are called long-term; Those who work on a daily basis are called short-term workers; He also farmed the land, and only came to work for a certain number of people during the New Year and rent collection), so he couldn't be busy, so he said to his father that he could ask his son Runtu to take care of the sacrificial vessels.我的父亲允许了；我也很高兴，因为我早听到闰土这名字，而且知道他和我仿佛年纪，闰月生的，五行缺土，所以他的父亲叫他闰土。他是能装弶捉小鸟雀的。
My father allowed it; I was also very happy, because I had heard the name Runtu for a long time, and I knew that he and I were the same age, born in the leap month, and lacked soil in the five elements, so his father called him Runtu. He can pretend to catch small birds.我于是日日盼望新年，新年到，闰土也就到了。好容易到了年末，有一日，母亲告诉我，闰土来了，我便飞跑的去看。他正在厨房里，紫色的圆脸，头戴一顶小毡帽，颈上套一个明晃晃的银项圈，这可见他的父亲十分爱他，怕他死去，所以在神佛面前许下愿心，用圈子将他套住了。他见人很怕羞，只是不怕我，没有旁人的时候，便和我说话，于是不到半日，我们便熟识了。
So I look forward to the New Year every day, and when the New Year comes, the leap earth will also arrive. It was finally the end of the year, and one day, my mother told me that Runtu was coming, so I flew to see it. He was in the kitchen, with a purple round face, a small felt hat, and a bright silver collar around his neck, which showed that his father loved him very much and was afraid that he would die, so he made a wish in front of the gods and Buddhas and wrapped him in a circle. He was very shy when he saw people, but he was not afraid of me, and when there was no one else, he talked to me, so in less than half a day, we became acquainted.我们那时候不知道谈些什么，只记得闰土很高兴，说是上城之后，见了许多没有见过的东西。
We didn't know what to talk about at that time, we only remembered that Runtu was very happy, saying that after going to the city, he saw many things he had never seen before.第二日，我便要他捕鸟。他说：
The next day, I asked him to catch birds. He said:“这不能。须大雪下了才好。我们沙地上，下了雪，我扫出一块空地来，用短棒支起一个大竹匾，撒下秕谷，看鸟雀来吃时，我远远地将缚在棒上的绳子只一拉，那鸟雀就罩在竹匾下了。什么都有：稻鸡，角鸡，鹁鸪，蓝背……”
"This can't. It must snow heavily. When we were on the sand, it was snowing, I swept out an open space, propped up a large bamboo plaque with a short stick, sprinkled chaff grain, and when I saw the birds come to eat, I only pulled the rope tied to the stick from a distance, and the birds covered under the bamboo plaque. There is everything: rice chicken, horned chicken, partridge, blue-backed ......"我于是又很盼望下雪。
I was looking forward to the snow again.闰土又对我说：
Runtu said to me again:“现在太冷，你夏天到我们这里来。我们日里到海边检贝壳去，红的绿的都有，鬼见怕也有，观音手也有。晚上我和爹管西瓜去，你也去。”
"It's too cold now, you come to us in the summer. We go to the beach to inspect the shells during the day, there are red and green ones, ghosts are scared, and Guanyin hands are also there. In the evening, my father and I will take care of the watermelon, and you will go too. ”“管贼么？”
"Do you care about thieves?"“不是。走路的人口渴了摘一个瓜吃，我们这里是不算偷的。要管的是獾猪，刺猬，猹。月亮地下，你听，啦啦的响了，猹在咬瓜了。你便捏了胡叉，轻轻地走去……”
"No. Walking people pick a melon when they are thirsty to eat, and we don't steal here. It is badger pigs, hedgehogs, and monkeys. Under the moon, you listen, there is a loud sound, and the monkey is biting the melon. You squeeze your fork and walk gently......"我那时并不知道这所谓猹的是怎么一件东西——便是现在也没有知道——只是无端的觉得状如小狗而很凶猛。
I didn't know what this so-called monkey was at the time—even I don't know it now—but for no reason I felt like a puppy and very fierce.“他不咬人么？”
"Doesn't he bite?"“有胡叉呢。走到了，看见猹了，你便刺。这畜生很伶俐，倒向你奔来，反从胯下窜了。他的皮毛是油一般的滑……”
"There is a Hu fork. When you walk and see a monkey, you stab it. This beast is very clever, it ran towards you, and ran from under the crotch. His fur is oily and smooth......"我素不知道天下有这许多新鲜事：海边有如许五色的贝壳；西瓜有这样危险的经历，我先前单知道他在水果店里出卖罢了。
I didn't know that there were so many new things in the world: there were so many five-colored shells on the seashore; Watermelon has such a dangerous experience, I only knew that he was sold in a fruit shop.“我们沙地里，潮汛要来的时候，就有许多跳鱼儿只是跳，都有青蛙似的两个脚……”
"In our sandy land, when the tide is coming, there are many jumping fish just jumping, and they all have two feet like frogs......"阿！闰土的心里有无穷无尽的希奇的事，都是我往常的朋友所不知道的。他们不知道一些事，闰土在海边时，他们都和我一样只看见院子里高墙上的四角的天空。
Pander to! There are endless strange things in Runtu's heart, all of which my usual friends don't know. They don't know some things, when Runtu is by the sea, they all see the sky in the four corners of the high wall in the yard like me.可惜正月过去了，闰土须回家里去，我急得大哭，他也躲到厨房里，哭着不肯出门，但终于被他父亲带走了。他后来还托他的父亲带给我一包贝壳和几支很好看的鸟毛，我也曾送他一两次东西，但从此没有再见面。
Unfortunately, the first month passed, Runtuxu went home, I was so anxious that I cried, and he also hid in the kitchen, crying and refusing to go out, but was finally taken away by his father. He later asked his father to bring me a pack of shells and a few beautiful bird feathers, and I gave him something once or twice, but we never met again.现在我的母亲提起了他，我这儿时的记忆，忽而全都闪电似的苏生过来，似乎看到了我的美丽的故乡了。我应声说：
Now that my mother mentioned him, all my childhood memories here suddenly came back to life like lightning, and I seemed to see my beautiful hometown. I responded:“这好极！他，——怎样？……”
"This is great! What ,—— he do? ……”“他？……他景况也很不如意……”母亲说着，便向房外看，“这些人又来了。说是买木器，顺手也就随便拿走的，我得去看看。”
"He? …… His situation is also very unsatisfactory......" said the mother, and looked out of the room, "These people are here again." It is said that it is to buy wood, and it is easy to take it away, I have to go and take a look. ”母亲站起身，出去了。门外有几个女人的声音。我便招宏儿走近面前，和他闲话：问他可会写字，可愿意出门。
Mother stood up and went out. There were several women's voices outside the door. I called Hong'er to approach him and gossip with him: ask him if he can write and if he is willing to go out.“我们坐火车去么？”
"Shall we take the train?"“我们坐火车去。”
"Let's take the train."“船呢？”
"Where's the boat?"“先坐船，……”
"Take the boat first,......"“哈！这模样了！胡子这么长了！”一种尖利的怪声突然大叫起来。
"Ha! This is what it looks like! The beard is so long! A sharp strange voice suddenly screamed.我吃了一吓，赶忙抬起头，却见一个凸颧骨，薄嘴唇，五十岁上下的女人站在我面前，两手搭在髀间，没有系裙，张着两脚，正像一个画图仪器里细脚伶仃的圆规。
I was startled, and hurriedly raised my head, only to see a woman with convex cheekbones and thin lips, about fifty years old, standing in front of me, with her hands between her thighs, without a skirt, and her feet open, just like a compass with slender feet in a drawing instrument.我愕然了。
I was stunned.“不认识了么？我还抱过你咧！”
"Don't you know me? I even hugged you! ”我愈加愕然了。幸而我的母亲也就进来，从旁说：
I was even more stunned. Fortunately, my mother came in and said:“他多年出门，统忘却了。你该记得罢，”便向着我说，“这是斜对门的杨二嫂，……开豆腐店的。”
"He has been out for many years and has forgotten about it. You should remember," he said to me, "This is Sister Yang Er's sister-in-law diagonally across the door,...... Open a tofu shop. ”哦，我记得了。我孩子时候，在斜对门的豆腐店里确乎终日坐着一个杨二嫂，人都叫伊“豆腐西施”。但是擦着白粉，颧骨没有这么高，嘴唇也没有这么薄，而且终日坐着，我也从没有见过这圆规式的姿势。那时人说：因为伊，这豆腐店的买卖非常好。但这大约因为年龄的关系，我却并未蒙着一毫感化，所以竟完全忘却了。然而圆规很不平，显出鄙夷的神色，仿佛嗤笑法国人不知道拿破仑，美国人不知道华盛顿似的，冷笑说：
Oh, I remember. When I was a child, there was indeed a Yang Ersao sitting in the tofu shop diagonally opposite the door all day long, and people called her "Tofu Xi Shi". But rubbing the white powder, the cheekbones are not so high, the lips are not so thin, and I have never seen this compass posture while sitting all day. At that time, people said: Because of Yi, the tofu shop is very good. But this is probably because of my age, but I was not blinded at all, so I completely forgot about it. However, the compass was very unfair, showing a look of contempt, as if laughing at the French who didn't know Napoleon and the Americans didn't know Washington, and sneered:“忘了？这真是贵人眼高……”
"Forgot? This is really a noble person's eyes......“那有这事……我……”我惶恐着，站起来说。
"Is there such a thing...... I ......," I said, standing up in fear.“那么，我对你说。迅哥儿，你阔了，搬动又笨重，你还要什么这些破烂木器，让我拿去罢。我们小户人家，用得着。”
"Well, let me say to you. Brother Xun, you are wide, and it is bulky to move, what do you want from these broken wooden utensils, let me take them. We are small families, and we can use it. ”“我并没有阔哩。我须卖了这些，再去……”
"I'm not broad. I have to sell these and then go ......."“阿呀呀，你放了道台了，还说不阔？你现在有三房姨太太；出门便是八抬的大轿，还说不阔？吓，什么都瞒不过我。”
"Ah, you put the Taoist platform, and you still can't say it? You now have a three-room aunt; When you go out, it's a big sedan chair with eight lifts, and it's not wide? Scared, you can't hide anything from me. ”我知道无话可说了，便闭了口，默默的站着。
I knew I had nothing to say, so I closed my mouth and stood silently.“阿呀阿呀，真是愈有钱，便愈是一毫不肯放松，愈是一毫不肯放松，便愈有钱……”圆规一面愤愤的回转身，一面絮絮的说，慢慢向外走，顺便将我母亲的一副手套塞在裤腰里，出去了。
"Ah, ah, the richer you are, the more you refuse to relax, and the more you refuse to relax, the richer you are......" The compass turned around indignantly, and said in a babbling manner, slowly walking out, and by the way, tucked a pair of my mother's gloves into the waistband of his pants and went out.此后又有近处的本家和亲戚来访问我。我一面应酬，偷空便收拾些行李，这样的过了三四天。
After that, my family and relatives from the neighborhood came to visit me. While socializing, I packed some luggage when I was free, and after three or four days, it took me three or four days.一日是天气很冷的午后，我吃过午饭，坐着喝茶，觉得外面有人进来了，便回头去看。我看时，不由的非常出惊，慌忙站起身，迎着走去。
One day it was a very cold afternoon, I had lunch, sat down to drink tea, and felt that someone outside had come in, so I looked back. When I saw it, I couldn't help but be very surprised, and hurriedly stood up and walked towards it.这来的便是闰土。虽然我一见便知道是闰土，但又不是我这记忆上的闰土了。他身材增加了一倍；先前的紫色的圆脸，已经变作灰黄，而且加上了很深的皱纹；眼睛也像他父亲一样，周围都肿得通红，这我知道，在海边种地的人，终日吹着海风，大抵是这样的。他头上是一顶破毡帽，身上只一件极薄的棉衣，浑身瑟索着；手里提着一个纸包和一支长烟管，那手也不是我所记得的红活圆实的手，却又粗又笨而且开裂，像是松树皮了。
This is the leap soil. Although I knew it was a leap soil at first sight, it was not the leap soil in my memory. He doubled in size; The previous purple round face has turned gray and yellow, and deep wrinkles have been added; His eyes were also swollen and red all around, just like his father, and I knew that people who farmed by the sea blew the sea breeze all day long, probably like this. He had a tattered felt hat on his head and only a very thin cotton coat on his body, and he was shivering all over; Carrying a paper bag and a long pipe in his hand, the hand was not the red and round hand I remembered, but thick, clumsy and cracked, like pine bark.我这时很兴奋，但不知道怎么说才好，只是说：
I was very excited at this time, but I didn't know what to say, so I just said:“阿！闰土哥，——你来了？……”
"Ah! Brother Runtu,—— are you here? ……”我接着便有许多话，想要连珠一般涌出：角鸡，跳鱼儿，贝壳，猹，……但又总觉得被什么挡着似的，单在脑里面回旋，吐不出口外去。
Then I had many words that I wanted to pour out: horned chickens, jumping fish, shells, monkeys,...... But I always feel as if I am blocked by something, swirling in my head alone, and I can't spit it out.他站住了，脸上现出欢喜和凄凉的神情；动着嘴唇，却没有作声。他的态度终于恭敬起来了，分明的叫道：
He stood still, with a look of joy and desolation on his face; moved his lips, but did not make a sound. His attitude finally became respectful, and he shouted clearly:“老爷！……”
"Master! ……”我似乎打了一个寒噤；我就知道，我们之间已经隔了一层可悲的厚障壁了。我也说不出话。
I seemed to shudder; I knew that there was a sad thick barrier between us. I couldn't speak.他回过头去说，“水生，给老爷磕头。”便拖出躲在背后的孩子来，这正是一个廿年前的闰土，只是黄瘦些，颈子上没有银圈罢了。“这是第五个孩子，没有见过世面，躲躲闪闪……”
He turned around and said, "Shui Shui, kowtow to the master." "Then drag out the child hiding behind him, this is exactly the leap soil from twenty years ago, but the yellow is thinner, and there is no silver ring on his neck." This is the fifth child, who has never seen the world and dodges ......"母亲和宏儿下楼来了，他们大约也听到了声音。
Mother and Hong'er came downstairs, and they probably heard the sound as well.“老太太。信是早收到了。我实在喜欢的了不得，知道老爷回来……”闰土说。
"Old lady. The letter was received early. I really like it, I know that the master is back......" Runtu said.“阿，你怎的这样客气起来。你们先前不是哥弟称呼么？还是照旧：迅哥儿。”母亲高兴的说。
"Ah, why are you so polite. Didn't you call you brother before?" Still the same: Brother Xun. The mother said happily.“阿呀，老太太真是……这成什么规矩。那时是孩子，不懂事……”闰土说着，又叫水生上来打拱，那孩子却害羞，紧紧的只贴在他背后。
"Ah, the old lady is really ...... What kind of rule is this? At that time, I was a child, ignorant......" Runtu said, and asked Shui Shui to come up and arch, but the child was shy and only clung to his back.“他就是水生？第五个？都是生人，怕生也难怪的；还是宏儿和他去走走。”母亲说。
"He is aquatic? The fifth? They are all strangers, so it is no wonder that they are afraid of life; Or Hong'er went for a walk with him. Mother said.宏儿听得这话，便来招水生，水生却松松爽爽同他一路出去了。母亲叫闰土坐，他迟疑了一回，终于就了坐，将长烟管靠在桌旁，递过纸包来，说：
When Hong'er heard this, he came to recruit Shui Shui, but Shui Shui went out with him all the way. His mother asked Runtu to sit, he hesitated for a while, and finally sat down, leaned the long cigarette pipe against the table, handed over the paper bag, and said:“冬天没有什么东西了。这一点干青豆倒是自家晒在那里的，请老爷……”
"There is nothing left in winter. This dried green beans are dried there at home, please ......我问问他的景况。他只是摇头。
I asked him how he was doing. He just shook his head.“非常难。第六个孩子也会帮忙了，却总是吃不够……又不太平……什么地方都要钱，没有定规……收成又坏。种出东西来，挑去卖，总要捐几回钱，折了本；不去卖，又只能烂掉……”
"It's very difficult. The sixth child will also help, but he always can't eat enough...... It's not peaceful...... Money is required everywhere, and there are no rules...... The harvest was also bad. When you grow something and pick it to sell, you always have to donate money several times and lose money; If you don't sell it, you can only rot......"他只是摇头；脸上虽然刻着许多皱纹，却全然不动，仿佛石像一般。他大约只是觉得苦，却又形容不出，沉默了片时，便拿起烟管来默默的吸烟了。
He just shook his head; Although there are many wrinkles engraved on his face, he is completely motionless, like a stone statue. He probably just felt bitter, but he couldn't describe it, and after a moment of silence, he picked up the pipe and smoked silently.母亲问他，知道他的家里事务忙，明天便得回去；又没有吃过午饭，便叫他自己到厨下炒饭吃去。
His mother asked him, knowing that he was busy with family affairs and had to go back tomorrow; He hadn't eaten lunch, so he asked him to go to the kitchen to eat fried rice.他出去了；母亲和我都叹息他的景况：多子，饥荒，苛税，兵，匪，官，绅，都苦得他像一个木偶人了。母亲对我说，凡是不必搬走的东西，尽可以送他，可以听他自己去拣择。
He went out; My mother and I both lamented his situation: many children, famine, harsh taxes, soldiers, bandits, officials, and gentry, all of whom suffered so much that he was like a puppet. My mother told me that anything that didn't have to be moved could be given to him, and he could choose for himself.下午，他拣好了几件东西：两条长桌，四个椅子，一副香炉和烛台，一杆抬秤。他又要所有的草灰（我们这里煮饭是烧稻草的，那灰，可以做沙地的肥料），待我们启程的时候，他用船来载去。
In the afternoon, he picked out a few things: two long tables, four chairs, a pair of incense burners and candlesticks, and a scale. He also asked for all the grass ash (we cook here by burning straw, and the ash can be used as fertilizer for the sand), and when we set off, he took it by boat.夜间，我们又谈些闲天，都是无关紧要的话；第二天早晨，他就领了水生回去了。
At night, we talk about some idle days, but they are all irrelevant words; The next morning, he took the water back.又过了九日，是我们启程的日期。闰土早晨便到了，水生没有同来，却只带着一个五岁的女儿管船只。我们终日很忙碌，再没有谈天的工夫。来客也不少，有送行的，有拿东西的，有送行兼拿东西的。待到傍晚我们上船的时候，这老屋里的所有破旧大小粗细东西，已经一扫而空了。
Nine days later, it was the date of our departure. The morning of the intercalary soil arrived, and the water did not come with him, but only took a five-year-old daughter to manage the boat. We were very busy all day long, and we didn't have time to talk anymore. There are also many guests, some see off, some take things, and some see off and take things. By the time we boarded the boat in the evening, all the dilapidated and thick things in the old house had been swept away.我们的船向前走，两岸的青山在黄昏中，都装成了深黛颜色，连着退向船后梢去。
Our boat moved forward, and the green mountains on both sides of the river were dressed in dark colors in the dusk, and they retreated to the back of the boat.宏儿和我靠着船窗，同看外面模糊的风景，他忽然问道：
Hong'er and I leaned against the boat window, looking at the blurry scenery outside, and he suddenly asked:“大伯！我们什么时候回来？”
"Uncle! When will we be back? ”“回来？你怎么还没有走就想回来了。”
"Come back? Why do you want to come back before you leave." ”“可是，水生约我到他家玩去咧……”他睁着大的黑眼睛，痴痴的想。
"But, Shui Shui asked me to go to his house to play......" He opened his big black eyes and thought foolishly.我和母亲也都有些惘然，于是又提起闰土来。母亲说，那豆腐西施的杨二嫂，自从我家收拾行李以来，本是每日必到的，前天伊在灰堆里，掏出十多个碗碟来，议论之后，便定说是闰土埋着的，他可以在运灰的时候，一齐搬回家里去；杨二嫂发见了这件事，自己很以为功，便拿了那狗气杀（这是我们这里养鸡的器具，木盘上面有着栅栏，内盛食料，鸡可以伸进颈子去啄，狗却不能，只能看着气死），飞也似的跑了，亏伊装着这么高底的小脚，竟跑得这样快。
My mother and I were also a little confused, so we brought up Runtu again. The day before yesterday, Yi took out more than ten dishes in the ash pile, and after discussing it, he decided that it was buried in the leap soil, and he could move it home together when transporting the ashes; Yang Ersao found out about this, and she thought it was a great achievement, so she took the dog to kill (this is the utensil we use to raise chickens here, there is a fence on the wooden plate, which contains food, and the chicken can reach into its neck to peck, but the dog can't, so it can only watch to death), and it ran away as if flying, but it was a pity that he had such a high-soled little foot, and he ran so fast.老屋离我愈远了；故乡的山水也都渐渐远离了我，但我却并不感到怎样的留恋。我只觉得我四面有看不见的高墙，将我隔成孤身，使我非常气闷；那西瓜地上的银项圈的小英雄的影像，我本来十分清楚，现在却忽地模糊了，又使我非常的悲哀。
The old house is getting farther away from me; The mountains and rivers of my hometown have gradually drifted away from me, but I don't feel any nostalgia. I only felt that I had invisible walls on all sides, separating me from myself and making me very depressed; I was very clear about the image of the little hero with a silver collar on the watermelon ground, but now it suddenly blurred, which made me very sad.母亲和宏儿都睡着了。
Mother and Hong'er fell asleep.我躺着，听船底潺潺的水声，知道我在走我的路。我想：我竟与闰土隔绝到这地步了，但我们的后辈还是一气，宏儿不是正在想念水生么。我希望他们不再像我，又大家隔膜起来……然而我又不愿意他们因为要一气，都如我的辛苦展转而生活，也不愿意他们都如闰土的辛苦麻木而生活，也不愿意都如别人的辛苦恣睢而生活。他们应该有新的生活，为我们所未经生活过的。
I lay down, listening to the murmuring water at the bottom of the boat, knowing that I was walking my way. I thought: I have been isolated from Runtu to this point, but our juniors are still in the same breath, isn't Hong'er missing Shui Shui. I hope they don't look like me anymore, and everyone is separated again...... However, I don't want them to live like my hard work because they want to be in one breath, nor do I want them to live like the hard work of the leap soil, nor do I want them to live like the hard work of others. They deserve a new life for what we have not lived.我想到希望，忽然害怕起来了。闰土要香炉和烛台的时候，我还暗地里笑他，以为他总是崇拜偶像，什么时候都不忘却。现在我所谓希望，不也是我自己手制的偶像么？只是他的愿望切近，我的愿望茫远罢了。
I thought of hope and suddenly became scared. When Runtu asked for an incense burner and a candlestick, I secretly laughed at him, thinking that he always worshipped idols and never forgot them. Isn't my so-called hope now also my own handmade idol? It's just that his wish is close, and my wish is far away.我在朦胧中，眼前展开一片海边碧绿的沙地来，上面深蓝的天空中挂着一轮金黄的圆月。我想：希望是本无所谓有，无所谓无的。这正如地上的路；其实地上本没有路，走的人多了，也便成了路。
In the haze, I saw a green sandy area on the beach, with a golden full moon hanging in the deep blue sky. I think: hope is indifferent, it doesn't matter if there is nothing. This is like the road on earth; In fact, there is no road on the ground, and if there are more people walking, it will become a road.一九二一年一月。
January 1921.

阿Q正传

阿Q正传

阿Q正传

The main story of Ah Q第一章　序
Chapter 1 Preface我要给阿Q做正传，已经不止一两年了。但一面要做，一面又往回想，这足见我不是一个“立言”的人，因为从来不朽之笔，须传不朽之人，于是人以文传，文以人传——究竟谁靠谁传，渐渐的不甚了然起来，而终于归结到传阿Q，仿佛思想里有鬼似的。
I'm going to make a biography for Ah Q, and it's been more than a year or two. But while doing it, I think about it again, which shows that I am not a person who "makes a statement", because the immortal pen must be passed on to immortal people, so people pass it on with literature, and people pass it on by people - who relies on whom to pass on, gradually it becomes less clear, and finally it comes down to passing on Ah Q, as if there is a ghost in the mind.然而要做这一篇速朽的文章，才下笔，便感到万分的困难了。第一是文章的名目。孔子曰，“名不正则言不顺”。这原是应该极注意的。传的名目很繁多：列传，自传，内传，外传，别传，家传，小传……，而可惜都不合。“列传”么，这一篇并非和许多阔人排在“正史”里；“自传”么，我又并非就是阿Q。说是“外传”，“内传”在那里呢？倘用“内传”，阿Q又决不是神仙。“别传”呢，阿Q实在未曾有大总统上谕宣付国史馆立“本传”——虽说英国正史上并无“博徒列传”，而文豪迭更司也做过《博徒别传》这一部书，但文豪则可，在我辈却不可的。其次是“家传”，则我既不知与阿Q是否同宗，也未曾受他子孙的拜托；或“小传”，则阿Q又更无别的“大传”了。总而言之，这一篇也便是“本传”，但从我的文章着想，因为文体卑下，是“引车卖浆者流”所用的话，所以不敢僭称，便从不入三教九流的小说家所谓“闲话休题言归正传”这一句套话里，取出“正传”两个字来，作为名目，即使与古人所撰《书法正传》的“正传”字面上很相混，也顾不得了。
However, it is extremely difficult to write this fast-decaying article. The first is the title of the article. Confucius said, "If the name is not correct, then the words will not be smooth." This should have been paid close attention to. There are many names of biographies: biographies, autobiographies, internal biographies, external biographies, other biographies, family traditions, short biographies, ......, but unfortunately they are not compatible. "Biography", this one is not ranked in the "official history" with many broad people; "Autobiography", I'm not Ah Q. It is said to be "external transmission", where is the "internal transmission"? If you use "internal transmission", Ah Q is definitely not a god. As for the "other biography", Ah Q has never had a president decree to the National History Museum to establish a "biography" - although there is no "biography of the gambler" in the official history of the United Kingdom, and the literary hero Diegensi has also made the book "The Biography of the Gambler", but the writer is fine, but not in our generation. The second is "family heirloom", then I don't know if I am of the same clan as Ah Q, nor have I been asked by his descendants; Or "small biography", then Ah Q has no other "big biography". All in all, this one is also the "main biography", but from the perspective of my article, because the style is humble, it is the words used by the "flow of the pulp seller", so I dare not overstep the title, so I never entered the novelist's so-called "gossip and return to the main biography", and took out the word "main biography" as a name, even if it was literally confused with the "main biography" of the "main biography" written by the ancients, I couldn't take care of it.第二，立传的通例，开首大抵该是“某，字某，某地人也”，而我并不知道阿Q姓什么。有一回，他似乎是姓赵，但第二日便模糊了。那是赵太爷的儿子进了秀才的时候，锣声镗镗的报到村里来，阿Q正喝了两碗黄酒，便手舞足蹈的说，这于他也很光采，因为他和赵太爷原来是本家，细细的排起来他还比秀才长三辈呢。其时几个旁听人倒也肃然的有些起敬了。那知道第二天，地保便叫阿Q到赵太爷家里去；太爷一见，满脸溅朱，喝道：
Second, the general rule of the biography should probably start with "so-and-so, the character so-and-so, a certain place", and I don't know what Ah Q's surname is. Once, he seemed to have the surname Zhao, but the next day it was blurred. That was when Mr. Zhao's son entered the scholar's house, and he reported to the village with a gong, and Ah Q was drinking two bowls of rice wine, so he danced and said, this is also very glorious to him, because he and Mrs. Zhao turned out to be their own family, and he was three generations older than the scholar in a fine row. At that time, several observers were also a little awe-inspiring. Knowing that the next day, the land protector asked Ah Q to go to Mr. Zhao's house; When the grandfather saw it, his face was splashed with vermilion, and he shouted:“阿Q，你这浑小子！你说我是你的本家么？”
"Ah Q, you bastard! Do you think I am your family? ”阿Q不开口。
Ah Q did not speak.赵太爷愈看愈生气了，抢进几步说：“你敢胡说！我怎么会有你这样的本家？你姓赵么？”
The more Mr. Zhao looked at it, the more angry he became, and he took a few steps forward and said, "You dare to talk nonsense!" How could I have a family like yours? Is your surname Zhao? ”阿Q不开口，想往后退了；赵太爷跳过去，给了他一个嘴巴。
Ah Q didn't speak, he wanted to step back; Mrs. Zhao jumped over and gave him a mouth.“你怎么会姓赵！——你那里配姓赵！”
"How can you be surnamed Zhao! ——You deserve the surname Zhao! ”阿Q并没有抗辩他确凿姓赵，只用手摸着左颊，和地保退出去了；外面又被地保训斥了一番，谢了地保二百文酒钱。知道的人都说阿Q太荒唐，自己去招打；他大约未必姓赵，即使真姓赵，有赵太爷在这里，也不该如此胡说的。此后便再没有人提起他的氏族来，所以我终于不知道阿Q究竟什么姓。
Ah Q did not defend that his surname was Zhao, he only touched his left cheek with his hand and withdrew; Outside, he was reprimanded by the land insurance again, and thanked the land insurance for 200 wen of wine money. People who know say that Ah Q is too ridiculous and will recruit himself; He probably may not be surnamed Zhao, even if his real surname is Zhao, with Mrs. Zhao here, he shouldn't be so nonsense. After that, no one mentioned his clan again, so I finally didn't know what Ah Q's surname was.第三，我又不知道阿Q的名字是怎么写的。他活着的时候，人都叫他阿Quei，死了以后，便没有一个人再叫阿Quei了，那里还会有“著之竹帛”的事。若论“著之竹帛”，这篇文章要算第一次，所以先遇着了这第一个难关。我曾经仔细想：阿Quei，阿桂还是阿贵呢？倘使他号叫月亭，或者在八月间做过生日，那一定是阿桂了；而他既没有号——也许有号，只是没有人知道他，——又未尝散过生日征文的帖子：写作阿桂，是武断的。又倘若他有一位老兄或令弟叫阿富，那一定是阿贵了；而他又只是一个人：写作阿贵，也没有佐证的。其余音Quei的偏僻字样，更加凑不上了。先前，我也曾问过赵太爷的儿子茂才先生，谁料博雅如此公，竟也茫然，但据结论说，是因为陈独秀办了《新青年》提倡洋字，所以国粹沦亡，无可查考了。我的最后的手段，只有托一个同乡去查阿Q犯事的案卷，八个月之后才有回信，说案卷里并无与阿Quei的声音相近的人。我虽不知道是真没有，还是没有查，然而也再没有别的方法了。生怕注音字母还未通行，只好用了“洋字”，照英国流行的拼法写他为阿Quei，略作阿Q。这近于盲从《新青年》，自己也很抱歉，但茂才公尚且不知，我还有什么好办法呢。
Third, I don't know how Ah Q's name is written. When he was alive, people called him Ah Quei, and after he died, no one called him Que again, and there would be "bamboo and silk" things there. If we talk about "writing on bamboo and silk", this article is the first time, so it encountered this first difficulty. I once thought carefully: Ah Quei, Ah Gui or Ah Gui? If he was called Yueting, or had a birthday in August, it would be Agui; And he has neither a number - maybe he has a number, but no one knows that he ,—— and has never distributed a birthday essay post: writing Agui is arbitrary. and if he has an old brother or brother named Ah Fu, it must be Ah Gui; And he is just a person: writing Agui, there is no evidence. The remote words of the rest of the sound Quei are even more difficult to make. Previously, I also asked Mr. Maocai, the son of Mr. Zhao, who would have thought that Liberal arts would be so public, and he was at a loss, but according to the conclusion, it was because Chen Duxiu ran "New Youth" to advocate foreign characters, so the quintessence of the country fell and there was no way to check it. My last resort was to ask a fellow villager to check the case file of Ah Q's crime, and eight months later, I received a reply saying that there was no one in the case file who was similar to Ah Quei's voice. Although I don't know if it's true or not, or if I haven't checked, there is no other way. I was afraid that the phonetic alphabet was not yet popular, so I had to use "foreign characters", and write him as Que according to the popular spelling in the UK, abbreviated as Ah Q. This is close to blindly following "New Youth", and I am also very sorry, but Mao Cai Gong still doesn't know, what else can I do?第四，是阿Q的籍贯了。倘他姓赵，则据现在好称郡望的老例，可以照《郡名百家姓》上的注解，说是“陇西天水人也”，但可惜这姓是不甚可靠的，因此籍贯也就有些决不定。他虽然多住未庄，然而也常常宿在别处，不能说是未庄人，即使说是“未庄人也”，也仍然有乖史法的。
Fourth, it is Ah Q's place of origin. If his surname is Zhao, then according to the old example of calling the county wang, it can be said that he is "Longxi Tianshui people" according to the annotation on the "Hundred Family Surnames of County Names", but unfortunately this surname is not very reliable, so the place of origin is somewhat uncertain. Although he lived in Weizhuang a lot, he often stayed elsewhere, and he could not be said to be a Weizhuang person, even if he was a "Weizhuang person", he still had a good historical law.我所聊以自慰的，是还有一个“阿”字非常正确，绝无附会假借的缺点，颇可以就正于通人。至于其余，却都非浅学所能穿凿，只希望有“历史癖与考据癖”的胡适之先生的门人们，将来或者能够寻出许多新端绪来，但是我这《阿Q正传》到那时却又怕早经消灭了。
What I am talking about to comfort is that there is also a very correct word "A", which has no shortcomings of attachment and borrowing, and it can be quite correct for people. As for the rest, they are not something that shallow knowledge can penetrate, and I only hope that Mr. Hu Shizhi's disciples, who have a "historical fetish and research fetish", may be able to find many new clues in the future, but my "The True Biography of Ah Q" is afraid that it will be eliminated by the time of death.以上可以算是序。
The above can be regarded as a preface.

阿Q正传

第二章　优胜记略

阿Q正传

Chapter 2 Victory Summary阿Q不独是姓名籍贯有些渺茫，连他先前的“行状”也渺茫。因为未庄的人们之于阿Q，只要他帮忙，只拿他玩笑，从来没有留心他的“行状”的。而阿Q自己也不说，独有和别人口角的时候，间或瞪着眼睛道：
Ah Q is not only a little vague in his name and place of origin, but also his previous "behavior". Because the people of Weizhuang are to Ah Q, as long as he helps, they only joke with him and never pay attention to his "behavior". And Ah Q himself didn't say anything, but when he was arguing with others, he occasionally stared and said:“我们先前——比你阔的多啦！你算是什么东西！”
"We were much wider than you! What are you! ”阿Q没有家，住在未庄的土谷祠里；也没有固定的职业，只给人家做短工，割麦便割麦，舂米便舂米，撑船便撑船。工作略长久时，他也或住在临时主人的家里，但一完就走了。所以，人们忙碌的时候，也还记起阿Q来，然而记起的是做工，并不是“行状”；一闲空，连阿Q都早忘却，更不必说“行状”了。只是有一回，有一个老头子颂扬说：“阿Q真能做！”这时阿Q赤着膊，懒洋洋的瘦伶仃的正在他面前，别人也摸不着这话是真心还是讥笑，然而阿Q很喜欢。
Ah Q has no home and lives in the Tugu Temple in Weizhuang; There is no fixed occupation, only short-term work for others, cutting wheat when cutting wheat, pounding rice when pounding rice, and supporting boats when supporting boats. When he worked for a little longer, he sometimes stayed in the house of the temporary master, but left as soon as he was done. Therefore, when people are busy, they still remember Ah Q, but what they remember is workmanship, not "behavior"; In a free time, even Ah Q has long forgotten about it, let alone "behavior". Only once, an old man praised: "Ah Q can really do it!" At this time, Ah Q was shirtless, lazy and thin in front of him, and others couldn't tell whether this was sincere or ridiculous, but Ah Q liked it very much.阿Q又很自尊，所有未庄的居民，全不在他眼神里，甚而至于对于两位“文童”也有以为不值一笑的神情。夫文童者，将来恐怕要变秀才者也；赵太爷钱太爷大受居民的尊敬，除有钱之外，就因为都是文童的爹爹，而阿Q在精神上独不表格外的崇奉，他想：我的儿子会阔得多啦！加以进了几回城，阿Q自然更自负，然而他又很鄙薄城里人，譬如用三尺长三寸宽的木板做成的凳子，未庄叫“长凳”，他也叫“长凳”，城里人却叫“条凳”，他想：这是错的，可笑！油煎大头鱼，未庄都加上半寸长的葱叶，城里却加上切细的葱丝，他想：这也是错的，可笑！然而未庄人真是不见世面的可笑的乡下人呵，他们没有见过城里的煎鱼！
Ah Q is also very self-respecting, all the residents of Weizhuang are not in his eyes, and even have a look of unworthiness for the two "Wen Tong". Literary children may become scholars in the future; Mrs. Zhao and Mrs. Qian are highly respected by the residents, in addition to being rich, because they are Wen Tong's fathers, and Ah Q is spiritually revered outside the form, he thought: My son will be much wider! In addition, after entering the city a few times, Ah Q was naturally more conceited, but he despised the people in the city, such as a stool made of wooden boards three feet long and three inches wide, Weizhuang was called "bench", he was also called "bench", but the people in the city called it "stool", he thought: This is wrong, ridiculous! Fried bighead fish, Weizhuang added half an inch long green onion leaves, but in the city, finely chopped shredded green onions were added, he thought: This is also wrong, ridiculous! However, the people of Weizhuang are really ridiculous countrymen who don't see the world, they haven't seen fried fish in the city!阿Q“先前阔”，见识高，而且“真能做”，本来几乎是一个“完人”了，但可惜他体质上还有一些缺点。最恼人的是在他头皮上，颇有几处不知起于何时的癞疮疤。这虽然也在他身上，而看阿Q的意思，倒也似乎以为不足贵的，因为他讳说“癞”以及一切近于“赖”的音，后来推而广之，“光”也讳，“亮”也讳，再后来，连“灯”“烛”都讳了。一犯讳，不问有心与无心，阿Q便全疤通红的发起怒来，估量了对手，口讷的他便骂，气力小的他便打；然而不知怎么一回事，总还是阿Q吃亏的时候多。于是他渐渐的变换了方针，大抵改为怒目而视了。
Ah Q was "broad before", highly knowledgeable, and "really able to do it", he was almost a "perfect person", but unfortunately he still had some shortcomings in his physique. The most annoying thing is that there are several scars on his scalp that I don't know when they started. Although this is also on him, looking at the meaning of Ah Q, it seems that it is not worth it, because he avoids saying "leprosy" and all sounds close to "Lai", which was later expanded, "light" is also taboo, "bright" is also taboo, and later, even "lamp" and "candle" are taboo. As soon as he committed a taboo, regardless of whether he was intentional or not, Ah Q became angry with all his scars red, estimated his opponent, scolded him for being spoken, and beat him when he was weak; However, somehow, Ah Q always suffers a lot. So he gradually changed his policy, and probably changed to glare.谁知道阿Q采用怒目主义之后，未庄的闲人们便愈喜欢玩笑他。一见面，他们便假作吃惊的说：
Who knew that after Ah Q adopted angry eyes, the players of Weizhuang liked to joke with him more and more. As soon as they met, they pretended to be surprised and said:“哙，亮起来了。”
"Wow, it's lit up."阿Q照例的发了怒，他怒目而视了。
Ah Q was angry as usual, and he glared angrily.“原来有保险灯在这里！”他们并不怕。
"It turns out that there is a safety light here!" They are not afraid.阿Q没有法，只得另外想出报复的话来：
Ah Q had no choice but to come up with another word of revenge:“你还不配……”这时候，又仿佛在他头上的是一种高尚的光荣的癞头疮，并非平常的癞头疮了；但上文说过，阿Q是有见识的，他立刻知道和“犯忌”有点抵触，便不再往底下说。
"You are not worthy of ......" At this time, it seemed that there was a noble and glorious leprosy on his head, not an ordinary leprosy; But as mentioned above, Ah Q is knowledgeable, and he immediately knew that it was a bit resistant to "taboo", so he stopped talking about it.闲人还不完，只撩他，于是终而至于打。阿Q在形式上打败了，被人揪住黄辫子，在壁上碰了四五个响头，闲人这才心满意足的得胜的走了，阿Q站了一刻，心里想，“我总算被儿子打了，现在的世界真不像样……”于是也心满意足的得胜的走了。
The idle man is not finished, he only teases him, and in the end, he is beaten. Ah Q was defeated in form, was grabbed by someone with yellow braids, and touched four or five heads on the wall, and the idler left contentedly and victoriously, Ah Q stood for a moment, thinking to himself, "I was finally beaten by my son, the world is really not good now......" so he also left satisfied and victorious.阿Q想在心里的，后来每每说出口来，所以凡有和阿Q玩笑的人们，几乎全知道他有这一种精神上的胜利法，此后每逢揪住他黄辫子的时候，人就先一着对他说：
Ah Q wanted to do it in his heart, and then he said it every time, so almost everyone who joked with Ah Q knew that he had this kind of spiritual victory method, and after that, whenever he grabbed his yellow braid, people would say to him first:“阿Q，这不是儿子打老子，是人打畜生。自己说：人打畜生！”
"Ah Q, this is not a son beating Lao Tzu, it's a man beating an animal. He said to himself: Man beats beasts! ”阿Q两只手都捏住了自己的辫根，歪着头，说道：
Ah Q pinched the roots of his braid with both hands, tilted his head, and said:“打虫豸，好不好？我是虫豸——还不放么？”
"Fight the insect, okay? I'm a bug - don't you let it go? ”但虽然是虫豸，闲人也并不放，仍旧在就近什么地方给他碰了五六个响头，这才心满意足的得胜的走了，他以为阿Q这回可遭了瘟。然而不到十秒钟，阿Q也心满意足的得胜的走了，他觉得他是第一个能够自轻自贱的人，除了“自轻自贱”不算外，余下的就是“第一个”。状元不也是“第一个”么？“你算是什么东西”呢？！
But although it was a bug, the idler did not let go, and still touched him five or six times in the nearest place, and then he left satisfied and victorious, thinking that Ah Q could suffer a pestilence this time. However, in less than ten seconds, Ah Q also left satisfied and victorious, he felt that he was the first person who could delight himself, except for "self-deprecation", the rest was the "first". Isn't the champion also the "first"? "What are you"? !阿Q以如是等等妙法克服怨敌之后，便愉快的跑到酒店里喝几碗酒，又和别人调笑一通，口角一通，又得了胜，愉快的回到土谷祠，放倒头睡着了。假使有钱，他便去押牌宝，一堆人蹲在地面上，阿Q即汗流满面的夹在这中间，声音他最响：
After Ah Q overcame the enemy with such and other wonderful methods, he happily ran to the hotel to drink a few bowls of wine, joked with others, quarreled with others, won again, and happily returned to the Tugu Shrine, put his head down and fell asleep. If he had money, he would bet on the treasure, and a bunch of people were squatting on the ground, and Ah Q was sweating and sandwiched between them, and his voice was the loudest:“青龙四百！”
"Qinglong Four Hundred!"“咳～～开～～啦！”桩家揭开盒子盖，也是汗流满面的唱。“天门啦～～角回啦～～！人和穿堂空在那里啦～～！阿Q的铜钱拿过来～～！”
"Cough~~ open~~!" The pile family opened the lid of the box and sang sweaty. "Tianmen~~ Jiao Hui~~! People and the hall are empty~~! Bring Ah Q's copper coins~~! ”“穿堂一百——一百五十！”
"One hundred and one hundred and fifty through the hall!"阿Q的钱便在这样的歌吟之下，渐渐的输入别个汗流满面的人物的腰间。他终于只好挤出堆外，站在后面看，替别人着急，一直到散场，然后恋恋的回到土谷祠，第二天，肿着眼睛去工作。
Ah Q's money was gradually entered into the waist of another sweaty character under such a song. He finally had to squeeze out of the pile, stand behind and watch, anxious for others, until the end of the scene, and then returned to the Tugu Shrine reluctantly, and the next day, he went to work with swollen eyes.但真所谓“塞翁失马安知非福”罢，阿Q不幸而赢了一回，他倒几乎失败了。
But the so-called "Saion lost his horse and knew that it was not a blessing", Ah Q unfortunately won once, but he almost failed.这是未庄赛神的晚上。这晚上照例有一台戏，戏台左近，也照例有许多的赌摊。做戏的锣鼓，在阿Q耳朵里仿佛在十里之外；他只听得桩家的歌唱了。他赢而又赢，铜钱变成角洋，角洋变成大洋，大洋又成了叠。他兴高采烈得非常：
This is the night of the god of Weizhuang. There was a play as usual this night, and the stage was close to the left, and there were many gambling stalls as usual. The gongs and drums of the play seem to be ten miles away in Ah Q's ears; He only heard the singing of the Zhu family. He won and won, and the copper coins became the horn ocean, the horn ocean became the ocean, and the ocean became a stack. He was very elated:“天门两块！”
"Two pieces of the gate of heaven!"他不知道谁和谁为什么打起架来了。骂声打声脚步声，昏头昏脑的一大阵，他才爬起来，赌摊不见了，人们也不见了，身上有几处很似乎有些痛，似乎也挨了几拳几脚似的，几个人诧异的对他看。他如有所失的走进土谷祠，定一定神，知道他的一堆洋钱不见了。赶赛会的赌摊多不是本村人，还到那里去寻根柢呢？
He didn't know who was fighting with whom and why. There was a sound of scolding and footsteps, and after a long period of dizziness, he got up, the gambling stall was gone, the people were gone, there were a few places on his body that seemed to be a little painful, and it seemed that he had been punched a few times, and several people looked at him in surprise. He walked into the Tugu Shrine as if he had lost something, and he knew that his pile of foreign money was missing. Most of the gambling stalls in the competition are not from the village, so where do they go to find their roots?很白很亮的一堆洋钱！而且是他的——现在不见了！说是算被儿子拿去了罢，总还是忽忽不乐；说自己是虫豸罢，也还是忽忽不乐：他这回才有些感到失败的苦痛了。
A pile of white and bright foreign money! And it was his—now gone! said that it was taken by his son, but he was still unhappy; Saying that he was a bug, he was still unhappy: he felt a little pain of failure this time.但他立刻转败为胜了。他擎起右手，用力的在自己脸上连打了两个嘴巴，热剌剌的有些痛；打完之后，便心平气和起来，似乎打的是自己，被打的是别一个自己，不久也就仿佛是自己打了别个一般，——虽然还有些热剌剌，——心满意足的得胜的躺下了。
But he immediately turned defeat into victory. He raised his right hand and slapped his face twice in a row, which was a little painful; After the fight, he calmed down, as if he was beating himself, and it was someone else who was beaten, and soon it was as if he had beaten someone else,—— although he was still a little hot,—— and lay down with satisfaction and victory.他睡着了。
He fell asleep.

阿Q正传

第三章　续优胜记略

阿Q正传

Chapter 3 Continuation of the winning summary然而阿Q虽然常优胜，却直待蒙赵太爷打他嘴巴之后，这才出了名。
However, although Ah Q often won, he became famous until Meng Zhao Taiye hit him in the mouth.他付过地保二百文酒钱，愤愤的躺下了，后来想：“现在的世界太不成话，儿子打老子……”于是忽而想到赵太爷的威风，而现在是他的儿子了，便自己也渐渐的得意起来，爬起身，唱着《小孤孀上坟》到酒店去。这时候，他又觉得赵太爷高人一等了。
He had paid 200 wen of wine for the land guarantee, and lay down indignantly, and then thought: "The current world is too ridiculous, my son beats me ......", so he suddenly thought of Mr. Zhao's majesty, and now he was his son, so he gradually became proud, got up, and sang "The Little Widow Goes to the Grave" to the hotel. At this time, he felt that Mrs. Zhao was superior to others.说也奇怪，从此之后，果然大家也仿佛格外尊敬他。这在阿Q，或者以为因为他是赵太爷的父亲，而其实也不然。未庄通例，倘如阿七打阿八，或者李四打张三，向来本不算一件事，必须与一位名人如赵太爷相关，这才载上他们的口碑。一上口碑，则打的既有名，被打的也就托庇有了名。至于错在阿Q，那自然是不必说。所以者何？就因为赵太爷是不会错的。但他既然错，为什么大家又仿佛格外尊敬他呢？这可难解，穿凿起来说，或者因为阿Q说是赵太爷的本家，虽然挨了打，大家也还怕有些真，总不如尊敬一些稳当。否则，也如孔庙里的太牢一般，虽然与猪羊一样，同是畜生，但既经圣人下箸，先儒们便不敢妄动了。
It's strange to say, since then, everyone seems to respect him extraordinarily. This is in Ah Q, or think that it is because he is the father of Mr. Zhao, but in fact it is not. As is customary in Weizhuang, if Ah Qi fights Ah Ba, or Li Si fights Zhang San, it has never been a thing, and it must be related to a celebrity such as Mrs. Zhao, so that their reputation can be recorded. As soon as it becomes a word of mouth, the person who is beaten is already famous, and the person who is beaten is also famous. As for the fault of Ah Q, it is naturally needless to say. What is the reason? Just because Mrs. Zhao can't be wrong. But since he was wrong, why did everyone seem to respect him so much? This is difficult to understand, to put it bluntly, or because Ah Q said that it was Mr. Zhao's own family, although he was beaten, everyone was still afraid that it was a little true, so it was better to respect some stability. Otherwise, it is like the prison in the Confucius Temple, although it is the same as pigs and sheep, it is the same beast, but since the saint has put down the chopsticks, the ancient Confucians did not dare to act.阿Q此后倒得意了许多年。
Ah Q has been proud for many years since then.有一年的春天，他醉醺醺的在街上走，在墙根的日光下，看见王胡在那里赤着膊捉虱子，他忽然觉得身上也痒起来了。这王胡，又癞又胡，别人都叫他王癞胡，阿Q却删去了一个癞字，然而非常渺视他。阿Q的意思，以为癞是不足为奇的，只有这一部络腮胡子，实在太新奇，令人看不上眼。他于是并排坐下去了。倘是别的闲人们，阿Q本不敢大意坐下去。但这王胡旁边，他有什么怕呢？老实说：他肯坐下去，简直还是抬举他。
One spring he was walking drunkenly on the street, and in the sunlight at the base of the wall, he saw Wang Hu catching lice bare-chested there, and he suddenly felt itchy on his body. This Wang Hu is leprosy and beard, others call him Wang Leopard, but Ah Q deleted a leprosy word, but he looked down on him very much. Ah Q meant that it was not surprising to think that leprosy was not surprising, only this beard was too novel and unsightly. So he sat down side by side. If it were other idle people, Ah Q would not dare to sit down carelessly. But next to this Wang Hu, what is he afraid of? To be honest: he was willing to sit down, and he simply lifted him up.阿Q也脱下破夹袄来，翻检了一回，不知道因为新洗呢还是因为粗心，许多工夫，只捉到三四个。他看那王胡，却是一个又一个，两个又三个，只放在嘴里毕毕剥剥的响。
Ah Q also took off his torn jacket and checked it once, not knowing whether it was because of the new wash or carelessness, and only caught three or four. He looked at the Wang Hu, but one after another, two and three, only put it in his mouth and peeled it off.阿Q最初是失望，后来却不平了：看不上眼的王胡尚且那么多，自己倒反这样少，这是怎样的大失体统的事呵！他很想寻一两个大的，然而竟没有，好容易才捉到一个中的，恨恨的塞在厚嘴唇里，狠命一咬，劈的一声，又不及王胡响。
Ah Q was disappointed at first, but then he was unfair: there are so many unsightly Wang Hu, and he has so few of them, what a big loss of decency! He really wanted to find one or two big ones, but there was none, and he easily caught one, and he hated it in his thick lips, bit it hard, and split it, but it was not as good as Wang Huxiang.他癞疮疤块块通红了，将衣服摔在地上，吐一口唾沫，说：
His leprosy scars turned red, he threw his clothes on the ground, spat and said:“这毛虫！”
"This caterpillar!"“癞皮狗，你骂谁？”王胡轻蔑的抬起眼来说。
"Leper dog, who are you scolding?" Wang Hu raised his eyes contemptuously and said.阿Q近来虽然比较的受人尊敬，自己也更高傲些，但和那些打惯的闲人们见面还胆怯，独有这回却非常武勇了。这样满脸胡子的东西，也敢出言无状么？
Although Ah Q has been more respected recently, and he is more arrogant, he is still timid when meeting those idlers who are used to fighting, but this time he is very brave. Does such a bearded thing dare to speak rudely?“谁认便骂谁！”他站起来，两手叉在腰间说。
"Whoever recognizes it will scold whom!" He stood up, put his hands on his waist and said.“你的骨头痒了么？”王胡也站起来，披上衣服说。
"Are your bones itchy?" Wang Hu also stood up, put on his clothes and said.阿Q以为他要逃了，抢进去就是一拳。这拳头还未达到身上，已经被他抓住了，只一拉，阿Q跄跄踉踉的跌进去，立刻又被王胡扭住了辫子，要拉到墙上照例去碰头。
Ah Q thought he was going to escape, so he grabbed it and punched it. This fist had not yet reached his body, he had already grabbed it, and only pulled it, Ah Q staggered in, and was immediately twisted by Wang Hu again, and wanted to pull it to the wall to meet as usual.“‘君子动口不动手’！”阿Q歪着头说。
"'A gentleman does not do anything'!" Ah Q tilted his head and said.王胡似乎不是君子，并不理会，一连给他碰了五下，又用力的一推，至于阿Q跌出六尺多远，这才满足的去了。
Wang Hu didn't seem to be a gentleman, so he ignored it, touched him five times in a row, and pushed hard, as for how far Ah Q fell six feet, he was satisfied.在阿Q的记忆上，这大约要算是生平第一件的屈辱，因为王胡以络腮胡子的缺点，向来只被他奚落，从没有奚落他，更不必说动手了。而他现在竟动手，很意外，难道真如市上所说，皇帝已经停了考，不要秀才和举人了，因此赵家减了威风，因此他们也便小觑了他么？
In Ah Q's memory, this is probably the first humiliation in his life, because Wang Hu has always been ridiculed by him for his shortcomings in the beard, never ridiculed him, let alone done it. And he actually did it now, which was very surprising, could it be that as the city said, the emperor had stopped the exam and did not want scholars and scholars, so the Zhao family reduced their prestige, so they underestimated him?阿Q无可适从的站着。
Ah Q stood helplessly.远远的走来了一个人，他的对头又到了。这也是阿Q最厌恶的一个人，就是钱太爷的大儿子。他先前跑上城里去进洋学堂，不知怎么又跑到东洋去了，半年之后他回到家里来，腿也直了，辫子也不见了，他的母亲大哭了十几场，他的老婆跳了三回井。后来，他的母亲到处说，“这辫子是被坏人灌醉了酒剪去的。本来可以做大官，现在只好等留长再说了。”然而阿Q不肯信，偏称他“假洋鬼子”，也叫作“里通外国的人”，一见他，一定在肚子里暗暗的咒骂。
A man came from afar, and his opponent arrived again. This is also the person Ah Q hates the most, that is, Mrs. Qian's eldest son. He ran to the city to enter the foreign school before, and somehow ran to the East again, and half a year later he came home, his legs were straight, his braids were gone, his mother cried more than a dozen times, and his wife jumped three times. Later, his mother said everywhere, "This braid was cut off by the bad guys who got drunk." I could have been a high official, but now I have to wait for the chief to talk about it. However, Ah Q refused to believe him, calling him a "fake foreign devil", also known as "a person who communicates with foreign countries", and when he saw him, he must secretly curse in his stomach.阿Q尤其“深恶而痛绝之”的，是他的一条假辫子。辫子而至于假，就是没有了做人的资格；他的老婆不跳第四回井，也不是好女人。
What Ah Q especially "hated and hated" was one of his fake braids. If you have braids and fakes, you have no qualifications to be a human being; His wife did not jump into the well for the fourth time, and she was not a good woman.这“假洋鬼子”近来了。
This "fake foreign devil" is nearby.“秃儿。驴……”阿Q历来本只在肚子里骂，没有出过声，这回因为正气忿，因为要报仇，便不由的轻轻的说出来了。
"Bald. Donkey ...... "Ah Q has always only scolded in his stomach, and has never made a sound, but this time because of righteousness and anger, because he wants to take revenge, he can't help but say it softly.不料这秃儿却拿着一支黄漆的棍子——就是阿Q所谓哭丧棒——大踏步走了过来。阿Q在这刹那，便知道大约要打了，赶紧抽紧筋骨，耸了肩膀等候着，果然，拍的一声，似乎确凿打在自己头上了。
Unexpectedly, the bald man strode over with a yellow lacquer stick - Ah Q's so-called crying stick. At this moment, Ah Q knew that he was about to fight, so he quickly tightened his muscles and bones, shrugged his shoulders and waited, and sure enough, with a slap, it seemed to hit his head.“我说他！”阿Q指着近旁的一个孩子，分辩说。
"I said him!" Ah Q pointed to a child nearby and argued.拍！拍拍！
Clap! Pat!在阿Q的记忆上，这大约要算是生平第二件的屈辱。幸而拍拍的响了之后，于他倒似乎完结了一件事，反而觉得轻松些，而且“忘却”这一件祖传的宝贝也发生了效力，他慢慢的走，将到酒店门口，早已有些高兴了。
In Ah Q's memory, this is probably the second humiliation in his life. Fortunately, after the clapping sounded, Yu seemed to have finished one thing, but felt more relaxed, and the ancestral treasure of "forgetting" also worked, he walked slowly, and was already a little happy when he was about to reach the door of the hotel.但对面走来了静修庵里的小尼姑。阿Q便在平时，看见伊也一定要唾骂，而况在屈辱之后呢？他于是发生了回忆，又发生了敌忾了。
But on the opposite side came the little nun from the monastery. Ah Q usually sees that he must spit and scold, let alone after humiliation? He then had memories and hostilities again.“我不知道我今天为什么这样晦气，原来就因为见了你！”他想。
"I don't know why I'm so unlucky today, it turns out it's because I saw you!" He thought.他迎上去，大声的吐一口唾沫：
He greeted him and spat loudly:“咳，呸！”
"Cough, bah!"小尼姑全不睬，低了头只是走。阿Q走近伊身旁，突然伸出手去摩着伊新剃的头皮，呆笑着，说：
The little nun ignored it at all, lowered her head and just left. Ah Q approached Yi, suddenly stretched out his hand to rub Yi Xin's shaved scalp, smiled dumbly, and said:“秃儿！快回去，和尚等着你……”
"Bald! Go back quickly, the monk is waiting for you......"“你怎么动手动脚……”尼姑满脸通红的说，一面赶快走。
"How do you move your hands and feet......" the nun said with a flushed face, and hurried away.酒店里的人大笑了。阿Q看见自己的勋业得了赏识，便愈加兴高采烈起来：
The people in the hotel laughed. Ah Q saw that his achievements were appreciated, and he became even more elated:“和尚动得，我动不得？”他扭住伊的面颊。
"The monk can move, but I can't?" He twisted his cheek.酒店里的人大笑了。阿Q更得意，而且为满足那些赏鉴家起见，再用力的一拧，才放手。
The people in the hotel laughed. Ah Q was even more proud, and in order to satisfy those connoisseurs, he twisted it hard before letting go.他这一战，早忘却了王胡，也忘却了假洋鬼子，似乎对于今天的一切“晦气”都报了仇；而且奇怪，又仿佛全身比拍拍的响了之后更轻松，飘飘然的似乎要飞去了。
In this battle, he had long forgotten Wang Hu and the fake foreign devils, and seemed to have avenged all today's "bad luck"; And strangely, it seems that the whole body is more relaxed than after the patting sound, and it seems to be flying away.“这断子绝孙的阿Q！”远远地听得小尼姑的带哭的声音。
"This Ah Q who has no children or grandchildren!" I could hear the crying voice of the little nun from a distance.“哈哈哈！”阿Q十分得意的笑。
"Hahaha!" Ah Q smiled very proudly.“哈哈哈！”酒店里的人也九分得意的笑。
"Hahaha!" The people in the hotel also smiled proudly.

阿Q正传

第四章　恋爱的悲剧

阿Q正传

Chapter 4 The tragedy of love有人说：有些胜利者，愿意敌手如虎，如鹰，他才感得胜利的欢喜；假使如羊，如小鸡，他便反觉得胜利的无聊。又有些胜利者，当克服一切之后，看见死的死了，降的降了，“臣诚惶诚恐死罪死罪”，他于是没有了敌人，没有了对手，没有了朋友，只有自己在上，一个，孤另另，凄凉，寂寞，便反而感到了胜利的悲哀。然而我们的阿Q却没有这样乏，他是永远得意的：这或者也是中国精神文明冠于全球的一个证据了。
Some people say: Some victors are willing to be like tigers and eagles, so they feel the joy of victory; If he is like a sheep or a chicken, he will feel the boredom of victory. There are also some victors, when they see that the dead are dead and the descendants are falling, "the minister is sincerely afraid of death and death", so he has no enemies, no opponents, no friends, only himself, one, alone, desolate, lonely, and feels the sadness of victory. However, our Ah Q is not so lacking, he is always proud: this may also be a proof that China's spiritual civilization is the best in the world.看哪，他飘飘然的似乎要飞去了！
Behold, he seems to be flying away!然而这一次的胜利，却又使他有些异样。他飘飘然的飞了大半天，飘进土谷祠，照例应该躺下便打鼾。谁知道这一晚，他很不容易合眼，他觉得自己的大拇指和第二指有点古怪：仿佛比平常滑腻些。不知道是小尼姑的脸上有一点滑腻的东西粘在他指上，还是他的指头在小尼姑脸上磨得滑腻了？……
However, this victory made him a little strange. He flew for most of the day, floated into the Tugu Shrine, and snored when he should lie down as usual. Who knew that this night, it was not easy for him to close his eyes, and he felt that his thumb and second finger were a little strange: it seemed to be more slippery than usual. I don't know if there was something slippery on the little nun's face stuck to his fingers, or if his fingers were rubbed against the little nun's face? ……“断子绝孙的阿Q！”
"Ah Q, who has no children or grandchildren!"阿Q的耳朵里又听到这句话。他想：不错，应该有一个女人，断子绝孙便没有人供一碗饭，……应该有一个女人。夫“不孝有三无后为大”，而“若敖之鬼馁而”，也是一件人生的大哀，所以他那思想，其实是样样合于圣经贤传的，只可惜后来有些“不能收其放心”了。
Ah Q heard this sentence again in his ears. He thought: Yes, there should be a woman, and no one will provide a bowl of rice if there are no children or grandchildren,...... There should be a woman. The husband's "unfilial piety has three no descendants is the greatest", and "the ghost of Ruo Ao" is also a great sorrow of life, so his thoughts are actually in line with the biblical teachings, but unfortunately some of them "can't be relieved" later.“女人，女人！……”他想。
"Woman, woman! ......," he thought.“……和尚动得……女人，女人！……女人！”他又想。
“…… The monk moved...... Woman, woman! …… Woman! He thought again.我们不能知道这晚上阿Q在什么时候才打鼾。但大约他从此总觉得指头有些滑腻，所以他从此总有些飘飘然；“女……”他想。
We can't know when Ah Q snored that night. But probably he always felt that his fingers were a little slippery from then on, so he was always a little fluttering from then on; "Female ......," he thought.即此一端，我们便可以知道女人是害人的东西。
At this end, we can know that women are harmful things.中国的男人，本来大半都可以做圣贤，可惜全被女人毁掉了。商是妲己闹亡的；周是褒姒弄坏的；秦……虽然史无明文，我们也假定他因为女人，大约未必十分错；而董卓可是的确给貂蝉害死了。
Most of the men in China could have been sages, but unfortunately they were all ruined by women. Shang is the death of Daji; Zhou was broken by Bao Si; Qin ...... Although there is no explicit historical text, we also assume that he is probably not very wrong because of a woman; And Dong Zhuo did kill Diao Chan.阿Q本来也是正人，我们虽然不知道他曾蒙什么明师指授过，但他对于“男女之大防”却历来非常严；也很有排斥异端——如小尼姑及假洋鬼子之类——的正气。他的学说是：凡尼姑，一定与和尚私通；一个女人在外面走，一定想引诱野男人；一男一女在那里讲话，一定要有勾当了。为惩治他们起见，所以他往往怒目而视，或者大声说几句“诛心”话，或者在冷僻处，便从后面掷一块小石头。
Although we don't know what Master he has taught, he has always been very strict about the "great defense of men and women"; It is also very righteous to reject heretics - such as little nuns and fake foreign devils. His doctrine is: every nun must have an affair with a monk; A woman walking outside must want to seduce a wild man; A man and a woman are talking there, there must be something. In order to punish them, he often glared angrily, or said a few "heart-killing" words loudly, or threw a small stone from behind in a remote place.谁知道他将到“而立”之年，竟被小尼姑害得飘飘然了。这飘飘然的精神，在礼教上是不应该有的，——所以女人真可恶，假使小尼姑的脸上不滑腻，阿Q便不至于被蛊，又假使小尼姑的脸上盖一层布，阿Q便也不至于被蛊了，——他五六年前，曾在戏台下的人丛中拧过一个女人的大腿，但因为隔一层裤，所以此后并不飘飘然，——而小尼姑并不然，这也足见异端之可恶。
Who knew that he would be in the year of "standing", and he was actually harmed by the little nun. This fluttering spirit should not be in terms of etiquette,—— so women are really hateful, if the little nun's face is not slippery, Ah Q will not be poisoned, and if the little nun's face is covered with a layer of cloth, Ah Q will not be poisoned,—— Five or six years ago, he twisted a woman's thigh in the crowd under the stage, but because of the pants, it has not fluttered since then,—— and the little nun is not, which also shows the hatefulness of heresy.“女……”阿Q想。
"Female ......," Ah Q thought.他对于以为“一定想引诱野男人”的女人，时常留心看，然而伊并不对他笑。他对于和他讲话的女人，也时常留心听，然而伊又并不提起关于什么勾当的话来。哦，这也是女人可恶之一节：伊们全都要装“假正经”的。
He often pays attention to women who think he "must want to seduce wild men", but Yi does not smile at him. He often listened attentively to the women who spoke to him, but he did not mention anything about it. Oh, this is also the hateful part of women: they all have to pretend to be "fake and serious".这一天，阿Q在赵太爷家里舂了一天米，吃过晚饭，便坐在厨房里吸旱烟。倘在别家，吃过晚饭本可以回去的了，但赵府上晚饭早，虽说定例不准掌灯，一吃完便睡觉，然而偶然也有一些例外：其一，是赵大爷未进秀才的时候，准其点灯读文章；其二，便是阿Q来做短工的时候，准其点灯舂米。因为这一条例外，所以阿Q在动手舂米之前，还坐在厨房里吸旱烟。
On this day, Ah Q pounded rice at Mrs. Zhao's house for a day, and after dinner, he sat in the kitchen and smoked dry cigarettes. If he was in another house, he could have gone back after dinner, but the Zhao Mansion had dinner early, although it was customary not to hold the lamp, and he would go to bed as soon as he finished eating, but there were some exceptions occasionally: first, when Uncle Zhao was not a scholar, he was allowed to light a lamp to read articles; The second is that when Ah Q comes to do short-term work, he is allowed to light the lamp and pound rice. Because of this regulation, Ah Q was still sitting in the kitchen smoking dry smoke before pounding rice.吴妈，是赵太爷家里唯一的女仆，洗完了碗碟，也就在长凳上坐下了，而且和阿Q谈闲天：
Wu Ma, the only maid in Mrs. Zhao's house, sat down on the bench after washing the dishes, and chatted with Ah Q:“太太两天没有吃饭哩，因为老爷要买一个小的……”
"My wife hasn't eaten for two days, because the master wants to buy a small ......."“女人……吴妈……这小孤孀……”阿Q想。
"Woman...... Wu Ma...... This little widow ......," Ah Q thought.“我们的少奶奶是八月里要生孩子了……”
"Our young grandmother is going to give birth in August......"“女人……”阿Q想。
"Woman......" Ah Q thought.阿Q放下烟管，站了起来。
Ah Q put down his pipe and stood up.“我们的少奶奶……”吴妈还唠叨说。
"Our young grandmother......" Wu's mother nagged.“我和你困觉，我和你困觉！”阿Q忽然抢上去，对伊跪下了。
"I am sleepy with you, I am sleepy with you!" Ah Q suddenly grabbed it and knelt down on it.一刹时中很寂然。
There was silence for a moment.“阿呀！”吴妈楞了一息，突然发抖，大叫着往外跑，且跑且嚷，似乎后来带哭了。
"Ah!" Wu Ma took a breath, suddenly trembled, screamed and ran out, running and shouting, as if she cried later.阿Q对了墙壁跪着也发楞，于是两手扶着空板凳，慢慢的站起来，仿佛觉得有些糟。他这时确也有些忐忑了，慌张的将烟管插在裤带上，就想去舂米。蓬的一声，头上着了很粗的一下，他急忙回转身去，那秀才便拿了一支大竹杠站在他面前。
Ah Q knelt against the wall and was frustrated, so he held the empty bench with both hands and stood up slowly, as if he felt a little bad. He was indeed a little apprehensive at this time, and he panicked and inserted the pipe into his trouser belt, wanting to pound rice. With a thud, a very thick bump on his head, he hurriedly turned around, and the scholar stood in front of him with a big bamboo pole.“你反了，……你这……”
"You are the opposite,...... You ......"大竹杠又向他劈下来了。阿Q两手去抱头，拍的正打在指节上，这可很有一些痛。他冲出厨房门，仿佛背上又着了一下似的。
The big bamboo pole was slashed down on him again. Ah Q held his head with both hands, and the slap was hitting his knuckles, which was very painful. He rushed out of the kitchen door, as if he had hit his back again.“忘八蛋！”秀才在后面用了官话这样骂。
"Forget the bastard!" The scholar scolded in official language behind him.阿Q奔入舂米场，一个人站着，还觉得指头痛，还记得“忘八蛋”，因为这话是未庄的乡下人从来不用，专是见过官府的阔人用的，所以格外怕，而印象也格外深。但这时，他那“女……”的思想却也没有了。而且打骂之后，似乎一件事也已经收束，倒反觉得一无挂碍似的，便动手去舂米。舂了一会，他热起来了，又歇了手脱衣服。
Ah Q ran into the rice pounding field, standing alone, still feeling a headache in his fingers, and remembering "forget the bastard", because this word is never used by the countrymen of Weizhuang, especially for the wealthy people who have seen the government, so they are particularly afraid, and the impression is also particularly deep. But at this time, his idea of "female ......" was gone. And after beating and scolding, it seemed that one thing had been contained, but I felt that there was nothing to worry about, so I started pounding rice. After pounding for a while, he got hot and took off his clothes.脱下衣服的时候，他听得外面很热闹，阿Q生平本来最爱看热闹，便即寻声走出去了。寻声渐渐的寻到赵太爷的内院里，虽然在昏黄中，却辨得出许多人，赵府一家连两日不吃饭的太太也在内，还有间壁的邹七嫂，真正本家的赵白眼，赵司晨。
When he took off his clothes, he heard that it was very lively outside, and Ah Q loved to watch the excitement the most in his life, so he immediately walked out in search of a voice. The sound gradually found the inner courtyard of Mr. Zhao, although it was in the dim light, but many people could be identified, including the wife of the Zhao Mansion who had not eaten for two days, as well as Zou Qi's sister-in-law in the wall, Zhao Baiyan and Zhao Sichen of the real family.少奶奶正拖着吴妈走出下房来，一面说：
The young grandmother was dragging Wu Ma out of the lower room, and said:“你到外面来，……不要躲在自己房里想……”
"You come outside,...... Don't hide in your room and think about ......"“谁不知道你正经，……短见是万万寻不得的。”邹七嫂也从旁说。
"Who doesn't know you're serious,...... Short-sightedness is hard to find. Zou Qi's sister-in-law also said from the side.吴妈只是哭，夹些话，却不甚听得分明。
Wu's mother just cried, interjecting some words, but she couldn't hear it very clearly.阿Q想：“哼，有趣，这小孤孀不知道闹着什么玩意儿了？”他想打听，走近赵司晨的身边。这时他猛然间看见赵大爷向他奔来，而且手里捏着一支大竹杠。他看见这一支大竹杠，便猛然间悟到自己曾经被打，和这一场热闹似乎有点相关。他翻身便走，想逃回舂米场，不图这支竹杠阻了他的去路，于是他又翻身便走，自然而然的走出后门，不多工夫，已在土谷祠内了。
Ah Q thought: "Hmph, interesting, this little widow doesn't know what is going on?" He wanted to inquire and approached Zhao Sichen's side. At this time, he suddenly saw Uncle Zhao running towards him, holding a big bamboo pole in his hand. When he saw this big bamboo pole, he suddenly realized that he had been beaten, and it seemed to have something to do with this excitement. He turned over and left, wanting to escape back to the rice pounding field, but he didn't expect this bamboo pole to block his way, so he turned over and left, and naturally walked out of the back door, and after not much effort, he was already in the Tugu Shrine.阿Q坐了一会，皮肤有些起粟，他觉得冷了，因为虽在春季，而夜间颇有余寒，尚不宜于赤膊。他也记得布衫留在赵家，但倘若去取，又深怕秀才的竹杠。然而地保进来了。
Ah Q sat for a while, his skin was a little corny, he felt cold, because although it was spring, there was still a lingering cold at night, and it was not suitable to be shirtless. He also remembered that the cloth shirt was left in the Zhao family, but if he went to pick it up, he was deeply afraid of the scholar's bamboo pole. However, the land is guaranteed to come in.“阿Q，你的妈妈的！你连赵家的用人都调戏起来，简直是造反。害得我晚上没有觉睡，你的妈妈的！……”
"Ah Q, your mother's! You even molested the Zhao family's employees, which is simply a rebellion. It caused me to not sleep at night, your mother's! ……”如是云云的教训了一通，阿Q自然没有话。临末，因为在晚上，应该送地保加倍酒钱四百文，阿Q正没有现钱，便用一顶毡帽做抵押，并且订定了五条件：
If Yunyun's lesson was learned, Ah Q naturally had nothing to say. At the end, because at night, the land insurance should be sent to double the wine money by 400 wen, Ah Q had no cash, so he used a felt hat as collateral and set five conditions:一　明天用红烛——要一斤重的——一对，香一封，到赵府上去赔罪。
Tomorrow, use red candles - one pound - a pair of incense, and go to the Zhao Mansion to make amends.二　赵府上请道士祓除缢鬼，费用由阿Q负担。
2. The Zhao Mansion asked the Taoist priest to exorcise the hanged ghosts, and the cost was borne by Ah Q.三　阿Q从此不准踏进赵府的门槛。
Three Ah Q is not allowed to step into the threshold of the Zhao Mansion from now on.四　吴妈此后倘有不测，惟阿Q是问。
4 If Wu Ma has any accidents after this, only Ah Q will ask.五　阿Q不准再去索取工钱和布衫。
5. A Q is not allowed to ask for wages and shirts.阿Q自然都答应了，可惜没有钱。幸而已经春天，棉被可以无用，便质了二千大钱，履行条约。赤膊磕头之后，居然还剩几文，他也不再赎毡帽，统统喝了酒了。但赵家也并不烧香点烛，因为太太拜佛的时候可以用，留着了。那破布衫是大半做了少奶奶八月间生下来的孩子的衬尿布，那小半破烂的便都做了吴妈的鞋底。
Ah Q naturally agreed, but unfortunately there was no money. Fortunately, it was spring, and the quilt was useless, so he pledged two thousand dollars to fulfill the treaty. After kowtowing shirtlessly, there were still a few pennies left, and he no longer redeemed his felt hat, and drank all the wine. But the Zhao family did not burn incense and candles, because their wives could use them when they worshipped Buddha and kept them. Most of the rags were diapers for the children born by the young grandmother in August, and the small ones were made into Wu Ma's soles.

阿Q正传

第五章　生计问题

阿Q正传

Chapter 5 Livelihood Issues阿Q礼毕之后，仍旧回到土谷祠，太阳下去了，渐渐觉得世上有些古怪。他仔细一想，终于省悟过来：其原因盖在自己的赤膊。他记得破夹袄还在，便披在身上，躺倒了，待张开眼睛，原来太阳又已经照在西墙上头了。他坐起身，一面说道，“妈妈的……”
After Ah Q finished the ceremony, he still returned to the Tugu Shrine, the sun went down, and he gradually felt that the world was a little strange. He thought about it carefully and finally realized: the reason was his bare chest. He remembered that the torn jacket was still there, so he put it on his body, lay down, and when he opened his eyes, it turned out that the sun had already shone on the west wall again. He sat up and said, "Mom's ......"他起来之后，也仍旧在街上逛，虽然不比赤膊之有切肤之痛，却又渐渐的觉得世上有些古怪了。仿佛从这一天起，未庄的女人们忽然都怕了羞，伊们一见阿Q走来，便个个躲进门里去。甚而至于将近五十岁的邹七嫂，也跟着别人乱钻，而且将十一岁的女儿都叫进去了。阿Q很以为奇，而且想：“这些东西忽然都学起小姐模样来了。这娼妇们……”
After he got up, he was still walking on the street, although it was not as painful as being shirtless, but he gradually felt that the world was a little strange. It seemed that from this day on, the women of Weizhuang were suddenly afraid, and as soon as they saw Ah Q coming, they all hid in the door. Even Zou Qi's sister-in-law, who is nearly fifty years old, also followed others to drill and called her eleven-year-old daughter in. Ah Q was very surprised, and thought, "These things suddenly learn to look like young ladies." These......"但他更觉得世上有些古怪，却是许多日以后的事。其一，酒店不肯赊欠了；其二，管土谷祠的老头子说些废话，似乎叫他走；其三，他虽然记不清多少日，但确乎有许多日，没有一个人来叫他做短工。酒店不赊，熬着也罢了；老头子催他走，噜苏一通也就算了；只是没有人来叫他做短工，却使阿Q肚子饿：这委实是一件非常“妈妈的”的事情。
But he felt that there were some strange things in the world, but they would be many days later. First, the hotel refuses to owe credit; second, the old man in charge of the Tugu Temple said some nonsense and seemed to tell him to go; Third, although he can't remember how many days, there are indeed many days when no one comes to ask him to do short-term work. the hotel is not on credit, it's okay to stay up; The old man urged him to leave, and Lu Su Tong was fine; It's just that no one came to ask him to do a short-term job, but it made Ah Q hungry: this is really a very "motherly" thing.阿Q忍不下去了，他只好到老主顾的家里去探问，——但独不许踏进赵府的门槛，——然而情形也异样：一定走出一个男人来，现了十分烦厌的相貌，像回复乞丐一般的摇手道：
Ah Q couldn't bear it anymore, he had to go to the old patron's house to inquire,—— but he was not allowed to step into the threshold of the Zhao Mansion,—— but the situation was also different: a man must have come out, showing a very annoying appearance, and shook his hand like a beggar in reply:“没有没有！你出去！”
"No, no! You get out! ”阿Q愈觉得稀奇了。他想，这些人家向来少不了要帮忙，不至于现在忽然都无事，这总该有些蹊跷在里面了。他留心打听，才知道他们有事都去叫小Don。这小D，是一个穷小子，又瘦又乏，在阿Q的眼睛里，位置是在王胡之下的，谁料这小子竟谋了他的饭碗去。所以阿Q这一气，更与平常不同，当气愤愤的走着的时候，忽然将手一扬，唱道：
Ah Q felt more and more strange. He thought that these people had always been indispensable for help, and it would not be that they were suddenly fine now, which should always be a little strange inside. He inquired carefully and found out that they had to call Little Don for anything. This little D is a poor boy, thin and tired, in Ah Q's eyes, the position is below Wang Hu, who would have thought that this kid would find his job. So Ah Q's anger was even more different from usual, when he was walking angrily, he suddenly raised his hand and sang:“我手执钢鞭将你打！……”
"I'll beat you with a steel whip in my hand! ……”几天之后，他竟在钱府的照壁前遇见了小D。“仇人相见分外眼明”，阿Q便迎上去，小D也站住了。
A few days later, he actually met Xiao D in front of the wall of the Qian Mansion. "Enemies are very clear when they meet", Ah Q greeted him, and Xiao D also stopped.“畜生！”阿Q怒目而视的说，嘴角上飞出唾沫来。
"Beast!" Ah Q said angrily, saliva flew from the corner of his mouth.“我是虫豸，好么？……”小D说。
"I'm a bug, okay? ......" Xiao D said.这谦逊反使阿Q更加愤怒起来，但他手里没有钢鞭，于是只得扑上去，伸手去拔小D的辫子。小D一手护住了自己的辫根，一手也来拔阿Q的辫子，阿Q便也将空着的一只手护住了自己的辫根。从先前的阿Q看来，小D本来是不足齿数的，但他近来挨了饿，又瘦又乏已经不下于小D，所以便成了势均力敌的现象，四只手拔着两颗头，都弯了腰，在钱家粉墙上映出一个蓝色的虹形，至于半点钟之久了。
This humility made Ah Q even more angry, but he didn't have a steel whip in his hand, so he had to pounce on it and reach out to pull out Xiao D's braid. Xiao D protected his braid with one hand, and pulled out Ah Q's braid with the other, and Ah Q also protected his braid with his free hand. From the previous Ah Q's point of view, Xiao D was originally not enough, but he has been hungry recently, thin and tired, and is no less than Xiao D, so it has become a phenomenon of evenness, four hands pull out two heads, all bend over, and a blue rainbow is released on the pink wall of the Qian family, as for half an o'clock.“好了，好了！”看的人们说，大约是解劝的。
"Okay, okay!" People who see it say that it is probably persuasion.“好，好！”看的人们说，不知道是解劝，是颂扬，还是煽动。
"Okay, okay!" People who read it said that they don't know whether it is persuasion, praise, or incitement.然而他们都不听。阿Q进三步，小D便退三步，都站着；小D进三步，阿Q便退三步，又都站着。大约半点钟，——未庄少有自鸣钟，所以很难说，或者二十分，——他们的头发里便都冒烟，额上便都流汗，阿Q的手放松了，在同一瞬间，小D的手也正放松了，同时直起，同时退开，都挤出人丛去。
However, they did not listen. Ah Q took three steps, and Xiao D took three steps back, both standing; Little D took three steps, and Ah Q took three steps back, and they all stood again. At about half an o'clock,—— Weizhuang rarely rare self-ringing bells, so it's hard to say, or twenty minutes,—— their hair was smoking, their foreheads were sweating, Ah Q's hand relaxed, and at the same moment, Xiao D's hand was also relaxing, straightening up at the same time, and stepping back at the same time, all squeezing out of the crowd.“记着罢，妈妈的……”阿Q回过头去说。
"Remember, mom's ......" Ah Q turned around and said.“妈妈的，记着罢……”小D也回过头来说。
"Mom, remember it......" Xiao D also turned around and said.这一场“龙虎斗”似乎并无胜败，也不知道看的人可满足，都没有发什么议论，而阿Q却仍然没有人来叫他做短工。
This "dragon and tiger fight" seems to have no victory or defeat, and I don't know if the viewers can be satisfied, so there is no discussion, but Ah Q still has no one to ask him to do short-term work.有一日很温和，微风拂拂的颇有些夏意了，阿Q却觉得寒冷起来，但这还可担当，第一倒是肚子饿。棉被，毡帽，布衫，早已没有了，其次就卖了棉袄；现在有裤子，却万不可脱的；有破夹袄，又除了送人做鞋底之外，决定卖不出钱。他早想在路上拾得一注钱，但至今还没有见；他想在自己的破屋里忽然寻到一注钱，慌张的四顾，但屋内是空虚而且了然。于是他决计出门求食去了。
One day it was very mild, and the breeze was quite summery, but Ah Q felt cold, but this was still responsible, the first was hungry. quilts, felt hats, and cloth shirts are long gone, and then padded jackets are sold; Now there are pants, but they must not be taken off; There is a torn jacket, and in addition to giving it away as a sole, it is decided that it cannot be sold. He had long wanted to find a bet of money on the road, but he hadn't seen it yet; He wanted to suddenly find a bet of money in his dilapidated house, and looked around in a panic, but the house was empty and clear. So he decided to go out to beg for food.他在路上走着要“求食”，看见熟识的酒店，看见熟识的馒头，但他都走过了，不但没有暂停，而且并不想要。他所求的不是这类东西了；他求的是什么东西，他自己不知道。
He walked on the road to "beg for food", saw familiar hotels, saw familiar steamed buns, but he walked through, not only did not pause, but also did not want it. He didn't ask for that kind of thing; He didn't know what he was asking for.未庄本不是大村镇，不多时便走尽了。村外多是水田，满眼是新秧的嫩绿，夹着几个圆形的活动的黑点，便是耕田的农夫。阿Q并不赏鉴这田家乐，却只是走，因为他直觉的知道这与他的“求食”之道是很辽远的。但他终于走到静修庵的墙外了。
Weizhuang was not a big village or town, and it was gone in a short time. Outside the village are mostly paddy fields, full of the tender green of new seedlings, sandwiched with a few circular black spots, that is, the farmer who cultivates the field. Ah Q didn't appreciate this Tian Jiale, but just left, because he intuitively knew that this was very far from his way of "asking for food". But he finally walked outside the walls of the monastery.庵周围也是水田，粉墙突出在新绿里，后面的低土墙里是菜园。阿Q迟疑了一会，四面一看，并没有人。他便爬上这矮墙去，扯着何首乌藤，但泥土仍然簌簌的掉，阿Q的脚也索索的抖；终于攀着桑树枝，跳到里面了。里面真是郁郁葱葱，但似乎并没有黄酒馒头，以及此外可吃的之类。靠西墙是竹丛，下面许多笋，只可惜都是并未煮熟的，还有油菜早经结子，芥菜已将开花，小白菜也很老了。
The hermitage is also surrounded by paddy fields, with pink walls protruding from the new greenery, and vegetable gardens in the low-earth wall behind. Ah Q hesitated for a while, looked around, and there was no one. He climbed up the low wall and pulled He Shou Wuteng, but the soil was still falling off, and Ah Q's feet were shaking; Finally climbed the mulberry branch and jumped into it. It's really lush inside, but it doesn't seem to have rice wine steamed buns, or anything else to eat. Next to the west wall is a bamboo bush, and there are many bamboo shoots below, but unfortunately they are not cooked, and the rapeseed has already seeded, the mustard greens are about to bloom, and the bok choy is also very old.阿Q仿佛文童落第似的觉得很冤屈，他慢慢走近园门去，忽而非常惊喜了，这分明是一畦老萝卜。他于是蹲下便拔，而门口突然伸出一个很圆的头来，又即缩回去了，这分明是小尼姑。小尼姑之流是阿Q本来视若草芥的，但世事须“退一步想”，所以他便赶紧拔起四个萝卜，拧下青叶，兜在大襟里。然而老尼姑已经出来了。
Ah Q felt very wronged as if Wen Tong had failed, he slowly approached the garden gate, and suddenly he was very surprised, this was clearly a field of old radishes. He then squatted down and pulled out, and a very round head suddenly stretched out at the door, and then retracted, which was clearly a little nun. The little nuns and the like were originally regarded by Ah Q as grass, but the world had to "take a step back and think", so he quickly pulled out four radishes, unscrewed the green leaves, and put them in his big collar. However, the old nun has already come out.“阿弥陀佛，阿Q，你怎么跳进园里来偷萝卜！……阿呀，罪过呵，阿唷，阿弥陀佛！……”
"Amitabha, Ah Q, how did you jump into the garden to steal radishes! …… Ah, sin, ah, Amitabha! ……”“我什么时候跳进你的园里来偷萝卜？”阿Q且看且走的说。
"When will I jump into your garden to steal radishes?" Ah Q said while looking and leaving.“现在……这不是？”老尼姑指着他的衣兜。
"Now...... Isn't it? The old nun pointed to his pocket.“这是你的？你能叫得他答应你么？你……”
"This is yours? Can you get him to agree to you? You ......"阿Q没有说完话，拔步便跑；追来的是一匹很肥大的黑狗。这本来在前门的，不知怎的到后园来了。黑狗哼而且追，已经要咬着阿Q的腿，幸而从衣兜里落下一个萝卜来，那狗给一吓，略略一停，阿Q已经爬上桑树，跨到土墙，连人和萝卜都滚出墙外面了。只剩着黑狗还在对着桑树嗥，老尼姑念着佛。
Ah Q didn't finish speaking, he ran away; Chasing was a very fat black dog. This was originally at the front door, but somehow it came to the back garden. The black dog snorted and chased, already about to bite Ah Q's leg, but fortunately a radish fell from his pocket, the dog was startled, and stopped slightly, Ah Q had climbed up the mulberry tree, stepped onto the earthen wall, and even the people and radishes rolled out of the wall. Only the black dog was still howling at the mulberry tree, and the old nun was chanting Buddha.阿Q怕尼姑又放出黑狗来，拾起萝卜便走，沿路又检了几块小石头，但黑狗却并不再现。阿Q于是抛了石块，一面走一面吃，而且想道，这里也没有什么东西寻，不如进城去……
Ah Q was afraid that the nun would release the black dog again, so he picked up the radish and left, and checked a few small stones along the way, but the black dog did not appear. Ah Q threw stones, ate them as he walked, and thought, there is nothing to look for here, so it is better to go into the city......待三个萝卜吃完时，他已经打定了进城的主意了。
By the time the three radishes were finished, he had already made up his mind to go to the city.

阿Q正传

第六章　从中兴到末路

阿Q正传

Chapter 6 From Revival to the End在未庄再看见阿Q出现的时候，是刚过了这年的中秋。人们都惊异，说是阿Q回来了，于是又回上去想道，他先前那里去了呢？阿Q前几回的上城，大抵早就兴高采烈的对人说，但这一次却并不，所以也没有一个人留心到。他或者也曾告诉过管土谷祠的老头子，然而未庄老例，只有赵太爷钱太爷和秀才大爷上城才算一件事。假洋鬼子尚且不足数，何况是阿Q：因此老头子也就不替他宣传，而未庄的社会上也就无从知道了。
When Weizhuang saw Ah Q appear again, it was just past the Mid-Autumn Festival of this year. People were surprised, saying that Ah Q was back, so they went back and thought, where did he go before? Ah Q had probably happily said to people the first few times in the city, but this time he didn't, so no one paid attention. He may have also told the old man in charge of the Tugu Temple, but as is the old case in Weizhuang, only Mrs. Zhao and Mrs. Qian and Uncle Xiucai go to the city. There are not enough fake foreign devils, not to mention Ah Q: Therefore, the old man does not promote for him, and there is no way to know in the Weizhuang society.但阿Q这回的回来，却与先前大不同，确乎很值得惊异。天色将黑，他睡眼蒙胧的在酒店门前出现了，他走近柜台，从腰间伸出手来，满把是银的和铜的，在柜上一扔说，“现钱！打酒来！”穿的是新夹袄，看去腰间还挂着一个大搭连，沉钿钿的将裤带坠成了很弯很弯的弧线。未庄老例，看见略有些醒目的人物，是与其慢也宁敬的，现在虽然明知道是阿Q，但因为和破夹袄的阿Q有些两样了，古人云，“士别三日便当刮目相待”，所以堂倌，掌柜，酒客，路人，便自然显出一种疑而且敬的形态来。掌柜既先之以点头，又继之以谈话：
But Ah Q's return this time is very different from before, which is indeed surprising. It was getting dark, and he appeared in front of the hotel with sleepy eyes, he approached the counter, stretched out his hand from his waist, full of silver and copper, and threw it on the cabinet and said, "Cash!" Hit the wine! He was wearing a new jacket, and he saw that there was still a big tie hanging around his waist, and he fell the trouser belt into a very curved arc. Although I know that it is Ah Q, but because it is a little different from Ah Q in a torn jacket, the ancients said, "Shi Bei should be impressed for three days", so the cousin, the shopkeeper, the drinker, and the passers-by naturally showed a suspicious and respectful form. The shopkeeper nodded first, and then talked:“嚄，阿Q，你回来了！”
"Oh, Ah Q, you're back!"“回来了。”
"It's back."“发财发财，你是——在……”
"Get rich, you are - in ......"“上城去了！”
"Go to the city!"这一件新闻，第二天便传遍了全未庄。人人都愿意知道现钱和新夹袄的阿Q的中兴史，所以在酒店里，茶馆里，庙檐下，便渐渐的探听出来了。这结果，是阿Q得了新敬畏。
This news spread throughout Quanweizhuang the next day. Everyone wants to know the history of the revival of Ah Q, who has cash and a new jacket, so in the hotel, in the teahouse, and under the eaves of the temple, they gradually heard about it. As a result, Ah Q gained new awe.据阿Q说，他是在举人老爷家里帮忙。这一节，听的人都肃然了。这老爷本姓白，但因为合城里只有他一个举人，所以不必再冠姓，说起举人来就是他。这也不独在未庄是如此，便是一百里方圆之内也都如此，人们几乎多以为他的姓名就叫举人老爷的了。在这人的府上帮忙，那当然是可敬的。但据阿Q又说，他却不高兴再帮忙了，因为这举人老爷实在太“妈妈的”了。这一节，听的人都叹息而且快意，因为阿Q本不配在举人老爷家里帮忙，而不帮忙是可惜的。
According to Ah Q, he was helping at the house of the lifting master. In this section, everyone who listened was awe-inspiring. This old man's surname is Bai, but because he is the only scholar in Hecheng, there is no need to take the surname anymore, and he is the one who sits on the scholar. This is not only true in Weizhuang, but also within a hundred miles, and people almost think that his name is called Master Juren. Helping in this person's house is of course respectable. But according to Ah Q, he was not happy to help anymore, because this scholar was too "mother's". In this section, everyone who listened sighed and was happy, because Ah Q was not worthy of helping at the house of the scholar, and it was a pity not to help.据阿Q说，他的回来，似乎也由于不满意城里人，这就在他们将长凳称为条凳，而且煎鱼用葱丝，加以最近观察所得的缺点，是女人的走路也扭得不很好。然而也偶有大可佩服的地方，即如未庄的乡下人不过打三十二张的竹牌，只有假洋鬼子能够叉“麻酱”，城里却连小乌龟子都叉得精熟的。什么假洋鬼子，只要放在城里的十几岁的小乌龟子的手里，也就立刻是“小鬼见阎王”。这一节，听的人都赧然了。
According to Ah Q, his return seems to be due to dissatisfaction with the people in the city, which is why they call the bench a stool, and the fish is fried with shredded green onions, and the shortcoming of recent observations is that the woman does not walk well. However, there are occasional things that are admirable, that is, the countrymen in Weizhuang only play thirty-two bamboo cards, and only fake foreign devils can fork "sesame sauce", but even the little turtle in the city is proficient. What kind of fake foreign devil, as long as it is placed in the hands of a teenage turtle in the city, it will immediately be "the little ghost sees Hell". In this section, everyone who listened was ashamed.“你们可看见过杀头么？”阿Q说，“咳，好看。杀革命党。唉，好看好看，……”他摇摇头，将唾沫飞在正对面的赵司晨的脸上。这一节，听的人都凛然了。但阿Q又四面一看，忽然扬起右手，照着伸长脖子听得出神的王胡的后项窝上直劈下去道：
"Have you ever seen a headcut?" Ah Q said, "Cough, it looks good." Kill the revolutionary party. Alas, it's good-looking,......" He shook his head and spat on Zhao Sichen's face directly opposite. In this verse, everyone who listened was awe-inspiring. But Ah Q looked around again, suddenly raised his right hand, and slashed straight down on the back of Wang Hu's neck, who could hear the god with his neck stretched out, and said:“嚓！”
"Huh!"王胡惊得一跳，同时电光石火似的赶快缩了头，而听的人又都悚然而且欣然了。从此王胡瘟头瘟脑的许多日，并且再不敢走近阿Q的身边；别的人也一样。
Wang Hu was shocked, and at the same time shrank his head like lightning, and everyone who listened was horrified and delighted. From then on, Wang Hu was in a daze for many days, and he no longer dared to approach Ah Q's side; The same goes for everyone else.阿Q这时在未庄人眼睛里的地位，虽不敢说超过赵太爷，但谓之差不多，大约也就没有什么语病的了。
Ah Q's status in the eyes of the Weizhuang people at this time, although he did not dare to say that he surpassed Mr. Zhao, but he said that it was almost the same, and there was probably no language disease.然而不多久，这阿Q的大名忽又传遍了未庄的闺中。虽然未庄只有钱赵两姓是大屋，此外十之九都是浅闺，但闺中究竟是闺中，所以也算得一件神异。女人们见面时一定说，邹七嫂在阿Q那里买了一条蓝绸裙，旧固然是旧的，但只化了九角钱。还有赵白眼的母亲，——一说是赵司晨的母亲，待考，——也买了一件孩子穿的大红洋纱衫，七成新，只用三百大钱九二串。于是伊们都眼巴巴的想见阿Q，缺绸裙的想问他买绸裙，要洋纱衫的想问他买洋纱衫，不但见了不逃避，有时阿Q已经走过了，也还要追上去叫住他，问道：
However, not long after, Ah Q's name suddenly spread throughout Weizhuang's boudoir. Although only the two surnames Qian and Zhao in Weizhuang are big houses, and nine out of ten are shallow boudoirs, but the boudoir is the boudoir, so it is also a miracle. When the women met, they must say that Zou Qi's sister-in-law bought a blue silk skirt from Ah Q, which was old and old, but only turned into nine cents. There is also Zhao Baiyan's mother,—— who said that it was Zhao Sichen's mother, and ,—— to take the exam, she also bought a big red gauze shirt worn by her child, which was 70% new, and only cost 300 yuan and 92 strings. So they all wanted to see Ah Q, those who lacked silk skirts wanted to ask him to buy silk skirts, and those who wanted gauze shirts wanted to ask him to buy gauze shirts.“阿Q，你还有绸裙么？没有？纱衫也要的，有罢？”
"Ah Q, do you still have a silk skirt? No? I also want a gauze shirt, right? ”后来这终于从浅闺传进深闺里去了。因为邹七嫂得意之余，将伊的绸裙请赵太太去鉴赏，赵太太又告诉了赵太爷而且着实恭维了一番。赵太爷便在晚饭桌上，和秀才大爷讨论，以为阿Q实在有些古怪，我们门窗应该小心些；但他的东西，不知道可还有什么可买，也许有点好东西罢。加以赵太太也正想买一件价廉物美的皮背心。于是家族决议，便托邹七嫂即刻去寻阿Q，而且为此新辟了第三种的例外：这晚上也姑且特准点油灯。
Later, this finally passed from the shallow boudoir to the deep boudoir. Because Zou Qi's sister-in-law was proud, she invited Mrs. Zhao to appreciate Yi's silk skirt, and Mrs. Zhao told Mrs. Zhao again and really complimented her. Mrs. Zhao discussed with the scholar at the dinner table, thinking that Ah Q was really a little weird, and we should be careful with our doors and windows; But his things, I don't know what else to buy, maybe some good things. In addition, Mrs. Zhao is also thinking of buying a cheap and high-quality leather vest. So the family decided to ask Sister-in-law Zou Qi to go to find Ah Q immediately, and created a third exception for this: the oil lamp was temporarily lit this night.油灯干了不少了，阿Q还不到。赵府的全眷都很焦急，打着呵欠，或恨阿Q太飘忽，或怨邹七嫂不上紧。赵太太还怕他因为春天的条件不敢来，而赵太爷以为不足虑：因为这是“我”去叫他的。果然，到底赵太爷有见识，阿Q终于跟着邹七嫂进来了。
The oil lamp has dried a lot, and Ah Q is not yet. The whole family of the Zhao Mansion was very anxious, yawning, or hating Ah Q for being too erratic, or complaining that Zou Qi's sister-in-law was not in a hurry. Mrs. Zhao was still afraid that he would not dare to come because of the spring conditions, and Mrs. Zhao thought it was not worth worrying about: because this was "me" to call him. Sure enough, in the end, Mrs. Zhao had knowledge, and Ah Q finally followed Zou Qi's sister-in-law in.“他只说没有没有，我说你自己当面说去，他还要说，我说……”邹七嫂气喘吁吁的走着说。
"He only said no, no, I said you said it in person, and he still had to say, I said......" Zou Qisao said as she walked out of breath.“太爷！”阿Q似笑非笑的叫了一声，在檐下站住了。
"Grandfather!" Ah Q screamed with a smile and stood under the eaves.“阿Q，听说你在外面发财，”赵太爷踱开去，眼睛打量着他的全身，一面说。“那很好，那很好的。这个，……听说你有些旧东西，……可以都拿来看一看，……这也并不是别的，因为我倒要……”
"Ah Q, I heard that you are making a fortune outside," Mrs. Zhao said as he paced away, his eyes looking at his whole body. "That's good, that's good. This one...... I heard you have some old stuff,...... You can take a look at them all,...... It's nothing else, because I want to ......"“我对邹七嫂说过了。都完了。”
"I told Zou Qi's sister-in-law. It's all over. ”“完了？”赵太爷不觉失声的说，“那里会完得这样快呢？”
"It's over?" Mrs. Zhao said unconsciously, "Where will it be so fast?" ”“那是朋友的，本来不多。他们买了些，……”
"That's a friend's, not much. They bought some ,......"“总该还有一点罢。”
"There should be one more point."“现在，只剩了一张门幕了。”
"Now, there is only one curtain left."“就拿门幕来看看罢。”赵太太慌忙说。
"Just take a look at the curtain." Mrs. Zhao said hurriedly.“那么，明天拿来就是，”赵太爷却不甚热心了。“阿Q，你以后有什么东西的时候，你尽先送来给我们看，……”
"Then, bring it tomorrow," Mrs. Zhao was not very enthusiastic. "Ah Q, when you have something in the future, you can send it to us first,......"“价钱决不会比别家出得少！”秀才说。秀才娘子忙一瞥阿Q的脸，看他感动了没有。
"The price will never be less than that of others!" The scholar said. The scholar's wife hurriedly glanced at Ah Q's face to see if he was moved.“我要一件皮背心。”赵太太说。
"I want a leather vest." Mrs. Zhao said.阿Q虽然答应着，却懒洋洋的出去了，也不知道他是否放在心上。这使赵太爷很失望，气愤而且担心，至于停止了打呵欠。秀才对于阿Q的态度也很不平，于是说，这忘八蛋要提防，或者竟不如吩咐地保，不许他住在未庄。但赵太爷以为不然，说这也怕要结怨，况且做这路生意的大概是“老鹰不吃窝下食”，本村倒不必担心的；只要自己夜里警醒点就是了。秀才听了这“庭训”，非常之以为然，便即刻撤消了驱逐阿Q的提议，而且叮嘱邹七嫂，请伊万不要向人提起这一段话。
Although Ah Q agreed, he went out lazily, and he didn't know if he took it to heart. This made Mrs. Zhao very disappointed, angry and worried, and stopped yawning. The scholar was also very unfair to Ah Q's attitude, so he said that this forgetful-boon should be beware, or it would be better to order the land to protect him and not allow him to live in Weizhuang. But Mrs. Zhao thought otherwise, saying that he was afraid of making a grudge, and the people who did this business probably "eagles don't eat nest food", so the village didn't have to worry; As long as you are alert at night. After hearing this "court instruction", the scholar was very convinced, so he immediately withdrew the proposal to expel Ah Q, and told Zou Qisao not to mention this paragraph to others.但第二日，邹七嫂便将那蓝裙去染了皂，又将阿Q可疑之点传扬出去了，可是确没有提起秀才要驱逐他这一节。然而这已经于阿Q很不利。最先，地保寻上门了，取了他的门幕去，阿Q说是赵太太要看的，而地保也不还，并且要议定每月的孝敬钱。其次，是村人对于他的敬畏忽而变相了，虽然还不敢来放肆，却很有远避的神情，而这神情和先前的防他来“嚓”的时候又不同，颇混着“敬而远之”的分子了。
But the next day, Zou Qi's sister-in-law dyed the blue skirt with soap, and spread the suspicious points of Ah Q, but there was no mention of the scholar wanting to expel him. However, this is already very unfavorable to Ah Q. First, the land protector came to the door and took his curtain, Ah Q said that Mrs. Zhao wanted to see it, and the land protector did not pay it back, and wanted to agree on a monthly filial piety money. Secondly, the villagers' awe of him suddenly became disguised, although they did not dare to come presumptuously, but they had a very avoidant look, and this expression was different from the previous time when they prevented him from coming to "scream", and it was quite mixed with elements that "stayed away".只有一班闲人们却还要寻根究底的去探阿Q的底细。阿Q也并不讳饰，傲然的说出他的经验来。从此他们才知道，他不过是一个小脚色，不但不能上墙，并且不能进洞，只站在洞外接东西。有一夜，他刚才接到一个包，正手再进去，不一会，只听得里面大嚷起来，他便赶紧跑，连夜爬出城，逃回未庄来了，从此不敢再去做。然而这故事却于阿Q更不利，村人对于阿Q的“敬而远之”者，本因为怕结怨，谁料他不过是一个不敢再偷的偷儿呢？这实在是“斯亦不足畏也矣”。
There is only a group of idlers who still have to find out the details of Ah Q. Ah Q did not shy away from it, and proudly told his experience. From then on, they knew that he was just a small foot, not only could not go up the wall, but also could not enter the hole, only standing outside the hole to catch things. One night, he received a bag just now, and he went in with his forehand, and after a while, he only heard a loud shout inside, so he hurriedly ran, climbed out of the city overnight, and fled back to Weizhuang, and did not dare to do it again. However, this story is even more unfavorable to Ah Q, the villagers are afraid of making a grudge against Ah Q, who would have thought that he was just a thief who did not dare to steal again? This is really "this is not to be feared".

阿Q正传

第七章　革命

阿Q正传

Chapter 7 Revolution宣统三年九月十四日——即阿Q将搭连卖给赵白眼的这一天——三更四点，有一只大乌篷船到了赵府上的河埠头。这船从黑魆魆中荡来，乡下人睡得熟，都没有知道；出去时将近黎明，却很有几个看见的了。据探头探脑的调查来的结果，知道那竟是举人老爷的船！
On September 14 of the third year of Xuantong - that is, the day Ah Q sold the company to Zhao Baiyan - at four o'clock in the morning, a large black canopy boat arrived at the river wharf on the Zhao Mansion. The boat swung from the dark ghost, and the countrymen slept soundly, and they didn't know it; When I went out, it was almost dawn, but there were a few who saw it. According to the results of the investigation, it is known that it is actually the boat of the scholar!那船便将大不安载给了未庄，不到正午，全村的人心就很摇动。船的使命，赵家本来是很秘密的，但茶坊酒肆里却都说，革命党要进城，举人老爷到我们乡下来逃难了。惟有邹七嫂不以为然，说那不过是几口破衣箱，举人老爷想来寄存的，却已被赵太爷回复转去。其实举人老爷和赵秀才素不相能，在理本不能有“共患难”的情谊，况且邹七嫂又和赵家是邻居，见闻较为切近，所以大概该是伊对的。
The boat carried the great unrest to Weizhuang, and before noon, the hearts of the whole village were shaken. The mission of the ship, the Zhao family was originally very secret, but the tea house and wine shop said that the revolutionary party was going to enter the city, and the master of the scholars came to our countryside to escape. Only Zou Qisao disagreed, saying that it was just a few broken suitcases, and the scholar wanted to deposit it, but it had been replied by Mrs. Zhao. In fact, the scholar and Zhao Xiucai have never been compatible, and they cannot have a friendship of "sharing hardships", and Zou Qi's sister-in-law is neighbors with the Zhao family, and they are relatively close, so it should probably be Yi Yi.然而谣言很旺盛，说举人老爷虽然似乎没有亲到，却有一封长信，和赵家排了“转折亲”。赵太爷肚里一轮，觉得于他总不会有坏处，便将箱子留下了，现就塞在太太的床底下。至于革命党，有的说是便在这一夜进了城，个个白盔白甲：穿着崇正皇帝的素。
However, the rumors are very strong, saying that although the master of the scholars did not seem to have arrived, he had a long letter and arranged a "turning kiss" with the Zhao family. Mrs. Zhao felt that it would not be bad for him, so he left the box and stuffed it under his wife's bed. As for the revolutionary party, some say that they entered the city that night, all wearing white helmets and white armor: wearing the plain of the Chongzheng Emperor.阿Q的耳朵里，本来早听到过革命党这一句话，今年又亲眼见过杀掉革命党。但他有一种不知从那里来的意见，以为革命党便是造反，造反便是与他为难，所以一向是“深恶而痛绝之”的。殊不料这却使百里闻名的举人老爷有这样怕，于是他未免也有些“神往”了，况且未庄的一群鸟男女的慌张的神情，也使阿Q更快意。
In Ah Q's ears, he had heard the words of the revolutionary party for a long time, and this year he had seen the killing of the revolutionary party with his own eyes. But he had an opinion that he didn't know where it came from, thinking that the revolutionary party was rebelling, and rebellion was embarrassing him, so he always "hated and hated it". Unexpectedly, this made the famous master of the Baili Juren so afraid, so he couldn't help but be a little "fascinated", and the panicked expressions of a group of bird men and women in Weizhuang also made Ah Q more happy.“革命也好罢，”阿Q想，“革这伙妈妈的的命，太可恶！太可恨！……便是我，也要投降革命党了。”
"Revolution is fine," Ah Q thought, "the life of this group of mothers is too hateful!" It's so hateful! …… Even I am going to surrender to the revolutionary party. ”阿Q近来用度窘，大约略略有些不平；加以午间喝了两碗空肚酒，愈加醉得快，一面想一面走，便又飘飘然起来。不知怎么一来，忽而似乎革命党便是自己，未庄人却都是他的俘虏了。他得意之余，禁不住大声的嚷道：
Ah Q has been embarrassed recently, and it is a little unfair; In addition, after drinking two bowls of empty belly wine at noon, I got drunk faster and faster, and while thinking about it, I became floating again. Somehow, it suddenly seemed that the revolutionary party was himself, but the Weizhuang people were all his prisoners. He was so proud that he couldn't help but shout loudly:“造反了！造反了！”
"Rebellion! Rebellion! ”未庄人都用了惊惧的眼光对他看。这一种可怜的眼光，是阿Q从来没有见过的，一见之下，又使他舒服得如六月里喝了雪水。他更加高兴的走而且喊道：
The people of Weizhuang looked at him with frightened eyes. This kind of pitiful gaze was something Ah Q had never seen before, and at first sight, it made him feel as comfortable as drinking snow water in June. He walked even happier and shouted:“好，……我要什么就是什么，我欢喜谁就是谁。
"Okay,...... I want what I want, and I am who I like.得得，锵锵！
Got it, boom!悔不该，酒醉错斩了郑贤弟，
I regret it, I got drunk and mistakenly beheaded Zheng Xiandi,悔不该，呀呀呀……
I regret it, yay......得得，锵锵，得，锵令锵！
Got it, clanged, got it, clanged clang!我手执钢鞭将你打……”
I will beat you ...... with a steel whip in my hand."赵府上的两位男人和两个真本家，也正站在大门口论革命。阿Q没有见，昂了头直唱过去。
The two men and the two real families in the Zhao Mansion were also standing at the gate talking about the revolution. Ah Q didn't see it, and sang straight over.“得得，……”
"Got ,......"“老Q，”赵太爷怯怯的迎着低声的叫。
"Old Q," Mrs. Zhao shouted timidly in a low voice.“锵锵，”阿Q料不到他的名字会和“老”字联结起来，以为是一句别的话，与己无干，只是唱。“得，锵，锵令锵，锵！”
"Qiang Qiang," Ah Q didn't expect his name to be associated with the word "old", thinking it was another sentence, which had nothing to do with him, just singing. "Okay, Qiang, Qiang, Qiang!"“老Q。”
"Old Q."“悔不该……”
"I regret not ......"“阿Q！”秀才只得直呼其名了。
"Ah Q!" The scholar had to call him by his name.阿Q这才站住，歪着头问道，“什么？”
Ah Q stopped, tilted his head and asked, "What?" ”“老Q，……现在……”赵太爷却又没有话，“现在……发财么？”
"Old Q,...... Now ......" Mrs. Zhao had no words, "Now...... Get rich? ”“发财？自然。要什么就是什么……”
"Get rich? Nature. Whatever you want, ......"“阿……Q哥，像我们这样穷朋友是不要紧的……”赵白眼惴惴的说，似乎想探革命党的口风。
"Ah ...... Brother Q, it doesn't matter if you have a poor friend like us......" Zhao Baiyan said anxiously, as if he wanted to explore the tone of the revolutionary party.“穷朋友？你总比我有钱。”阿Q说着自去了。
"Poor friend? You are always richer than me. Ah Q said and went by himself.大家都怃然，没有话。赵太爷父子回家，晚上商量到点灯。赵白眼回家，便从腰间扯下搭连来，交给他女人藏在箱底里。
Everyone was stunned and speechless. Mrs. Zhao and his son went home and discussed lighting the lamp at night. When Zhao Baiyan went home, he tore it off his waist and handed it to him to hide at the bottom of the box.阿Q飘飘然的飞了一通，回到土谷祠，酒已经醒透了。这晚上，管祠的老头子也意外的和气，请他喝茶；阿Q便向他要了两个饼，吃完之后，又要了一支点过的四两烛和一个树烛台，点起来，独自躺在自己的小屋里。他说不出的新鲜而且高兴，烛火像元夜似的闪闪的跳，他的思想也迸跳起来了：
Ah Q flew away and returned to the Tugu Shrine, and the wine was already sober. That night, the old man in charge of the ancestral hall was also unexpectedly kind and invited him to drink tea; Ah Q asked him for two cakes, and after eating, he asked for another lit candle and a tree candlestick, lit it, and lay alone in his hut. He couldn't say anything fresh and happy, the candle light jumped like a Lantern Night, and his thoughts also jumped:“造反？有趣，……来了一阵白盔白甲的革命党，都拿着板刀，钢鞭，炸弹，洋炮，三尖两刃刀，钩镰枪，走过土谷祠，叫道，‘阿Q！同去同去！’于是一同去。……
"Rebellion? Interesting...... A burst of revolutionaries in white helmets and white armor came, all holding plate knives, steel whips, bombs, foreign cannons, three-pointed two-edged knives, and hook sickles, walked past the Tugu Shrine, shouting, 'Ah Q! Go and go! So they went together. ……“这时未庄的一伙鸟男女才好笑哩，跪下叫道，‘阿Q，饶命！’谁听他！第一个该死的是小D和赵太爷，还有秀才，还有假洋鬼子，……留几条么？王胡本来还可留，但也不要了。……
At this time, a group of bird men and women in Weizhuang were funny, knelt down and shouted, 'Ah Q, spare my life!' Who listens to him! The first damn ones were Xiao D and Mrs. Zhao, as well as scholars, and fake foreign devils,...... How many do you keep? Wang Hu could have stayed, but he didn't want it anymore. ……“东西，……直走进去打开箱子来：元宝，洋钱，洋纱衫，……秀才娘子的一张宁式床先搬到土谷祠，此外便摆了钱家的桌椅，——或者也就用赵家的罢。自己是不动手的了，叫小D来搬，要搬得快，搬得不快打嘴巴。……
"Things,...... Go straight in and open the box: ingots, foreign money, gauze shirt,...... A Ning-style bed of the scholar's wife was moved to the Tugu Temple first, and the tables and chairs of the Qian family were set up,—— or the Zhao family's were used. I don't do it anymore, ask Xiao D to move, move quickly, and hit my mouth if I don't move fast. ……“赵司晨的妹子真丑。邹七嫂的女儿过几年再说。假洋鬼子的老婆会和没有辫子的男人睡觉，吓，不是好东西！秀才的老婆是眼胞上有疤的。……吴妈长久不见了，不知道在那里，——可惜脚太大。”
"Zhao Sichen's sister is so ugly. Zou Qi's daughter will talk about it in a few years. The wife of a fake foreign devil will sleep with a man without braids, scared, not a good thing! The scholar's wife has a scar on her eye. …… Wu's mother has been gone for a long time, and I don't know where she is,—— but unfortunately her feet are too big. ”阿Q没有想得十分停当，已经发了鼾声，四两烛还只点去了小半寸，红焰焰的光照着他张开的嘴。
Ah Q didn't think for a moment, he was already snoring, and the four or two candles were only lit half an inch, and the red flame light illuminated his open mouth.“荷荷！”阿Q忽而大叫起来，抬了头仓皇的四顾，待到看见四两烛，却又倒头睡去了。
"Hehe!" Ah Q suddenly screamed, raised his head and looked around in a hurry, and when he saw four or two candles, he fell asleep again.第二天他起得很迟，走出街上看时，样样都照旧。他也仍然肚饿，他想着，想不起什么来；但他忽而似乎有了主意了，慢慢的跨开步，有意无意的走到静修庵。
He got up late the next day, and when he went out into the street, everything was the same. He was still hungry, he thought, he couldn't think of anything; But he suddenly seemed to have an idea, slowly took a step, and walked to the retreat monastery intentionally or unintentionally.庵和春天时节一样静，白的墙壁和漆黑的门。他想了一想，前去打门，一只狗在里面叫。他急急拾了几块断砖，再上去较为用力的打，打到黑门上生出许多麻点的时候，才听得有人来开门。
The hermitage is as quiet as spring, with white walls and dark doors. He thought about it, went to knock on the door, and a dog barked inside. He hurriedly picked up a few broken bricks, and then went up and hit harder, until many pockmarks were born on the black door before he heard someone come to open the door.阿Q连忙捏好砖头，摆开马步，准备和黑狗来开战。但庵门只开了一条缝，并无黑狗从中冲出，望进去只有一个老尼姑。
Ah Q hurriedly kneaded the bricks, set off his horse, and prepared to go to war with the black dog. But there was only a crack in the door of the nunnery, and no black dog rushed out of it, and there was only an old nun looking in.“你又来什么事？”伊大吃一惊的说。
"What's wrong with you?" Yi said in surprise.“革命了……你知道？……”阿Q说得很含胡。
"Revolution...... You know? ......" Ah Q said very bearishly.“革命革命，革过一革的，……你们要革得我们怎么样呢？”老尼姑两眼通红的说。
"Revolutionary revolution, revolution,...... What do you want to do to us? The old nun said with red eyes.“什么？……”阿Q诧异了。
"What? ......" Ah Q was surprised.“你不知道，他们已经来革过了！”
"You don't know, they've already come to the revolution!"“谁？……”阿Q更其诧异了。
"Who? ...... "Ah Q was even more surprised.“那秀才和洋鬼子！”
"That scholar and foreign devil!"阿Q很出意外，不由的一错愕；老尼姑见他失了锐气，便飞速的关了门，阿Q再推时，牢不可开，再打时，没有回答了。
Ah Q was very surprised and couldn't help but be stunned; The old nun saw that he had lost his strength, so she quickly closed the door, and when Ah Q pushed again, it was unopenable, and when he hit again, there was no answer.那还是上午的事。赵秀才消息灵，一知道革命党已在夜间进城，便将辫子盘在顶上，一早去拜访那历来也不相能的钱洋鬼子。这是“咸与维新”的时候了，所以他们便谈得很投机，立刻成了情投意合的同志，也相约去革命。他们想而又想，才想出静修庵里有一块“皇帝万岁万万岁”的龙牌，是应该赶紧革掉的，于是又立刻同到庵里去革命。因为老尼姑来阻挡，说了三句话，他们便将伊当作满政府，在头上很给了不少的棍子和栗凿。尼姑待他们走后，定了神来检点，龙牌固然已经碎在地上了，而且又不见了观音娘娘座前的一个宣德炉。
That was still in the morning. As soon as he knew that the revolutionary party had entered the city at night, he put his braids on his top and went to visit the money and foreign devils who had never been able to get along. This was the time for "salty and reform", so they talked very speculatively, and immediately became like-minded comrades and made an appointment to go to the revolution. After thinking about it, they came up with a dragon sign in the monastery that read "Long live the emperor", which should be removed quickly, so they immediately went to the nunnery to revolutionize. Because the old nun came to stop it, after saying three words, they regarded it as the Manchu government and gave him a lot of sticks and chestnut chisels on his head. After they left, the nun calmed down and checked, although the dragon plaque had already broken on the ground, and a Xuande furnace in front of the seat of Guanyin Niangniang was missing.这事阿Q后来才知道。他颇悔自己睡着，但也深怪他们不来招呼他。他又退一步想道：
Ah Q only found out about this later. He regretted that he fell asleep, but he also blamed them for not greeting him. He took a step back and thought:“难道他们还没有知道我已经投降了革命党么？”
"Don't they know that I have surrendered to the Revolutionary Party?"

阿Q正传

第八章　不准革命

阿Q正传

Chapter 8 No Revolution Allowed未庄的人心日见其安静了。据传来的消息，知道革命党虽然进了城，倒还没有什么大异样。知县大老爷还是原官，不过改称了什么，而且举人老爷也做了什么——这些名目，未庄人都说不明白——官，带兵的也还是先前的老把总。只有一件可怕的事是另有几个不好的革命党夹在里面捣乱，第二天便动手剪辫子，听说那邻村的航船七斤便着了道儿，弄得不像人样子了。但这却还不算大恐怖，因为未庄人本来少上城，即使偶有想进城的，也就立刻变了计，碰不着这危险。阿Q本也想进城去寻他的老朋友，一得这消息，也只得作罢了。
The people of Weizhuang are quieting down day by day. According to the news that came out, although the revolutionary party entered the city, there was nothing unusual. The county magistrate is still the original official, but what was the name changed, and what did the master of the scholars do - these names, the Weizhuang people can't understand - the official, and the leader of the troops is still the previous old general. The only terrible thing was that there were a few other bad revolutionaries in it to make trouble, and the next day they started cutting their braids. But this is not a big horror, because the Weizhuang people originally rarely went to the city, and even if they wanted to enter the city occasionally, they immediately changed their plans and couldn't touch this danger. Ah Q also wanted to go into the city to find his old friend, but as soon as he got the news, he had to give up.但未庄也不能说是无改革。几天之后，将辫子盘在顶上的逐渐增加起来了，早经说过，最先自然是茂才公，其次便是赵司晨和赵白眼，后来是阿Q。倘在夏天，大家将辫子盘在头顶上或者打一个结，本不算什么稀奇事，但现在是暮秋，所以这“秋行夏令”的情形，在盘辫家不能不说是万分的英断，而在未庄也不能说无关于改革了。
But Weizhuang cannot be said to be without reform. A few days later, the braids on the top gradually increased, and as I had said, the first was naturally Mao Caigong, followed by Zhao Sichen and Zhao Baiyan, and later Ah Q. If in the summer, it is not uncommon for everyone to wear braids on the top of their heads or tie a knot, but now it is late autumn, so this situation of "autumn and summer" cannot but be said to be extremely heroic in the braided family, and it cannot be said that it is unrelated to reform in Weizhuang.赵司晨脑后空荡荡的走来，看见的人大嚷说，
Zhao Sichen walked empty behind his head, and the people he saw shouted,“嚄，革命党来了！”
"Oh, the revolutionary party is coming!"阿Q听到了很羡慕。他虽然早知道秀才盘辫的大新闻，但总没有想到自己可以照样做，现在看见赵司晨也如此，才有了学样的意思，定下实行的决心。他用一支竹筷将辫子盘在头顶上，迟疑多时，这才放胆的走去。
Ah Q was very envious when he heard it. Although he had long known the big news of the scholar's braiding, he never thought that he could do the same, and now that he saw Zhao Sichen doing the same, he had the intention of following the example and made up his mind to implement it. He used a bamboo chopstick to coil the braid on top of his head, and after hesitating for a long time, he walked boldly.他在街上走，人也看他，然而不说什么话，阿Q当初很不快，后来便很不平。他近来很容易闹脾气了；其实他的生活，倒也并不比造反之前反艰难，人见他也客气，店铺也不说要现钱。而阿Q总觉得自己太失意：既然革了命，不应该只是这样的。况且有一回看见小D，愈使他气破肚皮了。
He walked on the street, and people looked at him, but he didn't say anything, Ah Q was very unhappy at first, and then he was very unfair. He has been losing his temper easily lately; In fact, his life is not as difficult as before the rebellion, people are polite when they see him, and the store does not say that they want cash. And Ah Q always felt that he was too frustrated: since he was dismissed, it shouldn't be just like this. Moreover, once he saw Xiao D, he was even more angry.小D也将辫子盘在头顶上了，而且也居然用一支竹筷。阿Q万料不到他也敢这样做，自己也决不准他这样做！小D是什么东西呢？他很想即刻揪住他，拗断他的竹筷，放下他的辫子，并且批他几个嘴巴，聊且惩罚他忘了生辰八字，也敢来做革命党的罪。但他终于饶放了，单是怒目而视的吐一口唾沫道“呸！”
Xiao D also put his braids on the top of his head, and he actually used a bamboo chopstick. Ah Q never expected that he would dare to do this, and he would never allow him to do this! What is Xiao D? He wanted to grab him immediately, break his bamboo chopsticks, put down his braids, and slap him a few times, chatting and punishing him for forgetting his birthday and daring to commit the crime of the revolutionary party. But he finally let go, and just spat angrily and said, "Bah! ”这几日里，进城去的只有一个假洋鬼子。赵秀才本也想靠着寄存箱子的渊源，亲身去拜访举人老爷的，但因为有剪辫的危险，所以也就中止了。他写了一封“黄伞格”的信，托假洋鬼子带上城，而且托他给自己绍介绍介，去进自由党。假洋鬼子回来时，向秀才讨还了四块洋钱，秀才便有一块银桃子挂在大襟上了；未庄人都惊服，说这是柿油党的顶子，抵得一个翰林；赵太爷因此也骤然大阔，远过于他儿子初隽秀才的时候，所以目空一切，见了阿Q，也就很有些不放在眼里了。
In the past few days, there has been only one fake foreign devil who has entered the city. Zhao Xiucai also wanted to rely on the origin of the storage box to visit the scholar in person, but because of the danger of cutting the braids, he stopped. He wrote a letter of "Yellow Umbrella Grid", asking a fake foreign devil to take him to the city, and asked him to introduce himself to the Liberal Party. When the fake foreign devil came back, he asked the scholar for four yuan of foreign money, and the scholar had a silver peach hanging on his big collar; The people of Weizhuang were convinced, saying that this was the top of the persimmon oil party, worthy of a Hanlin; As a result, Mrs. Zhao suddenly became wider, far more than when his son Chujun was a scholar, so he was empty of everything, and when he saw Ah Q, he didn't pay attention to it.阿Q正在不平，又时时刻刻感着冷落，一听得这银桃子的传说，他立即悟出自己之所以冷落的原因了：要革命，单说投降，是不行的；盘上辫子，也不行的；第一着仍然要和革命党去结识。他生平所知道的革命党只有两个，城里的一个早已“嚓”的杀掉了，现在只剩了一个假洋鬼子。他除却赶紧去和假洋鬼子商量之外，再没有别的道路了。
As soon as he heard the legend of the silver peach, he immediately realized the reason why he was snubbed: if you want to revolution, you can't just surrender; braids on the plate are not good; First, we still have to get acquainted with the revolutionary party. There were only two revolutionary parties he knew in his life, and one in the city had already been killed, and now only one fake foreign devil remained. He had no other way but to hurry to discuss with the fake foreign devils.钱府的大门正开着，阿Q便怯怯的进去。他一到里面，很吃了惊，只见假洋鬼子正站在院子的中央，一身乌黑的大约是洋衣，身上也挂着一块银桃子，手里是阿Q曾经领教过的棍子，已经留到一尺多长的辫子都拆开了披在肩背上，蓬头散发的像一个刘海仙。对面挺直的站着赵白眼和三个闲人，正在必恭必敬的听说话。
The door of the Qian Mansion was open, and Ah Q entered timidly. As soon as he arrived inside, he was very surprised, only to see the fake foreign devil standing in the center of the yard, dressed in black clothes, with a silver peach hanging on his body, and a stick that Ah Q had once taught in his hand. Standing upright opposite Zhao Baiyan and three idlers, they were listening respectfully.阿Q轻轻的走近了，站在赵白眼的背后，心里想招呼，却不知道怎么说才好：叫他假洋鬼子固然是不行的了，洋人也不妥，革命党也不妥，或者就应该叫洋先生了罢。
Ah Q approached gently, standing behind Zhao Baiyan, wanting to say hello in his heart, but he didn't know how to say it: it is not okay to call him a fake foreign devil, it is not appropriate for foreigners, it is not appropriate for the revolutionary party, or it should be called Mr. Yang.洋先生却没有见他，因为白着眼睛讲得正起劲：
Mr. Yang didn't see him, because he spoke vigorously with white eyes:“我是性急的，所以我们见面，我总是说：洪哥！我们动手罢！他却总说道No！——这是洋话，你们不懂的。否则早已成功了。然而这正是他做事小心的地方。他再三再四的请我上湖北，我还没有肯。谁愿意在这小县城里做事情。……”
"I'm impatient, so when we meet, I always say: Brother Hong! Let's do it! But he always said No! ——This is a foreign language, you don't understand. Otherwise, it would have been successful. However, this is exactly what he is careful about. He repeatedly invited me to Hubei, but I still didn't agree. Who wants to do things in this small county. ……”“唔，……这个……”阿Q候他略停，终于用十二分的勇气开口了，但不知道因为什么，又并不叫他洋先生。
"No,...... This ...... Ah Q paused for a moment, and finally spoke with twelve points of courage, but I don't know why, and he didn't call him Mr. Yang.听着说话的四个人都吃惊的回顾他。洋先生也才看见：
The four people who listened to him all looked at him in surprise. Mr. Yang also saw that:“什么？”
"What?"“我……”
"I ......"“出去！”
"Get out!"“我要投……”
"I want to vote for ......."“滚出去！”洋先生扬起哭丧棒来了。
"Get out!" Mr. Yang raised his mourning stick.赵白眼和闲人们便都吆喝道：“先生叫你滚出去，你还不听么！”
Zhao Baiyan and the idlers shouted: "Sir, you told you to get out, don't you listen!" ”阿Q将手向头上一遮，不自觉的逃出门外；洋先生倒也没有追。他快跑了六十多步，这才慢慢的走，于是心里便涌起了忧愁：洋先生不准他革命，他再没有别的路；从此决不能望有白盔白甲的人来叫他，他所有的抱负，志向，希望，前程，全被一笔勾销了。至于闲人们传扬开去，给小D王胡等辈笑话，倒是还在其次的事。
Ah Q covered his head and escaped out of the door unconsciously; Mr. Yang didn't chase after him. He ran more than sixty steps quickly, and then walked slowly, so sorrow surged in his heart: Mr. Yang did not allow him to revolutionize, and he had no other way; From now on, he must not expect people in white helmets and white armor to call him, and all his ambitions, ambitions, hopes, and futures have been written off. As for the idlers spreading the word and making jokes to Xiao D Wang Hu and others, it is still a matter of secondary.他似乎从来没有经验过这样的无聊。他对于自己的盘辫子，仿佛也觉得无意味，要侮蔑；为报仇起见，很想立刻放下辫子来，但也没有竟放。他游到夜间，赊了两碗酒，喝下肚去，渐渐的高兴起来了，思想里才又出现白盔白甲的碎片。
He seemed to have never experienced such boredom. He seemed to feel meaningless about his braids, and he wanted to insult them; For the sake of revenge, I really wanted to put down the braid immediately, but I didn't let it go. He swam into the night, took two bowls of wine on credit, drank it, and gradually became happy, and fragments of white helmets and white armor appeared in his thoughts.有一天，他照例的混到夜深，待酒店要关门，才踱回土谷祠去。
One day, he stayed up late at night as usual, and when the hotel was about to close, he paced back to the Tugu Shrine.拍，吧！～～
Shoot, let's do it! ～～他忽而听得一种异样的声音，又不是爆竹。阿Q本来是爱看热闹，爱管闲事的，便在暗中直寻过去。似乎前面有些脚步声；他正听，猛然间一个人从对面逃来了。阿Q一看见，便赶紧翻身跟着逃。那人转弯，阿Q也转弯，既转弯，那人站住了，阿Q也站住。他看后面并无什么，看那人便是小D。
He suddenly heard a strange sound, and it was not a firecracker. Ah Q originally loved to watch the excitement and meddle in his own affairs, so he secretly searched for the past. There seemed to be some footsteps ahead; He was listening when suddenly a person fled from the opposite side. As soon as Ah Q saw it, he quickly turned over and ran away. The man turned, Ah Q also turned, and after the turn, the man stopped, and Ah Q also stopped. He looked at nothing behind him, and the person was Xiao D.“什么？”阿Q不平起来了。
"What?" Ah Q became upset.“赵……赵家遭抢了！”小D气喘吁吁的说。
"Zhao ...... The Zhao family was robbed! Xiao D said panting.阿Q的心怦怦的跳了。小D说了便走；阿Q却逃而又停的两三回。但他究竟是做过“这路生意”的人，格外胆大，于是出路角，仔细的听，似乎有些嚷嚷，又仔细的看，似乎许多白盔白甲的人，络绎的将箱子抬出了，器具抬出了，秀才娘子的宁式床也抬出了，但是不分明，他还想上前，两只脚却没有动。
Ah Q's heart was pounding. Xiao D said and left; Ah Q ran away and stopped two or three times. But he was a person who had done "this business", and he was particularly bold, so he went out of the corner, listened carefully, seemed to be a little shouting, and looked closely, it seemed that many people in white helmets and white armor carried out the boxes, the utensils were carried out, and the Ning-style bed of the scholar's wife was also lifted, but it was not clear, he still wanted to step forward, but his feet did not move.这一夜没有月，未庄在黑暗里很寂静，寂静到像羲皇时候一般太平。阿Q站着看到自己发烦，也似乎还是先前一样，在那里来来往往的搬，箱子抬出了，器具抬出了，秀才娘子的宁式床也抬出了，……抬得他自己有些不信他的眼睛了。但他决计不再上前，却回到自己的祠里去了。
There was no moon on this night, and Weizhuang was very silent in the darkness, so quiet that it was as peaceful as Xihuang's time. Ah Q stood and saw that he was annoyed, and it seemed to be the same as before, moving back and forth there, the box was carried out, the utensils were carried out, and the Ning-style bed of the scholar's wife was also carried out,...... He raised his own eyes a little disbelieving in his eyes. But he decided not to step forward, but returned to his ancestral hall.土谷祠里更漆黑；他关好大门，摸进自己的屋子里。他躺了好一会，这才定了神，而且发出关于自己的思想来：白盔白甲的人明明到了，并不来打招呼，搬了许多好东西，又没有自己的份，——这全是假洋鬼子可恶，不准我造反，否则，这次何至于没有我的份呢？阿Q越想越气，终于禁不住满心痛恨起来，毒毒的点一点头：“不准我造反，只准你造反？妈妈的假洋鬼子，——好，你造反！造反是杀头的罪名呵，我总要告一状，看你抓进县里去杀头，——满门抄斩，——嚓！嚓！”
It was even darker in the Tugu Shrine; He closed the door and reached into his room. He lay down for a while, then calmed down, and sent out his thoughts about himself: The people in white helmets and white armor obviously arrived, but they didn't come to say hello, they moved a lot of good things, and they didn't have their own share,—— these are all fake foreign devils, and I was not allowed to rebel, otherwise, why didn't I have my share this time? The more Ah Q thought about it, the more angry he became, and finally couldn't help but be full of hatred, and nodded poisonously: "Don't let me rebel, only allow you to rebel?" Mom's fake foreign devil,—— Okay, you rebel!" Rebellion is the crime of beheading, I always have to sue you, see if you catch the county to kill the head,—— the whole house is ,—— beheaded! Cha! ”

阿Q正传

第九章　大团圆

阿Q正传

Chapter 9 The Great Reunion赵家遭抢之后，未庄人大抵很快意而且恐慌，阿Q也很快意而且恐慌。但四天之后，阿Q在半夜里忽被抓进县城里去了。那时恰是暗夜，一队兵，一队团丁，一队警察，五个侦探，悄悄地到了未庄，乘昏暗围住土谷祠，正对门架好机关枪；然而阿Q不冲出。许多时没有动静，把总焦急起来了，悬了二十千的赏，才有两个团丁冒了险，垣进去，里应外合，一拥而入，将阿Q抓出来；直待擒出祠外面的机关枪左近，他才有些清醒了。
After the Zhao family was robbed, the Weizhuang people were probably very happy and panicked, and Ah Q was also very happy and panicked. But four days later, Ah Q was suddenly caught in the county seat in the middle of the night. It was a dark night, and a team of soldiers, a team of regimental soldiers, a team of policemen, and five detectives quietly arrived at Weizhuang, surrounded the Tugu Shrine in the dark, and set up machine guns in front of the gate; However, Ah Q did not rush out. There was no movement for many times, and the general became anxious, and a reward of 20,000 was hung, and only then did two regiment soldiers take risks, walled in, and should be combined inside and outside, rushing in and arresting Ah Q; It wasn't until he got out of the machine gun outside the shrine that he was a little sober.到进城，已经是正午，阿Q见自己被搀进一所破衙门，转了五六个弯，便推在一间小屋里。他刚刚一跄踉，那用整株的木料做成的栅栏门便跟着他的脚跟阖上了，其余的三面都是墙壁，仔细看时，屋角上还有两个人。
When he entered the city, it was already noon, and Ah Q saw that he was pushed into a broken yamen, turned five or six corners, and pushed into a hut. He had just stumbled when the fence door made of the whole tree closed with his heels, and the other three sides were walls, and when he looked closely, there were two people on the corner of the house.阿Q虽然有些忐忑，却并不很苦闷，因为他那土谷祠里的卧室，也并没有比这间屋子更高明。那两个也仿佛是乡下人，渐渐和他兜搭起来了，一个说是举人老爷要追他祖父欠下来的陈租，一个不知道为了什么事。他们问阿Q，阿Q爽利的答道，“因为我想造反。”
Although Ah Q was a little apprehensive, he was not very distressed, because his bedroom in the Tugu Shrine was not more intelligent than this room. Those two also seemed to be countrymen, and gradually got along with him, one said that the scholar wanted to chase the old rent owed by his grandfather, and the other didn't know what it was for. They asked Ah Q, and Ah Q replied cheerfully, "Because I want to rebel." ”他下半天便又被抓出栅栏门去了，到得大堂，上面坐着一个满头剃得精光的老头子。阿Q疑心他是和尚，但看见下面站着一排兵，两旁又站着十几个长衫人物，也有满头剃得精光像这老头子的，也有将一尺来长的头发披在背后像那假洋鬼子的，都是一脸横肉，怒目而视的看他；他便知道这人一定有些来历，膝关节立刻自然而然的宽松，便跪了下去了。
He was caught out of the fence gate again in the second half of the day, and when he arrived at the lobby, there was an old man with a shaved head sitting on it. Ah Q suspected that he was a monk, but he saw a row of soldiers standing below, and more than a dozen figures in long robes standing on both sides, some with shaved heads like this old man, and some with hair about a foot long behind their backs like the fake foreign devil, all of whom looked at him with a horizontal face and angry eyes; He knew that this person must have some origin, and his knee joints immediately relaxed naturally, and he knelt down.“站着说！不要跪！”长衫人物都吆喝说。
"Stand and say! Don't kneel! The people in the long robe shouted.阿Q虽然似乎懂得，但总觉得站不住，身不由己的蹲了下去，而且终于趁势改为跪下了。
Although Ah Q seemed to understand, he always felt that he couldn't stand still, so he couldn't help but squat down, and finally took advantage of the situation to kneel down.“奴隶性！……”长衫人物又鄙夷似的说，但也没有叫他起来。
"Slavery! ......" The man in the long shirt said contemptuously, but did not ask him to get up.“你从实招来罢，免得吃苦。我早都知道了。招了可以放你。”那光头的老头子看定了阿Q的脸，沉静的清楚的说。
"You recruit from the truth, so as not to suffer. I already knew. If you are recruited, you can be released. The bald old man looked at Ah Q's face and said calmly and clearly.“招罢！”长衫人物也大声说。
"Recruit!" The figure in the long shirt also said loudly.“我本来要……来投……”阿Q胡里胡涂的想了一通，这才断断续续的说。
"I was going to ...... Come and ......" Ah Q thought about it foolishly, and then said intermittently.“那么，为什么不来的呢？”老头子和气的问。
"So, why didn't you come?" The old man asked kindly.“假洋鬼子不准我！”
"Fake foreign devils don't allow me!"“胡说！此刻说，也迟了。现在你的同党在那里？”
"Nonsense! At this moment, it is too late. Where are your comrades now? ”“什么？……”
"What? ……”“那一晚打劫赵家的一伙人。”
"The group that robbed the Zhao family that night."“他们没有来叫我。他们自己搬走了。”阿Q提起来便愤愤。
"They didn't come to call me. They moved away on their own. Ah Q was indignant when he mentioned it.“走到那里去了呢？说出来便放你了。”老头子更和气了。
"Where did you go? If you say it, I'll let you go. The old man became more amiable.“我不知道，……他们没有来叫我……”
"I don't know,...... They didn't come to call me......"然而老头子使了一个眼色，阿Q便又被抓进栅栏门里了。他第二次抓出栅栏门，是第二天的上午。
However, the old man winked, and Ah Q was caught in the fence gate again. The second time he grabbed the fence gate was the next morning.大堂的情形都照旧。上面仍然坐着光头的老头子，阿Q也仍然下了跪。
The lobby is as usual. There was still a bald old man sitting on it, and Ah Q was still kneeling.老头子和气的问道，“你还有什么话说么？”
The old man asked kindly, "Do you have anything else to say?" ”阿Q一想，没有话，便回答说，“没有。”
Ah Q thought about it, but had nothing to say, so he replied, "No." ”于是一个长衫人物拿了一张纸，并一支笔送到阿Q的面前，要将笔塞在他手里。阿Q这时很吃惊，几乎“魂飞魄散”了：因为他的手和笔相关，这回是初次。他正不知怎样拿；那人却又指着一处地方教他画花押。
So a man in a long shirt took a piece of paper and sent a pen to Ah Q, asking him to stuff the pen in his hand. Ah Q was very surprised at this time, almost "lost his soul": because his hand was related to the pen, this was the first time. He didn't know how to take it; The man pointed to a place to teach him to draw flower bets.“我……我……不认得字。”阿Q一把抓住了笔，惶恐而且惭愧的说。
"I...... I...... I can't recognize the words. Ah Q grabbed the pen and said fearfully and ashamedly.“那么，便宜你，画一个圆圈！”
"Then, cheap for you, draw a circle!"阿Q要画圆圈了，那手捏着笔却只是抖。于是那人替他将纸铺在地上，阿Q伏下去，使尽了平生的力画圆圈。他生怕被人笑话，立志要画得圆，但这可恶的笔不但很沉重，并且不听话，刚刚一抖一抖的几乎要合缝，却又向外一耸，画成瓜子模样了。
Ah Q was about to draw a circle, but his hand was holding the pen but just shaking. So the man spread the paper on the ground for him, and Ah Q lay down and drew circles with all his life. He was afraid of being laughed at and was determined to draw a circle, but this hateful pen was not only very heavy, but also disobedient, and it was almost closed when it just shook and shook, but it shrugged outward and painted it in the shape of a melon seed.阿Q正羞愧自己画得不圆，那人却不计较，早已掣了纸笔去，许多人又将他第二次抓进栅栏门。
Ah Q was ashamed that he didn't draw roundly, but the man didn't care, he had already pulled the paper and pen away, and many people grabbed him into the fence door for the second time.他第二次进了栅栏，倒也并不十分懊恼。他以为人生天地之间，大约本来有时要抓进抓出，有时要在纸上画圆圈的，惟有圈而不圆，却是他“行状”上的一个污点。但不多时也就释然了，他想：孙子才画得很圆的圆圈呢。于是他睡着了。
He entered the fence for the second time, but he was not very upset. He thought that between heaven and earth in life, he probably had to grab in and out sometimes, and sometimes he had to draw circles on paper, but only the circle was not round, but it was a stain on his "line". But soon he was relieved, he thought: The grandson just drew a very round circle. So he fell asleep.然而这一夜，举人老爷反而不能睡：他和把总呕了气了。举人老爷主张第一要追赃，把总主张第一要示众。把总近来很不将举人老爷放在眼里了，拍案打凳的说道，“惩一儆百！你看，我做革命党还不上二十天，抢案就是十几件，全不破案，我的面子在那里？破了案，你又来迂。不成！这是我管的！”举人老爷窘急了，然而还坚持，说是倘若不追赃，他便立刻辞了帮办民政的职务。而把总却道，“请便罢！”于是举人老爷在这一夜竟没有睡，但幸而第二天倒也没有辞。
However, this night, the scholar could not sleep: he and the captain vomited. The master of the scholar advocates the first to recover the stolen goods, and the general advocates the first to show the public. The general has not taken the scholar master seriously recently, and said slammingly, "Punish one and set an example!" You see, I have been a revolutionary party for less than 20 days, and there are more than a dozen robbery cases, and I don't solve any of them, where is my face? After solving the case, you are here again. Not! This is my control! The scholar was embarrassed, but he still insisted, saying that if he did not recover the stolen goods, he immediately resigned from his position as assistant in civil affairs. But the captain said, "Please!" So the scholar didn't sleep that night, but fortunately he didn't say anything the next day.阿Q第三次抓出栅栏门的时候，便是举人老爷睡不着的那一夜的明天的上午了。他到了大堂，上面还坐着照例的光头老头子；阿Q也照例的下了跪。
When Ah Q grabbed the fence door for the third time, it was tomorrow morning, the night when Master Juren couldn't sleep. When he arrived at the lobby, there was still a bald old man sitting on it; Ah Q also knelt down as usual.老头子很和气的问道，“你还有什么话么？”
The old man asked kindly, "Do you have anything else to say?" ”阿Q一想，没有话，便回答说，“没有。”
Ah Q thought about it, but had nothing to say, so he replied, "No." ”许多长衫和短衫人物，忽然给他穿上一件洋布的白背心，上面有些黑字。阿Q很气苦：因为这很像是带孝，而带孝是晦气的。然而同时他的两手反缚了，同时又被一直抓出衙门外去了。
Many figures in long and short shirts suddenly put on a white vest made of foreign cloth with some black letters on it. Ah Q is very angry: Because this is very similar to filial piety, and filial piety is bad luck. However, at the same time, his hands were tied back, and at the same time, he was caught out of the yamen.阿Q被抬上了一辆没有篷的车，几个短衣人物也和他同坐在一处。这车立刻走动了，前面是一班背着洋炮的兵们和团丁，两旁是许多张着嘴的看客，后面怎样，阿Q没有见。但他突然觉到了：这岂不是去杀头么？他一急，两眼发黑，耳朵里喤的一声，似乎发昏了。然而他又没有全发昏，有时虽然着急，有时却也泰然；他意思之间，似乎觉得人生天地间，大约本来有时也未免要杀头的。
Ah Q was carried into a car without a canopy, and several people in short clothes sat with him. The car immediately moved around, in front of it was a group of soldiers and regiments carrying foreign artillery, and on both sides were many spectators with open mouths. But he suddenly realized: Isn't this going to kill the head? He was anxious, his eyes darkened, and his ears crackled, as if he was fainting. However, he was not completely dazed, sometimes anxious, sometimes calm; Between his meanings, he seemed to feel that in the world of life, it was inevitable that he would be killed sometimes.他还认得路，于是有些诧异了：怎么不向着法场走呢？他不知道这是在游街，在示众。但即使知道也一样，他不过便以为人生天地间，大约本来有时也未免要游街要示众罢了。
He still recognized the way, so he was a little surprised: Why don't you go towards the Dharma field? He didn't know that he was parading the streets, showing the public. But even if he knew it, he just thought that life was a world, and it was inevitable that he would sometimes have to parade the streets to show the public.他省悟了，这是绕到法场去的路，这一定是“嚓”的去杀头。他惘惘的向左右看，全跟着马蚁似的人，而在无意中，却在路旁的人丛中发见了一个吴妈。很久违，伊原来在城里做工了。阿Q忽然很羞愧自己没志气：竟没有唱几句戏。他的思想仿佛旋风似的在脑里一回旋：《小孤孀上坟》欠堂皇，《龙虎斗》里的“悔不该……”也太乏，还是“手执钢鞭将你打”罢。他同时想将手一扬，才记得这两手原来都捆着，于是“手执钢鞭”也不唱了。
He realized that this was the way around the Dharma field, and this must be a "slap" to kill the head. He looked left and right in a daze, all following people like horses and ants, but inadvertently, he found a Wu mother in the crowd on the side of the road. After a long time, Yi Yuan was working in the city. Ah Q was suddenly ashamed that he had no ambition: he didn't sing a few lines. His thoughts swirled in his mind like a whirlwind: "The Little Widow Goes to the Grave" is not grand, and the "regret should not be ......" in "Dragon and Tiger Fight" is too lacking, or "holding a steel whip to beat you". He wanted to raise his hand at the same time, only to remember that both hands were originally tied, so he stopped singing "holding a steel whip in his hand".“过了二十年又是一个……”阿Q在百忙中，“无师自通”的说出半句从来不说的话。
"Twenty years later, it's another ......" Ah Q was busy, "without a teacher" to say half a sentence that he never said.“好！！！”从人丛里，便发出豺狼的嗥叫一般的声音来。
"Good !!" From the crowd, there was a sound like the howl of a jackal.车子不住的前行，阿Q在喝采声中，轮转眼睛去看吴妈，似乎伊一向并没有见他，却只是出神的看着兵们背上的洋炮。
The car kept moving forward, Ah Q was cheering, turning his eyes to look at Wu Ma, it seemed that Yi had never seen him, but he was just looking at the foreign cannons on the backs of the soldiers.阿Q于是再看那些喝采的人们。
Ah Q then looked at the cheering people again.这刹那中，他的思想又仿佛旋风似的在脑里一回旋了。四年之前，他曾在山脚下遇见一只饿狼，永是不近不远的跟定他，要吃他的肉。他那时吓得几乎要死，幸而手里有一柄斫柴刀，才得仗这壮了胆，支持到未庄；可是永远记得那狼眼睛，又凶又怯，闪闪的像两颗鬼火，似乎远远的来穿透了他的皮肉。而这回他又看见从来没有见过的更可怕的眼睛了，又钝又锋利，不但已经咀嚼了他的话，并且还要咀嚼他皮肉以外的东西，永是不近不远的跟他走。
In this moment, his thoughts swirled in his mind like a whirlwind. Four years ago, he met a hungry wolf at the foot of the mountain, and he would never follow him near or far to eat his meat. He was so frightened that he almost died, but fortunately he had a wood-chopping knife in his hand, so he had to rely on this courage to support Weizhuang; But I will always remember the wolf's eyes, fierce and timid, shining like two ghost fires, as if they were penetrating his flesh and skin from afar. And this time he saw more terrifying eyes than he had ever seen before, dull and sharp, not only had chewed his words, but also chewed on things other than his flesh and skin, never near or far with him.这些眼睛们似乎连成一气，已经在那里咬他的灵魂。
The eyes seemed to be connected and were already there to bite his soul.“救命，……”
"Help,......然而阿Q没有说。他早就两眼发黑，耳朵里嗡的一声，觉得全身仿佛微尘似的迸散了。
However, Ah Q did not say. His eyes had already darkened, and his ears buzzed, and he felt that his whole body seemed to burst out like dust.
至于当时的影响，最大的倒反在举人老爷，因为终于没有追赃，他全家都号咷了。其次是赵府，非特秀才因为上城去报官，被不好的革命党剪了辫子，而且又破费了二十千的赏钱，所以全家也号了。从这一天以来，他们便渐渐的都发生了遗老的气味。
As for the influence at that time, the biggest rebellion was in the master of the juren, because he finally did not recover the stolen goods, and his whole family cried out. The second is the Zhao Mansion, not only the scholar was cut by the bad revolutionary party because he went to the city to report to the officials, and he spent 20,000 yuan on the reward, so the whole family also called out. From this day on, they gradually smelled of old age.
至于舆论，在未庄是无异议，自然都说阿Q坏，被枪毙便是他的坏的证据；不坏又何至于被枪毙呢？而城里的舆论却不佳，他们多半不满足，以为枪毙并无杀头这般好看；而且那是怎样的一个可笑的死囚呵，游了那么久的街，竟没有唱一句戏：他们白跟一趟了。
As for public opinion, there is no objection in Weizhuang, naturally they all say that Ah Q is bad, and being shot is evidence of his badness; If it's not bad, why should it be shot? However, the public opinion in the city is not good, and most of them are not satisfied, thinking that shooting is not as good as beheading; And what kind of ridiculous death row inmate was that, after swimming on the streets for so long, he didn't sing a play: they followed him in vain.一九二一年十二月。
December 1921.

端午节

端午节

端午节

dragon boat festival方玄绰近来爱说“差不多”这一句话，几乎成了“口头禅”似的；而且不但说，的确也盘据在他脑里了。他最初说的是“都一样”，后来大约觉得欠稳当了，便改为“差不多”，一直使用到现在。
Henry Fang has recently liked to say the phrase "almost", which has almost become a "mantra"; And not only that, but it was indeed in his mind. He initially said "all the same", but later felt that it was unstable, so he changed it to "almost", and has been used until now.他自从发见了这一句平凡的警句以后，虽然引起了不少的新感慨，同时却也得到许多新慰安。譬如看见老辈威压青年，在先是要愤愤的，但现在却就转念道，将来这少年有了儿孙时，大抵也要摆这架子的罢，便再没有什么不平了。又如看见兵士打车夫，在先也要愤愤的，但现在也就转念道，倘使这车夫当了兵，这兵拉了车，大抵也就这么打，便再也不放在心上了。他这样想着的时候，有时也疑心是因为自己没有和恶社会奋斗的勇气，所以瞒心昧己的故意造出来的一条逃路，很近于“无是非之心”，远不如改正了好。然而这意见，总反而在他脑里生长起来。
Since he discovered this ordinary aphorism, although he has aroused a lot of new emotions, he has also received a lot of new comfort. For example, when he saw the elders oppressing the young man, he was indignant at first, but now he changed his mind and said that when the young man has children and grandchildren in the future, he will probably put on this shelf, and there will be no more injustice. If you see a soldier hitting a coachman, you will be indignant at first, but now you will change your mind, if this coachman becomes a soldier, this soldier pulls the car, and he will probably fight like this, and he will never take it to heart again. When he thinks like this, he sometimes suspects that it is because he does not have the courage to fight against the evil society, so he deliberately created an escape route by hiding his heart and ignoring himself, which is very close to "no right and wrong", and it is far better to correct it. However, this opinion always grew in his mind.他将这“差不多说”最初公表的时候是在北京首善学校的讲堂上，其时大概是提起关于历史上的事情来，于是说到“古今人不相远”，说到各色人等的“性相近”，终于牵扯到学生和官僚身上，大发其议论道：
When he first announced this "almost" in the lecture hall of Beijing Shoushan School, he probably mentioned things in history, so he said that "ancient and modern people are not far apart", and when he talked about the "sexual similarity" of all kinds of people, he finally involved students and bureaucrats, and made a big fuss:“现在社会上时髦的都通行骂官僚，而学生骂得尤利害。然而官僚并不是天生的特别种族，就是平民变就的。现在学生出身的官僚就不少，和老官僚有什么两样呢？‘易地则皆然’，思想言论举动丰采都没有什么大区别……便是学生团体新办的许多事业，不是也已经难免出弊病，大半烟消火灭了么？差不多的。但中国将来之可虑就在此……”
"Nowadays, it is fashionable in society to scold bureaucrats, and students are particularly vicious. However, bureaucrats are not born with a special race, they are made by civilians. Now there are many bureaucrats from students, what is the difference between them and old bureaucrats? 'The same is true for changing places', and there is no big difference in thoughts, remarks and actions...... It is the many new undertaking of the student body, and it is inevitable that there will be problems, and most of them have been extinguished? Almost. But China's future is worrying about this......"散坐在讲堂里的二十多个听讲者，有的怅然了，或者是以为这话对；有的勃然了，大约是以为侮辱了神圣的青年；有几个却对他微笑了，大约以为这是他替自己的辩解：因为方玄绰就是兼做官僚的。
Some of the more than 20 listeners scattered in the lecture hall were stunned, or thought this was right; some were furious, probably thinking that they had insulted the holy youth; A few smiled at him, probably thinking that this was his justification for himself: because Fang Xuanchuo was also a bureaucrat.而其实却是都错误。这不过是他的一种新不平；虽说不平，又只是他的一种安分的空论。他自己虽然不知道是因为懒，还是因为无用，总之觉得是一个不肯运动，十分安分守己的人。总长冤他有神经病，只要地位还不至于动摇，他决不开一开口；教员的薪水欠到大半年了，只要别有官俸支持，他也决不开一开口。不但不开口，当教员联合索薪的时候，他还暗地里以为欠斟酌，太嚷嚷；直到听得同寮过分的奚落他们了，这才略有些小感慨，后来一转念，这或者因为自己正缺钱，而别的官并不兼做教员的缘故罢，于是也就释然了。
But in fact, it is all wrong. This is just a new injustice for him; Although it is unfair, it is just an empty theory of his peace. Although he himself didn't know if it was because of laziness or uselessness, in short, he felt that he was a person who refused to exercise and kept to himself. The chief complained that he had a mental illness, and as long as his status was not shaken, he would never open his mouth; The instructor's salary has been owed for more than half a year, and as long as he has no official salary support, he will never open his mouth. Not only did he not speak, but when the teachers jointly demanded salaries, he secretly thought that he was not considerate and too shouting; It wasn't until I heard my colleagues ridicule them excessively, that I felt a little emotional, and then I changed my mind, maybe because I was short of money, and other officials didn't also serve as teachers, so I was relieved.他虽然也缺钱，但从没有加入教员的团体内，大家议决罢课，可是不去上课了。政府说“上了课才给钱”，他才略恨他们的类乎用果子耍猴子；一个大教育家说道“教员一手挟书包一手要钱不高尚”，他才对于他的太太正式的发牢骚了。
Although he was also short of money, he never joined the faculty group, and everyone decided to go on strike, but he stopped going to class. The government said that "you will only give money after taking classes", so he hates them for playing monkeys with fruit; A great educator said, "It is not noble for a teacher to ask for money with a schoolbag in one hand and a hand", and he officially complained to his wife.“喂，怎么只有两盘？”听了“不高尚说”这一日的晚餐时候，他看着菜蔬说。
"Hey, why are there only two plates?" After listening to "Not Noble Saying" at dinner that day, he looked at the vegetables and said.他们是没有受过新教育的，太太并无学名或雅号，所以也就没有什么称呼了，照老例虽然也可以叫“太太”，但他又不愿意太守旧，于是就发明了一个“喂”字。太太对他却连“喂”字也没有，只要脸向着他说话，依据习惯法，他就知道这话是对他而发的。
They have no new education, and the wife has no scientific name or elegant name, so there is no name, although it can also be called "wife" according to the old practice, but he does not want to be old, so he invented the word "feed". The wife did not even say "hey" to him, as long as he spoke to him with his face, according to customary law, he knew that it was addressed to him.“可是上月领来的一成半都完了……昨天的米，也还是好容易才赊来的呢。”伊站在桌旁，脸对着他说。
"But the 10% and a half I received last month was finished...... Yesterday's rice was still easy to get on credit. Yi stood at the table and turned his face to him.“你看，还说教书的要薪水是卑鄙哩。这种东西似乎连人要吃饭，饭要米做，米要钱买这一点粗浅事情都不知道……”
"You see, it's despicable to say that teaching people ask for a salary. This kind of thing seems to not even know the superficial things that people want to eat, rice is cooked, and rice is paid for......"“对啦。没有钱怎么买米，没有米怎么煮……”
"That's right. How to buy rice without money, how to cook rice without rice......"他两颊都鼓起来了，仿佛气恼这答案正和他的议论“差不多”，近乎随声附和模样；接着便将头转向别一面去了，依据习惯法，这是宣告讨论中止的表示。
His cheeks bulged, as if he was annoyed that the answer was "almost" to his discussion, almost echoing the sound; Then he turned his head to the other side, which according to customary law was a sign of the suspension of discussion.待到凄风冷雨这一天，教员们因为向政府去索欠薪，在新华门前烂泥里被国军打得头破血出之后，倒居然也发了一点薪水。方玄绰不费一举手之劳的领了钱，酌还些旧债，却还缺一大笔款，这是因为官俸也颇有些拖欠了。当是时，便是廉吏清官们也渐以为薪之不可不索，而况兼做教员的方玄绰，自然更表同情于学界起来，所以大家主张继续罢课的时候，他虽然仍未到场，事后却尤其心悦诚服的确守了公共的决议。
On this day of cold and rain, the teachers were beaten to the head by the national army in the mud in front of Xinhua Gate because they asked the government for unpaid wages, but they actually paid a little salary. Henry Fang took the money without any effort, and paid off some old debts, but he was still short of a large amount of money, because the official salary was also quite arrear. At that time, even the honest officials and honest officials gradually thought that the salary must be asked, and Fang Xuanchuo, who was also a teacher, naturally showed more sympathy for the academic community, so when everyone advocated continuing the strike, although he was not present, he was especially happy afterwards and did abide by the public resolution.然而政府竟又付钱，学校也就开课了。但在前几天，却有学生总会上一个呈文给政府，说“教员倘若不上课，便不要付欠薪。”这虽然并无效，而方玄绰却忽而记起前回政府所说的“上了课才给钱”的话来，“差不多”这一个影子在他眼前又一幌，而且并不消灭，于是他便在讲堂上公表了。
However, the government paid again, and the school opened. But a few days ago, a student union submitted a document to the government, saying, "If teachers do not attend classes, they should not pay unpaid wages." Although this was ineffective, Henry Fang suddenly remembered what he had said in the previous government that "pay only after class", and the shadow of "almost" was in front of his eyes, and it was not eliminated, so he announced it in the lecture hall.准此，可见如果将“差不多说”锻炼罗织起来，自然也可以判作一种挟带私心的不平，但总不能说是专为自己做官的辩解。只是每到这些时，他又常常喜欢拉上中国将来的命运之类的问题，一不小心，便连自己也以为是一个忧国的志士：人们是每苦于没有“自知之明”的。
Based on this, it can be seen that if the "almost said" exercise is woven up, it can naturally be judged as a kind of selfish injustice, but it cannot be said that it is a justification for being an official for oneself. It's just that at these times, he often likes to pull up questions such as China's future fate, and if he is not careful, even he thinks he is a man who cares about the country: people often suffer from not having "self-knowledge".但是“差不多”的事实又发生了，政府当初虽只不理那些招人头痛的教员，后来竟不理到无关痛痒的官吏，欠而又欠，终于逼得先前鄙薄教员要钱的好官，也很有几员化为索薪大会里的骁将了。惟有几种日报上却很发了些鄙薄讥笑他们的文字。方玄绰也毫不为奇，毫不介意，因为他根据了他的“差不多说”，知道这是新闻记者还未缺少润笔的缘故，万一政府或是阔人停了津贴，他们多半也要开大会的。
But the "almost" fact happened again, although the government only ignored the instructors who caused headaches, but later ignored the innocuous officials, owed and owed again, and finally forced the good officials who had previously despised the teachers to ask for money, and many of them turned into brave generals in the salary conference. Only a few daily newspapers published some words that were contemptuous and ridiculed them. Henry Fang was not surprised and didn't mind, because according to his "almost said", he knew that this was because the news reporters had not yet lacked pens, and in case the government or the broad people stopped the allowance, they would most likely have to hold a conference.他既已表同情于教员的索薪，自然也赞成同寮的索俸，然而他仍然安坐在衙门中，照例的并不一同去讨债。至于有人疑心他孤高，那可也不过是一种误解罢了。他自己说，他是自从出世以来，只有人向他来要债，他从没有向人去讨过债，所以这一端是“非其所长”。而且他最不敢见手握经济之权的人物，这种人待到失了权势之后，捧着一本《大乘起信论》讲佛学的时候，固然也很是“蔼然可亲”的了，但还在宝座上时，却总是一副阎王脸，将别人都当奴才看，自以为手操着你们这些穷小子们的生杀之权。他因此不敢见，也不愿见他们。这种脾气，虽然有时连自己也觉得是孤高，但往往同时也疑心这其实是没本领。
He had expressed sympathy for the teacher's salary claim, and naturally agreed with the salary claim of his colleagues, but he still sat in the yamen and did not go to collect debts together as usual. As for some people suspecting that he is arrogant, it is just a misunderstanding. He himself said that since he was born, only people have come to him to ask for debts, and he has never asked anyone to collect debts, so this end is "not his strength". And he dares not see the person who holds the power of the economy the most, this kind of person is also very "amiable" when he holds a copy of the "Mahayana Theory of Faith" and lectures on Buddhism after losing power, but when he is still on the throne, he always has the face of Yama, treating others as slaves, thinking that he holds the power of life and death for you poor boys. Therefore he did not dare to see them, nor did he want to see them. This kind of temper, although sometimes even I feel that I am lonely, but at the same time, I often suspect that this is actually incompetent.大家左索右索，总算一节一节的挨过去了，但比起先前来，方玄绰究竟是万分的拮据，所以使用的小厮和交易的店家不消说，便是方太太对于他也渐渐的缺了敬意，只要看伊近来不很附和，而且常常提出独创的意见，有些唐突的举动，也就可以了然了。到了阴历五月初四的午前，他一回来，伊便将一叠账单塞在他的鼻子跟前，这也是往常所没有的。
Everyone searched left and right, and finally passed by section by section, but compared to before, Henry Fang was extremely tight, so it goes without saying that the small servant used and the store that traded with him gradually lacked respect, as long as it was seen that Yi had not been very agreeable recently, and often put forward original opinions, some abrupt actions, it would be clear. At noon on the fourth day of the fifth lunar month, as soon as he returned, Yi stuffed a stack of bills in front of his nose, which was also unusual.“一总总得一百八十块钱才够开消……发了么？”伊并不对着他看的说。
"It takes a total of 180 yuan to dispense...... Did you send it? He didn't say to him.“哼，我明天不做官了。钱的支票是领来的了，可是索薪大会的代表不发放，先说是没有同去的人都不发，后来又说是要到他们跟前去亲领。他们今天单捏着支票，就变了阎王脸了，我实在怕看见……我钱也不要了，官也不做了，这样无限量的卑屈……”
"Hmph, I won't be an official tomorrow. The check for the money was received, but the representatives of the salary meeting did not issue it, first saying that it was not distributed to anyone who did not go with them, and then saying that it was going to them to collect it in person. They just squeezed the check today, and their faces changed into Yama, and I was really afraid to see it...... I don't want money anymore, and I don't want to be an official, so it's an infinite amount of humiliation......"方太太见了这少见的义愤，倒有些愕然了，但也就沉静下来。
Mrs. Fang was a little stunned when she saw this rare righteous indignation, but she calmed down.“我想，还不如去亲领罢，这算什么呢。”伊看着他的脸说。
"I think, it's better to get it in person, what is this?" He looked at his face and said.“我不去！这是官俸，不是赏钱，照例应该由会计科送来的。”
"I'm not going! This is an official salary, not a reward, and should be sent by the accounting department as usual. ”“可是不送来又怎么好呢……哦，昨夜忘记说了，孩子们说那学费，学校里已经催过好几次了，说是倘若再不缴……”
"But what's the good if you don't send it...... Oh, I forgot to say it last night, the children said that the tuition fee has been urged several times in the school, saying that if it is not paid again......“胡说！做老子的办事教书都不给钱，儿子去念几句书倒要钱？”
"Nonsense! I don't give money to do Lao Tzu's affairs and teach, but my son wants money to read a few words? ”伊觉得他已经不很顾忌道理，似乎就要将自己当作校长来出气，犯不上，便不再言语了。
Yi felt that he was no longer very scrupulous about reason, and seemed to be going to use himself as the principal to vent his anger.两个默默的吃了午饭。他想了一会，又懊恼的出去了。
The two had lunch silently. He thought for a while, and then went out in annoyance.照旧例，近年是每逢节根或年关的前一天，他一定须在夜里的十二点钟才回家，一面走，一面掏着怀中，一面大声的叫道，“喂，领来了！”于是递给伊一叠簇新的中交票，脸上很有些得意的形色。谁知道初四这一天却破了例，他不到七点钟便回家来。方太太很惊疑，以为他竟已辞了职了，但暗暗地察看他脸上，却也并不见有什么格外倒运的神情。
As usual, in recent years, the day before the root of the festival or the end of the year, he must go home at twelve o'clock in the night, and while walking, he took out his arms and shouted loudly, "Hey, I got it!" So he handed Yi a stack of new Chinese handover tickets, and his face was very proud. Who knew that on the fourth day of the new year, he would come home before seven o'clock. Mrs. Fang was very suspicious, thinking that he had resigned, but secretly examining his face, she did not see any particularly unlucky expression.“怎么了？……这样早？……”伊看定了他说。
"What's wrong? …… So early? ......" he said.“发不及了，领不出了，银行已经关了门，得等初八。”
"I can't send it, I can't get it, the bank is closed, I have to wait for the eighth day of the first month."“亲领？……”伊惴惴的问。
"Personally? ......" Yi asked anxiously.“亲领这一层，倒也已经取消了，听说仍旧由会计科分送。可是银行今天已经关了门，休息三天，得等到初八的上午。”他坐下，眼睛看着地面了，喝过一口茶，才又慢慢的开口说，“幸而衙门里也没有什么问题了，大约到初八就准有钱……向不相干的亲戚朋友去借钱，实在是一件烦难事。我午后硬着头皮去寻金永生，谈了一会，他先恭维我不去索薪，不肯亲领，非常之清高，一个人正应该这样做；待到知道我想要向他通融五十元，就像我在他嘴里塞了一大把盐似的，凡有脸上可以打皱的地方都打起皱来，说房租怎样的收不起，买卖怎样的赔本，在同事面前亲身领款，也不算什么的，即刻将我支使出来了。”
"This layer has been canceled, and I heard that it is still distributed by the accounting department. But the bank has closed today and rested for three days, and I have to wait until the morning of the eighth day of the new year. He sat down, looked at the ground, took a sip of tea, and then slowly said, "Fortunately, there is no problem in the yamen, and there will be money around the eighth day of the first month...... Borrowing money from unrelated relatives and friends is really a troublesome thing. I bit the bullet in the afternoon and went to find Jin Yongsheng, and after talking for a while, he first complimented me for not asking for a salary and refusing to receive it myself, which was very noble, and a person should do this; When he knew that I wanted to accommodate him for fifty yuan, it was like I had stuffed a large handful of salt into his mouth, and wrinkled all the places on his face that could be wrinkled, saying how the rent could not be collected, what kind of loss he had to lose, and receiving the money in person in front of his colleagues, it was nothing, and he immediately paid me out. ”“这样紧急的节根，谁还肯借出钱去呢。”方太太却只淡淡的说，并没有什么慨然。
"Who would be willing to lend money for such an urgent joint." Mrs. Fang only said lightly, without any emotion.方玄绰低下头来了，觉得这也无怪其然的，况且自己和金永生本来很疏远。他接着就记起去年年关的事来，那时有一个同乡来借十块钱，他其时明明已经收到了衙门的领款凭单的了，因为死怕这人将来未必会还钱，便装了一副为难的神色，说道衙门里既然领不到俸钱，学校里又不发薪水，实在“爱莫能助”，将他空手送走了。他虽然自己并不看见装了怎样的脸，但此时却觉得很局促，嘴唇微微一动，又摇一摇头。
Henry Fang lowered his head, feeling that it was no wonder, and he and Jin Yongsheng were originally very estranged. He then remembered last year's New Year's Pass, when a fellow villager came to borrow ten yuan, and he had obviously received the payment voucher from the yamen at that time, because he was afraid that this person might not repay the money in the future, so he pretended to be embarrassed, saying that since the yamen could not receive the salary, and the school did not pay the salary, it was really "helpless" and sent him away empty-handed. Although he didn't see what kind of face he was pretending, he felt very cramped at this time, his lips moved slightly, and he shook his head again.然而不多久，他忽而恍然大悟似的发命令了：叫小厮即刻上街去赊一瓶莲花白。他知道店家希图明天多还账，大抵是不敢不赊的，假如不赊，则明天分文不还，正是他们应得的惩罚。
However, not long after, he suddenly realized and gave an order: ask the little servant to go to the street immediately to get a bottle of lotus white on credit. He knew that the store wanted to repay more tomorrow, and he probably didn't dare not give credit, and if he didn't pay on credit, he wouldn't pay back a penny tomorrow, which was the punishment they deserved.莲花白竟赊来了，他喝了两杯，青白色的脸上泛了红，吃完饭，又颇有些高兴了，他点上一枝大号哈德门香烟，从桌上抓起一本《尝试集》来，躺在床上就要看。
Lotus White actually came on credit, he drank two glasses, his pale face turned red, and after eating, he was quite happy, he lit a large Hardman cigarette, grabbed a copy of "Attempt Collection" from the table, and lay on the bed to read it.“那么，明天怎么对付店家呢？”方太太追上去，站在床面前，看着他的脸说。
"So, how to deal with the store tomorrow?" Mrs. Fang chased after her, stood in front of the bed, looked at his face and said.“店家？……教他们初八的下半天来。”
"Store? …… Teach them to come in the second half of the eighth day of the first month. ”“我可不能这么说。他们不相信，不答应的。”
"I can't say that. They don't believe it, they don't agree. ”“有什么不相信。他们可以问去，全衙门里什么人也没有领到，都得初八！”他戟着第二个指头在帐子里的空中画了一个半圆，方太太跟着指头也看了一个半圆，只见这手便去翻开了《尝试集》。
"What's not to believe. They can ask, no one in the yamen has received it, and they have to be on the eighth day! He drew a semicircle in the air in the tent with his second finger, and Mrs. Fang followed her finger and looked at a semicircle, only to see this hand and opened the "Collection of Attempts".方太太见他强横到出乎情理之外了，也暂时开不得口。
Mrs. Fang saw that he was unreasonably strong, and she couldn't speak for the time being.“我想，这模样是闹不下去的，将来总得想点法，做点什么别的事……”伊终于寻到了别的路，说。
"I think this kind of appearance can't go on, and I have to think of something to do something else in the future......" Yi finally found another way and said.“什么法呢？我‘文不像誊录生，武不像救火兵’，别的做什么？”
"What law? I'm not like a transcriber, and my martial arts are not like firefighters', what else do I do? ”“你不是给上海的书铺子做过文章么？”
"Haven't you written an article for a bookstore in Shanghai?"“上海的书铺子？买稿要一个一个的算字，空格不算数。你看我做在那里的白话诗去，空白有多少，怕只值三百大钱一本罢。收版权税又半年六月没消息，‘远水救不得近火’，谁耐烦。”
"A bookstore in Shanghai? Buying manuscripts requires word counting one by one, and the spaces do not count. Look at the vernacular poems I made there, how much blank is there, I'm afraid it's only worth three hundred dollars. There is no news from collecting copyright tax for half a year and six months, 'far water cannot save near fire', who is impatient. ”“那么，给这里的报馆里……”
"Then, give the newspaper here ......"“给报馆里？便在这里很大的报馆里，我靠着一个学生在那里做编辑的大情面，一千字也就是这几个钱，即使一早做到夜，能够养活你们么？况且我肚子里也没有这许多文章。”
"To the newspaper? In this big newspaper, I rely on the great affection of a student who is an editor there, and a thousand words is this money, even if I stay up early and late, can I support you? Besides, I don't have these many articles in my stomach. ”“那么，过了节怎么办呢？”
"So, what should I do after the festival?"“过了节么？——仍旧做官……明天店家来要钱，你只要说初八的下午。”
"Is it over the holiday? ——Still an official...... Tomorrow the store will come to ask for money, you just need to say that it is the afternoon of the eighth day of the lunar new year. ”他又要看《尝试集》了。方太太怕失了机会，连忙吞吞吐吐的说：
He is going to watch "Attempt Collection" again. Mrs. Fang was afraid of missing the opportunity, so she hurriedly said hesitantly:“我想，过了节，到了初八，我们……倒不如去买一张彩票……”
"I think after the festival, on the eighth day of the lunar new year, we ...... Why don't you buy a lottery ticket......"“胡说！会说出这样无教育的……”
"Nonsense! will say such an uneducated ......"这时候，他忽而又记起被金永生支使出来以后的事了。那时他惘惘的走过稻香村，看见店门口竖着许多斗大的字的广告道“头彩几万元”，仿佛记得心里也一动，或者也许放慢了脚步的罢，但似乎因为舍不得皮夹里仅存的六角钱，所以竟也毅然决然的走远了。他脸色一变，方太太料想他是在恼着伊的无教育，便赶紧退开，没有说完话。方玄绰也没有说完话，将腰一伸，咿咿呜呜的就念《尝试集》。
At this time, he suddenly remembered what happened after he was used by Jin Yongsheng. At that time, he walked through Daoxiang Village in a daze, and saw many advertisements in large characters at the door of the store saying "jackpot tens of thousands of yuan", as if he remembered that his heart was also moved, or maybe he slowed down, but it seemed that because he was reluctant to bear the only hexadion money left in his wallet, he resolutely walked away. His face changed, and Mrs. Fang expected that he was annoyed by Yi's lack of education, so she quickly stepped away without finishing her words. Fang Xuanchuo didn't finish speaking, stretched his waist, and babbled to read "Attempt Collection".一九二二年六月。
June 1922.

白光

白光

白光

white light陈士成看过县考的榜，回到家里的时候，已经是下午了。他去得本很早，一见榜，便先在这上面寻陈字。陈字也不少，似乎也都争先恐后的跳进他眼睛里来，然而接着的却全不是士成这两个字。他于是重新再在十二张榜的圆图里细细地搜寻，看的人全已散尽了，而陈士成在榜上终于没有见，单站在试院的照壁的面前。
Chen Shicheng looked at the county examination list, and when he returned home, it was already afternoon. He went very early, and as soon as he saw the list, he first looked for the word Chen on it. There were also a lot of Chen characters, and they all seemed to be scrambling to jump into his eyes, but what followed was not the word Shicheng. He then searched carefully in the circle chart of the twelve lists, and all the people who looked at it had dispersed, and Chen Shicheng finally did not see it on the list, standing alone in front of the wall of the examination court.凉风虽然拂拂的吹动他斑白的短发，初冬的太阳却还是很温和的来晒他。但他似乎被太阳晒得头晕了，脸色越加变成灰白，从劳乏的红肿的两眼里，发出古怪的闪光。这时他其实早已不看到什么墙上的榜文了，只见有许多乌黑的圆圈，在眼前泛泛的游走。
Although the cool breeze blew his short gray hair, the early winter sun still came to bask in him very gently. But he seemed to be dizzy from the sun, his face turned grayer and whiter, and a strange flash flashed from his red and swollen eyes. At this time, he actually didn't see any lists on the wall anymore, only to see many black circles wandering in front of his eyes.隽了秀才，上省去乡试，一径联捷上去，……绅士们既然千方百计的来攀亲，人们又都像看见神明似的敬畏，深悔先前的轻薄，发昏，……赶走了租住在自己破宅门里的杂姓——那是不劳说赶，自己就搬的，——屋宇全新了，门口是旗竿和扁额，……要清高可以做京官，否则不如谋外放。……他平日安排停当的前程，这时候又像受潮的糖塔一般，刹时倒塌，只剩下一堆碎片了。他不自觉的旋转了觉得涣散了的身躯，惘惘的走向归家的路。
Jun Xiucai, go to the provincial examination, and go to the victory,...... Since the gentlemen tried their best to get married, people were in awe as if they had seen the gods, deeply regretting their previous frivolity and fainting,...... drove away the miscellaneous surnames who rented in the door of his dilapidated house - it was not necessary to say that he moved to a new house,—— and the door was a flagpole and a flat forehead,...... If you want to be high, you can be a Beijing official, otherwise it is better to seek exile. …… He usually arranged to stop the future, but at this time it collapsed like a damp sugar tower, leaving only a pile of fragments. He unconsciously rotated his body that felt scattered, and walked home in a daze.他刚到自己的房门口，七个学童便一齐放开喉咙，吱的念起书来。他大吃一惊，耳朵边似乎敲了一声磬，只见七个头拖了小辫子在眼前幌，幌得满房，黑圈子也夹着跳舞。他坐下了，他们送上晚课来，脸上都显出小觑他的神色。
As soon as he arrived at the door of his room, the seven schoolchildren let go of their throats and squeaked to read. He was surprised, and there seemed to be a chime ringing in his ears, only to see seven heads dragging pigtails in front of him, covering the room, and dancing in black circles. He sat down, and they sent him to the evening class, all looking down on him.“回去罢。”他迟疑了片时，这才悲惨的说。
"Go back." He hesitated for a moment before saying tragically.他们胡乱的包了书包，挟着，一溜烟跑走了。
They wrapped their schoolbags randomly, held them, and ran away in a sudden way.陈士成还看见许多小头夹着黑圆圈在眼前跳舞，有时杂乱，有时也排成异样的阵图，然而渐渐的减少了，模胡了。
Chen Shicheng also saw many small heads dancing in front of him with black circles, sometimes chaotic, sometimes arranged in strange formations, but gradually decreased and became confusing.“这回又完了！”
"It's over again!"他大吃一惊，直跳起来，分明就在耳朵边的话，回过头去却并没有什么人，仿佛又听得嗡的敲了一声磬，自己的嘴也说道：
He was taken aback, jumped up, and the words were clearly right in his ears, but when he turned around, there was no one there, as if he heard a chime again, and his mouth also said:“这回又完了！”
"It's over again!"他忽而举起一只手来，屈指计数着想，十一，十三回，连今年是十六回，竟没有一个考官懂得文章，有眼无珠，也是可怜的事，便不由嘻嘻的失了笑。然而他愤然了，蓦地从书包布底下抽出誊真的制艺和试帖来，拿着往外走，刚近房门，却看见满眼都明亮，连一群鸡也正在笑他，便禁不住心头突突的狂跳，只好缩回里面了。
He suddenly raised a hand, counting on his fingers, eleven times, thirteen times, even sixteen times this year, there was not a single examiner who understood the article, and it was a pitiful thing to have eyes and no beads, so he couldn't help but laugh. However, he was indignant, and suddenly took out the transcription and test sheet from under the schoolbag cloth, took it out, and just approached the door, but saw that his eyes were bright, and even a flock of chickens were laughing at him, so he couldn't help but feel his heart beat wildly, so he had to retract inside.他又就了坐，眼光格外的闪烁；他目睹着许多东西，然而很模胡，——是倒塌了的糖塔一般的前程躺在他面前，这前程又只是广大起来，阻住了他的一切路。
He sat down again, his eyes flashing extraordinarily; He witnessed many things, but it was very vague,—— like a collapsed sugar tower lying in front of him, and this future only grew larger, blocking all his paths.别家的炊烟早消歇了，碗筷也洗过了，而陈士成还不去做饭。寓在这里的杂姓是知道老例的，凡遇到县考的年头，看见发榜后的这样的眼光，不如及早关了门，不要多管事。最先就绝了人声，接着是陆续的熄了灯火，独有月亮，却缓缓的出现在寒夜的空中。
The smoke from other houses has long since subsided, the dishes and chopsticks have been washed, and Chen Shicheng has not cooked yet. The miscellaneous surnames living here know the old example, and whenever they encounter the year of the county examination and see such an eye after the announcement of the list, it is better to close the door as soon as possible and not meddle in the affairs. At first, there was no human voice, and then the lights were turned off one after another, and the moon was the only one, but it slowly appeared in the cold night sky.空中青碧到如一片海，略有些浮云，仿佛有谁将粉笔洗在笔洗里似的摇曳。月亮对着陈士成注下寒冷的光波来，当初也不过像是一面新磨的铁镜罢了，而这镜却诡秘的照透了陈士成的全身，就在他身上映出铁的月亮的影。
The sky is as blue as a sea, with slightly floating clouds, swaying as if someone has washed the chalk in the brush. The moon cast cold light waves on Chen Shicheng, which was just like a freshly polished iron mirror at the beginning, but this mirror mysteriously shone through Chen Shicheng's whole body, and the shadow of the iron moon was released on him.他还在房外的院子里徘徊，眼里颇清静了，四近也寂静。但这寂静忽又无端的纷扰起来，他耳边又确凿听到急促的低声说：
He was still wandering in the yard outside the house, his eyes were quite quiet, and the surroundings were also silent. But the silence suddenly and unprovokedly disturbed, and he heard a hurried whisper in his ear:“左弯右弯……”
"Turn left and turn right......"他耸然了，倾耳听时，那声音却又提高的复述道：
He was stunned, and when he listened, the voice raised again:“右弯！”
"Turn right!"他记得了。这院子，是他家还未如此雕零的时候，一到夏天的夜间，夜夜和他的祖母在此纳凉的院子。那时他不过十岁有零的孩子，躺在竹榻上，祖母便坐在榻旁边，讲给他有趣的故事听。伊说是曾经听得伊的祖母说，陈氏的祖宗是巨富的，这屋子便是祖基，祖宗埋着无数的银子，有福气的子孙一定会得到的罢，然而至今还没有现。至于处所，那是藏在一个谜语的中间：
He remembered. This yard was the yard where his grandmother and his grandmother cooled off every night when his family was not so carved like this. At that time, he was only a ten-year-old child, lying on the bamboo couch, and his grandmother sat next to the couch and told him interesting stories. Yi said that he had heard Yi's grandmother say that the ancestors of the Chen family were extremely rich, this house was the ancestral foundation, and the ancestors buried countless silvers, and the blessed descendants would definitely get it, but it has not yet appeared. As for the premises, it is hidden in the middle of a riddle:“左弯右弯，前走后走，量金量银不论斗。”
"Turn left and right, go forward and back, measure gold and silver."对于这谜语，陈士成便在平时，本也常常暗地里加以揣测的，可惜大抵刚以为可以通，却又立刻觉得不合了。有一回，他确有把握，知道这是在租给唐家的房底下的了，然而总没有前去发掘的勇气；过了几时，可又觉得太不相像了。至于他自己房子里的几个掘过的旧痕迹，那却全是先前几回下第以后的发了怔忡的举动，后来自己一看到，也还感到惭愧而且羞人。
For this riddle, Chen Shicheng often secretly speculated about it, but unfortunately he probably just thought it could be understood, but he immediately felt that it was incompatible. Once, he was sure that it was under the house rented to the Tang family, but he never had the courage to dig out; After a while, I felt that it was too different. As for the few old traces in his own house, they were all stunned actions after the previous few failures, and when he saw it later, he felt ashamed and ashamed.但今天铁的光罩住了陈士成，又软软的来劝他了，他或者偶一迟疑，便给他正经的证明，又加上阴森的摧逼，使他不得不又向自己的房里转过眼光去。
But today the iron light covered Chen Shicheng, and he came to persuade him softly, and he occasionally hesitated, so he gave him a serious proof, and with the gloomy destruction, he had to turn his eyes to his room again.白光如一柄白团扇，摇摇摆摆的闪起在他房里了。
The white light was like a white fan, swaying and flashing in his room.“也终于在这里！”
"Finally here!"他说着，狮子似的赶快走进那房里去，但跨进里面的时候，便不见了白光的影踪，只有莽苍苍的一间旧房，和几个破书桌都没在昏暗里。他爽然的站着，慢慢的再定睛，然而白光却分明的又起来了，这回更广大，比硫黄火更白净，比朝雾更霏微，而且便在靠东墙的一张书桌下。
He said, like a lion, hurried into the room, but when he stepped inside, the trace of white light disappeared, only an old room and a few broken desks were not in the dark. He stood calmly, slowly fixing his eyes again, but the white light rose clearly again, this time it was wider, whiter than sulfur fire, fainter than morning mist, and under a desk against the east wall.陈士成狮子似的奔到门后边，伸手去摸锄头，撞着一条黑影。他不知怎的有些怕了，张惶的点了灯，看锄头无非倚着。他移开桌子，用锄头一气掘起四块大方砖，蹲身一看，照例是黄澄澄的细沙，揎了袖爬开细沙，便露出下面的黑土来。他极小心的，幽静的，一锄一锄往下掘，然而深夜究竟太寂静了，尖铁触土的声音，总是钝重的不肯瞒人的发响。
Chen Shicheng ran to the back of the door like a lion, reached out to touch the hoe, and bumped into a black shadow. He was a little scared somehow, so he lit the lamp in panic, looking at the hoe as nothing more than leaning on it. He moved the table, dug up four large square bricks with a hoe, squatted down to see, as usual, it was yellow fine sand, rolled up his sleeves and climbed out of the fine sand, revealing the black soil below. He was extremely careful and quiet, digging down with hoes and hoes, but it was too quiet in the middle of the night, and the sound of the sharp iron touching the soil was always dull and refused to hide the sound.土坑深到二尺多了，并不见有瓮口，陈士成正心焦，一声脆响，颇震得手腕痛，锄尖碰到什么坚硬的东西了；他急忙抛下锄头，摸索着看时，一块大方砖在下面。他的心抖得很利害，聚精会神的挖起那方砖来，下面也满是先前一样的黑土，爬松了许多土，下面似乎还无穷。但忽而又触着坚硬的小东西了，圆的，大约是一个锈铜钱；此外也还有几片破碎的磁片。
The pit was more than two feet deep, and there was no urn mouth, Chen Shicheng was anxious, and there was a crisp sound, which made his wrist hurt, and the tip of the hoe touched something hard; He hurriedly threw down his hoe and groped for it, and when he looked at it, a large square brick was underneath. His heart was shaking very badly, and he dug up the square brick intently, and the bottom was full of the same black soil as before, and a lot of soil was loosened, and it seemed that there was no end below. But suddenly I touched something hard again, round, about a rusty copper coin; There are also several broken magnetic disks.陈士成心里仿佛觉得空虚了，浑身流汗，急躁的只爬搔；这其间，心在空中一抖动，又触着一种古怪的小东西了，这似乎约略有些马掌形的，但触手很松脆。他又聚精会神的挖起那东西来，谨慎的撮着，就灯光下仔细的看时，那东西斑斑剥剥的像是烂骨头，上面还带着一排零落不全的牙齿。他已经悟到这许是下巴骨了，而那下巴骨也便在他手里索索的动弹起来，而且笑吟吟的显出笑影，终于听得他开口道：
Chen Shicheng seemed to feel empty in his heart, sweating all over his body, and only scratching impatiently; In the meantime, my heart shook in the air, and I touched a strange little thing again, which seemed to be slightly horseshoe-shaped, but the tentacles were very crunchy. He dug up the thing intently again, carefully pinched it, and when he looked closely under the light, it was patchy like rotten bones, with a row of incomplete teeth on it. He had already realized that this was a jawbone, and the jawbone was also moving in his hand, and he smiled and showed a smile, and finally heard him speak:“这回又完了！”
"It's over again!"他栗然的发了大冷，同时也放了手，下巴骨轻飘飘的回到坑底里不多久，他也就逃到院子里了。他偷看房里面，灯火如此辉煌，下巴骨如此嘲笑，异乎寻常的怕人，便再不敢向那边看。他躲在远处的檐下的阴影里，觉得较为安全了；但在这平安中，忽而耳朵边又听得窃窃的低声说：
He was terrified, and at the same time let go, and his jaw fluttered back to the bottom of the pit, and not long after, he fled to the yard. He peeked into the room, the lights were so brilliant, his jaw bone was so ridiculous, and he was unusually afraid of people, so he didn't dare to look over there anymore. He hid in the shadows under the eaves in the distance, feeling safer; But in this peace, suddenly a whisper was heard in my ear:“这里没有……到山里去……”
"There is no ...... here Go to the mountains......"陈士成似乎记得白天在街上也曾听得有人说这种话，他不待再听完，已经恍然大悟了。他突然仰面向天，月亮已向西高峰这方面隐去，远想离城三十五里的西高峰正在眼前，朝笏一般黑魆魆的挺立着，周围便放出浩大闪烁的白光来。
Chen Shicheng seemed to remember that he had heard someone say this kind of thing on the street during the day, and he didn't wait to finish listening to it, and he had suddenly realized. He suddenly looked up to the sky, the moon had disappeared towards the western peak, and he thought that the western peak, thirty-five miles away from the city, was in front of him, standing as black as a scepter, and a huge flashing white light was emitted around him.而且这白光又远远的就在前面了。
And this white light is far ahead.“是的，到山里去！”
"Yes, go to the mountains!"他决定的想，惨然的奔出去了。几回的开门之后，门里面便再不闻一些声息。灯火结了大灯花照着空屋和坑洞，毕毕剥剥的炸了几声之后，便渐渐的缩小以至于无有，那是残油已经烧尽了。
He decided to think and ran out miserably. After opening the door several times, there was no sound inside the door. The lights lit up, and the big lights shone on the empty houses and potholes, and after a few explosions, they gradually shrank to nothing, that is, the residual oil had burned out.“开城门来～～”
"Open the city gate~~"含着大希望的恐怖的悲声，游丝似的在西关门前的黎明中，战战兢兢的叫喊。
The terrifying sorrow containing great hope shouted tremblingly in the dawn in front of the West Gate like a gossamer.
第二天的日中，有人在离西门十五里的万流湖里看见一个浮尸，当即传扬开去，终于传到地保的耳朵里了，便叫乡下人捞将上来。那是一个男尸，五十多岁，“身中面白无须”，浑身也没有什么衣裤。或者说这就是陈士成。但邻居懒得去看，也并无尸亲认领，于是经县委员相验之后，便由地保抬埋了。至于死因，那当然是没有问题的，剥取死尸的衣服本来是常有的事，够不上疑心到谋害去；而且仵作也证明是生前的落水，因为他确凿曾在水底里挣命，所以十个指甲里都满嵌着河底泥。
At noon the next day, someone saw a floating corpse in Wanliu Lake, fifteen miles away from the west gate, and immediately spread it, and finally reached the ears of the land protector, so he asked the countrymen to come up. It was a male corpse, in his fifties, "white and beardless", and had no clothes or pants. Or this is Chen Shicheng. But the neighbors were too lazy to see it, and the body was not claimed, so after being inspected by the county committee, it was carried and buried by the local security guard. As for the cause of death, of course, there is no problem, stripping the clothes of the dead body is a common thing, and it is not enough to be suspicious to murder; Moreover, Wu Zuo also proved to have fallen into the water during his lifetime, because he was sure that he had struggled for his life under the water, so his ten nails were full of river mud.一九二二年六月。
June 1922.

兔和猫

兔和猫

兔和猫

Rabbit and cat住在我们后进院子里的三太太，在夏间买了一对白兔，是给伊的孩子们看的。
The third wife, who lives in our back yard, bought a pair of white rabbits in the summer for her children to see.这一对白兔，似乎离娘并不久，虽然是异类，也可以看出他们的天真烂熳来。但也竖直了小小的通红的长耳朵，动着鼻子，眼睛里颇现些惊疑的神色，大约究竟觉得人地生疏，没有在老家时候的安心了。这种东西，倘到庙会日期自己出去买，每个至多不过两吊钱，而三太太却花了一元，因为是叫小使上店买来的。
This pair of white rabbits seems to have been away from their mothers not long ago, although they are outliers, they can also see their innocence. But he also erected his small red long ears, moved his nose, and showed some suspicion in his eyes. This kind of thing, if you go out to buy it on the day of the temple fair, each is no more than two hanging coins, but the third wife spent one yuan, because it was bought by the little envoy in the store.孩子们自然大得意了，嚷着围住了看；大人也都围着看；还有一匹小狗名叫S的也跑来，闯过去一嗅，打了一个喷嚏，退了几步。三太太吆喝道，“S，听着，不准你咬他！”于是在他头上打了一掌，S便退开了，从此并不咬。
The children were naturally very proud and shouted to look around; The adults also looked around; Another puppy named S also ran over, sniffed it, sneezed, and took a few steps back. The third wife shouted, "S, listen, you are not allowed to bite him!" So he slapped him on the head, and S retreated and never bit again.这一对兔总是关在后窗后面的小院子里的时候多，听说是因为太喜欢撕壁纸，也常常啃木器脚。这小院子里有一株野桑树，桑子落地，他们最爱吃，便连喂他们的波菜也不吃了。乌鸦喜鹊想要下来时，他们便躬着身子用后脚在地上使劲的一弹，砉的一声直跳上来，像飞起了一团雪，鸦鹊吓得赶紧走，这样的几回，再也不敢近来了。三太太说，鸦鹊倒不打紧，至多也不过抢吃一点食料，可恶的是一匹大黑猫，常在矮墙上恶狠狠的看，这却要防的，幸而S和猫是对头，或者还不至于有什么罢。
This pair of rabbits is always locked in the small yard behind the back window, and I heard that it is because they like to tear wallpaper too much, and often gnaw on wooden feet. There is a wild mulberry tree in this small yard, and when the mulberry falls, they love to eat it the most, so they don't even eat the spinach that feeds them. When the crows and magpies wanted to come down, they bowed down and flicked the ground with their hind feet, and jumped up with a clatter, like a cloud of snow flying, and the crows and magpies were so frightened that they hurriedly left, and they never dared to come close again. The third wife said that the crows and magpies didn't matter, at most they just grabbed a little food, and the hateful thing was a big black cat, which often looked viciously on the low wall, but this had to be guarded against, but fortunately, S and the cat were opposites, or it wasn't anything.孩子们时时捉他们来玩耍；他们很和气，竖起耳朵，动着鼻子，驯良的站在小手的圈子里，但一有空，却也就溜开去了。他们夜里的卧榻是一个小木箱，里面铺些稻草，就在后窗的房檐下。
children catch them to play with from time to time; They were very kind, pricked up their ears, moved their noses, and stood docilely in the circle of little hands, but as soon as they were free, they slipped away. Their bed at night was a small wooden box with straw laid inside, just under the eaves of the back window.这样的几个月之后，他们忽而自己掘土了，掘得非常快，前脚一抓，后脚一踢，不到半天，已经掘成一个深洞。大家都奇怪，后来仔细看时，原来一个的肚子比别一个的大得多了。他们第二天便将干草和树叶衔进洞里去，忙了大半天。
After a few months like this, they suddenly dug the soil by themselves, digging very quickly, grabbing the front foot and kicking the back foot, and in less than half a day, they had dug a deep hole. Everyone was puzzled, but when they looked closely, it turned out that one had a much bigger belly than the other. They carried hay and leaves into the hole the next day and were busy for most of the day.大家都高兴，说又有小兔可看了；三太太便对孩子们下了戒严令，从此不许再去捉。我的母亲也很喜欢他们家族的繁荣，还说待生下来的离了乳，也要去讨两匹来养在自己的窗外面。
Everyone was happy and said that there was another rabbit to see; The third wife imposed martial law on the children and was not allowed to catch them again. My mother also liked the prosperity of their family, and said that when she was born, she would also ask for two to keep outside her window.他们从此便住在自造的洞府里，有时也出来吃些食，后来不见了，可不知道他们是预先运粮存在里面呢还是竟不吃。过了十多天，三太太对我说，那两匹又出来了，大约小兔是生下来又都死掉了，因为雌的一匹的奶非常多，却并不见有进去哺养孩子的形迹。伊言语之间颇气愤，然而也没有法。
Since then, they have lived in their own caves, and sometimes they come out to eat some food, but then they disappear, but I don't know if they transported food in advance or didn't eat it. After more than ten days, the third wife said to me that the two horses came out again, and about the little rabbits were born and died, because the female had a lot of milk, but there was no sign of going in to feed the child. He was quite angry in his words, but there was nothing he could do.有一天，太阳很温暖，也没有风，树叶都不动，我忽听得许多人在那里笑，寻声看时，却见许多人都靠着三太太的后窗看：原来有一个小兔，在院子里跳跃了。这比他的父母买来的时候还小得远，但也已经能用后脚一弹地，迸跳起来了。孩子们争着告诉我说，还看见一个小兔到洞口来探一探头，但是即刻缩回去了，那该是他的弟弟罢。
One day, the sun was very warm, there was no wind, and the leaves did not move, and I suddenly heard many people laughing there, and when I looked for a sound, I saw many people leaning against the back window of the third wife and watching: it turned out that there was a little rabbit jumping in the yard. This is much smaller than when his parents bought it, but he can already bounce on his hind feet and jump up. The children rushed to tell me that they saw a little rabbit come to the entrance of the cave to poke its head, but immediately retracted, it should be his brother.那小的也检些草叶吃，然而大的似乎不许他，往往夹口的抢去了，而自己并不吃。孩子们笑得响，那小的终于吃惊了，便跳着钻进洞里去；大的也跟到洞门口，用前脚推着他的孩子的脊梁，推进之后，又爬开泥土来封了洞。
The small one also checked some grass leaves to eat, but the big one didn't seem to allow him, and often snatched it away, but he didn't eat it. The children laughed loudly, and the little one was finally surprised, so he jumped into the hole; The big one also followed to the entrance of the cave, pushed his child's spine with his front foot, and after pushing forward, he crawled through the dirt to seal the hole.从此小院子里更热闹，窗口也时时有人窥探了。
Since then, the small courtyard has become more lively, and the window is often snooping.然而竟又全不见了那小的和大的。这时是连日的阴天，三太太又虑到遭了那大黑猫的毒手的事去。我说不然，那是天气冷，当然都躲着，太阳一出，一定出来的。
However, the small and big ones were all gone. At this time, it was a cloudy day for several days, and the third wife was worried about being poisoned by the big black cat. I said otherwise, it was cold, of course I was hiding, and as soon as the sun came out, it would definitely come out.太阳出来了，他们却都不见。于是大家就忘却了。
The sun came out, but they were gone. So everyone forgot.惟有三太太是常在那里喂他们波菜的，所以常想到。伊有一回走进窗后的小院子去，忽然在墙角上发见了一个别的洞，再看旧洞口，却依稀的还见有许多爪痕。这爪痕倘说是大兔的，爪该不会有这样大，伊又疑心到那常在墙上的大黑猫去了，伊于是也就不能不定下发掘的决心了。伊终于出来取了锄子，一路掘下去，虽然疑心，却也希望着意外的见了小白兔的，但是待到底，却只见一堆烂草夹些兔毛，怕还是临蓐时候所铺的罢，此外是冷清清的，全没有什么雪白的小兔的踪迹，以及他那只一探头未出洞外的弟弟了。
Only the third wife often feeds them spinach there, so she often thinks about it. Yi once walked into the small yard behind the window, and suddenly found another hole in the corner, and then looked at the old hole, but there were still many claw marks. If this claw mark is said to be a big rabbit, the claw should not be so big, and Yi is suspicious that the big black cat that is often on the wall is gone, so Yi can't make up his mind to dig up. Yi finally came out to get the hoe and dug all the way, although he was suspicious, he also hoped to see the little white rabbit unexpectedly, but to the end, he only saw a pile of rotten grass with some rabbit hair, I am afraid that it was still laid out when he was about to lay it, and it was deserted, and there was no trace of the snow-white rabbit, and his younger brother who had not poked his head out of the hole.气愤和失望和凄凉，使伊不能不再掘那墙角上的新洞了。一动手，那大的两匹便先窜出洞外面。伊以为他们搬了家了，很高兴，然而仍然掘，待见底，那里面也铺着草叶和兔毛，而上面却睡着七个很小的兔，遍身肉红色，细看时，眼睛全都没有开。
Anger, disappointment, and desolation made him unable to dig a new hole in the corner. As soon as they moved, the two big horses rushed out of the cave first. He thought they had moved and was very happy, but he still dug it, and when he saw the bottom, it was also covered with blades of grass and rabbit hair, and seven very small rabbits were sleeping on it, covered in flesh red, and when he looked closely, his eyes were not opened.一切都明白了，三太太先前的预料果不错。伊为预防危险起见，便将七个小的都装在木箱中，搬进自己的房里，又将大的也捺进箱里面，勒令伊去哺乳。
Everything was understood, and the third wife's previous prediction was good. In order to prevent danger, he put all seven small ones in wooden boxes, moved them into his room, and put the big ones into the box, and ordered him to breastfeed.三太太从此不但深恨黑猫，而且颇不以大兔为然了。据说当初那两个被害之先，死掉的该还有，因为他们生一回，决不至于只两个，但为了哺乳不匀，不能争食的就先死了。这大概也不错的，现在七个之中，就有两个很瘦弱。所以三太太一有闲空，便捉住母兔，将小兔一个一个轮流的摆在肚子上来喝奶，不准有多少。
From then on, the third wife not only hated the black cat, but also didn't think of the big rabbit anymore. It is said that the two who were killed at the beginning should have died, because they gave birth once, and there would never be only two, but in order to breastfeed unevenly, those who could not compete for food died first. This is probably not bad, now two out of seven are very thin. So as soon as the third wife had free time, she caught the female rabbit and put the rabbits on her stomach one by one to drink milk, not as many.母亲对我说，那样麻烦的养兔法，伊历来连听也未曾听到过，恐怕是可以收入《无双谱》的。
My mother told me that I had never even heard of such a troublesome rabbit raising method, and I am afraid that it could be included in the "Wushuang Spectrum".白兔的家族更繁荣；大家也又都高兴了。
The White Rabbit family is more prosperous; Everyone was happy again.但自此之后，我总觉得凄凉。夜半在灯下坐着想，那两条小性命，竟是人不知鬼不觉的早在不知什么时候丧失了，生物史上不着一些痕迹，并S也不叫一声。我于是记起旧事来，先前我住在会馆里，清早起身，只见大槐树下一片散乱的鸽子毛，这明明是膏于鹰吻的了，上午长班来一打扫，便什么都不见，谁知道曾有一个生命断送在这里呢？我又曾经路过西四牌楼，看见一匹小狗被马车轧得快死，待回来时，什么也不见了，搬掉了罢，过往行人憧憧的走着，谁知道曾有一个生命断送在这里呢？夏夜，窗外面，常听到苍蝇的悠长的吱吱的叫声，这一定是给蝇虎咬住了，然而我向来无所容心于其间，而别人并且不听到……
But since then, I have always felt desolate. Sitting under the lamp in the middle of the night and thinking, those two small lives were lost at some point without anyone knowing, and there were no traces in the history of biology, and they didn't scream. I then remembered the old thing, I used to live in the guild hall, and when I got up early in the morning, I saw a scattered pigeon feathers under the big locust tree, which was obviously anointed with the eagle's beak, and when the long shift came to clean in the morning, I didn't see anything, who knew that a life had been ruined here? I once passed by the West Fourth Archway and saw a puppy being crushed to death by a carriage, and when I came back, there was nothing there, so I moved it away. On summer nights, outside the window, I often hear the long squeaking of flies, which must have been bitten by the fly tiger, but I have never had any room for it, and others do not hear it......假使造物也可以责备，那么，我以为他实在将生命造得太滥，毁得太滥了。
If the Creator is also to blame, then I think He has made life too much, destroyed it too much.嗥的一声，又是两条猫在窗外打起架来。
With a howl, two cats started fighting outside the window.“迅儿！你又在那里打猫了？”
"Xun'er! Are you hitting the cat there again? ”“不，他们自己咬。他那里会给我打呢。”
"No, they bite themselves. He will call me there. ”我的母亲是素来很不以我的虐待猫为然的，现在大约疑心我要替小兔抱不平，下什么辣手，便起来探问了。而我在全家的口碑上，却的确算一个猫敌。我曾经害过猫，平时也常打猫，尤其是在他们配合的时候。但我之所以打的原因并非因为他们配合，是因为他们嚷，嚷到使我睡不着，我以为配合是不必这样大嚷而特嚷的。
My mother has never been very dissatisfied with my abuse of cats, and now she is probably suspicious that I want to be unfair to the little rabbit and do something hot, so she got up and asked. And I am indeed a cat enemy in the reputation of the whole family. I have harmed cats before, and I usually beat cats, especially when they cooperate. But the reason why I fought was not because they cooperated, but because they shouted so much that I couldn't sleep, and I thought that cooperation didn't have to be so loud and shouting.况且黑猫害了小兔，我更是“师出有名”的了。我觉得母亲实在太修善，于是不由的就说出模棱的近乎不以为然的答话来。
Moreover, the black cat harmed the little rabbit, and I am even more "famous". I felt that my mother was too cultivated, so I couldn't help but give an ambiguous and almost disapproving answer.造物太胡闹，我不能不反抗他了，虽然也许是倒是帮他的忙……
The creation is so foolish that I can't help but resist him, although maybe it's to help him......那黑猫是不能久在矮墙上高视阔步的了，我决定的想，于是又不由的一瞥那藏在书箱里的一瓶青酸钾。
The black cat couldn't stride on the low wall for a long time, I decided to think, so I couldn't help but glance at the bottle of potassium cyanide hidden in the bookcase.一九二二年十月。
October 1922.

鸭的喜剧

鸭的喜剧

鸭的喜剧

Duck comedy俄国的盲诗人爱罗先珂君带了他那六弦琴到北京之后不久，便向我诉苦说：
Shortly after the blind Russian poet Ero Xianke brought his six-stringed piano to Beijing, he complained to me:“寂寞呀，寂寞呀，在沙漠上似的寂寞呀！”
"Lonely, lonely, lonely like in the desert!"这应该是真实的，但在我却未曾感得；我住得久了，“入芝兰之室，久而不闻其香”，只以为很是嚷嚷罢了。然而我之所谓嚷嚷，或者也就是他之所谓寂寞罢。
This should be true, but I have never felt it; I have lived for a long time, "entering the room of Zhilan, and not smelling its fragrance for a long time", I just thought it was very shouting. However, what I mean by shouting is what he calls loneliness.我可是觉得在北京仿佛没有春和秋。老于北京的人说，地气北转了，这里在先是没有这么和暖。只是我总以为没有春和秋；冬末和夏初衔接起来，夏才去，冬又开始了。
I feel that there is no spring and autumn in Beijing. People who are old in Beijing said that the earth's qi has turned north, and it was not so warm here before. It's just that I always think there is no spring and autumn; The end of winter and the beginning of summer are connected, summer is gone, and winter begins again.一日就是这冬末夏初的时候，而且是夜间，我偶而得了闲暇，去访问爱罗先珂君。他一向寓在仲密君的家里；这时一家的人都睡了觉了，天下很安静。他独自靠在自己的卧榻上，很高的眉棱在金黄色的长发之间微蹙了，是在想他旧游之地的缅甸，缅甸的夏夜。
One day was the end of winter and the beginning of summer, and it was night, and I occasionally had some free time to visit Lord Ero Xianke. He has always lived in Zhongmi Jun's house; At this time, everyone in the family went to sleep, and the world was very quiet. He leaned alone on his couch, his high eyebrows frowning slightly between his long golden hair, thinking about the summer nights in Myanmar, the place he used to visit.“这样的夜间，”他说，“在缅甸是遍地是音乐。房里，草间，树上，都有昆虫吟叫，各种声音，成为合奏，很神奇。其间时时夹着蛇鸣：‘嘶嘶！’可是也与虫声相和协……”他沉思了，似乎想要追想起那时的情景来。
"On nights like this," he said, "there is music everywhere in Myanmar. In the room, in the grass, in the trees, there are insects chirping, and all kinds of sounds become an ensemble, which is very magical. In between, there was a snake crying: 'Hiss! But it also harmonizes with the sound of insects...... He pondered, as if he wanted to recall the scene at that time.我开不得口。这样奇妙的音乐，我在北京确乎未曾听到过，所以即使如何爱国，也辩护不得，因为他虽然目无所见，耳朵是没有聋的。
I can't open my mouth. I have never heard such wonderful music in Beijing, so no matter how patriotic he is, he cannot defend it, because although he is blind, his ears are not deaf.“北京却连蛙鸣也没有……”他又叹息说。
"Beijing doesn't even ...... frogs," he sighed again.“蛙鸣是有的！”这叹息，却使我勇猛起来了，于是抗议说，“到夏天，大雨之后，你便能听到许多虾蟆叫，那是都在沟里面的，因为北京到处都有沟。”
"There is a frog croaking!" This sigh made me brave, so I protested, "In the summer, after the heavy rains, you can hear many toads crying, all in the ditch, because there are ditches everywhere in Beijing." ”
“哦……”
"Oh......"过了几天，我的话居然证实了，因为爱罗先珂君已经买到了十几个科斗子。他买来便放在他窗外的院子中央的小池里。那池的长有三尺，宽有二尺，是仲密所掘，以种荷花的荷池。从这荷池里，虽然从来没有见过养出半朵荷花来，然而养虾蟆却实在是一个极合式的处所。
A few days later, my words were actually confirmed, because Ai Luo Xianke Jun had already bought more than a dozen science buckets. He bought it and put it in a small pond in the middle of the yard outside his window. The pond is three feet long and two feet wide, and it is a lotus pond dug by Zhongmi to plant lotus flowers. From this lotus pond, although I have never seen half a lotus flower raised, raising toads is really a very suitable place.科斗成群结队的在水里面游泳；爱罗先珂君也常常踱来访他们。有时候，孩子告诉他说，“爱罗先珂先生，他们生了脚了。”他便高兴的微笑道，“哦！”
Kodou swims in groups in the water; Ero Xianke also often walked to visit them. Sometimes, the child told him, "Mr. Erosenko, they have given birth to feet." He smiled happily and said, "Oh! ”然而养成池沼的音乐家却只是爱罗先珂君的一件事。他是向来主张自食其力的，常说女人可以畜牧，男人就应该种田。所以遇到很熟的友人，他便要劝诱他就在院子里种白菜；也屡次对仲密夫人劝告，劝伊养蜂，养鸡，养猪，养牛，养骆驼。后来仲密家里果然有了许多小鸡，满院飞跑，啄完了铺地锦的嫩叶，大约也许就是这劝告的结果了。
However, the musician who raised the pond was only one thing that Erosenko-kun loved. He has always advocated self-reliance, often saying that women can raise livestock, and men should farm. So when he met a very familiar friend, he would persuade him to plant cabbage in the yard; He also repeatedly advised Mrs. Zhongmi to raise bees, chickens, pigs, cattle, and camels. Later, there were many chicks in Zhongmi's house, flying all over the yard, pecking at the young leaves of the brocade, which may be the result of this advice.从此卖小鸡的乡下人也时常来，来一回便买几只，因为小鸡是容易积食，发痧，很难得长寿的；而且有一匹还成了爱罗先珂君在北京所作唯一的小说《小鸡的悲剧》里的主人公。有一天的上午，那乡下人竟意外的带了小鸭来了，咻咻的叫着；但是仲密夫人说不要。爱罗先珂君也跑出来，他们就放一个在他两手里，而小鸭便在他两手里咻咻的叫。他以为这也很可爱，于是又不能不买了，一共买了四个，每个八十文。
Since then, the countrymen who sell chicks have often come, and they will buy a few at a time, because chicks are easy to accumulate food, develop scabies, and it is difficult to live a long life; And there is also a horse that has become the protagonist of the only novel "The Tragedy of the Chicken" written by Luo Xianke Jun in Beijing. One morning, the countryman unexpectedly brought a duckling, and he screamed; But Mrs. Zhongmi said no. Ai Luo Xianke Jun also ran out, and they put one in his hands, and the duckling screamed in his hands. He thought it was also cute, so he couldn't help but buy it, and bought a total of four, eighty cents each.小鸭也诚然是可爱，遍身松花黄，放在地上，便蹒跚的走，互相招呼，总是在一处。大家都说好，明天去买泥鳅来喂他们罢。爱罗先珂君说，“这钱也可以归我出的。”
The ducklings are indeed cute, all over the pine flowers, and when placed on the ground, they stagger, greeting each other, always in one place. Everyone said yes, let's buy loaches tomorrow to feed them. Ai Luo Xianke said, "This money can also be paid by me." ”他于是教书去了；大家也走散。不一会，仲密夫人拿冷饭来喂他们时，在远处已听得泼水的声音，跑到一看，原来那四个小鸭都在荷池里洗澡了，而且还翻筋斗，吃东西呢。等到拦他们上了岸，全池已经是浑水，过了半天，澄清了，只见泥里露出几条细藕来；而且再也寻不出一个已经生了脚的科斗了。
So he went to teach; Everyone was also separated. After a while, when Mrs. Zhongmi brought cold rice to feed them, she heard the sound of splashing water in the distance, and ran to see that the four ducklings were bathing in the lotus pond, and they were somersaulting and eating. After a long time, it was clarified, and a few fine lotus roots were exposed in the mud; And I can no longer find a science fight that has given birth to a foot.“伊和希珂先，没有了，虾蟆的儿子。”傍晚时候，孩子们一见他回来，最小的一个便赶紧说。
"Yi and Xi Ke first, no, toad's son." In the evening, as soon as the children saw him coming back, the youngest one hurriedly said.“唔，虾蟆？”
"Hmm, toad?"仲密夫人也出来了，报告了小鸭吃完科斗的故事。
Mrs. Zhongmi also came out and reported the story of the duckling eating the fight.“唉，唉！……”他说。
"Alas, alas! ......," he said.
待到小鸭褪了黄毛，爱罗先珂君却忽而渴念着他的“俄罗斯母亲”了，便匆匆的向赤塔去。
When the duckling lost his yellow feathers, Ero Xianke Jun suddenly longed for his "Russian mother", so he hurried to Chita.待到四处蛙鸣的时候，小鸭也已经长成，两个白的，两个花的，而且不复咻咻的叫，都是“鸭鸭”的叫了。荷花池也早已容不下他们盘桓了，幸而仲密的住家的地势是很低的，夏雨一降，院子里满积了水，他们便欣欣然，游水，钻水，拍翅子，“鸭鸭”的叫。
By the time the frogs croaked around, the ducklings had also grown up, two white, two flowers, and no longer crowed, they were all called "ducks". The lotus pond has long been unable to accommodate them lingering, but fortunately, the terrain of Zhongmi's home is very low, and when the summer rain falls, the yard is full of water, they are happy, swimming, drilling, flapping their wings, and calling "duck duck".现在又从夏末交了冬初，而爱罗先珂君还是绝无消息，不知道究竟在那里了。
Now it has been handed over from the end of summer to the beginning of winter, and there is still no news from Ai Luo Xiankejun, and I don't know where he is.只有四个鸭，却还在沙漠上“鸭鸭”的叫。
There are only four ducks, but they are still calling "duck ducks" in the desert.一九二二年十月。
October 1922.

社戏

社戏

社戏

Social drama我在倒数上去的二十年中，只看过两回中国戏，前十年是绝不看，因为没有看戏的意思和机会，那两回全在后十年，然而都没有看出什么来就走了。
In the last twenty years, I have only seen Chinese operas twice, and I never watched them in the first ten years, because I had no intention and opportunity to watch them.第一回是民国元年我初到北京的时候，当时一个朋友对我说，北京戏最好，你不去见见世面么？我想，看戏是有味的，而况在北京呢。于是都兴致勃勃地跑到什么园，戏文已经开场了，在外面也早听到冬冬地响。我们挨进门，几个红的绿的在我的眼前一闪烁，便又看见戏台下满是许多头，再定神四面看，却见中间也还有几个空座，挤过去要坐时，又有人对我发议论，我因为耳朵已经喤喤的响着了，用了心，才听到他是说“有人，不行！”
The first time was when I first arrived in Beijing in the first year of the Republic of China, when a friend said to me, Beijing opera is the best, don't you go to see the world? I think watching a play is interesting, especially in Beijing. So they all ran to the garden with great interest, the play had already begun, and they had already heard the sound of winter outside. When we squeezed over to sit down, someone spoke to me again, and I heard him say "Someone, no!" ”我们退到后面，一个辫子很光的却来领我们到了侧面，指出一个地位来。这所谓地位者，原来是一条长凳，然而他那坐板比我的上腿要狭到四分之三，他的脚比我的下腿要长过三分之二。我先是没有爬上去的勇气，接着便联想到私刑拷打的刑具，不由的毛骨悚然的走出了。
We stepped back, and a shiny braid came to lead us to the side and point out a position. This so-called status man turned out to be a bench, but his seat was three-quarters narrower than my upper leg, and his feet were more than two-thirds longer than my lower leg. I didn't have the courage to climb up at first, and then I thought of the torture instruments of lynching, and I couldn't help but walk out of the torture in horror.走了许多路，忽听得我的朋友的声音道，“究竟怎的？”我回过脸去，原来他也被我带出来了。他很诧异的说，“怎么总是走，不答应？”我说，“朋友，对不起，我耳朵只在冬冬喤喤的响，并没有听到你的话。”
After walking a lot, I suddenly heard my friend's voice say, "What the hell is going on?" I turned my face and it turned out that he was also taken out by me. He was surprised and said, "Why do you always leave and don't agree?" I said, "Friend, I'm sorry, my ears are only ringing in the winter, and I don't hear your words." ”后来我每一想到，便很以为奇怪，似乎这戏太不好，——否则便是我近来在戏台下不适于生存了。
Later, every time I thought about it, I thought it was strange, it seemed that this play was too bad,—— otherwise I would not be able to survive under the stage recently.第二回忘记了那一年，总之是募集湖北水灾捐而谭叫天还没有死。捐法是两元钱买一张戏票，可以到第一舞台去看戏，扮演的多是名角，其一就是小叫天。我买了一张票，本是对于劝募人聊以塞责的，然而似乎又有好事家乘机对我说了些叫天不可不看的大法要了。我于是忘了前几年的冬冬喤喤之灾，竟到第一舞台去了，但大约一半也因为重价购来的宝票，总得使用了才舒服。我打听得叫天出台是迟的，而第一舞台却是新式构造，用不着争座位，便放了心，延宕到九点钟才出去，谁料照例，人都满了，连立足也难，我只得挤在远处的人丛中看一个老旦在台上唱。那老旦嘴边插着两个点火的纸捻子，旁边有一个鬼卒，我费尽思量，才疑心他或者是目连的母亲，因为后来又出来了一个和尚。然而我又不知道那名角是谁，就去问挤小在我的左边的一位胖绅士。他很看不起似的斜瞥了我一眼，说道，“龚云甫！”我深愧浅陋而且粗疏，脸上一热，同时脑里也制出了决不再问的定章，于是看小旦唱，看花旦唱，看老生唱，看不知什么角色唱，看一大班人乱打，看两三个人互打，从九点多到十点，从十点到十一点，从十一点到十一点半，从十一点半到十二点，——然而叫天竟还没有来。
The second time I forgot that year, in short, it was to raise donations for the Hubei flood and Tan Baotian was not dead. The donation method is to buy a ticket for two yuan, you can go to the first stage to watch the play, and most of the roles are famous roles, one of which is the little name. I bought a ticket, originally to persuade people to talk about blame, but it seems that some good people took the opportunity to say something to me. I forgot about the disaster of the past few years and went to the first stage, but about half of it was because of the treasure tickets I bought at a high price, and I had to use it to be comfortable. I inquired that it was late to come out, but the first stage was a new structure, and there was no need to fight for seats, so I was relieved and delayed until nine o'clock before going out. The old man had two ignited paper twisters stuck in his mouth, and there was a ghost pawn next to him, and I thought about it before I suspected that he or Mulian's mother, because a monk came out later. However, I didn't know who the famous character was, so I went to ask a fat gentleman who was squeezing to my left. He glanced at me very contemptuously and said, "Gong Yunfu! "I was deeply ashamed of my shallowness and sloppiness, my face was hot, and at the same time, I made a rule in my mind that I would never ask again, so I watched Xiao Dan sing, watched Hua Dan sing, watched Lao Sheng sing, watched a character sing, watched a large group of people fighting, watched two or three people fight each other, from nine to ten o'clock, from ten to eleven o'clock, from eleven o'clock to half past eleven, from eleven thirty to twelve o'clock,—— but the sky has not yet come.我向来没有这样忍耐的等候过什么事物，而况这身边的胖绅士的吁吁的喘气，这台上的冬冬喤喤的敲打，红红绿绿的晃荡，加之以十二点，忽而使我省悟到在这里不适于生存了。我同时便机械的拧转身子，用力往外只一挤，觉得背后便已满满的，大约那弹性的胖绅士早在我的空处胖开了他的右半身了。我后无回路，自然挤而又挤，终于出了大门。街上除了专等看客的车辆之外，几乎没有什么行人了，大门口却还有十几个人昂着头看戏目，别有一堆人站着并不看什么，我想：他们大概是看散戏之后出来的女人们的，而叫天却还没有来……
I have never waited so patiently for anything, and the gasping breath of the fat gentleman beside me, the beating of Dongdong on this stage, the swaying of red and green, and the twelve o'clock, suddenly made me realize that it was not suitable to live here. At the same time, I mechanically twisted my body and squeezed it outward, feeling that my back was full, and the elastic fat gentleman had already opened his right half of his body in my empty space. I had no way out, so I naturally squeezed and squeezed, and finally got out of the door. There were almost no pedestrians on the street except for the vehicles waiting for spectators, but there were more than a dozen people at the gate watching the play with their heads held high, and there were a bunch of people standing there and not watching anything......然而夜气很清爽，真所谓“沁人心脾”，我在北京遇着这样的好空气，仿佛这是第一遭了。
However, the night air is very refreshing, the so-called "refreshing", I encountered such good air in Beijing, as if this was the first time.这一夜，就是我对于中国戏告了别的一夜，此后再没有想到他，即使偶而经过戏园，我们也漠不相关，精神上早已一在天之南一在地之北了。
This night was the night I said goodbye to Chinese opera, and I never thought of him again, even if we occasionally passed by the theater, we were indifferent, and we were already in the south of the sky and the north of the earth in spirit.但是前几天，我忽在无意之中看到一本日本文的书，可惜忘记了书名和著者，总之是关于中国戏的。其中有一篇，大意仿佛说，中国戏是大敲，大叫，大跳，使看客头昏脑眩，很不适于剧场，但若在野外散漫的所在，远远的看起来，也自有他的风致。我当时觉着这正是说了在我意中而未曾想到的话，因为我确记得在野外看过很好的好戏，到北京以后的连进两回戏园去，也许还是受了那时的影响哩。可惜我不知道怎么一来，竟将书名忘却了。
But a few days ago, I suddenly saw a book in Japanese, but unfortunately I forgot the title and author, in short, it was about Chinese opera. One of them seems to say that Chinese opera is a big knocking, shouting, and jumping, which makes the audience dizzy and very unsuitable for the theater, but if it is loose in the wild, it looks like it has its own style from a distance. I felt that this was exactly what I had said in my mind but had never thought of it, because I did remember seeing a good show in the wild, and after going to Beijing, I went to the theater twice in a row, maybe I was still influenced by that time. It's a pity that I don't know how to forget the title of the book.至于我看那好戏的时候，却实在已经是“远哉遥遥”的了，其时恐怕我还不过十一二岁。我们鲁镇的习惯，本来是凡有出嫁的女儿，倘自己还未当家，夏间便大抵回到母家去消夏。那时我的祖母虽然还康健，但母亲也已分担了些家务，所以夏期便不能多日的归省了，只得在扫墓完毕之后，抽空去住几天，这时我便每年跟了我的母亲住在外祖母的家里。那地方叫平桥村，是一个离海边不远，极偏僻的，临河的小村庄；住户不满三十家，都种田，打鱼，只有一家很小的杂货店。但在我是乐土：因为我在这里不但得到优待，又可以免念“秩秩斯干幽幽南山”了。
As for when I watched that good show, it was really "far away", and I was afraid I was only eleven or twelve years old at that time. Our Lu Town habit was originally that if there was a married daughter, if he was not in charge, he would probably return to his mother's house to spend the summer in the summer. At that time, although my grandmother was still healthy, my mother had already shared some housework, so I couldn't return to the province for many days in the summer, so I had to take time to stay for a few days after the grave was swept away, and then I lived with my mother at my grandmother's house every year. The place is called Pingqiao Village, which is a small village not far from the sea, extremely remote, near the river; There are less than 30 households, all farming, fishing, and only a very small grocery store. But in my paradise: because I not only get preferential treatment here, but also avoid reciting "Zhi Zhi Si Gan Youyou Nanshan".和我一同玩的是许多小朋友，因为有了远客，他们也都从父母那里得了减少工作的许可，伴我来游戏。在小村里，一家的客，几乎也就是公共的。我们年纪都相仿，但论起行辈来，却至少是叔子，有几个还是太公，因为他们合村都同姓，是本家。然而我们是朋友，即使偶而吵闹起来，打了太公，一村的老老小小，也决没有一个会想出“犯上”这两个字来，而他们也百分之九十九不识字。
I played with many children, and because of the distant guests, they also got permission from their parents to reduce their work and play with me. In a small village, a family is almost a public one. We are all about the same age, but when it comes to seniors, we are at least uncles, and a few of them are still grandfathers, because they all have the same surname in the village and are from our own family. However, we are friends, and even if we occasionally quarrel and beat the grandfather, none of the old and young in the village will ever come up with the word "offend", and 99% of them are illiterate.我们每天的事情大概是掘蚯蚓，掘来穿在铜丝做的小钩上，伏在河沿上去钓虾。虾是水世界里的呆子，决不惮用了自己的两个钳捧着钩尖送到嘴里去的，所以不半天便可以钓到一大碗。这虾照例是归我吃的。其次便是一同去放牛，但或者因为高等动物了的缘故罢，黄牛水牛都欺生，敢于欺侮我，因此我也总不敢走近身，只好远远地跟着，站着。这时候，小朋友们便不再原谅我会读“秩秩斯干”，却全都嘲笑起来了。
Our daily work is probably to dig earthworms, dig them on small hooks made of copper wire, and lie down on the river to catch shrimp. Shrimp is a fool in the water world, and he is never afraid to use his two tongs to hold the hook tip and send it to his mouth, so he can catch a big bowl in less than half a day. This shrimp is for me as usual. The second is to go to herd cattle together, but perhaps because of the higher animals, the scalpers and buffaloes are bullying me and dare to bully me, so I always dare not get closer, so I have to follow from a distance and stand. At this time, the children no longer forgave me for reading "Zhi Zhi Si Gan", but they all laughed at me.至于我在那里所第一盼望的，却在到赵庄去看戏。赵庄是离平桥村五里的较大的村庄；平桥村太小，自己演不起戏，每年总付给赵庄多少钱，算作合做的。当时我并不想到他们为什么年年要演戏。现在想，那或者是春赛，是社戏了。
As for the first thing I was looking forward to there, I was going to Zhaozhuang to see a play. Zhaozhuang is a larger village five miles away from Pingqiao Village; Pingqiao Village is too small to act on its own, and how much money is paid to Zhao Zhuang every year is counted as a joint work. At that time, I didn't think about why they had to act every year. Now I think that it may be the Spring Games, which is a social drama.就在我十一二岁时候的这一年，这日期也看看等到了。不料这一年真可惜，在早上就叫不到船。平桥村只有一只早出晚归的航船是大船，决没有留用的道理。其余的都是小船，不合用；央人到邻村去问，也没有，早都给别人定下了。外祖母很气恼，怪家里的人不早定，絮叨起来。母亲便宽慰伊，说我们鲁镇的戏比小村里的好得多，一年看几回，今天就算了。只有我急得要哭，母亲却竭力的嘱咐我，说万不能装模装样，怕又招外祖母生气，又不准和别人一同去，说是怕外祖母要担心。
Just when I was eleven or twelve years old, this date was also waiting. Unexpectedly, this year is a pity, and the boat cannot be called in the morning. There is only one ship in Pingqiao Village that leaves early and returns late, which is a big ship, and there is no reason to keep it. The rest are small boats and are not suitable; The central people went to the neighboring village to ask, but they didn't, and they had already set it for others. My grandmother was very angry and blamed the family for not making up her mind early and chattering. The mother comforted Yi and said that the dramas in our Lu town were much better than those in the small village, and I watched them several times a year, and I would forget it today. Only I was so anxious that I wanted to cry, but my mother tried her best to tell me, saying that I must not pretend, for fear of making my grandmother angry again, and not allowing me to go with others, saying that I was afraid that my grandmother would worry.总之，是完了。到下午，我的朋友都去了，戏已经开场了，我似乎听到锣鼓的声音，而且知道他们在戏台下买豆浆喝。
In short, it's over. By the afternoon, my friends had all gone, the play had already begun, I seemed to hear the sound of gongs and drums, and knew that they were buying soy milk to drink under the stage.这一天我不钓虾，东西也少吃。母亲很为难，没有法子想。到晚饭时候，外祖母也终于觉察了，并且说我应当不高兴，他们太怠慢，是待客的礼数里从来所没有的。吃饭之后，看过戏的少年们也都聚拢来了，高高兴兴的来讲戏。只有我不开口；他们都叹息而且表同情。忽然间，一个最聪明的双喜大悟似的提议了，他说，“大船？八叔的航船不是回来了么？”十几个别的少年也大悟，立刻撺掇起来，说可以坐了这航船和我一同去。我高兴了。然而外祖母又怕都是孩子，不可靠；母亲又说是若叫大人一同去，他们白天全有工作，要他熬夜，是不合情理的。在这迟疑之中，双喜可又看出底细来了，便又大声的说道，“我写包票！船又大；迅哥儿向来不乱跑；我们又都是识水性的！”
I don't fish for shrimp that day, and I eat less. My mother was very embarrassed and had no way to think about it. By dinner, my grandmother finally noticed and said that I should be unhappy, that they were too negligent, which had never been seen in the etiquette of hospitality. After eating, the teenagers who had watched the play also gathered and happily came to talk about the play. Only I don't speak; They all sighed and expressed sympathy. Suddenly, one of the smartest double happiness made a proposal, he said, "Big ship? Didn't Uncle Eighth's ship come back? A dozen other teenagers also realized and immediately picked it up, saying that they could take this ship and go with me. I was happy. However, my grandmother was afraid that they were all children and unreliable; The mother also said that if she asked the adults to go with her, they all had work during the day, and it was unreasonable to ask him to stay up late. In this hesitation, Shuangxi Ke saw that the details were coming, so he said loudly, "I write a package!" The ship is big; Brother Xun has never run around; We are all water-conscious! ”诚然！这十多个少年，委实没有一个不会凫水的，而且两三个还是弄潮的好手。
True! Of these more than ten teenagers, none of them know how to swim, and two or three are still good at making tides.外祖母和母亲也相信，便不再驳回，都微笑了。我们立刻一哄的出了门。
My grandmother and mother also believed it, so they stopped rejecting it and smiled. We immediately rushed out.我的很重的心忽而轻松了，身体也似乎舒展到说不出的大。一出门，便望见月下的平桥内泊着一只白篷的航船，大家跳下船，双喜拔前篙，阿发拔后篙，年幼的都陪我坐在舱中，较大的聚在船尾。母亲送出来吩咐“要小心”的时候，我们已经点开船，在桥石上一磕，退后几尺，即又上前出了桥。于是架起两支橹，一支两人，一里一换，有说笑的，有嚷的，夹着潺潺的船头激水的声音，在左右都是碧绿的豆麦田地的河流中，飞一般径向赵庄前进了。
My heavy heart suddenly relaxed, and my body seemed to stretch to an indescribable size. As soon as I went out, I saw a white-canopy boat parked in the flat bridge under the moon, everyone jumped off the boat, Shuangxi pulled the front pole, Ah Fa pulled the back pole, the younger ones sat with me in the cabin, and the larger ones gathered at the stern. When my mother sent out to tell me to be careful, we had already ordered the boat to start, knocked on the bridge stone, stepped back a few feet, and then stepped forward to exit the bridge again. So two oars were erected, one for two people, one mile and one for each other, some laughing, some shouting, and the sound of the gurgling water on the bow of the boat, in the river with green bean and wheat fields on both sides, flying straight towards Zhaozhuang.两岸的豆麦和河底的水草所发散出来的清香，夹杂在水气中扑面的吹来；月色便朦胧在这水气里。淡黑的起伏的连山，仿佛是踊跃的铁的兽脊似的，都远远的向船尾跑去了，但我却还以为船慢。他们换了四回手，渐望见依稀的赵庄，而且似乎听到歌吹了，还有几点火，料想便是戏台，但或者也许是渔火。
the fragrance emanating from the beans and wheat on both sides of the river and the aquatic plants at the bottom of the river is mixed with the water vapor; The moonlight is hazy in this moisture. The pale black undulating mountains, like the spines of a leaping iron beast, all ran far towards the stern of the boat, but I thought the boat was slow. They changed their hands four times, and gradually saw the vague Zhao Zhuang, and seemed to hear the song blowing, and there were a few fires, which were expected to be stages, but maybe they were fishing fires.那声音大概是横笛，宛转，悠扬，使我的心也沉静，然而又自失起来，觉得要和他弥散在含着豆麦蕴藻之香的夜气里。
The sound was probably a horizontal flute, winding and melodious, which calmed my heart, but I lost myself again, feeling that I wanted to be dispersed with him in the night air containing the fragrance of beans and wheat algae.那火接近了，果然是渔火；我才记得先前望见的也不是赵庄。那是正对船头的一丛松柏林，我去年也曾经去游玩过，还看见破的石马倒在地下，一个石羊蹲在草里呢。过了那林，船便弯进了叉港，于是赵庄便真在眼前了。
The fire is close, and it is indeed a fishing fire; I just remembered that it was not Zhao Zhuang that I saw before. It was a clump of pine and cypress directly opposite the bow of the boat, and I had also visited it last year, and I saw a broken stone horse lying on the ground, and a stone sheep squatting in the grass. After passing the forest, the boat bent into the fork port, so Zhao Zhuang was really in front of him.最惹眼的是屹立在庄外临河的空地上的一座戏台，模胡在远处的月夜中，和空间几乎分不出界限，我疑心画上见过的仙境，就在这里出现了。这时船走得更快，不多时，在台上显出人物来，红红绿绿的动，近台的河里一望乌黑的是看戏的人家的船篷。
The most eye-catching thing is a stage standing in the open space facing the river outside the village, Mo Hu is in the distance on a moonlit night, and the space is almost inseparable. At this time, the boat went faster, and not long after, a character appeared on the stage, red and green, and the river near the stage looked black and black was the canopy of the people watching the play.“近台没有什么空了，我们远远的看罢。”阿发说。
"There is no space near the stage, let's watch it from a distance." Ah Fa said.这时船慢了，不久就到，果然近不得台旁，大家只能下了篙，比那正对戏台的神棚还要远。其实我们这白篷的航船，本也不愿意和乌篷的船在一处，而况并没有空地呢……
At this time, the boat slowed down, and soon arrived, and sure enough, it was not close to the stage, so everyone could only get off the pole, which was farther away than the shrine facing the stage. In fact, our white-canopy ship didn't want to be in the same place as the black-canopy ship, let alone there was no open space......在停船的匆忙中，看见台上有一个黑的长胡子的背上插着四张旗，捏着长枪，和一群赤膊的人正打仗。双喜说，那就是有名的铁头老生，能连翻八十四个筋斗，他日里亲自数过的。
In the hurry to stop the boat, I saw a black bearded man on the platform with four flags on his back, holding a spear, and fighting with a group of shirtless people. Shuangxi said that it was a famous iron-headed old man who could do eighty-four somersaults in a row, which he personally counted in the day.我们便都挤在船头上看打仗，但那铁头老生却又并不翻筋斗，只有几个赤膊的人翻，翻了一阵，都进去了，接着走出一个小旦来，咿咿呀呀的唱。双喜说，“晚上看客少，铁头老生也懈了，谁肯显本领给白地看呢？”我相信这话对，因为其时台下已经不很有人，乡下人为了明天的工作，熬不得夜，早都睡觉去了，疏疏朗朗的站着的不过是几十个本村和邻村的闲汉。乌篷船里的那些土财主的家眷固然在，然而他们也不在乎看戏，多半是专到戏台下来吃糕饼水果和瓜子的。所以简直可以算白地。
We all huddled on the bow of the boat to watch the battle, but the iron-headed old man didn't somersault, only a few shirtless people turned over, turned over for a while, all went in, and then came out of a small dan and babbled. Shuangxi said, "There are few spectators at night, and the iron-headed old man is also slack, who is willing to show his skills to show Bai Di?" "I believe this is right, because there were not many people in the audience at that time, and the countrymen couldn't stay up late for tomorrow's work, so they went to bed early, and the only people standing sparsely and cheerfully were dozens of idlers from the village and neighboring villages. Of course, the families of the rich people in the black canopy boat are there, but they don't care about watching the play, most of them go down the stage to eat cakes, fruits and melon seeds. So it's just a blank slate.然而我的意思却也并不在乎看翻筋斗。我最愿意看的是一个人蒙了白布，两手在头上捧着一支棒似的蛇头的蛇精，其次是套了黄布衣跳老虎。但是等了许多时都不见，小旦虽然进去了，立刻又出来了一个很老的小生。我有些疲倦了，托桂生买豆浆去。他去了一刻，回来说，“没有。卖豆浆的聋子也回去了。日里倒有，我还喝了两碗呢。现在去舀一瓢水来给你喝罢。”
However, I don't care about watching somersaults. What I would most like to see is a snake spirit covered with a white cloth and holding a stick-like snake's head on his head in both hands, followed by a tiger jumping in a yellow cloth. But after waiting for a long time and not seeing him, although Xiao Dan went in, a very old student immediately came out. I was a little tired, so I asked Guisheng to buy soy milk. He went for a moment, came back and said, "No." The deaf man who sold soy milk also went back. I drank two bowls during the day. Now go scoop a scoop of water for you to drink. ”我不喝水，支撑着仍然看，也说不出见了些什么，只觉得戏子的脸都渐渐的有些稀奇了，那五官渐不明显，似乎融成一片的再没有什么高低。年纪小的几个多打呵欠了，大的也各管自己谈话。忽而一个红衫的小丑被绑在台柱子上，给一个花白胡子的用马鞭打起来了，大家才又振作精神的笑着看。在这一夜里，我以为这实在要算是最好的一折。
I didn't drink water, I still watched, and I couldn't say what I saw, I just felt that the actor's face was gradually a little strange, and the facial features gradually became less obvious, and it seemed that there was no higher or lower in the fusion. The younger ones yawned more, and the older ones also talked to themselves. Suddenly, a clown in a red shirt was tied to a pillar and beaten with a riding whip to a white-bearded man, and everyone cheered up and smiled again. On this night, I thought it was really the best discount.然而老旦终于出台了。老旦本来是我所最怕的东西，尤其是怕他坐下了唱。这时候，看见大家也都很扫兴，才知道他们的意见是和我一致的。那老旦当初还只是踱来踱去的唱，后来竟在中间的一把交椅上坐下了。我很担心；双喜他们却就破口喃喃的骂。我忍耐的等着，许多工夫，只见那老旦将手一抬，我以为就要站起来了，不料他却又慢慢的放下在原地方，仍旧唱。全船里几个人不住的吁气，其余的也打起呵欠来。双喜终于熬不住了，说道，怕他会唱到天明还不完，还是我们走的好罢。大家立刻都赞成，和开船时候一样踊跃，三四人径奔船尾，拔了篙，点退几丈，回转船头，驾起橹，骂着老旦，又向那松柏林前进了。
However, Lao Dan finally came out. Lao Dan was originally what I was most afraid of, especially when he sat down to sing. At this time, I saw that everyone was also very disappointed, and I realized that their opinions were in line with mine. The old man was just pacing around singing, but later he sat down on a chair in the middle. I was worried; Double happiness and the others muttered and scolded. I waited patiently, and after a lot of effort, I saw the old man raise his hand, I thought he was about to stand up, but he slowly put it down in the same place and still sang. A few people in the whole ship couldn't stop sighing, and the rest also yawned. Shuangxi finally couldn't stand it anymore, and said, I'm afraid he won't finish singing until dawn, so it's better for us to go. Everyone immediately agreed, as enthusiastic as when the boat was sailing, three or four people rushed straight to the stern, pulled out the pole, retreated a few feet, turned the bow of the boat, drove the oars, scolded Lao Dan, and advanced towards the pine cylindrical again.月还没有落，仿佛看戏也并不很久似的，而一离赵庄，月光又显得格外的皎洁。回望戏台在灯火光中，却又如初来未到时候一般，又漂渺得像一座仙山楼阁，满被红霞罩着了。吹到耳边来的又是横笛，很悠扬；我疑心老旦已经进去了，但也不好意思说再回去看。
The moon hasn't set yet, as if it's not been a long time since I've been watching a play, and when I left Zhao Zhuang, the moonlight looked particularly bright. Looking back at the stage in the lights, it was as if it had not yet arrived when it first came, and it was like a fairy mountain pavilion, covered with red clouds. the flute that came to the ear was very melodious; I suspected that Lao Dan had already gone in, but I was embarrassed to say that I would go back and look at it again.不多久，松柏林早在船后了，船行也并不慢，但周围的黑暗只是浓，可知已经到了深夜。他们一面议论着戏子，或骂，或笑，一面加紧的摇船。这一次船头的激水声更其响亮了，那航船，就像一条大白鱼背着一群孩子在浪花里蹿，连夜渔的几个老渔父，也停了艇子看着喝采起来。
Not long after, the pine berlin was already behind the boat, and the boat was not slow, but the surrounding darkness was only thick, and it was late at night. While talking about the actors, or scolding, or laughing, they stepped up the rocking boat. This time, the sound of the water at the bow of the boat was even louder, and the boat was like a big white fish carrying a group of children on its back in the waves, and several old fishermen who had been fishing overnight also stopped their boats and watched and applauded.离平桥村还有一里模样，船行却慢了，摇船的都说很疲乏，因为太用力，而且许久没有东西吃。这回想出来的是桂生，说是罗汉豆正旺相，柴火又现成，我们可以偷一点来煮吃的。大家都赞成，立刻近岸停了船；岸上的田里，乌油油的便都是结实的罗汉豆。
There is still a mile away from Pingqiao Village, but the boat is slow, and the people who rock the boat say that they are very tired because they are too hard and have nothing to eat for a long time. This time I remembered that it was Gui Sheng, who said that Luo Han beans were in full swing, and the firewood was ready, so we could steal some to cook and eat. Everyone agreed, and immediately stopped the boat near the shore; In the fields on the shore, there are strong Luo Han beans.“阿阿，阿发，这边是你家的，这边是老六一家的，我们偷那一边的呢？”双喜先跳下去了，在岸上说。
"Ah, Ah Fa, this side belongs to your family, this side belongs to Lao Liu's family, which side do we steal?" Double happiness jumped down first and said on the shore.我们也都跳上岸。阿发一面跳，一面说道，“且慢，让我来看一看罢，”他于是往来的摸了一回，直起身来说道，“偷我们的罢，我们的大得多呢。”一声答应，大家便散开在阿发家的豆田里，各摘了一大捧，抛入船舱中。双喜以为再多偷，倘给阿发的娘知道是要哭骂的，于是各人便到六一公公的田里又各偷了一大捧。
We all jumped ashore too. Ah Fa jumped and said, "Slow, let me take a look," he then touched back and forth, straightened up and said, "Steal us, ours are much bigger." With a word of agreement, everyone dispersed in the bean field of the Afa family, each picked a large handful, and threw it into the cabin. Shuangxi thought that if he stole more, if he knew to Ah Fa's mother, he would cry and scold, so everyone went to the field of Liu Yi Father-in-law and stole a large handful of them.我们中间几个年长的仍然慢慢的摇着船，几个到后舱去生火，年幼的和我都剥豆。不久豆熟了，便任凭航船浮在水面上，都围起来用手撮着吃。吃完豆，又开船，一面洗器具，豆荚豆壳全抛在河水里，什么痕迹也没有了。双喜所虑的是用了八公公船上的盐和柴，这老头子很细心，一定要知道，会骂的。然而大家议论之后，归结是不怕。他如果骂，我们便要他归还去年在岸边拾去的一枝枯桕树，而且当面叫他“八癞子”。
A few of us were still slowly rocking the boat, a few went to the aft cabin to start a fire, and the younger ones and I were peeling beans. Soon the beans were ripe, and they let the boat float on the water, and they all gathered around and ate it with their hands. After eating the beans, we sailed the boat again, washing the utensils, and the pod shells were all thrown into the river, and there was no trace. What Shuangxi was worried about was the use of salt and firewood on the Eight Dukes ship, this old man was very careful, he must know, he would scold. However, after everyone talked, it came down to not being afraid. If he scolds, we will ask him to return a dead tree he picked up on the shore last year, and call him a "leper" in person.“都回来了！那里会错。我原说过写包票的！”双喜在船头上忽而大声的说。
"It's all back! It would be wrong there. I originally said that I would write a package ticket! Shuangxi suddenly said loudly on the bow of the boat.我向船头一望，前面已经是平桥。桥脚上站着一个人，却是我的母亲，双喜便是对伊说着话。我走出前舱去，船也就进了平桥了，停了船，我们纷纷都上岸。母亲颇有些生气，说是过了三更了，怎么回来得这样迟，但也就高兴了，笑着邀大家去吃炒米。
I looked at the bow of the boat and saw a flat bridge in front of me. There was a person standing at the foot of the bridge, but it was my mother, and Shuangxi was talking to him. I walked out of the front cabin, and the boat entered the flat bridge, stopped the boat, and we all went ashore. My mother was a little angry, saying that it was past midnight, why did she come back so late, but she was happy, and invited everyone to eat fried rice with a smile.大家都说已经吃了点心，又渴睡，不如及早睡的好，各自回去了。
Everyone said that they had eaten snacks and were thirsty for sleep, so it was better to go to bed early, so they went back.第二天，我向午才起来，并没有听到什么关系八公公盐柴事件的纠葛，下午仍然去钓虾。
The next day, I got up at noon, and I didn't hear anything related to the Hachiko salt and firewood incident, and I still went shrimp fishing in the afternoon.“双喜，你们这班小鬼，昨天偷了我的豆了罢？又不肯好好的摘，踏坏了不少。”我抬头看时，是六一公公棹着小船，卖了豆回来了，船肚里还有剩下的一堆豆。
"Double happiness, you little ghosts, you stole my beans yesterday? And he refused to pick it properly, and he trampled on it a lot. When I looked up, it was my father-in-law who was rowing a boat and selling beans and came back, and there was still a bunch of beans left in the belly of the boat.“是的。我们请客。我们当初还不要你的呢。你看，你把我的虾吓跑了！”双喜说。
"Yes. We treat you. We didn't want you in the first place. Look, you scared my shrimp away! Shuangxi said.六一公公看见我，便停了楫，笑道，“请客？——这是应该的。”于是对我说，“迅哥儿，昨天的戏可好么？”
When Father-in-law Liu Yi saw me, he stopped and said with a smile, "Treat? - This is how it should be. So he said to me, "Brother Xun, was yesterday's play good?" ”我点一点头，说道，“好。”
I nodded and said, "Okay." ”“豆可中吃呢？”
"Can you eat beans in the middle?"我又点一点头，说道，“很好。”
I nodded again and said, "Very good." ”不料六一公公竟非常感激起来，将大拇指一翘，得意的说道，“这真是大市镇里出来的读过书的人才识货！我的豆种是粒粒挑选过的，乡下人不识好歹，还说我的豆比不上别人的呢。我今天也要送些给我们的姑奶奶尝尝去……”他于是打着楫子过去了。
Unexpectedly, the father-in-law of Liuyi was very grateful, raised his thumbs up, and said proudly, "This is really a person who has read in a big city!" My bean seeds are selected grain, and the countrymen don't know what to do, and they say that my beans are not as good as others. I'm going to give some to our aunt to try today......" He then paddled over.待到母亲叫我回去吃晚饭的时候，桌上便有一大碗煮熟了的罗汉豆，就是六一公公送给母亲和我吃的。听说他还对母亲极口夸奖我，说“小小年纪便有见识，将来一定要中状元。姑奶奶，你的福气是可以写包票的了。”但我吃了豆，却并没有昨夜的豆那么好。
When my mother asked me to go back for dinner, there was a large bowl of cooked Luo Han beans on the table, which my father-in-law gave to my mother and me. I heard that he also praised me to my mother, saying, "I have knowledge at a young age, and I will definitely win the championship in the future." Auntie, your blessing is that you can write a package ticket. "But I ate beans, but they weren't as good as last night's beans.真的，一直到现在，我实在再没有吃到那夜似的好豆，——也不再看到那夜似的好戏了。
Really, until now, I really haven't eaten the good beans like that night,—— and I don't see the good show that night again.一九二二年十月。

October 1922.

封面

书名页

版权信息

图书在版编目（CIP）数据
Books in Print (CIP) data彷徨／鲁迅著．—南京：译林出版社，2013.11
Hesitation/Lu Xun.—Nanjing: Yilin Publishing House, 2013.11（鲁迅自编文集）
(Lu Xun's self-edited anthology)ISBN 978-7-5447-4373-0
ISBN 978-7-5447-4373-0Ⅰ．①彷…　Ⅱ．①鲁…　Ⅲ．①鲁迅小说－小说集　Ⅳ．①I210.6
I..(1) Like... II..(1) Lu... III..(1) Lu Xun's Novels-Collection IV..(1)I210.6中国版本图书馆CIP数据核字（2013）第211105号
China Version Library CIP Data Verification (2013) No. 211105 
书　　名　彷　徨
The title of the book is hesitant作　　者　鲁　迅
Author: Lu Xun责任编辑　王振华
Editor-in-charge: Wang Zhenhua特约编辑　邓　敏
Special editor Deng Min出版发行　凤凰出版传媒股份有限公司
Published and distributed by Phoenix Publishing and Media Co., Ltd译林出版社
Yilin Publishing House出版社地址　南京市湖南路1号A楼，邮编：210009
Publisher's address Building A, No. 1 Hunan Road, Nanjing, Zip Code: 210009电子邮箱　yilin@yilin.com
Email yilin@yilin.com出版社网址　http://www.yilin.com
Publisher website http://www.yilin.com印　　刷　北京凯达印务有限公司
Printing Beijing Kaida Printing Co., Ltd开　　本　787×1092毫米　1/32
Volume 787×1092 mm 1/32印　　张　5.125
Print 5.125字　　数　98千字
Word count: 98,000 words版　　次　2013年11月第1版　2013年11月第1次印刷
Edition November 2013 1st edition November 2013 1st printing书　　号　ISBN 978-7-5447-4373-0
ISBN 978-7-5447-4373-0定　　价　12.80元
The price is 12.80 yuan译林版图书若有印装错误可向承印厂调换

If there are printing errors in the translated version of the book, it can be exchanged with the printing factory

未知

朝发轫于苍梧兮，夕余至乎县圃；欲少留此灵琐兮，日忽忽其将暮。
In the morning, I set off from Cangwu, and in the evening, I arrived at the county garden; I wish to stay here for a while, but the sun is about to set.吾令羲和弭节兮，望崦嵫而勿迫；路漫漫其修远兮，吾将上下而求索。
I command Xihe to slow down, looking at the Yanzhi Mountains without being overwhelmed; The road ahead is long and long; I will search up and down.屈原：《离骚》。

Qu Yuan: "Li Sao".

Table of Contents

目录

Table of Contents

directory祝福 blessing
在酒楼上 In the restaurant
幸福的家庭 Happy family
肥皂 肥皂
长明灯 Everlasting lamp
示众 Streets
高老夫子 Old Master Gao
孤独者 Lonely people
伤逝 Died of injuries
弟兄 brothers
离婚 divorce
返回总目录 Return to the General Directory

祝福

祝福

祝福

blessing旧历的年底毕竟最像年底，村镇上不必说，就在天空中也显出将到新年的气象来。灰白色的沉重的晚云中间时时发出闪光，接着一声钝响，是送灶的爆竹；近处燃放的可就更强烈了，震耳的大音还没有息，空气里已经散满了幽微的火药香。我是正在这一夜回到我的故乡鲁镇的。虽说故乡，然而已没有家，所以只得暂寓在鲁四老爷的宅子里。他是我的本家，比我长一辈，应该称之曰“四叔”，是一个讲理学的老监生。他比先前并没有什么大改变，单是老了些，但也还未留胡子，一见面是寒暄，寒暄之后说我“胖了”，说我“胖了”之后即大骂其新党。但我知道，这并非借题在骂我：因为他所骂的还是康有为。但是，谈话是总不投机的了，于是不多久，我便一个人剩在书房里。
After all, the end of the old calendar is most like the end of the year, and not to mention the villages and towns, there is also a weather in the sky that will come to the New Year. The gray and white heavy evening clouds flashed from time to time, followed by a dull sound, which was a firecracker for the stove; The nearby fireworks were even more intense, the deafening sound had not yet subsided, and the air was already filled with a faint fragrance of gunpowder. I was returning to my hometown of Luzhen this night. Although it is a hometown, there is no home, so I have to temporarily live in the house of Master Lu Si. He is my family, one generation older than me, and should be called "Fourth Uncle", an old student who lectures on science. He hasn't changed much from before, just a little older, but he hasn't grown a beard yet, and when he met, he greeted me, and after exchanging pleasantries, he said that I was "fat", and after saying that I was "fat", he scolded his new party. But I know that this is not an excuse to scold me: because he is still scolding Kang Youwei. However, the conversation was never speculative, so it didn't take long for me to be left alone in the study.第二天我起得很迟，午饭之后，出去看了几个本家和朋友；第三天也照样。他们也都没有什么大改变，单是老了些；家中却一律忙，都在准备着“祝福”。这是鲁镇年终的大典，致敬尽礼，迎接福神，拜求来年一年中的好运气的。杀鸡，宰鹅，买猪肉，用心细细的洗，女人的臂膊都在水里浸得通红，有的还带着绞丝银镯子。煮熟之后，横七竖八的插些筷子在这类东西上，可就称为“福礼”了，五更天陈列起来，并且点上香烛，恭请福神们来享用；拜的却只限于男人，拜完自然仍然是放爆竹。年年如此，家家如此，——只要买得起福礼和爆竹之类的，——今年自然也如此。天色愈阴暗了，下午竟下起雪来，雪花大的有梅花那么大，满天飞舞，夹着烟霭和忙碌的气色，将鲁镇乱成一团糟。我回到四叔的书房里时，瓦楞上已经雪白，房里也映得较光明，极分明的显出壁上挂着的朱拓的大“壽”字，陈抟老祖写的；一边的对联已经脱落，松松的卷了放在长桌上，一边的还在，道是“事理通达心气和平”。我又无聊赖的到窗下的案头去一翻，只见一堆似乎未必完全的《康熙字典》，一部《近思录集注》和一部《四书衬》。无论如何，我明天决计要走了。
I got up late the next day, and after lunch, I went out to see a few family and friends; The same goes for the third day. They haven't changed much, just they're older; But the family is busy, preparing "blessings". This is the year-end ceremony of Luzhen, paying tribute to the god of fortune, and praying for good luck in the coming year. Killing chickens, slaughtering geese, buying pork, and washing them carefully, the women's arms were soaked red in the water, and some even wore twisted silver bracelets. After cooking, insert some chopsticks horizontally and vertically on this kind of thing, which can be called "blessing gift", displayed on the fifth watch, and lit incense candles, and respectfully invite the gods of fortune to enjoy; Worship is limited to men, and after worshiping, firecrackers are naturally set off. This is the case every year,—— as long as you can afford blessings and firecrackers,—— this year is naturally the same. The sky became darker, and it snowed in the afternoon, and the snowflakes were as big as plum blossoms, flying all over the sky, sandwiched between smoke and busy complexion, making Lu Zhen a mess. When I returned to my fourth uncle's study, the corrugated tiles were already snow-white, and the room was brighter, and it was very clear that Zhu Tuo's big "Shou" character hanging on the wall was written by Chen Tuan's ancestor; The couplet on one side has fallen off, and it is loosely rolled up and placed on the long table, and the one on the other side is still there, saying "things are clear and peaceful". I went to the desk under the window bored and flipped through it, and saw a bunch of seemingly incomplete "Kangxi Dictionary", a "Collected Notes on Recent Thoughts" and a "Four Book Lining". Anyway, I'm going to leave tomorrow.况且，一想到昨天遇见祥林嫂的事，也就使我不能安住。那是下午，我到镇的东头访过一个朋友，走出来，就在河边遇见她；而且见她瞪着的眼睛的视线，就知道明明是向我走来的。我这回在鲁镇所见的人们中，改变之大，可以说无过于她的了：五年前的花白的头发，即今已经全白，全不像四十上下的人；脸上瘦削不堪，黄中带黑，而且消尽了先前悲哀的神色，仿佛是木刻似的；只有那眼珠间或一轮，还可以表示她是一个活物。她一手提着竹篮，内中一个破碗，空的；一手拄着一支比她更长的竹竿，下端开了裂：她分明已经纯乎是一个乞丐了。
Moreover, when I think about meeting Xianglin's sister-in-law yesterday, I can't settle down. It was afternoon, and I visited a friend at the east end of the town, and when I came out, I met her by the river; And when I saw the gaze of her staring eyes, I knew that she was clearly coming towards me. Among the people I saw in Luzhen this time, it can be said that no one has changed more than her: the gray hair five years ago is now completely white, not like a person in his forties; The face was thin, yellow and black, and the previous sad look disappeared, as if it were a woodcut; Only between the eyeballs or a round can also indicate that she is a living creature. She was carrying a bamboo basket in one hand, and a broken bowl in it was empty; In one hand, she held a bamboo pole longer than hers, and the lower end cracked: she was clearly a pure beggar.我就站住，豫备她来讨钱。
I stopped and prepared for her to come and ask for money.“你回来了？”她先这样问。
"Are you back?" She asked first.“是的。”
"Yes."“这正好。你是识字的，又是出门人，见识得多。我正要问你一件事——”她那没有精采的眼睛忽然发光了。
"That's just right. You are literate, and you are a person who has seen a lot. I was about to ask you something—" Her unattractive eyes suddenly lit up.我万料不到她却说出这样的话来，诧异的站着。
I never expected her to say such a thing, standing in surprise.“就是——”她走近两步，放低了声音，极秘密似的切切的说，“一个人死了之后，究竟有没有魂灵的？”
"That's it—" she took two steps closer, lowered her voice, and said earnestly as if it were very secretive, "After a person dies, is there a soul?" ”我很悚然，一见她的眼钉着我的，背上也就遭了芒刺一般，比在学校里遇到不及豫防的临时考，教师又偏是站在身旁的时候，惶急得多了。对于魂灵的有无，我自己是向来毫不介意的；但在此刻，怎样回答她好呢？我在极短期的踌蹰中，想，这里的人照例相信鬼，然而她，却疑惑了，——或者不如说希望：希望其有，又希望其无……。人何必增添末路的人的苦恼，为她起见，不如说有罢。
I was very scared, as soon as I saw her eyes nailed me, my back was like a thorn, compared to when I encountered a temporary exam in school that was not enough to guard against and the teacher stood beside me, I was much more anxious. I have never minded the presence or absence of souls; But at this moment, how to answer her? In a very short period of hesitation, I thought that the people here believed in ghosts as usual, but she was puzzled,—— or rather hoped: I hope it exists, and I hope it doesn't ....... Why should people add to the distress of the end of the road, for her sake, it is better to say that there is.“也许有罢，——我想。”我于是吞吞吐吐的说。
"Maybe it,—— I think." I said hesitantly.“那么，也就有地狱了？”
"So, there is hell?"“阿！地狱？”我很吃惊，只得支梧着，“地狱？——论理，就该也有。——然而也未必，……谁来管这等事……。”
"Ah! Hell? I was so surprised that I had to hold on, "Hell?" ——Reasoning, there should be too. - However, it may not be ,...... Who will take care of such things...... ”“那么，死掉的一家的人，都能见面的？”
"So, can the dead family meet?"“唉唉，见面不见面呢？……”这时我已知道自己也还是完全一个愚人，什么踌蹰，什么计画，都挡不住三句问。我即刻胆怯起来了，便想全翻过先前的话来，“那是，……实在，我说不清……。其实，究竟有没有魂灵，我也说不清。”
"Alas, what about meeting or not? ...... "At this time, I already knew that I was still a complete fool, and I couldn't stop asking three questions about any hesitation or plan. I immediately became timid, so I wanted to turn over all the previous words, "That',...... Really, I can't tell ....... In fact, I can't tell if there is a soul. ”我乘她不再紧接的问，迈开步便走，匆匆的逃回四叔的家中，心里很觉得不安逸。自己想，我这答话怕于她有些危险。她大约因为在别人的祝福时候，感到自身的寂寞了，然而会不会含有别的什么意思的呢？——或者是有了什么豫感了？倘有别的意思，又因此发生别的事，则我的答话委实该负若干的责任……。但随后也就自笑，觉得偶尔的事，本没有什么深意义，而我偏要细细推敲，正无怪教育家要说是生着神经病；而况明明说过“说不清”，已经推翻了答话的全局，即使发生什么事，于我也毫无关系了。
I took advantage of her no longer asking immediately, took a step away, and hurriedly fled back to my fourth uncle's house, feeling very uneasy. I thought to myself, I was afraid that her answer would be a bit dangerous. She probably felt lonely when she was blessed by others, but could it mean anything else? ——Or do you have any premonitions? If there is any other meaning and something else happens because of this, then my answer should indeed bear some responsibilities ....... But then I laughed at myself, feeling that occasional things had no deep meaning, and I had to scrutinize it carefully, no wonder educators said that they were born with neurosis; And Kuang Ming said "unclear", which has overturned the overall situation of the answer, even if something happens, it has nothing to do with me.“说不清”是一句极有用的话。不更事的勇敢的少年，往往敢于给人解决疑问，选定医生，万一结果不佳，大抵反成了怨府，然而一用这说不清来作结束，便事事逍遥自在了。我在这时，更感到这一句话的必要，即使和讨饭的女人说话，也是万不可省的。
"Unclear" is a very useful phrase. Brave teenagers who don't do anything often dare to solve questions for others and choose doctors, and in case the results are not good, they will probably become resentful, but once they end with this inexplicable ending, everything is at ease. At this time, I felt the necessity of this sentence even more, even if I was talking to a begging woman, it was absolutely unavoidable.但是我总觉得不安，过了一夜，也仍然时时记忆起来，仿佛怀着什么不祥的豫感；在阴沉的雪天里，在无聊的书房里，这不安愈加强烈了。不如走罢，明天进城去。福兴楼的清燉鱼翅，一元一大盘，价廉物美，现在不知增价了否？往日同游的朋友，虽然已经云散，然而鱼翅是不可不吃的，即使只有我一个……。无论如何，我明天决计要走了。
But I always felt uneasy, and after a night, I still remembered it from time to time, as if I had some ominous premonition; On a gloomy snowy day, in a boring study, this uneasiness intensified. It would be better to leave and go to the city tomorrow. Fuxing Building's stewed shark fin, one yuan and a large plate, cheap and high-quality, now I don't know if the price has increased? Although the friends who traveled with me in the past have dispersed, shark fin is a must-eat, even if I am the only one ....... Anyway, I'm going to leave tomorrow.我因为常见些但愿不如所料，以为未毕竟如所料的事，却每每恰如所料的起来，所以很恐怕这事也一律。果然，特别的情形开始了。傍晚，我竟听到有些人聚在内室里谈话，仿佛议论什么事似的，但不一会，说话声也就止了，只有四叔且走而且高声的说：
Because I often hope that things are not as expected, I think that things are not as expected after all, but they always happen exactly as expected, so I am afraid that this will be the same. Sure enough, a special situation began. In the evening, I actually heard some people gathered in the inner room talking, as if they were talking about something, but after a while, the voice stopped, and only the fourth uncle left and said loudly:“不早不迟，偏偏要在这时候，——这就可见是一个谬种！”
"It's not too early, it's not too late, but at this time,—— this can be seen as a fallacy!"我先是诧异，接着是很不安，似乎这话于我有关系。试望门外，谁也没有。好容易待到晚饭前他们的短工来冲茶，我才得了打听消息的机会。
I was surprised at first, then very uneasy, as if this had something to do with me. Looking out the door, there was no one. It was easy to stay until their short-term workers came to make tea before dinner, and I got the opportunity to inquire about the news.“刚才，四老爷和谁生气呢？”我问。
"Just now, who was the fourth master angry with?" I asked.“还不是和祥林嫂？”那短工简捷的说。
"Isn't it Sister-in-law Xianglin?" The short man said simply.“祥林嫂？怎么了？”我又赶紧的问。
"Xianglin's sister-in-law? What's wrong? I asked quickly again.“老了。”
"Old."“死了？”我的心突然紧缩，几乎跳起来，脸上大约也变了色。但他始终没有抬头，所以全不觉。我也就镇定了自己，接着问：
"Dead?" My heart suddenly contracted, almost jumping, and my face probably changed color. But he never looked up, so he didn't feel it at all. I calmed myself down and asked:“什么时候死的？”
"When did you die?"“什么时候？——昨天夜里，或者就是今天罢。——我说不清。”
"When? ——Last night, or today. - I can't tell. ”“怎么死的？”
"How did you die?"“怎么死的？——还不是穷死的？”他淡然的回答，仍然没有抬头向我看，出去了。
"How did you die? ——Isn't he still poor? He replied indifferently, still didn't look up at me, and went out.然而我的惊惶却不过暂时的事，随着就觉得要来的事，已经过去，并不必仰仗我自己的“说不清”和他之所谓“穷死的”的宽慰，心地已经渐渐轻松；不过偶然之间，还似乎有些负疚。晚饭摆出来了，四叔俨然的陪着。我也还想打听些关于祥林嫂的消息，但知道他虽然读过“鬼神者二气之良能也”，而忌讳仍然极多，当临近祝福时候，是万不可提起死亡疾病之类的话的；倘不得已，就该用一种替代的隐语，可惜我又不知道，因此屡次想问，而终于中止了。我从他俨然的脸色上，又忽而疑他正以为我不早不迟，偏要在这时候来打搅他，也是一个谬种，便立刻告诉他明天要离开鲁镇，进城去，趁早放宽了他的心。他也不很留。这样闷闷的吃完了一餐饭。
However, my panic was only temporary, and as I felt that what was coming had passed, I did not have to rely on my own "intelligible" and his so-called "poor death" relief, and my heart was gradually relaxed; But by chance, it seems to be a little guilty. Dinner was served, and the fourth uncle was with him. I also want to inquire about some news about Xianglin's sister-in-law, but I know that although he has read "the good energy of the two qi of ghosts and gods", there are still many taboos, and when the blessing is approaching, it is absolutely not to mention words such as death and disease; If it is a last resort, I should use an alternative cryptic language, but unfortunately I don't know, so I want to ask repeatedly, and finally stopped. From his face, I suddenly suspected that he was thinking that I was neither early nor late, but it was also a mistake to disturb him at this time, so I immediately told him that he was leaving Luzhen tomorrow and going into the city to relax his heart as soon as possible. He didn't stay very much. I finished a meal like this.冬季日短，又是雪天，夜色早已笼罩了全市镇。人们都在灯下匆忙，但窗外很寂静。雪花落在积得厚厚的雪褥上面，听去似乎瑟瑟有声，使人更加感得沉寂。我独坐在发出黄光的菜油灯下，想，这百无聊赖的祥林嫂，被人们弃在尘芥堆中的，看得厌倦了的陈旧的玩物，先前还将形骸露在尘芥里，从活得有趣的人们看来，恐怕要怪讶她何以还要存在，现在总算被无常打扫得干干净净了。魂灵的有无，我不知道；然而在现世，则无聊生者不生，即使厌见者不见，为人为己，也还都不错。我静听着窗外似乎瑟瑟作响的雪花声，一面想，反而渐渐的舒畅起来。
The winter days are short and snowy, and the night has already enveloped the whole town. People were in a hurry under the lights, but there was silence outside the window. The snowflakes fell on the thick snow mattress, which seemed to make a shivering sound, making people feel even more silent. I sat alone under the vegetable oil lamp that emitted yellow light, thinking, this boring Xianglin sister-in-law, abandoned by people in the dust and mustard, tired of looking at the old plaything, and previously exposed her body in the dust mustard. I don't know whether there is a soul or not; However, in this world, boring people are not born, even if those who are tired of seeing are not seen, it is not bad for others and themselves. I listened to the sound of snowflakes that seemed to be rustling outside the window, and as I thought about it, I gradually felt relieved.然而先前所见所闻的她的半生事迹的断片，至此也联成一片了。
However, the fragments of her half-life deeds that she had seen and heard before were now connected.
她不是鲁镇人。有一年的冬初，四叔家里要换女工，做中人的卫老婆子带她进来了，头上扎着白头绳，乌裙，蓝夹袄，月白背心，年纪大约二十六七，脸色青黄，但两颊却还是红的。卫老婆子叫她祥林嫂，说是自己母家的邻舍，死了当家人，所以出来做工了。四叔皱了皱眉，四婶已经知道了他的意思，是在讨厌她是一个寡妇。但是她模样还周正，手脚都壮大，又只是顺着眼，不开一句口，很像一个安分耐劳的人，便不管四叔的皱眉，将她留下了。试工期内，她整天的做，似乎闲着就无聊，又有力，简直抵得过一个男子，所以第三天就定局，每月工钱五百文。
She is not from Luzhen. At the beginning of winter one year, the fourth uncle's family was going to change female workers, and Mrs. Wei, who was a middle-aged man, brought her in, with a white rope on her head, a black skirt, a blue jacket, and a moon-white vest, about twenty-six or seven years old, her face was blue and yellow, but her cheeks were still red. Mrs. Wei called her Xianglin's sister-in-law, saying that she was a neighbor of her mother's family, and she died as a family member, so she came out to work. The fourth uncle frowned, the fourth aunt already knew what he meant, and she hated her for being a widow. But she still looked good, her hands and feet were strong, and she just followed her eyes and didn't say a word, very much like a hard-working person, so she ignored the frown of the fourth uncle and left her. During the trial period, she worked all day, and it seemed that she was bored and powerful, and she was worth a man, so it was a foregone conclusion on the third day, and the monthly wage was 500 yuan.大家都叫她祥林嫂；没问她姓什么，但中人是卫家山人，既说是邻居，那大概也就姓卫了。她不很爱说话，别人问了才回答，答的也不多。直到十几天之后，这才陆续的知道她家里还有严厉的婆婆；一个小叔子，十多岁，能打柴了；她是春天没了丈夫的；他本来也打柴为生，比她小十岁：大家所知道的就只是这一点。
Everyone calls her Xianglin's sister-in-law; I didn't ask her what her surname was, but the Chinese man was from Weijiashan, and since he was a neighbor, he probably had the surname Wei. She is not very talkative, and she answers only when others ask, and she doesn't answer much. It wasn't until more than ten days later that she learned that she still had a strict mother-in-law at home; a little brother-in-law, in his teens, can chop firewood; She lost her husband in the spring; He also made a living by chopping firewood, ten years younger than her: that's all everyone knows.日子很快的过去了，她的做工却毫没有懈，食物不论，力气是不惜的。人们都说鲁四老爷家里雇着了女工，实在比勤快的男人还勤快。到年底，扫尘，洗地，杀鸡，宰鹅，彻夜的煮福礼，全是一人担当，竟没有添短工。然而她反满足，口角边渐渐的有了笑影，脸上也白胖了。
The days passed quickly, but her workmanship was unflawed, and she did not hesitate to use her strength regardless of food. People say that Master Lu Si hired female workers at home, and he was really more diligent than a diligent man. By the end of the year, sweeping the dust, washing the floor, killing chickens, slaughtering geese, and cooking blessings all night long were all responsible for one person, and there was no short-term work. However, she was satisfied, and a smile gradually appeared on the corner of her mouth, and her face became white and fat.新年才过，她从河边淘米回来时，忽而失了色，说刚才远远地看见一个男人在对岸徘徊，很像夫家的堂伯，恐怕是正为寻她而来的。四婶很惊疑，打听底细，她又不说。四叔一知道，就皱一皱眉，道：
Just after the New Year, when she came back from washing rice by the river, she suddenly lost her color, saying that she had just seen a man wandering on the other side from a distance, very much like her husband's cousin, and I was afraid that he was looking for her. The fourth aunt was very suspicious and asked for details, but she didn't say anything. As soon as the fourth uncle found out, he frowned and said:“这不好。恐怕她是逃出来的。”
"It's not good. I'm afraid she escaped. ”她诚然是逃出来的，不多久，这推想就证实了。
She did escape, and it didn't take long for this speculation to be confirmed.此后大约十几天，大家正已渐渐忘却了先前的事，卫老婆子忽而带了一个三十多岁的女人进来了，说那是祥林嫂的婆婆。那女人虽是山里人模样，然而应酬很从容，说话也能干，寒暄之后，就赔罪，说她特来叫她的儿媳回家去，因为开春事务忙，而家中只有老的和小的，人手不够了。
About ten days later, everyone was gradually forgetting what had happened before, and Mrs. Wei suddenly brought a woman in her thirties and said that it was Xianglin's mother-in-law. Although the woman looked like a mountain person, she was very calm in socializing and could speak, and after exchanging pleasantries, she made amends, saying that she had come to call her daughter-in-law home, because she was busy with spring affairs, and there were only old and young people in the family, and there were not enough manpower.“既是她的婆婆要她回去，那有什么话可说呢。”四叔说。
"Since her mother-in-law wants her to go back, what is there to say?" The fourth uncle said.于是算清了工钱，一共一千七百五十文，她全存在主人家，一文也还没有用，便都交给她的婆婆。那女人又取了衣服，道过谢，出去了。其时已经是正午。
So she calculated the wages, a total of 1,750 yuan, all of which she had in the master's house, and she didn't use a penny, so she handed it all over to her mother-in-law. The woman took her clothes again, thanked her, and went out. It was already noon.“阿呀，米呢？祥林嫂不是去淘米的么？……”好一会，四婶这才惊叫起来。她大约有些饿，记得午饭了。
"Oh, where's the rice? Didn't Xianglin's sister-in-law go to wash rice? ......" After a while, the fourth aunt screamed. She was probably a little hungry and remembered lunch.于是大家分头寻淘箩。她先到厨下，次到堂前，后到卧房，全不见淘箩的影子。四叔踱出门外，也不见，一直到河边，才见平平正正的放在岸上，旁边还有一株菜。
So everyone went to find a basket. She went to the kitchen first, then to the front of the hall, and then to the bedroom, and there was no shadow of the basket. The fourth uncle paced out the door and disappeared, until he reached the river, only to see it lying on the shore, and there was a vegetable next to it.看见的人报告说，河里面上午就泊了一只白篷船，篷是全盖起来的，不知道什么人在里面，但事前也没有人去理会他。待到祥林嫂出来淘米，刚刚要跪下去，那船里便突然跳出两个男人来，像是山里人，一个抱住她，一个帮着，拖进船去了。祥林嫂还哭喊了几声，此后便再没有什么声息，大约给用什么堵住了罢。接着就走上两个女人来，一个不认识，一个就是卫婆子。窥探舱里，不很分明，她像是捆了躺在船板上。
The person who saw it reported that a white canopy boat was parked in the river in the morning, and the canopy was fully covered, and it was not known who was inside, but no one paid attention to him beforehand. When Xianglin's sister-in-law came out to wash rice, just as she was about to kneel, two men suddenly jumped out of the boat, like mountain people, one hugged her, the other helped, and dragged into the boat. Xianglin's sister-in-law cried a few times, and there was no sound after that, so she probably blocked it with something. Then he walked up to two women, one he didn't know, and the other was Mrs. Wei. In the peeping cabin, it was not very clear, she seemed to be lying on the board of the ship.“可恶！然而……。”四叔说。
"Damn it! However....... The fourth uncle said.这一天是四婶自己煮中饭；他们的儿子阿牛烧火。
On this day, the fourth aunt cooked her own lunch; Their son Ah Niu burned the fire.午饭之后，卫老婆子又来了。
After lunch, Mrs. Wei came again.“可恶！”四叔说。
"Damn it!" The fourth uncle said.“你是什么意思？亏你还会再来见我们。”四婶洗着碗，一见面就愤愤的说，“你自己荐她来，又合伙劫她去，闹得沸反盈天的，大家看了成个什么样子？你拿我们家里开玩笑么？”
"What do you mean? You will come to see us again." The fourth aunt was washing the dishes, and as soon as they met, she said indignantly, "You recommended her yourself, and you robbed her with a partner, and you made a lot of noise, what did you look like?" Are you kidding our family? ”“阿呀阿呀，我真上当。我这回，就是为此特地来说说清楚的。她来求我荐地方，我那里料得到是瞒着她的婆婆的呢。对不起，四老爷，四太太。总是我老发昏不小心，对不起主顾。幸而府上是向来宽洪大量，不肯和小人计较的。这回我一定荐一个好的来折罪……。”
"Oh no, I'm really fooled. This time, I am here to make it clear. She came to ask me to recommend a place, and I expected it to be hidden from her mother-in-law. I'm sorry, Fourth Master, Fourth Wife. It's always me old and careless, sorry for the patron. Fortunately, the house has always been generous and refuses to care about villains. This time I will definitely recommend a good one to atone ....... ”“然而……。”四叔说。
"However...... The fourth uncle said.于是祥林嫂事件便告终结，不久也就忘却了。
So the Xianglin sister-in-law incident came to an end, and it was soon forgotten.
只有四婶，因为后来雇用的女工，大抵非懒即馋，或者馋而且懒，左右不如意，所以也还提起祥林嫂。每当这些时候，她往往自言自语的说，“她现在不知道怎么样了？”意思是希望她再来。但到第二年的新正，她也就绝了望。
There is only the fourth aunt, because the female workers hired later are probably either lazy or greedy, or greedy and lazy, and unsatisfactory, so they also mentioned Xianglin's sister-in-law. Whenever these times happen, she often says to herself, "I don't know what's going on now?" It means that I hope she will come again. But by the second year, she was desperate.新正将尽，卫老婆子来拜年了，已经喝得醉醺醺的，自说因为回了一趟卫家山的娘家，住下几天，所以来得迟了。她们问答之间，自然就谈到祥林嫂。
The new year is coming to an end, and Mrs. Wei came to pay New Year's greetings, and she was already drunk, saying that she was late because she went back to her parents' house in Weijiashan and stayed for a few days. During their Q&A, they naturally talked about Xianglin's sister-in-law.“她么？”卫老婆子高兴的说，“现在是交了好运了。她婆婆来抓她回去的时候，是早已许给了贺家墺的贺老六的，所以回家之后不几天，也就装在花轿里抬去了。”
"She?" Mrs. Wei said happily, "Now it's good luck." When her mother-in-law came to arrest her and go back, she had already promised He Laoliu to He Jiaqi, so a few days after returning home, she was carried in a sedan chair. ”“阿呀，这样的婆婆！……”四婶惊奇的说。
"Ah, such a mother-in-law! ......" the fourth aunt said in surprise.“阿呀，我的太太！你真是大户人家的太太的话。我们山里人，小户人家，这算得什么？她有小叔子，也得娶老婆。不嫁了她，那有这一注钱来做聘礼？她的婆婆倒是精明强干的女人呵，很有打算，所以就将她嫁到里山去。倘许给本村人，财礼就不多；惟独肯嫁进深山野墺里去的女人少，所以她就到手了八十千。现在第二个儿子的媳妇也娶进了，财礼只花了五十，除去办喜事的费用，还剩十多千。吓，你看，这多么好打算？……”
"Ah, my wife! You are really the wife of a big family. We are mountain people, small families, what is this? She has a brother-in-law and has to marry a wife. If you don't marry her, how can you have this money for a bride price? Her mother-in-law is a shrewd and capable woman, and she has a plan, so she married her to Satoyama. If it is allowed to be given to the people of the village, there will not be much financial gifts; Only there are few women who are willing to marry into the deep mountains and wilderness, so she got 80,000 yuan. Now the second son's daughter-in-law has also married, and the gift only cost fifty, excluding the cost of the wedding, there are still more than ten thousand left. Huh, look, what a good plan? ……”“祥林嫂竟肯依？……”
"Xianglin's sister-in-law is willing to comply? ……”“这有什么依不依。——闹是谁也总要闹一闹的；只要用绳子一捆，塞在花轿里，抬到男家，捺上花冠，拜堂，关上房门，就完事了。可是祥林嫂真出格，听说那时实在闹得利害，大家还都说大约因为在念书人家做过事，所以与众不同呢。太太，我们见得多了：回头人出嫁，哭喊的也有，说要寻死觅活的也有，抬到男家闹得拜不成天地的也有，连花烛都砸了的也有。祥林嫂可是异乎寻常，他们说她一路只是嚎，骂，抬到贺家墺，喉咙已经全哑了。拉出轿来，两个男人和她的小叔子使劲的擒住她也还拜不成天地。他们一不小心，一松手，阿呀，阿弥陀佛，她就一头撞在香案角上，头上碰了一个大窟窿，鲜血直流，用了两把香灰，包上两块红布还止不住血呢。直到七手八脚的将她和男人反关在新房里，还是骂，阿呀呀，这真是……。”她摇一摇头，顺下眼睛，不说了。
"What's wrong with this? ——Everyone always has to make a fuss; As long as you use a bundle of ropes, stuff them in the sedan chair, carry them to the man's house, put on the flower crown, worship the hall, close the door, and you're done. But Xianglin's sister-in-law was really outrageous, I heard that it was really a lot of trouble at that time, and everyone said that it was probably because she had done things in the family of scholars, so she was different. Madam, we have seen a lot: some people get married, some cry, some say they want to die and find life, some are carried to the man's house to make a fuss, and some even smash the candles. Xianglin's sister-in-law was unusual, they said that she just howled, scolded, and carried her to He Jiayuan, and her throat was completely mute. Pulling out the sedan chair, the two men and her brother-in-law grabbed her hard and couldn't worship the heavens and the earth. As soon as they were not careful, they let go, ah, Amitabha, she hit the corner of the incense table, hit a big hole on her head, blood flowed, she used two handfuls of incense ash, wrapped in two pieces of red cloth and couldn't stop the blood. Until she and the man were locked up in the new house, she still scolded, ah, this is really ....... She shook her head, lowered her eyes, and stopped talking.“后来怎么样呢？”四婶还问。
"What happened next?" The fourth aunt asked again.“听说第二天也没有起来。”她抬起眼来说。
"I heard that he didn't get up the next day." She raised her eyes and said.“后来呢？”
"What happened later?"“后来？——起来了。她到年底就生了一个孩子，男的，新年就两岁了。我在娘家这几天，就有人到贺家墺去，回来说看见他们娘儿俩，母亲也胖，儿子也胖；上头又没有婆婆，男人所有的是力气，会做活；房子是自家的。——唉唉，她真是交了好运了。”
"Later? ——Got up. She gave birth to a child at the end of the year, a boy, who will be two years old in the new year. In the past few days at my parents' house, someone went to He Jiacheng and came back to say that he saw their mother and son, their mother was fat, and their son was also fat; There is no mother-in-law on top, all men have is strength and can work; The house is home. - Alas, she really had good luck. ”从此之后，四婶也就不再提起祥林嫂。
Since then, the fourth aunt has never mentioned Xianglin's sister-in-law.
但有一年的秋季，大约是得到祥林嫂好运的消息之后的又过了两个新年，她竟又站在四叔家的堂前了。桌上放着一个荸荠式的圆篮，檐下一个小铺盖。她仍然头上扎着白头绳，乌裙，蓝夹祆，月白背心，脸色青黄，只是两颊上已经消失了血色，顺着眼，眼角上带些泪痕，眼光也没有先前那样精神了。而且仍然是卫老婆子领着，显出慈悲模样，絮絮的对四婶说：
But in the autumn of one year, about two New Year's Eve after getting the news of Xianglin's sister-in-law's good luck, she actually stood in front of the fourth uncle's house again. There is a water chestnut-style round basket on the table, and a small bedding under the eaves. She still wore a white rope on her head, a black skirt, a blue Zoroastrian, a moon-white vest, and her face was bluish-yellow, but the blood on her cheeks had disappeared, and she followed her eyes, with some tears at the corners of her eyes, and her eyes were not as energetic as before. And it was still led by Mrs. Wei, showing a compassionate appearance, and said to the fourth aunt in a babbling:“……这实在是叫作‘天有不测风云’，她的男人是坚实人，谁知道年纪青青，就会断送在伤寒上？本来已经好了的，吃了一碗冷饭，复发了。幸亏有儿子；她又能做，打柴摘茶养蚕都来得，本来还可以守着，谁知道那孩子又会给狼衔去的呢？春天快完了，村上倒反来了狼，谁料到？现在她只剩了一个光身了。大伯来收屋，又赶她。她真是走投无路了，只好来求老主人。好在她现在已经再没有什么牵挂，太太家里又凑巧要换人，所以我就领她来。——我想，熟门熟路，比生手实在好得多……。”
“…… This is really called 'there are unforeseen circumstances', her man is a solid person, who knows that he will be ruined by typhoid fever at a young age? It was already cured, but after eating a bowl of cold rice, it relapsed. Fortunately, I have a son; She can do it again, she can chop firewood, pick tea, raise silkworms, and she could have guarded it, who knew that the child would give the wolf a bite again? Spring is almost over, and the wolf in the village has come, who would have thought that? Now she was left naked. The uncle came to take over the house and drove her away. She was really desperate, so she had to come to beg the old master. Fortunately, she no longer has any worries now, and my wife's family happens to be replaced, so I brought her here. ——I think it is much better to be familiar with ...... than to be a beginner. ”“我真傻，真的，”祥林嫂抬起她没有神采的眼睛来，接着说。“我单知道下雪的时候野兽在山墺里没有食吃，会到村里来；我不知道春天也会有。我一清早起来就开了门，拿小篮盛了一篮豆，叫我们的阿毛坐在门槛上剥豆去。他是很听话的，我的话句句听；他出去了。我就在屋后劈柴，淘米，米下了锅，要蒸豆。我叫阿毛，没有应，出去一看，只见豆撒得一地，没有我们的阿毛了。他是不到别家去玩的；各处去一问，果然没有。我急了，央人出去寻。直到下半天，寻来寻去寻到山墺里，看见刺柴上挂着一只他的小鞋。大家都说，糟了，怕是遭了狼了。再进去；他果然躺在草窠里，肚里的五脏已经都给吃空了，手上还紧紧的捏着那只小篮呢。……”她接着但是呜咽，说不出成句的话来。
"I'm so stupid, really," Xianglin's sister-in-law raised her expressionless eyes and continued. "I only know that when it snows, the beasts have no food in the mountains and will come to the village; I didn't know there would be in spring too. I got up early in the morning and opened the door, took a small basket of beans, and asked our Ah Mao to sit on the threshold and peel the beans. He is very obedient, listening to my words; He went out. I chopped firewood behind the house, washed the rice, and the rice was put in the pot to steam the beans. My name is Ah Mao, I didn't answer, I went out to take a look, and I saw that the beans were scattered all over the ground, and there was no one with us. He didn't go to other places to play; I went everywhere and asked, and sure enough, there was none. I was in a hurry, and the people went out to look for it. Until the second half of the day, he searched around and found a small shoe of his in the mountain wall, and saw his little shoe hanging on the thorny wood. Everyone said, oh no, I'm afraid I've been hit by a wolf. Go back in; He was really lying in the grass nest, the internal organs in his stomach had already been empty, and he was still holding the small basket tightly in his hand. ......" She went on but whimpered, unable to say a word.四婶起初还踌蹰，待到听完她自己的话，眼圈就有些红了。她想了一想，便教拿圆篮和铺盖到下房去。卫老婆子仿佛卸了一肩重担似的嘘一口气，祥林嫂比初来时候神气舒畅些，不待指引，自己驯熟的安放了铺盖。她从此又在鲁镇做女工了。
The fourth aunt was hesitant at first, but after listening to her own words, her eyes turned a little red. She thought about it for a while, and then taught her to take the round basket and bedding to the lower room. Mrs. Wei sighed as if she had unloaded a burden on her shoulders, and Xianglin's sister-in-law was more relaxed than when she first came, and without waiting for guidance, she tamed the bedding by herself. She has since worked as a female worker in Luzhen again.大家仍然叫她祥林嫂。
Everyone still calls her Xianglin's sister-in-law.然而这一回，她的境遇却改变得非常大。上工之后的两三天，主人们就觉得她手脚已没有先前一样灵活，记性也坏得多，死尸似的脸上又整日没有笑影，四婶的口气上，已颇有些不满了。当她初到的时候，四叔虽然照例皱过眉，但鉴于向来雇用女工之难，也就并不大反对，只是暗暗地告诫四婶说，这种人虽然似乎很可怜，但是败坏风俗的，用她帮忙还可以，祭祀时候可用不着她沾手，一切饭莱，只好自己做，否则，不干不净，祖宗是不吃的。
However, this time, her situation has changed a lot. Two or three days after going to work, the masters felt that her hands and feet were not as flexible as before, her memory was much worse, and there was no smile on her corpse-like face all day long, and the fourth aunt's tone was already quite dissatisfied. When she first arrived, although the fourth uncle frowned as usual, in view of the difficulty of hiring female workers, he did not object much, but secretly warned the fourth aunt that although this kind of person seemed to be pitiful, but corrupted customs, it was okay to use her help, and she could not use her hands during the sacrifice, and all the food had to be made by herself, otherwise, if it was not clean, the ancestors would not eat.四叔家里最重大的事件是祭祀，祥林嫂先前最忙的时候也就是祭祀，这回她却清闲了。桌子放在堂中央，系上桌帏，她还记得照旧的去分配酒杯和筷子。
The most important event in the fourth uncle's family was the sacrifice, and Xianglin's sister-in-law was the busiest before the sacrifice, but this time she was idle. The table was placed in the center of the hall, and the curtains were tied, and she still remembered to distribute wine glasses and chopsticks as usual.“祥林嫂，你放着罢！我来摆。”四婶慌忙的说。
"Sister-in-law Xianglin, you can leave it alone! I'll put it on. The fourth aunt said hurriedly.她讪讪的缩了手，又去取烛台。
She withdrew her hand sneeringly and went to get the candlestick again.“祥林嫂，你放着罢！我来拿。”四婶又慌忙的说。
"Sister-in-law Xianglin, you can leave it alone! I'll get it. The fourth aunt said hurriedly.她转了几个圆圈，终于没有事情做，只得疑惑的走开。她在这一天可做的事是不过坐在灶下烧火。
She circled a few circles, and finally had nothing to do, so she had to walk away in confusion. All she could do on this day was to sit under the stove and light a fire.镇上的人们也仍然叫她祥林嫂，但音调和先前很不同；也还和她讲话，但笑容却冷冷的了。她全不理会那些事，只是直着眼睛，和大家讲她自己日夜不忘的故事：
The people in the town still call her Xianglin's sister-in-law, but the tone is very different from before; He also talked to her, but his smile was cold. She ignored those things at all, just straightened her eyes and told everyone her own story that she would never forget day and night:“我真傻，真的，”她说。“我单知道雪天是野兽在深山里没有食吃，会到村里来；我不知道春天也会有。我一大早起来就开了门，拿小篮盛了一篮豆，叫我们的阿毛坐在门槛上剥豆去。他是很听话的孩子，我的话句句听；他就出去了。我就在屋后劈柴，淘米，米下了锅，打算蒸豆。我叫，‘阿毛！’没有应。出去一看，只见豆撒得满地，没有我们的阿毛了。各处去一问，都没有。我急了，央人去寻去。直到下半天，几个人寻到山墺里，看见刺柴上挂着一只他的小鞋。大家都说，完了，怕是遭了狼了。再进去；果然，他躺在草窠里，肚里的五脏已经都给吃空了，可怜他手里还紧紧的捏着那只小篮呢。……”她于是淌下眼泪来，声音也呜咽了。
"I'm so stupid, really," she said. "I only know that snowy days are beasts that have no food in the deep mountains and will come to the village; I didn't know there would be in spring too. I got up early in the morning and opened the door, took a small basket of beans, and asked our Ah Mao to sit on the threshold and peel the beans. He is a very obedient child, listen to my words; And he went out. I chopped firewood behind the house, washed the rice, and the rice was put in the pot, intending to steam the beans. I shouted, 'Ah Mao! There was no response. When I went out, I saw beans scattered all over the ground, and there was no one to be our Ah Mao. I asked everywhere, but there was none. I was in a hurry, and the people went to look for it. Until the second half of the day, several people found the mountain wall and saw one of his small shoes hanging on the thorn wood. Everyone said, it's over, I'm afraid I've been hit by a wolf. Go back in; Sure enough, he was lying in the grass nest, and the internal organs in his stomach had been emptied, so it was a pity that he was still holding the small basket tightly in his hand. ......" She then shed tears and her voice whimpered.这故事倒颇有效，男人听到这里，往往敛起笑容，没趣的走了开去；女人们却不独宽恕了她似的，脸上立刻改换了鄙薄的神气，还要陪出许多眼泪来。有些老女人没有在街头听到她的话，便特意寻来，要听她这一段悲惨的故事。直到她说到呜咽，她们也就一齐流下那停在眼角上的眼泪，叹息一番，满足的去了，一面还纷纷的评论着。
This story is quite effective, and when men hear this, they often smile and walk away uninterestingly; The women not only seemed to forgive her, but their faces immediately changed their contemptuous looks, and they also had to accompany many tears. Some old women did not hear her words on the street, so they came to listen to her tragic story. Until she said whimpering, they all shed the tears that stopped at the corners of their eyes, sighed, and went with satisfaction, while commenting one after another.她就只是反复的向人说她悲惨的故事，常常引住了三五个人来听她。但不久，大家也都听得纯熟了，便是最慈悲的念佛的老太太们，眼里也再不见有一点泪的痕迹。后来全镇的人们几乎都能背诵她的话，一听到就烦厌得头痛。
She just repeatedly told people her tragic stories, often attracting three or five people to listen to her. But soon, everyone listened well, and the old ladies who chanted the Buddha were the most compassionate, and there was no trace of tears in their eyes. Later, almost all the people in the town could recite her words, and they were bored with headaches when they heard them.“我真傻，真的，”她开首说。
"I'm so stupid, really," she began.“是的，你是单知道雪天野兽在深山里没有食吃，才会到村里来的。”他们立即打断她的话，走开去了。
"Yes, you only know that snowy beasts have no food in the mountains, so they will come to the village." They immediately interrupted her and walked away.她张着口怔怔的站着，直着眼睛看他们，接着也就走了，似乎自己也觉得没趣。但她还妄想，希图从别的事，如小篮，豆，别人的孩子上，引出她的阿毛的故事来。倘一看见两三岁的小孩子，她就说：
She stood with her mouth open in a daze, looking straight at them, and then left, as if she thought it was boring. But she also delusional, trying to elicit her story from other things, such as small baskets, beans, and other people's children. If she saw a child two or three years old, she said:“唉唉，我们的阿毛如果还在，也就有这么大了。……”
"Alas, if our Ah Mao is still there, it will be so big. ……”孩子看见她的眼光就吃惊，牵着母亲的衣襟催她走。于是又只剩下她一个，终于没趣的也走了。后来大家又都知道了她的脾气，只要有孩子在眼前，便似笑非笑的先问她，道：
The child was surprised to see her eyes and took her mother's collar to urge her to go. So she was the only one left, and finally the boring one left. Later, everyone knew her temper again, as long as there was a child in front of them, they asked her first with a smile, saying:“祥林嫂，你们的阿毛如果还在，不是也就有这么大了么？”
"Sister-in-law Xianglin, if your Mao is still there, wouldn't it be so big?"她未必知道她的悲哀经大家咀嚼赏鉴了许多天，早已成为渣滓，只值得烦厌和唾弃；但从人们的笑影上，也仿佛觉得这又冷又尖，自己再没有开口的必要了。她单是一瞥他们，并不回答一句话。
She may not know that her sorrow has been chewed and appreciated by everyone for many days, and she has long become dregs, only worthy of annoyance and spurn; But from people's smiles, it seems that they feel that this is cold and sharp, and there is no need for them to open their mouths anymore. She just glanced at them and didn't answer a word.鲁镇永远是过新年，腊月二十以后就忙起来了。四叔家里这回须雇男短工，还是忙不过来，另叫柳妈做帮手，杀鸡，宰鹅；然而柳妈是善女人，吃素，不杀生的，只肯洗器皿。祥林嫂除烧火之外，没有别的事，却闲着了，坐着只看柳妈洗器皿。微雪点点的下来了。
Luzhen is always celebrating the New Year, and it will be busy after the 20th day of the lunar month. The fourth uncle's family had to hire a male short-term worker this time, but he was still too busy, so he asked Liu's mother to be a helper, killing chickens and slaughtering geese; However, Liu Ma is a good woman, a vegetarian, does not kill, and only washes utensils. Xianglin's sister-in-law had nothing else to do except burn the fire, but she was idle, sitting and only watching Liu's mother wash the utensils. The light snow is falling little by little.“唉唉，我真傻，”祥林嫂看了天空，叹息着，独语似的说。
"Oh, I'm so stupid," Xianglin's sister-in-law looked at the sky, sighed, and said to herself.“祥林嫂，你又来了。”柳妈不耐烦的看着她的脸，说。“我问你：你额角上的伤痕，不就是那时撞坏的么？”
"Sister-in-law Xianglin, you're here again." Liu's mother looked at her face impatiently and said. "Let me ask you: Isn't the scar on the corner of your forehead the one that was broken at that time?"“唔唔。”她含胡的回答。
"Hmm, no." She replied with a beard.“我问你：你那时怎么后来竟依了呢？”
"I ask you: Why did you follow it later?"“我么？……”
"Me? ……”“你呀。我想：这总是你自己愿意了，不然……。”
"You. I thought: This is always your own willingness, otherwise it ....... ”“阿阿，你不知道他力气多么大呀。”
"Ah, you don't know how strong he is."“我不信。我不信你这么大的力气，真会拗他不过。你后来一定是自己肯了，倒推说他力气大。”
"I don't believe it. I don't believe that you have such great strength, you really can't resist him." You must have been willing to do it yourself, and you pushed back to say that he was strong. ”“阿阿，你……你倒自己试试看。”她笑了。
"Aa, you...... Try it yourself. She smiled.柳妈的打皱的脸也笑起来，使她蹙缩得像一个核桃；干枯的小眼睛一看祥林嫂的额角，又钉住她的眼。祥林嫂似乎很局促了，立刻敛了笑容，旋转眼光，自去看雪花。
Liu's mother's wrinkled face also laughed, making her shrink like a walnut; The dry little eyes looked at the corner of Xianglin's forehead and nailed her eyes again. Xianglin's sister-in-law seemed to be very cramped, and immediately smiled, turned her eyes, and went to see the snowflakes.“祥林嫂，你实在不合算。”柳妈诡秘的说。“再一强，或者索性撞一个死，就好了。现在呢，你和你的第二个男人过活不到两年，倒落了一件大罪名。你想，你将来到阴司去，那两个死鬼的男人还要争，你给了谁好呢？阎罗大王只好把你锯开来，分给他们。我想，这真是……。”
"Sister-in-law Xianglin, you are really not worth it." Liu's mother said mysteriously. "It's good to be stronger, or simply hit one to death. Now, you have lived with your second man for less than two years, and you have fallen into a major crime. Do you think, you will go to the underworld, and those two dead men will still fight, who do you give it to? The King of Hell had no choice but to sawed you open and give it to them. I thought, this is really ....... ”她脸上就显出恐怖的神色来，这是在山村里所未曾知道的。
There was a terrifying look on her face, which was unknown in the mountain village.“我想，你不如及早抵当。你到土地庙里去捐一条门槛，当作你的替身，给千人踏，万人跨，赎了这一世的罪名，免得死了去受苦。”
"I think you might as well arrive early. You go to the land temple and donate a threshold as your stand-in, step on it for a thousand people, and cross it for ten thousand people, so as to atone for the sins of this life, so that you will not die and suffer. ”她当时并不回答什么话，但大约非常苦闷了，第二天早上起来的时候，两眼上便都围着大黑圈。早饭之后，她便到镇的西头的土地庙里去求捐门槛，庙祝起初执意不允许，直到她急得流泪，才勉强答应了。价目是大钱十二千。
She didn't answer anything at the time, but she was probably very distressed, and when she got up the next morning, her eyes were surrounded by big black circles. After breakfast, she went to the land temple at the west end of the town to ask for a donation, but the temple priest insisted on not allowing it at first, until she was so anxious that she burst into tears, and reluctantly agreed. The price is 12,000 yuan.她久已不和人们交口，因为阿毛的故事是早被大家厌弃了的；但自从和柳妈谈了天，似乎又即传扬开去，许多人都发生了新趣味，又来逗她说话了。至于题目，那自然是换了一个新样，专在她额上的伤疤。
She hasn't talked to people for a long time, because Ah Mao's story has long been abandoned by everyone; But since talking to Liu's mother, it seems to have spread again, and many people have had new interests and come to tease her again. As for the title, it was naturally a new look, focusing on the scar on her forehead.“祥林嫂，我问你：你那时怎么竟肯了？”一个说。
"Sister-in-law Xianglin, let me ask you: Why did you agree at that time?" One said.“唉，可惜，白撞了这一下。”一个看着她的疤，应和道。
"Alas, it's a pity, I hit this in vain." One looked at her scar and responded.她大约从他们的笑容和声调上，也知道是在嘲笑她，所以总是瞪着眼睛，不说一句话，后来连头也不回了。她整日紧闭了嘴唇，头上带着大家以为耻辱的记号的那伤痕，默默的跑街，扫地，洗菜，淘米。快够一年，她才从四婶手里支取了历来积存的工钱，换算了十二元鹰洋，请假到镇的西头去。但不到一顿饭时候，她便回来，神气很舒畅，眼光也分外有神，高兴似的对四婶说，自己已经在土地庙捐了门槛了。
She probably knew from their smiles and tone that they were laughing at her, so she always stared at her, didn't say a word, and then didn't even look back. She kept her lips closed all day long, with the scars on her head that everyone thought was a mark of shame, running the streets silently, sweeping the floor, washing vegetables, and washing rice. It was almost a year before she withdrew the wages she had accumulated from her fourth aunt, converted it into twelve yuan Yingyang, and took leave to go to the west end of the town. But before a meal, she came back, looking very comfortable, with a very good vision, and happily told the fourth aunt that she had donated the threshold in the land temple.冬至的祭祖时节，她做得更出力，看四婶装好祭品，和阿牛将桌子抬到堂屋中央，她便坦然的去拿酒杯和筷子。
During the ancestor worship season on the winter solstice, she worked harder, watching the fourth aunt prepare the sacrifices, and lifting the table to the center of the hall, she calmly went to get the wine glass and chopsticks.“你放着罢，祥林嫂！”四婶慌忙大声说。
"You let it go, Sister-in-law Xianglin!" The fourth aunt hurriedly said loudly.她像是受了炮烙似的缩手，脸色同时变作灰黑，也不再去取烛台，只是失神的站着。直到四叔上香的时候，教她走开，她才走开。这一回她的变化非常大，第二天，不但眼睛窈陷下去，连精神也更不济了。而且很胆怯，不独怕暗夜，怕黑影，即使看见人，虽是自己的主人，也总惴惴的，有如在白天出穴游行的小鼠；否则呆坐着，直是一个木偶人。不半年，头发也花白起来了，记性尤其坏，甚而至于常常忘却了去淘米。
She shrank her hands as if she had been burned, her face turned gray and black at the same time, and she no longer went to get the candlestick, but just stood in a daze. It wasn't until the fourth uncle offered incense that he taught her to walk away, and she walked away. This time she changed a lot, and the next day, not only did her eyes sink, but her spirit was even worse. And very timid, not only afraid of the dark night, afraid of dark shadows, even if you see people, even if you are your own master, you are always anxious, like mice parading out of the cave during the day; Otherwise, he would be a puppet. In less than half a year, his hair turned gray, and his memory was particularly bad, and he often forgot to go to wash rice.“祥林嫂怎么这样了？倒不如那时不留她。”四婶有时当面就这样说，似乎是警告她。
"Xianglin's sister-in-law is like this? It's better not to keep her at that time. The fourth aunt sometimes said this in person, as if to warn her.然而她总如此，全不见有怜悧起来的希望。他们于是想打发她走了，教她回到卫老婆子那里去。但当我还在鲁镇的时候，不过单是这样说；看现在的情状，可见后来终于实行了。然而她是从四叔家出去就成了乞丐的呢，还是先到卫老婆子家然后再成乞丐的呢？那我可不知道。
However, she was always like this, and there was no hope of pity. They wanted to send her away and teach her to go back to Mrs. Wei. But when I was still in Luzhen, I just said this; Looking at the current situation, it can be seen that it was finally implemented. However, did she become a beggar when she went out of her fourth uncle's house, or did she go to Mrs. Wei's house first and then become a beggar? Then I don't know.
我给那些因为在近旁而极响的爆竹声惊醒，看见豆一般大的黄色的灯火光，接着又听得毕毕剥剥的鞭炮，是四叔家正在“祝福”了；知道已是五更将近时候。我在蒙胧中，又隐约听到远处的爆竹声联绵不断，似乎合成一天音响的浓云，夹着团团飞舞的雪花，拥抱了全市镇。我在这繁响的拥抱中，也懒散而且舒适，从白天以至初夜的疑虑，全给祝福的空气一扫而空了，只觉得天地圣众歆享了牲醴和香烟，都醉醺醺的在空中蹒跚，豫备给鲁镇的人们以无限的幸福。
I woke up to the loud sound of firecrackers because I was nearby, saw the yellow lights as big as beans, and then heard the peeling firecrackers, which was the fourth uncle's family "blessing"; I know it's almost the fifth watch. In the haze, I vaguely heard the sound of firecrackers in the distance, which seemed to be a thick cloud of sound for a day, sandwiched by flying snowflakes, embracing the whole town. In this loud embrace, I was also lazy and comfortable, from the day to the beginning of the night, all the doubts were swept away by the air of blessing, only to feel that the saints of heaven and earth enjoyed the sacrificial wine and cigarettes, and were all drunk and waddled in the air, preparing to give infinite happiness to the people of Lu Town.一九二四年二月七日。
February 7, 1924.

在酒楼上

在酒楼上

在酒楼上

In the restaurant我从北地向东南旅行，绕道访了我的家乡，就到S城。这城离我的故乡不过三十里，坐了小船，小半天可到，我曾在这里的学校里当过一年的教员。深冬雪后，风景凄清，懒散和怀旧的心绪联结起来，我竟暂寓在S城的洛思旅馆里了；这旅馆是先前所没有的。城圈本不大，寻访了几个以为可以会见的旧同事，一个也不在，早不知散到那里去了；经过学校的门口，也改换了名称和模样，于我很生疏。不到两个时辰，我的意兴早已索然，颇悔此来为多事了。
I traveled from the north to the southeast, took a detour to visit my hometown, and arrived in S City. This city is only thirty miles away from my hometown, and I took a small boat to get there, and I worked as a teacher in a school here for a year. After the deep winter snow, the scenery is desolate, and the laziness and nostalgia are connected, and I actually temporarily live in the Los Hotel in S City; This hotel was not like anything before. The city circle was not big, and I searched for a few old colleagues who thought I could meet, but none of them were there, and I didn't know where they had gone; Passing by the gate of the school, the name and appearance were also changed, which was very unfamiliar to me. In less than two hours, my interest has already faded, and I regret that I have come here for a long time.我所住的旅馆是租房不卖饭的，饭菜必须另外叫来，但又无味，入口如嚼泥土。窗外只有渍痕班驳的墙壁，帖着枯死的莓苔；上面是铅色的天，白皑皑的绝无精采，而且微雪又飞舞起来了。我午餐本没有饱，又没有可以消遣的事情，便很自然的想到先前有一家很熟识的小酒楼，叫一石居的，算来离旅馆并不远。我于是立即锁了房门，出街向那酒楼去。其实也无非想姑且逃避客中的无聊，并不专为买醉。一石居是在的，狭小阴湿的店面和破旧的招牌都依旧；但从掌柜以至堂倌却已没有一个熟人，我在这一石居中也完全成了生客。然而我终于跨上那走熟的屋角的扶梯去了，由此径到小楼上。上面也依然是五张小板桌；独有原是木棂的后窗却换嵌了玻璃。
The hotel I stayed in was rented and did not sell food, and the food had to be called separately, but it was tasteless and the entrance was like chewing dirt. Outside the window, there are only stained walls, covered with dead berry moss; There was a lead-colored sky above, white and unspicious, and the light snow was flying again. I wasn't full for lunch, and I didn't have anything to do, so I naturally thought of a very familiar small restaurant called Yishiju, which was not far from the hotel. So I immediately locked the door and went out to the restaurant. In fact, it is nothing more than trying to escape the boredom of the guests, not just to get drunk. Yishiju is there, the small and damp storefront and dilapidated signboard are still the same; But there was no acquaintance from the shopkeeper to the cousin, and I became a stranger in this stone residence. However, I finally stepped onto the escalator in the familiar corner of the house and went straight to the small building. There are still five small board tables on it; The back window, which was originally a wooden lattice, was replaced with glass.“一斤绍酒。——菜？十个油豆腐，辣酱要多！”
"A pound of Shao wine. ——Dishes? Ten fried tofu, more hot sauce! ”我一面说给跟我上来的堂倌听，一面向后窗走，就在靠窗的一张桌旁坐下了。楼上“空空如也”，任我拣得最好的坐位：可以眺望楼下的废园。这园大概是不属于酒家的，我先前也曾眺望过许多回，有时也在雪天里。但现在从惯于北方的眼睛看来，却很值得惊异了：几株老梅竟斗雪开着满树的繁花，仿佛毫不以深冬为意；倒塌的亭子边还有一株山茶树，从暗绿的密叶里显出十几朵红花来，赫赫的在雪中明得如火，愤怒而且傲慢，如蔑视游人的甘心于远行。我这时又忽地想到这里积雪的滋润，著物不去，晶莹有光，不比朔雪的粉一般干，大风一吹，便飞得满空如烟雾。……
As I told the cousin who came up with me, I walked towards the back window and sat down at a table by the window. Upstairs is "empty", and I can choose the best seat: I can overlook the abandoned garden downstairs. This garden probably does not belong to a restaurant, and I have looked at it many times before, sometimes in the snow. But now, from the eyes accustomed to the north, it is very surprising: a few old plum trees are blooming with flowers all over the snow, as if they do not care about the depths of winter; There was also a camellia tree next to the collapsed pavilion, showing more than a dozen red flowers from the dark green leaves, shining brightly like fire in the snow, angry and arrogant, as if they were willing to travel far away with contempt for tourists. At this time, I suddenly thought of the nourishment of the snow here, it didn't go away, it was crystal clear, not as dry as the powder of Shuo Xue, and when the wind blew, it flew all over the sky like smoke. ……“客人，酒。……”
"Guest, wine. ……”堂倌懒懒的说着，放下杯，筷，酒壶和碗碟，酒到了。我转脸向了板桌，排好器具，斟出酒来。觉得北方固不是我的旧乡，但南来又只能算一个客子，无论那边的干雪怎样纷飞，这里的柔雪又怎样的依恋，于我都没有什么关系了。我略带些哀愁，然而很舒服的呷一口酒。酒味很纯正；油豆腐也煮得十分好；可惜辣酱太淡薄，本来S城人是不懂得吃辣的。
The cousin said lazily, put down the cups, chopsticks, wine jug and dishes, and the wine arrived. I turned my face to the table, arranged the utensils, and poured out the wine. I feel that the north is not my hometown, but I can only be regarded as a guest from the south, no matter how the dry snow over there is, and what kind of attachment the soft snow here is, it has nothing to do with me. I was a little sad, but I took a sip of wine comfortably. The taste of the wine is very pure; The fried tofu is also cooked very well; It's a pity that the hot sauce is too thin, and the people of S City don't know how to eat spicy food.大概是因为正在下午的缘故罢，这虽说是酒楼，却毫无酒楼气，我已经喝下三杯酒去了，而我以外还是四张空板桌。我看着废园，渐渐的感到孤独，但又不愿有别的酒客上来。偶然听得楼梯上脚步响，便不由的有些懊恼，待到看见是堂倌，才又安心了，这样的又喝了两杯酒。
Probably because it was in the afternoon, although it was a restaurant, there was no restaurant atmosphere, I had already drunk three glasses of wine, and there were still four empty tables besides me. I looked at the abandoned garden and gradually felt lonely, but I didn't want other drinkers to come up. Accidentally hearing footsteps on the stairs, I couldn't help but feel a little annoyed, and when I saw that it was a cousin, I felt relieved again, and drank two more glasses of wine.我想，这回定是酒客了，因为听得那脚步声比堂倌的要缓得多。约略料他走完了楼梯的时候，我便害怕似的抬头去看这无干的同伴，同时也就吃惊的站起来。我竟不料在这里意外的遇见朋友了，——假如他现在还许我称他为朋友。那上来的分明是我的旧同窗，也是做教员时代的旧同事，面貌虽然颇有些改变，但一见也就认识，独有行动却变得格外迂缓，很不像当年敏捷精悍的吕纬甫了。
I think it must be a drinker this time, because the footsteps are much slower than those of the cousin. When he finished walking the stairs, I looked up at this idle companion as if I was afraid, and at the same time stood up in surprise. I unexpectedly met a friend here,—— if he still allows me to call him a friend. The person who came up was clearly my old classmate and my old colleague when I was a teacher, although his appearance had changed a little, but he knew it at first sight, but his unique actions became particularly slow, very different from the agile and shrewd Lu Weifu back then.“阿，——纬甫，是你么？我万想不到会在这里遇见你。”
"Ah ,—— Weifu, is it you? I never thought I would meet you here. ”“阿阿，是你？我也万想不到……”
"Ah, it's you? I can't even think of ......"我就邀他同坐，但他似乎略略踌蹰之后，方才坐下来。我起先很以为奇，接着便有些悲伤，而且不快了。细看他相貌，也还是乱蓬蓬的须发；苍白的长方脸，然而衰瘦了。精神很沉静，或者却是颓唐；又浓又黑的眉毛底下的眼睛也失了精采，但当他缓缓的四顾的时候，却对废园忽地闪出我在学校时代常常看见的射人的光来。
I invited him to sit with me, but he seemed to hesitate a little before sitting down. I was surprised at first, then I was a little sad and unhappy. Looking closely at his appearance, he still has disheveled beard and hair; The pale rectangular face, however, is thin. The spirit is very calm, or it is decadent; The eyes under his thick and dark eyebrows also lost their brilliance, but when he slowly looked around, the shooting light that I often saw in the abandoned garden suddenly flashed out.“我们，”我高兴的，然而颇不自然的说，“我们这一别，怕有十年了罢。我早知道你在济南，可是实在懒得太难，终于没有写一封信。……”
"We," I said happily, but unnaturally, "we have been separated for ten years. I knew you were in Jinan, but I was too lazy to write a letter. ……”“彼此都一样。可是现在我在太原了，已经两年多，和我的母亲。我回来接她的时候，知道你早搬走了，搬得很干净。”
"It's the same for each other. But now I'm in Taiyuan, it's been more than two years, with my mother. When I came back to pick her up, I knew that you had moved away long ago, and it was very clean. ”“你在太原做什么呢？”我问。
"What are you doing in Taiyuan?" I asked.“教书，在一个同乡的家里。”
"Teaching, in a fellow townsman's home."“这以前呢？”
"What about before?"“这以前么？”他从衣袋里掏出一支烟卷来，点了火衔在嘴里，看着喷出的烟雾，沉思似的说：“无非做了些无聊的事情，等于什么也没有做。”
"Was this before?" He took out a cigarette from his pocket, lit a fire and held it in his mouth, looked at the smoke that was spewed out, and said contemplatively: "It's nothing more than doing something boring, which is equivalent to doing nothing." ”他也问我别后的景况；我一面告诉他一个大概，一面叫堂倌先取杯筷来，使他先喝着我的酒，然后再去添二斤。其间还点菜，我们先前原是毫不客气的，但此刻却推让起来了，终于说不清那一样是谁点的，就从堂倌的口头报告上指定了四样菜：茴香豆，冻肉，油豆腐，青鱼干。
He also asked me about the situation after parting; While telling him a rough idea, I asked the cousin to bring the cups and chopsticks first, so that he could drink my wine first, and then go to add two pounds. In the meantime, we were unceremonious, but now we pushed back, and finally couldn't tell who ordered that one, so we designated four dishes from the cousin's oral report: fennel beans, frozen meat, fried tofu, and dried herring.“我一回来，就想到我可笑。”他一手擎着烟卷，一只手扶着酒杯，似笑非笑的向我说。“我在少年时，看见蜂子或蝇子停在一个地方，给什么来一吓，即刻飞去了，但是飞了一个小圈子，便又回来停在原地点，便以为这实在很可笑，也可怜。可不料现在我自己也飞回来了，不过绕了一点小圈子。又不料你也回来了。你不能飞得更远些么？”
"As soon as I came back, I thought I was ridiculous." He held a cigarette in one hand and a wine glass in the other, smiling and smiling. "When I was a teenager, I saw a bee or a fly stopped in one place, gave something to scare me, and immediately flew away, but flew in a small circle and came back to stop in the same place, and I thought it was really ridiculous and pitiful. But now I have flown back myself, but I have made a small circle. Unexpectedly, you are back too. Can't you fly farther? ”“这难说，大约也不外乎绕点小圈子罢。”我也似笑非笑的说。“但是你为什么飞回来的呢？”
"It's hard to say, it's probably nothing more than a small circle." I also said with a smile. "But why did you fly back?"“也还是为了无聊的事。”他一口喝干了一杯酒，吸几口烟，眼睛略为张大了。“无聊的。——但是我们就谈谈罢。”
"It's still for boring things." He drank a glass of wine in one gulp, took a few puffs of smoke, and his eyes widened slightly. "Boring. ——But let's talk about it. ”堂倌搬上新添的酒菜来，排满了一桌，楼上又添了烟气和油豆腐的热气，仿佛热闹起来了；楼外的雪也越加纷纷的下。
The hallkeeper brought the newly added wine and dishes, filled the table, and added smoke and the heat of fried tofu upstairs, as if it was lively; The snow outside the building is also falling more and more.“你也许本来知道，”他接着说，“我曾经有一个小兄弟，是三岁上死掉的，就葬在这乡下。我连他的模样都记不清楚了，但听母亲说，是一个很可爱念的孩子，和我也很相投，至今她提起来还似乎要下泪。今年春天，一个堂兄就来了一封信，说他的坟边已经渐渐的浸了水，不久怕要陷入河里去了，须得赶紧去设法。母亲一知道就很着急，几乎几夜睡不着，——她又自己能看信的。然而我能有什么法子呢？没有钱，没有工夫：当时什么法也没有。
"You may have known," he continued, "that I once had a little brother who died when he was three years old and was buried in this country. I can't even remember what he looked like, but I heard from my mother that he was a very cute child, and he was very similar to me, and she still seemed to cry when she mentioned it. This spring, a cousin came to a letter, saying that his grave had gradually been soaked in water, and he was afraid that he would soon fall into the river, so he had to hurry up and find a way. When my mother found out, she was very anxious and could hardly sleep for several nights,—— and she could read the letter herself. But what can I do? No money, no time: there was no law at that time.“一直挨到现在，趁着年假的闲空，我才得回南给他来迁葬。”他又喝干一杯酒，看着窗外，说，“这在那边那里能如此呢？积雪里会有花，雪地下会不冻。就在前天，我在城里买了一口小棺材，——因为我豫料那地下的应该早已朽烂了，——带着棉絮和被褥，雇了四个土工，下乡迁葬去。我当时忽而很高兴，愿意掘一回坟，愿意一见我那曾经和我很亲睦的小兄弟的骨殖：这些事我生平都没有经历过。到得坟地，果然，河水只是咬进来，离坟已不到二尺远。可怜的坟，两年没有培土，也平下去了。我站在雪中，决然的指着他对土工说，‘掘开来！’我实在是一个庸人，我这时觉得我的声音有些希奇，这命令也是一个在我一生中最为伟大的命令。但土工们却毫不骇怪，就动手掘下去了。待到掘着圹穴，我便过去看，果然，棺木已经快要烂尽了，只剩下一堆木丝和小木片。我的心颤动着，自去拨开这些，很小心的，要看一看我的小兄弟，然而出乎意外！被褥，衣服，骨骼，什么也没有。我想，这些都消尽了，向来听说最难烂的是头发，也许还有罢。我便伏下去，在该是枕头所在的泥土里仔仔细细的看，也没有。踪影全无！”
"Until now, taking advantage of the free time of the annual leave, I have to go back to the south to rebury him." He drank another glass of wine, looked out the window, and said, "How can this be done over there?" There will be flowers in the snow, and it will not freeze under the snow. Just the day before yesterday, I bought a small coffin in the city,—— because I expected that the underground should have already rotted,—— so I hired four earthworkers with cotton wool and bedding to go to the countryside to rebury them. I was suddenly very happy at the time, willing to dig a grave, to see the bones of my little brother who used to be close to me: I have never experienced these things in my life. When I arrived at the cemetery, sure enough, the river water just bit in, less than two feet away from the grave. The poor grave, which has not been cultivated for two years, has also been leveled. I stood in the snow, pointed at him decisively, and said to the geotechnician, 'Dig it out! I am really a mediocre person, and I feel that my voice is a little strange, and this order is also the greatest order in my life. But the geoworkers were not surprised, so they started digging. When I dug the tomb, I went over to look, and sure enough, the coffin was almost rotten, leaving only a pile of wood wire and small pieces of wood. My heart was fluttering, and I went to push these aside, very carefully, to take a look at my little brother, but unexpectedly! No bedding, no clothes, no bones, nothing. I think these are all gone, and I have always heard that the most difficult thing to rot is hair, and maybe there is more. I crouched down and looked carefully in the dirt where the pillow was, but there was none. There is no trace! ”我忽而看见他眼圈微红了，但立即知道是有了酒意。他总不很吃菜，单是把酒不停的喝，早喝了一斤多，神情和举动都活泼起来，渐近于先前所见的吕纬甫了，我叫堂倌再添二斤酒，然后回转身，也拿着酒杯，正对面默默的听着。
I suddenly saw that his eyes were slightly red, but I immediately knew that he was drunk. He didn't eat vegetables very much, he just drank the wine non-stop, drank more than a pound early, his expression and actions became lively, and he gradually approached the Lu Weifu he had seen before, I asked the cousin to add two pounds of wine, and then turned around, also holding a wine glass, and listened silently opposite.“其实，这本已可以不必再迁，只要平了土，卖掉棺材，就此完事了的。我去卖棺材虽然有些离奇，但只要价钱极便宜，原铺子就许要，至少总可以捞回几文酒钱来。但我不这佯，我仍然铺好被褥，用棉花裹了些他先前身体所在的地方的泥土，包起来，装在新棺材里，运到我父亲埋着的坟地上，在他坟旁埋掉了。因为外面用砖墩，昨天又忙了我大半天：监工。但这样总算完结了一件事，足够去骗骗我的母亲，使她安心些。——阿阿，你这样的看我，你怪我何以和先前太不相同了么？是的，我也还记得我们同到城隍庙里去拔掉神像的胡子的时候，连日议论些改革中国的方法以至于打起来的时候。但我现在就是这样了，敷敷衍衍，模模胡胡。我有时自己也想到，倘若先前的朋友看见我，怕会不认我做朋友了。——然而我现在就是这样。”
"In fact, this could have been done without moving, as long as the soil was leveled and the coffin was sold, it was over. Although it is a bit bizarre for me to sell the coffin, as long as the price is extremely cheap, the original shop will ask for it, and at least I can always get back a few pennies of wine money. But I didn't, and I still made the bedding, wrapped some of the dirt from where his body had been before, wrapped it in a new coffin, and carried it to the grave where my father was buried, and buried it next to his grave. Because of the brick piers outside, I was busy for most of the day yesterday: the supervisor. But this is finally the end of one thing, enough to deceive my mother and make her feel at ease. ——Ah, you look at me like this, do you blame me for being so different from before? Yes, I also remember when we went to the City God Temple to pluck the beard of the statue, and we talked about some ways to reform China for several days so that we started fighting. But that's how I am now, perfunctory and nonsense. I sometimes thought to myself that if my former friends saw me, they would not recognize me as a friend. - And yet I am like that now. ”他又掏出一支烟卷来，衔在嘴里，点了火。
He took out another cigarette, put it in his mouth, and lit it.“看你的神情，你似乎还有些期望我，——我现在自然麻木得多了，但是有些事也还看得出。这使我很感激，然而也使我很不安：怕我终于辜负了至今还对我怀着好意的老朋友。……”他忽而停住了，吸几口烟，才又慢慢的说，“正在今天，刚在我到这一石居来之前，也就做了一件无聊事，然而也是我自己愿意做的。我先前的东边的邻居叫长富，是一个船户。他有一个女儿叫阿顺，你那时到我家里来，也许见过的，但你一定没有留心，因为那时她还小。后来她也长得并不好看，不过是平常的瘦瘦的瓜子脸，黄脸皮；独有眼睛非常大，睫毛也很长，眼白又青得如夜的晴天，而且是北方的无风的晴天，这里的就没有那么明净了。她很能干，十多岁没了母亲，招呼两个小弟妹都靠她；又得服侍父亲，事事都周到；也经济，家计倒渐渐的稳当起来了。邻居几乎没有一个不夸奖她，连长富也时常说些感激的活。这一次我动身回来的时候，我的母亲又记得她了，老年人记性真长久。她说她曾经知道顺姑因为看见谁的头上戴着红的剪绒花，自己也想有一朵，弄不到，哭了，哭了小半夜，就挨了她父亲的一顿打，后来眼眶还红肿了两三天。这种剪绒花是外省的东西，S城里尚且买不出，她那里想得到手呢？趁我这一次回南的便，便叫我买两朵去送她。
"Looking at your expression, you still seem to expect a little from me,—— I'm naturally much more numb now, but I can still see some things. This made me grateful, but also uneasy: I was afraid that I had finally let down my old friend who still had good intentions towards me. ......" He suddenly stopped, took a few puffs of smoke, and then said slowly, "Today, just before I came to this stone house, I did a boring thing, but it was also what I was willing to do." My previous neighbor to the east was called Changfu, a boatman. He has a daughter named Ah Shun, you came to my house at that time, you may have seen it, but you must not have paid attention because she was still young at that time. Later, she was not good-looking, but she had an ordinary thin melon seed face and yellow skin; The eyes are very large, the eyelashes are also very long, the whites of the eyes are as blue as a sunny day at night, and it is a windless sunny day in the north, so the ones here are not so clear. She is very capable, she lost her mother in her teens, and she relied on her to greet her two little siblings; and he had to serve his father, and he was thoughtful in everything; It is also economical, and the family is gradually becoming stable. Almost none of the neighbors did not praise her, and even Changfu often said something grateful. This time when I left and came back, my mother remembered her again, and the old man had a long memory. She said that she once knew that Shun Gu wanted to have one because she saw someone wearing a red velvet flower on her head, but she couldn't get it, cried, cried in the middle of the night, and was beaten by her father, and then her eyes were red and swollen for two or three days. This kind of velvet flower is something from other provinces, and it can't be bought in S City, where does she want to get it? When I returned to the south this time, I asked me to buy two flowers to send to her.“我对于这差使倒并不以为烦厌，反而很喜欢；为阿顺，我实在还有些愿意出力的意思的。前年，我回来接我母亲的时候，有一天，长富正在家，不知怎的我和他闲谈起来了。他便要请我吃点心，荞麦粉，并且告诉我所加的是白糖。你想，家里能有白糖的船户，可见决不是一个穷船户了，所以他也吃得很阔绰。我被劝不过，答应了，但要求只要用小碗。他也很识世故，便嘱咐阿顺说，‘他们文人，是不会吃东西的。你就用小碗，多加糖！’然而等到调好端来的时候，仍然使我吃一吓，是一大碗，足够我吃一天。但是和长富吃的一碗比起来，我的也确乎算小碗。我生平没有吃过荞麦粉，这回一尝，实在不可口，却是非常甜。我漫然的吃了几口，就想不吃了，然而无意中，忽然间看见阿顺远远的站在屋角里，就使我立刻消失了放下碗筷的勇气。我看她的神情，是害怕而且希望，大约怕自己调得不好，愿我们吃得有味。我知道如果剩下大半碗来，一定要使她很失望，而且很抱歉。我于是同时决心，放开喉咙灌下去了，几乎吃得和长富一样快。我由此才知道硬吃的苦痛，我只记得还做孩子时候的吃尽一碗拌着驱除蛔虫药粉的沙糖才有这样难。然而我毫不抱怨，因为她过来收拾空碗时候的忍着的得意的笑容，已尽够赔偿我的苦痛而有余了。所以我这一夜虽然饱胀得睡不稳，又做了一大串恶梦，也还是祝赞她一生幸福，愿世界为她变好。然而这些意思也不过是我的那些旧日的梦的痕迹，即刻就自笑，接着也就忘却了。
"I am not annoyed by this errand, but I like it very much; For Ah Shun, I really have some intentions of contributing. The year before last, when I came back to pick up my mother, one day, Changfu was at home, and somehow I started chatting with him. He wanted to treat me to snacks, buckwheat flour, and told me that it was sugar. You think, if a boatman with sugar at home can see that he is by no means a poor boatman, so he also eats very well. I couldn't be persuaded and agreed, but I asked to use only a small bowl. He was also very sophisticated, so he instructed Ah Shun, 'They literati don't know how to eat.' Just use a small bowl and add more sugar! But when it was ready, I was still frightened, and it was a big bowl, enough for me to eat for a day. But compared with the bowl Changfu ate, mine is indeed a small bowl. I have never eaten buckwheat flour in my life, and this time I tasted it, it was really unpalatable, but it was very sweet. I took a few bites casually and wanted to stop eating, but inadvertently, I suddenly saw Ah Shun standing in the corner of the house from a distance, which made me immediately lose the courage to put down the dishes and chopsticks. I saw her expression, she was afraid and hopeful, probably afraid that she was not adjusting well, and I hope we can eat deliciously. I knew that if I left half a bowl, I would definitely disappoint her, and I was sorry. At the same time, I made up my mind, let go of my throat and poured it down, eating almost as fast as Changfu. I only remember that when I was a child, I ate a bowl of sand sugar mixed with roundworm repellent powder to make it so difficult. However, I did not complain, because the smug smile she endured when she came to clean up the empty bowl was more than enough to compensate for my pain. So although I was so full that I couldn't sleep well that night, and I had a long list of nightmares, I still wished her a happy life, and I wished the world a better place for her. However, these meanings are just traces of my old dreams, which I laugh at myself at once, and then I forget them.“我先前并不知道她曾经为了一朵剪绒花挨打，但因为母亲一说起，便也记得了荞麦粉的事，意外的勤快起来了。我先在太原城里搜求了一遍，都没有；一直到济南……”
"I didn't know that she had been beaten for a velvet flower, but because my mother talked about it, she also remembered about buckwheat flour, and she became unexpectedly diligent. I searched in Taiyuan City first, but there was none; All the way to Jinan ......"窗外沙沙的一阵声响，许多积雪从被他压弯了的一枝山茶树上滑下去了，树枝笔挺的伸直，更显出乌油油的肥叶和血红的花来。天空的铅色来得更浓；小鸟雀啾唧的叫着，大概黄昏将近，地面又全罩了雪，寻不出什么食粮，都赶早回巢来休息了。
There was a rustling sound outside the window, and a lot of snow slid down from a camellia tree that he had bent, and the branches were straightened, showing the fat leaves and blood-red flowers. The lead color of the sky is stronger; The birds chirped, probably dusk was approaching, the ground was covered with snow, and they couldn't find any food, so they all hurried back to the nest to rest.“一直到了济南，”他向窗外看了一回，转身喝干一杯酒，又吸几口烟，接着说。“我才买到剪绒花。我也不知道使她挨打的是不是这一种，总之是绒做的罢了。我也不知道她喜欢深色还是浅色，就买了一朵大红的，一朵粉红的，都带到这里来。
"All the way to Jinan," he looked out the window, turned around to drink a glass of wine, took a few puffs of smoke, and continued. "I just bought a cut flower. I don't know if this is what made her beaten, in short, it's just made of velvet. I don't know if she likes dark or light colors, so I bought a big red one and a pink one, and brought them here.“就是今天午后，我一吃完饭，便去看长富，我为此特地耽搁了一天。他的家倒还在，只是看去很有些晦气色了，但这恐怕不过是我自己的感觉。他的儿子和第二个女儿——阿昭，都站在门口，大了。阿昭长得全不像她姊姊，简直像一个鬼，但是看见我走向她家，便飞奔的逃进屋里去。我就问那小子，知道长富不在家。‘你的大姊呢？’他立刻瞪起眼睛，连声问我寻她什么事，而且恶狠狠的似乎就要扑过来，咬我。我支吾着退走了，我现在是敷敷衍衍……
"It was this afternoon, as soon as I finished eating, I went to see Changfu, and I delayed for a day for this. His home is still there, but it looks a little unlucky, but I'm afraid this is just my own feeling. His son and second daughter, Ah Zhao, were both standing at the door, older. Ah Zhao didn't look like her sister at all, she looked like a ghost, but when she saw me walking towards her house, she ran into the house. I asked the kid and knew that Changfu was not at home. 'Where's your eldest sister?' He immediately widened his eyes and asked me what I was looking for her, and he seemed to be about to pounce on me and bite me. I hesitated and left, I am now perfunctory......“你不知道，我可是比先前更怕去访人了。因为我已经深知道自己之讨厌，连自己也讨厌，又何必明知故犯的去使人暗暗地不快呢？然而这回的差使是不能不办妥的，所以想了一想，终于回到就在斜对门的柴店里。店主的母亲，老发奶奶，倒也还在，而且也还认识我，居然将我邀进店里坐去了。我们寒暄几句之后，我就说明了回到S城和寻长富的缘故。不料她叹息说：
"You don't know, I'm more afraid of visiting people than before. Because I already know that I hate it, and even I hate it, why should I knowingly make others unhappy? However, this time the messenger had to be done properly, so after thinking about it, he finally returned to the firewood shop diagonally opposite the door. The owner's mother, Grandma Laofa, was still there, and she knew me, so she actually invited me into the store to sit down. After we exchanged a few pleasantries, I explained the reason for returning to S City and finding Changfu. Unexpectedly, she sighed and said:“‘可惜顺姑没有福气戴这剪绒花了。’
"'It's a pity that Aunt Shun is not blessed to wear this velvet flower.'“她于是详细的告诉我，说是‘大约从去年春天以来，她就见得黄瘦，后来忽而常常下泪了，问她缘故又不说；有时还整夜的哭，哭得长富也忍不住生气，骂她年纪大了，发了疯。可是一到秋初，起先不过小伤风，终于躺倒了，从此就起不来。直到咽气的前几天，才肯对长富说，她早就像她母亲一样，不时的吐红和流夜汗。但是瞒着，怕他因此要担心。有一夜，她的伯伯长庚又来硬借钱，——这是常有的事，——她不给，长庚就冷笑着说：你不要骄气，你的男人比我还不如！她从此就发了愁，又怕羞，不好问，只好哭。长富赶紧将她的男人怎样的挣气的话说给她听，那里还来得及？况且她也不信，反而说：好在我已经这样，什么也不要紧了。’
"She then told me in detail, saying, 'Since about last spring, she has seen yellow skin, and then suddenly and often shed tears, and asked her why she didn't say anything; Sometimes she cried all night, and Changfu couldn't help but get angry and scolded her for being old and crazy. But at the beginning of autumn, it was just a small cold, and finally he lay down and couldn't get up again. It wasn't until a few days before she took her breath that she was willing to tell Changfu that she was already like her mother, vomiting red and sweating at night from time to time. But hide it, for fear that he will worry about it. One night, her uncle Chang Geng came to borrow money again,—— which is a common thing,—— she didn't give it, Chang Geng sneered and said: Don't be arrogant, your man is worse than me! She was worried and shy from then on, and she couldn't ask, so she had to cry. Changfu hurriedly told her what kind of angry words her man was, where was it still too late? Moreover, she didn't believe it, but said: Fortunately, I am already like this, nothing matters. ’“她还说，‘如果她的男人真比长庚不如，那就真可怕呵！比不上一个偷鸡贼，那是什么东西呢？然而他来送殓的时候，我是亲眼看见他的，衣服很干净，人也体面；还眼泪汪汪的说，自己撑了半世小船，苦熬苦省的积起钱来聘了一个女人，偏偏又死掉了。可见他实在是一个好人，长庚说的全是诳。只可惜顺姑竟会相信那样的贼骨头的诳话，白送了性命。——但这也不能去怪谁，只能怪顺姑自己没有这一份好福气。’
"She also said, 'If her man is really worse than Chang Geng, it will be terrible!' It's not as good as a chicken thief, what is it? However, when he came to deliver the funeral, I saw him with my own eyes, his clothes were very clean, and he was decent; He also said with tears in his eyes that he had supported a small boat for half his life, and he had saved up money to hire a woman, but he died again. It can be seen that he is really a good person, and what Chang Geng said is all lies. It's a pity that Shun Gu would believe the lie of such a thief bone and gave her life in vain. ——But this can't be blamed on anyone, only Shun Gu herself for not having this good blessing. ’“那倒也罢，我的事情又完了。但是带在身边的两朵剪绒花怎么办呢？好，我就托她送了阿昭。这阿昭一见我就飞跑，大约将我当作一只狼或是什么，我实在不愿意去送她。——但是我也就送她了，对母亲只要说阿顺见了喜欢的了不得就是。这些无聊的事算什么？只要模模胡胡。模模胡胡的过了新年，仍旧教我的‘子曰诗云’去。”
"That's fine, my business is over again. But what about the two velvet flowers you bring with you? Okay, I asked her to send Ah Zhao. This Ah Zhao flew away as soon as he saw me, probably thinking of me as a wolf or something, and I really didn't want to send her off. ——But I also gave her away, as long as I said to my mother that Ah Shun liked it when he saw it. What are these boring things? As long as it is mocking. After the New Year, I still taught my 'Yue Yue Shiyun' to go. ”“你教的是‘子曰诗云’么？”我觉得奇异，便问。
"Do you teach 'Ziyue Shiyun'?" I thought it was strange, so I asked.“自然。你还以为教的是ABCD么？我先是两个学生，一个读《诗经》，一个读《孟子》。新近又添了一个，女的，读《女儿经》。连算学也不教，不是我不教，他们不要教。”
"Nature. Do you still think you are teaching ABCD? I was first two students, one reading the Book of Songs and the other reading Mencius. Recently, another one has been added, female, reading the "Daughter's Classic". They don't even teach arithmetic, it's not that I don't teach them, they don't want to teach them. ”“我实在料不到你倒去教这类的书，……”
"I really didn't expect you to teach this kind of book,......"“他们的老子要他们读这些；我是别人，无乎不可的。这些无聊的事算什么？只要随随便便，……”
"Their Lao Tzu wants them to read this; I am someone else, nothing is impossible. What are these boring things? Just ,...... casually"他满脸已经通红，似乎很有些醉，但眼光却又消沉下去了。我微微的叹息，一时没有话可说。楼梯上一阵乱响，拥上几个酒客来：当头的是矮子，拥肿的圆脸；第二个是长的，在脸上很惹眼的显出一个红鼻子；此后还有人，一叠连的走得小楼都发抖。我转眼去看吕纬甫，他也正转眼来看我，我就叫堂倌算酒账。
His face was already red, and he seemed to be a little drunk, but his eyes were depressed again. I sighed slightly, and there was nothing to say for a while. There was a chaotic noise on the stairs, and a few drinkers came: the one at the head was a short man with a swollen round face; the second is long, showing a red nose on the face; After that, there were still people, and the small building trembled one after another. I turned my eyes to look at Lu Weifu, and he was also looking at me in a blink of an eye, so I asked my cousin to settle the wine account.“你借此还可以支持生活么？”我一面准备走，一面问。
"Can you still support your life through this?" I asked as I prepared to leave.“是的。——我每月有二十元，也不大能够敷衍。”
"Yes. ——I have 20 yuan a month, and I can't be perfunctory. ”“那么，你以后豫备怎么办呢？”
"So, what will you do in the future?"“以后？——我不知道。你看我们那时豫想的事可有一件如意？我现在什么也不知道，连明天怎样也不知道，连后一分……”
"In the future? – I don't know. Do you think there is one wish for what we thought at that time? I don't know anything now, I don't even know what tomorrow will be, even a point ......"堂倌送上账来，交给我；他也不像初到时候的谦虚了，只向我看了一眼，便吸烟，听凭我付了账。
The cousin sent it to me and handed it to me; He was not as modest as he was when he first arrived, he only glanced at me, smoked, and let me pay the bill.我们一同走出店门，他所住的旅馆和我的方向正相反，就在门口分别了。我独自向着自己的旅馆走，寒风和雪片扑在脸上，倒觉得很爽快。见天色已是黄昏，和屋宇和街道都织在密雪的纯白而不定的罗网里。
We walked out of the store together, and the hotel he was staying in was in the opposite direction from mine, and we parted ways at the door. I walked alone towards my hotel, and the cold wind and snowflakes hit my face, which felt very refreshing. Seeing that it was already dusk, the houses and streets were woven into the pure white and indefinite net of dense snow.一九二四年二月一六日。
February 16, 1924.

幸福的家庭

幸福的家庭

幸福的家庭

Happy family——拟许钦文
——Proposed Xu Qinwen“……做不做全由自己的便；那作品，像太阳的光一样，从无量的光源中涌出来，不像石火，用铁和石敲出来，这才是真艺术。那作者，也才是真的艺术家。——而我，……这算是什么？……”他想到这里，忽然从床上跳起来了。以先他早已想过，须得捞几文稿费维持生活了；投稿的地方，先定为幸福月报社，因为润笔似乎比较的丰。但作品就须有范围，否则，恐怕要不收的。范围就范围，……现在的青年的脑里的大问题是？……大概很不少，或者有许多是恋爱，婚姻，家庭之类罢。……是的，他们确有许多人烦闷着，正在讨论这些事。那么，就来做家庭。然而怎么做做呢？……否则，恐怕要不收的，何必说些背时的话，然而……。他跳下卧床之后，四五步就走到书桌面前，坐下去，抽出一张绿格纸，毫不迟疑，但又自暴自弃似的写下一行题目道：《幸福的家庭》。
“…… Whether you do it or not is up to you; That work, like the light of the sun, gushes out from an infinite source of light, unlike stone fire, knocked out with iron and stone, this is true art. The author is also the real artist. ——And I,...... What is this? ......" He thought of this and suddenly jumped up from the bed. He had already thought that he would have to earn a few manuscript fees to make a living; The place of submission was first set as Happiness Monthly Newspaper, because the writing seems to be relatively rich. But the work must have a scope, otherwise, I am afraid it will not be accepted. Scope is range,...... What is the big question in the minds of today's young people? …… There are probably a lot, or many of them are love, marriage, family, etc. …… Yes, they do have many people who are bored and are discussing these things. So, let's start a family. But how? …… Otherwise, I'm afraid I won't accept it, so why say something backward, but ....... After he jumped out of bed, he walked to the desk in four or five steps, sat down, took out a piece of green grid paper, and wrote a line of title without hesitation, but as if he was giving up: "Happy Family".他的笔立刻停滞了；他仰了头，两眼瞪着房顶，正在安排那安置这“幸福的家庭”的地方。他想：“北京？不行，死气沉沉，连空气也是死的。假如在这家庭的周围筑一道高墙，难道空气也就隔断了么？简直不行！江苏浙江天天防要开仗；福建更无须说。四川，广东？都正在打。山东河南之类？——阿阿，要绑票的，倘使绑去一个，那就成为不幸的家庭了。上海天津的租界上房租贵；……假如在外国，笑话。云南贵州不知道怎样，但交通也太不便……。”他想来想去，想不出好地方，便要假定为A了，但又想，“现有不少的人是反对用西洋字母来代人地名的，说是要减少读者的兴味。我这回的投稿，似乎也不如不用，安全些。那么，在那里好呢？——湖南也打仗；大连仍然房租贵；察哈尔，吉林，黑龙江罢，——听说有马贼，也不行！……”他又想来想去，又想不出好地方，于是终于决心，假定这“幸福的家庭”所在的地方叫作A。
His pen immediately stopped; He raised his head and stared at the roof, arranging the place where this "happy family" would be placed. He thought, "Beijing? No, it's lifeless, even the air is dead. If a high wall is built around this family, will the air be cut off? It's simply not good! Jiangsu and Zhejiang are going to war every day; Fujian needs nothing to say. Sichuan, Guangdong? are all fighting. Shandong and Henan? ——Ah, if you want to kidnap a ticket, if you tie up one, it will become an unfortunate family. The rent in the concession in Shanghai and Tianjin is expensive; …… If in a foreign country, joke. I don't know what happened in Guizhou, Yunnan, but the traffic is too inconvenient ....... He thought about it and couldn't think of a good place, so he had to assume A, but he thought, "There are many people who oppose the use of Western letters to replace place names, saying that it is to reduce the interest of readers." My submission this time seems to be safer than not using it. So, where is it good? ——Hunan also fought; Dalian is still expensive to rent; Chahar, Jilin, Heilongjiang ,—— heard that there are horse thieves, but it is not good! ...... he thought about it again, but couldn't think of a good place, so he finally decided to assume that the place where this "happy family" was located was called A.“总之，这幸福的家庭一定须在A，无可磋商。家庭中自然是两夫妇，就是主人和主妇，自由结婚的。他们订有四十多条条约，非常详细，所以非常平等，十分自由。而且受过高等教育，优美高尚……。东洋留学生已经不通行，——那么，假定为西洋留学生罢。主人始终穿洋服，硬领始终雪白；主妇是前头的头发始终烫得蓬蓬松松像一个麻雀窠，牙齿是始终雪白的露着，但衣服却是中国装，……”
In short, this happy family must be in A, and there is no negotiation. Naturally, there are two couples in the family, that is, the master and the housewife, who marry freely. They have more than 40 treaties, very detailed, so they are very equal and very free. And highly educated, beautiful and noble ....... Oriental students are no longer accepted,—— so let's assume that they are Western students. The owner always wears a suit, and the hard collar is always snow-white; The housewife is always permed fluffy and fluffy like a sparrow's nest, and her teeth are always snow-white, but her clothes are Chinese,......"“不行不行，那不行！二十五斤！”
“不行不行，那不行！二十五斤！”他听得窗外一个男人的声音，不由的回过头去看，窗幔垂着，日光照着，明得眩目，他的眼睛昏花了；接着是小木片撒在地上的声响。“不相干，”他又回过头来想，“什么‘二十五斤’？——他们是优美高尚，很爱文艺的。但因为都从小生长在幸福里，所以不爱俄国的小说……。俄国小说多描写下等人，实在和这样的家庭也不合。‘二十五斤’？不管他。那么，他们看看什么书呢？——裴伦的诗？吉支的？不行，都不稳当。——哦，有了，他们都爱看《理想之良人》。我虽然没有见过这部书，但既然连大学教授也那么称赞他，想来他们也一定都爱看，你也看，我也看，——他们一人一本，这家庭里一共有两本，……”他觉得胃里有点空虚了，放下笔，用两只手支着头，教自己的头像地球仪似的在两个柱子间挂着。
He heard the voice of a man outside the window, and couldn't help but turn his head to look, the curtains were hanging down, the sunlight was shining, and his eyes were dizzy; Then there was the sound of small pieces of wood scattered on the ground. "It doesn't matter," he thought again, "What 'twenty-five pounds'?" ——They are beautiful and noble, and they love literature and art. But because they all grew up in happiness, they don't love Russian novels ....... Russian novels often describe lower-class people, which is really not compatible with such a family. 'Twenty-five pounds'? Regardless of him. So, what books do they look at? ——Pei Lun's poem? Jizhi's? No, it's not stable. ——Oh, yes, they all love to watch "The Ideal Lover". Although I have not seen this book, since even the university professors praise him so much, I think they must love to read it, you read it, I also ,——read it, I also read one copy for each of them, there are two books in this family,...... He felt a little empty in his stomach, put down his pen, supported his head with both hands, and taught his head to hang between the two pillars like a globe.“……他们两人正在用午餐，”他想，“桌上铺了雪白的布；厨子送上菜来，——中国菜。什么‘二十五斤’？不管他。为什么倒是中国菜？西洋人说，中国菜最进步，最好吃，最合于卫生：所以他们采用中国菜。送来的是第一碗，但这第一碗是什么呢？……”
“…… The two of them were having lunch," he thought, "with a snow-white cloth on the table; The chef brings the dishes ,—— Chinese food. What 'twenty-five pounds'? Regardless of him. Why Chinese food? Westerners say that Chinese cuisine is the most progressive, the most delicious, and the most hygienic: so they adopt Chinese cuisine. The first bowl was delivered, but what is this first bowl? ……”“劈柴，……”
"Splitting wood,......他吃惊的回过头去看，靠左肩，便立着他自己家里的主妇，两只阴凄凄的眼睛恰恰钉住他的脸。
He turned his head in surprise, leaning on his left shoulder, and stood the housewife of his own family, and his two gloomy eyes pinned his face.“什么？”他以为她来搅扰了他的创作，颇有些愤怒了。
"What?" He thought she was disturbing his creation, and he was a little angry.“劈柴，都用完了，今天买了些。前一回还是十斤两吊四，今天就要两吊六。我想给他两吊五，好不好？”
"Splitting firewood, it's all used up, I bought some today. Last time it was ten pounds and two hangs four, and today it will be two hangs and six. I want to give him two hangings, okay?" ”“好好，就是两吊五。”
"Okay, it's two hangs and five."“称得太吃亏了。他一定只肯算二十四斤半；我想就算他二十三斤半，好不好？”
"It's too much to lose. He must have been willing to count only twenty-four and a half pounds; I think even if he is twenty-three and a half pounds, okay? ”“好好，就算他二十三斤半。”
"Okay, even if he weighs twenty-three and a half pounds."“那么，五五二十五，三五一十五，……”
"Then, five, five, twenty-five, three, five, fifteen,......"“唔唔，五五二十五，三五一十五，……”他也说不下去了，停了一会，忽而奋然的抓起笔来，就在写着一行“幸福的家庭”的绿格纸上起算草，起了好久，这才仰起头来说道：
"Hmm, five, five, twenty-five, three, five, fifteen,......" He couldn't go on anymore, stopped for a while, suddenly picked up the pen, and started drafting on a line of green grid paper with "Happy Family" written on it, and after a long time, he raised his head and said:“五吊八！”
"Five hanging eight!"“那是，我这里不够了，还差八九个……。”
"That's right, I'm not good enough here, I'm still eight or nine ...... away."他抽开书桌的抽屉，一把抓起所有的铜元，不下二三十，放在她摊开的手掌上，看她出了房，才又回过头来向书桌。他觉得头里面很胀满，似乎桠桠叉叉的全被木柴填满了，五五二十五，脑皮质上还印着许多散乱的亚剌伯数目字。他很深的吸一口气，又用力的呼出，仿佛要借此赶出脑里的劈柴，五五二十五和亚刺伯数字来。果然，吁气之后，心地也就轻松不少了，于是仍复恍恍忽忽的想——
He opened the drawer of the desk, grabbed all the copper dollars, no less than twenty or thirty, and placed them on her spread palm, and when he saw her leave the room, he turned back to the desk. He felt that his head was very full, as if his forks were all filled with firewood, and there were many scattered Arabian numbers printed on the cerebral cortex. He took a deep breath and exhaled hard, as if to drive out the chopping wood in his head, five, five, twenty-five, and the number of Azabel. Sure enough, after sighing, my heart became a lot more relaxed, so I still thought in a trance -“什么菜？菜倒不妨奇特点。滑溜里脊，虾子海参，实在太凡庸。我偏要说他们吃的是‘龙虎斗’。但‘龙虎斗’又是什么呢？有人说是蛇和猫，是广东的贵重菜，非大宴会不吃的。但我在江苏饭馆的菜单上就见过这名目，江苏人似乎不吃蛇和猫，恐怕就如谁所说，是蛙和鳝鱼了。现在假定这主人和主妇为那里人呢？——不管他。总而言之，无论那里人吃一碗蛇和猫或者蛙和鳝鱼，于幸福的家庭是决不会有损伤的。总之这第一碗一定是‘龙虎斗’，无可磋商。
"What dish? The dishes may not be as strange as they are. Smooth tenderloin, shrimp and sea cucumber are too mediocre. I would like to say that they eat 'dragon and tiger fighting'. But what is the 'dragon and tiger fight'? Some people say that snakes and cats are valuable dishes in Guangdong and are not eaten unless they are big banquets. But I have seen this name on the menu of Jiangsu restaurants, Jiangsu people don't seem to eat snakes and cats, I'm afraid that, as anyone said, it's frogs and eels. Now suppose that the master and the mistress are from there? ——Regardless of him. All in all, no matter how much people there eat a bowl of snakes and cats or frogs and eels, there will never be any damage to a happy family. In short, this first bowl must be a 'dragon and tiger fight', which is non-negotiable.“于是一碗‘龙虎斗’摆在桌子中央了，他们两人同时捏起筷子，指着碗沿，笑迷迷的你看我，我看你……。
So a bowl of 'dragon and tiger fight' was placed in the center of the table, and the two of them pinched their chopsticks at the same time, pointing to the edge of the bowl, smiling and looking at me, I see you .......“‘My dear，please.’
“‘My dear，please.’“‘Please you eat first，my dear.’
“‘Please you eat first，my dear.’“‘Oh no，please you！’
“‘Oh no，please you！’“于是他们同时伸下筷子去，同时夹出一块蛇肉来，——不不，蛇肉究竟太奇怪，还不如说是鳝鱼罢。那么，这碗‘龙虎斗’是蛙和鳝鱼所做的了。他们同时夹出一块鳝鱼来，一样大小，五五二十五，三五……不管他，同时放进嘴里去，……”他不能自制的只想回过头去看，因为他觉得背后很热闹，有人来来往往的走了两三回。但他还熬着，乱嘈嘈的接着想，“这似乎有点肉麻，那有这样的家庭？唉唉，我的思路怎么会这样乱，这好题目怕是做不完篇的了。——或者不必定用留学生，就在国内受了高等教育的也可以。他们都是大学毕业的，高尚优美，高尚……。男的是文学家；女的也是文学家，或者文学崇拜家。或者女的是诗人；男的是诗人崇拜者，女性尊重者。或者……”他终于忍耐不住，回过头去了。
So they stretched out their chopsticks at the same time, and at the same time took out a piece of snake meat,—— no, no, snake meat is too strange, it might as well be called eel. Then, this bowl of 'dragon and tiger fight' is made by frogs and eels. At the same time, they picked up a piece of eel, the same size, five, twenty-five, three-five...... Regardless of him, put it in his mouth at the same time,...... "He couldn't control himself and just wanted to look back, because he felt that there was a lot of activity behind him, and people walked back and forth two or three times. But he was still holding on, and continued to think, "This seems a bit numb, how can there be such a family?" Alas, how can my thinking be so messy, I'm afraid I won't be able to finish this good topic. ——Or you don't have to use international students, you can also have higher education in China. They all graduated from college, noble and beautiful, noble ....... the man is a writer; Women are also writers, or literary admirers. or the woman is a poet; Men are poet admirers and women respect. Or ......" He finally couldn't stand it anymore and turned around.就在他背后的书架的旁边，已经出现了一座白菜堆，下层三株，中层两株，顶上一株，向他叠成一个很大的A字。
Right next to the bookshelf behind him, a pile of cabbage had already appeared, three on the lower level, two on the middle layer, and one on top, stacked into a large A-shape towards him.“唉唉！”他吃惊的叹息，同时觉得脸上骤然发热了，脊梁上还有许多针轻轻的刺着。“吁……。”他很长的嘘一口气，先斥退了脊梁上的针，仍然想，“幸福的家庭的房子要宽绰。有一间堆积房，白菜之类都到那边去。主人的书房另一间，靠壁满排着书架，那旁边自然决没有什么白菜堆；架上满是中国书，外国书，《理想之良人》自然也在内，——一共有两部。卧室又一间；黄铜床，或者质朴点，第一监狱工场做的榆木床也就够，床底下很干净，……”他当即一瞥自己的床下，劈柴已经用完了，只有一条稻草绳，却还死蛇似的懒懒的躺着。
"Alas!" He sighed in surprise, and at the same time felt that his face suddenly became hot, and there were many needles gently stabbing his spine. "Oh...... He let out a long sigh, first repelled the needle on his spine, and still thought, "A happy family's house should be spacious." There is a stacking room, and cabbage and the like go over there. The other room of the master's study is lined with bookshelves against the wall, and there is naturally no pile of cabbage next to it; The shelves are full of Chinese books, foreign books, and naturally "The Ideal Lover",—— there are two in total. another bedroom; The brass bed, or the rustic one, the elm bed made by the First Prison Workshop is enough, and the bottom of the bed is very clean,...... He immediately glanced under his bed, the firewood had been used up, there was only a straw rope, but he was still lying lazily like a dead snake.“二十三斤半，……”他觉得劈柴就要向床下“川流不息”的进来，头里面又有些桠桠叉叉了，便急忙起立，走向门口去想关门。但两手刚触着门，却又觉得未免太暴躁了，就歇了手，只放下那积着许多灰尘的门幕。他一面想，这既无闭关自守之操切，也没有开放门户之不安：是很合于“中庸之道”的。
"Twenty-three and a half pounds,......" He felt that the firewood was about to "flow endlessly" under the bed, and there were some forks in his head, so he hurriedly stood up and walked to the door to close the door. But as soon as he touched the door with both hands, he felt that it was too irritable, so he stopped and only put down the door curtain that was accumulating a lot of dust. He thought that this was neither the practice of seclusion nor the uneasiness of opening the door: it was very in line with the "golden mean".“……所以主人的书房门永远是关起来的。”他走回来，坐下，想，“有事要商量先敲门，得了许可才能进来，这办法实在对。现在假如主人坐在自己的书房里，主妇来谈文艺了，也就先敲门。——这可以放心，她必不至于捧着白菜的。
“…… So the owner's study door is always closed. He walked back, sat down, and thought, "If you have something to discuss, you have to knock on the door first, and you can only come in with permission, which is really right." Now if the master sits in his study and the housewife comes to talk about literature and art, she will knock on the door first. ——You can rest assured that she will not hold cabbage.“‘Come in，please，my dear．’
“‘Come in，please，my dear．’“然而主人没有工夫谈文艺的时候怎么办呢？那么，不理她，听她站在外面老是剥剥的敲？这大约不行罢。或者《理想之良人》里面都写着，——那恐怕确是一部好小说，我如果有了稿费，也得去买他一部来看看……。”
However, what should the master do when he doesn't have time to talk about literature and art? So, ignore her and listen to her standing outside and always knocking on the skin? This probably won't work. Or it is written in "The Ideal Lover",—— I'm afraid it's indeed a good novel, and if I have a manuscript fee, I have to buy one of him to see ....... ”拍！
Clap!他腰骨笔直了，因为他根据经验，知道这一声“拍”是主妇的手掌打在他们的三岁的女儿的头上的声音。
His waist was straight, because he knew from experience that this "slap" was the sound of a housewife's palm hitting the head of their three-year-old daughter.“幸福的家庭，……”他听到孩子的呜咽了，但还是腰骨笔直的想，“孩子是生得迟的，生得迟。或者不如没有，两个人干干净净。——或者不如住在客店里，什么都包给他们，一个人干干……”他听得呜咽声高了起来，也就站了起来，钻过门幕，想着，“马克思在儿女的啼哭声中还会做《资本论》，所以他是伟人，……”走出外间，开了风门，闻得一阵煤油气。孩子就躺倒在门的右边，脸向着地，一见他，便“哇”的哭出来了。
"Happy family,......" He heard the child's whimpering, but he still thought straight, "The child was born late, born late." Or it's better to have nothing, two people are clean. ——Or it is better to live in an inn, cover everything for them, and do it alone......" He heard that his whimpering voice became higher, so he stood up, drilled through the curtain, and thought, "Marx will also do "Capital" in the crying of his children, so he is a great man,......" "Walked outside, opened the wind door, and smelled a burst of kerosene gas." The child lay down on the right side of the door, his face facing the ground, and when he saw him, he cried "wow".“阿阿，好好，莫哭莫哭，我的好孩子。”他弯下腰去抱她。
"Ah, good, don't cry, don't cry, my good boy." He bent down to hug her.他抱了她回转身，看见门左边还站着主妇，也是腰骨笔直，然而两手插腰，怒气冲冲的似乎豫备开始练体操。
He hugged her and turned around, and saw that there was still a housewife standing on the left side of the door, also with a straight waist, but he put his hands on his waist, and he seemed to be ready to start practicing gymnastics angrily.“连你也来欺侮我！不会帮忙，只会捣乱，——连油灯也要翻了他。晚上点什么？……”
"Even you come to bully me! will not help, will only make trouble,—— even the oil lamp will turn over him. What to order in the evening? ……”“阿阿，好好，莫哭莫哭，”他把那些发抖的声音放在脑后，抱她进房，摩着她的头，说，“我的好孩子。”于是放下她，拖开椅子，坐下去，使她站在两膝的中间，擎起手来道，“莫哭了呵，好孩子。爹爹做‘猫洗脸’给你看。”他同时伸长颈子，伸出舌头，远远的对着手掌舔了两舔，就用这手掌向了自己的脸上画圆圈。
"Ah, okay, don't cry, don't cry," he put those trembling voices behind his head, carried her into the room, rubbed her head, and said, "My good boy." So he put her down, dragged away the chair, sat down, made her stand between her knees, raised her hand and said, "Don't cry, good boy." Daddy will do 'cat face washing' for you to see." He stretched his neck at the same time, stretched out his tongue, licked his palm twice from a distance, and used this palm to draw a circle on his face.“呵呵呵，花儿。”她就笑起来了。
"Hehehe, flowers." She laughed.“是的是的，花儿。”他又连画上几个圆圈，这才歇了手，只见她还是笑迷迷的挂着眼泪对他看。他忽而觉得，她那可爱的天真的脸，正像五年前的她的母亲，通红的嘴唇尤其像，不过缩小了轮廓。那时也是晴朗的冬天，她听得他说决计反抗一切阻碍，为她牺牲的时候，也就这样笑迷迷的挂着眼泪对他看。他惘然的坐着，仿佛有些醉了。
"Yes, yes, flowers." He drew a few more circles in a row, and then stopped, only to see that she was still smiling and looking at him with tears in her eyes. He suddenly felt that her lovely and innocent face was like her mother five years ago, and her red lips were especially similar, but the silhouette was narrowed. It was also a sunny winter, and when she heard him say that he was determined to resist all obstacles and sacrifice for her, she looked at him with tears in her eyes. He sat there dazedly, as if he was a little drunk.“阿阿，可爱的嘴唇……”他想。
"Ah, cute lips......" he thought.门幕忽然挂起。劈柴运进来了。
The curtain suddenly hung up. The firewood was brought in.他也忽然惊醒，一定睛，只见孩子还是挂着眼泪，而且张开了通红的嘴唇对他看。“嘴唇……”他向旁边一瞥，劈柴正在进来，“……恐怕将来也就是五五二十五，九九八十一！……而且两只眼睛阴凄凄的……。”他想着，随即粗暴的抓起那写着一行题目和一堆算草的绿格纸来，揉了几揉，又展开来给她拭去了眼泪和鼻涕。“好孩子，自己玩去罢。”他一面推开她，说；一面就将纸团用力的掷在纸篓里。
He also woke up suddenly, and he must have eyes, only to see that the child was still in tears, and opened his red lips to look at him. "Lips ......" He glanced to the side, chopping wood was coming in, "...... I'm afraid that in the future, it will be five, five, twenty-five, ninety-nine and eighty-one! …… And the eyes are ...... miserable. He thought, and then roughly grabbed the green grid paper with a line of titles and a pile of grass counting, rubbed it a few times, and unfolded it to wipe away her tears and snot. Good boy, just play by yourself. He pushed her away and said; On one side, he threw the paper ball into the paper basket hard.但他又立刻觉得对于孩子有些抱歉了，重复回头，目送着她独自茕茕的出去；耳朵里听得木片声。他想要定一定神，便又回转头，闭了眼睛，息了杂念，平心静气的坐着。他看见眼前浮出一朵扁圆的乌花，橙黄心，从左眼的左角漂到右，消失了；接着一朵明绿花，墨绿色的心；接着一座六株的白菜堆，屹然的向他叠成一个很大的A字。
But he immediately felt a little sorry for the child, and turned around repeatedly, watching her go out alone; I heard the sound of wood chips in my ears. He wanted to calm down, so he turned his head again, closed his eyes, stopped his distracting thoughts, and sat calmly. He saw a flat black flower floating in front of him, with an orange-yellow heart, floating from the left corner of his left eye to the right and disappearing; Then there is a bright green flower, dark green heart; Then a pile of six cabbages was stacked on him into a large A-shape.一九二四年二月一八日。
一九二四年二月一八日。

肥皂

肥皂

肥皂

肥皂四铭太太正在斜日光中背着北窗和她八岁的女儿秀儿糊纸锭，忽听得又重又缓的布鞋底声响，知道四铭进来了，并不去看他，只是糊纸锭。但那布鞋底声却愈响愈逼近，觉得终于停在她的身边了，于是不免转过眼去看，只见四铭就在她面前耸肩曲背的狠命掏着布马挂底下的袍子的大襟后面的口袋。
Mrs. Siming was carrying the north window and her eight-year-old daughter Xiu'er in the slanting sunlight when she suddenly heard the sound of heavy and slow cloth soles, knowing that Siming had come in, she didn't go to see him, just pasted the paper ingots. But the sound of the cloth soles was getting louder and closer, and he felt that it had finally stopped beside her, so he couldn't help but turn his eyes to look, only to see Siming shrugging his shoulders and bending his back in front of her, fiercely digging out the pocket behind the placket of the robe under the cloth horse.他好容易曲曲折折的汇出手来，手里就有一个小小的长方包，葵绿色的，一径递给四太太。她刚接到手，就闻到一阵似橄榄非橄榄的说不清的香味，还看见葵绿色的纸包上有一个金光灿烂的印子和许多细簇簇的花纹。秀儿即刻跳过来要抢着看，四太太赶忙推开她。
He easily handed out his hand in a twist and turn, and there was a small rectangular bag in his hand, sunflower green, and handed it to the fourth wife. As soon as she received it, she smelled an indescribable fragrance that resembled olives but not olives, and saw a golden mark and many fine clusters of patterns on the sunflower green paper bag. Xiu'er immediately jumped over to take a look, and the fourth wife hurriedly pushed her away.“上了街？……”她一面看，一面问。
"On the street? ......" she asked as she looked.“唔唔。”他看着她手里的纸包，说。
"Hmm, no." He looked at the paper bag in her hand and said.于是这葵绿色的纸包被打开了，里面还有一层很薄的纸，也是葵绿色，揭开薄纸，才露出那东西的本身来，光滑坚致，也是葵绿色，上面还有细簇簇的花纹，而薄纸原来却是米色的，似橄榄非橄榄的说不清的香味也来得更浓了。
So the sunflower green paper package was opened, and there was a very thin layer of paper inside, which was also sunflower green, and when the tissue paper was opened, it was revealed that the thing itself was revealed, smooth and firm, and it was also sunflower green, with thin clusters of patterns on it, and the tissue paper turned out to be beige, and the indescribable fragrance of olives but not olives was also stronger.“唉唉，这实在是好肥皂。”她捧孩子似的将那葵绿色的东西送到鼻子下面去，嗅着说。
"Oh, this is really good soap." She brought the sunflower green thing under her nose like a child, sniffing and saying.“唔唔，你以后就用这个……。”
"Hmm, you will use this ...... in the future."她看见他嘴里这么说，眼光却射在她的脖子上，便觉得颧骨以下的脸上似乎有些热。她有时自己偶然摸到脖子上，尤其是耳朵后，指面上总感着些粗糙，本来早就知道是积年的老泥，但向来倒也并不很介意。现在在他的注视之下，对着这葵绿异香的洋肥皂，可不禁脸上有些发热了，而且这热又不绝的蔓延开去，即刻一径到耳根。她于是就决定晚饭后要用这肥皂来拼命的洗一洗。
She saw him say this, but her eyes shot on her neck, and she felt that her face below her cheekbones seemed to be a little hot. She sometimes accidentally touched her neck, especially behind her ears, and her fingers always felt a little rough. Now under his gaze, facing this sunflower green and fragrant foreign soap, he couldn't help but feel a little hot on his face, and this heat spread endlessly, and immediately went straight to the root of his ears. She then decided to use this soap to wash desperately after dinner.“有些地方，本来单用皂荚子是洗不干净的。”她自对自的说。
"In some places, soap pods alone cannot be washed." She said to herself.“妈，这给我！”秀儿伸手来抢葵绿纸；在外面玩耍的小女儿招儿也跑到了。四太太赶忙推开她们，裹好薄纸，又照旧包上葵绿纸，欠过身去搁在洗脸台上最高的一层格子上，看一看，翻身仍然糊纸锭。
"Mom, this is for me!" Xiu'er reached out to grab the green paper; The youngest daughter Zhao'er, who was playing outside, also ran away. The fourth wife hurriedly pushed them away, wrapped them in tissue paper, wrapped them in green paper as usual, and leaned over to put them on the highest layer of lattice on the washbasin.“学程！”四铭记起了一件事似的，忽而拖长了声音叫，就在她对面的一把高背椅子上坐下了。
"Academic program!" Si remembered something, suddenly screamed for a long time, and sat down on a high-backed chair opposite her.“学程！”她也帮着叫。
"Academic program!" She also helped call.她停下糊纸锭，侧耳一听，什么响应也没有，又见他仰着头焦急的等着，不禁很有些抱歉了，便尽力提高了喉咙，尖利的叫：
She stopped pasting the paper ingots, listened to it, but there was no response, and when she saw him waiting anxiously with his head back, she couldn't help but feel a little sorry, so she tried her best to raise her throat and shouted sharply:“儿呀！”
"!"这一叫确乎有效，就听到皮鞋声橐橐的近来，不一会，儿已站在她面前了，只穿短衣，肥胖的圆脸上亮晶晶的流着油汗。
This call was indeed effective, and she heard the sound of leather shoes coming closely, and after a while,  was already standing in front of her, wearing only short clothes, and her fat round face was shining with oil sweat.“你在做什么？怎么爹叫也不听见？”她谴责的说。
"What are you doing? Why can't you hear your father's screaming? She said condemned.“我刚在练八卦拳……。”他立即转身向了四铭，笔挺的站着，看着他，意思是问他什么事。
"I was just practicing Bagua Quan...... He immediately turned to Siming, stood upright, and looked at him, meaning to ask him something.“学程，我就要问你：‘恶毒妇’是什么？”
"Xue Cheng, I want to ask you: What is a 'vicious woman'?"“‘恶毒妇’？……那是，‘很凶的女人’罢？……”
"'Vicious woman'? …… That's a 'very fierce woman'? ……”“胡说！胡闹！”四铭忽而怒得可观。“我是‘女人’么！？”
"Nonsense! Monkey business! "The four inscriptions were suddenly angry. Am I a 'woman'!? ”学程吓得倒退了两步，站得更挺了。他虽然有时觉得他走路很像上台的老生，却从没有将他当作女人看待，他知道自己答的很错了。
Xue Cheng was so frightened that he took two steps back and stood up even more. Although he sometimes felt that he walked like an old student on stage, he never treated him as a woman, and he knew that he was wrong.“‘恶毒妇’是‘很凶的女人’，我倒不懂，得来请教你？——这不是中国话，是鬼子话，我对你说。这是什么意思，你懂么？”
"A 'vicious woman' is a 'very fierce woman', I don't understand, I have to ask you? ——This is not Chinese, it is a devil language, I tell you. What does this mean, do you understand? ”“我，……我不懂。”学程更加局促起来。
"I,...... I don't understand. "The program is even more cramped.“吓，我白化钱送你进学堂，连这一点也不懂。亏煞你的学堂还夸什么‘口耳并重’，倒教得什么也没有。说这鬼话的人至多不过十四五岁，比你还小些呢，已经叽叽咕咕的能说了，你却连意思也说不出，还有这脸说‘我不懂’！——现在就给我去查出来！”
"Scared, I gave you money to send you to school, and I didn't even understand this. It's a shame that your school still praises 'equal emphasis on words and ears', but it teaches nothing." The person who said this nonsense is only fourteen or fifteen years old at most, younger than you, and can already chirp, but you can't even say what it means, and this face says 'I don't understand'! ——Find out for me now! ”学程在喉咙底里答应了一声“是”，恭恭敬敬的退出去了。
Xue Cheng agreed "yes" in his throat and exited respectfully.“这真叫作不成样子，”过了一会，四铭又慷慨的说，“现在的学生是。其实，在光绪年间，我就是最提倡开学堂的，可万料不到学堂的流弊竟至于如此之大：什么解放咧，自由咧，没有实学，只会胡闹。学程呢，为他化了的钱也不少了，都白化。好容易给他进了中西折中的学堂，英文又专是‘口耳并重’的，你以为这该好了罢，哼，可是读了一年，连‘恶毒妇’也不懂，大约仍然是念死书。吓，什么学堂，造就了些什么？我简直说：应该统统关掉！”
"This is really unbelievable," Siming said generously after a while, "The current students are." In fact, during the Guangxu period, I was the most advocate of opening a school, but I never expected that the evils of the school would be so great: what liberation, freedom, no practical learning, only fooling around. As for the program, a lot of money has been spent for him, and it has been white. It was easy for him to enter the school of Chinese and Western eclectics, and English was specialized in 'equal emphasis on word and ear', you thought this should be good, hum, but after studying for a year, I didn't even understand the 'vicious woman', and I was probably still reading a dead book. Scar, what kind of school has created something? I simply said: it should all be turned off! ”“对咧，真不如统统关掉的好。”四太太糊着纸锭，同情的说。
"Yes, it's really better to turn them all off." The fourth wife said sympathetically with a paper ingot.“秀儿她们也不必进什么学堂了。‘女孩子，念什么书？’九公公先前这样说，反对女学的时候，我还攻击他呢；可是现在看起来，究竟是老年人的话对。你想，女人一阵一阵的在街上走，已经很不雅观的了，她们却还要剪头发。我最恨的就是那些剪了头发的女学生，我简直说，军人土匪倒还情有可原，搅乱天下的就是她们，应该很严的办一办……。”
"Xiu'er and the others don't have to go to any school. ' Girl, what book do you read? 'The ninth duke said this before, when he opposed the girls' school, I still attacked him; But now it seems that the elderly are right. You think, it's already very unsightly for women to walk down the street one by one, but they still have to cut their hair. What I hate the most are those female students who cut their hair, I simply say that military bandits are forgivable, they are the ones who disrupt the world, and they should be dealt with very strictly...... ”“对咧，男人都像了和尚还不够，女人又来学尼姑了。”
"Yes, it's not enough for men to be like monks, women are coming to learn nuns again."“学程！”
"Academic program!"学程正捧着一本小而且厚的金边书快步进来，便呈给四铭，指着一处说：
Xue Cheng was holding a small and thick gold-rimmed book and walked in quickly, so he presented it to Siming, pointed to a place and said:“这倒有点像。这个……。”
"It's a bit like. This one....... ”四铭接来看时，知道是字典，但文字非常小，又是横行的。他眉头一皱，擎向窗口，细着眼睛，就学程所指的一行念过去：
When the four inscriptions were taken to see it, they knew it was a dictionary, but the text was very small and rampant. He frowned, looked at the window, squinted his eyes, and read the line pointed to by Xue Cheng:“‘第十八世纪创立之共济讲社之称’。——唔，不对。——这声音是怎么念的？”他指着前面的“鬼子”字，问。
"'The name of the Freemasonry Society founded in the eighteenth century'. - Well, that's not true. - How is this voice pronounced? He pointed to the word "devil" in front of him and asked.“恶特拂罗斯（Oddfellows）。”
"Oddfellows."“不对，不对，不是这个。”四铭又忽而愤怒起来了。“我对你说：那是一句坏话，骂人的话，骂我这样的人的。懂了么？查去！”
"No, no, it's not this." Siming suddenly became angry again. "I say to you: That's a bad word, a curse, a scolding for someone like me. Do you understand? Check it out! ”学程看了他几眼，没有动。
Xuecheng looked at him a few times and didn't move.“这是什么闷胡卢，没头没脑的？你也先得说说清，教他好用心的查去。”她看见学程为难，觉得可怜，便排解而且不满似的说。
"What kind of stuffy Hulu is this, headless and brainless? You also have to explain it clearly first and teach him to check it carefully. She saw that Xue Cheng was in trouble and felt pitiful, so she solved it and said dissatisfied.“就是我在大街上广润祥买肥皂的时候，”四铭呼出了一口气，向她转过脸去，说。“店里又有三个学生在那里买东西。我呢，从他们看起来，自然也怕太噜苏一点了罢。我一气看了六七样，都要四角多，没有买；看一角一块的，又太坏，没有什么香。我想，不如中通的好，便挑定了那绿的一块，两角四分。伙计本来是势利鬼，眼睛生在额角上的，早就撅着狗嘴的了；可恨那学生这坏小子又都挤眉弄眼的说着鬼话笑。后来，我要打开来看一看才付钱：洋纸包着，怎么断得定货色的好坏呢。谁知道那势利鬼不但不依，还蛮不讲理，说了许多可恶的废话；坏小子们又附和着说笑。那一句是顶小的一个说的，而且眼睛看着我，他们就都笑起来了：可见一定是一句坏话。”他于是转脸对着学程道，“你只要在‘坏话类’里去查去！”
"It's when I was buying soap in Guangrunxiang on the street," Siming exhaled, turned his face to her, and said. "There are three more students in the store who are buying things there. As for me, from their point of view, I am naturally afraid of being a little too saggy. I looked at six or seven things in one go, all of which had more than four corners, and I didn't buy them; Look at a corner, it's too bad, and there is no fragrance. I thought it was not as good as Zhongtong's, so I picked the green one, two corners and four points. The guy was originally a snob, with eyes on the corner of his forehead, and he had long pouted; I hate that student, this bad boy, is all frowning and laughing. Later, I had to open it and take a look before paying: it was wrapped in foreign paper, how to judge the quality of the goods. Who knew that the snob was not only unreasonable, but also quite unreasonable, and said a lot of hateful nonsense; The bad boys echoed and joked. That sentence was said by the youngest one, and when they looked at me, they all laughed: it must be a bad word. He then turned his face to Xue Cheng and said, "You just need to check it in the 'bad words'!" ”学程在喉咙底里答应了一声“是”，恭恭敬敬的退去了。
Xue Cheng agreed "yes" in his throat and retreated respectfully.“他们还嚷什么‘新文化新文化’，‘化’到这样了，还不够？”他两眼钉着屋梁，尽自说下去。“学生也没有道德，社会上也没有道德，再不想点法子来挽救，中国这才真个要亡了。——你想，那多么可叹？……”
"What else are they shouting about 'new culture and new culture', and 'transforming' to this extent is not enough?" His eyes were nailed to the beams, and he continued to talk about it. "Students have no morality, and there is no morality in society, and if they don't want to do something to save it, China is really going to die. ——You think, how lamentable is that? ……”“什么？”她随口的问，并不惊奇。
"What?" She asked casually, not surprised.“孝女。”他转眼对着她，郑重的说。“就在大街上，有两个讨饭的。一个是姑娘，看去该有十八九岁了。——其实这样的年纪，讨饭是很不相宜的了，可是她还讨饭。——和一个六七十岁的老的，白头发，眼睛是瞎的，坐在布店的檐下求乞。大家多说她是孝女，那老的是祖母。她只要讨得一点什么，便都献给祖母吃，自己情愿饿肚皮。可是这样的孝女，有人肯布施么？”他射出眼光来钉住她，似乎要试验她的识见。
"Filial daughter." He turned his eyes to her and said solemnly. "Right on the street, there were two beggars. One is a girl, who looks like she should be eighteen or nineteen years old. ——In fact, at such an age, it is very inappropriate to beg for food, but she still begs for food. ——And an old man in his sixties or seventies, with white hair and blind eyes, sat under the eaves of a cloth shop and begged. Everyone says that she is a filial daughter, and the old one is a grandmother. As long as she asked for something, she would give it to her grandmother to eat, and she would rather go hungry. But such a filial daughter, is anyone willing to give? He shot out his eyes to nail her, as if to test her insights.她不答话，也只将眼光钉住他，似乎倒是专等他来说明。
She didn't answer, and only pinned her eyes to him, as if she was waiting for him to explain.“哼，没有。”他终于自己回答说。“我看了好半天，只见一个人给了一文小钱；其余的围了一大圈，倒反去打趣。还有两个光棍，竟肆无忌惮的说：‘阿发，你不要看得这货色脏。你只要去买两块肥皂来，咯支咯支遍身洗一洗，好得很哩！’哪，你想，这成什么话？”
"Hmph, no." He finally replied to himself. "I looked at it for a long time, and I saw a person give a small penny; The rest circled in a big circle and joked instead. There were also two bachelors who said unscrupulously: 'Ah Fa, don't look dirty with this goods.' You just need to buy two bars of soap and wash your whole body, it's very good! 'Where, what do you think, what is this? ”“哼，”她低下头去了，久之，才又懒懒的问，“你给了钱么？”
"Hmph," she lowered her head, and after a long time, she asked lazily, "Did you give the money?" ”“我么？——没有。一两个钱，是不好意思拿出去的。她不是平常的讨饭，总得……。”
"Me? - Nope. One or two coins, I am embarrassed to take it out. She is not the usual begging, she always has to ....... ”“嗡。”她不等说完话，便慢慢地站起来，走到厨下去。昏黄只显得浓密，已经是晚饭时候了。
"Buzz." Without waiting for her to finish speaking, she slowly stood up and walked to the kitchen. The dim yellow only looks dense, and it is already dinner time.四铭也站起身，走出院子去。天色比屋子里还明亮，学程就在墙角落上练习八卦拳：这是他的“庭训”，利用昼夜之交的时间的经济法，学程奉行了将近大半年了。他赞许似的微微点一点头，便反背着两手在空院子里来回的踱方步。不多久，那惟一的盆景万年青的阔叶又已消失在昏暗中，破絮一般的白云间闪出星点，黑夜就从此开头。四铭当这时候，便也不由的感奋起来，仿佛就要大有所为，与周围的坏学生以及恶社会宣战。他意气渐渐勇猛，脚步愈跨愈大，布鞋底声也愈走愈响，吓得早已睡在笼子里的母鸡和小鸡也都唧唧足足的叫起来了。
Siming also stood up and walked out of the yard. The sky was brighter than the house, and Xue Cheng practiced Bagua Quan in the corner of the wall: this was his "court training", and the economic method of using the time of day and night had been pursued for nearly half a year. He nodded slightly approvingly, and then paced back and forth in the empty yard with his hands behind his back. Not long after, the broad leaves of the only bonsai evergreen had disappeared into the darkness again, and stars flashed among the white clouds like broken catkins, and the night began. At this time, Siming couldn't help but feel excited, as if he was about to do something and declare war on the bad students and evil society around him. He became more and more courageous, his steps became bigger and bigger, and the sound of cloth soles became louder and louder, so frightened that the hens and chicks who had already slept in the cage chirped.堂前有了灯光，就是号召晚餐的烽火，合家的人们便都齐集在中央的桌子周围。灯在下横；上首是四铭一人居中，也是学程一般肥胖的圆脸，但多两撇细胡子，在菜汤的热气里，独据一面，很像庙里的财神。左横是四太太带着招儿；右横是学程和秀儿一列。碗筷声雨点似的响，虽然大家不言语，也就是很热闹的晚餐。
There was a light in front of the hall, which was the beacon calling for dinner, and the whole family gathered around the table in the center. The lights are horizontal below; The first is Si Ming in the center, and he is also a fat round face like a school, but he has two more thin beards, and in the heat of the vegetable soup, he occupies one side, very much like the god of wealth in the temple. Zuo Heng is the fourth wife with a trick; On the right horizontally is a column of academic programs and shows. The sound of dishes and chopsticks rained down, although everyone didn't speak, that is, a very lively dinner.招儿带翻了饭碗了，菜汤流得小半桌。四铭尽量的睁大了细眼睛瞪着看得她要哭，这才收回眼光，伸筷自去夹那早先看中了的一个菜心去。可是菜心已经不见了，他左右一瞥，就发见学程刚刚夹着塞进他张得很大的嘴里去，他于是只好无聊的吃了一筷黄菜叶。
Zhao Er turned over the rice bowl, and the vegetable soup flowed half a table. Siming opened his eyes as wide as he could, staring at her until he was about to cry, so he retracted his eyes and stretched out his chopsticks to pick up the cabbage sum he had taken a fancy to earlier. But the cabbage was gone, he glanced left and right, and saw that Xue Cheng had just stuffed it into his wide mouth, so he had to eat a chopstick of yellow cabbage leaves boredly.“学程，”他看着他的脸说，“那一句查出了没有？”
"Xuecheng," he looked at his face and said, "Did you find out that sentence?" ”“那一句？——那还没有。”
"That sentence? - That's not yet. ”“哼，你看，也没有学问，也不懂道理，单知道吃！学学那个孝女罢，做了乞丐，还是一味孝顺祖母，自己情愿饿肚子。但是你们这些学生那里知道这些，肆无忌惮，将来只好像那光棍……。”
"Hmph, you see, I don't have any knowledge, I don't understand the reason, I only know how to eat! Learn from that filial daughter, become a beggar, or blindly filial to my grandmother, and I would rather be hungry. But you students know this, unscrupulous, and will only be like a bachelor ...... in the future. ”“想倒想着了一个，但不知可是。——我想，他们说的也许是‘阿尔特肤尔’。”
I thought about one, but I don't know why. - I think they may be talking about 'Altfur'. ”“哦哦，是的！就是这个！他们说的就是这样一个声音：‘恶毒夫咧。’这是什么意思？你也就是他们这一党：你知道的。”
"Oh, yes! That's it! They said something like this: 'Vicious husband.' What does this mean? You are their party: you know. ”“意思，——意思我不很明白。”
"I don't really understand what it means,——“胡说！瞒我。你们都是坏种！”
"Nonsense! Hide it from me. You are all bad seeds! ”“‘天不打吃饭人’，你今天怎么尽闹脾气，连吃饭时候也是打鸡骂狗的。他们小孩子们知道什么。”四太太忽而说。
"'Heaven doesn't beat the eater', why are you losing your temper today, even beating chickens and scolding dogs when eating. What do they know little ones. The fourth wife said suddenly.“什么？”四铭正想发话，但一回头，看见她陷下的两颊已经鼓起，而且很变了颜色，三角形的眼里也发着可怕的光，便赶紧改口说，“我也没有闹什么脾气，我不过教学程应该懂事些。”
"What?" Siming was about to speak, but when he turned around, he saw that her sunken cheeks had bulged and changed color, and the triangular eyes also glowed terribly, so he quickly changed his words and said, "I didn't lose my temper, I just taught Cheng to be more sensible." ”“他那里懂得你心里的事呢。”她可是更气忿了。“他如果能懂事，早就点了灯笼火把，寻了那孝女来了。好在你已经给她买好了一块肥皂在这里，只要再去买一块……”
"He knows what's in your heart there." She was even more angry. If he could be sensible, he would have lit a lantern and torch long ago and found the filial daughter. Fortunately, you have already bought her a bar of soap here, just go buy another one......"“胡说！那话是那光棍说的。”
"Nonsense! That was said by the bachelor. ”“不见得。只要再去买一块，给她咯支咯支的遍身洗一洗，供起来，天下也就太平了。”
"Not necessarily. As long as you go buy another piece, wash her whole body, and provide it, the world will be peaceful. ”“什么话？那有什么相干？我因为记起了你没有肥皂……”
"What? So what does it matter? I remember you don't have soap......"“怎么不相干？你是特诚买给孝女的，你咯支咯支的去洗去。我不配，我不要，我也不要沾孝女的光。”
"Why don't you have anything to do with it? You bought it for your filial daughter, and you washed it off. I am not worthy, I don't want it, and I don't want to be touched by the light of a filial daughter. ”“这真是什么话？你们女人……”四铭支吾着，脸上也像学程练了八卦拳之后似的流出油汗来，但大约大半也因为吃了太热的饭。
"What is this really saying? You women ......" Si Ming hesitated, and his face was sweating like after Xue Cheng practiced Bagua Quan, but most of it was because he ate too hot food.“我们女人怎么样？我们女人，比你们男人好得多。你们男人不是骂十八九岁的女学生，就是称赞十八九岁的女讨饭：都不是什么好心思。‘咯支咯支’，简直是不要脸！”
"How about us women? We women are much better than you men. You men either scold eighteen or nineteen-year-old female students or praise eighteen or nineteen-year-old girls for begging: they are not good intentions. 'Crack and cluck', it's simply shameless! ”“我不是已经说过了？那是一个光棍……”
"Didn't I already say it? That's a bachelor......"“四翁！”外面的暗中忽然起了极响的叫喊。
"Fourth Elder!" There was a sudden loud shout in the darkness outside.“道翁么？我就来！”四铭知道那是高声有名的何道统，便遇赦似的，也高兴的大声说。“学程，你快点灯照何老伯到书房去！”
"Dao Weng? I'll come! "Siming knew that it was He Daotong, who was famous for his reputation, so he seemed to be pardoned, and he was happy to say it loudly." Xuecheng, you quickly light up the lamp and go to the study with Uncle He!" ”学程点了烛，引着道统走进西边的厢房里，后面还跟着卜薇园。
Xue Cheng lit a candle and led Taoist into the west wing, followed by Bu Weiyuan.“失迎失迎，对不起。”四铭还嚼着饭，出来拱一拱手，说。“就在舍间用便饭，何如？……”
"I'm sorry for the welcome." Siming was still chewing the rice, came out and bowed his hands, and said. "Just have a meal in the room, how about it? ……”“已经偏过了。”薇园迎上去，也拱一拱手，说。“我们连夜赶来，就为了那移风文社的第十八届征文题目，明天不是‘逢七’么？”
"It's already biased." Wei Yuan greeted him, and also arched his hands and said. "We came overnight just for the topic of the 18th essay collection of the Yifeng Literary Society, isn't it 'every seventh' tomorrow?"“哦！今天十六？”四铭恍然的说。
"Oh! Sixteen today? Siming said suddenly.“你看，多么胡涂！”道统大嚷道。
"Look, what nonsense!" Daotong shouted.“那么，就得连夜送到报馆去，要他明天一准登出来。”
"Then, I have to send it to the newspaper overnight and ask him to log out tomorrow."“文题我已经拟下了。你看怎样，用得用不得？”道统说着，就从手巾包里挖出一张纸条来交给他。
"I have already drawn up the title. What do you think, can you use it? Daotong said, and dug out a note from his handkerchief bag and handed it to him.四铭踱到烛台面前，展开纸条，一字一字的读下去：
Si Ming walked to the candlestick, unfolded the note, and read it word by word:“‘恭拟全国人民合词吁请贵大总统特颁明令专重圣经崇祀孟母以挽颓风而存国粹文’。——好极好极。可是字数太多了罢？”
"'Respectfully draft the joint words of the people of the whole country, calling on your president to issue a special decree to focus on the Bible, worship Meng's mother, and save the national essence of the wind'. - Great, great. But the number of words is too much? ”“不要紧的！”道统大声说。“我算过了，还无须乎多加广告费。但是诗题呢？”
"It doesn't matter!" Daotong said loudly. "I've done the math, and I don't need to add more advertising costs. But what about poetry titles? ”“诗题么？”四铭忽而恭敬之状可掬了。“我倒有一个在这里：孝女行。那是实事，应该表彰表彰她。我今天在大街上……”
"Is it a poem?" The four inscriptions are suddenly respectful. "I have one here: filial piety. That is a fact, and she should be commended. I ...... on the street today"“哦哦，那不行。”薇园连忙摇手，打断他的话。“那是我也看见的。她大概是‘外路人’，我不懂她的话，她也不懂我的话，不知道她究竟是那里人。大家倒都说她是孝女；然而我问她可能做诗，她摇摇头。要是能做诗，那就好了。”
"Oh, that's not good." Wei Yuan hurriedly shook his hand and interrupted him. "That's what I saw too. She is probably an 'outsider', I don't understand her words, she doesn't understand my words, I don't know if she is from there. Everyone said she was a filial daughter; However, when I asked her if she might write poetry, she shook her head. If you can write poetry, that would be great. ”“然而忠孝是大节，不会做诗也可以将就……。”
"However, loyalty and filial piety are a big festival, and you can ...... it if you don't know how to do poetry."“那倒不然，而孰知不然！”薇园摊开手掌，向四铭连摇带推的奔过去，力争说。“要会做诗，然后有趣。”
"That's not the case, and who knows otherwise!" Wei Yuan spread his palms and ran towards Siming with a rocking belt, trying to say. "You have to be able to write poetry, and then it's interesting."“我们，”四铭推开他，“就用这个题目，加上说明，登报去。一来可以表彰表彰她；二来可以借此针砭社会。现在的社会还成个什么样子，我从旁考察了好半天，竟不见有什么人给一个钱，这岂不是全无心肝……”
"We," Siming pushed him away, "just use this title, add an explanation, and publish it in the newspaper." First, you can commend her; Second, we can use this to stab society. What is the current society like, I investigated from the side for a long time, and I didn't see anyone giving a money, isn't this completely heartless......"“阿呀，四翁！”薇园又奔过来，“你简直是在‘对着和尚骂贼秃’了。我就没有给钱，我那时恰恰身边没有带着。”
"Ah, Fourth Elder!" Wei Yuan ran over again, "You are simply 'scolding the monk for being bald'." I didn't give money, I didn't have it with me at that time. ”“不要多心，薇翁。”四铭又推开他，“你自然在外，又作别论。你听我讲下去：她们面前围了一大群人，毫无敬意，只是打趣。还有两个光棍，那是更其肆无忌惮了，有一个简直说，‘阿发，你去买两块肥皂来，咯支咯支遍身洗一洗，好得很哩。’你想，这……”
"Don't worry too much, Vion." Siming pushed him away again, "You are naturally outside, so don't say anything else." Listen to me: they are surrounded by a large group of people, no respect, just joking. There are also two bachelors, who are even more unscrupulous, and one of them simply said, 'Ah Fa, you go buy two pieces of soap, and wash your whole body, it's very good.' 'You think, this ......'“哈哈哈！两块肥皂！”道统的响亮的笑声突然发作了，震得人耳朵喤喤的叫。“你买，哈哈，哈哈！”
"Hahaha! Two bars of soap! "Taoism's loud laughter suddenly flared up, causing people's ears to scream." You buy, haha, haha! ”“道翁，道翁，你不要这么嚷。”四铭吃了一惊，慌张的说。
"Dao Weng, Dao Weng, don't shout like this." Siming was taken aback and said in a panic.“咯支咯支，哈哈！”
"Cluck, haha!"“道翁！”四铭沉下脸来了，“我们讲正经事，你怎么只胡闹，闹得人头昏。你听，我们就用这两个题目，即刻送到报馆去，要他明天一准登出来。这事只好偏劳你们两位了。”
"Dao Weng!" Siming lowered his face, "We talk about serious things, why are you just messing around and making people dizzy." Listen, we will use these two topics and send them to the newspaper office immediately, asking him to publish them tomorrow. This matter has to be left to the two of you. ”“可以可以，那自然。”薇园极口应承说。
"Yes, yes, that's natural." Wei Yuan agreed.“呵呵，洗一洗，咯支……唏唏……”
"Hehe, wash it, cluck...... Sigh......"“道翁！！！”四铭愤愤的叫。
"Dao Weng!!" Siming shouted indignantly.道统给这一喝，不笑了。他们拟好了说明，薇园誊在信笺上，就和道统跑往报馆去。四铭拿着烛台，送出门口，回到堂屋的外面，心里就有些不安逸，但略一踌蹰，也终于跨进门槛去了。他一进门，迎头就看见中央的方桌中间放着那肥皂的葵绿色的小小的长方包，包中央的金印子在灯光下明晃晃的发闪，周围还有细小的花纹。
Dao Tong gave this drink and stopped laughing. They prepared the instructions, and Wei Yuan transcribed them on letterhead, so they ran to the newspaper office with Daotong. Siming took the candlestick, sent it out of the door, and returned to the outside of the hall, feeling a little uneasy, but after a slight hesitation, he finally crossed the threshold. As soon as he entered the door, he saw a small rectangular bag of soapy sunflower green in the middle of the square table in the center, and the gold seal in the center of the bag shone brightly in the light, and there were small patterns around it.秀儿和招儿都蹲在桌子下横的地上玩；学程坐在右横查字典。最后在离灯最远的阴影里的高背椅子上发见了四太太，灯光照处，见她死板板的脸上并不显出什么喜怒，眼睛也并不看着什么东西。
Xiu'er and Zhao'er both squatted on the ground under the table to play; The course sits on the right horizontally to look up the dictionary. Finally, I found the fourth wife on the high-backed chair in the shadow farthest from the light, and when the light shone, I saw that her rigid face did not show any joy or anger, and her eyes did not look at anything.“咯支咯支，不要脸不要脸……”
"Cluck, shameless, shameless......"四铭微微的听得秀儿在他背后说，回头看时，什么动作也没有了，只有招儿还用了她两只小手的指头在自己脸上抓。
Siming heard Xiu'er say behind his back, and when he looked back, there was no movement, only Zhao'er used the fingers of her two small hands to grab her face.他觉得存身不住，便熄了烛，踱出院子去。他来回的踱，一不小心，母鸡和小鸡又唧唧足足的叫了起来，他立即放轻脚步，并且走远些。经过许多时，堂屋里的灯移到卧室里去了。他看见一地月光，仿佛满铺了无缝的白纱，玉盘似的月亮现在白云间，看不出一点缺。
He felt that he couldn't survive, so he turned off the candle and walked out of the yard. He paced back and forth, and when he was not careful, the hen and chick chirped again, and he immediately slowed down and walked away. After a long time, the lights in the hall were moved to the bedroom. He saw the moonlight on the ground, as if covered with seamless white gauze, and the moon like a jade plate appeared among the white clouds, and there was no shortage.他很有些悲伤，似乎也像孝女一样，成了“无告之民”，孤苦零丁了。他这一夜睡得非常晚。
He was a little sad, and seemed to be like a filial daughter, becoming a "silent people" and lonely. He slept very late that night.但到第二天的早晨，肥皂就被录用了。这日他比平日起得迟，看见她已经伏在洗脸台上擦脖子，肥皂的泡沫就如大螃蟹嘴上的水泡一般，高高的堆在两个耳朵后，比起先前用皂荚时候的只有一层极薄的白沫来，那高低真有霄壤之别了。从此之后，四太太的身上便总带着些似橄榄非橄榄的说不清的香味；几乎小半年，这才忽而换了样，凡有闻到的都说那可似乎是檀香。
But by the next morning, the soap was hired. On this day, he got up later than usual, and saw that she was already lying on the sink to wipe her neck, and the soap foam was like a blister on the mouth of a big crab, piled high behind the two ears. Since then, the fourth wife has always had some indescribable fragrance like olives but not olives; Almost half a year, it suddenly changed, and everyone who smelled it said it seemed to be sandalwood.一九二四年三月二二日。
March 22, 1924.

长明灯

长明灯

长明灯

Everlasting lamp春阴的下午，吉光屯唯一的茶馆子里的空气又有些紧张了，人们的耳朵里，仿佛还留着一种微细沉实的声息——
On a cloudy spring afternoon, the air in the only teahouse in Jiguangtun was a little tense again, and there seemed to be a faint and solid sound in people's ears -“熄掉他罢！”
"Turn him out!"但当然并不是全屯的人们都如此。这屯上的居民是不大出行的，动一动就须查黄历，看那上面是否写着“不宜出行”；倘没有写，出去也须先走喜神方，迎吉利。不拘禁忌地坐在茶馆里的不过几个以豁达自居的青年人，但在蛰居人的意中却以为个个都是败家子。
But of course, not all the people in the village are like this. The residents of this village do not travel much, and they must check the yellow calendar to see if it says "not suitable for travel"; If you don't write it, you must first go to the direction of joy and welcome good luck. There are only a few young people who claim to be open-minded sitting in the teahouse without taboos, but in the minds of the hibernating people, they all think that they are prodigals.现在也无非就是这茶馆里的空气有些紧张。
Now it's nothing more than a little tense in the air in this teahouse.“还是这样么？”三角脸的拿起茶碗，问。
"Is it still like this?" The triangular face picked up the teacup and asked.“听说，还是这样，”方头说，“还是尽说‘熄掉他熄掉他’。眼光也越加发闪了。见鬼！这是我们屯上的一个大害，你不要看得微细。我们倒应该想个法子来除掉他！”
"I heard that it is still like this," said Fang Tou, "and it is still said that 'turn him out, turn him out'. His eyes also became more and more shining. Damn it! This is a big harm in our settlement, don't look at it subtly. We should think of a way to get rid of him!" ”“除掉他，算什么一回事。他不过是一个……。什么东西！造庙的时候，他的祖宗就捐过钱，现在他却要来吹熄长明灯。这不是不肖子孙？我们上县去，送他忤逆！”阔亭捏了拳头，在桌上一击，慷慨地说。一只斜盖着的茶碗盖子也噫的一声，翻了身。
"Getting rid of him is a thing. He is nothing more than a ....... What is it! When the temple was built, his ancestors donated money, but now he wants to blow out the everlasting lamp. Isn't this an unworthy descendant? Let's go to the county and send him to disobey! Kuoting clenched his fists, struck it on the table, and said generously. The lid of a teacup that was covered diagonally also turned over with a sigh.“不成。要送忤逆，须是他的父母，母舅……”方头说。
"No. If you want to send the disobedient, you have to be his parents, his maternal uncle......" said the square head.“可惜他只有一个伯父……”阔亭立刻颓唐了。
"It's a pity that he only has one uncle......" Kuoting immediately declined.“阔亭！”方头突然叫道。“你昨天的牌风可好？”
"Kuoting!" Fang Tou suddenly shouted. "How was your card style yesterday?"阔亭睁着眼看了他一会，没有便答；胖脸的庄七光已经放开喉咙嚷起来了：
Kuoting opened his eyes and looked at him for a while, but did not answer; The fat-faced Zhuang Qiguang had already let go of his throat and shouted:“吹熄了灯，我们的吉光屯还成什么吉光屯，不就完了么？老年人不都说么：这灯还是梁武帝点起的，一直传下来，没有熄过；连长毛造反的时候也没有熄过……。你看，啧，那火光不是绿莹莹的么？外路人经过这里的都要看一看，都称赞……。啧，多么好……。他现在这么胡闹，什么意思？……”
"If the lights are blown out, what kind of Jiguangtun will our Jiguangtun become, isn't it over? Didn't the elderly say: This lamp was lit by Emperor Wu of Liang, and it has been passed down and never extinguished; Even the long hair rebelled and did not turn off ....... Look, tsk, isn't that fire green? Outsiders who pass by here have to take a look and praise ....... Tsk, what a good ....... What does he mean by messing around like this now? ……”“他不是发了疯么？你还没有知道？”方头带些藐视的神气说。
"Isn't he crazy? You don't know yet? Fang Tou said with some contempt.“哼，你聪明！”庄七光的脸上就走了油。
"Hmph, you're smart!" Zhuang Qiguang's face was oily.“我想：还不如用老法子骗他一骗，”灰五婶，本店的主人兼工人，本来是旁听着的，看见形势有些离了她专注的本题了，便赶忙来岔开纷争，拉到正经事上去。
"I thought: It's better to use the old method to deceive him," Aunt Huiwu, the owner and worker of the store, was originally listening, and saw that the situation was a little out of her focus, so she hurriedly came to diverge the dispute and pull it to the serious matter.“什么老法子？”庄七光诧异地问。
"What old method?" Zhuang Qiguang asked in surprise.“他不是先就发过一回疯么，和现在一模一样。那时他的父亲还在，骗了他一骗，就治好了。”
"Didn't he go crazy once, exactly the same as now. His father was still there at that time, and he was cured after deceiving him. ”“怎么骗？我怎么不知道？”庄七光更其诧异地问。
"How to deceive? How come I don't know? Zhuang Qiguang asked in surprise.“你怎么会知道？那时你们都还是小把戏呢，单知道喝奶拉矢。便是我，那时也不这样。你看我那时的一双手呵，真是粉嫩粉嫩……”
"How do you know? At that time, you were all just a little trick, just knowing how to drink milk and pull arrows. It was me, and it wasn't like that then. Look at my hands at that time, they are really pink and pink......“你现在也还是粉嫩粉嫩……”方头说。
"You are still pink and ...... now," Fang Tou said.“放你妈的屁！”灰五婶怒目地笑了起来，“莫胡说了。我们讲正经话。他那时也还年青哩；他的老子也就有些疯的。听说：有一天他的祖父带他进社庙去，教他拜社老爷，瘟将军，王灵官老爷，他就害怕了，硬不拜，跑了出来，从此便有些怪。后来就像现在一样，一见人总和他们商量吹熄正殿上的长明灯。他说熄了便再不会有蝗虫和病痛，真是像一件天大的正事似的。大约那是邪祟附了体，怕见正路神道了。要是我们，会怕见社老爷么？你们的茶不冷了么？对一点热水罢。好，他后来就自己闯进去，要去吹。他的老子又太疼爱他，不肯将他锁起来。呵，后来不是全屯动了公愤，和他老子去吵闹了么？可是，没有办法，——幸亏我家的死鬼那时还在，给想了一个法：将长明灯用厚棉被一围，漆漆黑黑地，领他去看，说是已经吹熄了。”
"Fart you!" Aunt Gray Wu laughed angrily, "Mo Hui." We speak seriously. He was still young then; His old man was a little crazy. I heard that one day his grandfather took him into the temple and taught him to worship the master of the society, the plague general, and the king of the spirit officials, and he was scared, refused to worship, and ran out, and since then he has been a little strange. Later, just like now, when I saw people, I always discussed with them to blow out the permanent lamp on the main hall. He said that if it is extinguished, there will be no more locusts and diseases, which is really like a big business. Probably it was possessed by evil spirits, and they were afraid of seeing the right way. If it weren't for us, would we be afraid of seeing the master of the society? Isn't your tea cold?" Just a little hot water. Okay, he broke in by himself later, to blow it. His old man loved him too much and refused to lock him up. Didn't the whole Tun get angry and quarrel with him? However, there was no way,—— fortunately, the dead ghost of my family was still there at that time, and he thought of a way: surround the everlasting lamp with a thick quilt, in the dark, and lead him to see it, saying that it had been blown out. ”“唉唉，这真亏他想得出。”三角脸吐一口气，说，不胜感服之至似的。
"Oh, it's really a pity that he can figure it out." Triangular face exhaled and said, overwhelmed with emotion.“费什么这样的手脚，”阔亭愤愤地说，“这样的东西，打死了就完了，吓！”
"What kind of hands and feet are you bothered with," Kuoting said indignantly, "Such a thing, if you kill it, it's over, scary!" ”“那怎么行？”她吃惊地看着他，连忙摇手道，“那怎么行！他的祖父不是捏过印靶子的么？”
"How can that work?" She looked at him in surprise, and quickly shook her hand and said, "How can that work!" Didn't his grandfather pinch the target? ”阔亭们立刻面面相觑，觉得除了“死鬼”的妙法以外，也委实无法可想了。
The Kuoting immediately looked at each other, feeling that in addition to the wonderful method of "dead ghosts", it was truly unimaginable.“后来就好了的！”她又用手背抹去一些嘴角上的白沫，更快地说，“后来全好了的！他从此也就不再走进庙门去，也不再提起什么来，许多年。不知道怎么这回看了赛会之后不多几天，又疯了起来了。哦，同先前一模一样。午后他就走过这里，一定又上庙里去了。你们和四爷商量商量去，还是再骗他一骗好。那灯不是梁五弟点起来的么？不是说，那灯一灭，这里就要变海，我们就都要变泥鳅么？你们快去和四爷商量商量罢，要不……”
"It'll be fine later!" She wiped some of the white foam from the corners of her mouth with the back of her hand, and said faster, "It's all better later!" He never walked into the temple gate again, nor did he mention anything for many years. I don't know why I went crazy again just a few days after watching the competition this time. Oh, exactly the same as before. In the afternoon, he walked through here and must have gone to the temple again. You discuss with the fourth master, or lie to him again." Wasn't that lamp lit by Liang Wudi? Doesn't it mean that as soon as the lamp goes out, this place will turn into a sea, and we will all become loaches? You go and discuss it with the fourth master, or ......"“我们还是先到庙前去看一看，”方头说着，便轩昂地出了门。
"Let's go to the temple first," Fang Tou said, and went out proudly.阔亭和庄七光也跟着出去了。三角脸走得最后，将到门口，回过头来说道：
Kuo Ting and Zhuang Qiguang also went out. Triangle Face walked last, was about to reach the door, turned around and said:“这回就记了我的账！入他……。”
"This time I recorded my account! Enter other ....... ”灰五婶答应着，走到东墙下拾起一块木炭来，就在墙上画有一个小三角形和一串短短的细线的下面，划添了两条线。
Aunt Hui agreed, walked to the east wall to pick up a piece of charcoal, and drew two lines under a small triangle and a short string of thin lines drawn on the wall.
他们望见社庙的时候，果然一并看到了几个人：一个正是他，两个是闲看的，三个是孩子。
When they saw the temple, they saw several people together: one was him, two were idle, and three were children.但庙门却紧紧地关着。
But the temple door was tightly closed.“好！庙门还关着。”阔亭高兴地说。
"Okay! The temple gate was still closed. Kuoting said happily.他们一走近，孩子们似乎也都胆壮，围近去了。本来对了庙门立着的他，也转过脸来对他们看。
As soon as they approached, the children seemed to be bold and surrounded them. He was standing at the temple gate, and he also turned his face to look at them.他也还如平常一样，黄的方脸和蓝布破大衫，只在浓眉底下的大而且长的眼睛中，略带些异样的光闪，看人就许多工夫不眨眼，并且总含着悲愤疑惧的神情。短的头发上粘着两片稻草叶，那该是孩子暗暗地从背后给他放上去的，因为他们向他头上一看之后，就都缩了颈子，笑着将舌头很快地一伸。
He was still as usual, with a yellow square face and a blue cloth tattered shirt, only in the big and long eyes under the thick eyebrows, with a slight strange light, looking at people without blinking, and always with a look of sadness, anger and fear. There were two straw leaves stuck to his short hair, which should have been put on him by the child secretly from behind, because when they looked at his head, they all shrank their necks and stretched out their tongues quickly with a smile.他们站定了，各人都互看着别个的脸。
They stood still, each looking at each other's faces.“你干什么？”但三角脸终于走上一步，诘问了。
"What are you doing?" But the triangular face finally took a step forward and questioned.“我叫老黑开门，”他低声，温和地说。“就因为那一盏灯必须吹熄。你看，三头六臂的蓝脸，三只眼睛，长帽，半个的头，牛头和猪牙齿，都应该吹熄……吹熄。吹熄，我们就不会有蝗虫，不会有猪嘴瘟……。”
"I'll tell Lao Hei to open the door," he said softly, softly. "Just because that lamp had to be blown out. You see, the blue face with three heads and six arms, three eyes, a long hat, half of the head, a bull's head and pig's teeth should all be blown out...... Blow out. If we blow it out, we will not have locusts or swine mouth fever....... ”“唏唏，胡闹！”阔亭轻蔑地笑了出来，“你吹熄了灯，蝗虫会还要多，你就要生猪嘴瘟！”
"Oh, fool!" Kuoting laughed contemptuously, "If you blow out the lights, there will be more locusts, and you will have pig mouth plague!" ”“唏唏！”庄七光也陪着笑。
"Sigh!" Zhuang Qiguang also laughed with him.一个赤膊孩子擎起他玩弄着的苇子，对他瞄准着，将樱桃似的小口一张，道：
A shirtless child picked up the reeds he was playing with, aimed at him, opened a small cherry-like mouth, and said:“吧！”
"Right!"“你还是回去罢！倘不，你的伯伯会打断你的骨头！灯么，我替你吹。你过几天来看就知道。”阔亭大声说。
"You should go back! If not, your uncle will break your bones! Lamp, I'll blow it for you. You'll know in a few days. Kuoting said loudly.他两眼更发出闪闪的光来，钉一般看定阔亭的眼，使阔亭的眼光赶紧辟易了。
His eyes flashed even more, and he looked at Kuoting's eyes like nails, which made Kuoting's eyes quickly avoid.“你吹？”他嘲笑似的微笑，但接着就坚定地说，“不能！不要你们。我自己去熄，此刻去熄！”
"You blow?" He smiled mockingly, but then said firmly, "No! I don't want you. I will turn it off myself, and I will turn it off now! ”阔亭便立刻颓唐得酒醒之后似的无力；方头却已站上去了，慢慢地说道：
Kuoting immediately collapsed and was weak as if he had sobered up; Fang Tou had already stood up and said slowly:“你是一向懂事的，这一回可是太胡涂了。让我来开导你罢，你也许能够明白。就是吹熄了灯，那些东西不是还在么？不要这么傻头傻脑了，还是回去！睡觉去！”
"You have always been sensible, but this time it was too foolish. Let me enlighten you, you may be able to understand. Even if the lights are blown out, aren't those things still there? Don't be so stupid, go back! Go to sleep! ”“我知道的，熄了也还在。”他忽又现出阴鸷的笑容，但是立即收敛了，沉实地说道，“然而我只能姑且这么办。我先来这么办，容易些。我就要吹熄他，自己熄！”他说着，一面就转过身去竭力地推庙门。
"I know, it's still there even if it's turned off." He suddenly showed a gloomy smile again, but immediately restrained himself and said calmly, "However, I can only do this for now." I'll do this first, it's easier. I'm going to blow him out, extinguish it myself! As he spoke, he turned around and pushed the temple door with all his might.“喂！”阔亭生气了，“你不是这里的人么？你一定要我们大家变泥鳅么？回去！你推不开的，你没有法子开的！吹不熄的！还是回去好！”
"Hey!" Kuoting was angry, "Aren't you from here?" Do you want us all to become loaches? Get back! You can't push it away, you can't open it! It can't be blown out! It's better to go back! ”“我不回去！我要吹熄他！”
"I'm not going back! I want to blow him out! ”“不成！你没法开！”
"No! You can't open it! ”“…………”
“你没法开！”
"You can't drive!"“那么，就用别的法子来。”他转脸向他们一瞥，沉静地说。
"Then, use other methods." He turned his face to glance at them and said quietly.“哼，看你有什么别的法。”
"Hmph, let's see what else you have."“…………”
“看你有什么别的法！”
"Let's see what other methods you have!"“我放火。”
"I set fire."“什么？”阔亭疑心自己没有听清楚。
"What?" Kuoting suspected that he didn't hear clearly.“我放火！”
"I'll set it on fire!"沉默像一声清磬，摇曳着尾声，周围的活物都在其中凝结了。但不一会，就有几个人交头接耳，不一会，又都退了开去；两三人又在略远的地方站住了。庙后门的墙外就有庄七光的声音喊道：
The silence was like a clear chime, swaying at the end, and the surrounding living creatures condensed in it. But after a while, a few people exchanged ears, and after a while, they all retreated; Two or three people stopped a little further away. Outside the wall of the back door of the temple, Zhuang Qiguang's voice shouted:“老黑呀，不对了！你庙门要关得紧！老黑呀，你听清了么？关得紧！我们去想了法子就来！”
"Old Hei, it's not right! Your temple door must be closed tightly! Lao Hei, do you hear clearly? Close tightly! Let's think of a way and come! ”但他似乎并不留心别的事，只闪烁着狂热的眼光，在地上，在空中，在人身上，迅速地搜查，仿佛想要寻火种。
But he didn't seem to pay attention to anything else, only flashing with a fanatical eye, searching quickly on the ground, in the air, on people, as if he wanted to find fire.
方头和阔亭在几家的大门里穿梭一般出入了一通之后，吉光屯全局顿然扰动了。许多人们的耳朵里，心里，都有了一个可怕的声音：“放火！”但自然还有多少更深的蛰居人的耳朵里心里是全没有。然而全屯的空气也就紧张起来，凡有感得这紧张的人们，都很不安，仿佛自己就要变成泥鳅，天下从此毁灭。他们自然也隐约知道毁灭的不过是吉光屯，但也觉得吉光屯似乎就是天下。
After Fang Tou and Kuoting shuttled in and out of the gates of several houses, the overall situation of Ji Guangtun was suddenly disturbed. In the ears and hearts of many people, there is a terrible voice: "Set fire!" But naturally, there are many deeper hibernating people who have nothing in their ears and hearts. However, the air in the whole village became tense, and everyone who felt this nervousness was very uneasy, as if they were about to become loaches, and the world would be destroyed from then on. Naturally, they also vaguely knew that it was only Jiguangtun that was destroyed, but they also felt that Jiguangtun seemed to be the world.这事件的中枢，不久就凑在四爷的客厅上了。坐在首座上的是年高德韶的郭老娃，脸上已经皱得如风干的香橙，还要用手捋着下颏上的白胡须，似乎想将他们拔下。
The center of this incident soon gathered in the living room of the fourth master. Sitting in the first seat was the old and virtuous Guo Laowa, whose face was wrinkled like a dried orange, and he had to stroke the white beard on his chin with his hands, as if he wanted to pluck them off.“上半天，”他放松了胡子，慢慢地说，“西头，老富的中风，他的儿子，就说是：因为，社神不安，之故。这样一来，将来，万一有，什么，鸡犬不宁，的事，就难免要到，府上……是的，都要来到府上，麻烦。”
"The first half of the day," he loosened his beard and said slowly, "Xitou, the old rich man had a stroke, and his son said it was: because the god of society was uneasy." In this way, in the future, if there is something, chickens and dogs will inevitably come, the house will ...... Yes, they have to come to the house, troublesome. ”“是么，”四爷也捋着上唇的花白的鲇鱼须，却悠悠然，仿佛全不在意模样，说，“这也是他父亲的报应呵。他自己在世的时候，不就是不相信菩萨么？我那时就和他不合，可是一点也奈何他不得。现在，叫我还有什么法？”
"Yes," the fourth master also stroked the white catfish whiskers on his upper lip, but leisurely, as if he didn't care at all, and said, "This is also his father's retribution." When he was alive, didn't he just not believe in bodhisattvas? I didn't get along with him at that time, but I couldn't help him at all. Now, what else can you call me? ”“我想，只有，一个。是的，有一个。明天，捆上城去，给他在那个，那个城隍庙里，搁一夜，是的，搁一夜，赶一赶，邪祟。”
"I think, only, one. Yes, there is one. Tomorrow, tie it up and go to the city, and give it to him in that city god temple, and leave it for one night, yes, put it on for one night, catch up, evil spirit. ”阔亭和方头以守护全屯的劳绩，不但第一次走进这一个不易瞻仰的客厅，并且还坐在老娃之下和四爷之上，而且还有茶喝。他们跟着老娃进来，报告之后，就只是喝茶，喝干之后，也不开口，但此时阔亭忽然发表意见了：
Not only did they walk into this living room that was not easy to admire for the first time, but they also sat under the old baby and above the fourth master, and also drank tea. They followed the old baby in, and after the report, they just drank tea, and after drinking it, they didn't speak, but at this time Kuoting suddenly expressed his opinion:“这办法太慢！他们两个还管着呢。最要紧的是马上怎么办。如果真是烧将起来……”
"This method is too slow! The two of them are still in charge. The most important thing is what to do right away. If it really burns......郭老娃吓了一跳，下巴有些发抖。
Guo Laowa was startled, her chin trembling a little.“如果真是烧将起来……”方头抢着说。
"If it's really burning......" Fang Tou rushed to say.“那么，”阔亭大声道，“就糟了！”
"Then," said Kuoting, "it's bad!" ”一个黄头发的女孩子又来冲上茶。阔亭便不再说话，立即拿起茶来喝。浑身一抖，放下了，伸出舌尖来舐了一舐上嘴唇，揭去碗盖嘘嘘地吹着。
A yellow-haired girl came to make tea again. Kuoting stopped talking and immediately picked up the tea to drink. He trembled all over, put it down, stretched out the tip of his tongue and licked his upper lip, removed the lid of the bowl and blew heavily.“真是拖累煞人！”四爷将手在桌上轻轻一拍，“这种子孙，真该死呵！唉！”
"It's really a drag!" The fourth master patted his hand lightly on the table, "This kind of descendant, damn it!" Alas! ”“的确，该死的。”阔亭抬起头来了，“去年，连各庄就打死一个：这种子孙。大家一口咬定，说是同时同刻，大家一齐动手，分不出打第一下的是谁，后来什么事也没有。”
"Indeed, damn it." Kuoting raised his head, "Last year, even each village killed one: this kind of descendant." Everyone insisted, saying that it was at the same time and at the same moment, and everyone did it together, and they couldn't tell who was the first hit, and nothing happened afterwards. ”“那又是一回事。”方头说，“这回，他们管着呢。我们得赶紧想法子。我想……”
"That's another thing." Fang Tou said, "This time, they are in charge." We have to think about it quickly. I want to ......."老娃和四爷都肃然地看着他的脸。
The old baby and the fourth master both looked at his face in awe.“我想：倒不如姑且将他关起来。”
"I thought: It's better to lock him up for now."“那倒也是一个妥当的办法。”四爷微微地点一点头。
"That's also a proper way." The fourth master nodded slightly.“妥当！”阔亭说。
"Appropriate!" Kuoting said.“那倒，确是，一个妥当的，办法。”老娃说，“我们，现在，就将他，拖到府上来。府上，就赶快，收拾出，一间屋子来。还，准备着，锁。”
"That's right, indeed, a proper way." The old baby said, "We, now, will drag him to the house." In the house, hurry up, clean up, and come to a room. Also, ready, lock. ”“屋子？”四爷仰了脸，想了一会，说，“舍间可是没有这样的闲房。他也说不定什么时候才会好……”
"House?" The fourth master raised his face, thought for a while, and said, "There is no such spare room in the dormitory." He might be fine when he will get better......"“就用，他，自己的……”老娃说。
"Just use him, his own ......," the old baby said.“我家的六顺，”四爷忽然严肃而且悲哀地说，声音也有些发抖了。“秋天就要娶亲……。你看，他年纪这么大了，单知道发疯，不肯成家立业。舍弟也做了一世人，虽然也不大安分，可是香火总归是绝不得的……。”
"My family's Liu Shun," the fourth master suddenly said seriously and sadly, and his voice trembled a little. "I will get married in the fall...... You see, he is so old, he knows that he is crazy and refuses to start a family. My brother has also been a person all his life, although he is not very at ease, but incense is always a ....... ”“那自然！”三个人异口同音地说。
"That's natural!" The three of them said in unison.“六顺生了儿子，我想第二个就可以过继给他。但是，——别人的儿子，可以白要的么？”
"Liu Shun gave birth to a son, and I think the second one can be adopted by him. But ,—— someone else's son, can he ask for nothing? ”“那不能！”三个人异口同音地说。
"That's not possible!" The three of them said in unison.“这一间破屋，和我是不相干；六顺也不在乎此。可是，将亲生的孩子白白给人，做母亲的怕不能就这么松爽罢？”
"This dilapidated house has nothing to do with me; The six shun don't care about this. However, if you give your own child to someone for free, you may not be so relaxed as a mother? ”“那自然！”三个人异口同音地说。
"That's natural!" The three of them said in unison.四爷沉默了。三个人交互看着别人的脸。
The fourth master was silent. The three of them looked at each other's faces interchangeably.“我是天天盼望他好起来，”四爷在暂时静穆之后，这才缓缓地说，“可是他总不好。也不是不好，是他自己不要好。无法可想，就照这一位所说似的关起来，免得害人，出他父亲的丑，也许倒反好，倒是对得起他的父亲……。”
"I hope he gets better every day," the fourth master said slowly after being quiet for a while, "but he is not good." It's not bad, it's that he doesn't want it himself. It is unthinkable to lock it up as this one said, so as not to harm others, and to make his father's ugliness out of his father's ugliness, maybe it is better, but it is worthy of his father's ....... ”“那自然，”阔亭感动的说，“可是，房子……”
"Naturally," said Kuoting with emotion, "but, the house is ......."“庙里就没有闲房？……”四爷慢腾腾地问道。
"There is no spare room in the temple? ......" the fourth master asked slowly.“有！”阔亭恍然道，“有！进大门的西边那一间就空着，又只有一个小方窗，粗木直栅的，决计挖不开。好极了！”
"Yes!" Kuoting suddenly said, "Yes!" The one on the west side of the gate was empty, and there was only a small square window, a thick wooden straight fence, and it could not be dug open. Great! ”老娃和方头也顿然都显了欢喜的神色；阔亭吐一口气，尖着嘴唇就喝茶。
The old baby and the square head also suddenly showed happy looks; Kuoting exhaled, pouted his lips and drank tea.
未到黄昏时分，天下已经泰平，或者竟是全都忘却了，人们的脸上不特已不紧张，并且早褪尽了先前的喜悦的痕迹。在庙前，人们的足迹自然比平日多，但不久也就稀少了。只因为关了几天门，孩子们不能进去玩，便觉得这一天在院子里格外玩得有趣，吃过了晚饭，还有几个跑到庙里去游戏，猜谜。
Before dusk, the world was already peaceful, or they had all forgotten it, and people's faces were not only no longer nervous, but also had long since faded away from the traces of their previous joy. In front of the temple, people's footprints naturally increased more than usual, but soon they became scarce. Just because the door was closed for a few days, the children couldn't go in to play, so they felt that the day was particularly fun in the yard, and after dinner, a few went to the temple to play games and guess riddles.“你猜。”一个最大的说，“我再说一遍：
"Guess what." The largest said, "I repeat:
白篷船，红划楫，White boats, red rows, 
摇到对岸歇一歇， rock to the other side to rest, 
点心吃一些， snacks to eat, 
戏文唱一出。” play a song. ”

“那是什么呢？‘红划楫’的。”一个女孩说。
'What is that?' Red rowing'. A girl said.“我说出来罢，那是……”
"Let me say it, that's ......"“慢一慢！”生癞头疮的说，“我猜着了，航船。”
"Slow down!" The leper said, "I guessed, Hang Ship." ”“航船。”赤膊的也道。
"Navigation." The shirtless one also said.“哈，航船？”最大的道，“航船是摇橹的。他会唱戏文么？你们猜不着。我说出来罢……”
"Ha, sailing?" The biggest way, "The ship is rocking." Can he sing opera? You can't guess. I'll just say it......"“慢一慢，”癞头疮还说。
"Slow down," said the leprosy.“哼，你猜不着。我说出来罢，那是：鹅。”
"Hmph, you can't guess. Let me say it, that's goose. ”“鹅！”女孩笑着说，“红划楫的。”
"Goose!" The girl smiled and said, "Red rowing." ”“怎么又是白篷船呢？”赤膊的问。
"Why is it a white sailboat again?" Shirtless asked.“我放火！”
"I'll set it on fire!"孩子们都吃惊，立时记起他来，一齐注视西厢房，又看见一只手扳着木栅，一只手撕着木皮，其间有两只眼睛闪闪地发亮。
The children were all surprised, and immediately remembered him, looked at the west wing together, and saw one hand holding the wooden fence and the other tearing the bark, with two eyes shining brightly.沉默只一瞬间，癞头疮忽而发一声喊，拔步就跑；其余的也都笑着嚷着跑出去了。赤膊的还将苇子向后一指，从喘吁吁的樱桃似的小嘴唇里吐出清脆的一声道：
After only a moment of silence, the leprosy suddenly shouted and ran away; The rest also ran out laughing and shouting. The shirtless man also pointed the reed back, and spat out a crisp sound from his pant cherry-like lips:“吧！”
"Right!"从此完全静寂了，暮色下来，绿莹莹的长明灯更其分明地照出神殿，神龛，而且照到院子，照到木栅里的昏暗。
From then on, it was completely silent, and as dusk fell, the green evergreen lamp illuminated the temple and the shrine more clearly, and also illuminated the courtyard and the darkness in the wooden fence.孩子们跑出庙外也就立定，牵着手，慢慢地向自己的家走去，都笑吟吟地，合唱着随口编派的歌：
The children ran out of the temple and stood still, holding hands, and slowly walking towards their homes, all smiling and singing the songs they casually chopped:“白篷船，对岸歇一歇。"White sailboat, take a break on the other side. 
此刻熄，自己熄。 Turn off at the moment, turn off yourself. 
戏文唱一出。 
我放火！哈哈哈！ I set fire! Hahaha! 
火火火，点心吃一些。 Fire, snack some. 
戏文唱一出。 
…………… …………… 
……… ……… 
…” …”
一九二五年三月一日。
March 1, 1925.

示众

示众

示众

Streets首善之区的西城的一条马路上，这时候什么扰攘也没有。火焰焰的太阳虽然还未直照，但路上的沙土仿佛已是闪烁地生光；酷热满和在空气里面，到处发挥着盛夏的威力。许多狗都拖出舌头来，连树上的乌老鸦也张着嘴喘气，——但是，自然也有例外的。远处隐隐有两个铜盏相击的声音，使人忆起酸梅汤，依稀感到凉意，可是那懒懒的单调的金属音的间作，却使那寂静更其深远了。
On a road in Xicheng, the first good district, there was no disturbance at this time. Although the flame of the sun has not yet shone directly, the sand on the road seems to be shining brightly; The scorching heat is full of air and the power of midsummer is exerted everywhere. Many dogs drag out their tongues, and even the crows in the trees are panting with their mouths open,—— However, there are naturally exceptions. In the distance, there was a faint sound of two copper cups colliding, reminiscent of sour plum soup, and I vaguely felt cool, but the interplay of the lazy monotonous metal sound made the silence even more profound.只有脚步声，车夫默默地前奔，似乎想赶紧逃出头上的烈日。
There was only footsteps, and the coachman ran forward silently, as if he wanted to quickly escape the scorching sun above his head.“热的包子咧！刚出屉的……。”
"Hot buns! Freshly drawn ....... ”十一二岁的胖孩子，细着眼睛，歪了嘴在路旁的店门前叫喊。声音已经嘶嗄了，还带些睡意，如给夏天的长日催眠。他旁边的破旧桌子上，就有二三十个馒头包子，毫无热气，冷冷地坐着。
The fat boy of eleven or twelve years old, with squinting eyes, crooked his mouth and shouting in front of the shop on the side of the road. The voice is already hoarse, and there is a little sleepiness, such as hypnotizing the long days of summer. On the dilapidated table next to him, there were twenty or thirty steamed buns, without any heat, sitting coldly.“荷阿！馒头包子咧，热的……。”
"Hoa! Steamed buns, hot ....... ”像用力掷在墙上而反拨过来的皮球一般，他忽然飞在马路的那边了。在电杆旁，和他对面，正向着马路，其时也站定了两个人：一个是淡黄制服的挂刀的面黄肌瘦的巡警，手里牵着绳头，绳的那头就拴在别一个穿蓝布大衫上罩白背心的男人的臂膊上。这男人戴一顶新草帽，帽檐四面下垂，遮住了眼睛的一带。但胖孩子身体矮，仰起脸来看时，却正撞见这人的眼睛了。那眼睛也似乎正在看他的脑壳。他连忙顺下眼，去看白背心，只见背心上一行一行地写着些大大小小的什么字。
Like a ball thrown the wall and turned over, he suddenly flew to the other side of the road. Next to the electric pole, opposite him, facing the road, two people were also standing at that time: a yellow-faced and thin patrol officer in a pale yellow uniform with a knife hanging on the rope, holding the rope in his hand, and the other end of the rope was tied to the arm of another man wearing a blue cloth shirt and a white vest. The man wore a new straw hat with a brim that drooped on all sides, covering the area around his eyes. But the fat boy was short, and when he raised his face to look at it, he bumped into the man's eyes. The eyes also seemed to be looking at his brain. He quickly looked at the white vest, and saw that there were some large and small words written on the vest line by line.刹时间，也就围满了大半圈的看客。待到增加了秃头的老头子之后，空缺已经不多，而立刻又被一个赤膊的红鼻子胖大汉补满了。这胖子过于横阔，占了两人的地位，所以续到的便只能屈在第二层，从前面的两个脖子之间伸进脑袋去。
In an instant, it was filled with more than half a circle of spectators. After adding the bald old man, there were not many vacancies, and they were immediately filled by a shirtless fat man with a red nose. This fat man was too arrogant and occupied the position of the two, so he could only bend to the second layer and stick into his head from between the two necks in front.秃头站在白背心的略略正对面，弯了腰，去研究背心上的文字，终于读起来：
The bald man stood slightly opposite the white vest, bent over, studied the words on the vest, and finally read:“嗡，都，哼，八，而，……”
"Hum, du, hum, eight, and ,......"胖孩子却看见那白背心正研究着这发亮的秃头，他也便跟着去研究，就只见满头光油油的，耳朵左近还有一片灰白色的头发，此外也不见得有怎样新奇。但是后面的一个抱着孩子的老妈子却想乘机挤进来了；秃头怕失了位置，连忙站直，文字虽然还未读完，然而无可奈何，只得另看白背心的脸：草帽檐下半个鼻子，一张嘴，尖下巴。
The fat boy saw that the white vest was studying the shiny bald head, so he followed suit, only to see that his head was shiny, and there was a patch of grayish-white hair near the left side of his ear, and there was not necessarily anything novel. But an old mother holding a child in the back wanted to take the opportunity to squeeze in; The bald man was afraid of losing his position, so he hurriedly stood up straight, although he had not finished reading the text, but he had no choice but to look at the face of the white vest: half of the nose under the brim of the straw hat, a mouth, and a pointed chin.又像用了力掷在墙上而反拨过来的皮球一般，一个小学生飞奔上来，一手按住了自己头上的雪白的小布帽，向人丛中直钻进去。但他钻到第三——也许是第四——层，竟遇见一件不可动摇的伟大的东西了，抬头看时，蓝裤腰上面有一座赤条条的很阔的背脊，背脊上还有汗正在流下来。他知道无可措手，只得顺着裤腰右行，幸而在尽头发见了一条空处，透着光明。他刚刚低头要钻的时候，只听得一声“什么”，那裤腰以下的屁股向右一歪，空处立刻闭塞，光明也同时不见了。
Like a ball thrown against the wall and backed over, a primary school student rushed up, pressed the snow-white little cloth hat on his head with one hand, and went straight into the crowd. But when he got to the third—maybe fourth—floor, he met something unshakable and great, and when he looked up, there was a very wide red ridge on the waistband of the blue trousers, and sweat was still flowing down the back. He knew that he was at a loss, so he had to walk along the waistband to the right, but fortunately he saw an empty space at the end of his hair, which was shining brightly. When he just lowered his head to drill, he only heard a "something", and the buttocks below the waistband tilted to the right, and the empty space was immediately closed, and the light disappeared at the same time.但不多久，小学生却从巡警的刀旁边钻出来了。他诧异地四顾：外面围着一圈人，上首是穿白背心的，那对面是一个赤膊的胖小孩，胖小孩后面是一个赤膊的红鼻子胖大汉。他这时隐约悟出先前的伟大的障碍物的本体了，便惊奇而且佩服似的只望着红鼻子。胖小孩本是注视着小学生的脸的，于是也不禁依了他的眼光，回转头去了，在那里是一个很胖的奶子，奶头四近有几枝很长的毫毛。
But not long after, the elementary school student got out of the patrolman's knife. He looked around in surprise: there was a circle of people outside, the one above was wearing a white vest, the other side was a shirtless fat child, and behind the fat child was a shirtless fat man with a red nose. At this time, he vaguely realized the essence of the previous great obstacle, and he only looked at the red nose in amazement and admiration. The fat child was looking at the face of the elementary school student, so he couldn't help but follow his gaze and turned his head, where there was a very fat tit, and there were a few long hairs on the nipples.“他，犯了什么事啦？……”
"What did he do? ……”大家都愕然看时，是一个工人似的粗人，正在低声下气地请教那秃头老头子。
When everyone looked at it in astonishment, it was a rough man like a worker, who was asking the bald old man in a low voice.秃头不作声，单是睁起了眼睛看定他。他被看得顺下眼光去，过一会再看时，秃头还是睁起了眼睛看定他，而且别的人也似乎都睁了眼睛看定他。他于是仿佛自己就犯了罪似的局促起来，终至于慢慢退后，溜出去了。一个挟洋伞的长子就来补了缺；秃头也旋转脸去再看白背心。
The bald head remained silent, just opened his eyes to look at him. He was looked down upon, and when he looked at him again after a while, the bald man still opened his eyes to see him, and everyone else seemed to have opened their eyes to see him. He then became cramped as if he had committed a crime, and finally slowly retreated and slipped out. An eldest son with an umbrella came to fill the gap; The bald man also turned his face to look at the white vest again.长子弯了腰，要从垂下的草帽檐下去赏识白背心的脸，但不知道为什么忽又站直了。于是他背后的人们又须竭力伸长了脖子；有一个瘦子竟至于连嘴都张得很大，像一条死鲈鱼。
The eldest son bent down to admire the face of the white vest from under the brim of his hanging straw hat, but he suddenly stood up straight again. So the people behind him had to stretch their necks with all their might; There was a thin man who even opened his mouth very wide, like a dead bass.巡警，突然间，将脚一提，大家又愕然，赶紧都看他的脚；然而他又放稳了，于是又看白背心。长子忽又弯了腰，还要从垂下的草帽檐下去窥测，但即刻也就立直，擎起一只手来拼命搔头皮。
The patrolman, suddenly, lifted his foot, and everyone was stunned again, and hurriedly looked at his feet; However, he calmed down again, so he looked at the white vest again. The eldest son suddenly bent down again, and he had to peek under the hanging brim of his straw hat, but he immediately stood up straight and raised a hand to scratch his scalp desperately.秃头不高兴了，因为他先觉得背后有些不太平，接着耳朵边就有唧咕唧咕的声响。他双眉一锁，回头看时，紧挨他右边，有一只黑手拿着半个大馒头正在塞进一个猫脸的人的嘴里去。他也就不说什么，自去看白背心的新草帽了。
The bald man was unhappy, because he first felt that something was not peaceful behind him, and then there was a chirping sound in his ears. His eyebrows furrowed, and when he looked back, right to his right, there was a black hand holding half a large steamed bun that was stuffing into the mouth of a cat-faced man. He didn't say anything, and went to see the new straw hat in the white vest.忽然，就有暴雷似的一击，连横阔的胖大汉也不免向前一跄踉。同时，从他肩膊上伸出一只胖得不相上下的臂膊来，展开五指，拍的一声正打在胖孩子的脸颊上。
Suddenly, there was a thunderous blow, and even the fat man couldn't help but stagger. At the same time, a fat arm stretched out from his shoulder, spread out his five fingers, and slapped the fat boy on the cheek.“好快活！你妈的……”同时，胖大汉后面就有一个弥勒佛似的更圆的胖脸这么说。
"So happy! Your mother's ......" At the same time, there was a fat face like Maitreya Buddha behind the fat man who said so.胖孩子也跄踉了四五步，但是没有倒，一手按着脸颊，旋转身，就想从胖大汉的腿旁的空隙间钻出去。胖大汉赶忙站稳，并且将屁股一歪，塞住了空隙，恨恨地问道：
The fat boy also staggered four or five steps, but did not fall, pressed his cheek with one hand, turned around, and wanted to get out of the gap next to the fat man's leg. The fat man hurriedly stood firm, and tilted his buttocks, plugged the gap, and asked hatefully:“什么？”
"What?"胖孩子就像小鼠子落在捕机里似的，仓皇了一会，忽然向小学生那一面奔去，推开他，冲出去了。小学生也返身跟出去了。
The fat boy was like a mouse falling into a trap, panicked for a while, and suddenly ran towards the elementary school student, pushed him away, and rushed out. The elementary school students also turned around and followed out.“吓，这孩子……。”总有五六个人都这样说。
"Scared, this kid ......." There are always five or six people who say this.待到重归平静，胖大汉再看白背心的脸的时候，却见白背心正在仰面看他的胸脯；他慌忙低头也看自己的胸脯时，只见两乳之间的洼下的坑里有一片汗，他于是用手掌拂去了这些汗。
When he returned to calm and the fat man looked at the white vest's face again, he saw the white vest looking up at his chest; When he hurriedly looked down at his chest, he saw a patch of sweat in the pit between his breasts, so he wiped off the sweat with his palm.然而形势似乎总不甚太平了。抱着小孩的老妈子因为在骚扰时四顾，没有留意，头上梳着的喜鹊尾巴似的“苏州俏”便碰了站在旁边的车夫的鼻梁。车夫一推，却正推在孩子上；孩子就扭转身去，向着圈外，嚷着要回去了。老妈子先也略略一跄踉，但便即站定，旋转孩子来使他正对白背心，一手指点着，说道：
However, the situation seems to be not very peaceful. The old mother holding the child didn't pay attention because she was looking around during the harassment, and the "Suzhou Qiao" like a magpie tail on her head touched the bridge of the nose of the coachman standing next to her. The coachman pushed, but he was pushing the child; The child turned around and shouted to go back. The old mother staggered slightly, but then stood still, rotated the child so that he was facing the white vest, pointed a finger, and said:“阿，阿，看呀！多么好看哪！……”
"Ah, ah, look! How beautiful! ……”空隙间忽而探进一个戴硬草帽的学生模样的头来，将一粒瓜子之类似的东西放在嘴里，下颚向上一磕，咬开，退出去了。这地方就补上了一个满头油汗而粘着灰土的椭圆脸。
Suddenly poked into the head of a student wearing a hard straw hat, put something like a melon seed in his mouth, knocked his jaw up, bit it open, and withdrew. This place made up for an oval face covered in oil and sweat and stuck to the dust.挟洋伞的长子也已经生气，斜下了一边的肩膊，皱眉疾视着肩后的死鲈鱼。大约从这么大的大嘴里呼出来的热气，原也不易招架的，而况又在盛夏。秃头正仰视那电杆上钉着的红牌上的四个白字，仿佛很觉得有趣。胖大汉和巡警都斜了眼研究着老妈子的钩刀般的鞋尖。
The eldest son holding the umbrella was also angry, tilted his shoulder to one side, and frowned at the dead bass behind his shoulder. The heat exhaled from such a big mouth was not easy to parry, and it was in the middle of summer. The bald man looked up at the four white characters on the red card nailed to the pole, as if he was very interested. The fat man and the patrol officer both squinted at the old mother's hook-like toe.“好！”
"Okay!"什么地方忽有几个人同声喝采。都知道该有什么事情起来了，一切头便全数回转去。连巡警和他牵着的犯人也都有些摇动了。
Somewhere suddenly a few people cheered in unison. Everyone knew that something was going to happen, and everything turned around. Even the patrol officer and the prisoner he was holding were a little shaken.“刚出屉的包子咧！荷阿，热的……。”
"The buns that just came out of the drawer! Hoa, hot ....... ”路对面是胖孩子歪着头，磕睡似的长呼；路上是车夫们默默地前奔，似乎想赶紧逃出头上的烈日。大家都几乎失望了，幸而放出眼光去四处搜索，终于在相距十多家的路上，发见了一辆洋车停放着，一个车夫正在爬起来。
On the other side of the road, there was a fat child tilting his head and screaming as if he was sleeping; On the road, the coachmen ran silently, as if they wanted to escape the scorching sun above their heads. Everyone was almost disappointed, but fortunately they let go of their eyes to search around, and finally found a foreign car parked on the road more than ten miles away, and a coachman was getting up.圆阵立刻散开，都错错落落地走过去。胖大汉走不到一半，就歇在路边的槐树下；长子比秃头和椭圆脸走得快，接近了。车上的坐客依然坐着，车夫已经完全爬起，但还在摩自己的膝髁。周围有五六个人笑嘻嘻地看他们。
The circle immediately dispersed, and they all walked over in a staggered manner. The fat man walked less than halfway and rested under the locust tree on the side of the road; The eldest son walked faster than the bald and oval face, and approached. The passengers in the car were still sitting, and the coachman had fully gotten up, but he was still rubbing his knee condyles. There were five or six people around looking at them with a smile.“成么？”车夫要来拉车时，坐客便问。
"Is it done?" When the driver was about to pull the car, the passenger asked.他只点点头，拉了车就走；大家就惘惘然目送他。起先还知道那一辆是曾经跌倒的车，后来被别的车一混，知不清了。
He just nodded, pulled the car and left; Everyone watched him off in a daze. At first, I knew that it was a car that had fallen, but then I was mixed up by another car and couldn't figure it out.马路上就很清闲，有几只狗伸出了舌头喘气；胖大汉就在槐阴下看那很快地一起一落的狗肚皮。
The road was very leisurely, and a few dogs stuck out their tongues and gasped; The fat man looked at the dog's belly that quickly fell together under the shade of the locust tree.老妈子抱了孩子从屋檐阴下蹩过去了。胖孩子歪着头，挤细了眼睛，拖长声音，磕睡地叫喊——
The old mother hugged the child and walked over under the shade of the eaves. The fat child tilted his head, narrowed his eyes, prolonged his voice, and shouted sleepily -“热的包子咧！荷阿！……刚出屉的……。”
"Hot buns! Hoa! …… Freshly drawn ....... ”一九二五年三月一八日。
March 18, 1925.

高老夫子

高老夫子

高老夫子

Old Master Gao这一天，从早晨到午后，他的工夫全费在照镜，看《中国历史教科书》和查《袁了凡纲鉴》里；真所谓“人生识字忧患始”，顿觉得对于世事很有些不平之意了。而且这不平之意，是他从来没有经验过的。
On this day, from morning to afternoon, he spent all his time looking in the mirror, reading the "Chinese History Textbook" and checking the "Yuan Lifan Gangjian"; The so-called "literacy and worries in life begin", I suddenly feel a little unfair about the world. And this injustice is something he has never experienced.首先就想到往常的父母实在太不将儿女放在心里。他还在孩子的时候，最喜欢爬上桑树去偷桑椹吃，但他们全不管，有一回竟跌下树来磕破了头，又不给好好地医治，至今左边的眉棱上还带着一个永不消灭的尖劈形的瘢痕。他现在虽然格外留长头发，左右分开，又斜梳下来，可以勉强遮住了，但究竟还看见尖劈的尖，也算得一个缺点，万一给女学生发见，大概是免不了要看不起的。他放下镜子，怨愤地吁一口气。
First of all, I thought that ordinary parents really don't take their children to heart. When he was a child, he liked to climb the mulberry tree to steal mulberries to eat, but they didn't care at all, and once he fell down the tree and broke his head, and he didn't treat it properly, and he still has a pointed scar on his left eyebrow that will never be erased. Although he now has extra long hair, parted left and right, and combed diagonally, it can barely be covered, but it is also a disadvantage to see the sharp split, and if it is discovered by female students, it is probably inevitable to look down on it. He put down the mirror and let out a sigh of resentment.其次，是《中国历史教科书》的编纂者竟太不为教员设想。他的书虽然和《了凡纲鉴》也有些相合，但大段又很不相同，若即若离，令人不知道讲起来应该怎样拉在一处。但待到他瞥着那夹在教科书里的一张纸条，却又怨起中途辞职的历史教员来了，因为那纸条上写的是：
Secondly, the compilers of the "Chinese History Textbook" did not think too much for the teachers. Although his book is somewhat consistent with the "Compendium of Liaofan", the large paragraphs are very different, and it is so separated that people don't know how to pull it together. But when he glanced at a note sandwiched in the textbook, he complained about the history teacher who resigned midway, because the note read:“从第八章《东晋之兴亡》起。”
"From Chapter 8, "The Rise and Fall of the Eastern Jin Dynasty".如果那人不将三国的事情讲完，他的豫备就决不至于这么困苦。他最熟悉的就是三国，例如桃园三结义，孔明借箭，三气周瑜，黄忠定军山斩夏侯渊以及其他种种，满肚子都是，一学期也许讲不完。到唐朝，则有秦琼卖马之类，便又较为擅长了，谁料偏偏是东晋。他又怨愤地吁一口气，再拉过《了凡纲鉴》来。
If that person did not finish talking about the Three Kingdoms, his preparations would never be so difficult. He is most familiar with the Three Kingdoms, such as Taoyuan Sanyi, Kong Ming borrowing arrows, Sanqi Zhou Yu, Huang Zhongdingjun Shan killing Xiahou Yuan and all kinds of others, full of belly, may not be able to finish talking in one semester. In the Tang Dynasty, there was Qin Qiong selling horses, and he was better at it, but it was the Eastern Jin Dynasty. He sighed resentfully again, and pulled the "Liaofan Gangjian" again.“哙，你怎么外面看看还不够，又要钻到里面去看了？”
"Wow, why aren't you looking outside enough, and you have to get inside to see it again?"一只手同时从他背后弯过来，一拨他的下巴。但他并不动，因为从声音和举动上，便知道是暗暗进来的打牌的老朋友黄三。他虽然是他的老朋友，一礼拜以前还一同打牌，看戏，喝酒，跟女人，但自从他在《大中日报》上发表了《论中华国民皆有整理国史之义务》这一篇脍炙人口的名文，接着又得了贤良女学校的聘书之后，就觉得这黄三一无所长，总有些下等相了。所以他并不回头，板着脸正正经经地回答道：
A hand bent over from behind him at the same time and flicked his chin. But he didn't move, because from his voice and actions, he knew that it was his old friend Huang San who came in secretly to play cards. Although he was an old friend of his, he played cards together, watched plays, drank, and had women a week ago, but since he published a popular article in the "Dazhong Daily" titled "On the Obligation of Chinese Citizens to Sort Out National History", and then got a letter of appointment from the Xianliang Girls' School, he felt that this Huang San was useless and always a little inferior. So he didn't look back, and replied seriously with a straight face:“不要胡说！我正在豫备功课……。”
"Don't talk nonsense! I am preparing for my homework ....... ”“你不是亲口对老钵说的么：你要谋一个教员做，去看看女学生？”
"Didn't you say to Lao Bo yourself: You want to find a teacher to do it and go see the female students?"“你不要相信老钵的狗屁！”
"Don't believe the bullshit of the old bowl!"黄三就在他桌旁坐下，向桌面上一瞥，立刻在一面镜子和一堆乱书之间，发见了一个翻开着的大红纸的帖子。他一把抓来，瞪着眼睛一字一字地看下去：
Huang San sat down at his desk, glanced at the table, and immediately found a post on open red paper between a mirror and a pile of scrambled books. He grabbed it and stared at it word by word:
今敦请
Now I urge you尔础高老夫子为本校历史教员每周授课四
Mr. Erchu is a history teacher at our school, teaching classes four times a week小时每小时敬送修金大洋三角正按时
The hourly tribute is sent to repair the gold Ocean Triangle on time间计算此约
Calculate this agreement from time to time贤良女学校校长何万淑贞敛衽谨订
The principal of the virtuous girls' school, He Wanshuzhen, was cautious and cautious中华民国十三年夏历菊月吉旦　立
In the thirteenth year of the Republic of China, the summer calendar of the chrysanthemum month was established
“‘尔础高老夫子’？谁呢？你么？你改了名字了么？”黄三一看完，就性急地问。
"'Your high old master'? Who? Are you? Have you changed your name? As soon as Huang San finished reading, he asked impatiently.但高老夫子只是高傲地一笑；他的确改了名字了。然而黄三只会打牌，到现在还没有留心新学问，新艺术。他既不知道有一个俄国大文豪高尔基，又怎么说得通这改名的深远的意义呢？所以他只是高傲地一笑，并不答复他。
But the old master Gao just smiled arrogantly; He did change his name. However, Huang San can only play cards, and has not paid attention to new knowledge and new art so far. He didn't know that there was a great Russian writer Gorky, so how could he understand the far-reaching significance of this name change? So he just smiled proudly and did not reply to him.“喂喂，老杆，你不要闹这些无聊的玩意儿了！”黄三放下聘书，说。“我们这里有了一个男学堂，风气已经闹得够坏了；他们还要开什么女学堂，将来真不知道要闹成什么样子才罢。你何苦也去闹，犯不上……。”
"Hey, hey, old pole, don't make these boring things!" Huang San put down the letter of appointment and said. "We have a boys' school here, and the atmosphere is already bad enough; What kind of girls' school are they going to open, I really don't know what they will be like in the future. Why bother to make trouble, you can't make ....... ”“这也不见得。况且何太太一定要请我，辞不掉……。”因为黄三毁谤了学校，又看手表上已经两点半，离上课时间只有半点了，所以他有些气忿，又很露出焦躁的神情。
"That's not necessarily. Besides, Mrs. He must invite me, and she can't refuse ....... Because Huang San slandered the school, and looked at the watch that it was already half past two, and it was only half an o'clock before class time, so he was a little angry and showed an anxious look.“好！这且不谈。”黄三是乖觉的，即刻转帆，说，“我们说正经事罢：今天晚上我们有一个局面。毛家屯毛资甫的大儿子在这里了，来请阳宅先生看坟地去的，手头现带着二百番。我们已经约定，晚上凑一桌，一个我，一个老钵，一个就是你。你一定来罢，万不要误事。我们三个人扫光他！”
"Okay! Let's not talk about that. Huang San was well-behaved, immediately turned the sails, and said, "Let's talk about serious things: we have a situation tonight." Mao Zifu's eldest son from Maojiatun is here, and he came to ask Mr. Yangzhai to see the cemetery, and he now has two hundred times on hand. We have agreed to make a table in the evening, one me, one old bowl, and one is you. You must come, don't make a mistake." The three of us swept him away! ”老杆——高老夫子——沉吟了，但是不开口。
The old rod - the old master - pondered, but did not speak.“你一定来，一定！我还得和老钵去接洽一回。地方还是在我的家里。那傻小子是‘初出茅庐’，我们准可以扫光他！你将那一副竹纹清楚一点的交给我罢！”
"You must come, definitely! I still have to contact Lao Bo once. The place is still in my home. That silly boy is a 'fledgling', we can definitely sweep him away!" Just give me that pair of bamboo patterns clearer!" ”高老夫子慢慢地站起来，到床头取了马将牌盒，交给他；一看手表，两点四十分了。他想：黄三虽然能干，但明知道我已经做了教员，还来当面毁谤学堂，又打搅别人的豫备功课，究竟不应该。他于是冷淡地说道：
Old Master Gao stood up slowly, went to the bedside to take the horse card box, and handed it to him; I looked at my watch, and it was two forty. He thought: Although Huang San is capable, he knows that I have become a teacher, and he still comes to slander the school in person, and disturb other people's homework, shouldn't it? He then said coldly:“晚上再商量罢。我要上课去了。”
"Let's discuss it in the evening. I'm going to class. ”他一面说，一面恨恨地向《了凡纲鉴》看了一眼，拿起教科书，装在新皮包里，又很小心地戴上新帽子，便和黄三出了门。他一出门，就放开脚步，像木匠牵着的钻子似的，肩膀一扇一扇地直走，不多久，黄三便连他的影子也望不见了。
As he said, he glanced at the "Liaofan Gangjian" hatefully, picked up the textbook, put it in a new leather bag, put on a new hat carefully, and went out with Huang San. As soon as he went out, he let go of his steps, like a drill led by a carpenter, and walked straight on his shoulders one by one, and not long after, Huang San couldn't even see his shadow.高老夫子一跑到贤良女学校，即将新印的名片交给一个驼背的老门房。不一忽，就听到一声“请”，他于是跟着驼背走，转过两个弯，已到教员豫备室了，也算是客厅。何校长不在校；迎接他的是花白胡子的教务长，大名鼎鼎的万瑶圃，别号“玉皇香案吏”的，新近正将他自己和女仙赠答的诗《仙坛酬唱集》陆续登在《大中日报》上。
As soon as Master Gao ran to the Xianliang Girls' School, he handed over the newly printed business card to an old concierge with a hunchback. Suddenly, he heard a "please", so he hunched over, turned two corners, and arrived at the instructor's preparation room, which can be regarded as the living room. Principal He is not on campus; He was greeted by the white-bearded provost and the famous Wan Yaopu, nicknamed "Jade Emperor Incense Case Official", who was recently publishing the poem "Immortal Altar Singing Collection" given by himself and the female immortal in the "Dazhong Daily".“阿呀！础翁！久仰久仰！……”万瑶圃连连拱手，并将膝关节和腿关节接连弯了五六弯，仿佛想要蹲下去似的。
"Oh! Father! Long admiration! ...... "Wan Yaopu clasped his hands again and again, and bent his knee joints and leg joints five or six times in succession, as if he wanted to squat down.“阿呀！瑶翁！久仰久仰！……”础翁夹着皮包照样地做，并且说。
"Oh! Yao Weng! Long admiration! ......" Chu Weng did the same with his leather bag in his hand, and said.他们于是坐下；一个似死非死的校役便端上两杯白开水来。高老夫子看看对面的挂钟，还只两点四十分，和他的手表要差半点。
So they sat down; A school officer who seemed to be dead brought two glasses of plain water. Old Master Gao looked at the wall clock opposite, it was only two forty o'clock, half a minute away from his watch.“阿呀！础翁的大作，是的，那个……。是的，那——‘中国国粹义务论’，真真要言不烦，百读不厌！实在是少年人们的座右铭，座右铭座右铭！兄弟也颇喜欢文学，可是，玩玩而已，怎么比得上础翁。”他重行拱一拱手，低声说，“我们的盛德乩坛天天请仙，兄弟也常常去唱和。础翁也可以光降光降罢。那乩仙，就是蕊珠仙子，从她的语气上看来，似乎是一位谪降红尘的花神。她最爱和名人唱和，也很赞成新党，像础翁这样的学者，她一定大加青眼的。哈哈哈哈！”
"Oh! The masterpiece of the old man, yes, that ....... Yes, that - 'China's quintessence of deontology', really don't get tired of talking about it, and never get tired of reading! It is really the motto of young people, the motto motto! The brothers also like literature, but they are just playing, how can they compare to the old man. He bowed his hands again and said in a low voice, "Our Shengde Altar invites immortals every day, and brothers often sing and sing together." The old man can also be light-descended. That fairy is the Ruizhu fairy, and from her tone, it seems that she is a flower god who has been demoted to the red dust. She loves to sing with celebrities the most, and she is also very in favor of the new party, and scholars like Chu Weng must be very blue-eyed. Hahahaha! ”但高老夫子却不很能发表什么崇论宏议，因为他的豫备——东晋之兴亡——本没有十分足，此刻又并不足的几分也有些忘却了。他烦躁愁苦着；从繁乱的心绪中，又涌出许多断片的思想来：上堂的姿势应该威严；额角的瘢痕总该遮住；教科书要读得慢；看学生要大方。但同时还模模胡胡听得瑶圃说着话：
But Master Gao was not very good at expressing any grand discussions, because his preparations - the rise and fall of the Eastern Jin Dynasty - were not very sufficient, and he had forgotten a little bit of what was not enough at the moment. He was irritable and sorrowful; From the chaotic mood, many fragments of thoughts gushed out: the posture of going to class should be majestic; the scar on the forehead corner should always be covered; Textbooks should be read slowly; Look at students to be generous. But at the same time, he also heard Yaopu say:“……赐了一个荸荠……。‘醉倚青鸾上碧霄’，多么超脱……那邓孝翁叩求了五回，这才赐了一首五绝……‘红袖拂天河，莫道……’蕊珠仙子说……础翁还是第一回……这就是本校的植物园！”
“…… Gave a water chestnut ....... 'Drunkenly leaning on the azure phoenix to the sky', how transcendent...... Deng Xiaoweng begged five times, and then gave him a five-piece poem...... 'Red sleeves blow the Tianhe, don't say ......' Fairy Ruizhu said...... This is the first time...... This is our school's botanical garden! ”“哦哦！”尔础忽然看见他举手一指，这才从乱头思想中惊觉，依着指头看去，窗外一小片空地，地上有四五株树，正对面是三间小平房。
"Oh, oh!" Erchu suddenly saw him raise his hand and point, and then he was shocked from his chaotic thoughts, and looked at his finger, a small open space outside the window, with four or five trees on the ground, and three small bungalows directly opposite.“这就是讲堂。”瑶圃并不移动他的手指，但是说。
"This is the lecture hall." Yaopu didn't move his fingers, but said.“哦哦！”
"Oh, oh!"“学生是很驯良的。她们除听讲之外，就专心缝纫……。”
"Students are very docile. In addition to listening to lectures, they concentrate on sewing ....... ”“哦哦！”尔础实在颇有些窘急了，他希望他不再说话，好给自己聚精会神，赶紧想一想东晋之兴亡。
"Oh, oh!" Er Zha was really a little embarrassed, he hoped that he would stop talking, so that he could concentrate on himself and quickly think about the rise and fall of the Eastern Jin Dynasty.“可惜内中也有几个想学学做诗，那可是不行的。维新固然可以，但做诗究竟不是大家闺秀所宜。蕊珠仙子也不很赞成女学，以为淆乱两仪，非天曹所喜。兄弟还很同她讨论过几回……。”
"It's a pity that there are a few people who want to learn to write poetry, but that's not possible. The Restoration is certainly possible, but making poetry is not suitable for everyone. Fairy Ruizhu is also not very in favor of women's studies, thinking that confusing the two rituals is not to the liking of the heavenly court. The brother also discussed the ...... with her several times. ”尔础忽然跳了起来，他听到铃声了。
Erchu suddenly jumped up, and he heard the bell.“不，不。请坐！那是退班铃。”
"No, no. Have a seat! That's the clock out. ”“瑶翁公事很忙罢，可以不必客气……。”
"Yao Weng is very busy with business, so you don't have to be polite ......."“不，不！不忙，不忙！兄弟以为振兴女学是顺应世界的潮流，但一不得当，即易流于偏，所以天曹不喜，也许不过是防微杜渐的意思。只要办理得人，不偏不倚，合乎中庸，一以国粹为归宿，那是决无流弊的。础翁，你想，可对？这是蕊珠仙子也以为‘不无可采’的话。哈哈哈哈！”
"No, no! Not busy, not busy! The brothers think that the revitalization of women's education is to conform to the trend of the world, but if it is not appropriate, it is easy to be biased, so Tiancao does not like it, perhaps it is just the meaning of preventing minor changes. As long as the handling is good, impartial, in line with the mean, and the quintessence of the country is the destination, there will be no corruption. "Father, what do you think, right?" This is what Fairy Ruizhu also thinks is 'not unacceptable'. Hahahaha! ”校役又送上两杯白开水来；但是铃声又响了。
the school officer brought two more glasses of plain water; But the bell rang again.瑶圃便请尔础喝了两口白开水，这才慢慢地站起来，引导他穿过植物园，走进讲堂去。
Yao Pu asked Er Chu to drink two sips of plain water, then slowly stood up and guided him through the botanical garden and into the lecture hall.他心头跳着，笔挺地站在讲台旁边，只看见半屋子都是蓬蓬松松的头发。瑶圃从大襟袋里掏出一张信笺，展开之后，一面看，一面对学生们说道：
His heart was beating, and he stood upright next to the podium, only to see that half of the room was full of fluffy hair. Yaopu took out a piece of letterhead from his pocket, unfolded it, looked at it, and said to the students:“这位就是高老师，高尔础高老师，是有名的学者，那一篇有名的《论中华国民皆有整理国史之义务》，是谁都知道的。《大中日报》上还说过，高老师是：骤慕俄国文豪高君尔基之为人，因改字尔础，以示景仰之意，斯人之出，诚吾中华文坛之幸也！现在经何校长再三敦请，竟惠然肯来，到这里来教历史了……”
This is Teacher Gao, Teacher Gao Erchu Gao, is a famous scholar, and everyone knows the famous article "On the Obligation of Chinese Citizens to Organize National History". The "Dazhong Daily" also said that Teacher Gao is: I suddenly admired the character of the Russian writer Gao Junerji, so I changed the word Erji to show my admiration. Now, after repeated persuasion by Principal He, he is willing to come here to teach history......"高老师忽而觉得很寂然，原来瑶翁已经不见，只有自己站在讲台旁边了。他只得跨上讲台去，行了礼，定一定神，又记起了态度应该威严的成算，便慢慢地翻开书本，来开讲“东晋之兴亡”。
Teacher Gao suddenly felt very silent, it turned out that Yaoweng was gone, only he was standing next to the podium. He had to step onto the podium, salute, set his mind, and remembered the majestic attitude, so he slowly opened the book and came to talk about "The Rise and Fall of the Eastern Jin Dynasty".“嘻嘻！”似乎有谁在那里窃笑了。
"Hehe!" It seems that someone is snickering there.高老夫子脸上登时一热，忙看书本，和他的话并不错，上面印着的的确是：“东晋之偏安”。书脑的对面，也还是半屋子蓬蓬松松的头发，不见有别的动静。他猜想这是自己的疑心，其实谁也没有笑；于是又定一定神，看住书本，慢慢地讲下去。当初，是自己的耳朵也听到自己的嘴说些什么的，可是逐渐胡涂起来，竟至于不再知道说什么，待到发挥“石勒之雄图”的时候，便只听得吃吃地窃笑的声音了。
Old Master Gao's face suddenly became hot, and he was busy reading the book, and his words were not bad, and what was printed on it was indeed: "The Eastern Jin Dynasty is partial". Opposite the book brain, there was still half a room of fluffy hair, and there was no other movement. He guessed that this was his suspicion, but in fact no one laughed; So I fixed my mind again, looked at the book, and continued slowly. At the beginning, it was my own ears that also heard my mouth say something, but gradually it became nonsense, so much so that I no longer knew what to say, and when it was time to play the "Shi Le Xiong Tu", I could only hear the sound of snickering.他不禁向讲台下一看，情形和原先已经很不同：半屋子都是眼睛，还有许多小巧的等边三角形，三角形中都生着两个鼻孔，这些连成一气，宛然是流动而深邃的海，闪烁地汪洋地正冲着他的眼光。但当他瞥见时，却又骤然一闪，变了半屋子蓬蓬松松的头发了。
He couldn't help but look down at the podium, and the situation was very different from before: half the room was full of eyes, and there were many small equilateral triangles, each with two nostrils, which were connected into one breath, like a flowing and deep sea, flickering at his eyes. But when he caught a glimpse of it, it suddenly flashed again, and half of the room was covered with fluffy hair.他也连忙收回眼光，再不敢离开教科书，不得已时，就抬起眼来看看屋顶。屋顶是白而转黄的洋灰，中央还起了一道正圆形的棱线；可是这圆圈又生动了，忽然扩大，忽然收小，使他的眼睛有些昏花。他豫料倘将眼光下移，就不免又要遇见可怕的眼睛和鼻孔联合的海，只好再回到书本上，这时已经是“淝水之战”，苻坚快要骇得“草木皆兵”了。
He also quickly retracted his eyes, and no longer dared to leave the textbook, and when he had to, he raised his eyes to look at the roof. The roof is white and yellowish gray, and there is a circular ridge in the center; But the circle became vivid again, suddenly enlarged and suddenly shrank, making his eyes a little dizzy. He expected that if he moved his eyes down, he would inevitably encounter the sea of terrible eyes and nostrils, so he had to return to the book, at this time it was already the "Battle of Feishui", and Fu Jian was about to be frightened by "all the grass and trees".他总疑心有许多人暗暗地发笑，但还是熬着讲，明明已经讲了大半天，而铃声还没有响，看手表是不行的，怕学生要小觑；可是讲了一会，又到“拓跋氏之勃兴”了，接着就是“六国兴亡表”，他本以为今天未必讲到，没有豫备的。
He always suspected that many people were secretly laughing, but he still kept talking, obviously he had been talking for most of the day, and the bell had not yet ringed, so he couldn't look at his watch, for fear that students would underestimate him; But after talking for a while, it was time for the "Rise of the Tuoba Clan", followed by the "Table of the Rise and Fall of the Six Kingdoms", which he thought might not be talked about today, and he was not prepared.他自己觉得讲义忽而中止了。
He himself felt that the handouts had suddenly stopped.“今天是第一天，就是这样罢……。”他惶惑了一会之后，才断续地说，一面点一点头，跨下讲台去，也便出了教室的门。
"Today is the first day, that's ...... it." After he was confused for a while, he said intermittently, nodded, stepped off the podium, and walked out of the classroom door.“嘻嘻嘻！”
"Hehehe!"他似乎听到背后有许多人笑，又仿佛看见这笑声就从那深邃的鼻孔的海里出来。他便惘惘然，跨进植物园，向着对面的教员豫备室大踏步走。
He seemed to hear many laughter behind him, and seemed to see this laughter coming out of the sea of deep nostrils. He was confused, stepped into the botanical garden, and strode towards the teacher's preparation room opposite.他大吃一惊，至于连《中国历史教科书》也失手落在地上了，因为脑壳上突然遭了什么东西的一击。他倒退两步，定睛看时，一枝夭斜的树枝横在他面前，已被他的头撞得树叶都微微发抖。他赶紧弯腰去拾书本，书旁边竖着一块木牌，上面写道：
He was surprised that even the "Chinese History Textbook" fell to the ground, because something suddenly hit his head. He took two steps back, and when he looked closely, a slanted branch lay in front of him, and the leaves trembled slightly from his head. He quickly bent down to pick up the book, and next to the book stood a wooden sign that read:
他似乎听到背后有许多人笑，又仿佛看见这笑声就从那深邃的鼻孔的海里出来。于是也就不好意思去抚摩头上已经疼痛起来的皮肤，只一心跑进教员豫备室里去。
He seemed to hear many laughter behind him, and seemed to see this laughter coming out of the sea of deep nostrils. So I was embarrassed to stroke the skin on my head that was already hurting, so I just ran into the instructor's preparation room.那里面，两个装着白开水的杯子依然，却不见了似死非死的校役，瑶翁也踪影全无了。一切都黯淡，只有他的新皮包和新帽子在黯淡中发亮。看壁上的挂钟，还只有三点四十分。
There, the two cups filled with plain water were still there, but the school officer who seemed to be dead was gone, and Yao Weng was nowhere to be found. Everything was bleak, only his new leather bag and new hat shone in the gloom. Looking at the wall clock on the wall, it was only 3:40.
高老夫子回到自家的房里许久之后，有时全身还骤然一热；又无端的愤怒；终于觉得学堂确也要闹坏风气，不如停闭的好，尤其是女学堂，——有什么意思呢，喜欢虚荣罢了！
After the old master returned to his room for a long time, sometimes his whole body suddenly became hot; and unprovoked anger; Finally, I feel that the school is indeed going to make a bad atmosphere, it is better to stop it, especially the girls' school,—— what's the point, I just like vanity!“嘻嘻！”
"Hehe!"他还听到隐隐约约的笑声。这使他更加愤怒，也使他辞职的决心更加坚固了。晚上就写信给何校长，只要说自己患了足疾。但是，倘来挽留，又怎么办呢？——也不去。女学堂真不知道要闹到什么样子，自己又何苦去和她们为伍呢？犯不上的。他想。
He also heard faint laughter. This made him even angrier and strengthened his determination to resign. In the evening, he wrote to Principal He, just saying that he had a foot disease. But what if it comes to retain? —— Don't go. The girls' school really doesn't know what kind of trouble it will be, so why bother to be with them? Can't commit it. He thought.他于是决绝地将《了凡纲鉴》搬开；镜子推在一旁；聘书也合上了。正要坐下，又觉得那聘书实在红得可恨，便抓过来和《中国历史教科书》一同塞入抽屉里。
He then resolutely moved the "Liaofan Gangjian" away; The mirror is pushed aside; The letter of appointment was also closed. Just as he was about to sit down, he felt that the letter of appointment was really hateful, so he grabbed it and stuffed it into the drawer along with the "Chinese History Textbook".一切大概已经打叠停当，桌上只剩下一面镜子，眼界清净得多了。然而还不舒适，仿佛欠缺了半个魂灵，但他当即省悟，戴上红结子的秋帽，径向黄三的家里去了。
Everything has probably come to a standstill, and there is only one mirror left on the table, and my vision is much clearer. However, it was still uncomfortable, as if he lacked half of his soul, but he immediately realized, put on a red knot autumn hat, and went straight to Huang San's house.“来了，尔础高老夫子！”老钵大声说。
"Here you go, old Master Erzhugao!" The old bowl said loudly.“狗屁！”他眉头一皱，在老钵的头顶上打了一下，说。
"Bullshit!" He frowned, slapped the top of the old bowl's head, and said.“教过了罢？怎么样，可有几个出色的？”黄三热心地问。
"Have you taught me? How about it, how many are outstanding? Huang San asked enthusiastically.“我没有再教下去的意思。女学堂真不知道要闹成什么样子。我辈正经人，确乎犯不上酱在一起……。”
"I have no intention of teaching anymore. I really don't know what the girls' school is going to look like. We are serious people, and we really can't get together ...... sauce. ”毛家的大儿子进来了，胖到像一个汤圆。
The eldest son of the Mao family came in, fat like a glutinous rice ball.“阿呀！久仰久仰！……”满屋子的手都拱起来，膝关节和腿关节接二连三地屈折，仿佛就要蹲了下去似的。
"Oh! Long admiration! ...... "The hands in the room were arched, and the knee and leg joints were bent one after another, as if they were about to squat.“这一位就是先前说过的高干亭兄。”老钵指着高老夫子，向毛家的大儿子说。
"This is the Gao Ganting brother I mentioned before." Lao Bo pointed to Master Gao and said to the eldest son of the Mao family.“哦哦！久仰久仰！……”毛家的大儿子便特别向他连连拱手，并且点头。
"Oh! Long admiration! ......" The eldest son of the Mao family bowed to him repeatedly and nodded.这屋子的左边早放好一顶斜摆的方桌，黄三一面招呼客人，一面和一个小鸦头布置着座位和筹马。不多久，每一个桌角上都点起一枝细瘦的洋烛来，他们四人便入座了。
A square table with an angle has already been placed on the left side of the room, and Huang San greeted the guests while arranging seats and horses with a small crow. Not long after, a thin candle was lit on every corner of the table, and the four of them were seated.万籁无声。只有打出来的骨牌拍在紫檀桌面上的声音，在初夜的寂静中清彻地作响。
There was no sound. Only the sound of the dominoes slapping on the rosewood table sounded clearly in the silence of the early night.高老夫子的牌风并不坏，但他总还抱着什么不平。他本来是什么都容易忘记的，惟独这一回，却总以为世风有些可虑；虽然面前的筹马渐渐增加了，也还不很能够使他舒适，使他乐观。但时移俗易，世风也终究觉得好了起来；不过其时很晚，已经在打完第二圈，他快要凑成“清一色”的时候了。
Master Gao's style of playing cards is not bad, but he always has some grievances. He was easy to forget everything, but this time, he always thought that the world was a bit worrying; Although the number of chips in front of him gradually increased, it was not very comfortable for him and made him optimistic. But times have changed, and the world has finally felt better; But it was very late, already after the second lap, and it was almost time for him to make it "all together".一九二五年五月一日。
May 1, 1925.

孤独者

孤独者

孤独者

Lonely people一
One我和魏连殳相识一场，回想起来倒也别致，竟是以送殓始，以送殓终。
I met Wei Lianshu once, and in retrospect, it was quite chic, it started with the funeral and ended with the funeral.那时我在S城，就时时听到人们提起他的名字，都说他很有些古怪：所学的是动物学，却到中学堂去做历史教员；对人总是爱理不理的，却常喜欢管别人的闲事；常说家庭应该破坏，一领薪水却一定立即寄给他的祖母，一日也不拖延。此外还有许多零碎的话柄；总之，在S城里也算是一个给人当作谈助的人。有一年的秋天，我在寒石山的一个亲戚家里闲住；他们就姓魏，是连殳的本家。但他们却更不明白他，仿佛将他当作一个外国人看待，说是“同我们都异样的”。
At that time, I was in S City, and I heard people mention his name from time to time, and they all said that he was a bit eccentric: he studied zoology, but went to middle school to work as a history teacher; He always ignores people, but often likes to meddle in other people's affairs; It is often said that the family should be destroyed, but as soon as he receives a salary, he must immediately send it to his grandmother without delay for a day. In addition, there are many fragmentary words; In short, in S City, he can be regarded as a person who gives people talk to help. One autumn, I was idle at a relative's house in Hanshi Mountain; Their surname is Wei, which is Lian Shu's family. But they didn't understand him even more, as if they treated him as a foreigner, saying that he was "different from us".这也不足为奇，中国的兴学虽说已经二十年了，寒石山却连小学也没有。全山村中，只有连殳是出外游学的学生，所以从村人看来，他确是一个异类；但也很妒羡，说他挣得许多钱。
This is not surprising, although it has been 20 years since China established schools, Hanshi Mountain does not even have a primary school. In the whole mountain village, only Lian Shu is a student who goes out to study, so from the perspective of the villagers, he is indeed an outlier; But he was also very jealous, saying that he made a lot of money.到秋末，山村中痢疾流行了；我也自危，就想回到城中去。那时听说连殳的祖母就染了病，因为是老年，所以很沉重；山中又没有一个医生。所谓他的家属者，其实就只有一个这祖母，雇一名女工简单地过活；他幼小失了父母，就由这祖母抚养成人的。听说她先前也曾经吃过许多苦，现在可是安乐了。但因为他没有家小，家中究竟非常寂寞，这大概也就是大家所谓异样之一端罢。
By the end of autumn, dysentery was prevalent in the mountain villages; I was also in danger, so I wanted to go back to the city. At that time, I heard that Lian Shu's grandmother was sick, and because she was old, she was very heavy; There is no doctor in the mountains. The so-called family members are actually only this grandmother, who hires a female worker to live simply; He lost his parents at a young age and was raised by this grandmother. I heard that she had suffered a lot before, but now she is at ease. But because he doesn't have a small family, his family is very lonely, which is probably one of the so-called strange things that everyone calls it.寒石山离城是旱道一百里，水道七十里，专使人叫连殳去，往返至少就得四天。山村僻陋，这些事便算大家都要打听的大新闻，第二天便轰传她病势已经极重，专差也出发了；可是到四更天竟咽了气，最后的话，是：“为什么不肯给我会一会连殳的呢？……”
Hanshi Mountain is a dry road of 100 miles and a waterway of 70 miles from the city, and it takes at least four days to go back and forth. The next day it was rumored that her condition was extremely serious, and the special envoy had also set off; But at the fourth watch, he swallowed his breath, and his last words were: "Why don't you give me a brief sentence for a while?" ……”族长，近房，他的祖母的母家的亲丁，闲人，聚集了一屋子，豫计连殳的到来，应该已是入殓的时候了。寿材寿衣早已做成，都无须筹画；他们的第一大问题是在怎样对付这“承重孙”，因为逆料他关于一切丧葬仪式，是一定要改变新花样的。聚议之后，大概商定了三大条件，要他必行。一是穿白，二是跪拜，三是请和尚道士做法事。总而言之：是全都照旧。
The patriarch, the close room, his grandmother's mother's relatives, and idlers, gathered in a room, and it should be time for the funeral to arrive. The longevity material and longevity clothes have already been made, and there is no need to plan; Their first problem was how to deal with this "burden-bearing grandson", because he had to change all the funeral rituals in a new way. After the meeting, three major conditions were probably agreed upon that he must do it. One is to wear white, the second is to kneel, and the third is to invite monks and Taoists to perform rituals. All in all: it's all business as usual.他们既经议妥，便约定在连殳到家的那一天，一同聚在厅前，排成阵势，互相策应，并力作一回极严厉的谈判。村人们都咽着唾沫，新奇地听候消息；他们知道连殳是“吃洋教”的“新党”，向来就不讲什么道理，两面的争斗，大约总要开始的，或者还会酿成一种出人意外的奇观。
After they agreed, they agreed to gather together in front of the hall on the day Lian Shu arrived home, lined up in formation, responded to each other, and made a very strict negotiation. The villagers swallowed their saliva and waited for the news in a novel way; They know that Lian Shu is a "new party" that "eats foreign religions", and has never said anything, and the fight between the two sides will probably begin, or it will become an unexpected spectacle.传说连殳的到家是下午，一进门，向他祖母的灵前只是弯了一弯腰。族长们便立刻照豫定计画进行，将他叫到大厅上，先说过一大篇冒头，然后引入本题，而且大家此唱彼和，七嘴八舌，使他得不到辩驳的机会。但终于话都说完了，沉默充满了全厅，人们全数悚然地紧看着他的嘴。只见连殳神色也不动，简单地回答道：
Legend has it that Lian Shu arrived home in the afternoon, and as soon as he entered the door, he just bent down in front of his grandmother's spirit. The patriarchs immediately proceeded according to the predetermined plan, called him to the hall, first said a large introduction, and then introduced the topic, and everyone sang and talked, so that he did not get a chance to argue. But finally the words were finished, and silence filled the hall, and people all looked at his mouth in horror. I saw that even Shu didn't move, and replied simply:“都可以的。”
"It's okay."这又很出于他们的意外，大家的心的重担都放下了，但又似乎反加重，觉得太“异样”，倒很有些可虑似的。打听新闻的村人们也很失望，口口相传道，“奇怪！他说‘都可以’哩！我们看去罢！”都可以就是照旧，本来是无足观了，但他们也还要看，黄昏之后，便欣欣然聚满了一堂前。
This was very much due to their surprise, and the burden of everyone's hearts was let go, but it seemed to be aggravated, and they felt that it was too "strange", which was a bit worrying. The villagers who inquired about the news were also disappointed, and word of mouth said, "Strange! He said, 'Yes.' Let's see! "It's all the same as before, it was originally unimpressive, but they also had to watch, and after dusk, they happily gathered in front of the hall.我也是去看的一个，先送了一份香烛；待到走到他家，已见连殳在给死者穿衣服了。原来他是一个短小瘦削的人，长方脸，蓬松的头发和浓黑的须眉占了一脸的小半，只见两眼在黑气里发光。那穿衣也穿得真好，井井有条，仿佛是一个大殓的专家，使旁观者不觉叹服。寒石山老例，当这些时候，无论如何，母家的亲丁是总要挑剔的；他却只是默默地，遇见怎么挑剔便怎么改，神色也不动。站在我前面的一个花白头发的老太太，便发出羡慕感叹的声音。
I was also the one who went to see it, and I gave a candle first; When I walked to his house, I saw Lian Shu dressing the deceased. It turned out that he was a short and thin man, with a rectangular face, fluffy hair and thick black eyebrows occupying half of his face, only to see his eyes glowing in the black air. The dress was also really well dressed and well-organized, as if he was an expert in a big funeral, which impressed the onlookers. As is the old case of Hanshi Mountain, at these times, no matter what, the relatives of the mother's family are always picky; But he just silently changed how picky he was, and his expression did not move. An old lady with gray hair standing in front of me let out a voice of envy and sigh.其次是拜；其次是哭，凡女人们都念念有词。其次入棺；其次又是拜；又是哭，直到钉好了棺盖。沉静了一瞬间，大家忽而扰动了，很有惊异和不满的形势。我也不由的突然觉到：连殳就始终没有落过一滴泪，只坐在草荐上，两眼在黑气里闪闪地发光。
followed by worship; The second is crying, and all women have words. followed by the coffin; followed by worship; Crying again until the coffin lid was nailed. After a moment of silence, everyone suddenly disturbed, and there was a very surprising and dissatisfied situation. I couldn't help but suddenly realize: Lian Shu never shed a single tear, only sitting on the grass mat, his eyes shining in the black air.大殓便在这惊异和不满的空气里面完毕。大家都怏怏地，似乎想走散，但连殳却还坐在草荐上沉思。忽然，他流下泪来了，接着就失声，立刻又变成长嚎，像一匹受伤的狼，当深夜在旷野中嗥叫，惨伤里夹杂着愤怒和悲哀。这模样，是老例上所没有的，先前也未曾豫防到，大家都手足无措了，迟疑了一会，就有几个人上前去劝止他，愈去愈多，终于挤成一大堆。但他却只是兀坐着号，铁塔似的动也不动。
The funeral was completed in this air of astonishment and discontent. Everyone was unhappy and seemed to want to be separated, but Lian Shu was still sitting on the grass and pondering. Suddenly, he shed tears, then he lost his voice, and immediately turned into a long howl, like a wounded wolf, howling in the wilderness late at night, with anger and sorrow mixed in the misery. This kind of appearance was not seen in the old example, and it had not been prevented before, everyone was at a loss, and after hesitating for a while, a few people stepped forward to persuade him, and more and more, and finally crowded into a large pile. But he just sat upright, motionless like an iron tower.大家又只得无趣地散开；他哭着，哭着，约有半点钟，这才突然停了下来，也不向吊客招呼，径自往家里走。接着就有前去窥探的人来报告：他走进他祖母的房里，躺在床上，而且，似乎就睡熟了。
Everyone had to disperse boredly; He cried and cried, and about half an o'clock before he suddenly stopped, did not greet the mourners, and walked straight home. Then a snooper came to report: he went into his grandmother's room, lay on the bed, and seemed to be asleep.隔了两日，是我要动身回城的前一天，便听到村人都遭了魔似的发议论，说连殳要将所有的器具大半烧给他祖母，余下的便分赠生时侍奉，死时送终的女工，并且连房屋也要无期地借给她居住了。亲戚本家都说到舌敝唇焦，也终于阻当不住。
Two days later, the day before I left for the city, I heard the villagers say that Lian Shu would burn most of all the utensils to his grandmother, and the rest would be given to the female workers who served during her life and died when she died, and even the house would be lent to her indefinitely. Relatives and their families all talked about their tongues and lips, and finally they couldn't stop it.恐怕大半也还是因为好奇心，我归途中经过他家的门口，便又顺便去吊慰。他穿了毛边的白衣出见，神色也还是那样，冷冷的。我很劝慰了一番；他却除了唯唯诺诺之外，只回答了一句话，是：
I'm afraid most of it was still out of curiosity, so I passed by the door of his house on the way back, so I went to pay my respects. He came out wearing white clothes with raw edges, and his expression was still the same, cold. I was very comforted; In addition to being submissive, he only replied with one sentence, which was:“多谢你的好意。”
"Thank you for your kindness."二
Two我们第三次相见就在这年的冬初，S城的一个书铺子里，大家同时点了一点头，总算是认识了。但使我们接近起来的，是在这年底我失了职业之后。从此，我便常常访问连殳去。一则，自然是因为无聊赖；二则，因为听人说，他倒很亲近失意的人的，虽然素性这么冷。但是世事升沉无定，失意人也不会长是失意人，所以他也就很少长久的朋友。这传说果然不虚，我一投名片，他便接见了。两间连通的客厅，并无什么陈设，不过是桌椅之外，排列些书架，大家虽说他是一个可怕的“新党”，架上却不很有新书。他已经知道我失了职业；但套话一说就完，主客便只好默默地相对，逐渐沉闷起来。我只见他很快地吸完一枝烟，烟蒂要烧着手指了，才抛在地面上。
The third time we met was at the beginning of winter this year, in a bookstore in S City, and everyone nodded at the same time, and finally got to know each other. But what brought us closer was after I lost my job at the end of the year. Since then, I have often visited Lian Shu. First, it is naturally because of boredom; Second, because I heard people say that he is very close to frustrated people, although he is so cold. But the world is uncertain, and a frustrated person will not always be a frustrated person, so he rarely has long-term friends. This legend is indeed true, as soon as I threw in my business card, he received it. The two connected living rooms had no furnishings, but there were some bookshelves lined up in addition to the tables and chairs. He already knew that I had lost my job; But as soon as the cliché was over, the host and guest had to face each other silently, gradually becoming dull. I saw him quickly finish smoking a cigarette, and the cigarette butt was about to burn his fingers, so he threw it on the ground.“吸烟罢。”他伸手取第二枝烟时，忽然说。
"Stop smoking." When he reached out to take the second cigarette, he suddenly said.我便也取了一枝，吸着，讲些关于教书和书籍的，但也还觉得沉闷。我正想走时，门外一阵喧嚷和脚步声，四个男女孩子闯进来了。大的八九岁，小的四五岁，手脸和衣服都很脏，而且丑得可以。但是连殳的眼里却即刻发出欢喜的光来了，连忙站起，向客厅间壁的房里走，一面说道：
I also took a branch, sucked it, and talked about teaching and books, but I still felt dull. Just as I was about to leave, there was a noise and footsteps outside the door, and four boys and girls broke in. The older one is eight or nine years old, the youngest is four or five years old, and their hands, face and clothes are very dirty, and they are ugly. But Lian Shu's eyes immediately flashed with joy, and he quickly stood up, walked towards the room on the wall of the living room, and said:“大良，二良，都来！你们昨天要的口琴，我已经买来了。”
"Daliang, Erliang, all come! I have already bought the harmonica you asked for yesterday. ”孩子们便跟着一齐拥进去，立刻又各人吹着一个口琴一拥而出，一出客厅门，不知怎的便打将起来。有一个哭了。
The children followed in together, and immediately each of them played a harmonica and rushed out, and as soon as they came out of the living room door, they somehow started fighting. One cried.“一人一个，都一样的。不要争呵！”他还跟在后面嘱咐。
"One for each person, it's the same. Don't fight! He still followed behind.“这么多的一群孩子都是谁呢？”我问。
"Who are so many children?" I asked.“是房主人的。他们都没有母亲，只有一个祖母。”
"It's the owner's. None of them had a mother, only a grandmother. ”“房东只一个人么？”
"Is the landlord alone?"“是的。他的妻子大概死了三四年了罢，没有续娶。——否则，便要不肯将余屋租给我似的单身人。”他说着，冷冷地微笑了。
"Yes. His wife had been dead for about three or four years, and he did not remarry. ——Otherwise, you will refuse to rent the remaining house to a single person like me. He said and smiled coldly.我很想问他何以至今还是单身，但因为不很熟，终于不好开口。
I really wanted to ask him why he was still single, but because he wasn't very familiar with him, he finally couldn't speak.只要和连殳一熟识，是很可以谈谈的。他议论非常多，而且往往颇奇警。使人不耐的倒是他的有些来客，大抵是读过《沉沦》的罢，时常自命为“不幸的青年”或是“零余者”，螃蟹一般懒散而骄傲地堆在大椅子上，一面唉声叹气，一面皱着眉头吸烟。还有那房主的孩子们，总是互相争吵，打翻碗碟，硬讨点心，乱得人头昏。但连殳一见他们，却再不像平时那样的冷冷的了，看得比自己的性命还宝贵。听说有一回，三良发了红斑痧，竟急得他脸上的黑气愈见其黑了；不料那病是轻的，于是后来便被孩子们的祖母传作笑柄。
As long as you are familiar with Lian Shu, you can talk about it. He talks a lot, and often quite alarming. What makes people impatient is that some of his guests, most of whom have read "The Sinking", often call themselves "unfortunate youths" or "surpluses", lazily piled up on the big chairs like crabs, sighing and smoking with a frown. And the homeowner's children are always arguing with each other, knocking over dishes, begging for snacks, and making a mess. But when Lian Shu saw them, he was no longer as cold as usual, and he saw that his life was more precious than his own life. I heard that once, Sanliang had erythema, and he was so anxious that the black gas on his face became darker; Unexpectedly, the disease was mild, so it was later passed down as a laughingstock by the children's grandmother.“孩子总是好的。他们全是天真……。”他似乎也觉得我有些不耐烦了，有一天特地乘机对我说。
"Children are always good. They are all naïve ....... He also seemed to think that I was a little impatient, and one day he took the opportunity to say to me.“那也不尽然。”我只是随便回答他。
"That's not necessarily." I just answered him casually.“不。大人的坏脾气，在孩子们是没有的。后来的坏，如你平日所攻击的坏，那是环境教坏的。原来却并不坏，天真……。我以为中国的可以希望，只在这一点。”
"Nope. Adults have bad tempers that children don't have. The later bad, such as the bad you attack on weekdays, is taught bad by the environment. It turns out that it is not bad, innocent ....... I thought China could hope, but only at this point. ”“不。如果孩子中没有坏根苗，大起来怎么会有坏花果？譬如一粒种子，正因为内中本含有枝叶花果的胚，长大时才能够发出这些东西来。何尝是无端……。”我因为闲着无事，便也如大人先生们一下野，就要吃素谈禅一样，正在看佛经。佛理自然是并不懂得的，但竟也不自检点，一味任意地说。
"Nope. If there are no bad roots and seedlings in the child, how can there be bad flowers and fruits when they grow up? For example, a seed, because it contains the embryo of branches, leaves, flowers and fruits, can only emit these things when it grows up. It was an unprovoked ....... "Because I have nothing to do, I am reading Buddhist scriptures, just like adults and gentlemen who go out and eat vegetarian and talk about Zen. Naturally, I don't understand Buddhism, but I don't even check myself, and I just say it arbitrarily.然而连殳气忿了，只看了我一眼，不再开口。我也猜不出他是无话可说呢，还是不屑辩。但见他又显出许久不见的冷冷的态度来，默默地连吸了两枝烟；待到他再取第三枝时，我便只好逃走了。
However, Lian Shu was angry, only glanced at me, and stopped speaking. I can't guess if he has nothing to say, or if he doesn't bother to argue. But seeing that he showed a cold attitude that he hadn't seen for a long time, he silently smoked two cigarettes in a row; When he took the third branch, I had no choice but to run away.这仇恨是历了三月之久才消释的。原因大概是一半因为忘却，一半则他自己竟也被“天真”的孩子所仇视了，于是觉得我对于孩子的冒渎的话倒也情有可原。但这不过是我的推测。其时是在我的寓里的酒后，他似乎微露悲哀模样，半仰着头道：
This hatred took three months to dissipate. The reason is probably half because of forgetting, and half is that he himself is hated by the "naïve" child, so I feel that my blasphemy towards the child is understandable. But that's just my speculation. At that time, after drinking in my apartment, he seemed to show a slight sad look, half-tilted his head and said:“想起来真觉得有些奇怪。我到你这里来时，街上看见一个很小的小孩，拿了一片芦叶指着我道：杀！他还不很能走路……。”
"It feels a little strange to think about it. When I came to you, I saw a very small child on the street, who took a reed leaf and pointed at me and said: Kill! He is not very ...... walking. ”“这是环境教坏的。”
"This is bad for the environment."我即刻很后悔我的话。但他却似乎并不介意，只竭力地喝酒，其间又竭力地吸烟。
I immediately regretted my words. But he didn't seem to mind, just drinking as hard as he could, and smoking as hard as he could.“我倒忘了，还没有问你，”我便用别的话来支梧，“你是不大访问人的，怎么今天有这兴致来走走呢？我们相识有一年多了，你到我这里来却还是第一回。”
"I forgot, I haven't asked you yet," I used other words to support Wu, "You are not a visitor, why do you have such interest to walk around today?" We've known each other for more than a year, but it's the first time you've come to me. ”“我正要告诉你呢：你这几天切莫到我寓里来看我了。我的寓里正有很讨厌的一大一小在那里，都不像人！”
"I'm about to tell you: you must not come to my apartment to see me these days. There are very annoying big and small people in my apartment, and they don't look like people! ”“一大一小？这是谁呢？”我有些诧异。
"One big and one small? Who is this? I was a little surprised.“是我的堂兄和他的小儿子。哈哈，儿子正如老子一般。”
"It was my cousin and his youngest son. Haha, the son is like Lao Tzu. ”“是上城来看你，带便玩玩的罢？”
"Are you going to the city to come to see you and bring it to play?"“不。说是来和我商量，就要将这孩子过继给我的。”
"Nope. He said he was here to discuss with me that he would adopt this child to me. ”“呵！过继给你？”我不禁惊叫了，“你不是还没有娶亲么？”
"Huh! Adopted to you? I couldn't help but exclaim, "Aren't you married yet?" ”“他们知道我不娶的了。但这都没有什么关系。他们其实是要过继给我那一间寒石山的破屋子。我此外一无所有，你是知道的；钱一到手就化完。只有这一间破屋子。他们父子的一生的事业是在逐出那一个借住着的老女工。”
"They know I'm not going to marry. But it doesn't matter. They actually want to adopt the dilapidated house in Hanshi Mountain to me. I have nothing else, you know; The money will melt as soon as it arrives. There is only this dilapidated house. The lifelong career of their father and son is to expel the old female worker who lives there. ”他那词气的冷峭，实在又使我悚然。但我还慰解他说：
The coldness of his tone really frightened me. But I also comforted him and said:“我看你的本家也还不至于此。他们不过思想略旧一点罢了。譬如，你那年大哭的时候，他们就都热心地围着使劲来劝你……。”
"I don't think your family is like this. They just think a little older. For example, when you cried that year, they all enthusiastically gathered around to persuade you to ....... ”“我父亲死去之后，因为夺我屋子，要我在笔据上画花押，我大哭着的时候，他们也是这样热心地围着使劲来劝我……。”他两眼向上凝视，仿佛要在空中寻出那时的情景来。
"After my father died, because he took my house, he asked me to draw a flower on the note, and when I cried, they also enthusiastically surrounded me to persuade me to ......." His eyes stared upwards, as if he wanted to find the scene in the air.“总而言之：关键就全在你没有孩子。你究竟为什么老不结婚的呢？”我忽而寻到了转舵的话，也是久已想问的话，觉得这时是最好的机会了。
"All in all: the key is that you don't have children. Why don't you get married? I suddenly found the words to turn the rudder, and it was also something I had wanted to ask for a long time, and I felt that this was the best opportunity.他诧异地看着我，过了一会，眼光便移到他自己的膝髁上去了，于是就吸烟，没有回答。
He looked at me in surprise, and after a while his eyes moved to his own knee condyle, so he smoked and did not answer.三
Three但是，虽在这一种百无聊赖的境地中，也还不给连殳安住。渐渐地，小报上有匿名人来攻击他，学界上也常有关于他的流言，可是这已经并非先前似的单是话柄，大概是于他有损的了。我知道这是他近来喜欢发表文章的结果，倒也并不介意。S城人最不愿意有人发些没有顾忌的议论，一有，一定要暗暗地来叮他，这是向来如此的，连殳自己也知道。但到春天，忽然听说他已被校长辞退了。这却使我觉得有些兀突；其实，这也是向来如此的，不过因为我希望着自己认识的人能够幸免，所以就以为兀突罢了，S城人倒并非这一回特别恶。
However, even in this boring situation, Lian Shu is not yet settled. Gradually, anonymous people in the tabloids attacked him, and there were often rumors about him in the academic circles, but this was no longer just a talk like before, probably to the detriment of him. I know this is the result of his recent love of publishing, but I don't mind. The people of S City are most reluctant to have someone post some unscrupulous discussions, and once there is, they must secretly tell him, this has always been the case, and even Shu himself knows it. But in the spring, he suddenly heard that he had been fired by the principal. This made me feel a little abrupt; In fact, this has always been the case, but because I hope that the people I know will be spared, I think it's just abrupt, and the people of S City are not particularly evil this time.其时我正忙着自己的生计，一面又在接洽本年秋天到山阳去当教员的事，竟没有工夫去访问他。待到有些余暇的时候，离他被辞退那时大约快有三个月了，可是还没有发生访问连殳的意思。有一天，我路过大街，偶然在旧书摊前停留，却不禁使我觉到震悚，因为在那里陈列着的一部汲古阁初印本《史记索隐》，正是连殳的书。他喜欢书，但不是藏书家，这种本子，在他是算作贵重的善本，非万不得已，不肯轻易变卖的。难道他失业刚才两三月，就一贫至此么？虽然他向来一有钱即随手散去，没有什么贮蓄。于是我便决意访问连殳去，顺便在街上买了一瓶烧酒，两包花生米，两个熏鱼头。
At that time, I was busy with my own livelihood, and while I was contacting about going to Shanyang to work as a teacher this fall, I didn't have time to visit him. When he had some free time, it had been almost three months since he was fired, but there was no intention of visiting Lian Shu yet. One day, I passed by the street and happened to stop in front of an old bookstall, but I couldn't help but feel shocked, because the first print of Jigu Pavilion "Historical Records Suoyin" displayed there was Lian Shu's book. He likes books, but he is not a bibliophile, and this kind of book is counted as a valuable rare book for him, and he refuses to sell it easily unless it is a last resort. Could it be that he has been unemployed for just two or three months, and he is so poor? Although he has always had money as soon as he has it, he has no savings. So I decided to visit Lian Shu and bought a bottle of soju, two packs of peanuts, and two smoked fish heads on the street.他的房门关闭着，叫了两声，不见答应。我疑心他睡着了，更加大声地叫，并且伸手拍着房门。
His door was closed, and he called twice, but there was no answer. I suspected that he was asleep, so I screamed even louder and reached out and knocked on the door.“出去了罢！”大良们的祖母，那三角眼的胖女人，从对面的窗口探出她花白的头来了，也大声说，不耐烦似的。
"Go out!" Daliang's grandmother, the fat woman with triangular eyes, poked her gray head out of the window opposite, and said loudly, as if impatient.“那里去了呢？”我问。
"Where did you go?" I asked.“那里去了？谁知道呢？——他能到那里去呢，你等着就是，一会儿总会回来的。”
"Where did it go? Who knows? ——He can go there, you just wait, he will always come back in a while. ”我便推开门走进他的客厅去。真是“一日不见，如隔三秋”，满眼是凄凉和空空洞洞，不但器具所余无几了，连书籍也只剩了在S城决没有人会要的几本洋装书。屋中间的圆桌还在，先前曾经常常围绕着忧郁慷慨的青年，怀才不遇的奇士和腌臜吵闹的孩子们的，现在却见得很闲静，只在面上蒙着一层薄薄的灰尘。我就在桌上放了酒瓶和纸包，拖过一把椅子来，靠桌旁对着房门坐下。
I pushed open the door and walked into his living room. It's really "not seen for a day, like three autumns", the eyes are full of desolation and emptiness, not only are there few utensils left, but even the books are only a few dress books that no one will want in S City. The round table in the middle of the room was still there, and the people who had once surrounded the melancholy and generous youth, the talented and the noisy children, were now very quiet, with only a thin layer of dust on their faces. I put a wine bottle and a paper bag on the table, dragged a chair, and sat down facing the door by the table.的确不过是“一会儿”，房门一开，一个人悄悄地阴影似的进来了，正是连殳。也许是傍晚之故罢，看去仿佛比先前黑，但神情却还是那样。
It was indeed just "a moment", as soon as the door opened, a person quietly came in like a shadow, it was Lian Shu. Maybe it's because of the evening, it looks darker than before, but the expression is still the same.“阿！你在这里？来得多久了？”他似乎有些喜欢。
"Ah! Are you here? How long has it been? He seemed to like it a little.“并没有多久。”我说，“你到那里去了？”
"It didn't take long." I said, "Where did you go?" ”“并没有到那里去，不过随便走走。”
"I didn't go there, but I just walked around."他也拖过椅子来，在桌旁坐下；我们便开始喝烧酒，一面谈些关于他的失业的事。但他却不愿意多谈这些；他以为这是意料中的事，也是自己时常遇到的事，无足怪，而且无可谈的。他照例只是一意喝烧酒，并且依然发些关于社会和历史的议论。不知怎地我此时看见空空的书架，也记起汲古阁初印本的《史记索隐》，忽而感到一种淡漠的孤寂和悲哀。
He also dragged his chair over and sat down at the table; We started drinking soju and talking about his unemployment. But he doesn't want to talk about it; He thought this was expected, and it was something he often encountered, so it was not surprising and there was nothing to talk about. As usual, he just drank soju and still posted some discussions about society and history. Somehow, I saw the empty bookshelves at this time, and I also remembered the first print of Jiguge's "Historical Records of Suoyin", and suddenly felt a kind of indifferent loneliness and sadness.“你的客厅这么荒凉……。近来客人不多了么？”
"Your living room is so desolate...... Don't you have many guests lately? ”“没有了。他们以为我心境不佳，来也无意味。心境不佳，实在是可以给人们不舒服的。冬天的公园，就没有人去……。”他连喝两口酒，默默地想着，突然，仰起脸来看着我问道，“你在图谋的职业也还是毫无把握罢？……”
"No, no. They thought I was in a bad mood and it was pointless to come. A bad mood can really make people uncomfortable. In winter, no one goes to ...... park. He took two sips of wine in a row, thought silently, and suddenly, he raised his face to look at me and asked, "Are you still unsure of the profession you are plotting?" ……”我虽然明知他已经有些酒意，但也不禁愤然，正想发话，只见他侧耳一听，便抓起一把花生米，出去了。门外是大良们笑嚷的声音。
Although I knew that he was already a little drunk, I couldn't help but be indignant, and I was about to speak, but when I saw him listen to it, he grabbed a handful of peanuts and went out. Outside the door was the sound of Daliang laughing.但他一出去，孩子们的声音便寂然，而且似乎都走了。他还追上去，说些话，却不听得有回答。他也就阴影似的悄悄地回来，仍将一把花生米放在纸包里。
But as soon as he went out, the children's voices fell silent, and they all seemed to be gone. He chased after him and said something, but he didn't hear an answer. He also came back quietly like a shadow, still putting a handful of peanuts in a paper bag.“连我的东西也不要吃了。”他低声，嘲笑似的说。
"Don't even eat my things." He said in a low voice, mockingly.“连殳，”我很觉得悲凉，却强装着微笑，说，“我以为你太自寻苦恼了。你看得人间太坏……。”
"Lian Shu," I felt very sad, but I forced a smile and said, "I thought you were too self-inflicted." You see that the world is too bad...... ”他冷冷的笑了一笑。
He smiled coldly.“我的话还没有完哩。你对于我们，偶而来访问你的我们，也以为因为闲着无事，所以来你这里，将你当作消遣的资料的罢？”
"My words are not over yet. You think that we who come to visit you occasionally think that because we are idle, we come to you and use you as a source of entertainment, right? ”“并不。但有时也这样想。或者寻些谈资。”
"No, it doesn't. But sometimes I think so. Or find some talk. ”“那你可错误了。人们其实并不这样。你实在亲手造了独头茧，将自己裹在里面了。你应该将世间看得光明些。”我叹惜着说。
"Then you are wrong. People don't. You have really made a one-headed cocoon with your own hands and wrapped yourself in it. You should see the world brighter. I sighed.“也许如此罢。但是，你说：那丝是怎么来的？——自然，世上也尽有这样的人，譬如，我的祖母就是。我虽然没有分得她的血液，却也许会继承她的运命。然而这也没有什么要紧，我早已豫先一起哭过了……。”
"Maybe that's it. But, you say: Where did the silk come from? ——Naturally, there are people like this in the world, for example, my grandmother is. Although I did not share her blood, I may inherit her fate. However, it doesn't matter, I have already cried together ...... Yu Xian. ”我即刻记起他祖母大殓时候的情景来，如在眼前一样。
I immediately remembered the scene of his grandmother's funeral, as if it were right in front of me.“我总不解你那时的大哭……。”于是鹘突地问了。
"I don't understand why you cried at that time...... So the hawk asked abruptly.“我的祖母入殓的时候罢？是的，你不解的。”他一面点灯，一面冷静地说，“你的和我交往，我想，还正因为那时的哭哩。你不知道，这祖母，是我父亲的继母；他的生母，他三岁时候就死去了。”他想着，默默地喝酒，吃完了一个熏鱼头。
"When my grandmother was buried? Yes, you don't understand. While lighting the lamp, he said calmly, "Your relationship with me, I think, is because of the crying at that time." You don't know, this grandmother is my father's stepmother; His biological mother, he died when he was three years old. He thought, drank silently, and finished a smoked fish head.“那些往事，我原是不知道的。只是我从小时候就觉得不可解。那时我的父亲还在，家景也还好，正月间一定要悬挂祖像，盛大地供养起来。看着这许多盛装的画像，在我那时似乎是不可多得的眼福。但那时，抱着我的一个女工总指了一幅像说：‘这是你自己的祖母。拜拜罢，保佑你生龙活虎似的大得快。’我真不懂得我明明有着一个祖母，怎么又会有什么‘自己的祖母’来。可是我爱这‘自己的祖母’，她不比家里的祖母一般老；她年青，好看，穿着描金的红衣服，戴着珠冠，和我母亲的像差不多。我看她时，她的眼睛也注视我，而且口角上渐渐增多了笑影：我知道她一定也是极其爱我的。
"I didn't know those past events. It's just that I've felt incomprehensible since I was a child. At that time, my father was still there, and the family scene was fine, so the ancestral statue must be hung and made a grand offering. Looking at these many costumed portraits, it seemed to me at that time a rare feast for the eyes. But at that time, a female worker holding me always pointed to a picture and said, 'This is your own grandmother.' Bye-bye, I wish you a fast life. I really don't understand how I have a grandmother, how can there be any 'own grandmother' when I have a grandmother. But I love this 'my own grandmother', who is no older than the grandmother at home; she is young and good-looking, wearing a red dress painted with gold and a beaded crown, and she looks like my mother. When I looked at her, her eyes were also fixed on me, and the smile gradually increased on the corners of her mouth: I knew she must love me very much.“然而我也爱那家里的，终日坐在窗下慢慢地做针线的祖母。虽然无论我怎样高兴地在她面前玩笑，叫她，也不能引她欢笑，常使我觉得冷冷地，和别人的祖母们有些不同。但我还爱她。可是到后来，我逐渐疏远她了；这也并非因为年纪大了，已经知道她不是我父亲的生母的缘故，倒是看久了终日终年的做针线，机器似的，自然免不了要发烦。但她却还是先前一样，做针线；管理我，也爱护我，虽然少见笑容，却也不加呵斥。直到我父亲去世，还是这样；后来呢，我们几乎全靠她做针线过活了，自然更这样，直到我进学堂……。”
"But I also love my grandmother who sits under the window all day and slowly does needlework. Although no matter how happily I joke and call her in front of her, I can't make her laugh, which often makes me feel cold, a little different from other grandmothers. But I still love her. But later, I gradually distanced myself from her; This is not because I am old, and I already know that she is not my father's biological mother, but because I have been doing needlework all day and year round, like a machine, it is inevitable that I will be annoyed. But she was still the same as before, making needles and threads; Manage me and love me, although I rarely see a smile, but I don't scold it. It was like this until my father died; Later, we almost all relied on her to do needlework for a living, and naturally it was even more like this until I entered the ...... school. ”灯火销沉下去了，煤油已经将涸，他便站起，从书架下摸出一个小小的洋铁壶来添煤油。
The lamp had sunk and the kerosene was about to dry up, so he stood up and took out a small iron kettle from under the bookshelf to add kerosene.“只这一月里，煤油已经涨价两次了……。”他旋好了灯头，慢慢地说。“生活要日见其困难起来。——她后来还是这样，直到我毕业，有了事做，生活比先前安定些；恐怕还直到她生病，实在打熬不住了，只得躺下的时候罢……。
"In this month alone, the price of kerosene has increased twice...... He rotated the lamp head and said slowly. "Life is becoming more difficult every day. ——She was still like this until I graduated, I had something to do, and my life was more stable than before. I'm afraid it's not until she gets sick, she really can't stand it anymore, so she has to lie down .......“她的晚年，据我想，是总算不很辛苦的，享寿也不小了，正无须我来下泪。况且哭的人不是多着么？连先前竭力欺凌她的人们也哭，至少是脸上很惨然。哈哈！……可是我那时不知怎地，将她的一生缩在眼前了，亲手造成孤独，又放在嘴里去咀嚼的人的一生。而且觉得这样的人还很多哩。这些人们，就使我要痛哭，但大半也还是因为我那时太过于感情用事……。
"Her old age, as far as I can tell, is not very hard, and her life is not small, so I don't need to cry. Besides, aren't there many people crying? Even the people who had tried their best to bully her before cried, at least on their faces. Ha ha! …… But at that time, somehow, I shrank her life in front of my eyes, causing loneliness with my own hands, and putting it in my mouth to chew on the life of a person. And I think there are many people like this. These people made me cry bitterly, but most of them were because I was too emotional at that time......“你现在对于我的意见，就是我先前对于她的意见。然而我的那时的意见，其实也不对的。便是我自己，从略知世事起，就的确逐渐和她疏远起来了……。”
"Your opinion of me now is what I said about her before. However, my opinion at that time was actually not right. It is myself that I have indeed gradually become estranged from her since I knew a little about ...... world. ”他沉默了，指间夹着烟卷，低了头，想着。灯火在微微地发抖。
He was silent, holding a cigarette between his fingers, lowering his head and thinking. The lights were trembling slightly.“呵，人要使死后没有一个人为他哭，是不容易的事呵。”他自言自语似的说；略略一停，便仰起脸来向我道，“想来你也无法可想。我也还得赶紧寻点事情做……。”
"Heh, it's not easy for a person to make no one cry for him after death." He said to himself; After a slight pause, he raised his face and said to me, "You can't even imagine it." I also have to find something to do ...... quickly. ”“你再没有可托的朋友了么？”我这时正是无法可想，连自己。
"Don't you have any friends to rely on?" I couldn't even imagine myself at this time.“那倒大概还有几个的，可是他们的境遇都和我差不多……。”
"There are probably a few more, but their situation is similar to mine......我辞别连殳出门的时候，圆月已经升在中天了，是极静的夜。
When I said goodbye to Lian Shu and went out, the full moon had already risen in the middle of the sky, and it was a very quiet night.四
Four山阳的教育事业的状况很不佳。我到校两月，得不到一文薪水，只得连烟卷也节省起来。但是学校里的人们，虽是月薪十五六元的小职员，也没有一个不是乐天知命的，仗着逐渐打熬成功的铜筋铁骨，面黄肌瘦地从早办公一直到夜，其间看见名位较高的人物，还得恭恭敬敬地站起，实在都是不必“衣食足而知礼节”的人民。我每看见这情状，不知怎的总记起连殳临别托付我的话来。他那时生计更其不堪了，窘相时时显露，看去似乎已没有往时的深沉，知道我就要动身，深夜来访，迟疑了许久，才吞吞吐吐地说道：
The state of education in Shanyang is very poor. I have been at school for two months, and I can't get a penny of salary, so I have to save even cigarettes. However, the people in the school, although they are small employees with a monthly salary of fifteen or sixteen yuan, none of them are not optimistic and know their fate, relying on the copper tendons and iron bones that have gradually succeeded, and their faces are yellow and thin from morning office to night. Every time I see this situation, I somehow always remember the words entrusted to me by Lian Shu at the end of the journey. He knew that I was about to leave, and he visited late at night, hesitated for a long time, and then said hesitantly:“不知道那边可有法子想？——便是钞写，一月二三十块钱的也可以的。我……。”
"I don't know if there is a way to think over there? ——Even if it is written in banknotes, twenty or thirty yuan a month is also fine. I....... ”我很诧异了，还不料他竟肯这样的迁就，一时说不出话来。
I was surprised, but I didn't expect him to be willing to accommodate me like this, and I was speechless for a while.“我……，我还得活几天……。”
"I ......, I have a few more days to live......."“那边去看一看，一定竭力去设法罢。”
"Go over there and take a look, and you will try your best to find a way."这是我当日一口承当的答话，后来常常自己听见，眼前也同时浮出连殳的相貌，而且吞吞吐吐地说道“我还得活几天”。到这些时，我便设法向各处推荐一番；但有什么效验呢，事少人多，结果是别人给我几句抱歉的话，我就给他几句抱歉的信。到一学期将完的时候，那情形就更加坏了起来。那地方的几个绅士所办的《学理周报》上，竟开始攻击我了，自然是决不指名的，但措辞很巧妙，使人一见就觉得我是在挑剔学潮，连推荐连殳的事，也算是呼朋引类。
This was my answer that day, and I often heard it myself, and Lian Shu's appearance also surfaced in front of me at the same time, and I said hesitantly, "I still have a few days to live." At these times, I try to recommend it everywhere; But what is the effect, there are few things and more people, and the result is that when others give me a few words of apology, I will give him a few letters of apology. By the end of the semester, the situation was even worse. In the "Xueli Weekly" run by a few gentlemen in that place, they actually began to attack me, and naturally they would never name me, but the wording was very ingenious, making people feel that I was picking on the trend of learning, and even recommending Lian Shu could be regarded as calling for friends.我只好一动不动，除上课之外，便关起门来躲着，有时连烟卷的烟钻出窗隙去，也怕犯了挑剔学潮的嫌疑。连殳的事，自然更是无从说起了。这样地一直到深冬。
I had no choice but to stay motionless, except for class, I closed the door and hid, and sometimes even the cigarette roll got out of the window gap, for fear of being suspected of being picky. Naturally, there is no way to talk about Lian Shu. This continued until late winter.下了一天雪，到夜还没有止，屋外一切静极，静到要听出静的声音来。我在小小的灯火光中，闭目枯坐，如见雪花片片飘坠，来增补这一望无际的雪堆；故乡也准备过年了，人们忙得很；我自己还是一个儿童，在后园的平坦处和一伙小朋友塑雪罗汉。雪罗汉的眼睛是用两块小炭嵌出来的，颜色很黑，这一闪动，便变了连殳的眼睛。
It snowed all day, and it didn't stop at night, and everything outside the house was extremely quiet, so quiet that I had to hear the sound of silence. I sat with my eyes closed in the small light, as if I saw snowflakes falling, to supplement this endless snowdrift; The hometown is also preparing for the New Year, and people are very busy; I myself was a child, and I made a snow arhat with a group of children on the flat side of the back garden. Xue Luohan's eyes were embedded with two small pieces of charcoal, and the color was very black, and this flash changed into Lian Shu's eyes.“我还得活几天！”仍是这样的声音。
"I still have a few days to live!" It is still like this.“为什么呢？”我无端地这样问，立刻连自己也觉得可笑了。
"Why?" I asked this for no reason, and immediately even I felt ridiculous.这可笑的问题使我清醒，坐直了身子，点起一枝烟卷来；推窗一望，雪果然下得更大了。听得有人叩门；不一会，一个人走进来，但是听熟的客寓杂役的脚步。他推开我的房门，交给我一封六寸多长的信，字迹很潦草，然而一瞥便认出“魏缄”两个字，是连殳寄来的。
This ridiculous question sobered me up, sat up straight, and lit a cigarette; Pushing the window and looking, the snow fell even more. I heard someone knocking on the door; After a while, a person walked in, but listened to the footsteps of the familiar guest housekeeper. He pushed open my door and handed me a letter more than six inches long, the handwriting was very scribbled, but at a glance I recognized the word "Wei Jian", which was sent by Lian Shu.这是从我离开S城以后他给我的第一封信。我知道他疏懒，本不以杳无消息为奇，但有时也颇怨他不给一点消息。待到接了这信，可又无端地觉得奇怪了，慌忙拆开来。里面也用了一样潦草的字体，写着这样的话：
This is the first letter he has given me since I left S City. I know he is lazy, and I am not surprised that there is no news, but sometimes I complain that he doesn't give any news. When I received the letter, I felt strange for no reason, so I hurriedly opened it. The same scribbled font is also used in it, which reads:“申飞……。
Shen Fei .......“我称你什么呢？我空着。你自己愿意称什么，你自己添上去罢。我都可以的。
"What do I call you? I'm empty. Whatever you want to weigh, add it yourself. I can do it too.“别后共得三信，没有复。这原因很简单：我连买邮票的钱也没有。
"After parting, I received three letters, but there was no reply. The reason for this is simple: I don't even have money for stamps.“你或者愿意知道些我的消息，现在简直告诉你罢：我失败了。先前，我自以为是失败者，现在知道那并不，现在才真是失败者了。先前，还有人愿意我活几天，我自己也还想活几天的时候，活不下去；现在，大可以无须了，然而要活下去……。
"You might want to know something about me, but now I'm telling you: I failed. Before, I thought I was a loser, but now I know that it is not, and now I am really a loser. Previously, there were people who wanted me to live for a few days, and I myself wanted to live for a few days, but I couldn't live; Now, you can do without need, but you have to live .......“然而就活下去么？
"But will you live?“愿意我活几天的，自己就活不下去。这人已被敌人诱杀了。谁杀的呢？谁也不知道。
"If I want to live for a few days, I won't be able to live myself. This man has been booby by the enemy. Who killed it? No one knows.“人生的变化多么迅速呵！这半年来，我几乎求乞了，实际，也可以算得已经求乞。然而我还有所为，我愿意为此求乞，为此冻馁，为此寂寞，为此辛苦。但灭亡是不愿意的。你看，有一个愿意我活几天的，那力量就这么大。然而现在是没有了，连这一个也没有了。同时，我自己也觉得不配活下去；别人呢？也不配的。同时，我自己又觉得偏要为不愿意我活下去的人们而活下去；好在愿意我好好地活下去的已经没有了，再没有谁痛心。使这样的人痛心，我是不愿意的。然而现在是没有了，连这一个也没有了。快活极了，舒服极了；我已经躬行我先前所憎恶，所反对的一切，拒斥我先前所崇仰，所主张的一切了。我已经真的失败，——然而我胜利了。
"How quickly life changes! In the past six months, I have almost begged, in fact, it can be regarded as begging. However, I still have something to do, I am willing to beg for this, to be hungry for this, to be lonely, and to work hard. But perishing is unwilling. You see, if there is someone who is willing to live for a few days, that power is so great. But now there is none, not even this one. At the same time, I myself feel that I am not worthy of living; What about others? It's not worth it. At the same time, I feel that I should live for those who do not want me to live; Fortunately, there is no one who wants me to live well, and no one is sad. I don't want to make such a person sad. But now there is none, not even this one. It is very happy and comfortable; I have done everything that I hated and opposed before, and rejected everything I admired and advocated. I have really failed,—— yet I have won.“你以为我发了疯么？你以为我成了英雄或伟人了么？不，不的。这事情很简单；我近来已经做了杜师长的顾问，每月的薪水就有现洋八十元了。
"Do you think I'm crazy? Do you think I've become a hero or a great man? No, no. It's simple; I have recently become a consultant to Commander Du, and my monthly salary is 80 yuan.“申飞……。
Shen Fei .......“你将以我为什么东西呢，你自己定就是，我都可以的。
"What do you think I am, you must be yourself, I can do it.“你大约还记得我旧时的客厅罢，我们在城中初见和将别时候的客厅。现在我还用着这客厅。这里有新的宾客，新的馈赠，新的颂扬，新的钻营，新的磕头和打拱，新的打牌和猜拳，新的冷眼和恶心，新的失眠和吐血……。
"You probably remember my old living room, the living room we first met and parted with in the city. I still use this living room. There are new guests, new gifts, new praises, new drill camps, new kowtows and arches, new cards and guessing, new cold eyes and nausea, new insomnia and vomiting blood.......“你前信说你教书很不如意。你愿意也做顾问么？可以告诉我，我给你办。其实是做门房也不妨，一样地有新的宾客和新的馈赠，新的颂扬……。
"You wrote in the previous letter that your teaching was very unsatisfactory. Would you like to be a consultant too? You can tell me, I'll do it for you." In fact, it might as well be a concierge, but there are also new guests, new gifts, and new praise .......“我这里下大雪了。你那里怎样？现在已是深夜，吐了两口血，使我清醒起来。记得你竟从秋天以来陆续给了我三封信，这是怎样的可以惊异的事呵。我必须寄给你一点消息，你或者不至于倒抽一口冷气罢。
"It's snowing heavily here. How are you there? It was late at night, and I vomited two mouthfuls of blood, which woke me up. I remember that you have given me three letters in succession since autumn, which is amazing. I have to send you a little message, you might not gasp.“此后，我大约不再写信的了，我这习惯是你早已知道的。何时回来呢？倘早，当能相见。——但我想，我们大概究竟不是一路的；那么，请你忘记我罢。我从我的真心感谢你先前常替我筹划生计。但是现在忘记我罢；我现在已经‘好’了。
"After that, I probably stopped writing letters, and you already know this habit. When will it come back? If only soon, we should be able to meet each other. ——But I think we probably didn't go all the way; Then, please forget me. I thank you from the bottom of my heart for planning my livelihood in the past. But now forget me; I'm 'good' now."
连殳。十二月十四日。”
Continuous killing. December 14th. ”这虽然并不使我“倒抽一口冷气”，但草草一看之后，又细看了一遍，却总有些不舒服，而同时可又夹杂些快意和高兴；又想，他的生计总算已经不成问题，我的担子也可以放下了，虽然在我这一面始终不过是无法可想。忽而又想写一封信回答他，但又觉得没有话说，于是这意思也立即消失了。
Although this did not make me "gasp", after a quick look at it, I looked at it again, but it was always a little uncomfortable, and at the same time, it was mixed with some pleasure and happiness; I also thought that his livelihood was finally no longer a problem, and my burden could be put down, although it was still unimaginable on my side. Suddenly I wanted to write a letter to answer him, but I felt that I had nothing to say, so the meaning immediately disappeared.我的确渐渐地在忘却他。在我的记忆中，他的面貌也不再时常出现。但得信之后不到十天，S城的学理七日报社忽然接续着邮寄他们的《学理七日报》来了。我是不大看这些东西的，不过既经寄到，也就随手翻翻。这却使我记起连殳来，因为里面常有关于他的诗文，如《雪夜谒连殳先生》，《连殳顾问高斋雅集》等等；有一回，《学理闲谭》里还津津地叙述他先前所被传为笑柄的事，称作“逸闻”，言外大有“且夫非常之人，必能行非常之事”的意思。
I was gradually forgetting him. In my memory, his face no longer appears from time to time. But less than ten days after receiving the letter, the Seven Days of Learning in S City suddenly mailed their "Seven Days of Learning" one after another. I don't look at these things much, but since they have been sent, I will flip through them casually. This reminds me of Lian Shu, because there are often poems about him in it, such as "Visiting Mr. Lian Shu on a Snowy Night", "Lian Shu Consultant Gao Zhai Yaji" and so on; Once, in "Xueli Gossip", he also recounted what he had previously been rumored to be a laughingstock, called "anecdotes", which means that "and an extraordinary person will be able to do extraordinary things".不知怎地虽然因此记起，但他的面貌却总是逐渐模胡；然而又似乎和我日加密切起来，往往无端感到一种连自己也莫明其妙的不安和极轻微的震颤。幸而到了秋季，这《学理七日报》就不寄来了；山阳的《学理周刊》上却又按期登起一篇长论文：《流言即事实论》。里面还说，关于某君们的流言，已在公正士绅间盛传了。这是专指几个人的，有我在内；我只好极小心，照例连吸烟卷的烟也谨防飞散。小心是一种忙的苦痛，因此会百事俱废，自然也无暇记得连殳。总之：我其实已经将他忘却了。
Somehow, although I remember this, his appearance is always gradually dull; However, it seems to be getting closer and closer to me day by day, and I often feel a kind of uneasiness and a very slight tremor that even I don't understand for no reason. Fortunately, in the fall, the "Seven Days of Academic Theory" was not sent; Shanyang's "Xueli Weekly" published a long paper on schedule: "Rumors are Facts". It also said that rumors about certain gentlemen have been spread among the fair gentry. This refers to a few people, including me; I had to be extremely careful, and as usual, even the cigarettes in the smoking rolls were not scattered. Being careful is a kind of busy pain, so everything will be wasted, and naturally there will be no time to remember Lian Shu. In short: I have actually forgotten about him.但我也终于敷衍不到暑假，五月底，便离开了山阳。
But I finally couldn't make it to the summer vacation, and at the end of May, I left Shanyang.五
Five从山阳到历城，又到太谷，一总转了大半年，终于寻不出什么事情做，我便又决计回S城去了。到时是春初的下午，天气欲雨不雨，一切都罩在灰色中；旧寓里还有空房，仍然住下。在道上，就想起连殳的了，到后，便决定晚饭后去看他。我提着两包闻喜名产的煮饼，走了许多潮湿的路，让道给许多拦路高卧的狗，这才总算到了连殳的门前。里面仿佛特别明亮似的。我想，一做顾问，连寓里也格外光亮起来了，不觉在暗中一笑。但仰面一看，门旁却白白的，分明帖着一张斜角纸。我又想，大良们的祖母死了罢；同时也跨进门，一直向里面走。
From Shanyang to Licheng, and then to Taigu, I turned around for more than half a year, and finally couldn't find anything to do, so I decided to go back to S City. It will be the afternoon of early spring, the weather will be rainy, and everything will be covered in gray; There are still vacant rooms in the old apartment, and they are still living there. On the road, I thought of Lian Shu, and when I arrived, I decided to see him after dinner. I carried two packs of Wenxi's famous boiled cakes and walked many damp roads, giving way to many dogs lying in the way, and finally arrived in front of Lian Shu's door. It seems to be particularly bright inside. I think that as soon as I became a consultant, even the apartment became particularly bright, and I couldn't help but smile secretly. But when I looked up, the door was white, and there was clearly a diagonal piece of paper pasted on it. I thought again, the grandmother of the great Liang died; At the same time, he also stepped into the door and walked inside.微光所照的院子里，放着一具棺材，旁边站一个穿军衣的兵或是马弁，还有一个和他谈话的，看时却是大良的祖母；另外还闲站着几个短衣的粗人。我的心即刻跳起来了。她也转过脸来凝视我。
In the courtyard illuminated by the dim light, there was a coffin, next to a soldier or horse in military uniform, and a person talking to him, but it was Daliang's grandmother; In addition, there were a few rough people in short clothes standing idly. My heart jumped instantly. She also turned her face to stare at me.“阿呀！您回来了？何不早几天……。”她忽而大叫起来。
"Oh! Are you back? Why not ...... a few days earlier. She suddenly shouted.“谁……谁没有了？”我其实是已经大概知道的了，但还是问。
"Who...... Who doesn't have it anymore? I actually knew it roughly, but I still asked.“魏大人，前天没有的。”
"Master Wei, I didn't have it the day before yesterday."我四顾，客厅里暗沉沉的，大约只有一盏灯；正屋里却挂着白的孝帏，几个孩子聚在屋外，就是大良二良们。
I looked around and saw that the living room was dark, with only about one light; There was a white filial piety curtain hanging in the main room, and a few children gathered outside the house, which were the two good people.“他停在那里，”大良的祖母走向前，指着说，“魏大人恭喜之后，我把正屋也租给他了；他现在就停在那里。”
"He stopped there," Daliang's grandmother stepped forward and pointed, "After Master Wei congratulated me, I also rented the main house to him; He stopped there now. ”孝帏上没有别的，前面是一张条桌，一张方桌；方桌上摆着十来碗饭菜。我刚跨进门，当面忽然现出两个穿白长衫的来拦住了，瞪了死鱼似的眼睛，从中发出惊疑的光来，钉住了我的脸。我慌忙说明我和连殳的关系，大良的祖母也来从旁证实，他们的手和眼光这才逐渐弛缓下去，默许我近前去鞠躬。
There is nothing else on the filial piety curtain, there is a table and a square table in front; There were more than a dozen bowls of rice on the square table. As soon as I stepped into the door, two men in white robes suddenly appeared in front of me to stop me, staring at me like dead fish, and a suspicious light came from them, nailing my face. I hurriedly explained my relationship with Lian Shu, and Daliang's grandmother also came to confirm that their hands and eyes gradually relaxed, acquiescing to me approaching and bowing.我一鞠躬，地下忽然有人呜呜的哭起来了，定神看时，一个十多岁的孩子伏在草荐上，也是白衣服，头发剪得很光的头上还络着一大绺苎麻丝。
As soon as I bowed, someone suddenly started crying on the ground, and when I looked at it, a teenage child was lying on the grass mat, also dressed in white, and his hair was cut very bare, and there was a large strand of ramie silk on his head.我和他们寒暄后，知道一个是连殳的从堂兄弟，要算最亲的了；一个是远房侄子。我请求看一看故人，他们却竭力拦阻，说是“不敢当”的。然而终于被我说服了，将孝帏揭起。
After I exchanged pleasantries with them, I learned that one was Lian Shang's cousin, who was the closest to me; One is a distant nephew. I asked to see my old friends, but they tried their best to stop me, saying that they "didn't dare to do it". However, I was finally persuaded to lift the filial piety curtain.这回我会见了死的连殳。但是奇怪！他虽然穿一套皱的短衫裤，大襟上还有血迹，脸上也瘦削得不堪，然而面目却还是先前那样的面目，宁静地闭着嘴，合着眼，睡着似的，几乎要使我伸手到他鼻子前面，去试探他可是其实还在呼吸着。
This time I met the dead Lian Shu. But strange! Although he was wearing a set of wrinkled shorts, there were blood stains on his collar, and his face was extremely thin, but his face was still the same as before, quietly closing his mouth, closing his eyes, as if he was asleep, almost making me reach in front of his nose to test him, but he was still breathing.一切是死一般静，死的人和活的人。我退开了，他的从堂兄弟却又来周旋，说“舍弟”正在年富力强，前程无限的时候，竟遽尔“作古”了，这不但是“衰宗”不幸，也太使朋友伤心。言外颇有替连殳道歉之意；这样地能说，在山乡中人是少有的。但此后也就沉默了，一切是死一般静，死的人和活的人。
Everything is as quiet as death, dead and alive. I stepped back, but his cousin came to deal with it again, saying that when the "younger brother" was in his prime and had unlimited prospects, he suddenly "became ancient", which was not only unfortunate for the "declining sect", but also made his friends too sad. Outside the words, there is a lot of apologies for Lian Shu; It can be said that people in the mountain villages are rare. But after that, there was silence, everything was as quiet as death, dead and alive.我觉得很无聊，怎样的悲哀倒没有，便退到院子里，和大良们的祖母闲谈起来。知道入殓的时候是临近了，只待寿衣送到；钉棺材钉时，“子午卯酉”四生肖是必须躲避的。她谈得高兴了，说话滔滔地泉流似的涌出，说到他的病状，说到他生时的情景，也带些关于他的批评。
I felt bored, and there was no sadness, so I retreated to the yard and chatted with the grandmother of the great goodmen. I knew that the time for the funeral was approaching, so I just waited for the shroud to be delivered; When nailing the coffin, the four zodiac signs of "Meridian and Maoyou" must be avoided. She talked happily, and her words gushed out like a spring, talking about his illness, about his life, and about him, and with some criticism about him.“你可知道魏大人自从交运之后，人就和先前两样了，脸也抬高起来，气昂昂的。对人也不再先前那么迂。你知道，他先前不是像一个哑子，见我是叫老太太的么？后来就叫‘老家伙’。唉唉，真是有趣。人送他仙居术，他自己是不吃的，就摔在院子里，——就是这地方，——叫道，‘老家伙，你吃去罢。’他交运之后，人来人往，我把正屋也让给他住了，自己便搬在这厢房里。他也真是一走红运，就与众不同，我们就常常这样说笑。要是你早来一个月，还赶得上看这里的热闹，三日两头的猜拳行令，说的说，笑的笑，唱的唱，做诗的做诗，打牌的打牌……。
"Do you know that since the delivery of the transport, Master Wei has been the same as before, and his face has been raised and high-spirited. People are no longer as pedantic as before. You know, didn't he look like a mute before, and when he saw me, he called me an old lady? Later, he was called 'old guy'. Oh, it's funny. When people gave him the immortal dwelling technique, he didn't eat it himself, so he threw it in the yard,—— and this is the place,—— shouting, 'Old guy, you can eat it.' After he delivered the goods, people came and went, and I gave him the main house to live in, and I moved into this wing room. He is also really different when he is popular, and we often joke like this. If you had come a month earlier, you would have been able to catch up with the excitement here, guessing boxing orders at two ends for three days, talking, laughing, singing, making poems, playing cards, playing cards, .......“他先前怕孩子们比孩子们见老子还怕，总是低声下气的。近来可也两样了，能说能闹，我们的大良们也很喜欢和他玩，一有空，便都到他的屋里去。他也用种种方法逗着玩；要他买东西，他就要孩子装一声狗叫，或者磕一个响头。哈哈，真是过得热闹。前两月二良要他买鞋，还磕了三个响头哩，哪，现在还穿着，没有破呢。”
He was afraid that the children were more afraid of the children than the children saw Lao Tzu, and he always whispered. Recently, it has been different, it can be said that it can make trouble, and our Da Liang also likes to play with him, and whenever they are free, they all go to his house. he also used various methods to tease and play; If he wants to buy something, he will ask the child to pretend to be a dog bark or kowtow. Haha, it's a lively life. Two months ago, Erliang asked him to buy shoes, and he kowtowed three times, hey, he is still wearing it, not broken. ”一个穿白长衫的人出来了，她就住了口。我打听连殳的病症，她却不大清楚，只说大约是早已瘦了下去的罢，可是谁也没理会，因为他总是高高兴兴的。到一个多月前，这才听到他吐过几回血，但似乎也没有看医生；后来躺倒了；死去的前三天，就哑了喉咙，说不出一句话。十三大人从寒石山路远迢迢地上城来，问他可有存款，他一声也不响。十三大人疑心他装出来的，也有人说有些生痨病死的人是要说不出话来的，谁知道呢……。
A man in a white robe came out, and she stopped. I inquired about Lian Shu's condition, but she didn't know much, only saying that she had already lost weight, but no one paid attention to it, because he was always happy. It wasn't until more than a month ago that I heard him vomit blood several times, but he didn't seem to see a doctor; Later he lay down; Three days before his death, he had a hoarse throat and couldn't say a word. The thirteenth lord came all the way to the city from Hanshi Mountain Road and asked him if he had any savings, but he didn't make a sound. The thirteenth lord was suspicious of what he pretended to have, and some people said that some people who died of tuberculosis were speechless, who knew .......“可是魏大人的脾气也太古怪，”她忽然低声说，“他就不肯积蓄一点，水似的化钱。十三大人还疑心我们得了什么好处。有什么屁好处呢？他就冤里冤枉胡里胡涂地化掉了。譬如买东西，今天买进，明天又卖出，弄破，真不知道是怎么一回事。待到死了下来，什么也没有，都糟掉了。要不然，今天也不至于这样地冷静……。
"But Master Wei's temper is too strange," she suddenly whispered, "He refuses to save a little and turn money like water." The thirteenth lord still doubts what benefits we have gained. What are the benefits of farts? He was wronged and dissolved. For example, if you buy something, buy it today, sell it tomorrow, and break it, I really don't know what's going on. When you die, there is nothing, everything is bad. Otherwise, I wouldn't be so calm ...... today.“他就是胡闹，不想办一点正经事。我是想到过的，也劝过他。这么年纪了，应该成家；照现在的样子，结一门亲很容易；如果没有门当户对的，先买几个姨太太也可以：人是总应该像个样子的。可是他一听到就笑起来，说道，‘老家伙，你还是总替别人惦记着这等事么？’你看，他近来就浮而不实，不把人的好话当好话听。要是早听了我的话，现在何至于独自冷清清地在阴间摸索，至少，也可以听到几声亲人的哭声……。”
"He just messed around and didn't want to do anything serious. I have thought about it and persuaded him. At such an age, you should start a family; As it is now, it is easy to get married; If you don't have the right one, you can buy a few aunts first: people should always look like this. But when he heard it, he laughed and said, 'Old guy, do you still always think about things like this for others?' You see, he has been superficial and unrealistic lately, and he doesn't take people's good words as good words. If I had listened to my words, why would I be groping alone in the underworld now, at least, I could hear a few cries of my relatives ....... ”一个店伙背了衣服来了。三个亲人便检出里衣，走进帏后去。不多久，孝帏揭起了，里衣已经换好，接着是加外衣。这很出我意外。一条土黄的军裤穿上了，嵌着很宽的红条，其次穿上去的是军衣，金闪闪的肩章，也不知道是什么品级，那里来的品级。到入棺，是连殳很不妥帖地躺着，脚边放一双黄皮鞋，腰边放一柄纸糊的指挥刀，骨瘦如柴的灰黑的脸旁，是一顶金边的军帽。
A shopkeeper came with clothes on his back. The three relatives checked out their underwear and walked into the back of the curtain. Not long after, the filial piety curtain was lifted, the underwear had been changed, and then the coat was added. It was a surprise to me. A pair of earthy yellow military pants were put on, with a wide red stripe embedded in them, and the second one was a military uniform, golden epaulettes, and I don't know what grade it was or where it came from. When he entered the coffin, Lian Shu was lying very inappropriately, with a pair of yellow leather shoes at his feet, a papier-mâché command knife at his waist, and a gold-rimmed military hat next to his skinny gray and black face.三个亲人扶着棺沿哭了一场，止哭拭泪；头上络麻线的孩子退出去了，三良也避去，大约都是属“子午卯酉”之一的。
Three relatives cried while holding the edge of the coffin, stopping crying and wiping tears; The children with twine, on their heads, withdrew, and Sanliang also avoided them, which were probably one of the "Meridian and Maoyou".粗人扛起棺盖来，我走近去最后看一看永别的连殳。
The rough man carried the coffin lid, and I approached to take a last look at the farewell Lian Shu.他在不妥帖的衣冠中，安静地躺着，合了眼，闭着嘴，口角间仿佛含着冰冷的微笑，冷笑着这可笑的死尸。
He lay quietly in his inappropriate clothes, his eyes closed, his mouth closed, and the corners of his mouth seemed to have a cold smile, sneering at this ridiculous corpse.敲钉的声音一响，哭声也同时迸出来。这哭声使我不能听完，只好退到院子里；顺脚一走，不觉出了大门了。潮湿的路极其分明，仰看太空，浓云已经散去，挂着一轮圆月，散出冷静的光辉。
As soon as the sound of knocking on the nails sounded, the cry burst out at the same time. I couldn't finish this cry, so I had to retreat to the yard; As soon as I walked away, I didn't realize I was out of the gate. The damp road was extremely distinct, and looking up at the space, the thick clouds had dispersed, and a full moon hung with a calm brilliance.我快步走着，仿佛要从一种沉重的东西中冲出，但是不能够。耳朵中有什么挣扎着，久之，久之，终于挣扎出来了，隐约像是长嗥，像一匹受伤的狼，当深夜在旷野中嗥叫，惨伤里夹杂着愤怒和悲哀。
I walked briskly, as if I was about to break out of something heavy, but I couldn't. There was something struggling in the ears, and after a long time, it finally struggled out, vaguely like a long howl, like a wounded wolf, howling in the wilderness late at night, with anger and sorrow mixed in the misery.我的心地就轻松起来，坦然地在潮湿的石路上走，月光底下。
My heart relaxed, and I walked calmly on the damp stone road, under the moonlight.一九二五年十月十七日毕。
Completed October 17, 1925.

伤逝

伤逝

伤逝

Died of injuries——涓生的手记
——Juansheng's notes如果我能够，我要写下我的悔恨和悲哀，为子君，为自己。
If I could, I would write down my regrets and sorrows, for my son and for myself.会馆里的被遗忘在偏僻里的破屋是这样地寂静和空虚。时光过得真快，我爱子君，仗着她逃出这寂静和空虚，已经满一年了。事情又这么不凑巧，我重来时，偏偏空着的又只有这一间屋。依然是这样的破窗，这样的窗外的半枯的槐树和老紫藤，这样的窗前的方桌，这样的败壁，这样的靠壁的板床。深夜中独自躺在床上，就如我未曾和子君同居以前一般，过去一年中的时光全被消灭，全未有过，我并没有曾经从这破屋子搬出，在吉兆胡同创立了满怀希望的小小的家庭。
The forgotten dilapidated houses in the guild hall are so silent and empty. Time flies so fast, I love Zijun, and it has been a year since I escaped from this silence and emptiness with her. Things are so unfortunate, when I come back, this room is the only one empty. It is still such a broken window, such a half-dead locust tree and old wisteria outside the window, such a square table in front of the window, such a broken wall, such a wooden bed against the wall. Lying alone in bed in the middle of the night, just like before I lived with Zijun, the past year has been wiped out, never, I have never moved out of this broken house and founded a small family full of hope in Jizhao Hutong.不但如此。在一年之前，这寂静和空虚是并不这样的，常常含着期待；期待子君的到来。在久待的焦躁中，一听到皮鞋的高底尖触着砖路的清响，是怎样地使我骤然生动起来呵！于是就看见带着笑涡的苍白的圆脸，苍白的瘦的臂膊，布的有条纹的衫子，玄色的裙。她又带了窗外的半枯的槐树的新叶来，使我看见，还有挂在铁似的老干上的一房一房的紫白的藤花。
Not only that. A year ago, this silence and emptiness were not like this, often with anticipation; Looking forward to the arrival of Zijun. In the long-awaited anxiety, when I heard the sound of the high-soled tips of leather shoes touching the brick road, how did it suddenly make me vivid! So I saw a pale round face with a swirl of laughter, pale thin arms, a striped shirt, and a dark skirt. She brought the new leaves of the half-dead locust tree outside the window, so that I could see the purple and white vine flowers hanging from the iron-like old trunk one by one.然而现在呢，只有寂静和空虚依旧，子君却决不再来了，而且永远，永远地！……
However, now, only silence and emptiness remain, but Zijun will never come again, and forever, forever! ……
子君不在我这破屋里时，我什么也看不见。在百无聊赖中，顺手抓过一本书来，科学也好，文学也好，横竖什么都一样；看下去，看下去，忽而自己觉得，已经翻了十多页了，但是毫不记得书上所说的事。只是耳朵却分外地灵，仿佛听到大门外一切往来的履声，从中便有子君的，而且橐橐地逐渐临近，——但是，往往又逐渐渺茫，终于消失在别的步声的杂沓中了。我憎恶那不像子君鞋声的穿布底鞋的长班的儿子，我憎恶那太像子君鞋声的常常穿着新皮鞋的邻院的搽雪花膏的小东西！
When Zijun is not in my dilapidated house, I can't see anything. In the midst of boredom, grab a book, whether it is science or literature, everything is the same; Looking on, looking on, I suddenly felt that I had turned more than ten pages, but I didn't remember what was said in the book. It's just that the ears are extraordinarily spiritual, as if they can hear all the footsteps outside the gate, from which there is Zijun's, and the baggage is gradually approaching,—— but it is often gradually faint, and finally disappears into the chaos of other footsteps. I hate the son of the long shift who wears cloth-soled shoes that doesn't sound like Zijun's shoes, and I hate the little thing in the neighbor's yard who often wears new leather shoes that sounds too much like Zijun's shoes!莫非她翻了车么？莫非她被电车撞伤了么？……
Could it be that she overturned the car? Could it be that she was hit by a tram? ……我便要取了帽子去看她，然而她的胞叔就曾经当面骂过我。
I was going to take my hat to see her, but her uncle once scolded me to my face.蓦然，她的鞋声近来了，一步响于一步，迎出去时，却已经走过紫藤棚下，脸上带着微笑的酒窝。她在她叔子的家里大约并未受气；我的心宁帖了，默默地相视片时之后，破屋里便渐渐充满了我的语声，谈家庭专制，谈打破旧习惯，谈男女平等，谈伊孛生，谈泰戈尔，谈雪莱……。她总是微笑点头，两眼里弥漫着稚气的好奇的光泽。壁上就钉着一张铜板的雪莱半身像，是从杂志上裁下来的，是他的最美的一张像。当我指给她看时，她却只草草一看，便低了头，似乎不好意思了。这些地方，子君就大概还未脱尽旧思想的束缚，——我后来也想，倒不如换一张雪莱淹死在海里的记念像或是伊孛生的罢；但也终于没有换，现在是连这一张也不知那里去了。
Suddenly, the sound of her shoes approached, and when she greeted her, she had already walked under the wisteria shed, with smiling dimples on her face. She was probably not angry at her uncle's house; My heart was at peace, and after looking at each other silently for a while, the dilapidated house was gradually filled with my voice, talking about family autocracy, breaking old habits, talking about equality between men and women, talking about Ibson, talking about Tagore, and talking about Shelley ....... She always smiled and nodded, her eyes filled with a childish and curious luster. A bust of Shelley nailed to the wall is a copper plate, cut from a magazine, and is his most beautiful portrait. When I pointed it out to her, she just looked at it hastily and lowered her head, as if she was embarrassed. In these places, Zijun probably hasn't escaped the shackles of old thoughts,—— and I later thought that it would be better to change to a memorial statue of Shelley drowning in the sea or Ibson's; But in the end, it was not changed, and now I don't even know where this one went.
“我是我自己的，他们谁也没有干涉我的权利！”
"I am my own, and none of them have the right to interfere with me!"这是我们交际了半年，又谈起她在这里的胞叔和在家的父亲时，她默想了一会之后，分明地，坚决地，沉静地说了出来的话。其时是我已经说尽了我的意见，我的身世，我的缺点，很少隐瞒；她也完全了解的了。这几句话很震动了我的灵魂，此后许多天还在耳中发响，而且说不出的狂喜，知道中国女性，并不如厌世家所说那样的无法可施，在不远的将来，便要看见辉煌的曙色的。
This is what we have been talking about for half a year, and when we talked about her uncle here and her father at home, she meditated for a while, and then said it clearly, resolutely, and quietly. At that time, I had already said all my opinions, my life experience, and my shortcomings, which I rarely hid; She also fully understood. These words shook my soul very much, and it was still ringing in my ears for many days afterwards, and I was indescribably ecstatic, knowing that Chinese women were not as powerless as the world-weary people said, and in the near future, they would see the dawn of glory.送她出门，照例是相离十多步远；照例是那鲇鱼须的老东西的脸又紧帖在脏的窗玻璃上了，连鼻尖都挤成一个小平面；到外院，照例又是明晃晃的玻璃窗里的那小东西的脸，加厚的雪花膏。她目不邪视地骄傲地走了，没有看见；我骄傲地回来。
Sending her out, as usual, is more than ten steps away; As usual, the face of the old catfish beard was pressed against the dirty window glass, and even the tip of his nose was squeezed into a small plane; When I arrived at the outer courtyard, as usual, it was the face of the little thing in the bright glass window, thickened alabaster paste. She walked away proudly without evil eyes, and did not see it; I came back proudly.“我是我自己的，他们谁也没有干涉我的权利！”这彻底的思想就在她的脑里，比我还透澈，坚强得多。半瓶雪花膏和鼻尖的小平面，于她能算什么东西呢？
"I am my own, and none of them have the right to interfere with me!" This thorough thought is in her head, much clearer and stronger than me. What can half a bottle of alabaster paste and a small plane at the tip of her nose be to her?
我已经记不清那时怎样地将我的纯真热烈的爱表示给她。岂但现在，那时的事后便已模胡，夜间回想，早只剩了一些断片了；同居以后一两月，便连这些断片也化作无可追踪的梦影。我只记得那时以前的十几天，曾经很仔细地研究过表示的态度，排列过措辞的先后，以及倘或遭了拒绝以后的情形。可是临时似乎都无用，在慌张中，身不由己地竟用了在电影上见过的方法了。后来一想到，就使我很愧恧，但在记忆上却偏只有这一点永远留遗，至今还如暗室的孤灯一般，照见我含泪握着她的手，一条腿跪了下去……。
I can't remember how I showed her my innocent and passionate love at that time. Not only now, but I am confused afterwards, and when I think back at night, there are only a few fragments left; After living together for a month or two, even these fragments turned into untraceable dreams. I only remember that in the past ten days or so, I had carefully studied the attitude expressed, arranged the order of the wording, and the situation after being rejected. But it seemed useless temporarily, and in a panic, I couldn't help but use the method I had seen in the movie. Later, when I thought about it, I was very ashamed, but in my memory, this is the only thing that will remain forever, and it is still like a lone lamp in a dark room, and I see me holding her hand with tears in my eyes, kneeling down on one leg .......不但我自己的，便是子君的言语举动，我那时就没有看得分明；仅知道她已经允许我了。但也还仿佛记得她脸色变成青白，后来又渐渐转作绯红，——没有见过，也没有再见的绯红；孩子似的眼里射出悲喜，但是夹着惊疑的光，虽然力避我的视线，张皇地似乎要破窗飞去。然而我知道她已经允许我了，没有知道她怎样说或是没有说。
Not only my own, but also Zijun's words and actions, I didn't see it clearly at that time; Only know that she has allowed me. But I still seem to remember that her face turned pale, and then gradually turned to crimson,—— which she had never seen or seen again; There was joy and sorrow in his childlike eyes, but there was a suspicious light, and although he tried to avoid my sight, he seemed to be about to break the window and fly away. However, I knew she had allowed me, not knowing what she said or didn't say.她却是什么都记得：我的言辞，竟至于读熟了的一般，能够滔滔背诵；我的举动，就如有一张我所看不见的影片挂在眼下，叙述得如生，很细微，自然连那使我不愿再想的浅薄的电影的一闪。夜阑人静，是相对温习的时候了，我常是被质问，被考验，并且被命复述当时的言语，然而常须由她补足，由她纠正，像一个丁等的学生。
But she remembered everything: my words were so good that they could be recited as if they were familiar with them; My actions are like a film hanging in front of me that I can't see, narrated vividly and subtly, and naturally even a flash of the shallow movie that makes me want to think about it again. I was often questioned, tested, and ordered to repeat the words of that time, but I often had to be supplemented and corrected by her, like a student of the Ding class.这温习后来也渐渐稀疏起来。但我只要看见她两眼注视空中，出神似的凝想着，于是神色越加柔和，笑窝也深下去，便知道她又在自修旧课了，只是我很怕她看到我那可笑的电影的一闪。但我又知道，她一定要看见，而且也非看不可的。
This review gradually became thinner later. But as long as I saw her eyes staring into the air, contemplating in a daze, her expression became softer and her smile deepened, and I knew that she was studying her old lesson again, but I was afraid that she would see a flash of my ridiculous movie. But I also know that she must see it, and she must see it.然而她并不觉得可笑。即使我自己以为可笑，甚而至于可鄙的，她也毫不以为可笑。这事我知道得很清楚，因为她爱我，是这样地热烈，这样地纯真。
However, she didn't find it ridiculous. Even if I thought it was ridiculous, or even contemptible, she didn't think it was ridiculous. I know this very well, because she loves me so passionately and so innocently.
去年的暮春是最为幸福，也是最为忙碌的时光。我的心平静下去了，但又有别一部分和身体一同忙碌起来。我们这时才在路上同行，也到过几回公园，最多的是寻住所。我觉得在路上时时遇到探索，讥笑，猥亵和轻蔑的眼光，一不小心，便使我的全身有些瑟缩，只得即刻提起我的骄傲和反抗来支持。她却是大无畏的，对于这些全不关心，只是镇静地缓缓前行，坦然如入无人之境。
Last year's late spring was the happiest and busiest time. My mind calmed down, but another part of me was busy with my body. We were only on the road at this time, and we had been to the park several times, most of which were looking for a place to live. I feel that I often encounter exploring, ridicule, obscene and contemptuous eyes on the road, and if I am not careful, my whole body will shrink a little, and I have to immediately mention my pride and resistance to support it. She was fearless, she didn't care about these at all, she just moved forward calmly and slowly, as if she were in a no-man's land.寻住所实在不是容易事，大半是被托辞拒绝，小半是我们以为不相宜。起先我们选择得很苛酷，——也非苛酷，因为看去大抵不像是我们的安身之所；后来，便只要他们能相容了。看了二十多处，这才得到可以暂且敷衍的处所，是吉兆胡同一所小屋里的两间南屋；主人是一个小官，然而倒是明白人，自住着正屋和厢房。他只有夫人和一个不到周岁的女孩子，雇一个乡下的女工，只要孩子不啼哭，是极其安闲幽静的。
Finding a place to live is not easy, most of them are rejected on excuses, and the other half are unsuitable for us. At first, we chose very harshly,—— not harshly, because it probably didn't look like our place to stay; Later, as long as they were compatible. After looking at more than 20 places, I got a place that could be temporarily perfunctory, which were two south houses in the same hut of Jizhao Hutong; The master is a small official, but he is an understanding person, and he lives in the main house and the side room. He only has his wife and a girl under the age of one, and hires a female worker in the countryside, as long as the child does not cry, it is extremely quiet and quiet.我们的家具很简单，但已经用去了我的筹来的款子的大半；子君还卖掉了她唯一的金戒指和耳环。我拦阻她，还是定要卖，我也就不再坚持下去了；我知道不给她加入一点股分去，她是住不舒服的。
Our furniture is simple, but it has used up most of the money I have raised; Zijun also sold her only gold ring and earrings. I stopped her, but I still had to sell it, so I didn't insist on it anymore; I know that if I don't add a little share to her, she will be uncomfortable.和她的叔子，她早经闹开，至于使他气愤到不再认她做侄女；我也陆续和几个自以为忠告，其实是替我胆怯，或者竟是嫉妒的朋友绝了交。然而这倒很清静。每日办公散后，虽然已近黄昏，车夫又一定走得这样慢，但究竟还有二人相对的时候。我们先是沉默的相视，接着是放怀而亲密的交谈，后来又是沉默。大家低头沉思着，却并未想着什么事。我也渐渐清醒地读遍了她的身体，她的灵魂，不过三星期，我似乎于她已经更加了解，揭去许多先前以为了解而现在看来却是隔膜，即所谓真的隔膜了。
With her uncle, she had a long argument, and he was so angry that he no longer recognized her as his niece; I also broke off relations with a few friends who thought they were giving advice, but were actually timid or jealous for me. However, it was very quiet. After the daily office is over, although it is close to dusk, and the coachman must be walking so slowly, but there is still a time when the two are facing each other. We first looked at each other in silence, then in a casual and intimate conversation, and then in silence. Everyone lowered their heads in thought, but they didn't think about anything. I also gradually read her body and her soul clearly, but in three weeks, I seemed to have learned more about her, removing many of the diaphragms that I thought I understood but now seem to be real, the so-called real diaphragm.子君也逐日活泼起来。但她并不爱花，我在庙会时买来的两盆小草花，四天不浇，枯死在壁角了，我又没有照顾一切的闲暇。然而她爱动物，也许是从官太太那里传染的罢，不一月，我们的眷属便骤然加得很多，四只小油鸡，在小院子里和房主人的十多只在一同走。但她们却认识鸡的相貌，各知道那一只是自家的。还有一只花白的叭儿狗，从庙会买来，记得似乎原有名字，子君却给它另起了一个，叫作阿随。我就叫它阿随，但我不喜欢这名字。
Zijun is also becoming more lively day by day. But she doesn't love flowers, the two pots of small grass flowers I bought at the temple fair didn't water for four days, and they withered in the corner, and I didn't have the leisure to take care of everything. However, she loved animals, perhaps it was contagious from the official wife, and in less than a month, our relatives suddenly increased a lot, four little oil chickens, walking with more than ten of the owner's dogs in the small yard. But they know the appearance of chickens, and each knows which one is their own. There is also a white-haired Ba'er dog, bought from the temple fair, I remember the original name, but Zijun gave it another one, called Asui. I call it Ah Sui, but I don't like the name.这是真的，爱情必须时时更新，生长，创造。我和子君说起这，她也领会地点点头。
This is true, love must be renewed, grown, and created all the time. When I talked to Zijun about this, she nodded understandingly.唉唉，那是怎样的宁静而幸福的夜呵！
Alas, what a quiet and happy night it was!
安宁和幸福是要凝固的，永久是这样的安宁和幸福。我们在会馆里时，还偶有议论的冲突和意思的误会，自从到吉兆胡同以来，连这一点也没有了；我们只在灯下对坐的怀旧谭中，回味那时冲突以后的和解的重生一般的乐趣。
Tranquility and happiness are to be solidified, and they are forever like this. When we were in the guild hall, there were occasional conflicts and misunderstandings of meaning, and since we arrived at Jizhao Hutong, there was not even this point; We only sit in the nostalgic tale under the lamp, reminiscing about the joy of rebirth after the conflict.子君竟胖了起来，脸色也红活了；可惜的是忙。管了家务便连谈天的工夫也没有，何况读书和散步。我们常说，我们总还得雇一个女工。
Zijun actually gained weight, and his face turned red; It's a pity that it's busy. After taking care of the housework, I don't even have time to talk, let alone read and walk. We often say that we always have to hire a female worker.这就使我也一样地不快活，傍晚回来，常见她包藏着不快活的颜色，尤其使我不乐的是她要装作勉强的笑容。幸而探听出来了，也还是和那小官太太的暗斗，导火线便是两家的小油鸡。但又何必硬不告诉我呢？人总该有一个独立的家庭。这样的处所，是不能居住的。
This made me equally unhappy, and when I came back in the evening, I often saw her hiding an unhappy color, and what made me especially unhappy was that she had to pretend to smile reluctantly. Fortunately, I heard about it, and it was still a secret fight with the little official's wife, and the fuse was the little oil chicken of the two families. But why don't you tell me? People should always have an independent family. Such a place is uninhabitable.我的路也铸定了，每星期中的六天，是由家到局，又由局到家。在局里便坐在办公桌前钞，钞，钞些公文和信件；在家里是和她相对或帮她生白炉子，煮饭，蒸馒头。我的学会了煮饭，就在这时候。
My path was also cast, six days a week, from home to bureau, and from bureau to home. In the bureau, he sat at the desk and wrote banknotes, banknotes, banknotes, and official documents and letters; At home, I was opposite her or helped her make a white stove, cook rice, and steam steamed buns. I learned to cook at this time.但我的食品却比在会馆里时好得多了。做菜虽不是子君的特长，然而她于此却倾注着全力；对于她的日夜的操心，使我也不能不一同操心，来算作分甘共苦。况且她又这样地终日汗流满面，短发都粘在脑额上；两只手又只是这样地粗糙起来。
But my food is much better than when I was in the hall. Although cooking is not Zijun's specialty, she is putting all her strength into this; My worries about her day and night made me unable not to worry about it together, so that I could count it as sharing the joys and sorrows. Moreover, she was sweating all day long, and her short hair was stuck to her forehead; The two hands just became rough like this.况且还要饲阿随，饲油鸡，……都是非她不可的工作。
Moreover, I also have to feed Asui and oil chickens,...... It is all a job that she must do.我曾经忠告她：我不吃，倒也罢了；却万不可这样地操劳。她只看了我一眼，不开口，神色却似乎有点凄然；我也只好不开口。然而她还是这样地操劳。
I once advised her: If I don't eat, it's fine; But you must not work like this. She only glanced at me and didn't speak, but her expression seemed a little sad; I had no choice but not to speak. And yet she still worked like this.
我所豫期的打击果然到来。双十节的前一晚，我呆坐着，她在洗碗。听到打门声，我去开门时，是局里的信差，交给我一张油印的纸条。我就有些料到了，到灯下去一看，果然，印着的就是：
The blow I was expecting really came. The night before the Double Tenth Festival, I was sitting and she was washing dishes. When I heard the knock on the door, when I went to open the door, it was the messenger in the bureau who handed me a mimeographed note. I had some expectations, and when I went under the lamp, sure enough, what was printed was:

这在会馆里时，我就早已料到了；那雪花膏便是局长的儿子的赌友，一定要去添些谣言，设法报告的。到现在才发生效验，已经要算是很晚的了。其实这在我不能算是一个打击，因为我早就决定，可以给别人去钞写，或者教读，或者虽然费力，也还可以译点书，况且《自由之友》的总编辑便是见过几次的熟人，两月前还通过信。但我的心却跳跃着。那么一个无畏的子君也变了色，尤其使我痛心；她近来似乎也较为怯弱了。
I had already expected this when I was in the guild hall; That alabaster paste is the director's son's gambling friend, and he must add some rumors and try to report it. It is already very late that it has only been effective. In fact, this cannot be regarded as a blow to me, because I have long decided that I can write for others, or teach them to read, or translate some books although it is laborious, and the editor-in-chief of "Friends of Freedom" is an acquaintance who has met several times, and he passed a letter two months ago. But my heart is beating. Then a fearless son also changed color, which made me especially sad; She also seems to be more timid lately.“那算什么。哼，我们干新的。我们……。”她说。
"What is that? Hmph, let's do a new one. We....... She said.她的话没有说完；不知怎地，那声音在我听去却只是浮浮的；灯光也觉得格外黯淡。人们真是可笑的动物，一点极微末的小事情，便会受着很深的影响。我们先是默默地相视，逐渐商量起来，终于决定将现有的钱竭力节省，一面登“小广告”去寻求钞写和教读，一面写信给《自由之友》的总编辑，说明我目下的遭遇，请他收用我的译本，给我帮一点艰辛时候的忙。
Her words were not finished; Somehow, the voice was just floating to me; The lighting also feels particularly dim. People are really ridiculous animals, and even the smallest things will be deeply affected. We first looked at each other silently, gradually discussed, and finally decided to save the existing money as much as possible, while publishing a "small advertisement" to seek banknotes and teaching, and on the other hand, I wrote to the editor-in-chief of "Friends of Freedom", explaining my current experience, asking him to accept my translation and help me in difficult times.“说做，就做罢！来开一条新的路！”
"If you say do it, just do it! Let's open a new path! ”我立刻转身向了书案，推开盛香油的瓶子和醋碟，子君便送过那黯淡的灯来。我先拟广告；其次是选定可译的书，迁移以来未曾翻阅过，每本的头上都满漫着灰尘了；最后才写信。
I immediately turned to the desk, pushed open the bottle and vinegar plate containing sesame oil, and Zijun sent the dim lamp. I draft an advertisement first; secondly, select translatable books, which have not been read since the migration, and each book is full of dust; Finally, I wrote a letter.我很费踌蹰，不知道怎样措辞好，当停笔凝思的时候，转眼去一瞥她的脸，在昏暗的灯光下，又很见得凄然。我真不料这样微细的小事情，竟会给坚决的，无畏的子君以这么显著的变化。她近来实在变得很怯弱了，但也并不是今夜才开始的。我的心因此更缭乱，忽然有安宁的生活的影像——会馆里的破屋的寂静，在眼前一闪，刚刚想定睛凝视，却又看见了昏暗的灯光。
I was very hesitant and didn't know how to say it, but when I stopped writing and thought, I glanced at her face in a blink of an eye, and in the dim light, it was very sad. I really didn't expect such a small thing to give such a significant change to the resolute and fearless Zijun. She has become very timid lately, but it didn't start tonight. My heart was even more turbulent because of this, and suddenly there was an image of a peaceful life - the silence of the dilapidated house in the guild hall, which flashed in front of my eyes, and I had just stared intently, but I saw the dim light again.许久之后，信也写成了，是一封颇长的信；很觉得疲劳，仿佛近来自己也较为怯弱了。于是我们决定，广告和发信，就在明日一同实行。大家不约而同地伸直了腰肢，在无言中，似乎又都感到彼此的坚忍崛强的精神，还看见从新萌芽起来的将来的希望。
After a long time, the letter was also written, and it was a long letter; I feel very tired, as if I have been relatively timid recently. So we decided that advertising and sending letters would be implemented together tomorrow. Everyone straightened their waists in unison, and in silence, they seemed to feel each other's perseverance and strong spirit, and also saw the hope of the future that had sprouted from the new ground.
外来的打击其实倒是振作了我们的新精神。局里的生活，原如鸟贩子手里的禽鸟一般，仅有一点小米维系残生，决不会肥胖；日子一久，只落得麻痹了翅子，即使放出笼外，早已不能奋飞。现在总算脱出这牢笼了，我从此要在新的开阔的天空中翱翔，趁我还未忘却了我的翅子的扇动。
The external blow actually cheered up our new spirit. Life in the bureau is like a bird in the hands of a bird dealer, with only a little millet to maintain the rest of life, and it will never be obese; After a long time, it only fell to paralyze its wings, and even if it was released out of the cage, it could no longer fly. Now that I have finally escaped from this cage, I will soar in the new open sky, while I have not forgotten the flapping of my wings.
小广告是一时自然不会发生效力的；但译书也不是容易事，先前看过，以为已经懂得的，一动手，却疑难百出了，进行得很慢。然而我决计努力地做，一本半新的字典，不到半月，边上便有了一大片乌黑的指痕，这就证明着我的工作的切实。《自由之友》的总编辑曾经说过，他的刊物是决不会埋没好稿子的。
Small advertisements will naturally not be effective for a while; But translating books is not an easy task, I have read it before, I thought I already understood it, but when I did it, it was full of difficulties and the progress was very slow. However, I decided to work hard, and in less than half a month, there was a large black finger mark on the side, which proved the practicality of my work. The editor-in-chief of Friends of Liberty once said that his publication will never bury good manuscripts.可惜的是我没有一间静室，子君又没有先前那么幽静，善于体帖了，屋子里总是散乱着碗碟，弥漫着煤烟，使人不能安心做事，但是这自然还只能怨我自己无力置一间书斋。然而又加以阿随，加以油鸡们。加以油鸡们又大起来了，更容易成为两家争吵的引线。
It's a pity that I don't have a quiet room, and Zijun is not as quiet as before, and he is good at being considerate, and the house is always scattered with dishes and filled with soot, making it impossible for people to do things with peace of mind, but this naturally can only blame me for not being able to afford a study. However, there is also the need for flattery and oil chickens. In addition, the oil chickens have grown up again, and it is easier to become the lead for the quarrel between the two families.加以每日的“川流不息”的吃饭；子君的功业，仿佛就完全建立在这吃饭中。吃了筹钱，筹来吃饭，还要喂阿随，饲油鸡；她似乎将先前所知道的全都忘掉了，也不想到我的构思就常常为了这催促吃饭而打断。即使在坐中给看一点怒色，她总是不改变，仍然毫无感触似的大嚼起来。
plus daily "endless" meals; Zijun's achievements seem to be completely built on this meal. ate to raise money, raised food, and fed Ah Sui and oil chicken; She seemed to have forgotten everything she knew before, and she didn't expect that my ideas were often interrupted by this urging to eat. Even if she showed a little anger while sitting, she always didn't change and still chewed it without feeling.使她明白了我的作工不能受规定的吃饭的束缚，就费去五星期。她明白之后，大约很不高兴罢，可是没有说。我的工作果然从此较为迅速地进行，不久就共译了五万言，只要润色一回，便可以和做好的两篇小品，一同寄给《自由之友》去。只是吃饭却依然给我苦恼。菜冷，是无妨的，然而竟不够；有时连饭也不够，虽然我因为终日坐在家里用脑，饭量已经比先前要减少得多。这是先去喂了阿随了，有时还并那近来连自己也轻易不吃的羊肉。她说，阿随实在瘦得太可怜，房东太太还因此嗤笑我们了，她受不住这样的奚落。
It made her understand that my work could not be bound by the prescribed meals, so it took five weeks. After she understood, she was probably very unhappy, but she didn't say anything. My work has been carried out relatively quickly since then, and soon I have translated a total of 50,000 words, and as long as I polish it once, I can send it to "Friends of Freedom" along with the two sketches I have made. Just eating still bothers me. It doesn't hurt to eat cold dishes, but it's not enough; Sometimes I don't even have enough food, although I have eaten much less than before because I sit at home all day and use my brain. This is the first to feed Ah Sui, and sometimes the mutton that even he doesn't eat easily recently. She said that Ah Sui was so thin that the landlady laughed at us because of this, and she couldn't stand such ridicule.于是吃我残饭的便只有油鸡们。这是我积久才看出来的，但同时也如赫胥黎的论定“人类在宇宙间的位置”一般，自觉了我在这里的位置：不过是叭儿狗和油鸡之间。
So the only ones who ate my leftover food were the oil chickens. This is something I have seen for a long time, but at the same time, as Huxley argued that "man's place in the universe", I am aware of my position here: it is just between a dog and an oil chicken.
后来，经多次的抗争和催逼，油鸡们也逐渐成为肴馔，我们和阿随都享用了十多日的鲜肥；可是其实都很瘦，因为它们早已每日只能得到几粒高粱了。从此便清静得多。只有子君很颓唐，似乎常觉得凄苦和无聊，至于不大愿意开口。我想，人是多么容易改变呵！
Later, after many struggles and pressures, the oil chickens gradually became a dish, and we and Ah Sui enjoyed the fresh fat for more than ten days; But they are actually very thin, because they can only get a few grains of sorghum a day. From then on, it was much quieter. Only Zijun is very decadent, and seems to often feel miserable and boring, so he is not willing to speak. I thought, how easy it is for people to change!但是阿随也将留不住了。我们已经不能再希望从什么地方会有来信，子君也早没有一点食物可以引它打拱或直立起来。冬季又逼近得这么快，火炉就要成为很大的问题；它的食量，在我们其实早是一个极易觉得的很重的负担。于是连它也留不住了。
But Ah Sui will not be able to keep it. We can no longer hope for a letter from somewhere, and Zijun has no food to lure it to arch or stand upright. Winter is approaching so fast, and the stove is going to be a big problem; Its food consumption has long been a heavy burden that we can easily feel. So even it can't be kept.倘使插了草标到庙市去出卖，也许能得几文钱罢，然而我们都不能，也不愿这样做。终于是用包袱蒙着头，由我带到西郊去放掉了，还要追上来，便推在一个并不很深的土坑里。
If we put a draft marker in the temple market and sell it, we might be able to get a few cents, but none of us can and do not want to do it. Finally, I covered my head with a baggage, and I took it to the western suburbs to let it go, and when I had to catch up, I pushed it into a pit that was not very deep.我一回寓，觉得又清静得多多了；但子君的凄惨的神色，却使我很吃惊。那是没有见过的神色，自然是为阿随。但又何至于此呢？我还没有说起推在土坑里的事。
When I returned to my residence, I felt much quieter; But Zijun's miserable look surprised me. It was a look that had never been seen before, and it was naturally for Asui. But why is it like this? I haven't talked about being pushed into the pit yet.到夜间，在她的凄惨的神色中，加上冰冷的分子了。
At night, in her miserable look, cold molecules were added.“奇怪。——子君，你怎么今天这样儿了？”我忍不住问。
"Strange. ——Zijun, why are you like this today? I couldn't help but ask.“什么？”她连看也不看我。
"What?" She didn't even look at me.“你的脸色……。”
"Your face is ......."“没有什么，——什么也没有。”
"Nothing,—— nothing."我终于从她言动上看出，她大概已经认定我是一个忍心的人。其实，我一个人，是容易生活的，虽然因为骄傲，向来不与世交来往，迁居以后，也疏远了所有旧识的人，然而只要能远走高飞，生路还宽广得很。现在忍受着这生活压迫的苦痛，大半倒是为她，便是放掉阿随，也何尝不如此。但子君的识见却似乎只是浅薄起来，竟至于连这一点也想不到了。
I finally saw from her words and actions that she had probably decided that I was a person of patience. In fact, it is easy for me to live alone, although because of pride, I have never interacted with the world, and after moving, I have alienated all old acquaintances, but as long as I can fly far away, the way to live is still very broad. Now enduring the pain of this oppression of life, most of it is for her, that is, to let go of Ah Sui, why not? But Zijun's insight seemed to be only shallow, and he couldn't even think of this.我拣了一个机会，将这些道理暗示她；她领会似的点头。然而看她后来的情形，她是没有懂，或者是并不相信的。
I chose an opportunity to hint to her these truths; She nodded in understanding. However, looking at her later situation, she did not understand, or did not believe it.天气的冷和神情的冷，逼迫我不能在家庭中安身。但是，往那里去呢？大道上，公园里，虽然没有冰冷的神情，冷风究竟也刺得人皮肤欲裂。我终于在通俗图书馆里觅得了我的天堂。
The cold weather and the cold look forced me to not settle down in my family. But where to go? On the avenue and in the park, although there is no cold look, the cold wind also pierces people's skin. I finally found my paradise in the popular library.那里无须买票；阅书室里又装着两个铁火炉。纵使不过是烧着不死不活的煤的火炉，但单是看见装着它，精神上也就总觉得有些温暖。书却无可看：旧的陈腐，新的是几乎没有的。
There is no need to buy tickets there; There are two iron stoves in the reading room. Even though it is just a furnace burning immortal coal, just seeing it in it always makes me feel a little warm in spirit. There is nothing to read in books: the old is stale, and the new is almost non-existent.好在我到那里去也并非为看书。另外时常还有几个人，多则十余人，都是单薄衣裳，正如我，各人看各人的书，作为取暖的口实。这于我尤为合式。道路上容易遇见熟人，得到轻蔑的一瞥，但此地却决无那样的横祸，因为他们是永远围在别的铁炉旁，或者靠在自家的白炉边的。
Fortunately, I didn't go there to read a book. In addition, there are often a few people, as many as more than ten people, all in thin clothes, just like me, everyone reads their own books as an excuse for warmth. This is especially suitable for me. It is easy to meet acquaintances on the road and get contemptuous glances, but there is no such misfortune here, because they are always around other iron furnaces, or leaning against their own white furnaces.那里虽然没有书给我看，却还有安闲容得我想。待到孤身枯坐，回忆从前，这才觉得大半年来，只为了爱，——盲目的爱，——而将别的人生的要义全盘疏忽了。第一，便是生活。人必生活着，爱才有所附丽。世界上并非没有为了奋斗者而开的活路；我也还未忘却翅子的扇动，虽然比先前已经颓唐得多……。
Although there are no books for me to read, there is still leisure for me to think. When I sat alone and recalled the past, I felt that for more than half a year, I had neglected the essence of other lives just for the sake of loving ,—— blind love,—— and neglecting the essence of other lives. First, it is life. People must live, and love is attached to beauty. There is no way to live for strivers in the world; I have not forgotten the flapping of my wings, although it is much more decadent than before......屋子和读者渐渐消失了，我看见怒涛中的渔夫，战壕中的兵士，摩托车中的贵人，洋场上的投机家，深山密林中的豪杰，讲台上的教授，昏夜的运动者和深夜的偷儿……。子君，——不在近旁。她的勇气都失掉了，只为着阿随悲愤，为着做饭出神；然而奇怪的是倒也并不怎样瘦损……。
The house and the reader gradually disappeared, and I saw fishermen in the raging waves, soldiers in the trenches, nobles on motorcycles, speculators on the ocean field, heroes in the deep mountains and forests, professors on the podium, activists in the dark and thieves in the middle of the night, ....... You are not ,—— nearby. She lost all her courage, just for Ah Sui's grief and anger, for cooking fascinated; However, the strange thing is that it is not so thin .......冷了起来，火炉里的不死不活的几片硬煤，也终于烧尽了，已是闭馆的时候。又须回到吉兆胡同，领略冰冷的颜色去了。近来也间或遇到温暖的神情，但这却反而增加我的苦痛。记得有一夜，子君的眼里忽而又发出久已不见的稚气的光来，笑着和我谈到还在会馆时候的情形，时时又很带些恐怖的神色。我知道我近来的超过她的冷漠，已经引起她的忧疑来，只得也勉力谈笑，想给她一点慰藉。然而我的笑貌一上脸，我的话一出口，却即刻变为空虚，这空虚又即刻发生反响，回向我的耳目里，给我一个难堪的恶毒的冷嘲。
When it got cold, the few pieces of hard coal in the stove that were not dead or alive finally burned out, and it was time to close. I have to go back to Jizhao Hutong again to appreciate the cold color. Recently, I have occasionally encountered warm expressions, but this has only increased my pain. I remember one night, Zijun's eyes suddenly emitted a childish light that had not been seen for a long time, and he smiled and talked to me about the situation when he was still in the guild hall, and he always had a very terrifying look. I knew that my recent indifference to her had aroused her worries, so I had to try my best to talk and laugh, trying to give her some comfort. However, as soon as my smile came to my face, as soon as my words were spoken, they immediately turned into emptiness, and this emptiness immediately reverberated, returning to my ears and eyes, giving me an embarrassing and vicious sneer.子君似乎也觉得的，从此便失掉了她往常的麻木似的镇静，虽然竭力掩饰，总还是时时露出忧疑的神色来，但对我却温和得多了。
Zijun also seemed to feel that she had lost her usual numb composure since then, and although she tried her best to hide it, she always showed a worried look from time to time, but she was much gentler with me.我要明告她，但我还没有敢，当决心要说的时候，看见她孩子一般的眼色，就使我只得暂且改作勉强的欢容。但是这又即刻来冷嘲我，并使我失却那冷漠的镇静。
I wanted to tell her clearly, but I didn't dare yet, and when I was determined to say it, I saw her childlike eyes, so I had to change to a reluctant smile for the time being. But this immediately came to mock me and made me lose my indifferent composure.她从此又开始了往事的温习和新的考验，逼我做出许多虚伪的温存的答案来，将温存示给她，虚伪的草稿便写在自己的心上。我的心渐被这些草稿填满了，常觉得难于呼吸。我在苦恼中常常想，说真实自然须有极大的勇气的；假如没有这勇气，而苟安于虚伪，那也便是不能开辟新的生路的人。不独不是这个，连这人也未尝有！
Since then, she has begun to review the past and new tests, forcing me to make many hypocritical answers to warm up, showing her warmth, and the hypocritical draft is written in my heart. My heart was gradually filled with these drafts, and I often felt that it was difficult to breathe. I often think in my distress that it takes great courage to say that truth is natural; If you don't have this courage and settle for hypocrisy, you are a person who cannot open up a new way of life. Not only is this not the case, but even this person has never had it!子君有怨色，在早晨，极冷的早晨，这是从未见过的，但也许是从我看来的怨色。我那时冷冷地气愤和暗笑了；她所磨练的思想和豁达无畏的言论，到底也还是一个空虚，而对于这空虚却并未自觉。她早已什么书也不看，已不知道人的生活的第一着是求生，向着这求生的道路，是必须携手同行，或奋身孤往的了，倘使只知道着一个人的衣角，那便是虽战士也难于战斗，只得一同灭亡。
Zijun had a resentful expression, in the morning, in the extremely cold morning, which I had never seen before, but maybe it was a resentment from my point of view. I was coldly angry and laughed secretly; The thoughts and open-minded remarks she honed were still empty in the end, but she was not conscious of this emptiness. She has long read no books, and she no longer knows that the first thing in people's lives is to survive, and on this road to survival, they must walk hand in hand, or strive to be alone, if they only know the corners of one person's clothes, it is difficult for even warriors to fight, and they have to perish together.我觉得新的希望就只在我们的分离；她应该决然舍去，——我也突然想到她的死，然而立刻自责，忏悔了。幸而是早晨，时间正多，我可以说我的真实。我们的新的道路的开辟，便在这一遭。
I think the new hope lies only in our separation; She should have given up resolutely,—— and I suddenly thought of her death, but I immediately blamed myself and repented. Fortunately, it was morning, and there was a lot of time, and I could say my truth. This is the opening of our new path.我和她闲谈，故意地引起我们的往事，提到文艺，于是涉及外国的文人，文人的作品：《诺拉》，《海的女人》。称扬诺拉的果决……。也还是去年在会馆的破屋里讲过的那些话，但现在已经变成空虚，从我的嘴传入自己的耳中，时时疑心有一个隐形的坏孩子，在背后恶意地刻毒地学舌。
I chatted with her, deliberately evoking our past and mentioning literature and art, so I involved foreign literati and literati's works: "Nora" and "The Woman of the Sea". Praise Nora's decisive ....... It was still the same words I said in the dilapidated house of the guild hall last year, but now it has become empty, from my mouth to my ears, and I always suspect that there is an invisible bad boy, maliciously learning to speak behind my back.她还是点头答应着倾听，后来沉默了。我也就断续地说完了我的话，连余音都消失在虚空中了。
She nodded in agreement to listen, and then fell silent. I finished speaking intermittently, and even the aftermath disappeared into the void.“是的。”她又沉默了一会，说，“但是，……涓生，我觉得你近来很两样了。可是的？你，——你老实告诉我。”
"Yes." She was silent for a while and said, "But,...... Juansheng, I think you've been very different lately. But yes? You ,—— tell me honestly. ”我觉得这似乎给了我当头一击，但也立即定了神，说出我的意见和主张来：新的路的开辟，新的生活的再造，为的是免得一同灭亡。
I felt that this seemed to give me a blow in the head, but I immediately calmed down and expressed my opinions and opinions: the opening of a new road, the reconstruction of a new life, so as not to perish together.临末，我用了十分的决心，加上这几句话：
At the end of the day, I used a lot of determination to add these few sentences:“……况且你已经可以无须顾虑，勇往直前了。你要我老实说；是的，人是不该虚伪的。我老实说罢：因为，因为我已经不爱你了！但这于你倒好得多，因为你更可以毫无挂念地做事……。”
“…… Besides, you can already move forward bravely without worry. You want me to be honest; Yes, people should not be hypocritical. I'll be honest: because, because I don't love you anymore! But it's much better for you, because you can do things without worry...... ”我同时豫期着大的变故的到来，然而只有沉默。她脸色陡然变成灰黄，死了似的；瞬间便又苏生，眼里也发了稚气的闪闪的光泽。这眼光射向四处，正如孩子在饥渴中寻求着慈爱的母亲，但只在空中寻求，恐怖地回避着我的眼。
At the same time, I was expecting a big change, but there was silence. Her face suddenly turned gray and yellow, as if she was dead; He came back to life in an instant, and his eyes also had a childish sparkle. This gaze shot everywhere, like a child seeking a loving mother in hunger and thirst, but only in the air, terrifying to avoid my eyes.我不能看下去了，幸而是早晨，我冒着寒风径奔通俗图书馆。
I couldn't read it anymore, but fortunately, in the morning, I braved the cold wind and ran to the popular library.在那里看见《自由之友》，我的小品文都登出了。这使我一惊，仿佛得了一点生气。我想，生活的路还很多，——但是，现在这样也还是不行的。
I saw "Friends of Freedom" there, and my sketches were published. This shocked me, as if I had a little anger. I think there are still many ways to live,—— but this is still not possible now.我开始去访问久已不相闻问的熟人，但这也不过一两次；他们的屋子自然是暖和的，我在骨髓中却觉得寒冽。夜间，便蜷伏在比冰还冷的冷屋中。
I began to visit acquaintances I hadn't heard of for a long time, but only once or twice; Their house was naturally warm, but I felt cold in my marrow. At night, he curled up in a cold room that was colder than ice.冰的针刺着我的灵魂，使我永远苦于麻木的疼痛。生活的路还很多，我也还没有忘却翅子的扇动，我想。——我突然想到她的死，然而立刻自责，忏悔了。
The ice needle pierced my soul, leaving me forever suffering from numbing pain. There are still many ways to live, and I haven't forgotten the flapping of my wings, I think. ——I suddenly thought of her death, but immediately blamed myself and repented.在通俗图书馆里往往瞥见一闪的光明，新的生路横在前面。她勇猛地觉悟了，毅然走出这冰冷的家，而且，——毫无怨恨的神色。我便轻如行云，漂浮空际，上有蔚蓝的天，下是深山大海，广厦高楼，战场，摩托车，洋场，公馆，晴明的闹市，黑暗的夜……。
In popular libraries, there is often a glimpse of a flash of light, and a new way of life lies ahead. She bravely realized and resolutely walked out of this cold home, and ,—— no resentment. I was as light as a cloud, floating in the air, with a blue sky above, mountains and seas, spacious buildings and high-rise buildings, battlefields, motorcycles, foreign fields, mansions, sunny downtown areas, and dark night .......而且，真的，我豫感得这新生面便要来到了。
And, really, I have a feeling that this new face is coming.
我们总算度过了极难忍受的冬天，这北京的冬天；就如蜻蜓落在恶作剧的坏孩子的手里一般，被系着细线，尽情玩弄，虐待，虽然幸而没有送掉性命，结果也还是躺在地上，只争着一个迟早之间。
We finally survived the extremely unbearable winter, this winter in Beijing; Just like a dragonfly falling into the hands of a mischievous bad child, it was tied with a thin thread, played with to its heart's content, abused, and although fortunately it did not lose its life, it still lay on the ground, only fighting for a matter of time.写给《自由之友》的总编辑已经有三封信，这才得到回信，信封里只有两张书券：两角的和三角的。我却单是催，就用了九分的邮票，一天的饥饿，又都白挨给于己一无所得的空虚了。
I already had three letters to the editor-in-chief of Friends of Liberty, and only then did I get a reply, and there were only two book coupons in the envelope: the two-corner one and the triangular one. I just urged it, so I used a nine-cent stamp, and a day's hunger was in vain to the emptiness of gaining nothing.然而觉得要来的事，却终于来到了。
However, what I thought was coming finally came.这是冬春之交的事，风已没有这么冷，我也更久地在外面徘徊；待到回家，大概已经昏黑。就在这样一个昏黑的晚上，我照常没精打采地回来，一看见寓所的门，也照常更加丧气，使脚步放得更缓。但终于走进自己的屋子里了，没有灯火；摸火柴点起来时，是异样的寂寞和空虚！
This is the turn of winter and spring, the wind is not so cold anymore, and I have been wandering outside for longer; By the time I got home, it was probably dark. On such a dark night, I came back listless as usual, and when I saw the door of the apartment, I was even more dejected as usual, and my steps slowed down. But finally I walked into my house, there was no light; When you touch a match and light it, it is strangely lonely and empty!正在错愕中，官太太便到窗外来叫我出去。
In the midst of the astonishment, Mrs. Guan came out the window and asked me to go out.“今天子君的父亲来到这里，将她接回去了。”她很简单地说。
"Today's father came here and took her back." She said simply.这似乎又不是意料中的事，我便如脑后受了一击，无言地站着。
This didn't seem to be expected, so I stood speechless as if I had been hit in the back of the head.“她去了么？”过了些时，我只问出这样一句话。
"Did she go?" After a while, I only asked this sentence.“她去了。”
"She went."“她，——她可说什么？”
"What can she say ,—— her?"“没说什么。单是托我见你回来时告诉你，说她去了。”
"Didn't say anything. Just ask me to tell you when I see you come back and say that she went. ”我不信；但是屋子里是异样的寂寞和空虚。我遍看各处，寻觅子君；只见几件破旧而黯淡的家具，都显得极其清疏，在证明着它们毫无隐匿一人一物的能力。我转念寻信或她留下的字迹，也没有；只是盐和干辣椒，面粉，半株白菜，却聚集在一处了，旁边还有几十枚铜元。这是我们两人生活材料的全副，现在她就郑重地将这留给我一个人，在不言中，教我借此去维持较久的生活。
I don't believe it; But there was a strange loneliness and emptiness in the house. I looked everywhere, looking for Zijun; I saw a few dilapidated and bleak pieces of furniture, all of which looked extremely sparse, proving that they had no ability to hide one person or one thing. I turned to the letter or the handwriting she had left, but there was none; It's just salt and dried chili peppers, flour, and half a cabbage, but they are gathered in one place, and there are dozens of copper dollars next to them. This is the whole set of living materials for the two of us, and now she solemnly leaves this to me alone, and without saying a word, teaches me to use it to maintain a longer life.我似乎被周围所排挤，奔到院子中间，有昏黑在我的周围；正屋的纸窗上映出明亮的灯光，他们正在逗着孩子玩笑。我的心也沉静下来，觉得在沉重的迫压中，渐渐隐约地现出脱走的路径：深山大泽，洋场，电灯下的盛筵，壕沟，最黑最黑的深夜，利刃的一击，毫无声响的脚步……。
I seemed to be ostracized by my surroundings, and ran to the middle of the yard, and there was darkness around me; The paper windows of the main house shine bright lights, and they are making fun of children. My heart also calmed down, and I felt that in the heavy pressure, the path to escape gradually faintly appeared: deep mountains and marshes, foreign fields, grand banquets under electric lights, trenches, the darkest and darkest nights, the blow of a sharp blade, and the silent footsteps .......心地有些轻松，舒展了，想到旅费，并且嘘一口气。
My heart was a little relaxed, I stretched, thought of the travel expenses, and sighed.
躺着，在合着的眼前经过的豫想的前途，不到半夜已经现尽；暗中忽然仿佛看见一堆食物，这之后，便浮出一个子君的灰黄的脸来，睁了孩子气的眼睛，恳托似的看着我。我一定神，什么也没有了。
lying down, the future of the co-author passed before the eyes of the author was exhausted before midnight; Suddenly I seemed to see a pile of food in the dark, and after that, a gray and yellow face of Zijun surfaced, opened his childish eyes, and looked at me pleadingly. I must be God, there is nothing.但我的心却又觉得沉重。我为什么偏不忍耐几天，要这样急急地告诉她真话的呢？现在她知道，她以后所有的只是她父亲——儿女的债主——的烈日一般的严威和旁人的赛过冰霜的冷眼。此外便是虚空。负着虚空的重担，在严威和冷眼中走着所谓人生的路，这是怎么可怕的事呵！而况这路的尽头，又不过是——连墓碑也没有的坟墓。
But my heart feels heavy. Why can't I endure for a few days to tell her the truth in such a hurry? Now she knew that all she had in the future was the scorching majesty of her father, the creditor of her children, and the frosty cold eyes of others. In addition, there is emptiness. Carrying the burden of the void and walking the so-called road of life in the eyes of Yan Wei and cold eyes, how terrible it is! And at the end of this road, it is nothing more than a grave without even a tombstone.我不应该将真实说给子君，我们相爱过，我应该永久奉献她我的说谎。如果真实可以宝贵，这在子君就不该是一个沉重的空虚。谎语当然也是一个空虚，然而临末，至多也不过这样地沉重。
I shouldn't tell the truth to Zijun, we have loved each other, and I should dedicate my lies to her forever. If truth can be precious, this should not be a heavy emptiness in Zijun. Of course, the lie is also an emptiness, but at the end of the day, it is only so heavy at best.我以为将真实说给子君，她便可以毫无顾虑，坚决地毅然前行，一如我们将要同居时那样。但这恐怕是我错误了。她当时的勇敢和无畏是因为爱。
I thought that if I told Zijun the truth, she would be able to move forward resolutely and resolutely without any worries, just like when we were going to live together. But I'm afraid I was wrong. Her bravery and fearlessness at that time was because of love.我没有负着虚伪的重担的勇气，却将真实的重担卸给她了。她爱我之后，就要负了这重担，在严威和冷眼中走着所谓人生的路。
I did not have the courage to bear the burden of hypocrisy, but I unburdened her with the burden of truth. After she loves me, she will bear this burden and walk the so-called road of life in the eyes of strictness and coldness.我想到她的死……。我看见我是一个卑怯者，应该被摈于强有力的人们，无论是真实者，虚伪者。然而她却自始至终，还希望我维持较久的生活……。
I thought about her ...... death. I see that I am a coward who should be excluded from powerful people, whether real or hypocritical. However, she always wanted me to maintain a longer ...... life.
我要离开吉兆胡同，在这里是异样的空虚和寂寞。我想，只要离开这里，子君便如还在我的身边；至少，也如还在城中，有一天，将要出乎意表地访我，像住在会馆时候似的。
I am leaving Jizhao Hutong, where there is a strange emptiness and loneliness. I think that as long as I leave here, Zijun will still be by my side; At least, as if I were still in the city, one day I would visit me unexpectedly, just like when I lived in the guild hall.然而一切请托和书信，都是一无反响；我不得已，只好访问一个久不问候的世交去了。他是我伯父的幼年的同窗，以正经出名的拔贡，寓京很久，交游也广阔的。
However, all requests and letters have no response; I had no choice but to visit a friend who hadn't said hello for a long time. He was my uncle's childhood classmate, famous for his seriousness, lived in Beijing for a long time, and had a wide range of friends.大概因为衣服的破旧罢，一登门便很遭门房的白眼。好容易才相见，也还相识，但是很冷落。我们的往事，他全都知道了。
Probably because of the shabby clothes, he was looked down upon by the concierge as soon as he entered the door. It's easy to meet, and we still know each other, but it's very cold. He knows all about our past.“自然，你也不能在这里了，”他听了我托他在别处觅事之后，冷冷地说，“但那里去呢？很难。——你那，什么呢，你的朋友罢，子君，你可知道，她死了。”
"Naturally, you can't be here either," he said coldly after hearing me ask him to look elsewhere, "but where are you going?" Hard. ——You, what, your friend, Zijun, do you know that she is dead. ”我惊得没有话。
I was speechless in shock.“真的？”我终于不自觉地问。
"Really?" I finally asked unconsciously.“哈哈。自然真的。我家的王升的家，就和她家同村。”
"Haha. Naturally, really. My family's Wang Sheng's home is in the same village as her family. ”“但是，——不知道是怎么死的？”
"But,—— I don't know how he died?"“谁知道呢。总之是死了就是了。”
"Who knows. In short, it's just dead. ”我已经忘却了怎样辞别他，回到自己的寓所。我知道他是不说谎话的；子君总不会再来的了，像去年那样。她虽是想在严威和冷眼中负着虚空的重担来走所谓人生的路，也已经不能。她的命运，已经决定她在我所给与的真实——无爱的人间死灭了！
I had forgotten how to say goodbye to him and return to my apartment. I know he doesn't lie; Zijun will never come again, like last year. Although she wanted to carry the burden of emptiness in the face of strict authority and cold eyes to walk the so-called road of life, she couldn't do it anymore. Her fate has determined the truth I gave her - the love world she died!自然，我不能在这里了；但是，“那里去呢？”
Naturally, I can't be here anymore; But, "Where are you going?" ”四围是广大的空虚，还有死的寂静。死于无爱的人们的眼前的黑暗，我仿佛一一看见，还听得一切苦闷和绝望的挣扎的声音。
There is a vast emptiness all around, and there is a dead silence. I seemed to see the darkness in front of the eyes of those who died without love, and I could hear all the voices of distress and desperate struggle.
我还期待着新的东西到来，无名的，意外的。但一天一天，无非是死的寂静。
I was also looking forward to the arrival of something new, nameless, unexpected. But day by day, it is nothing more than the silence of death.我比先前已经不大出门，只坐卧在广大的空虚里，一任这死的寂静侵蚀着我的灵魂。死的寂静有时也自己战栗，自己退藏，于是在这绝续之交，便闪出无名的，意外的，新的期待。
I didn't go out much more than before, just sitting and lying in the vast emptiness, allowing the silence of death to erode my soul. The silence of death sometimes trembles and retreats by itself, so in this continuous friendship, there is a flash of nameless, unexpected, and new expectations.一天是阴沉的上午，太阳还不能从云里面挣扎出来，连空气都疲乏着。耳中听到细碎的步声和咻咻的鼻息，使我睁开眼。大致一看，屋子里还是空虚；但偶然看到地面，却盘旋着一匹小小的动物，瘦弱的，半死的，满身灰土的……。
It was a gloomy morning, and the sun couldn't struggle out of the clouds, and even the air was tired. I heard the sound of small footsteps and snorting in my ears, which opened my eyes. At a glance, the house was still empty; But when I happened to see the ground, there was a small animal, thin, half-dead, covered in dust .......我一细看，我的心就一停，接着便直跳起来。
When I looked closely, my heart stopped, and then it jumped up.那是阿随。它回来了。
That's Ah Sui. It's back.
我的离开吉兆胡同，也不单是为了房主人们和他家女工的冷眼，大半就为着这阿随。但是，“那里去呢？”新的生路自然还很多，我约略知道，也间或依稀看见，觉得就在我面前，然而我还没有知道跨进那里去的第一步的方法。
My departure from Jizhao Hutong was not only for the cold eyes of the homeowners and his female workers, but mostly for this Ah Sui. But, "Where are you going?" "There are naturally many new ways to live, I know a little about it, and sometimes I vaguely see it, and I feel that it is right in front of me, but I still don't know how to take the first step to get there.经过许多回的思量和比较，也还只有会馆是还能相容的地方。依然是这样的破屋，这样的板床，这样的半枯的槐树和紫藤，但那时使我希望，欢欣，爱，生活的，却全都逝去了，只有一个虚空，我用真实去换来的虚空存在。
After many times of thinking and comparison, only the guild hall is still a place that can be compatible. It was still such a dilapidated house, such a wooden bed, such a half-dead locust tree and wisteria, but what made me hope, rejoice, love, and live at that time was all gone, and there was only one void, the existence of the void that I exchanged for reality.
新的生路还很多，我必须跨进去，因为我还活着。但我还不知道怎样跨出那第一步。有时，仿佛看见那生路就像一条灰白的长蛇，自己蜿蜒地向我奔来，我等着，等着，看看临近，但忽然便消失在黑暗里了。
There are still many new ways to live, and I have to step in because I am still alive. But I don't know how to take that first step. Sometimes, as if I saw the road of life like a long gray snake, meandering towards me, I waited, waited, looked close, but suddenly disappeared into the darkness.初春的夜，还是那么长。长久的枯坐中记起上午在街头所见的葬式，前面是纸人纸马，后面是唱歌一般的哭声。我现在已经知道他们的聪明了，这是多么轻松简截的事。
The night of early spring is still so long. In the long sitting, I remembered the funeral I saw on the street in the morning, with paper people and paper horses in front and singing cries behind. I now know how smart they are, how easy and simple it is.然而子君的葬式却又在我的眼前，是独自负着虚空的重担，在灰白的长路上前行，而又即刻消失在周围的严威和冷眼里了。
However, Zijun's funeral was in front of my eyes, carrying the burden of the void alone, moving forward on the long gray road, and immediately disappeared into the majesty and cold eyes around him.我愿意真有所谓鬼魂，真有所谓地狱，那么，即使在孽风怒吼之中，我也将寻觅子君，当面说出我的悔恨和悲哀，祈求她的饶恕；否则，地狱的毒焰将围绕我，猛烈地烧尽我的悔恨和悲哀。
I am willing to really have so-called ghosts, there is really so-called hell, then, even in the roar of evil winds, I will find Zijun, express my regret and sorrow to my face, and pray for her forgiveness; Otherwise, the poisonous flames of hell will surround me, violently burning my remorse and sorrow.我将在孽风和毒焰中拥抱子君，乞她宽容，或者使她快意……。
I will embrace Zijun in the evil wind and poisonous flames, beg her for forgiveness, or make her happy .......
但是，这却更虚空于新的生路；现在所有的只是初春的夜，竟还是那么长。我活着，我总得向着新的生路跨出去，那第一步，——却不过是写下我的悔恨和悲哀，为子君，为自己。
However, this is more empty than a new way of life; Now all is the early spring night, and it is still so long. I am alive, I have to step out of a new way of life, but the first step ,—— just write down my regrets and sorrows, for my son and for myself.我仍然只有唱歌一般的哭声，给子君送葬，葬在遗忘中。
I still only cried like singing, burying Zijun in oblivion.我要遗忘；我为自己，并且要不再想到这用了遗忘给子君送葬。
I want to forget; I want to do it for myself, and I don't want to think about it anymore.我要向着新的生路跨进第一步去，我要将真实深深地藏在心的创伤中，默默地前行，用遗忘和说谎做我的前导……。
I want to take the first step towards a new path of life, I want to hide the truth deeply in the trauma of my heart, move forward silently, and use forgetting and lying as my leading .......一九二五年十月二十一日毕。
Completed October 21, 1925.

弟兄

弟兄

弟兄

brothers公益局一向无公可办，几个办事员在办公室里照例的谈家务。秦益堂捧着水烟筒咳得喘不过气来，大家也只得住口。久之，他抬起紫涨着的脸来了，还是气喘吁吁的，说：
The Public Welfare Bureau has always had nothing to do, and several clerks talked about housework as usual in the office. Qin Yitang coughed out of breath while holding the hookah, and everyone had to keep their mouths shut. After a long time, he raised his purple face, still out of breath, and said:“到昨天，他们又打起架来了，从堂屋一直打到门口。我怎么喝也喝不住。”他生着几根花白胡子的嘴唇还抖着。“老三说，老五折在公债票上的钱是不能开公账的，应该自己赔出来……。”
"Yesterday, they fought again, from the hall to the door. I can't drink it anymore. "He had a few white bearded lips and were shaking. The third child said that the money on the public bond bill cannot be opened in the public account, and it should be paid ...... by itself. ”“你看，还是为钱，”张沛君就慷慨地从破的躺椅上站起来，两眼在深眼眶里慈爱地闪烁。“我真不解自家的弟兄何必这样斤斤计较，岂不是横竖都一样？……”
"You see, it's still for money," Zhang Peijun stood up generously from the broken recliner, his eyes flashing lovingly in his deep eyes. "I really don't understand why my brother has to care so much, isn't it the same horizontally and vertically? ……”“像你们的弟兄，那里有呢。”益堂说。
"Like your brothers, where is it?" Yitang said.“我们就是不计较，彼此都一样。我们就将钱财两字不放在心上。这么一来，什么事也没有了。有谁家闹着要分的，我总是将我们的情形告诉他，劝他们不要计较。益翁也只要对令郎开导开导……。”
"We just don't care, we're all the same. We don't take the word money to heart. In this way, nothing happened. If anyone is making a fuss about dividing it, I always tell him about our situation and advise them not to care. Yi Weng only needs to enlighten Ling Lang ....... ”
“那～～～～里……。”益堂摇头说。
"That~~~~ ......." Yitang shook his head and said.“这大概也怕不成。”汪月生说，于是恭敬地看着沛君的眼，“像你们的弟兄，实在是少有的；我没有遇见过。你们简直是谁也没有一点自私自利的心思，这就不容易……。”
"I'm probably not afraid of this." Wang Yuesheng said, so he looked into Pei Jun's eyes respectfully, "Like your brothers, it is really rare; I haven't met one. None of you have any selfish thoughts, which is not easy to ....... ”“他们一直从堂屋打到大门口……。”益堂说。
"They kept calling from the hall to the gate......" Yitang said.“令弟仍然是忙？……”月生问。
"Brother Ling is still busy? ......" Yuesheng asked.“还是一礼拜十八点钟功课，外加九十三本作文，简直忙不过来。这几天可是请假了，身热，大概是受了一点寒……。”
"It's still eighteen o'clock a week, plus ninety-three compositions, and it's simply too busy. I have asked for leave these days, and I have a fever, probably because I have suffered a little cold ....... ”“我看这倒该小心些，”月生郑重地说。“今天的报上就说，现在时症流行……。”
"I think you should be careful about this," Yuesheng said solemnly. "Today's newspaper said that the epidemic is ...... now."“什么时症呢？”沛君吃惊了，赶忙地问。
"What is the symptom?" Pei Jun was surprised and hurriedly asked.“那我可说不清了。记得是什么热罢。”
"Then I can't tell. Remember what the heat was. ”沛君迈开步就奔向阅报室去。
Pei Jun took a step and ran towards the newspaper reading room.“真是少有的，”月生目送他飞奔出去之后，向着秦益堂赞叹着。“他们两个人就像一个人。要是所有的弟兄都这样，家里那里还会闹乱子。我就学不来……。”
"It's really rare," Yuesheng admired Qin Yitang after watching him gallop out. "The two of them are like one person. If all the brothers were like this, there would be trouble at home. I can't learn ....... ”“说是折在公债票上的钱不能开公账……。”益堂将纸煤子插在纸煤管子里，恨恨地说。
"It is said that the money folded on the public bond cannot be opened in the public account...... Yitang inserted the paper coal into the paper coal pipe and said hatefully.办公室中暂时的寂静，不久就被沛君的步声和叫听差的声音震破了。他仿佛已经有什么大难临头似的，说话有些口吃了，声音也发着抖。他叫听差打电话给普悌思普大夫，请他即刻到同兴公寓张沛君那里去看病。
The temporary silence in the office was soon broken by Pei Jun's footsteps and the sound of calling for a messenger. He seemed to have some catastrophe imminent, his speech was a little stuttering, and his voice was shaking. He asked the attendant to call Dr. Pu Tisipu and asked him to go to Zhang Peijun in Tongxing Apartment immediately to see a doctor.月生便知道他很着急，因为向来知道他虽然相信西医，而进款不多，平时也节省，现在却请的是这里第一个有名而价贵的医生。于是迎了出去，只见他脸色青青的站在外面听听差打电话。
Yuesheng knew that he was very anxious, because he had always known that although he believed in Western medicine, he did not pay much and usually saved, but now he invited the first famous and expensive doctor here. So I greeted him out, and I saw him standing outside with a pale face listening to the messenger's call.“怎么了？”
"What's wrong?"“报上说……说流行的是猩……猩红热。我我午后来局的时，靖甫就是满脸通红……。已经出门了么？请……请他们打电话找，请他即刻来，同兴公寓，同兴公寓……。”
The newspaper said...... It is said that the popular is the ape...... Scarlet fever. When I came to the game in the afternoon, Jingfu's face was flushed ....... Have you already gone out? Please...... Please call and ask him to come immediately, Tongxing Apartment, Tongxing Apartment...... ”他听听差打完电话，便奔进办公室，取了帽子。汪月生也代为着急，跟了进去。
After hearing the messenger call, he ran into the office and took his hat. Wang Yuesheng was also anxious and followed.“局长来时，请给我请假，说家里有病人，看医生……。”他胡乱点着头，说。
"When the director comes, please ask me for leave, saying that there are patients at home and see a doctor...... He nodded randomly and said.“你去就是。局长也未必来。”月生说。
"You go. The director may not come. Yuesheng said.但是他似乎没有听到，已经奔出去了。
But he didn't seem to hear it and had already run out.
他到路上，已不再较量车价如平时一般，一看见一个稍微壮大，似乎能走的车夫，问过价钱，便一脚跨上车去，道，“好。只要给我快走！”
When he saw a slightly larger driver who seemed to be able to walk, he asked for the price, so he stepped into the car and said, "Okay." Just give me a quick go!" ”公寓却如平时一般，很平安，寂静；一个小伙计仍旧坐在门外拉胡琴。他走进他兄弟的卧室，觉得心跳得更利害，因为他脸上似乎见得更通红了，而且发喘。他伸手去一摸他的头，又热得炙手。
The apartment was as usual, very peaceful and quiet; A young man was still sitting outside the door playing the huqin. He went into his brother's bedroom and felt his heart beat harder, because his face seemed to be redder and he was panting. He reached out and touched his head, and it was hot again.“不知道是什么病？不要紧罢？”靖甫问，眼里发出忧疑的光，显系他自己也觉得不寻常了。
"I don't know what kind of disease it is? It doesn't matter? Jingfu asked, his eyes shining with suspicion, obviously he himself felt unusual.“不要紧的，……伤风罢了。”他支梧着回答说。
"It doesn't matter,...... It's just a cold. He replied with a straight end.他平时是专爱破除迷信的，但此时却觉得靖甫的样子和说话都有些不祥，仿佛病人自己就有了什么豫感。这思想更使他不安，立即走出，轻轻地叫了伙计，使他打电话去问医院：可曾找到了普大夫？
He usually loves to break superstitions, but at this time he felt that Jingfu's appearance and speech were a little ominous, as if the patient himself had some premonition. This thought made him even more uneasy, and he immediately walked out, gently called the guy, and asked him to call the hospital and ask: Have you ever found Dr. Pu?“就是啦，就是啦。还没有找到。”伙计在电话口边说。
"That's right, that's right. Not found yet. The guy said on the phone.沛君不但坐不稳，这时连立也不稳了；但他在焦急中，却忽而碰着了一条生路：也许并不是猩红热。然而普大夫没有找到，……同寓的白问山虽然是中医，或者于病名倒还能断定的，但是他曾经对他说过好几回攻击中医的话：况且追请普大夫的电话，他也许已经听到了……。
Pei Jun not only sat unsteadily, but also stood unsteadily at this time; But in his anxiety, he suddenly encountered a way out: maybe it wasn't scarlet fever. However, Dr. Pu did not find ,...... Although Bai Wenshan, who lives in the same residence, is a traditional Chinese medicine doctor, or the name of the disease can still be determined, he has attacked Chinese medicine to him several times: Moreover, he may have heard the call of Dr. Pu to ask for .......然而他终于去请白问山。
However, he finally went to ask Bai Wenshan.白问山却毫不介意，立刻戴起玳瑁边墨晶眼镜，同到靖甫的房里来。他诊过脉，在脸上端详一回，又翻开衣服看了胸部，便从从容容地告辞。沛君跟在后面，一直到他的房里。
Bai Wenshan didn't mind, and immediately put on tortoiseshell-rimmed ink crystal glasses and came to Jingfu's room together. He diagnosed the pulse, looked at his face, opened his clothes and looked at his chest, and then calmly took his leave. Pei Jun followed him all the way to his room.他请沛君坐下，却是不开口。
He asked Pei Jun to sit down, but he didn't speak.“问山兄，舍弟究竟是……？”他忍不住发问了。
"Ask Brother Shan, ...... is my brother?" He couldn't help but ask.“红斑痧。你看他已经‘见点’了。”
"Erythematosus. You see that he has already 'seen something'. ”“那么，不是猩红热？”沛君有些高兴起来。
"So, isn't it scarlet fever?" Pei Jun was a little happy.“他们西医叫猩红热，我们中医叫红斑痧。”
"Their Western medicine is called scarlet fever, and our Chinese medicine is called erythematosus."这立刻使他手脚觉得发冷。
This immediately made his hands and feet feel cold.“可以医么？”他愁苦地问。
"Can it be treated?" He asked sadly.“可以。不过这也要看你们府上的家运。”
"Yes. But it also depends on the family luck of your house. ”他已经胡涂得连自己也不知道怎样竟请白问山开了药方，从他房里走出；但当经过电话机旁的时候，却又记起普大夫来了。他仍然去问医院，答说已经找到了，可是很忙，怕去得晚，须待明天早晨也说不定的。然而他还叮嘱他要今天一定到。
He had already scribbled so badly that he didn't even know how to ask Bai Wenshan to prescribe the prescription and walk out of his room; But when I passed by the phone, I remembered that Dr. Pu was coming. He still went to the hospital and replied that he had found it, but he was very busy and afraid that he would go late, and he might have to wait until tomorrow morning. However, he also told him to arrive today.他走进房去点起灯来看，靖甫的脸更觉得通红了，的确还现出更红的点子，眼睑也浮肿起来。他坐着，却似乎所坐的是针毡；在夜的渐就寂静中，在他的翘望中，每一辆汽车的汽笛的呼啸声更使他听得分明，有时竟无端疑为普大夫的汽车，跳起来去迎接。但是他还未走到门口，那汽车却早经驶过去了；惘然地回身，经过院落时，见皓月已经西升，邻家的一株古槐，便投影地上，森森然更来加浓了他阴郁的心地。
He walked into the room and lit the lamp to see, Jingfu's face felt even redder, and indeed a redder idea, and his eyelids were also swollen. He sits, but it seems that he is sitting on a needle felt; In the gradual silence of the night, in his gaze, the whistle of each car made him hear it clearly, and sometimes he jumped up to greet it for no reason, suspecting it was Dr. Pu's car. But before he reached the door, the car had already passed by; Turning around in a daze, when he passed the courtyard, he saw that the bright moon had risen in the west, and an ancient locust tree next door was projected on the ground, which made his gloomy heart even more gloomy.突然一声乌鸦叫。这是他平日常常听到的；那古槐上就有三四个乌鸦窠。但他现在却吓得几乎站住了，心惊肉跳地轻轻地走进靖甫的房里时，见他闭了眼躺着，满脸仿佛都见得浮肿；但没有睡，大概是听到脚步声了，忽然张开眼来，那两道眼光在灯光中异样地凄怆地发闪。
Suddenly a crow crowed. This is what he often hears on weekdays; There were three or four crow's nests on the ancient locust tree. But now he was so frightened that he almost stopped, and when he walked into Jingfu's room gently in shock, he saw him lying with his eyes closed, his face seemed to be swollen; But he didn't sleep, probably because he heard footsteps, and suddenly opened his eyes, and those two eyes flashed strangely and sadly in the light.“信么？”靖甫问。
"Do you believe it?" Jingfu asked.“不，不。是我。”他吃惊，有些失措，吃吃地说，“是我。我想还是去请一个西医来，好得快一点。他还没有来……。”
"No, no. It's me. He was surprised and a little confused, and said stutteringly, "It's me." I think it's better to invite a Western doctor to get better quickly. He hasn't come ...... yet. ”靖甫不答话，合了眼。他坐在窗前的书桌旁边，一切都静寂，只听得病人的急促的呼吸声，和闹钟的札札地作响。忽而远远地有汽车的汽笛发响了，使他的心立刻紧张起来，听它渐近，渐近，大概正到门口，要停下了罢，可是立刻听出，驶过去了。这样的许多回，他知道了汽笛声的各样：有如吹哨子的，有如击鼓的，有如放屁的，有如狗叫的，有如鸭叫的，有如牛吼的，有如母鸡惊啼的，有如呜咽的……。他忽而怨愤自己：为什么早不留心，知道，那普大夫的汽笛是怎样的声音的呢？
Jingfu did not answer and closed his eyes. He sat at the desk in front of the window, everything was silent, only the rapid breathing of the patient and the rustling of the alarm clock. Suddenly, the whistle of a car sounded in the distance, which made his heart immediately tense, and he listened to it getting closer, getting closer, probably at the door, and was about to stop, but he immediately heard it and drove over. Many times like this, he knew all kinds of whistles: like whistles, like drums, like farts, like dogs barking, like ducks, like cows, like hens crying, like whimpering ....... He suddenly resented himself: Why didn't he pay attention earlier, knowing what kind of sound Dr. Pu's whistle sounded?对面的寓客还没有回来，照例是看戏，或是打茶围去了。但夜却已经很深了，连汽车也逐渐地减少。强烈的银白色的月光，照得纸窗发白。
The guest on the opposite side hasn't come back yet, and he is watching a play or playing tea circle as usual. But the night was already very late, and even the number of cars was gradually decreasing. The strong silvery-white moonlight illuminated the paper window white.他在等待的厌倦里，身心的紧张慢慢地弛缓下来了，至于不再去留心那些汽笛。但凌乱的思绪，却又乘机而起；他仿佛知道靖甫生的一定是猩红热，而且是不可救的。那么，家计怎么支持呢，靠自己一个？虽然住在小城里，可是百物也昂贵起来了……。自己的三个孩子，他的两个，养活尚且难，还能进学校去读书么？只给一两个读书呢，那自然是自己的康儿最聪明，——然而大家一定要批评，说是薄待了兄弟的孩子……。
In the tiredness of waiting, the tension of his body and mind slowly relaxed, and he no longer paid attention to those whistles. But the messy thoughts took the opportunity to rise again; He seemed to know that Jingfu must have scarlet fever and was irredeemable. So, how to support the family plan, on your own? Although I live in a small town, everything has become more expensive...... It is still difficult to support his three children, his two, can he still go to school? Only one or two books, that is naturally the smartest Kang'er,—— but everyone must criticize, saying that it is a child who treats his brothers poorly......后事怎么办呢，连买棺木的款子也不够，怎么能够运回家，只好暂时寄顿在义庄里……。
What to do with the funeral, even the money to buy a coffin is not enough, how can it be transported home, so I have to temporarily send it to Yizhuang .......忽然远远地有一阵脚步声进来，立刻使他跳起来了，走出房去，却知道是对面的寓客。
Suddenly, a sound of footsteps came in from a distance, which immediately made him jump up and walk out of the room, but he knew that it was a guest on the opposite side.“先帝爷，在白帝城……。”
"The late emperor, ...... in Baidi City."他一听到这低微高兴的吟声，便失望，愤怒，几乎要奔上去叱骂他。但他接着又看见伙计提着风雨灯，灯光中照出后面跟着的皮鞋，上面的微明里是一个高大的人，白脸孔，黑的络腮胡子。这正是普悌思。
As soon as he heard this low and happy groan, he was disappointed and angry, and almost ran up to scold him. But then he saw the guy carrying a wind and rain lamp, and the leather shoes behind him were illuminated in the light, and in the faint light on it was a tall man with a white face and a black beard. This is exactly what Putisi is.他像是得了宝贝一般，飞跑上去，将他领入病人的房中。两人都站在床面前，他擎了洋灯，照着。
As if he had a baby, he flew up and led him into the patient's room. Both of them stood in front of the bed, and he held up a foreign lamp and shone it.“先生，他发烧……。”沛君喘着说。
"Sir, he has a fever...... Pei Jun gasped.“什么时候，起的？”普悌思两手插在裤侧的袋子里，凝视着病人的脸，慢慢地问。
"When did you get up?" Pu Tisi put his hands in the bag on the side of his pants, stared at the patient's face, and asked slowly.“前天。不，大……大大前天。”
"The day before yesterday. No, it's ...... The day before yesterday. ”普大夫不作声，略略按一按脉，又叫沛君擎高了洋灯，照着他在病人的脸上端详一回；又叫揭去被卧，解开衣服来给他看。看过之后，就伸出手指在肚子上去一摩。
Dr. Pu remained silent, pressed his pulse slightly, and asked Pei Jun to raise the foreign lamp and look at him on the patient's face; He also asked him to take off the quilt and untie his clothes to show him. After reading it, he stretched out his finger and rubbed it on his stomach.“Measles……”普悌思低声自言自语似的说。
"Measles......" Putis whispered to himself.“疹子么？”他惊喜得声音也似乎发抖了。
"Rash?" He was so surprised that his voice seemed to tremble.“疹子。”
"Rash."“就是疹子？……”
"It's a rash? ……”“疹子。”
"Rash."“你原来没有出过疹子？……”
"You didn't have a rash before? ……”他高兴地刚在问靖甫时，普大夫已经走向书桌那边去了，于是也只得跟过去。只见他将一只脚踏在椅子上，拉过桌上的一张信笺，从衣袋里掏出一段很短的铅笔，就桌上飕飕地写了几个难以看清的字，这就是药方。
When he was happily asking Jingfu, Dr. Pu had already walked to the desk, so he had to follow. I saw him put one foot on the chair, pulled a letterhead on the table, took out a short pencil from his pocket, and wrote a few words on the table that were difficult to read, which was the prescription.“怕药房已经关了罢？”沛君接了方，问。
"I'm afraid the pharmacy is closed?" Pei Jun took the prescription and asked.“明天不要紧。明天吃。”
"It doesn't matter tomorrow. Eat tomorrow. ”“明天再看？……”
"See you tomorrow? ……”“不要再看了。酸的，辣的，太咸的，不要吃。热退了之后，拿小便，送到我的，医院里来，查一查，就是了。装在，干净的，玻璃瓶里；外面，写上名字。”
"Look no further. Sour, spicy, too salty, don't eat it. After the fever subsides, take urine, send it to mine, come to the hospital, check it, and that's it. Packed in, clean, in a glass bottle; Outside, write your name. ”普大夫且说且走，一面接了一张五元的钞票塞入衣袋里，一径出去了。他送出去，看他上了车，开动了，然后转身，刚进店门，只听得背后gö gö的两声，他才知道普悌思的汽车的叫声原来是牛吼似的。但现在是知道也没有什么用了，他想。
Dr. Pu said and left, while taking a five-yuan bill and stuffing it into his pocket, he went straight out. He sent him out, saw him get into the car, started it, then turned around, and as soon as he entered the store, he only heard two gö gö sounds behind him, and he knew that the cry of Putisi's car turned out to be like a bull's roar. But now it was useless to know, he thought.房子里连灯光也显得愉悦；沛君仿佛万事都已做讫，周围都很平安，心里倒是空空洞洞的模样。他将钱和药方交给跟着进来的伙计，叫他明天一早到美亚药房去买药，因为这药房是普大夫指定的，说惟独这一家的药品最可靠。
Even the lights in the house are pleasant; Pei Jun seemed to have done everything, and the surroundings were peaceful, but his heart was empty. He handed the money and prescription to the guy who followed him, and told him to go to Meiya Pharmacy tomorrow morning to buy medicine, because this pharmacy was designated by Dr. Pu, and said that this was the only medicine that was the most reliable.“东城的美亚药房！一定得到那里去。记住：美亚药房！”他跟在出去的伙计后面，说。
"Meiya Pharmacy in Dongcheng! You must get there. Remember: Meyer Pharmacy! He followed the guy who went out and said.院子里满是月色，白得如银；“在白帝城”的邻人已经睡觉了，一切都很幽静。只有桌上的闹钟愉快而平匀地札札地作响；虽然听到病人的呼吸，却是很调和。他坐下不多久，忽又高兴起来。
The yard is full of moonlight, as white as silver; The neighbors "in Baidi City" have already slept, and everything is very quiet. Only the alarm clock on the table rattled happily and evenly; Although I heard the patient's breathing, it was very harmonious. He sat down for a short time, and suddenly became happy again.“你原来这么大了，竟还没有出过疹子？”他遇到了什么奇迹似的，惊奇地问。
"You're so big, you haven't had a rash yet?" What miracle did he encounter, he asked in surprise.“…………”
“你自己是不会记得的。须得问母亲才知道。”
"You won't remember it yourself. You have to ask your mother to know. ”“…………”
“母亲又不在这里。竟没有出过疹子。哈哈哈！”
"Mother is not here. I never had a rash. Hahaha! ”
沛君在床上醒来时，朝阳已从纸窗上射入，刺着他朦胧的眼睛。但他却不能即刻动弹，只觉得四肢无力，而且背上冷冰冰的还有许多汗，而且看见床前站着一个满脸流血的孩子，自己正要去打她。
When Pei Jun woke up in bed, the morning sun had already shot in through the paper window, piercing his hazy eyes. But he couldn't move immediately, he only felt weak in his limbs, and there was a lot of sweat on his back, and he saw a child standing in front of the bed with a bleeding face, and he was about to beat her.但这景象一刹那间便消失了，他还是独自睡在自己的房里，没有一个别的人。他解下枕衣来拭去胸前和背上的冷汗，穿好衣服，走向靖甫的房里去时，只见“在白帝城”的邻人正在院子里漱口，可见时候已经很不早了。
But the scene disappeared in an instant, and he still slept alone in his room, with no one else. He took off his pillow to wipe the cold sweat from his chest and back, got dressed, and walked to Jingfu's room, only to see the neighbor "in Baidi City" rinsing his mouth in the yard, which showed that it was very late.靖甫也醒着了，眼睁睁地躺在床上。
Jingfu was also awake and lay on the bed.“今天怎样？”他立刻问。
"How is it today?" He asked immediately.“好些……。”
"Quite a ......."“药还没有来么？”
"Haven't the medicine come yet?"“没有。”
"No."他便在书桌旁坐下，正对着眠床；看靖甫的脸，已没有昨天那样通红了。但自己的头却还觉得昏昏的，梦的断片，也同时闪闪烁烁地浮出：
He sat down at the desk, facing the bed; Looking at Jingfu's face, it was no longer as red as yesterday. But his head still felt dizzy, and the fragments of the dream also flashed at the same time:——靖甫也正是这样地躺着，但却是一个死尸。他忙着收殓，独自背了一口棺材，从大门外一径背到堂屋里去。地方仿佛是在家里，看见许多熟识的人们在旁边交口赞颂……。
——Jingfu was lying like this, but it was a dead corpse. He was busy collecting the funeral, carrying a coffin alone and carrying it from outside the gate to the main room. The place seemed to be at home, and I saw many acquaintances praising ...... beside me.——他命令康儿和两个弟妹进学校去了；却还有两个孩子哭嚷着要跟去。他已经被哭嚷的声音缠得发烦，但同时也觉得自己有了最高的威权和极大的力。他看见自己的手掌比平常大了三四倍，铁铸似的，向荷生的脸上一掌批过去……。
——He ordered Kang'er and his two younger siblings to go to school; But there were two children crying and wanting to follow. He was already annoyed by the sound of crying, but at the same time he felt that he had the highest authority and great power. He saw that his palm was three or four times larger than usual, like casting iron, and slapped Hesheng's face with a .......他因为这些梦迹的袭击，怕得想站起来，走出房外去，但终于没有动。也想将这些梦迹压下，忘却，但这些却像搅在水里的鹅毛一般，转了几个圈，终于非浮上来不可：
Because of the attack of these dreams, he was so scared that he wanted to stand up and walk out of the house, but finally he didn't move. I also wanted to suppress these dreams and forget them, but these were like goose feathers stirred in the water, turning a few circles, and finally had to surface:——荷生满脸是血，哭着进来了。他跳在神堂上……。那孩子后面还跟着一群相识和不相识的人。他知道他们是都来攻击他的……。
——Hesheng's face was covered in blood, and he came in crying. He jumped on the temple ....... The child was followed by a group of people who knew each other and those who didn't know each other. He knew they were all coming to attack his .......——“我决不至于昧了良心。你们不要受孩子的诳话的骗……。”他听得自己这样说。
——"I will never lose my conscience." Don't be deceived by your children's lies...... He heard himself say this.——荷生就在他身边，他又举起了手掌……。
——He Sheng was next to him, and he raised his palm ...... again.他忽而清醒了，觉得很疲劳，背上似乎还有些冷。靖甫静静地躺在对面，呼吸虽然急促，却是很调匀。桌上的闹钟似乎更用了大声札札地作响。
He suddenly woke up, felt very tired, and seemed to be a little cold on his back. Jingfu lay quietly opposite, his breathing was rapid, but it was very well-coordinated. The alarm clock on the table seems to be ringing louder.他旋转身子去，对了书桌，只见蒙着一层尘，再转脸去看纸窗，挂着的日历上，写着两个漆黑的隶书：廿七。
He turned his body and went to the desk, only to see a layer of dust, and then turned his face to look at the paper window, and on the hanging calendar, there were two pitch-black clerical scripts: twenty-seven.伙计送药进来了，还拿着一包书。
The guy came in with medicine and a pack of books.“什么？”靖甫睁开了眼睛，问。
"What?" Jingfu opened his eyes and asked.“药。”他也从惝恍中觉醒，回答说。
"Medicine." He also woke up from his trance and replied.“不，那一包。”
"No, that pack."“先不管它。吃药罢。”他给靖甫服了药，这才拿起那包书来看，道，“索士寄来的。一定是你向他去借的那一本：《Sesame and Lilies》。”
"Leave it alone. Take the medicine. He gave Jingfu medicine, then picked up the bag of books and looked at it, saying, "It was sent by Suo Shi." It must be the one you borrowed from him: "Sesame and Lilies". ”靖甫伸手要过书去，但只将书面一看，书脊上的金字一摩，便放在枕边，默默地合上眼睛了。过了一会，高兴地低声说：
Jingfu stretched out his hand to pass the book, but only looked at the book, and when he rubbed the gold letters on the spine, he put it next to his pillow and closed his eyes silently. After a while, he whispered happily:“等我好起来，译一点寄到文化书馆去卖几个钱，不知道他们可要……。”
"When I get better, I will translate some and send it to the cultural library to sell for a few money, I don't know if they will ...... it."
这一天，沛君到公益局比平日迟得多，将要下午了；办公室里已经充满了秦益堂的水烟的烟雾。汪月生远远地望见，便迎出来。
On this day, Pei Jun arrived at the Public Welfare Bureau much later than usual, and it would be afternoon; The office was already filled with the smoke of Qin Yitang's hookah. Wang Yuesheng saw it from a distance and greeted him.“嚄！来了。令弟全愈了罢？我想，这是不要紧的；时症年年有，没有什么要紧。我和益翁正惦记着呢；都说：怎么还不见来？现在来了，好了！但是，你看，你脸上的气色，多少……。是的，和昨天多少两样。”
"Wow! Here it comes. Did you want your brother to be completely healed? I think it doesn't matter; Symptoms occur every year, and nothing matters. Yi Weng and I are thinking about it; They all said: Why haven't you seen me yet? Now it's coming, okay! But, you see, the complexion on your face is somewhat ....... Yes, it's quite the same as yesterday. ”沛君也仿佛觉得这办公室和同事都和昨天有些两样，生疏了。虽然一切也还是他曾经看惯的东西：断了的衣钩，缺口的唾壶，杂乱而尘封的案卷，折足的破躺椅，坐在躺椅上捧着水烟筒咳嗽而且摇头叹气的秦益堂……。
Pei Jun also seemed to feel that this office and colleagues were a little different from yesterday, and they were rusty. Although everything was still what he was used to seeing: broken clothes hooks, chipped spittoons, messy and dusty case files, broken recliners, broken recliners, Qin Yitang sitting on the recliner holding a hookah and coughing and shaking his head and sighing......“他们也还是一直从堂屋打到大门口……。”
"They still kept calling from the main house to the gate......"“所以呀，”月生一面回答他，“我说你该将沛兄的事讲给他们，教他们学学他。要不然，真要把你老头儿气死了……。”
"So," Yuesheng replied to him, "I said you should tell them about Brother Pei and teach them to learn from him." Otherwise, I really want to make your old man angry...... ”“老三说，老五折在公债票上的钱是不能算公用的，应该……应该……。”益堂咳得弯下腰去了。
The third child said that the money on the public bond bill cannot be considered public and should be ...... Should....... Yitang coughed and bent down.“真是‘人心不同’……。”月生说着，便转脸向了沛君，“那么，令弟没有什么？”
"It's really a 'different people'...... hearts." Yuesheng said, and turned his face to Pei Jun, "So, what does my brother have?" ”“没有什么。医生说是疹子。”
"Nothing. The doctor said it was a rash. ”“疹子？是呵，现在外面孩子们正闹着疹子。我的同院住着的三个孩子也都出了疹子了。那是毫不要紧的。但你看，你昨天竟急得那么样，叫旁人看了也不能不感动，这真所谓‘兄弟怡怡’。”
"Rash? Yes, now the children outside are making a rash. My three children living in the same hospital also had rashes. That doesn't matter. But you see, you were so anxious yesterday that you couldn't help but be moved when others saw it, which is really the so-called 'brother Yiyi'. ”“昨天局长到局了没有？”
"Did the director arrive yesterday?"“还是‘杳如黄鹤’。你去簿子上补画上一个‘到’就是了。”
"It's still 'like a yellow crane'. You just go to the book and make up a 'to'. ”“说是应该自己赔。”益堂自言自语地说。“这公债票也真害人，我是一点也莫名其妙。你一沾手就上当。到昨天，到晚上，也还是从堂屋一直打到大门口。老三多两个孩子上学，老五也说他多用了公众的钱，气不过……。”
"He said he should compensate himself." Yi Tang said to himself. "This public bond bill is really harmful, and I am not at all inexplicable. You will be fooled as soon as you get your hands on it. Until yesterday, until night, I still hit from the main room to the gate. The third child has two more children going to school, and the fifth child also said that he used more public money and was not angry ....... ”“这真是愈加闹不清了！”月生失望似的说。“所以看见你们弟兄，沛君，我真是‘五体投地’。是的，我敢说，这决不是当面恭维的话。”
"This is really getting more and more confusing!" Yuesheng said disappointedly. "So when I see you brothers, Pei Jun, I really 'bow down to the ground'. Yes, I dare say, this is by no means a compliment to your face. ”沛君不开口，望见听差的送进一件公文来，便迎上去接在手里。月生也跟过去，就在他手里看着，念道：
Pei Jun didn't speak, and when he saw the messenger sending an official document, he greeted him and took it in his hand. Yuesheng also followed, looked at it in his hand, and read:“‘公民郝上善等呈：东郊倒毙无名男尸一具请饬分局速行拨棺抬埋以资卫生而重公益由’。我来办。你还是早点回去罢，你一定惦记着令弟的病。你们真是‘鹡鸰在原’……。”
"'Citizen Hao Shangshan and others presented: A body of an unknown man was killed in the eastern suburbs, and the sub-bureau was asked to quickly allocate a coffin to bury it for hygiene and public welfare'. I'll do it. You should go back early, you must be thinking about your brother's illness." You are really 'wagtails in the plains'....... ”“不！”他不放手，“我来办。”
"No!" He didn't let go, "I'll do it." ”月生也就不再去抢着办了。沛君便十分安心似的沉静地走到自己的桌前，看着呈文，一面伸手去揭开了绿锈斑斓的墨盒盖。
Yuesheng no longer rushed to do it. Pei Jun walked to his desk calmly as if he was very relieved, looked at the presentation, and reached out to open the rusty ink cartridge lid.一九二五年十一月三日。
November 3, 1925.

离婚

离婚

离婚

divorce“阿阿，木叔！新年恭喜，发财发财！”
"Ah, Uncle Mu! Happy New Year, get rich! ”“你好，八三！恭喜恭喜！……”
"Hello, Basan! Congratulations! ……”“唉唉，恭喜！爱姑也在这里……”
"Oh, congratulations! Aunt Ai is also here......“阿阿，木公公！……”
"Ah, Father Mu! ……”庄木三和他的女儿——爱姑——刚从木莲桥头跨下航船去，船里面就有许多声音一齐嗡的叫了起来，其中还有几个人捏着拳头打拱；同时，船旁的坐板也空出四人的坐位来了。庄木三一面招呼，一面就坐，将长烟管倚在船边；爱姑便坐在他左边，将两只钩刀样的脚正对着八三摆成一个“八”字。
As soon as Zhuang Musan and his daughter - Ai Gu - stepped off the ship from the Mulian bridgehead, there were many voices in the boat buzzing together, and several of them clenched their fists and arched; At the same time, the seat next to the boat also vacated seats for four people. Zhuang Musan greeted and sat down, leaning the long smoke pipe on the side of the boat; Aunt Ai sat on his left and placed her two hook-like feet facing Basan into an "eight" figure.“木公公上城去？”一个蟹壳脸的问。
"Father Mu went to the city?" A crab-shell face asked.“不上城，”木公公有些颓唐似的，但因为紫糖色脸上原有许多皱纹，所以倒也看不出什么大变化，“就是到庞庄去走一遭。”
"Don't go to the city," Mu Gonggong was a little decadent, but because there were many wrinkles on his purple sugar face, he couldn't see any big changes, "Just go to Pangzhuang for a walk." ”合船都沉默了，只是看他们。
The boats were silent, just looking at them.“也还是为了爱姑的事么？”好一会，八三质问了。
"Is it still for my aunt's sake?" After a while, Baysan questioned.“还是为她。……这真是烦死我了，已经闹了整三年，打过多少回架，说过多少回和，总是不落局……。”
"Or for her. …… This really annoys me, it has been going on for three years, how many fights have I had, how many times I have said to reconcile, but I have always not fallen ....... ”“这回还是到慰老爷家里去？……”
"This time or go to Master Wei's house? ……”“还是到他家。他给他们说和也不止一两回了，我都不依。这倒没有什么。这回是他家新年会亲，连城里的七大人也在……。”
"Or go to his house. He made peace with them more than once or twice, but I didn't comply. It's nothing. This time it was his family's New Year's party, and even the seven adults in the city were ....... ”“七大人？”八三的眼睛睁大了。“他老人家也出来说话了么？……那是……。其实呢，去年我们将他们的灶都拆掉了，总算已经出了一口恶气。况且爱姑回到那边去，其实呢，也没有什么味儿……。”他于是顺下眼睛去。
"Lord Seven?" Basan's eyes widened. "Did his old man come out to talk too? …… Is that....... In fact, we dismantled all their stoves last year, and finally let out a bad breath. Besides, Aunt Ai went back there, in fact, there was no ....... He then lowered his eyes.“我倒并不贪图回到那边去，八三哥！”爱姑愤愤地昂起头，说，“我是赌气。你想，‘小畜生’姘上了小寡妇，就不要我，事情有这么容易的？‘老畜生’只知道帮儿子，也不要我，好容易呀！七大人怎样？难道和知县大老爷换帖，就不说人话了么？他不能像慰老爷似的不通，只说是‘走散好走散好’。我倒要对他说说我这几年的艰难，且看七大人说谁不错！”
"I'm not greedy to go back over there, Brother Basan!" Aunt Ai raised her head indignantly and said, "I'm angry." Do you think, if the 'little beast' falls in love with a little widow, he doesn't want me, is it so easy?" The 'old beast' only knows how to help his son, and he doesn't want me, it's so easy! How about the seven lords? Could it be that if you exchange posts with the county magistrate, you won't speak human words? He can't be as incomprehensible as Master Wei, just say that 'it's good to be separated'. I want to tell him about my difficulties in the past few years, and see who the seven lords say is good! ”八三被说服了，再开不得口。
Ba San was persuaded and couldn't speak anymore.只有潺潺的船头激水声；船里很静寂。庄木三伸手去摸烟管，装上烟。
only the sound of the gurgling of the bow of the boat; It was quiet in the boat. Zhuang Musan reached out to touch the pipe and filled it with cigarettes.斜对面，挨八三坐着的一个胖子便从肚兜里掏出一柄打火刀，打着火绒，给他按在烟斗上。
Diagonally opposite, a fat man sitting next to Basan took out a lighter from his belly pocket, hit tinder and pressed it on his pipe.“对对。”木三点头说。
"Yes, yes." Mu San nodded and said.“我们虽然是初会，木叔的名字却是早已知道的。”胖子恭敬地说。“是的，这里沿海三六十八村，谁不知道？施家的儿子姘上了寡妇，我们也早知道。去年木叔带了六位儿子去拆平了他家的灶，谁不说应该？……你老人家是高门大户都走得进的，脚步开阔，怕他们甚的！……”
"Although we are meeting for the first time, Uncle Mu's name has long been known." The fat man said respectfully. "Yes, who doesn't know the three hundred and sixty-eight villages along the coast? The son of the Shi family married a widow, and we knew it for a long time. Last year, Uncle Mu took his six sons to dismantle and level his stove, who doesn't say it should? …… Your old man is a high-ranking family who can walk in, and his steps are open, so he is afraid of them! ……”“你这位阿叔真通气，”爱姑高兴地说，“我虽然不认识你这位阿叔是谁。”
"Your uncle is really understandable," Aunt Ai said happily, "Although I don't know who your uncle is." ”“我叫汪得贵。”胖子连忙说。
"My name is Wang Degui." The fat man said quickly.“要撇掉我，是不行的。七大人也好，八大人也好。我总要闹得他们家败人亡！慰老爷不是劝过我四回么？连爹也看得赔贴的钱有点头昏眼热了……。”
"You can't leave me. The seven are good, and the eight are also good. I always want to make their family ruined!" Didn't Master Wei persuade me four times? Even my father was a little dizzy and hot when he saw the money he was paying ....... ”“你这妈的！”木三低声说。
"Damn it!" Mu San said in a low voice.“可是我听说去年年底施家送给慰老爷一桌酒席哩，八公公。”蟹壳脸道。
"But I heard that at the end of last year, the Shi family gave Master Wei a banquet, Eighth Duke." Crab shell face.“那不碍事。”汪得贵说，“酒席能塞得人发昏么？酒席如果能塞得人发昏，送大菜又怎样？他们知书识理的人是专替人家讲公道话的，譬如，一个人受众人欺侮，他们就出来讲公道话，倒不在乎有没有酒喝。去年年底我们敝村的荣大爷从北京回来，他见过大场面的，不像我们乡下人一样。他就说，那边的第一个人物要算光太太，又硬……。”
"That's not in the way." Wang Degui said, "Can the banquet make people faint? If the banquet can make people faint, what if they send big dishes? For example, if a person is bullied by others, they will come out to speak fairly, but they don't care whether they have wine or not. At the end of last year, Uncle Rong from our village came back from Beijing, and he had seen a big scene, not like us countrymen. He said that the first person over there should be Mrs. Guang, and he ...... hard. ”“汪家汇头的客人上岸哩！”船家大声叫着，船已经要停下来。
"The guests of Wangjiahui are ashore!" The boatman shouted loudly, and the boat was about to stop.“有我有我！”胖子立刻一把取了烟管，从中舱一跳，随着前进的船走在岸上了。
"There is me, there is me!" The fat man immediately took the pipe, jumped from the middle cabin, and walked ashore with the advancing boat.“对对！”他还向船里面的人点头，说。
"Yes, yes!" He also nodded to the people in the boat and said.船便在新的静寂中继续前进；水声又很听得出了，潺潺的。八三开始打磕睡了，渐渐地向对面的钩刀式的脚张开了嘴。前舱中的两个老女人也低声哼起佛号来，她们撷着念珠，又都看爱姑，而且互视，努嘴，点头。
The ship continued in a new silence; The sound of water can be heard again, gurgling. Ba San began to knock and fell asleep, and gradually opened his mouth to the hook and knife foot on the opposite side. The two old women in the front cabin also hummed the Buddha's name in a low voice, they held the rosary, looked at their aunt, and looked at each other, pouted, and nodded.爱姑瞪着眼看定篷顶，大半正在悬想将来怎样闹得他们家败人亡；“老畜生”，“小畜生”，全都走投无路。慰老爷她是不放在眼里的，见过两回，不过一个团头团脑的矮子：这种人本村里就很多，无非脸色比他紫黑些。
Aunt Ai stared at the canopy, most of them were in suspense thinking about how their family would be ruined in the future; "Old beasts" and "little beasts" are all cornered. Master Wei didn't pay attention to her, she had seen her twice, but a short man with a round head: there are many people like this in the village, and their faces are just darker than him.庄木三的烟早已吸到底，火逼得斗底里的烟油吱吱地叫了，还吸着。他知道一过汪家汇头，就到庞庄；而且那村口的魁星阁也确乎已经望得见。庞庄，他到过许多回，不足道的，以及慰老爷。他还记得女儿的哭回来，他的亲家和女婿的可恶，后来给他们怎样地吃亏。想到这里，过去的情景便在眼前展开，一到惩治他亲家这一局，他向来是要冷冷地微笑的，但这回却不，不知怎的忽而横梗着一个胖胖的七大人，将他脑里的局面挤得摆不整齐了。
Zhuang Musan's smoke had already been inhaled to the end, and the fire forced the e-liquid in the bottom of the bucket to squeak and still suck. He knew that as soon as he passed the Wangjiahui head, he would go to Pangzhuang; And the Kuixing Pavilion at the entrance of the village is indeed visible. Pang Zhuang, he has been there many times, but it is not enough, and he comforts the master. He still remembers his daughter's crying back, the hatred of his in-laws and son-in-law, and how he suffered to them later. Thinking of this, the past scene unfolded in front of his eyes, and when it came to punishing his in-laws, he had always wanted to smile coldly, but this time no, somehow a fat seven adults suddenly stumbled up, squeezing the situation in his head out of order.船在继续的寂静中继续前进；独有念佛声却宏大起来；此外一切，都似乎陪着木叔和爱姑一同浸在沉思里。
The ship continued to move forward in the silence that continued; the only sound of chanting Buddha became louder; In addition, everything seems to be immersed in contemplation with Uncle Mu and Aunt Ai.“木叔，你老上岸罢，庞庄到了。”
"Uncle Mu, you always go ashore, Pang Zhuang has arrived."木三他们被船家的声音警觉时，面前已是魁星阁了。
When Mu San and the others were alerted by the boatman's voice, they were already in front of Kuixing Pavilion.他跳上岸，爱姑跟着，经过魁星阁下，向着慰老爷家走。朝南走过三十家门面，再转一个弯，就到了，早望见门口一列地泊着四只乌篷船。
He jumped ashore, followed by Aunt Ai, passed His Excellency Kuixing, and walked towards Master Wei's house. Walking south past the façade of thirty houses, turning another corner, you will arrive, and you will see four black canopy boats parked in a row at the door.他们跨进黑油大门时，便被邀进门房去；大门后已经坐满着两桌船夫和长年。爱姑不敢看他们，只是溜了一眼，倒也并不见有“老畜生”和“小畜生”的踪迹。
When they stepped into the black oil gate, they were invited into the concierge; Behind the gate are already two tables of boatmen and perennials. Aunt Ai didn't dare to look at them, she just glanced at them, but there was no trace of the "old beast" and "little beast".当工人搬出年糕汤来时，爱姑不由得越加局促不安起来了，连自己也不明白为什么。“难道和知县大老爷换帖，就不说人话么？”她想。“知书识理的人是讲公道话的。我要细细地对七大人说一说，从十五岁嫁过去做媳妇的时候起……。”
When the workers moved out the rice cake soup, Aunt Ai couldn't help but become more and more cramped, and even she didn't understand why. "Did you exchange posts with the county magistrate, don't you speak human language?" She thought. "Those who know the book and reason speak fairly. I want to tell the seven adults in detail, since I married at the age of fifteen and became a daughter-in-law...... ”她喝完年糕汤；知道时机将到。果然，不一会，她已经跟着一个长年，和她父亲经过大厅，又一弯，跨进客厅的门槛去了。
She finished drinking rice cake soup; Know that the time is coming. Sure enough, after a while, she had been following her for a long time, passing through the hall with her father, turning another corner, and stepping into the threshold of the living room.客厅里有许多东西，她不及细看；还有许多客，只见红青缎子马挂发闪。在这些中间第一眼就看见一个人，这一定是七大人了。虽然也是团头团脑，却比慰老爷们魁梧得多；大的圆脸上长着两条细眼和漆黑的细胡须；头顶是秃的，可是那脑壳和脸都很红润，油光光地发亮。爱姑很觉得稀奇，但也立刻自己解释明白了：那一定是擦着猪油的。
There were many things in the living room, and she didn't have time to look closely; There are also many guests, only to see the red and blue satin horses hanging and shining. The first person I saw in the middle of these must be the Seven Masters. Although it is also a group of heads, it is much more burly than the comfort masters; The large round face has two thin eyes and a thin black beard; The top of his head was bald, but his head and face were rosy and shiny. Aunt Ai felt very strange, but she immediately explained it herself: it must be rubbed with lard.“这就是‘屁塞’，就是古人大殓的时候塞在屁股眼里的。”七大人正拿着一条烂石似的东西，说着，又在自己的鼻子旁擦了两擦，接着道，“可惜是‘新坑’。倒也可以买得，至迟是汉。你看，这一点是‘水银浸’……。”
"This is the 'fart plug', which is what the ancients stuffed into their buttocks during the funeral." The seventh adult was holding something like a rotten stone, and said, rubbing it twice next to his nose, and then said, "It's a pity that it's a 'new pit'." You can also buy it, but it's Han at the latest. You see, this is the ...... of 'mercury dipping'. ”“水银浸”周围即刻聚集了几个头，一个自然是慰老爷；还有几位少爷们，因为被威光压得像瘪臭虫了，爱姑先前竟没有见。
Several heads immediately gathered around the "mercury dipping", one of which was naturally the comfort of the old master; There were also a few young masters, because they were crushed like deflated bed bugs by the prestige, and Aunt Ai had not seen them before.她不懂后一段话；无意，而且也不敢去研究什么“水银浸”，便偷空向四处一看望，只见她后面，紧挨着门旁的墙壁，正站着“老畜生”和“小畜生”。虽然只一瞥，但较之半年前偶然看见的时候，分明都见得苍老了。
She didn't understand the latter paragraph; Unintentionally, and not daring to study any "mercury dipping", he stole the time to look around, only to see that behind her, next to the wall next to the door, were standing "old beasts" and "little beasts". Although it was only a glimpse, compared to when I happened to see it half a year ago, it was clearly old.接着大家就都从“水银浸”周围散开；慰老爷接过“屁塞”，坐下，用指头摩挲着，转脸向庄木三说话。
Then everyone dispersed from the "mercury dip"; Master Wei took the "fart plug", sat down, rubbed it with his fingers, and turned his face to talk to Zhuang Musan.“就是你们两个么？”
"Is it the two of you?"“是的。”
"Yes."“你的儿子一个也没有来？”
"None of your sons came?"“他们没有工夫。”
"They don't have the time."“本来新年正月又何必来劳动你们。但是，还是只为那件事，……我想，你们也闹得够了。不是已经有两年多了么？我想，冤仇是宜解不宜结的。爱姑既然丈夫不对，公婆不喜欢……。也还是照先前说过那样：走散的好。我没有这么大面子，说不通。七大人是最爱讲公道话的，你们也知道。现在七大人的意思也这样：和我一样。可是七大人说，两面都认点晦气罢，叫施家再添十块钱：九十元！”
"Why come to work for you in the first month of the new year. But it's still just for that thing,...... I think you've had enough. Isn't it more than two years old? I think that grievances should be resolved rather than concluded. Since my husband is wrong, my in-laws don't like ....... It's still as I said before: it's better to be separated. I don't have such a big face, it doesn't make sense. The seven adults love to speak fairly, and you know that. Now the Seven Lords mean the same: the same as me. But the seven adults said that both sides admit some bad luck, and ask the Shi family to add another ten yuan: ninety yuan! ”“…………”
“九十元！你就是打官司打到皇帝伯伯跟前，也没有这么便宜。这话只有我们的七大人肯说。”
"Ninety yuan! Even if you file a lawsuit in front of the emperor's uncle, it is not so cheap." Only our seven adults are willing to say this. ”七大人睁起细眼，看着庄木三，点点头。
The seven adults opened their narrow eyes, looked at Zhuang Musan, and nodded.爱姑觉得事情有些危急了，她很怪平时沿海的居民对他都有几分惧怕的自己的父亲，为什么在这里竟说不出话。她以为这是大可不必的；她自从听到七大人的一段议论之后，虽不很懂，但不知怎的总觉得他其实是和蔼近人，并不如先前自己所揣想那样的可怕。
Aunt Ai felt that things were a little critical, and she wondered why her father, who was usually a little afraid of him by coastal residents, couldn't speak here. She thought it was unnecessary; Ever since she heard a discussion from the Seven Lords, although she didn't understand it very well, she somehow always felt that he was actually a kind person, not as terrible as she had thought before.“七大人是知书识理，顶明白的；”她勇敢起来了。“不像我们乡下人。我是有冤无处诉；倒正要找七大人讲讲。自从我嫁过去，真是低头进，低头出，一礼不缺。他们就是专和我作对，一个个都像个‘气杀钟馗’。那年的黄鼠狼咬死了那匹大公鸡，那里是我没有关好吗？那是那只杀头癞皮狗偷吃糠拌饭，拱开了鸡橱门。那‘小畜生’不分青红皂白，就夹脸一嘴巴……。”
"The seven adults are knowledgeable and reasonable, and they understand it;" She became brave. "Not like us countrymen. I have a grievance and nowhere to complain; I was about to talk to the seven lords. Since I got married, I really bowed my head and bowed my head to come out, and there was no shortage of gifts. They just oppose me, and they are all like 'angry Zhong Kui'. The weasel bit the big rooster to death that year, was it okay for me to close it? It was the head-killing leper dog who stole the bran bibimbap and arched the chicken cabinet door. The 'little beast' was indiscriminate, and he ...... his face and mouth. ”七大人对她看了一眼。
The Seven Lords glanced at her.“我知道那是有缘故的。这也逃不出七大人的明鉴；知书识理的人什么都知道。他就是着了那滥婊子的迷，要赶我出去。我是三茶六礼定来的，花轿抬来的呵！那么容易吗？……我一定要给他们一个颜色看，就是打官司也不要紧。县里不行，还有府里呢……。”
"I know there's a reason for that. This cannot escape the wisdom of the seven adults; Those who know the book and reason know everything. He was obsessed with that bitch and wanted to kick me out. I was ordered by three teas and six ceremonies, and the sedan chair was brought here! Is it that easy? …… I must give them a color, even if it is a lawsuit, it doesn't matter. The county can't do it, and the government is ....... ”“那些事是七大人都知道的。”慰老爷仰起脸来说。“爱姑，你要是不转头，没有什么便宜的。你就总是这模样。你看你的爹多少明白；你和你的弟兄都不像他。打官司打到府里，难道官府就不会问问七大人么？那时候是，‘公事公办’，那是，……你简直……。”
"Those things are known to the seven lords." Master Wei raised his face and said. "Aunt Ai, if you don't turn your head, there's nothing cheap. You always look like this. You see how much your father understands; Neither you nor your brother are like him. If the lawsuit reaches the house, won't the government ask the seventh lord? At that time, it was 'business business', that was ,...... You are simply ....... ”“那我就拼出一条命，大家家败人亡。”
"Then I'll fight for my life, and everyone's family will be defeated."“那倒并不是拼命的事，”七大人这才慢慢地说了。“年纪青青。一个人总要和气些：‘和气生财’。对不对？我一添就是十块，那简直已经是‘天外道理’了。要不然，公婆说‘走！’就得走。莫说府里，就是上海北京，就是外洋，都这样。你要不信，他就是刚从北京洋学堂里回来的，自己问他去。”于是转脸向着一个尖下巴的少爷道，“对不对？”
"That's not a desperate thing," the Seven Lords said slowly. "Young. A person should always be kind: 'harmony makes money'. Right? I added ten yuan, which is already a 'strange truth'. Otherwise, the in-laws said, 'Let's go!' 'I have to go. Not to mention the house, it is Shanghai, Beijing, and the ocean, all of which are like this. If you don't believe it, he just came back from the Beijing Western-style School, and he asked him to go. So he turned his face to a young master with a pointed chin and said, "Right?" ”“的的确确。”尖下巴少爷赶忙挺直了身子，必恭必敬地低声说。
"That's right." The pointed chin young master hurriedly straightened up and whispered respectfully.爱姑觉得自己是完全孤立了；爹不说话，弟兄不敢来，慰老爷是原本帮他们的，七大人又不可靠，连尖下巴少爷也低声下气地像一个瘪臭虫，还打“顺风锣”。但她在胡里胡涂的脑中，还仿佛决定要作一回最后的奋斗。
Aunt Ai felt completely isolated; Dad didn't speak, the brothers didn't dare to come, Master Wei was originally helping them, the seven adults were unreliable, and even the pointed chin young master whispered like a deflated bed bug, and played a "downwind gong". But in her foolish mind, she seemed to have decided to make a final struggle.“怎么连七大人……。”她满眼发了惊疑和失望的光。“是的……。我知道，我们粗人，什么也不知道。就怨我爹连人情世故都不知道，老发昏了。就专凭他们‘老畜生’‘小畜生’摆布；他们会报丧似的急急忙忙钻狗洞，巴结人……。”
"Why did you even ...... the seventh lord." Her eyes were full of suspicion and disappointment. "Yes....... I know, we are rough people and don't know anything. I blamed my father for not even knowing the sophistication of human feelings, and he was old and faint. They are at the mercy of their 'old beasts' and 'little beasts'; they will hurriedly drill dog holes and curry favor with people ...... as if they were mourning. ”“七大人看看，”默默地站在她后面的“小畜生”忽然说话了。“她在大人面前还是这样。那在家里是，简直闹得六畜不安。叫我爹是‘老畜生’，叫我是口口声声‘小畜生’，‘逃生子’。”
"Look at the seven lords," the "little beast" who was standing silently behind her suddenly spoke. "She is still like this in front of adults. At home, it was simply uneasy. Call my father an 'old beast', call me a 'little beast' and a 'escapee'. ”“那个‘娘滥十十万人生’的叫你‘逃生子’？”爱姑回转脸去大声说，便又向着七大人道，“我还有话要当大众面前说说哩。他那里有好声好气呵，开口‘贱胎’，闭口‘娘杀’。自从结识了那婊子，连我的祖宗都入起来了。七大人，你给我批评批评，这……。”
"That 'mother who gave birth to 100,000 people' called you 'escape'?" Aunt Ai turned her face and said loudly, and then said to the seven masters, "I still have something to say in front of the public." He had a good voice and a good breath there, opening his mouth to say 'cheap fetus' and closing his mouth to 'mother killing'. Ever since I met that bitch, even my ancestors have come in. Seventh Lord, you give me criticism and criticism, this ....... ”她打了一个寒噤，连忙住口，因为她看见七大人忽然两眼向上一翻，圆脸一仰，细长胡子围着的嘴里同时发出一种高大摇曳的声音来了。
She shuddered and quickly stopped, because she saw that the seven adults suddenly rolled their eyes upwards, raised their round faces, and made a tall swaying sound from their mouths surrounded by slender beards at the same time.“来～～～～兮！”七大人说。
"Come on~~~~ Xi!" The seven adults said.她觉得心脏一停，接着便突突地乱跳，似乎大势已去，局面都变了；仿佛失足掉在水里一般，但又知道这实在是自己错。
She felt that her heart stopped, and then it beat abruptly, as if the general trend was gone and the situation had changed; It was as if he had slipped and fell into the water, but he knew that it was really his fault.立刻进来一个蓝袍子黑背心的男人，对七大人站定，垂手挺腰，像一根木棍。
Immediately, a man in a blue robe and a black vest came in, standing still in front of the seven adults, with his hands hanging down like a wooden stick.全客厅里是“鸦雀无声”。七大人将嘴一动，但谁也听不清说什么。然而那男人，却已经听到了，而且这命令的力量仿佛又已钻进了他的骨髓里，将身子牵了两牵，“毛骨耸然”似的；一面答应道：
The whole living room is "silent". The seven adults moved their mouths, but no one could hear what was said. However, the man had already heard it, and the power of this order seemed to have penetrated into his bone marrow again, and he pulled his body in two ways, as if it were "scorching"; One side agreed:“是。”他倒退了几步，才翻身走出去。
"Yes." He took a few steps back before turning over and walking out.爱姑知道意外的事情就要到来，那事情是万料不到，也防不了的。她这时才又知道七大人实在威严，先前都是自己的误解，所以太放肆，太粗卤了。她非常后悔，不由的自己说：
Aunt Ai knew that something unexpected was coming, and that thing was unexpected and could not be prevented. Only then did she know that the Seven Lords were really majestic, and it was her own misunderstanding before, so it was too presumptuous and too coarse. She regretted it very much and couldn't help but say to herself:“我本来是专听七大人吩咐……。”
"I originally listened to the orders of the Seven Lords......全客厅里是“鸦雀无声”。她的话虽然微细得如丝，慰老爷却像听到霹雳似的了；他跳了起来。
The whole living room is "silent". Although her words were as fine as silk, Master Wei felt like he heard a thunderbolt; He jumped.“对呀！七大人也真公平；爱姑也真明白！”他夸赞着，便向庄木三，“老木，那你自然是没有什么说的了，她自己已经答应。我想你红绿帖是一定已经带来了的，我通知过你。那么，大家都拿出来……。”
"Yes! The Seven are really fair; Aunt Ai really understands! He praised, and then said to Zhuang Musan, "Lao Mu, then naturally you have nothing to say, she herself has agreed." I think your red and green post must have been brought, and I informed you. So, everyone takes it out and ....... ”爱姑见她爹便伸手到肚兜里去掏东西；木棍似的那男人也进来了，将小乌龟模样的一个漆黑的扁的小东西递给七大人。爱姑怕事情有变故，连忙去看庄木三，见他已经在茶几上打开一个蓝布包裹，取出洋钱来。
When Aunt Ai saw her father, she reached into her belly pocket to take out things; The man who looked like a wooden stick also came in and handed a small black flat thing that looked like a little turtle to the seven adults. Aunt Ai was afraid that things would change, so she hurriedly went to see Zhuang Musan, and saw that he had opened a blue cloth package on the coffee table and took out foreign money.七大人也将小乌龟头拔下，从那身子里面倒一点东西在掌心上；木棍似的男人便接了那扁东西去。七大人随即用那一只手的一个指头蘸着掌心，向自己的鼻孔里塞了两塞，鼻孔和人中立刻黄焦焦了。他皱着鼻子，似乎要打喷嚏。
The seven adults also pulled out the little turtle's head and poured something from the body into the palm of their hands; The stick-like man took the flat thing. The seventh adult immediately dipped a finger of that hand in the palm of his hand and stuffed two plugs into his nostrils, and his nostrils and people were immediately yellow and scorched. He wrinkled his nose and seemed to sneeze.庄木三正在数洋钱。慰老爷从那没有数过的一叠里取出一点来，交还了“老畜生”；又将两份红绿帖子互换了地方，推给两面，嘴里说道：
Zhuang Mu San is counting foreign coins. Master Wei took out a little from the stack that he hadn't counted and handed it back to the "old beast"; The two red and green posts were swapped, pushed to both sides, and said:“你们都收好。老木，你要点清数目呀。这不是好当玩意儿的，银钱事情……。”
"You all put it away. Old Mu, you need to count the amount. This is not a good thing, money is ....... ”“呃啾”的一声响，爱姑明知道是七大人打喷嚏了，但不由得转过眼去看。只见七大人张着嘴，仍旧在那里皱鼻子，一只手的两个指头却撮着一件东西，就是那“古人大殓的时候塞在屁股眼里的”，在鼻子旁边摩擦着。
With a "uh-chirping" sound, Aunt Ai knew that it was the Seven Adults who sneezed, but she couldn't help but turn her eyes to look. I saw that the seven adults were still wrinkling their noses there, but the two fingers of one hand were pinching something, which was "stuffed into the buttocks and eyes of the ancients during the funeral", rubbing next to the nose.好容易，庄木三点清了洋钱；两方面各将红绿帖子收起，大家的腰骨都似乎直得多，原先收紧着的脸相也宽懈下来，全客厅顿然见得一团和气了。
It was easy, Zhuang Mu cleared the foreign money at three o'clock; Both sides put away the red and green posts, everyone's waist seemed to be much straighter, and the faces that were originally tightened also relaxed, and the whole living room suddenly saw a group of harmony.“好！事情是圆功了。”慰老爷看见他们两面都显出告别的神气，便吐一口气，说。“那么，嗡，再没有什么别的了。恭喜大吉，总算解了一个结。你们要走了么？不要走，在我们家里喝了新年喜酒去：这是难得的。”
"Okay! The thing is complete. "Master Wei saw that both of them showed a farewell look, so he exhaled and said. So, hum, nothing else. Congratulations, finally untied a knot. Are you leaving? Don't go, drink New Year's wine at our house: this is rare. ”“我们不喝了。存着，明年再来喝罢。”爱姑说。
"We don't drink anymore. Save it, come back next year to drink. Aunt Ai said.“谢谢慰老爷。我们不喝了。我们还有事情……。”庄木三，“老畜生”和“小畜生”，都说着，恭恭敬敬地退出去。
"Thank you, Master Wei. We don't drink anymore. We still have something to ....... Zhuang Musan, "Old Beast" and "Little Beast", all said, and exited respectfully.“唔？怎么？不喝一点去么？”慰老爷还注视着走在最后的爱姑，说。
"Hmm? How? Why don't you drink a little?" Master Wei also looked at his aunt who was walking at the end and said.“是的，不喝了。谢谢慰老爷。”
"Yes, don't drink it. Thank you, Master Wei." ”一九二五年十一月六日。
November 6, 1925.

封面

书名页

版权信息

图书在版编目（CIP）数据
Books in Print (CIP) data故事新编/鲁迅著．—南京：译林出版社，2013.11
New Story Compilation/Written by Lu Xun.—Nanjing: Yilin Publishing House, 2013.11（鲁迅自编文集）
(Lu Xun's self-edited anthology)ISBN 978-7-5447-4379-2
ISBN 978-7-5447-4379-2Ⅰ．①故…　Ⅱ．①鲁…　Ⅲ．①鲁迅小说－小说集　Ⅳ．①I210.6
I..(1) Therefore... II..(1) Lu... III..(1) Lu Xun's Novels-Collection IV..(1)I210.6中国版本图书馆CIP数据核字（2013）第211102号
China Version Library CIP Data Verification (2013) No. 211102 
书　　名　故事新编
Book title New story作　　者　鲁　迅
Author: Lu Xun责任编辑　陆元昶
Editor-in-charge: Lu Yuanchang特约编辑　刘　佳
Special editor Liu Jia出版发行　凤凰出版传媒股份有限公司
Published and distributed by Phoenix Publishing and Media Co., Ltd译林出版社
Yilin Publishing House出版社地址　南京市湖南路1号A楼，邮编：210009
Publisher's address Building A, No. 1 Hunan Road, Nanjing, Zip Code: 210009电子邮箱　yilin@yilin.com
Email yilin@yilin.com出版社网址　http://www.yilin.com
Publisher website http://www.yilin.com印　　刷　北京凯达印务有限公司
Printing Beijing Kaida Printing Co., Ltd开　　本　787×1092毫米　1/32
Volume 787×1092 mm 1/32印　　张　4.125
Print 4.125字　　数　78千字
Word count: 78,000 words版　　次　2013年11月第1版　2013年11月第1次印刷
Edition November 2013 1st edition November 2013 1st printing书　　号　ISBN 978-7-5447-4379-2
ISBN 978-7-5447-4379-2定　　价　11.00元
The price is 11.00 yuan译林版图书若有印装错误可向承印厂调换

If there are printing errors in the translated version of the book, it can be exchanged with the printing factory

Table of Contents

目录

Table of Contents

directory序言 序言
补天 Mending the sky
奔月 Rush to the moon
理水 Water management
采薇 Picking ferns
铸剑 Sword casting
出关 Exit
非攻 Not offensive
起死 He died
返回总目录 Return to the General Directory

序言

序言

序言

序言这一本很小的集子，从开手写起到编成，经过的日子却可以算得很长久了：足足有十三年。
This very small collection, from the beginning of writing to the compilation, can be counted as a long time: thirteen years.第一篇《补天》——原先题作《不周山》——还是一九二二年的冬天写成的。那时的意见，是想从古代和现代都采取题材，来做短篇小说，《不周山》便是取了“女娲炼石补天”的神话，动手试作的第一篇。首先，是很认真的，虽然也不过取了罗特说，来解释创造——人和文学的——的缘起。不记得怎么一来，中途停了笔，去看日报了，不幸正看见了谁——现在忘记了名字——的对于汪静之君的《蕙的风》的批评，他说要含泪哀求，请青年不要再写这样的文字。这可怜的阴险使我感到滑稽，当再写小说时，就无论如何，止不住有一个古衣冠的小丈夫，在女娲的两腿之间出现了。这就是从认真陷入了油滑的开端。油滑是创作的大敌，我对于自己很不满。
The first article, "Mending the Sky" - originally titled "Buzhou Mountain", was written in the winter of 1922. At that time, the opinion was to take the theme from ancient and modern times to make short stories, and "Buzhou Mountain" was the first to take the myth of "Nuwa refining stones to make up for the sky". First of all, it is very serious, although it is only taken from Roth's theory to explain the origin of creation—both human and literary. I don't remember how, I stopped writing halfway through, went to read the daily newspaper, and unfortunately I saw someone—now I have forgotten the name—criticism of Wang Jingzhijun's "Hui no Feng", he said that he would beg with tears, please stop writing such words. This poor insidiousness made me feel funny, and when I wrote the novel again, no matter what, I couldn't stop a little husband in ancient clothes from appearing between Nuwa's legs. This is the beginning of seriously falling into slippery. Oily slippery is the enemy of creation, and I am very dissatisfied with myself.我决计不再写这样的小说，当编印《呐喊》时，便将它附在卷末，算是一个开始，也就是一个收场。
I decided not to write such a novel again, and when I edited and printed "The Scream", I attached it to the end of the volume, which was a beginning and an end.这时我们的批评家成仿吾先生正在创造社门口的“灵魂的冒险”的旗子底下抡板斧。他以“庸俗”的罪名，几斧砍杀了《呐喊》，只推《不周山》为佳作，——自然也仍有不好的地方。坦白的说罢，这就是使我不但不能心服，而且还轻视了这位勇士的原因。我是不薄“庸俗”，也自甘“庸俗”的；对于历史小说，则以为博考文献，言必有据者，纵使有人讥为“教授小说”，其实是很难组织之作，至于只取一点因由，随意点染，铺成一篇，倒无需怎样的手腕；况且“如鱼饮水，冷暖自知”，用庸俗的话来说，就是“自家有病自家知”罢：《不周山》的后半是很草率的，决不能称为佳作。倘使读者相信了这冒险家的话，一定自误，而我也成了误人，于是当《呐喊》印行第二版时，即将这一篇删除；向这位“魂灵”回敬了当头一棒——我的集子里，只剩着“庸俗”在跋扈了。
At this time, our critic Mr. Cheng Fangwu was creating a board axe under the banner of "Soul's Adventure" at the entrance of the society. He slashed "Scream" with a few axes on the charge of "vulgarity", and only pushed "Buzhou Mountain" as a masterpiece,—— so naturally there are still bad things. Frankly, this is what not only made me unconvinced, but also despised this warrior. I am not "vulgar", and I am willing to be "vulgar"; For historical novels, it is thought that there must be evidence for extensive research, even if some people ridicule it as a "professor novel", it is actually difficult to organize. Moreover, "like a fish drinking water, knowing whether it is cold or warm", in vulgar terms, it is "knowing that you are sick": the second half of "Buzhou Mountain" is very sloppy and must not be called a masterpiece. If the reader believes the words of this adventurer, he must be mistaken, and I have also become a mistake, so when the second edition of "The Scream" was printed, this article was deleted; I paid tribute to this "soul" - in my collection, only "vulgarity" was domineering.直到一九二六年的秋天，一个人住在厦门的石屋里，对着大海，翻着古书，四近无生人气，心里空空洞洞。而北京的未名社，却不绝的来信，催促杂志的文章。这时我不愿意想到目前；于是回忆在心里出土了，写了十篇《朝华夕拾》；并且仍旧拾取古代的传说之类，预备足成八则《故事新编》。但刚写了《奔月》和《铸剑》——发表的那时题为《眉间尺》，——我便奔向广州，这事就又完全搁起了。后来虽然偶尔得到一点题材，作一段速写，却一向不加整理。
Until the autumn of 1926, he lived alone in a stone house in Xiamen, facing the sea, flipping through ancient books, surrounded by lifeless people, and empty in his heart. However, Beijing's Weiming Society has endless letters urging magazine articles. At this time, I don't want to think about the present; So the memories were unearthed in my heart, and I wrote ten "Morning and Evening Collections"; And still pick up ancient legends and the like, and prepare eight "New Stories". But as soon as I wrote "Running to the Moon" and "Casting a Sword" - when it was published, it was entitled "Ruler between the Eyebrows",—— I ran to Guangzhou, and this matter was completely put on hold. Later, although I occasionally got a little subject matter and made a sketch, I never organized it.现在才总算编成了一本书。其中也还是速写居多，不足称为“文学概论”之所谓小说。叙事有时也有一点旧书上的根据，有时却不过信口开河。而且因为自己的对于古人，不及对于今人的诚敬，所以仍不免时有油滑之处。过了十三年，依然并无长进，看起来真也是“无非《不周山》之流”；不过并没有将古人写得更死，却也许暂时还有存在的余地的罢。
Now it has finally been compiled into a book. Among them, there are still many sketches, which are not enough to be called "introduction to literature". The narrative sometimes has a little basis in old books, but sometimes it is just a lie. And because my respect for the ancients is not as good as that of today's people, I still can't help but be slippery from time to time. After thirteen years, there is still no progress, and it seems that it is really "nothing more than the likes of "Buzhou Mountain"; However, it did not write the ancients to be more dead, but perhaps there is still room for existence for the time being.一九三五年十二月二十六日，鲁迅。
December 26, 1935, Lu Xun.

补天

补天

补天

Mending the sky一
One女娲忽然醒来了。
Nuwa suddenly woke up.伊似乎是从梦中惊醒的，然而已经记不清做了什么梦；只是很懊恼，觉得有什么不足，又觉得有什么太多了。煽动的和风，暖暾的将伊的气力吹得弥漫在宇宙里。
He seemed to have woken up from a dream, but he could not remember what dream he had had; I was just very annoyed, feeling that there was something lacking, and I felt that there was too much. The incited breeze and warm blow his strength throughout the universe.伊揉一揉自己的眼睛。
Yi rubbed his eyes.粉红的天空中，曲曲折折的漂着许多条石绿色的浮云，星便在那后面忽明忽灭的眼。天边的血红的云彩里有一个光芒四射的太阳，如流动的金球包在荒古的熔岩中；那一边，却是一个生铁一般的冷而且白的月亮。然而伊并不理会谁是下去，和谁是上来。
In the pink sky, there were many stone-green floating clouds floating in twists and turns, and the stars flickered and disappeared behind them. In the blood-red clouds on the horizon, there is a radiant sun, like a flowing golden ball wrapped in ancient lava; On the other side, there was a cold and white moon as cold as pig iron. But he didn't care who went down and who came up.地上都嫩绿了，便是不很换叶的松柏也显得格外的娇嫩。桃红和青白色的斗大的杂花，在眼前还分明，到远处可就成为斑斓的烟霭了。
The ground is tender green, and even the pines and cypresses that do not change their leaves are particularly delicate. The peach and blue and white flowers are still clear in front of you, and they can become colorful smoke in the distance.“唉唉，我从来没有这样的无聊过！”伊想着，猛然间站立起来了，擎上那非常圆满而精力洋溢的臂膊，向天打一个欠伸，天空便突然失了色，化为神异的肉红，暂时再也辨不出伊所在的处所。
"Oh, I've never been bored like this!" Yi thought, suddenly stood up, raised his very round and energetic arm, yawned to the sky, and the sky suddenly lost its color and turned into a mysterious flesh red, and it was no longer possible to distinguish where he was for the time being.伊在这肉红色的天地间走到海边，全身的曲线都消融在淡玫瑰似的光海里，直到身中央才浓成一段纯白。波涛都惊异，起伏得很有秩序了，然而浪花溅在伊身上。这纯白的影子在海水里动摇，仿佛全体都正在四面八方的迸散。但伊自己并没有见，只是不由的跪下一足，伸手掬起带水的软泥来，同时又揉捏几回，便有一个和自己差不多的小东西在两手里。
Yi walked to the beach between this flesh-red heaven and earth, and the curves of his whole body melted into a sea of light like a pale rose, until the center of his body thickened into a pure white. The waves were amazed, and the ups and downs were very orderly, but the waves splashed on him. This pure white shadow swayed in the seawater, as if they were all scattering in all directions. But he didn't see it himself, but he couldn't help but kneel down, stretched out his hand to scoop up the ooze with water, and kneaded it a few times at the same time, and there was a small thing similar to himself in his hands.“阿，阿！”伊固然以为是自己做的，但也疑心这东西就白薯似的原在泥土里，禁不住很诧异了。
"Ah, ah!" Although he thought he made it himself, he also suspected that this thing was in the dirt like a white potato, and he couldn't help but be surprised.然而这诧异使伊喜欢，以未曾有的勇往和愉快继续着伊的事业，呼吸吹嘘着，汗混和着……
However, this surprise made him like, and he continued his career with unprecedented courage and joy, breathing and boasting, sweating and mixing......“Nga！nga！”那些小东西可是叫起来了。
“Nga！ nga！ "Those little things are screaming.“阿，阿！”伊又吃了惊，觉得全身的毛孔中无不有什么东西飞散，于是地上便罩满了乳白色的烟云，伊才定了神，那些小东西也住了口。
"Ah, ah!" Yi was surprised again, feeling that something was flying in the pores of his body, so the ground was covered with milky white smoke clouds, and he calmed down, and those little things also stopped.“Akon，Agon！”有些东西向伊说。
“Akon，Agon！” Something said to him.“阿阿，可爱的宝贝。”伊看定他们，伸出带着泥土的手指去拨他肥白的脸。
"Ah, cute baby." He looked at them and stretched out his dirty fingers to pluck his fat and white face.“Uvu，Ahaha！”他们笑了。这是伊第一回在天地间看见的笑，于是自己也第一回笑得合不上嘴唇来。
“Uvu，Ahaha！” They laughed. This was the first time he saw a smile between heaven and earth, so he couldn't close his lips for the first time.伊一面抚弄他们，一面还是做，被做的都在伊的身边打圈，但他们渐渐的走得远，说得多了，伊也渐渐的懂不得，只觉得耳朵边满是嘈杂的嚷，嚷得颇有些头昏。
While Yi was caressing them, he still did it, and everything that was done was circling around Yi, but they gradually walked away, talking too much, and Yi gradually didn't understand, only felt that his ears were full of noisy shouts, and he was a little dizzy.伊在长久的欢喜中，早已带着疲乏了。几乎吹完了呼吸，流完了汗，而况又头昏，两眼便蒙胧起来，两颊也渐渐的发了热，自己觉得无所谓了，而且不耐烦。然而伊还是照旧的不歇手，不自觉的只是做。
In his long joy, he was already weary. I almost finished blowing my breath, sweating, and dizzy, my eyes became cloudy, and my cheeks gradually became hot, and I felt that it didn't matter, and I was impatient. However, Yi still did not stop as usual, and unconsciously just did it.终于，腰腿的酸痛逼得伊站立起来，倚在一座较为光滑的高山上，仰面一看，满天是鱼鳞样的白云，下面则是黑压压的浓绿。伊自己也不知道怎样，总觉得左右不如意了，便焦躁的伸出手去，信手一拉，拔起一株从山上长到天边的紫藤，一房一房的刚开着大不可言的紫花，伊一挥，那藤便横搭在地面上，遍地散满了半紫半白的花瓣。
Finally, the soreness in his waist and legs forced him to stand up, leaning on a relatively smooth mountain, looking up, the sky was full of white clouds like fish scales, and below was a dark green. Yi himself didn't know what to do, he always felt that he was not satisfactory, so he stretched out his hand anxiously, pulled it out, and pulled up a wisteria that grew from the mountain to the sky, and the room by room had just bloomed with indescribable purple flowers.伊接着一摆手，紫藤便在泥和水里一翻身，同时也溅出拌着水的泥土来，待到落在地上，就成了许多伊先前做过了一般的小东西，只是大半呆头呆脑，獐头鼠目的有些讨厌。然而伊不暇理会这等事了，单是有趣而且烦躁，夹着恶作剧的将手只是抡，愈抡愈飞速了，那藤便拖泥带水的在地上滚，像一条给沸水烫伤了的赤练蛇。泥点也就暴雨似的从藤身上飞溅开来，还在空中便成了哇哇地啼哭的小东西，爬来爬去的撒得满地。
Yi then waved his hand, and the wisteria turned over in the mud and water, and at the same time splashed the mud mixed with the water, and when it fell to the ground, it became a lot of the ordinary little things Yi had done before, but most of them were dumbfounded, and the roe deer and rat eyes were a little annoying. However, Yi didn't have time to pay attention to such things, it was just funny and irritable, and the mischievous hand was just picked, and the faster it was picked, the faster it became, and the vine rolled on the ground with mud, like a red snake burned by boiling water. The mud splashed from the vine like a torrential rain, and it became a crying little thing in the air, crawling around and scattering all over the ground.伊近于失神了，更其抡，但是不独腰腿痛，连两条臂膊也都乏了力，伊于是不由的蹲下身子去，将头靠着高山，头发漆黑的搭在山顶上，喘息一回之后，叹一口气，两眼就合上了。紫藤从伊的手里落了下来，也困顿不堪似的懒洋洋的躺在地面上。
Yi was close to fainting, and he was even more stiff, but not only his waist and legs hurt, but also his arms and arms were weak, so he couldn't help but squat down, leaned his head against the mountain, and his hair was black on the top of the mountain. Wisteria fell from Yi's hands, and he also lay lazily on the ground as if he was in distress.

补天

二

补天

Two轰！！！
Rumble!!!在这天崩地塌价的声音中，女娲猛然醒来，同时也就向东南方直溜下去了。伊伸了脚想踏住，然而什么也踹不到，连忙一舒臂揪住了山峰，这才没有再向下滑的形势。
In this sound of the collapse of the sky, Nuwa suddenly woke up, and at the same time slipped straight down to the southeast. Yi stretched out his foot to step on it, but he couldn't kick anything, so he quickly stretched out his arm and grabbed the mountain peak, so that there was no longer a downward situation.但伊又觉得水和沙石都从背后向伊头上和身边滚泼过去了，略一回头，便灌了一口和两耳朵的水，伊赶紧低了头，又只见地面不住的动摇。幸而这动摇也似乎平静下去了，伊向后一移，坐稳了身子，这才挪出手来拭去额角上和眼睛边的水，细看是怎样的情形。
But Yi felt that water and sand and stones were rolling over his head and side from behind, and when he turned around slightly, he poured a mouthful of water and his ears, and Yi quickly lowered his head, only to see the ground shaking incessantly. Fortunately, this shaking seemed to calm down, and he moved back, sat down, and then reached out to wipe the water from the corner of his forehead and around his eyes, and took a closer look at what was going on.情形很不清楚，遍地是瀑布般的流水；大概是海里罢，有几处更站起很尖的波浪来。伊只得呆呆的等着。
The situation is very unclear, and there is waterfall flowing everywhere; It's probably just a mile out of the sea, and there are a few places where very sharp waves stand up. He had to wait blankly.可是终于大平静了，大波不过高如从前的山，像是陆地的处所便露出棱棱的石骨。伊正向海上看，只见几座山奔流过来，一面又在波浪堆里打旋子。伊恐怕那些山碰了自己的脚，便伸手将他们撮住，望那山坳里，还伏着许多未曾见过的东西。
But finally it was calm, and the waves were as high as the mountains in the past, and the edged stone bones were exposed everywhere like land. Yi was looking at the sea, and saw several mountains rushing over, and one side was spinning in the waves. Fearing that the mountains would touch his feet, he stretched out his hand to hold them and looked at the mountain hollow, where there were many things he had never seen before.伊将手一缩，拉近山来仔细的看，只见那些东西旁边的地上吐得很狼藉，似乎是金玉的粉末，又夹杂些嚼碎的松柏叶和鱼肉。他们也慢慢的陆续抬起头来了，女娲圆睁了眼睛，好容易才省悟到这便是自己先前所做的小东西，只是怪模怪样的已经都用什么包了身子，有几个还在脸的下半截长着雪白的毛毛了，虽然被海水粘得像一片尖尖的白杨叶。
Yi shrank his hand, pulled the mountain closer to take a closer look, and saw that the ground next to those things was vomiting very messily, which seemed to be gold and jade powder, mixed with some chewed pine and cypress leaves and fish meat. They also slowly raised their heads one after another, Nuwa Yuan opened her eyes, and finally realized that this was the little thing she had done before, but the strange ones had already wrapped their bodies with something, and a few of them were still snow-white hairs on the lower half of their faces, although they were glued by the seawater like a sharp poplar leaf.“阿，阿！”伊诧异而且害怕的叫，皮肤上都起粟，就像触着一支毛刺虫。
"Ah, ah!" He screamed in surprise and fear, and his skin was covered with corns, as if he had touched a burr worm.“上真救命……”一个脸的下半截长着白毛的昂了头，一面呕吐，一面断断续续的说，“救命……臣等……是学仙的。谁料坏劫到来，天地分崩了。……现在幸而……遇到上真，……请救蚁命，……并赐仙……仙药……”他于是将头一起一落的做出异样的举动。
"Shangzhen help...... "The lower half of his face was covered with white hair, and while vomiting, he said intermittently, "Help...... Ministers...... It is a learning immortal. Unexpectedly, when the bad calamity came, the heavens and the earth fell apart. …… Fortunately, now ...... Encounter real ,...... Please save the ants' lives,...... He was granted immortality...... Immortal Medicine ......" He then made a strange move with his head falling together.伊都茫然，只得又说，“什么？”
Yidu was at a loss, so he had to say again, "What? ”他们中的许多也都开口了，一样的是一面呕吐，一面“上真上真”的只是嚷，接着又都做出异样的举动。伊被他们闹得心烦，颇后悔这一拉，竟至于惹了莫名其妙的祸。伊无法可想的向四处看，便看见有一队巨鳌正在海面上游玩，伊不由的喜出望外了，立刻将那些山都搁在他们的脊梁上，嘱咐道，“给我驼到平稳点的地方去罢！”巨鳌们似乎点一点头，成群结队的驼远了。可是先前拉得过于猛，以致从山上摔下一个脸有白毛的来，此时赶不上，又不会凫水，便伏在海边自己打嘴巴。这倒使女娲觉得可怜了，然而也不管，因为伊实在也没有工夫来管这些事。
Many of them also spoke, the same was vomiting, and the other was just shouting, and then they all made strange moves. He was upset by them and regretted that he had caused an inexplicable disaster. Yi couldn't imagine looking around, and saw a group of giant turtles playing on the sea, and Yi couldn't help but be overjoyed, and immediately put those mountains on their backbones, and instructed, "Hump me to a stable place!" The giant turtles seemed to nod their heads, and the camels walked away in groups. But he pulled too hard before, so that he fell from the mountain with white hair, and he couldn't catch up at this time, and he couldn't swim in the water, so he lay on the beach and hit his mouth. This made Nuwa feel pitiful, but she didn't care, because she really didn't have the time to take care of these things.伊嘘一口气，心地较为轻松了，再转过眼光来看自己的身边，流水已经退得不少，处处也露出广阔的土石，石缝里又嵌着许多东西，有的是直挺挺的了，有的却还在动。伊瞥见有一个正在白着眼睛呆看伊；那是遍身多用铁片包起来的，脸上的神情似乎很失望而且害怕。
Yi sighed, his heart was more relaxed, and then he turned his eyes to look at his side, the flowing water had receded a lot, and vast soil and stones were exposed everywhere, and there were many things embedded in the stone crevices, some of which were straight, and some were still moving. He caught a glimpse of a man staring blankly at him; It was wrapped in iron plates, and the expression on his face seemed to be very disappointed and scared.“那是怎么一回事呢？”伊顺便的问。
"What's going on?" Yi asked by the way.“呜呼，天降丧。”那一个便凄凉可怜的说，“颛顼不道，抗我后，我后躬行天讨，战于郊，天不祐德，我师反走，……”
"Oh, heaven is mourning." The one said desolately and pitifully, "Zhuanxu is unreasonable, after resisting me, I will bow to the heavens and fight in the suburbs, and the sky will not bless me, and my division will go back,......"“什么？”伊向来没有听过这类话，非常诧异了。
"What?" He had never heard such words before, and he was very surprised.“我师反走，我后爰以厥首触不周之山，折天柱，绝地维，我后亦殂落。呜呼，是实惟……”
"My master fled, and my queen hit the mountain of Buzhou with his head, broke the pillar of heaven, and the Jedi Wei, and my queen also died. Alas, it is the only ......“够了够了，我不懂你的意思。”伊转过脸去了，却又看见一个高兴而且骄傲的脸，也多用铁片包了全身的。
"Enough, enough, I don't understand what you mean." Yi turned his face away, but saw a happy and proud face, and his whole body was wrapped in iron plates.“那是怎么一回事呢？”伊到此时才知道这些小东西竟会变这么花样不同的脸，所以也想问出别样的可懂的答话来。
"What's going on?" It was only at this time that Yi realized that these little things would change into such different faces, so he also wanted to ask a different kind of understandable answer.“人心不古，康回实有豕心，觑天位，我后躬行天讨，战于郊，天实祐德，我师攻战无敌，殛康回于不周之山。”
"The people's hearts are not ancient, Kang Hui really has a pig heart, looking at the heavenly position, I will personally go to the heavens, fight in the suburbs, the sky is invincible, my division is invincible, and Kang Hui is killed in the mountains of Buzhou."“什么？”伊大约仍然没有懂。
"What?" Iyo still doesn't understand.“人心不古，……”
"The human heart is not ancient,......"“够了够了，又是这一套！”伊气得从两颊立刻红到耳根，火速背转头，另外去寻觅，好容易才看见一个不包铁片的东西，身子精光，带着伤痕还在流血，只是腰间却也围着一块破布片。他正从别一个直挺挺的东西的腰间解下那破布来，慌忙系上自己的腰，但神色倒也很平淡。
"Enough, enough, this is the set again!" Yi was so angry that his cheeks immediately turned red from his ears, he quickly turned his head away, and went to look for it elsewhere, and finally saw a thing that was not covered with iron plates, his body was naked, and he was still bleeding with scars, but there was also a piece of rags around his waist. He was untying the rag from the waist of another straight thing, and hurriedly tied his waist, but his expression was also very flat.伊料想他和包铁片的那些是别一种，应该可以探出一些头绪了，便问道：
Yi Liang thought that he and the ones wrapped in iron plates were different kinds, and he should be able to find some clues, so he asked:“那是怎么一回事呢？”
"What's going on?"“那是怎么一回事呵。”他略一抬头，说。
"What's going on?" He looked up slightly and said.“那刚才闹出来的是？……”
"Then what happened just now? ……”“那刚才闹出来的么？”
"Then it just came out?"“是打仗罢？”伊没有法，只好自己来猜测了。
"Is it a war?" Yi had no choice, so he had to guess by himself.“打仗罢？”然而他也问。
"Fight?" However, he also asked.女娲倒抽了一口冷气，同时也仰了脸去看天。天上一条大裂纹，非常深，也非常阔。伊站起来，用指甲去一弹，一点不清脆，竟和破碗的声音相差无几了。伊皱着眉心，向四面察看一番，又想了一会，便拧去头发里的水，分开了搭在左右肩膀上，打起精神来向各处拔芦柴：伊已经打定了“修补起来再说”的主意了。
Nuwa gasped, and at the same time raised her face to look at the sky. There is a big crack in the sky, very deep and very wide. Yi stood up and flicked it with his fingernails, which was not crisp at all, and it was almost the same as the sound of a broken bowl. Yi frowned, looked around, thought for a while, then wringed out the water from his hair, put it on his left and right shoulders, and cheered up to pull reeds everywhere: Yi had already made up his mind to "mend it and talk about it".伊从此日日夜夜堆芦柴，柴堆高多少，伊也就瘦多少，因为情形不比先前，——仰面是歪斜开裂的天，低头是龌龊破烂的地，毫没有一些可以赏心悦目的东西了。
From then on, he piled up reeds day and night, and as high as the pile of firewood was, he became thinner, for the situation was no more crooked and cracked than before,—— and the ground was filthy and tattered when he bowed his head, and there was nothing pleasing to the eye.芦柴堆到裂口，伊才去寻青石头。当初本想用和天一色的纯青石的，然而地上没有这么多，大山又舍不得用，有时到热闹处所去寻些零碎，看见的又冷笑，痛骂，或者抢回去，甚而至于还咬伊的手。伊于是只好搀些白石，再不够，便凑上些红黄的和灰黑的，后来总算将就的填满了裂口，止要一点火，一熔化，事情便完成，然而伊也累得眼花耳响，支持不住了。
The reeds and firewood are piled up until the crack opens, and I go to find the green stone. At the beginning, I wanted to use pure blue stone that was the same color as the sky, but there were not so many on the ground, and the mountains were reluctant to use it, so sometimes I went to the lively place to find some bits and pieces, and when I saw it, I sneered, scolded, or snatched it back, and even bit his hand. Yi had no choice but to take some white stones, and if it was not enough, he made up some red, yellow and gray and black, and finally filled the crack, only a little fire, and as soon as it melted, the matter was completed, but Yi was also so tired that he couldn't support it.“唉唉，我从来没有这样的无聊过。”伊坐在一座山顶上，两手捧着头，上气不接下气的说。
"Alas, I've never been bored like this." Yi sat on the top of a mountain, holding his head in both hands, and said out of breath.这时昆仑山上的古森林的大火还没有熄，西边的天际都通红。伊向西一瞟，决计从那里拿过一株带火的大树来点芦柴积，正要伸手，又觉得脚趾上有什么东西刺着了。
At this time, the fire in the ancient forest on Kunlun Mountain had not yet been extinguished, and the western sky was red. Yi glanced to the west and decided to take a big tree with fire from there to accumulate some reeds, and was about to reach out when he felt something prick his toe.伊顺下眼去看，照例是先前所做的小东西，然而更异样了，累累坠坠的用什么布似的东西挂了一身，腰间又格外挂上十几条布，头上也罩着些不知什么，顶上是一块乌黑的小小的长方板，手里拿着一片物件，刺伊脚趾的便是这东西。
Yi Shun looked down, as usual, it was a small thing made before, but it was even more strange, he was hanging with something like cloth, and there were more than a dozen pieces of cloth hanging around his waist, and his head was also covered with something, and on top was a small black rectangular board, holding an object in his hand, and it was this thing that stabbed his toes.那顶着长方板的却偏站在女娲的两腿之间向上看，见伊一顺眼，便仓皇的将那小片递上来了。伊接过来看时，是一条很光滑的青竹片，上面还有两行黑色的细点，比槲树叶上的黑斑小得多。伊倒也很佩服这手段的细巧。
The person with the rectangular board stood between Nuwa's legs and looked up, and when he saw that Yi was pleasing to the eye, he hurriedly handed over the small piece. When Yi took it and looked at it, it was a very smooth green bamboo slice with two rows of thin black dots on it, much smaller than the black spots on the oak leaves. Yi also admired the delicacy of this method.“这是什么？”伊还不免于好奇，又忍不住要问了。
"What is this?" Yi couldn't help but be curious, and couldn't help but ask.顶长方板的便指着竹片，背诵如流的说道，“裸裎淫佚，失德蔑礼败度，禽兽行。国有常刑，惟禁！”
The person on the top of the rectangular board pointed to the bamboo piece and recited fluently, "Naked and obscene, immoral and rude, beastly." The country has a fixed punishment, but it is prohibited! ”女娲对那小方板瞪了一眼，倒暗笑自己问得太悖了，伊本已知道和这类东西扳谈，照例是说不通的，于是不再开口，随手将竹片搁在那头顶上面的方板上，回手便从火树林里抽出一株烧着的大树来，要向芦柴堆上去点火。
Nuwa glared at the small square board, and secretly laughed at herself for asking too absurdly, she already knew that it would not make sense to talk to this kind of thing, so she stopped speaking, casually put the bamboo piece on the square board above her head, and took out a big burning tree from the fire forest and wanted to light it on the pile of reeds.忽而听到呜呜咽咽的声音了，可也是闻所未闻的玩艺，伊姑且向下再一瞟，却见方板底下的小眼睛里含着两粒比芥子还小的眼泪。因为这和伊先前听惯的“nga nga”的哭声大不同了，所以竟不知道这也是一种哭。
Suddenly I heard a whimpering sound, but it was also an unheard of play, Yi Gu glanced down again, but saw two tears smaller than mustard seeds in the small eyes under the square board. Because this was very different from the cry of "nga nga" that he was used to hearing before, he didn't know that this was also a kind of crying.伊就去点上火，而且不止一地方。
He went to light the fire, and there was more than one place.火势并不旺，那芦柴是没有干透的，但居然也烘烘的响，很久很久，终于伸出无数火焰的舌头来，一伸一缩的向上舔，又很久，便合成火焰的重台花，又成了火焰的柱，赫赫的压倒了昆仑山上的红光。大风忽地起来，火柱旋转着发吼，青的和杂色的石块都一色通红了，饴糖似的流布在裂缝中间，像一条不灭的闪电。
The fire was not strong, the reeds were not dry, but they were actually roaring, for a long, long time, and finally stretched out the tongue of countless flames, stretched and licked upwards, and for a long time, it synthesized the heavy table flower of the flame, and became a pillar of flame, overpowering the red light on Kunlun Mountain. The wind suddenly rose, and the pillar of fire rotated and roared, and the blue and variegated stones were all red, and they flowed like candy in the middle of the cracks, like an undying lightning.风和火势卷得伊的头发都四散而且旋转，汗水如瀑布一般奔流，大光焰烘托了伊的身躯，使宇宙间现出最后的肉红色。
The wind and fire swirled his hair in all directions, sweat flowed like a waterfall, and the great flames set off his body, making the universe appear the last flesh red.火柱逐渐上升了，只留下一堆芦柴灰。伊待到天上一色青碧的时候，才伸手去一摸，指面上却觉得还很有些参差。
The pillar of fire gradually rose, leaving only a pile of ash. When the sky was blue, he reached out and touched it, but his fingers felt a little uneven.“养回了力气，再来罢。……”伊自己想。
"Regain your strength, come again. ...... thought to himself.伊于是弯腰去捧芦灰了，一捧一捧的填在地上的大水里，芦灰还未冷透，蒸得水澌澌的沸涌，灰水泼满了伊的周身。大风又不肯停，夹着灰扑来，使伊成了灰土的颜色。
Yi then bent down to hold the reed ash, and the reed ash was filled with the water on the ground, the reed ash was not yet cold, and the water was boiling, and the gray water splashed all over his body. The wind refused to stop, and it rushed in with the ashes, making it the color of gray soil.“吁！……”伊吐出最后的呼吸来。
"Oh! ......" Yi exhaled his last breath.天边的血红的云彩里有一个光芒四射的太阳，如流动的金球包在荒古的熔岩中；那一边，却是一个生铁一般的冷而且白的月亮。但不知道谁是下去和谁是上来。这时候，伊的以自己用尽了自己一切的躯壳，便在这中间躺倒，而且不再呼吸了。
In the blood-red clouds on the horizon, there is a radiant sun, like a flowing golden ball wrapped in ancient lava; On the other side, there was a cold and white moon as cold as pig iron. But I don't know who goes down and who comes up. At this time, Edim, having exhausted all his body, lay down in the midst of it, and stopped breathing.上下四方是死灭以上的寂静。
The upper and lower four directions are silence above death.

补天

三

补天

Three有一日，天气很寒冷，却听到一点喧嚣，那是禁军终于杀到了，因为他们等候着望不见火光和烟尘的时候，所以到得迟。他们左边一柄黄斧头，右边一柄黑斧头，后面一柄极大极古的大纛，躲躲闪闪的攻到女娲死尸的旁边，却并不见有什么动静。他们就在死尸的肚皮上扎了寨，因为这一处最膏腴，他们检选这些事是很伶俐的。然而他们却突然变了口风，说惟有他们是女娲的嫡派，同时也就改换了大纛旗上的科斗字，写道“女娲氏之肠”。
One day, it was very cold, but they heard a little noise, and it was the forbidden army that finally arrived, because they were waiting for the time when they could not see the fire and smoke, so they arrived late. They had a yellow axe on the left, a black axe on the right, and a very large and ancient flag behind them, dodging and attacking the side of Nuwa's corpse, but there was no movement. They built a camp on the belly of the corpse, because this place was the most fatty, and they were very clever in selecting these things. However, they suddenly changed their tone, saying that they were the only ones who were Nuwa's direct faction, and at the same time changed the word "Kedou on the big flag" and wrote "Nuwa's intestines".落在海岸上的老道士也传了无数代了。他临死的时候，才将仙山被巨鳌背到海上这一件要闻传授徒弟，徒弟又传给徒孙，后来一个方士想讨好，竟去奏闻了秦始皇，秦始皇便教方士去寻去。
The old Taoist priests who landed on the coast have also been passed down for countless generations. When he was dying, he passed on the news of the immortal mountain being carried to the sea by the giant turtle to his apprentice, and the apprentice passed it on to his apprentice, and later an alchemist wanted to please him, so he went to report to Qin Shi Huang, and Qin Shi Huang taught the alchemist to find it.方士寻不到仙山，秦始皇终于死掉了；汉武帝又教寻，也一样的没有影。
The alchemist could not find the immortal mountain, and Qin Shi Huang finally died; Emperor Wu of the Han Dynasty taught to search, and there was no shadow in the same way.大约巨鳌们是并没有懂得女娲的话的，那时不过偶而凑巧的点了点头。模模胡胡的背了一程之后，大家便走散去睡觉，仙山也就跟着沉下了，所以直到现在，总没有人看见半座神仙山，至多也不外乎发见了若干野蛮岛。
Probably the giant turtles didn't understand Nuwa's words, and they just nodded occasionally. After a long journey, everyone scattered to sleep, and the fairy mountain sank, so until now, no one had seen half of the fairy mountain, and at most they had found a few barbaric islands.一九二二年十一月作。
Created in November 1922.

奔月

奔月

奔月

Rush to the moon一
One聪明的牲口确乎知道人意，刚刚望见宅门，那马便立刻放缓脚步了，并且和它背上的主人同时垂了头，一步一顿，像捣米一样。
The clever animal did know people's intentions, and as soon as he saw the door of the house, the horse immediately slowed down, and bowed its head at the same time as the owner on its back, one step at a time, like pounding rice.暮霭笼罩了大宅，邻屋上都腾起浓黑的炊烟，已经是晚饭时候。家将们听得马蹄声，早已迎了出来，都在宅门外垂着手直挺挺地站着。羿在垃圾堆边懒懒地下了马，家将们便接过缰绳和鞭子去。他刚要跨进大门，低头看看挂在腰间的满壶的簇新的箭和网里的三匹乌老鸦和一匹射碎了的小麻雀，心里就非常踌蹰。但到底硬着头皮，大踏步走进去了；箭在壶里豁朗豁朗地响着。
The twilight haze enveloped the mansion, and thick black smoke rose from the neighboring houses, and it was already dinner time. The family generals heard the sound of horses' hooves and had already come out, and they all stood upright with their hands hanging down outside the door of the house. Yi lazily dismounted by the garbage heap, and the family leaders took the reins and whips. As soon as he was about to step into the gate, he looked down at the pot full of new arrows hanging around his waist, the three old crows in the net, and a little sparrow that had been shattered, and his heart was very hesitant. But in the end, he bit the bullet and strode in; The arrow rang loudly in the pot.刚到内院，他便见嫦娥在圆窗里探了一探头。他知道她眼睛快，一定早瞧见那几匹乌鸦的了，不觉一吓，脚步登时也一停，——但只得往里走。使女们都迎出来，给他卸了弓箭，解下网兜。他仿佛觉得她们都在苦笑。
As soon as he arrived at the inner courtyard, he saw Chang'e peeking out in the round window. He knew that her eyes were fast, and he must have seen those crows earlier, so he was startled, and his footsteps stopped,—— but he had to go inside. The maids all came out, unloaded his bow and arrow, and untied the net pocket. He seemed to feel that they were all smiling bitterly.“太太……。”他擦过手脸，走进内房去，一面叫。
"Madam......." He wiped his hands and face, walked into the inner room, and shouted.嫦娥正在看着圆窗外的暮天，慢慢回过头来，似理不理的向他看了一眼，没有答应。
Chang'e was looking at the twilight outside the round window, slowly turned around, and glanced at him ignorantly, but did not agree.这种情形，羿倒久已习惯的了，至少已有一年多。他仍旧走近去，坐在对面的铺着脱毛的旧豹皮的木榻上，搔着头皮，支支梧梧地说——
Yi has been accustomed to this situation for a long time, at least for more than a year. He still approached, sat on the wooden couch covered with old leopard skin on the opposite side, scratched his scalp, and said in a daze——“今天的运气仍旧不见佳，还是只有乌鸦……。”
"Today's luck is still not good, or there is only a crow ......."“哼！”嫦娥将柳眉一扬，忽然站起来，风似的往外走，嘴里咕噜着，“又是乌鸦的炸酱面，又是乌鸦的炸酱面！你去问问去，谁家是一年到头只吃乌鸦肉的炸酱面的？我真不知道是走了什么运，竟嫁到这里来，整年的就吃乌鸦的炸酱面！”
"Hmph!" Chang'e raised her willow eyebrows, suddenly stood up, walked out like the wind, and muttered in her mouth, "It's the crow's fried sauce noodles again, and it's the crow's fried sauce noodles again!" You go and ask, who only eats fried noodles with crow meat all year round? I really don't know what luck I had, but I got married here and ate crow's fried noodles all year round! ”“太太，”羿赶紧也站起，跟在后面，低声说，“不过今天倒还好，另外还射了一匹麻雀，可以给你做菜的。女辛！”他大声地叫使女，“你把那一匹麻雀拿过来请太太看！”
"Madam," Yi hurriedly stood up, followed behind, and whispered, "But it's okay today, and I also shot a sparrow, which can cook for you." Female Xin! He called out loudly to the maid, "Bring that sparrow over for your wife to see!" ”野味已经拿到厨房里去了，女辛便跑去挑出来，两手捧着，送在嫦娥的眼前。
The game had already been taken to the kitchen, so Nu Xin ran to pick it out, held it in both hands, and sent it to Chang'e's eyes.“哼！”她瞥了一眼，慢慢地伸手一捏，不高兴地说，“一团糟！不是全都粉碎了么？肉在那里？”
"Hmph!" She glanced at it, slowly reached out and pinched it, and said unhappily, "It's a mess!" Isn't it all shattered? Where is the meat? ”“是的，”羿很惶恐，“射碎的。我的弓太强，箭头太大了。”
"Yes," Yi was very frightened, "Shoot it to pieces." My bow is too strong, the arrow is too big. ”“你不能用小一点的箭头的么？”
"Can't you use a smaller arrow?"“我没有小的。自从我射封豕长蛇……。”
"I don't have a small one. Since I shot the pig and the snake ....... ”“这是封豕长蛇么？”她说着，一面回转头去对着女辛道，“放一碗汤罢！”便又退回房里去了。
"Is this a pig and a long snake?" She said, turning her head to Nu Xin and saying, "Put a bowl of soup!" Then he went back to the room.只有羿呆呆地留在堂屋里，靠壁坐下，听着厨房里柴草爆炸的声音。他回忆当年的封豕是多么大，远远望去就像一坐小土冈，如果那时不去射杀它，留到现在，足可以吃半年，又何用天天愁饭菜。还有长蛇，也可以做羹喝……。
Only Yi stayed in the hall in a daze, sat against the wall, and listened to the sound of firewood exploding in the kitchen. He recalled how big the sealed pig was back then, it looked like a small earthen hill from a distance, if he hadn't shot it at that time, and kept it until now, it would be enough to eat for half a year, so why worry about food every day. There are also long snakes, which can also be made into soup and .......女乙来点灯了，对面墙上挂着的彤弓，彤矢，卢弓，卢矢，弩机，长剑，短剑，便都在昏暗的灯光中出现。羿看了一眼，就低了头，叹一口气；只见女辛搬进夜饭来，放在中间的案上，左边是五大碗白面；右边两大碗，一碗汤；中央是一大碗乌鸦肉做的炸酱。
The female B came to light the lamp, and the red bow, red arrow, Lu bow, Lu arrow, crossbow machine, long sword, and short sword hanging on the opposite wall all appeared in the dim light. Yi took a look, then lowered his head and sighed; I saw Nu Xin move into the dinner and put it on the table in the middle, with five large bowls of white noodles on the left; two large bowls on the right, a bowl of soup; In the center is a large bowl of fried sauce made from crow meat.羿吃着炸酱面，自己觉得确也不好吃；偷眼去看嫦娥，她炸酱是看也不看，只用汤泡了面，吃了半碗，又放下了。他觉得她脸上仿佛比往常黄瘦些，生怕她生了病。
Yi ate fried noodles, and he thought it was not delicious; Stealing a glance at Chang'e, she didn't look at the fried sauce, she only soaked the noodles in the soup, ate half a bowl, and put it down again. He felt that her face seemed to be thinner than usual, for fear that she would get sick.到二更时，她似乎和气一些了，默坐在床沿上喝水。羿就坐在旁边的木榻上，手摩着脱毛的旧豹皮。
By the second watch, she seemed to be more amiable and sat silently on the edge of the bed drinking water. Yi sat on the wooden couch next to him, rubbing the old leopard skin that had been shed with his hands.“唉，”他和蔼地说，“这西山的文豹，还是我们结婚以前射得的，那时多么好看，全体黄金光。”他于是回想当年的食物，熊是只吃四个掌，驼留峰，其余的就都赏给使女和家将们。后来大动物射完了，就吃野猪兔山鸡；射法又高强，要多少有多少。“唉，”他不觉叹息，“我的箭法真太巧妙了，竟射得遍地精光。那时谁料到只剩下乌鸦做菜……。”
"Alas," he said kindly, "this literary leopard in Xishan was still shot before we got married, how beautiful it was at that time, all the golden light." He then recalled the food of the year, the bear only ate four palms, humped the peak, and rewarded the rest to the maids and generals. Later, when the big animals finished shooting, they ate wild boars, rabbits, and pheasants; The shooting method is also very strong, and it depends on how much it takes. "Alas," he sighed, "my archery is so ingenious that I shoot all over the place." Who would have thought that only crows would be left to cook at that time...... ”“哼。”嫦娥微微一笑。
"Hmph." Chang'e smiled slightly.“今天总还要算运气的，”羿也高兴起来，“居然猎到一只麻雀。这是远绕了三十里路才找到的。”
"Today is always lucky," Yi was also happy, "I actually hunted a sparrow." This was found after a thirty miles of detour. ”“你不能走得更远一点的么？！”
"Can't you go further?!"“对。太太。我也这样想。明天我想起得早些。倘若你醒得早，那就叫醒我。我准备再远走五十里，看看可有些獐子兔子。……但是，怕也难。当我射封豕长蛇的时候，野兽是那么多。你还该记得罢，丈母的门前就常有黑熊走过，叫我去射了好几回……。”
"Yes. Wife. I think so too. Tomorrow I will wake up earlier. If you wake up early, wake me up. I'm going to walk another fifty miles to see if there are some roe deer and rabbits. …… However, it is difficult to be afraid. When I shot the pig and the snake, there were so many beasts. You should also remember that there were often black bears walking in front of my mother-in-law's door and asked me to shoot several times...... ”“是么？”嫦娥似乎不大记得。
"Really?" Chang'e doesn't seem to remember much.“谁料到现在竟至于精光的呢。想起来，真不知道将来怎么过日子。我呢，倒不要紧，只要将那道士送给我的金丹吃下去，就会飞升。但是我第一先得替你打算，……所以我决计明天再走得远一点……。”
"Who would have thought that it would be so beautiful now. Thinking about it, I really don't know how to live in the future. As for me, it doesn't matter, as long as I eat the golden pill given to me by the Taoist priest, I will ascend. But I have to plan for you first,...... So I decided to go a little further tomorrow ....... ”“哼。”嫦娥已经喝完水，慢慢躺下，合上眼睛了。
"Hmph." Chang'e had already finished drinking water, slowly lay down, and closed her eyes.残膏的灯火照着残妆，粉有些褪了，眼圈显得微黄，眉毛的黛色也仿佛两边不一样。但嘴唇依然红得如火；虽然并不笑，颊上也还有浅浅的酒窝。
The light of the residual paste illuminated the remaining makeup, the powder faded a little, the eye circles looked slightly yellow, and the color of the eyebrows seemed to be different on both sides. But the lips were still red like fire; Although he didn't smile, he still had shallow dimples on his cheeks.“唉唉，这样的人，我就整年地只给她吃乌鸦的炸酱面……。”羿想着，觉得惭愧，两颊连耳根都热起来。
"Alas, such a person, I will only give her crow's fried noodles all year long...... Yi thought about it, feeling ashamed, and his cheeks even warmed up to the base of his ears.

奔月

二

奔月

Two过了一夜就是第二天。
After one night is the next day.羿忽然睁开眼睛，只见一道阳光斜射在西壁上，知道时候不早了；看看嫦娥，兀自摊开了四肢沉睡着。他悄悄地披上衣服，爬下豹皮榻，躄出堂前，一面洗脸，一面叫女庚去吩咐王升备马。
Yi suddenly opened his eyes and saw a ray of sunlight shining diagonally on the west wall, knowing that it was getting late; Looking at Chang'e, she spread her limbs and fell asleep. He quietly put on his clothes, climbed off the leopard skin couch, and limped out of the hall, washing his face while asking Nu Geng to instruct Wang Sheng to prepare a horse.他因为事情忙，是早就废止了朝食的；女乙将五个炊饼，五株葱和一包辣酱都放在网兜里，并弓箭一齐替他系在腰间。他将腰带紧了一紧，轻轻地跨出堂外面，一面告诉那正从对面进来的女庚道——
He abolished breakfast a long time ago because he was busy with things; Female B put five cooking cakes, five green onions and a packet of hot sauce in her net pocket, and tied her bow and arrow around his waist. He tightened his belt and gently stepped out of the hall, telling the female Geng who was coming in from the opposite side -“我今天打算到远地方去寻食物去，回来也许晚一些。看太太醒后，用过早点心，有些高兴的时候，你便去禀告，说晚饭请她等一等，对不起得很。记得么？你说：对不起得很。”
"I'm going to go far away today to find food, and maybe come back later. After seeing that your wife woke up, she used an early snack, and when she was a little happy, you went to report and said that she would wait for dinner, and she was very sorry. Do you remember? You say: I'm sorry. ”他快步出门，跨上马，将站班的家将们扔在脑后，不一会便跑出村庄了。前面是天天走熟的高粱田，他毫不注意，早知道什么也没有的。加上两鞭，一径飞奔前去，一气就跑了六十里上下，望见前面有一簇很茂盛的树林，马也喘气不迭，浑身流汗，自然慢下去了。大约又走了十多里，这才接近树林，然而满眼是胡蜂，粉蝶，蚂蚁，蚱蜢，那里有一点禽兽的踪迹。他望见这一块新地方时，本以为至少总可以有一两匹狐儿兔儿的，现在才知道又是梦想。他只得绕出树林，看那后面却又是碧绿的高粱田，远处散点着几间小小的土屋。风和日暖，鸦雀无声。
He walked out quickly, mounted his horse, threw the family generals on duty behind him, and ran out of the village after a while. In front of him was a sorghum field that was ripe every day, and he didn't pay attention, knowing that there was nothing. With the addition of two whips, he galloped forward, running up and down sixty miles in one breath, and saw a cluster of lush woods in front of him, and the horse was panting, sweating all over, and naturally slowed down. After walking about ten miles, I approached the woods, but my eyes were full of wasps, butterflies, ants, grasshoppers, and there were traces of beasts. When he saw this new place, he thought that there could always be at least one or two foxes and rabbits, but now he knew that it was a dream again. He had to go around the woods and see that behind it was a green sorghum field, with a few small earthen houses scattered in the distance. The wind is gentle and the sun is warm, and the crows are silent.“倒楣！”他尽量地大叫了一声，出出闷气。
"Unlucky!" He screamed as hard as he could, sulking.但再前行了十多步，他即刻心花怒放了，远远地望见一间土屋外面的平地上，的确停着一匹飞禽，一步一啄，像是很大的鸽子。他慌忙拈弓搭箭，引满弦，将手一放，那箭便流星般出去了。
But after taking more than ten steps forward, he immediately became happy, and from a distance, he saw a bird parked on the flat ground outside a dirt house, pecking at every step, like a big pigeon. He hurriedly picked up his bow and arrow, pulled the string, and as soon as he let go of his hand, the arrow went out like a meteor.这是无须迟疑的，向来有发必中；他只要策马跟着箭路飞跑前去，便可以拾得猎物。谁知道他将要临近，却已有一个老婆子捧着带箭的大鸽子，大声嚷着，正对着他的马头抢过来。
There is no need to hesitate, there has always been a hit; As long as he rode his horse and ran along the arrow road, he could pick up the prey. Who knew that he was about to approach, but there was already an old woman holding a big pigeon with an arrow, shouting loudly, and snatching it from his horse's head.“你是谁哪？怎么把我家的顶好的黑母鸡射死了？你的手怎的有这么闲哪？……”
"Who are you? How did you shoot my best black hen to death?" How can your hands be so idle? ……”羿的心不觉跳了一跳，赶紧勒住马。
Yi's heart jumped unconsciously, and he quickly restrained his horse.“阿呀！鸡么？我只道是一只鹁鸪。”他惶恐地说。
"Oh! Is it a chicken? I just said it was a partridge. He said in fear.“瞎了你的眼睛！看你也有四十多岁了罢。”
"Blind your eyes! Look at you in your forties. ”“是的。老太太。我去年就有四十五岁了。”
"Yes. Old lady. I turned forty-five last year. ”“你真是枉长白大！连母鸡也不认识，会当作鹁鸪！你究竟是谁哪？”
"You are really in vain! I don't even know the hen, I will treat it as a partridge! Who are you? ”“我就是夷羿。”他说着，看看自己所射的箭，是正贯了母鸡的心，当然死了，末后的两个字便说得不大响亮；一面从马上跨下来。
"I am Yi Yi." He said, looking at the arrow he shot, it was right through the hen's heart, and of course he died, and the last two words were not loud; One side stepped off the horse.“夷羿？……谁呢？我不知道。”她看着他的脸，说。
"Yi Yi? …… Who? I do not know. She looked at his face and said.“有些人是一听就知道的。尧爷的时候，我曾经射死过几匹野猪，几条蛇……。”
"Some people know it as soon as they hear it. When Yao Ye was a master, I once shot several wild boars and snakes ....... ”“哈哈，骗子！那是逢蒙老爷和别人合伙射死的。也许有你在内罢；但你倒说是你自己了，好不识羞！”
"Haha, liar! It was shot to death by Master Feng Meng in partnership with others. Maybe you are inside; But you said it was yourself, so shameless! ”“阿阿，老太太。逢蒙那人，不过近几年时常到我那里来走走，我并没有和他合伙，全不相干的。”
"Ah, old lady. Fengmena people, but in recent years, they have often come to my place, and I have not partnered with him, so it has nothing to do with it. ”“说诳。近来常有人说，我一月就听到四五回。”
"Lie. Recently, people often say that I hear it four or five times a month. ”“那也好。我们且谈正经事罢。这鸡怎么办呢？”
"That's fine. Let's talk about serious matters. What should I do with this chicken? ”“赔。这是我家最好的母鸡，天天生蛋。你得赔我两柄锄头，三个纺锤。”
"Compensation. This is the best hen in my family, laying eggs every day. You have to compensate me for two hoes and three spindles. ”“老太太，你瞧我这模样，是不耕不织的，那里来的锄头和纺锤。我身边又没有钱，只有五个炊饼，倒是白面做的，就拿来赔了你的鸡，还添上五株葱和一包甜辣酱。你以为怎样？……”他一只手去网兜里掏炊饼，伸出那一只手去取鸡。
"Old lady, look at me like this, I don't plow or weave, the hoe and spindle from there. I don't have any money around me, only five pancakes, but they are made of white flour, so I used them to compensate for your chicken, and added five green onions and a pack of sweet and spicy sauce. What do you think? ......" He went to the net pocket with one hand to take out the cooking cake, and stretched out the other hand to get the chicken.老婆子看见白面的炊饼，倒有些愿意了，但是定要十五个。磋商的结果，好容易才定为十个，约好至迟明天正午送到，就用那射鸡的箭作抵押。羿这时才放了心，将死鸡塞进网兜里，跨上鞍鞒，回马就走，虽然肚饿，心里却很喜欢，他们不喝鸡汤实在已经有一年多了。
When the old woman saw the white noodle pancakes, she was a little willing, but she had to have fifteen. As a result of the negotiation, it was easy to set it to ten, and it was agreed that it would be delivered by noon tomorrow at the latest, and the arrow from the chicken would be used as collateral. Yi was relieved at this time, stuffed the dead chicken into the net pocket, put on the saddle, and left, although he was hungry, he liked it very much, and they had not drunk chicken soup for more than a year.他绕出树林时，还是下午，于是赶紧加鞭向家里走；但是马力乏了，刚到走惯的高粱田近旁，已是黄昏时候。只见对面远处有人影子一闪，接着就有一枝箭忽地向他飞来。
When he went around the woods, it was still afternoon, so he hurriedly whipped home; But the horsepower was exhausted, and it was already dusk when I first arrived near the sorghum fields I was used to. I saw a shadow flashing in the distance opposite, and then an arrow suddenly flew towards him.羿并不勒住马，任它跑着，一面却也拈弓搭箭，只一发，只听得铮的一声，箭尖正触着箭尖，在空中发出几点火花，两枝箭便向上挤成一个“人”字，又翻身落在地上了。第一箭刚刚相触，两面立刻又来了第二箭，还是铮的一声，相触在半空中。那样地射了九箭，羿的箭都用尽了；但他这时已经看清逢蒙得意地站在对面，却还有一枝箭搭在弦上正在瞄准他的咽喉。
Yi did not restrain his horse, let it run, but on the other hand, he also took a bow and arrows, only one shot, only heard a clang, the tip of the arrow was touching the tip of the arrow, sending out a few sparks in the air, and the two arrows squeezed up into a "person" character, and turned over and fell to the ground. The first arrow just touched, and the second arrow immediately came from both sides, still with a clang, and it touched in mid-air. After shooting nine arrows like that, Yi's arrows were exhausted; But he could already see that Fengmeng was standing proudly opposite, but there was still an arrow on the string aiming at his throat.“哈哈，我以为他早到海边摸鱼去了，原来还在这些地方干这些勾当，怪不得那老婆子有那些话……。”羿想。
"Haha, I thought he had gone to the beach to fish early, and it turned out that he was still doing these things in these places, no wonder the old woman had those ....... Yi thought.那时快，对面是弓如满月，箭似流星。飕的一声，径向羿的咽喉飞过来。也许是瞄准差了一点了，却正中了他的嘴；一个筋斗，他带箭掉下马去了，马也就站住。
At that time, it was fast, and on the opposite side was a bow like a full moon and an arrow like a shooting star. With a whistle, it flew straight towards Yi's throat. maybe the aim was a little short, but it hit him in the mouth; In a somersault, he fell off his horse with an arrow, and the horse stopped.逢蒙见羿已死，便慢慢地躄过来，微笑着去看他的死脸，当作喝一杯胜利的白干。
When Feng Meng saw that Yi was dead, he slowly limped over and smiled to see his dead face, as if he had a cup of victory.刚在定睛看时，只见羿张开眼，忽然直坐起来。
When I was just looking at it, I saw Yi open his eyes and suddenly sit upright.“你真是白来了一百多回。”他吐出箭，笑着说，“难道连我的‘啮镞法’都没有知道么？这怎么行。你闹这些小玩艺儿是不行的，偷去的拳头打不死本人，要自己练练才好。”
"You've really come more than a hundred times in vain." He spat out the arrow and said with a smile, "Don't you even know my 'biting arrow method'?" How can this work? You can't make these little tricks, the stolen fist can't kill you, you have to practice by yourself. ”“即以其人之道，反诸其人之身……。”胜者低声说。
“即以其人之道，反诸其人之身……。 ”胜者低声说。“哈哈哈！”他一面大笑，一面站了起来，“又是引经据典。但这些话你只可以哄哄老婆子，本人面前捣什么鬼？俺向来就只是打猎，没有弄过你似的剪径的玩艺儿……。”他说着，又看看网兜里的母鸡，倒并没有压坏，便跨上马，径自走了。
"Hahaha!" He laughed and stood up, "It's a quote again." But you can only coax the old woman with these words, what the hell is going on in front of me? I've always been just hunting, and I've never had the art of cutting paths like you...... He said, and looked at the hen in the net pocket, but it was not crushed, so he mounted his horse and walked away.“……你打了丧钟！……”远远地还送来叫骂。
“…… You hit the death knell! ...... also sent scolding from afar.“真不料有这样没出息。青青年纪，倒学会了诅咒，怪不得那老婆子会那么相信他。”羿想着，不觉在马上绝望地摇了摇头。
"I really didn't expect it to be so unpromising. Young people learned curses, no wonder the old woman believed him so much. Yi thought, and immediately shook his head in despair.

奔月

三

奔月

Three还没有走完高粱田，天色已经昏黑；蓝的空中现出明星来，长庚在西方格外灿烂。马只能认着白色的田塍走，而且早已筋疲力竭，自然走得更慢了。幸而月亮却在天际渐渐吐出银白的清辉。
Before the sorghum field was finished, it was already dark; Stars appear in the blue sky, and Chang Geng is particularly brilliant in the west. The horse could only recognize the white fields and walk, and was already exhausted, so naturally walked slower. Fortunately, the moon gradually exhaled a silvery white brilliance in the sky.“讨厌！”羿听到自己的肚子里骨碌骨碌地响了一阵，便在马上焦躁了起来。“偏是谋生忙，便偏是多碰到些无聊事，白费工夫！”他将两腿在马肚子上一磕，催它快走，但马却只将后半身一扭，照旧地慢腾腾。
"I hate it!" Yi heard a rumbling sound in his stomach, and immediately became anxious. "It's just that I'm busy making a living, so I encounter more boring things, and it's a waste of effort!" He knocked his legs on the horse's belly and urged it to go quickly, but the horse only twisted the back of its body and continued to move slowly as usual.“嫦娥一定生气了，你看今天多么晚。”他想。“说不定要装怎样的脸给我看哩。但幸而有这一只小母鸡，可以引她高兴。我只要说：太太，这是我来回跑了二百里路才找来的。不，不好，这话似乎太逞能。”
"Chang'e must be angry, look at how late it is today." He thought. "Maybe you want to show me what kind of face you want to pretend. But fortunately, there is this little hen that can make her happy. I just have to say: Madam, I ran back and forth for two hundred miles to find it. No, it's not good, this seems too arrogant. ”他望见人家的灯火已在前面，一高兴便不再想下去了。马也不待鞭策，自然飞奔。圆的雪白的月亮照着前途，凉风吹脸，真是比大猎回来时还有趣。
He saw that the lights of the houses were already in front of him, and he stopped thinking about it when he was happy. The horse didn't need to be spurred, and naturally ran away. The round snow-white moon shines on the future, and the cool breeze blows on the face, which is really more interesting than when the hunt comes back.马自然而然地停在垃圾堆边；羿一看，仿佛觉得异样，不知怎地似乎家里乱毵毵。迎出来的也只有一个赵富。
The horse naturally stopped by the garbage heap; Yi looked at it, as if he felt strange, and somehow it seemed that the house was in chaos. There was only one Zhao Fu who came out.“怎的？王升呢？”他奇怪地问。
"What? Where is Wang Sheng? He asked strangely.“王升到姚家找太太去了。”
"Wang Sheng went to Yao's house to find his wife."“什么？太太到姚家去了么？”羿还呆坐在马上，问。
"What? Did your wife go to Yao's house? Yi still sat on the horse and asked.“喳……。”他一面答应着，一面去接马缰和马鞭。
"Hey......" He agreed while going to pick up the reins and whip.羿这才爬下马来，跨进门，想了一想，又回过头去问道——
Yi then climbed off his horse, stepped into the door, thought for a while, and then turned around and asked——“不是等不迭了，自己上饭馆去了么？”
"Didn't you can't wait any longer, did you go to the restaurant by yourself?"“喳。三个饭馆，小的都去问过了，没有在。”
"Hey. Three restaurants, the little ones have all asked, but they are not there. ”羿低了头，想着，往里面走，三个使女都惶惑地聚在堂前。他便很诧异，大声的问道——
Yi lowered his head, thought, and walked inside, and the three maidservants gathered in front of the hall in confusion. He was very surprised and asked loudly -“你们都在家么？姚家，太太一个人不是向来不去的么？”
"Are you all at home? Yao family, isn't the wife alone? ”她们不回答，只看看他的脸，便来给他解下弓袋和箭壶和装着小母鸡的网兜。羿忽然心惊肉跳起来，觉得嫦娥是因为气忿寻了短见了，便叫女庚去叫赵富来，要他到后园的池里树上去看一遍。但他一跨进房，便知道这推测是不确的了：房里也很乱，衣箱是开着，向床里一看，首先就看出失少了首饰箱。他这时正如头上淋了一盆冷水，金珠自然不算什么，然而那道士送给他的仙药，也就放在这首饰箱里的。
They did not answer, but looked at his face, and came to untie his bow bag, quiver, and net pocket containing the little hen. Yi suddenly jumped up in fright, feeling that Chang'e was looking for a short-sighted view because of anger, so she asked Nu Geng to call Zhao Fu and ask him to go to the tree in the pond in the back garden to see it again. But as soon as he stepped into the room, he knew that this speculation was not true: the room was also very messy, the wardrobe was open, and when he looked into the bed, he could first see that the jewelry box was missing. At this time, he was like a basin of cold water on his head, and the gold beads were naturally nothing, but the elixir given to him by the Taoist priest was placed in this jewelry box.羿转了两个圆圈，才看见王升站在门外面。
Yi turned two circles before he saw Wang Sheng standing outside the door.“回老爷，”王升说，“太太没有到姚家去；他们今天也不打牌。”
"Back to the master," Wang Sheng said, "the wife did not go to the Yao family; They don't play cards today. ”羿看了他一眼，不开口。王升就退出去了。
Yi glanced at him and did not speak. Wang Sheng withdrew.“老爷叫？……”赵富上来，问。
"Master? ......" Zhao Fu came up and asked.羿将头一摇，又用手一挥，叫他也退出去。
Yi shook his head and waved his hand again, telling him to withdraw as well.羿又在房里转了几个圈子，走到堂前，坐下，仰头看着对面壁上的彤弓，彤矢，卢弓，卢矢，弩机，长剑，短剑，想了些时，才问那呆立在下面的使女们道——
Yi walked around the room a few more times, walked to the front of the hall, sat down, looked up at the red bow, red arrow, Lu bow, Lu arrow, crossbow machine, long sword, short sword, and thought for a while, before asking the maids standing below -“太太是什么时候不见的？”
"When did you disappear, ma'am?"“掌灯时候就不看见了，”女乙说，“可是谁也没见她走出去。”
"I didn't see it when I was in charge of the lamp," said the second girl, "but no one saw her walk out." ”“你们可见太太吃了那箱里的药没有？”
"Can you see that your wife has taken the medicine in that box?"“那倒没有见。但她下午要我倒水喝是有的。”
"I didn't see that. But she asked me to pour water in the afternoon. ”羿急得站了起来，他似乎觉得，自己一个人被留在地上了。
Yi stood up anxiously, he seemed to feel that he was left alone on the ground.“你们看见有什么向天上飞升的么？”他问。
"Do you see anything ascending to heaven?" He asked.“哦！”女辛想了一想，大悟似的说，“我点了灯出去的时候，的确看见一个黑影向这边飞去的，但我那时万想不到是太太……。”于是她的脸色苍白了。
"Oh!" Nu Xin thought for a while and said as if enlightened, "When I lit the light and went out, I did see a black shadow flying this way, but I couldn't think it was my wife ...... at that time." So her face turned pale.“一定是了！”羿在膝上一拍，即刻站起，走出屋外去，回头问着女辛道，“那边？”
"It must be!" Yi patted him on his lap, stood up immediately, walked out of the house, and turned around to ask Nu Xin, "Over there?" ”女辛用手一指，他跟着看去时，只见那边是一轮雪白的圆月，挂在空中，其中还隐约现出楼台，树木；当他还是孩子时候祖母讲给他听的月宫中的美景，他依稀记得起来了。他对着浮游在碧海里似的月亮，觉得自己的身子非常沉重。
Nu Xin pointed with his hand, and when he followed to look, he saw a snow-white full moon hanging in the air, and there were faint towers and trees in it; When he was a child, he vaguely remembered the beautiful scenery in the Moon Palace that his grandmother told him. He looked at the moon as if floating in the blue sea, and felt that his body was very heavy.他忽然愤怒了。从愤怒里又发了杀机，圆睁着眼睛，大声向使女们叱咤道——
He suddenly became angry. From anger, he murdered again, opened his eyes, and shouted loudly to the maids-“拿我的射日弓来！和三枝箭！”
"Take my sun-shooting bow! and three arrows! ”女乙和女庚从堂屋中央取下那强大的弓，拂去尘埃，并三枝长箭都交在他手里。
Nu Yi and Nu Geng took the powerful bow from the center of the hall, brushed off the dust, and handed the three long arrows in his hands.他一手拈弓，一手捏着三枝箭，都搭上去，拉了一个满弓，正对着月亮。身子是岩石一般挺立着，眼光直射，闪闪如岩下电，须发开张飘动，像黑色火，这一瞬息，使人仿佛想见他当年射日的雄姿。
He held a bow in one hand and three arrows in the other, all of which were put on it, and pulled a full bow, facing the moon. The body was erect like a rock, his eyes were direct, shining like electricity under the rock, and his beard was fluttering, like black fire.飕的一声，——只一声，已经连发了三枝箭，刚发便搭，一搭又发，眼睛不及看清那手法，耳朵也不及分别那声音。本来对面是虽然受了三枝箭，应该都聚在一处的，因为箭箭相衔，不差丝发。但他为必中起见，这时却将手微微一动，使箭到时分成三点，有三个伤。
With a bang,—— three arrows have been fired in a row, and they have just fired, and they have fired again, and their eyes have not had time to see the technique clearly, and their ears have not been able to distinguish the sound. Originally, although the opposite side was hit by three arrows, they should all be gathered in one place, because the arrows and arrows were connected and not bad. But in order to be hit, he moved his hand slightly, so that the arrow was divided into three points and three wounds.使女们发一声喊，大家都看见月亮只一抖，以为要掉下来了，——但却还是安然地悬着，发出和悦的更大的光辉，似乎毫无伤损。
The maids shouted, and everyone saw that the moon only shook, thinking it was about to fall,—— but it still hung safely, emitting a greater brilliance of harmony, as if there was no damage.“呔！”羿仰天大喝一声，看了片刻；然而月亮不理他。他前进三步，月亮便退了三步；他退三步，月亮却又照数前进了。
"Oh!" Yi looked up to the sky and shouted for a moment; However, the moon ignored him. He took three steps forward, and the moon took three steps back; He took three steps back, but the moon moved forward again.他们都默着，各人看各人的脸。
They were silent, and each looked at their faces.羿懒懒地将射日弓靠在堂门上，走进屋里去。使女们也一齐跟着他。
Yi lazily leaned the sun-shooting bow against the hall door and walked into the house. The maidservants followed him together.“唉，”羿坐下，叹一口气，“那么，你们的太太就永远一个人快乐了。她竟忍心撇了我独自飞升？莫非看得我老起来了？但她上月还说：并不算老，若以老人自居，是思想的堕落。”
"Alas," Yi sat down and sighed, "then, your wife will always be happy alone." She actually had the heart to leave me to ascend alone? Could it be that I am getting older? But she also said last month: Not old, if you consider yourself an old man, it is a degeneration of thinking. ”“这一定不是的。”女乙说，“有人说老爷还是一个战士。”
"This must not be the case." Female B said, "Some people say that the master is still a warrior. ”“有时看去简直好像艺术家。”女辛说。
"Sometimes it looks like an artist." Nu Xin said.“放屁！——不过乌老鸦的炸酱面确也不好吃，难怪她忍不住……。”
"Fart! ——But the crow's fried noodles are indeed not delicious, no wonder she can't help but ....... ”“那豹皮褥子脱毛的地方，我去剪一点靠墙的脚上的皮来补一补罢，怪不好看的。”女辛就往房里走。
"The place where the leopard skin mattress is shed, I'll cut a little skin on the foot against the wall to make up for it, it's not good-looking." Nu Xin walked into the room.“且慢，”羿说着，想了一想，“那倒不忙。我实在饿极了，还是赶快去做一盘辣子鸡，烙五斤饼来，给我吃了好睡觉。明天再去找那道士要一服仙药，吃了追上去罢。女庚，你去吩咐王升，叫他量四升白豆喂马！”
"Slow down," Yi said, thinking for a while, "That's not busy." I was really hungry, so I hurried to make a plate of spicy chicken, baked five pounds of cakes, and gave me a good night's sleep. Tomorrow I will go to the Taoist priest to take the elixir, eat it and catch up. Nu Geng, you go and tell Wang Sheng to measure four liters of white beans to feed the horse! ”一九二六年十二月作。
Created in December 1926.

理水

理水

理水

Water management一
One这时候是“汤汤洪水方割，浩浩怀山襄陵”；舜爷的百姓，倒并不都挤在露出水面的山顶上，有的捆在树顶，有的坐着木排，有些木排上还搭有小小的板棚，从岸上看起来，很富于诗趣。
At this time, it is "the soup and flood is cutting, and the vast mountains and tombs are being cut"; Shunye's people are not all crowded on the top of the mountain that is exposed to the water, some are tied to the top of the trees, some are sitting on wooden rafts, and some wooden rafts are also set up with small board sheds, which look very poetic from the shore.远地里的消息，是从木排上传过来的。大家终于知道鲧大人因为治了九整年的水，什么效验也没有，上头龙心震怒，把他充军到羽山去了，接任的好像就是他的儿子文命少爷，乳名叫作阿禹。
The news from afar came from the wooden raft. Everyone finally knew that Lord Gun had no effect because he had treated the water for nine whole years, and the dragon was furious, and he was conscripted into the army to Yushan, and it seemed that his son Wenming Shaoye was named Ayu.灾荒得久了，大学早已解散，连幼稚园也没有地方开，所以百姓们都有些混混沌沌。只在文化山上，还聚集着许多学者，他们的食粮，是都从奇肱国用飞车运来的，因此不怕缺乏，因此也能够研究学问。然而他们里面，大抵是反对禹的，或者简直不相信世界上真有这个禹。
The famine has been going on for a long time, the university has long been disbanded, and there is no place to open even a kindergarten, so the people are a little confused. Only on the Cultural Mountain, there are also many scholars, whose food is transported from the Qigong Kingdom by flying car, so they are not afraid of lack, so they can also study knowledge. However, among them, most of them are against Yu, or simply do not believe that there is such a Yu in the world.每月一次，照例的半空中要簌簌的发响，愈响愈厉害，飞车看得清楚了，车上插一张旗，画着一个黄圆圈在发毫光。离地五尺，就挂下几只篮子来，别人可不知道里面装的是什么，只听得上下在讲话：
Once a month, as usual, it will make a rustling sound in mid-air, the louder it gets, the louder it is, the flying car can be seen clearly, a flag is planted on the car, and a yellow circle is drawn to glow. Five feet off the ground, hang a few baskets, others don't know what is inside, they can only hear the speech:“古貌林！”
"Gu Mao Lin!"“好杜有图！”
"Good Du Youtu!"“古鲁几哩……”
"Guru ......“O．K！”
“O． K！ ”飞车向奇肱国疾飞而去，天空中不再留下微声，学者们也静悄悄，这是大家在吃饭。独有山周围的水波，撞着石头，不住的澎湃的在发响。午觉醒来，精神百倍，于是学说也就压倒了涛声了。
The speeding car flew towards the Qi Gong Kingdom, there was no longer a whisper left in the sky, and the scholars were quiet, this was everyone eating. The water waves around the unique mountain hit the stones, and they couldn't stop surging. When I woke up from a nap, I was a hundred times more energetic, so the doctrine overwhelmed the sound of the waves.“禹来治水，一定不成功，如果他是鲧的儿子的话，”一个拿拄杖的学者说。“我曾经搜集了许多王公大臣和豪富人家的家谱，很下过一番研究工夫，得到一个结论：阔人的子孙都是阔人，坏人的子孙都是坏人——这就叫作‘遗传’。所以，鲧不成功，他的儿子禹一定也不会成功，因为愚人是生不出聪明人来的！”
"Yu came to control the water, and he would not have succeeded, if he was Gun's son," said a scholar with a cane. "I have collected the genealogies of many princes and ministers and wealthy families, and I have done a lot of research and come to a conclusion: the descendants of the broad people are all the broad people, and the children and grandchildren of the bad people are all bad people - this is called 'heredity'. Therefore, if Gun is not successful, his son Yu will definitely not succeed, because fools cannot give birth to smart people! ”“O．K！”一个不拿拄杖的学者说。
“O． K！ A scholar who does not take a cane said.“不过您要想想咱们的太上皇，”别一个不拿拄杖的学者道。
"But you have to think about our Supreme Emperor," said another scholar who did not hold a cane.“他先前虽然有些‘顽’，现在可是改好了。倘是愚人，就永远不会改好……”
"Although he was a little 'stubborn' before, he has changed it now. If you are a fool, you will never change ......"“O．K！”
“O． K！ ”“这这些些都是费话，”又一个学者吃吃的说，立刻把鼻尖胀得通红。“你们是受了谣言的骗的。其实并没有所谓禹，‘禹’是一条虫，虫虫会治水的吗？我看鲧也没有的，‘鲧’是一条鱼，鱼鱼会治水水水的吗？”他说到这里，把两脚一蹬，显得非常用劲。
"These are all nonsense," another scholar said, immediately swollen the tip of his nose red. "You have been deceived by rumors. In fact, there is no so-called Yu, 'Yu' is a worm, can insects control water? I don't think Gun has it, 'Gun' is a fish, can fish control water? When he said this, he kicked his feet and seemed very hard.“不过鲧却的确是有的，七年以前，我还亲眼看见他到昆仑山脚下去赏梅花的。”
"But Gun does have it, seven years ago, I saw him go to the foot of Kunlun Mountain to enjoy the plum blossoms."“那么，他的名字弄错了，他大概不叫‘鲧’，他的名字应该叫‘人’！至于禹，那可一定是一条虫，我有许多证据，可以证明他的乌有，叫大家来公评……”
"Then, his name is wrong, he is probably not called 'Gun', his name should be 'Ren'! As for Yu, it must be a worm, I have a lot of evidence to prove that he is nothing, so I asked everyone to come to the public commentary......"于是他勇猛的站了起来，摸出削刀，刮去了五株大松树皮，用吃剩的面包末屑和水研成浆，调了炭粉，在树身上用很小的蝌蚪文写上抹杀阿禹的考据，足足化掉了三九廿七天工夫。但是凡有要看的人，得拿出十片嫩榆叶，如果住在木排上，就改给一贝壳鲜水苔。
So he stood up bravely, took out a sharpener, scraped off the bark of five large pine trees, ground it into a pulp with leftover breadcrumbs and water, mixed charcoal powder, and wrote a small tadpole text on the tree to erase Ayu's evidence, which took a full three or nine twenty-seven days. But anyone who wants to see it has to take out ten young elm leaves, and if they live on a wooden raft, they will be given a shell of fresh water moss.横竖到处都是水，猎也不能打，地也不能种，只要还活着，所有的是闲工夫，来看的人倒也很不少。松树下挨挤了三天，到处都发出叹息的声音，有的是佩服，有的是疲劳。但到第四天的正午，一个乡下人终于说话了，这时那学者正在吃炒面。
There is water everywhere, hunting cannot be hunted, the land cannot be planted, as long as it is alive, all is idle work, and there are many people who come to see. After three days of being crowded under the pine trees, there were sighs everywhere, some admiring, some being tired. But by noon on the fourth day, a countryman finally spoke, and the scholar was eating fried noodles.“人里面，是有叫作阿禹的，”乡下人说。“况且‘禹’也不是虫，这是我们乡下人的简笔字，老爷们都写作‘禺’，是大猴子……”
"Among the people, there is a man named Ayu," said the countryman. "Moreover, 'Yu' is not a worm, this is a stick figure of our countrymen, and the old men all write 'Yu', which is a big monkey......"“人有叫作大大猴子的吗？……”学者跳起来了，连忙咽下没有嚼烂的一口面，鼻子红到发紫，吆喝道。
"Is there a person called a big monkey? ......" The scholar jumped up, quickly swallowed a mouthful of noodles that had not been chewed, his nose was red to purple, and shouted.“有的呀，连叫阿狗阿猫的也有。”
"Yes, there are even those called dogs and cats."“鸟头先生，您不要和他去辩论了，”拿拄杖的学者放下面包，拦在中间，说。“乡下人都是愚人。拿你的家谱来，”他又转向乡下人，大声道，“我一定会发见你的上代都是愚人……”
"Don't debate with him, Mr. Birdhead," said the cane-wielding scholar, putting down his bread and stopping in the middle. "The countrymen are fools. Take your family tree," he said aloud, turning to the countryman, "I will surely find that your ancestors were fools......“我就从来没有过家谱……”
"I've never had a family tree......"“呸，使我的研究不能精密，就是你们这些东西可恶！”
"Bah, make my research not precise, it's you damn these things!"“不过这这也用不着家谱，我的学说是不会错的。”鸟头先生更加愤愤的说。“先前，许多学者都写信来赞成我的学说，那些信我都带在这里……”
"But this doesn't require a family tree, my doctrine will not be wrong." Mr. Birdhead said even more indignantly. "Previously, many scholars wrote letters in favor of my doctrines, and I brought those letters here......"“不不，那可应该查家谱……”
"No, no, then you should check the family tree......"“但是我竟没有家谱，”那“愚人”说。“现在又是这么的人荒马乱，交通不方便，要等您的朋友们来信赞成，当作证据，真也比螺蛳壳里做道场还难。证据就在眼前：您叫鸟头先生，莫非真的是一个鸟儿的头，并不是人吗？”
"But I don't have a family tree," said the "fool." "Now it's so chaotic and inconvenient, and it's really more difficult to wait for your friends to write in favor and use it as evidence, than to build a dojo in a snail shell. The evidence is right in front of you: your name is Mr. Bird's Head, is it really the head of a bird, not a human? ”“哼！”鸟头先生气忿到连耳轮都发紫了。“你竟这样的侮辱我！说我不是人！我要和你到皋陶大人那里去法律解决！如果我真的不是人，我情愿大辟——就是杀头呀，你懂了没有？要不然，你是应该反坐的。你等着罢，不要动，等我吃完了炒面。”
"Hmph!" Mr. Birdhead was so angry that even the earrings turned purple. "You insulted me like this! Say I'm not human! I want to go to Lord Gao Yao with you to settle it legally!" If I really wasn't human, I would rather be executed - just beheading, do you understand? Otherwise, you should sit back. You wait, don't move, wait until I finish eating fried noodles." ”“先生，”乡下人麻木而平静的回答道，“您是学者，总该知道现在已是午后，别人也要肚子饿的。可恨的是愚人的肚子却和聪明人的一样：也要饿。真是对不起得很，我要捞青苔去了，等您上了呈子之后，我再来投案罢。”于是他跳上木排，拿起网兜，捞着水草，泛泛的远开去了。看客也渐渐的走散，鸟头先生就红着耳轮和鼻尖从新吃炒面，拿拄杖的学者在摇头。
"Sir," replied the countryman numbly and calmly, "you are a scholar, and you should know that it is afternoon and others will be hungry too." The hateful thing is that the fool's stomach is the same as that of the wise: he will also be hungry. I'm really sorry, I'm going to fish for moss, and I'll surrender again after you submit the petition. So he jumped on the wooden raft, picked up the net bag, fished for aquatic plants, and drove away. The spectators gradually dispersed, and Mr. Bird Head ate fried noodles with red earrings and the tip of his nose, and the scholar with a cane was shaking his head.然而“禹”究竟是一条虫，还是一个人呢，却仍然是一个大疑问。
However, whether "Yu" is a worm or a person is still a big question.

理水

二

理水

Two禹也真好像是一条虫。
Yu really seems to be a worm.大半年过去了，奇肱国的飞车已经来过八回，读过松树身上的文字的木排居民，十个里面有九个生了脚气病，治水的新官却还没有消息。直到第十回飞车来过之后，这才传来了新闻，说禹是确有这么一个人的，正是鲧的儿子，也确是简放了水利大臣，三年之前，已从冀州启节，不久就要到这里了。
More than half a year has passed, and the speeding car of Qigong Kingdom has been here eight times, and nine out of ten of the wooden row residents who have read the words on the pine tree have beriberi, but there is no news about the new official who controls the water. It wasn't until after the tenth speeding car came that the news came that Yu did have such a person, it was Gun's son, and he was indeed the Minister of Water Resources, who had started the festival from Jizhou three years ago and would be here soon.大家略有一点兴奋，但又很淡漠，不大相信，因为这一类不甚可靠的传闻，是谁都听得耳朵起茧了的。
Everyone was a little excited, but they were very indifferent and didn't believe it, because everyone could hear this kind of unreliable rumor.然而这一回却又像消息很可靠，十多天之后，几乎谁都说大臣的确要到了，因为有人出去捞浮草，亲眼看见过官船；他还指着头上一块乌青的疙瘩，说是为了回避得太慢一点了，吃了一下官兵的飞石：这就是大臣确已到来的证据。这人从此就很有名，也很忙碌，大家都争先恐后的来看他头上的疙瘩，几乎把木排踏沉；后来还经学者们召了他去，细心研究，决定了他的疙瘩确是真疙瘩，于是使鸟头先生也不能再执成见，只好把考据学让给别人，自己另去搜集民间的曲子了。
However, this time it was like the news was very reliable, more than ten days later, almost everyone said that the minister was indeed coming, because someone went out to fish for floating grass and saw the official ship with their own eyes; He also pointed to a black pimple on his head, saying that in order to avoid it too slowly, he ate the flying stone of the officers and soldiers: this is evidence that the minister has indeed arrived. This man has been famous and busy since then, and everyone rushed to see the pimple on his head, almost trampling the wooden raft; Later, he was summoned by scholars to study carefully, and it was decided that his pimple was indeed a real pimple, so Mr. Birdhead could no longer hold on to prejudices, so he had to give up his research to others and collect folk songs by himself.一大阵独木大舟的到来，是在头上打出疙瘩的大约二十多天之后，每只船上，有二十名官兵打桨，三十名官兵持矛，前后都是旗帜；刚靠山顶，绅士们和学者们已在岸上列队恭迎，过了大半天，这才从最大的船里，有两位中年的胖胖的大员出现，约略二十个穿虎皮的武士簇拥着，和迎接的人们一同到最高巅的石屋里去了。
The arrival of a large group of canoes came about 20 days after the pimples on their heads, and on each boat, there were 20 officers and soldiers paddling, 30 officers and soldiers holding spears, and there were flags in front and behind; As soon as they reached the top of the mountain, the gentlemen and scholars had lined up on the shore to greet them, and after most of the day, two middle-aged fat men appeared from the largest ship, surrounded by about twenty warriors wearing tiger skins, and went to the stone house at the highest point with the people who welcomed them.大家在水陆两面，探头探脑的悉心打听，才明白原来那两位只是考察的专员，却并非禹自己。
Everyone inquired carefully on both land and water, and only then did they realize that the two were just commissioners for inspection, not Yu himself.大员坐在石屋的中央，吃过面包，就开始考察。
The senior sat in the center of the stone house, ate the bread, and began to investigate.“灾情倒并不算重，粮食也还可敷衍，”一位学者们的代表，苗民言语学专家说。“面包是每月会从半空中掉下来的；鱼也不缺，虽然未免有些泥土气，可是很肥，大人。至于那些下民，他们有的是榆叶和海苔，他们‘饱食终日，无所用心’，——就是并不劳心，原只要吃这些就够。我们也尝过了，味道倒并不坏，特别得很……”
"The disaster is not serious, and the food is perfunctory," said a representative of the scholars, an expert in Miao linguistics. "Bread falls from mid-air every month; There is no shortage of fish, although it is a little earthy, but it is very fat, adult. As for those servants, they have elm leaves and seaweed, and they 'eat all day long, with no intention',—— they just don't bother, just eat these. We have also tasted it, and it tastes not bad, very ......"“况且，”别一位研究《神农本草》的学者抢着说，“榆叶里面是含有维他命W的；海苔里有碘质，可医瘰疬病，两样都极合于卫生。”
"Moreover," another scholar who studies "Shennong's Materia Medica" rushed to say, "Elm leaves contain vitamin W; Seaweed contains iodine, which can treat scrofula, and both are very suitable for hygiene. ”“O．K！”又一个学者说。大员们瞪了他一眼。
“O． K！ Another scholar said. The members glared at him.“饮料呢，”那《神农本草》学者接下去道，“他们要多少有多少，一万代也喝不完。可惜含一点黄土，饮用之前，应该蒸馏一下的。敝人指导过许多次了，然而他们冥顽不灵，绝对的不肯照办，于是弄出数不清的病人来……”
"What about drinks," the scholar of "Shennong's Materia Medica" continued, "They want as much as they want, and they can't drink it for ten thousand generations." It's a pity that it contains a little loess, which should be distilled before drinking. We have guided many times, but they are stubborn and absolutely refuse to do so, so they have brought out countless patients to ......."“就是洪水，也还不是他们弄出来的吗？”一位五绺长须，身穿酱色长袍的绅士又抢着说。“水还没来的时候，他们懒着不肯填，洪水来了的时候，他们又懒着不肯戽……”
"It's a flood, isn't it made by them?" A gentleman with a long beard and a sauce-colored robe rushed to say again. "When the water didn't come, they were too lazy to fill it, and when the flood came, they were too lazy to ...... it."“是之谓失其性灵，”坐在后一排，八字胡子的伏羲朝小品文学家笑道。“吾尝登帕米尔之原，天风浩然，梅花开矣，白云飞矣，金价涨矣，耗子眠矣，见一少年，口衔雪茄，面有蚩尤氏之雾……哈哈哈！没有法子……”
"It's called losing its spirit," laughed the Fuxi Dynasty sketch writer sitting in the back row. "I once climbed the Pamir Plain, the wind was strong, the plum blossoms were blooming, the white clouds were flying, the price of gold was rising, and the rats were sleeping, and I saw a young man with a cigar in his mouth and a mist on his face...... Hahaha! There is no way......"“O．K！”
“O． K！ ”这样的谈了小半天。大员们都十分用心的听着，临末是叫他们合拟一个公呈，最好还有一种条陈，沥述着善后的方法。
We talked like this for a long time. The officials listened very attentively, and at the end of the day, they were asked to draft a public presentation, and it was best to have a statement that explained the method of aftermath.于是大员们下船去了。第二天，说是因为路上劳顿，不办公，也不见客；第三天是学者们公请在最高峰上赏偃盖古松，下半天又同往山背后钓黄鳝，一直玩到黄昏。第四天，说是因为考察劳顿了，不办公，也不见客；第五天的午后，就传见下民的代表。
So the officers got off the boat. the next day, he said that it was because he was tired on the road, did not work, and did not see guests; On the third day, scholars were invited to enjoy the ancient pines on the highest peak, and in the second half of the day, they went to the back of the mountain to fish for yellow eels until dusk. On the fourth day, it is said that it is because of the fatigue of the inspection, and there is no office, nor does it see guests; On the afternoon of the fifth day, it was rumored that representatives of the common people were heard.下民的代表，是四天以前就在开始推举的，然而谁也不肯去，说是一向没有见过官。于是大多数就推定了头有疙瘩的那一个，以为他曾有见过官的经验。已经平复下去的疙瘩，这时忽然针刺似的痛起来了，他就哭着一口咬定：做代表，毋宁死！大家把他围起来，连日连夜的责以大义，说他不顾公益，是利己的个人主义者，将为华夏所不容；激烈点的，还至于捏起拳头，伸在他的鼻子跟前，要他负这回的水灾的责任。他渴睡得要命，心想与其逼死在木排上，还不如冒险去做公益的牺牲，便下了绝大的决心，到第四天，答应了。
The representatives of the common people began to be elected four days ago, but no one was willing to go, saying that they had never seen an official. So most of them assumed that the one with the pimple on his head thought that he had the experience of seeing officials. The pimple that had calmed down suddenly hurt like a needle prick, and he cried and insisted: Be a representative, rather than die! Everyone surrounded him and blamed him for day and night, saying that he disregarded the public welfare and was a self-interested individualist who would be tolerated by China; The more intense ones were even clenched into fists and stretched out in front of his nose, asking him to take responsibility for the flood. He was so thirsty that he thought that instead of being forced to die on a wooden raft, it would be better to take the risk of making sacrifices for the public welfare, so he made great determination and agreed on the fourth day.大家就都称赞他，但几个勇士，却又有些妒忌。
Everyone praised him, but a few warriors were a little jealous.就是这第五天的早晨，大家一早就把他拖起来，站在岸上听呼唤。果然，大员们呼唤了。他两腿立刻发抖，然而又立刻下了绝大的决心，决心之后，就又打了两个大呵欠，肿着眼眶，自己觉得好像脚不点地，浮在空中似的走到官船上去了。
On the morning of the fifth day, everyone dragged him up early in the morning and stood on the shore listening to the call. Sure enough, the officials called. His legs trembled immediately, but he immediately made great determination, and after making up his mind, he yawned twice, his eyes were swollen, and he felt as if his feet were not touching the ground, and he walked to the official ship as if he were floating in the air.奇怪得很，持矛的官兵，虎皮的武士，都没有打骂他，一直放进了中舱。舱里铺着熊皮，豹皮，还挂着几副弩箭，摆着许多瓶罐，弄得他眼花缭乱。定神一看，才看见在上面，就是自己的对面，坐着两位胖大的官员。什么相貌，他不敢看清楚。
It was very strange that the officers and soldiers with spears and the warriors in tiger skins did not beat and scold him, and kept putting him in the middle cabin. The cabin was covered with bear skins, leopard skins, and a few pairs of crossbow arrows, and many bottles and cans, which dazzled him. When he looked at it carefully, he saw two fat officials sitting on the opposite side of him. He didn't dare to see what it looked like.“你是百姓的代表吗？”大员中的一个问道。
"Are you a representative of the people?" One of the senior members asked.“他们叫我上来的。”他眼睛看着铺在舱底上的豹皮的艾叶一般的花纹，回答说。
"They called me up." He looked at the mugwort leaf-like pattern of the leopard skin spread on the bilge and replied.“你们怎么样？”
"How are you?"“……”他不懂意思，没有答。
"......" He didn't understand the meaning and didn't answer.“你们过得还好么？”
"How are you doing?"“托大人的鸿福，还好……”他又想了一想，低低的说道，“敷敷衍衍……混混……”
"Thanks to the great blessing of the lord, it's okay......" He thought for a while and said in a low voice, "Perfunctory...... Bastard ......"“吃的呢？”
"What about food?"“有，叶子呀，水苔呀……”
"Yes, leaves, sphagnum moss......“都还吃得来吗？”
"Can you still eat it?"“吃得来的。我们是什么都弄惯了的，吃得来的。只有些小畜生还要嚷，人心在坏下去哩，妈的，我们就揍他。”
"Eaten. We are used to everything and can eat it. Only some little beasts still want to shout, people's hearts are getting worse, damn it, we will beat him. ”大人们笑起来了，有一个对别一个说道：“这家伙倒老实。”
The adults laughed, and one said to the other: "This guy is honest." ”这家伙一听到称赞，非常高兴，胆子也大了，滔滔的讲述道：
When this guy heard the praise, he was very happy and bold, and gushed out:“我们总有法子想。比如水苔，顶好是做滑溜翡翠汤，榆叶就做一品当朝羹。剥树皮不可剥光，要留下一道，那么，明年春天树枝梢还是长叶子，有收成。如果托大人的福，钓到了黄鳝……”
"We always have a way to think. For example, sphagnum moss, at best, is made into a smooth jade soup, and elm leaves are made into a dish of morning soup. Peel the bark not to be stripped, leave one, then, next spring, the branches will still have long leaves, and there will be a harvest. If you rely on the blessing of the lord, you can catch a yellow eel......"然而大人好像不大爱听了，有一位也接连打了两个大呵欠，打断他的讲演道：“你们还是合具一个公呈来罢，最好是还带一个贡献善后方法的条陈。”
However, the adults didn't seem to like listening much, and one of them also yawned twice in a row, interrupting his speech and saying: "You should still prepare a public presentation, and it is best to bring a statement to contribute to the aftermath." ”“我们可是谁也不会写……”他惴惴的说。
"None of us can write ......," he said anxiously.“你们不识字吗？这真叫作不求上进！没有法子，把你们吃的东西拣一份来就是！”
"Aren't you illiterate? This is really called not seeking progress! There is no way, just choose a portion of what you eat!" ”他又恐惧又高兴的退了出来，摸一摸疙瘩疤，立刻把大人的吩咐传给岸上，树上和排上的居民，并且大声叮嘱道：“这是送到上头去的呵！要做得干净，细致，体面呀！……”
He retreated in fear and joy, touched the pimple scar, and immediately conveyed the lord's instructions to the residents on the shore, the trees and the rows, and loudly admonished: "This is to be sent to the top!" Be clean, meticulous, and decent! ……”所有居民就同时忙碌起来，洗叶子，切树皮，捞青苔，乱作一团。他自己是锯木版，来做进呈的盒子。有两片磨得特别光，连夜跑到山顶上请学者去写字，一片是做盒子盖的，求写“寿山福海”，一片是给自己的木排上做扁额，以志荣幸的，求写“老实堂”。但学者却只肯写了“寿山福海”的一块。
All the residents were busy at the same time, washing leaves, cutting bark, scooping moss, and making a mess. He himself sawed wood to make the presented box. There are two pieces that are particularly polished, and they ran to the top of the mountain overnight to ask scholars to write, one is made of box covers, asking to write "Shoushan Fuhai", and the other is to make a flat forehead for their own wooden rafts, and they are honored to write "Honest Hall". But scholars are only willing to write a piece of "Shoushan Fuhai".

理水

三

理水

Three当两位大员回到京都的时候，别的考察员也大抵陆续回来了，只有禹还在外。他们在家里休息了几天，水利局的同事们就在局里大排筵宴，替他们接风，份子分福禄寿三种，最少也得出五十枚大贝壳。这一天真是车水马龙，不到黄昏时候，主客就全都到齐了，院子里却已经点起庭燎来，鼎中的牛肉香，一直透到门外虎贲的鼻子跟前，大家就一齐咽口水。酒过三巡，大员们就讲了一些水乡沿途的风景，芦花似雪，泥水如金，黄鳝膏腴，青苔滑溜……等等。微醺之后，才取出大家采集了来的民食来，都装着细巧的木匣子，盖上写着文字，有的是伏羲八卦体，有的是仓颉鬼哭体，大家就先来赏鉴这些字，争论得几乎打架之后，才决定以写着“国泰民安”的一块为第一，因为不但文字质朴难识，有上古淳厚之风，而且立言也很得体，可以宣付史馆的。
When the two officials returned to Kyoto, the other inspectors probably returned one after another, and only Yu was still outside. They rested at home for a few days, and their colleagues from the Water Conservancy Bureau held a banquet in the bureau to pick up the wind for them, and the members were divided into three types: blessings and longevity, and at least fifty large shells were obtained. This day was really busy, before dusk, the host and guests were all there, but the courtyard had already lit a court fire, and the aroma of beef in the cauldron reached the nose of the tiger ben outside the door, and everyone swallowed their saliva together. After three rounds of wine, the officials talked about some scenery along the water town, the reeds were like snow, the muddy water was like gold, the yellow eels were fat, and the moss was slippery...... Wait a minute. After getting a little drunk, they took out the folk food that everyone had collected, all of which were filled with delicate wooden boxes, covered with words, some were Fuxi Bagua style, some were Cangjie ghost crying bodies, everyone came to appreciate these words first, and after arguing almost fighting, they decided to take the piece with "Guotai Min'an" written on it as the first, because not only the text is simple and difficult to read, it has the style of ancient simplicity, but also the words are also very decent, and they can be announced to the Historical Museum.评定了中国特有的艺术之后，文化问题总算告一段落，于是来考察盒子的内容了：大家一致称赞着饼样的精巧。然而大约酒也喝得太多了，便议论纷纷：有的咬一口松皮饼，极口叹赏它的清香，说自己明天就要挂冠归隐，去享这样的清福；咬了柏叶糕的，却道质粗味苦，伤了他的舌头，要这样与下民共患难，可见为君难，为臣亦不易。有几个又扑上去，想抢下他们咬过的糕饼来，说不久就要开展览会募捐，这些都得去陈列，咬得太多是很不雅观的。
After evaluating China's unique art, the cultural issue finally came to an end, so it was time to examine the contents of the box: everyone unanimously praised the exquisiteness of the cake pattern. However, probably too much wine was drunk, so there was a lot of discussion: some took a bite of the pine bark cake, admired its fragrance, and said that they would hang up their crowns and retire tomorrow to enjoy such a blessing; The one who bit the cypress leaf cake, but the Taoist was coarse and bitter, hurting his tongue, to share the hardships with the people in this way, it can be seen that it is difficult to be a king, and it is not easy to be a minister. A few of them pounced on them again, wanting to grab the cakes they had bitten into, saying that they would soon hold an exhibition to raise funds, and these had to be displayed, and it was very unsightly to bite too much.局外面也起了一阵喧嚷。一群乞丐似的大汉，面目黧黑，衣服破旧，竟冲破了断绝交通的界线，闯到局里来了。卫兵们大喝一声，连忙左右交叉了明晃晃的戈，挡住他们的去路。
There was also a commotion outside the bureau. A group of beggar-like men, with dark faces and shabby clothes, broke through the boundary of cutting off traffic and broke into the bureau. The guards shouted and quickly crossed their spears left and right, blocking their way.“什么？——看明白！”当头是一条瘦长的莽汉，粗手粗脚的，怔了一下，大声说。
"What? ——Understand! At the head was a slender reckless man, rough with rough hands and feet, stunned for a moment, and said loudly.卫兵们在昏黄中定睛一看，就恭恭敬敬的立正，举戈，放他们进去了，只拦住了气喘吁吁的从后面追来的一个身穿深蓝土布袍子，手抱孩子的妇女。
The guards looked at each other in the dim light, then respectfully stood upright, raised their spears, and let them in, only stopping a woman in a dark blue homespun robe and holding a child in her hand who was chasing from behind panting.“怎么？你们不认识我了吗？”她用拳头揩着额上的汗，诧异的问。
"What? Don't you know me? She wiped the sweat from her forehead with her fist and asked in surprise.“禹太太，我们怎会不认识您家呢？”
"Mrs. Yu, how can we not know your family?"“那么，为什么不放我进去的？”
"So, why didn't you let me in?"“禹太太，这个年头儿，不大好，从今年起，要端风俗而正人心，男女有别了。现在那一个衙门里也不放娘儿们进去，不但这里，不但您。这是上头的命令，怪不着我们的。”
"Mrs. Yu, this year, it's not very good, from this year onwards, we have to correct customs and correct people's hearts, and there is a difference between men and women. Now the women are not allowed in that yamen, not only here, not only you." This is an order from above, and we can't blame it. ”禹太太呆了一会，就把双眉一扬，一面回转身，一面嚷叫道：
Mrs. Yu stayed for a while, then raised her eyebrows, turned around, and shouted:“这杀千刀的！奔什么丧！走过自家的门口，看也不进来看一下，就奔你的丧！做官做官，做官有什么好处，仔细像你的老子，做到充军，还掉在池子里变大忘八！这没良心的杀千刀！……”
"This kills a thousand knives! What kind of funeral! Walking past the door of your own house, you don't even come in to take a look, just go to your funeral! Be an official and an official, what are the benefits of being an official, be like your Lao Tzu, be enlisted in the army, and fall into the pool and become big and forget eight! This is a thousand knives without conscience! ……”这时候，局里的大厅上也早发生了扰乱。大家一望见一群莽汉们奔来，纷纷都想躲避，但看不见耀眼的兵器，就又硬着头皮，定睛去看。奔来的也临近了，头一个虽然面貌黑瘦，但从神情上，也就认识他正是禹；其余的自然是他的随员。
At this time, there was already chaos in the hall of the bureau. When everyone saw a group of reckless men coming, they all wanted to dodge, but they couldn't see the dazzling weapons, so they bit the bullet and looked at it intently. The one who came was also approaching, although the first one was dark and thin, but from the expression, he knew that he was Yu; The rest are naturally his attachés.这一吓，把大家的酒意都吓退了，沙沙的一阵衣裳声，立刻都退在下面。禹便一径跨到席上，在上面坐下，大约是大模大样，或者生了鹤膝风罢，并不屈膝而坐，却伸开了两脚，把大脚底对着大员们，又不穿袜子，满脚底都是栗子一般的老茧。随员们就分坐在他的左右。
This fright scared everyone's drinking away, and the rustling sound of clothes immediately retreated below. Yu stepped onto the seat and sat down on it, about the size of a big man, or gave birth to a crane knee wind, and did not sit on his knees, but stretched out his feet, facing the soles of his big feet to the seniors, and did not wear socks, and the soles of his feet were full of chestnut-like calluses. The attachés sat on his left and right.“大人是今天回京的？”一位大胆的属员，膝行而前了一点，恭敬的问。
"My lord, are you returning to Beijing today?" A bold subordinate member knelt forward a little and asked respectfully.“你们坐近一点来！”禹不答他的询问，只对大家说。“查的怎么样？”
"Sit closer!" Yu did not answer his inquiry, but only said to everyone. "How is the investigation?"大员们一面膝行而前，一面面面相觑，列坐在残筵的下面，看见咬过的松皮饼和啃光的牛骨头。非常不自在——却又不敢叫膳夫来收去。
The members knelt forward on one side, looked at each other, and sat under the remnants of the banquet, seeing the bitten pine bark cakes and the gnawed beef bones. Very uncomfortable - but not afraid to call the chef to take it.“禀大人，”一位大员终于说。“倒还像个样子——印象甚佳。松皮水草，出产不少；饮料呢，那可丰富得很。百姓都很老实，他们是过惯了的。禀大人，他们都是以善于吃苦，驰名世界的人们。”
"Report to you," one of the officials finally said. "It's still the same - it's a good impression. pine bark aquatic plants, producing a lot; As for the drinks, they are very rich. The people are very honest, and they are used to it. Reporting to my lord, they are all people who are famous all over the world for being good at enduring hardships. ”“卑职可是已经拟好了募捐的计划，”又一位大员说。“准备开一个奇异食品展览会，另请女隗小姐来做时装表演。只卖票，并且声明会里不再募捐，那么，来看的可以多一点。”
"The lowly officer has already made a fundraising plan," said another senior official. "Preparing to hold a strange food exhibition, and invite Miss Kui to do a fashion show. Only sell tickets and declare that there will be no more donations in the meeting, so you can see more. ”“这很好。”禹说着，向他弯一弯腰。
"That's good." Yu said, bending over to him.“不过第一要紧的是赶快派一批大木筏去，把学者们接上高原来。”第三位大员说，“一面派人去通知奇肱国，使他们知道我们的尊崇文化，接济也只要每月送到这边来就好。学者们有一个公呈在这里，说的倒也很有意思，他们以为文化是一国的命脉，学者是文化的灵魂，只要文化存在，华夏也就存在，别的一切，倒还在其次……”
"But the first thing is to quickly send a batch of large rafts to connect the scholars to the plateau." The third official said, "On the one hand, send someone to inform the Qi Gong Kingdom, so that they know our respected culture, and the relief only needs to be sent here every month." Scholars have a public presentation here, which is also very interesting, they think that culture is the lifeblood of a country, scholars are the soul of culture, as long as culture exists, China also exists, and everything else is secondary......"“他们以为华夏的人口太多了，”第一位大员道，“减少一些倒也是致太平之道。况且那些不过是愚民，那喜怒哀乐，也决没有智者所推想的那么精微的。知人论事，第一要凭主观。例如莎士比亚……”
"They think that the population of China is too much," the first official said, "reducing some is also the way to peace." Moreover, those are just foolish people, and their joys, sorrows, and joys are by no means as subtle as the wise think. The first thing to know people and discuss matters is to rely on subjectivity. For example, Shakespeare......"“放他妈的屁！”禹心里想，但嘴上却大声的说道：“我经过查考，知道先前的方法：‘湮’，确是错误了。以后应该用‘导’！不知道诸位的意见怎么样？”
"Fucking fart!" Yu thought to himself, but said loudly: "After investigation, I know that the previous method: 'obliteration' is indeed wrong." In the future, you should use 'guide'!" I don't know what your opinion is? ”静得好像坟山；大员们的脸上也显出死色，许多人还觉得自己生了病，明天恐怕要请病假了。
It is as quiet as a grave mountain; The faces of the senior members also showed a dead color, and many of them felt that they were sick and would probably have to take sick leave tomorrow.“这是蚩尤的法子！”一个勇敢的青年官员悄悄的愤激着。
"This is Chi You's method!" A brave young official was quietly indignant.“卑职的愚见，窃以为大人是似乎应该收回成命的。”一位白须白发的大员，这时觉得天下兴亡，系在他的嘴上了，便把心一横，置死生于度外，坚决的抗议道：“湮是老大人的成法。‘三年无改于父之道，可谓孝矣。’——老大人升天还不到三年。”
"In my humble opinion, I think that the adult seems to be taking back his life." A white-bearded and white-haired official felt that the rise and fall of the world was tied to his mouth, so he put his heart aside, put his life and death aside, and resolutely protested: "Oblivion is the law of the old man." 'Three years without changing the way of the father can be said to be filial. '——The old man has been ascended to heaven for less than three years. ”禹一声也不响。
Yu didn't make a sound.“况且老大人化过多少心力呢。借了上帝的息壤，来湮洪水，虽然触了上帝的恼怒，洪水的深度可也浅了一点了。这似乎还是照例的治下去。”另一位花白须发的大员说，他是禹的母舅的干儿子。
"Besides, how much effort has the old man made? Borrowing God's breath to drown out the flood, although it touches God's wrath, the depth of the flood is also a little shallower. This seems to be the same as usual. Another white-bearded official said that he was the godson of Yu's maternal uncle.禹一声也不响。
Yu didn't make a sound.“我看大人还不如‘幹父之蛊’，”一位胖大官员看得禹不作声，以为他就要折服了，便带些轻薄的大声说，不过脸上还流出着一层油汗。“照着家法，挽回家声。大人大约未必知道人们在怎么讲说老大人罢……”
"I think adults are not as good as 'godfather's Gu'," a fat official looked at Yu silently, thinking that he was about to be convinced, so he said with some frivolous loudness, but there was still a layer of oil sweat on his face. According to the family law, save the voice of the family. You probably don't know what people are talking about......"“要而言之，‘湮’是世界上已有定评的好法子，”白须发的老官恐怕胖子闹出岔子来，就抢着说道。“别的种种，所谓‘摩登’者也，昔者蚩尤氏就坏在这一点上。”
"In short, 'obliteration' is a good way to have a fixed evaluation in the world," the white-bearded old official rushed to say because he was afraid that the fat man would make a mistake. "All sorts of other things, the so-called 'modern', the Chiyou clan was bad at this point in the past."禹微微一笑：“我知道的。有人说我的爸爸变了黄熊，也有人说他变了三足鳖，也有人说我在求名，图利。说就是了。我要说的是我查了山泽的情形，征了百姓的意见，已经看透实情，打定主意，无论如何，非‘导’不可！这些同事，也都和我同意的。”
Yu smiled slightly: "I know." Some people say that my father has turned into a yellow bear, some people say that he has turned into a three-legged turtle, and some people say that I am seeking fame and profit. Just say it. What I want to say is that I have investigated the situation in the mountains and marshes, solicited the opinions of the people, and have seen through the truth and made up my mind. These colleagues also agree with me. ”他举手向两旁一指。白须发的，花须发的，小白脸的，胖而流着油汗的，胖而不流油汗的官员们，跟着他的指头看过去，只见一排黑瘦的乞丐似的东西，不动，不言，不笑，像铁铸的一样。
He raised his hand and pointed to the sides. The officials with white beards, flowers, little white faces, fat and sweaty, fat but not sweaty, followed his fingers and looked over, only to see a row of black and thin beggar-like things, not moving, not speaking, not smiling, like iron casting.

理水

四

理水

Four禹爷走后，时光也过得真快，不知不觉间，京师的景况日见其繁盛了。首先是阔人们有些穿了茧绸袍，后来就看见大水果铺里卖着橘子和柚子，大绸缎店里挂着华丝葛；富翁的筵席上有了好酱油，清炖鱼翅，凉拌海参；再后来他们竟有熊皮褥子狐皮褂，那太太也戴上赤金耳环银手镯了。
After Master Yu left, time passed so fast, and before he knew it, the situation in the capital was becoming more and more prosperous. First of all, some of the broad people wore cocoon robes, and then they saw oranges and grapefruits sold in the big fruit shop, and hanging flower kudzu in the big silk shop; The rich man's banquet has good soy sauce, stewed shark fin, and cold sea cucumber; Later, they actually had bearskin mattresses and fox fur coats, and the wife also wore red gold earrings and silver bracelets.只要站在大门口，也总有什么新鲜的物事看：今天来一车竹箭，明天来一批松板，有时抬过了做假山的怪石，有时提过了做鱼生的鲜鱼；有时是一大群一尺二寸长的大乌龟，都缩了头装着竹笼，载在车子上，拉向皇城那面去。
As long as you stand at the gate, there will always be something fresh to see: a cart of bamboo arrows today, a batch of pine boards tomorrow, sometimes carrying over the strange rocks made into rockeries, sometimes mentioning fresh fish made into raw fish; Sometimes it was a large group of large turtles one foot and two inches long, all of which shrank their heads and put bamboo cages on the cart, pulling them towards the imperial city.“妈妈，你瞧呀，好大的乌龟！”孩子们一看见，就嚷起来，跑上去，围住了车子。
"Mom, look, what a big turtle!" As soon as the children saw it, they shouted, ran up, and surrounded the car.“小鬼，快滚开！这是万岁爷的宝贝，当心杀头！”
"Kid, get out of here! This is the treasure of the long live master, beware of beheading!" ”然而关于禹爷的新闻，也和珍宝的入京一同多起来了。百姓的檐前，路旁的树下，大家都在谈他的故事；最多的是他怎样夜里化为黄熊，用嘴和爪子，一拱一拱的疏通了九河，以及怎样请了天兵天将，捉住兴风作浪的妖怪无支祁，镇在龟山的脚下。皇上舜爷的事情，可是谁也不再提起了，至多，也不过谈谈丹朱太子的没出息。
However, the news about Master Yu has also increased along with the entry of treasures into Beijing. In front of the eaves, under the trees on the side of the road, everyone is talking about his story; The most important thing is how he turned into a yellow bear at night, using his mouth and claws to dredge the nine rivers one arch after another, and how he invited heavenly soldiers and generals to catch the monster Wuzhi Qi who was making waves and was stationed at the foot of Turtle Mountain. The matter of Emperor Shun, but no one mentioned it anymore, at most, it was just talking about Prince Danzhu's lack of prospects.禹要回京的消息，原已传布得很久了，每天总有一群人站在关口，看可有他的仪仗的到来。并没有。然而消息却愈传愈紧，也好像愈真。一个半阴半晴的上午，他终于在百姓们的万头攒动之间，进了冀州的帝都了。前面并没有仪仗，不过一大批乞丐似的随员。临末是一个粗手粗脚的大汉，黑脸黄须，腿弯微曲，双手捧着一片乌黑的尖顶的大石头——舜爷所赐的“玄圭”，连声说道“借光，借光，让一让，让一让”，从人丛中挤进皇宫里去了。
The news that Yu was going to return to Beijing had been spread for a long time, and there was always a group of people standing at the pass every day to see the arrival of his honor guard. Nope. However, the news is getting tighter and more true. On a half-cloudy and half-sunny morning, he finally entered the imperial capital of Jizhou amidst the crowding of the people. There was no ceremonial guard in front, but a large number of beggar-like entourage. At the end of the day was a big man with rough hands and feet, with a black face and yellow beard, slightly bent legs, holding a large stone with a black spire in both hands - the "Xuan Gui" given by Shun Ye, and repeatedly said, "Borrow light, borrow light, let go, let go", and squeezed into the palace from the crowd.百姓们就在宫门外欢呼，议论，声音正好像浙水的涛声一样。
The people cheered and discussed outside the palace gate, and their voices were like the waves of Zhejiang River.舜爷坐在龙位上，原已有了年纪，不免觉得疲劳，这时又似乎有些惊骇。禹一到，就连忙客气的站起来，行过礼，皋陶先去应酬了几句，舜才说道：
Shun Ye sat on the dragon seat, he was already old, and he couldn't help but feel tired, and he seemed to be a little frightened at this time. As soon as Yu arrived, he quickly stood up politely and saluted, Gao Yao went to socialize a few words first, and Shun said:“你也讲几句好话我听呀。”
"You can also say a few good words to me."“哼，我有什么说呢？”禹简截的回答道。“我就是想，每天孳孳！”
"Hmph, what do I have to say?" Yu replied briefly. "I just want to work every day!"“什么叫作‘孳孳’？”皋陶问。
"What is called 'breeding'?" Gao Yao asked.“洪水滔天，”禹说，“浩浩怀山襄陵，下民都浸在水里。我走旱路坐车，走水路坐船，走泥路坐橇，走山路坐轿。到一座山，砍一通树，和益俩给大家有饭吃，有肉吃。放田水入川，放川水入海，和稷俩给大家有难得的东西吃。东西不够，就调有余，补不足。搬家。大家这才静下来了，各地方成了个样子。”
"The flood was monstrous," Yu said, "and the people were immersed in the water." I take a car on a dry road, a boat on a water road, a sled on a dirt road, and a sedan on a mountain road. Go to a mountain, cut down a tree, and give everyone food and meat. Put the field water into the river, put the river water into the sea, and give everyone rare things to eat. If there are not enough things, there is more than enough to make up for the deficiency. Uproot. Only then did everyone calm down, and the places became the same. ”“对啦对啦，这些话可真好！”皋陶称赞道。
"Yes, yes, these words are so good!" Gao Yao praised.“唉！”禹说。“做皇帝要小心，安静。对天有良心，天才会仍旧给你好处！”
"Alas!" Yu said. "Be careful and quiet as an emperor. If you have a conscience to the sky, the genius will still give you benefits! ”舜爷叹一口气，就托他管理国家大事，有意见当面讲，不要背后说坏话。看见禹都答应了，又叹一口气，道：“莫像丹朱的不听话，只喜欢游荡，旱地上要撑船，在家里又捣乱，弄得过不了日子，这我可真看的不顺眼！”
Shun Ye sighed and asked him to manage national affairs, and if he had any opinions, he would speak ill of them behind his back. Seeing that Yu agreed, he sighed again and said, "Don't be disobedient like Danzhu, he only likes to wander, he has to support a boat on dry land, and he makes trouble at home, so he can't get by, which is really not pleasing to the eye!" ”“我讨过老婆，四天就走，”禹回答说。“生了阿启，也不当他儿子看。所以能够治了水，分作五圈，简直有五千里，计十二州，直到海边，立了五个头领，都很好。只是有苗可不行，你得留心点！”
"I have asked for a wife and will leave in four days," Yu replied. "Giving birth to Ah Qi is not his son. Therefore, it is very good to be able to cure the water and divide it into five circles, which is simply five thousand miles, twelve states, and five leaders are set up until the seaside. It's just that seedlings can't be used, you have to be careful! ”“我的天下，真是全仗的你的功劳弄好的！”舜爷也称赞道。
"My world is really made possible by your credit!" Shun Ye also praised.于是皋陶也和舜爷一同肃然起敬，低了头；退朝之后，他就赶紧下一道特别的命令，叫百姓都要学禹的行为，倘不然，立刻就算是犯了罪。
So Gao Yao was also in awe with Shun Ye and bowed his head; After retiring from the court, he quickly issued a special order, asking the people to learn from Yu's behavior, otherwise, they would immediately be considered guilty.这使商家首先起了大恐慌。但幸而禹爷自从回京以后，态度也改变一点了：吃喝不考究，但做起祭祀和法事来，是阔绰的；衣服很随便，但上朝和拜客时候的穿著，是要漂亮的。所以市面仍旧不很受影响，不多久，商人们就又说禹爷的行为真该学，皋爷的新法令也很不错；终于太平到连百兽都会跳舞，凤凰也飞来凑热闹了。
This caused a big panic among merchants in the first place. But fortunately, since Master Yu returned to Beijing, his attitude has changed a little: he is not exquisite in eating and drinking, but he is generous when it comes to sacrifices and rituals; The clothes are very casual, but they should be beautiful when going to court and visiting guests. Therefore, the market was still not very affected, and not long after, the merchants said that Yu Ye's behavior should really be learned, and Gao's new decree was also very good; Finally, it was so peaceful that even the beasts could dance, and the phoenix flew in to join in the fun.一九三五年十一月作。
Created in November 1935.

采薇

采薇

采薇

Picking ferns一
One这半年来，不知怎的连养老堂里也不大平静了，一部分的老头子，也都交头接耳，跑进跑出的很起劲。只有伯夷最不留心闲事，秋凉到了，他又老的很怕冷，就整天的坐在阶沿上晒太阳，纵使听到匆忙的脚步声，也决不抬起头来看。
In the past six months, somehow even the nursing home has not been very peaceful, and some old men have also listened to each other, running in and out very vigorously. Only Bo Yi was the least concerned about idle things, when the autumn coolness came, he was old and afraid of the cold, so he sat on the edge of the steps all day long to bask in the sun, even if he heard the sound of hurried footsteps, he would never raise his head to see.“大哥！”
"Big brother!"一听声音自然就知道是叔齐。伯夷是向来最讲礼让的，便在抬头之前，先站起身，把手一摆，意思是请兄弟在阶沿上坐下。
As soon as you hear the voice, you naturally know that it is Shu Qi. Bo Yi has always been the most courteous, so before looking up, he stood up and waved his hand, which meant asking his brother to sit down on the edge of the steps.“大哥，时局好像不大好！”叔齐一面并排坐下去，一面气喘吁吁的说，声音有些发抖。
"Big brother, the situation doesn't seem to be good!" Shu Qi sat down side by side, panting and saying, his voice trembling a little.“怎么了呀？”伯夷这才转过脸去看，只见叔齐的原是苍白的脸色，好像更加苍白了。
"What's wrong?" Bo Yi turned his face to look, only to see that Shu Qi's original pale face seemed to be even paler.“您听到过从商王那里，逃来两个瞎子的事了罢。”
"You have heard about two blind men escaping from the King of Shang."“唔，前几天，散宜生好像提起过。我没有留心。”
"Well, a few days ago, San Yisheng seemed to have mentioned it. I didn't pay attention. ”“我今天去拜访过了。一个是太师疵，一个是少师强，还带来许多乐器。听说前几时还开过一个展览会，参观者都‘啧啧称美’，——不过好像这边就要动兵了。”
"I visited today. One is Taishi Ci, the other is Shaoshi Qiang, and he also brought many musical instruments. I heard that there was an exhibition a while ago, and the visitors were 'tsk-tsk',—— but it seems that troops are about to be mobilized here. ”“为了乐器动兵，是不合先王之道的。”伯夷慢吞吞的说。
"It is not in line with the way of the former kings to mobilize troops for musical instruments." Bo Yi said slowly.“也不单为了乐器。您不早听到过商王无道，砍早上渡河不怕水冷的人的脚骨，看看他的骨髓，挖出比干王爷的心来，看它可有七窍吗？先前还是传闻，瞎子一到，可就证实了。况且还切切实实的证明了商王的变乱旧章。变乱旧章，原是应该征伐的。不过我想，以下犯上，究竟也不合先王之道……”
"Not just for musical instruments. Haven't you heard that the Shang king is unreasonable, cutting the foot bones of people who cross the river in the morning and are not afraid of cold water, look at his bone marrow, dig out the heart of Prince Bigan, and see if it has seven orifices? It was still a rumor before, but as soon as the blind man arrived, it was confirmed. Moreover, it also truly proves the old chapter of the Shang king's chaos. Changing the old chapter should have been conquered. But I think the following is not in line with the way of the former kings......"“近来的烙饼，一天一天的小下去了，看来确也像要出事情，”伯夷想了一想，说。“但我看你还是少出门，少说话，仍旧每天练你的太极拳的好！”
"The pancakes have been getting smaller day by day, and it seems that something is going to happen," Bo Yi thought for a moment and said. "But I think you should go out less, talk less, and still practice your Tai Chi every day!"“是……”叔齐是很悌的，应了半声。
"Yes......" Shu Qi was very friendly and responded with half a voice.“你想想看，”伯夷知道他心里其实并不服气，便接着说。“我们是客人，因为西伯肯养老，呆在这里的。烙饼小下去了，固然不该说什么，就是事情闹起来了，也不该说什么的。”
"Think about it," Bo Yi knew that he was actually not convinced in his heart, so he continued. "We are guests because we are retired and stay here. The pancake is small, of course, I shouldn't say anything, even if things are in trouble, I shouldn't say anything. ”“那么，我们可就成了为养老而养老了。”
"Then, we will become pensioners for the sake of retirement."“最好是少说话。我也没有力气来听这些事。”
"It's better to talk less. I don't have the strength to listen to these things. ”伯夷咳了起来，叔齐也不再开口。咳嗽一止，万籁寂然，秋末的夕阳，照着两部白胡子，都在闪闪的发亮。
Bo Yi coughed, and Shu Qi stopped speaking. As soon as the cough stopped, everything was silent, and the sunset at the end of autumn was shining brightly on the two white beards.

采薇

二

采薇

Two然而这不平静，却总是滋长起来，烙饼不但小下去，粉也粗起来了。养老堂的人们更加交头接耳，外面只听得车马行走声，叔齐更加喜欢出门，虽然回来也不说什么话，但那不安的神色，却惹得伯夷也很难闲适了：他似乎觉得这碗平稳饭快要吃不稳。
However, this is not calm, but it always grows, and the pancakes are not only smaller, but also thicker. The people in the retirement hall were even more whispering, only the sound of carriages and horses walking was heard outside, Shu Qi liked to go out more, although he didn't say anything when he came back, but the uneasy look made it difficult for Bo Yi to be idle: he seemed to feel that this bowl of stable rice was about to be unstable.十一月下旬，叔齐照例一早起了床，要练太极拳，但他走到院子里，听了一听，却开开堂门，跑出去了。约摸有烙十张饼的时候，这才气急败坏的跑回来，鼻子冻得通红，嘴里一阵一阵的喷着白蒸气。
In late November, Shu Qi got up early in the morning as usual to practice Tai Chi, but he walked to the yard, listened to it, but opened the hall door and ran out. When he was about to bake ten cakes, he ran back angrily, his nose was red from the cold, and white steam was spraying out of his mouth.“大哥！你起来！出兵了！”他恭敬的垂手站在伯夷的床前，大声说，声音有些比平常粗。
"Big brother! You get up! Troops have been sent! He stood in front of Bo Yi's bed with his hands respectfully lowered, and said loudly, his voice a little thicker than usual.伯夷怕冷，很不愿意这么早就起身，但他是非常友爱的，看见兄弟着急，只好把牙齿一咬，坐了起来，披上皮袍，在被窝里慢吞吞的穿裤子。
Bo Yi was afraid of the cold and was reluctant to get up so early, but he was very friendly, and when he saw his brother in a hurry, he had to grit his teeth, sit up, put on a leather robe, and slowly put on his pants in the bed.“我刚要练拳，”叔齐等着，一面说。“却听得外面有人马走动，连忙跑到大路上去看时——果然，来了。首先是一乘白彩的大轿，总该有八十一人抬着罢，里面一座木主，写的是‘大周文王之灵位’；后面跟的都是兵。我想：这一定是要去伐纣了。现在的周王是孝子，他要做大事，一定是把文王抬在前面的。看了一会，我就跑回来，不料我们养老堂的墙外就贴着告示……”
"I was just about to practice boxing," Shu Qi said, waiting. But when he heard people and horses walking outside, he hurriedly ran to the road to see - sure enough, it came. First of all, there is a white sedan chair, which should always be carried by eighty-one people, and there is a wooden master inside, which reads 'The Spiritual Seat of King Wen of the Great Zhou'; followed by soldiers. I thought: This must be going to attack Zhou. The current King of Zhou is a filial son, and if he wants to do great things, he must put King Wen in front. After looking at it for a while, I ran back, but there was a notice posted outside the wall of our retirement hall......"伯夷的衣服穿好了，弟兄俩走出屋子，就觉得一阵冷气，赶紧缩紧了身子。伯夷向来不大走动，一出大门，很看得有些新鲜。不几步，叔齐就伸手向墙上一指，可真的贴着一张大告示：
Bo Yi's clothes were dressed, and when the brothers walked out of the house, they felt a gust of cold air and quickly shrank back. Bo Yi has never moved around much, and as soon as he walked out of the door, he looked a little fresh. In a few steps, Shu Qi stretched out his hand and pointed to the wall, but there was really a big notice posted:
“照得今殷王纣，乃用其妇人之言，自绝于天，毁坏其三正，离其王父母弟。乃断弃其先祖之乐；乃为淫声，用变乱正声，怡说妇人。故今予发，维共行天罚。勉哉夫子，不可再，不可三！此示。”“照得今殷王纣，乃用其妇人之言，自绝于天，毁坏其三正，离其王父母弟。 乃断弃其先祖之乐；乃为淫声，用变乱正声，怡说妇人。 故今予发，维共行天罚。 勉哉夫子，不可再，不可三！此示。 ”
两人看完之后，都不作声，径向大路走去。只见路边都挤满了民众，站得水泄不通。两人在后面说一声“借光”，民众回头一看，见是两位白须老者，便照文王敬老的上谕，赶忙闪开，让他们走到前面。这时打头的木主早已望不见了，走过去的都是一排一排的甲士，约有烙三百五十二张大饼的工夫，这才见别有许多兵丁，肩着九旒云罕旗，仿佛五色云一样。接着又是甲士，后面一大队骑着高头大马的文武官员，簇拥着一位王爷，紫糖色脸，络腮胡子，左捏黄斧头，右拿白牛尾，威风凛凛：这正是“恭行天罚”的周王发。
After the two of them finished reading, they remained silent and walked straight towards the road. I saw that the roadside was crowded with people, standing still. The two said "borrow light" from behind, and when the people looked back, they saw that they were two white-bearded old men, so they followed King Wen's edict to respect the elderly, and hurriedly dodged and let them go to the front. At this time, the wooden master who was the leader was already out of sight, and the people who walked past were rows of armored soldiers, with about 352 flatbreads, and then he saw many other soldiers, carrying the nine-tasseled cloud Han flag, like five-colored clouds. Then there were the armored soldiers, and behind them a large group of civil and military officials riding tall horses, surrounded by a prince, with a purple sugar face, a beard, a yellow axe in the left, and a white ox tail in the right, majestic: this is the Zhou king who "respectfully punishes heaven".大路两旁的民众，个个肃然起敬，没有人动一下，没有人响一声。在百静中，不提防叔齐却拖着伯夷直扑上去，钻过几个马头，拉住了周王的马嚼子，直着脖子嚷起来道：
The people on both sides of the road were all in awe, no one moved, no one made a sound. In the silence, Shu Qi dragged Bo Yi straight up, drilled past a few horse heads, grabbed the King of Zhou's horse chew, and shouted straight with his neck:“老子死了不葬，倒来动兵，说得上‘孝’吗？臣子想要杀主子，说得上‘仁’吗？……”
"Lao Tzu died and did not bury him, but instead mobilized troops, can it be said to be 'filial piety'? If a courtier wants to kill his master, can it be said to be 'benevolent'? ……”开初，是路旁的民众，驾前的武将，都吓得呆了；连周王手里的白牛尾巴也歪了过去。但叔齐刚说了四句话，却就听得一片哗啷声响，有好几把大刀从他们的头上砍下来。
At the beginning, the people on the side of the road and the generals in front of the car were frightened; Even the white cow's tail in the hand of the King of Zhou was crooked. But as soon as Shu Qi said four words, he heard a clang, and several large knives were cut off from their heads.“且住！”
"Stay for now!"谁都知道这是姜太公的声音，岂敢不听，便连忙停了刀，看着这也是白须白发，然而胖得圆圆的脸。
Everyone knew that this was Jiang Taigong's voice, how could he dare not listen, so he quickly stopped the knife, looking at this is also a white beard and white hair, but a fat and round face.“义士呢。放他们去罢！”
"What about the righteous man. Let them go!" ”武将们立刻把刀收回，插在腰带上。一面是走上四个甲士来，恭敬的向伯夷和叔齐立正，举手，之后就两个挟一个，开正步向路旁走过去。民众们也赶紧让开道，放他们走到自己的背后去。
The generals immediately took back their knives and inserted them into their belts. On the one hand, four armored soldiers walked up, respectfully stood upright to Bo Yi and Shu Qi, raised their hands, and then two of them held one of them and walked towards the side of the road. The people also quickly got out of the way and let them walk behind them.到得背后，甲士们便又恭敬的立正，放了手，用力在他们俩的脊梁上一推。两人只叫得一声“阿呀”，跄跄踉踉的颠了周尺一丈路远近，这才扑通的倒在地面上。叔齐还好，用手支着，只印了一脸泥；伯夷究竟比较的有了年纪，脑袋又恰巧磕在石头上，便晕过去了。
When they got behind them, the armored soldiers respectfully stood upright, let go, and pushed the spines of the two of them. The two of them only shouted "Ah", staggered over a foot of the road, and then fell to the ground. Shu Qi was okay, he supported it with his hands, and only printed a face of mud; Bo Yi was older, and his head happened to hit the stone again, and he fainted.

采薇

三

采薇

Three大军过去之后，什么也不再望得见，大家便换了方向，把躺着的伯夷和坐着的叔齐围起来。有几个是认识他们的，当场告诉人们，说这原是辽西的孤竹君的两位世子，因为让位，这才一同逃到这里，进了先王所设的养老堂。这报告引得众人连声赞叹，几个人便蹲下身子，歪着头去看叔齐的脸，几个人回家去烧姜汤，几个人去通知养老堂，叫他们快抬门板来接了。
After the army passed, nothing was in sight, so everyone changed direction and surrounded the lying Bo Yi and the sitting Shuqi. A few of them knew them and told people on the spot that these were originally the two princes of Guzhu Jun in western Liaoning, and because they gave up, they fled here together and entered the retirement hall set up by the former king. This report attracted everyone's admiration, several people squatted down, tilted their heads to look at Uncle Qi's face, a few people went home to cook ginger soup, and a few people went to inform the nursing home and told them to pick up the door panel.大约过了烙好一百零三四张大饼的工夫，现状并无变化，看客也渐渐的走散；又好久，才有两个老头子抬着一扇门板，一拐一拐的走来，板上面还铺着一层稻草：这还是文王定下来的敬老的老规矩。板在地上一放，咙一声，震得伯夷突然张开了眼睛：他苏甦了。叔齐惊喜的发一声喊，帮那两个人一同轻轻的把伯夷扛上门板，抬向养老堂里去；自己是在旁边跟定，扶住了挂着门板的麻绳。
After about one hundred and three or four flatbreads, the status quo has not changed, and the spectators have gradually dispersed. After a long time, two old men came limping with a door panel, and there was a layer of straw on the board: this is still the old rule of respecting the elderly set by King Wen. As soon as the board was placed on the ground, there was a snort, and Bo Yi suddenly opened his eyes: he woke up. Shu Qi shouted in surprise, helped the two people gently carry Bo Yi onto the door panel and carried him to the retirement hall; I was standing next to him and holding on to the hemp rope hanging from the door panel.走了六七十步路，听得远远地有人在叫喊：
After walking sixty or seventy steps, I heard someone shouting in the distance:“您哪！等一下！姜汤来哩！”望去是一位年青的太太，手里端着一个瓦罐子，向这面跑来了，大约怕姜汤泼出罢，她跑得不很快。
"You! Wait a minute! Ginger soup is coming! It looked like a young lady, holding a clay pot in her hand, ran towards this side, probably afraid that the ginger soup would spill out, and she didn't run fast.大家只得停住，等候她的到来。叔齐谢了她的好意。她看见伯夷已经自己醒来了，似乎很有些失望，但想了一想，就劝他仍旧喝下去，可以暖暖胃。然而伯夷怕辣，一定不肯喝。
Everyone had to stop and wait for her arrival. Uncle Qi thanked her for her kindness. She seemed a little disappointed to see that Bo Yi had woken up on her own, but after thinking about it, she persuaded him to still drink it to warm his stomach. However, Bo Yi was afraid of spicy food and would definitely refuse to drink it.“这怎么办好呢？还是八年陈的老姜熬的呀。别人家还拿不出这样的东西来呢。我们的家里又没有爱吃辣的人……”她显然有点不高兴。
"What should I do? It's still eight years old ginger. Other people can't come up with such a thing. We don't have anyone who loves spicy food in our family......" She was obviously a little unhappy.叔齐只得接了瓦罐，做好做歹的硬劝伯夷喝了一口半，余下的还很多，便说自己也正在胃气痛，统统喝掉了。眼圈通红的，恭敬的夸赞了姜汤的力量，谢了那太太的好意之后，这才解决了这一场大纠纷。
Shu Qi had to take the clay pot, and persuaded Bo Yi to take a sip and a half, and there were still a lot left, so he said that he was also having a stomach ache and drank them all. His eyes were red, and he respectfully praised the power of Jiang Tang, and after thanking the wife for her kindness, this big dispute was resolved.他们回到养老堂里，倒也并没有什么余病，到第三天，伯夷就能够起床了，虽然前额上肿着一大块——然而胃口坏。
They returned to the nursing home, but there were no other ailments, and by the third day, Bo Yi was able to get up, although there was a large lump on his forehead - but his appetite was bad.官民们都不肯给他们超然，时时送来些搅扰他们的消息，或者是官报，或者是新闻。十二月底，就听说大军已经渡了盟津，诸侯无一不到。不久也送了武王的《太誓》的钞本来。这是特别钞给养老堂看的，怕他们眼睛花，每个字都写得有核桃一般大。不过伯夷还是懒得看，只听叔齐朗诵了一遍，别的倒也并没有什么，但是“自弃其先祖肆祀不答，昏弃其家国……”这几句，断章取义，却好像很伤了自己的心。
The officials and the people refused to give them detachment, and sent some news that disturbed them from time to time, either official newspapers or news. At the end of December, I heard that the army had crossed Mengjin, and all the princes had arrived. Soon he also sent the banknote of King Wu's "Tai Oath". This is a special bill for the nursing home, for fear that their eyes will be dazzled, and every word is written as big as a walnut. However, Bo Yi was still too lazy to read, and only listened to Shu Qi recite it once, and there was nothing else, but the sentences "abandoning his ancestors and not answering, abandoning his family and country......" were taken out of context, but they seemed to hurt his heart very much.传说也不少：有的说，周师到了牧野，和纣王的兵大战，杀得他们尸横遍野，血流成河，连木棍也浮起来，仿佛水上的草梗一样；有的却道纣王的兵虽然有七十万，其实并没有战，一望见姜太公带着大军前来，便回转身，反替武王开路了。
There are also many legends: some say that when the Zhou army arrived in Muye, he fought with the soldiers of King Zhou, killing them so that their corpses were all over the field, blood flowed into rivers, and even wooden sticks floated, like grass stalks on the water; Some said that although King Zhou's soldiers numbered 700,000, they did not actually fight, and when they saw Jiang Taigong coming with a large army, they turned around and opened the way for King Wu.这两种传说，固然略有些不同，但打了胜仗，却似乎确实的。此后又时时听到运来了鹿台的宝贝，巨桥的白米，就更加证明了得胜的确实。伤兵也陆陆续续的回来了，又好像还是打过大仗似的。凡是能够勉强走动的伤兵，大抵在茶馆，酒店，理发铺，以及人家的檐前或门口闲坐，讲述战争的故事，无论那里，总有一群人眉飞色舞的在听他。春天到了，露天下也不再觉得怎么凉，往往到夜里还讲得很起劲。
These two legends, although slightly different, seem to be true after winning the battle. Since then, I have heard from time to time that the treasure of Lutai and the white rice of the bridge have been transported, which further proves that victory is indeed true. The wounded soldiers also came back one after another, as if they had fought a big battle. All the wounded soldiers who could barely move around usually sat idly in teahouses, hotels, barbershops, and in front of the eaves or doors of people's houses, telling the story of the war. When spring comes, it no longer feels cold in the open air, and it often talks very energetically at night.伯夷和叔齐都消化不良，每顿总是吃不完应得的烙饼；睡觉还照先前一样，天一暗就上床，然而总是睡不着。伯夷只在翻来覆去，叔齐听了，又烦躁，又心酸，这时候，他常是重行起来，穿好衣服，到院子里去走走，或者练一套太极拳。
Bo Yi and Shu Qi both have indigestion and always can't finish the pancakes they deserve at every meal; I slept as before, going to bed as soon as it got dark, but I always couldn't sleep. Bo Yi was only tossing and turning, Shu Qi listened, irritable and sad, at this time, he often got up again, got dressed, went for a walk in the yard, or practiced a set of Tai Chi.有一夜，是有星无月的夜。大家都睡得静静的了，门口却还有人在谈天。叔齐是向来不偷听人家谈话的，这一回可不知怎的，竟停了脚步，同时也侧着耳朵。
There was a night when there were stars and no moon. Everyone slept quietly, but there were still people talking at the door. Shu Qi has never eavesdropped on other people's conversations, but this time, somehow, he stopped and tilted his ears at the same time.“妈的纣王，一败，就奔上鹿台去了，”说话的大约是回来的伤兵。“妈的，他堆好宝贝，自己坐在中央，就点起火来。”
"Damn, King Zhou, as soon as he was defeated, he ran to Lutai," the person who spoke was about the wounded soldier who came back. "Damn, he piled up the treasure, sat in the center by himself, and lit a fire."“阿唷，这可多么可惜呀！”这分明是管门人的声音。
"Ah, what a pity!" This is clearly the voice of the gatekeeper.“不慌！只烧死了自己，宝贝可没有烧哩。咱们大王就带着诸侯，进了商国。他们的百姓都在郊外迎接，大王叫大人们招呼他们道：‘纳福呀！’他们就都磕头。一直进去，但见门上都贴着两个大字道：‘顺民’。大王的车子一径走向鹿台，找到纣王自寻短见的处所，射了三箭……”
"Don't panic! Only burned himself, the baby didn't burn. Our king took the princes and entered the Shang Kingdom. Their people greeted them in the outskirts, and the king called the adults to greet them and said, 'O Nafu! They all kowtowed. I went in, but I saw two big characters on the door: 'Shunmin'. The king's car went straight to Lutai, found the place where the king was short-sighted, and shot three arrows......"“为什么呀？怕他没有死吗？”别一人问道。
"Why? Are you afraid that he is not dead? Another person asked.“谁知道呢。可是射了三箭，又拔出轻剑来，一砍，这才拿了黄斧头，嚓！砍下他的脑袋来，挂在大白旗上。”
"Who knows. But after shooting three arrows, he pulled out a light sword and slashed it, and then took the yellow axe, huh! Cut off his head and hang it on the big white flag. ”叔齐吃了一惊。
Uncle Qi was taken aback.“之后就去找纣王的两个小老婆。哼，早已统统吊死了。大王就又射了三箭，拔出剑来，一砍，这才拿了黑斧头，割下她们的脑袋，挂在小白旗上。这么一来……”
After that, he went to find the two little wives of the king. Hmph, they have all been hanged. The king shot three more arrows, drew his sword, and slashed it, then took the black axe, cut off their heads, and hung them on the small white flag. In this way......“那两个姨太太真的漂亮吗？”管门人打断了他的话。
"Are those two aunts really beautiful?" The gatekeeper interrupted him.“知不清。旗杆子高，看的人又多，我那时金创还很疼，没有挤近去看。”
"I don't know. The flagpole was high, and there were many people watching, and I was still in pain at that time, so I didn't squeeze close to see it. ”“他们说那一个叫作妲己的是狐狸精，只有两只脚变不成人样，便用布条子裹起来：真的？”
They said that the one named Daji was a vixen, and only two feet became inhuman, so they wrapped them in cloth strips: Really?"“谁知道呢。我也没有看见她的脚。可是那边的娘儿们却真有许多把脚弄得好像猪蹄子的。”
"Who knows. I didn't see her feet either. But there are really many women over there who make their feet look like pig's trotters. ”叔齐是正经人，一听到他们从皇帝的头，谈到女人的脚上去了，便双眉一皱，连忙掩住耳朵，返身跑进房里去。伯夷也还没有睡着，轻轻的问道：
Shu Qi was a serious person, and as soon as he heard them talking about the woman's feet from the emperor's head, he frowned, quickly covered his ears, and turned around and ran into the room. Bo Yi was not asleep yet, and asked softly:“你又去练拳了么？”
"Have you gone to practice boxing again?"叔齐不回答，慢慢的走过去，坐在伯夷的床沿上，弯下腰，告诉了他刚才听来的一些话。这之后，两人都沉默了许多时，终于是叔齐很困难的叹一口气，悄悄的说道：
Shu Qi didn't answer, slowly walked over, sat on the edge of Bo Yi's bed, bent down, and told him some of the things he had just heard. After that, both of them were silent for a long time, and finally Shu Qi sighed with difficulty and said quietly:“不料竟全改了文王的规矩……你瞧罢，不但不孝，也不仁……这样看来，这里的饭是吃不得了。”
Unexpectedly, he changed all the rules of King Wen...... You see, not only is it unfilial, but it is also unkind...... In this way, the food here is inedible. ”“那么，怎么好呢？”伯夷问。
"So, what should I do?" Bo Yi asked.“我看还是走……”
"I think it's better to go......"于是两人商量了几句，就决定明天一早离开这养老堂，不再吃周家的大饼；东西是什么也不带。兄弟俩一同走到华山去，吃些野果和树叶来送自己的残年。况且“天道无亲，常与善人”，或者竟会有苍朮和茯苓之类也说不定。
So the two discussed a few words, and decided to leave the nursing home early tomorrow morning and no longer eat the Zhou family's flatbread; Bring nothing. The brothers walked to Huashan together and ate some wild fruits and leaves to send off their remaining years. Moreover, "the way of heaven has no relatives, often with good people", or there may be Cangshu and Poria and the like.打定主意之后，心地倒十分轻松了。叔齐重复解衣躺下，不多久，就听到伯夷讲梦话；自己也觉得很有兴致，而且仿佛闻到茯苓的清香，接着也就在这茯苓的清香中，沉沉睡去了。
After making up his mind, he felt very relaxed. Uncle Qi repeatedly undressed and lay down, and not long after, he heard Bo Yi talking in his sleep; I also felt very interested, and I seemed to smell the fragrance of Poria, and then I fell asleep in the fragrance of Poria.

采薇

四

采薇

Four第二天，兄弟俩都比平常醒得早，梳洗完毕，毫不带什么东西，其实也并无东西可带，只有一件老羊皮长袍舍不得，仍旧穿在身上，拿了拄杖，和留下的烙饼，推称散步，一径走出养老堂的大门；心里想，从此要长别了，便似乎还不免有些留恋似的，回过头来看了几眼。
The next day, the brothers woke up earlier than usual, freshened up, and didn't bring anything, in fact, there was nothing to bring, only an old sheepskin robe was reluctant, still wearing it, taking a cane, and the pancakes left behind, presuming to take a walk, and walking out of the door of the retirement hall; Thinking in his heart, he was going to say goodbye for a long time, so he seemed to be a little nostalgic, so he looked back and looked at it a few times.街道上行人还不多；所遇见的不过是睡眼惺忪的女人，在井边打水。将近郊外，太阳已经高升，走路的也多起来了，虽然大抵昂着头，得意洋洋的，但一看见他们，却还是照例的让路。树木也多起来了，不知名的落叶树上，已经吐着新芽，一望好像灰绿的轻烟，其间夹着松柏，在蒙胧中仍然显得很苍翠。
There are not many pedestrians on the streets; What I met was nothing more than a sleepy-eyed woman fetching water by the well. Near the suburbs, the sun has risen, and there are more people walking, although most of them hold their heads high and triumphant, but as soon as they see them, they still give way as usual. There are also more trees, and the unknown deciduous trees have spit out new shoots, which look like gray-green light smoke, with pines and cypresses in between, which still look very green in the haze.满眼是阔大，自由，好看，伯夷和叔齐觉得仿佛年青起来，脚步轻松，心里也很舒畅了。
The eyes are wide, free, and good-looking, and Bo Yi and Shu Qi feel as if they are young, their steps are relaxed, and their hearts are also very comfortable.到第二天的午后，迎面遇见了几条岔路，他们决不定走那一条路近，便检了一个对面走来的老头子，很和气的去问他。
By the afternoon of the next day, they encountered several forks in the road, and they were sure which road would be closer, so they checked an old man walking across and asked him very kindly.“阿呀，可惜，”那老头子说。“您要是早一点，跟先前过去的那队马跑就好了。现在可只得先走这条路。前面岔路还多，再问罢。”
"Oh, what a pity," said the old man. "If only you had run with the team that passed earlier. Now I have to go this way first. There are still many forks in the road ahead, so let's ask again. ”叔齐就记得了正午时分，他们的确遇见过几个废兵，赶着一大批老马，瘦马，跛脚马，癞皮马，从背后冲上来，几乎把他们踏死，这时就趁便问那老人，这些马是赶去做什么的。
Shu Qi remembered that at noon, they did meet a few useless soldiers, driving a large number of old horses, thin horses, lame horses, and leprosy horses, rushing up from behind and almost trampling them to death.“您还不知道吗？”那人答道。“我们大王已经‘恭行天罚’，用不着再来兴师动众，所以把马放到华山脚下去的。这就是‘归马于华山之阳’呀，您懂了没有？我们还在‘放牛于桃林之野’哩！吓，这回可真是大家要吃太平饭了。”
"Don't you know yet?" The man replied. "Our king has already 'carried out the punishment of heaven', and there is no need to mobilize troops again, so he put his horse at the foot of Mount Hua. This is 'returning to the sun of Mount Hua', do you understand?" We are still 'herding cattle in the peach forest'!" Scary, this time everyone really wants to eat a peaceful meal. ”然而这竟是兜头一桶冷水，使两个人同时打了一个寒噤，但仍然不动声色，谢过老人，向着他所指示的路前行。无奈这“归马于华山之阳”，竟踏坏了他们的梦境，使两个人的心里，从此都有些七上八下起来。
However, this was actually a bucket of cold water in the head, which made the two people shudder at the same time, but they remained calm, thanked the old man, and walked forward in the direction he instructed. Helplessly, this "returning to the sun of Huashan" actually ruined their dream, making the hearts of the two people a little up and down from then on.心里忐忑，嘴里不说，仍是走，到得傍晚，临近了一座并不很高的黄土冈，上面有一些树林，几间土屋，他们便在途中议定，到这里去借宿。
In the evening, they approached a not very high loess hill, with some woods and a few earthen houses, and they agreed on the way to stay here.离土冈脚还有十几步，林子里便窜出五个彪形大汉来，头包白布，身穿破衣，为首的拿一把大刀，另外四个都是木棍。一到冈下，便一字排开，拦住去路，一同恭敬的点头，大声吆喝道：
There were still more than ten steps away from the foot of the hill, and five burly men rushed out of the forest, wrapped in white cloth and wearing tattered clothes, the leader was holding a big knife, and the other four were wooden sticks. As soon as they arrived at the bottom of the hill, they lined up in a line, blocked the way, nodded respectfully together, and shouted loudly:“老先生，您好哇！”
"Old sir, hello!"他们俩都吓得倒退了几步，伯夷竟发起抖来，还是叔齐能干，索性走上前，问他们是什么人，有什么事。
Both of them were so frightened that they took a few steps back, and Bo Yi actually started to shake, but Shu Qi was capable, so he simply stepped forward and asked them who they were and what was going on.“小人就是华山大王小穷奇，”那拿刀的说，“带了兄弟们在这里，要请您老赏一点买路钱！”
"The villain is the king of Huashan, Xiao Qiongqi," the man with the knife said, "I brought my brothers here, and I want you to reward me with a little money to buy the road!" ”“我们那里有钱呢，大王。”叔齐很客气的说。“我们是从养老堂里出来的。”
"We have money there, my lord." Shu Qi said politely. "We came out of the nursing home."“阿呀！”小穷奇吃了一惊，立刻肃然起敬，“那么，您两位一定是‘天下之大老也’了。小人们也遵先王遗教，非常敬老，所以要请您老留下一点纪念品……”他看见叔齐没有回答，便将大刀一挥，提高了声音道：“如果您老还要谦让，那可小人们只好恭行天搜，瞻仰一下您老的贵体了！”
"Ah!" Xiao Qiongqi was taken aback and immediately awe-inspired, "Then, you two must be the 'great elders of the world'." The villains also follow the teachings of the former king and respect the elderly very much, so I would like to ask you to leave a little souvenir......" Seeing that Shu Qi did not answer, he waved his big knife and raised his voice: "If you are old and still have to be humble, then the villains have to search the sky and pay homage to your old noble body!" ”伯夷叔齐立刻擎起了两只手；一个拿木棍的就来解开他们的皮袍，棉袄，小衫，细细搜检了一遍。
Bo Yi Shu Qi immediately raised his two hands; A man with a wooden stick came to untie their leather robes, padded jackets, and shirts, and searched them carefully.“两个穷光蛋，真的什么也没有！”他满脸显出失望的颜色，转过头去，对小穷奇说。
"Two paupers, really nothing!" His face was full of disappointment, he turned his head and said to Xiao Qiongqi.小穷奇看出了伯夷在发抖，便上前去，恭敬的拍拍他肩膀，说道：
Xiao Qiongqi saw that Bo Yi was trembling, so he stepped forward, patted him on the shoulder respectfully, and said:“老先生，请您不要怕。海派会‘剥猪猡’，我们是文明人，不干这玩意儿的。什么纪念品也没有，只好算我们自己晦气。现在您只要滚您的蛋就是了！”
"Old sir, please don't be afraid. Shanghai will 'peel pigs and monkeys', we are civilized people, we don't do this thing. There are no souvenirs, so we have to count ourselves as bad luck. Now you just have to roll your balls! ”伯夷没有话好回答，连衣服也来不及穿好，和叔齐迈开大步，眼看着地，向前便跑。这时五个人都已经站在旁边，让出路来了。看见他们在面前走过，便恭敬的垂下双手，同声问道：
Bo Yi had nothing to answer, and he didn't even have time to put on his clothes, so he and Uncle Qi took big steps, and when they saw the ground, they ran forward. At this time, all five people were already standing beside them, making way out. Seeing them walking in front of them, he respectfully lowered his hands and asked in unison:“您走了？您不喝茶了么？”
"Are you gone? Don't you drink tea anymore? ”“不喝了，不喝了……”伯夷和叔齐且走且说，一面不住的点着头。
"Don't drink, don't drink......" Bo Yi and Shu Qi walked and said, nodding their heads incessantly.

采薇

五

采薇

Five“归马于华山之阳”和华山大王小穷奇，都使两位义士对华山害怕，于是从新商量，转身向北，讨着饭，晓行夜宿，终于到了首阳山。
"Returning to the sun of Huashan" and the king of Huashan, Xiao Qiongqi, both made the two righteous men afraid of Huashan, so they discussed it anew, turned north, begged for food, traveled in the morning and stayed overnight, and finally arrived at Shouyang Mountain.这确是一座好山。既不高，又不深，没有大树林，不愁虎狼，也不必防强盗：是理想的幽栖之所。两人到山脚下一看，只见新叶嫩碧，土地金黄，野草里开着些红红白白的小花，真是连看看也赏心悦目。他们就满心高兴，用拄杖点着山径，一步一步的挨上去，找到上面突出一片石头，好像岩洞的处所，坐了下来，一面擦着汗，一面喘着气。
This is indeed a good mountain. It is neither high nor deep, there are no big forests, no worries about tigers and wolves, and no need to guard against robbers: it is an ideal place to live. When the two went to the foot of the mountain, they saw that the new leaves were tender and green, the land was golden, and there were some red and white flowers blooming in the weeds, which was really pleasing to the eye. They were full of joy, pointed the trail with their canes, went up step by step, found a stone protruding from it, like a cave, and sat down, wiping their sweat and panting.这时候，太阳已经西沉，倦鸟归林，啾啾唧唧的叫着，没有上山时候那么清静了，但他们倒觉得也还新鲜，有趣。在铺好羊皮袍，准备就睡之前，叔齐取出两个大饭团，和伯夷吃了一饱。这是沿路讨来的残饭，因为两人曾经议定，“不食周粟”，只好进了首阳山之后开始实行，所以当晚把它吃完，从明天起，就要坚守主义，绝不通融了。
At this time, the sun had already set in the west, and the tired birds returned to the forest, chirping, not as quiet as when they went up the mountain, but they felt that it was still fresh and interesting. Before laying out the sheepskin robe and getting ready to go to bed, Uncle Qi took out two large rice balls and ate them with Bo Yi. This is the leftover food begged along the road, because the two had agreed that "not eating Zhou millet" had to be implemented after entering Shouyang Mountain, so after eating it that night, from tomorrow, we must stick to the principle and never be accommodating.他们一早就被乌老鸦闹醒，后来重又睡去，醒来却已是上午时分。伯夷说腰痛腿酸，简直站不起；叔齐只得独自去走走，看可有可吃的东西。他走了一些时，竟发见这山的不高不深，没有虎狼盗贼，固然是其所长，然而因此也有了缺点：下面就是首阳村，所以不但常有砍柴的老人或女人，并且有进来玩耍的孩子，可吃的野果子之类，一颗也找不出，大约早被他们摘去了。
They were woken up by the old crow early in the morning, and then fell asleep again, but when they woke up, it was already morning. Bo Yi said that his lower back hurts and his legs are sore, and he can't stand up; Shu Qi had to go for a walk alone to see if there was anything to eat. When he walked a little, he found that the mountain was neither high nor deep, and there were no tigers, wolves and thieves, which was certainly its strength, but it also had disadvantages: below was Shouyang Village, so not only were there often old people or women chopping wood, but there were also children who came in to play, and they couldn't find a single edible wild fruit, and they had picked it about a long time ago.他自然就想到茯苓。但山上虽然有松树，却不是古松，都好像根上未必有茯苓；即使有，自己也不带锄头，没有法子想。接着又想到苍朮，然而他只见过苍朮的根，毫不知道那叶子的形状，又不能把满山的草都拔起来看一看，即使苍朮生在眼前，也不能认识。心里一暴躁，满脸发热，就乱抓了一通头皮。
He naturally thought of Poria. But although there are pine trees on the mountain, they are not ancient pines, and they seem to have not necessarily Poria on the roots; Even if there is, I don't bring a hoe and I can't think about it. Then he thought of Cangshu, but he had only seen the roots of Cangshu, and he didn't know the shape of the leaves, and he couldn't pull up all the grass all over the mountain to take a look, even if Cangshu was born in front of him, he couldn't recognize it. As soon as he was irritable and his face was hot, he scratched his scalp.但是他立刻平静了，似乎有了主意，接着就走到松树旁边，摘了一衣兜的松针，又往溪边寻了两块石头，砸下松针外面的青皮，洗过，又细细的砸得好像面饼，另寻一片很薄的石片，拿着回到石洞去了。
But he immediately calmed down, seemed to have an idea, and then walked to the pine tree, picked a pine needle from his pocket, looked for two more stones by the stream, smashed the green skin on the outside of the pine needle, washed it, smashed it finely like a cake, and found another very thin stone chip, and took it back to the stone cave.“三弟，有什么捞儿没有？我是肚子饿的咕噜咕噜响了好半天了。”伯夷一望见他，就问。
"Third brother, is there anything to catch? I've been gurgling hungry for a long time. As soon as Bo Yi saw him, he asked.“大哥，什么也没有。试试这玩意儿罢。”
"Big brother, nothing. Just try this thing. ”他就近拾了两块石头，支起石片来，放上松针面，聚些枯枝，在下面生了火。实在是许多工夫，才听得湿的松针面有些吱吱作响，可也发出一点清香，引得他们俩咽口水。叔齐高兴得微笑起来了，这是姜太公做八十五岁生日的时候，他去拜寿，在寿筵上听来的方法。
He picked up two stones nearby, propped up the stone chips, put pine needles on them, gathered some dead branches, and lit a fire below. It took a lot of effort to hear that the wet pine needle surface creaked a little, but it also emitted a little fragrance, which made the two of them swallow. Shu Qi smiled happily, this is the method that Jiang Taigong heard at the birthday banquet when he went to pay his respects on his eighty-fifth birthday.发香之后，就发泡，眼见它渐渐的干下去，正是一块糕。叔齐用皮袍袖子裹着手，把石片笑嘻嘻的端到伯夷的面前。伯夷一面吹，一面拗，终于拗下一角来，连忙塞进嘴里去。
After the fragrance, it foamed, and seeing it gradually dry, it was a cake. Shu Qi wrapped his hands in the sleeves of his leather robe and brought the stone shards to Bo Yi with a smile. Bo Yi blew and twisted on the other, and finally twisted a corner and quickly stuffed it into his mouth.他愈嚼，就愈皱眉，直着脖子咽了几咽，倒哇的一声吐出来了，诉苦似的看着叔齐道：
The more he chewed, the more he frowned, swallowed a few times with his neck straight, and spat it out with a wow, looking at Uncle Qi as if complaining:“苦……粗……”
"Bitter ...... Thick ......"这时候，叔齐真好像落在深潭里，什么希望也没有了。抖抖的也拗了一角，咀嚼起来，可真也毫没有可吃的样子：苦……粗……
At this time, Shu Qi really seemed to have fallen into a deep pool, and there was no hope. The trembling one also twisted a corner, chewed it, but there was really nothing to eat: bitter ...... Coarse......叔齐一下子失了锐气，坐倒了，垂了头。然而还在想，挣扎的想，仿佛是在爬出一个深潭去。爬着爬着，只向前。终于似乎自己变了孩子，还是孤竹君的世子，坐在保姆的膝上了。这保姆是乡下人，在和他讲故事：黄帝打蚩尤，大禹捉无支祁，还有乡下人荒年吃薇菜。
Shu Qi suddenly lost his strength, sat down, and hung his head. However, still thinking, struggling, as if climbing out of a deep pool. Crawling and crawling, only forward. Finally, it seems that he has changed into a child, still the prince of Guzhujun, sitting on the lap of the nanny. This nanny was a countryman, telling him stories: the Yellow Emperor beat Chiyou, Dayu caught Wuzhiqi, and the countrymen ate Weicai in the famine.他又记得了自己问过薇菜的样子，而且山上正见过这东西。他忽然觉得有了气力，立刻站起身，跨进草丛，一路寻过去。
He remembered that he had asked about Wei Cai, and he had seen this thing on the mountain. He suddenly felt that he had strength, immediately stood up, stepped into the grass, and searched all the way.果然，这东西倒不算少，走不到一里路，就摘了半衣兜。
Sure enough, this thing is not small, and after walking less than a mile, he took off half of his pocket.他还是在溪水里洗了一洗，这才拿回来；还是用那烙过松针面的石片，来烤薇菜。叶子变成暗绿，熟了。但这回再不敢先去敬他的大哥了，撮起一株来，放在自己的嘴里，闭着眼睛，只是嚼。
He still washed it in the stream and then took it back; Or use the stone chips that have been baked with pine needle noodles to roast Weicai. The leaves turn dark green and ripe. But this time he didn't dare to honor his eldest brother first, picked one up, put it in his mouth, closed his eyes, and just chewed it.“怎么样？”伯夷焦急的问。
"How is it?" Bo Yi asked anxiously.“鲜的！”
"Fresh!"两人就笑嘻嘻的来尝烤薇菜；伯夷多吃了两撮，因为他是大哥。
The two of them came to taste the roasted vegetables with a smile; Bo Yi ate two more pinches because he was the eldest brother.他们从此天天采薇菜。先前是叔齐一个人去采，伯夷煮；后来伯夷觉得身体健壮了一些，也出去采了。做法也多起来：薇汤，薇羹，薇酱，清炖薇，原汤焖薇芽，生晒嫩薇叶……
They have been picking weeds every day since then. Previously, Shu Qi went to pick alone, and Bo Yi cooked it; Later, Bo Yi felt that his body was a little stronger, so he went out to pick it. There are also more methods: Wei soup, Wei soup, Wei sauce, stewed Wei Wei, the original soup is stewed Wei sprouts, and the young Wei leaves are dried......然而近地的薇菜，却渐渐的采完，虽然留着根，一时也很难生长，每天非走远路不可了。搬了几回家，后来还是一样的结果。而且新住处也逐渐的难找了起来，因为既要薇菜多，又要溪水近，这样的便当之处，在首阳山上实在也不可多得的。叔齐怕伯夷年纪太大了，一不小心会中风，便竭力劝他安坐在家里，仍旧单是担任煮，让自己独自去采薇。
However, the weeds near the ground are gradually picked, although they have roots, it is difficult to grow for a while, and they have to travel far every day. I moved home a few times, and then the result was the same. And it is gradually difficult to find a new place to live, because it requires a lot of vegetables and a close stream, and such a bento is really rare on Shouyang Mountain. Shu Qi was afraid that Bo Yi would be too old and would accidentally have a stroke, so he tried his best to persuade him to sit at home, still serving as a cook, and let himself go to pick Wei alone.伯夷逊让了一番之后，倒也应允了，从此就较为安闲自在，然而首阳山上是有人迹的，他没事做，脾气又有些改变，从沉默成了多话，便不免和孩子去搭讪，和樵夫去扳谈。也许是因为一时高兴，或者有人叫他老乞丐的缘故罢，他竟说出了他们俩原是辽西的孤竹君的儿子，他老大，那一个是老三。父亲在日原是说要传位给老三的，一到死后，老三却一定向他让。他遵父命，省得麻烦，逃走了。不料老三也逃走了。两人在路上遇见，便一同来找西伯——文王，进了养老堂。又不料现在的周王竟“以臣弑君”起来，所以只好不食周粟，逃上首阳山，吃野菜活命……等到叔齐知道，怪他多嘴的时候，已经传播开去，没法挽救了。但也不敢怎么埋怨他；只在心里想：父亲不肯把位传给他，可也不能不说很有些眼力。
After Bo Yixun gave in, he agreed, and since then he has been relatively leisurely, but there are people on Shouyang Mountain, he has nothing to do, and his temper has changed a little, from silence to talking, so he can't help but talk to the child and talk with the woodcutter. Maybe it was because of a moment of joy, or because someone called him an old beggar, he actually said that the two of them were originally the sons of Gu Zhujun in western Liaoning, he was the eldest, and the one was the third. His father originally said that he would pass the throne to the third child, but when he died, the third child would definitely give it to him. He obeyed his father's orders, saved him trouble, and fled. Unexpectedly, the third child also escaped. The two met on the road, so they came to Xibo, King Wen, and entered the retirement hall. Unexpectedly, the current King of Zhou actually "killed the king with his ministers", so he had to stop eating Zhou millet, flee to Shouyang Mountain, and eat wild vegetables to survive...... By the time Shu Qi knew that he was talking too much, it had already spread and could not be saved. But I didn't dare to complain about him; I only thought in my heart: My father refused to pass the throne to him, but I couldn't help but say that he had some eyesight.叔齐的预料也并不错：这结果坏得很，不但村里时常讲到他们的事，也常有特地上山来看他们的人。有的当他们名人，有的当他们怪物，有的当他们古董。甚至于跟着看怎样采，围着看怎样吃，指手画脚，问长问短，令人头昏。而且对付还须谦虚，倘使略不小心，皱一皱眉，就难免有人说是“发脾气”。
Shu Qi's prediction was not good: this result was very bad, not only did the village often talk about them, but there were also people who came up the mountain to see them. Some are celebrities, some are monsters, and some are antiques. Even follow how to pick, look around how to eat, point fingers, ask long and short questions, which is dizzying. And you have to be humble when dealing with it, if you are a little careless and frown, it is inevitable that some people will say that it is a "tantrum".不过舆论还是好的方面多。后来连小姐太太，也有几个人来看了，回家去都摇头，说是“不好看”，上了一个大当。
However, public opinion still has many good aspects. Later, even the young lady and several people came to see it, and when they went home, they all shook their heads, saying that it was "not good-looking", and they were fooled.终于还引动了首阳村的第一等高人小丙君。他原是妲己的舅公的干女婿，做着祭酒，因为知道天命有归，便带着五十车行李和八百个奴婢，来投明主了。可惜已在会师盟津的前几天，兵马事忙，来不及好好的安插，便留下他四十车货物和七百五十个奴婢，另外给予两顷首阳山下的肥田，叫他在村里研究八卦学。他也喜欢弄文学，村中都是文盲，不懂得文学概论，气闷已久，便叫家丁打轿，找那两个老头子，谈谈文学去了；尤其是诗歌，因为他也是诗人，已经做好一本诗集子。
Finally, it also attracted Xiao Bingjun, the first-class master of Shouyang Village. He was originally the godson-in-law of Daji's uncle, and he was a sacrificial wine, because he knew that his destiny was returned, so he came to the Ming Lord with fifty carts of luggage and eight hundred slaves. Unfortunately, a few days before the meeting with Mengjin, the soldiers and horses were busy, and there was no time to properly arrange, so he left him with forty carts of goods and seven hundred and fifty slaves, and gave him two acres of fertile land under Shouyang Mountain, asking him to study gossip in the village. He also liked to play literature, the village was illiterate, did not understand the introduction of literature, and had been depressed for a long time, so he asked the servants to take a sedan chair and find the two old men to talk about literature; Especially poetry, because he is also a poet, has already made a collection of poems.然而谈过之后，他一上轿就摇头，回了家，竟至于很有些气愤。他以为那两个家伙是谈不来诗歌的。第一、是穷：谋生之不暇，怎么做得出好诗？第二、是“有所为”，失了诗的“敦厚”；第三、是有议论，失了诗的“温柔”。尤其可议的是他们的品格，通体都是矛盾。于是他大义凛然的斩钉截铁的说道：
However, after talking, he shook his head as soon as he got into the sedan chair and went home, which was a little angry. He thought that those two guys couldn't talk about poetry. First, it is poor: how can you make a good poem if you have no time to make a living? second, it is "doing something", losing the "honesty" of poetry; Third, there is discussion, and the "gentleness" of poetry is lost. What is especially controversial is their character, which is full of contradictions. So he said righteously and decisively:“‘普天之下，莫非王土’，难道他们在吃的薇，不是我们圣上的吗！”
"'Under the whole world, could it be the royal land', are they eating Wei, isn't it our holy emperor!"这时候，伯夷和叔齐也在一天一天的瘦下去了。这并非为了忙于应酬，因为参观者倒在逐渐的减少。所苦的是薇菜也已经逐渐的减少，每天要找一捧，总得费许多力，走许多路。
At this time, Bo Yi and Shu Qi were also losing weight day by day. This is not to be busy socializing, because the number of visitors is gradually decreasing. The bitter thing is that the weicai has gradually decreased, and it takes a lot of effort and a lot of walking to find a handful every day.然而祸不单行。掉在井里面的时候，上面偏又来了一块大石头。
However, the disaster does not come alone. When it fell into the well, another big stone came from above.有一天，他们俩正在吃烤薇菜，不容易找，所以这午餐已在下午了。忽然走来了一个二十来岁的女人，先前是没有见过的，看她模样，好像是阔人家里的婢女。
One day, the two of them were eating roasted vegetables, which were not easy to find, so this lunch was already in the afternoon. Suddenly a woman in her twenties walked over, I had never seen her before, and looking at her appearance, she seemed to be a maid in a wide family.“您吃饭吗？”她问。
"Do you eat?" She asked.叔齐仰起脸来，连忙陪笑，点点头。
Shu Qi raised his face, quickly laughed and nodded.“这是什么玩意儿呀？”她又问。
"What kind of thing is this?" She asked again.“薇。”伯夷说。
"Wei." Bo Yi said.“怎么吃着这样的玩意儿的呀？”
"Why are you eating such a thing?"“因为我们是不食周粟……”
"Because we don't eat Zhou millet......伯夷刚刚说出口，叔齐赶紧使一个眼色，但那女人好像聪明得很，已经懂得了。她冷笑了一下，于是大义凛然的斩钉截铁的说道：
As soon as Bo Yi said it, Shu Qi quickly winked, but the woman seemed to be very smart and already understood. She sneered, and then said decisively:“‘普天之下，莫非王土’，你们在吃的薇，难道不是我们圣上的吗！”
"'Under the whole world, could it be the royal land', the Wei you are eating, isn't it our holy emperor!"伯夷和叔齐听得清清楚楚，到了末一句，就好像一个大霹雳，震得他们发昏；待到清醒过来，那鸦头已经不见了。薇，自然是不吃，也吃不下去了，而且连看看也害羞，连要去搬开它，也抬不起手来，觉得仿佛有好几百斤重。
Bo Yi and Shu Qi heard it clearly, and when they reached the last sentence, it was like a big thunderbolt, which shocked them into a daze; When he woke up, the crow head was gone. Wei, naturally I don't eat, I can't eat it, and I am shy even when I look at it, and I can't even raise my hand to move it away, I feel as if it weighs hundreds of pounds.

采薇

六

采薇

Six樵夫偶然发见了伯夷和叔齐都缩做一团，死在山背后的石洞里，是大约这之后的二十天。并没有烂，虽然因为瘦，但也可见死的并不久；老羊皮袍却没有垫着，不知道弄到那里去了。这消息一传到村子里，又哄动了一大批来看的人，来来往往，一直闹到夜。结果是有几个多事的人，就地用黄土把他们埋起来，还商量立一块石碑，刻上几个字，给后来好做古迹。
The woodcutter accidentally found that Bo Yi and Shu Qi were shrunk into a ball and died in the stone cave behind the mountain, about twenty days later. It is not rotten, although it is thin, but it can also be seen that death is not long in coming; The old sheepskin robe was not padded, and I don't know where it got it. As soon as the news reached the village, it stirred up a large number of people to come and go, coming and going, and made noise until night. As a result, a few meddlesome people buried them with loess on the spot, and also discussed erecting a stone monument and engraved a few words to make it a monument for the future.然而合村里没有人能写字，只好去求小丙君。
However, no one in Hecun could write, so he had to ask Xiao Bingjun.然而小丙君不肯写。
However, Xiao Bing refused to write.“他们不配我来写，”他说。“都是昏蛋。跑到养老堂里来，倒也罢了，可又不肯超然；跑到首阳山里来，倒也罢了，可是还要做诗；做诗倒也罢了，可是还要发感慨，不肯安分守己，‘为艺术而艺术’。你瞧，这样的诗，可是有永久性的：
"They didn't deserve me to write," he said. "They are all faint. running to the nursing home, it's okay, but he refuses to be detached; running to Shouyang Mountain, it's fine, but I still have to write poetry; It's okay to make poetry, but I still have to sigh, refuse to keep to myself, 'art for art'. You see, such a poem is permanent:上那西山呀采它的薇菜，Go up to the western mountain to pick its weeds, 
强盗来代强盗呀不知道这的不对。 The robbers come to replace the robbers, I don't know if this is wrong. 
神农虞夏一下子过去了，我又那里去呢？ Shennong Yuxia passed all of a sudden, where am I going? 
唉唉死罢，命里注定的晦气！ Alas, death is destined to be unlucky!
“你瞧，这是什么话？温柔敦厚的才是诗。他们的东西，却不但‘怨’，简直‘骂’了。没有花，只有刺，尚且不可，何况只有骂。即使放开文学不谈，他们撇下祖业，也不是什么孝子，到这里又讥讪朝政，更不像一个良民……我不写！……”
"Look, what is this? Gentle and honest is poetry. Their things are not only 'resentful', but simply 'scolded'. There are no flowers, only thorns, and it is not possible, let alone scolding. Even if literature is aside, they are not filial sons who leave their ancestral business, and they ridicule the government here, let alone a good citizen...... I don't write! ……”文盲们不大懂得他的议论，但看见声势汹汹，知道一定是反对的意思，也只好作罢了。伯夷和叔齐的丧事，就这样的算是告了一段落。
The illiterate people didn't understand his arguments, but when they saw the menacing momentum, they knew that it must mean opposition, so they had to give up. The funerals of Bo Yi and Shu Qi came to an end.然而夏夜纳凉的时候，有时还谈起他们的事情来。有人说是老死的，有人说是病死的，有人说是给抢羊皮袍子的强盗杀死的。后来又有人说其实恐怕是故意饿死的，因为他从小丙君府上的鸦头阿金姐那里听来：这之前的十多天，她曾经上山去奚落他们了几句，傻瓜总是脾气大，大约就生气了，绝了食撒赖，可是撒赖只落得一个自己死。
However, when they cool off on summer nights, they sometimes talk about them. Some say he died of old age, some say he died of illness, and some say he was killed by robbers who robbed sheepskin robes. Later, some people said that he was actually afraid that he starved to death on purpose, because he heard from Sister Ajin, the crow head of Xiao Bingjun's house: More than ten days ago, she had gone up the mountain to ridicule them a few words, and the fool was always tempered, and he was about angry and cut off the food of Sarai, but Sarai only ended up dying by himself.于是许多人就非常佩服阿金姐，说她很聪明，但也有些人怪她太刻薄。
So many people admire Sister Ah Jin very much, saying that she is very smart, but some people blame her for being too mean.阿金姐却并不以为伯夷叔齐的死掉，是和她有关系的。自然，她上山去开了几句玩笑，是事实，不过这仅仅是玩笑。那两个傻瓜发脾气，因此不吃薇菜了，也是事实，不过并没有死，倒招来了很大的运气。
Sister Ah Jin didn't think that Bo Yi Shuqi's death had something to do with her. Naturally, she went up the mountain and made a few jokes, which was true, but it was just a joke. It is also true that those two fools lost their temper and stopped eating Weicai, but they did not die, but they attracted a lot of luck.“老天爷的心肠是顶好的，”她说。“他看见他们的撒赖，快要饿死了，就吩咐母鹿，用它的奶去喂他们。您瞧，这不是顶好的福气吗？用不着种地，用不着砍柴，只要坐着，就天天有鹿奶自己送到你嘴里来。可是贱骨头不识抬举，那老三，他叫什么呀，得步进步，喝鹿奶还不够了。他喝着鹿奶，心里想，‘这鹿有这么胖，杀它来吃，味道一定是不坏的。’一面就慢慢的伸开臂膊，要去拿石片。可不知道鹿是通灵的东西，它已经知道了人的心思，立刻一溜烟逃走了。老天爷也讨厌他们的贪嘴，叫母鹿从此不要去。您瞧，他们还不只好饿死吗？那里是为了我的话，倒是为了自己的贪心，贪嘴呵！……”
"God's heart is good," she said. When he saw that their saliah was about to starve, he commanded the doe to feed them with its milk. Look, isn't this a great blessing? You don't need to farm, you don't need to chop wood, as long as you sit, deer milk will be delivered to your mouth every day. But the cheap bones don't know how to lift, the third child, what is his name, he has to make progress, drinking deer milk is not enough. He drank the deer milk and thought to himself, 'This deer is so fat, kill it to eat, it must not taste bad.' On the other hand, he slowly stretched out his arms and was going to get the stone chips. But I don't know that the deer is a psychic thing, it already knows people's minds, and immediately fled. God also hated their greedy mouths and told the doe not to go again. Look, don't they have to starve to death? It's for my words, but it's for my own greed, greedy! ……”听到这故事的人们，临末都深深的叹一口气，不知怎的，连自己的肩膀也觉得轻松不少了。即使有时还会想起伯夷叔齐来，但恍恍忽忽，好像看见他们蹲在石壁下，正在张开白胡子的大口，拚命的吃鹿肉。
People who heard this story sighed deeply at the end of the day, and somehow, even their shoulders felt a lot easier. Even if I sometimes think of Uncle Bo Yi coming together, I feel as if I see them squatting under the stone wall, opening their big mouths with white beards and eating venison desperately.一九三五年十二月作。
Created in December 1935.

铸剑

铸剑

铸剑

Sword casting一
One眉间尺刚和他的母亲睡下，老鼠便出来咬锅盖，使他听得发烦。他轻轻地叱了几声，最初还有些效验，后来是简直不理他了，格支格支地径自咬。他又不敢大声赶，怕惊醒了白天做得劳乏，晚上一躺就睡着了的母亲。
As soon as he fell asleep with his mother, the mouse came out and bit the lid of the pot, making him annoyed. He scolded softly a few times, and at first it was somewhat effective, but then he simply ignored him and bit himself. He didn't dare to rush loudly, for fear of waking up his mother, who was tired during the day and fell asleep at night.许多时光之后，平静了；他也想睡去。忽然，扑通一声，惊得他又睁开眼。同时听到沙沙地响，是爪子抓着瓦器的声音。
After many times, it calmed down; He also wanted to sleep. Suddenly, with a plop, he opened his eyes again. At the same time, I heard a rustling sound, which was the sound of claws grasping the earthenware.“好！该死！”他想着，心里非常高兴，一面就轻轻地坐起来。
"Okay! Damn it! He thought, feeling very happy in his heart, and sat up gently.他跨下床，借着月光走向门背后，摸到钻火家伙，点上松明，向水瓮里一照。果然，一匹很大的老鼠落在那里面了；但是，存水已经不多，爬不出来，只沿着水瓮内壁，抓着，团团地转圈子。
He stepped out of bed, walked behind the door by the moonlight, touched the fire driller, lit a torch, and shone into the water urn. Sure enough, a big mouse landed on it; However, there is not much water stored in it, and it cannot be crawled out, so it only follows the inner wall of the water urn, grabbing it, and spinning in circles.“活该！”他一想到夜夜咬家具，闹得他不能安稳睡觉的便是它们，很觉得畅快。他将松明插在土墙的小孔里，赏玩着；然而那圆睁的小眼睛，又使他发生了憎恨，伸手抽出一根芦柴，将它直按到水底去。过了一会，才放手，那老鼠也随着浮了上来，还是抓着瓮壁转圈子。只是抓劲已经没有先前似的有力，眼睛也淹在水里面，单露出一点尖尖的通红的小鼻子，咻咻地急促地喘气。
"You deserve it!" He felt very happy when he thought that it was them that made him unable to sleep peacefully when he chewed furniture every night. He inserted the torch into the small hole in the earthen wall and enjoyed it; However, the small eyes that were round made him hate again, and he reached out and pulled out a reed firewood and pressed it straight to the bottom of the water. After a while, he let go, and the mouse also floated up, still holding on to the wall of the urn and spinning in circles. It's just that the grip is no longer as strong as before, and his eyes are also submerged in the water, revealing a little pointed red nose, panting rapidly.他近来很有点不大喜欢红鼻子的人。但这回见了这尖尖的小红鼻子，却忽然觉得它可怜了，就又用那芦柴，伸到它的肚下去，老鼠抓着，歇了一回力，便沿着芦干爬了上来。待到他看见全身，——湿淋淋的黑毛，大的肚子，蚯蚓似的尾巴，——便又觉得可恨可憎得很，慌忙将芦柴一抖，扑通一声，老鼠又落在水瓮里，他接着就用芦柴在它头上捣了几下，叫它赶快沉下去。
He has been a little disliking for people with red noses lately. But this time I saw this pointed little red nose, but I suddenly felt that it was pitiful, so I used the reed wood to reach its belly, the mouse grabbed it, took a break, and climbed up along the reed trunk. When he saw the wet black hair, big belly, and earthworm-like tail ,——all over his body,—— he felt hateful and hateful again, and hurriedly shook the reeds, plopped them, and the mouse fell into the water urn again.换了六回松明之后，那老鼠已经不能动弹，不过沉浮在水中间，有时还向水面微微一跳。眉间尺又觉得很可怜，随即折断芦柴，好容易将它夹了出来，放在地面上。老鼠先是丝毫不动，后来才有一点呼吸；又许多时，四只脚运动了，一翻身，似乎要站起来逃走。这使眉间尺大吃一惊，不觉提起左脚，一脚踏下去。只听得吱的一声，他蹲下去仔细看时，只见口角上微有鲜血，大概是死掉了。
After changing the torch six times, the mouse could no longer move, but it sank and floated in the water, sometimes jumping slightly towards the water. The ruler between the eyebrows felt very pitiful, and then broke the reeds, and finally picked it out and put it on the ground. The mouse did not move at first, and then breathed a little; Many times, the four feet moved, and when they turned over, they seemed to stand up and run away. This surprised the ruler between the eyebrows, and he lifted his left foot and stepped on it. He only heard a creak, and when he squatted down to take a closer look, he saw a little blood on the corner of his mouth, probably dead.他又觉得很可怜，仿佛自己作了大恶似的，非常难受。他蹲着，呆看着，站不起来。
He felt very pitiful, as if he had done a great evil, and it was very uncomfortable. He squatted, stared, and couldn't stand up.“尺儿，你在做什么？”他的母亲已经醒来了，在床上问。
"Chi'er, what are you doing?" His mother had woken up and asked in bed.“老鼠……。”他慌忙站起，回转身去，却只答了两个字。
"Mouse ......." He hurriedly stood up, turned around, but only answered two words.“是的，老鼠。这我知道。可是你在做什么？杀它呢，还是在救它？”
"Yes, mouse. I know this. But what are you doing? Kill it, or save it? ”他没有回答。松明烧尽了；他默默地立在暗中，渐看见月光的皎洁。
He didn't answer. The torch burned out; He stood silently in the dark, gradually seeing the brightness of the moonlight.“唉！”他的母亲叹息说，“一交子时，你就是十六岁了，性情还是那样，不冷不热地，一点也不变。看来，你的父亲的仇是没有人报的了。”
"Alas!" His mother sighed and said, "When you first met him, you were sixteen years old, and your temperament was still the same, lukewarm, and not at all. It seems that no one has avenged your father. ”他看见他的母亲坐在灰白色的月影中，仿佛身体都在颤动；低微的声音里，含着无限的悲哀，使他冷得毛骨悚然，而一转眼间，又觉得热血在全身中忽然腾沸。
He saw his mother sitting in the gray-white shadow of the moon, as if her body was trembling; In the low voice, there was infinite sadness, which made him feel creepy cold, and in the blink of an eye, he felt that his blood suddenly boiled in his body.“父亲的仇？父亲有什么仇呢？”他前进几步，惊急地问。
"Father's revenge? What hatred does my father have? He took a few steps forward and asked anxiously.“有的。还要你去报。我早想告诉你的了；只因为你太小，没有说。现在你已经成人了，却还是那样的性情。这教我怎么办呢？你似的性情，能行大事的么？”
"Yes. I still want you to report. I wanted to tell you a long time ago; Just because you are too young to say it. Now that you're an adult, you're still in that temperament. What does this teach me? Can you do great things with your temperament? ”“能。说罢，母亲。我要改过……。”
"Yes. After that, mother. I want to change ....... ”“自然。我也只得说。你必须改过……。那么，走过来罢。”
"Nature. I have to say it. You have to change ....... So, come here. ”他走过去；他的母亲端坐在床上，在暗白的月影里，两眼发出闪闪的光芒。
He walked over; His mother sat on the bed, her eyes shining brightly in the dark moonlight.“听哪！”她严肃地说，“你的父亲原是一个铸剑的名工，天下第一。他的工具，我早已都卖掉了来救了穷了，你已经看不见一点遗迹；但他是一个世上无二的铸剑的名工。二十年前，王妃生下了一块铁，听说是抱了一回铁柱之后受孕的，是一块纯青透明的铁。大王知道是异宝，便决计用来铸一把剑，想用它保国，用它杀敌，用它防身。不幸你的父亲那时偏偏入了选，便将铁捧回家里来，日日夜夜地锻炼，费了整三年的精神，炼成两把剑。
"Listen!" She said seriously, "Your father was originally a famous swordsmith, the best in the world." I have already sold all his tools to save the poor, and you can no longer see any relics; But he is a unique swordsmith in the world. Twenty years ago, the princess gave birth to a piece of iron, and I heard that she was conceived after hugging the iron pillar, and it was a piece of pure and transparent iron. The king knew that it was a rare treasure, so he decided to use it to cast a sword, wanting to use it to protect the country, use it to kill the enemy, and use it to defend himself. Unfortunately, your father was selected at that time, so he brought the iron back home, exercised day and night, and spent three years of energy to refine two swords.“当最末次开炉的那一日，是怎样地骇人的景象呵！哗拉拉地腾上一道白气的时候，地面也觉得动摇。那白气到天半便变成白云，罩住了这处所，渐渐现出绯红颜色，映得一切都如桃花。我家的漆黑的炉子里，是躺着通红的两把剑。你父亲用井华水慢慢地滴下去，那剑嘶嘶地吼着，慢慢转成青色了。这样地七日七夜，就看不见了剑，仔细看时，却还在炉底里，纯青的，透明的，正像两条冰。
"What a terrifying scene it was on the day of the last furnace opening! When a white gas rose with a loud noise, the ground also felt shaky. The white vapor turned into white clouds in the middle of the sky, covering the place, and gradually appeared a crimson color, reflecting everything like peach blossoms. In the dark stove of my house, there are two red swords lying. Your father slowly dripped down with well water, and the sword roared hissing, slowly turning blue. After seven days and nights like this, the sword was invisible, but when I looked closely, it was still at the bottom of the furnace, pure blue, transparent, just like two pieces of ice.“大欢喜的光采，便从你父亲的眼睛里四射出来；他取起剑，拂拭着，拂拭着。然而悲惨的皱纹，却也从他的眉头和嘴角出现了。他将那两把剑分装在两个匣子里。
"The brilliance of great joy shines out of your father's eyes; He picked up the sword and wiped it, wiped it. However, tragic wrinkles also appeared from the corners of his brow and mouth. He divided the two swords into two boxes.“‘你只要看这几天的景象，就明白无论是谁，都知道剑已炼就的了。’他悄悄地对我说。‘一到明天，我必须去献给大王。但献剑的一天，也就是我命尽的日子。怕我们从此要长别了。’
"'As long as you look at the scene of the past few days, you will understand that no matter who it is, you know that the sword has been refined.' He said to me quietly. 'Tomorrow I must go and offer it to the king.' But the day I offered my sword was the day my life ended. I'm afraid we will have to say goodbye from now on. ’“‘你……。’我很骇异，猜不透他的意思，不知怎么说的好。我只是这样地说：‘你这回有了这么大的功劳……。’
"'You .......' I was shocked, I couldn't guess what he meant, I didn't know how to say it. I just said, 'You have so much credit this time...... ’“‘唉！你怎么知道呢！’他说。‘大王是向来善于猜疑，又极残忍的。这回我给他炼成了世间无二的剑，他一定要杀掉我，免得我再去给别人炼剑，来和他匹敌，或者超过他。’
"'Alas! How do you know! He said. The king has always been suspicious and extremely cruel. This time I refined him into a sword that is unique in the world, and he must kill me, lest I go to refine the sword for others to match or surpass him. ’“我掉泪了。
"I burst into tears.“‘你不要悲哀。这是无法逃避的。眼泪决不能洗掉运命。我可是早已有准备在这里了！’他的眼里忽然发出电火似的光芒，将一个剑匣放在我膝上。‘这是雄剑。’他说。‘你收着。明天，我只将这雌剑献给大王去。倘若我一去竟不回来了呢，那是我一定不再在人间了。你不是怀孕已经五六个月了么？不要悲哀；待生了孩子，好好地抚养。一到成人之后，你便交给他这雄剑，教他砍在大王的颈子上，给我报仇！’”
"'Don't be sad. There is no escape. Tears must not wash away fate. I'm already ready here!" His eyes suddenly flashed like lightning, and he placed a sword box on my lap. 'This is a male sword. He said. You put it away. Tomorrow, I will only offer this female sword to the king. If I go and don't come back, then I must no longer be in the world. Aren't you pregnant for five or six months? Do not be sad; After giving birth, raise it well. As soon as you become an adult, you will give him this male sword and teach him to cut it on the king's neck and avenge me!" ’”“那天父亲回来了没有呢？”眉间尺赶紧问。
"Did my father come back that day?" The ruler between the eyebrows asked quickly.“没有回来！”她冷静地说。“我四处打听，也杳无消息。后来听得人说，第一个用血来饲你父亲自己炼成的剑的人，就是他自己——你的父亲。还怕他鬼魂作怪，将他的身首分埋在前门和后苑了！”
"Not back!" She said calmly. "I asked around, but there was no news. Later, I heard that the first person to feed your father's own sword with blood was himself, your father. I was afraid that he would be a ghost, so I buried his head in the front door and the back garden! ”眉间尺忽然全身都如烧着猛火，自己觉得每一枝毛发上都仿佛闪出火星来。他的双拳，在暗中捏得格格地作响。
The ruler between the eyebrows suddenly felt like a fierce fire, and he felt that every hair seemed to flash sparks. His fists were clenched in the dark.他的母亲站起了，揭去床头的木板，下床点了松明，到门背后取过一把锄，交给眉间尺道：“掘下去！”
His mother stood up, removed the wooden board at the head of the bed, got out of bed and lit a torch, went behind the door to take a hoe, handed it to the ruler between her eyebrows, and said, "Dig it down!" ”眉间尺心跳着，但很沉静的一锄一锄轻轻地掘下去。掘出来的都是黄土，约到五尺多深，土色有些不同了，似乎是烂掉的材木。
The ruler between his eyebrows was beating, but he dug down gently with a hoe and a hoe. What was dug out was loess, about five feet deep, and the color of the soil was a little different, and it seemed to be rotten wood.“看罢！要小心！”他的母亲说。
"Look! Be careful! His mother said.眉间尺伏在掘开的洞穴旁边，伸手下去，谨慎小心地撮开烂树，待到指尖一冷，有如触着冰雪的时候，那纯青透明的剑也出现了。他看清了剑靶，捏着，提了出来。
Lying down next to the dug cave, he stretched out his hand and carefully plucked the rotten tree, and when his fingertips were cold, as if touching ice and snow, the pure blue and transparent sword also appeared. He saw the sword target clearly, pinched it, and brought it out.窗外的星月和屋里的松明似乎都骤然失了光辉，惟有青光充塞宇内。那剑便溶在这青光中，看去好像一无所有。眉间尺凝神细视，这才仿佛看见长五尺余，却并不见得怎样锋利，剑口反而有些浑圆，正如一片韭叶。
The stars and moon outside the window and the torches in the house seemed to have suddenly lost their brilliance, but the blue light filled the world. The sword melted into this blue light, and it looked like there was nothing. The ruler between the eyebrows looked closely, and then it seemed to see that it was more than five feet long, but it was not necessarily so sharp, and the sword mouth was a little round, like a leek leaf.“你从此要改变你的优柔的性情，用这剑报仇去！”他的母亲说。
"From now on, you will change your gentle temperament and take revenge with this sword!" His mother said.“我已经改变了我的优柔的性情，要用这剑报仇去！”
"I have changed my indecisive temperament and want to take revenge with this sword!"“但愿如此。你穿了青衣，背上这剑，衣剑一色，谁也看不分明的。衣服我已经做在这里，明天就上你的路去罢。不要记念我！”她向床后的破衣箱一指，说。
"I hope so. You are wearing a green robe and carrying this sword on your back, and no one can see it clearly. I've already made the clothes here, and I'll go on your way tomorrow." Don't remember me! She pointed to the broken suitcase behind the bed and said.眉间尺取出新衣，试去一穿，长短正很合式。他便重行叠好，裹了剑，放在枕边，沉静地躺下。他觉得自己已经改变了优柔的性情；他决心要并无心事一般，倒头便睡，清晨醒来，毫不改变常态，从容地去寻他不共戴天的仇雠。
Take out the new clothes between your eyebrows and try on them, the length is just right. He folded it again, wrapped the sword, put it next to his pillow, and lay down quietly. He felt that he had changed his soft disposition; He was determined to have nothing to worry about, fell asleep, woke up in the morning, did not change his normality, and calmly went to find his sworn enemy.但他醒着。他翻来覆去，总想坐起来。他听到他母亲的失望的轻轻的长叹。他听到最初的鸡鸣；他知道已交子时，自己是上了十六岁了。
But he was awake. He tossed and turned, always wanting to sit up. He heard his mother's soft sigh of disappointment. He heard the first rooster's crow; When he knew that he had a son, he was sixteen years old.

铸剑

二

铸剑

Two当眉间尺肿着眼眶，头也不回的跨出门外，穿着青衣，背着青剑，迈开大步，径奔城中的时候，东方还没有露出阳光。杉树林的每一片叶尖，都挂着露珠，其中隐藏着夜气。但是，待到走到树林的那一头，露珠里却闪出各样的光辉，渐渐幻成晓色了。远望前面，便依稀看见灰黑色的城墙和雉堞。
When the eyebrows were swollen and his eyes were swollen, he stepped out of the door without looking back, wearing green clothes and carrying a green sword, and took big steps towards the city, the east had not yet shown the sun. Every leaf tip in the fir forest is hung with dewdrops, which hide the night air. However, when I reached the end of the woods, all kinds of brilliance flashed in the dewdrops, and gradually turned into dawn. Looking ahead, I vaguely saw gray-black city walls and porcupines.和挑葱卖菜的一同混入城里，街市上已经很热闹。男人们一排一排的呆站着；女人们也时时从门里探出头来。她们大半也肿着眼眶；蓬着头；黄黄的脸，连脂粉也不及涂抹。
Mixed into the city with the green onions and vegetables, the market was already very lively. The men stood in rows; The women also poked their heads out of the door from time to time. Most of them also have swollen eye sockets; disheveled; The yellow face is not even covered with makeup.眉间尺预觉到将有巨变降临，他们便都是焦躁而忍耐地等候着这巨变的。
The ruler between the eyebrows foresaw that a great change was coming, and they were all anxiously and patiently waiting for this great change.他径自向前走；一个孩子突然跑过来，几乎碰着他背上的剑尖，使他吓出了一身汗。转出北方，离王宫不远，人们就挤得密密层层，都伸着脖子。人丛中还有女人和孩子哭嚷的声音。他怕那看不见的雄剑伤了人，不敢挤进去；然而人们却又在背后拥上来。他只得宛转地退避；面前只看见人们的背脊和伸长的脖子。
He walked straight forward; A child suddenly ran over and almost touched the tip of the sword on his back, causing him to sweat profusely. Turning out of the north, not far from the palace, people were crowded in dense layers, all stretching their necks. There were also the sounds of women and children crying in the crowd. He was afraid that the invisible sword would hurt people, so he did not dare to squeeze in; However, people are rushing behind their backs. He had to retreat in a twist; In front of me, I could only see people's backs and elongated necks.忽然，前面的人们都陆续跪倒了；远远地有两匹马并着跑过来。此后是拿着木棍，戈，刀，弓弩，旌旗的武人，走得满路黄尘滚滚。又来了一辆四匹马拉的大车，上面坐着一队人，有的打钟击鼓，有的嘴上吹着不知道叫什么名目的劳什子。此后又是车，里面的人都穿画衣，不是老头子，便是矮胖子，个个满脸油汗。接着又是一队拿刀枪剑戟的骑士。跪着的人们便都伏下去了。这时眉间尺正看见一辆黄盖的大车驰来，正中坐着一个画衣的胖子，花白胡子，小脑袋；腰间还依稀看见佩着和他背上一样的青剑。
Suddenly, the people in front of him fell to their knees one after another; Two horses ran over in the distance. After that, there were warriors with wooden sticks, spears, knives, bows and crossbows, and banners, walking all over the road with yellow dust. Another four-horse cart came, and a group of people sat on it, some beating bells and drums, and some blowing on their mouths with unknown names. After that, it was a car again, and the people inside were wearing painted clothes, either old men or short and fat people, all of whom were sweaty. Then there was a team of knights with swords, guns, swords, and halberds. The kneeling people fell down. At this time, the ruler between the eyebrows saw a large car with a yellow cover coming, and in the middle sat a fat man in a painted coat, with a white beard and a small head; He also vaguely saw wearing the same green sword on his back on his waist.他不觉全身一冷，但立刻又灼热起来，像是猛火焚烧着。他一面伸手向肩头捏住剑柄，一面提起脚，便从伏着的人们的脖子的空处跨出去。
He didn't feel cold all over, but immediately it burned again, like a fierce fire. He reached out to squeeze the hilt of his sword on his shoulder, lifted his foot, and stepped out of the gap in the neck of the people lying down.但他只走得五六步，就跌了一个倒栽葱，因为有人突然捏住了他的一只脚。这一跌又正压在一个干瘪脸的少年身上；他正怕剑尖伤了他，吃惊地起来看的时候，肋下就挨了很重的两拳。他也不暇计较，再望路上，不但黄盖车已经走过，连拥护的骑士也过去了一大阵了。
But he only walked five or six steps before he fell an upside-down green onion because someone suddenly pinched one of his feet. This fall is pressing on a shriveled teenager; He was afraid that the tip of the sword would hurt him, and when he got up in surprise to look, he received two heavy punches under his ribs. He didn't have time to care, and when he looked at the road, not only the yellow cover car had already passed, but even the knights who supported him had passed for a long time.路旁的一切人们也都爬起来。干瘪脸的少年却还扭住了眉间尺的衣领，不肯放手，说被他压坏了贵重的丹田，必须保险，倘若不到八十岁便死掉了，就得抵命。闲人们又即刻围上来，呆看着，但谁也不开口；后来有人从旁笑骂了几句，却全是附和干瘪脸少年的。眉间尺遇到了这样的敌人，真是怒不得，笑不得，只觉得无聊，却又脱身不得。这样地经过了煮熟一锅小米的时光，眉间尺早已焦躁得浑身发火，看的人却仍不见减，还是津津有味似的。
Everyone on the side of the road also got up. The shriveled young man still twisted the collar of the ruler between his eyebrows and refused to let go, saying that he had crushed the precious dantian and must be insured, and if he died before the age of eighty, he would have to die. The idlers immediately gathered around and watched, but no one spoke; Later, someone laughed and scolded a few words, but they all echoed the shriveled-faced boy. When I met such an enemy, I really couldn't get angry, I couldn't laugh, I just felt bored, but I couldn't get out. After cooking a pot of millet in this way, the ruler between the eyebrows was already anxious and angry, but the people who watched it still did not decrease, and they still seemed to relish.前面的人圈子动摇了，挤进一个黑色的人来，黑须黑眼睛，瘦得如铁。他并不言语，只向眉间尺冷冷地一笑，一面举手轻轻地一拨干瘪脸少年的下巴，并且看定了他的脸。那少年也向他看了一会，不觉慢慢地松了手，溜走了；那人也就溜走了；看的人们也都无聊地走散。只有几个人还来问眉间尺的年纪，住址，家里可有姊姊。眉间尺都不理他们。
The circle of people in front of them was shaken, and a black man squeezed in, with a black beard and black eyes, and was as thin as iron. He didn't say a word, only smiled coldly at the ruler between his eyebrows, raised his hand and gently flicked the chin of the shriveled-faced boy, and looked at his face. The boy also looked at him for a while, then slowly let go and slipped away; The man slipped away; The people watching were also bored and separated. Only a few people came to ask about the age and address of the eyebrows, and whether there was a sister at home. The ruler between his eyebrows ignored them.他向南走着；心里想，城市中这么热闹，容易误伤，还不如在南门外等候他回来，给父亲报仇罢，那地方是地旷人稀，实在很便于施展。这时满城都议论着国王的游山，仪仗，威严，自己得见国王的荣耀，以及俯伏得有怎么低，应该采作国民的模范等等，很像蜜蜂的排衙。直至将近南门，这才渐渐地冷静。
He walked south; I thought to myself, the city is so lively, it is easy to get hurt by mistake, it is better to wait outside the south gate for him to come back and avenge his father, that place is sparsely populated, it is really easy to use. At this time, the whole city was talking about the king's parade, the ceremonial guard, the majesty, the glory of the king, and how low he should bow down, and how he should be a model for the people, etc., much like the row of bees. It wasn't until he was close to the south gate that he gradually calmed down.他走出城外，坐在一株大桑树下，取出两个馒头来充了饥；吃着的时候忽然记起母亲来，不觉眼鼻一酸，然而此后倒也没有什么。周围是一步一步地静下去了，他至于很分明地听到自己的呼吸。
He walked out of the city, sat under a big mulberry tree, and took out two steamed buns to satisfy his hunger; When I was eating, I suddenly remembered my mother, and my eyes and nose were sore, but there was nothing after that. The surroundings quieted down step by step, and he could hear his breathing very clearly.天色愈暗，他也愈不安，尽目力望着前方，毫不见有国王回来的影子。上城卖菜的村人，一个个挑着空担出城回家去了。
The darker the sky, the more uneasy he became, looking ahead with all his might, and there was no sign of the king's return. The villagers who went to the city to sell vegetables went out of the city one by one with empty burdens.人迹绝了许久之后，忽然从城里闪出那一个黑色的人来。
After disappearing for a long time, the black man suddenly flashed out of the city.“走罢，眉间尺！国王在捉你了！”他说，声音好像鸱鸮。
"Let's go, the ruler between the eyebrows! The king is catching you! He said, his voice like an owl.眉间尺浑身一颤，中了魔似的，立即跟着他走；后来是飞奔。他站定了喘息许多时，才明白已经到了杉树林边。后面远处有银白的条纹，是月亮已从那边出现；前面却仅有两点燐火一般的那黑色人的眼光。
The ruler between his eyebrows trembled, as if he was possessed by a demon, and immediately followed him; Then there was the rush. He stood still and gasped for a long time before realizing that he had arrived at the edge of the cedar forest. There are silver-white stripes in the distance, indicating that the moon has appeared from there; There were only two phosphorescent eyes in front of the black man.“你怎么认识我？……”他极其惶骇地问。
"How do you know me? ......," he asked in extreme horror.“哈哈！我一向认识你。”那人的声音说。“我知道你背着雄剑，要给你的父亲报仇，我也知道你报不成。岂但报不成；今天已经有人告密，你的仇人早从东门还宫，下令捕拿你了。”
"Haha! I have always known you. The man's voice said. I know you are carrying a sword and want to avenge your father, and I also know that you can't do it. Not only is it unsuccessful; Someone has already reported today that your enemy has already returned to the palace from the east gate and ordered you to be arrested. ”眉间尺不觉伤心起来。
The ruler between his eyebrows unconsciously felt sad.“唉唉，母亲的叹息是无怪的。”他低声说。
"Alas, my mother's sigh is not surprising." He whispered.“但她只知道一半。她不知道我要给你报仇。”
But she only knew half of it. She didn't know I was going to avenge you. ”“你么？你肯给我报仇么，义士？”
"You? Are you willing to avenge me, righteous man? ”“阿，你不要用这称呼来冤枉我。”
"Ah, don't use that title to wrongfully accuse me."“那么，你同情于我们孤儿寡妇？……”
"So, you sympathize with us orphans and widows? ……”“唉，孩子，你再不要提这些受了污辱的名称。”他严冷地说，“仗义，同情，那些东西，先前曾经干净过，现在却都成了放鬼债的资本。我的心里全没有你所谓的那些。我只不过要给你报仇！”
"Alas, child, don't mention these insulting names again." He said coldly, "Righteousness, sympathy, those things, which were clean before, have now become the capital for ghost debts." I don't have what you call in my heart. I just want to avenge you!" ”“好。但你怎么给我报仇呢？”
"Okay. But how do you avenge me? ”“只要你给我两件东西。”两粒燐火下的声音说。“那两件么？你听着：一是你的剑，二是你的头！”
"As long as you give me two things." The voice under the two phosphorescent flames said. "Those two pieces? Listen: one is your sword, the other is your head! ”眉间尺虽然觉得奇怪，有些狐疑，却并不吃惊。他一时开不得口。
Although the ruler between the eyebrows felt strange and a little suspicious, he was not surprised. He couldn't speak for a while.“你不要疑心我将骗取你的性命和宝贝。”暗中的声音又严冷地说。“这事全由你。你信我，我便去；你不信，我便住。”
"Don't be suspicious, I will deceive you of your life and your treasure." The voice in the dark said coldly. "It's all up to you. Believe me, and I will go; If you don't believe it, I'll stay. ”“但你为什么给我去报仇的呢？你认识我的父亲么？”
"But why did you take revenge on me? Do you know my father? ”“我一向认识你的父亲，也如一向认识你一样。但我要报仇，却并不为此。聪明的孩子，告诉你罢。你还不知道么，我怎么地善于报仇。你的就是我的；他也就是我。我的魂灵上是有这么多的，人我所加的伤，我已经憎恶了我自己！”
"I have always known your father as I have always known you. But I want revenge, but I don't do it. Smart child, let me tell you. Don't you know how good I am at revenge. Yours is mine; He is me. There are so many things in my soul, and I have hated myself for the wounds I have inflicted! ”暗中的声音刚刚停止，眉间尺便举手向肩头抽取青色的剑，顺手从后项窝向前一削，头颅坠在地面的青苔上，一面将剑交给黑色人。
As soon as the voice in the dark stopped, the ruler between his eyebrows raised his hand and pulled out the blue sword from his shoulder, slashed forward from the back of his neck, and his head fell on the moss on the ground, while handing the sword to the black man.“呵呵！”他一手接剑，一手捏着头发，提起眉间尺的头来，对着那热的死掉的嘴唇，接吻两次，并且冷冷地尖利地笑。
"Hehe!" He took the sword in one hand, pinched his hair in the other, lifted the head between his eyebrows, kissed the hot dead lips twice, and smiled coldly and sharply.笑声即刻散布在杉树林中，深处随着有一群燐火似的眼光闪动，倏忽临近，听到咻咻的饿狼的喘息。第一口撕尽了眉间尺的青衣，第二口便身体全都不见了，血痕也顷刻舔尽，只微微听得咀嚼骨头的声音。
Laughter immediately spread in the fir forest, and the depths flashed with a group of phosphorus-like eyes, and suddenly approached, hearing the gasp of the hungry wolf. The first bite tore up the green clothes between the eyebrows, and the second bite completely disappeared, and the blood stains were licked away in an instant, and only the sound of chewing bones could be heard faintly.最先头的一匹大狼就向黑色人扑过来。他用青剑一挥，狼头便坠在地面的青苔上。别的狼们第一口撕尽了它的皮，第二口便身体全都不见了，血痕也顷刻舔尽，只微微听得咀嚼骨头的声音。
The first big wolf pounced on the black man. He swung his green sword, and the wolf's head fell on the moss on the ground. The other wolves tore off its skin in the first bite, and in the second bite, all its bodies were gone, and the blood stains were licked up in an instant, and only the sound of chewing bones could be heard faintly.他已经掣起地上的青衣，包了眉间尺的头，和青剑都背在背脊上，回转身，在暗中向王城扬长地走去。
He had already pulled up the green clothes on the ground, wrapped the head between his eyebrows, and put the green sword on his back, turned around, and secretly walked towards the royal city.狼们站定了，耸着肩，伸出舌头，咻咻地喘着，放着绿的眼光看他扬长地走。
The wolves stood still, shrugged their shoulders, stuck out their tongues, gasped for breath, and watched him walk with green eyes.他在暗中向王城扬长地走去，发出尖利的声音唱着歌：
He secretly walked towards the royal city and sang in a shrill voice:哈哈爱兮爱乎爱乎！哈哈爱兮爱乎爱乎！
爱青剑兮一个仇人自屠。 爱青剑兮一个仇人自屠。 
夥颐连翩兮多少一夫。 夥颐连翩兮多少一夫。 
一夫爱青剑兮呜呼不孤。 一夫爱青剑兮呜呼不孤。 
头换头兮两个仇人自屠。 头换头兮两个仇人自屠。 
一夫则无兮爱乎呜呼！ 一夫则无兮爱乎呜呼！
爱乎呜呼兮呜呼阿呼， 爱乎呜呼兮呜呼阿呼，
阿呼呜呼兮呜呼呜呼！ 阿呼呜呼兮呜呼呜呼！

铸剑

三

铸剑

Three游山并不能使国王觉得有趣；加上了路上将有刺客的密报，更使他扫兴而还。那夜他很生气，说是连第九个妃子的头发，也没有昨天那样的黑得好看了。幸而她撒娇坐在他的御膝上，特别扭了七十多回，这才使龙眉之间的皱纹渐渐地舒展。
Mountain tours did not make the king feel interested; Coupled with the secret news that there would be assassins on the road, he was even more disappointed. He was very angry that night, saying that even the hair of the ninth concubine was not as black as yesterday. Fortunately, she sat on his lap coquettishly, twisting more than seventy times, which gradually stretched the wrinkles between the dragon's eyebrows.午后，国王一起身，就又有些不高兴，待到用过午膳，简直现出怒容来。
In the afternoon, when the king got up, he was a little unhappy, and when he had lunch, he showed an angry face.“唉唉！无聊！”他打一个大呵欠之后，高声说。
"Alas! Bored! After he yawned, he said loudly.上自王后，下至弄臣，看见这情形，都不觉手足无措。白须老臣的讲道，矮胖侏儒的打诨，王是早已听厌的了；近来便是走索，缘竿，抛丸，倒立，吞刀，吐火等等奇妙的把戏，也都看得毫无意味。他常常要发怒；一发怒，便按着青剑，总想寻点小错处，杀掉几个人。
From the queen to the jegoletto, when they saw this situation, they were at a loss. The preaching of the white-bearded old minister and the jokes of the short and fat dwarf, the king has long been tired of listening; Recently, wonderful tricks such as rope walking, rod climbing, shot throwing, handstands, knife swallowing, and spitting fire are also meaningless. He was often angry; When he got angry, he pressed the green sword, always trying to find some small mistakes and kill a few people.偷空在宫外闲游的两个小宦官，刚刚回来，一看见宫里面大家的愁苦的情形，便知道又是照例的祸事临头了，一个吓得面如土色；一个却像是大有把握一般，不慌不忙，跑到国王的面前，俯伏着，说道：
The two little eunuchs who were wandering outside the palace had just returned, and when they saw the sorrowful situation of everyone in the palace, they knew that disaster was coming as usual, and one was so frightened that his face turned pale; The other, as if he was very sure, ran unhurriedly to the king, prostrated himself, and said:“奴才刚才访得一个异人，很有异术，可以给大王解闷，因此特来奏闻。”
"The servant just found a strange person, who has a lot of magic and can relieve the king's boredom, so I came to report."“什么？！”王说。他的话是一向很短的。
"What?!" Wang said. His words are always short.“那是一个黑瘦的，乞丐似的男子。穿一身青衣，背着一个圆圆的青包裹；嘴里唱着胡诌的歌。人问他。他说善于玩把戏，空前绝后，举世无双，人们从来就没有看见过；一见之后，便即解烦释闷，天下太平。但大家要他玩，他却又不肯。说是第一须有一条金龙，第二须有一个金鼎。……”
"It was a dark, thin, beggar-like man. wearing a green dress and carrying a round green wrap; Singing nonsense. People asked him. He said that he was good at playing tricks, unprecedented, unparalleled in the world, and people had never seen it; After seeing each other, he immediately relieved his worries and boredom, and the world was at peace. But everyone wanted him to play, but he refused. It is said that the first must have a golden dragon, and the second must have a golden cauldron. ……”“金龙？我是的。金鼎？我有。”
"Golden dragon? I am. Golden tripod? I have. ”“奴才也正是这样想。……”
The servant thought exactly so. ……”“传进来！”
"Come in!"话声未绝，四个武士便跟着那小宦官疾趋而出。上自王后，下至弄臣，个个喜形于色。他们都愿意这把戏玩得解愁释闷，天下太平；即使玩不成，这回也有了那乞丐似的黑瘦男子来受祸，他们只要能挨到传了进来的时候就好了。
Before the words were finished, the four warriors hurried out with the little eunuch. From the queen to the jegoletto, everyone showed their joy. They are all willing to play this trick to relieve sorrow and relieve boredom, and the world will be peaceful; Even if they can't play, this time there are black and thin men like beggars to suffer, as long as they can withstand the time when they come in.并不要许多工夫，就望见六个人向金阶趋进。先头是宦官，后面是四个武士，中间夹着一个黑色人。待到近来时，那人的衣服却是青的，须眉头发都黑；瘦得颧骨，眼圈骨，眉棱骨都高高地突出来。他恭敬地跪着俯伏下去时，果然看见背上有一个圆圆的小包袱，青色布，上面还画上一些暗红色的花纹。
It didn't take much effort to see six people moving towards the golden steps. At the beginning is a eunuch, followed by four samurai, with a black man in between. When he came closer, the man's clothes were blue, and his beard and eyebrows and hair were black; The cheekbones, eye circles, and eyebrow ridges all protrude high. When he knelt down respectfully, he saw a small round baggage on his back, a cyan cloth, with some dark red patterns painted on it.“奏来！”王暴躁地说。他见他家伙简单，以为他未必会玩什么好把戏。
"Come on!" Wang said irritably. He saw that his guy was simple and thought he might not be able to play any good tricks.“臣名叫宴之敖者；生长汶汶乡。少无职业；晚遇明师，教臣把戏，是一个孩子的头。这把戏一个人玩不起来，必须在金龙之前，摆一个金鼎，注满清水，用兽炭煎熬。于是放下孩子的头去，一到水沸，这头便随波上下，跳舞百端，且发妙音，欢喜歌唱。这歌舞为一人所见，便解愁释闷，为万民所见，便天下太平。”
"My name is Yan Zhi Ao; He grew up in Wenwen Township. Young and unoccupied; In the evening, I met a master and taught me tricks, which was the head of a child. This trick cannot be played by one person, so it must be placed in front of the golden dragon, filled with water, and boiled with animal charcoal. So he put down the child's head, and as soon as the water boiled, this head went up and down with the waves, dancing in all kinds of ways, making wonderful sounds, and singing happily. This song and dance are seen by one person, and the sorrow and boredom are relieved, and the world is peaceful when seen by all people. ”“玩来！”王大声命令说。
"Play!" The king ordered loudly.并不要许多工夫，一个煮牛的大金鼎便摆在殿外，注满水，下面堆了兽炭，点起火来。那黑色人站在旁边，见炭火一红，便解下包袱，打开，两手捧出孩子的头来，高高举起。那头是秀眉长眼，皓齿红唇；脸带笑容；头发蓬松，正如青烟一阵。黑色人捧着向四面转了一圈，便伸手擎到鼎上，动着嘴唇说了几句不知什么话，随即将手一松，只听得扑通一声，坠入水中去了。水花同时溅起，足有五尺多高，此后是一切平静。
It didn't take much effort, and a large golden cauldron for cooking cattle was placed outside the hall, filled with water, and animal charcoal was piled up underneath and lit a fire. The black man stood next to him, and when he saw the charcoal fire red, he untied his baggage, opened it, held the child's head in both hands, and held it high. on the other end are beautiful eyebrows, long eyes, white teeth and red lips; with a smile on his face; The hair is fluffy, like a burst of blue smoke. The black man held it and turned around in all directions, then stretched out his hand to hold it on the cauldron, moved his lips and said a few words that he didn't know, and then let go of his hand, only heard a plop, and fell into the water. The water splashed at the same time, more than five feet high, and everything was calm after that.许多工夫，还无动静。国王首先暴躁起来，接着是王后和妃子，大臣，宦官们也都有些焦急，矮胖的侏儒们则已经开始冷笑了。王一见他们的冷笑，便觉自己受愚，回顾武士，想命令他们就将那欺君的莠民掷入牛鼎里去煮杀。
There is still no movement. The king first became irritable, then the queen and his concubines, ministers, and eunuchs were also a little anxious, and the short and fat dwarfs had already begun to sneer. As soon as the king saw their sneering, he felt fooled, looked back at the warriors, and wanted to order them to throw the deceitful people into the cauldron to boil them.但同时就听得水沸声；炭火也正旺，映着那黑色人变成红黑，如铁的烧到微红。王刚又回过脸来，他也已经伸起两手向天，眼光向着无物，舞蹈着，忽地发出尖利的声音唱起歌来：
But at the same time, I heard the sound of boiling water; The charcoal fire was also booming, reflecting the black man turning red and black, like iron burning to red. Wang Gang turned his face again, he had already stretched out his hands to the sky, his eyes were looking at nothing, dancing, and suddenly he sang in a sharp voice:哈哈爱兮爱乎爱乎！哈哈爱兮爱乎爱乎！
爱兮血兮兮谁乎独无。 爱兮血兮兮谁乎独无。 
民萌冥行兮一夫壶卢。 民萌冥行兮一夫壶卢。 
彼用百头颅，千头颅兮用万头颅！ 彼用百头颅，千头颅兮用万头颅！
我用一头颅兮而无万夫。 我用一头颅兮而无万夫。 
爱一头颅兮血乎呜呼！ 爱一头颅兮血乎呜呼！
血乎呜呼兮呜呼阿呼， 血乎呜呼兮呜呼阿呼，
阿呼呜呼兮呜呼呜呼！ 阿呼呜呼兮呜呼呜呼！
随着歌声，水就从鼎口涌起，上尖下广，像一座小山，但自水尖至鼎底，不住地回旋运动。那头即随水上上下下，转着圈子，一面又滴溜溜自己翻筋斗，人们还可以隐约看见他玩得高兴的笑容。过了些时，突然变了逆水的游泳，打旋子夹着穿梭，激得水花向四面飞溅，满庭洒下一阵热雨来。一个侏儒忽然叫了一声，用手摸着自己的鼻子。他不幸被热水烫了一下，又不耐痛，终于免不得出声叫苦了。
With the singing, the water gushed out from the mouth of the cauldron, wide at the top and wide at the bottom, like a hill, but from the tip of the water to the bottom of the cauldron, it kept swirling and moving. The other end went up and down with the water, turning in circles, and somersaulting himself, and people could vaguely see his happy smile. After a while, it suddenly changed to swimming against the current, and the spinner was sandwiched between the shuttles, causing the water to splash in all directions and pour a gust of hot rain all over the courtyard. A dwarf suddenly screamed and touched his nose with his hand. He was unfortunately scalded by hot water and couldn't stand the pain, so he finally couldn't help but cry out in pain.黑色人的歌声才停，那头也就在水中央停住，面向王殿，颜色转成端庄。这样的有十余瞬息之久，才慢慢地上下抖动；从抖动加速而为起伏的游泳，但不很快，态度很雍容。绕着水边一高一低地游了三匝，忽然睁大眼睛，漆黑的眼珠显得格外精采，同时也开口唱起歌来：
The black man's singing stopped, and the other end stopped in the middle of the water, facing the royal palace, and the color turned dignified. This lasted for more than ten moments before slowly shaking up and down; Swimming from jitter acceleration to ups and downs, but not fast, the attitude is very graceful. After swimming three times around the water's edge, his eyes suddenly widened, his dark eyes looked particularly brilliant, and he also sang a song:王泽流兮浩洋洋；王泽流兮浩洋洋；
克服怨敌，怨敌克服兮，赫兮强！ 克服怨敌，怨敌克服兮，赫兮强！
宇宙有穷止兮万寿无疆。 宇宙有穷止兮万寿无疆。 
幸我来也兮青其光！ 幸我来也兮青其光！
青其光兮永不相忘。 青其光兮永不相忘。 
异处异处兮堂哉皇！ 异处异处兮堂哉皇！
堂哉皇哉兮嗳嗳唷， 堂哉皇哉兮嗳嗳唷，
嗟来归来，嗟来陪来兮青其光！ 嗟来归来，嗟来陪来兮青其光！
头忽然升到水的尖端停住；翻了几个筋斗之后，上下升降起来，眼珠向着左右瞥视，十分秀媚，嘴里仍然唱着歌：
The head suddenly rises to the tip of the water and stops; After a few somersaults, he rose up and down, his eyes glanced left and right, very beautiful, and he was still singing in his mouth:阿呼呜呼兮呜呼呜呼，阿呼呜呼兮呜呼呜呼，
爱乎呜呼兮呜呼阿呼！ 爱乎呜呼兮呜呼阿呼！
血一头颅兮爱乎呜呼。 血一头颅兮爱乎呜呼。 
我用一头颅兮而无万夫！ 我用一头颅兮而无万夫！
彼用百头颅，千头颅…… 彼用百头颅，千头颅……
唱到这里，是沉下去的时候，但不再浮上来了；歌词也不能辨别。涌起的水，也随着歌声的微弱，渐渐低落，像退潮一般，终至到鼎口以下，在远处什么也看不见。
When you sing here, it is time to sink, but it no longer floats; The lyrics are also indistinguishable. The surging water also gradually lowered with the faintness of the singing, like a low tide, and finally reached below the cauldron, and nothing could be seen in the distance.“怎了？”等了一会，王不耐烦地问。
"What's wrong?" After waiting for a while, Wang asked impatiently.“大王，”那黑色人半跪着说。“他正在鼎底里作最神奇的团圆舞，不临近是看不见的。臣也没有法术使他上来，因为作团圆舞必须在鼎底里。”
"Your Majesty," said the black man, half-kneeling. He is doing the most magical reunion dance at the bottom of the cauldron, which is invisible unless it is close. I also have no spell to make him come up, because the reunion dance must be at the bottom of the cauldron. ”王站起身，跨下金阶，冒着炎热立在鼎边，探头去看。只见水平如镜，那头仰面躺在水中间，两眼正看着他的脸。待到王的眼光射到他脸上时，他便嫣然一笑。这一笑使王觉得似曾相识，却又一时记不起是谁来。刚在惊疑，黑色人已经掣出了背着的青色的剑，只一挥，闪电般从后项窝直劈下去，扑通一声，王的头就落在鼎里了。
The king stood up, stepped down the golden steps, stood by the cauldron in the heat, and looked out. I saw that the level was like a mirror, lying on his back in the water, his eyes were looking at his face. When the king's eyes hit his face, he smiled sweetly. This smile made Wang feel familiar, but he couldn't remember who was there for a while. Just as he was suspicious, the black man had already pulled out the blue sword he was carrying, and with a single wave, he slashed straight down from the back neck socket like lightning, and with a plop, the king's head fell into the cauldron.仇人相见，本来格外眼明，况且是相逢狭路。王头刚到水面，眉间尺的头便迎上来，很命在他耳轮上咬了一口。鼎水即刻沸涌，澎湃有声；两头即在水中死战。约有二十回合，王头受了五个伤，眉间尺的头上却有七处。王又狡猾，总是设法绕到他的敌人的后面去。眉间尺偶一疏忽，终于被他咬住了后项窝，无法转身。这一回王的头可是咬定不放了，他只是连连蚕食进去；连鼎外面也仿佛听到孩子的失声叫痛的声音。
When enemies meet, they are particularly clear-sighted, and it is a narrow road to meet. As soon as the king's head reached the surface of the water, the head of the ruler between his eyebrows came up and took a bite on his earring. The cauldron water immediately boiled and surged; Both ends fought to the death in the water. In about twenty rounds, the king's head was injured five times, but there were seven on the head of the ruler between the eyebrows. The king was cunning and always managed to get around behind his enemies. The ruler between the eyebrows was negligent, and finally he bit the back of his neck socket and couldn't turn around. This time the king's head was insistent, he just encroached on it again and again; Even outside the cauldron, it seemed to hear the child's cry of pain.上自王后，下至弄臣，骇得凝结着的神色也应声活动起来，似乎感到暗无天日的悲哀，皮肤上都一粒一粒地起粟；然而又夹着秘密的欢喜，瞪了眼，像是等候着什么似的。
From the queen to the rigoletto, the frightened and condensed expressions also moved in response, as if they felt a dark sadness, and their skin was growing grains of corn one by one; However, with secret joy, he stared, as if waiting for something.黑色人也仿佛有些惊慌，但是面不改色。他从从容容地伸开那捏着看不见的青剑的臂膊，如一段枯枝；伸长颈子，如在细看鼎底。臂膊忽然一弯，青剑便蓦地从他后面劈下，剑到头落，坠入鼎中，淜的一声，雪白的水花向着空中同时四射。
The black man also seemed to be a little panicked, but his face did not change color. He calmly stretched out the arm holding the invisible green sword, like a dead branch; Stretching his neck, as if looking closely at the bottom of the cauldron. With a sudden bend of his arm, the green sword slashed down from behind him, and the sword fell to his head and fell into the cauldron, with a bang, and the snow-white water splashed into the air at the same time.他的头一入水，即刻直奔王头，一口咬住了王的鼻子，几乎要咬下来。王忍不住叫一声“阿唷”，将嘴一张，眉间尺的头就乘机挣脱了，一转脸倒将王的下巴下死劲咬住。他们不但都不放，还用全力上下一撕，撕得王头再也合不上嘴。于是他们就如饿鸡啄米一般，一顿乱咬，咬得王头眼歪鼻塌，满脸鳞伤。先前还会在鼎里面四处乱滚，后来只能躺着呻吟，到底是一声不响，只有出气，没有进气了。
As soon as his head entered the water, he immediately went straight to the king's head and bit the king's nose with one bite, almost biting it off. The king couldn't help but shout "Ah", opened his mouth, and the head between his eyebrows took the opportunity to break free, and turned his face and bit the king's chin desperately. Not only did they not let go, but they also tore up and down with all their might, tearing the king's head so that he could no longer close his mouth. So they bit like hungry chickens pecking at rice, biting the king's head and eyes crooked, and his face was covered in bruises. Previously, he would roll around in the cauldron, but then he could only lie down and moan, in the end, there was no sound, only gas, no intake.黑色人和眉间尺的头也慢慢地住了嘴，离开王头，沿鼎壁游了一匝，看他可是装死还是真死。待到知道了王头确已断气，便四目相视，微微一笑，随即合上眼睛，仰面向天，沉到水底里去了。
The black man and the head between the eyebrows slowly stopped, left the king's head, and swam around the cauldron wall to see if he was pretending to be dead or really dead. When he knew that the king's head had indeed died, he looked at each other, smiled slightly, then closed his eyes, looked up to the sky, and sank to the bottom of the water.

铸剑

四

铸剑

Four烟消火灭；水波不兴。特别的寂静倒使殿上殿下的人们警醒。他们中的一个首先叫了一声，大家也立刻迭连惊叫起来；一个迈开腿向金鼎走去，大家便争先恐后地拥上去了。有挤在后面的，只能从人脖子的空隙间向里面窥探。
the smoke is extinguished and the fire is extinguished The water waves do not rise. The special silence awakened the people in the hall. One of them called out first, and everyone immediately screamed one after another; One opened his legs and walked towards the golden cauldron, and everyone rushed to hug it. Some are crowded behind, and they can only peek inside through the gap in the person's neck.热气还炙得人脸上发烧。鼎里的水却一平如镜，上面浮着一层油，照出许多人脸孔：王后，王妃，武士，老臣，侏儒，太监。……
The heat also burned people's faces. The water in the cauldron was as flat as a mirror, with a layer of oil floating on it, reflecting the faces of many people: queens, princesses, warriors, old ministers, dwarfs, and eunuchs. ……“阿呀，天哪！咱们大王的头还在里面哪，！”第六个妃子忽然发狂似的哭嚷起来。
"Oh, oh my God! Our king's head is still inside, ! The sixth concubine suddenly cried like crazy.上自王后，下至弄臣，也都恍然大悟，仓皇散开，急得手足无措，各自转了四五个圈子。一个最有谋略的老臣独又上前，伸手向鼎边一摸，然而浑身一抖，立刻缩了回来，伸出两个指头，放在口边吹个不住。
From the queen to the jegoletto, they all suddenly realized, dispersed in a hurry, and were at a loss in a hurry, and each turned four or five circles. One of the most strategic old ministers stepped forward again, stretched out his hand to touch the edge of the cauldron, but his whole body trembled, and he immediately shrank back, stretched out two fingers, and couldn't blow them on his mouth.大家定了定神，便在殿门外商议打捞办法。约略费去了煮熟三锅小米的工夫，总算得到一种结果，是：到大厨房去调集了铁丝勺子，命武士协力捞起来。
Everyone calmed down, and then discussed the salvage method outside the temple gate. It took a little effort to cook three pots of millet, and finally got a result: go to the big kitchen to gather wire spoons and order the samurai to work together to scoop them up.器具不久就调集了，铁丝勺，漏勺，金盘，擦桌布，都放在鼎旁边。武士们便揎起衣袖，有用铁丝勺的，有用漏勺的，一齐恭行打捞。有勺子相触的声音，有勺子刮着金鼎的声音；水是随着勺子的搅动而旋绕着。好一会，一个武士的脸色忽而很端庄了，极小心地两手慢慢举起了勺子，水滴从勺孔中珠子一般漏下，勺里面便显出雪白的头骨来。大家惊叫了一声；他便将头骨倒在金盘里。
The utensils were soon mobilized, and the wire spoon, colander, gold plate, and tablecloth were all placed next to the cauldron. The warriors rolled up their sleeves, using wire spoons and colanders, and salvaged them together. there is the sound of spoons touching each other, and there is the sound of spoons scraping the golden cauldron; The water swirls with the stirring of the spoon. After a while, a samurai's face suddenly became very dignified, and he slowly raised the spoon with both hands very carefully, and water droplets leaked out of the spoon hole like beads, and a snow-white skull appeared inside the spoon. Everyone exclaimed; He poured the skull into a golden dish.“阿呀！我的大王呀！”王后，妃子，老臣，以至太监之类，都放声哭起来。但不久就陆续停止了，因为武士又捞起了一个同样的头骨。
"Oh! O my king! The queen, the concubines, the old ministers, and even the eunuchs all cried loudly. But soon it stopped, because the samurai picked up another skull.他们泪眼模胡地四顾，只见武士们满脸油汗，还在打捞。此后捞出来的是一团糟的白头发和黑头发；还有几勺很短的东西，似乎是白胡须和黑胡须。此后又是一个头骨。此后是三枝簪。
They looked around with tears in their eyes, only to see that the warriors were sweating and still salvage. After that, what was fished out was a mess of white and black hair; There are also a few spoonfuls of very short things, which seem to be white and black beards. After that, another skull. After that, there are three hairpins.直到鼎里面只剩下清汤，才始住手；将捞出的物件分盛了三金盘：一盘头骨，一盘须发，一盘簪。
It wasn't until there was only clear soup left in the cauldron that he stopped; The fished out items were divided into three gold plates: a plate of skulls, a plate of beard and hair, and a plate of hairpins.“咱们大王只有一个头。那一个是咱们大王的呢？”第九个妃子焦急地问。
"Our king has only one head. Which one is our king's? The ninth concubine asked anxiously.“是呵……。”老臣们都面面相觑。
"Yes...... The old ministers all looked at each other.“如果皮肉没有煮烂，那就容易辨别了。”一个侏儒跪着说。
"If the flesh and skin are not boiled, it is easy to identify." A dwarf knelt down and said.大家只得平心静气，去细看那头骨，但是黑白大小，都差不多，连那孩子的头，也无从分辨。王后说王的右额上有一个疤，是做太子时候跌伤的，怕骨上也有痕迹。果然，侏儒在一个头骨上发见了；大家正在欢喜的时候，另外的一个侏儒却又在较黄的头骨的右额上看出相仿的瘢痕来。
Everyone had to calm down and take a closer look at the skull, but the black and white size was similar, and even the child's head could not be distinguished. The queen said that the king had a scar on his right forehead, which was injured when he was a prince, and there were also marks on the bone. Sure enough, the gnome was found on a skull; While everyone was rejoicing, another dwarf saw a similar scar on the right forehead of the yellower skull.“我有法子。”第三个王妃得意地说，“咱们大王的龙准是很高的。”
"I have a way." The third princess said proudly, "Our king's dragon accuracy is very high." ”太监们即刻动手研究鼻准骨，有一个确也似乎比较地高，但究竟相差无几；最可惜的是右额上却并无跌伤的瘢痕。
The eunuchs immediately began to study the nose bone, and one of them did seem to be relatively high, but there was not much difference; The most pity is that there is no scar from a fall on the right forehead.“况且，”老臣们向太监说，“大王的后枕骨是这么尖的么？”
"Moreover," the old ministers said to the eunuchs, "Is the king's back occipital bone so sharp? ”“奴才们向来就没有留心看过大王的后枕骨……。”
"The servants have never paid attention to the king's back occipital ......."王后和妃子们也各自回想起来，有的说是尖的，有的说是平的。叫梳头太监来问的时候，却一句话也不说。
The queen and concubines also recalled that some were sharp, and some were flat. When the eunuch who combed his hair came to ask, he didn't say a word.当夜便开了一个王公大臣会议，想决定那一个是王的头，但结果还同白天一样。并且连须发也发生了问题。白的自然是王的，然而因为花白，所以黑的也很难处置。讨论了小半夜，只将几根红色的胡子选出；接着因为第九个王妃抗议，说她确曾看见王有几根通黄的胡子，现在怎么能知道决没有一根红的呢。于是也只好重行归并，作为疑案了。
That night, a meeting of princes and ministers was held to decide which one was the head of the king, but the result was the same as during the day. And even the beard and hair had problems. The white one is naturally king, but because the flower is white, the black one is also difficult to dispose of. discussed in the middle of the night, and only a few red beards were selected; Then because the ninth princess protested, she said that she had indeed seen the king have several yellow beards, and now how could she know that there was no red one. So I had to re-merge as a suspicious case.到后半夜，还是毫无结果。大家却居然一面打呵欠，一面继续讨论，直到第二次鸡鸣，这才决定了一个最慎重妥善的办法，是：只能将三个头骨都和王的身体放在金棺里落葬。
In the second half of the night, there was still no result. Everyone actually yawned and continued to discuss until the second rooster crowed, which decided on the most prudent and proper method, which was to bury all three skulls and the king's body in a golden coffin.七天之后是落葬的日期，合城很热闹。城里的人民，远处的人民，都奔来瞻仰国王的“大出丧”。天一亮，道上已经挤满了男男女女；中间还夹着许多祭桌。待到上午，清道的骑士才缓辔而来。又过了不少工夫，才看见仪仗，什么旌旗，木棍，戈戟，弓弩，黄钺之类；此后是四辆鼓吹车。再后面是黄盖随着路的不平而起伏着，并且渐渐近来了，于是现出灵车，上载金棺，棺里面藏着三个头和一个身体。
Seven days later is the date of burial, and the whole city is very lively. The people in the city and the people far away all came to pay their respects to the king's "great funeral". When dawn broke, the road was already crowded with men and women; There are also many altar tables in between. It wasn't until the morning that the knight of the clearing path came slowly. After a lot of work, I saw the honor guard, what flags, wooden sticks, halberds, bows and crossbows, yellow axes, etc.; After that, there were four trumpet cars. Behind it was the yellow cover undulating with the unevenness of the road, and gradually approached, so a hearse appeared, loaded with a golden coffin, and three heads and a body were hidden in the coffin.百姓都跪下去，祭桌便一列一列地在人丛中出现。几个义民很忠愤，咽着泪，怕那两个大逆不道的逆贼的魂灵，此时也和王一同享受祭礼，然而也无法可施。
The people knelt down, and the sacrificial tables appeared in the crowd one by one. Several righteous people were very loyal and indignant, swallowing tears, afraid that the souls of the two rebellious rebels would also enjoy the sacrifice with the king at this time, but they could not do anything.此后是王后和许多王妃的车。百姓看她们，她们也看百姓，但哭着。此后是大臣，太监，侏儒等辈，都装着哀戚的颜色。只是百姓已经不看他们，连行列也挤得乱七八糟，不成样子了。
After that were the cars of the queen and many princesses. The people looked at them, and they looked at the people, but they cried. After that, ministers, eunuchs, dwarfs, etc., all wore sad colors. It's just that the people no longer look at them, and even the ranks are crowded in a mess, and they don't look like anything.一九二六年十月作。
It was created in October 1926.

出关

出关

出关

Exit老子毫无动静的坐着，好像一段呆木头。
I sat motionless, like a piece of wood.“先生，孔丘又来了！”他的学生庚桑楚，不耐烦似的走进来，轻轻的说。
"Sir, Confucius is here again!" His student Geng Sangchu walked in impatiently and said softly.“请……”
"Please ......"“先生，您好吗？”孔子极恭敬的行着礼，一面说。
"How are you, sir?" Confucius saluted very respectfully and said.“我总是这样子，”老子答道。“您怎么样？所有这里的藏书，都看过了罢？”
"I always do," replied Lao Tzu. "How are you? Have you read all the books here? ”“都看过了。不过……”孔子很有些焦躁模样，这是他从来所没有的。“我研究《诗》，《书》，《礼》，《乐》，《易》，《春秋》六经，自以为很长久了，够熟透了。去拜见了七十二位主子，谁也不采用。人可真是难得说明白呵。还是‘道’的难以说明白呢？”
"I've seen it all. However...... "Confucius was very anxious, which he had never seen before." "I studied the six classics of "Poetry", "Book", "Li", "Music", "Yi", and "Spring and Autumn", and I thought that I had been doing it for a long time and was familiar enough. went to meet seventy-two masters, but none of them adopted them. People are really rare to explain. Or is it difficult to explain the 'Tao'? ”“你还算运气的哩，”老子说，“没有遇着能干的主子。六经这玩艺儿，只是先王的陈迹呀。那里是弄出迹来的东西呢？你的话，可是和迹一样的。迹是鞋子踏成的，但迹难道就是鞋子吗？”停了一会，又接着说道：“白们只要瞧着，眼珠子动也不动，然而自然有孕；虫呢，雄的在上风叫，雌的在下风应，自然有孕；类是一身上兼具雌雄的，所以自然有孕。性，是不能改的；命，是不能换的；时，是不能留的；道，是不能塞的。只要得了道，什么都行，可是如果失掉了，那就什么都不行。”
"You're quite lucky," Lao Tzu said, "and you haven't met a capable master." The art of the Six Classics is just the relics of the former kings. Where is the trace of the trace? Your words are the same as the traces. The traces are stepped on by shoes, but are they shoes? After a pause, he continued: "As long as the white  people look, their eyes don't move, but they are naturally pregnant; As for the insects, the male one calls in the wind, and the female responds in the wind, so she is naturally pregnant; It is a type of male and female body, so it is natural to be pregnant. Sex cannot be changed; Life cannot be exchanged; time, it cannot be kept; The Tao cannot be blocked. As long as you get the Tao, anything will do, but if you lose it, you will not be able to do anything. ”孔子好像受了当头一棒，亡魂失魄的坐着，恰如一段呆木头。
Confucius seemed to have been hit in the head, and he sat in despair, just like a piece of wood.大约过了八分钟，他深深的倒抽了一口气，就起身要告辞，一面照例很客气的致谢着老子的教训。
After about eight minutes, he gasped deeply, got up to take his leave, and politely thanked Lao Tzu for his lesson as usual.老子也并不挽留他，站起来扶着拄杖，一直送他到图书馆的大门外。孔子就要上车了，他才留声机似的说道：
Lao Tzu didn't keep him, stood up and held the cane, and sent him all the way to the door of the library. Confucius was about to get into the car, and he said like a gramophone:“您走了？您不喝点儿茶去吗？……”
"Are you gone? Why don't you go with some catechia? ……”孔子答应着“是是”，上了车，拱着两只手极恭敬的靠在横板上；冉有把鞭子在空中一挥，嘴里喊一声“都”，车子就走动了。待到车子离开了大门十几步，老子才回进自己的屋里去。
Confucius agreed to "yes yes", got into the car, and leaned on the horizontal board with his hands arched very respectfully; Ran You waved his whip in the air, shouted "all", and the car moved around. After the car left the gate for more than ten steps, I went back to my house.“先生今天好像很高兴，”庚桑楚看老子坐定了，才站在旁边，垂着手，说。“话说的很不少……”
"Sir, you seem to be very happy today," Geng Sangchu saw that Lao Tzu was seated, and then stood beside him, hanging his hand, and said. "There is a lot to say......"“你说的对。”老子微微的叹一口气，有些颓唐似的回答道。“我的话真也说的太多了。”他又仿佛突然记起一件事情来，“哦，孔丘送我的一只雁鹅，不是晒了腊鹅了吗？你蒸蒸吃去罢。我横竖没有牙齿，咬不动。”
"You're right." Lao Tzu sighed slightly and replied a little decadently. "I really said too much." He seemed to suddenly remember something, "Oh, a goose that Confucius gave me, wasn't it dried a wax goose?" You can steam and eat. I have no teeth horizontally and vertically, and I can't bite. ”庚桑楚出去了。老子就又静下来，合了眼。图书馆里很寂静。只听得竹竿子碰着屋檐响，这是庚桑楚在取挂在檐下的腊鹅。
Geng Sangchu went out. Lao Tzu calmed down again and closed his eyes. There was silence in the library. I only heard the sound of bamboo poles touching the eaves, which was Geng Sangchu picking up the wax goose hanging under the eaves.
一过就是三个月。老子仍旧毫无动静的坐着，好像一段呆木头。
It's three months. Lao Tzu still sat motionless, like a piece of wood.“先生，孔丘来了哩！”他的学生庚桑楚，诧异似的走进来，轻轻的说。“他不是长久没来了吗？这的来，不知道是怎的？……”
"Sir, Confucius is here!" His student Geng Sangchu walked in surprised and said softly. "Didn't he come for a long time? I don't know how this is coming? ……”“请……”老子照例只说了这一个字。
"Please ......" Lao Tzu only said this word as usual.“先生，您好吗？”孔子极恭敬的行着礼，一面说。
"How are you, sir?" Confucius saluted very respectfully and said.“我总是这样子，”老子答道。“长久不看见了，一定是躲在寓里用功罢？”
"I always do," replied Lao Tzu. "I haven't seen it for a long time, I must be hiding in the apartment and working hard?"“那里那里，”孔子谦虚的说。“没有出门，在想着。想通了一点：鸦鹊亲嘴；鱼儿涂口水；细腰蜂儿化别个；怀了弟弟，做哥哥的就哭。我自己久不投在变化里了，这怎么能够变化别人呢！……”
"There, there," Confucius said modestly. "I didn't go out, I was thinking. I figured out one point: the crow kissed the mouth; fish smeared with saliva; The slender-waisted bee is different; If you are pregnant with a younger brother, you will cry when you are an older brother. I haven't been involved in change for a long time, how can this change others! ……”“对对！”老子道。“您想通了！”
"Yes, yes!" Lao Tzu said. "You figured it out!"大家都从此没有话，好像两段呆木头。
Everyone was silent from then on, as if two pieces of wood were dumbfounded.大约过了八分钟，孔子这才深深的呼出了一口气，就起身要告辞，一面照例很客气的致谢着老子的教训。
After about eight minutes, Confucius exhaled deeply, got up to take his leave, and politely thanked Lao Tzu for his lessons as usual.老子也并不挽留他。站起来扶着拄杖，一直送他到图书馆的大门外。孔子就要上车了，他才留声机似的说道：
Lao Tzu didn't keep him. He stood up and held the cane all the way to the door of the library. Confucius was about to get into the car, and he said like a gramophone:“您走了？您不喝点儿茶去吗？……”
"Are you gone? Why don't you go with some catechia? ……”孔子答应着“是是”，上了车，拱着两只手极恭敬的靠在横板上；冉有把鞭子在空中一挥，嘴里喊一声“都”，车子就走动了。待到车子离开了大门十几步，老子才回进自己的屋里去。
Confucius agreed to "yes yes", got into the car, and leaned on the horizontal board with his hands arched very respectfully; Ran You waved his whip in the air, shouted "all", and the car moved around. After the car left the gate for more than ten steps, I went back to my house.“先生今天好像不大高兴，”庚桑楚看老子坐定了，才站在旁边，垂着手，说。“话说的很少……”
"Sir, you don't seem to be very happy today," Geng Sangchu saw that Lao Tzu was seated, and then stood beside him, hanging his hands, and said. "Words are rarely ......"“你说的对。”老子微微的叹一口气，有些颓唐的回答道。“可是你不知道：我看我应该走了。”
"You're right." Lao Tzu sighed slightly and replied a little decadently. "But you don't know: I think I should go."“这为什么呢？”庚桑楚大吃一惊，好像遇着了晴天的霹雳。
"Why is that?" Geng Sangchu was taken aback, as if he had encountered a thunderbolt on a sunny day.“孔丘已经懂得了我的意思。他知道能够明白他的底细的，只有我，一定放心不下。我不走，是不大方便的……”
"Confucius already understands what I mean. He knew that the only one who could understand his details was me, and he must be at ease. It's not convenient for me to leave......"“那么，不正是同道了吗？还走什么呢？”
"So, isn't it the same way? What else to go? ”“不，”老子摆一摆手，“我们还是道不同。譬如同是一双鞋子罢，我的是走流沙，他的是上朝廷的。”
"No," Lao Tzu waved his hand, "We still say differently." For example, it's like a pair of shoes, mine is quicksand, and his is for the court. ”“但您究竟是他的先生呵！”
"But you are his husband!"“你在我这里学了这许多年，还是这么老实，”老子笑了起来，“这真是性不能改，命不能换了。你要知道孔丘和你不同：他以后就不再来，也再不叫我先生，只叫我老头子，背地里还要玩花样了呀。”
"You have studied with me for so many years, and you are still so honest," Lao Tzu laughed, "This is really sex that cannot be changed, and life cannot be changed." You have to know that Confucius is different from you: he will not come again in the future, and he will no longer call me Mr., only call me an old man, and he will play tricks behind his back. ”“我真想不到。但先生的看人是不会错的……”
"I really didn't expect it. But the gentleman's view of people will not be wrong......"“不，开头也常常看错。”
"No, I often misread the beginning."“那么，”庚桑楚想了一想，“我们就和他干一下……”
"Then," Geng Sangchu thought for a while, "Let's do it with him......"老子又笑了起来，向庚桑楚张开嘴：
Lao Tzu laughed again and opened his mouth to Geng Sangchu:“你看：我牙齿还有吗？”他问。
"Look: Do I still have teeth?" He asked.“没有了。”庚桑楚回答说。
"No." Geng Sangchu replied.“舌头还在吗？”
"Is the tongue still there?"“在的。”
"Yes."“懂了没有？”
"Do you understand?"“先生的意思是说：硬的早掉，软的却在吗？”
"What you mean is that the hard ones fall off early, but the soft ones are there?"“你说的对。我看你也还不如收拾收拾，回家看看你的老婆去罢。但先给我的那匹青牛刷一下，鞍鞯晒一下。我明天一早就要骑的。”
"You're right. I think you might as well pack up and go home to see your wife. But first brush my green cow and saddle dry. I'm going to ride early tomorrow morning. ”
老子到了函谷关，没有直走通到关口的大道，却把青牛一勒，转入岔路，在城根下慢慢的绕着。他想爬城。城墙倒并不高，只要站在牛背上，将身一耸，是勉强爬得上的；但是青牛留在城里，却没法搬出城外去。倘要搬，得用起重机，无奈这时鲁般和墨翟还都没有出世，老子自己也想不到会有这玩意。总而言之：他用尽哲学的脑筋，只是一个没有法。
When Lao Tzu arrived at Hangu Pass, he did not go straight to the main road leading to the pass, but he reined the green cow, turned into a fork in the road, and slowly circled under the city roots. He wanted to climb the city. The city wall is not high, as long as you stand on the back of a cow and shrug your body, you can barely climb up; But Qingniu stayed in the city and could not move out of the city. If you want to move, you have to use a crane, but at this time Lu Ban and Mo Zhai have not yet been born, and Lao Tzu himself could not have imagined this thing. In short: he exhausted his philosophical brain, but there was no law.然而他更料不到当他弯进岔路的时候，已经给探子望见，立刻去报告了关官。所以绕不到七八丈路，一群人马就从后面追来了。那个探子跃马当先，其次是关官，就是关尹喜，还带着四个巡警和两个签子手。
However, he didn't expect that when he turned into a fork in the road, he had already seen it to the spies and immediately reported it to the customs official. So less than seven or eight zhang away, a group of people chased after them. The spy took the lead, followed by the customs official, Guan Yinxi, and also brought four patrolmen and two signers.“站住！”几个人大叫着。
"Stop!" Several people shouted.老子连忙勒住青牛，自己是一动也不动，好像一段呆木头。
Lao Tzu hurriedly strangled the green cow, and he was motionless, like a piece of wood.“阿呀！”关官一冲上前，看见了老子的脸，就惊叫了一声，即刻滚鞍下马，打着拱，说道：“我道是谁，原来是老聃馆长。这真是万想不到的。”
"Ah!" As soon as Guan Guan rushed forward, when he saw Lao Tzu's face, he screamed, immediately rolled off his horse, arched his head, and said, "Who am I, it turns out to be Lao Dan's curator." This is really unexpected. ”老子也赶紧爬下牛背来，细着眼睛，看了那人一看，含含胡胡的说：“我记性坏……”
Lao Tzu also hurriedly climbed off the back of the cow, squinted his eyes, looked at the man, and said with a hint: "I have a bad memory......“自然，自然，先生是忘记了的。我是关尹喜，先前因为上图书馆去查《税收精义》，曾经拜访过先生……”
"Naturally, naturally, sir has forgotten. I am Guan Yinxi, and I have visited Mr. ...... because I went to the library to check the "Essence of Taxation".这时签子手便翻了一通青牛上的鞍鞯，又用签子刺一个洞，伸进指头去掏了一下，一声不响，橛着嘴走开了。
At this time, the signer turned over the saddle on the green ox, stabbed a hole with the stick, put it in his finger and took it out, said nothing, and walked away with his mouth open.“先生在城圈边溜溜？”关尹喜问。
"Sir, slipping around the city circle?" Guan Yin asked happily.“不，我想出去，换换新鲜空气……”
"No, I want to go out for fresh air......"“那很好！那好极了！现在谁都讲卫生，卫生是顶要紧的。不过机会难得，我们要请先生到关上去住几天，听听先生的教训……”
"That's good! That's great! Now everyone talks about hygiene, and hygiene is the most important. But the opportunity is rare, we want to invite Mr. to stay in the closing for a few days and listen to his lesson......"老子还没有回答，四个巡警就一拥上前，把他扛在牛背上，签子手用签子在牛屁股上刺了一下，牛把尾巴一卷，就放开脚步，一同向关口跑去了。
Before Lao Tzu could answer, the four patrolmen rushed forward, carried him on the back of the cow, and the signer stabbed the cow's buttocks with a stick, and the cow rolled its tail, let go of its steps, and ran towards the pass together.到得关上，立刻开了大厅来招待他。这大厅就是城楼的中一间，临窗一望，只见外面全是黄土的平原，愈远愈低；天色苍苍，真是好空气。这雄关就高踞峻坂之上，门外左右全是土坡，中间一条车道，好像在峭壁之间。实在是只要一丸泥就可以封住的。
When it was closed, the hall was immediately opened to entertain him. This hall is one of the city towers, and when you look out the window, you can see that the outside is full of loess plains, and the farther you go, the lower it gets; The sky is blue, it's really good air. This Xiongguan is high on a steep slope, with dirt slopes on the left and right outside the door, and a lane in the middle, as if between the cliffs. It really only takes a ball of mud to seal it.大家喝过开水，再吃饽饽。让老子休息一会之后，关尹喜就提议要他讲学了。老子早知道这是免不掉的，就满口答应。于是轰轰了一阵，屋里逐渐坐满了听讲的人们。同来的八人之外，还有四个巡警，两个签子手，五个探子，一个书记，账房和厨房。有几个还带着笔，刀，木札，预备抄讲义。
Everyone drank boiling water and then ate dumplings. After letting Lao Tzu rest for a while, Guan Yinxi proposed to give him a lecture. Lao Tzu knew that this was inevitable, so he agreed. So there was a roar, and the room gradually filled with people listening. In addition to the eight people who came with him, there were four patrol officers, two signers, five spies, a secretary, an accountant and a kitchen. A few of them also brought pens, knives, and wooden sticks to prepare to copy the handouts.老子像一段呆木头似的坐在中央，沉默了一会，这才咳嗽几声，白胡子里面的嘴唇在动起来了。大家即刻屏住呼吸，侧着耳朵听。只听得他慢慢的说道：
Lao Tzu sat in the center like a piece of wood, silent for a while, and then coughed a few times, and the lips inside the white beard were moving. Everyone immediately held their breath and listened with their ears sideways. I only heard him say slowly:“道可道，非常道；名可名，非常名。无名，天地之始；有名，万物之母。……”
"The Tao can be said, not the Tao; The name can be named, but it is not a name. Nameless, the beginning of heaven and earth; Famous is the mother of all things. ……”大家彼此面面相觑，没有抄。
Everyone looked at each other and did not copy.“故常无欲以观其妙，”老子接着说，“常有欲以观其窍。此两者，同出而异名。同，谓之玄，玄之又玄，众妙之门……”
“故常无欲以观其妙，”老子接着说，“常有欲以观其窍。 此两者，同出而异名。 同，谓之玄，玄之又玄，众妙之门……”大家显出苦脸来了，有些人还似乎手足失措。一个签子手打了一个大呵欠，书记先生竟打起磕睡来，哗啷一声，刀，笔，木札，都从手里落在席子上面了。
Everyone showed a bitter face, and some people seemed to be at a loss. A signer yawned, and the secretary fell asleep, and with a loud sound, the knife, pen, and wooden stick all fell on the mat from his hand.老子仿佛并没有觉得，但仿佛又有些觉得似的，因为他从此讲得详细了一点。然而他没有牙齿，发音不清，打着陕西腔，夹上湖南音，“哩”“呢”不分，又爱说什么“”：大家还是听不懂。可是时间加长了，来听他讲学的人，倒格外的受苦。
Lao Tzu didn't seem to feel it, but he seemed to feel a little more, because he talked a little more about it from then on. However, he has no teeth, his pronunciation is unclear, he plays in a Shaanxi accent, with a Hunan accent, "Li" and "Ni" are indistinguishable, and he likes to say what he likes to say "": everyone still can't understand. But as time went on, the people who came to listen to his lectures suffered extraordinarily.为面子起见，人们只好熬着，但后来总不免七倒八歪斜，各人想着自己的事，待到讲到“圣人之道，为而不争”，住了口了，还是谁也不动弹。老子等了一会，就加上一句道：
For the sake of face, people had to endure, but then they couldn't help but fall and slouch, everyone thought about their own affairs, and when they talked about "the way of the saints, for the sake of not fighting", they stopped, and no one moved. Lao Tzu waited for a while, and then added:“，完了！”
", it's over!"大家这才如大梦初醒，虽然因为坐得太久，两腿都麻木了，一时站不起身，但心里又惊又喜，恰如遇到大赦的一样。
Although they sat for too long, their legs were numb and they couldn't stand up for a while, but they were surprised and happy, just like encountering an amnesty.于是老子也被送到厢房里，请他去休息。他喝过几口白开水，就毫无动静的坐着，好像一段呆木头。
So Lao Tzu was also sent to the side room and asked him to rest. After drinking a few sips of plain water, he sat motionless like a piece of wood.人们却还在外面纷纷议论。过不多久，就有四个代表进来见老子，大意是说他的话讲的太快了，加上国语不大纯粹，所以谁也不能笔记。没有记录，可惜非常，所以要请他补发些讲义。
People are still talking about it outside. Not long after, four representatives came in to see Lao Tzu, to the effect that his words were spoken too quickly, and the Chinese was not very pure, so no one could take notes. There is no record, but unfortunately it is very good, so I want to ask him to reissue some handouts.“来笃话啥西，俺实直头听弗懂！”账房说。
"What are you talking about, I really don't understand!" The accountant said.“还是耐自家写子出来末哉。写子出来末，总算弗白嚼蛆一场哉啘。阿是？”书记先生道。
"It's still hard to write your own book. At the end of the book, I finally chewed maggots in vain. Ah? Mr. Secretary said.老子也不十分听得懂，但看见别的两个把笔，刀，木札，都摆在自己的面前了，就料是一定要他编讲义。他知道这是免不掉的，于是满口答应；不过今天太晚了，要明天才开手。
Lao Tzu didn't understand it very well, but when he saw the other two pens, knives, and wooden sticks in front of him, he expected that he would have to compile handouts. He knew that it was inevitable, so he agreed; But it's too late today, and we won't start until tomorrow.代表们认这结果为满意，退出去了。
The delegates were satisfied with the result and withdrew.第二天早晨，天气有些阴沉沉，老子觉得心里不舒适，不过仍须编讲义，因为他急于要出关，而出关，却须把讲义交卷。他看一眼面前的一大堆木札，似乎觉得更加不舒适了。
The next morning, the weather was a little gloomy, and Lao Tzu felt uncomfortable, but he still had to compile the handouts, because he was eager to leave the customs, and when he left the customs, he had to hand in the handouts. He glanced at the large pile of wooden slabs in front of him and seemed to feel even more uncomfortable.然而他还是不动声色，静静的坐下去，写起来。回忆着昨天的话，想一想，写一句。那时眼镜还没有发明，他的老花眼睛细得好像一条线，很费力；除去喝白开水和吃饽饽的时间，写了整整一天半，也不过五千个大字。
However, he remained calm, sat down quietly, and began to write. Recall yesterday's words, think about it, and write a sentence. At that time, glasses had not yet been invented, and his presbyopia eyes were as thin as a line, which was very laborious; Excluding the time spent drinking plain water and eating glutinous food, it took a whole day and a half to write, and it was only 5,000 big characters.“为了出关，我看这也敷衍得过去了。”他想。
"In order to get out of customs, I think this is perfunctory." He thought.于是取了绳子，穿起木札来，计两串，扶着拄杖，到关尹喜的公事房里去交稿，并且声明他立刻要走的意思。
So he took the rope, put on the wooden stick, counted two strings, held on the cane, went to Guan Yinxi's office to submit the manuscript, and declared that he was leaving immediately.关尹喜非常高兴，非常感谢，又非常惋惜，坚留他多住一些时，但看见留不住，便换了一副悲哀的脸相，答应了，命令巡警给青牛加鞍。一面自己亲手从架子上挑出一包盐，一包胡麻，十五个饽饽来，装在一个充公的白布口袋里送给老子做路上的粮食。并且声明：这是因为他是老作家，所以非常优待，假如他年纪青，饽饽就只能有十个了。
Guan Yinxi was very happy, very grateful, and very sorry, and insisted on keeping him for a longer time, but when he saw that he couldn't keep it, he changed his sad face, agreed, and ordered the patrol officer to saddle the green cow. While personally picking out a bag of salt, a pack of sesame, and fifteen dumplings from the shelf, he put them in a confiscated white cloth bag and gave them to Lao Tzu to make food on the road. And declared: This is because he is an old writer, so he is very preferential, if he is young, there can only be ten gluttony.老子再三称谢，收了口袋，和大家走下城楼，到得关口，还要牵着青牛走路；关尹喜竭力劝他上牛，逊让一番之后，终于也骑上去了。作过别，拨转牛头，便向峻坂的大路上慢慢的走去。
Lao Tzu thanked him again and again, put away his pockets, walked down the city tower with everyone, and when he reached the pass, he had to lead the green ox to walk; Guan Yinxi tried his best to persuade him to get on the cow, and after some concessions, he finally rode on it. After saying goodbye, he turned the bull's head and walked slowly towards the steep road.不多久，牛就放开了脚步。大家在关口目送着，去了两三丈远，还辨得出白发，黄袍，青牛，白口袋，接着就尘头逐步而起，罩着人和牛，一律变成灰色，再一会，已只有黄尘滚滚，什么也看不见了。
It didn't take long for the cow to let go. Everyone watched at the pass, went two or three feet away, and could still distinguish the white hair, yellow robe, green cow, white pocket, and then the dust gradually rose, covering people and cattle, all turning gray, and after a while, only yellow dust was rolling, and nothing could be seen.
大家回到关上，好像卸下了一副担子，伸一伸腰，又好像得了什么货色似的，咂一咂嘴，好些人跟着关尹喜走进公事房里去。
Everyone returned to the closing door, as if they had unloaded a burden, stretched their waists, and smacked their lips as if they had got some goods, and many people followed Guan Yinxi into the office.“这就是稿子？”账房先生提起一串木札来，翻着，说。“字倒写得还干净。我看到市上去卖起来，一定会有人要的。”
"This is the manuscript?" The accountant picked up a string of wooden sticks, flipped through them, and said. The words are written cleanly. I see it sold in the market, and someone will definitely want it. ”书记先生也凑上去，看着第一片，念道：
Mr. Secretary also leaned up, looked at the first piece, and read:“‘道可道，非常道’……哼，还是这些老套。真教人听得头痛，讨厌……”
"'Tao can be said, not very Tao'...... Hmph, it's still these clichés. It really gives people a headache and hates ......."“医头痛最好是打打盹。”账房放下了木札，说。
"The best way to treat headaches is to take a nap." The accountant put down Muza and said.“哈哈哈！……我真只好打盹了。老实说，我是猜他要讲自己的恋爱故事，这才去听的。要是早知道他不过这么胡说八道，我就压根儿不去坐这么大半天受罪……”
"Hahaha! …… I really had to take a nap. To be honest, I guessed that he was going to tell his love story, so I went to listen to it. If I had known that he was just talking so nonsense, I wouldn't have sat for so long and suffered at all......"“这可只能怪您自己看错了人，”关尹喜笑道。“他那里会有恋爱故事呢？他压根儿就没有过恋爱。”
"You can only blame yourself for seeing the wrong person," Guan Yinxi smiled. "Will he have a love story there? He has never been in love at all. ”“您怎么知道？”书记诧异的问。
"How do you know?" The secretary asked in surprise.“这也只能怪您自己打了磕睡，没有听到他说‘无为而无不为’。这家伙真是‘心高于天，命薄如纸’，想‘无不为’，就只好‘无为’。一有所爱，就不能无不爱，那里还能恋爱，敢恋爱？您看看您自己就是：现在只要看见一个大姑娘，不论好丑，就眼睛甜腻腻的都像是你自己的老婆。将来娶了太太，恐怕就要像我们的账房先生一样，规矩一些了。”
"This can only be blamed on you for snoozing off and not hearing him say 'do nothing and do nothing'. This guy is really 'his heart is higher than the sky, and his life is as thin as paper', and he wants to 'do everything', so he has to 'do nothing'. Once you love, you can't love everything, where you can still fall in love, dare to love? Look at yourself: now as long as you see a big girl, no matter how ugly it is, her eyes are sweet and greasy, just like your own wife. If you marry a wife in the future, I am afraid you will have to be more disciplined like our accountant. ”窗外起了一阵风，大家都觉得有些冷。
There was a gust of wind outside the window, and everyone felt a little cold.“这老头子究竟是到那里去，去干什么的？”书记先生趁势岔开了关尹喜的话。
"Where did this old man go, what was he doing?" Mr. Secretary took advantage of the situation to divert Guan Yinxi's words.“自说是上流沙去的，”关尹喜冷冷的说。“看他走得到。外面不但没有盐，面，连水也难得。肚子饿起来，我看是后来还要回到我们这里来的。”
"I said I went to the upper quicksand," Guan Yinxi said coldly. "See if he can walk. Not only is there no salt, noodles, but even water is rare. I was hungry, and I think he would come back to us later. ”“那么，我们再叫他著书。”账房先生高兴了起来。“不过饽饽真也太费。那时候，我们只要说宗旨已经改为提拔新作家，两串稿子，给他五个饽饽也足够了。”
"Then, let's ask him to write a book again." Mr. Accountant became happy. "But it's really too expensive. At that time, we only needed to say that the purpose had been changed to promote new writers, two strings of manuscripts, and five dumplings were enough. ”“那可不见得行。要发牢骚，闹脾气的。”
"That's not necessarily possible. You have to complain and lose your temper. ”“饿过了肚子，还要闹脾气？”
"If you are hungry, you still have a temper?"“我倒怕这种东西，没有人要看。”书记摇着手，说。“连五个饽饽的本钱也捞不回。譬如罢，倘使他的话是对的，那么，我们的头儿就得放下关官不做，这才是无不做，是一个了不起的大人……”
"I'm afraid of this kind of thing, no one wants to see it." The secretary shook his hand and said. "I can't even get back the capital of the five dumplings. For example, if his words are right, then our head has to let go of the customs officer and not do it, this is doing everything, he is a great adult......"“那倒不要紧，”账房先生说，“总有人看的。交卸了的关官和还没有做关官的隐士，不是多得很吗？……”
"It doesn't matter," said Mr. Accountant, "there is always someone watching. Aren't there a lot of customs officials who have been handed over and hermits who have not yet become customs officials? ……”窗外起了一阵风，括上黄尘来，遮得半天暗。这时关尹喜向门外一看，只见还站着许多巡警和探子，在呆听他们的闲谈。
A gust of wind blew outside the window, covering the yellow dust and covering the sky for half a day. At this time, Guan Yinxi looked out the door and saw many patrolmen and spies still standing, listening to their chatter.“呆站在这里干什么？”他吆喝道。“黄昏了，不正是私贩子爬城偷税的时候了吗？巡逻去！”
"What are you doing standing here?" He shouted. "It's dusk, isn't it time for smugglers to climb the city to evade taxes? Patrol go! ”门外的人们，一溜烟跑下去了。屋里的人们，也不再说什么话，账房和书记都走出去了。关尹喜才用袍袖子把案上的灰尘拂了一拂，提起两串木札来，放在堆着充公的盐，胡麻，布，大豆，饽饽等类的架子上。
The people outside the door ran down. The people in the room didn't say anything anymore, and the accountant and secretary walked out. Guan Yinxi brushed the dust off the table with his robe sleeves, picked up two strings of wooden sticks, and placed them on the shelves piled with confiscated salt, sesame, cloth, soybeans, dumplings and other things.一九三五年十二月作。
Created in December 1935.

非攻

非攻

非攻

Not offensive一
One子夏的徒弟公孙高来找墨子，已经好几回了，总是不在家，见不着。大约是第四或者第五回罢，这才恰巧在门口遇见，因为公孙高刚一到，墨子也适值回家来。他们一同走进屋子里。
Zixia's apprentice Gongsun Gao came to Mozi several times, but he was always away from home and could not see him. It was about the fourth or fifth time, and I happened to meet him at the door, because as soon as Gongsun Gao arrived, Mozi also came home just in time. They went into the house together.公孙高辞让了一通之后，眼睛看着席子的破洞，和气的问道：
After Gongsun Gao Ci gave in, he looked at the hole in the mat and asked kindly:“先生是主张非战的？”
"Sir, you advocate non-war?"“不错！”墨子说。
"Not bad!" Mozi said.“那么，君子就不斗么？”
"So, don't gentlemen fight?"“是的！”墨子说。
"Yes!" Mozi said.“猪狗尚且要斗，何况人……”
"Pigs and dogs still have to fight, let alone people......"“唉唉，你们儒者，说话称着尧舜，做事却要学猪狗，可怜，可怜！”墨子说着，站了起来，匆匆的跑到厨下去了，一面说：“你不懂我的意思……”
"Alas, you Confucianism, you speak like Yao Shun, but you have to learn pigs and dogs when you do things, pitiful, pitiful!" Mozi said, stood up, hurried to the kitchen, and said, "You don't understand what I mean......"他穿过厨下，到得后门外的井边，绞着辘轳，汲起半瓶井水来，捧着吸了十多口，于是放下瓦瓶，抹一抹嘴，忽然望着园角上叫了起来道：
He walked through the kitchen, went to the well outside the back door, twisted the wheel, fetched half a bottle of well water, held it and took more than ten mouthfuls, then put down the clay bottle, wiped his mouth, and suddenly looked at the corner of the garden and shouted:“阿廉！你怎么回来了？”
"Ah Lian! Why are you back? ”阿廉也已经看见，正在跑过来，一到面前，就规规矩矩的站定，垂着手，叫一声“先生”，于是略有些气愤似的接着说：
Ah Lian had already seen it, was running over, and as soon as he arrived in front of him, he stood still in an orderly manner, hung his hands, and called "Sir", so he continued with a little anger:“我不干了。他们言行不一致。说定给我一千盆粟米的，却只给了我五百盆。我只得走了。”
"I'm quitting. They don't do what they say. He said he would give me a thousand pots of corn, but he only gave me five hundred. I had to go. ”“如果给你一千多盆，你走么？”
"If I give you more than a thousand basins, will you go?"“不。”阿廉答。
"No." Alan replied.“那么，就并非因为他们言行不一致，倒是因为少了呀！”
"Then, it's not because their words and deeds are inconsistent, but because they are less!"墨子一面说，一面又跑进厨房里，叫道：
As Mozi spoke, he ran into the kitchen again and shouted:“耕柱子！给我和起玉米粉来！”
"Plough the pillar! Give me cornmeal! ”耕柱子恰恰从堂屋里走到，是一个很精神的青年。
Geng Zhuzi just walked from the hall and was a very energetic young man.“先生，是做十多天的干粮罢？”他问。
"Sir, it's dry food for more than ten days, right?" He asked.“对咧。”墨子说。“公孙高走了罢？”
"Yes." Mozi said. "Gongsun Gao is gone?"“走了，”耕柱子笑道。“他很生气，说我们兼爱无父，像禽兽一样。”
"Let's go," Geng Zhuzi smiled. "He was very angry and said that we love fatherless and are like beasts."墨子也笑了一笑。
Mozi also smiled.“先生到楚国去？”
"Sir, go to Chu?"“是的。你也知道了？”墨子让耕柱子用水和着玉米粉，自己却取火石和艾绒打了火，点起枯枝来沸水，眼睛看火焰，慢慢的说道：“我们的老乡公输般，他总是倚恃着自己的一点小聪明，兴风作浪的。造了拒，教楚王和越人打仗还不够，这回是又想出了什么云梯，要耸恿楚王攻宋去了。宋是小国，怎禁得这么一攻。我去按他一下罢。”
"Yes. You know that too? Mozi asked the ploughing pillar to use water and corn flour, but he took flint and mugwort to make a fire, lit the dead branches to boil water, looked at the flames with his eyes, and slowly said: "Our fellow is like a public loser, he always relies on his little cleverness to make waves." It was not enough to teach the King of Chu to fight with the Yue people, but this time he came up with some ladder to encourage the King of Chu to attack the Song. Song is a small country, how can it be such an attack. I'll go press him. ”他看得耕柱子已经把窝窝头上了蒸笼，便回到自己的房里，在壁厨里摸出一把盐渍藜菜干，一柄破铜刀，另外找了一张破包袱，等耕柱子端进蒸熟的窝窝头来，就一起打成一个包裹。衣服却不打点，也不带洗脸的手巾，只把皮带紧了一紧，走到堂下，穿好草鞋，背上包裹，头也不回的走了。从包裹里，还一阵一阵的冒着热蒸气。
He saw that the plowing pillar had already put the head of the nest on the steamer, so he returned to his room, took out a handful of salted dried quinoa in the wall kitchen, a broken copper knife, and found another piece of broken baggage, and when the plowing pillar brought it into the steamed nest, it was made into a package together. He didn't touch his clothes, nor did he bring a handkerchief to wash his face, he only tightened his belt, walked to the hall, put on straw sandals, wrapped it on his back, and left without looking back. From the package, there was still hot steam coming out one after another.“先生什么时候回来呢？”耕柱子在后面叫喊道。
"When will you come back, sir?" The plowing pillar shouted from behind.“总得二十来天罢，”墨子答着，只是走。
"It will take about twenty days," Mozi replied, just leaving.

非攻

二

非攻

Two墨子走进宋国的国界的时候，草鞋带已经断了三四回，觉得脚底上很发热，停下来一看，鞋底也磨成了大窟窿，脚上有些地方起茧，有些地方起泡了。他毫不在意，仍然走；沿路看看情形，人口倒很不少，然而历来的水灾和兵灾的痕迹，却到处存留，没有人民的变换得飞快。走了三天，看不见一所大屋，看不见一颗大树，看不见一个活泼的人，看不见一片肥沃的田地，就这样的到了都城。
When Mozi walked into the border of the Song Dynasty, the straw shoe laces had broken three or four times, and he felt that the soles of his feet were very hot, and when he stopped, the soles of his shoes had also been ground into big holes, and some places on his feet were calloused and blistered in some places. He didn't care and still went; Looking at the situation along the road, there are quite a lot of people, but the traces of floods and military disasters in the past remain everywhere, and there is no rapid change of people. After walking for three days, I couldn't see a big house, a big tree, a lively person, or a fertile field, and I arrived in the capital.城墙也很破旧，但有几处添了新石头；护城沟边看见烂泥堆，像是有人淘掘过，但只见有几个闲人坐在沟沿上似乎钓着鱼。
The walls are also very dilapidated, but new stones have been added in several places; I saw a pile of mud by the moat, as if someone had dug it up, but I saw a few idle people sitting on the edge of the ditch as if they were fishing.“他们大约也听到消息了，”墨子想。细看那些钓鱼人，却没有自己的学生在里面。
"They probably heard the news too," Mozi thought. Look closely at the anglers, but there are no students of their own.他决计穿城而过，于是走近北关，顺着中央的一条街，一径向南走。城里面也很萧条，但也很平静；店铺都贴着减价的条子，然而并不见买主，可是店里也并无怎样的货色；街道上满积着又细又粘的黄尘。
He decided to pass through the city, so he approached the North Gate, followed a street in the center, and walked south. The city is also desolate, but also very calm; The stores are all posted with price reduction slips, but there is no buyer, but there is no kind of goods in the store; The streets are full of fine and sticky yellow dust.“这模样了，还要来攻它！”墨子想。
"This is what it looks like, and we have to attack it!" Mozi thought.他在大街上前行，除看见了贫弱而外，也没有什么异样。楚国要来进攻的消息，是也许已经听到了的，然而大家被攻得习惯了，自认是活该受攻的了，竟并不觉得特别，况且谁都只剩了一条性命，无衣无食，所以也没有什么人想搬家。待到望见南关的城楼了，这才看见街角上聚着十多个人，好像在听一个人讲故事。
He walked forward on the street, and there was nothing unusual except for seeing the poor and weak. The news that the Chu state was going to attack may have been heard, but everyone was used to being attacked, and they thought they deserved to be attacked, and they didn't feel special, and everyone had only one life left, no food and clothing, so no one wanted to move. When I saw the city tower of Nanguan, I saw more than ten people gathered on the street corner, as if they were listening to a person telling a story.当墨子走得临近时，只见那人的手在空中一挥，大叫道：
When Mozi approached, he saw the man's hand waving in the air and shouting:“我们给他们看看宋国的民气！我们都去死！”
"Let's show them the popular spirit of the Song State! We're all going to die! ”墨子知道，这是自己的学生曹公子的声音。
Mozi knew that this was the voice of his student Cao Gongzi.然而他并不挤进去招呼他，匆匆的出了南关，只赶自己的路。又走了一天和大半夜，歇下来，在一个农家的檐下睡到黎明，起来仍复走。草鞋已经碎成一片一片，穿不住了，包袱里还有窝窝头，不能用，便只好撕下一块布裳来，包了脚。
However, he did not squeeze in to greet him, and hurriedly left the South Pass, only on his own way. After walking for another day and most of the night, he rested, slept under the eaves of a farmhouse until dawn, and got up and walked again. The straw sandals had been broken into pieces, and they couldn't be worn, and there were still nests in the baggage, which could not be used, so they had to tear off a piece of cloth and wrap their feet.不过布片薄，不平的村路梗着他的脚底，走起来就更艰难。到得下午，他坐在一株小小的槐树下，打开包裹来吃午餐，也算是歇歇脚。远远的望见一个大汉，推着很重的小车，向这边走过来了。到得临近，那人就歇下车子，走到墨子面前，叫了一声“先生”，一面撩起衣角来揩脸上的汗，喘着气。
However, the cloth is thin, and the uneven village road blocks the soles of his feet, making it even more difficult to walk. In the afternoon, he sat under a small locust tree, opened the package and had lunch, which was a rest. From a distance, I saw a big man, pushing a very heavy cart, walking this way. When he got closer, the man got out of the car, walked to Mozi, called "sir", lifted the corners of his clothes to wipe the sweat from his face, and gasped.“这是沙么？”墨子认识他是自己的学生管黔敖，便问。
"Is this sand?" Mozi knew that he was his student Guan Qianao, so he asked.“是的，防云梯的。”
"Yes, the anti-ladder."“别的准备怎么样？”
"How about other preparations?"“也已经募集了一些麻，灰，铁。不过难得很：有的不肯，肯的没有。还是讲空话的多……”
"Some hemp, ash, and iron have also been collected. But it's very rare: some refuse, some don't. Or is there a lot of empty talk......"“昨天在城里听见曹公子在讲演，又在玩一股什么‘气’，嚷什么‘死’了。你去告诉他：不要弄玄虚；死并不坏，也很难，但要死得于民有利！”
"Yesterday in the city, I heard Young Master Cao giving a speech, and he was playing with some 'anger' and shouting 'death'. Go and tell him: Don't make a fuss; Death is not bad, and it is difficult, but it is beneficial to the people to die! ”“和他很难说，”管黔敖怅怅的答道。“他在这里做了两年官，不大愿意和我们说话了……”
"It's hard to say to him," Guan Qianao replied dejectedly. "He has been an official here for two years and is not willing to talk to us......“禽滑釐呢？”
"Where's the bird slippery?"“他可是很忙。刚刚试验过连弩；现在恐怕在西关外看地势，所以遇不着先生。先生是到楚国去找公输般的罢？”
"He's very busy. I just tested a repeating crossbow; I'm afraid I'm looking at the terrain outside the West Pass now, so I can't meet Mr. Sir, are you going to Chu to find Gongshu? ”“不错，”墨子说，“不过他听不听我，还是料不定的。你们仍然准备着，不要只望着口舌的成功。”
"Yes," Mozi said, "but whether he listens to me or not is still uncertain." You are still prepared, don't just look at the success of your words. ”管黔敖点点头，看墨子上了路，目送了一会，便推着小车，吱吱嘎嘎的进城去了。
Guan Qian'ao nodded, watched Mozi get on the road, watched for a while, then pushed the cart and creaked into the city.

非攻

三

非攻

Three楚国的郢城可是不比宋国：街道宽阔，房屋也整齐，大店铺里陈列着许多好东西，雪白的麻布，通红的辣椒，斑斓的鹿皮，肥大的莲子。走路的人，虽然身体比北方短小些，却都活泼精悍，衣服也很干净，墨子在这里一比，旧衣破裳，布包着两只脚，真好像一个老牌的乞丐了。
The city of Chu is not as good as the Song state: the streets are wide, the houses are neat, and there are many good things displayed in the big shops, such as snow-white linen, red peppers, colorful deer skin, and fat lotus seeds. The people who walk, although their bodies are shorter than those in the north, are all lively and powerful, and their clothes are also very clean.再向中央走是一大块广场，摆着许多摊子，拥挤着许多人，这是闹市，也是十字路交叉之处。墨子便找着一个好像士人的老头子，打听公输般的寓所，可惜言语不通，缠不明白，正在手掌心上写字给他看，只听得轰的一声，大家都唱了起来，原来是有名的赛湘灵已经开始在唱她的《下里巴人》，所以引得全国中许多人，同声应和了。不一会，连那老士人也在嘴里发出哼哼声，墨子知道他决不会再来看他手心上的字，便只写了半个“公”字，拔步再往远处跑。然而到处都在唱，无隙可乘，许多工夫，大约是那边已经唱完了，这才逐渐显得安静。他找到一家木匠店，去探问公输般的住址。
Further towards the center is a large square with many stalls and crowded with many people, which is the downtown area and the intersection of the intersection. Mozi found an old man who seemed to be a scholar and inquired about the apartment like Gongshu, but unfortunately the language was incomprehensible, and he couldn't understand it, and he was writing on the palm of his hand to show him, only to hear a bang, and everyone sang, it turned out that the famous Sai Xiangling had begun to sing her "Xia Liba People", so it attracted many people in the country to respond in unison. After a while, even the old scholar hummed in his mouth, and Mozi knew that he would never come to see the words on his palm again, so he only wrote half of the word "Gong" and ran further away. However, there was singing everywhere, there was no gap, and a lot of effort was probably finished over there, which gradually became quiet. He found a carpenter's shop and went to inquire about Gongshu's address.“那位山东老，造拒的公输先生么？”店主是一个黄脸黑须的胖子，果然很知道。“并不远。你回转去，走过十字街，从右手第二条小道上朝东向南，再往北转角，第三家就是他。”
"That old Shandong man, Mr. Gongshu who refused?" The shopkeeper is a fat man with a yellow face and black beard, and he really knows it very well. "Not far. You turn around, walk across Cross Street, from the second path on your right, east to south, and then turn north, and the third house is him. ”墨子在手心上写着字，请他看了有无听错之后，这才牢牢的记在心里，谢过主人，迈开大步，径奔他所指点的处所。果然也不错的：第三家的大门上，钉着一块雕镂极工的楠木牌，上刻六个大篆道：“鲁国公输般寓”。
Mozi wrote on the palm of his hand, asked him to see if he had heard wrong, and then he kept it firmly in his heart, thanked the master, took a big step, and went straight to the place he pointed out. Sure enough, it's not bad: on the gate of the third house, there is a highly carved nanmu plaque nanjing, engraved with six large seal scripts: "Lu Guo Gongshu Banyu".墨子拍着红铜的兽环，当当的敲了几下，不料开门出来的却是一个横眉怒目的门丁。他一看见，便大声的喝道：
Mozi patted the red copper beast ring and knocked a few times, but unexpectedly it was a doorkeeper who opened the door and came out. As soon as he saw it, he shouted loudly:“先生不见客！你们同乡来告帮的太多了！”
"Sir, I don't see guests! You fellow villagers have come to help too much! ”墨子刚看了他一眼，他已经关了门，再敲时，就什么声息也没有。然而这目光的一射，却使那门丁安静不下来，他总觉得有些不舒服，只得进去禀他的主人。公输般正捏着曲尺，在量云梯的模型。
As soon as Mozi glanced at him, he had already closed the door, and when he knocked again, there was no sound. However, this shot of the gaze made the gatekeeper unable to calm down, and he always felt a little uncomfortable, so he had to go in and report to his master. Gongshu is pinching a curved ruler, measuring the model of the ladder.“先生，又有一个你的同乡来告帮了……这人可是有些古怪……”门丁轻轻的说。
"Sir, another of your fellow villagers has come to help...... This person is a bit weird...... Mending said softly.“他姓什么？”
"What's his surname?"“那可还没有问……”门丁惶恐着。
"That's not ...... yet," the doorman was frightened.“什么样子的？”
"What does it look like?"“像一个乞丐。三十来岁。高个子，乌黑的脸……”
"Like a beggar. In his thirties. Tall man, jet-black face......"“阿呀！那一定是墨翟了！”
"Oh! Then it must be Mo Zhai! ”公输般吃了一惊，大叫起来，放下云梯的模型和曲尺，跑到阶下去。门丁也吃了一惊，赶紧跑在他前面，开了门。墨子和公输般，便在院子里见了面。
Gongshu was taken aback, shouted, put down the model and ruler of the ladder, and ran down the steps. Mending was also taken aback, and quickly ran in front of him and opened the door. Mozi and Gongshu met in the courtyard.“果然是你。”公输般高兴的说，一面让他进到堂屋去。“你一向好么？还是忙？”
"Sure enough, it's you." Gongshu said happily, while letting him enter the hall. "Have you always been good? Still busy? ”“是的。总是这样……”
"Yes. It's always like this......"“可是先生这么远来，有什么见教呢？”
"But sir, you have come so far, what do you have to learn?"“北方有人侮辱了我，”墨子很沉静的说。“想托你去杀掉他……”
"Someone in the north insulted me," Mozi said calmly. "I want you to kill him......"公输般不高兴了。
Gongshu was unhappy.“我送你十块钱！”墨子又接着说。
"I'll give you ten yuan!" Mozi continued.这一句话，主人可真是忍不住发怒了；他沉了脸，冷冷的回答道：
With this sentence, the master really couldn't help but be angry; He sank his face and replied coldly:“我是义不杀人的！”
"I am righteous and do not kill!"“那好极了！”墨子很感动的直起身来，拜了两拜，又很沉静的说道：“可是我有几句话。我在北方，听说你造了云梯，要去攻宋。宋有什么罪过呢？楚国有余的是地，缺少的是民。杀缺少的来争有余的，不能说是智；宋没有罪，却要攻他，不能说是仁；知道着，却不争，不能说是忠；争了，而不得，不能说是强；义不杀少，然而杀多，不能说是知类。先生以为怎样？……”
"That's great!" Mozi was very moved to straighten up, bowed twice, and said very calmly: "But I have a few words." I was in the north, and I heard that you built a ladder to attack the Song Dynasty. What is Song's crime? What Chu has more than land and what it lacks is the people. killing what is lacking to fight for the surplus cannot be said to be wisdom; Song is not guilty, but he wants to attack him, which cannot be said to be benevolent; knowing, but not fighting, cannot be said to be loyal; If you fight and can't get it, it can't be said to be strong; The righteousness does not kill few, but killing too many cannot be said to be a wise species. What do you think, sir? ……”“那是……”公输般想着，“先生说得很对的。”
"That's ......," thought Gongshu, "the gentleman is right. ”“那么，不可以歇手了么？”
"So, can't you stop?"“这可不成，”公输般怅怅的说。“我已经对王说过了。”
"This is not possible," said Gongshu melancholy. "I have already told the king."“那么，带我见王去就是。”
"Then, take me to see the king."“好的。不过时候不早了，还是吃了饭去罢。”
"Okay. But it's getting late, so let's go eat. ”然而墨子不肯听，欠着身子，总想站起来，他是向来坐不住的。公输般知道拗不过，便答应立刻引他去见王；一面到自己的房里，拿出一套衣裳和鞋子来，诚恳的说道：
However, Mozi refused to listen, owed his body, and always wanted to stand up, he never could sit still. Gongshu knew that he couldn't resist, so he promised to lead him to the king immediately; While going to his room, he took out a set of clothes and shoes, and said sincerely:“不过这要请先生换一下。因为这里是和俺家乡不同，什么都讲阔绰的。还是换一换便当……”
"But this is to be changed by sir. Because this place is different from my hometown, everything is generous. Or change the bento......"“可以可以，”墨子也诚恳的说。“我其实也并非爱穿破衣服的……只因为实在没有工夫换……”
"Yes, yes," Mozi also said sincerely. "I'm not actually a fan of wearing rags...... Just because there is really no time to change ......"

非攻

四

非攻

Four楚王早知道墨翟是北方的圣贤，一经公输般绍介，立刻接见了，用不着费力。
The King of Chu had long known that Mo Zhai was a sage in the north, and as soon as he was introduced to him, he immediately received him without effort.墨子穿着太短的衣裳，高脚鹭鸶似的，跟公输般走到便殿里，向楚王行过礼，从从容容的开口道：
Mozi wore clothes that were too short, like a tall heron, and walked to the side hall like a public shu, saluted the King of Chu, and said calmly:“现在有一个人，不要轿车，却想偷邻家的破车子；不要锦绣，却想偷邻家的短毡袄；不要米肉，却想偷邻家的糠屑饭：这是怎样的人呢？”
"Now there is a person who doesn't want a car, but wants to steal his neighbor's broken car; I don't want to be splendor, but I want to steal the short felt jacket of the neighbor; I don't want rice and meat, but I want to steal the chaff rice from my neighbor: what kind of person is this? ”“那一定是生了偷摸病了。”楚王率直的说。
"Then he must have a sneaking disease." The King of Chu said bluntly.“楚的地面，”墨子道，“方五千里，宋的却只方五百里，这就像轿车的和破车子；楚有云梦，满是犀兕麋鹿，江汉里的鱼鳖鼋鼍之多，那里都赛不过，宋却是所谓连雉兔鲫鱼也没有的，这就像米肉的和糠屑饭；楚有长松文梓楠木豫章，宋却没有大树，这就像锦绣的和短毡袄。所以据臣看来，王吏的攻宋，和这是同类的。”
"The ground of Chu," Mozi said, "is five thousand miles square, but the Song is only five hundred miles square, which is like a car and a broken car; Chu has Yunmeng, full of rhinoceroses and elk, and there are so many fish, turtles, and toads in Jianghan, but Song is the so-called pheasant rabbit crucian carp, which is like rice meat and bran rice; Chu has long pines, Wen Zi Nanmu Yuzhang, but Song has no big trees, which is like brocade and short felt jackets. Therefore, in my opinion, Wang Li's attack on the Song Dynasty is of the same kind. ”“确也不错！”楚王点头说。“不过公输般已经给我在造云梯，总得去攻的了。”
"It's really good!" The King of Chu nodded and said. "But Gongshu has already built a ladder for me, so I have to attack."“不过成败也还是说不定的。”墨子道。“只要有木片，现在就可以试一试。”
"But success or failure is still uncertain." Mozi said. "As long as you have wood chips, you can try it now."楚王是一位爱好新奇的王，非常高兴，便教侍臣赶快去拿木片来。墨子却解下自己的皮带，弯作弧形，向着公输子，算是城；把几十片木片分作两份，一份留下，一份交与公输子，便是攻和守的器具。
The King of Chu was a king who loved novelty, and he was very happy, so he taught his attendants to get the wood chips quickly. Mozi untied his belt, bent it into an arc, and pointed towards Gongshuzi, which was a city; Divide dozens of pieces of wood into two parts, one is kept, and the other is handed over to Gongshuzi, which is the tool for offense and defense.于是他们俩各各拿着木片，像下棋一般，开始斗起来了，攻的木片一进，守的就一架，这边一退，那边就一招。不过楚王和侍臣，却一点也看不懂。
So the two of them each held a piece of wood, like playing chess, and began to fight. However, the King of Chu and his courtiers couldn't understand it at all.只见这样的一进一退，一共有九回，大约是攻守各换了九种的花样。这之后，公输般歇手了。墨子就把皮带的弧形改向了自己，好像这回是由他来进攻。也还是一进一退的支架着，然而到第三回，墨子的木片就进了皮带的弧线里面了。
I saw that there were a total of nine times in total, about nine tricks for offense and defense. After that, he stopped like a public loser. Mozi changed the arc of the belt to himself, as if he was attacking this time. It was still supported in advance and backward, but in the third time, Mozi's wood chip entered the arc of the belt.楚王和侍臣虽然莫明其妙，但看见公输般首先放下木片，脸上露出扫兴的神色，就知道他攻守两面，全都失败了。
Although the King of Chu and his courtiers didn't understand it, when they saw Gongshu first put down the wooden pieces and showed a disappointed look on his face, they knew that he had failed on both sides of the offensive and defensive sides.楚王也觉得有些扫兴。
The King of Chu also felt a little disappointed.“我知道怎么赢你的，”停了一会，公输般讪讪的说。“但是我不说。”
"I know how to win you," he said after a pause, sneering like a public loser. "But I don't say it."“我也知道你怎么赢我的，”墨子却镇静的说。“但是我不说。”
"I also know how you won me," Mozi said calmly. "But I don't say it."“你们说的是些什么呀？”楚王惊讶着问道。
"What are you talking about?" The King of Chu asked in surprise.“公输子的意思，”墨子旋转身去，回答道，“不过想杀掉我，以为杀掉我，宋就没有人守，可以攻了。然而我的学生禽滑釐等三百人，已经拿了我的守御的器械，在宋城上，等候着楚国来的敌人。就是杀掉我，也还是攻不下的！”
"Gongshuzi's meaning," Mozi turned around and replied, "But if you want to kill me, you think that if you kill me, there will be no one to defend Song, and you can attack." However, my student Qin Huali and three hundred others had already taken my defensive equipment and were waiting for the enemy from Chu on the Song city. Even if you kill me, you still can't capture it! ”“真好法子！”楚王感动的说。“那么，我也就不去攻宋罢。”
"What a good idea!" The King of Chu said with emotion. "Then, I won't attack Song."

非攻

五

非攻

Five墨子说停了攻宋之后，原想即刻回往鲁国的，但因为应该换还公输般借他的衣裳，就只好再到他的寓里去。时候已是下午，主客都很觉得肚子饿，主人自然坚留他吃午饭——或者已经是夜饭，还劝他宿一宵。
Mozi said that after stopping the attack on Song, he originally wanted to return to Lu immediately, but because he should return his clothes like a public shu, he had to go back to his residence. It was afternoon, and the host and guest felt hungry, so the host naturally insisted on keeping him for lunch - or it was already a supper meal, and advised him to stay overnight.“走是总得今天就走的，”墨子说。“明年再来，拿我的书来请楚王看一看。”
"If you leave, you have to leave today," Mozi said. "Come back next year and bring my book to the King of Chu to take a look."“你还不是讲些行义么？”公输般道。“劳形苦心，扶危济急，是贱人的东西，大人们不取的。他可是君王呀，老乡！”
"Aren't you talking about some righteousness?" Gongshu said. "Hard work and hard work to help the crisis are the things of the cheap, and the adults do not take them. He's a king, fellow! ”“那倒也不。丝麻米谷，都是贱人做出来的东西，大人们就都要。何况行义呢。”
"That's not true. Silk, hemp, rice, and grain are all things made by bitches, and adults want them. Not to mention righteousness. ”“那可也是的，”公输般高兴的说。“我没有见你的时候，想取宋；一见你，即使白送我宋国，如果不义，我也不要了……”
"That's true," Gongshu said happily. "When I didn't see you, I wanted to take Song; When I see you, even if I send me to the Song Kingdom for nothing, if it is unjust, I don't want it......“那可是我真送了你宋国了。”墨子也高兴的说。“你如果一味行义，我还要送你天下哩！”
"That's why I really sent you to the Song Kingdom." Mozi also said happily. "If you blindly do righteousness, I will give you the world!"当主客谈笑之间，午餐也摆好了，有鱼，有肉，有酒。墨子不喝酒，也不吃鱼，只吃了一点肉。公输般独自喝着酒，看见客人不大动刀匕，过意不去，只好劝他吃辣椒：
While the host and guests were chatting and laughing, lunch was also set up, with fish, meat, and wine. Mozi did not drink or eat fish, but only a little meat. Gongshu was drinking alone, and when he saw that the guest did not use a knife and dagger, he was reluctant to go, so he had to persuade him to eat chili:“请呀请呀！”他指着辣椒酱和大饼，恳切的说，“你尝尝，这还不坏。大葱可不及我们那里的肥……”
"Please, please!" He pointed to the chili sauce and flatbread and said earnestly, "You try it, it's not bad." Green onions are not as fat as we have ......."公输般喝过几杯酒，更加高兴了起来。
After drinking a few glasses of wine, he became even happier.“我舟战有拒，你的义也有拒么？”他问道。
"I have  rejection in naval battles, and do you also have  rejection?" He asked.“我这义的拒，比你那舟战的拒好。”墨子坚决的回答说。“我用爱来，用恭来拒。不用爱，是不相亲的，不用恭拒，是要油滑的，不相亲而又油滑，马上就离散。所以互相爱，互相恭，就等于互相利。现在你用去人，人也用来你，你用拒去拒人，人也用拒来拒你，互相，互相拒，也就等于互相害了。所以我这义的拒，比你那舟战的拒好。”
"My righteous  refusal is better than your  rejection." Mozi replied resolutely. "I use love to , and I use respect to reject. You don't have to love , you don't have to go on a blind date, you don't need to be respectful, you have to be oily, you don't want to be close and smooth, and you will be separated immediately. Therefore, loving and respecting each other is equivalent to mutual benefit. Now you use  to  people, people use  to  you, you use rejection to reject people, people use rejection to reject you,  to each other, reject each other, which is equivalent to harming each other. So my righteous  rejection is better than your  rejection. ”“但是，老乡，你一行义，可真几乎把我的饭碗敲碎了！”公输般碰了一个钉子之后，改口说，但也大约很有了一些酒意：他其实是不会喝酒的。
"But, fellow man, you are righteous, but you really almost smashed my rice bowl!" After touching a nail like a gongshu, he changed his words, but he was also very drunk: he actually couldn't drink.“但也比敲碎宋国的所有饭碗好。”
"But it's better than smashing all the jobs in the Song Kingdom."“可是我以后只好做玩具了。老乡，你等一等，我请你看一点玩意儿。”
"But I have to make toys in the future. Fellow man, wait a minute, I'll ask you to see some things. ”他说着就跳起来，跑进后房去，好像是在翻箱子。不一会，又出来了，手里拿着一只木头和竹片做成的喜鹊，交给墨子，口里说道：
As he spoke, he jumped up and ran into the back room, as if he was rummaging through boxes. After a while, he came out again, holding a magpie made of wood and bamboo chips in his hand, handed it to Mozi, and said:“只要一开，可以飞三天。这倒还可以说是极巧的。”
"As long as it is opened, it can fly for three days. This can be said to be a great coincidence. ”“可是还不及木匠的做车轮，”墨子看了一看，就放在席子上，说。“他削三寸的木头，就可以载重五十石。有利于人的，就是巧，就是好，不利于人的，就是拙，也就是坏的。”
"But it's not as good as a carpenter's wheel," Mozi looked at it, put it on the mat, and said. "He can carry fifty stones of wood by cutting three inches of wood. What is beneficial to people is coincidence, which is good, and what is not conducive to people, is clumsy, that is, bad. ”“哦，我忘记了，”公输般又碰了一个钉子，这才醒过来。“早该知道这正是你的话。”
"Oh, I forgot," Gongshu touched another nail before waking up. "I should have known that this is exactly what you said."“所以你还是一味的行义，”墨子看着他的眼睛，诚恳的说，“不但巧，连天下也是你的了。真是打扰了你大半天。我们明年再见罢。”
"So you still blindly do righteousness," Mozi looked into his eyes and said sincerely, "Not only is it a coincidence, but the world is also yours." It really bothered you for most of the day. We'll see you next year. ”墨子说着，便取了小包裹，向主人告辞；公输般知道他是留不住的，只得放他走。送他出了大门之后，回进屋里来，想了一想，便将云梯的模型和木鹊都塞在后房的箱子里。
Mozi said, took the small package and said goodbye to the master; Gongshu knew that he couldn't keep him, so he had to let him go. After sending him out of the gate, he went back into the house, thought about it, and stuffed the model of the ladder and the wooden magpie into the box in the back room.墨子在归途上，是走得较慢了，一则力乏，二则脚痛，三则干粮已经吃完，难免觉得肚子饿，四则事情已经办妥，不像来时的匆忙。然而比来时更晦气：一进宋国界，就被搜检了两回；走近都城，又遇到募捐救国队，募去了破包袱；到得南关外，又遭着大雨，到城门下想避避雨，被两个执戈的巡兵赶开了，淋得一身湿，从此鼻子塞了十多天。
On the way home, Mozi walked slower, one was weak, the second was sore feet, the third was that the dry food had been eaten, and it was inevitable that he would feel hungry, and the fourth thing was done, not like the hurry when he came. However, it was more unlucky than when it came: as soon as it entered the Song border, it was searched twice; approaching the capital, he encountered the fundraising and national salvation team, and raised a burden; When I arrived outside the South Pass, it rained heavily, and I went to the city gate to take shelter from the rain, but I was driven away by two patrolmen with weapons, and I was soaked, and my nose was stuffed for more than ten days.一九三四年八月作。
Created in August 1934.

起死

起死

起死

He died（一大片荒地。处处有些土冈，最高的不过六七尺。没有树木。遍地都是杂乱的蓬草；草间有一条人马踏成的路径。离路不远，有一个水溜。远处望见房屋。）
(A large wasteland.) There are some earthen hills everywhere, the highest of which is only six or seven feet. There are no trees. There is a mess of weeds everywhere; There is a path in the grass that people and horses step on. Not far from the road, there is a water slip. Houses can be seen in the distance. ）庄子——（黑瘦面皮，花白的络腮胡子，道冠，布袍，拿着马鞭，上。）出门没有水喝，一下子就觉得口渴。口渴可不是玩意儿呀，真不如化为蝴蝶。可是这里也没有花儿呀，……哦！海子在这里了，运气，运气！（他跑到水溜旁边，拨开浮萍，用手掬起水来，喝了十几口。）唔，好了。慢慢的上路。（走着，向四处看，）阿呀！一个髑髅。这是怎的？
Zhuangzi - (Black and thin skin, white beard, Taoist crown, cloth robe, holding a riding whip, up.) When I went out without water, I felt thirsty all of a sudden. Thirst is not a thing, it is really better to turn into a butterfly. But there are no flowers here,...... Oh! Haizi is here, luck, luck! (He ran to the side of the water slider, pushed aside the duckweed, scooped up the water with his hands, and took more than a dozen sips.) Well, okay. Slowly hit the road. (walking, looking around,) A skeleton. How is this?（用马鞭在蓬草间拨了一拨，敲着，说：）
(I used a riding whip to pluck between the grass, knocked on it, and said:)您是贪生怕死，倒行逆施，成了这样的呢？（橐橐。）还是失掉地盘，吃着板刀，成了这样的呢？（橐橐。）还是闹得一榻胡涂，对不起父母妻子，成了这样的呢？（橐橐。）您不知道自杀是弱者的行为吗？（橐橐橐！）还是您没有饭吃，没有衣穿，成了这样的呢？（橐橐。）还是年纪老了，活该死掉，成了这样的呢？（橐橐。）还是……唉，这倒是我胡涂，好像在做戏了。那里会回答。好在离楚国已经不远，用不着忙，还是请司命大神复他的形，生他的肉，和他谈谈闲天，再给他重回家乡，骨肉团聚罢。（放下马鞭，朝着东方，拱两手向天，提高了喉咙，大叫起来：）
Are you greedy for life and afraid of death, and you have become like this? (Tuo. Or did you lose your territory and eat a knife and become like this? (Tuo. Or is it a mess, sorry for your parents and wife, and it has become like this? (Tuo. Don't you know that suicide is the act of the weak? (Tuo Tu Tuo! Or did you have no food to eat, no clothes to wear, and became like this? (Tuo. Or is it that he is old and deserves to die, and it has become like this? (Tuo. Or ...... Alas, this is my foolishness, as if I am acting on a show. There will be an answer. Fortunately, it is not far from the Chu state, so there is no need to be busy, so I still ask the god of life to restore his form, give birth to his flesh, talk to him about leisure, and then return him to his hometown and reunite with his flesh and blood. (Put down the riding whip, face east, arch your hands to the sky, raise your throat, and shout :)至心朝礼，司命大天尊！……
Sincere worship, the great Heavenly Lord! ……（一阵阴风，许多蓬头的，秃头的，瘦的，胖的，男的，女的，老的，少的鬼魂出现。）
(A gust of wind blows, and many unkempt, bald, thin, fat, male, female, old, and young ghosts appear.) ）鬼魂——庄周，你这胡涂虫！花白了胡子，还是想不通。死了没有四季，也没有主人公。天地就是春秋，做皇帝也没有这么轻松。还是莫管闲事罢，快到楚国去干你自家的运动。……
Ghost - Zhuang Zhou, you nonsense! The beard is gray, but I still can't figure it out. There are no seasons and no protagonists when you die. Heaven and earth are spring and autumn, and being an emperor is not so easy. Don't mind your own business, go to Chu and do your own sports. ……庄子——你们才是胡涂鬼，死了也还是想不通。要知道活就是死，死就是活呀，奴才也就是主人公。我是达性命之源的，可不受你们小鬼的运动。
Zhuangzi - You are fools, and you still can't figure it out even if you die. You must know that life is death, death is life, and the servant is the protagonist. I am the source of life, but I am not subject to the movement of you little devils.鬼魂——那么，就给你当场出丑……
Ghosts - then, make a fool of yourself on the spot......庄子——楚王的圣旨在我头上，更不怕你们小鬼的起哄！（又拱两手向天，提高了喉咙，大叫起来：）
Zhuangzi - the holy purpose of the King of Chu is on my head, and I am not afraid of the coaxing of you little ghosts! (He arched his hands to the sky, raised his throat, and shouted:)至心朝礼，司命大天尊！
Sincere worship, the great Heavenly Lord!天地玄黄，宇宙洪荒。日月盈昃，辰宿列张。
Heaven and earth are dark and yellow, and the universe is vast and desolate. The sun and moon are full and waning, and the stars and stars are arranged in arrangements.赵钱孙李，周吴郑王。冯秦褚卫，姜沈韩杨。
赵钱孙李，周吴郑王。 冯秦褚卫，姜沈韩杨。太上老君急急如律令！敕！敕！敕！
太上老君急急如律令！敕！敕！敕！（一阵清风，司命大神道冠布袍，黑瘦面皮，花白的络腮胡子，手执马鞭，在东方的朦胧中出现。鬼魂全都隐去。）
(A gust of breeze, the great shrine of life appeared in the haze of the east, wearing a cloth robe, a black and thin face, a gray beard, and holding a riding whip.) All the ghosts disappeared. ）司命——庄周，你找我，又要闹什么玩意儿了？喝够了水，不安分起来了吗？
Si Ming - Zhuang Zhou, what are you going to do with me again? Have you drunk enough water and are you restless?庄子——臣是见楚王去的，路经此地，看见一个空髑髅，却还存着头样子。该有父母妻子的罢，死在这里了，真是呜呼哀哉，可怜得很。所以恳请大神复他的形，还他的肉，给他活转来，好回家乡去。
Zhuangzi - The minister saw the King of Chu, and when he passed by this place, he saw an empty skeleton, but it still had a head. There should be parents and wives, they died here, it's really sad, it's very pitiful. Therefore, I beg the great god to restore his form, return his flesh, and bring him back to life so that he can return to his hometown.司命——哈哈！这也不是真心话，你是肚子还没饱就找闲事做。认真不像认真，玩耍又不像玩耍。还是走你的路罢，不要和我来打岔。要知道“死生有命”，我也碍难随便安排。
Destiny - haha! This is not the truth, you are looking for idle things to do before you are full. Serious is not like being serious, and playing is not like playing. It's better to go your way and don't interrupt me." You must know that "life and death are fated", and I will arrange it casually.庄子——大神错矣。其实那里有什么死生。我庄周曾经做梦变了蝴蝶，是一只飘飘荡荡的蝴蝶，醒来成了庄周，是一个忙忙碌碌的庄周。究竟是庄周做梦变了蝴蝶呢，还是蝴蝶做梦变了庄周呢，可是到现在还没有弄明白。这样看来，又安知道这髑髅不是现在正活着，所谓活了转来之后，倒是死掉了呢？请大神随随便便，通融一点罢。做人要圆滑，做神也不必迂腐的。
Zhuangzi - the great god is wrong. In fact, there is life and death there. My Zhuang Zhou once dreamed of becoming a butterfly, a fluttering butterfly, and woke up to become Zhuang Zhou, a busy Zhuang Zhou. Whether Zhuang Zhou dreamed of becoming a butterfly, or whether the butterfly dreamed of changing Zhuang Zhou, but it has not been figured out so far. From this point of view, You An knew that this skeleton was not alive now, but after the so-called revival, it was dead? Please be casual and accommodating. Be tactful, and you don't have to be pedantic to be a god.司命——（微笑，）你也还是能说不能行，是人而非神……那么，也好，给你试试罢。
Si Ming - (smiles,) You can still say that you can't do it, it's a human rather than a god...... So, okay, give it a try for you.（司命用马鞭向蓬中一指。同时消失了。所指的地方，发出一道火光，跳起一个汉子来。）
(Siming pointed at the weeds with his riding whip.) At the same time, it disappeared. At the place he pointed to, a fire emitted and a man jumped up. ）汉子——（大约三十岁左右，体格高大，紫色脸，像是乡下人，全身赤条条的一丝不挂。用拳头揉了一通眼睛之后，定一定神，看见了庄子，）哙？
Man - (About thirty years old, tall physique, purple face, like a countryman, naked all over his body. After rubbing his eyes with his fist, he calmed down and saw Zhuangzi,) Huh?庄子——哙？（微笑着走近去，看定他，）你是怎么的？
Zhuangzi - Huh? (Smiled and approached, looked at him,) What's wrong with you?汉子——唉唉，睡着了。你是怎么的？（向两边看，叫了起来，）阿呀，我的包裹和伞子呢？（向自己的身上看，）阿呀呀，我的衣服呢？（蹲了下去。）
The man - alas, fell asleep. How are you? (Looking to both sides, shouting) Oh, where is my package and umbrella? (Look at yourself) Ah, where are my clothes? (Squatted down.) ）庄子——你静一静，不要着慌罢。你是刚刚活过来的。你的东西，我看是早已烂掉，或者给人拾去了。
Zhuangzi - Be quiet, don't panic. You just came to life. I think your things have long been rotten or picked up.汉子——你说什么？
Man - what did you say?庄子——我且问你：你姓甚名谁，那里人？
Zhuangzi - Let me ask you: What is your surname, and where are you from?汉子——我是杨家庄的杨大呀。学名叫必恭。
Man - I'm Yang Da from Yangjiazhuang. His scientific name is Bi Gong.庄子——那么，你到这里是来干什么的呢？
Zhuangzi - So, what are you here for?汉子——探亲去的呀，不提防在这里睡着了。（着急起来，）我的衣服呢？我的包裹和伞子呢？
Man - I went to visit relatives, don't be careful and fall asleep here. (Anxious,) Where's my clothes? What about my package and umbrella?庄子——你静一静，不要着慌罢——我且问你：你是什么时候的人？
Zhuangzi - be quiet, don't panic - let me ask you: When are you from?汉子——（诧异，）什么？……什么叫作“什么时候的人”？……我的衣服呢？……
Man - (surprised,) What? …… What is "when people"? …… What about my clothes? ……庄子——啧啧，你这人真是胡涂得要死的角儿——专管自己的衣服，真是一个澈底的利己主义者。你这“人”尚且没有弄明白，那里谈得到你的衣服呢？所以我首先要问你：你是什么时候的人？唉唉，你不懂。……那么，（想了一想，）我且问你：你先前活着的时候，村子里出了什么故事？
Zhuangzi - tsk, you are really a foolish corner - in charge of your own clothes, you are really a complete egoist. You "people" haven't figured it out yet, where can you talk about your clothes? So I want to ask you first: When are you from? Alas, you don't understand. …… So, (after thinking about it) let me ask you: What story happened in the village when you were alive before?汉子——故事吗？有的。昨天，阿二嫂就和七太婆吵嘴。
Man - a story? Some. Yesterday, Ah Er's sister-in-law quarreled with the seventh grandmother.庄子——还欠大！
Zhuangzi - still owed big!汉子——还欠大？……那么，杨小三旌表了孝子……
Man - still owed big? …… So, Yang Xiaosan honored his filial son......庄子——旌表了孝子，确也是一件大事情……不过还是很难查考……（想了一想，）再没有什么更大的事情，使大家因此闹了起来的了吗？
Zhuangzi - commending filial piety, it is indeed a big thing...... But it's still hard to check...... (After thinking about it,) Is there anything bigger that makes everyone make trouble because of this?汉子——闹了起来？……（想着，）哦，有有！那还是三四个月前头，因为孩子们的魂灵，要摄去垫鹿台脚了，真吓得大家鸡飞狗走，赶忙做起符袋来，给孩子们带上……
Man - made a fuss? …… (thinking) Oh, yes, yes! That was three or four months ago, because the children's souls were going to take the deer platform, which really scared everyone, so they hurriedly made talisman bags and brought them to the children......庄子——（出惊，）鹿台？什么时候的鹿台？
Zhuangzi - (surprised,) Lutai? When is Lutai?汉子——就是三四个月前头动工的鹿台。
The man is the deer platform that started construction three or four months ago.庄子——那么，你是纣王的时候死的？这真了不得，你已经死了五百多年了。
Zhuangzi - So, you died when you were the king? This is amazing, you have been dead for more than five hundred years.汉子——（有点发怒，）先生，我和你还是初会，不要开玩笑罢。我不过在这儿睡了一忽，什么死了五百多年。我是有正经事，探亲去的。快还我的衣服，包裹和伞子。我没有陪你玩笑的工夫。
Man - (a little angry,) Sir, you and I are still meeting for the first time, don't joke. I just slept here for a while, and I have been dead for more than five hundred years. I have something serious to do, and I am visiting relatives. Quickly return my clothes, packages and umbrellas. I don't have time to joke with you.庄子——慢慢的，慢慢的，且让我来研究一下。你是怎么睡着的呀？
Zhuangzi - slowly, slowly, let me study it. How did you fall asleep?"汉子——怎么睡着的吗？（想着，）我早上走到这地方，好像头顶上轰的一声，眼前一黑，就睡着了。
Man - how did he fall asleep? I walked to this place in the morning, as if there was a bang above my head, and my eyes went dark, and I fell asleep.庄子——疼吗？
Zhuangzi - Does it hurt?汉子——好像没有疼。
Man - it doesn't seem to hurt.庄子——哦……（想了一想，）哦……我明白了。一定是你在商朝的纣王的时候，独个儿走到这地方，却遇着了断路强盗，从背后给你一闷棍，把你打死，什么都抢走了。现在我们是周朝，已经隔了五百多年，还那里去寻衣服。你懂了没有？
Zhuangzi - Oh...... (thought about it,) Oh...... I understand. It must have been when you were the king of the Shang Dynasty, when you walked to this place alone, but you encountered a robber who broke the road, gave you a stuffy stick from behind, beat you to death, and snatched everything away. Now we are in the Zhou Dynasty, and it has been more than 500 years, and we are still looking for clothes there. Do you understand?汉子——（瞪了眼睛，看着庄子，）我一点也不懂。先生，你还是不要胡闹，还我衣服，包裹和伞子罢。我是有正经事，探亲去的，没有陪你玩笑的工夫！
Man - (staring, looking at Zhuangzi,) I don't understand at all. Sir, don't mess around, just return my clothes, packages and umbrellas. I have serious business, I went to visit relatives, and I don't have time to joke with you!庄子——你这人真是不明道理……
Zhuangzi - You are really unreasonable......汉子——谁不明道理？我不见了东西，当场捉住了你，不问你要，问谁要？（站起来。）
Man - who doesn't know the truth? I lost something, I caught you on the spot, I didn't ask you what you wanted, I asked who I wanted? (Stand up.) ）庄子——（着急，）你再听我讲：你原是一个髑髅，是我看得可怜，请司命大神给你活转来的。你想想看：你死了这许多年，那里还有衣服呢！我现在并不要你的谢礼，你且坐下，和我讲讲纣王那时候……
Zhuangzi - (anxious,) Listen to me again: You were originally a skeleton, I felt sorry for you, and asked the god of life to bring you back to life. Think about it: you have been dead for so many years, and there are still clothes there! I don't want your thank you now, sit down and tell me about the time when King Zhou was ......汉子——胡说！这话，就是三岁小孩子也不会相信的。我可是三十三岁了！（走开来，）你……
Man - nonsense! Even a three-year-old child would not believe this. I'm thirty-three years old! (Walk away,) you......庄子——我可真有这本领。你该知道漆园的庄周的罢。
Zhuangzi - I really have this ability. You should know Zhuang Zhou's in the lacquer garden.汉子——我不知道。就是你真有这本领，又值什么鸟？你把我弄得精赤条条的，活转来又有什么用？叫我怎么去探亲？包裹也没有了……（有些要哭，跑开来拉住了庄子的袖子，）我不相信你的胡说。这里只有你，我当然问你要！我扭你见保甲去！
Man - I don't know. If you really have this ability, what kind of bird is it worth? You made me naked, what's the use of being alive? How do you tell me to visit relatives? The package is gone...... (Some of them were about to cry, and ran away and grabbed Zhuangzi's sleeves.) I don't believe your nonsense. It's just you here, of course I ask you for it!" I'll twist you to see the Baojia!庄子——慢慢的，慢慢的，我的衣服旧了，很脆，拉不得。你且听我几句话：你先不要专想衣服罢，衣服是可有可无的，也许是有衣服对，也许是没有衣服对。鸟有羽，兽有毛，然而王瓜茄子赤条条。此所谓“彼亦一是非，此亦一是非”，你固然不能说没有衣服对，然而你又怎么能说有衣服对呢？……
Zhuangzi - Slowly, slowly, my clothes are old, very brittle, and I can't pull them. Listen to me: Don't just think about clothes, clothes are dispensable, maybe there are clothes, maybe no clothes. Birds have feathers, beasts have feathers, but the king melon and eggplant are red stripes. Of course, you can't say that there are no clothes, but how can you say that there are clothes? ……汉子——（发怒，）放你妈的屁！不还我的东西，我先揍死你！（一手捏了拳头，举起来，一手去揪庄子。）
Man - (angry,) Fart you! If you don't return my things, I will beat you to death first!" (Clenched a fist with one hand, raised it, and grabbed Zhuangzi with the other.) ）庄子——（窘急，招架着，）你敢动粗！放手！要不然，我就请司命大神来还你一个死！
Zhuangzi - (embarrassed, parrying,) You dare to be rough! Let go! Otherwise, I will ask the God of Destiny to give you a death!"汉子——（冷笑着退开，）好，你还我一个死罢。要不然，我就要你还我的衣服，伞子和包裹，里面是五十二个圜钱，斤半白糖，二斤南枣……
Man - (sneered and withdrew,) Okay, you give me back to death. Otherwise, I will ask you to return my clothes, umbrellas and packages, which contain fifty-two round coins, half a pound of sugar, and two pounds of southern jujubes......庄子——（严正地，）你不反悔？
Zhuangzi - (solemnly,) You don't regret it?汉子——小舅子才反悔！
Man - brother-in-law regrets it!庄子——（决绝地，）那就是了。既然这么胡涂，还是送你还原罢。（转脸朝着东方，拱两手向天，提高了喉咙，大叫起来：）
Zhuangzi - (Decisive,) That's it. Since it's so nonsense, I'll send you to restore it. (Turning his face to the east, arching his hands to the sky, raising his throat, and screaming :)至心朝礼，司命大天尊！
Sincere worship, the great Heavenly Lord!天地玄黄，宇宙洪荒。日月盈昃，辰宿列张。
Heaven and earth are dark and yellow, and the universe is vast and desolate. The sun and moon are full and waning, and the stars and stars are arranged in arrangements.赵钱孙李，周吴郑王。冯秦褚卫，姜沈韩杨。
赵钱孙李，周吴郑王。 冯秦褚卫，姜沈韩杨。太上老君急急如律令！敕！敕！敕！
太上老君急急如律令！敕！敕！敕！（毫无影响，好一会。）
（毫无影响，好一会。 ）天地玄黄！
天地玄黄！太上老君！敕！敕！敕！……敕！
太上老君！敕！敕！敕！…… 敕！（毫无影响，好一会。）
（毫无影响，好一会。 ）（庄子向周围四顾，慢慢的垂下手来。）
(Zhuangzi looked around and slowly lowered his hand.) ）汉子——死了没有呀？
Man - are you dead?庄子——（颓唐地，）不知怎的，这回可不灵……
Zhuangzi - (Decadent Tangdi,) Somehow, this time it doesn't work......汉子——（扑上前，）那么，不要再胡说了。赔我的衣服！
Man - (pounces forward,) Then, stop talking nonsense. Lose my clothes!庄子——（退后，）你敢动手？这不懂哲理的野蛮！
Zhuangzi - (step back,) Do you dare to do it? This is a barbarism that doesn't understand philosophy!汉子——（揪住他，）你这贼骨头！你这强盗军师！我先剥你的道袍，拿你的马，赔我……
Man - (grabbed him,) You thief bone! You robber military strategist!" I will first strip you of your Taoist robe, take your horse, and compensate me......（庄子一面支撑着，一面赶紧从道袍的袖子里摸出警笛来，狂吹了三声。汉子愕然，放慢了动作。不多久，从远处跑来一个巡士。）
(While supporting it, Zhuangzi quickly took out the siren from the sleeve of his Taoist robe and blew it three times.) The man was stunned and slowed down. Not long after, a patrol officer came running from a distance. ）巡士——（且跑且喊，）带住他！不要放！（他跑近来，是一个鲁国大汉，身材高大，制服制帽，手执警棍，面赤无须。）带住他！这舅子！……
Patrolman - (running and shouting,) Take him! Don't put it! (He ran closer, a big man from Lu State, tall, wearing a hat, holding a baton, and a red face and no beard.) Take him! This brother-in-law! ……汉子——（又揪紧了庄子，）带住他！这舅子！……
Man - (grabbed Zhuangzi again,) Hold him! This brother-in-law! ……（巡士跑到，抓住庄子的衣领，一手举起警棍来。汉子放手，微弯了身子，两手掩着小肚。）
(The patrolman ran over, grabbed Zhuangzi's collar, and raised his baton in one hand.) The man let go, bent slightly, and covered his belly with both hands. ）庄子——（托住警棍，歪着头，）l这算什么？
Zhuangzi - (holding the baton, tilting his head,) l What is this?巡士——这算什么？哼！你自己还不明白？
Inspector - what is this? Hum! You don't understand it yourself?庄子——（愤怒，）怎么叫了你来，你倒来抓我？
Zhuangzi - (angry,) Why did you call you here, and you came to arrest me?巡士——什么？
Inspector - what?庄子——我吹了警笛……
Zhuangzi - I blew the siren......巡士——你抢了人家的衣服，还自己吹警笛，这昏蛋！
Patrol - You robbed other people's clothes and blew the siren yourself, you fool!庄子——我是过路的，见他死在这里，救了他，他倒缠住我，说我拿了他的东西了。你看看我的样子，可是抢人东西的？
Zhuangzi - I was passing by, and when I saw him dying here, I saved him, but he pestered me and said that I had taken his things. Look at me, but I'm robbing people's things?巡士——（收回警棍，）“知人知面不知心”，谁知道。到局里去罢。
Patrol - (retract the baton,) "Know the face but not the heart", who knows. Go to the bureau.庄子——那可不成。我得赶路，见楚王去。
Zhuangzi - That's not possible. I have to hurry and see the King of Chu.巡士——（吃惊，松手，细看了庄子的脸，）那么，您是漆……
Patrol - (surprised, let go, looked at Zhuangzi's face carefully,) So, are you Qi ......庄子——（高兴起来，）不错！我正是漆园吏庄周。您怎么知道的？
Zhuangzi - (happy,) Not bad! I am Zhuang Zhou, a lacquer garden official. How do you know?巡士——咱们的局长这几天就常常提起您老，说您老要上楚国发财去了，也许从这里经过的。敝局长也是一位隐士，带便兼办一点差使，很爱读您老的文章，读《齐物论》，什么“方生方死，方死方生，方可方不可，方不可方可”，真写得有劲，真是上流的文章，真好！您老还是到敝局里去歇歇罢。
Inspector - Our director has often mentioned your old age in the past few days, saying that you are always going to Chu to make a fortune, maybe passing through here. Our director is also a hermit, with a little errand, I love to read your old articles, read "Qiwu Lun", what "Fang Sheng Fang Fang Fang, Fang, Fang Ke Fang Fang, Fang", really written vigorously, really a high-class article, really good! You should go to our bureau to rest.（汉子吃惊，退进蓬草丛中，蹲下去。）
(The man was surprised, retreated into the grass, and squatted down.) ）庄子——今天已经不早，我要赶路，不能耽搁了。还是回来的时候，再去拜访贵局长罢。
Zhuangzi - It's not early today, I'm on my way, I can't delay. Or when you come back, go visit your director again."（庄子且说且走，爬在马上，正想加鞭，那汉子突然跳出草丛，跑上去拉住了马嚼子。巡士也追上去，拉住汉子的臂膊。）
(Zhuangzi said and walked, climbed on the horse, and was about to whip when the man suddenly jumped out of the grass and ran up to grab the horse's chew.) The patrol officer also chased after him and grabbed the man's arm. ）庄子——你还缠什么？
Zhuangzi - what are you still pestering?汉子——你走了，我什么也没有，叫我怎么办？（看着巡士，）您瞧，巡士先生……
Man - you are gone, I have nothing, what should I do? (Looking at the inspector,) Look, Mr. Inspector......巡士——（搔着耳朵背后，）这模样，可真难办……但是，先生……我看起来，（看着庄子，）还是您老富裕一点，赏他一件衣服，给他遮遮羞……
Patrol - (scratching the back of his ears,) This kind of appearance is really difficult to handle...... But, sir...... I see, (looking at Zhuangzi,) It's better for you to be richer, reward him with a piece of clothing, and cover his shame......庄子——那自然可以的，衣服本来并非我有。不过我这回要去见楚王，不穿袍子，不行，脱了小衫，光穿一件袍子，也不行……
Zhuangzi - Of course, the clothes were not originally mine. But this time I want to see the King of Chu, I don't wear a robe, no, I take off my shirt, just wear a robe, I can't do it......巡士——对啦，这实在少不得。（向汉子，）放手！
Inspector - Yes, this is really indispensable. Let go!汉子——我要去探亲……
Man - I'm going to visit relatives......巡士——胡说！再麻烦，看我带你到局里去！（举起警棍，）滚开！
Inspector - nonsense! If it's troublesome, I'll take you to the bureau!" (Raise the baton,) Get away!（汉子退走，巡士追着，一直到乱蓬里。）
(The man retreated, and the patrolman chased after him until he reached the mess.) ）庄子——再见再见。
Zhuangzi - goodbye, goodbye.巡士——再见再见。您老走好哪！
Patrolman - goodbye, goodbye. How are you going!（庄子在马上打了一鞭，走动了。巡士反背着手，看他渐跑渐远，没入尘头中，这才慢慢的回转身，向原来的路上踱去。）
(Zhuangzi whipped the horse and walked around.) The patrol officer turned his back and watched him run farther and farther away, submerged in the dust, and then slowly turned around and paced towards the original road. ）（汉子突然从草丛中跳出来，拉住巡士的衣角。）
(The man suddenly jumped out of the grass and grabbed the corner of the patrolman's clothes.) ）巡士——干吗？
Patrol - what are you doing?汉子——我怎么办呢？
Man - what should I do?巡士——这我怎么知道。
Inspector - How do I know this?汉子——我要去探亲……
Man - I'm going to visit relatives......巡士——你探去就是了。
Inspector - You can go out.汉子——我没有衣服呀。
Man - I have no clothes.巡士——没有衣服就不能探亲吗？
Inspector - can't you visit relatives without clothes?汉子——你放走了他。现在你又想溜走了，我只好找你想法子。不问你，问谁呢？你瞧，这叫我怎么活下去！
Man - you let him go. Now that you want to slip away again, I have to find you to think of an idea. If you don't ask you, who do you ask? Look, how can I survive!巡士——可是我告诉你：自杀是弱者的行为呀！
Inspector - But let me tell you: suicide is the act of the weak!汉子——那么，你给我想法子！
Man - then, give me an idea!巡士——（摆脱着衣角，）我没有法子想！
Inspector - (getting rid of the corner of his clothes,) I have no way to think about it!汉子——（缒住巡士的袖子，）那么，你带我到局里去！
Man - (tie the patrolman's sleeve,) Then, you take me to the bureau!巡士——（摆脱着袖子，）这怎么成。赤条条的，街上怎么走。放手！
Inspector - (getting rid of his sleeves,) How can this be done. How to walk on the street. Let go!汉子——那么，你借我一条裤子！
Man - then, you lend me a pair of pants!巡士——我只有这一条裤子，借给了你，自己不成样子了。（竭力的摆脱着，）不要胡闹！放手！
Inspector - I only have these pants, I lent you them, and I don't look like myself. Don't mess around! Let go!汉子——（揪住巡士的颈子，）我一定要跟你去！
Man - (grabbed the patrolman's neck,) I must go with you!巡士——（窘急，）不成！
Inspector - (embarrassed,) No!汉子——那么，我不放你走！
Man - then, I won't let you go!巡士——你要怎么样呢？
Inspector - What do you want?汉子——我要你带我到局里去！
Man - I want you to take me to the bureau!巡士——这真是……带你去做什么用呢？不要捣乱了。放手！要不然……（竭力的挣扎。）
Inspector - This is really ...... What is it for you to take you for? Don't make trouble. Let go! Otherwise...... (Struggling hard.) ）汉子——（揪得更紧，）要不然，我不能探亲，也不能做人了。二斤南枣，斤半白糖……你放走了他，我和你拚命……
Man - (Pulling tighter,) Otherwise, I wouldn't be able to visit relatives or be a human being. Two pounds of southern dates, one and a half pounds of sugar...... You let him go, and I will fight with you......巡士——（挣扎着，）不要捣乱了！放手！要不然……要不然……（说着，一面摸出警笛，狂吹起来。）
Inspector - (struggling,) Don't make trouble! Let go! Otherwise...... Otherwise...... (As he spoke, he took out the siren and blew it wildly.) ）一九三五年十二月作。
Created in December 1935.

封面

书名页

版权信息

图书在版编目（CIP）数据
Books in Print (CIP) data朝花夕拾／鲁迅著．—南京：译林出版社，2013.11
Morning Flowers and Evening Pickup/Lu Xun.—Nanjing: Yilin Publishing House, 2013.11（鲁迅自编文集）
(Lu Xun's self-edited anthology)ISBN 978-7-5447-4371-6
ISBN 978-7-5447-4371-6Ⅰ．①朝…　Ⅱ．①鲁…　Ⅲ．①鲁迅散文—散文集　Ⅳ．①I210.4
I..(1) Morning... II..(1) Lu... III..(1) Lu Xun's Prose—Essay Collection IV..(1)I210.4中国版本图书馆CIP数据核字（2013）第211112号
China Version Library CIP Data Verification (2013) No. 211112书　　名　朝花夕拾
Book Title Morning Flowers and Evening Pickups作　　者　鲁　迅
Author: Lu Xun责任编辑　王振华
Editor-in-charge: Wang Zhenhua特约编辑　刘　佳
Special editor Liu Jia出版发行　凤凰出版传媒股份有限公司
Published and distributed by Phoenix Publishing and Media Co., Ltd译林出版社
Yilin Publishing House出版社地址　南京市湖南路1号A楼，邮编：210009
Publisher's address Building A, No. 1 Hunan Road, Nanjing, Zip Code: 210009电子信箱　yilin@yilin.com
E-mail yilin@yilin.com出版社网址　http://www.yilin.com
Publisher website http://www.yilin.com印　　刷　北京凯达印务有限公司
Printing Beijing Kaida Printing Co., Ltd开　　本　787×1092毫米　　1/32
Volume 787×1092 mm 1/32印　　张　3.125
Print 3.125字　　数　59千字
Word count: 59,000 words版　　次　2013年11月第1版　2013年11月第1次印刷
Edition November 2013 1st edition November 2013 1st printing书　　号　ISBN 978-7-5447-4371-6
ISBN 978-7-5447-4371-6定　　价　10.00元
The price is 10.00 yuan译林版图书若有印装错误可向承印厂调换

If there are printing errors in the translated version of the book, it can be exchanged with the printing factory

Table of Contents

目录

Table of Contents

directory小引 Small quote
狗·猫·鼠 Dog, cat, mouse
阿长与《山海经》 A Chang and the "Classic of Mountains and Seas"
《二十四孝图》 "Twenty-Four Filial Piety Pictures"
五猖会 Five Rampant Society
无常 impermanence
从百草园到三味书屋 From Baicao Garden to Sanwei Bookstore
父亲的病 Father's illness
琐记 Trivia
藤野先生 Mr. Fujino
范爱农 Fan Ainong
后记 postscript
返回总目录 Return to the General Directory

小引

小引

小引

Small quote我常想在纷扰中寻出一点闲静来，然而委实不容易。目前是这么离奇，心里是这么芜杂。一个人做到只剩了回忆的时候，生涯大概总要算是无聊了罢，但有时竟会连回忆也没有。中国的做文章有轨范，世事也仍然是螺旋。前几天我离开中山大学的时候，便想起四个月以前的离开厦门大学；听到飞机在头上鸣叫，竟记得了一年前在北京城上日日旋绕的飞机。我那时还做了一篇短文，叫做《一觉》。现在是，连这“一觉”也没有了。
I often want to find a little leisure in the chaos, but it is not easy. At present, it is so bizarre, and my heart is so complicated. When a person only has memories, his career is probably boring, but sometimes he doesn't even have memories. China's writing is on a regular basis, and the world is still spiral. When I left Sun Yat-sen University a few days ago, I remembered that I left Xiamen University four months ago; Hearing the plane chirping over my head, I actually remembered the plane that circled in Beijing every day a year ago. I also wrote a short article called "One Sleep" at that time. Now, even this "sleep" is gone.广州的天气热得真早，夕阳从西窗射入，逼得人只能勉强穿一件单衣。书桌上的一盆“水横枝”，是我先前没有见过的：就是一段树，只要浸在水中，枝叶便青葱得可爱。看看绿叶，编编旧稿，总算也在做一点事。做着这等事，真是虽生之日，犹死之年，很可以驱除炎热的。
The weather in Guangzhou was so hot that the sunset came in through the west window, forcing people to barely wear a single coat. A pot of "water horizontal branches" on the desk is something I have never seen before: it is a tree, as long as it is immersed in water, the branches and leaves are green and cute. Look at the green leaves, compile old drafts, and finally do something. Doing such a thing is really a day of life, a year of death, and it is very good to drive away the heat.前天，已将《野草》编定了；这回便轮到陆续载在《莽原》上的《旧事重提》，我还替他改了一个名称：《朝花夕拾》。带露折花，色香自然要好得多，但是我不能够。便是现在心目中的离奇和芜杂，我也还不能使他即刻幻化，转成离奇和芜杂的文章。或者，他日仰看流云时，会在我的眼前一闪烁罢。
The day before yesterday, "Weeds" was compiled; This time it was the turn of "Revisiting Old Things" that were successively published in "Mangyuan", and I also changed the name for him: "Morning Flowers and Evening Pickups". Flowers with dew are naturally much better, but I can't. Even the bizarre and chaotic in my mind now, I can't make him immediately transform into bizarre and chaotic articles. Or, when I look up at the flowing clouds in the future, it will flicker in front of my eyes.我有一时，曾经屡次忆起儿时在故乡所吃的蔬果：菱角，罗汉豆，茭白，香瓜。凡这些，都是极其鲜美可口的；都曾是使我思乡的蛊惑。后来，我在久别之后尝到了，也不过如此；惟独在记忆上，还有旧来的意味留存。他们也许要哄骗我一生，使我时时反顾。
For a while, I repeatedly remembered the fruits and vegetables I ate in my hometown as a child: water chestnuts, Luo Han beans, wild rice, melon. All of these are extremely delicious; It was a charm that made me feel homesick. Later, I tasted it after a long separation, and it was nothing more than that; Only in memory, there is still the meaning of the past. They may try to trick me into thinking about it all the time.这十篇就是从记忆中抄出来的，与实际容或有些不同，然而我现在只记得是这样。文体大概很杂乱，因为是或作或辍，经了九个月之多。环境也不一：前两篇写于北京寓所的东壁下；中三篇是流离中所作，地方是医院和木匠房；后五篇却在厦门大学的图书馆的楼上，已经是被学者们挤出集团之后了。
These ten articles were copied from memory, and they may be a little different from the actual appearance, but I only remember them now. The style is probably very messy, because it takes as many as nine months to do or stop. The environment is also different: the first two are written under the east wall of the Beijing apartment; The third part of the middle is written in the middle of the displacement, and the place is a hospital and a carpenter's room; The last five articles are upstairs in the library of Xiamen University, after being squeezed out of the group by scholars.一九二七年五月一日，鲁迅于广州白云楼记。
On May 1, 1927, Lu Xun recorded at Baiyun Tower in Guangzhou.

狗·猫·鼠

狗·猫·鼠

狗·猫·鼠

Dog, cat, mouse从去年起，仿佛听得有人说我是仇猫的。那根据自然是在我的那一篇《兔和猫》；这是自画招供，当然无话可说，——但倒也毫不介意。一到今年，我可很有点担心了。我是常不免于弄弄笔墨的，写了下来，印了出去，对于有些人似乎总是搔着痒处的时候少，碰着痛处的时候多。万一不谨，甚而至于得罪了名人或名教授，或者更甚而至于得罪了“负有指导青年责任的前辈”之流，可就危险已极。为什么呢？因为这些大脚色是“不好惹”的。怎地“不好惹”呢？就是怕要浑身发热之后，做一封信登在报纸上，广告道：“看哪！狗不是仇猫的么？鲁迅先生却自己承认是仇猫的，而他还说要打‘落水狗’！”这“逻辑”的奥义，即在用我的话，来证明我倒是狗，于是而凡有言说，全都根本推翻，即使我说二二得四，三三见九，也没有一字不错。这些既然都错，则绅士口头的二二得七，三三见千等等，自然就不错了。
Since last year, it seems that someone has heard someone say that I am a cat hater. That is based on nature in my article "The Rabbit and the Cat"; This is a self-drawn confession, of course, there is nothing to say,—— but I don't mind. This year, I am a little worried. I often can't help but play with pen and ink, write it down, print it out, for some people seem to always scratch the itch less often, touch the pain more often. If you are not careful, you will even offend a celebrity or a famous professor, or even offend the "seniors who are responsible for guiding young people", which can be extremely dangerous. Why? Because these big feet are "not easy to mess with". How can it be "not easy to mess with"? After being afraid of getting hot, he made a letter and published it in the newspaper, advertising: "Look! Aren't dogs cat-hating? Mr. Lu Xun admitted that he hated cats, and he also said that he would fight the 'drowning dog'! The secret of this "logic" is to use my words to prove that I am a dog, so everything that is said is fundamentally overturned, even if I say that two two get four, three three see nine, not a single word is good. Since these are all wrong, the gentleman's verbal two-two is seven, three-three is a thousand, etc., and so on, which is naturally good.我于是就间或留心着查考它们成仇的“动机”。这也并非敢妄学现下的学者以动机来褒贬作品的那些时髦，不过想给自己预先洗刷洗刷。据我想，这在动物心理学家，是用不着费什么力气的，可惜我没有这学问。后来，在覃哈特博士（Dr．O．Dähnhardt）的《自然史底国民童话》里，总算发见了那原因了。据说，是这么一回事：动物们因为要商议要事，开了一个会议，鸟，鱼，兽都齐集了，单是缺了象。大会议定，派伙计去迎接它，拈到了当这差使的阄的就是狗。“我怎么找到那象呢？我没有见过它，也和它不认识。”它问。“那容易，”大众说，“它是驼背的。”狗去了，遇见一匹猫，立刻弓起脊梁来，它便招待，同行，将弓着脊梁的猫介绍给大家道：“象在这里！”但是大家都嗤笑它了。从此以后，狗和猫便成了仇家。
So I occasionally pay attention to the "motives" of their hatred. This is not the fashion that dares to learn from the current scholars who praise and criticize their works with motives, but they want to wash themselves in advance. In my opinion, this does not require much effort for animal psychologists, but unfortunately I do not have this knowledge. Later, in Dr. O. Dähnhardt's "National Fairy Tales of Natural History", the reason was finally discovered. It is said that it is like this: the animals held a meeting because they wanted to discuss important matters, and the birds, fish, and beasts gathered, but the elephant was missing. The meeting decided to send a guy to greet it, and it was the dog who was the messenger. "How did I find the elephant? I have never seen it, and I don't know it. It asked. "It's easy," said the crowd, "and it's hunchbacked. The dog went, met a cat, and immediately arched its spine, and it entertained, walked together, and introduced the cat with the arched spine to everyone and said, "Like here! But everyone laughed at it. Since then, dogs and cats have become enemies.日耳曼人走出森林虽然还不很久，学术文艺却已经很可观，便是书籍的装潢，玩具的工致，也无不令人心爱。独有这一篇童话却实在不漂亮；结怨也结得没有意思。猫的弓起脊梁，并不是希图冒充，故意摆架子的，其咎却在狗的自己没眼力。然而原因也总可以算作一个原因。我的仇猫，是和这大大两样的。
Although the Germanic people have not been out of the forest for a long time, their academic literature and art are already considerable, even the decoration of books and the craftsmanship of toys are all lovely. This fairy tale is really not beautiful; Grudges are also boring. The cat's arched spine is not intended to be pretended to be a deliberate shelf, but the fault lies in the dog's own lack of eyesight. However, the reason can always be counted as a reason. My enemy cat is very different from this.其实人禽之辨，本不必这样严。在动物界，虽然并不如古人所幻想的那样舒适自由，可是噜苏做作的事总比人间少。它们适性任情，对就对，错就错，不说一句分辩话。虫蛆也许是不干净的，但它们并没有自鸣清高；鸷禽猛兽以较弱的动物为饵，不妨说是凶残的罢，但它们从来就没有竖过“公理”“正义”的旗子，使牺牲者直到被吃的时候为止，还是一味佩服赞叹它们。人呢，能直立了，自然是一大进步；能说话了，自然又是一大进步；能写字作文了，自然又是一大进步。然而也就堕落，因为那时也开始了说空话。说空话尚无不可，甚至于连自己也不知道说着违心之论，则对于只能嗥叫的动物，实在免不得“颜厚有忸怩”。假使真有一位一视同仁的造物主，高高在上，那么，对于人类的这些小聪明，也许倒以为多事，正如我们在万生园里，看见猴子翻筋斗，母象请安，虽然往往破颜一笑，但同时也觉得不舒服，甚至于感到悲哀，以为这些多余的聪明，倒不如没有的好罢。然而，既经为人，便也只好“党同伐异”，学着人们的说话，随俗来谈一谈，——辩一辩了。
In fact, the distinction between humans and animals does not have to be so strict. In the animal kingdom, although it is not as comfortable and free as the ancients imagined, Lu Su is always less artificialized than in the human world. They are adaptive and willful, right and wrong, and do not say a word of argument. Maggots may be unclean, but they are not self-explanatory; Fierce birds and beasts use weaker animals as bait, so it can be said that they are ferocious, but they have never raised the banner of "axioms" and "justice", so that the victims still blindly admire and admire them until they are eaten. As for people, being able to stand upright is naturally a great progress; being able to speak is naturally another big improvement; Being able to write and compose is naturally a big improvement. However, it also falls, because then it also begins to speak empty words. There is nothing wrong with empty words, and even if you don't know how to speak against your heart, you can't help but be "shy and embarrassed" for animals that can only howl. If there is really a creator who treats everyone equally, then for these little cleverness of human beings, we may think that it is troublesome, just like when we see monkeys somersaulting and mother elephants greeting each other in the Garden of All Life, although they often smile, but at the same time they also feel uncomfortable, and even feel sad, thinking that these superfluous cleverness is better than nothing. However, since he is a person, he has no choice but to "fight against the differences", learn from people's speech, talk about ,—— debate according to the world.现在说起我仇猫的原因来，自己觉得是理由充足，而且光明正大的。一，它的性情就和别的猛兽不同，凡捕食雀鼠，总不肯一口咬死，定要尽情玩弄，放走，又捉住，捉住，又放走，直待自己玩厌了，这才吃下去，颇与人们的幸灾乐祸，慢慢地折磨弱者的坏脾气相同。二，它不是和狮虎同族的么？可是有这么一副媚态！但这也许是限于天分之故罢，假使它的身材比现在大十倍，那就真不知道它所取的是怎么一种态度。然而，这些口实，仿佛又是现在提起笔来的时候添出来的，虽然也像是当时涌上心来的理由。要说得可靠一点，或者倒不如说不过因为它们配合时候的嗥叫，手续竟有这么繁重，闹得别人心烦，尤其是夜间要看书，睡觉的时候。当这些时候，我便要用长竹竿去攻击它们。狗们在大道上配合时，常有闲汉拿了木棍痛打；我曾见大勃吕该尔（P．Bruegel d．Ä）的一张铜版画Allegorie der Wollust上，也画着这回事，可见这样的举动，是中外古今一致的。自从那执拗的奥国学者弗罗特（S．Freud）提倡了精神分析说——Psychoanalysis，听说章士钊先生是译作“心解”的，虽然简古，可是实在难解得很——以来，我们的名人名教授也颇有隐隐约约，检来应用的了，这些事便不免又要归宿到性欲上去。打狗的事我不管，至于我的打猫，却只因为它们嚷嚷，此外并无恶意，我自信我的嫉妒心还没有这么博大，当现下“动辄获咎”之秋，这是不可不预先声明的。例如人们当配合之前，也很有些手续，新的是写情书，少则一束，多则一捆；旧的是什么“问名”“纳采”，磕头作揖，去年海昌蒋氏在北京举行婚礼，拜来拜去，就十足拜了三天，还印有一本红面子的《婚礼节文》，《序论》里大发议论道：“平心论之，既名为礼，当必繁重。专图简易，何用礼为？……然则世之有志于礼者，可以兴矣！不可退居于礼所不下之庶人矣！”然而我毫不生气，这是因为无须我到场；因此也可见我的仇猫，理由实在简简单单，只为了它们在我的耳朵边尽嚷的缘故。人们的各种礼式，局外人可以不见不闻，我就满不管，但如果当我正要看书或睡觉的时候，有人来勒令朗诵情书，奉陪作揖，那是为自卫起见，还要用长竹竿来抵御的。还有，平素不大交往的人，忽而寄给我一个红帖子，上面印着“为舍妹出阁”，“小儿完姻”，“敬请观礼”或“阖第光临”这些含有“阴险的暗示”的句子，使我不化钱便总觉得有些过意不去的，我也不十分高兴。
Now when it comes to the reason why I hate cats, I think it is enough reason, and it is open. First, its temperament is different from other beasts, whoever preys on sparrows and rats, always refuses to bite to death, must play with it to their heart's content, let it go, catch it, catch it, let it go, until they are tired of playing, and then eat it, which is quite the same as people's gloating, slowly torturing the bad temper of the weak. Second, isn't it of the same race as the liger? But there is such a coquettishness! But this may be limited to talent, if it is ten times larger than it is now, then I really don't know what kind of attitude it takes. However, these excuses seem to have been added when I picked up the pen now, although it also seemed to be the reason that came to my mind at that time. To be more reliable, or rather, because of their howls when cooperating, the procedures are so heavy that they upset others, especially when they have to read books and sleep at night. At these times, I will attack them with long bamboo poles. When the dogs cooperated on the road, there were often idle men who took wooden sticks and beat them; I have seen this on a copperplate engraving by P.Bruegel d.Ä on the Allegorie der Wollust, which shows that such a move is consistent between ancient and modern times at home and abroad. Since the stubborn Austrian scholar S. Freud advocated the theory of psychoanalysis - Psychoanalysis, I heard that Mr. Zhang Shizhao translated it as "heart understanding", although it is simple and ancient, but it is really difficult to understand - our famous professors have also vaguely applied it, and these things will inevitably return to sexual desire. I don't care about beating dogs, as for my beating cats, but only because they are shouting, and there is no malice, I am confident that my jealousy is not so broad, and it is necessary to declare in advance that it is the autumn of "being blamed at every turn". For example, when people cooperate, there are also some procedures, the new one is to write a love letter, as little as a bunch, as much as a bundle; Last year, Haichang Jiang held a wedding in Beijing, worshipped back and forth, and worshipped for three days, and also printed a red-faced "Wedding Festival", which was discussed in the "Preface": "To be fair, since it is called a ceremony, it must be heavy." If you want to be simple, why should you be polite? …… In this way, those in the world who aspire to propriety can thrive! We cannot retreat to the common people who do not obey the rites! "But I was not angry, because I didn't need to be there; Therefore, it can also be seen that my enemy cats are really simple for the sake of them shouting in my ears. I don't care about people's various etiquette, outsiders can see or hear, but if someone comes to order me to read a book or go to bed, it is for self-defense, and I have to use a long bamboo pole to resist. Also, people who don't usually interact with me suddenly sent me a red post, which was printed with "out of the cabinet for my sister", "the child is married", "please watch the ceremony" or "close the door" and other sentences containing "insidious hints", which made me always feel a little unhappy if I didn't turn money into money, and I was not very happy.但是，这都是近时的话。再一回忆，我的仇猫却远在能够说出这些理由之前，也许是还在十岁上下的时候了。至今还分明记得，那原因是极其简单的：只因为它吃老鼠，——吃了我饲养着的可爱的小小的隐鼠。
However, these are all recent words. In retrospect, my enemy cat was still around ten years old long before I could say these reasons. I still remember clearly that the reason was extremely simple: just because it ate mice,—— it ate the cute little hidden rat I raised.听说西洋是不很喜欢黑猫的，不知道可确；但Edgar Allan Poe的小说里的黑猫，却实在有点骇人。日本的猫善于成精，传说中的“猫婆”，那食人的惨酷确是更可怕。中国古时候虽然曾有“猫鬼”，近来却很少听到猫的兴妖作怪，似乎古法已经失传，老实起来了。只是我在童年，总觉得它有点妖气，没有什么好感。那是一个我的幼时的夏夜，我躺在一株大桂树下的小板桌上乘凉，祖母摇着芭蕉扇坐在桌旁，给我猜谜，讲故事。忽然，桂树上沙沙地有趾爪的爬搔声，一对闪闪的眼睛在暗中随声而下，使我吃惊，也将祖母讲着的话打断，另讲猫的故事了——
I heard that the West doesn't like black cats very much, I don't know if it's true; But the black cat in Edgar Allan Poe's novel is really a bit terrifying. Japanese cats are good at becoming spirits, and the legendary "cat woman", the cruelty of cannibalism is indeed even more terrifying. Although there were "cat ghosts" in ancient China, it is rare to hear about cats playing monsters recently, and it seems that the ancient method has been lost and has become honest. It's just that when I was a child, I always felt that it was a bit demonic and didn't have a good impression. It was a summer night when I was a child, lying on a small board table under a big laurel tree to cool off, and my grandmother sat at the table shaking a banana fan, guessing riddles and telling me stories. Suddenly, there was a rustling sound of toes and claws scratching on the laurel tree, and a pair of twinkling eyes fell in the dark, which surprised me, and interrupted what my grandmother was saying, and told the story of the cat -“你知道么？猫是老虎的先生。”她说。“小孩子怎么会知道呢，猫是老虎的师父。老虎本来是什么也不会的，就投到猫的门下来。猫就教给它扑的方法，捉的方法，吃的方法，像自己的捉老鼠一样。这些教完了；老虎想，本领都学到了，谁也比不过它了，只有老师的猫还比自己强，要是杀掉猫，自己便是最强的脚色了。它打定主意，就上前去扑猫。猫是早知道它的来意的，一跳，便上了树，老虎却只能眼睁睁地在树下蹲着。它还没有将一切本领传授完，还没有教给它上树。”
"Do you know? The cat is Mr. Tiger. She said. How can a child know that the cat is the master of the tiger. The tiger didn't know anything, so he threw it down the cat's door. The cat taught it how to pounce, how to catch, and how to eat, just like catching a mouse. These are finished; The tiger thought, he had learned all the skills, no one could compare to it, only the teacher's cat was better than himself, if he killed the cat, he would be the strongest. It made up its mind and went to pounce on the cat. The cat knew its intentions, and as soon as it jumped, it climbed up the tree, but the tiger could only watch it squat under the tree. It hasn't taught all its skills yet, and it hasn't taught it to climb the tree. ”这是侥幸的，我想，幸而老虎很性急，否则从桂树上就会爬下一匹老虎来。然而究竟很怕人，我要进屋子里睡觉去了。夜色更加黯然；桂叶瑟瑟地作响，微风也吹动了，想来草席定已微凉，躺着也不至于烦得翻来复去了。
This is a fluke, I think, fortunately, the tiger is very impatient, otherwise a tiger will climb from the laurel tree. However, I am very afraid of people, and I want to go into the house to sleep. The night is even darker; The laurel leaves rustled, and the breeze blew, thinking that the straw mat must have cooled slightly, and it would not be annoying to turn over and over again.几百年的老屋中的豆油灯的微光下，是老鼠跳梁的世界，飘忽地走着，吱吱地叫着，那态度往往比“名人名教授”还轩昂。猫是饲养着的，然而吃饭不管事。祖母她们虽然常恨鼠子们啮破了箱柜，偷吃了东西，我却以为这也算不得什么大罪，也和我不相干，况且这类坏事大概是大个子的老鼠做的，决不能诬陷到我所爱的小鼠身上去。这类小鼠大抵在地上走动，只有拇指那么大，也不很畏惧人，我们那里叫它“隐鼠”，与专住在屋上的伟大者是两种。我的床前就帖着两张花纸，一是“八戒招赘”，满纸长嘴大耳，我以为不甚雅观；别的一张“老鼠成亲”却可爱，自新郎新妇以至傧相，宾客，执事，没有一个不是尖腮细腿，像煞读书人的，但穿的都是红衫绿裤。我想，能举办这样大仪式的，一定只有我所喜欢的那些隐鼠。现在是粗俗了，在路上遇见人类的迎娶仪仗，也不过当作性交的广告看，不甚留心；但那时的想看“老鼠成亲”的仪式，却极其神往，即使像海昌蒋氏似的连拜三夜，怕也未必会看得心烦。正月十四的夜，是我不肯轻易便睡，等候它们的仪仗从床下出来的夜。然而仍然只看见几个光着身子的隐鼠在地面游行，不像正在办着喜事。直到我熬不住了，怏怏睡去，一睁眼却已经天明，到了灯节了。也许鼠族的婚仪，不但不分请帖，来收罗贺礼，虽是真的“观礼”，也绝对不欢迎的罢，我想，这是它们向来的习惯，无法抗议的。
Under the glimmer of the soybean oil lamp in the centuries-old house, it is a world of rats jumping on beams, walking and squeaking, and the attitude is often more loud than that of "famous professors". Cats are raised, but they don't care about eating. Although my grandmother and the others often hated the rats for breaking the boxes and stealing food, I thought it was not a great sin, and it had nothing to do with me, and this kind of bad thing was probably done by the big mice, and I must not frame the mice I loved. This kind of mouse mouse mostly walks on the ground, only the size of a thumb, and is not very afraid of people, we call it "hidden mouse", and the great one that lives in the house is a different kind. There are two pieces of flower paper in front of my bed, one is "Bajie Recruitment", the paper is full of long mouths and big ears, I think it is not very elegant; The other "mouse marriage" is cute, from the bride and groom to the ministers, guests, and deacons, none of them are not pointed cheeks and thin legs, like scholars, but they are all wearing red shirts and green pants. I think the only thing that can hold such a big ceremony must be the hidden rats I like. Now it is vulgar, and the wedding ceremonial guard of human beings on the road is only seen as an advertisement for sexual intercourse, and it is not very careful; But at that time, I wanted to see the ceremony of "mouse marriage", but I was extremely fascinated, even if I worshipped for three nights like the Jiang family in Haichang, I was afraid that I might not be upset to see it. The night of the fourteenth day of the first month was the night when I refused to sleep easily and waited for their honor guard to come out from under the bed. However, I still only saw a few naked hidden rats parading on the ground, not like they were holding a happy event. Until I couldn't stand it anymore and fell asleep, when I opened my eyes, it was already dawn, and it was the Festival of Lights. Perhaps the wedding ceremony of the rat tribe, not only does not divide the invitation, but also comes to collect congratulatory gifts, although it is really a "viewing ceremony", it is absolutely not welcome, I think, this is their habit, and they cannot protest.老鼠的大敌其实并不是猫。春后，你听到它“咋！咋咋咋咋！”地叫着，大家称为“老鼠数铜钱”的，便知道它的可怕的屠伯已经光降了。这声音是表现绝望的惊恐的，虽然遇见猫，还不至于这样叫。猫自然也可怕，但老鼠只要窜进一个小洞去，它也就奈何不得，逃命的机会还很多。独有那可怕的屠伯——蛇，身体是细长的，圆径和鼠子差不多，凡鼠子能到的地方，它也能到，追逐的时间也格外长，而且万难幸免，当“数钱”的时候，大概是已经没有第二步办法的了。
The enemy of mice is not actually cats. After spring, you hear it "What! Oh no! The man who called it "the rat counts copper coins" knew that its terrible butcher had descended from the light. This voice is a sign of desperate horror, although it does not bark like this when it meets a cat. Cats are naturally scary, but as long as the mouse scurls into a small hole, it can't help it, and there are still many opportunities to escape. The only terrible butcher - the snake, the body is slender, the diameter is similar to that of a mouse, wherever the rat can go, it can also go, the chase time is also extraordinarily long, and it is inevitable, when "counting money", there is probably no second step.有一回，我就听得一间空屋里有着这种“数钱”的声音，推门进去，一条蛇伏在横梁上，看地上，躺着一匹隐鼠，口角流血，但两胁还是一起一落的。取来给躺在一个纸盒子里，大半天，竟醒过来了，渐渐地能够饮食，行走，到第二日，似乎就复了原，但是不逃走。放在地上，也时时跑到人面前来，而且缘腿而上，一直爬到膝髁。给放在饭桌上，便检吃些菜渣，舐舐碗沿；放在我的书桌上，则从容地游行，看见砚台便舐吃了研着的墨汁。这使我非常惊喜了。我听父亲说过的，中国有一种墨猴，只有拇指一般大，全身的毛是漆黑而且发亮的。它睡在笔筒里，一听到磨墨，便跳出来，等着，等到人写完字，套上笔，就舐尽了砚上的余墨，仍旧跳进笔筒里去了。我就极愿意有这样的一个墨猴，可是得不到；问那里有，那里买的呢，谁也不知道。“慰情聊胜无”，这隐鼠总可以算是我的墨猴了罢，虽然它舐吃墨汁，并不一定肯等到我写完字。
Once, I heard this kind of "counting money" sound in an empty house, pushed the door in, a snake was lying on the beam, looking at the ground, there was a hidden rat lying on the ground, the corners of the mouth were bleeding, but the two sides still fell together. I took it and lay it in a cardboard box, and after most of the day, I woke up, and gradually I was able to eat and walk, and by the next day, it seemed to be back to normal, but I didn't run away. When placed on the ground, it also ran in front of people from time to time, and climbed up along the legs until it reached the kneecap. put it on the dining table, then check some vegetable residue and lick the edge of the bowl; Put it on my desk, and I paraded calmly, and when I saw the inkstone, I licked the ink I was grinding. This was a great surprise to me. I heard my father say that there is a kind of ink monkey in China, which is only the size of a thumb, and the hair on its whole body is black and shiny. It slept in the pen holder, and as soon as it heard the grinding ink, it jumped out, waited, and when the person finished writing and put on the pen, it licked up the remaining ink on the inkstone and still jumped into the pen holder. I would very much like to have such an ink monkey, but I can't get it; Ask where it is, where it is bought, no one knows. "Comfort and talk about nothing", this hidden rat can always be regarded as my ink monkey, although it licks the ink, and does not necessarily want to wait until I finish writing.现在已经记不分明，这样地大约有一两月；有一天，我忽然感到寂寞了，真所谓“若有所失”。我的隐鼠，是常在眼前游行的，或桌上，或地上。而这一日却大半天没有见，大家吃午饭了，也不见它走出来，平时，是一定出现的。我再等着，再等它一半天，然而仍然没有见。
Now I can't remember clearly, so it's been about a month or two; One day, I suddenly felt lonely, as if I had lost something. My hidden mouse often parades in front of me, or on the table, or on the ground. But on this day, I didn't see it for most of the day, everyone had lunch, and I didn't see it come out, usually, it must appear. I waited for another half day, but still didn't see it.长妈妈，一个一向带领着我的女工，也许是以为我等得太苦了罢，轻轻地来告诉我一句话。这即刻使我愤怒而且悲哀，决心和猫们为敌。她说：隐鼠是昨天晚上被猫吃去了！
My eldest mother, a female worker who has always led me, may have thought that I had waited too hard, so she gently came to tell me a word. This immediately made me angry and sad, determined to fight the cats. She said: The hidden rat was eaten by a cat last night!当我失掉了所爱的，心中有着空虚时，我要充填以报仇的恶念！
When I lose the one I love and have emptiness in my heart, I want to fill it with evil thoughts for revenge!我的报仇，就从家里饲养着的一匹花猫起手，逐渐推广，至于凡所遇见的诸猫。最先不过是追赶，袭击；后来却愈加巧妙了，能飞石击中它们的头，或诱入空屋里面，打得它垂头丧气。这作战继续得颇长久，此后似乎猫都不来近我了。但对于它们纵使怎样战胜，大约也算不得一个英雄；况且中国毕生和猫打仗的人也未必多，所以一切韬略，战绩，还是全都省略了罢。
My revenge started with a flower cat raised at home, and gradually promoted, as for all the cats I met. The first is just chasing, attacking; Later, it became more and more ingenious, and it could hit their heads with flying stones, or lure them into an empty house, beating it dejectedly. This battle lasted for quite a long time, and it seemed that the cats did not come near me after that. But no matter how they are defeated, they are probably not a hero; Moreover, there may not be many people in China who have fought with cats all their lives, so all strategies and achievements are omitted.但许多天之后，也许是已经经过了大半年，我竟偶然得到一个意外的消息：那隐鼠其实并非被猫所害，倒是它缘着长妈妈的腿要爬上去，被她一脚踏死了。
But many days later, perhaps more than half a year later, I accidentally got an unexpected news: the hidden rat was not actually killed by the cat, but it was about to climb up along the leg of the eldest mother and was trampled to death by her.这确是先前所没有料想到的。现在我已经记不清当时是怎样一个感想，但和猫的感情却终于没有融和；到了北京，还因为它伤害了兔的儿女们，便旧隙夹新嫌，使出更辣的辣手。“仇猫”的话柄，也从此传扬开来。然而在现在，这些早已是过去的事了，我已经改变态度，对猫颇为客气，倘其万不得已，则赶走而已，决不打伤它们，更何况杀害。这是我近几年的进步。经验既多，一旦大悟，知道猫的偷鱼肉，拖小鸡，深夜大叫，人们自然十之九是憎恶的，而这憎恶是在猫身上。假如我出而为人们驱除这憎恶，打伤或杀害了它，它便立刻变为可怜，那憎恶倒移在我身上了。所以，目下的办法，是凡遇猫们捣乱，至于有人讨厌时，我便站出去，在门口大声叱曰：“嘘！滚！”小小平静，即回书房，这样，就长保着御侮保家的资格。其实这方法，中国的官兵就常在实做的，他们总不肯扫清土匪或扑灭敌人，因为这么一来，就要不被重视，甚至于因失其用处而被裁汰。我想，如果能将这方法推广应用，我大概也总可望成为所谓“指导青年”的“前辈”的罢，但现下也还未决心实践，正在研究而且推敲。
This was indeed unexpected. Now I can't remember how I felt at that time, but my relationship with the cat finally didn't melt; When he arrived in Beijing, because he hurt the children of the rabbit, he used new suspicions in the old gap and used a spicier hand. The word "hatred of cats" has also spread since then. But now, these are long in the past, and I have changed my attitude, and I am quite polite to the cats, and if it is a last resort, I will just drive them away, and I will never hurt them, let alone kill them. This is my progress in recent years. After a lot of experience, once you realize that cats steal fish, drag chicks, and scream late at night, people naturally hate nine out of ten, and this hatred is in cats. If I go out and drive out this abomination for people, and wound or kill it, it immediately becomes pitiful, and the abomination is reversed on me. Therefore, the current solution is that whenever the cats make trouble, as for someone who hates it, I will stand up and shout loudly at the door: "Shh! Get lost! "A little calm, that is, go back to the study, so that you can maintain the qualification to resist insults and protect your family for a long time. In fact, this method is often practiced by Chinese officers and soldiers, and they are always unwilling to wipe out bandits or extinguish the enemy, because in this way, they will not be taken seriously, or even eliminated because they are useless. I think that if this method can be popularized and applied, I will probably always hope to become a "senior" who so-called "guides young people", but I have not yet decided to put it into practice, and I am studying and deliberating.一九二六年二月二十一日。
February 21, 1926.

阿长与《山海经》

阿长与《山海经》

阿长与《山海经》

A Chang and the "Classic of Mountains and Seas"长妈妈，已经说过，是一个一向带领着我的女工，说得阔气一点，就是我的保姆。我的母亲和许多别的人都这样称呼她，似乎略带些客气的意思。只有祖母叫她阿长。我平时叫她“阿妈”，连“长”字也不带；但到憎恶她的时候，——例如知道了谋死我那隐鼠的却是她的时候，就叫她阿长。
My eldest mother, as I have said, is a female worker who has always led me, and to put it bluntly, she is my nanny. My mother and many others called her that way, with a little politeness. Only her grandmother called her Ah Chang. I usually call her "Mom", and I don't even have the word "long"; But when it comes to hating her,—— for example, when you know that it was her who murdered me, you call her Ah Chang.我们那里没有姓长的；她生得黄胖而矮，“长”也不是形容词。又不是她的名字，记得她自己说过，她的名字是叫作什么姑娘的。什么姑娘，我现在已经忘却了，总之不是长姑娘；也终于不知道她姓什么。记得她也曾告诉过我这个名称的来历：先前的先前，我家有一个女工，身材生得很高大，这就是真阿长。后来她回去了，我那什么姑娘才来补她的缺，然而大家因为叫惯了，没有再改口，于是她从此也就成为长妈妈了。
We don't have a long one there; She was born yellow and fat and short, and "long" is not an adjective. It's not her name, I remember she herself said what kind of girl her name was. What girl, I have forgotten now, in short, not the eldest girl; Finally, I don't know what her surname is. I remember that she also told me the origin of this name: Previously, there was a female worker in my family who was very tall, this is the real Ah Chang. Later, when she went back, I didn't come to make up for her shortcomings, but everyone didn't change their words because they were used to it, so she became a long-term mother from then on.虽然背地里说人长短不是好事情，但倘使要我说句真心话，我可只得说：我实在不大佩服她。最讨厌的是常喜欢切切察察，向人们低声絮说些什么事，还竖起第二个手指，在空中上下摇动，或者点着对手或自己的鼻尖。我的家里一有些小风波，不知怎的我总疑心和这“切切察察”有些关系。又不许我走动，拔一株草，翻一块石头，就说我顽皮，要告诉我的母亲去了。一到夏天，睡觉时她又伸开两脚两手，在床中间摆成一个“大”字，挤得我没有余地翻身，久睡在一角的席子上，又已经烤得那么热。推她呢，不动；叫她呢，也不闻。
Although it is not a good thing to say that the length of a person is not a good thing behind my back, if I were to tell the truth, I would have to say: I really don't admire her. What I hate the most is that I often like to cheek and chat, whisper something to people, and raise a second finger, shake it up and down in the air, or point the tip of my opponent or my own nose. There is a small turmoil in my family, and somehow I always suspect that it has something to do with this "Che Che Cha Cha". He didn't allow me to move around, pull out a grass, turn over a stone, and said that I was naughty and wanted to tell my mother to go. In the summer, when she slept, she stretched out her feet and hands, and placed a "big" in the middle of the bed, so that I had no room to turn over, and I slept on the mat in the corner for a long time, and it was already so hot. Push her, don't move; Call her, don't smell it.“长妈妈生得那么胖，一定很怕热罢？晚上的睡相，怕不见得很好罢？……”
"The eldest mother is so fat, she must be afraid of the heat? I'm afraid I won't see a good sleeping appearance at night, right? ……”母亲听到我多回诉苦之后，曾经这样地问过她。我也知道这意思是要她多给我一些空席。她不开口。但到夜里，我热得醒来的时候，却仍然看见满床摆着一个“大”字，一条臂膊还搁在我的颈子上。我想，这实在是无法可想了。
After hearing my complaints repeatedly, my mother once asked her like this. I also knew that this meant asking her to give me more empty seats. She didn't speak. But at night, when I woke up so hot, I still saw the word "big" all over the bed, and an arm was still resting on my neck. I think this is really unimaginable.但是她懂得许多规矩；这些规矩，也大概是我所不耐烦的。一年中最高兴的时节，自然要数除夕了。辞岁之后，从长辈得到压岁钱，红纸包着，放在枕边，只要过一宵，便可以随意使用。睡在枕上，看着红包，想到明天买来的小鼓，刀枪，泥人，糖菩萨……。然而她进来，又将一个福橘放在床头了。
But she knows many rules; These rules are probably what I am impatient. The happiest time of the year is naturally Chinese New Year's Eve. After resigning, you can get New Year's money from your elders, wrap it in red paper, put it next to your pillow, and use it at will as long as you spend one night. Sleeping on the pillow, looking at the red envelope, thinking of the small drums, knives and guns, clay figures, sugar bodhisattvas, ...... bought tomorrow. However, she came in and put another Fu orange on the head of the bed.“哥儿，你牢牢记住！”她极其郑重地说。“明天是正月初一，清早一睁开眼睛，第一句话就得对我说：‘阿妈，恭喜恭喜！’记得么？你要记着，这是一年的运气的事情。不许说别的话！说过之后，还得吃一点福橘。”她又拿起那橘子来在我的眼前摇了两摇，“那么，一年到头，顺顺流流……。”
"Brother, remember it firmly!" She said extremely solemnly. "Tomorrow is the first day of the first lunar month, and as soon as I open my eyes early in the morning, the first thing I have to say to me is: 'Mom, congratulations!' Do you remember? You have to remember that this is a matter of luck for a year. Don't say anything else! After saying that, I have to eat a little Fu orange. She picked up the orange again and shook it twice in front of my eyes, "Then, all year round, it will flow smoothly...... ”梦里也记得元旦的，第二天醒得特别早，一醒，就要坐起来。她却立刻伸出臂膊，一把将我按住。我惊异地看她时，只见她惶急地看着我。
I also remember New Year's Day in my dream, and I woke up very early the next day, and when I woke up, I had to sit up. But she immediately stretched out her arm and held me down. When I looked at her in amazement, I saw her looking at me anxiously.她又有所要求似的，摇着我的肩。我忽而记得了——
She shook my shoulders as if she was asking for something again. I suddenly remembered-“阿妈，恭喜……。”
"Mom, congratulations ......."“恭喜恭喜！大家恭喜！真聪明！恭喜恭喜！”她于是十分喜欢似的，笑将起来，同时将一点冰冷的东西，塞在我的嘴里。我大吃一惊之后，也就忽而记得，这就是所谓福橘，元旦辟头的磨难，总算已经受完，可以下床玩耍去了。
"Congratulations, congratulations! Congratulations! How smart! Congratulations! She smiled as if she liked it very much, and at the same time stuffed a little cold thing into my mouth. After I was surprised, I suddenly remembered that this was the so-called Fu Orange, and the ordeal of New Year's Day was finally over, and I could get out of bed and play.她教给我的道理还很多，例如说人死了，不该说死掉，必须说“老掉了”；死了人，生了孩子的屋子里，不应该走进去；饭粒落在地上，必须拣起来，最好是吃下去；晒裤子用的竹竿底下，是万不可钻过去的……。此外，现在大抵忘却了，只有元旦的古怪仪式记得最清楚。总之：都是些烦琐之至，至今想起来还觉得非常麻烦的事情。
She taught me many more truths, such as saying that when a person dies, he should not say that he is dead, but must say "old"; dead people, in the house where children have been born, should not be walked in; When the rice falls on the ground, it must be picked up, and it is best to eat it; Under the bamboo pole used to dry pants, it is a ...... that must not be drilled through. Moreover, it is now largely forgotten, and only the strange rituals of New Year's Day are remembered best. In short: they are all troublesome things, and I still feel very troublesome when I think about them.然而我有一时也对她发生过空前的敬意。她常常对我讲“长毛”。她之所谓“长毛”者，不但洪秀全军，似乎连后来一切土匪强盗都在内，但除却革命党，因为那时还没有。她说得长毛非常可怕，他们的话就听不懂。她说先前长毛进城的时候，我家全都逃到海边去了，只留一个门房和年老的煮饭老妈子看家。后来长毛果然进门来了，那老妈子便叫他们“大王”，——据说对长毛就应该这样叫，——诉说自己的饥饿。长毛笑道：“那么，这东西就给你吃了罢！”将一个圆圆的东西掷了过来，还带着一条小辫子，正是那门房的头。煮饭老妈子从此就骇破了胆，后来一提起，还是立刻面如土色，自己轻轻地拍着胸脯道：“阿呀，骇死我了，骇死我了……。”
However, I also had unprecedented respect for her for a while. She often said "long hair" to me. Her so-called "long-haired" people not only included Hong Xiu's entire army, but also seemed to include all the bandits and robbers later, but except for the revolutionary party, because there was no such thing at that time. She said that the long hair was so scary that they couldn't understand what they said. She said that when Changmao went to the city before, all my family fled to the beach, leaving only a concierge and an old cooking mother to watch over the house. Later, when Changmao came in, the old mother called them "King",—— and it was said that Changmao should be called this ,—— tell him about his hunger. Long Mao smiled and said, "Then, this thing will be eaten for you!" He threw a round thing over, with a small pigtail, which was the head of the concierge. The old mother who cooked was frightened from then on, and when she mentioned it later, her face was immediately like earth, and she gently patted her chest and said, "Ah, I was scared, I was scared...... ”我那时似乎倒并不怕，因为我觉得这些事和我毫不相干的，我不是一个门房。但她大概也即觉到了，说道：“像你似的小孩子，长毛也要掳的，掳去做小长毛。还有好看的姑娘，也要掳。”
I didn't seem to be afraid at the time, because I felt that these things had nothing to do with me, and I was not a concierge. But she probably felt it immediately and said, "A child like you has long hair to be captured, and captured to make small long hair." There are also good-looking girls who will also be captured. ”“那么，你是不要紧的。”我以为她一定最安全了，既不做门房，又不是小孩子，也生得不好看，况且颈子上还有许多灸疮疤。
"Well, it doesn't matter to you." I thought she must be the safest, she is neither a concierge, nor a child, and she is not good-looking, and she has many moxibustion scars on her neck.“那里的话？！”她严肃地说。“我们就没有用么？我们也要被掳去。城外有兵来攻的时候，长毛就叫我们脱下裤子，一排一排地站在城墙上，外面的大炮就放不出来；再要放，就炸了！”
"Words there?!" She said seriously. "Aren't we useless? We will also be taken captive. When soldiers attacked outside the city, Changmao told us to take off our pants and stand on the city wall in rows, so that the cannons outside could not be released; If you want to put it again, it will explode! ”这实在是出于我意想之外的，不能不惊异。我一向只以为她满肚子是麻烦的礼节罢了，却不料她还有这样伟大的神力。从此对于她就有了特别的敬意，似乎实在深不可测；夜间的伸开手脚，占领全床，那当然是情有可原的了，倒应该我退让。
This is really unexpected and I can't help but be surprised. I always thought that she was full of troublesome etiquette, but I didn't expect her to have such great divine power. Since then, I have had a special respect for her, which seems to be really unfathomable; Stretching out my hands and feet at night and occupying the whole bed is of course excusable, but I should give in.这种敬意，虽然也逐渐淡薄起来，但完全消失，大概是在知道她谋害了我的隐鼠之后。那时就极严重地诘问，而且当面叫她阿长。我想我又不真做小长毛，不去攻城，也不放炮，更不怕炮炸，我惧惮她什么呢！
This respect, although gradually faded, disappeared completely, probably after knowing that she had murdered my hidden mouse. At that time, he questioned her very seriously, and called her Ah Chang in person. I don't think I'm really a little long-haired, I don't attack the city, I don't fire cannons, and I'm not afraid of bombing, what am I afraid of her!但当我哀悼隐鼠，给它复仇的时候，一面又在渴慕着绘图的《山海经》了。这渴慕是从一个远房的叔祖惹起来的。他是一个胖胖的，和蔼的老人，爱种一点花木，如珠兰，茉莉之类，还有极其少见的，据说从北边带回去的马缨花。他的太太却正相反，什么也莫名其妙，曾将晒衣服的竹竿搁在珠兰的枝条上，枝折了，还要愤愤地咒骂道：“死尸！”这老人是个寂寞者，因为无人可谈，就很爱和孩子们往来，有时简直称我们为“小友”。在我们聚族而居的宅子里，只有他书多，而且特别。制艺和试帖诗，自然也是有的；但我却只在他的书斋里，看见过陆玑的《毛诗草木鸟兽虫鱼疏》，还有许多名目很生的书籍。我那时最爱看的是《花镜》，上面有许多图。他说给我听，曾经有过一部绘图的《山海经》，画着人面的兽，九头的蛇，三脚的鸟，生着翅膀的人，没有头而以两乳当作眼睛的怪物，……可惜现在不知道放在那里了。
But when I mourned the hidden mouse and took revenge on it, I was longing for the "Classic of Mountains and Seas" drawn again. This longing was aroused by a distant uncle. He is a chubby, kind old man who loves to plant a little flowers and trees, such as pearl orchids, jasmine, etc., and the extremely rare lantana, which is said to have been brought back from the north. His wife, on the contrary, was inexplicable, and once put the bamboo pole for drying clothes on the branches of Zhulan, and when the branches broke, she cursed indignantly: "Dead corpse!" "This old man is a lonely person, because there is no one to talk to, he loves to interact with children, and sometimes he simply calls us "little friends". In the house where we live together, he is the only one who has a lot of books, and it is special. There are naturally art making and trial poems; But I only saw Lu Ji's "Mao Poems, Plants, Trees, Birds, Beasts, Insects and Fish" in his study, and many books with very fresh names. My favorite thing to read at that time was "Flower Mirror", which had many pictures on it. He told me that there was once a drawing of the "Classic of Mountains and Seas", which depicted a beast with a human face, a nine-headed snake, a three-legged bird, a man with wings, and a monster without a head and with two breasts as eyes,...... It's a pity that I don't know where it was placed now.我很愿意看看这样的图画，但不好意思力逼他去寻找，他是很疏懒的。问别人呢，谁也不肯真实地回答我。压岁钱还有几百文，买罢，又没有好机会。有书买的大街离我家远得很，我一年中只能在正月间去玩一趟，那时候，两家书店都紧紧地关着门。
I would love to see such a picture, but I was embarrassed to force him to look for it, he was very lazy. When I asked others, no one would answer me truthfully. There are still a few hundred wen of New Year's money, and there is no good opportunity to buy it. The main street where there are books is very far from my home, and I can only go there once a year in the first month, when both bookstores are tightly closed.玩的时候倒是没有什么的，但一坐下，我就记得绘图的《山海经》。
There was nothing when I played, but as soon as I sat down, I remembered the "Classic of Mountains and Seas" drawn.大概是太过于念念不忘了，连阿长也来问《山海经》是怎么一回事。这是我向来没有和她说过的，我知道她并非学者，说了也无益；但既然来问，也就都对她说了。
Probably too much to forget, even Ah Chang came to ask what was going on with the "Classic of Mountains and Seas". I have never told her this, I know she is not a scholar, and it is useless to say it; But since she came to ask, she told her.过了十多天，或者一个月罢，我还很记得，是她告假回家以后的四五天，她穿着新的蓝布衫回来了，一见面，就将一包书递给我，高兴地说道：
After more than ten days, or a month, I still remember that four or five days after she took leave to go home, she came back wearing a new blue shirt, and as soon as we met, she handed me a pack of books and said happily:“哥儿，有画儿的‘三哼经’，我给你买来了！”
"Brother, there is a painting of the 'Three Hum Sutra', I bought it for you!"我似乎遇着了一个霹雳，全体都震悚起来；赶紧去接过来，打开纸包，是四本小小的书，略略一翻，人面的兽，九头的蛇，……果然都在内。
I seemed to have encountered a thunderbolt, and everyone was shocked; Hurry up and pick it up, open the paper bag, it is four small books, slightly flipped through it, a beast with a human face, a nine-headed snake,...... Sure enough, it's all in.这又使我发生新的敬意了，别人不肯做，或不能做的事，她却能够做成功。她确有伟大的神力。谋害隐鼠的怨恨，从此完全消灭了。
This gave me a new respect, what others are unwilling to do or can't do, but she can succeed. She did have great divine power. The resentment of murdering the hidden rat has been completely eliminated since then.这四本书，乃是我最初得到，最为心爱的宝书。
These four books are the first and most beloved treasure books I got.书的模样，到现在还在眼前。可是从还在眼前的模样来说，却是一部刻印都十分粗拙的本子。纸张很黄；图像也很坏，甚至于几乎全用直线凑合，连动物的眼睛也都是长方形的。但那是我最为心爱的宝书，看起来，确是人面的兽；九头的蛇；一脚的牛；袋子似的帝江；没有头而“以乳为目，以脐为口”，还要“执干戚而舞”的刑天。
The appearance of the book is still in front of me. But from the appearance that is still in front of me, it is a book with very rough engravings. The paper is very yellow; The image is also very bad, even almost all of them are made with straight lines, and even the animal's eyes are rectangular. But it is my most beloved treasure book, and it looks like a beast with a human face; nine-headed serpent; a cow with one foot; the bag-like Dijiang; Xing Tian who has no head and "takes the milk as the eye, the navel as the mouth", and also "dances with the trumpet and the shield".此后我就更其搜集绘图的书，于是有了石印的《尔雅音图》和《毛诗品物图考》，又有了《点石斋丛画》和《诗画舫》。《山海经》也另买了一部石印的，每卷都有图赞，绿色的画，字是红的，比那木刻的精致得多了。这一部直到前年还在，是缩印的郝懿行疏。木刻的却已经记不清是什么时候失掉了。
Since then, I have collected more books on drawings, so there are stone seals of "Erya Yin Tu" and "Mao Poetry Picture Examination", as well as "Dian Shizhai Conghua" and "Poetry and Painting Boat". The "Classic of Mountains and Seas" also bought another stone print, each volume has a picture, a green painting, and the words are red, which is much more delicate than the woodcut. This one was still there until the year before last, and it was a miniature Hao Yi Xingshu. The woodcut can't remember when it was lost.我的保姆，长妈妈即阿长，辞了这人世，大概也有了三十年了罢。我终于不知道她的姓名，她的经历；仅知道有一个过继的儿子，她大约是青年守寡的孤孀。
My nanny, the eldest mother, is Ah Chang, who has passed away for about thirty years. I finally don't know her name, her experience; I only know that there is an adopted son, who is about a widow in a young man.仁厚黑暗的地母呵，愿在你怀里永安她的魂灵！
Benevolent and dark Earth Mother, may her soul be forever in your arms!三月十日。
March 10th.

《二十四孝图》

《二十四孝图》

《二十四孝图》

"Twenty-Four Filial Piety Pictures"我总要上下四方寻求，得到一种最黑，最黑，最黑的咒文，先来诅咒一切反对白话，妨害白话者。即使人死了真有灵魂，因这最恶的心，应该堕入地狱，也将决不改悔，总要先来诅咒一切反对白话，妨害白话者。
I always have to seek from all directions to get the blackest, blackest, blackest spell, to curse all those who oppose the vernacular and hinder the vernacular. Even if a person dies and really has a soul, because of this most evil heart, he should fall into hell, and he will never repent, and he will always come to curse all those who oppose the vernacular and hinder the vernacular.自从所谓“文学革命”以来，供给孩子的书籍，和欧，美，日本的一比较，虽然很可怜，但总算有图有说，只要能读下去，就可以懂得的了。可是一班别有心肠的人们，便竭力来阻遏它，要使孩子的世界中，没有一丝乐趣。北京现在常用“马虎子”这一句话来恐吓孩子们。或者说，那就是《开河记》上所载的，给隋炀帝开河，蒸死小儿的麻叔谋；正确地写起来，须是“麻胡子”。那么，这麻叔谋乃是胡人了。但无论他是甚么人，他的吃小孩究竟也还有限，不过尽他的一生。妨害白话者的流毒却甚于洪水猛兽，非常广大，也非常长久，能使全中国化成一个麻胡，凡有孩子都死在他肚子里。
Since the so-called "literary revolution", the books provided to children, compared with Europe, the United States, and Japan, although very pitiful, finally have pictures and sayings, as long as you can read it, you can understand. But a group of people with different hearts tried their best to stop it, so that there was no joy in the child's world. Beijing now often uses the phrase "sloppy" to intimidate children. In other words, that is what is recorded in the "Record of Opening the River", which opened a river for Emperor Yang of Sui and steamed a child to death; Correctly written, it must be "hemp beard". Then, this Uncle Ma is a Hu person. But no matter who he is, his children are still limited, but he has spent his whole life. The poison of the vernacular is worse than the flood beast, very vast and very long-lasting, which can turn the whole of China into a hemp, and all children will die in his belly.只要对于白话来加以谋害者，都应该灭亡！
As long as those who murder the vernacular should perish!这些话，绅士们自然难免要掩住耳朵的，因为就是所谓“跳到半天空，骂得体无完肤，——还不肯罢休。”而且文士们一定也要骂，以为大悖于“文格”，亦即大损于“人格”。岂不是“言者心声也”么？“文”和“人”当然是相关的，虽然人间世本来千奇百怪，教授们中也有“不尊敬”作者的人格而不能“不说他的小说好”的特别种族。但这些我都不管，因为我幸而还没有爬上“象牙之塔”去，正无须怎样小心。倘若无意中竟已撞上了，那就即刻跌下来罢。然而在跌下来的中途，当还未到地之前，还要说一遍：
These words, gentlemen will inevitably have to cover their ears, because it is the so-called "jumping into the middle of the sky, scolding to the point of being incomplete,—— and refusing to give up. And the scribes must also scold, thinking that it is contrary to the "literary style", that is, it is greatly damaged to the "personality". Isn't it "the voice of the speaker"? "Literature" and "people" are of course related, although the world is full of strange things, and there are also special races among professors who "do not respect" the author's personality and cannot "not say that his novels are good". But I don't care about this, because fortunately I haven't climbed the "Ivory Tower" yet, so I don't need to be careful. If you accidentally hit it, then fall down immediately. However, in the middle of the fall, before reaching the ground, I have to say again:只要对于白话来加以谋害者，都应该灭亡！
As long as those who murder the vernacular should perish!每看见小学生欢天喜地地看着一本粗拙的《儿童世界》之类，另想到别国的儿童用书的精美，自然要觉得中国儿童的可怜。但回忆起我和我的同窗小友的童年，却不能不以为他幸福，给我们的永逝的韶光一个悲哀的吊唁。我们那时有什么可看呢，只要略有图画的本子，就要被塾师，就是当时的“引导青年的前辈”禁止，呵斥，甚而至于打手心。我的小同学因为专读“人之初性本善”读得要枯燥而死了，只好偷偷地翻开第一叶，看那题着“文星高照”四个字的恶鬼一般的魁星像，来满足他幼稚的爱美的天性。昨天看这个，今天也看这个，然而他们的眼睛里还闪出苏醒和欢喜的光辉来。
Whenever I see primary school students happily looking at a crude book like "Children's World", and thinking of the exquisite children's books in other countries, I naturally feel the pity of Chinese children. But recalling the childhood of my classmate and my classmate, I can't help but think that he is happy and give us a sad condolence to our eternal glory. What was there to see at that time, as long as there was a book with a little picture, it would be banned by the tunic teacher, the "senior who guided the youth" at that time, scolded, and even slapped the palm of the hand. My little classmate died of boredom because he was reading "The Original Nature of Man is Inherently Good", so he had to secretly open the first leaf and look at the ghost-like Kuixing statue with the words "Wen Xing Gaozhao" to satisfy his childish beauty-loving nature. Yesterday I looked at this, and today I also looked at this, but their eyes still flashed with the brilliance of awakening and joy.在书塾以外，禁令可比较的宽了，但这是说自己的事，各人大概不一样。我能在大众面前，冠冕堂皇地阅看的，是《文昌帝君阴骘文图说》和《玉历钞传》，都画着冥冥之中赏善罚恶的故事，雷公电母站在云中，牛头马面布满地下，不但“跳到半天空”是触犯天条的，即使半语不合，一念偶差，也都得受相当的报应。这所报的也并非“睚眦之怨”，因为那地方是鬼神为君，“公理”作宰，请酒下跪，全都无功，简直是无法可想。在中国的天地间，不但做人，便是做鬼，也艰难极了。然而究竟很有比阳间更好的处所：无所谓“绅士”，也没有“流言”。
Outside of the school, the ban is relatively wide, but this is about oneself, and everyone is probably different. What I can read in front of the public in a high-sounding manner is "Wenchang Emperor Yin Lu Wen Tu Shuo" and "Yuli Banknote Biography", both of which depict the story of rewarding good and punishing evil in the dark, Lei Gong and the electric mother standing in the clouds, the bull's head and horse face are covered with the ground, not only "jumping into the sky" is against the heavenly rule, even if the half language is not in agreement, even if the thought is even wrong, you will have to suffer considerable retribution. This is not a "grudge", because that place is the ghost and god as the king, and the "axioms" are the slaughterers, and the invitation to drink and kneel down is all in vain, which is simply unimaginable. In China's world, it is not only difficult to be a human being, but also to be a ghost. However, there is a better place than the human world: there is no "gentleman" or "rumor".阴间，倘要稳妥，是颂扬不得的。尤其是常常好弄笔墨的人，在现在的中国，流言的治下，而又大谈“言行一致”的时候。前车可鉴，听说阿尔志跋绥夫曾答一个少女的质问说，“惟有在人生的事实这本身中寻出欢喜者，可以活下去。倘若在那里什么也不见，他们其实倒不如死。”于是乎有一个叫作密哈罗夫的，寄信嘲骂他道，“……所以我完全诚实地劝你自杀来祸福你自己的生命，因为这第一是合于逻辑，第二是你的言语和行为不至于背驰。”
In the underworld, if it is safe, it cannot be praised. Especially those who are often good at writing and ink, in today's China, under the rule of rumors, and talk about "consistent words and deeds". I heard that Alzhiba Suifu once answered a girl's question, "Only those who find joy in the facts of life themselves can live." If they don't see anything there, they might as well die. So a man named Mikharov sent a letter mocking him, saying, "...... Therefore, I advise you to commit suicide in complete honesty to bring your own life to life, for this is firstly logical, and secondly, your words and actions will not deviate from it. ”其实这论法就是谋杀，他就这样地在他的人生中寻出欢喜来。阿尔志跋绥夫只发了一大通牢骚，没有自杀。密哈罗夫先生后来不知道怎样，这一个欢喜失掉了，或者另外又寻到了“什么”了罢。诚然，“这些时候，勇敢，是安稳的；情热，是毫无危险的。”
In fact, this argument is murder, and he finds joy in his life in this way. Alzhiv only complained a lot and did not commit suicide. Mr. Mikharov later did not know how, this joy was lost, or he found "something" again. It is true that "at these times, bravery is stable; There is no danger in love. ”然而，对于阴间，我终于已经颂扬过了，无法追改；虽有“言行不符”之嫌，但确没有受过阎王或小鬼的半文津贴，则差可以自解。总而言之，还是仍然写下去罢：
However, I have finally praised the underworld and cannot change it; Although there is a suspicion of "words and deeds do not match", it is true that he has not received a half-penny allowance from Yama or a little ghost, so he can solve himself. All in all, let's still write:我所看的那些阴间的图画，都是家藏的老书，并非我所专有。我所收得的最先的画图本子，是一位长辈的赠品：《二十四孝图》。这虽然不过薄薄的一本书，但是下图上说，鬼少人多，又为我一人所独有，使我高兴极了。那里面的故事，似乎是谁都知道的；便是不识字的人，例如阿长，也只要一看图画便能够滔滔地讲出这一段的事迹。但是，我于高兴之余，接着就是扫兴，因为我请人讲完了二十四个故事之后，才知道“孝”有如此之难，对于先前痴心妄想，想做孝子的计划，完全绝望了。
The pictures of the underworld I saw were all old books in my collection, not exclusive to me. The first drawing book I received was a gift from an elder: "Twenty-Four Filial Piety Pictures". Although this is just a thin book, the picture below says that there are few ghosts and many people, and it is unique to me, which makes me very happy. The story in it seems to be known to everyone; Even illiterate people, such as Ah Chang, can talk about this paragraph of deeds as long as they look at the pictures. However, in addition to being happy, then I was disappointed, because after I asked someone to tell twenty-four stories, I realized that "filial piety" was so difficult, and I was completely desperate for my previous wishful thinking and plan to be a filial son.“人之初，性本善”么？这并非现在要加研究的问题。但我还依稀记得，我幼小时候实未尝蓄意忤逆，对于父母，倒是极愿意孝顺的。不过年幼无知，只用了私见来解释“孝顺”的做法，以为无非是“听话”，“从命”，以及长大之后，给年老的父母好好地吃饭罢了。自从得了这一本孝子的教科书以后，才知道并不然，而且还要难到几十几百倍。其中自然也有可以勉力仿效的，如“子路负米”，“黄香扇枕”之类。“陆绩怀橘”也并不难，只要有阔人请我吃饭。“鲁迅先生作宾客而怀橘乎？”我便跪答云，“吾母性之所爱，欲归以遗母。”阔人大佩服，于是孝子就做稳了，也非常省事。“哭竹生笋”就可疑，怕我的精诚未必会这样感动天地。但是哭不出笋来，还不过抛脸而已，一到“卧冰求鲤”，可就有性命之虞了。我乡的天气是温和的，严冬中，水面也只结一层薄冰，即使孩子的重量怎样小，躺上去，也一定哗喇一声，冰破落水，鲤鱼还不及游过来。自然，必须不顾性命，这才孝感神明，会有出乎意料之外的奇迹，但那时我还小，实在不明白这些。
"At the beginning of man, nature is good"? This is not a question to be studied now. But I still vaguely remember that when I was young, I was not deliberately disobedient, but I was very willing to be filial to my parents. However, when he was young and ignorant, he only used his private opinion to explain the practice of "filial piety", thinking that it was nothing more than "obedience", "obedience", and when he grew up, he gave his elderly parents a good meal. Since I got this textbook of filial piety, I knew that this was not the case, and it was dozens or hundreds of times more difficult. Among them, there are naturally things that can be reluctantly imitated, such as "Zilu negative rice", "yellow fragrance fan pillow" and so on. "Lu Ji Huai Orange" is not difficult, as long as there is a wide person to invite me to dinner. "Mr. Lu Xun is a guest and has oranges?" I knelt down and replied, "I love my mother's nature, and I want to return it to my mother." "The broad people admire it, so the filial son is stable and very trouble-free." Crying bamboo shoots" is suspicious, afraid that my sincerity may not move the world like this. But if you can't cry out of the bamboo shoots, it's just throwing your face, and when it comes to "lying on the ice and begging for carp", your life is in danger. The weather in my hometown is mild, in the harsh winter, the water surface is only a thin layer of ice, no matter how small the weight of the child is, lying on it, there must be a loud noise, the ice breaks and falls into the water, and the carp has not had time to swim over. Naturally, you must disregard your life, so that filial piety will be to the gods, and there will be unexpected miracles, but I was still young at that time and really didn't understand this.其中最使我不解，甚至于发生反感的，是“老莱娱亲”和“郭巨埋儿”两件事。
Among them, the ones that puzzled me the most, and even disgusted, were the two things of "Lao Lai Yuqin" and "Guo Ju buried his child".我至今还记得，一个躺在父母跟前的老头子，一个抱在母亲手上的小孩子，是怎样地使我发生不同的感想呵。他们一手都拿着“摇咕咚”。这玩意儿确是可爱的，北京称为小鼓，盖即鼗也，朱熹曰，“鼗，小鼓，两旁有耳；持其柄而摇之，则旁耳还自击，”咕咚咕咚地响起来。然而这东西是不该拿在老莱子手里的，他应该扶一枝拐杖。现在这模样，简直是装佯，侮辱了孩子。我没有再看第二回，一到这一叶，便急速地翻过去了。
I still remember how an old man lying in front of his parents and a child holding his mother's hands made me feel differently. They all held "shaking dong in one hand". This thing is indeed cute, Beijing is called a small drum, and the cover is also a drum, Zhu Xi said, "The drum, the small drum, there are ears on both sides; Hold the handle and shake it, and the side ear will hit itself," the gurgling sounded. However, this thing should not be in Lao Laizi's hands, he should hold on to a cane. Now this appearance is simply pretending and insulting the child. I didn't look at it a second time, and as soon as I reached this leaf, I quickly turned over.那时的《二十四孝图》，早已不知去向了，目下所有的只是一本日本小田海僊所画的本子，叙老莱子事云，“行年七十，言不称老，常著五色斑斓之衣，为婴儿戏于亲侧。又常取水上堂，诈跌仆地，作婴儿啼，以娱亲意。”大约旧本也差不多，而招我反感的便是“诈跌”。无论忤逆，无论孝顺，小孩子多不愿意“诈”作，听故事也不喜欢是谣言，这是凡有稍稍留心儿童心理的都知道的。
At that time, the "Twenty-Four Filial Piety Pictures" had long been gone, and all that was there was now a book drawn by Oda Kaiqiao in Japan, narrating the story of Lao Laizi, "Seventy years old, not old, often wearing colorful clothes, playing for the baby on his side." He often took water from the hall, pretended to fall to the ground, and cried like a baby to entertain his parents. "It's about the same as the old version, and what disgusts me is the "fake fall". No matter how disobedient or filial piety is, most children are unwilling to "cheat" and do not like rumors when listening to stories, which is known to anyone who pays a little attention to children's psychology.然而在较古的书上一查，却还不至于如此虚伪。师觉授《孝子传》云，“老莱子……常著斑斓之衣，为亲取饮，上堂脚跌，恐伤父母之心，僵仆为婴儿啼。”（《太平御览》四百十三引）较之今说，似稍近于人情。不知怎地，后之君子却一定要改得他“诈”起来，心里才能舒服。邓伯道弃子救侄，想来也不过“弃”而已矣，昏妄人也必须说他将儿子捆在树上，使他追不上来才肯歇手。正如将“肉麻当作有趣”一般，以不情为伦纪，诬蔑了古人，教坏了后人。老莱子即是一例，道学先生以为他白璧无瑕时，他却已在孩子的心中死掉了。
However, if you look it up in an older book, it is not so hypocritical. Shi Jue taught him the "Biography of the Filial Son", saying, "Lao Laizi...... He often wore colorful clothes to fetch water for his parents. If he fell in class, he might hurt his parents' hearts, and he would freeze and cry like a baby. (413 quotes from "Taiping Yulan") Compared with today's statement, it seems to be slightly closer to human feelings. Somehow, the gentleman of the later generation must change him to "deceive" in order to feel comfortable. Deng Bodao abandoned his son to save his nephew, thinking that it was just "abandonment", and the foolish man had to say that he tied his son to a tree so that he could not catch up before he was willing to stop. Just as "meat and hemp are regarded as fun", taking heartlessness as the discipline of ethics slanders the ancients and teaching future generations. Lao Laizi is an example, when Mr. Taoism thought he was flawless, he had died in the child's heart.至于玩着“摇咕咚”的郭巨的儿子，却实在值得同情。他被抱在他母亲的臂膊上，高高兴兴地笑着；他的父亲却正在掘窟窿，要将他埋掉了。说明云，“汉郭巨家贫，有子三岁，母尝减食与之。巨谓妻曰，贫乏不能供母，子又分母之食。盍埋此子？”但是刘向《孝子传》所说，却又有些不同：巨家是富的，他都给了两弟；孩子是才生的，并没有到三岁。结末又大略相像了，“及掘坑二尺，得黄金一釜，上云：天赐郭巨，官不得取，民不得夺！”
As for Guo Ju's son who plays "Shake Gu Dong", it is really worthy of sympathy. He was held in his mother's arms and smiled happily; His father was digging a hole and wanted to bury him. The explanation said, "Han Guo's family is poor, and he has a three-year-old son, and his mother has reduced his food to give it." Wei Ju said to his wife, "I am too poor to support my mother, and my son will share my mother's food." Why not bury this child? But what Liu Xiang said in "The Biography of Filial Sons" is a little different: the giant family is rich, and he gave it to his two younger brothers; The child was born and did not reach the age of three. The ending is roughly similar, "When the pit was dug two feet, a pot of gold was obtained, and it was said: God gave Guo Ju, the official cannot take it, and the people cannot take it!" ”我最初实在替这孩子捏一把汗，待到掘出黄金一釜，这才觉得轻松。然而我已经不但自己不敢再想做孝子，并且怕我父亲去做孝子了。家景正在坏下去，常听到父母愁柴米；祖母又老了，倘使我的父亲竟学了郭巨，那么，该埋的不正是我么？如果一丝不走样，也掘出一釜黄金来，那自然是如天之福，但是，那时我虽然年纪小，似乎也明白天下未必有这样的巧事。
At first, I really sweated for this child, and only then did I feel relaxed when I dug out a pot of gold. However, not only did I dare not want to be a filial son anymore, but I was afraid that my father would be a filial son. The family scenery is deteriorating, and I often hear my parents worrying about firewood; My grandmother is old again, if my father actually learns from Guo Ju, then isn't it me who should be buried? If you don't go out of shape at all, you can dig out a pot of gold, which will naturally be like a blessing from heaven, but although I was young at that time, I seemed to understand that there may not be such a coincidence in the world.现在想起来，实在很觉得傻气。这是因为现在已经知道了这些老玩意，本来谁也不实行。整饬伦纪的文电是常有的，却很少见绅士赤条条地躺在冰上面，将军跳下汽车去负米。何况现在早长大了，看过几部古书，买过几本新书，什么《太平御览》咧，《古孝子传》咧，《人口问题》咧，《节制生育》咧，《二十世纪是儿童的世界》咧，可以抵抗被埋的理由多得很。不过彼一时，此一时，彼时我委实有点害怕：掘好深坑，不见黄金，连“摇咕咚”一同埋下去，盖上土，踏得实实的，又有什么法子可想呢。我想，事情虽然未必实现，但我从此总怕听到我的父母愁穷，怕看见我的白发的祖母，总觉得她是和我不两立，至少，也是一个和我的生命有些妨碍的人。后来这印象日见其淡了，但总有一些留遗，一直到她去世——这大概是送给《二十四孝图》的儒者所万料不到的罢。
Now that I think about it, I really feel stupid. This is because these old things are now known, and no one would have practiced them in the first place. It is common to see a gentleman lying naked on the ice, and the general jumping out of the car to carry the meter. What's more, now that I have grown up, I have read a few ancient books, bought a few new books, what "Taiping Yulan", "The Biography of Ancient Filial Sons", "Population Issues", "Birth Control", "The Twentieth Century is a Children's World", there are many reasons to resist being buried. But at that time, at this time, I was really a little scared: dig a deep pit, don't see the gold, and bury it with "shaking and gurgling", cover it with soil, and step on it solidly, what can I think of? I think that although things may not come true, I have always been afraid of hearing that my parents are poor, afraid of seeing my gray-haired grandmother, and always feel that she is incompatible with me, at least, she is also a person who is a little in the way of my life. Later, this impression faded day by day, but there were always some legacies, until her death - this was probably unexpected by the Confucian scholars who gave it to the "Twenty-Four Filial Piety Diagram".五月十日。
May 10th.

五猖会

五猖会

五猖会

Five Rampant Society孩子们所盼望的，过年过节之外，大概要数迎神赛会的时候了。但我家的所在很偏僻，待到赛会的行列经过时，一定已在下午，仪仗之类，也减而又减，所剩的极其寥寥。往往伸着颈子等候多时，却只见十几个人抬着一个金脸或蓝脸红脸的神像匆匆地跑过去。于是，完了。
What the children are looking forward to is that in addition to the New Year's holidays, it is probably time to welcome the gods. But my home is very remote, and by the time the procession of the competition passes, it must have been in the afternoon, and the honor guards and the like have also been reduced and reduced, and there are extremely few left. Often stretched out their necks and waited for a long time, only to see more than a dozen people carrying a statue of a god with a golden face or a blue face and a red face running over in a hurry. So, it's over.我常存着这样的一个希望：这一次所见的赛会，比前一次繁盛些。可是结果总是一个“差不多”；也总是只留下一个纪念品，就是当神像还未抬过之前，化一文钱买下的，用一点烂泥，一点颜色纸，一枝竹签和两三枝鸡毛所做的，吹起来会发出一种刺耳的声音的哨子，叫作“吹都都”的，吡吡地吹它两三天。
I often have this hope that the competition I saw this time was more prosperous than the previous one. But the result is always "almost"; There is always only one souvenir left, that is, when the statue is not carried up, it is bought for a penny, made with a little mud, a little colored paper, a bamboo skewer and two or three chicken feathers, and it will make a harsh sound when it is blown, called "blowing Dudu", and it will be blown for two or three days.现在看看《陶庵梦忆》，觉得那时的赛会，真是豪奢极了，虽然明人的文章，怕难免有些夸大。因为祷雨而迎龙王，现在也还有的，但办法却已经很简单，不过是十多人盘旋着一条龙，以及村童们扮些海鬼。那时却还要扮故事，而且实在奇拔得可观。他记扮《水浒传》中人物云：“……于是分头四出，寻黑矮汉，寻梢长大汉，寻头陀，寻胖大和尚，寻茁壮妇人，寻姣长妇人，寻青面，寻歪头，寻赤须，寻美髯，寻黑大汉，寻赤脸长须。大索城中；无，则之郭，之村，之山僻，之邻府州县。用重价聘之，得三十六人，梁山泊好汉，个个呵活，臻臻至至，人马称娖而行。……”这样的白描的活古人，谁能不动一看的雅兴呢？可惜这种盛举，早已和明社一同消灭了。
Now looking at "Tao'an Dream Memory", I feel that the competition at that time was really extravagant, although the articles of the Ming people are probably a little exaggerated. There are still some to welcome the Dragon King because of praying for rain, but the method is already very simple, just more than ten people hovering around a dragon, and the village children pretending to be some sea ghosts. At that time, I still had to pretend to be a story, and it was really extraordinary. He remembered playing the characters in "Water Margin": "...... So they split their heads and went out in all directions, looking for the black dwarf, looking for the big man, looking for the head tuo, looking for the fat monk, looking for the strong woman, looking for the long woman, looking for the green face, looking for the crooked head, looking for the red beard, looking for the beautiful beard, looking for the black man, looking for the red face and long beard. Dasuo City; If there is none, then go to the city, the village, the mountain, the neighboring prefecture and county. They hired them at a high price, and thirty-six people were recruited, all of whom were heroes from Liangshanbo, all of whom were cared for and treated with utmost care, and the people and horses praised and walked together. ...... "Who can not look at the elegant interest of such a living ancient? It's a pity that this grand event has long been eliminated along with the Ming Society.赛会虽然不像现在上海的旗袍，北京的谈国事，为当局所禁止，然而妇孺们是不许看的，读书人即所谓士子，也大抵不肯赶去看。只有游手好闲的闲人，这才跑到庙前或衙门前去看热闹；我关于赛会的知识，多半是从他们的叙述上得来的，并非考据家所贵重的“眼学”。然而记得有一回，也亲见过较盛的赛会。开首是一个孩子骑马先来，称为“塘报”；过了许久，“高照”到了，长竹竿揭起一条很长的旗，一个汗流浃背的胖大汉用两手托着；他高兴的时候，就肯将竿头放在头顶或牙齿上，甚而至于鼻尖。其次是所谓“高跷”，“抬阁”，“马头”了；还有扮犯人的，红衣枷锁，内中也有孩子。我那时觉得这些都是有光荣的事业，与闻其事的即全是大有运气的人，——大概羡慕他们的出风头罢。我想，我为什么不生一场重病，使我的母亲也好到庙里去许下一个“扮犯人”的心愿的呢？……然而我到现在终于没有和赛会发生关系过。
Although the competition is not like the cheongsam in Shanghai now, and the discussion of state affairs in Beijing is prohibited by the authorities, women and children are not allowed to watch it, and scholars, the so-called scholars, are probably unwilling to rush to see it. Only idle people who are idle will go to the temple or yamen to watch the excitement; Most of my knowledge about the competition comes from their narratives, not the "eye science" that is valuable to researchers. However, I remember one time, I also saw a more prosperous competition in person. At the beginning, a child rode a horse first, called "Tang Bao"; After a long time, the "high light" arrived, and a long bamboo pole lifted a very long flag, held by a sweaty fat man with both hands; When he was happy, he was willing to put the head of the rod on the top of his head or on his teeth, and even the tip of his nose. followed by the so-called "stilts", "pavilion", and "horse head"; There are also prisoners, red shackles, and children inside. At that time, I thought that these were all glorious careers, and those who heard about them were all lucky people,—— probably envious of their limelight. I thought, why didn't I get seriously ill so that my mother would go to the temple to make a wish to "pretend to be a prisoner"? …… However, I have never had a relationship with the competition until now.要到东关看五猖会去了。这是我儿时所罕逢的一件盛事。因为那会是全县中最盛的会，东关又是离我家很远的地方，出城还有六十多里水路，在那里有两座特别的庙。一是梅姑庙，就是《聊斋志异》所记，室女守节，死后成神，却篡取别人的丈夫的；现在神座上确塑着一对少年男女，眉开眼笑，殊与“礼教”有妨。其一便是五猖庙了，名目就奇特。据有考据癖的人说：这就是五通神。然而也并无确据。神像是五个男人，也不见有什么猖獗之状；后面列坐着五位太太，却并不“分坐”，远不及北京戏园里界限之谨严。其实呢，这也是殊与“礼教”有妨的，——但他们既然是五猖，便也无法可想，而且自然也就“又作别论”了。
I want to go to Dongguan to see the Five Rampant Society. This was a rare event in my childhood. Because it was the most prosperous meeting in the county, Dongguan was far away from my home, and there were more than 60 miles of waterway out of the city, where there were two special temples. The first is the Meigu Temple, which is recorded in "Liao Zhai Zhi Yi", where the maid kept the festival and became a god after death, but usurped someone else's husband; Now there is indeed a pair of young men and women on the throne, smiling with their eyebrows open, which is particularly harmful to "etiquette". One of them is the Five Rampant Temple, which has a peculiar name. According to people with a fetish for research: This is the five gods. However, there is no conclusive evidence. the statue of five men, and there was no rampant appearance; There are five wives sitting in the back, but they are not "separated", which is far less strict than the strict boundaries in the Beijing Theater. In fact, this is also very harmful to "etiquette",—— but since they are five rampant, they cannot be imagined, and naturally they are "another story".因为东关离城远，大清早大家就起来。昨夜预定好的三道明瓦窗的大船，已经泊在河埠头，船椅，饭菜，茶炊，点心盒子，都在陆续搬下去了。我笑着跳着，催他们要搬得快。忽然，工人的脸色很谨肃了，我知道有些蹊跷，四面一看，父亲就站在我背后。
Because Dongguan is far from the city, everyone gets up early in the morning. The big boat with three bright tile windows booked last night has been moored at the river wharf, and the chairs, meals, samovar and snack boxes have been moved down one after another. I laughed and jumped, urging them to move fast. Suddenly, the worker's face became very serious, I knew something was strange, and when I looked around, my father was standing behind me.“去拿你的书来。”他慢慢地说。
"Go get your book." He said slowly.这所谓“书”，是指我开蒙时候所读的《鉴略》，因为我再没有第二本了。我们那里上学的岁数是多拣单数的，所以这使我记住我其时是七岁。
This so-called "book" refers to the "Jianlue" that I read when I was enlightened, because I don't have a second one. The age of our school there was odd, so it made me remember that I was seven years old.我忐忑着，拿了书来了。他使我同坐在堂中央的桌子前，教我一句一句地读下去。我担着心，一句一句地读下去。
I was apprehensive and brought the book. He made me sit at a table in the center of the hall and taught me to read sentence by sentence. I carried my heart and read it sentence by sentence.两句一行，大约读了二三十行罢，他说：
After reading about twenty or thirty lines in one sentence and one line, he said:“给我读熟。背不出，就不准去看会。”
"Read it to me. If you can't memorize it, you are not allowed to go to the meeting. ”他说完，便站起来，走进房里去了。
After he finished speaking, he stood up and walked into the room.我似乎从头上浇了一盆冷水。但是，有什么法子呢？自然是读着，读着，强记着，——而且要背出来。
I seem to pour a basin of cold water over my head. But what can be done? Naturally, read, read, memorize ,—— and memorize it.粤自盘古，生于太荒，Guangdong has been born in the Great Wilderness since Pangu, and 
首出御世，肇开混茫。 was the first to emerge from the world, starting from the chaos.
就是这样的书，我现在只记得前四句，别的都忘却了；那时所强记的二三十行，自然也一齐忘却在里面了。记得那时听人说，读《鉴略》比读《千字文》，《百家姓》有用得多，因为可以知道从古到今的大概。知道从古到今的大概，那当然是很好的，然而我一字也不懂。“粤自盘古”就是“粤自盘古”，读下去，记住它，“粤自盘古”呵！“生于太荒”呵！……
This is such a book, I only remember the first four sentences now, and I have forgotten everything else; The twenty or thirty lines that I had memorized at that time were naturally forgotten in it. I remember hearing people say that reading "Jianlue" is much more useful than reading "Thousand Character Text" and "Hundred Family Surnames", because you can know the general situation from ancient times to the present. Of course, it is good to know the general idea from ancient times to the present, but I don't understand a word. "Guangdong from Pangu" is "Guangdong from Pangu", read on, remember it, "Guangdong from Pangu" huh! "Born in the wilderness" Huh! ……应用的物件已经搬完，家中由忙乱转成静肃了。朝阳照着西墙，天气很清朗。母亲，工人，长妈妈即阿长，都无法营救，只默默地静候着我读熟，而且背出来。在百静中，我似乎头里要伸出许多铁钳，将什么“生于太荒”之流夹住；也听到自己急急诵读的声音发着抖，仿佛深秋的蟋蟀，在夜中鸣叫似的。
The applied objects have been moved, and the home has changed from busy to quiet. The morning sun shines on the west wall, and the weather is very clear. My mother, the worker, and the eldest mother, Ah Chang, could not be rescued, so they only silently waited for me to read it and memorize it. In the silence, I seem to have a lot of iron tongs sticking out of my head to clamp the flow of "born in the wilderness"; I also heard my voice trembling as I hurriedly recited, like crickets chirping in the night in late autumn.他们都等候着；太阳也升得更高了。
They are all waiting; The sun also rose higher.我忽然似乎已经很有把握，便即站了起来，拿书走进父亲的书房，一气背将下去，梦似的就背完了。
I suddenly seemed to be very sure, so I stood up, took the book and walked into my father's study, memorized it in one go, and finished memorizing it like a dream.“不错。去罢。”父亲点着头说。
"Not bad. Go and dismiss. My father nodded and said.大家同时活动起来，脸上都露出笑容，向河埠走去。工人将我高高地抱起，仿佛在祝贺我的成功一般，快步走在最前头。
Everyone moved at the same time, with smiles on their faces, and walked towards the river port. The workers picked me up high, as if congratulating me on my success, and walked quickly to the front.我却并没有他们那么高兴。开船以后，水路中的风景，盒子里的点心，以及到了东关的五猖会的热闹，对于我似乎都没有什么大意思。
I wasn't as happy as they were. After sailing, the scenery on the waterway, the snacks in the box, and the excitement of the Five Rampant Club in Dongguan didn't seem to be of much interest to me.直到现在，别的完全忘却，不留一点痕迹了，只有背诵《鉴略》这一段，却还分明如昨日事。
Until now, everything else has been completely forgotten, leaving no trace, only reciting the paragraph of "Jianlue", but it is still as clear as yesterday.我至今一想起，还诧异我的父亲何以要在那时候叫我来背书。
When I think about it to this day, I am still surprised why my father asked me to endorse it at that time.五月二十五日。
May 25th.

无常

无常

无常

impermanence迎神赛会这一天出巡的神，如果是掌握生杀之权的，——不，这生杀之权四个字不大妥，凡是神，在中国仿佛都有些随意杀人的权柄似的，倒不如说是职掌人民的生死大事的罢，就如城隍和东岳大帝之类，那么，他的卤簿中间就另有一群特别的脚色：鬼卒，鬼王，还有活无常。
The god who went out on the tour on the day of the Welcoming God Competition, if he is in control of the power of life and death,—— no, the four words of the right of life and death are not very appropriate, all gods, in China seem to have some authority to kill people at will, but it is better to say that they are in charge of the people's life and death events, such as the City God and the Dongyue Emperor, then, there is another group of special foot characters in the middle of his ceremonial procession: ghost soldiers, ghost kings, and living impermanence.这些鬼物们，大概都是由粗人和乡下人扮演的。鬼卒和鬼王是红红绿绿的衣裳，赤着脚；蓝脸，上面又画些鱼鳞，也许是龙鳞或别的什么鳞罢，我不大清楚。鬼卒拿着钢叉，叉环振得琅琅地响，鬼子拿的是一块小小的虎头牌。据传说，鬼王是只用一只脚走路的；但他究竟是乡下人，虽然脸上已经画上些鱼鳞或者别的什么鳞，却仍然只得用了两只脚走路。所以看客对于他们不很敬畏，也不大留心，除了念佛老妪和她的孙子们为面面圆到起见，也照例给他们一个“不胜屏营待命之至”的仪节。
These ghosts are probably played by rough people and country people. The ghost soldier and the ghost king are dressed in red, red and green, barefoot; Blue face, and some fish scales are drawn on it, maybe dragon scales or some other scales, I don't know. The ghost soldier held a steel fork, the fork ring vibrated loudly, and the devil was holding a small tiger head card. According to legend, the ghost king walked on only one foot; But he was a countryman, although he had painted some fish scales or other scales on his face, but he still had to walk on two feet. Therefore, the spectators were not very in awe of them, nor did they pay much attention, except for the old woman and her grandchildren who were round, they also gave them a "standing by" ceremony as usual.至于我们——我相信：我和许多人——所最愿意看的，却在活无常。他不但活泼而诙谐，单是那浑身雪白这一点，在红红绿绿中就有“鹤立鸡群”之概。只要望见一顶白纸的高帽子和他手里的破芭蕉扇的影子，大家就都有些紧张，而且高兴起来了。
As for us, I believe, I and many others, what we want to see most is living impermanence. He is not only lively and witty, but also has the idea of "standing out from the flock" in the red, red, green and green alone. As long as they saw the shadow of a tall hat on white paper and the broken banana fan in his hand, everyone was a little nervous and happy.人民之于鬼物，惟独与他最为稔熟，也最为亲密，平时也常常可以遇见他。譬如城隍庙或东岳庙中，大殿后面就有一间暗室，叫作“阴司间”，在才可辨色的昏暗中，塑着各种鬼：吊死鬼，跌死鬼，虎伤鬼，科场鬼，……而一进门口所看见的长而白的东西就是他。我虽然也曾瞻仰过一回这“阴司间”，但那时胆子小，没有看明白。听说他一手还拿着铁索，因为他是勾摄生魂的使者。相传樊江东岳庙的“阴司间”的构造，本来是极其特别的：门口是一块活板，人一进门，踏着活板的这一端，塑在那一端的他便扑过来，铁索正套在你脖子上。后来吓死了一个人，钉实了，所以在我幼小的时候，这就已不能动。
The people are the most familiar with ghosts, and they are the most intimate, and they can often meet him. For example, in the City God Temple or Dongyue Temple, there is a dark room behind the main hall, called the "Underworld Room", in the darkness where colors can be distinguished, all kinds of ghosts are sculpted: hanging ghosts, falling ghosts, tiger wounding ghosts, and science field ghosts,...... And the long, white thing he saw as soon as he entered the door was him. Although I had also admired this "underworld" once, I was timid and didn't understand it at that time. I heard that he was still holding an iron rope in one hand, because he was a messenger of seducing souls. According to legend, the structure of the "underworld" of the Dongyue Temple in Fanjiang was originally extremely special: the door was a trap, and as soon as a person entered the door, stepped on this end of the trap, he pounced on the sculpted at that end, and the iron cable was put around your neck. Later, I scared someone to death and nailed it down, so when I was young, I couldn't move.倘使要看个分明，那么，《玉历钞传》上就画着他的像，不过《玉历钞传》也有繁简不同的本子的，倘是繁本，就一定有。身上穿的是斩衰凶服，腰间束的是草绳，脚穿草鞋，项挂纸锭；手上是破芭蕉扇，铁索，算盘；肩膀是耸起的，头发却披下来；眉眼的外梢都向下，像一个“八”字。头上一顶长方帽，下大顶小，按比例一算，该有二尺来高罢；在正面，就是遗老遗少们所戴瓜皮小帽的缀一粒珠子或一块宝石的地方，直写着四个字道：“一见有喜”。有一种本子上，却写的是“你也来了”。这四个字，是有时也见于包公殿的扁额上的，至于他的帽上是何人所写，他自己还是阎罗王，我可没有研究出。
If you want to see it clearly, then his portrait is painted on the "Jade Calendar Banknote", but the "Jade Calendar Banknote" also has different books of tradition and simplicity, if it is a traditional version, there must be one. He wore a murderous costume, a straw rope tied around his waist, straw sandals on his feet, and paper ingots hanging around his neck; In his hand are broken banana fans, iron cables, and abacus; The shoulders are shrugged, but the hair is draped down; The outer tips of the eyebrows and eyes are downward, like a "eight". a rectangular hat on the head, a large top and a small top, according to the scale, it should be two feet high; On the front, there is a bead or a gemstone attached to the melon skin hat worn by the old and young, and four words are written directly: "There is joy at first sight". There is a kind of book that says "You are here too". These four words are sometimes seen on the flat forehead of the Bao Gong Hall, as for who wrote it on his hat, he himself is still the King of Hell, I have not researched it.《玉历钞传》上还有一种和活无常相对的鬼物，装束也相仿，叫作“死有分”。这在迎神时候也有的，但名称却讹作死无常了，黑脸，黑衣，谁也不爱看。在“阴司间”里也有的，胸口靠着墙壁，阴森森地站着；那才真真是“碰壁”。凡有进去烧香的人们，必须摩一摩他的脊梁，据说可以摆脱了晦气；我小时也曾摩过这脊梁来，然而晦气似乎终于没有脱，——也许那时不摩，现在的晦气还要重罢，这一节也还是没有研究出。
There is also a ghost on the "Jade Calendar Banknotes" that is opposed to the impermanence of life, and the costume is similar, called "death has a share". This is also seen when welcoming the gods, but the name is misrepresented as impermanence, black face, black clothes, no one likes to look at it. There are also those in the "underworld", standing gloomily with their chests against the wall; That's really "hitting a wall". Anyone who goes in to burn incense must rub his spine, which is said to get rid of bad luck; I also rubbed this spine when I was a child, but the bad luck seems to have not come off at all,—— maybe I didn't rub it at that time, and the bad luck is even worse now, and this section has not been studied.我也没有研究过小乘佛教的经典，但据耳食之谈，则在印度的佛经里，焰摩天是有的，牛首阿旁也有的，都在地狱里做主任。至于勾摄生魂的使者的这无常先生，却似乎于古无征，耳所习闻的只有什么“人生无常”之类的话。大概这意思传到中国之后，人们便将他具象化了。这实在是我们中国人的创作。
I have not studied the scriptures of Theravada Buddhism, but according to what I have heard, in the Buddhist scriptures in India, there are flames in the sky, and there are also bull heads and abunts, all of whom are directors in hell. As for this Mr. Impermanence, who is the messenger of the soul, it seems that there is no sign in ancient times, and all he is familiar with is words such as "the impermanence of life". Probably after this meaning spread to China, people made him concrete. This is really the creation of our Chinese.然而人们一见他，为什么就都有些紧张，而且高兴起来呢？
However, when people saw him, why were they a little nervous and happy?凡有一处地方，如果出了文士学者或名流，他将笔头一扭，就很容易变成“模范县”。我的故乡，在汉末虽曾经虞仲翔先生揄扬过，但是那究竟太早了，后来到底免不了产生所谓“绍兴师爷”，不过也并非男女老小全是“绍兴师爷”，别的“下等人”也不少。这些“下等人”，要他们发什么“我们现在走的是一条狭窄险阻的小路，左面是一个广漠无际的泥潭，右面也是一片广漠无际的浮砂，前面是遥遥茫茫荫在薄雾的里面的目的地”那样热昏似的妙语，是办不到的，可是在无意中，看得往这“荫在薄雾的里面的目的地”的道路很明白：求婚，结婚，养孩子，死亡。但这自然是专就我的故乡而言，若是“模范县”里的人民，那当然又作别论。他们——敝同乡“下等人”——的许多，活着，苦着，被流言，被反噬，因了积久的经验，知道阳间维持“公理”的只有一个会，而且这会的本身就是“遥遥茫茫”，于是乎势不得不发生对于阴间的神往。人是大抵自以为衔些冤抑的；活的“正人君子”们只能骗鸟，若问愚民，他就可以不假思索地回答你：公正的裁判是在阴间！
Wherever there is a place, if there are scribes and scholars or celebrities, he twists the tip of his pen, and it is easy to turn it into a "model county". Although my hometown was once praised by Mr. Yu Zhongxiang at the end of the Han Dynasty, it was too early, and the so-called "Shaoxing Master" was inevitable in the end, but not all men, women, and children were "Shaoxing Masters", and there were many other "inferior people". These "inferior people", what do you want them to say, "We are now walking on a narrow and dangerous path, on the left is an endless quagmire, on the right is also a vast and endless floating sand, and in front is a destination in the distant shade of the mist", it is impossible to do, but inadvertently, it is clear that the road to this "destination shaded in the mist" is very clear: propose, get married, raise children, and die. But this is naturally specific to my hometown, if it is the people in the "model county", then of course it is a different matter. Many of them, our fellow townsmen, are alive, suffering, gossiped, and backlashed, because of their accumulated experience, they know that there is only one association that maintains "axioms" in the human world, and this meeting itself is "far away", so it is inevitable that the fascination with the underworld will occur. People generally think that they have some grievances; Living "righteous gentlemen" can only deceive birds, and if you ask a foolish person, he can answer you without thinking: the fair judgment is in the underworld!想到生的乐趣，生固然可以留恋；但想到生的苦趣，无常也不一定是恶客。无论贵贱，无论贫富，其时都是“一双空手见阎王”，有冤的得伸，有罪的就得罚。然而虽说是“下等人”，也何尝没有反省？自己做了一世人，又怎么样呢？未曾“跳到半天空”么？没有“放冷箭”么？无常的手里就拿着大算盘，你摆尽臭架子也无益。对付别人要滴水不羼的公理，对自己总还不如虽在阴司里也还能够寻到一点私情。然而那又究竟是阴间，阎罗天子，牛首阿旁，还有中国人自己想出来的马面，都是并不兼差，真正主持公理的脚色，虽然他们并没有在报上发表过什么大文章。当还未做鬼之前，有时先不欺心的人们，遥想着将来，就又不能不想在整块的公理中，来寻一点情面的末屑，这时候，我们的活无常先生便见得可亲爱了，利中取大，害中取小，我们的古哲墨翟先生谓之“小取”云。
Thinking of the joy of life, life can certainly be nostalgic; But thinking of the bitterness of life, impermanence is not necessarily a bad guest. No matter whether you are rich or poor, whether rich or poor, it is always "a pair of empty-handed Yama Kings", those who are wronged will be punished, and those who are guilty will be punished. However, even though he is a "lower person", why has he not reflected? What if you have been a person all your life? Haven't you "jumped into the sky"? Isn't there a "cold arrow"? Impermanence has a big abacus in his hand, and it is useless for you to put on a stinky show. The axiom of dealing with others is not as good as being able to find a little private affection even in the underworld. However, what is the underworld, the Son of Heaven, the bull head A Pang, and the horse noodles that the Chinese themselves came up with, are not bad, and they really preside over the axioms, although they have not published any big articles in the newspaper. When before becoming a ghost, sometimes people who do not deceive their hearts, thinking about the future, can't help but want to find a little bit of affection in the whole piece of axioms, at this time, our Mr. Impermanence sees lovely, taking the big from the benefit and the small from the harm, our ancient philosopher Mr. Mo Zhai called it "small take".在庙里泥塑的，在书上墨印的模样上，是看不出他那可爱来的。最好是去看戏。但看普通的戏也不行，必须看“大戏”或者“目连戏”。目连戏的热闹，张岱在《陶庵梦忆》上也曾夸张过，说是要连演两三天。在我幼小时候可已经不然了，也如大戏一样，始于黄昏，到次日的天明便完结。这都是敬神禳灾的演剧，全本里一定有一个恶人，次日的将近天明便是这恶人的收场的时候，“恶贯满盈”，阎王出票来勾摄了，于是乎这活的活无常便在戏台上出现。
In the clay sculpture in the temple, the appearance of the ink print on the book, you can't see his cuteness. It is better to go to the play. But watching ordinary dramas is not enough, you must watch "big dramas" or "mulian dramas". The liveliness of the Mu Lian opera, Zhang Dai also exaggerated in "Tao'an Dream Memory", saying that it would be performed for two or three days. This was not the case when I was young, and it was like a big play, starting at dusk and ending at dawn the next day. This is all a play to worship the gods and ward off disasters, there must be a wicked person in the whole book, and the next day is almost dawn when this evil man ends, "full of evil", the King of Hell issued a ticket to sketch it, so this living impermanence appeared on the stage.我还记得自己坐在这一种戏台下的船上的情形，看客的心情和普通是两样的。平常愈夜深愈懒散，这时却愈起劲。他所戴的纸糊的高帽子，本来是挂在台角上的，这时预先拿进去了；一种特别乐器，也准备使劲地吹。这乐器好像喇叭，细而长，可有七八尺，大约是鬼物所爱听的罢，和鬼无关的时候就不用；吹起来，Nhatu，nhatu，nhatututuu地响，所以我们叫它“目连嗐头”。
I still remember sitting on a boat under this kind of stage, and the mood of the spectators was different from that of ordinary people. Usually the later the night gets, the more lazy he is, but now he is more energetic. The papier-mâché high hat he wore was originally hung on the corner of the stage, but he took it in advance; A special instrument that is also ready to be played hard. This instrument is like a trumpet, thin and long, seven or eight feet long, which is probably what ghosts like to listen to, and is not used when it has nothing to do with ghosts; When it blows, it sounds like Nhatu, nhatu, nhatututuu, so we call it "Muliantou".在许多人期待着恶人的没落的凝望中，他出来了，服饰比画上还简单，不拿铁索，也不带算盘，就是雪白的一条莽汉，粉面朱唇，眉黑如漆，蹙着，不知道是在笑还是在哭。但他一出台就须打一百零八个嚏，同时也放一百零八个屁，这才自述他的履历。可惜我记不清楚了，其中有一段大概是这样：
In the gaze of many people looking forward to the decline of the wicked, he came out, his clothes were simpler than the painting, without iron chains or abacus, he was a snow-white reckless man, with pink faces and red lips, his eyebrows were as black as lacquer, frowning, not knowing whether he was laughing or crying. But as soon as he came out, he had to sneeze one hundred and eight times, and at the same time, he had to let out one hundred and eight farts before he told his resume. Unfortunately, I can't remember clearly, but one of them is roughly like this:“…………
大王出了牌票，叫我去拿隔壁的癞子。
The king took out the ticket and asked me to get the leper next door.问了起来呢，原来是我堂房的阿侄。
When I asked, it turned out to be my nephew.生的是什么病？伤寒，还带痢疾。
What kind of disease do you have? Typhoid fever and dysentery.看的是什么郎中？下方桥的陈念义la儿子。
What kind of doctor are you looking at? Chen Nianyi of the lower bridge.开的是怎样的药方？附子，肉桂，外加牛膝。
What kind of prescription is prescribed? Aconite, cinnamon, plus ox hyssop.第一煎吃下去，冷汗发出；
The first frying is eaten, and cold sweat comes out;第二煎吃下去，两脚笔直。
Eat the second fry, with straight feet.我道nga阿嫂哭得悲伤，暂放他还阳半刻。
My sister-in-law cried sadly, and let him go for half an hour.大王道我是得钱买放，就将我捆打四十！”
The king said that I got money to buy and release, so he tied me up forty times! ”这叙述里的“子”字都读作入声。陈念义是越中的名医，俞仲华曾将他写入《荡寇志》里，拟为神仙；可是一到他的令郎，似乎便不大高明了。la者“的”也；“儿”读若“倪”，倒是古音罢；nga者，“我的”或“我们的”之意也。
The word "zi" in this narrative is read as sound. Chen Nianyi is a famous doctor in Yuezhong, and Yu Zhonghua once wrote him into the "Chronicles of the Dangkou" and intended to be a god; But as soon as he arrived at his Linglang, he didn't seem to be very smart. la is "of" also; "er" is pronounced like "Ni", but it is an ancient sound; nga means "mine" or "our".他口里的阎罗天子仿佛也不大高明，竟会误解他的人格，——不，鬼格。但连“还阳半刻”都知道，究竟还不失其“聪明正直之谓神”。不过这惩罚，却给了我们的活无常以不可磨灭的冤苦的印象，一提起，就使他更加蹙紧双眉，捏定破芭蕉扇，脸向着地，鸭子浮水似的跳舞起来。
The Yama Son of Heaven in his mouth didn't seem to be very clever, and he would misunderstand his personality,—— no, ghost. But even "half a moment of returning to the sun" knows that it is still "smart and upright called God". However, this punishment gave us the impression of indelible injustice and impermanence, and when he mentioned it, he frowned even more, pinched the broken banana fan, his face fell to the ground, and danced like a duck floating water.Nhatu，nhatu，nhatu－nhatu－nhatututuu！目连嗐头也冤苦不堪似的吹着。
Nhatu，nhatu，nhatu－nhatu－nhatututuu！ Mu Lian's head was blown as if he was in agony.他因此决定了：
He therefore decided:“难是弗放者个！
"It's hard to let go!那怕你，铜墙铁壁！
Even if you are impregnable!那怕你，皇亲国戚！
Even if you are a royal relative!…………”
“难”者，“今”也；“者个”者，“的了”之意，词之决也。“虽有忮心，不怨飘瓦”，他现在毫不留情了，然而这是受了阎罗老子的督责之故，不得已也。一切鬼众中，就是他有点人情；我们不变鬼则已，如果要变鬼，自然就只有他可以比较的相亲近。
"Difficult" means "now"; The meaning of "the" is the decision of the word. "Although he is jealous, he does not complain about the floating tiles", he is now merciless, but this is because he is supervised by Yama Lao Tzu, and it is a last resort. Among all the ghosts, he is a little humane; If we don't become ghosts, if we want to become ghosts, naturally only he can be close to each other.我至今还确凿记得，在故乡时候，和“下等人”一同，常常这样高兴地正视过这鬼而人，理而情，可怖而可爱的无常；而且欣赏他脸上的哭或笑，口头的硬语与谐谈……。
I still remember that when I was in my hometown, I often happily faced this ghost and human, reasonable and emotional, terrifying and lovely impermanence; And appreciate the crying or laughter on his face, the hard words and the ...... of humor.迎神时候的无常，可和演剧上的又有些不同了。他只有动作，没有言语，跟定了一个捧着一盘饭菜的小丑似的脚色走，他要去吃；他却不给他。另外还加添了两名脚色，就是“正人君子”之所谓“老婆儿女”。凡“下等人”，都有一种通病：常喜欢以己之所欲，施之于人。虽是对于鬼，也不肯给他孤寂，凡有鬼神，大概总要给他们一对一对地配起来。无常也不在例外。所以，一个是漂亮的女人，只是很有些村妇样，大家都称她无常嫂；这样看来，无常是和我们平辈的，无怪他不摆教授先生的架子。一个是小孩子，小高帽，小白衣；虽然小，两肩却已经耸起了，眉目的外梢也向下。这分明是无常少爷了，大家却叫他阿领，对于他似乎都不很表敬意；猜起来，仿佛是无常嫂的前夫之子似的。但不知何以相貌又和无常有这么像？吁！鬼神之事，难言之矣，只得姑且置之弗论。至于无常何以没有亲儿女，到今年可很容易解释了：鬼神能前知，他怕儿女一多，爱说闲话的就要旁敲侧击地锻成他拿卢布，所以不但研究，还早已实行了“节育”了。
The impermanence of welcoming the gods is a little different from acting. He only moved, no words, and walked like a clown holding a plate of food, and he was going to eat; But he didn't give it to him. In addition, two characters were added, the so-called "wives and children" of "upright gentlemen". All "inferior people" have a common problem: they often like to do what they want to others. Even for ghosts, they refuse to give him loneliness, and whenever there are ghosts and gods, they must probably be matched with them one-on-one. Impermanence is no exception. Therefore, one is a beautiful woman, but she looks like a village woman, and everyone calls her impermanent sister-in-law; From this point of view, impermanence is on the same level as us, so it's no wonder he doesn't put on the shelf of a professor. one is a child, a little top hat, and a little white dress; Although small, the shoulders are already raised, and the outer tips of the eyebrows are also down. This is clearly the impermanent young master, but everyone calls him Ah Ling, and they don't seem to show much respect for him; Guessing it, it seems to be the son of the ex-husband of the impermanence sister-in-law. But I don't know why it looks so similar to impermanence? Sigh! The matters of ghosts and gods are difficult to discuss, so I have to set aside them for now. As for why impermanence does not have children, it is easy to explain this year: ghosts and gods can foresee, he is afraid that there will be many children, and those who love to gossip will forge him into taking rubles, so he not only researched, but also practiced "birth control".这捧着饭菜的一幕，就是“送无常”。因为他是勾魂使者，所以民间凡有一个人死掉之后，就得用酒饭恭送他。至于不给他吃，那是赛会时候的开玩笑，实际上并不然。但是，和无常开玩笑，是大家都有此意的，因为他爽直，爱发议论，有人情，——要寻真实的朋友，倒还是他妥当。
This scene of holding a meal is "sending impermanence". Because he is a soul seduction messenger, whenever a person dies in the folk, he must be sent off with wine and food. As for not giving him food, it was a joke during the competition, but in fact it was not. However, joking with impermanence is something everyone has this intention, because he is straightforward, loves to talk, has favors,—— and wants to find real friends, but he is still appropriate.有人说，他是生人走阴，就是原是人，梦中却入冥去当差的，所以很有些人情。我还记得住在离我家不远的小屋子里的一个男人，便自称是“走无常”，门外常常燃着香烛。但我看他脸上的鬼气反而多。莫非入冥做了鬼，倒会增加人气的么？吁！鬼神之事，难言之矣，这也只得姑且置之弗论了。
Some people say that he is a living person who goes to the yin, that is, he was originally a human being, but he went to the underworld to work as an errand boy in his dream, so he has a lot of favors. I still remember a man who lived in a small house not far from my house, who called himself a "walking impermanence", and often burned incense candles outside the door. But I see that there is more ghostly energy on his face. Could it be that going into the underworld and becoming a ghost will increase his popularity? Sigh! It is difficult to talk about ghosts and gods, so I have to put it aside for the time being.六月二十三日。
六月二十三日。

从百草园到三味书屋

从百草园到三味书屋

从百草园到三味书屋

From Baicao Garden to Sanwei Bookstore我家的后面有一个很大的园，相传叫作百草园。现在是早已并屋子一起卖给朱文公的子孙了，连那最末次的相见也已经隔了七八年，其中似乎确凿只有一些野草；但那时却是我的乐园。
There is a large garden behind my house, which is said to be called Baicao Garden. Now it has already been sold to Zhu Wengong's descendants along with the house, and even the last meeting has been separated by seven or eight years, and it seems that there are only some weeds in it; But it was my paradise then.不必说碧绿的菜畦，光滑的石井栏，高大的皂荚树，紫红的桑椹；也不必说鸣蝉在树叶里长吟，肥胖的黄蜂伏在菜花上，轻捷的叫天子（云雀）忽然从草间直窜向云霄里去了。单是周围的短短的泥墙根一带，就有无限趣味。油蛉在这里低唱，蟋蟀们在这里弹琴。翻开断砖来，有时会遇见蜈蚣；还有斑蝥，倘若用手指按住它的脊梁，便会拍的一声，从后窍喷出一阵烟雾。何首乌藤和木莲藤缠络着，木莲有莲房一般的果实，何首乌有拥肿的根。有人说，何首乌根是有像人形的，吃了便可以成仙，我于是常常拔它起来，牵连不断地拔起来，也曾因此弄坏了泥墙，却从来没有见过有一块根像人样。如果不怕刺，还可以摘到覆盆子，像小珊瑚珠攒成的小球，又酸又甜，色味都比桑椹要好得远。
Needless to say, the turquoise vegetable beds, the smooth stone well railing, the tall acacia trees, and the purple-red mulberries; Needless to say, the cicadas sang in the leaves, the fat wasps lay on the cauliflower, and the sky sky (lark) suddenly flew straight from the grass into the sky. Just the surrounding area of the short mud wall root is infinitely interesting. Oilflies sing here, and crickets play here. When you turn over the broken bricks, you will sometimes meet centipedes; There is also a cantharid, if you press its spine with your fingers, it will slap and spew out a burst of smoke from the back orifice. He Shou Wu vine and magnolia vine are intertwined, magnolia has lotus-like fruits, and He Shou Wu has swollen roots. Some people say that He Shou Wugen has a humanoid shape, and you can become an immortal if you eat it, so I often pulled it up, implicated and constantly pulled it up, and I have also broken the mud wall because of this, but I have never seen a root that looks like a human. If you are not afraid of thorns, you can also pick raspberries, like small balls made of small coral beads, sour and sweet, and the color and taste are far better than mulberries.长的草里是不去的，因为相传这园里有一条很大的赤练蛇。
It is not in the long grass, because it is said that there is a large red snake in this garden.长妈妈曾经讲给我一个故事听：先前，有一个读书人住在古庙里用功，晚间，在院子里纳凉的时候，突然听到有人在叫他。答应着，四面看时，却见一个美女的脸露在墙头上，向他一笑，隐去了。他很高兴；但竟给那走来夜谈的老和尚识破了机关。说他脸上有些妖气，一定遇见“美女蛇”了；这是人首蛇身的怪物，能唤人名，倘一答应，夜间便要来吃这人的肉的。他自然吓得要死，而那老和尚却道无妨，给他一个小盒子，说只要放在枕边，便可高枕而卧。他虽然照样办，却总是睡不着，——当然睡不着的。到半夜，果然来了，沙沙沙！门外像是风雨声。他正抖作一团时，却听得豁的一声，一道金光从枕边飞出，外面便什么声音也没有了，那金光也就飞回来，敛在盒子里。后来呢？后来，老和尚说，这是飞蜈蚣，它能吸蛇的脑髓，美女蛇就被它治死了。
My eldest mother once told me a story: Previously, a scholar lived in an ancient temple and worked hard, and at night, when he was cooling off in the yard, he suddenly heard someone calling him. Agreed, and when he looked around, he saw a beautiful woman's face exposed on the wall, smiled at him, and disappeared. He was happy; But he actually saw through the mechanism for the old monk who came to talk at night. said that he had a little demonic aura on his face, and he must have met a "beautiful snake"; This is a monster with a human head and a snake body, which can call people's names, and if they agree, they will come to eat this person's flesh at night. He was naturally scared to death, but the old monk said it was okay, gave him a small box, and said that as long as he put it next to his pillow, he could lie down with his pillow. Although he still did it, he always couldn't sleep,—— of course he couldn't sleep. In the middle of the night, it really came, rustling! Outside the door was like the sound of wind and rain. When he was shaking into a ball, he heard a sudden, a golden light flew out from the pillow, and there was no sound outside, and the golden light flew back and was hidden in the box. What happened later? Later, the old monk said that this was a flying centipede, which could suck the brain marrow of a snake, and the beautiful snake was killed by it.结末的教训是：所以倘有陌生的声音叫你的名字，你万不可答应他。
The final lesson is: So if a strange voice calls your name, you must not agree to him.这故事很使我觉得做人之险，夏夜乘凉，往往有些担心，不敢去看墙上，而且极想得到一盒老和尚那样的飞蜈蚣。走到百草园的草丛旁边时，也常常这样想。但直到现在，总还是没有得到，但也没有遇见过赤练蛇和美女蛇。叫我名字的陌生声音自然是常有的，然而都不是美女蛇。
This story makes me feel very dangerous to be a person, enjoying the shade on summer nights, often a little worried, not daring to look at the wall, and really wanting to get a box of flying centipedes like the old monk. When I walk to the grass in the Baicao Garden, I often think like this. But until now, I still haven't gotten it, but I haven't met the red snake and the beautiful snake. Unfamiliar voices calling my name are naturally common, but they are not beautiful snakes.冬天的百草园比较的无味；雪一下，可就两样了。拍雪人（将自己的全形印在雪上）和塑雪罗汉需要人们鉴赏，这是荒园，人迹罕至，所以不相宜，只好来捕鸟。薄薄的雪，是不行的；总须积雪盖了地面一两天，鸟雀们久已无处觅食的时候才好。扫开一块雪，露出地面，用一枝短棒支起一面大的竹筛来，下面撒些秕谷，棒上系一条长绳，人远远地牵着，看鸟雀下来啄食，走到竹筛底下的时候，将绳子一拉，便罩住了。但所得的是麻雀居多，也有白颊的“张飞鸟”，性子很躁，养不过夜的。
the grass garden in winter is relatively tasteless; Snow is the same. Shooting snowmen (printing their full form on the snow) and sculpting snow arhats need to be appreciated, this is a deserted garden, inaccessible to people, so it is not suitable, so they have to come to catch birds. Thin snow is not good; It is always good when the snow covers the ground for a day or two, and the birds have nowhere to forage for a long time. Sweep away a piece of snow, expose the ground, use a short stick to prop up a large bamboo sieve, sprinkle some chaff grain below, tie a long rope to the stick, people lead it from a distance, watch the birds come down to peck, and when they walk under the bamboo sieve, pull the rope and cover it. But most of the sparrows are obtained, and there are also white-cheeked "Zhang flying birds", which are very irritable and cannot be raised overnight.这是闰土的父亲所传授的方法，我却不大能用。明明见它们进去了，拉了绳，跑去一看，却什么都没有，费了半天力，捉住的不过三四只。闰土的父亲是小半天便能捕获几十只，装在叉袋里叫着撞着的。我曾经问他得失的缘由，他只静静地笑道：你太性急，来不及等它走到中间去。
This is the method taught by Runtu's father, but I can't use it. Obviously seeing them go in, I pulled the rope and ran to take a look, but there was nothing, and it took a long time to catch only three or four. Runtu's father was able to catch dozens of them in half a day, and put them in fork bags and screamed and bumped into them. I once asked him the reason for his gains and losses, and he only smiled quietly and said: You are too impatient to wait for it to go to the middle.我不知道为什么家里的人要将我送进书塾里去了，而且还是全城中称为最严厉的书塾。也许是因为拔何首乌毁了泥墙罢，也许是因为将砖头抛到间壁的梁家去了罢，也许是因为站在石井栏上跳了下来罢，……都无从知道。总而言之：我将不能常到百草园了。Ade，我的蟋蟀们！Ade，我的覆盆子们和木莲们！……
I don't know why my family sent me to a cram school, and it was called the strictest cram school in the city. Maybe it was because He Shou Wu destroyed the mud wall, maybe it was because he threw bricks at the Liang family, or maybe he jumped off while standing on the stone well railing,...... There is no way to know. All in all: I won't be able to go to Baicao Garden often. Ade, my crickets! Ade, my raspberries and magnolias! ……出门向东，不上半里，走过一道石桥，便是我的先生的家了。从一扇黑油的竹门进去，第三间是书房。中间挂着一块扁道：三味书屋；扁下面是一幅画，画着一只很肥大的梅花鹿伏在古树下。没有孔子牌位，我们便对着那扁和鹿行礼。第一次算是拜孔子，第二次算是拜先生。
Go out to the east, less than half a mile, walk across a stone bridge, and you will find my husband's home. Entering through a black oil bamboo door, the third room is the study. There is a flat road hanging in the middle: Sanwei Bookstore; Below the flat is a painting depicting a very fat sika deer lying under an ancient tree. Without the Confucius tablet, we saluted the flat and the deer. The first time is to worship Confucius, and the second time is to worship Mr.第二次行礼时，先生便和蔼地在一旁答礼。他是一个高而瘦的老人，须发都花白了，还戴着大眼镜。我对他很恭敬，因为我早听到，他是本城中极方正，质朴，博学的人。
When he saluted for the second time, the gentleman kindly returned the salute on the side. He was a tall and thin old man with gray hair and big glasses. I have great respect for him, because I have heard that he is the most upright, simple, and erudite man in the city.不知从那里听来的，东方朔也很渊博，他认识一种虫，名曰“怪哉”，冤气所化，用酒一浇，就消释了。我很想详细地知道这故事，但阿长是不知道的，因为她毕竟不渊博。现在得到机会了，可以问先生。
I don't know where I heard it, Dongfang Shuo is also very knowledgeable, he knows a kind of insect, called "weird", the grievances are transformed, and they are dissolved when poured with wine. I really want to know this story in detail, but Ah Chang doesn't know, because she is not knowledgeable after all. Now that you have the opportunity, you can ask sir.“先生，‘怪哉’这虫，是怎么一回事？……”我上了生书，将要退下来的时候，赶忙问。
"Sir, what's going on with this 'strange' insect? ...... "I went to the student book, and when I was about to retire, I hurriedly asked.“不知道！”他似乎很不高兴，脸上还有怒色了。
"I don't know!" He seemed very unhappy, and there was anger on his face.我才知道做学生是不应该问这些事的，只要读书，因为他是渊博的宿儒，决不至于不知道，所谓不知道者，乃是不愿意说。年纪比我大的人，往往如此，我遇见过好几回了。
I realized that as a student, you shouldn't ask these things, as long as you read, because he is a profound scholar, he will never know, and the so-called don't know is unwilling to say. People older than me are often like this, and I have met them several times.我就只读书，正午习字，晚上对课。先生最初这几天对我很严厉，后来却好起来了，不过给我读的书渐渐加多，对课也渐渐地加上字去，从三言到五言，终于到七言。
I only read, practice at noon, and take classes in the evening. My husband was strict with me in the first few days, but then he got better, but he gradually read more books to me, and gradually added words to the class, from three words to five words, and finally to seven words.三味书屋后面也有一个园，虽然小，但在那里也可以爬上花坛去折蜡梅花，在地上或桂花树上寻蝉蜕。最好的工作是捉了苍蝇喂蚂蚁，静悄悄地没有声音。然而同窗们到园里的太多，太久，可就不行了，先生在书房里便大叫起来：
There is also a garden behind the Sanwei Bookstore, although small, but there you can also climb up the flower bed to fold wax plum blossoms and look for cicadas on the ground or osmanthus trees. The best job is to catch flies and feed the ants, quietly and silently. However, the classmates went to the garden too much, too long, but it was not good, and the teacher shouted in the study:“人都到那里去了？！”
"Where did everyone go?!"人们便一个一个陆续走回去；一同回去，也不行的。他有一条戒尺，但是不常用，也有罚跪的规则，但也不常用，普通总不过瞪几眼，大声道：
People went back one by one; It's not okay to go back together. He has a ruler, but it is not commonly used, and there is also a rule of punishment for kneeling, but it is not commonly used, and he usually just glared a few times and said loudly:“读书！”
"Reading!"于是大家放开喉咙读一阵书，真是人声鼎沸。有念“仁远乎哉我欲仁斯仁至矣”的，有念“笑人齿缺曰狗窦大开”的，有念“上九潜龙勿用”的，有念“厥土下上上错厥贡苞茅橘柚”的……。先生自己也念书。后来，我们的声音便低下去，静下去了，只有他还大声朗读着：
So everyone let go of their throats and read for a while, and there was really a lot of people. Some recite "Benevolence is far away, I want benevolence to come", some recite "laughing at people's missing teeth and say the dog's hole is wide open", some chant "Don't use the dragon on the upper nine", and there are ...... chanting "Jue Tu Xia Zhi Jiu Gong Bao Mao Orange Pomelo". Mr. himself also studied. Later, our voices fell down and fell silent, and only he read aloud:“铁如意，指挥倜傥，一座皆惊呢；金叵罗，颠倒淋漓噫，千杯未醉嗬……。”
"Tie Ruyi, the command is dashing, everyone is surprised; Golden Silk, upside down, a thousand cups of not drunk ....... ”我疑心这是极好的文章，因为读到这里，他总是微笑起来，而且将头仰起，摇着，向后面拗过去，拗过去。
I suspect this is an excellent article, because when I read this, he always smiles, and raises his head, shakes it, twists it backwards, twists it.先生读书入神的时候，于我们是很相宜的。有几个便用纸糊的盔甲套在指甲上做戏。我是画画儿，用一种叫作“荆川纸”的，蒙在小说的绣像上一个个描下来，像习字时候的影写一样。读的书多起来，画的画也多起来；书没有读成，画的成绩却不少了，最成片段的是《荡寇志》和《西游记》的绣像，都有一大本。后来，因为要钱用，卖给一个有钱的同窗了。他的父亲是开锡箔店的；听说现在自己已经做了店主，而且快要升到绅士的地位了。这东西早已没有了罢。
When Mr. is immersed in reading, it is very suitable for us. A few of them put papier-mâché armor on their nails to play. I paint, using a kind of paper called "Jingchuan paper", which is drawn one by one on the embroidered portrait of the novel, just like copying when practicing calligraphy. the more books you read, the more paintings you draw; The book was not read, but the painting was a lot, and the most fragmentary was the embroidered portraits of "Dang Kou Zhi" and "Journey to the West", both of which had a large copy. Later, because he wanted money, he sold it to a rich classmate. His father opened a tin foil shop; I heard that he has now become a shopkeeper and is about to rise to the status of a gentleman. This thing is long gone.九月十八日。
September 18th.

父亲的病

父亲的病

父亲的病

Father's illness大约十多年前罢，S城中曾经盛传过一个名医的故事：
About ten years ago, there was a story of a famous doctor in S City:他出诊原来是一元四角，特拔十元，深夜加倍，出城又加倍。有一夜，一家城外人家的闺女生急病，来请他了，因为他其时已经阔得不耐烦，便非一百元不去。他们只得都依他。待去时，却只是草草地一看，说道“不要紧的”，开一张方，拿了一百元就走。那病家似乎很有钱，第二天又来请了。他一到门，只见主人笑面承迎，道，“昨晚服了先生的药，好得多了，所以再请你来复诊一回。”仍旧引到房里，老妈子便将病人的手拉出帐外来。他一按，冷冰冰的，也没有脉，于是点点头道，“唔，这病我明白了。”从从容容走到桌前，取了药方纸，提笔写道：
His visit turned out to be one yuan and four corners, and he specially selected ten yuan, which was doubled late at night and doubled when he went out of the city. One night, a girl from an out-of-town family fell ill and came to invite him, because he was already impatient at that time, so he had to go for 100 yuan. They had to rely on him. When he went, he just looked at it hastily, said "it doesn't matter", opened a square, took 100 yuan and left. The patient seemed to be very rich, and he came to invite him again the next day. As soon as he arrived at the door, he saw the owner smiling and greeting, and said, "I took my husband's medicine last night, and it was much better, so I would like you to come for a follow-up consultation." Still led into the room, the old mother pulled the patient's hand out of the tent. He pressed, cold and had no pulse, so he nodded and said, "Well, I understand this disease." From calmly walked to the table, took the prescription paper, picked up a pen and wrote:“凭票付英洋壹百元正。”下面是署名，画押。
"Pay 100 yuan with the ticket." Below is the signature, drawn.“先生，这病看来很不轻了，用药怕还得重一点罢。”主人在背后说。
"Sir, this disease seems to be very serious, and I am afraid that the medication will be a little heavier." The master said behind his back.“可以。”他说。于是另开了一张方：
"Yes." He said. So I opened another square:“凭票付英洋贰百元正。”下面仍是署名，画押。
"Pay the British and Ocean two hundred yuan by the ticket." The following is still signed, drawn and signed.这样，主人就收了药方，很客气地送他出来了。
In this way, the master accepted the prescription and sent him out very politely.我曾经和这名医周旋过两整年，因为他隔日一回，来诊我的父亲的病。那时虽然已经很有名，但还不至于阔得这样不耐烦；可是诊金却已经是一元四角。现在的都市上，诊金一次十元并不算奇，可是那时是一元四角已是巨款，很不容易张罗的了；又何况是隔日一次。他大概的确有些特别，据舆论说，用药就与众不同。我不知道药品，所觉得的，就是“药引”的难得，新方一换，就得忙一大场。先买药，再寻药引。“生姜”两片，竹叶十片去尖，他是不用的了。起码是芦根，须到河边去掘；一到经霜三年的甘蔗，便至少也得搜寻两三天。可是说也奇怪，大约后来总没有购求不到的。
I had dealt with this doctor for two whole years, because he came to see my father every other day. Although it was already famous at that time, it was not so wide and impatient; But the consultation fee is already one yuan and four corners. In today's cities, it is not surprising that the consultation fee is ten yuan at a time, but at that time it was a huge amount of money, and it was not easy to spread it; Not to mention once every other day. He is probably indeed a little special, and according to public opinion, the use of medicine is different. I don't know about medicines, but what I think is that "medicine introduction" is rare, and once the new prescription is changed, you have to be busy a lot. Buy medicine first, then look for a drug license. Two pieces of "ginger" and ten bamboo leaves to remove the tip, he didn't use it. At least the reed roots must be dug up by the river; As soon as the sugarcane that has been frosted for three years arrives, it has to be searched for at least two or three days. But it's strange to say, probably there is nothing that can't be purchased later.据舆论说，神妙就在这地方。先前有一个病人，百药无效；待到遇见了什么叶天士先生，只在旧方上加了一味药引：梧桐叶。只一服，便霍然而愈了。“医者，意也。”其时是秋天，而梧桐先知秋气。其先百药不投，今以秋气动之，以气感气，所以……。我虽然并不了然，但也十分佩服，知道凡有灵药，一定是很不容易得到的，求仙的人，甚至于还要拚了性命，跑进深山里去采呢。
According to public opinion, the magic is in this place. There was a patient before, and all medicines were ineffective; When I met Mr. Ye Tianshi, I only added a medicine to the old recipe: sycamore leaves. After just one dose, he was cured. "Doctors are intentions." It was autumn, and the sycamore tree knew the autumn air. Previously, all drugs were not injected, but now they are moved by autumn energy, which is why they are ....... Although I don't know, I also admire it very much, knowing that wherever there is an elixir, it must be very difficult to obtain, and those who seek immortality even have to risk their lives to run into the mountains to pick them.这样有两年，渐渐地熟识，几乎是朋友了。父亲的水肿是逐日利害，将要不能起床；我对于经霜三年的甘蔗之流也逐渐失了信仰，采办药引似乎再没有先前一般踊跃了。正在这时候，他有一天来诊，问过病状，便极其诚恳地说：
After two years, we gradually became acquainted and almost became friends. My father's edema is a daily stake, and he will not be able to get up; I gradually lost faith in sugarcane and other things that had been frosted for three years, and it seemed that I was no longer as enthusiastic about purchasing medicine as before. At this time, he came to the clinic one day, asked about the condition, and said extremely sincerely:“我所有的学问，都用尽了。这里还有一位陈莲河先生，本领比我高。我荐他来看一看，我可以写一封信。可是，病是不要紧的，不过经他的手，可以格外好得快……。”
"All my knowledge has been exhausted. There is also a Mr. Chen Lianhe here, who is more skilled than me. I recommended him to take a look, and I could write a letter. However, it doesn't matter if the disease is good, but through his hands, it can be cured very quickly...... ”这一天似乎大家都有些不欢，仍然由我恭敬地送他上轿。进来时，看见父亲的脸色很异样，和大家谈论，大意是说自己的病大概没有希望的了；他因为看了两年，毫无效验，脸又太熟了，未免有些难以为情，所以等到危急时候，便荐一个生手自代，和自己完全脱了干系。但另外有什么法子呢？本城的名医，除他之外，实在也只有一个陈莲河了。明天就请陈莲河。
Everyone seemed to be a little unhappy on this day, and I still respectfully sent him into the sedan chair. When I came in, I saw that my father's face was very strange, and I talked to everyone, to the effect that my illness was probably hopeless; Because he had been watching it for two years, it was ineffective, and his face was too familiar, so he waited until the time was critical, so he recommended a new person to take his place and completely disconnected from himself. But what else can be done? In addition to him, there is really only one famous doctor in this city, Chen Lianhe. Tomorrow, please invite Chen Lianhe.陈莲河的诊金也是一元四角。但前回的名医的脸是圆而胖的，他却长而胖了：这一点颇不同。还有用药也不同，前回的名医是一个人还可以办的，这一回却是一个人有些办不妥帖了，因为他一张药方上，总兼有一种特别的丸散和一种奇特的药引。
Chen Lianhe's consultation fee is also one yuan and four corners. But the face of the famous doctor last time was round and fat, but he was long and fat: this is quite different. There is also a difference in the use of medicine, the famous doctor last time can be done by one person, but this time it is a person who is a little inappropriate, because he always has a special pill powder and a peculiar medicine guide on a prescription.芦根和经霜三年的甘蔗，他就从来没有用过。最平常的是“蟋蟀一对”，旁注小字道：“要原配，即本在一窠中者。”似乎昆虫也要贞节，续弦或再醮，连做药资格也丧失了。但这差使在我并不为难，走进百草园，十对也容易得，将它们用线一缚，活活地掷入沸汤中完事。然而还有“平地木十株”呢，这可谁也不知道是什么东西了，问药店，问乡下人，问卖草药的，问老年人，问读书人，问木匠，都只是摇摇头，临末才记起了那远房的叔祖，爱种一点花木的老人，跑去一问，他果然知道，是生在山中树下的一种小树，能结红子如小珊瑚珠的，普通都称为“老弗大”。
He has never used reed roots and sugarcane that has been frosted for three years. The most common is "a pair of crickets", with a small note on the sidelines: "To be the original match, that is, the one who is in a nest." It seems that insects also have to be chastity, renew their strings or remarry, and even lose their qualifications to make medicine. But this errand is not difficult for me, walking into the Baicao Garden, ten pairs are also easy to get, tie them with a thread, and throw them alive into the boiling water to finish the task. However, there are also "ten flat trees", no one knows what it is, ask the pharmacy, ask the countryman, ask the herb seller, ask the elderly, ask the scholar, ask the carpenter, they all just shook their heads, and at the end of the day, they remembered the distant uncle, the old man who loved to plant a little flowers and trees, ran to ask, he really knew that it was a kind of small tree born under the tree in the mountains, which can produce red seeds like small coral beads, and is usually called "Lao Fu Da".“踏破铁鞋无觅处，得来全不费工夫。”药引寻到了，然而还有一种特别的丸药：败鼓皮丸。这“败鼓皮丸”就是用打破的旧鼓皮做成；水肿一名鼓胀，一用打破的鼓皮自然就可以克伏他。清朝的刚毅因为憎恨“洋鬼子”，预备打他们，练了些兵称作“虎神营”，取虎能食羊，神能伏鬼的意思，也就是这道理。可惜这一种神药，全城中只有一家出售的，离我家就有五里，但这却不像平地木那样，必须暗中摸索了，陈莲河先生开方之后，就恳切详细地给我们说明。
"There is nowhere to find a place to step on the iron shoes, and it takes no effort to get it." The medicine was found, but there was also a special pill: the drum skin pill. This "defeated drum skin ball" is made of broken old drum skin; The edema is called bulge, and the broken drum skin can naturally subdue him. The fortitude of the Qing Dynasty was to fight them because of its hatred of the "foreign devils", and trained some soldiers called the "Tiger God Camp", which means that tigers can eat sheep and gods can subdue ghosts, which is the truth. It's a pity that this kind of miracle medicine is only sold in one store in the city, five miles away from my home, but this is not like flat wood, it must be groped secretly, after Mr. Chen Lianhe prescribed the prescription, he earnestly explained it to us in detail.“我有一种丹，”有一回陈莲河先生说，“点在舌上，我想一定可以见效。因为舌乃心之灵苗……。价钱也并不贵，只要两块钱一盒……。”
"I have a kind of pill," Mr. Chen Lianhe said once, "and I think it will definitely work on the tongue." Because the tongue is the spiritual seedling of the heart...... The price is not expensive, only two yuan a box ....... ”我父亲沉思了一会，摇摇头。
My father pondered for a while and shook his head.“我这样用药还会不大见效，”有一回陈莲河先生又说，“我想，可以请人看一看，可有什么冤愆……。医能医病，不能医命，对不对？自然，这也许是前世的事……。”
"I will not be effective if I use medicine like this," Mr. Chen Lianhe said once, "I think I can ask someone to take a look, but what is wrong...... Doctors can treat diseases, but they can't treat lives, right? Naturally, this may be a matter of the past life...... ”我的父亲沉思了一会，摇摇头。
My father pondered for a while and shook his head.凡国手，都能够起死回生的，我们走过医生的门前，常可以看见这样的扁额。现在是让步一点了，连医生自己也说道：“西医长于外科，中医长于内科。”但是S城那时不但没有西医，并且谁也还没有想到天下有所谓西医，因此无论什么，都只能由轩辕岐伯的嫡派门徒包办。轩辕时候是巫医不分的，所以直到现在，他的门徒就还见鬼，而且觉得“舌乃心之灵苗”。这就是中国人的“命”，连名医也无从医治的。
All national players can come back to life, and we can often see such a flat forehead when we walk in front of the doctor. Now it's time to make some concessions, and even the doctor himself said: "Western medicine is better than surgery, and traditional Chinese medicine is better than internal medicine." But S City not only did not have Western medicine at that time, but no one thought that there was a so-called Western medicine in the world, so no matter what, it could only be arranged by Xuanyuan Qibo's direct disciples. Xuanyuan was a witch doctor in his time, so until now, his disciples still saw ghosts and felt that "the tongue is the spiritual seedling of the heart". This is the "life" of the Chinese, and even famous doctors cannot cure it.不肯用灵丹点在舌头上，又想不出“冤愆”来，自然，单吃了一百多天的“败鼓皮丸”有什么用呢？依然打不破水肿，父亲终于躺在床上喘气了。还请一回陈莲河先生，这回是特拔，大洋十元。他仍旧泰然的开了一张方，但已停止败鼓皮丸不用，药引也不很神妙了，所以只消半天，药就煎好，灌下去，却从口角上回了出来。
Refusing to use the elixir on the tongue, and not being able to think of "injustice", naturally, what is the use of taking the "defeated drum skin pill" for more than a hundred days? Still unable to break the edema, my father finally lay on the bed and gasped. Please also go back to Mr. Chen Lianhe, this time it is special, ten yuan in the ocean. He still calmly prescribed a prescription, but he had stopped using the drum skin pills, and the medicine was not very mysterious, so it only took half a day for the medicine to be fried and poured, but it came back from the corner of his mouth.从此我便不再和陈莲河先生周旋，只在街上有时看见他坐在三名轿夫的快轿里飞一般抬过；听说他现在还康健，一面行医，一面还做中医什么学报，正在和只长于外科的西医奋斗哩。
Since then, I have no longer dealt with Mr. Chen Lianhe, and I have only sometimes seen him flying in the fast sedan chair of three sedan bearers on the street; I heard that he is still healthy, practicing medicine while also doing some journals of traditional Chinese medicine, and is struggling with Western medicine that is only good at surgery.中西的思想确乎有一点不同。听说中国的孝子们，一到将要“罪孽深重祸延父母”的时候，就买几斤人参，煎汤灌下去，希望父母多喘几天气，即使半天也好。我的一位教医学的先生却教给我医生的职务道：可医的应该给他医治，不可医的应该给他死得没有痛苦。——但这先生自然是西医。
There is indeed a little difference between Chinese and Western thinking. I heard that Chinese filial sons, when they were about to "bring great sins to their parents", bought a few pounds of ginseng and poured it into the soup, hoping that their parents would breathe a few more days, even if it was half a day. One of my teachers who taught medicine taught me the position of doctor: those who can be treated should be healed, and those who cannot be treated should be given to die painlessly. ——But this gentleman is naturally a Western doctor.父亲的喘气颇长久，连我也听得很吃力，然而谁也不能帮助他。我有时竟至于电光一闪似的想道：“还是快一点喘完了罢……。”立刻觉得这思想就不该，就是犯了罪；但同时又觉得这思想实在是正当的，我很爱我的父亲。便是现在，也还是这样想。
My father's breathing was quite long, and even I had a hard time listening, but no one could help him. Sometimes I even thought like a flash of lightning, "It's better to catch my breath quickly...... "Immediately thinking that this thought should not be done is to commit a sin; But at the same time, I feel that this idea is really justified, and I love my father very much. Even now, I still think so.早晨，住在一门里的衍太太进来了。她是一个精通礼节的妇人，说我们不应该空等着。于是给他换衣服；又将纸锭和一种什么《高王经》烧成灰，用纸包了给他捏在拳头里……。
In the morning, Mrs. Yan, who lived in a door, came in. She is a woman who is well known in etiquette and says that we should not wait in vain. So he changed his clothes; He also burned the paper ingots and some kind of "Gao Wang Jing" to ashes, wrapped them in paper and pinched them in his fists......“叫呀，你父亲要断气了。快叫呀！”衍太太说。
"Scream, your father is dying. Shout! Mrs. Yan said.“父亲！父亲！”我就叫起来。
"Father! Father! I screamed.“大声！他听不见。还不快叫？！”
"Loud! He couldn't hear. Why don't you scream?!" ”“父亲！！！父亲！！！”
"Father!! Father!!! ”他已经平静下去的脸，忽然紧张了，将眼微微一睁，仿佛有一些苦痛。
His face, which had calmed down, suddenly became nervous, and he opened his eyes slightly, as if he had some pain.“叫呀！快叫呀！”她催促说。
"Scream! Shout! She urged.“父亲！！！”
"Father !!"“什么呢？……不要嚷。……不……。”他低低地说，又较急地喘着气，好一会，这才复了原状，平静下去了。
"What? …… Don't shout. …… No....... He said in a low voice, panting more urgently, and after a while, he returned to his original state and calmed down.“父亲！！！”我还叫他，一直到他咽了气。
"Father !!" I called him until he took his breath.我现在还听到那时的自己的这声音，每听到时，就觉得这却是我对于父亲的最大的错处。
I still hear my voice at that time, and every time I hear it, I feel that this is my biggest mistake towards my father.十月七日。
October 7th.

琐记

琐记

琐记

Trivia衍太太现在是早经做了祖母，也许竟做了曾祖母了；那时却还年青，只有一个儿子比我大三四岁。她对自己的儿子虽然狠，对别家的孩子却好的，无论闹出什么乱子来，也决不去告诉各人的父母，因此我们就最愿意在她家里或她家的四近玩。
Mrs. Yan has now become a grandmother early, and may have become a great-grandmother; I was still young at that time, with only one son who was three or four years older than me. Although she is cruel to her son, she is good to other children, no matter what trouble occurs, she will never tell everyone's parents, so we are most willing to play in her house or near her house.举一个例说罢，冬天，水缸里结了薄冰的时候，我们大清早起一看见，便吃冰。有一回给沈四太太看到了，大声说道：“莫吃呀，要肚子疼的呢！”这声音又给我母亲听到了，跑出来我们都挨了一顿骂，并且有大半天不准玩。我们推论祸首，认定是沈四太太，于是提起她就不用尊称了，给她另外起了一个绰号，叫作“肚子疼”。
For example, in winter, when there is thin ice in the water tank, we eat ice as soon as we see it early in the morning. Once Mrs. Shen Si saw it and said loudly: "Don't eat, your stomach will hurt!" "This voice was heard by my mother again, and we were all scolded when we ran out, and we were not allowed to play for most of the day. We deduced that the culprit was Mrs. Shen Si, so we didn't need to use honorific titles when we mentioned her, and gave her another nickname, called "stomach pain".衍太太却决不如此。假如她看见我们吃冰，一定和蔼地笑着说，“好，再吃一块。我记着，看谁吃的多。”
Mrs. Yan would never do this. If she saw us eating ice, she would smile kindly and say, "Okay, eat another piece." I remember to see who eats more. ”但我对于她也有不满足的地方。一回是很早的时候了，我还很小，偶然走进她家去，她正在和她的男人看书。我走近去，她便将书塞在我的眼前道，“你看，你知道这是什么？”我看那书上画着房屋，有两个人光着身子仿佛在打架，但又不很像。正迟疑间，他们便大笑起来了。这使我很不高兴，似乎受了一个极大的侮辱，不到那里去大约有十多天。一回是我已经十多岁了，和几个孩子比赛打旋子，看谁旋得多。她就从旁计着数，说道，“好，八十二个了！再旋一个，八十三！好，八十四……”但正在旋着的阿祥，忽然跌倒了，阿祥的婶母也恰恰走进来。她便接着说道，“你看，不是跌了么？不听我的话。我叫你不要旋，不要旋……。”
But I am also dissatisfied with her. The first time was very early, I was still very young, and I happened to walk into her house, and she was reading a book with her man. I approached, and she stuffed the book in front of my eyes and said, "Look, do you know what this is?" "I saw that the book depicted houses, and there were two people naked as if they were fighting, but they didn't look alike. While they were hesitating, they burst into laughter. This made me very unhappy, as if I had been greatly insulted, and I had not been there for about ten days. Once I was in my teens, I competed with a few children to see who spun more. She counted from the side and said, "Okay, eighty-two!" Spin one more, eighty-three! Okay, eighty-four ......" But Ah Xiang, who was spinning, suddenly fell, and Ah Xiang's aunt also walked in. She continued, "Look, didn't you fall? Don't listen to me. I told you not to spin, not to spin ....... ”虽然如此，孩子们总还喜欢到她那里去。假如头上碰得肿了一大块的时候，去寻母亲去罢，好的是骂一通，再给擦一点药；坏的是没有药擦，还添几个栗凿和一通骂。衍太太却决不埋怨，立刻给你用烧酒调了水粉，搽在疙瘩上，说这不但止痛，将来还没有瘢痕。
Even so, the children always like to go to her. If you have a large lump of swelling on your head, go find your mother, and if you scold it, you can wipe some medicine; The bad thing is that there is no medicine, and a few chestnuts and a scolding are added. Mrs. Yan never complained, and immediately mixed gouache with soju for you and applied it to the pimple, saying that this not only relieved the pain, but also had no scars in the future.父亲故去之后，我也还常到她家里去，不过已不是和孩子们玩耍了，却是和衍太太或她的男人谈闲天。我其时觉得很有许多东西要买，看的和吃的，只是没有钱。有一天谈到这里，她便说道，“母亲的钱，你拿来用就是了，还不就是你的么？”我说母亲没有钱，她就说可以拿首饰去变卖；我说没有首饰，她却道，“也许你没有留心。到大厨的抽屉里，角角落落去寻去，总可以寻出一点珠子这类东西……。”
After my father passed away, I often went to her house, but instead of playing with the children, I was chatting with Mrs. Yan or her man. At that time, I felt that there were many things to buy, see and eat, but there was no money. One day when she talked about this, she said, "You can use your mother's money, isn't it yours?" "I said that my mother had no money, so she said that she could sell the jewelry; I said there was no jewelry, but she said, "Maybe you didn't pay attention." In the chef's drawer, if you go down to the corner and look for it, you can always find a little bead or something like that....... ”这些话我听去似乎很异样，便又不到她那里去了，但有时又真想去打开大厨，细细地寻一寻。大约此后不到一月，就听到一种流言，说我已经偷了家里的东西去变卖了，这实在使我觉得有如掉在冷水里。流言的来源，我是明白的，倘是现在，只要有地方发表，我总要骂出流言家的狐狸尾巴来，但那时太年青，一遇流言，便连自己也仿佛觉得真是犯了罪，怕遇见人们的眼睛，怕受到母亲的爱抚。
These words seemed strange to me, so I didn't go to her again, but sometimes I really wanted to open the chef and look for it carefully. About a month later, I heard a rumor that I had stolen things from my house and sold them, which really made me feel like I had fallen into cold water. I understand the source of the rumors, if it were now, as long as there was a place to publish, I would always scold the fox tail of the rumorist, but at that time I was too young, and when I encountered rumors, even I felt that I had really committed a crime, afraid of meeting people's eyes, and afraid of being caressed by my mother.好。那么，走罢！
Good. So, let's go!但是，那里去呢？S城人的脸早经看熟，如此而已，连心肝也似乎有些了然。总得寻别一类人们去，去寻为S城人所诟病的人们，无论其为畜生或魔鬼。那时为全城所笑骂的一个开得不久的学校，叫作中西学堂，汉文之外，又教些洋文和算学。然而已经成为众矢之的了；熟读圣贤书的秀才们，还集了“四书”的句子，做一篇八股来嘲诮它，这名文便即传遍了全城，人人当作有趣的话柄。我只记得那“起讲”的开头是：
But where to go? The faces of the people in S City have been familiar for a long time, and that's all, even the heart and liver seem to be a little clear. You have to find another type of people, to find people who are criticized by the people of S City, whether they are beasts or devils. At that time, a school that was ridiculed and scolded by the whole city for a short time was called the Chinese and Western School, which taught some foreign languages and arithmetic in addition to Chinese. However, it has become the target of public criticism; The scholars who were familiar with the books of the sages also collected the sentences of the "Four Books" and made an eight-strand to ridicule it, and this famous article spread throughout the city, and everyone regarded it as an interesting topic. I only remember that the beginning of the "speech" was:“徐子以告夷子曰：吾闻用夏变夷者，未闻变于夷者也。今也不然：舌之音，闻其声，皆雅言也。……”
“徐子以告夷子曰：吾闻用夏变夷者，未闻变于夷者也。 今也不然：舌之音，闻其声，皆雅言也。 ……”以后可忘却了，大概也和现今的国粹保存大家的议论差不多。但我对于这中西学堂，却也不满足，因为那里面只教汉文，算学，英文和法文。功课较为别致的，还有杭州的求是书院，然而学费贵。
It can be forgotten in the future, and it is probably similar to everyone's discussion about preserving the essence of the country today. But I am not satisfied with this Chinese and Western school, because it only teaches Chinese, arithmetic, English and French. The homework is more unique, and there is Qiushi Academy in Hangzhou, but the tuition fee is expensive.无须学费的学校在南京，自然只好往南京去。第一个进去的学校，目下不知道称为什么了，光复以后，似乎有一时称为雷电学堂，很像《封神榜》上“太极阵”“混元阵”一类的名目。总之，一进仪凤门，便可以看见它那二十丈高的桅杆和不知多高的烟通。功课也简单，一星期中，几乎四整天是英文：“It is a cat.”“Is it a rat？”一整天是读汉文：“君子曰，颍考叔可谓纯孝也已矣，爱其母，施及庄公。”一整天是做汉文：《知己知彼百战百胜论》，《颍考叔论》，《云从龙风从虎论》，《咬得菜根则百事可做论》。
The school without tuition fees is in Nanjing, so naturally I have to go to Nanjing. The first school to enter, I don't know what it is called now, after the restoration, it seems to be called Thunder and Lightning School for a while, very similar to the names of "Tai Chi Array" and "Hunyuan Array" on the "Fengshen List". In short, as soon as you enter the Yifeng Gate, you can see its twenty-foot-high mast and the chimney that I don't know how high. The homework is also simple, almost four days of the week, in English: "It is a cat."" Is it a rat？ "The whole day is reading Hanwen: "The gentleman said, Uncle Ying Kao can be described as pure filial piety, loving his mother, and giving to Duke Zhuang." "The whole day is doing Chinese: "Knowing Yourself and Knowing Your Opponent and Winning a Hundred Battles", "Uncle Ying Kao's Theory", "The Theory of Yun Conglong Feng Conghu", "The Theory of Biting Vegetable Roots and Doing Everything Can Be Doed".初进去当然只能做三班生，卧室里是一桌一凳一床，床板只有两块。头二班学生就不同了，二桌二凳或三凳一床，床板多至三块。不但上讲堂时挟着一堆厚而且大的洋书，气昂昂地走着，决非只有一本“泼赖妈”和四本《左传》的三班生所敢正视；便是空着手，也一定将肘弯撑开，像一只螃蟹，低一班的在后面总不能走出他之前。这一种螃蟹式的名公巨卿，现在都阔别得很久了，前四五年，竟在教育部的破脚躺椅上，发见了这姿势，然而这位老爷却并非雷电学堂出身的，可见螃蟹态度，在中国也颇普遍。
Of course, when I first entered, I could only be a third-class student, and the bedroom was a table, a stool and a bed, and there were only two bed boards. The students in the first two classes are different, two tables, two stools or three stools and a bed, and there are as many as three bed boards. Not only did he carry a pile of thick and large foreign books when he went to the lecture hall, but he walked proudly, which was by no means only the third class students of "Po Lai Ma" and four "Zuo Zhuan" dared to face up; Even if he is empty-handed, he must stretch his elbow bend, like a crab, and the lower class can never get out of front of him. In the first four or five years, he actually found this posture on the broken leg lounge chair of the Ministry of Education, but this master was not from the Thunder and Lightning Academy, which shows that the crab attitude is also quite common in China.可爱的是桅杆。但并非如“东邻”的“支那通”所说，因为它“挺然翘然”，又是什么的象征。乃是因为它高，乌鸦喜鹊，都只能停在它的半途的木盘上。人如果爬到顶，便可以近看狮子山，远眺莫愁湖，——但究竟是否真可以眺得那么远，我现在可委实有点记不清楚了。而且不危险，下面张着网，即使跌下来，也不过如一条小鱼落在网子里；况且自从张网以后，听说也还没有人曾经跌下来。
The cute thing is the mast. But it is not as the "eastern neighbor" of "China Tong" said, because it is "quite upright" and a symbol of something. Because it is so high, crows and magpies can only stop on its halfway wooden plate. If people climb to the top, they can see Lion Rock up close and Mochou Lake in the distance,—— but whether it is really possible to see that far is not clear now. And it is not dangerous, there is a net below, even if it falls, it is just like a small fish falling into the net; Moreover, since Zhang Wang, I heard that no one has ever fallen.原先还有一个池，给学生学游泳的，这里面却淹死了两个年幼的学生。当我进去时，早填平了，不但填平，上面还造了一所小小的关帝庙。庙旁是一座焚化字纸的砖炉，炉口上方横写着四个大字道：“敬惜字纸”。只可惜那两个淹死鬼失了池子，难讨替代，总在左近徘徊，虽然已有“伏魔大帝关圣帝君”镇压着。办学的人大概是好心肠的，所以每年七月十五，总请一群和尚到雨天操场来放焰口，一个红鼻而胖的大和尚戴上毗卢帽，捏诀，念咒：“回资啰，普弥耶吽！唵耶吽！唵！耶！吽！！！”
There was originally a pool for students to learn to swim, but two young students drowned in it. When I went in, it had already been filled, not only filled in, but also built a small Guandi Temple on it. Next to the temple is a brick stove that incinerates word paper, and four large characters are written horizontally above the mouth of the stove: "Cherish the word paper". It's a pity that the two drowning ghosts lost their pools, and it was difficult to find a replacement, and they were always wandering around the left, although they had been suppressed by the "Demon Demon Emperor Guan Sheng Emperor". The people who run the school are probably kind-hearted, so every year on the 15th of July, a group of monks are always invited to the playground on rainy days to set off the flames, and a big monk with a red nose and a fat monk wears a Pilu hat, pinches the spell, and recites a mantra: "Return the money, Pumiye!" Oh yes! Om! Yes! Bellow!!! ”我的前辈同学被关圣帝君镇压了一整年，就只在这时候得到一点好处，——虽然我并不深知是怎样的好处。所以当这些时，我每每想：做学生总得自己小心些。
My senior classmates were suppressed by Emperor Guan Sheng for a whole year, and they only got a little benefit at this time,—— although I didn't know what kind of benefit it was. So when I do this, I always think: I have to be careful as a student.总觉得不大合适，可是无法形容出这不合适来。现在是发见了大致相近的字眼了，“乌烟瘴气”，庶几乎其可也。只得走开。近来是单是走开也就不容易，“正人君子”者流会说你骂人骂到了聘书，或者是发“名士”脾气，给你几句正经的俏皮话。不过那时还不打紧，学生所得的津贴，第一年不过二两银子，最初三个月的试习期内是零用五百文。于是毫无问题，去考矿路学堂去了，也许是矿路学堂，已经有些记不真，文凭又不在手头，更无从查考。试验并不难，录取的。
I always feel that it is not suitable, but I can't describe it. Now I have found a roughly similar word, "smoky miasma", which is almost acceptable. had to walk away. Recently, it is not easy to just walk away, and the "upright gentleman" will say that you have scolded people to the letter of appointment, or sent a "celebrity" temper and gave you a few serious witty words. But at that time, it was not a big deal, and the allowance received by students was only two taels of silver in the first year, and it was 500 coins during the first three months of probation. So there was no problem, I went to the Mining Road School, maybe it was the Mining Road School, I already couldn't remember it a little, and the diploma was not at hand, let alone checked. The experiment is not difficult, admitted.这回不是It is a cat了，是Der Mann，Das Weib，Das Kind。汉文仍旧是“颍考叔可谓纯孝也已矣”，但外加《小学集注》。论文题目也小有不同，譬如《工欲善其事必先利其器论》，是先前没有做过的。
This time it's not It's a cat, it's Der Mann, Das Weib, Das Kind. The Chinese text is still "Uncle Ying Kao can be described as pure filial piety", but with the addition of "Notes on Primary Schools". The title of the paper is also slightly different, such as "If you want to do a good job, you must first sharpen your tools", which has not been done before.此外还有所谓格致，地学，金石学，……都非常新鲜。但是还得声明：后两项，就是现在之所谓地质学和矿物学，并非讲舆地和钟鼎碑版的。只是画铁轨横断面图却有些麻烦，平行线尤其讨厌。但第二年的总办是一个新党，他坐在马车上的时候大抵看着《时务报》，考汉文也自己出题目，和教员出的很不同。有一次是《华盛顿论》，汉文教员反而惴惴地来问我们道：“华盛顿是什么东西呀？……”
In addition, there are the so-called style, geology, epigraphy,...... All very fresh. However, it must be stated that the latter two are the so-called geology and mineralogy now, not the Yudi and Zhongding stele versions. It's just that drawing cross-sectional drawings of railroad tracks is a bit troublesome, and parallel lines are especially annoying. But the general office of the second year was a new party, and when he sat in the carriage, he probably looked at the "Current Affairs Newspaper", and the Chinese test also came up with his own questions, which was very different from the teacher's question. Once, in "Washington Theory", the Chinese teacher came to us anxiously and asked, "What is Washington? ……”看新书的风气便流行起来，我也知道了中国有一部书叫《天演论》。星期日跑到城南去买了来，白纸石印的一厚本，价五百文正。翻开一看，是写得很好的字，开首便道：
The trend of reading new books became popular, and I also learned that there is a book in China called "Tianyan Lun". On Sunday, I went to the south of the city to buy a thick copy printed on white paper and stone, priced at five hundred wen. When I opened it, it was a well-written handwriting, and it began with the words:“赫胥黎独处一室之中，在英伦之南，背山而面野，槛外诸境，历历如在机下。乃悬想二千年前，当罗马大将恺彻未到时，此间有何景物？计惟有天造草昧……”
“赫胥黎独处一室之中，在英伦之南，背山而面野，槛外诸境，历历如在机下。 乃悬想二千年前，当罗马大将恺彻未到时，此间有何景物？计惟有天造草昧……”哦！原来世界上竟还有一个赫胥黎坐在书房里那么想，而且想得那么新鲜？一口气读下去，“物竞”“天择”也出来了，苏格拉第，柏拉图也出来了，斯多噶也出来了。学堂里又设立了一个阅报处，《时务报》不待言，还有《译学汇编》，那书面上的张廉卿一流的四个字，就蓝得很可爱。
Oh! It turns out that there is a Huxley in the world who is sitting in the study and thinking so freshly? Read it in one breath, "Competition" and "Natural Selection" also came out, Socrates, Plato also came out, and Stoic also came out. There is also a newspaper reading office in the school, "Shiwu Bao" needless to say, and the "Translation Compilation", the four first-class words of Zhang Lianqing on the paper are very cute.“你这孩子有点不对了，拿这篇文章去看去，抄下来去看去。”一位本家的老辈严肃地对我说，而且递过一张报纸来。接来看时，“臣许应骙跪奏……”，那文章现在是一句也不记得了，总之是参康有为变法的；也不记得可曾抄了没有。
"You're a little wrong, take this article and copy it down." An elder of the family said to me seriously, and handed me a newspaper. When I took it to see it, "Chen Xu Yinghua knelt down to play ......", the article is now not remembered at all, in short, it is Shen Kang's reform; I don't remember if I copied it.仍然自己不觉得有什么“不对”，一有闲空，就照例地吃侉饼，花生米，辣椒，看《天演论》。
I still don't feel that there is anything "wrong", and as soon as I have free time, I eat cakes, peanuts, peppers, and watch "Tianyan Lun" as usual.但我们也曾经有过一个很不平安的时期。那是第二年，听说学校就要裁撤了。这也无怪，这学堂的设立，原是因为两江总督（大约是刘坤一罢）听到青龙山的煤矿出息好，所以开手的。待到开学时，煤矿那面却已将原先的技师辞退，换了一个不甚了然的人了。理由是：一、先前的技师薪水太贵；二、他们觉得开煤矿并不难。于是不到一年，就连煤在那里也不甚了然起来，终于是所得的煤，只能供烧那两架抽水机之用，就是抽了水掘煤，掘出煤来抽水，结一笔出入两清的账。既然开矿无利，矿路学堂自然也就无须乎开了，但是不知怎的，却又并不裁撤。到第三年我们下矿洞去看的时候，情形实在颇凄凉，抽水机当然还在转动，矿洞里积水却有半尺深，上面也点滴而下，几个矿工便在这里面鬼一般工作着。
But we also had a very unsafe time. It was the second year, and I heard that the school was about to be abolished. It is no wonder that the establishment of this school was originally because the governor of Liangjiang (about Liu Kunyi) heard that the coal mine in Qinglong Mountain was promising, so he started it. When school started, the coal mine had dismissed the original technician and replaced it with a person who didn't know much. The reasons are: 1. The salary of the previous technician is too expensive; Second, they think it is not difficult to open a coal mine. So in less than a year, even the coal was not very clear there, and finally the coal obtained could only be used to burn the two pumps, that is, to pump water and dig coal, dig out coal to pump water, and settle an account of two clears. Since it is not profitable to open a mine, there is naturally no need to open a mining road, but somehow, it is not abolished. By the third year when we went down to the mine to see, the situation was really bleak, of course, the pumping machine was still turning, but the water in the mine was half a foot deep, and it was dripping down from above, and several miners were working like ghosts here.毕业，自然大家都盼望的，但一到毕业，却又有些爽然若失。爬了几次桅，不消说不配做半个水兵；听了几年讲，下了几回矿洞，就能掘出金银钢铁锡来么？实在连自己也茫无把握，没有做《工欲善其事必先利其器论》的那么容易。爬上天空二十丈和钻下地面二十丈，结果还是一无所能，学问是“上穷碧落下黄泉，两处茫茫皆不见”了。所余的还只有一条路：到外国去。
Graduation, naturally, everyone is looking forward to it, but when it comes to graduation, it is a little refreshing. climbed the mast several times, needless to say, not worthy of being half a sailor; After listening to it for a few years, can you dig out gold, silver, steel, and tin after a few times in the mine? I really don't even know what to do, and it's not as easy as doing "If you want to do a good job, you must first sharpen your tools". Climbing twenty feet into the sky and drilling down the ground twenty feet, the result is still nothing, and the knowledge is "the poor blue falls into the yellow spring, and the two places are gone". There is only one way left: to a foreign country.留学的事，官僚也许可了，派定五名到日本去。其中的一个因为祖母哭得死去活来，不去了，只剩了四个。日本是同中国很两样的，我们应该如何准备呢？有一个前辈同学在，比我们早一年毕业，曾经游历过日本，应该知道些情形。跑去请教之后，他郑重地说：
The bureaucrats also allowed them to study abroad and sent five people to Japan. One of them died because his grandmother cried and did not go, leaving only four. Japan is very different from China, how should we prepare? There is a senior classmate who graduated a year before us and has traveled to Japan, so he should know something. After running to ask for advice, he said solemnly:“日本的袜是万不能穿的，要多带些中国袜。我看纸票也不好，你们带去的钱不如都换了他们的现银。”
"Japanese socks must not be worn, bring more Chinese socks. I don't think paper tickets are good, so it's better to exchange the money you bring for their cash. ”四个人都说遵命。别人不知其详，我是将钱都在上海换了日本的银元，还带了十双中国袜——白袜。
All four of them said they would obey orders. Others don't know the details, I exchanged all my money in Shanghai for Japanese silver dollars, and also brought ten pairs of Chinese socks - white socks.后来呢？后来，要穿制服和皮鞋，中国袜完全无用；一元的银圆日本早已废置不用了，又赔钱换了半元的银圆和纸票。
What happened later? Later, Chinese socks were completely useless to wear uniforms and leather shoes; The one-yuan silver dollar has long been abandoned in Japan, and it has lost money to exchange it for half-yuan silver dollars and paper tickets.十月八日。
October 8th.

藤野先生

藤野先生

藤野先生

Mr. Fujino东京也无非是这样。上野的樱花烂熳的时节，望去确也像绯红的轻云，但花下也缺不了成群结队的“清国留学生”的速成班，头顶上盘着大辫子，顶得学生制帽的顶上高高耸起，形成一座富士山。也有解散辫子，盘得平的，除下帽来，油光可鉴，宛如小姑娘的发髻一般，还要将脖子扭几扭。实在标致极了。
Tokyo is nothing more than this. When the cherry blossoms in Ueno are in full bloom, they do look like crimson light clouds, but there are also groups of "Qing international students" under the flowers. There are also disbanded braids, flattened, and when the hat is removed, the oil shine is recognizable, just like a little girl's bun, and the neck has to be twisted a few times. It's really Peugeot.中国留学生会馆的门房里有几本书买，有时还值得去一转；倘在上午，里面的几间洋房里倒也还可以坐坐的。但到傍晚，有一间的地板便常不免要咚咚咚地响得震天，兼以满房烟尘斗乱；问问精通时事的人，答道，“那是在学跳舞。”
There are several books to buy in the concierge of the China International Student Association, and sometimes it is worth a visit; If it is in the morning, you can still sit in the few bungalows inside. But in the evening, the floor of one room often had to make a loud noise, and the room was full of smoke and dust; Ask someone who is well-versed in current affairs and they reply, "That's learning to dance." ”到别的地方去看看，如何呢？
How about going somewhere else?我就往仙台的医学专门学校去。从东京出发，不久便到一处驿站，写道：日暮里。不知怎地，我到现在还记得这名目。其次却只记得水户了，这是明的遗民朱舜水先生客死的地方。仙台是一个市镇，并不大；冬天冷得利害；还没有中国的学生。
I went to a medical school in Sendai. Departing from Tokyo, I soon arrived at a post station and wrote: Nippori. Somehow, I still remember the name. Secondly, I only remember Mito, which is the place where Mr. Zhu Shunshui, a remnant of the Ming Dynasty, died. Sendai is a municipality, not big; Winter is cold; There are no Chinese students yet.大概是物以希为贵罢。北京的白菜运往浙江，便用红头绳系住菜根，倒挂在水果店头，尊为“胶菜”；福建野生着的芦荟，一到北京就请进温室，且美其名曰“龙舌兰”。我到仙台也颇受了这样的优待，不但学校不收学费，几个职员还为我的食宿操心。我先是住在监狱旁边一个客店里的，初冬已经颇冷，蚊子却还多，后来用被盖了全身，用衣服包了头脸，只留两个鼻孔出气。在这呼吸不息的地方，蚊子竟无从插嘴，居然睡安稳了。饭食也不坏。但一位先生却以为这客店也包办囚人的饭食，我住在那里不相宜，几次三番，几次三番地说。我虽然觉得客店兼办囚人的饭食和我不相干，然而好意难却，也只得别寻相宜的住处了。于是搬到别一家，离监狱也很远，可惜每天总要喝难以下咽的芋梗汤。
It is probably because things are rare and precious. When cabbage from Beijing is shipped to Zhejiang, the roots of the vegetables are tied with a red-headed rope and hung upside down in the fruit store, which is revered as "glue vegetables"; Aloe vera, which is wild in Fujian, is invited into the greenhouse as soon as it arrives in Beijing, and it is beautifully called "agave". I also received such preferential treatment when I arrived in Sendai, not only did the school not charge tuition, but several staff members also worried about my food and accommodation. I first lived in an inn next to the prison, it was already quite cold in early winter, but there were still many mosquitoes, and then I covered my whole body with a quilt, wrapped my head and face with clothes, leaving only two nostrils to breathe. In this breathless place, the mosquitoes couldn't interject, and they actually slept peacefully. The food is not bad either. But one gentleman thought that this inn also arranged meals for prisoners, and it was not suitable for me to live there, so he said it several times, several times. Although I felt that the inn also served as a prisoner's meal had nothing to do with me, it was difficult to refuse good intentions, so I had to find a suitable place to live. So I moved to another house, which was also very far from the prison, but unfortunately I always had to drink taro stem soup that was difficult to swallow every day.从此就看见许多陌生的先生，听到许多新鲜的讲义。解剖学是两个教授分任的。最初是骨学。其时进来的是一个黑瘦的先生，八字须，戴着眼镜，挟着一叠大大小小的书。一将书放在讲台上，便用了缓慢而很有顿挫的声调，向学生介绍自己道：
Since then, I have seen many strange gentlemen and heard many fresh handouts. Anatomy is divided between two professors. Originally osteology. At that time, a black and thin gentleman came in, with a mustache, glasses, and a stack of books. As soon as he put the book on the podium, he introduced himself to the students in a slow and frustrated tone:“我就是叫作藤野严九郎的……。”
"I'm the ...... named Fujino Yankuro."后面有几个人笑起来了。他接着便讲述解剖学在日本发达的历史，那些大大小小的书，便是从最初到现今关于这一门学问的著作。起初有几本是线装的；还有翻刻中国译本的，他们的翻译和研究新的医学，并不比中国早。
A few people behind me laughed. He went on to tell the history of the development of anatomy in Japan, and those large and small books are works on this discipline from the beginning to the present. At first several were wire-bound; There are also those who reprint Chinese translations, and their translations and research of new medicine are not earlier than those in China.那坐在后面发笑的是上学年不及格的留级学生，在校已经一年，掌故颇为熟悉的了。他们便给新生讲演每个教授的历史。这藤野先生，据说是穿衣服太模胡了，有时竟会忘记带领结；冬天是一件旧外套，寒颤颤的，有一回上火车去，致使管车的疑心他是扒手，叫车里的客人大家小心些。
The one sitting in the back laughing was the repeater who failed last school year, and he had been in school for a year, and his palm story was quite familiar. They gave the freshmen a lecture on the history of each professor. This Mr. Fujino is said to be too foolish to wear clothes, and sometimes he forgets to tie a bow tie; In winter, it was an old coat, shivering with chills, and once I got on the train, which made the person in charge of the car suspicious that he was a pickpocket, and told the guests in the car to be careful.他们的话大概是真的，我就亲见他有一次上讲堂没有带领结。
Their words were probably true, and I saw him once in a lecture hall without a bow tie.过了一星期，大约是星期六，他使助手来叫我了。到得研究室，见他坐在人骨和许多单独的头骨中间，——他其时正在研究着头骨，后来有一篇论文在本校的杂志上发表出来。
A week later, about Saturday, he asked his assistant to call me. When I got to the laboratory, I saw him sitting between human bones and many individual skulls,—— he was studying the skull at the time, and a paper was later published in the journal of our school.“我的讲义，你能抄下来么？”他问。
"Can you copy my handouts?" He asked.“可以抄一点。”
"You can copy a little."“拿来我看！”
"Bring it to me!"我交出所抄的讲义去，他收下了，第二三天便还我，并且说，此后每一星期要送给他看一回。我拿下来打开看时，很吃了一惊，同时也感到一种不安和感激。原来我的讲义已经从头到末，都用红笔添改过了，不但增加了许多脱漏的地方，连文法的错误，也都一一订正。这样一直继续到教完了他所担任的功课：骨学，血管学，神经学。
I handed over the handouts I had copied, and he accepted them, returned them to me on the second or third day, and said that I would give them to him every week from now on. When I took it down and opened it, I was surprised, and at the same time I felt a sense of unease and gratitude. It turned out that my handouts had been corrected with a red pen from beginning to end, not only adding many omissions, but also correcting grammatical errors one by one. This continued until he finished teaching his homework: osteology, vascularism, neurology.可惜我那时太不用功，有时也很任性。还记得有一回藤野先生将我叫到他的研究室里去，翻出我那讲义上的一个图来，是下臂的血管，指着，向我和蔼的说道：
It's a pity that I was too tired and sometimes willful. I still remember one time Mr. Fujino called me to his laboratory, turned out a picture on my handout, which was a blood vessel in my lower arm, pointed to it, and said to me kindly:“你看，你将这条血管移了一点位置了。——自然，这样一移，的确比较的好看些，然而解剖图不是美术，实物是那么样的，我们没法改换它。现在我给你改好了，以后你要全照着黑板上那样的画。”
"Look, you've moved this vein a little bit. ——Naturally, it is indeed more beautiful to move like this, but the anatomical drawing is not art, the real thing is like that, and we can't change it. Now I've changed it for you, and in the future you will have to follow the same picture on the blackboard. ”但是我还不服气，口头答应着，心里却想道：
But I was still not convinced, and verbally agreed, but I thought in my heart:“图还是我画的不错；至于实在的情形，我心里自然记得的。”
"I still drew the picture well; As for the actual situation, I naturally remember it in my heart. ”学年试验完毕之后，我便到东京玩了一夏天，秋初再回学校，成绩早已发表了，同学一百余人之中，我在中间，不过是没有落第。这回藤野先生所担任的功课，是解剖实习和局部解剖学。
After the school year experiment, I went to Tokyo for a summer, and returned to school in early autumn, and the results had already been announced. This time, Mr. Fujino's homework was anatomy practice and local anatomy.解剖实习了大概一星期，他又叫我去了，很高兴地，仍用了极有抑扬的声调对我说道：
After about a week of anatomy practice, he called me again, and happily, still said to me in a very intonated tone:“我因为听说中国人是很敬重鬼的，所以很担心，怕你不肯解剖尸体。现在总算放心了，没有这回事。”
"I was worried because I heard that Chinese people respect ghosts very much, for fear that you would not dissect the corpse. Now I am finally relieved, there is no such thing. ”但他也偶有使我很为难的时候。他听说中国的女人是裹脚的，但不知道详细，所以要问我怎么裹法，足骨变成怎样的畸形，还叹息道，“总要看一看才知道。究竟是怎么一回事呢？”
But he also occasionally makes me feel embarrassed. He heard that Chinese women wrap their feet, but they didn't know the details, so he asked me how to wrap them and what kind of deformity my foot bones became, and sighed, "You have to take a look to know." What is going on? ”有一天，本级的学生会干事到我寓里来了，要借我的讲义看。我检出来交给他们，却只翻检了一通，并没有带走。但他们一走，邮差就送到一封很厚的信，拆开看时，第一句是：
One day, the student union officer at my level came to my apartment to borrow my handouts. I checked it out and handed it to them, but I only checked it and didn't take it away. But as soon as they left, the postman sent a very thick letter, and when he opened it, the first sentence was:“你改悔罢！”
"You repent!"这是《新约》上的句子罢，但经托尔斯泰新近引用过的。其时正值日俄战争，托老先生便写了一封给俄国和日本的皇帝的信，开首便是这一句。日本报纸上很斥责他的不逊，爱国青年也愤然，然而暗地里却早受了他的影响了。其次的话，大略是说上年解剖学试验的题目，是藤野先生在讲义上做了记号，我预先知道的，所以能有这样的成绩。末尾是匿名。
This is a sentence from the New Testament, but it was recently quoted by Tolstoy. At that time, it was the Russo-Japanese War, and Mr. Tuo Lao wrote a letter to the emperors of Russia and Japan, which began with this sentence. Japanese newspapers reprimanded him for his rudeness, and patriotic young people were also indignant, but secretly they had already been influenced by him. Secondly, the topic of the anatomy test last year was marked by Mr. Fujino in the handout, and I knew it in advance, so I was able to achieve such results. The end is anonymous.我这才回忆到前几天的一件事。因为要开同级会，干事便在黑板上写广告，末一句是“请全数到会勿漏为要”，而且在“漏”字旁边加了一个圈。我当时虽然觉到圈得可笑，但是毫不介意，这回才悟出那字也在讥刺我了，犹言我得了教员漏泄出来的题目。
I then remembered an incident from the other day. Because he was going to hold a meeting at the same level, the officer wrote an advertisement on the blackboard, and the last sentence was "Please attend the meeting without missing it", and added a circle next to the word "leak". Although I felt that the circle was ridiculous at the time, I didn't mind, and this time I realized that the word was also mocking me, and I still said that I had a topic leaked by the teacher.我便将这事告知了藤野先生；有几个和我熟识的同学也很不平，一同去诘责干事托辞检查的无礼，并且要求他们将检查的结果，发表出来。终于这流言消灭了，干事却又竭力运动，要收回那一封匿名信去。结末是我便将这托尔斯泰式的信退还了他们。
I told Mr. Fujino about this; A few classmates who were familiar with me were also very upset, and together they went to reprimand the officers for their rudeness in excusing the inspection and asked them to publish the results of the inspection. Finally, the rumor was eliminated, but the officer tried his best to withdraw the anonymous letter. In the end, I returned the Tolstoy-esque letter to them.中国是弱国，所以中国人当然是低能儿，分数在六十分以上，便不是自己的能力了：也无怪他们疑惑。但我接着便有参观枪毙中国人的命运了。第二年添教霉菌学，细菌的形状是全用电影来显示的，一段落已完而还没有到下课的时候，便影几片时事的片子，自然都是日本战胜俄国的情形。但偏有中国人夹在里边：给俄国人做侦探，被日本军捕获，要枪毙了，围着看的也是一群中国人；在讲堂里的还有一个我。
China is a weak country, so of course the Chinese are imbecile, and if the score is above 60 points, it is not their ability: no wonder they are confused. But then I visited the fate of shooting Chinese. In the second year, I added mycology, and the shape of bacteria was all shown in movies, and when a paragraph was over and before the end of class, I took a few films of current affairs, which were naturally the situation of Japan's victory over Russia. But there are Chinese people in it: they are detectives for the Russians, captured by the Japanese army, and are about to be shot, and there is also a group of Chinese people watching around; There was also me in the lecture hall.“万岁！”他们都拍掌欢呼起来。
"Hooray!" They all clapped and cheered.这种欢呼，是每看一片都有的，但在我，这一声却特别听得刺耳。此后回到中国来，我看见那些闲看枪毙犯人的人们，他们也何尝不酒醉似的喝采，——呜呼，无法可想！但在那时那地，我的意见却变化了。
This kind of cheer is present in every piece of film, but for me, this sound is particularly harsh. After returning to China, I saw those people who were idly watching the shooting of prisoners, and they didn't cheer as if they were drunk,—— alas, it's unimaginable! But then and there, my opinion changed.到第二学年的终结，我便去寻藤野先生，告诉他我将不学医学，并且离开这仙台。他的脸色仿佛有些悲哀，似乎想说话，但竟没有说。
At the end of the second academic year, I went to Mr. Fujino and told him that I would not study medicine and leave Sendai. His face seemed to be a little sad, as if he wanted to speak, but he didn't speak.“我想去学生物学，先生教给我的学问，也还有用的。”其实我并没有决意要学生物学，因为看得他有些凄然，便说了一个慰安他的谎话。
"I want to study biology, and the knowledge my teacher taught me is also useful." In fact, I didn't decide to study biology, because I saw that he was a little sad, so I told a lie to comfort him.“为医学而教的解剖学之类，怕于生物学也没有什么大帮助。”他叹息说。
"Anatomy taught for medicine and the like are probably not of much help to biology." He sighed.将走的前几天，他叫我到他家里去，交给我一张照相，后面写着两个字道：“惜别”，还说希望将我的也送他。但我这时适值没有照相了；他便叮嘱我将来照了寄给他，并且时时通信告诉他此后的状况。
A few days before I left, he asked me to go to his house and handed me a photo, with two words written on the back: "Farewell", and said that he hoped to give mine to him as well. But I didn't take pictures at this time; He told me to send him a photo in the future, and to keep in touch with him about the situation after that.我离开仙台之后，就多年没有照过相，又因为状况也无聊，说起来无非使他失望，便连信也怕敢写了。经过的年月一多，话更无从说起，所以虽然有时想写信，却又难以下笔，这样的一直到现在，竟没有寄过一封信和一张照片。从他那一面看起来，是一去之后，杳无消息了。
After I left Sendai, I hadn't taken a photo for many years, and because of the boring situation, it was nothing more than disappointing him, so I was afraid to write a letter. After a long time, there is no way to start, so although I sometimes want to write a letter, it is difficult to write, so until now, I have not sent a letter or a photo. From his side, it seems that after he left, there was no news.但不知怎地，我总还时时记起他，在我所认为我师的之中，他是最使我感激，给我鼓励的一个。有时我常常想：他的对于我的热心的希望，不倦的教诲，小而言之，是为中国，就是希望中国有新的医学；大而言之，是为学术，就是希望新的医学传到中国去。他的性格，在我的眼里和心里是伟大的，虽然他的姓名并不为许多人所知道。
But somehow, I always remember him, and among all the people I think of as my teacher, he is the one who makes me most grateful and encourages me. Sometimes I often think: his ardent hope for me, his tireless teachings, in a small way, for China, that is, for China, that is, for the hope that there will be new medicine in China; In a big way, it is for academics, that is, to hope that new medicine will spread to China. His character is great in my eyes and heart, although his name is not known to many.他所改正的讲义，我曾经订成三厚本，收藏着的，将作为永久的纪念。不幸七年前迁居的时候，中途毁坏了一口书箱，失去半箱书，恰巧这讲义也遗失在内了。责成运送局去找寻，寂无回信。只有他的照相至今还挂在我北京寓居的东墙上，书桌对面。每当夜间疲倦，正想偷懒时，仰面在灯光中瞥见他黑瘦的面貌，似乎正要说出抑扬顿挫的话来，便使我忽又良心发现，而且增加勇气了，于是点上一枝烟，再继续写些为“正人君子”之流所深恶痛疾的文字。
The handouts he corrected, which I once ordered into three thick editions, will be used as a permanent memorial. Unfortunately, when I moved seven years ago, I destroyed a bookcase and lost half a box of books, and it happened that this handout was also lost. The transport bureau was instructed to look for it, but there was no reply. Only his photo still hangs on the east wall of my Beijing residence, opposite the desk. Whenever I was tired at night and was about to be lazy, I caught a glimpse of his dark and thin face in the light, and it seemed that I was about to say the words of intonation, which made me suddenly find out in conscience and increase my courage, so I lit a cigarette and continued to write some words that were deeply hated by the "upright gentlemen".十月十二日。
October 12th.

范爱农

范爱农

范爱农

Fan Ainong在东京的客店里，我们大抵一起来就看报。学生所看的多是《朝日新闻》和《读卖新闻》，专爱打听社会上琐事的就看《二六新闻》。一天早晨，辟头就看见一条从中国来的电报，大概是：
In the inn in Tokyo, we usually read the newspaper together. Students mostly read the Asahi Shimbun and the Yomiuri Shimbun, and those who like to inquire about trivial matters in society read the "Erliu News". One morning, I saw a telegram from China, which was probably the following:“安徽巡抚恩铭被Jo Shiki Rin刺杀，刺客就擒。”
"Anhui Governor En Ming was assassinated by Jo Shiki Rin, and the assassin was captured."大家一怔之后，便容光焕发地互相告语，并且研究这刺客是谁，汉字是怎样三个字。但只要是绍兴人，又不专看教科书的，却早已明白了。这是徐锡麟，他留学回国之后，在做安徽候补道，办着巡警事务，正合于刺杀巡抚的地位。
After everyone was stunned, they told each other brightly, and studied who the assassin was and what the Chinese characters were. But as long as you are from Shaoxing and don't read textbooks, you have already understood. This is Xu Xilin, after he returned from studying abroad, he was working as an assistant in Anhui and doing patrol affairs, which was in line with the status of assassinating the governor.大家接着就预测他将被极刑，家族将被连累。不久，秋瑾姑娘在绍兴被杀的消息也传来了，徐锡麟是被挖了心，给恩铭的亲兵炒食净尽。人心很愤怒。有几个人便秘密地开一个会，筹集川资；这时用得着日本浪人了，撕乌贼鱼下酒，慷慨一通之后，他便登程去接徐伯荪的家属去。
Everyone then predicted that he would be sentenced to death and his family would be implicated. Soon, the news of Qiu Jin's murder in Shaoxing also came, and Xu Xilin was dug out of his heart and fried up for Enming's personal soldiers. People are angry. A few people secretly held a meeting to raise Sichuan funds; At this time, the Japanese ronin was needed, tore the squid fish and drank, and after being generous, he set off to pick up Xu Bosun's family.照例还有一个同乡会，吊烈士，骂满洲；此后便有人主张打电报到北京，痛斥满政府的无人道。会众即刻分成两派：一派要发电，一派不要发。我是主张发电的，但当我说出之后，即有一种钝滞的声音跟着起来：
As usual, there is also a hometown association to hang martyrs and scold Manchuria; Since then, some people have advocated sending telegrams to Beijing to denounce the inhumanity of the Manchu government. The congregation immediately split into two factions: one wanted to generate electricity, and the other did not. I am in favor of generating electricity, but as soon as I say it, a dull voice follows:“杀的杀掉了，死的死掉了，还发什么屁电报呢。”
"Kill it, kill it, die it, what kind of fart telegram do you send?"这是一个高大身材，长头发，眼球白多黑少的人，看人总像在渺视。他蹲在席子上，我发言大抵就反对；我早觉得奇怪，注意着他的了，到这时才打听别人：说这话的是谁呢，有那么冷？认识的人告诉我说：他叫范爱农，是徐伯荪的学生。
This is a tall person, with long hair, more white and less black eyeballs, and he always looks down on people. He squatted on the mat, and I generally objected to my speech; I had long thought it was strange, and I paid attention to him, and only then did I ask others: Who said this, is it so cold? Someone I knew told me that his name was Fan Ainong and he was a student of Xu Bosun.我非常愤怒了，觉得他简直不是人，自己的先生被杀了，连打一个电报还害怕，于是便坚执地主张要发电，同他争起来，结果是主张发电的居多数，他屈服了。其次要推出人来拟电稿。
I was very angry, thinking that he was not a human being, that his husband had been killed, and he was afraid that he would even make a telegram, so he insisted on generating electricity and fighting with him, but the result was that the majority of those who advocated power generation were the majority, and he gave in. Secondly, it is necessary to introduce people to draft the telegram.“何必推举呢？自然是主张发电的人啰。”他说。
"Why nominate? Naturally, it is the person who advocates power generation. He said.我觉得他的话又在针对我，无理倒也并非无理的。但我便主张这一篇悲壮的文章必须深知烈士生平的人做，因为他比别人关系更密切，心里更悲愤，做出来就一定更动人。于是又争起来。结果是他不做，我也不做，不知谁承认做去了；其次是大家走散，只留下一个拟稿的和一两个干事，等候做好之后去拍发。
I feel that his words are aimed at me again, and it is not unreasonable. But I advocate that this tragic article must be written by someone who knows the life of the martyr well, because he has a closer relationship than others, and his heart is more sad and angry, and it must be more moving. So they fought again. The result is that he didn't do it, and I didn't do it, I don't know who admitted to doing it; Secondly, everyone was separated, leaving only one drafter and one or two officers, waiting for the finished work to be filmed.从此我总觉得这范爱农离奇，而且很可恶。天下可恶的人，当初以为是满人，这时才知道还在其次；第一倒是范爱农。中国不革命则已，要革命，首先就必须将范爱农除去。
Since then, I have always felt that this Fan Ainong is bizarre and hateful. The hateful people in the world thought they were Manchus at first, but then they realized that they were secondary; The first is Fan Ainong. If China does not revolutionize, it is fine, and if it wants to revolutionize, it must first get rid of Fan Ainong.然而这意见后来似乎逐渐淡薄，到底忘却了，我们从此也没有再见面。直到革命的前一年，我在故乡做教员，大概是春末时候罢，忽然在熟人的客座上看见了一个人，互相熟视了不过两三秒钟，我们便同时说：
However, this opinion seemed to gradually fade, and we forgot about it, and we never met again. Until the year before the revolution, when I was a teacher in my hometown, about the end of spring, I suddenly saw a person at an acquaintance's guest seat, and we looked at each other for only two or three seconds, and we said at the same time:“哦哦，你是范爱农！”
"Oh, you're Fan Ainong!"“哦哦，你是鲁迅！”
"Oh, you are Lu Xun!"不知怎地我们便都笑了起来，是互相的嘲笑和悲哀。他眼睛还是那样，然而奇怪，只这几年，头上却有了白发了，但也许本来就有，我先前没有留心到。他穿着很旧的布马褂，破布鞋，显得很寒素。谈起自己的经历来，他说他后来没有了学费，不能再留学，便回来了。回到故乡之后，又受着轻蔑，排斥，迫害，几乎无地可容。现在是躲在乡下，教着几个小学生糊口。但因为有时觉得很气闷，所以也趁了航船进城来。
Somehow we all laughed, laughing and sadly at each other. His eyes are still like that, but strangely, in the past few years, he has gray hair on his head, but maybe there is, I didn't pay attention to it before. He was wearing a very old cloth robe and rag shoes, looking very humble. Talking about his own experience, he said that he later had no tuition fees and could no longer study abroad, so he came back. After returning to his hometown, he was despised, ostracized, and persecuted, and there was almost no place to tolerate. Now he is hiding in the countryside and teaching a few elementary school students to make a living. But because I sometimes feel very stuffy, I also took advantage of the boat to enter the city.他又告诉我现在爱喝酒，于是我们便喝酒。从此他每一进城，必定来访我，非常相熟了。我们醉后常谈些愚不可及的疯话，连母亲偶然听到了也发笑。一天我忽而记起在东京开同乡会时的旧事，便问他：
He also told me that I love to drink now, so we drank. From then on, every time he entered the city, he would definitely visit me, and we were very familiar with each other. We often talk about stupid crazy things when we get drunk, and even my mother laughs when she hears it by chance. One day, I suddenly remembered the old things I had when I was holding a hometown meeting in Tokyo, so I asked him:“那一天你专门反对我，而且故意似的，究竟是什么缘故呢？”
"What is the reason why you specifically opposed me that day, and it seemed to be deliberately?"“你还不知道？我一向就讨厌你的，——不但我，我们。”
"You don't know yet? I've always hated you,—— not just me, we. ”“你那时之前，早知道我是谁么？”
"Did you know who I was before then?"“怎么不知道。我们到横滨，来接的不就是子英和你么？你看不起我们，摇摇头，你自己还记得么？”
"Why don't you know. When we go to Yokohama, isn't it Ziying and you who come to pick us up? You looked down on us, shook your head, do you remember yourself? ”我略略一想，记得的，虽然是七八年前的事。那时是子英来约我的，说到横滨去接新来留学的同乡。汽船一到，看见一大堆，大概一共有十多人，一上岸便将行李放到税关上去候查检，关吏在衣箱中翻来翻去，忽然翻出一双绣花的弓鞋来，便放下公事，拿着子细地看。我很不满，心里想，这些鸟男人，怎么带这东西来呢。自己不注意，那时也许就摇了摇头。检验完毕，在客店小坐之后，即须上火车。不料这一群读书人又在客车上让起坐位来了，甲要乙坐在这位上，乙要丙去坐，揖让未终，火车已开，车身一摇，即刻跌倒了三四个。我那时也很不满，暗地里想：连火车上的坐位，他们也要分出尊卑来……。自己不注意，也许又摇了摇头。然而那群雍容揖让的人物中就有范爱农，却直到这一天才想到。岂但他呢，说起来也惭愧，这一群里，还有后来在安徽战死的陈伯平烈士，被害的马宗汉烈士；被囚在黑狱里，到革命后才见天日而身上永带着匪刑的伤痕的也还有一两人。而我都茫无所知，摇着头将他们一并运上东京了。徐伯荪虽然和他们同船来，却不在这车上，因为他在神户就和他的夫人坐车走了陆路了。
I thought about it for a moment, although it was seven or eight years ago. At that time, Ziying came to ask me to go to Yokohama to pick up my new compatriots who came to study abroad. As soon as the steamboat arrived, they saw a large pile of them, probably more than ten people in total, and as soon as they landed, they put their luggage on the tax customs to wait for inspection. I was very dissatisfied, thinking to myself, how can these bird men bring this thing? If you don't pay attention, you may shake your head at that time. After the inspection, after sitting in the inn, you must get on the train. Unexpectedly, this group of scholars gave up their seats on the bus again, A wanted B to sit on this, B wanted C to sit down, the bow was not over, the train was starting, the body shook, and immediately fell three or four. I was also very dissatisfied at the time, and secretly thought: Even the seats on the train must be divided into high and low, ....... If you don't pay attention, you may shake your head again. However, among the group of graceful and humble characters was Fan Ainong, but he didn't think of it until this day. In this group, there are also martyrs Chen Boping who died in Anhui and martyrs Ma Zonghan who were killed; There are also one or two people who were imprisoned in the black prison and did not see the light of day until after the revolution, and their bodies always bear the scars of banditry. And I didn't know anything, so I shook my head and transported them to Tokyo together. Although Xu Bosun came in the same boat as them, he was not in this car, because he took a car with his wife in Kobe and took the overland route.我想我那时摇头大约有两回，他们看见的不知道是那一回。让坐时喧闹，检查时幽静，一定是在税关上的那一回了，试问爱农，果然是的。
I think I shook my head about twice, and they didn't know what they saw. Let it be noisy when sitting and quiet when checking, it must be the time at the tax customs, just ask Ainong, sure enough.“我真不懂你们带这东西做什么？是谁的？”
"I really don't understand what you're doing with this thing? Whose is it? ”“还不是我们师母的？”他瞪着他多白的眼。
"It's not our master's wife yet?" He stared at his white eyes.“到东京就要假装大脚，又何必带这东西呢？”
"When you arrive in Tokyo, you have to pretend to have big feet, so why bring this thing?"“谁知道呢？你问她去。”
"Who knows? You ask her to go. ”到冬初，我们的景况更拮据了，然而还喝酒，讲笑话。忽然是武昌起义，接着是绍兴光复。第二天爱农就上城来，戴着农夫常用的毡帽，那笑容是从来没有见过的。
By the beginning of winter, our situation was even more difficult, but we still drank and told jokes. Suddenly there was the Wuchang Uprising, followed by the restoration of Shaoxing. The next day, Ai Nong came to the city, wearing a felt hat commonly used by farmers, and his smile was never seen before.“老迅，我们今天不喝酒了。我要去看看光复的绍兴。我们同去。”
"Lao Xun, we won't drink today. I want to see the restored Shaoxing. Let's go together. ”我们便到街上去走了一通，满眼是白旗。然而貌虽如此，内骨子是依旧的，因为还是几个旧乡绅所组织的军政府，什么铁路股东是行政司长，钱店掌柜是军械司长……。这军政府也到底不长久，几个少年一嚷，王金发带兵从杭州进来了，但即使不嚷或者也会来。他进来以后，也就被许多闲汉和新进的革命党所包围，大做王都督。在衙门里的人物，穿布衣来的，不上十天也大概换上皮袍子了，天气还并不冷。
We went to the street and walked around, and our eyes were full of white flags. However, despite the appearance, the inner bones are still the same, because it is still a military government organized by a few old gentry, the railway shareholder is the administrative director, and the money shopkeeper is the director of the ordnance department...... This military government didn't last long, a few teenagers shouted, Wang Jinfa led troops in from Hangzhou, but even if he didn't shout, he would come. After he came in, he was surrounded by many idlers and new revolutionary parties, and he became the governor of the king. The characters in the yamen came in plain clothes, and they probably changed into leather robes within ten days, and the weather was not cold yet.我被摆在师范学校校长的饭碗旁边，王都督给了我校款二百元。爱农做监学，还是那件布袍子，但不大喝酒了，也很少有工夫谈闲天。他办事，兼教书，实在勤快得可以。
I was placed next to the principal's job bowl of the normal school, and Governor Wang gave me 200 yuan in school funds. Ai Nong is a supervisor, still the same cloth robe, but he doesn't drink much, and he rarely has time to talk about idle days. He is very diligent in doing things and teaching.“情形还是不行，王金发他们。”一个去年听过我的讲义的少年来访问我，慷慨地说，“我们要办一种报来监督他们。不过发起人要借用先生的名字。还有一个是子英先生，一个是德清先生。为社会，我们知道你决不推却的。”
"The situation is still not good, Wang Jinfa and the others." A teenager who had heard my handouts last year came to visit me and generously said, "We are going to run a newspaper to supervise them." However, the promoter has to borrow the name of Mr. Another is Mr. Ziying and the other is Mr. Deqing. For society, we know you will never shirk it. ”我答应他了。两天后便看见出报的传单，发起人诚然是三个。五天后便见报，开首便骂军政府和那里面的人员；此后是骂都督，都督的亲戚，同乡，姨太太……。
I promised him. Two days later, I saw the flyer that came out of the newspaper, and the initiators were indeed three. Five days later, I saw the newspaper, and at the beginning I scolded the military government and its personnel; After that, he scolded the governor, the governor's relatives, fellow villagers, and aunts .......这样地骂了十多天，就有一种消息传到我的家里来，说都督因为你们诈取了他的钱，还骂他，要派人用手枪来打死你们了。
After scolding like this for more than ten days, news came to my house, saying that the governor scolded him because you cheated his money, and wanted to send someone to kill you with a pistol.别人倒还不打紧，第一个着急的是我的母亲，叮嘱我不要再出去。但我还是照常走，并且说明，王金发是不来打死我们的，他虽然绿林大学出身，而杀人却不很轻易。况且我拿的是校款，这一点他还能明白的，不过说说罢了。
Others didn't care, the first one was my mother, who told me not to go out again. But I still went as usual, and explained that Wang Jinfa did not come to kill us, although he was from Green Forest University, it was not easy to kill. Besides, I am taking the school fund, which he can still understand, but it's just talking.果然没有来杀。写信去要经费，又取了二百元。但仿佛有些怒意，同时传令道：再来要，没有了！
Sure enough, he didn't come to kill him. I wrote a letter asking for funds, and took another 200 yuan. But as if he was a little angry, he ordered at the same time: Come again, no!不过爱农得到了一种新消息，却使我很为难。原来所谓“诈取”者，并非指学校经费而言，是指另有送给报馆的一笔款。报纸上骂了几天之后，王金发便叫人送去了五百元。于是乎我们的少年们便开起会议来，第一个问题是：收不收？决议曰：收。第二个问题是：收了之后骂不骂？决议曰：骂。理由是：收钱之后，他是股东；股东不好，自然要骂。
But Ainong got a new kind of news, but it made me very embarrassed. It turns out that the so-called "fraud" does not refer to school funds, but refers to a sum of money given to the newspaper. After a few days of scolding in the newspaper, Wang Jinfa asked someone to send 500 yuan. So our teenagers held a meeting, and the first question was: Do you accept it? The resolution is: Collect. The second question is: Do you scold after receiving it? The resolution is: scolding. The reason is: after receiving the money, he is a shareholder; If the shareholders are not good, they will naturally be scolded.我即刻到报馆去问这事的真假。都是真的。略说了几句不该收他钱的话，一个名为会计的便不高兴了，质问我道：
I immediately went to the newspaper to ask if this matter was true or false. It's all true. After saying a few words that he shouldn't have accepted money, a man named an accountant became unhappy and asked me:“报馆为什么不收股本？”
"Why doesn't the newspaper collect share capital?"“这不是股本……。”
"It's not a ...... equity."“不是股本是什么？”
"What is not share capital?"我就不再说下去了，这一点世故是早已知道的，倘我再说出连累我们的话来，他就会面斥我太爱惜不值钱的生命，不肯为社会牺牲，或者明天在报上就可以看见我怎样怕死发抖的记载。
If I say something that hurts us again, he will scold me for cherishing my worthless life too much and refusing to sacrifice for society, or tomorrow I will see in the newspaper how I tremble in fear of death.然而事情很凑巧，季茀写信来催我往南京了。爱农也很赞成，但颇凄凉，说：
However, it was a coincidence, and Ji Fu wrote a letter urging me to go to Nanjing. Ainong also agreed, but it was quite desolate, saying:“这里又是那样，住不得。你快去罢……。”
"It's like that here, I can't live. You go quickly...... ”我懂得他无声的话，决计往南京。先到都督府去辞职，自然照准，派来了一个拖鼻涕的接收员，我交出账目和余款一角又两铜元，不是校长了。后任是孔教会会长傅力臣。
I understood his silent words and decided to go to Nanjing. I went to the Governor's Mansion to resign first, and naturally complied, and sent a snot-dragging receiver, and I handed over the accounts and the balance of the balance and two bronze dollars, not the principal. The successor was the president of the Confucius Church, Fulham.报馆案是我到南京后两三个星期了结的，被一群兵们捣毁。子英在乡下，没有事；德清适值在城里，大腿上被刺了一尖刀。他大怒了。自然，这是很有些痛的，怪他不得。他大怒之后，脱下衣服，照了一张照片，以显示一寸来宽的刀伤，并且做一篇文章叙述情形，向各处分送，宣传军政府的横暴。我想，这种照片现在是大约未必还有人收藏着了，尺寸太小，刀伤缩小到几乎等于无，如果不加说明，看见的人一定以为是带些疯气的风流人物的裸体照片，倘遇见孙传芳大帅，还怕要被禁止的。
The newspaper case was concluded two or three weeks after I arrived in Nanjing, and was destroyed by a group of soldiers. Ziying is in the countryside, nothing happens; Deqing happened to be in the city when he was stabbed with a sharp knife in the thigh. He was furious. Naturally, this is very painful, and he can't be blamed. After he was furious, he took off his clothes, took a photo to show the knife wound about an inch wide, and wrote an article describing the situation, which was sent to various places to publicize the tyranny of the military government. I think this kind of photo may not be collected by anyone now, the size is too small, the knife wound has shrunk to almost nothing, if you don't explain, the person who sees it must think that it is a nude photo of some crazy romantic figures, if you meet Sun Chuanfang, you are afraid that you will be banned.我从南京移到北京的时候，爱农的学监也被孔教会会长的校长设法去掉了。他又成了革命前的爱农。我想为他在北京寻一点小事做，这是他非常希望的，然而没有机会。他后来便到一个熟人的家里去寄食，也时时给我信，景况愈困穷，言辞也愈凄苦。终于又非走出这熟人的家不可，便在各处飘浮。不久，忽然从同乡那里得到一个消息，说他已经掉在水里，淹死了。
When I moved from Nanjing to Beijing, the superintendent of Ainong was also removed by the president of the Confucius Church. He became a pre-revolutionary farmer again. I wanted to find something small for him in Beijing, which he wanted very much, but there was no opportunity. He later went to an acquaintance's house to send food, and he wrote to me from time to time, and the poorer the situation, the more miserable his words became. Finally, I had to get out of this acquaintance's house, so I floated everywhere. Soon, he suddenly received news from his fellow villagers that he had fallen into the water and drowned.我疑心他是自杀。因为他是浮水的好手，不容易淹死的。
I suspect he committed suicide. Because he is a good hand at floating water, it is not easy to drown.夜间独坐在会馆里，十分悲凉，又疑心这消息并不确，但无端又觉得这是极其可靠的，虽然并无证据。一点法子都没有，只做了四首诗，后来曾在一种日报上发表，现在是将要忘记完了。只记得一首里的六句，起首四句是：“把酒论天下，先生小酒人。大圜犹酩酊，微醉合沉沦。”中间忘掉两句，末了是“旧朋云散尽，余亦等轻尘。”
Sitting alone in the guild hall at night, very sad, and suspecting that the news was not true, but for no reason, I felt that this was extremely reliable, although there was no evidence. There was no way at all, only four poems were made, which were later published in a kind of daily newspaper, and now they are about to be forgotten. I only remember the six sentences in one poem, the first four sentences are: "Talk about wine in the world, sir is a little wine man." The big circle is still drunk, and a little drunkenness should sink. I forgot two sentences in the middle, and the last one was "The old friends are gone, and the rest are also light dust." ”后来我回故乡去，才知道一些较为详细的事。爱农先是什么事也没得做，因为大家讨厌他。他很困难，但还喝酒，是朋友请他的。他已经很少和人们来往，常见的只剩下几个后来认识的较为年青的人了，然而他们似乎也不愿意多听他的牢骚，以为不如讲笑话有趣。
Later, when I went back to my hometown, I learned some more detailed things. Ai Nong didn't have to do anything at first, because everyone hated him. He was difficult, but he also drank, and it was his friends who invited him. He had little contact with people, and only a few younger people he met later, but they didn't seem to want to listen to his complaints, thinking that it was not as interesting as telling jokes.“也许明天就收到一个电报，拆开来一看，是鲁迅来叫我的。”他时常这样说。
"Maybe I'll receive a telegram tomorrow, and when I open it, it's Lu Xun who called me." He often said this.一天，几个新的朋友约他坐船去看戏，回来已过夜半，又是大风雨，他醉着，却偏要到船舷上去小解。大家劝阻他，也不听，自己说是不会掉下去的。但他掉下去了，虽然能浮水，却从此不起来。
One day, a few new friends asked him to take a boat to see a play, and it was past midnight when he came back, and it was a big storm again. Everyone dissuaded him, but he didn't listen, saying that he would not fall. But he fell, and although he could float on the water, he never got up.第二天打捞尸体，是在菱荡里找到的，直立着。
The next day, the body was found in the lingdang, standing upright.我至今不明白他究竟是失足还是自杀。
I still don't understand whether he stumbled or committed suicide.他死后一无所有，遗下一个幼女和他的夫人。有几个人想集一点钱作他女孩将来的学费的基金，因为一经提议，即有族人来争这笔款的保管权，——其实还没有这笔款，——大家觉得无聊，便无形消散了。
After his death, he had nothing, leaving behind a young daughter and his wife. A few people wanted to raise a little money for the fund for his girl's future tuition, because as soon as it was proposed, there were clansmen who came to fight for the custody of the money,—— in fact,—— everyone was bored, so it dissipated invisibly.现在不知他唯一的女儿景况如何？倘在上学，中学已该毕业了罢。
Now I don't know what the situation of his only daughter is? If you are in school, you should have graduated from middle school.十一月十八日。
November 18th.

后记

后记

后记

postscript我在第三篇讲《二十四孝》的开头，说北京恐吓小孩的“马虎子”应作“麻胡子”，是指麻叔谋，而且以他为胡人。现在知道是错了，“胡”应作“祜”，是叔谋之名，见唐人李济翁做的《资暇集》卷下，题云《非麻胡》。原文如次：
At the beginning of the third article "Twenty-Four Filial Piety", I said that the "sloppy" who intimidated children in Beijing should be called "Ma Huzi", referring to Uncle Ma and treating him as a Hu person. Now I know that it is wrong, "Hu" should be "Hu", which is the name of Shu Mou, see the volume of "Leisure Collection" made by Li Jiweng of the Tang Dynasty, titled "Non Ma Hu". The original text is as follows:“俗怖婴儿曰：麻胡来！不知其源者，以为多髯之神而验刺者，非也。隋将军麻祜，性酷虐，炀帝令开汴河，威棱既盛，至稚童望风而畏，互相恐吓曰：麻祜来！稚童语不正，转祜为胡。只如宪宗朝泾将郝玭，蕃中皆畏惮，其国婴儿啼者，以玭怖之则止。又，武宗朝，闾阎孩孺相胁云：薛尹来！咸类此也。况《魏志》载张文远辽来之明证乎？”（原注：麻祜庙在睢阳。鄜方节度李丕即其后。丕为重建碑。）
“俗怖婴儿曰：麻胡来！不知其源者，以为多髯之神而验刺者，非也。 隋将军麻祜，性酷虐，炀帝令开汴河，威棱既盛，至稚童望风而畏，互相恐吓曰：麻祜来！稚童语不正，转祜为胡。 只如宪宗朝泾将郝玭，蕃中皆畏惮，其国婴儿啼者，以玭怖之则止。 又，武宗朝，闾阎孩孺相胁云：薛尹来！咸类此也。 况《魏志》载张文远辽来之明证乎？”（原注：麻祜庙在睢阳。 鄜方节度李丕即其后。 丕为重建碑。 ）原来我的识见，就正和唐朝的“不知其源者”相同，贻讥于千载之前，真是咎有应得，只好苦笑。但又不知麻祜庙碑或碑文，现今尚在睢阳或存于方志中否？倘在，我们当可以看见和小说《开河记》所载相反的他的功业。
It turns out that my insight is the same as that of the Tang Dynasty's "those who do not know its origin", and it was ridiculed thousands of years ago, and I really deserved it, so I had to smile bitterly. But I don't know if the Ma Hu temple stele or inscription is still in Suiyang or in the local chronicles? If he is, we should be able to see his achievements contrary to those recorded in the novel "The Opening of the River".因为想寻几张插画，常维钧兄给我在北京搜集了许多材料，有几种是为我所未曾见过的。如光绪己卯（1879）肃州胡文炳作的《二百卌孝图》——原书有注云：“卌读如习。”我真不解他何以不直称四十，而必须如此麻烦——即其一。我所反对的“郭巨埋儿”，他于我还未出世的前几年，已经删去了。序有云：
Because I wanted to find a few illustrations, Brother Chang Weijun collected a lot of materials for me in Beijing, some of which I had never seen before. For example, Guangxu Jimao (1879) Suzhou Hu Wenbing's "Two Hundred Filial Piety Diagram" - the original book has a note: "Reading like Xi." "I really don't understand why he doesn't just call it forty, but it has to be so troublesome - that is, one of them. The "Guo Ju Burial" that I opposed had been deleted a few years before I was born. The preface says:“……坊间所刻《二十四孝》，善矣。然其中郭巨埋儿一事，揆之天理人情，殊不可以训。……炳窃不自量，妄为编辑。凡矫枉过正而刻意求名者，概从割爱；惟择其事之不诡于正，而人人可为者，类为六门。……”
“…… 坊间所刻《二十四孝》，善矣。 然其中郭巨埋儿一事，揆之天理人情，殊不可以训。 …… 炳窃不自量，妄为编辑。 凡矫枉过正而刻意求名者，概从割爱；惟择其事之不诡于正，而人人可为者，类为六门。 ……”这位肃州胡老先生的勇决，委实令我佩服了。但这种意见，恐怕是怀抱者不乏其人，而且由来已久的，不过大抵不敢毅然删改，笔之于书。如同治十一年（1872）刻的《百孝图》，前有纪常郑绩序，就说：
I really admire the courage of this Mr. Hu of Suzhou. But this kind of opinion, I am afraid that there is no shortage of people who embrace it, and it has been around for a long time, but most of them do not dare to resolutely delete it and put it into writing. Just like the "Hundred Filial Piety Diagram" engraved in the eleventh year of Zhi (1872), there is a preface to Ji Chang Zheng Ji, which says:“……况迩来世风日下，沿习浇漓，不知孝出天性自然，反以孝作另成一事。且择古人投炉埋儿为忍心害理，指割股抽肠为损亲遗体。殊未审孝只在乎心，不在乎迹。尽孝无定形，行孝无定事。古之孝者非在今所宜，今之孝者难泥古之事。因此时此地不同，而其人其事各异，求其所以尽孝之心则一也。子夏曰：事父母能竭其力。故孔门问孝，所答何尝有同然乎？……”
“…… 况迩来世风日下，沿习浇漓，不知孝出天性自然，反以孝作另成一事。 且择古人投炉埋儿为忍心害理，指割股抽肠为损亲遗体。 殊未审孝只在乎心，不在乎迹。 尽孝无定形，行孝无定事。 古之孝者非在今所宜，今之孝者难泥古之事。 因此时此地不同，而其人其事各异，求其所以尽孝之心则一也。 子夏曰：事父母能竭其力。 故孔门问孝，所答何尝有同然乎？……”则同治年间就有人以埋儿等事为“忍心害理”，灼然可知。至于这一位“纪常郑绩”先生的意思，我却还是不大懂，或者像是说：这些事现在可以不必学，但也不必说他错。
It is clear that during the Tongzhi period, some people regarded the burial of children and other matters as "cruel and harmful to reason". As for the meaning of this "Ji Chang Zheng Ji", I still don't understand it, or as if to say: These things don't have to be learned now, but there is no need to say that he is wrong.
这部《百孝图》的起源有点特别，是因为见了“粤东颜子”的《百美新咏》而作的。人重色而己重孝，卫道之盛心可谓至矣。虽然是“会稽俞葆真兰浦编辑”，与不佞有同乡之谊，——但我还只得老实说：不大高明。例如木兰从军的出典，他注云：“隋史”。这样名目的书，现今是没有的；倘是《隋书》，那里面又没有木兰从军的事。
The origin of this "Hundred Filial Piety Pictures" is a bit special, because it was made after seeing the "Hundred Beautiful New Songs" of "Yanzi in Guangdong". People value beauty while they value filial piety; the grandeur of the Guardian Dao can be said to be the most profound. Although I am the "editor of Kuaiji Yu Baozhen Lanpu" and have a friendship with Bu Ning,—— I have to be honest: not very clever. For example, Mulan's source in the army, he annotated: "History of Sui". There are no books with such a name today; If it is the "Book of Sui", there is no Mulan in the army.而中华民国九年（1920），上海的书店却偏偏将它用石印翻印了，书名的前后各添了两个字：《男女百孝图全传》。第一叶上还有一行小字道：家庭教育的好模范。又加了一篇“吴下大错王鼎谨识”的序，开首先发同治年间“纪常郑绩”先生一流的感慨：
In the ninth year of the Republic of China (1920), the bookstore in Shanghai reprinted it with a stone seal, and two words were added before and after the title of the book: "The Complete Biography of Men and Women". There is also a line of small characters on the first leaf: A good model of family education. added a preface to "Wu Xia Da Mistake Wang Ding Cautious Knowledge", and opened the first-class emotion of Mr. "Ji Chang Zheng Ji" during the Tongzhi period:“慨自欧化东渐，海内承学之士，嚣嚣然侈谈自由平等之说，致道德日就沦胥，人心日益浇漓，寡廉鲜耻，无所不为，侥幸行险，人思幸进，求所谓砥砺廉隅，束身自爱者，世不多睹焉。……起观斯世之忍心害理，几全如陈叔宝之无心肝。长此滔滔，伊何底止？……”
“慨自欧化东渐，海内承学之士，嚣嚣然侈谈自由平等之说，致道德日就沦胥，人心日益浇漓，寡廉鲜耻，无所不为，侥幸行险，人思幸进，求所谓砥砺廉隅，束身自爱者，世不多睹焉。 …… 起观斯世之忍心害理，几全如陈叔宝之无心肝。 长此滔滔，伊何底止？……”其实陈叔宝模胡到好像“全无心肝”，或者有之，若拉他来配“忍心害理”，却未免有些冤枉。这是有几个人以评“郭巨埋儿”和“李娥投炉”的事的。
In fact, Chen Shubao seems to be "completely heartless", or if he is pulled to match "patience and harm", it is inevitable that it will be a little unjust. This is because several people commented on "Guo Ju buried" and "Li E threw into the furnace".至于人心，有几点确也似乎正在浇漓起来。自从《男女之秘密》，《男女交合新论》出现后，上海就很有些书名喜欢用“男女”二字冠首。现在是连“以正人心而厚风俗”的《百孝图》上也加上了。这大概为因不满于《百美新咏》而教孝的“会稽俞葆真兰浦”先生所不及料的罢。
As for people's hearts, there are indeed some points that seem to be pouring out. Since the emergence of "The Secret of Men and Women" and "New Theory of Male and Female Copulation", there are many books in Shanghai that like to use the word "male and female" as the first title. Now even the "Hundred Filial Piety Diagram" that "upholds people's hearts and thick customs" has also been added. This is probably unexpected by Mr. "Kuaiji Yu Baozhen Lanpu", who taught filial piety because he was dissatisfied with the "Hundred Beautiful New Songs".
从说“百行之先”的孝而忽然拉到“男女”上去，仿佛也近乎不庄重，——浇漓。但我总还想趁便说几句，——自然竭力来减省。
From the filial piety of saying "the first of a hundred deeds" to suddenly pulling up to "men and women", it seems that it is almost unsolemn ,—— pouring. But I always want to take the opportunity to say a few words,—— and naturally try my best to reduce it.我们中国人即使对于“百行之先”，我敢说，也未必就不想到男女上去的。太平无事，闲人很多，偶有“杀身成仁舍生取义”的，本人也许忙得不暇检点，而活着的旁观者总会加以绵密的研究。曹娥的投江觅父，淹死后抱父尸出，是载在正史，很有许多人知道的，但这一个“抱”字却发生过问题。
Even if we Chinese dare to say that we are "the first in a hundred lines", we may not want men and women to go up. There are many idle people, and occasionally there are those who "kill themselves for benevolence and sacrifice their lives for righteousness", and I may be too busy to check, and living bystanders will always study them carefully. Cao E's throwing into the river to find her father, drowning and holding her father's body, is recorded in the official history, and many people know it, but this word "hug" has had problems.我幼小时候，在故乡曾经听到老年人这样讲：
When I was a child, I heard the elderly say this in my hometown:“……死了的曹娥，和她父亲的尸体，最初是面对面抱着浮上来的。然而过往行人看见的都发笑了，说：哈哈！这么一个年青姑娘抱着这么一个老头子！于是那两个死尸又沉下去了；停了一刻又浮起来，这回是背对背的负着。”
“…… The dead Cao E and her father's body were initially held face to face and floated up. However, passers-by laughed when they saw it, saying: Haha! Such a young girl hugging such an old man! So the two dead bodies sank again; After a moment, it floated again, this time back-to-back. ”好！在礼义之邦里，连一个年幼——呜呼，“娥年十四”而已——的死孝女要和死父亲一同浮出，也有这么艰难！
Good! In the country of propriety and righteousness, it is so difficult for even a young filial daughter - ah, "E is only fourteen years old" - to surface with her dead father!我检查《百孝图》和《二百卌孝图》，画师都很聪明，所画的是曹娥还未跳入江中，只在江干啼哭。但吴友如画的《女二十四孝图》（1892）却正是两尸一同浮出的这一幕，而且也正画作“背对背”，如第一图的上方。我想，他大约也知道我所听到的那故事的。还有《后二十四孝图说》，也是吴友如画，也有曹娥，则画作正在投江的情状，如第一图下。
I checked the "Hundred Filial Piety Pictures" and "Two Hundred Filial Piety Pictures", and the painters were very smart, and what they painted was that Cao E had not yet jumped into the river, but only cried in the river. However, Wu Youru's painting "Twenty-Four Filial Piety Pictures of Women" (1892) is exactly the scene where the two corpses emerge together, and it is also painted "back to back", as shown above the first picture. I think he probably knew the story I heard. There is also "The Later Twenty-Four Filial Piety Picture", which is also a painting by Wu Youru, and there is also Cao E, and the painting is thrown into the river, as shown in the first picture.就我现今所见的教孝的图说而言，古今颇有许多遇盗，遇虎，遇火，遇风的孝子，那应付的方法，十之九是“哭”和“拜”。
As far as the illustrations of teaching filial piety that I see today, there are many filial sons who have encountered thieves, tigers, fires, and winds in ancient and modern times, and nine out of ten of the ways to deal with them are "crying" and "worshiping".中国的哭和拜，什么时候才完呢？
When will China's crying and worship end?
至于画法，我以为最简古的倒要算日本的小田海僊本，这本子早已印入《点石斋丛画》里，变成国货，很容易入手的了。吴友如画的最细巧，也最能引动人。但他于历史画其实是不大相宜的；他久居上海的租界里，耳濡目染，最擅长的倒在作“恶鸨虐妓”，“流氓拆梢”一类的时事画，那真是勃勃有生气，令人在纸上看出上海的洋场来。但影响殊不佳，近来许多小说和儿童读物的插画中，往往将一切女性画成妓女样，一切孩童都画得像一个小流氓，大半就因为太看了他的画本的缘故。
As for the painting method, I think the simplest and most ancient is the Japanese Oda Kai book, which has long been printed in the "Dian Shizhai Conghua" and has become a domestic product, which is easy to start. Wu Youru's paintings are the most delicate and the most moving. But he is actually not suitable for historical painting; He has lived in the Shanghai concession for a long time, and he is best at making current affairs paintings such as "evil bustards abusing prostitutes" and "hooligans tearing down the tips", which is really lively and makes people see Shanghai's foreign market on paper. However, the influence is not very good, and in the illustrations of many novels and children's books recently, all women are often drawn as prostitutes, and all children are drawn like a little hooligan, most of which are because they read his picture books too much.

而孝子的事迹也比较地更难画，因为总是惨苦的多。譬如“郭巨埋儿”，无论如何总难以画到引得孩子眉飞色舞，自愿躺到坑里去。还有“尝粪心忧”，也不容易引人入胜。还有老莱子的“戏彩娱亲”，题诗上虽说“喜色满庭帏”，而图画上却绝少有有趣的家庭的气息。
And the deeds of filial sons are also more difficult to draw, because they are always much more miserable. For example, "Guo Ju Buried", no matter what, it is always difficult to draw to make the child dance and voluntarily lie down in the pit. There is also "dung worries", which is not easy to be fascinating. There is also Lao Laizi's "drama and entertainment relatives", although the inscription poem is "full of joy", but there is rarely an interesting family atmosphere in the picture.我现在选取了三种不同的标本，合成第二图。上方的是《百孝图》中的一部分，“陈村何云梯”画的，画的是“取水上堂诈跌卧地作婴儿啼”这一段。也带出“双亲开口笑”来。中间的一小块是我从“直北李锡彤”画的《二十四孝图诗合刊》上描下来的，画的是“著五色斑斓之衣为婴儿戏于亲侧”这一段；手里捏着“摇咕咚”，就是“婴儿戏”这三个字的点题。但大约李先生觉得一个高大的老头子玩这样的把戏究竟不像样，将他的身子竭力收缩，画成一个有胡子的小孩子了。然而仍然无趣。至于线的错误和缺少，那是不能怪作者的，也不能埋怨我，只能去骂刻工。查这刻工当前清同治十二年（1873）时，是在“山东省布政司街南首路西鸿文堂刻字处”。下方的是“民国壬戌”（1922）慎独山房刻本，无画人姓名，但是双料画法，一面“诈跌卧地”，一面“为婴儿戏”，将两件事合起来，而将“斑斓之衣”忘却了。吴友如画的一本，也合两事为一，也忘了斑斓之衣，只是老莱子比较的胖一些，且绾着双丫髻，——不过还是无趣味。
I have now selected three different specimens to synthesize the second image. The above is a part of the "Hundred Filial Piety Map", painted by "He Yunti of Chen Village", which paints the paragraph "taking water and pretending to fall to the ground and crying as a baby". It also brings out "parents laughing". The small piece in the middle is drawn by me from the "Twenty-Four Filial Piety Poems Collection" painted by "Li Xitong of the Straight North", and the painting is the paragraph "wearing colorful clothes to play with babies on the side of their parents"; Holding "Shake Gu Dong" in his hand is the question of the three words "baby play". But about Mr. Li felt that it was not appropriate for a tall old man to play such a trick, so he shrank his body as hard as he could and painted him like a bearded child. Yet still boring. As for the error and lack of lines, I can't blame the author, nor can I blame me, I can only scold the carver. In the twelfth year of Tongzhi in the Qing Dynasty (1873), it was in the "Hongwentang Engraving Office on the West Hongwentang Road, Nanshou Road, Chief Secretariat Street, Shandong Province". Below is the "Republic of China Renxu" (1922) Shen Du Mountain House engraving, without the name of the painter, but the double painting method, one side "pretending to fall to the ground", the other "for the baby play", combining the two things, and forgetting the "colorful clothes". Wu Youru's picturesque one also combines two things into one, and he also forgot the colorful clothes, but Lao Laizi is fatter and wears a double bun,—— but it is still boring.

人说，讽刺和冷嘲只隔一张纸，我以为有趣和肉麻也一样。孩子对父母撒娇可以看得有趣，若是成人，便未免有些不顺眼。放达的夫妻在人面前的互相爱怜的态度，有时略一跨出有趣的界线，也容易变为肉麻。老莱子的作态的图，正无怪谁也画不好。像这些图画上似的家庭里，我是一天也住不舒服的，你看这样一位七十岁的老太爷整年假惺惺地玩着一个“摇咕咚”。
People say that sarcasm and cynicism are only separated by a piece of paper, and I think funny and fleshy are the same. Children can be interesting to see their parents coquettishly, but if they are adults, they will inevitably be a little unpleasant. The attitude of a free-spirited couple in front of others can sometimes step out of an interesting line, and it is easy to become numb. No wonder no one can draw a picture of Lao Laizi's behavior. In a family like these pictures, I don't live comfortably for a day, you see such a seventy-year-old old lady playing a "shaking dong" all year round.汉朝人在宫殿和墓前的石室里，多喜欢绘画或雕刻古来的帝王，孔子弟子，列士，列女，孝子之类的图。宫殿当然一椽不存了；石室却偶然还有，而最完全的是山东嘉祥县的武氏石室。我仿佛记得那上面就刻着老莱子的故事。但现在手头既没有拓本，也没有《金石萃编》，不能查考了；否则，将现时的和约一千八百年前的图画比较起来，也是一种颇有趣味的事。
In the stone chambers in front of palaces and tombs, Han Dynasty people liked to paint or carve pictures of ancient emperors, Confucius disciples, scholars, women, filial sons, etc. Of course, the palace is gone; The stone chamber is occasionally there, and the most complete is the Wu family stone chamber in Jiaxiang County, Shandong Province. I seem to remember that the story of Lao Laizi was engraved on it. But now there are neither rubbings nor "Jinshi Cuibian" at hand, so it cannot be checked; Otherwise, it is interesting to compare the current picture with the picture of about 1,800 years ago.
关于老莱子的，《百孝图》上还有这样的一段：
Regarding Lao Laizi, there is also such a paragraph on the "Hundred Filial Piety Map":“……莱子又有弄雏娱亲之事：尝弄雏于双亲之侧，欲亲之喜。”（原注：《高士传》。）
“…… Lai Zi also had a way of playing with chicks to entertain his parents: he once played with the chicks next to his parents, hoping to make them happy. (Original note: "The Biography of Gao Shi".) ）谁做的《高士传》呢？嵇康的，还是皇甫谧的？也还是手头没有书，无从查考。只在新近因为白得了一个月的薪水，这才发狠买来的《太平御览》上查了一通，到底查不着，倘不是我粗心，那就是出于别的唐宋人的类书里的了。但这也没有什么大关系。我所觉得特别的，是文中的那“雏”字。
Who made "The Biography of Coats"? Ji Kang's, or Huangfu Mi's? I still don't have a book on hand, so I can't check it. Only recently because I got a month's salary for nothing, I checked it on the "Taiping Yulan" that I bought hard, and I couldn't find it in the end, if it weren't for my carelessness, it would be from other Tang and Song people's books. But it doesn't matter much. What I think is special is the word "chick" in the text.我想，这“雏”未必一定是小禽鸟。孩子们喜欢弄来玩耍的，用泥和绸或布做成的人形，日本也叫Hina，写作“雏”。他们那里往往存留中国的古语；而老莱子在父母面前弄孩子的玩具，也比弄小禽鸟更自然。所以英语的Doll，即我们现在称为“洋囡囡”或“泥人儿”，而文字上只好写作“傀儡”的，说不定古人就称“雏”，后来中绝，便只残存于日本了。但这不过是我一时的臆测，此外也并无什么坚实的凭证。
I think this "chick" may not necessarily be a small bird. Children like to play with human figures made of clay and silk or cloth, also called Hina in Japan, written as "Hina". They often retain ancient Chinese languages there; And Lao Laizi playing with children's toys in front of his parents is more natural than playing with small birds. Therefore, the English doll, that is, what we now call "foreign girl" or "clay figure", and the text has to be written as "puppet", maybe the ancients were called "chicks", and later it was extinct, and it only remained in Japan. But this is just my temporary speculation, and there is no solid evidence.这弄雏的事，似乎也还没有人画过图。
It seems that no one has drawn a picture of this chick yet.
我所搜集的另一批，是内有“无常”的画像的书籍。一曰《玉历钞传警世》（或无下二字），一曰《玉历至宝钞》（或作编）。其实是两种都差不多的。关于搜集的事，我首先仍要感谢常维钧兄，他寄给我北京龙光斋本，又鉴光斋本；天津思过斋本，又石印局本；南京李光明庄本。其次是章矛尘兄，给我杭州玛瑙经房本，绍兴许广记本，最近石印本。又其次是我自己，得到广州宝经阁本，又翰元楼本。
Another batch I collected was books with portraits of "impermanence". The first is "Jade Calendar Banknotes Warning the World" (or no two words), and the other is "Jade Calendar to Treasure Banknotes" (or compiled). In fact, both are similar. Regarding the collection, I would like to first thank Brother Chang Weijun, who sent me the Beijing Longguangzhai version and the Jianguangzhai version; Tianjin Siguo Zhai Ben, and the stone printing bureau version; Nanjing Li Guangming Zhuang Ben. The second is Brother Zhang Maochen, who gave me the Hangzhou agate scripture room, Shaoxing Xu Guang record, and the most recent stone print. Then there is myself, who got the Guangzhou Baojing Pavilion and the Hanyuan Lou version.这些《玉历》，有繁简两种，是和我的前言相符的。但我调查了一切无常的画像之后，却恐慌起来了。因为书上的“活无常”是花袍，纱帽，背后插刀；而拿算盘，戴高帽子的却是“死有分”！虽然面貌有凶恶和和善之别，脚下有草鞋和布（？）鞋之殊，也不过画工偶然的随便，而最关紧要的题字，则全体一致，曰：“死有分”。呜呼，这明明是专在和我为难。
These "Jade Calendars" are in two types, traditional and simple, which are consistent with my preface. But after investigating the portrait of all impermanence, I panicked. Because the "impermanence" in the book is a flower robe, a gauze hat, and a knife in the back; And when you take the abacus, the one wearing a high hat is "death has a point"! Although there is a difference between fierce and kind appearance, there are straw sandals and cloth (?) The difference between shoes is just an accidental casual by the painter, and the most important inscription is all the same, saying: "Death has a point". Alas, this is obviously dedicated to embarrassing me.

然而我还不能心服。一者因为这些书都不是我幼小时候所见的那一部，二者因为我还确信我的记忆并没有错。不过撕下一叶来做插画的企图，却被无声无臭地打得粉碎了。只得选取标本各一——南京本的死有分和广州本的活无常——之外，还自己动手，添画一个我所记得的目连戏或迎神赛会中的“活无常”来塞责，如第三图上方。好在我并非画家，虽然太不高明，读者也许不至于嗔责罢。先前想不到后来，曾经对于吴友如先生辈颇说过几句蹊跷话，不料曾几何时，即须自己出丑了，现在就预先辩解几句在这里存案。但是，如果无效，那也只好直抄徐（印世昌）大总统的哲学：听其自然。
However, I am not convinced yet. One is because these books are not the ones I saw when I was a child, and the other is because I am still sure that my memory is not wrong. However, the attempt to tear off a leaf to make an illustration was shattered silently and smelllessly. In addition to choosing one specimen each - the Nanjing version of the death and the impermanence of the Guangzhou version - I also did it myself, and added a "living impermanence" in the Mulian opera or the god-welcoming competition that I remember to offend the blame, as shown in the top of the third picture. Fortunately, I am not a painter, although I am too unclever, readers may not be angry and reproachful. I didn't expect that later, I had said a few strange words to Mr. Wu Youru and his generation, but once upon a time, I had to make a fool of myself, and now I will defend a few sentences in advance to save the case here. However, if it is ineffective, then we have to copy President Xu (Yin Shichang)'s philosophy: let nature take its course.还有不能心服的事，是我觉得虽是宣传《玉历》的诸公，于阴间的事情其实也不大了然。例如一个人初死时的情状，那图像就分成两派。一派是只来一位手执钢叉的鬼卒，叫作“勾魂使者”，此外什么都没有；一派是一个马面，两个无常——阳无常和阴无常——而并非活无常和死有分。倘说，那两个就是活无常和死有分罢，则和单个的画像又不一致。如第四图版上的A，阳无常何尝是花袍纱帽？只有阴无常却和单画的死有分颇相像的，但也放下算盘拿了扇。这还可以说大约因为其时是夏天，然而怎么又长了那么长的络腮胡子了呢？难道夏天时疫多，他竟忙得连修刮的工夫都没有了么？这图的来源是天津思过斋的本子，合并声明；还有北京和广州本上的，也相差无几。
There is also something that I can't be convinced of, that is, I think that although the gentlemen who promote the "Jade Calendar", they don't really know much about the underworld. For example, when a person first dies, the image is divided into two factions. One faction is only a ghost soldier holding a steel fork, called the "soul seduction messenger", and nothing else; One faction is a horse face, two impermanences - yang impermanence and yin impermanence - instead of life and death. If those two are separate from life and death, they are inconsistent with a single portrait. For example, A on the fourth plate, why is Yang Wuchang a flower robe and gauze hat? Only Yin Wuchang is quite similar to the death of the single painting, but he also put down the abacus and took the fan. This can also be said to be about because it was summer, but why did he grow such a long beard? Could it be that there are so many epidemics in the summer that he is so busy that he doesn't even have time to repair the scraping? The source of this picture is the book of Tianjin Siguozhai, and the combined statement; There is also a difference between Beijing and Guangzhou.B是从南京的李光明庄刻本上取来的，图画和A相同，而题字则正相反了：天津本指为阴无常者，它却道是阳无常。但和我的主张是一致的。那么，倘有一个素衣高帽的东西，不问他胡子之有无，北京人，天津人，广州人只管去称为阴无常或死有分，我和南京人则叫他活无常，各随自己的便罢。“名者，实之宾也”，不关什么紧要的。
B is taken from the Li Guangmingzhuang engraving in Nanjing, the picture is the same as A, but the inscription is the opposite: Tianjin originally refers to the yin impermanence, but it is said to be yang impermanence. But it is consistent with my opinion. Then, if there is a thing in plain clothes and a high hat, regardless of whether he has a beard or not, Beijingers, Tianjin, and Guangzhou people can only call it yin impermanence or death, while Nanjing and I call him impermanent, and we can do as we please. "The name is the guest of reality", it doesn't matter.不过我还要添上一点C图，是绍兴许广记刻本中的一部分，上面并无题字，不知宣传者于意云何。我幼小时常常走过许广记的门前，也闲看他们刻图画，是专爱用弧线和直线，不大肯作曲线的，所以无常先生的真相，在这里也难以判然。只是他身边另有一个小高帽，却还能分明看出，为别的本子上所无。这就是我所说过的在赛会时候出现的阿领。他连办公时间也带着儿子（？）走，我想，大概是在叫他跟随学习，预备长大之后，可以“无改于父之道”的。
However, I would like to add a little C picture, which is part of the Shaoxing Xu Guangji engraving, and there is no inscription on it, so I don't know what the propagandist means. When I was young, I often walked in front of Xu Guangji's door, and I also watched them carve pictures, and they liked to use arcs and straight lines, and were not willing to compose lines, so the truth of Mr. Impermanence is difficult to determine here. It's just that there is another little top hat beside him, but he can still clearly see that it is not in other books. This is what I said about the collar that appeared at the competition. He even took his son (?) with him during office hours. Go, I think, probably telling him to follow his studies and prepare to grow up so that he can "not change the way of the Father."除勾摄人魂外，十殿阎罗王中第四殿五官王的案桌旁边，也什九站着一个高帽脚色。如D图，1取自天津的思过斋本，模样颇漂亮；2是南京本，舌头拖出来了，不知何故；3是广州的宝经阁本，扇子破了；4是北京龙光斋本，无扇，下巴之下一条黑，我看不透它是胡子还是舌头；5是天津石印局本，也颇漂亮，然而站到第七殿泰山王的公案桌边去了：这是很特别的。
In addition to seducing people's souls, next to the desk of the Five Officials King of the Fourth Hall of the Ten Halls of Yama, there was also a tall hat. As shown in the D picture, 1 is taken from Tianjin's Siguo Zhai book, which looks quite beautiful; 2 is the Nanjing version, the tongue dragged out, somehow; 3 is the treasure scripture pavilion in Guangzhou, the fan is broken; 4 is the Beijing Longguangzhai version, no fan, a black under the chin, I can't see through whether it is a beard or a tongue; 5 is the Tianjin stone printing bureau version, which is also quite beautiful, but I stood at the koan table of the King of Taishan in the seventh hall: this is very special.又，老虎噬人的图上，也一定画有一个高帽的脚色，拿着纸扇子暗地里在指挥。不知道这也就是无常呢，还是所谓“伥鬼”？但我乡戏文上的伥鬼都不戴高帽子。
In addition, on the picture of a tiger eating people, there must be a high hat foot, holding a paper fan and secretly commanding. I don't know if this is impermanence, or is it the so-called "ghost"? But the ghosts in my hometown don't wear high hats.

研究这一类三魂渺渺，七魄茫茫，“死无对证”的学问，是很新颖，也极占便宜的。假使征集材料，开始讨论，将各种往来的信件都编印起来，恐怕也可以出三四本颇厚的书，并且因此升为“学者”。但是，“活无常学者”，名称不大冠冕，我不想干下去了，只在这里下一个武断：
The study of this type of knowledge of three souls, seven souls, and "death without evidence" is very novel and extremely advantageous. If the materials were collected, the discussion began, and all kinds of correspondence were compiled and printed, I am afraid that three or four thick books could be published, and thus promoted to "scholar". However, the "living impermanence scholar", the name is not a big crown, I don't want to do it anymore, just make an arbitrary decision here:《玉历》式的思想是很粗浅的：“活无常”和“死有分”，合起来是人生的象征。人将死时，本只须死有分来到。因为他一到，这时候，也就可见“活无常”。
The "Jade Calendar" style of thinking is very superficial: "life is impermanent" and "death is divided", which together are symbols of life. When a person is about to die, he only needs to die to have a point. Because as soon as he arrives, at this time, it can be seen that "life is impermanent".但民间又有一种自称“走阴”或“阴差”的，是生人暂时入冥，帮办公事的脚色。因为他帮同勾魂摄魄，大家也就称之为“无常”；又以其本是生魂也，则别之曰“阳”，但从此便和“活无常”隐然相混了。如第四图版之A，题为“阳无常”的，是平常人的普通装束，足见明明是阴差，他的职务只在领鬼卒进门，所以站在阶下。
However, there is another kind of folk who claims to be "going to yin" or "yin", which is the footsteps of the living people temporarily entering the underworld and helping with the affairs. Because he helped to seduce the soul, everyone called it "impermanence"; And because it is originally a living soul, it is called "yang", but from then on it is vaguely confused with "living impermanence". For example, the fourth plate A, entitled "Yang Impermanence", is an ordinary costume of ordinary people, which shows that he is obviously a yin servant, and his position is only to lead the ghost pawn into the door, so he stands at the bottom of the steps.既有了生魂入冥的“阳无常”，便以“阴无常”来称职务相似而并非生魂的死有分了。
Since there is "Yang Impermanence" of the living soul entering the underworld, it is called "Yin Impermanence" to call the death of the living soul with similar positions and not the death of the living soul.做目连戏和迎神赛会虽说是祷祈，同时也等于娱乐，扮演出来的应该是阴差，而普通状态太无趣，——无所谓扮演，——不如奇特些好，于是就将“那一个无常”的衣装给他穿上了；——自然原也没有知道得很清楚。然而从此也更传讹下去。所以南京人和我之所谓活无常，是阴差而穿着死有分的衣冠，顶着真的活无常的名号，大背经典，荒谬得很的。
Although the Mu Lian drama and the god-welcoming competition are prayers, they are also equivalent to entertainment, and the role should be yin, and the ordinary state is too boring,—— it doesn't matter that it is better to play ,—— be strange, so he put on the costume of "that one impermanence"; ——Naturally, he didn't know it very clearly. However, since then, it has become more and more spread. Therefore, the so-called impermanence of Nanjing people and me is a yin mistake and wears a crown with a share of death, wearing the name of real impermanence, and memorizing the classics, which is very ridiculous.不知海内博雅君子，以为何如？
不知海内博雅君子，以为何如？
我本来并不准备做什么后记，只想寻几张旧画像来做插图，不料目的不达，便变成一面比较，剪贴，一面乱发议论了。那一点本文或作或辍地几乎做了一年，这一点后记也或作或辍地几乎做了两个月。天热如此，汗流浃背，是亦不可以已乎：爰为结。
I wasn't going to do any postscripts, I just wanted to find a few old portraits to illustrate, but the goal was not achieved, so I ended up comparing, cutting and pasting, and talking nonsense. This article has been written or stopped for almost a year, and this postscript has been done for almost two months. It's so hot, sweating profusely, and it can't be stopped.一九二七年七月十一日，写完于广州东堤寓楼之西窗下。
On July 11, 1927, he finished writing under the west window of the East Dike Apartment Building in Guangzhou.

封面

书名页

版权信息

图书在版编目（CIP）数据
Books in Print (CIP) data坟/鲁迅著．—南京：译林出版社，2013.11
Grave/Lu Xun.—Nanjing: Yilin Publishing House, 2013.11（鲁迅自编文集）
(Lu Xun's self-edited anthology)ISBN 978-7-5447-4378-5
ISBN 978-7-5447-4378-5Ⅰ．①坟…　Ⅱ．①鲁…　Ⅲ．①鲁迅杂文－杂文集　Ⅳ．①I210.4
I..(1) Grave... II..(1) Lu... III..(1) Lu Xun's Essays - Essays IV..(1)I210.4中国版本图书馆CIP数据核字（2013）第211106号
China Version Library CIP Data Verification (2013) No. 211106
书　　名　坟
Book title grave作　　者　鲁　迅
Author: Lu Xun责任编辑　陆元昶
Editor-in-charge: Lu Yuanchang特约编辑　史会美
Special editor Shi Huimei出版发行　凤凰出版传媒股份有限公司　
Published and distributed by Phoenix Publishing and Media Co., Ltd译林出版社
Yilin Publishing House出版社地址　南京市湖南路1号A楼，邮编：210009
Publisher's address Building A, No. 1 Hunan Road, Nanjing, Zip Code: 210009电子信箱　yilin@yilin.com
E-mail yilin@yilin.com出版社网址　http://www.yilin.com
Publisher website http://www.yilin.com印　　刷　北京凯达印务有限公司
Printing Beijing Kaida Printing Co., Ltd开　　本　787×1092毫米　1/32
Volume 787×1092 mm 1/32印　　张　7.375
Print 7.375字　　数　135千字
Word count: 135,000 words版　　次　2013年11月第1版　2013年11月第1次印刷
Edition November 2013 1st edition November 2013 1st printing标准书号　ISBN 978-7-5447-4378-5
Standard ISBN ISBN 978-7-5447-4378-5定　　价　17.80元
The price is 17.80 yuan译林版图书若有印装错误可向承印厂调换

If there are printing errors in the translated version of the book, it can be exchanged with the printing factory

Table of Contents

目录

Table of Contents

directory题记 Inscription
人之历史 The history of man
科学史教篇 History of Science Education
文化偏至论 Cultural bias
摩罗诗力说 Moro Shili said
我之节烈观 My festival is a martyrdom
我们现在怎样做父亲 How we are fathers now
宋民间之所谓小说及其后来 The so-called novels of the Song Dynasty and its later years
娜拉走后怎样 What happened after Nala left
未有天才之前 Before the genius
论雷峰塔的倒掉 On the fall of the Leifeng Pagoda
说胡须 Talk about beards
论照相之类 On photography and the like
再论雷峰塔的倒掉 Let's talk about the collapse of the Leifeng Pagoda
看镜有感 Looking in the mirror, I feel it
春末闲谈 Late spring chat
灯下漫笔 Under the lamp, I wrote casually
杂忆 Miscellaneous memories
论“他妈的！” On "Fuck! ”
论睁了眼看 Lun opened his eyes and looked
从胡须说到牙齿 From beards to teeth
坚壁清野主义 Solid wall purification of the wilderness
寡妇主义 Widowism
论“费厄泼赖”应该缓行 It is argued that "Fayerprey" should be slowed down
写在《坟》后面 Written behind "The Tomb"
返回总目录 Return to the General Directory

题记

题记

题记

Inscription将这些体式上截然不同的东西，集合了做成一本书样子的缘由，说起来是很没有什么冠冕堂皇的。首先就因为偶尔看见了几篇将近二十年前所做的所谓文章。这是我做的么？我想。看下去，似乎也确是我做的。那是寄给《河南》的稿子；因为那编辑先生有一种怪脾气，文章要长，愈长，稿费便愈多。所以如《摩罗诗力说》那样，简直是生凑。倘在这几年，大概不至于那么做了。又喜欢做怪句子和写古字，这是受了当时的《民报》的影响；现在为排印的方便起见，改了一点，其余的便都由他。这样生涩的东西，倘是别人的，我恐怕不免要劝他“割爱”，但自己却总还想将这存留下来，而且也并不“行年五十而知四十九年非”，愈老就愈进步。其中所说的几个诗人，至今没有人再提起，也是使我不忍抛弃旧稿的一个小原因。他们的名，先前是怎样地使我激昂呵，民国告成以后，我便将他们忘却了，而不料现在他们竟又时时在我的眼前出现。
The reason for combining these completely different things in style into a book is very high-sounding. First of all, because I occasionally saw a few so-called articles made nearly twenty years ago. Is this what I did? I think. Looking at it, it seems that I did it. It was a manuscript sent to "Henan"; Because the editor has a strange temper, the article is longer, and the longer it is, the more the manuscript fee will be. Therefore, as in "Moro Shili Theory", it is simply raw. If in the past few years, it probably wouldn't have been like that. he also liked to make strange sentences and write ancient characters, which was influenced by the "Minbao" at that time; Now for the convenience of typesetting, it has been changed a little, and the rest will be left to him. If such a jerky thing belongs to someone else, I am afraid that I will inevitably persuade him to "cut off love", but I always want to keep it, and I don't "know forty-nine years at the age of fifty", the older I get, the more I progress. The poets mentioned in it have not been mentioned again, which is also a small reason why I can't bear to abandon the old manuscript. How their names made me excited before, after the Republic of China was completed, I forgot about them, but now they appear in front of my eyes from time to time.其次，自然因为还有人要看，但尤其是因为又有人憎恶着我的文章。说话说到有人厌恶，比起毫无动静来，还是一种幸福。天下不舒服的人们多着，而有些人们却一心一意在造专给自己舒服的世界。这是不能如此便宜的，也给他们放一点可恶的东西在眼前，使他有时小不舒服，知道原来自己的世界也不容易十分美满。苍蝇的飞鸣，是不知道人们在憎恶他的；我却明知道，然而只要能飞鸣就偏要飞鸣。我的可恶有时自己也觉得，即如我的戒酒，吃鱼肝油，以望延长我的生命，倒不尽是为了我的爱人，大大半乃是为了我的敌人，——给他们说得体面一点，就是敌人罢——要在他的好世界上多留一些缺陷。君子之徒曰：你何以不骂杀人不眨眼的军阀呢？斯亦卑怯也已！但我是不想上这些诱杀手段的当的。木皮道人说得好，“几年家软刀子割头不觉死”，我就要专指斥那些自称“无枪阶级”而其实是拿着软刀子的妖魔。即如上面所引的君子之徒的话，也就是一把软刀子。假如遭了笔祸了，你以为他就尊你为烈士了么？不，那时另有一番风凉话。倘不信，可看他们怎样评论那死于三一八惨杀的青年。
Secondly, naturally because there are still people to read, but especially because there are people who hate my articles. Talking about someone being disgusted is a kind of happiness compared to no movement. There are many people in the world who are uncomfortable, but some people are single-mindedly creating a world that is comfortable for them. This can't be so cheap, and it also puts a little hateful thing in front of them, which makes him a little uncomfortable at times, and it is not easy to know that his own world is not very happy. The flying of flies does not know that people hate him; I know it, but as long as I can fly, I want to fly. My hateful sometimes feels that even if I quit drinking and eating cod liver oil in order to prolong my life, it is not all for my lover, but mostly for my enemies,—— to put it decently, they are enemies—to leave more flaws in his good world. The gentleman said: Why don't you scold the warlord who kills people without blinking? This is truly cowardly! But I don't want to be fooled by these booby traps. The wooden bark Taoist said well, "A few years of soft knives cut off the head without realizing death", I will specifically accuse those demons who call themselves the "gunless class" but are actually holding soft knives. That is, as the gentleman quoted above, it is a soft knife. If you suffer a pen disaster, do you think he will honor you as a martyr? No, there was another sarcastic remark at that time. If you don't believe it, you can see how they comment on the young man who died in the 318 massacre.此外，在我自己，还有一点小意义，就是这总算是生活的一部分的痕迹。所以虽然明知道过去已经过去，神魂是无法追蹑的，但总不能那么决绝，还想将糟粕收敛起来，造成一座小小的新坟，一面是埋藏，一面也是留恋。至于不远的踏成平地，那是不想管，也无从管了。
In addition, for myself, there is a small meaning, that is, this is finally a trace of a part of life. So although I know that the past has passed, the soul cannot be pursued, but I can't be so decisive, and I want to converge the dross and create a small new grave, buried on the one hand, and nostalgic on the other. As for stepping on the flat ground not far away, I don't want to care about it, and I can't control it.我十分感谢我的几个朋友，替我搜集，抄写，校印，各费去许多追不回来的光阴。我的报答，却只能希望当这书印钉成工时，或者可以博得各人的真心愉快的一笑。别的奢望，并没有什么；至多，但愿这本书能够暂时躺在书摊上的书堆里，正如博厚的大地，不至于容不下一点小土块。再进一步，可就有些不安分了，那就是中国人的思想，趣味，目下幸而还未被所谓正人君子所统一，譬如有的专爱瞻仰皇陵，有的却喜欢凭吊荒冢，无论怎样，一时大概总还有不惜一顾的人罢。只要这样，我就非常满足了；那满足，盖不下于取得富家的千金云。
I am very grateful to a few of my friends for collecting, copying, proofreading, and spending a lot of time that cannot be recovered. My repayment, but I can only hope that when this book is printed, it may win everyone's sincere and happy smile. There are no other extravagant hopes; At most, I hope this book can temporarily lie in the pile of books on the bookstall, just like the thick earth, so that it will not be able to tolerate a little clod of soil. Further, it is a little restless, that is, the Chinese thoughts, interests, fortunately have not yet been unified by the so-called righteous gentlemen, such as some love to pay homage to the imperial mausoleum, some like to hang on the barren tomb, no matter what, there are probably always people who do not hesitate to take care of it for a while. As long as that's it, I'm very satisfied; That satisfaction is no less than the daughter of a rich family.一九二六年十月三十大风之夜，鲁迅记于厦门。
On the windy night of October 30, 1926, Lu Xun recorded in Xiamen.

人之历史——德国黑格尔氏种族发生学之一元研究诠解

人之历史——德国黑格尔氏种族发生学之一元研究诠解

人之历史——德国黑格尔氏种族发生学之一元研究诠解

Human History: A Meta-Study Interpretation of Hegelian Ethnogenesis in Germany进化之说，灼于希腊智者德黎（Thales），至达尔文（Ch. Darwin）而大定。德之黑格尔（E. Haeckel）者，犹赫胥黎（T. H. Huxley）然，亦近世达尔文说之讴歌者也，顾亦不笃于旧，多所更张，作生物进化系图，远追动植之绳迹，明其曼衍之由，间有不足，则补以化石，区分记述，蔚为鸿裁，上自单幺，近迄人类，会成一统，征信历然。虽后世学人，或更上征而无底极，然十九世纪末之言进化者，固已大就于斯人矣。中国迩日，进化之语，几成常言，喜新者凭以丽其辞，而笃故者则病侪人类于猕猴，辄沮遏以全力。德哲学家保罗生（Fr. Paulsen）亦曰，读黑格尔书者多，吾德之羞也。夫德意志为学术渊丛，保罗生亦爱智之士，而犹有斯言，则中国抱残守阙之辈，耳新声而疾走，固无足异矣。虽然，人类进化之说，实未尝渎灵长也，自卑而高，日进无既，斯益见人类之能，超乎群动，系统何昉，宁足耻乎？黑氏著书至多，辄明斯旨，且立种族发生学（Phylogenie），使与个体发生学（Ontogenie）并，远稽人类由来，及其曼衍之迹，群疑冰泮，大犁然，为近日生物学之峰极。今乃敷张其义，先述此论造端，止于近世，而以黑氏所张皇者终。
进化之说，灼于希腊智者德黎（Thales），至达尔文（Ch. Darwin）而大定。 德之黑格尔（E. Haeckel）者，犹赫胥黎（T. H. Huxley）然，亦近世达尔文说之讴歌者也，顾亦不笃于旧，多所更张，作生物进化系图，远追动植之绳迹，明其曼衍之由，间有不足，则补以化石，区分记述，蔚为鸿裁，上自单幺，近迄人类，会成一统，征信历然。 虽后世学人，或更上征而无底极，然十九世纪末之言进化者，固已大就于斯人矣。 中国迩日，进化之语，几成常言，喜新者凭以丽其辞，而笃故者则病侪人类于猕猴，辄沮遏以全力。 德哲学家保罗生（Fr. Paulsen）亦曰，读黑格尔书者多，吾德之羞也。 夫德意志为学术渊丛，保罗生亦爱智之士，而犹有斯言，则中国抱残守阙之辈，耳新声而疾走，固无足异矣。 虽然，人类进化之说，实未尝渎灵长也，自卑而高，日进无既，斯益见人类之能，超乎群动，系统何昉，宁足耻乎？黑氏著书至多，辄明斯旨，且立种族发生学（Phylogenie），使与个体发生学（Ontogenie）并，远稽人类由来，及其曼衍之迹，群疑冰泮，大犁然，为近日生物学之峰极。 今乃敷张其义，先述此论造端，止于近世，而以黑氏所张皇者终。人类种族发生学者，乃言人类发生及其系统之学，职所治理，在动物种族，何所由昉，事始近四十年来，生物学分支之最新者也。盖古之哲士宗徒，无不目人为灵长，超迈群生，故纵疑官品起原，亦彷徨于神话之歧途，诠释率神而不可思议。如中国古说，谓盘古辟地，女娲死而遗骸为天地，则上下未形，人类已现，冥昭瞢暗，安所措足乎？屈灵均谓鳌载山抃，何以安之，衷怀疑而词见也。西国创造之谭，摩西最古，其《创世记》开篇，即云帝以七日作天地万有，抟埴成男，析其肋为女。当十三世纪时，力大伟于欧土，科学隐耀，妄信横行，罗马法王，又竭全力以塞学者之口，天下为之智昏，黑格尔谥之曰世界史之大欺罔者（Die grossten Gaukler Weltgeschichte），非虚言也。已而宗教改萌，景教之迷信亦渐破，歌白尼（Copernicus）首出，知地实绕日而运，恒动不居，于此地球中心之说隳，而考核人类之士，亦稍稍现，如韦赛黎（A. Vesalius）欧斯泰几（Eustachi）等，无不以验之术，进智识于光明。至动物系统论，则以林那出而一振。
The anthropogenesis of ethnogenesis is the latest branch of biology in the nearly 40 years since its inception. Because the ancient philosophers and apostles all regarded humans as primates, superior to all living beings, so even if they doubted the origin of official ranks, they still hesitated in the wrong path of mythology, interpreting the divine and inconceivable. For example, the ancient Chinese saying is that Pangu opened up the earth, and Nuwa's remains became heaven and earth, so the upper and lower realms have not yet taken shape, and humanity has already appeared, and the darkness is dark, so where can we be satisfied? Qu Lingjun said that Ao Zai Shanbian, how to settle down, is a matter of suspicion and the words are clear. The creation story of the Western kingdom, Moses is the oldest, and the beginning of the book of Genesis says that God created the heavens and the earth in seven days, twisted clay into a man, and split his ribs into a woman. In the thirteenth century, the power was great in Europe, science was hidden, delusions were rampant, the Roman Pope did his best to silence scholars, and the world was confused, and Hegel was called the great deceiver of world history (Die grossten Gaukler Weltgeschichte), which is not a lie. Copernicus was the first to know that the earth actually revolves around the sun and is constantly moving, which destroys the theory of geocentrism, and scholars who assess human beings have gradually appeared, such as Viserys (A. Vesalius, Eustachi, and others all used the art of verification to advance wisdom to the light. As for animal systematics, it was inspired by Linna's appearance.林那（K. von Linné）者，瑞典耆宿也，病其时诸国之治天物者，率以方言命名，繁杂而不可理，则著《天物系统论》，悉名动植以腊丁，立二名法，与以属名与种名二。如猫虎狮三物大同，则谓之猫属（Felis）；而三物又各异，则猫曰Felis domestica，虎曰Felis tigris，狮曰Felis leo。又集与此相似者，谓之猫科；科进为目，为纲，为门，为界。界者，动植之判也。且所著书中，复各各记其特点，使一披而了然。惟天物繁多，不可猝尽，故每见新种，必与新名，于是世之欲以得新种博令誉者，皆相竞搜采，所得至多，林那之名大显，而物种（Arten）者何，与其内容界域之疑问，亦同为学者所注目矣。虽然，林那于此，固仍袭摩西创造之说也，《创世记》谓今之生物，皆造自世界开辟之初，故《天物系统论》亦云免诺亚时洪水之难，而留遗于今者，是为物种，凡动植种类，绝无增损变化，以殊异于神所手创云。盖林那仅知现在之生物，而往古无量数年前，尝有生物栖息地球之上，为今日所无有者，则未之觉，故起原之研究，遂不可几。并世博物家，亦笃守旧说，无所发挥，即偶有觉者，谓生物种类，经久久年月间，不无微变，而世人闻之皆峻拒，不能昌也。递十九世纪初，乃始诚有知生物进化之事实，立理论以诠释之者，其人曰兰麻克，而寇伟实先之。
林那（K. von Linné）者，瑞典耆宿也，病其时诸国之治天物者，率以方言命名，繁杂而不可理，则著《天物系统论》，悉名动植以腊丁，立二名法，与以属名与种名二。 如猫虎狮三物大同，则谓之猫属（Felis）；而三物又各异，则猫曰Felis domestica，虎曰Felis tigris，狮曰Felis leo。 又集与此相似者，谓之猫科；科进为目，为纲，为门，为界。 界者，动植之判也。 且所著书中，复各各记其特点，使一披而了然。 惟天物繁多，不可猝尽，故每见新种，必与新名，于是世之欲以得新种博令誉者，皆相竞搜采，所得至多，林那之名大显，而物种（Arten）者何，与其内容界域之疑问，亦同为学者所注目矣。 虽然，林那于此，固仍袭摩西创造之说也，《创世记》谓今之生物，皆造自世界开辟之初，故《天物系统论》亦云免诺亚时洪水之难，而留遗于今者，是为物种，凡动植种类，绝无增损变化，以殊异于神所手创云。 盖林那仅知现在之生物，而往古无量数年前，尝有生物栖息地球之上，为今日所无有者，则未之觉，故起原之研究，遂不可几。 并世博物家，亦笃守旧说，无所发挥，即偶有觉者，谓生物种类，经久久年月间，不无微变，而世人闻之皆峻拒，不能昌也。 递十九世纪初，乃始诚有知生物进化之事实，立理论以诠释之者，其人曰兰麻克，而寇伟实先之。寇伟（G. Cuvier）法国人，勤学博识，于学术有伟绩，尤所致力者，为动物比较解剖及化石之研究，著《化石骨胳论》，为今日古生物学所由昉。盖化石者，太古生物之遗体，留迹石中，历无数劫以至今，其形了然可识，于以知前世界动植之状态，于以知古今生物之不同，实造化之历史，自泐其业于人间者也。揣古希腊哲人，似不无微知此意者，而厥后则牵强附会之说大行，或谓化石之成，不过造化之游戏，或谓两间精气，中人为胎，迷入石中，则为石蛤石螺之属。逮兰麻克查贝类之化石，寇伟查鱼兽之化石，始知化石诚古生物之留蜕，其物已不存于今，而林那创造以来无增减变迁之说遂失当。然寇伟为人，固仍袭生物种类永住不变之观念者也，前说垂破，则别建“变动说”以解之。其言曰，今日生存动物之种属，皆开辟之时，造自天帝之手者尔。特动植之遭开辟，非止一回，每开辟前，必有大变，水转成陆，海坟为山，于是旧种死而新种生，故今兹化石，悉由神造，惟造之之时不同，则为状自异，其间无系属也。高山之颠，实见鱼贝，足为故海之征，而化石为形，大率撑拒惨苦，人可知其变之剧矣。自开辟以至今，地球表面之大故，至少亦十五六度，每一变动起，旧种悉亡，爰成化石，留后世也。其说逞肊，无实可征，而当时力乃至伟，崇信者满学界，惟圣契黎（E. Geoffroy St. Hilaire）与抗于巴黎学士会院，而寇伟博识，据垒极坚，圣契黎动物进化之说，复不具足。于是千八百三十年七月三十日之讨论，圣契黎遂败。寇伟变动之说，盛行于时。
寇伟（G. Cuvier）法国人，勤学博识，于学术有伟绩，尤所致力者，为动物比较解剖及化石之研究，著《化石骨胳论》，为今日古生物学所由昉。 盖化石者，太古生物之遗体，留迹石中，历无数劫以至今，其形了然可识，于以知前世界动植之状态，于以知古今生物之不同，实造化之历史，自泐其业于人间者也。 揣古希腊哲人，似不无微知此意者，而厥后则牵强附会之说大行，或谓化石之成，不过造化之游戏，或谓两间精气，中人为胎，迷入石中，则为石蛤石螺之属。 逮兰麻克查贝类之化石，寇伟查鱼兽之化石，始知化石诚古生物之留蜕，其物已不存于今，而林那创造以来无增减变迁之说遂失当。 然寇伟为人，固仍袭生物种类永住不变之观念者也，前说垂破，则别建“变动说”以解之。 其言曰，今日生存动物之种属，皆开辟之时，造自天帝之手者尔。 特动植之遭开辟，非止一回，每开辟前，必有大变，水转成陆，海坟为山，于是旧种死而新种生，故今兹化石，悉由神造，惟造之之时不同，则为状自异，其间无系属也。 高山之颠，实见鱼贝，足为故海之征，而化石为形，大率撑拒惨苦，人可知其变之剧矣。 自开辟以至今，地球表面之大故，至少亦十五六度，每一变动起，旧种悉亡，爰成化石，留后世也。 其说逞肊，无实可征，而当时力乃至伟，崇信者满学界，惟圣契黎（E. Geoffroy St. Hilaire）与抗于巴黎学士会院，而寇伟博识，据垒极坚，圣契黎动物进化之说，复不具足。 于是千八百三十年七月三十日之讨论，圣契黎遂败。 寇伟变动之说，盛行于时。虽然，不变之说，遂不足久餍学者之心也，十八世纪后叶，已多欲以自然释其疑问，于是有瞿提（W. von Goethe）起，建“形蜕论”。瞿提者，德之大诗人也，又邃于哲理，故其论虽凭理想以立言，不尽根于事实，而识见既博，思力复丰，则犁然知生物有相互之关系，其由来本于一原。千七百九十年，著《植物形态论》，谓诸种植物，出皆原型，即其机关，亦悉从原官而出；原官者，叶也。次复比较骨胳，造诣至深，知动物之骨，亦当归一，即在人类，更无别于他种动物之型，而外状之异，特缘形变而已。形变之因，有大力之构成作用二：在内谓之求心力，在外谓之离心力，求心力所以归同，离心力所以趋异。归同犹今之遗传，趋异犹今之适应。盖瞿提所研究，为从自然哲学深入官品构造及变成之因，虽谓为兰麻克达尔文之先驱，蔑不可也。所憾者则其进化之观念，与康德（I. Kant）倭堪（L. Oken）诸哲学家立意略同，不能奋其伟力，以撼种族不变说之基础耳。有之，自兰麻克始。
虽然，不变之说，遂不足久餍学者之心也，十八世纪后叶，已多欲以自然释其疑问，于是有瞿提（W. von Goethe）起，建“形蜕论”。 瞿提者，德之大诗人也，又邃于哲理，故其论虽凭理想以立言，不尽根于事实，而识见既博，思力复丰，则犁然知生物有相互之关系，其由来本于一原。 千七百九十年，著《植物形态论》，谓诸种植物，出皆原型，即其机关，亦悉从原官而出；原官者，叶也。 次复比较骨胳，造诣至深，知动物之骨，亦当归一，即在人类，更无别于他种动物之型，而外状之异，特缘形变而已。 形变之因，有大力之构成作用二：在内谓之求心力，在外谓之离心力，求心力所以归同，离心力所以趋异。 归同犹今之遗传，趋异犹今之适应。 盖瞿提所研究，为从自然哲学深入官品构造及变成之因，虽谓为兰麻克达尔文之先驱，蔑不可也。 所憾者则其进化之观念，与康德（I. Kant）倭堪（L. Oken）诸哲学家立意略同，不能奋其伟力，以撼种族不变说之基础耳。 有之，自兰麻克始。兰麻克（Jean de Lamarck）者，法之大科学家也，千八百二年所著《生体论》，已言及种族之不恒，与形态之转变；而精力所注，尤在《动物哲学》一书，中所张皇，先在生物种别，由于人为之立异。其言曰，凡在地球之上，无间有生无生，决无差别，空间凡有，悉归于一，故支配非官品之原因，亦即支配有官品之原因，而吾党所执以治非官品者，亦即治有官品之途术。盖世所谓生，仅力学的现象而已。动植诸物，与人类同，无不能诠解以自然之律；惟种亦然，决非如《圣书》所言，出天帝之创造。况寇伟之说，谓经十余回改作者乎？凡此有生，皆自古代联绵继续而来，起于无官，结构至简，继随地球之转变，以渐即于高等，如今日也。至最下等生物，渐趋高等之因，则氏有二律，一曰假有动物，雏而未壮，用一官独多，则其官必日强，作用亦日盛。至新能力之大小强弱，则视使用之久暂有差。浅譬之，如锻人之腕，荷夫之胫，初固弗殊于常人，逮就职之日多，则力亦加进，使反是，废而不用，则官渐小弱，能力亦亡，如盲肠者，鸟以转化食品，而无用于人，则日萎，耳筋者，兽以动耳者也，至人而失其用，则留微迹而已：是为适应。二曰凡动物一生中，由外缘所得或失之性质，必依生殖作用，而授诸子孙。官之大小强弱亦然，惟在此时，必其父母之性质相等：是为遗传。适应之说，迄今日学人犹奉为圭臬，遗传之说，则论诤方烈，未有折衷，惟其所言，固进化之大法，即谓以机械作用，进动物于高等是已。试翻《动物哲学》一书，殆纯以一元论眼光，烛天物之系统，而所凭借，则进化论也。故进化论之成，自破神造说始。兰麻克亦如圣契黎然，力驳寇伟，而不为世所知。盖当是时，生物学之研究方殷，比较解剖及生理之学亦盛，且细胞说初成，更近于个体发生学者一步，于是萃人心于一隅，遂蔑有致意于物种由来之故者。而一般人士，又笃守旧说，得新见无所动其心，故兰麻克之论既出，应者寂然，即寇伟之《动物学年报》中，亦不为一记，则说之孤立无和，可以知矣。迨千八百五十八年而达尔文暨华累斯（A. R. Wallace）之“天择论”现，越一年而达尔文《物种由来》成，举世震动，盖生物学界之光明，扫群疑于一说之下者也。
兰麻克（Jean de Lamarck）者，法之大科学家也，千八百二年所著《生体论》，已言及种族之不恒，与形态之转变；而精力所注，尤在《动物哲学》一书，中所张皇，先在生物种别，由于人为之立异。 其言曰，凡在地球之上，无间有生无生，决无差别，空间凡有，悉归于一，故支配非官品之原因，亦即支配有官品之原因，而吾党所执以治非官品者，亦即治有官品之途术。 盖世所谓生，仅力学的现象而已。 动植诸物，与人类同，无不能诠解以自然之律；惟种亦然，决非如《圣书》所言，出天帝之创造。 况寇伟之说，谓经十余回改作者乎？凡此有生，皆自古代联绵继续而来，起于无官，结构至简，继随地球之转变，以渐即于高等，如今日也。 至最下等生物，渐趋高等之因，则氏有二律，一曰假有动物，雏而未壮，用一官独多，则其官必日强，作用亦日盛。 至新能力之大小强弱，则视使用之久暂有差。 浅譬之，如锻人之腕，荷夫之胫，初固弗殊于常人，逮就职之日多，则力亦加进，使反是，废而不用，则官渐小弱，能力亦亡，如盲肠者，鸟以转化食品，而无用于人，则日萎，耳筋者，兽以动耳者也，至人而失其用，则留微迹而已：是为适应。 二曰凡动物一生中，由外缘所得或失之性质，必依生殖作用，而授诸子孙。 官之大小强弱亦然，惟在此时，必其父母之性质相等：是为遗传。 适应之说，迄今日学人犹奉为圭臬，遗传之说，则论诤方烈，未有折衷，惟其所言，固进化之大法，即谓以机械作用，进动物于高等是已。 试翻《动物哲学》一书，殆纯以一元论眼光，烛天物之系统，而所凭借，则进化论也。 故进化论之成，自破神造说始。 兰麻克亦如圣契黎然，力驳寇伟，而不为世所知。 盖当是时，生物学之研究方殷，比较解剖及生理之学亦盛，且细胞说初成，更近于个体发生学者一步，于是萃人心于一隅，遂蔑有致意于物种由来之故者。 而一般人士，又笃守旧说，得新见无所动其心，故兰麻克之论既出，应者寂然，即寇伟之《动物学年报》中，亦不为一记，则说之孤立无和，可以知矣。 迨千八百五十八年而达尔文暨华累斯（A. R. Wallace）之“天择论”现，越一年而达尔文《物种由来》成，举世震动，盖生物学界之光明，扫群疑于一说之下者也。达尔文治生学之术，不同兰麻克，主用内籀，集知识之大成，年二十二，即乘汽舰壁克耳，环世界一周，历审生物，因悟物种所由始，渐而搜集事实，融会贯通，立生物进化之大原，且晓形变之因，本于淘汰，而淘汰原理，乃在争存，建“淘汰论”，亦曰“达尔文说”（Selektionstheorie od. Darwinismus），空前古者也。举其要旨，首为人择，设有人立一定之仪的，择动物之与相近者育之，既得苗裔，则又育其子之近似，历年既永，宜者遂传。古之牧者园丁，已知此术，赫胥黎谓亚美利加有羊者，惧羊跳踉，超圈而去，则留短足者而渐汰其他，递生子孙，亦复如是，久之短足者独传，修胫遂绝，此以人力传宜种者也。然此特人择动植而已，天然之力，亦择生物，与人择动植无大殊，所异者人择出人意，而天择则以生物争存之故，行于不知不觉间耳。盖生物增加，皆遵几何级数，设有动物一偶于此，毕生能产四子，四子又育，当得八孙，五传六十四，十传而千二十八，如是递增，繁殖至迅。然时有强物，灭其耎弱，沮其长成，故强之种日昌，而弱之种日耗；时代既久，宜者遂留，而天择即行其中，使生物臻于极适。达尔文言此，所征引信据，盖至繁博而坚实也。故究进化论历史，当首德黎，继乃局脊于神造之论；比至兰麻克而一进；得达尔文而大成；迨黑格尔出，复总会前此之结果，建官品之种族发生学，于是人类演进之事，昭然无疑影矣。
达尔文治生学之术，不同兰麻克，主用内籀，集知识之大成，年二十二，即乘汽舰壁克耳，环世界一周，历审生物，因悟物种所由始，渐而搜集事实，融会贯通，立生物进化之大原，且晓形变之因，本于淘汰，而淘汰原理，乃在争存，建“淘汰论”，亦曰“达尔文说”（Selektionstheorie od. Darwinismus），空前古者也。 举其要旨，首为人择，设有人立一定之仪的，择动物之与相近者育之，既得苗裔，则又育其子之近似，历年既永，宜者遂传。 古之牧者园丁，已知此术，赫胥黎谓亚美利加有羊者，惧羊跳踉，超圈而去，则留短足者而渐汰其他，递生子孙，亦复如是，久之短足者独传，修胫遂绝，此以人力传宜种者也。 然此特人择动植而已，天然之力，亦择生物，与人择动植无大殊，所异者人择出人意，而天择则以生物争存之故，行于不知不觉间耳。 盖生物增加，皆遵几何级数，设有动物一偶于此，毕生能产四子，四子又育，当得八孙，五传六十四，十传而千二十八，如是递增，繁殖至迅。 然时有强物，灭其耎弱，沮其长成，故强之种日昌，而弱之种日耗；时代既久，宜者遂留，而天择即行其中，使生物臻于极适。 达尔文言此，所征引信据，盖至繁博而坚实也。 故究进化论历史，当首德黎，继乃局脊于神造之论；比至兰麻克而一进；得达尔文而大成；迨黑格尔出，复总会前此之结果，建官品之种族发生学，于是人类演进之事，昭然无疑影矣。黑格尔以前，凡云发生，皆指个体，至氏而建此学，使与个体发生学对立，著《生物发生学上之根本律》一卷，言二学有至密之关系，种族进化，亦缘遗传及适应二律而来，而尤所置重者，为形蜕论。其律曰，凡个体发生，实为种族发生之反复，特期短而事迅者耳，至所以决定之者，遗传及适应之生理作用也。黑氏以此法治个体发生，知禽兽鱼虫，虽繁不可计，而逖推本原，咸归于一；又以治种族发生，知一切生物，实肇自至简之原官，由进化而繁变，以至于人。盖人类女性之胚卵，亦与他种脊椎动物之胚卵，同为极简之细胞；男性精丝，亦复无异。二性既会，是成根干细胞，此细胞成，而个人之存在遂始。若求诸动物界，为阿弥巴属，构造至简，仅有自动及求食之力而已，继乃分裂，依几何级数成细胞群，如班陀黎那（Pandorina），作桑葚状，葚空其中，渐而内陷，是成原肠，今日淡水沟渠中动物希特拉（Hydra），亦如是也。更进，则由心房生血管四偶，曲向左右，状如鱼鳃，胎儿届此时，适合动物界之鱼类；复次之发达，皆与人类以外之高等动物无微殊，即已有脑髓耳目及足，而以较他种脊椎动物之胎儿，仍无辨也。凡此研究，皆能目击，日审胚胎之发育而得其变化。惟种族发生学独不然，所追迹者，事距今数千万载，其为演进，目不可窥，即直接观察，亦局于至隘之分域，可据者仅间接推理与批判反省二术，及取诸科学所经验荟萃之材，较量揅究之而已。故黑格尔曰，此其为学，肄治滋难，决非个体发生学所能较也。
In his book "The Fundamental Laws of Biogenetics", he argued that the two sciences have a very close relationship, and that racial evolution also comes from the two laws of heredity and adaptation, with the most important being the theory of metaphyllism. The law states that ontogeny is actually a repetition of racial genesis, with a short period of time and rapid development, and that the factors that determine it are the physiological effects of genetics and adaptation. Hei used this rule of law to understand the ontogenization of animals, beasts, fish and insects, although it was incalculable, but the root was inferred, and they all came together; He also studied the evolution of races and understood that all living things actually began from the simplest primordial organisms, from evolution to complexity, and even to humans. The embryo of a human woman is also a minimalist cell like the embryo of other vertebrates; Male sperm is no different. When the two properties meet, they are root-forming stem cells, and when these cells are formed, the existence of individuals begins. If we look at the animal kingdom, it is the genus Amoeba, which has a very simple structure, only automatic and food-seeking power, and then divides and forms cell groups according to geometric sequences, such as Pandorina, which is shaped like a mulberry, hollowed out in it, and gradually sinks, forming prostrulae, as is the case with the animal Hitler in the freshwater ditch today. further, it is from the atrium to the four even, curved to the left and right, shaped like the gills, and the fetus is suitable for the fish of the animal kingdom at this time; The development of the second generation is not slightly different from that of higher animals other than humans, that is, it already has brains, marrow, ears, eyes, and feet, but it is still difficult to distinguish between the fetuses of other vertebrates. All these studies can be witnessed, and the development of the embryo can be observed every day to understand the changes. However, racial genesis is different, tracing events that go back tens of millions of years, and its evolution is impossible to see, even direct observation is confined to the narrowest domain, and the only evidence that can be relied upon is indirect reasoning and critical reflection, as well as comparative research based on scientific experience. Therefore, Hegel said that this is a science that is difficult to study and manage, and it is by no means something that can be compared with ontogenics.往之言此事者，有达尔文《原人论》，赫胥黎《化中人位论》。黑格尔著《人类发生学》，则以古生物学个体发生学及形态学证人类之系统，知动物进化，与人类胎儿之发达同，凡脊椎动物之始为鱼类，见地质学上太古代之僦罗纪，继为迭逢纪之蛙鱼，为石墨纪之两栖，为二叠纪之爬虫，及中古代之哺乳动物，递近古代第三纪，乃见半猿，次生真猿，猿有狭鼻族，由其族生犬猿，次生人猿，人猿生猿人，不能言语，降而能语，是谓之人，此皆比较解剖个体发生及脊椎动物所明证者也。惟个体发达之序亦然，故曰种族发生，为个体发生之反复。然此仅有脊椎动物而已，若更上溯无脊椎动物而探其统系，为业尤艰巨于前。盖此种动物，无骨骼之存，故不见于化石，特据生物学原则，知人类所始为原生动物，与胎孕时之根干细胞相当，下此亦各有相当之动物。于是黑格尔乃追进化之迹而识别之，间有不足，则补以化石与悬拟之生物，而自单幺以至人类之系图遂成，图中所载，即自穆那罗（Monera）渐进以至人类之历史，生物学上所谓种族的发生者是也。其系图如别幅。
In the past, there were Darwin's "Primitive Man" and Huxley's "Theory of Human Position in Evolution." Hegel's "Anthropogenesis" uses paleontological ontogeny and morphology to prove the system of human beings, knowing that animal evolution is the same as the development of human fetuses, and all vertebrates began as fish, seen in geology in the Archean period of the Luo period, followed by the frogfish of the Diefeng period, amphibians of the graphite period, reptiles of the Permian, and mammals of the Middle Ages, and closer to the ancient Tertiary, we saw semi-apes, secondary true apes, apes have narrow-nosed tribes, and from that race gave birth to canine apes, secondary apes, and apes gave birth to apes, which could not speak, descended and could speak, which is called humans. These are all evidence from comparative anatomical ontogeny and vertebrates. The same is true for the order of individual development, so it is called racial generation, which is the repetition of ontogenesis. However, this is only vertebrates, and if we trace the invertebrates further back and explore their phylogies, it will be even more difficult than before. Because these animals do not have skeletons, they are not found in fossils, but based on biological principles, it is known that humans were protozoa that were the same as root stem cells during gestation, and there are also corresponding animals here. Thus, Hegel traced the traces of evolution and identified them, supplementing them with fossils and suspended organisms, and the phylogenetic map from Monera to human history was completed, which contained the so-called occurrence of races in biology from the gradual development of Monera to human history. The series map is as shown in another panel.

近三十年来，古生物学之发见，亦多有力之证，最著者为爪哇之猿人化石，是石现，而人类系统遂大成。盖往者狭鼻猿类与人之系属，缺不可见，逮得化石，征信弥真，力不逊比较解剖及个体发生学也。故论人类从出，为物至卑，曰原生动物。原生动物出自穆那罗，穆那罗出自泼罗比翁（Probion）；泼罗比翁，原生物也。若更究原生物由来，则以那格黎（Naegeli）氏说为近理，其说曰，有生始于无生，盖质力不灭律所生之成果尔；若物质全界，无不由因果而成，宇宙间现象，亦遵此律，则成于非官品之质，且终转化而为非官品之官品，究其本始，亦为非官品必矣。近者法有学人，能以质力之变，转非官品为植物，又有以毒鸩金属杀之，易其导电传热之性者。故有生无生二界，且日益近接，终不能分，无生物之转有生，是成不易之真理，十九世纪末学术之足惊怖，有如是也。至无生物所始，则当俟宇宙发生学（Kosmogenie）言之。
In the past 30 years, paleontological discoveries have provided strong evidence, most notably the fossil of an ape man in Java, which is the discovery of fossils that led to the formation of human systems. In the past, the phylogeny of narrow-nosed apes and humans was missing and unclear, and the fossils found were more credible, but they were not inferior to comparative anatomy and ontogenics. Therefore, when it comes to the origin of humans, they are the lowest types of things, called protozoa. The protozoa comes from Munaro, which comes from Probion; Probioon is a protozoa. If we further investigate the origin of protozoa, we will take Naegeli's theory as a close theory, which says that life begins without life, and it is the result of the law of indestructibility of material force; If the entire material world is formed by cause and effect, and the phenomena in the universe also follow this law, then they will become the quality of non-official products, and will eventually transform into non-official official products. Recently, researchers have been able to convert non-official products into plants using changes in material and force, and there are also those who can kill them with poisonous metals to change their conductive and heat transfer properties. Therefore, the two worlds of existence and non-existence are getting closer and closer, and they can never be separated. As for the beginning of non-living things, we should wait for cosmogenesis (Kosmogenie) to explain it.一九〇七年作。
Created in 1907.

科学史教篇

科学史教篇

科学史教篇

History of Science Education观于今之世，不瞿然者几何人哉？自然之力，既听命于人间，发纵指挥，如使其马，束以器械而用之；交通贸迁，利于前时，虽高山大川，无足沮核；饥疠之害减；教育之功全；较以百祀前之社会，改革盖无烈于是也。孰先驱是，孰偕行是？察其外状，虽不易于犁然，而实则多缘科学之进步。盖科学者，以其知识，历探自然见象之深微，久而得效，改革遂及于社会，继复流衍，来溅远东，浸及震旦，而洪流所向，则尚浩荡而未有止也。观其所发之强，斯足测所蕴之厚，知科学盛大，决不缘于一朝。索其真源，盖远在夫希腊，既而中止，几一千年，递十七世纪中叶，乃复决为大川，状益汪洋，流益曼衍，无有断绝，以至今兹。实益骈生，人间生活之幸福，悉以增进。第相科学历来发达之绳迹，则勤劬艰苦之影在焉，谓之教训。
观于今之世，不瞿然者几何人哉？自然之力，既听命于人间，发纵指挥，如使其马，束以器械而用之；交通贸迁，利于前时，虽高山大川，无足沮核；饥疠之害减；教育之功全；较以百祀前之社会，改革盖无烈于是也。 孰先驱是，孰偕行是？察其外状，虽不易于犁然，而实则多缘科学之进步。 盖科学者，以其知识，历探自然见象之深微，久而得效，改革遂及于社会，继复流衍，来溅远东，浸及震旦，而洪流所向，则尚浩荡而未有止也。 观其所发之强，斯足测所蕴之厚，知科学盛大，决不缘于一朝。 索其真源，盖远在夫希腊，既而中止，几一千年，递十七世纪中叶，乃复决为大川，状益汪洋，流益曼衍，无有断绝，以至今兹。 实益骈生，人间生活之幸福，悉以增进。 第相科学历来发达之绳迹，则勤劬艰苦之影在焉，谓之教训。希腊罗马科学之盛，殊不逊于艺文。尔时巨制，有毕撒哥拉（Pythagoras）之生理音阶，亚里士多德（Aristoteles）之解剖气象二学，柏拉图（Platon）之《谛妙斯篇》（Timaeus）暨《邦国篇》，迪穆克黎多（Demokritos）之“质点论”，至流质力学则昉于亚勒密提士（Archimedes），几何则建于宥克立（Eukleides），械具学则成于希伦（Heron），此他学者，犹难列举。其亚利山德大学，特称学者渊薮，藏书至十万余卷，较以近时，盖无愧色。而思想之伟妙，亦至足以铄今。盖尔时智者，实不仅启上举诸学之端而已，且运其思理，至于精微，冀直解宇宙之元质，德黎（Thales）谓水，亚那克希美纳（Anaximenes）谓气，希拉克黎多（Herakleitos）谓火。其说无当，固不俟言。华惠尔尝言其故曰，探自然必赖夫玄念，而希腊学者无有是，即有亦极微，盖缘定此念之意义，非名学之助不为功也。（中略）而尔时诸士，直欲以今日吾曹滥用之文字，解宇宙之玄纽而去之。然其精神，则毅然起叩古人所未知，研索天然，不肯止于肤廓，方诸近世，直无优劣之可言。盖世之评一时代历史者，褒贬所加，辄不一致，以当时人文所现，合之近今，得其差池，因生不满。若自设为古之一人，返其旧心，不思近世，平意求索，与之批评，则所论始云不妄，略有思理之士，无不然矣。若据此立言，则希腊学术之隆，为至可褒而不可黜；其他亦然。世有哂神话为迷信，斥古教为谫陋者，胥自迷之徒耳，足悯谏也。盖凡论往古人文，加之轩轾，必取他种人与是相当之时劫，相度其所能至而较量之，决论之出，斯近正耳。惟张皇近世学说，无不本之古人，一切新声，胥为绍述，则意之所执，与蔑古亦相同。盖神思一端，虽古之胜今，非无前例，而学则构思验实，必与时代之进而俱升，古所未知，后无可愧，且亦无庸讳也。昔英人设水道于天竺，其国人恶而拒之，有谓水道本创自天竺古贤，久而术失，白人不过窃取而更新之者，水道始大行。旧国笃古之余，每至不惜于自欺如是。震旦死抱国粹之士，作此说者最多，一若今之学术艺文，皆我数千载前所已具。不知意之所在，将如天竺造说之人，聊弄术以入新学，抑诚尸祝往时，视为全能而不可越也？虽然，非是不协不听之社会，亦有罪焉已。
希腊罗马科学之盛，殊不逊于艺文。 尔时巨制，有毕撒哥拉（Pythagoras）之生理音阶，亚里士多德（Aristoteles）之解剖气象二学，柏拉图（Platon）之《谛妙斯篇》（Timaeus）暨《邦国篇》，迪穆克黎多（Demokritos）之“质点论”，至流质力学则昉于亚勒密提士（Archimedes），几何则建于宥克立（Eukleides），械具学则成于希伦（Heron），此他学者，犹难列举。 其亚利山德大学，特称学者渊薮，藏书至十万余卷，较以近时，盖无愧色。 而思想之伟妙，亦至足以铄今。 盖尔时智者，实不仅启上举诸学之端而已，且运其思理，至于精微，冀直解宇宙之元质，德黎（Thales）谓水，亚那克希美纳（Anaximenes）谓气，希拉克黎多（Herakleitos）谓火。 其说无当，固不俟言。 华惠尔尝言其故曰，探自然必赖夫玄念，而希腊学者无有是，即有亦极微，盖缘定此念之意义，非名学之助不为功也。 （中略）而尔时诸士，直欲以今日吾曹滥用之文字，解宇宙之玄纽而去之。 然其精神，则毅然起叩古人所未知，研索天然，不肯止于肤廓，方诸近世，直无优劣之可言。 盖世之评一时代历史者，褒贬所加，辄不一致，以当时人文所现，合之近今，得其差池，因生不满。 若自设为古之一人，返其旧心，不思近世，平意求索，与之批评，则所论始云不妄，略有思理之士，无不然矣。 若据此立言，则希腊学术之隆，为至可褒而不可黜；其他亦然。 世有哂神话为迷信，斥古教为谫陋者，胥自迷之徒耳，足悯谏也。 盖凡论往古人文，加之轩轾，必取他种人与是相当之时劫，相度其所能至而较量之，决论之出，斯近正耳。 惟张皇近世学说，无不本之古人，一切新声，胥为绍述，则意之所执，与蔑古亦相同。 盖神思一端，虽古之胜今，非无前例，而学则构思验实，必与时代之进而俱升，古所未知，后无可愧，且亦无庸讳也。 昔英人设水道于天竺，其国人恶而拒之，有谓水道本创自天竺古贤，久而术失，白人不过窃取而更新之者，水道始大行。 旧国笃古之余，每至不惜于自欺如是。 震旦死抱国粹之士，作此说者最多，一若今之学术艺文，皆我数千载前所已具。 不知意之所在，将如天竺造说之人，聊弄术以入新学，抑诚尸祝往时，视为全能而不可越也？虽然，非是不协不听之社会，亦有罪焉已。希腊既苓落，罗马亦衰，而亚剌伯人继起，受学于那思得理亚与僦思人，翻译诠释之业大盛；眩其新异，妄信以生，于是科学之观念漠然，而进步亦遂止。盖希腊罗马之科学，在探未知，而亚剌伯之科学，在模前有，故以注疏易征验，以评骘代会通，博览之风兴，而发见之事少，宇宙见象，在当时乃又神秘而不可测矣。怀念既尔，所学遂妄，科学隐，幻术兴，天学不昌，占星代起，所谓点金通幽之术，皆以昉也。顾亦有不可贬者，为尔时学士，实非懒散而无为，精神之弛，因入退守；徒以方术之误，结果乃止于无功，至所致力，固有足以惊叹。如当时回教新立，政事学术，相辅而蒸，可尔特跋暨巴格达德之二帝，对峙东西，竞导希腊罗马之学，传之其国，又好读亚里士多德与柏拉图书。而学校亦林立，以治文理数理爱智质学及医药之事；质学有醇酒硝硫酸之发明，数学有代数三角之进步；又复设度测地，以摆计时，星表之作，亦始此顷，其学术之盛，盖几世界之中枢矣。而景教子弟，复多出入于日斯巴尼亚之学校，取亚剌伯科学而传诸宗邦，景教国之学术，为之一振；递十一世纪，始衰微也。赫胥黎作《十九世纪后叶科学进步志》，论之曰，中世学校，咸以天文几何算术音乐为高等教育之四分科，学者非知其一，不足称有适当之教育；今不遇此，吾徒耻之。此其言表，与震旦谋新之士，大号兴学者若同，特中之所指，乃理论科学居其三，非此之重有形应用科学而又其方术者，所可取以自涂泽其说者也。
希腊既苓落，罗马亦衰，而亚剌伯人继起，受学于那思得理亚与僦思人，翻译诠释之业大盛；眩其新异，妄信以生，于是科学之观念漠然，而进步亦遂止。 盖希腊罗马之科学，在探未知，而亚剌伯之科学，在模前有，故以注疏易征验，以评骘代会通，博览之风兴，而发见之事少，宇宙见象，在当时乃又神秘而不可测矣。 怀念既尔，所学遂妄，科学隐，幻术兴，天学不昌，占星代起，所谓点金通幽之术，皆以昉也。 顾亦有不可贬者，为尔时学士，实非懒散而无为，精神之弛，因入退守；徒以方术之误，结果乃止于无功，至所致力，固有足以惊叹。 如当时回教新立，政事学术，相辅而蒸，可尔特跋暨巴格达德之二帝，对峙东西，竞导希腊罗马之学，传之其国，又好读亚里士多德与柏拉图书。 而学校亦林立，以治文理数理爱智质学及医药之事；质学有醇酒硝硫酸之发明，数学有代数三角之进步；又复设度测地，以摆计时，星表之作，亦始此顷，其学术之盛，盖几世界之中枢矣。 而景教子弟，复多出入于日斯巴尼亚之学校，取亚剌伯科学而传诸宗邦，景教国之学术，为之一振；递十一世纪，始衰微也。 赫胥黎作《十九世纪后叶科学进步志》，论之曰，中世学校，咸以天文几何算术音乐为高等教育之四分科，学者非知其一，不足称有适当之教育；今不遇此，吾徒耻之。 此其言表，与震旦谋新之士，大号兴学者若同，特中之所指，乃理论科学居其三，非此之重有形应用科学而又其方术者，所可取以自涂泽其说者也。时亚剌伯虽如是，而景教诸国，则于科学无发扬。且不独不发扬而已，又进而摈斥夭阏之，谓人之最可贵者，无逾于道德上之义务与宗教上之希望，苟致力于科学，斯谬用其所能。有拉克坦谛（Lactantius）者，彼教之能才也，尝曰，探万汇之原因，问大地之动定，谈月表之隆陷，究星辰之悬属，考成天之质分，而焦心苦思于此诸问端者，犹絮陈未见之国都，其愚为不可几及。贤者如是，庸俗可知，科学之光，遂以黯淡。顾大势如是，究亦不起于无因。准丁达尔（J. Tyndall）言，则以其时罗马及他国之都，道德无不颓废，景教适以时起，宣福音于平人，制非极严，不足以矫俗，故宗徒之遘害虽多，而终得以制胜。惟心意之受婴久，斯痕迹之漫漶也难，于是虽奉为灵粮之圣文，亦以供科学之判决。见象如是，夫何进步之可期乎？至厥后教会与列国政府间之冲突，亦于揅究之受妨，与有力也。由是观之，可知人间教育诸科，每不即于中道，甲张则乙弛，乙盛则甲衰，迭代往来，无有纪极。如希腊罗马之科学，以极盛称，迨亚剌伯学者兴，则一归于学古；景教诸国，则建至严之教，为德育本根，知识之不绝者如线。特以世事反复，时势迁流，终乃屹然更兴，蒸蒸以至今日。所谓世界不直进，常曲折如螺旋，大波小波，起伏万状，进退久之而达水裔，盖诚言哉。且此又不独知识与道德为然也，即科学与美艺之关系亦然。欧洲中世，画事各有原则，迨科学进，又益以他因，而美术为之中落，迨复遵守，则近事耳。惟此消长，论者亦无利害之可言，盖中世宗教暴起，压抑科学，事或足以震惊，而社会精神，乃于此不无洗涤，熏染陶冶，亦胎嘉葩。二千年来，其色益显，或为路德，或为克灵威尔，为弥耳敦，为华盛顿，为嘉来勒，后世瞻思其业，将孰谓之不伟欤？此其成果，以偿沮遏科学之失，绰然有余裕也。盖无间教宗学术美艺文章，均人间曼衍之要旨，定其孰要，今兹未能。惟若眩至显之实利，摹至肤之方术，则准史实所垂，当反本心而获恶果，可决论而已。此何以故？则以如是种人之得久，盖于文明政事二史皆未之见也。
时亚剌伯虽如是，而景教诸国，则于科学无发扬。 且不独不发扬而已，又进而摈斥夭阏之，谓人之最可贵者，无逾于道德上之义务与宗教上之希望，苟致力于科学，斯谬用其所能。 有拉克坦谛（Lactantius）者，彼教之能才也，尝曰，探万汇之原因，问大地之动定，谈月表之隆陷，究星辰之悬属，考成天之质分，而焦心苦思于此诸问端者，犹絮陈未见之国都，其愚为不可几及。 贤者如是，庸俗可知，科学之光，遂以黯淡。 顾大势如是，究亦不起于无因。 准丁达尔（J. Tyndall）言，则以其时罗马及他国之都，道德无不颓废，景教适以时起，宣福音于平人，制非极严，不足以矫俗，故宗徒之遘害虽多，而终得以制胜。 惟心意之受婴久，斯痕迹之漫漶也难，于是虽奉为灵粮之圣文，亦以供科学之判决。 见象如是，夫何进步之可期乎？至厥后教会与列国政府间之冲突，亦于揅究之受妨，与有力也。 由是观之，可知人间教育诸科，每不即于中道，甲张则乙弛，乙盛则甲衰，迭代往来，无有纪极。 如希腊罗马之科学，以极盛称，迨亚剌伯学者兴，则一归于学古；景教诸国，则建至严之教，为德育本根，知识之不绝者如线。 特以世事反复，时势迁流，终乃屹然更兴，蒸蒸以至今日。 所谓世界不直进，常曲折如螺旋，大波小波，起伏万状，进退久之而达水裔，盖诚言哉。 且此又不独知识与道德为然也，即科学与美艺之关系亦然。 欧洲中世，画事各有原则，迨科学进，又益以他因，而美术为之中落，迨复遵守，则近事耳。 惟此消长，论者亦无利害之可言，盖中世宗教暴起，压抑科学，事或足以震惊，而社会精神，乃于此不无洗涤，熏染陶冶，亦胎嘉葩。 二千年来，其色益显，或为路德，或为克灵威尔，为弥耳敦，为华盛顿，为嘉来勒，后世瞻思其业，将孰谓之不伟欤？此其成果，以偿沮遏科学之失，绰然有余裕也。 盖无间教宗学术美艺文章，均人间曼衍之要旨，定其孰要，今兹未能。 惟若眩至显之实利，摹至肤之方术，则准史实所垂，当反本心而获恶果，可决论而已。 此何以故？则以如是种人之得久，盖于文明政事二史皆未之见也。迄今所述，止于昏黄，若去而求明星于尔时，则亦有可言者一二，如十二世纪有摩格那思（A. Magnus），十三世纪有洛及培庚（Roger Bacon生一二一四年，中国所习闻者生十六世纪与此异），尝作书论失学之故，画恢复之策，中多名言，至足称述；然其见知于世，去今才百余年耳。书首举失学元因凡四：曰摹古，曰伪智，曰泥于习，曰惑于常。近世华惠尔亦论之，籍当时见象，统归四因，与培庚言殊异，因一曰思不坚，二曰卑琐，三曰不假之性，四曰热中之性，且多援例以实之。丁达尔后出，于第四因有违言，谓热中妨学，盖指脑之弱者耳，若其诚强，乃反足以助学。科学者耄，所发见必不多，此非智力衰也，正坐热中之性渐微故。故人有谓知识的事业，当与道德力分者，此其说为不真，使诚脱是力之鞭策而惟知识之依，则所营为，特可悯者耳。发见之故，此其一也。今更进究发见之深因，则尤有大于此者。盖科学发见，常受超科学之力，易语以释之，亦可曰非科学的理想之感动，古今知名之士，概如是矣。阑喀曰，孰辅相人，而使得至真之知识乎？不为真者，不为可知者，盖理想耳。此足据为铁证者也。英之赫胥黎，则谓发见本于圣觉，不与人之能力相关；如是圣觉，即名曰真理发见者。有此觉而中才亦成宏功，如无此觉，则虽天纵之才，事亦终于不集。说亦至深切而可听也。茀勒那尔以力数学之研究有名，尝柬其友曰，名誉之心，去己久矣。吾今所为，不以令誉，特以吾意之嘉受耳。其恬淡如是。且发见之誉大矣，而威累司逊其成就于达尔文，本生付其勤劬于吉息霍甫，其谦逊又如是。故科学者，必常恬淡，常逊让，有理想，有圣觉，一切无有，而能贻业绩于后世者，未之有闻。即其他事业，亦胥如此矣。若曰，此累叶之言，皆空虚而无当于实欤？则曰然亦近世实益增进之母耳。此述其母，为厥子故，即以慰之。
迄今所述，止于昏黄，若去而求明星于尔时，则亦有可言者一二，如十二世纪有摩格那思（A. Magnus），十三世纪有洛及培庚（Roger Bacon生一二一四年，中国所习闻者生十六世纪与此异），尝作书论失学之故，画恢复之策，中多名言，至足称述；然其见知于世，去今才百余年耳。 书首举失学元因凡四：曰摹古，曰伪智，曰泥于习，曰惑于常。 近世华惠尔亦论之，籍当时见象，统归四因，与培庚言殊异，因一曰思不坚，二曰卑琐，三曰不假之性，四曰热中之性，且多援例以实之。 丁达尔后出，于第四因有违言，谓热中妨学，盖指脑之弱者耳，若其诚强，乃反足以助学。 科学者耄，所发见必不多，此非智力衰也，正坐热中之性渐微故。 故人有谓知识的事业，当与道德力分者，此其说为不真，使诚脱是力之鞭策而惟知识之依，则所营为，特可悯者耳。 发见之故，此其一也。 今更进究发见之深因，则尤有大于此者。 盖科学发见，常受超科学之力，易语以释之，亦可曰非科学的理想之感动，古今知名之士，概如是矣。 阑喀曰，孰辅相人，而使得至真之知识乎？不为真者，不为可知者，盖理想耳。 此足据为铁证者也。 英之赫胥黎，则谓发见本于圣觉，不与人之能力相关；如是圣觉，即名曰真理发见者。 有此觉而中才亦成宏功，如无此觉，则虽天纵之才，事亦终于不集。 说亦至深切而可听也。 茀勒那尔以力数学之研究有名，尝柬其友曰，名誉之心，去己久矣。 吾今所为，不以令誉，特以吾意之嘉受耳。 其恬淡如是。 且发见之誉大矣，而威累司逊其成就于达尔文，本生付其勤劬于吉息霍甫，其谦逊又如是。 故科学者，必常恬淡，常逊让，有理想，有圣觉，一切无有，而能贻业绩于后世者，未之有闻。 即其他事业，亦胥如此矣。 若曰，此累叶之言，皆空虚而无当于实欤？则曰然亦近世实益增进之母耳。 此述其母，为厥子故，即以慰之。前此黑暗期中，虽有图复古之一二伟人出，而终亦不能如其所期，东方之光，盖实作于十五六两世纪顷。惟苓落既久，思想大荒，虽冀履前人之旧迹，亦不可以猝得，故直近十七世纪中叶，人始诚闻夫晓声，回顾其前，则歌白尼（N. Copernicus）首出，说太阳系，开布勒（J. Kepler）行星运动之法继之，此他有格里累阿（Galileo Galilei），于星力二学，多所发明，又善导人，使事斯学；后复有思迭文（S. Stevin）之机械学，吉勒裒德（W. Gilbert）之磁学，哈维（W. Harvey）之生理学。法朗西意大利诸国学校，则解剖之学大盛；科学协会亦始立，意之林舍亚克特美（Accademia dei Lincei）即科学研究之渊薮也。事业之盛，足惊叹矣。夫气运所趣既如此，则桀士自以笃生，故英则有法朗希思培庚，法则有特嘉尔。
In the previous dark period, although there were one or two great figures from the retro period, they were not as expected, and the light of the East was actually created in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. Therefore, it was not until the middle of the seventeenth century that people began to hear the voice of the dawn of the husband, and looking back at the past, it was N. Pernicus (N. Copernicus) was the first to describe the solar system, and Kebler (J. Kepler) The method of planetary motion was followed, and there was Galileo Galilei, who made many inventions in the study of star forces, and was good at guiding people to make things happen; Later, there was S. Stevens (S. Stevin's Mechanics, W. Magnetism by Gilbert, Harvey (W. Harvey). In schools in France and Italy, anatomy was very popular; Scientific associations have also been established, and the Italian Accademia dei Lincei is the source of scientific research. The grandeur of his career is enough to amaze you. Since the interest of the atmosphere is so great, the heroes believe that they are born with integrity, so in England, there is France Heath Speggen, and in France, there is Te Jiaer.培庚（F. Bacon 1561—1626）著书，序古来科学之进步，与何以达其主的之法曰《格致新机》。虽后之结果，不如著者所希，而平议其业，决不可云不伟。惟中所张主，为循序内籀之术，而不更云征验：后以是多讶之。顾培庚之时，学风至异，得一二琐末之事实，辄视为大法之前因，培庚思矫其俗，势自不得不斥前古悬拟夸大之风，而一偏于内籀，则其不崇外籀之事，固非得已矣。况此又特未之语耳，察其思惟，亦非偏废；氏所述理董自然见象者凡二法：初由经验而入公论，次更由公论而入新经验。故其言曰，事物之成，以手乎，抑以心乎？此不完于一。必有机械而辅以其他，乃以具足焉。盖事业者，成以手，亦赖乎心者也。观于此言，则《新机论》第二分中，当必有言外籀者，然其第二分未行世也。顾由是而培庚之术为不完，凡所张皇，仅至具足内籀而止。内籀之具足者，不为人所能，其所成就，亦无逾于实历；就实历而探新理，且更进而窥宇宙之大法，学者难之。况悬拟虽培庚所不喜，而今日之有大功于科学，致诸盛大之域者，实多悬拟为之乎？然其说之偏于一方，视为匡世之术可耳，无足深难也。
培庚（F. Bacon 1561—1626）著书，序古来科学之进步，与何以达其主的之法曰《格致新机》。 虽后之结果，不如著者所希，而平议其业，决不可云不伟。 惟中所张主，为循序内籀之术，而不更云征验：后以是多讶之。 顾培庚之时，学风至异，得一二琐末之事实，辄视为大法之前因，培庚思矫其俗，势自不得不斥前古悬拟夸大之风，而一偏于内籀，则其不崇外籀之事，固非得已矣。 况此又特未之语耳，察其思惟，亦非偏废；氏所述理董自然见象者凡二法：初由经验而入公论，次更由公论而入新经验。 故其言曰，事物之成，以手乎，抑以心乎？此不完于一。 必有机械而辅以其他，乃以具足焉。 盖事业者，成以手，亦赖乎心者也。 观于此言，则《新机论》第二分中，当必有言外籀者，然其第二分未行世也。 顾由是而培庚之术为不完，凡所张皇，仅至具足内籀而止。 内籀之具足者，不为人所能，其所成就，亦无逾于实历；就实历而探新理，且更进而窥宇宙之大法，学者难之。 况悬拟虽培庚所不喜，而今日之有大功于科学，致诸盛大之域者，实多悬拟为之乎？然其说之偏于一方，视为匡世之术可耳，无足深难也。后斯人几三十年，有特嘉尔（R. Descartes 1596—1650）生于法，以数学名，近世哲学之基，亦赖以立。尝屹然扇尊疑之大潮，信真理之有在，于是专心一志，求基础于意识，觅方术于数理。其言有曰，治几何者，能以至简之名理，会解定理之繁多。吾因悟凡人智以内事，亦咸得以如是法解。若不以不真者为真，而履当履之道，则事之不成物之不解者，将无有矣。故其哲理，盖全本外籀而成，扩而用之，即以驭科学，所谓由因入果，非自果导因，为其著《哲学要义》中所自述，亦特嘉尔方术之本根，思理之枢机也。至其方术，则论者亦谓之不完，奉而不贰，弊亦弗异于偏倚培庚之内籀，惟于过重经验者，可为救正之用而已。若其执中，则偏于培庚之内籀者固非，而笃于特嘉尔之外籀者，亦不云是。二术俱用，真理始昭，而科学之有今日，亦实以有会二术而为之者故。如格里累阿，如哈维，如波尔（R. Boyle），如奈端（I. Newton），皆偏内籀不如培庚，守外籀不如特嘉尔，卓然独立，居中道而经营者也。培庚生时，于国民之富有，与实践之结果，企望极坚，越百年，科学益进而事乃不如其意。奈端发见至卓，特嘉尔数理亦至精，而世人所得，仅脑海之富而止；国之安舒，生之乐易，未能获也。他若波尔立质力二学征实之法，巴斯加耳（B. Pascal）暨多烈舍黎（E. Torricelli）测大气之量，摩勒毕奇（M. Malpighi）等精揅官品之理，而工业如故，交通未良，矿业亦无所进益，惟以机械学之结果，始见极粗之时辰表而已。至十八世纪中叶，英法德意诸国科学之士辈出，质学生学地学之进步，灿然可观，惟所以福社会者若何，则论者尚难于置对。迨酝酿既久，实益乃昭，当同世纪末叶，其效忽大著，举工业之械具资材，植物之滋殖繁养，动物之畜牧改良，无不蒙科学之泽，所谓十九世纪之物质文明，亦即胚胎于是时矣。洪波浩然，精神亦以振，国民风气，因而一新。顾治科学之桀士，则不以是婴心也，如前所言，盖仅以知真理为惟一之仪的，扩脑海之波澜，扫学区之荒秽，因举其身心时力，日探自然之大法而已。尔时之科学名家，无不如是，如侯失勒（J. Herschel）暨拉布拉（S. de Laplace）之于星学，扬俱（Th. Young）暨弗勒那尔（A. Fresnel）之于光学，欧思第德（H. C. Oersted）之于力学，兰麻克（J. de Lamarck）之于生学，迭亢陀耳（A. de Candolle）之于植物学，威那（A. G. Werner）之于矿物学，哈敦（J. Hutton）之于地学，瓦特（J. Watt）之于机械学，其尤著者也。试察所仪，岂在实利哉？然防火灯作矣，汽机出矣，矿术兴矣。而社会之耳目，乃独震惊有此点，日颂当前之结果，于学者独恝然而置之。倒果为因，莫甚于此。欲以求进，殆无异鼓鞭于马勒欤，夫安得如所期？第谓惟科学足以生实业，而实业更无利于科学，人皆慕科学之荣，则又不如是也。社会之事繁，分业之要起，人自不得不有所专，相互为援，于以两进。故实业之蒙益于科学者固多，而科学得实业之助者亦非鲜。今试置身于野人之中，显镜衡机不俟言，即醇酒玻璃，亦不可致，则科学者将何如，仅得运其思理而已。思理孤运，此雅典暨亚历山德府科学之所以中衰也。事多共其悲喜，盖亦诚言也夫。
后斯人几三十年，有特嘉尔（R. Descartes 1596—1650）生于法，以数学名，近世哲学之基，亦赖以立。 尝屹然扇尊疑之大潮，信真理之有在，于是专心一志，求基础于意识，觅方术于数理。 其言有曰，治几何者，能以至简之名理，会解定理之繁多。 吾因悟凡人智以内事，亦咸得以如是法解。 若不以不真者为真，而履当履之道，则事之不成物之不解者，将无有矣。 故其哲理，盖全本外籀而成，扩而用之，即以驭科学，所谓由因入果，非自果导因，为其著《哲学要义》中所自述，亦特嘉尔方术之本根，思理之枢机也。 至其方术，则论者亦谓之不完，奉而不贰，弊亦弗异于偏倚培庚之内籀，惟于过重经验者，可为救正之用而已。 若其执中，则偏于培庚之内籀者固非，而笃于特嘉尔之外籀者，亦不云是。 二术俱用，真理始昭，而科学之有今日，亦实以有会二术而为之者故。 如格里累阿，如哈维，如波尔（R. Boyle），如奈端（I. Newton），皆偏内籀不如培庚，守外籀不如特嘉尔，卓然独立，居中道而经营者也。 培庚生时，于国民之富有，与实践之结果，企望极坚，越百年，科学益进而事乃不如其意。 奈端发见至卓，特嘉尔数理亦至精，而世人所得，仅脑海之富而止；国之安舒，生之乐易，未能获也。 他若波尔立质力二学征实之法，巴斯加耳（B. Pascal）暨多烈舍黎（E. Torricelli）测大气之量，摩勒毕奇（M. Malpighi）等精揅官品之理，而工业如故，交通未良，矿业亦无所进益，惟以机械学之结果，始见极粗之时辰表而已。 至十八世纪中叶，英法德意诸国科学之士辈出，质学生学地学之进步，灿然可观，惟所以福社会者若何，则论者尚难于置对。 迨酝酿既久，实益乃昭，当同世纪末叶，其效忽大著，举工业之械具资材，植物之滋殖繁养，动物之畜牧改良，无不蒙科学之泽，所谓十九世纪之物质文明，亦即胚胎于是时矣。 洪波浩然，精神亦以振，国民风气，因而一新。 顾治科学之桀士，则不以是婴心也，如前所言，盖仅以知真理为惟一之仪的，扩脑海之波澜，扫学区之荒秽，因举其身心时力，日探自然之大法而已。 尔时之科学名家，无不如是，如侯失勒（J. Herschel）暨拉布拉（S. de Laplace）之于星学，扬俱（Th. Young）暨弗勒那尔（A. Fresnel）之于光学，欧思第德（H. C. Oersted）之于力学，兰麻克（J. de Lamarck）之于生学，迭亢陀耳（A. de Candolle）之于植物学，威那（A. G. Werner）之于矿物学，哈敦（J. Hutton）之于地学，瓦特（J. Watt）之于机械学，其尤著者也。 试察所仪，岂在实利哉？然防火灯作矣，汽机出矣，矿术兴矣。 而社会之耳目，乃独震惊有此点，日颂当前之结果，于学者独恝然而置之。 倒果为因，莫甚于此。 欲以求进，殆无异鼓鞭于马勒欤，夫安得如所期？第谓惟科学足以生实业，而实业更无利于科学，人皆慕科学之荣，则又不如是也。 社会之事繁，分业之要起，人自不得不有所专，相互为援，于以两进。 故实业之蒙益于科学者固多，而科学得实业之助者亦非鲜。 今试置身于野人之中，显镜衡机不俟言，即醇酒玻璃，亦不可致，则科学者将何如，仅得运其思理而已。 思理孤运，此雅典暨亚历山德府科学之所以中衰也。 事多共其悲喜，盖亦诚言也夫。故震他国之强大，栗然自危，兴业振兵之说，日腾于口者，外状固若成然觉矣，按其实则仅眩于当前之物，而未得其真谛。夫欧人之来，最眩人者，固莫前举二事若，然此亦非本柢而特葩叶耳。寻其根源，深无底极，一隅之学，夫何力焉。顾著者于此，亦非谓人必以科学为先务，待其结果之成，始以振兵兴业也，特信进步有序，曼衍有源，虑举国惟枝叶之求，而无一二士寻其本，则有源者日长，逐末者仍立拨耳。居今之世，不与古同，尊实利可，摹方术亦可，而有不为大潮所漂泛，屹然当横流，如古贤人，能播将来之佳果于今兹，移有根之福祉于宗国者，亦不能不要求于社会，且亦当为社会要求者矣。丁达尔不云乎：止属目于外物，或但以政事之感，而误凡事之真者，每谓邦国安危，一系于政治之思想，顾至公之历史，则立证其不然。夫法之有今日也，宁有他因耶？特以科学之长，胜他国耳。千七百九十二年之变，全欧嚣然，争执干戈以攻法国，联军伺其外，内讧兴于中，武库空虚，战士多死，既不能以疲卒当锐兵，而又无粮以济守者，武人抚剑而视太空，政家饮泪而悲来日，束手衔恨，俟天运矣。而时之振作其国人者何人？震怖其外敌者又何人？曰，科学也。其时学者，无不尽其心力，竭其智能，见兵士不足，则补以发明，武具不足，则补以发明，当防守之际，即知有科学者在，而后之战胜必矣。然此犹可曰丁达尔自治科学，因阿所好而立言耳，然证以阿罗戈之所载书，乃益明其不妄，书所记曰，时公会征九十万人，盖御外敌之四集，实非此不胜用尔。而人不如数；众乃大惧。加以武库久空，战备不足，故目前之急，有非人力所能救者。盖时所必要，首为弹药，而原料硝石，曩悉来自印度，至此时遂穷。次为枪炮，而法地产铜不多，必仰俄英印度之给，至今亦绝。三为钢铁，然平日亦取诸外国，制造之术，无知之者。于是行最后之策，集通国学者，开会议之，其最要而最难得者为火药。政府使者皆知不能成，叹曰，硝石安在？声未绝，学者孟耆即起曰，有之。至适当之地，如马厩土仓中，有硝石无量，为汝所梦想不到者。氏禀天才，加以知识，爱国出于至诚，乃睥睨阖室曰，吾能集其土为之！不越三日，火药就矣，于是以至简之法，晓谕国中，老弱妇稚，悉能制造，俄顷间全法国如大工厂也。此外有质学家，以法化分钟铜，用作武器，而炼铁新法亦昉于是时，凡铸刀剑枪械，无不可用国产。柔皮术亦不日竟成，制履之韦，因以不匮。尔时所称异之气球暨空气中之电报，亦均改良扩张，用之争战，前者即摩洛将军乘之探敌阵，得其情实，因制殊胜者也。丁达尔乃论曰，法国尔时，实生二物，曰：科学与爱国。其至有力者，为孟耆（Monge）与加尔诺（Carnot），与有力者，为孚勒克洛，穆勒惠，暨巴列克黎之徒。大业之成，此其枢纽。故科学者，神圣之光，照世界者也，可以遏末流而生感动。时泰，则为人性之光；时危，则由其灵感，生整理者如加尔诺，生强者强于拿破仑之战将云。今试总观前例，本根之要，洞然可知。盖末虽亦能灿烂于一时，而所宅不坚，顷刻可以蕉萃，储能于初，始长久耳。顾犹有不可忽者，为当防社会入于偏，日趋而之一极，精神渐失，则破灭亦随之。盖使举世惟知识之崇，人生必大归于枯寂，如是既久，则美上之感情漓，明敏之思想失，所谓科学，亦同趣于无有矣。故人群所当希冀要求者，不惟奈端已也，亦希诗人如狭斯丕尔（Shakespeare）；不惟波尔，亦希画师如洛菲罗（Raphaelo）；既有康德，亦必有乐人如培得诃芬（Beethoven）；既有达尔文，亦必有文人如嘉来勒（Garlyle）。凡此者，皆所以致人性于全，不使之偏倚，因以见今日之文明者也。嗟夫，彼人文史实之所垂示，固如是已！
故震他国之强大，栗然自危，兴业振兵之说，日腾于口者，外状固若成然觉矣，按其实则仅眩于当前之物，而未得其真谛。 夫欧人之来，最眩人者，固莫前举二事若，然此亦非本柢而特葩叶耳。 寻其根源，深无底极，一隅之学，夫何力焉。 顾著者于此，亦非谓人必以科学为先务，待其结果之成，始以振兵兴业也，特信进步有序，曼衍有源，虑举国惟枝叶之求，而无一二士寻其本，则有源者日长，逐末者仍立拨耳。 居今之世，不与古同，尊实利可，摹方术亦可，而有不为大潮所漂泛，屹然当横流，如古贤人，能播将来之佳果于今兹，移有根之福祉于宗国者，亦不能不要求于社会，且亦当为社会要求者矣。 丁达尔不云乎：止属目于外物，或但以政事之感，而误凡事之真者，每谓邦国安危，一系于政治之思想，顾至公之历史，则立证其不然。 夫法之有今日也，宁有他因耶？特以科学之长，胜他国耳。 千七百九十二年之变，全欧嚣然，争执干戈以攻法国，联军伺其外，内讧兴于中，武库空虚，战士多死，既不能以疲卒当锐兵，而又无粮以济守者，武人抚剑而视太空，政家饮泪而悲来日，束手衔恨，俟天运矣。 而时之振作其国人者何人？震怖其外敌者又何人？曰，科学也。 其时学者，无不尽其心力，竭其智能，见兵士不足，则补以发明，武具不足，则补以发明，当防守之际，即知有科学者在，而后之战胜必矣。 然此犹可曰丁达尔自治科学，因阿所好而立言耳，然证以阿罗戈之所载书，乃益明其不妄，书所记曰，时公会征九十万人，盖御外敌之四集，实非此不胜用尔。 而人不如数；众乃大惧。 加以武库久空，战备不足，故目前之急，有非人力所能救者。 盖时所必要，首为弹药，而原料硝石，曩悉来自印度，至此时遂穷。 次为枪炮，而法地产铜不多，必仰俄英印度之给，至今亦绝。 三为钢铁，然平日亦取诸外国，制造之术，无知之者。 于是行最后之策，集通国学者，开会议之，其最要而最难得者为火药。 政府使者皆知不能成，叹曰，硝石安在？声未绝，学者孟耆即起曰，有之。 至适当之地，如马厩土仓中，有硝石无量，为汝所梦想不到者。 氏禀天才，加以知识，爱国出于至诚，乃睥睨阖室曰，吾能集其土为之！不越三日，火药就矣，于是以至简之法，晓谕国中，老弱妇稚，悉能制造，俄顷间全法国如大工厂也。 此外有质学家，以法化分钟铜，用作武器，而炼铁新法亦昉于是时，凡铸刀剑枪械，无不可用国产。 柔皮术亦不日竟成，制履之韦，因以不匮。 尔时所称异之气球暨空气中之电报，亦均改良扩张，用之争战，前者即摩洛将军乘之探敌阵，得其情实，因制殊胜者也。 丁达尔乃论曰，法国尔时，实生二物，曰：科学与爱国。 其至有力者，为孟耆（Monge）与加尔诺（Carnot），与有力者，为孚勒克洛，穆勒惠，暨巴列克黎之徒。 大业之成，此其枢纽。 故科学者，神圣之光，照世界者也，可以遏末流而生感动。 时泰，则为人性之光；时危，则由其灵感，生整理者如加尔诺，生强者强于拿破仑之战将云。 今试总观前例，本根之要，洞然可知。 盖末虽亦能灿烂于一时，而所宅不坚，顷刻可以蕉萃，储能于初，始长久耳。 顾犹有不可忽者，为当防社会入于偏，日趋而之一极，精神渐失，则破灭亦随之。 盖使举世惟知识之崇，人生必大归于枯寂，如是既久，则美上之感情漓，明敏之思想失，所谓科学，亦同趣于无有矣。 故人群所当希冀要求者，不惟奈端已也，亦希诗人如狭斯丕尔（Shakespeare）；不惟波尔，亦希画师如洛菲罗（Raphaelo）；既有康德，亦必有乐人如培得诃芬（Beethoven）；既有达尔文，亦必有文人如嘉来勒（Garlyle）。 凡此者，皆所以致人性于全，不使之偏倚，因以见今日之文明者也。 嗟夫，彼人文史实之所垂示，固如是已！一九〇七年作。
Created in 1907.

文化偏至论

文化偏至论

文化偏至论

Cultural bias中国既以自尊大昭闻天下，善诋者，或谓之顽固；且将抱守残阙，以底于灭亡。近世人士，稍稍耳新学之语，则亦引以为愧，翻然思变，言非同西方之理弗道，事非合西方之术弗行，掊击旧物，惟恐不力，曰将以革前缪而图富强也。间尝论之：昔者帝轩辕氏之戡蚩尤而定居于华土也，典章文物，于以权舆，有苗裔之繁衍于兹，则更改张皇，益臻美大。其蠢蠢于四方者，胥蕞尔小蛮夷耳，厥种之所创成，无一足为中国法，是故化成发达，咸出于己而无取乎人。降及周秦，西方有希腊罗马起，艺文思理，灿然可观，顾以道路之艰，波涛之恶，交通梗塞，未能择其善者以为师资。洎元明时，虽有一二景教父师，以教理暨历算质学干中国，而其道非盛。故迄于海禁既开，晳人踵至之顷，中国之在天下，见夫四夷之则效上国，革面来宾者有之；或野心怒发，狡焉思逞者有之；若其文化昭明，诚足以相上下者，盖未之有也。屹然出中央而无校雠，则其益自尊大，宝自有而傲睨万物，固人情所宜然，亦非甚背于理极者矣。虽然，惟无校雠故，则宴安日久，苓落以胎，迫拶不来，上征亦辍，使人苶，使人屯，其极为见善而不思式。有新国林起于西，以其殊异之方术来向，一施吹拂，块然踣傹，人心始自危，而辁才小慧之徒，于是竞言武事。后有学于殊域者，近不知中国之情，远复不察欧美之实，以所拾尘芥，罗列人前，谓钩爪锯牙，为国家首事，又引文明之语，用以自文，征印度波兰，作之前鉴。夫以力角盈绌者，于文野亦何关？远之则罗马之于东西戈尔，迩之则中国之于蒙古女真，此程度之离距为何如，决之不待智者。然其胜负之数，果奈何矣？苟曰是惟往古为然，今则机械其先，非以力取，故胜负所判，即文野之由分也。则曷弗启人智而开发其性灵，使知罟获戈矛，不过以御豺虎，而喋喋誉白人肉攫之心，以为极世界之文明者又何耶？且使如其言矣，而举国犹孱，授之巨兵，奚能胜任，仍有僵死而已矣。嗟夫，夫子盖以习兵事为生，故不根本之图，而仅提所学以干天下；虽兜牟深隐其面，威武若不可陵，而干禄之色，固灼然现于外矣！计其次者，乃复有制造商估立宪国会之说。前二者素见重于中国青年间，纵不主张，治之者亦将不可缕数。盖国若一日存，固足以假力图富强之名，博志士之誉；即有不幸，宗社为墟，而广有金资，大能温饱，即使怙恃既失，或被虐杀如犹太遗黎，然善自退藏，或不至于身受；纵大祸垂及矣，而幸免者非无人，其人又适为己，则能得温饱又如故也。若夫后二，可无论已。中较善者，或诚痛乎外侮迭来，不可终日，自既荒陋，则不得已，姑拾他人之绪余，思鸠大群以抗御，而又飞扬其性，善能攘扰，见异己者兴，必借众以陵寡，托言众治，压制乃尤烈于暴君。此非独于理至悖也，即缘救国是图，不惜以个人为供献，而考索未用，思虑粗疏，茫未识其所以然，辄皈依于众志，盖无殊痼疾之人，去药石摄卫之道弗讲，而乞灵于不知之力，拜祷稽首于祝由之门者哉。至尤下而居多数者，乃无过假是空名，遂其私欲，不顾见诸实事，将事权言议，悉归奔走干进之徒，或至愚屯之富人，否亦善垄断之市侩，特以自长营搰，当列其班，况复掩自利之恶名，以福群之令誉，捷径在目，斯不惮竭蹶以求之耳。呜呼，古之临民者，一独夫也；由今之道，且顿变而为千万无赖之尤，民不堪命矣，于兴国究何与焉。顾若而人者，当其号召张皇，盖蔑弗托近世文明为后盾，有佛戾其说者起，辄谥之曰野人，谓为辱国害群，罪当甚于流放。第不知彼所谓文明者，将已立准则，慎施去取，指善美而可行诸中国之文明乎，抑成事旧章，咸弃捐不顾，独指西方文化而为言乎？物质也，众数也，十九世纪末叶文明之一面或在兹，而论者不以为有当。盖今所成就，无一不绳前时之遗迹，则文明必日有其迁流，又或抗往代之大潮，则文明亦不能无偏至。诚若为今立计，所当稽求既往，相度方来，掊物质而张灵明，任个人而排众数。人既发扬踔厉矣，则邦国亦以兴起。奚事抱枝拾叶，徒金铁国会立宪之云乎？夫势利之念昌狂于中，则是非之辨为之昧，措置张主，辄失其宜，况乎志行污下，将借新文明之名，以大遂其私欲者乎？是故今所谓识时之彦，为按其实，则多数常为盲子，宝赤菽以为玄珠，少数乃为巨奸，垂微饵以冀鲸鲵。即不若是，中心皆中正无瑕玷矣，于是拮据辛苦，展其雄才，渐乃志遂事成，终致彼所谓新文明者，举而纳之中国，而此迁流偏至之物，已陈旧于殊方者，馨香顶礼，吾又何为若是其芒芒哉！是何也？曰物质也，众数也，其道偏至。根史实而见于西方者不得已，横取而施之中国则非也。借曰非乎？请循其本——
中国既以自尊大昭闻天下，善诋者，或谓之顽固；且将抱守残阙，以底于灭亡。 近世人士，稍稍耳新学之语，则亦引以为愧，翻然思变，言非同西方之理弗道，事非合西方之术弗行，掊击旧物，惟恐不力，曰将以革前缪而图富强也。 间尝论之：昔者帝轩辕氏之戡蚩尤而定居于华土也，典章文物，于以权舆，有苗裔之繁衍于兹，则更改张皇，益臻美大。 其蠢蠢于四方者，胥蕞尔小蛮夷耳，厥种之所创成，无一足为中国法，是故化成发达，咸出于己而无取乎人。 降及周秦，西方有希腊罗马起，艺文思理，灿然可观，顾以道路之艰，波涛之恶，交通梗塞，未能择其善者以为师资。 洎元明时，虽有一二景教父师，以教理暨历算质学干中国，而其道非盛。 故迄于海禁既开，晳人踵至之顷，中国之在天下，见夫四夷之则效上国，革面来宾者有之；或野心怒发，狡焉思逞者有之；若其文化昭明，诚足以相上下者，盖未之有也。 屹然出中央而无校雠，则其益自尊大，宝自有而傲睨万物，固人情所宜然，亦非甚背于理极者矣。 虽然，惟无校雠故，则宴安日久，苓落以胎，迫拶不来，上征亦辍，使人苶，使人屯，其极为见善而不思式。 有新国林起于西，以其殊异之方术来向，一施吹拂，块然踣傹，人心始自危，而辁才小慧之徒，于是竞言武事。 后有学于殊域者，近不知中国之情，远复不察欧美之实，以所拾尘芥，罗列人前，谓钩爪锯牙，为国家首事，又引文明之语，用以自文，征印度波兰，作之前鉴。 夫以力角盈绌者，于文野亦何关？远之则罗马之于东西戈尔，迩之则中国之于蒙古女真，此程度之离距为何如，决之不待智者。 然其胜负之数，果奈何矣？苟曰是惟往古为然，今则机械其先，非以力取，故胜负所判，即文野之由分也。 则曷弗启人智而开发其性灵，使知罟获戈矛，不过以御豺虎，而喋喋誉白人肉攫之心，以为极世界之文明者又何耶？且使如其言矣，而举国犹孱，授之巨兵，奚能胜任，仍有僵死而已矣。 嗟夫，夫子盖以习兵事为生，故不根本之图，而仅提所学以干天下；虽兜牟深隐其面，威武若不可陵，而干禄之色，固灼然现于外矣！计其次者，乃复有制造商估立宪国会之说。 前二者素见重于中国青年间，纵不主张，治之者亦将不可缕数。 盖国若一日存，固足以假力图富强之名，博志士之誉；即有不幸，宗社为墟，而广有金资，大能温饱，即使怙恃既失，或被虐杀如犹太遗黎，然善自退藏，或不至于身受；纵大祸垂及矣，而幸免者非无人，其人又适为己，则能得温饱又如故也。 若夫后二，可无论已。 中较善者，或诚痛乎外侮迭来，不可终日，自既荒陋，则不得已，姑拾他人之绪余，思鸠大群以抗御，而又飞扬其性，善能攘扰，见异己者兴，必借众以陵寡，托言众治，压制乃尤烈于暴君。 此非独于理至悖也，即缘救国是图，不惜以个人为供献，而考索未用，思虑粗疏，茫未识其所以然，辄皈依于众志，盖无殊痼疾之人，去药石摄卫之道弗讲，而乞灵于不知之力，拜祷稽首于祝由之门者哉。 至尤下而居多数者，乃无过假是空名，遂其私欲，不顾见诸实事，将事权言议，悉归奔走干进之徒，或至愚屯之富人，否亦善垄断之市侩，特以自长营搰，当列其班，况复掩自利之恶名，以福群之令誉，捷径在目，斯不惮竭蹶以求之耳。 呜呼，古之临民者，一独夫也；由今之道，且顿变而为千万无赖之尤，民不堪命矣，于兴国究何与焉。 顾若而人者，当其号召张皇，盖蔑弗托近世文明为后盾，有佛戾其说者起，辄谥之曰野人，谓为辱国害群，罪当甚于流放。 第不知彼所谓文明者，将已立准则，慎施去取，指善美而可行诸中国之文明乎，抑成事旧章，咸弃捐不顾，独指西方文化而为言乎？物质也，众数也，十九世纪末叶文明之一面或在兹，而论者不以为有当。 盖今所成就，无一不绳前时之遗迹，则文明必日有其迁流，又或抗往代之大潮，则文明亦不能无偏至。 诚若为今立计，所当稽求既往，相度方来，掊物质而张灵明，任个人而排众数。 人既发扬踔厉矣，则邦国亦以兴起。 奚事抱枝拾叶，徒金铁国会立宪之云乎？夫势利之念昌狂于中，则是非之辨为之昧，措置张主，辄失其宜，况乎志行污下，将借新文明之名，以大遂其私欲者乎？是故今所谓识时之彦，为按其实，则多数常为盲子，宝赤菽以为玄珠，少数乃为巨奸，垂微饵以冀鲸鲵。 即不若是，中心皆中正无瑕玷矣，于是拮据辛苦，展其雄才，渐乃志遂事成，终致彼所谓新文明者，举而纳之中国，而此迁流偏至之物，已陈旧于殊方者，馨香顶礼，吾又何为若是其芒芒哉！是何也？曰物质也，众数也，其道偏至。 根史实而见于西方者不得已，横取而施之中国则非也。 借曰非乎？请循其本——夫世纪之元，肇于耶稣出世，历年既百，是为一期，大故若兴，斯即此世纪所有事，盖从历来之旧贯，而假是为区分，无奥义也。诚以人事连绵，深有本柢，如流水之必自原泉，卉木之茁于根茇，倏忽隐见，理之必无。故苟为寻绎其条贯本末，大都蝉联而不可离，若所谓某世纪文明之特色何在者，特举荦荦大者而为言耳。按之史实，乃如罗马统一欧洲以来，始生大洲通有之历史；已而教皇以其权力，制御全欧，使列国靡然受圈，如同社会，疆域之判，等于一区；益以梏亡人心，思想之自由几绝，聪明英特之士，虽摘发新理，怀抱新见，而束于教令，胥缄口结舌而不敢言。虽然，民如大波，受沮益浩，则于是始思脱宗教之系缚，英德二国，不平者多，法皇宫庭，实为怨府，又以居于意也，乃并意大利人而疾之。林林之民，咸致同情于不平者，凡有能阻泥教旨，抗拒法皇，无间是非，辄与赞和。时则有路德（M. Luther）者起于德，谓宗教根元，在乎信仰，制度戒法，悉其荣华，力击旧教而仆之。自所创建，在废弃阶级，黜法皇僧正诸号，而代以牧师，职宣神命，置身社会，弗殊常人；仪式祷祈，亦简其法。至精神所注，则在牧师地位，无所胜于平人也。转轮既始，烈栗遍于欧洲，受其改革者，盖非独宗教而已，且波及于其他人事，如邦国离合，争战原因，后兹大变，多基于是。加以束缚弛落，思索自由，社会蔑不有新色，则有尔后超形气学上之发见，与形气学上之发明。以是胚胎，又作新事：发隐地也，善机械也，展学艺而拓贸迁也，非去羁勒而纵人心，不有此也。顾世事之常，有动无定，宗教之改革已，自必益进而求政治之更张。溯厥由来，则以往者颠覆法皇，一假君主之权力，变革既毕，其力乃张，以一意孤临万民，在下者不能加之抑制，日夕孳孳，惟开拓封域是务，驱民纳诸水火，绝无所动于心：生计绌，人力耗矣。而物反于穷，民意遂动，革命于是见于英，继起于美，复次则大起于法朗西，扫荡门第，平一尊卑，政治之权，主以百姓，平等自由之念，社会民主之思，弥漫于人心。流风至今，则凡社会政治经济上一切权利，义必悉公诸众人，而风俗习惯道德宗教趣味好尚言语暨其他为作，俱欲去上下贤不肖之闲，以大归乎无差别。同是者是，独是者非，以多数临天下而暴独特者，实十九世纪大潮之一派，且曼衍入今而未有既者也。更举其他，则物质文明之进步是已。当旧教盛时，威力绝世，学者有见，大率默然，其有毅然表白于众者，每每获囚戮之祸。递教力堕地，思想自由，凡百学术之事，勃焉兴起，学理为用，实益遂生，故至十九世纪，而物质文明之盛，直傲睨前此二千余年之业绩。数其著者，乃有棉铁石炭之属，产生倍旧，应用多方，施之战斗制造交通，无不功越于往日；为汽为电，咸听指挥，世界之情状顿更，人民之事业益利。久食其赐，信乃弥坚，渐而奉为圭臬，视若一切存在之本根，且将以之范围精神界所有事，现实生活，胶不可移，惟此是尊，惟此是尚，此又十九世纪大潮之一派，且曼衍入今而未有既者也。虽然，教权庞大，则覆之假手于帝王，比大权尽集一人，则又颠之以众庶。理若极于众庶矣，而众庶果足以极是非之端也耶？宴安逾法，则矫之以教宗，递教宗淫用其权威，则又掊之以质力。事若尽于物质矣，而物质果足尽人生之本也耶？平意思之，必不然矣。然而大势如是者，盖如前言，文明无不根旧迹而演来，亦以矫往事而生偏至，缘督校量，其颇灼然，犹孑与躄焉耳。特其见于欧洲也，为不得已，且亦不可去，去孑与躄，斯失孑与躄之德，而留者为空无。不安受宝重之者奈何？顾横被之不相系之中国而膜拜之，又宁见其有当也？明者微睇，察逾众凡，大士哲人，乃蚤识其弊而生愤叹，此十九世纪末叶思潮之所以变矣。德人尼佉（Fr. Nietzsche）氏，则假察罗图斯德罗（Zarathustra）之言曰，吾行太远，孑然失其侣，返而观夫今之世，文明之邦国矣，斑斓之社会矣。特其为社会也，无确固之崇信；众庶之于知识也，无作始之性质。邦国如是，奚能淹留？吾见放于父母之邦矣！聊可望者，独苗裔耳。此其深思遐瞩，见近世文明之伪与偏，又无望于今之人，不得已而念来叶者也。
夫世纪之元，肇于耶稣出世，历年既百，是为一期，大故若兴，斯即此世纪所有事，盖从历来之旧贯，而假是为区分，无奥义也。 诚以人事连绵，深有本柢，如流水之必自原泉，卉木之茁于根茇，倏忽隐见，理之必无。 故苟为寻绎其条贯本末，大都蝉联而不可离，若所谓某世纪文明之特色何在者，特举荦荦大者而为言耳。 按之史实，乃如罗马统一欧洲以来，始生大洲通有之历史；已而教皇以其权力，制御全欧，使列国靡然受圈，如同社会，疆域之判，等于一区；益以梏亡人心，思想之自由几绝，聪明英特之士，虽摘发新理，怀抱新见，而束于教令，胥缄口结舌而不敢言。 虽然，民如大波，受沮益浩，则于是始思脱宗教之系缚，英德二国，不平者多，法皇宫庭，实为怨府，又以居于意也，乃并意大利人而疾之。 林林之民，咸致同情于不平者，凡有能阻泥教旨，抗拒法皇，无间是非，辄与赞和。 时则有路德（M. Luther）者起于德，谓宗教根元，在乎信仰，制度戒法，悉其荣华，力击旧教而仆之。 自所创建，在废弃阶级，黜法皇僧正诸号，而代以牧师，职宣神命，置身社会，弗殊常人；仪式祷祈，亦简其法。 至精神所注，则在牧师地位，无所胜于平人也。 转轮既始，烈栗遍于欧洲，受其改革者，盖非独宗教而已，且波及于其他人事，如邦国离合，争战原因，后兹大变，多基于是。 加以束缚弛落，思索自由，社会蔑不有新色，则有尔后超形气学上之发见，与形气学上之发明。 以是胚胎，又作新事：发隐地也，善机械也，展学艺而拓贸迁也，非去羁勒而纵人心，不有此也。 顾世事之常，有动无定，宗教之改革已，自必益进而求政治之更张。 溯厥由来，则以往者颠覆法皇，一假君主之权力，变革既毕，其力乃张，以一意孤临万民，在下者不能加之抑制，日夕孳孳，惟开拓封域是务，驱民纳诸水火，绝无所动于心：生计绌，人力耗矣。 而物反于穷，民意遂动，革命于是见于英，继起于美，复次则大起于法朗西，扫荡门第，平一尊卑，政治之权，主以百姓，平等自由之念，社会民主之思，弥漫于人心。 流风至今，则凡社会政治经济上一切权利，义必悉公诸众人，而风俗习惯道德宗教趣味好尚言语暨其他为作，俱欲去上下贤不肖之闲，以大归乎无差别。 同是者是，独是者非，以多数临天下而暴独特者，实十九世纪大潮之一派，且曼衍入今而未有既者也。 更举其他，则物质文明之进步是已。 当旧教盛时，威力绝世，学者有见，大率默然，其有毅然表白于众者，每每获囚戮之祸。 递教力堕地，思想自由，凡百学术之事，勃焉兴起，学理为用，实益遂生，故至十九世纪，而物质文明之盛，直傲睨前此二千余年之业绩。 数其著者，乃有棉铁石炭之属，产生倍旧，应用多方，施之战斗制造交通，无不功越于往日；为汽为电，咸听指挥，世界之情状顿更，人民之事业益利。 久食其赐，信乃弥坚，渐而奉为圭臬，视若一切存在之本根，且将以之范围精神界所有事，现实生活，胶不可移，惟此是尊，惟此是尚，此又十九世纪大潮之一派，且曼衍入今而未有既者也。 虽然，教权庞大，则覆之假手于帝王，比大权尽集一人，则又颠之以众庶。 理若极于众庶矣，而众庶果足以极是非之端也耶？宴安逾法，则矫之以教宗，递教宗淫用其权威，则又掊之以质力。 事若尽于物质矣，而物质果足尽人生之本也耶？平意思之，必不然矣。 然而大势如是者，盖如前言，文明无不根旧迹而演来，亦以矫往事而生偏至，缘督校量，其颇灼然，犹孑与躄焉耳。 特其见于欧洲也，为不得已，且亦不可去，去孑与躄，斯失孑与躄之德，而留者为空无。 不安受宝重之者奈何？顾横被之不相系之中国而膜拜之，又宁见其有当也？明者微睇，察逾众凡，大士哲人，乃蚤识其弊而生愤叹，此十九世纪末叶思潮之所以变矣。 德人尼佉（Fr. Nietzsche）氏，则假察罗图斯德罗（Zarathustra）之言曰，吾行太远，孑然失其侣，返而观夫今之世，文明之邦国矣，斑斓之社会矣。 特其为社会也，无确固之崇信；众庶之于知识也，无作始之性质。 邦国如是，奚能淹留？吾见放于父母之邦矣！聊可望者，独苗裔耳。 此其深思遐瞩，见近世文明之伪与偏，又无望于今之人，不得已而念来叶者也。然则十九世纪末思想之为变也，其原安在，其实若何，其力之及于将来也又奚若？曰言其本质，即以矫十九世纪文明而起者耳。盖五十年来，人智弥进，渐乃返观前此，得其通弊，察其暗，于是浡焉兴作，会为大潮，以反动破坏充其精神，以获新生为其希望，专向旧有之文明，而加之掊击扫荡焉。全欧人士，为之栗然震惊者有之，芒然自失者有之，其力之烈，盖深入于人之灵府矣。然其根柢，乃远在十九世纪初叶神思一派；递夫后叶，受感化于其时现实之精神，已而更立新形，起以抗前时之现实，即所谓神思宗之至新者也。若夫影响，则眇眇来世，肊测殊难，特知此派之兴，决非突见而靡人心，亦不至突灭而归乌有，据地极固，函义甚深。以是为二十世纪文化始基，虽云早计，然其为将来新思想之朕兆，亦新生活之先驱，则按诸史实所昭垂，可不俟繁言而解者已。顾新者虽作，旧亦未僵，方遍满欧洲，冥通其地人民之呼吸，余力流衍，乃扰远东，使中国之人，由旧梦而入于新梦，冲决嚣叫，状犹狂酲。夫方贱古尊新，而所得既非新，又至偏而至伪，且复横决，浩乎难收，则一国之悲哀亦大矣。今为此篇，非云已尽西方最近思想之全，亦不为中国将来立则，惟疾其已甚，施之抨弹，犹神思新宗之意焉耳。故所述止于二事：曰非物质，曰重个人。
然则十九世纪末思想之为变也，其原安在，其实若何，其力之及于将来也又奚若？曰言其本质，即以矫十九世纪文明而起者耳。 盖五十年来，人智弥进，渐乃返观前此，得其通弊，察其暗，于是浡焉兴作，会为大潮，以反动破坏充其精神，以获新生为其希望，专向旧有之文明，而加之掊击扫荡焉。 全欧人士，为之栗然震惊者有之，芒然自失者有之，其力之烈，盖深入于人之灵府矣。 然其根柢，乃远在十九世纪初叶神思一派；递夫后叶，受感化于其时现实之精神，已而更立新形，起以抗前时之现实，即所谓神思宗之至新者也。 若夫影响，则眇眇来世，肊测殊难，特知此派之兴，决非突见而靡人心，亦不至突灭而归乌有，据地极固，函义甚深。 以是为二十世纪文化始基，虽云早计，然其为将来新思想之朕兆，亦新生活之先驱，则按诸史实所昭垂，可不俟繁言而解者已。 顾新者虽作，旧亦未僵，方遍满欧洲，冥通其地人民之呼吸，余力流衍，乃扰远东，使中国之人，由旧梦而入于新梦，冲决嚣叫，状犹狂酲。 夫方贱古尊新，而所得既非新，又至偏而至伪，且复横决，浩乎难收，则一国之悲哀亦大矣。 今为此篇，非云已尽西方最近思想之全，亦不为中国将来立则，惟疾其已甚，施之抨弹，犹神思新宗之意焉耳。 故所述止于二事：曰非物质，曰重个人。个人一语，入中国未三四年，号称识时之士，多引以为大诟，苟被其谥，与民贼同。意者未遑深知明察，而迷误为害人利己之义也欤？夷考其实，至不然矣。而十九世纪末之重个人，则吊诡殊恒，尤不能与往者比论。试案尔时人性，莫不绝异其前，入于自识，趣于我执，刚愎主己，于庸俗无所顾忌。如诗歌说部之所记述，每以骄蹇不逊者为全局之主人。此非操觚之士，独凭神思构架而然也，社会思潮，先发其朕，则迻之载籍而已矣。盖自法朗西大革命以来，平等自由，为凡事首，继而普通教育及国民教育，无不基是以遍施。久浴文化，则渐悟人类之尊严；既知自我，则顿识个性之价值；加以往之习惯坠地，崇信荡摇，则其自觉之精神，自一转而之极端之主我。且社会民主之倾向，势亦大张，凡个人者，即社会之一分子，夷隆实陷，是为指归，使天下人人归于一致，社会之内，荡无高卑。此其为理想诚美矣，顾于个人殊特之性，视之蔑如，既不加之别分，且欲致之灭绝。更举暗，则流弊所至，将使文化之纯粹者，精神益趋于固陋，颓波日逝，纤屑靡存焉。盖所谓平社会者，大都夷峻而不湮卑，若信至程度大同，必在前此进步水平以下。况人群之内，明哲非多，伧俗横行，浩不可御，风潮剥蚀，全体以沦于凡庸。非超越尘埃，解脱人事，或愚屯罔识，惟众是从者，其能缄口而无言乎？物反于极，则先觉善斗之士出矣：德人斯契纳尔（M. Stirner）乃先以极端之个人主义现于世。谓真之进步，在于己之足下。人必发挥自性，而脱观念世界之执持。惟此自性，即造物主。惟有此我，本属自由；既本有矣，而更外求也，是曰矛盾。自由之得以力，而力即在乎个人，亦即资财，亦即权利。故苟有外力来被，则无间出于寡人，或出于众庶，皆专制也。国家谓吾当与国民合其意志，亦一专制也。众意表现为法律，吾即受其束缚，虽曰为我之舆台，顾同是舆台耳。去之奈何？曰：在绝义务。义务废绝，而法律与偕亡矣。意盖谓凡一个人，其思想行为，必以己为中枢，亦以己为终极：即立我性为绝对之自由者也。至勖宾霍尔（A. Schopenhauer），则自既以兀傲刚愎有名，言行奇觚，为世希有；又见夫盲瞽鄙倍之众，充塞两间，乃视之与至劣之动物并等，愈益主我扬己而尊天才也。至丹麦哲人契开迦尔（S. Kierkegaard）则愤发疾呼，谓惟发挥个性，为至高之道德，而顾瞻他事，胥无益焉。其后有显理伊勃生（Henrik Ibsen）见于文界，瑰才卓识，以契开迦尔之诠释者称。其所著书，往往反社会民主之倾向，精力旁注，则无间习惯信仰道德，苟有拘于虚而偏至者，无不加之抵排。更睹近世人生，每托平等之名，实乃愈趋于恶浊，庸凡凉薄，日益以深，顽愚之道行，伪诈之势逞，而气宇品性，卓尔不群之士，乃反穷于草莽，辱于泥涂，个性之尊严，人类之价值，将咸归于无有，则常为慷慨激昂而不能自已也。如其《民敌》一书，谓有人宝守真理，不阿世媚俗，而不见容于人群，狡狯之徒，乃巍然独为众愚领袖，借多陵寡，植党自私，于是战斗以兴，而其书亦止：社会之象，宛然具于是焉。若夫尼佉，斯个人主义之至雄桀者矣，希望所寄，惟在大士天才；而以愚民为本位，则恶之不殊蛇蝎。意盖谓治任多数，则社会元气，一旦可隳，不若用庸众为牺牲，以冀一二天才之出世，递天才出而社会之活动亦以萌，即所谓超人之说，尝震惊欧洲之思想界者也。由是观之，彼之讴歌众数，奉若神明者，盖仅见光明一端，他未遍知，因加赞颂，使反而观诸黑暗，当立悟其不然矣。一梭格拉第也，而众希腊人鸩之，一耶稣基督也，而众犹太人磔之，后世论者，孰不云缪，顾其时则从众志耳。设留今之众志，迻诸载籍，以俟评骘于来哲，则其是非倒置，或正如今人之视往古，未可知也。故多数相朋，而仁义之途，是非之端，樊然淆乱；惟常言是解，于奥义也漠然。常言奥义，孰近正矣？是故布鲁多既杀该撒，昭告市人，其词秩然有条，名分大义，炳如观火；而众之受感，乃不如安多尼指血衣之数言。于是方群推为爱国之伟人，忽见逐于域外。夫誉之者众数也，逐之者又众数也，一瞬息中，变易反复，其无特操不俟言；即观现象，已足知不祥之消息矣。故是非不可公于众，公之则果不诚；政事不可公于众，公之则治不郅。惟超人出，世乃太平。苟不能然，则在英哲。嗟夫，彼持无政府主义者，其颠覆满盈，铲除阶级，亦已至矣，而建说创业诸雄，大都以导师自命。夫一导众从，智愚之别即在斯。与其抑英哲以就凡庸，曷若置众人而希英哲？则多数之说，缪不中经，个性之尊，所当张大，盖揆之是非利害，已不待繁言深虑而可知矣。虽然，此亦赖夫勇猛无畏之人，独立自强，去离尘垢，排舆言而弗沦于俗囿者也。
个人一语，入中国未三四年，号称识时之士，多引以为大诟，苟被其谥，与民贼同。 意者未遑深知明察，而迷误为害人利己之义也欤？夷考其实，至不然矣。 而十九世纪末之重个人，则吊诡殊恒，尤不能与往者比论。 试案尔时人性，莫不绝异其前，入于自识，趣于我执，刚愎主己，于庸俗无所顾忌。 如诗歌说部之所记述，每以骄蹇不逊者为全局之主人。 此非操觚之士，独凭神思构架而然也，社会思潮，先发其朕，则迻之载籍而已矣。 盖自法朗西大革命以来，平等自由，为凡事首，继而普通教育及国民教育，无不基是以遍施。 久浴文化，则渐悟人类之尊严；既知自我，则顿识个性之价值；加以往之习惯坠地，崇信荡摇，则其自觉之精神，自一转而之极端之主我。 且社会民主之倾向，势亦大张，凡个人者，即社会之一分子，夷隆实陷，是为指归，使天下人人归于一致，社会之内，荡无高卑。 此其为理想诚美矣，顾于个人殊特之性，视之蔑如，既不加之别分，且欲致之灭绝。 更举暗，则流弊所至，将使文化之纯粹者，精神益趋于固陋，颓波日逝，纤屑靡存焉。 盖所谓平社会者，大都夷峻而不湮卑，若信至程度大同，必在前此进步水平以下。 况人群之内，明哲非多，伧俗横行，浩不可御，风潮剥蚀，全体以沦于凡庸。 非超越尘埃，解脱人事，或愚屯罔识，惟众是从者，其能缄口而无言乎？物反于极，则先觉善斗之士出矣：德人斯契纳尔（M. Stirner）乃先以极端之个人主义现于世。 谓真之进步，在于己之足下。 人必发挥自性，而脱观念世界之执持。 惟此自性，即造物主。 惟有此我，本属自由；既本有矣，而更外求也，是曰矛盾。 自由之得以力，而力即在乎个人，亦即资财，亦即权利。 故苟有外力来被，则无间出于寡人，或出于众庶，皆专制也。 国家谓吾当与国民合其意志，亦一专制也。 众意表现为法律，吾即受其束缚，虽曰为我之舆台，顾同是舆台耳。 去之奈何？曰：在绝义务。 义务废绝，而法律与偕亡矣。 意盖谓凡一个人，其思想行为，必以己为中枢，亦以己为终极：即立我性为绝对之自由者也。 至勖宾霍尔（A. Schopenhauer），则自既以兀傲刚愎有名，言行奇觚，为世希有；又见夫盲瞽鄙倍之众，充塞两间，乃视之与至劣之动物并等，愈益主我扬己而尊天才也。 至丹麦哲人契开迦尔（S. Kierkegaard）则愤发疾呼，谓惟发挥个性，为至高之道德，而顾瞻他事，胥无益焉。 其后有显理伊勃生（Henrik Ibsen）见于文界，瑰才卓识，以契开迦尔之诠释者称。 其所著书，往往反社会民主之倾向，精力旁注，则无间习惯信仰道德，苟有拘于虚而偏至者，无不加之抵排。 更睹近世人生，每托平等之名，实乃愈趋于恶浊，庸凡凉薄，日益以深，顽愚之道行，伪诈之势逞，而气宇品性，卓尔不群之士，乃反穷于草莽，辱于泥涂，个性之尊严，人类之价值，将咸归于无有，则常为慷慨激昂而不能自已也。 如其《民敌》一书，谓有人宝守真理，不阿世媚俗，而不见容于人群，狡狯之徒，乃巍然独为众愚领袖，借多陵寡，植党自私，于是战斗以兴，而其书亦止：社会之象，宛然具于是焉。 若夫尼佉，斯个人主义之至雄桀者矣，希望所寄，惟在大士天才；而以愚民为本位，则恶之不殊蛇蝎。 意盖谓治任多数，则社会元气，一旦可隳，不若用庸众为牺牲，以冀一二天才之出世，递天才出而社会之活动亦以萌，即所谓超人之说，尝震惊欧洲之思想界者也。 由是观之，彼之讴歌众数，奉若神明者，盖仅见光明一端，他未遍知，因加赞颂，使反而观诸黑暗，当立悟其不然矣。 一梭格拉第也，而众希腊人鸩之，一耶稣基督也，而众犹太人磔之，后世论者，孰不云缪，顾其时则从众志耳。 设留今之众志，迻诸载籍，以俟评骘于来哲，则其是非倒置，或正如今人之视往古，未可知也。 故多数相朋，而仁义之途，是非之端，樊然淆乱；惟常言是解，于奥义也漠然。 常言奥义，孰近正矣？是故布鲁多既杀该撒，昭告市人，其词秩然有条，名分大义，炳如观火；而众之受感，乃不如安多尼指血衣之数言。 于是方群推为爱国之伟人，忽见逐于域外。 夫誉之者众数也，逐之者又众数也，一瞬息中，变易反复，其无特操不俟言；即观现象，已足知不祥之消息矣。 故是非不可公于众，公之则果不诚；政事不可公于众，公之则治不郅。 惟超人出，世乃太平。 苟不能然，则在英哲。 嗟夫，彼持无政府主义者，其颠覆满盈，铲除阶级，亦已至矣，而建说创业诸雄，大都以导师自命。 夫一导众从，智愚之别即在斯。 与其抑英哲以就凡庸，曷若置众人而希英哲？则多数之说，缪不中经，个性之尊，所当张大，盖揆之是非利害，已不待繁言深虑而可知矣。 虽然，此亦赖夫勇猛无畏之人，独立自强，去离尘垢，排舆言而弗沦于俗囿者也。若夫非物质主义者，犹个人主义然，亦兴起于抗俗。盖唯物之倾向，固以现实为权舆，浸润人心，久而不止。故在十九世纪，爰为大潮，据地极坚，且被来叶，一若生活本根，舍此将莫有在者。不知纵令物质文明，即现实生活之大本，而崇奉逾度，倾向偏趋，外此诸端，悉弃置而不顾，则按其究竟，必将缘偏颇之恶因，失文明之神旨，先以消耗，终以灭亡，历世精神，不百年而具尽矣。递夫十九世纪后叶，而其弊果益昭，诸凡事物，无不质化，灵明日以亏蚀，旨趣流于平庸，人惟客观之物质世界是趋，而主观之内面精神，乃舍置不之一省。重其外，放其内，取其质，遗其神，林林众生，物欲来蔽，社会憔悴，进步以停，于是一切诈伪罪恶，蔑弗乘之而萌，使性灵之光，愈益就于黯淡：十九世纪文明一面之通弊，盖如此矣。时乃有新神思宗徒出，或崇奉主观，或张皇意力，匡纠流俗，厉如电霆，使天下群伦，为闻声而摇荡。即其他评骘之士，以至学者文家，虽意主和平，不与世迕，而见此唯物极端，且杀精神生活，则亦悲观愤叹，知主观与意力主义之兴，功有伟于洪水之有方舟者焉。主观主义者，其趣凡二：一谓惟以主观为准则，用律诸物；一谓视主观之心灵界，当较客观之物质界为尤尊。前者为主观倾向之极端，力特著于十九世纪末叶，然其趋势，颇与主我及我执殊途，仅于客观之习惯，无所盲从，或不置重，而以自有之主观世界为至高之标准而已。以是之故，则思虑动作，咸离外物，独往来于自心之天地，确信在是，满足亦在是，谓之渐自省其内曜之成果可也。若夫兴起之由，则原于外者，为大势所向，胥在平庸之客观习惯，动不由己，发如机缄，识者不能堪，斯生反动；其原于内者，乃实以近世人心，日进于自觉，知物质万能之说，且逸个人之情意，使独创之力，归于槁枯，故不得不以自悟者悟人，冀挽狂澜于方倒耳。如尼佉伊勃生诸人，皆据其所信，力抗时俗，示主观倾向之极致；而契开迦尔则谓真理准则，独在主观，惟主观性，即为真理，至凡有道德行为，亦可弗问客观之结果若何，而一任主观之善恶为判断焉。其说出世，和者日多，于是思潮为之更张，骛外者渐转而趣内，渊思冥想之风作，自省抒情之意苏，去现实物质与自然之樊，以就其本有心灵之域；知精神现象实人类生活之极颠，非发挥其辉光，于人生为无当；而张大个人之人格，又人生之第一义也。然尔时所要求之人格，有甚异于前者。往所理想，在知见情操，两皆调整，若主智一派，则在聪明睿智，能移客观之大世界于主观之中者。如是思惟，迨黑该尔（F. Hegel）出而达其极。若罗曼暨尚古一派，则息孚支培黎（Shaftesbury）承卢骚（J. Rousseau）之后，尚容情感之要求，特必与情操相统一调和，始合其理想之人格。而希籁（Fr. Schiller）氏者，乃谓必知感两性，圆满无间，然后谓之全人。顾至十九世纪垂终，则理想为之一变。明哲之士，反省于内面者深，因以知古人所设具足调协之人，决不能得之今世；惟有意力轶众，所当希求，能于情意一端，处现实之世，而有勇猛奋斗之才，虽屡踣屡僵，终得现其理想：其为人格，如是焉耳。故如勖宾霍尔所张主，则以内省诸己，豁然贯通，因曰意力为世界之本体也；尼佉之所希冀，则意力绝世，几近神明之超人也；伊勃生之所描写，则以更革为生命，多力善斗，即迕万众不慑之强者也。夫诸凡理想，大致如斯者，诚以人丁转轮之时，处现实之世，使不若是，每至舍己从人，沉溺逝波，莫知所届，文明真髓，顷刻荡然；惟有刚毅不挠，虽遇外物而弗为移，始足作社会桢干。排斥万难，黾勉上征，人类尊严，于此攸赖，则具有绝大意力之士贵耳。虽然，此又特其一端而已。试察其他，乃亦以见末叶人民之弱点，盖往之文明流弊，浸灌性灵，众庶率纤弱颓靡，日益以甚，渐乃反观诸己，为之欿然，于是刻意求意力之人，冀倚为将来之柱石。此正犹洪水横流，自将灭顶，乃神驰彼岸，出全力以呼善没者尔，悲夫！
若夫非物质主义者，犹个人主义然，亦兴起于抗俗。 盖唯物之倾向，固以现实为权舆，浸润人心，久而不止。 故在十九世纪，爰为大潮，据地极坚，且被来叶，一若生活本根，舍此将莫有在者。 不知纵令物质文明，即现实生活之大本，而崇奉逾度，倾向偏趋，外此诸端，悉弃置而不顾，则按其究竟，必将缘偏颇之恶因，失文明之神旨，先以消耗，终以灭亡，历世精神，不百年而具尽矣。 递夫十九世纪后叶，而其弊果益昭，诸凡事物，无不质化，灵明日以亏蚀，旨趣流于平庸，人惟客观之物质世界是趋，而主观之内面精神，乃舍置不之一省。 重其外，放其内，取其质，遗其神，林林众生，物欲来蔽，社会憔悴，进步以停，于是一切诈伪罪恶，蔑弗乘之而萌，使性灵之光，愈益就于黯淡：十九世纪文明一面之通弊，盖如此矣。 时乃有新神思宗徒出，或崇奉主观，或张皇意力，匡纠流俗，厉如电霆，使天下群伦，为闻声而摇荡。 即其他评骘之士，以至学者文家，虽意主和平，不与世迕，而见此唯物极端，且杀精神生活，则亦悲观愤叹，知主观与意力主义之兴，功有伟于洪水之有方舟者焉。 主观主义者，其趣凡二：一谓惟以主观为准则，用律诸物；一谓视主观之心灵界，当较客观之物质界为尤尊。 前者为主观倾向之极端，力特著于十九世纪末叶，然其趋势，颇与主我及我执殊途，仅于客观之习惯，无所盲从，或不置重，而以自有之主观世界为至高之标准而已。 以是之故，则思虑动作，咸离外物，独往来于自心之天地，确信在是，满足亦在是，谓之渐自省其内曜之成果可也。 若夫兴起之由，则原于外者，为大势所向，胥在平庸之客观习惯，动不由己，发如机缄，识者不能堪，斯生反动；其原于内者，乃实以近世人心，日进于自觉，知物质万能之说，且逸个人之情意，使独创之力，归于槁枯，故不得不以自悟者悟人，冀挽狂澜于方倒耳。 如尼佉伊勃生诸人，皆据其所信，力抗时俗，示主观倾向之极致；而契开迦尔则谓真理准则，独在主观，惟主观性，即为真理，至凡有道德行为，亦可弗问客观之结果若何，而一任主观之善恶为判断焉。 其说出世，和者日多，于是思潮为之更张，骛外者渐转而趣内，渊思冥想之风作，自省抒情之意苏，去现实物质与自然之樊，以就其本有心灵之域；知精神现象实人类生活之极颠，非发挥其辉光，于人生为无当；而张大个人之人格，又人生之第一义也。 然尔时所要求之人格，有甚异于前者。 往所理想，在知见情操，两皆调整，若主智一派，则在聪明睿智，能移客观之大世界于主观之中者。 如是思惟，迨黑该尔（F. Hegel）出而达其极。 若罗曼暨尚古一派，则息孚支培黎（Shaftesbury）承卢骚（J. Rousseau）之后，尚容情感之要求，特必与情操相统一调和，始合其理想之人格。 而希籁（Fr. Schiller）氏者，乃谓必知感两性，圆满无间，然后谓之全人。 顾至十九世纪垂终，则理想为之一变。 明哲之士，反省于内面者深，因以知古人所设具足调协之人，决不能得之今世；惟有意力轶众，所当希求，能于情意一端，处现实之世，而有勇猛奋斗之才，虽屡踣屡僵，终得现其理想：其为人格，如是焉耳。 故如勖宾霍尔所张主，则以内省诸己，豁然贯通，因曰意力为世界之本体也；尼佉之所希冀，则意力绝世，几近神明之超人也；伊勃生之所描写，则以更革为生命，多力善斗，即迕万众不慑之强者也。 夫诸凡理想，大致如斯者，诚以人丁转轮之时，处现实之世，使不若是，每至舍己从人，沉溺逝波，莫知所届，文明真髓，顷刻荡然；惟有刚毅不挠，虽遇外物而弗为移，始足作社会桢干。 排斥万难，黾勉上征，人类尊严，于此攸赖，则具有绝大意力之士贵耳。 虽然，此又特其一端而已。 试察其他，乃亦以见末叶人民之弱点，盖往之文明流弊，浸灌性灵，众庶率纤弱颓靡，日益以甚，渐乃反观诸己，为之欿然，于是刻意求意力之人，冀倚为将来之柱石。 此正犹洪水横流，自将灭顶，乃神驰彼岸，出全力以呼善没者尔，悲夫！由是观之，欧洲十九世纪之文明，其度越前古，凌驾亚东，诚不俟明察而见矣。然既以改革而胎，反抗为本，则偏于一极，固理势所必然。洎夫末流，弊乃自显。于是新宗蹶起，特反其初，复以热烈之情，勇猛之行，起大波而加之涤荡。直至今日，益复浩然。其将来之结果若何，盖未可以率测。然作旧弊之药石，造新生之津梁，流衍方长，曼不遽已，则相其本质，察其精神，有可得而征信者。意者文化常进于幽深，人心不安于固定，二十世纪之文明，当必沉邃庄严，至与十九世纪之文明异趣。新生一作，虚伪道消，内部之生活，其将愈深且强欤？精神生活之光耀，将愈兴起而发扬欤？成然以觉，出客观梦幻之世界，而主观与自觉之生活，将由是而益张欤？内部之生活强，则人生之意义亦愈邃，个人尊严之旨趣亦愈明，二十世纪之新精神，殆将立狂风怒浪之间，恃意力以辟生路者也。中国在今，内密既发，四邻竞集而迫拶，情状自不能无所变迁。夫安弱守雌，笃于旧习，固无以争存于天下。第所以匡救之者，缪而失正，则虽日易故常，哭泣叫号之不已，于忧患又何补矣？此所为明哲之士，必洞达世界之大势，权衡校量，去其偏颇，得其神明，施之国中，翕合无间。外之既不后于世界之思潮，内之仍弗失固有之血脉，取今复古，别立新宗，人生意义，致之深邃，则国人之自觉至，个性张，沙聚之邦，由是转为人国。人国既建，乃始雄厉无前，屹然独见于天下，更何有于肤浅凡庸之事物哉？顾今者翻然思变，历岁已多，青年之所思惟，大都归罪恶于古之文物，甚或斥言文为蛮野，鄙思想为简陋，风发浡起，皇皇焉欲进欧西之物而代之，而于适所言十九世纪末之思潮，乃漠然不一措意。凡所张主，惟质为多，取其质犹可也，更按其实，则又质之至伪而偏，无所可用。虽不为将来立计，仅图救今日之阽危，而其术其心，违戾亦已甚矣。况乎凡造言任事者，又复有假改革公名，而阴以遂其私欲者哉？今敢问号称志士者曰，将以富有为文明欤，则犹太遗黎，性长居积，欧人之善贾者，莫与比伦，然其民之遭遇何如矣？将以路矿为文明欤，则五十年来非澳二洲，莫不兴铁路矿事，顾此二洲土著之文化何如矣？将以众治为文明欤，则西班牙波陀牙二国，立宪且久，顾其国之情状又何如矣？若曰惟物质为文化之基也，则列机括，陈粮食，遂足以雄长天下欤？曰惟多数得是非之正也，则以一人与众禺处，其亦将木居而芧食欤？此虽妇竖，必否之矣。然欧美之强，莫不以是炫天下者，则根柢在人，而此特现象之末，本原深而难见，荣华昭而易识也。是故将生存两间，角逐列国是务，其首在立人，人立而后凡事举；若其道术，乃必尊个性而张精神。假不如是，槁丧且不俟夫一世。夫中国在昔，本尚物质而疾天才矣，先王之泽，日以殄绝，逮蒙外力，乃退然不可自存。而辁才小慧之徒，则又号召张皇，重杀之以物质而囿之以多数，个人之性，剥夺无余。往者为本体自发之偏枯，今则获以交通传来之新疫，二患交伐，而中国之沉沦遂以益速矣。呜呼，眷念方来，亦已焉哉！
由是观之，欧洲十九世纪之文明，其度越前古，凌驾亚东，诚不俟明察而见矣。 然既以改革而胎，反抗为本，则偏于一极，固理势所必然。 洎夫末流，弊乃自显。 于是新宗蹶起，特反其初，复以热烈之情，勇猛之行，起大波而加之涤荡。 直至今日，益复浩然。 其将来之结果若何，盖未可以率测。 然作旧弊之药石，造新生之津梁，流衍方长，曼不遽已，则相其本质，察其精神，有可得而征信者。 意者文化常进于幽深，人心不安于固定，二十世纪之文明，当必沉邃庄严，至与十九世纪之文明异趣。 新生一作，虚伪道消，内部之生活，其将愈深且强欤？精神生活之光耀，将愈兴起而发扬欤？成然以觉，出客观梦幻之世界，而主观与自觉之生活，将由是而益张欤？内部之生活强，则人生之意义亦愈邃，个人尊严之旨趣亦愈明，二十世纪之新精神，殆将立狂风怒浪之间，恃意力以辟生路者也。 中国在今，内密既发，四邻竞集而迫拶，情状自不能无所变迁。 夫安弱守雌，笃于旧习，固无以争存于天下。 第所以匡救之者，缪而失正，则虽日易故常，哭泣叫号之不已，于忧患又何补矣？此所为明哲之士，必洞达世界之大势，权衡校量，去其偏颇，得其神明，施之国中，翕合无间。 外之既不后于世界之思潮，内之仍弗失固有之血脉，取今复古，别立新宗，人生意义，致之深邃，则国人之自觉至，个性张，沙聚之邦，由是转为人国。 人国既建，乃始雄厉无前，屹然独见于天下，更何有于肤浅凡庸之事物哉？顾今者翻然思变，历岁已多，青年之所思惟，大都归罪恶于古之文物，甚或斥言文为蛮野，鄙思想为简陋，风发浡起，皇皇焉欲进欧西之物而代之，而于适所言十九世纪末之思潮，乃漠然不一措意。 凡所张主，惟质为多，取其质犹可也，更按其实，则又质之至伪而偏，无所可用。 虽不为将来立计，仅图救今日之阽危，而其术其心，违戾亦已甚矣。 况乎凡造言任事者，又复有假改革公名，而阴以遂其私欲者哉？今敢问号称志士者曰，将以富有为文明欤，则犹太遗黎，性长居积，欧人之善贾者，莫与比伦，然其民之遭遇何如矣？将以路矿为文明欤，则五十年来非澳二洲，莫不兴铁路矿事，顾此二洲土著之文化何如矣？将以众治为文明欤，则西班牙波陀牙二国，立宪且久，顾其国之情状又何如矣？若曰惟物质为文化之基也，则列机括，陈粮食，遂足以雄长天下欤？曰惟多数得是非之正也，则以一人与众禺处，其亦将木居而芧食欤？此虽妇竖，必否之矣。 然欧美之强，莫不以是炫天下者，则根柢在人，而此特现象之末，本原深而难见，荣华昭而易识也。 是故将生存两间，角逐列国是务，其首在立人，人立而后凡事举；若其道术，乃必尊个性而张精神。 假不如是，槁丧且不俟夫一世。 夫中国在昔，本尚物质而疾天才矣，先王之泽，日以殄绝，逮蒙外力，乃退然不可自存。 而辁才小慧之徒，则又号召张皇，重杀之以物质而囿之以多数，个人之性，剥夺无余。 往者为本体自发之偏枯，今则获以交通传来之新疫，二患交伐，而中国之沉沦遂以益速矣。 呜呼，眷念方来，亦已焉哉！一九〇七年作。
Created in 1907.

摩罗诗力说

摩罗诗力说

摩罗诗力说

Moro Shili said求古源尽者将求方来之泉，将求新源。嗟我昆弟，新生之作，新泉之涌于渊深，其非远矣。
Those who seek the end of the ancient source will seek the spring of the future and the new source. Alas, my brothers, the work of new life, the spring of new springs gushing from the abyss, is not far away.——尼佉
——Ni Qian

摩罗诗力说

一

摩罗诗力说

One人有读古国文化史者，循代而下，至于卷末，必凄以有所觉，如脱春温而入于秋肃，勾萌绝朕，枯槁在前，吾无以名，姑谓之萧条而止。盖人文之留遗后世者，最有力莫如心声。古民神思，接天然之宫，冥契万有，与之灵会，道其能道，爰为诗歌。其声度时劫而入人心，不与缄口同绝；且益曼衍，视其种人。递文事式微，则种人之运命亦尽，群生辍响，荣华收光；读史者萧条之感，即以怒起，而此文明史记，亦渐临末页矣。凡负令誉于史初，开文化之曙色，而今日转为影国者，无不如斯。使举国人所习闻，最适莫如天竺。天竺古有《韦陀》四种，瑰丽幽敻，称世界大文；其《摩诃波罗多》暨《罗摩衍那》二赋，亦至美妙。厥后有诗人加黎陀萨（Kalidasa）者出，以传奇鸣世，间染抒情之篇；日耳曼诗宗瞿提（W. von Goethe），至崇为两间之绝唱。降及种人失力，而文事亦共零夷，至大之声，渐不生于彼国民之灵府，流转异域，如亡人也。次为希伯来，虽多涉信仰教诫，而文章以幽邃庄严胜，教宗文术，此其源泉，灌溉人心，迄今兹未艾。特在以色列族，则止耶利米（Jeremiah）之声；列王荒矣，帝怒以赫，耶路撒冷遂隳，而种人之舌亦默。当彼流离异地，虽不遽忘其宗邦，方言正信，拳拳未释，然《哀歌》而下，无赓响矣。复次为伊兰埃及，皆中道废弛，有如断绠，灿烂于古，萧瑟于今。若震旦而逸斯列，则人生大戬，无逾于此。何以故？英人加勒尔（Th. Carlyle）曰，得昭明之声，洋洋乎歌心意而生者，为国民之首义。意太利分崩矣，然实一统也，彼生但丁（Dante Alighieri），彼有意语。大俄罗斯之札尔，有兵刃炮火，政治之上，能辖大区，行大业。然奈何无声？中或有大物，而其为大也喑。（中略）迨兵刃炮火，无不腐蚀，而但丁之声依然。有但丁者统一，而无声兆之俄人，终支离而已。
人有读古国文化史者，循代而下，至于卷末，必凄以有所觉，如脱春温而入于秋肃，勾萌绝朕，枯槁在前，吾无以名，姑谓之萧条而止。 盖人文之留遗后世者，最有力莫如心声。 古民神思，接天然之宫，冥契万有，与之灵会，道其能道，爰为诗歌。 其声度时劫而入人心，不与缄口同绝；且益曼衍，视其种人。 递文事式微，则种人之运命亦尽，群生辍响，荣华收光；读史者萧条之感，即以怒起，而此文明史记，亦渐临末页矣。 凡负令誉于史初，开文化之曙色，而今日转为影国者，无不如斯。 使举国人所习闻，最适莫如天竺。 天竺古有《韦陀》四种，瑰丽幽敻，称世界大文；其《摩诃波罗多》暨《罗摩衍那》二赋，亦至美妙。 厥后有诗人加黎陀萨（Kalidasa）者出，以传奇鸣世，间染抒情之篇；日耳曼诗宗瞿提（W. von Goethe），至崇为两间之绝唱。 降及种人失力，而文事亦共零夷，至大之声，渐不生于彼国民之灵府，流转异域，如亡人也。 次为希伯来，虽多涉信仰教诫，而文章以幽邃庄严胜，教宗文术，此其源泉，灌溉人心，迄今兹未艾。 特在以色列族，则止耶利米（Jeremiah）之声；列王荒矣，帝怒以赫，耶路撒冷遂隳，而种人之舌亦默。 当彼流离异地，虽不遽忘其宗邦，方言正信，拳拳未释，然《哀歌》而下，无赓响矣。 复次为伊兰埃及，皆中道废弛，有如断绠，灿烂于古，萧瑟于今。 若震旦而逸斯列，则人生大戬，无逾于此。 何以故？英人加勒尔（Th. Carlyle）曰，得昭明之声，洋洋乎歌心意而生者，为国民之首义。 意太利分崩矣，然实一统也，彼生但丁（Dante Alighieri），彼有意语。 大俄罗斯之札尔，有兵刃炮火，政治之上，能辖大区，行大业。 然奈何无声？中或有大物，而其为大也喑。 （中略）迨兵刃炮火，无不腐蚀，而但丁之声依然。 有但丁者统一，而无声兆之俄人，终支离而已。尼佉（Fr. Nietzsche）不恶野人，谓中有新力，言亦确凿不可移。盖文明之朕，固孕于蛮荒，野人狉其形，而隐曜即伏于内。文明如华，蛮野如蕾，文明如实，蛮野如华，上征在是，希望亦在是。惟文化已止之古民不然：发展既央，隳败随起，况久席古宗祖之光荣，尝首出周围之下国，暮气之作，每不自知，自用而愚，污如死海。其煌煌居历史之首，而终匿形于卷末者，殆以此欤？俄之无声，激响在焉。俄如孺子，而非喑人；俄如伏流，而非古井。十九世纪前叶，果有鄂戈理（N. Gogol）者起，以不可见之泪痕悲色，振其邦人，或以拟英之狭斯丕尔（W. Shakespeare），即加勒尔所赞扬崇拜者也。顾瞻人间，新声争起，无不以殊特雄丽之言，自振其精神而绍介其伟美于世界；若渊默而无动者，独前举天竺以下数古国而已。嗟夫，古民之心声手泽，非不庄严，非不崇大，然呼吸不通于今，则取以供览古之人，使摩挲咏叹而外，更何物及其子孙？否亦仅自语其前此光荣，即以形迩来之寂寞，反不如新起之邦，纵文化未昌，而大有望于方来之足致敬也。故所谓古文明国者，悲凉之语耳，嘲讽之辞耳！中落之胄，故家荒矣，则喋喋语人，谓厥祖在时，其为智慧武怒者何似，尝有闳宇崇楼，珠玉犬马，尊显胜于凡人。有闻其言，孰不腾笑？夫国民发展，功虽有在于怀古，然其怀也，思理朗然，如鉴明镜，时时上征，时时反顾，时时进光明之长途，时时念辉煌之旧有，故其新者日新，而其古亦不死。若不知所以然，漫夸耀以自悦，则长夜之始，即在斯时。今试履中国之大衢，当有见军人蹀躞而过市者，张口作军歌，痛斥印度波兰之奴性；有漫为国歌者亦然。盖中国今日，亦颇思历举前有之耿光，特未能言，则姑曰左邻已奴，右邻且死，择亡国而较量之，冀自显其佳胜。夫二国与震旦究孰劣，今姑弗言；若云颂美之什，国民之声，则天下之咏者虽多，固未见有此作法矣。诗人绝迹，事若甚微，而萧条之感，辄以来袭。意者欲扬宗邦之真大，首在审己，亦必知人，比较既周，爰生自觉。自觉之声发，每响必中于人心，清晰昭明，不同凡响。非然者，口舌一结，众语俱沦，沉默之来，倍于前此。盖魂意方梦，何能有言？即震于外缘，强自扬厉，不惟不大，徒增欷耳。故曰国民精神之发扬，与世界识见之广博有所属。
尼佉（Fr. Nietzsche）不恶野人，谓中有新力，言亦确凿不可移。 盖文明之朕，固孕于蛮荒，野人狉其形，而隐曜即伏于内。 文明如华，蛮野如蕾，文明如实，蛮野如华，上征在是，希望亦在是。 惟文化已止之古民不然：发展既央，隳败随起，况久席古宗祖之光荣，尝首出周围之下国，暮气之作，每不自知，自用而愚，污如死海。 其煌煌居历史之首，而终匿形于卷末者，殆以此欤？俄之无声，激响在焉。 俄如孺子，而非喑人；俄如伏流，而非古井。 十九世纪前叶，果有鄂戈理（N. Gogol）者起，以不可见之泪痕悲色，振其邦人，或以拟英之狭斯丕尔（W. Shakespeare），即加勒尔所赞扬崇拜者也。 顾瞻人间，新声争起，无不以殊特雄丽之言，自振其精神而绍介其伟美于世界；若渊默而无动者，独前举天竺以下数古国而已。 嗟夫，古民之心声手泽，非不庄严，非不崇大，然呼吸不通于今，则取以供览古之人，使摩挲咏叹而外，更何物及其子孙？否亦仅自语其前此光荣，即以形迩来之寂寞，反不如新起之邦，纵文化未昌，而大有望于方来之足致敬也。 故所谓古文明国者，悲凉之语耳，嘲讽之辞耳！中落之胄，故家荒矣，则喋喋语人，谓厥祖在时，其为智慧武怒者何似，尝有闳宇崇楼，珠玉犬马，尊显胜于凡人。 有闻其言，孰不腾笑？夫国民发展，功虽有在于怀古，然其怀也，思理朗然，如鉴明镜，时时上征，时时反顾，时时进光明之长途，时时念辉煌之旧有，故其新者日新，而其古亦不死。 若不知所以然，漫夸耀以自悦，则长夜之始，即在斯时。 今试履中国之大衢，当有见军人蹀躞而过市者，张口作军歌，痛斥印度波兰之奴性；有漫为国歌者亦然。 盖中国今日，亦颇思历举前有之耿光，特未能言，则姑曰左邻已奴，右邻且死，择亡国而较量之，冀自显其佳胜。 夫二国与震旦究孰劣，今姑弗言；若云颂美之什，国民之声，则天下之咏者虽多，固未见有此作法矣。 诗人绝迹，事若甚微，而萧条之感，辄以来袭。 意者欲扬宗邦之真大，首在审己，亦必知人，比较既周，爰生自觉。 自觉之声发，每响必中于人心，清晰昭明，不同凡响。 非然者，口舌一结，众语俱沦，沉默之来，倍于前此。 盖魂意方梦，何能有言？即震于外缘，强自扬厉，不惟不大，徒增欷耳。 故曰国民精神之发扬，与世界识见之广博有所属。今且置古事不道，别求新声于异邦，而其因即动于怀古。新声之别，不可究详；至力足以振人，且语之较有深趣者，实莫如摩罗诗派。摩罗之言，假自天竺，此云天魔，欧人谓之撒但，人本以目裴伦（G. Byron）。今则举一切诗人中，凡立意在反抗，指归在动作，而为世所不甚愉悦者悉入之，为传其言行思惟，流别影响，始宗主裴伦，终以摩迦（匈加利）文士。凡是群人，外状至异，各禀自国之特色，发为光华；而要其大归，则趣于一：大都不为顺世和乐之音，动吭一呼，闻者兴起，争天拒俗，而精神复深感后世人心，绵延至于无已。虽未生以前，解脱而后，或以其声为不足听；若其生活两间，居天然之掌握，辗转而未得脱者，则使之闻之，固声之最雄桀伟美者矣。然以语平和之民，则言者滋惧。
今且置古事不道，别求新声于异邦，而其因即动于怀古。 新声之别，不可究详；至力足以振人，且语之较有深趣者，实莫如摩罗诗派。 摩罗之言，假自天竺，此云天魔，欧人谓之撒但，人本以目裴伦（G. Byron）。 今则举一切诗人中，凡立意在反抗，指归在动作，而为世所不甚愉悦者悉入之，为传其言行思惟，流别影响，始宗主裴伦，终以摩迦（匈加利）文士。 凡是群人，外状至异，各禀自国之特色，发为光华；而要其大归，则趣于一：大都不为顺世和乐之音，动吭一呼，闻者兴起，争天拒俗，而精神复深感后世人心，绵延至于无已。 虽未生以前，解脱而后，或以其声为不足听；若其生活两间，居天然之掌握，辗转而未得脱者，则使之闻之，固声之最雄桀伟美者矣。 然以语平和之民，则言者滋惧。

摩罗诗力说

二

摩罗诗力说

Two平和为物，不见于人间。其强谓之平和者，不过战事方已或未始之时，外状若宁，暗流仍伏，时劫一会，动作始矣。故观之天然，则和风拂林，甘雨润物，似无不以降福祉于人世，然烈火在下，出为地囱，一旦偾兴，万有同坏。其风雨时作，特暂伏之见象，非能永劫安易，如亚当之故家也。人事亦然，衣食家室邦国之争，形现既昭，已不可以讳掩；而二士室处，亦有吸呼，于是生颢气之争，强肺者致胜。故杀机之昉，与有生偕；平和之名，等于无有。特生民之始，既以武健勇烈，抗拒战斗，渐进于文明矣，化定俗移，转为新懦，知前征之至险，则爽然思归其雌，而战场在前，复自知不可避，于是运其神思，创为理想之邦，或托之人所莫至之区，或迟之不可计年以后。自柏拉图（Platon）《邦国论》始，西方哲士，作此念者不知几何人。虽自古迄今，绝无此平和之朕，而延颈方来，神驰所慕之仪的，日逐而不舍，要亦人间进化之一因子欤？吾中国爱智之士，独不与西方同，心神所注，辽远在于唐虞，或迳入古初，游于人兽杂居之世；谓其时万祸不作，人安其天，不如斯世之恶浊阽危，无以生活。其说照之人类进化史实，事正背驰。盖古民曼衍播迁，其为争抗劬劳，纵不厉于今，而视今必无所减；特历时既永，史乘无存，汗迹血腥，泯灭都尽，则追而思之，似其时为至足乐耳。傥使置身当时，与古民同其忧患，则颓唐侘傺，复远念盘古未生，斧凿未经之世，又事之所必有者已。故作此念者，为无希望，为无上征，为无努力，较以西方思理，犹水火然；非自杀以从古人，将终其身更无可希冀经营，致人我于所仪之主的，束手浩叹，神质同隳焉而已。且更为忖度其言，又将见古之思士，决不以华土为可乐，如今人所张皇；惟自知良懦无可为，乃独图脱屣尘埃，惝恍古国，任人群堕于虫兽，而己身以隐逸终。思士如是，社会善之，咸谓之高蹈之人，而自云我虫兽我虫兽也。其不然者，乃立言辞，欲致人同归于朴古，老子之辈，盖其枭雄。老子书五千语，要在不撄人心；以不撄人心故，则必先自致槁木之心，立无为之治；以无为之为化社会，而世即于太平。其术善也。然奈何星气既凝，人类既出而后，无时无物，不禀杀机，进化或可停，而生物不能返本。使拂逆其前征，势即入于苓落，世界之内，实例至多，一览古国，悉其信证。若诚能渐致人间，使归于禽虫卉木原生物，复由渐即于无情，则宇宙自大，有情已去，一切虚无，宁非至净。而不幸进化如飞矢，非堕落不止，非著物不止，祈逆飞而归弦，为理势所无有。此人世所以可悲，而摩罗宗之为至伟也。人得是力，乃以发生，乃以曼衍，乃以上征，乃至于人所能至之极点。
平和为物，不见于人间。 其强谓之平和者，不过战事方已或未始之时，外状若宁，暗流仍伏，时劫一会，动作始矣。 故观之天然，则和风拂林，甘雨润物，似无不以降福祉于人世，然烈火在下，出为地囱，一旦偾兴，万有同坏。 其风雨时作，特暂伏之见象，非能永劫安易，如亚当之故家也。 人事亦然，衣食家室邦国之争，形现既昭，已不可以讳掩；而二士室处，亦有吸呼，于是生颢气之争，强肺者致胜。 故杀机之昉，与有生偕；平和之名，等于无有。 特生民之始，既以武健勇烈，抗拒战斗，渐进于文明矣，化定俗移，转为新懦，知前征之至险，则爽然思归其雌，而战场在前，复自知不可避，于是运其神思，创为理想之邦，或托之人所莫至之区，或迟之不可计年以后。 自柏拉图（Platon）《邦国论》始，西方哲士，作此念者不知几何人。 虽自古迄今，绝无此平和之朕，而延颈方来，神驰所慕之仪的，日逐而不舍，要亦人间进化之一因子欤？吾中国爱智之士，独不与西方同，心神所注，辽远在于唐虞，或迳入古初，游于人兽杂居之世；谓其时万祸不作，人安其天，不如斯世之恶浊阽危，无以生活。 其说照之人类进化史实，事正背驰。 盖古民曼衍播迁，其为争抗劬劳，纵不厉于今，而视今必无所减；特历时既永，史乘无存，汗迹血腥，泯灭都尽，则追而思之，似其时为至足乐耳。 傥使置身当时，与古民同其忧患，则颓唐侘傺，复远念盘古未生，斧凿未经之世，又事之所必有者已。 故作此念者，为无希望，为无上征，为无努力，较以西方思理，犹水火然；非自杀以从古人，将终其身更无可希冀经营，致人我于所仪之主的，束手浩叹，神质同隳焉而已。 且更为忖度其言，又将见古之思士，决不以华土为可乐，如今人所张皇；惟自知良懦无可为，乃独图脱屣尘埃，惝恍古国，任人群堕于虫兽，而己身以隐逸终。 思士如是，社会善之，咸谓之高蹈之人，而自云我虫兽我虫兽也。 其不然者，乃立言辞，欲致人同归于朴古，老子之辈，盖其枭雄。 老子书五千语，要在不撄人心；以不撄人心故，则必先自致槁木之心，立无为之治；以无为之为化社会，而世即于太平。 其术善也。 然奈何星气既凝，人类既出而后，无时无物，不禀杀机，进化或可停，而生物不能返本。 使拂逆其前征，势即入于苓落，世界之内，实例至多，一览古国，悉其信证。 若诚能渐致人间，使归于禽虫卉木原生物，复由渐即于无情，则宇宙自大，有情已去，一切虚无，宁非至净。 而不幸进化如飞矢，非堕落不止，非著物不止，祈逆飞而归弦，为理势所无有。 此人世所以可悲，而摩罗宗之为至伟也。 人得是力，乃以发生，乃以曼衍，乃以上征，乃至于人所能至之极点。中国之治，理想在不撄，而意异于前说。有人撄人，或有人得撄者，为帝大禁，其意在保位，使子孙王千万世，无有底止，故性解（Genius）之出，必竭全力死之；有人撄我，或有能撄人者，为民大禁，其意在安生，宁蜷伏堕落而恶进取，故性解之出，亦必竭全力死之。柏拉图建神思之邦，谓诗人乱治，当放域外；虽国之美污，意之高下有不同，而术实出于一。盖诗人者，撄人心者也。凡人之心，无不有诗，如诗人作诗，诗不为诗人独有，凡一读其诗，心即会解者，即无不自有诗人之诗。无之何以能解？惟有而未能言，诗人为之语，则握拨一弹，心弦立应，其声澈于灵府，令有情皆举其首，如睹晓日，益为之美伟强力高尚发扬，而污浊之平和，以之将破。平和之破，人道蒸也。虽然，上极天帝，下至舆台，则不能不因此变其前时之生活；协力而夭阏之，思永保其故态，殆亦人情已。故态永存，是曰古国。惟诗究不可灭尽，则又设范以囚之。如中国之诗，舜云言志；而后贤立说，乃云持人性情，三百之旨，无邪所蔽。夫既言志矣，何持之云？强以无邪，即非人志。许自繇于鞭策羁縻之下，殆此事乎？然厥后文章，乃果辗转不逾此界。其颂祝主人，悦媚豪右之作，可无俟言。即或心应虫鸟，情感林泉，发为韵语，亦多拘于无形之囹圄，不能舒两间之真美；否则悲慨世事，感怀前贤，可有可无之作，聊行于世。倘其嗫嚅之中，偶涉眷爱，而儒服之士，即交口非之。况言之至反常俗者乎？惟灵均将逝，脑海波起，通于汨罗，返顾高丘，哀其无女，则抽写哀怨，郁为奇文。茫洋在前，顾忌皆去，怼世俗之浑浊，颂己身之修能，怀疑自遂古之初，直至百物之琐末，放言无惮，为前人所不敢言。然中亦多芳菲凄恻之音，而反抗挑战，则终其篇未能见，感动后世，为力非强。刘彦和所谓才高者菀其鸿裁，中巧者猎其艳辞，吟讽者衔其山川，童蒙者拾其香草。皆著意外形，不涉内质，孤伟自死，社会依然，四语之中，函深哀焉。故伟美之声，不震吾人之耳鼓者，亦不始于今日。大都诗人自倡，生民不耽。试稽自有文字以至今日，凡诗宗词客，能宣彼妙音，传其灵觉，以美善吾人之性情，崇大吾人之思理者，果几何人？上下求索，几无有矣。第此亦不能为彼徒罪也，人人之心，无不泐二大字曰实利，不获则劳，既获便睡。纵有激响，何能撄之？夫心不受撄，非槁死则缩朒耳，而况实利之念，复热于中，且其为利，又至陋劣不足道，则驯至卑懦俭啬，退让畏葸，无古民之朴野，有末世之浇漓，又必然之势矣，此亦古哲人所不及料也。夫云将以诗移人性情，使即于诚善美伟强力敢为之域，闻者或哂其迂远乎；而事复无形，效不显于顷刻。使举一密栗之反证，殆莫如古国之见灭于外仇矣。凡如是者，盖不止笞击縻系，易于毛角而已，且无有为沉痛著大之声，撄其后人，使之兴起；即间有之，受者亦不为之动，创痛少去，即复营营于治生，活身是图，不恤污下，外仇又至，摧败继之。故不争之民，其遭遇战事，常较好争之民多，而畏死之民，其苓落殇亡，亦视强项敢死之民众。
中国之治，理想在不撄，而意异于前说。 有人撄人，或有人得撄者，为帝大禁，其意在保位，使子孙王千万世，无有底止，故性解（Genius）之出，必竭全力死之；有人撄我，或有能撄人者，为民大禁，其意在安生，宁蜷伏堕落而恶进取，故性解之出，亦必竭全力死之。 柏拉图建神思之邦，谓诗人乱治，当放域外；虽国之美污，意之高下有不同，而术实出于一。 盖诗人者，撄人心者也。 凡人之心，无不有诗，如诗人作诗，诗不为诗人独有，凡一读其诗，心即会解者，即无不自有诗人之诗。 无之何以能解？惟有而未能言，诗人为之语，则握拨一弹，心弦立应，其声澈于灵府，令有情皆举其首，如睹晓日，益为之美伟强力高尚发扬，而污浊之平和，以之将破。 平和之破，人道蒸也。 虽然，上极天帝，下至舆台，则不能不因此变其前时之生活；协力而夭阏之，思永保其故态，殆亦人情已。 故态永存，是曰古国。 惟诗究不可灭尽，则又设范以囚之。 如中国之诗，舜云言志；而后贤立说，乃云持人性情，三百之旨，无邪所蔽。 夫既言志矣，何持之云？强以无邪，即非人志。 许自繇于鞭策羁縻之下，殆此事乎？然厥后文章，乃果辗转不逾此界。 其颂祝主人，悦媚豪右之作，可无俟言。 即或心应虫鸟，情感林泉，发为韵语，亦多拘于无形之囹圄，不能舒两间之真美；否则悲慨世事，感怀前贤，可有可无之作，聊行于世。 倘其嗫嚅之中，偶涉眷爱，而儒服之士，即交口非之。 况言之至反常俗者乎？惟灵均将逝，脑海波起，通于汨罗，返顾高丘，哀其无女，则抽写哀怨，郁为奇文。 茫洋在前，顾忌皆去，怼世俗之浑浊，颂己身之修能，怀疑自遂古之初，直至百物之琐末，放言无惮，为前人所不敢言。 然中亦多芳菲凄恻之音，而反抗挑战，则终其篇未能见，感动后世，为力非强。 刘彦和所谓才高者菀其鸿裁，中巧者猎其艳辞，吟讽者衔其山川，童蒙者拾其香草。 皆著意外形，不涉内质，孤伟自死，社会依然，四语之中，函深哀焉。 故伟美之声，不震吾人之耳鼓者，亦不始于今日。 大都诗人自倡，生民不耽。 试稽自有文字以至今日，凡诗宗词客，能宣彼妙音，传其灵觉，以美善吾人之性情，崇大吾人之思理者，果几何人？上下求索，几无有矣。 第此亦不能为彼徒罪也，人人之心，无不泐二大字曰实利，不获则劳，既获便睡。 纵有激响，何能撄之？夫心不受撄，非槁死则缩朒耳，而况实利之念，复热于中，且其为利，又至陋劣不足道，则驯至卑懦俭啬，退让畏葸，无古民之朴野，有末世之浇漓，又必然之势矣，此亦古哲人所不及料也。 夫云将以诗移人性情，使即于诚善美伟强力敢为之域，闻者或哂其迂远乎；而事复无形，效不显于顷刻。 使举一密栗之反证，殆莫如古国之见灭于外仇矣。 凡如是者，盖不止笞击縻系，易于毛角而已，且无有为沉痛著大之声，撄其后人，使之兴起；即间有之，受者亦不为之动，创痛少去，即复营营于治生，活身是图，不恤污下，外仇又至，摧败继之。 故不争之民，其遭遇战事，常较好争之民多，而畏死之民，其苓落殇亡，亦视强项敢死之民众。千八百有六年八月，拿坡仑大挫普鲁士军，翌年七月，普鲁士乞和，为从属之国。然其时德之民族，虽遭败亡窘辱，而古之精神光耀，固尚保有而未隳。于是有爱伦德（E. M. Arndt）者出，著《时代精神篇》（Geist der Zeit），以伟大壮丽之笔，宣独立自繇之音，国人得之，敌忾之心大炽；已而为敌觉察，探索极严，乃走瑞士。递千八百十二年，拿坡仑挫于墨斯科之酷寒大火，逃归巴黎，欧土遂为云扰，竞举其反抗之兵。翌年，普鲁士帝威廉三世乃下令召国民成军，宣言为三事战，曰自由正义祖国；英年之学生诗人美术家争赴之。爱伦德亦归，著《国民军者何》暨《莱因为德国大川特非其界》二篇，以鼓青年之意气。而义勇军中，时亦有人曰台陀开纳（Theodor Körner），慨然投笔，辞维也纳国立剧场诗人之职，别其父母爱者，遂执兵行；作书贻父母曰，普鲁士之鹫，已以鸷击诚心，觉德意志民族之大望矣。吾之吟咏，无不为宗邦神往。吾将舍所有福祉欢欣，为宗国战死。嗟夫，吾以明神之力，已得大悟。为邦人之自由与人道之善故，牺牲孰大于是？热力无量，涌吾灵台，吾起矣！后此之《竖琴长剑》（Leier und Schwert）一集，亦无不以是精神，凝为高响，展卷方诵，血脉已张。然时之怀热诚灵悟如斯状者，盖非止开纳一人也，举德国青年，无不如是。开纳之声，即全德人之声，开纳之血，亦即全德人之血耳。故推而论之，败拿坡仑者，不为国家，不为皇帝，不为兵刃，国民而已。国民皆诗，亦皆诗人之具，而德卒以不亡。此岂笃守功利，摈斥诗歌，或抱异域之朽兵败甲，冀自卫其衣食室家者，意料之所能至哉？然此亦仅譬诗力于米盐，聊以震崇实之士，使知黄金黑铁，断不足以兴国家，德法二国之外形，亦非吾邦所可活剥；示其内质，冀略有所悟解而已。此篇本意，固不在是也。
千八百有六年八月，拿坡仑大挫普鲁士军，翌年七月，普鲁士乞和，为从属之国。 然其时德之民族，虽遭败亡窘辱，而古之精神光耀，固尚保有而未隳。 于是有爱伦德（E. M. Arndt）者出，著《时代精神篇》（Geist der Zeit），以伟大壮丽之笔，宣独立自繇之音，国人得之，敌忾之心大炽；已而为敌觉察，探索极严，乃走瑞士。 递千八百十二年，拿坡仑挫于墨斯科之酷寒大火，逃归巴黎，欧土遂为云扰，竞举其反抗之兵。 翌年，普鲁士帝威廉三世乃下令召国民成军，宣言为三事战，曰自由正义祖国；英年之学生诗人美术家争赴之。 爱伦德亦归，著《国民军者何》暨《莱因为德国大川特非其界》二篇，以鼓青年之意气。 而义勇军中，时亦有人曰台陀开纳（Theodor Körner），慨然投笔，辞维也纳国立剧场诗人之职，别其父母爱者，遂执兵行；作书贻父母曰，普鲁士之鹫，已以鸷击诚心，觉德意志民族之大望矣。 吾之吟咏，无不为宗邦神往。 吾将舍所有福祉欢欣，为宗国战死。 嗟夫，吾以明神之力，已得大悟。 为邦人之自由与人道之善故，牺牲孰大于是？热力无量，涌吾灵台，吾起矣！后此之《竖琴长剑》（Leier und Schwert）一集，亦无不以是精神，凝为高响，展卷方诵，血脉已张。 然时之怀热诚灵悟如斯状者，盖非止开纳一人也，举德国青年，无不如是。 开纳之声，即全德人之声，开纳之血，亦即全德人之血耳。 故推而论之，败拿坡仑者，不为国家，不为皇帝，不为兵刃，国民而已。 国民皆诗，亦皆诗人之具，而德卒以不亡。 此岂笃守功利，摈斥诗歌，或抱异域之朽兵败甲，冀自卫其衣食室家者，意料之所能至哉？然此亦仅譬诗力于米盐，聊以震崇实之士，使知黄金黑铁，断不足以兴国家，德法二国之外形，亦非吾邦所可活剥；示其内质，冀略有所悟解而已。 此篇本意，固不在是也。

摩罗诗力说

三

摩罗诗力说

Three由纯文学上言之，则以一切美术之本质，皆在使观听之人，为之兴感怡悦。文章为美术之一，质当亦然，与个人暨邦国之存，无所系属，实利离尽，究理弗存。故其为效，益智不如史乘，诫人不如格言，致富不如工商，弋功名不如卒业之券。特世有文章，而人乃以几于具足。英人道覃（E. Dowden）有言曰，美术文章之桀出于世者，观诵而后，似无裨于人间者，往往有之。然吾人乐于观诵，如游巨浸，前临渺茫，浮游波际，游泳既已，神质悉移。而彼之大海，实仅波起涛飞，绝无情愫，未始以一教训一格言相授。顾游者之元气体力，则为之陡增也。故文章之于人生，其为用决不次于衣食，宫室，宗教，道德。盖缘人在两间，必有时自觉以勤勉，有时丧我而惝恍，时必致力于善生，时必并忘其善生之事而入于醇乐，时或活动于现实之区，时或神驰于理想之域；苟致力于其偏，是谓之不具足。严冬永留，春气不至，生其躯壳，死其精魂，其人虽生，而人生之道失。文章不用之用，其在斯乎？约翰穆黎曰，近世文明，无不以科学为术，合理为神，功利为鹄。大势如是，而文章之用益神。所以者何？以能涵养吾人之神思耳。涵养人之神思，即文章之职与用也。
由纯文学上言之，则以一切美术之本质，皆在使观听之人，为之兴感怡悦。 文章为美术之一，质当亦然，与个人暨邦国之存，无所系属，实利离尽，究理弗存。 故其为效，益智不如史乘，诫人不如格言，致富不如工商，弋功名不如卒业之券。 特世有文章，而人乃以几于具足。 英人道覃（E. Dowden）有言曰，美术文章之桀出于世者，观诵而后，似无裨于人间者，往往有之。 然吾人乐于观诵，如游巨浸，前临渺茫，浮游波际，游泳既已，神质悉移。 而彼之大海，实仅波起涛飞，绝无情愫，未始以一教训一格言相授。 顾游者之元气体力，则为之陡增也。 故文章之于人生，其为用决不次于衣食，宫室，宗教，道德。 盖缘人在两间，必有时自觉以勤勉，有时丧我而惝恍，时必致力于善生，时必并忘其善生之事而入于醇乐，时或活动于现实之区，时或神驰于理想之域；苟致力于其偏，是谓之不具足。 严冬永留，春气不至，生其躯壳，死其精魂，其人虽生，而人生之道失。 文章不用之用，其在斯乎？约翰穆黎曰，近世文明，无不以科学为术，合理为神，功利为鹄。 大势如是，而文章之用益神。 所以者何？以能涵养吾人之神思耳。 涵养人之神思，即文章之职与用也。此他丽于文章能事者，犹有特殊之用一。盖世界大文，无不能启人生之机，而直语其事实法则，为科学所不能言者。所谓机，即人生之诚理是已。此为诚理，微妙幽玄，不能假口于学子。如热带人未见冰前，为之语冰，虽喻以物理生理二学，而不知水之能凝，冰之为冷如故；惟直示以冰，使之触之，则虽不言质力二性，而冰之为物，昭然在前，将直解无所疑沮。惟文章亦然，虽缕判条分，理密不如学术，而人生诚理，直笼其辞句中，使闻其声者，灵府朗然，与人生即会。如热带人既见冰后，曩之竭研究思索而弗能喻者，今宛在矣。昔爱诺尔特（M. Arnold）氏以诗为人生评骘，亦正此意。故人若读鄂谟（Homeros）以降大文，则不徒近诗，且自与人生会，历历见其优胜缺陷之所存，更力自就于圆满。此其效力，有教示意；既为教示，斯益人生；而其教复非常教，自觉勇猛发扬精进，彼实示之。凡苓落颓唐之邦，无不以不耳此教示始。
此他丽于文章能事者，犹有特殊之用一。 盖世界大文，无不能启人生之机，而直语其事实法则，为科学所不能言者。 所谓机，即人生之诚理是已。 此为诚理，微妙幽玄，不能假口于学子。 如热带人未见冰前，为之语冰，虽喻以物理生理二学，而不知水之能凝，冰之为冷如故；惟直示以冰，使之触之，则虽不言质力二性，而冰之为物，昭然在前，将直解无所疑沮。 惟文章亦然，虽缕判条分，理密不如学术，而人生诚理，直笼其辞句中，使闻其声者，灵府朗然，与人生即会。 如热带人既见冰后，曩之竭研究思索而弗能喻者，今宛在矣。 昔爱诺尔特（M. Arnold）氏以诗为人生评骘，亦正此意。 故人若读鄂谟（Homeros）以降大文，则不徒近诗，且自与人生会，历历见其优胜缺陷之所存，更力自就于圆满。 此其效力，有教示意；既为教示，斯益人生；而其教复非常教，自觉勇猛发扬精进，彼实示之。 凡苓落颓唐之邦，无不以不耳此教示始。顾有据群学见地以观诗者，其为说复异：要在文章与道德之相关。谓诗有主分，曰观念之诚。其诚奈何？则曰为诗人之思想感情，与人类普遍观念之一致。得诚奈何？则曰在据极溥博之经验。故所据之人群经验愈溥博，则诗之溥博视之。所谓道德，不外人类普遍观念所形成。故诗与道德之相关，缘盖出于造化。诗与道德合，即为观念之诚，生命在是，不朽在是。非如是者，必与群法僢驰。以背群法故，必反人类之普遍观念；以反普遍观念故，必不得观念之诚。观念之诚失，其诗宜亡。故诗之亡也，恒以反道德故。然诗有反道德而竟存者奈何？则曰，暂耳。无邪之说，实与此契。苟中国文事复兴之有日，虑操此说以力削其萌蘖者，尚有徒也。而欧洲评骘之士，亦多抱是说以律文章。十九世纪初，世界动于法国革命之风潮，德意志西班牙意太利希腊皆兴起，往之梦意，一晓而苏；惟英国较无动。顾上下相迕，时有不平，而诗人裴伦，实生此际。其前有司各德（W. Scott）辈，为文率平妥翔实，与旧之宗教道德极相容。迨有裴伦，乃超脱古范，直抒所信，其文章无不函刚健抗拒破坏挑战之声。平和之人，能无惧乎？于是谓之撒但。此言始于苏惹（R. Southey），而众和之；后或扩以称修黎（P. B. Shelley）以下数人，至今不废。苏惹亦诗人，以其言能得当时人群普遍之诚故，获月桂冠，攻裴伦甚力。裴伦亦以恶声报之，谓之诗商。所著有《纳尔逊传》（The Life of Lord Nelson）今最行于世。
顾有据群学见地以观诗者，其为说复异：要在文章与道德之相关。 谓诗有主分，曰观念之诚。 其诚奈何？则曰为诗人之思想感情，与人类普遍观念之一致。 得诚奈何？则曰在据极溥博之经验。 故所据之人群经验愈溥博，则诗之溥博视之。 所谓道德，不外人类普遍观念所形成。 故诗与道德之相关，缘盖出于造化。 诗与道德合，即为观念之诚，生命在是，不朽在是。 非如是者，必与群法僢驰。 以背群法故，必反人类之普遍观念；以反普遍观念故，必不得观念之诚。 观念之诚失，其诗宜亡。 故诗之亡也，恒以反道德故。 然诗有反道德而竟存者奈何？则曰，暂耳。 无邪之说，实与此契。 苟中国文事复兴之有日，虑操此说以力削其萌蘖者，尚有徒也。 而欧洲评骘之士，亦多抱是说以律文章。 十九世纪初，世界动于法国革命之风潮，德意志西班牙意太利希腊皆兴起，往之梦意，一晓而苏；惟英国较无动。 顾上下相迕，时有不平，而诗人裴伦，实生此际。 其前有司各德（W. Scott）辈，为文率平妥翔实，与旧之宗教道德极相容。 迨有裴伦，乃超脱古范，直抒所信，其文章无不函刚健抗拒破坏挑战之声。 平和之人，能无惧乎？于是谓之撒但。 此言始于苏惹（R. Southey），而众和之；后或扩以称修黎（P. B. Shelley）以下数人，至今不废。 苏惹亦诗人，以其言能得当时人群普遍之诚故，获月桂冠，攻裴伦甚力。 裴伦亦以恶声报之，谓之诗商。 所著有《纳尔逊传》（The Life of Lord Nelson）今最行于世。《旧约》记神既以七日造天地，终乃抟埴为男子，名曰亚当，已而病其寂也，复抽其肋为女子，是名夏娃，皆居伊甸。更益以鸟兽卉木；四水出焉。伊甸有树，一曰生命，一曰知识。神禁人勿食其实；魔乃半侂蛇以诱夏娃，使食之，爰得生命知识。神怒，立逐人而诅蛇，蛇腹行而土食；人则既劳其生，又得其死，罚且及于子孙，无不如是。英诗人弥耳敦（J. Milton），尝取其事作《失乐园》（The Paradise Lost），有天神与撒但战事，以喻光明与黑暗之争。撒但为状，复至狞厉。是诗而后，人之恶撒但遂益深。然使震旦人士异其信仰者观之，则亚当之居伊甸，盖不殊于笼禽，不识不知，惟帝是悦，使无天魔之诱，人类将无由生。故世间人，当蔑弗秉有魔血，惠之及人世者，撒但其首矣。然为基督宗徒，则身被此名，正如中国所谓叛道，人群共弃，艰于置身，非强怒善战豁达能思之士，不任受也。亚当夏娃既去乐园，乃举二子，长曰亚伯，次曰凯因。亚伯牧羊，凯因耕植是事，尝出所有以献神。神喜脂膏而恶果实，斥凯因献不视；以是，凯因渐与亚伯争，终杀之。神则诅凯因，使不获地力，流于殊方。裴伦取其事作传奇，于神多所诘难。教徒皆怒，谓为渎圣害俗，张皇灵魂有尽之诗，攻之至力。迄今日评骘之士，亦尚有以是难裴伦者。尔时独穆亚（Th. Moore）及修黎二人，深称其诗之雄美伟大。德诗宗瞿提，亦谓为绝世之文，在英国文章中，此为至上之作；后之劝遏克曼（J. P. Eckermann）治英国语言，盖即冀其直读斯篇云。《约》又记凯因既流，亚当更得一子，历岁永永，人类益繁，于是心所思惟，多涉恶事。主神乃悔，将殄之。有挪亚独善事神，神令致亚斐木为方舟，将眷属动植，各从其类居之。遂作大雨四十昼夜，洪水泛滥，生物灭尽，而挪亚之族独完，水退居地，复生子孙，至今日不绝。吾人记事涉此，当觉神之能悔，为事至奇；而人之恶撒但，其理乃无足诧。盖既为挪亚子孙，自必力斥抗者，敬事主神，战战兢兢，绳其祖武，冀洪水再作之日，更得密诏而自保于方舟耳。抑吾闻生学家言，有云反种一事，为生物中每现异品，肖其远先，如人所牧马，往往出野物，类之不拉（Zebra），盖未驯以前状，复现于今日者。撒但诗人之出，殆亦如是，非异事也。独众马怒其不伏箱，群起而交踶之，斯足悯叹焉耳。
《旧约》记神既以七日造天地，终乃抟埴为男子，名曰亚当，已而病其寂也，复抽其肋为女子，是名夏娃，皆居伊甸。 更益以鸟兽卉木；四水出焉。 伊甸有树，一曰生命，一曰知识。 神禁人勿食其实；魔乃半侂蛇以诱夏娃，使食之，爰得生命知识。 神怒，立逐人而诅蛇，蛇腹行而土食；人则既劳其生，又得其死，罚且及于子孙，无不如是。 英诗人弥耳敦（J. Milton），尝取其事作《失乐园》（The Paradise Lost），有天神与撒但战事，以喻光明与黑暗之争。 撒但为状，复至狞厉。 是诗而后，人之恶撒但遂益深。 然使震旦人士异其信仰者观之，则亚当之居伊甸，盖不殊于笼禽，不识不知，惟帝是悦，使无天魔之诱，人类将无由生。 故世间人，当蔑弗秉有魔血，惠之及人世者，撒但其首矣。 然为基督宗徒，则身被此名，正如中国所谓叛道，人群共弃，艰于置身，非强怒善战豁达能思之士，不任受也。 亚当夏娃既去乐园，乃举二子，长曰亚伯，次曰凯因。 亚伯牧羊，凯因耕植是事，尝出所有以献神。 神喜脂膏而恶果实，斥凯因献不视；以是，凯因渐与亚伯争，终杀之。 神则诅凯因，使不获地力，流于殊方。 裴伦取其事作传奇，于神多所诘难。 教徒皆怒，谓为渎圣害俗，张皇灵魂有尽之诗，攻之至力。 迄今日评骘之士，亦尚有以是难裴伦者。 尔时独穆亚（Th. Moore）及修黎二人，深称其诗之雄美伟大。 德诗宗瞿提，亦谓为绝世之文，在英国文章中，此为至上之作；后之劝遏克曼（J. P. Eckermann）治英国语言，盖即冀其直读斯篇云。 《约》又记凯因既流，亚当更得一子，历岁永永，人类益繁，于是心所思惟，多涉恶事。 主神乃悔，将殄之。 有挪亚独善事神，神令致亚斐木为方舟，将眷属动植，各从其类居之。 遂作大雨四十昼夜，洪水泛滥，生物灭尽，而挪亚之族独完，水退居地，复生子孙，至今日不绝。 吾人记事涉此，当觉神之能悔，为事至奇；而人之恶撒但，其理乃无足诧。 盖既为挪亚子孙，自必力斥抗者，敬事主神，战战兢兢，绳其祖武，冀洪水再作之日，更得密诏而自保于方舟耳。 抑吾闻生学家言，有云反种一事，为生物中每现异品，肖其远先，如人所牧马，往往出野物，类之不拉（Zebra），盖未驯以前状，复现于今日者。 撒但诗人之出，殆亦如是，非异事也。 独众马怒其不伏箱，群起而交踶之，斯足悯叹焉耳。

摩罗诗力说

四

摩罗诗力说

Four裴伦名乔治戈登（George Gordon），系出司堪第那比亚海贼蒲隆（Burun）族。其族后居诺曼，从威廉入英，递显理二世时，始用今字。裴伦以千七百八十八年一月二十二日生于伦敦，十二岁即为诗；长游堪勃力俱大学不成，渐决去英国，作汗漫游，始于波陀牙，东至希腊突厥及小亚细亚，历审其天物之美，民俗之异，成《哈洛尔特游草》（Childe Harold's Pilgrimage）二卷，波谲云诡，世为之惊绝。次作《不信者》（The Giaour）暨《阿毕陀斯新妇行》（The Bride of Abydos）二篇，皆取材于突厥。前者记不信者（对回教而言）通哈山之妻，哈山投其妻于水，不信者逸去，后终归而杀哈山，诣庙自忏；绝望之悲，溢于毫素，读者哀之。次为女子苏黎加爱舍林，而其父将以婚他人，女偕舍林出奔，已而被获，舍林斗死，女亦终尽；其言有反抗之音。迨千八百十四年一月，赋《海贼》（The Corsair）之诗。篇中英雄曰康拉德，于世已无一切眷爱，遗一切道德，惟以强大之意志，为贼渠魁，领其从者，建大邦于海上。孤舟利剑，所向悉如其意。独家有爱妻，他更无有；往虽有神，而康拉德早弃之，神亦已弃康拉德矣。故一剑之力，即其权利，国家之法度，社会之道德，视之蔑如。权力若具，即用行其意志，他人奈何，天帝何命，非所问也。若问定命之何如？则曰，在鞘中，一旦外辉，彗且失色而已。然康拉德为人，初非元恶，内秉高尚纯洁之想，尝欲尽其心力，以致益于人间；比见细人蔽明，谗谄害聪，凡人营营，多猜忌中伤之性，则渐冷淡，则渐坚凝，则渐嫌厌；终乃以受自或人之怨毒，举而报之全群，利剑轻舟，无间人神，所向无不抗战。盖复仇一事，独贯注其全精神矣。一日攻塞特，败而见囚，塞特有妃爱其勇，助之脱狱，泛舟同奔，遇从者于波上，乃大呼曰，此吾舟，此吾血色之旗也，吾运未尽于海上！然归故家，则银暗而爱妻逝矣。既而康拉德亦失去，其徒求之波间海角，踪迹杳然，独有以无量罪恶，系一德义之名，永存于世界而已。裴伦之祖约翰，尝念先人为海王，因投海军为之帅；裴伦赋此，缘起似同；有即以海贼字裴伦者，裴伦闻之窃喜，则篇中康拉德为人，实即此诗人变相，殆无可疑已。越三月，又作赋曰《罗罗》（Lara），记其人尝杀人不异海贼，后图起事，败而伤，飞矢来贯其胸，遂死。所叙自尊之夫，力抗不可避之定命，为状惨烈，莫可比方。此他犹有所制，特非雄篇。其诗格多师司各德，而司各德由是锐意于小说，不复为诗，避裴伦也。已而裴伦去其妇，世虽不知去之之故，然争难之，每临会议，嘲骂即四起，且禁其赴剧场。其友穆亚为之传，评是事曰，世于裴伦，不异其母，忽爱忽恶，无判决也。顾窘戮天才，殆人群恒状，滔滔皆是，宁止英伦。中国汉晋以来，凡负文名者，多受谤毁，刘彦和为之辩曰，人禀五才，修短殊用，自非上哲，难以求备，然将相以位隆特达，文士以职卑多诮，此江河所以腾涌，涓流所以寸析者。东方恶习，尽此数言。然裴伦之祸，则缘起非如前陈，实反由于名盛，社会顽愚，仇敌窥，乘隙立起，众则不察而妄和之；若颂高官而厄寒士者，其污且甚于此矣。顾裴伦由是遂不能居英，自曰，使世之评骘诚，吾在英为无值，若评骘谬，则英于我为无值矣。吾其行乎？然未已也，虽赴异邦，彼且蹑我。已而终去英伦，千八百十六年十月，抵意太利。自此，裴伦之作乃益雄。
裴伦名乔治戈登（George Gordon），系出司堪第那比亚海贼蒲隆（Burun）族。 其族后居诺曼，从威廉入英，递显理二世时，始用今字。 裴伦以千七百八十八年一月二十二日生于伦敦，十二岁即为诗；长游堪勃力俱大学不成，渐决去英国，作汗漫游，始于波陀牙，东至希腊突厥及小亚细亚，历审其天物之美，民俗之异，成《哈洛尔特游草》（Childe Harold's Pilgrimage）二卷，波谲云诡，世为之惊绝。 次作《不信者》（The Giaour）暨《阿毕陀斯新妇行》（The Bride of Abydos）二篇，皆取材于突厥。 前者记不信者（对回教而言）通哈山之妻，哈山投其妻于水，不信者逸去，后终归而杀哈山，诣庙自忏；绝望之悲，溢于毫素，读者哀之。 次为女子苏黎加爱舍林，而其父将以婚他人，女偕舍林出奔，已而被获，舍林斗死，女亦终尽；其言有反抗之音。 迨千八百十四年一月，赋《海贼》（The Corsair）之诗。 篇中英雄曰康拉德，于世已无一切眷爱，遗一切道德，惟以强大之意志，为贼渠魁，领其从者，建大邦于海上。 孤舟利剑，所向悉如其意。 独家有爱妻，他更无有；往虽有神，而康拉德早弃之，神亦已弃康拉德矣。 故一剑之力，即其权利，国家之法度，社会之道德，视之蔑如。 权力若具，即用行其意志，他人奈何，天帝何命，非所问也。 若问定命之何如？则曰，在鞘中，一旦外辉，彗且失色而已。 然康拉德为人，初非元恶，内秉高尚纯洁之想，尝欲尽其心力，以致益于人间；比见细人蔽明，谗谄害聪，凡人营营，多猜忌中伤之性，则渐冷淡，则渐坚凝，则渐嫌厌；终乃以受自或人之怨毒，举而报之全群，利剑轻舟，无间人神，所向无不抗战。 盖复仇一事，独贯注其全精神矣。 一日攻塞特，败而见囚，塞特有妃爱其勇，助之脱狱，泛舟同奔，遇从者于波上，乃大呼曰，此吾舟，此吾血色之旗也，吾运未尽于海上！然归故家，则银暗而爱妻逝矣。 既而康拉德亦失去，其徒求之波间海角，踪迹杳然，独有以无量罪恶，系一德义之名，永存于世界而已。 裴伦之祖约翰，尝念先人为海王，因投海军为之帅；裴伦赋此，缘起似同；有即以海贼字裴伦者，裴伦闻之窃喜，则篇中康拉德为人，实即此诗人变相，殆无可疑已。 越三月，又作赋曰《罗罗》（Lara），记其人尝杀人不异海贼，后图起事，败而伤，飞矢来贯其胸，遂死。 所叙自尊之夫，力抗不可避之定命，为状惨烈，莫可比方。 此他犹有所制，特非雄篇。 其诗格多师司各德，而司各德由是锐意于小说，不复为诗，避裴伦也。 已而裴伦去其妇，世虽不知去之之故，然争难之，每临会议，嘲骂即四起，且禁其赴剧场。 其友穆亚为之传，评是事曰，世于裴伦，不异其母，忽爱忽恶，无判决也。 顾窘戮天才，殆人群恒状，滔滔皆是，宁止英伦。 中国汉晋以来，凡负文名者，多受谤毁，刘彦和为之辩曰，人禀五才，修短殊用，自非上哲，难以求备，然将相以位隆特达，文士以职卑多诮，此江河所以腾涌，涓流所以寸析者。 东方恶习，尽此数言。 然裴伦之祸，则缘起非如前陈，实反由于名盛，社会顽愚，仇敌窥，乘隙立起，众则不察而妄和之；若颂高官而厄寒士者，其污且甚于此矣。 顾裴伦由是遂不能居英，自曰，使世之评骘诚，吾在英为无值，若评骘谬，则英于我为无值矣。 吾其行乎？然未已也，虽赴异邦，彼且蹑我。 已而终去英伦，千八百十六年十月，抵意太利。 自此，裴伦之作乃益雄。裴伦在异域所为文，有《哈洛尔特游草》之续，《堂祥》（Don Juan）之诗，及三传奇称最伟，无不张撒但而抗天帝，言人所不能言。一曰《曼弗列特》（Manfred），记曼以失爱绝欢，陷于巨苦，欲忘弗能，鬼神见形问所欲，曼云欲忘，鬼神告以忘在死，则对曰，死果能令人忘耶？复衷疑而弗信也。后有魅来降曼弗列特，而曼忽以意志制苦，毅然斥之曰，汝曹决不能诱惑灭亡我。（中略）我，自坏者也。行矣，魅众！死之手诚加我矣，然非汝手也。意盖谓己有善恶，则褒贬赏罚，亦悉在己，神天魔龙，无以相凌，况其他乎？曼弗列特意志之强如是，裴伦亦如是。论者或以拟瞿提之传奇《法斯忒》（Faust）云。二曰《凯因》（Cain），典据已见于前分，中有魔曰卢希飞勒，导凯因登太空，为论善恶生死之故，凯因悟，遂师摩罗。比行世，大遭教徒攻击，则作《天地》（Heaven and Earth）以报之，英雄为耶彼第，博爱而厌世，亦以诘难教宗，鸣其非理者。夫撒但何由昉乎？以彼教言，则亦天使之大者，徒以陡起大望，生背神心，败而堕狱，是云魔鬼。由是言之，则魔亦神所手创者矣。已而潜入乐园，至善美安乐之伊甸，以一言而立毁，非具大能力，曷克至是？伊甸，神所保也，而魔毁之，神安得云全能？况自创恶物，又从而惩之，且更瓜蔓以惩人，其慈又安在？故凯因曰，神为不幸之因。神亦自不幸，手造破灭之不幸者，何幸福之可言？而吾父曰，神全能也。问之曰，神善，何复恶邪？则曰，恶者，就善之道尔。神之为善，诚如其言：先以冻馁，乃与之衣食；先以疠疫，乃施之救援；手造罪人，而曰吾赦汝矣。人则曰，神可颂哉，神可颂哉！营营而建伽兰焉。卢希飞勒不然，曰吾誓之两间，吾实有胜我之强者，而无有加于我之上位。彼胜我故，名我曰恶，若我致胜，恶且在神，善恶易位耳。此其论善恶，正异尼佉。尼佉意谓强胜弱故，弱者乃字其所为曰恶，故恶实强之代名；此则以恶为弱之冤谥。故尼佉欲自强，而并颂强者；此则亦欲自强，而力抗强者，好恶至不同，特图强则一而已。人谓神强，因亦至善。顾善者乃不喜华果，特嗜腥膻，凯因之献，纯洁无似，则以旋风振而落之。人类之始，实由主神，一拂其心，即发洪水，并无罪之禽虫卉木而殄之。人则曰，爰灭罪恶，神可颂哉！耶彼第乃曰，汝得救孺子众！汝以为脱身狂涛，获天幸欤？汝曹偷生，逞其食色，目击世界之亡，而不生其悯叹；复无勇力，敢当大波，与同胞之人，共其运命；偕厥考逃于方舟，而建都邑于世界之墓上，竟无惭耶？然人竟无惭也，方伏地赞颂，无有休止，以是之故，主神遂强。使众生去而不之理，更何威力之能有？人既授神以力，复假之以厄撒但；而此种人，又即主神往所殄灭之同类。以撒但之意观之，其为顽愚陋劣，如何可言？将晓之欤，则音声未宣，众已疾走，内容何若，不省察也。将任之欤，则非撒但之心矣，故复以权力现于世。神，一权力也；撒但，亦一权力也。惟撒但之力，即生于神，神力若亡，不为之代；上则以力抗天帝，下则以力制众生，行之背驰，莫甚于此。顾其制众生也，即以抗故。倘其众生同抗，更何制之云？裴伦亦然，自必居人前，而怒人之后于众。盖非自居人前，不能使人勿后于众故；任人居后而自为之前，又为撒但大耻故。故既揄扬威力，颂美强者矣，复曰，吾爱亚美利加，此自由之区，神之绿野，不被压制之地也。由是观之，裴伦既喜拿坡仑之毁世界，亦爱华盛顿之争自由，既心仪海贼之横行，亦孤援希腊之独立，压制反抗，兼以一人矣。虽然，自由在是，人道亦在是。
裴伦在异域所为文，有《哈洛尔特游草》之续，《堂祥》（Don Juan）之诗，及三传奇称最伟，无不张撒但而抗天帝，言人所不能言。 一曰《曼弗列特》（Manfred），记曼以失爱绝欢，陷于巨苦，欲忘弗能，鬼神见形问所欲，曼云欲忘，鬼神告以忘在死，则对曰，死果能令人忘耶？复衷疑而弗信也。 后有魅来降曼弗列特，而曼忽以意志制苦，毅然斥之曰，汝曹决不能诱惑灭亡我。 （中略）我，自坏者也。 行矣，魅众！死之手诚加我矣，然非汝手也。 意盖谓己有善恶，则褒贬赏罚，亦悉在己，神天魔龙，无以相凌，况其他乎？曼弗列特意志之强如是，裴伦亦如是。 论者或以拟瞿提之传奇《法斯忒》（Faust）云。 二曰《凯因》（Cain），典据已见于前分，中有魔曰卢希飞勒，导凯因登太空，为论善恶生死之故，凯因悟，遂师摩罗。 比行世，大遭教徒攻击，则作《天地》（Heaven and Earth）以报之，英雄为耶彼第，博爱而厌世，亦以诘难教宗，鸣其非理者。 夫撒但何由昉乎？以彼教言，则亦天使之大者，徒以陡起大望，生背神心，败而堕狱，是云魔鬼。 由是言之，则魔亦神所手创者矣。 已而潜入乐园，至善美安乐之伊甸，以一言而立毁，非具大能力，曷克至是？伊甸，神所保也，而魔毁之，神安得云全能？况自创恶物，又从而惩之，且更瓜蔓以惩人，其慈又安在？故凯因曰，神为不幸之因。 神亦自不幸，手造破灭之不幸者，何幸福之可言？而吾父曰，神全能也。 问之曰，神善，何复恶邪？则曰，恶者，就善之道尔。 神之为善，诚如其言：先以冻馁，乃与之衣食；先以疠疫，乃施之救援；手造罪人，而曰吾赦汝矣。 人则曰，神可颂哉，神可颂哉！营营而建伽兰焉。 卢希飞勒不然，曰吾誓之两间，吾实有胜我之强者，而无有加于我之上位。 彼胜我故，名我曰恶，若我致胜，恶且在神，善恶易位耳。 此其论善恶，正异尼佉。 尼佉意谓强胜弱故，弱者乃字其所为曰恶，故恶实强之代名；此则以恶为弱之冤谥。 故尼佉欲自强，而并颂强者；此则亦欲自强，而力抗强者，好恶至不同，特图强则一而已。 人谓神强，因亦至善。 顾善者乃不喜华果，特嗜腥膻，凯因之献，纯洁无似，则以旋风振而落之。 人类之始，实由主神，一拂其心，即发洪水，并无罪之禽虫卉木而殄之。 人则曰，爰灭罪恶，神可颂哉！耶彼第乃曰，汝得救孺子众！汝以为脱身狂涛，获天幸欤？汝曹偷生，逞其食色，目击世界之亡，而不生其悯叹；复无勇力，敢当大波，与同胞之人，共其运命；偕厥考逃于方舟，而建都邑于世界之墓上，竟无惭耶？然人竟无惭也，方伏地赞颂，无有休止，以是之故，主神遂强。 使众生去而不之理，更何威力之能有？人既授神以力，复假之以厄撒但；而此种人，又即主神往所殄灭之同类。 以撒但之意观之，其为顽愚陋劣，如何可言？将晓之欤，则音声未宣，众已疾走，内容何若，不省察也。 将任之欤，则非撒但之心矣，故复以权力现于世。 神，一权力也；撒但，亦一权力也。 惟撒但之力，即生于神，神力若亡，不为之代；上则以力抗天帝，下则以力制众生，行之背驰，莫甚于此。 顾其制众生也，即以抗故。 倘其众生同抗，更何制之云？裴伦亦然，自必居人前，而怒人之后于众。 盖非自居人前，不能使人勿后于众故；任人居后而自为之前，又为撒但大耻故。 故既揄扬威力，颂美强者矣，复曰，吾爱亚美利加，此自由之区，神之绿野，不被压制之地也。 由是观之，裴伦既喜拿坡仑之毁世界，亦爱华盛顿之争自由，既心仪海贼之横行，亦孤援希腊之独立，压制反抗，兼以一人矣。 虽然，自由在是，人道亦在是。

摩罗诗力说

五

摩罗诗力说

Five自尊至者，不平恒继之，忿世嫉俗，发为巨震，与对之徒争衡。盖人既独尊，自无退让，自无调和，意力所如，非达不已，乃以是渐与社会生冲突，乃以是渐有所厌倦于人间。若裴伦者，即其一矣。其言曰，硗确之区，吾侪奚获耶？（中略）凡有事物，无不定以习俗至谬之衡，所谓舆论，实具大力，而舆论则以昏黑蔽全球也。此其所言，与近世诺威文人伊孛生（H. Ibsen）所见合，伊氏生于近世，愤世俗之昏迷，悲真理之匿耀，假《社会之敌》以立言，使医士斯托克曼为全书主者，死守真理，以拒庸愚，终获群敌之谥。自既见放于地主，其子复受斥于学校，而终奋斗，不为之摇。末乃曰，吾又见真理矣。地球上至强之人，至独立者也！其处世之道如是。顾裴伦不尽然，凡所描绘，皆禀种种思，具种种行，或以不平而厌世，远离人群，宁与天地为侪偶，如哈洛尔特；或厌世至极，乃希灭亡，如曼弗列特；或被人天之楚毒，至于刻骨，乃咸希破坏，以复仇雠，如康拉德与卢希飞勒；或弃斥德义，蹇视淫游，以嘲弄社会，聊快其意，如堂祥。其非然者，则尊侠尚义，扶弱者而平不平，颠仆有力之蠢愚，虽获罪于全群无惧，即裴伦最后之时是已。彼当前时，经历一如上述书中众士，特未欷歔断望，愿自逖于人间，如曼弗列特之所为而已。故怀抱不平，突突上发，则倨傲纵逸，不恤人言，破坏复仇，无所顾忌，而义侠之性，亦即伏此烈火之中，重独立而爱自繇，苟奴隶立其前，必衷悲而疾视，衷悲所以哀其不幸，疾视所以怒其不争，此诗人所为援希腊之独立，而终死于其军中者也。盖裴伦者，自繇主义之人耳，尝有言曰，若为自由故，不必战于宗邦，则当为战于他国。是时意太利适制于墺，失其自由，有秘密政党起，谋独立，乃密与其事，以扩张自由之元气者自任，虽狙击密侦之徒，环绕其侧，终不为废游步驰马之事。后秘密政党破于墺人，企望悉已，而精神终不消。裴伦之所督励，力直及于后日，起马志尼，起加富尔，于是意之独立成。故马志尼曰，意太利实大有赖于裴伦。彼，起吾国者也！盖诚言已。裴伦平时，又至有情愫于希腊，思想所趣，如磁指南。特希腊时自由悉丧，入突厥版图，受其羁縻，不敢抗拒。诗人惋惜悲愤，往往见于篇章，怀前古之光荣，哀后人之零落，或与斥责，或加激励，思使之攘突厥而复兴，更睹往日耀灿庄严之希腊，如所作《不信者》暨《堂祥》二诗中，其怨愤谯责之切，与希冀之诚，无不历然可征信也。比千八百二十三年，伦敦之希腊协会驰书托裴伦，请援希腊之独立。裴伦平日，至不满于希腊今人，尝称之曰世袭之奴，曰自由苗裔之奴，因不即应；顾以义愤故，则终诺之，遂行。而希腊人民之堕落，乃诚如其说，励之再振，为业至难，因羁滞于克茀洛尼亚岛者五月，始向密淑伦其。其时海陆军方奇困，闻裴伦至，狂喜，群集迓之，如得天使也。次年一月，独立政府任以总督，并授军事及民事之全权，而希腊是时，财政大匮，兵无宿粮，大势几去。加以式列阿忒佣兵见裴伦宽大，复多所要索，稍不满，辄欲背去；希腊堕落之民，又诱之使窘裴伦。裴伦大愤，极诋彼国民性之陋劣；前所谓世袭之奴，乃果不可猝救如是也。而裴伦志尚不灰，自立革命之中枢，当四围之艰险，将士内讧，则为之调和，以己为楷模，教之人道，更设法举债，以振其穷，又定印刷之制，且坚堡垒以备战。内争方烈，而突厥果攻密淑伦其，式列阿忒佣兵三百人，复乘乱占要害地。裴伦方病，闻之泰然，力平党派之争，使一心以面敌。特内外迫拶，神质剧劳，久之，疾乃渐革。将死，其从者持楮墨，将录其遗言。裴伦曰否，时已过矣。不之语，已而微呼人名，终乃曰，吾言已毕。从者曰，吾不解公言。裴伦曰，吁，不解乎？呜呼晚矣！状若甚苦。有间，复曰，吾既以吾物暨吾康健，悉付希腊矣。今更付之吾生。他更何有？遂死，时千八百二十四年四月十八日夕六时也。今为反念前时，则裴伦抱大望而来，将以天纵之才，致希腊复归于往时之荣誉，自意振臂一呼，人必将靡然向之。盖以异域之人，犹凭义愤为希腊致力，而彼邦人，纵堕落腐败者日久，然旧泽尚存，人心未死，岂意遂无情愫于故国乎？特至今兹，则前此所图，悉如梦迹，知自由苗裔之奴，乃果不可猝救有如此也。次日，希腊独立政府为举国民丧，市肆悉罢，炮台鸣炮三十七，如裴伦寿也。
自尊至者，不平恒继之，忿世嫉俗，发为巨震，与对之徒争衡。 盖人既独尊，自无退让，自无调和，意力所如，非达不已，乃以是渐与社会生冲突，乃以是渐有所厌倦于人间。 若裴伦者，即其一矣。 其言曰，硗确之区，吾侪奚获耶？（中略）凡有事物，无不定以习俗至谬之衡，所谓舆论，实具大力，而舆论则以昏黑蔽全球也。 此其所言，与近世诺威文人伊孛生（H. Ibsen）所见合，伊氏生于近世，愤世俗之昏迷，悲真理之匿耀，假《社会之敌》以立言，使医士斯托克曼为全书主者，死守真理，以拒庸愚，终获群敌之谥。 自既见放于地主，其子复受斥于学校，而终奋斗，不为之摇。 末乃曰，吾又见真理矣。 地球上至强之人，至独立者也！其处世之道如是。 顾裴伦不尽然，凡所描绘，皆禀种种思，具种种行，或以不平而厌世，远离人群，宁与天地为侪偶，如哈洛尔特；或厌世至极，乃希灭亡，如曼弗列特；或被人天之楚毒，至于刻骨，乃咸希破坏，以复仇雠，如康拉德与卢希飞勒；或弃斥德义，蹇视淫游，以嘲弄社会，聊快其意，如堂祥。 其非然者，则尊侠尚义，扶弱者而平不平，颠仆有力之蠢愚，虽获罪于全群无惧，即裴伦最后之时是已。 彼当前时，经历一如上述书中众士，特未欷歔断望，愿自逖于人间，如曼弗列特之所为而已。 故怀抱不平，突突上发，则倨傲纵逸，不恤人言，破坏复仇，无所顾忌，而义侠之性，亦即伏此烈火之中，重独立而爱自繇，苟奴隶立其前，必衷悲而疾视，衷悲所以哀其不幸，疾视所以怒其不争，此诗人所为援希腊之独立，而终死于其军中者也。 盖裴伦者，自繇主义之人耳，尝有言曰，若为自由故，不必战于宗邦，则当为战于他国。 是时意太利适制于墺，失其自由，有秘密政党起，谋独立，乃密与其事，以扩张自由之元气者自任，虽狙击密侦之徒，环绕其侧，终不为废游步驰马之事。 后秘密政党破于墺人，企望悉已，而精神终不消。 裴伦之所督励，力直及于后日，起马志尼，起加富尔，于是意之独立成。 故马志尼曰，意太利实大有赖于裴伦。 彼，起吾国者也！盖诚言已。 裴伦平时，又至有情愫于希腊，思想所趣，如磁指南。 特希腊时自由悉丧，入突厥版图，受其羁縻，不敢抗拒。 诗人惋惜悲愤，往往见于篇章，怀前古之光荣，哀后人之零落，或与斥责，或加激励，思使之攘突厥而复兴，更睹往日耀灿庄严之希腊，如所作《不信者》暨《堂祥》二诗中，其怨愤谯责之切，与希冀之诚，无不历然可征信也。 比千八百二十三年，伦敦之希腊协会驰书托裴伦，请援希腊之独立。 裴伦平日，至不满于希腊今人，尝称之曰世袭之奴，曰自由苗裔之奴，因不即应；顾以义愤故，则终诺之，遂行。 而希腊人民之堕落，乃诚如其说，励之再振，为业至难，因羁滞于克茀洛尼亚岛者五月，始向密淑伦其。 其时海陆军方奇困，闻裴伦至，狂喜，群集迓之，如得天使也。 次年一月，独立政府任以总督，并授军事及民事之全权，而希腊是时，财政大匮，兵无宿粮，大势几去。 加以式列阿忒佣兵见裴伦宽大，复多所要索，稍不满，辄欲背去；希腊堕落之民，又诱之使窘裴伦。 裴伦大愤，极诋彼国民性之陋劣；前所谓世袭之奴，乃果不可猝救如是也。 而裴伦志尚不灰，自立革命之中枢，当四围之艰险，将士内讧，则为之调和，以己为楷模，教之人道，更设法举债，以振其穷，又定印刷之制，且坚堡垒以备战。 内争方烈，而突厥果攻密淑伦其，式列阿忒佣兵三百人，复乘乱占要害地。 裴伦方病，闻之泰然，力平党派之争，使一心以面敌。 特内外迫拶，神质剧劳，久之，疾乃渐革。 将死，其从者持楮墨，将录其遗言。 裴伦曰否，时已过矣。 不之语，已而微呼人名，终乃曰，吾言已毕。 从者曰，吾不解公言。 裴伦曰，吁，不解乎？呜呼晚矣！状若甚苦。 有间，复曰，吾既以吾物暨吾康健，悉付希腊矣。 今更付之吾生。 他更何有？遂死，时千八百二十四年四月十八日夕六时也。 今为反念前时，则裴伦抱大望而来，将以天纵之才，致希腊复归于往时之荣誉，自意振臂一呼，人必将靡然向之。 盖以异域之人，犹凭义愤为希腊致力，而彼邦人，纵堕落腐败者日久，然旧泽尚存，人心未死，岂意遂无情愫于故国乎？特至今兹，则前此所图，悉如梦迹，知自由苗裔之奴，乃果不可猝救有如此也。 次日，希腊独立政府为举国民丧，市肆悉罢，炮台鸣炮三十七，如裴伦寿也。吾今为案其为作思惟，索诗人一生之内，则所遇常抗，所向必动，贵力而尚强，尊己而好战，其战复不如野兽，为独立自由人道也，此已略言之前分矣。故其平生，如狂涛如厉风，举一切伪饰陋习，悉与荡涤，瞻顾前后，素所不知；精神郁勃，莫可制抑，力战而毙，亦必自救其精神；不克厥敌，战则不止。而复率真行诚，无所讳掩，谓世之毁誉褒贬是非善恶，皆缘习俗而非诚，因悉措而不理也。盖英伦尔时，虚伪满于社会，以虚文缛礼为真道德，有秉自由思想而探究者，世辄谓之恶人。裴伦善抗，性又率真，夫自不可以默矣，故托凯因而言曰，恶魔者，说真理者也。遂不恤与人群敌。世之贵道德者，又即以此交非之。遏克曼亦尝问瞿提以裴伦之文，有无教训。瞿提对曰，裴伦之刚毅雄大，教训即函其中；苟能知之，斯获教训。若夫纯洁之云，道德之云，吾人何问焉。盖知伟人者，亦惟伟人焉而已。裴伦亦尝评朋思（R. Burns）曰，斯人也，心情反张，柔而刚，疏而密，精神而质，高尚而卑，有神圣者焉，有不净者焉，互和合也。裴伦亦然，自尊而怜人之为奴，制人而援人之独立，无惧于狂涛而大儆于乘马，好战崇力，遇敌无所宽假，而于累囚之苦，有同情焉。意者摩罗为性，有如此乎？且此亦不独摩罗为然，凡为伟人，大率如是。即一切人，若去其面具，诚心以思，有纯禀世所谓善性而无恶分者，果几何人？遍观众生，必几无有，则裴伦虽负摩罗之号，亦人而已，夫何诧焉。顾其不容于英伦，终放浪颠沛而死异域者，特面具为之害耳。此即裴伦所反抗破坏，而迄今犹杀真人而未有止者也。嗟夫，虚伪之毒，有如是哉！裴伦平时，其制诗极诚，尝曰，英人评骘，不介我心。若以我诗为愉快，任之而已。吾何能阿其所好为？吾之握管，不为妇孺庸俗，乃以吾全心全情感全意志，与多量之精神而成诗，非欲聆彼辈柔声而作者也。夫如是，故凡一字一辞，无不即其人呼吸精神之形现，中于人心，神弦立应，其力之曼衍于欧土，例不能别求之英诗人中；仅司各德所为说部，差足与相伦比而已。若问其力奈何？则意太利希腊二国，已如上述，可毋赘言。此他西班牙德意志诸邦，亦悉蒙其影响。次复入斯拉夫族而新其精神，流泽之长，莫可阐述。至其本国，则犹有修黎（Percy Bysshe Shelley）一人。契支（John Keats）虽亦蒙摩罗诗人之名，而与裴伦别派，故不述于此。
吾今为案其为作思惟，索诗人一生之内，则所遇常抗，所向必动，贵力而尚强，尊己而好战，其战复不如野兽，为独立自由人道也，此已略言之前分矣。 故其平生，如狂涛如厉风，举一切伪饰陋习，悉与荡涤，瞻顾前后，素所不知；精神郁勃，莫可制抑，力战而毙，亦必自救其精神；不克厥敌，战则不止。 而复率真行诚，无所讳掩，谓世之毁誉褒贬是非善恶，皆缘习俗而非诚，因悉措而不理也。 盖英伦尔时，虚伪满于社会，以虚文缛礼为真道德，有秉自由思想而探究者，世辄谓之恶人。 裴伦善抗，性又率真，夫自不可以默矣，故托凯因而言曰，恶魔者，说真理者也。 遂不恤与人群敌。 世之贵道德者，又即以此交非之。 遏克曼亦尝问瞿提以裴伦之文，有无教训。 瞿提对曰，裴伦之刚毅雄大，教训即函其中；苟能知之，斯获教训。 若夫纯洁之云，道德之云，吾人何问焉。 盖知伟人者，亦惟伟人焉而已。 裴伦亦尝评朋思（R. Burns）曰，斯人也，心情反张，柔而刚，疏而密，精神而质，高尚而卑，有神圣者焉，有不净者焉，互和合也。 裴伦亦然，自尊而怜人之为奴，制人而援人之独立，无惧于狂涛而大儆于乘马，好战崇力，遇敌无所宽假，而于累囚之苦，有同情焉。 意者摩罗为性，有如此乎？且此亦不独摩罗为然，凡为伟人，大率如是。 即一切人，若去其面具，诚心以思，有纯禀世所谓善性而无恶分者，果几何人？遍观众生，必几无有，则裴伦虽负摩罗之号，亦人而已，夫何诧焉。 顾其不容于英伦，终放浪颠沛而死异域者，特面具为之害耳。 此即裴伦所反抗破坏，而迄今犹杀真人而未有止者也。 嗟夫，虚伪之毒，有如是哉！裴伦平时，其制诗极诚，尝曰，英人评骘，不介我心。 若以我诗为愉快，任之而已。 吾何能阿其所好为？吾之握管，不为妇孺庸俗，乃以吾全心全情感全意志，与多量之精神而成诗，非欲聆彼辈柔声而作者也。 夫如是，故凡一字一辞，无不即其人呼吸精神之形现，中于人心，神弦立应，其力之曼衍于欧土，例不能别求之英诗人中；仅司各德所为说部，差足与相伦比而已。 若问其力奈何？则意太利希腊二国，已如上述，可毋赘言。 此他西班牙德意志诸邦，亦悉蒙其影响。 次复入斯拉夫族而新其精神，流泽之长，莫可阐述。 至其本国，则犹有修黎（Percy Bysshe Shelley）一人。 契支（John Keats）虽亦蒙摩罗诗人之名，而与裴伦别派，故不述于此。

摩罗诗力说

六

摩罗诗力说

Six修黎生三十年而死，其三十年悉奇迹也，而亦即无韵之诗。时既艰危，性复狷介，世不彼爱，而彼亦不爱世，人不容彼，而彼亦不容人，客意太利之南方，终以壮龄而夭死，谓一生即悲剧之实现，盖非夸也。修黎者，以千七百九十二年生于英之名门，姿状端丽，夙好静思；比入中学，大为学友暨校师所不喜，虐遇不可堪。诗人之心，乃早萌反抗之朕兆；后作说部，以所得值飨其友八人，负狂人之名而去。次入恶斯佛大学，修爱智之学，屡驰书乞教于名人。而尔时宗教，权悉归于冥顽之牧师，因以妨自由之崇信。修黎蹶起，著《无神论之要》一篇，略谓惟慈爱平等三，乃使世界为乐园之要素，若夫宗教，于此无功，无有可也。书成行世，校长见之大震，终逐之；其父亦惊绝，使谢罪返校，而修黎不从，因不能归。天地虽大，故乡已失，于是至伦敦，时年十八，顾已孤立两间，欢爱悉绝，不得不与社会战矣。已而知戈德文（W. Godwin），读其著述，博爱之精神益张。次年入爱尔兰，檄其人士，于政治宗教，皆欲有所更革，顾终不成。逮千八百十五年，其诗《阿剌斯多》（Alastor）始出世，记怀抱神思之人，索求美者，遍历不见，终死旷原，如自叙也。次年乃识裴伦于瑞士；裴伦深称其人，谓奋迅如狮子，又善其诗，而世犹无顾之者。又次年成《伊式阑转轮篇》（The Revolt of Islam）。凡修黎怀抱，多抒于此。篇中英雄曰罗昂，以热诚雄辩，警其国民，鼓吹自由，掊击压制，顾正义终败，而压制于以凯还，罗昂遂为正义死。是诗所函，有无量希望信仰，暨无穷之爱，穷追不舍，终以殒亡。盖罗昂者，实诗人之先觉，亦即修黎之化身也。
修黎生三十年而死，其三十年悉奇迹也，而亦即无韵之诗。 时既艰危，性复狷介，世不彼爱，而彼亦不爱世，人不容彼，而彼亦不容人，客意太利之南方，终以壮龄而夭死，谓一生即悲剧之实现，盖非夸也。 修黎者，以千七百九十二年生于英之名门，姿状端丽，夙好静思；比入中学，大为学友暨校师所不喜，虐遇不可堪。 诗人之心，乃早萌反抗之朕兆；后作说部，以所得值飨其友八人，负狂人之名而去。 次入恶斯佛大学，修爱智之学，屡驰书乞教于名人。 而尔时宗教，权悉归于冥顽之牧师，因以妨自由之崇信。 修黎蹶起，著《无神论之要》一篇，略谓惟慈爱平等三，乃使世界为乐园之要素，若夫宗教，于此无功，无有可也。 书成行世，校长见之大震，终逐之；其父亦惊绝，使谢罪返校，而修黎不从，因不能归。 天地虽大，故乡已失，于是至伦敦，时年十八，顾已孤立两间，欢爱悉绝，不得不与社会战矣。 已而知戈德文（W. Godwin），读其著述，博爱之精神益张。 次年入爱尔兰，檄其人士，于政治宗教，皆欲有所更革，顾终不成。 逮千八百十五年，其诗《阿剌斯多》（Alastor）始出世，记怀抱神思之人，索求美者，遍历不见，终死旷原，如自叙也。 次年乃识裴伦于瑞士；裴伦深称其人，谓奋迅如狮子，又善其诗，而世犹无顾之者。 又次年成《伊式阑转轮篇》（The Revolt of Islam）。 凡修黎怀抱，多抒于此。 篇中英雄曰罗昂，以热诚雄辩，警其国民，鼓吹自由，掊击压制，顾正义终败，而压制于以凯还，罗昂遂为正义死。 是诗所函，有无量希望信仰，暨无穷之爱，穷追不舍，终以殒亡。 盖罗昂者，实诗人之先觉，亦即修黎之化身也。至其杰作，尤在剧诗；尤伟者二，一曰《解放之普洛美迢斯》（Prometheus Unbound），一曰《煔希》（The Cenci）。前者事本希腊神话，意近裴伦之《凯因》。假普洛美迢为人类之精神，以爱与正义自由故，不恤艰苦，力抗压制主者僦毕多，窃火贻人，受絷于山顶，猛鹫日啄其肉，而终不降。僦毕多为之辟易；普洛美迢乃眷女子珂希亚，获其爱而毕。珂希亚者，理想也。《煔希》之篇，事出意太利，记女子煔希之父，酷虐无道，毒虐无所弗至，煔希终杀之，与其后母兄弟，同戮于市。论者或谓之不伦。顾失常之事，不能绝于人间，即中国《春秋》，修自圣人之手者，类此之事，且数数见，又多直书无所讳，吾人独于修黎所作，乃和众口而难之耶？上述二篇，诗人悉出以全力，尝自言曰，吾诗为众而作，读者将多。又曰，此可登诸剧场者。顾诗成而后，实乃反是，社会以谓不足读，伶人以谓不可为；修黎抗伪俗弊习以成诗，而诗亦即受伪俗弊习之夭阏，此十九稘上叶精神界之战士，所为多抱正义而骈殒者也。虽然，往时去矣，任其自去，若夫修黎之真值，则至今日而大昭。革新之潮，此其巨派，戈德文书出，初启其端，得诗人之声，乃益深入世人之灵府。凡正义自由真理以至博爱希望诸说，无不化而成醇，或为罗昂，或为普洛美迢，或为伊式阑之壮士，现于人前，与旧习对立，更张破坏，无稍假借也。旧习既破，何物斯存，则惟改革之新精神而已。十九世纪机运之新，实赖有此。朋思唱于前，裴伦修黎起其后，掊击排斥，人渐为之仓皇；而仓皇之中，即亟人生之改进。故世之嫉视破坏，加之恶名者，特见一偏而未得其全体者尔。若为案其真状，则光明希望，实伏于中。恶物悉颠，于群何毒？破坏之云，特可发自冥顽牧师之口，而不可出诸全群者也。若其闻之，则破坏为业，斯愈益贵矣！况修黎者，神思之人，求索而无止期，猛进而不退转，浅人之所观察，殊莫可得其渊深。若能真识其人，将见品性之卓，出于云间，热诚勃然，无可沮遏，自趁其神思而奔神思之乡；此其为乡，则爰有美之本体。奥古斯丁曰，吾未有爱而吾欲爱，因抱希冀以求足爱者也。惟修黎亦然，故终出人间而神行，冀自达其所崇信之境；复以妙音，喻一切未觉，使知人类曼衍之大故，暨人生价值之所存，扬同情之精神，而张其上征渴仰之思想，使怀大希以奋进，与时劫同其无穷。世则谓之恶魔，而修黎遂以孤立；群复加以排挤，使不可久留于人间，于是压制凯还，修黎以死，盖宛然阿剌斯多之殒于大漠也。
至其杰作，尤在剧诗；尤伟者二，一曰《解放之普洛美迢斯》（Prometheus Unbound），一曰《煔希》（The Cenci）。 前者事本希腊神话，意近裴伦之《凯因》。 假普洛美迢为人类之精神，以爱与正义自由故，不恤艰苦，力抗压制主者僦毕多，窃火贻人，受絷于山顶，猛鹫日啄其肉，而终不降。 僦毕多为之辟易；普洛美迢乃眷女子珂希亚，获其爱而毕。 珂希亚者，理想也。 《煔希》之篇，事出意太利，记女子煔希之父，酷虐无道，毒虐无所弗至，煔希终杀之，与其后母兄弟，同戮于市。 论者或谓之不伦。 顾失常之事，不能绝于人间，即中国《春秋》，修自圣人之手者，类此之事，且数数见，又多直书无所讳，吾人独于修黎所作，乃和众口而难之耶？上述二篇，诗人悉出以全力，尝自言曰，吾诗为众而作，读者将多。 又曰，此可登诸剧场者。 顾诗成而后，实乃反是，社会以谓不足读，伶人以谓不可为；修黎抗伪俗弊习以成诗，而诗亦即受伪俗弊习之夭阏，此十九稘上叶精神界之战士，所为多抱正义而骈殒者也。 虽然，往时去矣，任其自去，若夫修黎之真值，则至今日而大昭。 革新之潮，此其巨派，戈德文书出，初启其端，得诗人之声，乃益深入世人之灵府。 凡正义自由真理以至博爱希望诸说，无不化而成醇，或为罗昂，或为普洛美迢，或为伊式阑之壮士，现于人前，与旧习对立，更张破坏，无稍假借也。 旧习既破，何物斯存，则惟改革之新精神而已。 十九世纪机运之新，实赖有此。 朋思唱于前，裴伦修黎起其后，掊击排斥，人渐为之仓皇；而仓皇之中，即亟人生之改进。 故世之嫉视破坏，加之恶名者，特见一偏而未得其全体者尔。 若为案其真状，则光明希望，实伏于中。 恶物悉颠，于群何毒？破坏之云，特可发自冥顽牧师之口，而不可出诸全群者也。 若其闻之，则破坏为业，斯愈益贵矣！况修黎者，神思之人，求索而无止期，猛进而不退转，浅人之所观察，殊莫可得其渊深。 若能真识其人，将见品性之卓，出于云间，热诚勃然，无可沮遏，自趁其神思而奔神思之乡；此其为乡，则爰有美之本体。 奥古斯丁曰，吾未有爱而吾欲爱，因抱希冀以求足爱者也。 惟修黎亦然，故终出人间而神行，冀自达其所崇信之境；复以妙音，喻一切未觉，使知人类曼衍之大故，暨人生价值之所存，扬同情之精神，而张其上征渴仰之思想，使怀大希以奋进，与时劫同其无穷。 世则谓之恶魔，而修黎遂以孤立；群复加以排挤，使不可久留于人间，于是压制凯还，修黎以死，盖宛然阿剌斯多之殒于大漠也。虽然，其独慰诗人之心者，则尚有天然在焉。人生不可知，社会不可恃，则对天物之不伪，遂寄之无限之温情。一切人心，孰不如是。特缘受染有异，所感斯殊，故目睛夺于实利，则欲驱天然为之得金资；智力集于科学，则思制天然而见其法则；若至下者，乃自春徂冬，于两间崇高伟大美妙之见象，绝无所感应于心，自堕神智于深渊，寿虽百年，而迄不知光明为何物，又奚解所谓卧天然之怀，作婴儿之笑矣。修黎幼时，素亲天物，尝曰，吾幼即爱山河林壑之幽寂，游戏于断崖绝壁之为危险，吾伴侣也。考其生平，诚如自述。方在稚齿，已盘桓于密林幽谷之中，晨瞻晓日，夕观繁星，俯则瞰大都中人事之盛衰，或思前此压制抗拒之陈迹；而芜城古邑，或破屋中贫人啼饥号寒之状，亦时复历历入其目中。其神思之澡雪，既至异于常人，则旷观天然，自感神，凡万汇之当其前，皆若有情而至可念也。故心弦之动，自与天籁合调，发为抒情之什，品悉至神，莫可方物，非狭斯丕尔暨斯宾塞所作，不有足与相伦比者。比千八百十九年春，修黎定居罗马，次年迁毕撒；裴伦亦至，此他之友多集，为其一生中至乐之时。迨二十二年七月八日，偕其友乘舟泛海，而暴风猝起，益以奔电疾雷，少顷波平，孤舟遂杳。裴伦闻信大震，遣使四出侦之，终得诗人之骸于水裔，乃葬罗马焉。修黎生时，久欲与生死问题以诠解，自曰，未来之事，吾意已满于柏拉图暨培庚之所言，吾心至定，无畏而多望，人居今日之躯壳，能力悉蔽于阴云，惟死亡来解脱其身，则秘密始能阐发。又曰，吾无所知，亦不能证，灵府至奥之思想，不能出以言辞，而此种事，纵吾身亦莫能解尔。嗟乎，死生之事大矣，而理至，置而不解，诗人未能，而解之之术，又独有死而已。故修黎曾泛舟坠海，乃大悦呼曰，今使吾释其秘密矣！然不死。一日浴于海，则伏而不起，友引之出，施救始苏，曰，吾恒欲探井中，人谓诚理伏焉，当我见诚，而君见我死也。然及今日，则修黎真死矣，而人生之，亦以真释，特知之者，亦独修黎已耳。
虽然，其独慰诗人之心者，则尚有天然在焉。 人生不可知，社会不可恃，则对天物之不伪，遂寄之无限之温情。 一切人心，孰不如是。 特缘受染有异，所感斯殊，故目睛夺于实利，则欲驱天然为之得金资；智力集于科学，则思制天然而见其法则；若至下者，乃自春徂冬，于两间崇高伟大美妙之见象，绝无所感应于心，自堕神智于深渊，寿虽百年，而迄不知光明为何物，又奚解所谓卧天然之怀，作婴儿之笑矣。 修黎幼时，素亲天物，尝曰，吾幼即爱山河林壑之幽寂，游戏于断崖绝壁之为危险，吾伴侣也。 考其生平，诚如自述。 方在稚齿，已盘桓于密林幽谷之中，晨瞻晓日，夕观繁星，俯则瞰大都中人事之盛衰，或思前此压制抗拒之陈迹；而芜城古邑，或破屋中贫人啼饥号寒之状，亦时复历历入其目中。 其神思之澡雪，既至异于常人，则旷观天然，自感神，凡万汇之当其前，皆若有情而至可念也。 故心弦之动，自与天籁合调，发为抒情之什，品悉至神，莫可方物，非狭斯丕尔暨斯宾塞所作，不有足与相伦比者。 比千八百十九年春，修黎定居罗马，次年迁毕撒；裴伦亦至，此他之友多集，为其一生中至乐之时。 迨二十二年七月八日，偕其友乘舟泛海，而暴风猝起，益以奔电疾雷，少顷波平，孤舟遂杳。 裴伦闻信大震，遣使四出侦之，终得诗人之骸于水裔，乃葬罗马焉。 修黎生时，久欲与生死问题以诠解，自曰，未来之事，吾意已满于柏拉图暨培庚之所言，吾心至定，无畏而多望，人居今日之躯壳，能力悉蔽于阴云，惟死亡来解脱其身，则秘密始能阐发。 又曰，吾无所知，亦不能证，灵府至奥之思想，不能出以言辞，而此种事，纵吾身亦莫能解尔。 嗟乎，死生之事大矣，而理至，置而不解，诗人未能，而解之之术，又独有死而已。 故修黎曾泛舟坠海，乃大悦呼曰，今使吾释其秘密矣！然不死。 一日浴于海，则伏而不起，友引之出，施救始苏，曰，吾恒欲探井中，人谓诚理伏焉，当我见诚，而君见我死也。 然及今日，则修黎真死矣，而人生之，亦以真释，特知之者，亦独修黎已耳。

摩罗诗力说

七

摩罗诗力说

Seven若夫斯拉夫民族，思想殊异于西欧，而裴伦之诗，亦疾进无所沮核。俄罗斯当十九世纪初叶，文事始新，渐乃独立，日益昭明，今则已有齐驱先觉诸邦之概，令西欧人士，无不惊其美伟矣。顾夷考权舆，实本三士：曰普式庚，曰来尔孟多夫，曰鄂戈理。前二者以诗名世，均受影响于裴伦；惟鄂戈理以描绘社会人生之黑暗著名，与二人异趣，不属于此焉。
若夫斯拉夫民族，思想殊异于西欧，而裴伦之诗，亦疾进无所沮核。 俄罗斯当十九世纪初叶，文事始新，渐乃独立，日益昭明，今则已有齐驱先觉诸邦之概，令西欧人士，无不惊其美伟矣。 顾夷考权舆，实本三士：曰普式庚，曰来尔孟多夫，曰鄂戈理。 前二者以诗名世，均受影响于裴伦；惟鄂戈理以描绘社会人生之黑暗著名，与二人异趣，不属于此焉。普式庚（A. Pushkin）以千七百九十九年生于墨斯科，幼即为诗，初建罗曼宗于其文界，名以大扬。顾其时俄多内讧，时势方亟，而普式庚诗多讽喻，人即借而挤之，将流鲜卑，有数耆宿力为之辩，始获免，谪居南方。其时始读裴伦诗，深感其大，思理文形，悉受转化，小诗亦尝摹裴伦；尤著者有《高加索累囚行》，至与《哈洛尔特游草》相类。中记俄之绝望青年，囚于异域，有少女为释缚纵之行，青年之情意复苏，而厥后终于孤去。其《及泼希》（Gypsy）一诗亦然，及泼希者，流浪欧洲之民，以游牧为生者也。有失望于世之人曰阿勒戈，慕是中绝色，因入其族，与为婚因，顾多嫉，渐察女有他爱，终杀之。女之父不施报，特令去不与居焉。二者为诗，虽有裴伦之色，然又至殊，凡厥中勇士，等是见放于人群，顾复不离亚历山大时俄国社会之一质分，易于失望，速于奋兴，有厌世之风，而其志至不固。普式庚于此，已不与以同情，诸凡切于报复而观念无所胜人之失，悉指摘不为讳饰。故社会之伪善，既灼然现于人前，而及泼希之朴野纯全，亦相形为之益显。论者谓普式庚所爱，渐去裴伦式勇士而向祖国纯朴之民，盖实自斯时始也。尔后巨制，曰《阿内庚》（Eugiene Onieguine），诗材至简，而文特富丽，尔时俄之社会，情状略具于斯。惟以推敲八年，所蒙之影响至不一，故性格迁流，首尾多异。厥初二章，尚受裴伦之感化，则其英雄阿内庚为性，力抗社会，断望人间，有裴伦式英雄之概，特已不凭神思，渐近真然，与尔时其国青年之性质肖矣。厥后外缘转变，诗人之性格亦移，于是渐离裴伦，所作日趣于独立；而文章益妙，著述亦多。至与裴伦分道之因，则为说亦不一：或谓裴伦绝望奋战，意向峻绝，实与普式庚性格不相容，曩之信崇，盖出一时之激越，迨风涛大定，自即弃置而返其初；或谓国民性之不同，当为是事之枢纽，西欧思想，绝异于俄，其去裴伦，实由天性，天性不合，则裴伦之长存自难矣。凡此二说，无不近理：特就普式庚个人论之，则其对于裴伦，仅摹外状，迨放浪之生涯毕，乃骤返其本然，不能如来尔孟多夫，终执消极观念而不舍也。故旋墨斯科后，立言益务平和，凡足与社会生冲突者，咸力避而不道，且多赞诵，美其国之武功。千八百三十一年波兰抗俄，西欧诸国右波兰，于俄多所憎恶。普式庚乃作《俄国之谗谤者》暨《波罗及诺之一周年》二篇，以自明爱国。丹麦评骘家勃阑兑思（G. Brandes）于是有微辞，谓惟武力之恃而狼藉人之自由，虽云爱国，顾为兽爱。特此亦不仅普式庚为然，即今之君子，日日言爱国者，于国有诚为人爱而不坠于兽爱者，亦仅见也。及晚年，与和阑公使子覃提斯迕，终于决斗被击中腹，越二日而逝，时为千八百三十七年。俄自有普式庚，文界始独立，故文史家芘宾谓真之俄国文章，实与斯人偕起也。而裴伦之摩罗思想，则又经普式庚而传来尔孟多夫。
普式庚（A. Pushkin）以千七百九十九年生于墨斯科，幼即为诗，初建罗曼宗于其文界，名以大扬。 顾其时俄多内讧，时势方亟，而普式庚诗多讽喻，人即借而挤之，将流鲜卑，有数耆宿力为之辩，始获免，谪居南方。 其时始读裴伦诗，深感其大，思理文形，悉受转化，小诗亦尝摹裴伦；尤著者有《高加索累囚行》，至与《哈洛尔特游草》相类。 中记俄之绝望青年，囚于异域，有少女为释缚纵之行，青年之情意复苏，而厥后终于孤去。 其《及泼希》（Gypsy）一诗亦然，及泼希者，流浪欧洲之民，以游牧为生者也。 有失望于世之人曰阿勒戈，慕是中绝色，因入其族，与为婚因，顾多嫉，渐察女有他爱，终杀之。 女之父不施报，特令去不与居焉。 二者为诗，虽有裴伦之色，然又至殊，凡厥中勇士，等是见放于人群，顾复不离亚历山大时俄国社会之一质分，易于失望，速于奋兴，有厌世之风，而其志至不固。 普式庚于此，已不与以同情，诸凡切于报复而观念无所胜人之失，悉指摘不为讳饰。 故社会之伪善，既灼然现于人前，而及泼希之朴野纯全，亦相形为之益显。 论者谓普式庚所爱，渐去裴伦式勇士而向祖国纯朴之民，盖实自斯时始也。 尔后巨制，曰《阿内庚》（Eugiene Onieguine），诗材至简，而文特富丽，尔时俄之社会，情状略具于斯。 惟以推敲八年，所蒙之影响至不一，故性格迁流，首尾多异。 厥初二章，尚受裴伦之感化，则其英雄阿内庚为性，力抗社会，断望人间，有裴伦式英雄之概，特已不凭神思，渐近真然，与尔时其国青年之性质肖矣。 厥后外缘转变，诗人之性格亦移，于是渐离裴伦，所作日趣于独立；而文章益妙，著述亦多。 至与裴伦分道之因，则为说亦不一：或谓裴伦绝望奋战，意向峻绝，实与普式庚性格不相容，曩之信崇，盖出一时之激越，迨风涛大定，自即弃置而返其初；或谓国民性之不同，当为是事之枢纽，西欧思想，绝异于俄，其去裴伦，实由天性，天性不合，则裴伦之长存自难矣。 凡此二说，无不近理：特就普式庚个人论之，则其对于裴伦，仅摹外状，迨放浪之生涯毕，乃骤返其本然，不能如来尔孟多夫，终执消极观念而不舍也。 故旋墨斯科后，立言益务平和，凡足与社会生冲突者，咸力避而不道，且多赞诵，美其国之武功。 千八百三十一年波兰抗俄，西欧诸国右波兰，于俄多所憎恶。 普式庚乃作《俄国之谗谤者》暨《波罗及诺之一周年》二篇，以自明爱国。 丹麦评骘家勃阑兑思（G. Brandes）于是有微辞，谓惟武力之恃而狼藉人之自由，虽云爱国，顾为兽爱。 特此亦不仅普式庚为然，即今之君子，日日言爱国者，于国有诚为人爱而不坠于兽爱者，亦仅见也。 及晚年，与和阑公使子覃提斯迕，终于决斗被击中腹，越二日而逝，时为千八百三十七年。 俄自有普式庚，文界始独立，故文史家芘宾谓真之俄国文章，实与斯人偕起也。 而裴伦之摩罗思想，则又经普式庚而传来尔孟多夫。来尔孟多夫（M. Lermontov）生于千八百十四年，与普式庚略并世。其先来尔孟斯（T. Learmont）氏，英之苏格兰人；故每有不平，辄云将去此冰雪警吏之地，归其故乡。顾性格全如俄人，妙思善感，惆怅无间，少即能缀德语成诗；后入大学被黜，乃居陆军学校二年，出为士官，如常武士，惟自谓仅于香宾酒中，加少许诗趣而已。及为禁军骑兵小校，始仿裴伦诗纪东方事，且至慕裴伦为人。其自记有曰，今吾读《世胄裴伦传》，知其生涯有同我者；而此偶然之同，乃大惊我。又曰，裴伦更有同我者一事，即尝在苏格兰，有媪谓裴伦母曰，此儿必成伟人，且当再娶。而在高加索，亦有媪告吾大母，言与此同。纵不幸如裴伦，吾亦愿如其说。顾来尔孟多夫为人，又近修黎。修黎所作《解放之普洛美迢》，感之甚力，于人生善恶竞争诸问，至为不宁，而诗则不之仿。初虽摹裴伦及普式庚，后亦自立。且思想复类德之哲人勖宾赫尔，知习俗之道德大原，悉当改革，因寄其意于二诗，一曰《神摩》（Demon），一曰《谟哜黎》（Mtsyri）。前者托旨于巨灵，以天堂之逐客，又为人间道德之憎者，超越凡情，因生疾恶，与天地斗争，苟见众生动于凡情，则辄施以贱视。后者一少年求自由之呼号也。有孺子焉，生长山寺，长老意已断其情感希望，而孺子魂梦，不离故园，一夜暴风雨，乃乘长老方祷，潜遁出寺，彷徨林中者三日，自由无限，毕生莫伦。后言曰，尔时吾自觉如野兽，力与风雨电光猛虎战也。顾少年迷林中不能返，数日始得之，惟已以斗豹得伤，竟以是殒。尝语侍疾老僧曰，丘墓吾所弗惧，人言毕生忧患，将入睡眠，与之永寂，第忧与吾生别耳。……吾犹少年。……宁汝尚忆少年之梦，抑已忘前此世间憎爱耶？倘然，则此世于汝，失其美矣。汝弱且老，灭诸希望矣。少年又为述林中所见，与所觉自由之感，并及斗豹之事曰，汝欲知吾获自由时，何所为乎？吾生矣。老人，吾生矣。使尽吾生无此三日者，且将惨淡冥暗，逾汝暮年耳。及普式庚斗死，来尔孟多夫又赋诗以寄其悲，末解有曰，汝侪朝人，天才自由之屠伯，今有法律以自庇，士师盖无如汝何，第犹有尊严之帝在天，汝不能以金资为赂。……以汝黑血，不能涤吾诗人之血痕也。诗出，举国传诵，而来尔孟多夫亦由是得罪，定流鲜卑；后遇援，乃戍高加索，见其地之物色，诗益雄美。惟当少时，不满于世者义至博大，故作《神摩》，其物犹撒但，恶人生诸凡陋劣之行，力与之敌。如勇猛者，所遇无不庸懦，则生激怒；以天生崇美之感，而众生扰扰，不能相知，爰起厌倦，憎恨人世也。顾后乃渐即于实，凡所不满，已不在天地人间，退而止于一代；后且更变，而猝死于决斗。决斗之因，即肇于来尔孟多夫所为书曰《并世英雄记》。人初疑书中主人，即著者自序，迨再印，乃辨言曰，英雄不为一人，实吾曹并时众恶之象。盖其书所述，实即当时人士之状尔。于是有友摩尔迭诺夫者，谓来尔孟多夫取其状以入书，因与索斗。来尔孟多夫不欲杀其友，仅举枪射空中；顾摩尔迭诺夫则拟而射之，遂死，年止二十七。
来尔孟多夫（M. Lermontov）生于千八百十四年，与普式庚略并世。 其先来尔孟斯（T. Learmont）氏，英之苏格兰人；故每有不平，辄云将去此冰雪警吏之地，归其故乡。 顾性格全如俄人，妙思善感，惆怅无间，少即能缀德语成诗；后入大学被黜，乃居陆军学校二年，出为士官，如常武士，惟自谓仅于香宾酒中，加少许诗趣而已。 及为禁军骑兵小校，始仿裴伦诗纪东方事，且至慕裴伦为人。 其自记有曰，今吾读《世胄裴伦传》，知其生涯有同我者；而此偶然之同，乃大惊我。 又曰，裴伦更有同我者一事，即尝在苏格兰，有媪谓裴伦母曰，此儿必成伟人，且当再娶。 而在高加索，亦有媪告吾大母，言与此同。 纵不幸如裴伦，吾亦愿如其说。 顾来尔孟多夫为人，又近修黎。 修黎所作《解放之普洛美迢》，感之甚力，于人生善恶竞争诸问，至为不宁，而诗则不之仿。 初虽摹裴伦及普式庚，后亦自立。 且思想复类德之哲人勖宾赫尔，知习俗之道德大原，悉当改革，因寄其意于二诗，一曰《神摩》（Demon），一曰《谟哜黎》（Mtsyri）。 前者托旨于巨灵，以天堂之逐客，又为人间道德之憎者，超越凡情，因生疾恶，与天地斗争，苟见众生动于凡情，则辄施以贱视。 后者一少年求自由之呼号也。 有孺子焉，生长山寺，长老意已断其情感希望，而孺子魂梦，不离故园，一夜暴风雨，乃乘长老方祷，潜遁出寺，彷徨林中者三日，自由无限，毕生莫伦。 后言曰，尔时吾自觉如野兽，力与风雨电光猛虎战也。 顾少年迷林中不能返，数日始得之，惟已以斗豹得伤，竟以是殒。 尝语侍疾老僧曰，丘墓吾所弗惧，人言毕生忧患，将入睡眠，与之永寂，第忧与吾生别耳。 …… 吾犹少年。 …… 宁汝尚忆少年之梦，抑已忘前此世间憎爱耶？倘然，则此世于汝，失其美矣。 汝弱且老，灭诸希望矣。 少年又为述林中所见，与所觉自由之感，并及斗豹之事曰，汝欲知吾获自由时，何所为乎？吾生矣。 老人，吾生矣。 使尽吾生无此三日者，且将惨淡冥暗，逾汝暮年耳。 及普式庚斗死，来尔孟多夫又赋诗以寄其悲，末解有曰，汝侪朝人，天才自由之屠伯，今有法律以自庇，士师盖无如汝何，第犹有尊严之帝在天，汝不能以金资为赂。 …… 以汝黑血，不能涤吾诗人之血痕也。 诗出，举国传诵，而来尔孟多夫亦由是得罪，定流鲜卑；后遇援，乃戍高加索，见其地之物色，诗益雄美。 惟当少时，不满于世者义至博大，故作《神摩》，其物犹撒但，恶人生诸凡陋劣之行，力与之敌。 如勇猛者，所遇无不庸懦，则生激怒；以天生崇美之感，而众生扰扰，不能相知，爰起厌倦，憎恨人世也。 顾后乃渐即于实，凡所不满，已不在天地人间，退而止于一代；后且更变，而猝死于决斗。 决斗之因，即肇于来尔孟多夫所为书曰《并世英雄记》。 人初疑书中主人，即著者自序，迨再印，乃辨言曰，英雄不为一人，实吾曹并时众恶之象。 盖其书所述，实即当时人士之状尔。 于是有友摩尔迭诺夫者，谓来尔孟多夫取其状以入书，因与索斗。 来尔孟多夫不欲杀其友，仅举枪射空中；顾摩尔迭诺夫则拟而射之，遂死，年止二十七。前此二人之于裴伦，同汲其流，而复殊别。普式庚在厌世主义之外形，来尔孟多夫则直在消极之观念。故普式庚终服帝力，入于平和，而来尔孟多夫则奋战力拒，不稍退转。波覃勖迭氏评之曰，来尔孟多夫不能胜来追之运命，而当降伏之际，亦至猛而骄。凡所为诗，无不有强烈弗和与踔厉不平之响者，良以是耳。来尔孟多夫亦甚爱国，顾绝异普式庚，不以武力若何，形其伟大。凡所眷爱，乃在乡村大野，及村人之生活；且推其爱而及高加索土人。此土人者，以自由故，力敌俄国者也；来尔孟多夫虽自从军，两与其役，然终爱之，所作《伊思迈尔培》（Ismail-Bey）一篇，即纪其事。来尔孟多夫之于拿坡仑，亦稍与裴伦异趣。裴伦初尝责拿坡仑对于革命思想之谬，及既败，乃有愤于野犬之食死狮而崇之。来尔孟多夫则专责法人，谓自陷其雄士。至其自信，亦如裴伦，谓吾之良友，仅有一人，即是自己。又负雄心，期所过必留影迹。然裴伦所谓非憎人间，特去之而已，或云吾非爱人少，惟爱自然多耳等意，则不能闻之来尔孟多夫。彼之平生，常以憎人者自命，凡天物之美，足以乐英诗人者，在俄国英雄之目，则长此黯淡，浓云疾雷而不见霁日也。盖二国人之异，亦差可于是见之矣。
前此二人之于裴伦，同汲其流，而复殊别。 普式庚在厌世主义之外形，来尔孟多夫则直在消极之观念。 故普式庚终服帝力，入于平和，而来尔孟多夫则奋战力拒，不稍退转。 波覃勖迭氏评之曰，来尔孟多夫不能胜来追之运命，而当降伏之际，亦至猛而骄。 凡所为诗，无不有强烈弗和与踔厉不平之响者，良以是耳。 来尔孟多夫亦甚爱国，顾绝异普式庚，不以武力若何，形其伟大。 凡所眷爱，乃在乡村大野，及村人之生活；且推其爱而及高加索土人。 此土人者，以自由故，力敌俄国者也；来尔孟多夫虽自从军，两与其役，然终爱之，所作《伊思迈尔培》（Ismail-Bey）一篇，即纪其事。 来尔孟多夫之于拿坡仑，亦稍与裴伦异趣。 裴伦初尝责拿坡仑对于革命思想之谬，及既败，乃有愤于野犬之食死狮而崇之。 来尔孟多夫则专责法人，谓自陷其雄士。 至其自信，亦如裴伦，谓吾之良友，仅有一人，即是自己。 又负雄心，期所过必留影迹。 然裴伦所谓非憎人间，特去之而已，或云吾非爱人少，惟爱自然多耳等意，则不能闻之来尔孟多夫。 彼之平生，常以憎人者自命，凡天物之美，足以乐英诗人者，在俄国英雄之目，则长此黯淡，浓云疾雷而不见霁日也。 盖二国人之异，亦差可于是见之矣。

摩罗诗力说

八

摩罗诗力说

Eight丹麦人勃阑兑思，于波兰之罗曼派，举密克威支（A. Mi-ckiewicz）斯洛伐支奇（J. Slowacki）克拉旬斯奇（S. Krasinski）三诗人。密克威支者，俄文家普式庚同时人，以千七百九十八年生于札希亚小村之故家。村在列图尼亚，与波兰邻比。十八岁出就维尔那大学，治言语之学，初尝爱邻女马理维来苏萨加，而马理他去，密克威支为之不欢。后渐读裴伦诗，又作诗曰《死人之祭》（Dziady）。中数份叙列图尼亚旧俗，每十一月二日，必置酒果于垅上，用享死者，聚村人牧者术士一人，暨众冥鬼，中有失爱自杀之人，已经冥判，每届是日，必更历苦如前此；而诗止断片未成。尔后居加夫诺（Kowno）为教师；二三年返维尔那。递千八百二十二年，捕于俄吏，居囚室十阅月，窗牖皆木制，莫辨昼夜；乃送圣彼得堡，又徙阿兑塞，而其地无需教师，遂之克利米亚，揽其地风物以助咏吟，后成《克利米亚诗集》一卷。已而返墨斯科，从事总督府中，著诗二种，一曰《格罗苏那》（Grazyna），记有王子烈泰威尔，与其外父域多勒特迕，将乞外兵为援，其妇格罗苏那知之，不能令勿叛，惟命守者，勿容日耳曼使人入诺华格罗迭克。援军遂怒，不攻域多勒特而引军薄烈泰威尔，格罗苏那自擐甲，伪为王子与战，已而王子归，虽幸胜，而格罗苏那中流丸，旋死。及葬，絷发炮者同置之火，烈泰威尔亦殉焉。此篇之意，盖在假有妇人，第以祖国之故，则虽背夫子之命，斥去援兵，欺其军士，濒国于险，且召战争，皆不为过，苟以是至高之目的，则一切事，无不可为者也。一曰《华连洛德》（Wallenrod），其诗取材古代，有英雄以败亡之余，谋复国仇，因伪降敌陈，渐为其长，得一举而复之。此盖以意太利文人摩契阿威黎（Machiavelli）之意，附诸裴伦之英雄，故初视之亦第罗曼派言情之作。检文者不喻其意，听其付梓，密克威支名遂大起。未几得间，因至德国，见其文人瞿提。此他犹有《佗兑支氏》（Pan Tadeusz）一诗，写苏孛烈加暨诃什支珂二族之事，描绘物色，为世所称。其中虽以佗兑支为主人，而其父约舍克易名出家，实其主的。初记二人熊猎，有名华伊斯奇者吹角，起自微声，以至洪响，自榆度榆，自檞至檞，渐乃如千万角声，合于一角；正如密克威支所为诗，有今昔国人之声，寄于是焉。诸凡诗中之声，清澈弘厉，万感悉至，直至波兰一角之天，悉满歌声，虽至今日，而影响于波兰人之心者，力犹无限。令人忆诗中所云，听者当华伊斯奇吹角久已，而尚疑其方吹未已也。密克威支者，盖即生于彼歌声反响之中，至于无尽者夫。
丹麦人勃阑兑思，于波兰之罗曼派，举密克威支（A. Mi-ckiewicz）斯洛伐支奇（J. Slowacki）克拉旬斯奇（S. Krasinski）三诗人。 密克威支者，俄文家普式庚同时人，以千七百九十八年生于札希亚小村之故家。 村在列图尼亚，与波兰邻比。 十八岁出就维尔那大学，治言语之学，初尝爱邻女马理维来苏萨加，而马理他去，密克威支为之不欢。 后渐读裴伦诗，又作诗曰《死人之祭》（Dziady）。 中数份叙列图尼亚旧俗，每十一月二日，必置酒果于垅上，用享死者，聚村人牧者术士一人，暨众冥鬼，中有失爱自杀之人，已经冥判，每届是日，必更历苦如前此；而诗止断片未成。 尔后居加夫诺（Kowno）为教师；二三年返维尔那。 递千八百二十二年，捕于俄吏，居囚室十阅月，窗牖皆木制，莫辨昼夜；乃送圣彼得堡，又徙阿兑塞，而其地无需教师，遂之克利米亚，揽其地风物以助咏吟，后成《克利米亚诗集》一卷。 已而返墨斯科，从事总督府中，著诗二种，一曰《格罗苏那》（Grazyna），记有王子烈泰威尔，与其外父域多勒特迕，将乞外兵为援，其妇格罗苏那知之，不能令勿叛，惟命守者，勿容日耳曼使人入诺华格罗迭克。 援军遂怒，不攻域多勒特而引军薄烈泰威尔，格罗苏那自擐甲，伪为王子与战，已而王子归，虽幸胜，而格罗苏那中流丸，旋死。 及葬，絷发炮者同置之火，烈泰威尔亦殉焉。 此篇之意，盖在假有妇人，第以祖国之故，则虽背夫子之命，斥去援兵，欺其军士，濒国于险，且召战争，皆不为过，苟以是至高之目的，则一切事，无不可为者也。 一曰《华连洛德》（Wallenrod），其诗取材古代，有英雄以败亡之余，谋复国仇，因伪降敌陈，渐为其长，得一举而复之。 此盖以意太利文人摩契阿威黎（Machiavelli）之意，附诸裴伦之英雄，故初视之亦第罗曼派言情之作。 检文者不喻其意，听其付梓，密克威支名遂大起。 未几得间，因至德国，见其文人瞿提。 此他犹有《佗兑支氏》（Pan Tadeusz）一诗，写苏孛烈加暨诃什支珂二族之事，描绘物色，为世所称。 其中虽以佗兑支为主人，而其父约舍克易名出家，实其主的。 初记二人熊猎，有名华伊斯奇者吹角，起自微声，以至洪响，自榆度榆，自檞至檞，渐乃如千万角声，合于一角；正如密克威支所为诗，有今昔国人之声，寄于是焉。 诸凡诗中之声，清澈弘厉，万感悉至，直至波兰一角之天，悉满歌声，虽至今日，而影响于波兰人之心者，力犹无限。 令人忆诗中所云，听者当华伊斯奇吹角久已，而尚疑其方吹未已也。 密克威支者，盖即生于彼歌声反响之中，至于无尽者夫。密克威支至崇拿坡仑，谓其实造裴伦，而裴伦之生活暨其光耀，则觉普式庚于俄国，故拿坡仑亦间接起普式庚。拿坡仑使命，盖在解放国民，因及世界，而其一生，则为最高之诗。至于裴伦，亦极崇仰，谓裴伦所作，实出于拿坡仑，英国同代之人，虽被其天才影响，而卒莫能并大。盖自诗人死后，而英国文章，状态又归前纪矣。若在俄国，则善普式庚，二人同为斯拉夫文章首领，亦裴伦分支，逮年渐进，亦均渐趣于国粹；所异者，普式庚少时欲畔帝力，一举不成，遂以铩羽，且感帝意，愿为之臣，失其英年时之主义，而密克威支则长此保持，洎死始已也。当二人相见时，普式庚有《铜马》一诗，密克威支则有《大彼得像》一诗为其记念。盖千八百二十九年顷，二人尝避雨像次，密克威支因赋诗纪所语，假普式庚为言，末解曰，马足已虚，而帝不勒之返。彼曳其枚，行且坠碎。历时百年，今犹未堕，是犹山泉喷水，著寒而冰，临悬崖之侧耳。顾自由日出，熏风西集，寒沍之地，因以昭苏，则喷泉将何如，暴政将何如也？虽然，此实密克威支之言，特托之普式庚者耳。波兰破后，二人遂不相见，普式庚有诗怀之；普式庚伤死，密克威支亦念之至切。顾二人虽甚稔，又同本裴伦，而亦有特异者，如普式庚于晚出诸作，恒自谓少年眷爱自繇之梦，已背之而去，又谓前路已不见仪的之存，而密克威支则仪的如是，决无疑贰也。
密克威支至崇拿坡仑，谓其实造裴伦，而裴伦之生活暨其光耀，则觉普式庚于俄国，故拿坡仑亦间接起普式庚。 拿坡仑使命，盖在解放国民，因及世界，而其一生，则为最高之诗。 至于裴伦，亦极崇仰，谓裴伦所作，实出于拿坡仑，英国同代之人，虽被其天才影响，而卒莫能并大。 盖自诗人死后，而英国文章，状态又归前纪矣。 若在俄国，则善普式庚，二人同为斯拉夫文章首领，亦裴伦分支，逮年渐进，亦均渐趣于国粹；所异者，普式庚少时欲畔帝力，一举不成，遂以铩羽，且感帝意，愿为之臣，失其英年时之主义，而密克威支则长此保持，洎死始已也。 当二人相见时，普式庚有《铜马》一诗，密克威支则有《大彼得像》一诗为其记念。 盖千八百二十九年顷，二人尝避雨像次，密克威支因赋诗纪所语，假普式庚为言，末解曰，马足已虚，而帝不勒之返。 彼曳其枚，行且坠碎。 历时百年，今犹未堕，是犹山泉喷水，著寒而冰，临悬崖之侧耳。 顾自由日出，熏风西集，寒沍之地，因以昭苏，则喷泉将何如，暴政将何如也？虽然，此实密克威支之言，特托之普式庚者耳。 波兰破后，二人遂不相见，普式庚有诗怀之；普式庚伤死，密克威支亦念之至切。 顾二人虽甚稔，又同本裴伦，而亦有特异者，如普式庚于晚出诸作，恒自谓少年眷爱自繇之梦，已背之而去，又谓前路已不见仪的之存，而密克威支则仪的如是，决无疑贰也。斯洛伐支奇以千八百九年生克尔舍密涅克（Krzemieniec），少孤，育于后父；尝入维尔那大学，性情思想如裴伦。二十一岁入华骚户部为书记；越二年，忽以事去国，不能复返。初至伦敦；已而至巴黎，成诗一卷，仿裴伦诗体。时密克威支亦来相见，未几而迕。所作诗歌，多惨苦之音。千八百三十五年去巴黎，作东方之游，经希腊埃及叙利亚；三十七年返意太利，道出曷尔爱列须阻疫，滞留久之，作《大漠中之疫》一诗。记有亚剌伯人，为言目击四子三女，洎其妇相继死于疫，哀情涌于毫素，读之令人忆希腊尼阿孛（Niobe）事，亡国之痛，隐然在焉。且又不止此苦难之诗而已，凶惨之作，恒与俱起，而斯洛伐支奇为尤。凡诗词中，靡不可见身受楚毒之印象或其见闻，最著者或根史实，如《克垒勒度克》（Król Duch）中所述俄帝伊凡四世，以剑钉使者之足于地一节，盖本诸古典者也。
斯洛伐支奇以千八百九年生克尔舍密涅克（Krzemieniec），少孤，育于后父；尝入维尔那大学，性情思想如裴伦。 二十一岁入华骚户部为书记；越二年，忽以事去国，不能复返。 初至伦敦；已而至巴黎，成诗一卷，仿裴伦诗体。 时密克威支亦来相见，未几而迕。 所作诗歌，多惨苦之音。 千八百三十五年去巴黎，作东方之游，经希腊埃及叙利亚；三十七年返意太利，道出曷尔爱列须阻疫，滞留久之，作《大漠中之疫》一诗。 记有亚剌伯人，为言目击四子三女，洎其妇相继死于疫，哀情涌于毫素，读之令人忆希腊尼阿孛（Niobe）事，亡国之痛，隐然在焉。 且又不止此苦难之诗而已，凶惨之作，恒与俱起，而斯洛伐支奇为尤。 凡诗词中，靡不可见身受楚毒之印象或其见闻，最著者或根史实，如《克垒勒度克》（Król Duch）中所述俄帝伊凡四世，以剑钉使者之足于地一节，盖本诸古典者也。波兰诗人多写狱中戍中刑罚之事，如密克威支作《死人之祭》第三卷中，几尽绘己身所历，倘读其《契珂夫斯奇》（Cichowski）一章，或《娑波卢夫斯奇》（Sobolewski）之什，记见少年二十橇，送赴鲜卑事，不为之生愤激者盖鲜也。而读上述二人吟咏，又往往闻报复之声。如《死人祭》第三篇，有囚人所歌者：其一央珂夫斯奇曰，欲我为信徒，必见耶稣马理，先惩污吾国土之俄帝而后可。俄帝若在，无能令我呼耶稣之名。其二加罗珂夫斯奇曰，设吾当受谪放，劳役缧绁，得为俄帝作工，夫何靳耶？吾在刑中，所当力作，自语曰，愿此苍铁，有日为帝成一斧也。吾若出狱，当迎鞑靼女子，语之曰，为帝生一巴棱（杀保罗一世者）。吾若迁居植民地，当为其长，尽吾陇亩，为帝植麻，以之成一苍色巨索，织以银丝，俾阿尔洛夫（杀彼得三世者）得之，可缳俄帝颈也。末为康拉德歌曰，吾神已寂，歌在坟墓中矣。惟吾灵神，已嗅血腥，一噭而起，有如血蝠（Vampire），欲人血也。渴血渴血，复仇复仇！仇吾屠伯！天意如是，固报矣；即不如是，亦报尔！报复诗华，盖萃于是，使神不之直，则彼且自报之耳。
波兰诗人多写狱中戍中刑罚之事，如密克威支作《死人之祭》第三卷中，几尽绘己身所历，倘读其《契珂夫斯奇》（Cichowski）一章，或《娑波卢夫斯奇》（Sobolewski）之什，记见少年二十橇，送赴鲜卑事，不为之生愤激者盖鲜也。 而读上述二人吟咏，又往往闻报复之声。 如《死人祭》第三篇，有囚人所歌者：其一央珂夫斯奇曰，欲我为信徒，必见耶稣马理，先惩污吾国土之俄帝而后可。 俄帝若在，无能令我呼耶稣之名。 其二加罗珂夫斯奇曰，设吾当受谪放，劳役缧绁，得为俄帝作工，夫何靳耶？吾在刑中，所当力作，自语曰，愿此苍铁，有日为帝成一斧也。 吾若出狱，当迎鞑靼女子，语之曰，为帝生一巴棱（杀保罗一世者）。 吾若迁居植民地，当为其长，尽吾陇亩，为帝植麻，以之成一苍色巨索，织以银丝，俾阿尔洛夫（杀彼得三世者）得之，可缳俄帝颈也。 末为康拉德歌曰，吾神已寂，歌在坟墓中矣。 惟吾灵神，已嗅血腥，一噭而起，有如血蝠（Vampire），欲人血也。 渴血渴血，复仇复仇！仇吾屠伯！天意如是，固报矣；即不如是，亦报尔！报复诗华，盖萃于是，使神不之直，则彼且自报之耳。如上所言报复之事，盖皆隐藏，出于不意，其旨在凡窘于天人之民，得用诸术，拯其父国，为圣法也。故格罗苏那虽背其夫而拒敌，义为非谬；华连洛德亦然。苟拒异族之军，虽用诈伪，不云非法，华连洛德伪附于敌，乃歼日耳曼军，故土自由，而自亦忏悔而死。其意盖以为一人苟有所图，得当以报，则虽降敌，不为罪愆。如《阿勒普耶罗斯》（Alpujarras）一诗，益可以见其意。中叙摩亚之王阿勒曼若，以城方大疫，且不得不以格拉那陀地降西班牙，因夜出。西班牙人方聚饮，忽白有人乞见，来者一阿剌伯人，进而呼曰，西班牙人，吾愿奉汝明神，信汝先哲，为汝奴仆！众识之，盖阿勒曼若也。西人长者抱之为吻礼，诸首领皆礼之。而阿勒曼若忽仆地，攫其巾大悦呼曰，吾中疫矣！盖以彼忍辱一行，而疫亦入西班牙之军矣。斯洛伐支奇为诗，亦时责奸人自行诈于国，而以诈术陷敌，则甚美之，如《阑勃罗》（Lambro）《珂尔强》（Kordjan）皆是。《阑勃罗》为希腊人事，其人背教为盗，俾得自由以仇突厥，性至凶酷，为世所无，惟裴伦东方诗中能见之耳。珂尔强者，波兰人谋刺俄帝尼可拉一世者也。凡是二诗，其主旨所在，皆特报复而已矣。
如上所言报复之事，盖皆隐藏，出于不意，其旨在凡窘于天人之民，得用诸术，拯其父国，为圣法也。 故格罗苏那虽背其夫而拒敌，义为非谬；华连洛德亦然。 苟拒异族之军，虽用诈伪，不云非法，华连洛德伪附于敌，乃歼日耳曼军，故土自由，而自亦忏悔而死。 其意盖以为一人苟有所图，得当以报，则虽降敌，不为罪愆。 如《阿勒普耶罗斯》（Alpujarras）一诗，益可以见其意。 中叙摩亚之王阿勒曼若，以城方大疫，且不得不以格拉那陀地降西班牙，因夜出。 西班牙人方聚饮，忽白有人乞见，来者一阿剌伯人，进而呼曰，西班牙人，吾愿奉汝明神，信汝先哲，为汝奴仆！众识之，盖阿勒曼若也。 西人长者抱之为吻礼，诸首领皆礼之。 而阿勒曼若忽仆地，攫其巾大悦呼曰，吾中疫矣！盖以彼忍辱一行，而疫亦入西班牙之军矣。 斯洛伐支奇为诗，亦时责奸人自行诈于国，而以诈术陷敌，则甚美之，如《阑勃罗》（Lambro）《珂尔强》（Kordjan）皆是。 《阑勃罗》为希腊人事，其人背教为盗，俾得自由以仇突厥，性至凶酷，为世所无，惟裴伦东方诗中能见之耳。 珂尔强者，波兰人谋刺俄帝尼可拉一世者也。 凡是二诗，其主旨所在，皆特报复而已矣。上二士者，以绝望故，遂于凡可祸敌，靡不许可，如格罗苏那之行诈，如华连洛德之伪降，如阿勒曼若之种疫，如珂尔强之谋刺，皆是也。而克拉旬斯奇之见，则与此反。此主力报，彼主爱化。顾其为诗，莫不追怀绝泽，念祖国之忧患。波兰人动于其诗，因有千八百三十年之举；馀忆所及，而六十三年大变，亦因之起矣。即在今兹，精神未忘，难亦未已也。
上二士者，以绝望故，遂于凡可祸敌，靡不许可，如格罗苏那之行诈，如华连洛德之伪降，如阿勒曼若之种疫，如珂尔强之谋刺，皆是也。 而克拉旬斯奇之见，则与此反。 此主力报，彼主爱化。 顾其为诗，莫不追怀绝泽，念祖国之忧患。 波兰人动于其诗，因有千八百三十年之举；馀忆所及，而六十三年大变，亦因之起矣。 即在今兹，精神未忘，难亦未已也。

摩罗诗力说

九

摩罗诗力说

Nine若匈加利当沉默蜷伏之顷，则兴者有裴彖飞（A. Petöfi），沽肉者子也，以千八百二十三年生于吉思珂罗（Kiskökrös）。其区为匈之低地，有广漠之普斯多（Puszta此翻平原），道周之小旅以及村舍，种种物色，感之至深。盖普斯多之在匈，犹俄之有斯第孛（Steppe此亦翻平原），善能起诗人焉。父虽贾人，而殊有学，能解腊丁文。裴彖飞十岁出学于科勒多，既而至阿琐特，治文法三年。然生有殊禀，挚爱自繇，愿为俳优；天性又长于吟咏。比至舍勒美支，入高等学校三月，其父闻裴彖飞与优人伍，令止读，遂徒步至菩特沛思德，入国民剧场为杂役。后为亲故所得，留养之，乃始为诗咏邻女，时方十六龄。顾亲属谓其无成，仅能为剧，遂任之去。裴彖飞忽投军为兵，虽性恶压制而爱自由，顾亦居军中者十八月，以病疟罢。又入巴波大学，时亦为优，生计极艰，译英法小说自度。千八百四十四年访伟罗思摩谛（M. Vörösmarty），伟为梓其诗，自是遂专力于文，不复为优。此其半生之转点，名亦陡起，众目为匈加利之大诗人矣，次年春，其所爱之女死，因旅行北方自遣，及秋始归。洎四十七年，乃访诗人阿阑尼（J. Arany）于萨伦多，而阿阑尼杰作《约尔提》（Joldi）适竣，读之叹赏，订交焉。四十八年以始，裴彖飞诗渐倾于政事，盖知革命将兴，不期而感，犹野禽之识地震也。是年三月，墺大利人革命报至沛思德，裴彖飞感之，作《兴矣摩迦人》（Tolpra Magyar）一诗，次日诵以徇众，至解末叠句云，誓将不复为奴！则众皆和，持至检文之局，逐其吏而自印之，立俟其毕，各持之行。文之脱检，实自此始。裴彖飞亦尝自言曰，吾琴一音，吾笔一下，不为利役也。居吾心者，爰有天神，使吾歌且吟。天神非他，即自由耳。顾所为文章，时多过情，或与众忤；尝作《致诸帝》一诗，人多责之。裴彖飞自记曰，去三月十五数日而后，吾忽为众恶之人矣，褫夺花冠，独研深谷之中，顾吾终幸不屈也。比国事渐急，诗人知战争死亡且近，极思赴之。自曰，天不生我于孤寂，将召赴战场矣。吾今得闻角声召战，吾魂几欲骤前，不及待令矣。遂投国民军（Honvéd）中，四十九年转隶贝谟将军麾下。贝谟者，波兰武人，千八百三十年之役，力战俄人者也。时轲苏士招之来，使当脱阑希勒伐尼亚一面，甚爱裴彖飞，如家人父子然。裴彖飞三去其地，而不久即返，似或引之。是年七月三十一日舍俱思跋之战，遂殁于军。平日所谓为爱而歌，为国而死者，盖至今日而践矣。裴彖飞幼时，尝治裴伦暨修黎之诗，所作率纵言自由，诞放激烈，性情亦仿佛如二人。曾自言曰，吾心如反响之森林，受一呼声，应以百响者也。又善体物色，著之诗歌，妙绝人世，自称为无边自然之野花。所著长诗，有《英雄约诺斯》（János Vitéz）一篇，取材于古传，述其人悲欢畸迹。又小说一卷曰《缢吏之缳》（A Hóhér Kötele），记以眷爱起争，肇生孽障，提尔尼阿遂终陷安陀罗奇之子于法。安陀罗奇失爱绝欢，庐其子垅上，一日得提尔尼阿，将杀之。而从者止之曰，敢问死与生之忧患孰大？曰，生哉！乃纵之使去；终诱其孙令自经，而其为绳，即昔日缳安陀罗奇子之颈者也。观其首引耶和华言，意盖云厥祖罪愆，亦可报诸其苗裔，受施必复，且不嫌加甚焉。至于诗人一生，亦至殊异，浪游变易，殆无宁时。虽少逸豫者一时，而其静亦非真静，殆犹大海漩洑中心之静点而已。设有孤舟，卷于旋风，当有一瞬间忽尔都寂，如风云已息，水波不兴，水色青如微笑，顾漩洑偏急，舟复入卷，乃至破没矣。彼诗人之暂静，盖亦犹是焉耳。
若匈加利当沉默蜷伏之顷，则兴者有裴彖飞（A. Petöfi），沽肉者子也，以千八百二十三年生于吉思珂罗（Kiskökrös）。 其区为匈之低地，有广漠之普斯多（Puszta此翻平原），道周之小旅以及村舍，种种物色，感之至深。 盖普斯多之在匈，犹俄之有斯第孛（Steppe此亦翻平原），善能起诗人焉。 父虽贾人，而殊有学，能解腊丁文。 裴彖飞十岁出学于科勒多，既而至阿琐特，治文法三年。 然生有殊禀，挚爱自繇，愿为俳优；天性又长于吟咏。 比至舍勒美支，入高等学校三月，其父闻裴彖飞与优人伍，令止读，遂徒步至菩特沛思德，入国民剧场为杂役。 后为亲故所得，留养之，乃始为诗咏邻女，时方十六龄。 顾亲属谓其无成，仅能为剧，遂任之去。 裴彖飞忽投军为兵，虽性恶压制而爱自由，顾亦居军中者十八月，以病疟罢。 又入巴波大学，时亦为优，生计极艰，译英法小说自度。 千八百四十四年访伟罗思摩谛（M. Vörösmarty），伟为梓其诗，自是遂专力于文，不复为优。 此其半生之转点，名亦陡起，众目为匈加利之大诗人矣，次年春，其所爱之女死，因旅行北方自遣，及秋始归。 洎四十七年，乃访诗人阿阑尼（J. Arany）于萨伦多，而阿阑尼杰作《约尔提》（Joldi）适竣，读之叹赏，订交焉。 四十八年以始，裴彖飞诗渐倾于政事，盖知革命将兴，不期而感，犹野禽之识地震也。 是年三月，墺大利人革命报至沛思德，裴彖飞感之，作《兴矣摩迦人》（Tolpra Magyar）一诗，次日诵以徇众，至解末叠句云，誓将不复为奴！则众皆和，持至检文之局，逐其吏而自印之，立俟其毕，各持之行。 文之脱检，实自此始。 裴彖飞亦尝自言曰，吾琴一音，吾笔一下，不为利役也。 居吾心者，爰有天神，使吾歌且吟。 天神非他，即自由耳。 顾所为文章，时多过情，或与众忤；尝作《致诸帝》一诗，人多责之。 裴彖飞自记曰，去三月十五数日而后，吾忽为众恶之人矣，褫夺花冠，独研深谷之中，顾吾终幸不屈也。 比国事渐急，诗人知战争死亡且近，极思赴之。 自曰，天不生我于孤寂，将召赴战场矣。 吾今得闻角声召战，吾魂几欲骤前，不及待令矣。 遂投国民军（Honvéd）中，四十九年转隶贝谟将军麾下。 贝谟者，波兰武人，千八百三十年之役，力战俄人者也。 时轲苏士招之来，使当脱阑希勒伐尼亚一面，甚爱裴彖飞，如家人父子然。 裴彖飞三去其地，而不久即返，似或引之。 是年七月三十一日舍俱思跋之战，遂殁于军。 平日所谓为爱而歌，为国而死者，盖至今日而践矣。 裴彖飞幼时，尝治裴伦暨修黎之诗，所作率纵言自由，诞放激烈，性情亦仿佛如二人。 曾自言曰，吾心如反响之森林，受一呼声，应以百响者也。 又善体物色，著之诗歌，妙绝人世，自称为无边自然之野花。 所著长诗，有《英雄约诺斯》（János Vitéz）一篇，取材于古传，述其人悲欢畸迹。 又小说一卷曰《缢吏之缳》（A Hóhér Kötele），记以眷爱起争，肇生孽障，提尔尼阿遂终陷安陀罗奇之子于法。 安陀罗奇失爱绝欢，庐其子垅上，一日得提尔尼阿，将杀之。 而从者止之曰，敢问死与生之忧患孰大？曰，生哉！乃纵之使去；终诱其孙令自经，而其为绳，即昔日缳安陀罗奇子之颈者也。 观其首引耶和华言，意盖云厥祖罪愆，亦可报诸其苗裔，受施必复，且不嫌加甚焉。 至于诗人一生，亦至殊异，浪游变易，殆无宁时。 虽少逸豫者一时，而其静亦非真静，殆犹大海漩洑中心之静点而已。 设有孤舟，卷于旋风，当有一瞬间忽尔都寂，如风云已息，水波不兴，水色青如微笑，顾漩洑偏急，舟复入卷，乃至破没矣。 彼诗人之暂静，盖亦犹是焉耳。上述诸人，其为品性言行思惟，虽以种族有殊，外缘多别，因现种种状，而实统于一宗：无不刚健不挠，抱诚守真；不取媚于群，以随顺旧俗；发为雄声，以起其国人之新生，而大其国于天下。求之华土，孰比之哉？夫中国之立于亚洲也，文明先进，四邻莫之与伦，蹇视高步，因益为特别之发达；及今日虽凋苓，而犹与西欧对立，此其幸也。顾使往昔以来，不事闭关，能与世界大势相接，思想为作，日趣于新，则今日方卓立宇内，无所愧逊于他邦，荣光俨然，可无苍黄变革之事，又从可知尔。故一为相度其位置，稽考其邂逅，则震旦为国，得失滋不云微。得者以文化不受影响于异邦，自具特异之光采，近虽中衰，亦世希有。失者则以孤立自是，不遇校雠，终至堕落而之实利；为时既久，精神沦亡，逮蒙新力一击，即砉然冰泮，莫有起而与之抗。加以旧染既深，辄以习惯之目光，观察一切，凡所然否，谬解为多，此所为呼维新既二十年，而新声迄不起于中国也。夫如是，则精神界之战士贵矣。英当十八世纪时，社会习于伪，宗教安于陋，其为文章，亦摹故旧而事涂饰，不能闻真之心声。于是哲人洛克首出，力排政治宗教之积弊，唱思想言议之自由，转轮之兴，此其播种。而在文界，则有农人朋思生苏格阑，举全力以抗社会，宣众生平等之音，不惧权威，不跽金帛，洒其热血，注诸韵言；然精神界之伟人，非遂即人群之骄子，轲流落，终以夭亡。而裴伦修黎继起，转战反抗，具如前陈。其力如巨涛，直薄旧社会之柱石。余波流衍，入俄则起国民诗人普式庚，至波兰则作报复诗人密克威支，入匈加利则觉爱国诗人裴彖飞；其他宗徒，不胜具道。顾裴伦修黎，虽蒙摩罗之谥，亦第人焉而已。凡其同人，实亦不必曰摩罗宗，苟在人间，必有如是。此盖聆热诚之声而顿觉者也，此盖同怀热诚而互契者也。故其平生，亦甚神肖，大都执兵流血，如角剑之士，转辗于众之目前，使抱战栗与愉快而观其鏖扑。故无流血于众之目前者，其群祸矣；虽有而众不之视，或且进而杀之，斯其为群，乃愈益祸而不可救也！
上述诸人，其为品性言行思惟，虽以种族有殊，外缘多别，因现种种状，而实统于一宗：无不刚健不挠，抱诚守真；不取媚于群，以随顺旧俗；发为雄声，以起其国人之新生，而大其国于天下。 求之华土，孰比之哉？夫中国之立于亚洲也，文明先进，四邻莫之与伦，蹇视高步，因益为特别之发达；及今日虽凋苓，而犹与西欧对立，此其幸也。 顾使往昔以来，不事闭关，能与世界大势相接，思想为作，日趣于新，则今日方卓立宇内，无所愧逊于他邦，荣光俨然，可无苍黄变革之事，又从可知尔。 故一为相度其位置，稽考其邂逅，则震旦为国，得失滋不云微。 得者以文化不受影响于异邦，自具特异之光采，近虽中衰，亦世希有。 失者则以孤立自是，不遇校雠，终至堕落而之实利；为时既久，精神沦亡，逮蒙新力一击，即砉然冰泮，莫有起而与之抗。 加以旧染既深，辄以习惯之目光，观察一切，凡所然否，谬解为多，此所为呼维新既二十年，而新声迄不起于中国也。 夫如是，则精神界之战士贵矣。 英当十八世纪时，社会习于伪，宗教安于陋，其为文章，亦摹故旧而事涂饰，不能闻真之心声。 于是哲人洛克首出，力排政治宗教之积弊，唱思想言议之自由，转轮之兴，此其播种。 而在文界，则有农人朋思生苏格阑，举全力以抗社会，宣众生平等之音，不惧权威，不跽金帛，洒其热血，注诸韵言；然精神界之伟人，非遂即人群之骄子，轲流落，终以夭亡。 而裴伦修黎继起，转战反抗，具如前陈。 其力如巨涛，直薄旧社会之柱石。 余波流衍，入俄则起国民诗人普式庚，至波兰则作报复诗人密克威支，入匈加利则觉爱国诗人裴彖飞；其他宗徒，不胜具道。 顾裴伦修黎，虽蒙摩罗之谥，亦第人焉而已。 凡其同人，实亦不必曰摩罗宗，苟在人间，必有如是。 此盖聆热诚之声而顿觉者也，此盖同怀热诚而互契者也。 故其平生，亦甚神肖，大都执兵流血，如角剑之士，转辗于众之目前，使抱战栗与愉快而观其鏖扑。 故无流血于众之目前者，其群祸矣；虽有而众不之视，或且进而杀之，斯其为群，乃愈益祸而不可救也！今索诸中国，为精神界之战士者安在？有作至诚之声，致吾人于善美刚健者乎？有作温煦之声，援吾人出于荒寒者乎？家国荒矣，而赋最末哀歌，以诉天下贻后人之耶利米，且未之有也。非彼不生，即生而贼于众，居其一或兼其二，则中国遂以萧条。劳劳独躯壳之事是图，而精神日就于荒落；新潮来袭，遂以不支。众皆曰维新，此即自白其历来罪恶之声也，犹云改悔焉尔。顾既维新矣，而希望亦与偕始，吾人所待，则有介绍新文化之士人。特十余年来，介绍无已，而究其所携将以来归者；乃又舍治饼饵守囹圄之术而外，无他有也。则中国尔后，且永续其萧条，而第二维新之声，亦将再举，盖可准前事而无疑者矣。俄文人凯罗连珂（V. Korolenko）作《末光》一书，有记老人教童子读书于鲜卑者，曰，书中述樱花黄鸟，而鲜卑沍寒，不有此也。翁则解之曰，此鸟即止于樱木，引吭为好音者耳。少年乃沉思。然夫，少年处萧条之中，即不诚闻其好音，亦当得先觉之诠解；而先觉之声，乃又不来破中国之萧条也。然则吾人，其亦沉思而已夫，其亦惟沉思而已夫！
今索诸中国，为精神界之战士者安在？有作至诚之声，致吾人于善美刚健者乎？有作温煦之声，援吾人出于荒寒者乎？家国荒矣，而赋最末哀歌，以诉天下贻后人之耶利米，且未之有也。 非彼不生，即生而贼于众，居其一或兼其二，则中国遂以萧条。 劳劳独躯壳之事是图，而精神日就于荒落；新潮来袭，遂以不支。 众皆曰维新，此即自白其历来罪恶之声也，犹云改悔焉尔。 顾既维新矣，而希望亦与偕始，吾人所待，则有介绍新文化之士人。 特十余年来，介绍无已，而究其所携将以来归者；乃又舍治饼饵守囹圄之术而外，无他有也。 则中国尔后，且永续其萧条，而第二维新之声，亦将再举，盖可准前事而无疑者矣。 俄文人凯罗连珂（V. Korolenko）作《末光》一书，有记老人教童子读书于鲜卑者，曰，书中述樱花黄鸟，而鲜卑沍寒，不有此也。 翁则解之曰，此鸟即止于樱木，引吭为好音者耳。 少年乃沉思。 然夫，少年处萧条之中，即不诚闻其好音，亦当得先觉之诠解；而先觉之声，乃又不来破中国之萧条也。 然则吾人，其亦沉思而已夫，其亦惟沉思而已夫！一九〇七年作。
Created in 1907.

我之节烈观

我之节烈观

我之节烈观

My festival is a martyrdom“世道浇漓，人心日下，国将不国”这一类话，本是中国历来的叹声。不过时代不同，则所谓“日下”的事情，也有迁变：从前指的是甲事，现在叹的或是乙事。除了“进呈御览”的东西不敢妄说外，其余的文章议论里，一向就带这口吻。因为如此叹息，不但针砭世人，还可以从“日下”之中，除去自己。所以君子固然相对慨叹，连杀人放火嫖妓骗钱以及一切鬼混的人，也都乘作恶余暇，摇着头说道，“他们人心日下了。”
The phrase "the world is pouring, the people's hearts are declining, and the country will not be a country" is a sigh that China has always had. However, the times are different, and the so-called "under the sun" has also changed: in the past, it referred to A, but now it is sighed or B. Except for the things that "are presented to the emperor" and dare not say anything, the rest of the articles have always been in this tone. Because of such a sigh, not only can you needle the world, but you can also remove yourself from the "sun". Therefore, the gentleman certainly sighed relatively, and even those who killed, set fires, prostitutes, cheated money, and all fooled around took advantage of the leisure time to do evil, shook their heads and said, "Their hearts are declining." ”世风人心这件事，不但鼓吹坏事，可以“日下”；即使未曾鼓吹，只是旁观，只是赏玩，只是叹息，也可以叫他“日下”。所以近一年来，居然也有几个不肯徒托空言的人，叹息一番之后，还要想法子来挽救。第一个是康有为，指手画脚的说“虚君共和”才好，陈独秀便斥他不兴；其次是一班灵学派的人，不知何以起了极古奥的思想，要请“孟圣矣乎”的鬼来画策；陈百年钱玄同刘半农又道他胡说。
The matter of the world's style and people's hearts not only advocates bad things, but can also be "under the sun"; Even if he has not advocated, just watched, just enjoyed, and sighed, he can still be called "under the sun". So in the past year, there have been a few people who refused to talk in vain, and after sighing, they had to think of ways to save them. The first is Kang Youwei, who pointed fingers and said that it was good to "falsely rule the republic", and Chen Duxiu reprimanded him for not being interested; secondly, a group of people from the spiritual school, who did not know why they had an extremely ancient and profound idea, and wanted to invite the ghost of "Meng Sheng Yihu" to make a plan; Chen Bainian, Qian Xuantong, and Liu Bannong said that he was talking nonsense.这几篇驳论，都是《新青年》里最可寒心的文章。时候已是二十世纪了；人类眼前，早已闪出曙光。假如《新青年》里，有一篇和别人辩地球方圆的文字，读者见了，怕一定要发怔。然而现今所辩，正和说地体不方相差无几。将时代和事实，对照起来，怎能不教人寒心而且害怕？
These rebuttals are the most chilling articles in "New Youth". It was the twentieth century; There has already been a light in front of mankind. If there is a text in "New Youth" that argues with others about the square and circle of the earth, readers will be stunned when they see it. However, the current debate is not much different from the theory that the earth is not square. Comparing the times with the facts, how can we not teach people to be chilled and afraid?近来虚君共和是不提了，灵学似乎还在那里捣鬼，此时却又有一群人，不能满足；仍然摇头说道，“人心日下”了。于是又想出一种挽救的方法；他们叫作“表彰节烈”！
Recently, the Xujun Republic is not mentioned, and spirituality seems to be still there, but at this time there is a group of people who cannot be satisfied; Still shaking his head and saying, "The people's hearts are declining." So he came up with a way to save it; They are called "Commendation and Festival"!这类妙法，自从君政复古时代以来，上上下下，已经提倡多年；此刻不过是竖起旗帜的时候。文章议论里，也照例时常出现，都嚷道“表彰节烈”！要不说这件事，也不能将自己提拔，出于“人心日下”之中。
This kind of wonderful method has been advocated for many years since the retro era of monarchy; This is just the time to raise the flag. In the discussion of the article, it also appears from time to time as usual, shouting "commendation for the martyrs"! Otherwise, if you don't talk about this, you can't promote yourself out of the "people's hearts".节烈这两个字，从前也算是男子的美德，所以有过“节士”，“烈士”的名称。然而现在的“表彰节烈”，却是专指女子，并无男子在内。据时下道德家的意见，来定界说，大约节是丈夫死了，决不再嫁，也不私奔，丈夫死得愈早，家里愈穷，他便节得愈好。烈可是有两种：一种是无论已嫁未嫁，只要丈夫死了，他也跟着自尽；一种是有强暴来污辱他的时候，设法自戕，或者抗拒被杀，都无不可。这也是死得愈惨愈苦，他便烈得愈好，倘若不及抵御，竟受了污辱，然后自戕，便免不了议论。万一幸而遇着宽厚的道德家，有时也可以略迹原情，许他一个烈字。可是文人学士，已经不甚愿意替他作传；就令勉强动笔，临了也不免加上几个“惜夫惜夫”了。
The word Jie Lie was once regarded as a man's virtue, so there were names such as "Jie Shi" and "Martyr". However, the current "commendation of martyrs" refers specifically to women, not men. According to the opinions of today's moralists, it is said that the husband dies, never marries again, and does not elope, and the sooner the husband dies, the poorer the family, the better he will be in the festival. There are two kinds of martyrs: one is whether he is married or not, as long as his husband dies, he will also commit suicide; One is that when there is violence to insult him, he tries to kill himself, or resists being killed. This is also the worse and more painful he died, the better he became, if he didn't have time to resist, he was humiliated, and then killed himself, it was inevitable to talk about it. In case you are lucky enough to meet a generous moralist, you can sometimes trace the original situation and allow him a fierce word. However, the literati scholar was no longer very willing to write a biography for him; I reluctantly started writing, and I couldn't help but add a few "cherishing my husband" when I came.总而言之：女子死了丈夫，便守着，或者死掉；遇了强暴，便死掉；将这类人物，称赞一通，世道人心便好，中国便得救了。大意只是如此。
In short: when a woman dies with her husband, she guards it, or dies; when he was raped, he died; If such a person is praised, the hearts of the people will be good, and China will be saved. The gist is just that.康有为借重皇帝的虚名，灵学家全靠着鬼话。这表彰节烈，却是全权都在人民，大有渐进自力之意了。然而我仍有几个疑问，须得提出。还要据我的意见，给他解答。我又认定这节烈救世说，是多数国民的意思；主张的人，只是喉舌。虽然是他发声，却和四支五官神经内脏，都有关系。所以我这疑问和解答，便是提出于这群多数国民之前。
Kang Youwei borrowed the emperor's false name, and spiritualists relied on nonsense. This commendation is a martyr, but it is full power in the hands of the people, and it has the meaning of gradual self-reliance. However, I still have a few questions that need to be raised. I also want to give him an answer according to my opinion. I also believe that this doctrine of salvation is the meaning of the majority of the people; The person who advocates is just a mouthpiece. Although he spoke out, it was related to the four facial senses, nerves, and internal organs. So my question and answer are put forward before this group of people.首先的疑问是：不节烈（中国称不守节作“失节”，不烈却并无成语，所以只能合称他“不节烈”）的女子如何害了国家？照现在的情形，“国将不国”，自不消说：丧尽良心的事故，层出不穷；刀兵盗贼水旱饥荒，又接连而起。但此等现象，只是不讲新道德新学问的缘故，行为思想，全钞旧帐；所以种种黑暗，竟和古代的乱世仿佛，况且政界军界学界商界等等里面，全是男人，并无不节烈的女子夹杂在内。也未必是有权力的男子，因为受了他们蛊惑，这才丧了良心，放手作恶。至于水旱饥荒，便是专拜龙神，迎大王，滥伐森林，不修水利的祸祟，没有新知识的结果；更与女子无关。只有刀兵盗贼，往往造出许多不节烈的妇女。但也是兵盗在先，不节烈在后，并非因为他们不节烈了，才将刀兵盗贼招来。
The first question is: How did a woman who was undisciplined harm the country (China calls it "undisciplined", but there is no idiom for not being martyr, so it can only be collectively called "undisciplined") harm the country? According to the current situation, "the country will not be a country", it goes without saying: accidents that have lost conscience are endless; Soldiers, bandits, floods, droughts, and famine rose one after another. However, these phenomena are only because they do not talk about new morality and new knowledge, behavioral thoughts, and all old accounts; Therefore, all kinds of darkness are similar to the troubled times of ancient times, and the political, military, academic, business, etc., are all men, and there are all women who are not undisciplined. It may not be a man with power, because he was bewitched by them, he lost his conscience and let go of evil. As for floods, droughts and famines, it is the result of worshiping the dragon god, welcoming the king, indiscriminately cutting down forests, and not repairing water conservancy; It has nothing to do with women. Only swordsmen and thieves often create many unruly women. But it is also the soldiers and thieves who come first, and the bandits are not the ones who are not martyrs, not because they are not martyrs, so they recruit the swordsmen and thieves.其次的疑问是：何以救世的责任，全在女子？照着旧派说起来，女子是“阴类”，是主内的，是男子的附属品。然则治世救国，正须责成阳类，全仗外子，偏劳主体。决不能将一个绝大题目，都阁在阴类肩上。倘依新说，则男女平等，义务略同。纵令该担责任，也只得分担。其余的一半男子，都该各尽义务。不特须除去强暴，还应发挥他自己的美德。不能专靠惩劝女子，便算尽了天职。
The second question is: Why is the responsibility for saving the world all in women? According to the old school, women are "yin", they are in the Lord, and they are appendages of men. Therefore, to govern the world and save the country, it is necessary to blame the masculine category, rely entirely on foreign sons, and work partially on the main body. We must not put a huge topic on the shoulders of the underworld. If the new theory is followed, men and women are equal and have almost the same obligations. Even if you should take responsibility, you can only share it. The remaining half of the men should do their duty. Not only must he get rid of violence, but he should also exert his own virtues. If you can't just rely on punishing women, you will do your duty.其次的疑问是：表彰之后，有何效果？据节烈为本，将所有活着的女子，分类起来，大约不外三种：一种是已经守节，应该表彰的人（烈者非死不可，所以除出）；一种是不节烈的人；一种是尚未出嫁，或丈夫还在，又未遇见强暴，节烈与否未可知的人。第一种已经很好，正蒙表彰，不必说了。第二种已经不好，中国从来不许忏悔，女子做事一错，补过无及，只好任其羞杀，也不值得说了。最要紧的，只在第三种，现在一经感化，他们便都打定主意道：“倘若将来丈夫死了，决不再嫁；遇着强暴，赶紧自裁！”试问如此立意，与中国男子做主的世道人心，有何关系？这个缘故，已在上文说明。更有附带的疑问是：节烈的人，既经表彰，自是品格最高。但圣贤虽人人可学，此事却有所不能。假如第三种的人，虽然立志极高，万一丈夫长寿，天下太平，他便只好饮恨吞声，做一世次等的人物。
The second question is: what is the effect after the commendation? According to the principle of integrity, all living women are classified, and there are about three types: one is those who have kept the festival and should be commended (the martyrs must die, so they are removed); One is an unprincipled person; One is a person who has not yet been married, or whose husband is still alive, and has not met a person who has not been raped, and it is unknown whether he is fierce or not. The first one is already very good and is being commended, needless to say. The second is no longer good, China has never allowed repentance, a woman has done a wrong thing, it is too late to make amends, so she has to let her be humiliated, and it is not worth saying. The most important thing is only in the third type, and now once they are reformed, they all make up their minds: "If my husband dies in the future, I will never marry again; In the event of rape, commit suicide quickly! "What does this idea have to do with the hearts of Chinese men in the world? This reason has been explained above. There is also a side question: a person who is a martyr has the highest character after being commended. But although everyone can learn from the sages, there are things that cannot be done. If the third type of person, although his ambitions are extremely high, in case his husband lives a long life and the world is peaceful, he will have to swallow his hatred and be a second-class person for a lifetime.以上是单依旧日的常识，略加研究，便已发见了许多矛盾。若略带二十世纪气息，便又有两层：
The above is the common sense of the past, and a little research has found many contradictions. If it has a slight atmosphere of the 20th century, there are two more layers:一问节烈是否道德？道德这事，必须普遍，人人应做，人人能行，又于自他两利，才有存在的价值。现在所谓节烈，不特除开男子，绝不相干；就是女子，也不能全体都遇着这名誉的机会。所以决不能认为道德，当作法式。上回《新青年》登出的《贞操论》里，已经说过理由。不过贞是丈夫还在，节是男子已死的区别，道理却可类推。只有烈的一件事，尤为奇怪，还须略加研究。
1. Is Jie Lie moral? Morality must be universal, everyone should do it, everyone can do it, and it is beneficial to both oneself and others in order to have the value of existence. Now the so-called festival is not only irrelevant except for men; Even women can't all meet this opportunity for fame. Therefore, morality must not be regarded as a law. In the "Theory of Chastity" published in "New Youth" last time, the reason has been said. However, chastity is the difference between the husband is still there and the knot is the difference between the man is dead, but the truth can be inferred. There is only one thing that is particularly strange and needs to be studied a little.照上文的节烈分类法看来，烈的第一种，其实也只是守节，不过生死不同。因为道德家分类，根据全在死活，所以归入烈类。性质全异的，便是第二种。这类人不过一个弱者（现在的情形，女子还是弱者），突然遇着男性的暴徒，父兄丈夫力不能救，左邻右舍也不帮忙，于是他就死了；或者竟受了辱，仍然死了；或者终于没有死。久而久之，父兄丈夫邻舍，夹着文人学士以及道德家，便渐渐聚集，既不羞自己怯弱无能，也不提暴徒如何惩办，只是七口八嘴，议论他死了没有？受污没有？死了如何好，活着如何不好。于是造出了许多光荣的烈女，和许多被人口诛笔伐的不烈女。只要平心一想，便觉不像人间应有的事情，何况说是道德。
According to the classification of martyrs above, the first type of martyrs is actually just a festival, but life and death are different. Because moralists are classified, according to life and death, they are classified as martyrs. The one with a completely different nature is the second type. This kind of person is just a weak person (in the current situation, the woman is still a weak person), and suddenly encounters a male thug, the father, brother, and husband cannot be saved, and the neighbors do not help, so he dies; Or they are humiliated and still die; Or finally not dead. Over time, fathers, brothers, husbands, and neighbors, sandwiched between literati and moralists, gradually gathered, neither ashamed of their cowardice or incompetence, nor did they mention how the thugs were punished, but just talked about whether he was dead? Is it tainted? How good is it to die, how bad is it to live. As a result, many glorious martyrs were created, and many unmartyrs who were criticized by the people. As long as you think about it calmly, it doesn't feel like something that should happen in the world, let alone morality.二问多妻主义的男子，有无表彰节烈的资格？替以前的道德家说话，一定是理应表彰。因为凡是男子，便有点与众不同，社会上只配有他的意思。一面又靠着阴阳内外的古典，在女子面前逞能。然而一到现在，人类的眼里，不免见到光明，晓得阴阳内外之说，荒谬绝伦；就令如此，也证不出阳比阴尊贵，外比内崇高的道理。况且社会国家，又非单是男子造成。所以只好相信真理，说是一律平等。既然平等，男女便都有一律应守的契约。男子决不能将自己不守的事，向女子特别要求。若是买卖欺骗贡献的婚姻，则要求生时的贞操，尚且毫无理由。何况多妻主义的男子，来表彰女子的节烈。
Second, do polygamist men have the qualifications to commend martyrs? Speaking for the former moralists must be commended. Because every man is a little different, and society only has his meaning. On the other hand, he relies on the classics of yin and yang inside and outside, and shows off his abilities in front of women. However, now, in the eyes of human beings, it is inevitable to see the light, and the theory of yin and yang inside and outside is absurd; Even so, it cannot prove that yang is more noble than yin, and the outside is more noble than the inside. Moreover, the social state is not only created by men. So I had to believe in the truth and say that everyone is equal. Since they are equal, men and women have the same contract to keep. A man must not make special demands on a woman what he does not keep. If it is a marriage of buying and selling deception and contributions, then there is no reason to require chastity during life. What's more, polygamous men come to commend women's integrity.以上，疑问和解答都完了。理由如此支离，何以直到现今，居然还能存在？要对付这问题，须先看节烈这事，何以发生，何以通行，何以不生改革的缘故。
Above, the questions and answers are over. The reason is so fragmented, why does it still exist to this day? To deal with this problem, we must first look at the matter of Jie Lie, why it happened, why it was popular, and why it did not cause reform.古代的社会，女子多当作男人的物品。或杀或吃，都无不可；男人死后，和他喜欢的宝贝，日用的兵器，一同殉葬，更无不可。后来殉葬的风气，渐渐改了，守节便也渐渐发生。但大抵因为寡妇是鬼妻，亡魂跟着，所以无人敢娶，并非要他不事二夫。这样风俗，现在的蛮人社会里还有。中国太古的情形，现在已无从详考。但看周末虽有殉葬，并非专用女人，嫁否也任便，并无什么裁制，便可知道脱离了这宗习俗，为日已久。由汉至唐也并没有鼓吹节烈。直到宋朝，那一班“业儒”的才说出“饿死事小失节事大”的话，看见历史上“重适”两个字，便大惊小怪起来。出于真心，还是故意，现在却无从推测。其时也正是“人心日下，国将不国”的时候，全国士民，多不像样。或者“业儒”的人，想借女人守节的话，来鞭策男子，也不一定。但旁敲侧击，方法本嫌鬼祟，其意也太难分明，后来因此多了几个节妇，虽未可知，然而吏民将卒，却仍然无所感动。于是“开化最早，道德第一”的中国终于归了“长生天气力里大福荫护助里”的什么“薛禅皇帝，完泽笃皇帝，曲律皇帝”了。此后皇帝换过了几家，守节思想倒反发达。皇帝要臣子尽忠，男人便愈要女人守节。到了清朝，儒者真是愈加利害。看见唐人文章里有公主改嫁的话，也不免勃然大怒道，“这是什么事！你竟不为尊者讳，这还了得！”假使这唐人还活着，一定要斥革功名，“以正人心而端风俗”了。
In ancient society, women were mostly regarded as men's items. Killing or eating, there is nothing wrong; After a man dies, he is buried with his favorite treasures and daily weapons, and it is even more impossible. Later, the atmosphere of martyrdom gradually changed, and the observance of festivals gradually occurred. But probably because the widow is a ghost wife and the soul follows, no one dares to marry, not that he does not want to serve two husbands. This kind of custom still exists in today's barbarian society. The situation in ancient China is now impossible to examine in detail. But if you look at the weekend, although there is a martyrdom, it is not a special woman, and whether to marry or not, there is no sanction, so you can know that it has been separated from this custom for a long time. From the Han Dynasty to the Tang Dynasty, there was no advocacy of integrity. It was not until the Song Dynasty that the group of "amateur Confucians" said the words "starvation to death is a small loss of integrity and a big thing", and when they saw the word "heavy suitability" in history, they made a fuss. Whether it was sincere or intentional, it is impossible to speculate now. At that time, it was also the time when "people's hearts are declining, and the country will not be a country", and most of the people across the country are not decent. Or "amateur Confucian" people want to use women's words to spur men to keep their festivals, but not necessarily. However, the method was originally sneaky, and its meaning was too difficult to distinguish, and later there were a few more chaste women, although it is unknown, but the officials and people were still unmoved. So China, which was "the earliest in civilization and morality first", finally belonged to the "Xue Chan Emperor, Wan Ze Du Emperor, and Qu Lu Emperor" of "Eternal Life, Great Blessing and Protection". Since then, the emperor has changed several families, and the idea of keeping the festival has developed. The emperor wants his courtiers to be loyal, and the more men want women to keep their integrity. In the Qing Dynasty, Confucianism was really more and more interesting. Seeing that there was a princess remarrying in the Tang article, he couldn't help but be furious, "What is this!" You don't hide it for the venerable, this is good!" If this Tang man is still alive, he must denounce his fame and "correct the customs with righteous people's hearts".国民将到被征服的地位，守节盛了；烈女也从此着重。因为女子既是男子所有，自己死了，不该嫁人，自己活着，自然更不许被夺。然而自己是被征服的国民，没有力量保护，没有勇气反抗了，只好别出心裁，鼓吹女人自杀。或者妻女极多的阔人，婢妾成行的富翁，乱离时候，照顾不到，一遇“逆兵”（或是“天兵”），就无法可想。只得救了自己，请别人都做烈女；变成烈女，“逆兵”便不要了。他便待事定以后，慢慢回来，称赞几句。好在男子再娶，又是天经地义，别讨女人，便都完事。因此世上遂有了“双烈合传”，“七姬墓志”，甚而至于钱谦益的集中，也布满了“赵节妇”“钱烈女”的传记和歌颂。
The people will be in a conquered position, and the festival will be prosperous; Martyrs have also paid attention to since then. Because women are owned by men, they should not marry if they die, and they are alive and naturally not allowed to be taken away. However, he was a conquered citizen, had no strength to protect, and had no courage to resist, so he had to come up with ideas and advocate women's suicide. Or a wealthy man with a lot of wives and daughters, a rich man with a line of servants and concubines, when they are separated, they can't take care of it, and when they encounter a "rebel soldier" (or "heavenly soldier"), they can't think of it. I had to save myself and ask others to be martyrs; If you become a martyr, you don't want the "rebel soldiers". After the matter was settled, he slowly came back and praised a few words. Fortunately, it is natural for a man to remarry, and if he doesn't ask for a woman, everything will be over. Therefore, there are "Biography of Double Martyrs", "Epitaph of Seven Concubines", and even the concentration of Qian Qianyi, which is also full of biographies and praises of "Zhao Jiefu" and "Qian Martyr".只有自己不顾别人的民情，又是女应守节男子却可多妻的社会，造出如此畸形道德，而且日见精密苛酷，本也毫不足怪。但主张的是男子，上当的是女子。女子本身，何以毫无异言呢？原来“妇者服也”，理应服事于人。教育固可不必，连开口也都犯法。他的精神，也同他体质一样，成了畸形。所以对于这畸形道德，实在无甚意见。就令有了异议，也没有发表的机会。做几首“闺中望月”“园里看花”的诗，尚且怕男子骂他怀春，何况竟敢破坏这“天地间的正气”？只有说部书上，记载过几个女人，因为境遇上不愿守节，据做书的人说：可是他再嫁以后，便被前夫的鬼捉去，落了地狱；或者世人个个唾骂，做了乞丐，也竟求乞无门，终于惨苦不堪而死了！
It is not surprising that only oneself disregards the people's feelings of others, and it is a society where women should keep their chastity but men can have multiple wives, creating such a deformed morality, and it is becoming more and more precise and harsh. But it is the men who advocate, and the women who are fooled. Why is the woman herself not dissenting? It turns out that "women are dressed", and they should serve others. Education is not necessary, and even opening it is illegal. His spirit, like his physique, has become deformed. So I really have no opinion on this deformed morality. There was no objection, and there was no opportunity to publish. Make a few poems of "looking at the moon in the boudoir" and "watching flowers in the garden", but he is still afraid that the man will scold him for being in the spring, let alone dare to destroy this "righteousness between heaven and earth"? According to the person who wrote the book, "But after he remarried, he was captured by his ex-husband's ghost and went to hell; Or everyone in the world scolded and became beggars, but they had no way to beg and finally died miserably!如此情形，女子便非“服也”不可。然而男子一面，何以也不主张真理，只是一味敷衍呢？汉朝以后，言论的机关，都被“业儒”的垄断了。宋元以来，尤其利害。我们几乎看不见一部非业儒的书，听不到一句非士人的话。除了和尚道士，奉旨可以说话的以外，其余“异端”的声音，决不能出他卧房一步。况且世人大抵受了“儒者柔也”的影响；不述而作，最为犯忌。即使有人见到，也不肯用性命来换真理。即如失节一事，岂不知道必须男女两性，才能实现。他却专责女性；至于破人节操的男子，以及造成不烈的暴徒，便都含糊过去。男子究竟较女性难惹，惩罚也比表彰为难。其间虽有过几个男人，实觉于心不安，说些室女不应守志殉死的平和话，可是社会不听；再说下去，便要不容，与失节的女人一样看待。他便也只好变了“柔也”，不再开口了。所以节烈这事，到现在不生变革。
In this case, women must "obey". However, on the man's side, why don't he advocate the truth, but just perfunctory? After the Han Dynasty, the organs of speech were monopolized by "amateur Confucians". Since the Song and Yuan dynasties, it has been particularly interesting. We can hardly see a book by a non-amateur Confucian scholar or hear a word of a non-scholar. Except for the monk Taoist priest, who was ordered to speak, the rest of the "heretical" voices must not leave his bedroom. Moreover, the world is mostly influenced by "Confucian softness"; Writing without description is the most taboo. Even if some people see it, they will not exchange their lives for the truth. Even if it is a matter of losing integrity, don't you know that it must be achieved by both men and women. He is dedicated to women; As for the men who broke the morals, and the thugs who caused the fierceness, they were all vague. Men are more difficult to mess with than women, and punishment is more difficult than commendation. Although there were a few men who felt uneasy and said some peaceful words that women should not die for their aspirations, the society did not listen; If you continue, you must not tolerate it and treat it like a woman who has lost her chastity. He had no choice but to change to "Rouye" and no longer spoke. Therefore, the matter of Jie Lie has not changed so far.（此时，我应声明：现在鼓吹节烈派的里面，我颇有知道的人。敢说确有好人在内，居心也好。可是救世的方法是不对，要向西走了北了。但也不能因为他是好人，便竟能从正西直走到北。所以我又愿他回转身来。）
(At this point, I should declare that I know quite a few people among the adherents of the festival and martyrdom.) I dare to say that there are indeed good people in it, and the intention is also good. But the way to save the world is wrong, and they have to go west and north. But just because he is a good person, he can go straight from the west to the north. So I want him to turn around. ）其次还有疑问：
Secondly, there are questions:节烈难么？答道，很难。男子都知道极难，所以要表彰他。社会的公意，向来以为贞淫与否，全在女性。男子虽然诱惑了女人，却不负责任。譬如甲男引诱乙女，乙女不允，便是贞节，死了，便是烈；甲男并无恶名，社会可算淳古。倘若乙女允了，便是失节；甲男也无恶名，可是世风被乙女败坏了！别的事情，也是如此。所以历史上亡国败家的原因，每每归咎女子。糊糊涂涂的代担全体的罪恶，已经三千多年了。男子既然不负责任，又不能自己反省，自然放心诱惑；文人著作，反将他传为美谈。所以女子身旁，几乎布满了危险。除却他自己的父兄丈夫以外，便都带点诱惑的鬼气。所以我说很难。
Is it difficult to be a martyr? Answer, it's difficult. Men know that it is extremely difficult, so they want to commend him. The public opinion of society has always been that whether chastity or adultery is entirely up to women. Although the man seduces the woman, he is irresponsible. For example, if a man seduces a girl and the girl refuses, she is chastity, and if she dies, she is fierce; The man is not notorious, and the society can be regarded as simple. If the maiden agrees, it is a loss of integrity; A man is not notorious, but the world is corrupted by the second girl! The same is true for other things. Therefore, the reason for the downfall of the country and the ruin in history is often blamed on women. It has been more than 3,000 years since the confused person bears all the sins. Since the man is irresponsible and cannot reflect on himself, he is naturally tempted; Literati's writings have turned him into a beautiful story. So the woman's side is almost full of danger. Except for his own father, brother and husband, they all have a bit of temptation. So I say it's hard.节烈苦么？答道，很苦。男子都知道很苦，所以要表彰他。凡人都想活；烈是必死，不必说了。节妇还要活着。精神上的惨苦，也姑且弗论。单是生活一层，已是大宗的痛楚。假使女子生计已能独立，社会也知道互助，一人还可勉强生存。不幸中国情形，却正相反。所以有钱尚可，贫人便只能饿死。直到饿死以后，间或得了旌表，还要写入志书。所以各府各县志书传记类的末尾，也总有几卷“烈女”。一行一人，或是一行两人，赵钱孙李，可是从来无人翻读。就是一生崇拜节烈的道德大家，若问他贵县志书里烈女门的前十名是谁？也怕不能说出。其实他是生前死后，竟与社会漠不相关的。所以我说很苦。
Is the festival bitter? replied, very bitter. Men know that it is very bitter, so they want to commend him. Mortals want to live; Fierce is bound to die, needless to say. The chaste woman still has to live. Mental misery is not to be discussed. Just one layer of life is already a major pain. If a woman's livelihood is independent, and society knows how to help each other, one person can barely survive. Unfortunately, the situation in China is the opposite. Therefore, if you have money, the poor can only starve to death. Until he starved to death, he occasionally got a commendation and wrote it in the chronicle. Therefore, at the end of the biographies of the chronicles of each prefecture and county, there are always several volumes of "martyrs". One person in a row, or two people in a row, Zhao Qian Sun Li, but no one has ever read it. It is a moral master who worships integrity all his life, if you ask him who are the top ten martyrs in your county chronicle? I'm afraid I can't say it. In fact, he was indifferent to society before and after his death. So I say it's bitter.照这样说，不节烈便不苦么？答道，也很苦。社会公意，不节烈的女人，既然是下品；他在这社会里，是容不住的。社会上多数古人模模糊糊传下来的道理，实在无理可讲；能用历史和数目的力量，挤死不合意的人。这一类无主名无意识的杀人团里，古来不晓得死了多少人物；节烈的女子，也就死在这里。不过他死后间有一回表彰，写入志书。不节烈的人，便生前也要受随便什么人的唾骂，无主名的虐待。所以我说也很苦。
In this way, is it not bitter if you are not fierce? replied, it was also very bitter. Social justice, unruly women, since they are inferior; He can't tolerate it in this society. The truths passed down by most of the ancients in society are really unreasonable; can use the power of history and numbers to squeeze out unsatisfactory people. In this kind of nameless and unconscious murder group, I don't know how many people have died in ancient times; The woman who was fierce also died here. However, after his death, he was commended once and wrote in the chronicle. Those who are not fierce will be scolded by anyone and abused without a name during their lifetime. So I say it's also bitter.女子自己愿意节烈么？答道，不愿。人类总有一种理想，一种希望。虽然高下不同，必须有个意义。自他两利固好，至少也得有益本身。节烈很难很苦，既不利人，又不利己。说是本人愿意，实在不合人情。所以假如遇着少年女人，诚心祝赞他将来节烈，一定发怒；或者还要受他父兄丈夫的尊拳。然而仍旧牢不可破，便是被这历史和数目的力量挤着。可是无论何人，都怕这节烈。怕他竟钉到自己和亲骨肉的身上。所以我说不愿。
Is the woman willing to be martyrdom? He replied, "I don't want to." There is always an ideal, a hope. Although the level is different, it must have a meaning. Of course, it is good for both sides, but at least it must be beneficial to itself. It is difficult and painful, not good for others and not good for oneself. It is really unkind to say that I want to. Therefore, if you meet a young woman and sincerely wish her a martyr in the future, you will definitely be angry; Or he will be punished by his father, brother, and husband. However, it is still unbreakable, it is squeezed by the power of history and numbers. But no matter who it is, they are afraid of this festival. I am afraid that he will nail himself and his own flesh and blood. So I said no.我依据以上的事实和理由，要断定节烈这事是：极难，极苦，不愿身受，然而不利自他，无益社会国家，于人生将来又毫无意义的行为，现在已经失了存在的生命和价值。
Based on the above facts and reasons, I want to conclude that the matter of integrity is extremely difficult, extremely painful, unwilling to endure it, but it is not beneficial to oneself or others, it is not beneficial to society and the country, and it is meaningless in the future of life, and now it has lost its life and value.临了还有一层疑问：
There is another layer of questions:节烈这事，现代既然失了存在的生命和价值；节烈的女人，岂非白苦一番么？可以答他说：还有哀悼的价值。他们是可怜人；不幸上了历史和数目的无意识的圈套，做了无主名的牺牲。可以开一个追悼大会。
Since the matter of festivals and martyrdom has lost its life and value in modern times; Isn't a fierce woman suffering in vain? You can answer him: There is also the value of mourning. They are poor people; Unfortunately, he fell into the unconscious trap of history and numbers and made sacrifices without a name. A memorial service may be held.我们追悼了过去的人，还要发愿：要自己和别人，都纯洁聪明勇猛向上。要除去虚伪的脸谱。要除去世上害己害人的昏迷和强暴。
We mourn the people of the past and vow: to be pure, intelligent, brave and upward. Remove the hypocritical face. We must get rid of the coma and rape that harms oneself and others in the world.我们追悼了过去的人，还要发愿：要除去于人生毫无意义的苦痛。要除去制造并赏玩别人苦痛的昏迷和强暴。
We mourn the past and vow to get rid of the meaningless pain in life. Get rid of the stupores and rapes that create and enjoy the pain of others.我们还要发愿：要人类都受正当的幸福。
We also vow that all mankind will be deserved happiness.一九一八年七月。
July 1918.

我们现在怎样做父亲

我们现在怎样做父亲

我们现在怎样做父亲

How we are fathers now我作这一篇文的本意，其实是想研究怎样改革家庭；又因为中国亲权重，父权更重，所以尤想对于从来认为神圣不可侵犯的父子问题，发表一点意见。总而言之：只是革命要革到老子身上罢了。但何以大模大样，用了这九个字的题目呢？这有两个理由：
My original intention in writing this article is actually to study how to reform the family; And because China has more parental power and more patriarchy, I especially want to express my opinion on the issue of father and son, which has always been considered sacred and inviolable. All in all: it's just that the revolution is going to be revolutionized by Lao Tzu. But why did you use these nine words in a big way? There are two reasons for this:第一，中国的“圣人之徒”，最恨人动摇他的两样东西。一样不必说，也与我辈决不相干；一样便是他的伦常，我辈却不免偶然发几句议论，所以株连牵扯，很得了许多“铲伦常”“禽兽行”之类的恶名。他们以为父对于子，有绝对的权力和威严；若是老子说话，当然无所不可，儿子有话，却在未说之前早已错了。但祖父子孙，本来各各都只是生命的桥梁的一级，决不是固定不易的。现在的子，便是将来的父，也便是将来的祖。我知道我辈和读者，若不是现任之父，也一定是候补之父，而且也都有做祖宗的希望，所差只在一个时间。为想省却许多麻烦起见，我们便该无须客气，尽可先行占住了上风，摆出父亲的尊严，谈谈我们和我们子女的事；不但将来着手实行，可以减少困难，在中国也顺理成章，免得“圣人之徒”听了害怕，总算是一举两得之至的事了。所以说，“我们怎样做父亲。”
First, the Chinese "saints" hate people to shake him the most. Needless to say, it has nothing to do with our generation; The same is his ethics, but our generation inevitably occasionally posts a few words, so they are involved, and they have gained a lot of notoriety such as "shoveling ethics" and "beastly behavior". They think that the Father has absolute power and majesty over the Son; If Lao Tzu speaks, of course he can do anything, but his son has something to say, but he has already been wrong before he says it. But grandfathers and grandchildren are originally only the first level of the bridge of life, and they are by no means fixed. The present son is the future father and the future ancestor. I know that my generation and readers, if not the current father, must also be the alternate father, and they also have the hope of being ancestors, and the difference is only one time. In order to save a lot of trouble, we should not be polite, but should have the upper hand first, put on the dignity of a father, and talk about us and our children; Not only can it be implemented in the future, but it can also reduce difficulties, and it is also logical in China, so that the "saints" will not be afraid when they hear it, and it will finally kill two birds with one stone. So, "How do we be fathers?" ”第二，对于家庭问题，我在《新青年》的《随感录》（二五，四十，四九）中，曾经略略说及，总括大意，便只是从我们起，解放了后来的人。论到解放子女，本是极平常的事，当然不必有什么讨论。但中国的老年，中了旧习惯旧思想的毒太深了，决定悟不过来。譬如早晨听到乌鸦叫，少年毫不介意，迷信的老人，却总须颓唐半天。虽然很可怜，然而也无法可救。没有法，便只能先从觉醒的人开手，各自解放了自己的孩子。自己背着因袭的重担，肩住了黑暗的闸门，放他们到宽阔光明的地方去；此后幸福的度日，合理的做人。
Second, regarding family issues, I briefly mentioned in "New Youth" in "Sui Sensation" (25, 40, 49) that the general idea is that it only starts with us and liberates those who come after us. When it comes to the liberation of children, it is a very common thing, and of course there is no need to discuss it. But China's old age has been poisoned by old habits and old ideas too deeply, and it is decided not to understand. For example, if you hear a crow crying in the morning, the young man doesn't mind, but the superstitious old man always has to be depressed for a long time. Although it is pitiful, it cannot be saved. There is no way, so you can only start with the awakened people and liberate their own children. He carried the burden of the inheritance, shouldered the floodgates of darkness, and let them go to a wide and bright place; After that, live happily and be a reasonable person.还有，我曾经说，自己并非创作者，便在上海报纸的《新教训》里，挨了一顿骂。但我辈评论事情，总须先评论了自己，不要冒充，才能像一篇说话，对得起自己和别人。我自己知道，不特并非创作者，并且也不是真理的发见者。凡有所说所写，只是就平日见闻的事理里面，取了一点心以为然的道理；至于终极究竟的事，却不能知。便是对于数年以后的学说的进步和变迁，也说不出会到如何地步，单相信比现在总该还有进步还有变迁罢了。所以说，“我们现在怎样做父亲。”
Also, I once said that I was not a creator, so I was scolded in the "New Lesson" of the Shanghai newspaper. But when we comment on things, we must first comment on ourselves, don't pretend, so that we can speak like a piece and be worthy of ourselves and others. I know that I am not only not the creator, but also the discoverer of the truth. Everything that is said and written is just a little truth from the things I see and hear on weekdays; As for the ultimate thing, we don't know. It is impossible to say how far the progress and changes of the doctrine will be in a few years, and I believe that there should always be progress and changes than now. So, "How do we be fathers now?" ”我现在心以为然的道理，极其简单。便是依据生物界的现象，一，要保存生命；二，要延续这生命；三，要发展这生命（就是进化）。生物都这样做，父亲也就是这样做。
The truth I think now is extremely simple. It is based on the phenomena of the biological world, first, to preserve life; second, to continue this life; Third, we must develop this life (that is, evolution). All living things do this, and so do the father.生命的价值和生命价值的高下，现在可以不论。单照常识判断，便知道既是生物，第一要紧的自然是生命。因为生物之所以为生物，全在有这生命，否则失了生物的意义。生物为保存生命起见，具有种种本能，最显著的是食欲。因有食欲才摄取食物，因有食物才发生温热，保存了生命。但生物的个体，总免不了老衰和死亡，为继续生命起见，又有一种本能，便是性欲。因性欲才有性交，因有性交才发生苗裔，继续了生命。所以食欲是保存自己，保存现在生命的事；性欲是保存后裔，保存永久生命的事。饮食并非罪恶，并非不净；性交也就并非罪恶，并非不净。饮食的结果，养活了自己，对于自己没有恩；性交的结果，生出子女，对于子女当然也算不了恩。——前前后后，都向生命的长途走去，仅有先后的不同，分不出谁受谁的恩典。
The value of life and the value of life can now be ignored. Judging by common sense alone, we know that since it is a living thing, the first and most important thing is naturally life. Because the reason why living things are living things is because of this life, otherwise the meaning of living things will be lost. In order to preserve life, living beings have various instincts, the most obvious of which is appetite. Food is ingested because of appetite, and warmth occurs because of food, which preserves life. But the individual of the creature is inevitable to old age and death, and in order to continue life, there is another instinct, which is sexual desire. Because of sexual desire, there is sexual intercourse, and because of sexual intercourse, descendants occur and continue life. Therefore, appetite is the preservation of oneself and the preservation of the present life; Sexual desire is the preservation of descendants, the preservation of eternal life. Eating is not sinful, not impure; Sexual intercourse is not sinful or impure. As a result of diet, I feed myself, and I am not kind to myself; As a result of sexual intercourse, giving birth to children is certainly not a favor to children. ——Before and after, they all go to the long distance of life, only the order is different, and it is impossible to tell who receives whom's grace.可惜的是中国的旧见解，竟与这道理完全相反。夫妇是“人伦之中”，却说是“人伦之始”；性交是常事，却以为不净；生育也是常事，却以为天大的大功。人人对于婚姻，大抵先夹带着不净的思想。亲戚朋友有许多戏谑，自己也有许多羞涩，直到生了孩子，还是躲躲闪闪，怕敢声明；独有对于孩子，却威严十足，这种行径，简直可以说是和偷了钱发迹的财主，不相上下了。我并不是说，——如他们攻击者所意想的，——人类的性交也应如别种动物，随便举行；或如无耻流氓，专做些下流举动，自鸣得意。是说，此后觉醒的人，应该先洗净了东方固有的不净思想，再纯洁明白一些，了解夫妇是伴侣，是共同劳动者，又是新生命创造者的意义。所生的子女，固然是受领新生命的人，但他也不永久占领，将来还要交付子女，像他们的父母一般。只是前前后后，都做一个过付的经手人罢了。
Unfortunately, China's old views are completely opposite to this truth. Husband and wife are "in human relationships", but it is said to be "the beginning of human relationships"; sexual intercourse is commonplace, but it is thought to be impur; Childbirth is also a common thing, but I think it is a great achievement. Everyone probably has impure thoughts about marriage first. Relatives and friends have a lot of jokes, and they also have a lot of shyness, until they give birth to a child, they still dodge and dodge, afraid of daring to declare; It is unique to children, but it is full of majesty, and this kind of behavior can be said to be on par with the rich man who stole money and made a fortune. I am not saying,—— as their attackers conceive,—— human intercourse should be held casually, like other animals; Or like a shameless hooligan, specializing in some obscene actions and boasting about himself. That is to say, those who awaken after that should first cleanse themselves of the impure thoughts inherent in the East, and then become more pure and understand, and understand the meaning of husband and wife as partners, common laborers, and creators of new life. The children born are certainly the ones who receive new life, but they do not occupy them permanently, and they will be delivered to them in the future, just like their parents. It's just that before and after, I am just a person who pays for it.生命何以必需继续呢？就是因为要发展，要进化。个体既然免不了死亡，进化又毫无止境，所以只能延续着，在这进化的路上走。走这路须有一种内的努力，有如单细胞动物有内的努力，积久才会繁复，无脊椎动物有内的努力，积久才会发生脊椎。所以后起的生命，总比以前的更有意义，更近完全，因此也更有价值，更可宝贵；前者的生命，应该牺牲于他。
Why does life have to go on? It is because of development and evolution. Since death is inevitable and evolution is endless, it can only continue and walk on the road of evolution. There must be an internal effort to walk this path, just like a single-celled animal has internal effort, it will be complex over time, and invertebrates have internal effort, and it will take a long time to develop a spine. Therefore, the later life is always more meaningful, closer to perfection than the previous one, and therefore more valuable and precious; The life of the former should be sacrificed to him.但可惜的是中国的旧见解，又恰恰与这道理完全相反。本位应在幼者，却反在长者；置重应在将来，却反在过去。前者做了更前者的牺牲，自己无力生存，却苛责后者又来专做他的牺牲，毁灭了一切发展本身的能力。我也不是说，——如他们攻击者所意想的，——孙子理应终日痛打他的祖父，女儿必须时时咒骂他的亲娘。是说，此后觉醒的人，应该先洗净了东方古传的谬误思想，对于子女，义务思想须加多，而权力思想却大可切实核减，以准备改作幼者本位的道德。况且幼者受了权利，也并非永久占有，将来还要对于他们的幼者，仍尽义务，只是前前后后，都做一切过付的经手人罢了。
But unfortunately, China's old views are exactly the opposite of this. The standard should be in the young, but in the elderly; The emphasis should be in the future, but it is the past. The former made the sacrifice of the former, and he was unable to survive, but he harshly accused the latter of making his sacrifice and destroying all the ability to develop itself. Nor am I saying,—— as their attackers expect,—— grandson should beat his grandfather all day long, and the daughter must curse his mother all the time. That is to say, those who awaken after this should first wash away the fallacious ideas of ancient oriental traditions, and for children, the idea of obligation must be increased, while the idea of power can be effectively reduced in order to prepare for the morality of the child-oriented. Moreover, the young have received the right, and it is not permanently possessed, and they will still have to fulfill their obligations to their young in the future, but they will only be the handlers of all the overpayments before and after.“父子间没有什么恩”这一个断语，实是招致“圣人之徒”面红耳赤的一大原因。他们的误点，便在长者本位与利己思想，权利思想很重，义务思想和责任心却很轻。以为父子关系，只须“父兮生我”一件事，幼者的全部，便应为长者所有。尤其堕落的，是因此责望报偿，以为幼者的全部，理该做长者的牺牲。殊不知自然界的安排，却件件与这要求反对，我们从古以来，逆天行事，于是人的能力，十分萎缩，社会的进步，也就跟着停顿。我们虽不能说停顿便要灭亡，但较之进步，总是停顿与灭亡的路相近。
The assertion that "there is no grace between father and son" is actually a major reason why the "saints" are red-faced. Their mistakes lie in the elder-based and self-interested ideas, the idea of rights is very heavy, but the idea of obligation and responsibility is very light. I think that the relationship between father and son only needs one thing, "father gives birth to me", and everything for the young should belong to the elder. Especially depraved people are so reproachful that they think that the whole of the young deserves to be sacrificed by the elders. As everyone knows, the arrangement of nature, but everything is opposed to this demand, we have acted against the sky since ancient times, so human ability is very shrinking, and the progress of society has come to a standstill. Although we cannot say that pause will lead to destruction, compared to progress, pause is always close to the path of destruction.自然界的安排，虽不免也有缺点，但结合长幼的方法，却并无错误。他并不用“恩”，却给予生物以一种天性，我们称他为“爱”。动物界中除了生子数目太多一一爱不周到的如鱼类之外，总是挚爱他的幼子，不但绝无利益心情，甚或至于牺牲了自己，让他的将来的生命，去上那发展的长途。
Although the arrangement of nature inevitably has shortcomings, there is no mistake in combining the old and the young. He does not use "grace", but gives living beings a nature, which we call "love". In addition to the fish that have too many children and do not love them thoughtfully, they always love their young, not only have no interest in it, but even sacrifice themselves to let his future life go on the long road of development.人类也不外此，欧美家庭，大抵以幼者弱者为本位，便是最合于这生物学的真理的办法。便在中国，只要心思纯白，未曾经过“圣人之徒”作践的人，也都自然而然的能发现这一种天性。例如一个村妇哺乳婴儿的时候，决不想到自己正在施恩；一个农夫取妻的时候，也决不以为将要放债。只是有了子女，即天然相爱，愿他生存；更进一步的，便还要愿他比自己更好，就是进化。这离绝了交换关系利害关系的爱，便是人伦的索子，便是所谓“纲”。倘如旧说，抹杀了“爱”，一味说“恩”，又因此责望报偿，那便不但败坏了父子间的道德，而且也大反于做父母的实际的真情，播下乖剌的种子。有人做了乐府，说是“劝孝”，大意是什么“儿子上学堂，母亲在家磨杏仁，预备回来给他喝，你还不孝么”之类，自以为“拚命卫道”。殊不知富翁的杏酪和穷人的豆浆，在爱情上价值同等，而其价值却正在父母当时并无求报的心思；否则变成买卖行为，虽然喝了杏酪，也不异“人乳喂猪”，无非要猪肉肥美，在人伦道德上，丝毫没有价值了。
Human beings are no exception, and European and American families are mostly based on the young and the weak, which is the method that is most in line with this biological truth. Even in China, as long as the mind is pure and has not been practiced by the "disciples of the saints", they can naturally discover this nature. For example, when a village woman is breastfeeding a baby, she never thinks that she is giving grace; When a farmer marries a wife, he never thinks that he is going to lend money. Just have children, that is, natural love, may he survive; Furthermore, we must hope that he is better than ourselves, that is, evolution. This love that separates from the exchange of interests in the relationship is the rope of human ethics, which is the so-called "program". If, as the old saying goes, erasing "love", blindly saying "kindness", and expecting repayment, it will not only corrupt the morality between father and son, but also go against the actual true feelings of parenthood and sow the seeds of obedience. Some people made Yuefu, saying that it was "persuading filial piety", to the effect of "the son goes to school, the mother grinds almonds at home, and is ready to come back to drink for him, are you still unfilial", thinking that he is "desperately defending". As everyone knows, the rich man's apricot cheese and the poor man's soy milk are of equal value in love, but their value is that their parents did not have the intention of seeking repayment at that time; Otherwise, it becomes a buying and selling behavior, although drinking apricot cheese, it is no different from "feeding pigs with human milk", which is nothing more than making pork fat, and it has no value at all in terms of human morality.所以我现在心以为然的，便只是“爱”。
So what I think is right now is just "love".无论何国何人，大都承认“爱己”是一件应当的事。这便是保存生命的要义，也就是继续生命的根基。因为将来的运命，早在现在决定，故父母的缺点，便是子孙灭亡的伏线，生命的危机。易卜生做的《群鬼》（有潘家洵君译本，载在《新朝》一卷五号）虽然重在男女问题，但我们也可以看出遗传的可怕。欧士华本是要生活，能创作的人，因为父亲的不检，先天得了病毒，中途不能做人了。他又很爱母亲，不忍劳他服侍，便藏着吗啡，想待发作时候，由使女瑞琴帮他吃下，毒杀了自己；可是瑞琴走了。他于是只好托他母亲了。
No matter what country or person you are, most of them admit that "loving yourself" is a proper thing. This is the essence of preserving life, that is, the foundation of continuing life. Because the future fate is decided as early as now, the shortcomings of parents are the foreshadowing of the demise of their children and grandchildren, the crisis of life. Although Ibsen's "Group of Ghosts" (translated by Pan Jiaxunjun, published in "New Dynasty" Volume 1, No. 5) focuses on the issue of men and women, we can also see the horror of heredity. Ou Shihua was originally a person who wanted to live and create, but because of his father's misconduct, he was born with a virus and could not be a human being halfway. He loved his mother very much, and he couldn't bear to bother him to serve, so he hid morphine, and when he had an attack, the maid Ruiqin helped him eat it and poisoned himself; But Ruiqin is gone. So he had to rely on his mother.
欧　“母亲，现在应该你帮我的忙了。”
Ou "Mother, you should help me now."阿夫人　“我吗？”
"Me?"欧　“谁能及得上你。”
"Who can match you?"阿夫人　“我！你的母亲！”
"Me! Your mother! ”欧　“正为那个。”
"That's exactly what it is."阿夫人　“我，生你的人！”
Mrs. Ah "I, the one who gave birth to you!"欧　“我不曾教你生我。并且给我的是一种什么日子？我不要他！你拿回去罢！”
"I never taught you to give birth to me. And what kind of day was given to me? I don't want him! You take it back!" ”
这一段描写，实在是我们做父亲的人应该震惊戒惧佩服的；决不能昧了良心，说儿子理应受罪。这种事情，中国也很多，只要在医院做事，便能时时看见先天梅毒性病儿的惨状；而且傲然的送来的，又大抵是他的父母。但可怕的遗传，并不只是梅毒，另外许多精神上体质上的缺点，也可以传之子孙，而且久而久之，连社会都蒙着影响。我们且不高谈人群，单为子女说，便可以说凡是不爱己的人，实在欠缺做父亲的资格。就令硬做了父亲，也不过如古代的草寇称王一般，万万算不了正统。将来学问发达，社会改造时，他们侥幸留下的苗裔，恐怕总不免要受善种学（Eugenics）者的处置。
This description is really what we fathers should be shocked and admired; You must not lose your conscience and say that your son deserves to suffer. As long as you work in the hospital, you can always see the tragic situation of children with congenital syphilitis; And the one who sent it proudly was probably his parents. But terrible heredity is not only syphilis, but also many other mental and physical shortcomings, which can also be passed on to future generations, and over time, even society is affected. Let's not talk about the crowd, just for the sake of our children, we can say that anyone who does not love themselves really lacks the qualifications to be a father. Even if he was forced to be a father, it was just like the ancient grass bandits called kings, and it was definitely not orthodox. In the future, when knowledge develops and social transformation occurs, the descendants they leave behind by chance may inevitably be dealt with by the Eugenics.倘若现在父母并没有将什么精神上体质上的缺点交给子女，又不遇意外的事，子女便当然健康，总算已经达到了继续生命的目的。但父母的责任还没有完，因为生命虽然继续了，却是停顿不得，所以还须教这新生命去发展。凡动物较高等的，对于幼雏，除了养育保护以外，往往还教他们生存上必需的本领。例如飞禽便教飞翔，鸷兽便教搏击。人类更高几等，便也有愿意子孙更进一层的天性。这也是爱，上文所说的是对于现在，这是对于将来。只要思想未遭锢蔽的人，谁也喜欢子女比自己更强，更健康，更聪明高尚，——更幸福；就是超越了自己，超越了过去。超越便须改变，所以子孙对于祖先的事，应该改变，“三年无改于父之道可谓孝矣”，当然是曲说，是退婴的病根。假使古代的单细胞动物，也遵着这教训，那便永远不敢分裂繁复，世界上再也不会有人类了。
If parents do not hand over any mental and physical shortcomings to their children, and there are no accidents, the children will of course be healthy and have finally achieved the purpose of continuing their lives. But the responsibility of parents is not over, because although life continues, it cannot be stopped, so it must be taught to develop this new life. For those with higher animals, in addition to raising and protecting the young chicks, they often teach them the skills necessary for survival. For example, birds teach to fly, and fierce beasts teach to fight. Human beings are a few ranks higher, and they also have the nature to be willing to go one step further. This is also love, what I said above is for the present, this is for the future. As long as the mind is not confined, everyone likes their children to be stronger, healthier, smarter, noble,—— happier than themselves; It is to surpass oneself and the past. Transcendence must be changed, so the descendants should change the affairs of their ancestors, "three years of not changing the way of the father can be called filial piety", of course, it is a distortion, it is the root of the disease of the baby. If ancient single-celled animals also followed this lesson, they would never dare to divide and reproduce, and there would be no more humans in the world.幸而这一类教训，虽然害过许多人，却还未能完全扫尽了一切人的天性。没有读过“圣贤书”的人，还能将这天性在名教的斧钺底下，时时流露，时时萌蘖；这便是中国人虽然凋落萎缩，却未灭绝的原因。
Fortunately, this kind of lesson, although it has harmed many people, has not completely swept away the nature of all people. Those who have not read the "Book of Sages" can still put this nature under the axe and axe of the famous teachings, always revealing and sprouting; This is the reason why the Chinese have not become extinct although they have withered and shrunk.所以觉醒的人，此后应将这天性的爱，更加扩张，更加醇化；用无我的爱，自己牺牲于后起新人。开宗第一，便是理解。往昔的欧人对于孩子的误解，是以为成人的预备；中国人的误解是以为缩小的成人。直到近来，经过许多学者的研究，才知道孩子的世界，与成人截然不同；倘不先行理解，一味蛮做，便大碍于孩子的发达。所以一切设施，都应该以孩子为本位，日本近来，觉悟的也很不少；对于儿童的设施，研究儿童的事业，都非常兴盛了。第二，便是指导。时势既有改变，生活也必须进化；所以后起的人物，一定尤异于前，决不能用同一模型，无理嵌定。长者须是指导者协商者，却不该是命令者。不但不该责幼者供奉自己；而且还须用全副精神，专为他们自己，养成他们有耐劳作的体力，纯洁高尚的道德，广博自由能容纳新潮流的精神，也就是能在世界新潮流中游泳，不被淹没的力量。第三，便是解放。子女是即我非我的人，但既已分立，也便是人类中的人。因为即我，所以更应该尽教育的义务，交给他们自立的能力；因为非我，所以也应同时解放，全部为他们自己所有，成一个独立的人。
Therefore, awakened people should expand and mellow this natural love in the future; With selfless love, he sacrificed himself to the rising newcomer. The first thing to do is to understand. In the past, Europeans misunderstood children as preparations for adults; The Chinese misconception is that they think they are shrinking adults. It was only recently, after the research of many scholars, that we knew that the world of children is completely different from that of adults; If you don't understand it first, it will greatly hinder the development of your children. Therefore, all facilities should be child-oriented, and Japan has recently been enlightened; Facilities for children, research on children, are very prosperous. Second, it is guidance. The times have changed, and life must also evolve; Therefore, the rising figures must be more different from the previous ones, and they must not use the same model and unreasonably embedding. The elder must be the guide and the negotiator, but not the orderer. Not only should the young should not be blamed for offering themselves; And they must also use all their spirit, exclusively for themselves, to cultivate their physical strength to work, pure and noble morals, and the spirit of broad freedom to accommodate new trends, that is, the strength to swim in the new trends of the world and not be overwhelmed. Third, it is liberation. Children are people who are not me, but since they are separated, they are also people in mankind. Because it is me, we should fulfill our obligation of education and give them the ability to be self-reliant; Because it is not me, they should also be liberated at the same time, all for themselves, and become an independent person.这样，便是父母对于子女，应该健全的产生，尽力的教育，完全的解放。
In this way, parents should give their children a healthy birth, do their best to educate, and completely liberate them.但有人会怕，仿佛父母从此以后，一无所有，无聊之极了。这种空虚的恐怖和无聊的感想，也即从谬误的旧思想发生；倘明白了生物学的真理，自然便会消灭。但要做解放子女的父母，也应预备一种能力。便是自己虽然已经带着过去的色采，却不失独立的本领和精神，有广博的趣味，高尚的娱乐。要幸福么？连你的将来的生命都幸福了。要“返老还童”，要“老复丁”么？子女便是“复丁”，都已独立而且更好了。这才是完了长者的任务，得了人生的慰安。倘若思想本领，样样照旧，专以“勃谿”为业，行辈自豪，那便自然免不了空虚无聊的苦痛。
But some people will be afraid, as if their parents have nothing from now on, and they will be extremely bored. This empty horror and boring feeling arises from false old thoughts; If you understand the truth of biology, it will naturally disappear. But parents who want to liberate their children should also prepare an ability. It is that although he has the color of the past, he does not lose his independent skills and spirit, has broad interest, and noble entertainment. Do you want to be happy? Even your future life is happy. Do you want to "rejuvenate" or "rejuvenate"? The children are "Fu Ding", and they are all independent and better. This is the end of the elderly's task and the comfort of life. If you have ideological skills, everything is the same, and you are proud of "Boxi", then you will naturally inevitably suffer from emptiness and boredom.或者又怕，解放之后，父子间要疏隔了。欧美的家庭，专制不及中国，早已大家知道；往者虽有人比之禽兽，现在却连“卫道”的圣徒，也曾替他们辩护，说并无“逆子叛弟”了。因此可知：惟其解放，所以相亲；惟其没有“拘挛”子弟的父兄，所以也没有反抗“拘挛”的“逆子叛弟”。若威逼利诱，便无论如何，决不能有“万年有道之长”。例便如我中国，汉有举孝，唐有孝悌力田科，清末也还有孝廉方正，都能换到官做。父恩谕之于先，皇恩施之于后，然而割股的人物，究属寥寥。足可证明中国的旧学说旧手段，实在从古以来，并无良效，无非使坏人增长些虚伪，好人无端的多受些人我都无利益的苦痛罢了。
Or I am afraid that after liberation, the father and son will be estranged. European and American families are not as authoritarian as China, which has long been known; In the past, some people compared them to beasts, but now even the saints who "defended the Way" defended them, saying that there were no "traitors". Therefore, it can be seen that only its liberation is the blind date; However, he did not have a father or brother who was "restrained" by his children, so he did not have a "rebellious son and brother" who resisted the "restraint". If there is coercion and temptation, no matter what, there must be no "ten thousand years of longevity". For example, in China, the Han Dynasty had filial piety, the Tang Dynasty had filial piety, and at the end of the Qing Dynasty, there were also filial piety and integrity, all of which could be changed to officials. The father's grace was given to the first, and the emperor's grace was given to the queen, but the figures who cut off their legs were ultimately few. It is enough to prove that China's old doctrines and old methods have really not been effective since ancient times, and they are nothing more than making the bad people increase some hypocrisy, and the good people suffer more for no reason.独有“爱”是真的。路粹引孔融说，“父之于子，当有何亲？论其本意，实为情欲发耳。子之于母，亦复奚为，譬如寄物瓶中，出则离矣。”（汉末的孔府上，很出过几个有特色的奇人，不像现在这般冷落，这话也许确是北海先生所说；只是攻击他的偏是路粹和曹操，教人发笑罢了。）虽然也是一种对于旧说的打击，但实于事理不合。因为父母生了子女，同时又有天性的爱，这爱又很深广很长久，不会即离。现在世界没有大同，相爱还有差等，子女对于父母，也便最爱，最关切，不会即离。所以疏隔一层，不劳多虑。至于一种例外的人，或者非爱所能钩连。但若爱力尚且不能钩连，那便任凭什么“恩威，名分，天经，地义”之类，更是钩连不住。
Unique "love" is real. Lu Cui quoted Kong Rong as saying, "What kind of relatives should a father have to his son? In terms of its original intention, it is actually a matter of desire. What does a child do to his mother, like putting something in a bottle, and when it comes out, it will leave. (In the Confucius Mansion at the end of the Han Dynasty, there were a few strange people with characteristics, not as neglected as they are now, which may indeed be what Mr. Beihai said; It's just that Lu Cui and Cao Cao attacked him, teaching people to laugh. Although it is also a blow to the old theory, it is really unreasonable. Because parents have children, and at the same time they have natural love, this love is deep, wide, and long-lasting, and will not leave immediately. Now there is no unity in the world, and there is still a difference in love, and children love and care about their parents the most, and they will not leave immediately. Therefore, it is necessary to separate one layer without worrying too much. As for an exception, it may not be possible to connect with love. But if the love cannot be connected, then no matter what "grace, title, heavenly scriptures, and earthly righteousness" and so on, it will not be connected.或者又怕，解放之后，长者要吃苦了。这事可分两层：第一，中国的社会，虽说“道德好”，实际却太缺乏相爱相助的心思。便是“孝”“烈”这类道德，也都是旁人毫不负责，一味收拾幼者弱者的方法。在这样社会中，不独老者难于生活，即解放的幼者，也难于生活。第二，中国的男女，大抵未老先衰，甚至不到二十岁，早已老态可掬，待到真实衰老，便更须别人扶持。所以我说，解放子女的父母，应该先有一番预备；而对于如此社会，尤应该改造，使他能适于合理的生活。许多人预备着，改造着，久而久之，自然可望实现了。单就别国的往时而言，斯宾塞未曾结婚，不闻他侘傺无聊；瓦特早没有了子女，也居然“寿终正寝”，何况在将来，更何况有儿女的人呢？
Or I am afraid that after liberation, the elders will suffer. This matter can be divided into two layers: First, although Chinese society is "morally good", it actually lacks the mind of loving and helping each other. Even morality such as "filial piety" and "martyrdom" are also methods of blindly cleaning up the young and the weak. In such a society, it is difficult not only for the elderly to live, but also for the liberated young. Second, most of Chinese men and women are not old enough, or even less than 20 years old, and they are already old, and when they really age, they need the support of others. Therefore, I say that parents who liberate their children should first make some preparations; And for such a society, it should be transformed so that it can be suitable for a reasonable life. Many people are preparing and transforming, and over time, it is naturally expected to be realized. As far as the past of other countries is concerned, Spencer has never been married, and he has not heard of his boredom; Watt has long since lost his children, and he is actually "dying", let alone in the future, let alone those who have children?或者又怕，解放之后，子女要吃苦了。这事也有两层，全如上文所说，不过一是因为老而无能，一是因为少不更事罢了。因此觉醒的人，愈觉有改造社会的任务。中国相传的成法，谬误很多：一种是锢闭，以为可以与社会隔离，不受影响。一种是教给他恶本领，以为如此才能在社会中生活。用这类方法的长者，虽然也含有继续生命的好意，但比照事理，却决定谬误。此外还有一种，是传授些周旋方法，教他们顺应社会。这与数年前讲“实用主义”的人，因为市上有假洋钱，便要在学校里遍教学生看洋钱的法子之类，同一错误。社会虽然不能不偶然顺应，但决不是正当办法。因为社会不良，恶现象便很多，势不能一一顺应；倘都顺应了，又违反了合理的生活，倒走了进化的路。所以根本方法，只有改良社会。
Or I am afraid that after liberation, my children will suffer. There are two layers to this matter, all as mentioned above, but one is because of old age and incompetence, and the other is because of lack of trouble. Therefore, awakened people feel more and more that they have the task of transforming society. There are many fallacies in the Chinese tradition: one is to be confined, thinking that it can be isolated from society and not affected. One is to teach him evil skills, thinking that this is how he can live in society. Elders who use this kind of method, although they also have the good intention to continue their lives, are mistaken in their decisions. In addition, there is another way to teach them how to deal with society. This is the same mistake as those who talked about "pragmatism" a few years ago, because there were fake foreign coins in the market, so they had to teach students how to read foreign money in schools. Although society cannot help but conform by chance, it is by no means a legitimate way. Because of the bad society, there are many evil phenomena, and it is inevitable that they cannot conform to them one by one; If they all conform to it, they violate a reasonable life and go the wrong way of evolution. Therefore, the only fundamental way is to improve society.就实际上说，中国旧理想的家族关系父子关系之类，其实早已崩溃。这也非“于今为烈”，正是“在昔已然”。历来都竭力表彰“五世同堂”，便足见实际上同居的为难；拚命的劝孝，也足见事实上孝子的缺少。而其原因，便全在一意提倡虚伪道德，蔑视了真的人情。我们试一翻大族的家谱，便知道始迁祖宗，大抵是单身迁居，成家立业；一到聚族而居，家谱出版，却已在零落的中途了。况在将来，迷信破了，便没有哭竹，卧冰；医学发达了，也不必尝秽，割股。又因为经济关系，结婚不得不迟，生育因此也迟，或者子女才能自存，父母已经衰老，不及依赖他们供养，事实上也就是父母反尽了义务。世界潮流逼拶着，这样做的可以生存，不然的便都衰落；无非觉醒者多，加些人力，便危机可望较少就是了。
In fact, China's old ideal family relationship and father-son relationship have actually collapsed long ago. This is not "martyr today", it is "already in the past". has always tried its best to commend the "five generations in the same house", which shows the difficulty of actually living together; The desperate persuasion of filial piety also shows the lack of filial piety. And the reason for this is that it is all about advocating hypocritical morality and despising real human feelings. If we try to look at the family tree of the big family, we will know that the ancestors who migrated were probably single people who moved and started a family; As soon as the family lives together, the family tree is published, but it is already in the middle of the decline. Moreover, in the future, if superstition is broken, there will be no crying bamboo or lying ice; With the development of medicine, there is no need to taste filthy and cut off the thigh. And because of economic relations, marriage has to be late, childbirth is also late, or children can survive on their own, and the parents are old and cannot rely on them to provide for them, in fact, the parents have fulfilled their obligations. The world trend is forcing us to survive, otherwise we will decline; It's just that there are more awakened people, and with some manpower, the crisis is expected to be less.但既如上言，中国家庭，实际久已崩溃，并不如“圣人之徒”纸上的空谈，则何以至今依然如故，一无进步呢？这事很容易解答。第一，崩溃者自崩溃，纠缠者自纠缠，设立者又自设立；毫无戒心，也不想到改革，所以如故。第二，以前的家庭中间，本来常有勃谿，到了新名词流行之后，便都改称“革命”，然而其实也仍是讨嫖钱至于相骂，要赌本至于相打之类，与觉醒者的改革，截然两途。这一类自称“革命”的勃谿子弟，纯属旧式，待到自己有了子女，也决不解放；或者毫不管理，或者反要寻出《孝经》，勒令诵读，想他们“学于古训”，都做牺牲。这只能全归旧道德旧习惯旧方法负责，生物学的真理决不能妄任其咎。
But as mentioned above, the Chinese family has actually collapsed for a long time, and it is not as empty talk as the "saints" on paper, so why is it still the same as before, with no progress? This is easy to answer. First, the collapse collapses by itself, the entangler entangles itself, and the establishment establishes itself; Unsuspecting, I didn't want to reform, so I remained the same. Second, in the past, there were often Boxi in the family, but after the new term became popular, they were all renamed "revolution", but in fact, it was still about asking for prostitution money and scolding each other, and betting on each other, which was completely different from the reform of the awakened people. This type of Boxi children who call themselves "revolutionary" are purely old-fashioned, and they will never be liberated until they have children; or without management, or on the contrary, they wanted to find the "Classic of Filial Piety" and order them to recite it, thinking that they would "learn from the ancient teachings" and make sacrifices. This can only be attributed to old morality, old habits and methods, and biological truth must not be left to blame.既如上言，生物为要进化，应该继续生命，那便“不孝有三无后为大”，三妻四妾，也极合理了。这事也很容易解答。人类因为无后，绝了将来的生命，虽然不幸，但若用不正当的方法手段，苟延生命而害及人群，便该比一人无后，尤其“不孝”。因为现在的社会，一夫一妻制最为合理，而多妻主义，实能使人群堕落。堕落近于退化，与继续生命的目的，恰恰完全相反。无后只是灭绝了自己，退化状态的有后，便会毁到他人。人类总有些为他人牺牲自己的精神，而况生物自发生以来，交互关联，一人的血统，大抵总与他人有多少关系，不会完全灭绝。所以生物学的真理，决非多妻主义的护符。
As mentioned above, in order for living things to evolve, they should continue to live, so "unfilial piety has three no descendants", and three wives and four concubines are also very reasonable. This is also easy to answer. Although it is unfortunate, if human beings use improper methods and means to prolong their lives and harm the people, they should be more than one person without descendants, especially "unfilial". Because in today's society, monogamy is the most reasonable, and polygamy can actually degrade the crowd. Fall is close to degradation, which is the exact opposite of the purpose of continuing life. The queen only exterminates himself, and the queen in a degraded state will destroy others. Human beings have always sacrificed their spirit for others, and since the emergence of living things, they have been interrelated, and a person's bloodline is probably always related to others, and it will not become completely extinct. Therefore, biological truth is by no means a talisman of polygamy.总而言之，觉醒的父母，完全应该是义务的，利他的，牺牲的，很不易做；而在中国尤不易做。中国觉醒的人，为想随顺长者解放幼者，便须一面清结旧账，一面开辟新路。就是开首所说的“自己背着因袭的重担，肩住了黑暗的闸门，放他们到宽阔光明的地方去；此后幸福的度日，合理的做人。”这是一件极伟大的要紧的事，也是一件极困苦艰难的事。
All in all, awakened parents should be obligatory, altruistic, sacrificial, and not easy to do; It is especially difficult to do in China. The awakened people of China, in order to liberate the young by following the elderly, must settle old accounts and open up new paths at the same time. It is what is said at the beginning, "I carry the burden of the attack, shoulder the floodgates of darkness, and let them go to a wide and bright place; After that, live happily and be a reasonable person. "This is a great and important thing, and it is also a very difficult and difficult thing.但世间又有一类长者，不但不肯解放子女，并且不准子女解放他们自己的子女；就是并要孙子曾孙都做无谓的牺牲。这也是一个问题；而我是愿意平和的人，所以对于这问题，现在不能解答。
But there is another type of elderly in the world who not only refuse to liberate their children, but also do not allow their children to liberate their own children; It is to make unnecessary sacrifices for grandchildren and great-grandchildren. This is also a problem; And I am a person who is willing to be peaceful, so I can't answer this question now.一九一九年十月。
October, 1919.

宋民间之所谓小说及其后来

宋民间之所谓小说及其后来

宋民间之所谓小说及其后来

The so-called novels of the Song Dynasty and its later years宋代行于民间的小说，与历来史家所著录者很不同，当时并非文辞，而为属于技艺的“说话”之一种。
The folk novels in the Song Dynasty were very different from those written by historians throughout the years, and they were not literary words at that time, but a kind of "speaking" that belonged to skills.说话者，未详始于何时，但据故书，可以知道唐时则已有。段成式（《酉阳杂俎续集》四《贬误》）云：
It is not known when the speaker began, but according to the old books, it can be known that it existed in the Tang Dynasty. Duan Chengshi ("Youyang Zazu Sequel" 4 "Derogatory Error") said:“予太和末因弟生日观杂戏，有市人小说，呼扁鹊作褊鹊字，上声。予令任道昇字正之。市人言‘二十年前尝于上都斋会设此，有一秀才甚赏某呼扁字与褊同声，云世人皆误。’”
“予太和末因弟生日观杂戏，有市人小说，呼扁鹊作褊鹊字，上声。 予令任道昇字正之。 市人言‘二十年前尝于上都斋会设此，有一秀才甚赏某呼扁字与褊同声，云世人皆误。 ’”其详细虽难晓，但因此已足以推见数端：一小说为杂戏中之一种，二由于市人之口述，三在庆祝及斋会时用之。而郎瑛（《七修类藁》二十二）所谓“小说起宋仁宗，盖时太平盛久，国家闲暇，日欲进一奇怪之事以娱之，故小说‘得胜头回’之后，即云话说赵宋某年”者，亦即由此分明证实，不过一种无稽之谈罢了。
Although the details are difficult to know, it is enough to infer several aspects: one is a kind of miscellaneous drama, two is due to the oral narration of the public, and three is used during celebrations and fasts. And Lang Ying ("Seven Revisions of Straws" 22) said, "The novel began with Song Renzong, because it was peaceful and prosperous for a long time, and the country was idle, and it wanted to do a strange thing to entertain it every day, so after the novel 'won the first time', that is, the cloud said that Zhao Song was a certain year", which is clearly confirmed, but it is just a kind of nonsense.到宋朝，小说的情形乃始比较的可以知道详细。孟元老在南渡之后，追怀汴梁盛况，作《东京梦华录》，于“京瓦技艺”条下有当时说话的分目，为小说，合生，说诨话，说三分，说《五代史》等。而操此等职业者则称为“说话人”。
By the Song Dynasty, the situation of the novel could be known in detail. After Meng Yuanlao crossed south, he reminisced about the grand occasion of Bianliang and wrote "Tokyo Menghualu", which had the sub-heading of the speech at that time under the article "Jingwa Skills", for novels, joint births, jokes, three points, and "History of the Five Dynasties". Those who practice such professions are called "speakers".高宗既定都临安，更历孝光两朝，汴梁式的文物渐已遍满都下，伎艺人也一律完备了。关于说话的记载，在故书中也更详尽，端平年间的著作有灌园耐得翁《都城纪胜》，元初的著作有吴自牧《梦粱录》及周密《武林旧事》，都更详细的有说话的分科：
Emperor Gaozong established the capital Lin'an, and after the two dynasties of Xiaoguang, the Bianliang-style cultural relics gradually spread all over the capital, and the artists were also complete. The records about speaking are also more detailed in the old books, such as the works of Guanyuan Naideweng during the Duanping period, and the works of Wu Zimu in the early Yuan Dynasty include Wu Zimu's "Meng Liang Lu" and Zhou Mi's "Old Things of Wulin", all of which have more detailed sub-sections of talking:

《都城纪胜》"Capital Victory"
《梦粱录》（二十）"Dream Liang Lu" (20)

说话有四家：There are four schools to speak:
说话者，谓之舌辩，虽有四家数，各有门庭：The speaker is called the tongue debate, although there are four schools, each with its own court:

一者小说，谓之银字儿如烟粉灵怪传奇；说公案，皆是搏刀赶棒及发迹变态之事说铁骑儿，谓士马金鼓之事。One is a novel, called a silver character like a legend of smoke powder and spirits; Talking about public cases is all about fighting with knives and sticks and making a fortune.
且小说，名银字儿，如烟粉灵怪传奇；公案，朴刀杆棒发发踪参（案此四字当有误）之事。……谈论古今，如水之流。And the novel, the name of the silver word, is like the legend of the smoke powder and the monster; In the public case, the Park knife rod and the stick are sent to trace the reference (according to these four words should be wrong). …… Talking about ancient and modern times is like the flow of water.

说经，谓演说佛书；说参请，谓宾主参禅悟道等事。Speaking of scriptures refers to speaking Buddhist books; Speaking of participation, it refers to the participation of guests and hosts in meditation and enlightenment.
谈经者，谓演说佛书；说参请者，谓宾主参禅悟道等事。……又有说诨经者。谈经者，谓演说佛书；说参请者，谓宾主参禅悟道等事。 …… 又有说诨经者。

讲史书，讲说前代书史文传兴废争战之事。……讲史书，讲说前代书史文传兴废争战之事。 ……
讲史书者，谓讲说《通鉴》汉唐历代书史文传兴废争战之事。讲史书者，谓讲说《通鉴》汉唐历代书史文传兴废争战之事。

合生，与起令随令相似各占一事。合生，与起令随令相似各占一事。
合生，与起今随今相似，各占一事也。合生，与起今随今相似，各占一事也。

但周密所记者又小异，为演史，说经诨经，小说，说诨话；而无合生。唐中宗时，武平一上书言“比来妖伎胡人，街童市子，或言妃主情貌，或列王公名质，咏歌蹈舞，号曰合生。”（《新唐书》一百十九）则合生实始于唐，且用诨词戏谑，或者也就是说诨话；惟至宋当又稍有迁变，今未详。起今随今之“今”，《都城纪胜》作“令”，明抄本《说郛》中之《古杭梦游录》又作起令随合，何者为是，亦未详。
但周密所记者又小异，为演史，说经诨经，小说，说诨话；而无合生。 唐中宗时，武平一上书言“比来妖伎胡人，街童市子，或言妃主情貌，或列王公名质，咏歌蹈舞，号曰合生。 ”（《新唐书》一百十九）则合生实始于唐，且用诨词戏谑，或者也就是说诨话；惟至宋当又稍有迁变，今未详。 起今随今之“今”，《都城纪胜》作“令”，明抄本《说郛》中之《古杭梦游录》又作起令随合，何者为是，亦未详。据耐得翁及吴自牧说，是说话之一科的小说，又因内容之不同而分为三子目：
According to Naideweng and Wu Zimu, it is a novel of the speaking category, and it is divided into three sub-categories due to different contents:1. 银字儿　所说者为烟粉（烟花粉黛），灵怪（神仙鬼怪），传奇（离合悲欢）等。
1. Silver Word The person mentioned is tobacco powder (fireworks powder), spirit monster (gods and ghosts), legend (clutch and joy), etc.2. 说公案　所说者为搏刀赶棒（拳勇），发迹变态（遇合）之事。
2. Saying koan What is said is the matter of fighting with a knife and a stick (boxing courage) and making a fortune (encounter).3. 说铁骑儿　所说者为士马金鼓（战争）之事。
3. Talking about the iron cavalry is about the war.惟有小说，是说话中最难的一科，所以说话人“最畏小说，盖小说者，能讲一朝一代故事，顷刻间提破”（《都城纪胜》云；《梦粱录》同，惟“提破”作“捏合”），非同讲史，易于铺张；而且又须有“谈论古今，如水之流”的口辩。然而在临安也不乏讲小说的高手，吴自牧所记有谭淡子等六人，周密所记有蔡和等五十二人，其中也有女流，如陈郎娘枣儿，史蕙英。
Only novels are the most difficult subjects in speaking, so the speaker is "most afraid of novels, and the novelist can tell the story of a generation and break it in an instant" ("Capital Victory"; "Meng Liang Lu" is the same, but "Ti Po" is used as "pinching"), which is not the same as telling history, and is easy to be extravagant; And there must be an eloquence of "talking about ancient and modern, like the flow of water". However, there is no shortage of masters of telling novels in Lin'an, Wu Zimu recorded six people including Tan Danzi, and Zhou Mi recorded fifty-two people including Cai He, among whom there were also female streams, such as Chen Langniang Zao'er and Shi Huiying.临安的文士佛徒多有集会；瓦舍的技艺人也多有，其主意大约是在于磨炼技术的。小说专家所立的社会，名曰雄辩社。（《武林旧事》三）
Lin'an scribes and Buddhists have many gatherings; There are also many skilled craftsmen in Washer, and their idea is probably to hone their skills. The society established by novel experts is called the Eloquent Society. ("Old Stories of Wulin" 3)元人杂剧虽然早经销歇，但尚有流传的曲本，来示人以大概的情形。宋人的小说也一样，也幸而借了“话本”偶有留遗，使现在还可以约略想见当时瓦舍中说话的模样。
Although the Yuan people's miscellaneous dramas have long been distributed, there are still circulating song books to show people the general situation. The same is true for the novels of the Song people, and fortunately, there are occasional relics left behind by borrowing the "word book", so that we can now roughly imagine the appearance of speaking in the Washe at that time.其话本曰《京本通俗小说》，全书不知凡几卷，现在所见的只有残本，经江阴缪氏影刻，是卷十至十六的七卷，先曾单行，后来就收在《烟画东堂小品》之内了。还有一卷是叙金海陵王的秽行的，或者因为文笔过于碍眼了罢，缪氏没有刻，然而仍有郋园的改换名目的排印本；郋园是长沙叶德辉的园名。
The book is called "Jingben Popular Novel", the whole book does not know how many volumes, and now only the fragments are seen, which are seven volumes from volume 10 to 16 by Jiangyin Miao's shadow. There is also a volume that describes the filthy deeds of King Hailing of Jin, or because the writing is too eyesore, Miao did not engrave it, but there is still a typesetting version of the changed name of Yunyuan; Yun Garden is the name of Changsha Ye Dehui.刻本七卷中所收小说的篇目以及故事发生的年代如下列：
The titles of the novels included in the seven volumes of the engraved version and the age of the story are as follows:

卷十　碾玉观音Volume 10 Grinding Jade Guanyin
“绍兴年间。”"During the Shaoxing period."

十一　菩萨蛮11. Bodhisattva barbarians
“大宋高宗绍兴年间。”"During the Shaoxing period of Emperor Gaozong of the Great Song Dynasty."

十二　西山一窟鬼12. A cave ghost in the western mountains
“绍兴十年间。”"Shaoxing in the past ten years."

十三　志诚张主管13. Zhicheng Zhang supervisor
无年代，但云东京汴州开封事。无年代，但云东京汴州开封事。

十四　拗相公十四 拗相公
“先朝。”“先朝。 ”

十五　错斩崔宁十五 错斩崔宁
“高宗时。”“高宗时。 ”

十六　冯玉梅团圆十六 冯玉梅团圆
“建炎四年。”“建炎四年。 ”

每题俱是一全篇，自为起讫，并不相联贯。钱曾《也是园书目》（十）著录的“宋人词话”十六种中，有《错斩崔宁》与《冯玉梅团圆》两种，可知旧刻又有单篇本，而《通俗小说》即是若干单篇本的结集，并非一手所成。至于所说故事发生的时代，则多在南宋之初；北宋已少，何况汉唐。又可知小说取材，须在近时；因为演说古事，范围即属讲史，虽说小说家亦复“谈论古今，如水之流”，但其谈古当是引证及装点，而非小说的本文。如《拗相公》开首虽说王莽，但主意却只在引出王安石，即其例。
Each topic is a complete article, starting and ending, and is not connected. Among the sixteen kinds of "Song People's Words" recorded in Qian Zeng's "Yiyuan Bibliography" (10), there are two types: "Wrongly Cut Cui Ning" and "Feng Yumei Reunion", which shows that there is a single version in the old engraving, and the "Popular Novel" is a collection of several single books, not made by one hand. As for the era in which the story takes place, it is mostly at the beginning of the Southern Song Dynasty; The Northern Song Dynasty has been few, let alone the Han and Tang dynasties. It can also be seen that the material of the novel must be in the near future; Although novelists also "talk about ancient and modern, like the flow of water", their talk about the past should be quotation and embellishment, not the text of the novel. For example, although Wang Mang is mentioned at the beginning of "The Strange Gentleman", the idea is only to lead out Wang Anshi, that is, an example.七篇中开首即入正文者只有《菩萨蛮》；其余六篇则当讲说之前，俱先引诗词或别的事实，就是“先引下一个故事来，权做个‘得胜头回’。”（本书十五）“头回”当即冒头的一回之意，“得胜”是吉语，瓦舍为军民所聚，自然也不免以利市语说之，未必因为进御才如此。
Among the seven chapters, only "Bodhisattva Man" is the one that enters the main text; The remaining six articles should be quoted before telling, and they all quote poems or other facts, that is, "first lead the next story, and do a 'victory first time'." "(Book 15) "First return" immediately means a time, "victory" is a auspicious language, and Washe is gathered by the military and civilians, so naturally it is inevitable to say it in the Lishi language, not necessarily because of the imperial process.“得胜头回”略有定法，可说者凡四：
There are four ways to say about the "winning head":1. 以略相关涉的诗词引起本文。如卷十用《春词》十一首引起延安郡王游春；卷十二用士人沈文述的词逐句解释，引起遇鬼的士人皆是。
1. This article is caused by slightly related poems. For example, Volume 10 uses eleven songs of "Spring Words" to cause Yan'an County Prince Youchun; Volume 12 is explained sentence by sentence with the words of the scholar Shen Wenshu, causing the scholars who encounter ghosts to be.2. 以相类之事引起本文。如卷十四以王莽引起王安石是。
2. Cause this article to be similar to it. For example, Volume 14 caused Wang Mang to cause Wang Anshi.3. 以较逊之事引起本文。如卷十五以魏生因戏言落职，引起刘贵因戏言遇大祸；卷十六以“交互姻缘”转入“双镜重圆”而“有关风化，到还胜似几倍”皆是。
3. This article is caused by inferior things. For example, Volume 15 caused Liu Gui to suffer a great disaster because of his jokes; Volume 16 shifts from "interactive marriage" to "double mirror reunion" and "related to weathering, and it is better than several times".4. 以相反之事引起本文。如卷十三以王处厚照镜见白发的词有知足之意，引起不伏老的张士廉以晚年娶妻破家是。而这四种定法，也就牢笼了后来的许多拟作了。在日本还传有中国旧刻的《大唐三藏取经记》三卷，共十七章，章必有诗；别一小本则题曰《大唐三藏取经诗话》。《也是园书目》将《错斩崔宁》及《冯玉梅团圆》归入“宋人词话”门，或者此类话本，有时亦称词话：就是小说的别名。《通俗小说》每篇引用诗词之多，实远过于讲史（《五代史平话》，《三国志传》，《水浒传》等），开篇引首，中间铺叙与证明，临末断结咏叹，无不征引诗词，似乎此举也就是小说的一样必要条件。引诗为证，在中国本是起源很古的，汉韩婴的《诗外传》，刘向的《列女传》，皆早经引《诗》以证杂说及故事，但未必与宋小说直接相关；只是“借古语以为重”的精神，则虽说汉之与宋，学士之与市人，时候学问，皆极相违，而实有一致的处所。唐人小说中也多半有诗，即使妖魔鬼怪，也每能互相酬和，或者做几句即兴诗，此等风雅举动，则与宋市人小说不无关涉，但因为宋小说多是市井间事，人物少有物魅及诗人，于是自不得不由吟咏而变为引证，使事状虽殊，而诗气不脱；吴自牧记讲史高手，为“讲得字真不俗，记问渊源甚广”（《梦粱录》二十），即可移来解释小说之所以多用诗词的缘故的。
4. Causing this article to do the opposite. For example, Volume 13 uses Wang Chuhou's words to look in the mirror and see gray hair have the meaning of contentment, which caused Zhang Shilian, who was not old enough, to marry a wife and break his family in his later years. And these four laws have imprisoned many of the later drafts. In Japan, there are also three volumes of the "Tang Tripitaka Scriptures" engraved in China, with a total of seventeen chapters, and the chapters must have poems; Another small book is titled "Tang Sanzang Scriptures and Poems". The "Bibliography of Yiyuan" classifies "Wrongly Killed Cui Ning" and "Feng Yumei Reunion" into the "Song People's Words" gate, or such scripts, sometimes called words: it is another name for novels. The number of poems quoted in each "Popular Novel" is far more than telling history ("Five Dynasties History Plain Words", "Romance of the Three Kingdoms", "Water Margin", etc.), the beginning of the introduction, the middle of the narration and proof, the ending of the knot and the lamentation, all of which are quoted poems, it seems that this move is also a necessary condition for novels. Citing poetry as evidence, in China is very ancient, Han Hanying's "Poetry Biography" and Liu Xiang's "Biography of Women" have long quoted "Poems" to prove miscellaneous stories and stories, but they may not be directly related to Song novels; It's just that the spirit of "borrowing ancient words as important", although the Han Dynasty and the Song Dynasty, the scholars and the citizens, and the knowledge of the time are all extremely opposite, but there is actually a consistent place. There are also mostly poems in Tang novels, even if they are monsters and monsters, they can always reciprocate with each other, or make a few impromptu poems, such elegant actions are not unrelated to the novels of the Song people, but because Song novels are mostly market affairs, the characters have few ghosts and poets, so they have to change from chanting to quotation, so that although the situation is different, the poetry is not out; Wu Zimu is a master of telling history, and in order to "speak really well and have a wide range of sources" ("Meng Liang Lu" 20), it can be moved to explain the reason why the novel uses more poetry.由上文推断，则宋市人小说的必要条件大约有三：
From the above, there are about three necessary conditions for the novels of Song Shiren:1. 须讲近世事；
1. Modern affairs must be discussed;2. 什九须有“得胜头回”；
2. Nine out of ten must have a "winning first round";3. 须引证诗词。
3. Poems must be cited.宋民间之所谓小说的话本，除《京本通俗小说》之外，今尚未见有第二种。《大唐三藏取经诗话》是极拙的拟话本，并且应属于讲史。《大宋宣和遗事》钱曾虽列入“宋人词话”中，而其实也是拟作的讲史，惟因其系钞撮十种书籍而成，所以也许含有小说分子在内。
The so-called novels of the Song Dynasty, except for the "Jingben Popular Novels", have not yet been seen. "The Poems of the Tang Dynasty Tripitaka" is an extremely clumsy copy, and it should belong to the history of the story. Although Qian Zeng was included in the "Song Dynasty Words", it was actually a proposed history, but because it was made up of ten kinds of books, it may contain novel elements.然而在《通俗小说》未经翻刻以前，宋代的市人小说也未尝断绝；他间或改了名目，夹杂着后人拟作而流传。那些拟作，则大抵出于明朝人，似宋人话本当时留存尚多，所以拟作的精神形式虽然也有变更，而大体仍然无异。
However, before the "Popular Novel" was reprinted, the novels of the Song Dynasty were not interrupted; In other places, the name may have been changed, mixed with the imitation of later generations and circulated. Those proposed works were mostly from the Ming Dynasty, and there were still many Song people's manuscripts at that time, so although the spiritual form of the proposed works had also changed, they were still generally the same.以下是所知道的几部书：
Here are a few books that are known:1．《喻世明言》。未见。
1. "Yu Shi Ming Yan". I haven't seen it.2．《警世通言》。未见。王士禛云，“《警世通言》有《拗相公》一篇，述王安石罢相归金陵事，极快人意，乃因卢多逊谪岭南事而稍附益之。”（《香祖笔记》十）《拗相公》见《通俗小说》卷十四，是《通言》必含有宋市人小说。
2. "Warning of the World". I haven't seen it. Wang Shizhen said, "There is an article called "The Gentleman" in the "Warning of the World", which describes Wang Anshi's dismissal and return to Jinling, which is very satisfactory, and it is slightly added to it because of Lu Duoxun's exile to Lingnan. ("Notes of Xiangzu" 10) "Xiang Xianggong" is found in "Popular Novels" Volume 14, which means that "General Words" must contain novels by Song Shiren.3．《醒世恒言》。四十卷，共三十九事；不题作者姓名。前有天启丁卯（1627）陇西可一居士序云，“六经国史而外，凡著述皆小说也，而尚理或病于艰深，修词或伤于藻绘，则不足以触里耳而振恒心，此《醒世恒言》所以继《明言》、《通言》而作也。……”因知三言之内，最后出的是《恒言》。所说者汉二事，隋三事，唐八事，宋十一事，明十五事。其中隋唐故事，多采自唐人小说，故唐人小说在元既已侵入杂剧及传奇，至明又侵入了话本；然而悬想古事，不易了然，所以逊于叙述明朝故事的十余篇远甚了。宋事有三篇像拟作，七篇（《卖油郎独占花魁》，《灌园叟晚逢仙女》，《乔太守乱点鸳鸯谱》，《勘皮靴单证二郎神》，《闹樊楼多情周胜仙》，《吴衙内邻舟赴约》，《郑节使立功神臂弓》）疑出自宋人话本，而一篇（《十五贯戏言成巧祸》）则即是《通俗小说》卷十五的《错斩崔宁》。
3．《醒世恒言》。 四十卷，共三十九事；不题作者姓名。 前有天启丁卯（1627）陇西可一居士序云，“六经国史而外，凡著述皆小说也，而尚理或病于艰深，修词或伤于藻绘，则不足以触里耳而振恒心，此《醒世恒言》所以继《明言》、《通言》而作也。 ……”因知三言之内，最后出的是《恒言》。 所说者汉二事，隋三事，唐八事，宋十一事，明十五事。 其中隋唐故事，多采自唐人小说，故唐人小说在元既已侵入杂剧及传奇，至明又侵入了话本；然而悬想古事，不易了然，所以逊于叙述明朝故事的十余篇远甚了。 宋事有三篇像拟作，七篇（《卖油郎独占花魁》，《灌园叟晚逢仙女》，《乔太守乱点鸳鸯谱》，《勘皮靴单证二郎神》，《闹樊楼多情周胜仙》，《吴衙内邻舟赴约》，《郑节使立功神臂弓》）疑出自宋人话本，而一篇（《十五贯戏言成巧祸》）则即是《通俗小说》卷十五的《错斩崔宁》。松禅老人序《今古奇观》云，“墨憨斋增补《平妖》，穷工极变，不失本来。……至所纂《喻世》、《醒世》、《警世》三言，极摹人情世态之岐，备写悲欢离合之致。……”是纂三言与补《平妖》者为一人。明本《三遂平妖传》有张无咎序，云“兹刻回数倍前，盖吾友龙子犹所补也。”而首叶则题“冯犹龙先生增定”。可知三言亦冯犹龙作，而龙子犹乃其游戏笔墨时的隐名。
松禅老人序《今古奇观》云，“墨憨斋增补《平妖》，穷工极变，不失本来。 …… 至所纂《喻世》、《醒世》、《警世》三言，极摹人情世态之岐，备写悲欢离合之致。 ……”是纂三言与补《平妖》者为一人。 明本《三遂平妖传》有张无咎序，云“兹刻回数倍前，盖吾友龙子犹所补也。 ”而首叶则题“冯犹龙先生增定”。 可知三言亦冯犹龙作，而龙子犹乃其游戏笔墨时的隐名。冯犹龙名梦龙，长洲人（《曲品》作吴县人），由贡生拔授寿宁知县，有《七乐斋稿》;然而朱彝尊以为“善为启颜之辞，时入打油之调，不得为诗家。”（《明诗综》七十一）盖冯犹龙所擅长的是词曲，既作《双雄记传奇》，又刻《墨憨斋传奇定本十种》，多取时人名曲，再加删订，颇为当时所称；而其中的《万事足》，《风流梦》，《新灌园》是自作。他又极有意于稗说，所以在小说则纂《喻世》、《警世》、《醒世》三言，在讲史则增补《三遂平妖传》。
Feng Youlong's name is Menglong, a native of Changzhou ("Qupin" is a native of Wu County), and was appointed as the county magistrate of Shouning by Gongsheng, and there is a "Seven Music Zhai Manuscript"; However, Zhu Yizun thought that "good is a word of enlightenment, and sometimes it is in the tone of oil, and it cannot be a poet." ("Ming Poetry Collection" 71) Gai Feng Youlong is good at lyrics and music, not only as "The Legend of the Two Heroes", but also engraved with "Ten Kinds of Legends of Mohanzhai", which took more famous songs of the time, and then edited them, which was quite famous at that time; Among them, "Everything is Enough", "Romantic Dream", and "New Irrigation Garden" are self-made. He was also very interested in barnyard theory, so he compiled the three words "Metaphorical World", "Warning World" and "Awakening World" in the novel, and added the "Biography of the Three Suiping Demons" in the history lecture.4．《拍案惊奇》。三十六卷；每卷一事，唐六，宋六，元四，明二十。前有即空观主人序云，“龙子犹氏所辑《喻世》等书，颇存雅道，时著良规，复取古今来杂碎事，可新听睹，佐谈谐者，演而畅之，得若干卷。……”则仿佛此书也是冯犹龙作。然而叙述平板，引证贫辛，“头回”与正文“捏合”不灵，有时如两大段；冯犹龙是“文苑之滑稽”，似乎不至于此。同时的松禅老人也不信，故其序《今古奇观》，于叙墨憨斋编纂三言之下，则云“即空观主人壶矢代兴，爰有《拍案惊奇》之刻，颇费搜获，足供谈麈”了。
4. "Surprise of the Crime". Thirty-six volumes; Each volume has one event, Tang six, Song six, Yuan four, Ming twenty. In front of the preface, the owner of the empty view said, "Books such as "Yu Shi" compiled by Longzi Youshi are quite elegant, and they often write good rules, and they take the miscellaneous things of ancient and modern times, which can be heard in a new way, and those who assist in talking and laughing, interpret and smooth, and get several volumes. ......" seems to be written by Feng Youlong. However, the narrative is flat, the citation is poor, and the "first return" and the main text are not "pinched", sometimes like two large paragraphs; Feng Youlong is "the funny of the literary garden", and it doesn't seem to be like this. At the same time, the old man Songchan did not believe it, so his preface "Wonders of Ancient and Modern Times", under the three words compiled by Xu Mo Hanzhai, it was said that "that is, the owner of the empty view is the rise of the pot and arrow, and there is a moment of "Surprise at the Case", which is quite difficult to find and is enough for talking".5．《今古奇观》。四十卷；每卷一事。这是一部选本，有姑苏松禅老人序，云是抱瓮老人由《喻世》、《醒世》、《警世》三言及《拍案惊奇》中选刻而成。所选的出于《醒世恒言》者十一篇（第一，二，七，八，十五，十六，十七，二十五，二十六，二十七，二十八回），疑为宋人旧话本之《卖油郎》，《灌园叟》，《乔太守》在内；而《十五贯》落了选。出于《拍案惊奇》者七篇（第九，十，十八，二十九，三十七，三十九，四十回）。其余二十二篇，当然是出于《喻世明言》及《警世通言》的了，所以现在借了易得的《今古奇观》，还可以推见那希觏的《明言》《通言》的大概。其中还有比汉更古的故事，如俞伯牙，庄子休及羊角哀皆是。但所选并不定佳，大约因为两篇的题目须字字相对，所以去取之间，也就很受了束缚了。
5. "Wonders of Ancient and Modern Times". forty volumes; One thing per volume. This is an anthology, with a preface by the old man Gusu Songchan, and the old man who holds the urn is selected and engraved from the three words of "Yu Shi", "Awakening World", "Warning World" and "Surprise of the Case". The eleven selected articles from "Awakening the Evergreen Words" (1st, 2nd, 7th, 8th, 15th, 16th, 17th, 25th, 26th, 27th, and 28th times) are suspected to be the old Song people's "Oil Seller", "Guanyuan Sou", "Qiao Taishou" included; And "Fifteen Guan" was not selected. Seven of them came from "Amazing Crime" (9th, 10th, 18th, 29th, 37th, 39th, 40th episode). The remaining twenty-two articles, of course, are from "Yu Shi Ming Yan" and "Jing Shi Tong Yan", so now with the easy "Wonders of Ancient and Modern Times", we can also infer the approximate of Na Xi Yan's "Ming Yan" and "General Words". There are also stories older than the Han Dynasty, such as Yu Boya, Zhuangzi Xiu and Yang Jiao Ai. But the choice is not necessarily good, probably because the titles of the two articles must be opposite each other, so they are very constrained between going and taking.6．《今古奇闻》。二十二卷；每卷一事。前署东壁山房主人编次，也不知是何人。书中提及“发逆”，则当是清咸丰或同治初年的著作。日本有翻刻，王寅（字冶梅）到日本去卖画，又翻回中国来，有光绪十七年序，现在印行的都出于此本。这也是一部选集，其中取《醒世恒言》者四篇（卷一，二，六，十八），《十五贯》也在内，可惜删落了“得胜头回”；取《西湖佳话》者一篇（卷十）；余未详，篇末多有自怡轩主人评语，大约是别一种小说的话本，然而笔墨拙涩，尚且及不到《拍案惊奇》。
6. "Strange Stories of Ancient and Modern Times". Twenty-two volumes; One thing per volume. I don't know who the owner of the East Wall Mountain is the editor of the previous office. The mention of "rebellion" in the book should be a work in the early years of Xianfeng or Tongzhi in the Qing Dynasty. There was a reprint in Japan, Wang Yin (Zi Yemei) went to Japan to sell paintings, and then returned to China, with the seventeenth year of Guangxu, and now it is printed from this book. This is also an anthology, of which there are four articles taken from "Awakening Hengyan" (Volumes 1, 2, 6, and 18), including "Fifteen Guan", but unfortunately the "victory is the first time"; Take an article from "West Lake Good Stories" (Volume 10); I don't know, at the end of the article, there are many comments from the owner of Yixuan, which is probably the script of another novel, but the writing and ink are clumsy, and it is not as good as "The Surprise of the Case".7．《续今古奇观》。三十卷；每卷一回。无编者名，亦无印行年月，然大约当在同治末或光绪初。同治七年，江苏巡抚丁日昌严禁淫词小说，《拍案惊奇》也在内，想来其时市上遂难得，于是《拍案惊奇》即小加删改，化为《续今古奇观》而出，依然流行世间。但除去了《今古奇观》所已采的七篇，而加上《今古奇闻》中的一篇（《康友仁轻财重义得科名》），改立题目，以足三十卷的整数。
7. "Continuation of the Wonders of Ancient and Modern Times". Thirty volumes; Each volume is repetitive. There is no editor's name, nor is there a date of publication, but it should have been at the end of the Tongzhi era or the beginning of the Guangxu era. In the seventh year of Tongzhi, Jiangsu Governor Ding Richang strictly prohibited obscene novels, including "Shooting Surprise", which was rare in the market at that time, so "Shooting Surprise" was slightly deleted and turned into "Continuation of the Wonders of Ancient and Modern Times", which is still popular in the world. However, the seven articles that have been adopted in "Wonders of Ancient and Modern Times" were removed, and one of the "Strange Stories of Ancient and Modern Times" was added ("Kang Youren Light Wealth and Heavy Righteousness to Get the Name of the Subject"), and the title was changed to complete the integer of thirty volumes.此外，明人拟作的小说也还有，如杭人周楫的《西湖二集》三十四卷，东鲁古狂生的《醉醒石》十五卷皆是。但都与几经选刻，辗转流传的本子无关，故不复论。
In addition, there are also novels to be written by the Ming people, such as the thirty-four volumes of "West Lake Second Collection" by Zhou Ji of Hangzhou, and the fifteen volumes of "Drunken Awakening Stone" by Donglu Gu Kuangsheng. But it has nothing to do with the books that have been selected and passed down, so I won't discuss it further.一九二三年十一月。
November 1923.

娜拉走后怎样——一九二三年十二月二十六日在北京女子高等师范学校文艺会讲

娜拉走后怎样——一九二三年十二月二十六日在北京女子高等师范学校文艺会讲

娜拉走后怎样——一九二三年十二月二十六日在北京女子高等师范学校文艺会讲

What happened after Nala left - lectured at the Beijing Women's Higher Normal School Literary and Art Association on December 26, 1923我今天要讲的是“娜拉走后怎样？”
What I'm going to talk about today is "What happens after Nala leaves?" ”伊孛生是十九世纪后半的瑙威的一个文人。他的著作，除了几十首诗之外，其余都是剧本。这些剧本里面，有一时期是大抵含有社会问题的，世间也称作“社会剧”，其中有一篇就是《娜拉》。
Ibsen was a literati in Nauwei in the second half of the nineteenth century. His writings, except for dozens of poems, are scripts. Among these scripts, there is a period that mostly contains social problems, which is also called "social drama" in the world, and one of them is "Nala".《娜拉》一名Ein Puppenheim，中国译作《傀儡家庭》。但Puppe不单是牵线的傀儡，孩子抱着玩的人形也是；引申开去，别人怎么指挥，他便怎么做的人也是。娜拉当初是满足地生活在所谓幸福的家庭里的，但是她竟觉悟了：自己是丈夫的傀儡，孩子们又是她的傀儡。她于是走了，只听得关门声，接着就是闭幕。这想来大家都知道，不必细说了。
"Nala" is also known as Ein Puppenheim, which is translated into Chinese as "Puppet Family". But Puppe is not only a puppet of matchmaking, but also a human figure that children hold and play with; By extension, how others command, he does what he does. Nala was content to live in a so-called happy family, but she realized that she was her husband's puppet, and her children were her puppet. She then left, only to hear the sound of the door closing, and then the door closed. Everyone knows this, so there is no need to go into details.娜拉要怎样才不走呢？或者说伊孛生自己有解答，就是Die Frau vom Meer，《海的女人》，中国有人译作《海上夫人》的。这女人是已经结婚的了，然而先前有一个爱人在海的彼岸，一日突然寻来，叫她一同去。她便告知她的丈夫，要和那外来人会面。临末，她的丈夫说，“现在放你完全自由。（走与不走）你能够自己选择，并且还要自己负责任。”于是什么事全都改变，她就不走了。这样看来，娜拉倘也得到这样的自由，或者也便可以安住。
How can Nala not leave? Or Ibosheng himself has an answer, that is, Die Frau vom Meer, "The Woman of the Sea", which some Chinese people translate as "Lady of the Sea". This woman was already married, but she had a lover on the other side of the sea, and one day she suddenly came and asked her to go with her. She told her husband that she was going to meet with the outsider. At the end of her life, her husband said, "Now let you be completely free." You can choose for yourself and be responsible for yourself. So everything changed, and she didn't leave. In this way, if Nala also gets such freedom, she may be able to settle down.但娜拉毕竟是走了的。走了以后怎样？伊孛生并无解答；而且他已经死了。即使不死，他也不负解答的责任。因为伊孛生是在做诗，不是为社会提出问题来而且代为解答。就如黄莺一样，因为他自己要歌唱，所以他歌唱，不是要唱给人们听得有趣，有益。伊孛生是很不通世故的，相传在许多妇女们一同招待他的筵宴上，代表者起来致谢他作了《傀儡家庭》，将女性的自觉，解放这些事，给人心以新的启示的时候，他却答道，“我写那篇却并不是这意思，我不过是做诗。”
But Nala is gone after all. What happens after you leave? Ibsen did not answer; And he is dead. Even if he doesn't die, he doesn't take responsibility for answering. Because Ibosheng is making poetry, not asking questions for society and answering them on his behalf. Just like the yellow warbler, because he wants to sing himself, he sings, not to make it interesting and beneficial for people to hear. It is said that at the banquet where many women entertained him, the representative stood up to thank him for making "Puppet Family", liberating women's consciousness, these things, and giving people new inspiration, but he replied, "I didn't mean that when I wrote that poem, I just wrote poetry." ”娜拉走后怎样？——别人可是也发表过意见的。一个英国人曾作一篇戏剧，说一个新式的女子走出家庭，再也没有路走，终于堕落，进了妓院了。还有一个中国人，——我称他什么呢？上海的文学家罢，——说他所见的《娜拉》是和现译本不同，娜拉终于回来了。这样的本子可惜没有第二人看见，除非是伊孛生自己寄给他的。但从事理上推想起来，娜拉或者也实在只有两条路：不是堕落，就是回来。因为如果是一匹小鸟，则笼子里固然不自由，而一出笼门，外面便又有鹰，有猫，以及别的什么东西之类；倘使已经关得麻痹了翅子，忘却了飞翔，也诚然是无路可以走。还有一条，就是饿死了，但饿死已经离开了生活，更无所谓问题，所以也不是什么路。
What happened after Nala left? ——Others have also expressed their opinions. An Englishman once wrote a play about a new style of woman who walked out of the family, had no way out, and finally fell into a brothel. There is also a Chinese,—— what do I call him? The writer in Shanghai ,—— said that the "Nala" he saw was different from the current translation, and Nala finally returned. Unfortunately, no second person saw such a book, unless it was sent to him by Ibsen himself. But when I think about it, Nala may really have only two paths: either fall or come back. Because if it is a small bird, the cage is not free, but as soon as it comes out of the cage, there are eagles, cats, and other things outside; If you have closed your wings and forgot to fly, there is indeed no way to go. There is another one, that is, starving to death, but starvation has left life, and it doesn't matter what the problem is, so it's not a road.人生最苦痛的是梦醒了无路可以走。做梦的人是幸福的；倘没有看出可走的路，最要紧的是不要去惊醒他。你看，唐朝的诗人李贺，不是困顿了一世的么？而他临死的时候，却对他的母亲说，“阿妈，上帝造成了白玉楼，叫我做文章落成去了。”这岂非明明是一个诳，一个梦？然而一个小的和一个老的，一个死的和一个活的，死的高兴地死去，活的放心地活着。说诳和做梦，在这些时候便见得伟大。所以我想，假使寻不出路，我们所要的倒是梦。
The most painful thing in life is that there is no way to go when you wake up from a dream. Dreamers are happy; If you don't see the way to go, the most important thing is not to wake him up. Look, didn't the poet Li He of the Tang Dynasty be trapped all his life? And when he was dying, he said to his mother, "Mom, God created the White Jade Building and asked me to make a fuss." "Isn't this obviously a lie, a dream? However, a young one and an old man, a dead man and a living one, die happily and live with peace of mind. Lying and dreaming are great at these times. So I think if we can't find a way out, what we want is a dream.但是，万不可做将来的梦。阿尔志跋绥夫曾经借了他所做的小说，质问过梦想将来的黄金世界的理想家，因为要造那世界，先唤起许多人们来受苦。他说，“你们将黄金世界预约给他们的子孙了，可是有什么给他们自己呢？”有是有的，就是将来的希望。但代价也太大了，为了这希望，要使人练敏了感觉来更深切地感到自己的苦痛，叫起灵魂来目睹他自己的腐烂的尸骸。惟有说诳和做梦，这些时候便见得伟大。所以我想，假使寻不出路，我们所要的就是梦；但不要将来的梦，只要目前的梦。
However, do not dream about the future. Alzhiv once borrowed his novel and questioned the idealists who dreamed of the golden world of the future, because to create that world, many people must first be aroused to suffer. He said, "You have reserved the golden world for their descendants, but what do you have for yourself?" "There is something, it is the hope of the future. But the price is too great, and for this hope it is necessary to sensitize the senses to feel their pain more deeply, to call upon the soul to witness his own decaying corpse. Only by lying and dreaming can you see greatness at these times. So I think that if we can't find a way out, what we want is a dream; But don't dream of the future, just dream of the present.然而娜拉既然醒了，是很不容易回到梦境的，因此只得走；可是走了以后，有时却也免不掉堕落或回来。否则，就得问：她除了觉醒的心以外，还带了什么去？倘只有一条像诸君一样的紫红的绒绳的围巾，那可是无论宽到二尺或三尺，也完全是不中用。她还须更富有，提包里有准备，直白地说，就是要有钱。
However, since Nala woke up, it was not easy to return to the dream, so she had to leave; But after leaving, sometimes it is inevitable to fall or come back. Otherwise, you have to ask: What else does she take with her besides her awakened heart? If there is only a scarf with purple and red velvet rope like you, it is completely useless whether it is two feet wide or three feet. She still needs to be richer, and she has preparations in her bag, to put it bluntly, she wants to be rich.梦是好的；否则，钱是要紧的。
Dreams are good; Otherwise, money is important.钱这个字很难听，或者要被高尚的君子们所非笑，但我总觉得人们的议论是不但昨天和今天，即使饭前和饭后，也往往有些差别。凡承认饭需钱买，而以说钱为卑鄙者，倘能按一按他的胃，那里面怕总还有鱼肉没有消化完，须得饿他一天之后，再来听他发议论。
The word money is hard to hear, or it will be ridiculed by noble gentlemen, but I always feel that people's discussions are often different not only between yesterday and today, but even before and after meals. Whoever admits that money is needed to buy food, but thinks that money is despicable, if he can press his stomach, there may always be fish and meat that has not been digested, and he will have to starve him for a day before listening to his discussions.所以为娜拉计，钱，——高雅的说罢，就是经济，是最要紧的了。自由固不是钱所能买到的，但能够为钱而卖掉。人类有一个大缺点，就是常常要饥饿。为补救这缺点起见，为准备不做傀儡起见，在目下的社会里，经济权就见得最要紧了。第一，在家应该先获得男女平均的分配；第二，在社会应该获得男女相等的势力。可惜我不知道这权柄如何取得，单知道仍然要战斗；或者也许比要求参政权更要用剧烈的战斗。
So for Nala's plan, money ,—— elegantly said that the economy is the most important. Freedom is not something that money can buy, but it can be sold for money. Humans have a big shortcoming that they often starve. In order to remedy this shortcoming, in order not to be a puppet, in the current society, economic power is the most important. First, at home, men and women should be evenly distributed; Second, men and women should be given equal power in society. Unfortunately, I do not know how this authority is obtained, but I know that I still have to fight; Or perhaps it is more intense to fight than to demand suffrage.要求经济权固然是很平凡的事，然而也许比要求高尚的参政权以及博大的女子解放之类更烦难。天下事尽有小作为比大作为更烦难的。譬如现在似的冬天，我们只有这一件棉袄，然而必须救助一个将要冻死的苦人，否则便须坐在菩提树下冥想普度一切人类的方法去。普度一切人类和救活一人，大小实在相去太远了，然而倘叫我挑选，我就立刻到菩提树下去坐着，因为免得脱下唯一的棉袄来冻杀自己。所以在家里说要参政权，是不至于大遭反对的，一说到经济的平匀分配，或不免面前就遇见敌人，这就当然要有剧烈的战斗。
Asking for economic rights is certainly a very ordinary thing, but it may be more troublesome than demanding noble political suffrage and broad women's emancipation. There are small actions in the world that are more troublesome than big ones. For example, in winter like now, we only have this padded jacket, but we must rescue a suffering person who is about to freeze to death, otherwise we will have to sit under the Bodhi tree and meditate on the way to save all mankind. The size of saving all mankind and saving one person is too far apart, but if I were to choose, I would immediately go to the Bodhi tree and sit down, lest I take off my only padded jacket and freeze myself to death. Therefore, when it comes to the equal distribution of the economy, it is inevitable to meet the enemy in front of you, which of course requires fierce battles.战斗不算好事情，我们也不能责成人人都是战士，那么，平和的方法也就可贵了，这就是将来利用了亲权来解放自己的子女。中国的亲权是无上的，那时候，就可以将财产平匀地分配子女们，使他们平和而没有冲突地都得到相等的经济权，此后或者去读书，或者去生发，或者为自己去享用，或者为社会去做事，或者去花完，都请便，自己负责任。这虽然也是颇远的梦，可是比黄金世界的梦近得不少了。但第一需要记性。记性不佳，是有益于己而有害于子孙的。人们因为能忘却，所以自己能渐渐地脱离了受过的苦痛，也因为能忘却，所以往往照样地再犯前人的错误。被虐待的儿媳做了婆婆，仍然虐待儿媳；嫌恶学生的官吏，每是先前痛骂官吏的学生；现在压迫子女的，有时也就是十年前的家庭革命者。这也许与年龄和地位都有关系罢，但记性不佳也是一个很大的原因。救济法就是各人去买一本note-book来，将自己现在的思想举动都记上，作为将来年龄和地位都改变了之后的参考。假如憎恶孩子要到公园去的时候，取来一翻，看见上面有一条道，“我想到中央公园去”，那就即刻心平气和了。别的事也一样。
Fighting is not a good thing, and we can't blame everyone for being a warrior, so the peaceful method is also valuable, which is to use parental power to liberate one's children in the future. At that time, the property could be distributed evenly to the children, so that they could get equal economic rights peacefully and without conflict. Although this is also a dream that is quite far away, it is much closer than the dream of the golden world. But the first requires memory. Poor memory is beneficial to oneself and harmful to descendants. Because people can forget, they can gradually get rid of the pain they have suffered, and because they can forget, they often make the mistakes of their predecessors again. the abused daughter-in-law became a mother-in-law and still abused her daughter-in-law; officials who hate students are always students who have scolded officials before; What oppresses children now is sometimes the family revolutionaries of ten years ago. This may have something to do with age and status, but poor memory is also a big reason. The relief method is for everyone to buy a notebook and write down their current thoughts and actions as a reference after their age and status change in the future. If you hate your child when you want to go to the park, take it and see a road on it, "I want to go to Central Park", then you will immediately feel at ease. The same goes for other things.世间有一种无赖精神，那要义就是韧性。听说拳匪乱后，天津的青皮，就是所谓无赖者很跋扈，譬如给人搬一件行李，他就要两元，对他说这行李小，他说要两元，对他说道路近，他说要两元，对他说不要搬了，他说也仍然要两元。青皮固然是不足为法的，而那韧性却大可以佩服。要求经济权也一样，有人说这事情太陈腐了，就答道要经济权；说是太卑鄙了，就答道要经济权；说是经济制度就要改变了，用不着再操心，也仍然答道要经济权。
There is a scoundrel spirit in the world, and the essence is resilience. For example, if you move a piece of luggage for someone, he will ask for two yuan, he will tell him that the luggage is small, he will ask for two yuan, he will tell him that the road is close, he will ask for two yuan, he will tell him not to move, he will still ask for two yuan. The green skin is certainly not worth it, but its toughness is admirable. The same is true for economic rights, some people say that this matter is too trite, so they reply that they want economic rights; said it was too despicable, and replied that he wanted economic power; It is said that the economic system is about to change, so there is no need to worry about it, and it still answers that it wants economic power.其实，在现在，一个娜拉的出走，或者也许不至于感到困难的，因为这人物很特别，举动也新鲜，能得到若干人们的同情，帮助着生活。生活在人们的同情之下，已经是不自由了，然而倘有一百个娜拉出走，便连同情也减少，有一千一万个出走，就得到厌恶了，断不如自己握着经济权之为可靠。
In fact, now, a Nala runaway, or maybe not difficult, because this character is very special, his actions are fresh, and he can get the sympathy of several people and help life. Living under people's sympathy is no longer free, but if a hundred Nala run away, even sympathy will decrease, and if 10 or 10 thousand run away, they will be disgusted, and it is definitely not as reliable as holding economic power by themselves.在经济方面得到自由，就不是傀儡了么？也还是傀儡。无非被人所牵的事可以减少，而自己能牵的傀儡可以增多罢了。因为在现在的社会里，不但女人常作男人的傀儡，就是男人和男人，女人和女人，也相互地作傀儡，男人也常作女人的傀儡，这决不是几个女人取得经济权所能救的。但人不能饿着静候理想世界的到来，至少也得留一点残喘，正如涸辙之鲋，急谋升斗之水一样，就要这较为切近的经济权，一面再想别的法。
If you are free economically, aren't you a puppet? is still a puppet. It's just that the things that are involved by others can be reduced, and the puppets that you can lead can increase. Because in today's society, not only women often act as puppets of men, but also men and men, women and women, but also puppets of each other, and men often become puppets of women. But people can't wait hungry for the arrival of the ideal world, at least they have to leave a little breath, just like a crucian in a rut and a bucket of water, we need this more immediate economic power, and then think of other methods.如果经济制度竟改革了，那上文当然完全是废话。
If the economic system is reformed, then of course the above is complete nonsense.然而上文，是又将娜拉当作一个普通的人物而说的，假使她很特别，自己情愿闯出去做牺牲，那就又另是一回事。我们无权去劝诱人做牺牲，也无权去阻止人做牺牲。况且世上也尽有乐于牺牲，乐于受苦的人物。欧洲有一个传说，耶稣去钉十字架时，休息在Ahasvar的檐下，Ahasvar不准他，于是被了咒诅，使他永世不得休息，直到末日裁判的时候。Ahasvar从此就歇不下，只是走，现在还在走。走是苦的，安息是乐的，他何以不安息呢？虽说背着咒诅，可是大约总该是觉得走比安息还适意，所以始终狂走的罢。
However, the above is to treat Nala as an ordinary character, if she is very special and she is willing to break out and make sacrifices, it is another matter. We have no right to persuade people to make sacrifices, nor to prevent them from making sacrifices. Moreover, there are people in the world who are willing to sacrifice and suffer. There is a European legend that when Jesus went to be crucified, he rested under the eaves of Ahasvar, but Ahasvar did not allow him, so he was cursed so that he would never rest until the time of the Last Judgment. Ahasvar couldn't rest from then on, just walked, and is still walking. Walking is hard, rest is joyful, so why is he restless? Although he was carrying a curse, he probably always felt that walking was more comfortable than resting, so he always walked wildly.只是这牺牲的适意是属于自己的，与志士们之所谓为社会者无涉。群众，——尤其是中国的，——永远是戏剧的看客。牺牲上场，如果显得慷慨，他们就看了悲壮剧；如果显得觳，他们就看了滑稽剧。北京的羊肉铺前常有几个人张着嘴看剥羊，仿佛颇愉快，人的牺牲能给与他们的益处，也不过如此。而况事后走不几步，他们并这一点愉快也就忘却了。
It's just that the suitability of this sacrifice belongs to himself and has nothing to do with the so-called sociality of the people with lofty ideals. The masses,—— especially the Chinese ,——, are always spectators of the drama. sacrifice on the field, if it seems generous, they watch the tragic drama; If it seems to be a joke, they watch a burlesque. In front of the mutton shop in Beijing, there are often a few people with their mouths open to watch the sheep peeled, as if it is quite pleasant, and the benefits that human sacrifice can give them are nothing more than that. And after a few steps afterwards, they forgot that they were not happy.对于这样的群众没有法，只好使他们无戏可看倒是疗救，正无需乎震骇一时的牺牲，不如深沉的韧性的战斗。
There is no way for such a mass, so they have no drama to watch, but it is a cure, and there is no need for shocking sacrifices, it is better to fight with deep resilience.可惜中国太难改变了，即使搬动一张桌子，改装一个火炉，几乎也要血；而且即使有了血，也未必一定能搬动，能改装。不是很大的鞭子打在背上，中国自己是不肯动弹的。我想这鞭子总要来，好坏是别一问题，然而总要打到的。但是从那里来，怎么地来，我也是不能确切地知道。
Unfortunately, China is too difficult to change, even if you move a table and modify a stove, it almost costs blood; And even if there is blood, it may not necessarily be able to move and modify. It is not a big whip on the back, and China itself refuses to move. I think this whip will always come, whether it is good or bad is another matter, but it will always be hit. But I can't know exactly where it came from and how it came from.我这讲演也就此完结了。
This is the end of my speech.

未有天才之前——一九二四年一月十七日在北京师范大学附属中学校友会讲

未有天才之前——一九二四年一月十七日在北京师范大学附属中学校友会讲

未有天才之前——一九二四年一月十七日在北京师范大学附属中学校友会讲

Before the genius - on January 17, 1924, he gave a lecture at the Alumni Association of the Affiliated Middle School of Beijing Normal University我自己觉得我的讲话不能使诸君有益或者有趣，因为我实在不知道什么事，但推托拖延得太长久了，所以终于不能不到这里来说几句。
I myself feel that my speech cannot be useful or interesting to you, because I really don't know anything, but I have delayed it for too long, so I can't stop saying a few words here.我看现在许多人对于文艺界的要求的呼声之中，要求天才的产生也可以算是很盛大的了，这显然可以反证两件事：一是中国现在没有一个天才，二是大家对于现在的艺术的厌薄。天才究竟有没有？也许有着罢，然而我们和别人都没有见。倘使据了见闻，就可以说没有；不但天才，还有使天才得以生长的民众。
I think that among the demands of many people in the literary and artistic circles, the production of geniuses can also be regarded as very grand, which can obviously prove two things: one is that there is no genius in China now, and the other is everyone's disdain for the current art. Is there a genius? Maybe there is, but we and others have not seen it. If you see and hear, you can say no; Not only geniuses, but also people who make geniuses grow.天才并不是自生自长在深林荒野里的怪物，是由可以使天才生长的民众产生，长育出来的，所以没有这种民众，就没有天才。有一回拿破仑过Alps山，说，“我比Alps山还要高！”这何等英伟，然而不要忘记他后面跟着许多兵；倘没有兵，那只有被山那面的敌人捉住或者赶回，他的举动，言语，都离了英雄的界线，要归入疯子一类了。所以我想，在要求天才的产生之前，应该先要求可以使天才生长的民众。——譬如想有乔木，想看好花，一定要有好土；没有土，便没有花木了；所以土实在较花木还重要。花木非有土不可，正同拿破仑非有好兵不可一样。
Genius is not a monster that grows in the deep forest and wilderness, but is produced and nurtured by people who can make geniuses grow, so without this kind of people, there is no genius. Once Napoleon passed through the Alps and said, "I am higher than the Alps!" "How magnificent it is, but do not forget that he was followed by many soldiers; If there are no soldiers, he can only be caught or driven back by the enemy on the other side of the mountain, and his actions and words are out of the bounds of heroes and should be classified as a madman. So I think that before asking for the emergence of geniuses, we should first ask for people who can make geniuses grow. ——For example, if you want to have trees and flowers, you must have good soil; Without soil, there will be no flowers and trees; Therefore, the soil is really more important than the flowers and trees. Flowers and trees must have land, just like Napoleon must have good soldiers.然而现在社会上的论调和趋势，一面固然要求天才，一面却要他灭亡，连预备的土也想扫尽。举出几样来说：
However, the current social arguments and trends, on the one hand, require genius, but on the other hand, they want him to perish, and even the prepared soil wants to be swept away. To name a few:其一就是“整理国故”。自从新思潮来到中国以后，其实何尝有力，而一群老头子，还有少年，却已丧魂失魄的来讲国故了，他们说，“中国自有许多好东西，都不整理保存，倒去求新，正如放弃祖宗遗产一样不肖。”抬出祖宗来说法，那自然是极威严的，然而我总不信在旧马褂未曾洗净叠好之前，便不能做一件新马褂。就现状而言，做事本来还随各人的自便，老先生要整理国故，当然不妨去埋在南窗下读死书，至于青年，却自有他们的活学问和新艺术，各干各事，也还没有大妨害的，但若拿了这面旗子来号召，那就是要中国永远与世界隔绝了。倘以为大家非此不可，那更是荒谬绝伦！我们和古董商人谈天，他自然总称赞他的古董如何好，然而他决不痛骂画家，农夫，工匠等类，说是忘记了祖宗：他实在比许多国学家聪明得远。
One is to "sort out the national history". Since the new trend of thought came to China, it is actually powerful, and a group of old men, as well as young people, have come to talk about the country in despair, they said, "China has many good things, but they do not organize and preserve, but seek innovation, just like giving up the ancestral heritage." "Carrying out the ancestors to explain the Dharma, it is naturally extremely majestic, but I always don't believe that a new horse coat cannot be made until the old horse coat has been washed and folded. As far as the current situation is concerned, things are still at the discretion of each person, the old gentleman wants to sort out the national history, of course, he might as well go to bury himself under the south window to read dead books, as for the young people, but they have their own living knowledge and new art, and they do their own things, and there is no big hindrance, but if they take this flag to call, it is to cut China off from the world forever. If you think that everyone has to do this, it is even more ridiculous! When we talk to antique dealers, they naturally always praise how good his antiques are, but he never scolds painters, farmers, craftsmen, etc., saying that he has forgotten his ancestors: he is really far smarter than many Chinese scholars.其一是“崇拜创作”。从表面上看来，似乎这和要求天才的步调很相合，其实不然。那精神中，很含有排斥外来思想，异域情调的分子，所以也就是可以使中国和世界潮流隔绝的。许多人对于托尔斯泰，都介涅夫，陀思妥夫斯奇的名字，已经厌听了，然而他们的著作，有什么译到中国来？眼光囚在一国里，听谈彼得和约翰就生厌，定须张三李四才行，于是创作家出来了，从实说，好的也离不了刺取点外国作品的技术和神情，文笔或者漂亮，思想往往赶不上翻译品，甚者还要加上些传统思想，使他适合于中国人的老脾气，而读者却已为他所牢笼了，于是眼界便渐渐的狭小，几乎要缩进旧圈套里去。作者和读者互相为因果，排斥异流，抬上国粹，那里会有天才产生？即使产生了，也是活不下去的。
The first is "worship creation". On the surface, it seems that this is in line with the pace of requiring geniuses, but it is not. That spirit contains elements that reject foreign ideas and exotic moods, so it can isolate China from the world trend. Many people are tired of the names of Tolstoy, Dujieniev, and Dostovsky, but what are their works translated into China? The eyes are imprisoned in a country, and I get tired of hearing about Peter and John, and I must have Zhang San and Li Si, so the creator comes out, to be honest, the good is inseparable from the technology and expression of some foreign works, the writing or beautiful, the thought often can't catch up with the translation, and even add some traditional ideas, so that he is suitable for the old temper of the Chinese, but the reader has been imprisoned by him, so the vision is gradually narrowed, almost shrinking into the old trap. The author and the reader are causal to each other, reject the other, and carry up the quintessence of the country, where will geniuses be produced? Even if it arises, it will not survive.这样的风气的民众是灰尘，不是泥土，在他这里长不出好花和乔木来！
The people with such a atmosphere are dust, not soil, and they can't grow good flowers and trees here!还有一样是恶意的批评。大家的要求批评家的出现，也由来已久了，到目下就出了许多批评家。可惜他们之中很有不少是不平家，不像批评家，作品才到面前，便恨恨地磨墨，立刻写出很高明的结论道，“唉，幼稚得很。中国要天才！”到后来，连并非批评家也这样叫喊了，他是听来的。其实即使天才，在生下来的时候的第一声啼哭，也和平常的儿童的一样，决不会就是一首好诗。因为幼稚，当头加以戕贼，也可以萎死的。我亲见几个作者，都被他们骂得寒噤了。那些作者大约自然不是天才，然而我的希望是便是常人也留着。
There is also malicious criticism. Everyone has been asking critics for a long time, and there are many critics now. Unfortunately, many of them are unfair, unlike critics, as soon as the work arrives in front of them, they grind the ink hatefully, and immediately write a very clever conclusion, "Alas, it is very naïve." China wants geniuses! Later, even non-critics shouted like this, and he heard it. In fact, even if a genius cries at birth, it will never be a good poem like that of ordinary children. Because they are naïve, they can also wither if they kill them in the first place. I saw several authors with my own eyes, and they were all scolded by them. Those authors are probably not geniuses, but my hope is that ordinary people will also keep them.恶意的批评家在嫩苗的地上驰马，那当然是十分快意的事；然而遭殃的是嫩苗——平常的苗和天才的苗。幼稚对于老成，有如孩子对于老人，决没有什么耻辱；作品也一样，起初幼稚，不算耻辱的。因为倘不遭了戕贼，他就会生长，成熟，老成；独有老衰和腐败，倒是无药可救的事！我以为幼稚的人，或者老大的人，如有幼稚的心，就说幼稚的话，只为自己要说而说，说出之后，至多到印出之后，自己的事就完了，对于无论打着什么旗子的批评，都可以置之不理的！
It is of course very pleasant for malicious critics to gallop on the ground of young seedlings; However, it was the young seedlings that suffered—ordinary seedlings and genius seedlings. Childishness is to the old, just as children are to the elderly, there is no shame; The same goes for the work, which is naïve at first and not shameful. Because if he is not killed, he will grow, mature, and mature; Only old age and corruption are incurable! I think that if a naïve person, or an eldest person, has a childish heart, he will say childish things, just for what he wants to say, and after saying it, at most after it is printed, his own affairs will be over, and he can ignore criticism under any banner!就是在座的诸君，料来也十之九愿有天才的产生罢，然而情形是这样，不但产生天才难，单是有培养天才的泥土也难。我想，天才大半是天赋的；独有这培养天才的泥土，似乎大家都可以做。做土的功效，比要求天才还切近；否则，纵有成千成百的天才，也因为没有泥土，不能发达，要像一碟子绿豆芽。
Even the gentlemen here are expected to have geniuses nine out of ten, but the situation is like this, not only is it difficult to produce geniuses, but it is also difficult to have the soil to cultivate geniuses. I think most geniuses are talented; It seems that everyone can do this unique soil for cultivating geniuses. The effect of making soil is closer than requiring genius; Otherwise, even if there are thousands of geniuses, they cannot develop because there is no soil, and they must be like a plate of mung bean sprouts.做土要扩大了精神，就是收纳新潮，脱离旧套，能够容纳，了解那将来产生的天才；又要不怕做小事业，就是能创作的自然是创作，否则翻译，介绍，欣赏，读，看，消闲都可以。以文艺来消闲，说来似乎有些可笑，但究竟较胜于戕贼他。
To make soil to expand the spirit, that is, to accept the new trend, break away from the old set, be able to accommodate, and understand the genius that will be produced in the future; If you are not afraid of doing small business, you can naturally create, otherwise you can translate, introduce, appreciate, read, watch, and have fun. It seems a bit ridiculous to use literature and art to relax, but it is better than killing him.泥土和天才比，当然是不足齿数的，然而不是坚苦卓绝者，也怕不容易做；不过事在人为，比空等天赋的天才有把握。这一点，是泥土的伟大的地方，也是反有大希望的地方。而且也有报酬，譬如好花从泥土里出来，看的人固然欣然的赏鉴，泥土也可以欣然的赏鉴，正不必花卉自身，这才心旷神怡的——假如当作泥土也有灵魂的说。
Compared with clay and genius, of course, it is not enough, but it is not a hard worker, and I am afraid that it will not be easy to do; However, things are man-made, and geniuses with talents such as Bikong are sure. This is the great place of the soil, and it is also a place of great hope. And there is also a reward, for example, a good flower comes out of the soil, the viewer is certainly happy to appreciate it, and the soil can also be appreciated happily, and it is not necessary for the flower itself to be happy - if it is said that the soil also has a soul.

论雷峰塔的倒掉

论雷峰塔的倒掉

论雷峰塔的倒掉

On the fall of the Leifeng Pagoda听说，杭州西湖上的雷峰塔倒掉了，听说而已，我没有亲见。但我却见过未倒的雷峰塔，破破烂烂的映掩于湖光山色之间，落山的太阳照着这些四近的地方，就是“雷峰夕照”，西湖十景之一。“雷峰夕照”的真景我也见过，并不见佳，我以为。
I heard that the Leifeng Pagoda on Hangzhou West Lake has fallen, I have only heard of it, I have not seen it with my own eyes. But I have seen the unfallen Leifeng Pagoda, tattered and hidden between the lakes and mountains, and the setting sun shines on these nearby places, which is "Leifeng Sunset", one of the ten views of West Lake. I have also seen the real scene of "Leifeng Sunset", but it is not good, I thought.然而一切西湖胜迹的名目之中，我知道得最早的却是这雷峰塔。我的祖母曾经常常对我说，白蛇娘娘就被压在这塔底下！有个叫作许仙的人救了两条蛇，一青一白，后来白蛇便化作女人来报恩，嫁给许仙了；青蛇化作丫鬟，也跟着。一个和尚，法海禅师，得道的禅师，看见许仙脸上有妖气，——凡讨妖怪做老婆的人，脸上就有妖气的，但只有非凡的人才看得出——便将他藏在金山寺的法座后，白蛇娘娘来寻夫，于是就“水满金山”。我的祖母讲起来还要有趣得多，大约是出于一部弹词叫作《义妖传》里的，但我没有看过这部书，所以也不知道“许仙”“法海”究竟是否这样写。总而言之，白蛇娘娘终于中了法海的计策，被装在一个小小的钵盂里了。钵盂埋在地里，上面还造起一座镇压的塔来，这就是雷峰塔。此后似乎事情还很多，如“白状元祭塔”之类，但我现在都忘记了。
However, among all the famous places in West Lake, the earliest I know is this Leifeng Pagoda. My grandmother used to tell me that the White Snake Niangniang was crushed under this tower! A man named Xu Xian saved two snakes, one green and one white, and later the white snake turned into a woman to repay the favor and married Xu Xian; The green snake turned into a maid and followed. A monk, Fahai Zen Master, a Zen master who has attained enlightenment, saw Xu Xian's face with demonic energy,—— anyone who asks for a monster to be his wife has a demonic aura on his face, but only extraordinary people can see it - so after hiding him in the Dharma seat of Jinshan Temple, the White Snake Niangniang came to find a husband, so he was "full of water and golden mountains". My grandmother is much more interesting to talk about, probably because of a word called "The Legend of the Righteous Demon", but I haven't read this book, so I don't know if "Xu Xian" and "Fahai" are written like this. All in all, the White Snake Niangniang finally fell for Fahai's scheme and was put in a small bowl. The bowl was buried in the ground, and a tower of suppression was built on it, which was the Leifeng Pagoda. After that, it seems that there are still many things, such as the "White Champion Sacrifice Pagoda", but I have forgotten them all now.那时我惟一的希望，就在这雷峰塔的倒掉。后来我长大了，到杭州，看见这破破烂烂的塔，心里就不舒服。后来我看看书，说杭州人又叫这塔作保叔塔，其实应该写作“保俶塔”，是钱王的儿子造的。那么，里面当然没有白蛇娘娘了，然而我心里仍然不舒服，仍然希望他倒掉。
At that time, my only hope was the fall of this Leifeng Pagoda. Later, when I grew up and went to Hangzhou, I felt uncomfortable when I saw this tattered tower. Later, I read the book and said that the people of Hangzhou also called this tower Baoshu Pagoda, which should actually be written as "Baochu Pagoda", which was built by the son of King Qian. Then, of course, there is no White Snake Niangniang inside, but I still feel uncomfortable and still hope that he will fall out.现在，他居然倒掉了，则普天之下的人民，其欣喜为何如？
Now, if he has actually fallen, how happy are the people of the world?这是有事实可证的。试到吴越的山间海滨，探听民意去。凡有田夫野老，蚕妇村氓，除了几个脑髓里有点贵恙的之外，可有谁不为白娘娘抱不平，不怪法海太多事的？
This is proven by facts. Try to go to the mountain seaside of Wuyue and listen to public opinion. All the farmers and wild elders, silkworm women and villagers, except for a few who are a little noble in their brains, who doesn't hold grievances for Bai Niangniang and don't blame Fahai for having too many troubles?和尚本应该只管自己念经。白蛇自迷许仙，许仙自娶妖怪，和别人有什么相干呢？他偏要放下经卷，横来招是搬非，大约是怀着嫉妒罢，——那简直是一定的。
The monk should have just taken care of chanting scriptures himself. The white snake is fascinated by Xu Xian, and Xu Xian marries a monster, what does it have to do with others? He wants to put down the scriptures and move the right and wrong, probably out of jealousy,—— that is simply certain.听说，后来玉皇大帝也就怪法海多事，以至荼毒生灵，想要拿办他了。他逃来逃去，终于逃在蟹壳里避祸，不敢再出来，到现在还如此。我对于玉皇大帝所做的事，腹诽的非常多，独于这一件却很满意，因为“水满金山”一案，的确应该由法海负责；他实在办得很不错的。只可惜我那时没有打听这话的出处，或者不在《义妖传》中，却是民间的传说罢。
I heard that later the Jade Emperor blamed Fahai for being troublesome, so much so that he poisoned the living beings and wanted to deal with him. He fled around, and finally fled in the crab shell to avoid disaster, not daring to come out again, and still does. I have slandered a lot about what the Jade Emperor did, but I am very satisfied with this one, because the case of "water full of gold" should indeed be responsible for Fahai; He did a really good job. It's a pity that I didn't inquire about the source of this at that time, or it wasn't in "The Legend of the Righteous Demon", but it was a folk legend.秋高稻熟时节，吴越间所多的是螃蟹，煮到通红之后，无论取哪一只，揭开背壳来，里面就有黄，有膏；倘是雌的，就有石榴子一般鲜红的子。先将这些吃完，即一定露出一个圆锥形的薄膜，再用小刀小心地沿着锥底切下，取出，翻转，使里面向外，只要不破，便变成一个罗汉模样的东西，有头脸，身子，是坐着的，我们那里的小孩子都称他“蟹和尚”，就是躲在里面避难的法海。
In the autumn high rice ripening season, there are many crabs in Wu and Yue, and after cooking until they are red, no matter which one you take, open the back shell, there is yellow and paste inside; If it is female, there will be bright red seeds like pomegranate seeds. Eat these first, that is, a cone-shaped film must be exposed, and then carefully cut off along the bottom of the cone with a knife, take it out, turn it over, so that the inside is facing out, as long as it is not broken, it will become an Arhat-like thing, with a head, face, body, and sitting, and our children there call him "Crab Monk", which is the sea of law that hides in it.当初，白蛇娘娘压在塔底下，法海禅师躲在蟹壳里。现在却只有这位老禅师独自静坐了，非到螃蟹断种的那一天为止出不来。莫非他造塔的时候，竟没有想到塔是终究要倒的么？
At the beginning, the White Snake Niangniang was pressed under the tower, and Zen Master Fahai hid in the crab shell. Now only this old Zen master sits quietly alone, and he can't come out until the day the crab is cut off. Could it be that when he built the tower, he didn't think that the tower would eventually fall?活该。
Deserve.一九二四年十月二十八日。
October 28, 1924.

说胡须

说胡须

说胡须

Talk about beards今年夏天游了一回长安，一个多月之后，胡里胡涂的回来了。知道的朋友便问我：“你以为那边怎样？”我这才栗然地回想长安，记得看见很多的白杨，很大的石榴树，道中喝了不少的黄河水。然而这些又有什么可谈呢？我于是说：“没有什么怎样。”他于是废然而去了，我仍旧废然而住，自愧无以对“不耻下问”的朋友们。
I traveled back to Chang'an this summer, and more than a month later, I came back in a mess. A friend who knew asked me, "What do you think of that place?" I remembered seeing a lot of poplars, large pomegranate trees, and drinking a lot of Yellow River water on the road. But what is there to talk about? I said, "It's nothing." He then left in vain, and I still lived in abandonment, ashamed of my friends who were "not ashamed to ask".今天喝茶之后，便看书，书上沾了一点水，我知道上唇的胡须又长起来了。假如翻一翻《康熙字典》，上唇的，下唇的，颊旁的，下巴上的各种胡须，大约都有特别的名号谥法的罢，然而我没有这样闲情别致。总之是这胡子又长起来了，我又要照例的剪短他，先免得沾汤带水。于是寻出镜子，剪刀，动手就剪，其目的是在使他和上唇的上缘平齐，成一个隶书的一字。我一面剪，一面却忽而记起长安，记起我的青年时代，发出连绵不断的感慨来。长安的事，已经不很记得清楚了，大约确乎是游历孔庙的时候，其中有一间房子，挂着许多印画，有李二曲像，有历代帝王像，其中有一张是宋太祖或是什么宗，我也记不清楚了，总之是穿一件长袍，而胡子向上翘起的。于是一位名士就毅然决然地说：“这都是日本人假造的，你看这胡子就是日本式的胡子。”
After drinking tea today, I read a book, and the book was stained with a little water, and I knew that the beard on my upper lip had grown again. If you look at the "Kangxi Dictionary", the upper lip, the lower lip, the cheeks, and all kinds of beards on the chin probably have special names, but I don't have such leisure and chic. In short, this beard has grown again, and I want to cut him short as usual, so as not to get wet with water. So he found a mirror and scissors, and cut them with his hands, the purpose of which was to make him flush with the upper edge of the upper lip, into a clerical script. While I was cutting, I suddenly remembered Chang'an, remembered my youth, and let out continuous emotions. I don't remember the things in Chang'an very clearly, about the time I visited the Confucius Temple, there was a house with many seals and paintings, there were portraits of Li Erqu, there were portraits of emperors of the past dynasties, one of which was Song Taizu or what kind of sect, I can't remember clearly, in short, he was wearing a robe, and his beard was raised upwards. So a celebrity resolutely said: "This is all fake by the Japanese, you see this beard is a Japanese-style beard." ”诚然，他们的胡子确乎如此翘上，他们也未必不假造宋太祖或什么宗的画像，但假造中国皇帝的肖像而必须对了镜子，以自己的胡子为法式，则其手段和思想之离奇，真可谓“出乎意表之外”了。清乾隆中，黄易掘出汉武梁祠石刻画像来，男子的胡须多翘上；我们现在所见北魏至唐的佛教造像中的信士像，凡有胡子的也多翘上，直到元明的画像，则胡子大抵受了地心的吸力作用，向下面拖下去了。日本人何其不惮烦，孳孳汲汲地造了这许多从汉到唐的假古董，来埋在中国的齐鲁燕晋秦陇巴蜀的深山邃谷废墟荒地里？
It is true that their beards are indeed so upright, and they may not have forged portraits of Song Taizu or some sect, but if they forge the portrait of the Chinese emperor and look in the mirror, using their own beard as a French style, then their methods and ideas are bizarre and can be described as "unexpected". In the Qianlong period of the Qing Dynasty, Huang Yi dug up the stone carved portrait of the Han Wuliang Temple, and the man's beard was raised more; The statues of believers in the Buddhist statues from the Northern Wei Dynasty to the Tang Dynasty that we see now are mostly upturned up, and until the portraits of the Yuan and Ming dynasties, the beards are largely dragged down by the gravitation of the center of the earth. Why are the Japanese so unafraid and diligently made these many fake antiques from the Han to the Tang Dynasty to bury them in the ruins of the deep mountains and valleys of Qilu, Yan, Jin, Qin, Long, and Bashu in China?我以为拖下的胡子倒是蒙古式，是蒙古人带来的，然而我们的聪明的名士却当作国粹了。留学日本的学生因为恨日本，便神往于大元，说道“那时倘非天幸，这岛国早被我们灭掉了！”则认拖下的胡子为国粹亦无不可。然而又何以是黄帝的子孙？又何以说台湾人在福建打中国人是奴隶根性？
I thought the dragged beard was Mongolian, brought by the Mongols, but our smart celebrities regarded it as the quintessence of the country. The students studying in Japan were fascinated by the Great Yuan because they hated Japan, saying, "If it weren't for luck at that time, this island country would have been destroyed by us!" Then it is not impossible to recognize the dragged beard as the quintessence of the country. However, why is he a descendant of the Yellow Emperor? Why do you say that Taiwanese fighting Chinese in Fujian is a slave nature?我当时就想争辩，但我即刻又不想争辩了。留学德国的爱国者X君，——因为我忘记了他的名字，姑且以X代之，——不是说我的毁谤中国，是因为娶了日本女人，所以替他们宣传本国的坏处么？我先前不过单举几样中国的缺点，尚且要带累“贱内”改了国籍，何况现在是有关日本的问题？好在即使宋太祖或什么宗的胡子蒙些不白之冤，也不至于就有洪水，就有地震，有什么大相干。我于是连连点头，说道：“嗡，嗡，对啦。”因为我实在比先前似乎油滑得多了，——好了。
I wanted to argue, but I didn't want to argue anymore. Mr. X, a patriot studying in Germany,—— because I forgot his name, and replaced him with X,—— Isn't it because I slander China, because I married a Japanese woman, so I promoted the bad of my country for them? I only listed a few shortcomings of China before, and I still have to change my nationality with the "cheap country", not to mention that it is now a question about Japan? Fortunately, even if Song Taizu or the beard of any sect suffered some unjust injustice, there would be no floods, earthquakes, and anything to do with it. I nodded repeatedly and said, "Buzz, bum, right." "Because I really seem to be much more oily than before,—— it's better.我剪下自己的胡子的左尖端毕，想，陕西人费心劳力，备饭化钱，用汽车载，用船装，用骡车拉，用自动车装，请到长安去讲演，大约万料不到我是一个虽对于决无杀身之祸的小事情，也不肯直抒自己的意见，只会“嗡，嗡，对啦”的罢。他们简直是受了骗了。
I cut off the left tip of my beard, thinking, Shaanxi people take the trouble to prepare food and money, use cars, use boats, pull with mule carts, and use automatic cars to put them on, please go to Chang'an to give a speech. They were simply deceived.我再向着镜中的自己的脸，看定右嘴角，剪下胡子的右尖端，撒在地上，想起我的青年时代来——
I looked at my face in the mirror, looked at the corner of my right mouth, cut off the right tip of my beard, and scattered it on the ground, thinking of my youth——那已经是老话，约有十六七年了罢。
That's an old saying, about sixteen or seventeen years.我就从日本回到故乡来，嘴上就留着宋太祖或什么宗似的向上翘起的胡子，坐在小船里，和船夫谈天。
I returned to my hometown from Japan, with a beard raised upwards like Song Taizu or some kind of sect on my mouth, sitting in a small boat and chatting with the boatman.“先生，你的中国话说得真好。”后来，他说。
"Sir, you speak Chinese so well." Later, he said.“我是中国人，而且和你是同乡，怎么会……”
"I'm Chinese, and I'm from the same hometown as you, how could I ......"“哈哈哈，你这位先生还会说笑话。”
"Hahaha, your gentleman can still tell jokes."记得我那时的没奈何，确乎比看见X君的通信要超过十倍。我那时随身并没有带着家谱，确乎不能证明我是中国人。即使带着家谱，而上面只有一个名字，并无画像，也不能证明这名字就是我。即使有画像，日本人会假造从汉到唐的石刻，宋太祖或什么宗的画像，难道偏不会假造一部木版的家谱么？
I remember that I was helpless at that time, and it was indeed more than ten times more than seeing Mr. X's communication. I didn't have a family tree with me at that time, so I really couldn't prove that I was Chinese. Even if you have a family tree and there is only one name on it, and there is no portrait, it cannot prove that the name is me. Even if there are portraits, will the Japanese forge stone carvings from the Han to the Tang Dynasty, the portraits of Song Taizu or some sect, will they not forge a woodblock genealogy?凡对于以真话为笑话的，以笑话为真话的，以笑话为笑话的，只有一个方法：就是不说话。
There is only one way for those who take the truth as a joke, to take a joke as a joke, and to take a joke as a joke: not to speak.于是我从此不说话。
So I never spoke again.然而，倘使在现在，我大约还要说：“嗡，嗡，……今天天气多么好呀？……那边的村子叫什么名字？……”因为我实在比先前似乎油滑得多了，——好了。
However, if I were now, I would probably say, "Hum, hum,...... How nice is the weather today? …… What is the name of the village over there? ...... "Because I'm really much smoother than before,—— it's better."现在我想，船夫的改变我的国籍，大概和X君的高见不同。其原因只在于胡子罢，因为我从此常常为胡子受苦。
Now I think that the boatman's change of nationality is probably different from Mr. X's high opinion. The reason for this is only the beard, because I have always suffered for it since then.国度会亡，国粹家是不会少的，而只要国粹家不少，这国度就不算亡。国粹家者，保存国粹者也；而国粹者，我的胡子是也。这虽然不知道是什么“逻辑”法，但当时的实情确是如此的。
The country will perish, and there will be no fewer nationalists, and as long as there are many nationalists, the kingdom will not be dead. The national quintessence is the one who preserves the national essence; And the quintessence of the country is my beard. Although I don't know what kind of "logical" method this is, the truth at that time was indeed like this.“你怎么学日本人的样子，身体既矮小，胡子又这样，……”一位国粹家兼爱国者发过一篇崇论宏议之后，就达到这一个结论。
"How do you learn from the Japanese, your body is short and your beard is like this,...... "A nationalist and patriot came to this conclusion after posting a grand discussion.可惜我那时还是一个不识世故的少年，所以就愤愤地争辩。第一，我的身体是本来只有这样高，并非故意设法用什么洋鬼子的机器压缩，使他变成矮小，希图冒充。第二，我的胡子，诚然和许多日本人的相同，然而我虽然没有研究过他们的胡须样式变迁史，但曾经见过几幅古人的画像，都不向上，只是向外，向下，和我们的国粹差不多。维新以后，可是翘起来了，那大约是学了德国式。你看威廉皇帝的胡须，不是上指眼梢，和鼻梁正作平行么？虽然他后来因为吸烟烧了一边，只好将两边都剪平了。但在日本明治维新的时候，他这一边还没有失火……。
Unfortunately, I was still an ignorant teenager at the time, so I argued indignantly. First, my body was originally only this tall, and I didn't deliberately try to compress it with some foreign devil's machine to make him short, and I wanted to pretend to be him. Second, my beard is indeed the same as that of many Japanese, but although I have not studied the history of their beard style changes, I have seen several portraits of the ancients, none of which are upward, but outward, downward, similar to our national essence. After the Restoration, it was upturned, and it was about learning the German style. Look at Emperor Wilhelm's beard, doesn't it point to the tip of the eye, parallel to the bridge of the nose? Although he later burned one side because of smoking, he had to cut both sides flat. But during the Meiji Restoration in Japan, there was no ...... fire on his side.这一场辩解大约要两分钟，可是总不能解国粹家之怒，因为德国也是洋鬼子，而况我的身体又矮小乎。而况国粹家很不少，意见又很统一，因此我的辩解也就很频繁，然而总无效，一回，两回，以至十回，十几回，连我自己也觉得无聊而且麻烦起来了。罢了，况且修饰胡须用的胶油在中国也难得，我便从此听其自然了。
This defense took about two minutes, but it could not relieve the anger of the nationalists, because Germany was also a foreign devil, and my body was short. Moreover, there are many nationalists, and their opinions are very unified, so my defenses are very frequent, but they are always ineffective, once, twice, or even ten times, or more than a dozen times, and even I myself find it boring and troublesome. That's all, and the glue used to modify the beard is rare in China, so I will let it go naturally.听其自然之后，胡子的两端就显出毗心现象来，于是也就和地面成为九十度的直角。国粹家果然也不再说话，或者中国已经得救了罢。
After listening to its nature, the two ends of the beard show the phenomenon of adjacency, so it becomes a right angle to the ground at a right angle of 90 degrees. The nationalists really don't speak anymore, or China has been saved.然而接着就招了改革家的反感，这也是应该的。我于是又分疏，一回，两回，以至许多回，连我自己也觉得无聊而且麻烦起来了。
However, it then attracted the disgust of the reformers, which is also right. So I was estranged again, once, twice, and even many times, and even I felt bored and troublesome.大约在四五年或七八年前罢，我独坐在会馆里，窃悲我的胡须的不幸的境遇，研究他所以得谤的原因，忽而恍然大悟，知道那祸根全在两边的尖端上。于是取出镜子，剪刀，即刻剪成一平，使他既不上翘，也难拖下，如一个隶书的一字。
About four or five or seven or eight years ago, I sat alone in the hall, secretly mourning the unfortunate condition of my beard, studying the reasons why he was slandered, and suddenly realized that the root of the bane was all on the tips of both sides. So he took out the mirror and scissors, and immediately cut it flat, so that he was neither upturned nor difficult to drag down, like a character in a clerical script.“阿，你的胡子这样了？”当初也曾有人这样问。
"Ah, what's wrong with your beard?" Someone asked this question at the beginning.“唔唔，我的胡子这样了。”
"Hmm, my beard is like this."他可是没有话。我不知道是否因为寻不着两个尖端，所以失了立论的根据，还是我的胡子“这样”之后，就不负中国存亡的责任了。总之我从此太平无事的一直到现在，所麻烦者，必须时常剪剪而已。
He had nothing to say. I don't know if I lost the basis for my thesis because I couldn't find the two tips, or if my beard was "like this", I would not be responsible for China's survival. In short, I have been peaceful since then, and the trouble is that I have to cut it from time to time.一九二四年十月三十日。
October 30, 1924.

论照相之类

论照相之类

论照相之类

On photography and the like一　材料之类
1. Materials我幼小时候，在S城，——所谓幼小时候者，是三十年前，但从进步神速的英才看来，就是一世纪；所谓S城者，我不说他的真名字，何以不说之故，也不说。总之，是在S城，常常旁听大大小小男男女女谈论洋鬼子挖眼睛。曾有一个女人，原在洋鬼子家里佣工，后来出来了，据说她所以出来的原因，就因为亲见一坛盐渍的眼睛，小鲫鱼似的一层一层积叠着，快要和坛沿齐平了。她为远避危险起见，所以赶紧走。
When I was young, in S City,—— the so-called childhood was thirty years ago, but from the perspective of the rapidly progressing talents, it was the first century; The so-called S City, I don't say his real name, why don't I say it, and I don't say it. In short, in S City, I often listen to men and women of all sizes talking about foreign devils gouging their eyes. It is said that the reason why she came out was because she saw a jar of salted eyes, layer by layer like a crucian carp, almost level with the edge of the altar. She hurried away to avoid danger.S城有一种习惯，就是凡是小康之家，到冬天一定用盐来腌一缸白菜，以供一年之需，其用意是否和四川的榨菜相同，我不知道。但洋鬼子之腌眼睛，则用意当然别有所在，惟独方法却大受了S城腌白菜法的影响，相传中国对外富于同化力，这也就是一个证据罢。然而状如小鲫鱼者何？答曰：此确为S城人之眼睛也。S城庙宇中常有一种菩萨，号曰眼光娘娘。有眼病的，可以去求祷；愈，则用布或绸做眼睛一对，挂神龛上或左右，以答神庥。所以只要看所挂眼睛的多少，就知道这菩萨的灵不灵。而所挂的眼睛，则正是两头尖尖，如小鲫鱼，要寻一对和洋鬼子生理图上所画似的圆球形者，决不可得。黄帝岐伯尚矣；王莽诛翟义党，分解肢体，令医生们察看，曾否绘图不可知，纵使绘过，现在已佚，徒令“古已有之”而已。宋的《析骨分经》，相传也据目验，《说郛》中有之，我曾看过它，多是胡说，大约是假的。否则，目验尚且如此胡涂，则S城人之将眼睛理想化为小鲫鱼，实也无足深怪了。
There is a habit in S City, that is, all well-off families must use salt to pickle a jar of cabbage in winter for a year's needs, and I don't know if the intention is the same as that of Sichuan mustard. However, the pickled eyes of foreign devils have other intentions, but the method is greatly influenced by the S City pickled cabbage method, and it is said that China is rich in assimilation to the outside world, which is also a proof. However, what does it look like a small crucian carp? Answer: This is indeed the eye of the people of S City. There is often a kind of Bodhisattva in the temple of S City, called the Lady of the Eye. those who have eye diseases can go to prayer; If it heals, make a pair of eyes out of cloth or silk and hang it on or on the left and right of the shrine to answer the gods. Therefore, just look at the number of eyes hanging to know whether the bodhisattva's spirit is effective. The eyes hanging are pointed at both ends, like small crucian carp, and it is impossible to find a pair of spherical shapes similar to those drawn on the physiological map of foreign devils. The Yellow Emperor and Qibo are still alive; Wang Mang killed Zhai Yidang, dismembered the limbs, and ordered the doctors to observe, whether they had been drawn or not, even if they had been drawn, they were now lost, and it was only "there was it in ancient times". Song's "Bone Analysis" is also said to be visually verified, and there is it in "Shuo Cheng", and I have seen it, most of which is nonsense, probably false. Otherwise, if the visual inspection is still so nonsense, it is not surprising that the people of S City idealize their eyes into small crucian cars.然而洋鬼子是吃腌眼睛来代腌菜的么？是不然，据说是应用的。一，用于电线，这是根据别一个乡下人的话，如何用法，他没有谈，但云用于电线罢了；至于电线的用意，他却说过，就是每年加添铁丝，将来鬼兵到时，使中国人无处逃走。二，用于照相，则道理分明，不必多赘，因为我们只要和别人对立，他的瞳子里一定有我的一个小照相的。
However, do foreign devils eat pickled eyes instead of pickles? It is not, it is said that it is applied. First, it is used for wires, which is according to the words of another countryman, how to use it, he did not talk about it, but the cloud is used for wires; As for the intention of the wire, he said that it was to add wire every year, so that when the ghost soldiers arrived in the future, the Chinese would have nowhere to escape. Second, for taking pictures, the reason is clear, there is no need to go into details, because as long as we are opposed to others, there must be a small photographer of mine in his eyes.而且洋鬼子又挖心肝，那用意，也是应用。我曾旁听过一位念佛的老太太说明理由：他们挖了去，熬成油，点了灯，向地下各处去照去。人心总是贪财的，所以照到埋着宝贝的地方，火头便弯下去了。他们当即掘开来，取了宝贝去，所以洋鬼子都这样的有钱。
And the foreign devil digs his heart and liver, and that intention is also an application. I once listened to an old lady chanting Buddha explain the reason: they dug it up, boiled it into oil, lit a lamp, and went to various places underground. People are always greedy for money, so when they shine on the place where the treasure is buried, the fire head bends down. They immediately dug it up and took the treasure, so the foreign devils are so rich.道学先生之所谓“万物皆备于我”的事，其实是全国，至少是S城的“目不识丁”的人们都知道，所以人为“万物之灵”。所以月经精液可以延年，毛发爪甲可以补血，大小便可以医许多病，臂膊上的肉可以养亲。然而这并非本论的范围，现在姑且不说。况且S城人极重体面，有许多事不许说；否则，就要用阴谋来惩治的。
Mr. Taoism's so-called "everything is for me" is actually known to the "illiterate" people in the whole country, at least in S City, so people are the "spirit of all things". Therefore, menstrual semen can prolong life, hair and nails can replenish blood, urine and defecation can cure many diseases, and the meat on the arms and arms can nourish relatives. However, this is not the scope of this theory, so let's not talk about it now. Moreover, the people of S City value decency and have many things that are not allowed to be said; Otherwise, they will be punished with conspiracies.

论照相之类

二　形式之类

论照相之类

2. Form要之，照相似乎是妖术。咸丰年间，或一省里；还有因为能照相而家产被乡下人捣毁的事情。但当我幼小的时候，——即三十年前，S城却已有照相馆了，大家也不甚疑惧。虽然当闹“义和拳民”时，——即二十五年前，或一省里，还以罐头牛肉当作洋鬼子所杀的中国孩子的肉看。然而这是例外，万事万物，总不免有例外的。
In short, photography seems to be sorcery. During the Xianfeng period, or in a province; There are also things that the family property was destroyed by the countrymen because they could take pictures. But when I was young,—— that is, 30 years ago, S City already had a photo studio, and everyone was not very afraid. Although when there was a "boxer",—— that is, 25 years ago, or in a province, canned beef was still regarded as the meat of Chinese children killed by foreign devils. However, this is an exception, and there are always exceptions to everything.要之，S城早有照相馆了，这是我每一经过，总须流连赏玩的地方，但一年中也不过经过四五回。大小长短不同颜色不同的玻璃瓶，又光滑又有刺的仙人掌，在我都是珍奇的物事；还有挂在壁上的框子里的照片：曾大人，李大人，左中堂，鲍军门。一个族中的好心的长辈，曾经借此来教育我，说这许多都是当今的大官，平“长毛”的功臣，你应该学学他们。我那时也很愿意学，然而想，也须赶快仍复有“长毛”。
In short, there has been a photo studio in S City, which is a place where I have to linger and enjoy every time I pass by, but I only pass by four or five times a year. glass bottles of different sizes and colors, smooth and thorny cacti are all rare things to me; There are also photos hanging in the frame on the wall: Lord Zeng, Lord Li, Zuo Zhongtang, Bao Junmen. A well-meaning elder in the clan once used this to educate me, saying that many of these are today's high-ranking officials, and you should learn from them. I was also willing to learn at that time, but I thought that I would have to quickly regain "long hair".但是，S城人却似乎不甚爱照相，因为精神要被照去的，所以运气正好的时候，尤不宜照，而精神则一名“威光”：我当时所知道的只有这一点。直到近年来，才又听到世上有因为怕失了元气而永不洗澡的名士，元气大约就是威光罢，那么，我所知道的就更多了：中国人的精神一名威光即元气，是照得去，洗得下的。
However, the people of S City don't seem to like to take pictures very much, because the spirit is to be photographed, so when the luck is just right, it is especially not suitable to take pictures, and the spirit is a "majesty": this is all I knew at the time. It wasn't until recent years that I heard that there are celebrities in the world who never take a bath because they are afraid of losing their vitality, and vitality is probably prestige, so I know more: the spirit of the Chinese is majesty is vitality, which can be illuminated and washed.然而虽然不多，那时却又确有光顾照相的人们，我也不明白是什么人物，或者运气不好之徒，或者是新党罢。只是半身像是大抵避忌的，因为像腰斩。自然，清朝是已经废去腰斩的了，但我们还能在戏文上看见包爷爷的铡包勉，一刀两段，何等可怕，则即使是国粹乎，而亦不欲人之加诸我也，诚然也以不照为宜。所以他们所照的多是全身，旁边一张大茶几，上有帽架，茶碗，水烟袋，花盆，几下一个痰盂，以表明这人的气管枝中有许多痰，总须陆续吐出。人呢，或立或坐，或者手执书卷，或者大襟上挂一个很大的时表，我们倘用放大镜一照，至今还可以知道他当时拍照的时辰，而且那时还不会用镁光，所以不必疑心是夜里。
However, although there were not many, there were indeed people who patronized the photo at that time, and I didn't understand who it was, or the unlucky people, or the new party. It's just that the bust is mostly taboo, because it looks like a waist cut. Naturally, the Qing Dynasty has abolished the waist cut, but we can still see Grandpa Bao's bao mian in the drama, one knife and two pieces, how terrible, even if it is the quintessence of the country, I don't want people to impose it on me, and it is true that it is appropriate not to follow it. So they mostly took pictures of the whole body, with a large coffee table next to it, with a hat rack, tea bowls, hookahs, flower pots, and a few spittoons to show that there was a lot of phlegm in the man's tracheal branches, which had to be spit out one after another. If we use a magnifying glass to look at it, we can still know the time when he took the photo, and he would not use magnesium light at that time, so there is no need to suspect that it was at night.然而名士风流，又何代蔑有呢？雅人早不满于这样千篇一律的呆鸟了，于是也有赤身露体装作晋人的，也有斜领丝绦装作X人的，但不多。较为通行的是先将自己照下两张，服饰态度各不同，然后合照为一张，两个自己即或如宾主，或如主仆，名曰“二我图”。但设若一个自己傲然地坐着，一个自己卑劣可怜地，向了坐着的那一个自己跪着的时候，名色便又两样了：“求己图”。这类“图”晒出之后，总须题些诗，或者词如“调寄满庭芳”“摸鱼儿”之类，然后在书房里挂起。至于贵人富户，则因为属于呆鸟一类，所以决计想不出如此雅致的花样来，即有特别举动，至多也不过自己坐在中间，膝下排列着他的一百个儿子，一千个孙子和一万个曾孙（下略）照一张“全家福”。
However, what generation does the romance of celebrities have? Yaren was already dissatisfied with such a cookie-cutter stupid bird, so there were also naked pretending to be Jin people, and there were also diagonal collars and silk ribbons pretending to be X people, but not many. It is more common to first take two pictures of yourself, with different clothing attitudes, and then take a group photo as one, and the two selves are either like guests and hosts, or like masters and servants, called "two self pictures". But if one sits proudly and the other kneels to the one who is sitting, the name and color are different: "seek oneself". After this kind of "picture" is posted, it is always necessary to inscribe some poems, or words such as "send full courtyard fragrance" and "touch fish", and then hang it in the study. As for the noble and wealthy families, because they belong to the category of stupid birds, they can't think of such elegant tricks, even if they have special moves, at most they are just sitting in the middle, with his hundred sons, 1,000 grandsons and 10,000 great-grandchildren (omitted below) taking a "family photo" under his knees.Th. Lipps在他那《伦理学的根本问题》中，说过这样意思的话。就是凡是人主，也容易变成奴隶，因为他一面既承认可做主人，一面就当然承认可做奴隶，所以威力一坠，就死心塌地，俯首帖耳于新主人之前了。那书可惜我不在手头，只记得一个大意，好在中国已经有了译本，虽然是节译，这些话应该存在的罢。用事实来证明这理论的最显著的例是孙皓，治吴时候，如此骄纵酷虐的暴主，一降晋，却是如此卑劣无耻的奴才。中国常语说，临下骄者事上必谄，也就是看穿了这把戏的话。但表现得最透澈的却莫如“求己图”，将来中国如要印《绘图伦理学的根本问题》，这实在是一张极好的插画，就是世界上最伟大的讽刺画家也万万想不到，画不出的。
Th. Lipps said this in his book "The Fundamental Questions of Ethics". Even any master is easy to become a slave, because he admits that he can be a master on the one hand, and of course he admits that he can be a slave on the other hand, so as soon as his power falls, he will give up and bow his head in front of the new master. It's a pity that I don't have that book at hand, I only remember one gist, fortunately, there is already a translation in China, although it is an abridged translation, these words should exist. The most striking example of using facts to prove this theory is Sun Hao, when he ruled Wu, such an arrogant and cruel tyrant, once he surrendered to Jin, he was such a despicable and shameless servant. As the Chinese saying goes, those who are arrogant must flatter themselves, that is, they see through this trick. But the most transparent is the "self-seeking picture", if China wants to print "The Fundamental Problems of Drawing Ethics" in the future, this is really an excellent illustration, even the greatest satirist in the world can never imagine it, and cannot draw it.但现在我们所看见的，已没有卑劣可怜地跪着的照相了，不是什么会纪念的一群，即是什么人放大的半个，都很凛凛地。我愿意我之常常将这些当作半张“求己图”看，乃是我的杞忧。
But now what we see is no longer a despicable and pitiful kneeling photo, not a group of people who will commemorate, that is, someone enlarged half of it, very awe-inspiring. I hope that I often see these as half a "self-seeking picture", which is my unfounded worry.

论照相之类

三　无题之类

论照相之类

3. Untitled照相馆选定一个或数个阔人的照相，放大了挂在门口，似乎是北京特有，或近来流行的。我在S城所见的曾大人之流，都不过六寸或八寸，而且挂着的永远是曾大人之流，也不像北京的时时掉换，年年不同。但革命以后，也许撤去了罢，我知道得不真确。
The photo studio selects a photo of one or several broad people and enlarges it to hang at the door, which seems to be unique to Beijing or popular recently. The people I see in S City are only six or eight inches, and they are always hanging like Zeng Daren, and they are not like Beijing's time to change, which is different every year. But after the revolution, maybe it was withdrawn, I know it is not true.至于近十年北京的事，可是略有所知了，无非其人阔，则其像放大，其人“下野”，则其像不见，比电光自然永久得多。倘若白昼明烛，要在北京城内寻求一张不像那些阔人似的缩小放大挂起挂倒的照相，则据鄙陋所知，实在只有一位梅兰芳君。而该君的麻姑一般的“天女散花”“黛玉葬花”像，也确乎比那些缩小放大挂起挂倒的东西标致，即此就足以证明中国人实有审美的眼睛，其一面又放大挺胸凸肚的照相者，盖出于不得已。
As for the events in Beijing in the past ten years, I know a little, it is nothing more than the person is wide, the image is enlarged, and the person "goes to the field", the image is invisible, which is much more permanent than lightning. If you want to find a photo in Beijing that is not zoomed out and hung up like those broad people, then as far as I know, there is really only one Mei Lanfangjun. And the gentleman's Magu-like "Heavenly Maiden Scattering Flowers" and "Daiyu Funeral Flowers" statues are indeed more than those things that are shrunk and enlarged, which is enough to prove that Chinese people really have aesthetic eyes, and on the other hand, they enlarge the photographers with their chests and bellies, probably out of necessity.我在先只读过《红楼梦》，没有看见“黛玉葬花”的照片的时候，是万料不到黛玉的眼睛如此之凸，嘴唇如此之厚的。我以为她该是一副瘦削的痨病脸，现在才知道她有些福相，也像一个麻姑。然而只要一看那些继起的模仿者们的拟天女照相，都像小孩子穿了新衣服，拘束得怪可怜的苦相，也就会立刻悟出梅兰芳君之所以永久之故了，其眼睛和嘴唇，盖出于不得已，即此也就足以证明中国人实有审美的眼睛。
I had only read "Dream of Red Mansions" before, and when I didn't see the photo of "Daiyu's Funeral Flowers", I didn't expect Daiyu's eyes to be so convex and her lips to be so thick. I thought she should have a thin tuberculosis face, but now I know that she has some blessings and looks like a magu. However, as long as you look at the photos of the mimic celestial maidens of those imitators who followed, they are all like children wearing new clothes and restrained and pitiful, and you will immediately realize that the reason why Mei Lanfangjun is permanent is that her eyes and lips are out of necessity, which is enough to prove that Chinese people really have aesthetic eyes.印度的诗圣泰戈尔先生光临中国之际，像一大瓶好香水似地很熏上了几位先生们以文气和玄气，然而够到陪坐祝寿的程度的却只有一位梅兰芳君：两国的艺术家的握手。待到这位老诗人改姓换名，化为“竺震旦”，离开了近于他的理想境的这震旦之后，震旦诗贤头上的印度帽也不大看见了，报章上也很少记他的消息，而装饰这近于理想境的震旦者，也仍旧只有那巍然地挂在照相馆玻璃窗里的一张“天女散花图”或“黛玉葬花图”。
When the Indian poet Mr. Saint Tagore visited China, he was like a large bottle of good perfume and was very intoxicated by several gentlemen with literary and mysterious atmosphere, but only one Mei Lanfangjun was enough to sit with him to celebrate his birthday: the handshake of artists from the two countries. After the old poet changed his surname and became "Zhu Zhendan", and left the Aurora that was close to his ideal world, the Indian hat on the head of the Aurora poet was not easily seen, and there was little news about him in the newspapers, and the only Aurora who decorated this close ideal was still the "Heavenly Maiden Scattering Flower Picture" or "Daiyu Funeral Flower Picture" hanging majestically in the glass window of the photo studio.惟有这一位“艺术家”的艺术，在中国是永久的。
Only the art of this "artist" is permanent in China.我所见的外国名伶美人的照相并不多，男扮女的照相没有见过，别的名人的照相见过几十张。托尔斯泰，伊孛生，罗丹都老了，尼采一脸凶相，勖本华尔一脸苦相，淮尔特，穿上他那审美的衣装的时候，已经有点呆相了，而罗曼罗兰似乎带点怪气，戈尔基又简直像一个流氓。虽说都可以看出悲哀和苦斗的痕迹来罢，但总不如天女的“好”得明明白白。假使吴昌硕翁的刻印章也算雕刻家，加以作画的润格如是之贵，则在中国确是一位艺术家了，但他的照相我们看不见。林琴南翁负了那么大的文名，而天下也似乎不甚有热心于“识荆”的人，我虽然曾在一个药房的仿单上见过他的玉照，但那是代表了他的“如夫人”函谢丸药的功效，所以印上的，并不因为他的文章。更就用了“引车卖浆者流”的文字来做文章的诸君而言，南亭亭长我佛山人往矣，且从略；近来则虽是奋战忿斗，做了这许多作品的如创造社诸君子，也不过印过很小的一张三人的合照，而且是铜板而已。
I haven't seen many photos of famous foreign actors and beauties, I haven't seen photos of men dressed as women, and I have seen dozens of photos of other celebrities. Tolstoy, Ibsen, Rodin are all old, Nietzsche has a fierce face, Xu Benwaal has a bitter face, Walter, when he puts on his aesthetic costume, he is already a little dumbfounded, and Romain Rolland seems to be a little strange, and Gorky is like a hooligan. Although traces of sorrow and struggle can be seen, it is not as clear as the "good" of the heavenly maiden. If Wu Changshuoweng's engraving seal is also considered a sculptor, and the Runge of painting is so expensive, he is indeed an artist in China, but we cannot see his photographs. Lin Qinnanweng owes such a big literary name, and the world does not seem to be very enthusiastic about "knowing Jing", although I have seen his jade photo on a pharmacy's imitation list, but it represents the efficacy of his "Mrs. Ru" letter thank you pills, so it is not printed because of his article. As far as the words "leading the cart and selling pulp" are concerned, the head of the Nanting Pavilion, I am from Foshan, and I will omitt; Recently, although they have been fighting and fought, the gentlemen of the Creation Society who have made many works have only printed a very small photo of the three of them, and they are just copper plates.我们中国的最伟大最永久的艺术是男人扮女人。
The greatest and most permanent art in our China is that men pretend to be women.异性大抵相爱。太监只能使别人放心，决没有人爱他，因为他是无性了，——假使我用了这“无”字还不算什么语病。然而也就可见虽然最难放心，但是最可贵的是男人扮女人了，因为从两性看来，都近于异性，男人看见“扮女人”，女人看见“男人扮”，所以这就永远挂在照相馆的玻璃窗里，挂在国民的心中。外国没有这样的完全的艺术家，所以只好任凭那些捏锤凿，调采色，弄墨水的人们跋扈。
Opposite sexes generally love each other. The eunuch can only reassure others, no one loves him, because he is sexless,—— if I use the word "nothing", it is not a language disease. However, it can be seen that although it is the most difficult to rest assured, the most valuable thing is that men pretend to be women, because from the perspective of both sexes, they are close to the opposite sex, men see "pretend to be women", and women see "men pretending", so this will always hang in the glass window of the photo studio and hang in the hearts of the people. There are no such complete artists in foreign countries, so they have to let those who pinch hammers, color and ink be domineering.我们中国的最伟大最永久，而且最普遍的艺术也就是男人扮女人。
The greatest, most permanent and most common art in China is that men pretend to be women.一九二四年十一月十一日。
November 11, 1924.

再论雷峰塔的倒掉

再论雷峰塔的倒掉

再论雷峰塔的倒掉

Let's talk about the collapse of the Leifeng Pagoda从崇轩先生的通信（二月份《京报副刊》）里，知道他在轮船上听到两个旅客谈话，说是杭州雷峰塔之所以倒掉，是因为乡下人迷信那塔砖放在自己的家中，凡事都必平安，如意，逢凶化吉，于是这个也挖，那个也挖，挖之久久，便倒了。一个旅客并且再三叹息道：西湖十景这可缺了呵！
From Mr. Chongxuan's correspondence (Beijing News Supplement in February), I know that he heard two passengers talking on the ship, saying that the reason why the Leifeng Pagoda in Hangzhou collapsed was because the countrymen were superstitious that the tower bricks were placed in their homes, and everything would be safe, wishful, and auspicious, so they dug this and that, and after digging for a long time, they fell. A passenger sighed repeatedly: The ten views of West Lake are lacking!这消息，可又使我有点畅快了，虽然明知道幸灾乐祸，不像一个绅士，但本来不是绅士的，也没有法子来装潢。
This news made me a little happy, although I knew that I was gloating, not like a gentleman, but I was not a gentleman, and I had no way to decorate.我们中国的许多人，——我在此特别郑重声明：并不包括四万万同胞全部！——大抵患有一种“十景病”，至少是“八景病”，沉重起来的时候大概在清朝。凡看一部县志，这一县往往有十景或八景，如“远村明月”“萧寺清钟”“古池好水”之类。而且，“十”字形的病菌，似乎已经侵入血管，流布全身，其势力早不在“！”形惊叹亡国病菌之下了。点心有十样锦，菜有十碗，音乐有十番，阎罗有十殿，药有十全大补，猜拳有全福手福手全，连人的劣迹或罪状，宣布起来也大抵是十条，仿佛犯了九条的时候总不肯歇手。现在西湖十景可缺了呵！“凡为天下国家有九经”，九经固古已有之，而九景却颇不习见，所以正是对于十景病的一个针砭，至少也可以使患者感到一种不平常，知道自己的可爱的老病，忽而跑掉了十分之一了。
Many of us in China,—— I hereby solemnly declare that not all of our 40 million compatriots are included! ——Probably suffered from a kind of "ten scenery disease", at least "eight scenery diseases", and it was probably in the Qing Dynasty when it became heavy. Whenever you look at a county chronicle, this county often has ten or eight scenes, such as "Mingyue in the Far Village", "Xiaosi Qingzhong", "Ancient Pond Good Water" and so on. Moreover, the "cross" shaped germs seem to have invaded the blood vessels and spread throughout the body, and their power is no longer there"! "I was amazed that the country was under the germs. There are ten kinds of brocade for dim sum, ten bowls of dishes, ten times for music, Yama has ten halls, medicine has ten perfect supplements, guessing boxing has all kinds of blessings, and even people's bad deeds or crimes are announced as ten, as if they never refuse to rest when they commit nine crimes. Now the ten views of West Lake are missing! "There are nine classics for all countries in the world", the nine classics have existed in ancient times, but the nine views are quite unfamiliar, so it is a needle for the ten scenery diseases, at least it can make the patient feel an unusual, knowing that his lovely old illness suddenly ran away one-tenth.但仍有悲哀在里面。
But there is still sadness in it.其实，这一种势所必至的破坏，也还是徒然的，畅快不过是无聊的自欺。雅人和信士和传统大家，定要苦心孤诣巧语花言地再来补足了十景而后已。
In fact, this kind of inevitable destruction is still in vain, and the pleasure is just a boring self-deception. Elegant people, believers and traditional people must painstakingly make up for the ten scenes in clever words.无破坏即无新建设，大致是的；但有破坏却未必即有新建设。卢梭，斯谛纳尔，尼采，托尔斯泰，伊孛生等辈，若用勃兰兑斯的话来说，乃是“轨道破坏者”。其实他们不单是破坏，而且是扫除，是大呼猛进，将碍脚的旧轨道不论整条或碎片，一扫而空，并非想挖一块废铁古砖挟回家去，预备卖给旧货店。中国很少这一类人，即使有之，也会被大众的唾沫淹死。孔丘先生确是伟大，生在巫鬼势力如此旺盛的时代，偏不肯随俗谈鬼神；但可惜太聪明了，“祭如在祭神如神在”，只用他修《春秋》的照例手段以两个“如”字略寓“俏皮刻薄”之意，使人一时莫明其妙，看不出他肚皮里的反对来。他肯对子路赌咒，却不肯对鬼神宣战，因为一宣战就不和平，易犯骂人——虽然不过骂鬼——之罪，即不免有《衡论》（见一月份《晨报副镌》）作家TY先生似的好人，会替鬼神来奚落他道：为名乎？骂人不能得名。为利乎？骂人不能得利。想引诱女人乎？又不能将蚩尤的脸子印在文章上。何乐而为之也欤？
No destruction means no new construction, roughly yes; But if there is destruction, it may not necessarily lead to new construction. Rousseau, Steiner, Nietzsche, Tolstoy, Ibsen and others, in Brande's words, are "orbital breakers". In fact, they are not only destroying, but also sweeping away, shouting and sweeping away the old tracks that get in the way, whether whole or fragmented, not to dig up a scrap iron brick and take it home, ready to sell it to a thrift store. There are very few such people in China, and even if there are, they will be drowned in the saliva of the public. Mr. Confucius is indeed great, born in an era when the power of witches and ghosts is so strong, but he refuses to talk about ghosts and gods with the world; But it's a pity that it's too smart, "the sacrifice is like the god is in the gods", and he only used his usual method of revising the "Spring and Autumn Annals" to use the two "like" words to slightly imply the meaning of "playful and mean", which made people incomprehensible for a while, and he couldn't see the opposition in his belly. He is willing to gamble on Zilu, but he refuses to declare war on ghosts and gods, because once war is declared, it is not peaceful, and it is easy to commit the crime of scolding people - although it is not just scolding ghosts, that is, it is inevitable that there will be good people like Mr. TY, the writer of "Heng Lun" (see the "Morning News" in January), who will ridicule him for the ghosts and gods: For the sake of fame? You can't get a name for scolding people. Is it profitable? Scolding people does not make a profit. Do you want to seduce a woman? and you can't print Chi You's face on the article. Why do you enjoy doing it?孔丘先生是深通世故的老先生，大约除脸子付印问题以外，还有深心，犯不上来做明目张胆的破坏者，所以只是不谈，而决不骂，于是乎俨然成为中国的圣人，道大，无所不包故也。否则，现在供在圣庙里的，也许不姓孔。
Mr. Confucius is an old gentleman who is deeply knowledgeable about the world, probably in addition to the problem of face printing, he also has a deep heart, and he can't be a blatant saboteur, so he just doesn't talk about it, and never scolds, so he seems to have become a saint in China, the Tao is great, and he is all-encompassing. Otherwise, those who are now offered in the temple may not have the surname Kong.不过在戏台上罢了，悲剧将人生的有价值的东西毁灭给人看，喜剧将那无价值的撕破给人看。讥讽又不过是喜剧的变简的一支流。但悲壮滑稽，却都是十景病的仇敌，因为都有破坏性，虽然所破坏的方面各不同。中国如十景病尚存，则不但卢梭他们似的疯子决不产生，并且也决不产生一个悲剧作家或喜剧作家或讽刺诗人。所有的，只是喜剧底人物或非喜剧非悲剧底人物，在互相模造的十景中生存，一面各各带了十景病。
But on the stage, tragedy destroys the valuable things in life for people to see, and comedy tears up the worthless things for people to see. Sarcasm is just a simplified branch of comedy. But tragic and funny, they are all enemies of the Ten Scenery Disease, because they are all destructive, although the aspects of the destruction are different. If the Ten Scenery Disease still exists in China, not only will there be no madmen like Rousseau, but also a tragic writer, comedy writer, or satirist. All of them are just comedy characters or non-comedy and non-tragic characters, surviving in ten scenes imitated by each other, each with ten scenes of illness.然而十全停滞的生活，世界上是很不多见的事，于是破坏者到了，但并非自己的先觉的破坏者，却是狂暴的强盗，或外来的蛮夷。狁早到过中原，五胡来过了，蒙古也来过了；同胞张献忠杀人如草，而满洲兵的一箭，就钻进树丛中死掉了。有人论中国说，倘使没有带着新鲜的血液的野蛮的侵入，真不知自身会腐败到如何！这当然是极刻毒的恶谑，但我们一翻历史，怕不免要有汗流浃背的时候罢。外寇来了，暂一震动，终于请他作主子，在他的刀斧下修补老例；内寇来了，也暂一震动，终于请他做主子，或者别拜一个主子，在自己的瓦砾中修补老例。再来翻县志，就看见每一次兵燹之后，所添上的是许多烈妇烈女的氏名。看近来的兵祸，怕又要大举表扬节烈了罢。许多男人们都那里去了？
However, a completely stagnant life is a very rare thing in the world, so the saboteur arrives, but not the saboteur of his own prescience, but a violent robber, or a foreign barbarian. The Xiongnu have been to the Central Plains early, the Wuhu have come, and the Mongols have also come; Compatriot Zhang Xianzhong killed like grass, and the Manchurian soldier's arrow got into the bushes and died. Some people say that if there is no barbaric invasion with fresh blood, I really don't know how corrupt it will be! This is of course a very vicious joke, but when we turn to history, I am afraid that there will be times when we will sweat. When the foreign invaders came, they were temporarily shaken, and finally asked him to be the master and repair the old rules under his knife and axe; When the internal invaders came, they were temporarily shaken, and finally asked him to be the master, or don't worship a master, and mend the old rules in his own rubble. When I looked at the county chronicle again, I saw that after each war, the names of many martyrs and martyrs were added. Looking at the recent military disaster, I am afraid that I will praise Jie Lie again. Where did many men go?凡这一种寇盗式的破坏，结果只能留下一片瓦砾，与建设无关。
All this kind of robbery-style destruction can only leave a piece of rubble, which has nothing to do with construction.但当太平时候，就是正在修补老例，并无寇盗时候，即国中暂时没有破坏么？也不然的，其时有奴才式的破坏作用常川活动着。
But when there is peace, it is repairing the old precedent, and there are no thieves, that is, there is no damage in the country for the time being? Otherwise, there is a servant-like sabotage effect at that time, and Changchuan is active.雷峰塔砖的挖去，不过是极近的一条小小的例。龙门的石佛，大半肢体不全，图书馆中的书籍，插图须谨防撕去，凡公物或无主的东西，倘难于移动，能够完全的即很不多。但其毁坏的原因，则非如革除者的志在扫除，也非如寇盗的志在掠夺或单是破坏，仅因目前极小的自利，也肯对于完整的大物暗暗的加一个创伤。人数既多，创伤自然极大，而倒败之后，却难于知道加害的究竟是谁。正如雷峰塔倒掉以后，我们单知道由于乡下人的迷信。共有的塔失去了，乡下人的所得，却不过一块砖，这砖，将来又将为别一自利者所藏，终究至于灭尽。倘在民康物阜时候，因为十景病的发作，新的雷峰塔也会再造的罢。但将来的运命，不也就可以推想而知么？如果乡下人还是这样的乡下人，老例还是这样的老例。
The excavation of the bricks of the Leifeng Pagoda is just a very close example. The stone Buddha of Longmen, most of the limbs are incomplete, the books in the library, the illustrations must be torn off, all public property or ownerless things, if it is difficult to move, there are very few that can be complete. However, the reason for its destruction is not the intention of the abolitionists, nor the intention of the robbers to plunder or simply destroy, but only because of the current very small self-interest, and is willing to secretly add a trauma to the complete big thing. Since there are many people, the trauma is naturally great, but after the defeat, it is difficult to know who the perpetrator is. Just as after the Leifeng Pagoda fell, we only know that it was due to the superstition of the countrymen. The shared tower is lost, but the countryman's gain is only a brick, and this brick will be hidden by another self-interested person in the future, and it will eventually be destroyed. If it is in Minkang Wufu, because of the onset of the Ten Scenic Diseases, the new Leifeng Pagoda will also be rebuilt. But isn't the fate of the future also inferred? If the countryman is still such a countryman, the old example is still like this.这一种奴才式的破坏，结果也只能留下一片瓦砾，与建设无关。
This kind of slave-like destruction can only leave a piece of rubble and has nothing to do with construction.岂但乡下人之于雷峰塔，日日偷挖中华民国的柱石的奴才们，现在正不知有多少！
Not only the countrymen are to the Leifeng Pagoda, but the servants who steal the pillars of the Republic of China every day, I don't know how many there are now!瓦砾场上还不足悲，在瓦砾场上修补老例是可悲的。我们要革新的破坏者，因为他内心有理想的光。我们应该知道他和寇盗奴才的分别；应该留心自己堕入后两种。这区别并不烦难，只要观人，省己，凡言动中，思想中，含有借此据为己有的朕兆者是寇盗，含有借此占些目前的小便宜的朕兆者是奴才，无论在前面打着的是怎样鲜明好看的旗子。
It is not sad to be sad on the rubble field, but it is sad to repair the old example on the rubble field. We want the destroyer of innovation, because he has the ideal light in him. We should know the difference between him and the thief's servant; You should pay attention to the latter two. This difference is not annoying, as long as you observe people, save yourself, in all words and deeds, in thoughts, those who contain the signs that take this as their own are thieves, and those who contain the signs that take advantage of this to take advantage of the present are slaves, no matter how bright and good-looking the flag is in front.一九二五年二月六日。
February 6, 1925.

看镜有感

看镜有感

看镜有感

Looking in the mirror, I feel it因为翻衣箱，翻出几面古铜镜子来，大概是民国初年初到北京时候买在那里的，“情随事迁”，全然忘却，宛如见了隔世的东西了。
Because I rummaged through the clothes box and dug out a few bronze mirrors, which I probably bought there when I arrived in Beijing at the beginning of the Republic of China, "love changes with the situation", completely forgotten, as if I had seen something from another world.一面圆径不过二寸，很厚重，背面满刻蒲陶，还有跳跃的鼯鼠，沿边是一圈小飞禽。古董店家都称为“海马葡萄镜”。但我的一面并无海马，其实和名称不相当。记得曾见过别一面，是有海马的，但贵极，没有买。这些都是汉代的镜子；后来也有模造或翻沙者，花纹可造粗拙得多了。汉武通大宛安息，以致天马蒲萄，大概当时是视为盛事的，所以便取作什器的装饰。古时，于外来物品，每加海字，如海榴，海红花，海棠之类。海即现在之所谓洋，海马译成今文，当然就是洋马。镜鼻是一个虾蟆，则因为镜如满月，月中有蟾蜍之故，和汉事不相干了。
One side is only two inches in diameter, very heavy, and the back is full of grapes, as well as jumping flying squirrels, and along the edge is a circle of small birds. Antique shops call it "Seahorse Grape Mirror". But my side does not have a hippocampus, which is actually not equivalent to the name. I remember seeing another side, there was a seahorse, but it was very expensive, so I didn't buy it. These are mirrors of the Han Dynasty; Later, there were also molders or sand turners, and the pattern could be much rougher. Han Wu Tong Dawan rested, so that the Pegasus grape was probably regarded as a grand event at that time, so it was used as a decoration for furniture. In ancient times, the word "sea" was added to foreign items, such as pomegranate, sea safflower, begonia, etc. The sea is now the so-called ocean, and the seahorse is translated into today's language, of course, it is the Yanmar. The mirror nose is a toad, because the mirror is like a full moon, and there is a toad in the moon, so it has nothing to do with Han affairs.遥想汉人多少闳放，新来的动植物，即毫不拘忌，来充装饰的花纹。唐人也还不算弱，例如汉人的墓前石兽，多是羊，虎，天禄，辟邪，而长安的昭陵上，却刻着带箭的骏马，还有一匹驼鸟，则办法简直前无古人。现今在坟墓上不待言，即平常的绘画，可有人敢用一朵洋花一只洋鸟，即私人的印章，可有人肯用一个草书一个俗字么？许多雅人，连记年月也必是甲子，怕用民国纪元。不知道是没有如此大胆的艺术家；还是虽有而民众都加迫害，他于是乎只得萎缩，死掉了？
Think about how many Han people are so popular, and the new animals and plants, that is, unrestrained, come to fill the decorative patterns. The Tang people are not weak, for example, the stone beasts in front of the tombs of the Han people are mostly sheep, tigers, Tianlu, and warding off evil spirits, but on the Zhaoling in Chang'an, there is a horse with arrows and an ostrich, which is simply unprecedented. Nowadays, it goes without saying on the grave, that is, in ordinary paintings, someone dares to use a foreign flower and a foreign bird, that is, a private seal, but is anyone willing to use a cursive script and a vulgar character? Many elegant people, even remembering the year must be Jiazi, afraid of using the era of the Republic of China. I don't know if there are any such bold artists; Or was it that the people were persecuted, so he had to shrink and die?宋的文艺，现在似的国粹气味就熏人。然而辽金元陆续进来了，这消息很耐寻味。汉唐虽然也有边患，但魄力究竟雄大，人民具有不至于为异族奴隶的自信心，或者竟毫未想到，凡取用外来事物的时候，就如将彼俘来一样，自由驱使，绝不介怀。一到衰弊陵夷之际，神经可就衰弱过敏了，每遇外国东西，便觉得仿佛彼来俘我一样，推拒，惶恐，退缩，逃避，抖成一团，又必想一篇道理来掩饰，而国粹遂成为孱王和孱奴的宝贝。
The literature and art of the Song Dynasty are now like the smell of national essence. However, Liao Jinyuan came in one after another, and this news is very intriguing. Although the Han and Tang dynasties also had border troubles, their courage was so great that the people had the confidence that they would not be slaves of foreign races, or they never thought that when they took foreign things, they were like capturing them, and they were driven freely and never minded. Every time I encounter something foreign, I feel as if he is coming to capture me, refusing, panicking, retreating, escaping, shaking into a ball, and I must think of a truth to cover it up, and the quintessence of the country has become the treasure of the king and the slave.无论从那里来的，只要是食物，壮健者大抵就无需思索，承认是吃的东西。惟有衰病的，却总常想到害胃，伤身，特有许多禁条，许多避忌；还有一大套比较利害而终于不得要领的理由，例如吃固无妨，而不吃尤稳，食之或当有益，然究以不吃为宜云云之类。但这一类人物总要日见其衰弱的，因为他终日战战兢兢，自己先已失了活气了。
No matter where it comes from, as long as it is food, the strong probably don't need to think about it, and admit that it is something to eat. Only those who are sick often think of harming the stomach and body, and there are many prohibitions and taboos; There is also a large set of reasons for comparing interests and not getting the point, such as eating is not harmful, but not eating is more stable, eating may be beneficial, but it is better not to eat. But this type of character always sees his weakness day by day, because he trembles all day long, and he has lost his vitality first.不知道南宋比现今如何，但对外敌，却明明已经称臣，惟独在国内特多繁文缛节以及唠叨的碎话。正如倒霉人物，偏多忌讳一般，豁达闳大之风消歇净尽了。直到后来，都没有什么大变化。我曾在古物陈列所所陈列的古画上看见一颗印文，是几个罗马字母。但那是所谓“我圣祖仁皇帝”的印，是征服了汉族的主人，所以他敢；汉族的奴才是不敢的。便是现在，便是艺术家，可有敢用洋文的印的么？
I don't know how the Southern Song Dynasty is compared to today, but it has obviously been a vassal to foreign enemies, but there are a lot of red tape and nagging in China. Just like the unlucky characters, there are many taboos, and the wind of open-mindedness has disappeared. Until later, there were no major changes. I once saw a seal on an ancient painting displayed in the antiquities exhibition hall, which was a few Roman letters. But that was the seal of the so-called "My Holy Ancestor Ren Emperor", which was the master who conquered the Han people, so he dared; Han slaves do not dare. Even now, if you are an artist, do you dare to print in foreign languages?清顺治中，时宪书上印有“依西洋新法”五个字，痛哭流涕来劾洋人汤若望的偏是汉人杨光先。直到康熙初，争胜了，就教他做钦天监正去，则又叩阍以“但知推步之理不知推步之数”辞。不准辞，则又痛哭流涕地来做《不得已》，说道“宁可使中夏无好历法，不可使中夏有西洋人。”然而终于连闰月都算错了，他大约以为好历法专属于西洋人，中夏人自己是学不得，也学不好的。但他竟论了大辟，可是没有杀，放归，死于途中了。汤若望入中国还在明崇祯初，其法终未见用；后来阮元论之曰：“明季君臣以大统寖疏，开局修正，既知新法之密，而讫未施行。圣朝定鼎，以其法造时宪书，颁行天下。彼十余年辩论翻译之劳，若以备我朝之采用者，斯亦奇矣！……我国家圣圣相传，用人行政，惟求其是，而不先设成心。即是一端，可以仰见如天之度量矣！”（《畴人传》四十五）
During the Shunzhi period of the Qing Dynasty, the five words "according to the new Western law" were printed on the constitutional book, and it was the Han Yang Guangxian who cried bitterly to impeach the foreigner Tang Ruowang. Until the beginning of Kangxi, when he won the battle, he taught him to be the head of the Qin Tianjian, and then knocked on the door with the words "but know the principle of pushing steps, but not the number of pushes". If he was not allowed to leave, he would cry bitterly and do "Last Resort", saying, "It is better to have no good calendar in China than to have Westerners in China." However, in the end, even the leap month was miscalculated, and he probably thought that the good calendar was exclusive to Westerners, and the Chinese people themselves could not learn it, nor could they learn it well. But he was sentenced to death, but he was not killed, released, and died on the way. Tang Ruowang entered China in the early Ming Chongzhen period, and his method was never used; Later, Ruan Yuan commented: "In the late Ming Dynasty, the monarch and ministers were loose and revised, and they knew the secret of the new law, but it was not implemented. The Holy Dynasty established the Ding Dynasty and used this method to create the Constitution of the time, which was promulgated throughout the realm. It is truly remarkable that the work of debating and translating for more than ten years is used to prepare for our dynasty's adoption. …… In our country, the saints and sages have passed down the tradition of employing people and administration, only seeking the right things without first setting up a mindset. This is one end, and you can look up at the measurement of heaven. ("The Biography of the People" 45)现在流传的古镜们，出自冢中者居多，原是殉葬品。但我也有一面日用镜，薄而且大，规抚汉制，也许是唐代的东西。那证据是：一，镜鼻已多磨损；二，镜面的沙眼都用别的铜来补好了。当时在妆阁中，曾照唐人的额黄和眉绿，现在却监禁在我的衣箱里，它或者大有今昔之感罢。
Most of the ancient mirrors that are now circulating are from tombs and were originally burial goods. But I also have a daily mirror, thin and large, gauge the Han system, maybe something from the Tang Dynasty. The evidence is: first, the mirror nose has been worn a lot; Second, the trachoma on the mirror surface is repaired with other copper. At that time, in the makeup pavilion, I used to shine on the yellow forehead and green eyebrows of the Tang people, but now they are imprisoned in my closet, and it may have a sense of the past and present.但铜镜的供用，大约道光咸丰时候还与玻璃镜并行；至于穷乡僻壤，也许至今还用着。我们那里，则除了婚丧仪式之外，全被玻璃镜驱逐了。然而也还有余烈可寻，倘街头遇见一位老翁，肩了长凳似的东西，上面缚着一块猪肝色石和一块青色石，试伫听他的叫喊，就是“磨镜，磨剪刀！”
However, the supply of copper mirrors was still parallel to glass mirrors during the Daoguang Xianfeng period; As for the poor and remote areas, they may still be used today. Except for the wedding and funeral ceremonies, we were all expelled by the glass mirror. However, there are still remnants to be found, if you meet an old man on the street, with something like a bench on his shoulder, with a pig liver-colored stone and a cyan stone tied to it, try to listen to his shout, that is, "Sharpen the mirror, sharpen the scissors!" ”宋镜我没有见过好的，什九并无藻饰，只有店号或“正其衣冠”等类的迂铭词，真是“世风日下”。但是要进步或不退步，总须时时自出新裁，至少也必取材异域，倘若各种顾忌，各种小心，各种唠叨，这么做即违了祖宗，那么做又像了夷狄，终生惴惴如在薄冰上，发抖尚且来不及，怎么会做出好东西来。所以事实上“今不如古”者，正因为有许多唠叨着“今不如古”的诸位先生们之故。现在情形还如此。倘再不放开度量，大胆地，无畏地，将新文化尽量地吸收，则杨光先似的向西洋主人沥陈中夏的精神文明的时候，大概是不劳久待的罢。
I have never seen a good Song mirror, there is no decoration in the nineteenth of ten, only the store number or the inscription such as "correct its clothes", which is really "the world is declining". But to progress or not regress, you must always make new decisions from time to time, at least you must take foreign materials, if you have all kinds of scruples, all kinds of cautions, all kinds of nagging, doing so is against your ancestors, then doing it is like a barbarian, anxious for the rest of your life, trembling is too late, how can you make good things. So in fact, those who say "today is not as good as the ancients" are precisely because there are many gentlemen who nag that "today is not as good as the ancients". This is still the case now. If we don't let go of the measure, boldly and fearlessly, and absorb the new culture as much as possible, then when Yang Guangxian pours out the spiritual civilization of Zhongxia to the Western master, it will probably not be necessary to wait for a long time.但我向来没有遇见过一个排斥玻璃镜子的人。单知道咸丰年间，汪曰桢先生却在他的大著《湖雅》里攻击过的。他加以比较研究之后，终于决定还是铜镜好。最不可解的是：他说，照起面貌来，玻璃镜不如铜镜之准确。莫非那时的玻璃镜当真坏到如此，还是因为他老先生又带上了国粹眼镜之故呢？我没有见过古玻璃镜。这一点终于猜不透。
But I have never met a person who rejects glass mirrors. I only know that during the Xianfeng period, Mr. Wang Yuezhen attacked in his masterpiece "Huya". After comparative research, he finally decided that the bronze mirror was better. The most incomprehensible thing is that he said that when it comes to his appearance, the glass mirror is not as accurate as the bronze mirror. Could it be that the glass mirror at that time was really so bad, or was it because his old husband brought the quintessence glasses again? I have never seen an ancient glass mirror. I finally couldn't guess this.一九二五年二月九日。
February 9, 1925.

春末闲谈

春末闲谈

春末闲谈

Late spring chat北京正是春末，也许我过于性急之故罢，觉着夏意了，于是突然记起故乡的细腰蜂。那时候大约是盛夏，青蝇密集在凉棚索子上，铁黑色的细腰蜂就在桑树间或墙角的蛛网左近往来飞行，有时衔一支小青虫去了，有时拉一个蜘蛛。青虫或蜘蛛先是抵抗着不肯去，但终于乏力，被衔着腾空而去了，坐了飞机似的。
It was late spring in Beijing, and maybe I was too impatient, but I felt the summer, so I suddenly remembered the slender-waisted bees in my hometown. It was about midsummer, and the green flies were densely packed on the pergola ropes, and the iron-black slender-waisted bees flew back and forth between the mulberry trees or in the corners of the cobwebs, sometimes carrying a small green worm, and sometimes pulling a spider. The green worm or spider resisted at first and refused to go, but finally became weak and was carried away into the air, as if on a plane.老前辈们开导我，那细腰蜂就是书上所说的果蠃，纯雌无雄，必须捉螟蛉去做继子的。她将小青虫封在窠里，自己在外面日日夜夜敲打着，祝道“像我像我”，经过若干日，——我记不清了，大约七七四十九日罢，——那青虫也就成了细腰蜂了，所以《诗经》里说：“螟蛉有子，果负之。”螟蛉就是桑上小青虫。蜘蛛呢？他们没有提。我记得有几个考据家曾经立过异说，以为她其实自能生卵；其捉青虫，乃是填在窠里，给孵化出来的幼蜂做食料的。但我所遇见的前辈们都不采用此说，还道是拉去做女儿。我们为存留天地间的美谈起见，倒不如这样好。当长夏无事，遣暑林阴，瞥见二虫一拉一拒的时候，便如睹慈母教女，满怀好意，而青虫的宛转抗拒，则活像一个不识好歹的毛鸦头。
The old-timers enlightened me that the slender-waisted bee was the fruit cockroach mentioned in the book, pure male and female, and it had to catch the moth to be a stepson. She sealed the little green worm in the nest, and she beat it outside day and night, wishing "like me", after a few days,—— I can't remember, about seven days and forty-nine days,—— the green worm also became a slender-waisted bee, so the "Book of Songs" says: "The borer has a son, and the fruit is negative." "The moth is the little green worm on the mulberry. What about spiders? They didn't mention it. I remember that several researchers once made a different opinion, thinking that she could actually lay eggs on her own; The green worms are filled in the nest to feed the hatched young bees. But the seniors I met didn't adopt this statement, and they said they were pulling me to be their daughters. For the sake of preserving the beautiful talk between heaven and earth, it is not as good as this. When there is nothing to do in the long summer, in the shade of the forest, and when you catch a glimpse of the two insects pulling and rejecting, it is like seeing a loving mother and a daughter, full of good intentions, and the green worm's resistance is like a hairy crow head that does not know what to do.但究竟是夷人可恶，偏要讲什么科学。科学虽然给我们许多惊奇，但也搅坏了我们许多好梦。自从法国的昆虫学大家发勃耳（Fabre）仔细观察之后，给幼蜂做食料的事可就证实了。而且，这细腰蜂不但是普通的凶手，还是一种很残忍的凶手，又是一个学识技术都极高明的解剖学家。她知道青虫的神经构造和作用，用了神奇的毒针，向那运动神经球上只一螫，它便麻痹为不死不活状态，这才在它身上生下蜂卵，封入窠中。青虫因为不死不活，所以不动，但也因为不活不死，所以不烂，直到她的子女孵化出来的时候，这食料还和被捕当日一样的新鲜。
But what kind of science is it that the barbarians are hateful? Although science has given us many surprises, it has also ruined many of our good dreams. Since the careful observation of the French entomologist Fabre, it has been confirmed that food is used for young bees. Moreover, this slender-waisted bee is not only an ordinary murderer, but also a very cruel murderer, and an anatomist with extremely high knowledge and skills. She knew the nervous structure and function of the green worm, and used a magical needle to sting the motor nerve sphere, and it was paralyzed into an immortal state, and then gave birth to a bee egg on it and sealed it in the nest. The green worm does not move because it is not dead or alive, but it is also not rotten because it is not alive or dead, until her children hatch, the food is still as fresh as the day of the arrest.三年前，我遇见神经过敏的俄国的E君，有一天他忽然发愁道，不知道将来的科学家，是否不至于发明一种奇妙的药品，将这注射在谁的身上，则这人即甘心永远去做服役和战争的机器了？那时我也就皱眉叹息，装作一齐发愁的模样，以示“所见略同”之至意，殊不知我国的圣君，贤臣，圣贤，圣贤之徒，却早已有过这一种黄金世界的理想了。不是“唯辟作福，唯辟作威，唯辟玉食”么？不是“君子劳心，小人劳力”么？不是“治于人者食（去声）人，治人者食于人”么？可惜理论虽已卓然，而终于没有发明十全的好方法。要服从作威就须不活，要贡献玉食就须不死；要被治就须不活，要供养治人者又须不死。人类升为万物之灵，自然是可贺的，但没有了细腰蜂的毒针，却很使圣君，贤臣，圣贤，圣贤之徒，以至现在的阔人，学者，教育家觉得棘手。将来未可知，若已往，则治人者虽然尽力施行过各种麻痹术，也还不能十分奏效，与果并驱争先。即以皇帝一伦而言，便难免时常改姓易代，终没有“万年有道之长”;“二十四史”而多至二十四，就是可悲的铁证。现在又似乎有些别开生面了，世上挺生了一种所谓“特殊智识阶级”的留学生，在研究室中研究之结果，说医学不发达是有益于人种改良的，中国妇女的境遇是极其平等的，一切道理都已不错，一切状态都已够好。E君的发愁，或者也不为无因罢，然而俄国是不要紧的，因为他们不像我们中国，有所谓“特别国情”，还有所谓“特殊智识阶级”。
Three years ago, I met Mr. E in Russia, who was nervous, and one day he suddenly became worried that he wondered if the future scientist would not invent a wonderful drug and inject it into whom, and this person would be willing to be a machine of service and war forever? At that time, I frowned and sighed, pretending to be worried together, to show the sincerity of "seeing the same thing", but I didn't know that our country's holy kings, virtuous ministers, sages, and sages had already had this kind of golden world ideal. Isn't it "only the blessing, the only power, and the only jade food"? Isn't it "a gentleman labors, a villain labors"? Isn't it "those who govern people eat (remove the sound) people, and those who govern people eat people"? Unfortunately, although the theory has been outstanding, there is no good way to invent perfection. If you want to obey and dominate, you must not live, and if you want to contribute jade food, you must not die; To be governed, one must not live, and to support and heal others, one must not die. Human beings are naturally congratulated on their rise to the spirits of all things, but without the poisonous needle of the slender-waisted bee, it makes the holy kings, virtuous ministers, sages, sages, and even the current broad people, scholars, and educators feel tricky. The future is unknown, and if it has passed, although the healers have tried their best to perform various paralysis techniques, they have not yet been fully effective, and they are still ahead of the curve. That is, in the case of the emperor, it is inevitable to change the surname and change generations from time to time, and there is no "ten thousand years of longevity"; "Twenty-four histories" and as many as twenty-four are sad ironclad evidence. The results of research in the laboratory say that underdeveloped medicine is conducive to racial improvement, and the situation of Chinese women is extremely equal. Mr. E's worries may not be for no reason, but Russia doesn't matter, because unlike us in China, there are so-called "special national conditions" and so-called "special intellectual class".但这种工作，也怕终于像古人那样，不能十分奏效的罢，因为这实在比细腰蜂所做的要难得多。她于青虫，只须不动，所以仅在运动神经球上一螫，即告成功。而我们的工作，却求其能运动，无知觉，该在知觉神经中枢，加以完全的麻醉的。但知觉一失，运动也就随之失却主宰，不能贡献玉食，恭请上自“极峰”下至“特殊智识阶级”的赏收享用了。就现在而言，窃以为除了遗老的圣经贤传法，学者的进研究室主义，文学家和茶摊老板的莫谈国事律，教育家的勿视勿听勿言勿动论之外，委实还没有更好，更完全，更无流弊的方法。便是留学生的特别发见，其实也并未轶出了前贤的范围。
But this kind of work is afraid that it will not be very effective like the ancients, because it is really much more difficult than what the slender-waisted bee does. She only needs to be immovable in the green worm, so she only needs to sting the motor nerve bulb and she will succeed. Our work, on the other hand, requires movement and sensation, and should be completely anesthetized in the sensory nerve center. But once the perception is lost, the movement will lose its dominance, and it will not be able to contribute jade food, and it is respectfully appreciated and enjoyed from the "extreme peak" to the "special intellectual class". For now, I think that apart from the biblical teachings of the elderly, the study of scholars, the laws of writers and tea stall owners, and the theory of educators not to see, listen, speak, and act, there is no better, more complete, and less corrupt method. It is the special discovery of international students, but in fact, it is not beyond the scope of the predecessors.那么，又要“礼失而求诸野”了。夷人，现在因为想去取法，姑且称之为外国，他那里，可有较好的法子么？可惜，也没有。所有者，仍不外乎不准集会，不许开口之类，和我们中华并没有什么很不同。然亦可见至道嘉猷，人同此心，心同此理，固无华夷之限也。猛兽是单独的，牛羊则结队；野牛的大队，就会排角成城以御强敌了，但拉开一匹，定只能牟牟地叫。人民与牛马同流，——此就中国而言，夷人别有分类法云，——治之之道，自然应该禁止集合：这方法是对的。其次要防说话。人能说话，已经是祸胎了，而况有时还要做文章。所以苍颉造字，夜有鬼哭。鬼且反对，而况于官？猴子不会说话，猴界即向无风潮，——可是猴界中也没有官，但这又作别论，——确应该虚心取法，反朴归真，则口且不开，文章自灭：这方法也是对的。然而上文也不过就理论而言，至于实效，却依然是难说。最显著的例，是连那么专制的俄国，而尼古拉二世“龙御上宾”之后，罗马诺夫氏竟已“覆宗绝祀”了。要而言之，那大缺点就在虽有二大良法，而还缺其一，便是：无法禁止人们的思想。
Then, it is necessary to "lose etiquette and seek the wilderness". The barbarians, now because they want to take the law, let's call it a foreign country, is there a better way there? Unfortunately, no. The owner is still nothing more than not allowed to assemble, not to speak, etc., which is not very different from our China. However, it can also be seen that the best way is good, and people share this heart, and their hearts are the same, and there are no limits between the Chinese and the barbarians. The beasts are alone, and the cattle and sheep are grouped; The bison brigade will line up to resist the strong enemy, but if you pull one away, you will only be able to call it. The people are in the same flow as cattle and horses,—— as far as China is concerned, the barbarians have a different classification law,—— and the way to govern it should naturally prohibit gathering: this method is correct. Secondly, we must prevent talking. People can talk, which is already a disaster, and sometimes they have to make a fuss. Therefore, when Cangjie coined characters, there were ghosts crying at night. If the ghost opposes it, how much more so for the officials? Monkeys can't speak, the monkey world is to no trend,—— but there are no officials in the monkey world, but this is another matter,—— it is true that we should take the law with an open mind, return to simplicity, and then do not open our mouths, and the article will self-extinguish: this method is also correct. However, the above is only in theory, but as for the practical effect, it is still difficult to say. The most striking example is even such an autocratic Russia, and after Nicholas II's "dragon emperor guest", the Romanovs have been "extinguished". In short, the big drawback is that although there are two good laws, one is still missing, that is, it is impossible to prohibit people's thoughts.于是我们的造物主——假如天空真有这样的一位“主子”——就可恨了：一恨其没有永远分清“治者”与“被治者”；二恨其不给治者生一枝细腰蜂那样的毒针；三恨其不将被治者造得即使砍去了藏着的思想中枢的脑袋而还能动作——服役。三者得一，阔人的地位即永久稳固，统御也永久省了气力，而天下于是乎太平。今也不然，所以即使单想高高在上，暂时维持阔气，也还得日施手段，夜费心机，实在不胜其委屈劳神之至……。
So our Creator - if there really is such a "master" in the sky - is hateful: one hates that he has not always distinguished between "rulers" and "governed"; second, he hates that he does not give the healer a poisonous needle like a slender-waisted bee; 3. Hate that it does not make the governed, even if the head of the hidden ideological center is cut off, it can still move - serve. If you get one of the three, the position of the broad people will be permanently stable, and the command will permanently save energy, and the world will be peaceful. It's not like that now, so even if you just want to be high and temporarily maintain your generosity, you still have to use means every day and work hard at night, which is really ...... grieved and exhausting.假使没有了头颅，却还能做服役和战争的机械，世上的情形就何等地醒目呵！这时再不必用什么制帽勋章来表明阔人和窄人了，只要一看头之有无，便知道主奴，官民，上下，贵贱的区别。并且也不至于再闹什么革命，共和，会议等等的乱子了，单是电报，就要省下许多许多来。古人毕竟聪明，仿佛早想到过这样的东西，《山海经》上就记载着一种名叫“刑天”的怪物。他没有了能想的头，却还活着，“以乳为目，以脐为口”，——这一点想得很周到，否则他怎么看，怎么吃呢，——实在是很值得奉为师法的。假使我们的国民都能这样，阔人又何等安全快乐？但他又“执干戚而舞”，则似乎还是死也不肯安分，和我那专为阔人图便利而设的理想底好国民又不同。陶潜先生又有诗道：“刑天舞干戚，猛志固常在。”连这位貌似旷达的老隐士也这么说，可见无头也会仍有猛志，阔人的天下一时总怕难得太平的了。但有了太多的“特殊智识阶级”的国民，也许有特在例外的希望；况且精神文明太高了之后，精神的头就会提前飞去，区区物质的头的有无也算不得什么难问题。
If there is no head, but it can still be a machine for service and war, how striking the situation in the world is! At this time, there is no need to use any hat-making medals to indicate the wide and narrow people, as long as you look at the presence or absence of heads, you can know the difference between master and slave, officials and people, up and down, noble and lowly. And there will be no more revolutions, republics, conferences, etc., and the telegraph alone will save a lot. After all, the ancients were smart, as if they had thought of such a thing long ago, and there is a monster called "Xing Tian" recorded in the "Classic of Mountains and Seas". He has no head to think, but he is still alive, "with milk as his eyes, with the navel as his mouth",—— this point is very thoughtful, otherwise how he will see and eat,—— it is really worthy of being a teacher. If our people can do this, how safe and happy are the broad people? But he also "dances with a trunk", and it seems that he still refuses to settle down, which is different from my ideal good citizen who is specially designed for the convenience of broad people. Mr. Tao Qian also has a poem saying: "Xing Tian dances with relatives, and the fierce ambition is always there." Even this seemingly open-minded old hermit said so, it can be seen that there will still be fierce ambition without a head, and the world of broad people is always afraid of being too peaceful for a while. But with too many "special intellectual classes" of the people, there may be hope for exceptions; Moreover, after the spiritual civilization is too high, the spiritual head will fly away in advance, and the existence of a mere material head is not a difficult problem.一九二五年四月二十二日。
April 22, 1925.

灯下漫笔

灯下漫笔

灯下漫笔

Under the lamp, I wrote casually一
One有一时，就是民国二三年时候，北京的几个国家银行的钞票，信用日见其好了，真所谓蒸蒸日上。听说连一向执迷于现银的乡下人，也知道这既便当，又可靠，很乐意收受，行使了。至于稍明事理的人，则不必是“特殊知识阶级”，也早不将沉重累坠的银元装在怀中，来自讨无谓的苦吃。想来，除了多少对于银子有特别嗜好和爱情的人物之外，所有的怕大都是钞票了罢，而且多是本国的。但可惜后来忽然受了一个不小的打击。
For a while, in the second and third years of the Republic of China, the banknotes of several national banks in Beijing were getting better and better. I heard that even the countrymen who have always been obsessed with cash know that this is both convenient and reliable, and they are happy to accept and exercise it. As for those who are a little more reasonable, they do not have to be "special intellectual classes", and they have long since put heavy and burdensome silver dollars in their arms to ask for unnecessary hardships. Come to think of it, except for a few people who have a special hobby and love for silver, most of them are banknotes, and most of them are from their own country. But unfortunately, I suddenly suffered a big blow.就是袁世凯想做皇帝的那一年，蔡松坡先生溜出北京，到云南去起义。这边所受的影响之一，是中国和交通银行的停止兑现。虽然停止兑现，政府勒令商民照旧行用的威力却还有的；商民也自有商民的老本领，不说不要，却道找不出零钱。假如拿几十几百的钞票去买东西，我不知道怎样，但倘使只要买一枝笔，一盒烟卷呢，难道就付给一元钞票么？不但不甘心，也没有这许多票。那么，换铜元，少换几个罢，又都说没有铜元。那么，到亲戚朋友那里借现钱去罢，怎么会有？于是降格以求，不讲爱国了，要外国银行的钞票。但外国银行的钞票这时就等于现银，他如果借给你这钞票，也就借给你真的银元了。
It was the year when Yuan Shikai wanted to be emperor, and Mr. Cai Songpo slipped out of Beijing and went to Yunnan to revolt. One of the impacts here is the suspension of cash by China and Bank of Communications. Although the government stopped cashing, the power of the government to order the merchants to act as usual was still there; Merchants also have their own old skills, not saying no, but they can't find change. If I take dozens or hundreds of bills to buy something, I don't know how, but if I only buy a pen and a box of cigarettes, will I pay a one-dollar bill? Not only is it unwilling, but there are not so many votes. Then, change the copper dollar, change a few less, and they all say that there is no copper dollar. So, how can you borrow cash from relatives and friends? So I downgraded to seek no more patriotism, and asked for banknotes from foreign banks. But the banknotes of foreign banks are equivalent to cash at this time, and if he lends you this banknote, he will lend you real silver dollars.我还记得那时我怀中还有三四十元的中交票，可是忽而变了一个穷人，几乎要绝食，很有些恐慌。俄国革命以后的藏着纸卢布的富翁的心情，恐怕也就这样的罢；至多，不过更深更大罢了。我只得探听，钞票可能折价换到现银呢？说是没有行市。幸而终于，暗暗地有了行市了：六折几。我非常高兴，赶紧去卖了一半。后来又涨到七折了，我更非常高兴，全去换了现银，沉垫垫地坠在怀中，似乎这就是我的性命的斤两。倘在平时，钱铺子如果少给我一个铜元，我是决不答应的。
I still remember that I still had thirty or forty yuan in my arms, but suddenly I became a poor person, almost on a hunger strike, and I was a little panicked. After the Russian Revolution, the mood of the rich man who hid the paper ruble was probably like this; At most, it's just deeper and bigger. I have to ask, maybe the banknotes can be discounted for cash? It is said that there is no market. Fortunately, finally, there is a market in the dark: 60% off. I was so happy that I hurried to sell half of it. Later, it rose to 70% off, and I was even more happy, I exchanged it all for cash, and fell into my arms, as if this was the weight of my life. If the money shop gives me one less copper dollar in normal times, I will never agree."但我当一包现银塞在怀中，沉垫垫地觉得安心，喜欢的时候，却突然起了另一思想，就是：我们极容易变成奴隶，而且变了之后，还万分喜欢。
But when I stuffed a bag of cash into my arms and felt at ease and liked it, I suddenly had another thought, that is: it is very easy for us to become slaves, and after we change, we still like it very much.假如有一种暴力，“将人不当人”，不但不当人，还不及牛马，不算什么东西；待到人们羡慕牛马，发生“乱离人，不及太平犬”的叹息的时候，然后给与他略等于牛马的价格，有如元朝定律，打死别人的奴隶，赔一头牛，则人们便要心悦诚服，恭颂太平的盛世。为什么呢？因为他虽不算人，究竟已等于牛马了。
If there is a kind of violence, "treating people as people", not only is it not human, but it is not as good as cattle and horses, and it is nothing; When people envy cattle and horses, and sigh that "chaos is separated, not as good as a peaceful dog", and then give him a price slightly equal to the price of cattle and horses, just like the law of the Yuan Dynasty, killing other people's slaves and losing a cow, then people will be happy and sincerely convinced and praise the prosperity of peace. Why? Because although he is not a human being, he is already equal to a cow and a horse.我们不必恭读《钦定二十四史》，或者入研究室，审察精神文明的高超。只要一翻孩子所读的《鉴略》，——还嫌烦重，则看《历代纪元编》，就知道“三千余年古国古”的中华，历来所闹的就不过是这一个小玩艺。但在新近编纂的所谓“历史教科书”一流东西里，却不大看得明白了，只仿佛说：咱们向来就很好的。
We don't have to read the "Twenty-Four Histories of the Imperial Dynasty" or enter the research room to examine the superb of spiritual civilization. As long as the "Jianlue" read by the child is still too cumbersome ,——, then look at the "Chronicles of the Dynasties", and you will know that the China of "more than 3,000 years of ancient countries" has always been nothing more than this little trick. However, in the newly compiled so-called "history textbooks" first-class things, it is not very clear, as if to say: We have always been very good.但实际上，中国人向来就没有争到过“人”的价格，至多不过是奴隶，到现在还如此，然而下于奴隶的时候，却是数见不鲜的。中国的百姓是中立的，战时连自己也不知道属于那一面，但又属于无论那一面。强盗来了，就属于官，当然该被杀掠；官兵既到，该是自家人了罢，但仍然要被杀掠，仿佛又属于强盗似的。这时候，百姓就希望有一个一定的主子，拿他们去做百姓，——不敢，是拿他们去做牛马，情愿自己寻草吃，只求他决定他们怎样跑。
But in fact, the Chinese have never competed for the price of "people", at most they are just slaves, and they are still like this, but when they are inferior to slaves, it is not uncommon. The Chinese people are neutral, and even they don't know which side they belong to during wartime, but they belong to either side. When the robbers come, they belong to the officials, and of course they should be killed and plundered; When the officers and soldiers arrived, they should be their own families, but they still had to be killed and plundered, as if they belonged to the robbers again. At this time, the people hope to have a certain master, and they do not dare to use them as people,——, but they are willing to use them as cattle and horses, and they are willing to find grass to eat by themselves, just asking him to decide how they run.假使真有谁能够替他们决定，定下什么奴隶规则来，自然就“皇恩浩荡”了。可惜的是往往暂时没有谁能定。举其大者，则如五胡十六国的时候，黄巢的时候，五代时候，宋末元末时候，除了老例的服役纳粮以外，都还要受意外的灾殃。张献忠的脾气更古怪了，不服役纳粮的要杀，服役纳粮的也要杀，敌他的要杀，降他的也要杀：将奴隶规则毁得粉碎。这时候，百姓就希望来一个另外的主子，较为顾及他们的奴隶规则的，无论仍旧，或者新颁，总之是有一种规则，使他们可上奴隶的轨道。
If anyone could decide for them and set what slave rules would be established, it would naturally be "imperial grace". Unfortunately, no one can decide for the time being. For example, during the time of the Five Hu and Sixteen Kingdoms, the Huang Chao period, the Five Dynasties, and the end of the Song Dynasty and the end of the Yuan Dynasty, in addition to the old service and grain payment, they all suffered unexpected disasters. Zhang Xianzhong's temper is even more eccentric, those who do not serve and pay grain must be killed, those who serve and pay grain must be killed, the enemy must be killed, and those who surrender must also be killed: destroy the slave rules to pieces. At this time, the people hoped to come to another master, who would take more into account their slave rules, whether they were still old or newly enacted, in short, there was a rule that would enable them to get on the track of slavery.“时日曷丧，予及汝偕亡！”愤言而已，决心实行的不多见。实际上大概是群盗如麻，纷乱至极之后，就有一个较强，或较聪明，或较狡滑，或是外族的人物出来，较有秩序地收拾了天下。厘定规则：怎样服役，怎样纳粮，怎样磕头，怎样颂圣。而且这规则是不像现在那样朝三暮四的。于是便“万姓胪欢”了；用成语来说，就叫作“天下太平”。
"Time is gone, I will die with you!" It is only indignant, and it is rare to be determined to implement it. In fact, it was probably a group of bandits, and after the chaos reached its peak, a stronger, or smarter, or more cunning, or foreign figure came out and cleaned up the world in a more orderly manner. Determine the rules: how to serve, how to pay grain, how to kowtow, how to praise the saints. And this rule is not as chaotic as it is now. So it was "ten thousand surnames and joys"; In idioms, it is called "peace in the world".任凭你爱排场的学者们怎样铺张，修史时候设些什么“汉族发祥时代”、“汉族发达时代”、“汉族中兴时代”的好题目，好意诚然是可感的，但措辞太绕湾子了。有更其直捷了当的说法在这里——
No matter how extravagant the scholars who love to show off are and set up some good topics such as "the era of the birth of the Han nationality", "the era of the development of the Han nationality", and "the era of the revival of the Han nationality" when revising history, the good intentions are indeed palpable, but the wording is too roundabout. There is a more straightforward statement here-一，想做奴隶而不得的时代；
First, the era when you want to be a slave but can't;二，暂时做稳了奴隶的时代。
Second, the era of temporarily stabilizing slaves.这一种循环，也就是“先儒”之所谓“一治一乱”；那些作乱人物，从后日的“臣民”看来，是给“主子”清道辟路的，所以说：“为圣天子驱除云尔。”
This cycle is the so-called "one rule and one chaos" of the "former Confucians"; Those rebels, from the perspective of the "subjects" in the future, cleared the way for the "master", so they said: "Expel Yun'er for the Holy Son of Heaven." ”现在入了那一时代，我也不了然。但看国学家的崇奉国粹，文学家的赞叹固有文明，道学家的热心复古，可见于现状都已不满了。然而我们究竟正向着那一条路走呢？百姓是一遇到莫名其妙的战争，稍富的迁进租界，妇孺则避入教堂里去了，因为那些地方都比较的“稳”，暂不至于想做奴隶而不得。总而言之，复古的，避难的，无智愚贤不肖，似乎都已神往于三百年前的太平盛世，就是“暂时做稳了奴隶的时代”了。
Now that I have entered that era, I don't know. However, looking at the admiration of Chinese scholars, the admiration of writers for inherent civilization, and the enthusiasm of Taoists for retro, it can be seen that they are dissatisfied with the status quo. But which path are we heading? When the people encountered an inexplicable war, they moved into the concession if they were a little richer, and women and children took refuge in the church, because those places were relatively "stable", and they did not want to be slaves for the time being. All in all, the retro, the refuge, the ignorant, the foolish, the virtuous, and the unworthy all seem to have been fascinated by the peaceful and prosperous era three hundred years ago, which is "the era of temporarily stabilizing slaves".但我们也就都像古人一样，永久满足于“古已有之”的时代么？都像复古家一样，不满于现在，就神往于三百年前的太平盛世么？
But are we all like the ancients, forever satisfied with the era of "what exists in ancient times"? Are they all like retro families, dissatisfied with the present, and fascinated by the peaceful and prosperous era three hundred years ago?自然，也不满于现在的，但是，无须反顾，因为前面还有道路在。而创造这中国历史上未曾有过的第三样时代，则是现在的青年的使命！
Naturally, I am not satisfied with the present, but there is no need to look back, because there is still a road ahead. Creating this third era that has never existed in Chinese history is the mission of today's youth!

灯下漫笔

二

灯下漫笔

Two但是赞颂中国固有文明的人们多起来了，加之以外国人。我常常想，凡有来到中国的，倘能疾首蹙额而憎恶中国，我敢诚意地捧献我的感谢，因为他一定是不愿意吃中国人的肉的！
However, there are more people who praise China's inherent civilization, plus foreigners. I often think that anyone who comes to China, if he can frown and hate China, I dare to sincerely give my thanks, because he must not want to eat Chinese meat!鹤见祐辅氏在《北京的魅力》中，记一个白人将到中国，预定的暂住时候是一年，但五年之后，还在北京，而且不想回去了。有一天，他们两人一同吃晚饭——
In "The Charm of Beijing", Yusuke Tsurumi remembers that a white man was about to go to China, and the scheduled temporary residence was for one year, but five years later, he was still in Beijing and did not want to go back. One day, the two of them had dinner together -“在圆的桃花心木的食桌前坐定，川流不息地献着山海的珍味，谈话就从古董，画，政治这些开头。电灯上罩着支那式的灯罩，淡淡的光洋溢于古物罗列的屋子中。什么无产阶级呀，Proletariat呀那些事，就像不过在什么地方刮风。
Sitting at the round mahogany dining table, the river endlessly offered the delicacies of the mountains and seas, and the conversation began with antiques, paintings, and politics. The electric lamps are covered with Chinese lampshades, and the faint light fills the room with antiquities. What the proletariat, Proletariat, those things are like the wind blowing somewhere.“我一面陶醉在支那生活的空气中，一面深思着对于外人有着‘魅力’的这东西。元人也曾征服支那，而被征服于汉人种的生活美了；满人也征服支那，而被征服于汉人种的生活美了。现在西洋人也一样，嘴里虽然说着Democracy呀，什么什么呀，而却被魅于支那人费六千年而建筑起来的生活的美。一经住过北京，就忘不掉那生活的味道。大风时候的万丈的沙尘，每三月一回的督军们的开战游戏，都不能抹去这支那生活的魅力。”
"While I was intoxicated by the air of life in China, I thought deeply about this thing that had a 'charm' to outsiders. The Yuan people also conquered China, and the life of the Han people was beautiful; The Manchus also conquered China, and the life of the Han people was beautiful. Nowadays, Westerners are the same, although they say Democracy, whatsoever, but they are fascinated by the beauty of the life that the Chinese people have spent 6,000 years to build. Once you live in Beijing, you can't forget the taste of life. The sand and dust in the windy season, and the war game of the overseers every three months, cannot erase the charm of this team. ”这些话我现在还无力否认他。我们的古圣先贤既给与我们保古守旧的格言，但同时也排好了用子女玉帛所做的奉献于征服者的大宴。中国人的耐劳，中国人的多子，都就是办酒的材料，到现在还为我们的爱国者所自诩的。西洋人初入中国时，被称为蛮夷，自不免个个蹙额，但是，现在则时机已至，到了我们将曾经献于北魏，献于金，献于元，献于清的盛宴，来献给他们的时候了。出则汽车，行则保护：虽遇清道，然而通行自由的；虽或被劫，然而必得赔偿的；孙美瑶掳去他们站在军前，还使官兵不敢开火。何况在华屋中享用盛宴呢？待到享受盛宴的时候，自然也就是赞颂中国固有文明的时候；但是我们的有些乐观的爱国者，也许反而欣然色喜，以为他们将要开始被中国同化了罢。古人曾以女人作苟安的城堡，美其名以自欺曰“和亲”，今人还用子女玉帛为作奴的贽敬，又美其名曰“同化”。所以倘有外国的谁，到了已有赴宴的资格的现在，而还替我们诅咒中国的现状者，这才是真有良心的真可佩服的人！
I still can't deny these words. Our ancient sages not only gave us the maxim of preserving the ancient and conservative, but also arranged a banquet for the conquerors made with their children and jade and silk. The hard work of the Chinese and the proud children of the Chinese are all materials for making wine, and they are still proud of our patriots. When Westerners first entered China, they were called barbarians, and they couldn't help but frown, but now the time has come, and it is time for us to dedicate to them the feast that was once dedicated to the Northern Wei Dynasty, to the Jin, to the Yuan, and to the Qing Dynasty. Cars are out, and protection is traveling: although the road is cleared, the passage is free; Although they may be robbed, they must be compensated; Sun Meiyao kidnapped them and stood in front of the army, and made the officers and soldiers dare not fire. Not to mention enjoying a feast in a splendid house? When it comes time to enjoy the feast, it is naturally the time to praise China's inherent civilization; But some of our optimistic patriots may be happy that they are about to begin to be assimilated by China. The ancients used women as castles for Gou'an, and deceived themselves with the name of "marriage", and now people also use their children and jade and silk as a tribute to slavery, and they also call it "assimilation". Therefore, if there is anyone from a foreign country who is qualified to attend the banquet and curses the status quo in China for us, this is a person with a real conscience and a real admiration!但我们自己是早已布置妥帖了，有贵贱，有大小，有上下。自己被人凌虐，但也可以凌虐别人；自己被人吃，但也可以吃别人。一级一级的制驭着，不能动弹，也不想动弹了。因为倘一动弹，虽或有利，然而也有弊。我们且看古人的良法美意罢——
But we ourselves have already been arranged, there are noble and lowly, large and small, up and down. I am abused by others, but I can also abuse others; You are eaten by others, but you can also eat others. I can't move and don't want to move. Because if you move, although it may be beneficial, it also has disadvantages. Let's look at the good laws and good intentions of the ancients——“天有十日，人有十等。下所以事上，上所以共神也。故王臣公，公臣大夫，大夫臣士，士臣皁，皁臣舆，舆臣隶，隶臣僚，僚臣仆，仆臣台。”（《左传》昭公七年）
“天有十日，人有十等。 下所以事上，上所以共神也。 故王臣公，公臣大夫，大夫臣士，士臣皁，皁臣舆，舆臣隶，隶臣僚，僚臣仆，仆臣台。 ”（《左传》昭公七年）但是“台”没有臣，不是太苦了么？无须担心的，有比他更卑的妻，更弱的子在。而且其子也很有希望，他日长大，升而为“台”，便又有更卑更弱的妻子，供他驱使了。如此连环，各得其所，有敢非议者，其罪名曰不安分！
But "Taiwan" has no ministers, isn't it too bitter? There is no need to worry, there is a wife who is lower than him, and a son who is weaker. And his son is also very hopeful, and when he grows up and rises to the "platform", he will have a humble and weaker wife for him to drive. Such a series of people, each in their own right, and anyone who dares to criticize it will be punished with restlessness!虽然那是古事，昭公七年离现在也太辽远了，但“复古家”尽可不必悲观的。太平的景象还在：常有兵燹，常有水旱，可有谁听到大叫唤么？打的打，革的革，可有处士来横议么？对国民如何专横，向外人如何柔媚，不犹是差等的遗风么？中国固有的精神文明，其实并未为共和二字所埋没，只有满人已经退席，和先前稍不同。
Although that is an ancient thing, and Zhao Gong's seven years are too far away from the present, the "retro family" does not need to be pessimistic. The scene of peace is still there: there are often wars, floods and droughts, but who hears the shouts? Fight, fight, revolution, can there be a recluse to discuss it? How domineering to the people and how to be gentle to outsiders, isn't it still a legacy of inferiority? China's inherent spiritual civilization has not actually been buried by the word republic, only the Manchus have withdrawn, which is slightly different from before.因此我们在目前，还可以亲见各式各样的筵宴，有烧烤，有翅席，有便饭，有西餐。但茅檐下也有淡饭，路傍也有残羹，野上也有饿莩；有吃烧烤的身价不资的阔人，也有饿得垂死的每斤八文的孩子（见《现代评论》二十一期）。所谓中国的文明者，其实不过是安排给阔人享用的人肉的筵宴。所谓中国者，其实不过是安排这人肉的筵宴的厨房。不知道而赞颂者是可恕的，否则，此辈当得永远的诅咒！
Therefore, we can also see all kinds of banquets in person, including barbecue, winged mats, light meals, and Western food. But there are light rice under the eaves, scraps on the roadside, and hunger in the fields; There are worthless wealthy people who eat barbecue, and there are children who are starving to death at eight cents per catty (see Modern Review No. 21). The so-called Chinese civilization is actually nothing more than a feast of human flesh arranged for the broad people to enjoy. The so-called Chinese is actually just the kitchen that arranges this feast of human flesh. Those who do not know and praise are forgivable, otherwise, this generation deserves to be cursed forever!外国人中，不知道而赞颂者，是可恕的；占了高位，养尊处优，因此受了蛊惑，昧却灵性而赞叹者，也还可恕的。可是还有两种，其一是以中国人为劣种，只配悉照原来模样，因而故意称赞中国的旧物。其一是愿世间人各不相同以增自己旅行的兴趣，到中国看辫子，到日本看木屐，到高丽看笠子，倘若服饰一样，便索然无味了，因而来反对亚洲的欧化。这些都可憎恶。至于罗素在西湖见轿夫含笑，便赞美中国人，则也许别有意思罢。但是，轿夫如果能对坐轿的人不含笑，中国也早不是现在似的中国了。
Among foreigners, those who do not know and praise are forgivable; Those who occupy high positions, are pampered, and are therefore bewitched, but are ignorant of spirituality and admire are also forgivable. But there are two kinds, one is that the Chinese are inferior, and they only deserve to be as they are, so they deliberately praise China's old things. One is to hope that people in the world will be different to increase their interest in traveling, to see braids in China, clogs in Japan, and hats in Goryeo. These are all abominations. As for Russell's smile when he saw the sedan chairman smiling at West Lake, he praised the Chinese, which may be interesting. However, if the bearer could not smile at the people in the sedan chair, China would no longer be the China it is now.这文明，不但使外国人陶醉，也早使中国一切人们无不陶醉而且至于含笑。因为古代传来而至今还在的许多差别，使人们各各分离，遂不能再感到别人的痛苦；并且因为自己各有奴使别人，吃掉别人的希望，便也就忘却自己同有被奴使被吃掉的将来。于是大小无数的人肉的筵宴，即从有文明以来一直排到现在，人们就在这会场中吃人，被吃，以凶人的愚妄的欢呼，将悲惨的弱者的呼号遮掩，更不消说女人和小儿。
This civilization not only intoxicated foreigners, but also made all people in China intoxicated and smiling. Because of the many differences that came from ancient times and still exist today, people are separated and can no longer feel the pain of others; And because they each have their own hopes of enslaving others and eating others, they forget that they also have a future where they will be enslaved and eaten. Thus, the feast of countless human flesh, large and small, has been arranged from the beginning of civilization to the present, in which people eat and are eaten, and with the foolish cheers of the murderer, the cries of the miserable weak, not to mention women and children.这人肉的筵宴现在还排着，有许多人还想一直排下去。扫荡这些食人者，掀掉这筵席，毁坏这厨房，则是现在的青年的使命！
This feast of human flesh is still lined up, and many people still want to keep lining up. Sweeping away these cannibals, tearing down this banquet, and destroying this kitchen is the mission of today's youth!一九二五年四月二十九日。
April 29, 1925.

杂忆

杂忆

杂忆

Miscellaneous memories1
有人说G. Byron的诗多为青年所爱读，我觉得这话很有几分真。就自己而论，也还记得怎样读了他的诗而心神俱旺；尤其是看见他那花布裹头，去助希腊独立时候的肖像。这像，去年才从《小说月报》传入中国了。可惜我不懂英文，所看的都是译本。听近今的议论，译诗是已经不值一文钱，即使译得并不错。但那时大家的眼界还没有这样高，所以我看了译本，倒也觉得好，或者就因为不懂原文之故，于是便将臭草当作芳兰。《新罗马传奇》中的译文也曾传诵一时，虽然用的是词调，又译Sappho为“萨芷波”，证明着是根据日文译本的重译。
Some say that G. Byron's poems are mostly read by young people, and I think this is very true. As far as I am concerned, I still remember how to read his poems and be full of energy; Especially when I saw his floral cloth wrapped in a cloth to help Greece with its portrait at the time of independence. This is like it was only introduced to China from "Novel Monthly" last year. Unfortunately, I don't understand English, so all I read is the translation. Listening to today's discussions, translated poems are no longer worth a penny, even if they are not well translated. But at that time, everyone's vision was not so high, so I read the translation and felt good, or because I didn't understand the original text, I regarded the stinky grass as a fragrant orchid. The translation in the "New Roman Legend" was also recited for a while, although it used a tone, and Sappho was translated as "Sa Zhi Bo", proving that it was a retranslation from the Japanese translation.苏曼殊先生也译过几首，那时他还没有做诗“寄弹筝人”，因此与Byron也还有缘。但译文古奥得很，也许曾经章太炎先生的润色的罢，所以真像古诗，可是流传倒并不广。后来收入他自印的绿面金签的《文学因缘》中，现在连这《文学因缘》也少见了。
Mr. Su Manshu also translated a few poems, and at that time he had not yet made a poem "The Zheng Man", so he also had a connection with Byron. But the translation is very ancient, maybe it was once polished by Mr. Zhang Taiyan, so it is really like an ancient poem, but it is not widely circulated. Later, it was included in his self-printed "Literary Cause" with a green face and gold seal, and now even this "Literary Cause" is rare.其实，那时Byron之所以比较的为中国人所知，还有别一原因，就是他的助希腊独立。时当清的末年，在一部分中国青年的心中，革命思潮正盛，凡有叫喊复仇和反抗的，便容易惹起感应。那时我所记得的人，还有波兰的复仇诗人Adam Mickiewicz；匈牙利的爱国诗人Peöfi Sändor；飞猎滨的文人而为西班牙政府所杀的厘沙路，——他的祖父还是中国人，中国也曾译过他的绝命诗。Hauptmann，Sudermann，Ibsen这些人虽然正负盛名，我们却不大注意。别有一部分人，则专意搜集明末遗民的著作，满人残暴的记录，钻在东京或其他的图书馆里，抄写出来，印了，输入中国，希望使忘却的旧恨复活，助革命成功。于是《扬州十日记》，《嘉定屠城记略》，《朱舜水集》，《张苍水集》都翻印了，还有《黄萧养回头》及其他单篇的汇集，我现在已经举不出那些名目来。别有一部分人，则改名“扑满”“打清”之类，算是英雄。这些大号，自然和实际的革命不甚相关，但也可见那时对于光复的渴望之心，是怎样的旺盛。
In fact, there was another reason why Byron was known to the Chinese at that time, that is, he helped Greece become independent. At the end of the Qing Dynasty, in the hearts of some Chinese youth, revolutionary ideology was in full swing, and anyone who shouted revenge and resistance was prone to induction. The people I remember at that time were the Polish revenge poet Adam Mickiewicz; Hungarian patriotic poet Peöfi Sändor; Lishalu, a literati who fled to the shore and was killed by the Spanish government,—— his grandfather was still Chinese, and China also translated his desperate poems. Hauptmann, Sudermann, Ibsen, these people are famous, but we don't pay much attention. Some people devoted themselves to collecting the writings of the remnants of the late Ming Dynasty and the brutal records of the Manchus, copying them, printing them, and importing them into China, hoping to resurrect the forgotten old hatred and help the revolution succeed. So "Yangzhou Ten Diaries", "Jiading Massacre Records", "Zhu Shunshui Collection", "Zhang Cangshui Collection" have all been reprinted, as well as "Huang Xiaoyang Returns" and other collections of single articles, I can't name those names now. There are some people who change their names to "pounce full" and "clear up", which are considered heroes. These tubas are naturally not related to the actual revolution, but they also show how vigorous the desire for restoration was at that time.不独英雄式的名号而已，便是悲壮淋漓的诗文，也不过是纸片上的东西，于后来的武昌起义怕没有什么大关系。倘说影响，则别的千言万语，大概都抵不过浅近直截的“革命军马前卒邹容”所做的《革命军》。
Not only is it a heroic name, but it is also a tragic poem, but it is just a piece of paper, and it may not have much to do with the later Wuchang Uprising. If we talk about influence, then thousands of other words are probably not worth the "Revolutionary Army" made by the straightforward "Revolutionary Army Patrol Zou Rong".

杂忆

2
待到革命起来，就大体而言，复仇思想可是减退了。我想，这大半是因为大家已经抱着成功的希望，又服了“文明”的药，想给汉人挣一点面子，所以不再有残酷的报复。但那时的所谓文明，却确是洋文明，并不是国粹；所谓共和，也是美国法国式的共和，不是周召共和的共和。革命党人也大概竭力想给本族增光，所以兵队倒不大抢掠。南京的土匪兵小有劫掠，黄兴先生便勃然大怒，枪毙了许多，后来因为知道土匪是不怕枪毙而怕枭首的，就从死尸上割下头来，草绳络住了挂在树上。从此也不再有什么变故了，虽然我所住的一个机关的卫兵，当我外出时举枪立正之后，就从窗门洞爬进去取了我的衣服，但究竟手段已经平和得多，也客气得多了。
When the revolution broke out, the idea of revenge declined in general. I think this is mostly because everyone has the hope of success, and has taken the medicine of "civilization" and wants to earn a little face for the Han people, so there is no longer cruel retaliation. But the so-called civilization at that time was indeed a foreign civilization, not a national essence; The so-called republic is also a French-style republic in the United States, not a republic in Zhou Zhao Republic. The revolutionaries probably tried their best to add glory to their own people, so the troops did not loot much. Later, because he knew that the bandits were not afraid of being shot and were afraid of beheading, he cut off his head from the corpse and hung it on a tree with a grass rope. Although the guards of one of the agencies where I lived climbed in and took my clothes through the window and door opening after I stood up with my gun when I went out, the methods were much more peaceful and polite.南京是革命政府所在地，当然格外文明。但我去一看先前的满人的驻在处，却是一片瓦砾；只有方孝孺血迹石的亭子总算还在。这里本是明的故宫，我做学生时骑马经过，曾很被顽童骂詈和投石，——犹言你们不配这样，听说向来是如此的。现在却面目全非了，居民寥寥；即使偶有几间破屋，也无门窗；若有门，则是烂洋铁做的。总之，是毫无一点木料。
Nanjing is the seat of the revolutionary government, and of course it is particularly civilized. But when I went to see where the Manchus had been stationed, it was a piece of rubble; Only Fang Xiaoru's bloodstained stone pavilion is still there. This was originally the Forbidden City of the Ming Dynasty, and when I was a student, I rode a horse and was scolded and stoned by urchins,—— and I still said that you are not worthy of this, and I heard that it has always been like this. Now it is unrecognizable, with few residents; Even if there are a few dilapidated houses, there are no doors and windows; If there is a door, it is made of rotten iron. In short, there is no wood at all.那么，城破之时，汉人大大的发挥了复仇手段了么？并不然。知道情形的人告诉我：战争时候自然有些损坏；革命军一进城，旗人中间便有些人定要按古法殉难，在明的冷宫的遗址的屋子里使火药炸裂，以炸杀自己，恰巧一同炸死了几个适从近旁经过的骑兵。革命军以为埋藏地雷反抗了，便烧了一回，可是燹余的房子还不少。此后是他们自己动手，拆屋材出卖，先拆自己的，次拆较多的别人的，待到屋无尺材寸椽，这才大家流散，还给我们一片瓦砾场。——但这是我耳闻的，保不定可是真话。
So, when the city was breached, did the Han people greatly use their revenge methods? Not so. People who know the situation told me that there was naturally some damage during the war; As soon as the revolutionary army entered the city, some of the bannermen were bound to be martyred according to the ancient method, and the gunpowder exploded in the house of the ruins of the Ming Cold Palace to blow themselves up, and happened to kill several cavalrymen who happened to pass by. The revolutionary army thought that the mines had been buried and resisted, so they burned it once, but there were still many houses burned down. After that, they did it themselves, demolished the house materials and sold them, first demolished their own, and then demolished more others' ones, and when the house had no rafters, everyone dispersed and gave us a rubble field. ——But this is what I have heard, and it may be true.看到这样的情形，即使你将《扬州十日记》挂在眼前，也不至于怎样愤怒了罢。据我感得，民国成立以后，汉满的恶感仿佛很是消除了，各省的界限也比先前更其轻淡了。然而“罪孽深重不自殒灭”的中国人，不到一年，情形便又逆转：有宗社党的活动和遗老的谬举而两族的旧史又令人忆起，有袁世凯的手段而南北的交恶加甚，有阴谋家的狡计而省界又被利用，并且此后还要增长起来！
Seeing such a situation, even if you hang the "Ten Diaries of Yangzhou" in front of you, you won't be so angry. As far as I know, after the founding of the Republic of China, the evil feelings of Han Manchuria seemed to have been eliminated, and the boundaries of the provinces were lighter than before. However, the situation of the Chinese, who were "guilty and did not kill themselves", was reversed in less than a year: there were the activities of the Zongshe Party and the fallacies of the elderly, and the old history of the two ethnic groups was reminiscent, and the enmity between the north and the south intensified with Yuan Shikai's methods, and the cunning of conspirators and the provincial borders were used, and they will grow thereafter!

杂忆

3
不知道我的性质特别坏，还是脱不出往昔的环境的影响之故，我总觉得复仇是不足为奇的，虽然也并不想诬无抵抗主义者为无人格。但有时也想：报复，谁来裁判，怎能公平呢？便又立刻自答：自己裁判，自己执行；既没有上帝来主持，人便不妨以目偿头，也不妨以头偿目。有时也觉得宽恕是美德，但立刻也疑心这话是怯汉所发明，因为他没有报复的勇气；或者倒是卑怯的坏人所创造，因为他贻害于人而怕人来报复，便骗以宽恕的美名。
I don't know if my nature is particularly bad, or because I can't escape the influence of the environment in the past, but I always feel that revenge is not surprising, although I don't want to falsely accuse the non-resisters of being impersonal. But sometimes I also think: revenge, who will referee, how can it be fair? Then he immediately answered himself: judge by himself, execute by himself; Since there is no God to preside, people may as well pay their heads with their eyes, or they may as well pay their eyes with their heads. Sometimes he felt that forgiveness was a virtue, but at once he suspected that this word was invented by a coward, because he did not have the courage to retaliate; Or it is created by a cowardly bad person, because he is afraid of retaliation from others, so he deceives the reputation of forgiveness.因此我常常欣慕现在的青年，虽然生于清末，而大抵长于民国，吐纳共和的空气，该不至于再有什么异族轭下的不平之气，和被压迫民族的合辙之悲罢。果然，连大学教授，也已经不解何以小说要描写下等社会的缘故了，我和现代人要相距一世纪的话，似乎有些确凿。但我也不想湔洗，——虽然很觉得惭惶。
Therefore, I often admire the youth of today, although they were born in the late Qing Dynasty, but most of them grew up in the Republic of China, and breathe the air of the republic, so that there should be no more injustice under the yoke of different races and the sorrow of the union of the oppressed nation. Sure enough, even university professors don't understand why novels want to describe lower-class society, and it seems a bit conclusive that I am a century apart from modern people. But I don't want to wash ,—— although I feel very ashamed.当爱罗先珂君在日本未被驱逐之前，我并不知道他的姓名。直到已被放逐，这才看起他的作品来；所以知道那迫辱放逐的情形的，是由于登在《读卖新闻》上的一篇江口涣氏的文字。于是将这译出，还译他的童话，还译他的剧本《桃色的云》。其实，我当时的意思，不过要传播被虐待者的苦痛的呼声和激发国人对于强权者的憎恶和愤怒而已，并不是从什么“艺术之宫”里伸出手来，拔了海外的奇花瑶草，来移植在华国的艺苑。
I didn't know his name until he was expelled from Japan. It was not until he was banished that he looked at his works; Therefore, the situation of forced humiliation and exile is known because of an article by Mr. Huan Eguchi published in the "Yomiuri Shimbun". So he translated this, translated his fairy tales, and also translated his script "Peach Clouds". In fact, what I meant at the time was just to spread the pain of the abused and arouse the hatred and anger of the Chinese people against the powerful, not to reach out from some "palace of art" and pull out the strange flowers and Yao grass from overseas to transplant them to the art garden in China.日文的《桃色的云》出版时，江口氏的文章也在，可是已被检查机关（警察厅？）删节得很多。我的译文是完全的，但当这剧本印成本子时，却没有印上去。因为其时我又见了别一种情形，起了别一种意见，不想在中国人的愤火上，再添薪炭了。
When the Japanese version of "Peach Clouds" was published, Mr. Eguchi's article was also there, but it had been published by the inspection agency (National Police Agency?). A lot of abridgements. My translation was complete, but when the script was printed, it was not printed. Because at that time, I saw another situation and had a different opinion, and I didn't want to add fuel to the anger of the Chinese.

杂忆

4
孔老先生说过：“毋友不如己者。”其实这样的势利眼睛，现在的世界上还多得很。我们自己看看本国的模样，就可知道不会有什么友人的了，岂但没有友人，简直大半都曾经做过仇敌。不过仇甲的时候，向乙等候公论，后来仇乙的时候，又向甲期待同情，所以片段的看起来，倒也似乎并不是全世界都是怨敌。但怨敌总常有一个，因此每一两年，爱国者总要鼓舞一番对于敌人的怨恨与愤怒。
Mr. Kong Lao said: "Do not have friends who are inferior to yourself." In fact, there are many such snobbish eyes in the world now. If we look at the appearance of our own country, we will know that there will be no friends, not only no friends, but most of them have been enemies. However, when he hated A, he waited for public opinion from B, and later when he hated B, he expected sympathy from A, so the clip did not seem to be a grudge in the whole world. But there is always one enemy, so every year or two, patriots always have to encourage resentment and anger towards the enemy.这也是现在极普通的事情，此国将与彼国为敌的时候，总得先用了手段，煽起国民的敌忾心来，使他们一同去扞御或攻击。但有一个必要的条件，就是：国民是勇敢的。因为勇敢，这才能勇往直前，肉搏强敌，以报仇雪恨。假使是怯弱的人民，则即使如何鼓舞，也不会有面临强敌的决心；然而引起的愤火却在，仍不能不寻一个发泄的地方，这地方，就是眼见得比他们更弱的人民，无论是同胞或是异族。
This is also a very common thing now, when this country will be an enemy of another country, it must first use means to incite the hostility of the people, so that they can resist or attack together. But there is a necessary condition, that is, the people are brave. Because of bravery, we can move forward bravely, fight strong enemies hand-to-hand, and avenge our hatred. If it is a cowardly people, no matter how much they are encouraged, they will not have the determination to face a strong enemy; However, the anger aroused was there, and they still had to find a place to vent, which was to see the people who were weaker than them, whether they were compatriots or foreigners.我觉得中国人所蕴蓄的怨愤已经够多了，自然是受强者的蹂躏所致的。但他们却不很向强者反抗，而反在弱者身上发泄，兵和匪不相争，无枪的百姓却并受兵匪之苦，就是最近便的证据。再露骨地说，怕还可以证明这些人的卑怯。卑怯的人，即使有万丈的愤火，除弱草以外，又能烧掉甚么呢？
I think the Chinese have accumulated enough resentment, which is naturally caused by the ravages of the strong. But they do not resist the strong, but vent on the weak, soldiers and bandits do not fight, but the people without guns suffer from soldiers and bandits, which is the recent evidence. If you say it more explicitly, I am afraid it can also prove the cowardice of these people. Even if a cowardly person has a great anger, what can he burn except weak grass?或者要说，我们现在所要使人愤恨的是外敌，和国人不相干，无从受害。可是这转移是极容易的，虽曰国人，要借以泄愤的时候，只要给与一种特异的名称，即可放心剚刃。先前则有异端，妖人，奸党，逆徒等类名目，现在就可用国贼，汉奸，二毛子，洋狗或洋奴。庚子年的义和团捉住路人，可以任意指为教徒，据云这铁证是他的神通眼已在那人的额上看出一个“十”字。
In other words, what we want to make people hate now is foreign enemies, which have nothing to do with the Chinese people and cannot be harmed. But this transfer is extremely easy, although the Chinese people, when they want to vent their anger, as long as they are given a special name, they can rest assured to cut the blade. Previously, there were heretics, demons, traitors, traitors, traitors and other names, but now they can be used as national traitors, traitors, two hairy children, foreign dogs or foreign slaves. The Boxers in the year of Gengzi caught passers-by and could be arbitrarily referred to as believers, and it is said that this ironclad evidence is that his supernatural eyes have seen a "ten" on the man's forehead.然而我们在“毋友不如己者”的世上，除了激发自己的国民，使他们发些火花，聊以应景之外，又有什么良法呢。可是我根据上述的理由，更进一步而希望于点火的青年的，是对于群众，在引起他们的公愤之余，还须设法注入深沉的勇气，当鼓舞他们的感情的时候，还须竭力启发明白的理性；而且还得偏重于勇气和理性，从此继续地训练许多年。这声音，自然断乎不及大叫宣战杀贼的大而闳，但我以为却是更紧要而更艰难伟大的工作。
However, in a world where "no friends are inferior to ourselves", what good way is there other than stimulating our own people, making them spark some sparks, and chatting about the situation? But on the basis of the above reasons, I hope to go a step further and hope for the young people who are igniting the fire, that in addition to arousing their public indignation, we must also try to inject deep courage into them, and when stirring up their feelings, we must also strive to inspire clear reason; And you have to focus on courage and reason, and continue to train for many years. This voice is naturally not as loud and loud as shouting war to kill thieves, but I thought it was a more important and difficult and great work.否则，历史指示过我们，遭殃的不是什么敌手而是自己的同胞和子孙。那结果，是反为敌人先驱，而敌人就做了这一国的所谓强者的胜利者，同时也就做了弱者的恩人。因为自己先已互相残杀过了，所蕴蓄的怨愤都已消除，天下也就成为太平的盛世。
Otherwise, history has shown us that it is not our enemies who suffer but our own compatriots and descendants. The result is that he is the forerunner of the enemy, and the enemy becomes the victor of the so-called strong of this country, and at the same time the benefactor of the weak. Because they have killed each other before, the resentment they have accumulated has been eliminated, and the world will become a peaceful and prosperous era.总之，我以为国民倘没有智，没有勇，而单靠一种所谓“气”，实在是非常危险的。现在，应该更进而着手于较为坚实的工作了。
In short, I think that if the people have no wisdom or courage, and rely only on a so-called "qi", it is really very dangerous. Now, it is time to go further and start with more solid work.一九二五年六月十六日。
June 16, 1925.

论“他妈的！”

论“他妈的！”

论“他妈的！”

On "Fuck! ”无论是谁，只要在中国过活，便总得常听到“他妈的”或其相类的口头禅。我想：这话的分布，大概就跟着中国人足迹之所至罢；使用的遍数，怕也未必比客气的“您好呀”会更少。假使依或人所说，牡丹是中国的“国花”，那么，这就可以算是中国的“国骂”了。
No matter who lives in China, you will always hear "fuck" or similar mantras. I think: the distribution of these words probably follows the footprints of the Chinese; The number of times you use it may not be less than a polite "hello". If peony is China's "national flower", then this can be regarded as China's "national scolding".我生长于浙江之东，就是西滢先生之所谓“某籍”。那地方通行的“国骂”却颇简单：专一以“妈”为限，决不牵涉余人。后来稍游各地，才始惊异于国骂之博大而精微：上溯祖宗，旁连姊妹，下递子孙，普及同性，真是“犹河汉而无极也”。而且，不特用于人，也以施之兽。前年，曾见一辆煤车的只轮陷入很深的辙迹里，车夫便愤然跳下，出死力打那拉车的骡子道：“你姊姊的！你姊姊的！”
I grew up in the east of Zhejiang, which is what Mr. Xiying calls "a certain nationality". The "national scolding" that is common in that place is quite simple: it is limited to "mother" and never involves other people. Later, after traveling around the world, I was amazed at the breadth and subtlety of the national curse: tracing back to the ancestors, connecting the sisters, passing on the descendants, and popularizing the same sex, it is really "like the Milky Way and the Infinite River". Moreover, it is not only used for humans, but also for beasts. The year before last, I saw that the wheel of a coal cart fell into a deep rut, and the coachman jumped off angrily and hit the mule pulling the cart with all his might: "Your sister's! Your sister's! ”别的国度里怎样，我不知道。单知道诺威人Hamsun有一本小说叫《饥饿》，粗野的口吻是很多的，但我并不见这一类话。Gorky所写的小说中多无赖汉，就我所看过的而言，也没有这骂法。惟独Artzybashev在《工人绥惠略夫》里，却使无抵抗主义者亚拉借夫骂了一句“你妈的”。但其时他已经决计为爱而牺牲了，使我们也失却笑他自相矛盾的勇气。这骂的翻译，在中国原极容易的，别国却似乎为难，德文译本作“我使用过你的妈”，日文译本作“你的妈是我的母狗”。这实在太费解，——由我的眼光看起来。
I don't know what happens in other countries. I only know that Norwegian Hamsun has a novel called "Hunger", and there are many rude tones, but I have not seen this kind of words. There are many scoundrels in Gorky's novels, and as far as I have seen, there is no such curse. Only Artzybashev, in "The Worker Suihuiliov", made the non-resistance Yara borrower scold "damn it". But at that time, he had already decided to sacrifice for love, so that we also lost the courage to laugh at his contradictions. The German translation is "I used your mother", and the Japanese translation is "Your mother is my". This is really puzzling,—— it looks like it from my eyes.那么，俄国也有这类骂法的了，但因为究竟没有中国似的精博，所以光荣还得归到这边来。好在这究竟又并非什么大光荣，所以他们大约未必抗议；也不如“赤化”之可怕，中国的阔人，名人，高人，也不至于骇死的。但是，虽在中国，说的也独有所谓“下等人”，例如“车夫”之类，至于有身分的上等人，例如“士大夫”之类，则决不出之于口，更何况笔之于书。“予生也晚”，赶不上周朝，未为大夫，也没有做士，本可以放笔直干的，然而终于改头换面，从“国骂”上削去一个动词和一个名词，又改对称为第三人称者，恐怕还因为到底未曾拉车，因而也就不免“有点贵族气味”之故。那用途，既然只限于一部分，似乎又有些不能算作“国骂”了；但也不然，阔人所赏识的牡丹，下等人又何尝以为“花之富贵者也”？
Then, Russia also has this kind of scolding, but because it is not as profound as China, the glory has to go here. Fortunately, this is not a great honor, so they probably may not protest; It is not as terrible as "redification", and China's broad people, celebrities, and masters will not be frightened to death. However, although in China, there are only so-called "inferior people", such as "coachmen", and as for the upper class people with status, such as "scholar-officials", they will never speak of it, let alone write about it. "I was born too late", I couldn't catch up with the Zhou Dynasty, I was not a doctor, and I didn't want to be a scholar, I could have done it straight, but finally changed my face, cut off a verb and a noun from the "national scolding", and changed it to the third person, I am afraid that it was because I had not pulled the car in the end, so it was inevitable that it would be "a bit of an aristocratic smell". Since that use is limited to a part, it seems that some of them cannot be counted as "national scolding"; But no, the peony appreciated by the broad people, why do the lower class people think that they are "the rich and noble of flowers"?这“他妈的”的由来以及始于何代，我也不明白。经史上所见骂人的话，无非是“役夫”，“奴”，“死公”；较厉害的，有“老狗”，“貉子”；更厉害，涉及先代的，也不外乎“而母婢也”，“赘阉遗丑”罢了！还没见过什么“妈的”怎样，虽然也许是士大夫讳而不录。但《广弘明集》（七）记北魏邢子才“以为妇人不可保。谓元景曰，‘卿何必姓王？’元景变色。子才曰，‘我亦何必姓邢；能保五世耶？’”则颇有可以推见消息的地方。
I don't understand where this "fucking" came from and what generation it began. The words of scolding seen in history are nothing more than "servants", "slaves", and "dead men"; the more powerful ones include "old dogs" and "raccoon dogs"; What's even more powerful, involving the ancestors, it's nothing more than "and the mother and maid", "the eunuch and the ugly"! I haven't seen any "damn" yet, although maybe the scholar-official is hidden. However, the "Guang Hongming Collection" (7) records that Xing Zicai of the Northern Wei Dynasty "thinks that women cannot be guaranteed." He said to Liu Yuanjing, 'Why do you have to be surnamed Wang?' 'Yuan Jing changed color. Zicai said, 'Why should I have the surname Xing; Can it last for five generations? There are quite a few places where the news can be inferred.晋朝已经是大重门第，重到过度了；华胄世业，子弟便易于得官；即使是一个酒囊饭袋，也还是不失为清品。北方疆土虽失于拓跋氏，士人却更其发狂似的讲究阀阅，区别等第，守护极严。庶民中纵有俊才，也不能和大姓比并。至于大姓，实不过承祖宗余荫，以旧业骄人，空腹高心，当然使人不耐。但士流既然用祖宗做护符，被压迫的庶民自然也就将他们的祖宗当作仇敌。邢子才的话虽然说不定是否出于愤激，但对于躲在门第下的男女，却确是一个致命的重伤。势位声气，本来仅靠了“祖宗”这惟一的护符而存，“祖宗”倘一被毁，便什么都倒败了。这是倚赖“余荫”的必得的果报。
The Jin Dynasty was already a heavy family, and it was too heavy; Hua Zhou is a generational business, and it is easy for his children to get an official position; Even if it is a wine bag and rice bag, it is still a clear product. Although the northern territory was lost to the Tuoba clan, the scholars paid more attention to the valve reading as if they were crazy, distinguished the ranks, and guarded them extremely strictly. Even if there are talented people among the common people, they cannot be compared with the big families. As for the big surname, it is really just inheriting the legacy of the ancestors, arrogant with the old business, empty stomach and high heart, of course, impatient. But since Shiliu used his ancestors as talismans, the oppressed common people naturally regarded their ancestors as enemies. Although Xing Zicai's words may be out of indignation, they are indeed a fatal and serious injury to the men and women hiding under the door. The momentum and momentum originally existed only by the only talisman of the "ancestor", and if the "ancestor" was destroyed, everything would be defeated. This is the inevitable result of relying on the "remaining shade".同一的意思，但没有邢子才的文才，而直出于“下等人”之口的，就是：“他妈的！”
The same meaning, but without Xing Zicai's literary talent, and what comes directly from the mouth of "inferior people" is: "Fuck!" ”要攻击高门大族的坚固的旧堡垒，却去瞄准他的血统，在战略上，真可谓奇谲的了。最先发明这一句“他妈的”的人物，确要算一个天才，——然而是一个卑劣的天才。
To attack the strong old fortress of the Gaomen clan, but to target his bloodline, strategically, it is really strange. The character who first invented this phrase "fucking" is indeed a genius,—— but a despicable genius.唐以后，自夸族望的风气渐渐消除；到了金元，已奉夷狄为帝王，自不妨拜屠沽作卿士，“等”的上下本该从此有些难定了，但偏还有人想辛辛苦苦地爬进“上等”去。刘时中的曲子里说：“堪笑这没见识街市匹夫，好打那好顽劣。江湖伴侣，旋将表德官名相体呼，声音多厮称，字样不寻俗。听我一个个细数：粜米的唤子良；卖肉的呼仲甫……开张卖饭的呼君宝；磨面登罗底叫德夫：何足云乎？！”（《乐府新编阳春白雪》三）这就是那时的暴发户的丑态。
After the Tang Dynasty, the trend of boasting about the clan's prestige gradually disappeared; In the Jin Yuan, the barbarians have been regarded as emperors, so they might as well worship Tugu as a minister, and the "waiting" should be a little difficult to determine from now on, but there are still people who want to climb into the "upper class" hard. Liu Shizhong's song said: "It's ridiculous that this is a man who doesn't know the market, and it's so stubborn to fight." The companions of the rivers and lakes will soon be called by the names of the officials, and the voice is more of a name, and the words are not vulgar. Listen to me count one by one: the call of Ziliang who sells rice; Hu Zhongfu, who sells meat...... Hu Junbao, who opened a restaurant to sell food; Mill face Denrodi called Dev: What is there to say?! ("Yuefu New Compilation of Yangchun Baixue" 3) This is the ugliness of the nouveau riche at that time.“下等人”还未暴发之先，自然大抵有许多“他妈的”在嘴上，但一遇机会，偶窃一位，略识几字，便即文雅起来：雅号也有了；身分也高了；家谱也修了，还要寻一个始祖，不是名儒便是名臣。从此化为“上等人”，也如上等前辈一样，言行都很温文尔雅。然而愚民究竟也有聪明的，早已看穿了这鬼把戏，所以又有俗谚，说：“口上仁义礼智，心里男盗女娼！”他们是很明白的。
Before the "inferior people" broke out, there were naturally a lot of "fucking" on their mouths, but when they had the opportunity, they occasionally stole one and knew a few words, and they became elegant: they also had elegant names; the status is also high; The family tree has also been repaired, and an ancestor must be found, either a famous scholar or a famous minister. Since then, he has become a "superior person", and like his seniors, his words and deeds are very gentle. However, the foolish people are also smart, and they have already seen through this ghost trick, so there is a common saying, "Benevolence, righteousness, propriety and wisdom in the mouth, men steal and female prostitutes in their hearts!" "They understand it very well.于是他们反抗了，曰：“他妈的！”
So they resisted, saying, "Fuck! ”但人们不能蔑弃扫荡人我的余泽和旧荫，而硬要去做别人的祖宗，无论如何，总是卑劣的事。有时，也或加暴力于所谓“他妈的”的生命上，但大概是乘机，而不是造运会，所以无论如何，也还是卑劣的事。
But people cannot despise the remnants and old shades of others, and insist on doing other people's ancestors, no matter what, it is always a despicable thing. Sometimes, violence may be inflicted on the so-called "fucking" life, but it is probably an opportunity, not a lucky meeting, so in any case, it is still a despicable thing.中国人至今还有无数“等”，还是依赖门第，还是倚仗祖宗。倘不改造，即永远有无声的或有声的“国骂”。就是“他妈的”，围绕在上下和四旁，而且这还须在太平的时候。
Chinese still have countless "waits", still relying on family and ancestors. If it is not transformed, there will always be silent or loud "national scolding". It's "fucking", all around and around, and this must be done in times of peace.但偶尔也有例外的用法：或表惊异，或表感服。我曾在家乡看见乡农父子一同午饭，儿子指一碗菜向他父亲说：“这不坏，妈的你尝尝看！”那父亲回答道：“我不要吃。妈的你吃去罢！”则简直已经醇化为现在时行的“我的亲爱的”的意思了。
But occasionally there are exceptions: either to express surprise, or to express convincing. I once saw a rural farmer father and son having lunch together in my hometown, and the son pointed to a bowl of dishes and said to his father: "This is not bad, damn it, try it!" The father replied, "I don't want to eat it." Damn, you can eat it! It has simply been mellowed into the meaning of "my dear" in the current tense.一九二五年七月十九日。
July 19, 1925.

论睁了眼看

论睁了眼看

论睁了眼看

Lun opened his eyes and looked虚生先生所做的时事短评中，曾有一个这样的题目：“我们应该有正眼看各方面的勇气”（《猛进》十九期）。诚然，必须敢于正视，这才可望敢想，敢说，敢作，敢当。倘使并正视而不敢，此外还能成什么气候。然而，不幸这一种勇气，是我们中国人最所缺乏的。
In the short commentary on current affairs made by Mr. Xu Sheng, there was such a topic: "We should have the courage to look at all aspects" ("Fierce Progress" No. 19). It is true that we must dare to face up to it, so that we can dare to think, dare to speak, dare to do, and dare to be. If you don't dare to face it, what kind of climate can it become? However, unfortunately, this kind of courage is what we Chinese lack the most.但现在我所想到的是别一方面——
But now I think about something else—中国的文人，对于人生，——至少是对于社会现象，向来就多没有正视的勇气。我们的圣贤，本来早已教人“非礼勿视”的了；而这“礼”又非常之严，不但“正视”，连“平视”“斜视”也不许。现在青年的精神未可知，在体质，却大半还是弯腰曲背，低眉顺眼，表示着老牌的老成的子弟，驯良的百姓，——至于说对外却有大力量，乃是近一月来的新说，还不知道究竟是如何。
Chinese literati have always had the courage to face up to life,—— at least social phenomena. Our sages have long taught people not to look at indecent things; And this "etiquette" is very strict, not only "facing up", but also "head-up" and "strabismus". Now the spirit of young people is unknown, but in terms of physique, most of them are still bent over, low eyebrows and pleasing to the eye, indicating the old old and mature children, the docile people,—— As for the external power, it is a new theory in the past month, and I don't know how.再回到“正视”问题去：先既不敢，后便不能，再后，就自然不视，不见了。一辆汽车坏了，停在马路上，一群人围着呆看，所得的结果是一团乌油油的东西。然而由本身的矛盾或社会的缺陷所生的苦痛，虽不正视，却要身受的。文人究竟是敏感人物，从他们的作品上看来，有些人确也早已感到不满，可是一到快要显露缺陷的危机一发之际，他们总即刻连说“并无其事”，同时便闭上了眼睛。这闭着的眼睛便看见一切圆满，当前的苦痛不过是“天之将降大任于是人也，必先苦其心志，劳其筋骨，饿其体肤，空乏其身，行拂乱其所为。”于是无问题，无缺陷，无不平，也就无解决，无改革，无反抗。因为凡事总要“团圆”，正无须我们焦躁；放心喝茶，睡觉大吉。再说费话，就有“不合时宜”之咎，免不了要受大学教授的纠正了。呸！
Let's go back to the problem of "facing up": first I don't dare, then I can't, and then I naturally don't look at it and disappear. A car broke down and parked on the road, and a group of people watched around, and the result was a mess of oily things. However, the pain caused by one's own contradictions or social defects, although not faced head-on, has to be suffered. It seems that some people have long been dissatisfied with whether literati are sensitive figures, but when the crisis is about to reveal their flaws, they always say "nothing happens" and close their eyes at the same time. This closed eye sees that everything is complete, and the current pain is nothing more than "the great responsibility of heaven will be given to people, and they will first suffer their minds, work their muscles and bones, starve their bodies, empty their bodies, and mess up their actions." So there are no problems, no defects, no injustices, no solutions, no reforms, no resistance. Because everything must be "reunited", we don't need to be anxious; Drink tea with confidence and sleep well. If you talk nonsense, you will be blamed for being "out of place" and will inevitably be corrected by university professors. Bah!我并未实验过，但有时候想：倘将一位久蛰洞房的老太爷抛在夏天正午的烈日底下，或将不出闺门的千金小姐拖到旷野的黑夜里，大概只好闭了眼睛，暂续他们残存的旧梦，总算并没有遇到暗或光，虽然已经是绝不相同的现实。中国的文人也一样，万事闭眼睛，聊以自欺，而且欺人，那方法是：瞒和骗。
I have not experimented, but sometimes I think: if an old lady who has been dormant in the bridal chamber for a long time is left under the scorching sun at noon in summer, or if the daughter who does not leave the boudoir is dragged into the dark night of the wilderness, I will probably have to close my eyes and temporarily continue their remaining old dreams, and finally I will not encounter darkness or light, although it is already a reality that is by no means the same. The Chinese literati are the same, closing their eyes in everything, talking about self-deception, and deceiving others, that method: concealment and deception.中国婚姻方法的缺陷，才子佳人小说作家早就感到了，他于是使一个才子在壁上题诗，一个佳人便来和，由倾慕——现在就得称恋爱——而至于有“终身之约”。但约定之后，也就有了难关。我们都知道，“私订终身”在诗和戏曲或小说上尚不失为美谈（自然只以与终于中状元的男人私订为限），实际却不容于天下的，仍然免不了要离异。明末的作家便闭上眼睛，并这一层也加以补救了，说是：才子及第，奉旨成婚。“父母之命媒妁之言”经这大帽子来一压，便成了半个铅钱也不值，问题也一点没有了。假使有之，也只在才子的能否中状元，而决不在婚姻制度的良否。
The flaws of the Chinese marriage method have long been felt by the writer of talented and beautiful novels, so he made a talented man inscribe a poem on the wall, and a beautiful woman came to reconcile, from admiration - now it must be called love - and to a "lifelong contract". But after the agreement, there were difficulties. We all know that "private engagement for life" is still a beautiful talk in poetry, opera or novels (naturally only limited to private engagement with a man who finally won the championship), but in reality, it is not tolerated by the world, and divorce is still inevitable. The writers of the late Ming Dynasty closed their eyes and remedied this layer as well, saying: The talent passed the exam and was ordered to get married. "The words of the matchmaker of the parents' life" are pressed by this big hat, and it becomes half a lead coin that is not worth it, and the problem is gone at all. If there is, it is only in the ability of the talent to win the championship, and by no means in the quality of the marriage system.（近来有人以为新诗人的做诗发表，是在出风头，引异性；且迁怒于报章杂志之滥登。殊不知即使无报，墙壁实“古已有之”，早做过发表机关了；据《封神演义》，纣王已曾在女娲庙壁上题诗，那起源实在非常之早。报章可以不取白话，或排斥小诗，墙壁却拆不完，管不及的；倘一律刷成黑色，也还有破磁可划，粉笔可书，真是穷于应付。做诗不刻木板，去藏之名山，却要随时发表，虽然很有流弊，但大概是难以杜绝的罢。）
(Recently, some people think that the publication of poetry by new poets is in the limelight and attracting the opposite sex; And he vented his anger on the excessive publication of newspapers and magazines. As everyone knows, even if there is no newspaper, the wall is actually "ancient and existent", and it has long been a publishing organ; According to the "Romance of the Gods", King Zhou has inscribed poems on the wall of the Nuwa Temple, and the origin is very early. Newspapers can not take the vernacular, or reject small poems, but the walls cannot be dismantled, and they cannot be controlled; If they are all painted black, there are still magnetism to scratch and chalk to write, which is really difficult to cope with. Writing poetry without carving wooden boards, going to hidden famous mountains, but publishing at any time, although it is very corrupt, it is probably difficult to eliminate. ）《红楼梦》中的小悲剧，是社会上常有的事，作者又是比较的敢于实写的，而那结果也并不坏。无论贾氏家业再振，兰桂齐芳，即宝玉自己，也成了个披大红猩猩毡斗篷的和尚。和尚多矣，但披这样阔斗篷的能有几个，已经是“入圣超凡”无疑了。至于别的人们，则早在册子里一一注定，末路不过是一个归结：是问题的结束，不是问题的开头。读者即小有不安，也终于奈何不得。然而后来或续或改，非借尸还魂，即冥中另配，必令“生旦当场团圆”，才肯放手者，乃是自欺欺人的瘾太大，所以看了小小骗局，还不甘心，定须闭眼胡说一通而后快。赫克尔（E. Haeckel）说过：人和人之差，有时比类人猿和原人之差还远。我们将《红楼梦》的续作者和原作者一比较，就会承认这话大概是确实的。
The small tragedy in "Dream of Red Mansions" is a common thing in society, and the author dares to write it truthfully, and the result is not bad. No matter how the Jia family business revitalizes, Lan Gui Qifang, that is, Baoyu himself, has also become a monk wearing a gorilla felt cloak. There are many monks, but there are only a few who wear such a wide cloak, and there is no doubt that they are already "saints and extraordinary". As for other people, it is predestined one by one in the booklet, and the end is just a conclusion: it is the end of the problem, not the beginning of the problem. Even if the reader is a little uneasy, he can't help it in the end. However, later it was continued or changed, either borrowing the corpse to return to the soul, that is, another match in the underworld, and it must be "reunited on the spot", so those who were willing to let go were too addicted to self-deception, so after watching a small scam, they were not reconciled, and they had to close their eyes and talk nonsense. E. Haeckel) said: The difference between humans and humans is sometimes farther than the difference between great apes and primitive humans. If we compare the sequel to "Dream of Red Mansions" with the original author, we will admit that this is probably true.“作善降祥”的古训，六朝人本已有些怀疑了，他们作墓志，竟会说“积善不报，终自欺人”的话。但后来的昏人，却又瞒起来。元刘信将三岁痴儿抛入纸火盆，妄希福祐，是见于《元典章》的；剧本《小张屠焚儿救母》却道是为母延命，命得延，儿亦不死了。一女愿侍痼疾之夫，《醒世恒言》中还说终于一同自杀的；后来改作的却道是有蛇坠入药罐里，丈夫服后便全愈了。凡有缺陷，一经作者粉饰，后半便大抵改观，使读者落诬妄中，以为世间委实尽够光明，谁有不幸，便是自作，自受。
The people of the Six Dynasties were already a little suspicious of the ancient motto of "doing good deeds and bringing good fortune", and when they wrote epitaphs, they would actually say "accumulate good deeds and never repay them, and eventually deceive others". But the faint people who came later hid it again. Yuan Liu Xin threw the three-year-old fool into the paper brazier, hoping for blessings, which is seen in the "Yuan Dianzhang"; The script "Xiao Zhang Slaughtered and Burned the Child to Save His Mother" said that it was to prolong his mother's life, and his life was extended, and the child did not die. A woman is willing to serve her husband with a chronic illness, and it is said in "Awakening the World" that they finally committed suicide together; Later, it was changed to say that a snake fell into the medicine jar, and the husband was completely healed after taking it. Whenever there are flaws, once the author whitewashes them, the second half of them will largely change, making the reader fall into the delusion, thinking that the truth in the world is bright enough, and whoever has misfortune is self-inflicted and self-inflicted.有时遇到彰明的史实，瞒不下，如关羽岳飞的被杀，便只好别设骗局了。一是前世已造夙因，如岳飞；一是死后使他成神，如关羽。定命不可逃，成神的善报更满人意，所以杀人者不足责，被杀者也不足悲，冥冥中自有安排，使他们各得其所，正不必别人来费力了。
Sometimes when encountering clear historical facts, they can't hide it, such as the killing of Guan Yu and Yue Fei, so they have to set up a scam. First, the previous life has created the cause of the past, such as Yue Fei; One is to make him a god after death, such as Guan Yu. There is no escape from fate, and the good reward of becoming a god is more satisfactory, so the murderer is not to blame, and the killed are not sad.中国人的不敢正视各方面，用瞒和骗，造出奇妙的逃路来，而自以为正路。在这路上，就证明着国民性的怯弱，懒惰，而又巧滑。一天一天的满足着，即一天一天的堕落着，但却又觉得日见其光荣。在事实上，亡国一次，即添加几个殉难的忠臣，后来每不想光复旧物，而只去赞美那几个忠臣；遭劫一次，即造成一群不辱的烈女，事过之后，也每每不思惩凶，自卫，却只顾歌咏那一群烈女。仿佛亡国遭劫的事，反而给中国人发挥“两间正气”的机会，增高价值，即在此一举，应该一任其至，不足忧悲似的。自然，此上也无可为，因为我们已经借死人获得最上的光荣了。沪汉烈士的追悼会中，活的人们在一块很可景仰的高大的木主下互相打骂，也就是和我们的先辈走着同一的路。
Chinese people do not dare to face up to all aspects, and use concealment and deception to create wonderful escape routes, but think they are the right way. On this road, it proves that the national character is timid, lazy, and slippery. Day by day, I am satisfied, that is, I am falling day by day, but I feel that I am seeing its glory day by day. In fact, once the country was destroyed, several martyred loyal ministers were added, and later they did not want to restore the old things, but only praised those loyal ministers; After being robbed, he often did not think about punishing the murderer and defending himself, but only sang about the group of martyrs. It seems that the subjugation of the country and the robbery of the country has given the Chinese the opportunity to play the "two righteousness" and increase the value, that is, in this move, it should be left to its own devices, as if there is no need to worry or be sad. Naturally, there is nothing to be done about this, because we have already obtained the highest glory through the dead. At the memorial service for the martyrs of Shanghai and Han, the living people beat and scolded each other under a tall wooden master that was very admirable, that is, they walked the same path as our ancestors.文艺是国民精神所发的火光，同时也是引导国民精神的前途的灯火。这是互为因果的，正如麻油从芝麻榨出，但以浸芝麻，就使它更油。倘以油为上，就不必说；否则，当参入别的东西，或水或硷去。中国人向来因为不敢正视人生，只好瞒和骗，由此也生出瞒和骗的文艺来，由这文艺，更令中国人更深地陷入瞒和骗的大泽中，甚而至于已经自己不觉得。世界日日改变，我们的作家取下假面，真诚地，深入地，大胆地看取人生并且写出他的血和肉来的时候早到了；早就应该有一片崭新的文场，早就应该有几个凶猛的闯将！
Literature and art are the fire emitted by the national spirit, and it is also the light that guides the future of the national spirit. This is mutually causal, just as sesame oil is squeezed out of sesame seeds, but soaking sesame seeds makes it more oily. If oil is the best, there is no need to say it; Otherwise, it should be mixed with something else, either water or alkali. Chinese people have always had to hide and deceive because they did not dare to face up to life, which also gave birth to the literature and art of concealment and deception, and this literature and art made the Chinese fall deeper into the great marsh of concealment and deception, and even did not feel it themselves. The world is changing day by day, and the time has come for our writer to take off his mask, look at life sincerely, deeply, boldly and write about his flesh and blood; There should have been a brand new literary field a long time ago, and there should have been a few fierce breakers!现在，气象似乎一变，到处听不见歌吟花月的声音了，代之而起的是铁和血的赞颂。然而倘以欺瞒的心，用欺瞒的嘴，则无论说A和O，或Y和Z，一样是虚假的；只可以吓哑了先前鄙薄花月的所谓批评家的嘴，满足地以为中国就要中兴。可怜他在“爱国”的大帽子底下又闭上了眼睛了——或者本来就闭着。
Now, the weather seems to have changed, and the sound of singing flowers and moons can no longer be heard everywhere, replaced by the praise of iron and blood. However, if you use a deceitful heart and a deceitful mouth, then whether you say A and O, or Y and Z, it is false; It can only scare the mouths of the so-called critics who previously despised Hua Yue, and contentedly think that China is about to revive. It's a pity that he closed his eyes again under the big hat of "patriotism" - or he was closed.没有冲破一切传统思想和手法的闯将，中国是不会有真的新文艺的。
Without breaking through all traditional ideas and techniques, China will not have real new literature and art.一九二五年七月二十二日。
July 22, 1925.

从胡须说到牙齿

从胡须说到牙齿

从胡须说到牙齿

From beards to teeth1
一翻《呐喊》，才又记得我曾在中华民国九年双十节的前几天做过一篇《头发的故事》；去年，距今快要一整年了罢，那时是《语丝》出世未久，我又曾为它写了一篇《说胡须》。实在似乎很有些章士钊之所谓“每况愈下”了，——自然，这一句成语，也并不是章士钊首先用错的，但因为他既以擅长旧学自居，我又正在给他打官司，所以就栽在他身上。当时就听说，——或者也是时行的“流言”，——一位北京大学的名教授就愤慨过，以为从胡须说起，一直说下去，将来就要说到屁股，则于是乎便和上海的《晶报》一样了。为什么呢？这须是熟精今典的人们才知道，后进的“束发小生”是不容易了然的。因为《晶报》上曾经登过一篇《太阳晒屁股赋》，屁股和胡须又都是人身的一部分，既说此部，即难免不说彼部，正如看见洗脸的人，敏捷而聪明的学者即能推见他一直洗下去，将来一定要洗到屁股。所以有志于做gentleman者，为防微杜渐起见，应该在背后给一顿奚落的。——如果说此外还有深意，那我可不得而知了。
When I flipped through "The Scream", I remembered that I had done a "Hair Story" a few days before the Double Tenth Festival of the Republic of China; Last year, almost a whole year ago, not long after the birth of "Yusi", I wrote a "Talking Beard" for it. It really seems that there is a lot of Zhang Shizhao's so-called "deterioration",—— Naturally, this idiom was not the first thing Zhang Shizhao used wrong, but because he claims to be good at old learning, and I am fighting a lawsuit for him, so I planted it on him. At that time,—— I heard that it was also Shixing's "rumor",—— a famous professor at Peking University was indignant, thinking that if you start with a beard and keep talking, you will talk about the buttocks in the future, so it will be the same as Shanghai's "Jingbao". Why? This must be known to people who are proficient in modern classics that it is not easy to understand the "bundled hair". Because there was an article in the "Crystal News" called "The Sun Bass the Buttocks", the buttocks and beard are both part of the human body, and it is inevitable not to talk about the other part, just as when he sees a person washing his face, an agile and intelligent scholar can infer that he has been washing his buttocks and must wash his buttocks in the future. Therefore, those who aspire to be gentlemen should be ridiculed behind their backs in order to prevent minor changes. ——If there is a deeper meaning, then I don't know.昔者窃闻之：欧美的文明人讳言下体以及和下体略有渊源的事物。假如以生殖器为中心而画一正圆形，则凡在圆周以内者均在讳言之列；而圆之半径，则美国者大于英。中国的下等人，是不讳言的；古之上等人似乎也不讳，所以虽是公子而可以名为黑臀。讳之始，不知在什么时候；而将英美的半径放大，直至于口鼻之间或更在其上，则昉于一千九百二十四年秋。
In the past, I heard that civilized people in Europe and the United States avoided talking about the lower body and things that had something to do with the lower body. If a regular circle is drawn with the genitals as the center, then everything within the circumference is included in the taboo; The radius of the circle is larger in the United States than in the United Kingdom. China's inferior people are not shy about it; In ancient times, the upper class did not seem to be hidden, so even though he was a young man, he could be called a black buttock. The beginning of the taboo, I don't know when; The radius of Britain and America was enlarged to the area between the mouth and nose or even above it, in the autumn of 1924.文人墨客大概是感性太锐敏了之故罢，向来就很娇气，什么也给他说不得，见不得，听不得，想不得。道学先生于是乎从而禁之，虽然很像背道而驰，其实倒是心心相印。然而他们还是一看见堂客的手帕或者姨太太的荒冢就要做诗。我现在虽然也弄弄笔墨做做白话文，但才气却仿佛早经注定是该在“水平线”之下似的，所以看见手帕或荒冢之类，倒无动于中；只记得在解剖室里第一次要在女性的尸体上动刀的时候，可似乎略有做诗之意，——但是，不过“之意”而已，并没有诗，读者幸勿误会，以为我有诗集将要精装行世，传之其人，先在此预告。后来，也就连“之意”都没有了，大约是因为见惯了的缘故罢，正如下等人的说惯一样。否则，也许现在不但不敢说胡须，而且简直非“人之初性本善论”或“天地玄黄赋”便不屑做。遥想土耳其革命后，撕去女人的面幕，是多么下等的事？呜呼，她们已将嘴巴露出，将来一定要光着屁股走路了！
Literati and writers are probably too sensitive, and they have always been very squeamish, and they can't tell him anything, see, hear, or think. Mr. Taoism thus banned it, although it was very similar to going against the way, but in fact it was heart-to-heart. However, they still want to write poetry as soon as they see the handkerchief of the guest or the desolate tomb of the aunt. Although I am now also playing with pen and ink to write vernacular texts, my talent seems to be destined to be below the "horizon line", so when I see handkerchiefs or deserted graves, I am not moved; I only remember that when I was going to use the knife on a woman's corpse for the first time in the dissection room, it seemed to have a slight meaning of poetry,—— but it was just a "meaning", there was no poem, readers should not misunderstand, thinking that I had a collection of poems that was going to be published in hardcover, and I would pass it on to him, so I will announce it here first. Later, there was not even a "meaning", probably because of the habit of seeing it, just as the lower class people were used to. Otherwise, maybe not only do I dare not talk about beards now, but I simply disdain to do it if it is not "the theory of the original goodness of human nature" or "the mysterious yellow fu of heaven and earth". Thinking about how despicable it is to tear off women's faces after the Turkish Revolution? Oh, they have already exposed their mouths, and they must walk barefoot in the future!

从胡须说到牙齿

2
虽然有人数我为“无病呻吟”党之一，但我以为自家有病自家知，旁人大概是不很能够明白底细的。倘没有病，谁来呻吟？如果竟要呻吟，那就已经有了呻吟病了，无法可医。——但模仿自然又是例外。即如自胡须直至屁股等辈，倘使相安无事，谁爱去纪念它们；我们平居无事时，从不想到自己的头，手，脚以至脚底心。待到慨然于“头颅谁斫”，“髀肉（又说下去了，尚希绅士淑女恕之）复生”的时候，是早已别有缘故的了，所以，“呻吟”。而批评家们曰：“无病。”我实在艳羡他们的健康。
Although there are people who say that I am one of the "moaning without illness" party, I think that I know that I am sick, and others probably cannot understand the details. If you are not sick, who will moan? If you want to moan, you already have a moaning disease that cannot be treated. ——But imitation is an exception. That is, from the beard to the buttocks, if there is nothing to do, who loves to commemorate them; When we have nothing to do, we never think about our heads, hands, feet or even the soles of our feet. When it comes to "who cut off the head" and "the thigh meat (and the gentlemen and ladies forgive it) are resurrected", there is already another reason, so "moaning". But critics said, "It's not a problem." "I really envy their health.譬如腋下和胯间的毫毛，向来不很肇祸，所以也没有人引为题目，来呻吟一通。头发便不然了，不但白发数茎，能使老先生揽镜慨然，赶紧拔去；清初还因此杀了许多人。民国既经成立，辫子总算剪定了，即使保不定将来要翻出怎样的花样来，但目下总不妨说是已经告一段落。于是我对于自己的头发，也就淡然若忘，而况女子应否剪发的问题呢，因为我并不预备制造桂花油或贩卖烫剪：事不干己，是无所容心于其间的。但到民国九年，寄住在我的寓里的一位小姐考进高等女子师范学校去了，而她是剪了头发的，再没有法可梳盘龙髻或S髻。到这时，我才知道虽然已是民国九年，而有些人之嫉视剪发的女子，竟和清朝末年之嫉视剪发的男子相同；校长M先生虽被天夺其魄，自己的头顶秃到近乎精光了，却偏以为女子的头发可系千钧，示意要她留起。设法去疏通了几回，没有效，连我也听得麻烦起来，于是乎“感慨系之矣”了，随口呻吟了一篇《头发的故事》。但是，不知怎的，她后来竟居然并不留长，现在还是蓬蓬松松的在北京道上走。
For example, the hair between the armpits and the crotch has never caused much trouble, so no one has cited it as a topic to moan. The hair is not like that, not only a few white hairs, but also a few strands of white hair, which can make the old gentleman look in the mirror and quickly pull it out; In the early Qing Dynasty, many people were killed because of this. Since the establishment of the Republic of China, the braids have finally been pruned, even if it is certain what kind of tricks will be turned out in the future, but it may be said that it has come to an end now. So I was indifferent to my hair, let alone the question of whether women should cut their hair, because I was not prepared to make osmanthus oil or sell perm scissors: if I don't do things myself, I have no room for it. But in the ninth year of the Republic of China, a young lady who lived in my apartment was admitted to the Higher Women's Normal School, and she had a haircut, and there was no way to comb a dragon bun or S bun. At this time, I realized that although it was the ninth year of the Republic of China, some people were jealous of women who cut their hair, and they were the same as the men who were jealous of cutting their hair at the end of the Qing Dynasty; Although the principal, Mr. M, was robbed by the heavens and the top of his head was almost bald, he thought that the woman's hair could be tied up, and signaled her to keep it. I tried to dredge it several times, but it didn't work, and even I was in trouble listening to it, so I "sighed and tied it", and casually moaned a "Hair Story". However, somehow, she didn't stay long later, and now she is still walking fluffily on Beijing Road.本来，也可以无须说下去了，然而连胡须样式都不自由，也是我平生的一件感愤，要时时想到的。胡须的有无，式样，长短，我以为除了直接受着影响的人以外，是毫无容喙的权利和义务的，而有些人们偏要越俎代谋，说些无聊的废话，这真和女子非梳头不可的教育，“奇装异服”者要抓进警厅去办罪的政治一样离奇。要人没有反拨，总须不加刺激；乡下人捉进知县衙门去，打完屁股之后，叩一个头道：“谢大老爷！”这情形是特异的中国民族所特有的。
Originally, there was no need to say anything, but even the beard style was not free, which was also a feeling in my life, and I had to think about it all the time. The existence or absence of beards, styles, and lengths, I thought that except for those who were directly affected, there was no right or obligation to tolerate them, and some people preferred to overstep their bounds and talk boring nonsense, which is really as bizarre as the politics of education where women have to comb their hair, and those who are "dressed in strange clothes" have to be arrested in the police department to commit crimes. If people do not counterattack, they must always be stimulated; The countryman was caught in the county magistrate's yamen, and after spanking, he bowed his head and said, "Master Xie!" This situation is unique to the unique Chinese nation.不料恰恰一周年，我的牙齿又发生问题了，这当然就要说牙齿。这回虽然并非说下去，而是说进去，但牙齿之后是咽喉，下面是食道，胃，大小肠，直肠，和吃饭很有相关，仍将为大雅所不齿；更何况直肠的邻近还有膀胱呢，呜呼！
Unexpectedly, on the first anniversary, I had another problem with my teeth, which of course has to be about teeth. Although this time it is not said to go on, but to say it, after the teeth is the throat, below is the esophagus, stomach, large and small intestines, rectum, which is very related to eating, and will still be despised by Daya; What's more, there is a bladder next to the rectum, alas!

从胡须说到牙齿

3
中华民国十四年十月二十七日，即夏历之重九，国民因为主张关税自主，游行示威了。但巡警却断绝交通，至于发生冲突，据说两面“互有死伤”。次日，几种报章（《社会日报》，《世界日报》，《舆论报》，《益世报》，《顺天时报》等）的新闻中就有这样的话：
On October 27, the fourteenth year of the Republic of China, the ninth day of the summer calendar, the people demonstrated because they advocated tariff independence. However, the patrol police cut off traffic, and as for the conflict, it is said that "there were deaths and injuries" on both sides. The next day, there were words like this in the news of several newspapers ("Social Daily", "World Journal", "Public Opinion Daily", "Yishi Bao", "Shuntian Times", etc.):“学生被打伤者，有吴兴身（第一英文学校），头部刀伤甚重……周树人（北大教员）齿受伤，脱门牙二。其他尚未接有报告。……”
"Among the injured students were Wu Xingshen (First English School), who suffered serious stab wounds to the head...... Zhou Shuren (Peking University faculty) suffered a tooth injury and lost two front teeth. Others have not yet been reported. ……”这样还不够，第二天，《社会日报》，《舆论报》，《黄报》，《顺天时报》又道：
This was not enough, and the next day, "Social Daily", "Public Opinion Daily", "Yellow News", and "Shuntian Times" said:“……游行群众方面，北大教授周树人（即鲁迅）门牙确落二个。……”
“…… In terms of the parade, Peking University professor Zhou Shuren (i.e. Lu Xun) did have two front teeth. ……”舆论也好，指导社会机关也好，“确”也好，不确也好，我是没有修书更正的闲情别致的。但被害苦的是先有许多学生们，次日我到L学校去上课，缺席的学生就有二十余，他们想不至于因为我被打落门牙，即以为讲义也跌了价的，大概是预料我一定请病假。还有几个尝见和未见的朋友，或则面问，或则函问；尤其是朋其君，先行肉薄中央医院，不得，又到我的家里，目睹门牙无恙，这才重回东城，而“昊天不吊”，竟刮起大风来了。
Whether it is public opinion, guiding social organs, "true" or inaccurate, I have no leisure to correct books. But the victim was that there were many students first, and the next day I went to class at L school, and there were more than 20 students who were absent. There are also a few friends who have seen and have not seen each other, either in person or in letter; Especially Pengqijun, who first went to the Central Hospital, but he couldn't go to my house again, and saw that his front teeth were unharmed, so he returned to Dongcheng, and "Haotian did not hang", and a strong wind blew.假使我真被打落两个门牙，倒也大可以略平“整顿学风”者和其党徒之气罢；或者算是说了胡须的报应，——因为有说下去之嫌，所以该得报应，——依博爱家言，本来也未始不是一举两得的事。但可惜那一天我竟不在场。我之所以不到场者，并非遵了胡适教授的指示在研究室里用功，也不是从了江绍原教授的忠告在推敲作品，更不是依着易卜生博士的遗训正在“救出自己”；惭愧我全没有做那些大工作，从实招供起来，不过是整天躺在窗下的床上而已。为什么呢？曰：生些小病，非有他也。
If I were really knocked out of my two front teeth, I would be able to slightly calm the anger of those who "rectified the academic style" and their followers; Or it can be regarded as the retribution of the beard,—— because there is a suspicion of continuing to say it, so it should be retributed,—— According to the words of the fraternity, it is not a matter of killing two birds with one stone. But unfortunately, I was not there that day. The reason why I was not present was not because I was working hard in the laboratory according to Professor Hu Shi's instructions, nor was I scrutinizing my works from Professor Jiang Shaoyuan's advice, nor was I "rescuing myself" according to Dr. Ibsen's teachings; I'm ashamed that I didn't do all those big jobs, and I confessed honestly, but I just lay on the bed under the window all day. Why? He said: "I have some minor illnesses, but there is nothing else."然而我的门牙，却是“确落二个”的。
However, my front teeth are "indeed falling two".

从胡须说到牙齿

4
这也是自家有病自家知的一例，如果牙齿健全的，决不会知道牙痛的人的苦楚，只见他歪着嘴角吸风，模样着实可笑。自从盘古开辟天地以来，中国就未曾发明过一种止牙痛的好方法，现在虽然很有些什么“西法镶牙补眼”的了，但大概不过学了一点皮毛，连消毒去腐的粗浅道理也不明白。以北京而论，以中国自家的牙医而论，只有几个留美出身的博士是好的，但是，yes，贵不可言。至于穷乡僻壤，却连皮毛家也没有，倘使不幸而牙痛，又不安本分而想医好，怕只好去叩求城隍土地爷爷罢。
This is also an example of knowing that you are sick, if you have sound teeth, you will never know the pain of a person with a toothache, only to see him crooked the corner of his mouth to breathe air, the appearance is really ridiculous. Since Pangu opened up the world, China has not invented a good way to relieve toothache, and now although there is a lot of "Western method to put teeth and fill the eyes", it is probably only a little bit of a coat, and even the superficial principles of disinfection and decay are not understood. In the case of Beijing, in terms of China's own dentists, only a few doctors from the United States are good, but yes, it is indescribable. As for the poor and remote areas, but there is not even a fur family, if you are unfortunate and have a toothache, and you are uneasy about your duty and want to heal it, I am afraid that you will have to go to the city god land grandfather.我从小就是牙痛党之一，并非故意和牙齿不痛的正人君子们立异，实在是“欲罢不能”。听说牙齿的性质的好坏，也有遗传的，那么，这就是我的父亲赏给我的一份遗产，因为他牙齿也很坏。于是或蛀，或破，……终于牙龈上出血了，无法收拾；住的又是小城，并无牙医。那时也想不到天下有所谓“西法……”也者，惟有《验方新编》是唯一的救星；然而试尽“验方”都不验。后来，一个善士传给我一个秘方：择日将栗子风干，日日食之，神效。应择那一日，现在已经忘却了，好在这秘方的结果不过是吃栗子，随时可以风干的，我们也无须再费神去查考。自此之后，我才正式看中医，服汤药，可惜中医仿佛也束手了，据说这是叫“牙损”，难治得很呢。还记得有一天一个长辈斥责我，说，因为不自爱，所以会生这病的；医生能有什么法？我不解，但从此不再向人提起牙齿的事了，似乎这病是我的一件耻辱。如此者久而久之，直至我到日本的长崎，再去寻牙医，他给我刮去了牙后面的所谓“齿垽”，这才不再出血了，化去的医费是两元，时间是约一小时以内。
I have been one of the toothache parties since I was a child, and I did not deliberately stand out from the upright gentlemen who did not have pain, but I really "couldn't stop". I heard that the nature of teeth is good and bad, and there are also inherited ones, so this is an inheritance that my father rewarded me, because his teeth are also bad. Thus, some were mothed and some were broken,...... Finally, the gums were bleeding and could not be cleaned up; I live in a small city and there are no dentists. At that time, I couldn't think of the so-called "Western Method...... in the world, but the "New Compilation of Prescriptions" was the only savior; However, all the "prescriptions" were not effective. Later, a good man passed on a secret recipe to me: choose a day to dry the chestnuts and eat them every day, which is miraculous. The day should be chosen, but now it has been forgotten, fortunately, the result of this secret recipe is just eating chestnuts, which can be air-dried at any time, and we don't need to bother to investigate. Since then, I have officially seen Chinese medicine and taken decoctions, but unfortunately Chinese medicine seems to be restrained, it is said that this is called "tooth damage", which is very difficult to treat. I still remember one day an elder scolded me, saying that because I don't love myself, I will get this disease; What can doctors do? I was puzzled, but I never mentioned teeth to people again, and it seemed that this disease was a shame for me. After a long time, until I went to Nagasaki, Japan, and then went to the dentist, he scraped off the so-called "tooth placture" behind my teeth, and then I stopped bleeding, and the medical fee was two yuan, and the time was less than an hour.我后来也看看中国的医药书，忽而发见触目惊心的学说了。它说，齿是属于肾的，“牙损”的原因是“阴亏”。我这才顿然悟出先前的所以得到申斥的原因来，原来是它们在这里这样诬陷我。到现在，即使有人说中医怎样可靠，单方怎样灵，我还都不信。自然，其中大半是因为他们耽误了我的父亲的病的缘故罢，但怕也很挟带些切肤之痛的自己的私怨。
Later, I also read Chinese medical books and suddenly came across a shocking doctrine. It says that teeth belong to the kidneys, and the cause of "tooth damage" is "yin loss". Only then did I suddenly realize the reason why I was reprimanded before, it turned out that they were here to frame me like this. Until now, even if some people say how reliable Chinese medicine is and how effective it is, I still don't believe it. Naturally, most of them were because they delayed my father's illness, but I was afraid that it would also bring some painful personal grievances to my own.事情还很多哩，假使我有Victor Hugo先生的文才，也许因此可以写出一部Les Misérables的续集。然而岂但没有而已么，遭难的又是自家的牙齿，向人分送自己的冤单，是不大合式的，虽然所有文章，几乎十之九是自身的暗中的辩护。现在还不如迈开大步一跳，一径来说“门牙确落二个”的事罢：
There is still a lot to be done, and if I had the literary talent of Mr. Victor Hugo, I might be able to write a sequel to Les Misérables. However, it is not only nothing, but it is also one's own teeth that suffer, and it is not very appropriate to distribute one's own grievances to others, although almost nine out of ten of all articles are one's own secret defense. Now is better to take a big leap and say that "two front teeth do fall out":袁世凯也如一切儒者一样，最主张尊孔。做了离奇的古衣冠，盛行祭孔的时候，大概是要做皇帝以前的一两年。自此以来，相承不废，但也因秉政者的变换，仪式上，尤其是行礼之状有些不同：大概自以为维新者出则西装而鞠躬，尊古者兴则古装而顿首。我曾经是教育部的佥事，因为“区区”，所以还不入鞠躬或顿首之列的；但届春秋二祭，仍不免要被派去做执事。执事者，将所谓“帛”或“爵”递给鞠躬或顿首之诸公的听差之谓也。民国十一年秋，我“执事”后坐车回寓去，既是北京，又是秋，又是清早，天气很冷，所以我穿着厚外套，带了手套的手是插在衣袋里的。那车夫，我相信他是因为磕睡，胡涂，决非章士钊党；但他却在中途用了所谓“非常处分”，以“迅雷不及掩耳之手段”，自己跌倒了，并将我从车上摔出。我手在袋里，来不及抵按，结果便自然只好和地母接吻，以门牙为牺牲了。于是无门牙而讲书者半年，补好于十二年之夏，所以现在使朋其君一见放心，释然回去的两个，其实却是假的。
Yuan Shikai, like all Confucians, advocates respecting Confucius the most. When he made bizarre ancient clothes and crowns, he was about a year or two before he became emperor. Since then, the succession has not been abolished, but due to the change of the ruler, the ceremony, especially the salute, is somewhat different: probably think that the reformers bow in suits when they come out, and bow in ancient costumes when they respect the ancients. I used to be an assistant secretary of the Ministry of Education, because I was "just a little bit", so I was not among the ranks of bowing or bowing; However, in the second festival of spring and autumn, it is inevitable that he will still be sent as a deacon. The deacon refers to the person who hands over the so-called "silk" or "title" to the nobles who bow or bow. In the autumn of the eleventh year of the Republic of China, I took a car back to my residence after being a "deacon", it was Beijing, it was autumn, and it was early in the morning, and the weather was very cold, so I wore a thick coat and my hands with gloves were inserted into my pockets. The coachman, I believe he is because he is sleepy, foolish, and by no means Zhang Shizhao's party; But he used the so-called "extraordinary punishment" in the middle, and with "lightning speed", he fell and threw me out of the car. My hands were in the bag, and I didn't have time to press it, so I naturally had to kiss the Earth Mother and sacrifice my front teeth. So the lecturer without front teeth for half a year made up for it in the summer of the twelfth year, so now the two who made Pengqijun feel relieved at first sight and went back with relief are actually fake.

从胡须说到牙齿

5
孔二先生说，“虽有周公之才之美，使骄且吝，其余，不足观也矣。”这话，我确是曾经读过的，也十分佩服。所以如果打落了两个门牙，借此能给若干人们从旁快意，“痛快”，倒也毫无吝惜之心。而无如门牙，只有这几个，而且早经脱落何？但是将前事拉成今事，却也是不甚愿意的事，因为有些事情，我还要说真实，便只好将别人的“流言”抹杀了，虽然这大抵也以有利于己，至少是无损于己者为限。准此，我便顺手又要将章士钊的将后事拉成前事的胡涂账揭出来。
Mr. Kong Er said, "Although there is the beauty of the Duke of Zhou's talent, it makes him arrogant and stingy, and the rest is not worth seeing." I have indeed read these words before, and I admire them very much. Therefore, if the two front teeth are knocked out, it can give a few people a sense of pleasure and "happiness", but there is no regret. And there are only these few front teeth, and they have fallen out early. But it is also unwilling to pull the past into the present, because there are some things, I still have to say the truth, so I have to erase other people's "rumors", although this is probably limited to those that are beneficial to oneself, at least not to oneself. In this way, I will reveal Zhang Shizhao's nonsense account of the funeral as the past.又是章士钊。我之遇到这个姓名而摇头，实在由来已久；但是，先前总算是为“公”，现在却像憎恶中医一样，仿佛也挟带一点私怨了，因为他“无故”将我免了官，所以，在先已经说过：我正在给他打官司。近来看见他的古文的答辩书了，很斤斤于“无故”之辩，其中有一段：
It's Zhang Shizhao again. I have shook my head when I encountered this name, and it has been a long time; However, I was finally "public" before, but now I hate Chinese medicine, as if I have a little personal grudge, because he removed me from office "for no reason", so I have already said before: I am suing him. Recently, I saw his ancient defense letter, which is very serious about the "no reason" argument, one of which is a paragraph:“……又该伪校务维持会擅举该员为委员，该员又不声明否认，显系有意抗阻本部行政，既情理之所难容，亦法律之所不许。……不得已于八月十二日，呈请执政将周树人免职，十三日由　执政明令照准……”
“…… In addition, the pseudo-school maintenance committee unilaterally nominated the member as a member, and the member did not declare or deny it, which was obviously intended to resist the administration of the headquarters, which was both unreasonable and not allowed by law. …… On August 12, he petitioned the ruling party to dismiss Zhou Shuren, and on the 13th, the ruling party explicitly ordered ......"于是乎我也“之乎者也”地驳掉他：
So I also refuted him:“查校务维持会公举树人为委员，系在八月十三日，而该总长呈请免职，据称在十二日。岂先预知将举树人为委员而先为免职之罪名耶？……”
"The school maintenance committee publicly elected a member of the school maintenance committee on August 13, and the president petitioned for dismissal, allegedly on August 12. Did you know in advance that you would nominate a person to be a committee member and then be dismissed from office? ……”其实，那些什么“答辩书”也不过是中国的胡牵乱扯的照例的成法，章士钊未必一定如此胡涂；假使真只胡涂，倒还不失为胡涂人，但他是知道舞文玩法的。他自己说过：“挽近政治。内包甚复。一端之起。其真意往往难于迹象求之。执法抗争。不过迹象间事。……”所以倘若事不干己，则与其听他说政法，谈逻辑，实在远不如看《太阳晒屁股赋》，因为欺人之意，这些赋里倒没有的。
In fact, those "defense letters" are just China's nonsense as usual, and Zhang Shizhao may not necessarily be so nonsense; If he is really a Hutu, he is still a Hutu person, but he knows how to dance and play. He himself said: "Get closer to politics." The inner package is very complex. One end is rising. Its true meaning is often difficult to find out from the signs. Law enforcement protests. It's just a sign of something. ...... "So if you don't do things yourself, instead of listening to him talk about politics and law, talking about logic, it is really far better to read "Sun Sun Butt Fu", because of the deception, there is nothing in these fu.离题愈说愈远了：这并不是我的身体的一部分。现在即此收住，将来说到那里，且看民国十五年秋罢。
I digress further and further from the topic: it's not part of my body. Now put it here, and it will be there, and look at the autumn of the fifteenth year of the Republic of China.一九二五年十月三十日。
October 30, 1925.

坚壁清野主义

坚壁清野主义

坚壁清野主义

Solid wall purification of the wilderness新近，我在中国社会上发现了几样主义。其一，是坚壁清野主义。
Recently, I have discovered several doctrines in Chinese society. First, it is a strong wall and a barbarism.“坚壁清野”是兵家言，兵家非我的素业，所以这话不是从兵家得来，乃是从别的书上看来，或社会上听来的。听说这回的欧洲战争时最要紧的是壕堑战，那么，虽现在也还使用着这战法——坚壁。至于清野，世界史上就有着有趣的事例：相传十九世纪初拿破仑进攻俄国，到了墨斯科时，俄人便大发挥其清野手段，同时在这地方纵火，将生活所需的东西烧个干净，请拿破仑和他的雄兵猛将在空城里吸西北风。吸不到一个月，他们便退走了。
"Strengthening the wall and clearing the wilderness" is the saying of the soldiers, and the soldiers are not my profession, so this word is not from the soldiers, but from other books or heard in society. I heard that the most important thing in this European war was trench warfare, so although this tactic is still used - strong walls. As for clearing the wilderness, there are interesting examples in world history: it is said that Napoleon attacked Russia at the beginning of the 19th century, and when he arrived in Mexico, the Russians used their means of clearing the wilderness, and at the same time set fire to this place to burn the things needed for life, and asked Napoleon and his soldiers to suck the northwest wind in the empty city. Within a month of smoking, they retreated.中国虽说是儒教国，年年祭孔；“俎豆之事，则尝闻之矣，军旅之事，丘未之学也。”但上上下下却都使用着这兵法；引导我看出来的是本月的报纸上的一条新闻。据说，教育当局因为公共娱乐场中常常发生有伤风化情事，所以令行各校，禁止女学生往游艺场和公园；并通知女生家属，协同禁止。自然，我并不深知这事是否确实；更未见明令的原文；也不明白教育当局之意，是因为娱乐场中的“有伤风化”情事，即从女生发生，所以不许其去，还是只要女生不去，别人也不发生，抑或即使发生，也就管他妈的了。
Although China is a Confucian country, it worships Confucius every year; "I have heard about the sacrificial vessels, but I have not learned about military affairs." But this art of war is used up and down; What led me to see was a news in this month's newspaper. It is said that the education authorities ordered all schools to prohibit female students from going to amusement parks and parks because of the frequent incidents of sexual misconduct in public casinos. And notify the girl's family to cooperate with the ban. Naturally, I don't know if this is true; There is no original text of the explicit order; I don't understand the meaning of the education authorities, because the "indecent" situation in the casino happens, that is, it happens from the girl, so it is not allowed to go, or as long as the girl does not go, others will not happen, or even if it happens, it will be fucked.或者后一种的推测庶几近之。我们的古哲和今贤，虽然满口“正本清源”，“澄清天下”，但大概是有口无心的，“未有己不正，而能正人者”，所以结果是：收起来。第一，是“以己之心，度人之心”，想专以“不见可欲，使民心不乱”。第二，是器宇只有这么大，实在并没有“澄清天下”之才，正如富翁唯一的经济法，只有将钱埋在自己的地下一样。古圣人所教的“慢藏诲盗，冶容诲淫”，就是说子女玉帛的处理方法，是应该坚壁清野的。
Or the latter kind of speculation is almost like that. Although our ancient philosophers and modern sages are full of "clarifying the source" and "clarifying the world", they are probably unintentional, "those who are not right, but can correct others", so the result is: put it away. First, it is to "measure people's hearts with one's own heart", and want to focus on "not seeing what is desired, so that the people's hearts are not confused". Second, the instrument is only so big, and there is really no talent to "clarify the world", just like the only economic law of the rich is to bury money in their own ground. The ancient sages taught "slow hiding and teaching theft, smiling and teaching lust", that is to say, the treatment of children's jade and silk should be firmly cleared.其实这种方法，中国早就奉行的了，我所到过的地方，除北京外，一路大抵只看见男人和卖力气的女人，很少见所谓上流妇女。但我先在此声明，我之不满于这种现象者，并非因为预备遍历中国，去窃窥一切太太小姐们；我并没有积下一文川资，就是最确的证据。今年是“流言”鼎盛时代，稍一不慎，《现代评论》上就会弯弯曲曲地登出来的，所以特地先行预告。至于一到名儒，则家里的男女也不给容易见面，霍渭厓的《家训》里，就有那非常麻烦的分隔男女的房子构造图。似乎有志于圣贤者，便是自己的家里也应该看作游艺场和公园；现在究竟是二十世纪，而且有“少负不羁之名，长习自由之说”的教育总长，实在宽大得远了。
In fact, this method has been pursued in China for a long time, and wherever I go, except for Beijing, I have mostly only seen men and women working hard, and it is rare to see so-called upper-class women. But I would like to state here that I am not dissatisfied with this phenomenon because I am preparing to travel through China to spy on all the ladies and wives; I didn't accumulate a single piece of Sichuan capital, which is the most conclusive evidence. This year is the heyday of "rumors", and if you are not careful, the "Modern Review" will be published in a twisted manner, so it is specially announced in advance. As for the famous scholars, the men and women in the family are not easy to meet, and in Huo Weiya's "Family Instructions", there is a very troublesome house structure diagram that separates men and women. It seems that those who aspire to be sages should also regard their own homes as amusement parks and parks; It is now the twentieth century, and the chief education officer who has "the name of being less unruly and learning the theory of freedom" is too lenient.北京倒是不大禁锢妇女，走在外面，也不很加侮蔑的地方，但这和我们的古哲和今贤之意相左，或者这种风气，倒是满洲人输入的罢。满洲人曾经做过我们的“圣上”，那习俗也应该遵从的。然而我想，现在却也并非排满，如民元之剪辫子，乃是老脾气复发了，只要看旧历过年的放鞭爆，就日见其多。可惜不再出一个魏忠贤来试验试验我们，看可有人去作干儿，并将他配享孔庙。
Beijing does not imprison women much, and it is not a place to insult when walking outside, but this is contrary to the intention of our ancient philosophers and modern sages, or this atmosphere is imported by the Manchurians. The Manchurians once became our "holy emperor", and that custom should also be followed. However, I think that it is not full now, such as Min Yuan's braids, but the old temper has relapsed, as long as you look at the old calendar New Year's whip explosion, you will see more and more every day. It's a pity that there won't be a Wei Zhongxian to test us, and see if someone can do it, and he will be worthy of the Confucius Temple.要风化好，是在解放人性，普及教育，尤其是性教育，这正是教育者所当为之事，“收起来”却是管牢监的禁卒哥哥的专门。况且社会上的事不比牢监那样简单，修了长城，胡人仍然源源而至，深沟高垒，都没有用处的。未有游艺场和公园以前，闺秀不出门，小家女也逛庙会，看祭赛，谁能说“有伤风化”情事，比高门大族为多呢？
To weather well is to liberate human nature and popularize education, especially sex education, which is exactly what educators should do. Moreover, things in society are not as simple as prisons, and after building the Great Wall, the Hu people still come in a steady stream, and the deep ditches and high walls are useless. Before the amusement park and park, the ladies did not go out, and the little girls also visited the temple fair and watched the festival, who can say that there are more "indecent" affairs than the high-ranking families?总之，社会不改良，“收起来”便无用，以“收起来”为改良社会的手段，是坐了津浦车往奉天。这道理很浅显：壁虽坚固，也会冲倒的。兵匪的“绑急票”，抢妇女，于风化何如？没有知道呢，还是知而不能言，不敢言呢？倒是歌功颂德的！
In short, if society is not improved, "putting away" is useless, and using "putting away" as a means of improving society is to take the Jinpu car to Fengtian. This principle is very simple: although the wall is strong, it will also be knocked down. How about the "tying of urgent tickets" and robbing women by soldiers and bandits? Don't know, or do you know but can't speak, dare not speak? It's a song of praise!其实，“坚壁清野”虽然是兵家的一法，但这究竟是退守，不是进攻。或者就因为这一点，适与一般人的退婴主义相称，于是见得志同道合的罢。但在兵事上，是别有所待的，待援军的到来，或敌军的引退；倘单是困守孤城，那结果就只有灭亡，教育上的“坚壁清野”法，所待的是什么呢？照历来的女教来推测，所待的只有一件事：死。
In fact, although "strengthening the wall and clearing the field" is a method of soldiers, this is a retreat, not an attack. Or because of this, it is suitable for ordinary people's infantism, so they see like-minded people. But in military affairs, there is nothing else to wait for, waiting for the arrival of reinforcements, or the retirement of the enemy; If you are trapped in a lonely city, then the result will only be destruction, and what is the "strong wall and clearing the wilderness" method in education? According to the historical female religion, there is only one thing to wait for: death.天下太平或还能苟安时候，所谓男子者俨然地教贞顺，说幽娴，“内言不出于阃”，“男女授受不亲”。好！都听你，外事就拜托足下罢。但是天下弄得鼎沸，暴力袭来了，足下将何以见教呢？曰：做烈妇呀！
When the world is peaceful or can still be peaceful, the so-called men teach chastity and obedience, saying that they are quiet, "inner words do not come from the gate", and "men and women are not close". Good! Listen to you, and leave foreign affairs to you. But the world is in turmoil, violence is coming, how will you teach me? He said: "Be a fierce woman!"宋以来，对付妇女的方法，只有这一个，直到现在，还是这一个。
Since the Song Dynasty, there has been only this one way to deal with women, and until now, it is still this one.如果这女教当真大行，则我们中国历来多少内乱，多少外患，兵燹频仍，妇女不是死尽了么？不，也有幸免的，也有不死的，易代之际，就和男人一同降伏，做奴才。于是生育子孙，祖宗的香火幸而不断，但到现在还很有带着奴气的人物，大概也就是这个流弊罢。“有利必有弊”，是十口相传，大家都知道的。
If this women's religion is really popular, then how many civil strife, how many external troubles, and frequent wars in China have were, and aren't women dead? No, there are those who are survived, and there are those who do not die, and when the era changes, they surrender with men and become slaves. So he gave birth to descendants, and the incense of the ancestors was fortunate, but there are still very servile characters, which is probably this evil. "There must be pros and cons", it is passed down from ten mouths, and everyone knows it.但似乎除此之外，儒者，名臣，富翁，武人，阔人以至小百姓，都想不出什么善法来，因此还只得奉这为至宝。更昏庸的，便以为只要意见和这些歧异者，就是土匪了。和官相反的是匪，也正是当然的事。但最近，孙美瑶据守抱犊崮，其实倒是“坚壁”，至于“清野”的通品，则我要推举张献忠。
But it seems that in addition to this, Confucianism, famous ministers, rich people, warriors, broad people and even ordinary people cannot think of any good law, so they have to regard this as the treasure. Those who are even more mediocre think that as long as their opinions differ from these, they are bandits. The opposite of the official is the bandit, which is a matter of course. But recently, Sun Meiyao has been holding on to Baodu Gu, which is actually a "strong wall", and as for the general product of "Qingye", I want to recommend Zhang Xianzhong.张献忠在明末的屠戮百姓，是谁也知道，谁也觉得可骇的，譬如他使ABC三枝兵杀完百姓之后，便令AB杀C，又令A杀B，又令A自相杀。为什么呢？是李自成已经入北京，做皇帝了。做皇帝是要百姓的，他就要杀完他的百姓，使他无皇帝可做。正如伤风化是要女生的，现在关起一切女生，也就无风化可伤一般。
Zhang Xianzhong's massacre of the people at the end of the Ming Dynasty is known to everyone, and everyone finds it terrifying, for example, after he made ABC's three soldiers kill the people, he ordered AB to kill C, and then ordered A to kill B, and A to kill each other. Why? It was Li Zicheng who had already entered Beijing and became emperor. To be an emperor is to the people, and he must kill his people so that he has no emperor to do. Just as insanity is for girls, now that all girls are locked up, there is no weathering to hurt.连土匪也有坚壁清野主义，中国的妇女实在已没有解放的路；听说现在的乡民，于兵匪也已经辨别不清了。
Even bandits have a strong wall of clearing, and Chinese women really have no way to be liberated; I heard that the current villagers are no longer able to distinguish between soldiers and bandits.一九二五年十一月二十二日。
November 22, 1925.

寡妇主义

寡妇主义

寡妇主义

Widowism范源廉先生是现在许多青年所钦仰的；各人有各人的意思，我当然无从推度那些缘由。但我个人所叹服的，是在他当前清光绪末年，首先发明了“速成师范”。一门学术而可以速成，迂执的先生们也许要觉得离奇罢；殊不知那时中国正闹着“教育荒”，所以这正是一宗急赈的款子。半年以后，从日本留学回来的师资就不在少数了，还带着教育上的各种主义，如军国民主义，尊王攘夷主义之类。在女子教育，则那时候最时行，常常听到嚷着的，是贤母良妻主义。
Mr. Fan Yuanlian is admired by many young people now; Everyone has their own opinions, and of course I can't infer those reasons. But what I personally admire is that in the late years of Guangxu in the current Qing Dynasty, he first invented the "Crash Normal School". An academic subject that can be achieved quickly, and pedantic gentlemen may find it bizarre; As everyone knows, China was experiencing an "education shortage" at that time, so this was an urgent relief fund. Half a year later, there were not a few teachers who came back from studying in Japan, and they still brought with them various doctrines in education, such as military nationalism, respect for the king and barbarianism. In women's education, it was the most popular at that time, and what was often heard was the doctrine of good mothers and good wives.我倒并不一定以为这主义错，愚母恶妻是谁也不希望的。然而现在有几个急进的人们，却以为女子也不专是家庭中物，因而很攻击中国至今还钞了日本旧刊文来教育自己的女子的谬误。人们真容易被听惯的讹传所迷，例如近来有人说：谁是卖国的，谁是只为子孙计的。于是许多人也都这样说。其实如果真能卖国，还该得点更大的利，如果真为子孙计，也还算较有良心；现在的所谓谁者，大抵不过是送国，也何尝想到子孙。这贤母良妻主义也不在例外，急进者虽然引以为病，而事实上又何尝有这么一回事；所有的，不过是“寡妇主义”罢了。
I don't necessarily think that this doctrine is wrong, no one wants a foolish mother and a bad wife. However, there are now a few radical people who think that women are not exclusively part of the family, so they attack the fallacy that China has still copied old Japanese publications to educate its own women. People are really easy to be fascinated by the rumors they are used to, such as recently someone has said: Who is a traitor and who is only for his descendants. So many people say the same. In fact, if you can really betray the country, you should get a greater profit, and if you really plan for your descendants, you are still more conscientious; The so-called who is now is probably just sending the country, and he has never thought of his descendants. This good mother and good wife doctrine is no exception, although the radical is sick, in fact there is no such thing; All of them are just "widowhood".这“寡妇”二字，应该用纯粹的中国思想来解释，不能比附欧，美，印度或亚剌伯的；倘要翻成洋文，也决不宜意译或神译，只能译音：Kuofuism。
The word "widow" should be interpreted in pure Chinese thought, and cannot be compared with those of Europe, the United States, India or Arabia; If it is translated into foreign language, it is definitely not suitable for free translation or divine translation, but can only be translated: Kuofuism.我生以前不知道怎样，我生以后，儒教却已经颇“杂”了：“奉母命权作道场”者有之，“神道设教”者有之，佩服《文昌帝君功过格》者又有之，我还记得那《功过格》，是给“谈人闺阃”者以很大的罚。我未出户庭，中国也未有女学校以前不知道怎样，自从我涉足社会，中国也有了女校，却常听到读书人谈论女学生的事，并且照例是坏事。有时实在太谬妄了，但倘若指出它的矛盾，则说的听的都大不悦，仇恨简直是“若杀其父兄”。这种言动，自然也许是合于“儒行”的罢，因为圣道广博，无所不包；或者不过是小节，不要紧的。
I didn't know what it was like before I was born, but after I was born, Confucianism was already quite "mixed": there were people who were ordered by their mother to make a dojo, there were those who "set up a religion in Shinto", and there were those who admired the "Wenchang Emperor's Meritorious Demerits", and I still remember that the "Meritorious Demerits" was a great punishment for those who "talked about people's boudoirs". Since I got involved in society, there are also girls' schools in China, but I often hear scholars talk about female students, and as usual, it is a bad thing. Sometimes it is too absurd, but if you point out its contradictions, you will be very unhappy, and the hatred is simply "if you kill your father and brother". This kind of words and actions may naturally be in line with "Confucianism", because the holy way is vast and all-encompassing; Or it's just a subsection, it doesn't matter.我曾经也略略猜想过这些谣诼的由来：反改革的老先生，色情狂气味的幻想家，制造流言的名人，连常识也没有或别有作用的新闻访事和记者，被学生赶走的校长和教员，谋做校长的教育家，跟着一犬而群吠的邑犬……。但近来却又发见了一种另外的，是：“寡妇”或“拟寡妇”的校长及舍监。
I once guessed a little about the origin of these rumors: the old gentleman who countered the reform, the visionary who smelled of pornography, the celebrities who created rumors, the news interviewers and reporters who had no common sense or had no effect, the principals and teachers who were driven away by the students, the educators who sought to be the principals, and the ...... of the towns and dogs who barked after a dog. Recently, however, another type has been discovered, namely: "widow" or "widow" principal and warden.这里所谓“寡妇”，是指和丈夫死别的；所谓“拟寡妇”，是指和丈夫生离以及不得已而抱独身主义的。
The so-called "widow" here refers to the death of her husband; The so-called "pseudo-widow" refers to the separation from her husband and the last resort.中国的女性出而在社会上服务，是最近才有的，但家族制度未曾改革，家务依然纷繁，一经结婚，即难于兼做别的事。于是社会上的事业，在中国，则大抵还只有教育，尤其是女子教育，便多半落在上文所说似的独身者的掌中。这在先前，是道学先生所占据的，继而以顽固无识等恶名失败，她们即以曾受新教育，曾往国外留学，同是女性等好招牌，起而代之。社会上也因为她们并不与任何男性相关，又无儿女系累，可以专心于神圣的事业，便漫然加以信托。但从此而青年女子之遭灾，就远在于往日在道学先生治下之上了。
Chinese women have only recently come out to serve in society, but the family system has not been reformed, housework is still complicated, and once married, it is difficult to do other things. Therefore, in China, there is probably only education, especially women's education, which mostly falls into the hands of celibacies like the above. This was previously occupied by Taoist teachers, and then failed with the notoriety of stubbornness and ignorance, and they were replaced by good signs such as having received new education, studied abroad, and were also women. Society also trusts them casually because they are not related to any man and have no children, so they can concentrate on the sacred cause. But since then, the suffering of young women has been far above the rule of Mr. Taoism in the past.即使是贤母良妻，即使是东方式，对于夫和子女，也不能说可以没有爱情。爱情虽说是天赋的东西，但倘没有相当的刺戟和运用，就不发达。譬如同是手脚，坐着不动的人将自己的和铁匠挑夫的一比较，就非常明白。在女子，是从有了丈夫，有了情人，有了儿女，而后真的爱情才觉醒的；否则，便潜藏着，或者竟会萎落，甚且至于变态。所以托独身者来造贤母良妻，简直是请盲人骑瞎马上道，更何论于能否适合现代的新潮流。自然，特殊的独身的女性，世上也并非没有，如那过去的有名的数学家Sophie Kowalewsky，现在的思想家Ellen Key等；但那是一则欲望转了向，一则思想已经透澈的。然而当学士会院以奖金表彰Kowalewsky的学术上的名誉时，她给朋友的信里却有这样的话：“我收到各方面的贺信。运命的奇异的讥刺呀，我从来没有感到过这样的不幸。”
Even if it is a good mother and a good wife, even if it is in the Eastern way, it cannot be said that there is no love for husbands and children. Although love is a gifted thing, if there is no considerable thorn and halberd, it will not be developed. For example, if a sitting person compares himself with a blacksmith porter, he will understand it very clearly. In women, it is from having a husband, a lover, and children, and then true love awakens; Otherwise, it will lurk, or it will wither, or even pervert. Therefore, entrusting a single person to create a good mother and wife is simply asking the blind to ride a blind horse, not to mention whether it can fit into the new trend of modern times. Naturally, there are many special celibate women in the world, such as the famous mathematician Sophie Kowalewsky in the past, the current thinker Ellen Key, etc.; But it is a desire that has turned around, and a thought that has been transparent. However, when the Academy honored Kowalewsky's academic reputation with a prize money, her letter to her friend said: "I have received congratulatory letters from all sides. The strange irony of fate, I have never felt such misfortune. ”至于因为不得已而过着独身生活者，则无论男女，精神上常不免发生变化，有着执拗猜疑阴险的性质者居多。欧洲中世的教士，日本维新前的御殿女中（女内侍），中国历代的宦官，那冷酷险狠，都超出常人许多倍。别的独身者也一样，生活既不合自然，心状也就大变，觉得世事都无味，人物都可憎，看见有些天真欢乐的人，便生恨恶。尤其是因为压抑性欲之故，所以于别人的性底事件就敏感，多疑；欣羡，因而妒嫉。其实这也是势所必至的事：为社会所逼迫，表面上固不能不装作纯洁，但内心却终于逃不掉本能之力的牵掣，不自主地蠢动着缺憾之感的。
As for those who live a celibate life because they have no choice, whether they are men or women, they often change spiritually, and most of them have a stubborn, suspicious, and insidious nature. The priests of the Middle Ages in Europe, the palace girls (female servants) before the Japanese Restoration, and the eunuchs of the Chinese dynasties, who were ruthless and dangerous, were many times more than ordinary people. The same goes for other celibates, life is not natural, and their state of mind changes greatly, they feel that the world is boring, the characters are hateful, and they hate when they see some innocent and happy people. Especially because of the suppression of sexual desire, they are sensitive and suspicious of other people's sexual events; He was envious, and then jealous. In fact, this is also an inevitable thing: being forced by society, on the surface, you can't help but pretend to be pure, but in your heart, you finally can't escape the constraints of instinctive power, and you can't involuntarily stir up a sense of regret.然而学生是青年，只要不是童养媳或继母治下出身，大抵涉世不深，觉得万事都有光明，思想言行，即与此辈正相反。此辈倘能回忆自己的青年时代，本来就可以了解的。然而天下所多的是愚妇人，那里能想到这些事；始终用了她多年炼就的眼光，观察一切：见一封信，疑心是情书了；闻一声笑，以为是怀春了；只要男人来访，就是情夫；为什么上公园呢，总该是赴密约。被学生反对，专一运用这种策略的时候不待言，虽在平时，也不免如此。加以中国本是流言的出产地方，“正人君子”也常以这些流言作谈资，扩势力，自造的流言尚且奉为至宝，何况是真出于学校当局者之口的呢，自然就更有价值地传布起来了。
However, students are young people, as long as they are not born under the rule of a child bride or stepmother, they are probably not deeply involved in the world, and they feel that everything is bright, and their thoughts, words and deeds are the opposite of this generation. If this generation could recall their youth, they would have understood. But there are many foolish women in the world, where these things can be thought of; She always used her years of refined vision to observe everything: when she saw a letter, her suspicion was a love letter; Hearing a laugh, I thought it was Huai Chun; As long as a man visits, he is a lover; Why go to the park, it should always be a secret appointment. It goes without saying that when students oppose this strategy and use it exclusively, even in normal times, it is inevitable. In addition, China is a place where rumors are produced, and "righteous gentlemen" often use these rumors as a talking point to expand their power, and their own rumors are still regarded as treasures, not to mention that they really come from the mouths of school authorities, so they are naturally more valuable.我以为在古老的国度里，老于世故者和许多青年，在思想言行上，似乎有很远的距离，倘观以一律的眼光，结果即往往谬误。譬如中国有许多坏事，各有专名，在书籍上又偏多关于它的别名和隐语。当我编辑周刊时，所收的文稿中每有直犯这些别名和隐语的；在我，是向来避而不用。但细一查考，作者实茫无所知，因此也坦然写出；其咎却在中国的坏事的别名隐语太多，而我亦太有所知道，疑虑及避忌。看这些青年，仿佛中国的将来还有光明；但再看所谓学士大夫，却又不免令人气塞。他们的文章或者古雅，但内心真是干净者有多少。即以今年的士大夫的文言而论，章士钊呈文中的“荒学逾闲恣为无忌”，“两性衔接之机缄缔构”，“不受检制竟体忘形”，“谨愿者尽丧所守”等……可谓臻媟黩之极致了。但其实，被侮辱的青年学生们是不懂的；即使仿佛懂得，也大概不及我读过一些古文者的深切地看透作者的居心。
I thought that in the ancient country, there seemed to be a long distance between the old and many young people in their thoughts, words and deeds, and if we look at it from a uniform perspective, the results are often false. For example, there are many bad things in China, each with its own name, and there are many aliases and hidden words about it in books. When I edited the weekly magazine, there were many direct violations of these aliases and cryptic words in the manuscripts I received; For me, it has always been avoided and not used. But upon closer inspection, the author really didn't know, so he wrote it calmly; The fault lies in the fact that there are too many aliases and hidden words for bad things in China, and I also know too much, doubt and avoid them. Looking at these young people, it seems that China's future is still bright; But looking at the so-called bachelor's doctor, it is inevitably frustrating. Their articles may be quaint, but how many people are really clean in their hearts. That is, in terms of the literary language of this year's scholars, Zhang Shizhao's writings include "absurd learning is more than leisure and unscrupulous", "the mechanism of gender connection is created", "unchecked and forgotten", "those who wish to be loyal will lose their bodies", etc...... It can be said to be the ultimate in corruption. But in fact, the young students who were insulted did not understand; Even if it seems to understand, it is probably not as deep as the author's intention that I have read some ancient texts.言归正传罢。因为人们因境遇而思想性格能有这样不同，所以在寡妇或拟寡妇所办的学校里，正当的青年是不能生活的。青年应当天真烂漫，非如她们的阴沉，她们却以为中邪了；青年应当有朝气，敢作为，非如她们的萎缩，她们却以为不安本分了：都有罪。只有极和她们相宜，——说得冠冕一点罢，就是极其“婉顺”的，以她们为师法，使眼光呆滞，面肌固定，在学校所化成的阴森的家庭里屏息而行，这才能敷衍到毕业；拜领一张纸，以证明自己在这里被多年陶冶之余，已经失了青春的本来面目，成为精神上的“未字先寡”的人物，自此又要到社会上传布此道去了。
The return to the main story is over. Because people's thoughts and personalities can be so different depending on their circumstances, legitimate young people cannot live in schools run by widows or widows. Young people should be innocent, unlike their gloom, but they think they are evil; Young people should be energetic and dare to act, but unlike their shrinkage, they think they are uneasy about their duty: they are all guilty. Only when they are very suitable ,—— to put it bluntly, they are extremely "gentle", taking them as teachers, making their eyes dull, their facial muscles fixed, and walking with bated breath in the gloomy family transformed into a school, which can be perfunctory until graduation; I received a piece of paper to prove that I had been cultivated here for many years, and had lost the original face of my youth, and became a spiritual "widow before the word", and since then I have to go to the society to spread this way.虽然是中国，自然也有一些解放之机，虽然是中国妇女，自然也有一些自立的倾向；所可怕的是幸而自立之后，又转而凌虐还未自立的人，正如童养媳一做婆婆，也就像她的恶姑一样毒辣。我并非说凡在教育界的独身女子，一定都得去配一个男人，无非愿意她们能放开思路，再去较为远大地加以思索；一面，则希望留心教育者，想到这事乃是一个女子教育上的大问题，而有所挽救，因为我知道凡有教育学家，是决不肯说教育是没有效验的。大约中国此后这种独身者还要逐渐增加，倘使没有善法补救，则寡妇主义教育的声势，也就要逐渐浩大，许多女子，都要在那冷酷险狠的陶冶之下，失其活泼的青春，无法复活了。全国受过教育的女子，无论已嫁未嫁，有夫无夫，个个心如古井，脸若严霜，自然倒也怪好看的罢，但究竟也太不像真要人模样地生活下去了；为他帖身的使女，亲生的女儿着想，倒是还在其次的事。
Although it is China, there are naturally some opportunities for liberation, and although it is Chinese women, it naturally has some tendencies to be self-reliant; The scary thing is that after being fortunate enough to be self-reliant, she turns to abuse those who have not yet become self-reliant, just like a child bride who becomes a mother-in-law, she is as vicious as her evil aunt. I am not saying that all single women in the education world must be matched with a man, but I hope they can let go of their thinking and think more far-reaching; On the one hand, I hope to pay attention to educators, thinking that this is a big problem in women's education, and save it, because I know that all educators will never say that education is ineffective. If there is no good law remedy, the momentum of widowhood education will gradually increase, and many women will lose their lively youth under the cold and dangerous cultivation and cannot be resurrected. Educated women across the country, whether they are married or not, have husbands and no husbands, their hearts are like ancient wells, and their faces are like severe frost, so they are naturally good-looking, but they are too unwilling to live like real people; For the sake of his personal maid and his own daughter, it is still secondary.我是不研究教育的，但这种危害，今年却因为或一机会，深切地感到了，所以就趁《妇女周刊》征文的机会，将我的所感说出。
I don't study education, but this year I felt this harm deeply because of an opportunity, so I took the opportunity of "Women's Weekly" to express my feelings.一九二五年十一月二十三日。
November 23, 1925.

论“费厄泼赖”应该缓行

论“费厄泼赖”应该缓行

论“费厄泼赖”应该缓行

It is argued that "Fayerprey" should be slowed down一　解题
1. Problem solving《语丝》五七期上语堂先生曾经讲起“费厄泼赖”（Fair play），以为此种精神在中国最不易得，我们只好努力鼓励；又谓不“打落水狗”，即足以补充“费厄泼赖”的意义。我不懂英文，因此也不明这字的函义究竟怎样，如果不“打落水狗”也即这种精神之一体，则我却很想有所议论。但题目上不直书“打落水狗”者，乃为回避触目起见，即并不一定要在头上强装“义角”之意。总而言之，不过说是“落水狗”未始不可打，或者简直应该打而已。
Mr. Shangyutang once talked about "fair play" in the 57th issue of "Yusi", thinking that this kind of spirit is the most difficult to obtain in China, so we have to try to encourage it; He also said that if he did not "hit the water dog", it would be enough to supplement the meaning of "Fayer Prey". I don't understand English, so I don't know what the meaning of this word is, but if it doesn't "hit the water dog", that is, this spirit, I would like to talk about it. However, the title does not directly write "Kill the water dog", but to avoid being eye-catching, that is, it is not necessary to force the meaning of "righteous horn" on the head. All in all, it's just that the "reservoir dog" can't be beaten, or it should be beaten.

论“费厄泼赖”应该缓行

二　论“落水狗”有三种，大都在可打之列

论“费厄泼赖”应该缓行

2. There are three types of "reservoir dogs", most of which are among the ones that can be beaten今之论者，常将“打死老虎”与“打落水狗”相提并论，以为都近于卑怯。我以为“打死老虎”者，装怯作勇，颇含滑稽，虽然不免有卑怯之嫌，却怯得令人可爱。至于“打落水狗”，则并不如此简单，当看狗之怎样，以及如何落水而定。考落水原因，大概可有三种：（1）狗自己失足落水者，（2）别人打落者， （3）亲自打落者。倘遇前二种，便即附和去打，自然过于无聊，或者竟近于卑怯；但若与狗奋战，亲手打其落水，则虽用竹竿又在水中从而痛打之，似乎也非已甚，不得与前二者同论。
Today's commentators often compare "killing a tiger" with "beating a water dog", thinking that they are close to cowardice. I think the person who "killed the tiger" pretends to be timid and brave, which is quite funny, although it is inevitable that he will be cowardly, but he is cutely scared. As for "hitting the drowning dog", it is not so simple, it depends on what the dog is like and how it falls into the water. There are probably three reasons for falling into the water: (1) the dog itself falls into the water, (2) others fall down, and (3) the person who is knocked down by himself. If you encounter the first two, you will immediately agree to fight, which is naturally too boring, or close to cowardice; However, if you fight with a dog and hit it into the water with your own hands, even if you use a bamboo pole and hit it hard in the water, it seems that it is not too much, and it cannot be discussed in the same way as the first two.听说刚勇的拳师，决不再打那已经倒地的敌手，这实足使我们奉为楷模。但我以为尚须附加一事，即敌手也须是刚勇的斗士，一败之后，或自愧自悔而不再来，或尚须堂皇地来相报复，那当然都无不可。而于狗，却不能引此为例，与对等的敌手齐观，因为无论它怎样狂嗥，其实并不解什么“道义”；况且狗是能浮水的，一定仍要爬到岸上，倘不注意，它先就耸身一摇，将水点洒得人们一身一脸，于是夹着尾巴逃走了。但后来性情还是如此。老实人将它的落水认作受洗，以为必已忏悔，不再出而咬人，实在是大错而特错的事。
I heard that the brave boxer will never fight the opponent who has fallen to the ground, which is enough to make us a role model. But I think there is one more thing that needs to be added, that is, the opponent must also be a brave fighter, and after a defeat, he may feel ashamed and regret and not come back, or he must take revenge on each other in a dignified manner, of course. Yu Gou, on the other hand, cannot take this as an example to look at his equal rivals, because no matter how wild it howls, it actually does not understand any "morality"; Moreover, the dog can float on the water, and it must still climb to the shore, if it does not pay attention, it will first shake its body and sprinkle water on people's faces, and then run away with its tail between its legs. But then the temperament was still like this. It is a great mistake for an honest person to think that he has repented and will not come out again to bite someone.总之，倘是咬人之狗，我觉得都在可打之列，无论它在岸上或在水中。
In short, if it is a biting dog, I think it is among the fightable, whether it is on the shore or in the water.

论“费厄泼赖”应该缓行

三　论叭儿狗尤非打落水里，又从而打之不可

论“费厄泼赖”应该缓行

3. The dog must be beaten into the water, and it must be beaten叭儿狗一名哈吧狗，南方却称为西洋狗了，但是，听说倒是中国的特产，在万国赛狗会里常常得到金奖牌，《大不列颠百科全书》的狗照相上，就很有几匹是咱们中国的叭儿狗。这也是一种国光。但是，狗和猫不是仇敌么？它却虽然是狗，又很像猫，折中，公允，调和，平正之状可掬，悠悠然摆出别个无不偏激，惟独自己得了“中庸之道”似的脸来。因此也就为阔人，太监，太太，小姐们所钟爱，种子绵绵不绝。它的事业，只是以伶俐的皮毛获得贵人豢养，或者中外的娘儿们上街的时候，脖子上拴了细链子跟在脚后跟。
The dog is also called a Haba dog, but it is called a Western dog in the south, but I heard that it is a Chinese specialty, and it often gets gold medals in the International Greyhound Racing Association. This is also a kind of national light. But aren't dogs and cats enemies? Although it is a dog, it is very similar to a cat, compromised, fair, harmonious, and fair, and it is leisurely posing to be extreme, but it has a face like the "golden mean". Therefore, it is loved by the broad people, eunuchs, wives, and ladies, and the seeds are endless. Its career is only raised by nobles with clever fur, or when Chinese and foreign women go to the street, they wear thin chains around their necks and follow their heels.这些就应该先行打它落水，又从而打之；如果它自坠入水，其实也不妨又从而打之，但若是自己过于要好，自然不打亦可，然而也不必为之叹息。叭儿狗如可宽容，别的狗也大可不必打了，因为它们虽然非常势利，但究竟还有些像狼，带着野性，不至于如此骑墙。
These should be beaten into the water first, and then beaten; If it falls into the water, it might as well be beaten again, but if it is too good, it is naturally okay not to hit it, but there is no need to sigh about it. If the dog can be tolerated, other dogs don't need to be beaten, because although they are very snobbish, they are still a bit like wolves, with wildness, and they won't ride the wall like this.以上是顺便说及的话，似乎和本题没有大关系。
The above is a passing remark that seems to have nothing to do with this topic.

论“费厄泼赖”应该缓行

四　论不“打落水狗”是误人子弟的

论“费厄泼赖”应该缓行

4. It is misleading to "hit the water dog"总之，落水狗的是否该打，第一是在看它爬上岸了之后的态度。
In short, whether the drowning dog should be beaten, the first is to see its attitude after it climbs ashore.狗性总不大会改变的，假使一万年之后，或者也许要和现在不同，但我现在要说的是现在。如果以为落水之后，十分可怜，则害人的动物，可怜者正多，便是霍乱病菌，虽然生殖得快，那性格却何等地老实。然而医生是决不肯放过它的。
Dog nature will never change, if it is 10,000 years from now, or maybe it will be different from now, but what I want to say now is now. If you think that after falling into the water, it is very pitiful, then there are many harmful animals, and there are many pitiful ones, which are cholera germs, although they reproduce quickly, but their personalities are so honest. However, the doctor will never let it go.现在的官僚和土绅士或洋绅士，只要不合自意的，便说是赤化，是共产；民国元年以前稍不同，先是说康党，后是说革党，甚至于到官里去告密，一面固然在保全自己的尊荣，但也未始没有那时所谓“以人血染红顶子”之意。可是革命终于起来了，一群臭架子的绅士们，便立刻皇皇然若丧家之狗，将小辫子盘在头顶上。革命党也一派新气，——绅士们先前所深恶痛绝的新气，“文明”得可以；说是“咸与维新”了，我们是不打落水狗的，听凭它们爬上来罢。于是它们爬上来了，伏到民国二年下半年，二次革命的时候，就突出来帮着袁世凯咬死了许多革命人，中国又一天一天沉入黑暗里，一直到现在，遗老不必说，连遗少也还是那么多。这就因为先烈的好心，对于鬼蜮的慈悲，使它们繁殖起来，而此后的明白青年，为反抗黑暗计，也就要花费更多更多的气力和生命。
Today's bureaucrats and local gentry or foreign gentlemen, as long as they are not satisfactory, they are said to be red and communist; Before the first year of the Republic of China, it was slightly different, first talking about the Kang Party, then talking about the Revolutionary Party, and even going to the official to inform, on the one hand, it was certainly preserving its own honor, but it did not have the meaning of "dyeing the red top with human blood" at that time. But the revolution finally rose, and a group of stinky gentlemen immediately became like a lost dog, coiling pigtails on top of their heads. The revolutionary party also has a new atmosphere,—— which the gentlemen hated before, and it is "civilized"; It is said that it is "salty and renewal", we don't fight the water dogs, just let them climb up. So they climbed up, and in the second half of the second year of the Republic of China, during the second revolution, they came out to help Yuan Shikai bite many revolutionaries to death, and China sank into darkness day by day. This is because of the kindness of the martyrs and the compassion for the ghosts, so that they multiply, and the young people who understand after that will spend more and more energy and lives to resist the darkness.秋瑾女士，就是死于告密的，革命后暂时称为“女侠”，现在是不大听见有人提起了。革命一起，她的故乡就到了一个都督，——等于现在之所谓督军，——也是她的同志：王金发。他捉住了杀害她的谋主，调集了告密的案卷，要为她报仇。然而终于将那谋主释放了，据说是因为已经成了民国，大家不应该再修旧怨罢。但等到二次革命失败后，王金发却被袁世凯的走狗枪决了，与有力的是他所释放的杀过秋瑾的谋主。
Ms. Qiu Jin, who died of a snitshot, was temporarily called a "heroine" after the revolution, and now she has not heard anyone mention it. With the revolution, her hometown came to a governor,—— which is now the so-called overseer,—— and also her comrade: Wang Jinfa. He caught the mastermind who killed her and mobilized the informant case file to avenge her. However, the mastermind was finally released, it is said that it was because it had become the Republic of China, and everyone should no longer repair old grievances. But after the failure of the Second Revolution, Wang Jinfa was shot by Yuan Shikai's lackeys, and the powerful one was the mastermind who had killed Qiu Jin released by him.这人现在也已“寿终正寝”了，但在那里继续跋扈出没着的也还是这一流人，所以秋瑾的故乡也还是那样的故乡，年复一年，丝毫没有长进。从这一点看起来，生长在可为中国模范的名城里的杨荫榆女士和陈西滢先生，真是洪福齐天。
This person has now "died", but it is still this first-class person who continues to be domineering there, so Qiu Jin's hometown is still like that, year after year, without any growth. From this point of view, Ms. Yang Yinyu and Mr. Chen Xiying, who grew up in a famous city that can be a model for China, are really blessed.

论“费厄泼赖”应该缓行

五　论塌台人物不当与“落水狗”相提并论

论“费厄泼赖”应该缓行

5. The figures of the collapsed platform should not be compared with the "drowning dog"“犯而不校”是恕道，“以眼还眼以牙还牙”是直道。中国最多的却是枉道：不打落水狗，反被狗咬了。但是，这其实是老实人自己讨苦吃。
"Violating without proofreading" is forgiveness, and "an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth" is a straight path. The most common thing in China is that it is in vain: if you don't hit the water dog, you will be bitten by the dog. However, this is actually the honest person himself.俗语说：“忠厚是无用的别名，”也许太刻薄一点罢，但仔细想来，却也觉得并非唆人作恶之谈，乃是归纳了许多苦楚的经历之后的警句。譬如不打落水狗说，其成因大概有二：一是无力打；二是比例错。前者且勿论；后者的大错就又有二：一是误将塌台人物和落水狗齐观，二是不辨塌台人物又有好有坏，于是视同一律，结果反成为纵恶。即以现在而论，因为政局的不安定，真是此起彼伏如转轮，坏人靠着冰山，恣行无忌，一旦失足，忽而乞怜，而曾经亲见，或亲受其噬啮的老实人，乃忽以“落水狗”视之，不但不打，甚至于还有哀矜之意，自以为公理已伸，侠义这时正在我这里。殊不知它何尝真是落水，巢窟是早已造好的了，食料是早经储足的了，并且都在租界里。虽然有时似乎受伤，其实并不，至多不过是假装跛脚，聊以引起人们的恻隐之心，可以从容避匿罢了。他日复来，仍旧先咬老实人开手，“投石下井”，无所不为，寻起原因来，一部分就正因为老实人不“打落水狗”之故。所以，要是说得苛刻一点，也就是自家掘坑自家埋，怨天尤人，全是错误的。
As the saying goes: "Loyalty is a useless alias," maybe it's a bit too mean, but if you think about it carefully, I also feel that it is not a statement that incites people to do evil, but an aphorism after summarizing many painful experiences. For example, if you don't hit the water dog, there are probably two causes: one is the inability to fight; Second, the proportion is wrong. Let's not talk about the former; There are two big mistakes in the latter: one is to mistakenly view the collapsed characters and the drowning dogs together, and the other is to not distinguish between the collapsed characters and good and bad, so they are regarded as the same, and the result is to indulge evil. That is, in the present, because of the instability of the political situation, it is really like a spinning wheel, bad people rely on icebergs, act recklessly, once they stumble, suddenly beg for mercy, and the honest people who have seen or been bitten by it suddenly regard them as "reservoir dogs", not only do not fight, but even have the meaning of pity, thinking that justice has been done, and chivalry is here with me at this time. As everyone knows, it really fell into the water, the nest has already been built, the food has been stored in sufficient preparation, and they are all in the concession. Although it sometimes seems to be injured, in fact, it is not, at most it is just pretending to be lame, chatting to arouse people's compassion, and can calmly hide. When he came back one day, he still bit the honest man first, "throwing stones into the well", doing everything, and finding out the reason, part of it was because the honest man did not "hit the water dog". Therefore, if you put it harshly, that is, digging a pit and burying it yourself, complaining about others, it is all wrong.

论“费厄泼赖”应该缓行

六　论现在还不能一味“费厄”

论“费厄泼赖”应该缓行

6. Theory cannot be blindly "Fayre" now仁人们或者要问：那么，我们竟不要“费厄泼赖”么？我可以立刻回答：当然是要的，然而尚早。这就是“请君入瓮”法。虽然仁人们未必肯用，但我还可以言之成理。土绅士或洋绅士们不是常常说，中国自有特别国情，外国的平等自由等等，不能适用么？我以为这“费厄泼赖”也是其一。否则，他对你不“费厄”，你却对他去“费厄”，结果总是自己吃亏，不但要“费厄”而不可得，并且连要不“费厄”而亦不可得。所以要“费厄”，最好是首先看清对手，倘是些不配承受“费厄”的，大可以老实不客气；待到它也“费厄”了，然后再与它讲“费厄”不迟。
Humane people may ask: So, don't we want to "pay for it"? I can answer immediately: Of course I do, but it's still early. This is the "please enter the urn" method. Although benevolent people may not be willing to use it, I can still make sense. Don't local or foreign gentlemen often say that China has its own special national conditions, foreign equality and freedom, etc., which cannot be applied? I think this "Feierprei" is one of them. Otherwise, he will not "Fei" to you, but you will go to him "Fei", and the result will always be a loss for yourself, not only "Fei" but also not "Fei". Therefore, to "Fae", it is best to first see the opponent clearly, if it is not worthy of bearing "Fae", you can be honest and unceremonious; It is not too late to talk to it about "Fayre" until it is "Fei".这似乎很有主张二重道德之嫌，但是也出于不得已，因为倘不如此，中国将不能有较好的路。中国现在有许多二重道德，主与奴，男与女，都有不同的道德，还没有划一。要是对“落水狗”和“落水人”独独一视同仁，实在未免太偏，太早，正如绅士们之所谓自由平等并非不好，在中国却微嫌太早一样。所以倘有人要普遍施行“费厄泼赖”精神，我以为至少须俟所谓“落水狗”者带有人气之后。但现在自然也非绝不可行，就是，有如上文所说：要看清对手。而且还要有等差，即“费厄”必视对手之如何而施，无论其怎样落水，为人也则帮之，为狗也则不管之，为坏狗也则打之。一言以蔽之：“党同伐异”而已矣。
This seems to be a suspicion of advocating double morality, but it is also out of necessity, because if this is not the case, China will not have a better path. China now has many dual morals, master and slave, man and woman, all have different morals, and they are not uniform. If the "drowning dog" and "overboard man" are treated equally, it is too biased and too early, just as the so-called freedom and equality of gentlemen are not bad, but in China it is slightly too early. So if anyone wants to universally implement the spirit of "Fae E Prey", I think it must at least wait until the so-called "reservoir dog" becomes popular. But now it is naturally not impossible, that is, as mentioned above: to see the opponent clearly. And there must be a difference, that is, "Fayette" must depend on how the opponent is used, no matter how he falls into the water, if he is a person, he will help him, if he is a dog, he will not care about it, and if he is a bad dog, he will beat him. In a word, it is just "the same party fights against the difference".满心“婆理”而满口“公理”的绅士们的名言暂且置之不论不议之列，即使真心人所大叫的公理，在现今的中国，也还不能救助好人，甚至于反而保护坏人。因为当坏人得志，虐待好人的时候，即使有人大叫公理，他决不听从，叫喊仅止于叫喊，好人仍然受苦。然而偶有一时，好人或稍稍蹶起，则坏人本该落水了，可是，真心的公理论者又“勿报复”呀，“仁恕”呀，“勿以恶抗恶”呀……的大嚷起来。这一次却发生实效，并非空嚷了：好人正以为然，而坏人于是得救。但他得救之后，无非以为占了便宜，何尝改悔；并且因为是早已营就三窟，又善于钻谋的，所以不多时，也就依然声势赫奕，作恶又如先前一样。这时候，公理论者自然又要大叫，但这回他却不听你了。
The famous sayings of gentlemen who are full of "politics" and "axioms" are put aside for the time being, even if the axioms shouted by sincere people cannot save good people in today's China, or even protect bad people. Because when a bad person succeeds and abuses a good person, even if someone shouts about justice, he will never listen. However, once in a while, the good guys might rise up a little, and the bad guys should have fallen into the water, but the sincere public theorists "don't retaliate", "forgive", "don't fight evil with evil"...... shouted. This time it worked, not in vain: the good guys thought so, and the bad guys were saved. But after he was saved, he thought he had taken advantage of it, so he repented; And because he had already set up three caves and was good at strategizing, he was still strong and did the same evil as before. At this time, the public theorist naturally wanted to shout again, but this time he didn't listen to you.但是，“疾恶太严”，“操之过急”，汉的清流和明的东林，却正以这一点倾败，论者也常常这样责备他们。殊不知那一面，何尝不“疾善如仇”呢？人们却不说一句话。假使此后光明和黑暗还不能作彻底的战斗，老实人误将纵恶当作宽容，一味姑息下去，则现在似的混沌状态，是可以无穷无尽的。
However, "the evil is too strict" and "too hasty", the clear streams of the Han Dynasty and the Donglin of the Ming Dynasty are failing with this, and commentators often blame them in this way. As everyone knows, why not "hate good like hatred"? People don't say a word. If light and darkness cannot fight thoroughly after this, and honest people mistakenly regard indulgence as tolerance and blindly tolerate it, then the current state of chaos can be endless.

论“费厄泼赖”应该缓行

七　论“即以其人之道还治其人之身”

论“费厄泼赖”应该缓行

七 论“即以其人之道还治其人之身”中国人或信中医或信西医，现在较大的城市中往往并有两种医，使他们各得其所。我以为这确是极好的事。倘能推而广之，怨声一定还要少得多，或者天下竟可以臻于郅治。例如民国的通礼是鞠躬，但若有人以为不对的，就独使他磕头。民国的法律是没有笞刑的，倘有人以为肉刑好，则这人犯罪时就特别打屁股。碗筷饭菜，是为今人而设的，有愿为燧人氏以前之民者，就请他吃生肉；再造几千间茅屋，将在大宅子里仰慕尧舜的高士都拉出来，给住在那里面；反对物质文明的，自然更应该不使他衔冤坐汽车。这样一办，真所谓“求仁得仁又何怨”，我们的耳根也就可以清净许多罢。
Chinese people either believe in Chinese medicine or Western medicine, and now there are often two types of medicine in larger cities, so that they can get their place. I thought it was a great thing. If it can be expanded, there must be much less complaints, or the world can actually reach Zhi Zhi. For example, the common etiquette of the Republic of China is to bow, but if someone thinks it is wrong, he will kowtow alone. The law of the Republic of China does not include flogging, and if someone thinks corporal punishment is good, the person will be spanked when he commits a crime. Bowls, chopsticks, and rice are for today's people, and those who wish to be the people before the Suiren clan invite him to eat raw meat; rebuild thousands of thatched huts, pull out the high scholars who admire Yao Shun in the big mansion and live in them; Those who oppose material civilization should naturally not let him sit in a car with injustice. In this way, the so-called "what is there to complain about seeking benevolence and benevolence", our ear roots will be much cleaner.但可惜大家总不肯这样办，偏要以己律人，所以天下就多事。“费厄泼赖”尤其有流弊，甚至于可以变成弱点，反给恶势力占便宜。例如刘百昭殴曳女师大学生，《现代评论》上连屁也不放，一到女师大恢复，陈西滢鼓动女大学生占据校舍时，却道“要是她们不肯走便怎样呢？你们总不好意思用强力把她们的东西搬走了罢？”殴而且拉，而且搬，是有刘百昭的先例的，何以这一回独独“不好意思”？这就因为给他嗅到了女师大这一面有些“费厄”气味之故。但这“费厄”却又变成弱点，反而给人利用了来替章士钊的“遗泽”保镳。
But unfortunately, everyone is unwilling to do this, but they have to discipline others with themselves, so the world is troubled. "Fei E Prey" is especially corrupt, and can even become a weakness and give advantage to evil forces. For example, Liu Baizhao beat female college students, and the "Modern Review" didn't even fart, and when the Women's Normal University recovered, Chen Xiying encouraged female college students to occupy the school building, but said, "What if they refuse to leave?" Are you embarrassed to move their things away with force?" "Beating and pulling, and moving, there is a precedent for Liu Baizhao, why is it "embarrassing" this time? This is because he smelled a bit of "Faye" on the side of the Women's Normal University. But this "Fei" has become a weakness again, and has been used as a bodyguard for Zhang Shizhao's "legacy".

论“费厄泼赖”应该缓行

八　结末

论“费厄泼赖”应该缓行

8. Conclusion或者要疑我上文所言，会激起新旧，或什么两派之争，使恶感更深，或相持更烈罢。但我敢断言，反改革者对于改革者的毒害，向来就并未放松过，手段的厉害也已经无以复加了。只有改革者却还在睡梦里，总是吃亏，因而中国也总是没有改革，自此以后，是应该改换些态度和方法的。
Some people doubt that what I said above will provoke a dispute between the old and the new, or some kind of conflict between the two factions, deepen the sense of evil, or make the stalemate more intense. But I dare to assert that the poison of counter-reformers against reformers has never been relaxed, and the power of their methods has been unparalleled. Only the reformers are still asleep and always suffer losses, so China has always had no reforms, and since then, some attitudes and methods should be changed.一九二五年十二月二十九日。
December 29, 1925.

写在《坟》后面

写在《坟》后面

写在《坟》后面

Written behind "The Tomb"在听到我的杂文已经印成一半的消息的时候，我曾经写了几行题记，寄往北京去。当时想到便写，写完便寄，到现在还不满二十天，早已记不清说了些甚么了。今夜周围是这么寂静，屋后面的山脚下腾起野烧的微光；南普陀寺还在做牵丝傀儡戏，时时传来锣鼓声，每一间隔中，就更加显得寂静。电灯自然是辉煌着，但不知怎地忽有淡淡的哀愁来袭击我的心，我似乎有些后悔印行我的杂文了。我很奇怪我的后悔；这在我是不大遇到的，到如今，我还没有深知道所谓悔者究竟是怎么一回事。但这心情也随即逝去，杂文当然仍在印行，只为想驱逐自己目下的哀愁，我还要说几句话。
When I heard the news that half of my essay had been printed, I wrote a few lines of inscription and sent it to Beijing. At that time, I thought of writing it, and I sent it after writing, but it has been less than twenty days, and I can't remember what I said. The surroundings were so quiet tonight, and there was a glimmer of wild fire at the foot of the mountain behind the house; Nanputuo Temple is still doing a string puppet show, and the sound of gongs and drums is heard from time to time, and in each interval, it becomes even more silent. The electric light was naturally brilliant, but somehow a faint sadness suddenly hit my heart, and I seemed to regret printing my essay. I am curious about my regrets; I don't have much of an encounter with this, and until now, I still don't know what the so-called repentant is. But this mood also passed away, and of course the essays were still being printed, just to expel my current sorrow, I still have to say a few words.记得先已说过：这不过是我的生活中的一点陈迹。如果我的过往，也可以算作生活，那么，也就可以说，我也曾工作过了。但我并无喷泉一般的思想，伟大华美的文章，既没有主义要宣传，也不想发起一种什么运动。不过我曾经尝得，失望无论大小，是一种苦味，所以几年以来，有人希望我动动笔的，只要意见不很相反，我的力量能够支撑，就总要勉力写几句东西，给来者一些极微末的欢喜。人生多苦辛，而人们有时却极容易得到安慰，又何必惜一点笔墨，给多尝些孤独的悲哀呢？于是除小说杂感之外，逐渐又有了长长短短的杂文十多篇。其间自然也有为卖钱而作的。这回就都混在一处。我的生命的一部分，就这样地用去了，也就是做了这样的工作。然而我至今终于不明白我一向是在做什么。比方做土工的罢，做着做着，而不明白是在筑台呢还在掘坑。所知道的是即使是筑台，也无非要将自己从那上面跌下来或者显示老死；倘是掘坑，那就当然不过是埋掉自己。总之：逝去，逝去，一切一切，和光阴一同早逝去，在逝去，要逝去了。——不过如此，但也为我所十分甘愿的。
I remember saying earlier: This is just a little bit of a relic in my life. If my past can also be counted as life, then it can be said that I have also worked. But I don't have fountain thoughts, great and beautiful articles, neither doctrine to propagate nor any movement. However, I have tasted that disappointment, no matter how big or small, is a bitter taste, so for several years, some people have wanted me to start writing, as long as the opinions are not very opposite, my strength can support it, I always have to try to write a few words to give the visitor some minimal joy. Life is so hard, and people are sometimes very easy to be comforted, so why spare a little pen and ink to give more sadness of loneliness? So in addition to the miscellaneous feelings of the novel, there were gradually more than ten essays of length and shortness. Naturally, there are also those who make money to sell. This time they were all mixed together. A part of my life was used like this, that is, I did this kind of work. However, I still don't understand what I have always been doing. For example, a person who does earthwork is doing it, but he doesn't understand that he is building a platform and is still digging a pit. What we know is that even if you build a platform, you have nothing more than to fall from it or show that you are old and dead; If you dig a pit, of course, you are just burying yourself. In short: gone, gone, everything, and time have passed away early, in the passing, about to pass. ——But that's it, but it's also very willing for me.然而这大约也不过是一句话。当呼吸还在时，只要是自己的，我有时却也喜欢将陈迹收存起来，明知不值一文，总不能绝无眷恋，集杂文而名之曰《坟》，究竟还是一种取巧的掩饰。刘伶喝得酒气熏天，使人荷锸跟在后面，道：死便埋我。虽然自以为放达，其实是只能骗骗极端老实人的。
However, this is probably just a sentence. When the breath is still there, as long as it is my own, I sometimes like to store the relics, knowing that it is not worth a penny, I can never be without attachment, and the collection of essays and the name "Grave" is still a clever cover-up. Liu Ling was so drunk that he made people follow him with a shovel, and said: If you die, bury me. Although they think they are open-minded, they can only deceive extremely honest people.所以这书的印行，在自己就是这么一回事。至于对别人，记得在先也已说过，还有愿使偏爱我的文字的主顾得到一点喜欢；憎恶我的文字的东西得到一点呕吐，——我自己知道，我并不大度，那些东西因我的文字而呕吐，我也很高兴的。别的就什么意思也没有了。倘若硬要说出好处来，那么，其中所介绍的几个诗人的事，或者还不妨一看；最末的论“费厄泼赖”这一篇，也许可供参考罢，因为这虽然不是我的血所写，却是见了我的同辈和比我年幼的青年们的血而写的。
So the printing of this book is like this for me. As for others, I remember that I have said before that I wish to give a little favor to my patrons who prefer my words; Things that hate my words get a little vomit,—— I know that I am not generous, and I am happy that those things vomit because of my words. It doesn't mean anything else. If you insist on talking about the benefits, then you might as well take a look at the affairs of the poets introduced in it; The last article on "Feierprei" may be useful for reference, because although it was not written in my blood, it was written in the blood of my peers and young people younger than me.偏爱我的作品的读者，有时批评说，我的文字是说真话的。这其实是过誉，那原因就因为他偏爱。我自然不想太欺骗人，但也未尝将心里的话照样说尽，大约只要看得可以交卷就算完。我的确时时解剖别人，然而更多的是更无情面地解剖我自己，发表一点，酷爱温暖的人物已经觉得冷酷了，如果全露出我的血肉来，末路正不知要到怎样。我有时也想就此驱除旁人，到那时还不唾弃我的，即使是枭蛇鬼怪，也是我的朋友，这才真是我的朋友。倘使并这个也没有，则就是我一个人也行。但现在我并不。因为，我还没有这样勇敢，那原因就是我还想生活，在这社会里。还有一种小缘故，先前也曾屡次声明，就是偏要使所谓正人君子也者之流多不舒服几天，所以自己便特地留几片铁甲在身上，站着，给他们的世界上多有一点缺陷，到我自己厌倦了，要脱掉了的时候为止。
Readers who prefer my work sometimes criticize that my words tell the truth. This is actually an overstatement, and the reason is because he prefers it. Naturally, I didn't want to deceive people too much, but I didn't say everything in my heart, probably as long as I could read it. I do dissect others from time to time, but more often I dissect myself more ruthlessly, expressing a little bit of warmth, the characters who love warmth already feel cold, if I expose all my flesh and blood, I don't know what the end will be. Sometimes I want to drive away others, and at that time I don't spit on me, even if it is a snake or ghost, it is my friend, this is really my friend. If there is no such thing, then I can do it alone. But now I don't. Because, I am not so brave yet, and that is because I still want to live in this society. There is also a small reason, which I have repeatedly stated before, that is, to make the so-called righteous gentlemen and gentlemen uncomfortable for a few more days, so I specially left a few pieces of iron armor on my body, standing, and giving them a little more flaws in the world, until I got tired of it and wanted to take it off.倘说为别人引路，那就更不容易了，因为连我自己还不明白应当怎么走。中国大概很有些青年的“前辈”和“导师”罢，但那不是我，我也不相信他们。我只很确切地知道一个终点，就是：坟。然而这是大家都知道的，无须谁指引。问题是在从此到那的道路。那当然不只一条，我可正不知那一条好，虽然至今有时也还在寻求。在寻求中，我就怕我未熟的果实偏偏毒死了偏爱我的果实的人，而憎恨我的东西如所谓正人君子也者偏偏都矍铄，所以我说话常不免含胡，中止，心里想：对于偏爱我的读者的赠献，或者最好倒不如是一个“无所有”。我的译著的印本，最初，印一次是一千，后来加五百，近时是二千至四千，每一增加，我自然是愿意的，因为能赚钱，但也伴着哀愁，怕于读者有害，因此作文就时常更谨慎，更踌躇。有人以为我信笔写来，直抒胸臆，其实是不尽然的，我的顾忌并不少。我自己早知道毕竟不是什么战士了，而且也不能算前驱，就有这么多的顾忌和回忆。还记得三四年前，有一个学生来买我的书，从衣袋里掏出钱来放在我手里，那钱上还带着体温。这体温便烙印了我的心，至今要写文字时，还常使我怕毒害了这类的青年，迟疑不敢下笔。我毫无顾忌地说话的日子，恐怕要未必有了罢。但也偶尔想，其实倒还是毫无顾忌地说话，对得起这样的青年。但至今也还没有决心这样做。
It is even more difficult to lead the way for others, because even I myself do not know how to go. There are probably many "seniors" and "mentors" of young people in China, but that's not me, and I don't believe in them. I only know exactly one end, that is: the grave. However, this is known to everyone and does not need to be guided by anyone. The problem is the road from here to there. Of course, there is more than one, I don't know which one is good, although I am still looking for it sometimes. In my search, I was afraid that my unripe fruit would poison those who favored my fruit, and that the things that hated me, such as the so-called righteous gentlemen, were all fierce, so I often spoke with a beard, stopped, and thought to myself: For the reader who prefers me, it is better to be a "nothing". The printed version of my translation, at first, was printed for 1,000 at a time, then added 500, and recently it was 2,000 to 4,000. Some people think that I write it with a pen and express my heart directly, but in fact it is not entirely true, and I have many scruples. I myself knew that I was not a warrior after all, and I couldn't be considered a pioneer, so I had so many scruples and memories. I still remember three or four years ago, a student came to buy my book, took money out of his pocket and put it in my hand, and the money was still with body temperature. This body temperature has imprinted my heart, and when I want to write, I often make me afraid of poisoning such young people, and I hesitate to write. I'm afraid that the days when I speak without scruples may not be there. But I also occasionally think that in fact, I still speak without scruples, worthy of such a young man. But so far there is no determination to do so.今天所要说的话也不过是这些，然而比较的却可以算得真实。此外，还有一点余文。
That's all I want to say today, but the comparison can be considered true. In addition, there is a little bit of remainder.记得初提倡白话的时候，是得到各方面剧烈的攻击的。后来白话渐渐通行了，势不可遏，有些人便一转而引为自己之功，美其名曰“新文化运动”。又有些人便主张白话不妨作通俗之用；又有些人却道白话要做得好，仍须看古书。前一类早已二次转舵，又反过来嘲骂“新文化”了；后二类是不得已的调和派，只希图多留几天僵尸，到现在还不少。我曾在杂感上掊击过的。
I remember when I first advocated the vernacular, I was violently attacked from all sides. Later, the vernacular gradually became popular and unstoppable, and some people turned to it as their own merit, calling it the "New Culture Movement". some people advocate that the vernacular may be used for popular purposes; Some people say that to do well in the vernacular, you still need to read ancient books. The former category has already turned the rudder for the second time, and in turn has ridiculed the "new culture"; The latter two categories are the last resort conciliators, who only want to keep zombies for a few more days, and there are still quite a few. I have struck it with mixed senses.新近看见一种上海出版的期刊，也说起要做好白话须读好古文，而举例为证的人名中，其一却是我。这实在使我打了一个寒噤。别人我不论，若是自己，则曾经看过许多旧书，是的确的，为了教书，至今也还在看。因此耳濡目染，影响到所做的白话上，常不免流露出它的字句，体格来。但自己却正苦于背了这些古老的鬼魂，摆脱不开，时常感到一种使人气闷的沉重。就是思想上，也何尝不中些庄周韩非的毒，时而很随便，时而很峻急。孔孟的书我读得最早，最熟，然而倒似乎和我不相干。大半也因为懒惰罢，往往自己宽解，以为一切事物，在转变中，是总有多少中间物的。动植之间，无脊椎和脊椎动物之间，都有中间物；或者简直可以说，在进化的链子上，一切都是中间物。当开首改革文章的时候，有几个不三不四的作者，是当然的，只能这样，也需要这样。他的任务，是在有些警觉之后，喊出一种新声；又因为从旧垒中来，情形看得较为分明，反戈一击，易制强敌的死命。但仍应该和光阴偕逝，逐渐消亡，至多不过是桥梁中的一木一石，并非什么前途的目标，范本。跟着起来便该不同了，倘非天纵之圣，积习当然也不能顿然荡除，但总得更有新气象。以文字论，就不必更在旧书里讨生活，却将活人的唇舌作为源泉，使文章更加接近语言，更加有生气。至于对于现在人民的语言的穷乏欠缺，如何救济，使他丰富起来，那也是一个很大的问题，或者也须在旧文中取得若干资料，以供使役，但这并不在我现在所要说的范围以内，姑且不论。
Recently, I saw a journal published in Shanghai, and it also said that to do a good job in vernacular, you must read ancient texts well, and one of the names of the people who gave examples is me. This really made me shudder. I don't care about others, if it is myself, I have read many old books, yes, I am still reading them in order to teach. Therefore, it affects the vernacular it does, and its words and physique are often revealed. But I am suffering from carrying these ancient ghosts, and I can't get rid of it, and I often feel a kind of heaviness that makes people feel stuffy. Even ideologically, it is not poisoned by Zhuang Zhou Hanfei, sometimes very casual, sometimes very urgent. I read Confucius and Mencius's books the earliest and most familiar with them, but they seem to have nothing to do with me. Most of them are also lazy, and they often let go of themselves, thinking that there are always some intermediate things in the transformation of everything. There are intermediates between animals and plants, invertebrates and vertebrates; Or it can simply be said that on the chain of evolution, everything is an intermediary. When the reform article begins, there are several authors, of course, but this can only be done and needs to be like this. His task is to shout a new voice after being a little alert; And because it came from the old fortifications, the situation was more clear, and it was easy to control the death of a strong enemy with a counterattack. But it should still pass with time and gradually die out, at most it is just a piece of wood and a stone in the bridge, not a future goal, a model. If it is not the saint of heaven, of course, the accumulated habits cannot be eliminated immediately, but there must be a new atmosphere. In terms of words, there is no need to beg for life in old books, but use the lips and tongues of living people as the source to make the article closer to language and more lively. As for the poverty of the language of the people now, how to relieve and enrich them is also a big question, or it is necessary to obtain some information from the old texts for use, but this is not within the scope of what I am going to say now, so let's leave it alone.我以为我倘十分努力，大概也还能够博采口语，来改革我的文章。但因为懒而且忙，至今没有做。我常疑心这和读了古书很有些关系，因为我觉得古人写在书上的可恶思想，我的心里也常有，能否忽而奋勉，是毫无把握的。我常常诅咒我的这思想，也希望不再见于后来的青年。去年我主张青年少读，或者简直不读中国书，乃是用许多苦痛换来的真话，决不是聊且快意，或什么玩笑，愤激之辞。古人说，不读书便成愚人，那自然也不错的。然而世界却正由愚人造成，聪明人决不能支持世界，尤其是中国的聪明人。现在呢，思想上且不说，便是文辞，许多青年作者又在古文，诗词中摘些好看而难懂的字面，作为变戏法的手巾，来装潢自己的作品了。我不知这和劝读古文说可有相关，但正在复古，也就是新文艺的试行自杀，是显而易见的。
I thought that if I worked very hard, I would probably be able to adopt colloquial language to reform my writing. But because I was lazy and busy, I haven't done it so far. I often suspect that this has something to do with reading ancient books, because I feel that the hateful thoughts written by the ancients in books are often in my heart, and I am unsure whether I can suddenly work hard. I often curse this thought of mine, and I hope that it will not be seen again in the youth of later generations. Last year, I advocated that young people read less, or not read Chinese books at all, but the truth exchanged for a lot of pain, and it was by no means a joke or indignation. The ancients said that if you don't read, you will become a fool, and that is naturally not bad. However, the world is being created by fools, and smart people must not support the world, especially the smart people in China. Now, not to mention ideologically, it is literary words, and many young authors have picked some beautiful and incomprehensible words in ancient texts and poems as handkerchiefs for juggling to decorate their works. I don't know if this has anything to do with persuading people to read ancient texts, but it is obvious that they are committing suicide in retro, that is, new literature and art.不幸我的古文和白话合成的杂集，又恰在此时出版了，也许又要给读者若干毒害。只是在自己，却还不能毅然决然将他毁灭，还想借此暂时看看逝去的生活的余痕。惟愿偏爱我的作品的读者也不过将这当作一种纪念，知道这小小的丘陇中，无非埋着曾经活过的躯壳。待再经若干岁月，又当化为烟埃，并纪念也从人间消去，而我的事也就完毕了。上午也正在看古文，记起了几句陆士衡的吊曹孟德文，便拉来给我的这一篇作结——
Unfortunately, my collection of ancient texts and vernacular was published at this time, and it may be poisonous to readers. It's just that in myself, I can't resolutely destroy him, and I want to take this opportunity to temporarily see the traces of my lost life. I hope that readers who prefer my work will also regard this as a kind of memorial, knowing that in this small hill, there is nothing more than a shell buried in the past. After a few more years, it will turn into smoke and dust, and the commemoration will be erased from the world, and my affairs will be finished. I was also reading ancient texts in the morning, and I remembered a few sentences of Lu Shiheng's hanging Cao Meng Dewen, so I pulled this article to end with me——既睎古以遗累，信简礼而薄葬。既睎古以遗累，信简礼而薄葬。 
彼裘绂于何有，贻尘谤于后王。 彼裘绂于何有，贻尘谤于后王。 
嗟大恋之所存，故虽哲而不忘。 嗟大恋之所存，故虽哲而不忘。 
览遗籍以慷慨，献兹文而凄伤！ 览遗籍以慷慨，献兹文而凄伤！
一九二六，一一，一一，夜。鲁迅。

1926, 11, 11, night. Lu Xun.

封面

书名页

版权信息

图书在版编目（CIP）数据
Books in Print (CIP) data热风／鲁迅著．—南京：译林出版社，2013.11
Hot Wind/Lu Xun.—Nanjing: Yilin Publishing House, 2013.11（鲁迅自编文集）
(Lu Xun's self-edited anthology)ISBN 978-7-5447-4374-7
ISBN 978-7-5447-4374-7Ⅰ．①热…　Ⅱ．①鲁…　Ⅲ．①鲁迅杂文－杂文集　Ⅳ．①I210.4
I..(1) Heat... II..(1) Lu... III..(1) Lu Xun's Essays - Essays IV..(1)I210.4中国版本图书馆CIP数据核字（2013）第211037号
China Version Library CIP Data Verification (2013) No. 211037

书　　名　热　风
The title of the book is Hot Wind作　　者　鲁　迅
Author: Lu Xun责任编辑　王振华
Editor-in-charge: Wang Zhenhua特约编辑　邓　敏
Special editor Deng Min出版发行　凤凰出版传媒股份有限公司
Published and distributed by Phoenix Publishing and Media Co., Ltd译林出版社
Yilin Publishing House出版社地址　南京市湖南路1号A楼，邮编：210009
Publisher's address Building A, No. 1 Hunan Road, Nanjing, Zip Code: 210009电子信箱　yilin@yilin.com
E-mail yilin@yilin.com出版社网址　http://www.yilin.com
Publisher website http://www.yilin.com印　　刷　北京凯达印务有限公司
Printing Beijing Kaida Printing Co., Ltd开　　本　787×1092毫米　1/32
Volume 787×1092 mm 1/32印　　张　3.875
Print 3.875字　　数　74千字
Word count: 74,000 words版　　次　2013年11月第1版　2013年11月第1次印刷
Edition November 2013 1st edition November 2013 1st printing标准书号　ISBN 978-7-5447-4374-7
ISBN 978-7-5447-4374-7定　　价　11.80元
The price is 11.80 yuan译林版图书若有印装错误可向承印厂调换

If there are printing errors in the translated version of the book, it can be exchanged with the printing factory

Table of Contents

目录

Table of Contents

directory题记 Inscription
一九一八年 1918
随感录二十五 Twenty-five records with feelings
三十三 thirty-three
三十五 thirty-five
三十六 thirty-six
三十七 thirty-seven
三十八 thirty-eight
一九一九年 In 1919
随感录三十九 Recorded 39 with Impressions
四十 forty
四十一 forty-one
四十二 forty-two
四十三 forty-three
四十六 forty-six
四十七 forty-seven
四十八 forty-eight
四十九 forty-nine
五十三 fifty-three
五十四 fifty-four
五十六　“来了” 56 "Here it comes"
五十七　现在的屠杀者 57 The current slayer
五十八　人心很古 五十八 人心很古
五十九　“圣武” 59 "Shengwu"
六十一　不满 61 Dissatisfied
六十二　恨恨而死 62 Die with hatred
六十三　“与幼者” 63 "With the Young"
六十四　有无相通 64 Existence and non-existence are connected
六十五　暴君的臣民 65 Subjects of tyrants
六十六　生命的路 66 The road of life
一九二一年 1921
智识即罪恶 Wisdom is sin
事实胜于雄辩 Actions speak louder than words
一九二二年 1922
估《学衡》 Estimate of "Academic Balance"
为“俄国歌剧团” For the "Russian Opera Company"
无题 Untitled
“以震其艰深” "To shake its hardships"
所谓“国学” The so-called "Chinese studies"
儿歌的“反动” The "reaction" of children's songs
“一是之学说” "The Doctrine of One"
不懂的音译 I don't understand transliteration
对于批评家的希望 Hope for critics
反对“含泪”的批评家 Critics against "tears"
即小见大 That is, the small sees the big
一九二四年 1924
望勿“纠正” I hope it will not be "corrected"
返回总目录 Return to the General Directory

题记

题记

题记

Inscription现在有谁经过西长安街一带的，总可以看见几个衣履破碎的穷苦孩子叫卖报纸。记得三四年前，在他们身上偶而还剩有制服模样的残余；再早，就更体面，简直是童子军的拟态。
Nowadays, anyone who passes by the area of West Chang'an Street can always see a few poor children with broken clothes selling newspapers. I remember that three or four years ago, there were occasional remnants of uniforms left on them; Earlier, it would be more decent, simply a mimicry of a Boy Scout.那是中华民国八年，即西历一九一九年，五月四日北京学生对于山东问题的示威运动以后，因为当时散传单的是童子军，不知怎的竟惹了投机家的注意，童子军式的卖报孩子就出现了。其年十二月，日本公使小幡酉吉抗议排日运动，情形和今年大致相同；只是我们的卖报孩子却穿破了第一身新衣以后，便不再做，只见得年不如年地显出穷苦。
It was the eighth year of the Republic of China, that is, in 1919 AD, after the demonstration of Beijing students on the Shandong issue on May 4, because it was the Boy Scouts who distributed leaflets at that time, somehow attracted the attention of speculators, and Scout-style newspaper selling children appeared. In December of that year, the Japanese minister Obata Yukichi protested against the anti-Japanese movement, which was roughly the same as this year; It's just that our newspaper children don't do it anymore after wearing their first new clothes, only to see that they are not as poor as they are every year.我在《新青年》的《随感录》中做些短评，还在这前一年，因为所评论的多是小问题，所以无可道，原因也大都忘却了。但就现在的文字看起来，除几条泛论之外，有的是对于扶乩，静坐，打拳而发的；有的是对于所谓“保存国粹”而发的；有的是对于那时旧官僚的以经验自豪而发的；有的是对于上海《时报》的讽刺画而发的。记得当时的《新青年》是正在四面受敌之中，我所对付的不过一小部分；其他大事，则本志具在，无须我多言。
I made some short comments in "New Youth"'s "Impressions", and the year before that, because most of the comments were minor problems, there was nothing to say, and most of the reasons were forgotten. But as far as the current text is concerned, except for a few general theories, some are for supporting women, sitting quietly, and punching; some are issued for the so-called "preservation of the quintessence of the country"; some are proud of the experience of the old bureaucrats at that time; Some were sent in response to the satirical paintings of the Shanghai Times. I remember that at that time, "New Youth" was under attack from all sides, and I only dealt with a small part of it; As for other important matters, the original intention is here, so there is no need for me to say more.五四运动之后，我没有写什么文字，现在已经说不清是不做，还是散失消灭的了。但那时革新运动，表面上却颇有些成功，于是主张革新的也就蓬蓬勃勃，而且有许多还就是在先讥笑，嘲骂《新青年》的人们，但他们却是另起了一个冠冕堂皇的名目：新文化运动。这也就是后来又将这名目反套在《新青年》身上，而又加以嘲骂讥笑的，正如笑骂白话文的人，往往自称最得风气之先，早经主张过白话文一样。
After the May Fourth Movement, I didn't write anything, and now I can't tell whether I didn't do it or lost it. But at that time, the reform movement was quite successful on the surface, so those who advocated innovation were also vigorous, and many people were still ridiculing and ridiculing the "New Youth" first, but they came up with another high-sounding name: the New Culture Movement. This is why this name was later put on "New Youth", and it was ridiculed and ridiculed, just as people who laugh and scold vernacular literature often claim to be the first to gain popularity, and have long advocated vernacular literature.再后，更无可道了。只记得一九二一年中的一篇是对于所谓“虚无哲学”而发的；更后一年则大抵对于上海之所谓“国学家”而发，不知怎的那时忽而有许多人都自命为国学家了。
After that, there is nothing more to say. I only remember that one in 1921 was published on the so-called "philosophy of nihilism"; In the following year, it was mostly about the so-called "Chinese scholars" in Shanghai, and somehow many people suddenly called themselves Chinese scholars.自《新青年》出版以来，一切应之而嘲骂改革，后来又赞成改革，后来又嘲骂改革者，现在拟态的制服早已破碎，显出自身的本相来了，真所谓“事实胜于雄辩”，又何待于纸笔喉舌的批评。所以我的应时的浅薄的文字，也应该置之不顾，一任其消灭的；但几个朋友却以为现状和那时并没有大两样，也还可以存留，给我编辑起来了。这正是我所悲哀的。我以为凡对于时弊的攻击，文字须与时弊同时灭亡，因为这正如白血轮之酿成疮疖一般，倘非自身也被排除，则当它的生命的存留中，也即证明着病菌尚在。
Since the publication of "New Youth", everything has been ridiculed for reform, later in favor of reform, and later ridiculed for reformers. Therefore, my shallow words should also be ignored and destroyed; But a few friends thought that the current situation was not much different from that time, and it could still be kept and edited for me. This is exactly what I am sad about. I think that any attack on the evils of the times must be destroyed at the same time as the evils of the times, because this is like the boil caused by the white blood wheel, if it is not excluded by itself, then when it is in its life, it is proved that the germs are still there.但如果凡我所写，的确都是冷的呢？则它的生命原来就没有，更谈不到中国的病证究竟如何。然而，无情的冷嘲和有情的讽刺相去本不及一张纸，对于周围的感受和反应，又大概是所谓“如鱼饮水冷暖自知”的；我却觉得周围的空气太寒冽了，我自说我的话，所以反而称之曰《热风》。
But what if everything I write is indeed cold? Then its life is not in the first place, let alone what the symptoms are in China. However, ruthless cynicism and affectionate irony are not as far apart as a piece of paper, and the feelings and reactions around them are probably the so-called "like a fish drinking water and knowing whether it is cold or warm"; I felt that the air around me was too cold, and I spoke my own words, so I called it "Hot Wind" instead.一九二五年十一月三日之夜，鲁迅。
On the night of November 3, 1925, Lu Xun.

一九一八年

一九一八年

一九一八年

1918

一九一八年

随感录二十五

一九一八年

Twenty-five records with feelings我一直从前曾见严又陵在一本什么书上发过议论，书名和原文都忘记了。大意是：“在北京道上，看见许多孩子，辗转于车轮马足之间，很怕把他们碰死了，又想起他们将来怎样得了，很是害怕。”其实别的地方，也都如此，不过车马多少不同罢了。现在到了北京，这情形还未改变，我也时时发起这样的忧虑；一面又佩服严又陵究竟是“做”过赫胥黎《天演论》的，的确与众不同：是一个十九世纪末年中国感觉锐敏的人。
I have always seen Yan Youling discuss a book before, and I have forgotten the title and original text. The gist is: "On the Peking Road, I saw many children, tossing and turning between the wheels and horses, afraid of touching them to death, and thinking about how they would get in the future, I was very scared." "In fact, it is the same in other places, but the carriages and horses are somewhat different. Now in Beijing, this situation has not changed, and I have always initiated such worries; On the one hand, I admire Yan Youling for "doing" Huxley's "Tianyan Lun", which is indeed different: he is a person with a keen sense in China at the end of the 19th century.穷人的孩子蓬头垢面的在街上转，阔人的孩子妖形妖势娇声娇气的在家里转。转得大了，都昏天黑地的在社会上转，同他们的父亲一样，或者还不如。
The children of the poor were unkempt and wandering around the streets, and the children of the broad people were wandering around the house in a coquettish and coquettish manner. When they turn big, they are all turning in society in the dark, just like their fathers, or worse.所以看十来岁的孩子，便可以逆料二十年后中国的情形；看二十多岁的青年，——他们大抵有了孩子，尊为爹爹了，——便可以推测他儿子孙子，晓得五十年后七十年后中国的情形。
Therefore, if you look at teenage children, you can predict the situation in China twenty years from now; Looking at young people in their twenties,—— they probably have children, and if they are respected as fathers,—— they can speculate on their sons and grandsons, and know what China will be like in fifty or seventy years.中国的孩子，只要生，不管他好不好，只要多，不管他才不才。生他的人，不负教他的责任。虽然“人口众多”这一句话，很可以闭了眼睛自负，然而这许多人口，便只在尘土中辗转，小的时候，不把他当人，大了以后，也做不了人。
Chinese children, as long as they are born, no matter whether they are good or not, as long as there are many, no matter whether they are talented or not. The person who gave birth to him lives up to the responsibility of teaching him. Although the phrase "large population" can be conceited with closed eyes, this large population is only tossing and turning in the dust, and when he is young, he is not regarded as a human being, and when he is old, he cannot be a human being.中国娶妻早是福气，儿子多也是福气。所有小孩，只是他父母福气的材料，并非将来的“人”的萌芽，所以随便辗转，没人管他，因为无论如何，数目和材料的资格，总还存在。即使偶尔送进学堂，然而社会和家庭的习惯，尊长和伴侣的脾气，却多与教育反背，仍然使他与新时代不合。大了以后，幸而生存，也不过“仍旧贯如之何”，照例是制造孩子的家伙，不是“人”的父亲，他生了孩子，便仍然不是“人”的萌芽。
It has long been a blessing for China to marry a wife, and it is also a blessing to have many sons. All children are just the material of his parents' blessings, not the germ of the future "people", so he tosses and turns casually, and no one cares about him, because no matter what, the number and material qualifications always exist. Even if he is occasionally sent to school, the habits of society and family, the temper of respect and partner, are mostly contrary to education, which still makes him incompatible with the new era. As usual, he is the guy who makes the child, not the father of the "person", and he gives birth to a child, so he is still not the germ of the "person".最看不起女人的奥国人华宁该尔（Otto Weininger）曾把女人分成两大类：一是“母妇”，一是“娼妇”。照这分法，男人便也可以分作“父男”和“嫖男”两类了。但这父男一类，却又可以分成两种：其一是孩子之父，其一是“人”之父。第一种只会生，不会教，还带点嫖男的气息。第二种是生了孩子，还要想怎样教育，才能使这生下来的孩子，将来成一个完全的人。
Otto Weininger, an Austrian who looked down on women the most, once divided women into two categories: one is "mother and woman" and the other is "prostitute". According to this division, men can also be divided into two categories: "father and man" and "prostitute man". But this father-male category can be divided into two types: one is the father of the child, and the other is the father of the "person". The first one will only give birth, will not teach, and has a bit of a prostitute atmosphere. The second is that after giving birth to a child, we still need to think about how to educate the child so that the child born can become a complete person in the future.前清末年，某省初开师范学堂的时候，有一位老先生听了，很为诧异，便发愤说：“师何以还须受教，如此看来，还该有父范学堂了！”这位老先生，便以为父的资格，只要能生。能生这件事，自然便会，何须受教呢。却不知中国现在，正须父范学堂；这位先生便须编入初等第一年级。
At the end of the Qing Dynasty, when a certain province first opened a normal school, an old gentleman was very surprised when he heard it, so he said angrily: "Why do teachers still have to be taught, so it seems that there should be a father's school!" "This old gentleman thinks that he is qualified as a father, as long as he can give birth. If you can give birth to this, you will naturally know, so why should you be taught? But I don't know that China is now in need of a father Fan School; The gentleman must be placed in the first grade of primary school.因为我们中国所多的是孩子之父；所以以后是只要“人”之父！
Because we in China are mostly fathers of children; So in the future, as long as it is the father of "people"!

一九一八年

三十三

一九一八年

thirty-three现在有一班好讲鬼话的人，最恨科学，因为科学能教道理明白，能教人思路清楚，不许鬼混，所以自然而然的成了讲鬼话的人的对头。于是讲鬼话的人，便须想一个方法排除他。
Now there is a group of people who are good at talking nonsense, and they hate science the most, because science can teach people to understand the truth, teach people to think clearly, and are not allowed to fool around, so they naturally become the opponents of those who talk nonsense. So the person who talks nonsense must think of a way to eliminate him.其中最巧妙的是捣乱。先把科学东扯西拉，羼进鬼话，弄得是非不明，连科学也带了妖气：例如一位大官做的卫生哲学，里面说——
The most ingenious of them is to make trouble. First of all, science is pulled around, and it is mixed into nonsense, making it unclear, and even science is demonic: for example, a high-ranking official made a hygiene philosophy, which says——“吾人初生之一点，实自脐始，故人之根本在脐。……故脐下腹部最为重要，道书所以称之曰丹田。”
"The first point of our birth actually starts from the navel, so the root of the human being is in the navel. …… Therefore, the abdomen below the umbilical cord is the most important, which is why Taoist books call it dantian. ”用植物来比人，根须是胃，脐却只是一个蒂，离了便罢，有什么重要。但这还不过比喻奇怪罢了，尤其可怕的是——
Using plants to compare people, the root is the stomach, but the navel is just a stem. But this is just a metaphor, especially frightening-“精神能影响于血液，昔日德国科布博士发明霍乱（虎列拉）病菌，有某某二博士反对之，取其所培养之病菌，一口吞入，而竟不病。”
"Spirit can affect the blood, in the past, Dr. Cobb of Germany invented cholera (Hurella) germs, and two doctors opposed it, took the germs he cultivated, swallowed them in one bite, and did not get sick."据我所晓得的，是Koch博士发见（查出了前人未知的事物叫发见，创出了前人未知的器具和方法才叫发明）了真虎列拉菌；别人也发见了一种，Koch说他不是，把他的菌吞了，后来没有病，便证明了那人所发见的，的确不是病菌。如今颠倒转来，当作“精神能改造肉体”的例证，岂不危险已极么？
As far as I know, it was Dr. Koch who discovered (discovering things that were unknown to predecessors was called discovery, and creating tools and methods unknown to predecessors was called invention). Others also found one, but Koch said he was not, swallowed his bacteria, and later did not get sick, which proved that what the man found was indeed not a germ. Now that it is turned upside down, isn't it extremely dangerous to use it as an example of "the spirit can transform the body"?捣乱得更凶的，是一位神童做的《三千大千世界图说》。他拿了儒，道士，和尚，耶教的糟粕，乱作一团，又密密的插入鬼话。他说能看见天上地下的情形，他看见的“地球星”，虽与我们所晓得的无甚出入，一到别的星系，可是五花八门了。因为他有天眼通，所以本领在科学家之上。他先说道——
What made the trouble even more fierce was the "Illustrated Explanation of the Three Thousand Great Thousand Worlds" made by a prodigy. He took the dross of Confucianism, Taoist priests, monks, and Yejiao, made a mess, and secretly inserted nonsense. He said that he could see the situation in the sky and on the ground, and although the "earth star" he saw was not much different from what we knew, it was all kinds of galaxies when it came to other galaxies. Because he has clairvoyance, his skills are above those of scientists. He said first -“今科学家之发明，欲观天文则用天文镜……然犹不能持此以观天堂地狱也。究之学问之道如大海然，万不可入海饮一滴水，即自足也。”
“今科学家之发明，欲观天文则用天文镜…… 然犹不能持此以观天堂地狱也。 究之学问之道如大海然，万不可入海饮一滴水，即自足也。 ”他虽然也分不出发见和发明的不同，论学问却颇有理。但学问的大海，究竟怎样情形呢？他说——
Although he couldn't tell the difference between insight and invention, he was quite reasonable in terms of knowledge. But what is the situation in the sea of knowledge? He said—“赤精天……有毒火坑，以水晶盖压之。若遇某星球将坏之时，即去某星球之水晶盖，则毒火大发，焚毁民物。”
"Red Spirit Heaven...... The poisonous fire pit is pressed with a crystal lid. If a planet is about to collapse, remove the crystal cover of a certain planet, and the poisonous fire will explode and burn people's belongings. ”“众星……大约分为三种，曰恒星，行星，流星。……据西学家言，恒星有三十五千万，以小子视之，不下七千万万也。……行星共计一百千万大系。……流星之多，倍于行星。……其绕日者，约三十三年一周，每秒能行六十五里。”
“众星…… 大约分为三种，曰恒星，行星，流星。 …… 据西学家言，恒星有三十五千万，以小子视之，不下七千万万也。 …… 行星共计一百千万大系。 …… 流星之多，倍于行星。 …… 其绕日者，约三十三年一周，每秒能行六十五里。 ”“日面纯为大火。……因其热力极大，人不能生，故太阳星君居焉。”
“日面纯为大火。 …… 因其热力极大，人不能生，故太阳星君居焉。 ”其余怪话还多；但讲天堂的远不及六朝方士的《十洲记》，讲地狱的也不过钞袭《玉历钞传》。这神童算是糟了！另外还有感慨的话，说科学害了人。上面一篇“嗣汉六十二代天师正一真人张元旭”的序文，尤为单刀直入，明明白白道出——
There are many other strange stories; But the story of heaven is far less than the "Records of the Ten Continents" of the alchemists of the Six Dynasties, and the story of hell is nothing more than the "Jade Calendar Banknotes". This child prodigy is bad! In addition, there are emotional words, saying that science harms people. The preface to the above article "Zhang Yuanxu, the sixty-second generation of the Han Dynasty's Heavenly Master Zhengyi Zhengzheng", is particularly straightforward and clearly states -“自拳匪假托鬼神，致招联军之祸，几至国亡种灭，识者痛心疾首，固已极矣。又适值欧化东渐，专讲物质文明之秋，遂本科学家世界无帝神管辖，人身无魂魄轮回之说，奉为国是，俾播印于人人脑髓中，自是而人心之敬畏绝矣。敬畏绝，而道德无根柢以发生矣！放僻邪侈，肆无忌惮，争权夺利，日相战杀，其祸将有甚于拳匪者！……”
“自拳匪假托鬼神，致招联军之祸，几至国亡种灭，识者痛心疾首，固已极矣。 又适值欧化东渐，专讲物质文明之秋，遂本科学家世界无帝神管辖，人身无魂魄轮回之说，奉为国是，俾播印于人人脑髓中，自是而人心之敬畏绝矣。 敬畏绝，而道德无根柢以发生矣！放僻邪侈，肆无忌惮，争权夺利，日相战杀，其祸将有甚于拳匪者！……”这简直说是万恶都由科学，道德全靠鬼话；而且与其科学，不如拳匪了。从前的排斥外来学术和思想，大抵专靠皇帝；自六朝至唐宋，凡攻击佛教的人，往往说他不拜君父，近乎造反。现在没有皇帝了，却寻出一个“道德”的大帽子，看他何等利害。不提防想不到的一本绍兴《教育杂志》里面，也有一篇仿古先生的《教育偏重科学无甯偏重道德》（甯字原文如此，疑是避讳）的论文，他说——
This is simply that all evil is caused by science, and morality depends on nonsense; And it's better to be a boxer than a science. In the past, the exclusion of foreign scholarship and ideas mostly relied on the emperor; From the Six Dynasties to the Tang and Song Dynasties, anyone who attacked Buddhism often said that he did not worship the king, which was almost a rebellion. Now there is no emperor, but he has found a big hat of "morality" to see what he is interested in. Don't be wary of the unexpected Shaoxing "Education Magazine", there is also a paper by Mr. Fang Gu "Education Focuses on Science and Emphasizes Ning Emphasizes Morality" (the original text of Ning is like this, suspected to be a taboo), he said——“西人以数百年科学之心力，仅酿成此次之大战争。……科学云乎哉？多见其为残贼人道矣！”
"Westerners have only caused this great war with hundreds of years of scientific effort. …… Is it science? Many people have seen that they are brutal and humane! ”“偏重于科学，则相尚于知能；偏重于道德，则相尚于欺伪。相尚于欺伪，则祸止于欺伪，相尚于知能，则欺伪莫由得而明矣！”
“偏重于科学，则相尚于知能；偏重于道德，则相尚于欺伪。 相尚于欺伪，则祸止于欺伪，相尚于知能，则欺伪莫由得而明矣！”虽然不说鬼神为道德根本，至于向科学宣告死刑，却居然两教同心了。所以拳匪的传单上，明白写着——
Although it is not said that ghosts and gods are the foundation of morality, as for pronouncing the death penalty to science, the two religions are actually of the same mind. So on the flyer of the boxer, it is clearly written -“傅言由山东来，赶紧急傅，并无虚言！”（傅字原文如此，疑传字之误。）
" Fu Yan came from Shandong, rushing to the emergency Fu, there is no falsehood!" (The original text of the word Fu is like this, and it is suspected that the word is wrong.) ）照他们看来，这般可恨可恶的科学世界，怎样挽救呢？《灵学杂志》内俞复先生答吴稚晖先生书里说过：“鬼神之说不张，国家之命遂促！”可知最好是张鬼神之说了。鬼神为道德根本，也与张天师和仿古先生的意见毫不冲突。可惜近来北京乩坛，又印出一本《感显利冥录》，内有前任北京城隍白知和谛闲法师的问答——
In their opinion, how can such a hateful and hateful scientific world be saved? In the "Journal of Spiritual Studies", Mr. Yu Fu replied to Mr. Wu Zhihui in his book: "If the words of ghosts and gods are not open, the fate of the country will be shortened!" It can be seen that it is best to say that it is Zhang Ghost. Ghosts and gods are the foundation of morality, and they do not conflict with the opinions of Master Zhang and Mr. Antiquity. Unfortunately, recently, the Beijing Witch Altar has printed another book of "Manifestation and Benefit of the Underworld", which contains questions and answers between the former Beijing City God Bai Zhi and Master Dixian -“师云：发愿一事，的确要紧。……此次由南方来，闻某处有济公临坛，所说之话，殊难相信。济祖是阿罗汉，见思惑已尽，断不为此。……不知某会临坛者，是济祖否？请示。
Shi Yun: Making a vow is indeed important. …… This time I came from the south, and I heard that there was a Jigong on the altar somewhere, and what he said was hard to believe. Jizu is an Arhat, and seeing that his thoughts have exhausted, he will never do such a thing. …… I wonder if the person who came to the altar at a certain meeting was Jizu? Ask.“乩云：承谕发愿，……谨记斯言。某处坛，灵鬼附之耳。须知灵鬼，即魔道也。知此后当发愿驱除此等之鬼。”
“乩云：承谕发愿，…… 谨记斯言。 某处坛，灵鬼附之耳。 须知灵鬼，即魔道也。 知此后当发愿驱除此等之鬼。 ”“师云”的发愿，城隍竟不能懂；却先与某会力争正统。照此看来，国家之命未延，鬼兵先要打仗；道德仍无根柢，科学也还该活命了。
The vow of "Shi Yun" could not be understood by the City God; But first I will fight for orthodoxy with a certain association. From this point of view, the life of the country has not been extended, and the ghost soldiers will fight first; Morality is still unfounded, and science should still live.其实中国自所谓维新以来，何尝真有科学。现在儒道诸公，却径把历史上一味捣鬼不治人事的恶果，都移到科学身上，也不问什么叫道德，怎样是科学，只是信口开河，造谣生事；使国人格外惑乱，社会上罩满了妖气。以上所引的话，不过随手拈出的几点黑影；此外自大埠以至僻地，还不知有多少奇谈。但即此几条，已足可推测我们周围的空气，以及将来的情形，如何黑暗可怕了。
In fact, since the so-called Restoration, China has never really had science. Now the Confucian and Taoist gentlemen have directly shifted the evil consequences of blindly causing trouble in history to science, and they do not ask what morality is or what science is, but just talk nonsense and spread rumors and cause trouble; It confuses the Chinese people, and the society is full of demonic energy. The above quotes are just a few black shadows that are casually picked up; In addition, from the big port to the remote place, I don't know how many strange stories. But these are enough to speculate about how dark and terrifying the air around us and the future will be.据我看来，要救治这“几至国亡种灭”的中国，那种“传言由山东来”的方法，是全不对症的，只有这鬼话的对头的科学！——不是皮毛的真正科学！——这是什么缘故呢？陈正敏《遯斋闲览》有一段故事（未见原书，据《本草纲目》所引写出，但这也全是道士所编造的谣言，并非事实，现在只当他比喻用）说得好——
In my opinion, to treat this China, which is "almost destroyed by the country and the extinction", the method of " rumors come from Shandong" is completely wrong, only the science of the opposite of this nonsense! – Not the real science of fur! ——What is the reason for this? There is a story in Chen Zhengmin's "Dun Zhai Leisure" (not seen in the original book, according to the "Compendium of Materia Medica", but this is all a rumor fabricated by Taoist priests, not a fact, now only used as a metaphor) is well said——“杨勔中年得异疾；每发语，腹中有小声应之，久渐声大。有道士见之，曰：此应声虫也！但读《本草》取不应者治之。读至雷丸，不应，遂顿服数粒而愈。”
“杨勔中年得异疾；每发语，腹中有小声应之，久渐声大。 有道士见之，曰：此应声虫也！但读《本草》取不应者治之。 读至雷丸，不应，遂顿服数粒而愈。 ”关于吞食病菌的事，我上文所说的大概也是错的，但现在手头无书可查。也许是Koch博士发见了虎列拉菌时，Pfeffer博士以为不是真病菌，当面吞下去了，后来病得几乎要死。总之，无论如何，这一案决不能作“精神能改造肉体”的例证。
What I said above about swallowing germs is probably wrong, but there are no books at hand. Perhaps when Dr. Koch discovered Tigerella, Dr. Pfeffer thought it was not a real germ and swallowed it in person, and later became almost deadly of illness. In short, in any case, this case must not be an example of "the spirit can transform the body".一九二五年九月二十四日补记。
Supplement on September 24, 1925.

一九一八年

三十五

一九一八年

thirty-five从清期末年，直到现在，常常听人说“保存国粹”这一句话。
From the end of the Qing Dynasty to the present, I often hear people say the phrase "preserve the essence of the country".前清末年说这话的人，大约有两种：一是爱国志士，一是出洋游历的大官。他们在这题目的背后，各各藏着别的意思。志士说保存国粹，是光复旧物的意思；大官说保存国粹，是教留学生不要去剪辫子的意思。
There are about two types of people who said this at the end of the Qing Dynasty: one is a patriot, and the other is a high-ranking official who has traveled abroad. Behind this topic, they each have other meanings. The aspirant said that preserving the essence of the country means to restore the old things; The high official said that preserving the quintessence of the country means teaching international students not to cut their braids.现在成了民国了。以上所说的两个问题，已经完全消灭。所以我不能知道现在说这话的是那一流人，这话的背后藏着什么意思了。
Now it has become the Republic of China. The two problems mentioned above have been completely eliminated. So I can't know which first-class person is saying this now, and what is the meaning behind these words.可是保存国粹的正面意思，我也不懂。
But I don't understand the positive meaning of preserving the essence of the country.什么叫“国粹”？照字面看来，必是一国独有，他国所无的事物了。换一句话，便是特别的东西。但特别未必定是好，何以应该保存？
What is the "quintessence of the country"? Literally, it must be something unique to one country and not in other countries. In other words, it is something special. But it may not be good, so why should it be preserved?譬如一个人，脸上长了一个瘤，额上肿出一颗疮，的确是与众不同，显出他特别的样子，可以算他的“粹”。然而据我看来，还不如将这“粹”割去了，同别人一样的好。
For example, a person has a tumor on his face and a sore on his forehead, which is indeed different, showing his special appearance, which can be regarded as his "essence". However, in my opinion, it is better to cut off this "essence", as good as others.倘说：中国的国粹，特别而且好；又何以现在糟到如此情形，新派摇头，旧派也叹气。
If you say: China's national essence is special and good; Why is it so bad now, the new school shook its head, and the old school also sighed.倘说：这便是不能保存国粹的缘故，开了海禁的缘故，所以必须保存。但海禁未开以前，全国都是“国粹”，理应好了；何以春秋战国五胡十六国闹个不休，古人也都叹气。
If you say: This is because the quintessence of the country cannot be preserved, and the sea ban has been opened, so it must be preserved. But before the sea ban was opened, the whole country was the "quintessence of the country", which should be good; Why did the Five Hu and Sixteen Kingdoms of the Spring and Autumn Warring States period make endless troubles, and the ancients sighed.倘说：这是不学成汤文武周公的缘故；何以真正成汤文武周公时代，也先有桀纣暴虐，后有殷顽作乱；后来仍旧弄出春秋战国五胡十六国闹个不休，古人也都叹气。
If you say: This is because you don't learn Tang, Wenwu, and Zhou Gong; How to really become the era of Tang, Wenwu and Duke of Zhou, there was first the tyranny of Jie and Zhou, and then there was the stubborn rebellion; Later, it still made a lot of trouble in the Spring and Autumn Warring States Five Hu and Sixteen Kingdoms, and the ancients sighed.我有一位朋友说得好：“要我们保存国粹，也须国粹能保存我们。”
A friend of mine said it well: "If we want to preserve the essence of the country, we must also be able to preserve us." ”保存我们，的确是第一义。只要问他有无保存我们的力量，不管他是否国粹。
Saving us is indeed the first meaning. Just ask him if he has preserved our strength, whether he is the quintessence of the country or not.

一九一八年

三十六

一九一八年

thirty-six现在许多人有大恐惧；我也有大恐惧。
Now many people have great fear; I also have great fears.许多人所怕的，是“中国人”这名目要消灭；我所怕的，是中国人要从“世界人”中挤出。
What many people fear is that the name "Chinese" will be eliminated; What I am afraid of is that the Chinese will be squeezed out of the "people of the world".我以为“中国人”这名目，决不会消灭；只要人种还在，总是中国人。譬如埃及犹太人，无论他们还有“国粹”没有，现在总叫他埃及犹太人，未尝改了称呼。可见保存名目，全不必劳力费心。
I thought that the name "Chinese" would never be eliminated; As long as the race is still there, it will always be Chinese. For example, Egyptian Jews, whether they still have "national essence" or not, now always call him Egyptian Jew, and the name has not changed. It can be seen that there is no need to work hard to save the name.但是想在现今的世界上，协同生长，挣一地位，即须有相当的进步的智识，道德，品格，思想，才能够站得住脚：这事极须劳力费心。而“国粹”多的国民，尤为劳力费心，因为他的“粹”太多。粹太多，便太特别。太特别，便难与种种人协同生长，挣得地位。
But if you want to grow together and earn a position in today's world, you must have considerable progress in intellect, morality, character, and thought, in order to be able to stand firm: this is a matter of great labor and effort. Nationals with a lot of "national essence" are particularly labor-intensive because they have too much "essence". Too much essence is too special. If it is too special, it will be difficult to grow with all kinds of people and earn status.有人说：“我们要特别生长；不然，何以为中国人！”
Some people say: "We must grow specially; Otherwise, how can you be Chinese? ”于是乎要从“世界人”中挤出。
Therefore, it is necessary to squeeze out from the "people of the world".于是乎中国人失了世界，却暂时仍要在这世界上住！——这便是我的大恐惧。
So the Chinese lost the world, but they still have to live in this world for the time being! - This is my great fear.

一九一八年

三十七

一九一八年

thirty-seven近来很有许多人，在那里竭力提倡打拳。记得先前也曾有过一回，但那时提倡的，是满清王公大臣，现在却是民国的教育家，位分略有不同。至于他们的宗旨，是一是二，局外人便不得而知。
Recently, there have been many people who are trying to promote boxing there. I remember that there was a time before, but at that time, it was the princes and ministers of the Manchu Qing Dynasty, but now it is the educators of the Republic of China, and the position is slightly different. As for their purpose, whether it is one or two, outsiders do not know.现在那班教育家，把“九天玄女传与轩辕黄帝，轩辕黄帝传与尼姑”的老方法，改称“新武术”，又是“中国式体操”，叫青年去练习。听说其中好处甚多，重要的举出两种来，是：
Now the group of educators have renamed the old method of "Nine Heavens Xuan Nu to Xuanyuan Huangdi, Xuanyuan Huangdi to Nuns" to "New Martial Arts", and "Chinese gymnastics", asking young people to practice. I heard that there are many benefits, and the two important ones are:一，用在体育上。据说中国人学了外国体操，不见效验；所以须改习本国式体操（即打拳）才行。依我想来：两手拿着外国铜锤或木棍，把手脚左伸右伸的，大约于筋肉发达上，也该有点“效验”。无如竟不见效验！那自然只好改途去练“武松脱铐”那些把戏了。这或者因为中国人生理上与外国人不同的缘故。
First, it is used in sports. It is said that the Chinese learned foreign gymnastics, but it was not effective; Therefore, it is necessary to change to national gymnastics (that is, boxing). According to my opinion, holding a foreign copper hammer or wooden stick in both hands, stretching out my hands and feet to the left and right, should also be a bit "effective" in terms of muscle development. It's better not to see the effect! Naturally, I had to change my path to practice the tricks of "Wu Song unhandcuffing". This may be because Chinese people are physiologically different from foreigners.二，用在军事上。中国人会打拳，外国人不会打拳：有一天见面对打，中国人得胜，是不消说的了。即使不把外国人“板油扯下”，只消一阵“乌龙扫地”，也便一齐扫倒，从此不能爬起。无如现在打仗，总用枪炮。枪炮这件东西，中国虽然“古时也已有过”，可是此刻没有了。籐牌操法，又不练习，怎能御得枪炮？我想（他们不曾说明，这是我的“管窥蠡测”）：打拳打下去，总可达到“枪炮打不进”的程度（即内功？）。这件事从前已经试过一次，在一千九百年。可惜那一回真是名誉的完全失败了。且看这一回如何。
Second, it is used in military affairs. Chinese can punch, foreigners can't box: one day they will meet and fight, and the Chinese will win, needless to say. Even if the foreigners are not "ripped off", they will only be swept down for a while, and they will not be able to get up from then on. There is no such thing as fighting now, always using guns. Although China "has had it in ancient times", it is not there at the moment. If you don't practice rattan cards, how can you resist guns? I think (they didn't explain it, this is my "tube peeping"): if you keep punching, you can always reach the level of "guns can't enter" (i.e., internal strength?). ）。 This has been tried once before, in 1,900 years. It's a pity that it was a complete failure of reputation. Let's see how this time goes.

一九一八年

三十八

一九一八年

thirty-eight中国人向来有点自大。——只可惜没有“个人的自大”，都是“合群的爱国的自大”。这便是文化竞争失败之后，不能再见振拔改进的原因。
Chinese people have always been a bit arrogant. ——It's a pity that there is no "personal arrogance", it is all "gregarious patriotic arrogance". This is the reason why after the failure of cultural competition, there can be no improvement.“个人的自大”，就是独异，是对庸众宣战。除精神病学上的夸大狂外，这种自大的人，大抵有几分天才，——照Nordau等说，也可说就是几分狂气，他们必定自己觉得思想见识高出庸众之上，又为庸众所不懂，所以愤世疾俗，渐渐变成厌世家，或“国民之敌”。但一切新思想，多从他们出来，政治上宗教上道德上的改革，也从他们发端。所以多有这“个人的自大”的国民，真是多福气！多幸运！
"Personal arrogance" is unique, and it is a declaration of war on mediocrity. In addition to psychiatric exaggeration, this kind of arrogant people are probably a bit of genius,—— according to Nordau and others, it can also be said to be a bit of madness, they must feel that their ideology and insight are higher than the mediocre, and they are not understood by the mediocre, so they are cynical, and gradually become misanthropic, or "enemies of the people". But all new ideas mostly come from them, and political, religious, and moral reforms also start from them. So how blessed it is to have such a "personal arrogance" of the people! How lucky!“合群的自大”，“爱国的自大”，是党同伐异，是对少数的天才宣战；——至于对别国文明宣战，却尚在其次。他们自己毫无特别才能，可以夸示于人，所以把这国拿来做个影子；他们把国里的习惯制度抬得很高，赞美的了不得；他们的国粹，既然这样有荣光，他们自然也有荣光了！倘若遇见攻击，他们也不必自去应战，因为这种蹲在影子里张目摇舌的人，数目极多，只须用mob的长技，一阵乱噪，便可制胜。胜了，我是一群中的人，自然也胜了；若败了时，一群中有许多人，未必是我受亏：大凡聚众滋事时，多具这种心理，也就是他们的心理。他们举动，看似猛烈，其实却很卑怯。至于所生结果，则复古，尊王，扶清灭洋等等，已领教得多了。所以多有这“合群的爱国的自大”的国民，真是可哀，真是不幸！
"gregarious arrogance" and "patriotic arrogance" are the party's unity against differences and the declaration of war on a small number of geniuses; ——As for declaring war on other civilizations, it is still secondary. They have no special talents and can boast to others, so they use this country as a shadow; They held the customary system in the country very high and praised it greatly; Their national essence, since they are glorious, they naturally have glory! If they encounter an attack, they don't have to fight on their own, because there are a lot of people squatting in the shadows, and they only need to use the long skills of mobs and make a noise to win. If I win, I am a person in a group, so naturally I will win; If I lose, there are many people in the group, and I may not be at a loss: when gathering people to cause trouble, most people have this kind of mentality, that is, their psychology. Their actions seem violent, but they are actually very cowardly. As for the results, they have learned a lot about retro, respecting the king, supporting the Qing and destroying the ocean, etc. So it is really sad and unfortunate that there are so many people who are "gregarious and patriotic"!不幸中国偏只多这一种自大：古人所作所说的事，没一件不好，遵行还怕不及，怎敢说到改革？这种爱国的自大家的意见，虽各派略有不同，根柢总是一致，计算起来，可分作下列五种：
Unfortunately, China only has this kind of arrogance: none of the things the ancients did or said were bad, and they were afraid of not being able to follow them, so how dare they talk about reform? Although the opinions of this kind of patriotic self-respect are slightly different from each faction, the roots are always the same, and when calculated, they can be divided into the following five types:甲云：“中国地大物博，开化最早；道德天下第一。”这是完全自负。
Jia Yun: "China is vast and has a lot of resources, and it is the earliest of enlightenment; Morality is the best in the world. "This is complete conceit.乙云：“外国物质文明虽高，中国精神文明更好。”
Yi said: "Although foreign material civilization is high, Chinese spiritual civilization is better. ”丙云：“外国的东西，中国都已有过；某种科学，即某子所说的云云”，这两种都是“古今中外派”的支流；依据张之洞的格言，以“中学为体西学为用”的人物。
Bing Yun: "Foreign things, China has already done; a certain science, that is, what a certain son said", both of which are tributaries of "ancient and modern Chinese and foreign schools"; According to Zhang Zhidong's maxim, the character who "uses middle school as the body and Western learning".丁云：“外国也有叫化子，——（或云）也有草舍，——娼妓，——臭虫。”这是消极的反抗。
Ding Yun: "There are also foreign countries called Huazi ,—— (or clouds) There are also grass huts,—— prostitutes,—— and bed bugs. "This is negative resistance.戊云：“中国便是野蛮的好。”又云：“你说中国思想昏乱，那正是我民族所造成的事业的结晶。从祖先昏乱起，直要昏乱到子孙；从过去昏乱起，直要昏乱到未来。……（我们是四万万人，）你能把我们灭绝么？”这比“丁”更进一层，不去拖人下水，反以自己的丑恶骄人；至于口气的强硬，却很有《水浒传》中牛二的态度。
Wu Yun: "China is barbaric." He also said: "You say that China's thinking is confused, which is the crystallization of the cause caused by our nation." From the confusion of the ancestors, it will be confused to the descendants; From the past to the future. …… (We are 40 million people,) Can you exterminate us? This is one level higher than "Ding", not dragging people into the water, but proud of his ugliness; As for the toughness of the tone, it has the attitude of Niu Er in "Water Margin".五种之中，甲乙丙丁的话，虽然已很荒谬，但同戊比较，尚觉情有可原，因为他们还有一点好胜心存在。譬如衰败人家的子弟，看见别家兴旺，多说大话，摆出大家架子；或寻求人家一点破绽，聊给自己解嘲。这虽然极是可笑，但比那一种掉了鼻子，还说是祖传老病，夸示于众的人，总要算略高一步了。
Among the five types, A, B, C, and D are ridiculous, but compared with E, they still feel that they are excusable, because they still have a little competitive spirit. For example, the children of declining families, when they see other families prospering, talk more and put on everyone's show; Or seek a little flaw in others and talk about ridicule for yourself. Although this is extremely ridiculous, it is always a little higher than the kind of person who has dropped his nose and said that it is an ancestral old disease, and boasts to the public.戊派的爱国论最晚出，我听了也最寒心；这不但因其居心可怕，实因他所说的更为实在的缘故。昏乱的祖先，养出昏乱的子孙，正是遗传的定理。民族根性造成之后，无论好坏，改变都不容易的。法国G．Le Bon著《民族进化的心理》中，说及此事道（原文已忘，今但举其大意）——“我们一举一动，虽似自主，其实多受死鬼的牵制。将我们一代的人，和先前几百代的鬼比较起来，数目上就万不能敌了。”我们几百代的祖先里面，昏乱的人，定然不少：有讲道学的儒生，也有讲阴阳五行的道士，有静坐炼丹的仙人，也有打脸打把子的戏子。所以我们现在虽想好好做“人”，难保血管里的昏乱分子不来作怪，我们也不由自主，一变而为研究丹田脸谱的人物：这真是大可寒心的事。但我总希望这昏乱思想遗传的祸害，不至于有梅毒那样猛烈，竟至百无一免。即使同梅毒一样，现在发明了六百零六，肉体上的病，既可医治；我希望也有一种七百零七的药，可以医治思想上的病。这药原来也已发明，就是“科学”一味。只希望那班精神上掉了鼻子的朋友，不要又打着“祖传老病”的旗号来反对吃药，中国的昏乱病，便也总有全愈的一天。祖先的势力虽大，但如从现代起，立意改变：扫除了昏乱的心思，和助成昏乱的物事（儒道两派的文书），再用了对症的药，即使不能立刻奏效，也可把那病毒略略羼淡。如此几代之后待我们成了祖先的时候，就可以分得昏乱祖先的若干势力，那时便有转机，Le Bon所说的事，也不足怕了。
The patriotism of the Wu faction came out the latest, and I was the most chilled when I heard it; This is not only because of his terrible intentions, but also because what he said is more real. The confused ancestors and the breeding of confused descendants are the theorem of heredity. After the national roots are created, it is not easy to change, for better or for worse. In the French G.Le Bon book "The Psychology of National Evolution", he said about this matter (the original text has been forgotten, but now I will give the general idea) - "Although our every move seems to be autonomous, it is actually mostly constrained by the dead ghosts. Compared with the ghosts of the previous hundreds of generations, we are invincible in number. "Among our ancestors for hundreds of generations, there must be many people who are confused: there are Confucian scholars who preach Taoism, Taoist priests who talk about yin and yang and the five elements, immortals who sit quietly and refine alchemy, and actors who slap their faces. So although we want to be a good "person" now, it is difficult to ensure that the confused elements in the blood vessels will not cause trouble, and we can't help but change into a person who studies the face of the dantian: this is really chilling. But I always hope that the scourge of this inheritance of confused thoughts will not be as violent as syphilis, and it will be inevitable. Even if it is the same as syphilis, now six hundred and six have been invented, and physical diseases can be cured; I hope there is also a seven hundred and seven medicine that can cure the disease of the mind. This medicine has also been invented, which is "science". I just hope that those friends who have lost their noses mentally will not oppose taking medicine under the banner of "ancestral old disease", and China's comatose disease will always be cured one day. Although the power of the ancestors is great, if from modern times, the intention has changed: to sweep away the confused mind, and to help the confusion (the documents of Confucianism and Taoism), and then use the right medicine, even if it does not work immediately, it can slightly fade the virus. In this way, when we become ancestors after a few generations, we can divide some of the forces that confuse our ancestors, and then there will be a turnaround, and what Le Bon said is not to be feared.以上是我对于“不长进的民族”的疗救方法；至于“灭绝”一条，那是全不成话，可不必说。“灭绝”这两个可怕的字，岂是我们人类应说的？只有张献忠这等人曾有如此主张，至今为人类唾骂；而且于实际上发生出什么效验呢？但我有一句话，要劝戊派诸公。“灭绝”这句话，只能吓人，却不能吓倒自然。他是毫无情面：他看见有自向灭绝这条路走的民族，便请他们灭绝，毫不客气。我们自己想活，也希望别人都活；不忍说他人的灭绝，又怕他们自己走到灭绝的路上，把我们带累了也灭绝，所以在此着急。倘使不改现状，反能兴旺，能得真实自由的幸福生活，那就是做野蛮也很好。——但可有人敢答应说“是”么？The above is my treatment method for the "nation that does not grow"; As for the "extinction", it is completely unspeakable, but it goes without saying. How can the terrible word "extinction" be said by us humans? Only Zhang Xianzhong and others have made such a claim, and they are still scolded by mankind; And what effect does it actually have? But I have a sentence to persuade the gentlemen of the Wu faction. The phrase "extinction" can only frighten people, but it cannot frighten nature. He was ruthless: when he saw a people who were going to exterminate themselves, he asked them to exterminate them unceremoniously. We want to live ourselves, and we also hope that others will live; I can't bear to talk about the extinction of others, and I'm afraid that they will go to extinction on their own, and they will tire us and become extinct, so I'm anxious here. If you don't change the status quo, you can prosper, and you can live a true and free happy life, then it is good to be savage. ——But does anyone dare to say "yes"?

一九一九年

一九一九年

一九一九年

In 1919

一九一九年

随感录三十九

一九一九年

Recorded 39 with Impressions《新青年》的五卷四号，隐然是一本戏剧改良号，我是门外汉，开口不得；但见《再论戏剧改良》这一篇中，有“中国人说到理想，便含着轻薄的意味，觉得理想即是妄想，理想家即是妄人”一段话，却令我发生了追忆，不免又要说几句空谈。
The fourth volume of the fifth volume of "New Youth" is vaguely a drama improvement number, I am a layman and cannot speak; However, in the article "On Dramatic Improvement", there is a passage that "Chinese talk about ideals, with a frivolous meaning, thinking that ideals are delusions, and idealists are delusions", but it made me reminisce, and I couldn't help but say a few empty words.据我的经验，这理想价值的跌落，只是近五年以来的事。民国以前，还未如此，许多国民，也肯认理想家是引路的人。到了民国元年前后，理论上的事情，著著实现，于是理想派——深浅真伪现在姑且弗论——也格外举起头来。一方面却有旧官僚的攘夺政权，以及遗老受冷不过，豫备下山，都痛恨这一类理想派，说什么闻所未闻的学理法理，横亘在前，不能大踏步摇摆。于是沉思三日三夜，竟想出了一种兵器，有了这利器，才将“理”字排行的元恶大憝，一律肃清。这利器的大名，便叫“经验”。现在又添上一个雅号，便是高雅之至的“事实”。
In my experience, the decline in this ideal value has only happened in the past five years. Before the Republic of China, this was not the case, and many people were willing to recognize the idealist as the one who led the way. Around the first year of the Republic of China, theoretical things were realized, so the idealists—whether they were true or false now—also raised their heads. On the one hand, there are old bureaucrats who usurp power, and the old people who are cold and ready to go down the mountain, all of whom hate this type of idealist. So after contemplating for three days and three nights, he actually came up with a weapon, and with this sharp weapon, the main evil who ranked the word "reason" was eliminated. The name of this sharp weapon is called "experience". Now another nickname has been added, which is the most elegant "fact".经验从那里得来，便是从清朝得来的。经验提高了他的喉咙含含糊糊说，“狗有狗道理，鬼有鬼道理，中国与众不同，也自有中国道理。道理各各不同，一味理想，殊堪痛恨。”这时候，正是上下一心理财强种的时候，而且带着理字的，又大半是洋货，爱国之士，义当排斥。所以一转眼便跌了价值；一转眼便遭了嘲骂；又一转眼，便连他的影子，也同拳民时代的教民一般，竟犯了与众共弃的大罪了。
Experience comes from there, it comes from the Qing Dynasty. Experience raised his throat and said vaguely, "Dogs have dog truths, ghosts have ghosts, China is different, and it also has its own Chinese truth." The principles are different, and the ideals are very hateful. "At this time, it is the time to strengthen the psychological wealth of the upper and lower levels, and most of the people with the word "reason" are foreign goods, patriots, and should be rejected. So the value fell in a blink of an eye; In the blink of an eye, he was ridiculed; In the blink of an eye, even his shadow, like the parishioners of the boxing era, actually committed the great sin of abandoning everyone.但我们应该明白，人格的平等，也是一种外来的旧理想；现在“经验”既已登坛，自然株连着化为妄想，理合不分首从，全踏在朝靴底下，以符列祖列宗的成规。这一踏不觉过了四五年，经验家虽然也增加了四五岁，与素未经验的生物学学理——死——渐渐接近，但这与众不同的中国，却依然不是理想的住家。一大批踏在朝靴底下的学习诸公，早经竭力大叫，说他也得了经验了。
But we should understand that equality of personality is also an old foreign ideal; Now that the "experience" has been on the stage, it is natural to turn into delusion, and it is reasonable to do not distinguish between the first and the second, and all step under the boots of the court, in order to conform to the rules of the ancestors and ancestors. After four or five years of this step, although the empirists have increased by four or five years, and they are gradually getting closer to the biological theory of death - which they have never experienced, this unique China is still not an ideal home. A large number of study gentlemen who stepped under the boots of the court shouted as hard as they could, saying that he had also gained experience.但我们应该明白，从前的经验，是从皇帝脚底下学得；现在与将来的经验，是从皇帝的奴才的脚底下学得。奴才的数目多，心传的经验家也愈多。待到经验家二世的全盛时代，那便是理想单被轻薄，理想家单当妄人，还要算是幸福侥幸了。
But we should understand that the previous experience was learned from the emperor's feet; The experience of the present and the future is learned from the feet of the emperor's servants. The more servants there are, the more experienced people who have been transmitted from the heart. In the heyday of the second generation of empiricists, it was a happy fluke to be the ideal alone and the idealist to be a delusion.现在的社会，分不清理想与妄想的区别。再过几时，还要分不清“做不到”与“不肯做到”的区别，要将扫除庭园与劈开地球混作一谈。理想家说，这花园有秽气，须得扫除，——到那时候，说这宗话的人，也要算在理想党里，——他却说道，他们从来在此小便，如何扫除？万万不能，也断乎不可！
In today's society, it is impossible to distinguish between ideals and delusions. In a while, it will be difficult to distinguish the difference between "can't do it" and "won't do it", and it will be confused with sweeping the garden and splitting the earth. The idealist said that this garden has a filth and must be swept away,—— and at that time, those who say this sect will also be counted in the ideal party,—— but he said, they have always urinated here, how to sweep it away? Absolutely not, it is absolutely impossible!那时候，只要从来如此，便是宝贝。即使无名肿毒，倘若生在中国人身上，也便“红肿之处，艳若桃花；溃烂之时，美如乳酪”。国粹所在，妙不可言。那些理想学理法理，既是洋货，自然完全不在话下了。
At that time, as long as it was always like this, it was a baby. Even if it is nameless and poisonous, if it is born in a Chinese, it will be "red and swollen, as beautiful as a peach blossom; When it festers, it is as beautiful as cheese." The essence of the country is indescribable. Those ideals and theories are foreign goods, so naturally they are completely out of the question.但最奇怪的，是七年十月下半，忽有许多经验家，理想经验双全家，经验理想未定家，都说公理战胜了强权，还向公理颂扬了一番，客气了一顿。这事不但溢出了经验的范围，而且又添上一个理字排行的厌物。将来如何收场，我是毫无经验，不敢妄谈。经验诸公，想也未曾经验，开口不得。
But the strangest thing is that in the second half of October of the seventh year, suddenly there were many experienced people, both ideal and experienced, and the experience and ideal were not determined, all of whom said that axioms defeated power, and also praised the axioms, and were polite. This not only overflowed the scope of experience, but also added a disgust to the ranking. I have no experience and dare not talk about how it will end in the future. Experienced gentlemen, I don't think I've ever experienced it, and I can't speak.没有法，只好在此提出，请教受人轻薄的理想家了。
There is no way, so I have to propose here and ask the idealist who is frivolous.

一九一九年

四十

一九一九年

forty终日在家里坐，至多也不过看见窗外四角形惨黄色的天，还有什么感？只有几封信，说道，“久违芝宇，时切葭思”；有几个客，说道，“今天天气很好”：都是祖传老店的文字语言。写的说的，既然有口无心，看的听的，也便毫无所感了。
Sitting at home all day, at most I can only see the yellow sky outside the window, what else does it feel? There are only a few letters, saying, "It's been a long time since I last saw Zhiyu, and I think about it"; A few customers said, "The weather is good today": they are all in the written language of the ancestral old shop. What is written and said, since there is no intention, what is seen and listened to is not felt at all.有一首诗，从一位不相识的少年寄来，却对于我有意义。——
There is a poem sent by a teenager I don't know, but it means something to me. ——爱情
Love我是一个可怜的中国人。爱情！我不知道你是什么。
I am a poor Chinese. Love! I don't know what you are.我有父母，教我育我，待我很好；我待他们，也还不差。我有兄弟姊妹，幼时共我玩耍，长来同我切磋，待我很好；我待他们，也还不差。但是没有人曾经“爱”过我，我也不曾“爱”过他。
I have parents, who taught me to raise me and treated me well; I treat them well, and it's not bad. I have brothers and sisters who played with me when I was young, and when I grew up, they competed with me and treated me very well; I treat them well, and it's not bad. But no one has ever "loved" me, and I have never "loved" him.我年十九，父母给我讨老婆。于今数年，我们两个，也还和睦。可是这婚姻，是全凭别人主张，别人撮合：把他们一日戏言，当我们百年的盟约。仿佛两个牲口听着主人的命令：“咄，你们好好的住在一块儿罢！”
I was nineteen years old, and my parents gave me a wife. In the past few years, the two of us are still in harmony. But this marriage is all based on the ideas of others, and others are matched: they joke about it for a day, treating it as our century-old covenant. It was as if the two animals were listening to their master's orders: "Hey, you live together!" ”爱情！可怜我不知道你是什么！
Love! Poor I don't know what you are!诗的好歹，意思的深浅，姑且勿论；但我说，这是血的蒸气，醒过来的人的真声音。
The quality of the poem and the depth of the meaning are not to be discussed; But I say, this is the steam of blood, the true voice of the awakened person.爱情是什么东西？我也不知道。中国的男女大抵一对或一群——一男多女——的住着，不知道有谁知道。
What is love? I don't know. Most men and women in China live in pairs or groups - one man or more women - and I don't know who knows.但从前没有听到苦闷的叫声。即使苦闷，一叫便错；少的老的，一齐摇头，一齐痛骂。
But I didn't hear a cry of distress before. Even if you are depressed, you will be wrong when you call it; The young and the old shook their heads and scolded together.然而无爱情结婚的恶结果，却连续不断的进行。形式上的夫妇，既然都全不相关，少的另去姘人宿娼，老的再来买妾：麻痹了良心，各有妙法。所以直到现在，不成问题。但也曾造出一个“妒”字，略表他们曾经苦心经营的痕迹。
However, the evil result of marriage without love continues to progress. Formal couples, since they are completely unrelated, the few go to the prostitutes, and the old ones come to buy concubines: they paralyze their conscience, and each has their own wonderful methods. So until now, it was not a problem. But they also created the word "jealousy", which slightly shows the traces of their painstaking management.可是东方发白，人类向各民族所要的是“人”，——自然也是“人之子”——我们所有的是单是人之子，是儿媳妇与儿媳之夫，不能献出于人类之前。
But the East is white, what mankind wants from all ethnic groups is "people",—— and naturally it is also "children of man" - all we have is only the son of man, the daughter-in-law and the husband of the daughter-in-law, and cannot be dedicated before mankind.可是魔鬼手上，终有漏光的处所，掩不住光明：人之子醒了；他知道了人类间应有爱情；知道了从前一班少的老的所犯的罪恶；于是起了苦闷，张口发出这叫声。
But in the hands of the devil, there is always a place where the light leaks, and the light cannot be hidden: the Son of Man is awake; He knew that there should be love among humans; I know the sins committed by the old and the young; So he became distressed and opened his mouth to make this cry.但在女性一方面，本来也没有罪，现在是做了旧习惯的牺牲。我们既然自觉着人类的道德，良心上不肯犯他们少的老的的罪，又不能责备异性，也只好陪着做一世牺牲，完结了四千年的旧账。
But on the female side, there was no sin in the first place, and now it is a sacrifice of old habits. Since we are conscious of human morality and refuse to commit the sins of our young and old in our conscience, we cannot blame the opposite sex, so we have to accompany them to make lifelong sacrifices and end the old account of four thousand years.做一世牺牲，是万分可怕的事；但血液究竟干净，声音究竟醒而且真。
It is a terrible thing to sacrifice a lifetime; But the blood is clean, and the voice is awake and true.我们能够大叫，是黄莺便黄莺般叫；是鸱鸮便鸱鸮般叫。我们不必学那才从私窝子里跨出脚，便说“中国道德第一”的人的声音。
We can scream, and it is the yellow warbler that screams; It's an owl that calls like an owl. We don't have to learn the voice of a person who steps out of his private nest and says "China's morality first".我们还要叫出没有爱的悲哀，叫出无所可爱的悲哀。……我们要叫到旧账勾消的时候。
We also have to call out the sorrow of no love, the sorrow of lovelessness. …… We have to call the time to write off the old accounts.旧账如何勾消？我说，“完全解放了我们的孩子！”
How to cancel old accounts? I said, "Completely liberated our children!" ”

一九一九年

四十一

一九一九年

forty-one从一封匿名信里看见一句话，是“数麻石片”（原注江苏方言），大约是没有本领便不必提倡改革，不如去数石片的好的意思。因此又记起了本志通信栏内所载四川方言的“洗煤炭”。想来别省方言中，相类的话还多；守着这专劝人自暴自弃的格言的人，也怕并不少。
I saw a sentence from an anonymous letter, which is "counting hemp stone pieces" (originally annotated in Jiangsu dialect), which probably means that if you don't have the ability, you don't have to advocate reform, it's better to count stone pieces. Therefore, I remembered the "coal washing" of the Sichuan dialect contained in the correspondence column of this chronicle. I think there are many similar words in the dialects of other provinces; I am afraid that there are not many people who adhere to this maxim that advises people to give up on themselves.凡中国人说一句话，做一件事，倘与传来的积习有若干抵触，须一个斤斗便告成功，才有立足的处所；而且被恭维得烙铁一般热。否则免不了标新立异的罪名，不许说话；或者竟成了大逆不道，为天地所不容。这一种人，从前本可以夷到九族，连累邻居；现在却不过是几封匿名信罢了。但意志略略薄弱的人便不免因此萎缩，不知不觉的也入了“数麻石片”党。
Whenever a Chinese person says a word or does something, if there is some resistance to the accumulated habits that have been passed on, it must be successful in one pound to have a foothold; And he was complimented as hot as a soldering iron. Otherwise, unconventional charges will inevitably be avoided, and you are not allowed to speak; Or it has become a great rebellion and is not tolerated by heaven and earth. This kind of person could have been exterminated to the nine clans and implicated his neighbors; Now it's just a few anonymous letters. But people with a slightly weak will inevitably shrink because of this, and unknowingly join the "counting stone pieces" party.所以现在的中国，社会上毫无改革，学术上没有发明，美术上也没有创作；至于多人继续的研究，前仆后继的探险，那更不必提了。国人的事业，大抵是专谋时式的成功的经营，以及对于一切的冷笑。
Therefore, in China now, there is no reform in society, no invention in academics, and no creation in art; As for the continued research of many people and the successive expeditions, it goes without saying. The cause of the Chinese people is probably to dedicate to the successful management of the time and the sneer of everything.但冷笑的人，虽然反对改革，却又未必有保守的能力：即如文字一面，白话固然看不上眼，古文也不甚提得起笔。照他的学说，本该去“数麻石片”了；他却又不然，只是莫名其妙的冷笑。
However, those who sneer, although opposed to reform, may not have the ability to be conservative: that is, like words, the vernacular is not easy to look at, and ancient texts are not very affordable. According to his doctrine, it was time to "count the stone chips"; He was not, just sneered inexplicably.中国的人，大抵在如此空气里成功，在如此空气里萎缩腐败，以至老死。
Chinese people are probably successful in such an air, shrinking and corrupting in such an air, and even dying of old age.我想，人猿同源的学说，大约可以毫无疑义了。但我不懂，何以从前的古猴子，不都努力变人，却到现在还留着子孙，变把戏给人看。还是那时竟没有一匹想站起来学说人话呢？还是虽然有了几匹，却终被猴子社会攻击他标新立异，都咬死了；所以终于不能进化呢？
I think the theory of the homology of apes can probably be undoubted. But I don't understand why the ancient monkeys in the past didn't all work hard to become human, but they still have children and grandchildren to show them their tricks. Or did not a single horse want to stand up and learn to speak human language at that time? or although there were a few, he was finally attacked by the monkey society for being unconventional, and they were all bitten to death; So it can't evolve in the end?尼采式的超人，虽然太觉渺茫，但就世界现有人种的事实看来，却可以确信将来总有尤为高尚尤近圆满的人类出现。到那时候，类人猿上面，怕要添出“类猿人”这一个名词。
Although Nietzschean superman is too vague, judging from the fact that there are existing races in the world, it is certain that there will always be particularly noble and near-perfect human beings in the future. At that time, the term "ape-like" will be added to the great apes.所以我时常害怕，愿中国青年都摆脱冷气，只是向上走，不必听自暴自弃者流的话。能做事的做事，能发声的发声。有一分热，发一分光，就令萤火一般，也可以在黑暗里发一点光，不必等候炬火。
So I am often afraid that I hope that Chinese young people will get rid of the air conditioning and just go upwards, without having to listen to the words of those who give up on themselves. Do things that can be done, and speak out if you can speak. If there is a bit of heat, it will emit a bit of light, and it will be like a firefly, or it can emit a little light in the dark, without waiting for the torch.此后如竟没有炬火：我便是唯一的光。倘若有了炬火，出了太阳，我们自然心悦诚服的消失，不但毫无不平，而且还要随喜赞美这炬火或太阳；因为他照了人类，连我都在内。
After that, if there is no torch: I am the only light. If there is a torch and the sun comes out, we will naturally disappear with joy and sincerity, not only without any injustice, but also praise the torch or the sun with joy; Because he took care of mankind, even me.我又愿中国青年都只是向上走，不必理会这冷笑和暗箭。尼采说：
I also hope that Chinese youth will just go upwards and ignore this sneer and arrow. Nietzsche said:“真的，人是一个浊流。应该是海了，能容这浊流使他干净。
"Really, people are a muddy stream. It should be the sea, which can allow this turbid current to make him clean.“咄，我教你们超人：这便是海，在他这里，能容下你们的大侮蔑。”（《札拉图如是说》的《序言》第三节）
"Hey, I'll teach you Superman: this is the sea, and here he can accommodate your great insults." (Section 3 of the Preface to Thus Says Zaratu)纵令不过一洼浅水，也可以学学大海；横竖都是水，可以相通。几粒石子，任他们暗地里掷来；几滴秽水，任他们从背后泼来就是了。
Even if it is only a puddle of shallow water, you can also learn the sea; Both horizontally and vertically are water, which can be connected. A few stones were thrown secretly; Just let them splash a few drops of filthy water from behind.这还算不到“大侮蔑”——因为大侮蔑也须有胆力。
This is not a "great insult" - because great contempt also requires courage.

一九一九年

四十二

一九一九年

forty-two听得朋友说，杭州英国教会里的一个医生，在一本医书上做一篇序，称中国人为土人；我当初颇不舒服，子细再想，现在也只好忍受了。土人一字，本来只说生在本地的人，没有什么恶意。后来因其所指，多系野蛮民族，所以加添了一种新意义，仿佛成了野蛮人的代名词。他们以此称中国人，原不免有侮辱的意思；但我们现在，却除承受这个名号以外，实是别无方法。因为这类是非，都凭事实，并非单用口舌可以争得的。试看中国的社会里，吃人，劫掠，残杀，人身卖买，生殖器崇拜，灵学，一夫多妻，凡有所谓国粹，没一件不与蛮人的文化（？）恰合。拖大辫，吸鸦片，也正与土人的奇形怪状的编发及吃印度麻一样。至于缠足，更要算在土人的装饰法中，第一等的新发明了。他们也喜欢在肉体上做出种种装饰：剜空了耳朵嵌上木塞；下唇剜开一个大孔，插上一支兽骨，像鸟嘴一般；面上雕出兰花；背上刺出燕子；女人胸前做成许多圆的长的疙瘩。可是他们还能走路，还能做事；他们终是未达一间，想不到缠足这好法子。……世上有如此不知肉体上的苦痛的女人，以及如此以残酷为乐，丑恶为美的男子，真是奇事怪事。
I heard from a friend that a doctor in the Church of England in Hangzhou wrote a preface to a medical book, calling Chinese natives; I was quite uncomfortable at first, but after thinking about it carefully, I have to endure it now. The word native, originally only said people born in the local area, without any malice. Later, because most of them were barbaric peoples, a new meaning was added, as if it had become synonymous with barbarians. They call themselves Chinese in this way, which is inevitably insulting; But now, we have no other way but to bear this name. Because this kind of right and wrong is based on facts, not by words alone. Try to look at Chinese society, cannibalism, looting, killing, human trafficking, genital worship, spiritualism, polygamy, all the so-called national essence, there is no culture that is not with the culture of barbarians (?). Just right. Dragging big braids and smoking opium are the same as the strangely shaped braided hair of the natives and eating Indian hemp. As for foot binding, it is even more considered a first-class new invention in the decoration method of the natives. They also like to make various decorations on the flesh: hollowing out the ears and inserting wooden plugs; A large hole was cut out on the lower lip, and an animal bone was inserted, like a bird's beak; orchids are carved on the face; swallows pierced on their backs; The woman's chest is made into many round long pimples. But they can still walk and do things; They have not yet reached one room, and they can't think of a good way to bind their feet. …… It is really strange that there are women in the world who do not know physical pain, and men who take pleasure in cruelty and ugliness as beauty.自大与好古，也是土人的一个特性。英国人乔治葛来任纽西兰总督的时候，做了一部《多岛海神话》，序里说他著书的目的，并非全为学术，大半是政治上的手段。他说，纽西兰土人是不能同他说理的。只要从他们的神话的历史里，抽出一条相类的事来做一个例，讲给酋长祭师们听，一说便成了。譬如要造一条铁路，倘若对他们说这事如何有益，他们决不肯听；我们如果根据神话，说从前某某大仙，曾推着独轮车在虹霓上走，现在要仿他造一条路，那便无所不可了。（原文已经忘却，以上所说只是大意）中国十三经二十五史，正是酋长祭师们一心崇奉的治国平天下的谱，此后凡与土人有交涉的“西哲”，倘能人手一编，便助成了我们的“东学西渐”，很使土人高兴；但不知那译本的序上写些什么呢？
Arrogance and antiquity are also a characteristic of the natives. When the Englishman George Graham came to New Zealand as governor of New Zealand, he made a "Myth of the Archipelago Sea", in which he said that the purpose of his book was not all academic, but mostly political means. He said that the natives of New Zealand cannot reason with him. Just take a similar thing from the history of their mythology and make an example, tell the chieftain shamans, and it will be done. For example, if you want to build a railway, they will not listen to it if you tell them how it is beneficial; If we say that in the past, a certain immortal used to push a wheelbarrow on a rainbow, and now we want to imitate him to build a road, then everything is possible. (The original text has been forgotten, the above is just the general idea) The Thirteen Classics and Twenty-Five Histories of China are the genealogy of governing the country and pacifying the world wholeheartedly worshipped by the chieftains and shamans. But I don't know what is written in the preface of the translation?

一九一九年

四十三

一九一九年

forty-three进步的美术家，——这是我对于中国美术界的要求。
Progressive artists,—— this is my requirement for the Chinese art world.美术家固然须有精熟的技工，但尤须有进步的思想与高尚的人格。他的制作，表面上是一张画或一个雕像，其实是他的思想与人格的表现。令我们看了，不但欢喜赏玩，尤能发生感动，造成精神上的影响。
Artists must certainly have skilled craftsmen, but they must especially have progressive ideas and noble personalities. His production, on the surface, is a painting or a statue, but in fact it is an expression of his thoughts and personality. It makes us not only enjoy it, but also be moved, causing a spiritual impact.我们所要求的美术家，是能引路的先觉，不是“公民团”的首领。我们所要求的美术品，是表记中国民族知能最高点的标本，不是水平线以下的思想的平均分数。
The artist we are looking for is a foresight that can lead the way, not the leader of the "civic group". The artwork we request is a specimen that represents the highest point of Chinese national knowledge, not the average score of ideas below the horizontal line.近来看见上海什么报的增刊《泼克》上，有几张讽刺画。他的画法，倒也模仿西洋；可是我很疑惑，何以思想如此顽固，人格如此卑劣，竟同没有教育的孩子只会在好好的白粉墙上写几个“某某是我而子”一样。可怜外国事物，一到中国，便如落在黑色染缸里似的，无不失了颜色。美术也是其一：学了体格还未匀称的裸体画，便画猥亵画：学了明暗还未分明的静物画，只能画招牌。皮毛改新，心思仍旧，结果便是如此。至于讽刺画之变为人身攻击的器具，更是无足深怪了。
Recently, I saw several satirical paintings in the supplement "Poke" of Shanghai Newspaper. His painting style also imitates the West; But I was very puzzled as to why my thoughts were so stubborn and my personality was so despicable, just like an uneducated child who would only write a few "so-and-so is my son" on a good white powder wall. Poor foreign things, as soon as they arrive in China, are like falling into a black dye vat, and they all lose their color. Art is also one of them: after learning nude painting with an unproportionate physique, he paints obscene paintings: after learning still life paintings with not yet clear light and dark, he can only paint signs. The fur is renewed, the mind is still the same, and this is the result. As for the transformation of caricature into a tool for personal attacks, it is even more surprising.说起讽刺画，不禁想到美国画家勃拉特来（L．D．Bradley 1853—1917）了。他专画讽刺画，关于欧战的画，尤为有名；只可惜前年死掉了。我见过他一张《秋收时之月》（《The Harvest Moon》）的画。上面是一个形如骷髅的月亮，照着荒田；田里一排一排的都是兵的死尸。唉唉，这才算得真的进步的美术家的讽刺画。我希望将来中国也能有一日，出这样一个进步的讽刺画家。
When it comes to satirical paintings, I can't help but think of the American painter L.D. Bradley (1853-1917). He specializes in satirical paintings, especially paintings about the European War; It's a pity that he died the year before last. I have seen one of his paintings "The Harvest Moon". above is a skull-shaped moon, shining on the barren fields; The rows in the fields were filled with the corpses of soldiers. Alas, this is a satirical painting of a really progressive artist. I hope that in the future, China will one day produce such a progressive satirical painter.

一九一九年

四十六

一九一九年

forty-six民国八年正月间，我在朋友家里见到上海一种什么报的星期增刊讽刺画，正是开宗明义第一回；画着几方小图，大意是骂主张废汉文的人的；说是给外国医生换上外国狗的心了，所以读罗马字时，全是外国狗叫。但在小图的上面，又有两个双钩大字“泼克”，似乎便是这增刊的名目；可是全不像中国话。我因此很觉这美术家可怜：他——对于个人的人身攻击姑且不论——学了外国画，来骂外国话，然而所用的名目又仍然是外国话。讽刺画本可以针砭社会的锢疾；现在施针砭的人的眼光，在一方尺大的纸片上，尚且看不分明，怎能指出确当的方向，引导社会呢？
In the first month of the eighth year of the Republic of China, I saw a weekly supplementary caricature of a newspaper in Shanghai at a friend's house, which was the first time in the founding of the school; draw a few small pictures, to the effect that they are scolding those who advocate the abolition of Chinese; It is said that it is to change the heart of a foreign dog for a foreign doctor, so when reading Roman characters, it is all foreign dog barking. But on the top of the small picture, there are two double-hook big characters "Poke", which seems to be the name of this supplement; But it doesn't sound like Chinese at all. Therefore, I feel very pitiful about this artist: he - regardless of personal attacks - has learned foreign paintings and scolded foreign languages, but the names he uses are still foreign languages. satirical paintings can acupuncture the ills of society; Now the eyes of the needle and needle are still unclear on a piece of paper the size of a foot, so how can they point out the correct direction and guide the society?这几天又见到一张所谓《泼克》，是骂提倡新文艺的人了。大旨是说凡所崇拜的，都是外国的偶像。我因此愈觉这美术家可怜：他学了画，而且画了“泼克”，竟还未知道外国画也是文艺之一。他对于自己的本业，尚且罩在黑坛子里，摸不清楚，怎能有优美的创作，贡献于社会呢？
In the past few days, I have seen another so-called "Pock", which is scolding those who advocate new literature and art. The main idea is that everything worshipped is a foreign idol. Because of this, I feel more and more pitiful about this artist: he learned to paint and painted "Pock", but he didn't know that foreign painting was also one of the literary arts. He is still covered in a black jar for his own business, and he can't figure it out, so how can he create beautiful creations and contribute to society?但“外国偶像”四个字，却亏他想了出来。
But the four words "foreign idol" were thought of by him.不论中外，诚然都有偶像。但外国是破坏偶像的人多；那影响所及，便成功了宗教改革，法国革命。旧像愈摧破，人类便愈进步；所以现在才有比利时的义战，与人道的光明。那达尔文易卜生托尔斯泰尼采诸人，便都是近来偶像破坏的大人物。
Whether at home or abroad, there are indeed idols. But there are many people in foreign countries who destroy idols; The influence was successful, and the Reformation and the French Revolution were successful. The more the old image is destroyed, the more humanity progresses; That's why there is now a Belgian righteous war and the light of humanity. Darwin, Ibsen, Tolstony, and others are all major figures in recent idolatry.在这一流偶像破坏者，《泼克》却完全无用；因为他们都有确固不拔的自信，所以决不理会偶像保护者的嘲骂。易卜生说：
In this class of idol destroyers, "Pock" is completely useless; Because they all have unwavering self-confidence, they will never pay attention to the ridicule of the idol protector. Ibsen said:“我告诉你们，是这个——世界上最强壮有力的人，就是那孤立的人。”（见《国民之敌》）
"I tell you, it's this—the strongest and most powerful person in the world, the isolated one." (See "Enemy of the Nation")但也不理会偶像保护者的恭维。尼采说：
But ignore the compliments of idol protectors. Nietzsche said:“他们又拿着称赞，围住你嗡嗡的叫：他们的称赞是厚脸皮。他们要接近你的皮肤和你的血。”（《札拉图如是说》第二卷《市场之蝇》）
They took the compliments and buzzed around you: their praise was cheeky. They are to be close to your skin and your blood. ("Thus Says Zaratu", Volume 2, "The Fly of the Market")这样，才是创作者。——我辈即使才力不及，不能创作，也该当学习；即使所崇拜的仍然是新偶像，也总比中国陈旧的好。与其崇拜孔丘关羽，还不如崇拜达尔文易卜生；与其牺牲于瘟将军五道神，还不如牺牲于Apollo。
In this way, you are the creator. ——Even if our generation is not talented enough and cannot create, we should still learn; Even if the worship is still a new idol, it is better than the old Chinese one. Instead of worshiping Confucius and Guan Yu, it is better to worship Darwin Ibsen; Instead of sacrificing to the Plague General Five Gods, it is better to sacrifice to Apollo.

一九一九年

四十七

一九一九年

forty-seven有人做了一块象牙片，半寸方，看去也没有什么；用显微镜一照，却看见刻着一篇行书的《兰亭序》。我想：显微镜的所以制造，本为看那些极细微的自然物的；现在既用人工，何妨便刻在一块半尺方的象牙板上，一目了然，省却用显微镜的工夫呢？
Someone made an ivory piece, half an inch square, and it looked nothing; When I looked at it with a microscope, I saw the "Orchid Pavilion Preface" engraved with a running script. I think: the reason why microscopes are made is to look at those extremely subtle natural objects; Now that it is manual, why not engrave it on a half-foot square ivory board, which is clear at a glance and saves the time of using a microscope?张三李四是同时人。张三记了古典来做古文；李四又记了古典，去读张三做的古文。我想：古典是古人的时事，要晓得那时的事，所以免不了翻着古典；现在两位既然同时，何妨老实说出，一目了然，省却你也记古典，我也记古典的工夫呢？
Zhang San and Li Si are contemporaries. Zhang San memorized the classics to make ancient texts; Li Si memorized the classics again and went to read the ancient texts made by Zhang San. I think: the classics are the current affairs of the ancients, and we must know what happened at that time, so it is inevitable to turn to the classics; Now that the two of you are at the same time, why don't you say it honestly, at a glance, save you from remembering the classics, and I also remember the classics?内行的人说：什么话！这是本领，是学问！
The insider said: What are you talking about! This is skill, it is knowledge!我想，幸而中国人中，有这一类本领学问的人还不多。倘若谁也弄这玄虚：农夫送来了一粒粉，用显微镜照了，却是一碗饭；水夫挑来用水湿过的土，想喝茶的又须挤出湿土里的水：那可真要支撑不住了。
I think fortunately, there are not many people in Chinese who have this kind of skill and knowledge. If anyone makes this mystery: the farmer sent a grain of powder, which was illuminated with a microscope, but it was a bowl of rice; The sailor picks up the soil that has been wet with water, and those who want to drink tea have to squeeze out the water from the wet soil: that really can't be supported.

一九一九年

四十八

一九一九年

forty-eight中国人对于异族，历来只有两样称呼：一样是禽兽，一样是圣上。从没有称他朋友，说他也同我们一样的。
Chinese people have always had only two names for foreign races: the same is a beast, and the other is a saint. He never called him a friend, saying that he was the same as us.古书里的弱水，竟是骗了我们：闻所未闻的外国人到了；交手几回，渐知道“子曰诗云”似乎无用，于是乎要维新。
The weak water in the ancient book actually deceived us: unheard of foreigners have arrived; After fighting a few times, I gradually realized that "Ziyue Shiyun" seemed useless, so I wanted to renovate it.维新以后，中国富强了，用这学来的新，打出外来的新，关上大门，再来守旧。
After the Restoration, China became rich and strong, and used this new learning, played the new outside, closed the door, and then came to the old.可惜维新单是皮毛，关门也不过一梦。外国的新事理，却愈来愈多，愈优胜，“子曰诗云”也愈挤愈苦，愈看愈无用。于是从那两样旧称呼以外，别想了一样新号：“西哲”或曰“西儒”。
Unfortunately, the Restoration is just a superficial thing, and closing the door is just a dream. There are more and more new things in foreign countries, and the more they are superior, the more they are squeezed and the more they are looked, the more useless they are. So in addition to those two old names, I thought of a new name: "Western Philosophy" or "Western Confucianism".他们的称号虽然新了，我们的意见却照旧。因为“西哲”的本领虽然要学，“子曰诗云”也更要昌明。换几句话，便是学了外国本领，保存中国旧习。本领要新，思想要旧。要新本领旧思想的新人物，驼了旧本领旧思想的旧人物，请他发挥多年经验的老本领。一言以蔽之：前几年谓之“中学为体，西学为用”，这几年谓之“因时制宜，折衷至当”。
Although their titles are new, our opinions are the same. Because although the ability of "Western philosophy" has to be learned, "Ziyue Shiyun" is also more prosperous. In other words, it is to learn foreign skills and preserve old Chinese habits. Skills should be new, and thoughts should be old. If you want a new person with new skills and old ideas, you can hump the old person with old skills and old ideas, and ask him to give full play to his old skills with many years of experience. In a word, it was said that in the past few years, it was called "middle school as the body, Western learning as the application", and in recent years, it has been called "adapting to the situation and compromising to the appropriate".其实世界上决没有这样如意的事。即使一头牛，连生命都牺牲了，尚且祀了孔便不能耕田，吃了肉便不能搾乳。何况一个人先须自己活着，又要驼了前辈先生活着；活着的时候，又须恭听前辈先生的折衷：早上打拱，晚上握手；上午“声光化电”，下午“子曰诗云”呢？
In fact, there is no such thing as a satisfactory thing in the world. Even if a cow sacrifices its life, it cannot cultivate the field if it is sacrificed, and it cannot milk if it eats meat. What's more, a person must live by himself first, and he must live by his predecessors first; When you are alive, you must listen to the compromises of your predecessors: arching in the morning and shaking hands at night; What about "sound, light, chemical and electricity" in the morning and "Ziyue Shiyun" in the afternoon?社会上最迷信鬼神的人，尚且只能在赛会这一日抬一回神舆。不知那些学“声光化电”的“新进英贤”，能否驼着山野隐逸，海滨遗老，折衷一世？
The most superstitious people in society can only carry the shrine once on the day of the competition. I wonder if those "new heroes" who learn "sound, light, chemistry and electricity" can hunch over the mountains and fields, the old people on the seaside, and compromise for a lifetime?“西哲”易卜生盖以为不能，以为不可。所以借了Brand的嘴说：“All or nothing！”
"Western philosopher" Ibsen probably thought it was impossible, thought it was impossible. So he borrowed Brand's mouth and said, "All or nothing!" ”

一九一九年

四十九

一九一九年

forty-nine凡有高等动物，倘没有遇着意外的变故，总是从幼到壮，从壮到老，从老到死。
All higher animals, if they do not encounter unexpected changes, will always go from young to strong, from strong to old, from old to dead.我们从幼到壮，既然毫不为奇的过去了；自此以后，自然也该毫不为奇的过去。
We have passed from childhood to adulthood, since it is not surprising; Since then, it should be no surprise that the past should not be surprising.可惜有一种人，从幼到壮，居然也毫不为奇的过去了；从壮到老，便有点古怪；从老到死，却更奇想天开，要占尽了少年的道路，吸尽了少年的空气。
It's a pity that there is a kind of person who has passed from childhood to adulthood without surprise; from strong to old, it is a bit strange; From old age to death, but it is even more whimsical, and it wants to occupy the path of the teenager and suck up the air of the teenager.少年在这时候，只能先行萎黄，且待将来老了，神经血管一切变质以后，再来活动。所以社会上的状态，先是“少年老成”；直待弯腰曲背时期，才更加“逸兴遄飞”，似乎从此以后，才上了做人的路。
At this time, the teenager can only chlorosis first, and wait until he is old in the future and all the nerves and blood vessels are deteriorated before he can move. Therefore, the state of society is first "young and mature"; It was not until the period of bending over that he became more "prosperous", and it seemed that from then on, he embarked on the road of being a human being.可是究竟也不能自忘其老；所以想求神仙。大约别的都可以老，只有自己不肯老的人物，总该推中国老先生算一甲一名。
But in the end, you can't forget your old age; So I want to ask for immortals. Probably everything else can be old, only the characters who refuse to grow old should always be pushed to be the first in the world.万一当真成了神仙，那便永远请他主持，不必再有后进，原也是极好的事。可惜他又究竟不成，终于个个死去，只留下造成的老天地，教少年驼着吃苦。
In case he really becomes a god, then he will always be asked to preside, and there is no need to have any backwards, which is also an excellent thing. It's a pity that he didn't succeed in the end, and finally died one by one, leaving only the old world he caused, teaching the young man to hump and endure hardship.这真是生物界的怪现象！
This is really a strange phenomenon in the biological world!我想种族的延长，——便是生命的连续，——的确是生物界事业里的一大部分。何以要延长呢？不消说是想进化了。但进化的途中总须新陈代谢。所以新的应该欢天喜地的向前走去，这便是壮，旧的也应该欢天喜地的向前走去，这便是死；各各如此走去，便是进化的路。
I think the extension of race ,—— is the continuity of life,—— which is indeed a large part of the cause of the biological world. Why do you want to extend it? Needless to say, I want to evolve. But metabolism is always required in the process of evolution. Therefore, the new should move forward joyfully, which is strong, and the old should also move forward joyfully, which is death; If everyone goes like this, it is the path of evolution.老的让开道，催促着，奖励着，让他们走去。路上有深渊，便用那个死填平了，让他们走去。
The old man gave way, urged, rewarded, and let them go. There was an abyss on the road, so he filled it with that death and let them go.少的感谢他们填了深渊，给自己走去；老的也感谢他们从我填平的深渊上走去。——远了远了。
Thank you for filling the abyss and walking for yourself; The old ones also thanked them for walking from the abyss I filled. - Far away.明白这事，便从幼到壮到老到死，都欢欢喜喜的过去；而且一步一步，多是超过祖先的新人。
Understanding this, they will go through happily from childhood to old age to death; And step by step, most of them are newcomers who surpass their ancestors.这是生物界正当开阔的路！人类的祖先，都已这样做了。
This is the right way for the biological world! The ancestors of mankind have done this.

一九一九年

五十三

一九一九年

fifty-three上海盛德坛扶乩，由“孟圣”主坛；在北京便有城隍白知降坛，说他是“邪鬼”。盛德坛后来却又有什么真人下降，谕别人不得擅自扶乩。
Shanghai Shengde Altar is supported by "Mengsheng"; In Beijing, there is a city god Bai Zhijiang altar, saying that he is an "evil ghost". Later, Shengde Altar had some real people descending, instructing others not to help them without authorization.北京议员王讷提议推行新武术，以“强国强种”；中华武士会便率领了一班天罡拳阴截腿之流，大分冤单，说他“抑制暴弃祖性相传之国粹”。
Beijing lawmaker Wang Ne proposed to promote new martial arts to "strengthen the country and strengthen the species"; The Chinese Samurai Association led a group of Tiangang Quan Yin Leg Amputation and others, and said that he "suppressed the abandonment of the national essence of ancestral inheritance".绿帜社提倡“爱世语”，专门崇拜“柴圣”，说别种国际语（如Ido等）是冒牌的。
The Green Flag Society advocates "love the world", specially worships "Chai Sheng", and speaking other international languages (such as Ido, etc.) is counterfeit.上海有一种单行的《泼克》，又有一种报上增刊的《泼克》；后来增刊《泼克》登广告声明要将送错的单行《泼克》的信件撕破。
In Shanghai, there is a single line of "Poke", and there is also a kind of "Poke" in the newspaper; Later, the supplement "Pop" advertised that it would tear up the wrong single line of "Pop" letter.上海有许多“美术家”；其中的一个美术家，不知如何散了伙，便在《泼克》上大骂别的美术家“盲目盲心”，不知道新艺术真艺术。
There are many "artists" in Shanghai; One of the artists, who didn't know how to break up, scolded other artists for being "blind and blind" in "Pock" and didn't know what Art Nouveau was true art.以上五种同业的内讧，究竟是什么原因，局外人本来不得而知。但总觉现在时势不很太平，无论新的旧的，都各各起哄：扶乩打拳那些鬼画符的东西，倒也罢了；学几句世界语，画几笔花，也是高雅的事，难道也要同行嫉妬，必须声明鱼目混珠，雷击火焚么？
Outsiders did not know what the reasons for the above five types of infighting among peers were. But I always feel that the current situation is not very peaceful, whether it is new or old, everyone is coaxing: Fu Yi punches those ghostly talismans, it's okay; Learning a few words of Esperanto and drawing a few strokes of flowers is also an elegant thing, do you have to be jealous of your peers, must you declare that the eyes of the fish are mixed with pearls, and the lightning strikes and fire?我对于那“美术家”的内讧又格外失望。我于美术虽然全是门外汉，但很望中国有新兴美术出现。现在上海那班美术家所做的，是否算得美术，原是难说；但他们既然自称美术家，即使幼稚，也可以希望长成：所以我期望有个美术家的幼虫，不要是似是而非的木叶蝶。如今见了他们两方面的成绩，不免令我对于中国美术前途发生一种怀疑。
I was particularly disappointed with the infighting of the "artist". Although I am a layman in art, I hope that new art will emerge in China. It is difficult to say whether what the artists in Shanghai are doing now is considered art; But since they call themselves artists, even if they are naïve, they can still hope to grow up: so I hope that there will be an artist's larvae, not a plausible Konoha butterfly. Now that I have seen their achievements in both aspects, I can't help but have doubts about the future of Chinese art.画《泼克》的美术家说他们盲目盲心，所研究的只是十九世纪的美术，不晓得有新艺术真艺术。我看这些美术家的作品，不是剥制的鹿，便是畸形的美人，的确不甚高明，恐怕连十“八”世纪，也未必有这类绘画：说到底，只好算是中国的所谓美术罢了。但那一位画《泼克》的美术家的批评，却又不甚可解：研究十九世纪的美术，何以便是盲目盲心？十九世纪以后的新艺术真艺术，又是怎样？我听人说：后期印象派（Postimpressionism）的绘画，在今日总还不算十分陈旧；其中的大人物如Cézanne与Van Gogh等，也是十九世纪后半的人，最迟的到一九〇六年也故去了。二十世纪才是十九年初头，好像还没有新派兴起。立方派（Cubism）未来派（Futurism）的主张，虽然新奇，却尚未能确立基础；而且在中国，又怕未必能够理解。在那《泼克》上面，也未见有这一派的绘画；不知那《泼克》美术家的所谓新艺术真艺术，究竟是指着什么？现在的中国美术家诚然心盲目盲，但其弊却不在单研究十九世纪的美术，——因为据我看来，他们并不研究什么世纪的美术，——所以那《泼克》美术家的话，实在令人难解。
The artists who painted "Pock" said that they were blind and blind, and only studied the art of the 19th century, and did not know that there was art nouveau and true art. I see that the works of these artists, either taxidermy deer or deformed beauties, are indeed not very clever, and I am afraid that even in the 18th century, there may not be such paintings: in the final analysis, they can only be regarded as so-called Chinese art. But the criticism of the artist who painted "Pock" is not very understandable: why is it blind to study nineteenth-century art? What about the new art and true art after the 19th century? I have heard people say that Postimpressionist painting is not very old today; Among them, big figures such as Cézanne and Van Gogh were also from the second half of the nineteenth century, and died as late as 1906. The twentieth century is the beginning of the nineteenth century, and it seems that there is no new school rising. The ideas of Cubism and Futurism, although novel, have not yet been able to establish a foundation; And in China, I am afraid that it may not be understandable. There is no painting of this school on the "Pock"; I don't know what the so-called Art Nouveau true art of the artist "Pock" refers to? It is true that Chinese artists today are blind and blind, but their disadvantage is not only in studying the art of the 19th century,—— because in my opinion, they do not study the art of any century,—— so the words of the artist "Pock" are really incomprehensible.《泼克》美术家满口说新艺术真艺术，想必自己懂得这新艺术真艺术的了。但我看他所画的讽刺画，多是攻击新文艺新思想的。——这是二十世纪的美术么？这是新艺术真艺术么？
The artist of "Pop" is full of words about art nouveau and true art, and he must understand this new art and true art. But I see that most of the satirical paintings he paints attack new literature and new ideas. ——Is this the art of the twentieth century? Is this art nouveau real art?

一九一九年

五十四

一九一九年

fifty-four中国社会上的状态，简直是将几十世纪缩在一时：自油松片以至电灯，自独轮车以至飞机，自镖枪以至机关炮，自不许“妄谈法理”以至护法，自“食肉寝皮”的吃人思想以至人道主义，自迎尸拜蛇以至美育代宗教，都摩肩挨背的存在。
The state of Chinese society is simply shrinking dozens of centuries into a moment: from pine chips to electric lights, from wheelbarrows to airplanes, from dartsguns to machine guns, from "talking nonsense" to protecting the law, from the cannibalistic ideology of "eating meat and sleeping on the skin" to humanitarianism, from welcoming corpses and worshiping snakes to aesthetic education and religion, they are all rubbing shoulders with each other.这许多事物挤在一处，正如我辈约了燧人氏以前的古人，拼开饭店一般，即使竭力调和，也只能煮个半熟；伙计们既不会同心，生意也自然不能兴旺，——店铺总要倒闭。
These many things are crowded in one place, just like the ancients before we made an appointment with the Suiren clan and opened a restaurant, even if we tried our best to reconcile, we could only cook it half-cooked; The guys will not be united, and the business will naturally not prosper,—— the store will always close.黄郛氏做的《欧战之教训与中国之将来》中，有一段话，说得很透澈：
In Huang Feng's "Lessons from the European War and China's Future", there is a passage that says it very clearly:“七年以来，朝野有识之士，每腐心于政教之改良，不注意于习俗之转移；庸讵知旧染不去，新运不生：事理如此，无可勉强者也。外人之评我者，谓中国人有一种先天的保守性，即或迫于时势，各种制度有改革之必要时，而彼之所谓改革者，决不将旧日制度完全废止，乃在旧制度之上，更添加一层新制度。试览前清之兵制变迁史，可以知吾言之不谬焉。最初命八旗兵驻防各地，以充守备之任；及年月既久，旗兵已腐败不堪用，洪秀全起，不得已，征募湘淮两军以应急：从此旗兵绿营，并肩存在，遂变成二重兵制。甲午战后，知绿营兵力又不可恃，乃复编练新式军队：于是并前二者而变成三重兵制矣。今旗兵虽已消灭，而变面换形之绿营，依然存在，总是二重兵制也。从可知吾国人之无澈底改革能力，实属不可掩之事实。他若贺阳历新年者，复贺阴历新年；奉民国正朔者，仍存宣统年号。一察社会各方面，盖无往而非二重制。即今日政局之所以不宁，是非之所以无定者，简括言之，实亦不过一种‘二重思想’在其间作祟而已。”
“七年以来，朝野有识之士，每腐心于政教之改良，不注意于习俗之转移；庸讵知旧染不去，新运不生：事理如此，无可勉强者也。 外人之评我者，谓中国人有一种先天的保守性，即或迫于时势，各种制度有改革之必要时，而彼之所谓改革者，决不将旧日制度完全废止，乃在旧制度之上，更添加一层新制度。 试览前清之兵制变迁史，可以知吾言之不谬焉。 最初命八旗兵驻防各地，以充守备之任；及年月既久，旗兵已腐败不堪用，洪秀全起，不得已，征募湘淮两军以应急：从此旗兵绿营，并肩存在，遂变成二重兵制。 甲午战后，知绿营兵力又不可恃，乃复编练新式军队：于是并前二者而变成三重兵制矣。 今旗兵虽已消灭，而变面换形之绿营，依然存在，总是二重兵制也。 从可知吾国人之无澈底改革能力，实属不可掩之事实。 他若贺阳历新年者，复贺阴历新年；奉民国正朔者，仍存宣统年号。 一察社会各方面，盖无往而非二重制。 即今日政局之所以不宁，是非之所以无定者，简括言之，实亦不过一种‘二重思想’在其间作祟而已。 ”此外如既许信仰自由，却又特别尊孔；既自命“胜朝遗老”，却又在民国拿钱；既说是应该革新，却又主张复古：四面八方几乎都是二三重以至多重的事物，每重又各各自相矛盾。一切人便都在这矛盾中间，互相抱怨着过活，谁也没有好处。
In addition, if you allow freedom of belief, you will be particularly respectful; not only calls himself a "victorious old man", but also takes money in the Republic of China; It is said that it should be innovated, but it also advocates retro: almost all directions are two, three or more things, and each layer is contradictory. Everyone is in the middle of this contradiction, complaining to each other and living without benefiting anyone.要想进步，要想太平，总得连根的拔去了“二重思想”。因为世界虽然不小，但彷徨的人种，是终竟寻不出位置的。
If you want to make progress and want peace, you must uproot the "double thinking". Because although the world is not small, the hesitant race will never find a place.

一九一九年

五十六　“来了”

一九一九年

56 "Here it comes"近来时常听得人说，“过激主义来了”；报纸上也时常写着，“过激主义来了”。
Recently, I often hear people say, "Extremism is coming"; Newspapers often say, "Extremism is coming."于是有几文钱的人，很不高兴。官员也着忙，要防华工，要留心俄国人；连警察厅也向所属发出了严查“有无过激党设立机关”的公事。
So the people who had a few pennies were very unhappy. Officials are also busy, to guard against Chinese workers and to pay attention to the Russians; Even the National Police Department issued an official order to strictly investigate "whether there are any extremist party establishments".着忙是无怪的，严查也无怪的；但先要问：什么是过激主义呢？
There is nothing strange about being busy, and there is nothing strange about strict investigation; But first, let's ask: what is extremism?这是他们没有说明，我也无从知道，我虽然不知道，却敢说一句话：“过激主义”不会来，不必怕他；只有“来了”是要来的，应该怕的。
This is something they didn't explain, and I have no way of knowing, although I don't know, I dare to say one sentence: "Extremism" will not come, don't be afraid of him; Only "coming" is coming, and it should be feared.我们中国人，决不能被洋货的什么主义引动，有抹杀他扑灭他的力量。军国民主义么，我们何尝会同别人打仗；无抵抗主义么，我们却是主战参战的；自由主义么，我们连发表思想都要犯罪，讲几句话也为难；人道主义么，我们人身还可以买卖呢。
We Chinese must not be attracted by the doctrine of foreign goods, and have the power to erase him and extinguish him. military-nationalism, why would we fight with others; There is no resistance, but we are the main battle and participate in the war; Liberalism, we even have to commit a crime to express our thoughts, and it is difficult to say a few words; Humanitarian, we can still buy and sell our lives.所以无论什么主义，全扰乱不了中国；从古到今的扰乱，也不听说因为什么主义。试举目前的例，便如陕西学界的布告，湖南灾民的布告，何等可怕，与比利时公布的德兵苛酷情形，俄国别党宣布的列宁政府残暴情形，比较起来，他们简直是太平天下了。德国还说是军国主义，列宁不消说还是过激主义哩！
Therefore, no matter what doctrine it is, it cannot disturb China; From ancient times to the present, I have not heard of anythingism. To give the current example, such as the announcement of the Shaanxi academic circles and the announcement of the victims of Hunan, how terrible it is, compared with the harsh situation of the German soldiers announced in Belgium and the brutality of the Lenin government announced by the Russian party, they are simply peaceful. Germany also said that it was militarism, and Lenin was still extremist!这便是“来了”来了。来的如果是主义，主义达了还会罢；倘若单是“来了”，他便来不完，来不尽，来的怎样也不可知。
This is "coming". If it is a doctrine, it will be done when the doctrine is reached; If it is just "coming", he will not be able to come, he will not be exhausted, and it is impossible to know how he will come.民国成立的时候，我住在一个小县城里，早已挂过白旗。有一日，忽然见许多男女，纷纷乱逃：城里的逃到乡下，乡下的逃进城里。问他们什么事，他们答道，“他们说要来了。”
When the Republic of China was founded, I lived in a small county and had already flown the white flag. One day, I suddenly saw many men and women fleeing one after another: those in the city fled to the countryside, and those in the countryside fled into the city. Ask them what they are doing, and they answer, "They say they are coming." ”可见大家都单怕“来了”，同我一样。那时还只有“多数主义”，没有“过激主义”哩。
It can be seen that everyone is afraid of "coming", just like me. At that time, there was only "majoritarianism" and no "radicalism".

一九一九年

五十七　现在的屠杀者

一九一九年

57 The current slayer高雅的人说，“白话鄙俚浅陋，不值识者一哂之者也。”
Elegant people said, "The vernacular is vulgar and shallow, and it is not worth the sake of those who know it." ”中国不识字的人，单会讲话，“鄙俚浅陋”，不必说了。“因为自己不通，所以提倡白话，以自文其陋”如我辈的人，正是“鄙俚浅陋”，也不在话下了。最可叹的是几位雅人，也还不能如《镜花缘》里说的君子国的酒保一般，满口“酒要一壶乎，两壶乎，菜要一碟乎，两碟乎”的终日高雅，却只能在呻吟古文时，显出高古品格；一到讲话，便依然是“鄙俚浅陋”的白话了。四万万中国人嘴里发出来的声音，竟至总共“不值一哂”，真是可怜煞人。
Chinese illiterate people can only speak, "vulgar and shallow", needless to say. "Because I don't understand, I advocate the vernacular and write my own ugliness" People like me are "vulgar and shallow", and it is not a problem. The most lamentable thing is that a few elegant people cannot be like the bartenders of the country of Junzi mentioned in "Mirror Flower Edge", full of "wine needs one pot, two pots, food needs one plate, two plates" all day long, but can only show ancient character when moaning ancient texts; As soon as it comes to speech, it is still a "vulgar and shallow" vernacular. The voices that come out of the mouths of 40 million Chinese people are really pitiful.做了人类想成仙；生在地上要上天；明明是现代人，吸着现在的空气，却偏要勒派朽腐的名教，僵死的语言，侮蔑尽现在，这都是“现在的屠杀者”。杀了“现在”，也便杀了“将来”。——将来是子孙的时代。
I want to become an immortal as a human being; Be born on earth and go to heaven; Obviously modern people, sucking the air of the present, but they want to send rotten famous religions, dead language, and insult the present, these are all "current slaughterers". If you kill the "now", you will also kill the "future". ——The future is the era of children and grandchildren.

一九一九年

五十八　人心很古

一九一九年

五十八 人心很古慷慨激昂的人说，“世道浇漓，人心不古，国粹将亡，此吾所为仰天扼腕切齿三叹息者也！”
慷慨激昂的人说，“世道浇漓，人心不古，国粹将亡，此吾所为仰天扼腕切齿三叹息者也！”我初听这话，也曾大吃一惊；后来翻翻旧书，偶然看见《史记》《赵世家》里面记着公子成反对主父改胡服的一段话：
When I first heard this, I was also surprised; Later, when I flipped through the old books, I happened to see a passage in the "Historical Records" and "Zhao Family" that recorded Gongzi Cheng's opposition to the lord's father's change to Hu clothes:“臣闻中国者，盖聪明徇智之所居也，万物财用之所聚也，贤圣之所教也，仁义之所施也，《诗》《书》礼乐之所用也，异敏技能之所试也，远方之所观赴也，蛮夷之所义行也；今王舍此而袭远方之服，变古之教，易古之道，逆人之心，而怫学者，离中国，故臣愿王图之也。”
“臣闻中国者，盖聪明徇智之所居也，万物财用之所聚也，贤圣之所教也，仁义之所施也，《诗》《书》礼乐之所用也，异敏技能之所试也，远方之所观赴也，蛮夷之所义行也；今王舍此而袭远方之服，变古之教，易古之道，逆人之心，而怫学者，离中国，故臣愿王图之也。 ”这不是与现在阻抑革新的人的话，丝毫无异么？后来又在《北史》里看见记周静帝的司马后的话：
Isn't this no different from the words of those who are currently blocking innovation? Later, in the "History of the North", I saw the words of Empress Sima who recorded Emperor Jing of Zhou:“后性尤妒忌，后宫莫敢进御。尉迟迥女孙有美色，先在宫中，帝于仁寿宫见而悦之，因得幸。后伺帝听朝，阴杀之。上大怒，单骑从苑中出，不由径路，入山谷间三十余里；高颎杨素等追及，扣马谏，帝太息曰，‘吾贵为天子，不得自由。’”
“后性尤妒忌，后宫莫敢进御。 尉迟迥女孙有美色，先在宫中，帝于仁寿宫见而悦之，因得幸。 后伺帝听朝，阴杀之。 上大怒，单骑从苑中出，不由径路，入山谷间三十余里；高颎杨素等追及，扣马谏，帝太息曰，‘吾贵为天子，不得自由。 ’”这又不是与现在信口主张自由和反对自由的人，对于自由所下的解释，丝毫无异么？别的例证，想必还多，我见闻狭隘，不能多举了。但即此看来，已可见虽然经过了这许多年，意见还是一样。现在的人心，实在古得很呢。
Isn't this no different from the interpretation of freedom given by those who advocate freedom and oppose freedom now? There must be many other examples, but I am too narrow to give more. But from this point of view, it can be seen that although many years have passed, the opinion is still the same. Today's people's hearts are really old.中国人倘能努力再古一点，也未必不能有古到三皇五帝以前的希望，可惜时时遇着新潮流新空气激荡着，没有工夫了。
If the Chinese can work hard to be a little more ancient, they may not be able to have hope from ancient times to the Three Sovereigns and Five Emperors, but unfortunately there is no time to encounter new trends and new air all the time.在现存的旧民族中，最合中国式理想的，总要推锡兰岛的Vedda族。他们和外界毫无交涉，也不受别民族的影响，还是原始的状态，真不愧所谓“羲皇上人”。
Among the existing old ethnic groups, the most Chinese ideal is always the Vedda tribe of Ceylon. They have no negotiations with the outside world, nor are they influenced by other ethnic groups, and they are still in a primitive state, which is truly worthy of the so-called "Xihuang Master".但听说他们人口年年减少，现在快要没有了：这实在是一件万分可惜的事。
But I heard that their population is decreasing year by year, and now it is almost gone: this is a great pity.

一九一九年

五十九　“圣武”

一九一九年

59 "Shengwu"我前回已经说过“什么主义都与中国无干”的话了；今天忽然又有些意见，便再写在下面：
I have already said last time that "any doctrine has nothing to do with China"; Today, I suddenly have some opinions, so I will write them below:我想，我们中国本不是发生新主义的地方，也没有容纳新主义的处所，即使偶然有些外来思想，也立刻变了颜色，而且许多论者反要以此自豪。我们只要留心译本上的序跋，以及各样对于外国事情的批评议论，便能发见我们和别人的思想中间，的确还隔着几重铁壁。他们是说家庭问题的，我们却以为他鼓吹打仗；他们是写社会缺点的，我们却说他讲笑话；他们以为好的，我们说来却是坏的。若再留心看看别国的国民性格，国民文学，再翻一本文人的评传，便更能明白别国著作里写出的性情，作者的思想，几乎全不是中国所有。所以不会了解，不会同情，不会感应；甚至彼我间的是非爱憎，也免不了得到一个相反的结果。
I think that China is not a place where neologism occurs, nor is there a place for newism, and even if there are occasional foreign ideas, they immediately change color, and many commentators are proud of this. As long as we pay attention to the preface on the translation and all kinds of criticism and discussion on foreign affairs, we can find that there are indeed several iron walls between our thoughts and those of others. They are talking about family problems, but we think he advocates war; They write about social shortcomings, but we say he tells jokes; What they think is good is bad for us. If you pay attention to the national character and literature of other countries, and then look at the commentaries of writers, you can better understand that the temperament and thoughts written in the writings of other countries are almost all not owned by China. So they won't understand, sympathize, or sense; Even the right and wrong between us and ourselves will inevitably lead to the opposite result.新主义宣传者是放火人么，也须别人有精神的燃料，才会着火；是弹琴人么，别人的心上也须有弦索，才会出声；是发声器么，别人也必须是发声器，才会共鸣。中国人都有些不很像，所以不会相干。
Are the propagandists of the new doctrine arsonists, and they also need the spiritual fuel of others to catch fire; Is it a piano player, and other people's hearts must also have strings to make a sound; Is it a sounder, others must also be a sounder to resonate. Chinese people are a little different, so they don't matter.几位读者怕要生气，说，“中国时常有将性命去殉他主义的人，中华民国以来，也因为主义上死了多少烈士，你何以一笔抹杀？吓！”这话也是真的。我们从旧的外来思想说罢，六朝的确有许多焚身的和尚，唐朝也有过砍下臂膊布施无赖的和尚；从新的说罢，自然也有过几个人的。然而与中国历史，仍不相干。因为历史结帐，不能像数学一般精密，写下许多小数，却只能学粗人算帐的四舍五入法门，记一笔整数。
Several readers were afraid of getting angry and said, "There are often people in China who sacrifice their lives for otherism, and since the Republic of China, how many martyrs have died because of doctrine, why do you erase them in one stroke?" Scare! This is also true. Let's talk about the old foreign thinking, there were indeed many monks who burned themselves in the Six Dynasties, and there were also monks who cut off their arms to give to scoundrels in the Tang Dynasty; From the new point of view, there have naturally been several people. However, it is still irrelevant to Chinese history. Because historical settlement cannot be as precise as mathematics, write down many decimals, but can only learn the rounding method of rough people and record an integer.中国历史的整数里面，实在没有什么思想主义在内。这整数只是两种物质，——是刀与火，“来了”便是他的总名。
There is really no ideology in the whole number of Chinese history. This integer is just two substances,—— knife and fire, and "coming" is his general name.火从北来便逃向南，刀从前来便退向后，一大堆流水帐簿，只有这一个模型。倘嫌“来了”的名称不很庄严，“刀与火”也触目，我们也可以别想花样，奉献一个谥法，称作“圣武”，便好看了。
The fire fled from the north to the south, the knife retreated from the front, and there was only this one model. If you think that the name of "coming" is not very solemn, and "knife and fire" is also eye-catching, we can also think of tricks and dedicate a posthumous name, called "Shengwu", which will be good-looking.古时候，秦始皇帝很阔气，刘邦和项羽都看见了；邦说，“嗟乎！大丈夫当如此也！”羽说，“彼可取而代也！”羽要“取”什么呢？便是取邦所说的“如此”。“如此”的程度，虽有不同，可是谁也想取；被取的是“彼”，取的是“丈夫”。所有“彼”与“丈夫”的心中，便都是这“圣武”的产生所，受纳所。
In ancient times, Qin Shi Huang was very generous, and Liu Bang and Xiang Yu both saw it; Bang said, "Oh! A man should be like this! Yu said, "He can be replaced!" What does "Yu" take? It is what the state said "so". Although the degree of "so" is different, everyone wants to take it; It is "he" that is taken, and it is taken as "husband". In the hearts of all "he" and "husband", it is the place where this "holy martial arts" are born and received.何谓“如此”？说起来话长；简单地说，便只是纯粹兽性方面的欲望的满足——威福，子女，玉帛，——罢了。然而在一切大小丈夫，却要算最高理想（？）了。我怕现在的人，还被这理想支配着。
What does "so" mean? It's a long story; To put it simply, it is just the satisfaction of pure animal desires - power, children, jade and silk,—— However, in all husbands, it is the highest ideal (?) It's over. I am afraid that people today are still dominated by this ideal.大丈夫“如此”之后，欲望没有衰，身体却疲敝了；而且觉得暗中有一个黑影——死——到了身边了。于是无法，只好求神仙。这在中国，也要算最高理想了。我怕现在的人，也还被这理想支配着。
After the husband is "like this", his desire does not decline, but his body is exhausted; And I feel that there is a dark shadow - death - that is close to me. So I had no choice but to ask for immortals. This is also the highest ideal in China. I am afraid that people today are still dominated by this ideal.求了一通神仙，终于没有见，忽然有些疑惑了。于是要造坟，来保存死尸，想用自己的尸体，永远占据着一块地面。这在中国，也要算一种没奈何的最高理想了。我怕现在的人，也还被这理想支配着。
I asked for an immortal, but finally I didn't see it, and suddenly I was a little confused. So he wanted to build a grave to preserve the dead body, and wanted to use his own body to occupy a piece of the ground forever. In China, this is also a helpless highest ideal. I am afraid that people today are still dominated by this ideal.现在的外来思想，无论如何，总不免有些自由平等的气息，互助共存的气息，在我们这单有“我”，单想“取彼”，单要由我喝尽了一切空间时间的酒的思想界上，实没有插足的余地。
In today's foreign thinking, no matter what, there is inevitably some atmosphere of freedom and equality, the atmosphere of mutual assistance and coexistence, and there is really no room for intervention in our ideological circle, where we only have "me", only want to "take the other", and only want to drink all the wine of space and time.因此，只须防那“来了”便够了。看看别国，抗拒这“来了”的便是有主义的人民。他们因为所信的主义，牺牲了别的一切，用骨肉碰钝了锋刃，血液浇灭了烟焰。在刀光火色衰微中，看出一种薄明的天色，便是新世纪的曙光。
Therefore, it is enough to guard against the "coming". Looking at other countries, it is the people who resist this "coming". Because of the doctrine they believed in, they sacrificed everything else, dull the blade with their flesh and blood, and extinguish the flames with their blood. In the fading color of the sword and fire, a thin sky is seen, which is the dawn of the new century.曙光在头上，不抬起头，便永远只能看见物质的闪光。
The dawn is on the head, and if you don't raise your head, you can only see the flash of matter forever.

一九一九年

六十一　不满

一九一九年

61 Dissatisfied欧战才了的时候，中国很抱着许多希望，因此现在也发出许多悲观绝望的声音，说“世界上没有人道”，“人道这句话是骗人的”。有几位评论家，还引用了他们外国论者自己责备自己的文字，来证明所谓文明人者，比野蛮尤其野蛮。
When the European war was just over, China had a lot of hopes, so now it is also making many pessimistic and desperate voices, saying that "there is no humanity in the world" and "the word humanity is a lie". Several critics also quoted their own reproach of foreign theorists to prove that the so-called civilized man is more barbaric than barbarism.这诚然是痛快淋漓的话，但要问：照我们的意见，怎样才算有人道呢？那答话，想来大约是“收回治外法权，收回租界，退还庚子赔款……”现在都很渺茫，实在不合人道。
This is indeed a cheerful statement, but we have to ask: in our opinion, what is humane? The answer is, I think, "recovering extraterritoriality, recovering the concession, and returning the Gengzi reparation......" is now very slim and really inhumane.但又要问：我们中国的人道怎么样？那答话，想来只能“……”。对于人道只能“……”的人的头上，决不会掉下人道来。因为人道是要各人竭力挣来，培植，保养的，不是别人布施，捐助的。
But I have to ask: How is our humanity in China? That answer can only be "......". Humanity will never fall on the heads of people who can only "......" humanity. Because humanity requires everyone to earn, cultivate, and maintain with all their might, not by others to give or donate.其实近于真正的人道，说的人还不很多，并且说了还要犯罪。若论皮毛，却总算略有进步了。这回虽然是一场恶战，也居然没有“食肉寝皮”，没有“夷其社稷”，而且新兴了十八个小国。就是德国对待比国，都说残暴绝伦，但看比国的公布，也只是囚徒不给饮食，村长挨了打骂，平民送上战线之类。这些事情，在我们中国自己对自己也常有，算得什么希奇？
In fact, it is close to true humanity, and there are not many people who say it, and they will commit crimes. When it comes to fur, it's finally a slight improvement. Although this time it was a fierce battle, there was no "eating meat and sleeping skin", there was no "razing the state", and eighteen small countries were emerging. Even Germany treated Belgium and said that it was extremely brutal, but looking at the announcement of Belgium, it was only that prisoners were not given food, village chiefs were beaten and scolded, and civilians were sent to the front line. These things are common to us in China, what is the surprise?人类尚未长成，人道自然也尚未长成，但总在那里发荣滋长。我们如果问问良心，觉得一样滋长，便什么都不必忧愁；将来总要走同一的路。看罢，他们是战胜军国主义的，他们的评论家还是自己责备自己，有许多不满。不满是向上的车轮，能够载着不自满的人类，向人道前进。
Human beings have not yet grown up, and humanity has not yet grown, but it always flourishes and grows there. If we ask our conscience and feel that it is the same, we will not have to worry about anything; In the future, we will always follow the same path. After all, they have overcome militarism, and their critics still blame themselves and have many grievances. Dissatisfaction is an upward wheel that can carry dissatisfied humanity and move towards humanity.多有不自满的人的种族，永远前进，永远有希望。
There are many races of dissatisfied people, always moving forward, always hopeful.多有只知责人不知反省的人的种族，祸哉祸哉！
There are many races that only know how to blame others and do not reflect on themselves, which is a disaster!

一九一九年

六十二　恨恨而死

一九一九年

62 Die with hatred古来很有几位恨恨而死的人物。他们一面说些“怀才不遇”“天道宁论”的话，一面有钱的便狂嫖滥赌，没钱的便喝几十碗酒，——因为不平的缘故，于是后来就恨恨而死了。
There have been several characters who died of hatred in ancient times. While they said some words of "talent is not encountered" and "heaven is peaceful", on the other hand, those who had money prostituted and gambled, and those who had no money drank dozens of bowls of wine,—— because of injustice, so they later died of hatred.我们应该趁他们活着的时候问他：诸公！您知道北京离昆仑山几里，弱水去黄河几丈么？火药除了做鞭爆，罗盘除了看风水，还有什么用处么？棉花是红的还是白的？谷子是长在树上，还是长在草上？桑间濮上如何情形，自由恋爱怎样态度？您在半夜里可忽然觉得有些羞，清早上可居然有点悔么？四斤的担，您能挑么？三里的道，您能跑么？
We should ask him while they are alive: Gentlemen! Do you know how many miles Beijing is from Kunlun Mountain, and how many feet are weak water to the Yellow River? In addition to making whiplash explosions, what is the use of the compass except for looking at feng shui? Is cotton red or white? Does millet grow on trees or grass? What is the situation in Sangjian Pu, and what is the attitude towards free love? You suddenly feel a little ashamed in the middle of the night, but do you actually regret it in the morning? Can you pick a four-pound load? Sanli Dao, can you run?他们如果细细的想，慢慢的悔了，这便很有些希望。万一越发不平，越发愤怒，那便“爱莫能助”。——于是他们终于恨恨而死了。
If they think carefully and slowly regret it, there is some hope. If you become more and more unfair and angry, then "love can't help". ——So they finally died of hatred.中国现在的人心中，不平和愤恨的分子太多了。不平还是改造的引线，但必须先改造了自己，再改造社会，改造世界；万不可单是不平。至于愤恨，却几乎全无用处。
There are too many unpeaceful and resentful elements in the hearts of people in China now. Injustice is still the lead of transformation, but we must first transform ourselves, then transform society, and transform the world; It must not be just unfair. As for resentment, it is almost completely useless.愤恨只是恨恨而死的根苗，古人有过许多，我们不要蹈他们的覆辙。
Resentment is just the root of hatred and death, the ancients had many, let's not follow their mistakes.我们更不要借了“天下无公理，无人道”这些话，遮盖自暴自弃的行为，自称“恨人”，一副恨恨而死的脸孔，其实并不恨恨而死。
Let alone borrow the words "there is no justice in the world, no humanity" to cover up the behavior of self-abandonment, calling ourselves "hating people", with a face that dies of hatred, but in fact does not die of hatred.

一九一九年

六十三　“与幼者”

一九一九年

63 "With the Young"做了《我们现在怎样做父亲》的后两日，在有岛武郎《著作集》里看到《与幼者》这一篇小说，觉得很有许多好的话。
Two days after I made "How We Are Fathers Now", I saw the novel "With the Young" in Takero Arishima's "Collected Works" and felt that there were many good words.“时间不住的移过去。你们的父亲的我，到那时候，怎样映在你们（眼）里，那是不能想像的了。大约像我在现在，嗤笑可怜那过去的时代一般，你们也要嗤笑可怜我的古老的心思，也未可知的。我为你们计，但愿这样子。你们若不是毫不客气的拿我做一个踏脚，超越了我，向着高的远的地方进去，那便是错的。
Time kept moving. It is unimaginable how I, your father, will be reflected in your eyes at that time. Just as I am now mocking and pitiful the past times, you will also laugh at my ancient thoughts, which is unknown. I plan for you, I hope so. If you don't unceremoniously use me as a stepping stone, surpass me, and go high and far, then you are wrong.“人间很寂寞。我单能这样说了就算么？你们和我，像尝过血的兽一样，尝过爱了。去罢，为要将我的周围从寂寞中救出，竭力做事罢。我爱过你们，而且永远爱着。这并不是说，要从你们受父亲的报酬，我对于‘教我学会了爱你们的你们’的要求，只是受取我的感谢罢了……像吃尽了亲的死尸，贮着力量的小狮子一样，刚强勇猛，舍了我，踏到人生上去就是了。
"The world is very lonely. Can I just say this? You and I have tasted love like beasts that have tasted blood. Go, in order to rescue my surroundings from loneliness, do my best. I have loved you and always will love. This does not mean that I am to receive my father's remuneration from you, my request for 'you who taught me to love you' is just to receive my thanks...... Like a little lion that has eaten all the corpses of its relatives and stores strength, it is strong and brave, giving up me and stepping into life.“我的一生就令怎样失败，怎样胜不了诱惑；但无论如何，使你们从我的足迹上寻不出不纯的东西的事，是要做的，是一定做的。你们该从我的倒毙的所在，跨出新的脚步去。但那里走，怎么走的事，你们也可以从我的足迹上探索出来。
"My life has made me fail, how I can't overcome temptation; But in any case, the things that cause you to find nothing impure in my footsteps are to be done, and must be done. You should take a new step from where I died. But you can also explore from my footsteps about going there and how to go.“幼者呵！将又不幸又幸福的你们的父母的祝福，浸在胸中，上人生的旅路罢。前途很远，也很暗。然而不要怕。不怕的人的面前才有路。
"Young man! Soak the blessings of your unfortunate and happy parents in your hearts and embark on the journey of life. The future is long and bleak. However, fear not. There is a way in front of those who are not afraid.“走罢！勇猛着！幼者呵！”
"Let's go! Be brave! Young people! ”有岛氏是白桦派，是一个觉醒的，所以有这等话；但里面也免不了带些眷恋凄怆的气息。
The Arishima clan is a birch sect, an awakened one, so there are such words; But it is inevitable that there will be some nostalgia and sadness inside.这也是时代的关系。将来便不特没有解放的话，并且不起解放的心，更没有什么眷恋和凄怆；只有爱依然存在。——但是对于一切幼者的爱。
This is also the relationship of the times. In the future, not only will there be no words of liberation, and there will be no heart of liberation, let alone nostalgia and sadness; Only love remains. ——But love for all young people.

一九一九年

六十四　有无相通

一九一九年

64 Existence and non-existence are connected南北的官僚虽然打仗，南北的人民却很要好，一心一意的在那里“有无相通”。
Although the bureaucrats of the north and south are at war, the people of the north and south are very good, and they are wholeheartedly there to "communicate with each other".北方人可怜南方人太文弱，便教给他们许多拳脚：什么“八卦拳”“太极拳”，什么“洪家”“侠家”，什么“阴截腿”“抱桩腿”“谭腿”“戳脚”，什么“新武术”“旧武术”，什么“实为尽美尽善之体育”，“强国保种尽在于斯”。
Northerners pity that southerners are too weak, so they teach them a lot of punches and feet: what "Baguaquan" and "Taijiquan", what "Hong family" and "chivalrous family", what "yin cut leg", "pile leg", "Tan leg", "poke foot", what "new martial arts" and "old martial arts", what "really is the perfect sport", and "the protection of the country is all here".南方人也可怜北方人太简单了，便送上许多文章：什么“……梦”“……魂”“……痕”“……影”“……泪”，什么“外史”“趣史”“秽史”“秘史”，什么“黑幕”“现形”，什么“淌牌”“吊膀”“拆白”，什么“噫嘻卿卿我我”“呜呼燕燕莺莺”“吁嗟风风雨雨”，“耐阿是勒浪勿要面孔哉！”
Southerners also feel sorry for the northerners for being too simple, so they send many articles: "What"...... Dream"...... Soul"...... "...... Shadow"...... Tears", what "foreign history", "interesting history", "filthy history", "secret history", what "shady scene", "appearance", what "flowing card", "hanging arm", "dismantling white", what "oh hee Qingqing me", "woo hu swallow Yan Yingying", "sigh wind and rain", "Nai A is Le Lang don't want a face!" ”直隶山东的侠客们，勇士们呵！诸公有这许多筋力，大可以做一点神圣的劳作；江苏浙江湖南的才子们，名士们呵！诸公有这许多文才，大可以译几叶有用的新书。我们改良点自己，保全些别人；想些互助的方法，收了互害的局面罢！
The knights directly under Shandong, the warriors! You have so much strength that you can do a little sacred work; Talents in Jiangsu, Zhejiang, and Hunan, celebrities! You have so many literary talents, and you can translate several useful new books. We improve ourselves and protect others; Think of some ways to help each other, and end up in a situation of mutual harm!

一九一九年

六十五　暴君的臣民

一九一九年

65 Subjects of tyrants从前看见清朝几件重案的记载，“臣工”拟罪很严重，“圣上”常常减轻，便心里想：大约因为要博仁厚的美名，所以玩这些花样罢了。后来细想，殊不尽然。
In the past, I saw the records of several major cases in the Qing Dynasty, and the crimes of "ministers" were very serious, and the "emperor" was often mitigated, so I thought to myself: Probably because I want to have a good reputation for benevolence, I just play these tricks. Later, when I thought about it carefully, it was not entirely so.暴君治下的臣民，大抵比暴君更暴；暴君的暴政，时常还不能餍足暴君治下的臣民的欲望。
The subjects under the tyrant are generally more violent than the tyrant; The tyranny of tyrants often fails to satisfy the desires of their subjects under tyrants.中国不要提了罢。在外国举一个例：小事件则如Gogol的剧本《按察使》，众人都禁止他，俄皇却准开演；大事件则如巡抚想放耶稣，众人却要求将他钉上十字架。
China should not mention it. To give an example in foreign countries: small incidents such as Gogol's script "The Inspector", everyone forbids him, but the Russian emperor allows the performance; The big event is like the governor wanting to release Jesus, but the crowd demands that he be crucified.暴君的臣民，只愿暴政暴在他人的头上，他却看着高兴，拿“残酷”做娱乐，拿“他人的苦”做赏玩，做慰安。
The tyrant's subjects only want tyranny and tyranny on the heads of others, but he looks happy, using "cruelty" as entertainment, and "other people's suffering" as entertainment and comfort.自己的本领只是“幸免”。
His own ability is only "spared".从“幸免”里又选出牺牲，供给暴君治下的臣民的渴血的欲望，但谁也不明白。死的说“阿呀”，活的高兴着。
From the "spared", sacrifices are selected to supply the bloodthirsty desires of the subjects under the tyrant, but no one understands. The dead said "Ah", and they were happy to live.

一九一九年

六十六　生命的路

一九一九年

66 The road of life想到人类的灭亡是一件大寂寞大悲哀的事；然而若干人们的灭亡，却并非寂寞悲哀的事。
Thinking about the demise of mankind is a great loneliness and sadness; However, the demise of some people is not a lonely and sad thing.生命的路是进步的，总是沿着无限的精神三角形的斜面向上走，什么都阻止他不得。
The path of life is progressive, always going up the slope of the infinite spiritual triangle, and nothing can stop him.自然赋与人们的不调和还很多，人们自己萎缩堕落退步的也还很多，然而生命决不因此回头。无论什么黑暗来防范思潮，什么悲惨来袭击社会，什么罪恶来亵渎人道，人类的渴仰完全的潜力，总是踏了这些铁蒺藜向前进。
There are still many discords between nature and people, and there are still many people who shrink and degenerate themselves, but life will never turn back. No matter what darkness to guard against ideological trends, what tragedy attacks society, what evil desecrates humanity, human beings yearn for full potential, always step on these thistles.生命不怕死，在死的面前笑着跳着，跨过了灭亡的人们向前进。
Life is not afraid of death, it laughs and dances in the face of death, and moves forward beyond the people who perished.什么是路？就是从没路的地方践踏出来的，从只有荆棘的地方开辟出来的。
What is Road? It is trampled out of a place where there is no road, and it is opened up from a place where there are only thorns.以前早有路了，以后也该永远有路。
There was a road before, and there should always be a road in the future.人类总不会寂寞，因为生命是进步的，是乐天的。
Human beings will never be lonely, because life is progressive and optimistic.昨天，我对我的朋友L说，“一个人死了，在死者自身和他的眷属是悲惨的事，但在一村一镇的人看起来不算什么；就是一省一国一种……”
Yesterday I said to my friend L, "It is tragic for a person to die for the deceased himself and his family, but it seems nothing to a person in a village or town; It is one province, one country, one ......"L很不高兴，说，“这是Natur（自然）的话，不是人们的话。你应该小心些。”
L was very upset and said, "These are the words of Natur (nature), not the words of people. You should be careful. ”我想，他的话也不错。I think his words are also good.

一九二一年

一九二一年

一九二一年

1921

一九二一年

智识即罪恶

一九二一年

Wisdom is sin我本来是一个四平八稳，给小酒馆打杂，混一口安稳饭吃的人，不幸认得几个字，受了新文化运动的影响，想求起智识来了。
I was originally a person who was stable, doing odd jobs in taverns and eating a stable meal, but unfortunately I recognized a few words, and was influenced by the New Culture Movement, so I wanted to seek wisdom.那时我在乡下，很为猪羊不平；心里想，虽然苦，倘也如牛马一样，可以有一件别的用，那就免得专以卖肉见长了。然而猪羊满脸呆气，终生胡涂，实在除了保持现状之外，没有别的法。所以，诚然，智识是要紧的！
At that time, I was in the countryside, and I was very unfair to pigs and sheep; I thought to myself, although it is bitter, if it is like cattle and horses, it can have another use, so that it will not be good at selling meat. However, pigs and sheep are full of dumb faces, and there is really no other way but to maintain the status quo. So, it is true that knowledge is important!于是我跑到北京，拜老师，求智识。地球是圆的。元质有七十多种。X＋y＝z。闻所未闻，虽然难，却也以为是人所应该知道的事。
So I went to Beijing to pay respects to my teacher and ask for knowledge. The Earth is round. There are more than 70 types of primordial materials. X＋y＝z。 It is unheard of, although it is difficult, but I also think that it is something that people should know.有一天，看见一种日报，却又将我的确信打破了。报上有一位虚无哲学家说：智识是罪恶，赃物……。虚无哲学，多大的权威呵，而说道智识是罪恶。我的智识虽然少，而确实是智识，这倒反而坑了我了。我于是请教老师去。
One day, I saw a kind of daily newspaper, but it broke my conviction again. There is a nihilistic philosopher in the newspaper who said: Wisdom is sin, and stolen goods ....... Nihilism is a philosophy, how much authority is there, and it is a sin to say that wisdom is a sin. Although my knowledge is small, it is indeed intelligence, which has pitted me. So I asked the teacher to go.老师道：“呸，你懒得用功，便胡说，走！”
The teacher said: "Bah, you are too lazy to work hard, so you talk nonsense, let's go!" ”我想：“老师贪图束脩罢。智识倒也还不如没有的稳当，可惜粘在我脑里，立刻抛不去，我赶快忘了他罢。”
I thought, "The teacher is greedy for the bundle." Wisdom is not as stable as nothing, but unfortunately it stuck in my head and I couldn't throw it away immediately, so I quickly forgot about him. ”然而迟了。因为这一夜里，我已经死了。
However, it was too late. Because on this night, I was dead.半夜，我躺在公寓的床上，忽而走进两个东西来，一个“活无常”，一个“死有分”。但我却并不诧异，因为他们正如城隍庙里塑着的一般。然而跟在后面的两个怪物，却使我吓得失声，因为并非牛头马面，而却是羊面猪头！我便悟到，牛马还太聪明，犯了罪，换上这诸公了，这可见智识是罪恶……。我没有想完，猪头便用嘴将我一拱，我于是立刻跌入阴府里，用不着久等烧车马。
In the middle of the night, I was lying on the bed in my apartment, and suddenly two things came into me, one was "living impermanently" and the other was "dead". But I wasn't surprised, because they were just like the ones in the City God Temple. However, the two monsters following me were so frightened that I was stunned, because it was not a bull head or a horse face, but a sheep's face and a pig's head! I realized that the cattle and horses were still too smart, and if they committed a crime, they would be replaced by these gentlemen, which shows that wisdom is ...... sin. Before I finished thinking, the pig's head arched me with his mouth, and I immediately fell into the underworld, and I didn't have to wait for a long time to burn the carriage and horses.到过阴间的前辈先生多说，阴府的大门是有匾额和对联的，我留心看时，却没有，只见大堂上坐着一位阎罗王。希奇，他便是我的隔壁的大富豪朱朗翁。大约钱是身外之物，带不到阴间的，所以一死便成为清白鬼了，只是不知道怎么又做了大官。他只穿一件极俭朴的爱国布的龙袍，但那龙颜却比活的时候胖得多了。
Senior gentlemen who have been to the underworld often say that there are plaques and couplets at the gate of the underworld, but when I paid attention, I didn't, I saw a King of Hell sitting in the lobby. Hitch, he is the rich man Zhu Langweng next door to me. Probably money is something outside the body and cannot be taken to the underworld, so he became an innocent ghost when he died, but he didn't know how to become a high official again. He only wore a dragon robe made of extremely frugal patriotic cloth, but his dragon face was much fatter than when he was alive.“你有智识么？”朗翁脸上毫无表情的问。
"Do you have intelligence?" Lang Weng asked expressionlessly.“没……”我是记得虚无哲学家的话的，所以这样答。
"No......" I remember the words of the philosopher of nothingness, so I answered like this.“说没有便是有——带去！”
"If you don't say you don't have it, you have it - take it!"我刚想：阴府里的道理真奇怪……却又被羊角一叉，跌出阎罗殿去了。
I just thought: The truth in the underworld is really strange...... But he was forked by the horn and fell out of the Yama Hall.其时跌在一坐城池里，其中都是青砖绿门的房屋，门顶上大抵是洋灰做的两个所谓狮子，门外面都挂一块招牌。倘在阳间，每一所机关外总挂五六块牌，这里却只一块，足见地皮的宽裕了。这瞬息间，我又被一位手执钢叉的猪头夜叉用鼻子拱进一间屋子里去，外面有牌额是：
At that time, he fell into a city, which were all houses with green bricks and green doors, and the top of the door was probably two so-called lions made of foreign gray, and a sign was hung outside the door. If in the Yang world, there are always five or six cards hanging outside each organ, but there is only one here, which shows the abundance of land. In an instant, I was arched into a room by a pig-headed yaksha holding a steel fork with his nose, and there was a sign outside that read:“油豆滑跌小地狱”
"Oil beans slip and fall into a little hell"进得里面，却是一望无边的平地，满铺了白豆拌着桐油。只见无数的人在这上面跌倒又起来，起来又跌倒。我也接连的摔了十二交，头上长出许多疙瘩来。但也有竟在门口坐着躺着，不想爬起，虽然浸得油汪汪的，却毫无一个疙瘩的人，可惜我去问他，他们都瞠着眼不说话。我不知道他们是不听见呢还是不懂，不愿意说呢还是无话可谈。
When I entered it, it was an endless flat ground, covered with white beans mixed with tung oil. I saw countless people falling and getting up on this, getting up and falling again. I also fell twelve times in a row, and many pimples grew on my head. But there were also people who were sitting and lying at the door, not wanting to get up, although they were soaked in oil, but there was not a single pimple, but unfortunately when I asked him, they all stared at him and did not speak. I don't know if they don't hear or don't understand, or if they don't want to say it, or if they don't want to say it, they still have nothing to say.我于是跌上前去，去问那些正在乱跌的人们。其中的一个道：
So I went forward and asked the people who were falling. One of them said:“这就是罚智识的，因为智识是罪恶，赃物……。我们还算是轻的呢。你在阳间的时候，怎么不昏一点？……”他气喘吁吁的断续的说。
"This is the punishment of knowledge, because knowledge is sin, and stolen goods ....... We're still light. When you are in the human world, why don't you faint? ......," he said pantingly and intermittently.“现在昏起来罢。”
"Get up now."“迟了。”
"It's too late."“我听得人说，西医有使人昏睡的药，去请他注射去，好么？”
"I heard that Western medicine has a medicine that makes people sleepy, so go and ask him to inject it, okay?"“不成，我正因为知道医药，所以在这里跌，连针也没有了。”
"No, I fell here because I knew medicine, and I didn't even have a needle."“那么……有专给人打吗啡针的，听说多是没智识的人……我寻他们去。”
"So...... There are people who give morphine injections, and I heard that most of them are unintelligent people...... I will look for them. ”在这谈话时，我们本已滑跌了几百交了。我一失望，便更不留神，忽然将头撞在白豆稀薄的地面上。地面很硬，跌势又重，我于是胡里胡涂的发了昏……
At the time of this conversation, we had already slipped and slipped hundreds of times. When I was disappointed, I was even more careless and suddenly hit my head on the thin ground of white beans. The ground was very hard and the fall was heavy, so I fainted......阿！自由！我忽而在平野上了，后面是那城，前面望得见公寓。我仍然胡里胡涂的走，一面想：我的妻和儿子，一定已经上京了，他们正围着我的死尸哭呢。我于是扑向我的躯壳去，便直坐起来，他们吓跑了，后来竭力说明，他们才了然，都高兴得大叫道：你还阳了，呵呀，我的老天爷啊……
Pander to! Freely! I was suddenly on the plain, behind me was the city, and I could see the apartments in front of me. I was still walking around, thinking: My wife and son must have gone to Beijing, and they are crying around my dead body. So I threw myself on my shell, and sat upright, they scared me away, and then tried my best to explain that they understood, and they all shouted with joy: You are still yang, oh, my God......我这样胡里胡涂的想时，忽然活过来了……
When I was thinking about it like this, I suddenly came to life......没有我的妻和儿子在身边，只有一个灯在桌上，我觉得自己睡在公寓里。间壁的一位学生已经从戏园回来，正哼着“先帝爷唉唉唉”哩，可见时候是不早了。
Without my wife and son around, only a lamp on the table, I felt like I was sleeping in an apartment. A student on the wall had already returned from the theater and was humming "The late emperor sighs", which shows that it is not too late.这还阳还得太冷静，简直不像还阳，我想，莫非先前也并没有死么？
This is too calm, it doesn't look like Huan Yang, I think, could it be that he didn't die before?倘若并没死，那么，朱朗翁也就并没有做阎罗王。
If he didn't die, then Zhu Langweng would not have been the King of Hell.解决这问题，用智识究竟还怕是罪恶，我们还是用感情来决一决罢。
To solve this problem, whether it is a sin with intellect or not, we should use our feelings to decide.十月二十三日。
October 23.

一九二一年

事实胜于雄辩

一九二一年

Actions speak louder than words西哲说：事实胜于雄辩。我当初很以为然，现在才知道在我们中国，是不适用的。
Xizhe said: Facts speak louder than words. I thought so, but now I know that it is not applicable in China.去年我在青云阁的一个铺子里买过一双鞋，今年破了，又到原铺子去照样的买一双。
Last year, I bought a pair of shoes in a shop in Qingyun Pavilion, and this year I broke them, so I went to the original shop to buy a pair again.一个胖伙计，拿出一双鞋来，那鞋头又尖又浅了。
A fat guy took out a pair of shoes, and the toe was pointed and shallow.我将一只旧式的和一只新式的都排在柜上，说道：
I lined up both the old and the new ones on the cabinet and said:“这不一样……”
"It's different......"“一样，没有错。”
"Same, nothing wrong."“这……”
"This ......"“一样，您瞧！”
"Same, look!"我于是买了尖头鞋走了。
So I bought pointed shoes and left.我顺便有一句话奉告我们中国的某爱国大家，您说，攻击本国的缺点，是拾某国人的唾余的，试在中国上，加上我们二字，看看通不通。
By the way, I have a sentence to tell a certain patriot in China, you said, attacking the shortcomings of your own country is to pick up the saliva of a certain Chinese person, try to add the word "us" to China, and see if it works.现在我敬谨加上了，看过了，然而通的。
Now I have added it respectfully, I have seen it, but it works.您瞧！
Lo and behold!十一月四日。November 4th.

一九二二年

一九二二年

一九二二年

1922

一九二二年

估《学衡》

一九二二年

Estimate of "Academic Balance"我在二月四日的《晨报副刊》上看见式芬先生的杂感，很诧异天下竟有这样拘迂的老先生，竟不知世故到这地步，还来同《学衡》诸公谈学理。夫所谓《学衡》者，据我看来，实不过聚在“聚宝之门”左近的几个假古董所放的假毫光；虽然自称为“衡”，而本身的称星尚且未曾钉好，更何论于他所衡的轻重的是非。所以，决用不着较准，只要估一估就明白了。
I saw Mr. Shifen's miscellaneous feelings in the "Morning Post Supplement" on February 4, and I was surprised that there was such a rigid old gentleman in the world, who did not know the world to this extent, and came to talk about the theory with the gentlemen of "Xueheng". The so-called "Xueheng", in my opinion, is really nothing more than a fake light emitted by a few fake antiques gathered near the "Gate of Treasures"; Although he calls himself "Heng", his own star has not yet been nailed, let alone the right and wrong of his weight. Therefore, it is never necessary to be more accurate, just guess it and understand.《弁言》说，“籀绎之作必趋雅音以崇文”，“籀绎”如此，述作可知。夫文者，即使不能“载道”，却也应该“达意”，而不幸诸公虽然张皇国学，笔下却未免欠亨，不能自了，何以“衡”人。这实在是一个大缺点。看罢，诸公怎么说：
"Bian Yan" says, "Zhou Yi's work must go to elegant music to promote literature", "Zhou Yi" is like this, and the narrative can be known. Writers, even if they cannot "carry the way", should also "reach the meaning", and unfortunately, although the gentlemen are Zhang Huangguo, their pen is still indebted to Heng, and they cannot help themselves, so why "balance" people. This is really a big drawback. After reading, what do you all say:《弁言》云，“杂志迩例弁以宣言”，按宣言即布告，而弁者，周人戴在头上的瓜皮小帽一般的帽子，明明是顶上的东西，所以“弁言”就是序，异于“杂志迩例”的宣言，并为一谈，太汗漫了。《评提倡新文化者》文中说，“或操笔以待。每一新书出版。必为之序。以尽其领袖后进之责。顾亭林曰。人之患在好为人序。其此之谓乎。故语彼等以学问之标准与良知。犹语商贾以道德。娼妓以贞操也。”原来做一篇序“以尽其领袖后进之责”，便有这样的大罪案。然而诸公又何以也“突而弁兮”的“言”了起来呢？照前文推论，那便是我的质问，却正是“语商贾以道德。娼妓以贞操也”了。
The "Bianyan" says, "The magazine is a declaration", according to the declaration is a proclamation, and the bian is a hat like a melon skin hat worn on the head of the Zhou people, which is obviously the thing on the top, so the "bianyan" is the preface, which is different from the declaration of the "magazine and the declaration", and it is too sweaty. The article "Commenting on the Promoters of New Culture" said, "Or wait with the pen." Every new book is published. It must be prefaced. In order to fulfill the responsibility of the leader and the younger generation. Gu Tinglin said. The problem with people is that they like to be orderly. This is what it means. Therefore, I tell them the standards of learning and conscience. It is like telling merchants to be moral. Prostitutes are chastity. It turns out that there is such a great crime when it comes to making a preface "to fulfill the responsibility of its leader and backwardness". However, why did you also "suddenly speak"? According to the previous inference, that is my question, but it is precisely "to tell merchants to be moral." Prostitutes are also chastity."《中国提倡社会主义之商榷》中说，“凡理想学说之发生。皆有其历史上之背影。决非悬空虚构。造乌托之邦。作无病之呻者也。”查“英吉之利”的摩耳，并未做Pia of Uto，虽曰之乎者也，欲罢不能，但别寻古典，也非难事，又何必当中加楦呢。于古未闻“睹史之陀”，在今不云“宁古之塔”，奇句如此，真可谓“有病之呻”了。
"China's Discussion on Advocating Socialism" says, "Wherever ideal doctrine occurs. All have their own historical backs. It is by no means a fiction. Create a utopian country. He is a moaner who is not sick. "Check the "English Profit" Moore, but did not do Pia of Uto, although it is said to be yes, I can't stop it, but it is not difficult to find another classic, so why add a last to it? In ancient times, I have never heard of "seeing the historical tower", and today it is not called "Ninggu Tower".《国学摭谭》中说，“虽三皇寥廓而无极。五帝搢绅先生难言之。”人而能“寥廓”，已属奇闻，而第二句尤为费解，不知是三皇之事，五帝和绅先生皆难言之，抑是五帝之事，搢绅先生也难言之呢？推度情理，当从后说，然而太史公所谓“搢绅先生难言之”者，乃指“百家言黄帝”而并不指五帝，所以翻开《史记》，便是赫然的一篇《五帝本纪》，又何尝“难言之”。难道太史公在汉朝，竟应该算是下等社会中人么？
"Guoxue Tan" says, "Although the Three Emperors are vast and boundless. It is difficult for the five emperors and gentlemen to say this. It is already a strange story that people can be "vast", and the second sentence is particularly incomprehensible, I don't know if it is the matter of the Three Emperors, it is difficult for the Five Emperors and Mr. Shen to say, or it is difficult for Mr. Shen to say about the Five Emperors? The reasoning should be said later, but the so-called "Mr. Gentry is difficult to say" refers to "the Hundred Schools of Thought Yellow Emperor" and does not refer to the Five Emperors, so when he opens the "Records of the Grand Historian", it is a remarkable "Chronicle of the Five Emperors", and it is "difficult to say". Could it be that Tai Shi Gong should be regarded as a person in a lower society in the Han Dynasty?《记白鹿洞谈虎》中说，“诸父老能健谈。谈多称虎。当其摹示抉噬之状。闻者鲜不色变。退而记之。亦资诙噱之类也。”姑不论其“能”“健”“谈”“称”，床上安床，“抉噬之状”，终于未记，而“变色”的事，但“资诙噱”，也可谓太远于事情。倘使但“资诙噱”，则先前的闻而色变者，简直是呆子了。记又云，“伥者。新鬼而膏虎牙者也。”刚做新鬼，便“膏虎牙”，实在可悯。那么，虎不但食人，而且也食鬼了。这是古来未知的新发见。
"Remembering the White Deer Cave Talking about the Tiger" says, "The elders can talk." Talk about tigers. When he copied it, it showed the state of biting. Few people who heard it did not change color. Let's take a note. It's also a kind of humor. Regardless of its "ability", "health", "talking", "weighing", "putting the bed on the bed", "biting the state", finally not remembered, and the "discoloration" thing, but "gimmick", can also be said to be too far away from the matter. If it is only "witty and humorous", then the person who changed color after hearing it before is simply a fool. The record also says, "The one who is the wrestler. It is a new ghost and a tiger's tooth. As soon as he became a new ghost, he "anointed tiger teeth", which is really pitiful. Then, the tiger not only eats people, but also eats ghosts. This is a new discovery that has not been known since ancient times.《渔丈人行》的起首道：“楚王无道杀伍奢。覆巢之下无完家。”这“无完家”虽比“无完卵”新奇，但未免颇有语病。假如“家”就是鸟巢，那便犯了复，而且“之下”二字没有着落，倘说是人家，则掉下来的鸟巢未免太沉重了。除了大鹏金翅鸟（出《说岳全传》），断没有这样的大巢，能够压破彼等的房子。倘说是因为押韵，不得不然，那我敢说：这是“挂脚韵”。押韵至于如此，则翻开《诗韵合璧》的“六麻”来，写道“无完蛇”“无完瓜”“无完叉”，都无所不可的。
The beginning of "The Fisherman's Journey" said: "The King of Chu killed Wu She without a way." There is no complete home under the overturned nest. Although this "incomplete home" is novel than "incomplete egg", it is inevitably quite flawed. If "home" is a bird's nest, then it is a crime, and the word "below" does not land, if it is a person, then the fallen bird's nest is too heavy. Except for the Dapeng golden-winged bird (from "The Biography of Yue Quan"), there is no such big nest that can crush their houses. If it is because of the rhyme, it has to be, then I dare to say: this is the "hanging foot rhyme". Rhyme As for this, turn over the "six hemp" of "Poetry and Rhyme" and write "no perfect snake", "no perfect melon" and "no perfect fork", all of which are possible.还有《浙江采集植物游记》，连题目都不通了。采集有所务，并非漫游，所以古人作记，务与游不并举，地与游才相连。匡庐峨眉，山也，则曰纪游，采硫访碑，务也，则曰日记。虽说采集时候，也兼游览，但这应该包举在主要的事务里，一列举便不“古”了。例如这记中也说起吃饭睡觉的事，而题目不可作《浙江采集植物游食眠记》。
There is also "Zhejiang Collecting Plant Travels", which doesn't even make sense of the title. Collecting is a task, not a roaming, so the ancients wrote a record, not at the same time as traveling, but connecting the place with the traveler. Kuanglu Emei is a mountain, so it is called a travel, sulfur mining and visiting monuments, and a diary is also a matter. Although it is also a tour when collecting, this should be included in the main affairs, and it is not "ancient" to list. For example, this record also talks about eating and sleeping, and the title cannot be "Zhejiang Collecting Plants".以上不过随手拾来的事，毛举起来，更要费笔费墨费时费力，犯不上，中止了。因此诸公的说理，便没有指正的必要，文且未亨，理将安托，穷乡僻壤的中学生的成绩，恐怕也不至于此的了。
The above is just a casual pick-up, Mao lifted it, and it took a lot of time and effort to write and ink, and it was stopped. Therefore, there is no need to correct the reasoning of the gentlemen, and the text is not successful, and the reasoning will be peaceful, and the grades of middle school students in poor and remote areas may not be like this.总之，诸公掊击新文化而张皇旧学问，倘不自相矛盾，倒也不失其为一种主张。可惜的是于旧学并无门径，并主张也还不配。倘使字句未通的人也算是国粹的知己，则国粹更要惭惶煞人！“衡”了一顿，仅仅“衡”出了自己的铢两来，于新文化无伤，于国粹也差得远。
In short, if you don't contradict yourself, it is also a proposition. Unfortunately, there is no way to learn from the old school, and it is not worthy of advocating it. If people who do not understand the words can also be regarded as confidants of the quintessence of the country, then the quintessence of the country is even more ashamed! "Heng" after a meal, only "balance" his own baht, which is harmless to the new culture and far from the quintessence of the country.我所佩服诸公的只有一点，是这种东西也居然会有发表的勇气。
The only thing I admire about you is that this kind of thing actually has the courage to publish.

一九二二年

为“俄国歌剧团”

一九二二年

For the "Russian Opera Company"我不知道，——其实是可以算知道的，然而我偏要这样说，——俄国歌剧团何以要离开他的故乡，却以这美妙的艺术到中国来博一点茶水喝。你们还是回去罢！
I don't know,—— but I can actually know it, but I want to say this,—— why the Russian opera company left his homeland and went to China to get some tea with this wonderful art. You should go back!"我到第一舞台看俄国的歌剧，是四日的夜间，是开演的第二日。
I went to the first stage to watch a Russian opera, on the night of the fourth day, on the second day of the performance.一入门，便使我发生异样的心情了：中央三十多人，旁边一大群兵，但楼上四五等中还有三百多的看客。
As soon as I entered, I felt strange: there were more than 30 people in the center, a large group of soldiers next to me, but there were more than 300 spectators in the fourth and fifth grades upstairs.有人初到北京的，不久便说：我似乎住在沙漠里了。
Someone who first arrived in Beijing soon said: I seem to live in the desert.是的，沙漠在这里。
Yes, the desert is here.没有花，没有诗，没有光，没有热。没有艺术，而且没有趣味，而且至于没有好奇心。
No flowers, no poetry, no light, no heat. There is no art, and there is no interest, and as for curiosity.沉重的沙……
Heavy sand......我是怎么一个怯弱的人呵。这时我想：倘使我是一个歌人，我的声音怕要销沉了罢。
What a cowardly person I am. At this time, I thought: If I were a singer, my voice would probably be dull.沙漠在这里。
The desert is here.然而他们舞蹈了，歌唱了，美妙而且诚实的，而且勇猛的。
Yet they danced, sang, and were wonderful and honest, and brave.流动而且歌吟的云……
Flowing and singing clouds......兵们拍手了，在接吻的时候。兵们又拍手了，又在接吻的时候。
The soldiers clapped their hands while kissing. The soldiers clapped their hands again, and when they were kissing again.非兵们也有几个拍手了，也在接吻的时候，而一个最响，超出于兵们的。
There were also a few non-soldiers who clapped their hands and were also kissing, and the one was the loudest, beyond the soldiers.我是怎么一个褊狭的人呵。这时我想：倘使我是一个歌人，我怕要收藏了我的竖琴，沉默了我的歌声罢。倘不然，我就要唱我的反抗之歌。
What a narrow-minded person I am. At this time, I thought: If I were a singer, I would probably have collected my harp and silenced my singing. Otherwise, I will sing my song of resistance.而且真的，我唱了我的反抗之歌了！
And really, I sang my song of defiance!沙漠在这里，恐怖的……
The desert is here, the terrifying ......然而他们舞蹈了，歌唱了，美妙而且诚实的，而且勇猛的。
Yet they danced, sang, and were wonderful and honest, and brave.你们漂流转徙的艺术者，在寂寞里歌舞，怕已经有了归心了罢。你们大约没有复仇的意思，然而一回去，我们也就被复仇了。
You drifting artists, singing and dancing in loneliness, are afraid that they already have the intention to return. You probably have no intention of revenge, but as soon as you go back, we will be avenged.比沙漠更可怕的人世在这里。
The world is more terrifying than the desert here.呜呼！这便是我对于沙漠的反抗之歌，是对于相识以及不相识的同感的朋友的劝诱，也就是为流转在寂寞中间的歌人们的广告。
Alack! This is my song of resistance to the desert, the persuasion of friends who know and do not know each other, that is, the advertisement for singers who circulate in loneliness.四月九日。
April 9th.

一九二二年

无题

一九二二年

Untitled私立学校游艺大会的第二日，我也和几个朋友到中央公园去走一回。
On the second day of the private school amusement convention, I also went for a walk in Central Park with a few friends.我站在门口帖着“昆曲”两字的房外面，前面是墙壁，而一个人用了全力要从我的背后挤上去，挤得我喘不出气。他似乎以为我是一个没有实质的灵魂了，这不能不说他有一点错。
I stood outside the room with the word "Kunqu Opera" on the door, with a wall in front of me, and a person tried with all his might to squeeze up from behind me, making me breathless. He seems to think that I am a soul without substance, which cannot help but say that he is a little wrong.回去要分点心给孩子们，我于是乎到一个制糖公司里去买东西。买的是“黄枚朱古律三文治”。
When I went back, I had to give snacks to the children, so I went to a sugar company to buy something. I bought a "yellow chocolate sandwich".这是盒子上写着的名字，很有些神秘气味了。然而不的，用英文，不过是Chocolate apricot sandwich。
This is the name written on the box, which has a mysterious smell. But no, in English, it's just Chocolate apricot sandwich.我买定了八盒这“黄枚朱古律三文治”，付过钱，将他们装入衣袋里。不幸而我的眼光忽然横溢了，于是看见那公司的伙计正揸开了五个指头，罩住了我所未买的别的一切“黄枚朱古律三文治”。
I bought eight boxes of these "yellow chocolate sandwiches", paid for them, and put them in my pockets. Unfortunately, my eyes suddenly overflowed, and I saw the guy from the company holding five fingers open to cover everything else I hadn't bought.这明明是给我的一个侮辱！然而，其实，我可不应该以为这是一个侮辱，因为我不能保证他如不罩住，也可以在纷乱中永远不被偷。也不能证明我决不是一个偷儿，也不能自己保证我在过去现在以至未来决没有偷窃的事。
This is obviously an insult to me! However, in fact, I shouldn't think this is an insult, because I can't guarantee that he will never be stolen in the chaos if he is not covered. Nor can it prove that I am not a thief, nor can I guarantee that I have never stolen in the past, present or in the future.但我在那时不高兴了，装出虚伪的笑容，拍着这伙计的肩头说：
But I was unhappy at that time, pretended to smile hypocritically, patted the guy on the shoulder and said:“不必的，我决不至于多拿一个……”
"No need, I will never take one more ......"他说：“那里那里……”赶紧掣回手去，于是惭愧了。这很出我意外，——我预料他一定要强辩，——于是我也惭愧了。
He said, "There and there......" He quickly withdrew his hand, so he was ashamed. This was a surprise to me,—— I expected him to argue strongly,—— so I was ashamed.这种惭愧，往往成为我的怀疑人类的头上的一滴冷水，这于我是有损的。
This shame often becomes a drop of cold water on my suspicious human head, which is detrimental to me.夜间独坐在一间屋子里，离开人们至少也有一丈多远了。吃着分剩的“黄枚朱古律三文治”；看几叶托尔斯泰的书，渐渐觉得我的周围，又远远地包着人类的希望。
Sitting alone in a room at night, at least more than a foot away from people. eat the leftover "Huangmei Chocolate Sandwich"; After reading a few Tolstoy books, I gradually felt that my surroundings were far away with the hope of mankind.四月十二日。
April 12th.

一九二二年

“以震其艰深”

一九二二年

"To shake its hardships"上海租界上的“国学家”，以为做白话文的大抵是青年，总该没有看过古董书的，于是乎用了所谓“国学”来吓呼他们。
The "Chinese scholars" in the Shanghai Concession thought that most of the people who wrote vernacular texts were young people who had never read antique books, so they used the so-called "Chinese studies" to scare them.《时报》上载着一篇署名“涵秋”的《文字感想》，其中有一段说：
The Times published a "Text Impression" signed "Han Qiu", which has a passage that says:“新学家薄国学为不足道故为钩辀格磔之文以震其艰深也一读之欲呕再读之昏昏睡去矣”
“新学家薄国学为不足道故为钩辀格磔之文以震其艰深也一读之欲呕再读之昏昏睡去矣”领教。我先前只以为“钩辀格磔”是古人用他来形容鹧鸪的啼声，并无别的深意思；亏得这《文字感想》，才明白这是怪鹧鸪啼得“艰深”了，以此责备他的。但无论如何，“艰深”却不能令人“欲呕”，闻鹧鸪啼而呕者，世固无之，即以文章论，“粤若稽古”，注释纷纭，“绛即东雍”，圈点不断，这总该可以算是艰深的了，可是也从未听说，有人因此反胃。呕吐的原因决不在乎别人文章的“艰深”，是在乎自己的身体里的，大约因为“国学”积蓄得太多，笔不及写，所以涌出来了罢。
Leading. I only thought that "hook and twist" was the ancients used to describe the cry of partridges, and it had no other deep meaning; Thanks to this "Written Impressions", I realized that this was the partridge crying "hard", so I blamed him. But in any case, "difficult" cannot make people "nauseous", those who hear the partridge crying and vomit, there is no such thing in the world, that is, in terms of articles, "Yue Ruo Ji Gu", the annotations are diverse, "Jiang is Dongyong", the circle is constant, this should always be regarded as difficult, but I have never heard of it, some people are sick of it. The reason for vomiting is by no means the "difficult" of other people's articles, but about one's own body, probably because "Chinese studies" have accumulated too much and the pen is not enough to write, so it gushes out.“以震其艰深也”的“震”字，从国学的门外汉看来也不通，但也许是为手民所误的，因为排字印报也是新学，或者也不免要“以震其艰深”。
The word "Zhen" in "to shake its hardship" does not make sense from the layman of Chinese studies, but it may be mistaken by the hands, because typesetting printing is also a new school, or it is inevitable to "shake its difficulty".否则，如此“国学”，虽不艰深，却是恶作，真是“一读之欲呕”，再读之必呕矣。
Otherwise, such a "Chinese studies", although not difficult, is a prank, it is really "disgusting to read", and it will vomit if you read it again.国学国学，新学家既“薄为不足道”，国学家又道而不能亨，你真要道尽途穷了！
Chinese studies, new scholars are not only "thin enough", and Chinese scholars are also unable to succeed, you really want to run out of roads!九月二十日。
September 20.

一九二二年

所谓“国学”

一九二二年

The so-called "Chinese studies"现在暴发的“国学家”之所谓“国学”是什么？
What is the so-called "Chinese studies" of the "Chinese scholars" that are now erupting?一是商人遗老们翻印了几十部旧书赚钱，二是洋场上的文豪又做了几篇鸳鸯蝴蝶体小说出版。
First, the old businessmen reprinted dozens of old books to make money, and secondly, the writers on the foreign field made several mandarin duck butterfly novels and published.商人遗老们的印书是书籍的古董化，其置重不在书籍而在古董。遗老有钱，或者也不过聊以自娱罢了，而商人便大吹大擂的借此获利。还有茶商盐贩，本来是不齿于“士类”的，现在也趁着新旧纷扰的时候，借刻书为名，想挨进遗老遗少的“士林”里去。他们所刻的书都无民国年月，辨不出是元版是清版，都是古董性质，至少每本两三元，绵连，锦帙，古色古香，学生们是买不起的。这就是他们之所谓“国学”。
The printing of books by the old merchants is the antique of books, and its emphasis is not on books but on antiques. The old man is rich, or just for his own amusement, and the businessman makes a big profit by blowing it up. There are also tea merchants and salt dealers, who originally despised the "scholars", but now they also take advantage of the turmoil between the old and the new, in the name of engraving books, and want to enter the "Shilin" of the old and the young. The books they engraved do not have the date of the Republic of China, and they cannot tell whether they are Yuan editions or Qing editions, they are all antiques, at least two or three yuan each, continuous, brocade, antique, and students cannot afford to buy them. This is what they call "Chinese studies".然而巧妙的商人可也决不肯放过学生们的钱的，便用坏纸恶墨别印什么“菁华”什么“大全”之类来搜括。定价并不大，但和纸墨一比较却是大价了。至于这些“国学”书的校勘，新学家不行，当然是出于上海的所谓“国学家”的了，然而错字叠出，破句连篇（用的并不是新式圈点），简直是拿少年来开玩笑。这是他们之所谓“国学”。
However, clever businessmen would never let go of the students' money, so they used bad paper and bad ink to print "essence" or "encyclopedia" to collect them. The price is not big, but compared with paper and ink, it is a big price. As for the proofreading of these "Chinese studies" books, the new scholars are not good, of course, they are from the so-called "Chinese scholars" in Shanghai, but the typos are stacked and the sentences are broken (not using new circles), which is simply a joke about teenagers. This is what they call "Chinese studies".洋场上的往古所谓文豪，“卿卿我我”“蝴蝶鸳鸯”诚然做过一小堆，可是自有洋场以来，从没有人称这些文章（？）为国学，他们自己也并不以“国学家”自命的。现在不知何以，忽而奇想天开，也学了盐贩茶商，要凭空挨进“国学家”队里去了。然而事实很可惨，他们之所谓国学，是“拆白之事各处皆有而以上海一隅为最甚（中略）余于课余之暇不惜浪费笔墨编纂事实作一篇小说以饷阅者想亦阅者所乐闻也”。（原本每句都密圈，今从略，以省排工，阅者谅之。）
The so-called literary heroes in ancient times, "Qingqing, me" and "butterfly mandarin ducks" have indeed done a small number of them, but since the existence of the foreign field, no one has ever called these articles (?). For Chinese studies, they themselves do not call themselves "Chinese scholars". Now I don't know why, suddenly whimsical and also learned from salt dealers and tea merchants, and I was going to join the "Chinese scholar" team out of thin air. However, the facts are very tragic, their so-called Chinese studies are "dismantled everywhere, and a corner of Shanghai is the most (omitted), and I do not hesitate to waste pen and ink in my spare time to compile facts and write a novel to feed the readers, and I think it is also what the readers are happy to hear." (Originally, each sentence was densely circled, but now it is omitted to save the scheduling, and the reader will forgive it.) ）“国学”乃如此而已乎？
Is this all there is to "national studies"?试去翻一翻历史里的儒林和文苑传罢，可有一个将旧书当古董的鸿儒，可有一个以拆白饷阅者的文士？
Try to look through the Confucian and literary traditions in history, but there is a great Confucian who treats old books as antiques, and there is a scribe who pays readers for free?倘说，从今年起，这些就是“国学”，那又是“新”例了。你们不是讲“国学”的么？
If from this year onwards, these are "Chinese studies", then it is a "new" example. Aren't you talking about "Chinese studies"?

一九二二年

儿歌的“反动”

一九二二年

The "reaction" of children's songs一　儿歌
A children's song胡怀琛
Hu Huaichen“月亮！月亮！"Moon! Moon! 
还有半个那里去了？” and half of them have gone? "
“被人家偷去了。” "It was stolen." 
“偷去做甚么？” "What are you stealing for?" 
“当镜子照。” "Look in the mirror."
二　反动歌
2. Reactionary songs小孩子
child天上半个月亮，Half the moon in the sky, 
我道是“破镜飞上天”， I said "broken mirror flying into the sky", 
原来却是被人偷下地了。 It turned out to have been stolen from the ground. 
有趣呀，有趣呀，成了镜子了！ It's interesting, it's funny, it's a mirror! 
可是我见过圆的方的长方的八角六角 But I've seen round, square, rectangular, octagonal, hexagonal 
的菱花式的宝相花式的镜子矣， diamond-style mirrors, and 
没有见过半月形的镜子也。 I've never seen half-moon-shaped mirrors. 
我于是乎很不有趣也！ I don't find it interesting!
谨案小孩子略受新潮，辄敢妄行诘难，人心不古，良足慨然！然拜读原诗，亦存小失，倘能改第二句为“两半个都那里去了”，即成全璧矣。胡先生夙擅改削，当不以鄙言为河汉也。夏历中秋前五日，某生者谨注。
谨案小孩子略受新潮，辄敢妄行诘难，人心不古，良足慨然！然拜读原诗，亦存小失，倘能改第二句为“两半个都那里去了”，即成全璧矣。 胡先生夙擅改削，当不以鄙言为河汉也。 夏历中秋前五日，某生者谨注。十月九日。
October 9th.

一九二二年

“一是之学说”

一九二二年

"The Doctrine of One"我从《学灯》上看见驳吴宓君《新文化运动之反应》这一篇文章之后，才去寻《中华新报》来看他的原文。
After I saw an article refuting Wu Mijun's "Reaction to the New Cultural Movement" in "Xuedeng", I went to "Zhonghua Xinbao" to read his original text.那是一篇浩浩洋洋的长文，该有一万多字罢，——而且还有作者吴宓君的照相。记者又在论前介绍说，“泾阳吴宓君美国哈佛大学硕士现为国立东南大学西洋文学教授君既精通西方文学得其神髓而国学复涵养甚深近主撰学衡杂志以提倡实学为任时论崇之”。
It was a vast long article, which should have more than 10,000 words,—— and there was also a photo of the author Wu Mijun. The reporter also introduced before the discussion, "Jingyang Wu Mijun, a master's degree from Harvard University in the United States, is now a professor of Western literature at National Southeast University, and is not only proficient in Western literature, but also has a deep cultivation of Chinese studies.但这篇大文的内容是很简单的。说大意，就是新文化本也可以提倡的，但提倡者“当思以博大之眼光。宽宏之态度。肆力学术。深窥精研。观其全体。而贯通澈悟。然后平情衡理。执中驭物。造成一是之学说。融合中西之精华。以为一国一时之用。”而可恨“近年有所谓新文化运动者。本其偏激之主张。佐以宣传之良法。……加之喜新盲从者之多。”便忽而声势浩大起来。殊不知“物极必反。理有固然。”于是“近顷于新文化运动怀疑而批评之书报渐多”了。这就谓之“新文化运动之反应”。然而“又所谓反应者非反抗之谓……读者幸勿因吾论列于此。而遂疑其为不赞成新文化者”云。
But the content of this article is very simple. To put it bluntly, it is a new culture that can also be advocated, but the advocate "should think with a broad vision. Magnanimous attitude. He devoted himself to academics. Deep peek and research. Look at the whole thing. And it is clear and enlightened. Then balance the situation. Controlling things in the center. It creates the doctrine of one is. Integrating the essence of China and the West. It is believed to be for the sake of a country and a temporary situation. "And hatefully" in recent years there has been a so-called new culture movement. It is based on its extreme proposition. Supplemented by good publicity methods. …… In addition, there are many new blind followers. Then suddenly the momentum became huge. As everyone knows, "Things must be reversed. There is a reason for this. As a result, "in recent years, there have been more and more books and newspapers that are suspicious and criticized by the New Culture Movement." This is called the "reaction of the new cultural movement". However, "the so-called reaction is not resistance...... Readers, please do not list here because of my discussion. And I suspect that he is a person who does not support the new culture."反应的书报一共举了七种，大体上都是“执中驭物”，宣传“正轨”的新文化的。现在我也来绍介一回：一《民心周报》，二《经世报》，三《亚洲学术杂志》，四《史地学报》，五《文哲学报》，六《学衡》，七《湘君》。
There are a total of seven kinds of books and newspapers that responded, and they are generally "in charge of things" and promote a new culture of "on the right track". Now I will also introduce you once: 1. "Minxin Weekly", 2. "Jingshi Bao", 3. "Asian Academic Journal", 4. "Journal of History and Geography", 5. "Journal of Literature and Philosophy", 6. "Xueheng", 7. "Xiangjun".此外便是吴君对于这七种书报的“平情衡理”的批评（？）了。例如《民心周报》，“自发刊以至停版。除小说及一二来稿外。全用文言。不用所谓新式标点。即此一端。在新潮方盛之时。亦可谓砥柱中流矣。”至于《湘君》之用白话及标点，却又别有道理，那是“《学衡》本事理之真。故拒斥粗劣白话及英文标点。《湘君》求文艺之美。故兼用通妥白话及新式标点”的。总而言之，主张偏激，连标点也就偏激，那白话自然更不“通妥”了。即如我的白话，离通妥就很远；而我的标点则是“英文标点”。
In addition, Wu Jun's criticism of these seven kinds of books and newspapers is "fair and reasonable" (?). It's over. For example, "People's Heart Weekly", "from publication to suspension." In addition to novels and one or two manuscripts. All literary words are used. No so-called modern punctuation. This is one of the ends. At the height of the new wave. It can also be said that he is in the middle of the pillar. As for the use of vernacular and punctuation in "Xiangjun", it makes sense, that is, "the truth of "Xueheng". Therefore, he rejected the crude vernacular and English punctuation. "Xiangjun" seeks the beauty of literature and art. Therefore, both the vernacular and the new punctuation are used". All in all, if you advocate extreme, even the punctuation will be extreme, and the vernacular will naturally be even less "reasonable". That is, as my vernacular is, it is far from being complete; My punctuation is "English punctuation".但最“贯通澈悟”的是拉《经世报》来做“反应”，当《经世报》出版的时候，还没有“万恶孝为先”的谣言，而他们却早已发过许多崇圣的高论，可惜现在从日报变了月刊，实在有些萎缩现象了。至于“其于君臣之伦。另下新解”，“《亚洲学术杂志》议其牵强附会。必以君为帝王”，实在并不错，这才可以算得“新文化之反应”，而吴君又以为“则过矣”，那可是自己“则过矣”了。因为时代的关系，那时的君，当然是帝王而不是大总统。又如民国以前的议论，也因为时代的关系，自然多含革命的精神，《国粹学报》便是其一，而吴君却怪他谈学术而兼涉革命，也就是过于“融合”了时间的先后的原因。
But the most "penetrating enlightenment" is to pull the "Jingshi Bao" to "react", when the "Jingshi Bao" was published, there was no rumor of "all evils and filial piety first", but they had already issued many high theories about the saints, but unfortunately now it has changed from a daily newspaper to a monthly magazine, which is really a bit of a shrinkage. As for "the relationship between ruler and subject. In addition, a new explanation was issued," the Asian Journal of Academics commented on its far-fetched and far-fetched comments. must be regarded as the emperor", which is really not good, which can be regarded as a "reaction of the new culture", and Wu Jun thinks that "it is too much", which is his own "too much". Because of the times, the king at that time was of course the emperor rather than the president. Another example is the discussion before the Republic of China, and because of the relationship of the times, it naturally contains the spirit of revolution, and the "Journal of National Essence" is one of them, but Wu Jun blames him for talking about academia and revolution, that is, the reason why he "integrates" the order of time too much.此外还有一个太没见识处，就是遗漏了《长青》，《红》，《快活》，《礼拜六》等近顷风起云涌的书报，这些实在都是“新文化运动的反应”，而且说“通妥白话”的。
In addition, there is another thing that is too uninsightful, that is, it omits "Evergreen", "Red", "Happy", "Saturday" and other books and newspapers that have been surging in recent times, which are really "reactions to the new cultural movement" and speak "in the vernacular".十一月三日。
November 3rd.

一九二二年

不懂的音译

一九二二年

I don't understand transliteration一
One凡有一件事，总是永远缠夹不清的，大约莫过于在我们中国了。
There is always one thing that can never be clarified, probably more than in our China.翻外国人的姓名用音译，原是一件极正当，极平常的事，倘不是毫无常识的人们，似乎决不至于还会说费话。然而在上海报（我记不清楚什么报了，总之不是《新申报》便是《时报》）上，却又有伏在暗地里掷石子的人来嘲笑了。他说，做新文学家的秘诀，其一是要用些“屠介纳夫”“郭歌里”之类使人不懂的字样的。
Transliterating the names of foreigners is originally a very legitimate and common thing, and if it weren't for people with no common sense, it seems that they would never talk nonsense. However, on the poster (I can't remember what newspaper, in short, it was either "New Declaration" or "Times"), there were people who were lying in the dark and throwing stones to laugh. He said that one of the secrets of being a new writer is to use some words that people don't understand, such as "Tu Jie Nafu" and "Guo Ge Li".凡有旧来音译的名目：靴，狮子，葡萄，萝卜，佛，伊犁等……都毫不为奇的使用，而独独对于几个新译字来作怪；若是明知的，便可笑；倘不，更可怜。
All the names that have been transliterated in the past: boots, lions, grapes, turnips, Buddhas, Ili, etc...... It is not surprising that it is used, but it is strange to a few new translations; If you know it, it's ridiculous; If not, it's even more pitiful.其实是，现在的许多翻译者，比起往古的翻译家来，已经含有加倍的顽固性的了。例如南北朝人译印度的人名：阿难陀，实叉难陀，鸠摩罗什婆……决不肯附会成中国的人名模样，所以我们到了现在，还可以依了他们的译例推出原音来。不料直到光绪末年，在留学生的书报上，说是外国出了一个“柯伯坚”，倘使粗粗一看，大约总不免要疑心他是柯府上的老爷柯仲软的令兄的罢，但幸而还有照相在，可知道并不如此，其实是俄国的Kropotkin。那书上又有一个“陶斯道”，我已经记不清是Dostoievski呢，还是Tolstoi了。
In fact, many translators today are twice as stubborn as those of the past. For example, the people of the Northern and Southern Dynasties translated Indian names: Ananda, Shichananda, Kumarashva...... We will never attach to the appearance of Chinese people's names, so we can still follow their translation examples to introduce the original sound. Unexpectedly, until the end of Guangxu, in the books and newspapers of international students, it was said that a "Ke Bojian" was produced by a foreign country, and if you look at it roughly, you will probably have to suspect that he is the brother of Ke Zhongruan, the master of the Ke family, but fortunately, there are still photos, but you know that this is not the case, in fact, it is Kropotkin in Russia. There is another "Taos Road" in the book, and I can't remember whether it was Dostoievski or Tolstoi.这“屠介纳夫”和“郭歌里”，虽然古雅赶不上“柯伯坚”，但于外国人的氏姓上定要加一个《百家姓》里所有的字，却几乎成了现在译界的常习，比起六朝和尚来，已可谓很“安本分”的了。然而竟还有人从暗中来掷石子，装鬼脸，难道真所谓“人心不古”么？
Although this "Tu Jie Nafu" and "Guo Ge Li" are not as quaint as "Ke Bojian", they must add a word in the "Hundred Family Surnames" to the surnames of foreigners, but it has almost become a common practice in the translation world. However, there are still people who come from the dark to throw stones and pretend to grimace, is it really the so-called "people's hearts are not ancient"?我想，现在的翻译家倒大可以学学“古之和尚”，凡有人名地名，什么音便怎么译，不但用不着白费心思去嵌镶，而且还须去改正。即如“柯伯坚”，现在虽然改译“苦鲁巴金”了，但第一音既然是K不是Ku，我们便该将“苦”改作“克”，因为K和Ku的分别，在中国字音上是办得到的。
I think that today's translators can learn from the "ancient monks", and all the names of people and places can be translated as they are, not only do they not need to spend time to emblay them, but they also have to be corrected. For example, "Ke Bo Jian", although it has now been translated as "Ku Lu Ba Jin", since the first sound is K instead of Ku, we should change "Ku" to "Ke", because the difference between K and Ku can be done in Chinese pronunciation.而中国却是更没有注意到，所以去年Kropotkin死去的消息传来的时候，上海《时报》便用日俄战争时旅顺败将Kuropatkin的照相，把这位无治主义老英雄的面目来顶替了。
China, on the other hand, did not notice it, so when the news of Kropotkin's death came last year, the Shanghai Times used a photo of Kuropatkin, a defeated general of Lushun during the Russo-Japanese War, to replace the face of this old anarchist hero.十一月四日。
November 4th.二
Two自命为“国学家”的对于译音也加以嘲笑，确可以算得一种古今的奇闻；但这不特显示他的昏愚，实在也足以看出他的悲惨。
The self-proclaimed "Chinese scholar" also ridiculed the translation, which can indeed be regarded as a kind of anecdote in ancient and modern times; But this not only shows his foolishness, but also shows his misery.倘如他的尊意，则怎么办呢？我想，这只有三条计。上策是凡有外国的事物都不谈；中策是凡有外国人都称之为洋鬼子，例如屠介纳夫的《猎人日记》，郭歌里的《巡按使》，都题为“洋鬼子著”；下策是，只好将外国人名改为王羲之唐伯虎黄三太之类，例如进化论是唐伯虎提倡的，相对论是王羲之发明的，而发见美洲的则为黄三太。
What if it is his will? I think there are only three plans. The best policy is not to talk about anything that is foreign; The middle policy is that all foreigners call them foreign devils, such as Tu Jie Nafu's "Hunter's Diary" and Guo Geli's "Inspector", all of which are titled "Foreign Devils"; For example, the theory of evolution was advocated by Tang Bohu, the theory of relativity was invented by Wang Xizhi, and the one who discovered America was Huang Santai.倘不能，则为自命为国学家所不懂的新的音译语，可是要侵入真的国学的地域里来了。
If not, it is a new transliteration that the self-proclaimed Chinese scholars do not understand, but it is going to invade the territory of real Chinese studies.中国有一部《流沙坠简》，印了将有十年了。要谈国学，那才可以算一种研究国学的书。开首有一篇长序，是王国维先生做的，要谈国学，他才可以算一个研究国学的人物。而他的序文中有一段说，“案古简所出为地凡三（中略）其三则和阗东北之尼雅城及马咱托拉拔拉滑史德三地也”。
There is a "Quicksand Falling Slip" in China, which has been printed for nearly ten years. If you want to talk about Chinese studies, it can be regarded as a book on Chinese studies. There is a long preface at the beginning, which was written by Mr. Wang Guowei, and he can be regarded as a person who studies Chinese studies if he wants to talk about Chinese studies. And there is a passage in his preface that says, "According to the ancient slips, there are three places (omitted), three of which are the city of Niya and the three places of Mazan Torabala and Huashide in the northeast of Khotan."这些译音，并不比“屠介纳夫”之类更古雅，更易懂。然而何以非用不可呢？就因为有三处地方，是这样的称呼；即使上海的国学家怎样冷笑，他们也仍然还是这样的称呼。当假的国学家正在打牌喝酒，真的国学家正在稳坐高斋读古书的时候，沙士比亚的同乡斯坦因博士却已经在甘肃新疆这些地方的沙碛里，将汉晋简牍掘去了；不但掘去，而且做出书来了。所以真要研究国学，便不能不翻回来；因为真要研究，所以也就不能行我的三策：或绝口不提，或但云“得于华夏”，或改为“获之于春申浦畔”了。
These translations are no more quaint and understandable than "Tu Jie Nafu" and the like. But why must it be used? Just because there are three places, it is called like this; No matter how much the Chinese scholars in Shanghai sneered, they still called it that. When fake Chinese scholars are playing cards and drinking, and real Chinese scholars are sitting firmly in Gaozhai reading ancient books, Shakespeare's fellow countryman Dr. Stein has already dug up the Han and Jin bamboo slips in the deserts of these places in Xinjiang, Gansu Province; Not only did he dig it up, but he also made a book. Therefore, if you really want to study Chinese studies, you have to turn it over; Because I really want to study, I can't do my three strategies: either never mention it, or just say "obtained from China", or change it to "obtained from Chunshenpu".而且不特这一事。此外如真要研究元朝的历史，便不能不懂“屠介纳夫”的国文，因为单用些“鸳鸯”“蝴蝶”这些字样，实在是不够敷衍的。所以中国的国学不发达则已，万一发达起来，则敢请恕我直言，可是断不是洋场上的自命为国学家“所能厕足其间者也”的了。
And not only this thing. In addition, if you really want to study the history of the Yuan Dynasty, you must understand the Chinese language of "Tu Jie Nafu", because using the words "mandarin ducks" and "butterflies" alone is really not perfunctory enough. Therefore, if China's Chinese studies are not developed, if they do, I dare to ask for my forgiveness, but it is definitely not the self-proclaimed Chinese scholars in the foreign field who "can fill the gap".但我于序文里所谓三处中的“马咱托拉拔拉滑史德”，起初却实在不知道怎样断句，读下去才明白二是“马咱托拉”，三是“拔拉滑史德”。
But in the preface, I really didn't know how to break the sentence at first, and after reading it, I understood that the second was "Mazan Tora" and the third was "Bala Slippery Stone".所以要清清楚楚的讲国学，也仍然须嵌外国字，须用新式的标点的。
Therefore, to clearly explain Chinese studies, it is still necessary to embed foreign characters and use new punctuation.十一月六日。
November 6th.

一九二二年

对于批评家的希望

一九二二年

Hope for critics前两三年的书报上，关于文艺的大抵只有几篇创作（姑且这样说）和翻译，于是读者颇有批评家出现的要求，现在批评家已经出现了，而且日见其多了。
In the first two or three years, there were only a few creations (let's say so) and translations about literature and art, so readers had a lot of demands for critics to appear, and now critics have appeared, and there are more and more of them.以文艺如此幼稚的时候，而批评家还要发掘美点，想扇起文艺的火焰来，那好意实在很可感。即不然，或则叹息现代作品的浅薄，那是望著作家更其深，或则叹息现代作品之没有血泪，那是怕著作界复归于轻佻。虽然似乎微辞过多，其实却是对于文艺的热烈的好意，那也实在是很可感谢的。
When literature and art are so naïve, and critics still have to discover the beauty and want to fan the flame of literature and art, that kind intention is really very touchable. That is, if not, or sigh at the shallowness of modern works, that is, to look deeper at the writer, or to sigh that there is no blood or tears in modern works, that is, for fear that the writing industry will return to frivolity. Although it seems to be too much micro-words, it is actually a warm goodwill for literature and art, which is really grateful.独有靠了一两本“西方”的旧批评论，或则捞一点头脑板滞的先生们的唾余，或则仗着中国固有的什么天经地义之类的，也到文坛上来践踏，则我以为委实太滥用了批评的权威。试将粗浅的事来比罢：譬如厨子做菜，有人品评他坏，他固不应该将厨刀铁釜交给批评者，说道你试来做一碗好的看：但他却可以有几条希望，就是望吃菜的没有“嗜痂之癖”，没有喝醉了酒，没有害着热病，舌苔厚到二三分。
Only relying on one or two old commentaries of "Western", or fishing for a little bit of spitting gentlemen, or relying on some of China's inherent righteousness, etc., also trampled on the literary world, I think that the authority of criticism has been abused too much. Try to compare superficial things: for example, if a chef cooks and someone judges him badly, he should not hand over the kitchen knife and iron cauldron to the critic and say, "You try to make a good bowl of goodness": but he can have a few hopes, that is, he does not have a "scab habit", is not drunk, does not suffer from a fever, and his tongue coating is as thick as two or three points.我对于文艺批评家的希望却还要小。我不敢望他们于解剖裁判别人的作品之前，先将自己的精神来解剖裁判一回，看本身有无浅薄卑劣荒谬之处，因为这事情是颇不容易的。我所希望的不过愿其有一点常识，例如知道裸体画和春画的区别，接吻和性交的区别，尸体解剖和戮尸的区别，出洋留学和“放诸四夷”的区别，笋和竹的区别，猫和老虎的区别，老虎和番菜馆的区别……。更进一步，则批评以英美的老先生学说为主，自然是悉听尊便的，但尤希望知道世界上不止英美两国；看不起托尔斯泰，自然也自由的，但尤希望先调查一点他的行实，真看过几本他所做的书。
My hopes for literary critics are even smaller. I don't dare to expect them to dissect the referee with their own spirit before dissecting other people's works, to see if there is anything shallow, despicable, and absurd, because this matter is not easy. What I hope is that he has a little common sense, such as knowing the difference between nude painting and spring painting, the difference between kissing and sexual intercourse, the difference between dissection and corpse killing, the difference between studying abroad and "putting it in the barbarians", the difference between bamboo shoots and bamboo, the difference between cats and tigers, and the difference between tigers and fan restaurants, ....... furthermore, the criticism is based on the doctrine of the old gentleman of Britain and the United States, which is naturally listened to and respected, but especially wants to know that there are more than two countries in the world; I look down on Tolstoy, and I am naturally free, but I especially hope to investigate his facts first, and I have really read a few books he has made.还有几位批评家，当批评译本的时候，往往诋为不足齿数的劳力，而怪他何不去创作。创作之可尊，想来翻译家该是知道的，然而他竟止于翻译者，一定因为他只能翻译，或者偏爱翻译的缘故。所以批评家若不就事论事，而说些应当去如此如彼，是溢出于事权以外的事，因为这类言语，是商量教训而不是批评。现在还将厨子来比，则吃菜的只要说出品味如何就尽够，苦于此之外，又怪他何以不去做裁缝或造房子，那是无论怎样的呆厨子，也难免要说这位客官是痰迷心窍的了。
There are also several critics who, when criticizing translations, often discredit them as insufficient labor and blame him for not creating. The creation is respectable, and the translator should know it, but he is only a translator, and it must be because he can only translate, or prefers translation. Therefore, if a critic does not discuss the matter on the matter, but says something that should be done this or that, it is beyond his authority, because this kind of speech is to discuss lessons rather than criticism. Now comparing the chef, it is enough for the person who eats the food to say how he tastes, and in addition to this, he blames why he doesn't work as a tailor or build a house.十一月九日。
November 9th.

一九二二年

反对“含泪”的批评家

一九二二年

Critics against "tears"现在对于文艺的批评日见其多了，是好现象；然而批评日见其怪了，是坏现象，愈多反而愈坏。
Nowadays, there are more and more criticisms of literature and art, which is a good phenomenon; However, criticism is becoming more and more strange, and it is a bad phenomenon, and the more it is, the worse it gets.我看了很觉得不以为然的是胡梦华君对于汪静之君《蕙的风》的批评，尤其觉得非常不以为然的是胡君答复章鸿熙君的信。
What I disagreed with was Hu Menghuajun's criticism of Wang Jingzhijun's "Hui Zhi Feng", and I especially felt very dissatisfied with Hu Jun's reply to Zhang Hongxijun's letter.一，胡君因为《蕙的风》里有一句“一步一回头瞟我意中人”，便科以和《金瓶梅》一样的罪：这是锻炼周纳的。《金瓶梅》卷首诚然有“意中人”三个字，但不能因为有三个字相同，便说这书和那书是一模样。例如胡君要青年去忏悔，而《金瓶梅》也明明说是一部“改过的书”，若因为这一点意思偶合，而说胡君的主张也等于《金瓶梅》，我实在没有这样的粗心和大胆。我以为中国之所谓道德家的神经，自古以来，未免过敏而又过敏了，看见一句“意中人”，便即想到《金瓶梅》，看见一个“瞟”字，便即穿凿到别的事情上去。然而一切青年的心，却未必都如此不净；倘竟如此不净，则即使“授受不亲”，后来也就会“瞟”，以至于瞟以上的等等事，那时便是一部《礼记》，也即等于《金瓶梅》了，又何有于《蕙的风》？
First, Hu Jun was sentenced to the same sin as "Jin Ping Mei" because there is a sentence in "Hui Wind" that "look back at my favorite person step by step": this is to exercise Zhou Na. It is true that there are three words "the person in mind" at the beginning of "Jin Ping Mei", but just because there are three words the same, it cannot be said that this book and that book are the same. For example, Hu Jun asked young people to repent, and "Jin Ping Mei" is also clearly said to be a "book of reform", if because of this meaning, and Hu Jun's proposition is also equal to "Jin Ping Mei", I really do not have such carelessness and boldness. I think that the nerves of the so-called moralists in China have been allergic and allergic since ancient times, and when they see a sentence of "the person they like", they think of "Jin Ping Mei", and when they see the word "glance", they immediately go to other things. However, the hearts of all young people may not be so impure; If it is so impure, then even if it is "not close to giving and receiving", it will be "glanced" later, so that it will be a "Book of Rites" at that time, which is equivalent to "Jin Ping Mei", so how can there be "Hui no Feng"?二，胡君因为诗里有“一个和尚悔出家”的话，便说是诬蔑了普天下和尚，而且大呼释迦牟尼佛：这是近于宗教家而且援引多数来恫吓，失了批评的态度的。其实一个和尚悔出家，并不是怪事，若普天下的和尚没有一个悔出家的，那倒是大怪事。中国岂不是常有酒肉和尚，还俗和尚么？非“悔出家”而何？倘说那些是坏和尚，则那诗里的便是坏和尚之一，又何至诬蔑了普天下的和尚呢？这正如胡君说一本诗集是不道德，并不算诬蔑了普天下的诗人。至于释迦牟尼，可更与文艺界“风马牛”了，据他老先生的教训，则做诗便犯了“绮语戒”，无论道德或不道德，都不免受些孽报，可怕得很的！
Second, because there is a sentence in the poem "a monk repents of becoming a monk", he said that he slandered the monks of the world, and shouted Shakyamuni Buddha: this is close to a religious person and invokes the majority to intimidate, losing the attitude of criticism. In fact, it is not strange for a monk to regret becoming a monk, but if none of the monks in the world regret becoming a monk, it is a big strange thing. Isn't there often a monk in China, and a monk who is still a vulgar monk? What if it is not "regret becoming a monk"? If those are bad monks, then the poem is one of the bad monks, so why slander the monks of the whole world? This is just like Hu Jun said that a collection of poems is immoral, and it is not a slander for poets all over the world. As for Shakyamuni, he is even more "windy and cow" with the literary and artistic circles, according to the lessons of his old gentleman, he has committed the "precept of beautiful words" when making poetry, whether moral or immoral, he is not immune to some evil retribution, which is very terrifying!三，胡君说汪君的诗比不上歌德和雪利，我以为是对的。但后来又说，“论到人格，歌德一生而十九娶，为世诟病，正无可讳。然而歌德所以垂世不朽者，乃五十岁以后忏悔的歌德，我们也知道么？”这可奇特了。雪利我不知道，若歌德即Goethe，则我敢替他呼几句冤，就是他并没有“一生而十九娶”，并没有“为世诟病”，并没有“五十岁以后忏悔”。而且对于胡君所说的“自‘耳食’之风盛，歌德，雪利之真人格遂不为国人所知，无识者流，更妄相援引，可悲亦复可笑！”这一段话，也要请收回一些去。
Third, Hu Jun said that Wang Jun's poems are not as good as Goethe and Shirley, and I think he is right. But later he said, "When it comes to personality, Goethe married nineteen in his life, which is criticized by the world, which is undeniable." However, the reason why Goethe is immortal is Goethe, who repents after the age of fifty, do we know? "This is strange. Shirley I don't know, if Goethe is Goethe, then I dare to say a few words for him, that is, he did not "marry nineteen in his life", did not "criticize the world", and did not "repent after the age of fifty". And for what Hu Jun said, "Since the 'ear eating' is popular, Goethe and Shirley's true personality is not known to the Chinese people, and the ignorant are even more arrogantly quoted, which is sad and ridiculous!" "Please take back some of this paragraph.我不知道汪君可曾过了五十岁，倘没有，则即使用了胡君的论调来裁判，似乎也还不妨做“一步一回头瞟我意中人”的诗，因为以歌德为例，也还没有到“忏悔”的时候。
I don't know that Wang Jun has passed the age of fifty, and if not, even if Hu Jun's argument is used to judge, it seems that he might as well make a poem of "looking back at my favorite person step by step", because taking Goethe as an example, it is not yet time for "repentance".临末，则我对于胡君的“悲哀的青年，我对于他们只有不可思议的眼泪！”“我还想多写几句，我对于悲哀的青年底不可思议的泪已盈眶了”这一类话，实在不明白“其意何居”。批评文艺，万不能以眼泪的多少来定是非。文艺界可以收到创作家的眼泪，而沾了批评家的眼泪却是污点。胡君的眼泪的确洒得非其地，非其时，未免万分可惜了。
At the end of my life, I only have incredible tears for Hu Jun's "sad youths!" "I want to write a few more sentences, I have tears in my eyes for the sad youth", I really don't understand "what does it mean". Criticizing literature and art must not be judged by the number of tears. The literary and artistic circles can receive the tears of creators, but the tears of critics are stained. Hu Jun's tears did fall out of place, and it was a pity that it was not the right time.起稿已完，才看见《青光》上的一段文章，说近人用先生和君，含有尊敬和小觑的差别意见。我在这文章里正用君，但初意却不过贪图少写一个字，并非有什么《春秋》笔法。现在声明于此，却反而多写了许多字了。
After the draft was finished, I saw an article in "Qingguang", saying that the use of Mr. and Jun by neighbors contains different opinions of respect and contempt. I am using Jun in this article, but the original intention is just to write one less word, not any "Spring and Autumn" penmanship. Now that it is declared here, many more words have been written.十一月十七日。
November 17th.

一九二二年

即小见大

一九二二年

That is, the small sees the big北京大学的反对讲义收费风潮，芒硝火焰似的起来，又芒硝火焰似的消灭了，其间就是开除了一个学生冯省三。
Peking University's opposition to the handout fee trend rose like a mirabilite flame, and then disappeared like a mirabilite flame, during which a student Feng Shengsan was expelled.这事很奇特，一回风潮的起灭，竟只关于一个人。倘使诚然如此，则一个人的魄力何其太大，而许多人的魄力又何其太无呢。
This matter is very peculiar, once the rise and fall of the trend is only about one person. If this is the case, then how much courage is one person, and how little courage is there for many people.现在讲义费已经取消，学生是得胜了，然而并没有听得有谁为那做了这次的牺牲者祝福。
Now that the handout fee has been canceled, the students are victorious, but no one has heard of the blessing of the victims who did this time.即小见大，我于是竟悟出一件长久不解的事来，就是：三贝子花园里面，有谋刺良弼和袁世凯而死的四烈士坟，其中有三块墓碑，何以直到民国十一年还没有人去刻一个字。
That is, I realized something that I couldn't understand for a long time, that is: in the Sanbeizi Garden, there are the graves of the four martyrs who plotted to assassinate Liangbi and Yuan Shikai, and there are three tombstones, why no one has carved a word until the eleventh year of the Republic of China.凡有牺牲在祭坛前沥血之后，所留给大家的，实在只有“散胙”这一件事了。
After the sacrifice in front of the altar, all that is left for everyone is the "scattering".十一月十八日。November 18th.

一九二四年

一九二四年

一九二四年

1924

一九二四年

望勿“纠正”

一九二四年

I hope it will not be "corrected"汪原放君已经成了古人了，他的标点和校正小说，虽然不免小谬误，但大体是有功于作者和读者的。谁料流弊却无穷，一班效颦的便随手拉一部书，你也标点，我也标点，你也作序，我也作序，他也校改，这也校改，又不肯好好的做，结果只是糟蹋了书。
Wang Yuanfangjun has become an ancient, and although his punctuation and correction of novels are inevitably small fallacies, they are generally credited to the author and readers. Who would have thought that the corruption was endless, and a group of imitators casually pulled a book, you also punctuated, I also punctuated, you also made a preface, I also made a preface, and he also corrected it, which was also corrected, and he refused to do it well, and the result was just a ruin of the book.《花月痕》本不必当作宝贝书，但有人要标点付印，自然是各随各便。这书最初是木刻的，后有排印本；最后是石印，错字很多，现在通行的多是这一种。至于新标点本，则陶乐勤君序云，“本书所取的原本，虽属佳品，可是错误尚多。余虽都加以纠正，然失检之处，势必难免。……”我只有错字很多的石印本，偶然对比了第二十五回中的三四叶，便觉得还是石印本好，因为陶君于石印本的错字多未纠正，而石印本的不错字儿却多纠歪了。
"Flower Moon Traces" does not have to be regarded as a baby book, but if someone wants to punctuate and print, it is naturally as they please. The book was originally woodcut and later typeset; Finally, there are stone seals, there are many typos, and this is the most common one now. As for the new punctuation version, Tao Leqinjun said in the preface, "Although the original taken in this book is a good product, there are still many errors." Although I have corrected everything, it is inevitable that there will be mistakes. ...... "I only have a lithograph with a lot of typos, and I accidentally compared the three or four leaves in the twenty-fifth chapter, and I think it is better to have a lithograph, because Tao Junyu has not corrected many typos in the lithograph, but the good words in the lithograph are more crooked."“钗黛直是个子虚乌有，算不得什么。……”
"Chai Dai is just a nothing, nothing. ……”这“直是个”就是“简直是一个”之意，而纠正本却改作“真是个”，便和原意很不相同了。
This "straight one" means "simply one", but the correction version is changed to "really one", which is very different from the original meaning.“秋痕头上包着绉帕……突见痴珠，便含笑低声说道，‘我料得你挨不上十天，其实何苦呢？’
"Qiu Hen has a crepe handkerchief wrapped around his head...... Suddenly seeing the foolish pearl, he smiled and whispered, 'I expected you to not last ten days, so why bother?' ’“……痴珠笑道，‘往后再商量罢。’……”
“…… Foolish pearl smiled and said, 'Let's discuss it later.' ’……”他们俩虽然都沦落，但其时却没有什么大悲哀，所以还都笑。而纠正本却将两个“笑”字都改成“哭”字了。教他们一见就哭，看眼泪似乎太不值钱，况且“含哭”也不成话。
Although both of them fell, they didn't have any great sorrow at that time, so they both laughed. However, the correction version changed both "laugh" words to "crying". Teach them to cry at first sight, and tears seem too worthless, and "crying" is not a word.我因此想到一种要求，就是印书本是美事，但若自己于意义不甚了然时，不可便以为是错的，而奋然“加以纠正”，不如“过而存之”，或者倒是并不错。
Therefore, I thought of a requirement, that is, printing books is a good thing, but if you don't know the meaning very well, you should not think that it is wrong, and strive to "correct it", it is better to "live and keep it", or it is not bad.我因此又起了一个疑问，就是有些人攻击译本小说“看不懂”，但他们看中国人自作的旧小说，当真看得懂么？
Therefore, I have another question, that is, some people attack the translated novel for "not understanding", but do they really understand the old novels written by the Chinese?一月二十八日。
January 28th.这一篇短文发表之后，曾记得有一回遇见胡适之先生，谈到汪先生的事，知道他很康健。胡先生还以为我那“成了古人”云云，是说他做过许多工作，已足以表见于世的意思。这实在使我“诚惶诚恐”，因为我本意实不如此，直白地说，就是说已经“死掉了”。可是直到那时候，我才知这先前所听到的竟是一种毫无根据的谣言。现在我在此敬向汪先生谢我的粗疏之罪，并且将旧文的第一句订正，改为：“汪原放君未经成了古人了。”一九二五年九月二十四日，身热头痛之际，书。After this short article was published, I remember meeting Mr. Hu Shizhi once, talking about Mr. Wang, and knowing that he was very healthy. Mr. Hu also thought that my "became an ancient" cloud meant that he had done a lot of work, which was enough to show the meaning of the world. This really made me "sincerely afraid", because I didn't mean to do so, to put it bluntly, I was "dead". But it wasn't until then that I realized that what I had heard before was an unfounded rumor. Now I would like to apologize to Mr. Wang for my sloppy sins, and corrected the first sentence of the old text to read: "Wang Yuan Fangjun has not become an ancient." "On September 24, 1925, when I had a fever and headache, I wrote.

封面

书名页

版权信息

图书在版编目（CIP）数据
Books in Print (CIP) data野草／鲁迅著．—南京：译林出版社，2013.11
Wild Grass/Lu Xun.—Nanjing: Yilin Publishing House, 2013.11（鲁迅自编文集）
(Lu Xun's self-edited anthology)ISBN 978-7-5447-4461-4
ISBN 978-7-5447-4461-4Ⅰ．①野…　Ⅱ．①鲁…　Ⅲ．①鲁迅诗歌—诗集　Ⅳ．①I210.5
I..(1) No... II..(1) Lu... III..(1) Lu Xun's Poems - Poetry Collection IV..(1)I210.5中国版本图书馆CIP数据核字（2013）第223209号
China Version Library CIP Data Verification (2013) No. 223209 

书　　名　野　草
The title of the book is Wild Grass作　　者　鲁　迅
Author: Lu Xun责任编辑　陆元昶
Editor-in-charge: Lu Yuanchang特约编辑　邓　敏
Special editor Deng Min出版发行　凤凰出版传媒股份有限公司
Published and distributed by Phoenix Publishing and Media Co., Ltd译林出版社
Yilin Publishing House出版社地址　南京市湖南路1号A楼，邮编：210009
Publisher's address Building A, No. 1 Hunan Road, Nanjing, Zip Code: 210009电子信箱　yilin@yilin.com
E-mail yilin@yilin.com出版社网址　http://www.yilin.com
Publisher website http://www.yilin.com印　　刷　北京凯达印务有限公司
Printing Beijing Kaida Printing Co., Ltd开　　本　787×1092毫米　1/32
Volume 787×1092 mm 1/32印　　张　2.625
Print 2.625字　　数　50千字
Word count: 50,000 words版　　次　2013年11月第1版　2013年11月第1次印刷
Edition November 2013 1st edition November 2013 1st printing书　　号　ISBN 978-7-5447-4461-4
ISBN 978-7-5447-4461-4定　　价　9.00元
The price is 9.00 yuan译林版图书若有印装错误可向承印厂调换

If there are printing errors in the translated version of the book, it can be exchanged with the printing factory

Table of Contents

目录

Table of Contents

directory题辞 Inscription
秋夜 Autumn night
影的告别 Farewell to the shadow
求乞者 Beggars
我的失恋 My broken love
复仇 revenge
复仇（其二） Revenge (Part 2)
希望 wish
雪 雪
风筝 kite
好的故事 Good story
过客 Passer
死火 Dead fire
狗的驳诘 The dog's rebuttal
失掉的好地狱 Good hell to lose
墓碣文 Tomb inscription
颓败线的颤动 The trembling of the line of decay
立论 Argument
死后 Died
这样的战士 Such a fighter
聪明人和傻子和奴才 Smart people and fools and minions
腊叶 Waxed leaves
淡淡的血痕中 In the faint bloodstains
一觉 一觉
返回总目录 Return to the General Directory

题辞

题辞

题辞

Inscription当我沉默着的时候，我觉得充实；我将开口，同时感到空虚。
When I was silent, I felt fulfilled; I will open my mouth and feel empty at the same time.过去的生命已经死亡。我对于这死亡有大欢喜，因为我借此知道它曾经存活。死亡的生命已经朽腐。我对于这朽腐有大欢喜，因为我借此知道它还非空虚。
Past lives are dead. I rejoice in this death because I know that it was alive. The life of death has decayed. I rejoice in this decay, because I know that it is not empty.生命的泥委弃在地面上，不生乔木，只生野草，这是我的罪过。
The mud of life is abandoned on the ground, and it is my sin that it does not grow trees, but only weeds.野草，根本不深，花叶不美，然而吸取露，吸取水，吸取陈死人的血和肉，各各夺取它的生存。当生存时，还是将遭践踏，将遭删刈，直至于死亡而朽腐。
Weeds are not deep at all, and the flowers and leaves are not beautiful, but they absorb dew, water, and the blood and flesh of the dead, each taking its survival. When it is alive, it will still be trampled on, it will be cut off, until it dies and rots.但我坦然，欣然。我将大笑，我将歌唱。
But I am calm and happy. I will laugh, I will sing.我自爱我的野草，但我憎恶这以野草作装饰的地面。
I love my weeds, but I hate the ground decorated with weeds.地火在地下运行，奔突；熔岩一旦喷出，将烧尽一切野草，以及乔木，于是并且无可朽腐。
The earth fire runs underground, rushing; Once the lava erupted, it would burn all the weeds and trees, so it would be incorruptible.但我坦然，欣然。我将大笑，我将歌唱。
But I am calm and happy. I will laugh, I will sing.天地有如此静穆，我不能大笑而且歌唱。天地即不如此静穆，我或者也将不能。我以这一丛野草，在明与暗，生与死，过去与未来之际，献于友与仇，人与兽，爱者与不爱者之前作证。
The world is so quiet that I can't laugh and sing. If heaven and earth were not so quiet, I might not be able to. I use this bush of weeds to testify in front of friends and enemies, humans and beasts, lovers and unloved at the moment of light and darkness, life and death, past and future.为我自己，为友与仇，人与兽，爱者与不爱者，我希望这野草的死亡与朽腐，火速到来。要不然，我先就未曾生存，这实在比死亡与朽腐更其不幸。
For myself, for friends and enemies, between people and beasts, between lovers and unloved, I hope that the death and decay of this weed will come soon. Otherwise, I would not have survived, which is more unfortunate than death and decay.去罢，野草，连着我的题辞！
Go, weeds, with my inscription!一九二七年四月二十六日，鲁迅记于广州之白云楼上。
On April 26, 1927, Lu Xun was recorded on the Baiyun Tower in Guangzhou.

秋夜

秋夜

秋夜

Autumn night在我的后园，可以看见墙外有两株树，一株是枣树，还有一株也是枣树。
In my back garden, I can see two trees outside the wall, one is a jujube tree and the other is also a jujube tree.这上面的夜的天空，奇怪而高，我生平没有见过这样的奇怪而高的天空。他仿佛要离开人间而去，使人们仰面不再看见。然而现在却非常之蓝，闪闪地着几十个星星的眼，冷眼。他的口角上现出微笑，似乎自以为大有深意，而将繁霜洒在我的园里的野花草上。
The night sky above here is strange and high, and I have never seen such a strange and high sky in my life. He seems to be going out of the world, so that people can no longer see when they look up. But now it is very blue, shining with id_0000 the eyes of dozens of stars, cold eyes. A smile appeared on the corner of his mouth, as if he thought he had a deep meaning, and sprinkled frost on the wildflowers and grasses in my garden.我不知道那些花草真叫什么名字，人们叫他们什么名字。我记得有一种开过极细小的粉红花，现在还开着，但是更极细小了，她在冷的夜气中，瑟缩地做梦，梦见春的到来，梦见秋的到来，梦见瘦的诗人将眼泪擦在她最末的花瓣上，告诉她秋虽然来，冬虽然来，而此后接着还是春，胡蝶乱飞，蜜蜂都唱起春词来了。她于是一笑，虽然颜色冻得红惨惨地，仍然瑟缩着。
I don't know what the names of those flowers and plants really are, and what people call them. I remember that there was a very small pink flower that bloomed, and it is still blooming, but it is even smaller, she dreamed in the cold night air, shrinking and dreaming, dreaming of the arrival of spring, dreaming of the arrival of autumn, dreaming of the thin poet wiping tears on her last petals, telling her that although autumn is coming, although winter is coming, and then it is still spring, butterflies fly around, and bees are singing spring words. She smiled, and although her color was red and miserable, she still shrank.枣树，他们简直落尽了叶子。先前，还有一两个孩子来打他们别人打剩的枣子，现在是一个也不剩了，连叶子也落尽了。他知道小粉红花的梦，秋后要有春；他也知道落叶的梦，春后还是秋。他简直落尽叶子，单剩干子，然而脱了当初满树是果实和叶子时候的弧形，欠伸得很舒服。但是，有几枝还低亚着，护定他从打枣的竿梢所得的皮伤，而最直最长的几枝，却已默默地铁似的直刺着奇怪而高的天空，使天空闪闪地鬼眼；直刺着天空中圆满的月亮，使月亮窘得发白。
Jujube trees, they simply lost all their leaves. Previously, there were one or two children who came to beat the dates left over by others, but now there is not a single one left, and even the leaves have fallen. He knew the dream of the little pink flower, and there would be spring after autumn; He also knows the dream of falling leaves, spring or autumn. He simply lost all the leaves, leaving only the dried seeds, but he took off the arc shape when the tree was full of fruits and leaves, and yawned very comfortably. However, a few branches were still low, protecting the skin wounds he had obtained from the tips of the jujube poles, and the straightest and longest branches had silently pierced the strange and high sky like a subway, making the sky sparkle with ghostly eye id_0000 s. It pierced the full moon in the sky, making the moon embarrassed and white.鬼眼的天空越加非常之蓝，不安了，仿佛想离去人间，避开枣树，只将月亮剩下。然而月亮也暗暗地躲到东边去了。而一无所有的干子，却仍然默默地铁似的直刺着奇怪而高的天空，一意要制他的死命，不管他各式各样地着许多蛊惑的眼睛。
The sky in the eyes of the ghost  became more and more very blue, and he was uneasy, as if he wanted to leave the world, avoid the jujube trees, and only leave the moon. However, the moon also secretly hid in the east. And the god who had nothing still silently stabbed the strange and high sky like a subway, determined to control his life, no matter how many bewitching eyes he had.哇的一声，夜游的恶鸟飞过了。
With a wow, the evil birds of the night roaming flew by.我忽而听到夜半的笑声，吃吃地，似乎不愿意惊动睡着的人，然而四围的空气都应和着笑。夜半，没有别的人，我即刻听出这声音就在我嘴里，我也即刻被这笑声所驱逐，回进自己的房。灯火的带子也即刻被我旋高了。
I suddenly heard laughter in the middle of the night, eating and drinking, as if I didn't want to alarm the sleeping people, but the air around me responded with laughter. In the middle of the night, when there was no one else, I immediately heard the sound in my mouth, and I was immediately expelled by the laughter and went back to my room. The strap of the light was immediately turned up by me.后窗的玻璃上丁丁地响，还有许多小飞虫乱撞。不多久，几个进来了，许是从窗纸的破孔进来的。他们一进来，又在玻璃的灯罩上撞得丁丁地响。一个从上面撞进去了，他于是遇到火，而且我以为这火是真的。两三个却休息在灯的纸罩上喘气。那罩是昨晚新换的罩，雪白的纸，折出波浪纹的叠痕，一角还画出一枝猩红色的栀子。
The glass of the rear window was tinkling, and there were many small flying insects bumping into each other. Not long after, a few came in, probably through the hole in the window paper. As soon as they came in, they bumped into the glass lampshade again. One crashed into it from above, and he got into the fire, and I thought it was real. Two or three of them rested on the paper cover of the lamp to gasp. The cover was newly changed last night, snow-white paper, folded with wavy overlapping marks, and a scarlet gardenia was drawn in one corner.猩红的栀子开花时，枣树又要做小粉红花的梦，青葱地弯成弧形了……。我又听到夜半的笑声；我赶紧砍断我的心绪，看那老在白纸罩上的小青虫，头大尾小，向日葵子似的，只有半粒小麦那么大，遍身的颜色苍翠得可爱，可怜。
When the scarlet gardenia blooms, the jujube tree has to dream of small pink flowers again, and the green bends into an arc ....... I heard the laughter of the night again; I hurriedly cut off my mind and looked at the little green worm on the white paper cover, with a big head and a small tail, like sunflower seeds, only the size of half a grain of wheat, and the color of the whole body was so green and cute, pitiful.我打一个呵欠，点起一支纸烟，喷出烟来，对着灯默默地敬奠这些苍翠精致的英雄们。
I yawned, lit a cigarette, spewed out the smoke, and silently paid tribute to these green and exquisite heroes in front of the lamp.一九二四年九月十五日。
September 15, 1924.

影的告别

影的告别

影的告别

Farewell to the shadow人睡到不知道时候的时候，就会有影来告别，说出那些话——
When people sleep until they don't know the time, there will be shadows to say goodbye and say those words -
有我所不乐意的在天堂里，我不愿去；有我所不乐意的在地狱里，我不愿去；有我所不乐意的在你们将来的黄金世界里，我不愿去。
There are things in heaven that I do not like, and I do not want to go; There are things in hell that I don't like, and I don't want to go; There are things I don't want to go to in your future golden world.然而你就是我所不乐意的。
But you are what I don't like.朋友，我不想跟随你了，我不愿住。
Friend, I don't want to follow you anymore, I don't want to live.我不愿意！
I don't want to!呜乎呜乎，我不愿意，我不如彷徨于无地。
Oh no, I don't want to, I might as well wander in nothingness.我不过一个影，要别你而沉没在黑暗里了。然而黑暗又会吞并我，然而光明又会使我消失。
I am just a shadow, and I will leave you and sink into the darkness. But the darkness will swallow me up, and the light will make me disappear.然而我不愿彷徨于明暗之间，我不如在黑暗里沉没。
However, I don't want to wander between light and dark, I might as well sink in the dark.
然而我终于彷徨于明暗之间，我不知道是黄昏还是黎明。我姑且举灰黑的手装作喝干一杯酒，我将在不知道时候的时候独自远行。
However, I finally wandered between light and dark, and I didn't know if it was dusk or dawn. I will raise my gray and black hand and pretend to have a glass of wine, and I will travel alone when I don't know the time.呜乎呜乎，倘若黄昏，黑夜自然会来沉没我，否则我要被白天消失，如果现是黎明。
Woohoo, if it is dusk, the night will naturally come to sink me, otherwise I will disappear by the day, if it is dawn.
朋友，时候近了。
Friend, the time is near.我将向黑暗里彷徨于无地。
I will wander into the darkness and be nothing.你还想我的赠品。我能献你甚么呢？无已，则仍是黑暗和虚空而已。但是，我愿意只是黑暗，或者会消失于你的白天；我愿意只是虚空，决不占你的心地。
You still want my giveaway. What can I offer you? There is no end, but it is still darkness and emptiness. But I would like to be just dark, or disappear into your daylight; I am willing to be just empty and never take your heart.
我愿意这样，朋友——
I would like this, friend—我独自远行，不但没有你，并且再没有别的影在黑暗里。只有我被黑暗沉没，那世界全属于我自己。
I traveled alone, not only without you, but also without other shadows in the darkness. Only I was sunk by darkness, and the world belonged to me.一九二四年九月二十四日。
September 24, 1924.

求乞者

求乞者

求乞者

Beggars我顺着剥落的高墙走路，踏着松的灰土。另外有几个人，各自走路。微风起来，露在墙头的高树的枝条带着还未干枯的叶子在我头上摇动。
I walked along the peeling wall, stepping on the gray soil of the pines. There were a few other people, each walking. The breeze rose, and the branches of the tall trees exposed on the wall swayed on my head with leaves that had not yet dried up.微风起来，四面都是灰土。
The breeze rises, and the surroundings are gray.一个孩子向我求乞，也穿着夹衣，也不见得悲戚，而拦着磕头，追着哀呼。
A child begged for me, also wearing a jacket, and was not necessarily sad, but stopped kowtowing and chasing and wailing.我厌恶他的声调，态度。我憎恶他并不悲哀，近于儿戏；我烦厌他这追着哀呼。
I disgust his tone, his attitude. I hate him not sad, almost child's play; I am tired of him chasing and crying.我走路。另外有几个人各自走路。微风起来，四面都是灰土。
I walk. A few others walked separately. The breeze rises, and the surroundings are gray.一个孩子向我求乞，也穿着夹衣，也不见得悲戚，但是哑的，摊开手，装着手势。
A child begged me, also wearing a jacket, not necessarily sad, but dumb, spread his hands, and gestured.我就憎恶他这手势。而且，他或者并不哑，这不过是一种求乞的法子。
I hate his gesture. Moreover, he may not be dumb, this is just a way to beg.我不布施，我无布施心，我但居布施者之上，给与烦腻，疑心，憎恶。
I don't give, I don't have the heart to give, I just sit above the giver, giving trouble, suspicion, and hatred.我顺着倒败的泥墙走路，断砖叠在墙缺口，墙里面没有什么。微风起来，送秋寒穿透我的夹衣；四面都是灰土。
I walked along the collapsed mud wall, and the broken bricks were stacked in the gaps in the wall, and there was nothing in the wall. The breeze rises, sending the autumn cold through my jacket; It was covered with gray soil on all sides.我想着我将用什么方法求乞：发声，用怎样声调？装哑，用怎样手势？……
I thought about how I would beg: vocalize, what tone? Pretending to be dumb, what gesture to use? ……另外有几个人各自走路。
A few others walked separately.我将得不到布施，得不到布施心；我将得到自居于布施之上者的烦腻，疑心，憎恶。
I will not receive generosity, nor will I be able to receive the heart of giving; I will get the annoyance, doubt, and hatred of those who are above generosity.我将用无所为和沉默求乞……
I will beg with inaction and silence......我至少将得到虚无。
I will at least get nothingness.微风起来，四面都是灰土。另外有几个人各自走路。
The breeze rises, and the surroundings are gray. A few others walked separately.灰土，灰土，……
Gray soil, gray soil,......………………
灰土……
Lime soil......一九二四年九月二十四日。
September 24, 1924.

我的失恋

我的失恋

我的失恋

My broken love——拟古的新打油诗
——A new limerick that imitates antiquity我的所爱在山腰；My love is on the mountainside; 
想去寻她山太高， I want to find her The mountain is too high, 
低头无法泪沾袍。 I can't wet my robe with tears. 
爱人赠我百蝶巾； My lover gave me a hundred butterfly scarves; 
回她什么：猫头鹰。 What's back to her: Owl. 
从此翻脸不理我， has been turning his face and ignoring me since then, and 
不知何故兮使我心惊。 somehow scared me.  
我的所爱在闹市； My love is in the downtown area; 
想去寻她人拥挤， I want to find her crowded, 
仰头无法泪沾耳。 I can't get tears on my ears when I look up. 
爱人赠我双燕图； My lover gave me a picture of a double swallow; 
回她什么：冰糖壶卢。 What is it back to her: Rock sugar pot Lu. 
从此翻脸不理我， has been ignoring me since then, and 
不知何故兮使我胡涂。 has somehow made me foolish.  
我的所爱在河滨； My love is on the riverside; 
想去寻她河水深， wanted to find her deep river, 
歪头无法泪沾襟。 tilted his head and couldn't weep his clothes. 
爱人赠我金表索； My lover gave me a gold watch; 
回她什么：发汗药。 What's back to her: Diaphoretic. 
从此翻脸不理我， has been ignoring me since then, and 
不知何故兮使我神经衰弱。 has somehow made me have a nervous breakdown.  
我的所爱在豪家； My love is in the wealthy family; 
想去寻她兮没有汽车， I want to find her but I don't have a car, 
摇头无法泪如麻。 shakes her head and can't cry. 
爱人赠我玫瑰花； My lover gave me roses; 
回她什么：赤练蛇。 What to reply to her: Red training snake. 
从此翻脸不理我， has been turning her face and ignoring me since then, 
不知何故兮——由她去罢。 is somehow - let her go.
一九二四年十月三日。
October 3, 1924.

复仇

复仇

复仇

revenge人的皮肤之厚，大概不到半分，鲜红的热血，就循着那后面，在比密密层层地爬在墙壁上的槐蚕更其密的血管里奔流，散出温热。于是各以这温热互相蛊惑，煽动，牵引，拚命地希求偎倚，接吻，拥抱，以得生命的沉酣的大欢喜。
The thickness of human skin is probably less than half, and the bright red blood follows behind it, rushing through the blood vessels denser than the locust silkworms crawling densely on the wall, radiating warmth. So each of them bewitched, incited, and pulled each other with this warmth, desperately hoping to snuggle, kiss, and hug each other, so as to get the great joy of life.但倘若用一柄尖锐的利刃，只一击，穿透这桃红色的，菲薄的皮肤，将见那鲜红的热血激箭似的以所有温热直接灌溉杀戮者；其次，则给以冰冷的呼吸，示以淡白的嘴唇，使之人性茫然，得到生命的飞扬的极致的大欢喜；而其自身，则永远沉浸于生命的飞扬的极致的大欢喜中。
But if you use a sharp blade to penetrate this peachy, thin skin with just one blow, you will see the bright red bloody arrow directly irrigating the killer with all the warmth; secondly, it gives cold breath and pale lips, so that it is humane and dazed, and gets the ultimate joy of life; And it itself will always be immersed in the ultimate joy of the flying of life.这样，所以，有他们俩裸着全身，捏着利刃，对立于广漠的旷野之上。
In this way, there are two of them naked, pinching sharp blades, opposing the vast wilderness.他们俩将要拥抱，将要杀戮……
They are going to hug and kill......路人们从四面奔来，密密层层地，如槐蚕爬上墙壁，如马蚁要扛鲞头。衣服都漂亮，手倒空的。然而从四面奔来，而且拚命地伸长颈子，要赏鉴这拥抱或杀戮。他们已经豫觉着事后的自己的舌上的汗或血的鲜味。
Passers-by came from all sides, densely layered, like locust silkworms climbing the wall, like horse ants carrying the head. The clothes are beautiful, and the hands are empty. Yet they came from all directions, and stretched their necks desperately, wanting to appreciate the embrace or kill. They already have a sense of the sweat or the umami of blood on their tongues afterwards.然而他们俩对立着，在广漠的旷野之上，裸着全身，捏着利刃，然而也不拥抱，也不杀戮，而且也不见有拥抱或杀戮之意。
However, the two of them were opposite, naked in the vast wilderness, holding sharp blades, but they did not hug, did not kill, and did not have the intention of hugging or killing.他们俩这样地至于永久，圆活的身体，已将干枯，然而毫不见有拥抱或杀戮之意。
Their permanent, round bodies are dry, yet there is no intention of embracing or killing.路人们于是乎无聊；觉得有无聊钻进他们的毛孔，觉得有无聊从他们自己的心中由毛孔钻出，爬满旷野，又钻进别人的毛孔中。他们于是觉得喉舌干燥，脖子也乏了；终至于面面相觑，慢慢走散；甚而至于居然觉得干枯到失了生趣。
Passers-by are bored; They feel bored getting into their pores, they feel boredom coming out of their own hearts, crawling all over the wilderness, and into other people's pores. They felt that their mouthpieces were dry and their necks were tired; In the end, they looked at each other and slowly separated; It even feels so dry that it is boring.于是只剩下广漠的旷野，而他们俩在其间裸着全身，捏着利刃，干枯地立着；以死人似的眼光，赏鉴这路人们的干枯，无血的大戮，而永远沉浸于生命的飞扬的极致的大欢喜中。
So only the vast wilderness remained, and the two of them stood naked, pinching sharp blades, and dry; With a dead eye, appreciate the dryness and bloodless slaughter of these people, and forever immerse yourself in the ultimate joy of the flying of life.一九二四年十二月二十日。
December 20, 1924.

复仇（其二）

复仇（其二）

复仇（其二）

Revenge (Part 2)因为他自以为神之子，以色列的王，所以去钉十字架。
Because he thought he was the Son of God, the King of Israel, he went to be crucified.兵丁们给他穿上紫袍，戴上荆冠，庆贺他；又拿一根苇子打他的头，吐他，屈膝拜他；戏弄完了，就给他脱了紫袍，仍穿他自己的衣服。
The soldiers put on a purple robe and a crown to celebrate him; And he took a reed and struck him on the head, spit him out, and bowed his knees to him. After the teasing, he took off his purple robe and still wore his own clothes.看哪，他们打他的头，吐他，拜他……
Behold, they beat him on the head, spit him out, and worship him......他不肯喝那用没药调和的酒，要分明地玩味以色列人怎样对付他们的神之子，而且较永久地悲悯他们的前途，然而仇恨他们的现在。
He refused to drink the wine mixed with myrrh, but to play with the Israelites in what they had done to their Son of God, and to have a more permanent compassion for their future, but to hate their present.四面都是敌意，可悲悯的，可咒诅的。
On all sides are hostility, pitiful, and damned.丁丁地响，钉尖从掌心穿透，他们要钉杀他们的神之子了，可悯的人们呵，使他痛得柔和。丁丁地响，钉尖从脚背穿透，钉碎了一块骨，痛楚也透到心髓中，然而他们自己钉杀着他们的神之子了，可咒诅的人们呵，这使他痛得舒服。
The sound of the nail pierced through the palm of their hand, and they were going to crucify their Son of God, poor people, and softened his pain. The tip of the nail pierced through the top of the foot, and broke a bone, and the pain penetrated into the heart, but they themselves nailed their Son of God, but the cursed people made him feel comfortable.十字架竖起来了；他悬在虚空中。
The cross was erected; He hangs in the void.他没有喝那用没药调和的酒，要分明地玩味以色列人怎样对付他们的神之子，而且较永久地悲悯他们的前途，然而仇恨他们的现在。
He did not drink the wine mixed with myrrh, but was to play with the Israelites for how they dealt with their Son of God, and to have a permanent compassion for their future, but to hate their present.路人都辱骂他，祭司长和文士也戏弄他，和他同钉的两个强盗也讥诮他。
The passers-by reproached him, the chief priests and scribes mocked him, and the two robbers who were nailed with him mocked him.看哪，和他同钉的……
Behold, he who is nailed with him......四面都是敌意，可悲悯的，可咒诅的。
On all sides are hostility, pitiful, and damned.他在手足的痛楚中，玩味着可悯的人们的钉杀神之子的悲哀和可咒诅的人们要钉杀神之子，而神之子就要被钉杀了的欢喜。突然间，碎骨的大痛楚透到心髓了，他即沉酣于大欢喜和大悲悯中。
In the pain of his hands and feet, he played with the sorrow of the pitiful people crucifying the Son of God and the joy of the cursed people wanting to crucify the Son of God, and the Son of God was about to be crucified. Suddenly, the great pain of broken bones penetrated his heart, and he was immersed in great joy and great compassion.他腹部波动了，悲悯和咒诅的痛楚的波。
His abdomen fluctuated, waves of pity and cursed pain.遍地都黑暗了。
It was dark everywhere.“以罗伊，以罗伊，拉马撒巴各大尼？！”（翻出来，就是：我的上帝，你为甚么离弃我？！）
"Eloi, Eloi, Ramasa Bahá'nī?!" (Turn it out, it is: My God, why have you forsaken me?!) ）上帝离弃了他，他终于还是一个“人之子”；然而以色列人连“人之子”都钉杀了。
God forsaken him, and he was finally a "son of man"; Yet the Israelites crucified even the "Son of Man."钉杀了“人之子”的人们的身上，比钉杀了“神之子”的尤其血污，血腥。
The body of those who nailed the "Son of Man" was especially bloody and bloody than the Nailed "Son of God".一九二四年十二月二十日。
December 20, 1924.

希望

希望

希望

wish我的心分外地寂寞。
My heart was extremely lonely.然而我的心很平安：没有爱憎，没有哀乐，也没有颜色和声音。
Yet my heart is at peace: there is no love or hate, no sorrow or joy, no color or sound.我大概老了。我的头发已经苍白，不是很明白的事么？我的手颤抖着，不是很明白的事么？那么，我的魂灵的手一定也颤抖着，头发也一定苍白了。
I'm probably old. My hair is already pale, isn't it very clear? My hands trembled, didn't I understand it? Then, my soul's hands must also tremble, and my hair must be pale.然而这是许多年前的事了。
However, this was many years ago.这以前，我的心也曾充满过血腥的歌声：血和铁，火焰和毒，恢复和报仇。而忽而这些都空虚了，但有时故意地填以没奈何的自欺的希望。希望，希望，用这希望的盾，抗拒那空虚中的暗夜的袭来，虽然盾后面也依然是空虚中的暗夜。然而就是如此，陆续地耗尽了我的青春。
Before this, my heart was also filled with bloody songs: blood and iron, fire and poison, restoration and vengeance. And suddenly these are empty, but sometimes deliberately filled with helpless self-deceptive hopes. Hope, hope, use this shield of hope to resist the attack of the dark night in the void, although behind the shield is still the dark night in the void. However, this is the case, which has exhausted my youth one after another.我早先岂不知我的青春已经逝去了？但以为身外的青春固在：星，月光，僵坠的胡蝶，暗中的花，猫头鹰的不祥之言，杜鹃的啼血，笑的渺茫，爱的翔舞……。虽然是悲凉漂渺的青春罢，然而究竟是青春。
Didn't I know earlier that my youth had passed? But I think that the youth outside the body is fixed: stars, moonlight, stiff butterflies, flowers in the dark, ominous words of owls, cuckoos' crying blood, laughter is faint, love is dancing ....... Although it is a sad and ethereal youth, it is youth in the end.然而现在何以如此寂寞？难道连身外的青春也都逝去，世上的青年也多衰老了么？
But why is it so lonely now? Isn't even the youth outside the body gone, and how old are the young people in the world?我只得由我来肉薄这空虚中的暗夜了。我放下了希望之盾，我听到Petfi Sándor（1823—49）的“希望”之歌：
I have to come to the dark night in the emptiness of thinness. I put down the shield of hope, and I heard the song "Hope" by Petfi Sándor (1823-49):希望是甚么？是娼妓：
What is hope? It's a prostitute:她对谁都蛊惑，将一切都献给；
She bewitches everyone and gives everything to her;待你牺牲了极多的宝贝——
When you sacrifice a lot of treasures——你的青春——她就弃掉你。
Your youth - she abandoned you.这伟大的抒情诗人，匈牙利的爱国者，为了祖国而死在可萨克兵的矛尖上，已经七十五年了。悲哉死也，然而更可悲的是他的诗至今没有死。
It has been seventy-five years since this great lyric poet, a Hungarian patriot, died for the Motherland on the tip of the spear of the Cossack soldiers. It is a sad death, but what is even sadder is that his poems have not died so far.但是，可惨的人生！桀骜英勇如Petfi，也终于对了暗夜止步，回顾着茫茫的东方了。他说：
However, what a miserable life! Unruly and heroic like Petfi, he finally stopped in the dark night and looked back at the vast east. He said:绝望之为虚妄，正与希望相同。
Despair is false, just like hope.倘使我还得偷生在不明不暗的这“虚妄”中，我就还要寻求那逝去的悲凉漂渺的青春，但不妨在我的身外。因为身外的青春倘一消灭，我身中的迟暮也即凋零了。
If I still have to live in this "illusion" that is unknown and undark, I will still seek the sad and ethereal youth that has passed, but it might as well be outside my body. Because if the youth outside my body is destroyed, the twilight in my body will wither.然而现在没有星和月光，没有僵坠的胡蝶以至笑的渺茫，爱的翔舞。然而青年们很平安。
However, now there are no stars and moonlight, no stiff butterflies, and even the vagueness of laughter and the soaring dance of love. However, the young people were safe.我只得由我来肉薄这空虚中的暗夜了，纵使寻不到身外的青春，也总得自己来一掷我身中的迟暮。但暗夜又在那里呢？现在没有星，没有月光以至笑的渺茫和爱的翔舞；青年们很平安，而我的面前又竟至于并且没有真的暗夜。
I have to come to the dark night in the emptiness of thinness, even if I can't find the youth outside me, I have to throw the twilight in my body by myself. But where is the dark night again? Now there are no stars, no moonlight and even the vagueness of laughter and the dance of love; The young people are safe, and there is no real dark night in front of me.绝望之为虚妄，正与希望相同！
绝望之为虚妄，正与希望相同！一九二五年一月一日。
一九二五年一月一日。

雪

雪

雪

雪暖国的雨，向来没有变过冰冷的坚硬的灿烂的雪花。博识的人们觉得他单调，他自己也以为不幸否耶？江南的雪，可是滋润美艳之至了；那是还在隐约着的青春的消息，是极壮健的处子的皮肤。雪野中有血红的宝珠山茶，白中隐青的单瓣梅花，深黄的磬口的蜡梅花；雪下面还有冷绿的杂草。胡蝶确乎没有；蜜蜂是否来采山茶花和梅花的蜜，我可记不真切了。但我的眼前仿佛看见冬花开在雪野中，有许多蜜蜂们忙碌地飞着，也听得他们嗡嗡地闹着。
The rain in a warm country has never changed into a cold, hard, and brilliant snowflake. Knowledgeable people think he is monotonous, and he himself thinks it is unfortunate. The snow in Jiangnan is moist and beautiful; It was the news of youth that was still vague, and it was the skin of a very strong virgin. There are blood-red pearl camellias, white and blue single-petal plum blossoms, and dark yellow wax plum blossoms; There are also cold green weeds under the snow. Hu Die really didn't; I can't really remember whether the bees came to collect nectar from camellias and plum blossoms. But I seemed to see winter flowers blooming in the snowy fields, and many bees were busy flying, and I could hear them buzzing.孩子们呵着冻得通红，像紫芽姜一般的小手，七八个一齐来塑雪罗汉。因为不成功，谁的父亲也来帮忙了。罗汉就塑得比孩子们高得多，虽然不过是上小下大的一堆，终于分不清是壶卢还是罗汉；然而很洁白，很明艳，以自身的滋润相粘结，整个地闪闪地生光。孩子们用龙眼核给他做眼珠，又从谁的母亲的脂粉奁中偷得胭脂来涂在嘴唇上。这回确是一个大阿罗汉了。他也就目光灼灼地嘴唇通红地坐在雪地里。
The children were red from the cold, and their small hands like purple bud ginger came together to sculpt the snow arhat. Because it was unsuccessful, someone's father also came to help. The arhat is much taller than the children, although it is just a small and large pile, and finally it is impossible to tell whether it is Hulu or Arhat; However, it is very white and bright, bonded with its own moisture, and the whole ground shines brightly. The children used longan kernels to make eyeballs for him, and stole rouge from someone's mother's powder box to apply to his lips. This time he was indeed a great arhat. He also sat in the snow with burning eyes and red lips.第二天还有几个孩子来访问他；对了他拍手，点头，嘻笑。但他终于独自坐着了。晴天又来消释他的皮肤，寒夜又使他结一层冰，化作不透明的水晶模样；连续的晴天又使他成为不知道算什么，而嘴上的胭脂也褪尽了。
Several more children came to visit him the next day; He clapped his hands, nodded, and laughed. But he finally sat alone. The sunny day melted his skin again, and the cold night made him form a layer of ice, turning into an opaque crystal; The continuous sunny days made him feel like he didn't know what to do, and the rouge on his mouth faded.但是，朔方的雪花在纷飞之后，却永远如粉，如沙，他们决不粘连，撒在屋上，地上，枯草上，就是这样。屋上的雪是早已就有消化了的，因为屋里居人的火的温热。别的，在晴天之下，旋风忽来，便蓬勃地奋飞，在日光中灿灿地生光，如包藏火焰的大雾，旋转而且升腾，弥漫太空，使太空旋转而且升腾地闪烁。
However, after the snowflakes in Shuo Fang flew away, they were always like powder, like sand, they would never stick, and they would be scattered on the roof, on the ground, and on the dry grass, that's it. The snow on the house has already been digested because of the warmth of the fire of the people in the house. Otherwise, under a sunny day, a whirlwind suddenly comes, and it flies vigorously, shining brightly in the daylight, like a mist containing flames, rotating and rising, spreading space, making space rotate and flicker upwards.在无边的旷野上，在凛冽的天宇下，闪闪地旋转升腾着的是雨的精魂……
In the boundless wilderness, under the cold sky, it was the spirit of rain that was spinning and rising......是的，那是孤独的雪，是死掉的雨，是雨的精魂。
Yes, it is lonely snow, dead rain, and the spirit of rain.一九二五年一月十八日。
January 18, 1925.

风筝

风筝

风筝

kite北京的冬季，地上还有积雪，灰黑色的秃树枝丫叉于晴朗的天空中，而远处有一二风筝浮动，在我是一种惊异和悲哀。
In winter in Beijing, there is still snow on the ground, gray-black bald branches are crossed in the clear sky, and one or two kites are floating in the distance, which is a kind of surprise and sadness to me.故乡的风筝时节，是春二月，倘听到沙沙的风轮声，仰头便能看见一个淡墨色的蟹风筝或嫩蓝色的蜈蚣风筝。还有寂寞的瓦片风筝，没有风轮，又放得很低，伶仃地显出憔悴可怜模样。但此时地上的杨柳已经发芽，早的山桃也多吐蕾，和孩子们的天上的点缀相照应，打成一片春日的温和。我现在在那里呢？四面都还是严冬的肃杀，而久经诀别的故乡的久经逝去的春天，却就在这天空中荡漾了。
The kite season in my hometown is spring and February, if you hear the rustling of wind wheels, you can look up and see a light ink crab kite or a tender blue centipede kite. There are also lonely tile kites, without wind wheels, and they are set very low, showing a haggard and pitiful appearance. But at this time, the willows on the ground have sprouted, and the early mountain peaches have also sprouted more buds, which corresponds to the children's heavenly embellishments, making it a gentle spring day. Where am I now? It is still the harsh winter on all sides, but the long-lost spring of the long-lost hometown is rippling in this sky.但我是向来不爱放风筝的，不但不爱，并且嫌恶他，因为我以为这是没出息孩子所做的玩艺。和我相反的是我的小兄弟，他那时大概十岁内外罢，多病，瘦得不堪，然而最喜欢风筝，自己买不起，我又不许放，他只得张着小嘴，呆看着空中出神，有时至于小半日。远处的蟹风筝突然落下来了，他惊呼；两个瓦片风筝的缠绕解开了，他高兴得跳跃。他的这些，在我看来都是笑柄，可鄙的。
But I have never loved flying kites, not only do I not love it, but I hate him, because I think this is a play done by a promising child. The opposite of me was my little brother, who was about ten years old at the time, sickly, and thin, but he liked kites the most, and he couldn't afford to buy them, and I was not allowed to put them down, so he had to open his mouth and watch the air in a daze, sometimes for half a day. The crab kite in the distance suddenly fell, and he exclaimed; The two tile kites were untangled, and he jumped with joy. These of his, in my opinion, are all laughing stocks and contemptible.有一天，我忽然想起，似乎多日不很看见他了，但记得曾见他在后园拾枯竹。我恍然大悟似的，便跑向少有人去的一间堆积杂物的小屋去，推开门，果然就在尘封的什物堆中发见了他。他向着大方凳，坐在小凳上；便很惊惶地站了起来，失了色瑟缩着。大方凳旁靠着一个胡蝶风筝的竹骨，还没有糊上纸，凳上是一对做眼睛用的小风轮，正用红纸条装饰着，将要完工了。我在破获秘密的满足中，又很愤怒他的瞒了我的眼睛，这样苦心孤诣地来偷做没出息孩子的玩艺。我即刻伸手折断了胡蝶的一支翅骨，又将风轮掷在地下，踏扁了。论长幼，论力气，他是都敌不过我的，我当然得到完全的胜利，于是傲然走出，留他绝望地站在小屋里。后来他怎样，我不知道，也没有留心。
One day, I suddenly remembered that I hadn't seen him for many days, but I remembered seeing him picking up dead bamboo in the back garden. As if I suddenly realized, I ran to a small hut where few people went to a pile of debris, opened the door, and sure enough, I found him in the dusty pile of things. He sat on a small stool facing a large square stool; He stood up in panic, losing his color and shrinking. Next to the large stool is a bamboo bone of a butterfly kite, which has not yet been pasted with paper, and on the stool is a pair of small wind wheels for the eyes, decorated with red strips of paper, and is about to be completed. In the satisfaction of cracking the secret, I was very angry that he hid from my eyes, so painstakingly came to steal the play of a promising child. I immediately reached out and broke one of Hu Die's wing bones, threw the wind wheel on the ground, and flattened it. In terms of age and strength, he was no match for me, and of course I was completely victorious, so I walked out proudly, leaving him standing in the cabin in despair. I don't know what happened to him later, and I didn't pay attention.然而我的惩罚终于轮到了，在我们离别得很久之后，我已经是中年。我不幸偶而看了一本外国的讲论儿童的书，才知道游戏是儿童最正当的行为，玩具是儿童的天使。于是二十年来毫不忆及的幼小时候对于精神的虐杀的这一幕，忽地在眼前展开，而我的心也仿佛同时变了铅块，很重很重的堕下去了。
However, my punishment finally came, and I was middle-aged long after we parted. Unfortunately, I occasionally read a foreign book on children, and then I realized that play is the most legitimate behavior of children, and toys are children's angels. So the scene of the spiritual abuse of my childhood, which I had not remembered for twenty years, suddenly unfolded in front of my eyes, and my heart seemed to have turned into a block of lead at the same time, and it fell very heavily.但心又不竟堕下去而至于断绝，他只是很重很重地堕着，堕着。
But the mind does not fall and is cut off, it just falls very heavily, falls.我也知道补过的方法的：送他风筝，赞成他放，劝他放，我和他一同放。我们嚷着，跑着，笑着。——然而他其时已经和我一样，早已有了胡子了。
I also know how to make up for it: give him a kite, approve of him to fly, persuade him to fly, and I will fly it with him. We shouted, ran, laughed. - But he was already bearded like me.我也知道还有一个补过的方法的：去讨他的宽恕，等他说，“我可是毫不怪你呵。”那么，我的心一定就轻松了，这确是一个可行的方法。有一回，我们会面的时候，是脸上都已添刻了许多“生”的辛苦的条纹，而我的心很沉重。我们渐渐谈起儿时的旧事来，我便叙述到这一节，自说少年时代的胡涂。“我可是毫不怪你呵。”我想，他要说了，我即刻便受了宽恕，我的心从此也宽松了罢。
I also know that there is another way to make amends: to ask for his forgiveness, and when he says, "I don't blame you." "Then my heart must be at ease, and this is indeed a feasible method. Once, when we met, there were many "raw" hard stripes engraved on our faces, and my heart was very heavy. We gradually talked about the old things of our childhood, and I recounted this section, talking about the nonsense of my youth. "I don't blame you." I thought he was going to say it, and I was immediately forgiven, and my heart was relaxed from then on.“有过这样的事么？”他惊异地笑着说，就像旁听着别人的故事一样。他什么也不记得了。
"Has there ever been such a thing?" He smiled in amazement, as if he were listening to someone else's story. He remembers nothing.全然忘却，毫无怨恨，又有什么宽恕之可言呢？无怨的恕，说谎罢了。
Completely forgetful, without resentment, what forgiveness is there? Forgiveness without complaint is just a lie.我还能希求什么呢？我的心只得沉重着。
What more could I ask for? My heart had to be heavy.现在，故乡的春天又在这异地的空中了，既给我久经逝去的儿时的回忆，而一并也带着无可把握的悲哀。我倒不如躲到肃杀的严冬中去罢，——但是，四面又明明是严冬，正给我非常的寒威和冷气。
Now, the spring of my hometown is in the air of this foreign place again, which not only gives me long-lost childhood memories, but also carries an uncertain sadness. I might as well hide in the harsh winter,—— but it is obviously a harsh winter on all sides, which is giving me a very cold and cold air.一九二五年一月二十四日。
January 24, 1925.

好的故事

好的故事

好的故事

Good story灯火渐渐地缩小了，在预告石油的已经不多；石油又不是老牌，早熏得灯罩很昏暗。鞭爆的繁响在四近，烟草的烟雾在身边：是昏沉的夜。
The lights are gradually shrinking, and there are not many people who are predicting oil; Oil is not an old brand, and the lampshade is very dim because it has been smoked early. The sound of whiplash is nearby, and the smoke of tobacco is around: it is a gloomy night.我闭了眼睛，向后一仰，靠在椅背上；捏着《初学记》的手搁在膝髁上。
I closed my eyes, leaned back, and leaned back on the back of my chair; The hand holding the "Beginner's Record" rested on the knee condyle.我在蒙胧中，看见一个好的故事。
I saw a good story in my haze.这故事很美丽，幽雅，有趣。许多美的人和美的事，错综起来像一天云锦，而且万颗奔星似的飞动着，同时又展开去，以至于无穷。
This story is beautiful, elegant and interesting. Many beautiful people and beautiful things are intricately intertwined like a day of clouds, and thousands of stars fly like flying stars, and at the same time unfold to infinity.我仿佛记得曾坐小船经过山阴道，两岸边的乌桕，新禾，野花，鸡，狗，丛树和枯树，茅屋，塔，伽蓝，农夫和村妇，村女，晒着的衣裳，和尚，蓑笠，天，云，竹，……都倒影在澄碧的小河中，随着每一打桨，各各夹带了闪烁的日光，并水里的萍藻游鱼，一同荡漾。诸影诸物，无不解散，而且摇动，扩大，互相融和；刚一融和，却又退缩，复近于原形。边缘都参差如夏云头，镶着日光，发出水银色焰。凡是我所经过的河，都是如此。
I seem to remember taking a small boat through the mountains, the black trees, new rice, wildflowers, chickens, dogs, bushes and dead trees, thatched huts, towers, temples, farmers and village women, village girls, dry clothes, monks, raincoats, sky, clouds, bamboo,...... They are all reflected in the clear blue river, with each oar, each with flickering sunlight, and the duckweed and swimming fish in the water, rippling together. All shadows and things are dissolved, shaken, expanded, and blended with each other; Just blended, but then retreated, and it was close to its original form. The edges are uneven like summer clouds, inlaid with sunlight and emitting mercury flames. This is true for all the rivers I pass through.现在我所见的故事也如此。水中的青天的底子，一切事物统在上面交错，织成一篇，永是生动，永是展开，我看不见这一篇的结束。
So are the stories I see now. The bottom of the blue sky in the water, everything is intertwined on it, woven into a piece, always vivid, always unfolding, I can't see the end of this article.河边枯柳树下的几株瘦削的一丈红，该是村女种的罢。大红花和斑红花，都在水里面浮动，忽而碎散，拉长了，如缕缕的胭脂水，然而没有晕。茅屋，狗，塔，村女，云，……也都浮动着。大红花一朵朵全被拉长了，这时是泼剌奔迸的红锦带。带织入狗中，狗织入白云中，白云织入村女中……。在一瞬间，他们又将退缩了。但斑红花影也已碎散，伸长，就要织进塔，村女，狗，茅屋，云里去。
A few thin red trees under the dead willow trees by the river should have been planted by village girls. The big red flower and the spotted red flower both floated in the water, suddenly broke and scattered, and stretched, like wisps of rouge water, but there was no dizziness. Thatched huts, dogs, towers, village girls, clouds,...... are also floating. The big red flowers are all stretched one by one, and at this time it is a red ribbon that is rushing around. The belt is woven into the dog, the dog is woven into the white clouds, and the white clouds are woven into the village girls...... In an instant, they will back down again. But the shadows of the red flowers have also been shattered, stretched out, and are about to be woven into the tower, the village girl, the dog, the thatched hut, and the clouds.现在我所见的故事清楚起来了，美丽，幽雅，有趣，而且分明。青天上面，有无数美的人和美的事，我一一看见，一一知道。
Now the story I see is clear, beautiful, elegant, interesting, and distinct. In the sky, there are countless beautiful people and beautiful things, I have seen them one by one, and I know them one by one.我就要凝视他们……。
I was going to stare at their .......我正要凝视他们时，骤然一惊，睁开眼，云锦也已皱蹙，凌乱，仿佛有谁掷一块大石下河水中，水波陡然起立，将整篇的影子撕成片片了。我无意识地赶忙捏住几乎坠地的《初学记》，眼前还剩着几点虹霓色的碎影。
When I was about to stare at them, I was suddenly startled, and when I opened my eyes, Yun Jin was also wrinkled and messy, as if someone had thrown a big stone into the river, and the water waves suddenly stood up, tearing the shadow of the whole article into pieces. I unconsciously hurriedly pinched the "Beginner's Record" that almost fell to the ground, and there were still a few rainbow-colored fragments left in front of me.我真爱这一篇好的故事，趁碎影还在，我要追回他，完成他，留下他。我抛了书，欠身伸手去取笔，——何尝有一丝碎影，只见昏暗的灯光，我不在小船里了。
I really love this good story, while the broken shadow is still there, I want to chase him back, finish him, and keep him. I threw away the book, leaned down and reached for the pen,—— there was a trace of fragments, only to see the dim light, I was no longer in the boat.但我总记得见过这一篇好的故事，在昏沉的夜……。
But I always remember seeing this good story, ...... in a gloomy night.一九二五年二月二十四日。
February 24, 1925.

过客

过客

过客

Passer时：
Time:或一日的黄昏。
Or the twilight of the day.地：
Earth:或一处。
Or in one place.人：
Person:老翁——约七十岁，白须发，黑长袍。
The old man - about seventy years old, with white beard and hair, black robe.女孩——约十岁，紫发，乌眼珠，白地黑方格长衫。
Girl - about ten years old, purple hair, black eyes, black checkered gown on a white background.过客——约三四十岁，状态困顿倔强，眼光阴沉，黑须，乱发，黑色短衣裤皆破碎，赤足著破鞋，胁下挂一个口袋，支着等身的竹杖。
Passerby - about thirty or forty years old, in a difficult and stubborn state, gloomy eyes, black beard, messy hair, black shorts and trousers are broken, barefoot in broken shoes, a pocket under the armpit, and a bamboo cane of the same body.东，是几株杂树和瓦砾；西，是荒凉破败的丛葬；其间有一条似路非路的痕迹。一间小土屋向这痕迹开着一扇门；门侧有一段枯树根。
to the east, there are a few miscellaneous trees and rubble; to the west, is a desolate and dilapidated mass burial; There is a trace that seems to be a road or a road. A small earthen hut opened a door to this trace; There is a section of dead tree roots on the side of the door.
（女孩正要将坐在树根上的老翁搀起。）
(The girl was about to pick up the old man sitting at the root of the tree.) ）翁——孩子。喂，孩子！怎么不动了呢？
Weng - child. Hey, kid! Why don't you move?孩——（向东望着，）有谁走来了，看一看罢。
Child——(Looking east,) Anyone is coming, take a look.翁——不用看他。扶我进去罢。太阳要下去了。
Weng - no need to look at him. Help me in. The sun is going down.孩——我，——看一看。
Kid—I ,—— take a look.翁——唉，你这孩子！天天看见天，看见土，看见风，还不够好看么？什么也不比这些好看。你偏是要看谁。太阳下去时候出现的东西，不会给你什么好处的。……还是进去罢。
Weng - Alas, you kid! Seeing the sky, the earth, and the wind every day, isn't it beautiful enough? Nothing looks better than these. Who do you want to see? What appears when the sun goes down will not give you any benefits. …… Let's go in.孩——可是，已经近来了。阿阿，是一个乞丐。
Child—But, it's already late. Ah, it's a beggar.翁——乞丐？不见得罢。
Weng - beggar? It doesn't necessarily stop.（过客从东面的杂树间跄踉走出，暂时踌蹰之后，慢慢地走近老翁去。）
(The passerby staggered out of the weeds in the east, and after hesitating for a while, slowly approached the old man.) ）客——老丈，你晚上好？
Guest - Uncle, how are you in the evening?翁——阿，好！托福。你好？
Weng - Ah, okay! TOEFL. Hello?客——老丈，我实在冒昧，我想在你那里讨一杯水喝。我走得渴极了。这地方又没有一个池塘，一个水洼。
Guest-Father-in-law, I'm really presumptuous, I want to ask you for a glass of water. I was very thirsty. There is not a pond or a puddle in this place.翁——唔，可以可以。你请坐罢。（向女孩）孩子，你拿水来，杯子要洗干净。
Weng - No, yes, yes. Please sit down. Child, bring water, wash the cup.（女孩默默地走进土屋去。）
(The girl silently walked into the earthen house.) ）翁——客官，你请坐。你是怎么称呼的。
Weng - Guest officer, please sit down. What do you call it?客——称呼？——我不知道。从我还能记得的时候起，我就只一个人。我不知道我本来叫什么。我一路走，有时人们也随便称呼我，各式各样地，我也记不清楚了，况且相同的称呼也没有听到过第二回。
Guest - Call? – I don't know. For as long as I can remember, I was alone. I don't know what I was called. I walked along the way, and sometimes people called me casually, in all sorts of ways, I can't remember clearly, and I haven't heard the same name a second time.翁——阿阿。那么，你是从那里来的呢？
Father - Ah. So, where did you come from?客——（略略迟疑，）我不知道。从我还能记得的时候起，我就在这么走。
Guest- (hesitated,) I don't know. I've been walking like this since I can still remember.翁——对了。那么，我可以问你到那里去么？
Weng - That's right. So, may I ask you where to go?客——自然可以。——但是，我不知道。从我还能记得的时候起，我就在这么走，要走到一个地方去，这地方就在前面。我单记得走了许多路，现在来到这里了。我接着就要走向那边去，（西指，）前面！
Guest—of course. – But, I don't know. I've been walking like this since I can still remember, going to a place that is right in front of me. I just remember walking a lot, and now I'm here. I'm going to go over there, (west finger,) ahead!（女孩小心地捧出一个木杯来，递去。）
(The girl carefully held out a wooden cup and handed it over.) ）客——（接杯，）多谢，姑娘。（将水两口喝尽，还杯，）多谢，姑娘。这真是少有的好意。我真不知道应该怎样感激！
Guest- (take the glass,) Thank you, girl. (Drink two sips of water and return the glass,) Thank you, girl. This is really a rare kindness. I really don't know how to be grateful!翁——不要这么感激。这于你是没有好处的。
Weng - Don't be so grateful. This is not good for you.客——是的，这于我没有好处。可是我现在很恢复了些力气了。我就要前去。老丈，你大约是久住在这里的，你可知道前面是怎么一个所在么？
Guest—Yes, it's not good for me. But I have regained some strength now. I'm going to go. Uncle, you have been living here for a long time, do you know where the one in front is?翁——前面？前面，是坟。
Weng - Front? In front, there is a grave.客——（诧异地，）坟？
Guest- (surprised,) Grave?孩——不，不，不的。那里有许多许多野百合，野蔷薇，我常常去玩，去看他们的。
Child—no, no, no. There are many, many wild lilies and wild roses there, and I often go to play and see them.客——（西顾，仿佛微笑，）不错。那些地方有许多许多野百合，野蔷薇，我也常常去玩过，去看过的。但是，那是坟。（向老翁，）老丈，走完了那坟地之后呢？
Guest——(Looking west, as if smiling,) Not bad. There are many, many wild lilies and wild roses in those places, and I have often visited and seen them. But, that's a grave. (Old man,) Old man, what about after walking through that cemetery?翁——走完之后？那我可不知道。我没有走过。
Weng - After leaving? Then I don't know. I didn't walk through it.客——不知道？！
Guest - I don't know?!孩——我也不知道。
Kid—I don't know.翁——我单知道南边；北边；东边，你的来路。那是我最熟悉的地方，也许倒是于你们最好的地方。你莫怪我多嘴，据我看来，你已经这么劳顿了，还不如回转去，因为你前去也料不定可能走完。
Weng - I only know the south; North; East, your way forward. That's the place I'm most familiar with, maybe the best place for you. Don't blame me for being talkative, in my opinion, you are already so tired, you might as well turn around, because you may finish when you go.客——料不定可能走完？……（沉思，忽然惊起，）那不行！我只得走。回到那里去，就没一处没有名目，没一处没有地主，没一处没有驱逐和牢笼，没一处没有皮面的笑容，没一处没有眶外的眼泪。我憎恶他们，我不回转去！
Guest—maybe it will be finished? …… (pondering, suddenly startled,) That's not good! I had to go. When you go back there, there is no place without names, no landlords, no eviction and cages, no leathery smiles, and no tears outside the eyes. I hate them, I don't turn back!翁——那也不然。你也会遇见心底的眼泪，为你的悲哀。
Weng - That's not the case either. You will also meet tears in your heart for your sorrow.客——不。我不愿看见他们心底的眼泪，不要他们为我的悲哀！
Guest—No. I don't want to see the tears in their hearts, and I don't want them to mourn for me!翁——那么，你，（摇头，）你只得走了。
Weng - Then, you, (shaking your head,) you have to go.客——是的，我只得走了。况且还有声音常在前面催促我，叫唤我，使我息不下。可恨的是我的脚早经走破了，有许多伤，流了许多血。（举起一足给老人看，）因此，我的血不够了；我要喝些血。但血在那里呢？可是我也不愿意喝无论谁的血。我只得喝些水，来补充我的血。一路上总有水，我倒也并不感到什么不足。只是我的力气太稀薄了，血里面太多了水的缘故罢。今天连一个小水洼也遇不到，也就是少走了路的缘故罢。
Guest—yes, I had to go. Moreover, there are voices that often urge me in front of me, calling me so that I can't breathe. The hateful thing is that my feet have long been broken, with many wounds and a lot of blood. (Holding up a foot to show the old man,) Therefore, my blood is not enough; I want to drink some blood. But where is the blood? But I don't want to drink anyone's blood. I had to drink some water to replenish my blood. There is always water along the way, and I don't feel anything lacking. It's just that my strength is too thin, and there is too much water in my blood. I can't even meet a small puddle today, that is, because I don't walk much.翁——那也未必。太阳下去了，我想，还不如休息一会的好罢，像我似的。
Weng - That's not necessarily. The sun went down, and I thought, it would be better to rest for a while, like me.客——但是，那前面的声音叫我走。
Guest - However, the voice in front of me told me to go.翁——我知道。
Weng - I know.客——你知道？你知道那声音么？
Guest - you know? Do you know that sound?翁——是的。他似乎曾经也叫过我。
Weng - Yes. He seems to have called me too.客——那也就是现在叫我的声音么？
Guest - Is that the voice that calls me now?翁——那我可不知道。他也就是叫过几声，我不理他，他也就不叫了，我也就记不清楚了。
Weng - Then I don't know. He just called a few times, but I ignored him, and he stopped calling, and I can't remember clearly.客——唉唉，不理他……。（沉思，忽然吃惊，倾听着，）不行！我还是走的好。我息不下。可恨我的脚早经走破了。（准备走路。）
Guest—alas, ignore his ....... (pondering, suddenly surprised, listening,) No! I'm still good to go. I can't breathe. I hate that my feet have long been broken. (Prepare to walk.) ）孩——给你！（递给一片布，）裹上你的伤去。
Kid—here you go! (Hand over a piece of cloth,) Wrap up your wounds.客——多谢，（接取，）姑娘。这真是……。这真是极少有的好意。这能使我可以走更多的路。（就断砖坐下，要将布缠在踝上，）但是，不行！（竭力站起，）姑娘，还了你罢，还是裹不下。况且这太多的好意，我没法感激。
Guest—Thank you, (accepted,) girl. This is really ....... This is really a rare kindness. This allows me to walk more. (Just break the brick and sit down, and wrap the cloth around your ankles.) But, no! (Try your best to stand up,) Girl, I will return you, but I still can't wrap it up. Besides, I can't thank you for this too much kindness.翁——你不要这么感激，这于你没有好处。
Weng - Don't be so grateful, it's not good for you.客——是的，这于我没有什么好处。但在我，这布施是最上的东西了。你看，我全身上可有这样的。
Guest: Yes, it is not good for me. But for me, this generosity is the best thing. You see, I have this all over my body.翁——你不要当真就是。
Weng - Don't take it seriously.客——是的。但是我不能。我怕我会这样：倘使我得到了谁的布施，我就要像兀鹰看见死尸一样，在四近徘徊，祝愿她的灭亡，给我亲自看见；或者咒诅她以外的一切全都灭亡，连我自己，因为我就应该得到咒诅。但是我还没有这样的力量；即使有这力量，我也不愿意她有这样的境遇，因为她们大概总不愿意有这样的境遇。我想，这最稳当。（向女孩，）姑娘，你这布片太好，可是太小一点了，还了你罢。
Guest—Yes. But I can't. I fear that I will do this: if I receive someone's alms, I will wander around like a vulture that sees a dead body, wishing for her destruction, and showing me for myself; Or curse everything except her, even myself, because I deserve it. But I don't have the strength yet; Even with this power, I don't want her to be in such a situation, because they probably don't want to be in such a situation. I think this is the safest. (To the girl,) Girl, your piece of cloth is too good, but it's too small, so I'll give it back to you.孩——（惊惧，退后，）我不要了！你带走！
Child- (frightened, stepping back,) I don't want it anymore! You take it!客——（似笑，）哦哦，……因为我拿过了？
Guest——(laughing,) Oh,...... Because I took it?孩——（点头，指口袋，）你装在那里，去玩玩。
Child- (nodding, pointing to the pocket,) You put it there and go play.客——（颓唐地退后，）但这背在身上，怎么走呢？……
Guest——(stepped back dejectedly,) But this is on your back, how to go? ……翁——你息不下，也就背不动。——休息一会，就没有什么了。
Weng - if you can't breathe, you can't turn your back. ——Take a break and there will be nothing.客——对咧，休息……。（默想，但忽然惊醒，倾听。）不，我不能！我还是走好。
Guest—yes, rest ....... (Meditate, but suddenly wake up and listen.) No, I can't! I'm still going.翁——你总不愿意休息么？
Weng - Don't you always want to rest?客——我愿意休息。
Guest - I am willing to rest.翁——那么，你就休息一会罢。
Weng - Well, you can rest for a while.客——但是，我不能……。
Guest—However, I can't .......翁——你总还是觉得走好么？
Weng - Do you still think it's good to go?客——是的。还是走好。
Guest—Yes. It's better to go.翁——那么，你也还是走好罢。
Weng - Well, you should go too.客——（将腰一伸，）好，我告别了。我很感谢你们。（向着女孩，）姑娘，这还你，请你收回去。
Guest——(Stretching his waist,) Okay, I'm saying goodbye. I appreciate you all. (Towards the girl,) Girl, this is back to you, please take it back.（女孩惊惧，敛手，要躲进土屋里去。）
(The girl was frightened, withdrew her hand, and wanted to hide in the mud house.) ）翁——你带去罢。要是太重了，可以随时抛在坟地里面的。
Weng - You can take it. If it is too heavy, it can be thrown in the cemetery at any time.孩——（走向前，）阿阿，那不行！
Child——(Walking forward,) Ah, that's not good!客——阿阿，那不行的。
Guest—ah, that's not good.翁——那么，你挂在野百合野蔷薇上就是了。
Weng - Then, you just hang on the wild lily and wild rose.孩——（拍手，）哈哈！好！
Child——(clapping,) Haha! Good!客——哦哦……。
Guest—oh oh.......（极暂时中，沉默。）
(Very temporary, silence.) ）翁——那么，再见了。祝你平安。（站起，向女孩，）孩子，扶我进去罢。你看，太阳早已下去了。（转身向门。）
Weng - Goodbye. Peace be upon you. (Stand up, to the girl,) Child, help me in. You see, the sun has already gone down. (Turn toward the door.) ）客——多谢你们。祝你们平安。（徘徊，沉思，忽然吃惊，）然而我不能！我只得走。我还是走好罢……。（即刻昂了头，奋然向西走去。）
Guest: Thank you. Peace be upon you. (Wandering, pondering, suddenly surprised,) But I can't! I had to go. I'd better go...... (Immediately raised his head and walked westward.) ）（女孩扶老人走进土屋，随即阖了门。过客向野地里跄踉地闯进去，夜色跟在他后面。）
(The girl helped the old man into the mud house and then closed the door.) The passerby staggered into the field, and the night followed him. ）一九二五年三月二日。
March 2, 1925.

死火

死火

死火

Dead fire我梦见自己在冰山间奔驰。
I dreamed that I was running between icebergs.这是高大的冰山，上接冰天，天上冻云弥漫，片片如鱼鳞模样。山麓有冰树林，枝叶都如松杉。一切冰冷，一切青白。
This is a tall iceberg, connected to the ice sky, the sky is filled with frozen clouds, and the pieces look like fish scales. There is an ice forest at the foot of the mountain, and the branches and leaves are like pines and firs. Everything is cold, everything is blue and white.但我忽然坠在冰谷中。
But I suddenly fell into the ice valley.上下四旁无不冰冷，青白。而一切青白冰上，却有红影无数，纠结如珊瑚网。我俯看脚下，有火焰在。
The upper and lower sides are all cold, blue and white. And on all the blue and white ice, there are countless red shadows, tangled like coral nets. I looked down at my feet, and there was a flame.这是死火。有炎炎的形，但毫不摇动，全体冰结，像珊瑚枝；尖端还有凝固的黑烟，疑这才从火宅中出，所以枯焦。这样，映在冰的四壁，而且互相反映，化为无量数影，使这冰谷，成红珊瑚色。
This is a dead fire. There is a fiery shape, but it does not shake, and the whole is frozen, like a coral branch; There was also solidified black smoke at the tip, which was suspected to have come out of the fire house, so it was scorched. In this way, they are reflected on the four walls of the ice, and they reflect each other, turning into countless shadows, making this ice valley red coral.哈哈！
Ha ha!当我幼小的时候，本就爱看快舰激起的浪花，洪炉喷出的烈焰。不但爱看，还想看清。可惜他们都息息变幻，永无定形。虽然凝视又凝视，总不留下怎样一定的迹象。
When I was young, I loved to watch the waves caused by the fast ship and the flames spewed out by the furnace. Not only do I love to watch, but I also want to see clearly. It's a pity that they are all constantly changing and never fixed. Although he stared and stared, he never left any certain signs.死的火焰，现在先得到了你了！
Dead flame, now I got you first!我拾起死火，正要细看，那冷气已使我的指头焦灼；但是，我还熬着，将他塞入衣袋中间。冰谷四面，登时完全青白。我一面思索着走出冰谷的法子。
I picked up the dead fire and was about to take a closer look, but the cold air had burned my fingers; However, I still held on and stuffed him in the middle of my pocket. The ice valley was completely blue and white at that time. I thought about how to get out of the ice valley.我的身上喷出一缕黑烟，上升如铁线蛇。冰谷四面，又登时满有红焰流动，如大火聚，将我包围。我低头一看，死火已经燃烧，烧穿了我的衣裳，流在冰地上了。
A wisp of black smoke erupted from my body, rising like a wire snake. On all sides of the ice valley, red flames flowed like fire, surrounding me. I looked down and saw that the dead fire had burned, burned through my clothes, and flowed on the ice.“唉，朋友！你用了你的温热，将我惊醒了。”他说。
"Alas, friend! You used your warmth to wake me up. He said.我连忙和他招呼，问他名姓。
I hurriedly greeted him and asked for his name.“我原先被人遗弃在冰谷中，”他答非所问地说，“遗弃我的早已灭亡，消尽了。我也被冰冻冻得要死。倘使你不给我温热，使我重行烧起，我不久就须灭亡。”
"I was abandoned in the valley of ice," he replied, "and the abandonment of me is long gone, and it has disappeared." I was also frozen to death. If you do not give me warmth, and make me burn again, I will soon perish. ”“你的醒来，使我欢喜。我正在想着走出冰谷的方法；我愿意携带你去，使你永不冰结，永得燃烧。”
"Your awakening makes me happy. I was thinking of a way out of the ice valley; I will take you with me, so that you will never freeze and burn forever. ”“唉唉！那么，我将烧完！”
"Alas! Then, I'll burn it out! ”“你的烧完，使我惋惜。我便将你留下，仍在这里罢。”
"Your burning makes me feel sorry for it. I will leave you here and stay here. ”“唉唉！那么，我将冻灭了！”
"Alas! Then, I will freeze to death! ”“那么，怎么办呢？”
"So, what to do?"“但你自己，又怎么办呢？”他反而问。
"But what about yourself?" Instead, he asked.“我说过了：我要出这冰谷……。”
"I said: I want to get out of this ice valley ......."“那我就不如烧完！”
"Then I might as well burn it out!"他忽而跃起，如红彗星，并我都出冰谷口外。有大石车突然驰来，我终于碾死在车轮底下，但我还来得及看见那车就坠入冰谷中。
He suddenly jumped up, like a red comet, and I was out of the mouth of the ice valley. A big stone cart suddenly came and I finally ran under the wheels, but I didn't have time to see the car fall into the ice valley.“哈哈！你们是再也遇不着死火了！”我得意地笑着说，仿佛就愿意这样似的。
"Haha! You will never meet a dead fire again!" I smiled proudly and said, as if I wanted to.一九二五年四月二十三日。
April 23, 1925.

狗的驳诘

狗的驳诘

狗的驳诘

The dog's rebuttal我梦见自己在隘巷中行走，衣履破碎，像乞食者。
I dreamed that I was walking in a narrow alley, my clothes and shoes torn, like a beggar.一条狗在背后叫起来了。
A dog barked behind his back.我傲慢地回顾，叱咤说：
I looked back arrogantly and shouted:“呔！住口！你这势利的狗！”
"Oh! Shut up! You snobbish dog! ”“嘻嘻！”他笑了，还接着说，“不敢，愧不如人呢。”
"Hehe!" He smiled and continued, "I don't dare, I'm ashamed of being inferior to others." ”“什么！？”我气愤了，觉得这是一个极端的侮辱。
"What!?" I was angry and felt that this was an extreme insult.“我惭愧：我终于还不知道分别铜和银；还不知道分别布和绸；还不知道分别官和民；还不知道分别主和奴；还不知道……”
"I am ashamed: I do not know the difference between copper and silver; I don't know how to distinguish between cloth and silk; I don't know the distinction between officials and people; I don't know the difference between master and slave; I don't know ...... yet."我逃走了。
I ran away.“且慢！我们再谈谈……”他在后面大声挽留。
"Slow down! Let's talk about ......" he shouted behind him.我一径逃走，尽力地走，直到逃出梦境，躺在自己的床上。
I ran away, and walked as hard as I could, until I escaped from the dream and lay down in my bed.一九二五年四月二十三日。
April 23, 1925.

失掉的好地狱

失掉的好地狱

失掉的好地狱

Good hell to lose我梦见自己躺在床上，在荒寒的野外，地狱的旁边。一切鬼魂们的叫唤无不低微，然有秩序，与火焰的怒吼，油的沸腾，钢叉的震颤相和鸣，造成醉心的大乐，布告三界：地下太平。
I dreamed that I was lying in bed, in the wilderness, next to hell. The calls of all the ghosts are all low, but orderly, and the roar of the flames, the boiling of oil, and the trembling of the steel forks harmonize with the great joy of intoxication, announcing the three realms: peace underground.有一伟大的男子站在我面前，美丽，慈悲，遍身有大光辉，然而我知道他是魔鬼。
There was a great man standing in front of me, beautiful, merciful, with great brilliance, yet I knew he was the devil.“一切都已完结，一切都已完结！可怜的鬼魂们将那好的地狱失掉了！”他悲愤地说，于是坐下，讲给我一个他所知道的故事——
"It's all over, it's all over! Poor ghosts have lost that good hell! He said sadly and indignantly, so he sat down and told me a story he knew -“天地作蜂蜜色的时候，就是魔鬼战胜天神，掌握了主宰一切的大威权的时候。他收得天国，收得人间，也收得地狱。他于是亲临地狱，坐在中央，遍身发大光辉，照见一切鬼众。
"When the heavens and the earth are the color of honey, it is the time when the devil overcomes the gods and takes control of the great authority that dominates everything. He received the kingdom of heaven, and the world and hell. So he went to hell and sat in the center, shining with great brilliance and shining on all the demons.“地狱原已废弛得很久了：剑树消却光芒；沸油的边际早不腾涌；大火聚有时不过冒些青烟，远处还萌生曼陀罗花，花极细小，惨白可怜。——那是不足为奇的，因为地上曾经大被焚烧，自然失了他的肥沃。
"Hell has long been abandoned: the sword tree has lost its light; The margin of boiling oil has long ceased to surge; The fire gathers sometimes only a little green smoke, and there are datura flowers in the distance, which are very small and pale and pitiful. ——This is not surprising, because the earth was once burned, and naturally lost its fertility.“鬼魂们在冷油温火里醒来，从魔鬼的光辉中看见地狱小花，惨白可怜，被大蛊惑，倏忽间记起人世，默想至不知几多年，遂同时向着人间，发一声反狱的绝叫。
The ghosts woke up in the cold oil and warm fire, saw the little flowers of hell from the light of the devil, pale and pitiful, bewitched by the great bewitchment, and suddenly remembered the world, meditated on it for an unknown number of years, and then at the same time sent a scream of anti-hell to the world.“人类便应声而起，仗义执言，与魔鬼战斗。战声遍满三界，远过雷霆。终于运大谋略，布大网罗，使魔鬼并且不得不从地狱出走。最后的胜利，是地狱门上也竖了人类的旌旗！
Humanity responded to the sound, spoke righteously, and fought against the devil. The sound of battle spread throughout the three realms, far beyond thunder. Finally, a great plan was used to set up a great snare so that the devil had to escape from hell. The final victory was that the human flag was also erected on the gates of hell!“当鬼魂们一齐欢呼时，人类的整饬地狱使者已临地狱，坐在中央，用了人类的威严，叱咤一切鬼众。
When the ghosts cheered together, the messenger of hell who rectified the hell of mankind had come to hell, sat in the center, and used the majesty of mankind to command all the ghosts.“当鬼魂们又发一声反狱的绝叫时，即已成为人类的叛徒，得到永劫沉沦的罚，迁入剑树林的中央。
When the ghosts let out another cry of anti-prison, they became traitors to mankind, were punished with eternal demise, and moved into the center of the sword forest.“人类于是完全掌握了主宰地狱的大威权，那威棱且在魔鬼以上。人类于是整顿废弛，先给牛首阿旁以最高的俸草；而且，添薪加火，磨砺刀山，使地狱全体改观，一洗先前颓废的气象。
"Humanity then completely grasped the great authority of hell, which was more powerful than the devil. Mankind then rectified the neglect and first gave Niu Shou Apang the highest salary grass; Moreover, adding fuel and fire, sharpening the mountain of knives, changed the whole of hell, and washed away the previous decadent atmosphere.“曼陀罗花立即焦枯了。油一样沸；刀一样铦；火一样热；鬼众一样呻吟，一样宛转，至于都不暇记起失掉的好地狱。
"The datura flowers immediately died. Oil boils like oil; The knife is as sharp; As hot as fire; The ghosts moaned and twisted in the same way, and they didn't have time to remember the good hell they lost.“这是人类的成功，是鬼魂的不幸……。
"This is the success of mankind, the unfortunate ...... of ghosts.“朋友，你在猜疑我了。是的，你是人！我且去寻野兽和恶鬼……。”
"Friend, you're suspicious of me. Yes, you are human! I'll go find the ...... of beasts and evil spirits. ”一九二五年六月十六日。
June 16, 1925.

墓碣文

墓碣文

墓碣文

Tomb inscription我梦见自己正和墓碣对立，读着上面的刻辞。那墓碣似是沙石所制，剥落很多，又有苔藓丛生，仅存有限的文句——
I dreamed that I was facing the tombstone, reading the inscription on it. The tomb seems to be made of sand and stone, peeling off a lot, and there are mosses, and only a limited sentence remains——……于浩歌狂热之际中寒；于天上看见深渊。于一切眼中看见无所有；于无所希望中得救。……
…… In the midst of the frenzy of Hao Ge, it is cold; I saw the abyss in the sky. see nothing in all eyes; Saved from hopelessness. …………有一游魂，化为长蛇，口有毒牙。不以啮人，自啮其身，终以殒颠。……
…… 有一游魂，化为长蛇，口有毒牙。 不以啮人，自啮其身，终以殒颠。 …………离开！……
…… 离开！……我绕到碣后，才见孤坟，上无草木，且已颓坏。即从大阙口中，窥见死尸，胸腹俱破，中无心肝。而脸上却绝不显哀乐之状，但蒙蒙如烟然。
I walked around to the back of the stone tablet and saw a solitary grave, with no grass or trees on it, and it had already collapsed. He then peeked through the mouth of the large gate and saw a corpse, with his chest and abdomen shattered, and there was no heart or liver inside. But his face never showed any signs of sadness or joy, but it was hazy like smoke.我在疑惧中不及回身，然而已看见墓碣阴面的残存的文句——
I didn't have time to turn around in my doubts, but I had already seen the remaining sentences on the dark side of the tomb——……抉心自食，欲知本味。创痛酷烈，本味何能知？……
…… Eat your own heart, and want to know the original taste. The pain is so intense; how can one know the true taste? …………痛定之后，徐徐食之。然其心已陈旧，本味又何由知？……
…… After the pain is calmed, eat slowly. However, his heart has become outdated, and how can he know his true taste? …………答我。否则，离开！……
…… Answer me. Otherwise, leave! ……我就要离开。而死尸已在坟中坐起，口唇不动，然而说——
I'm leaving. And the dead body had sat up in the grave, without moving his lips, but he said—“待我成尘时，你将见我的微笑！”
"When I turn to dust, you will see my smile!"我疾走，不敢反顾，生怕看见他的追随。
I walked quickly, not daring to look back, for fear of seeing his following.一九二五年六月十七日。
June 17, 1925.

颓败线的颤动

颓败线的颤动

颓败线的颤动

The trembling of the line of decay我梦见自己在做梦。自身不知所在，眼前却有一间在深夜中紧闭的小屋的内部，但也看见屋上瓦松的茂密的森林。
I dreamed that I was dreaming. I didn't know where I was, but in front of me was the inside of a hut closed in the middle of the night, but I could also see the dense forest of tiles on the roof.板桌上的灯罩是新拭的，照得屋子里分外明亮。在光明中，在破榻上，在初不相识的披毛的强悍的肉块底下，有瘦弱渺小的身躯，为饥饿，苦痛，惊异，羞辱，欢欣而颤动。弛缓，然而尚且丰腴的皮肤光润了；青白的两颊泛出轻红，如铅上涂了胭脂水。
The lampshade on the board table was freshly wiped, illuminating the room very brightly. In the light, on the broken bed, under the strong flesh of the fur that I had never known before, there were thin and small bodies, trembling with hunger, pain, astonishment, humiliation, and joy. Relaxed, but still plump skin is glossy; The pale and white cheeks were light red, like lead coated with rouge water.灯火也因惊惧而缩小了，东方已经发白。
The lights also shrank with fear, and the east was already white.然而空中还弥漫地摇动着饥饿，苦痛，惊异，羞辱，欢欣的波涛……。
Yet the air still shook the waves of hunger, pain, astonishment, humiliation, and joy .......“妈！”约略两岁的女孩被门的开阖声惊醒，在草席围着的屋角的地上叫起来了。
"Mom!" The girl, who was about two years old, was awakened by the sound of the door opening and closing, and screamed on the ground in the corner of the house surrounded by straw mats.“还早哩，再睡一会罢！”她惊惶地说。
"It's still early, let's sleep for a while!" She said in panic.“妈！我饿，肚子痛。我们今天能有什么吃的？”
"Mom! I was hungry and my stomach hurt. What can we eat today? ”“我们今天有吃的了。等一会有卖烧饼的来，妈就买给你。”她欣慰地更加紧捏着掌中的小银片，低微的声音悲凉地发抖，走近屋角去一看她的女儿，移开草席，抱起来放在破榻上。
"We have something to eat today. When someone sells sesame cakes comes later, Mom will buy it for you. She squeezed the small silver piece in her palm tighter with relief, her low voice trembled sadly, approached the corner of the house to see her daughter, removed the straw mat, picked it up and put it on the broken bed.“还早哩，再睡一会罢。”她说着，同时抬起眼睛，无可告诉地一看破旧的屋顶以上的天空。
"It's still early, let's sleep for a while." She said, raising her eyes and looking at the sky above the dilapidated rooftops without telling anything.空中突然另起了一个很大的波涛，和先前的相撞击，回旋而成旋涡，将一切并我尽行淹没，口鼻都不能呼吸。
Suddenly, another big wave rose in the air, colliding with the previous one, swirling into a vortex, submerging everything and me, and I couldn't breathe.我呻吟着醒来，窗外满是如银的月色，离天明还很辽远似的。
I woke up groaning, and the window was full of silver moonlight, as if it was still far away from dawn.
我自身不知所在，眼前却有一间在深夜中紧闭的小屋的内部，我自己知道是在续着残梦。可是梦的年代隔了许多年了。屋的内外已经这样整齐；里面是青年的夫妻，一群小孩子，都怨恨鄙夷地对着一个垂老的女人。
I didn't know where I was, but there was an inside of a hut closed in the middle of the night, and I knew I was continuing my dream. But the age of dreams has been separated by many years. The inside and outside of the house are already so neat; Inside were young couples, a group of children, all resentful and contemptuous at an aging woman.“我们没有脸见人，就只因为你，”男人气忿地说。“你还以为养大了她，其实正是害苦了她，倒不如小时候饿死的好！”
"We don't have the face to see people, just because of you," the man said angrily. "You thought you raised her, but in fact, it was she who suffered, but it was better to starve to death when you were a child!"“使我委屈一世的就是你！”女的说。
"You are the one who has wronged me for the rest of my life!" The woman said.“还要带累了我！”男的说。
"You're still tired of me!" The man said.“还要带累他们哩！”女的说，指着孩子们。
"I still have to tire them!" The woman said, pointing at the children.最小的一个正玩着一片干芦叶，这时便向空中一挥，仿佛一柄钢刀，大声说道：
The youngest one was playing with a dried reed leaf, and then he waved it into the air, like a steel knife, and said loudly:“杀！”
"Kill!"那垂老的女人口角正在痉挛，登时一怔，接着便都平静，不多时候，她冷静地，骨立的石像似的站起来了。她开开板门，迈步在深夜中走出，遗弃了背后一切的冷骂和毒笑。
The old woman's horns were spasming, and she was startled, and then she calmed down, and after a while, she stood up calmly, like a stone statue. She opened the door and walked out of the middle of the night, abandoning all the scolding and poisonous laughter behind her.她在深夜中尽走，一直走到无边的荒野；四面都是荒野，头上只有高天，并无一个虫鸟飞过。她赤身露体地，石像似的站在荒野的中央，于一刹那间照见过往的一切：饥饿，苦痛，惊异，羞辱，欢欣，于是发抖；害苦，委屈，带累，于是痉挛；杀，于是平静。……又于一刹那间将一切并合：眷念与决绝，爱抚与复仇，养育与歼除，祝福与咒诅……。她于是举两手尽量向天，口唇间漏出人与兽的，非人间所有，所以无词的言语。
She walked in the middle of the night, all the way to the boundless wilderness; There was wilderness on all sides, only the sky was high above, and not a single insect or bird flew by. She stood naked in the middle of the wilderness like a stone statue, and in an instant saw everything that had passed: hunger, pain, astonishment, humiliation, rejoicing, and trembling; Suffering, grievance, and tiredness, so spasms; Kill, then calm. …… And in an instant, everything is combined: love and determination, caresses and revenge, nurturing and annihilation, blessing and curse....... She then raised her hands to the sky as much as possible, and the words of humans and beasts leaked out from her lips, not in the world, so there were no words.当她说出无词的言语时，她那伟大如石像，然而已经荒废的，颓败的身躯的全面都颤动了。这颤动点点如鱼鳞，每一鳞都起伏如沸水在烈火上；空中也即刻一同振颤，仿佛暴风雨中的荒海的波涛。
When she spoke the wordless words, her greatness, however, the whole of her abandoned, decadent body trembled. This trembling bit is like fish scales, and each scale rises and falls like boiling water on the fire; The air immediately trembled, like the waves of the desolate sea in a storm.她于是抬起眼睛向着天空，并无词的言语也沉默尽绝，惟有颤动，辐射若太阳光，使空中的波涛立刻回旋，如遭飓风，汹涌奔腾于无边的荒野。
She then raised her eyes to the sky, and her words were silent, only trembling, radiating like sunlight, causing the waves in the air to immediately swirl like a hurricane, surging in the boundless wilderness.我梦魇了，自己却知道是因为将手搁在胸脯上了的缘故；我梦中还用尽平生之力，要将这十分沉重的手移开。
I had a nightmare, but I knew it was because I put my hand on my chest; In my dream, I used all my strength to remove this very heavy hand.一九二五年六月二十九日。
June 29, 1925.

立论

立论

立论

Argument我梦见自己正在小学校的讲堂上预备作文，向老师请教立论的方法。
I dreamed that I was preparing an essay in a lecture hall in a primary school and asked the teacher for advice on how to write an argument.“难！”老师从眼镜圈外斜射出眼光来，看着我，说。“我告诉你一件事——
"Difficult!" The teacher shot out his eyes from outside the glasses circle, looked at me, and said. "Let me tell you one thing—“一家人家生了一个男孩，合家高兴透顶了。满月的时候，抱出来给客人看，——大概自然是想得一点好兆头。
"The family gave birth to a boy, and the whole family was overjoyed. When the moon is full, it is probably a good omen to take out to show the guests,—— which is probably a good omen.“一个说：‘这孩子将来要发财的。’他于是得到一番感谢。
"One said, 'This child will get rich in the future.' He was thanked.“一个说：‘这孩子将来要做官的。’他于是收回几句恭维。
"One said: 'This child will be an official in the future.' He then withdrew a few compliments.“一个说：‘这孩子将来是要死的。’他于是得到一顿大家合力的痛打。
"One said: 'This child is going to die.' He then got a beating from everyone.“说要死的必然，说富贵的许谎。但说谎的得好报，说必然的遭打。你……”
"Saying that death is inevitable, telling the lie of wealth. But those who lie will be rewarded, and they will inevitably be beaten. You ......"“我愿意既不谎人，也不遭打。那么，老师，我得怎么说呢？”
"I am willing to neither lie nor be beaten. So, teacher, what do I have to say? ”“那么，你得说：‘啊呀！这孩子呵！您瞧！多么……。阿唷！哈哈！Hehe！he，hehehehe！’”
"Well, you have to say, 'Ahhh! This kid! Lo and behold! How....... Ahh! Ha ha! Hehe！ he，hehehehe！ ’”一九二五年七月八日。
July 8, 1925.

死后

死后

死后

Died我梦见自己死在道路上。
I dreamed that I was dying on the road.这是那里，我怎么到这里来，怎么死的，这些事我全不明白。总之，待到我自己知道已经死掉的时候，就已经死在那里了。
This is there, how I got here, how I died, I don't understand these things at all. In short, by the time I knew I was dead, I was already dead there.听到几声喜鹊叫，接着是一阵乌老鸦。空气很清爽，——虽然也带些土气息，——大约正当黎明时候罢。我想睁开眼睛来，他却丝毫也不动，简直不像是我的眼睛；于是想抬手，也一样。
I heard a few magpie calls, followed by a burst of crows. The air is very refreshing,—— although it also has a bit of an earthy smell,—— about dawn. I wanted to open my eyes, but he didn't move at all, it didn't look like mine; So I wanted to raise my hand, and it was the same.恐怖的利镞忽然穿透我的心了。在我生存时，曾经玩笑地设想：假使一个人的死亡，只是运动神经的废灭，而知觉还在，那就比全死了更可怕。谁知道我的预想竟的中了，我自己就在证实这预想。
The terrifying arrowhead suddenly penetrated my heart. When I was alive, I once jokingly imagined that if a person's death was just the destruction of motor nerves and the perception remained, it would be more terrible than all death. Who knew that my prediction was correct, and I myself confirmed this expectation.听到脚步声，走路的罢。一辆独轮车从我的头边推过，大约是重载的，轧轧地叫得人心烦，还有些牙齿。很觉得满眼绯红，一定是太阳上来了。那么，我的脸是朝东的。但那都没有什么关系。切切嚓嚓的人声，看热闹的。他们踹起黄土来，飞进我的鼻孔，使我想打喷嚏了，但终于没有打，仅有想打的心。
Hear the footsteps and walk. A wheelbarrow pushed past my head, probably heavily loaded, screaming annoyingly, and some teeth. I feel that my eyes are full of crimson, and the sun must have come up. Well, my face is facing east. But it doesn't matter. Cut the human voice, watch the lively. They kicked up the loess and flew into my nostrils, making me want to sneeze, but in the end I didn't, only the heart I wanted to hit.陆陆续续地又是脚步声，都到近旁就停下，还有更多的低语声：看的人多起来了。我忽然很想听听他们的议论。但同时想，我生存时说的什么批评不值一笑的话，大概是违心之论罢：才死，就露了破绽了。然而还是听；然而毕竟得不到结论，归纳起来不过是这样——
One after another, there were footsteps, all stopping when they got closer, and there were more whispers: there were more people watching. I suddenly wanted to hear what they had to say. But at the same time, I thought that what criticism I said while I was alive was probably against my heart: just died, I revealed my flaws. Yet listen; However, after all, there is no conclusion, and it is just like this -“死了？……”
"Dead? ……”“嗡。——这……”
"Buzz. ——This ......"“哼！……”
"Hmph! ……”“啧。……唉！……”
"Tsk. …… Alas! ……”我十分高兴，因为始终没有听到一个熟识的声音。否则，或者害得他们伤心；或则要使他们快意；或则要使他们加添些饭后闲谈的材料，多破费宝贵的工夫；这都会使我很抱歉。现在谁也看不见，就是谁也不受影响。好了，总算对得起人了！
I was very happy because I never heard a familiar voice. otherwise, it may cause them to be sad; Or to make them happy; Or they have to add some materials for chatting after the meal, and spend more precious work; This makes me feel sorry. Now no one can see it, even no one is affected. Okay, finally worthy of people!但是，大约是一个马蚁，在我的脊梁上爬着，痒痒的。我一点也不能动，已经没有除去他的能力了；倘在平时，只将身子一扭，就能使他退避。而且，大腿上又爬着一个哩！你们是做什么的？虫豸！？
But, about a horse ant, crawling on my spine, tickling. I can't move at all, and I have no ability to get rid of him; If he was normal, just twisting his body could make him retreat. Moreover, there is another one crawling on his thigh! What do you do? Worm!?事情可更坏了：嗡的一声，就有一个青蝇停在我的颧骨上，走了几步，又一飞，开口便舐我的鼻尖。我懊恼地想：足下，我不是什么伟人，你无须到我身上来寻做论的材料……。但是不能说出来。他却从鼻尖跑下，又用冷舌头来舐我的嘴唇了，不知道可是表示亲爱。还有几个则聚在眉毛上，跨一步，我的毛根就一摇。实在使我烦厌得不堪，——不堪之至。
Things got worse: with a buzz, a green fly landed on my cheekbones, took a few steps, flew again, and licked the tip of my nose when it opened. I thought annoyedly: Feet, I am not a great man, you don't need to come to me to find materials for ....... But it can't be said. But he ran down from the tip of his nose and licked my lips with his cold tongue, I don't know if he was dear. A few others gathered on my eyebrows, and when I took a step, my hair roots shook. It really made me unbearably annoyed,—— unbearable.忽然，一阵风，一片东西从上面盖下来，他们就一同飞开了，临走时还说——
Suddenly, a gust of wind blew down, and a piece of something covered it from above, and they flew away together, and before leaving, they said -“惜哉！……”
"What a pity! ……”我愤怒得几乎昏厥过去。
I was so angry that I almost fainted.木材摔在地上的钝重的声音同着地面的震动，使我忽然清醒，前额上感着芦席的条纹。但那芦席就被掀去了，又立刻感到了日光的灼热。还听得有人说——
The dull sound of wood falling to the ground and the vibration of the ground made me suddenly wake up, and I felt the stripes of the reed mat on my forehead. But the reed mat was lifted, and I immediately felt the scorching heat of the sun. I also heard someone say -“怎么要死在这里？……”
"Why do you want to die here? ……”这声音离我很近，他正弯着腰罢。但人应该死在那里呢？我先前以为人在地上虽没有任意生存的权利，却总有任意死掉的权利的。现在才知道并不然，也很难适合人们的公意。可惜我久没了纸笔；即有也不能写，而且即使写了也没有地方发表了。只好就这样地抛开。
The voice was very close to me, and he was bending over. But where should people die? I used to think that although people do not have the right to live freely on earth, they always have the right to die at will. Only now do I know that this is not the case, and it is difficult to meet people's public opinion. It's a pity that I have lost my pen and paper for a long time; Even if there is, it cannot be written, and even if it is written, there is no place to publish it. I had to leave it like this.有人来抬我，也不知道是谁。听到刀鞘声，还有巡警在这里罢，在我所不应该“死在这里”的这里。我被翻了几个转身，便觉得向上一举，又往下一沉；又听得盖了盖，钉着钉。但是，奇怪，只钉了两个。难道这里的棺材钉，是只钉两个的么？
Someone came to carry me, but I don't know who it was. Hearing the sound of scabbards, and the patrol officers here, I shouldn't have "died here". I was turned over a few times, and then I felt that I lifted up and sank down; I heard the lid again, nailed it. But, strangely, only two were nailed. Is there only two coffin nails here?我想：这回是六面碰壁，外加钉子。真是完全失败，呜呼哀哉了！……
I thought: This time it hit the wall on six sides, plus nails. What a complete failure, alas! ……“气闷！……”我又想。
"Stuffy! ...... I thought again.然而我其实却比先前已经宁静得多，虽然知不清埋了没有。在手背上触到草席的条纹，觉得这尸衾倒也不恶。只不知道是谁给我化钱的，可惜！但是，可恶，收敛的小子们！我背后的小衫的一角皱起来了，他们并不给我拉平，现在抵得我很难受。你们以为死人无知，做事就这样地草率么？哈哈！
However, I was actually much quieter than before, although I didn't know if I was buried. I touched the stripes of the straw mat on the back of my hand, and I felt that this corpse quilt was not evil. I just don't know who gave me money, it's a pity! But, damn it, convergent boys! The corner of the shirt behind me was wrinkled, they didn't level me, and now it's hard for me. Do you think that dead people are ignorant and do things so hastily? Ha ha!我的身体似乎比活的时候要重得多，所以压着衣皱便格外的不舒服。但我想，不久就可以习惯的；或者就要腐烂，不至于再有什么大麻烦。此刻还不如静静地静着想。
My body seems to be much heavier than when I was alive, so it was particularly uncomfortable to press on the wrinkles of my clothes. But I think I will soon get used to it; Or it will rot so that there will be no more big trouble. At this moment, it is better to think quietly.“您好？您死了么？”
"Hello? Are you dead? ”是一个颇为耳熟的声音。睁眼看时，却是勃古斋旧书铺的跑外的小伙计。不见约有二十多年了，倒还是那一副老样子。我又看看六面的壁，委实太毛糙，简直毫没有加过一点修刮，锯绒还是毛毵毵的。
It is a rather familiar voice. When I opened my eyes, it was the young man running out of the old bookstore of Boguzhai. It's been about 20 years since I last saw him, but it's still the same. I looked at the walls on six sides again, they were too rough, and they didn't have any trimming, and the sawdust was still fluffy.“那不碍事，那不要紧。”他说，一面打开暗蓝色布的包裹来。“这是明板《公羊传》，嘉靖黑口本，给您送来了。您留下他罢。这是……。”
"That's not in the way, it doesn't matter." He said, opening the dark blue cloth package. "This is the Ming Plate "The Legend of the Ram", Jiajing Black Mouth, sent to you. You leave him alone. This is....... ”“你！”我诧异地看定他的眼睛，说，“你莫非真正胡涂了？你看我这模样，还要看什么明板？……”
"You!" I looked him in surprise and said, "Are you really foolish?" Look at me like this, what else do you want to see? ……”“那可以看，那不碍事。”
"That's okay, that's not in the way."我即刻闭上眼睛，因为对他很烦厌。停了一会，没有声息，他大约走了。但是似乎一个马蚁又在脖子上爬起来，终于爬到脸上，只绕着眼眶转圈子。
I immediately closed my eyes because I was tired of him. After a pause, there was no sound, and he was about gone. But it seemed that a horse ant got up on its neck again, and finally climbed onto its face, only circling around its eye sockets.
万不料人的思想，是死掉之后也还会变化的。忽而，有一种力将我的心的平安冲破；同时，许多梦也都做在眼前了。几个朋友祝我安乐，几个仇敌祝我灭亡。我却总是既不安乐，也不灭亡地不上不下地生活下来，都不能副任何一面的期望。现在又影一般死掉了，连仇敌也不使知道，不肯赠给他们一点惠而不费的欢欣。……
Unexpectedly, people's thoughts will change even after death. Suddenly, there was a force that broke through the peace of my heart; At the same time, many dreams are also in front of you. A few friends wish me peace, and a few enemies wish me destruction. But I am always unhappy, and I am not doomed to live up or down, and I cannot live up to the expectations of any side. Now he is dead like a shadow, and even his enemies do not want to know, and he refuses to give them a little joy without cost. ……我觉得在快意中要哭出来。这大概是我死后第一次的哭。
I feel like crying out in pleasure. This was probably the first time I cried since I died.然而终于也没有眼泪流下；只看见眼前仿佛有火花一闪，我于是坐了起来。
However, in the end, there were no tears; I saw a spark flashing in front of me, so I sat up.一九二五年七月十二日。
July 12, 1925.

这样的战士

这样的战士

这样的战士

Such a fighter要有这样的一种战士——
There must be such a kind of warrior -已不是蒙昧如非洲土人而背着雪亮的毛瑟枪的；也并不疲惫如中国绿营兵而却佩着盒子炮。他毫无乞灵于牛皮和废铁的甲胄；他只有自己，但拿着蛮人所用的，脱手一掷的投枪。
is no longer as ignorant as the African natives and carrying a shiny Mauser gun; They are not as tired as the Chinese green battalion soldiers, but they wear box cannons. He has no armor of cowhide or scrap iron; He only had himself, but he took the gun used by the barbarians and threw it away.他走进无物之阵，所遇见的都对他一式点头。他知道这点头就是敌人的武器，是杀人不见血的武器，许多战士都在此灭亡，正如炮弹一般，使猛士无所用其力。
He walked into the formation of nothingness and nodded to him all he met. He knew that this nod was the enemy's weapon, a weapon that killed without blood, and many warriors perished here, like cannonballs, making the warriors useless.那些头上有各种旗帜，绣出各样好名称：慈善家，学者，文士，长者，青年，雅人，君子……。头下有各样外套，绣出各式好花样：学问，道德，国粹，民意，逻辑，公义，东方文明……。
Those with all kinds of banners on their heads, embroidered with all kinds of good names: philanthropist, scholar, scribe, elder, youth, elegant, gentleman....... There are all kinds of coats under the head, embroidering all kinds of good patterns: knowledge, morality, national essence, public opinion, logic, justice, oriental civilization.......但他举起了投枪。
But he raised his throwing gun.他们都同声立了誓来讲说，他们的心都在胸膛的中央，和别的偏心的人类两样。他们都在胸前放着护心镜，就为自己也深信心在胸膛中央的事作证。
They all swore in unison that their hearts were in the center of their chests, just like other eccentric human beings. They all had goggles on their chests, and they testified to what they were confident in the center of their chests.但他举起了投枪。
But he raised his throwing gun.他微笑，偏侧一掷，却正中了他们的心窝。
He smiled and threw it sideways, but it hit their hearts.一切都颓然倒地；——然而只有一件外套，其中无物。无物之物已经脱走，得了胜利，因为他这时成了戕害慈善家等类的罪人。
Everything collapsed to the ground; - However, there is only one coat, and there is nothing in it. The nothingness has been taken off and victorious, because he has become a sinner who harms philanthropists and the like.但他举起了投枪。
But he raised his throwing gun.他在无物之阵中大踏步走，再见一式的点头，各种的旗帜，各样的外套……。
He strode in the formation of nothingness, nodded goodbye, all kinds of flags, all kinds of coats, .......但他举起了投枪。
But he raised his throwing gun.他终于在无物之阵中老衰，寿终。他终于不是战士，但无物之物则是胜者。
He finally died of old age in the battle of nothingness. He is not a warrior after all, but the thing without nothing is the winner.在这样的境地里，谁也不闻战叫：太平。
In such a situation, no one hears the cry of war: peace.太平……。
Taiping.......但他举起了投枪！
But he raised his gun!一九二五年十二月十四日。
December 14, 1925.

聪明人和傻子和奴才

聪明人和傻子和奴才

聪明人和傻子和奴才

Smart people and fools and minions奴才总不过是寻人诉苦。只要这样，也只能这样。有一日，他遇到一个聪明人。
Servants are always just looking for people to complain. As long as this is the case, it can only be like this. One day, he met a smart man.“先生！”他悲哀地说，眼泪联成一线，就从眼角上直流下来。“你知道的。我所过的简直不是人的生活。吃的是一天未必有一餐，这一餐又不过是高粱皮，连猪狗都不要吃的，尚且只有一小碗……。”
"Sir!" He said sadly, tears formed a line and flowed down from the corners of his eyes. "You know. What I am living is simply not a human life. There may not be one meal a day, and this meal is just sorghum skin, and even pigs and dogs don't want to eat it, and there is only a small bowl of ....... ”“这实在令人同情。”聪明人也惨然说。
"It's really sympathetic." The smart man said miserably.“可不是么！”他高兴了。“可是做工是昼夜无休息的：清早担水晚烧饭，上午跑街夜磨面，晴洗衣裳雨张伞，冬烧汽炉夏打扇。半夜要煨银耳，侍候主人耍钱；头钱从来没分，有时还挨皮鞭……。”
"Isn't it!" He was happy. "But the workmanship is day and night: carrying water in the morning and cooking rice in the evening, running on the street in the morning and grinding noodles at night, washing clothes in the sun and setting up umbrellas in the rain, burning steam stoves in winter and fanning in summer. In the middle of the night, you have to simmer white fungus and wait for the master to play with money; The first money is never divided, and sometimes he is whipped ....... ”“唉唉……。”聪明人叹息着，眼圈有些发红，似乎要下泪。
"Oh ......." The smart man sighed, his eyes were a little red, and he seemed to be about to cry.“先生！我这样是敷衍不下去的。我总得另外想法子。可是什么法子呢？……”
"Sir! I can't go on like this. I have to think of something else. But what is the method? ……”“我想，你总会好起来……。”
"I think you'll always get better......“是么？但愿如此。可是我对先生诉了冤苦，又得你的同情和慰安，已经舒坦得不少了。可见天理没有灭绝……。”
"Really? I hope so. But I complained to my husband, and I got your sympathy and comfort, and I was already a lot more comfortable. It can be seen that the principle of heaven has not ...... extinction. ”但是，不几日，他又不平起来了，仍然寻人去诉苦。
However, within a few days, he became unhappy again and still looked for someone to complain.“先生！”他流着眼泪说，“你知道的。我住的简直比猪窠还不如。主人并不将我当人；他对他的叭儿狗还要好到几万倍……。”
"Sir!" He said with tears in his eyes, "You know." I live worse than a pig nest. The master does not treat me as a person; He was tens of thousands of times better to his dog ...... his dog. ”“混帐！”那人大叫起来，使他吃惊了。那人是一个傻子。
"Bastard!" The man cried out, startling him. That man is a fool.“先生，我住的只是一间破小屋，又湿，又阴，满是臭虫，睡下去就咬得真可以。秽气冲着鼻子，四面又没有一个窗……。”
"Sir, I live in just a dilapidated hut, wet, shady, full of bed bugs, and I can bite you when you sleep. The foul smell rushed to the nose, and there was no window ...... on all sides. ”“你不会要你的主人开一个窗的么？”
"Won't you ask your master to open a window?"“这怎么行？……”
"How can this work? ……”“那么，你带我去看去！”
"Then, take me to see it!"傻子跟奴才到他屋外，动手就砸那泥墙。
The fool and the servant went to his house and smashed the mud wall.“先生！你干什么？”他大惊地说。
"Sir! What are you doing? He said in shock.“我给你打开一个窗洞来。”
"I'll open a window for you."“这不行！主人要骂的！”
"This is not good! The master wants to scold! ”“管他呢！”他仍然砸。
"What about him!" He still smashed.“人来呀！强盗在毁咱们的屋子了！快来呀！迟一点可要打出窟窿来了！……”他哭嚷着，在地上团团地打滚。
"People are coming! The robbers are destroying our houses!" Come on! I'm going to make a hole later!" ......" he cried and rolled on the ground.一群奴才都出来了，将傻子赶走。
A group of minions came out and drove the fool away.听到了喊声，慢慢地最后出来的是主人。
Hearing the shout, it was the owner who slowly came out at the end.“有强盗要来毁咱们的屋子，我首先叫喊起来，大家一同把他赶走了。”他恭敬而得胜地说。
"There are robbers who want to destroy our house, I shout first, and everyone drives him away together." He said respectfully and triumphantly.“你不错。”主人这样夸奖他。
"You're good." The master praised him like this.这一天就来了许多慰问的人，聪明人也在内。
On this day, many people came to offer condolences, including smart people.“先生。这回因为我有功，主人夸奖了我了。你先前说我总会好起来，实在是有先见之明……。”他大有希望似的高兴地说。
"Sir. This time, because of my meritorious service, the master praised me. You said before that I will always get better, and you really have a prescient ....... He said happily, as if he was hopeful.“可不是么……。”聪明人也代为高兴似的回答他。
"Isn't it...... The wise man also answered him happily.一九二五年十二月二十六日。
December 26, 1925.

腊叶

腊叶

腊叶

Waxed leaves灯下看《雁门集》，忽然翻出一片压干的枫叶来。
Watching "Yanmen Collection" under the lamp, a dried maple leaf suddenly came out.这使我记起去年的深秋。繁霜夜降，木叶多半凋零，庭前的一株小小的枫树也变成红色了。我曾绕树徘徊，细看叶片的颜色，当他青葱的时候是从没有这么注意的。他也并非全树通红，最多的是浅绛，有几片则在绯红地上，还带着几团浓绿。一片独有一点蛀孔，镶着乌黑的花边，在红，黄和绿的斑驳中，明眸似的向人凝视。我自念：这是病叶呵！便将他摘了下来，夹在刚才买到的《雁门集》里。大概是愿使这将坠的被蚀而斑斓的颜色，暂得保存，不即与群叶一同飘散罢。
This reminds me of the late autumn of last year. Frost fell at night, most of the leaves withered, and a small maple tree in front of the courtyard turned red. I used to wander around the tree, looking closely at the color of the leaves, and I never paid so much attention when he was green. He is not all red, the most is light crimson, and a few pieces are on the crimson ground, with a few clusters of rich green. A unique cavity, inlaid with black lace, stared at people like bright eyes in the mottled red, yellow and green. I thought to myself: This is a sick leaf! So he took him off and sandwiched it in the "Yanmen Collection" he had just bought. Probably because he wished to preserve the eroded and colorful colors that had fallen for the time being, or to disperse with the leaves.但今夜他却黄蜡似的躺在我的眼前，那眸子也不复似去年一般灼灼。假使再过几年，旧时的颜色在我记忆中消去，怕连我也不知道他何以夹在书里面的原因了。将坠的病叶的斑斓，似乎也只能在极短时中相对，更何况是葱郁的呢。看看窗外，很能耐寒的树木也早经秃尽了；枫树更何消说得。当深秋时，想来也许有和这去年的模样相似的病叶的罢，但可惜我今年竟没有赏玩秋树的余闲。
But tonight he was lying in front of me like yellow wax, and his eyes were no longer as burning as last year. If in a few years, the old colors will be erased from my memory, and I am afraid that even I will not know why he is sandwiched in the book. The colorful colors of the fallen sick leaves seem to be only relative in a very short time, let alone lush. Looking out the window, the hardy trees have long been bald; The maple tree is not to mention. When it was late autumn, I thought there might be sick leaves that looked similar to last year, but unfortunately I didn't have the leisure to enjoy the autumn trees this year.一九二五年十二月二十六日。
December 26, 1925.

淡淡的血痕中

淡淡的血痕中

淡淡的血痕中

In the faint bloodstains——记念几个死者和生者和未生者
- Remember the dead and the living and the unborn目前的造物主，还是一个怯弱者。
The current Creator is still a coward.他暗暗地使天变地异，却不敢毁灭一个这地球；暗暗地使生物衰亡，却不敢长存一切尸体；暗暗地使人类流血，却不敢使血色永远鲜秾；暗暗地使人类受苦，却不敢使人类永远记得。
He secretly changed the world, but he did not dare to destroy an earth; secretly causing the decay of living things, but not daring to keep all corpses for long; secretly causing human blood to bleed, but not daring to make blood forever bright; It secretly makes human beings suffer, but does not dare to make human beings remember forever.他专为他的同类——人类中的怯弱者——设想，用废墟荒坟来衬托华屋，用时光来冲淡苦痛和血痕；日日斟出一杯微甘的苦酒，不太少，不太多，以能微醉为度，递给人间，使饮者可以哭，可以歌，也如醒，也如醉，若有知，若无知，也欲死，也欲生。他必须使一切也欲生；他还没有灭尽人类的勇气。
He conceived for his kind, the cowards of mankind, using ruins and desolate graves to set off the splendid houses, and using time to dilute the pain and bloodstains; Pour out a cup of slightly sweet bitter wine every day, not too little, not too much, to be slightly drunk, and hand it over to the world, so that the drinker can cry, sing, as if sober, like drunk, if there is knowledge, if there is ignorance, it also wants to die, and it also wants to live. He must make all things live; He has not yet exhausted the courage of mankind.几片废墟和几个荒坟散在地上，映以淡淡的血痕，人们都在其间咀嚼着人我的渺茫的悲苦。但是不肯吐弃，以为究竟胜于空虚，各各自称为“天之僇民”，以作咀嚼着人我的渺茫的悲苦的辩解，而且悚息着静待新的悲苦的到来。新的，这就使他们恐惧，而又渴欲相遇。
Several ruins and several desolate graves are scattered on the ground, reflecting faint blood stains, and people are chewing on the vague misery of people and me. But they refused to spit it out, thinking that they were better than emptiness, and each of them called themselves "the people of heaven", in order to justify the misery of chewing on the faint misery of man and me, and waiting for the arrival of new misery. This makes them fearful and thirsty to meet.这都是造物主的良民。他就需要这样。
These are all good people of the Creator. He needs that.叛逆的猛士出于人间；他屹立着，洞见一切已改和现有的废墟和荒坟，记得一切深广和久远的苦痛，正视一切重叠淤积的凝血，深知一切已死，方生，将生和未生。他看透了造化的把戏；他将要起来使人类苏生，或者使人类灭尽，这些造物主的良民们。
Rebellious warriors come from the world; He stood tall, seeing all the changed and existing ruins and desolate graves, remembering all the deep, broad and long-standing pain, facing up to all the overlapping and accumulated blood congeals, and knowing that everything was dead, alive, and born and unborn. He saw through the tricks of nature; He will rise up and raise mankind, or destroy them, these good people of the Creator.造物主，怯弱者，羞惭了，于是伏藏。天地在猛士的眼中于是变色。
造物主，怯弱者，羞惭了，于是伏藏。 天地在猛士的眼中于是变色。一九二六年四月八日。
一九二六年四月八日。

一觉

一觉

一觉

一觉飞机负了掷下炸弹的使命，像学校的上课似的，每日上午在北京城上飞行。每听得机件搏击空气的声音，我常觉到一种轻微的紧张，宛然目睹了“死”的袭来，但同时也深切地感着“生”的存在。
The plane was tasked with dropping bombs, flying over Beijing every morning like a school class. Every time I hear the sound of the machine fighting the air, I often feel a slight nervousness, as if witnessing the attack of "death", but at the same time, I also deeply feel the existence of "life".隐约听到一二爆发声以后，飞机嗡嗡地叫着，冉冉地飞去了。也许有人死伤了罢，然而天下却似乎更显得太平。窗外的白杨的嫩叶，在日光下发乌金光；榆叶梅也比昨日开得更烂漫。收拾了散乱满床的日报，拂去昨夜聚在书桌上的苍白的微尘，我的四方的小书斋，今日也依然是所谓“窗明几净”。
After vaguely hearing one or two explosions, the plane hummed and flew away. Maybe someone was killed or injured, but the world seemed to be more peaceful. The young leaves of the poplar outside the window glow black gold in the sunlight; The elm leaf plum is also more blooming than yesterday. After cleaning up the scattered daily newspapers on the bed and brushing away the pale dust that had gathered on the desk last night, my small study in all directions is still the so-called "bright and clean windows" today.因为或一种原因，我开手编校那历来积压在我这里的青年作者的文稿了；我要全都给一个清理。我照作品的年月看下去，这些不肯涂脂抹粉的青年们的魂灵便依次屹立在我眼前。他们是绰约的，是纯真的，——阿，然而他们苦恼了，呻吟了，愤怒，而且终于粗暴了，我的可爱的青年们！
For one reason or another, I started editing the manuscripts of the young authors who had always been backlogged with me; I'm going to clean them all up. As I look at the years of the work, the souls of these young people who refuse to apply makeup stand in front of my eyes one after another. They are graceful, innocent ,——, yet they are distressed, moaning, angry, and at last rough, my lovely young men!魂灵被风沙打击得粗暴，因为这是人的魂灵，我爱这样的魂灵；我愿意在无形无色的鲜血淋漓的粗暴上接吻。漂渺的名园中，奇花盛开着，红颜的静女正在超然无事地逍遥，鹤唳一声，白云郁然而起……。这自然使人神往的罢，然而我总记得我活在人间。
The soul was hit roughly by the wind and sand, because this is the soul of a person, and I love such a soul; I am willing to kiss on the bloody roughness of the formless and colorless. In the ethereal garden, strange flowers are blooming, and the red-faced quiet girl is freeing freely and uneventfully, with a crane cry, and white clouds rise ....... This is naturally fascinating, but I always remember that I live in the world.我忽然记起一件事：两三年前，我在北京大学的教员预备室里，看见进来了一个并不熟识的青年，默默地给我一包书，便出去了，打开看时，是一本《浅草》。就在这默默中，使我懂得了许多话。阿，这赠品是多么丰饶呵！可惜那《浅草》不再出版了，似乎只成了《沉钟》的前身。那《沉钟》就在这风沙洞中，深深地在人海的底里寂寞地鸣动。
I suddenly remembered something: two or three years ago, I was in the faculty preparation room of Peking University, and I saw a young man I didn't know well, silently gave me a package of books, and went out. It was in this silence that I understood many words. Ah, how rich this gift is! Unfortunately, "Asakusa" is no longer published, and it seems to have only become the predecessor of "Shen Zhong". The "Shen Bell" is in this wind and sand  cave, ringing lonely deep in the sea of people.野蓟经了几乎致命的摧折，还要开一朵小花，我记得托尔斯泰曾受了很大的感动，因此写出一篇小说来。但是，草木在旱干的沙漠中间，拚命伸长他的根，吸取深地中的水泉，来造成碧绿的林莽，自然是为了自己的“生”的，然而使疲劳枯渴的旅人，一见就怡然觉得遇到了暂时息肩之所，这是如何的可以感激，而且可以悲哀的事！？
The wild thistle was almost fatally destroyed and had to bloom a small flower, and I remember that Tolstoy was very moved, so he wrote a novel. However, the grass and trees in the middle of the dry desert, desperately stretching their roots, absorbing the water and springs in the deep ground, to create a turquoise forest, naturally for their own "life", but the tired and thirsty traveler feels happy at first sight that he has encountered a temporary place to rest his shoulders, how grateful and sad is this!?《沉钟》的《无题》——代启事——说：“有人说：我们的社会是一片沙漠。——如果当真是一片沙漠，这虽然荒漠一点也还静肃；虽然寂寞一点也还会使你感觉苍茫。何至于像这样的混沌，这样的阴沉，而且这样的离奇变幻！”
"Untitled" of "Shen Zhong" - on behalf of the notice - said: "Some people say: Our society is a desert. ——If it is really a desert, although it is desert at all; Although loneliness can also make you feel empty. How can it be so chaotic, so gloomy, and so bizarre! ”是的，青年的魂灵屹立在我眼前，他们已经粗暴了，或者将要粗暴了，然而我爱这些流血和隐痛的魂灵，因为他使我觉得是在人间，是在人间活着。
Yes, the spirits of young men stand before my eyes, they have been and will be rough, but I love these bleeding and painful souls, because he makes me feel that they are on earth, on earth.在编校中夕阳居然西下，灯火给我接续的光。各样的青春在眼前一一驰去了，身外但有昏黄环绕。我疲劳着，捏着纸烟，在无名的思想中静静地合了眼睛，看见很长的梦。忽而惊觉，身外也还是环绕着昏黄；烟篆在不动的空气中上升，如几片小小夏云，徐徐幻出难以指名的形象。
In the editing, the sunset actually set, and the lights gave me continuous light. All kinds of youth rushed away one by one in front of my eyes, but there was a dim yellow surrounded by them. I was tired, holding a cigarette, quietly closing my eyes in my nameless thoughts, and seeing a long dream. Suddenly I woke up, and there was still a dim yellow outside my body; The smoke rose in the motionless air, like a few small summer clouds, slowly creating an image that was difficult to name.一九二六年四月十日。

April 10, 1926.

封面

书名页

版权信息

图书在版编目（CIP）数据
Books in Print (CIP) data华盖集/鲁迅著．—南京：译林出版社，2013.11
Huagai Collection/Lu Xun.—Nanjing: Yilin Publishing House, 2013.11（鲁迅自编文集）
(Lu Xun's self-edited anthology)ISBN 978-7-5447-4381-5
ISBN 978-7-5447-4381-5Ⅰ．①华…　Ⅱ．①鲁…　Ⅲ．①鲁迅杂文－杂文集　Ⅳ．①I210.4
I..(1) Hua... II..(1) Lu... III..(1) Lu Xun's Essays - Essays IV..(1)I210.4中国版本图书馆CIP数据核字（2013）第211085号
China Version Library CIP Data Verification (2013) No. 211085
书　　名　华盖集
Book title Huagai Collection作　　者　鲁　迅
Author: Lu Xun责任编辑　王振华
Editor-in-charge: Wang Zhenhua特约编辑　邓　敏
Special editor Deng Min出版发行　凤凰出版传媒股份有限公司　
Published and distributed by Phoenix Publishing and Media Co., Ltd译林出版社
Yilin Publishing House出版社地址　南京市湖南路1号A楼，邮编：210009
Publisher's address Building A, No. 1 Hunan Road, Nanjing, Zip Code: 210009电子信箱　yilin@yilin.com
E-mail yilin@yilin.com出版社网址　http://www.yilin.com
Publisher website http://www.yilin.com印　　刷　北京凯达印务有限公司
Printing Beijing Kaida Printing Co., Ltd开　　本　787×1092毫米　1/32
Volume 787×1092 mm 1/32印　　张　4.75
Print 4.75字　　数　91千字
Word count: 91,000 words版　　次　2013年11月第1版　2013年11月第1次印刷
Edition November 2013 1st edition November 2013 1st printing标准书号　ISBN 978-7-5447-4381-5
ISBN 978-7-5447-4381-5定　　价　12.80元
The price is 12.80 yuan译林版图书若有印装错误可向承印厂调换

If there are printing errors in the translated version of the book, it can be exchanged with the printing factory

Table of Contents

目录

Table of Contents

directory题记 Inscription
一九二五年 1925
咬文嚼字 Chew the words
青年必读书 Young people must read
忽然想到 Suddenly thought
通讯 communication
论辩的魂灵 The soul of argument
牺牲谟 Sacrifice
战士和苍蝇 Warriors and flies
夏三虫 Three insects in summer
忽然想到 Suddenly thought
杂感 Mixed feelings
北京通信 Beijing Communications
导师 mentor
长城 The Great Wall
忽然想到 Suddenly thought
“碰壁”之后 After "hitting the wall"
并非闲话 Not idle
我的“籍”和“系” My "Nationality" and "Department"
咬文嚼字 Chew the words
忽然想到 Suddenly thought
补白 Filler
答KS君 Answer Mr. KS
“碰壁”之余 In addition to "hitting the wall"
并非闲话（二） Not gossip (2)
十四年的“读经” Fourteen years of "Bible reading"
评心雕龙 Comment on the carved dragon
这个与那个 This and that
并非闲话（三） Not gossip (3)
我观北大 I look at Peking University
碎话 Broken words
“公理”的把戏 The trick of "axiom"
这回是“多数”的把戏 This time it was the trick of the "majority"
后记 postscript
返回总目录 Return to the General Directory

题记

题记

题记

Inscription在一年的尽头的深夜中，整理了这一年所写的杂感，竟比收在《热风》里的整四年中所写的还要多。意见大部分还是那样，而态度却没有那么质直了，措辞也时常弯弯曲曲，议论又往往执滞在几件小事情上，很足以贻笑于大方之家。然而那又有什么法子呢。我今年偏遇到这些小事情，而偏有执滞于小事情的脾气。
In the late night at the end of the year, I sorted out more miscellaneous feelings written in this year than I wrote in the four years of "Hot Wind". Most of the opinions are still like that, but the attitude is not so straightforward, the wording is often crooked, and the discussion is often fixated on a few small things, which is enough to be ridiculed by the generous family. But what can be done? I have encountered these small things this year, and I have a temper that is stuck in small things.我知道伟大的人物能洞见三世，观照一切，历大苦恼，尝大欢喜，发大慈悲。但我又知道这必须深入山林，坐古树下，静观默想，得天眼通，离人间愈远遥，而知人间也愈深，愈广；于是凡有言说，也愈高，愈大；于是而为天人师。我幼时虽曾梦想飞空，但至今还在地上，救小创伤尚且来不及，那有余暇使心开意豁，立论都公允妥洽，平正通达，像“正人君子”一般；正如沾水小蜂，只在泥土上爬来爬去，万不敢比附洋楼中的通人，但也自有悲苦愤激，决非洋楼中的通人所能领会。
I know that great people can see the three lifetimes, observe everything, experience great suffering, taste great joy, and have great compassion. But I also know that this must go deep into the mountains and forests, sit under the ancient trees, meditate and meditate, so that the eyes of heaven are opened, and the farther away from the world, the deeper and wider the world becomes; Therefore, wherever there is a word, it is higher and greater; Thus, he became a teacher to heaven and man. Although I dreamed of flying in the sky when I was young, I am still on the ground, and it is too late to save small wounds. Just like the water-dipping bee, it only crawls around on the soil, and it never dares to compare with the ordinary people in the attached western-style buildings, but it also has its own sorrow and anger, which is by no means comprehensible to the ordinary people in the western-style buildings.这病痛的根柢就在我活在人间，又是一个常人，能够交着“华盖运”。
The root of this illness lies in the fact that I live in the world, and I am an ordinary person, able to hand over the "canopy luck".我平生没有学过算命，不过听老年人说，人是有时要交“华盖运”的。这“华盖”在他们口头上大概已经讹作“镬盖”了，现在加以订正。所以，这运，在和尚是好运：顶有华盖，自然是成佛作祖之兆。但俗人可不行，华盖在上，就要给罩住了，只好碰钉子。我今年开手作杂感时，就碰了两个大钉子：一是为了《咬文嚼字》，一是为了《青年必读书》。署名和匿名的豪杰之士的骂信，收了一大捆，至今还塞在书架下。此后又突然遇见了一些所谓学者，文士，正人，君子等等，据说都是讲公话，谈公理，而且深不以“党同伐异”为然的。可惜我和他们太不同了，所以也就被他们伐了几下，——但这自然是为“公理”之故，和我的“党同伐异”不同。这样，一直到现下还没有完结，只好“以待来年”。
I have never studied fortune-telling in my life, but I heard from the elderly that people sometimes have to pay "canopy luck". This "canopy" has probably been misspelled as "pot cover" in their mouth, and it has now been corrected. Therefore, this luck is good luck for monks: with a canopy on top, it is naturally a sign of becoming a Buddha and an ancestor. But the layman can't do it, the canopy is on top, and it has to be covered, so I have to touch the nail. When I started working on miscellaneous feelings this year, I touched two big nails: one was for "Biting Texts and Chewing Words", and the other was for "Must-Read Books for Young People". The scolding letters of signed and anonymous heroes received a large bundle, which is still stuffed under the bookshelf. After that, I suddenly met some so-called scholars, scribes, righteous people, gentlemen, etc., who are said to be speaking public and talking about axioms, and they are deeply dissatisfied with "the party fights against differences". It's a pity that I am too different from them, so I was cut down by them a few times,—— but this is naturally for the sake of "axioms", which is different from my "party fighting differences". In this way, it has not been finished until now, so we have to "wait for the next year".也有人劝我不要做这样的短评。那好意，我是很感激的，而且也并非不知道创作之可贵。然而要做这样的东西的时候，恐怕也还要做这样的东西，我以为如果艺术之宫里有这么麻烦的禁令，倒不如不进去；还是站在沙漠上，看看飞沙走石，乐则大笑，悲则大叫，愤则大骂，即使被沙砾打得遍身粗糙，头破血流，而时时抚摩自己的凝血，觉得若有花纹，也未必不及跟着中国的文士们去陪莎士比亚吃黄油面包之有趣。
Some people also advised me not to make such short comments. I am very grateful for that kindness, and I am not unaware of the value of creation. However, when I want to make such a thing, I am afraid that I will also make such a thing, and I thought that if there was such a troublesome prohibition in the Palace of Art, it would be better not to go in; Still standing on the desert, watching the flying sand and stones, laughing when happy, screaming when sad, scolding when angry, even if you are beaten rough all over your body by sand and gravel, your head is bleeding, and you always stroke your blood clotting, and feel that if there is a pattern, it may not be as interesting as following the Chinese scribes to accompany Shakespeare to eat butter bread.然而只恨我的眼界小，单是中国，这一年的大事件也可以算是很多的了，我竟往往没有论及，似乎无所感触。我早就很希望中国的青年站出来，对于中国的社会，文明，都毫无忌惮地加以批评，因此曾编印《莽原周刊》，作为发言之地，可惜来说话的竟很少。在别的刊物上，倒大抵是对于反抗者的打击，这实在是使我怕敢想下去的。
However, I only hate that my vision is small, China alone, this year's big events can be regarded as many, I often don't talk about it, it seems that I don't feel anything. I have long hoped that Chinese youth will stand up and criticize China's society and civilization without scruples, so I have edited and printed "Mangyuan Weekly" as a place to speak, but unfortunately there are very few people to speak. In other publications, it is mostly a blow to the rebels, which really makes me afraid to think about it.现在是一年的尽头的深夜，深得这夜将尽了，我的生命，至少是一部分的生命，已经耗费在写这些无聊的东西中，而我所获得的，乃是我自己的灵魂的荒凉和粗糙。但是我并不惧惮这些，也不想遮盖这些，而且实在有些爱他们了，因为这是我转辗而生活于风沙中的瘢痕。凡有自己也觉得在风沙中转辗而生活着的，会知道这意思。
It was the end of the year, and it was so late that the night was coming to an end, and my life, at least part of it, had been spent writing about these boring things, and what I had gained was the desolation and roughness of my own soul. But I am not afraid of this, nor do I want to cover it, and I really love them a little, because this is the scar of my life in the wind and sand. Anyone who feels that they are living in the wind and sand will know what this means.我编《热风》时，除遗漏的之外，又删去了好几篇。这一回却小有不同了，一时的杂感一类的东西，几乎都在这里面。
When I edited "Hot Air", I deleted several articles in addition to the ones I omitted. This time it was a little different, almost all the temporary miscellaneous feelings were in it.一九二五年十二月三十一日之夜，记于绿林书屋东壁下。
On the night of December 31, 1925, it was recorded under the east wall of the Greenwood Library.

一九二五年

一九二五年

一九二五年

1925

咬文嚼字

咬文嚼字

咬文嚼字

Chew the words一
One以摆脱传统思想的束缚而来主张男女平等的男人，却偏喜欢用轻靓艳丽字样来译外国女人的姓氏：加些草头，女旁，丝旁。不是“思黛儿”，就是“雪琳娜”。西洋和我们虽然远哉遥遥，但姓氏并无男女之别，却和中国一样的，——除掉斯拉夫民族在语尾上略有区别之外。所以如果我们周家的姑娘不另姓绸，陈府上的太太也不另姓蔯，则欧文的小姐正无须改作妪纹，对于托尔斯泰夫人也不必格外费心，特别写成妥嬭丝苔也。
Men who advocate gender equality by getting rid of the shackles of traditional ideas prefer to use light and beautiful words to translate the surnames of foreign women: add some grass heads, female sides, and silk sides. It's either "Stella" or "Shelina". Although the West is far away from us, there is no difference between men and women in surnames, but they are the same as China,—— except for the slight difference between the Slavic peoples in the ending. Therefore, if the girl of the Zhou family does not have another surname Silk, and the wife of the Chen family does not have another surname Zhen, then Miss Owen does not need to change to the old woman's pattern, and there is no need to worry about Mrs. Tolstoy, especially written as Tuo Silk Moss.以摆脱传统思想的束缚而来介绍世界文学的文人，却偏喜欢使外国人姓中国姓：Gogol姓郭；Wilde姓王；D'Annunzio姓段，一姓唐；Holz姓何；Gorky姓高；Galsworthy也姓高，假使他谈到Gorky，大概是称他“吾家rky”的了。我真万料不到一本《百家姓》，到现在还有这般伟力。
Literati who introduce world literature to get rid of the shackles of traditional ideas prefer to give foreigners Chinese surnames: Gogol's surname is Guo; Wilde's surname is Wang; D'Annunzio's surname is Duan, the first surname is Tang, Holz's surname is He, Gorky's surname is Gao, and Galsworthy is also surnamed Gao. I really didn't expect a book of "Hundred Family Surnames" to be so powerful to this day.一月八日。
January 8th.

咬文嚼字

二

咬文嚼字

Two古时候，咱们学化学，在书上很看见许多“金”旁和非“金”旁的古怪字，据说是原质名目，偏旁是表明“金属”或“非金属”的，那一边大概是译音。但是，， ，锡，错，矽，连化学先生也讲得很费力，总须附加道：“这回是熟悉的悉。这回是休息的息了。这回是常见的锡。”而学生们为要记得符号，仍须另外记住腊丁字。现在渐渐译起有机化学来，因此这类怪字就更多了，也更难了，几个字拼合起来，像贴在商人帐桌面前的将“黄金万两”拼成一个的怪字一样。中国的化学家多能兼做新仓颉。我想，倘若就用原文，省下造字的功夫来，一定于本职的化学上更其大有成绩，因为中国人的聪明是决不在白种人之下的。
In ancient times, when we studied chemistry, we saw many strange words next to "gold" and non-"gold" in books, which were said to be original names, and the side was indicating "metal" or "non-metal", and that side was probably a translation. However, , , tin, wrong, silicon, even the chemistry teacher spoke very laboriously, and always had to add: "This time it is familiar." This time it's time to rest. This time it was the common tin. In order to remember the symbols, students still have to memorize the word Lading. Now that organic chemistry is gradually being translated, there are more and more strange words like this, and it is more difficult, and a few words are put together, like the strange words that spell "ten thousand taels of gold" into one in front of the merchant's account. Chinese chemists can also be Xincangjie. I think that if we use the original text and save the effort of making characters, we will definitely achieve greater results in chemistry in our own job, because the intelligence of the Chinese is by no means inferior to that of the Caucasians.在北京常看见各样好地名：辟才胡同，乃兹府，丞相胡同，协资庙，高义伯胡同，贵人关。但探起底细来，据说原是劈柴胡同，奶子府，绳匠胡同，蝎子庙，狗尾巴胡同，鬼门关。字面虽然改了，涵义还依旧。这很使我失望；否则，我将鼓吹改奴隶二字为“弩理”，或是“努礼”，使大家可以永远放心打盹儿，不必再愁什么了。但好在似乎也并没有什么人愁着，爆竹毕毕剥剥地都祀过财神了。
In Beijing, you can often see all kinds of good place names: Bicai Hutong, Naizi Mansion, Prime Minister Hutong, Xiezi Temple, Gaoyibo Hutong, and Guirenguan. But when I looked into the details, it is said that it was originally a firewood alley, a tit house, a rope craftsman's alley, a scorpion temple, a dog's tail alley, and a ghost gate. Although the word has changed, the meaning is still the same. It disappointed me; Otherwise, I will advocate changing the word slave to "crossbow" or "nuli", so that everyone can always take a nap with peace of mind and don't have to worry about anything. But fortunately, no one seems to be worried, and the firecrackers have been worshipped by the God of Wealth.二月十日。
February 10th.

青年必读书——应《京报副刊》的征求

青年必读书——应《京报副刊》的征求

青年必读书——应《京报副刊》的征求

Must-read books for young people - at the request of the Beijing News Supplement

青年必读书Young people must read
从来没有留心过，所以现在说不出。I never paid attention, so I can't say now.

附注annotations
但我要趁这机会，略说自己的经验，以供若干读者的参考——我看中国书时，总觉得就沉静下去，与实人生离开；读外国书——但除了印度——时，往往就与人生接触，想做点事。中国书虽有劝人入世的话，也多是僵尸的乐观；外国书即使是颓唐和厌世的，但却是活人的颓唐和厌世。我以为要少——或者竟不——看中国书，多看外国书。少看中国书，其结果不过不能作文而已。但现在的青年最要紧的是“行”，不是“言”。只要是活人，不能作文算什么大不了的事。（二月十日。）But I would like to take this opportunity to briefly talk about my experience for the reference of some readers -  When I read Chinese books, I always feel that I will calm down and leave the real life; When reading foreign books - but except in India - I often get in touch with life and want to do something. Although Chinese books have words that persuade people to enter the world, they are mostly zombie optimism; Even if foreign books are decadent and world-weary, they are the decadent and world-weary of living people.  I think I should read less - or not - read Chinese books and read more foreign books.  I read a little Chinese book, and the result is just that I can't write. But the most important thing for today's young people is "action", not "words". As long as you are a living person, it is not a big deal not to be able to compose.  (February 10. ）

忽然想到

忽然想到

忽然想到

Suddenly thought一
One做《内经》的不知道究竟是谁。对于人的肌肉，他确是看过，但似乎单是剥了皮略略一观，没有细考校，所以乱成一片，说是凡有肌肉都发源于手指和足趾。宋的《洗冤录》说人骨，竟至于谓男女骨数不同；老仵作之谈，也有不少胡说。然而直到现在，前者还是医家的宝典，后者还是检验的南针：这可以算得天下奇事之一。
I don't know who the person who made the "Neijing" is. He did see human muscles, but it seemed that he only peeled off the skin and took a quick look, without careful examination, so he was in a mess, saying that all muscles originate from the fingers and toes. Song's "Record of Washing Wrongs" said that human bones are different, and the number of bones of men and women is different; There is also a lot of nonsense in the old man's talk. However, until now, the former is still a treasure book for doctors, and the latter is still a southern needle for testing: this can be regarded as one of the wonders of the world.牙痛在中国不知发端于何人？相传古人壮健，尧舜时代盖未必有；现在假定为起于二千年前罢。我幼时曾经牙痛，历试诸方，只有用细辛者稍有效，但也不过麻痹片刻，不是对症药。至于拔牙的所谓“离骨散”，乃是理想之谈，实际上并没有。西法的牙医一到，这才根本解决了；但在中国人手里一再传，又每每只学得镶补而忘了去腐杀菌，仍复渐渐地靠不住起来。牙痛了二千年，敷敷衍衍的不想一个好方法，别人想出来了，却又不肯好好地学：这大约也可以算得天下奇事之二罢。
I don't know who started toothache in China? It is said that the ancients were strong, and the Yao and Shun era may not have it; It is now assumed that it started 2,000 years ago. I had a toothache when I was a child, and I tried various prescriptions, but only those with Xixin were slightly effective, but they were only numb for a moment, not a symptomatic remedy. As for the so-called "separation of bones" for tooth extraction, it is an ideal statement, but in fact it is not. As soon as the dentist in Spain arrived, it was fundamentally solved; However, it has been passed on repeatedly in the hands of the Chinese, and it has gradually become unreliable. After a toothache for two thousand years, perfunctory I didn't want a good way, and others came up with it, but they refused to learn it well: this can probably be regarded as the second wonder in the world.康圣人主张跪拜，以为“否则要此膝何用”。走时的腿的动作，固然不易于看得分明，但忘记了坐在椅上时候的膝的曲直，则不可谓非圣人之疏于格物也。身中间脖颈最细，古人则于此斫之，臀肉最肥，古人则于此打之，其格物都比康圣人精到，后人之爱不忍释，实非无因。所以僻县尚打小板子，去年北京戒严时亦尝恢复杀头，虽延国粹于一脉乎，而亦不可谓非天下奇事之三也！
Kang Shengren advocated kneeling, thinking that "otherwise this knee is of no use". The movement of the legs when walking is not easy to see clearly, but forgetting the curvature and straightness of the knees when sitting on the chair cannot be said to be the negligence of the saints. The neck in the middle of the body is the thinnest, the ancients cut it here, the buttocks are the fattest, the ancients beat it here, and its style is more refined than that of Kang Shengren, and the love of later generations is not without reason. Therefore, remote counties are still playing small boards, and last year when Beijing was under martial law, it was also restored to the head of the killing head.一月十五日。
January 15th.

忽然想到

二

忽然想到

Two校着《苦闷的象征》的排印样本时，想到一些琐事——
When proofreading the typesetting sample of "The Symbol of Distress", I thought of some trivial things -我于书的形式上有一种偏见，就是在书的开头和每个题目前后，总喜欢留些空白，所以付印的时候，一定明白地注明。但待排出寄来，却大抵一篇一篇挤得很紧，并不依所注的办。查看别的书，也一样，多是行行挤得极紧的。
I have a prejudice against the form of the book, that is, I always like to leave some blank space at the beginning of the book and before and after each topic, so when I print it, I must clearly indicate it. But when it was sent out, it was usually very crowded one by one, and it was not done according to the notes. Looking at other books, it is the same, most of them are extremely tight.较好的中国书和西洋书，每本前后总有一两张空白的副页，上下的天地头也很宽。而近来中国的排印的新书则大抵没有副页，天地头又都很短，想要写上一点意见或别的什么，也无地可容，翻开书来，满本是密密层层的黑字；加以油臭扑鼻，使人发生一种压迫和窘促之感，不特很少“读书之乐”，且觉得仿佛人生已没有“余裕”，“不留余地”了。
The better Chinese and Western books always have one or two blank subpages before and after each book, and the upper and lower parts are also very wide. Recently, most of the new books printed in China have no subpages, and the world is very short, and if you want to write a little opinion or something else, there is no place to accommodate it. In addition, the smell of oil makes people feel oppressed and embarrassed, not only has little "joy of reading", but also feels as if there is no "room" and "no room left" in life.或者也许以这样的为质朴罢。但质朴是开始的“陋”，精力弥满，不惜物力的。现在的却是复归于陋，而质朴的精神已失，所以只能算窳败，算堕落，也就是常谈之所谓“因陋就简”。在这样“不留余地”空气的围绕里，人们的精神大抵要被挤小的。
Or maybe it's just a simple thing. But simplicity is the "ugliness" of the beginning, full of energy, and sparing no material resources. Now it is a return to ugliness, and the simple spirit has been lost, so it can only be regarded as failure and depravity, which is the so-called "simple because of ugliness". Surrounded by such a "leave no room" air, people's spirits are probably squeezed out.外国的平易地讲述学术文艺的书，往往夹杂些闲话或笑谈，使文章增添活气，读者感到格外的兴趣，不易于疲倦。但中国的有些译本，却将这些删去，单留下艰难的讲学语，使他复近于教科书。这正如折花者，除尽枝叶，单留花朵，折花固然是折花，然而花枝的活气却灭尽了。人们到了失去余裕心，或不自觉地满抱了不留余地心时，这民族的将来恐怕就可虑。上述的那两样，固然是比牛毛还细小的事，但究竟是时代精神表现之一端，所以也可以类推到别样。例如现在器具之轻薄草率（世间误以为灵便），建筑之偷工减料，办事之敷衍一时，不要“好看”，不想“持久”，就都是出于同一病源的。即再用这来类推更大的事，我以为也行。
Foreign books that plain talk about academic literature and art are often mixed with gossip or jokes, which add vitality to the article, and readers feel extra interested and not easy to get tired. However, some Chinese translations have deleted these, leaving only difficult lectures, making him close to textbooks. This is like a flower folder, removing all the branches and leaves, leaving only the flowers, folding flowers is certainly folding flowers, but the vitality of the flower branches is extinguished. When people lose their leeway, or unconsciously embrace the mindset of not leaving room for them, the future of this nation may be worrying. The above two things are certainly smaller than cow hair, but they are one end of the manifestation of the spirit of the times, so they can also be inferred to other things. For example, the current equipment is light and sloppy (the world mistakenly thinks it is convenient), the construction cuts corners, and the perfunctory work is temporary, not "good-looking" and not "long-lasting", all of which are from the same source. Even if you use this analogy to infer bigger things, I think it will work.一月十七日。
January 17th.

忽然想到

三

忽然想到

Three我想，我的神经也许有些瞀乱了。否则，那就可怕。
I think my nerves may be a little confused. Otherwise, it would be terrible.我觉得仿佛久没有所谓中华民国。
I feel as if there has been no so-called Republic of China for a long time.我觉得革命以前，我是做奴隶；革命以后不多久，就受了奴隶的骗，变成他们的奴隶了。
I think before the revolution, I was a slave; Not long after the revolution, he was deceived by the slaves and became their slaves.我觉得有许多民国国民而是民国的敌人。
I think there are many citizens of the Republic of China who are enemies of the Republic of China.我觉得有许多民国国民很像住在德法等国里的犹太人，他们的意中别有一个国度。
I think there are many citizens of the Republic of China who are very similar to Jews living in Germany, France and other countries, and they have a different country in mind.我觉得许多烈士的血都被人们踏灭了，然而又不是故意的。
I think the blood of many martyrs has been trampled on by people, but it is not intentional.我觉得什么都要从新做过。
I feel like I have to do everything from scratch.退一万步说罢，我希望有人好好地做一部民国的建国史给少年看，因为我觉得民国的来源，实在已经失传了，虽然还只有十四年！
Taking 10,000 steps back, I hope someone will make a good history of the founding of the Republic of China for young people to see, because I think the source of the Republic of China has really been lost, although it is only fourteen years!二月十二日。
February 12th.

忽然想到

四

忽然想到

Four先前，听到二十四史不过是“相斫书”，是“独夫的家谱”一类的话，便以为诚然。后来自己看起来，明白了：何尝如此。
Previously, when I heard that the twenty-four histories were just "mutual cutting books" and "genealogy of single husbands", I thought it was true. Later, I seemed to understand it: why not?历史上都写着中国的灵魂，指示着将来的命运，只因为涂饰太厚，废话太多，所以很不容易察出底细来。正如通过密叶投射在莓苔上面的月光，只看见点点的碎影。但如看野史和杂记，可更容易了然了，因为他们究竟不必太摆史官的架子。
History is written about the soul of China, indicating the future destiny, just because the decoration is too thick and there is too much nonsense, so it is not easy to detect the details. Just like the moonlight projected on the berry moss through the dense leaves, only a few fragments can be seen. But if you look at wild history and miscellaneous notes, it is easier to understand, because they don't have to put on the shelf of historians too much.秦汉远了，和现在的情形相差已多，且不道。元人著作寥寥。至于唐宋明的杂史之类，则现在多有。试将记五代，南宋，明末的事情的，和现今的状况一比较，就当惊心动魄于何其相似之甚，仿佛时间的流驶，独与我们中国无关。现在的中华民国也还是五代，是宋末，是明季。
The Qin and Han dynasties are far away, and they are much different from the current situation, and they are not good. The writings of the Yuan people are few. As for the miscellaneous histories of the Tang, Song and Ming dynasties, there are many now. Try to compare the events of the Five Dynasties, the Southern Song Dynasty, and the end of the Ming Dynasty with the current situation, and it will be thrilling to see how similar they are, as if the passage of time has nothing to do with our China. The current Republic of China is still the Five Dynasties, the end of the Song Dynasty, and the Ming Dynasty.以明末例现在，则中国的情形还可以更腐败，更破烂，更凶酷，更残虐，现在还不算达到极点。但明末的腐败破烂也还未达到极点，因为李自成张献忠闹起来了。而张李的凶酷残虐也还未达到极点，因为满洲兵进来了。
Taking the example of the end of the Ming Dynasty, the situation in China can be more corrupt, more tattered, more ferocious, and more cruel, and it has not yet reached its peak. But the corruption and rags at the end of the Ming Dynasty had not yet reached its peak, because Li Zicheng and Zhang Xianzhong made trouble. And Zhang Li's ferocity and cruelty have not yet reached the extreme, because the Manchurian soldiers came in.难道所谓国民性者，真是这样地难于改变的么？倘如此，将来的命运便大略可想了，也还是一句烂熟的话：古已有之。
Is the so-called national character really so difficult to change? If this is the case, the future fate can be roughly imagined, and it is still a familiar sentence: it has existed in ancient times.伶俐人实在伶俐，所以，决不攻难古人，摇动古例的。古人做过的事，无论什么，今人也都会做出来。而辩护古人，也就是辩护自己。况且我们是神州华胄，敢不“绳其祖武”么？
Clever people are really clever, so they will never attack the ancients and shake the ancient examples. What the ancients did, no matter what they did, the people of today will also do it. And defending the ancients is defending yourself. Moreover, we are the Chinese soldiers of China, dare not "rope their ancestral martial arts"?幸而谁也不敢十分决定说：国民性是决不会改变的。在这“不可知”中，虽可有破例——即其情形为从来所未有——的灭亡的恐怖，也可以有破例的复生的希望，这或者可作改革者的一点慰藉罢。
Fortunately, no one dared to make a decision to say: national character will never change. In this "unknowable", although there can be an exception - that is, the situation is unprecedented - there can be an exception to the horror of destruction, but there can also be an exception to the hope of resurrection, which may be a little comfort for the reformers.但这一点慰藉，也会勾消在许多自诩古文明者流的笔上，淹死在许多诬告新文明者流的嘴上，扑灭在许多假冒新文明者流的言动上，因为相似的老例，也是“古已有之”的。
But this consolation will also be erased in the pens of many self-proclaimed ancient civilizations, drowned in the mouths of many falsely accused of new civilizations, and extinguished in the words and deeds of many fake new civilizations, because similar old examples are also "already existed in ancient times".其实这些人是一类，都是伶俐人，也都明白，中国虽完，自己的精神是不会苦的，——因为都能变出合式的态度来。倘有不信，请看清朝的汉人所做的颂扬武功的文章去，开口“大兵”，闭口“我军”，你能料得到被这“大兵”“我军”所败的就是汉人的么？你将以为汉人带了兵将别的一种什么野蛮腐败民族歼灭了。
In fact, these people are a category, they are all clever people, and they all understand that although China is over, their spirit will not be bitter,—— because they can conjure up a suitable attitude. If you don't believe it, please read the articles praising martial arts made by the Han people of the Qing Dynasty, open their mouths to "big soldiers" and close their mouths to "our army", can you expect that it is the Han people who are defeated by this "big soldier" and "our army"? You will think that the Han people have brought troops to annihilate some other barbaric and corrupt nation.然而这一流人是永远胜利的，大约也将永久存在。在中国，惟他们最适于生存，而他们生存着的时候，中国便永远免不掉反复着先前的运命。
However, this class of people will always win, and will probably last forever. In China, they are the only ones who are most suitable for survival, and while they are alive, China will always be able to repeat its previous fate.“地大物博，人口众多”，用了这许多好材料，难道竟不过老是演一出轮回把戏而已么？
"The land is vast and the population is large", with so many good materials, is it just a reincarnation trick all the time?二月十六日。
February 16th.

通讯

通讯

通讯

communication一
One旭生先生：
Mr. Xusheng:前天收到《猛进》第一期，我想是先生寄来的，或者是玄伯先生寄来的。无论是谁寄的，总之：我谢谢。
The day before yesterday, I received the first issue of "Rush", I think it was sent by Mr. or Mr. Xuanbo. No matter who sent it, in short: I thank you.那一期里有论市政的话，使我忽然想起一件不相干的事来。我现在住在一条小胡同里，这里有所谓土车者，每月收几吊钱，将煤灰之类搬出去。搬出去怎么办呢？就堆在街道上，这街就每日增高。有几所老房子，只有一半露出在街上的，就正在豫告着别的房屋的将来。我不知道什么缘故，见了这些人家，就像看见了中国人的历史。
In that issue, there was a talk about municipal affairs, which suddenly reminded me of an unrelated matter. I now live in a small alley, where there are so-called dirt trucks who charge a few hanging money a month to move coal ash and the like. What should I do if I move out? It is piled up on the street, and the street is getting taller every day. There are several old houses, only half of which are exposed on the street, and they are predicting the future of other houses. I don't know why, but seeing these people is like seeing the history of the Chinese.姓名我忘记了，总之是一个明末的遗民，他曾将自己的书斋题作“活埋庵”。谁料现在的北京的人家，都在建造“活埋庵”，还要自己拿出建造费。看看报章上的论坛，“反改革”的空气浓厚透顶了，满车的“祖传”，“老例”，“国粹”等等，都想来堆在道路上，将所有的人家完全活埋下去。“强聒不舍”，也许是一个药方罢，但据我所见，则有些人们——甚至于竟是青年——的论调，简直和“戊戌政变”时候的反对改革者的论调一模一样。你想，二十七年了，还是这样，岂不可怕。大约国民如此，是决不会有好的政府的；好的政府，或者反而容易倒。也不会有好议员的；现在常有人骂议员，说他们收贿，无特操，趋炎附势，自私自利，但大多数的国民，岂非正是如此的么？这类的议员，其实确是国民的代表。
I forgot the name, in short, he was a remnant of the late Ming Dynasty, and he once inscribed his study "Buried Alive". Unexpectedly, people in Beijing are building "buried alive nunnery" now, and they have to pay for the construction by themselves. Looking at the forums in the newspapers, the atmosphere of "counter-reform" is thick, and the cars full of "ancestral traditions", "old examples", "national quintessence", etc., all want to pile up on the road and completely bury all people alive. "Forced reluctance" may be a prescription, but as far as I can see, the arguments of some people, even young people, are exactly the same as those of the opposers during the "Wuxu Coup". You think, twenty-seven years later, it's still like this, isn't it scary? There will never be a good government if the people are like this; Good government may be more likely to fail. There will be no good parliamentarians; Nowadays, some people often scold parliamentarians, saying that they accept bribes, have no special conduct, tend to follow the flames, and are selfish, but isn't this the case for the majority of the people? Such parliamentarians are indeed representatives of the people.我想，现在的办法，首先还得用那几年以前《新青年》上已经说过的“思想革命”。还是这一句话，虽然未免可悲，但我以为除此没有别的法。而且还是准备“思想革命”的战士，和目下的社会无关。待到战士养成了，于是再决胜负。我这种迂远而且渺茫的意见，自己也觉得是可叹的，但我希望于《猛进》的，也终于还是“思想革命”。
I think that the current method must first use the "ideological revolution" that was already mentioned in "New Youth" a few years ago. Again, although this sentence is sad, I think there is no other way. Moreover, they are fighters who are preparing for an "ideological revolution" and have nothing to do with the current society. When the warriors are developed, they will decide the outcome. I also think that my distant and vague opinion is lamentable, but I hope that what I hope for "Fierce Progress" will finally be an "ideological revolution".鲁迅。三月十二日。
Lu Xun. March 12th.鲁迅先生：
Mr. Lu Xun:你所说底“二十七年了，还是这样，”诚哉是一件极“可怕”的事情。人类思想里面，本来有一种惰性的东西，我们中国人的惰性更深。惰性表现的形式不一，而最普通的，第一就是听天任命，第二就是中庸。听天任命和中庸的空气打不破，我国人的思想，永远没有进步的希望。
What you said is "twenty-seven years, and it is still like this", which is a very "terrible" thing. There is originally an inertia in human thought, and we Chinese have deeper inertia. The forms of inertia are different, and the most common is the appointment of heaven, and the second is the golden mean. The air of rehearsal appointment and moderation cannot be broken, and our country's thinking will never have any hope of progress.你所说底“讲话和写文章，似乎都是失败者的征象。正在和运命恶战的人，顾不到这些。”实在是最痛心的话。但是我觉得从另外一方面看，还有许多人讲话和写文章，还可以证明人心的没有全死。可是这里需要有分别，必需要是一种不平的呼声，不管是冷嘲或热骂，才是人心未全死的证验。如果不是这样，换句话说，如果他的文章里面，不用很多的“！”，不管他说的写的怎么样好听，那人心已经全死，亡国不亡国，倒是第二个问题。
What you say "Speaking and writing articles seem to be signs of failure. People who are fighting against fate can't take care of this. "It's really the most painful words. But I think from another perspective, there are many people who speak and write articles, which can also prove that people's hearts are not all dead. But there needs to be a difference here, and it must be a cry of injustice, whether it is cynicism or hot scolding, which is proof that people's hearts are not completely dead. If not, in other words, if his article is in it, there is no need for a lot"! No matter how good he wrote, the people's hearts are all dead, and whether the country will be destroyed or not is the second question.“思想革命”，诚哉是现在最重要不过的事情，但是我总觉得《语丝》，《现代评论》和我们的《猛进》，就是合起来，还负不起这样的使命。我有两种希望：第一希望大家集合起来，办一个专讲文学思想的月刊。里面的内容，水平线并无庸过高，破坏者居其六七，介绍新者居其三四。这样一来，大学或中学的学生有一种消闲的良友，与思想的进步上，总有很大的裨益。我今天给适之先生略谈几句，他说现在我们办月刊很难，大约每月出八万字，还属可能，如若想出十一二万字，就几乎不可能。我说你又何必拘定十一二万字才出，有七八万就出七八万，即使再少一点，也未尝不可，要之有它总比没有它好的多。这是我第一个希望。第二我希望有一种通俗的小日报。现在的《第一小报》，似乎就是这一类的。这个报我只看见三两期，当然无从批评起，但是我们的印象：第一，是篇幅太小，至少总要再加一半才敷用；第二，这种小报总要记清是为民众和小学校的学生看的。所以思想虽需要极新，话却要写得极浅显。所有专门术语和新名词，能躲避到什么步田地躲到什么步田地。《第一小报》对于这一点，似还不很注意。这样良好的通俗小日报，是我第二种的希望。拉拉杂杂写来，漫无伦叙。你的意思以为何如？
"Ideological revolution" is indeed the most important thing now, but I always feel that "Yusi", "Modern Review" and our "Fierce Progress" are combined and cannot bear such a mission. I have two hopes: First, I hope everyone will gather together and run a monthly magazine dedicated to literary thought. The content inside, the horizontal line is not too high, the vandals account for six or seven, and the introduction of newcomers accounts for three or four. In this way, students in universities or middle schools have a kind of leisure friend, which is always of great benefit to the progress of thinking. I will give Mr. Shizhi a few words today, he said that it is difficult for us to run a monthly magazine now, about 80,000 words a month, it is still possible, if you think of 110,000 or 20,000 words, it is almost impossible. I said why do you have to limit yourself to 110,000 or 20,000 words before coming out, if there are 70,000 or 80,000 words, 70,000 or 80,000 will come out, even if it is a little less, it is not impossible, it is much better to have it than not to have it. This is my first hope. Second, I hope there is a kind of popular little daily. The current "First Tabloid" seems to be of this category. I have only seen two or three issues of this newspaper, of course, I can't criticize it, but our impression: first, the length is too small, and at least half of it must be added before it is applied; Second, this kind of tabloid must always be remembered that it is for the public and primary school students. Therefore, although the ideas need to be extremely new, the words must be written in a very simple way. All the specialized terms and new terms can be avoided in what steps and fields. The First Tabloid doesn't seem to pay much attention to this. Such a good popular daily newspaper is my second hope. Lara wrote a mixed bag, and it was incoherent. What do you mean?徐炳昶。三月十六日。
Xu Bingchang. March 16th.

通讯

二

通讯

Two旭生先生：
Mr. Xusheng:给我的信早看见了，但因为琐琐的事情太多，所以到现在才能作答。
I have seen the letter to me for a long time, but because there are too many trivial things, I can only answer it now.有一个专讲文学思想的月刊，确是极好的事，字数的多少，倒不算什么问题。第一为难的却是撰人，假使还是这几个人，结果即还是一种增大的某周刊或合订的各周刊之类。况且撰人一多，则因为希图保持内容的较为一致起见，即不免有互相牵就之处，很容易变为和平中正，吞吞吐吐的东西，而无聊之状于是乎可掬。现在的各种小周刊，虽然量少力微，却是小集团或单身的短兵战，在黑暗中，时见匕首的闪光，使同类者知道也还有谁还在袭击古老坚固的堡垒，较之看见浩大而灰色的军容，或者反可以会心一笑。在现在，我倒只希望这类的小刊物增加，只要所向的目标小异大同，将来就自然而然的成了联合战线，效力或者也不见得小。但目下倘有我所未知的新的作家起来，那当然又作别论。
It is indeed an excellent thing to have a monthly magazine specializing in literary thought, and the number of words is not a problem. The first thing that is difficult is the writers, and if they are still these people, the result will be an enlarged weekly magazine or a weekly magazine that has been subscribed. Moreover, if there are many writers, it is because Xitu keeps the content relatively consistent, that is, there will inevitably be mutual entanglements, and it is easy to become peaceful and upright, hesitant, and boredom. In the dark, the flash of daggers can be seen from time to time, so that people of the same kind know who else is still attacking the ancient and strong fortress, compared to seeing the huge and gray military appearance, or you can smile knowingly. At present, I only hope that this kind of small publications will increase, as long as the goals are small and similar, they will naturally become a united front in the future, and the effectiveness may not be small. But if there is a new writer who I don't know now, of course it is a different story.通俗的小日报，自然也紧要的；但此事看去似易，做起来却很难。我们只要将《第一小报》与《群强报》之类一比，即知道实与民意相去太远，要收获失败无疑。民众要看皇帝何在，太妃安否，而《第一小报》却向他们去讲“常识”，岂非悖谬。教书一久，即与一般社会睽离，无论怎样热心，做起事来总要失败。假如一定要做，就得存学者的良心，有市侩的手段，但这类人才，怕教员中间是未必会有的。我想，现在没奈何，也只好从智识阶级——其实中国并没有俄国之所谓智识阶级，此事说起来话太长，姑且从众这样说——一面先行设法，民众俟将来再谈。而且他们也不是区区文字所能改革的，历史通知过我们，清兵入关，禁缠足，要垂辫，前一事只用文告，到现在还是放不掉，后一事用了别的法，到现在还在拖下来。
popular small daily newspapers are naturally important; But this seems easy, but it is difficult to do. As long as we compare the "First Tabloid" with the "Qunqiang Daily", we know that the truth is too far from public opinion, and we will undoubtedly fail. The people want to see where the emperor is and whether the concubine is safe, but the "First Tabloid" tells them "common sense", isn't it absurd? After teaching for a long time, you will be separated from the general society, and no matter how enthusiastic you are, you will always fail when you start doing things. If you must do it, you must have the conscience of scholars and have philistine means, but I am afraid that this kind of talent may not be available among the teachers. I think there is no choice but to start with the intellectual class - in fact, there is no so-called intellectual class in Russia in China, this matter is too long, let's say it this way - while trying to find a way first, the people will talk about it later. And they are not something that can be reformed by mere words, history has informed us that the Qing soldiers entered the customs, forbidden to bind their feet, and to braid, the former only used proclamations, and they still can't let go, and the latter thing uses other methods, and it is still dragging it down.单为在校的青年计，可看的书报实在太缺乏了，我觉得至少还该有一种通俗的科学杂志，要浅显而且有趣的。可惜中国现在的科学家不大做文章，有做的，也过于高深，于是就很枯燥。现在要Brehm的讲动物生活，Fabre的讲昆虫故事似的有趣，并且插许多图画的；但这非有一个大书店担任即不能印。至于作文者，我以为只要科学家肯放低手眼，再看看文艺书，就够了。
For the young people in school alone, there is really a lack of books and newspapers to read, and I think there should be at least a popular science magazine, which should be simple and interesting. Unfortunately, China's current scientists don't make much of a fuss, and if they do, they are too profound, so they are very boring. Now Brehm talks about animal life, Fabre tells insect stories as interesting, and inserts many pictures; But this cannot be printed unless there is a big bookstore. As for the writer, I think it is enough as long as scientists are willing to put down their hands and eyes and read literary books.前三四年有一派思潮，毁了事情颇不少。学者多劝人踱进研究室，文人说最好是搬入艺术之宫，直到现在都还不大出来，不知道他们在那里面情形怎样。这虽然是自己愿意，但一大半也因新思想而仍中了“老法子”的计。我新近才看出这圈套，就是从“青年必读书”事件以来，很收些赞同和嘲骂的信，凡赞同者，都很坦白，并无什么恭维。如果开首称我为什么“学者”“文学家”的，则下面一定是谩骂。我才明白这等称号，乃是他们所公设的巧计，是精神的枷锁，故意将你定为“与众不同”，又借此来束缚你的言动，使你于他们的老生活上失去危险性的。不料有许多人，却自囚在什么室什么宫里，岂不可惜。只要掷去了这种尊号，摇身一变，化为泼皮，相骂相打（舆论是以为学者只应该拱手讲讲义的），则世风就会日上，而月刊也办成了。
In the first three or four years, there was a school of thought that ruined a lot of things. Scholars often persuaded people to walk into the laboratory, and the literati said that it was best to move into the palace of art, but until now they have not come out, and I don't know what their situation is there. Although this is their own willingness, more than half of them are still caught up in the "old method" because of the new ideas. I only recently discovered this trap, that is, since the "Youth Must Read" incident, I have received a lot of letters of approval and ridicule, and those who agree are very honest and have no compliments. If you start by saying why I am a "scholar" and "writer", then the following must be an insult. I realized that these titles are their clever schemes, spiritual shackles, deliberately designating you as "different", and using this to restrain your words and actions, so that you lose the danger of their old life. Unexpectedly, many people are imprisoned in some room or palace, isn't it a pity? As long as this honorific title is thrown away, it is transformed, it turns into a playful person, and it scolds and fights (public opinion thinks that scholars should only give lectures), then the world will rise day by day, and the monthly magazine will be done.先生的信上说：惰性表现的形式不一，而最普通的，第一就是听天任命，第二就是中庸。我以为这两种态度的根柢，怕不可仅以惰性了之，其实乃是卑怯。遇见强者，不敢反抗，便以“中庸”这些话来粉饰，聊以自慰。所以中国人倘有权力，看见别人奈何他不得，或者有“多数”作他护符的时候，多是凶残横恣，宛然一个暴君，做事并不中庸；待到满口“中庸”时，乃是势力已失，早非“中庸”不可的时候了。一到全败，则又有“命运”来做话柄，纵为奴隶，也处之泰然，但又无往而不合于圣道。这些现象，实在可以使中国人败亡，无论有没有外敌。要救正这些，也只好先行发露各样的劣点，撕下那好看的假面具来。
The teacher's letter said: There are different forms of inertia, and the most common is the appointment of heaven, and the second is the golden mean. I think the root of these two attitudes is probably not just inertia, but actually cowardice. When he met a strong person, he did not dare to resist, so he used the words "moderation" to whitewash it and talk about masturbation. Therefore, if the Chinese have power, when they see that others cannot do anything to him, or when there is a "majority" as his talisman, they are mostly ferocious and arrogant, like a tyrant, and they are not mediocre; By the time the mouth is full of "moderation", it is time for the power to be lost, and it is time for the "golden mean" to be indispensable. When it comes to complete defeat, there is "fate" as a handle, even if you are a slave, you are calm, but you are always in line with the holy way. These phenomena can really lead to the downfall of the Chinese, regardless of whether there are foreign enemies or not. To remedy these, we had to first reveal all kinds of shortcomings and tear off the good-looking mask.鲁迅。三月二十九日。
Lu Xun. March 29.鲁迅先生：
Mr. Lu Xun:你看出什么“踱进研究室”，什么“搬入艺术之宫”，全是“一种圈套”，真是一件重要的发现。我实在告诉你说：我近来看见自命gentleman的人就怕极了。看见玄同先生挖苦gentleman的话（见《语丝》第二十期），好像大热时候，吃一盘冰激零，不晓得有多么痛快。总之这些字全是一种圈套，大家总要相戒，不要上他们的当才好。
What you see "pacing into the research room" and "moving into the palace of art" is all "a kind of trap", which is really an important discovery. Truly I tell you: I have been terrified of the self-proclaimed gentlemen lately. Seeing Mr. Xuantong's sarcastic words about gentleman (see the twentieth issue of "Yusi"), it seems that when it is hot, I don't know how happy it is to eat a plate of ice cream. In short, these words are all a kind of trap, and everyone should always warn each other not to be fooled by them.我好像觉得通俗的科学杂志并不是那样容易的，但是我对于这个问题完全没有想，所以对于它觉暂且无论什么全不能说。
I seem to think that popular scientific magazines are not that easy, but I have no idea about this question at all, so I feel that I can't say anything about it for the time being.我对于通俗的小日报有许多的话要说，但因为限于篇幅，止好暂且不说。等到下一期，我要作一篇小东西，专论这件事，到那时候，还要请你指教才好。
I have a lot to say about the popular small daily newspaper, but because of the limited space, I will not say it for the time being. In the next issue, I will write a small article on this matter, and at that time, I will ask for your advice.徐炳昶。三月三十一日。
Xu Bingchang. March 31.

论辩的魂灵

论辩的魂灵

论辩的魂灵

The soul of argument二十年前到黑市，买得一张符，名叫“鬼画符”。虽然不过一团糟，但帖在壁上看起来，却随时显出各样的文字，是处世的宝训，立身的金箴。今年又到黑市去，又买得一张符，也是“鬼画符”。但帖了起来看，也还是那一张，并不见什么增补和修改。今夜看出来的大题目是“论辩的魂灵”；细注道：“祖传老年中年青年‘逻辑’扶乩灭洋必胜妙法太上老君急急如律令敕”。今谨摘录数条，以公同好——
Twenty years ago, I went to the black market and bought a talisman called "Ghost Painting Talisman". Although it is just a mess, it looks like it is posted on the wall, but it shows all kinds of words at any time, which are the teachings of the world and the golden admonitions of standing up. This year, I went to the black market again and bought another talisman, which was also a "ghost drawing talisman". But when I posted it, it was still the same one, and there were no additions or modifications. The big topic we saw tonight is "The Soul of Argumentation"; Carefully note: "The ancestral elderly and middle-aged young people's 'logic' helps the girl to destroy the ocean and wins the wonderful method, and the Supreme Laojun is as anxious as the law." I would like to excerpt a few points for the public to like—“洋奴会说洋话。你主张读洋书，就是洋奴，人格破产了！受人格破产的洋奴崇拜的洋书，其价值从可知矣！但我读洋文是学校的课程，是政府的功令，反对者，即反对政府也。无父无君之无政府党，人人得而诛之。”
"Foreign slaves can speak foreign languages. If you advocate reading foreign books, you are a foreign slave, and your personality is bankrupt! The value of foreign books worshiped by foreign slaves with bankrupt personalities can be known! But reading foreign language is a school curriculum, a merit order of the government, and those who oppose it are also against the government. An anarchist party without a father and a ruler, everyone can be killed. ”“你说中国不好。你是外国人么？为什么不到外国去？可惜外国人看你不起……。”
"You say China is not good. Are you a foreigner? Why not go abroad? It's a pity that foreigners can't afford to ...... you. ”“你说甲生疮。甲是中国人，你就是说中国人生疮了。既然中国人生疮，你是中国人，就是你也生疮了。你既然也生疮，你就和甲一样。而你只说甲生疮，则竟无自知之明，你的话还有什么价值？倘你没有生疮，是说诳也。卖国贼是说诳的，所以你是卖国贼。我骂卖国贼，所以我是爱国者。爱国者的话是最有价值的，所以我的话是不错的，我的话既然不错，你就是卖国贼无疑了！”
"You said Nail had sores. A is Chinese, you mean that the Chinese have sores. Since the Chinese have sores, you are Chinese, even if you have sores. Since you also have sores, you are like A. And if you only say that the nail has sores, you have no self-knowledge, what is the value of your words? If you don't have sores, you are lying. Traitors are lying, so you are traitors. I call traitors, so I am a patriot. The words of patriots are the most valuable, so my words are good, and since my words are good, you are undoubtedly a traitor! ”“自由结婚未免太过激了。其实，我也并非老顽固，中国提倡女学的还是我第一个。但他们却太趋极端了，太趋极端，即有亡国之祸，所以气得我偏要说‘男女授受不亲’。况且，凡事不可过激；过激派都主张共妻主义的。乙赞成自由结婚，不就是主张共妻主义么？他既然主张共妻主义，就应该先将他的妻拿出来给我们‘共’。”
"Free marriage is too extreme. In fact, I am not old and stubborn, I am the first in China to advocate women's studies. But they are too extreme, too extreme, that is, there is a disaster of the fall of the country, so I am so angry that I want to say 'men and women are not close'. Moreover, everything should not be excessive; radicals all advocate communism. Isn't B in favor of free marriage advocating co-wifeism? Since he advocates communism, he should first take out his wife and give it to us 'communism'. ”“丙讲革命是为的要图利：不为图利，为什么要讲革命？我亲眼看见他三千七百九十一箱半的现金抬进门。你说不然，反对我么？那么，你就是他的同党。呜呼，党同伐异之风，于今为烈，提倡欧化者不得辞其咎矣！”
"C Talking about revolution is for profit: why talk about revolution if it is not for profit? I saw him carry 3,791 and a half boxes of cash into the door. Do you say otherwise, against me? Then, you are his party. Alas, the trend of partisanship and fighting against dissent is still very strong today, and those who advocate Europeanization cannot escape the blame! ”“丁牺牲了性命，乃是闹得一塌糊涂，活不下去了的缘故。现在妄称志士，诸君切勿为其所愚。况且，中国不是更坏了么？”
Ding sacrificed his life because he was in a mess and could not survive. Now that you are falsely claiming to be a person of ambition, you must not be fooled by him. Besides, isn't China worse? ”“戊能算什么英雄呢？听说，一声爆竹，他也会吃惊。还怕爆竹，能听枪炮声么？怕听枪炮声，打起仗来不要逃跑么？打起仗来就逃跑的反称英雄，所以中国糟透了。”
"What kind of hero can Wu be? When he heard that a firecracker sounded, he would also be surprised. Are you still afraid of firecrackers, can you listen to the sound of gunfire? Are you afraid of hearing gunfire and not running away when you fight? The anti-hero who ran away after a war was called a hero, so China was terrible. ”“你自以为是‘人’，我却以为非也。我是畜类，现在我就叫你爹爹。你既然是畜类的爹爹，当然也就是畜类了。”
"You think you are a 'person', but I think you are not. I am an animal, and now I will call you Daddy." Since you are the father of animals, of course you are also animals. ”“勿用惊叹符号，这是足以亡国的。但我所用的几个在例外。
"Don't use the exclamation symbol, this is enough to destroy the country. But I use a few exceptions.中庸太太提起笔来，取精神文明精髓，作明哲保身大吉大利格言二句云：
Mrs. Doctrine of the Mean picked up the pen, took the essence of spiritual civilization, and made two maxims of wisdom and self-preservation:中学为体西学用，Middle school is for Western learning, and 不薄今人爱古人。” does not underestimate the modern love for the ancients. ”

牺牲谟——“鬼画符”失敬失敬章第十三

牺牲谟——“鬼画符”失敬失敬章第十三

牺牲谟——“鬼画符”失敬失敬章第十三

Sacrifice - "Ghost Painting Talisman" Disrespect Chapter 13“阿呀阿呀，失敬失敬！原来我们还是同志。我开初疑心你是一个乞丐，心里想：好好的一个汉子，又不衰老，又非残疾，为什么不去做工，读书的？所以就不免露出‘责备贤者’的神色来，请你不要见气，我们的心实在太坦白了，什么也藏不住，哈哈！可是，同志，你也似乎太……。
"Oh, aa, disrespect! It turns out that we are still comrades. I was suspicious at first that you were a beggar, and I thought to myself: A good man, not old and not disabled, why not work and study? So I can't help but show the look of 'blaming the sage', please don't be angry, our hearts are too honest, we can't hide anything, haha! But, comrade, you also seem to be too .......“哦哦！你什么都牺牲了？可敬可敬！我最佩服的就是什么都牺牲，为同胞，为国家。我向来一心要做的也就是这件事。你不要看得我外观阔绰，我为的是要到各处去宣传。社会还太势利，如果像你似的只剩一条破裤，谁肯来相信你呢？所以我只得打扮起来，宁可人们说闲话，我自己总是问心无愧。正如‘禹入裸国亦裸而游’一样，要改良社会，不得不然，别人那里会懂得我们的苦心孤诣。但是，朋友，你怎么竟奄奄一息到这地步了？
"Oh! You sacrificed everything? Respectable, respectable! What I admire most is to sacrifice everything, for my compatriots and for the country. That's what I've always been focused on. Don't look at my grand appearance, I'm going to go everywhere to publicize. Society is still too snobbish, if there is only a pair of torn pants left like you, who will believe you? So I had to dress up, and I would rather people gossip, and I always have a clear conscience. Just like 'Yu entered the naked country and traveled naked', to improve society, it is inevitable that others will understand our painstaking efforts. But, friend, why are you dying like this?“哦哦！已经九天没有吃饭？！这真是清高得很哪！我只好五体投地。看你虽然怕要支持不下去，但是——你在历史上一定成名，可贺之至哪！现在什么‘欧化’‘美化’的邪说横行，人们的眼睛只看见物质，所缺的就是你老兄似的模范人物。你瞧，最高学府的教员们，也居然一面教书，一面要起钱来，他们只知道物质，中了物质的毒了。难得你老兄以身作则，给他们一个好榜样看，这于世道人心，一定大有裨益的。你想，现在不是还嚷着什么教育普及么？教育普及起来，要有多少教员；如果都像他们似的定要吃饭，在这四郊多垒时候，那里来这许多饭？像你这样清高，真是浊世中独一无二的中流砥柱：可敬可敬！你读过书没有？如果读过书，我正要创办一个大学，
"Oh! I haven't eaten for nine days?! This is really high! I had to fall to the ground. Although you are afraid that you will not be able to support it, but - you will definitely become famous in history, what a congratulations! Nowadays, the heresy of 'Europeanization' and 'beautification' is rampant, and people's eyes only see the material, and what is lacking is a model figure like your brother. You see, the faculty members of the highest universities actually taught and asked for money, they only knew about material things, and they were poisoned by material things. It is rare for your brother to lead by example and set a good example for them, which will be of great benefit to the hearts of the world. Do you think that there is still some kind of education popularization now? How many teachers are needed to popularize education; If they were all like them, where would they come when there were so many meals? As noble as you, you are really a unique mainstay in the turbid world: respectable and respectable! Have you read a book? If I had studied, I would have started a university.就请你当教务长去。其实你只要读过‘四书’就好，加以这样品格，已经很够做‘莘莘学子’的表率了。
I will ask you to be the provostomy. In fact, as long as you have read the 'Four Books', with such a character, you are already enough to be an example of 'diligent students'.“不行？没有力气？可惜可惜！足见一面为社会做牺牲，一面也该自己讲讲卫生。你于卫生可惜太不讲究了。你不要以为我的胖头胖脸是因为享用好，我其实是专靠卫生，尤其得益的是精神修养，‘君子忧道不忧贫’呀！但是，我的同志，你什么都牺牲完了，究竟也大可佩服，可惜你还剩一条裤，将来在历史上也许要留下一点白璧微瑕……。
"No? No strength? What a pity! It shows that on the one hand, we should make sacrifices for society, and on the other hand, we should also talk about hygiene. It's a pity that you are too unparticular about hygiene. Don't think that my fat head and fat face are because I enjoy it well, I actually rely on hygiene, especially benefiting from spiritual cultivation, 'a gentleman worries about the Tao and not about poverty'! However, my comrade, you have sacrificed everything, and you are admirable, but unfortunately you still have a pair of pants left, and you may have to leave a little white jade flaw in history in the future......“哦哦，是的。我知道，你不说也明白：你自然连这裤子也不要，你何至于这样地不彻底；那自然，你不过还没有牺牲的机会罢了。敝人向来最赞成一切牺牲，也最乐于‘成人之美’，况且我们是同志，我当然应该给你想一个完全办法，因为一个人最紧要的是‘晚节’，一不小心，可就前功尽弃了！
"Oh yes. I know, you don't even know if you don't say it: you naturally don't even want these pants, why are you so incomplete; Naturally, you just haven't had a chance to sacrifice yet. We have always been in favor of all sacrifices, and we are also the most happy to 'adult beauty', and we are comrades, of course I should think of a complete solution for you, because the most important thing for a person is 'evening', if you are not careful, you will lose all your previous efforts!"“机会凑得真好：舍间一个小鸦头，正缺一条裤……。朋友，你不要这么看我，我是最反对人身买卖的，这是最不人道的事。但是，那女人是在大旱灾时候留下的，那时我不要，她的父母就会把她卖到妓院里去。你想，这何等可怜。我留下她，正为的讲人道。况且那也不算什么人身买卖，不过我给了她父母几文，她的父母就把自己的女儿留在我家里就是了。我当初原想将她当作自己的女儿看，不，简直当作姊妹，同胞看；可恨我的贱内是旧式，说不通。你要知道旧式的女人顽固起来，真是无法可想的，我现在正在另外想点法子……。
"The opportunity was really good: a small crow in the room was missing a pair of pants....... Friend, don't look at me like that, I am the most opposed to human trafficking, which is the most inhumane thing. But the woman was left behind during the great drought, and if I didn't want it then, her parents would sell her to a brothel. You think, how pitiful this is. I left her here to preach humanity. Besides, it wasn't a personal sale, but I gave her parents a few cents, and her parents left their daughter at my house. I originally wanted to see her as my daughter, no, I saw her as a sister and a compatriot; It's a pity that my cheap inner world is old-fashioned, and it doesn't make sense. You have to know that it is really unimaginable for old-fashioned women to be stubborn, and I am now thinking of another way to .......“但是，那娃儿已经多天没有裤子了，她是灾民的女儿。我料你一定肯帮助的。我们都是‘贫民之友’呵。况且你做完了这一件事情之后，就是全始全终；我保你将来铜像巍巍，高入云表，呵，一切贫民都鞠躬致敬……。
However, the baby has not had pants for many days, and she is the daughter of the victim. I think you will be willing to help. We are all 'friends of the poor'. Moreover, after you finish this thing, it is the whole end; I guarantee that in the future, the bronze statue will be majestic and towering, and all the poor will bow and pay tribute to .......“对了，我知道你一定肯，你不说我也明白。但你此刻且不要脱下来。我不能拿了走，我这副打扮，如果手上拿一条破裤子，别人见了就要诧异，于我们的牺牲主义的宣传会有妨碍的。现在的社会还太胡涂，——你想，教员还要吃饭，——那里能懂得我们这纯洁的精神呢，一定要误解的。一经误解，社会恐怕要更加自私自利起来，你的工作也就‘非徒无益而又害之’了，朋友。
"By the way, I know you will definitely be willing, and I understand if you don't say it. But don't take it off at this moment. I can't take it away, my dress, if I hold a pair of torn pants in my hand, others will be surprised when they see it, and it will hinder our sacrificial propaganda. Today's society is still too foolish,—— you think, teachers still have to eat,—— where they can understand our pure spirit, they must be misunderstood. Once misunderstood, society may become more selfish, and your work will be 'not only useless but also harmful', my friend.“你还能勉强走几步罢？不能？这可叫人有点为难了，——那么，你该还能爬？好极了！那么，你就爬过去。你趁你还能爬的时候赶紧爬去，万不要‘功亏一篑’。但你须用趾尖爬，膝髁不要太用力；裤子擦着沙石，就要更破烂，不但可怜的灾民的女儿受不着实惠，并且连你的精神都白扔了。先行脱下了也不妥当，一则太不雅观，二则恐怕巡警要干涉，还是穿着爬的好。我的朋友，我们不是外人，肯给你上当的么？舍间离这里也并不远，你向东，转北，向南，看路北有两株大槐树的红漆门就是。你一爬到，就脱下来，对号房说：这是老爷叫我送来的，交给太太收下。你一见号房，应该赶快说，否则也许将你当作一个讨饭的，会打你。唉唉，近来讨饭的太多了，他们不去做工，不去读书，单知道要饭。所以我的号房就借痛打这方法，给他们一个教训，使他们知道做乞丐是要给人痛打的，还不如去做工读书好……。
"Can you barely walk a few steps? No? This is a bit embarrassing,—— So, can you still climb? Great! Well, you climb over. You can climb while you can still climb, don't 'fall short'. But you must climb with the tips of your toes, and do not use too much force on the knee condyle; If your pants are rubbed with sand and stones, they will be even more tattered, not only will the poor victim's daughter not be able to bear the benefits, but even your spirit will be thrown away in vain. It is not appropriate to take it off first, one is too unsightly, and the other is afraid that the patrol police will interfere, so it is better to dress and climb. My friend, we are not outsiders, are we willing to be fooled by you? The house is not far from here, you go east, turn north, south, and see the red lacquer door of two big locust trees on the north side of the road. As soon as you climb up, take it off and say to the number room: This is what the master asked me to send and give it to my wife to accept. When you see the number room, you should say it quickly, otherwise they may treat you as a beggar and beat you. Alas, there have been too many beggars lately, they don't work, they don't study, they only know how to ask for food. So my number room used this method to teach them a lesson, so that they knew that being a beggar would be beaten by others, and it would be better to work and study......“你就去么？好好！但千万不要忘记：交代清楚了就爬开，不要停在我的屋界内。你已经九天没有吃东西了，万一出了什么事故，免不了要给我许多麻烦，我就要减少许多宝贵的光阴，不能为社会服务。我想，我们不是外人，你也决不愿意给自己的同志许多麻烦的，我这话也不过姑且说说。
"Are you going? Good! But don't forget: crawl away when the explanation is clear, and don't stop in my house. You haven't eaten for nine days, and if something happens, it will inevitably cause me a lot of trouble, and I will reduce a lot of precious time and not be able to serve the society. I think we are not outsiders, and you will never want to cause a lot of trouble to your comrades, so I will just say this.“你就去罢！好，就去！本来我也可以叫一辆人力车送你去，但我知道用人代牛马来拉人，你一定不赞成的，这事多么不人道！我去了。你就动身罢。你不要这么萎靡不振，爬呀！朋友！我的同志，你快爬呀，向东呀！……”
"Just go! Okay, let's go! Originally, I could have called a rickshaw to take you there, but I know that you must not approve of using people to pull people instead of cattle and horses, how inhumane this is!" I went. Just go. Don't be so sluggish, crawl! Friend! My comrade, climb quickly, to the east! ……”

战士和苍蝇

战士和苍蝇

战士和苍蝇

Warriors and fliesSchopenhauer说过这样的话：要估定人的伟大，则精神上的大和体格上的大，那法则完全相反。后者距离愈远即愈小，前者却见得愈大。
Schopenhauer once said: To measure the greatness of a person, the law is completely opposite to the great of the spirit and the great physique. The farther the latter is, the smaller it is, while the former is larger.正因为近则愈小，而且愈看见缺点和创伤，所以他就和我们一样，不是神道，不是妖怪，不是异兽。他仍然是人，不过如此。但也惟其如此，所以他是伟大的人。
It is precisely because the closer he gets, the smaller he is, and the more he sees shortcomings and traumas, he is the same as us, not a god, not a monster, not a strange beast. He is still human, but that's it. But that's why he's a great man.战士战死了的时候，苍蝇们所首先发见的是他的缺点和伤痕，嘬着，营营地叫着，以为得意，以为比死了的战士更英雄。但是战士已经战死了，不再来挥去他们。于是乎苍蝇们即更其营营地叫，自以为倒是不朽的声音，因为它们的完全，远在战士之上。
When a soldier dies in battle, the first thing the flies find is his shortcomings and scars, chattering, barking, thinking that they are more heroic than the dead soldiers. But the warriors were already dead and no longer came and went. So the flies cried out in a loud voice, thinking that it was an immortal voice, because their perfection was far above the warriors.的确的，谁也没有发见过苍蝇们的缺点和创伤。
Indeed, no one has ever seen the shortcomings and traumas of flies.然而，有缺点的战士终竟是战士，完美的苍蝇也终竟不过是苍蝇。
However, a warrior with flaws is a warrior after all, and a perfect fly is nothing more than a fly after all.去罢，苍蝇们！虽然生着翅子，还能营营，总不会超过战士的。你们这些虫豸们！
Go, flies! Although it has wings, it can still camp, and it will never surpass the warrior. You bugs!三月二十一日。
March 21.

夏三虫

夏三虫

夏三虫

Three insects in summer夏天近了，将有三虫：蚤，蚊，蝇。
Summer is approaching, and there will be three insects: fleas, mosquitoes, and flies.假如有谁提出一个问题，问我三者之中，最爱什么，而且非爱一个不可，又不准像“青年必读书”那样的缴白卷的。我便只得回答道：跳蚤。
If someone asks me a question and asks me what I love the most among the three, and I have to love one, and I am not allowed to submit a blank paper like "Youth Must Read". I had to answer: fleas.跳蚤的来吮血，虽然可恶，而一声不响地就是一口，何等直截爽快。蚊子便不然了，一针叮进皮肤，自然还可以算得有点彻底的，但当未叮之前，要哼哼地发一篇大议论，却使人觉得讨厌。如果所哼的是在说明人血应该给它充饥的理由，那可更其讨厌了，幸而我不懂。
The flea comes to suck blood, although it is hateful, but it is a mouthful without making a sound, how straightforward and refreshing. Mosquitoes are not like that, a needle into the skin can naturally be considered a bit thorough, but before the bite, it is annoying to hum a big discussion. If what you are humming is explaining the reason why human blood should satisfy its hunger, it is even more annoying, but fortunately I don't understand.野雀野鹿，一落在人手中，总时时刻刻想要逃走。其实，在山林间，上有鹰，下有虎狼，何尝比在人手里安全。为什么当初不逃到人类中来，现在却要逃到鹰虎狼间去？或者，鹰虎狼之于它们，正如跳蚤之于我们罢。肚子饿了，抓着就是一口，决不谈道理，弄玄虚。被吃者也无须在被吃之前，先承认自己之理应被吃，心悦诚服，誓死不二。人类，可是也颇擅长于哼哼的了，害中取小，它们的避之惟恐不速，正是绝顶聪明。
Wild birds and wild deer, once they fall into the hands of people, always want to escape. In fact, in the mountains and forests, there are eagles above and tigers and wolves below, which is safer than in human hands. Why didn't you escape to humans at the beginning, but now you want to escape to the eagle tiger and wolf? Or, eagles  tigers and wolves are to them what fleas are to us. If you are hungry, grab it and take a bite, never talk about reason, and make a mystery. The eaten do not need to admit that they deserve to be eaten before being eaten, and they are convinced and vow to die. Humans, however, are also quite good at humming, taking the lesser of harm, and they are afraid of being unhurried, which is extremely smart.苍蝇嗡嗡地闹了大半天，停下来也不过舐一点油汗，倘有伤痕或疮疖，自然更占一些便宜；无论怎么好的，美的，干净的东西，又总喜欢一律拉上一点蝇矢。但因为只舐一点油汗，只添一点腌臜，在麻木的人们还没有切肤之痛，所以也就将它放过了。中国人还不很知道它能够传播病菌，捕蝇运动大概不见得兴盛。它们的运命是长久的；还要更繁殖。
The flies buzzed for most of the day, and they only licked a little oil and sweat when they stopped, and if there were scars or boils, they would naturally take some advantage; No matter how good, beautiful, and clean things are, they always like to pull a little fly arrow. But because only a little oil sweat is licked, only a little pickled meat is added, and people who are numb do not have the pain of cutting their skin, so they let it go. Chinese people are not well aware that it can spread germs, and fly hunting is probably not necessarily prosperous. Their destiny is long-lasting; It is also necessary to reproduce more.但它在好的，美的，干净的东西上拉了蝇矢之后，似乎还不至于欣欣然反过来嘲笑这东西的不洁：总要算还有一点道德的。
But after pulling a fly arrow on something good, beautiful, and clean, it does not seem to be happy to laugh at the uncleanliness of this thing in turn: there must be a little morality.古今君子，每以禽兽斥人，殊不知便是昆虫，值得师法的地方也多着哪。
Gentlemen of ancient and modern times, every time they scold people with beasts, they don't know that they are insects, and there are many places worth learning from.四月四日。
April 4th.

忽然想到

忽然想到

忽然想到

Suddenly thought五
Five我生得太早一点，连康有为们“公车上书”的时候，已经颇有些年纪了。政变之后，有族中的所谓长辈也者教诲我，说：康有为是想篡位，所以他的名字叫有为；有者，“富有天下”，为者，“贵为天子”也。非图谋不轨而何？我想：诚然。可恶得很！
I was born a little early, and when Lian Kang Youwei "wrote on the bus", he was already quite old. After the coup, the so-called elders in the clan taught me, saying: Kang Youwei wanted to usurp the throne, so his name was Youwei; Possessing means "wealth in the world," while doing means "being noble as the Son of Heaven." What if it is not a conspiracy? I think: indeed. It's so hateful!长辈的训诲于我是这样的有力，所以我也很遵从读书人家的家教。屏息低头，毫不敢轻举妄动。两眼下视黄泉，看天就是傲慢，满脸装出死相，说笑就是放肆。我自然以为极应该的，但有时心里也发生一点反抗。心的反抗，那时还不算什么犯罪，似乎诛心之律，倒不及现在之严。
The teachings of my elders are so powerful to me, so I also follow the tutoring of scholars. Holding his breath and bowing his head, he did not dare to act rashly. Looking down at the underworld, looking at the sky is arrogant, pretending to be dead on his face, and laughing is presumptuous. I naturally thought it was very appropriate, but sometimes I also felt a little rebellious in my heart. The resistance of the heart was not a crime at that time, and it seemed that the law of punishing the heart was not as strict as it is now.但这心的反抗，也还是大人们引坏的，因为他们自己就常常随便大说大笑，而单是禁止孩子。黔首们看见秦始皇那么阔气，捣乱的项羽道：“彼可取而代也！”没出息的刘邦却说：“大丈夫不当如是耶？”我是没出息的一流，因为羡慕他们的随意说笑，就很希望赶忙变成大人，——虽然此外也还有别种的原因。
But this resistance of the heart is also bad for adults, because they often laugh casually, and only forbid children. The people saw Qin Shi Huang so generous, and the troublesome Xiang Yu said: "He can be replaced!" Liu Bang, who was unpromising, said: "Shouldn't a man be like this? "I'm a first-class person who has no prospects, because I envy their casual jokes, and I really want to become an adult in a hurry,—— although there are other reasons.大丈夫不当如是耶，在我，无非只想不再装死而已，欲望也并不甚奢。
A man shouldn't be like this, for me, it's just that I just want to stop pretending to be dead, and my desires are not too extravagant.现在，可喜我已经大了，这大概是谁也不能否认的罢，无论用了怎样古怪的“逻辑”。
Now, fortunately, I am older, which is probably something that no one can deny, no matter how strange "logic" is used.我于是就抛了死相，放心说笑起来，而不意立刻又碰了正经人的钉子：说是使他们“失望”了。我自然是知道的，先前是老人们的世界，现在是少年们的世界了；但竟不料治世的人们虽异，而其禁止说笑也则同。那么，我的死相也还得装下去，装下去，“死而后已”，岂不痛哉！
So I threw away the dead face and laughed with confidence, but I didn't expect to immediately touch the nail of a serious person again: saying that I had "disappointed" them. Naturally, I know that it was the world of the old people before, and now it is the world of the teenagers; But unexpectedly, although the people who ruled the world were different, their prohibition of jokes was the same. Then, my death appearance has to be pretended, pretended, "after death", isn't it painful!我于是又恨我生得太迟一点。何不早二十年，赶上那大人还准说笑的时候？真是“我生不辰”，正当可诅咒的时候，活在可诅咒的地方了。
I then hated that I was born a little too late. Why not catch up with the time when the adult is allowed to joke twenty years earlier? It's really "I was born at the wrong time", just when I can be cursed, I live in a cursed place.约翰弥耳说：专制使人们变成冷嘲。我们却天下太平，连冷嘲也没有。我想：暴君的专制使人们变成冷嘲，愚民的专制使人们变成死相。大家渐渐死下去，而自己反以为卫道有效，这才渐近于正经的活人。
John Mill said: Autocracy turns people into cynics. But we are at peace in the world, and there is not even cynicism. I think: the tyranny of tyrants turns people into cynicism, and the tyranny of the foolish people turns people into death. Everyone gradually died, but they thought that the defense was effective, and they gradually became closer to serious living people.世上如果还有真要活下去的人们，就先该敢说，敢笑，敢哭，敢怒，敢骂，敢打，在这可诅咒的地方击退了可诅咒的时代！
If there are people in the world who really want to live, they should dare to speak, laugh, cry, get angry, scold, and fight, and repel the cursed era in this cursed place!四月十四日。
April 14th.

忽然想到

六

忽然想到

Six外国的考古学者们联翩而至了。
Foreign archaeologists came one after another.久矣夫，中国的学者们也早已口口声声的叫着“保古！保古！保古！……”
For a long time, Chinese scholars have long been shouting "Preserve the ancients!" Hoko! Hoko! ……”但是不能革新的人种，也不能保古的。
But the race that cannot be reformed cannot be preserved in the past.所以，外国的考古学者们便联翩而至了。
Therefore, foreign archaeologists came one after another.长城久成废物，弱水也似乎不过是理想上的东西。老大的国民尽钻在僵硬的传统里，不肯变革，衰朽到毫无精力了，还要自相残杀。于是外面的生力军很容易地进来了，真是“匪今斯今，振古如兹”。至于他们的历史，那自然都没我们的那么古。
The Great Wall has become a waste for a long time, and weak water seems to be just an ideal thing. The people of the boss are trapped in rigid traditions, refusing to change, decaying to the point of having no energy, and killing each other. So the new forces outside came in easily, and it was really "bandits of the present, and the revitalization of the past is like this". As for their history, it is naturally not as ancient as ours.可是我们的古也就难保，因为土地先已危险而不安全。土地给了别人，则“国宝”虽多，我觉得实在也无处陈列。
But our ancient times are difficult to protect, because the land is already dangerous and unsafe. If the land is given to others, then although there are many "national treasures", I think there is really nowhere to display them.但保古家还在痛骂革新，力保旧物地干：用玻璃板印些宋版书，每部定价几十几百元；“涅槃！涅槃！涅槃！”佛自汉时已入中国，其古色古香为何如哉！买集些旧书和金石，是劬古爱国之士，略作考证，赶印目录，就升为学者或高人。而外国人所得的古董，却每从高人的高尚的袖底里共清风一同流出。即不然，归安陆氏的皕宋，潍县陈氏的十钟，其子孙尚能世守否？
However, the ancient family is still scolding innovation and trying to keep the old things dry: print some Song editions of books with glass plates, and each copy is priced at tens or hundreds of yuan; "Nirvana! Nirvana! Nirvana! "The Buddha has been in China since the Han Dynasty, how antique is it! Buying some old books and gold and stone, he is a patriot who works hard for the ancients, does a little research, prints the catalog, and is promoted to a scholar or a master. However, the antiques obtained by foreigners often flow out of the noble sleeves of the masters with the breeze. Otherwise, can the descendants of the Song Dynasty of the Anlu clan and the ten bells of the Chen clan in Weixian still be kept for generations?现在，外国的考古学者们便联翩而至了。
Now, foreign archaeologists are coming.他们活有余力，则以考古，但考古尚可，帮同保古就更可怕了。有些外人，很希望中国永是一个大古董以供他们的赏鉴，这虽然可恶，却还不奇，因为他们究竟是外人。而中国竟也有自己还不够，并且要率领了少年，赤子，共成一个大古董以供他们的赏鉴者，则真不知是生着怎样的心肝。
They have more than enough to live, so they use archaeology, but archaeology is acceptable, and it is even more terrible to help protect the ancients. Some outsiders hope that China will always be a big antique for their appreciation, which is hateful, but it is not surprising, because they are outsiders. And China actually has its own people who are not enough, and want to lead teenagers and children to form a big antique for their appreciation, I really don't know what kind of heart and liver it is.中国废止读经了，教会学校不是还请腐儒做先生，教学生读“四书”么？民国废去跪拜了，犹太学校不是偏请遗老做先生，要学生磕头拜寿么？外国人办给中国人看的报纸，不是最反对五四以来的小改革么？而外国总主笔治下的中国小主笔，则倒是崇拜道学，保存国粹的！
China has abolished the reading of the Bible, and the church schools have not invited corrupt Confucians to be teachers and teach students to read the "Four Books"? The Republic of China abolished kneeling, didn't the Jewish school invite the elderly to be teachers and ask students to kowtow to their birthdays? Isn't the newspaper run by foreigners for Chinese the most opposed to the small reforms since May Fourth? The Chinese chief writer under the rule of the foreign chief writer worships Taoism and preserves the essence of the country!但是，无论如何，不革新，是生存也为难的，而况保古。现状就是铁证，比保古家的万言书有力得多。
However, in any case, it is difficult to survive without innovation, let alone preserve the ancients. The status quo is ironclad evidence, much more powerful than the ten thousand words of the Bao Gu family.我们目下的当务之急，是：一要生存，二要温饱，三要发展。苟有阻碍这前途者，无论是古是今，是人是鬼，是《三坟》《五典》，百宋千元，天球河图，金人玉佛，祖传丸散，秘制膏丹，全都踏倒他。
Our immediate priorities are: first, to survive, second, to eat and drink, and third, to develop. If there is anyone who hinders this future, whether it is ancient or modern, human or ghost, it is the "Three Tombs", "Five Classics", a hundred songs and a thousand yuan, the Tianqiu River Map, the golden man and the jade Buddha, the ancestral pill powder, and the secret ointment, all of them will trample on him.保古家大概总读过古书，“林回弃千金之璧，负赤子而趋”，该不能说是禽兽行为罢。那么，弃赤子而抱千金之璧的是什么？
The Baogu family probably always read ancient books, "Lin Hui abandoned the jade of a thousand gold and went with a child", which should not be said to be beastly behavior. So, what is it that abandons the innocence and embraces the treasure of a thousand gold?四月十八日。
April 18th.

杂感

杂感

杂感

Mixed feelings人们有泪，比动物进化，但即此有泪，也就是不进化，正如已经只有盲肠，比鸟类进化，而究竟还有盲肠，终不能很算进化一样。凡这些，不但是无用的赘物，还要使其人达到无谓的灭亡。
People have tears, more evolved than animals, but there are tears, that is, they do not evolve, just as there is only an appendix, more evolved than birds, and there is still an appendix, which cannot be considered evolutionary after all. All of this is not only useless redundancy, but also leads to unnecessary destruction.现今的人们还以眼泪赠答，并且以这为最上的赠品，因为他此外一无所有。无泪的人则以血赠答，但又各各拒绝别人的血。
People today also give with tears, and this is the best gift, because he has nothing else. Those who do not shed tears give blood in return, but each rejects the blood of others.人大抵不愿意爱人下泪。但临死之际，可能也不愿意爱人为你下泪么？无泪的人无论何时，都不愿意爱人下泪，并且连血也不要：他拒绝一切为他的哭泣和灭亡。
Most people don't want their lovers to cry. But when you are dying, you may not want your lover to cry for you? A person without tears does not want his lover to weep at any time, and he does not even want blood: he refuses to weep and perish for him.人被杀于万众聚观之中，比被杀在“人不知鬼不觉”的地方快活，因为他可以妄想，博得观众中的或人的眼泪。但是，无泪的人无论被杀在什么所在，于他并无不同。
A person is happier to be killed in a crowd than to be killed in a place where "people are unaware", because he can fantasize and win the tears of the audience. However, no matter where the person without tears is killed, he is no different.杀了无泪的人，一定连血也不见。爱人不觉他被杀之惨，仇人也终于得不到杀他之乐：这是他的报恩和复仇。
If you kill someone without tears, you must not even see blood. The lover did not realize that he was killed tragically, and the enemy finally did not get the pleasure of killing him: this was his repayment and revenge.
死于敌手的锋刃，不足悲苦；死于不知何来的暗器，却是悲苦。但最悲苦的是死于慈母或爱人误进的毒药，战友乱发的流弹，病菌的并无恶意的侵入，不是我自己制定的死刑。
dying at the edge of the enemy's blade is not enough to be sad; Died from a hidden weapon that I don't know where it came from, but it was tragic. But the most tragic thing is that I died from the poison of my loving mother or lover, the stray bullets fired by my comrades-in-arms, and the malicious intrusion of germs, not the death penalty I formulated myself.
仰慕往古的，回往古去罢！想出世的，快出世罢！想上天的，快上天罢！灵魂要离开肉体的，赶快离开罢！现在的地上，应该是执着现在，执着地上的人们居住的。
Admire the ancients, go back to the ancients! If you want to be born, be born quickly! If you want to go to heaven, go to heaven quickly! If the soul wants to leave the body, leave quickly! The current earth should be inhabited by people who cling to the present and cling to the earth.但厌恶现世的人们还住着。这都是现世的仇仇，他们一日存在，现世即一日不能得救。
But the people who hate the present world still live. These are all enemies of this world, and if they exist for a day, they cannot be saved for a day in this world.先前，也曾有些愿意活在现世而不得的人们，沉默过了，呻吟过了，叹息过了，哭泣过了，哀求过了，但仍然愿意活在现世而不得，因为他们忘却了愤怒。
Previously, there were some people who were willing to live in this world but were silent, groaned, sighed, cried, and begged, but they were still willing to live in this world because they had forgotten their anger.勇者愤怒，抽刃向更强者；怯者愤怒，却抽刃向更弱者。不可救药的民族中，一定有许多英雄，专向孩子们瞪眼。这些孱头们！
The brave are angry and draw their blades against the stronger; The cowardly one was angry and drew his blade towards the weaker. Among the incorrigible nations, there must be many heroes who glared at the children. These bastards!孩子们在瞪眼中长大了，又向别的孩子们瞪眼，并且想：他们一生都过在愤怒中。因为愤怒只是如此，所以他们要愤怒一生，——而且还要愤怒二世，三世，四世，以至末世。
The children grow up staring, and then they stare at other children and think: they have lived their lives in anger. Because anger is just that, they will be angry for the rest of their lives,—— and they will be angry at the second, third, fourth, and even the last days.无论爱什么，——饭，异性，国，民族，人类等等，——只有纠缠如毒蛇，执着如怨鬼，二六时中，没有已时者有望。但太觉疲劳时，也无妨休息一会罢；但休息之后，就再来一回罢，而且两回，三回……。血书，章程，请愿，讲学，哭，电报，开会，挽联，演说，神经衰弱，则一切无用。
No matter what you love, ,—— food, the opposite sex, the country, the nation, the human beings,—— etc., only entanglement is like a poisonous snake, persistence is like a resentful ghost, and there is no hope for the time in the twenty-six hours. But when you feel too tired, it doesn't hurt to rest for a while; But after the break, just do it again, and twice, three times, ....... Blood letters, constitutions, petitions, lectures, crying, telegrams, meetings, elegiacs, speeches, nervous breakdowns, all are useless.血书所能挣来的是什么？不过就是你的一张血书，况且并不好看。至于神经衰弱，其实倒是自己生了病，你不要再当作宝贝了，我的可敬爱而讨厌的朋友呀！
What can be earned from blood books? It's just a blood book of yours, and it's not good-looking. As for the nervous breakdown, in fact, it is that you are sick, don't treat it as a treasure anymore, my dear and hated friend!我们听到呻吟，叹息，哭泣，哀求，无须吃惊。见了酷烈的沉默，就应该留心了；见有什么像毒蛇似的在尸林中蜿蜒，怨鬼似的在黑暗中奔驰，就更应该留心了：这在豫告“真的愤怒”将要到来。那时候，仰慕往古的就要回往古去了，想出世的要出世去了，想上天的要上天了，灵魂要离开肉体的就要离开了！……
We are not surprised to hear moans, sighs, crying, and begging. When you see the fierce silence, you should pay attention; When you see something meandering in the forest of corpses like a poisonous snake or running in the darkness like a ghost, you should pay more attention: this foretells that "real anger" is coming. At that time, those who admired the past had to go back to the ancients, those who wanted to be born would go to the world, those who wanted to go to heaven would go to heaven, and those whose souls wanted to leave the body would leave! ……五月五日。
May 5th.

北京通信

北京通信

北京通信

Beijing Communications蕴儒，培良两兄：
Yunru, Peiliang's two brothers:昨天收到两份《豫报》，使我非常快活，尤其是见了那《副刊》。因为它那蓬勃的朝气，实在是在我先前的豫想以上。你想：从有着很古的历史的中州，传来了青年的声音，仿佛在豫告这古国将要复活，这是一件如何可喜的事呢？
Yesterday I received two copies of the "Yu News", which made me very happy, especially when I saw the "Supplement". Because its vigorous vitality is really above my previous expectations. You think: From Zhongzhou, which has a very ancient history, the voice of a young man came, as if predicting that this ancient country would be resurrected, how gratifying is this?倘使我有这力量，我自然极愿意有所贡献于河南的青年。但不幸我竟力不从心，因为我自己也正站在歧路上，——或者，说得较有希望些：站在十字路口。站在歧路上是几乎难于举足，站在十字路口，是可走的道路很多。我自己，是什么也不怕的，生命是我自己的东西，所以我不妨大步走去，向着我自以为可以走去的路；即使前面是深渊，荆棘，狭谷，火坑，都由我自己负责。然而向青年说话可就难了，如果盲人瞎马，引入危途，我就该得谋杀许多人命的罪孽。
If I have this strength, I am naturally very willing to contribute to the youth of Henan. But unfortunately I was unable to do so, because I myself was standing at a wrong path,—— or, to put it more hopefully, standing at a crossroads. It is almost difficult to stand at a crossroads, and there are many roads to walk when standing at a crossroads. I am not afraid of anything, life is my own thing, so I might as well stride towards the road I think I can go; Even if there is an abyss, thorns, valleys, fire pits, I am responsible for it. However, it is difficult to speak to young people, if a blind man leads a dangerous path, I should be guilty of murdering many lives.所以，我终于还不想劝青年一同走我所走的路；我们的年龄，境遇，都不相同，思想的归宿大概总不能一致的罢。但倘若一定要问我青年应当向怎样的目标，那么，我只可以说出我为别人设计的话，就是：一要生存，二要温饱，三要发展。有敢来阻碍这三事者，无论是谁，我们都反抗他，扑灭他！
Therefore, I finally do not want to persuade young people to follow the path I have taken; Our ages and circumstances are different, and the destination of our thoughts is probably not the same. But if I had to ask what kind of goals young people should pursue, then I could only say what I designed for others, that is: first, to survive, second, to eat and drink, and third, to develop. Whoever dares to hinder these three things, no matter who it is, we will resist him and extinguish him!可是还得附加几句话以免误解，就是：我之所谓生存，并不是苟活；所谓温饱，并不是奢侈；所谓发展，也不是放纵。
But I have to add a few sentences to avoid misunderstanding, that is: my so-called survival is not survival; The so-called food and clothing are not luxury; The so-called development is not indulgence.中国古来，一向是最注重于生存的，什么“知命者不立于岩墙之下”咧，什么“千金之子坐不垂堂”咧，什么“身体发肤受之父母不敢毁伤”咧，竟有父母愿意儿子吸鸦片的，一吸，他就不至于到外面去，有倾家荡产之虞了。可是这一流人家，家业也决不能长保，因为这是苟活。苟活就是活不下去的初步，所以到后来，他就活不下去了。意图生存，而太卑怯，结果就得死亡。以中国古训中教人苟活的格言如此之多，而中国人偏多死亡，外族偏多侵入，结果适得其反，可见我们蔑弃古训，是刻不容缓的了。这实在是无可奈何，因为我们要生活，而且不是苟活的缘故。
Since ancient China, it has always paid the most attention to survival, what "the one who knows his fate does not stand under the rock wall", what "the son of a daughter can't sit in the hall", what "the body and skin are affected by the parents dare not be damaged", there are parents who want their son to smoke opium, once he sucks, he will not go outside, there is a risk of bankruptcy. But this first-class family must not maintain their family business for a long time, because this is a survival. Survival is the initial stage of not being able to live, so later, he will not be able to live. If you are too cowardly with the intention of survival, you will die. With so many adages in ancient Chinese teachings that teach people to survive, and the Chinese die more and foreign tribes invade more, the result is counterproductive, it can be seen that we despise the ancient teachings, and it is urgent for us to ignore the ancient teachings. This is really helpless, because we have to live, and not to live.中国人虽然想了各种苟活的理想乡，可惜终于没有实现。但我却替他们发见了，你们大概知道的罢，就是北京的第一监狱。这监狱在宣武门外的空地里，不怕邻家的火灾；每日两餐，不虑冻馁；起居有定，不会伤生；构造坚固，不会倒塌；禁卒管着，不会再犯罪；强盗是决不会来抢的。住在里面，何等安全，真真是“千金之子坐不垂堂”了。但阙少的就有一件事：自由。
Although the Chinese thought of various utopias, unfortunately they did not realize them. But I found it for them, as you probably know, it is Beijing's No. 1 Prison. This prison is in the open space outside Xuanwu Gate, and it is not afraid of the fire of the neighbor; Two meals a day, not worrying about cold and hunger; The daily life is fixed, and it will not harm life; The structure is strong and will not collapse; The jailer will not sin again; Robbers will never come to rob. Living in it, how safe it is, it is really "the son of a daughter can't sit in the hall". But there is one thing missing: freedom.古训所教的就是这样的生活法，教人不要动。不动，失错当然就较少了，但不活的岩石泥沙，失错不是更少么？我以为人类为向上，即发展起见，应该活动，活动而有若干失错，也不要紧。惟独半死半生的苟活，是全盘失错的。因为他挂了生活的招牌，其实却引人到死路上去！
This is how the ancient teachings teach, teaching people not to move. If you don't move, of course, there will be fewer mistakes, but if you don't live in rock sediment, won't you make fewer mistakes? I think that human beings should move for the sake of upward, that is, for development, and it doesn't matter if there are some mistakes in activities. Only half-dead and half-alive survival is a complete mistake. Because he hung up the sign of life, it actually led people to death!我想，我们总得将青年从牢狱里引出来，路上的危险，当然是有的，但这是求生的偶然的危险，无从逃避。想逃避，就须度那古人所希求的第一监狱式生活了，可是真在第一监狱里的犯人，都想早些释放，虽然外面并不比狱里安全。
I think we have to lure young people out of prison, of course, there are dangers on the road, but this is an accidental danger of survival, and there is no way to escape. If you want to escape, you have to live the first prison-style life that the ancients longed for, but the prisoners in the first prison really want to be released early, although it is not safer outside than in prison.北京暖和起来了；我的院子里种了几株丁香，活了；还有两株榆叶梅，至今还未发芽，不知道他是否活着。
Beijing is warming up; I planted a few lilacs in my yard, and they were alive; There are also two elm-leaved plum trees, which have not yet sprouted, and I don't know if he is alive.昨天闹了一个小乱子，许多学生被打伤了；听说还有死的，我不知道确否。其实，只要听他们开会，结果不过是开会而已，因为加了强力的迫压，遂闹出开会以上的事来。俄国的革命，不就是从这样的路径出发的么？
Yesterday there was a small mess, and many students were injured; I heard that there are still dead, but I don't know if it's true. In fact, as long as they listen to their meeting, the result is just a meeting, because of the strong pressure, so there is more than a meeting. Didn't the Russian revolution start from such a path?夜深了，就此搁笔，后来再谈罢。
It's late at night, so I'll put down my pen and talk about it later.鲁迅。五月八日夜。
Lu Xun. On the night of May 8th.

导师

导师

导师

mentor近来很通行说青年；开口青年，闭口也是青年。但青年又何能一概而论？有醒着的，有睡着的，有昏着的，有躺着的，有玩着的，此外还多。但是，自然也有要前进的。
Recently, it is very common to talk about youth; Young people who open their mouths and close their mouths are also young people. But how can young people generalize? There are awake, asleep, faint, lying, playing, and many more. However, there is naturally something to move forward.要前进的青年们大抵想寻求一个导师。然而我敢说：他们将永远寻不到。寻不到倒是运气；自知的谢不敏，自许的果真识路么？凡自以为识路者，总过了“而立”之年，灰色可掬了，老态可掬了，圆稳而已，自己却误以为识路。假如真识路，自己就早进向他的目标，何至于还在做导师。说佛法的和尚，卖仙药的道士，将来都与白骨是“一丘之貉”，人们现在却向他听生西的大法，求上升的真传，岂不可笑！
Young people who want to move forward probably want to seek a mentor. But I dare say: they will never be found. It is luck that cannot be found; Do you really know the way to know yourself? Anyone who thinks he knows the way has passed the age of "standing", gray is palpable, old is picky, round and stable, but he mistakenly thinks he knows the way. If he truly knows the way, he will have advanced towards his goal early, so why should he still be a mentor. Monks who speak of Buddhism and Taoist priests who sell elixirs will all be "raccoons on a hill" with white bones in the future, but people are now listening to him about the Dafa of the West and asking for the true transmission of ascension, isn't it ridiculous?但是我并非敢将这些人一切抹杀；和他们随便谈谈，是可以的。说话的也不过能说话，弄笔的也不过能弄笔；别人如果希望他打拳，则是自己错。他如果能打拳，早已打拳了，但那时，别人大概又要希望他翻筋斗。
But I do not dare to erase all of these people; It's okay to talk to them casually. those who speak can only speak, and those who make pens can only make pens; If others want him to punch, it's his fault. If he could punch, he would have already punched, but at that time, others probably wanted him to somersault again.有些青年似乎也觉悟了，我记得《京报副刊》征求青年必读书时，曾有一位发过牢骚，终于说：只有自己可靠！我现在还想斗胆转一句，虽然有些杀风景，就是：自己也未必可靠的。
I remember that when the "Beijing News Supplement" solicited must-read books for young people, one of them complained, and finally said: Only he is reliable! I still want to dare to change my sentence, although there are some killing scenery, that is: I may not be reliable.我们都不大有记性。这也无怪，人生苦痛的事太多了，尤其是在中国。记性好的，大概都被厚重的苦痛压死了；只有记性坏的，适者生存，还能欣然活着。但我们究竟还有一点记忆，回想起来，怎样的“今是昨非”呵，怎样的“口是心非”呵，怎样的“今日之我与昨日之我战”呵。我们还没有正在饿得要死时于无人处见别人的饭，正在穷得要死时于无人处见别人的钱，正在性欲旺盛时遇见异性，而且很美的。我想，大话不宜讲得太早，否则，倘有记性，将来想到时会脸红。
None of us have a good memory. No wonder, there are too many painful things in life, especially in China. those with good memory are probably crushed to death by heavy pain; Only those with bad memories survive and can live happily. But we still have a little memory, looking back, what kind of "today is yesterday", what kind of "duplicity", what kind of "today's me and yesterday's me". We haven't seen other people's food in nowhere when we are hungry to death, we are seeing other people's money in no one when we are poor to death, and we are meeting the opposite sex when we are in high libido, and it is beautiful. I think it is not advisable to speak too early, otherwise, if you have a memory, you will blush when you think about it in the future.或者还是知道自己之不甚可靠者，倒较为可靠罢。
Or maybe you know that you are not very reliable, but you are more reliable.青年又何须寻那挂着金字招牌的导师呢？不如寻朋友，联合起来，同向着似乎可以生存的方向走。你们所多的是生力，遇见深林，可以辟成平地的，遇见旷野，可以栽种树木的，遇见沙漠，可以开掘井泉的。问什么荆棘塞途的老路，寻什么乌烟瘴气的鸟导师！
Why do young people need to look for a mentor with a golden sign? It is better to find friends, unite, and walk in a direction that seems to survive. What you have is vitality, and when you meet a deep forest, you can open up flat land, you will meet a wilderness, you will plant trees, you will meet a desert, you will dig wells and springs. Ask what thorny old road is blocked, and what kind of smoky bird tutor is looking for!五月十一日。
May 11th.

长城

长城

长城

The Great Wall伟大的长城！
The Great Wall!这工程，虽在地图上也还有它的小像，凡是世界上稍有知识的人们，大概都知道的罢。
This project, although it still has its small statue on the map, is probably known to anyone with a little knowledge in the world.其实，从来不过徒然役死许多工人而已，胡人何尝挡得住。现在不过一种古迹了，但一时也不会灭尽，或者还要保存它。
In fact, it has never been just a futile death of many workers, and the Hu people have never been able to stop it. Now it is just a monument, but it will not be extinguished for a while, or it will be preserved.我总觉得周围有长城围绕。这长城的构成材料，是旧有的古砖和补添的新砖。两种东西联为一气造成了城壁，将人们包围。
I always feel surrounded by the Great Wall. The composition of this Great Wall is old ancient bricks and new bricks. The two East and West are united to create a city wall that surrounds people.何时才不给长城添新砖呢？
When will we not add new bricks to the Great Wall?这伟大而可诅咒的长城！
This great and damned Great Wall!五月十一日。
May 11th.

忽然想到

忽然想到

忽然想到

Suddenly thought七
Seven大约是送报人忙不过来了，昨天不见报，今天才给补到，但是奇怪，正张上已经剪去了两小块；幸而副刊是完全的。那上面有一篇武者君的《温良》，又使我记起往事，我记得确曾用了这样一个糖衣的毒刺赠送过我的同学们。现在武者君也在大道上发见了两样东西了：凶兽和羊。但我以为这不过发见了一部分，因为大道上的东西还没有这样简单，还得附加一句，是：凶兽样的羊，羊样的凶兽。
It was probably because the newspaper delivery person was too busy, and I didn't see the newspaper yesterday, so I only made up for it today, but strangely, two small pieces had been cut off from the main sheet; Fortunately, the supplement is complete. There was a "Gentleman" by Warrior Jun on it, which reminded me of the past, and I remember that I had used such a sugar-coated stinger to give to my classmates. Now the warrior has also found two things on the road: fierce beasts and sheep. But I thought this was only part of the discovery, because the things on the road were not so simple, and I had to add a sentence: a beast-like sheep, a sheep-like beast.他们是羊，同时也是凶兽；但遇见比他更凶的凶兽时便现羊样，遇见比他更弱的羊时便现凶兽样，因此，武者君误认为两样东西了。
They are sheep and beasts at the same time; But when he met a fierce beast that was more fierce than him, he appeared like a sheep, and when he met a sheep weaker than him, he appeared like a fierce beast, so the warrior Jun mistook two things.我还记得第一次五四以后，军警们很客气地只用枪托，乱打那手无寸铁的教员和学生，威武到很像一队铁骑在苗田上驰骋；学生们则惊叫奔避，正如遇见虎狼的羊群。但是，当学生们成了大群，袭击他们的敌人时，不是遇见孩子也要推他摔几个觔斗么？在学校里，不是还唾骂敌人的儿子，使他非逃回家去不可么？这和古代暴君的灭族的意见，有什么区分！
I still remember that after the first May Fourth, the military and police policely used only the butt of their guns to beat the unarmed teachers and students, so powerful that they were like a team of iron horses galloping on the seedling fields; The students screamed and ran away, just like a flock of tigers and wolves. But when the students become a large group and attack their enemies, don't you push the child to throw a few fights? In school, didn't he scold the enemy's son, so that he had to flee home? What is the difference between this and the opinion of the ancient tyrant on the extermination of the clan!我还记得中国的女人是怎样被压制，有时简直并羊而不如。现在托了洋鬼子学说的福，似乎有些解放了。但她一得到可以逞威的地位如校长之类，不就雇用了“掠袖擦掌”的打手似的男人，来威吓毫无武力的同性的学生们么？不是利用了外面正有别的学潮的时候，和一些狐群狗党趁势来开除她私意所不喜的学生们么？而几个在“男尊女卑”的社会生长的男人们，此时却在异性的饭碗化身的面前摇尾，简直并羊而不如。羊，诚然是弱的，但还不至于如此，我敢给我所敬爱的羊们保证！
I still remember how Chinese women were suppressed, sometimes as good as sheep. Now that I have the blessing of the doctrine of foreign devils, I seem to be a little liberated. But as soon as she got a position where she could show off her power, such as the principal, didn't she hire a man like a thug to intimidate the students of the same sex who had no force? Didn't she take advantage of the fact that there were other student trends outside, and some fox and dog parties took advantage of the situation to expel the students she didn't like? And a few men who grew up in a society of "male superiority and female inferiority" wagged their tails in front of the incarnation of the opposite sex at this time, which was simply inferior to sheep. Sheep are indeed weak, but not yet, I dare to assure my beloved sheep!但是，在黄金世界还未到来之前，人们恐怕总不免同时含有这两种性质，只看发现时候的情形怎样，就显出勇敢和卑怯的大区别来。可惜中国人但对于羊显凶兽相，而对于凶兽则显羊相，所以即使显着凶兽相，也还是卑怯的国民。这样下去，一定要完结的。
However, before the golden world arrived, people were afraid that both qualities would inevitably be contained at the same time, and the difference between courage and cowardice would be revealed just by looking at the situation at the time of discovery. It's a pity that the Chinese show the appearance of a beast for sheep, and a sheep appearance for a beast, so even if they show a strong beast appearance, they are still cowardly citizens. If this continues, it must be over.我想，要中国得救，也不必添什么东西进去，只要青年们将这两种性质的古传用法，反过来一用就够了：对手如凶兽时就如凶兽，对手如羊时就如羊！
I think that if China wants to be saved, there is no need to add anything to it, as long as the young people use these two ancient traditions in reverse: when the opponent is like a beast, it is like a beast, and when the opponent is like a sheep, it is like a sheep!那么，无论什么魔鬼，就都只能回到他自己的地狱里去。
Then, no matter what the devil is, he can only go back to his own hell.五月十日。
May 10th.

忽然想到

八

忽然想到

Eight五月十二日《京报》的“显微镜”下有这样的一条——
There is such an article under the "microscope" of the "Beijing News" on May 12 -“某学究见某报上载教育总长‘’五七呈文，愀然曰：‘名字怪僻如此，非圣人之徒也，岂能为吾侪卫古文之道者乎！’”
“某学究见某报上载教育总长‘’五七呈文，愀然曰：‘名字怪僻如此，非圣人之徒也，岂能为吾侪卫古文之道者乎！’”因此想起中国有几个字，不但在白话文中，就是在文言文中也几乎不用。其一是这误印为“钉”的“钊”字，还有一个是“淦”字，大概只在人名里还有留遗。我手头没有《说文解字》，钊字的解释完全不记得了，淦则仿佛是船底漏水的意思。我们现在要叙述船漏水，无论用怎样古奥的文章，大概总不至于说“淦矣”了罢，所以除了印张国淦，孙嘉淦或新淦县的新闻之外，这一粒铅字简直是废物。
Therefore, I remember that there are several words in China, not only in the vernacular, but also in classical Chinese. One is the word "Zhao" that is mistakenly printed as "nail", and the other is the word "Gan", which is probably only left in the person's name. I don't have "Shuowen Jiezi" at hand, and I don't remember the explanation of the word Zhao at all, and Gan seems to mean that the bottom of the boat is leaking. We are now going to describe the leakage of the ship, no matter how ancient articles are used, probably not to say "Ganyi", so in addition to printing the news of Zhang Guogan, Sun Jiagan or Xingan County, this grain of lead is simply waste.至于“钊”，则化而为“钉”还不过一个小笑话；听说竟有人因此受害。曹锟做总统的时代（那时这样写法就要犯罪），要办李大钊先生，国务会议席上一个阁员说：“只要看他的名字，就知道不是一个安分的人。什么名字不好取，他偏要叫李大剑？！”于是乎办定了，因为这位“大剑”先生已经用名字自己证实，是“大刀王五”一流人。
As for "Zhao", it is just a small joke to turn it into a "nail"; I heard that some people were victimized because of this. When Cao Kun was president (at that time, it was a crime to write like this), to deal with Mr. Li Dazhao, a cabinet member at the State Council said: "Just look at his name, you know that he is not a safe person." What name is not easy to choose, he wants to be called Li Dajian?! So it was done, because this "big sword" gentleman had confirmed by his name that he was a first-class person of the "big sword king five".我在N的学堂做学生的时候，也曾经因这“钊”字碰过几个小钉子，但自然因为我自己不“安分”。一个新的职员到校了，势派非常之大，学者似的，很傲然。可惜他不幸遇见了一个同学叫“沈钊”的，就倒了楣，因为他叫他“沈钧”，以表白自己的不识字。于是我们一见面就讥笑他，就叫他为“沈钧”，并且由讥笑而至于相骂。两天之内，我和十多个同学就迭连记了两小过两大过，再记一小过，就要开除了。但开除在我们那个学校里并不算什么大事件，大堂上还有军令，可以将学生杀头的。做那里的校长这才威风呢，——但那时的名目却叫作“总办”的，资格又须是候补道。
When I was a student in N's school, I also touched a few small nails because of the word "Zhao", but naturally because I was not "safe". A new staff member arrived at the school, and the power was very large, like a scholar, very proud. Unfortunately, he met a classmate named "Shen Zhao", so he fell because he called him "Shen Jun" to confess his illiteracy. So as soon as we met, we laughed at him, called him "Shen Jun", and scolded each other from ridicule. Within two days, more than a dozen classmates and I repeatedly recorded two minor faults and two major faults, and then a small mistake, and we were to be expelled. But expulsion is not a big event in our school, and there is a military order in the lobby that can behead students. It is prestigious to be the principal there,—— but at that time, the name was called "General Office", and the qualification must be a candidate.假使那时也像现在似的专用高压手段，我们大概是早经“正法”，我也不会还有什么“忽然想到”的了。我不知怎的近来很有“怀古”的倾向，例如这回因为一个字，就会露出遗老似的“缅怀古昔”的口吻来。
If we had used high-pressure methods like we do now, we would probably have gone through the "rectification of the Dharma" long ago, and I would not have had anything else to "suddenly think". For some reason, I have a tendency to "nostalgia" recently, for example, this time, because of a word, I will show a tone of "remembering the past" like an old man.五月十三日。
May 13th.

忽然想到

九

忽然想到

Nine记得有人说过，回忆多的人们是没出息的了，因为他眷念从前，难望再有勇猛的进取；但也有说回忆是最为可喜的。前一说忘却了谁的话，后一说大概是A．France罢，——都由他。可是他们的话也都有些道理，整理起来，研究起来，一定可以消费许多功夫；但这都听凭学者们去干去，我不想来加入这一类高尚事业了，怕的是毫无结果之前，已经“寿终正寝”。（是否真是寿终，真在正寝，自然是没有把握的，但此刻不妨写得好看一点。）我能谢绝研究文艺的酒筵，能远避开除学生的饭局，然而阎罗大王的请帖，大概是终于没法“谨谢”的，无论你怎样摆架子。好，现在是并非眷念过去，而是遥想将来了，可是一样的没出息。管他娘的，写下去——
I remember someone saying that people with many memories are not promising, because they miss the past and hope to have courageous progress again; But it is also said that memories are the most gratifying. The first said who forgot the words, and the second said that it was probably A.France,—— it was all up to him. But their words also have some truth, sorting them out and researching them will definitely consume a lot of effort; But this is all up to the scholars, I don't want to join this kind of noble cause, I am afraid that I will "die" before there is no result. (Whether it is really the end of life or whether it is really in the middle of the bed, naturally it is uncertain, but at this moment you might as well write better.) I can refuse the banquet of studying literature and art, and I can avoid the dinner of the students, but the invitation of the King of Hell probably cannot be "thanked" in the end, no matter how you put on the air. Okay, now I don't miss the past, but I think about the future, but it's the same as not promising. Fuck it, write it down -不动笔是为要保持自己的身分，我近来才知道；可是动笔的九成九是为自己来辩护，则早就知道的了，至少，我自己就这样。所以，现在要写出来的，也不过是为自己的一封信——FD君：
I only recently learned that I don't write to maintain my identity; But 90% of the time I write is to defend myself, and I have known for a long time, at least, I am like this. Therefore, what I want to write now is just a letter for myself - FD Jun:记得一年或两年之前，蒙你赐书，指摘我在《阿Q正传》中写捉拿一个无聊的阿Q而用机关枪，是太远于事理。我当时没有答复你，一则你信上不写住址，二则阿Q已经捉过，我不能再邀你去看热闹，共同证实了。
I remember a year or two ago, I was given a letter by you, accusing me of using a machine gun to capture a boring Ah Q in "The True Biography of Ah Q", which is too far from the truth. I didn't reply to you at the time, one is that your letter does not write the address, and the other is that Ah Q has already been caught, and I can't invite you to watch the excitement anymore, and we have confirmed it together.但我前几天看报章，便又记起了你。报上有一则新闻，大意是学生要到执政府去请愿，而执政府已于事前得知，东门上添了军队，西门上还摆起两架机关枪，学生不得入，终于无结果而散云。你如果还在北京，何妨远远地——愈远愈好——去望一望呢，倘使真有两架，那么，我就“振振有辞”了。
But I read the newspaper a few days ago and remembered you again. There was a news in the newspaper to the effect that the students were going to petition the ruling government, and the ruling government had learned in advance that troops had been added to the east gate, and two machine guns were placed on the west gate. If you are still in Beijing, why not take a look from a distance—the farther the better—if there are really two, then I will be "excited".夫学生的游行和请愿，由来久矣。他们都是“郁郁乎文哉”，不但绝无炸弹和手枪，并且连九节钢鞭，三尖两刃刀也没有，更何况丈八蛇矛和青龙掩月刀乎？至多，“怀中一纸书”而已，所以向来就没有闹过乱子的历史。现在可是已经架起机关枪来了，而且有两架！
Student marches and petitions have a long history. They are all "depressed and literate", not only do they have no bombs and pistols, but they don't even have a nine-section steel whip or a three-pointed two-edged knife, let alone the Zhangba snake spear and the Qinglong moon knife? At most, it is just "a book in my arms", so there has never been a history of trouble. Now the machine guns have been set up, and there are two!但阿Q的事件却大得多了，他确曾上城偷过东西，未庄也确已出了抢案。那时又还是民国元年，那些官吏，办事自然比现在更离奇。先生！你想：这是十三年前的事呵。那时的事，我以为即使在《阿Q正传》中再给添上一混成旅和八尊过山炮，也不至于“言过其实”的罢。
But Ah Q's incident is much bigger, he has indeed gone to the city to steal things, and Weizhuang has indeed committed a robbery. At that time, it was still the first year of the Republic of China, and those officials were naturally more bizarre than they are now. Mr! You think: This was thirteen years ago. At that time, I thought that even if a mixed brigade and eight roller coasters were added to "The True Story of Ah Q", it would not be "exaggerated".请先生不要用普通的眼光看中国。我的一个朋友从印度回来，说，那地方真古怪，每当自己走过恒河边，就觉得还要防被捉去杀掉而祭天。我在中国也时时起这一类的恐惧。普通认为romantic的，在中国是平常事；机关枪不装在土谷祠外，还装到那里去呢？
Please don't look at China with ordinary eyes. A friend of mine came back from India and said that the place was so strange that whenever he walked by the Ganges, he felt that he had to be caught and killed and sacrificed to the heavens. I also have this kind of fear in China from time to time. It is common in China to think that it is romantic; If the machine gun is not installed outside the Tugu Shrine, where is it still loaded?一九二五年五月十四日，鲁迅上。
On May 14, 1925, Lu Xun went up.

“碰壁”之后

“碰壁”之后

“碰壁”之后

After "hitting the wall"我平日常常对我的年青的同学们说：古人所谓“穷愁著书”的话，是不大可靠的。穷到透顶，愁得要死的人，那里还有这许多闲情逸致来著书？我们从来没有见过候补的饿殍在沟壑边吟哦；鞭扑底下的囚徒所发出来的不过是直声的叫喊，决不会用一篇妃红俪白的骈体文来诉痛苦的。所以待到磨墨吮笔，说什么“履穿踵决”时，脚上也许早经是丝袜；高吟“饥来驱我去……”的陶征士，其时或者偏已很有些酒意了。正当苦痛，即说不出苦痛来，佛说极苦地狱中的鬼魂，也反而并无叫唤！
I often say to my young classmates: The so-called "poor and sorrowful books" of the ancients are not very reliable. People who are extremely poor and sorrowful to death, where are there so many leisure people who come to write books? We have never seen a waiting list starving by the ravine; What the prisoners under the whip made was nothing more than a straight cry, and they would never use a concubine's red and white parallel text to complain of pain. So when you grind ink and suck the pen and say something "shoes are worn on the heels", the feet may have been stockings; Tao Zhengshi, who chanted "Hunger drives me to ......", may have been a little drunk at that time. Just suffering, that is, indescribable pain, the Buddha said that the ghosts in hell are not calling!华夏大概并非地狱，然而“境由心造”，我眼前总充塞着重迭的黑云，其中有故鬼，新鬼，游魂，牛首阿旁，畜生，化生，大叫唤，无叫唤，使我不堪闻见。我装作无所闻见模样，以图欺骗自己，总算已从地狱中出离。
China is probably not hell, but "the realm is made by the heart", and my eyes are always filled with overlapping black clouds, including old ghosts, new ghosts, wandering souls, bull heads, beasts, metamorphosis, shouting, and no calling, which makes me unbearable. I pretended not to hear or see anything in an attempt to deceive myself, and finally I was out of hell.打门声一响，我又回到现实世界了。又是学校的事。我为什么要做教员？！想着走着，出去开门，果然，信封上首先就看见通红的一行字：国立北京女子师范大学。
As soon as the door rang, I returned to the real world. It's a school business again. Why should I be a teacher?! Thinking about walking, I went out to open the door, and sure enough, I first saw a line of red words on the envelope: National Beijing Women's Normal University.我本就怕这学校，因为一进门就觉得阴惨惨，不知其所以然，但也常常疑心是自己的错觉。后来看到杨荫榆校长《致全体学生公启》里的“须知学校犹家庭，为尊长者断无不爱家属之理，为幼稚者亦当体贴尊长之心”的话，就恍然了，原来我虽然在学校教书，也等于在杨家坐馆，而这阴惨惨的气味，便是从“冷板凳”里出来的。可是我有一种毛病，自己也疑心是自讨苦吃的根苗，就是偶尔要想想。所以恍然之后，即又有疑问发生：这家族人员——校长和学生——的关系是怎样的，母女，还是婆媳呢？
I was afraid of this school, because as soon as I entered the door, I felt miserable, I didn't know why, but I often suspected that it was my own delusion. Later, when I saw the words in Principal Yang Yinyu's "To All Students", "You must know that school is like a family, and there is no reason not to love family members for the elderly, and for the childish, you should also be considerate of the elders", and it suddenly dawned that although I was teaching in school, it was equivalent to sitting in the Yang family, and this miserable smell came out of the "cold bench". But I have a problem, and I suspect that it is a root seedling of asking for trouble, even if I think about it occasionally. So suddenly, another question arises: what is the relationship between the family members - the principal and the students - what is the relationship between the mother and daughter, or the mother-in-law and daughter-in-law?想而又想，结果毫无。幸而这位校长宣言多，竟在她《对于暴烈学生之感言》里获得正确的解答了。曰，“与此曹子勃谿相向”，则其为婆婆无疑也。
After thinking about it, there was nothing. Fortunately, the principal has many declarations, and he actually got the correct answer in her "Testimonials to Violent Students". She said, "I am facing this Cao Zi Bo Xi," so there is no doubt that she is a mother-in-law.现在我可以大胆地用“妇姑勃谿”这句古典了。但婆媳吵架，与西宾又何干呢？因为究竟是学校，所以总还是时常有信来，或是婆婆的，或是媳妇的。我的神经又不强，一闻打门而悔做教员者以此，而且也确有可悔的理由。
Now I can boldly use the classic phrase "aunt Boxi". But if the mother-in-law and daughter-in-law quarrel, what does it have to do with Xibin? Because it is a school, there are always letters from time to time, either from mother-in-law or daughter-in-law. My nerves are not strong, and I regret being a teacher when I hear the door, and I do have reasons to regret it.这一年她们的家务简直没有完，媳妇儿们不佩服婆婆做校长了，婆婆可是不歇手。这是她的家庭，怎么肯放手呢？无足怪的。而且不但不放，还趁“五七”之际，在什么饭店请人吃饭之后，开除了六个学生自治会的职员，并且发表了那“须知学校犹家庭”的名论。
This year, their housework is simply endless, and the daughters-in-law don't admire their mother-in-law for being the principal, but the mother-in-law doesn't stop. This is her family, how can she be willing to let go? No surprise. And not only did he not let go, but also took advantage of the "May Seventh" to invite people to dinner in some restaurant, fired the staff of the six student unions, and published the famous theory that "the school is like a family".这回抽出信纸来一看，是媳妇儿们的自治会所发的，略谓：
This time I took out the letter paper and saw that it was sent by the daughters-in-law's self-governing association, which said:“旬余以来，校务停顿，百费待兴，若长此迁延，不特虚掷数百青年光阴，校务前途，亦岌岌不可终日。……”
"For more than ten days, school affairs have been suspended, and all expenses are waiting to be raised, and if this delay is prolonged, not only will hundreds of young people's time be wasted, but the future of school affairs will also be in jeopardy. ……”底下是请教员开一个会，出来维持的意思的话，订定的时间是当日下午四点钟。
The bottom is to ask the teacher to hold a meeting, and if you come out to maintain it, the set time is four o'clock in the afternoon of the same day.“去看一看罢。”我想。
"Go take a look." I think.这也是我的一种毛病，自己也疑心是自讨苦吃的根苗；明知道无论什么事，在中国是万不可轻易去“看一看”的，然而终于改不掉，所以谓之“病”。但是，究竟也颇熟于世故了，我想后，又立刻决定，四点太早，到了一定没有人，四点半去罢。
This is also a problem of mine, and I also suspect that it is a root seedling of asking for trouble; Knowing that no matter what happens, it is not easy to "take a look" in China, but in the end it cannot be changed, so it is called "disease". However, after thinking about it, I immediately decided that four o'clock was too early, and there must be no one when I arrived, so I went at half past four.四点半进了阴惨惨的校门，又走进教员休息室。出乎意料之外！除一个打盹似的校役以外，已有两位教员坐着了。一位是见过几面的；一位不认识，似乎说是姓汪，或姓王，我不大听明白，——其实也无须。
At half past four, I entered the miserable school gate and walked into the faculty lounge. Unexpected! Except for a school official who was napping, two faculty members were already sitting. One has met several times; One who doesn't know him, seems to say that his surname is Wang, or his surname is Wang, I don't understand it,—— in fact, I don't need it.我也和他们在一处坐下了。
I sat down with them too.“先生的意思以为这事情怎样呢？”这不识教员在招呼之后，看住了我的眼睛问。
"What do you think this matter is, sir?" After greeting me, the ignorant instructor looked me in the eye and asked.“这可以由各方面说……。你问的是我个人的意见么？我个人的意见，是反对杨先生的办法的……。”
This can be said from all sides...... Are you asking for my personal opinion? My personal opinion is the ...... against Mr. Yang's method. ”糟了！我的话没有说完，他便将他那灵便小巧的头向旁边一摇，表示不屑听完的态度。但这自然是我的主观；在他，或者也许本有将头摇来摇去的毛病的。
Oh no! Before I finished speaking, he shook his nimble head to the side, expressing his disdain for listening. But this is naturally my subjective opinion; In him, or maybe he has a problem with shaking his head around.“就是开除学生的罚太严了。否则，就很容易解决……。”我还要继续说下去。
"The punishment for expelling students is too severe. Otherwise, it is easy to solve ....... "I have to go on.“嗡嗡。”他不耐烦似的点头。
"Buzz." He nodded impatiently.我就默然，点起火来吸烟卷。
I was silent, lit a fire, and smoked a cigarette.“最好是给这事情冷一冷……。”不知怎的他又开始发表他的“冷一冷”学说了。
"It's best to give this matter a cold ......." Somehow he began to publish his "cold and cold" doctrine again.“嗡嗡。瞧着看罢。”这回是我不耐烦似的点头，但终于多说了一句话。
"Buzz. Just look at it. This time I nodded impatiently, but finally said one more word.我点头讫，瞥见坐前有一张印刷品，一看之后，毛骨便悚然起来。文略谓：
I nodded and caught a glimpse of a printed document in front of me, and when I looked at it, my spines went down my spine. The text briefly states:“……第用学生自治会名义，指挥讲师职员，召集校务维持讨论会，……本校素遵部章，无此学制，亦无此办法，根本上不能成立。……而自闹潮以来……不能不筹正当方法，又有其他校务进行，亦待大会议决，兹定于（月之二十一日）下午七时，由校特请全体主任专任教员评议会会员在太平湖饭店开校务紧急会议，解决种种重要问题。务恳大驾莅临，无任盼祷！”
“…… In the name of the Student Government Association, direct the lecturers and staff to convene a seminar on school affairs,...... Our school has always adhered to the ministry's regulations, and without this academic system, there is no such method, and it cannot be established at all. …… And since the uprising...... At 7 p.m. on the 21st of this month, all the members of the full-time faculty council of the school will be invited to hold an emergency meeting on school affairs at the Taiping Lake Hotel to solve various important issues. Be sure to come and pray for it. ”署名就是我所视为畏途的“国立北京女子师范大学”，但下面还有一个“启”字。我这时才知道我不该来，也无须“莅临”太平湖饭店，因为我不过是一个“兼任教员”。然而校长为什么不制止学生开会，又不预先否认，却要叫我到了学校来看这“启”的呢？我愤然地要质问了，举目四顾，两个教员，一个校役，四面砖墙带着门和窗门，而并没有半个负有答复的责任的生物。“国立北京女子师范学校”虽然能“启”，然而是不能答的。只有默默地阴森地四周的墙壁将人包围，现出险恶的颜色。
The signature is "National Beijing Women's Normal University" that I regard as a daunting path, but there is also a word "Qi" below. Only then did I realize that I shouldn't come, and I didn't need to "visit" the Taiping Lake Hotel, because I was just a "part-time teacher". However, why didn't the principal stop the students from holding a meeting, and instead of denying it in advance, he wanted to call me to the school to see this "Qi"? I was about to question angrily, and looked around, two instructors, a school officer, four brick walls with doors and windows, and not half a creature with an answer. Although the "National Beijing Women's Normal School" can be "opened", it cannot be answered. Only silently and eeriely surrounding walls surround people, showing sinister colors.我感到苦痛了，但没有悟出它的原因。
I felt pain, but I didn't realize the reason for it.可是两个学生来请开会了；婆婆终于没有露面。我们就走进会场去，这时连我已经有五个人；后来陆续又到了七八人。于是乎开会。
But two students came to invite a meeting; The mother-in-law finally did not show up. We walked into the venue, and there were already five of us; Later, there were seven or eight people one after another. So the meeting was held.“为幼稚者”仿佛不大能够“体贴尊长之心”似的，很诉了许多苦。然而我们有什么权利来干预“家庭”里的事呢？而况太平湖饭店里又要“解决种种重要问题”了！但是我也说明了几句我所以来校的理由，并要求学校当局今天缩头缩脑办法的解答。然而，举目四顾，只有媳妇儿们和西宾，砖墙带着门和窗门，而并没有半个负有答复的责任的生物！
"For the naïve" seems to be unlikely to be able to "be considerate of the elders", and complains a lot. But what right do we have to intervene in the affairs of the "family"? Moreover, the Taiping Lake Hotel has to "solve all kinds of important problems" again! But I also explained a few reasons why I came to the school, and asked the school authorities to answer the method of shrinking today. However, looking around, there were only daughters-in-law and Xibin, brick walls with doors and windows, and not half a creature with an answer!我感到苦痛了，但没有悟出它的原因。
I felt pain, but I didn't realize the reason for it.这时我所不识的教员和学生在谈话了；我也不很细听。但在他的话里听到一句“你们做事不要碰壁”，在学生的话里听到一句“杨先生就是壁”，于我就仿佛见了一道光，立刻知道我的痛苦的原因了。
At this time, the faculty and students I didn't know were talking; I don't listen very carefully. But when I heard the sentence "Don't hit the wall when you do things" in his words, and heard the sentence "Mr. Yang is the wall" in the students' words, I felt as if I saw a light and immediately knew the reason for my pain.碰壁，碰壁！我碰了杨家的壁了！
Hit the wall, hit the wall! I touched the wall of the Yang family!其时看看学生们，就像一群童养媳……。
At that time, looking at the students, it was like a group of child brides......这一种会议是照例没有结果的，几个自以为大胆的人物对于婆婆稍加微辞之后，即大家走散。我回家坐在自己的窗下的时候，天色已近黄昏，而阴惨惨的颜色却渐渐地退去，回忆到碰壁的学说，居然微笑起来了。
This kind of meeting was fruitless as usual, and after a few self-righteous figures said a little to their mother-in-law, everyone was separated. When I went home and sat under my window, it was almost dusk, but the gloomy colors gradually receded, and I actually smiled when I recalled the doctrine of hitting the wall.中国各处是壁，然而无形，像“鬼打墙”一般，使你随时能“碰”。能打这墙的，能碰而不感到痛苦的，是胜利者。——但是，此刻太平湖饭店之宴已近阑珊，大家都已经吃到冰其淋，在那里“冷一冷”了罢……。
There are walls everywhere in China, but they are invisible, like "ghosts hitting the wall", so that you can "touch" them at any time. Those who can hit this wall, who can touch it without feeling pain, are the winners. ——However, at this moment, the banquet at the Taiping Lake Hotel is nearing its end, and everyone has already eaten ice and ...... "cold" there.我于是仿佛看见雪白的桌布已经沾了许多酱油渍，男男女女围着桌子都吃冰其淋，而许多媳妇儿，就如中国历来的大多数媳妇儿在苦节的婆婆脚下似的，都决定了暗淡的运命。
I seemed to see that the snow-white tablecloth had been stained with a lot of soy sauce stains, men and women were eating ice around the table, and many daughters-in-law, just like most daughters-in-law in China who were at the feet of their mother-in-law, had decided their bleak fate.我吸了两支烟，眼前也光明起来，幻出饭店里电灯的光彩，看见教育家在杯酒间谋害学生，看见杀人者于微笑后屠戮百姓，看见死尸在粪土中舞蹈，看见污秽洒满了风籁琴，我想取作画图，竟不能画成一线。我为什么要做教员，连自己也侮蔑自己起来。但是织芳来访我了。
I smoked two cigarettes, and my eyes lit up, conjuring up the brilliance of the electric lights in the restaurant, seeing educators murdering students in the glass of wine, seeing murderers slaughtering people after smiling, seeing corpses dancing in the dung, and seeing filth sprinkled all over the wind and sound. Why should I be a teacher, even belittle myself. But Zhi Fang came to visit me.我们闲谈之间，他也忽而发感慨——
While we were chatting, he also suddenly sighed -“中国什么都黑暗，谁也不行，但没有事的时候是看不出来的。教员咧，学生咧，烘烘烘，烘烘烘，真像一个学校，一有事故，教员也不见了，学生也慢慢躲开了；结局只剩下几个傻子给大家做牺牲，算是收束。多少天之后，又是这样的学校，躲开的也出来了，不见的也露脸了，‘地球是圆的’咧，‘苍蝇是传染病的媒介’咧，又是学生咧，教员咧，烘烘烘……。”
"China is dark about everything, no one can do it, but you can't see it when there is nothing wrong. The instructors are busy, the students are busy, it's really like a school, when there is an accident, the teachers are gone, and the students slowly dodge; In the end, there are only a few fools left to make sacrifices for everyone, which is considered a restraint. How many days later, it was such a school again, those who avoided it came out, and those who didn't see it showed their faces, 'the earth is round', 'flies are the vector of infectious diseases', and the students again, the teachers, and the ....... ”从不像我似的常常“碰壁”的青年学生的眼睛看来，中国也就如此之黑暗么？然而他们仅有微弱的呻吟，然而一呻吟就被杀戮了！
From the eyes of young students who have never "hit a wall" like me, is China so dark? However, they only moaned faintly, and as soon as they moaned, they were killed!五月二十一日夜。
On the night of May 21st.

并非闲话

并非闲话

并非闲话

Not idle凡事无论大小，只要和自己有些相干，便不免格外警觉。即如这一回女子师范大学的风潮，我因为在那里担任一点钟功课，也就感到震动，而且就发了几句感慨，登在五月十二的《京报副刊》上。自然，自己也明知道违了“和光同尘”的古训了，但我就是这样，并不想以骑墙或阴柔来买人尊敬。三四天之后，忽然接到一本《现代评论》十五期，很觉得有些稀奇。这一期是新印的，第一页上目录已经整齐（初版字有参差处），就证明着至少是再版。我想：为什么这一期特别卖的多，送的多呢，莫非内容改变了么？翻开初版来，校勘下去，都一样；不过末叶的金城银行的广告已经杳然，所以一篇《女师大的学潮》就赤条条地露出。我不是也发过议论的么？自然要看一看，原来是赞成杨荫榆校长的，和我的论调正相反。做的人是“一个女读者”。
No matter how big or small everything is, as long as it has something to do with yourself, you can't help but be extra vigilant. Just like the trend of women's normal universities this time, I felt shocked because I was doing my homework there, and I posted a few words of emotion, which were published in the "Beijing News Supplement" on May 12. Naturally, I know that I have violated the ancient motto of "being with light and dust", but I am like this, and I don't want to buy respect by riding a wall or being feminine. Three or four days later, I suddenly received a fifteenth issue of "Modern Review", which I felt a little strange. This issue is newly printed, and the table of contents on the first page has been neatly arranged (the words of the first edition are uneven), which proves that it is at least a reprint. I thought: Why is this issue sold so much and given away, could it be that the content has changed? Open the first edition and proofread, it's the same; However, the advertisement of Jincheng Bank at the end of the year has disappeared, so an article "The Student Tide of Women's Normal University" was exposed. Didn't I also post a discussion? Naturally, I had to take a look, and it turned out that I was in favor of Principal Yang Yinyu, which was the opposite of my argument. The person who does it is "a female reader".中国原是玩意儿最多的地方，近来又刚闹过什么“琴心是否女士”问题，我于是心血来潮，忽而想：又捣什么鬼，装什么佯了？但我即刻不再想下去，因为接着就起了别一个念头，想到近来有些人，凡是自己善于在暗中播弄鼓动的，一看见别人明白质直的言动，便往往反噬他是播弄和鼓动，是某党，是某系；正如偷汉的女人的丈夫，总愿意说世人全是忘八，和他相同，他心里才觉舒畅。这种思想是卑劣的；我太多心了，人们也何至于一定用裙子来做军旗。我就将我的念头打断了。
China used to be a place with the most things, and recently there was a question of "whether the heart of the piano is a lady", so I had a whim and suddenly thought: What the hell are you messing with, what are you pretending? But I immediately stopped thinking about it, because then I had another thought, thinking that recently, some people, whoever they are good at sowing incitement in secret, often bite back at him as soon as they see others understand and incite straightforward words and actions, whether it is a certain party or a certain department; Just like the husband of a woman who steals a man, he is always willing to say that the world is all forgetful, and he feels comfortable in his heart. This kind of thinking is despicable; I have too much care, why do people have to use skirts to make military flags. I interrupted my thoughts.此后，风潮还是拖延着，而且展开来，于是有七个教员的宣言发表，也登在五月二十七日的《京报》上，其中的一个是我。
Since then, the trend has been delayed and unfolded, so the manifesto of seven teachers has been published, which was also published in the "Beijing News" on May 27, one of which is me.这回的反响快透了，三十日发行（其实是二十九日已经发卖）的《现代评论》上，西滢先生就在《闲话》的第一段中特地评论。但是，据说宣言是“《闲话》正要付印的时候”才在报上见到的，所以前半只论学潮，和宣言无涉。后来又做了三大段，大约是见了宣言之后，这才文思泉涌的罢，可是《闲话》付印的时间，大概总该颇有些耽误了。但后做而移在前面，也未可知。那么，足见这是一段要紧的“闲话”。
This time, the response was so fast that in the "Modern Review" released on the 30th (in fact, it was released on the 29th), Mr. Xi Ying specially commented in the first paragraph of "Gossip". However, it is said that the declaration was only seen in the newspaper "when "Gossip" was about to be printed, so the first half only talked about the academic trend and had nothing to do with the declaration. Later, I made three more paragraphs, about after seeing the declaration, and then the literary thought flowed in, but the time for the printing of "Gossip" should probably be delayed. But it is unclear whether it will be done later and moved to the front. Then, it shows that this is an important "gossip".《闲话》中说，“以前我们常常听说女师大的风潮，有在北京教育界占最大势力的某籍某系的人在暗中鼓动，可是我们总不敢相信。”所以他只在宣言中摘出“最精彩的几句”，加上圈子，评为“未免偏袒一方”；而且因为“流言更加传布得厉害”，遂觉“可惜”，但他说“还是不信我们平素所很尊敬的人会暗中挑剔风潮”。这些话我觉得确有些超妙的识见。例如“流言”本是畜类的武器，鬼蜮的手段，实在应该不信它。又如一查籍贯，则即使装作公平，也容易启人疑窦，总不如“不敢相信”的好，否则同籍的人固然惮于在一张纸上宣言，而别一某籍的人也不便在暗中给同籍的人帮忙了。这些“流言”和“听说”，当然都只配当作狗屁！
"Gossip" said, "In the past, we often heard about the trend of women's normal universities, and some people from a certain department who occupied the largest power in Beijing's education circles were secretly agitating, but we couldn't believe it. Therefore, he only picked out the "most wonderful sentences" in the manifesto, added circles, and rated them as "inevitably partial"; And because "the rumors are spreading more violently", he felt "pity", but he said, "I still don't believe that the people we usually respect will secretly pick on the trend." I think these words do have some wonderful insights. For example, "rumors" are weapons of animals and ghosts, and we really shouldn't believe them. Another example is to check the place of origin, even if it is pretending to be fair, it is easy to raise suspicions, it is better to "can't believe it", otherwise people of the same nationality will certainly be afraid to declare on a piece of paper, and it is inconvenient for people of other nationalities to secretly help people of the same nationality. These "rumors" and "hearsays" are of course only worthy of bullshit!但是，西滢先生因为“未免偏袒一方”而遂叹为“可惜”，仍是引用“流言”，我却以为是“可惜”的事。清朝的县官坐堂，往往两造各责小板五百完案，“偏袒”之嫌是没有了，可是终于不免为胡涂虫。假使一个人还有是非之心，倒不如直说的好；否则，虽然吞吞吐吐，明眼人也会看出他暗中“偏袒”那一方，所表白的不过是自己的阴险和卑劣。宣言中所谓“若离若合，殊有混淆黑白之嫌”者，似乎也就是为此辈的手段写照。而且所谓“挑剔风潮”的“流言”，说不定就是这些伏在暗中，轻易不大露面的东西所制造的，但我自然也“没有调查详细的事实，不大知道”。可惜的是西滢先生虽说“还是不信”，却已为我辈“可惜”，足见流言之易于惑人，无怪常有人用作武器。但在我，却直到看见这《闲话》之后，才知道西滢先生们原来“常常”听到这样的流言，并且和我偶尔听到的都不对。可见流言也有种种，某种流言，大抵是奔凑到某种耳朵，写出在某种笔下的。
However, Mr. Xiying sighed as "a pity" because he "inevitably took sides", and still quoted "rumors", but I thought it was a "pity". The county officials of the Qing Dynasty often blamed each for completing the case with 500 small boards, and the suspicion of "favoritism" was gone, but in the end, it was inevitable to be a Hu Tu worm. If a person still has a heart of right and wrong, it is better to speak directly; Otherwise, although he hesitated, a discerning person would also see that he was secretly "favoring" the other side, and what he confessed was only his own insidiousness and despicability. The so-called "if they are separated or combined, there is a suspicion of confusing black and white", seems to be a portrayal of the methods of this generation. Moreover, the so-called "rumors" of the "picky trend" may be created by these things that are hidden in the dark and do not show up easily, but naturally I "did not investigate the detailed facts, so I didn't know". It is a pity that although Mr. Xiying said "I still don't believe it", he has been "sorry" for our generation, which shows that rumors are easy to confuse, and it is no wonder that people often use them as weapons. But it wasn't until I saw this "gossip" that I realized that Mr. Xiying had heard such rumors "often", and it was not the same as what I occasionally heard. It can be seen that there are all kinds of rumors, and some rumors are probably rushed to some kind of ear and written in a certain pen.但在《闲话》的前半，即西滢先生还未在报上看见七个教员的宣言之前，已经比学校为“臭毛厕”，主张“人人都有扫除的义务”了。为什么呢？一者报上两个相反的启事已经发现；二者学生把守校门；三者有“校长不能在学校开会，不得不借邻近的饭店招集教员开会的奇闻”。但这所述的“臭毛厕”的情形还得修改些，因为层次有点颠倒。据宣言说，则“饭店开会”，乃在“把守校门”之前，大约西滢先生觉得不“最精彩”，所以没有摘录，或者已经写好，所以不及摘录的罢。现在我来补摘几句，并且也加些圈子，聊以效颦——
But in the first half of "Gossip", that is, before Mr. Xiying saw the declaration of the seven teachers in the newspaper, he had already compared the school to a "stinky toilet" and advocated that "everyone has the obligation to clean it". Why? One reported that two opposite notices had been discovered; second, students guard the school gate; The three include "the anecdote that the principal cannot hold a meeting at the school and has to use a nearby hotel to convene a meeting." But the situation of the "stinky toilet" mentioned in this article needs to be modified a bit, because the level is a bit reversed. According to the declaration, the "hotel meeting" was before "guarding the school gate", and Mr. Xiying felt that it was not "the most exciting", so he did not excerpt it, or it had already been written, so it was not as good as the excerpt. Now I will add a few sentences, and also add some circles to talk about the frown——“……迨五月七日校内讲演时，学生劝校长杨荫榆先生退席后，杨先生乃于饭馆召集校员若干燕饮，继即以评议会名义，将学生自治会职员六人揭示开除，由是全校哗然，有坚拒杨先生长校之事变。……”
“…… When the students persuaded the principal, Mr. Yang Yinyu, to leave the seat during the speech on May 7, Mr. Yang summoned a number of school members to drink in the restaurant, and then in the name of the council, he revealed and expelled six staff members of the Student Government Association. ……”《闲话》里的和这事实的颠倒，从神经过敏的看起来，或者也可以认为“偏袒”的表现；但我在这里并非举证，不过聊作插话而已。其实，“偏袒”两字，因我适值选得不大堂皇，所以使人厌观，倘用别的字，便会大大的两样。况且，即使是自以为公平的批评家，“偏袒”也在所不免的，譬如和校长同籍贯，或是好朋友，或是换帖兄弟，或是叨过酒饭，每不免于不知不觉间有所“偏袒”。这也算人情之常，不足深怪；但当侃侃而谈之际，那自然也许流露出来。然而也没有什么要紧，局外人那里会知道这许多底细呢，无伤大体的。
The reversal of this fact in "Gossip" looks like a nervous person, or it can also be considered a manifestation of "favoritism"; But I'm not here to provide evidence, I'm just interjecting. In fact, the word "favoritism" is annoying because I chose it at the right time, so it is annoying, and if I use other words, it will be very different. Moreover, even critics who think they are fair are inevitably "favored", such as being from the same place of origin as the principal, or being a good friend, or changing brothers, or having eaten and drinking, and they are inevitably "favored" unconsciously. This is also a common occurrence, not surprising; But when talking eloquently, it may naturally be revealed. However, it doesn't matter, outsiders will know these many details, it doesn't hurt the big picture.但是学校的变成“臭毛厕”，却究竟在“饭店召集教员”之后，酒醉饭饱，毛厕当然合用了。西滢先生希望“教育当局”打扫，我以为在打扫之前，还须先封饭店，否则醉饱之后，总要拉矢，毛厕即永远需用，怎么打扫得干净？而且，还未打扫之前，不是已经有了“流言”了么？流言之力，是能使粪便增光，蛆虫成圣的，打扫夫又怎么动手？姑无论现在有无打扫夫。
However, the school became a "stinky toilet", but after the "hotel called the teachers", the drunk and full of food, the toilet was of course suitable. Mr. Xiying hopes that the "education authorities" will clean, I think that before cleaning, the hotel must be sealed first, otherwise after getting drunk and full, there will always be a pull, and the wool toilet will always be used, how to clean it? Moreover, before cleaning, isn't there already a "rumor"? The power of rumors can make feces brighter and maggots sanctified, so how can the cleaner do it? Whether you have a cleaner or not.至于“万不可再敷衍下去”，那可实在是斩钉截铁的办法。正应该这样办。但是，世上虽然有斩钉截铁的办法，却很少见有敢负责任的宣言。所多的是自在黑幕中，偏说不知道；替暴君奔走，却以局外人自居；满肚子怀着鬼胎，而装出公允的笑脸；有谁明说出自己所观察的是非来的，他便用了“流言”来作不负责任的武器：这种蛆虫充满的“臭毛厕”，是难于打扫干净的。丢尽“教育界的面目”的丑态，现在和将来还多着哩！
As for "no more perfunctory", it is really a categorical method. That's exactly what it should be. However, although there are categorical methods in the world, there are few responsible declarations. What is more is that I am free in the shady scene, and I don't know; running for the tyrant, but thinking of himself as an outsider; full of ghostly fetuses, and pretending to be fair smiling; Whoever clearly states the right and wrong of what he observes, he uses "rumors" as an irresponsible weapon: this maggot-filled "stinky toilet" is difficult to clean. The ugliness of losing the "face of the education industry" is still and will be more!五月三十日。
May 30.

我的“籍”和“系”

我的“籍”和“系”

我的“籍”和“系”

My "Nationality" and "Department"虽然因为我劝过人少——或者竟不——读中国书，曾蒙一位不相识的青年先生赐信要我搬出中国去，但是我终于没有走。而且我究竟是中国人，读过中国书的，因此也颇知道些处世的妙法。譬如，假使要掉文袋，可以说说“桃红柳绿”，这些事是大家早已公认的，谁也不会说你错。如果论史，就赞几句孔明，骂一通秦桧，这些是非也早经论定，学述一回决没有什么差池；况且秦太师的党羽现已半个无存，也可保毫无危险。至于近事呢，勿谈为佳，否则连你的籍贯也许会使你由可“尊敬”而变为“可惜”的。
Although I had advised few people to read Chinese books, I was once given a letter from a young gentleman I didn't know to move out of China, but I didn't leave. And I am Chinese, I have read Chinese books, so I know some wonderful ways to live in the world. For example, if you want to drop your stationery, you can say "peach red and willow green", these things have long been recognized by everyone, and no one will say that you are wrong. If you talk about history, just praise a few words of Kongming and scold Qin Hui, these rights and wrongs have already been discussed, and there is no mistake in learning and narrative; Moreover, half of Qin Taishi's henchmen are now gone, and there is no danger. As for recent events, it is better not to talk about them, otherwise even your place of origin may make you change from "respectable" to "pitiful".我记得宋朝是不许南人做宰相的，那是他们的“祖制”，只可惜终于不能坚持。至于“某籍”人说不得话，却是我近来的新发见。也还是女师大的风潮，我说了几句话。但我先要声明，我既然说过，颇知道些处世的妙法，为什么又去说话呢？那是，因为，我是见过清末捣乱的人，没有生长在太平盛世，所以纵使颇有些涵养工夫，有时也不免要开口，客气地说，就是大不“安分”的。于是乎我说话了，不料陈西滢先生早已常常听到一种“流言”，那大致是“女师大的风潮，有北京教育界占最大势力的某籍某系的人在暗中鼓动”。现在我一说话，恰巧化“暗”为“明”，就使这常常听到流言的西滢先生代为“可惜”，虽然他存心忠厚，“自然还是不信平素所很尊敬的人会暗中挑剔风潮”；无奈“流言”却“更加传布得厉害了”，这怎不使人“怀疑”呢？自然是难怪的。
I remember that the Song Dynasty did not allow southerners to be prime ministers, which was their "ancestral system", but unfortunately it could not be adhered to in the end. As for the "certain nationality" people who can't speak, it is my recent discovery. It is still a trend at the Women's Normal University, and I said a few words. But I want to declare first, since I have said that I know some wonderful ways to live in the world, why do I speak again? That's because, I have seen people who made trouble in the late Qing Dynasty, and they did not grow up in a peaceful and prosperous era, so even if they have a lot of self-cultivation, sometimes they can't help but speak, to put it politely, they are not "settled". So I spoke, but unexpectedly, Mr. Chen Xiying had already heard a kind of "rumor" from time to time, which was roughly "the trend of women's normal universities, and there were people from a certain department who accounted for the largest power in Beijing's education circles secretly agitating it." Now as soon as I speak, I happen to turn "dark" into "light", which makes Mr. Xiying, who often hears rumors, "pity" on behalf of Mr. Xiying, although he is loyal, "naturally I still don't believe that people I usually respect will secretly pick on the trend"; Helplessly, the "rumors" are "more spreadable", how can this not make people "suspicious"? Naturally, it's no wonder.我确有一个“籍”，也是各人各有一个的籍，不足为奇。但我是什么“系”呢？自己想想，既非“研究系”，也非“交通系”，真不知怎么一回事。只好再精查，细想；终于也明白了，现在写它出来，庶几乎免得又有“流言”，以为我是黑籍的政客。
I do have a "nationality", and it is not surprising that everyone has a nationality. But what is "yes"? Think about it yourself, it is neither a "research department" nor a "transportation department", I really don't know what is going on. I had to check and think about it carefully; Finally, I understand, and now that I write it, I will almost avoid "rumors" that I am a black politician.因为应付某国某君的嘱托，我正写了一点自己的履历，第一句是“我于一八八一年生在浙江省绍兴府城里一家姓周的家里”，这里就说明了我的“籍”。但自从到了“可惜”的地位之后，我便又在末尾添上一句道，“近几年我又兼做北京大学，师范大学，女子师范大学的国文系讲师”，这大概就是我的“系”了。我真不料我竟成了这样的一个“系”。
Because of the entrustment of a certain country and a certain king, I am writing a little bit of my resume, the first sentence is "I was born in 1881 in a family surnamed Zhou in Shaoxing Prefecture, Zhejiang Province", which explains my "nationality". But since I reached the status of "pity", I added a sentence at the end, "In recent years, I have also been a lecturer in the Department of Chinese Literature at Peking University, Normal University, and Women's Normal University", which is probably my "department". I really didn't expect me to become such a "department".我常常要“挑剔”文字是确的，至于“挑剔风潮”这一种连字面都不通的阴谋，我至今还不知道是怎样的做法。何以一有流言，我就得沉默，否则立刻犯了嫌疑，至于使和我毫不相干的人如西滢先生者也来代为“可惜”呢？那么，如果流言说我正在钻营，我就得自己锁在房里了；如果流言说我想做皇帝，我就得连忙自称奴才了。然而古人却确是这样做过了，还留下些什么“空穴来风，桐乳来巢”的鬼格言。可惜我总不耐烦敬步后尘；不得已，我只好对于无论是谁，先奉还他无端送给我的“尊敬”。
I often have to "criticize" the text to be true, but as for the "picky trend", a conspiracy that doesn't even make sense literally, I still don't know what kind of practice it is. Why do I have to be silent as soon as there are rumors, otherwise I will immediately be suspected, and as for making people who have nothing to do with me like Mr. Xiying also come to say "pity"? Then, if rumors say I'm drilling camp, I'll have to lock myself in the room; If rumors say I want to be emperor, I have to quickly call myself a servant. However, the ancients did do this, and left behind some ghost adage of "groundless wind, tung milk comes to nest". It's a pity that I am always impatient to follow in my footsteps; As a last resort, I had to return the "respect" he gave me for no reason, no matter who it was.其实，现今的将“尊敬”来布施和拜领的人们，也就都是上了古人的当。我们的乏的古人想了几千年，得到一个制驭别人的巧法：可压服的将他压服，否则将他抬高。而抬高也就是一种压服的手段，常常微微示意说，你应该这样，倘不，我要将你摔下来了。求人尊敬的可怜虫于是默默地坐着；但偶然也放开喉咙道“有利必有弊呀！”“彼亦一是非，此亦一是非呀！”“猗欤休哉呀！”听众遂亦同声赞叹道，“对呀对呀，可敬极了呀！”这样的互相敷衍下去，自己以为有趣。
In fact, today's people who "respect" to give and worship are all fooled by the ancients. Our poor ancients thought for thousands of years and came up with a clever way to control others: to suppress those who can subdue him, otherwise to raise him up. And lifting is also a means of subduing, often slightly signaling that you should do this, if not, I will throw you down. The poor wretched begging for respect sat silently; But accidentally let go of his throat and said, "There must be pros and cons!" "He is also right and wrong, and this is also right and wrong!" "Oh no! The audience also praised in unison, "Yes, yes, it's very respectable!" "This kind of perfunctory mutual perfunctory makes me think it's interesting.从此这一个办法便成为八面锋，杀掉了许多乏人和白痴，但是穿了圣贤的衣冠入殓。可怜他们竟不知道自己将褒贬他的人们的身价估得太大了，反至于连自己的原价也一同失掉。
Since then, this method has become an eight-faced front, killing many people and idiots, but wearing the clothes of sages and burial. It's a pity that they don't know that they have overestimated the value of those who praise and criticize him, and even their original price has been lost.人类是进化的，现在的人心，当然比古人的高洁；但是“尊敬”的流毒，却还不下于流言，尤其是有谁装腔作势，要来将这撒去时，更足使乏人和白痴惶恐。我本来也无可尊敬；也不愿受人尊敬，免得不如人意的时候，又被人摔下来。更明白地说罢：我所憎恶的太多了，应该自己也得到憎恶，这才还有点像活在人间；如果收得的乃是相反的布施，于我倒是一个冷嘲，使我对于自己也要大加侮蔑；如果收得的是吞吞吐吐的不知道算什么，则使我感到将要呕哕似的恶心。然而无论如何，“流言”总不能吓哑我的嘴……。
Human beings are evolving, and the current human heart is of course nobler than the ancients; But the poison of "respect" is no less than rumors, especially when someone pretends to spread it, it is enough to make the poor and idiots fearful. I was not respectable; I don't want to be respected, lest I be thrown down again when I am not satisfied. To put it more clearly: I hate too much, and I should get it myself, which is a bit like living in the world; If what I receive is the opposite of almsgiving, it is a cynicism to me, and I have to despise myself as well; If what I received was hesitation and I didn't know what it was, it made me feel nauseous as if I was about to vomit. However, in any case, "rumors" cannot scare my mouth .......六月二日晨。
Morning of June 2nd.

咬文嚼字

咬文嚼字

咬文嚼字

Chew the words三
Three自从世界上产生了“须知学校犹家庭”的名论之后，颇使我觉得惊奇，想考查这家庭的组织。后来，幸而在《国立北京女子师范大学校长杨荫榆对于暴烈学生之感言》中，发见了“与此曹子勃谿相向”这一句话，才算得到一点头绪：校长和学生的关系是“犹”之“妇姑”。于是据此推断，以为教员都是杂凑在杨府上的西宾，将这结论在《语丝》上发表。“可惜”！昨天偶然在《晨报》上拜读“该校哲教系教员兼代主任汪懋祖以彼之意见书投寄本报”的话，这才知道我又错了，原来都是弟兄，而且现正“相煎益急”，像曹操的儿子阿丕和阿植似的。
Since the famous theory of "school is like a family" has emerged in the world, I am quite surprised and want to examine the organization of this family. Later, fortunately, in the "Speech of Yang Yinyu, President of National Beijing Women's Normal University, to the Violent Students", I found the sentence "Facing this Cao Ziboxi", and I got a little clue: the relationship between the principal and the students is "Like" and "mother-in-law". So based on this, it was inferred that the instructors were all Xi Bin mixed in the Yang Mansion, and published this conclusion in "Yusi". "It's a pity"! Yesterday, I happened to read in the "Morning Post" that "Wang Maozu, a teacher and acting director of the school's Department of Philosophy and Education, sent his opinion to this newspaper", and then I realized that I was wrong again, it turned out that they were all brothers, and now they were "boiling each other more and more", like Cao Cao's sons Ah Pi and Ah Zhi.但是，尚希原谅，我于引用的原文上都不加圈了。只因为我不想圈，并非文章坏。
However, I hope to forgive you, I have not circled the original text I quoted. Just because I don't want to circle, it's not that the article is bad.据考据家说，这曹子建的《七步诗》是假的。但也没有什么大相干，姑且利用它来活剥一首，替豆萁伸冤：
According to the researchers, Cao Zijian's "Seven Steps Poem" is fake. But it doesn't matter much, let's use it to peel a piece alive and seek justice for Dou Qi:煮豆燃豆萁，萁在釜下泣——Boiling beans and burning beans, Qi cried under the pot - 我烬你熟了，正好办教席！ I'm cooked, just in time to set up a teaching chair!
六月五日。
June 5th.

忽然想到

忽然想到

忽然想到

Suddenly thought十
Ten无论是谁，只要站在“辩诬”的地位的，无论辩白与否，都已经是屈辱。更何况受了实际的大损害之后，还得来辩诬。
No matter who stands in the position of "defense", whether it is defended or not, it is already a humiliation. What's more, after suffering great actual damage, they have to defend themselves.我们的市民被上海租界的英国巡捕击杀了，我们并不还击，却先来赶紧洗刷牺牲者的罪名。说道我们并非“赤化”，因为没有受别国的煽动；说道我们并非“暴徒”，因为都是空手，没有兵器的。我不解为什么中国人如果真使中国赤化，真在中国暴动，就得听英捕来处死刑？记得新希腊人也曾用兵器对付过国内的土耳其人，却并不被称为暴徒；俄国确已赤化多年了，也没有得到别国开枪的惩罚。而独有中国人，则市民被杀之后，还要皇皇然辩诬，张着含冤的眼睛，向世界搜求公道。
Our citizens were killed by the British patrols in the Shanghai Concession, and we did not fight back, but came first to clear the victims' names. said that we are not "red", because we are not incited by other countries; said that we are not "thugs" because we are all empty-handed and unweaponed. I don't understand why if the Chinese really turn China red and really riot in China, they have to listen to the British arrest and sentence them to death? I remember that the New Greeks also used weapons against the Turks in the country, but they were not called thugs; Russia has indeed been red for many years, and it has not been punished by other countries to shoot. Only the Chinese, after the citizens were killed, they still had to defend themselves, open their eyes with grievances, and seek justice from the world.其实，这原由是很容易了然的，就因为我们并非暴徒，并未赤化的缘故。
In fact, the reason for this is easy to understand, because we are not thugs and have not turned red.因此我们就觉得含冤，大叫着伪文明的破产。可是文明是向来如此的，并非到现在才将假面具揭下来。只因为这样的损害，以前是别民族所受，我们不知道，或者是我们原已屡次受过，现在都已忘却罢了。公道和武力合为一体的文明，世界上本未出现，那萌芽或者只在几个先驱者和几群被迫压民族的脑中。但是，当自己有了力量的时候，却往往离而为二了。
Therefore, we feel wronged and shout about the bankruptcy of pseudo-civilization. But civilization has always been like this, and it is not until now that the mask has been removed. Just because such damage was suffered by other ethnic groups before, we don't know, or we have suffered it many times, and now we have forgotten it. A civilization that integrates justice and force has never appeared in the world, and it may only be in the brains of a few pioneers and a few groups of forced nations. However, when you have strength, you are often separated.但英国究竟有真的文明人存在。今天，我们已经看见各国无党派智识阶级劳动者所组织的国际工人后援会，大表同情于中国的《致中国国民宣言》了。列名的人，英国就有培那特萧（Bernard Shaw），中国的留心世界文学的人大抵知道他的名字；法国则巴尔布斯（Henri Barbusse），中国也曾译过他的作品。他的母亲却是英国人；或者说，因此他也富有实行的质素，法国作家所常有的享乐的气息，在他的作品中是丝毫也没有的。现在都出而为中国鸣不平了，所以我觉得英国人的品性，我们可学的地方还多着，——但自然除了捕头，商人，和看见学生的游行而在屋顶拍手嘲笑的娘儿们。
But there are really civilized people in Britain. Today, we have seen the International Workers' Support Association, organized by non-partisan intellectual class workers in various countries, expressing their sympathy for China's "Declaration to the Chinese People". Among the people on the list, there is Bernard Shaw in the UK, and most people in China who pay attention to world literature know his name; In France, Henri Barbusse has also translated his works in China. His mother was British; In other words, he is therefore also rich in practical quality, and the hedonistic atmosphere that French writers often have is not at all present in his works. Now they are all complaining about China, so I think there is still a lot to learn from the character of the British,—— but naturally in addition to headcatchers, businessmen, and women who clap their hands and laugh at the students on the rooftops.我并非说我们应该做“爱敌若友”的人，不过说我们目下委实并没有认谁作敌。近来的文字中，虽然偶有“认清敌人”这些话，那是行文过火的毛病。倘有敌人，我们就早该抽刃而起，要求“以血偿血”了。而现在我们所要求的是什么呢？辩诬之后，不过想得点轻微的补偿；那办法虽说有十几条，总而言之，单是“不相往来”，成为“路人”而已。虽是对于本来极密的友人，怕也不过如此罢。
I am not saying that we should be people who "love enemies as friends", but I am saying that we do not recognize anyone as an enemy at the moment. In recent texts, although there are occasional words such as "recognize the enemy", it is a problem of excessive writing. If there is an enemy, we should have risen up long ago and demanded "blood for blood". And what are we asking for now? After the defense, I just want to get some slight compensation; Although there are more than a dozen methods, all in all, it is just "not communicating" and becoming a "passerby". Although it is for a close friend, I am afraid it is just like this.然而将实话说出来，就是：因为公道和实力还没有合为一体，而我们只抓得了公道，所以满眼是友人，即使他加了任意的杀戮。
However, to tell the truth, that is: because justice and strength have not yet been combined, and we can only catch justice, our eyes are full of friends, even if he kills arbitrarily.如果我们永远只有公道，就得永远着力于辩诬，终身空忙碌。这几天有些纸贴在墙上，仿佛叫人勿看《顺天时报》似的。我从来就不大看这报，但也并非“排外”，实在因为它的好恶，每每和我的很不同。然而也间有很确，为中国人自己不肯说的话。大概两三年前，正值一种爱国运动的时候罢，偶见一篇它的社论，大意说，一国当衰弊之际，总有两种意见不同的人。一是民气论者，侧重国民的气概，一是民力论者，专重国民的实力。前者多则国家终亦渐弱，后者多则将强。我想，这是很不错的；而且我们应该时时记得的。
If we always have only justice, we must always focus on defense and be busy for the rest of our lives. In the past few days, some paper has been pasted on the wall, as if telling people not to read the "Shuntian Times". I have never read this newspaper, but it is not "xenophobic", because its likes and dislikes are always very different from mine. However, there are also things that the Chinese themselves refuse to say. About two or three years ago, during the time of a patriotic movement, I occasionally saw an editorial of it, to the effect that when a country is in decline, there are always two people with different opinions. One is the popular spirit theorist, focusing on the spirit of the people, and the other is the people's power theory, focusing on the strength of the people. If there are more formers, the country will eventually become weaker, and if there are more latter, it will become stronger. I think this is very good; And we should always remember it.可惜中国历来就独多民气论者，到现在还如此。如果长此不改，“再而衰，三而竭”，将来会连辩诬的精力也没有了。所以在不得已而空手鼓舞民气时，尤必须同时设法增长国民的实力，还要永远这样的干下去。
Unfortunately, China has always had many popular people, and it is still the case. If this does not change for a long time, "then decline, three and exhausted", in the future there will be no energy to defend and slander. Therefore, when we have no choice but to boost the people's morale, we must try to increase the strength of the people at the same time, and we must continue to do this forever.因此，中国青年负担的烦重，就数倍于别国的青年了。因为我们的古人将心力大抵用到玄虚漂渺平稳圆滑上去了，便将艰难切实的事情留下，都待后人来补做，要一人兼做两三人，四五人，十百人的工作，现在可正到了试练的时候了。对手又是坚强的英人，正是他山的好石，大可以借此来磨练。假定现今觉悟的青年的平均年龄为二十，又假定照中国人易于衰老的计算，至少也还可以共同抗拒，改革，奋斗三十年。不够，就再一代，二代……。这样的数目，从个体看来，仿佛是可怕的，但倘若这一点就怕，便无药可救，只好甘心灭亡。因为在民族的历史上，这不过是一个极短时期，此外实没有更快的捷径。我们更无须迟疑，只是试练自己，自求生存，对谁也不怀恶意的干下去。
Therefore, the burden on Chinese youth is several times that of young people in other countries. Because our ancients mostly used their mental strength to the mysterious and mysterious and smooth and smooth, they left the difficult and practical things to be made up for by future generations, and one person had to do the work of two or three, four or five, ten or a hundred people, and now it was time to try. The opponent is a strong British, and he is a good stone in his mountain, which can be used to hone him. Assuming that the average age of today's enlightened youth is 20, and assuming that according to the calculation of Chinese prone to aging, they can at least resist, reform, and struggle together for 30 years. If it is not enough, it will be another generation, the second generation ....... Such a number seems terrible from the individual's point of view, but if this is fearful, there is no cure, and it has to perish willingly. Because in the history of the nation, this is only a very short period, and there is really no faster shortcut. We don't need to hesitate, just test ourselves, seek to survive, and do it without malice to anyone.但足以破灭这运动的持续的危机，在目下就有三样：一是日夜偏注于表面的宣传，鄙弃他事；二是对同类太操切，稍有不合，便呼之为国贼，为洋奴；三是有许多巧人，反利用机会，来猎取自己目前的利益。
But there are three things that are enough to break the ongoing crisis of this movement: first, day and night focus on superficial propaganda and despise other things; second, they are too rigid about their own kind, and if they disagree with each other, they will be called national thieves and foreign slaves; Third, there are many clever people who take advantage of opportunities to hunt for their current interests.六月十一日。
June 11.

忽然想到

十一

忽然想到

Eleven1　急不择言
1 Hurry up and don't say anything“急不择言”的病源，并不在没有想的工夫，而在有工夫的时候没有想。
The source of the disease of "haste and unscrupulousness" is not that there is no time to think, but that there is no time to think when there is time.上海的英国捕头残杀市民之后，我们就大惊愤，大嚷道：伪文明人的真面目显露了！那么，足见以前还以为他们有些真文明。然而中国有枪阶级的焚掠平民，屠杀平民，却向来不很有人抗议。莫非因为动手的是“国货”，所以连残杀也得欢迎；还是我们原是真野蛮，所以自己杀几个自家人就不足为奇呢？
After the British in Shanghai killed the citizens, we were shocked and shouted: The true face of the pseudo-civilized people has been revealed! Then, it shows that they thought they were some real civilization before. However, there has never been much protest against the burning and massacre of civilians by the gun class in China. Could it be that because it is a "domestic product", even killing must be welcomed; Or are we really barbaric, so it's not surprising that we kill a few of our own family members?自家相杀和为异族所杀当然有些不同。譬如一个人，自己打自己的嘴巴，心平气和，被别人打了，就非常气忿。但一个人而至于乏到自己打嘴巴，也就很难免为别人所打，如果世界上“打”的事实还没有消除。
Of course, there is a difference between killing oneself and being killed by a foreign race. For example, a person who hits himself in the mouth and is calm, but is very angry when he is beaten by others. But if a person is so tired that he hits himself, it is difficult to avoid being beaten by others, if the fact of "beating" in the world has not been eliminated.我们确有点慌乱了，反基督教的叫喊的尾声还在，而许多人已颇佩服那教士的对于上海事件的公证；并且还有去向罗马教皇诉苦的。一流血，风气就会这样的转变。
We were indeed a little flustered, the end of the anti-Christian cry was still there, and many had admired the priest's notarization of the Shanghai incident; And there are those who complain to the Pope. As soon as you get blood, the atmosphere will change like this.2　一致对外
2. Consistent with the outside world甲：“喂，乙先生！你怎么趁我忙乱的时候，又将我的东西拿走了？现在拿出来，还我罢！”
A: "Hey, Mr. B!" Why did you take my things away while I was busy?" Take it out now and give it back to me!" ”乙：“我们要一致对外！这样危急时候，你还只记得自己的东西么？亡国奴！”
B: "We must be unanimous with the outside world!" In such a critical time, do you only remember your own things? Slave to the country! ”3　“同胞同胞！”
3 "Compatriots!"我愿意自首我的罪名：这回除硬派的不算外，我也另捐了极少的几个钱，可是本意并不在以此救国，倒是为了看见那些老实的学生们热心奔走得可感，不好意思给他们碰钉子。
I am willing to surrender my crimes: this time, in addition to the hard-core ones, I also donated a very small amount of money, but the original intention was not to save the country in this way, but to see those honest students running enthusiastically and feel embarrassed to hit nails for them.学生们在演讲的时候常常说，“同胞，同胞！……”但你们可知道你们所有的是怎样的“同胞”，这些“同胞”是怎样的心么？
Students often say when they give speeches, "Compatriots, compatriots!" ...... "But do you know what kind of "compatriots" you have, and what kind of hearts these "compatriots" have?不知道的。即如我的心，在自己说出之前，募捐的人们大概就不知道。
I don't know. Even if it is like my heart, the people who raise donations probably don't know until they say it.我的近邻有几个小学生，常常用几张小纸片，写些幼稚的宣传文，用他们弱小的腕，来贴在电杆或墙壁上。待到第二天，我每见多被撕掉了。虽然不知道撕的是谁，但未必是英国人或日本人罢。
There are a few elementary school students in my neighborhood who often use a few small pieces of paper to write childish propaganda texts and use their weak wrists to stick to electric poles or walls. By the next day, I was torn off every time I saw it. Although I don't know who tore it, it may not be British or Japanese.“同胞，同胞！……”学生们说。
"Compatriots, compatriots! ......," the students said.我敢于说，中国人中，仇视那真诚的青年的眼光，有的比英国或日本人还凶险。为“排货”复仇的，倒不一定是外国人！
I dare to say that among the Chinese, some of them are more dangerous than the British or Japanese. It is not neceased that foreigners avenge the "arrangement"!要中国好起来，还得做别样的工作。
If China wants to get better, it has to do other things.这回在北京的演讲和募捐之后，学生们和社会上各色人物接触的机会已经很不少了，我希望有若干留心各方面的人，将所见，所受，所感的都写出来，无论是好的，坏的，像样的，丢脸的，可耻的，可悲的，全给它发表，给大家看看我们究竟有着怎样的“同胞”。
I hope that there will be a number of people who pay attention to all aspects and write out what they see, suffer, and feel, whether it is good, bad, decent, shameful, shameful, sad, all published to show everyone what kind of "compatriots" we have.明白以后，这才可以计画别样的工作。
After understanding, you can plan a different kind of work.而且也无须掩饰。即使所发见的并无所谓同胞，也可以从头创造的；即使所发见的不过完全黑暗，也可以和黑暗战斗的。
And there is no need to hide it. Even if what is found is not a fellow countryman, it can be created from scratch; Even if what you see is nothing but complete darkness, you can fight against it.而且也无须掩饰了，外国人的知道我们，常比我们自己知道得更清楚。试举一个极近便的例，则中国人自编的《北京指南》，还是日本人做的《北京》精确！
And there is no need to hide it, foreigners often know us better than we know ourselves. To give a very close example, the "Beijing Guide" compiled by the Chinese is still the "Beijing" made by the Japanese!4　断指和晕倒
4 Broken fingers and fainting又是砍下指头，又是当场晕倒。
He cut off his finger again, and fainted on the spot.断指是极小部分的自杀，晕倒是极暂时中的死亡。我希望这样的教育不普及；从此以后，不再有这样的现象。
Broken fingers are a very small part of suicide, and fainting is a very temporary death. I hope that such education will not be popular; Since then, there has been no such phenomenon.5　文学家有什么用？
5 What is the use of a writer?因为沪案发生以后，没有一个文学家出来“狂喊”，就有人发了疑问了，曰：“文学家究竟有什么用处？”
Because after the Shanghai case, no writer came out to "shout", some people asked, "What is the use of writers?" ”今敢敬谨答曰：文学家除了诌几句所谓诗文之外，实在毫无用处。
Now I dare to respectfully reply: Writers are really useless except for a few so-called poems.中国现下的所谓文学家又作别论；即使是真的文学大家，然而却不是“诗文大全”，每一个题目一定有一篇文章，每一回案件一定有一通狂喊。他会在万籁无声时大呼，也会在金鼓喧阗中沉默。Leonardo da Vinci非常敏感，但为要研究人的临死时的恐怖苦闷的表情，却去看杀头。中国的文学家固然并未狂喊，却还不至于如此冷静。况且有一首《血花缤纷》，不是早经发表了么？虽然还没有得到是否“狂喊”的定评。
China's current so-called writers are different; Even if it is a real literary master, but it is not a "complete collection of poetry and literature", there must be an article on every topic, and there must be a shout in every case. He will shout when everything is silent, and he will be silent in the noise of the drums. Leonardo da Vinci was very sensitive, but in order to study the horror and distress of a person when he was dying, he went to see the head of the killing. Although Chinese writers did not shout wildly, they were not so calm. Moreover, there is a song "Blood Flowers", isn't it published early? Although it has not yet been evaluated whether it is "shouting".文学家也许应该狂喊了。查老例，做事的总不如做文的有名。所以，即使上海和汉口的牺牲者的姓名早已忘得干干净净，诗文却往往更久地存在，或者还要感动别人，启发后人。
Writers should probably shout. According to old examples, those who do things are not as famous as those who do articles. Therefore, even if the names of the victims in Shanghai and Hankou have long been forgotten, poetry often exists longer, or it has to touch others and inspire future generations.这倒是文学家的用处。血的牺牲者倘要讲用处，或者还不如做文学家。
This is the usefulness of a writer. If the victim of blood wants to be useful, it may be better to be a writer.6　“到民间去”
6 "Go to the people"但是，好许多青年要回去了。
But many young people are going back.从近时的言论上看来，旧家庭仿佛是一个可怕的吞噬青年的新生命的妖怪，不过在事实上，却似乎还不失为到底可爱的东西，比无论什么都富于摄引力。儿时的钓游之地，当然很使人怀念的，何况在和大都会隔绝的城乡中，更可以暂息大半年来努力向上的疲劳呢。
From the recent remarks, the old family seems to be a terrible monster that devours the new life of young people, but in fact, it seems to be a cute thing in the end, more gravitational than anything else. Of course, the fishing place of childhood is very nostalgic, not to mention that in the urban and rural areas isolated from the metropolis, you can take a break from the fatigue of working hard for more than half a year.更何况这也可以算是“到民间去”。
What's more, this can also be regarded as "going to the people".但从此也可以知道：我们的“民间”怎样；青年单独到民间时，自己的力量和心情，较之在北京一同大叫这一个标语时又怎样？
But from this we can also know: what is our "folk"; When young people go to the people alone, what is their strength and mood compared to when they shout this slogan together in Beijing?将这经历牢牢记住，倘将来从民间来，在北京再遇到一同大叫这一个标语的时候，回忆起来，就知道自己是在说真还是撒诳。
Keep this experience in mind, if you come from the people in the future, when you meet this slogan in Beijing again, you will know whether you are telling the truth or lying.那么，就许有若干人要沉默，沉默而苦痛，然而新的生命就会在这苦痛的沉默里萌芽。
Then there may be a number of people who will be silent, silent and painful, but new life will sprout in this painful silence.7　魂灵的断头台
7 The guillotine of the soul近年以来，每个夏季，大抵是有枪阶级的打架季节，也是青年们的魂灵的断头台。
In recent years, every summer has been the fighting season of the gun class, and it is also the guillotine of the souls of young people.到暑假，毕业的都走散了，升学的还未进来，其余的也大半回到家乡去。各样同盟于是暂别，喊声于是低微，运动于是销沉，刊物于是中辍。好像炎热的巨刃从天而降，将神经中枢突然斩断，使这首都忽而成为尸骸。但独有狐鬼却仍在死尸上往来，从从容容地竖起它占领一切的大纛。
By the summer vacation, those who graduated were separated, those who went on to higher education had not yet come in, and most of the rest had returned to their hometowns. All kinds of alliances parted ways, the shouts were lowered, the movement faded, and the publications were stopped. It was as if a hot blade fell from the sky, suddenly cutting off the nerve center, making the capital suddenly a corpse. But the only fox ghost was still moving back and forth on the corpse, calmly raising the banner that occupied everything.待到秋高气爽时节，青年们又聚集了，但不少是已经新陈代谢。他们在未曾领略过的首善之区的使人健忘的空气中，又开始了新的生活，正如毕业的人们在去年秋天曾经开始过的新的生活一般。
When the autumn weather is crisp, young people gather again, but many of them have metabolized. They have started a new life in the forgettable air of the first good district that they have never experienced, just as the graduates had started a new life last fall.于是一切古董和废物，就都使人觉得永远新鲜；自然也就觉不出周围是进步还是退步，自然也就分不出遇见的是鬼还是人。不幸而又有事变起来，也只得还在这样的世上，这样的人间，仍旧“同胞同胞”的叫喊。
So all antiques and waste make people feel that they are always fresh; Naturally, you can't tell whether the surroundings are progressing or regressing, and naturally you can't tell whether you are a ghost or a human. Unfortunately, things have changed, and I have to be in such a world, in such a world, I still cry out for "compatriots".8　还是一无所有
8 Or nothing中国的精神文明，早被枪炮打败了，经过了许多经验，已经要证明所有的还是一无所有。讳言这“一无所有”，自然可以聊以自慰；倘更铺排得好听一点，还可以寒天烘火炉一样，使人舒服得要打盹儿。但那报应是永远无药可医，一切牺牲全都白费，因为在大家打着盹儿的时候，狐鬼反将牺牲吃尽，更加肥胖了。
China's spiritual civilization has long been defeated by guns, and after a lot of experience, it has to prove that everything is still nothing. Avoiding saying that this "has nothing", you can naturally talk about masturbation; If the arrangement is better, it can also be like a cold weather oven, making people feel so comfortable that they want to take a nap. But the retribution is that there will always be no cure, and all sacrifices will be in vain, because when everyone is taking a nap, the fox ghost will eat up the sacrifice and become even more obese.大概，人必须从此有记性，观四向而听八方，将先前一切自欺欺人的希望之谈全都扫除，将无论是谁的自欺欺人的假面全都撕掉，将无论是谁的自欺欺人的手段全都排斥，总而言之，就是将华夏传统的所有小巧的玩艺儿全都放掉，倒去屈尊学学枪击我们的洋鬼子，这才可望有新的希望的萌芽。
Probably, people must have a memory from now on, look in all directions and listen to all directions, sweep away all previous self-deceptive hopes, tear off all the masks of self-deception no matter who they are, and reject all the means of self-deception no matter who they are.六月十八日。
June 18th.

补白

补白

补白

Filler一
One“公理战胜”的牌坊，立在法国巴黎的公园里不知怎样，立在中国北京的中央公园里可实在有些希奇，——但这是现在的话。当时，市民和学生也曾游行欢呼过。
The archway of "Axiom Victory" is somehow erected in the park of Paris, France, and it is really strange to stand in the Central Park of Beijing, China,—— but this is the current situation. At that time, citizens and students also marched and cheered.我们那时的所以入战胜之林者，因为曾经送去过很多的工人；大家也常常自夸工人在欧战的劳绩。现在不大有人提起了，战胜也忘却了，而且实际上是战败了。
We were the ones who entered the forest of victory at that time, because we had sent many workers; Everyone often boasted about the workers' achievements in the European war. Now not much is mentioned, and the victory has been forgotten, and in fact it is defeated.
现在的强弱之分固然在有无枪炮，但尤其是在拿枪炮的人。假使这国民是卑怯的，即纵有枪炮，也只能杀戮无枪炮者，倘敌手也有，胜败便在不可知之数了。这时候才见真强弱。
The difference between strength and weakness now is certainly whether there are guns or not, but especially in those who hold guns. If this people are cowardly, even if they have guns, they can only kill those who do not have guns, and if the enemy also has them, the victory or defeat will be unknown. Only then can we see the real strength and weakness.我们弓箭是能自己制造的，然而败于金，败于元，败于清。记得宋人的一部杂记里记有市井间的谐谑，将金人和宋人的事物来比较。譬如问金人有箭，宋有什么？则答道，“有锁子甲”。又问金有四太子，宋有何人？则答道，“有岳少保”。临末问，金人有狼牙棒（打人脑袋的武器），宋有什么？却答道，“有天灵盖”！
Our bows and arrows can be made by ourselves, but they were defeated by Jin, Yuan, and Qing. I remember that a miscellaneous note of the Song people recorded the humor in the market, comparing the things of the Jin people and the Song people. For example, if the Jin people have arrows, what does the Song Dynasty have? He replied, "There is chain mail." He then asked if the Jin Dynasty had four princes, but who was there in the Song Dynasty? He replied, "There is Yue Shaobao." At the end of the question, the Jin people had a mace (a weapon to hit people's heads), what did the Song Dynasty have? But he replied, "There is a heavenly spirit cover"!自宋以来，我们终于只有天灵盖而已，现在又发现了一种“民气”，更加玄虚飘渺了。
Since the Song Dynasty, we have finally only had Tianling Gai, and now we have discovered a kind of "people's spirit", which is even more mysterious and ethereal.
但不以实力为根本的民气，结果也只能以固有而不假外求的天灵盖自豪，也就是以自暴自弃当作得胜。我近来也颇觉“心上有杞天之虑”，怕中国更要复古了。瓜皮帽，长衫，双梁鞋，打拱作揖，大红名片，水烟筒，或者都要成为爱国的标征，因为这些都可以不费力气而拿出来，和天灵盖不相上下的。（但大红名片也许不用，以避“赤化”之嫌。）
However, the popular spirit that is not based on strength can only be proud of the inherent and not false external demands, that is, to give up on oneself as victory. Recently, I have also felt that I have "unfounded worries" and am afraid that China will become even more retro. Melon skin hats, long gowns, double-beam shoes, bowing, big red business cards, hookahs, or all of them must become patriotic symbols, because these can be taken out without effort, and they are comparable to the heavenly spirit cover. (But the big red business card may not be used to avoid the suspicion of "redification".) ）然而我并不说中国人顽固，因为我相信，鸦片和扑克是不会在排斥之列的。况且爱国之士不是已经说过，马将牌已在西洋盛行，给我们复了仇么？
However, I do not say that the Chinese are stubborn, because I believe that opium and poker will not be excluded. Besides, haven't patriots already said that the horse will card has become popular in the West and has avenged us?
爱国之士又说，中国人是爱和平的。但我殊不解既爱和平，何以国内连年打仗？或者这话应该修正：中国人对外国人是爱和平的。
Patriots also say that Chinese people love peace. But I don't understand why the country has been fighting wars for years since I love peace. Or this sentence should be corrected: Chinese people love peace towards foreigners.我们仔细查察自己，不再说诳的时候应该到来了，一到不再自欺欺人的时候，也就是到了看见希望的萌芽的时候。
We examine ourselves carefully, and the time has come when we stop lying, and when we stop deceiving ourselves, it is time to see the sprouts of hope.我不以为自承无力，是比自夸爱和平更其耻辱。
I don't think it's more shameful than boasting about your love for peace.六月二十三日。
六月二十三日。

补白

二

补白

Two先前以“士人”“上等人”自居的，现在大可以改称“平民”了罢；在实际上，也确有许多人已经如此。彼一时，此一时，清朝该去考秀才，捐监生，现在就只得进学校。“平民”这一个徽号现已日见其时式，地位也高起来了，以此自居，大概总可以从别人得到和先前对于“上等人”一样的尊敬，时势虽然变迁，老地位是不会失掉的。倘遇见这样的平民，必须恭维他，至少也得点头拱手陪笑唯诺，像先前下等人的对于贵人一般。否则，你就会得到罪名，曰：“骄傲”，或“贵族的”。因为他已经是平民了。见平民而不格外趋奉，非骄傲而何？
Those who used to call themselves "scholars" and "superior people" can now be renamed "commoners"; In fact, many people have already done so. At that time, at this time, the Qing Dynasty should go to the scholar examination and donate to the students, and now they had to enter the school. The emblem of "commoner" is now becoming more and more fashionable, and its status has also increased, so it is probably always possible to get the same respect from others as for the "superior people" before. If you meet such a commoner, you must compliment him, at least you have to nod your head and smile and agree, just like the previous inferior people to the nobles. Otherwise, you will be charged with "pride" or "aristocratic." Because he is already a civilian. What is it other than pride when you see civilians and do not pay special attention to them?清的末年，社会上大抵恶革命党如蛇蝎，南京政府一成立，漂亮的士绅和商人看见似乎革命党的人，便亲密的说道：“我们本来都是‘草字头’，一路的呵。”
As soon as the Nanjing government was established, the beautiful gentry and businessmen saw people who seemed to be revolutionaries and said intimately: "We were all 'grass prefixes', all the way." ”徐锡麟刺杀恩铭之后，大捕党人，陶成章君是其中之一，罪状曰：“著《中国权力史》，学日本催眠术。”（何以学催眠术就有罪，殊觉费解。）于是连他在家的父亲也大受痛苦；待到革命兴旺，这才被尊称为“老太爷”；有人给“孙少爷”去说媒。可惜陶君不久就遭人暗杀了，神主入祠的时候，捧香恭送的士绅和商人尚有五六百。直到袁世凯打倒二次革命之后，这才冷落起来。
After Xu Xilin assassinated En Ming, he arrested party members, and Tao Chengzhangjun was one of them, and the crime was: "Write "History of Chinese Power" and learn Japanese hypnosis. (Why is it guilty to learn hypnosis, which is very puzzling.) So even his father at home suffered greatly; When the revolution flourished, he was honored as the "old lady"; Someone gave "Young Master Sun" a matchmaker. Unfortunately, Tao Jun was assassinated soon after, and when the god entered the temple, there were still five or six hundred gentry and merchants holding incense and sending them off. It wasn't until Yuan Shikai overthrew the Second Revolution that he was snubbed.谁说中国人不善于改变呢？每一新的事物进来，起初虽然排斥，但看到有些可靠，就自然会改变。不过并非将自己变得合于新事物，乃是将新事物变得合于自己而已。
Who says Chinese are not good at change? Every new thing that comes in, although it is repulsive at first, will naturally change when it sees some reliability. But it is not that we become in accordance with new things, but that we make new things suitable for ourselves.佛教初来时便大被排斥，一到理学先生谈禅，和尚做诗的时候，“三教同源”的机运就成熟了。听说现在悟善社里的神主已经有了五块：孔子，老子，释迦牟尼，耶稣基督，谟哈默德。
Buddhism was greatly rejected when it first came, and when Mr. Confucianism talked about Zen and the monk wrote poetry, the opportunity of "the three religions of the same origin" was ripe. I heard that there are already five gods in the Wushan Society: Confucius, Laozi, Shakyamuni, Jesus Christ, and Mohammed.
中国老例，凡要排斥异己的时候，常给对手起一个诨名，——或谓之“绰号”。这也是明清以来讼师的老手段；假如要控告张三李四，倘只说姓名，本很平常，现在却道“六臂太岁张三”，“白额虎李四”，则先不问事迹，县官只见绰号，就觉得他们是恶棍了。
In China, when you want to exclude dissidents, you often give your opponent a nickname,—— or a "nickname". This is also the old method of litigators since the Ming and Qing dynasties; If you want to sue Zhang San and Li Si, if you only say the name, it is very ordinary, but now you say "Six-armed Tai Sui Zhang San" and "Bai Frontal Tiger Li Si", then you don't ask about the deeds, and the county magistrate only sees the nickname, and thinks they are villains.月球只一面对着太阳，那一面我们永远不得见。歌颂中国文明的也惟以光明的示人，隐匿了黑的一面。譬如说到家族亲旧，书上就有许多好看的形容词：慈呀，爱呀，悌呀，……又有许多好看的古典：五世同堂呀，礼门呀，义宗呀，……至于诨名，却藏在活人的心中，隐僻的书上。最简单的打官司教科书《萧曹遗笔》里就有着不少惯用的恶谥，现在钞一点在这里，省得自己做文章——
The moon only faces the sun on one side, and we will never see that side. those who praise Chinese civilization only show people with light and hide the dark side. For example, when it comes to family relatives and friends, there are many beautiful adjectives in the book: kindness, love, brotherhood,...... There are also many beautiful classics: the five generations are in the same hall, the gate of ceremony, and the Yizong,...... As for the nickname, it is hidden in the hearts of the living, in hidden books. The simplest lawsuit textbook "Xiao Cao's Posthumous Writings" has a lot of customary bad posthumous titles, and now a little money is here, so you don't have to make a fuss about yourself——
亲戚类
亲戚类孽亲　枭亲　兽亲　鳄亲　虎亲　歪亲
孽亲 枭亲 兽亲 鳄亲 虎亲 歪亲尊长类
尊长类鳄伯　虎伯（叔同）　孽兄　毒兄　虎兄
鳄伯 虎伯（叔同） 孽兄 毒兄 虎兄卑幼类
卑幼类悖男　恶侄　孽侄　悖孙　虎孙　枭甥
悖男 恶侄 孽侄 悖孙 虎孙 枭甥孽甥　悖妾　泼媳　枭弟　恶婿　凶奴
孽甥 悖妾 泼媳 枭弟 恶婿 凶奴
其中没有父母，那是例不能控告的，因为历朝大抵“以孝治天下”。
There are no parents, which cannot be sued, because most of the dynasties have "ruled the world with filial piety".这一种手段也不独讼师有。民国元年章太炎先生在北京，好发议论，而且毫无顾忌地褒贬。常常被贬的一群人于是给他起了一个绰号，曰“章疯子”。其人既是疯子，议论当然是疯话，没有价值的了，但每有言论，也仍在他们的报章上登出来，不过题目特别，道：《章疯子大发其疯》。有一回，他可是骂到他们的反对党头上去了。那怎么办呢？第二天报上登出来的时候，那题目是：《章疯子居然不疯》。
This method is not unique to litigators. In the first year of the Republic of China, Mr. Zhang Taiyan was in Beijing, easy to discuss, and praised and criticized without scruples. A group of people who were often demoted gave him a nickname, called "Zhang Madman". Since he is a madman, of course the discussion is crazy and worthless, but every time he makes a statement, it is still published in their newspaper, but the title is special, saying: "Zhang Madman Goes Crazy". Once, he scolded their opposition party. So what to do? When it was published in the newspaper the next day, the title was: "Zhang Crazy Man is Not Crazy".往日看《鬼谷子》，觉得其中的谋略也没有什么出奇，独有《飞箝》中的“可箝而从，可箝而横，……可引而反，可引而覆。虽覆能复，不失其度”这一段里的一句“虽覆能复”很有些可怕。但这一种手段，我们在社会上是时常遇见的。
In the past, when I watched "Guiguzi", I felt that there was nothing surprising about the strategy, only the "can be clamped and followed, but can be clamped and horizontal,...... It can be reversed, and it can be overturned. Although it can be recovered, it does not lose its degree" The sentence "although it can be recovered" is a bit scary. But this is a means that we often encounter in society.
《鬼谷子》自然是伪书，决非苏秦张仪的老师所作；但作者也决不是“小人”，倒是一个老实人。宋的来鹄已经说，“捭阖飞箝，今之常态，不读鬼谷子书者，皆得自然符契也。”人们常用，不以为奇，作者知道了一点，便笔之于书，当作秘诀，可见禀性纯厚，不但手段，便是心里的机诈也并不多。如果是大富翁，他肯将十元钞票嵌在镜屏里当宝贝么？
"Guiguzi" is naturally a pseudo-book, and it was by no means written by Su Qin Zhang Yi's teacher; But the author is by no means a "villain", but an honest person. Song's Lai Hu has already said, "Shutting down and flying, the norm today, those who do not read Guiguzi's book, are all natural talismans." People often use it, not surprisingly, the author knows a little, so he writes it in the book as a secret, which shows that the innate nature is pure, not only the means, but also the cunning in the heart is not much. If he was a monopoly, would he be willing to embed a ten-dollar bill in the mirror screen as a treasure?鬼谷子所以究竟不是阴谋家，否则，他还该说得吞吞吐吐些；或者自己不说，而钩出别人来说；或者并不必钩出别人来说，而自己永远阔不可言。这末后的妙法，知者不言，书上也未见，所以我不知道，倘若知道，就不至于老在灯下编《莽原》，做《补白》了。
Guiguzi is not a conspirator after all, otherwise, he should have said hesitantly; or they don't say it themselves, but hook out others; Or you don't have to hook others out, and you will never be able to speak of yourself. This last wonderful method, those who know do not speak, and it is not seen in the book, so I don't know, if I knew, I would not always make up "Mangyuan" under the lamp and do "Supplement".但各种小纵横，我们总常要身受，或者目睹。夏天的忽而甲乙相打；忽而甲乙相亲，同去打丙；忽而甲丙相合，又同去打乙，忽而甲丙又互打起来，就都是这“覆”“复”作用；化数百元钱，请一回酒，许多人立刻变了色彩，也还是这顽意儿。然而真如来鹄所说，现在的人们是已经“是乃天授，非人力也”的；倘使要看了《鬼谷子》才能，就如拿着文法书去和外国人谈天一样，一定要碰壁。
But all kinds of small traits, we always have to experience or witness. In summer, A and B suddenly fight; Suddenly, A and B went on a blind date, and they went to play C together; Suddenly A and C are combined, and they go to fight B together, and suddenly A and C fight each other, which is the effect of "covering" and "repetition"; Hundreds of yuan, please drink, many people immediately change color, and they are still stubborn. However, as the true Tathagata said, people today are already "gifted by heaven, not by manpower"; If you want to read "Guiguzi", it is like taking a grammar book to talk to foreigners, you must hit a wall.七月一日。
July 1st.

补白

三

补白

Three离五卅事件的发生已有四十天，北京的情形就像五月二十九日一样。聪明的批评家大概快要提出照例的“五分钟热度”说来了罢，虽然也有过例外：曾将汤尔和先生的大门“打得擂鼓一般，足有十五分钟之久。”（见六月二十三日《晨报》）有些学生们也常常引这“五分热”说自诫，仿佛早经觉到了似的。
It has been 40 days since the May 30th Incident, and the situation in Beijing is the same as on May 29. The clever critic was probably about to come up with the usual "five-minute heat", although there were exceptions: he had beaten Mr. Tom's door "like a drum for fifteen minutes." (See the "Morning Post" on June 23) Some students often quote this "five-point fever" to admonish themselves, as if they have sensed it early.但是，中国的老先生们——连二十岁上下的老先生们都算在内——不知怎的总有一种矛盾的意见，就是将女人孩子看得太低，同时又看得太高。妇孺是上不了场面的；然而一面又拜才女，捧神童，甚至于还想借此结识一个阔亲家，使自己也连类飞黄腾达。什么木兰从军，缇萦救父，更其津津乐道，以显示自己倒是一个死不挣气的瘟虫。对于学生也是一样，既要他们“莫谈国事”，又要他们独退番兵，退不了，就冷笑他们无用。
But the old gentlemen of China—even those in their twenties—somehow always have a contradictory opinion that they think too low of women and children, and at the same time too high. Women and children can't be on the scene; However, on the one hand, he worships talented women, praises prodigies, and even wants to use this to get acquainted with a broad in-law, so that he can also soar. What Mulan joined the army, Ti Ying saved her father, and talked about it even more, to show that she was a plague who didn't get angry. The same is true for students, not only asking them to "don't talk about state affairs", but also asking them to withdraw the troops alone, and if they can't retreat, they sneer at them for being useless.倘在教育普及的国度里，国民十之九是学生；但在中国，自然还是一个特别种类。虽是特别种类，却究竟是“束发小生”，所以当然不会有三头六臂的大神力。他们所能做的，也无非是演讲，游行，宣传之类，正如火花一样，在民众的心头点火，引起他们的光焰来，使国势有一点转机。倘若民众并没有可燃性，则火花只能将自身烧完，正如在马路上焚纸人轿马，暂时引得几个人闲看，而终于毫不相干，那热闹至多也不过如“打门”之久。谁也不动，难道“小生”们真能自己来打枪铸炮，造兵舰，糊飞机，活擒番将，平定番邦么？所以这“五分热”是地方病，不是学生病。这已不是学生的耻辱，而是全国民的耻辱了；倘在别的有活力，有生气的国度里，现象该不至于如此的。外人不足责，而本国的别的灰冷的民众，有权者，袖手旁观者，也都于事后来嘲笑，实在是无耻而且昏庸！
If in a country where education is popular, nine out of ten citizens are students; But in China, it is naturally a special species. Although it is a special species, it is a "bundled hair", so of course there will be no great divine power with three heads and six arms. All they can do is give speeches, parades, propaganda, etc., just like a spark, ignite the hearts of the people, arouse their flames, and make the country turn around a little. If the people are not flammable, the spark can only burn itself, just like burning paper people and sedan chairs on the road, temporarily attracting a few people to watch, and finally it has nothing to do with it, and the excitement is at most like "knocking on the door" for a long time. No one moved, could the "little students" really come to shoot guns and cannons, build warships, paste airplanes, capture Fan generals alive, and pacify Fanbang by themselves? Therefore, this "five-point fever" is an endemic disease, not a student disease. This is no longer a shame for students, but a shame for the whole people; If it were in other vibrant and vibrant countries, the phenomenon would not be like this. Outsiders are not to blame, and other gray and cold people in their own country, those in power, and those who stand by and stand by, are also ridiculed after the incident, which is really shameless and mediocre!但是，别有所图的聪明人又作别论，便是真诚的学生们，我以为自身却有一个颇大的错误，就是正如旁观者所希望或冷笑的一样：开首太自以为有非常的神力，有如意的成功。幻想飞得太高，堕在现实上的时候，伤就格外沉重了；力气用得太骤，歇下来的时候，身体就难于动弹了。为一般计，或者不如知道自己所有的不过是“人力”，倒较为切实可靠罢。
However, smart people with other plans are not to mention, that is, sincere students, I think I have made a big mistake, that is, just as the bystanders hope or sneer: at the beginning they think they have great divine power and have the desired success. When the fantasy flies too high and falls into reality, the injury is particularly heavy; If you use too much strength, when you rest, it will be difficult for your body to move. For the sake of generality, it may be better to know that all you have is "manpower", which is more practical and reliable.现在，从读书以至“寻异性朋友讲情话”，似乎都为有些有志者所诟病了。但我想，责人太严，也正是“五分热”的一个病源。譬如自己要择定一种口号——例如不买英日货——来履行，与其不饮不食的履行七日或痛哭流涕的履行一月，倒不如也看书也履行至五年，或者也看戏也履行至十年，或者也寻异性朋友也履行至五十年，或者也讲情话也履行至一百年。记得韩非子曾经教人以竞马的要妙，其一是“不耻最后”。即使慢，驰而不息，纵令落后，纵令失败，但一定可以达到他所向的目标。
Now, from reading to "looking for friends of the opposite sex to talk about love", it seems to be criticized by some aspirants. But I think that being too strict with people is also a source of "five-point fever". For example, if you want to choose a slogan—for example, don't buy British and Japanese goods—to fulfill it, instead of not eating or drinking for seven days or crying bitterly for a month, it is better to read books for five years, or watch plays for ten years, or find friends of the opposite sex for fifty years, or talk about love for a hundred years. I remember that Han Feizi once taught people the secrets of horse racing, one of which is "not ashamed of the last". Even if he is slow and galloping, even if he falls behind or fails, he will definitely achieve his goal.七月八日。
July 8th.

答KS君

答KS君

答KS君

Answer Mr. KSKS兄：
Brother KS:我很感谢你的殷勤的慰问，但对于你所愤慨的两点和几句结论，我却并不谓然，现在略说我的意见——
I am very grateful for your kind condolences, but I do not think so, and now I will briefly express my opinion -第一，章士钊将我免职，我倒并没有你似的觉得诧异，他那对于学校的手段，我也并没有你似的觉得诧异，因为我本就没有预期章士钊能做出比现在更好的事情来。我们看历史，能够据过去以推知未来，看一个人的已往的经历，也有一样的效用。你先有了一种无端的迷信，将章士钊当作学者或智识阶级的领袖看，于是从他的行为上感到失望，发生不平，其实是作茧自缚；他这人本来就只能这样，有着更好的期望倒是你自己的误谬。使我较为感到有趣的倒是几个向来称为学者或教授的人们，居然也渐次吞吞吐吐地来说微温话了，什么“政潮”咧，“党”咧，仿佛他们都是上帝一样，超然象外，十分公平似的。谁知道人世上并没有这样一道矮墙，骑着而又两脚踏地，左右稳妥，所以即使吞吞吐吐，也还是将自己的魂灵枭首通衢，挂出了原想竭力隐瞒的丑态。丑态，我说，倒还没有什么丢人，丑态而蒙着公正的皮，这才催人呕吐。但终于使我觉得有趣的是蒙着公正的皮的丑态，又自己开出帐来发表了。仿佛世界上还有光明，所以即便费尽心机，结果仍然是一个瞒不住。
First, Zhang Shizhao dismissed me, I am not as surprised as you are, and I am not as surprised as you are about his methods for the school, because I did not expect Zhang Shizhao to do better things than now. When we look at history, we can infer the future based on the past, and it is also effective to look at a person's past experience. You first have an unfounded superstition, seeing Zhang Shizhao as a scholar or the leader of the intellectual class, so you are disappointed in his behavior. He can only be like this, and it is your own mistake to have better expectations. What I find more interesting is that a few people who have always been called scholars or professors have gradually spoken softly, what kind of "political tide" and "party" are muddled, as if they are all gods, transcendent and very fair. Who knew that there was no such low wall in the world, riding and stepping on the ground with both feet, left and right, so even if he hesitated, he still beheaded his soul on the street and hung up the ugliness that he wanted to hide. Ugliness, I said, is not anything to be ashamed of, ugliness and covered with a fair skin, which makes people vomit. But what finally found interesting to me was the ugliness of covering the skin of justice, and he opened his own account and published it. It seems that there is still light in the world, so even if you try your best, the result is still one that cannot be hidden.第二，你这样注意于《甲寅周刊》，也使我莫明其妙。《甲寅》第一次出版时，我想，大约章士钊还不过熟读了几十篇唐宋八大家文，所以模仿吞剥，看去还近于清通。至于这一回，却大大地退步了，关于内容的事且不说，即以文章论，就比先前不通得多，连成语也用不清楚，如“每下愈况”之类。尤其害事的是他似乎后来又念了几篇骈文，没有融化，而急于挦撦，所以弄得文字庞杂，有如泥浆混着沙砾一样。即如他那《停办北京女子师范大学呈文》中有云，“钊念儿女乃家家所有良用痛心为政而人人悦之亦无是理”，旁加密圈，想是得意之笔了。但比起何栻《齐姜醉遣晋公子赋》的“公子固翩翩绝世未免有情少年而碌碌因人安能成事”来，就显得字句和声调都怎样陋弱可哂。何栻比他高明得多，尚且不能入作者之林，章士钊的文章更于何处讨生活呢？况且，前载公文，接着就是通信，精神虽然是自己广告性的半官报，形式却成了公报尺牍合璧了，我中国自有文字以来，实在没有过这样滑稽体式的著作。这种东西，用处只有一种，就是可以借此看看社会的暗角落里，有着怎样灰色的人们，以为现在是攀附显现的时候了，也都吞吞吐吐的来开口。至于别的用处，我委实至今还想不出来。倘说这是复古运动的代表，那可是只见得复古派的可怜，不过以此当作讣闻，公布文言文的气绝罢了。
Second, your attention to "Jiayin Weekly" also makes me confused. When "Jiayin" was first published, I thought that Zhang Shizhao had only read dozens of the eight major texts of the Tang and Song dynasties, so imitating and swallowing and peeling looked close to Qingtong. As for this time, it has taken a big step back, not to mention the content, that is, in terms of articles, it is much more unclear than before, and even idioms are not used clearly, such as "every time it gets worse". What is particularly harmful is that he seems to have read a few more parallel texts later, but did not melt, but was in a hurry to get rid of them, so he made the words complicated, like mud mixed with sand. As he said in his "Submission on the Suspension of Beijing Women's Normal University", "It is unreasonable for Zhao to think that his children are all good people in the family, and everyone likes them". But compared with He Shi's "Qi Jiang Drunken Jin Gongzi Fu", "Gongzi is a peerless young man who is inevitably affectionate, and he can do things because of people", it seems that the words and tone are so ugly and weak. He Mushi is much smarter than him, and he can't enter the forest of authors, so where can Zhang Shizhao's articles make a living? Moreover, the first official document, followed by the correspondence, although the spirit is its own advertising semi-official newspaper, the form has become a combination of the communiqué and the ruler. This kind of thing has only one use, that is, it can be used to see what kind of gray people are in the dark corners of society, thinking that it is time to cling to and manifest, and they all hesitate to speak. As for other uses, I can't think of anything else. If this is a representative of the retro movement, it is only the pity of the retro school, but it is just an obituary to publish classical Chinese.所以，即使真如你所说，将有文言白话之争，我以为也该是争的终结，而非争的开头，因为《甲寅》不足称为敌手，也无所谓战斗。倘要开头，他们还得有一个更通古学，更长古文的人，才能胜对垒之任，单是现在似的每周印一回公牍和游谈的堆积，纸张虽白，圈点虽多，是毫无用处的。
Therefore, even if it is really as you said, there will be a dispute between the literary and vernacular, I think it should be the end of the dispute, not the beginning of the dispute, because "Jiayin" is not enough to be called an opponent, and it doesn't matter if it is a battle. If they want to start, they must have a person who is more knowledgeable in ancient studies and longer ancient texts in order to win the confrontation, just like the current pile of printing official documents and talks once a week, although the paper is white, although there are many circles, it is useless.鲁迅。八月二十日。
Lu Xun. August 20th.

“碰壁”之余

“碰壁”之余

“碰壁”之余

In addition to "hitting the wall"女师大事件在北京似乎竟颇算一个问题，号称“大报”如所谓《现代评论》者，居然也“评论”了好几次。据我所记得的，是先有“一个女读者”的一封信，无名小，不在话下。此后是两个作者的“评论”了：陈西滢先生在《闲话》之间评为“臭毛厕”，李仲揆先生的《在女师大观剧的经验》里则比作戏场。我很吃惊于同是人，而眼光竟有这么不同；但究竟同是人，所以意见也不无符合之点：都不将学校看作学校。这一点，也可以包括杨荫榆女士的“学校犹家庭”和段祺瑞执政的“先父兄之教”。
The incident of the Women's Normal University seems to be quite a problem in Beijing, and the so-called "big newspapers" such as the so-called "Modern Review" have actually "commented" several times. As far as I remember, there was a letter from "a female reader", nameless and small, out of the question. After that, there were "comments" by two authors: Mr. Chen Xiying rated it as a "stinky toilet" between "Gossip", and Mr. Li Zhongkui's "Experience in Watching Drama at the University of Women's Teachers" was compared to a theater. I was surprised that we were all human beings, but our visions were so different; But in the end, they are all people, so there is no consensus: they do not regard the school as a school. This can also include Ms. Yang Yinyu's "school like a family" and Duan Qirui's "teaching of fathers and brothers".陈西滢先生是“久已夫非一日矣”的《闲话》作家，那大名我在报纸的广告上早经看熟了，然而大概还是一位高人，所以遇有不合自意的，便一气呵成屎橛，而世界上蛆虫也委实太多。至于李仲揆先生其人也者，我在《女师风潮纪事》上才识大名，是八月一日拥杨荫榆女士攻入学校的三勇士之一；到现在，却又知道他还是一位达人了，庸人以为学潮的，到他眼睛里就等于“观剧”：这是何等逍遥自在。
Mr. Chen Xiying is the writer of "Gossip" who has been a husband for a long time, and I have been familiar with the name in the newspaper advertisements, but he is probably still a master, so when he encounters something unsatisfactory, he will become a stump in one go, and there are too many maggots in the world. As for Mr. Li Zhongkui himself, I only learned the name in the "Chronicle of the Female Teacher's Trend", and he was one of the three warriors who supported Ms. Yang Yinyu to attack the school on August 1st; Until now, he knows that he is still a master, and the mediocre people think that learning is equivalent to "watching a drama" in his eyes: how carefree this is.据文章上说，这位李仲揆先生是和杨女士“不过见面两次”，但却被用电话邀去看“名振一时的文明新戏”去了，幸而李先生自有脚踏车，否则，还要用汽车来迎接哩。我真自恨福薄，一直活到现在，寿命已不可谓不长，而从没有遇见过一个不大认识的女士来邀“观剧”；对于女师大的事说了几句话，尚且因为不过是教一两点功课的讲师，“碰壁之后”，还很恭听了些高仁山先生在《晨报》上所发表的伟论。真的，世界上实在又有各式各样的运气，各式各样的嘴，各式各样的眼睛。
According to the article, this Mr. Li Zhongkui and Ms. Yang "only met twice", but he was invited by phone to see the "famous new civilization drama". I really hate myself for being unlucky, and I have lived until now, and my life is not long, and I have never met a lady I don't know very well to invite me to "watch a play"; I said a few words about the Women's Normal University, and because I was just a lecturer who taught one or two homework, "after hitting a wall", I also listened to some of the great theories published by Mr. Gao Renshan in the "Morning Post". Really, there are all kinds of luck, all kinds of mouths, and all kinds of eyes in the world.
接着又是西滢先生的《闲话》：“现在一部分报纸的篇幅，几乎全让女师风潮占去了。现在大部分爱国运动的青年的时间，也几乎全让女师风潮占去了。……女师风潮实在是了不得的大事情，实在有了不得的大意义。”临末还有颇为俏皮的结论道：“外国人说，中国人是重男轻女的。我看不见得吧。”
Then there was Mr. Xiying's "Gossip": "Now the space of some newspapers is almost entirely occupied by the trend of female teachers. Now most of the time of the young people in the patriotic movement is almost entirely occupied by the trend of female teachers. …… The trend of female teachers is really a big thing, and it really has great significance. At the end of the day, there was a rather playful conclusion: "Foreigners say that Chinese people are patriarchal." I can't see it. ”我看也未必一定“见得”。正如人们有各式各样的眼睛一样，也有各式各样的心思，手段。便是外国人的尊重一切女性的事，倘使好讲冷话的人说起来，也许以为意在于一个女性。然而侮蔑若干女性的事，有时也就可以说意在于一个女性。偏执的弗罗特先生宣传了“精神分析”之后，许多正人君子的外套都被撕碎了。但撕下了正人君子的外套的也不一定就是“小人”，只要并非自以为还钻在外套里的不显本相的脚色。
I don't think it may necessarily be "seen". Just as people have all kinds of eyes, there are also all kinds of minds and means. It is the respect for all women by foreigners, and if a person who is good at talking cold talks speaks, he may think that the meaning is a woman. However, the insult to a certain woman can sometimes be said to be meant by a woman. After the paranoid Mr. Frott promoted "psychoanalysis", the coats of many decent gentlemen were torn apart. But the person who tore off the coat of a decent gentleman is not necessarily a "villain", as long as he is not a person who thinks he is still in the coat.我看也未必一定“见得”。中国人是“圣之时者也”教徒，况且活在二十世纪了，有华道理，有洋道理，轻重当然是都随意而无不合于道的：重男轻女也行，重女轻男也行，为了一个女性而重一切女性或轻若干女性也行，为了一个男人而轻若干女性或男性也行……。所可惜的是自从西滢先生看出底细之后，除了哑吧或半阴阳，就都坠入弗罗特先生所掘的陷坑里去了。
I don't think it may necessarily be "seen". Chinese is a "holy time" believer, and living in the twentieth century, there are Chinese principles, foreign principles, and the importance is of course arbitrary and all in line with the way: it is okay to favor sons over women, it is okay to favor women over men, it is okay to emphasize all women or some women for the sake of a woman, and it is also okay to underestimate a number of women or men for a man...... It's a pity that since Mr. Xiying saw the details, except for the dumb bar or the semi-yin and yang, they all fell into the pit dug by Mr..自己坠下去的是自作自受，可恨者乃是还要带累超然似的局外人，例如女师大——对不起，又是女师大——风潮，从有些眼睛看来，原是不值得提起的，但因为竟占去了许多可贵的东西，如“报纸的篇幅”“青年的时间”之类，所以，连《现代评论》的“篇幅”和西滢先生的时间也被拖累着占去一点了，而尤其罪大恶极的是触犯了什么“重男轻女”重女轻男这些大秘密。倘不是西滢先生首先想到，提出，大概是要被含胡过去了的。
For example, the trend of the Women's Normal University - sorry, it is the Women's Normal University - from some eyes, it is not worth mentioning, but because it has taken up a lot of valuable things, such as "the space of the newspaper" and "the time of youth", so even the "space" of the "Modern Review" and Mr. Xiying's time have been dragged down a little, and the most heinous crime is to violate the big secrets of "patriarchy" and patriarchy. If Mr. Xiying hadn't thought of it first and proposed it, it would probably have been Han Hu.我看，奥国的学者实在有些偏激，弗罗特就是其一，他的分析精神，竟一律看待，不让谁站在超人间的上帝的地位上。还有那短命的Otto Weininger，他的痛骂女人，不但不管她是校长，学生，同乡，亲戚，爱人，自己的太太，太太的同乡，简直连自己的妈都骂在内。这实在和弗罗特说一样，都使人难于利用。不知道咱们的教授或学者们，可有方法补救没有？但是，我要先报告一个好消息：Weininger早用手枪自杀了。这已经有刘百昭率领打手痛打女师大——对不起，又是女师大——的“毛丫头”一般“痛快”，他的话也就大可置之不理了罢。
I think that Austrian scholars are really a bit extreme, and Froth is one of them, and his analytical spirit actually looks at it all, not allowing anyone to stand in the position of a superhuman God. And the short-lived Otto Weininger, who scolded women, not only whether she was the principal, the student, the fellow villagers, relatives, lovers, his own wife, his wife's fellow villagers, but even his own mother. This is really the same as's statement, which makes it difficult for people to take advantage of it. I don't know if our professors or scholars have any way to remedy it? However, I want to report the good news first: Weininger committed suicide with a pistol long ago. This is already the "hairy girl" who led Liu Baizhao to beat the Women's Normal University - I'm sorry, it's the Women's Normal University - and his words can be ignored.还有一个好消息。“毛丫头”打出之后，张崧年先生引“罗素之所信”道，“因世人之愚，许多问题或终于不免只有武力可以解决也！”（《京副》二五〇号）又据杨荫榆女士章士钊总长者流之所说，则捣乱的“毛丫头”是极少数，可见中国的聪明人还多着哩，这是大可以乐观的。
There is also good news. After the "Mao Girl" was played, Mr. Zhang Songnian quoted "What Russell Believes" and said, "Because of the foolishness of the world, many problems may finally be solved only by force!" ("Beijing Deputy" No. 250) According to Ms. Yang Yinyu and Zhang Shizhao, there are very few "hairy girls" who make trouble, which shows that there are still many smart people in China, which is very optimistic.
忽而想谈谈我自己的事了。
Suddenly I want to talk about myself.我今年已经有两次被封为“学者”，而发表之后，也就即刻取消。第一次是我主张中国的青年应当多看外国书，少看，或者竟不看中国书的时候，便有论客以为素称学者的鲁迅不该如此，而现在竟至如此，则不但决非学者，而且还有洋奴的嫌疑。第二次就是这回佥事免职之后，我在《莽原》上发表了答KS君信，论及章士钊的脚色和文章的时候，又有论客以为因失了“区区佥事”而反对章士钊，确是气量狭小，没有“学者的态度”；而且，岂但没有“学者的态度”而已哉，还有“人格卑污”的嫌疑云。
I have been named a "scholar" twice this year, and after publishing, it was canceled immediately. The first time was when I advocated that Chinese young people should read more foreign books, read less, or even not read Chinese books, some commentators thought that Lu Xun, who was known as a scholar, should not be like this, but now he is not only a scholar, but also suspected of being a foreign slave. The second time was after the dismissal of the assistant officer, I published a reply to KS Junxin in "Mangyuan", when discussing Zhang Shizhao's footwork and articles, some commentators thought that they opposed Zhang Shizhao because of the loss of "mere assistants", which was indeed narrow-minded and did not have the "attitude of a scholar"; Moreover, not only is there no "scholar's attitude", but there is also a suspicion of "despicable personality".其实，没有“学者的态度”，那就不是学者喽，而有些人偏要硬派我做学者。至于何时封赠，何时考定，却连我自己也一点不知道。待到他们在报上说出我是学者，我自己也借此知道了原来我是学者的时候，则已经同时发表了我的罪状，接着就将这体面名称革掉了，虽然总该还要恢复，以便第三次的借口。
In fact, if there is no "scholar's attitude", then I am not a scholar, and some people want to make me a scholar. As for when it will be awarded and when it will be examined, even I don't know it at all. By the time they said in the newspaper that I was a scholar, and I myself learned that I was a scholar, I had already published my crimes at the same time, and then I removed this decent name, although it should have been restored in order to make a third excuse.据我想来，佥事——文士诗人往往误作签事，今据官书正定——这一个官儿倒也并不算怎样“区区”，只要看我免职之后，就颇有些人在那里钻谋补缺，便是一个老大的证据。至于又有些人以为无足重轻者，大约自己现在还不过做几句“说不出”的诗文，所以不知不觉地就来“慷他人之慨”了罢，因为人的将来是想不到的。然而，惭愧我还不是“臣罪当诛兮天王圣明”式的理想奴才，所以竟不能“尽如人意”，已经在平政院对章士钊提起诉讼了。
As far as I can see, the assistant - scribes and poets often mistakenly sign things, and now according to the official book - this official is not so "meritorious", as long as you look at my dismissal, there are quite a few people there to make up for the gaps, which is evidence of a boss. As for some people who think they are insignificant, they probably only make a few "unspeakable" poems now, so they unconsciously come to "be generous to others", because people's future is unimaginable. However, I am ashamed that I am not yet an ideal servant of the style of "the minister should be punished and the king of heaven is wise", so I can't "do what I want", and I have already filed a lawsuit against Zhang Shizhao in the Pingzheng Yuan.提起诉讼之后，我只在答KS君信里论及一回章士钊，但听说已经要“人格卑污”了。然而别一论客却道是并不大骂，所以鲁迅究竟不足取。我所经验的事委实有点希奇，每有“碰壁”一类的事故，平时回护我的大抵愿我设法应付，甚至于暂图苟全。平时憎恶我的却总希望我做一个完人，即使敌手用了卑劣的流言和阴谋，也应该正襟危坐，毫无愤怨，默默地吃苦；或则戟指嚼舌，喷血而亡。为什么呢？自然是专为顾全我的人格起见喽。
After filing the lawsuit, I only mentioned Zhang Shizhao once in my reply to KS Junxin, but I heard that he was already going to be "despicable". However, another commentator said that he did not scold, so Lu Xun was not worthy of it. Whenever there is an accident such as "hitting a wall", I usually hope that I will try to cope with it, or even try to survive temporarily. Even if the enemy uses despicable rumors and conspiracies, he should sit upright, without resentment, and endure hardships silently; Or he would bite his tongue with his fingers and spit blood. Why? Naturally, it is for the sake of taking care of my personality.够了，我其实又何尝“碰壁”，至多也不过遇见了“鬼打墙”罢了。
Enough, I actually didn't "hit the wall", at most I just met a "ghost hitting the wall".九月十五日。
September 15th.

并非闲话（二）

并非闲话（二）

并非闲话（二）

Not gossip (2)向来听说中国人具有大国民的大度，现在看看，也未必然。但是我们要说得好，那么，就说好清净，有志气罢。所以总愿意自己是第一，是唯一，不爱见别的东西共存。行了几年白话，弄古文的人们讨厌了；做了一点新诗，吟古诗的人们憎恶了；做了几首小诗，做长诗的人们生气了；出了几种定期刊物，连别的出定期刊物的人们也来诅咒了：太多，太坏，只好做将来被淘汰的资料。
I have always heard that Chinese people have the generosity of a large citizen, but now look at it, it is not necessarily so. But if we want to say it well, then let's say it is pure and ambitious. So I always want to be the first, the only one, and I don't like to see other things coexist. After a few years of vernacular, people who play ancient Chinese hate it; made a little new poem, and the people who recited ancient poems hated it; made a few small poems, and the people who wrote long poems were angry; Several periodicals were published, and even other people who published periodicals came to curse: too much, too bad, so they had to make materials that would be eliminated in the future.中国有些地方还在“溺女”，就因为豫料她们将来总是没出息的。可惜下手的人们总没有好眼力，否则并以施之男孩，可以减少许多单会消耗食粮的废料。
There are still "drowning women" in some parts of China, because they are expected to be unpromising in the future. It's a pity that the people who started it always don't have good eyesight, otherwise they can reduce a lot of waste that will consume food alone.但是，歌颂“淘汰”别人的人也应该先行自省，看可有怎样不灭的东西在里面，否则，即使不肯自杀，似乎至少也得自己打几个嘴巴。然而人是总是自以为是的，这也许正是逃避被淘汰的一条路。相传曾经有一个人，一向就以“万物不得其所”为宗旨的，平生只有一个大愿，就是愿中国人都死完，但要留下他自己，还有一个女人和一个卖食物的。现在不知道他怎样，久没有听到消息了，那默默无闻的原因，或者就因为中国人还没有死完的缘故罢。
However, those who praise others for "eliminating" others should also introspect themselves first to see what kind of indestructible things are in them, otherwise, even if they refuse to commit suicide, they seem to have to at least slap themselves in the mouth. However, people are always self-righteous, and this may be the way to escape being eliminated. According to legend, there was once a man who had always aimed at "all things are not in his place", and he had only one great wish in his life, that is, he wished that the Chinese would die, but he would leave himself, a woman and a food seller. I don't know what happened to him now, I haven't heard the news for a long time, the reason for his obscurity, or just because the Chinese are not dead yet.据说，张歆海先生看见两个美国兵打了中国的车夫和巡警，于是三四十个人，后来就有百余人，都跟在他们后面喊“打！打！”，美国兵却终于安然的走到东交民巷口了，还回头“笑着嚷道：‘来呀！来呀！’说也奇怪，这喊打的百余人不到两分钟便居然没有影踪了！”
It is said that Mr. Zhang Xinhai saw two American soldiers beating the Chinese coachman and patrol policeman, so thirty or forty people, and later more than a hundred, all followed them and shouted, "Fight!" Beat! The American soldiers finally walked safely to the entrance of Dongjiaomin Alley, and turned around and shouted: 'Come on! Come on! It's strange to say, the more than 100 people who shouted and beat disappeared in less than two minutes! ”西滢先生于是在《闲话》中斥之曰：“打！打！宣战！宣战！这样的中国人，呸！”
Mr. Xi Ying then reprimanded him in "Gossip": "Fight! Beat! Declare war! Declare war! Such a Chinese, bah! ”这样的中国人真应该受“呸！”他们为什么不打的呢，虽然打了也许又有人来说是“拳匪”。但人们那里顾忌得许多，终于不打，“怯”是无疑的。他们所有的不是拳头么？
Such Chinese really deserve to be "bah!" "Why don't they fight, although if they do, some people may say that they are "boxers". But people had a lot of scruples there, and finally stopped fighting, and there was no doubt about "cowardice". Aren't all they have fists?但不知道他们可曾等候美国兵走进了东交民巷之后，远远地吐了唾沫？《现代评论》上没有记载，或者虽然“怯”，还不至于“卑劣”到那样罢。
But I don't know if they have waited for the American soldiers to walk into Dongjiaomin Lane and spit from a distance? It is not recorded in the "Modern Review", or although it is "timid", it is not so "despicable" as that.然而美国兵终于走进东交民巷口了，毫无损伤，还笑嚷着“来呀来呀”哩！你们还不怕么？你们还敢说“打！打！宣战！宣战！”么？这百余人，就证明着中国人该被打而不作声！
However, the American soldiers finally walked into the East Jiaomin Alley without any damage, and laughed and shouted, "Come, come"! Aren't you afraid? You dare to say "Fight!" Beat! Declare war! Declare war! "Huh? These more than 100 people prove that the Chinese should be beaten and silent!“这样的中国人，呸！呸！！！”
"Such a Chinese, bah! Bah!!! ”
更可悲观的是现在“造谣者的卑鄙龌龊更远过于章炳麟”，真如《闲话》所说，而且只能“匿名的在报上放一两枝冷箭”。而且如果“你代被群众专制所压迫者说了几句公平话，那么你不是与那人有‘密切的关系’，便是吃了他或她的酒饭。在这样的社会里，一个报不顾利害的专论是非，自然免不了诽谤丛生，谣诼蜂起。”这确是近来的实情。即如女师大风潮，西滢先生就听到关于我们的“流言”，而我竟不知道是怎样的“流言”，是那几个“卑鄙龌龊更远过于章炳麟”者所造。还有女生的罪状，已见于章士钊的呈文，而那些作为根据的“流言”，也不知道是那几个“卑鄙龌龊”且至于远不如畜类者所造。但是学生却都被打出了，其时还有人在酒席上得意。——但这自然也是“谣诼”。
What is even more pessimistic is that now "the rumor-mongers are far more despicable and dirty than Zhang Binglin", as "Gossip" said, and they can only "anonymously put one or two cold arrows in the newspaper". And if "you say a few fair words on behalf of someone who is oppressed by mass autocracy, then you either have a 'close relationship' with that person or eat his or her wine and food." In such a society, a monograph that disregards the interests of the public will inevitably be slandered and rumors will arise. This is indeed the recent truth. That is, like the trend of female teachers, Mr. Xiying heard "rumors" about us, but I didn't know what kind of "rumors" were made by those who were "despicable and dirty and far more despicable than Zhang Binglin". There are also the crimes of the girls, which have been seen in Zhang Shizhao's submission, and those "rumors" that are based on them are not known to be made by those who are "despicable and dirty" and far inferior to animals. But the students were all beaten, and some people were proud at the banquet. ——But this is naturally also a "rumor".可是我倒也并不很以“流言”为奇，如果要造，就听凭他们去造去。好在中国现在还不到“群众专制”的时候，即使有几十个人，只要“无权势”者叫一大群警察，雇些女流氓，一打，就打散了，正无须乎我来为“被压迫者”说什么“公平话”。即使说，人们也未必尽相信，因为“在这样的社会里”，有些“公平话”总还不免是“他或她的酒饭”填出来的。不过事过境迁，“酒饭”已经消化，吸收，只剩下似乎毫无缘故的“公平话”罢了。倘使连酒饭也失了效力，我想，中国也还要光明些。
But I'm not very surprised by "rumors", if you want to make them, let them make them. Fortunately, China is not yet "mass autocracy", even if there are dozens of people, as long as the "powerless" call a large group of police officers and hire some female hooligans, they will be dispersed in one dozen dozens. Even if it is said, people may not believe it, because "in such a society", some "fair words" are inevitably filled in by "his or her wine and rice". However, things have passed, and the "wine and rice" have been digested and absorbed, leaving only "fair words" that seem to have no reason. If even the food and wine lose their effectiveness, I think China will be brighter.但是，这也不足为奇的。不是上帝，那里能够超然世外，真下公平的批评。人自以为“公平”的时候，就已经有些醉意了。世间都以“党同伐异”为非，可是谁也不做“党异伐同”的事。现在，除了疯子，倘使有谁要来接吻，人大约总不至于倒给她一个嘴巴的罢。
However, this is not surprising. It is not God, who can transcend the world and give fair criticism. When people think they are "fair", they are already a little drunk. The world thinks that "the party is the same and the difference" is wrong, but no one does the thing of "the party is different and the same". Now, except for the madman, if anyone wants to kiss her, people probably won't give her a mouth.九月十九日。
September 19th.

十四年的“读经”

十四年的“读经”

十四年的“读经”

Fourteen years of "Bible reading"自从章士钊主张读经以来，论坛上又很出现了一些论议，如谓经不必尊，读经乃是开倒车之类。我以为这都是多事的，因为民国十四年的“读经”，也如民国前四年，四年，或将来的二十四年一样，主张者的意思，大抵并不如反对者所想像的那么一回事。
Since Zhang Shizhao advocated reading the scriptures, there have been some discussions on the forum, such as saying that the scriptures do not need to be respected, and reading the scriptures is to drive backwards. I think this is all troublesome, because the "reading of the scriptures" in the fourteenth year of the Republic of China, like the first four years, four years, or the next twenty-four years, the meaning of the proponents is probably not as much as the opponents imagine.尊孔，崇儒，专经，复古，由来已经很久了。皇帝和大臣们，向来总要取其一端，或者“以孝治天下”，或者“以忠诏天下”，而且又“以贞节励天下”。但是，二十四史不现在么？其中有多少孝子，忠臣，节妇和烈女？自然，或者是多到历史上装不下去了；那么，去翻专夸本地人物的府县志书去。我可以说，可惜男的孝子和忠臣也不多的，只有节烈的妇女的名册却大抵有一大卷以至几卷。孔子之徒的经，真不知读到那里去了；倒是不识字的妇女们能实践。还有，欧战时候的参战，我们不是常常自负的么？但可曾用《论语》感化过德国兵，用《易经》咒翻了潜水艇呢？儒者们引为劳绩的，倒是那大抵目不识丁的华工！
Respecting Confucius, revering Confucianism, specializing in classics, and retro has been around for a long time. The emperor and ministers have always had to take one end, either "ruling the world with filial piety", or "edicting the world with loyalty", and "inspiring the world with chastity". However, isn't the twenty-four histories now? How many filial sons, loyal ministers, chaste women and martyrs are there? Naturally, or there are too many to fit in history; So, go to the prefecture and county chronicles that praise local figures. I can say that unfortunately there are not many filial sons and loyal men among men, and the roster of only martyr women usually has a large volume or even a few volumes. I really don't know where I read the scriptures of Confucius's disciples; However, illiterate women can practice it. Also, when we participated in the European War, weren't we often conceited? But have you ever used the Analects to influence the German soldiers and used the "I Ching" to curse the submarine? The Confucian scholars cited the work of the Chinese workers, who were probably illiterate!所以要中国好，或者倒不如不识字罢，一识字，就有近乎读经的病根了。“瞰亡往拜”“出疆载质”的最巧玩艺儿，经上都有，我读熟过的。只有几个胡涂透顶的笨牛，真会诚心诚意地来主张读经。而且这样的脚色，也不消和他们讨论。他们虽说什么经，什么古，实在不过是空嚷嚷。问他们经可是要读到像颜回，子思，孟轲，朱熹，秦桧（他是状元），王守仁，徐世昌，曹锟；古可是要复到像清（即所谓“本朝”），元，金，唐，汉，禹汤文武周公，无怀氏，葛天氏？他们其实都没有定见。他们也知不清颜回以至曹锟为人怎样，“本朝”以至葛天氏情形如何；不过像苍蝇们失掉了垃圾堆，自不免嗡嗡地叫。况且既然是诚心诚意主张读经的笨牛，则决无钻营，取巧，献媚的手段可知，一定不会阔气；他的主张，自然也决不会发生什么效力的。
Therefore, if China is good, or it is better not to be illiterate, once literate, there is a root cause of almost reading the Bible. The most ingenious tricks of "looking at the dead and worshiping" and "going out of the border to carry quality" are all in the scriptures, and I have read them well. Only a few foolish stupid cows will really advocate reading the Bible sincerely. And such a footage, there is no need to discuss it with them. Although they say what scriptures and ancients, they are really just empty shouts. Ask them if they want to read the scriptures like Yan Hui, Zi Si, Meng Ke, Zhu Xi, Qin Hui (he is the champion), Wang Shouren, Xu Shichang, Cao Kun; In ancient times, it was necessary to return to the Qing Dynasty (the so-called "current dynasty"), Yuan, Jin, Tang, Han, Yu, Tang, Zhou Gong, Wu Huai, Ge Tian? They don't actually have a fixed opinion. They also don't know what Yan Hui and Cao Kun are like, and what is the situation of "this dynasty" and even Ge Tianshi; But like flies losing the garbage heap, they can't help but buzz. Moreover, since it is a stupid cow who sincerely advocates reading the Bible, there will be no trickery, trickery, and flattery methods, and it will definitely not be arrogant; Naturally, his proposition will never have any effect.至于现在的能以他的主张，引起若干议论的，则大概是阔人。阔人决不是笨牛，否则，他早已伏处牖下，老死田间了。现在岂不是正值“人心不古”的时候么？则其所以得阔之道，居然可知。他们的主张，其实并非那些笨牛一般的真主张，是所谓别有用意；反对者们以为他真相信读经可以救国，真是“谬以千里”了！
As for the current one who can cause some discussion with his ideas, it is probably a broad person. The broad man is by no means a stupid cow, otherwise, he would have been lying under the window and dying of old age in the field. Isn't it time for "people's hearts are not ancient"? So the reason for the wide range can be understood. Their proposition is not actually those stupid Allah, but the so-called other intentions; Opponents thought that he really believed that reading the Bible could save the country, which was really "a thousand miles away"!我总相信现在的阔人都是聪明人；反过来说，就是倘使老实，必不能阔是也。至于所挂的招牌是佛学，是孔道，那倒没有什么关系。总而言之，是读经已经读过了，很悟到一点玩意儿，这种玩意儿，是孔二先生的先生老聃的大著作里就有的，此后的书本子里还随时可得。所以他们都比不识字的节妇，烈女，华工聪明；甚而至于比真要读经的笨牛还聪明。何也？曰：“学而优则仕”故也。倘若“学”而不“优”，则以笨牛没世，其读经的主张，也不为世间所知。
I always believe that the current broad people are smart people; On the other hand, if you are honest, you must not be wide. As for the sign hanging is Buddhism and Confucianism, it doesn't matter. All in all, I have read the scriptures and realized a little thing, which is in the great works of Mr. Kong Er's husband, Lao Dan, and is still available in subsequent books. Therefore, they are all smarter than illiterate women, martyrs, and Chinese workers; Even smarter than a stupid cow who really wants to read the Bible. Why is that? It is said that "if you learn and excel, you will become an official." If he "learns" and does not "excel", he will die as a stupid cow, and his proposition of reading the scriptures will not be known to the world.孔子岂不是“圣之时者也”么，而况“之徒”呢？现在是主张“读经”的时候了。武则天做皇帝，谁敢说“男尊女卑”？多数主义虽然现称过激派，如果在列宁治下，则共产之合于葛天氏，一定可以考据出来的。但幸而现在英国和日本的力量还不弱，所以，主张亲俄者，是被卢布换去了良心。
Isn't Confucius "the one who was a saint", let alone a "disciple"? Now is the time to advocate "reading the scriptures". Wu Zetian is the emperor, who dares to say that "men are superior to women"? Although majoritarianism is now called radicalism, if it is under Lenin's rule, then the communism in line with Ge Tian will definitely be able to be verified. But fortunately, the power of Britain and Japan is not weak now, so those who advocate pro-Russia are exchanged for conscience by rubles.我看不见读经之徒的良心怎样，但我觉得他们大抵是聪明人，而这聪明，就是从读经和古文得来的。我们这曾经文明过而后来奉迎过蒙古人满洲人大驾了的国度里，古书实在太多，倘不是笨牛，读一点就可以知道，怎样敷衍，偷生，献媚，弄权，自私，然而能够假借大义，窃取美名。再进一步，并可以悟出中国人是健忘的，无论怎样言行不符，名实不副，前后矛盾，撒诳造谣，蝇营狗苟，都不要紧，经过若干时候，自然被忘得干干净净；只要留下一点卫道模样的文字，将来仍不失为“正人君子”。况且即使将来没有“正人君子”之称，于目下的实利又何损哉？
I don't see what the conscience of the Bible readers is, but I think they are probably smart people, and this intelligence comes from reading the Bible and ancient texts. In our country that was once civilized and later welcomed the Mongols and Manchurians, there are too many ancient books, if you are not a stupid cow, you can know how to perfunctory, steal life, flattery, gain power, and be selfish, but you can steal a good name under the guise of righteousness. Going further, we can realize that the Chinese are forgetful, no matter how inconsistent their words and deeds, the name and reality are inconsistent, inconsistent, spread rumors, and flies, it doesn't matter, after a certain period of time, they are naturally forgotten; As long as you leave a little text that looks like a guardian, you will still be a "righteous gentleman" in the future. Moreover, even if there is no title of "upright gentleman" in the future, what harm is there in the current practical benefits?这一类的主张读经者，是明知道读经不足以救国的，也不希望人们都读成他自己那样的；但是，耍些把戏，将人们作笨牛看则有之，“读经”不过是这一回耍把戏偶尔用到的工具。抗议的诸公倘若不明乎此，还要正经老实地来评道理，谈利害，那我可不再客气，也要将你们归入诚心诚意主张读经的笨牛类里去了。
This type of reader knows that reading the Bible is not enough to save the country, and does not want people to read it like himself; However, there are some tricks to make people look like stupid cows, and "reading the Bible" is just a tool used occasionally in this trick. If the protesting gentlemen do not understand this, and still have to seriously and honestly judge the reasoning and talk about the pros and cons, then I will no longer be polite, and I will also classify you as stupid cows who sincerely advocate reading the Bible.以这样文不对题的话来解释“俨乎其然”的主张，我自己也知道有不恭之嫌，然而我又自信我的话，因为我也是从“读经”得来的。我几乎读过十三经。
I know that it is disrespectful to explain the proposition of "as it is" in such incorrect words, but I am confident in my words, because I also got it from "reading the scriptures". I have read almost the thirteen scriptures.衰老的国度大概就免不了这类现象。这正如人体一样，年事老了，废料愈积愈多，组织间又沉积下矿质，使组织变硬，易就于灭亡。一面，则原是养卫人体的游走细胞（Wanderzelle）渐次变性，只顾自己，只要组织间有小洞，它便钻，蚕食各组织，使组织耗损，易就于灭亡。俄国有名的医学者梅契尼珂夫（Elias Metschnikov）特地给他别立了一个名目：大嚼细胞（Fresserzelle）。据说，必须扑灭了这些，人体才免于老衰；要扑灭这些，则须每日服用一种酸性剂。他自己就实行着。
This kind of phenomenon is probably inevitable in the country of aging. This is just like the human body, as we get older, more and more waste accumulates, and minerals are deposited between the tissues, making the tissues hard and prone to extinction. On the one hand, the Wanderzelle, which originally nourishes the human body, gradually degenerates, only cares about itself, as long as there is a small hole between the tissues, it will drill and encroach on various tissues, causing tissue wear and tear, and it is easy to perish. The famous Russian medical scientist Elias Metschnikov specially gave him a name: Fresserzelle. It is said that these must be extinguished in order for the human body to avoid old age; To extinguish them, one acid is taken daily. He practiced it himself.古国的灭亡，就因为大部分的组织被太多的古习惯教养得硬化了，不再能够转移，来适应新环境。若干分子又被太多的坏经验教养得聪明了，于是变性，知道在硬化的社会里，不妨妄行。单是妄行的是可与论议的，故意妄行的却无须再与谈理。惟一的疗救，是在另开药方：酸性剂，或者简直是强酸剂。
The demise of the ancient country was because most of the organizations were hardened by too many ancient habits and could no longer be transferred to adapt to the new environment. Some molecules have been raised smart by too many bad experiences, so they change their sex, knowing that in a hardened society, they might as well act recklessly. Those who act recklessly alone can be discussed, but those who deliberately act recklessly do not need to be discussed again. The only remedy is to prescribe another prescription: acids, or simply strong acids.不提防临末又提到了一个俄国人，怕又有人要疑心我收到卢布了罢。我现在郑重声明：我没有收过一张纸卢布。因为俄国还未赤化之前，他已经死掉了，是生了别的急病，和他那正在实验的药的有效与否这问题无干。
Don't be wary of mentioning another Russian at the end, I'm afraid that someone will suspect that I received rubles. I now solemnly declare: I have not received a single paper ruble. Because he was dead before Russia turned red, he had other acute illnesses, and it had nothing to do with the effectiveness of the medicine he was experimenting with.十一月十八日。
November 18th.

评心雕龙

评心雕龙

评心雕龙

Comment on the carved dragon甲　A-a-a-ch！
A A-a-a-ch!乙　你搬到外国去！并且带了你的家眷！你可是黄帝子孙？中国话里叹声尽多，你为什么要说洋话？敝人是不怕的，敢说：要你搬到外国去！
B. You move to a foreign country! And bring your family! Are you a descendant of the Yellow Emperor?" There are so many sighs in Chinese, why do you speak foreign languages? We are not afraid, I dare to say: I want you to move to a foreign country!丙　他是在骂中国，奚落中国人，替某国间接宣传咱们中国的坏处。他的表兄的侄子的太太就是某国人。
C He is scolding China, ridiculing the Chinese, and indirectly promoting the bad things about our China for a certain country. The wife of his cousin's nephew is a certain countryman.丁　中国话里这样的叹声倒也有的，他不过是自然地喊。但这就证明了他是一个死尸！现在应该用表现法；除了表现地喊，一切声音都不算声音。这“A-a-a”倒也有一点成功了，但那“ch”就没有味。——自然，我的话也许是错的；但至少我今天相信我的话并不错。
Ding There are sighs like this in Chinese, but he just shouts naturally. But this proves that he is a dead body! Now we should use expressions; Except for shouting expressively, all sounds are not sounds. This "A-a-a" is also a little successful, but the "ch" is tasteless. ——Naturally, my words may be wrong; But at least I don't take my word for it today.戊　那么，就须说“嗟”，用这样“引车卖浆者流”的话，是要使自己的身分成为下等的。况且现在正要读经了……。
E Then, you must say "sigh", and use such words as "the pulp seller" to make one's identity inferior. Besides, we are about to read the Bible......己　胡说！说“唉”也行。但可恨他竟说过好几回，将“唉”都“垄断”了去，使我们没有来说的余地了。
Nonsense! It's okay to say "alas". But it is hateful that he said it several times, "monopolizing" all the "sighs", so that we have no room to say.庚　曰“唉”乎？予蔑闻之。何也？噫嘻吗呢为之障也。
Geng said, "Alas"? I have never heard of it. Why is that? Oh, hey, it's a barrier.辛　然哉！故予素主张而文言者也。
Painful! Therefore, I have always advocated for and written words.壬　嗟夫！余曩者之曾为白话，盖痰迷心窍者也，而今悔之矣。
壬 嗟夫！余曩者之曾为白话，盖痰迷心窍者也，而今悔之矣。癸　他说“呸”么？这是人格已经破产了！我本就看不起他，正如他的看不起我。现在因为受了庚先生几句抢白，便“呸”起来；非人格破产是甚么？我并非赞成庚先生，我也批评过他的。可是他不配“呸”庚先生。我就是爱说公道话。
Gui He said "bah"? This is a personality that has gone bankrupt! I looked down on him as much as he looked down on me. Now because of Mr. Geng's robbery, he "bah"; What is impersonal bankruptcy? I am not in favor of Mr. Geng, and I have criticized him. But he is not worthy of "bah" Mr. Geng. I just love to speak fairly.子　但他是说“嗳”。
Son But he said "belch".丑　你是他一党！否则，何以替他来辩？我们是青年，我们就有这个脾气，心爱吹毛求疵。他说“呸”或说“嗳”，我固然没有听到；但即使他说的真是“嗳”，又何损于癸君的批评的价值呢。可是你既然是他的一党，那么，你就也人格破产了！
Ugly, you are his party! Otherwise, how can you defend him? We are young people, we have this temperament, and we love to nitpick. He said "bah" or "belch", but I certainly didn't hear it; But even if what he said was really "belching", how could it detract from the value of Guijun's criticism? But since you are his party, then your personality is also bankrupt!寅　不要破口就骂。满口谩骂，不成其为批评， Gentleman决不如此。至于说批评全不能骂，那也不然。应该估定他的错处，给以相当的骂，像塾师打学生的手心一样，要公平。骂人，自然也许要得到回报的，可是我们也须有这一点不怕事的胆量：批评本来是“精神的冒险”呀！
Yin: Don't scold when you break your mouth. Being full of insults is not a criticism, and Gentleman is never like that. As for saying that criticism cannot be scolded at all, that is not the case. His mistakes should be assessed and given a considerable scolding, just like a cram school teacher beating a student's palm, to be fair. Scolding may naturally be rewarded, but we must also have the courage to not be afraid of things: criticism is originally a "spiritual adventure"!卯　这确是一条熹微翠朴的硬汉！王九妈妈的嶒小提囊，杜鹃叫道“行不得也哥哥”儿。滃然“哀哈”之蓝缕的蒺藜，劣马样儿。这口风一滑溜，凡有绯刚的评论都要逼得翘辫儿了。
Mao This is indeed a tough guy with a subtle greenery! Wang Jiu's mother's  small bag, the cuckoo shouted, "I can't do it, brother." The blue threads of "Aiha" are like bad horses. This wind is slippery, and all comments with scarlet gang will be forced to braid.辰　并不是这么一回事。他是窃取着外国人的声音，翻译着。喂！你为什么不去创作？
Chen: That's not the case. He is stealing the voice of a foreigner and translating. Feed! Why don't you create?巳　那么，他就犯了罪了！研究起来，字典上只有“Ach”，没有什么“A－a－a－ch”。我实在料不到他竟这样杜撰。所以我说：你们都得买一本字典，坐在书房里看看，这才免得为这类脚色所欺。
Then, he has sinned! When researched, there is only "Ach" in the dictionary, and there is nothing "A-a-a-ch". I really didn't expect him to fabricate it like this. So I said: You all have to buy a dictionary and sit in the study to read it, so as not to be deceived by this kind of footwork.午　他不再往下说，他的话流产了。
Wu He didn't say anything further, and his words were aborted.未　夫今之青年何其多流产也，岂非因为急于出风头之故么？所以我奉劝今之青年，安分守己，切莫动弹，庶几可以免于流产，……
Why do today's young people have so many miscarriages, isn't it because they are eager to be in the limelight? Therefore, I advise today's young people to keep their duties and not move, so that they can avoid miscarriage,......申　夫今之青年何其多误译也，还不是因为不买字典之故么？且夫……
Why do today's young people mistranslate, isn't it because they don't buy dictionaries? And ......酉　这实在“唉”得不行！中国之所以这样“世风日下”，就是他说了“唉”的缘故。但是诸位在这里，我不妨明说，三十年前，我也曾经“唉”过的，我何尝是木石，我实在是开风气之先。后来我觉得流弊太多了，便绝口不谈此事，并且深恶而痛绝之。并且到了今年，深悟读经之可以救国，并且深信白话文之应该废除。但是我并不说中国应该守旧……。
This is really "alas"! The reason why China is so "declining" is because he said "alas". But here, I might as well say that thirty years ago, I also "sighed", I was not a wood and stone, I was really the first to open the wind. Later, I felt that there were too many corruptions, so I never talked about it, and hated it deeply. And this year, I deeply realized that reading the Bible could save the country, and I firmly believed that vernacular literature should be abolished. But I don't say that China should be conservative .......戌　我也并且到了今年，深信读经之可以救国……。
I am also convinced that reading the Bible can save the country ...... this year.亥　并且深信白话文之应当废除……。
He also firmly believed that vernacular literature should be abolished.......十一月十八日。
November 18th.

这个与那个

这个与那个

这个与那个

This and that一　读经与读史
1. Reading the Bible and Reading History一个阔人说要读经，嗡的一阵一群狭人也说要读经。岂但“读”而已矣哉，据说还可以“救国”哩。“学而时习之，不亦说乎？”那也许是确凿的罢，然而甲午战败了，——为什么独独要说“甲午”呢，是因为其时还在开学校，废读经以前。
A broad man said he wanted to read the scriptures, and a group of narrow people also said he wanted to read the scriptures. It's not just about "reading", it is said that it can also "save the country". "Isn't it good to learn and practice from time to time?" That may be conclusive, but after the defeat of the Jiawu War,—— why did he say "Jiawu" alone, because he was still opening a school at that time, and before the reading of the scriptures was abolished.我以为伏案还未功深的朋友，现在正不必埋头来哼线装书。倘其咿唔日久，对于旧书有些上瘾了，那么，倒不如去读史，尤其是宋朝明朝史，而且尤须是野史；或者看杂说。
I thought that friends who had not yet sat down at the desk did not have to bury their heads in humming the thread to bind the book. If you don't babble for a long time and are a little addicted to old books, then it is better to read history, especially the history of the Song and Ming dynasties, and especially wild history; Or read the miscellaneous stories.现在中西的学者们，几乎一听到“钦定四库全书”这名目就魂不附体，膝弯总要软下来似的。其实呢，书的原式是改变了，错字是加添了，甚至于连文章都删改了，最便当的是《琳琅秘室丛书》中的两种《茅亭客话》，一是宋本，一是四库本，一比较就知道。“官修”而加以“钦定”的正史也一样，不但本纪咧，列传咧，要摆“史架子”；里面也不敢说什么。据说，字里行间是也含着什么褒贬的，但谁有这么多的心眼儿来猜闷壶卢。至今还道“将平生事迹宣付国史馆立传”，还是算了罢。
Nowadays, Chinese and Western scholars are almost captivated by the name "The Complete Book of the Four Libraries of the Imperial Dynasty", and their knees are always soft. In fact, the original format of the book has changed, typos have been added, and even the article has been deleted, and the most convenient are the two "Maoting Hakka Words" in the "Linlang Secret Room Series", one is the Song version, and the other is the Siku version, which can be known as soon as you compare. The same is true for the official history of "official repair" and "imperial approval", not only the chronicles, but also the biographies, and the "historical shelf"; I didn't dare to say anything inside. It is said that there is something to praise and criticism between the lines, but who has so many hearts and eyes to guess the stuffy pot Lu. So far, he still said that he "announced his life deeds to the National History Museum to be established", or forget it.野史和杂说自然也免不了有讹传，挟恩怨，但看往事却可以较分明，因为它究竟不像正史那样地装腔作势。看宋事，《三朝北盟汇编》已经变成古董，太贵了，新排印的《宋人说部丛书》却还便宜。明事呢，《野获编》原也好，但也化为古董了，每部数十元；易于入手的是《明季南北略》，《明季稗史汇编》，以及新近集印的《痛史》。
Wild history and miscellaneous theories are naturally bound to have rumors and grievances, but looking at the past can be more clear, because it is not as pretentious as the official history. Looking at the Song Dynasty, the "Compilation of the Three Dynasties and the Northern Alliance" has become an antique and is too expensive, but the newly typeset "Song People's Commentary Series" is still cheap. As for the obvious thing, "Wild Harvest" is good, but it has also turned into an antique, tens of yuan per copy; The easy ones to start are the "Ming Dynasty North and South Strategy", "Compilation of the History of the Ming Dynasty", and the newly collected "History of Pain".史书本来是过去的陈帐簿，和急进的猛士不相干。但先前说过，倘若还不能忘情于咿唔，倒也可以翻翻，知道我们现在的情形，和那时的何其神似，而现在的昏妄举动，胡涂思想，那时也早已有过，并且都闹糟了。
The history books were originally the old account books of the past, and they had nothing to do with the radical warriors. But as I said before, if you can't forget your feelings about babbling, you can also turn over and know how similar our current situation is to that time, and the current foolish behavior and foolish thoughts have already existed at that time, and they have all made a mess.试到中央公园去，大概总可以遇见祖母带着她孙女儿在玩的。这位祖母的模样，就预示着那娃儿的将来。所以倘有谁要预知令夫人后日的丰姿，也只要看丈母。不同是当然要有些不同的，但总归相去不远。我们查帐的用处就在此。
Try to go to Central Park, and you can probably always meet a grandmother playing with her granddaughter. The appearance of this grandmother indicates the future of the baby. So if anyone wants to predict Mrs. Ling's future beauty, they only need to look at their mother-in-law. Of course, the difference is somewhat different, but it is not far apart. This is where our audit comes in.但我并不说古来如此，现在遂无可为，劝人们对于“过去”生敬畏心，以为它已经铸定了我们的运命。Le Bon先生说，死人之力比生人大，诚然也有一理的，然而人类究竟进化着。又据章士钊总长说，则美国的什么地方已在禁讲进化论了，这实在是吓死我也，然而禁只管禁，进却总要进的。
But I don't say that this has been the case in ancient times, and now there is nothing we can do, persuading people to be in awe of the "past", thinking that it has shaped our destiny. Mr. Le Bon said that it is true that the power of the dead is greater than that of the living, but human beings are evolving. According to President Zhang Shizhao, it is forbidden to talk about evolution somewhere in the United States, which really scares me to death.总之：读史，就愈可以觉悟中国改革之不可缓了。虽是国民性，要改革也得改革，否则，杂史杂说上所写的就是前车。一改革，就无须怕孙女儿总要像点祖母那些事，譬如祖母的脚是三角形，步履维艰的，小姑娘的却是天足，能飞跑；丈母老太太出过天花，脸上有些缺点的，令夫人却种的是牛痘，所以细皮白肉：这也就大差其远了。
In short: reading history, the more you can realize that China's reform cannot be delayed. Although it is a national character, it must be reformed if it is to be reformed, otherwise, what is written in the miscellaneous histories is the past. As soon as the reform is done, there is no need to be afraid that the granddaughter will always be like her grandmother, for example, the grandmother's feet are triangular and she is struggling, but the little girl's is heavenly and can fly; The old lady of the mother-in-law had smallpox and had some shortcomings on her face, but Mrs. Ling planted cowpox, so the skin and white flesh were fine: this is far from it.十二月八日。
December 8th.

这个与那个

二　捧与挖

这个与那个

2. Holding and digging中国的人们，遇见带有会使自己不安的朕兆的人物，向来就用两样法：将他压下去，或者将他捧起来。
When Chinese people encounter people with signs that will make them uneasy, they have always used two methods: to suppress him or to hold him up.压下去就用旧习惯和旧道德，或者凭官力，所以孤独的精神的战士，虽然为民众战斗，却往往反为这“所为”而灭亡。到这样，他们这才安心了。压不下时，则于是乎捧，以为抬之使高，餍之使足，便可以于己稍稍无害，得以安心。
If you suppress it, you will use old habits and morals, or rely on official power, so the lonely warriors, although they fight for the people, often perish because of this "action". At this point, they felt relieved. When you can't press down, you can hold it up, thinking that if you lift it high and eat it enough, you can feel a little more harmless to yourself and feel at ease.伶俐的人们，自然也有谋利而捧的，如捧阔老，捧戏子，捧总长之类；但在一般粗人，——就是未尝“读经”的，则凡有捧的行为的“动机”，大概是不过想免害。即以所奉祀的神道而论，也大抵是凶恶的，火神瘟神不待言，连财神也是蛇呀刺蝟呀似的骇人的畜类；观音菩萨倒还可爱，然而那是从印度输入的，并非我们的“国粹”。要而言之：凡是被捧者，十之九不是好东西。
Clever people naturally also have those who seek profit, such as praising the elderly, supporting actors, and praising the chief; However, if the average rough person ,—— has not tasted "reading the scriptures", then the "motive" of any behavior is probably just to avoid harm. Even in terms of the Shinto worshipped, it is probably vicious, the god of fire and the plague god needless to say, and even the god of wealth is a terrifying animal like a snake and a hedgehog; Guanyin Bodhisattva is still cute, but it was imported from India, not our "national essence". In short: 90% of all the people who are supported are not good things.既然十之九不是好东西，则被捧而后，那结果便自然和捧者的希望适得其反了。不但能使不安，还能使他们很不安，因为人心本来不易餍足。然而人们终于至今没有悟，还以捧为苟安之一道。
Since nine out of ten things are not good things, they are praised, and the result is naturally counterproductive to the hopes of the sponsors. Not only can it make them uneasy, but it can also make them very uneasy, because the human heart is not easy to be satisfied. However, people have not realized it so far, and they still regard it as a way to live in peace.记得有一部讲笑话的书，名目忘记了，也许是《笑林广记》罢，说，当一个知县的寿辰，因为他是子年生，属鼠的，属员们便集资铸了一个金老鼠去作贺礼。知县收受之后，另寻了机会对大众说道：明年又恰巧是贱内的整寿；她比我小一岁，是属牛的。其实，如果大家先不送金老鼠，他决不敢想金牛。一送开手，可就难于收拾了，无论金牛无力致送，即使送了，怕他的姨太太也会属象。象不在十二生肖之内，似乎不近情理罢，但这是我替他设想的法子罢了，知县当然别有我们所莫测高深的妙法在。
I remember a book that told jokes, the name of which I forgot, maybe it was "Laughing Forest Guangji", saying that when a county magistrate had a birthday, because he was born in the year of the child and was a rat, the members raised funds to cast a golden mouse as a congratulatory gift. After the county magistrate accepted it, he found another opportunity to say to the public: Next year happens to be the whole life of the cheap one; She is one year younger than me and is an ox. In fact, if everyone doesn't give the golden rat first, he will never dare to think about the golden bull. As soon as he gave it away, it was difficult to clean it up, no matter how hard Taurus could afford to send it, even if he did, he was afraid that his aunt would be an elephant. The elephant is not in the zodiac, it seems unreasonable, but this is just the method I envisioned for him, and of course the county magistrate has other wonderful methods that we cannot fathom.民元革命时候，我在S城，来了一个都督。他虽然也出身绿林大学，未尝“读经”（？），但倒是还算顾大局，听舆论的，可是自绅士以至于庶民，又用了祖传的捧法群起而捧之了。这个拜会，那个恭维，今天送衣料，明天送翅席，捧得他连自己也忘其所以，结果是渐渐变成老官僚一样，动手刮地皮。
During the Minyuan Revolution, I was in S City and came to a governor. Although he was also born in Green Forest University, he did not "read the scriptures" (?) But it is still considered to be the overall situation and listen to public opinion, but from the gentlemen to the common people, they have used the ancestral support of the Dharma to praise it. This visit, that compliment, today to send clothes, tomorrow to send wing mats, he even forgot about himself, and as a result, he gradually became like an old bureaucrat, scraping the ground.最奇怪的是北几省的河道，竟捧得河身比屋顶高得多了。当初自然是防其溃决，所以壅上一点土；殊不料愈壅愈高，一旦溃决，那祸害就更大。于是就“抢堤”咧，“护堤”咧，“严防决堤”咧，花色繁多，大家吃苦。如果当初见河水泛滥，不去增堤，却去挖底，我以为决不至于这样。
The strangest thing is that the rivers in the northern provinces are much higher than the roofs. At the beginning, it was naturally to prevent it from rupturing, so a little soil was blocked; Unexpectedly, the more congested it becomes, the more it collapses, and the disaster will be even greater. So they "grabbed the embankment", "berm", "strictly prevented the embankment from bursting", and there were many colors, and everyone endured hardships. If I had seen the river flooding and not increased the embankment, but dug the bottom, I thought it would never be like this.有贪图金牛者，不但金老鼠，便是死老鼠也不给。那么，此辈也就连生日都未必做了。单是省却拜寿，已经是一件大快事。
There are those who covet Taurus, not only golden rats, but also dead rats. Then, this generation may not even have a birthday. Just saving the birthday is already a great pleasure.中国人的自讨苦吃的根苗在于捧，“自求多福”之道却在于挖。其实，劳力之量是差不多的，但从惰性太多的人们看来，却以为还是捧省力。
The root of the Chinese's self-behaviour lies in holding it, but the way of "asking for more blessings" lies in digging. In fact, the amount of labor is about the same, but from the perspective of people who are too inert, they think that it is still labor-saving.十二月十日。
December 10th.

这个与那个

三　最先与最后

这个与那个

3. First and last《韩非子》说赛马的妙法，在于“不为最先，不耻最后”。这虽是从我们这样外行的人看起来，也觉得很有理。因为假若一开首便拚命奔驰，则马力易竭。但那第一句是只适用于赛马的，不幸中国人却奉为人的处世金鍼了。
"Han Feizi" says that the wonderful method of horse racing is to "not be the first, not ashamed of the last". Although this seems to be very reasonable from the perspective of laymen like us. Because if you run hard at the beginning, the horsepower will be easily exhausted. But the first sentence is only applicable to horse racing, but unfortunately the Chinese regard it as a golden needle for human life.中国人不但“不为戎首”，“不为祸始”，甚至于“不为福先”。所以凡事都不容易有改革；前驱和闯将，大抵是谁也怕得做。然而人性岂真能如道家所说的那样恬淡；欲得的却多。既然不敢径取，就只好用阴谋和手段。以此，人们也就日见其卑怯了，既是“不为最先”，自然也不敢“不耻最后”，所以虽是一大堆群众，略见危机，便“纷纷作鸟兽散”了。如果偶有几个不肯退转，因而受害的，公论家便异口同声，称之曰傻子。对于“锲而不舍”的人们也一样。
The Chinese are not only "not the leader of the war", "not the beginning of disaster", and even "not the first of fortune". Therefore, it is not easy to reform everything; Pioneers and breakers are probably afraid of anyone to do. However, human nature can really be as tranquil as Taoists say; But I want more. Since they didn't dare to take it directly, they had to use conspiracies and means. In this way, people are seeing their cowardice day by day, not only "not being the first", but naturally not daring to "be ashamed of the last", so although it is a large number of people, when they see a slight crisis, they "disperse as birds and beasts". If there are a few people who refuse to retreat and are victimized because of this, public opinion experts will call them fools in unison. The same is true for people who are "persevering".我有时也偶尔去看看学校的运动会。这种竞争，本来不像两敌国的开战，挟有仇隙的，然而也会因了竞争而骂，或者竟打起来。但这些事又作别论。竞走的时候，大抵是最快的三四个人一到决胜点，其余的便松懈了，有几个还至于失了跑完豫定的圈数的勇气，中途挤入看客的群集中；或者佯为跌倒，使红十字队用担架将他抬走。假若偶有虽然落后，却尽跑，尽跑的人，大家就嗤笑他。大概是因为他太不聪明，“不耻最后”的缘故罢。
I also occasionally go to the school sports day. This kind of competition is not like a war between two enemy countries, with enmity, but it will also be scolded because of the competition, or even fight. But these things are a different story. When racing, it is probably the fastest three or four people as soon as they reach the decisive point, and the rest relax, and a few even lose the courage to run the predetermined laps and squeeze into the crowd of spectators in the middle; Or feign a fall so that the Red Cross carries him away on a stretcher. If there is a person who is behind but runs and runs, everyone will laugh at him. Probably because he is too unsmart and "not ashamed of the last".所以中国一向就少有失败的英雄，少有韧性的反抗，少有敢单身鏖战的武人，少有敢抚哭叛徒的吊客；见胜兆则纷纷聚集，见败兆则纷纷逃亡。战具比我们精利的欧美人，战具未必比我们精利的匈奴蒙古满洲人，都如入无人之境。“土崩瓦解”这四个字，真是形容得有自知之明。
Therefore, China has always had few failed heroes, few resilient resistances, few warriors who dare to fight alone, and few mourners who dare to cry traitors; When they see the signs of victory, they gather, and when they see the signs of defeat, they flee. Europeans and Americans whose weapons are better than ours, and the Xiongnu, Mongolians, and Manchurians whose weapons may not be better than ours, are all like entering a no-man's land. The four words "collapse" are really self-aware.多有“不耻最后”的人的民族，无论什么事，怕总不会一下子就“土崩瓦解”的，我每看运动会时，常常这样想：优胜者固然可敬，但那虽然落后而仍非跑至终点不止的竞技者，和见了这样竞技者而肃然不笑的看客，乃正是中国将来的脊梁。
Every time I watch the Games, I often think like this: the winners are respectable, but the competitors who are behind but still do not run to the finish line, and the spectators who do not smile when they see such competitors, are the backbone of China's future.

这个与那个

四　流产与断种

这个与那个

4. Abortion and seed termination近来对于青年的创作，忽然降下一个“流产”的恶谥，哄然应和的就有一大群。我现在相信，发明这话的是没有什么恶意的，不过偶尔说一说；应和的也是情有可原的，因为世事本来大概就这样。
Recently, for the creation of young people, a bad posthumous title of "miscarriage" has suddenly been lowered, and there is a large group of people who respond in unison. I now believe that there was no malicious intention in inventing this word, but it is said occasionally; It is also forgivable to agree, because the world is probably like this.我独不解中国人何以于旧状况那么心平气和，于较新的机运就这么疾首蹙额；于已成之局那么委曲求全，于初兴之事就这么求全责备？
I don't understand why the Chinese are so calm about the old situation and frown so quickly in the newer situation; In the already established situation, so compromised, and in the initial matter, so blame?智识高超而眼光远大的先生们开导我们：生下来的倘不是圣贤，豪杰，天才，就不要生；写出来的倘不是不朽之作，就不要写；改革的事倘不是一下子就变成极乐世界，或者，至少能给我（！）有更多的好处，就万万不要动！……
The wise and far-sighted gentlemen enlighten us: if you are not a sage, a hero, or a genius, do not give birth; If what is written is not an immortal work, don't write it; If the reform does not suddenly become a paradise, or, at least it can give me (!) If there are more benefits, don't move! ……那么，他是保守派么？据说：并不然的。他正是革命家。惟独他有公平，正当，稳健，圆满，平和，毫无流弊的改革法；现下正在研究室里研究着哩，——只是还没有研究好。
So, is he a conservative? It is said: Not really. He was a revolutionary. Only he has a fair, just, steady, complete, peaceful, and free reform law; This is currently being studied in the laboratory,—— but it has not yet been studied.什么时候研究好呢？答曰：没有准儿。
When is it good to research? The answer is: There is no standard.孩子初学步的第一步，在成人看来，的确是幼稚，危险，不成样子，或者简直是可笑的。但无论怎样的愚妇人，却总以恳切的希望的心，看他跨出这第一步去，决不会因为他的走法幼稚，怕要阻碍阔人的路线而“逼死”他；也决不至于将他禁在床上，使他躺着研究到能够飞跑时再下地。因为她知道：假如这么办，即使长到一百岁也还是不会走路的。
A child's first step in toddlerhood is, in the eyes of adults, indeed childish, dangerous, unsightly, or simply ridiculous. But no matter what kind of foolish woman she is, she always watches him take this first step with a sincere hope, and will never "force" him to death because of his naïve way of walking, for fear of hindering the route of the broad man; Nor will he be confined to the bed, so that he can lie down and study until he can fly before going to the ground. Because she knew that if she did this, she would still not be able to walk even if she was a hundred years old.古来就这样，所谓读书人，对于后起者却反而专用彰明较著的或改头换面的禁锢。近来自然客气些，有谁出来，大抵会遇见学士文人们挡驾：且住，请坐。接着是谈道理了：调查，研究，推敲，修养，……结果是老死在原地方。否则，便得到“捣乱”的称号。我也曾有如现在的青年一样，向已死和未死的导师们问过应走的路。他们都说：不可向东，或西，或南，或北。但不说应该向东，或西，或南，或北。我终于发见他们心底里的蕴蓄了：不过是一个“不走”而已。
In ancient times, the so-called scholars were dedicated to the confinement of the newcomers or the transformation of the face. Recently, it is natural to be more polite, and whoever comes out will probably meet the scholars and literati who block the drive: Stay, please sit down. Then there is the reasoning: investigation, research, scrutiny, self-cultivation,...... The result is old death in the same place. Otherwise, you will get the title of "troublemaker". I have also asked my mentors, both dead and undead, like young people today, about the way to go. They all said, "Do not go east, or west, or south, or north." But it is not said that it should be east, or west, or south, or north. I finally discovered the accumulation in their hearts: it's just a "don't leave".坐着而等待平安，等待前进，倘能，那自然是很好的，但可虑的是老死而所等待的却终于不至；不生育，不流产而等待一个英伟的宁馨儿，那自然也很可喜的，但可虑的是终于什么也没有。
Sitting and waiting for peace, waiting for progress, if possible, it is naturally very good, but what is worrying is that what is waiting for will not finally come; Not having children, not having a miscarriage and waiting for a magnificent Ning Xin'er, that is naturally very gratifying, but what is worrying is that there is nothing in the end.倘以为与其所得的不是出类拔萃的婴儿，不如断种，那就无话可说。但如果我们永远要听见人类的足音，则我以为流产究竟比不生产还有望，因为这已经明明白白地证明着能够生产的了。
If you think that instead of getting an outstanding baby, it is better to cut off the seeds, then there is nothing to say. But if we are to hear human footsteps forever, I think that miscarriage is more promiscuous than not producing, because it has been clearly proven that it is possible to produce.十二月二十日。
December 20th.

并非闲话（三）

并非闲话（三）

并非闲话（三）

Not gossip (3)西滢先生这回是义形于色，在《现代评论》四十八期的《闲话》里很为被书贾擅自选印作品，因而受了物质上损害的作者抱不平。而且贱名也忝列于作者之列：惶恐透了。吃饭之后，写一点自己的所感罢。至于捏笔的“动机”，那可大概是“不纯洁”的。记得幼小时候住在故乡，每看见绅士将一点骗人的自以为所谓恩惠，颁给下等人，而下等人不大感谢时，则斥之曰“不识抬举！”我的父祖是读书的，总该可以算得士流了，但不幸从我起，不知怎的就有了下等脾气，不但恩惠，连吊慰都不很愿意受，老实说罢：我总疑心是假的。这种疑心，大约就是“不识抬举”的根苗，或者还要使写出来的东西“不纯洁”。
Mr. Xi Ying was righteous this time, and in the 48th issue of "Modern Review", he was very upset with the author who was selected and printed by the bookseller without authorization, so he suffered material damage. And my name is also worthy of being listed among the authors: I am terrified. After eating, write a little about your feelings. As for the "motive" of pinching the pen, it is probably "impure". I remember living in my hometown when I was a child, and every time I saw a gentleman giving a little deceptive self-proclaimed favor to the lower class, and the lower class did not thank him, he would scold him, "I don't know how to lift up!" "My father and grandfather were scholars, and they should always be considered scholars, but unfortunately from me, somehow I have a lowly temper, not only favors, but even condolences are not very willing, to be honest: I always suspect that it is false. This kind of suspicion is probably the root of "ignorance of lifting", or it also makes what is written "impure".我何尝有什么白刃在前，烈火在后，还是钉住书桌，非写不可的“创作冲动”；虽然明知道这种冲动是纯洁，高尚，可贵的，然而其如没有何。前几天早晨，被一个朋友怒视了两眼，倒觉得脸有点热，心有点酸，颇近乎有什么冲动了，但后来被深秋的寒风一吹拂，脸上的温度便复原，——没有创作。至于已经印过的那些，那是被挤出来的。这“挤”字是挤牛乳之“挤”；这“挤牛乳”是专来说明“挤”字的，并非故意将我的作品比作牛乳，希冀装在玻璃瓶里，送进什么“艺术之宫”。倘用现在突然流行起来了的论调，将青年的急于发表未熟的作品称为“流产”，则我的便是“打胎”；或者简直不是胎，是狸猫充太子。所以一写完，便完事，管他妈的，书贾怎么偷，文士怎么说，都不再来提心吊胆。但是，如果有我所相信的人愿意看，称赞好，我终于是欢喜的。后来也集印了，为的是还想卖几文钱，老实说。
I have no white blade in front and fire behind, or nail the desk, and I must write; Although we know that this impulse is pure, noble, and precious, it is noble. A few mornings ago, I was glared at by a friend, but I felt that my face was a little hot, my heart was a little sour, and I almost had some impulse, but then I was blown by the cold wind in late autumn, and the temperature on my face recovered,—— I didn't create. As for those that have already been printed, they are squeezed out. The word "squeeze" is the "milking" of milking; This "milking" is specifically to illustrate the word "milking", not to deliberately compare my work to milk, hoping to be put in a glass bottle and sent to some "palace of art". If I use the argument that has suddenly become popular now, and call the young people's eagerness to publish immature works "abortion", then mine is "abortion"; Or it is not a fetus at all, it is a civet cat as a prince. So as soon as I finished writing, it was over, no matter how the fuck, how the bookseller stole it, and what the scribe said, I no longer came to worry. However, if there are people I believe in who are willing to watch and praise it, I will finally rejoice. Later, it was also printed, in order to sell it for a few cents, to be honest.那么，我在写的时候没有虔敬的心么？答曰：有罢。即使没有这种冠冕堂皇的心，也决不故意耍些油腔滑调。被挤着，还能嬉皮笑脸，游戏三昧么？倘能，那简直是神仙了。我并没有在吕纯阳祖师门下投诚过。
So, did I not have a reverent heart when I wrote? The answer is: Yes, it is canceled. Even if you don't have this high-sounding heart, you will never deliberately play some oily tones. If you are squeezed, can you still have a hippie smile and play a game? If you can, it's simply a god. I have not surrendered under Patriarch Lu Chunyang.但写出以后，却也不很爱惜羽毛，有所谓“敝帚自珍”的意思，因为，已经说过，其时已经是“便完事，管他妈的”了。谁有心肠来管这些无聊的后事呢？所以虽然有什么选家在那里放出他那伟大的眼光，选印我的作品，我也照例给他一个不管。其实，要管也无从管起的。我曾经替人代理过一回收版税的译本，打听得卖完之后，向书店去要钱，回信却道，旧经理人已经辞职回家了，你向他要去罢；我们可是不知道。这书店在上海，我怎能趁了火车去向他坐索，或者打官司？但我对于这等选本，私心却也有“窃以为不然”的几点，一是原本上的错字，虽然一见就明知道是错的，他也照样错下去；二是他们每要发几句伟论，例如什么主义咧，什么意思咧之类，大抵是我自己倒觉得并不这样的事。自然，批评是“精神底冒险”，批评家的精神总比作者会先一步的，但在他们的所谓死尸上，我却分明听到心搏，这真是到死也说不到一块儿，此外，倒也没有什么大怨气了。
But after writing it, he didn't cherish the feathers very much, and there was the so-called meaning of "broom self-cherishing", because it has been said that it was already "it's over, fuck it". Who has the heart to take care of these boring funeral affairs? So although there are some selectors who show their great vision and choose to print my works, I will give him a leave of regard as usual. In fact, there is no way to manage it. I once acted as an agent for someone to recycle a translation of royalties, and after inquiring about the sale, I went to the bookstore to ask for money, but the reply said that the old manager had resigned and went home, so you can ask him to go; We don't know. This bookstore is in Shanghai, how can I take advantage of the train to ask him for a rope, or fight a lawsuit? First, the original typo, although he knew it was wrong at first sight, he was still wrong; second, every time they want to make a few grand statements, such as what doctrine and what they mean, I probably don't think this is the case. Naturally, criticism is a "spiritual adventure", and the spirit of the critic is always one step ahead of the author, but on their so-called dead body, I clearly hear the heartbeat, which is really impossible to say until death, and in addition, there is no big resentment.这虽然似乎是东方文明式的大度，但其实倒怕是因为我不靠卖文营生。在中国，骈文寿序的定价往往还是每篇一百两，然而白话不值钱；翻译呢，听说是自己不能创作而嫉妒别人去创作的坏心肠人所提倡的，将来文坛一进步，当然更要一文不值。我所写出来的东西，当初虽然很碰过许多大钉子，现在的时价是每千字一至二三元，但是不很有这样好主顾，常常只好尽些不知何自而来的义务。有些人以为我不但用了这些稿费或版税造屋，买米，而且还靠它吸烟卷，吃果糖。殊不知那些款子是另外骗来的；我实在不很擅长于先装鬼脸去吓书坊老板，然后和他接洽。我想，中国最不值钱的是工人的体力了，其次是咱们的所谓文章，只有伶俐最值钱。倘真要直直落落，借文字谋生，则据我的经验，卖来卖去，来回至少一个月，多则一年余，待款子寄到时，作者不但已经饿死，倘在夏天，连筋肉也都烂尽了，那里还有吃饭的肚子。
Although this seems to be the generosity of oriental civilization, I am actually afraid that it is because I do not make a living by selling literature. In China, the price of the preface to the preface is often one hundred taels per article, but the vernacular is not valuable; As for translation, I heard that it was advocated by bad-hearted people who could not create themselves and were jealous of others to create. Although I have touched many big nails at the beginning, the current price is one to two or three yuan per thousand words, but I do not have such a good customer, and I often have to fulfill some obligations that come from nowhere. Some people think that I not only used these manuscript fees or royalties to build houses and buy rice, but also relied on it to smoke rolls and eat fructose. As everyone knows, those money were scammed separately; I'm really not very good at pretending to make faces to scare the bookstore owner first, and then contact him. I think the least valuable thing in China is the physical strength of workers, followed by our so-called articles, only clever is the most valuable. If you really want to go straight and make a living through words, then according to my experience, sell it back and forth for at least a month, or more than a year, and when the money arrives, the author is not only starving to death, but if in the summer, even the muscles are rotten, and there is still a stomach to eat.所以我总用别的道儿谋生；至于所谓文章也者，不挤，便不做。挤了才有，则和什么高超的“烟士披离纯”呀，“创作感兴”呀之类不大有关系，也就可想而知。倘说我假如不必用别的道儿谋生，则心志一专，就会有“烟士披离纯”等类，而产生较伟大的作品，至少，也可以免于献出剥皮的狸猫罢，那可是也未必。三家村的冬烘先生，一年到头，一早到夜教村童，不但毫不“时时想政治活动”，简直并不很“干着种种无聊的事”，但是他们似乎并没有《教育学概论》或“高头讲章”的待定稿，藏之名山。而马克思的《资本论》，陀思妥夫斯奇的《罪与罚》等，都不是啜末加加啡，吸埃及烟卷之后所写的。除非章士钊总长治下的“有些天才”的编译馆人员，以及讨得官僚津贴或银行广告费的“大报”作者，于谋成事遂，睡足饭饱之余，三月炼字，半年锻句，将来会做出超伦轶群的古奥漂亮作品。总之，在我，是肚子一饱，应酬一少，便要心平气和，关起门来，什么也不写了；即使还写，也许不过是温暾之谈，两可之论，也即所谓执中之说，公允之言，其实等于不写而已。
So I always make a living by other ways; As for the so-called articles, if they are not squeezed, they will not be done. If you squeeze it out, it has nothing to do with what superb "smokers are pure", "creative excitement", etc., and it can be imagined. If I don't have to use other ways to make a living, then if I focus on it, there will be "smokers who are pure and pure", and produce greater works, at least, I can avoid offering a skinned civet cat, but that may not be the case. Mr. Donghuan of Sanjia Village, all year round, goes to the village early in the morning to teach the village children, not only does not "think about political activities all the time", but is not very "doing all kinds of boring things", but they do not seem to have a "Introduction to Pedagogy" or a "high-head lecture" to be finalized, hidden in the famous mountain. Marx's "Capital" and Dostovsky's "Crime and Punishment" were not written after sipping the last coffee and smoking Egyptian cigarettes. Unless the "some genius" compilers under President Zhang Shizhao, and the authors of the "big newspapers" who ask for bureaucratic allowances or bank advertising fees, in addition to achieving success and getting enough sleep and eating, they will refine their words in three months and forge sentences in half a year, and they will make extraordinary ancient and beautiful works in the future. In short, for me, when my stomach is full and I have little socializing, I have to be calm, close the door, and write nothing; Even if it is still written, it may only be a gentle talk, a theory of ambiguity, that is, the so-called theory of neutrality, a fair statement, which is actually equivalent to not writing.所以上海的小书贾化作蚊子，吸我的一点血，自然是给我物质上的损害无疑，而我却还没有什么大怨气，因为我知道他们是蚊子，大家也都知道他们是蚊子。我一生中，给我大的损害的并非书贾，并非兵匪，更不是旗帜鲜明的小人：乃是所谓“流言”。即如今年，就有什么“鼓动学潮”呀，“谋做校长”呀，“打落门牙”呀这些话。有一回，竟连现在为我的著作权受损失抱不平的西滢先生也要相信了，也就在《现代评论》（第二十五期）的照例的《闲话》上发表出来；它的效力就可想。譬如一个女学生，与其被若干卑劣阴险的文人学士们暗地里散布些关于品行的谣言，倒不如被土匪抢去一条红围巾——物质。但这种“流言”，造的是一个人还是多数人？姓甚，名谁？我总是查不出；后来，因为没有多工夫，也就不再去查考了，仅为便于述说起见，就总称之曰畜生。
So the little bookseller in Shanghai turned into a mosquito and sucked a little of my blood, which naturally caused me material damage, but I didn't have any big grievances, because I knew they were mosquitoes, and everyone knew they were mosquitoes. In my life, it was not the booksellers, the soldiers and bandits, nor the villains with a clear banner that caused me great damage: it was the so-called "rumors". That is, this year, there are words such as "agitating the student tide", "seeking to be a principal", and "knocking out front teeth". Once, even Mr. Xi Ying, who was now upset about the loss of my copyright, had to believe it, and it was published in the usual "Gossip" of "Modern Review" (No. 25); Its effectiveness can be imagined. For example, a female student, instead of being secretly spread some rumors about her character by some despicable and insidious literati and scholars, it is better to be robbed of a red scarf - material by bandits. But is this kind of "rumor" created by one person or the majority? What is your surname? I always can't find out; Later, because there was not much work, I stopped researching, and just for the sake of convenience, it was collectively called a beast.虽然分了类，但不幸这些畜生就杂在人们里，而一样是人头，实际上仍然无从辨别。所以我就多疑，不大要听人们的说话；又因为无话可说，自己也就不大愿意做文章。有时候，甚至于连真的义形于色的公话也会觉得古怪，珍奇，于是乎而下等脾气的“不识抬举”遂告成功，或者会终于不可救药。
Although they are classified, unfortunately these beasts are mixed among people, and the same is a human head, and in fact it is still impossible to distinguish. So I am suspicious and don't want to listen to people; And because I have nothing to say, I am not very willing to make a fuss. Sometimes, even the official dialect of the true meaning will feel strange and strange, so the "ignorance of lifting" with a lowly temper will succeed, or it will finally be hopeless.平心想起来，所谓“选家”这一流人物，虽然因为容易联想到明季的制艺的选家的缘故，似乎使人厌闻，但现在倒是应该有几个。这两三年来，无名作家何尝没有胜于较有名的作者的作品，只是谁也不去理会他，一任他自生自灭。去年，我曾向DF先生提议过，以为该有人搜罗了各处的各种定期刊行物，仔细评量，选印几本小说集，来绍介于世间；至于已有专集者，则一概不收，“再拜而送之大门之外”。但这话也不过终于是空话，当时既无定局，后来也大家走散了。我又不能做这事业，因为我是偏心的。评是非时我总觉得我的熟人对，读作品是异己者的手腕大概不高明。在我的心里似乎是没有所谓“公平”，在别人里我也没有看见过，然而还疑心什么地方也许有，因此就不敢做那两样东西了：法官，批评家。
To be fair, although the so-called "selector" seems to be annoying because it is easily associated with the selection of the Ming Dynasty's art, there should be a few now. In the past two or three years, the works of unknown writers have not been better than those of more famous authors, but no one has paid attention to him, and he has left him to fend for himself. Last year, I proposed to Mr. DF that someone should collect various periodicals from all over the place, carefully evaluate them, and select and print a few collections of novels to introduce to the world; As for those who already have a special collection, they will not accept it at all, and "bow again and send it out of the door". But these words were just empty words, there was no definite conclusion at the time, and then everyone was separated. I can't do this because I'm eccentric. When judging right and wrong, I always feel that my acquaintances are right, and those who read works are probably not smart. In my heart, there seems to be no such thing as "fairness", and I have not seen it in others, but I still doubt that there may be something, so I dare not do those two things: judges and critics.现在还没有专门的选家时，这事批评家也做得，因为批评家的职务不但是剪除恶草，还得灌溉佳花，——佳花的苗。譬如菊花如果是佳花，则他的原种不过是黄色的细碎的野菊，俗名“满天星”的就是。但是，或者是文坛上真没有较好的作品之故罢，也许是一做批评家，眼界便极高卓，所以我只见到对于青年作家的迎头痛击，冷笑，抹杀，却很少见诱掖奖劝的意思的批评。有一种所谓“文士”而又似批评家的，则专是一个人的御前侍卫，托尔斯泰呀，托她斯泰呀，指东画西的，就只为一人做屏风。其甚者竟至于一面暗护此人，一面又中伤他人，却又不明明白白地举出姓名和实证来，但用了含沙射影的口气，使那人不知道说着自己，却又另用口头宣传以补笔墨所不及，使别人可以疑心到那人身上去。这不但对于文字，就是女人们的名誉，我今年也看见有用了这畜生道的方法来毁坏的。古人常说“鬼蜮技俩”，其实世间何尝真有鬼蜮，那所指点的，不过是这类东西罢了。这类东西当然不在话下，就是只做侍卫的，也不配评选一言半语，因为这种工作，做的人自以为不偏而其实是偏的也可以，自以为公平而其实不公平也可以，但总不可“别有用心”于其间的。
When there is no special selection of households, critics can also do this, because the critic's job is not only to cut off the weeds, but also to irrigate the seedlings of the good flowers ,—— the good flowers. For example, if a chrysanthemum is a good flower, its original species is just a yellow fine wild chrysanthemum, commonly known as "gypsophila". However, perhaps because there are really no good works in the literary world, or perhaps as soon as I become a critic, my vision is extremely high, so I only see criticism of young writers head-on, sneering, and erasing, but rarely criticizing them with the meaning of temptation and encouragement. There is a so-called "scribe" who is also like a critic, and it is dedicated to one person's imperial guard, Tolstoy, Tolstoy, who refers to the east and west, and only makes a screen for one person. What's more, while secretly protecting this person, he slandered others, but he unclearly cited his name and evidence, but used a tone of insinuation to make the person not know that he was talking about himself, but he also used verbal propaganda to make up for the lack of pen and ink, so that others could be suspicious of that person. This is not only for words, but also for women's reputations, and I have also seen this animal method used to destroy it this year. The ancients often said that "ghosts and tricks", in fact, there are really ghosts in the world, and what they point out is just this kind of thing. Of course, this kind of thing is not a problem, even if it is only a guard, it is not worthy of a word and a word, because this kind of work, the person who does it thinks that he is not biased but is actually biased, and it is okay to think that he is fair but actually unfair, but he must not have "ulterior motives" in it.书贾也像别的商人一样，惟利是图；他的出版或发议论的“动机”，谁也知道他“不纯洁”，决不至于和大学教授的来等量齐观的。但他们除惟利是图之外，别的倒未必有什么用意，这就是使我反而放心的地方。自然，倘是向来没有受过更奇特而阴毒的暗箭的福人，那当然即此一点也要感到痛苦。
booksellers, like other merchants, are profit-seeking; No one knows that his "motive" for publishing or publishing articles is "impure" and will never be on par with that of university professors. But they may not have any intentions other than profit, which is what reassures me. Naturally, if you are a blessed person who has never been exposed to a more peculiar and vicious hidden arrow, of course you will feel pain at this point.这也算一篇作品罢，但还是挤出来的，并非围炉煮茗时中的闲话，临了，便回上去填作题目，纪实也。
This is also a work, but it is still squeezed out, not the gossip when making tea around the stove, and when it comes, it goes back to fill in the title, and it is also a documentary.十一月二十二日。
November 22.

我观北大

我观北大

我观北大

I look at Peking University因为北大学生会的紧急征发，我于是总得对于本校的二十七周年纪念来说几句话。
Because of the emergency requisition of the Peking University Student Union, I have to say a few words about the 27th anniversary of our school.据一位教授的名论，则“教一两点钟的讲师”是不配与闻校事的，而我正是教一点钟的讲师。但这些名论，只好请恕我置之不理；——如其不恕，那么，也就算了，人那里顾得这些事。
According to a professor's famous theory, "a lecturer who teaches one or two o'clock" is not worthy of hearing about school affairs, and I am the lecturer who teaches one o'clock. But these famous theories have to be ignored by me; ——If they don't forgive, then forget it, people take care of these things.我向来也不专以北大教员自居，因为另外还与几个学校有关系。然而不知怎的，——也许是含有神妙的用意的罢，今年忽而颇有些人指我为北大派。我虽然不知道北大可真有特别的派，但也就以此自居了。北大派么？就是北大派！怎么样呢？
I have never regarded myself as a faculty member of Peking University, because I have connections with several other schools. However, somehow,—— maybe there is a mysterious intention, and this year some people suddenly called me Peking University faction. Although I didn't know that Peking University really had a special school, I took it upon myself. Peking University faction? It's the Peking University faction! How?但是，有些流言家幸勿误会我的意思，以为谣我怎样，我便怎样的。我的办法也并不一律。譬如前次的游行，报上谣我被打落了两个门牙，我可决不肯具呈警厅，吁请补派军警，来将我的门牙从新打落。我之照着谣言做去，是以专检自己所愿意者为限的。
However, some rumors should not misunderstand what I mean, thinking that if I am a rumor, I will be like that. My methods are not uniform. For example, in the last parade, there was a rumor that I had lost two front teeth, and I would never report it to the police department, and I called on the military and police to knock out my front teeth again. I follow the rumors and limit myself to what I want.我觉得北大也并不坏。如果真有所谓派，那么，被派进这派里去，也还是也就算了。理由在下面：
I don't think Peking University is bad either. If there is really a so-called faction, then it is still okay to be sent into this faction. The reasons are as follows:既然是二十七周年，则本校的萌芽，自然是发于前清的，但我并民国初年的情形也不知道。惟据近七八年的事实看来，第一，北大是常为新的，改进的运动的先锋，要使中国向着好的，往上的道路走。虽然很中了许多暗箭，背了许多谣言；教授和学生也都逐年地有些改换了，而那向上的精神还是始终一贯，不见得弛懈。自然，偶尔也免不了有些很想勒转马头的，可是这也无伤大体，“万众一心”，原不过是书本子上的冠冕话。
Since it is the 27th anniversary, the germination of this school naturally originated in the former Qing Dynasty, but I do not know the situation in the early years of the Republic of China. However, according to the facts of the past seven or eight years, first, Peking University is often the vanguard of the new and improved movement, and it is necessary to make China move towards a good and upward path. Although he was hit by many hidden arrows and memorized many rumors; Professors and students have also changed a little year by year, and the upward spirit is still consistent and not necessarily relaxed. Naturally, occasionally there are inevitably some people who want to turn the horse's head, but this doesn't hurt the whole thing, "all people are united", it turns out to be just a crown word in a book.第二，北大是常与黑暗势力抗战的，即使只有自己。自从章士钊提了“整顿学风”的招牌来“作之师”，并且分送金款以来，北大却还是给他一个依照彭允彝的待遇。现在章士钊虽然还伏在暗地里做总长，本相却已显露了；而北大的校格也就愈明白。那时固然也曾显出一角灰色，但其无伤大体，也和第一条所说相同。
Second, Peking University often fights against dark forces, even if it is only itself. Since Zhang Shizhao put forward the signboard of "rectifying the academic style" to "be a teacher" and distributing the money, Peking University still gave him a treatment according to Peng Yunyi. Now although Zhang Shizhao is still hiding in the shadows as the chief, his true nature has been revealed; And the school style of Peking University is becoming clearer. At that time, there was certainly a corner of gray, but it was harmless and the same as the first one.我不是公论家，有上帝一般决算功过的能力。仅据我所感得的说，则北大究竟还是活的，而且还在生长的。凡活的而且在生长者，总有着希望的前途。
I am not a public opinionator, and I have the ability to calculate merits and demerits like God. From what I can feel, Peking University is still alive and growing. Those who live and grow always have a hopeful future.今天所想到的就是这一点。但如果北大到二十八周年而仍不为章士钊者流所谋害，又要出纪念刊，我却要预先声明：不来多话了。一则，命题作文，实在苦不过；二则，说起来大约还是这些话。
That's what comes to mind today. But if Peking University is still not murdered by Zhang Shizhao and is going to publish a commemorative magazine on the 28th anniversary, I have to declare in advance: I won't say more. First, the proposition composition is really bitter; Second, it is still about these words.十二月十三日。
December 13th.

碎话

碎话

碎话

Broken words如果只有自己，那是都可以的：今日之我与昨日之我战也好，今日这么说明日那么说也好。但最好是在自己的脑里想，在自己的宅子里说；或者和情人谈谈也不妨，横竖她总能以“阿呀”表示其佩服，而没有第三者与闻其事。只是，假使不自珍惜，陆续发表出来，以“领袖”“正人君子”自居，而称这些为“思想”或“公论”之类，却难免有多少老实人遭殃。自然，凡有神妙的变迁，原是反足以见学者文人们进步之神速的；况且文坛上本来就“只许州官放火不准百姓点灯”，既不幸而为庸人，则给天才做一点牺牲，也正是应尽的义务。谁叫你不能研究或创作的呢？亦惟有活该吃苦而已矣！
If it's only yourself, it's okay: it's okay to fight today with yesterday's me, or to say that today is the day. But it is best to think in your own head and say it in your own house; Or talk to your lover, she can always express her admiration with "Ah", and there is no third party to hear about it. However, if you don't cherish yourself and publish them one after another, claiming to be "leaders" and "upright gentlemen", and call these "thoughts" or "public opinions", it is inevitable that many honest people will suffer. Naturally, whenever there are miraculous changes, it is enough to see the rapid progress of scholars and literati; Moreover, in the literary world, "only state officials are allowed to set fires and the people are not allowed to light lamps", which is unfortunate and mediocre, so it is also an obligation to make a little sacrifice for geniuses. Who says you can't study or create? It is only necessary to endure hardship!然而，这是天才，或者是天才的奴才的崇论宏议。从庸人一方面看起来，却不免觉得此说虽合乎理而反乎情；因为“蝼蚁尚且贪生”，也还是古之明训。所以虽然是庸人，总还想活几天，乐一点。无奈爱管闲事是他们吃苦的根苗，坐在家里好好的，却偏要出来寻导师，听公论了。学者文人们正在一日千变地进步，大家跟在他后面；他走的是小弯，你走的是大弯，他在圆心里转，你却必得在圆周上转，汗流浃背而终于不知所以，那自然是不待数计龟卜而后知的。
However, this is a grand discussion of genius, or a servant of genius. From the perspective of mediocre people, they can't help but feel that although this statement is reasonable and contrary to reason; Because "ants are still greedy for life", it is also an ancient admonition. So even though I am a mediocre person, I always want to live for a few days and have fun. Helpless nosyness is the root of their hardships, sitting at home is good, but they want to come out to find a mentor and listen to public opinion. Scholars and literati are making progress day by day, and everyone is following him; He walks a small bend, you walk a big bend, he turns in the center of the circle, but you have to turn around the circle, sweating profusely and finally not knowing why, that naturally does not wait for the number of turtles to know.什么事情都要干，干，干！那当然是名言，但是倘有傻子真去买了手枪，就必要深悔前非，更进而悟到救国必先求学。这当然也是名言，何用多说呢，就遵谕钻进研究室去。待到有一天，你发见了一颗新彗星，或者知道了刘歆并非刘向的儿子之后，跳出来救国时，先觉者可是“杳如黄鹤”了，寻来寻去，也许会在戏园子里发见。你不要再菲薄那“小东人嗯嗯！哪，唉唉唉！”罢：这是艺术。听说“人类不仅是理智的动物”，必须“种种方面有充分发达的人，才可以算完人”呀，学者之在戏园，乃是“在感情方面求种种的美”。“束发小生”变成先生，从研究室里钻出，救国的资格也许有一点了，却不料还是一个精神上种种方面没有充分发达的畸形物，真是可怜可怜。
Do everything, do it, do it! Of course, that is a famous saying, but if a fool really buys a pistol, he must deeply regret his past mistakes, and then realize that he must first study to save the country. Of course, this is also a famous saying, so why say more, just follow the instructions and drill into the research room. When one day, you find a new comet, or after knowing that Liu Xin is not Liu Xiang's son, when you jump out to save the country, the pre-enlightened person is "like a yellow crane", looking around, maybe you will find it in the theater. Don't be underestimating that" Xiaodong hmm! Hey, alas! "Stop: This is art. I heard that "human beings are not only rational animals", but must be "fully developed in all kinds of aspects to be considered a perfect person". The "bundled hair" became a gentleman, drilled out of the research room, and the qualifications to save the country may be a little, but unexpectedly it is still a deformity that is not fully developed in various aspects of spirit, which is really pitiful.那么，立刻看夜戏，去求种种的美去，怎么样？谁知道呢。也许学者已经出戏园，学说也跟着长进（俗称改变，非也）了。
So, how about watching night dramas immediately and seeking all kinds of beauty? Who knows. Perhaps scholars have left the theater, and their theories have also grown (commonly known as change, not also).叔本华先生以厌世名一时，近来中国的绅士们却独独赏识了他的《妇人论》。的确，他的骂女人虽然还合绅士们的脾胃，但别的话却实在很有些和我们不相宜的。即如《读书和书籍》那一篇里，就说，“我们读着的时候，别人却替我们想。我们不过反复了这人的心的过程。……然而本来底地说起来，则读书时，我们的脑已非自己的活动地。这是别人的思想的战场了。”但是我们的学者文人们却正需要这样的战场——未经老练的青年的脑髓。但也并非在这上面和别的强敌战斗，乃是今日之我打昨日之我，“道义”之手批“公理”之颊——说得俗一点：自己打嘴巴。作了这样的战场者，怎么还能明白是怎么一回事。
Mr. Schopenhauer was famous for his world-weariness, but recently Chinese gentlemen have appreciated his "Theory of Women". Indeed, although his scolding of women is still in line with the gentlemen's temperament, other words are really not suitable for us. For example, in the article "Reading and Books", it is said, "When we read, others think for us." We just repeat the process of this person's heart. …… However, to put it bluntly, when reading, our brains are no longer our own place of activity. This is the battlefield of other people's thoughts. "But our scholars and literati need such a battlefield - the brains of unexperienced youth. But it is not fighting with other strong enemies on this, but today I beat yesterday's me, and the hand of "morality" criticizes the cheek of "axioms" - to put it vulgarly: hit yourself in the mouth. How can a person who has been on such a battlefield understand what is going on.这一月来，不知怎的又有几个学者文人或批评家亡魂失魄了，仿佛他们在上月底才从娘胎钻出，毫不知道民国十四年十二月以前的事似的。女师大学生一归她们被占的本校，就有人引以为例，说张胡子或李胡子可以“派兵送一二百学生占据了二三千学生的北大”。如果这样，北大学生确应该群起而将女师大扑灭，以免张胡或李胡援例，确保母校的安全。但我记得北大刚举行过二十七周年纪念，那建立的历史，是并非由章士钊将张胡或李胡将要率领的二百学生拖出，然后改立北大，招生三千，以掩人耳目的。这样的比附，简直是在青年的脑上打滚。夏间，则也可以称为“挑剔风潮”。但也许批评界有时也是“只许州官放火不准百姓点灯”，正如天才之在文坛一样的。
In the past month, somehow a few scholars, literati or critics have lost their souls, as if they only got out of their mother's womb at the end of last month, as if they didn't know what happened before December of the fourteenth year of the Republic of China. As soon as the female normal college students returned to the school they occupied, some people cited it as an example, saying that Zhang Huzi or Li Huzi could "send troops to Peking University with two or two hundred students occupying two or three thousand students." If this is the case, Peking University students should indeed rise up to extinguish the female normal university, so as not to prevent Zhang Hu or Li Hu from citing examples to ensure the safety of their alma mater. But I remember that Peking University had just held its 27th anniversary, and the history of its establishment was not that Zhang Shizhao dragged out the 200 students that Zhang Hu or Li Hu were going to lead, and then changed Peking University to enroll 3,000 students to hide people's eyes. Such a comparison is simply rolling in the brains of young people. In summer, it can also be called a "picky trend". But perhaps the critics sometimes "only allow state officials to set fires and not allow the people to light lamps", just like geniuses in the literary world.学者文人们最好是有这样的一个特权，月月，时时，自己和自己战，——即自己打嘴巴。免得庸人不知，以常人为例，误以为连一点“闲话”也讲不清楚。
Scholars and literati should have such a privilege, month after month, all the time, fighting with themselves,—— that is, slapping their mouths. Lest the mediocre people don't know, taking ordinary people as an example, mistakenly thinking that they can't even say a little "gossip" clearly.十二月二十二日。
December 22.

“公理”的把戏

“公理”的把戏

“公理”的把戏

The trick of "axiom"自从去年春间，北京女子师范大学有了反对校长杨荫榆事件以来，于是而有该校长在太平湖饭店请客之后，任意将学生自治会员六人除名的事；有引警察及打手蜂拥入校的事；迨教育总长章士钊复出，遂有非法解散学校的事；有司长刘百昭雇用流氓女丐殴曳学生出校，禁之补习所空屋中的事；有手忙脚乱，急挂女子大学招牌以掩天下耳目的事；有胡敦复之趁火打劫，攫取女大校长饭碗，助章士钊欺罔世人的事。女师大的许多教职员，——我敢特地声明：并不是全体！——本极以章杨的措置为非，复痛学生之无辜受戮，无端失学，而校务维持会之组织，遂愈加严固。我先是该校的一个讲师，于黑暗残虐情形，多曾目睹；后是该会的一个委员，待到女师大在宗帽胡同自赁校舍，而章士钊尚且百端迫压的苦痛，也大抵亲历的。当章氏势焰熏天时，我也曾环顾这首善之区，寻求所谓“公理”“道义”之类而不得；而现在突起之所谓“教育界名流”者，那时则鸦雀无声；甚且捧献肉麻透顶的呈文，以歌颂功德。但这一点，我自然也判不定是因为畏章氏有嗾使兵警痛打之威呢，还是贪图分润金款之利，抑或真以他为“公理”或“道义”等类的具象的化身？但是，从章氏逃走，女师大复校以后，所谓“公理”等件，我却忽而间接地从女子大学在撷英馆宴请“北京教育界名流及女大学生家长”的席上找到了。
Since the incident of opposition to President Yang Yinyu at Beijing Women's Normal University last spring, the president arbitrarily removed six student autonomy members after entertaining guests at the Taiping Lake Hotel; there are incidents of police and thugs swarming into the school; When the chief of education, Zhang Shizhao, came back, there was an illegal dissolution of the school; Liu Baizhao hired rogue female beggars to beat and drag students out of the school and banned them from doing things in the empty cram school; there are things that are in a hurry and hurriedly hang up the signboard of women's universities to cover the eyes and ears of the world; There is Hu Dunfu who took advantage of the fire to rob and seize the job of the female university principal, helping Zhang Shizhao deceive the world. Many faculty members of Women's Normal University,—— I dare to declare that not all! ——Benji believes that Zhang Yang's measures are wrong, and he is pained by the innocent killing of students and the unprovoked loss of school, and the organization of the school affairs maintenance association has become more and more strict. I was a lecturer at the school, and I had witnessed many dark and cruel situations; Later, he was a member of the association, and when the Women's Normal University rented a school building in Zongmao Hutong, Zhang Shizhao was still oppressed in various ways, and he probably experienced it firsthand. When Zhang's power was overwhelming, I also looked around this area of goodness, seeking the so-called "axioms" and "morality" but couldn't find it; The so-called "celebrities in the education industry" who are now emerging were silent at that time; He even presented a meat-hemp presentation to praise the merits. But at this point, I naturally can't judge whether it is because I am afraid that Zhang Shi will instigate the soldiers and police to beat him up, or is he greedy for the profit of sharing the money, or is he really regarded as a concrete embodiment of "axioms" or "morality"? However, after escaping from Zhang's family and the resumption of Women's Normal University, I suddenly and indirectly found the so-called "axioms" and other things from the banquet hosted by Women's University at the Xiying Pavilion to entertain "celebrities in the education circles and parents of female college students".据十二月十六日的《北京晚报》说，则有些“名流”即于十四日晚六时在那个撷英番菜馆开会。请吃饭的，去吃饭的，在中国一天不知道有多多少少，本不与我相干，虽然也令我记起杨荫榆也爱在太平湖饭店请人吃饭的旧事。但使我留心的是，从这饭局里产生了“教育界公理维持会”，从这会又变出“国立女子大学后援会”，从这会又发出“致国立各校教职员联席会议函”，声势浩大，据说是“而于该校附和暴徒，自堕人格之教职员，即不能投畀豺虎，亦宜屏诸席外，勿与为伍”云。他们之所谓“暴徒”，盖即刘百昭之所谓“土匪”，官僚名流，口吻如一，从局外人看来，不过煞是可笑而已。而我是女师大维持会员之一，又是女师大教员，人格所关，当然有抗议的权利。岂但抗议？“投虎”“割席”，“名流”的熏灼之状，竟至于斯，则虽报以恶声，亦不为过。但也无须如此，只要看一看这些“名流”究竟是什么东西，就尽够了。报上和函上有名单：
According to the "Beijing Evening News" on December 16, some "celebrities" held a meeting at the British restaurant at 6 p.m. on the 14th. Those who invite people to eat, those who go to eat, I don't know how much a day in China, it has nothing to do with me, although it also reminds me of the old story of Yang Yinyu also loving to invite people to dinner at the Taiping Lake Hotel. However, what makes me note is that from this dinner came the "Education Circle Axiom Maintenance Association", from which the "National Women's University Support Association" was formed, and from this meeting issued the "Letter to the Joint Conference of Faculty and Staff of National Universities", which was said to be "and the faculty and staff who echo the mob in the school and degenerate their personalities should not vote for the jackals, and should be kept out of the table and not be in the company of them." Their so-called "thugs" are Liu Baizhao's so-called "bandits", bureaucrats and celebrities, with the same tone, from the perspective of outsiders, but it is just ridiculous. And I am one of the maintenance members of the Women's Normal University, and I am also a faculty member of the Women's Normal University. Is it just a protest? The scorching scene of "throwing tigers", "cutting the mat", and "celebrities" has reached this point, so even if it is reported with a bad reputation, it is not an exaggeration. But there is no need to do this, just take a look at what these "celebrities" are. There is a list in the report and letter:除了万里鸣是太平湖饭店掌柜，以及董子鹤辈为我所不知道的不计外，陶昌善是农大教务长，教长兼农大校长章士钊的替身；石志泉是法大教务长；查良钊是师大教务长；李顺卿，王桐龄是师大教授；萧友梅是前女师大而今女大教员；蹇华芬是前女师大而今女大学生；马寅初是北大讲师，又是中国银行的什么，也许是“总司库”，这些名目我记不清楚了；燕树棠，白鹏飞，陈源即做《闲话》的西滢，丁燮林即做过《一只马蜂》的西林，周鲠生即周览，皮宗石，高一涵，李仲揆即李四光曾有一篇杨荫榆要用汽车迎他“观剧”的作品登在《现代评论》上的，都是北大教授，又大抵原住在东吉祥胡同，又大抵是先前反对北大对章士钊独立的人物，所以当章士钊炙手可热之际，《大同晚报》曾称他们为“东吉祥派的正人君子”，虽然他们那时并没有开什么“公理”会。但他们的住址，今年新印的《北大职员录》上可很有些函胡了，我所依据的是民国十一年的本子。
In addition to Wan Liming being the shopkeeper of the Taiping Lake Hotel and Dong Zihe and his generation for what I don't know, Tao Changshan is the provost of Agricultural University, the stand-in of Zhang Shizhao, the dean and president of Agricultural University; Shi Zhiquan is the provost of the University of Law; Cha Liangzhao is the provost of Normal University; Li Shunqing and Wang Tongling are professors at Normal University; Xiao Youmei is a former teacher of Women's Normal University and now a teacher at Women's University; Jian Huafen is a former female college student at Women's Normal University and now a female college student; Ma Yinchu is a lecturer at Peking University, and he is also a Bank of China, maybe the "chief treasurer", I can't remember these names clearly; Yan Shutang, Bai Pengfei, Chen Yuan is Xi Ying of "Gossip", Ding Xielin is Xi Lin of "A Hornet", Zhou Kunsheng is Zhou Lan, Pi Zongshi, Gao Yihan, Li Zhongkui is Li Siguang There was a work of Yang Yinyu to welcome him with a car to "watch the drama" published in the "Modern Review", all of whom were professors at Peking University, and they were probably originally living in Dongjixiang Hutong, and they were probably people who had previously opposed Peking University's independence to Zhang Shizhao, so when Zhang Shizhao was hot, the "Datong Evening News" once called them "righteous gentlemen of the East Auspicious School", Although they did not hold any "axiomatic" meetings at that time. But their addresses are a bit strange on the newly printed "Peking University Staff Record" this year, and I am based on the book of the eleventh year of the Republic of China.日本人学了中国人口气的《顺天时报》，即大表同情于女子大学，据说多人的意见，以为女师大教员多系北大兼任，有附属于北大之嫌。亏它征得这么多人的意见。然而从上列的名单看来，那观察是错的。女师大向来少有专任教员，正是杨荫榆的狡计，这样，则校长即可以独揽大权；当我们说话时，高仁山即以讲师不宜与闻校事来箝制我辈之口。况且女师大也决不因为中有北大教员，即精神上附属于北大，便是北大教授，正不乏有当学生反对杨荫榆的时候，即协力来歼灭她们的人。即如八月七日的《大同晚报》，就有“某当局……谓北大教授中，如东吉祥派之正人君子，亦主张解散”等语。《顺天时报》的记者倘竟不知，可谓昏瞀，倘使知道而故意淆乱黑白，那就有挑拨对于北大怀着恶感的人物，将那恶感蔓延于女师大之嫌，居心可谓卑劣。但我们国内战争，尚且常有日本浪人从中作祟，使良民愈陷于水深火热之中，更何况一校女生和几个教员之被诬蔑。我们也只得自责国人之不争气，竟任这样的报纸跳梁！
Chinese It is said that many people believe that most of the faculty members of the Women's Normal University are part-time at Peking University and are suspected of being affiliated with Peking University. It is a pity that it has so many people's opinions. However, from the list above, that observation is wrong. Women's Normal University has always had few full-time faculty members, which is Yang Yinyu's cunning, so that the president can monopolize power; When we spoke, Gao Renshan said that lecturers should not participate in school affairs to silence us. Moreover, the Women's Normal University is by no means because there are Peking University faculty members, that is, they are spiritually attached to Peking University, that is, they are Peking University professors, and there is no shortage of people who work together to annihilate Yang Yinyu when they oppose them. For example, in the "Datong Evening News" on August 7, there was "a certain authority...... It is said that among the professors of Peking University, such as the righteous gentlemen of the East Jixiang faction, they also advocate dissolution." If the reporter of the "Shuntian Times" does not know, it can be described as dim, and if he knows and deliberately confuses black and white, then there is a person who has a bad feeling towards Peking University and spreads that evil feeling to the suspicion of the female normal university, and the intention can be described as despicable. However, in our civil war, there are often Japanese ronin who are causing trouble, making the good people more and more dire straits, not to mention the slander of a school girl and several teachers. We have no choice but to blame ourselves for the incompetence of the Chinese people, and let such a newspaper jump the beam!北大教授王世杰在撷英馆席上演说，即云“本人决不主张北大少数人与女师大合作”，就可以证明我前言的不诬。至又谓“照北大校章教职员不得兼他机关主要任务然而现今北大教授在女师大兼充主任者已有五人实属违法应加以否认云云”，则颇有语病。北大教授兼国立京师图书馆副馆长月薪至少五六百元的李四光，不也是正在坐中“维持公理”，而且演说的么？使之何以为情？李教授兼副馆长的演说辞，报上却不载；但我想，大概是不赞成这个办法的。
Wang Shijie, a professor at Peking University, said in a speech at the Xiying Pavilion, that is, "I will never advocate that a few people from Peking University cooperate with Women's Normal University", which can prove that my preface is true. He even said that "according to the school constitution of Peking University, the faculty and staff are not allowed to concurrently hold the main tasks of other organs, but now there are five professors of Peking University who also serve as directors at Women's Normal University, which is really illegal and should be denied." Li Siguang, a professor at Peking University and deputy director of the National Normal Library with a monthly salary of at least five or six hundred yuan, is not also sitting in the middle of "maintaining axioms" and giving speeches? What makes it emotional? Professor Li's speech and deputy curator was not recorded in the newspaper; But I think I probably don't approve of this method.北大教授燕树棠谓女大学生极可佩服，而对于“形同土匪破坏女大的人应以道德上之否认加之”，则竟连所谓女大教务长萧纯锦的自辩女大当日所埋伏者是听差而非流氓的启事也没有见，却已一口咬定，嘴上忽然跑出一个“道德”来了。那么，对于形同鬼蜮破坏女师大的人，应以什么上之否认加之呢？
Yan Shutang, a professor at Peking University, said that female college students are extremely admirable, and for "people who are like bandits destroying women's universities should be added with moral denial", they did not even see the so-called provost of women's universities Xiao Chunjin's self-defense that the ambushed people of women's universities that day were listeners rather than hooligans. So, what denial should be added to those who are like ghosts destroying Women's Normal University?“公理”实在是不容易谈，不但在一个维持会上，就要自相矛盾，有时竟至于会用了“道义”上之手，自批“公理”上之脸的嘴巴。西滢是曾在《现代评论》（三十八）的《闲话》里冷嘲过援助女师大的人们的：“外国人说，中国人是重男轻女的。我看不见得吧。”现在却签名于什么公理会上了，似乎性情或体质有点改变。而且曾经感慨过：“你代被群众专制所压迫者说了几句公平话，那么你不是与那人有‘密切的关系’便是吃了他或她的酒饭。”（《现代》四十）然而现在的公理什么会上的言论和发表的文章上，却口口声声，侧重多数了；似乎主张又颇有些参差，只有“吃饭”的一件事还始终如一。在《现代评论》（五十三）上，自诩是“所有的批评都本于学理和事实，绝不肆口嫚骂”，而忘却了自己曾称女师大为“臭毛厕”，并且署名于要将人“投畀豺虎”的信尾曰：陈源。陈源不就是西滢么？半年的事，几个的人，就这么矛盾支离，实在可以使人悯笑。但他们究竟是聪明的，大约不独觉得“公理”歪邪，而且连自己们的“公理维持会”也很有些歪邪了罢，所以突然一变而为“女子大学后援会”了，这是的确的，后援，就是站在背后的援助。
"Axioms" are really not easy to talk about, not only in a maintenance meeting, but also in a contradiction to oneself, sometimes even using the hands of "morality" and the mouth of self-criticizing the face of "axioms". Xi Ying once sneered at the people who aided the Women's Normal University in "Gossip" in "Modern Review" (38): "Foreigners say that Chinese are patriarchal. I can't see it. "Now he is signed to some congregation, and it seems that his temperament or physique has changed a little. And once sighed: "If you say a few fair words on behalf of those who are oppressed by mass autocracy, then you either have a 'close relationship' with that person or eat his or her wine and food." ("Modern" 40) However, the current axioms of the speeches and published articles are kept talking and focusing on the majority; It seems that the propositions are quite uneven, and only one thing about "eating" is still the same. In the "Modern Review" (53), he boasted that "all criticism is based on theory and facts, and will never insult him", but forgot that he once called the Women's Normal University a "stinky toilet", and signed the end of the letter to "throw people to the jackals and tigers": Chen Yuan. Isn't Chen Yuan Xiying? In half a year, several people are so contradictory and fragmented, which can really make people laugh. But they are smart, probably not only do they feel that the "axiom" is crooked, but even their own "axiom maintenance association" is also a little crooked, so it suddenly changed into the "Women's University Support Association", which is true, and the support is the assistance standing behind the scenes.但是十八日《晨报》上所载该后援会开会的记事，却连发言的人的名姓也没有了，一律叫作“某君”。莫非后来连对于自己的姓名也觉得可羞，真是“内愧于心”了？还是将人“投畀豺虎”之后，豫备归过于“某君”，免得自己负责任，受报复呢？虽然报复的事，并为“正人君子”们所反对，但究竟还不如先使人不知道“后援”者为谁的稳当，所以即使为着“道义”，而坦白的态度，也仍为他们所不取罢。因为明白地站出来，就有些“形同土匪”或“暴徒”，怕要失了专在背后，用暗箭的聪明人的人格。
However, the record of the meeting of the support association recorded in the "Morning Post" on the 18th did not even have the name of the speaker, and they were all called "a certain gentleman". Could it be that he felt ashamed of his name later, and he was really "ashamed of his heart"? Or after "throwing people to the jackals and tigers", the preparation is attributed to "a certain king", so as not to be responsible and retaliated? Although the matter of revenge is opposed by the "righteous gentlemen", it is better to let people not know who the "supporter" is safe, so even for the sake of "morality", the frank attitude is still not accepted by them. Because if you stand up clearly, there are some "bandits" or "thugs", and you are afraid of losing the personality of a smart person who is dedicated to the back and uses hidden arrows.其实，撷英馆里和后援会中所啸聚的一彪人马，也不过是各处流来的杂人，正如我一样，到北京来骗一口饭，岂但“投畀豺虎”，简直是已经“投畀有北”的了。这算得什么呢？以人论，我与王桐龄，李顺卿虽曾在西安点首谈话，却并不当作朋侪；与陈源虽尝在给泰戈尔祝寿的戏台前一握手，而早已视为异类，又何至于会有和他们连席之意？而况于不知什么东西的杂人等辈也哉！以事论，则现在的教育界中实无豺虎，但有些城狐社鼠之流，那是当然不能免的。不幸十余年来，早见得不少了；我之所以对于有些人的口头的鸟“公理”而不敬者，即大抵由于此。
In fact, the crowd gathered in the Xiying Pavilion and the support club is just a miscellaneous person flowing from all over the place, just like me, coming to Beijing to cheat a bite of food, not only "vote for the jackal", but simply "vote for Youbei". What is this? In terms of people, although Wang Tongling and Li Shunqing had nodded and talked in Xi'an, they were not regarded as peers; Although he and Chen Yuan once shook hands in front of the stage to celebrate Tagore's birthday, they had already regarded them as outliers, so why would they have the intention of sitting with them? And let alone the miscellaneous people who don't know what it is! In terms of facts, there are really no jackals in the current education circles, but some city foxes and rats are of course unavoidable. Unfortunately, I have seen a lot of them in the past ten years; The reason why I am disrespectful to some people's verbal bird "axioms" is probably because of this.十二月十八日。
December 18th.

这回是“多数”的把戏

这回是“多数”的把戏

这回是“多数”的把戏

This time it was the trick of the "majority"《现代评论》五五期《闲话》的末一段是根据了女大学生的宣言，说女师大学生只有二十个，别的都已进了女大，就深悔从前受了“某种报纸的催眠”。幸而见了宣言，这才省悟过来了，于是发问道：“要是二百人（按据云这是未解散前的数目）中有一百九十九人入了女大便怎样？要是二百人都入了女大便怎样？难道女师大校务维持会招了几个新生也去恢复么？我们不免要奇怪那维持会维持的究竟是谁呢？他们的目的究竟是什么呢？”
The last paragraph of the 55th issue of "Gossip" of the "Modern Review" is based on the declaration of female college students, saying that there are only 20 female normal college students, and the others have entered women's universities, and they deeply regret that they have been "hypnotized by some kind of newspaper" in the past. Fortunately, after seeing the declaration, he realized it, so he asked: "What if one hundred and ninety-nine of the two hundred people (according to the number before the dissolution) enter the female feces?" What if 200 people have female feces? Could it be that the Women's Normal University School Affairs Maintenance Association has recruited a few freshmen to recover? We can't help but wonder who will maintain it? What is their purpose? ”这当然要为夏间并不维持女师大而现在则出而维持“公理”的陈源教授所不解的。我虽然是女师大维持会的一个委员，但也知道别一种可解的办法——
Of course, this is puzzled by Professor Chen Yuan, who did not maintain the Women's Normal University in the summer, but now he is out to maintain the "axioms". Although I am a member of the Women's Normal University Maintenance Committee, I also know another solution -二十人都往多的一边跑，维持会早该趋奉章士钊！
Twenty people are running to the side of the more, and the maintenance will be long gone to Zhang Shizhao!我也是“四五十岁的人爱说四五岁的孩子话”，而且爱学奴才话的，所以所说的也许是笑话。但是既经说开，索性再说几句罢：要是二百人中有二百另一人入了女大便怎样？要是维持会员也都入了女大便怎样？要是一百九十九人入了女大，而剩下的一个人偏不要维持便怎样？……
I am also "people in their forties and fifties love to speak the language of children of four or five years old", and I love to learn the words of servants, so what I say may be a joke. But after saying it, let's just say a few more words: What if another person out of 200 people enters the female stool? What if the members are also in the female stool? What if 199 people enter the women's university and the remaining one does not want to maintain it? ……我想这些妙问，大概是无人能答的。这实在问得太离奇，虽是四五岁的孩子也不至于此，——我们不要小觑了孩子。人也许能受“某种报纸的催眠”，但也因人而异，“某君”只限于“某种”；即如我，就决不受《现代评论》或“女大学生某次宣言”的催眠。假如，倘使我看了《闲话》之后，便抚心自问：“要是二百人中有一百九十九人入了女大便怎样？……维持会维持的究竟是谁呢？……”那可真要连自己也奇怪起来，立刻对章士钊的木主肃然起敬了。但幸而连陈源教授所据为典要的《女大学生二次宣言》也还说有二十人，所以我也正不必有什么“杞天之虑”。
I think these wonderful questions are probably unanswerable. This is really a bizarre question, even if it is a four or five-year-old child,—— let's not underestimate the child. People may be hypnotized by "some kind of newspaper", but it also varies from person to person, and "so-and-so" is limited to "something"; That is, like me, I will never be hypnotized by the "Modern Review" or "a certain manifesto of female college students". If, after reading "Gossip", I ask myself: "What if 199 out of 200 people have female stool?" …… Who will maintain it? ...... "That's really strange even for himself, and he immediately awe-inspires Zhang Shizhao's wooden master." But fortunately, even the "Second Declaration of Female College Students" based on Professor Chen Yuan still said that there were 20 people, so I didn't have to worry about anything.记得“公理”时代（可惜这黄金时代竟消失得那么快），不是有人说解散女师大的是章士钊，女大乃另外设立，所以石驸马大街的校址是不该归还的么？自然，或者也可以这样说。但我却没有被其催眠，反觉得这道理比满洲人所说的“亡明者闯贼也，我大清天下，乃得之于闯贼，非取之于明”的话还可笑。从表面上看起来，满人的话，倒还算顺理成章，不过也只能骗顺民，不能骗遗民和逆民，因为他们知道此中的底细。我不聪明，本也很可以相信的，然而竟不被骗者，因为幸而目睹了十四年前的革命，自己又是中国人。
Remember the "Axiom" era (it's a pity that this golden age disappeared so quickly), didn't some people say that it was Zhang Shizhao who disbanded the Women's Normal University, and the Women's University was established separately, so the school site on Shi Consort Street should not be returned? Naturally, or it can be said that way. But I was not hypnotized by it, but I felt that this truth was more ridiculous than what the Manchurians said, "The blind are also thieves, and I am the Qing Dynasty, but I get it from the thief, not from the Ming". On the surface, it seems that the words of the Manchus are quite logical, but they can only deceive the obedient people, not the remnants and rebels, because they know the details of this. I am not smart, and I can be trusted, but I was not deceived, because I was fortunate to witness the revolution fourteen years ago, and I am Chinese.然而“要是”女师大学生竟一百九十九人都入了女大，又怎样呢？其实，“要是”章士钊再做半年总长，或者他的走狗们作起祟来，宗帽胡同的学生纵不至于“都入了女大”，但可以被迫胁到只剩一个或不剩一个，也正是意中事。陈源教授毕竟是“通品”，虽是理想也未始没有实现的可能。那么，怎么办呢？我想，维持。那么，“目的究竟是什么呢？”我想，就用一句《闲话》来答复：“代被群众专制所压迫者说几句公平话”。
However, what if "if" all 199 female normal college students entered the women's university? In fact, "if" Zhang Shizhao becomes the chief for another half year, or if his lackeys cause trouble, even if the students of Zongmao Hutong do not "all enter the women's university", they can be forced to coerce only one or not one left, which is exactly what they want. After all, Professor Chen Yuan is a "general product", and although it is an ideal, it is not impossible to achieve it. So, what to do? I thought, maintain. So, "What is the purpose?" I think I will reply with a sentence of "gossip": "Say a few fair words on behalf of those who are oppressed by the dictatorship of the masses."可惜正如“公理”的忽隐忽现一样，“少数”的时价也四季不同的。杨荫榆时候多数不该“压迫”少数，现在是少数应该服从多数了。你说多数是不错的么，可是俄国的多数主义现在也还叫作过激党，为大英大日本和咱们中华民国的绅士们所“深恶而痛绝之”。这真要令我莫名其妙。或者“暴民”是虽然多数，也得算作例外的罢。
Unfortunately, just like the flickering and flickering of "axioms", the market price of "few" is also different in four seasons. When Yang Yinyu was in power, the majority should not "oppress" the minority, but now the minority should obey the majority. Do you think the majority is good, but Russian majoritarianism is still called the Radical Party, which is "deeply hated and detested" by British Japan and the gentlemen of our Republic of China. This really makes me inexplicable. Or the "mob" is the majority, but it must be counted as an exception.“要是”帝国主义者抢去了中国的大部分，只剩了一二省，我们便怎样？别的都归了强国了，少数的土地，还要维持么？！明亡以后，一点土地也没有了，却还有窜身海外，志在恢复的人。凡这些，从现在的“通品”看来，大约都是谬种，应该派“在德国手格盗匪数人”，立功海外的英雄刘百昭去剿灭他们的罢。
What if the "imperialists snatch most of China, leaving only one or two provinces?" Everything else has belonged to the strong country, and the small amount of land still needs to be maintained? ! After the fall of the Ming Dynasty, there was no land at all, but there were still people who fled overseas and were determined to recover. All of these, from the current "general products", are probably all false species, and Liu Baizhao, a hero who has made meritorious contributions overseas, should be sent to exterminate them.“要是”真如陈源教授所言，女师大学生只有二十了呢？但是究竟还有二十人。这足可使在章士钊门下暗作走狗而脸皮还不十分厚的教授文人学者们愧死！
"What if" is really as Professor Chen Yuan said, female normal college students are only twenty? But there are still twenty people in the end. This is enough to make the professors, literati and scholars who are secretly lackeys under Zhang Shizhao and are not very thick-skinned, ashamed!十二月二十八日。
December 28th.

后记

后记

后记

postscript本书中至少有两处，还得稍加说明——
There are at least two places in this book, and I have to explain a little -一，徐旭生先生第一次回信中所引的话，是出于ZM君登在《京报副刊》（十四年三月八日）上的一篇文章的。其时我正因为回答“青年必读书”，说“不能作文算什么大不了的事”，很受着几位青年的攻击。ZM君便发表了我在讲堂上口说的话，大约意在申明我的意思，给我解围。现在就钞一点在下面——
First, the words quoted in Mr. Xu Xusheng's first reply are from an article by ZM Jundeng in the Beijing News Supplement (March 8, 14). At that time, I was attacked by several young people because I answered "young people must read" and said, "Not being able to write is a big deal". ZM Jun then expressed what I said in the lecture hall, probably to affirm my meaning and relieve me. Now a little bit of money is below-读了许多名人学者给我们开的必读书目，引起不少的感想；但最打动我的是鲁迅先生的两句附注，……因这几句话，又想起他所讲的一段笑话来。他似乎这样说：
I have read the must-read books given to us by many celebrities and scholars, which has aroused a lot of feelings; But what moved me the most were Mr. Lu Xun's two notes,...... Because of these words, I remembered a joke he had told. He seems to say this:“‘讲话和写文章，似乎都是失败者的征象。正在和运命恶战的人，顾不到这些；真有实力的胜利者也多不做声。譬如鹰攫兔子，叫喊的是兔子不是鹰；猫捕老鼠，啼呼的是老鼠不是猫……。又好像楚霸王……追奔逐北的时候，他并不说什么；等到摆出诗人面孔，饮酒唱歌，那已经是兵败势穷，死日临头了。最近像吴佩孚名士的“登彼西山，赋彼其诗”，齐燮元先生的“放下枪枝，拿起笔干”，更是明显的例了。’”
"'Speaking and writing articles seem to be signs of failure. those who are fighting against fate cannot take care of this; Most of the really powerful winners are silent. For example, when an eagle catches a rabbit, it shouts that the rabbit is not an eagle; Cats catch mice, crying out that mice are not cats....... It seems to be the overlord of Chu...... when chasing north, he didn't say anything; By the time he put on a poet's face, drank and sang, he was already defeated and dying. Recently, like Wu Peifu's "Climbing the West Mountain and Compose Poems", Mr. Qi Xieyuan's "Put down the gun and pick up the pen and drying" are obvious examples. ’”二，近几年来，常听到人们说学生嚣张，不单是老先生，连刚出学校而做了小官或教员的也往往这么说。但我却并不觉得这样。记得革命以前，社会上自然还不如现在似的憎恶学生，学生也没有目下一般驯顺，单是态度，就显得桀傲，在人丛中一望可知。现在却差远了，大抵长袍大袖，温文尔雅，正如一个古之读书人。我也就在一个大学的讲堂上提起过，临末还说：其实，现在的学生是驯良的，或者竟可以说是太驯良了……。武者君登在《京报副刊》（约十四年五月初）上的一篇《温良》中，所引的就是我那时所说的这几句话。我因此又写了《忽然想到》第七篇，其中所举的例，一是前几年被称为“卖国贼”者的子弟曾大受同学唾骂，二是当时女子师范大学的学生正被同性的校长使男职员威胁。我的对于女师大风潮说话，这是第一回，过了十天，就“碰壁”；又过了十天，陈源教授就在《现代评论》上发表“流言”，过了半年，据《晨报副刊》（十五年一月三十日）所发表的陈源教授给徐志摩“诗哲”的信，则“捏造事实传布流言”的倒是我了。真是世事白云苍狗，不禁感慨系之矣！
Second, in recent years, I often hear people say that students are arrogant, not only old gentlemen, but also those who have just left school and become minor officials or teachers. But I don't think so. I remember that before the revolution, the society was naturally not as bad as it is now, and the students were not as docile as they are now. Now it is far from it, mostly in a long robe and long sleeves, gentle and elegant, just like an ancient scholar. I also mentioned it in a university lecture hall, and at the end of the day, he said: In fact, today's students are tame, or it can be said that they are too tame...... In an article "Gentleness" in the "Beijing News Supplement" (about the beginning of May of the fourteenth year), the warrior Junden quoted these few sentences that I said at that time. Therefore, I wrote the seventh article of "Sudden Thought", in which the examples given are: firstly, the children of those who were called "traitors" were scolded by their classmates a few years ago, and secondly, the students of the Women's Normal University at that time were being threatened by male staff by the president of the same sex. This is the first time I have spoken about the trend of women's normal universities, and after ten days, I will "hit a wall"; Ten days later, Professor Chen Yuan published "rumors" in the "Modern Review", and half a year later, according to the letter from Professor Chen Yuan to Xu Zhimo "Shi Zhe" published in the "Morning Post Supplement" (January 30, 15), it was me who "fabricated facts and spread rumors". It's really a white cloud dog in the world, and I can't help but feel emotional!又，我在《“公理”的把戏》中说杨荫榆女士“在太平湖饭店请客之后，任意将学生自治会员六人除名”，那地点是错误的，后来知道那时的请客是西长安街的西安饭店。等到五月二十一日即我们“碰壁”的那天，这才换了地方，“由校特请全体主任专任教员评议会会员在太平湖饭店开校务紧急会议，解决种种重要问题。”请客的饭馆是那一个，和紧要关键原没有什么大相干，但从“所有的批评都本于学理和事实”的所谓“文士”学者之流看来，也许又是“捏造事实”，而且因此就证明了凡我所说，无一句真话，甚或至于连杨荫榆女士也本无其人，都是我凭空结撰的了。这于我是很不好的，所以赶紧订正于此，庶几“收之桑榆”云。
In addition, I said in "The Trick of "Axiom" that Ms. Yang Yinyu "arbitrarily removed six student autonomy members after entertaining guests at the Taiping Lake Hotel", and the location was wrong, and later I learned that the invitation at that time was the Xi'an Hotel on West Chang'an Street. It was not until May 21, the day we "hit the wall", that we changed places, "and the school specially invited all the members of the full-time faculty council to hold an emergency meeting on school affairs at the Taipinghu Hotel to solve various important problems." The restaurant where the guests were invited had nothing to do with the critical point, but from the perspective of the so-called "scribe" scholars who "all criticism is based on theory and facts", it may be "fabricating facts", and thus proves that everything I say is not a word of truth, or even Ms. Yang Yinyu, is not a person, I wrote it out of thin air. This is very bad for me, so I quickly corrected it here, hoping to "collect it".一九二六年二月十五日校毕记。仍在绿林书屋之东壁下。

February 15, 1926 End of School. It is still under the east wall of the Green Forest Bookstore.

封面

书名页

版权信息

图书在版编目（CIP）数据
Books in Print (CIP) data华盖集续编/鲁迅著．—南京：译林出版社，2013.11
Continuation of Huagai Collection/Written by Lu Xun.—Nanjing: Yilin Publishing House, 2013.11（鲁迅自编文集）
(Lu Xun's self-edited anthology)ISBN 978-7-5447-4460-7
ISBN 978-7-5447-4460-7
Ⅰ．①华…　Ⅱ．①鲁…　Ⅲ．①鲁迅杂文－杂文集　Ⅳ．①I210.4
I..(1) Hua... II..(1) Lu... III..(1) Lu Xun's Essays - Essays IV..(1)I210.4
中国版本图书馆CIP数据核字（2013）第223210号
China Version Library CIP Data Verification (2013) No. 223210
书　　名　华盖集续编
Book title Continuation of the canopy collection作　　者　鲁　迅
Author: Lu Xun责任编辑　陆元昶
Editor-in-charge: Lu Yuanchang特约编辑　邓　敏
Special editor Deng Min出版发行　凤凰出版传媒股份有限公司
Published and distributed by Phoenix Publishing and Media Co., Ltd译林出版社
Yilin Publishing House出版社地址　南京市湖南路1号A楼，邮编：210009
Publisher's address Building A, No. 1 Hunan Road, Nanjing, Zip Code: 210009电子信箱　yilin@yilin.com
E-mail yilin@yilin.com出版社网址　http://www.yilin.com
Publisher website http://www.yilin.com印　　刷　北京凯达印务有限公司
Printing Beijing Kaida Printing Co., Ltd开　　本　787×1092毫米　1/32
Volume 787×1092 mm 1/32印　　张　6
Print 6字　　数　115千字
Word count: 115,000 words版　　次　2013年11月第1版　2013年11月第1次印刷
Edition November 2013 1st edition November 2013 1st printing书　　号　ISBN 978-7-5447-4460-7
ISBN 978-7-5447-4460-7定　　价　15.00元
The price is 15.00 yuan译林版图书若有印装错误可向承印厂调换

If there are printing errors in the translated version of the book, it can be exchanged with the printing factory

未知

注释
exegesis 

□□□□□
□□□□□ 

本书中所出现的如上方框同原版纸书。
The box above is the same as the original paper book.

Table of Contents

目录

Table of Contents

directory小引 Small quote
一九二六年 1926
杂论管闲事·做学问·灰色等 Miscellaneous discussions, such as meddling, doing knowledge, gray, etc
有趣的消息 Interesting news
学界的三魂 The three souls of the school world
古书与白话 Ancient books and vernacular
一点比喻 A little metaphor
不是信 It is not a letter
我还不能“带住” I can't "take it" yet
送灶日漫笔 Send the stove day to the pen
谈皇帝 Talking about the emperor
无花的蔷薇 Flowerless roses
无花的蔷薇之二 The second of the flowerless rose
“死地” "Dead Ground"
可惨与可笑 It's tragic and ridiculous
记念刘和珍君 Remember Liu Hezhen
空谈 Talk
如此“讨赤” Such a "red attack"
无花的蔷薇之三 The third of the flowerless rose
新的蔷薇 New roses
再来一次 One more time
为半农题记《何典》后，作 It was written after Bannon's inscription "He Dian"
马上日记 Diary right away
马上支日记 Immediately pay for the diary
马上日记之二 The second diary of the horse
记“发薪” Record "payroll"
记谈话 Remember the conversation
上海通信 Shanghai Communications
华盖集续编的续编 A sequel to the sequel to the canopy collection
厦门通信 Xiamen Communications
厦门通信（二） Xiamen Communications (2)
《阿Q正传》的成因 The cause of "The True Biography of Ah Q"
关于《三藏取经记》等 About "Tripitaka Scriptures" and so on
所谓“思想界先驱者”鲁迅启事 The so-called "pioneer of ideology" Lu Xun noticed
厦门通信（三） Xiamen Communications (3)
海上通信 Maritime communications
返回总目录 Return to the General Directory

小引

小引

小引

Small quote还不满一整年，所写的杂感的分量，已有去年一年的那么多了。秋来住在海边，目前只见云水，听到的多是风涛声，几乎和社会隔绝。如果环境没有改变，大概今年不见得再有什么废话了罢。灯下无事，便将旧稿编集起来；还豫备付印，以供给要看我的杂感的主顾们。
It's less than a whole year, and the weight of the miscellaneous feelings written is as much as last year. Qiu Lai lives by the sea, and currently only sees clouds and water, and hears mostly the sound of wind and waves, almost isolated from society. If the environment hadn't changed, there might not be any more nonsense this year. When there was nothing to do under the lamp, he compiled the old manuscripts; I will also prepare a seal for the patrons who want to see my miscellaneous feelings.这里面所讲的仍然并没有宇宙的奥义和人生的真谛。不过是，将我所遇到的，所想到的，所要说的，一任它怎样浅薄，怎样偏激，有时便都用笔写了下来。说得自夸一点，就如悲喜时节的歌哭一般，那时无非借此来释愤抒情，现在更不想和谁去抢夺所谓公理或正义。你要那样，我偏要这样是有的；偏不遵命，偏不磕头是有的；偏要在庄严高尚的假面上拨它一拨也是有的，此外却毫无什么大举。名副其实，“杂感”而已。
What is said here is still not the mystery of the universe and the true meaning of life. However, I wrote down everything I encountered, thought, and said, no matter how shallow or extreme it was, sometimes I wrote it down with a pen. To put it bluntly, it is like singing and crying in the joys and sorrows, which was nothing more than a way to relieve anger and lyricism, and now I don't want to snatch the so-called axiom or justice with anyone. If you want that, I want it this way. There are those who do not obey orders and do not kowtow; There are also cases where it is necessary to pluck it on the mask of solemnity and nobility, but there is no major action besides that. As the name suggests, it is just a "mixed feeling".从一月以来的，大略都在内了；只删去了一篇。那是因为其中开列着许多人，未曾，也不易遍征同意，所以不好擅自发表。
Since January, it has been roughly included; Only one article was deleted. That's because there are many people listed in it, who have not and are not easy to obtain consent, so it is not easy to publish without authorization.书名呢？年月是改了，情形却依旧，就还叫《华盖集》。然而年月究竟是改了，因此只得添上两个字：“续编”。
What about the title of the book? The years have changed, but the situation is still the same, so it is still called "Huagai Collection". However, the year and month have changed, so two words have to be added: "continuation".一九二六年十月十四日，鲁迅记于厦门。
On October 14, 1926, Lu Xun recorded in Xiamen.

一九二六年

一九二六年

一九二六年

1926

杂论管闲事·做学问·灰色等

杂论管闲事·做学问·灰色等

杂论管闲事·做学问·灰色等

Miscellaneous discussions, such as meddling, doing knowledge, gray, etc1
听说从今年起，陈源（即西滢）教授要不管闲事了；这豫言就见于《现代评论》五十六期的《闲话》里。惭愧我没有拜读这一期，因此也不知其详。要是确的呢，那么，除了用那照例的客套说声“可惜”之外，真的倒实在很诧异自己之胡涂：年纪这么大了，竟不知道阳历的十二月三十一日和一月一日之交在别人是可以发生这样的大变动。我近来对于年关颇有些神经过钝了，全不觉得怎样。其实，倘要觉得罢，可是也不胜其觉得。大家挂上五色旗，大街上搭起几坐彩坊，中间还有四个字道：“普天同庆”，据说这算是过年。大家关了门，贴上门神，爆竹毕剥砰的放起来，据说这也是过年。要是言行真跟着过年为转移，怕要转移不迭，势必至于成为转圈子。所以，神经过钝虽然有落伍之虑，但有弊必有利，却也很占一点小小的便宜的。
I heard that from this year onwards, Professor Chen Yuan (i.e. Xi Ying) will not be idle; This prophecy is found in "Gossip" in the 56th issue of "Modern Review". I'm ashamed that I didn't read this issue, so I don't know the details. If it is true, then, in addition to saying "it's a pity" in the usual polite way, I am really surprised by my own nonsense: I am so old that I don't know that such a big change can occur in others at the turn of December 31st and January 1st of the solar calendar. I've been a little dull lately, and I don't think it's anything at all. In fact, if you want to feel it, you can't help it. Everyone hung up five-color flags, set up several color workshops on the street, and there were four words in the middle: "Universal celebration", it is said that this is the New Year. Everyone closed the door, put on the door god, and put the firecrackers on the ground, which is said to be the New Year. If the words and deeds really follow the New Year, I am afraid that if I don't change, it will inevitably become a circle. Therefore, although the gods are dull and have the concern of being outdated, there are disadvantages and benefits, but they also take a small advantage.但是，还有些事我终于想不明白：即如天下有闲事，有人管闲事之类。我现在觉得世上是仿佛没有所谓闲事的，有人来管，便都和自己有点关系；即便是爱人类，也因为自己是人。假使我们知道了火星里张龙和赵虎打架，便即大有作为，请酒开会，维持张龙，或否认赵虎，那自然是颇近于管闲事了。然而火星上事，既然能够“知道”，则至少必须已经可以通信，关系也密切起来，算不得闲事了。因为既能通信，也许将来就能交通，他们终于会在我们的头顶上打架。至于咱们地球之上，即无论那一处，事事都和我们相关，然而竟不管者，或因不知道，或因管不着，非以其“闲”也。譬如英国有刘千昭雇了爱尔兰老妈子在伦敦拉出女生，在我们是闲事似的罢，其实并不，也会影响到我们这里来。留学生不是多多，多多了么？倘有合宜之处，就要引以为例，正如在文学上的引用什么莎士比亚呀，塞文狄斯呀，芮恩施呀一般。
However, there are still some things that I finally can't figure out: that is, if there are idle things in the world, some people are nosy. I now feel that there is no such thing as idle things in the world, and if someone takes care of it, it has something to do with me; Even if you love humans, it is because you are human. If we know that Zhang Long and Zhao Hu are fighting on Mars, we will make a big difference, invite a drink, hold a meeting, maintain Zhang Long, or deny Zhao Hu, which is naturally quite nosy. However, since you can "know" what is happening on Mars, you must at least be able to communicate and have a close relationship, which is not idle. Because they can communicate, maybe in the future, they will finally fight over our heads. As for our earth, no matter where it is, everything is related to us, but those who don't care about it either because they don't know it, or because they can't control it, not because they are "idle". For example, Liu Qianzhao in the UK hired an Irish mother to pull out girls in London, which seems to be idle to us, but in fact, it is not, and it will affect us. Isn't there a lot of international students? If there is a place where it is appropriate, it should be cited as an example, just as Shakespeare, Severndis, and Reensch are quoted in literature.（不对，错了。芮恩施是美国的驻华公使，不是文学家。我大约因为在讲什么文艺学术的一篇论文上见过他的名字，所以一不小心便带出来了。合即订正于此，尚希读者谅之。）
(No, wrong.) Reinsch is the U.S. minister to China, not a writer. I probably saw his name in a paper on literature and art scholarship, so I accidentally brought it out. I hope readers will understand this. ）即使是动物，也怎能和我们不相干？青蝇的脚上有一个霍乱菌，蚊子的唾沫里有两个疟疾菌，就说不定会钻进谁的血里去。管到“邻猫生子”，很有人以为笑谈，其实却正与自己大有相关。譬如我的院子里，现在就有四匹邻猫常常吵架了，倘使这些太太们之一又诞育四匹，则三四月后，我就得常听到八匹猫们常常吵闹，比现在加倍地心烦。
How can even animals have nothing to do with us? There is a cholera bacterium on the feet of a green fly, and two malaria bacteria in the saliva of a mosquito, so it may burrow into someone's blood. When it comes to "neighboring cats giving birth", many people think it is a joke, but in fact it has a lot to do with themselves. For example, in my yard, there are now four neighboring cats who often quarrel, and if one of these wives gives birth to four, then after three or four months, I will often hear the eight cats making noise, and I will be doubly upset than now.所以我就有了一种偏见，以为天下本无所谓闲事，只因为没有这许多遍管的精神和力量，于是便只好抓一点来管。为什么独抓这一点呢？自然是最和自己相关的，大则因为同是人类，或是同类，同志；小则，因为是同学，亲戚，同乡，——至少，也大概叨光过什么，虽然自己的显在意识上并不了然，或者其实了然，而故意装痴作傻。
So I have a prejudice that the world doesn't matter, just because I don't have so many omnidirectional spirits and powers, so I have to grasp a little bit of it. Why do you grasp this alone? Nature is the most related to oneself, and it is largely because it is the same human being, or the same kind, comrades; Xiao Ze, because he is a classmate, relative, fellow townsman,—— at least, he has probably talked about something, although his consciousness is not clear, or he actually knows, and deliberately pretends to be stupid.但陈源教授据说是去年却管了闲事了，要是我上文所说的并不错，那就确是一个超人。今年不问世事，也委实是可惜之至，真是斯人不管，“如苍生何”了。幸而阴历的过年又快到了，除夕的亥时一过，也许又可望心回意转的罢。
But Professor Chen Yuan is said to have meddled his own business last year, and if what I said above is not good, then he is indeed a superman. This year, it is a pity that we do not care about the world, and it is really a pity that people do not care. Fortunately, the Chinese New Year of the lunar calendar is approaching, and once the pig hour of Chinese New Year's Eve passes, it may be possible to change your mind again.

杂论管闲事·做学问·灰色等

2
昨天下午我从沙滩回家的时候，知道大琦君来访过我了。这使我很高兴，因为我是猜想他进了病院的了，现在知道并没有。而尤其使我高兴的是他还留赠我一本《现代评论增刊》，只要一看见封面上画着的一枝细长的蜡烛，便明白这是光明之象，更何况还有许多名人学者的著作，更何况其中还有陈源教授的一篇《做学问的工具》呢？这是正论，至少可以赛过“闲话”的；至少，是我觉得赛过“闲话”，因为它给了我许多东西。
When I came home from the beach yesterday afternoon, I knew that Daqijun had visited me. This made me happy because I guessed that he was in the hospital, but now I know that he hasn't. And what made me particularly happy was that he also left me a copy of the "Supplement to the Modern Review", as soon as I saw a slender candle painted on the cover, I knew that this was a sign of light, not to mention the works of many famous scholars, not to mention Professor Chen Yuan's "Tools for Learning". This is the right theory, at least it can compete with "gossip"; At least, I feel like I've been "gossiping" because it has given me a lot of things.我现在才知道南池子的“政治学会图书馆”去年“因为时局的关系，借书的成绩长进了三至七倍”了，但他“家翰笙”却还“用‘平时不烧香，临时抱佛脚’十个字形容当今学术界大部分的状况”。这很改正了我许多误解。我先已说过，现在的留学生是多多，多多了，但我总疑心他们大部分是在外国租了房子，关起门来燉牛肉吃的，而且在东京实在也看见过。那时我想：燉牛肉吃，在中国就可以，何必路远迢迢，跑到外国来呢？虽然外国讲究畜牧，或者肉里面的寄生虫可以少些，但燉烂了，即使多也就没有关系。所以，我看见回国的学者，头两年穿洋服，后来穿皮袍，昂头而走的，总疑心他是在外国亲手燉过几年牛肉的人物，而且即使有了什么事，连“佛脚”也未必肯抱的。现在知道并不然，至少是“留学欧美归国的人”并不然。但可惜中国的图书馆里的书太少了，据说北京“三十多个大学，不论国立私立，还不及我们私人的书多”云。这“我们”里面，据说第一要数“溥仪先生的教师庄士敦先生”，第二大概是“孤桐先生”即章士钊，因为在德国柏林时候，陈源教授就亲眼看见他两间屋里“几乎满床满架满桌满地，都是关于社会主义的德文书”。现在呢，想来一定是更多的了。这真教我欣羡佩服。记得自己留学时候，官费每月三十六元，支付衣食学费之外，简直没有赢余，混了几年，所有的书连一壁也遮不满，而且还是杂书，并非专而又专，如“都是关于社会主义的德文书”之类。
I only now know that Nanchizi's "Political Science Society Library" "borrowed books three to seven times because of the current situation" last year, but his "Jia Hansheng" also "used the ten words 'usually do not burn incense, cramming' to describe most of the current situation in the academic world". This corrected many of my misunderstandings. As I said earlier, there are many international students now, but I always suspect that most of them rent houses in foreign countries and eat stewed beef behind closed doors, and I have seen them in Tokyo. At that time, I thought: Beef stew can be eaten in China, why go all the way to a foreign country? Although foreign countries pay attention to animal husbandry, or the parasites in the meat can be less, but if it is stewed, it doesn't matter if there are more. Therefore, when I saw a scholar who returned to China, wearing a suit for the first two years, and then wearing a leather robe, he always suspected that he was a person who had stewed beef in a foreign country for several years, and even if something happened, he might not even be willing to hug the "Buddha's feet". Now I know that this is not the case, at least not for "people who have returned from studying in Europe and the United States". But unfortunately, there are too few books in China's libraries, and it is said that Beijing has "more than 30 universities, whether national or private, but not as many books as our private ones." Among these "we", it is said that the first is "Mr. Johnston, Mr. Puyi's teacher", and the second is probably "Mr. Gutong", that is, Zhang Shizhao, because when he was in Berlin, Germany, Professor Chen Yuan saw with his own eyes that his two rooms were "almost full of beds and shelves, all German books on socialism". Now, I think there must be more. This really makes me envious. I remember when I was studying abroad, the official fee was thirty-six yuan a month, and there was no surplus except for paying for food and clothing, and after a few years, all the books were not even covered by a wall, and they were also miscellaneous books, not specialized and specialized, such as "all German books about socialism".但是很可惜，据说当民众“再毁”这位“孤桐先生”的“寒家”时，“好像他们夫妇两位的藏书都散失了”。想那时一定是拉了几十车，向各处走散，可惜我没有去看，否则倒也是一个壮观。
But unfortunately, it is said that when the people "destroyed" the "Han family" of this "Mr. Gutong", "it seems that the collection of books of the two of them has been lost". I think there must have been dozens of cars pulled and scattered everywhere, but unfortunately I didn't go to see it, otherwise it would have been a spectacle.所以“暴民”之为“正人君子”所深恶痛绝，也实在有理由，即如这回之“散失”了“孤桐先生”夫妇的藏书，其加于中国的损失，就在毁坏了三十多个国立及私立大学的图书馆之上。和这一比较，刘百昭司长的失少了家藏的公款八千元，要算小事件了，但我们所引为遗憾的是偏是章士钊刘百昭有这么多的储藏，而这些储藏偏又全都遭了劫。
Therefore, there is a reason why the "mob" is deeply hated by the "upright gentlemen", that is, the "loss" of the collection of "Mr. Gu Tong" and his wife this time has caused damage to China, which is the destruction of the libraries of more than 30 national and private universities. In comparison, Director Liu Baizhao's loss of 8,000 yuan of public funds from his family is a small incident, but what we regret is that Zhang Shizhao and Liu Baizhao have so much storage, and all of these reserves have been robbed.在幼小时候曾有一个老于世故的长辈告诫过我：你不要和没出息的担子或摊子为难，他会自己摔了，却诬赖你，说不清，也赔不完。这话于我似乎到现在还有影响，我新年去逛火神庙的庙会时，总不敢挤近玉器摊去，即使它不过摆着寥寥的几件。怕的是一不小心，将它碰倒了，或者摔碎了一两件，就要变成宝贝，一辈子赔不完，那罪孽之重，会在毁坏一坐博物馆之上。而且推而广之，连热闹场中也不大去了，那一回的示威运动时，虽有“打落门牙”的“流言”，其实却躺在家里，托福无恙。但那两屋子“关于社会主义的德文书”以及其他从“孤桐先生”府上陆续散出的壮观，却也因此“交臂失之”了。这实在也就是所谓“有一利必有一弊”，无法两全的。
When I was a child, an elder who was old and sophisticated warned me: Don't be embarrassed by a burden or stall that is not promising, he will fall by himself, but he will slander you, and he can't say it clearly, and he can't compensate for it. This seems to have an impact on me to this day, when I go to the temple fair of the Fire Temple in the New Year, I always dare not squeeze close to the jade stall, even if it only has a few pieces. What I am afraid of is that if I accidentally knock it over, or break one or two pieces, it will become a treasure, and I will not be able to pay it for a lifetime, and the weight of the sin will be on the destruction of a museum. And by extension, even the lively scene is not much, during that demonstration, although there were "rumors" that "knock out the front teeth", in fact, they were lying at home, and the TOEFL was unharmed. But the "German Documents on Socialism" and other spectacular things that emanated from the house of "Mr. Gu Tong" in those two rooms were also "lost". This is really the so-called "there must be one benefit and one disadvantage", and it is impossible to have both.现在是收藏洋书之富，私人要数庄士敦先生，公团要推“政治学会图书馆”了，只可惜一个是外国人，一个是靠着美国公使芮恩施竭力提倡出来的。“北京国立图书馆”将要扩张，实在是再好没有的事，但听说所依靠的还是美国退还的赔款，常年经费又不过三万元，每月二千余。要用美国的赔款，也是非同小可的事，第一，馆长就必须学贯中西，世界闻名的学者。据说，这自然只有梁启超先生了，但可惜西学不大贯，所以配上一个北大教授李四光先生做副馆长，凑成一个中外兼通的完人。然而两位的薪水每月就要一千多，所以此后也似乎不大能够多买书籍。这也就是所谓“有利必有弊”罢，想到这里，我们就更不能不痛切地感到“孤桐先生”独力购置的几房子好书惨遭散失之可惜了。
Now it is a wealth of foreign books, and the private sector is Mr. Johnston, and the public corporation is going to promote the "Political Science Society Library", but unfortunately one is a foreigner, and the other is advocated by the American minister Ryan Ensche. The "Beijing National Library" is about to expand, which is really a good thing, but I heard that it still relies on the reparations returned by the United States, and the annual budget is only 30,000 yuan, more than 2,000 yuan per month. It is not a trivial matter to use the reparations of the United States, first, the curator must be a world-renowned scholar who is well-versed in Chinese and Western languages. It is said that this is naturally only Mr. Liang Qichao, but unfortunately Western studies are not very popular, so with a Peking University professor Mr. Li Siguang as the deputy curator, he made up a perfect person who is both Chinese and foreign. However, their salaries are more than 1,000 per month, so it seems that they will not be able to buy more books after that. This is the so-called "there must be pros and cons", thinking of this, we can't help but feel the pity that several good books purchased by "Mr. Gu Tong" alone were lost.总之，在近几年中，是未必能有较好的“做学问的工具”的，学者要用功，只好是自己买书读，但又没有钱。听说“孤桐先生”倒是想到了这一节，曾经发表过文章，然而下台了，很可惜。学者们另外还有什么法子呢，自然“也难怪他们除了说说‘闲话’便没有什么可干”，虽然北京三十多个大学还不及他们“私人的书多”。为什么呢？要知道做学问不是容易事，“也许一个小小的题目得参考百十种书”，连“孤桐先生”的藏书也未必够用。陈源教授就举着一个例：“就以‘四书’来说”罢，“不研究汉宋明清许多儒家的注疏理论，‘四书’的真正意义是不易领会的。短短的一部‘四书’，如果细细的研究起来，就得用得了几百几千种参考书”。
In short, in recent years, there may not be a better "tool for learning", and scholars have to work hard, so they have to buy books to read by themselves, but they have no money. I heard that "Mr. Gu Tong" thought of this section and once published an article, but it is a pity that he stepped down. What else can scholars do, naturally "no wonder they have nothing to do but 'gossip'", although more than 30 universities in Beijing are not as "private books" as they have. Why? You must know that it is not easy to do knowledge, "maybe a small topic has to refer to hundreds of books", and even the collection of books of "Mr. Gutong" may not be enough. Professor Chen Yuan gave an example: "Take the 'Four Books' as an example", "Without studying the commentary theories of many Confucians in the Han, Song, Ming and Qing dynasties, the true meaning of the 'Four Books' is not easy to understand. If you study it carefully, you will have to use hundreds or thousands of reference books."这就足见“学问之道，浩如烟海”了，那“短短的一部‘四书’”，我是读过的，至于汉人的“四书”注疏或理论，却连听也没有听到过。陈源教授所推许为“那样提倡风雅的封藩大臣”之一张之洞先生在做给“束发小生”们看的《书目答问》上曾经说：“‘四书’，南宋以后之名。”我向来就相信他的话，此后翻翻《汉书艺文志》，《隋书经籍志》之类，也只有“五经”，“六经”，“七经”，“六艺”，却没有“四书”，更何况汉人所做的注疏和理论。但我所参考的，自然不过是通常书，北京大学的图书馆里就有，见闻寡陋，也未可知，然而也只得这样就算了，因为即使要“抱”，却连“佛脚”都没有。由此想来，那能“抱佛脚”的，肯“抱佛脚”的，的确还是真正的福人，真正的学者了。他“家翰笙”还慨乎言之，大约是“《春秋》责备贤者”之意罢。
This shows that "the way of learning is as vast as a sea of smoke", and I have read the "short 'Four Books'", but as for the annotations or theories of the Han people's "Four Books", I have not even heard of them. Mr. Zhang Zhidong, who is recommended by Professor Chen Yuan as one of the "feudal ministers who advocate elegance like that", once said in the "Bibliographic Q&A" for the "bundled hair": "The 'Four Books' are the names after the Southern Song Dynasty. I have always believed his words, and since then, I have flipped through the "Han Book Art and Literature", "Sui Shu Jing Zhi", etc., and there are only "Five Classics", "Six Classics", "Seven Classics", "Six Arts", but there are no "Four Books", not to mention the annotations and theories made by the Han people. But what I refer to is naturally just ordinary books, which are available in the library of Peking University, and I don't know what to know, but I have to forget it, because even if I want to "hug", I don't even have "Buddha's feet". From this point of view, those who can "cramm" and are willing to "cramm" are indeed real blessed people and true scholars. His "Jia Hansheng" also said with emotion, which is probably the meaning of "the Spring and Autumn Annals" reproaching the sages.

杂论管闲事·做学问·灰色等

完

杂论管闲事·做学问·灰色等

finish现在不高兴写下去了，只好就此完结。总之：将《现代评论增刊》略翻一遍，就觉得五光十色，正如看见有一回广告上所开列的作者的名单。例如李仲揆教授的《生命的研究》呀，胡适教授的《译诗三首》呀，徐志摩先生的译诗一首呀，西林氏的《压迫》呀，陶孟和教授的要到二〇二五年才发表而必须我们的玄孙才能全部拜读的大著作的一部分呀……。但是，翻下去时，不知怎的我的眼睛却看见灰色了，于是乎抛开。
Now I'm not happy to write it, so I have to end it. In short: A slight flip through the "Supplement to the Modern Review" makes you feel colorful, just like seeing the list of authors listed in an advertisement once. For example, Professor Li Zhongkui's "Study of Life", Professor Hu Shi's "Three Translated Poems", Mr. Xu Zhimo's translated poem, Xilin's "Oppression", and Professor Tao Menghe's "Part of the great work that will not be published until 2025 and must be read by our great-grandchildren....... However, when I turned it over, somehow my eyes saw gray, so I put it away.现在的小学生就能玩七色板，将七种颜色涂在圆板上，停着的时候，是好看的，一转，便变成灰色，——本该是白色的罢，可是涂得不得法，变成灰色了。收罗许多著名学者的大著作的大报，自然是光怪陆离，但也是转不得，转一周，就不免要显出灰色来，虽然也许这倒正是它的特色。
Nowadays, primary school students can play with seven-color boards, paint seven colors on the round board, when it is stopped, it is good-looking, and when it turns, it turns gray,—— it should be white, but it is not painted properly, it becomes gray. The big newspaper, which contains the great works of many famous scholars, is naturally bizarre, but it cannot be turned, and after a week, it will inevitably appear gray, although perhaps this is its characteristic.一月三日。
January 3rd.

有趣的消息

有趣的消息

有趣的消息

Interesting news虽说北京像一片大沙漠，青年们却还向这里跑；老年们也不大走，即或有到别处去走一趟的，不久就转回来了，仿佛倒是北京还很有什么可以留恋。厌世诗人的怨人生，真是“感慨系之矣”，然而他总活着；连祖述释迦牟尼先生的哲人勗本华尔也不免暗地里吃一种医治什么病症的药，不肯轻易“涅槃”。俗语说：“好死不如恶活”，这当然不过是俗人的俗见罢了，可是文人学者之流也何尝不这样。所不同的，只是他总有一面辞严义正的军旗，还有一条尤其义正辞严的逃路。真的，倘不这样，人生可真要无聊透顶，无话可说了。
Although Beijing is like a big desert, young people still run here; The elderly don't go much, even if they go to other places, they will soon turn back, as if there is still something to miss in Beijing. The world-weary poet's resentful life is really "tied to emotion", but he is always alive; Even the philosopher of Mr. Shakyamuni, Ben Wal, secretly took a medicine to treat any disease and refused to "nirvana" easily. As the saying goes: "It is better to die than to live evil", this is of course just a common view of ordinary people, but literati and scholars are not like this. The difference is that he always has a military flag that is strict and righteous, and there is a way out of escape. Really, if this is not the case, life will be really boring and there will be nothing to say.北京就是一天一天地百物昂贵起来；自己的“区区佥事”，又因为“妄有主张”，被章士钊先生革掉了。向来所遭遇的呢，借了安特来夫的话来说，是“没有花，没有诗”，就只有百物昂贵。然而也还是“妄有主张”，没法回头；倘使有一个妹子，如《晨报副刊》上所艳称的“闲话先生”的家事似的，叫道：“阿哥！”那声音正如“银铃之响于幽谷”，向我求告，“你不要再做文章得罪人家了，好不好？”我也许可以借此拨转马头，躲到别墅里去研究汉朝人所做的“四书”注疏和理论去。然而，惜哉，没有这样的好妹子；“女媭之婵媛兮，申申其詈予，曰：鲧婞直以亡身兮，终然殀乎羽之野。”连有一个那样凶姊姊的幸福也不及屈灵均。我的终于“妄有主张”，或者也许是无可推托之故罢。然而这关系非同小可，将来怕要遭殃了，因为我知道，得罪人是要得到报应的。
Beijing is becoming more expensive day by day; His own "mere assistant" was dismissed by Mr. Zhang Shizhao because of "arrogant claims". What has always been encountered, in Antref's words, is "no flowers, no poetry", only everything is expensive. However, it is still "arrogant" and there is no turning back; If there is a girl, like the family affairs of the "Mr. Gossip Talk" flamboyantly called in the "Morning News Supplement", she will shout: "Brother! The voice was like "the silver bell rings in the valley", begging me, "Don't offend others by making a fuss anymore, okay?" "I may be able to take this opportunity to turn my head and hide in the villa to study the annotations and theories of the "Four Books" made by the Han Dynasty. However, unfortunately, there is no such good girl; "The beautiful woman of the concubine, repeatedly scolding me, saying: Gun Cheng died in the wilderness of Yu." Even the happiness of having such a fierce sister is not as good as Qu Lingjun's. My finally "arrogant claims", or maybe there is no excuse. However, this relationship is not trivial, and I am afraid that I will suffer in the future, because I know that offending people will be retributed.话要回到释迦先生的教训去了，据说：活在人间，还不如下地狱的稳妥。做人有“作”就是动作（＝造孽），下地狱却只有“报”（＝报应）了；所以生活是下地狱的原因，而下地狱倒是出地狱的起点。这样说来，实在令人有些想做和尚，但这自然也只限于“有根”（据说，这是“一句天津话”）的大人物，我却不大相信这一类鬼画符。活在沙漠似的北京城里，枯燥当然是枯燥的，但偶然看看世态，除了百物昂贵之外，究竟还是五花八门，创造艺术的也有，制造流言的也有，肉麻的也有，有趣的也有……这大概就是北京之所以为北京的缘故，也就是人们总还要奔凑聚集的缘故。可惜的是只有一些小玩意，老实一点的朋友就难于给自己竖起一杆辞严义正的军旗来。
Going back to the lesson of Mr. Shakyamuni, it is said that living in the world is not as safe as going to hell. "doing" is action (= committing evil), but going to hell is only "retribution" (= retribution); Therefore, life is the reason for going to hell, and going to hell is the starting point of going out of hell. In this way, it really makes people want to be a monk, but this is naturally limited to the big people who have "roots" (it is said that this is "a sentence of Tianjin"), but I don't really believe in this kind of ghost painting. Living in the desert-like city of Beijing, boring is of course boring, but if you look at the world by chance, in addition to the high price, there are still a variety of things, there are those who create art, there are those who create rumors, there are also fleshy and hemp ones, and there are also interesting ones...... This is probably the reason why Beijing is Beijing, that is, people always have to rush to gather. It's a pity that there are only a few gadgets, and it is difficult for honest friends to erect a military flag for themselves.我一向以为下地狱的事，待死后再对付，只有目前的生活的枯燥是最可怕的，于是便不免于有时得罪人，有时则寻些小玩意儿来开开笑口，但这也就是得罪人。得罪人当然要受报，那也只好准备着，因为寻些小玩意儿来开开笑口的是更不能竖起辞严义正的军旗来的。其实，这里也何尝没有国家大事的消息呢，“关外战事不日将发生”呀，“国军一致拥段”哪，有些报纸上都用了头号字煌煌地排印着，可以刺得人们头昏，但于我却都没有什么鸟趣味。人的眼界之狭是不大有药可救的，我近来觉得有趣的倒要算看见那在德国手格盗匪若干人，在北京率领三河县老妈子一大队的武士刘百昭校长居然做骈文，大有偃武修文之意了；而且“百昭海邦求学，教部备员，多艺之誉愧不如人，审美之情差堪自信”，还是一位文武全才，我先前实在没有料想到。第二，就是去年肯管闲事的“学者”，今年不管闲事了，在年底结清帐目的办法，原来不止是掌柜之于流水簿，也可以适用于“正人君子”的行为的。或者，“阿哥！”这一声叫，正在中华民国十四年十二月卅一日的夜间十二点钟罢。
I have always thought that going to hell will be dealt with after death, and only the boredom of the current life is the most terrible, so I can't help but sometimes offend people, and sometimes find some gadgets to make jokes, but this is also offending people. Of course, those who offend will be punished, so they have to be prepared, because those who find some gadgets to laugh at cannot raise the military flag with strict and righteous words. In fact, there is no news about national affairs here, "the war outside the pass will happen soon", "the national army unanimously supports the section", some newspapers have used the number one word brilliantly typesetting, which can stab people's heads, but for me, there is no bird interest. I recently found it interesting to see that several bandits in Germany, and the warrior principal Liu Baizhao who led a large group of old mothers in Sanhe County in Beijing actually wrote parallel texts, which had the meaning of closing martial arts and cultivating literature; Moreover, "Bai Zhao Haibang studyed, the Ministry of Education is a reserve, the reputation of versatility is not as good as others, and the aesthetic feelings are not confident", or a literary and martial arts all-rounder, I really didn't expect it before. Second, it is the "scholars" who were willing to meddle in their affairs last year, and this year, regardless of their idle affairs, the method of settling the accounts at the end of the year turned out to be not only the shopkeeper's turnover, but also applicable to the behavior of "upright gentlemen". Or, "Brother! This cry was at twelve o'clock on the night of December 31, the fourteenth year of the Republic of China.但是，这些趣味，刹那间也即消失了，就是我自己的思想的变动，也诚然是可恨。我想，照着境遇，思想言行当然要迁移，一迁移，当然会有所以迁移的道理。况且世界上的国庆很不少，古今中外名流尤其多，他们的军旗，是全都早经竖定了的。前人之勤，后人之乐，要做事的时候可以援引孔丘墨翟，不做事的时候另外有老聃，要被杀的时候我是关龙逄，要杀人的时候他是少正卯，有些力气的时候看看达尔文赫胥黎的书，要人帮忙就有克鲁巴金的《互助论》，勃朗宁夫妇岂不是讲恋爱的模范么，勗本华尔和尼采又是咒诅女人的名人，……归根结蒂，如果杨荫榆或章士钊可以比附到犹太人特莱孚斯去，则他的篾片就可以等于左拉等辈了。这个时候，可怜的左拉要被中国人背出来；幸而杨荫榆或章士钊是否等于特莱孚斯，也还是一个大疑问。
However, these interests disappeared in an instant, even the changes in my own thoughts were indeed hateful. I think that according to the circumstances, of course, thoughts, words and deeds must be transferred, and once they migrate, of course, there will be reasons for migration. Moreover, there are many national days in the world, especially Chinese and foreign celebrities in ancient and modern times, and their military flags have all been erected long ago. The diligence of the predecessors, the joy of the descendants, when you want to do things, you can quote Confucius and Mozi, when you don't do things, there is Lao Dan, when you want to be killed, I am Guan Longfeng, when you want to kill people, he is Shao Zhengmao, when you have some strength, you can read Darwin Huxley's books, and if you want help, there is Krupakin's "Theory of Mutual Aid", aren't the Brownings models of love, and Benwahl and Nietzsche are celebrities who curse women,...... In the final analysis, if Yang Yinyu or Zhang Shizhao can be compared to the Jew Trefus, then his bamboo strips can be equal to Zola and others. At this time, poor Zola was going to be carried out by the Chinese; Fortunately, whether Yang Yinyu or Zhang Shizhao is equal to Trefus is still a big question.然而事情还没有这么简单，中国的坏人（如水平线下的文人和学棍学匪之类），似乎将来要大吃其苦了，虽然也许要在身后，像下地狱一般。但是，深谋远虑的人，总还以从此小心，不要多说为稳妥。你以为“闲话先生”真是不管闲事了么？并不然的。据说他是要“到那天这班出锋头的人们脱尽了锐气的日子，我们这位闲话先生正在从容的从事他那‘完工的拂拭’（The finishing touch），笑吟吟的擎着他那枝从铁杠磨成的绣针，讽刺我们情急是多么不经济的一个态度，反面说只有无限的耐心才是天才唯一的凭证”。（《晨报副刊》一四二三）
However, things are not so simple, and China's bad guys (such as literati and gangsters at the horizon) seem to be going to suffer a lot in the future, although they may be behind them, like going to hell. However, far-sighted people always think that it is safe to be careful from now on and not say more. Do you think "Mr. Gosip" really doesn't care about idle things? Not really. It is said that he was going to "on that day when this group of people who came out of the lead was exhausted, our gossip gentleman was calmly engaged in his 'The finishing touch', smiling and holding his embroidery needle sharpened from an iron bar, satirizing how uneconomical our impatience was, and on the other hand, saying that only infinite patience is the only proof of genius." (Morning News Supplement, 1423)后出者胜于前者，本是天下的平常事情，但除了堕落的民族。即以衣服而论，也是由裸体而用会阴带或围裙，于是有衣裳，衮冕。我们将来的天才却特异的，别人系了围裙狂跳时，他却躲在绣房里刺绣，——不，磨绣针。待到别人的围裙全数破旧，他却穿了绣花衫子站出来了。大家只好说道“阿！”可怜的性急的野蛮人，竟连围裙也不知道换一条，怪不得锐气终于脱尽；脱尽犹可，还要看那“笑吟吟”的“讽刺”的“天才”脸哩，这实在是对于灵魂的鞭责，虽说还在辽远的将来。
The latecomers are better than the former, which is a common thing in the world, except for the fallen people. In terms of clothing, it is also naked with perineal belts or aprons, so there are clothes and crowns. Our future genius is unique, when others wear aprons and jump wildly, he hides in the embroidery room to embroider,——no, grind the embroidery needle. When other people's aprons were all worn out, he stood up wearing an embroidered shirt. Everyone had to say, "Ah! "Poor impatient savage, he didn't even know how to change his apron, no wonder his sharpness was finally gone; It is still possible to take it off, but it also depends on the "smiling" and "ironic" "genius" face, which is really a whipping of the soul, although it is still in the distant future.还有更可怕的，是我们风闻二〇二五年一到，陶孟和教授要发表一部著作。内容如何，只有百年后的我们的曾孙或玄孙们知道罢了，但幸而在《现代评论增刊》上提前发表了几节，所以我们竟还能“管中窥豹”似的，略见这一部新书的大概。那是讲“现代教育界的特色”的，连教员的“兼课”之多也说在内。他问：“我的议论太悲观，太刻薄，太荒诞吗？我深愿受这个批评，假使事实可以证明。”这些批评我们且俟之百年之后，虽然那时也许无从知道事实；典籍呢，大概也只有“笑吟吟的”佳作留传。要是当真这样，那大半是“英雄所见略同”的，后人总不至于以为刻薄罢。但我们也难于悬揣，不过就今论今，似乎颇有些“孔子作《春秋》，而乱臣贼子惧”之意了。人们不逢如此盛事者，盖已将二千四百年云。
What's even more frightening is that we are rumored that Professor Tao Menghe will publish a book in 2025. Only our great-grandchildren or great-grandchildren will know what the content is a hundred years later, but fortunately, a few sections were published in advance in the "Supplement to the Modern Review", so we can still "peek into the leopard" and get a glimpse of this new book. That is talking about the "characteristics of modern education", including the number of "part-time classes" of teachers. He asked: "Is my discussion too pessimistic, too mean, too absurd? I would be willing to accept this criticism, if it can be proved. "We will wait a hundred years for these criticisms, although we may not know the facts then; As for the classics, there are probably only "smiling" masterpieces. If this is true, most of them will be "similar to what the heroes see", and future generations will not think that they are mean. But it is also difficult for us to speculate, but as far as we are concerned, it seems that there is a bit of "Confucius wrote the Spring and Autumn Annals, and the traitors and thieves are afraid". People have not encountered such a grand event for nearly 2,400 years.总之：百年以内，将有陈源教授的许多（？）书，百年以后，将有陶孟和教授的一部书出现。内容虽然不知道怎样，但据目下所走漏的风声看起来，大概总是讽刺“那班出锋头的人们”，或“驰驱九城”的教授的。
In short: within a hundred years, there will be many (?) A hundred years later, a book by Professor Tao Menghe will appear. Although I don't know what the content is, according to the rumors that have been leaked at the moment, it seems that it is probably always a satire of "the people who are at the forefront" or the professors who "drive through the nine cities".我常常感叹，印度小乘教的方法何等厉害：它立了地狱之说，借着和尚，尼姑，念佛老妪的嘴来宣扬，恐吓异端，使心志不坚定者害怕。那诀窍是在说报应并非眼前，却在将来百年之后，至少也须到锐气脱尽之时。这时候你已经不能动弹了，只好听别人摆布，流下鬼泪，深悔生前之妄出锋头；而且这时候，这才认识阎罗大王的尊严和伟大。
I often lament how powerful the methods of Indian Theravada Buddhism are: it establishes the theory of hell, promotes it through the mouths of monks, nuns, and old women who chant Buddhism, intimidates heretics, and makes those who are not determined afraid. The trick is to say that retribution is not imminent, but in the next hundred years, at least until the time when the sharpness is exhausted. At this time, you can no longer move, so you have to listen to the mercy of others, shed ghost tears, and deeply regret your reckless actions in life; And at this time, I know the dignity and greatness of King Hell.这些信仰，也许是迷信罢，但神道设教，于“挽世道而正人心”的事，或者也还是不无裨益。况且，未能将坏人“投畀豺虎”于生前，当然也只好口诛笔伐之于身后，孔子一车两马，倦游各国以还，抽出钢笔来作《春秋》，盖亦此志也。
These beliefs may be superstitious, but Shinto teachings may still be beneficial to the matter of "saving the world and correcting people's hearts". Moreover, he failed to "throw the bad guys to the jackals and tigers" in his lifetime, of course, he had to punish the pen behind him, Confucius had a cart and two horses, tired of traveling around the world, and took out a pen to write the "Spring and Autumn Annals", which was also this ambition.但是，时代迁流了，到现在，我以为这些老玩意，也只好骗骗极端老实人。连闹这些玩意儿的人们自己尚且未必信，更何况所谓坏人们。得罪人要受报应，平平常常，并不见得怎样奇特，有时说些宛转的话，是姑且客气客气的，何尝想借此免于下地狱。这是无法可想的，在我们不从容的人们的世界中，实在没有那许多工夫来摆臭绅士的臭架子了，要做就做，与其说明年喝酒，不如立刻喝水；待廿一世纪的剖拨戮尸，倒不如马上就给他一个嘴巴。至于将来，自有后起的人们，决不是现在人即将来所谓古人的世界，如果还是现在的世界，中国就会完！
However, times have changed, and now, I think these old things have no choice but to deceive extremely honest people. Even the people who make trouble with these things may not believe it, let alone the so-called bad people. Offenders are subject to retribution, ordinary, not necessarily peculiar, sometimes say some twisted words, they are polite and polite, why do you want to avoid going to hell. This is unimaginable, in our uncalm people's world, there is really not so much time to put on the stinky shelf of a stinky gentleman, do what you want, instead of saying that you will drink water next year, it is better to drink water immediately; When the twenty-first century is dissected, it is better to give him a mouth immediately. As for the future, the people who have their own up-and-coming people will never be the world of the so-called ancients that people are about to come to now, if it is still the current world, China will be over!一月十四日。
January 14th.

学界的三魂

学界的三魂

学界的三魂

The three souls of the school world从《京报副刊》上知道有一种叫《国魂》的期刊，曾有一篇文章说章士钊固然不好，然而反对章士钊的“学匪”们也应该打倒。我不知道大意是否真如我所记得？但这也没有什么关系，因为不过引起我想到一个题目，和那原文是不相干的。意思是，中国旧说，本以为人有三魂六魄，或云七魄；国魂也该这样。而这三魂之中，似乎一是“官魂”，一是“匪魂”，还有一个是什么呢？也许是“民魂”罢，我不很能够决定。又因为我的见闻很偏隘，所以未敢悉指中国全社会，只好缩而小之曰“学界”。
From the "Beijing News Supplement", I know that there is a journal called "National Soul", and there was an article saying that Zhang Shizhao is not good, but the "student bandits" who oppose Zhang Shizhao should also be defeated. I don't know if the gist is really as I remember? But it doesn't matter, because it just reminds me of a topic that has nothing to do with the original text. This means that the old Chinese saying originally thought that people have three souls and six souls, or seven souls; The soul of the country should be like this. And among these three souls, it seems that one is the "official soul" and the other is the "bandit soul", what is the other one? Maybe it's the "soul of the people", I can't decide. And because my experience is very narrow, I did not dare to refer to the whole Chinese society, so I had to shorten it to "academic circles".中国人的官瘾实在深，汉重孝廉而有埋儿刻木，宋重理学而有高帽破靴，清重帖括而有“且夫”“然则”。总而言之：那魂灵就在做官，——行官势，摆官腔，打官话。顶着一个皇帝做傀儡，得罪了官就是得罪了皇帝，于是那些人就得了雅号曰“匪徒”。学界的打官话是始于去年，凡反对章士钊的都得了“土匪”，“学匪”，“学棍”的称号，但仍然不知道从谁的口中说出，所以还不外乎一种“流言”。
The Chinese are really addicted to officials, the Han Dynasty emphasized filial piety and carved wood, the Song Dynasty emphasized science and had high hats and broken boots, and the Qing and Zhong were "Qiefu" and "Ranze". All in all: the soul is doing official ,—— acting officially, putting on an official tone, and speaking official language. Being a puppet in front of an emperor, offending an official is offending the emperor, so those people are nicknamed "bandits". The official rhetoric in the academic circles began last year, and everyone who opposed Zhang Shizhao was awarded the titles of "bandit", "student bandit", and "student stick", but they still didn't know from whose mouth they said it, so it was nothing more than a "rumor".但这也足见去年学界之糟了，竟破天荒的有了学匪。以大点的国事来比罢，太平盛世，是没有匪的；待到群盗如毛时，看旧史，一定是外戚，宦官，奸臣，小人当国，即使大打一通官话，那结果也还是“呜呼哀哉”。当这“呜呼哀哉”之前，小民便大抵相率而为盗，所以我相信源增先生的话：“表面上看只是些土匪与强盗，其实是农民革命军。”（《国民新报副刊》四三）那么，社会不是改进了么？并不，我虽然也是被谥为“土匪”之一，却并不想为老前辈们饰非掩过。农民是不来夺取政权的，源增先生又道：“任三五热心家将皇帝推倒，自己过皇帝瘾去。”但这时候，匪便被称为帝，除遗老外，文人学者却都来恭维，又称反对他的为匪了。
But this also shows that last year's academic circles were bad, and there were unprecedented student bandits. Compared with the larger state affairs, there are no bandits in a peaceful and prosperous world; When the bandits are like hair, looking at the old history, it must be foreign relatives, eunuchs, traitors, and villains in power. Before this "oh sadness", the common people mostly became thieves, so I believe Mr. Genzeng's words: "On the surface, they are just bandits and robbers, but in fact they are the peasant revolutionary army." ("National News Supplement" 43) So, hasn't society improved? No, although I am also posthumously named one of the "bandits", I don't want to cover up the old-timers. The peasants did not come to seize power, and Mr. Yuan Zeng said: "Ren Sanwu enthusiasts pushed the emperor down and became addicted to the emperor himself. But at this time, the bandits were called emperors, and in addition to the old people, literati and scholars came to compliment, also known as bandits who opposed him.所以中国的国魂里大概总有这两种魂：官魂和匪魂。这也并非硬要将我辈的魂挤进国魂里去，贪图与教授名流的魂为伍，只因为事实仿佛是这样。社会诸色人等，爱看《双官诰》，也爱看《四杰村》，望偏安巴蜀的刘玄德成功，也愿意打家劫舍的宋公明得法；至少，是受了官的恩惠时候则艳羡官僚，受了官的剥削时候便同情匪类。但这也是人情之常；倘使连这一点反抗心都没有，岂不就成为万劫不复的奴才了？
Therefore, there are probably two kinds of souls in China's national soul: official soul and bandit soul. This is not to squeeze the soul of our generation into the soul of the country, and to be with the souls of professors and celebrities, just because the fact seems to be so. People of all kinds in society love to watch "Shuangguan Edict", but also love to watch "Sijie Village", hoping that Liu Xuande, who is biased towards Anbashu, will succeed, and Song Gongming, who is willing to rob his house, will get the law; At least, when they are favored by officials, they envy bureaucrats, and when they are exploited by officials, they sympathize with bandits. But this is also a common occurrence; If you don't even have this sense of resistance, won't you become an irreversible slave?然而国情不同，国魂也就两样。记得在日本留学时候，有些同学问我在中国最有大利的买卖是什么，我答道：“造反。”他们便大骇怪。在万世一系的国度里，那时听到皇帝可以一脚踢落，就如我们听说父母可以一棒打杀一般。为一部分士女所心悦诚服的李景林先生，可就深知此意了，要是报纸上所传非虚。今天的《京报》即载着他对某外交官的谈话道：“予预计于旧历正月间，当能与君在天津晤谈；若天津攻击竟至失败，则拟俟三四月间卷土重来，若再失败，则暂投土匪，徐养兵力，以待时机”云。但他所希望的不是做皇帝，那大概是因为中华民国之故罢。
However, the national conditions are different, and the national soul is also different. I remember when I was studying in Japan, some classmates asked me what was the most profitable trade in China, and I replied, "Rebellion." They were shocked. In the kingdom of the eternal lineage, we heard that the emperor could be kicked down, just as we heard that parents could be beaten to death with a stick. Mr. Li Jinglin, who is sincerely convinced by some men and women, knows this very well, if what is rumored in the newspaper is true. Today's "Beijing News" contains his conversation with a diplomat: "I expect that in the first month of the old calendar, I will be able to meet with you in Tianjin; If the attack on Tianjin fails, it is planned to make a comeback in March or April, and if it fails again, it will temporarily surrender to the bandits and slowly raise troops to wait for the opportunity." But what he wanted was not to be an emperor, it was probably because of the Republic of China.所谓学界，是一种发生较新的阶级，本该可以有将旧魂灵略加湔洗之望了，但听到“学官”的官话，和“学匪”的新名，则似乎还走着旧道路。那末，当然也得打倒的。这来打倒他的是“民魂”，是国魂的第三种。先前不很发扬，所以一闹之后，终不自取政权，而只“任三五热心家将皇帝推倒，自己过皇帝瘾去”了。
The so-called academic circle is a relatively new class, which should have the hope of washing away the old soul a little, but hearing the official language of "academic official" and the new name of "scholar bandit", it seems that it is still following the old path. In that case, of course, it has to be defeated. What came to overthrow him was the "people's soul", the third type of national soul. It was not very promoted before, so after a fuss, he did not take power for himself, but only "let the three or five enthusiasts push the emperor down and live the emperor's addiction by himself".惟有民魂是值得宝贵的，惟有他发扬起来，中国才有真进步。但是，当此连学界也倒走旧路的时候，怎能轻易地发挥得出来呢？在乌烟瘴气之中，有官之所谓“匪”和民之所谓匪；有官之所谓“民”和民之所谓民；有官以为“匪”而其实是真的国民，有官以为“民”而其实是衙役和马弁。所以貌似“民魂”的，有时仍不免为“官魂”，这是鉴别魂灵者所应该十分注意的。
Only the soul of the people is precious, and only when he carries it forward can China make real progress. However, when even the academic community goes backwards, how can it be easily exerted? In the miasma, there are the so-called "bandits" of the officials and the so-called bandits of the people; there are the so-called "people" of officials and the so-called people of the people; Some officials think they are "bandits" but are actually real citizens, and some officials think they are "people" but are actually yamen and horses. Therefore, what seems to be a "people's soul" is sometimes still an "official soul", which is something that those who identify souls should pay great attention to.话又说远了，回到本题去。去年，自从章士钊提了“整顿学风”的招牌，上了教育总长的大任之后，学界里就官气弥漫，顺我者“通”，逆我者“匪”，官腔官话的余气，至今还没有完。但学界却也幸而因此分清了颜色；只是代表官魂的还不是章士钊，因为上头还有“减膳”执政在，他至多不过做了一个官魄；现在是在天津“徐养兵力，以待时机”了。我不看《甲寅》，不知道说些什么话：官话呢，匪话呢，民话呢，衙役马弁话呢？……
Speaking of which, let's go back to the topic. Last year, since Zhang Shizhao put forward the signboard of "rectifying the academic style" and took up the post of chief of education, the academic circles have been filled with officialdom. But the academic community is fortunate to distinguish the colors; It's just that it is not Zhang Shizhao who represents the soul of the official, because there is still a "reduced meal" in power, and he is at most an official soul; Now it is time to "raise troops in Tianjin and wait for the opportunity". I don't read "Jiayin", I don't know what to say: what about the official language, what about the bandit language, what about the folk language, what about the yamen Ma Bian? ……一月二十四日。
January 24th.

古书与白话

古书与白话

古书与白话

Ancient books and vernacular记得提倡白话那时，受了许多谣诼诬谤，而白话终于没有跌倒的时候，就有些人改口说：然而不读古书，白话是做不好的。我们自然应该曲谅这些保古家的苦心，但也不能不悯笑他们这祖传的成法。凡有读过一点古书的人都有这一种老手段：新起的思想，就是“异端”，必须歼灭的，待到它奋斗之后，自己站住了，这才寻出它原来与“圣教同源”；外来的事物，都要“用夷变夏”，必须排除的，但待到这“夷”入主中夏，却考订出来了，原来连这“夷”也还是黄帝的子孙。这岂非出人意料之外的事呢？无论什么，在我们的“古”里竟无不包函了！
I remember that when I advocated the vernacular, I was slandered by many rumors, and when the vernacular finally did not fall, some people changed their words and said: However, if you don't read ancient books, the vernacular will not be good. Naturally, we should forgive the painstaking efforts of these ancient preservation families, but we can't help but laugh at their ancestral law. Anyone who has read a little ancient book has this old method: the new idea, which is "heresy", must be annihilated, and after it struggles, it stands on its own, and only then can it find its original "holy religion"; Foreign things must be "used to change Xia", which must be excluded, but when this "Yi" entered the Central Xia, it was examined, and it turned out that even this "Yi" was still a descendant of the Yellow Emperor. Isn't this unexpected? No matter what, there is nothing in our "ancient" that is not included!用老手段的自然不会长进，到现在仍是说非“读破几百卷书者”即做不出好白话文，于是硬拉吴稚晖先生为例。可是竟又会有“肉麻当有趣”，述说得津津有味的，天下事真是千奇百怪。其实吴先生的“用讲话体为文”，即“其貌”也何尝与“黄口小儿所作若同”。不是“纵笔所之，辄万数千言”么？其中自然有古典，为“黄口小儿”所不知，尤有新典，为“束发小生”所不晓。清光绪末，我初到日本东京时，这位吴稚晖先生已在和公使蔡钧大战了，其战史就有这么长，则见闻之多，自然非现在的“黄口小儿”所能企及。所以他的遣辞用典，有许多地方是惟独熟于大小故事的人物才能够了然，从青年看来，第一是惊异于那文辞的滂沛。这或者就是名流学者们所认为长处的罢，但是，那生命却不在于此。甚至于竟和名流学者们所拉拢恭维的相反，而在自己并不故意显出长处，也无法灭去名流学者们的所谓长处；只将所说所写，作为改革道中的桥梁，或者竟并不想到作为改革道中的桥梁。
Naturally, those who use old methods will not grow, and it is still said that they cannot make good vernacular prose unless they "read through hundreds of volumes", so Mr. Wu Zhihui is taken as an example. But there will be "meat and hemp should be interesting", which is told with relish, and the things in the world are really strange. In fact, Mr. Wu's "use the speech style as a text", that is, "its appearance", is not the same as "what the yellow-mouthed child does". Isn't it "wherever the pen goes, there are thousands of words"? Among them, there are naturally classics, which are unknown to the "yellow-mouthed children", especially the new classics, which are not understood by the "bundled hair". At the end of the Qing Dynasty, when I first arrived in Tokyo, Japan, this Mr. Wu Zhihui was already fighting with the minister Cai Jun, and his war history was so long, so he saw and heard a lot, which was naturally beyond the reach of the current "yellow-mouthed children". Therefore, there are many places in his dictionary that can only be understood by characters who are familiar with large and small stories, and from the perspective of young people, the first is to be amazed by the peiness of the words. This may be what celebrities and scholars think is their strength, but life is not here. Even contrary to the compliments of celebrity scholars, and if they do not deliberately show their strengths, they cannot eliminate the so-called strengths of celebrity scholars; Only what is said and written is used as a bridge in the reform road, or it is not intended as a bridge in the reform road.愈是无聊赖，没出息的脚色，愈想长寿，想不朽，愈喜欢多照自己的照相，愈要占据别人的心，愈善于摆臭架子。但是，似乎“下意识”里，究竟也觉得自己之无聊的罢，便只好将还未朽尽的“古”一口咬住，希图做着肠子里的寄生虫，一同传世；或者在白话文之类里找出一点古气，反过来替古董增加宠荣。如果“不朽之大业”不过这样，那未免太可怜了罢。而且，到了二九二五年，“黄口小儿”们还要看什么《甲寅》之流，也未免过于可惨罢，即使它“自从孤桐先生下台之后，……也渐渐的有了生气了”。
The more boring and unpromising you are, the more you want to live a long life, the more you want to be immortal, the more you like to take pictures of yourself, the more you want to occupy the hearts of others, and the better you are at putting on a stinky show. However, it seems that "subconsciously", I also feel that I am bored, so I have to bite the "ancient" that has not yet decayed, hoping to be a parasite in the intestines and pass it on to the world together; Or find a little antiquity in the vernacular, which in turn increases the favor of antiques. If the "Great Cause of Immortality" is just like this, it will be too pitiful. Moreover, by 2925, it would be too miserable for the "yellow-mouthed children" to watch "Jiayin" and the like, even if it was "since Mr. Gutong stepped down,...... I gradually became angry."菲薄古书者，惟读过古书者最有力，这是的确的。因为他洞知弊病，能“以子之矛攻子之盾”，正如要说明吸雅片的弊害，大概惟吸过雅片者最为深知，最为痛切一般。但即使“束发小生”，也何至于说，要做戒绝雅片的文章，也得先吸尽几百两雅片才好呢。
It is true that only those who have read ancient books are the most powerful. Because he knows the shortcomings and can "attack the shield of the son with the spear of the son", just as to illustrate the disadvantages of smoking elegant films, it is probably the most deeply known and painful only for those who have smoked elegant films. But even if you are a "bundled hair", how can you say that if you want to make an article about quitting elegant films, you have to absorb hundreds of taels of elegant films first.古文已经死掉了；白话文还是改革道上的桥梁，因为人类还在进化。便是文章，也未必独有万古不磨的典则。虽然据说美国的某处已经禁讲进化论了，但在实际上，恐怕也终于没有效的。
The ancient text is dead; Vernacular is still a bridge on the road to reform, because humans are still evolving. Even if it is an article, it may not be unique to the eternal rules. Although it is said that evolution has been banned somewhere in the United States, in reality, it may not be effective at all.一月二十五日。
January 25th.

一点比喻

一点比喻

一点比喻

A little metaphor在我的故乡不大通行吃羊肉，阖城里，每天大约不过杀几匹山羊。北京真是人海，情形可大不相同了，单是羊肉铺就触目皆是。雪白的群羊也常常满街走，但都是胡羊，在我们那里称绵羊的。山羊很少见；听说这在北京却颇名贵了，因为比胡羊聪明，能够率领羊群，悉依它的进止，所以畜牧家虽然偶而养几匹，却只用作胡羊们的领导，并不杀掉它。
In my hometown, mutton is not widely eaten, and in the whole city, only a few goats are killed every day. Beijing is really a sea of people, the situation is very different, just the mutton shop is everywhere. Snow-white sheep often walk all over the streets, but they are all Hu sheep, which we call sheep. Goats are rare; I heard that this is quite famous in Beijing, because it is smarter than the Hu sheep, can lead the sheep, and follow its progress, so although the livestock herdsman occasionally raises a few horses, they only use them as leaders for the Hu sheep and do not kill it.这样的山羊我只见过一回，确是走在一群胡羊的前面，脖子上还挂着一个小铃铎，作为智识阶级的徽章。通常，领的赶的却多是牧人，胡羊们便成了一长串，挨挨挤挤，浩浩荡荡，凝着柔顺有余的眼色，跟定他匆匆地竞奔它们的前程。我看见这种认真的忙迫的情形时，心里总想开口向它们发一句愚不可及的疑问——
I have only seen such a goat once, and it is true that it walks in front of a herd of sheep, and there is a small bell around its neck as the insignia of the intellectual class. Usually, most of the leaders were shepherds, and the sheep became a long line, crowded one after another, mighty, with a soft eye, and they hurriedly rushed to their future. When I see this serious busy situation, I always want to ask them a foolish question——“往那里去？！”
"Where are you going?!"人群中也很有这样的山羊，能领了群众稳妥平静地走去，直到他们应该走到的所在。袁世凯明白一点这种事，可惜用得不大巧，大概因为他是不很读书的，所以也就难于熟悉运用那些的奥妙。后来的武人可更蠢了，只会自己乱打乱割，乱得哀号之声，洋洋盈耳，结果是除了残虐百姓之外，还加上轻视学问，荒废教育的恶名。然而“经一事，长一智”，二十世纪已过了四分之一，脖子上挂着小铃铎的聪明人是总要交到红运的，虽然现在表面上还不免有些小挫折。
There are also such goats in the crowd, who can lead the masses to walk safely and calmly until they are where they should go. Yuan Shikai understood a little bit of this kind of thing, but unfortunately he didn't use it very coincidentally, probably because he was not very well-read, so it was difficult to be familiar with the mysteries of using them. The later warriors were even more stupid, they would only beat and cut indiscriminately, making the sound of wailing and full of ears, and the result was that in addition to cruelizing the people, they also added the notoriety of despising learning and abandoning education. However, a quarter of the twentieth century has passed, and smart people with small bells around their necks always have to hand over red luck, although there are still some small setbacks on the surface.那时候，人们，尤其是青年，就都循规蹈矩，既不嚣张，也不浮动，一心向着“正路”前进了，只要没有人问——
At that time, people, especially young people, were following the rules, neither arrogant nor floating, and were bent on moving towards the "right path", as long as no one asked——“往那里去？！”
"Where are you going?!"
君子若曰：“羊总是羊，不成了一长串顺从地走，还有什么别的法子呢？君不见夫猪乎？拖延着，逃着，喊着，奔突着，终于也还是被捉到非去不可的地方去，那些暴动，不过是空费力气而已矣。”
If a gentleman says: "Sheep are always sheep, and if they don't become a long string of obedient people, what other way is there?" Don't you see the pig? Procrastinating, fleeing, shouting, rushing, and finally being caught in a place where he had to go, those riots were just a waste of effort. ”这是说：虽死也应该如羊，使天下太平，彼此省力。
This means that even if you die, you should be like a sheep, so that the world will be peaceful and save each other's efforts.这计划当然是很妥帖，大可佩服的。然而，君不见夫野猪乎？它以两个牙，使老猎人也不免于退避。这牙，只要猪脱出了牧豕奴所造的猪圈，走入山野，不久就会长出来。
This plan is of course very appropriate and admirable. However, don't you see the wild boar? With its two teeth, the old hunter is not immune to retreat. This tooth, as long as the pig gets out of the pigsty made by the pig slave and goes into the mountains, will soon grow out.
Schopenhauer先生曾将绅士们比作豪猪，我想，这实在有些失体统。但在他，自然是并没有什么别的恶意的，不过拉扯来作一个比喻。《Parerga und Paralipomena》里有着这样意思的话：有一群豪猪，在冬天想用了大家的体温来御寒冷，紧靠起来了，但它们彼此即刻又觉得刺的疼痛，于是乎又离开。然而温暖的必要，再使它们靠近时，却又吃了照样的苦。但它们在这两种困难中，终于发见了彼此之间的适宜的间隔，以这距离，它们能够过得最平安。人们因为社交的要求，聚在一处，又因为各有可厌的许多性质和难堪的缺陷，再使他们分离。他们最后所发见的距离，——使他们得以聚在一处的中庸的距离，就是“礼让”和“上流的风习”。有不守这距离的，在英国就这样叫，“Keep your distance！”
Mr. Schopenhauer once compared gentlemen to porcupines, which I think is a bit undecent. But in him, naturally there is no other malice, but it is pulled as a metaphor. In "Parerga und Paralipomena", there are words that mean this: There is a group of porcupines, who want to use everyone's body temperature to keep out the cold in winter, and they cling to each other, but they immediately feel the pain of each other's stings and leave. However, the need for warmth, when they were brought closer, suffered the same hardship. But in these two difficulties, they finally found a suitable distance between each other, and at this distance, they were able to live the most peacefully. People gather in one place because of the demands of socialization, and because of their many disgusting qualities and embarrassing flaws, they are separated. The distance they finally discovered ,—— the golden mean distance that allowed them to gather in one place, which was "courtesy" and "upper-class customs". Those who don't keep this distance are called in the UK, "Keep your distance!" ”但即使这样叫，恐怕也只能在豪猪和豪猪之间才有效力罢，因为它们彼此的守着距离，原因是在于痛而不在于叫的。假使豪猪们中夹着一个别的，并没有刺，则无论怎么叫，它们总还是挤过来。孔子说：礼不下庶人。照现在的情形看，该是并非庶人不得接近豪猪，却是豪猪可以任意刺着庶人而取得温暖。受伤是当然要受伤的，但这也只能怪你自己独独没有刺，不足以让他守定适当的距离。孔子又说：刑不上大夫。这就又难怪人们的要做绅士。
But even if it is called like this, I am afraid it can only be effective between porcupines and porcupines, because they keep a distance from each other, and the reason is the pain and not the barking. If the porcupines have something else in their hands and no thorns, they will always squeeze over no matter how they scream. Confucius said: Etiquette is no less than that of commoners. According to the current situation, it should not be that the common people are not allowed to approach the porcupine, but the porcupine can stab the common people at will to get warmth. Of course, injuries are injured, but this can only be blamed on yourself for not being thorny, which is not enough for him to keep an appropriate distance. Confucius also said: Punishment is not a doctor. It's no wonder that people want to be gentlemen.这些豪猪们，自然也可以用牙角或棍棒来抵御的，但至少必须拚出背一条豪猪社会所制定的罪名：“下流”或“无礼”。
These porcupines can naturally be resisted with teeth or sticks, but at least they must fight for the crime set by the porcupine society: "obscene" or "rude".一月二十五日。
January 25th.

不是信

不是信

不是信

It is not a letter一个朋友忽然寄给我一张《晨报副刊》，我就觉得有些特别，因为他是知道我懒得看这种东西的。但既然特别寄来了，姑且看题目罢：《关于下面一束通信告读者们》。署名是：志摩。哈哈，这是寄来和我开玩笑的，我想；赶紧翻转，便是几封信，这寄那，那寄这，看了几行，才知道似乎还是什么“闲话……闲话”问题。这问题我仅知道一点儿，就是曾在新潮社看见陈源教授即西滢先生的信，说及我“捏造的事实，传布的‘流言’，本来已经说不胜说”。不禁好笑；人就苦于不能将自己的灵魂砍成酱，因此能有记忆，也因此而有感慨或滑稽。记得首先根据了“流言”，来判决杨荫榆事件即女师大风潮的，正是这位西滢先生，那大文便登在去年五月三十日发行的《现代评论》上。我不该生长“某籍”又在“某系”教书，所以也被归入“暗中挑剔风潮”者之列，虽然他说还不相信，不过觉得可惜。在这里声明一句罢，以免读者的误解：“某系”云者，大约是指国文系，不是说研究系。那时我见了“流言”字样，曾经很愤然，立刻加以驳正，虽然也很自愧没有“十年读书十年养气的工夫”。不料过了半年，这些“流言”却变成由我传布的了，自造自己的“流言”，这真是自己掘坑埋自己，不必说聪明人，便是傻子也想不通。倘说这回的所谓“流言”，并非关于“某籍某系”的，乃是关于不信“流言”的陈源教授的了，则我实在不知道陈教授有怎样的被捏造的事实和流言在社会上传布。说起来惭愧煞人，我不赴宴会，很少往来，也不奔走，也不结什么文艺学术的社团，实在最不合式于做捏造事实和传布流言的枢纽。只是弄弄笔墨是在所不免的，但也不肯以流言为根据，故意给它传布开来，虽然偶有些“耳食之言”，又大抵是无关大体的事；要是错了，即使月久年深，也决不惜追加订正，例如对于汪原放先生“已作古人”一案，其间竟隔了几乎有两年。——但这自然是只对于看过《热风》的读者说的。
A friend suddenly sent me a copy of the Morning News Supplement, and I felt a little special because he knew that I was too lazy to read this kind of thing. But since it was specially sent, let's look at the title: "About the following bundle of correspondence to readers". The signature is: Shima. Haha, this was sent as a joke to me, I thought; Quickly flipped over, it was a few letters, this to that, that to send this, after reading a few lines, I realized that it seemed to be some "gossip...... gossip" question. I only know one thing about this issue, that is, I saw a letter from Professor Chen Yuan, Mr. Xi Ying, in the Xinchao Society, saying that I "fabricated facts and 'rumors' that have been spread beyond words." can't help but be funny; People suffer from not being able to cut their souls into sauce, so they can have memories, and because of this, they are emotional or funny. I remember that it was Mr. Xiying who first judged the Yang Yinyu incident, that is, the trend of women's teachers, based on "rumors", and the article was published in the "Modern Review" issued on May 30 last year. I shouldn't have grown up in a "certain place" and taught in a "certain department", so I was also included in the list of "secretly picky trends", although he said he didn't believe it, but I felt it was a pity. Just make a statement here to avoid readers' misunderstanding: "A certain department" probably refers to the Department of Chinese Literature, not the Department of Research. At that time, when I saw the word "rumor", I was very angry and immediately refuted it, although I was also ashamed that I did not have "ten years of studying and ten years of cultivating energy". Unexpectedly, after half a year, these "rumors" became spread by me, and I created my own "rumors", which is really digging a pit and burying myself, not to mention smart people, even fools can't figure it out. If the so-called "rumors" this time are not about "a certain nationality or department", but about Professor Chen Yuan, who does not believe in "rumors", then I really don't know what kind of fabricated facts and rumors Professor Chen has spread in society. I don't go to banquets, I rarely come and go, I don't run around, and I don't form any literary and artistic societies, which is really the most inappropriate to be a hub for fabricating facts and spreading rumors. It is inevitable to just play with the pen and ink, but it refuses to be based on rumors and deliberately spreads it, although there are occasional "ear-eaten words", and it is probably irrelevant; If it is wrong, even if it is a long time, it will never hesitate to make additional corrections, for example, for the case of Mr. Wang Yuanfang "already an ancient", there was almost two years between them. ——But this is naturally only for readers who have read "Hot Wind".这几天，我的“捏……言”罪案，仿佛只等于昙花一现了，《一束通信》的主要部分中，似乎也承情没有将我“流”进去，不过在后屁股的《西滢致志摩》是附带的对我的专论，虽然并非一案，却因为亲属关系而灭族，或文字狱的株连一般。灭族呀，株连呀，又有点“刑名师爷”口吻了，其实这是事实，法家不过给他起了一个名，所谓“正人君子”是不肯说的，虽然不妨这样做。此外如甲对乙先用流言，后来却说乙制造流言这一类事，“刑名师爷”的笔下就简括到只有两个字：“反噬”。呜呼，这实在形容得痛快淋漓。然而古语说，“察见渊鱼者不祥”，所以“刑名师爷”总没有好结果，这是我早经知道的。
In the past few days, my "pinching...... In the main part of "A Bundle of Correspondence", it seems that I did not "flow" in, but the "Xiying to Shima" in the back butt is an incidental monograph on me, although it is not a case, but it is exterminated because of kinship, or the implications of the literary prison. Extermination, implication, and a bit of a "criminal master" tone, in fact, this is a fact, the Legalists just gave him a name, and the so-called "righteous gentleman" refused to say it, although it might as well be done. In addition, if A first used rumors against B, but later said that B created rumors, the pen of "Master of Criminal Names" was summarized to only two words: "backlash". Alas, this is really a vivid description. However, as the old saying goes, "those who see the abyssal fish are ominous", so the "criminal master" always has no good results, which I have long known.我猜想那位寄给我《晨报副刊》的朋友的意思了：来刺激我，讥讽我，通知我的，还是要我也说几句话呢？终于不得而知。好，好在现在正须还笔债，就用这一点事来搪塞一通罢，说话最方便的题目是《鲁迅致□□》，既非根据学理和事实的论文，也不是“笑吟吟”的天才的讽刺，不过是私人通信而已，自己何尝愿意发表；无论怎么说，粪坑也好，毛厕也好，决定与“人气”无关。即不然，也是因为生气发热，被别人逼成的，正如别的副刊将被《晨报副刊》“逼死”一样。我的镜子真可恨，照出来的总是要使陈源教授呕吐的东西，但若以赵子昂——“是不是他？”——画马为例，自然恐怕正是我自己。自己是没有什么要紧的，不过总得替□□想一想。现在不是要谈到《西滢致志摩》么，那可是极其危险的事，一不小心就要跌入“泥潭中”，遇到“悻悻的狗”，暂时再也看不见“笑吟吟”。至少，一关涉陈源两个字，你总不免要被公理家认为“某籍”，“某系”，“某党”，“喽罗”，“重女轻男”……等；而且还得小心记住，倘有人说过他是文士，是法兰斯，你便万不可再用“文士”或“法兰斯”字样，否则，——自然，当然又有“某籍”……等等的嫌疑了，我何必如此陷害无辜，《鲁迅致□□》决计不用，所以一直写到这里，还没有题目，且待写下去看罢。
I guess the friend who sent me the Morning Supplement meant: To provoke me, to ridicule me, to inform me, or to ask me to say a few words? In the end, it is unknown. Okay, fortunately, now I have to pay off the debt, so I will use this matter to prevaricate, the most convenient topic to speak on is "Lu Xun to □□", which is neither a thesis based on theory and facts, nor is it a satire of a genius of "laughing and laughing", but just a private correspondence, and I am willing to publish it; In any case, whether it is a cesspool or a toilet, the decision has nothing to do with "popularity". Even if it is not, it is also because of anger and fever, and it is forced by others, just as other supplements will be "forced to death" by the "Morning News Supplement". My mirror is really hateful, and what it reflects is always something that makes Professor Chen Yuan vomit, but if Zhao Ziang - "Is it him?" ——Painting horses as an example, naturally I am afraid it is myself. It doesn't matter to me, but I have to think about it for □□. Isn't it about "Xiying to Shima" now, it is an extremely dangerous thing, if you are not careful, you will fall into the "quagmire", meet the "angry dog", and you will never see "Smiling Yinyin" for the time being. At least, when it comes to the word Chen Yuan, you will inevitably be considered by axioms to be "a certain nationality", "a certain lineage", "a certain party", "a certain party", "a Luo", and "a preference for daughters over sons"...... Wait; And you have to remember carefully that if someone says that he is a scribe, a Frans, you must not use the word "scribe" or "Frans" again, otherwise it ,——will be natural, and of course there will be "a certain nationality"...... etc., why should I frame the innocent like this, "Lu Xun to □□" is not used, so I have been writing here, there is no title, and I will write it down.我先前不是刚说我没有“捏造事实”么？那封信里举的却有。说是我说他“同杨荫榆女士有亲戚朋友的关系，并且吃了她许多酒饭”了，其实都不对。杨荫榆女士的善于请酒，我说过的，或者别人也说过，并且偶见于新闻上。现在的有些公论家，自以为中立，其实却偏，或者和事主倒有亲戚，朋友，同学，同乡，……等等关系，甚至于叨光了酒饭，我也说过的。这不是明明白白的么，报社收津贴，连同业中也互讦过，但大家仍都自称为公论。至于陈教授和杨女士是亲戚而且吃了酒饭，那是陈教授自己连结起来的，我没有说曾经吃酒饭，也不能保证未曾吃酒饭，没有说他们是亲戚，也不能保证他们不是亲戚，大概不过是同乡罢，但只要不是“某籍”，同乡有什么要紧呢。绍兴有“刑名师爷”，绍兴人便都是“刑名师爷”的例，是只适用于绍兴的人们的。
Didn't I just say before that I didn't "fabricate facts"? The letter cites it. It is actually wrong to say that I said that he "has a relative and friend relationship with Ms. Yang Yinyu and has eaten a lot of wine and food from her". Ms. Yang Yinyu's good at inviting wine, I have said, or others have said it, and I have occasionally seen it on the news. Some public opinionators nowadays think they are neutral, but in fact they are biased, or they have relatives, friends, classmates, and fellow townsmen with the victim,...... and so on, and even ran out of wine and food, I also said it. Isn't this obvious, the newspaper collects allowances, and even the industry has attacked each other, but everyone still calls themselves public opinion. As for Professor Chen and Ms. Yang being relatives and having eaten wine, it is Professor Chen himself who connects them, I did not say that they have ever had a meal, and I cannot guarantee that they have not eaten wine and dinner, I did not say that they are relatives, nor can I guarantee that they are not relatives, probably just fellow townsmen, but as long as they are not "a certain nationality", what does it matter to be in the same hometown? Shaoxing has a "criminal master", and Shaoxing people are all examples of "criminal masters", which is only applicable to people in Shaoxing.我有时泛论一般现状，而无意中触着了别人的伤疤，实在是非常抱歉的事。但这也是没法补救，除非我真去读书养气，一共廿年，被人们骗得老死牖下；或者自己甘心倒掉；或者遭了阴谋。即如上文虽然说明了他们是亲戚并不是我说的话，但因为列举的名词太多了，“同乡”两字，也足以招人“生气”，只要看自己愤然于“流言”中的“某籍”两字，就可想而知。照此看来，这一回的说“叭儿狗”（《莽原半月刊》第一期），怕又有人猜想我是指着他自己，在那里“悻悻”了。其实我不过是泛论，说社会上有神似这个东西的人，因此多说些它的主人：阔人，太监，太太，小姐。本以为这足见我是泛论了，名人们现在那里还有肯跟太监的呢，但是有些人怕仍要忽略了这一层，各各认定了其中的主人之一，而以“叭儿狗”自命。时势实在艰难，我似乎只有专讲上帝，才可以免于危险，而这事又非我所长。但是，倘使所有的只是暴戾之气，还是让它尽量发出来罢，“一群悻悻的狗”，在后面也好，在对面也好。我也知道将什么之气都放在心里，脸上笔下却全都“笑吟吟”，是极其好看的；可是掘不得，小小的挖一个洞，便什么之气都出来了。但其实这倒是真面目。
I sometimes talk about the general status quo and inadvertently touch other people's scars, which is really sorry. But this is also irreparable, unless I really go to study to cultivate my energy, for a total of twenty years, I have been deceived by people to die of old age; Or they willingly throw it away; Or they were conspiratorial. That is, although the above explains that they are relatives is not what I said, but because there are too many nouns listed, the word "fellow townsman" is enough to make people "angry". From this point of view, this time I said "Ba'er Dog" (the first issue of "Mangyuan Semi-Monthly"), I am afraid that some people will guess that I am referring to himself and "angry" there. In fact, I am just a general theory, saying that there are people in society who look like this thing, so I will talk more about its owner: broad people, eunuchs, wives, and young ladies. I thought this showed that I was generalizing, and there are still celebrities who are willing to follow the eunuchs, but some people are afraid that they will still ignore this layer, and each of them has identified one of the masters, and called themselves "Ba'er Dog". The times were really difficult, and it seemed that I could only avoid danger by talking about God, and this was not my strength. However, if all is just violent anger, let it be sent out as much as possible, "a group of angry dogs", whether behind or on the opposite side. I also know that I put all the anger in my heart, but the pen on my face is all "smiling", which is extremely good-looking; But if you can't dig a small hole, all the gas will come out. But in fact, this is the real face.第二种罪案是“近一些的一个例”，陈教授曾“泛论图书馆的重要”，“说孤桐先生在他未下台以前发表的两篇文章里，这一层‘他似乎没看到’。”我却轻轻地改为“听说孤桐先生倒是想到了这一节，曾经发表过文章，然而下台了，很可惜”了。而且还问道：“你看见吗，那刀笔吏的笔尖？”“刀笔吏”是不会有漏洞的，我却与陈教授的原文不合，所以成了罪案，或者也就不成其为“刀笔吏”了罢。《现代评论》早已不见，全文无从查考，现在就据这一回的话，敬谨改正，为“据说孤桐先生在未下台以前发表的文章里竟也没想到；现在又下了台，目前无法补救了，很可惜”罢。这里附带地声明，我的文字中，大概是用别人的原文用引号，举大意用“据说”，述听来的类似“流言”的用“听说”，和《晨报》大将文例不相同。
The second type of crime is "a recent example", Professor Chen once "talked about the importance of libraries", "said that in the two articles published by Mr. Gutong before he stepped down, this layer 'he didn't seem to see'. I gently changed it to "I heard that Mr. Gu Tong thought of this section and had published an article, but it was a pity that he stepped down." And asked: "Do you see the tip of the pen clerk?" There will be no loopholes in the "knife and pen official", but I do not agree with Professor Chen's original text, so it has become a crime, or it will not be a "knife and pen official". "Modern Review" has long been gone, and the full text cannot be checked, and now according to this time, it is respectfully corrected, for "It is said that Mr. Gu Tong did not expect it in the article published before he stepped down; Now that he has stepped down, it is a pity that it cannot be remedied at present." Incidentally, I would like to state that in my text, I probably use quotation marks in other people's original texts, use "supposedly" to give the general idea, and use "heard" to describe similar "rumors", which is different from the general sentence of the "Morning Post".第三种罪案是关于我说“北大教授兼京师图书馆副馆长月薪至少五六百元的李四光”的事，据说已告了一年的假，假期内不支薪，副馆长的月薪又不过二百五十元。别一张《晨副》上又有本人的声明，话也差不多，不过说月薪确有五百元，只是他“只拿二百五十元”，其余的“捐予图书馆购买某种书籍”了。此外还给我许多忠告，这使我非常感谢，但愿意奉还“文士”的称号，我是不属于这一类的。只是我以为告假和辞职不同，无论支薪与否，教授也仍然是教授，这是不待“刀笔吏”才能知道的。至于图书馆的月薪，我确信李教授（或副馆长）现在每月“只拿二百五十元”的现钱，是美国那面的；中国这面的一半，真说不定要拖欠到什么时候才有。但欠帐究竟也是钱，别人的兼差，大抵多是欠帐，连一半现钱也没有，可是早成了有些论客的口实了，虽然其缺点是在不肯及早捐出去。我想，如果此后每月必发，而以学校欠薪作比例，中国的一半是明年的正月间会有的，倘以教育部欠俸作比例，则须十七年正月间才有，那时购买书籍来，我一定就更正，只要我还在做“官僚”，因为这容易得知，我也自信还有这样的记性，不至于今年忘了去年事。但是，倘若又被章士钊们革掉，那就莫明其妙，更正的事也只好作罢了。可是我所说的职衔和钱数，在今日却是事实。
The third crime is about Li Siguang, a professor at Peking University and deputy director of the Beijing Normal Library, who has a monthly salary of at least five or six hundred yuan, and is said to have taken a year's leave, and the monthly salary of the deputy director is only 250 yuan. There is another statement of my own on the "Morning Copy", and the words are similar, but it is said that the monthly salary is indeed 500 yuan, but he "only takes 250 yuan", and the rest "donates to the library to buy some kind of book". In addition, I was given a lot of advice, which I am very grateful for, but I am willing to return the title of "scribe", to which I do not belong. It's just that I think that taking a leave of absence is different from resigning, whether paid or not, the professor is still a professor, which can only be known by the "knife and pen official". As for the monthly salary of the library, I am sure that Professor Li (or the deputy director) now "only takes 250 yuan" in cash per month, which is from the United States; Half of China's side may be in arrears until when. But the debt is also money, and most of the other people's part-time work is in debt, not even half of the cash, but it has long become the excuse of some commentators, although its disadvantage is that it refuses to donate it early. I think that if it is paid every month after that, and the school's salary arrears are used as a proportion, half of China's will be in the first month of next year, and if the Ministry of Education is used as a proportion, it will be in the first month of the seventeenth year. However, if he is dismissed by Zhang Shizhao and others, it will be incomprehensible, and the correction will have to be done. But the title and money I said are true today.第四种的罪案是……。陈源教授说，“好了，不举例了。”为什么呢？大约是因为“本来已经说不胜说”，或者是在矫正“打笔墨官司的时候，谁写得多，骂得下流，捏造得新奇就是谁的理由大”的恶习之故罢，所以就用三个例来概其全般，正如中国戏上用四个兵卒来象征十万大军一样。此后，就可以结束，漫骂——“正人君子”一定另有名称，但我不知道，只好暂用这加于“下流”人等的行为上的话——了。原文很可以做“正人君子”的真相的标本，删之可惜，扯下来粘在后面罢——
The fourth type of crime is ....... Professor Chen Yuan said, "Okay, I won't give an example." "Why? Probably because "it is already too much to say", or to correct the vice of "when fighting a lawsuit, whoever writes more, scolds vulgarly, and fabricates novelty is who has a great reason", so three examples are used to summarize the general, just as four soldiers are used in Chinese dramas to symbolize an army of 100,000. After that, you can end it and scold - "upright gentleman" must have another name, but I don't know, so I have to temporarily use this word added to the behavior of "obscene" people. The original text can be used as a specimen of the truth of "a righteous gentleman", but it is a pity to delete it, just tear it off and stick it at the back -“有人同我说，鲁迅先生缺乏的是一面大镜子，所以永远见不到他的尊容。我说他说错了。鲁迅先生的所以这样，正因为他有了一面大镜子。你听见过赵子昂——是不是他？——画马的故事罢？他要画一个姿势，就对镜伏地做出那个姿势来。鲁迅先生的文章也是对了他的大镜子写的，没有一句骂人的话不能应用在他自己的身上。要是你不信，我可以同你打一个赌。”
"Someone told me that what Mr. Lu Xun lacks is a big mirror, so he will never see his dignity. I said he was wrong. Mr. Lu Xun is like this because he has a big mirror. Have you heard of Zhao Ziang - is it him? ——The story of the horse? If he wants to draw a pose, he will make that pose in front of the mirror. Mr. Lu Xun's article was also written in his big mirror, and there was not a single scolding word that could not be applied to himself. If you don't believe me, I can make a bet with you. ”这一段意思很了然，犹言我写马则自己就是马，写狗自己就是狗，说别人的缺点就是自己的缺点，写法兰斯自己就是法兰斯，说“臭毛厕”自己就是臭毛厕，说别人和杨荫榆女士同乡，就是自己和她同乡。赵子昂也实在可笑，要画马，看看真马就够了，何必定作畜生的姿势；他终于还是人，并不沦入马类，总算是侥幸的。不过赵子昂也是“某籍”，所以这也许还是一种“流言”，或自造，或那时的“正人君子”所造都说不定。这只能看作一种无稽之谈。倘若陈源教授似的信以为真，自己也照样做，则写法兰斯的时候坐下做一个法姿势，讲“孤桐先生”的时候立起作一个孤姿势，倒还堂哉皇哉；可是讲“粪车”也就得伏地变成粪车，说“毛厕”即须翻身充当便所，未免连臭架子也有些失掉罢，虽然肚子里本来满是这样的货色。
The meaning of this paragraph is very clear, just like saying that I write a horse and I am a horse, I write a dog myself is a dog, say that other people's shortcomings are my own shortcomings, write that France is France, say that "stinky toilet" is a stinky toilet, say that others are from the same hometown as Ms. Yang Yinyu, that is, I am from the same hometown as her. Zhao Ziang is also really ridiculous, if you want to draw a horse, it is enough to see a real horse, why must you be in the pose of a beast; He was finally still a human being, and he did not fall into the category of horses, which was finally a fluke. However, Zhao Ziang is also a "certain nationality", so this may still be a kind of "rumor", or self-made, or it may be created by the "upright gentleman" at that time. This can only be seen as nonsense. If Professor Chen Yuan believes it to be true and does the same, then when writing about France, he sits down and makes a Dharma posture, and when he talks about "Mr. Gutong", he stands up in a solitary posture, which is still dignified; However, when it comes to "dung trucks", they have to lie on the ground and become dung trucks, and when they say "toilets", they have to turn over and act as toilets, and even the stinky shelf is a little lost, although the stomach is full of such goods.“不是有一次一个报馆访员称我们为‘文士’吗？鲁迅先生为了那名字几乎笑掉了牙。可是后来某报天天鼓吹他是‘思想界的权威者’他倒又不笑了。
"Didn't a newspaper visitor once call us 'scribes'? Mr. Lu Xun almost laughed out his teeth for that name. But later, a certain newspaper advocated that he was an 'authority in the intellectual world', and he stopped laughing.“他没有一篇文章里不放几枝冷箭，但是他自己常常的说人‘放冷箭’，并且说‘放冷箭’是卑劣的行为。
"He didn't put a few cold arrows in his article, but he often said that people 'put cold arrows' and said that 'putting cold arrows' was a despicable act.“他常常‘散布流言’和‘捏造事实’，如上面举出来的几个例，但是他自己又常常的骂人‘散布流言’‘捏造事实’，并且承认那样是‘下流’。
"He often 'spreads rumors' and 'fabricates facts', as in the examples given above, but he himself often scolds people for 'spreading rumors' and 'fabricating facts', and admits that it is 'obscene'.“他常常的无故骂人，要是那人生气，他就说人家没有‘幽默’。可是要是有人侵犯了他一言半语，他就跳到半天空，骂得你体无完肤——还不肯罢休。”
"He often scolds people for no reason, and if that person is angry, he will say that they don't have 'humor'. But if someone violates him for a word, he will jump into the sky and scold you until you are completely untouched - and will not give up. ”这是根据了三条例和一个赵子昂故事的结论。其实是称别个为“文士”我也笑，称我为“思想界的权威者”我也笑，但牙却并非“笑掉”，据说是“打掉”的，这较可以使他们快意些。至于“思想界的权威者”等等，我连夜梦里也没有想做过，无奈我和“鼓吹”的人不相识，无从劝止他，不像唱双簧的朋友，可以彼此心照；况且自然会有“文士”来骂倒，更无须自己费力。我也不想借这些头衔去发财发福，有了它于实利上是并无什么好处的。我也曾反对过将自己的小说采入教科书，怕的是教错了青年，记得曾在报上发表；不过这本不是对上流人说的，他们当然不知道。冷箭呢，先是不肯的，后来也放过几枝，但总是对于先“放冷箭”用“流言”的如陈源教授之辈，“请君入瓮”，也给他尝尝这滋味。不过虽然对于他们，也还是明说的时候多，例如《语丝》上的《音乐》就说明是指徐志摩先生，《我的籍和系》和《并非闲话》也分明对西滢即陈源教授而发；此后也还要射，并无悔祸之心。至于署名，则去年以来只用一个，就是陈教授之所谓“鲁迅，即教育部佥事周树人”就是。但在下半年，应将“教育部佥事”五字删去，因为被“孤桐先生”所革；今年却又变了“暂署佥事”了，还未去做，然而豫备去做的，目的是在弄几文俸钱，因为我祖宗没有遗产，老婆没有奁田，文章又不值钱，只好以此暂且糊口。还有一个小目的，是在对于以我去年的免官为“痛快”者，给他一个不舒服，使他恨得扒耳搔腮，忍不住露出本相。至于“流言”，则先已说过，正是陈源教授首先发明的专卖品，独有他听到过许多；在我呢，心术是看不见的东西，且勿说，我的躲在家里的生活即不利于作“捏……言”的枢纽。剩下的只有“幽默”问题了，我又没有说过这些话，也没有主张过“幽默”，也许将这两字连写，今天还算第一回。我对人是“骂人”，人对我是“侵犯了一言半语”，这真使我记起我的同乡“刑名师爷”来，而且还是弄着不正经的“出重出轻”的玩意儿的时候。这样看来，一面镜子确是该有的，无论生在那一县。还有罪状哩——
This is based on the conclusion of the Three Regulations and a story of Zhao Ziang. In fact, I laugh when I call others "scribes", and I laugh when I call myself "authorities in the intellectual world", but the teeth are not "laughed off", it is said that they are "knocked out", which can make them happy. As for the "authority in the ideological world", etc., I didn't even want to do it in my dreams overnight, but I didn't know the person who "advocated", and I couldn't dissuade him. Moreover, there will naturally be "scribes" to scold down, and there is no need to work hard. I don't want to use these titles to get rich and fortune, and there is no benefit in terms of practical benefits with them. I also opposed the inclusion of my novels in textbooks, fearing that I would teach the wrong young people, and I remember that I had published them in the newspaper; But this is not for the upper class, of course they don't know. As for the cold arrows, he refused at first, and then let go of a few sticks, but he always "put cold arrows" and used "rumors" like Professor Chen Yuan, "invite you into the urn", and also gave him a taste of this. For example, "Music" on "Yusi" explains that it refers to Mr. Xu Zhimo, and "My Origin and Department" and "Not Gossip" are also clearly issued to Xi Ying, that is, Professor Chen Yuan; After that, I still have to shoot, and I have no regrets. As for the signature, only one has been used since last year, which is Professor Chen's so-called "Lu Xun, that is, Zhou Shuren, assistant director of the Ministry of Education". However, in the second half of the year, the five words "assistant to the Ministry of Education" should be deleted because it was dismissed by "Mr. Gutong"; This year, it has changed to "temporary assistants", and I haven't done it yet, but I am prepared to do it, the purpose is to get a few cents of salary, because my ancestors have no inheritance, my wife has no dowry, and the article is not worth it, so I have to make a living for the time being. There is also a small purpose, which is to give him an uncomfortable feeling for those who are "happy" with my dismissal last year, so that he hates it and scratches his cheeks, and can't help but show his true nature. As for "rumors", it has been said that it was the monopoly invented by Professor Chen Yuan first, and he has heard a lot of it; For me, the mind is something invisible, and not to mention, my life of hiding at home is not conducive to "pinching...... The hub of the language. The only thing left is the issue of "humor", I have not said these words, nor have I advocated "humor", maybe I will write these two words together, today is the first time. I "scolded" people, and people "violated a word and a half" to me, which really reminded me of my fellow townsman "Master of Criminal Names", and it was also when I was playing improper "heavy and light" things. In this way, a mirror is indeed what it should be, no matter which county it is born in. And the charges—“他常常挖苦别人家抄袭。有一个学生钞了沫若的几句诗，他老先生骂得刻骨镂心的痛快，可是他自己的《中国小说史略》，却就是根据日本人盐谷温的《支那文学概论讲话》里面的‘小说’一部分。其实拿人家的著述做你自己的蓝本，本可以原谅，只要你在书中有那样的声明，可是鲁迅先生就没有那样的声明。在我们看来，你自己做了不正当的事也就罢了，何苦再去挖苦一个可怜的学生，可是他还尽量的把人家刻薄。‘窃钩者诛，窃国者侯’，本是自古已有的道理。”
He often sarcastically criticized other people's plagiarism. A student copied a few lines of Mo Ruo's poems, and his old gentleman scolded him heart-wrenchingly, but his own "Brief History of Chinese Novels" was based on the 'novel' part of the "Speech on Introduction to Chinese Literature" by the Japanese Shiotani Wen. In fact, you can be forgiven for using other people's writings as your own blueprint, as long as you have such a statement in the book, but Mr. Lu Xun does not have such a statement. In our opinion, it's okay if you have done something improper yourself, why bother to sarcastic a poor student, but he still tries his best to be mean to others. 'Those who steal the hook will be punished, and those who steal the country will be marquised', which has been a truth since ancient times. ”这“流言”早听到过了；后来见于《闲话》，说是“整大本的摽窃”，但不直指我，而同时有些人的口头上，却相传是指我的《中国小说史略》。我相信陈源教授是一定会干这样勾当的。但他既不指名，我也就只回敬他一通骂街，这可实在不止“侵犯了他一言半语”。这回说出来了；我的“以小人之心”也没有猜错了“君子之腹”。但那罪名却改为“做你自己的蓝本”了，比先前轻得多，仿佛比自谦为“一言半语”的“冷箭”钝了一点似的。盐谷氏的书，确是我的参考书之一，我的《小说史略》二十八篇的第二篇，是根据它的，还有论《红楼梦》的几点和一张《贾氏系图》，也是根据它的，但不过是大意，次序和意见就很不同。其他二十六篇，我都有我独立的准备，证据是和他的所说还时常相反。例如现有的汉人小说，他以为真，我以为假；唐人小说的分类他据森槐南，我却用我法。六朝小说他据《汉魏丛书》，我据别本及自己的辑本，这工夫曾经费去两年多，稿本有十册在这里；唐人小说他据谬误最多的《唐人说荟》，我是用《太平广记》的，此外还一本一本搜起来……。其余分量，取舍，考证的不同，尤难枚举。自然，大致是不能不同的，例如他说汉后有唐，唐后有宋，我也这样说，因为都以中国史实为“蓝本”。我无法“捏造得新奇”，虽然塞文狄斯的事实和“四书”合成的时代也不妨创造。但我的意见，却以为似乎不可，因为历史和诗歌小说是两样的。诗歌小说虽有人说同是天才即不妨所见略同，所作相像，但我以为究竟也以独创为贵；历史则是纪事，固然不当偷成书，但也不必全两样。说诗歌小说相类不妨，历史有几点近似便是“摽窃”，那是“正人君子”的特别意见，只在以“一言半语”“侵犯”“鲁迅先生”时才适用的。好在盐谷氏的书听说（！）已有人译成（？）中文，两书的异点如何，怎样“整大本的摽窃”，还是做“蓝本”，不久（？）就可以明白了。在这以前，我以为恐怕连陈源教授自己也不知道这些底细，因为不过是听来的“耳食之言”。不知道对不对？（盐谷教授的《支那文学概论讲话》的译本，今年夏天看见了，将五百余页的原书，译成了薄薄的一本，那小说一部分，和我的也无从对比了。广告上却道“选译”。措辞实在聪明得很。十月十四日补记。）
This "rumor" has been heard a long time ago; Later, I saw it in "Gossip", saying that it was "the theft of the whole book", but it did not point directly at me, and at the same time, some people verbally said that it was referring to my "Brief History of Chinese Novels". I believe that Professor Chen Yuan will definitely do this. But he didn't name him, so I only scolded him in return, which was really more than "infringing on his words". This time it was said; My "heart of a villain" did not guess the "belly of a gentleman" wrong. But the charge was changed to "be your own blueprint", which was much lighter than before, as if it was a little duller than the "cold arrow" that humbly said "a word and a half". Shioya's book is indeed one of my reference books, and the second of the twenty-eight chapters of my "Brief History of Novels" is based on it, as well as a few points on "Dream of Red Mansions" and a "Jia Family Map", which is also based on it, but it is just a general idea, and the order and opinions are very different. In the other twenty-six articles, I have my own independent preparations, and the evidence is often contrary to what he said. For example, in the existing Han novels, he thought it was true, and I thought it was false; The classification of Tang novels is based on Sen Huainan, but I use my method. The novels of the Six Dynasties are based on the "Han and Wei Series", and I am based on other books and my own editions, which took more than two years, and there are ten volumes of manuscripts here; According to the most fallacious Tang novels, I used "Taiping Guangji", and I searched for them one by one, ....... The other weights, trade-offs, and differences in research are especially difficult to enumerate. For example, he said that there was Tang after the Han Dynasty and Song after the Tang Dynasty, and I also said the same, because they were all based on Chinese historical facts. I can't "fabricate novelty", although the era of the synthesis of Severdis' facts and the "Four Books" might as well be created. But my opinion seems impossible, because history and poetry novels are two different things. Although some people say that the same genius is the same, it may be better to see the same thing and do the same, but I think originality is the most important in the end; History is a chronicle, and of course it should not be stolen into a book, but it doesn't have to be both. It is okay to say that poetry and novels are similar, but there are several similarities in history that are "plagiarism", which is the special opinion of "upright gentlemen", which is only applicable when it is "a word and a half", "infringement" and "Mr. Lu Xun". Fortunately, I heard about Shioya's book (!) It has been translated into (?) Chinese, what are the differences between the two books, how to "steal the whole book", or make a "blueprint", soon (?) You can understand. Before this, I thought that even Professor Chen Yuan himself did not know these details, because it was just a "word of ear food". I don't know, right? (I saw a translation of Professor Shioya's "Speech on Introduction to Chinese Literature" this summer, and the original book of more than 500 pages was translated into a thin one, and part of the novel was incomparable to mine.) The advertisement says "selected translation". The wording is really clever. October 14 supplement. ）但我还要对于“一个学生钞了沫若的几句诗”这事说几句话；“骂得刻骨镂心的痛快”的，似乎并不是我。因为我于诗向不留心，所以也没有看过“沫若的诗”，因此即更不知道别人的是否钞袭。陈源教授的那些话，说得坏一点，就是“捏造事实”，故意挑拨别人对我的恶感，真可以说发挥着他的真本领。说得客气一点呢，他自说写这信时是在“发热”，那一定是热度太高，发了昏，忘记装腔了，不幸显出本相；并且因为自己爬着，所以觉得我“跳到半天空”，自己抓破了皮肤或者一向就破着，却以为被我“骂”破了。——但是，我在有意或无意中碰破了一角纸糊绅士服，那也许倒是有的；此后也保不定。彼此迎面而来，总不免要挤擦，碰磕，也并非“还不肯罢休”。
But I also want to say a few words about "a student paid for a few poems by Moruo"; It doesn't seem to be me who "scolds so painfully". Because I don't pay attention to poetry, I haven't read "Moruo's poems", so I don't know if others have plundered it. Professor Chen Yuan's words, to put it worse, are "fabricating facts" and deliberately provoking others' bad feelings towards me, which can really be said to be his true ability. To put it mildly, he said that he was "feverish" when he wrote this letter, which must have been too hot, he was faint, he forgot to pretend, and unfortunately showed his true nature; And because I was crawling, I felt that I "jumped into the air", scratched my skin or had always broken, but I thought I was "scolded" for breaking. ——But I accidentally or unintentionally broke a corner of papier-mâché gentleman's suit, which may be true; After that, it is uncertain. When they come face to face, they will inevitably have to squeeze and bump, and it is not that they "refuse to give up".绅士的跳踉丑态，实在特别好看，因为历来隐藏蕴蓄着，所以一来就比下等人更浓厚。因这一回的放泄，我才悟到陈源教授大概是以为揭发叔华女士的剽窃小说图画的文章，也是我做的，所以早就将“大盗”两字挂在“冷箭”上，射向“思想界的权威者”。殊不知这也不是我做的，我并不看这些小说。“琵亚词侣”的画，我是爱看的，但是没有书，直到那“剽窃”问题发生后，才刺激我去买了一本Art of A.Beardsley来，化钱一元七。可怜教授的心目中所看见的并不是我的影，叫跳竟都白费了。遇见的“粪车”，也是境由心造的，正是自己脑子里的货色，要吐的唾沫，还是静静的咽下去罢。
The ugliness of a gentleman's jumping and stagnation is really beautiful, because it has always been hidden, so it is stronger than that of inferior people. Because of this venting, I realized that Professor Chen Yuan probably thought that the article exposing Ms. Shuhua's plagiarized novel pictures was also done by me, so he had already hung the word "big thief" on the "cold arrow" and shot it at the "authority in the intellectual world". As everyone knows, this is not what I did, I don't read these novels. I love to read the paintings of "Pia Poets", but there are no books, and it wasn't until the "plagiarism" problem that I was stimulated to buy a copy of Art of A. Beardsley for one yuan and seven. What the poor professor saw in his mind was not my shadow, and the jump was in vain. The "dung truck" I met was also created by the heart, it was the color of the goods in my head, and the saliva I wanted to spit out was still swallowed quietly.太费纸张了，虽然我不至于娇贵到会发热，但也得赶紧的收梢。然而还得粘上一段大罪状——
It's too paper-consuming, although I'm not so delicate that I get hot, but I have to finish it quickly. However, there is still a major crime -“据他自己的自传，他从民国元年便做了教育部的官，从没脱离过。所以袁世凯称帝，他在教育部，曹锟贿选，他在教育部，‘代表无耻的彭允彝，做总长，他也在教育部，甚而至于‘代表无耻的章士钊’免了他的职后，他还大嚷‘佥事这一个官儿倒也并不算怎样的“区区”’，怎样有人在那里钻谋补他的缺，怎样以为无足轻重的人是‘慷他人之慨’，如是如是，这样这样……这像‘青年叛徒的领袖’吗？
According to his own autobiography, he has been an official of the Ministry of Education since the first year of the Republic of China and has never left it. Therefore, Yuan Shikai was called emperor, he was in the Ministry of Education, Cao Kun bribed the election, he was in the Ministry of Education, 'on behalf of the shameless Peng Yunyi, as the chief minister, he was also in the Ministry of Education, and even after 'the shameless Zhang Shizhao' was dismissed from his position, he also shouted that 'this official is not a 'mere 'merit'', how can someone be there to make up for his shortcomings, how can he think that an insignificant person is 'generous to others', so yes, so and so...... Is this like the 'leader of the young traitors'?“其实一个人做官也不大要紧，做了官再装出这样的面孔来可叫人有些恶心吧了。
"In fact, it doesn't matter if a person is an official, and it is a little disgusting to pretend to be an official and then put on such a face.“现在又有人送他‘土匪’的名号了。好一个‘土匪’。”
"Now someone has given him the name of 'bandit' again. What a 'bandit'. ”苦心孤诣给我加了上去的“土匪”的恶名，这一回忽又否认了，可见唾沫还是静静的咽下去好，免得后来自己舐回去。但是，“文士”别有慧心，那里会给我便宜呢，自然即代以自“袁世凯称帝”以来的罪恶，仿佛“称帝”“贿选”那类事，我既在教育部，即等于全由我一手包办似的。这是真的，从那时以来，我确没有带兵独立过，但我也没有冷笑云南起义，也没有希望国民军失败；对于教育部，其实是脱离过两回，一是张勋复辟时，一就是章士钊长部时，前一回以教授的一点才力自然不知道，后一回却忘却得有些离奇。我向来就“装出这样的面孔”，不但毫不顾忌陈源教授可“有些恶心”，对于“孤桐先生”也一样。要在我的面孔上寻出些有趣来，本来是没头脑的妄想，还是去看别的面孔罢。
The notoriety of "bandit" that painstakingly added to me was suddenly denied this time, so it can be seen that it is better to swallow the saliva quietly, so as not to lick it back later. However, the "scribe" has a different wisdom, and he will give me a bargain there, so he will naturally replace the sins since "Yuan Shikai became emperor", as if "calling himself emperor" and "bribing elections", since I am in the Ministry of Education, it is equivalent to me taking care of it all by myself. This is true, since then, I have indeed not led troops to become independent, but I did not sneer at the Yunnan uprising, nor did I hope that the Nationalist army would fail; For the Ministry of Education, it has actually been separated from twice, one is when Zhang Xun was restored, and the other is when Zhang Shizhao was the chief of the department. I have always "put on such a face", not only is Professor Chen Yuan "a little disgusting", but the same is true for "Mr. Gutong". To find something interesting in my face, it was originally a mindless delusion, or to look at other faces.这类误解似乎不止陈源教授，有些人也往往如此，以为教员清高，官僚是卑下的。真所谓“得意忘形”，“官僚官僚”的骂着。可悲的就在此，现在的骂官僚的人里面，到外国去炸大过一回而且做教员的就很多：所谓“钻谋补他的缺”的也就是这一流，那时我说“佥事这一个官儿倒也并不算怎样的‘区区’”，就为此人的乘机想做官而发，刺他一针，聊且快意，不提防竟又被陈教授“刻骨镂心”的记住了，也许又疑心我向他在“放冷箭”了罢。
This kind of misunderstanding seems to be not only Professor Chen Yuan, but also some people, thinking that the faculty is noble and the bureaucracy is lowly. The so-called "getting carried away" and scolding "bureaucrats and bureaucrats". The sad thing is that among the people who scold the bureaucrats now, there are many who go abroad to blow up once and become instructors: the so-called "drilling to make up for his shortcomings" is this class, at that time I said, "This official is not a 'mere 'mere'", so I took the opportunity to be an official, stabbed him, chatted and was happy, and I was not caught off guard and was remembered by Professor Chen "heart-wrenching", maybe I was suspicious that I had "fired cold arrows" at him.我并非因为自己是官僚，定要上侪于清高的教授之列，官僚的高下也因人而异，如所谓“孤桐先生”，做官时办《甲寅》，佩服的人就很多，下台之后，听说更有生气了。而我“下台”时所做的文章，岂不是不但并不更有生气，还招了陈源教授的一顿“教训”，而且罪孽深重，延祸“面孔”了么？这是以文才和面孔言；至于从别一方面看，则官僚与教授就有“一丘之貉”之叹，这就是说：钱的来源。国家行政机关的事务官所得的所谓俸钱，国立学校的教授所得的所谓薪水，还不是同一来源，出于国库的么？在曹锟政府下做国立学校的教员，和做官的没有大区别。难道教员的是捐给了学校，所以特别清高了？袁世凯称帝时代，陈源教授或者还在外国的研究室里，是到了曹锟贿选前后才做教授的，比我到北京迟得多，福气也比我好得多。曹锟贿选，他做教授，“代表无耻的彭允彝做总长”，他做教授，“甚而至于‘代表无耻的章士钊’做总长”，他自然做教授，我可是被革掉了，甚而至于待到那“甚而至于‘代表无耻的章士钊’”不做总长了，他自然还做教授，归国以来，一帆风顺，一个小钉子也没有碰。这当然是因为有适宜的面孔，不“叫人有些恶心”之故喽。看他脸上既无我一样的可厌的“八字胡子”，也可以说没有“官僚的神情”，所以对于他的面孔，却连我也并没有什么大“恶心”，而且仿佛还觉得有趣。这一类的面孔，只要再白胖一点，也许在中国就不可多得了。
I am not a bureaucrat, I must be among the high-ranking professors, and the level of bureaucrats also varies from person to person, such as the so-called "Mr. Gu Tong", when he was an official, he ran "Jia Yin", and there were many people who admired him, and after stepping down, he heard that he was even more angry. And the article I made when I "stepped down" was not only not more lively, but also attracted a "lesson" from Professor Chen Yuan, and the sin was deep, and the disaster was "face"? This is to speak with literary talent and face; As for looking at it from another aspect, bureaucrats and professors have a sigh of "a hill of raccoon", which means that the source of money. Aren't the so-called salaries of the officials of state administrative organs and the so-called salaries of professors of state schools not from the same source and from the national treasury? Being a teacher in a national school under the Cao Kun government is not much different from being an official. Could it be that the teachers donated to the school, so they are particularly high-minded? When Yuan Shikai was emperor, Professor Chen Yuan was still in a foreign research laboratory, and he only became a professor before and after Cao Kun's bribery election, which was much later than me in Beijing, and the blessings were much better than mine. Cao Kun bribed the election, he became a professor, "on behalf of the shameless Peng Yunyi as the president", he was a professor, "and even 'Zhang Shizhao on behalf of the shameless' as the president", he was naturally a professor, but I was dismissed, and even until "even 'Zhang Shizhao, who represents the shameless'" did not become the president, he naturally became a professor, and since returning to China, it has been smooth sailing, and not a small nail has been touched. Of course, this is because there is a suitable face, not "a little disgusting". Seeing that he doesn't have the same disgusting "mustache" as me, it can be said that he doesn't have a "bureaucratic look", so even I don't have a big "disgust" about his face, and it seems to be funny. This kind of face, as long as it is a little fatter, may be rare in China.不免招我说几句费话的不过是他对镜装成的姿势和“爆发”出来的蕴蓄，但又即刻掩了起来，关上大门，据说“大约不再打这样的笔墨官司”了。前面的香车既经杳然，我且不做叫门的事，因为这些时候所遇到的大概不过几个家丁；而且已是往“国立北京女子师范大学复校纪念会”的时候了，就这样的算收束。
I can't help but say a few words about his posture in the mirror and the accumulation that "exploded", but he immediately covered it up and closed the door, and it is said that "there will be no more lawsuits like this". Since the incense car in front of me has been gone, I won't do anything to call the door, because there are probably only a few servants I encounter at these times; And it is already time to go to the "National Beijing Women's Normal University Resumption Commemorative Meeting", so it will be counted as a restraint.二月一日。
February 1st.

我还不能“带住”

我还不能“带住”

我还不能“带住”

I can't "take it" yet一月三十日《晨报副刊》上满载着一些东西，现在有人称它为“攻周专号”，真是些有趣的玩意儿，倒可以看见绅士的本色。不知怎的，今天的《晨副》忽然将这事结束，照例用通信，李四光教授开场白，徐志摩“诗哲”接后段，一唱一和，说道“带住！让我们对着混斗的双方猛喝一声，带住！”了。还“声明一句，本刊此后不登载对人攻击的文字”云。
The "Morning News Supplement" on January 30 was full of something, and now some people call it "Attack Weekly Special Number", which is really an interesting thing, but you can see the true nature of a gentleman. Somehow, today's "Morning Vice" suddenly ended this matter, using communication as usual, Professor Li Siguang opened the speech, Xu Zhimo's "Shi Zhe" took over the latter part, sang and harmonized, and said, "Bring it!" Let's shout at both sides of the melee, take it! "It's over. It also "declares that this journal will not publish the text of attacks on people in the future."他们的什么“闲话……闲话”问题，本与我没有什么鸟相干，“带住”也好，放开也好，拉拢也好，自然大可以随便玩把戏。但是，前几天不是因为“令兄”关系，连我的“面孔”都攻击过了么？我本没有去“混斗”，倒是株连了我。现在我还没有怎样开口呢，怎么忽然又要“带住”了？从绅士们看来，这自然不过是“侵犯”了我“一言半语”，正无须“跳到半天空”，然而我其实也并没有“跳到半天空”，只是还不能这样地谨听指挥，你要“带住”了，我也就“带住”。
What "gossip" about them...... The "gossip" question has nothing to do with me, whether it is "leading", letting go, or winning over, naturally you can play tricks casually. However, didn't you attack my "face" a few days ago because of the relationship between "brother Ling"? I didn't go to the "fight", but it implicated me. I haven't opened my mouth yet, why do I suddenly have to "take it" again? From the perspective of the gentlemen, this is naturally just a "violation" of my "word and a half", and there is no need to "jump to half the sky", but I actually did not "jump into the sky", but I can't listen to the command so carefully, you have to "take it", I will "take it".对不起，那些文字我无心细看，“诗哲”所说的要点，似乎是这样闹下去，要失了大学教授的体统，丢了“负有指导青年重责的前辈”的丑，使学生不相信，青年不耐烦了。可怜可怜，有臭赶紧遮起来。“负有指导青年重责的前辈”，有这么多的丑可丢，有那么多的丑怕丢么？用绅士服将“丑”层层包裹，装着好面孔，就是教授，就是青年的导师么？中国的青年不要高帽皮袍，装腔作势的导师；要并无伪饰，——倘没有，也得少有伪饰的导师。倘有戴着假面，以导师自居的，就得叫他除下来，否则，便将它撕下来，互相撕下来。撕得鲜血淋漓，臭架子打得粉碎，然后可以谈后话。这时候，即使只值半文钱，却是真价值；即使丑得要使人“恶心”，却是真面目。略一揭开，便又赶忙装进缎子盒里去，虽然可以使人疑是钻石，也可以猜作粪土，纵使外面满贴着好招牌，法兰斯呀，萧伯讷呀，……毫不中用的！
I'm sorry, I don't want to read those words carefully, the main points said by "Shi Zhe" seem to continue like this, losing the style of a university professor, losing the ugliness of "seniors who have the heavy responsibility of guiding young people", making students not believe and young people impatient. Poor thing, if there is a smell, quickly cover it up. "Seniors who have the heavy responsibility of guiding young people", there are so many ugliness to lose, so much ugliness to lose? Wrapping the "ugly" layer by layer in a gentleman's uniform and putting a good face on it, is it a professor, a mentor to young people? Chinese youth do not wear high hats and leather robes, and pretend to be mentors; There must be no disguise,—— and if not, there must be few disguised mentors. If someone wears a mask and claims to be a mentor, they must be asked to remove it, otherwise, they will tear it off and tear each other off. Tear it up bloody, beat the stinky rack to pieces, and then you can talk about it. At this time, even if it is only worth half a penny, it is the real value; Even if it is ugly to make people "disgusting", it is the true face. After opening it slightly, it was hurriedly put into a satin box, although it could be suspected to be a diamond, or it could be guessed as dung, even if it was full of good signs, France, Shaw,...... It's useless!李四光教授先劝我“十年读书十年养气”。还一句绅士话罢：盛意可感。书是读过的，不止十年，气也养过的，不到十年，可是读也读不好，养也养不好。我是李教授所早认为应当“投畀豺虎”者之一，此时本已不必温言劝谕，说什么“弄到人家无故受累”，难道真以为自己是“公理”的化身，判我以这样巨罚之后，还要我叩谢天恩么？还有，李教授以为我“东方文学家的风味，似乎格外的充足，……所以总要写到露骨到底，才尽他的兴会。”我自己的意见却绝不同。我正因为生在东方，而且生在中国，所以“中庸”“稳妥”的余毒，还沦肌浃髓，比起法国的勃罗亚——他简直称大报的记者为“蛆虫”——来，真是“小巫见大巫”，使我自惭究竟不及白人之毒辣勇猛。即以李教授的事为例罢：一，因为我知道李教授是科学家，不很“打笔墨官司”的，所以只要可以不提，便不提；只因为要回敬贵会友一杯酒，这才说出“兼差”的事来。二，关于兼差和薪水一节，已在《语丝》（六五）上答复了，但也还没有“写到露骨到底”。
Professor Li Siguang first advised me to "study for ten years and cultivate qi". Another gentleman's words: the enthusiasm is touching. Books have been read, not only for ten years, but also for ten years, but they can't read well, and they can't be raised well. I am one of the people who Professor Li has long believed that I should "vote for the jackals and tigers", and at this time, there is no need to gently persuade me, saying that "people are burdened for no reason", do you really think that you are the embodiment of "justice", and after sentencing me to such a huge punishment, do you still want me to thank God? Also, Professor Li thought that my "oriental writer's flavor seems to be particularly sufficient,...... Therefore, he always has to write to the end to make his best of interest. "My own opinion is absolutely different. It is precisely because I was born in the East and in China that the residual poison of "moderation" and "prudence" has also become muscle-soaked, compared to the French Broia - who simply called the reporters of the big newspapers "maggots" - it is really a "little witch", which makes me ashamed that I am not as vicious and brave as the white people. Let's take Professor Li's case as an example: First, because I know that Professor Li is a scientist and does not "fight lawsuits", so as long as I can not mention it, I will not mention it; Only because I want to return a glass of wine to my friends, I say the thing of "part-time work". Second, the section on part-time work and salary has been replied to in the "Silk of Words" (65), but it has not yet been "written to the end".我自己也知道，在中国，我的笔要算较为尖刻的，说话有时也不留情面。但我又知道人们怎样地用了公理正义的美名，正人君子的徽号，温良敦厚的假脸，流言公论的武器，吞吐曲折的文字，行私利己，使无刀无笔的弱者不得喘息。倘使我没有这笔，也就是被欺侮到赴诉无门的一个；我觉悟了，所以要常用，尤其是用于使麒麟皮下露出马脚。万一那些虚伪者居然觉得一点痛苦，有些省悟，知道技俩也有穷时，少装些假面目，则用了陈源教授的话来说，就是一个“教训”。只要谁露出真价值来，即使只值半文，我决不敢轻薄半句。但是，想用了串戏的方法来哄骗，那是不行的；我知道的，不和你们来敷衍。
I myself know that in China, my pen is more sharp, and I sometimes speak mercilessly. But I also know how people use the reputation of justice and justice, the emblem of a righteous gentleman, the false face of gentleness and honesty, the weapon of gossip, the tortuous words, and the self-interest, so that the weak without a knife or pen cannot breathe. If I don't have this, I will be bullied to the point where I have no way to sue; I am enlightened, so I use it frequently, especially to make the unicorn's feet exposed under the skin. In case those hypocrites actually feel a little pain, some realization, and know that their skills are also poor, they pretend to be less pretended, in the words of Professor Chen Yuan, it is a "lesson". As long as whoever reveals his true value, even if it is only worth half a penny, I will never dare to take half a sentence lightly. However, if you want to use the method of string play to coax, that is not possible; I know, I won't be perfunctory with you.“诗哲”为援助陈源教授起见，似乎引过罗曼罗兰的话，大意是各人的身上都有鬼，但人却只知道打别人身上的鬼。没有细看，说不清了，要是差不多，那就是一并承认了陈源教授的身上也有鬼，李四光教授自然也难逃。他们先前是自以为没有鬼的。假使真知道了自己身上也有鬼，“带住”的事可就容易办了。只要不再串戏，不再摆臭架子，忘却了你们的教授的头衔，且不做指导青年的前辈，将你们的“公理”的旗插到“粪车”上去，将你们的绅士衣装抛到“臭毛厕”里去，除下假面具，赤条条地站出来说几句真话就够了！
In order to assist Professor Chen Yuan, "Shi Zhe" seems to have quoted Romain Rolland's words, to the effect that everyone has ghosts in their bodies, but people only know how to beat ghosts on others. If it is almost the same, it is also admitted that Professor Chen Yuan also has ghosts, and Professor Li Siguang naturally cannot escape. They used to think they didn't have ghosts. If you really know that you also have a ghost in your body, it will be easy to "bring it". As long as you stop squatting, no longer put on a stinky show, forget your title as a professor, and don't be a senior who guides young people, put your "axioms" on the "dung truck", throw your gentleman's costumes into the "stinky toilet", take off your masks, and stand up naked and say a few words of truth!二月三日。
February 3rd.

送灶日漫笔

送灶日漫笔

送灶日漫笔

Send the stove day to the pen坐听着远远近近的爆竹声，知道灶君先生们都在陆续上天，向玉皇大帝讲他的东家的坏话去了，但是他大概终于没有讲，否则，中国人一定比现在要更倒楣。
Sitting and listening to the sound of firecrackers far and near, I knew that the Kitchen Lords were going to heaven one after another to tell the Jade Emperor bad things about his owner, but he probably didn't say it in the end, otherwise, the Chinese would be more unlucky than they are now.灶君升天的那日，街上还卖着一种糖，有柑子那么大小，在我们那里也有这东西，然而扁的，像一个厚厚的小烙饼。那就是所谓“胶牙饧”了。本意是在请灶君吃了，粘住他的牙，使他不能调嘴学舌，对玉帝说坏话。我们中国人意中的神鬼，似乎比活人要老实些，所以对鬼神要用这样的强硬手段，而于活人却只好请吃饭。
On the day of the Kitchen Lord's ascension, there was still a kind of sugar sold on the street, the size of a tangerine, and we also had this thing, but it was flat, like a thick small pancake. That is the so-called "glue tooth dumpling". The original intention was to invite the Kitchen Lord to eat it, stick to his teeth, so that he could not speak ill of the Jade Emperor. The gods and ghosts in our Chinese minds seem to be more honest than the living, so we have to use such tough methods against ghosts and gods, but the living have to invite them to dinner.今之君子往往讳言吃饭，尤其是请吃饭。那自然是无足怪的，的确不大好听。只是北京的饭店那么多，饭局那么多，莫非都在食蛤蜊，谈风月，“酒酣耳热而歌呜呜”么？不尽然的，的确也有许多“公论”从这些地方播种，只因为公论和请帖之间看不出蛛丝马迹，所以议论便堂哉皇哉了。但我的意见，却以为还是酒后的公论有情。人非木石，岂能一味谈理，碍于情面而偏过去了，在这里正有着人气息。况且中国是一向重情面的。何谓情面？明朝就有人解释过，曰：“情面者，面情之谓也。”自然不知道他说什么，但也就可以懂得他说什么。在现今的世上，要有不偏不倚的公论，本来是一种梦想；即使是饭后的公评，酒后的宏议，也何尝不可姑妄听之呢。然而，倘以为那是真正老牌的公论，却一定上当，——但这也不能独归罪于公论家，社会上风行请吃饭而讳言请吃饭，使人们不得不虚假，那自然也应该分任其咎的。
Today's gentlemen often avoid eating, especially inviting them to eat. That's naturally not surprising, it's really not good. It's just that there are so many restaurants and so many dinners in Beijing, could it be that they are all eating clams, talking about wind and moon, "drinking and singing"? Not necessarily, there are indeed many "public opinions" sown from these places, just because there are no clues between public opinion and invitations, so the discussion is grand. But my opinion is that I still think that the public opinion after drinking is affectionate. People are not wood and stone, how can they blindly talk about reason, and they are deviating from the situation, and there is a human atmosphere here. Moreover, China has always been affectionate. What is emotion? Someone in the Ming Dynasty explained, "Affection is also the meaning of face." "Naturally, I don't know what he said, but I can understand what he said. In today's world, it is originally a dream to have an impartial public opinion; Even if it is a public comment after a meal or a grand discussion after drinking, why not listen to it carelessly. However, if you think that it is a really old public opinion, you must be fooled,—— but this cannot be blamed solely on the public opinion critics.记得好几年前，是“兵谏”之后，有枪阶级专喜欢在天津会议的时候，有一个青年愤愤地告诉我道：他们那里是会议呢，在酒席上，在赌桌上，带着说几句就决定了。他就是受了“公论不发源于酒饭说”之骗的一个，所以永远是愤然，殊不知他那理想中的情形，怕要到二九二五年才会出现呢，或者竟许到三九二五年。
I remember a few years ago, after the "military admonition", when the gun class liked the meeting in Tianjin, a young man told me indignantly: They are there for a meeting, at the banquet, at the gambling table, with a few words, it was decided. He was the one who was deceived by the fact that "public opinion does not originate from wine and rice", so he was always indignant, but he didn't know that his ideal situation would not appear until 2925, or maybe until 3925.然而不以酒饭为重的老实人，却是的确也有的，要不然，中国自然还要坏。有些会议，从午后二时起，讨论问题，研究章程，此问彼难，风起云涌，一直到七八点，大家就无端觉得有些焦躁不安，脾气愈大了，议论愈纠纷了，章程愈渺茫了，虽说我们到讨论完毕后才散罢，但终于一哄而散，无结果。这就是轻视了吃饭的报应，六七点钟时分的焦躁不安，就是肚子对于本身和别人的警告，而大家误信了吃饭与讲公理无关的妖言，毫不瞅睬，所以肚子就使你演说也没精采，宣言也——连草稿都没有。
However, there are indeed honest people who do not focus on food and drink, otherwise, China will naturally be bad. In some meetings, from two o'clock in the afternoon, the problem was discussed, the charter was studied, the question was difficult, the wind was surging, until seven or eight o'clock, everyone felt a little restless for no reason, the temper grew, the discussion became more disputed, and the charter became more and more vague. This is the retribution of despising eating, the restlessness at six or seven o'clock, that is, the belly's warning to itself and others, and everyone mistakenly believes the demonic words that have nothing to do with eating and talks about justice, and ignores them, so the stomach makes your speech not exciting, and the declaration is not even a draft.但我并不说凡有一点事情，总得到什么太平湖饭店，撷英番菜馆之类里去开大宴；我于那些店里都没有股本，犯不上替他们来拉主顾，人们也不见得都有这么多的钱。我不过说，发议论和请吃饭，现在还是有关系的；请吃饭之于发议论，现在也还是有益处的；虽然，这也是人情之常，无足深怪的。
But I don't say that whenever there is a little thing, I always get something like Taiping Lake Hotel, picking up a British restaurant and so on to hold a big banquet; I don't have any share capital in those stores, so I can't attract customers for them, and people don't necessarily have so much money. I just said that there is still a relationship between discussing and inviting you to dinner; Please eat is still beneficial to discuss it; Although, this is also a common occurrence and not surprising.顺便还要给热心而老实的青年们进一个忠告，就是没酒没饭的开会，时候不要开得太长，倘若时候已晚了，那么，买几个烧饼来吃了再说。这么一办，总可以比空着肚子的讨论容易有结果，容易得收场。
By the way, I would like to give a piece of advice to the enthusiastic and honest young people, that is, to hold a meeting without wine or food, don't hold it too long, if it's too late, then buy a few sesame cakes to eat. In this way, it is always easier to get results and end easily than discussions on an empty stomach.胶牙饧的强硬办法，用在灶君身上我不管它怎样，用之于活人是不大好的。倘是活人，莫妙于给他醉饱一次，使他自己不开口，却不是胶住他。中国人对人的手段颇高明，对鬼神却总有些特别，二十三夜的捉弄灶君即其一例，但说起来也奇怪，灶君竟至于到了现在，还仿佛没有省悟似的。
The tough method of glue tooth glue, I don't care what it is used on the kitchen lord, it is not good to use it on living people. If he is a living person, it is better to give him a drunken and full meal, so that he does not open his mouth, but it is not to glue him. The Chinese are quite clever in their methods towards people, but they are always a little special for ghosts and gods, and the teasing of the Stove Lord on the twenty-three nights is one of them, but it is strange to say that the Kitchen Lord still seems to have no enlightenment until now.道士们的对付“三尸神”，可是更利害了。我也没有做过道士，详细是不知道的，但据“耳食之言”，则道士们以为人身中有三尸神，到有一日，便乘人熟睡时，偷偷地上天去奏本身的过恶。这实在是人体本身中的奸细，《封神传演义》常说的“三尸神暴躁，七窍生烟”的三尸神，也就是这东西。但据说要抵制他却不难，因为他上天的日子是有一定的，只要这一日不睡觉，他便无隙可乘，只好将过恶都放在肚子里，再看明年的机会了。连胶牙饧都没得吃，他实在比灶君还不幸，值得同情。
The Taoist priests' deal with the "Three Corpse Gods" is even more beneficial. I have never been a Taoist priest, I don't know the details, but according to the "words of ear eating", the Taoist priests thought that there were three corpse gods in the human body, and one day, when they were asleep, they secretly went to heaven to play their own evils. This is really a spy in the human body itself, and the three corpse gods who often say in "The Romance of the Gods" that "the three corpse gods are irritable and the seven orifices are smoked" is this thing. But it is said that it is not difficult to resist him, because his days in heaven are certain, as long as he does not sleep on this day, he will have no opportunity to take advantage of it, so he has to put all the evils in his stomach and look at next year's opportunity. He is really more unfortunate than the Kitchen Lord, and he deserves sympathy.三尸神不上天，罪状都放在肚子里；灶君虽上天，满嘴是糖，在玉皇大帝面前含含胡胡地说了一通，又下来了。对于下界的情形，玉皇大帝一点也听不懂，一点也不知道，于是我们今年当然还是一切照旧，天下太平。
the three corpses do not go to heaven, and the crimes are all in the stomach; Although the Kitchen Lord went to heaven, his mouth was full of sugar, and he said it with a hint in front of the Jade Emperor, and then came down again. The Jade Emperor didn't understand the situation in the lower realm at all, and he didn't know anything at all, so of course we still did everything as usual this year, and the world was peaceful.我们中国人对于鬼神也有这样的手段。
We Chinese also have such methods against ghosts and gods.我们中国人虽然敬信鬼神；却以为鬼神总比人们傻，所以就用了特别的方法来处治他。至于对人，那自然是不同的了，但还是用了特别的方法来处治，只是不肯说；你一说，据说你就是卑视了他了。诚然，自以为看穿了的话，有时也的确反不免于浅薄。
Although we Chinese worship ghosts and gods; But he thought that ghosts and gods were always stupid than people, so he used a special method to deal with him. As for people, it is naturally different, but they still use special methods to deal with it, but they just refuse to say it; When you say it, it is said that you have despised him. It is true that if you think you have seen through it, sometimes it is indeed shallow.二月五日。
February 5th.

谈皇帝

谈皇帝

谈皇帝

Talking about the emperor中国人的对付鬼神，凶恶的是奉承，如瘟神和火神之类，老实一点的就要欺侮，例如对于土地或灶君。待遇皇帝也有类似的意思。君民本是同一民族，乱世时“成则为王败则为贼”，平常是一个照例做皇帝，许多个照例做平民；两者之间，思想本没有什么大差别。所以皇帝和大臣有“愚民政策”，百姓们也自有其“愚君政策”。
Chinese people deal with ghosts and gods, and the vicious thing is flattery, such as the plague god and the fire god, and the honest one must be bullied, such as the land or the stove lord. The treatment of the emperor has a similar meaning. The monarch and the people are originally the same people, and in troubled times, "if you succeed, you will be a king, if you lose, you will be a thief". There is no big difference in thought between the two. Therefore, the emperor and ministers have a "foolish policy", and the people also have their own "foolish policy".往昔的我家，曾有一个老仆妇，告诉过我她所知道，而且相信的对付皇帝的方法。她说——
In the past, there was an old servant woman in my family who told me what she knew and believed in dealing with the emperor. She said——“皇帝是很可怕的。他坐在龙位上，一不高兴，就要杀人；不容易对付的。所以吃的东西也不能随便给他吃，倘是不容易办到的，他吃了又要，一时办不到；——譬如他冬天想到瓜，秋天要吃桃子，办不到，他就生气，杀人了。现在是一年到头给他吃波菜，一要就有，毫不为难。但是倘说是波菜，他又要生气的，因为这是便宜货，所以大家对他就不称为波菜，另外起一个名字，叫作‘红嘴绿鹦哥’。”
"The emperor is very scary. He sits on the dragon throne, and if he is unhappy, he will kill; It's not easy to deal with. Therefore, you can't give him anything to eat, if it's not easy to do, he wants it again, and he can't do it for a while; ——For example, if he thinks of melons in winter and wants to eat peaches in autumn, but if he can't do it, he gets angry and kills people. Now I give him spinach all year round, and I have it as soon as I want it, and I don't have any difficulty. But if it is a spinach, he will be angry again, because it is a bargain, so everyone will not call him spinach, and give him another name, called 'Red-billed Green Parrot'. ”在我的故乡，是通年有波菜的，根很红，正如鹦哥的嘴一样。
In my hometown, there are spinach all year round, and the roots are very red, just like the mouth of a parrot.这样的连愚妇人看来，也是呆不可言的皇帝，似乎大可以不要了。然而并不，她以为要有的，而且应该听凭他作威作福。至于用处，仿佛在靠他来镇压比自己更强梁的别人，所以随便杀人，正是非备不可的要件。然而倘使自己遇到，且须侍奉呢？可又觉得有些危险了，因此只好又将他练成傻子，终年耐心地专吃着“红嘴绿鹦哥”。
In the eyes of such a foolish woman, he is also an unspeakable emperor, and it seems that he can not do it. However, no, she thought she had it, and she should let him do whatever he wanted. As for its usefulness, it seems that he is relying on him to suppress others who are stronger than himself, so killing people casually is an essential element. However, if you encounter it, you must serve? But he felt a little dangerous, so he had to train him into a fool again, and patiently ate the "red-billed green parrot" all year round.其实利用了他的名位，“挟天子以令诸侯”的，和我那老仆妇的意思和方法都相同，不过一则又要他弱，一则又要他愚。儒家的靠了“圣君”来行道也就是这玩意，因为要“靠”，所以要他威重，位高；因为要便于操纵，所以又要他颇老实，听话。
In fact, using his name to "threaten the emperor to command the princes" has the same meaning and method as my old servant, but one wants him to be weak, and the other wants him to be foolish. Confucianism relies on the "holy king" to practice the Tao, because it wants to "rely on", so it wants him to be dignified and high-ranking; Because it is easy to manipulate, he is also required to be honest and obedient.皇帝一自觉自己的无上威权，这就难办了。既然“普天之下，莫非皇土”，他就胡闹起来，还说是“自我得之，自我失之，我又何恨”哩！于是圣人之徒也只好请他吃“红嘴绿鹦哥”了，这就是所谓“天”。据说天子的行事，是都应该体帖天意，不能胡闹的；而这“天意”也者，又偏只有儒者们知道着。
Once the emperor realized his supreme authority, it was difficult to handle. Since "under the whole world, it is the imperial land", he started to fool around, and said that "I got it, I lost it, why do I hate it"! So the saint's disciples had to treat him to eat "red-billed green parrot", which is the so-called "sky". It is said that the actions of the Son of Heaven should be considerate of the will of heaven and should not be foolish; And this "providence" is also known only to Confucian scholars.这样，就决定了：要做皇帝就非请教他们不可。
In this way, it was decided: if you want to be emperor, you must consult them.然而不安分的皇帝又胡闹起来了。你对他说“天”么，他却道，“我生不有命在天？！”岂但不仰体上天之意而已，还逆天，背天，“射天”，简直将国家闹完，使靠天吃饭的圣贤君子们，哭不得，也笑不得。
However, the restless emperor started messing around again. Do you say "heaven" to him, but he said, "Do I have a life in heaven?!" Not only did he not look up to the will of heaven, but he also went against the sky, turned his back on the sky, and "shot at the sky", which simply made the country over, so that the sages and gentlemen who relied on the sky for food could not cry or laugh.于是乎他们只好去著书立说，将他骂一通，豫计百年之后，即身殁之后，大行于时，自以为这就了不得。
So they had no choice but to write a book and scold him, and after a hundred years, that is, after his death, it would be popular, thinking that this would be amazing.但那些书上，至多就止记着“愚民政策”和“愚君政策”全都不成功。
But those books only record that the "Foolish People's Policy" and the "Foolish Jun Policy" were all unsuccessful.二月十七日。
February 17th.

无花的蔷薇

无花的蔷薇

无花的蔷薇

Flowerless roses1
又是Schopenhauer先生的话——
Again Mr. Schopenhauer's words—“无刺的蔷薇是没有的。——然而没有蔷薇的刺却很多。”
"There are no thornless roses. - However, there are many thorns without roses. ”题目改变了一点，较为好看了。
The title has changed a little and is more beautiful.“无花的蔷薇”也还是爱好看。
"Flowerless rose" is still a favorite to watch.

无花的蔷薇

2
去年，不知怎的这位勗本华尔先生忽然合于我们国度里的绅士们的脾胃了，便拉扯了他的一点《女人论》；我也就夹七夹八地来称引了好几回，可惜都是刺，失了蔷薇，实在大煞风景，对不起绅士们。
Last year, somehow this Mr. Benwaal suddenly fell in love with the spleen and stomach of the gentlemen in our country, and pulled his little "On Women"; I also came to weigh it several times, but unfortunately it was all thorns, and I lost the roses, which was really bad, sorry gentlemen.记得幼小时候看过一出戏，名目忘却了，一家正在结婚，而勾魂的无常鬼已到，夹在婚仪中间，一同拜堂，一同进房，一同坐床……实在大煞风景，我希望我还不至于这样。
I remember watching a play when I was a child, I forgot the name, the family was getting married, and the impermanence ghost who seduced the soul had arrived, sandwiched in the middle of the wedding ceremony, worshiping together, entering the room together, and sitting on the bed together...... It's really a bad scenery, I hope I don't do this.

无花的蔷薇

3
有人说我是“放冷箭者”。
Some people say that I am a "cold arrow".我对于“放冷箭”的解释，颇有些和他们一流不同，是说有人受伤，而不知这箭从什么地方射出。所谓“流言”者，庶几近之。但是我，却明明站在这里。
My explanation of "putting cold arrows" is quite different from their first-class, that is, someone is injured and I don't know where the arrow came from. The so-called "rumors" are almost close. But I am clearly standing here.但是我，有时虽射而不说明靶子是谁，这是因为初无“与众共弃”之心，只要该靶子独自知道，知道有了洞，再不要面皮鼓得急绷绷，我的事就完了。
But sometimes I don't explain who the target is, because I don't have the heart of "abandoning everyone", as long as the target knows alone, knows that there is a hole, and don't have a tense face, my business is over.

无花的蔷薇

4
蔡孑民先生一到上海，《晨报》就据国闻社电报郑重地发表他的谈话，而且加以按语，以为“当为历年潜心研究与冷眼观察之结果，大足诏示国人，且为知识阶级所注意也。”
As soon as Mr. Cai Jiemin arrived in Shanghai, the "Morning Post" solemnly published his speech according to the telegram of the National News Agency, and commented on it, believing that "it should be the result of years of painstaking research and cold observation, and it should be edicted to the Chinese people and attracted the attention of the intellectual class." ”我很疑心那是胡适之先生的谈话，国闻社的电码有些错误了。
I was very suspicious that it was Mr. Hu Shizhi's conversation, and the code of the National News Agency was wrong.

无花的蔷薇

5
豫言者，即先觉，每为故国所不容，也每受同时人的迫害，大人物也时常这样。他要得人们的恭维赞叹时，必须死掉，或者沉默，或者不在面前。
The prophet, that is, the foresight, is always not tolerated by the homeland, and every time he is persecuted by his contemporaries, the big people are often like this. When he wants to be praised by people, he must die, or be silent, or not in front of him.总而言之，第一要难于质证。
All in all, the first thing is difficult to cross-examine.如果孔丘，释迦，耶稣基督还活着，那些教徒难免要恐慌。对于他们的行为，真不知道教主先生要怎样慨叹。
If Confucius, Shakyamuni, and Jesus Christ were still alive, those believers would inevitably panic. I really don't know how Mr. Leader will sigh about their behavior.所以，如果活着，只得迫害他。
Therefore, if he is alive, he has to be persecuted.待到伟大的人物成为化石，人们都称他伟人时，他已经变了傀儡了。
By the time the great man became a fossil and people called him a great man, he had already become a puppet.有一流人之所谓伟大与渺小，是指他可给自己利用的效果的大小而言。
The so-called greatness and insignificance of a first-class person refers to the size of the effect he can use for himself.

无花的蔷薇

6
法国罗曼罗兰先生今年满六十岁了。晨报社为此征文，徐志摩先生于介绍之余，发感慨道：“……但如其有人拿一些时行的口号，什么打倒帝国主义等等，或是分裂与猜忌的现象，去报告罗兰先生说这是新中国，我再也不能预料他的感想了。”（《晨副》一二九九）
Mr. Romain Rolland of France turns 60 this year. The Morning News solicited essays for this, and Mr. Xu Zhimo sighed in addition to the introduction: "...... But if someone takes some popular slogans, what to overthrow imperialism, etc., or the phenomenon of division and suspicion, to report to Mr. Roland that this is New China, I can no longer predict his feelings. ("Morning Vice" 1299)他住得远，我们一时无从质证，莫非从“诗哲”的眼光看来，罗兰先生的意思，是以为新中国应该欢迎帝国主义的么？
He lives far away, and we have no way to verify it for a while, could it be that from the perspective of "poetry and philosophy", does Mr. Roland mean that New China should welcome imperialism?“诗哲”又到西湖看梅花去了，一时也无从质证。不知孤山的古梅，著花也未，可也在那里反对中国人“打倒帝国主义”？
"Shi Zhe" went to West Lake to see the plum blossoms again, and there was no way to verify it for a while. I don't know if the ancient plum in Gushan has not bloomed, but it is also there to oppose the Chinese to "overthrow imperialism"?

无花的蔷薇

7
志摩先生曰：“我很少夸奖人的。但西滢就他学法郎士的文章说，我敢说，已经当得起一句天津话：‘有根’了。”而且“像西滢这样，在我看来，才当得起‘学者’的名词。”（《晨副》一四二三）
Mr. Shima said, "I rarely praise people. But Xi Ying said about his article on learning Francis, I dare to say that it is worthy of a Tianjin dialect: 'rooted'. And "like Xiying, in my opinion, he is worthy of the term 'scholar'." ("Morning Vice" 1423)西滢教授曰：“中国的新文学运动，方在萌芽，可是稍有贡献的人，如胡适之，徐志摩，郭沫若，郁达夫，丁西林，周氏兄弟等等都是曾经研究过他国文学的人。尤其是志摩他非但在思想方面，就是在体制方面，他的诗及散文，都已经有一种中国文学里从来不曾有过的风格。”（《现代》六三）
Professor Xi Ying said: "China's new literary movement is still in its infancy, but people who have made slight contributions, such as Hu Shizhi, Xu Zhimo, Guo Moruo, Yu Dafu, Ding Xilin, the Zhou brothers, etc., are all people who have studied the literature of other countries. In particular, Shimata is not only in terms of thought, but also in terms of system, and his poems and prose already have a style that has never been seen in Chinese literature. ("Modern" 63)虽然抄得麻烦，但中国现今“有根”的“学者”和“尤其”的思想家及文人，总算已经互相选出了。
Although it is troublesome to copy, China's "rooted" "scholars" and "especially" thinkers and literati have finally been selected from each other.

无花的蔷薇

8
志摩先生曰：“鲁迅先生的作品，说来大不敬得很，我拜读过很少，就只《呐喊》集里两三篇小说，以及新近因为有人尊他是中国的尼采他的《热风》集里的几页。他平常零星的东西，我即使看也等于白看，没有看进去或是没有看懂。”（《晨副》一四三三）
Mr. Shima said: "Mr. Lu Xun's works are very disrespectful, I have read very little, only two or three novels in the "Scream" collection, and a few pages in his collection of "Hot Wind" by Nietzsche because some people have recently revered him as China. Even if I look at his usual sporadic things, even if I look at them, it is equivalent to seeing them in vain, and I don't see them or I don't understand them. ("Morning Vice" 1433)西滢教授曰：“鲁迅先生一下笔就构陷人家的罪状。……可是他的文章，我看过了就放进了应该去的地方——说句体己话，我觉得它们就不应该从那里出来——手边却没有。”（同上）
Professor Xiying said: "Mr. Lu Xun framed the crimes of others with one pen. …… But I read his articles and put them where they should be—to put it bluntly, I don't think they should come out of there—but I don't have them at hand. (Ibid.)虽然抄得麻烦，但我总算已经被中国现在“有根”的“学者”和“尤其”的思想家及文人协力踏倒了。
Although it was troublesome to copy, I was finally trampled down by the "rooted" "scholars" and "especially" thinkers and literati in China.

无花的蔷薇

9
但我愿奉还“曾经研究过他国文学”的荣名。“周氏兄弟”之一，一定又是我了。我何尝研究过什么呢，做学生时候看几本外国小说和文人传记，就能算“研究过他国文学”么？
But I would like to return the honor of "having studied the literature of other countries". One of the "Zhou brothers" must be me again. When I was a student, I read a few foreign novels and biographies of literati, and I could be considered "studying foreign literature"?该教授——恕我打一句“官话”——说过，我笑别人称他们为“文士”，而不笑“某报天天鼓吹”我是“思想界的权威者”。现在不了，不但笑，简直唾弃它。
The professor - forgive me for typing "official words" - said that I laugh at others for calling them "scribes", not at "a certain newspaper advocating every day" that I am an "authority in the intellectual world". Not now, not only laughing, but simply spitting on it.

无花的蔷薇

10
其实呢，被毁则报，被誉则默，正是人情之常。谁能说人的左颊既受爱人接吻而不作一声，就得援此为例，必须默默地将右颊给仇人咬一口呢？
In fact, it is common for people to be rewarded when they are destroyed and silent when they are praised. Who can say that a person's left cheek is kissed by his lover without making a sound, and he has to use this as an example, and he must silently bite his enemy with his right cheek?我这回的竟不要那些西滢教授所颁赏陪衬的荣名，“说句体己话”罢，实在是不得已。我的同乡不是有“刑名师爷”的么？他们都知道，有些东西，为要显示他伤害你的时候的公正，在不相干的地方就称赞你几句，似乎有赏有罚，使别人看去，很像无私……。
This time, I don't want the honorary name awarded by Professor Xiying, just "say something about yourself", it is really a last resort. Doesn't my fellow townsman have a "criminal master"? They all know that there are some things, in order to show his justice when he hurts you, he praises you in irrelevant places, as if there are rewards and punishments, so that others see it as a selfless .......“带住！”又要“构陷人家的罪状”了。只是这一点，就已经够使人“即使看也等于白看”，或者“看过了就放进了应该去的地方”了。
"Hold on!" It's going to "frame other people's crimes" again. This alone is enough to make people "even if they look at it, it is equivalent to seeing it in vain", or "they put it where they should go after seeing it".二月二十七日。
February 27th.

无花的蔷薇之二

无花的蔷薇之二

无花的蔷薇之二

The second of the flowerless rose1
英国勃尔根贵族曰：“中国学生只知阅英文报纸，而忘却孔子之教。英国之大敌，即此种极力诅咒帝国而幸灾乐祸之学生。……中国为过激党之最好活动场……。”（一九二五年六月三十日伦敦路透电。）
The British aristocracy of Bergen said: "Chinese students only know how to read English newspapers and forget the teachings of Confucius. Britain's great enemy is this kind of student who curses the empire and gloats over misfortune. …… China is the best venue for radical parties...... (London Reuters, June 30, 1925.) ）南京通信云：“基督教城中会堂聘金大教授某神学博士讲演，中有谓孔子乃耶稣之信徒，因孔子吃睡时皆祷告上帝。当有听众……质问何所据而云然；博士语塞。时乃有教徒数人，突紧闭大门，声言‘发问者，乃苏俄卢布买收来者’。当呼警捕之。……”（三月十一日《国民公报》。）
南京通信云：“基督教城中会堂聘金大教授某神学博士讲演，中有谓孔子乃耶稣之信徒，因孔子吃睡时皆祷告上帝。 当有听众…… 质问何所据而云然；博士语塞。 时乃有教徒数人，突紧闭大门，声言‘发问者，乃苏俄卢布买收来者’。 当呼警捕之。 ……”（三月十一日《国民公报》。 ）苏俄的神通真是广大，竟能买收叔梁纥，使生孔子于耶稣之前，则“忘却孔子之教”和“质问何所据而云然”者，当然都受着卢布的驱使无疑了。
The magical power of Soviet Russia is really vast, and it can buy Shu Lianghe and give birth to Confucius before Jesus, so those who "forget Confucius's teachings" and "question what is the basis for it" are of course driven by the ruble.

无花的蔷薇之二

2
西滢教授曰：“听说在‘联合战线’中，关于我的流言特别多，并且据说我一个人每月可以领到三千元。‘流言’是在口上流的，在纸上到也不大见。”（《现代》六十五。）
Professor Xi Ying said: "I heard that there are a lot of rumors about me in the 'United Front', and it is said that I can receive 3,000 yuan a month alone. 'Rumors' are on the lips and are not common on paper. ("Modern" 65.) ）该教授去年是只听到关于别人的流言的，却由他在纸上发表；据说今年却听到关于自己的流言了，也由他在纸上发表。“一个人每月可以领到三千元”，实在特别荒唐，可见关于自己的“流言”都不可信。但我以为关于别人的似乎倒是近理者居多。
The professor only heard rumors about others last year, but he published them on paper; It is said that this year he heard rumors about himself, and he also published it on paper. "A person can receive 3,000 yuan a month" is really absurd, which shows that the "rumors" about oneself are not credible. But I think most of the people about others seem to be close to reason.

无花的蔷薇之二

3
据说“孤桐先生”下台之后，他的什么《甲寅》居然渐渐的有了活气了。可见官是做不得的。
It is said that after "Mr. Gu Tong" stepped down, his "Jia Yin" gradually became alive. It can be seen that officials cannot do it.然而他又做了临时执政府秘书长了，不知《甲寅》可仍然还有活气？如果还有，官也还是做得的……。
However, he became the secretary-general of the interim ruling government again, I wonder if "Jiayin" is still alive? If there is more, the official is still ...... done.

无花的蔷薇之二

4
已不是写什么“无花的蔷薇”的时候了。
It's not the time to write about "flowerless roses".虽然写的多是刺，也还要些和平的心。
Although it is mostly written with thorns, it also requires some peaceful hearts.现在，听说北京城中，已经施行了大杀戮了。当我写出上面这些无聊的文字的时候，正是许多青年受弹饮刃的时候。呜呼，人和人的魂灵，是不相通的。
Now, I heard that a massacre has been carried out in Beijing. When I write these boring words, it is the time when many young people are shot. Alas, people and human souls are not connected.

无花的蔷薇之二

5
中华民国十五年三月十八日，段祺瑞政府使卫兵用步枪大刀，在国务院门前包围虐杀徒手请愿，意在援助外交之青年男女，至数百人之多。还要下令，诬之曰“暴徒”！
On March 18, the fifteenth year of the Republic of China, Duan Qirui's government sent guards to surround and kill hundreds of young men and women in front of the State Council with rifles and knives, intending to assist hundreds of young men and women in diplomacy. He also ordered that he be falsely accused of being a "thug"!如此残虐险狠的行为，不但在禽兽中所未曾见，便是在人类中也极少有的，除却俄皇尼古拉二世使可萨克兵击杀民众的事，仅有一点相像。
Such cruel and dangerous behavior is not only unseen among beasts, but also very rare among humans, except for the fact that Emperor Nicholas II of Russia sent the Cossack soldiers to kill the people, which is only a little similar.

无花的蔷薇之二

6
中国只任虎狼侵食，谁也不管。管的只有几个年青的学生，他们本应该安心读书的，而时局漂摇得他们安心不下。假如当局者稍有良心，应如何反躬自责，激发一点天良？
China only allows tigers and wolves to erode, and no one cares. There are only a few young students in charge, who should have studied with peace of mind, but the current situation is so shaken that they are not at ease. If the authorities have a little conscience, how should they blame themselves and inspire a little conscience?然而竟将他们虐杀了！
However, they were tortured to death!

无花的蔷薇之二

7
假如这样的青年一杀就完，要知道屠杀者也决不是胜利者。
If such a young man is killed, you must know that the butcher is by no means a winner.中国要和爱国者的灭亡一同灭亡。屠杀者虽然因为积有金资，可以比较长久地养育子孙，然而必至的结果是一定要到的。“子孙绳绳”又何足喜呢？灭亡自然较迟，但他们要住最不适于居住的不毛之地，要做最深的矿洞的矿工，要操最下贱的生业……。
China will perish along with the demise of patriots. Although the butcher can raise his descendants for a longer period of time because of his accumulated money, the inevitable result must come. What is the joy of "descendants rope"? Naturally, they will perish later, but they will live in the most uninhabitable barren land, be the miners in the deepest mines, and work the lowest livelihood .......

无花的蔷薇之二

8
如果中国还不至于灭亡，则已往的史实示教过我们，将来的事便要大出于屠杀者的意料之外——
If China does not perish, then past historical facts have taught us that the future will be beyond the expectations of the massacres-这不是一件事的结束，是一件事的开头。
This is not the end of one thing, but the beginning of something.墨写的谎说，决掩不住血写的事实。
The lies written in ink can never hide the fact that they are written in blood.血债必须用同物偿还。拖欠得愈久，就要付更大的利息！
Blood debts must be repaid with the same thing. The longer you are in arrears, the more interest you will have to pay!

无花的蔷薇之二

9
以上都是空话。笔写的，有什么相干？
The above are all empty words. What does it matter if it is written with a pen?实弹打出来的却是青年的血。血不但不掩于墨写的谎语，不醉于墨写的挽歌；威力也压它不住，因为它已经骗不过，打不死了。
What came out of the live ammunition was the blood of the youth. Blood not only does not hide the lies written in ink, but also does not get drunk on the elegy written in ink; The power can't suppress it, because it can't be deceived and can't be killed.三月十八日，民国以来最黑暗的一天，写。
March 18, the darkest day since the Republic of China, wrote.

“死地”

“死地”

“死地”

"Dead Ground"从一般人，尤其是久受异族及其奴仆鹰犬的蹂躏的中国人看来，杀人者常是胜利者，被杀者常是劣败者。而眼前的事实也确是这样。
From the perspective of ordinary people, especially the Chinese, who have long been ravaged by foreign races and their slaves and hawks, the murderer is often the winner, and the killed is often the inferior loser. And the fact in front of us is indeed the same.三月十八日段政府惨杀徒手请愿的市民和学生的事，本已言语道断，只使我们觉得所住的并非人间。但北京的所谓言论界，总算还有评论，虽然纸笔喉舌，不能使洒满府前的青年的热血逆流入体，仍复苏生转来。无非空口的呼号，和被杀的事实一同逐渐冷落。
The massacre of citizens and students who petitioned with their bare hands on March 18 has already been cut off, and it only makes us feel that we are not living in this world. However, the so-called speech circles in Beijing finally have comments, although the mouthpiece of paper and pen cannot make the blood of the young people sprinkled in front of the mansion flow back into the body, but it is still revived. It is nothing more than an empty call sign, and the fact that he was killed gradually fell out of the cold.但各种评论中，我觉得有一些比刀枪更可以惊心动魄者在。这就是几个论客，以为学生们本不应当自蹈死地，前去送死的。倘以为徒手请愿是送死，本国的政府门前是死地，那就中国人真将死无葬身之所，除非是心悦诚服地充当奴子，“没齿而无怨言”。不过我还不知道中国人的大多数人的意见究竟如何。假使也这样，则岂但执政府前，便是全中国，也无一处不是死地了。
But among the various comments, I think there are some that can be more thrilling than knives and guns. These are a few commentators who think that students should not have committed suicide and went to die. If you think that petitioning with bare hands is to die, and the front of your country's government is a place of death, then the Chinese will really die without a place to bury themselves, unless they are willing to act as slaves, "toothless and without complaints". But I don't know what the majority of Chinese people think. If this is the case, not only before the government, but also all of China, and there is no place that is not dead.人们的苦痛是不容易相通的。因为不易相通，杀人者便以杀人为唯一要道，甚至于还当作快乐。然而也因为不容易相通，所以杀人者所显示的“死之恐怖”，仍然不能够儆戒后来，使人民永远变作牛马。历史上所记的关于改革的事，总是先仆后继者，大部分自然是由于公义，但人们的未经“死之恐怖”，即不容易为“死之恐怖”所慑，我以为也是一个很大的原因。
People's pain is not easy to communicate. Because it is not easy to communicate, murderers take killing as the only way, and even regard it as happiness. However, because it is not easy to communicate, the "horror of death" shown by the murderer still cannot warn the future and turn the people into cattle and horses forever. Most of the things recorded in history about reform are always due to justice, but I think that people's lack of "terror of death", that is, not easy to be intimidated by "terror of death", is also a big reason.但我却恳切地希望：“请愿”的事，从此可以停止了。倘用了这许多血，竟换得一个这样的觉悟和决心，而且永远纪念着，则似乎还不算是很大的折本。
But I earnestly hope that the "petition" can be stopped from now on. If you use so much blood to get such a consciousness and determination, and remember it forever, it doesn't seem to be a big loss.世界的进步，当然大抵是从流血得来。但这和血的数量，是没有关系的，因为世上也尽有流血很多，而民族反而渐就灭亡的先例。即如这一回，以这许多生命的损失，仅博得“自蹈死地”的批判，便已将一部分人心的机微示给我们，知道在中国的死地是极其广博。
Of course, the progress of the world comes from bloodshed. But this has nothing to do with the amount of blood, because there are precedents in the world where a lot of blood is shed and the nation gradually perishes. That is, this time, with the loss of so many lives, only the criticism of "self-inflicted death" has shown us the subtleties of some people's hearts, knowing that the place of death in China is extremely extensive.现在恰有一本罗曼罗兰的《Le Jeu de L'Amour et de La Mort》在我面前，其中说：加尔是主张人类为进步计，即不妨有少许污点，万不得已，也不妨有一点罪恶的；但他们却不愿意杀库尔跋齐，因为共和国不喜欢在臂膊上抱着他的死尸，因为这过于沉重。
Now there is a copy of Romain Rolland's "Le Jeu de L'Amour et de La Mort" in front of me, which says: Gall advocates that human beings should be progressive, that is, they may have a little stain, and if necessary, they may also have a little sin; But they were reluctant to kill Kurbaqi because the Republic did not like to carry his dead body in his arms because it was too heavy.会觉得死尸的沉重，不愿抱持的民族里，先烈的“死”是后人的“生”的唯一的灵药，但倘在不再觉得沉重的民族里，却不过是压得一同沦灭的东西。
In a nation that feels the heaviness of the dead body and does not want to hold it, the "death" of the martyrs is the only elixir for the "life" of future generations, but if it is no longer heavy, it is just something that is crushed together.中国的有志于改革的青年，是知道死尸的沉重的，所以总是“请愿”。殊不知别有不觉得死尸的沉重的人们在，而且一并屠杀了“知道死尸的沉重”的心。
China's young people who aspire to reform know the weight of the dead body, so they always "petition". As everyone knows, there are other people who don't feel the heaviness of dead bodies, and they have slaughtered the hearts of "knowing the heaviness of dead bodies".死地确乎已在前面。为中国计，觉悟的青年应该不肯轻死了罢。
Death is indeed ahead. For the sake of China, enlightened young people should not die lightly.三月二十五日。
March 25th.

可惨与可笑

可惨与可笑

可惨与可笑

It's tragic and ridiculous三月十八日的惨杀事件，在事后看来，分明是政府布成的罗网，纯洁的青年们竟不幸而陷下去了，死伤至于三百多人。这罗网之所以布成，其关键就全在于“流言”的奏了功效。
The massacre on March 18, in hindsight, was clearly a net set up by the government, and the pure young people unfortunately fell into it, killing and injuring more than 300 people. The key to the establishment of this net lies in the effectiveness of "rumors".这是中国的老例，读书人的心里大抵含着杀机，对于异己者总给他安排下一点可死之道。就我所眼见的而论，凡阴谋家攻击别一派，光绪年间用“康党”，宣统年间用“革党”，民二以后用“乱党”，现在自然要用“共产党”了。其实，去年有些“正人君子”们称别人为“学棍”“学匪”的时候，就有杀机存在，因为这类诨号，和“臭绅士”“文士”之类不同，在“棍”“匪”字里，就藏着可死之道的。但这也许是“刀笔吏”式的深文周纳。
This is an old example in China, where a scholar probably has murderous intent in his heart, and always arranges a little way to die for dissidents. As far as I can see, whenever conspirators attack other factions, they used "Kang Party" during the Guangxu period, "Revolutionary Party" during the Xuantong period, and "Chaos Party" after Min Er, and now they naturally use "Communist Party". In fact, last year, when some "upright gentlemen" called others "school sticks" and "school bandits", there was a murderous intention, because this kind of nickname, unlike "stinky gentleman" and "scribe", in the words "stick" and "bandit", there is a way to die. But this may be a "knife and pen official" style of deep literary acceptance.去年，为“整顿学风”计，大传播学风怎样不良的流言，学匪怎样可恶的流言，居然很奏了效。今年，为“整顿学风”计，又大传播共产党怎样活动，怎样可恶的流言，又居然很奏了效。于是便将请愿者作共产党论，三百多人死伤了，如果有一个所谓共产党的首领死在里面，就更足以证明这请愿就是“暴动”。
Last year, in order to "rectify the academic style", the rumors about how bad the academic style was and how hateful the rumors were by the bandits actually worked. This year, in order to "rectify the academic style", the rumors about how the Communist Party was active and what hateful rumors were actually very effective. So the petitioner was labeled as a communist, and more than 300 people were killed and injured, and if a so-called Communist Party leader died in it, it would be more enough to prove that this petition was a "riot".可惜竟没有。这该不是共产党了罢。据说也还是的，但他们全都逃跑了，所以更可恶。而这请愿也还是暴动，做证据的有一根木棍，两支手枪，三瓶煤油。姑勿论这些是否群众所携去的东西；即使真是，而死伤三百多人所携的武器竟不过这一点，这是怎样可怜的暴动呵！
Unfortunately, there is none. This should not be the Communist Party. It is said that they are still there, but they all ran away, so it is even more hateful. And this petition was still a riot, and the evidence was a wooden stick, two pistols, and three bottles of kerosene. Not to mention whether these are things carried by the masses; Even if it is true, and the weapons carried by more than 300 dead and wounded are only this, what a pitiful riot!但次日，徐谦，李大钊，李煜瀛，易培基，顾兆熊的通缉令发表了。因为他们“啸聚群众”，像去年女子师范大学生的“啸聚男生”（章士钊解散女子师范大学呈文语）一样，“啸聚”了带着一根木棍，两支手枪，三瓶煤油的群众。以这样的群众来颠覆政府，当然要死伤三百多人；而徐谦们以人命为儿戏到这地步，那当然应该负杀人之罪了；而况自己又不到场，或者全都逃跑了呢？
But the next day, the wanted warrants of Xu Qian, Li Dazhao, Li Yuying, Yi Peiji, and Gu Zhaoxiong were published. Because they "gathered the masses", like last year's "howling boys" (Zhang Shizhao disbanded the Women's Normal University Chengwen), they "gathered" the masses with a wooden stick, two pistols, and three bottles of kerosene. To subvert the government with such a mass, of course, more than 300 people will be killed and injured; And Xu Qian and the others have taken human life as child's play to this point, so of course they should be guilty of murder; And what if you don't show up, or all run away?以上是政治上的事，我其实不很了然。但从别一方面看来，所谓“严拿”者，似乎倒是赶走；所谓“严拿”暴徒者，似乎不过是赶走北京中法大学校长兼清室善后委员会委员长（李），中俄大学校长（徐），北京大学教授（李大钊），北京大学教务长（顾），女子师范大学校长（易）；其中的三个又是俄款委员会委员：一共空出九个“优美的差缺”也。
The above is a political matter, I don't really understand. But from another point of view, the so-called "strict nailing" seems to be driving away; The so-called "strict" rioters seem to be just driving away the president of Beijing Sino-French University and chairman of the Qing Room Aftermath Committee (Li), the president of Sino-Russian University (Xu), the professor of Peking University (Li Dazhao), the provost of Peking University (Gu), and the president of Women's Normal University (Yi); Three of them are members of the Russian Funding Committee: a total of nine "beautiful vacancies" have been vacated.同日就又有一种谣言，便是说还要通缉五十多人；但那姓名的一部分，却至今日才见于《京报》。这种计画，在目下的段祺瑞政府的秘书长章士钊之流的脑子里，是确实会有的。国事犯多至五十余人，也是中华民国的一个壮观；而且大概多是教员罢，倘使一同放下五十多个“优美的差缺”，逃出北京，在别的地方开起一个学校来，倒也是中华民国的一件趣事。
On the same day, there was another rumor, that is, more than 50 people were wanted; But part of that name has only been seen in the "Beijing News" today. This kind of plan will indeed exist in the minds of Zhang Shizhao, the secretary-general of the Duan Qirui government. There are more than 50 state offenders, which is also a spectacle of the Republic of China; And most of them are teachers, so if they let go of more than 50 "beautiful shortcomings" together, escape from Beijing, and open a school elsewhere, it would be an interesting thing in the Republic of China.那学校的名称，就应该叫作“啸聚”学校。
The name of the school should be called "Xiaoju" School.三月二十六日。
March 26.

记念刘和珍君

记念刘和珍君

记念刘和珍君

Remember Liu Hezhen一
One中华民国十五年三月二十五日，就是国立北京女子师范大学为十八日在段祺瑞执政府前遇害的刘和珍杨德群两君开追悼会的那一天，我独在礼堂外徘徊，遇见程君，前来问我道，“先生可曾为刘和珍写了一点什么没有？”我说“没有”。她就正告我，“先生还是写一点罢；刘和珍生前就很爱看先生的文章。”
On March 25, the fifteenth year of the Republic of China, the day when the National Beijing Women's Normal University held a memorial service for Liu Hezhen and Yang Dequn, who were killed in front of Duan Qirui's government on the 18th, I wandered alone outside the auditorium, met Cheng Jun, and came to ask me, "Sir, have you written anything for Liu Hezhen?" I said "no". She was telling me, "Sir, just write a little; Liu Hezhen loved to read Mr. Zhen's articles before his death. ”这是我知道的，凡我所编辑的期刊，大概是因为往往有始无终之故罢，销行一向就甚为寥落，然而在这样的生活艰难中，毅然预定了《莽原》全年的就有她。我也早觉得有写一点东西的必要了，这虽然于死者毫不相干，但在生者，却大抵只能如此而已。倘使我能够相信真有所谓“在天之灵”，那自然可以得到更大的安慰，——但是，现在，却只能如此而已。
This is what I know, all the journals I edit, probably because they often have a beginning and no end, and the sales have always been very sparse, but in such a difficult life, I resolutely booked "Mangyuan" for the whole year. I have long felt the need to write something, although it has nothing to do with the dead, but in the living, it is probably only like this. If I could believe that there was a so-called "spirit in heaven", I would naturally be able to get greater comfort,—— but for now, it can only be so.可是我实在无话可说。我只觉得所住的并非人间。四十多个青年的血，洋溢在我的周围，使我艰于呼吸视听，那里还能有什么言语？长歌当哭，是必须在痛定之后的。而此后几个所谓学者文人的阴险的论调，尤使我觉得悲哀。我已经出离愤怒了。我将深味这非人间的浓黑的悲凉；以我的最大哀痛显示于非人间，使它们快意于我的苦痛，就将这作为后死者的菲薄的祭品，奉献于逝者的灵前。
But I really have nothing to say. I just feel that I don't live in the world. The blood of more than forty young people overflowed around me, making it difficult for me to breathe and hear, what words could there be? When crying, it must be after painful confirmment. After that, the insidious arguments of several so-called scholars and literati made me feel particularly sad. I'm out of my anger. I will deeply savor the sadness of this dark darkness of this world; With my greatest sorrow shown to the non-human world, so that they may be pleased with my pain, I offer this as a meager sacrifice to the spirit of the deceased.

记念刘和珍君

二

记念刘和珍君

Two真的猛士，敢于直面惨淡的人生，敢于正视淋漓的鲜血。这是怎样的哀痛者和幸福者？然而造化又常常为庸人设计，以时间的流驶，来洗涤旧迹，仅使留下淡红的血色和微漠的悲哀。在这淡红的血色和微漠的悲哀中，又给人暂得偷生，维持着这似人非人的世界。我不知道这样的世界何时是一个尽头！
A real warrior dares to face a bleak life and dare to face up to the dripping blood. What kind of mourner and happy person is this? However, nature is often designed for the mediocre, and the passage of time washes the old relics, leaving only a pale red blood color and indifferent sadness. In this pale red blood and indifferent sadness, people have to live temporarily, maintaining this inhuman world. I don't know when such a world will come to an end!我们还在这样的世上活着；我也早觉得有写一点东西的必要了。离三月十八日也已有两星期，忘却的救主快要降临了罢，我正有写一点东西的必要了。
We still live in such a world; I also felt the need to write something. With two weeks to go until March 18, the forgotten Savior is coming, and I need to write something.

记念刘和珍君

三

记念刘和珍君

Three在四十余被害的青年之中，刘和珍君是我的学生。学生云者，我向来这样想，这样说，现在却觉得有些踌躇了，我应该对她奉献我的悲哀与尊敬。她不是“苟活到现在的我”的学生，是为了中国而死的中国的青年。
Among the more than forty young people who were killed, Liu Hezhenjun was my student. Student Yunzhe, I have always thought like this, and now I feel a little hesitant, I should dedicate my sorrow and respect to her. She is not a student of "living to the present me", but a Chinese youth who died for China.她的姓名第一次为我所见，是在去年夏初杨荫榆女士做女子师范大学校长，开除校中六个学生自治会职员的时候。其中的一个就是她；但是我不认识。直到后来，也许已经是刘百昭率领男女武将，强拖出校之后了，才有人指着一个学生告诉我，说：这就是刘和珍。其时我才能将姓名和实体联合起来，心中却暗自诧异。我平素想，能够不为势利所屈，反抗一广有羽翼的校长的学生，无论如何，总该是有些桀骜锋利的，但她却常常微笑着，态度很温和。待到偏安于宗帽胡同，赁屋授课之后，她才始来听我的讲义，于是见面的回数就较多了，也还是始终微笑着，态度很温和。待到学校恢复旧观，往日的教职员以为责任已尽，准备陆续引退的时候，我才见她虑及母校前途，黯然至于泣下。此后似乎就不相见。总之，在我的记忆上，那一次就是永别了。
The first time I saw her name was when Ms. Yang Yinyu was the president of Women's Normal University at the beginning of last summer and expelled six student government association staff members in the school. One of them is her; But I don't know. It wasn't until later, perhaps after Liu Baizhao led the male and female generals to drag them out of school, that someone pointed to a student and told me, saying: This is Liu Hezhen. Only then can I unite the name and entity, but I am secretly surprised. I usually think that a student who can resist a wide range of winged principals without being succumbed to snobbery should always be a little unruly and sharp no matter what, but she often smiles and has a gentle attitude. After she settled in Zongmao Hutong and rented a house to teach, she began to listen to my handouts, so we met more often, and she was always smiling and very gentle. When the school regained its old outlook and the former faculty and staff thought that their responsibilities had been fulfilled and were about to retire one after another, I saw that she was worried about the future of her alma mater and cried. It seems that they haven't seen each other since then. In short, in my memory, that time was a farewell.

记念刘和珍君

四

记念刘和珍君

Four我在十八日早晨，才知道上午有群众向执政府请愿的事；下午便得到噩耗，说卫队居然开枪，死伤至数百人，而刘和珍君即在遇害者之列。但我对于这些传说，竟至于颇为怀疑。我向来是不惮以最坏的恶意，来推测中国人的，然而我还不料，也不信竟会下劣凶残到这地步。况且始终微笑着的和蔼的刘和珍君，更何至于无端在府门前喋血呢？
On the morning of the 18th, I learned that there were people petitioning the ruling government in the morning; In the afternoon, I got bad news that the guards actually fired, killing and wounding hundreds of people, and Liu Hezhenjun was among the victims. But I am quite skeptical of these legends. I have always been afraid to speculate on the Chinese with the worst malice, but I didn't expect it, and I didn't believe that it would be so bad and brutal. Moreover, the kind Liu Hezhenjun, who is always smiling, why is he bleeding in front of the mansion for no reason?然而即日证明是事实了，作证的便是她自己的尸骸。还有一具，是杨德群君的。而且又证明着这不但是杀害，简直是虐杀，因为身体上还有棍棒的伤痕。
However, it turned out to be true on the same day, and it was her own body that testified. There is also one that belongs to Yang Dequn. And it proves that this is not only killing, but simply torture, because there are still scars from sticks on the body.但段政府就有令，说她们是“暴徒”！
But the Duan government issued an order saying that they were "thugs"!但接着就有流言，说她们是受人利用的。
But then there were rumors that they were being used.惨象，已使我目不忍视了；流言，尤使我耳不忍闻。我还有什么话可说呢？我懂得衰亡民族之所以默无声息的缘由了。沉默呵，沉默呵！不在沉默中爆发，就在沉默中灭亡。
The tragic phenomenon has made me unbearable to look at it; Rumors are especially unbearable to hear. What else do I have to say? I understand the reason why the declining nation is silent. Silence, silence! If it does not break out in silence, it will perish in silence.

记念刘和珍君

五

记念刘和珍君

Five但是，我还有要说的话。
However, I have something else to say.我没有亲见；听说，她，刘和珍君，那时是欣然前往的。自然，请愿而已，稍有人心者，谁也不会料到有这样的罗网。但竟在执政府前中弹了，从背部入，斜穿心肺，已是致命的创伤，只是没有便死。同去的张静淑君想扶起她，中了四弹，其一是手枪，立仆；同去的杨德群君又想去扶起她，也被击，弹从左肩入，穿胸偏右出，也立仆。但她还能坐起来，一个兵在她头部及胸部猛击两棍，于是死掉了。
I have not seen it with my own eyes; I heard that she, Liu and Zhenjun, were happy to go at that time. Naturally, it is just a petition, and no one would have expected such a net if there was a little heart. But he was shot in front of the ruling government, entering from the back and diagonally through the heart and lungs, which was already a fatal trauma, but he did not die. Zhang Jingshujun, who went with her, wanted to help her up, but was hit by four bullets, one of which was a pistol and stood up; Yang Dequnjun, who went with her, wanted to help her up again, but was also hit, and the bullet entered from the left shoulder, passed through the chest and went out to the right, and also fell down. But she was able to sit up, and a soldier slammed her twice in the head and chest, and she died.始终微笑的和蔼的刘和珍君确是死掉了，这是真的，有她自己的尸骸为证；沉勇而友爱的杨德群君也死掉了，有她自己的尸骸为证；只有一样沉勇而友爱的张静淑君还在医院里呻吟。当三个女子从容地转辗于文明人所发明的枪弹的攒射中的时候，这是怎样的一个惊心动魄的伟大呵！中国军人的屠戮妇婴的伟绩，八国联军的惩创学生的武功，不幸全被这几缕血痕抹杀了。
Liu Hezhenjun, who was always smiling and kind, was indeed dead, this is true, as evidenced by her own corpse; The brave and friendly Yang Dequn also died, as evidenced by her own body; Only Zhang Jingshujun, who is brave and friendly, is still moaning in the hospital. When the three women calmly turned around in the bullets invented by civilized people, what a thrilling greatness! The great achievements of the Chinese soldiers in the slaughter of women and babies, and the martial arts of the Eight-Nation Allied Forces in punishing students, unfortunately were all erased by these few strands of blood.但是中外的杀人者却居然昂起头来，不知道个个脸上有着血污……。
But the murderers at home and abroad actually raised their heads, not knowing that they all had blood on their faces......

记念刘和珍君

六

记念刘和珍君

Six时间永是流驶，街市依旧太平，有限的几个生命，在中国是不算什么的，至多，不过供无恶意的闲人以饭后的谈资，或者给有恶意的闲人作“流言”的种子。至于此外的深的意义，我总觉得很寥寥，因为这实在不过是徒手的请愿。人类的血战前行的历史，正如煤的形成，当时用大量的木材，结果却只是一小块，但请愿是不在其中的，更何况是徒手。
Time is always flowing, the market is still peaceful, and a few lives are nothing in China, at most, but they are for idlers without malicious intentions to talk after dinner, or to make "rumors" for malicious idlers. As for the deeper meaning of this, I always feel that it is very little, because it is really just a petition with bare hands. The history of human bloody battles, just like the formation of coal, used a large amount of wood at that time, but the result was only a small piece, but the petition was not among them, let alone bare hands.然而既然有了血痕了，当然不觉要扩大。至少，也当浸渍了亲族，师友，爱人的心，纵使时光流驶，洗成绯红，也会在微漠的悲哀中永存微笑的和蔼的旧影。陶潜说过，“亲戚或余悲，他人亦已歌，死去何所道，托体同山阿。”倘能如此，这也就够了。
However, since there are blood stains, of course they don't feel like they want to expand. At least, when it is impregnated with the hearts of relatives, teachers, friends, and lovers, even if time passes and is washed into crimson, it will always have a smiling and kind old shadow in the slight sadness. Tao Qian said, "Relatives or Yu Grief, others have also sung, what to say when they die, and the body is the same as the mountain." "If so, that's enough.

记念刘和珍君

七

记念刘和珍君

Seven我已经说过：我向来是不惮以最坏的恶意来推测中国人的。但这回却很有几点出于我的意外。一是当局者竟会这样地凶残，一是流言家竟至如此之下劣，一是中国的女性临难竟能如是之从容。
I have already said: I have always been afraid to speculate on the Chinese with the worst malice. But this time there were a few things that came by my surprise. One is that the authorities are so brutal, one is that the gossipers are so bad, and the other is that Chinese women can be so calm in times of crisis.我目睹中国女子的办事，是始于去年的，虽然是少数，但看那干练坚决，百折不回的气概，曾经屡次为之感叹。至于这一回在弹雨中互相救助，虽殒身不恤的事实，则更足为中国女子的勇毅，虽遭阴谋秘计，压抑至数千年，而终于没有消亡的明证了。倘要寻求这一次死伤者对于将来的意义，意义就在此罢。
I witnessed the work of Chinese women starting last year, although it was a minority, but looking at the capable and resolute spirit, I have repeatedly sighed for it. As for the fact that they rescued each other in the rain of bullets this time, although they died without caring for themselves, it is more enough to show the courage of Chinese women, although they were suppressed for thousands of years by conspiracies and secret schemes, and there is no clear evidence of their demise. If we want to seek the meaning of this casualty for the future, this is the meaning.苟活者在淡红的血色中，会依稀看见微茫的希望；真的猛士，将更奋然而前行。
Those who survive will vaguely see a faint hope in the pale red blood; A real warrior will move forward more vigorously.呜呼，我说不出话，但以此记念刘和珍君！
Oh, I can't speak, but I remember Liu Hezhenjun with this!"四月一日。
April 1st.

空谈

空谈

空谈

Talk一
One请愿的事，我一向就不以为然的，但并非因为怕有三月十八日那样的惨杀。那样的惨杀，我实在没有梦想到，虽然我向来常以“刀笔吏”的意思来窥测我们中国人。我只知道他们麻木，没有良心，不足与言，而况是请愿，而况又是徒手，却没有料到有这么阴毒与凶残。能逆料的，大概只有段祺瑞，贾德耀，章士钊和他们的同类罢。四十七个男女青年的生命，完全是被骗去的，简直是诱杀。
I have never taken the petition seriously, but not because I am afraid of a massacre like the one on March 18. I really didn't dream of such a massacre, although I have always used the meaning of "knife and pen official" to spy on us Chinese. I only know that they are numb, have no conscience, and are not worthy of words, let alone petitions, and they are unarmed hands, but I did not expect such viciousness and murder. The only ones who can go against the expectations are probably Duan Qirui, Jia Deyao, Zhang Shizhao and their kind. The lives of forty-seven young men and women were completely deceived, and they were simply booby-trapped.有些东西——我称之为什么呢，我想不出——说：群众领袖应负道义上的责任。这些东西仿佛就承认了对徒手群众应该开枪，执政府前原是“死地”，死者就如自投罗网一般。群众领袖本没有和段祺瑞等辈心心相印，也未曾互相钩通，怎么能够料到这阴险的辣手。这样的辣手，只要略有人气者，是万万豫想不到的。
Something—I can't think of what I call it—says that mass leaders have moral responsibility. These things seem to admit that unarmed people should be shot, and the ruling government is originally a "dead place", and the dead are like throwing themselves into a trap. The mass leaders did not have a heart-to-heart with Duan Qirui and others, nor did they connect with each other, so how could they expect this insidious hot hand. Such a hot hand, as long as he is slightly popular, is unexpected.我以为倘要锻炼群众领袖的错处，只有两点：一是还以请愿为有用；二是将对手看得太好了。
I think there are only two mistakes in training mass leaders: first, petitions are still useful; The second is to see the opponent too well.

空谈

二

空谈

Two但以上也仍然是事后的话。我想，当这事实没有发生以前，恐怕谁也不会料到要演这般的惨剧，至多，也不过获得照例的徒劳罢了。只有有学问的聪明人能够先料到，承认凡请愿就是送死。
But the above is still an afterthought. I think that before this fact happened, I am afraid that no one would have expected such a tragedy, at most, it would be in vain as usual. Only a learned and intelligent person can foresee and admit that any petition is to die.陈源教授的《闲话》说：“我们要是劝告女志士们，以后少加入群众运动，她们一定要说我们轻视她们，所以我们也不敢来多嘴。可是对于未成年的男女孩童，我们不能不希望他们以后不再参加任何运动。”（《现代评论》六十八）为什么呢？因为参加各种运动，是甚至于像这次一样，要“冒枪林弹雨的险，受践踏死伤之苦”的。
Professor Chen Yuan's "Gossip" said: "If we advise women to join the mass movement less in the future, they must say that we despise them, so we dare not talk too much." But for underage boys and girls, we can't help but want them to stop playing any sports in the future. (Modern Review, 68) Why? Because participating in various sports is even like this time, "risking bullets and bullets and suffering from trampling and death and injury".这次用了四十七条性命，只购得一种见识：本国的执政府前是“枪林弹雨”的地方，要去送死，应该待到成年，出于自愿的才是。
This time, forty-seven lives were used, and only one insight was purchased: the ruling government of the country was a place of "bullets", and if you want to die, you should stay until you are an adult, and it is voluntary.我以为“女志士”和“未成年的男女孩童”，参加学校运动会，大概倒还不至于有很大的危险的。至于“枪林弹雨”中的请愿，则虽是成年的男志士们，也应该切切记住，从此罢休！
I thought that "female ambitionists" and "underage boys and girls" would probably not be in great danger when participating in school sports days. As for the petition in the "rain of bullets", even if it is an adult male ambitious man, it should be remembered that it will stop from now on!看现在竟如何。不过多了几篇诗文，多了若干谈助。几个名人和什么当局者在接洽葬地，由大请愿改为小请愿了。埋葬自然是最妥当的收场。然而很奇怪，仿佛这四十七个死者，是因为怕老来死后无处埋葬，特来挣一点官地似的。万生园多么近，而四烈士坟前还有三块墓碑不镌一字，更何况僻远如圆明园。
Let's see how it is now. However, there are a few more poems and essays, and there are a few more talks. Several celebrities and authorities were contacting the burial site, and the petition was changed from a big petition to a small petition. Burial is naturally the most appropriate ending. However, it is very strange, as if these forty-seven dead people were afraid that they would have nowhere to be buried after death in old age, so they came to earn a little official land. How close is the Wansheng Garden, and there are three tombstones in front of the tombs of the four martyrs without a word, not to mention that they are as remote as the Old Summer Palace.死者倘不埋在活人的心中，那就真真死掉了。
If the dead are not buried in the hearts of the living, they are really dead.

空谈

三

空谈

Three改革自然常不免于流血，但流血非即等于改革。血的应用，正如金钱一般，吝啬固然是不行的，浪费也大大的失算。我对于这回的牺牲者，非常觉得哀伤。
Reform is often bloody, but bloodshed is not the same as reform. The application of blood, just like money, is certainly not stingy, and waste is also greatly miscalculated. I feel very sad for the victims this time.但愿这样的请愿，从此停止就好。
I hope such petitions will stop from now on.请愿虽然是无论那一国度里常有的事，不至于死的事，但我们已经知道中国是例外，除非你能将“枪林弹雨”消除。正规的战法，也必须对手是英雄才适用。汉末总算还是人心很古的时候罢，恕我引一个小说上的典故：许褚赤体上阵，也就很中了好几箭。而金圣叹还笑他道：“谁叫你赤膊？”
Although petitions are common in any country and will not die, we already know that China is an exception, unless you can eliminate the "rain of bullets". Regular tactics must also be applied only when the opponent is a hero. The end of the Han Dynasty was finally a time when people's hearts were very old, forgive me for quoting an allusion from a novel: Xu Chu went into battle naked, and he was hit by several arrows. And Jin Shengsian laughed at him and said, "Who told you to be shirtless? ”至于现在似的发明了许多火器的时代，交兵就都用壕堑战。这并非吝惜生命，乃是不肯虚掷生命，因为战士的生命是宝贵的。在战士不多的地方，这生命就愈宝贵。所谓宝贵者，并非“珍藏于家”，乃是要以小本钱换得极大的利息，至少，也必须卖买相当。以血的洪流淹死一个敌人，以同胞的尸体填满一个缺陷，已经是陈腐的话了。从最新的战术的眼光看起来，这是多么大的损失。
As for the era when many firearms were invented now, trench warfare was used in the battle. This is not to be stingy with life, but to refuse to waste life, because the life of a warrior is precious. Where there are not many soldiers, this life is more precious. The so-called precious thing is not "treasured at home", but to exchange a small capital for great interest, at least, it must be sold and bought equally. Drowning an enemy with a torrent of blood and filling a defect with the corpse of a compatriot is already a cliché. From the perspective of the latest tactics, what a loss this is.这回死者的遗给后来的功德，是在撕去了许多东西的人相，露出那出于意料之外的阴毒的心，教给继续战斗者以别种方法的战斗。
This time, the merit of the deceased to the later was to tear off the appearance of many things, reveal the unexpected and vicious heart, and teach the continuing fighters to fight in a different way.四月二日。
April 2nd.

如此“讨赤”

如此“讨赤”

如此“讨赤”

Such a "red attack"京津间许多次大小战争，战死了不知多少人，为“讨赤”也；执政府前开排枪，打死请愿者四十七，伤百余，通缉“率领暴徒”之徐谦等人五，为“讨赤”也；奉天飞机三临北京之空中，掷下炸弹，杀两妇人，伤一小黄狗，为“讨赤”也。
In many large and small wars between Beijing and Tianjin, an unknown number of people died in order to "fight for red"; The ruling government opened fire in front of the government, killing 47 petitioners and injuring more than 100, and wanted Xu Qian and five others who "led the rioters" for "fighting red"; Fengtian planes dropped bombs over Beijing three times, killing two women and injuring a small yellow dog, in a "fight against red".京津间战死之兵士和北京中被炸死之两妇人和被炸伤之一小黄狗，是否即“赤”，尚无“明令”，下民不得而知。至于府前枪杀之四十七人，则第一“明令”已云有“误伤”矣；京师地方检察厅公函又云“此次集会请愿宗旨尚属正当，又无不正之行为”矣；而国务院会议又将“从优拟恤”矣。然则徐谦们所率领的“暴徒”那里去了呢？他们都有符咒，能避枪炮的么？
Whether the soldiers who died in the battle between Beijing and Tianjin, the two women killed in the bombing in Beijing and a little yellow dog who was injured by the bombing, are "red", there is no "explicit order", and the people do not know. As for the 47 people shot dead in front of the government, the first "clear order" has already said that there were "accidental injuries"; The official letter of the Beijing District Procuratorate also said that "the purpose of this rally petition is still legitimate, and there is no improper act"; The State Council meeting will also "preferentially propose compensation." So where did the "thugs" led by Xu Qian go? They all have charms, can they avoid guns?总而言之：“讨”则“讨”矣了，而“赤”安在呢？
All in all, "to attack" is to "attack", but where is the "red"?而“赤”安在，姑且勿论。归根结蒂，“烈士”落葬，徐谦们逃亡，两个俄款委员会委员出缺。六日《京报》云：“昨日九校教职员联席会议代表在法政大学开会，查良钊主席，先报告前日因俄款委员会改组事，与教长胡仁源接洽之情形；次某代表发言，略云，政府此次拟以外教财三部事务官接充委员，同人应绝对反对，并非反对该项人员人格，实因俄款数目甚大，中国教育界仰赖甚深……。”
And where is the "red", let's not talk about it for now. In the final analysis, the "martyrs" were buried, Xu Qian fled, and two members of the Russian Committee were vacant. On the 6th, the Beijing News said: "Yesterday, representatives of the joint meeting of faculty and staff of the nine universities met at Thammasat University, and Chairman Cha Liangzhao first reported on the situation of contacting the principal Hu Renyuan due to the reorganization of the Russian Committee the day before; The second representative made a speech, saying that the government intends to take over the affairs officer of the three ministries of education and finance as a member of the committee, and the same person should absolutely oppose it, not against the personality of the person, because the amount of Russian funds is very large, and the Chinese education sector relies on it deeply...... ”又有一条新闻，题目是“五私大亦注意俄款委员会”云。
There is also a news article titled "The five private universities also pay attention to the Russian funding committee".四十七人之死，有功于“中国教育界”良非浅尠也。“从优拟恤”，谁曰不宜！？
The deaths of the forty-seven people are not superficial in the "Chinese education sector". "Preferential compensation", who says it is not appropriate!?而今而后，庶几“中国教育界”中，不至于再称异己者为“卢布党”欤？
From now on, perhaps in the "Chinese education circles", dissidents will no longer be called the "ruble party"?四月六日。
April 6th.

无花的蔷薇之三

无花的蔷薇之三

无花的蔷薇之三

The third of the flowerless rose1
积在天津的纸张运不到北京，连印书也颇受战争的影响，我的旧杂感的结集《华盖集》付印两月了，排校还不到一半。可惜先登了一个预告，以致引出陈源教授的“反广告”来——
The paper accumulated in Tianjin could not be transported to Beijing, and even the printing of books was quite affected by the war. It's a pity that a trailer was published first, which led to Professor Chen Yuan's "anti-advertising" -“我不能因为我不尊敬鲁迅先生的人格，就不说他的小说好，我也不能因为佩服他的小说，就称赞他其余的文章。我觉得他的杂感，除了《热风》中二三篇外，实在没有一读之价值。”（《现代评论》七十一，《闲话》。）
"I can't stop saying that Mr. Lu Xun's novels are good just because I don't respect his personality, and I can't praise his rest of his articles just because I admire his novels. I think his miscellaneous feelings, except for two or three chapters in "Hot Wind", are really not worth reading. (Modern Review, 71, "Gossip".) ）这多么公平！原来我也是“今不如古”了；《华盖集》的销路，比起《热风》来，恐怕要较为悲观。而且，我的作小说，竟不料是和“人格”无关的。“非人格”的一种文字，像新闻记事一般的，倒会使教授“佩服”，中国又仿佛日见其光怪陆离了似的，然则“实在没有一读之价值”的杂感，也许还要存在罢。
How fair! It turns out that I am also "not as good as the past"; The sales of "Canopy Collection" are probably more pessimistic than "Hot Wind". Moreover, my novel has nothing to do with "personality". A kind of "impersonal" text, like a news record, will make the professor "admire", and China seems to see its bizarre every day, so the miscellaneous feeling of "really not worth reading" may still exist.

无花的蔷薇之三

2
做那有名的小说《Don Quijote》的M.de Cervantes先生，穷则有之，说他像叫化子，可不过是一种特别流行于中国学者间的流言。他说Don Quijote看游侠小说看疯了，便自己去做侠客，打不平。他的亲人知道是书籍作的怪，就请了间壁的理发匠来检查；理发匠选出几部好的留下来，其余的便都烧掉了。
Mr. M.de Cervantes, who wrote the famous novel "Don Quijote", said that he was called Huazi, but it was just a rumor that was particularly popular among Chinese scholars. He said that Don Quijote was crazy about reading ranger novels, so he became a chivalrous man himself, and he was unfair. His relatives knew that it was a monster made by the books, so they asked the barber in the wall to check it; The barber chose a few good ones to stay, and burned the rest.大概是烧掉的罢，记不清楚了；也忘了是多少种。想来，那些入选的“好书”的作家们，当时看了这小说里的书单，怕总免不了要面红耳赤地苦笑的罢。
It was probably burned, I can't remember clearly; I also forgot how many there are. Come to think of it, those writers who were selected for the "good books" were afraid that they would inevitably smile bitterly when they read the book list in this novel.中国虽然似乎日见其光怪陆离了。然而，乌乎哀哉！我们连“苦笑”也得不到。
Although China seems to be seeing its bizarre day by day. However, how sad it is! We can't even get a "bitter smile".

无花的蔷薇之三

3
有人从外省寄快信来问我平安否。他不熟于北京的情形，上了流言的当了。
Someone sent me a letter from another province asking if I was okay. He was not familiar with the situation in Beijing and was fooled by rumors.北京的流言报，是从袁世凯称帝，张勋复辟，章士钊“整顿学风”以还，一脉相传，历来如此的。现在自然也如此。
Beijing's rumors have been passed down since Yuan Shikai became emperor, Zhang Xun was restored, and Zhang Shizhao "rectified the style of study". Naturally, this is the case now.第一步曰：某方要封闭某校，捕拿某人某人了。这是造给某校某人看，恐吓恐吓的。
The first step is: I am going to close down a certain school and arrest someone. This is made for someone in a certain school to see, intimidating and intimidating.第二步曰：某校已空虚，某人已逃走了。这是造给某方看，煽动煽动的。
The second step is: A certain school is empty, and someone has escaped. This is made for a certain party to see, incitement and incitement.又一步曰：某方已搜检甲校，将搜检乙校了。这是恐吓乙校，煽动某方的。
Another step is to say: "I have already searched for Grade A and will be searching for Grade B." This is to intimidate Officer B and incite a certain party.“平生不作亏心事，夜半敲门不吃惊。”乙校不自心虚，怎能给恐吓呢？然而，少安毋躁罢。还有一步曰：乙校昨夜通宵达旦，将赤化书籍完全焚烧矣。
"I don't do bad things in my life, and I don't be surprised when I knock on the door in the middle of the night." School B is not guilty, how can it intimidate? However, it is important not to be impatient. Another step is that Officer B stayed up all night last night and completely burned the red books.于是甲校更正，说并未搜检；乙校更正，说并无此项书籍云。
So Officer A corrected it, saying that it had not been searched; Correction B said there was no such book.

无花的蔷薇之三

4
于是连卫道的新闻记者，圆稳的大学校长也住进六国饭店，讲公理的大报也摘去招牌，学校的号房也不卖《现代评论》：大有“火炎昆冈，玉石俱焚”之概了。
So even the news reporter of Weidao and the president of Yuanwen University also lived in the Six Nations Hotel, the axiomatic newspaper also took off its signboard, and the school's number room did not sell the "Modern Review": there is a lot of "fire Kungang, jade and stone are burned".其实是不至于此的，我想。不过，谣言这东西，却确是造谣者本心所希望的事实，我们可以借此看看一部分人的思想和行为。
In fact, it is not so much, I think. However, rumors are indeed the fact that rumor-mongers hope for, and we can take a look at the thoughts and behaviors of some people.

无花的蔷薇之三

5
中华民国九年七月直皖战争开手；八月，皖军溃灭，徐树铮等九人避入日本公使馆。这时还点缀着一点小玩意，是有一些正人君子——不是现在的一些正人君子——去游说直派武人，请他杀戮改革论者了。终于没有结果；便是这事也早从人们的记忆上消去。但试去翻那年八月的《北京日报》，还可以看见一个大广告，里面是什么大英雄得胜之后，必须廓清邪说，诛戮异端等类古色古香的名言。
In July of the ninth year of the Republic of China, the Zhiwan War began; In August, the Anhui army was defeated, and Xu Shuzheng and nine others took refuge in the Japanese embassy. At this time, there are also a little gadget, there are some decent gentlemen - not some of the current decent gentlemen - to lobby the straight warriors and ask him to kill the reformists. Finally there was no result; Even this matter has long been erased from people's memory. But if you try to flip through the "Beijing Daily" in August of that year, you can also see a big advertisement in which a great hero must clear out heresies, kill heresies and other antique famous quotes after victory.那广告是有署名的，在此也无须提出。但是，较之现在专躲在暗中的流言家，却又不免令人有“今不如古”之感了。我想，百年前比现在好，千年前比百年前好，万年前比千年前好……特别在中国或者是确凿的。
The advertisement is signed and does not need to be mentioned here. However, compared with the current rumors who are hiding in the dark, it is inevitable that people will feel that "the present is not as good as the past". I think a hundred years ago is better than now, a thousand years ago is better than a hundred years ago, and ten thousand years ago is better than a thousand years ago...... Especially in China or conclusive.

无花的蔷薇之三

6
在报章的角落里常看见对青年们的谆谆的教诫：敬惜字纸咧；留心国学咧；伊卜生这样，罗曼罗兰那样咧。时候和文字是两样了，但含义却使我觉得很耳熟：正如我年幼时所听过的耆宿的教诫一般。
In the corners of newspapers, I often see earnest admonitions to young people: cherish the words; Pay attention to Chinese studies; Ibsen is like this, Romain Rolland is like that. Time and words are different, but the meaning feels familiar to me: just like the teachings of the elders I heard when I was young.这可仿佛是“今不如古”的反证了。但是，世事都有例外，对于上一节所说的事，这也算作一个例外罢。
This seems to be a counter-proof that "the present is not as good as the past". However, there are exceptions to the world, and this is an exception to what was said in the previous verse.五月六日。
May 6th.

新的蔷薇　——然而还是无花的

新的蔷薇New roses ——然而还是无花的 - yet still unflowered
因为《语丝》在形式上要改成中本了，我也不想再用老题目，所以破格地奋发，要写出“新的蔷薇”来。
Because "Yusi" is going to be changed to the middle version in form, I don't want to use the old title anymore, so I made an unusual effort to write a "new rose".——这回可要开花了？
——Is it going to bloom this time?——嗡嗡，——不见得罢。
- Buzz,—— not necessarily.
我早有点知道：我是大概以自己为主的。所谈的道理是“我以为”的道理，所记的情状是我所见的情状。听说一月以前，杏花和碧桃都开过了。我没有见，我就不以为有杏花和碧桃。
I already knew a little bit: I was probably self-centered. The truth talked about is the truth of "I think", and the situation recorded is the situation I saw. I heard that apricot blossoms and peaches bloomed a month ago. I didn't see it, so I didn't think there were apricot blossoms and peaches.——然而那些东西是存在的。——学者们怕要说。
– And yet those things exist. ——Scholars are afraid to say.——好！那么，由它去罢。——这是我敬谨回禀学者们的话。
——Okay! So, let it go. ——These are my respectful words to report to scholars.有些讲“公理”的，说我的杂感没有一看的价值。那是一定的。其实，他来看我的杂感，先就自己失了魂了，——假如也有魂。我的话倘会合于讲“公理”者的胃口，我不也成了“公理维持会”会员了么？我不也成了他，和其余的一切会员了么？我的话不就等于他们的话了么？许多人和许多话不就等于一个人和一番话了么？
Some people talk about "axioms" and say that my miscellaneous feelings are not worth seeing. That's for sure. In fact, when he came to see my miscellaneous feelings, he first lost his soul,—— if he also had a soul. If my words meet the appetite of the "Axiom" speaker, will I not also become a member of the "Axiom Maintenance Association"? Didn't I become him and all the rest of the members? Aren't my words the same as theirs? Isn't it the same as one person and many words?公理是只有一个的。然而听说这早被他们拿去了，所以我已经一无所有。
There is only one axiom. However, I heard that they had already taken it, so I had nothing.
这回“北京城内的外国旗”，大约特别地多罢，竟使学者为之愤慨：“……至于东交民巷界线以外，无论中国人外国人，那就不能借插用外国国旗，以为保护生命财产的护符。”
This time, the "foreign flags in Beijing" were probably particularly abolished, which made scholars indignant: "...... As for the boundary of Dongjiaomin Lane, regardless of Chinese foreigners, they cannot borrow the use of foreign flags as a talisman to protect life and property. ”这是的确的。“保护生命财产的护符”，我们自有“法律”在。
That's true. "The talisman to protect life and property", we have our own "law".如果还不放心呢，那么，就用一种更稳妥的旗子： 红卍字旗。介乎中外之间，超于“无耻”和有耻之外，——确是好旗子！
If you are still not at ease, then use a more secure flag: the red swastika flag. Between China and abroad, beyond "shameless" and shameful,—— is indeed a good flag!
从清末以来，“莫谈国事”的条子帖在酒楼饭馆里，至今还没有跟着辫子取消。所以，有些时候，难煞了执笔的人。
Since the end of the Qing Dynasty, the note "Don't talk about state affairs" has been posted in restaurants and restaurants, and it has not been canceled with the braids. Therefore, sometimes, it is difficult to discourage the person who writes.但这时却可以看见一种有趣的东西，是：希望别人以文字得祸的人所做的文字。
But at this time, we can see an interesting thing, which is the words made by people who hope that others will get into trouble with words.
聪明人的谈吐也日见其聪明了。说三月十八日被害的学生是值得同情的，因为她本不愿去而受了教职员的怂恿。说“那些直接或间接用苏俄的金钱的人”是情有可原的，因为“他们自己可以挨饿，老婆子女却不能不吃饭呵！”
The conversation of smart people is also becoming smarter. He said that the student who was killed on March 18 was sympathetic because she was instigated by the faculty and staff because she did not want to go. It is forgivable to say that "those who directly or indirectly use Soviet Russian money" because "they can starve themselves, but their wives and children cannot skip eating!" ”推开了甲而陷没了乙，原谅了情而坐实了罪；尤其是他们的行动和主张，都见得一钱不值了。
pushed A away and trapped B, forgave the love and confirmed the crime; In particular, their actions and ideas are worthless.然而听说赵子昂的画马，却又是镜中照出来的自己的形相哩。
However, when I heard that Zhao Ziang's painting of horses was his own image reflected in the mirror.
因为“老婆子女却不能不吃饭”，于是自然要发生“节育问题”了。但是先前山格夫人来华的时候，“有些志士”却又大发牢骚，说她要使中国人灭种。
Because "wives and children can't skip eating", so "birth control problems" will naturally occur. But when Mrs. Shanger came to China before, "some ambitious people" complained again, saying that she wanted to exterminate the Chinese.独身主义现今尚为许多人所反对，节育也行不通。为赤贫的绅士计，目前最好的方法，我以为莫如弄一个有钱的女人做老婆。
Celibacy is still opposed by many today, and birth control does not work. For the destitute gentleman, I think the best way at present is to get a rich woman as his wife.我索性完全传授了这个秘诀罢：口头上，可必须说是为了“爱”。
I simply taught this secret completely: verbally, it must be said that it is for "love".
“苏俄的金钱”十万元，这回竟弄得教育部和教育界发生纠葛了，因为大家都要一点。
"Soviet Russia's money" of 100,000 yuan, this time it actually caused entanglement between the Ministry of Education and the education community, because everyone wanted a little.这也许还是因为“老婆子女”之故罢。但这批卢布和那批卢布却不一样的。这是归还的庚子赔款；是拳匪“扶清灭洋”，各国联军入京的余泽。
This may be because of the "wife and children". But this ruble is not the same as that ruble. This is the returned Gengzi reparation; It is the remnants of the boxers "helping the Qing and destroying the ocean" and the coalition forces of various countries entering Beijing.那年代很容易记：十九世纪末，一九〇〇年。二十六年之后，我们却“间接”用了拳匪的金钱来给“老婆子女”吃饭；如果大师兄有灵，必将爽然若失者欤。
That era is easy to remember: the end of the 19th century, 1900. Twenty-six years later, we "indirectly" used the money of the boxers to feed the "wives and children"; If the senior brother had a spirit, he would definitely be refreshed as if he had lost it.还有，各国用到中国来做“文化事业”的，也是这一笔款……。
In addition, it is also the ...... of this money that countries use China for "cultural undertakings".五月二十三日。
May 23rd.

再来一次

再来一次

再来一次

One more time去年编定《热风》时，还有绅士们所谓“存心忠厚”之意，很删削了好几篇。但有一篇，却原想编进去的，因为失掉了稿子，便只好从缺。现在居然寻出来了；待《热风》再版时，添上这篇，登一个广告，使迷信我的文字的读者们再买一本，于我倒不无裨益。但是，算了罢，这实在不很有趣。不如再登一次，将来收入杂感第三集，也就算作补遗罢。
When compiling "Hot Wind" last year, there were also gentlemen's so-called "loyal and honest" meaning, and several articles were deleted. But there was one that I wanted to compile, but because I lost the manuscript, I had to leave it missing. Now I actually found it; When "Hot Wind" is republished, add this article and publish an advertisement so that readers who are superstitious about my words will buy another copy, which will be beneficial to me. But, forget it, it's really not fun. It's better to go on it again, and it will be included in the third episode of Miscellaneous Feelings in the future, even if it is a supplement.这是关于章士钊先生的——
This is about Mr. Zhang Shizhao——“两个桃子杀了三个读书人”
"Two peaches killed three scholars"章行严先生在上海批评他之所谓“新文化”说，“二桃杀三士”怎样好，“两个桃子杀了三个读书人”便怎样坏，
Mr. Zhang Xingyan criticized his so-called "new culture" in Shanghai, saying that "two peaches kill three scholars" is good, and "two peaches kill three scholars" is bad.而归结到新文化之“是亦不可以已乎？”
And it boils down to the new culture. ”是亦大可以已者也！“二桃杀三士”并非僻典，旧文化书中常见的。但既然是“谁能为此谋？相国齐晏子。”我们便看看《晏子春秋》罢。
This is also a very good way to stop it. "Two peaches kill three scholars" is not a rare classic, it is common in old culture books. But since it is "who can do this?" The Prime Minister of Qi, Yan Zi. Let's take a look at "Yanzi Spring and Autumn".《晏子春秋》现有上海石印本，容易入手的了，这古典就在该石印本的卷二之内。大意是“公孙接田开疆古冶子事景公，以勇力搏虎闻，晏子过而趋，三子者不起，”于是晏老先生以为无礼，和景公说，要除去他们了。那方法是请景公使人送他们两个桃子，说道，“你三位就照着功劳吃桃罢。”呵，这可就闹起来了：
"Yanzi Chunqiu" has a Shanghai stone print, which is easy to start, and this classic is in the second volume of the stone print. The gist is that "Gongsun took over the field and opened the border to serve Duke Jing, and was known for fighting tigers with courage, and Yan Zi passed by, and the three sons could not afford it," so Mr. Yan thought it was rude and told Duke Jing that he would get rid of them. The way to do this was to ask Duke Jing to send them two peaches and said, "You three will eat peaches according to your merits." "Heh, this is going to make a fuss:“公孙接仰天而叹曰，‘晏子，智人也，夫使公之计吾功者，不受桃，是无勇也。士众而桃寡，何不计功而食桃矣？接一搏猏而再搏虎，若接之功，可以食桃而无与人同矣。’援桃而起。
“公孙接仰天而叹曰，‘晏子，智人也，夫使公之计吾功者，不受桃，是无勇也。 士众而桃寡，何不计功而食桃矣？接一搏猏而再搏虎，若接之功，可以食桃而无与人同矣。 ’援桃而起。“田开疆曰，‘吾仗兵而却三军者再。若开疆之功，可以食桃而无与人同矣。’援桃而起。
“田开疆曰，‘吾仗兵而却三军者再。 若开疆之功，可以食桃而无与人同矣。 ’援桃而起。“古冶子曰，‘吾尝从君济于河，鼋衔左骖以入砥柱之流。当是时也，冶少不能游，潜行逆流百步，顺流九里，得鼋杀之，左操骖尾，右挈鼋头，鹤跃而出。津人皆曰，河伯也；若冶视之，则大鼋之首。若冶之功，可以食桃而无与人同矣！二子何不反桃？’抽剑而起。”
“古冶子曰，‘吾尝从君济于河，鼋衔左骖以入砥柱之流。 当是时也，冶少不能游，潜行逆流百步，顺流九里，得鼋杀之，左操骖尾，右挈鼋头，鹤跃而出。 津人皆曰，河伯也；若冶视之，则大鼋之首。 若冶之功，可以食桃而无与人同矣！二子何不反桃？’抽剑而起。 ”钞书太讨厌。总而言之，后来那二士自愧功不如古冶子，自杀了；古冶子不愿独生，也自杀了：于是乎就成了“二桃杀三士”。
Money is too annoying. All in all, the two scholars later committed suicide because they were ashamed that their merits were inferior to Gu Yezi; Gu Yezi did not want to be alone, and committed suicide: so he became "two peaches killing three scholars".我们虽然不知道这三士于旧文化有无心得，但既然书上说是“以勇力闻”，便不能说他们是“读书人”。倘使《梁父吟》说是“二桃杀三勇士”，自然更可了然，可惜那是五言诗，不能增字，所以不得不作“二桃杀三士”，于是也就害了章行严先生解作“两个桃子杀了三个读书人”。
Although we don't know whether these three scholars have any experience in the old culture, since the book says that they are "famous for their bravery", we cannot say that they are "scholars". If "Liang Fu Yin" says that it is "two peaches kill three warriors", it is naturally clearer, but unfortunately it is a five-character poem, and the words cannot be added, so it has to be "two peaches kill three scholars", so it also harmed Mr. Zhang Xingyan's interpretation as "two peaches killed three scholars".旧文化也实在太难解，古典也诚然太难记，而那两个旧桃子也未免太作怪：不但那时使三个读书人因此送命，到现在还使一个读书人因此出丑，“是亦不可以已乎”！
The old culture is too difficult to understand, and the classics are indeed too difficult to remember, and those two old peaches are too strange: not only did three scholars die at that time, but now they also make a scholar embarrassed because of this, "yes and can't stop"!去年，因为“每下愈况”问题，我曾经很受了些自以为公平的青年的教训，说是因为他革去了我的“签事”，我便那么奚落他。现在我在此只得特别声明：这还是一九二三年九月所作，登在《晨报副刊》上的。那时的《晨报副刊》，编辑尚不是陪过泰戈尔先生的“诗哲”，也还未负有逼死别人，掐死自己的使命，所以间或也登一点我似的俗人的文章；而我那时和这位后来称为“孤桐先生”的，也毫无“睚眦之怨”。那“动机”，大概不过是想给白话的流行帮点忙。
Last year, because of the problem of "getting worse every time", I was taught a lesson by some young people who thought they were fair, saying that it was because he removed my "signing", and I ridiculed him like that. Now I have to make a special statement here: this was written in September 1923 and published in the "Morning Post Supplement". At that time, the editor of the "Morning Post Supplement" had not yet accompanied Mr. Tagore's "poetry and philosophy", nor had he yet undertaken the mission of forcing others to death and strangling himself, so he occasionally published articles of laypeople like me; And I had no "grievances" with this person who was later called "Mr. Gutong" at that time. That "motive" is probably just to help the popularity of the vernacular.在这样“祸从口出”之秋，给自己也辩护得周到一点罢。或者将曰，且夫这次来补遗，却有“打落水狗”之嫌，“动机”就很“不纯洁”了。然而我以为也并不。自然，和不多时以前，士钊秘长运筹帷幄，假公济私，谋杀学生，通缉异己之际，“正人君子”时而相帮讥笑着被缉诸人的逃亡，时而“孤桐先生”“孤桐先生”叫得热剌剌地的时候一比较，目下诚不免有落寞之感。但据我看来，他其实并未落水，不过“安住”在租界里而已：北京依旧是他所豢养过的东西在张牙舞爪，他所勾结着的报馆在颠倒是非，他所栽培成的女校在兴风作浪：依然是他的世界。
In such an autumn of "disaster comes from the mouth", defend yourself thoughtfully. Or it will be said that the husband came to supplement this time, but there is a suspicion of "hitting the water dog", and the "motive" is very "impure". However, I don't think so. Naturally, not long ago, when Secretary Shizhao was strategizing, using public affairs for personal gain, murdering students, and wanting dissidents, the "upright gentlemen" sometimes helped each other ridicule the escape of the arrested people, and sometimes "Mr. Gu Tong" and "Mr. Gu Tong" were called hot. But in my opinion, he did not actually fall into the water, but "lived" in the concession: Beijing was still the things he had raised, the newspaper he colluded with was reversing right and wrong, and the girls' school he cultivated was still his world.在“桃子”上给一下小打击，岂遂可与“打落水狗”同日而语哉？！
Giving a small blow to the "peach" can be the same as "hitting the water dog"? !但不知怎的，这位“孤桐先生”竟在《甲寅》上辩起来了，以为这不过是小事。这是真的，不过是小事。弄错一点，又何伤乎？即使不知道晏子，不知道齐国，于中国也无损。农民谁懂得《梁父吟》呢，农业也仍然可以救国的。但我以为攻击白话的豪举，可也大可以不必了；将白话来代文言，即使有点不妥，反正也不过是小事情。
But somehow, this "Mr. Gu Tong" actually argued on "Jia Yin", thinking that it was just a trivial matter. It's true, but it's a small thing. What harm is there in getting a little wrong? Even if you don't know Yan Zi and don't know Qi, it won't hurt China. Who among the peasants understands "Liang Fu Yin", agriculture can still save the country. But I think the bold act of attacking the vernacular is unnecessary; Replacing the vernacular with literary language, even if it is a little inappropriate, is just a small matter anyway.我虽然未曾在“孤桐先生”门下钻，没有看见满桌满床满地的什么德文书的荣幸，但偶然见到他所发表的“文言”，知道他于法律的不可恃，道德习惯的并非一成不变，文字语言的必有变迁，其实倒是懂得的。懂得而照直说出来的，便成为改革者；懂得而不说，反要利用以欺瞒别人的，便成为“孤桐先生”及其“之流”。他的保护文言，内骨子也不过是这样。
Although I have never drilled under the door of "Mr. Gutong", and I have not seen any German books on the table and bed, I happened to see his "literary words" and knew that he was unreliable in the law, that his moral habits were not static, and that there would be changes in written language, but in fact, I understood it. those who understand and speak directly become reformers; If you understand but don't say it, but use it to deceive others, you will become "Mr. Gutong" and his "stream". His protective words are just like this.如果我的检验是确的，那么，“孤桐先生”大概也就染了《闲话》所谓“有些志士”的通病，为“老婆子女”所累了，此后似乎应该另买几本德文书，来讲究“节育”。
If my test is correct, then "Mr. Gu Tong" is probably infected with the so-called "some ambitious people" in "Gossip" and is tired of "wives and children", and it seems that he should buy a few German books to pay attention to "birth control" after that.五月二十四日。
May 24th.

为半农题记《何典》后，作

为半农题记《何典》后，作

为半农题记《何典》后，作

It was written after Bannon's inscription "He Dian"还是两三年前，偶然在光绪五年（1879）印的《申报馆书目续集》上看见《何典》题要，这样说：
Or two or three years ago, I accidentally saw the title of "He Dian" in the "Sequel to the Bibliography of the Declaration Hall" printed in the fifth year of Guangxu (1879), and said:“《何典》十回。是书为过路人编定，缠夹二先生评，而太平客人为之序。书中引用诸人，有曰活鬼者，有曰穷鬼者，有曰活死人者，有曰臭花娘者，有曰畔房小姐者：阅之已堪喷饭。况阅其所记，无一非三家村俗语；无中生有，忙里偷闲。其言，则鬼话也；其人，则鬼名也；其事，则开鬼心，扮鬼脸，钓鬼火，做鬼戏，搭鬼棚也。语曰，‘出于何典’？而今而后，有人以俗语为文者，曰‘出于《何典》’而已矣。”
“《何典》十回。 是书为过路人编定，缠夹二先生评，而太平客人为之序。 书中引用诸人，有曰活鬼者，有曰穷鬼者，有曰活死人者，有曰臭花娘者，有曰畔房小姐者：阅之已堪喷饭。 况阅其所记，无一非三家村俗语；无中生有，忙里偷闲。 其言，则鬼话也；其人，则鬼名也；其事，则开鬼心，扮鬼脸，钓鬼火，做鬼戏，搭鬼棚也。 语曰，‘出于何典’？而今而后，有人以俗语为文者，曰‘出于《何典》’而已矣。 ”疑其颇别致，于是留心访求，但不得；常维钧多识旧书肆中人，因托他搜寻，仍不得。今年半农告我已在厂甸庙市中无意得之，且将校点付印；听了甚喜。此后半农便将校样陆续寄来，并且说希望我做一篇短序，他知道我是至多也只能做短序的。然而我还很踌蹰，我总觉得没有这种本领。我以为许多事是做的人必须有这一门特长的，这才做得好。譬如，标点只能让汪原放，做序只能推胡适之，出版只能由亚东图书馆；刘半农，李小峰，我，皆非其选也。然而我却决定要写几句。为什么呢？只因为我终于决定要写几句了。
I suspected that it was quite chic, so I paid attention to it, but I couldn't find it; Chang Weijun knew many people from the second-hand bookstore, so he asked him to search for them, but still couldn't find them. This year, half of the farmers told me that I had accidentally obtained it in the factory temple market, and the officer ordered it to be printed; I was very happy to hear this. After that, Bannong sent proofs one after another, and said that he wanted me to make a short preface, and he knew that I could only do a short preface at most. However, I was still very hesitant, and I always felt that I didn't have this skill. I think that people who do many things must have this specialty to do it well. For example, punctuation can only be released by Wang, preface can only be pushed by Hu Shizhi, and publication can only be published by the Far Eastern Library; Liu Bannong, Li Xiaofeng, and I are not his choices. However, I decided to write a few sentences. Why? Just because I finally decided to write a few sentences.还未开手，而躬逢战争，在炮声和流言当中，很不宁帖，没有执笔的心思。夹着是得知又有文士之徒在什么报上骂半农了，说《何典》广告怎样不高尚，不料大学教授而竟堕落至于斯。这颇使我凄然，因为由此记起了别的事，而且也以为“不料大学教授而竟堕落至于斯”。从此一见《何典》，便感到苦痛，再也说不出一句话。
Before he started, he was in the midst of war, and in the midst of the sound of cannons and rumors, he was very restless and had no intention of writing. In addition, I learned that there were scholars who scolded Bannon in some newspaper, saying how noble the advertisement of "He Dian" was, but unexpectedly the university professor had fallen to such a point. This made me quite sad, because it reminded me of other things, and I also thought that "I didn't expect a university professor to fall to this". From then on, as soon as I saw "He Dian", I felt painful and could no longer say a word.是的，大学教授要堕落下去。无论高的或矮的，白的或黑的，或灰的。不过有些是别人谓之堕落，而我谓之困苦。我所谓困苦之一端，便是失了身分。我曾经做过《论“他妈的！”》早有青年道德家乌烟瘴气地浩叹过了，还讲身分么？但是也还有些讲身分。我虽然“深恶而痛绝之”于那些戴着面具的绅士，却究竟不是“学匪”世家；见了所谓“正人君子”固然决定摇头，但和歪人奴子相处恐怕也未必融洽。用了无差别的眼光看，大学教授做一个滑稽的，或者甚而至于夸张的广告何足为奇？就是做一个满嘴“他妈的”的广告也何足为奇？然而呀，这里用得着然而了，我是究竟生在十九世纪的，又做过几年官，和所谓“孤桐先生”同部，官——上等人——气骤不易退，所以有时也觉得教授最相宜的也还是上讲台。又要然而了，然而必须有够活的薪水，兼差倒可以。这主张在教育界大概现在已经有一致赞成之望，去年在什么公理会上一致攻击兼差的公理维持家，今年也颇有一声不响地去兼差的了，不过“大报”上决不会登出来，自己自然更未必做广告。
Yes, university professors are going to fall. Whether tall or short, white or black, or gray. But some are what others call depravity, and I call them misery. One of my so-called hardships is the loss of identity. I once wrote "On "Fuck! "" has long been a young moralist who sighed angrily, do you still talk about identity? But there is also some identity. Although I "hate and hate them" to those gentlemen wearing masks, I am not a "scholar bandit" after all; Although he decided to shake his head when he saw the so-called "upright gentleman", he may not get along well with crooked slaves. With an indiscriminate perspective, what is it that a university professor would do a funny, or even exaggerated advertisement? Even if it's a mouthful of "fucking" ads, what's so surprising? However, I was born in the nineteenth century, and I was an official for a few years, and I was in the same department as the so-called "Mr. Gu Tong". However, there must be a salary to live with, and part-time work is fine. This proposition is probably now unanimously supported by the education circles, and last year it unanimously attacked the axiom maintainers who worked part-time at what congregational meeting, and this year they have also gone to the part-time job quite silently, but they will never be published in the "big newspaper", and naturally they may not advertise.半农到德法研究了音韵好几年，我虽然不懂他所做的法文书，只知道里面很夹些中国字和高高低低的曲线，但总而言之，书籍具在，势必有人懂得。所以他的正业，我以为也还是将这些曲线教给学生们。可是北京大学快要关门大吉了；他兼差又没有。那么，即使我是怎样的十足上等人，也不能反对他印卖书。既要印卖，自然想多销，既想多销，自然要做广告，既做广告，自然要说好。难道有自己印了书，却发广告说这书很无聊，请列位不必看的么？说我的杂感无一读之价值的广告，那是西滢（即陈源）做的。——顺便在此给自己登一个广告罢：陈源何以给我登这样的反广告的呢，只要一看我的《华盖集》就明白。主顾诸公，看呀！快看呀！每本大洋六角，北新书局发行。
Bannon went to Germany and France to study phonology for several years, although I didn't understand the French books he made, I only knew that there were some Chinese characters and high and low curves in them, but all in all, the books are there, and someone is bound to understand. So I think he still teaches these curves to his students. But Peking University is about to close; He didn't have a part-time job. Then, no matter how superior I am, I cannot oppose him printing and selling books. If you want to print and sell, you naturally want to sell more, if you want to sell more, you must naturally advertise, and if you want to advertise, you must naturally say good. Is there anyone who prints a book by himself, but advertises that the book is boring, please don't read it? The advertisement that said that my miscellaneous feelings were worthless was made by Xi Ying (i.e. Chen Yuan). ——By the way, I put an advertisement for myself here: Why did Chen Yuan put such an anti-advertisement for me, just look at my "Huagai Collection" to understand. Lords, look! Look! Each Ocean Hexagon is published by Beixin Book Company.想起来已经有二十多年了，以革命为事的陶焕卿，穷得不堪，在上海自称会稽先生，教人催眠术以糊口。有一天他问我，可有什么药能使人一嗅便睡去的呢？我明知道他怕施术不验，求助于药物了。其实呢，在大众中试验催眠，本来是不容易成功的。我又不知道他所寻求的妙药，爱莫能助。两三月后，报章上就有投书（也许是广告）出现，说会稽先生不懂催眠术，以此欺人。清政府却比这干鸟人灵敏得多，所以通缉他的时候，有一联对句道：“著《中国权力史》，学日本催眠术。”
Thinking about it, it has been more than 20 years, Tao Huanqing, who is engaged in revolution, is so poor that he calls himself Mr. Kuaiji in Shanghai and teaches people hypnosis to make a living. One day he asked me, what medicine can make people fall asleep by smelling? I knew that he was afraid that the operation would not work, so he turned to medicine. In fact, experimenting with hypnosis in the public is not easy to succeed. I don't know the magic medicine he is seeking, and love can't help. Two or three months later, a letter (perhaps an advertisement) appeared in the newspaper, saying that Mr. Kuaiji did not understand hypnosis and deceived people. The Qing government was much more sensitive than this dry birdman, so when he was wanted, there was a couplet saying: "Write "History of Chinese Power" and learn Japanese hypnosis. ”《何典》快要出版了，短序也已经迫近交卷的时候。夜雨潇潇地下着，提起笔，忽而又想到用麻绳做腰带的困苦的陶焕卿，还夹杂些和《何典》不相干的思想。但序文已经迫近了交卷的时候，只得写出来，而且还要印上去。我并非将半农比附“乱党”，——现在的中华民国虽由革命造成，但许多中华民国国民，都仍以那时的革命者为乱党，是明明白白的，——不过说，在此时，使我回忆从前，念及几个朋友，并感到自己的依然无力而已。
"He Dian" is about to be published, and the short preface is approaching the time to hand over the volume. Night rain fell lightly, picked up the pen, and suddenly thought of Tao Huanqing, who was struggling to make a belt with hemp rope, and mixed with some thoughts that had nothing to do with "He Dian". But the preface was approaching the time to hand in the paper, so it had to be written and printed. Although the current Republic of China was created by the revolution,——, many people of the Republic of China still regard the revolutionaries of that time as a rebellious party,—— but at this time, it makes me think of the past, think of a few friends, and feel that I am still powerless.但短序总算已经写成，虽然不像东西，却究竟结束了一件事。我还将此时的别的心情写下，并且发表出去，也作为《何典》的广告。
But the short preface has finally been written, and although it doesn't look like a thing, it ends one thing. I also wrote down my other moods at this time and published them as an advertisement for "He Dian".五月二十五日之夜，碰着东壁下，书。
On the night of May 25, under the east wall, the book.

马上日记

马上日记

马上日记

Diary right away豫序
Prelude在日记还未写上一字之前，先做序文，谓之豫序。
Before writing a word in the diary, make a preface, which is called a preface.我本来每天写日记，是写给自己看的；大约天地间写着这样日记的人们很不少。假使写的人成了名人，死了之后便也会印出；看的人也格外有趣味，因为他写的时候不像做《内感篇》外冒篇似的须摆空架子，所以反而可以看出真的面目来。我想，这是日记的正宗嫡派。
I used to write a diary every day, and I wrote it for myself; There are probably many people in the world who write such diaries. If the person who wrote it becomes a celebrity, it will be printed after death; The people who watch it are also particularly interesting, because when he writes, he doesn't have to put on an empty shelf like doing the "Inner Sense" outer chapter, so you can see the real face. I think this is the authentic branch of the diary.我的日记却不是那样。写的是信札往来，银钱收付，无所谓面目，更无所谓真假。例如：二月二日晴，得A信；B来。三月三日雨，收C校薪水X元，复D信。一行满了，然而还有事，因为纸张也颇可惜，便将后来的事写入前一天的空白中。总而言之：是不很可靠的。但我以为B来是在二月一，或者二月二，其实不甚有关系，即便不写也无妨；而实际上，不写的时候也常有。我的目的，只在记上谁有来信，以便答复，或者何时答复过，尤其是学校的薪水，收到何年何月的几成几了，零零星星，总是记不清楚，必须有一笔帐，以便检查，庶几乎两不含胡，我也知道自己有多少债放在外面，万一将来收清之后，要成为怎样的一个小富翁。此外呢，什么野心也没有了。
My diary is not like that. It is written that letters and letters are exchanged, and money is received and paid, regardless of appearance, and it does not matter whether it is true or false. For example: February 2 is sunny, and I get a letter A; B comes. On March 3rd, it rained, and C school salary X yuan was collected, and D letters were restored. The line was full, but there was still something to do, because the paper was also a pity, so I wrote what happened later in the blank of the previous day. In short: it is not very reliable. But I thought B came on February 1st or February 2nd, which actually doesn't matter much, even if I don't write it; In fact, there are often times when I don't write. My purpose is only to record who has a letter in order to reply, or when it has been replied, especially the school's salary, how many years and months have been received, sporadically, always I can't remember clearly, there must be an account, so that there is almost no Hu, and I also know how many debts I have outside, in case I will become a little rich man after it is paid off in the future. In addition, there is no ambition left.吾乡的李慈铭先生，是就以日记为著述的，上自朝章，中至学问，下迄相骂，都记录在那里面。果然，现在已有人将那手迹用石印印出了，每部五十元，在这样的年头，不必说学生，就是先生也无从买起。那日记上就记着，当他每装成一函的时候，早就有人借来借去的传钞了，正不必老远的等待“身后”。这虽然不像日记的正脉，但若有志在立言，意存褒贬，欲人知而又畏人知的，却不妨模仿着试试。什么做了一点白话，便说是要在一百年后发表的书里面的一篇，真是其蠢臭为不可及也。
Mr. Li Ciming from my hometown wrote in his diary, from the court chapters, to learning, to the scolding, all recorded in it. Sure enough, now someone has printed the handwriting with stone prints, fifty yuan each, in such a year, not to mention students, even teachers can't afford it. The diary recorded that when he made a letter, someone had already borrowed and borrowed money to pass on it, and he didn't have to wait far for "behind him". Although this is not like the main vein of the diary, if you are interested in making a statement, have praise and criticism, and want to be known but afraid of being known, you might as well try to imitate it. What does it do a little vernacular, that is, it is said that it is an article in a book to be published a hundred years later, which is really stupid and unattainable.我这回的日记，却不是那样的“有厚望焉”的，也不是原先的很简单的，现在还没有，想要写起来。四五天以前看见半农，说是要编《世界日报》的副刊去，你得寄一点稿。那自然是可以的喽。然而稿子呢？这可着实为难。看副刊的大抵是学生，都是过来人，做过什么“学而时习之不亦说乎论”或“人心不古议”的，一定知道做文章是怎样的味道。有人说我是“文学家”，其实并不是的，不要相信他们的话，那证据，就是我也最怕做文章。
My diary this time is not so "hopeful", nor is it very simple as before, and I don't have it yet, and I want to write it. Four or five days ago, I saw Bannong, who said that he was going to edit a supplement to the World Journal, and you had to send a little manuscript. That's naturally possible. But what about the manuscript? This is really difficult. Most of the students who read the supplement are people who have been there, and they must know what it is like to make an article if they have done something "learning and learning from time to time" or "people's hearts are not ancient discussions". Some people say that I am a "writer", but in fact it is not, don't believe their words, the evidence is that I am also most afraid of making a fool.然而既然答应了，总得想点法。想来想去，觉得感想倒偶尔也有一点的，平时接着一懒，便搁下，忘掉了。如果马上写出，恐怕倒也是杂感一类的东西。于是乎我就决计：一想到，就马上写下来，马上寄出去，算作我的画到簿。因为这是开首就准备给第三者看的，所以恐怕也未必很有真面目，至少，不利于己的事，现在总还要藏起来。愿读者先明白这一点。
However, since he agreed, he had to think of a way. After thinking about it, I feel that I occasionally have a little feeling, and I usually get lazy, so I put it aside and forget about it. If I write it right away, I'm afraid it's a miscellaneous feeling. So I decided: as soon as I thought of it, I would write it down immediately, send it out immediately, and count it as my painting in the book. Because this is prepared to be shown to a third party at the beginning, I am afraid that it may not be very true, at least, things that are not conducive to oneself must be hidden now. I hope the reader understands this first.如果写不出，或者不能写了，马上就收场。所以这日记要有多么长，现在一点不知道。
If you can't write it, or if you can't write it, it will end immediately. So how long this diary will be, I don't know at all now.一九二六年六月二十五日，记于东壁下。
On June 25, 1926, it was recorded under the east wall.

马上日记

六月二十五日

马上日记

June 25th晴。
Clear.生病。——今天还写这个，仿佛有点多事似的。因为这是十天以前的事，现在倒已经可以算得好起来了。不过余波还没有完，所以也只好将这作为开宗明义章第一。谨案才子立言，总须大嚷三大苦难：一曰穷，二曰病，三曰社会迫害我。那结果，便是失掉了爱人；若用专门名词，则谓之失恋。我的开宗明义虽然近似第二大苦难，实际上却不然，倒是因为端午节前收了几文稿费，吃东西吃坏了，从此就不消化，胃痛。我的胃的八字不见佳，向来就担不起福泽的。也很想看医生。中医，虽然有人说是玄妙无穷，内科尤为独步，我可总是不相信。西医呢，有名的看资贵，事情忙，诊视也潦草，无名的自然便宜些，然而我总还有些踌蹰。事情既然到了这样，当然只好听凭敝胃隐隐地痛着了。
Sick. ——Writing this today, as if it is a bit troublesome. Because this was ten days ago, it can be considered better now. However, the aftermath is not over yet, so I have to take this as the first chapter of the opening of the Ming Yi Chapter. According to the words of talented people, we must always shout about three major sufferings: poverty, illness, and social persecution. The result is the loss of a lover; If you use a special term, it is called a broken love. Although my founding intention is similar to the second greatest suffering, it is actually not, but because I received a few manuscript fees before the Dragon Boat Festival, and I ate badly, and I couldn't digest it and had stomach pain. My stomach is not good, and I have never been able to bear the blessings. I also want to see a doctor. Although some people say that traditional Chinese medicine is infinitely mysterious, internal medicine is particularly unique, but I always don't believe it. As for Western medicine, the famous one is expensive, the matter is busy, the diagnosis is also sloppy, and the nameless one is naturally cheaper, but I am always a little hesitant. Since things have come to this, of course, I have to listen to the faint pain in my stomach.自从西医割掉了梁启超的一个腰子以后，责难之声就风起云涌了，连对于腰子不很有研究的文学家也都“仗义执言”。同时，“中医了不得论”也就应运而起；腰子有病，何不服黄蓍欤？什么有病，何不吃鹿茸欤？但西医的病院里确也常有死尸抬出。我曾经忠告过G先生：你要开医院，万不可收留些看来无法挽回的病人；治好了走出，没有人知道，死掉了抬出，就哄动一时了，尤其是死掉的如果是“名流”。我的本意是在设法推行新医学，但G先生却似乎以为我良心坏。这也未始不可以那么想，——由他去罢。
Since Western medicine cut off one of Liang Qichao's waists, the voices of criticism have been surging, and even writers who are not very knowledgeable about waists have "spoken out righteously". At the same time, "traditional Chinese medicine is not to be discussed" has also emerged; If the waist is ill, why not take yellow yarrow? If you are sick, why not eat deer antler? But it is true that dead bodies are often carried out in Western medicine hospitals. I once advised Mr. G: If you want to open a hospital, you must not take in patients who seem irreparable; After being cured and walked out, no one knew, and if he died and carried out, he would be agitated for a while, especially if the dead were "celebrities". My intention was to try to promote a new medicine, but Mr. G seemed to think that I had a bad conscience. This is not something you can't think about,—— let him go.但据我看来，实行我所说的方法的医院可很有，只是他们的本意却并不在要使新医学通行。新的本国的西医又大抵模模胡胡，一出手便先学了中医一样的江湖诀，和水的龙胆丁几两日份八角；漱口的淡硼酸水每瓶一元。至于诊断学呢，我似的门外汉可不得而知。总之，西方的医学在中国还未萌芽，便已近于腐败。我虽然只相信西医，近来也颇有些望而却步了。
But in my opinion, there are many hospitals that implement the method I mentioned, but their original intention is not to make new medicine popular. The new Western medicine in the country is mostly mocking, and as soon as he makes a move, he first learns the same jianghu tricks as traditional Chinese medicine, and the gentian of water is a couple of days of star anise; The light boric acid water for rinsing your mouth is one yuan per bottle. As for diagnostics, I don't know if I am a layman. In short, Western medicine was close to corruption before it sprouted in China. Although I only believe in Western medicine, I have been a little discouraged recently.前几天和季茀谈起这些事，并且说，我的病，只要有熟人开一个方就好，用不着向什么博士化冤钱。第二天，他就给我请了正在继续研究的Dr.H.来了。开了一个方，自然要用稀盐酸，还有两样这里无须说；我所最感谢的是又加些Sirup Simpel使我喝得甜甜的，不为难。向药房去配药，可又成为问题了，因为药房也不免有模模胡胡的，他所没有的药品，也许就替换，或者竟删除。结果是托Fraeulein H.远远地跑到较大的药房去。
A few days ago, I talked to Ji Fu about these things, and said that my illness, as long as an acquaintance prescribes a prescription, there is no need to pay any doctor for wrongful money. The next day, he invited Dr. H., who was continuing his research, to come. If you open a prescription, you naturally need to use dilute hydrochloric acid, and there are two things that need not be said here; What I am most grateful for is that I added some Sirup Simpel to make it sweet, so I didn't have to worry about it. Dispensing medicine to the pharmacy has become a problem again, because the pharmacy is inevitably nonsense, and the medicine he does not have may be replaced, or even deleted. The result was that Fraeulein H. ran far away to the larger pharmacy.这样一办，加上车钱，也还要比医院的药价便宜到四分之三。
In this way, plus the car fare, it is also three-quarters cheaper than the hospital's drug price.胃酸得了外来的生力军，强盛起来，一瓶药还未喝完，痛就停止了。我决定多喝它几天。但是，第二瓶却奇怪，同一的药房，同一的药方，药味可是不同一了；不像前一回的甜，也不酸。我检查我自己，并不发热，舌苔也不厚，这分明是药水有些蹊跷。喝了两回，坏处倒也没有；幸而不是急病，不大要紧，便照例将它喝完。去买第三瓶时，却附带了严重的质问；那回答是：也许糖分少了一点罢。这意思就是说紧要的药品没有错。中国的事情真是稀奇，糖分少一点，不但不甜，连酸也不酸了，的确是“特别国情”。
The stomach acid got a new force from outside, and it became strong, and the pain stopped before a bottle of medicine was finished. I decided to drink it for a few more days. However, the second bottle is strange, the same pharmacy, the same prescription, the taste of the medicine is different; It's not as sweet as the last time, and it's not sour. I checked myself, I didn't have a fever, and the tongue coating was not thick, which was clearly a bit strange in the potion. I drank it twice, but there was no harm; Fortunately, it was not an emergency, so it didn't matter, so I drank it as usual. when I went to buy the third bottle, it was accompanied by serious questions; The answer is: maybe it's a little less sugar. This means that there is nothing wrong with important medicines. Things in China are really strange, less sugar, not only not sweet, not even sour, it is indeed a "special national condition".现在多攻击大医院对于病人的冷漠，我想，这些医院，将病人当作研究品，大概是有的，还有在院里的“高等华人”，将病人看作下等研究品，大概也是有的。不愿意的，只好上私人所开的医院去，可是诊金药价都很贵。请熟人开了方去买药呢，药水也会先后不同起来。
Nowadays, I attack the indifference of large hospitals to patients, I think that there are probably some of these hospitals that treat patients as research objects, and there are probably "higher Chinese" in the hospital who regard patients as inferior research objects. If you don't want to, you have to go to a private hospital, but the price of the consultation is very expensive. If you ask an acquaintance to prescribe a prescription to buy medicine, the potions will be different.这是人的问题。做事不切实，便什么都可疑。吕端大事不胡涂，犹言小事不妨胡涂点，这自然很足以显示我们中国人的雅量，然而我的胃痛却因此延长了。在宇宙的森罗万象中，我的胃痛当然不过是小事，或者简直不算事。
This is a human problem. If you don't do things practically, everything will be suspicious. Lu Duan doesn't mess around on big things, and he says that small things might as well be foolish, which is naturally enough to show the elegance of our Chinese, but my stomach pain has been prolonged. In the midst of all the universe, my stomach ache is of course nothing more than a trivial matter, or nothing at all.质问之后的第三瓶药水，药味就同第一瓶一样了。先前的闷胡卢，到此就很容易打破，就是那第二瓶里，是只有一日分的药，却加了两日分的水的，所以药味比正当的要薄一半。
The third bottle of potion after questioning tasted the same as the first bottle. The previous stuffy hulu is easy to break here, that is, in the second bottle, there is only one day's worth of medicine, but two days' worth of water is added, so the taste of the medicine is half thinner than the legitimate one.虽然连吃药也那么蹭蹬，病却也居然好起来了。病略见好，H就攻击我头发长，说为什么不赶快去剪发。
Although he was so hesitant to take medicine, his illness actually got better. When I got better, H attacked me for having long hair and said why don't you get a haircut quickly.这种攻击是听惯的，照例“着毋庸议”。但也不想用功，只是清理抽屉。翻翻废纸，其中有一束纸条，是前几年钞写的；这很使我觉得自己也日懒一日了，现在早不想做这类事。那时大概是想要做一篇攻击近时印书，胡乱标点之谬的文章的，废纸中就钞有很奇妙的例子。要塞进字纸篓里时，觉得有几条总还是爱不忍释，现在钞几条在这里，马上印出，以便“有目共赏”罢。其余的便作为换取火柴之助——
This kind of attack is accustomed to hearing, and it is "unnecessarily discussed" as usual. But I don't want to work hard, just clean the drawers. Rummaging through the waste paper, there was a bundle of notes, which were written by banknotes a few years ago; This makes me feel like I'm lazy every day, and I don't want to do this kind of thing now. At that time, I probably wanted to make an article that attacked the recent printing of books and the error of punctuation, and there were wonderful examples of banknotes in waste paper. When I stuffed it into the paper basket, I felt that there were a few that I still couldn't bear to let go, but now a few banknotes are here, and they are printed immediately so that they can be "appreciated by everyone". The rest is used as a match for help -“国朝陈锡路黄嬭余话云。唐傅奕考覈道经众本。有项羽妾。本齐武平五年彭城人。开项羽妾冢。得之。”（上海进步书局石印本《茶香室丛钞》卷四第二叶。）
Chen Xilu Huang Huanyu of the National Dynasty said. Tang Fu Yi examined the various foundations of the Taoist scriptures. He had a concubine named Xiang Yu. He was originally from Pengcheng in the fifth year of the reign of King Wuping of the Qi dy The tomb of Xiang Yu's concubine was opened. I got it. (Shanghai Progress Book Company's stone print "Tea Fragrance Room Congba" volume 4, second leaf.) ）“国朝欧阳泉点勘记云。欧阳修醉翁亭。记让泉也。本集及滁州石刻。並同诸选本。作酿泉。误也。”（同上卷八第七叶。）
“国朝欧阳泉点勘记云。 欧阳修醉翁亭。 记让泉也。 本集及滁州石刻。 並同诸选本。 作酿泉。 误也。 ”（同上卷八第七叶。 ）“袁石公典试秦中。后颇自悔。其少作诗文。皆粹然一出于正。”（上海士林精舍石印本《书影》卷一第四叶。）
Yuan Shigong tried Qinzhong. Later, he regretted it quite a bit. In his youth, he wrote poetry and prose. All of them are pure and come from the right path. (Shanghai Shilin Jingshe stone print "Book Shadow", volume 1, fourth leaf.) ）“考……顺治中，秀水又有一陈忱，……著诚斋诗集，不出户庭，录读史随笔，同姓名录诸书。”（上海亚东图书馆排印本《水浒续集两种序》第七叶。）
"Exam...... During the Shunzhi period, there was another Chen Chen in Xiushui,...... He is the author of a collection of poems by Chengzhai, and without leaving the courtyard, he transcribes historical essays and books with the same name. (The seventh leaf of the typesetting version of "Two Prefaces to the Sequel to Water Margin" by the Shanghai Far Eastern Library.) ）标点古文，确是一种小小的难事，往往无从下笔；有许多处，我常疑心即使请作者自己来标点，怕也不免于迟疑。但上列的几条，却还不至于那么无从索解。末两条的意义尤显豁，而标点也弄得更聪明。
Punctuating ancient texts is indeed a small difficulty, and it is often impossible to write; There are many places, and I often doubt that even if the author is asked to punctuate it himself, I am afraid that he will not hesitate. But the above few are not so incomprehensible. The meaning of the last two is particularly open, and the punctuation is also smarter.

马上日记

六月二十六日

马上日记

June 26晴。
Clear.上午，得霁野从他家乡寄来的信，话并不多，说家里有病人，别的一切人也都在毫无防备的将被疾病袭击的恐怖中；末尾还有几句感慨。
In the morning, De Jiye sent a letter from his hometown, which did not say much, saying that there were patients at home, and everyone else was in the horror of being attacked by the disease without defense; There are a few more emotions at the end.午后，织芳从河南来，谈了几句，匆匆忙忙地就走了，放下两个包，说这是“方糖”，送你吃的，怕不见得好。织芳这一回有点发胖，又这么忙，又穿着方马褂，我恐怕他将要做官了。
In the afternoon, Zhi Fang came from Henan, talked a few words, and left in a hurry, put down two bags, saying that this was a "sugar cube", and it was for you to eat, I was afraid it might not be good. Zhi Fang is a little fat this time, so busy, and wearing a square coat, I'm afraid he will become an official.打开包来看时，何尝是“方”的，却是圆圆的小薄片，黄棕色。吃起来又凉又细腻，确是好东西。但我不明白织芳为什么叫它“方糖”？但这也就可以作为他将要做官的一证。
When I opened the bag, it was "square", but it was a small round flake, yellowish-brown. It tastes cold and delicate, and it is indeed a good thing. But I don't understand why Zhi Fang calls it a "sugar cube"? But this can also be used as proof that he will be an official.景宋说这是河南一处什么地方的名产，是用柿霜做成的；性凉，如果嘴角上生些小疮之类，用这一搽，便会好。怪不得有这么细腻，原来是凭了造化的妙手，用柿皮来滤过的。可惜到他说明的时候，我已经吃了一大半了。连忙将所余的收起，豫备将来嘴角上生疮的时候，好用这来搽。
Jing Song said that this is a specialty of a place in Henan, which is made of persimmon frost; It is cool, if there are some small sores on the corners of the mouth, it will be good if you use this brush. No wonder it is so delicate, it turned out to be filtered with persimmon skin by the skillful hand of nature. Unfortunately, by the time he explained, I had already eaten more than half of it. Quickly put away the rest, preparing for the sores on the corners of the mouth in the future, so that it can be used to apply them.夜间，又将藏着的柿霜糖吃了一大半，因为我忽而又以为嘴角上生疮的时候究竟不很多，还不如现在趁新鲜吃一点。不料一吃，就又吃了一大半了。
At night, I ate more than half of the persimmon frost candy I hidden, because I suddenly thought that there weren't many sores on the corners of my mouth, so it was better to eat a little while it was fresh. Unexpectedly, as soon as I ate it, I ate more than half of it.

马上日记

六月二十八日

马上日记

June 28晴，大风。
Sunny, strong wind.上午出门，主意是在买药，看见满街挂着五色国旗；军警林立。走到丰盛胡同中段，被军警驱入一条小胡同中。少顷，看见大路上黄尘滚滚，一辆摩托车驰过；少顷，又是一辆；少顷，又是一辆；又是一辆；又是一辆……。车中人看不分明，但见金边帽。车边上挂着兵，有的背着扎红绸的板刀；小胡同中人都肃然有敬畏之意。又少顷，摩托车没有了，我们渐渐溜出，军警也不作声。
When I went out in the morning, I thought about buying medicine and saw five-colored national flags hanging all over the streets; There are many military and police officers. Walking to the middle of Fengsheng Hutong, he was driven into a small alley by the military and police. After a while, I saw yellow dust rolling on the road, and a motorcycle galloped by; After a while, it was another one; After a while, it was another one; Another one; Another ....... The people in the carriage could not see clearly, only the gold-rimmed hat. There were soldiers hanging on the side of the car, some carrying knives tied with red silk; The people in the alley were in awe. After a while, the motorcycle was gone, and we gradually slipped out, and the military and police did not make a sound.溜到西单牌楼大街，也是满街挂着五色国旗，军警林立。一群破衣孩子，各各拿着一把小纸片，叫道：欢迎吴玉帅号外呀！一个来叫我买，我没有买。
Slipping to Xidan Pailou Street, the streets are also full of five-colored national flags, and there are many military and police. A group of children in tattered clothes, each holding a small piece of paper, shouted: Welcome Wu Yushuai! One came to ask me to buy it, but I didn't buy it.将近宣武门口，一个黄色制服，汗流满面的汉子从外面走进来，忽而大声道：草你妈！许多人都对他看，但他走过去了，许多人也就不看了。走进宣武门城洞下，又是一个破衣孩子拿着一把小纸片，但却默默地将一张塞给我，接来一看，是石印的李国恒先生的传单，内中大意，是说他的多年痔疮，已蒙一个国手叫作什么先生的医好了。
Approaching the gate of Xuanwu, a man in a yellow uniform and sweaty walked in from outside, and suddenly said loudly: Grass your mother! Many people looked at him, but when he walked over, many people stopped looking. Walking into the Xuanwumen City Cave, another child in ragged clothes was holding a small piece of paper, but silently stuffed one into me, and when I took a look, it was a leaflet of Mr. Li Guoheng with a stone seal, which was to the effect that his hemorrhoids for many years had been cured by a national master called Mr. He.到了目的地的药房时，外面正有一群人围着看两个人的口角；一柄浅蓝色的旧洋伞正挡住药房门。我推那洋伞时，斤量很不轻；终于伞底下回过一个头来，问我“干什么？”我答说进去买药。他不作声，又回头去看口角去了，洋伞的位置依旧。我只好下了十二分的决心，猛力冲锋；一冲，可就冲进去了。
When I arrived at the destination pharmacy, there was a group of people outside watching the quarrel between the two people; An old light blue umbrella was blocking the door of the pharmacy. When I pushed the umbrella, the weight was not light; Finally, he turned around under the umbrella and asked me, "What are you doing?" I replied that I would go in and buy medicine. He remained silent, turned back to look at the corner of his mouth, and the position of the umbrella was still the same. I had to make up my mind to charge fiercely; As soon as he rushed, he rushed in.药房里只有帐桌上坐着一个外国人，其余的店伙都是年青的同胞，服饰干净漂亮。不知怎地，我忽而觉得十年以后，他们便都要变为高等华人，而自己却现在就有下等人之感。于是乎恭恭敬敬地将药方和瓶子捧呈给一位分开头发的同胞。
There was only a foreigner sitting at the account table in the pharmacy, and the rest of the shopkeepers were young compatriots, dressed cleanly and beautifully. Somehow, I suddenly felt that ten years from now, they would all become high-class Chinese, but I now feel inferior. So he respectfully presented the prescription and bottle to a compatriot with parted hair.“八毛五分。”他接了，一面走，一面说。
"Eight cents and five cents." He took it and said as he walked.“喂！”我实在耐不住，下等脾气又发作了。药价八毛，瓶子钱照例五分，我是知道的。现在自己带了瓶子，怎么还要付五分钱呢？这一个“喂”字的功用就和国骂的“他妈的”相同，其中含有这么多的意义。
"Hey!" I couldn't stand it anymore, and my temper flares up again. The price of the medicine is eight cents, and the bottle is five cents as usual, I know. Now that I brought my own bottle, why do I have to pay five cents? The function of this word "feed" is the same as the "fucking" of the national scolding, which contains so many meanings.“八毛！”他也立刻懂得，将五分钱让去，真是“从善如流”，有正人君子的风度。
"Eight cents!" He also immediately understood that giving away five cents was really "good like a stream" and had the demeanor of a decent gentleman.我付了八毛钱，等候一会，药就拿出来了。我想，对付这一种同胞，有时是不宜于太客气的。于是打开瓶塞，当面尝了一尝。
I paid eight cents, waited for a while, and the medicine was taken out. I think it is sometimes not appropriate to be too polite to deal with this kind of compatriot. So I opened the cork and tasted it in person.“没有错的。”他很聪明，知道我不信任他。
"There's nothing wrong." He was smart and knew I didn't trust him.“唔。”我点头表示赞成。其实是，还是不对，我的味觉不至于很麻木，这回觉得太酸了一点了，他连量杯也懒得用，那稀盐酸分明已经过量。然而这于我倒毫无妨碍的，我可以每回少喝些，或者对上水，多喝它几回。所以说“唔”；“唔”者，介乎两可之间，莫明其真意之所在之答话也。
"Hmm." I nodded in agreement. In fact, yes, or not, my taste is not very numb, this time I feel a little too sour, he doesn't even bother to use the measuring cup, the dilute hydrochloric acid is clearly excessive. However, this does not hinder me, I can drink less each time, or drink it a few more times with water. So say "no"; "No" is an answer that is between the two and does not know where the true meaning lies.“回见回见！”我取了瓶子，走着说。
"See you again!" I took the bottle and walked away.“回见。不喝水么？”
"See you again. Don't drink water? ”“不喝了。回见。”
"Don't drink anymore. See you later. ”我们究竟是礼教之邦的国民，归根结蒂，还是礼让。让出了玻璃门之后，在大毒日头底下的尘土中趱行，行到东长安街左近，又是军警林立。我正想横穿过去，一个巡警伸手拦住道：不成！我说只要走十几步，到对面就好了。他的回答仍然是：不成！那结果，是从别的道路绕。
Whether we are citizens of the country of etiquette or courtesy, in the final analysis, is still courtesy. After giving up the glass door, he walked in the dust under the poisonous sun, and when he walked to the left side of East Chang'an Street, there were many military and police officers. I was about to cross over, but a patrol officer stretched out his hand to stop me and said: No! I said that just a dozen steps to the opposite side. His answer is still no! As a result, it was a detour from another road.绕到L君的寓所前，便打门，打出一个小使来，说L君出去了，须得午饭时候才回家。我说，也快到这个时候了，我在这里等一等罢。他说：不成！你贵姓呀？这使我很狼狈，路既这么远，走路又这么难，白走一遭，实在有些可惜。我想了十秒钟，便从衣袋里挖出一张名片来，叫他进去禀告太太，说有这么一个人，要在这里等一等，可以不？约有半刻钟，他出来了，结果是：也不成！先生要三点钟才回来哩，你三点钟再来罢。
When I went around to Mr. L's apartment, I knocked on the door and sent out a small messenger, saying that Mr. L was out and would not go home until lunch. I said, it's almost this time, I'll wait here. He said: No! Is your surname your surname? This made me very embarrassed, the road was so far, and it was so difficult to walk, it was a pity to walk in vain. I thought for ten seconds, then dug out a business card from my pocket and asked him to go in and report to his wife, saying that there was such a person, and he had to wait here, okay? After about half a quarter of an hour, he came out, and the result was: no! Sir, you won't be back until three o'clock; you can come back at three o'clock.又想了十秒钟，只好决计去访C君，仍在大毒日头底下的尘土中趱行，这回总算一路无阻，到了。打门一问，来开门的答道：去看一看可在家。我想：这一次是大有希望了。果然，即刻领我进客厅，C君也跑出来。我首先就要求他请我吃午饭。于是请我吃面包，还有葡萄酒；主人自己却吃面。那结果是一盘面包被我吃得精光，虽然另有奶油，可是四碟菜也所余无几了。
After thinking about it for another ten seconds, I had to decide to visit Mr. C, still walking in the dust under the poisonous sun, and this time I finally arrived all the way unhindered. When he knocked on the door and asked, the person who came to open the door replied: Go and take a look at it. I thought: this time there is a lot of hope. Sure enough, he immediately led me into the living room, and Mr. C also ran out. I first asked him to treat me to lunch. So I was invited to bread and wine; The owner himself eats noodles. The result was a plate of bread that I had eaten, and although there was butter, there was not much left for the four plates.吃饱了就讲闲话，直到五点钟。
When you are full, gossip until five o'clock.客厅外是很大的一块空地方，种着许多树。一株频果树下常有孩子们徘徊；C君说，那是在等候频果落下来的；因为有定律：谁拾得就归谁所有。我很笑孩子们耐心，肯做这样的迂远事。然而奇怪，到我辞别出去时，我看见三个孩子手里已经各有一个频果了。
Outside the living room is a large empty space with many trees. children often wander under a fruit tree; Mr. C said that he was waiting for the fruit to fall; Because there is a law: whoever finds it belongs to whoever it is. I laugh at the children's patience and willingness to do such a roundabout thing. However, strangely, when I said goodbye and went out, I saw that each of the three children had a frequency fruit in their hands.回家看日报，上面说：“……吴在长辛店留宿一宵。除上述原因外，尚有一事，系吴由保定启程后，张其锽曾为吴卜一课，谓二十八日入京大利，必可平定西北。二十七日入京欠佳。吴颇以为然。此亦吴氏迟一日入京之由来也。”因此又想起我今天“不成”了大半天，运气殊属欠佳，不如也卜一课，以觇晚上的休咎罢。但我不明卜法，又无筮龟，实在无从措手。后来发明了一种新法，就是随便拉过一本书来，闭了眼睛，翻开，用手指指下去，然后张开眼，看指着的两句，就算是卜辞。
When I went home and read the daily newspaper, it said, "...... Wu Sheng stayed overnight at Changxin Inn. In addition to the above reasons, there is another thing, after Wu set off from Baoding, Zhang Qiqiang once gave Wu a lesson, saying that entering Beijing on the 28th will definitely be able to pacify the northwest. On the 27th, I entered the capital and was not good. Wu Sheng thought this was quite reasonable. This is also the reason why Wu arrived in the capital a day late. Therefore, I remembered that I had "failed" for most of the day today, and my luck was very bad, so I might as well take a lesson to see what would happen in the evening. But I don't know how to divine, and I don't know how to divine, so I really can't do anything. Later, a new method was invented, that is, to pull a book casually, close your eyes, open them, point them down with your fingers, and then open your eyes to look at the two sentences pointed to, even if they are divination.用的是《陶渊明集》，如法泡制，那两句是：“寄意一言外，兹契谁能别。”详了一会，竟不知道是怎么一回事。
The two sentences are: "Outside the word, who can say goodbye." After a while, I didn't know what was going on.

马上支日记

马上支日记

马上支日记

Immediately pay for the diary前几天会见小峰，谈到自己要在半农所编的副刊上投点稿，那名目是《马上日记》。小峰怃然曰，回忆归在《旧事重提》中，目下的杂感就写进这日记里面去……。意思之间，似乎是说：你在《语丝》上做什么呢？——但这也许是我自己的疑心病。我那时可暗暗地想：生长在敢于吃河豚的地方的人，怎么也会这样拘泥？政党会设支部，银行会开支店，我就不会写支日记的么？因为《语丝》上须投稿，而这暗想马上就实行了，于是乎作支日记。
A few days ago, I met Xiaofeng and talked about how he wanted to submit a manuscript in the supplement edited by Bannong, which was called "Diary Immediately". Xiaofeng said sadly, the memories are returned to "Revisiting Old Things", and the current miscellaneous feelings are written into this diary to ....... Between the meanings, it seems to say: What are you doing on "Yusi"? - But this may be my own suspicion. At that time, I secretly thought: How could people who grew up in places that dared to eat puffer fish be so stubborn? Political parties will set up branches, banks will open branches, won't I write a diary? Because "Yusi" had to be contributed, and this secret thought was immediately implemented, so I wrote a diary.

马上支日记

六月二十九日

马上支日记

June 29th晴。
Clear.早晨被一个小蝇子在脸上爬来爬去爬醒，赶开，又来；赶开，又来；而且一定要在脸上的一定的地方爬。打了一回，打它不死，只得改变方针：自己起来。
In the morning, I was awakened by a small fly crawling around on my face, driving away, and coming again; drive away, come again; And be sure to crawl in a certain place on your face. After beating it once, it didn't die, so I had to change my policy: get up by myself.记得前年夏天路过S州，那客店里的蝇群却着实使人惊心动魄。饭菜搬来时，它们先追逐着赏鉴；夜间就停得满屋，我们就枕，必须慢慢地，小心地放下头去，倘若猛然一躺，惊动了它们，便轰的一声，飞得你头昏眼花，一败涂地。到黎明，青年们所希望的黎明，那自然就照例地到你脸上来爬来爬去了。但我经过街上，看见一个孩子睡着，五六个蝇子在他脸上爬，他却睡得甜甜的，连皮肤也不牵动一下。在中国过活，这样的训练和涵养工夫是万不可少的。与其鼓吹什么“捕蝇”，倒不如练习这一种本领来得切实。
I remember passing by S State last summer, but the fly swarm in the inn was really thrilling. When the food is brought in, they chase and appreciate it first; At night, the house is full, and we are pillows, we must put our heads down slowly and carefully, and if we lie down suddenly and alarm them, it will make you dizzy and defeated. By dawn, the dawn that young people hope for, they will naturally crawl around on your face as usual. But when I passed by the street, I saw a child asleep, five or six flies crawling on his face, but he slept sweetly, not even touching his skin. To live in China, such training and cultivation are indispensable. Instead of advocating some "fly catching", it is better to practice this skill.什么事都不想做。不知道是胃病没有全好呢，还是缺少了睡眠时间。仍旧懒懒地翻翻废纸，又看见几条《茶香室丛钞》式的东西。已经团入字纸篓里的了，又觉得“弃之不甘”，挑一点关于《水浒传》的，移录在这里罢——
I don't want to do anything. I don't know if it's because the stomach problem is not completely cured, or if there is a lack of sleep time. I was still lazily rummaging through the waste paper, and I saw a few "Tea Fragrance Room Banknotes" style. It has already been put into the word basket, and I feel that I am "unwilling to abandon it", so pick a little about "Water Margin" and transfer it here——宋洪迈《夷坚甲志》十四云：“绍兴二十五年，吴傅朋说除守安丰军，自番阳遣一卒往呼吏士，行至舒州境，见村民穰穰，十百相聚，因弛担观之。其人曰，吾村有妇人为虎衔去，其夫不胜愤，独携刀往探虎穴，移时不反，今谋往救也。久之，民负死妻归，云，初寻迹至穴，虎牝牡皆不在，有二子戏岩窦下，即杀之，而隐其中以俟。少顷，望牝者衔一人至，倒身入穴，不知人藏其中也。吾急持尾，断其一足。虎弃所衔人，踉而窜；徐出视之，果吾妻也，死矣。虎曳足行数十步，堕涧中。吾复入窦伺，牡者俄咆跃而至，亦以尾先入，又如前法杀之。妻冤已报，无憾矣。乃邀邻里往视，舆四虎以归，分烹之。”案《水浒传》叙李逵沂岭杀四虎事，情状极相类，疑即本此等传说作之。《夷坚甲志》成于乾道初（1165），此条题云《舒民杀四虎》。
宋洪迈《夷坚甲志》十四云：“绍兴二十五年，吴傅朋说除守安丰军，自番阳遣一卒往呼吏士，行至舒州境，见村民穰穰，十百相聚，因弛担观之。 其人曰，吾村有妇人为虎衔去，其夫不胜愤，独携刀往探虎穴，移时不反，今谋往救也。 久之，民负死妻归，云，初寻迹至穴，虎牝牡皆不在，有二子戏岩窦下，即杀之，而隐其中以俟。 少顷，望牝者衔一人至，倒身入穴，不知人藏其中也。 吾急持尾，断其一足。 虎弃所衔人，踉而窜；徐出视之，果吾妻也，死矣。 虎曳足行数十步，堕涧中。 吾复入窦伺，牡者俄咆跃而至，亦以尾先入，又如前法杀之。 妻冤已报，无憾矣。 乃邀邻里往视，舆四虎以归，分烹之。 ”案《水浒传》叙李逵沂岭杀四虎事，情状极相类，疑即本此等传说作之。 《夷坚甲志》成于乾道初（1165），此条题云《舒民杀四虎》。宋庄季裕《鸡肋编》中云：“浙人以鸭儿为大讳。北人但知鸭羹虽甚热，亦无气。后至南方，乃始知鸭若只一雄，则虽合而无卵，须二三始有子，其以为讳者，盖为是耳，不在于无气也。”案《水浒传》叙郓哥向武大索麦稃，“武大道：‘我屋里又不养鹅鸭，那里有这麦稃？’郓哥道：‘你说没麦稃，怎地栈得肥地，便颠倒提起你来也不妨，煮你在锅里也没气？’武大道：‘含鸟猢狲！倒骂得我好。我的老婆又不偷汉子，我如何是鸭？’……”鸭必多雄始孕，盖宋时浙中俗说，今已不知。然由此可知《水浒传》确为旧本，其著者则浙人；虽庄季裕，亦仅知鸭羹无气而已。《鸡肋编》有绍兴三年（1133）序，去今已将八百年。
宋庄季裕《鸡肋编》中云：“浙人以鸭儿为大讳。 北人但知鸭羹虽甚热，亦无气。 后至南方，乃始知鸭若只一雄，则虽合而无卵，须二三始有子，其以为讳者，盖为是耳，不在于无气也。 ”案《水浒传》叙郓哥向武大索麦稃，“武大道：‘我屋里又不养鹅鸭，那里有这麦稃？’郓哥道：‘你说没麦稃，怎地栈得肥地，便颠倒提起你来也不妨，煮你在锅里也没气？’武大道：‘含鸟猢狲！倒骂得我好。 我的老婆又不偷汉子，我如何是鸭？’……”鸭必多雄始孕，盖宋时浙中俗说，今已不知。 然由此可知《水浒传》确为旧本，其著者则浙人；虽庄季裕，亦仅知鸭羹无气而已。 《鸡肋编》有绍兴三年（1133）序，去今已将八百年。元陈泰《所安遗集》《江南曲序》云：“余童艸时，闻长老言宋江事，未究其详。至治癸亥秋九月十六日，过梁山泊，舟遥见一峰，嵲雄跨，问之篙师，曰，此安山也，昔宋江事处，绝湖为池，阔九十里，皆蕖荷菱芡，相传以为宋妻所植。宋之为人，勇悍狂侠，其党如宋者三十六人。至今山下有分赃台，置石座三十六所，俗所谓‘去时三十六，归时十八双’，意者其自誓之辞也。始予过此，荷花弥望，今无复存者，惟残香相送耳。因记王荆公诗云：‘三十六陂春水，白头想见江南。’味其词，作《江南曲》以叙游历，且以慰宋妻种荷之意云。（原注：曲因蠹损无存。）”案宋江有妻在梁山泺中，且植芰荷，仅见于此；而谓江勇悍狂侠，亦与今所传性格绝殊，知《水浒》故事，宋元来异说多矣。泰字志同，号所安，茶陵人，延祐甲寅（1314），以《天马赋》中省试第十二名，会试赐乙卯科张起岩榜进士第，由翰林庶吉士改授龙南令，卒官。至曾孙朴，始集其遗文为一卷。成化丁未，来孙铨等又并补遗重刊之。《江南曲》即在补遗中，而失其诗。近《涵芬楼秘笈》第十集收金侃手写本，则并序失之矣。“舟遥见一峰”及“昔宋江事处”二句，当有脱误，未见别本，无以正之。
元陈泰《所安遗集》《江南曲序》云：“余童艸时，闻长老言宋江事，未究其详。 至治癸亥秋九月十六日，过梁山泊，舟遥见一峰，嵲雄跨，问之篙师，曰，此安山也，昔宋江事处，绝湖为池，阔九十里，皆蕖荷菱芡，相传以为宋妻所植。 宋之为人，勇悍狂侠，其党如宋者三十六人。 至今山下有分赃台，置石座三十六所，俗所谓‘去时三十六，归时十八双’，意者其自誓之辞也。 始予过此，荷花弥望，今无复存者，惟残香相送耳。 因记王荆公诗云：‘三十六陂春水，白头想见江南。 ’味其词，作《江南曲》以叙游历，且以慰宋妻种荷之意云。 （原注：曲因蠹损无存。 ）”案宋江有妻在梁山泺中，且植芰荷，仅见于此；而谓江勇悍狂侠，亦与今所传性格绝殊，知《水浒》故事，宋元来异说多矣。 泰字志同，号所安，茶陵人，延祐甲寅（1314），以《天马赋》中省试第十二名，会试赐乙卯科张起岩榜进士第，由翰林庶吉士改授龙南令，卒官。 至曾孙朴，始集其遗文为一卷。 成化丁未，来孙铨等又并补遗重刊之。 《江南曲》即在补遗中，而失其诗。 近《涵芬楼秘笈》第十集收金侃手写本，则并序失之矣。 “舟遥见一峰”及“昔宋江事处”二句，当有脱误，未见别本，无以正之。

马上支日记

七月一日

马上支日记

July 1st晴。
Clear.上午，空六来谈；全谈些报纸上所载的事，真伪莫辨。许多工夫之后，他走了，他所谈的我几乎都忘记了，等于不谈。只记得一件：据说吴佩孚大帅在一处宴会的席上发表，查得赤化的始祖乃是蚩尤，因为“蚩”“赤”同音，所以蚩尤即“赤尤”，“赤尤”者，就是“赤化之尤”的意思；说毕，合座为之“欢然”云。
In the morning, Kong Liu came to talk; All about what was written in the newspaper, the truth is indistinguishable. After a lot of work, he left, and I almost forgot what he said, which is equivalent to not talking about it. I only remember one thing: it is said that Marshal Wu Peifu announced at a banquet that the ancestor of Chihua was Chiyou, because "Chi" and "Chi" are homonymous, so Chiyou is "Chiyou", and "Chiyou" means "Chihua You"; After speaking, the audience was "happy."太阳很烈，几盆小草花的叶子有些垂下来了，浇了一点水。田妈忠告我：浇花的时候是每天必须一定的，不能乱；一乱，就有害。我觉得有理，便踌躇起来；但又想，没有人在一定的时候来浇花，我又没有一定的浇花的时候，如果遵照她的学说，那些小花可只好晒死罢了。即使乱浇，总胜于不浇；即使有害，总胜于晒死罢。便继续浇下去，但心里自然也不大踊跃。下午，叶子都直起来了，似乎不甚有害，这才放了心。
The sun was very strong, and the leaves of a few pots of small grass flowers were a little drooping, so I watered them a little. Tian Ma advised me: Watering flowers must be done every day, not messy; If it is chaotic, it will be harmful. I think it makes sense, so I hesitate; But I also thought that no one would come to water the flowers at a certain time, and I would not have a certain time to water the flowers, if I followed her doctrine, those little flowers would have to be sunburned to death. Even if it is watered indiscriminately, it is always better than not watering at all; Even if it is harmful, it is better than dying. So he continued to pour it, but naturally he was not very enthusiastic. In the afternoon, the leaves straightened up, and it didn't seem to be very harmful, so I was relieved.灯下太热，夜间便在暗中呆坐着，凉风微动，不觉也有些“欢然”。人倘能够“超然象外”，看看报章，倒也是一种清福。我对于报章，向来就不是博览家，然而这半年来，已经很遇见了些铭心绝品。远之，则如段祺瑞执政的《二感篇》，张之江督办的《整顿学风电》，陈源教授的《闲话》；近之，则如丁文江督办（？）的自称“书呆子”演说，胡适之博士的英国庚款答问，牛荣声先生的“开倒车”论（见《现代评论》七十八期），孙传芳督军的与刘海粟先生论美术书。但这些比起赤化源流考来，却又相去不可以道里计。今年春天，张之江督办明明有电报来赞成枪毙赤化嫌疑的学生，而弄到底自己还是逃不出赤化。这很使我莫明其妙；现在既知道蚩尤是赤化的祖师，那疑团可就冰释了。蚩尤曾打炎帝，炎帝也是“赤魁”。炎者，火德也，火色赤；帝不就是首领么？所以三一八惨案，即等于以赤讨赤，无论那一面，都还是逃不脱赤化的名称。
It was too hot under the lamp, so I sat in the dark at night, and the cool breeze moved slightly, and I didn't feel a little "happy". If people can "transcend the outside" and read the newspaper, it is also a kind of happiness. I have never been a reader of newspapers, but in the past six months, I have encountered some unforgettable masterpieces. In the distance, it is like Duan Qirui's "Two Senses", Zhang Zhijiang's "Rectification of Wind Power", and Professor Chen Yuan's "Gossip"; Closely, it is like Ding Wenjiang supervising (?) ) self-proclaimed "nerd" speech, Dr. Hu Shizhi's British Geng Q&A, Mr. Niu Rongsheng's "driving backwards" theory (see "Modern Review" No. 78), and Sun Chuanfang's discussion of art books with Mr. Liu Haisu. But these are not as far apart as the source of red. This spring, Zhang Zhijiang's supervisor clearly had a telegram in favor of shooting the suspected reddening students, but in the end, he still couldn't escape reddening. This is very confusing to me; Now that he knows that Chi You is the ancestor of Chihua, the suspicion can be solved. Chi You once fought the Yan Emperor, and the Yan Emperor was also a "Chi Kui". Flame is the virtue of fire, and the color of fire is red; Isn't the emperor the leader? Therefore, the 318 tragedy is equivalent to fighting red with red, and no matter which side, it still cannot escape the name of red.这样巧妙的考证天地间委实不很多，只记得先前在日本东京时，看见《读卖新闻》上逐日登载着一种大著作，其中有黄帝即亚伯拉罕的考据。大意是日本称油为“阿蒲拉”（Abura），油的颜色大概是黄的，所以“亚伯拉”就是“黄”。至于“帝”，是与“罕”形近，还是与“可汗”音近呢，我现在可记不真确了，总之：阿伯拉罕即油帝，油帝就是黄帝而已。篇名和作者，现在也都忘却，只记得后来还印成一本书，而且还只是上卷。但这考据究竟还过于弯曲，不深究也好。
I only remember that when I was in Tokyo, Japan, I saw a big work published in the Yomiuri Shimbun every day, which included the evidence of the Yellow Emperor, that is, Abraham. The gist is that Japan calls oil "Abura", and the color of the oil is probably yellow, so "Abura" is "yellow". As for the "emperor", whether it is close to "Han" or "Khan", I can't remember it really now, in short: Abraham is the Oil Emperor, and the Oil Emperor is the Yellow Emperor. The title and author of the article are now forgotten, only that it was later printed as a book, and it was only the first volume. But this evidence is still too crooked, so it's okay not to delve into it.

马上支日记

七月二日

马上支日记

July 2晴。
Clear.午后，在前门外买药后，绕到东单牌楼的东亚公司闲看。这虽然不过是带便贩卖一点日本书，可是关于研究中国的就已经很不少。因为或种限制，只买了一本安冈秀夫所作的《从小说看来的支那民族性》就走了，是薄薄的一本书，用大红深黄做装饰的，价一元二角。
In the afternoon, after buying medicine outside the front door, I went around to the East Asia Company in the Dongdan Archway to take a look. Although this is just a small sale of Japanese books, there is already a lot about studying China. Because of some restrictions, I only bought a copy of "Chinese Nationality from the Perspective of Novels" written by Hideo Yasuoka and left, which was a thin book, decorated with bright red and dark yellow, and priced at one yuan and two corners.傍晚坐在灯下，就看看那本书，他所引用的小说有三十四种，但其中也有其实并非小说和分一部为几种的。蚊子来叮了好几口，虽然似乎不过一两个，但是坐不住了，点起蚊烟香来，这才总算渐渐太平下去。
Sitting under the lamp in the evening, I looked at the book, there were thirty-four novels he cited, but some of them were not actually novels and were divided into several parts. The mosquitoes came to bite several times, although it seemed to be only one or two, but they couldn't sit still, lit the mosquito cigarette coils, and finally calmed down.安冈氏虽然很客气，在绪言上说，“这样的也不仅只支那人，便是在日本，怕也有难于漏网的。”但是，“一测那程度的高下和范围的广狭，则即使夸称为支那的民族性，也毫无应该顾忌的处所，”所以从支那人的我看来，的确不免汗流浃背。只要看目录就明白了：一，总说；二，过度置重于体面和仪容；三，安运命而肯罢休；四，能耐能忍；五，乏同情心多残忍性；六，个人主义和事大主义；七，过度的俭省和不正的贪财；八，泥虚礼而尚虚文；九，迷信深；十，耽享乐而淫风炽盛。
Although the Yasuoka clan was very polite, he said in the introduction, "This is not only the Chinese people, but also in Japan, and I am afraid that it will be difficult to escape the net." However, "once you measure the level of the degree and the breadth of the range, even if you exaggerate the national character of China, there is no place to worry about," so from my point of view as a Chinese person, I can't help but sweat. Just look at the table of contents to understand: one, always say; second, excessive emphasis on decency and appearance; third, be willing to give up with fate; fourth, be patient and patient; 5. Lack of compassion and cruelty; 6. Individualism and grandism; 7. Excessive frugality and improper greed for money; Eighth, mud and empty etiquette and empty text; 9. Superstition is deep; Ten, indulging in pleasure and lewdness.他似乎很相信Smith的《Chinese Characteristies》，常常引为典据。这书在他们，二十年前就有译本，叫作《支那人气质》； 但是支那人的我们却不大有人留心它。第一章就是Smith说，以为支那人是颇有点做戏气味的民族，精神略有亢奋，就成了戏子样，一字一句，一举手一投足，都装模装样，出于本心的分量，倒还是撑场面的分量多。这就是因为太重体面了，总想将自己的体面弄得十足，所以敢于做出这样的言语动作来。总而言之，支那人的重要的国民性所成的复合关键，便是这“体面”。
He seems to believe in Smith's Chinese Characteristies, often citing it as a reference. This book was translated by them twenty years ago, called "Chinese Temperament"; But we in China don't pay much attention to it. The first chapter is Smith saying that he thinks that the Chinese people are a people who smell a bit of drama, and their spirit is slightly excited, so they become like actors, word by word, every gesture, all pretend, out of the weight of their own hearts, but they still have a lot of weight to support the scene. This is because it is too decent, and I always want to make my own decency full, so I dare to make such words and actions. All in all, the key to the compound of the important national character of the Chinese people is this "decency".我们试来博观和内省，便可以知道这话并不过于刻毒。相传为戏台上的好对联，是“戏场小天地，天地大戏场”。大家本来看得一切事不过是一出戏，有谁认真的，就是蠢物。但这也并非专由积极的体面，心有不平而怯于报复，也便以万事是戏的思想了之。万事既然是戏，则不平也非真，而不报也非怯了。所以即使路见不平，不能拔刀相助，也还不失其为一个老牌的正人君子。
If we try to look at it and introspect, we can see that this is not too harsh. It is said to be a good couplet on the stage, which is "the small world of the theater, the big theater of heaven and earth". Everyone originally thought that everything was just a play, and anyone who was serious was a fool. But this is not just a positive decency, if you are unfair and afraid of retaliation, you will think that everything is a play. Since everything is a joke, it is not true that it is unfair, and it is not cowardly not to report it. Therefore, even if the road is unfair and cannot draw a sword to help, it is still a veteran and upright gentleman.我所遇见的外国人，不知道可是受了Smith的影响，还是自己实验出来的，就很有几个留心研究着中国人之所谓“体面”或“面子”。但我觉得，他们实在是已经早有心得，而且应用了，倘若更加精深圆熟起来，则不但外交上一定胜利，还要取得上等“支那人”的好感情。这时须连“支那人”三个字也不说，代以“华人”，因为这也是关于“华人”的体面的。
The foreigners I met, I don't know if they were influenced by Smith or experimented with them themselves, but a few of them paid attention to studying the so-called "decency" or "face" of Chinese. But I think they really have experience and apply it, and if they become more profound and mature, they will not only win diplomacy, but also obtain the good feelings of the superior "Chinese people". At this time, the word "Chinese" must not even be said, but replaced with "Chinese", because this is also about the dignity of "Chinese".我还记得民国初年到北京时，邮局门口的扁额是写着“邮政局”的，后来外人不干涉中国内政的叫声高起来，不知道是偶然还是什么，不几天，都一律改了“邮务局”了。外国人管理一点邮“务”，实在和内“政”不相干，这一出戏就一直唱到现在。
I still remember that when I arrived in Beijing in the early years of the Republic of China, the plaque at the door of the post office read "Post Office", and then the cry of outsiders not interfering in China's internal affairs became louder, I don't know if it was accidental or something, and within a few days, they were all changed to "Post Office". Foreigners manage a little postal "affairs", which really has nothing to do with internal "politics", and this play has been sung until now.向来，我总不相信国粹家道德家之类的痛哭流涕是真心，即使眼角上确有珠泪横流，也须检查他手巾上可浸着辣椒水或生姜汁。什么保存国故，什么振兴道德，什么维持公理，什么整顿学风……心里可真是这样想？一做戏，则前台的架子，总与在后台的面目不相同。但看客虽然明知是戏，只要做得像，也仍然能够为它悲喜，于是这出戏就做下去了；有谁来揭穿的，他们反以为扫兴。
Even if there are indeed tears flowing from the corners of his eyes, he must check whether his handkerchief can be soaked in chili water or ginger juice. What preserves the country's history, what revitalizes morality, what maintains axioms, and what rectifies the style of study...... Is this really what you think in your heart? When it comes to playing, the shelf in the front desk is always different from the face in the background. But although the audience knows that it is a play, as long as it is done similarly, they can still be sad or happy for it, so the play continues; Whoever will expose it, they will be disappointed.中国人先前听到俄国的“虚无党”三个字，便吓得屁滚尿流，不下于现在之所谓“赤化”。其实是何尝有这么一个“党”；只是“虚无主义者”或“虚无思想者”却是有的，是都介涅夫（I.Turgeniev）给创立出来的名目，指不信神，不信宗教，否定一切传统和权威，要复归那出于自由意志的生活的人物而言。但是，这样的人物，从中国人看来也就已经可恶了。然而看看中国的一些人，至少是上等人，他们的对于神，宗教，传统的权威，是“信”和“从”呢，还是“怕”和“利用”？只要看他们的善于变化，毫无特操，是什么也不信从的，但总要摆出和内心两样的架子来。要寻虚无党，在中国实在很不少；和俄国的不同的处所，只在他们这么想，便这么说，这么做，我们的却虽然这么想，却是那么说，在后台这么做，到前台又那么做……。将这种特别人物，另称为“做戏的虚无党”或“体面的虚无党”以示区别罢，虽然这个形容词和下面的名词万万联不起来。
When the Chinese heard the word "nihilistic party" in Russia, they were frightened, no less than the current so-called "redification". In fact, there is no such "party"; However, there are "nihilists" or "nihilists", which are the names coined by I. Turgeniev, referring to those who do not believe in God, do not believe in religion, deny all traditions and authority, and want to return to the life of free will. However, such a character is already hateful from the Chinese point of view. However, looking at some people in China, at least the upper class, their authority over God, religion, and tradition, are they "believed" and "obeyed", or "feared" and "used"? As long as you see that they are good at change, have no special tricks, and don't believe in anything, but they always have to put on a shelf that is different from their hearts. There are a lot of nihilistic parties in China; In places different from Russia, only when they think so, they say and do this, but ours think so, but they say so, do this in the background, and do it in the front desk ...... do it. This special person is also called "the nihilistic party of the show" or "the decent nihilistic party" to distinguish it, although this adjective is not connected with the following nouns.夜，寄品青信，托他向孔德学校去代借《闾邱辨囿》。
At night, he sent a letter to the blue letter and asked him to borrow "Lu Qiu Discrimination Garden" from the Conte School.夜半，在决计睡觉之前，从日历上将今天的一张撕去，下面这一张是红印的。我想，明天还是星期六，怎么便用红字了呢？仔细看时，有两行小字道：“马厂誓师再造共和纪念”。我又想，明天可挂国旗呢？……于是，不想什么，睡下了。
In the middle of the night, before deciding to go to bed, tear today's one from the calendar, and the one below is a red seal. I thought, tomorrow is still Saturday, why do I use red letters? When you look closely, there are two lines of small print: "The Machang Oath to Rebuild the Republican Memorial". I also thought, can the national flag be hung tomorrow? …… So, I didn't think about anything and fell asleep.

马上支日记

七月三日

马上支日记

July 3rd晴。
Clear.热极，上半天玩，下半天睡觉。
It's extremely hot, play for the first half of the day, and sleep for the second half of the day.晚饭后在院子里乘凉，忽而记起万牲园，因此说：那地方在夏天倒也很可看，可惜现在进不去了。田妈就谈到那管门的两个长人，说最长的一个是她的邻居，现在已经被美国人雇去，往美国了，薪水每月有一千元。
After dinner, I was enjoying the shade in the yard, and suddenly remembered the Garden of Ten Thousand Animals, so I said: That place is also very beautiful in summer, but unfortunately I can't go in now. Tian Ma talked about the two elders in charge of the door, saying that the eldest was her neighbor, who had now been hired by the Americans and went to the United States, with a salary of 1,000 yuan a month.这话给了我一个很大的启示。我先前看见《现代评论》上保举十一种好著作，杨振声先生的小说《玉君》即是其中的一种，理由之一是因为做得“长”。我于这理由一向总有些隔膜，到七月三日即“马厂誓师再造共和纪念”的晚上这才明白了：“长”，是确有价值的。《现代评论》的以“学理和事实”并重自许，确也说得出，做得到。
These words gave me a great inspiration. I have seen eleven good works listed in "Modern Review" before, and Mr. Yang Zhensheng's novel "Yujun" is one of them, one of the reasons is that it is "long". I have always been a little separated from this reason, but it was not until July 3rd, the night of the "Ma Factory Oath to Rebuild the Republic", that I realized that "long" is indeed valuable. The "Modern Review" prides itself on "theory and facts", and it can indeed be said and done.今天到我的睡觉时为止，似乎并没有挂国旗，后半夜补挂与否，我不知道。
Today until I went to bed, it seems that the national flag was not hung, and I don't know if it will be rehung in the second half of the night.

马上支日记

七月四日

马上支日记

July 4th晴。
Clear.早晨，仍然被一个蝇子在脸上爬来爬去爬醒，仍然赶不走，仍然只得自己起来。品青的回信来了，说孔德学校没有《闾邱辨囿》。
In the morning, I was still awakened by a fly crawling around on my face, but I still couldn't drive it away, and I still had to get up by myself. Pinqing's reply came, saying that there was no "Lu Qiu Distinction Garden" at the Commune School.也还是因为那一本《从小说看来的支那民族性》。因为那里面讲到中国的肴馔，所以也就想查一查中国的肴馔。我于此道向来不留心，所见过的旧记，只有《礼记》里的所谓“八珍”，《酉阳杂俎》里的一张御赐菜帐和袁枚名士的《随园食单》。元朝有和斯辉的《饮馔正要》，只站在旧书店头翻了一翻，大概是元版的，所以买不起。唐朝的呢，有杨煜的《膳夫经手录》，就收在《闾邱辨囿》中。现在这书既然借不到，只好拉倒了。
It is also because of that book "The Chinese Nationality from the Perspective of the Novel". Because it talks about Chinese cuisine, I also want to check Chinese cuisine. I have never paid attention to this road, and the only old records I have seen are the so-called "Eight Treasures" in the "Book of Rites", a royal vegetable tent in the "Youyang Zazu" and Yuan Mei's "Suiyuan Food List". In the Yuan Dynasty, there was He Sihui's "Drinking and Eating Zhengyao", which only stood in the second-hand bookstore and flipped through it, probably the Yuan version, so it could not be bought. In the Tang Dynasty, there is Yang Yu's "Chef's Handbook", which is included in the "Lu Qiu Discrimination Garden". Now that this book can't be borrowed, I have to pull it down.近年尝听到本国人和外国人颂扬中国菜，说是怎样可口，怎样卫生，世界上第一，宇宙间第n。但我实在不知道怎样的是中国菜。我们有几处是嚼葱蒜和杂合面饼，有几处是用醋，辣椒，腌菜下饭；还有许多人是只能舐黑盐，还有许多人是连黑盐也没得舐。中外人士以为可口，卫生，第一而第n的，当然不是这些；应该是阔人，上等人所吃的肴馔。但我总觉得不能因为他们这么吃，便将中国菜考列一等，正如去年虽然出了两三位“高等华人”，而别的人们也还是“下等”的一般。
In recent years, I have heard locals and foreigners praise Chinese food, saying that it is delicious and hygienic, the first in the world, and the nth in the universe. But I really don't know what Chinese food is. We have a few places to chew onions, garlic and mixed dough cakes, and a few places to use vinegar, chili peppers, and pickles to serve rice; There are many people who can only lick black salt, and many people who don't even have to lick black salt. Chinese and foreign people think that it is delicious, hygienic, and the first and nth, of course, these are not these; It should be the food eaten by the broad people, the upper class. But I always feel that Chinese food cannot be ranked first because they eat like this, just like last year, although there were two or three "high Chinese", other people were still "inferior".安冈氏的论中国菜，所引据的是威廉士的《中国》（《Middle Kingdom by Williams》），在最末《耽享乐而淫风炽盛》这一篇中。其中有这么一段——
Yasuoka's discussion of Chinese cuisine is based on Williams' "China" ("Middle Kingdom by Williams"), in the last article "Indulging in Pleasure and Lust". There is such a paragraph -“这好色的国民，便在寻求食物的原料时，也大概以所想像的性欲底效能为目的。从国外输入的特殊产物的最多数，就是认为含有这种效能的东西。……在大宴会中，许多菜单的最大部分，即是想像为含有或种特殊的强壮剂底性质的奇妙的原料所做。……”
When this lustful citizen sought raw materials for food, he probably aimed at the imaginary sexual desire. The largest number of special products imported from abroad are those that are considered to contain this efficacy. …… The largest part of many menus at a grand banquet is imagined to be made with wonderful ingredients that contain or have special strong properties. ……”我自己想，我对于外国人的指摘本国的缺失，是不很发生反感的，但看到这里却不能不失笑。筵席上的中国菜诚然大抵浓厚，然而并非国民的常食；中国的阔人诚然很多淫昏，但还不至于将肴馔和壮阳药并合。“纣虽不善，不如是之甚也。”研究中国的外国人，想得太深，感得太敏，便常常得到这样——比“支那人”更有性底敏感——的结果。
I think I am not very disgusted by foreigners' criticism of my country's shortcomings, but I can't help but laugh when I see this. The Chinese food at the banquet is indeed strong, but it is not a common food of the people; It is true that many Chinese people are lewd, but they are not yet able to combine dishes with aphrodisiacs. "Although King Zhou is not good, it is not as bad as this." Foreigners who study China often get such a result - more sexually sensitive than "Chinese people".安冈氏又自己说——
Mr. Yasuoka himself said -“笋和支那人的关系，也与虾正相同。彼国人的嗜笋，可谓在日本人以上。虽然是可笑的话，也许是因为那挺然翘然的姿势，引起想像来的罢。”
"The relationship between bamboo shoots and Chinese people is also the same as that of shrimp. The love of bamboo shoots among the people of that country can be said to be higher than that of the Japanese. Although it is ridiculous, maybe it is because of that upright posture that arouses imagination. ”会稽至今多竹。竹，古人是很宝贵的，所以曾有“会稽竹箭”的话。然而宝贵它的原因是在可以做箭，用于战斗，并非因为它“挺然翘然”像男根。多竹，即多笋；因为多，那价钱就和北京的白菜差不多。我在故乡，就吃了十多年笋，现在回想，自省，无论如何，总是丝毫也寻不出吃笋时，爱它“挺然翘然”的思想的影子来。因为姿势而想像它的效能的东西是有一种的，就是肉苁蓉，然而那是药，不是菜。总之，笋虽然常见于南边的竹林中和食桌上，正如街头的电干和屋里的柱子一般，虽“挺然翘然”，和色欲的大小大概是没有什么关系的。
To this day, there are many bamboo in Kuaiji. Bamboo, the ancients were very precious, so there was a saying of "Kuaiji bamboo arrows". However, the reason why it is valuable is that it can be used as arrows and used in battle, not because it is "upright" like a phallus. more bamboo, that is, many bamboo shoots; Because there are many, the price is about the same as that of cabbage in Beijing. I have been eating bamboo shoots for more than ten years in my hometown, and now looking back, introspection, no matter what, I can't find the shadow of the idea of loving it when I eat bamboo shoots. There is one thing that imagines its efficacy because of posture, which is Cistanche, but it is medicine, not a dish. In short, although bamboo shoots are commonly found in the bamboo forest in the south and on the dining table, just like the electric dryers on the street and the pillars in the house, although they are "upright", they probably have nothing to do with the size of lust.然而洗刷了这一点，并不足证明中国人是正经的国民。要得结论，还很费周折罢。可是中国人偏不肯研究自己。安冈氏又说，“去今十余年前，有……称为《留东外史》这一种不知作者的小说，似乎是记事实，大概是以恶意地描写日本人的性底不道德为目的的。然而通读全篇，较之攻击日本人，倒是不识不知地将支那留学生的不品行，特地费了力招供出来的地方更其多，是滑稽的事。”这是真的，要证明中国人的不正经，倒在自以为正经地禁止男女同学，禁止模特儿这些事件上。
However, washing away this is not enough to prove that Chinese people are serious citizens. It takes a lot of effort to get a conclusion. But the Chinese refused to study themselves. Mr. Yasuoka added, "More than ten years ago, there was a ...... The novel called "History of Foreign Affairs in the East", which is unknown to the author, seems to be a record of facts, probably for the purpose of maliciously describing the immorality of the Japanese people. However, reading through the whole article, compared to attacking the Japanese, it is ridiculous to unknowingly confess the misconduct of Chinese international students and deliberately confessing to them. This is true, to prove the impropriety of the Chinese, it is to ban male and female classmates and models from self-righteousness.我没有恭逢过奉陪“大宴会”的光荣，只是经历了几回中宴会，吃些燕窝鱼翅。现在回想，宴中宴后，倒也并不特别发生好色之心。但至今觉得奇怪的，是在燉，蒸，煨的烂熟的肴馔中间，夹着一盘活活的醉虾。据安冈氏说，虾也是与性欲有关系的；不但从他，我在中国也听到过这类话。然而我所以为奇怪的，是在这两极端的错杂，宛如文明烂熟的社会里，忽然分明现出茹毛饮血的蛮风来。而这蛮风，又并非将由蛮野进向文明，乃是已由文明落向蛮野，假如比前者为白纸，将由此开始写字，则后者便是涂满了字的黑纸罢。一面制礼作乐，尊孔读经，“四千年声明文物之邦”，真是火候恰到好处了，而一面又坦然地放火杀人，奸淫掳掠，做着虽蛮人对于同族也还不肯做的事……全个中国，就是这样的一席大宴会！
I have not had the honor of accompanying the "big banquet", but I have experienced several banquets and eaten some bird's nest shark fin. Looking back now, after the banquet, there was no particular lustful heart. But what I still find strange is that in the middle of the stewed, steamed, and simmered cooked dishes, there is a plate of live drunken shrimp. According to Yasuoka, shrimp is also related to sexual desire; Not only from him, but I have also heard such words in China. However, what I find strange is that in these two extremes, like a civilized society, there is suddenly a clear barbaric trend of eating hair and drinking blood. And this barbaric wind is not going to move from barbarism to civilization, but has fallen from civilization to barbarism, if it is a blank paper than the former, it will start to write from this, then the latter is just black paper full of words. On the one hand, they made rituals and had fun, respected Confucius and read the scriptures, and "declared the country of cultural relics for four thousand years", which was really just right, but on the other hand, they calmly set fire to kill, raped and plundered, and did things that even barbarians would not do to their own people...... The whole of China is such a big banquet!我以为中国人的食物，应该去掉煮得烂熟，萎靡不振的；也去掉全生，或全活的。应该吃些虽然熟，然而还有些生的带着鲜血的肉类……。
I thought that Chinese food should be removed from the overcooked and sluggish food; Also remove the whole life, or the whole living. You should eat some meat that is cooked, but there is still some raw and bloody .......正午，照例要吃午饭了，讨论中止。菜是：干菜，已不“挺然翘然”的笋干，粉丝，腌菜。对于绍兴，陈源教授所憎恶的是“师爷”和“刀笔吏的笔尖”，我所憎恶的是饭菜。《嘉泰会稽志》已在石印了，但还未出版，我将来很想查一查，究竟绍兴遇着过多少回大饥馑，竟这样地吓怕了居民，仿佛明天便要到世界末日似的，专喜欢储藏干物品。有菜，就晒干；有鱼，也晒干；有豆，又晒干；有笋，又晒得它不像样；菱角是以富于水分，肉嫩而脆为特色的，也还要将它风干……。听说探险北极的人，因为只吃罐头食物，得不到新东西，常常要生坏血病；倘若绍兴人肯带了干菜之类去探险，恐怕可以走得更远一点罢。
At noon, lunch was going as usual, and the discussion was suspended. The dishes are: dried vegetables, dried bamboo shoots that are no longer "upright", vermicelli, pickles. For Shaoxing, what Professor Chen Yuan hates is the "master" and "the tip of the pen of the knife and pen official", and what I hate is the food. "Jiatai Kuaiji Chronicle" has been printed in the stone, but it has not yet been published, and I really want to find out in the future, how many times Shaoxing has encountered a great famine, and it has frightened the residents like this, as if tomorrow will be the end of the world, and I like to store dry items. If there are vegetables, dry them; if there is fish, it is also dried; There are beans, and they are dried; there are bamboo shoots, and they are sunburned so badly; Water chestnuts are characterized by being rich in moisture, tender and crispy, and they also need to be air-dried ....... I heard that people who explore the North Pole often suffer from scurvy because they only eat canned food and cannot get new things; If Shaoxing people are willing to take dried vegetables and the like to explore, I am afraid they can go a little further.晚，得乔峰信并丛芜所译的布宁的短篇《轻微的欷歔》稿，在上海的一个书店里默默地躺了半年，这回总算设法讨回来了。
In the evening, I got the manuscript of Bunin's short story "Slight Sigh" translated by Qiao Fengxin and Cong Wu, and lay silently in a bookstore in Shanghai for half a year, and this time I finally managed to get it back.中国人总不肯研究自己。从小说来看民族性，也就是一个好题目。此外，则道士思想（不是道教，是方士）与历史上大事件的关系，在现今社会上的势力；孔教徒怎样使“圣道”变得和自己的无所不为相宜；战国游士说动人主的所谓“利”“害”是怎样的，和现今的政客有无不同；中国从古到今有多少文字狱；历来“流言”的制造散布法和效验等等……可以研究的新方面实在多。
Chinese people always refuse to study themselves. From the perspective of novels, nationality is a good topic. In addition, the relationship between Taoist thought (not Taoism, but alchemists) and major events in history is the power in today's society; how the Confucians made the "holy way" suitable for their everything; The Warring States wanderer said what the so-called "benefits" and "harms" of moving the lord were different from today's politicians; How many literary prisons there are in China from ancient times to the present; the production and dissemination of "rumors" and so on...... There are so many new aspects that can be studied.

马上支日记

七月五日

马上支日记

July 5th晴。
Clear.晨，景宋将《小说旧闻钞》的一部分理清送来。自己再看了一遍，到下午才毕，寄给小峰付印。天气实在热得可以。
In the morning, Jing Song sent a part of the "Novel Old News Banknotes" to clarify it. I read it again, and it wasn't finished until the afternoon, and I sent it to Xiaofeng for printing. The weather is really hot.觉得疲劳。晚上，眼睛怕见灯光，熄了灯躺着，仿佛在享福。听得有人打门，连忙出去开，却是谁也没有，跨出门去根究，一个小孩子已在暗中逃远了。
Feeling tired. At night, my eyes are afraid of seeing the light, so I turn off the lights and lie down, as if enjoying myself. Hearing someone knocking on the door, he hurriedly went out to open it, but there was no one.关了门，回来，又躺下，又仿佛在享福。一个行人唱着戏文走过去，余音袅袅，道，“咿，咿，咿！”不知怎地忽然想起今天校过的《小说旧闻钞》里的强汝询老先生的议论来。这位先生的书斋就叫作求有益斋，则在那斋中写出来的文章的内容，也就可想而知。他自己说，诚不解一个人何以无聊到要做小说，看小说。但于古小说的判决却从宽，因为他古，而且昔人已经著录了。
closed the door, came back, lay down again, and seemed to be enjoying it. A pedestrian walked over singing a play, and the afterglow was lingering, saying, "Bab, bab, bab! Somehow, I suddenly remembered the discussion of Mr. Qiang Ruxun in the "Old News of Novels" that I proofread today. This gentleman's study is called the Qiu Yi Zhai, and the content of the articles written in that study can be imagined. He himself said that he really didn't understand why a person was so bored that he wanted to write a novel and read a novel. But the verdict of Yu Gu's novel is lenient, because he is ancient, and the ancients have already written it.憎恶小说的也不只是这位强先生，诸如此类的高论，随在可以闻见。但我们国民的学问，大多数却实在靠着小说，甚至于还靠着从小说编出来的戏文。虽是崇奉关岳的大人先生们，倘问他心目中的这两位“武圣”的仪表，怕总不免是细着眼睛的红脸大汉和五绺长须的白面书生，或者还穿着绣金的缎甲，脊梁上还插着四张尖角旗。
It is not only this Mr. Qiang who hates novels, and such high arguments can be heard at any time. But most of our people's knowledge really relies on novels, and even relies on dramas made up from novels. Although the adults and gentlemen who worship Guan Yue, if you ask him about the appearance of these two "martial saints" in his mind, I am afraid that they will inevitably be red-faced men with slender eyes and white-faced scholars with five long beards, or they are still wearing embroidered satin armor, and there are four pointed horn flags on their backs.近来确是上下同心，提倡着忠孝节义了，新年到庙市上去看年画，便可以看见许多新制的关于这类美德的图。然而所画的古人，却没有一个不是老生，小生，老旦，小旦，末，外，花旦……。
Recently, it is true that the upper and lower levels are united in advocating loyalty and filial piety, and when you go to the temple market to see the New Year's paintings in the New Year, you can see many newly made pictures of this kind of virtue. However, none of the ancients painted were not Lao Sheng, Xiao Sheng, Lao Dan, Xiao Dan, Mo, Wai, Hua Dan, .......

马上支日记

七月六日

马上支日记

July 6th晴。
Clear.午后，到前门外去买药。配好之后，付过钱，就站在柜台前喝了一回份。其理由有三：一，已经停了一天了，应该早喝；二，尝尝味道，是否不错的；三，天气太热，实在有点口渴了。
In the afternoon, go to the front door to buy medicine. After matching, after paying, I stood in front of the counter and drank it. There are three reasons: first, it has been stopped for a day, so you should drink it early; second, taste the taste, whether it is good; Third, the weather is too hot, and I am really a little thirsty.不料有一个买客却看得奇怪起来。我不解这有什么可以奇怪的；然而他竟奇怪起来了，悄悄地向店伙道：
Unexpectedly, a buyer looked strange. I don't understand what's so strange about this; However, he became strange and quietly said to the shopkeeper:“那是戒烟药水罢？”
"That's a quit potion, right?"“不是的！”店伙替我维持名誉。
"No!" The shopkeeper maintains my reputation.“这是戒大烟的罢？”他于是直接地问我了。
"This is to quit smoking?" He then asked me directly.我觉得倘不将这药认作“戒烟药水”，他大概是死不瞑目的。人生几何，何必固执，我便似点非点的将头一动，同时请出我那“介乎两可之间”的好回答来：
I think if he doesn't recognize this medicine as a "quit smoking potion", he will probably die. How much life is geometric, why be stubborn, I moved my head as if I was a little wrong, and at the same time asked for my good answer "between the two":“唔唔……。”
"No, no, ......."这既不伤店伙的好意，又可以聊慰他热烈的期望，该是一帖妙药。果然，从此万籁无声，天下太平，我在安静中塞好瓶塞，走到街上了。
This neither hurts the shopkeeper's kindness, but can also comfort his warm expectations, which should be a wonderful medicine. Sure enough, from then on, everything was silent, the world was peaceful, I plugged the cork in the silence and walked out into the street.到中央公园，径向约定的一个僻静处所，寿山已先到，略一休息，便开手对译《小约翰》。这是一本好书，然而得来却是偶然的事。大约二十年前，我在日本东京的旧书店头买到几十本旧的德文文学杂志，内中有着这书的绍介和作者的评传，因为那时刚译成德文。觉得有趣，便托丸善书店去买来了；想译，没有这力。后来也常常想到，但总为别的事情岔开；直到去年，才决计在暑假中将它译好，并且登出广告去，而不料那一暑假过得比别的时候还艰难。今年又记得起来，翻检一过，疑难之处很不少，还是没有这力。问寿山可肯同译，他答应了，于是开手；并且约定，必须在这暑假期中译完。
When I arrived at Central Park, I walked to a secluded place as agreed, and Shoushan had already arrived first, and after a short rest, I started translating "Little John". This is a good book, but it is accidental. About twenty years ago, I bought dozens of old German literary magazines in a used bookstore in Tokyo, Japan, containing a description of the book and a review of the author, because it had just been translated into German. I thought it was interesting, so I asked Maruzen Bookstore to buy it; I want to translate, but I don't have this power. Later, I often thought about it, but I always diverged for other things; It wasn't until last year that I decided to translate it during the summer vacation and publish the advertisement, but that summer vacation was even more difficult than other times. This year, I remember again, after reviewing it, there are many difficulties, but I still don't have this strength. asked Shoushan if he could translate the same translation, and he agreed, so he started; And it was agreed that the translation must be completed during this summer vacation.晚上回家，吃了一点饭，就坐在院子里乘凉。田妈告诉我，今天下午，斜对门的谁家的婆婆和儿媳大吵了一通嘴。据她看来，婆婆自然有些错，但究竟是儿媳妇太不合道理了。问我的意思，以为何如。我先就没有听清吵嘴的是谁家，也不知道是怎样的两个婆媳，更没有听到她们的来言去语，明白她们的旧恨新仇。现在要我加以裁判，委实有点不敢自信，况且我又向来并不是批评家。我于是只得说：这事我无从断定。
I went home in the evening, ate a little food, and sat in the yard to enjoy the coolness. Tian's mother told me that this afternoon, the mother-in-law and daughter-in-law of the family diagonally opposite the door had a big quarrel. In her opinion, the mother-in-law is naturally a little wrong, but it is the daughter-in-law who is too unreasonable. Ask me what I mean, what do you think? I didn't hear who was arguing, I didn't know what kind of two mothers-in-law and daughters-in-law they were, let alone hear their words and understand their old hatred and new hatred. Now that I am asked to judge, I am a little afraid to be confident, and I have never been a critic. So I had to say: I can't say for sure.但是这句话的结果很坏。在昏暗中，虽然看不见脸色，耳朵中却听到：一切声音都寂然了。静，沉闷的静；后来还有人站起，走开。
But the result of this sentence is very bad. In the darkness, although I couldn't see the face, I heard in my ears: all voices were silent. quiet, dull quiet; Later, some people stood up and walked away.我也无聊地慢慢地站起，走进自己的屋子里，点了灯，躺在床上看晚报；看了几行，又无聊起来了，便碰到东壁下去写日记，就是这《马上支日记》。
I also stood up slowly out of boredom, walked into my room, lit the light, and lay on the bed to read the evening newspaper; After reading a few lines, I got bored again, so I ran into the east wall to write a diary, which is this "Diary of the Right Branch".院子里又渐渐地有了谈笑声，谠论声。
There was gradually laughter and chatter in the yard.今天的运气似乎很不佳：路人冤我喝“戒烟药水”，田妈说我……。她怎么说，我不知道。但愿从明天起，不再这样。
Today's luck seems to be very bad: passers-by wrongfully accused me of drinking "smoking cessation potions", and Tian's mother said that I ....... What she said, I don't know. I hope that from tomorrow onwards, this will not be the case again.

马上日记之二

马上日记之二

马上日记之二

The second diary of the horse七月七日
July 7th晴。
Clear.每日的阴晴，实在写得自己也有些不耐烦了，从此想不写。好在北京的天气，大概总是晴的时候多；如果是梅雨期内，那就上午晴，午后阴，下午大雨一阵，听到泥墙倒塌声。不写也罢，又好在我这日记，将来决不会有气象学家拿去做参考资料的。
The daily clouds and sunny days really made me a little impatient to write, and I didn't want to write from now on. Fortunately, the weather in Beijing is probably always sunny; If it is during the rainy season, it will be sunny in the morning, cloudy in the afternoon, and heavy rain in the afternoon, and the sound of the mud wall collapsing will be heard. It's okay if I don't write it, but fortunately, my diary will never be used as a reference by meteorologists in the future.上午访素园，谈谈闲天，他说俄国有名的文学者毕力涅克（Boris Piliniak）上月已经到过北京，现在是走了。
In the morning, he visited Suyuan and talked about leisure, saying that the famous Russian writer Boris Piliniak had been to Beijing last month and is now leaving.我单知道他曾到日本，却不知道他也到中国来。
I only knew that he had been to Japan, but I didn't know that he had also come to China.这两年中，就我所听到的而言，有名的文学家来到中国的有四个。第一个自然是那最有名的泰戈尔即“竺震旦”，可惜被戴印度帽子的震旦人弄得一榻胡涂，终于莫名其妙而去；后来病倒在意大利，还电召震旦“诗哲”前往，然而也不知道“后事如何”。现在听说又有人要将甘地扛到中国来了，这坚苦卓绝的伟人，只在印度能生，在英国治下的印度能活的伟人，又要在震旦印下他伟大的足迹。但当他精光的脚还未踏着华土时，恐怕乌云已在出岫了。
In the past two years, as far as I have heard, four famous writers have come to China. The first one is naturally the most famous Tagore, that is, "Zhu Zhendan", but unfortunately he was made a mess by the Aurora wearing an Indian hat, and finally left inexplicably; Later, he fell ill in Italy and called Aurora "Shi Zhe" to go, but he didn't know "what the aftermath would be". Now I hear that someone is going to carry Gandhi to China, this great man who can only be born in India, and the great man who can live in India under British rule, will print his great footprints in Aurora. But when his bare feet had not yet stepped on the Chinese soil, I am afraid that the dark clouds were already out of the mountains.其次是西班牙的伊本纳兹（Blasco Ibá ez），中国倒也早有人绍介过；但他当欧战时，是高唱人类爱和世界主义的，从今年全国教育联合会的议案看来，他实在很不适宜于中国，当然谁也不理他，因为我们的教育家要提倡民族主义了。
followed by Blasco Ibáez of Spain, which has long been introduced in China; But when he was in Europe, he sang about human love and cosmopolitanism, and judging from the bill of the National Education Federation this year, he was really not suitable for China, and of course no one paid attention to him, because our educators were going to advocate nationalism.还有两个都是俄国人。一个是斯吉泰烈支（Skitalez），一个就是毕力涅克。两个都是假名字。斯吉泰烈支是流亡在外的。毕力涅克却是苏联的作家，但据他自传，从革命的第一年起，就为着买面包粉忙了一年多。以后，便做小说，还吸过鱼油，这种生活，在中国大概便是整日叫穷的文学家也未必梦想到。
Two more are Russians. One is Skitalez, and the other is Bilinek. Both are pseudonyms. Skiterizhi is in exile. Bilinek was a Soviet writer, but according to his autobiography, from the first year of the revolution, he was busy buying bread flour for more than a year. In the future, he wrote novels and smoked fish oil, a life that even writers who are poor all day long may not dream of in China.他的名字，任国桢君辑译的《苏俄的文艺论战》里是出现过的，作品的译本却一点也没有。日本有一本《伊凡和马理》（《Ivan and Maria》），格式很特别，单是这一点，在中国的眼睛——中庸的眼睛——里就看不惯。文法有些欧化，有些人尚且如同眼睛里著了玻璃粉，何况体式更奇于欧化。悄悄地自来自去，实在要算是造化的。
His name appeared in the "Literary and Art Debate in Soviet Russia" compiled and translated by Ren Guozhenjun, but there was no translation of the work at all. There is a book in Japan called "Ivan and Maria", which has a very special format, which alone is not used to the Chinese eye, the average eye. The grammar is a bit Europeanized, and some people still feel like they have glass powder in their eyes, not to mention that the asana is even more Europeanized. Quietly going freely, it is really a matter of fate.还有，在中国，姓名仅仅一见于《苏俄的文艺论战》里的里培进司基（U.Libedinsky），日本却也有他的小说译出了，名曰《一周间》。他们的介绍之速而且多实在可骇。我们的武人以他们的武人为祖师，我们的文人却毫不学他们文人的榜样，这就可预卜中国将来一定比日本太平。
Also, in China, the name is only seen in "The Literary Debate of Soviet Russia" (U. Libedinsky), but in Japan there is also a translation of his novel called "Between the Week". The speed and number of their introductions are really shocking. Our warriors take their warriors as their ancestors, but our literati do not follow the example of their literati, which predicts that China will be more peaceful than Japan in the future.但据《伊凡和马理》的译者尾濑敬止氏说，则作者的意思，是以为“频果的花，在旧院落中也开放，大地存在间，总是开放”的。那么，他还是不免于念旧。然而他眼见，身历了革命了，知道这里面有破坏，有流血，有矛盾，但也并非无创造，所以他决没有绝望之心。这正是革命时代的活着的人的心。诗人勃洛克（Alexander Block）也如此。他们自然是苏联的诗人，但若用了纯马克斯流的眼光来批评，当然也还是很有可议的处所。不过我觉得托罗兹基（Trotsky）的文艺批评，倒还不至于如此森严。
However, according to Keizhi Oze, the translator of "Ivan and Mari", the author's meaning is that "the flowers of the frequent fruits are also open in the old courtyard, and the earth is always open in the existence of the earth". Then, he still can't help but be nostalgic. However, he saw that he had experienced the revolution and knew that there was destruction, bloodshed, and contradictions, but it was not without creation, so he had no despair. This is the heart of the living in the revolutionary era. The same goes for the poet Alexander Block. They are naturally Soviet poets, but if they are criticized from a pure Maxian perspective, of course, there is still a lot to discuss. However, I think Trotsky's literary criticism is not so strict.可惜我还没有看过他们最新的作者的作品《一周间》。
It's a pity that I haven't seen their latest author's work, "Between the Week".革命时代总要有许多文艺家萎黄，有许多文艺家向新的山崩地塌般的大波冲进去，乃仍被吞没，或者受伤。被吞没的消灭了；受伤的生活着，开拓着自己的生活，唱着苦痛和愉悦之歌。待到这些逝去了，于是现出一个较新的新时代，产出更新的文艺来。
In the revolutionary era, there will always be many writers and artists wilting, and many writers and artists will rush into the new landslide-like waves, but they will still be swallowed up or injured. The engulfed are destroyed; Living a wounded life, carving out his own life, singing songs of pain and joy. When these are gone, a relatively new era emerges, and newer literature and art are produced.中国自民元革命以来，所谓文艺家，没有萎黄的，也没有受伤的，自然更没有消灭，也没有苦痛和愉悦之歌。这就是因为没有新的山崩地塌般的大波，也就是因为没有革命。
Since the Minyuan Revolution in China, the so-called writers and artists have not been wilted, nor have they been injured, and naturally they have not been eliminated, nor have they sung songs of pain and joy. This is because there are no new landslides, that is, because there is no revolution.

马上日记之二

七月八日

马上日记之二

July 8th上午，往伊东医士寓去补牙，等在客厅里，有些无聊。四壁只挂着一幅织出的画和两副对，一副是江朝宗的，一副是王芝祥的。署名之下，各有两颗印，一颗是姓名，一颗是头衔；江的是“迪威将军”，王的是“佛门弟子”。
In the morning, I went to the Ito doctor's residence to fill my teeth and waited in the living room, which was a little boring. There is only one woven painting and two pairs hanging on the four walls, one belongs to Jiang Chaozong and the other belongs to Wang Zhixiang. Under the signature, there are two seals, one is the name and the other is the title; Jiang is "General Diwei", and Wang is "Buddhist disciple".午后，密斯高来，适值毫无点心，只得将宝藏着的搽嘴角生疮有效的柿霜糖装在碟子里拿出去。我时常有点心，有客来便请他吃点心；最初是“密斯”和“密斯得”一视同仁，但密斯得有时委实利害，往往吃得很彻底，一个不留，我自己倒反有“向隅”之感。如果想吃，又须出去买来。于是很有戒心了，只得改变方针，有万不得已时，则以落花生代之。这一著很有效，总是吃得不多，既然吃不多，我便开始敦劝了，有时竟劝得怕吃落花生如织芳之流，至于因此逡巡逃走。从去年夏天发明了这一种花生政策以后，至今还在继续厉行。但密斯们却不在此限，她们的胃似乎比他们要小五分之四，或者消化力要弱到十分之八，很小的一个点心，也大抵要留下一半，倘是一片糖，就剩下一角。拿出来陈列片时，吃去一点，于我的损失是极微的，“何必改作”？
In the afternoon, Mies Gao came, and there was no snack, so he had to put the treasured persimmon frost candy on a plate and take it out. I often have snacks, and when guests come, I invite them to have snacks; At first, "Mies" and "Miesde" were treated equally, but Mies De sometimes honestly ate the pros and cons, and often ate very thoroughly, leaving no one behind, but I myself had a sense of "corner". If you want to eat it, you have to go out and buy it. So I was very wary and had to change my policy, and when it was a last resort, I would replace it with peanuts. This is very effective, I always don't eat much, since I don't eat much, I began to persuade him, and sometimes I was afraid of eating peanuts like weaving fragrance, so I hesitated and fled. Since the invention of this peanut policy last summer, it has continued to be enforced. But the Mies were not like that, their stomachs seemed to be four-fifths smaller than theirs, or their digestion was as weak as eight-tenths, and a very small snack was probably left in half, and if it was a piece of sugar, there was only a corner left. When I took out the display film, I ate a little, and the loss to me was minimal, "why change it"?密斯高是很少来的客人，有点难于执行花生政策。恰巧又没有别的点心，只好献出柿霜糖去了。这是远道携来的名糖，当然可以见得郑重。
Miesgaard is a rare guest and a bit difficult to enforce the peanut policy. It just so happened that there was no other snack, so I had to offer persimmon frost candy. This is a famous sugar brought from afar, of course, it can be seen solemnly.我想，这糖不大普通，应该先说明来源和功用。但是，密斯高却已经一目了然了。她说：这是出在河南汜水县的；用柿霜做成。颜色最好是深黄；倘是淡黄，那便不是纯柿霜。这很凉，如果嘴角这些地方生疮的时候，便含着，使它渐渐从嘴角流出，疮就好了。
I think this sugar is not ordinary, and the source and function should be explained first. However, Miesgaard is already clear at a glance. She said: This is from Sishui County, Henan; Made with persimmon cream. The color is preferably dark yellow; If it's light yellow, it's not pure persimmon frost. This is very cold, if there are sores in these places at the corners of the mouth, hold them in your mouth, let them gradually flow out of the corners of the mouth, and the sores will heal.她比我耳食所得的知道得更清楚，我只好不作声，而且这时才记起她是河南人。请河南人吃几片柿霜糖，正如请我喝一小杯黄酒一样，真可谓“其愚不可及也”。
She knew better than what I had heard, so I had to remain silent, and only then did I remember that she was from Henan. Inviting Henan people to eat a few pieces of persimmon frost candy is like inviting me to drink a small glass of rice wine, which can really be described as "its foolishness is unattainable".茭白的心里有黑点的，我们那里称为灰茭，虽是乡下人也不愿意吃，北京却用在大酒席上。卷心白菜在北京论斤论车地卖，一到南边，便根上系着绳，倒挂在水果铺子的门前了，买时论两，或者半株，用处是放在阔气的火锅中，或者给鱼翅垫底。但假如有谁在北京特地请我吃灰茭，或北京人到南边时请他吃煮白菜，则即使不至于称为“笨伯”，也未免有些乖张罢。
There are black spots in the heart of wild rice, which we call gray wild rice, even if it is a country person, it is unwilling to eat, but it is used in Beijing for banquets. Iceberg cabbage is sold in Beijing, and as soon as it arrives in the south, it is tied with a rope on the root and hung upside down in front of the door of the fruit shop. But if someone specially invites me to eat gray wild rice in Beijing, or if a Beijinger invites him to eat boiled cabbage when he goes to the south, even if he is not called "stupid uncle", it is a bit perverse.但密斯高居然吃了一片，也许是聊以敷衍主人的面子的。到晚上我空口坐着，想：这应该请河南以外的别省人吃的，一面想，一面吃，不料这样就吃完了。
But Miesgaard actually ate a slice, perhaps to perfunctory the master's face. In the evening, I sat empty-mouthed, thinking: This should be eaten by people from other provinces outside Henan.凡物总是以希为贵。假如在欧美留学，毕业论文最好是讲李太白，杨朱，张三；研究萧伯讷，威尔士就不大妥当，何况但丁之类。《但丁传》的作者跋忒莱尔（A.J.Butler）就说关于但丁的文献实在看不完。待到回了中国，可就可以讲讲萧伯讷，威尔士，甚而至于莎士比亚了。何年何月自己曾在曼殊斐儿墓前痛哭，何月何日何时曾在何处和法兰斯点头，他还拍着自己的肩头说道：你将来要有些像我的，至于“四书”“五经”之类，在本地似乎究以少谈为是。虽然夹些“流言”在内，也未必便于“学理和事实”有妨。
Everything is always rare and precious. If you study in Europe and the United States, the graduation thesis is best to talk about Li Taibai, Yang Zhu, Zhang San; Studying Shaw is not very appropriate in Wales, let alone Dante and the like. A.J. Butler, the author of "The Biography of Dante", said that there is really no end to the literature about Dante. When I return to China, I can talk about Shaw, Wales, and even Shakespeare. He also patted himself on the shoulder and said: You will be a little like me in the future, as for the "Four Books" and "Five Classics", it seems that it is better to talk less in the local area. Although some "rumors" are included, it may not be convenient for "theories and facts".

记“发薪”

记“发薪”

记“发薪”

Record "payroll"下午，在中央公园里和C君做点小工作，突然得到一位好意的老同事的警报，说，部里今天发给薪水了，计三成；但必须本人亲身去领，而且须在三天以内。
In the afternoon, while doing some small work with Mr. C in Central Park, I suddenly received an alert from a well-meaning old colleague, saying that the ministry had paid a salary today, totaling 30%; However, it must be collected in person and within three days.否则？
Otherwise?否则怎样，他却没有说。但这是“洞若观火”的，否则，就不给。
Otherwise, he didn't say. But this is "like watching the fire", otherwise, it will not be given.只要有银钱在手里经过，即使并非檀越的布施，人是也总爱逞逞威风的，要不然，他们也许要觉到自己的无聊，渺小。明明有物品去抵押，当铺却用这样的势利脸和高柜台；明明用银元去换铜元，钱摊却帖着“收买现洋”的纸条，隐然以“买主”自命。钱票当然应该可以到负责的地方去换现钱，而有时却规定了极短的时间，还要领签，排班，等候，受气；军警督压着，手里还有国粹的皮鞭。
As long as there is money passing through the hand, even if it is not a benefactor's almsgiving, people always like to show off their majesty, otherwise, they may feel bored and small. obviously there are items to mortgage, but the pawnshop uses such snobbery and high counters; Obviously, silver dollars were exchanged for copper dollars, but the money stall was posted with a note of "buying cash", and he vaguely called himself a "buyer". Of course, the money ticket should be exchanged for cash at the responsible place, but sometimes it stipulates a very short time, and it also has to be signed, scheduled, waited, and angry; The military and police supervisor pressed it, and there was a leather whip of the national essence in his hand.不听话么？不但不得钱，而且要打了！
Are you disobedient? Not only did he not get the money, but he was going to be beaten!我曾经说过，中华民国的官，都是平民出身，并非特别种族。虽然高尚的文人学士或新闻记者们将他们看作异类，以为比自己格外奇怪，可鄙可嗤；然而从我这几年的经验看来，却委实不很特别，一切脾气，却与普通的同胞差不多，所以一到经手银钱的时候，也还是照例有一点借此威风一下的嗜好。
I once said that the officials of the Republic of China are all from civilian backgrounds, not of a special race. Although noble literati and journalists regard them as outliers, thinking that they are more strange and contemptible than themselves; However, from my experience in the past few years, it is not very special, and all temperaments are similar to those of ordinary compatriots, so when it comes to handling money, I still have a little hobby to take advantage of this as usual.“亲领”问题的历史，是起源颇古的，中华民国十一年，就因此引起过方玄绰的牢骚，我便将这写了一篇《端午节》。但历史虽说如同螺旋，却究竟并非印板，所以今之与昔，也还是小有不同。在昔盛世，主张“亲领”的是“索薪会”——呜呼，这些专门名词，恕我不暇一一解释了，而且纸张也可惜。——的骁将，昼夜奔走，向国务院呼号，向财政部坐讨，一旦到手，对于没有一同去索的人的无功受禄，心有不甘，用此给吃一点小苦头的。其意若曰，这钱是我们讨来的，就同我们的一样；你要，必得到这里来领布施。你看施衣施粥，有施主亲自送到受惠者的家里去的么？
The history of the issue of "personal leadership" has a long origin, and in the eleventh year of the Republic of China, it caused Fang Xuanchuo's complaints, so I wrote a "Dragon Boat Festival". But although history is like a spiral, it is not a printing plate after all, so there is still a slight difference between today and the past. In the prosperous era of the past, it was the "salary meeting" that advocated "personal receipt" - ah, these special terms, I don't have time to explain them one by one, and the paper is also a pity. —— The brave general, running day and night, calling out to the State Council, sitting on the Ministry of Finance, once in hand, is unwilling to accept the unmeritorious salary of those who did not go to ask for it together, and use this to give a little suffering. If it means that this money is what we asked, it is the same as ours; If you want it, you will get it here to receive alms. Do you see that the donor personally delivered the clothes and porridge to the beneficiary's home?然而那是盛世的事。现在是无论怎么“索”，早已一文也不给了，如果偶然“发薪”，那是意外的上头的嘉惠，和什么“索”丝毫无关。不过临时发布“亲领”命令的施主却还有，只是已非善于索薪的骁将，而是天天“画到”，未曾另谋生活的“不贰之臣”了。所以，先前的“亲领”是对于没有同去索薪的人们的罚，现在的“亲领”是对于不能空着肚子，天天到部的人们的罚。
However, that was a prosperous thing. If you accidentally "pay", it is an unexpected favor from above, and it has nothing to do with what "demand" is. However, the benefactor who temporarily issued the order to "personally lead" was still there, but he was no longer a brave general who was good at asking for salaries, but a "minister" who was "drawn" every day and had never sought another life. Therefore, the previous "personal lead" was a punishment for those who did not go to ask for wages together, and the current "personal lead" is a punishment for those who could not go to the ministry every day on an empty stomach.但这不过是一个大意，此外的事，倘非身临其境，实在有些说不清。譬如一碗酸辣汤，耳闻口讲的，总不如亲自呷一口的明白。近来有几个心怀叵测的名人间接忠告我，说我去年作文，专和几个人闹意见，不再论及文学艺术，天下国家，是可惜的。殊不知我近来倒是明白了，身历其境的小事，尚且参不透，说不清，更何况那些高尚伟大，不甚了然的事业？我现在只能说说较为切己的私事，至于冠冕堂皇如所谓“公理”之类，就让公理专家去消遣罢。
But this is just a general idea, and other things, if you are not immersed in them, are really a bit unclear. For example, a bowl of hot and sour soup, what you hear and say, it is better to take a sip and understand it yourself. Recently, several ill-intentioned celebrities have indirectly advised me, saying that it is a pity that I wrote last year's essay and had disagreements with a few people, and no longer discussed literature and art, the world, and the country. As everyone knows, I have recently understood that the small things I have experienced are still incomprehensible and unclear, let alone those noble and great, unclear careers? I can only talk about my own personal matters now, and as for the high-sounding "axioms" and the like, let the axioms experts entertain them.总之，我以为现在的“亲领”主张家，已颇不如先前了，这就是“孤桐先生”之所谓“每况愈下”。而且便是空牢骚如方玄绰者，似乎也已经很寥寥了。
In short, I think that the current "pro-leader" advocate family is not as good as before, which is the so-called "deterioration" of "Mr. Gu Tong". Moreover, even those who complained in vain like Henry Fang seemed to be very few.“去！”我一得警报，便走出公园，跳上车，径奔衙门去。
"Go!" As soon as I got the alarm, I ran out of the park, jumped into the car, and ran straight to the office.一进门，巡警就给我一个立正举手的敬礼，可见做官要做得较大，虽然阔别多日，他们也还是认识的。到里面，不见什么人，因为办公时间已经改在上午，大概都已亲领了回家了。觅得一位听差，问明了“亲领”的规则，是先到会计科去取得条子，然后拿了这条子，到花厅里去领钱。
As soon as I entered the door, the patrol officer gave me a standing and raising salute, which shows that being an official has to be bigger, and although they have been away for many days, they still know each other. When I got inside, I didn't see anyone, because the office hours had been changed to the morning, and they had probably been taken home. I found a messenger and asked for the rules of "personal receipt", which was to go to the accounting department to get the note, and then take the note and go to the flower hall to receive the money.就到会计科，一个部员看了一看我的脸，便翻出条子来。我知道他是老部员，熟识同人，负着“验明正身”的重大责任的；接过条子之后，我便特别多点了两个头，以表示告别和感谢之至意。
When I went to the accounting department, a member looked at my face and turned out a note. I know that he is an old member, familiar with fellow people, and bears the great responsibility of "verifying the identity"; After taking the note, I nodded two more heads to express my farewell and gratitude.其次是花厅了，先经过一个边门，只见上帖纸条道：“丙组”，又有一行小注是“不满百元”。我看自己的条子上，写的是九十九元，心里想，这真是“人生不满百，常怀千岁忧。……”同时便直撞进去。看见一个和我差不多大的官，说道这“不满百元”是指全俸而言，我的并不在这里，是在里间。
The second is the flower hall, first passing through a side door, I saw a note saying: "Group C", and there is a line of small notes that are "less than 100 yuan". I looked at my note, it was written as ninety-nine yuan, and I thought to myself, this is really "life is less than a hundred, and I often have a thousand years of worry." ......" and rushed straight in. I saw an official about the same age as me, and said that this "less than 100 yuan" refers to the full salary, mine is not here, but in the room.就到里间，那里有两张大桌子，桌旁坐着几个人，一个熟识的老同事就招呼我了；拿出条子去，签了名，换得钱票，总算一帆风顺。这组的旁边还坐着一位很胖的官，大概是监督者，因为他敢于解开了官纱——也许是纺绸，我不大认识这些东西。——小衫，露着胖得拥成折叠的胸肚，使汗珠雍容地越过了折叠往下流。
I went to the inner room, where there were two large tables, and a few people were sitting at the tables, and an old colleague I knew greeted me; took out the note, signed it, exchanged it for money tickets, and finally it was smooth sailing. There was also a very fat official sitting next to this group, probably a supervisor, because he dared to untie the official yarn - maybe spinning, I don't know much about these things. ——The small shirt exposed the chest and belly that were so fat that they were folded, so that the sweat beads flowed down gracefully over the fold.这时我无端有些感慨，心里想，大家现在都说“灾官”“灾官”，殊不知“心广体胖”的还不在少呢。便是两三年前教员正嚷索薪的时候，学校的教员豫备室里也还有人因为吃得太饱了，咳的一声，胃中的气体从嘴里反叛出来。
At this time, I felt a little emotional for no reason, thinking to myself, everyone now says "disaster official" and "disaster official", but I don't know that there are not a few people who are "fat with a big heart". It was two or three years ago when the teachers were clamoring for salaries, and there were still people in the school's teacher preparation room who coughed because they were too full, and the gas in their stomachs rebelled out of their mouths.走出外间，那一位和我差不多大的官还在，便拉住他发牢骚。
When he walked outside, the official who was about the same age as me was still there, so he grabbed him and complained.“你们怎么又闹这些玩艺儿了？”我说。
"Why are you making these tricks again?" I say.“这是他的意思……。”他和气地回答，而且笑嘻嘻的。
"That's what he meant......" He replied kindly, and with a smile.“生病的怎么办呢？放在门板上抬来么？”
"What should I do if I am sick? Put it on the door panel and lift it? ”“他说：这些都另法办理……。”
He said: These are handled separately......我是一听便了然的，只是在“门——衙门之门——外汉”怕不易懂，最好是再加上一点注解。这所谓“他”者，是指总长或次长而言。此时虽然似乎所指颇蒙胧，但再掘下去，便可以得到指实，但如果再掘下去，也许又要更蒙胧。总而言之，薪水既经到手，这些事便应该“适可而止，毋贪心也”的，否则，怕难免有些危机。即如我的说了这些话，其实就已经不大妥。
I understood it as soon as I heard it, but I am afraid that it is not easy to understand in "the door - the gate of the yamen - the outsider", so it is best to add a little annotation. The so-called "other" refers to the chief or deputy chief. At this time, although the referral seems to be quite vague, if you dig it down again, you can get the truth, but if you dig it up again, it may be even more hazy. All in all, once the salary is in hand, these things should be "stopped in moderation, not greedy", otherwise, I am afraid that some crises will inevitably be avoided. Even if I say these things, it is actually not appropriate.于是我退出花厅，却又遇见几个旧同事，闲谈了一回。知道还有“戊组”，是发给已经死了的人的薪水的，这一组大概无须“亲领”。又知道这一回提出“亲领”律者，不但“他”，也有“他们”在内。所谓“他们”者，粗粗一听，很像“索薪会”的头领们，但其实也不然，因为衙门里早就没有什么“索薪会”，所以这一回当然是别一批新人物了。
So I quit the flower hall, but I met a few old colleagues and chatted for a while. Knowing that there is also a "group E", which is paid to people who have died, this group probably does not need to be "personally led". I also know that this time the person who proposed to "personally lead" the law is not only "him", but also "them". The so-called "them", at first glance, sound very similar to the leaders of the "Salary Demanding Association", but in fact, this is not the case, because there has been no "Salary Demanding Society" in the yamen for a long time, so of course this time it is a new batch of new figures.我们这回“亲领”的薪水，是中华民国十三年二月份的。因此，事前就有了两种学说。一，即作为十三年二月的薪水发给。然而还有新来的和新近加俸的呢，可就不免有向隅之感。于是第二种新学说自然起来：不管先前，只作为本年六月份的薪水发给。不过这学说也不大妥，只是“不管先前”这一句，就很有些疵病。
Our "personally" salary this time was in February of the thirteenth year of the Republic of China. Therefore, there are two doctrines beforehand. First, it is paid as a salary in February of the thirteenth year. However, there are also new arrivals and new salary increases, but there is a sense of cornering. So the second new doctrine naturally arises: regardless of the previous one, it is only paid as a salary for June of this year. However, this theory is not very appropriate, but the sentence "regardless of the past" is very flawed.这个办法，先前也早有人苦心经营过。去年章士钊将我免职之后，自以为在地位上已经给了一个打击，连有些文人学士们也喜得手舞足蹈。然而他们究竟是聪明人，看过“满床满桌满地”的德文书的，即刻又悟到我单是抛了官，还不至于一败涂地，因为我还可以得欠薪，在北京生活。于是他们的司长刘百昭便在部务会议席上提出，要不发欠薪，何月领来，便作为何月的薪水。这办法如果实行，我的受打击是颇大的，因为就受着经济的迫压。然而终于也没有通过。那致命伤，就在“不管先前”上；而刘百昭们又不肯自称革命党，主张不管什么，都从新来一回。
This method has been painstakingly operated before. After Zhang Shizhao dismissed me last year, I thought that I had dealt a blow to my status, and even some literati and scholars danced with joy. However, they are smart people, and those who have read German books with "beds, tables, and floors" immediately realized that if I just abandoned my official position, I would not be completely defeated, because I could still have to live in Beijing with unpaid wages. So their director Liu Baizhao proposed at the ministerial meeting that if he did not pay the arrears of wages, He Yue would receive it as He Yue's salary. If this method is implemented, I will be hit hard, because I will be under economic pressure. However, it was not passed in the end. The fatal wound is in "regardless of the precedent"; And Liu Baizhao refused to call himself a revolutionary party, advocating that no matter what, they would start over.所以现在每一领到政费，所发的也还是先前的钱；即使有人今年不在北京了，十三年二月间却在，实在也有些难于说是现今不在，连那时的曾经在此也不算了。但是，既然又有新的学说起来，总得采纳一点，这采纳一点，也就是调和一些。因此，我们这回的收条上，年月是十三年二月的，钱的数目是十五年六月的。
So now every time I receive government expenses, I still get the money I received before; Even if someone is not in Beijing this year, but he was there in February of the thirteenth year, it is really difficult to say that he is not here now, and even the time he was here at that time. However, since there is a new doctrine, we must adopt a little, and this adopt a little, that is, reconcile. Therefore, on our receipt this time, the year and month are February of the thirteenth year, and the amount of money is in June of the fifteenth year.这么一来，既然并非“不管先前”，而新近升官或加俸的又可以多得一点钱，可谓比较的周到。于我是无益也无损，只要还在北京，拿得出“正身”来。
In this way, since it is not "regardless of the past", and those who have recently been promoted or increased their salaries can get a little more money, it can be described as more thoughtful. It is neither beneficial nor harmful to me, as long as I am still in Beijing, I can get my "right body".翻开我的简单日记一查，我今年已经收了四回俸钱了：第一次三元；第二次六元；第三次八十二元五角，即二成五，端午节的夜里收到的；第四次三成，九十九元，就是这一次。再算欠我的薪水，是大约还有九千二百四十元，七月份还不算。
When I opened my simple diary, I had received four times my salary this year: three yuan for the first time; the second six yuan; the third time is 82 yuan and 5 jiao, that is, 25%, received on the night of the Dragon Boat Festival; The fourth time is 30%, 99 yuan, which is this time. Counting the salary owed to me, it is about 9,240 yuan, not counting in July.我觉得已是一个精神上的财主；只可惜这“精神文明”是不很可靠的，刘百昭就来动摇过。将来遇见善于理财的人，怕还要设立一个“欠薪整理会”，里面坐着几个人物，外面挂着一块招牌，使凡有欠薪的人们都到那里去接洽。几天或几月之后，人不见了，接着连招牌也不见了；于是精神上的财主就变了物质上的穷人了。
I feel that I am already a spiritual rich man; It's a pity that this "spiritual civilization" is not very reliable, and Liu Baizhao has come to shake it. In the future, when I meet people who are good at managing money, I am afraid that I will set up a "wage arrears sorting meeting", where several people sit and a sign is hung outside, so that all people who have wage arrears can go there to contact. After a few days or months, the person is gone, and then even the sign is gone; So the spiritual rich man became the material poor.但现在却还的确收了九十九元，对于生活又较为放心，趁闲空来发一点议论再说。
But now I did charge ninety-nine yuan, and I was more at ease with life, so I took advantage of my free time to post a little discussion.七月二十一日。
July 21.

记谈话

记谈话

记谈话

Remember the conversation鲁迅先生快到厦门去了，虽然他自己说或者因天气之故而不能在那里久住，但至少总有半年或一年不在北京，这实在是我们认为很使人留恋的一件事。八月二十二日，女子师范大学学生会举行毁校周年纪念，鲁迅先生到会，曾有一番演说，我恐怕这是他此次在京最后的一回公开讲演，因此把它记下来，表示我一点微弱的纪念的意思。人们一提到鲁迅先生，或者不免觉得他稍微有一点过于冷静，过于默视的样子，而其实他是无时不充满着热烈的希望，发挥着丰富的感情的。在这一次谈话里，尤其可以显明地看出他的主张；那么，我把他这一次的谈话记下，作为他出京的纪念，也许不是完全没有重大的意义罢。我自己，为免得老实人费心起见，应该声明一下：那天的会，我是以一个小小的办事员的资格参加的。
Mr. Lu Xun is about to go to Xiamen, and although he himself said that he could not stay there for a long time or because of the weather, he was always absent from Beijing for at least half a year or a year, which is really a nostalgic thing that we think is very nostalgic. On August 22, the Student Union of Women's Normal University held the anniversary of the destruction of the school, and Mr. Lu Xun attended the meeting and gave a speech, which I am afraid was his last public speech in Beijing, so I wrote it down to express my faint sense of commemoration. When people mention Mr. Lu Xun, they may feel that he is a little too calm and too silent, but in fact, he is always full of warm hope and rich feelings. In this conversation, his proposition can be especially clearly seen; So, I will write down his conversation this time as a commemoration of his departure from Beijing, which may not be completely of great significance. Myself, in order not to bother honest people, should declare: I participated in that day's meeting as a small clerk.（培良）
(Peiliang)我昨晚上在校《工人绥惠略夫》，想要另印一回，睡得太迟了，到现在还没有很醒；正在校的时候，忽然想到一些事情，弄得脑子里很混乱，一直到现在还是很混乱，所以今天恐怕不能有什么多的话可说。
I was in school last night in "Workers Sui Hui Luofu", and I wanted to print it again, but I slept too late and still haven't woken up very much; When I was in school, I suddenly thought of something that made my mind very confused, and it is still very confusing until now, so I am afraid I can't say much today.提到我翻译《工人绥惠略夫》的历史，倒有点有趣。十二年前，欧洲大混战开始了，后来我们中国也参加战事，就是所谓“对德宣战”；派了许多工人到欧洲去帮忙；以后就打胜了，就是所谓“公理战胜”。中国自然也要分得战利品，——有一种是在上海的德国商人的俱乐部里的德文书，总数很不少，文学居多，都搬来放在午门的门楼上。教育部得到这些书，便要整理一下，分类一下，——其实是他们本来分类好了的，然而有些人以为分得不好，所以要从新分一下。——当时派了许多人，我也是其中的一个。后来，总长要看看那些书是什么书了。怎样看法呢？叫我们用中文将书名译出来，有义译义，无义译音，该撒呀，克来阿派忒拉呀，大马色呀……。每人每月有十块钱的车费，我也拿了百来块钱，因为那时还有一点所谓行政费。这样的几里古鲁了一年多，花了几千块钱，对德和约成立了，后来德国来取还，便仍由点收的我们全盘交付，——也许少了几本罢。至于“克来阿派忒拉”之类，总长看了没有，我可不得而知了。
It is a bit interesting to mention the history of my translation of "Workers Suihuiliov". Twelve years ago, the great melee in Europe began, and later we in China also participated in the war, which is the so-called "declaration of war on Germany"; sent many workers to Europe to help; In the future, it will be won, which is the so-called "axiom victory". China naturally wants to share the spoils,—— there is a German book in the club of German merchants in Shanghai, the total number is a lot, most of which are literature, all of which are moved to the gatehouse of the noon gate. When the Ministry of Education gets these books, they have to sort them out and classify them,—— in fact, they have already classified them, but some people think that they are not well divided, so they have to divide them anew. ——Many people were sent at that time, and I was one of them. Later, the chief wanted to see what kind of books those books were. What do you think? Let us translate the title of the book with Chinese, with meaning and without meaning, Caesar, Cleaethera, Damascus, ....... Each person had a fare of ten yuan a month, and I also took a hundred yuan, because there was also a little so-called administrative fee at that time. Such a few miles of guru for more than a year, spent thousands of dollars, and the peace treaty with Germany was established, and then Germany came to take it back, and we still delivered it in full,—— maybe a few copies were missing. As for "Creepella" and the like, I don't know if the chief has seen it.据我所知道的说，“对德宣战”的结果，在中国有一座中央公园里的“公理战胜”的牌坊，在我就只有一篇这《工人绥惠略夫》的译本，因为那底本，就是从那时整理着的德文书里挑出来的。
As far as I know, as a result of the "declaration of war on Germany", there is an archway of "axiom victory" in the Central Park in China, and I only have a translation of "Workers' Sui Huiliov", because that original copy was selected from the German books compiled at that time.那一堆书里文学书多得很，为什么那时偏要挑中这一篇呢？那意思，我现在有点记不真切了。大概，觉得民国以前，以后，我们也有许多改革者，境遇和绥惠略夫很相像，所以借借他人的酒杯罢。然而昨晚上一看，岂但那时，譬如其中的改革者的被迫，代表的吃苦，便是现在，——便是将来，便是几十年以后，我想，还要有许多改革者的境遇和他相像的。所以我打算将它重印一下……。
There are a lot of literary books in that pile of books, why did you choose this one at that time? I don't really remember that now. Probably, I feel that before and after the Republic of China, we also had many reformers, and the situation was very similar to that of Sui Huiliufu, so we borrowed other people's wine glasses. However, last night, I saw that not only at that time, for example, the forced reformers among them, the hardships they represented were now,—— in the future, and decades later, I think there would be many reformers in a situation similar to his. So I'm going to reprint it .......《工人绥惠略夫》的作者阿尔志跋绥夫是俄国人。现在一提到俄国，似乎就使人心惊胆战。但是，这是大可以不必的，阿尔志跋绥夫并非共产党，他的作品现在在苏俄也并不受人欢迎。听说他已经瞎了眼睛，很在吃苦，那当然更不会送我一个卢布……。总而言之：和苏俄是毫不相干。但奇怪的是有许多事情竟和中国很相像，譬如，改革者，代表者的受苦，不消说了；便是教人要安本分的老婆子，也正如我们的文人学士一般。有一个教员因为不受上司的辱骂而被革职了，她背地里责备他，说他“高傲”得可恶，“你看，我以前被我的主人打过两个嘴巴，可是我一句话都不说，忍耐着。究竟后来他们知道我冤枉了，就亲手赏了我一百卢布。”自然，我们的文人学士措辞决不至于如此拙直，文字也还要华赡得多。
The author of "Worker Suihuiliov" is Russian. Now when Russia is mentioned, it seems to be terrifying. However, this is unnecessary, Alzhiv is not a communist, and his works are not popular in Soviet Russia now. I heard that he was blind and was suffering, so of course he would not give me a ruble ....... All in all: it has nothing to do with Soviet Russia. But strangely, there are many things that are very similar to China, such as the suffering of reformers and representatives, needless to say; It is the old woman who teaches people to do their duty, just like our literati and scholars. A teacher was dismissed because she was not insulted by her superiors, and she reproached him behind her back, saying that he was "arrogant" and hateful, "You see, I was beaten in the mouth twice by my master before, but I didn't say a word, I endured." Later, when they knew that I had been wronged, they rewarded me with one hundred rubles with their own hands. "Naturally, our literati and scholars will never be so clumsy and straightforward, and the words will be much more gorgeous.然而绥惠略夫临末的思想却太可怕。他先是为社会做事，社会倒迫害他，甚至于要杀害他，他于是一变而为向社会复仇了，一切是仇仇，一切都破坏。中国这样破坏一切的人还不见有，大约也不会有的，我也并不希望其有。但中国向来有别一种破坏的人，所以我们不去破坏的，便常常受破坏。我们一面被破坏，一面修缮着，辛辛苦苦地再过下去。所以我们的生活，便成了一面受破坏，一面修补，一面受破坏，一面修补的生活了。这个学校，也就是受了杨荫榆章士钊们的破坏之后，修补修补，整理整理，再过下去的。
However, Sui Huiliufu's final thoughts were too terrifying. He first did things for society, but society persecuted him, and even wanted to kill him, so he turned into revenge on society, everything was hatred, everything was destroyed. There are no people like China who destroy everything, and there probably won't be, and I don't want them to have them. But China has always had another kind of saboteur, so if we don't destroy, we will often be destroyed. We were destroyed, repaired, and worked hard to get on again. Therefore, our life has become a life of being destroyed, repaired, destroyed, and repaired. This school, that is, after being destroyed by Yang Yinyu and Zhang Shizhao, was repaired, sorted out, and then lived.俄国老婆子式的文人学士也许说，这是“高傲”得可恶了，该得惩罚。这话自然很像不错的，但也不尽然。我的家里还住着一个乡下人，因为战事，她的家没有了，只好逃进城里来。她实在并不“高傲”，也没有反对过杨荫榆，然而她的家没有了，受了破坏。战事一完，她一定要回去的，即使屋子破了，器具抛了，田地荒了，她也还要活下去。她大概只好搜集一点剩下的东西，修补修补，整理整理，再来活下去。
The Russian wife-like literati may say that this is "arrogant" and deserves punishment. This is naturally a good thing, but it is not necessarily. There was still a countryman living in my house, and because of the war, her home was gone, so she had to flee into the city. She was really not "arrogant", nor did she oppose Yang Yinyu, but her home was gone and destroyed. As soon as the war is over, she must go back, even if the house is broken, the equipment is thrown away, and the fields are barren, she still has to live. She probably had to collect some of the leftovers, tinker with them, sort them out, and then come back to live.中国的文明，就是这样破坏了又修补，破坏了又修补的疲乏伤残可怜的东西。但是很有人夸耀它，甚至于连破坏者也夸耀它。便是破坏本校的人，假如你派他到万国妇女的什么会里去，请他叙述中国女学的情形，他一定说，我们中国有一个国立北京女子师范大学在。
This is how Chinese civilization has destroyed and repaired, destroyed and repaired tired, disabled and pitiful things. But there are many people who boast about it, even vandals. If you send him to a meeting of women from all over the world and ask him to describe the situation of Chinese women's schools, he will definitely say that we have a National Beijing Women's Normal University in China.这真是万分可惜的事，我们中国人对于不是自己的东西，或者将不为自己所有的东西，总要破坏了才快活的。杨荫榆知道要做不成这校长，便文事用文士的“流言”，武功用三河的老妈，总非将一班“毛鸦头”赶尽杀绝不可。先前我看见记载上说的张献忠屠戮川民的事，我总想不通他是什么意思；后来看到别一本书，这才明白了：他原是想做皇帝的，但是李自成先进北京，做了皇帝了，他便要破坏李自成的帝位。怎样破坏法呢？做皇帝必须有百姓；他杀尽了百姓，皇帝也就谁都做不成了。既无百姓，便无所谓皇帝，于是只剩了一个李自成，在白地上出丑，宛如学校解散后的校长一般。这虽然是一个可笑的极端的例，但有这一类的思想的，实在并不止张献忠一个人。
This is really a pity, we Chinese always have to destroy things that are not our own, or things that will not be owned by ourselves, to be happy. Yang Yinyu knew that he would not be able to be the principal, so he used the "rumors" of scribes in civil affairs and the mother of Sanhe in martial arts, and he had to drive out a group of "crows". I saw the record about Zhang Xianzhong's massacre of the Sichuan people, and I couldn't figure out what he meant; Later, when I saw another book, I understood: he originally wanted to be emperor, but Li Zicheng advanced to Beijing and became emperor, and he wanted to destroy Li Zicheng's throne. How to destroy the law? To be an emperor, you must have the people; He killed all the people, and the emperor couldn't do anyone. Since there are no people, there is no emperor, so there is only one Li Zicheng left, making a fool of himself on the white ground, like the principal after the school was disbanded. Although this is a ridiculous extreme example, Zhang Xianzhong is not the only one with this kind of thinking.我们总是中国人，我们总要遇见中国事，但我们不是中国式的破坏者，所以我们是过着受破坏了又修补，受破坏了又修补的生活。我们的许多寿命白费了。我们所可以自慰的，想来想去，也还是所谓对于将来的希望。希望是附丽于存在的，有存在，便有希望，有希望，便是光明。如果历史家的话不是诳话，则世界上的事物可还没有因为黑暗而长存的先例。黑暗只能附丽于渐就灭亡的事物，一灭亡，黑暗也就一同灭亡了，它不永久。然而将来是永远要有的，并且总要光明起来；只要不做黑暗的附着物，为光明而灭亡，则我们一定有悠久的将来，而且一定是光明的将来。
We are always Chinese, we always have to meet Chinese things, but we are not Chinese-style destroyers, so we live a life of being destroyed and repaired, destroyed and repaired. Many of our lives are in vain. What we can masturbate, thinking about it, is still the so-called hope for the future. Hope is attached to existence, there is hope, and hope is light. If the historian's words are not lies, there is no precedent for things in the world to last forever because of darkness. Darkness can only be attached to things that are gradually dying, and when they die, darkness will also perish, and it will not be permanent. However, the future will always be there, and it will always be bright; As long as we do not become attachments to darkness and perish for the light, we must have a long future, and it must be a bright future.我赴这会的后四日，就出北京了。在上海看见日报，知道女师大已改为女子学院的师范部，教育总长任可澄自做院长，师范部的学长是林素园。后来看见北京九月五日的晚报，有一条道：“今日下午一时半，任可澄特同林氏，并率有警察厅保安队及军督察处兵士共四十左右，驰赴女师大，武装接收。……”原来刚一周年，又看见用兵了。不知明年这日，还是带兵的开得校纪念呢，还是被兵的开毁校纪念？现在姑且将培良君的这一篇转录在这里，先作一个本年的纪念罢。
Four days after I went to this meeting, I left Beijing. I saw the daily in Shanghai and knew that the Women's Normal University had been changed to the normal department of the women's college, and the chief of education Ren Kecheng was the dean, and the senior of the normal department was Lin Suyuan. Later, I saw the evening news of Beijing on September 5, and there was a saying: "At half past one o'clock this afternoon, Ren Kecheng and Lin, along with about 40 soldiers from the National Police Department Security Team and the Military Inspection Department, rushed to the Women's Normal University to receive armed reception." ...... "It turns out that it has just been the first anniversary, and I have seen the use of troops again." I don't know if on this day next year, it will be a commemoration of the opening of the school by the soldiers, or a commemoration of the opening of the school by the soldiers? Now let's transcribe this article of Pei Liangjun here, and make a commemoration of this year.一九二六年十月十四日，鲁迅附记。
October 14, 1926, Lu Xun added a note.

上海通信

上海通信

上海通信

Shanghai Communications小峰兄：
Brother Xiaofeng:别后之次日，我便上车，当晚到天津。途中什么事也没有，不过刚出天津车站，却有一个穿制服的，大概是税吏之流罢，突然将我的提篮拉住，问道“什么？”我刚答说“零用什物”时，他已经将篮摇了两摇，扬长而去了。幸而我的篮里并无人参汤榨菜汤或玻璃器皿，所以毫无损失，请勿念。
The day after parting, I got on the bus and arrived in Tianjin that night. There was nothing on the way, but as soon as I left Tianjin Station, there was a man in uniform, probably a tax collector, who suddenly pulled my basket and asked, "What?" As soon as I replied "pocket items", he had already shaken the basket twice and walked away. Fortunately, there is no ginseng soup, mustard soup, or glassware in my basket, so there is no loss, so please don't read it.从天津向浦口，我坐的是特别快车，所以并不嚣杂，但挤是挤的。我从七年前护送家眷到北京以后，便没有坐过这车；现在似乎男女分坐了，间壁的一室中本是一男三女的一家，这回却将男的逐出，另外请进一个女的去。将近浦口，又发生一点小风潮，因为那四口的一家给茶房的茶资太少了，一个长壮伟大的茶房便到我们这里来演说，“使之闻之”。其略曰：钱是自然要的。一个人不为钱为什么？然而自己只做茶房图几文茶资，是因为良心还在中间，没有到这边（指腋下介）去！自己也还能卖掉田地去买枪，招集了土匪，做个头目；好好地一玩，就可以升官，发财了。然而良心还在这里（指胸骨介），所以甘心做茶房，赚点小钱，给儿女念念书，将来好好过活。……但，如果太给自己下不去了，什么不是人做的事要做也会做出来！我们一堆共有六个人，谁也没有反驳他。听说后来是添了一块钱完事。
From Tianjin to Pukou, I took a very fast train, so it was not noisy, but it was crowded. I haven't ridden this car since I escorted my family to Beijing seven years ago; Now it seems that the men and women are sitting separately, and the room on the wall was originally a family of one man and three women, but this time the man was expelled and another woman was invited. Near Pukou, there was another small trend, because the family of four gave too little tea to the tea room, and a long and great tea house came to us to give a speech, "so that it can be heard". The general idea is: money is naturally needed. Why is a person not for money? However, I only make tea room pictures and tea fees, because my conscience is still in the middle, and I didn't go here (referring to the armpit)! he can also sell his fields to buy guns, recruit bandits, and be a leader; If you play well, you can get promoted and get rich. However, the conscience is still here (referring to the sternum), so I am willing to make a tea room, earn some money, read to my children, and live a good life in the future. …… However, if you can't do it too much for yourself, you will do what you don't do! There were six of us in a bunch of people, and no one refuted him. I heard that it was done with a dollar later.我并不想步勇敢的文人学士们的后尘，在北京出版的周刊上斥骂孙传芳大帅。不过一到下关，记起这是投壶的礼义之邦的事来，总不免有些滑稽之感。在我的眼睛里，下关也还是七年前的下关，无非那时是大风雨，这回却是晴天。赶不上特别快车了，只好趁夜车，便在客寓里暂息。挑夫（即本地之所谓“夫子”）和茶房还是照旧地老实；板鸭，插烧，油鸡等类，也依然价廉物美。喝了二两高粱酒，也比北京的好。这当然只是“我以为”；但也并非毫无理由：就因为它有一点生的高粱气味，喝后合上眼，就如身在雨后的田野里一般。
I don't want to follow in the footsteps of brave literati and scholars and scold Sun Chuanfang in a weekly magazine published in Beijing. However, when I arrived at Xiaguan, I remembered that this was a country of propriety and righteousness for throwing pots, and I couldn't help but feel a little funny. In my eyes, Xiaguan was still seven years ago, it was nothing more than a stormy day, but this time it was a sunny day. I couldn't catch up with the particularly fast train, so I had to take advantage of the night train and take a break in the guesthouse. The porters (i.e., the local so-called "masters") and the tea room are still as honest as ever; Plate duck, roast, oil chicken and other types are still cheap and good. I drank two taels of sorghum wine, which was also better than Beijing's. It's of course just "I thought"; But not without reason: just because it has a little smell of raw sorghum, after drinking it, you close your eyes, just like in a field after the rain.正在田野里的时候，茶房来说有人要我出去说话了。出去看时，是几个人和三四个兵背着枪，究竟几个，我没有细数；总之是一大群。其中的一个说要看我的行李。问他先看那一个呢？他指定了一个麻布套的皮箱。给他解了绳，开了锁，揭开盖，他才蹲下去在衣服中间摸索。摸索了一会，似乎便灰心了，站起来将手一摆，一群兵便都“向后转”，往外走出去了。那指挥的临走时还对我点点头，非常客气。我和现任的“有枪阶级”接洽，民国以来这是第一回。我觉得他们倒并不坏；假使他们也如自称“无枪阶级”的善造“流言”，我就要连路也不能走。
When I was in the field, someone in the tea room said that someone wanted me to go out and talk. When I went out to see, there were a few people and three or four soldiers carrying guns, and I didn't count how many they were; In short, a large group. One of them said to look at my luggage. Ask him which one to look at first? He specified a leather case with a burlap cover. Untied the rope, unlocked it, and lifted the lid, before he squatted down and groped in the middle of his clothes. After groping for a while, he seemed to be discouraged, stood up and waved his hand, and a group of soldiers all "turned back" and walked out. The conductor nodded to me before leaving, very politely. I contacted the current "gun class", and this was the first time since the Republic of China. I don't think they're bad; If they are like the "rumors" that call themselves the "gunless class", I will not even be able to walk.向上海的夜车是十一点钟开的，客很少，大可以躺下睡觉，可惜椅子太短，身子必须弯起来。这车里的茶是好极了，装在玻璃杯里，色香味都好，也许因为我喝了多年井水茶，所以容易大惊小怪了罢，然而大概确是很好的。因此一共喝了两杯，看看窗外的夜的江南，几乎没有睡觉。
The night train to Shanghai departed at eleven o'clock, and there were few passengers, so you could lie down and sleep, but unfortunately the chair was too short and you had to bend over. The tea in this car is excellent, served in a glass, the color and fragrance are good, maybe because I have been drinking well water tea for many years, so it is easy to make a fuss, but it is probably very good. So I drank a total of two cups, looked at Jiangnan at night outside the window, and hardly slept.在这车上，才遇见满口英语的学生，才听到“无线电”“海底电”这类话。也在这车上，才看见弱不胜衣的少爷，绸衫尖头鞋，口嗑南瓜子，手里是一张《消闲录》之类的小报，而且永远看不完。这一类人似乎江浙特别多，恐怕投壶的日子正长久哩。
On this bus, I met students who were full of English, and only then did I hear words like "radio" and "undersea electricity". It was also in this car that I saw the weak young master, wearing a silk shirt and pointed shoes, eating pumpkin seeds, and holding a tabloid such as "Leisure Record" in his hand, and he could never finish reading it. This type of people seems to be very large in Jiangsu and Zhejiang, and I am afraid that the days of throwing pots are long.现在是住在上海的客寓里了；急于想走。走了几天，走得高兴起来了，很想总是走来走去。先前听说欧洲有一种民族，叫作“吉柏希”的，乐于迁徙，不肯安居，私心窃以为他们脾气太古怪，现在才知道他们自有他们的道理，倒是我胡涂。
Now I live in a guest house in Shanghai; Eager to leave. After walking for a few days, I was happy to walk and wanted to always walk around. I had heard that there was a people in Europe called "Gibbershi", who were willing to migrate and refused to settle down, and privately thought that their temper was too strange.这里在下雨，不算很热了。
It's raining here, not very hot.鲁迅。八月三十日，上海。
Lu Xun. August 30, Shanghai.这半年我又看见了许多血和许多泪，In the past six months, I have seen a lot of blood and a lot of tears, 
然而我只有杂感而已。 However, I only have mixed feelings.
泪揩了，血消了；Tears are wiped away, blood is gone; 
屠伯们逍遥复逍遥， The butchers are free, 
用钢刀的，用软刀的。 Use steel knives, use soft knives. 
然而我只有“杂感”而已。 However, I only have "mixed feelings".
连“杂感”也被“放进了应该去的地方”时，When even the "miscellaneous senses" are "put where they should go", 
我于是只有“而已”而已！ I only have "that"!
十月十四夜，校讫记。
On the night of October 14th, the proofreading was completed.

华盖集续编的续编

华盖集续编的续编

华盖集续编的续编

A sequel to the sequel to the canopy collection在厦门岛的四个月，只做了几篇无聊文字，除去最无聊者，还剩六篇，称为《华盖集续编的续编》，总算一年中所作的杂感全有了。
In the four months on Xiamen Island, I only wrote a few boring texts, and except for the most boring ones, there were still six left, called "The Continuation of the Continuation of the Huagai Collection", and finally all the miscellaneous feelings I made in a year were gone.一九二七年一月八日，鲁迅记。
January 8, 1927, Lu Xunji.

厦门通信

厦门通信

厦门通信

Xiamen CommunicationsH.M.兄：
Brother H.M.我到此快要一个月了，懒在一所三层楼上，对于各处都不大写信。这楼就在海边，日夜被海风呼呼地吹着。海滨很有些贝壳，检了几回，也没有什么特别的。四围的人家不多，我所知道的最近的店铺，只有一家，卖点罐头食物和糕饼，掌柜的是一个女人，看年纪大概可以比我长一辈。
I've been here for almost a month, lazy on a three-story building, and don't write much about everywhere. This building is right by the sea, blowing by the sea breeze day and night. There are some shells on the beach, and after checking them a few times, there is nothing special. There are not many people around, and there is only one nearest store I know, selling canned food and pastries, and the shopkeeper is a woman, who is probably a generation older than me.风景一看倒不坏，有山有水。我初到时，一个同事便告诉我：山光海气，是春秋早暮都不同。还指给我石头看：这块像老虎，那块像癞虾蟆，那一块又像什么什么……。我忘记了，其实也不大相像。我对于自然美，自恨并无敏感，所以即使恭逢良辰美景，也不甚感动。但好几天，却忘不掉郑成功的遗迹。离我的住所不远就有一道城墙，据说便是他筑的。一想到除了台湾，这厦门乃是满人入关以后我们中国的最后亡的地方，委实觉得可悲可喜。台湾是直到一六八三年，即所谓“圣祖仁皇帝”二十二年才亡的，这一年，那“仁皇帝”们便修补“十三经”和“二十一史”的刻板。现在呢，有些国民巴不得读经；殿板“二十一史”也变成了宝贝，古董藏书家不惜重资，购藏于家，以贻子孙云。然而郑成功的城却很寂寞，听说城脚的沙，还被人盗运去卖给对面鼓浪屿的谁，快要危及城基了。有一天我清早望见许多小船，吃水很重，都张着帆驶向鼓浪屿去，大约便是那卖沙的同胞。
The scenery is not bad at first glance, there are mountains and waters. When I first arrived, a colleague told me: The mountains and seas are different in spring and autumn. He also pointed to the stone: this one looks like a tiger, that one looks like a toad, and that one looks like something...... I forgot, it's not much like it. I am not sensitive to natural beauty and self-hatred, so even if I encounter the beautiful scenery, I am not very moved. But for several days, I couldn't forget Zheng Chenggong's relics. Not far from my dwelling there is a wall that is said to have been built by him. When I think that in addition to Taiwan, this Xiamen is the last place where our China died after the Manchus entered the customs, I really feel sad and gratifying. Taiwan did not die until 1683, the twenty-second year of the so-called "Holy Ancestor Ren Emperor", and in this year, the "Ren Emperors" repaired the stereotypes of the "Thirteen Classics" and "Twenty-One Histories". Now, some people are eager to read the Bible; The "Twenty-One History" of the hall board has also become a treasure, and antique bibliophiles have spared no expense to buy it at home to leave it to their descendants. However, Zheng Chenggong's city was very lonely, and he heard that the sand at the foot of the city was also stolen and sold to someone on Gulangyu Island opposite, which was about to endanger the foundation of the city. One morning I saw many small boats, with a heavy draft, all sailing towards Gulangyu with their sails open, probably the compatriots who sold sand.周围很静；近处买不到一种北京或上海的新的出版物，所以有时也觉得枯寂一些，但也看不见灰烟瘴气的《现代评论》。这不知是怎的，有那么许多正人君子，文人学者执笔，竟还不大风行。
The surroundings are very quiet; I can't buy a new publication in Beijing or Shanghai nearby, so sometimes I feel a little bored, but I can't see the gray miasma of the "Modern Review". I don't know why, there are so many upright gentlemen, literati and scholars, but it is not very popular.这几天我想编我今年的杂感了。自从我写了这些东西，尤其是关于陈源的东西以后，就很有几个自称“中立”的君子给我忠告，说你再写下去，就要无聊了。我却并非因为忠告，只因环境的变迁，近来竟没有什么杂感，连结集旧作的事也忘却了。前几天的夜里，忽然听到梅兰芳“艺员”的歌声，自然是留在留声机里的，像粗糙而钝的针尖一般，刺得我耳膜很不舒服。于是我就想到我的杂感，大约也刺得佩服梅“艺员”的正人君子们不大舒服罢，所以要我不再做。然而我的杂感是印在纸上的，不会振动空气，不愿见，不翻他开来就完了，何必冒充了中立来哄骗我。我愿意我的东西躺在小摊上，被愿看的买去，却不愿意受正人君子赏识。世上爱牡丹的或者是最多，但也有喜欢曼陀罗花或无名小草的，朋其还将霸王鞭种在茶壶里当盆景哩。不过看看旧稿，很有些太不清楚了，你可以给我抄一点么？
These days, I want to make up my miscellaneous feelings for this year. Since I wrote these things, especially about Chen Yuan, there have been a few gentlemen who call themselves "neutral" to give me advice, saying that if you continue to write, it will be boring. I didn't feel any distractions recently, not because of advice, but because of the changes in the environment, and I forgot about the collection of old works. A few days ago, I suddenly heard Mei Lanfang's "artist" singing, which naturally remained in the gramophone, like a rough and blunt needle tip, which stabbed my eardrums very uncomfortable. So I thought of my miscellaneous feelings, and probably made the upright gentlemen who admired Mei's "artists" uncomfortable, so I asked them not to do it anymore. However, my miscellaneous feelings are printed on paper, they don't vibrate the air, I don't want to see them, and it's over if I don't turn them over, so why pretend to be neutral to coax me. I want my things to lie on the stall and be bought by those who want to see them, but I don't want to be appreciated by upright gentlemen. There are some people in the world who love peonies the most, but there are also those who like datura flowers or nameless grasses, and Pengqi also planted the overlord whip in the teapot as a bonsai. But looking at the old draft, it is very unclear, can you copy a little for me?此时又在发风，几乎日日这样，好像北京，可是其中很少灰土。我有时也偶然去散步，在丛葬中，这是Borel讲厦门的书上早就说过的：中国全国就是一个大墓场。墓碑文很多不通：有写先妣某而没有儿子的姓名的；有头上横写着地名的；还有刻着“敬惜字纸”四字的，不知道叫谁敬惜字纸。
At this time, the wind is blowing again, almost every day, like Beijing, but there is very little gray soil in it. I sometimes go for a walk in the mass burial, which is what Borel said in his book about Xiamen: the whole of China is a big cemetery. There are many incomprehensible tombstone texts: some write the name of the ancestor without the son; some have place names written horizontally on their heads; There are also those engraved with the words "Respect the Word Paper", I don't know who to call the Cherish Word Paper.这些不通，就因为读了书之故。假如问一个不识字的人，坟里的人是谁，他道父亲；再问他什么名字，他说张二；再问他自己叫什么，他说张三。照直写下来，那就清清楚楚了。而写碑的人偏要舞文弄墨，所以反而越舞越胡涂，他不知道研究“金石例”的，从元朝到清朝就终于没有了局。
These things don't work because of reading books. If you ask an illiterate person who is in the grave, he will say his father; asked him what his name was, and he said Zhang Er; When asked what his name was, he said Zhang San. Write it down straight, and it will be clear. The person who wrote the stele preferred to dance and ink, so the more he danced, the more foolish, he didn't know that the study of "gold and stone examples" was finally out of the game from the Yuan Dynasty to the Qing Dynasty.我还同先前一样；不过太静了，倒是什么也不想写。
I am still the same as before; But it's too quiet, and I don't want to write anything.鲁迅。九月二十三日。
Lu Xun. September 23.

厦门通信（二）

厦门通信（二）

厦门通信（二）

Xiamen Communications (2)小峰兄：
Brother Xiaofeng:《语丝》百一和百二期，今天一同收到了。许多信件一同收到，在这里是常有的事，大约每星期有两回。我看了这两期的《语丝》特别喜欢，恐怕是因为他们已经超出了一百期之故罢。在中国，几个人组织的刊物要出到一百期，实在是不容易的。
The 101st and 102nd issues of "Yusi" were received together today. Many letters are received together, and it is common here, about twice a week. I particularly liked these two issues of "Yusi", probably because they had exceeded 100 issues. In China, it is not easy for a publication organized by several people to publish 100 issues.我虽然在这里，也常想投稿给《语丝》，但是一句也写不出，连“野草”也没有一茎半叶。现在只是编讲义。为什么呢？这是你一定了然的：为吃饭。吃了饭为什么呢？倘照这样下去，就是为了编讲义。吃饭是不高尚的事，我倒并不这样想。然而编了讲义来吃饭，吃了饭来编讲义，可也觉得未免近于无聊。别的学者们教授们又作别论，从我们平常人看来，教书和写东西是势不两立的，或者死心塌地地教书，或者发狂变死地写东西，一个人走不了方向不同的两条路。
Although I am here, I often want to contribute to "Yusi", but I can't write a word, and I don't even have a single and a half leaves of "weeds". Now it's just a handout. Why? This is what you must know: for eating. Why did you eat? If this continues, it is to compile handouts. Eating is not a noble thing, but I don't think so. However, I made up handouts to eat, and I ate to compile handouts, but I also felt that it was almost boring. From the perspective of ordinary people, teaching and writing are incompatible, or teaching with a dead heart, or writing like crazy, one person cannot take two paths in different directions.忽然记起一件事来了，还是夏天罢，《现代评论》上仿佛曾有正人君子之流说过：因为骂人的小报流行，正经的文章没有人看，也不能印了。我很佩服这些学者们的大才。不知道你可能替我调查一下，他们有多少正经文章的稿子“藏于家”，给我开一个目录？但如果是讲义，或者什么民法八万七千六百五十四条之类，那就不必开，我不要看。
Suddenly remembered something, it was still summer, and it seemed that there were people in the "Modern Review" who once said: Because scolding tabloids are popular, no one reads serious articles and cannot be printed. I admire the great talents of these scholars. I don't know if you might investigate for me, how many manuscripts of serious articles are "hidden at home" and open a catalog for me? But if it's a handout, or something like Article 87,654 of the Civil Code, then you don't have to open it, I don't want to read it.今天又接到漱园兄的信，说北京已经结冰了。这里却还只穿一件夹衣，怕冷就晚上加一件棉背心。宋玉先生的什么“皇天平分四时兮窃独悲此廪秋，白露既下百草兮奄离披此梧楸”等类妙文，拿到这里来就完全是“无病呻吟”。白露不知可曾“下”了百草，梧楸却并不离披，景象大概还同夏末相仿。我的住所的门前有一株不认识的植物，开着秋葵似的黄花。我到时就开着花的了，不知道他是什么时候开起的；现在还开着；还有未开的蓓蕾，正不知道他要到什么时候才肯开完。“古已有之”，“于今为烈”，我近来很有些怕敢看他了。还有鸡冠花，很细碎，和江浙的有些不同，也红红黄黄地永是这样一盆一盆站着。
Today I received a letter from Brother Shuyuan, saying that Beijing has frozen. But here I only wear a jacket, and if I am afraid of the cold, I will add a cotton vest at night. Mr. Song Yu's wonderful writings such as "The emperor divides the four seasons equally and secretly mourns this autumn, and the white dew falls on the grass and leaves this sycamore", which is completely "moaning without illness" when you get it here. Bai Lu didn't know that he had "fallen" the grass, but the sycamore was not separated, and the scene was probably similar to the end of summer. In front of the door of my residence, there was an unknown plant with okra-like yellow flowers. I will be blooming at that time, and I don't know when it bloomed; It's still open; There are still unbloomed buds, and I don't know when he will be willing to finish blooming. "It has existed in ancient times", "It is fierce in the present", I am a little afraid to dare to look at him recently. There are also cockscombs, which are very fine, which are a little different from those in Jiangsu and Zhejiang, and they are also red and yellow and yellow and standing like this one by one.我本来不大喜欢下地狱，因为不但是满眼只有刀山剑树，看得太单调，苦痛也怕很难当。现在可又有些怕上天堂了。四时皆春，一年到头请你看桃花，你想够多么乏味？即使那桃花有车轮般大，也只能在初上去的时候，暂时吃惊，决不会每天做一首“桃之夭夭”的。
I didn't like going to hell very much, because not only were my eyes full of swords and swords, but it was too monotonous, and I was afraid that it would be difficult to bear the pain. Now I'm a little afraid of going to heaven. It's spring all year round, please see the peach blossoms all year round, how boring do you think it is? Even if the peach blossom is as big as a wheel, it can only be temporarily surprised when it first goes up, and it will never make a song "Peach Blossoms" every day.然而荷叶却早枯了；小草也有点萎黄。这些现象，我先前总以为是所谓“严霜”之故，于是有时候对于那“廪秋”不免口出怨言，加以攻击。然而这里却没有霜，也没有雪，凡萎黄的都是“寿终正寝”，怪不得别个。呜呼，牢骚材料既被减少，则又有何话之可说哉！
However, the lotus leaves withered early; The grass is also a little chlorosis. I used to think that these phenomena were due to the so-called "severe frost", so sometimes I couldn't help but complain and attack the "Linqiu". However, there is no frost or snow here, and all those who have chrysanthemum are "dying", no wonder it is none other than this. Alas, since the complaint material has been reduced, what is there to say?现在是连无从发牢骚的牢骚，也都发完了。再谈罢。从此要动手编讲义。
Now even the complaints that I can't complain about are finished. Let's talk about it again. From now on, we must start compiling handouts.鲁迅。十一月七日。
Lu Xun. November 7th.

《阿Q正传》的成因

《阿Q正传》的成因

《阿Q正传》的成因

The cause of "The True Biography of Ah Q"在《文学周报》二五一期里，西谛先生谈起《呐喊》，尤其是《阿Q正传》。这不觉引动我记起了一些小事情，也想借此来说一说，一则也算是做文章，投了稿；二则还可以给要看的人去看去。
In the 251st issue of "Literary Weekly", Mr. Xidi talked about "The Scream", especially "The True Biography of Ah Q". This unconsciously reminded me of some small things, and I also wanted to use this to talk about it, one of which can be regarded as making an article and submitting a manuscript; the other can also be seen by those who want to see it.我先要抄一段西谛先生的原文——
I want to copy a piece of Mr. Xidi's original text -“这篇东西值得大家如此的注意，原不是无因的。但也有几点值得商榷的，如最后‘大团圆’的一幕，我在《晨报》上初读此作之时，即不以为然，至今也还不以为然，似乎作者对于阿Q之收局太匆促了；他不欲再往下写了，便如此随意的给他以一个‘大团圆’。像阿Q那样的一个人，终于要做起革命党来，终于受到那样大团圆的结局，似乎连作者他自己在最初写作时也是料不到的。至少在人格上似乎是两个。”
"This thing deserves everyone's attention, and it is not without reason. But there are also a few points that are debatable, such as the final 'reunion' scene, when I first read this work in the "Morning Post", I didn't think so, and I still don't think so, it seems that the author is too hasty for Ah Q's ending; He didn't want to write any further, so he gave him a 'reunion' so casually. A person like Ah Q finally wants to start a revolutionary party and finally receive such a happy ending, which seems to be unexpected even by the author himself when he first wrote. At least in terms of personality, it seems to be two. ”阿Q是否真要做革命党，即使真做了革命党，在人格上是否似乎是两个，现在姑且勿论。单是这篇东西的成因，说起来就要很费功夫了。我常常说，我的文章不是涌出来的，是挤出来的。听的人往往误解为谦逊，其实是真情。我没有什么话要说，也没有什么文章要做，但有一种自害的脾气，是有时不免呐喊几声，想给人们去添点热闹。譬如一匹疲牛罢，明知不堪大用的了，但废物何妨利用呢，所以张家要我耕一弓地，可以的；李家要我挨一转磨，也可以的；赵家要我在他店前站一刻，在我背上帖出广告道：敝店备有肥牛，出售上等消毒滋养牛乳。我虽然深知道自己是怎么瘦，又是公的，并没有乳，然而想到他们为张罗生意起见，情有可原，只要出售的不是毒药，也就不说什么了。但倘若用得我太苦，是不行的，我还要自己觅草吃，要喘气的工夫；要专指我为某家的牛，将我关在他的牛牢内，也不行的，我有时也许还要给别家挨几转磨。如果连肉都要出卖，那自然更不行，理由自明，无须细说。倘遇到上述的三不行，我就跑，或者索性躺在荒山里。即使因此忽而从深刻变为浅薄，从战士化为畜生，吓我以康有为，比我以梁启超，也都满不在乎，还是我跑我的，我躺我的，决不出来再上当，因为我于“世故”实在是太深了。
Whether Ah Q really wants to be a revolutionary party, and even if he really becomes a revolutionary party, whether he seems to be two in terms of personality, let's not talk about it now. The cause of this thing alone is a lot of effort to talk about. I often say that my articles do not pour out, they are squeezed out. People who listen often misunderstand it as humility, but it is actually true feelings. I have nothing to say, and I don't have any articles to do, but I have a self-harming temper, which is that sometimes I can't help but shout a few times, wanting to add some liveliness to people. For example, a tired cow knows that it is useless, but why use the waste, so the Zhang family wants me to plow a bow of land, okay; The Li family wants me to grind it, it's okay; The Zhao family asked me to stand in front of his store for a moment, and posted an advertisement on my back: Our store has fat cows and sells high-quality sterilized and nourishing milk. Although I know how thin I am, and I am male and have no milk, but it is forgivable to think that they are doing business for the sake of business, as long as what is sold is not poison, I won't say anything. But if I use it too hard, it won't work, I have to find grass to eat by myself, and I have to breathe; It is not okay to specifically refer to me as a cow of a certain family and lock me in his cow cage, and I may have to be grinded a few times by another family. If even the meat has to be sold, then naturally it is even worse, the reason is self-explanatory, there is no need to go into detail. If I encounter the above three noes, I will run away, or simply lie in the barren mountains. Even if it suddenly changes from deep to shallow, from a warrior to a beast, scaring me into Kang Youwei, compared to me with Liang Qichao, I don't care, or I run mine, I lie down on me, and I will never come out to be fooled again, because I am too deep in "sophistication".近几年《呐喊》有这许多人看，当初是万料不到的，而且连料也没有料。不过是依了相识者的希望，要我写一点东西就写一点东西。也不很忙，因为不很有人知道鲁迅就是我。我所用的笔名也不只一个：LS，神飞，唐俟，某生者，雪之，风声；更以前还有：自树，索士，令飞，迅行。鲁迅就是承迅行而来的，因为那时的《新青年》编辑者不愿意有别号一般的署名。
In recent years, "The Scream" has been watched by so many people, which was unexpected at the beginning, and there was no material at all. It's just that according to the wishes of acquaintances, I can write a little if I want to write something. It's not very busy, because not many people know that Lu Xun is me. I have more than one pen name: LS, Shen Fei, Tang Qi, a certain student, Xue Zhi, Feng Sheng; Before that, there were: self-tree, search for a soldier, command flight, and fast travel. Lu Xun came here because the editor of "New Youth" at that time was unwilling to have a nickname-like signature.现在是有人以为我想做什么狗首领了，真可怜，侦察了百来回，竟还不明白。我就从不曾插了鲁迅的旗去访过一次人；“鲁迅即周树人”，是别人查出来的。这些人有四类：一类是为要研究小说，因而要知道作者的身世；一类单是好奇；一类是因为我也做短评，所以特地揭出来，想我受点祸；一类是以为于他有用处，想要钻进来。
Now some people think I want to be a dog leader, it's really pitiful, I have scouted hundreds of times, but I still don't understand. I have never planted Lu Xun's banner to visit people once; "Lu Xun is Zhou Shuren", it was found out by others. There are four categories of these people: one is to study novels, so they need to know the author's life experience; One is simply curiosity; One is because I also make short comments, so I specially exposed it, thinking that I would suffer some misfortune; One is to think that it is useful to him and want to get in.那时我住在西城边，知道鲁迅就是我的，大概只有《新青年》，《新潮》社里的人们罢；孙伏园也是一个。他正在晨报馆编副刊。不知是谁的主意，忽然要添一栏称为“开心话”的了，每周一次。他就来要我写一点东西。
At that time, I lived on the edge of Xicheng and knew that Lu Xun was mine, probably only the people in the "New Youth" and "New Wave" clubs; Sun Fuyuan is also one. He is editing a supplement in the Morning News. I don't know whose idea it was, but suddenly I want to add a column called "happy words", once a week. He came to ask me to write something.阿Q的影像，在我心目中似乎确已有了好几年，但我一向毫无写他出来的意思。经这一提，忽然想起来了，晚上便写了一点，就是第一章：序。因为要切“开心话”这题目，就胡乱加上些不必有的滑稽，其实在全篇里也是不相称的。署名是“巴人”，取“下里巴人”，并不高雅的意思。谁料这署名又闯了祸了，但我却一向不知道，今年在《现代评论》上看见涵庐（即高一涵）的《闲话》才知道的。那大略是——
Ah Q's image seems to have been in my mind for several years, but I have never intended to write about him. After this mention, I suddenly remembered that I wrote a little in the evening, which is the first chapter: Preface. Because I want to cut the topic of "happy words", I randomly add some unnecessary funny, which is actually not commensurate in the whole article. The signature is "Ba people", and it is not elegant to take "Xia Li Ba people". Unexpectedly, this signature got into trouble again, but I never knew it, and I only knew about it when I saw Hanlu (that is, Gao Yihan)'s "Gossip" in "Modern Review" this year. That's roughly -“……我记得当《阿Q正传》一段一段陆续发表的时候，有许多人都栗栗危惧，恐怕以后要骂到他的头上。并且有一位朋友，当我面说，昨日《阿Q正传》上某一段仿佛就是骂他自己。因此便猜疑《阿Q正传》是某人作的，何以呢？因为只有某人知道他这一段私事。……从此疑神疑鬼，凡是《阿Q正传》中所骂的，都以为就是他的阴私；凡是与登载《阿Q正传》的报纸有关系的投稿人，都不免做了他所认为《阿Q正传》的作者的嫌疑犯了！等到他打听出来《阿Q正传》的作者名姓的时候，他才知道他和作者素不相识，因此，才恍然自悟，又逢人声明说不是骂他。”（第四卷第八十九期）
“…… I remember that when "The True Biography of Ah Q" was published one after another, many people were terrified, afraid that they would scold him in the future. And a friend said to me that a certain paragraph of "The True Story of Ah Q" yesterday seemed to be scolding himself. Therefore, I suspect that "The True Biography of Ah Q" was written by someone, why? Because only someone knows about his private affairs. …… From then on, he was suspicious of gods and ghosts, and everything he scolded in "The True Biography of Ah Q" thought it was his private life; All contributors who have a relationship with the newspaper that published "The True Biography of Ah Q" will inevitably become suspects of the author of "The True Biography of Ah Q"! When he found out the name of the author of "The True Biography of Ah Q", he knew that he and the author had never known each other, so he suddenly realized that he was not scolding him. (Vol. 4, No. 89)我对于这位“某人”先生很抱歉，竟因我而做了许多天嫌疑犯。可惜不知是谁，“巴人”两字很容易疑心到四川人身上去，或者是四川人罢。直到这一篇收在《呐喊》里，也还有人问我：你实在是在骂谁和谁呢？我只能悲愤，自恨不能使人看得我不至于如此下劣。
I am very sorry for this "someone" gentleman who has been a suspect for many days because of me. It's a pity that I don't know who it is, but the word "Ba people" is easy to suspect Sichuan people, or Sichuan people. Until this article was included in "The Scream", someone asked me: Who are you really scolding and whom? I can only be sad and angry, and I hate that I can't make people see me as not so inferior.第一章登出之后，便“苦”字临头了，每七天必须做一篇。我那时虽然并不忙，然而正在做流民，夜晚睡在做通路的屋子里，这屋子只有一个后窗，连好好的写字地方也没有，那里能够静坐一会，想一下。伏园虽然还没有现在这样胖，但已经笑嬉嬉，善于催稿了。每星期来一回，一有机会，就是：“先生，《阿Q正传》……。明天要付排了。”于是只得做，心里想着，“俗语说：‘讨饭怕狗咬，秀才怕岁考。’我既非秀才，又要周考，真是为难……。”然而终于又一章。但是，似乎渐渐认真起来了；伏园也觉得不很“开心”，所以从第二章起，便移在“新文艺”栏里。
After the first chapter was published, the word "bitter" came to the end, and one must be written every seven days. Although I was not busy at that time, I was working as a refugee, sleeping in a house that made a passage at night, which had only a back window and didn't even have a good place to write, where I could sit quietly for a while and think about it. Although Fu Yuan is not as fat as he is now, he is already smiling and good at urging manuscripts. Come once a week, and when you have the opportunity, it is: "Sir, "The True Biography of Ah Q"....... Tomorrow I have to pay for the platoon. So I had to do it, thinking to myself, "As the saying goes: 'Begging for food is afraid of dog bites, and scholars are afraid of the annual exam.'" 'I'm not a scholar, and I have to take the weekly exam, which is really embarrassing...... However, there is finally another chapter. However, it seems to be gradually becoming serious; Fu Yuan also felt that he was not very "happy", so from the second chapter, he moved it to the "New Literature and Art" column.这样地一周一周挨下去，于是乎就不免发生阿Q可要做革命党的问题了。据我的意思，中国倘不革命，阿Q便不做，既然革命，就会做的。我的阿Q的运命，也只能如此，人格也恐怕并不是两个。民国元年已经过去，无可追踪了，但此后倘再有改革，我相信还会有阿Q似的革命党出现。我也很愿意如人们所说，我只写出了现在以前的或一时期，但我还恐怕我所看见的并非现代的前身，而是其后，或者竟是二三十年之后。其实这也不算辱没了革命党，阿Q究竟已经用竹筷盘上他的辫子了；此后十五年，长虹“走到出版界”，不也就成为一个中国的“绥惠略夫”了么？
If this goes on week after week, it will inevitably happen that Ah Q will be a revolutionary party. According to my meaning, if China does not revolutionize, Ah Q will not do it, and since it is a revolution, it will do it. My Ah Q's fate can only be like this, and my personalities are probably not two. The first year of the Republic of China has passed, and there is no traceability, but if there are any reforms after that, I believe there will be a revolutionary party like Ah Q. I am also willing to write only before or for a period before the present, as people say, but I am afraid that what I see is not the predecessor of the modern era, but after, or even twenty or thirty years later. In fact, this is not an insult to the revolutionary party, Ah Q has already used bamboo chopsticks to plate his braids; In the following fifteen years, Changhong "went to the publishing world" and became a Chinese "Sui Hui Luofu"?《阿Q正传》大约做了两个月，我实在很想收束了，但我已经记不大清楚，似乎伏园不赞成，或者是我疑心倘一收束，他会来抗议，所以将“大团圆”藏在心里，而阿Q却已经渐渐向死路上走。到最末的一章，伏园倘在，也许会压下，而要求放阿Q多活几星期的罢。但是“会逢其适”，他回去了，代庖的是何作霖君，于阿Q素无爱憎，我便将“大团圆”送去，他便登出来。待到伏园回京，阿Q已经枪毙了一个多月了。纵令伏园怎样善于催稿，如何笑嬉嬉，也无法再说“先生，《阿Q正传》……。”从此我总算收束了一件事，可以另干别的去。另干了别的什么，现在也已经记不清，但大概还是这一类的事。
"The True Biography of Ah Q" has been done for about two months, and I really want to restrain it, but I don't remember it clearly, it seems that Fu Yuan does not approve, or I suspect that if he restrains, he will come to protest, so he hides the "reunion" in his heart, but Ah Q has gradually gone to the dead end. In the last chapter, if Fu Yuan is here, he may be suppressed and asked to let Ah Q live for a few more weeks. But "it will be the right time", he went back, and it was He Zuolin Jun who cooked on behalf of Ah Q, and Yu Ah Q had no love or hate, so I sent the "reunion" to him, and he logged out. When Fuyuan returned to Beijing, Ah Q had been shot dead for more than a month. No matter how good Fuyuan is at urging manuscripts and how he laughs and plays, he can no longer say, "Sir, "The True Biography of Ah Q"....... "Since then, I have finally restrained one thing, and I can do something else. I can't remember what else I did, but it's probably still this kind of thing.其实“大团圆”倒不是“随意”给他的；至于初写时可曾料到，那倒确乎也是一个疑问。我仿佛记得：没有料到。不过这也无法，谁能开首就料到人们的“大团圆”？不但对于阿Q，连我自己将来的“大团圆”，我就料不到究竟是怎样。终于是“学者”，或“教授”乎？还是“学匪”或“学棍”呢？“官僚”乎，还是“刀笔吏”呢？“思想界之权威”乎，抑“思想界先驱者”乎，抑又“世故的老人”乎？“艺术家”？“战士”？抑又是见客不怕麻烦的特别“亚拉籍夫”乎？乎？乎？乎？乎？
In fact, the "reunion" was not given to him "at will"; As for what I expected when I first wrote it, it was indeed a question. I seem to remember: I didn't expect it. But this can't be, who can expect people's "reunion" at the beginning? Not only for Ah Q, but also for my own future "reunion", I can't predict what it will be like. In the end, is it "scholar" or "professor"? Or is it a "bandit" or "stick"? "Bureaucracy" or "knife and pen official"? Is it "the authority of the ideological world", or "the pioneer of the ideological world", or the "old man of the world"? "Artist"? "Warrior"? Or is it a special "Ara man" who is not afraid of trouble when meeting guests? At? At? At? At?但阿Q自然还可以有各种别样的结果，不过这不是我所知道的事。
But Ah Q can naturally have all kinds of different results, but this is not something I know.先前，我觉得我很有写得“太过”的地方，近来却不这样想了。中国现在的事，即使如实描写，在别国的人们，或将来的好中国的人们看来，也都会觉得grotesk。我常常假想一件事，自以为这是想得太奇怪了；但倘遇到相类的事实，却往往更奇怪。在这事实发生以前，以我的浅见寡识，是万万想不到的。
Previously, I thought I had written too much, but recently I don't think so. Even if what happens in China now is described truthfully, people in other countries, or people who will be good in China in the future, will feel grotesk. I often imagine something, thinking that it is too strange; But if you encounter similar facts, it is often even more strange. Before this happened, my shallow knowledge was unimaginable.大约一个多月以前，这里枪毙一个强盗，两个穿短衣的人各拿手枪，一共打了七枪。不知道是打了不死呢，还是死了仍然打，所以要打得这么多。当时我便对我的一群少年同学们发感慨，说：这是民国初年初用枪毙的时候的情形；现在隔了十多年，应该进步些，无须给死者这么多的苦痛。北京就不然，犯人未到刑场，刑吏就从后脑一枪，结果了性命，本人还来不及知道已经死了呢。所以北京究竟是“首善之区”，便是死刑，也比外省的好得远。
About a month ago, a robber was shot here, and two men in short clothes each held a pistol and fired a total of seven shots. I don't know if I won't die after fighting, or if I still fight after death, so I have to fight so much. At that time, I sighed to a group of my teenage classmates, saying: This is the situation when I was shot at the beginning of the Republic of China; Now that more than ten years have passed, we should make more progress and not give so much pain to the deceased. This is not the case in Beijing, where the prisoner shot the back of the head before he arrived at the execution ground, resulting in his life, and he did not have time to know that he was dead. Therefore, whether Beijing is the "first good area" or the death penalty is far better than that of other provinces.但是前几天看见十一月二十三日的北京《世界日报》，又知道我的话并不的确了，那第六版上有一条新闻，题目是《杜小拴子刀铡而死》，共分五节，现在撮录一节在下面——
But a few days ago, I saw the Beijing "World Journal" on November 23, and I knew that my words were not true, and there was a news on the sixth edition, titled "Du Xiaotiezi died with a knife", which was divided into five sections, and now a section is excerpted below -▲杜小拴子刀铡余人枪毙先时，卫戍司令部因为从了毅军各兵士的请求，决定用“枭首刑”，所以杜等不曾到场以前，刑场已预备好了铡草大刀一把了。刀是长形的，下边是木底，中缝有厚大而锐利的刀一把，刀下头有一孔，横嵌木上，可以上下的活动，杜等四人入刑场之后，由招扶的兵士把杜等架下刑车，就叫他们脸冲北，对着已备好的刑桌前站着。……杜并没有跪，有外右五区的某巡官去问杜：要人把着不要？杜就笑而不答，后来就自己跑到刀前，自己睡在刀上，仰面受刑，先时行刑兵已将刀抬起，杜枕到适宜的地方后，行刑兵就合眼猛力一铡，杜的身首，就不在一处了。当时血出极多。在旁边跪等枪决的宋振山等三人，也各偷眼去看，中有赵振一名，身上还发起颤来。后由某排长拿手枪站在宋等的后面，先毙宋振山，后毙李有三赵振，每人都是一枪毙命。……先时，被害程步墀的两个儿子忠智忠信，都在场观看，放声大哭，到各人执刑之后，去大喊：爸！妈呀！你的仇已报了！我们怎么办哪？听的人都非常难过，后来由家族引导着回家去了。
▲ Du Xiao tied the knife and shot the rest of the people First, the garrison headquarters decided to use "beheading" because it complied with the request of the soldiers of the Yi Army, so before Du and others arrived, the execution ground had prepared a big knife for the grass. The knife is long, the bottom is a wooden bottom, there is a thick and sharp knife in the middle seam, there is a hole under the knife, horizontally embedded in the wood, can move up and down, after Du and the other four people entered the execution ground, the recruiting soldiers put Du and others off the execution car, and told them to face north and stand in front of the prepared torture table. …… Du did not kneel, and a certain patrol officer from the Outer Right Fifth District went to ask Du: Do you want someone to hold it? Du smiled and did not answer, and then ran to the knife, slept on the knife, and was tortured on his back, and the executioner had lifted the knife first, and after Du pillowed to the right place, the executioner closed his eyes and slammed hard, and Du's head was no longer in the same place. At that time, there was a lot of blood. Song Zhenshan and the other three who were kneeling next to him waiting for the execution also stole a glance, and Zhao Zhen was among them, and his body trembled. Later, a platoon leader stood behind Song and others with a pistol, killing Song Zhenshan first, then Li Yousan and Zhao Zhen, each of whom was killed with one shot. …… First, the two sons of the murdered Cheng Buchi, Zhongzhi and Zhongxin, were all present to watch, crying loudly, and after everyone was executed, they went to shout: Dad! Oh my God! Your revenge has been avenged! What should we do? The listeners were very sad, and later they were guided home by their families.假如有一个天才，真感着时代的心搏，在十一月二十二日发表出记叙这样情景的小说来，我想，许多读者一定以为是说着包龙图爷爷时代的事，在西历十一世纪，和我们相差将有九百年。
If there is a genius who really feels the heartbeat of the times and publishes a novel that describes such a situation on November 22, I think many readers must think that it is about the time of Grandpa Bao Longtu, which will be 900 years different from us in the eleventh century AD.这真是怎么好……。
How good is this......至于《阿Q正传》的译本，我只看见过两种。法文的登在八月分的《欧罗巴》上，还止三分之一，是有删节的。英文的似乎译得很恳切，但我不懂英文，不能说什么。只是偶然看见还有可以商榷的两处：一是“三百大钱九二串”当译为“三百大钱，以九十二文作为一百”的意思；二是“柿油党”不如译音，因为原是“自由党”，乡下人不能懂，便讹成他们能懂的“柿油党”了。
As for the translation of "The True Biography of Ah Q", I have only seen two types. The French version of the article was published in the August issue of "Europa", and it was only one-third of it, and it was abridged. The English one seems to be translated very earnestly, but I don't understand English and can't say anything. I just happened to see two places that can be discussed: one is that "three hundred big money and nine two strings" should be translated as "three hundred big money, with ninety-two wen as one hundred"; Second, the "Persimmon Oil Party" is not as good as the translation, because it was originally a "Liberal Party", and the countrymen could not understand it, so it was misinterpreted as the "Persimmon Oil Party" that they could understand.十二月三日，在厦门写。
December 3, written in Xiamen.

关于《三藏取经记》等

关于《三藏取经记》等

关于《三藏取经记》等

About "Tripitaka Scriptures" and so on阔别了多年的SF君，忽然从日本东京寄给我一封信，转来转去，待我收到时，去发信的日子已经有二十天了。但这在我，却真如空谷里听到跫然的足音。信函中还附着一片十一月十四日东京《国民新闻》的记载，是德富苏峰氏纠正我那《小说史略》的谬误的。
SF, who has been away for many years, suddenly sent me a letter from Tokyo, Japan, and when I received it, it had been twenty days since I sent the letter. But for me, it was like hearing the sound of footsteps in an empty valley. The letter also contained a record of the "National News" in Tokyo on November 14, which was corrected by Mr. Tokufu Sufeng's "Brief History of Novels".凡一本书的作者，对于外来的纠正，以为然的就遵从，以为非的就缄默，本不必有一一说明下笔时是什么意思，怎样取舍的必要。但苏峰氏是日本深通“支那”的耆宿，《三藏取经记》的收藏者，那措辞又很波俏，因此也就想来说几句话。
The author of a book obeys the correction from the outside and remains silent if he thinks it is wrong, and there is no need to explain what it means when writing and how to make a choice. But Su Feng is a senior who is deeply connected to "China" in Japan and a collector of the "Tripitaka Scriptures", and the wording is very fancy, so I want to say a few words.首先还得翻出他的原文来——
First of all, I have to turn out his original text -
鲁迅氏之《中国小说史略》　　苏峰生
Lu Xun's "Brief History of Chinese Novels" Su Fengsheng顷读鲁迅氏之《中国小说史略》，有云：
Recently, I read Lu Xun's "A Brief History of Chinese Novels", which says:《大唐三藏法师取经记》三卷，旧本在日本，又有一小本曰《大唐三藏取经诗话》，内容悉同，卷尾一行云“中瓦子张家印”，张家为宋时临安书铺，世因以为宋刊，然逮于元朝，张家或亦无恙，则此书或为元人所撰，未可知矣。……
The three volumes of "The Records of the Great Tang Tripitaka Master", the old version is in Japan, and there is a small book called "The Poems of the Tang Dynasty", the content is the same, and the last line of the volume says "Zhongwazi Zhang Jiayin", the Zhang family was a bookstore in Lin'an during the Song Dynasty, and the world thought it was a Song publication, but by the Yuan Dynasty, the Zhang family may have been fine, so this book may have been written by the Yuan people, and it is unknown. ……这倒并非没有聊加辩正的必要。
This is not without the need to defend and justify.《大唐三藏取经记》者，实是我的成篑堂的插架中之一，而《取经诗话》的袖珍本，则是故三浦观树将军的珍藏。这两书，是都由明慧上人和红叶广知于世，从京都栂尾高山寺散出的。看那书中的高山寺的印记，又看高山寺藏书目录，都证明着如此。
The "Tang Dynasty Tripitaka Scriptures" is actually one of my Cheng Basket Hall inserts, and the pocket book of "Classic Poems" is the collection of the late General Miura Kanshu. These two books were both widely known to the world by Master Minghui and Momiji, and were distributed from Tsugao Takayama Temple in Kyoto. Looking at the imprint of Gaoshan Temple in the book, and looking at the catalog of Gaoshan Temple's collection, it all proves this.这不但作为宋椠的稀本；作为宋代所著的说话本（日本之所谓言文一致体），也最可珍重的的罢。然而鲁迅氏却轻轻地断定道，“此书或为元人撰，未可知矣。”过于太早计了。
This is not only a rare copy of Song Yu; As a speech book written in the Song Dynasty (the so-called unity of language and literature in Japan), it is also the most precious. However, Lu Xun gently concluded, "This book may have been written for the Yuan people, but it is unknown." "It's too early.鲁迅氏未见这两书的原板，所以不知究竟，倘一见，则其为宋椠，决不容疑。其纸质，其墨色，其字体，无不皆然。不仅因为张家是宋时的临安的书铺。
Lu Xun has not seen the original plates of these two books, so he does not know the end, if he sees it, it is Song Zhen, and there is no doubt about it. The paper quality, the color of the ink, the font, everything is the same. Not only because the Zhang family was a bookstore in Lin'an during the Song Dynasty.加之，至于成篑堂的《取经记》，则有着可以说是宋版的特色的阙字。好个罗振玉氏，于此早已觉到了。
In addition, as for Cheng Xiangtang's "Record of Taking the Scriptures", it has a character that can be said to be a characteristic of the Song version. What a Luo Zhenyu clan, I have already realized this.皆（三浦本，成篑堂本）为高山寺旧藏。而此本（成篑堂藏《取经记》）刊刻尤精，书中驚字作，敬字缺末笔，盖亦宋椠也。（《雪堂校刊群书叙录》）
皆（三浦本，成篑堂本）为高山寺旧藏。 而此本（成篑堂藏《取经记》）刊刻尤精，书中驚字作，敬字缺末笔，盖亦宋椠也。 （《雪堂校刊群书叙录》）想鲁迅氏未读罗氏此文，所以疑是或为元人之作的罢。即使世间多不可思议事，元人著作的宋刻，是未必有可以存在的理由的。
I think Lu Xun has not read Luo's article, so I suspect it may have been written by the Yuan people. Even if there are many incredible things in the world, the Song engravings of the Yuan people's works may not have a reason to exist.
罗振玉氏对于此书，曾这样说。宋代平话，旧但有《宣和遗事》而已。近年若《五代平话》，《京本小说》，渐有重刊本。宋人平话之传于人间者，至是遂得四种。因为是斯学界中如此重要的书籍，所以明白其真相，未必一定是无用之业罢。
Luo Zhenyu once said this about this book. In the plain language of the Song Dynasty, there was only "Xuanhe Relics" in the past. In recent years, such as "Five Dynasties Plain Stories" and "Jingben Novels", there have been gradual reprints. The Song people's plain dialect spread to the world, and by this time, four types of dialect had been discovered. Because it is such an important book in the academic world, understanding its truth may not necessarily be useless.

总之，苏峰氏的意思，无非在证明《三藏取经记》等是宋椠。其论据有三——
In short, Su Feng's meaning is nothing more than proving that the "Tripitaka Scriptures" and others are Song Zhen. There are three arguments for this—一　纸墨字体是宋；
1. The paper and ink font is Song;二　宋讳缺笔；
2. Song Yu missing pen;三　罗振玉氏说是宋刻。
3. Luo Zhenyu said that it was a Song carving.说起来也惭愧，我虽然草草编了一本《小说史略》，而家无储书，罕见旧刻，所用为资料的，几乎都是翻刻本，新印本，甚而至于是石印本，序跋及撰人名，往往缺失，所以漏略错误，一定很多。但《三藏法师取经记》及《诗话》两种，所见的却是罗氏影印本，纸墨虽新，而字体和缺笔是看得出的。那后面就有罗跋，正不必再求之于《雪堂校刊群书叙录》，我所谓“世因以为宋刊”，即指罗跋而言。现在苏峰氏所举的三证中，除纸墨因确未目睹，无从然否外，其余二事，则那时便已不足使我信受，因此就不免“疑”起来了。
I'm ashamed to say that although I hastily compiled a "Brief History of Novels", I don't have a book at home, and it is rare to use old engravings, and almost all of the materials used as materials are reprints, new prints, and even stone prints, prefaces and authors' names are often missing, so there must be a lot of omissions. However, the two types of "Tripitaka Master's Scriptures" and "Poems" are photocopies of Luo's book, and although the paper and ink are new, the font and lack of pen can be seen. Then there is Luo Ba, and there is no need to ask for it in the "Xuetang School Magazine Group Books Narrative", what I mean by "the world is thought to be a Song publication", that is, it refers to Luo Ba. Now, among the three evidences cited by Su Feng, except for the paper and ink that I have not witnessed it, the other two things are no longer enough for me to believe at that time, so I can't help but "doubt".某朝讳缺笔是某朝刻本，是藏书家考定版本的初步秘诀，只要稍看过几部旧书的人，大抵知道的。何况缺笔的驚字的怎样地触目。但我却以为这并不足以确定为宋本。前朝的缺笔字，因为故意或习惯，也可以沿至后一朝。例如我们民国已至十五年了，而遗老们所刻的书，儀字还“敬缺末笔”。非遗老们所刻的书，寧字玄字也常常缺笔，或者以甯代寧，以元代玄。这都是在民国而讳清讳；不足为清朝刻本的证据。京师图书馆所藏的《易林注》残本（现有影印本，在《四部丛刊》中），恆字搆字都缺笔的，纸质，墨色，字体，都似宋；而且是蝶装，缪荃荪氏便定为宋本。但细看内容，却引用着阴时夫的《韵府群玉》，而阴时夫则是道道地地的元人。所以我以为不能据缺笔字便确定为某朝刻，尤其是当时视为无足重轻的小说和剧曲之类。
The absence of a pen in a certain dynasty is an engraved version of a certain dynasty, which is the preliminary secret of the bibliophile's examination version, as long as you have read a few old books, you probably know it. Not to mention how eye-catching the words of the lack of a pen are. But I thought this was not enough to determine the Song version. The lack of pen words in the previous dynasty, because of intention or habit, can also be traced back to the later dynasty. For example, our Republic of China has been in the past fifteen years, and the books engraved by the elderly are still "missing the last pen". In the books engraved by the intangible cultural heritage elders, the words Ning and Xuan often lack pens, or Ning instead of Ning, and Yuan instead of Xuan. This is all taboo in the Republic of China; It is not enough evidence for the Qing Dynasty engraving. The fragments of "Yi Lin Zhu" in the collection of the Beijing Library (existing photocopies, in the "Four Series"), the Hengzi and the characters are missing the pen, and the paper, ink color, and font are all like the Song Dynasty; And it is a butterfly costume, and Miao Quansun's family is set as the Song version. But if you look closely at the content, you can see that Yin Shifu's "Yunfu Qunyu" is quoted, and Yin Shifu is an authentic Yuan person. So I don't think it can be determined as a certain dynasty based on the lack of words, especially novels and operas that were considered insignificant at that time.罗氏的论断，在日本或者很被引为典据罢，但我却并不尽信奉，不但书跋，连书画金石的题跋，无不皆然。即如罗氏所举宋代平话四种中，《宣和遗事》我也定为元人作，但这并非我的轻轻断定，是根据了明人胡应麟氏所说的。而且那书是抄撮而成，文言和白话都有，也不尽是“平话”。
Luo's assertion may be cited as a classic in Japan, but I do not fully believe in it, not only in books, but also in calligraphy and painting. That is, among the four plain words of the Song Dynasty cited by Luo, I also set the "Xuanhe Relics" as a Yuan person, but this is not my light judgment, it is based on what the Ming people Hu Yinglin said. Moreover, the book is copied, both in classical Chinese and vernacular, and it is not all "plain words".我的看书，和藏书家稍不同，是不尽相信缺笔，抬头，以及罗氏题跋的。因此那时便疑；只是疑，所以说“或”，说“未可知”。我并非想要唐突宋椠和收藏者，即使如何廓大其冒昧，似乎也不过轻疑而已，至于“轻轻地断定”，则殆未也。
My reading is slightly different from that of bibliophiles, and I don't fully believe in the lack of pens, heads, and Roche's inscriptions. Therefore, I was suspicious then; It's just doubt, so I say "or" and "unknown". I don't want to abruptly criticize Song Yu and the collector, even if I try to exaggerate his presumptuousness, it seems to be just a suspicion, and as for "gently determine", it is probably not.但在未有更确的证明之前，我的“疑”是存在的。待证明之后，就成为这样的事：鲁迅疑是元刻，为元人作；今确是宋椠，故为宋人作。无论如何，苏峰氏所豫想的“元人著作的宋版”这滑稽剧，是未必能够开演的。
But until there is a more conclusive proof, my "doubt" exists. After it is proved, it becomes like this: Lu Xun is suspected of being a Yuan carved and made for the Yuan people; Now it is indeed Song Yu, so it was written for the Song people. In any case, the burlesque drama "Song version of the Yuan people's writings" that Su Feng envisioned may not be able to start.然而在考辨的文字中杂入一点滑稽轻薄的论调，每容易迷眩一般读者，使之失去冷静，坠入彀中，所以我便译出，并略加说明，如上。
However, the text of the examination is mixed with a little funny and frivolous argument, which is easy to confuse the general reader, make him lose his composure, and fall into the trap, so I translated it and explained it slightly, as above.十二月二十日。
December 20th.

所谓“思想界先驱者”鲁迅启事

所谓“思想界先驱者”鲁迅启事

所谓“思想界先驱者”鲁迅启事

The so-called "pioneer of ideology" Lu Xun noticed《新女性》八月号登有“狂飙社广告”，说：“狂飙运动的开始远在二年之前……去年春天本社同人与思想界先驱者鲁迅及少数最进步的青年文学家合办《莽原》……兹为大规模地进行我们的工作起见于北京出版之《乌合》《未名》《莽原》《弦上》四种出版物外特在上海筹办《狂飙丛书》及一篇幅较大之刊物”云云。我在北京编辑《莽原》，《乌合丛书》，《未名丛刊》三种出版物，所用稿件，皆系以个人名义送来；对于狂飙运动，向不知是怎么一回事：如何运动，运动甚么。今忽混称“合办”，实出意外；不敢掠美，特此声明。又，前因有人不明真相，或则假借虚名，加我纸冠，已非一次，业经先有陈源在《现代评论》上，近有长虹在《狂飙》上，迭加嘲骂，而狂飙社一面又锡以第三顶“纸糊的假冠”，真是头少帽多，欺人害己，虽“世故的老人”，亦身心之交病矣。只得又来特此声明：我也不是“思想界先驱者”即英文Forerunner之译名。此等名号，乃是他人暗中所加，别有作用，本人事前并不知情，事后亦未尝高兴。倘见者因此受愚，概与本人无涉。
The August issue of "New Woman" published an "Hurricane Club Advertisement", saying: "The Hurricane Movement began long ago two years ago...... Last spring, the Society co-organized "Mangyuan" with Lu Xun, a pioneer in the intellectual world, and a few of the most progressive young writers...... In order to carry out our work on a large scale, we have published four publications in Beijing: "Rabble", "Weiming", "Mangyuan" and "Xianshang", and specially prepared the "Hurricane Series" and a larger publication in Shanghai." I edited three publications in Beijing: "Mangyuan", "Rabble", and "Unnamed Series", and the manuscripts used were all sent in my personal name; For Hurricane Sports, I don't know what it is: how to exercise, what is exercise. Now it is suddenly called "co-organized", which is really unexpected; I dare not plunder the United States, and I hereby declare. In addition, because someone did not know the truth, or used a false name to add my paper crown, it was not once, and there was Chen Yuan in the "Modern Review", and recently Changhong in "Hurricane", repeatedly ridiculed, and the Hurricane Society gave a third "fake crown of paper paste", which is really less heads and more hats, deceiving others and harming oneself, although it is a "sophisticated old man", it is also a physical and mental illness. I have to come again to declare: I am not a "pioneer in the world of thought", that is, the translation of the English Forerunner. These names are secretly added by others, and they have a different effect, and I did not know about them beforehand, and I was not happy afterwards. If the witness is fooled by this, it has nothing to do with me.

厦门通信（三）

厦门通信（三）

厦门通信（三）

Xiamen Communications (3)小峰兄：
Brother Xiaofeng:二十七日寄出稿子两篇，想已到。其实这一类东西，本来也可做可不做，但是一则因为这里有几个少年希望我耍几下，二则正苦于没有文章做，所以便写了几张，寄上了。本地也有人要我做一点批评厦门的文字，然而至今一句也没有做，言语不通，又不知各种底细，从何说起。例如这里的报纸上，先前连日闹着“黄仲训霸占公地”的笔墨官司，我至今终于不知道黄仲训何人，曲折怎样，如果竟来批评，岂不要笑断真的批评家的肚肠。但别人批评，我是不妨害的。以为我不准别人批评者，诬也；我岂有这么大的权力。不过倘要我做编辑，那么，我以为不行的东西便不登，我委实不大愿意做一个莫名其妙的什么运动的傀儡。
On the 27th, I sent out two manuscripts, and I think they have arrived. In fact, this kind of thing could have been done or not, but one was because there were a few teenagers here who wanted me to play a few times, and the other was suffering from no articles to do, so I wrote a few and sent them. There are also people in the local area who ask me to write a little criticism of Xiamen, but I haven't done a word so far, I don't understand the language, and I don't know the details, so where to start. For example, in the newspaper here, there was a lawsuit over "Huang Zhongxun occupying the public land" for several days, and I still don't know who Huang Zhongxun is and what the twists and turns are. But I don't mind criticizing others. It is false to think that I am not allowed to criticize others; How can I have so much power." But if I were to be an editor, then what I thought wouldn't work would not be published, and I really didn't want to be a puppet of some inexplicable movement.前几天，卓治睁大着眼睛对我说，别人胡骂你，你要回骂。还有许多人要看你的东西，你不该默不作声，使他们迷惑。你现在不是你自己的了。我听了又打了一个寒噤，和先前听得有人说青年应该学我的多读古文时候相同。呜呼，一戴纸冠，遂成公物，负“帮忙”之义务，有回骂之必须，然则固不如从速坍台，还我自由之为得计也。质之高明，未识以为然否？
A few days ago, Zhuo Zhi said to me with wide eyes, if others scold you, you have to scold back. There are still many people who want to see your things, and you should not remain silent and confuse them. You are not your own now. I shuddered again, the same time I heard someone say that young people should learn from me to read more ancient texts. Alas, once you wear a paper crown, you become a public property, bearing the obligation to "help" and have the need to scold back, so it is better to quickly collapse the platform and return our freedom. I don't know if you think so.今天也遇到了一件要打寒噤的事。厦门大学的职务，我已经都称病辞去了。百无可为，溜之大吉。然而很有几个学生向我诉苦，说他们是看了厦门大学革新的消息而来的，现在不到半年，今天这个走，明天那个走，叫他们怎么办？这实在使我夹脊梁发冷，哑口无言。不料“思想界权威者”或“思想界先驱者”这一顶“纸糊的假冠”，竟又是如此误人子弟。几回广告（却并不是我登的），将他们从别的学校里骗来，而结果是自己倒跑掉了，真是万分抱歉。我很惋惜没有人在北京早做黑幕式的记事，将学生们拦住。“见面时一谈，不见时一战”哲学，似乎有时也很是误人子弟的。
Today I also encountered something that made me shweep. I have resigned from my position at Xiamen University. There is nothing to do, but it is a good thing. However, a few students complained to me, saying that they came after seeing the news of Xiamen University's innovation, and now it has been less than half a year. This really made me feel cold down my spine and be speechless. Unexpectedly, the "papier-mâché fake crown" of "ideological authority" or "ideological pioneer" turned out to be such a misleading child. I advertised several times (but I didn't post it), deceiving them from other schools, and the result was that I ran away, I'm really sorry. I regret that no one made shady notes in Beijing and stopped the students. The philosophy of "talking when you meet, fighting when you don't see each other" seems to be sometimes misleading.你大约还不知道底细，我最初的主意，倒的确想在这里住两年，除教书之外，还希望将先前所集成的《汉画象考》和《古小说钩沈》印出。这两种书自己印不起，也不敢请你印。因为看的人一定很少，折本无疑，惟有有钱的学校才合适。及至到了这里，看看情形，便将印《汉画象考》的希望取消，并且自己缩短年限为一年。其实是已经可以走了，但看着语堂的勤勉和为故乡做事的热心，我不好说出口。后来豫算不算数了，语堂力争；听说校长就说，只要你们有稿子拿来，立刻可以印。于是我将稿子拿出去，放了大约至多十分钟罢，拿回来了，从此没有后文。这结果，不过证明了我确有稿子，并不欺骗。那时我便将印《古小说钩沈》的意思也取消，并且自己再缩短年限为半年。语堂是除办事教书之外，还要防暗算，我看他在不相干的事情上，弄得力尽神疲，真是冤枉之至。
You probably don't know the details yet, my original idea was to live here for two years, in addition to teaching, I also hoped to print the previously integrated "Han Painting Elephant Examination" and "Ancient Novel Hook Shen". I can't afford to print these two books, and I don't dare to ask you to print them. Because there must be very few people to watch, there is no doubt that the loss is undoubted, and only rich schools are suitable. When he got here, looking at the situation, he canceled the hope of printing the "Han Painting and Elephant Examination" and shortened the period to one year. In fact, I can already leave, but looking at Yutang's diligence and enthusiasm for doing things for my hometown, I can't say it. Later, Yu Su did not count, and Yutang struggled; When I heard that the principal said, as long as you have a manuscript, you can print it immediately. So I took out the manuscript, put it on for about ten minutes at most, and got it back, and there was no further text from then on. This result, however, proves that I do have a manuscript and is not deceiving. At that time, I also canceled the meaning of printing "Ancient Novels Hook Shen", and shortened the period to half a year. In addition to doing things and teaching, Yutang also has to prevent conspiracies, and I think he is exhausted in irrelevant things, which is really unjust.前天开会议，连国学院的周刊也几乎印不成了；然而校长的意思，却要添顾问，如理科主任之流，都是顾问，据说是所以连络感情的。我真不懂厦门的风俗，为什么研究国学，就会伤理科主任之流的感情，而必用顾问的绳，将他络住？联络感情法我没有研究过；兼士又已辞职，所以我决计也走了。现在去放假不过三星期，本来暂停也无妨，然而这里对于教职员的薪水，有时是锱铢必较的，离开学校十来天也想扣，所以我不想来沾放假中的薪水的便宜，至今天止，扣足一月。昨天已经出题考试，作一结束了。阅卷当在下月，但是不取分文。看完就走，刊物请暂勿寄来，待我有了驻足之所，当即函告，那时再寄罢。
The day before yesterday, even the weekly magazine of the Chinese Academy could hardly be printed; However, the principal's intention is to add advisors, such as science directors, who are all consultants, and it is said that this is why they are emotionally connected. I really don't understand the customs of Xiamen, why does studying Chinese studies hurt the feelings of the director of science and the like, and must use the rope of the consultant to tie him up? I haven't studied the contact relationship method; The part-time scholar has resigned, so I decided to leave. Now it's only three weeks on vacation, and it's okay to pause, but the salary of the faculty and staff here is sometimes a must, and I want to deduct it after leaving school for more than ten days, so I don't want to take advantage of the salary during the holidays, and as of today, I will deduct a full month. Yesterday, the exam was already over. The review should be next month, but it will not be divided. After reading it, I left, please don't send the publication for the time being, when I have a place to stop, I will write to you immediately, and then send it again.临末，照例要说到天气。所谓例者，我之例也；怕有批评家指为我要勒令天下青年都照我的例，所以特此声明：并非如此。天气，确已冷了。草也比先前黄得多；然而我那门前的秋葵似的黄花却还在开着，山里也还有石榴花。苍蝇不见了，蚊子间或有之。
At the end of the day, we have to talk about the weather as usual. The so-called example is my example; I am afraid that some critics will accuse me of ordering all the young people of the world to follow my example, so I hereby declare that this is not the case. The weather is indeed cold. The grass is also much yellower than before; However, the okra-like yellow flowers in front of my door are still blooming, and there are pomegranate flowers in the mountains. Flies are gone, but mosquitoes may be there.夜深了，再谈罢。
It's late at night, let's talk about it again.鲁迅。十二月三十一日。
Lu Xun. December 31st.再：睡了一觉醒来，听到柝声，已经是五更了。这是学校的新政，上月添设，更夫也不止一人。我听着，才知道各人的打法是不同的，声调最分明地可以区别的有两种——
Again: When I woke up from a nap, I heard the sound of watches, and it was already five o'clock. This is a new policy for schools, which was added last month, and there is more than one shifter. As I listened, I realized that everyone's style of play is different, and there are two types of tones that can be most clearly distinguished -托，托，托，托托！
To, to, to, toto!托，托，托托！托。
To, to, toto! Torr.打更的声调也有派别，这是我先前所不知道的。并以奉告，当作一件新闻。
There are also factions in the tone of the night watch, which I didn't know before. And I will tell you that it will be a piece of news.

海上通信

海上通信

海上通信

Maritime communications小峰兄：
Brother Xiaofeng:前几天得到来信，因为忙于结束我所担任的事，所以不能即刻奉答。现在总算离开厦门坐在船上了。船正在走，也不知道是在什么海上。总之一面是一望汪洋，一面却看见岛屿。但毫无风涛，就如坐在长江的船上一般。小小的颠簸自然是有的，不过这在海上就算不得颠簸；陆上的风涛要比这险恶得多。
I received a letter the other day, and I can't reply immediately because I am busy finishing my work. Now I finally left Xiamen and sat on the boat. The ship was moving, and I didn't know what sea it was on. In short, one side is the ocean, but the other side is the island. But there are no winds and waves, just like sitting on a boat on the Yangtze River. There are naturally small bumps, but this is not a bump at sea; The winds and waves on land are much more sinister than this.同舱的一个是台湾人，他能说厦门话，我不懂；我说的蓝青官话，他不懂。他也能说几句日本话，但是，我也不大懂得他。于是乎只好笔谈，才知道他是丝绸商。我于丝绸一无所知，他于丝绸之外似乎也毫无意见。于是乎他只得睡觉，我就独霸了电灯写信了。
One of the people in the same cabin is Taiwanese, he can speak Xiamen dialect, I don't understand; He didn't understand what I said. He can also speak a few words of Japanese, but I don't know him very well. So I had to talk about it in writing, only to find out that he was a silk merchant. I know nothing about silk, and he seems to have no opinion about it. So he had to sleep, and I took control of the electric light and wrote letters.从上月起，我本在搜集材料，想趁寒假的闲空，给《唐宋传奇集》做一篇后记，准备付印，不料现在又只得搁起来。至于《野草》，此后做不做很难说，大约是不见得再做了，省得人来谬托知己，舐皮论骨，什么是“入于心”的。但要付印，也还须细看一遍，改正错字，颇费一点工夫。因此一时也不能寄上。
Since last month, I have been collecting materials, and I want to take advantage of the free time of the winter vacation to make an afterword for the "Collection of Tang and Song Legends", ready to be printed, but now I have to put it on hold. As for "Weeds", it is difficult to say whether it will be done or not after that, and it is probably not necessary to do it again, so that people can mistakenly rely on their confidants, lick their skin and talk about bones, what is "in the heart". But if you want to print it, you have to look at it carefully, correct the typo, and it takes a little effort. Therefore, it cannot be sent for a while.我直到十五日才上船，因为先是等上月份的薪水，后来是等船。在最后的一星期中，住着实在很为难，但也更懂了一些新的世故，就是，我先前只以为要饭碗不容易，现在才知道不要饭碗也是不容易的。我辞职时，是说自己生病，因为我觉得无论怎样的暴主，还不至于禁止生病；倘使所生的并非气厥病，也不至于牵连了别人。不料一部分的青年不相信，给我开了几次送别会，演说，照相，大抵是逾量的优礼，我知道有些不妥了，连连说明：我是戴着“纸糊的假冠”的，请他们不要惜别，请他们不要忆念。但是，不知怎地终于发生了改良学校运动，首先提出的是要求校长罢免大学秘书刘树杞博士。
I didn't get on the boat until the 15th, because first I was waiting for last month's salary, and then I was waiting for the boat. In the last week, it was really difficult to live, but I also understood some new sophistication, that is, I only thought it was not easy to get a job before, and now I know that it is not easy to get a job. When I resigned, I said that I was sick, because I felt that no matter what kind of tyrant I was, I would not forbid to get sick; If it is not a qi syncope, it will not implicate others. Unexpectedly, some young people didn't believe it, and held several farewell parties for me, speeches, and photos, probably excessive gifts, I knew something was wrong, and explained again and again: I am wearing a "fake crown of papier-mâché", please don't say goodbye, please don't remember. However, somehow the movement to improve the school finally took place, and the first thing was to demand that the president remove Dr. Liu Shuqi, the university secretary.听说三年前，这里也有一回相类的风潮，结果是学生完全失败，在上海分立了一个大夏大学。那时校长如何自卫，我不得而知；这回是说我的辞职，和刘博士无干，乃是胡适之派和鲁迅派相排挤，所以走掉的。这话就登在鼓浪屿的日报《民钟》上，并且已经加以驳斥。但有几位同事还大大地紧张起来，开会提出质问；而校长却答复得很干脆：没有说这话。有的还不放心，更给我放散别种的谣言，要减轻“排挤说”的势力。真是“天下纷纷，何时定乎？”如果我安心在厦门大学吃饭，或者没有这些事的罢，然而这是我所意料不到的。
I heard that three years ago, there was a similar trend here, and the result was that the students completely failed and established a Daxia University in Shanghai. I don't know how the principal defended himself at that time; This time it means that my resignation has nothing to do with Dr. Liu, but it was the Hu Shizhi faction and the Lu Xun faction that were excluded, so I left. This was published in Gulangyu's daily newspaper "People's Bell" and has been refuted. However, several colleagues were still very nervous and held a meeting to ask questions; But the principal replied very simply: I didn't say this. Some are not at ease, and even spread other rumors to me, to reduce the power of "exclusion theory". It's really "the world is in turmoil, when will it be decided?" "If I were to eat at Xiamen University with peace of mind, or there would be no such things, but this was what I didn't expect.校长林文庆博士是英国籍的中国人，开口闭口，不离孔子，曾经做过一本讲孔教的书，可惜名目我忘记了。听说还有一本英文的自传，将在商务印书馆出版；现在正做着《人种问题》。他待我实在是很隆重，请我吃过几回饭；单是饯行，就有两回。不过现在“排挤说”倒衰退了；前天所听到的是他在宣传，我到厦门，原是来捣乱，并非豫备在厦门教书的，所以北京的位置都没有辞掉。
The principal, Dr. Lin Wenqing, is a British Chinese, who has kept his mouth shut and never left Confucius, and once made a book on Confucianism, but unfortunately I forgot the name. I heard that there is also an autobiography in English, which will be published in the Commercial Press; Now I am working on "Race Issues". He treated me very solemnly and invited me to dinner several times; There are two farewell trips alone. But now the "exclusion theory" has declined; What I heard the day before yesterday was that he was propaganda, I went to Xiamen, it turned out to be to make trouble, not to prepare to teach in Xiamen, so I didn't resign from my position in Beijing.现在我没有到北京，“位置说”大概又要衰退了罢，新说如何，可惜我已在船上，不得而知。据我的意料，罪孽一定是日见其深重的，因为中国向来就是“当面输心背面笑”，正不必“新的时代”的青年才这样。对面是“吾师”和“先生”，背后是毒药和暗箭，领教了已经不只两三次了。
Now that I haven't been to Beijing, the "location says" are probably going to decline again, how about the new statement, but unfortunately I am already on the ship, I don't know. According to my expectation, the sins must be deep, because China has always been "losing to the face and laughing behind the back", and it is not necessary for the youth of the "new era" to be like this. Opposite are "My Master" and "Mr.", and behind them are poisons and hidden arrows, and I have learned more than two or three times.新近还听到我的一件罪案，是关于集美学校的。厦门大学和集美学校，都是秘密世界，外人大抵不大知道。现在因为反对校长，闹了风潮了。先前，那校长叶渊定要请国学院里的人们去演说，于是分为六组，每星期一组，凡两人。第一次是我和语堂。那招待法也很隆重，前一夜就有秘书来迎接。此公和我谈起，校长的意思是以为学生应该专门埋头读书的。我就说，那么我却以为也应该留心世事，和校长的尊意正相反，不如不去的好罢。他却道不妨，也可以说说。于是第二天去了，校长实在沉鸷得很，殷勤劝我吃饭。我却一面吃，一面愁。心里想，先给我演说就好了，听得讨厌，就可以不请我吃饭；现在饭已下肚，倘使说话有背谬之处，适足以加重罪孽，如何是好呢。午后讲演，我说的是照例的聪明人不能做事，因为他想来想去，终于什么也做不成等类的话。那时校长坐在我背后，我看不见。直到前几天，才听说这位叶渊校长也说集美学校的闹风潮，都是我不好，对青年人说话，那里可以说人是不必想来想去的呢。当我说到这里的时候，他还在后面摇摇头。
I also recently heard about a crime of mine, which is about Jimei School. Xiamen University and Jimei School are both secret worlds, and outsiders probably don't know much about them. Now because of the opposition to the principal, there is a trend. Previously, the principal Ye Yuan was going to invite people from the Chinese Academy to give a speech, so he was divided into six groups, one group a week, two people. The first time was me and Yutang. The hospitality was also very grand, and a secretary came to greet him the night before. This gentleman talked to me that the principal meant that he thought that students should be immersed in studying. I said, then I think we should also pay attention to the world, which is the opposite of the principal's dignity, so it is better not to go. He said it didn't matter, but he could also talk about it. So I went the next day, and the principal was really serious and earnestly persuaded me to eat. I eat while worrying. I thought to myself, just give me a speech first, and if I don't like it, I can not invite me to dinner; Now that the meal has been eaten, if there is something wrong in the speech, it is enough to aggravate the sin, what should we do? In the afternoon speech, I said that smart people can't do things as usual, because they think about it and finally can't do anything. The principal was sitting behind me and I couldn't see it. It wasn't until a few days ago that I heard that the principal Ye Yuan also said that the trouble in Jimei School was all my fault, and when I spoke to young people, it could be said that people don't have to think about it. When I said this, he was still shaking his head in the back.我的处世，自以为退让得尽够了，人家在办报，我决不自行去投稿；人家在开会，我决不自己去演说。硬要我去，自然也可以的，但须任凭我说一点我所要说的话，否则，我宁可一声不响，算是死尸。但这里却必须我开口说话，而话又须合于校长之意。我不是别人，那知道别人的意思呢？“先意承志”的妙法，又未曾学过。其被摇头，实活该也。
In my life, I think I have given in enough, and when people are running newspapers, I will never submit them by myself; People are in a meeting, and I will never give a speech myself. If I insist on going, it is naturally possible, but I must be allowed to say what I want to say, otherwise, I would rather remain silent and be regarded as a dead corpse. But here I have to speak, and the words must be in line with the principal's will. I'm not someone else, so how can I know what others mean? The wonderful method of "first intention and will" has never been learned. He was shaken his head, and he really deserved to live.但从去年以来，我居然大大地变坏，或者是进步了。虽或受着各方面的斫刺，似乎已经没有创伤，或者不再觉得痛楚；即使加我罪案，也并不觉着一点沉重了。这是我经历了许多旧的和新的世故之后，才获得的。我已经管不得许多，只好从退让到无可退避之地，进而和他们冲突，蔑视他们，并且蔑视他们的蔑视了。
But since last year, I have actually become much worse, or improved. Although they may have been stabbed in various ways, they seem to be no longer traumatized, or no longer feel pain; Even if I am added to the crime, I don't feel a little heavy. This is what I got after going through many old and new sophistications. I couldn't control much anymore, so I had to go from retreating to no retreat, and then conflicting with them, despising them, and despising their contempt.我的信要就此收场。海上的月色是这样皎洁；波面映出一大片银鳞，闪烁摇动；此外是碧玉一般的海水，看去仿佛很温柔。我不信这样的东西是会淹死人的。但是，请你放心，这是笑话，不要疑心我要跳海了，我还毫没有跳海的意思。
My letter is going to end here. The moonlight on the sea is so bright; The wave surface reflects a large piece of silver scales, flickering and shaking; In addition, it is jasper-like seawater, which looks very gentle. I don't believe that such a thing can drown. However, please rest assured, this is a joke, don't doubt that I am going to jump into the sea, I have no intention of jumping into the sea yet.鲁迅。一月十六夜，海上。

Lu Xun. On the night of January 16, at sea.

封面

书名页

版权信息

图书在版编目（CIP）数据
Books in Print (CIP) data而已集/鲁迅著．—南京：译林出版社，2013.11
Already a collection / by Lu Xun.—Nanjing: Yilin Publishing House, 2013.11（鲁迅自编文集）
(Lu Xun's self-edited anthology)ISBN 978-7-5447-4459-1
ISBN 978-7-5447-4459-1Ⅰ．①而…　Ⅱ．①鲁…　Ⅲ．①鲁迅杂文－杂文集　Ⅳ．①I210.4
I..(1) And... II..(1) Lu... III..(1) Lu Xun's Essays - Essays IV..(1)I210.4中国版本图书馆CIP数据核字（2013）第223185号
CIP Data Verification (2013) No. 223185书　　名　而已集
Book title is already collected作　　者　鲁　迅
Author: Lu Xun责任编辑　陆元昶
Editor-in-charge: Lu Yuanchang特约编辑　刘　佳
Special editor Liu Jia出版发行　凤凰出版传媒股份有限公司
Published and distributed by Phoenix Publishing and Media Co., Ltd译林出版社
Yilin Publishing House出版社地址　南京市湖南路1号A楼，邮编：210009
Publisher's address Building A, No. 1 Hunan Road, Nanjing, Zip Code: 210009电子信箱　yilin@yilin.com
E-mail yilin@yilin.com出版社网址　http://www.yilin.com
Publisher website http://www.yilin.com印　　刷　北京凯达印务有限公司
Printing Beijing Kaida Printing Co., Ltd开　　本　787×1092毫米　1/32
Volume 787×1092 mm 1/32印　　张　4.875
Print 4.875字　　数　93千字
Word count: 93,000 words版　　次　2013年11月第1版　2013年11月第1次印刷
Edition November 2013 1st edition November 2013 1st printing书　　号　ISBN 978-7-5447-4459-1
ISBN 978-7-5447-4459-1定　　价　12.80元
The price is 12.80 yuan译林版图书若有印装错误可向承印厂调换

If there are printing errors in the translated version of the book, it can be exchanged with the printing factory

未知

注释
exegesis 

□□□□□
□□□□□ 

本书中所出现的如上方框同原版纸书。

The box above is the same as the original paper book.

Table of Contents

目录

Table of Contents

directory题辞 Inscription
一九二七年 1927
黄花节的杂感 The miscellaneous feeling of the Yellow Flower Festival
略论中国人的脸 A little about the Chinese face
革命时代的文学 Literature in the revolutionary era
写在《劳动问题》之前 Written before "Labor Issues"
略谈香港 A little talk about Hong Kong
读书杂谈 Reading and chatting
通信 correspondence
答有恒先生 Answer Mr. Youheng
辞“大义” Decline "Great Righteousness"
反“漫谈” Anti-"rambling"
忧“天乳” Worry about "heavenly milk"
革“首领” Revolution "leader"
谈“激烈” Talking about "intense"
扣丝杂感 Buttons and threads are mixed
“公理”之所在 Where is the "axiom"
可恶罪 Heal sin
“意表之外” "Unexpected"
新时代的放债法 Money lending laws in the new era
魏晋风度及文章与药及酒之关系 The relationship between Wei and Jin demeanor and literature and medicine and wine
小杂感 A little miscellaneous
再谈香港 Let's talk about Hong Kong again
革命文学 Revolutionary literature
《尘影》题辞 "Dust Shadow" inscription
当陶元庆君的绘画展览时 When Tao Yuanqingjun's paintings were exhibited
卢梭和胃口 Rousseau and appetite
文学和出汗 Literature and sweating
文艺和革命 Literature and Revolution
谈所谓“大内档案” Talking about the so-called "Inner Archives"
拟预言 Intended to prophesy
附录 appendix
大衍发微 大衍发微
返回总目录 Return to the General Directory

题辞

题辞

题辞

Inscription这半年我又看见了许多血和许多泪，In the past six months, I have seen a lot of blood and a lot of tears, 然而我只有杂感而已。 But I only have mixed feelings.  泪揩了，血消了； Tears wiped away, blood disappeared; 屠伯们逍遥复逍遥， The butchers are free, 用钢刀的，用软刀的。 with steel knives and soft knives. 然而我只有“杂感”而已。 However, I only have "mixed feelings".  连“杂感”也被“放进了应该去的地方”时， When even the "miscellaneous feelings" are "put where they should go", 我于是只有“而已”而已！ I only have "that"!
以上的八句话，是在一九二六年十月十四夜里，编完那年那时为止的杂感集后，写在末尾的，现在便取来作为一九二七年的杂感集的题辞。
The above eight sentences were written at the end of the collection of miscellaneous feelings up to that time on the night of October 14, 1926, and are now taken as the inscription of the miscellaneous feelings collection in 1927.一九二八年十月三十日，鲁迅校讫记。
On October 30, 1928, Lu Xun finished proofreading.

一九二七年

一九二七年

一九二七年

1927

黄花节的杂感

黄花节的杂感

黄花节的杂感

The miscellaneous feeling of the Yellow Flower Festival黄花节将近了，必须做一点所谓文章。但对于这一个题目的文章，教我做起来，实在近于先前的在考场里“对空策”。因为，——说出来自己也惭愧，——黄花节这三个字，我自然明白它是什么意思的；然而战死在黄花冈头的战士们呢，不但姓名，连人数也不知道。
The Yellow Flower Festival is approaching, and we must do a little so-called article. But for the article on this topic, teaching me to do it is really close to the previous "empty strategy" in the examination room. Because ,—— I am ashamed to say ,—— three words of Yellow Flower Festival, I naturally understand what it means; However, the soldiers who died at Huanghuagang Head not only did not know their names, but also their numbers.为寻些材料，好发议论起见，只得查《辞源》。书里面有是有的，可不过是:
In order to find some material and make a good discussion, I had to look up the "Etymology". There are some in the book, but they are:“黄花冈。地名，在广东省城北门外白云山之麓。清宣统三年三月二十九日，革命党数十人，攻袭督署，不成而死，丛葬于此。”
"Huanghuagang. The place name is located at the foot of Baiyun Mountain outside the north gate of Guangdong Province. On March 29, the third year of the Qing Xuantong era, dozens of revolutionary party members attacked the governor's office, but they failed and died, and were buried here. ”轻描淡写，和我所知道的差不多，于我并不能有所裨益。
To put it mildly, it is about the same as what I know, and it does not help me.我又愿意知道一点十七年前的三月二十九日的情形，但一时也找不到目击耳闻的耆老。从别的地方——如北京，南京，我的故乡——的例子推想起来，当时大概有若干人痛惜，若干人快意，若干人没有什么意见，若干人当作酒后茶余的谈助的罢。接着便将被人们忘却。久受压制的人们，被压制时只能忍苦，幸而解放了便只知道作乐，悲壮剧是不能久留在记忆里的。
I would like to know a little about the situation on March 29 seventeen years ago, but I can't find any old people who have witnessed or heard about it for a while. From the examples of other places - such as Beijing, Nanjing, my hometown - there were probably a few people who regretted it, some people were happy, some people had no opinions, and some people just used it as a chat after drinking and tea. Then it will be forgotten. People who have been suppressed for a long time can only endure suffering when they are suppressed, but fortunately they only know how to have fun when they are liberated, and tragic dramas cannot remain in memory for a long time.但是三月二十九日的事却特别，当时虽然失败，十月就是武昌起义，第二年，中华民国便出现了。于是这些失败的战士，当时也就成为革命成功的先驱，悲壮剧刚要收场，又添上一个团圆剧的结束。这于我们是很可庆幸的，我想，在纪念黄花节的时候便可以看出。
But what happened on March 29 was special, although it failed at that time, October was the Wuchang Uprising, and the following year, the Republic of China appeared. So these defeated soldiers became the pioneers of the success of the revolution at that time, and the tragic drama was about to end, adding the end of a reunion drama. This is very fortunate for us, and I think we can see it when commemorating the Yellow Flower Festival.我还没有亲自遇见过黄花节的纪念，因为久在北方。不过，中山先生的纪念日却遇见过了:在学校里，晚上来看演剧的特别多，连凳子也踏破了几条，非常热闹。用这例子来推断，那么，黄花节也一定该是极其热闹的罢。
I haven't personally encountered the commemoration of the Yellow Flower Festival because I have been in the north for a long time. However, Mr. Sun Yat-sen's anniversary has been met: in school, there are a lot of people watching plays at night, and even a few stools have been broken, which is very lively. Using this example, it can be inferred that the Yellow Flower Festival must also be extremely lively.当三月十二日那天的晚上，我在热闹场中，便深深地更感得革命家的伟大。我想，恋爱成功的时候，一个爱人死掉了，只能给生存的那一个以悲哀。然而革命成功的时候，革命家死掉了，却能每年给生存的大家以热闹，甚而至于欢欣鼓舞。惟独革命家，无论他生或死，都能给大家以幸福。同是爱，结果却有这样地不同，正无怪现在的青年，很有许多感到恋爱和革命的冲突的苦闷。
When I was in the bustling scene on the night of March 12, I deeply felt the greatness of the revolutionaries. I think that when a love is successful, a lover dies, and only the one who survives can be sad. However, when the revolution succeeds, the revolutionaries die, but they can give everyone who survives lively every year, and even rejoice. Only a revolutionary, whether he is alive or dead, can bring happiness to everyone. It is no wonder that today's young people feel the bitterness of the conflict between love and revolution.以上的所谓“革命成功”，是指暂时的事而言；其实是“革命尚未成功”的。革命无止境，倘使世上真有什么“止于至善”，这人间世便同时变了凝固的东西了。不过，中国经了许多战士的精神和血肉的培养，却的确长出了一点先前所没有的幸福的花果来，也还有逐渐生长的希望。倘若不像有，那是因为继续培养的人们少，而赏玩，攀折这花，摘食这果实的人们倒是太多的缘故。
The so-called "revolutionary success" above refers to temporary matters; In fact, "the revolution has not yet succeeded". The revolution is endless, and if there is really something in the world that "stops at the best", the world will change at the same time. However, China has been cultivated by the spirit and flesh and blood of many soldiers, but it has indeed grown a little happiness and fruit that was not available before, and there is still hope for gradual growth. If it doesn't seem to exist, it is because there are few people who continue to cultivate, and there are too many people who enjoy playing, climbing this flower, and picking and eating this fruit.我并非说，大家都须天天去痛哭流涕，以凭吊先烈的“在天之灵”，一年中有一天记起他们也就可以了。但就广东的现在而论，我却觉得大家对于节日的办法，还须改良一点。黄花节很热闹，热闹一天自然也好；热闹得疲劳了，回去就好好地睡一觉。然而第二天，元气恢复了，就该加工做一天自己该做的工作。这当然是劳苦的，但总比枪弹从致命的地方穿过去要好得远；何况这也算是在培养幸福的花果，为着后来的人们呢。
I am not saying that everyone has to cry bitterly every day to mourn the "spirit in heaven" of the martyrs, and it is enough to remember them one day a year. But as far as Guangdong is concerned, I think everyone's approach to festivals needs to be improved a little. The Yellow Flower Festival is very lively, and it is natural to have a lively day; I'm tired from the excitement, so I'll go back and have a good night's sleep. However, the next day, when the vitality is restored, it is time to process and do the work that should be done for the day. It is laborious, of course, but it is far better than a bullet passing through a deadly place; What's more, this can be regarded as cultivating happy flowers and fruits for future generations.三月二十四日夜。
On the night of March 24th.

略论中国人的脸

略论中国人的脸

略论中国人的脸

A little about the Chinese face大约人们一遇到不大看惯的东西，总不免以为他古怪。我还记得初看见西洋人的时候，就觉得他脸太白，头发太黄，眼珠太淡，鼻梁太高。虽然不能明明白白地说出理由来，但总而言之:相貌不应该如此。至于对于中国人的脸，是毫无异议；即使有好丑之别，然而都不错的。
Probably when people encounter something they are not used to, they can't help but think that he is weird. I still remember when I first saw a Westerner, I thought his face was too white, his hair was too yellow, his eyes were too light, and his nose bridge was too high. Although the reason cannot be clearly stated, in short: appearance should not be like this. As for the Chinese face, there is no objection; Even if there are good and ugly differences, they are all good.我们的古人，倒似乎并不放松自己中国人的相貌。周的孟轲就用眸子来判胸中的正不正，汉朝还有《相人》二十四卷。后来闹这玩艺儿的尤其多；分起来，可以说有两派罢:一是从脸上看出他的智愚贤不肖；一是从脸上看出他过去，现在和将来的荣枯。于是天下纷纷，从此多事，许多人就都战战兢兢地研究自己的脸。我想，镜子的发明，恐怕这些人和小姐们是大有功劳的。不过近来前一派已经不大有人讲究，在北京上海这些地方捣鬼的都只是后一派了。
Our ancients did not seem to relax their Chinese appearance. Meng Ke of Zhou used his eyes to judge the righteousness of his chest, and the Han Dynasty also had twenty-four volumes of "Physiognomy". Later, there were many people who made fun of this trick; Divided into two factions: one is to see from his face that his wisdom and foolishness are virtuous; First, you can see the rise and fall of his past, present and future from his face. So the world was in turmoil, and many people studied their faces tremblingly. I think that the invention of the mirror is probably due to these people and ladies. However, recently, the former faction has not paid much attention to it, and it is only the latter faction that makes trouble in Beijing and Shanghai.我一向只留心西洋人。留心的结果，又觉得他们的皮肤未免太粗；毫毛有白色的，也不好。皮上常有红点，即因为颜色太白之故，倒不如我们之黄。尤其不好的是红鼻子，有时简直像是将要熔化的蜡烛油，仿佛就要滴下来，使人看得栗栗危惧，也不及黄色人种的较为隐晦，也见得较为安全。总而言之:相貌还是不应该如此的。
I have always paid attention to Westerners. As a result of paying attention, I feel that their skin is too thick; The hair is white, and it is not good. There are often red spots on the skin, which is not as yellow as ours because the color is too white. Especially bad is the red nose, which sometimes looks like candle oil that is about to melt, as if it is about to drip, which makes people look terrified, and it is not as obscure as the yellow race, and it is also safer. All in all: appearance should not be like this.后来，我看见西洋人所画的中国人，才知道他们对于我们的相貌也很不敬。那似乎是《天方夜谈》或者《安兑生童话》中的插画，现在不很记得清楚了。头上戴着拖花翎的红缨帽，一条辫子在空中飞扬，朝靴的粉底非常之厚。但这些都是满洲人连累我们的。独有两眼歪斜，张嘴露齿，却是我们自己本来的相貌。不过我那时想，其实并不尽然，外国人特地要奚落我们，所以格外形容得过度了。
Later, when I saw the Chinese painted by Westerners, I realized that they were also very disrespectful to our appearance. It seems to be an illustration from "Arabian Nights" or "An Duisheng's Fairy Tale", but I don't remember it very well now. He wore a red tassel hat with flapped feathers on his head, a braid flew in the air, and the foundation of his boots was very thick. But these are all Manchurians who have implicated us. The only thing that is slanted eyes and open mouth is that it is our original appearance. But I thought at the time that it was not entirely so, foreigners specifically wanted to ridicule us, so it was particularly exaggerated.但此后对于中国一部分人们的相貌，我也逐渐感到一种不满，就是他们每看见不常见的事件或华丽的女人，听到有些醉心的说话的时候，下巴总要慢慢挂下，将嘴张了开来。这实在不大雅观；仿佛精神上缺少着一样什么机件。据研究人体的学者们说，一头附着在上颚骨上，那一头附着在下颚骨上的“咬筋”，力量是非常之大的。我们幼小时候想吃核桃，必须放在门缝里将它的壳夹碎。但在成人，只要牙齿好，那咬筋一收缩，便能咬碎一个核桃。有着这么大的力量的筋，有时竟不能收住一个并不沉重的自己的下巴，虽然正在看得出神的时候，倒也情有可原，但我总以为究竟不是十分体面的事。
But since then, I have gradually felt a sense of dissatisfaction with the appearance of some people in China, that is, whenever they see an uncommon event or a gorgeous woman, and hear a little intoxicated speech, they always have to slowly lower their chins and open their mouths. This is really not an elegant view; It seems that there is something missing in the spirit. According to scholars who study the human body, the "bite tendon" attached to the maxilla and the other attached to the mandible is very powerful. When we were young, we wanted to eat walnuts, so we had to put them in the crack of the door to crush its shell. But in adults, as long as the teeth are good, the biter tendon can crush a walnut as soon as it contracts. With such a strong tendon, sometimes I can't hold my chin that is not heavy, although it is understandable when I can see God, but I always think that it is not a very decent thing in the end.日本的长谷川如是闲是善于做讽刺文字的。去年我见过他的一本随笔集，叫作《猫·狗·人》；其中有一篇就说到中国人的脸。大意是初见中国人，即令人感到较之日本人或西洋人，脸上总欠缺着一点什么。久而久之，看惯了，便觉得这样已经尽够，并不缺少东西；倒是看得西洋人之流的脸上，多余着一点什么。这多余着的东西，他就给它一个不大高妙的名目:兽性。中国人的脸上没有这个，是人，则加上多余的东西，即成了下列的算式:
Japan's Hasegawa is so idle that he is good at making satirical words. Last year I saw a collection of his essays called "Cats, Dogs, and People"; One of them talks about the face of the Chinese. The gist is that when you first see Chinese, you will feel that there is always something missing on your face compared to Japanese or Westerners. Over time, when I get used to it, I feel that this is enough, and there is no shortage of things; On the contrary, it seems that there is something extra on the faces of Westerners. This superfluous thing, he gave it a not very wonderful name: bestiality. If the Chinese does not have this on their faces, they are people, and they add superfluous things to become the following formula:人＋兽性＝西洋人
Human + bestiality = Westerners他借了称赞中国人，贬斥西洋人，来讥刺日本人的目的，这样就达到了，自然不必再说这兽性的不见于中国人的脸上，是本来没有的呢，还是现在已经消除。如果是后来消除的，那么，是渐渐净尽而只剩了人性的呢，还是不过渐渐成了驯顺。野牛成为家牛，野猪成为猪，狼成为狗，野性是消失了，但只足使牧人喜欢，于本身并无好处。人不过是人，不再夹杂着别的东西，当然再好没有了。倘不得已，我以为还不如带些兽性，如果合于下列的算式倒是不很有趣的:
He borrowed the purpose of praising the Chinese and denigrating the Westerners to ridicule the Japanese, so that he achieved it, and naturally there is no need to say that this beastly nature is not seen on the faces of the Chinese, whether it was not there in the first place, or has now been eliminated. If it was eliminated later, then it was gradually cleansed and only humanity remained, or it was just gradually tamed. The wild cow becomes a domestic cow, the wild boar becomes a pig, the wolf becomes a dog, and the wildness disappears, but it is enough to make the shepherd like it, and it is not good in itself. People are just people, no longer mixed with other things, of course it is not good. If it is necessary, I think it would be better to bring some beastliness, but it would not be very interesting if it fits the following formula:人＋家畜性＝某一种人
People + domestic animals = a certain kind of person中国人的脸上真可有兽性的记号的疑案，暂且中止讨论罢。我只要说近来却在中国人所理想的古今人的脸上，看见了两种多余。一到广州，我觉得比我所从来的厦门丰富得多的，是电影，而且大半是“国片”，有古装的，有时装的。因为电影是“艺术”，所以电影艺术家便将这两种多余加上去了。
The suspicion that the Chinese face can really have a beastly mark, so let's stop the discussion for the time being. I just need to say that recently, I have seen two kinds of superfluous on the faces of ancient and modern people idealized by Chinese. When I arrived in Guangzhou, I felt that what was much richer than Xiamen, where I came from, was movies, and most of them were "national films", including costumes and fashion ones. Because film is "art", film artists add these two superfluous things.古装的电影也可以说是好看，那好看不下于看戏；至少，决不至于有大锣大鼓将人的耳朵震聋。在“银幕”上，则有身穿不知何时何代的衣服的人物，缓慢地动作；脸正如古人一般死，因为要显得活，便只好加上些旧式戏子的昏庸。
costume movies can also be said to be good-looking, which is no less good-looking than watching a play; At least, there will never be big gongs and drums that deafen people's ears. On the "screen", there are characters wearing clothes of unknown times and generations, moving slowly; The face is as dead as the ancients, because it wants to appear alive, so it has to add some old-fashioned actors.时装人物的脸，只要见过清朝光绪年间上海的吴友如的《画报》的，便会觉得神态非常相像。《画报》所画的大抵不是流氓拆梢，便是妓女吃醋，所以脸相都狡猾。这精神似乎至今不变，国产影片中的人物，虽是作者以为善人杰士者，眉宇间也总带些上海洋场式的狡猾。可见不如此，是连善人杰士也做不成的。
The faces of fashion figures, as long as you have seen Wu Youru's "Pictorial" in Shanghai during the Guangxu period of the Qing Dynasty, will feel that their demeanor is very similar. Most of the paintings in the "Pictorial" are either hooligans or prostitutes who are jealous, so their faces are cunning. This spirit seems to have remained unchanged to this day, and the characters in domestic films, although the author thinks they are good people, always have some cunning in the style of the Shanghai Ocean Arena between their eyebrows. It can be seen that if this is not the case, even good people and heroes cannot do it.听说，国产影片之所以多，是因为华侨欢迎，能够获利，每一新片到，老的便带了孩子去指点给他们看道:“看哪，我们的祖国的人们是这样的。”在广州似乎也受欢迎，日夜四场，我常见看客坐得满满。
I heard that the reason why there are so many domestic films is because overseas Chinese are welcome and can make profits, and every time a new film arrives, the old one takes the child to show them and says: "Look, the people of our motherland are like this." It also seems to be popular in Guangzhou, and I often see spectators full of spectators in four performances a day and night.广州现在也如上海一样，正在这样地修养他们的趣味。可惜电影一开演，电灯一定熄灭，我不能看见人们的下巴。
Guangzhou, like Shanghai, is now cultivating their interests in this way. Unfortunately, as soon as the movie started, the lights would have gone out, and I couldn't see people's chins.四月六日。
April 6th.

革命时代的文学　——四月八日在黄埔军官学校讲

革命时代的文学Literature in the Revolutionary Era ——四月八日在黄埔军官学校讲 - Lectured at the Whampoa Military Academy on April 8
今天要讲几句的话是就将这“革命时代的文学”算作题目。这学校是邀过我好几次了，我总是推宕着没有来。为什么呢？因为我想，诸君的所以来邀我，大约是因为我曾经做过几篇小说，是文学家，要从我这里听文学。其实我并不是的，并不懂什么。我首先正经学习的是开矿，叫我讲掘煤，也许比讲文学要好一些。自然，因为自己的嗜好，文学书是也时常看看的，不过并无心得，能说出于诸君有用的东西来。加以这几年，自己在北京所得的经验，对于一向所知道的前人所讲的文学的议论，都渐渐的怀疑起来。那是开枪打杀学生的时候罢，文禁也严厉了，我想:文学文学，是最不中用的，没有力量的人讲的；有实力的人并不开口，就杀人，被压迫的人讲几句话，写几个字，就要被杀；即使幸而不被杀，但天天呐喊，叫苦，鸣不平，而有实力的人仍然压迫，虐待，杀戮，没有方法对付他们，这文学于人们又有什么益处呢？
A few words to say today is to count this "literature of the revolutionary era" as the title. This school has invited me several times, but I always hesitate not to come. Why? Because I think that the reason why you invited me is probably because I have written several novels, I am a writer, and I want to listen to literature from me. In fact, I don't, I don't know anything. The first serious thing I learned was mining, and I was asked to talk about coal mining, which might be better than literature. Naturally, because of my hobbies, I often read literary books, but I don't have any experience, and I can say that it is useful to you. In addition, in the past few years, the experience I have gained in Beijing has gradually become suspicious of the literary discussions I have always known about my predecessors. That was when students were shot and killed, and the ban on literature was also strict, I thought: literature is the most useless, powerless person to talk about; Those who are powerful will kill if they do not speak, and those who are oppressed will be killed if they say a few words or write a few words; Even if they are lucky enough not to be killed, but they shout, complain, and complain every day, and the powerful people still oppress, abuse, and kill, and there is no way to deal with them, what benefit does this literature do to people?在自然界里也这样，鹰的捕雀，不声不响的是鹰，吱吱叫喊的是雀；猫的捕鼠，不声不响的是猫，吱吱叫喊的是老鼠；结果，还是只会开口的被不开口的吃掉。文学家弄得好，做几篇文章，也许能够称誉于当时，或者得到多少年的虚名罢，——譬如一个烈士的追悼会开过之后，烈士的事情早已不提了，大家倒传诵着谁的挽联做得好:这实在是一件很稳当的买卖。
In nature, the eagle catches sparrows, the eagle is the eagle that is silent, and the sparrow is the squeak; The cat's mouse catching, the silent cat is the cat, and the squeaking is the mouse; As a result, those who only open their mouths are eaten by those who don't. For example,——, after a martyr's memorial service is held, the martyr's affairs have long been mentioned, and everyone recites whose elegy is good: this is really a very stable deal.但在这革命地方的文学家，恐怕总喜欢说文学和革命是大有关系的，例如可以用这来宣传，鼓吹，煽动，促进革命和完成革命。不过我想，这样的文章是无力的，因为好的文艺作品，向来多是不受别人命令，不顾利害，自然而然地从心中流露的东西；如果先挂起一个题目，做起文章来，那又何异于八股，在文学中并无价值，更说不到能否感动人了。为革命起见，要有“革命人”，“革命文学”倒无须急急，革命人做出东西来，才是革命文学。所以，我想:革命，倒是与文章有关系的。革命时代的文学和平时的文学不同，革命来了，文学就变换色彩。但大革命可以变换文学的色彩，小革命却不，因为不算什么革命，所以不能变换文学的色彩。在此地是听惯了“革命”了，江苏浙江谈到革命二字，听的人都很害怕，讲的人也很危险。其实“革命”是并不稀奇的，惟其有了它，社会才会改革，人类才会进步，能从原虫到人类，从野蛮到文明，就因为没有一刻不在革命。生物学家告诉我们:“人类和猴子是没有大两样的，人类和猴子是表兄弟。”但为什么人类成了人，猴子终于是猴子呢？这就因为猴子不肯变化——它爱用四只脚走路。也许曾有一个猴子站起来，试用两脚走路的罢，但许多猴子就说:“我们底祖先一向是爬的，不许你站！”咬死了。它们不但不肯站起来，并且不肯讲话，因为它守旧。人类就不然，他终于站起，讲话，结果是他胜利了。现在也还没有完。所以革命是并不稀奇的，凡是至今还未灭亡的民族，还都天天在努力革命，虽然往往不过是小革命。
However, writers in this revolutionary place may always like to say that literature and revolution have a lot to do with it, for example, it can be used to propagate, advocate, incite, promote revolution and complete revolution. However, I think that such articles are powerless, because good literary and artistic works have always been things that are not ordered by others, regardless of interests, and naturally reveal from the heart; If you hang up a topic and start an article, it is no different from eight strands, which have no value in literature, let alone whether they can move people. For the sake of revolution, there must be "revolutionaries", and there is no need to rush "revolutionary literature". Therefore, I think: revolution has something to do with the article. The literature of the revolutionary era is different from the literature of ordinary times, and when the revolution comes, literature changes color. But the great revolution can change the color of literature, but the small revolution does not, because it is not a revolution, so it cannot change the color of literature. When Jiangsu and Zhejiang talk about the word revolution, everyone who listens is very scared, and the person who speaks is also very dangerous. In fact, "revolution" is not unusual, but with it, society will reform, mankind will progress, from protozoa to humans, from barbarism to civilization, because there is no moment of revolution. Biologists tell us: "Humans and monkeys are not the same, humans and monkeys are cousins." But why did humans become humans and monkeys finally become monkeys? This is because the monkey refuses to change - it loves to walk on four feet. Maybe there was a monkey who stood up and tried to walk on two feet, but many monkeys said, "Our ancestors have always climbed, you are not allowed to stand!" Bite to death. Not only do they refuse to stand up, but they refuse to speak because it is old-fashioned. Humans are different, he finally stands up, speaks, and the result is that he wins. It's not over yet. Therefore, revolutions are not uncommon, and all nations that have not yet perished are still working hard to revolutionize every day, although they are often just small revolutions.大革命与文学有什么影响呢？大约可以分开三个时候来说:
What was the impact of the Revolution and literature? It can be said that it is about three times:（一）大革命之前，所有的文学，大抵是对于种种社会状态，觉得不平，觉得痛苦，就叫苦，鸣不平，在世界文学中关于这类的文学颇不少。但这些叫苦鸣不平的文学对于革命没有什么影响，因为叫苦鸣不平，并无力量，压迫你们的人仍然不理，老鼠虽然吱吱地叫，尽管叫出很好的文学，而猫儿吃起它来，还是不客气。所以仅仅有叫苦鸣不平的文学时，这个民族还没有希望，因为止于叫苦和鸣不平。例如人们打官司，失败的方面到了分发冤单的时候，对手就知道他没有力量再打官司，事情已经了结了；所以叫苦鸣不平的文学等于喊冤，压迫者对此倒觉得放心。有些民族因为叫苦无用，连苦也不叫了，他们便成为沉默的民族，渐渐更加衰颓下去，埃及，阿拉伯，波斯，印度就都没有什么声音了！至于富有反抗性，蕴有力量的民族，因为叫苦没用，他便觉悟起来，由哀音而变为怒吼。怒吼的文学一出现，反抗就快到了；他们已经很愤怒，所以与革命爆发时代接近的文学每每带有愤怒之音；他要反抗，他要复仇。苏俄革命将起时，即有些这类的文学。但也有例外，如波兰，虽然早有复仇的文学，然而他的恢复，是靠着欧洲大战的。
(1) Before the Great Revolution, all literature was mostly about various social conditions, feeling injustice and pain, complaining and complaining, and there were quite a lot of literature about this kind of literature in world literature. But these bitter literature have no impact on the revolution, because the bitter cry has no power, and the oppressors still ignore it, and although the mouse squeaks, although it calls out good literature, and the cat is still unpolite when it eats it. Therefore, when there is only literature that complains, this nation has no hope, because it only complains and complains. For example, when people file lawsuits, when the failed side distributes the wrongful claims, the opponent knows that he has no strength to fight the lawsuit again, and the matter is over; Therefore, literature that complains is tantamount to crying out for injustice, and the oppressor is relieved by this. Some peoples have become silent nations because they are useless and don't even cry out for suffering, and gradually decline even more, and Egypt, Arabia, Persia, and India have no voice! As for the rebellious and powerful nation, because it was useless to cry out, he became aware and changed from a mourning sound to a roar. As soon as roaring literature appears, resistance is coming; They are already very angry, so literature close to the era of revolution always has the sound of anger; He wants to resist, he wants revenge. When the Soviet Russian Revolution was about to begin, there was some such literature. But there are exceptions, such as Poland, although there has long been literature of revenge, but his recovery relied on the European war.（二）到了大革命的时代，文学没有了，没有声音了，因为大家受革命潮流的鼓荡，大家由呼喊而转入行动，大家忙着革命，没有闲空谈文学了。还有一层，是那时民生凋敝，一心寻面包吃尚且来不及，那里有心思谈文学呢？守旧的人因为受革命潮流的打击，气得发昏，也不能再唱所谓他们底文学了。有人说:“文学是穷苦的时候做的”，其实未必，穷苦的时候必定没有文学作品的；我在北京时，一穷，就到处借钱，不写一个字，到薪俸发放时，才坐下来做文章。忙的时候也必定没有文学作品，挑担的人必要把担子放下，才能做文章；拉车的人也必要把车子放下，才能做文章。大革命时代忙得很，同时又穷得很，这一部分人和那一部分人斗争，非先行变换现代社会底状态不可，没有时间也没有心思做文章；所以大革命时代的文学便只好暂归沉寂了。
(2) In the era of the Great Revolution, literature is gone, there is no voice, because everyone is agitated by the revolutionary trend, everyone turns from shouting to action, everyone is busy with the revolution, and there is no idle talk about literature. There is another layer, that at that time, people's livelihood was withering, and it was too late to find bread to eat, where was the mind to talk about literature? Conservatives are so angry that they can no longer sing their so-called literature because they are hit by the revolutionary trend. Some people say: "Literature is done when you are poor", but in fact, it is not necessarily, there must be no literary works when you are poor; When I was in Beijing, when I was poor, I borrowed money everywhere, didn't write a word, and only sat down to write an article when my salary was paid. When you are busy, there must be no literary works, and the person who carries the burden must put down the burden in order to make an article; The person pulling the car must also put the car down before he can make a fuss. The era of the Great Revolution was very busy and very poor at the same time, and this part of the people and that part of the struggle had to change the bottom state of modern society first, and they had no time or mind to make a fuss; Therefore, the literature of the revolutionary era had to be temporarily silent.（三）等到大革命成功后，社会底状态缓和了，大家底生活有余裕了，这时候就又产生文学。这时候底文学有二:一种文学是赞扬革命，称颂革命，——讴歌革命，因为进步的文学家想到社会改变，社会向前走，对于旧社会的破坏和新社会的建设，都觉得有意义，一方面对于旧制度的崩坏很高兴，一方面对于新的建设来讴歌。另有一种文学是吊旧社会的灭亡——挽歌——也是革命后会有的文学。有些的人以为这是“反革命的文学”，我想，倒也无须加以这么大的罪名。革命虽然进行，但社会上旧人物还很多，决不能一时变成新人物，他们的脑中满藏着旧思想旧东西；环境渐变，影响到他们自身的一切，于是回想旧时的舒服，便对于旧社会眷念不已，恋恋不舍，因而讲出很古的话，陈旧的话，形成这样的文学。这种文学都是悲哀的调子，表示他心里不舒服，一方面看见新的建设胜利了，一方面看见旧的制度灭亡了，所以唱起挽歌来。但是怀旧，唱挽歌，就表示已经革命了，如果没有革命，旧人物正得势，是不会唱挽歌的。
(3) After the success of the Great Revolution, the social situation eased and everyone had enough to live, and literature was produced at this time. At this time, there are two types of literature: one literature praises the revolution, praises the revolution,—— and praises the revolution, because progressive writers think of social change and society moving forward, and feel meaningful for the destruction of the old society and the construction of the new society. Another kind of literature is the demise of the old society - elegy - which is also the literature that will exist after the revolution. Some people think this is "counter-revolutionary literature", but I think there is no need to charge it with such a big crime. Although the revolution is underway, there are still many old figures in society, and they must not become new figures for a while, and their minds are full of old ideas and old things; The gradual change of the environment affects everything about themselves, so they recall the comfort of the old days, and they are nostalgic for the old society and are reluctant to give up, so they speak very ancient words, old words, and form such literature. This kind of literature is all sad tones, indicating that he is uncomfortable, on the one hand, he sees the victory of the new construction, and on the other hand, he sees the demise of the old system, so he sings elegies. But nostalgia and singing elegies means that there has been a revolution, and if there is no revolution, the old characters are in power and will not sing elegies.不过中国没有这两种文学——对旧制度挽歌，对新制度讴歌；因为中国革命还没有成功，正是青黄不接，忙于革命的时候。不过旧文学仍然很多，报纸上的文章，几乎全是旧式。我想，这足见中国革命对于社会没有多大的改变，对于守旧的人没有多大的影响，所以旧人仍能超然物外。广东报纸所讲的文学，都是旧的，新的很少，也可以证明广东社会没有受革命影响；没有对新的讴歌，也没有对旧的挽歌，广东仍然是十年前底广东。不但如此，并且也没有叫苦，没有鸣不平；止看见工会参加游行，但这是政府允许的，不是因压迫而反抗的，也不过是奉旨革命。中国社会没有改变，所以没有怀旧的哀词，也没有崭新的进行曲，只在苏俄却已产生了这两种文学。他们的旧文学家逃亡外国，所作的文学，多是吊亡挽旧的哀词；新文学则正在努力向前走，伟大的作品虽然还没有，但是新作品已不少，他们已经离开怒吼时期而过渡到讴歌的时期了。赞美建设是革命进行以后的影响，再往后去的情形怎样，现在不得而知，但推想起来，大约是平民文学罢，因为平民的世界，是革命的结果。
However, China does not have these two types of literature - an elegy for the old system and an ode to the new system; Because the Chinese revolution has not yet succeeded, it is the time when the youth and yellow are busy with the revolution. However, there is still a lot of old literature, and the articles in the newspapers are almost all old-fashioned. I think this shows that the Chinese revolution has not changed much in society and has not had much impact on the conservatives, so the old people can still be transcendent. The literature taught in Guangdong newspapers is all old and very new, which can also prove that Guangdong society was not affected by the revolution; There is no new eulogy, no elegy for the old, Guangdong is still Guangdong ten years ago. Not only that, but there was no complaint or complaint; I only saw the trade unions participating in the march, but this was allowed by the government, not because of oppression, but because of the revolution. Chinese society has not changed, so there are no nostalgic laments or new marches, but these two types of literature have been produced in Soviet Russia. Most of their old writers fled to foreign countries, and most of the literature they wrote was mostly lamentations for the dead; New literature is trying to move forward, although there are no great works yet, but there are many new works, and they have left the roaring period and transitioned to the period of eulogism. Praise construction is the influence of the revolution after it is carried out, and it is not known what will happen in the future, but it is inferred that it is probably civilian literature, because the world of the common people is the result of the revolution.现在中国自然没有平民文学，世界上也还没有平民文学，所有的文学，歌呀，诗呀，大抵是给上等人看的；他们吃饱了，睡在躺椅上，捧着看。一个才子出门遇见一个佳人，两个人很要好，有一个不才子从中捣乱，生出差迟来，但终于团圆了。这样地看看，多么舒服。或者讲上等人怎样有趣和快乐，下等人怎样可笑。前几年《新青年》载过几篇小说，描写罪人在寒地里的生活，大学教授看了就不高兴，因为他们不喜欢看这样的下流人。如果诗歌描写车夫，就是下流诗歌；一出戏里，有犯罪的事情，就是下流戏。他们的戏里的脚色，止有才子佳人，才子中状元，佳人封一品夫人，在才子佳人本身很欢喜，他们看了也很欢喜，下等人没奈何，也只好替他们一同欢喜欢喜。在现在，有人以平民——工人农民——为材料，做小说做诗，我们也称之为平民文学，其实这不是平民文学，因为平民还没有开口。这是另外的人从旁看见平民的生活，假托平民底口吻而说的。眼前的文人有些虽然穷，但总比工人农民富足些，这才能有钱去读书，才能有文章；一看好像是平民所说的，其实不是；这不是真的平民小说。平民所唱的山歌野曲，现在也有人写下来，以为是平民之音了，因为是老百姓所唱。但他们间接受古书的影响很大，他们对于乡下的绅士有田三千亩，佩服得不了，每每拿绅士的思想，做自己的思想，绅士们惯吟五言诗，七言诗；因此他们所唱的山歌野曲，大半也是五言或七言。这是就格律而言，还有构思取意，也是很陈腐的，不能称是真正的平民文学。现在中国底小说和诗实在比不上别国，无可奈何，只好称之曰文学；谈不到革命时代的文学，更谈不到平民文学。现在的文学家都是读书人，如果工人农民不解放，工人农民的思想，仍然是读书人的思想，必待工人农民得到真正的解放，然后才有真正的平民文学。有些人说:“中国已有平民文学”，其实这是不对的。
Now there is naturally no civilian literature in China, and there is no civilian literature in the world. They were full, slept on the lounge chairs, and held them up. A talented man went out to meet a beautiful woman, the two of them were very good, and an untalented man made trouble from it, and he was late on a business trip, but finally reunited. How comfortable it is to look at it this way. Or how interesting and happy the upper class is, and how ridiculous the lower class is. A few years ago, "New Youth" published several novels describing the life of sinners in cold places, and university professors were unhappy when they read it, because they didn't like to watch such vulgar people. If the poem describes the coachman, it is obscene poetry; In a play, if there is a crime, it is an obscene drama. In their plays, there are only talented beauties, talented champions, and beauties are named first-class ladies, and they are very happy to see them, and they are also very happy to see them. Nowadays, some people use civilians, workers and peasants, as materials to write novels and poems, which we also call civilian literature, but in fact, this is not civilian literature, because the common people have not yet opened their mouths. This is something that another person said by seeing the lives of civilians from the side, pretending to be a commoner. Although some of the literati in front of them are poor, they are always richer than the workers and peasants, so that they can have money to study and have articles; One looks like what the common people say, but it is not; This is not really civilian fiction. The folk songs and wild songs sung by the common people are now written down, thinking that they are the voices of the common people, because they are sung by the common people. But they were indirectly influenced by ancient books, they couldn't admire the gentlemen in the countryside who had 3,000 acres of land, and they often took the thoughts of gentlemen and did their own thoughts, and the gentlemen were accustomed to reciting five-character poems and seven-character poems; Therefore, most of the folk songs and wild songs they sing are also five or seven words. This is as far as the rhythm is concerned, and it is also very cliché, and it cannot be called true civilian literature. Nowadays, Chinese novels and poems are really not as good as other countries, so I have no choice but to call them literature; There is no talk of literature in the revolutionary era, let alone civilian literature. If the workers and peasants are not emancipated, the thoughts of the workers and peasants are still the thoughts of scholars, and they must wait for the workers and peasants to be truly liberated, and then there will be real civilian literature. Some people say: "China already has civilian literature", but this is not true.诸君是实际的战争者，是革命的战士，我以为现在还是不要佩服文学的好。学文学对于战争，没有益处，最好不过作一篇战歌，或者写得美的，便可于战余休憩时看看，倒也有趣。要讲得堂皇点，则譬如种柳树，待到柳树长大，浓阴蔽日，农夫耕作到正午，或者可以坐在柳树底下吃饭，休息休息。中国现在的社会情状，止有实地的革命战争，一首诗吓不走孙传芳，一炮就把孙传芳轰走了。自然也有人以为文学于革命是有伟力的，但我个人总觉得怀疑，文学总是一种余裕的产物，可以表示一民族的文化，倒是真的。
You are actual warners, revolutionary fighters, I think it's better not to admire literature now. Studying literature is not beneficial to war, it is best to write a war song, or write it beautifully, so you can read it when you rest after the war, which is also interesting. To be more grand, it is like planting willow trees, waiting until the willow trees grow up, the thick shade covers the sun, and the farmer works until noon, or you can sit under the willow tree to eat and rest. The current social situation in China is only a revolutionary war on the ground, and a poem cannot scare Sun Chuanfang away, and Sun Chuanfang is blown away with one shot. Naturally, some people think that literature has great power in revolution, but I personally always feel that literature is always a product of surplus, which can represent the culture of a nation, but it is true.人大概是不满于自己目前所做的事的，我一向只会做几篇文章，自己也做得厌了，而捏枪的诸君，却又要听讲文学。我呢，自然倒愿意听听大炮的声音，仿佛觉得大炮的声音或者比文学的声音要好听得多似的。我的演说只有这样多，感谢诸君听完的厚意！
People are probably dissatisfied with what they are doing so far, I have always only done a few articles, and I am tired of doing it, but the gentlemen who hold guns have to listen to literature. As for me, I am naturally willing to listen to the sound of cannons, as if I think the sound of cannons may be much better than the sound of literature. There are only so many of my speeches, thank you all for your kindness!

写在《劳动问题》之前

写在《劳动问题》之前

写在《劳动问题》之前

Written before "Labor Issues"还记得去年夏天住在北京的时候，遇见张我权君，听到他说过这样意思的话:“中国人似乎都忘记了台湾了，谁也不大提起。”他是一个台湾的青年。
I still remember when I lived in Beijing last summer, I met Zhang Wo Quanjun and heard him say something like this: "Chinese seem to have forgotten Taiwan, and no one mentions it." He is a young man from Taiwan.我当时就像受了创痛似的，有点苦楚；但口上却道:“不。那倒不至于的。只因为本国太破烂，内忧外患，非常之多，自顾不暇了，所以只能将台湾这些事情暂且放下。……”
I was in a bit of pain as if I had been wounded; But he said, "No." That's not the case. Just because the country is too tattered, there are many internal and external troubles, and there are too many to take care of itself, so I can only put these things in Taiwan aside for the time being. ……”但正在困苦中的台湾的青年，却并不将中国的事情暂且放下。他们常希望中国革命的成功，赞助中国的改革，总想尽些力，于中国的现在和将来有所裨益，即使是自己还在做学生。
But the young people in Taiwan who are in distress do not put aside China's affairs for the time being. They often hope for the success of the Chinese revolution, sponsor China's reforms, and always want to do their best to benefit China now and in the future, even if they are still students.张秀哲君是我在广州才遇见的。我们谈了几回，知道他已经译成一部《劳动问题》给中国，还希望我做一点简短的序文。我是不善于作序，也不赞成作序的；况且对于劳动问题，一无所知，尤其没有开口的资格。我所能负责说出来的，不过是张君于中日两国的文字，俱极精通，译文定必十分可靠这一点罢了。
Zhang Xiuzhe Jun was only met in Guangzhou. We talked a few times, and I knew that he had translated a "Labor Problem" for China, and he wanted me to make a short preface. I am not good at writing prefaces, and I do not approve of prefaces; Moreover, he knew nothing about labor issues, especially not qualified to speak. All I can say is that Zhang Jun is very proficient in both Chinese and Japanese writings, and the translation must be very reliable.但我这回却很愿意写几句话在这一部译本之前，只要我能够。我虽然不知道劳动问题，但译者在游学中尚且为民众尽力的努力与诚意，我是觉得的。
But this time I am willing to write a few words before this translation, as long as I can. Although I don't know about labor issues, I feel that the translator still does his best for the people during his study tour.我只能以这几句话表出我个人的感激。但我相信，这努力与诚意，读者也一定都会觉得的。这实在比无论什么序文都有力。
I can only express my personal gratitude in these few words. But I believe that readers will definitely feel this effort and sincerity. This is really more powerful than any preface.一九二七年四月十一日，鲁迅识于广州中山大学。
On April 11, 1927, Lu Xun met at Sun Yat-sen University in Guangzhou.

略谈香港

略谈香港

略谈香港

A little talk about Hong Kong本年一月间我曾去过一回香港，因为跌伤的脚还未全好，不能到街上去闲走，演说一了，匆匆便归，印象淡薄得很，也早已忘却了香港了。今天看见《语丝》一三七期上辰江先生的通信，忽又记得起来，想说几句话来凑热闹。
I went back to Hong Kong once in January this year, because my injured foot was not fully healed, and I couldn't go to the street to walk around. Today I saw Mr. Chenjiang's correspondence in the 137th issue of "Yusi", and suddenly remembered it again and wanted to say a few words to join in the fun.我去讲演的时候，主持其事的人大约很受了许多困难，但我都不大清楚。单知道先是颇遭干涉，中途又有反对者派人索取入场券，收藏起来，使别人不能去听；后来又不许将讲稿登报，经交涉的结果，是削去和改窜了许多。
When I went to give a lecture, the person who presided over the lecture must have suffered a lot, but I didn't know much about it. I know that I was interfered with at first, and in the middle, some opponents sent people to ask for admission tickets and collect them so that others could not listen to them; Later, it was not allowed to publish the speech in the newspaper, and as a result of negotiations, it was cut and changed a lot.然而我的讲演，真是“老生常谈”，而且还是七八年前的“常谈”。
However, my speech is really a "cliché", and it is still a "cliché" seven or eight years ago.从广州往香港时，在船上还亲自遇见一桩笑话。有一个船员，不知怎地，是知道我的名字的，他给我十分担心。他以为我的赴港，说不定会遭谋害；我遥遥地跑到广东来教书，而无端横死，他——广东人之一——也觉得抱歉。于是他忙了一路，替我计画，禁止上陆时如何脱身，到埠捕拿时如何避免。到埠后，既不禁止，也不捕拿，而他还不放心，临别时再三叮嘱，说倘有危险，可以避到什么地方去。
When I traveled from Guangzhou to Hong Kong, I personally encountered a joke on the boat. There was a crew member who, somehow, knew my name, was very worried about me. He thought that if I went to Hong Kong, I might be murdered; I ran to Guangdong to teach, and he died for no reason, and he, one of the Cantonese people, also felt sorry. So he was busy all the way, planning for me how to get out when I was prohibited from landing, and how to avoid it when I went to the port to catch him. After arriving at the port, neither prohibition nor arrest, and he was still not at ease, and when he parted, he repeatedly told him that if there was danger, he could avoid somewhere.我虽然觉得可笑，但我从真心里十分感谢他的好心，记得他的认真的脸相。
Although I think it's ridiculous, I sincerely thank him for his kindness and remember his serious face.三天之后，平安地出了香港了，不过因为攻击国粹，得罪了若干人。现在回想起来，像我们似的人，大危险是大概没有的。不过香港总是一个畏途。这用小事情便可以证明。即如今天的香港《循环日报》上，有这样两条琐事:
Three days later, he left Hong Kong safely, but because of the attack on the quintessence of the country, he offended several people. Looking back now, people like us probably don't have any great dangers. But Hong Kong is always a daunting road. This can be proven by small things. For example, in today's Hong Kong "Circulation Daily", there are two trivial matters:▲陈国被控窃去芜湖街一百五十七号地下布裤一条，昨由史司判笞十二藤云。
Chen Guo was charged with stealing a pair of cloth pants from the basement of 157 Wuhu Street, and was sentenced yesterday by the Historical Division to 12 lashes.▲昨晚夜深，石塘嘴有两西装男子，……遇一英警上前执行搜身。该西装男子用英语对之。该英警不理会，且警以□□□。于是双方缠上警署。……
▲Late last night, there were two men in suits in Shitangzui,...... A British police officer stepped forward to conduct a body search. The man in the suit spoke in English. The British police ignored the meeting and warned that they were □□□. So the two sides got entangled in the police station. ……第一条我们一目了然，知道中国人还在那里被抽藤条。“司”当是“藩司”“臬司”之“司”，是官名；史者，姓也，英国人的。港报上所谓“政府”，“警司”之类，往往是指英国的而言，不看惯的很容易误解，不如上海称为“捕房”之分明。
The first one is clear to us at a glance, knowing that the Chinese are still being drawn there. "Si" should be the "Si" of "Fan Si" and "Jian Si", which is the official name; Historian is a surname, British. The so-called "government" and "superintendent" in Hong Kong newspapers often refer to the United Kingdom, and it is easy to misunderstand if you are not used to it, and it is not as clear as Shanghai calling it a "arrest room".第二条是“搜身”的纠葛，在香港屡见不鲜。但三个方围不知道是甚么。何以要避忌？恐怕不是好的事情。这□□□似乎是因为西装和英语而得的；英警嫌恶这两件:这是主人的言语和服装。颜之推以为学鲜卑语，弹琵琶便可以生存的时代，早已过去了。
The second is the entanglement of "body search", which is not uncommon in Hong Kong. But I don't know what the three square circles are. Why should we avoid taboos? I'm afraid it's not a good thing. The □□□ seems to have been obtained because of the suit and English; The British police hated these two things: these were the words and clothing of the owner. Yan Zhitui thought that the era when learning Xianbei language and playing the pipa could survive has long passed.在香港时遇见一位某君，是受了高等教育的人。他自述曾因受屈，向英官申辩，英官无话可说了，但他还是输。那最末是得到严厉的训斥，道:“总之是你错的:因为我说你错！”
When I was in Hong Kong, I met a certain gentleman, who was a highly educated person. He said that he had defended the British official because he was wronged, and the British official had nothing to say, but he still lost. In the end, he was severely reprimanded, saying, "In short, you are wrong: because I say you are wrong!"带着书籍的人也困难，因为一不小心，会被指为“危险文件”的。这“危险”的界说，我不知其详。总之一有嫌疑，便麻烦了。人先关起来，书去译成英文，译好之后，这才审判。而这“译成英文”的事先就可怕。我记得蒙古人“入主中夏”时，裁判就用翻译。一个和尚去告状追债，而债户商同通事，将他的状子改成自愿焚身了。官说道好；于是这和尚便被推入烈火中。我去讲演的时候也偶然提起元朝，听说颇为“X司”所不悦，他们是的确在研究中国的经史的。
It is also difficult for people with books, because if they are not careful, they will be accused of being "dangerous documents". I don't know the details of this "dangerous" world. In short, if there is suspicion, it will be troublesome. People are locked up first, and the book is translated into English, and then it is judged. And this "translation into English" is terrible in advance. I remember that when the Mongols "entered China", the referees used translations. A monk went to sue to collect debts, and the creditor merchant and the interpreter changed his petition to voluntarily burn himself. The official said yes; So the monk was pushed into the fire. When I went to give a lecture, I also accidentally mentioned the Yuan Dynasty, and I heard that the "X Division" was quite displeased, and they were indeed studying China's classics and history.但讲讲元朝，不但为“政府”的“X司”所不悦，且亦为有些“同胞”所不欢。我早知道不稳当，总要受些报应的。果然，我因为谨避“学者”，搬出中山大学之后，那边的《工商报》上登出来了，说是因为“清党”，已经逃走。后来，则在《循环日报》上，以讲文学为名，提起我的事，说我原是“《晨报副刊》特约撰述员”，现在则“到了汉口”。我知道这种宣传有点危险，意在说我先是研究系的好友，现是共产党的同道，虽不至于“枪终路寝”，益处大概总不会有的，晦气点还可以因此被关起来。便写了一封信去更正:
But talking about the Yuan Dynasty, it was not only disliked by the "X Division" of the "government", but also disliked by some "compatriots". I knew that if I was unstable, I would always suffer some retribution. Sure enough, because I was careful to avoid "scholars", after I moved out of Sun Yat-sen University, the "Industrial and Commercial Daily" over there published it, saying that it was because of the "Qing Party" and had fled. Later, in the "Circulation Daily", in the name of talking about literature, he mentioned my matter, saying that I was originally a "special writer of the "Morning News Supplement", and now I "went to Hankou". I know that this kind of propaganda is a bit dangerous, which means that I was a friend of the research department and now a colleague of the Communist Party. So he wrote a letter to correct it:“在六月十日十一日两天的《循环世界》里，看见徐丹甫先生的一篇《北京文艺界之分门别户》。各人各有他的眼光，心思，手段。他耍他的，我不想来多嘴。但其中有关于我的三点，我自己比较的清楚些，可以请为更正，即:
In the two-day "Circular World" on June 10 and 11, I saw Mr. Xu Danfu's article "The Division of Beijing's Literary and Art Circles". Everyone has their own vision, mind, and means. He plays with him, I don't want to talk too much. But there are three points about me, which I am clearer and can be corrected, namely:“一，我从来没有做过《晨报副刊》的‘特约撰述员’。
"First, I have never been a 'special writer' for the Morning News Supplement.“二，陈大悲被攻击后，我并未停止投稿。
"Second, after Chen Dabei was attacked, I did not stop contributing.“三，我现仍在广州，并没有‘到了汉口’。”
"Third, I am still in Guangzhou and have not 'arrived in Hankou'."从发信之日到今天，算来恰恰一个月，不见登出来。“总之你是这样的:因为我说你是这样”罢。幸而还有内地的《语丝》；否则，“十二藤”，“□□□”，那里去诉苦！
From the date of the letter to today, it has been exactly a month, and it has not been published. "In short, you are like this: because I say you are like this." Fortunately, there is also the mainland's "Yusi"; Otherwise, "Twelve vines", "□□□", go there to complain!我观在还有时记起那一位船上的广东朋友，虽然神经过敏，但怕未必是无病呻吟。他经验多。
I still remember the Guangdong friend on the boat, although he was nervous, but I was afraid that he might not be moaning without illness. He has a lot of experience.若夫“香江”（案:盖香港之雅称）之于国粹，则确是正在大振兴而特振兴。如六月二十五日《循环日报》“昨日下午督宪府茶会”条下，就说:
As for "Hong Kong" (case: the elegant name of Hong Kong), it is indeed undergoing great revitalization and special revitalization. For example, on June 25, the "Circulation Daily" article "Yesterday afternoon's Tea Party at the Constitutional Office" said:“（上略）赖济熙太史即席演说，略谓大学堂汉文专科异常重要，中国旧道德与乎国粹所关，皆不容缓视，若不贯彻进行，深为可惜，（中略）周寿臣爵士亦演说汉文之宜见重于当世，及汉文科学之重要，关系国家与个人之荣辱等语，后督宪以华语演说，略谓华人若不通汉文为第一可惜，若以华人而中英文皆通达，此后中英感情必更融洽，故大学汉文一科，非常重要，未可以等闲视之云云。（下略）”
(omitted) Lai Jixi Taishi impromptu speech, slightly said that the Chinese language major in the university hall is extremely important, China's old morality and the quintessence of the country, are not to be delayed, if not implemented, it is a pity, (omitted) Sir Zhou Shouchen also delivered a speech that Chinese literature should be valued in the world, and the importance of Chinese science, related to the honor and disgrace of the country and individuals, etc., and later the governor gave a speech in Chinese, saying that if the Chinese do not understand Chinese is the first pity, if the Chinese are proficient in both Chinese and English, the relationship between China and Britain will be more harmonious in the future, so the university Chinese subject is very important. It cannot be treated as a matter of course. (omitted)"我又记得还在报上见过一篇“金制军”的关于国粹的演说，用的是广东话，看起来颇费力；又以为这“金制军”是前清遗老，遗老的议论是千篇一律的，便不去理会它了。现在看了辰江先生的通信，才知道这“金制军”原来就是“港督”金文泰，大英国人也。大惊失色，赶紧跳起来去翻旧报。运气，在六月二十八日这张《循环日报》上寻到了。因为这是中国国粹不可不振兴的铁证，也是将来“中国国学振兴史”的贵重史料，所以毫不删节，并请广东朋友校正误字（但末尾的四句集《文选》句，因为不能悬揣“金制军”究竟如何说法，所以不敢妄改），剪贴于下，加以略注，希《语丝》记者以国学前途为重，予以排印，至纫公谊:
I also remember seeing a speech in the newspaper about the quintessence of the "Jin Zhi Jun", which was in Cantonese, which looked quite laborious; I also thought that this "Jin Zhijun" was the old man of the former Qing Dynasty, and the discussion of the old man was the same, so he ignored it. Now that I have read Mr. Chenjiang's correspondence, I know that this "Jinzhi Army" turned out to be the "Hong Kong Governor" Kim Wentai, who is also a great British. Shocked, he quickly jumped up and went to the old newspaper. Luck was found in this "Circulation Daily" on June 28th. Because this is ironclad evidence that China's national essence cannot be revitalized, and it is also a valuable historical material for the future "History of the Revitalization of Chinese Studies", it is not abridged, and Guangdong friends are asked to correct the typos (but the last four sentences of the collection of "Selected Works", because I can't hang on how to say "Jin Zhijun", so I dare not change it), cut and paste below, with a little note, I hope that the reporter of "Yusi" will focus on the future of Chinese studies and typeset it, to Gongyi:▲六月二十四号督辕茶会金制军演说词
▲June 24 Governor's Tea Party Jin Zhijun speech列位先生，提高中文学业，周爵绅，赖太史，今日已经发挥尽致，毋庸我详细再讲咯，我对于呢件事，觉得有三种不能不办嘅原因，而家想同列位谈谈，（第一）系中国人要顾全自己祖国学问呀，香港地方，华人居民，最占多数，香港大学学生，华人子弟，亦系至多，如果在呢间大学，徒然侧重外国科学文字，对于中国历代相传嘅大道宏经，反转当作等闲，视为无足轻重嘅学业，岂唔系一件大憾事吗，所以为香港中国居民打算，为大学中国学生打算，呢一科实在不能不办，（第二）系中国人应该整理国故呀，中国事物文章，原本有极可宝贵嘅价值，不过因为文字过于艰深，所以除哓书香家子弟，同埋天分极高嘅人以外，能够领略其中奥义嘅，实在很少，为呢个原故，近年中国学者，对于（整理国故）嘅声调已经越唱越高，香港地方，同中国大陆相离，仅仅隔一衣带水，如果今日所提倡嘅中国学科，能够设立完全，将来集合一班大学问嘅人，将向来所有困难，一一加以整理，为后生学者，开条轻便嘅路途，岂唔系极安慰嘅事咩，所以为中国发扬国光计，呢一科更不能不办，（第三）就系令中国道德学问，普及世界呀，中国通商以来，华人学习语言文字，成通材嘅，虽然项背相望，但系外国人精通汉学，同埋中国人精通外国科学，能够用中国言语文字翻译介绍各国高深学术嘅，仍然系好少，呢的岂系因外国人，同中国外洋留学生，唔愿学华国文章，不过因中国文字语言，未曾用科学方法整理完备，令到呢两班人，抱一类（可望而不可即）之叹啫，如果港大（华文学系）得到成立健全，就从前所有困难，都可以由呢处逐渐解免，个时中外求学之士，一定多列门墙，争自濯磨，中外感情，自然更加浓浃，唔哙有乜野隔膜咯，所以为中国学问及世界打算，呢一科亦不能不办，列位先生，我记得十几年前有一班中国外洋留学生，因为想研精中国学问，也曾出过一份（汉风杂志），个份杂志，书面题辞，有四句集文选句，十分动人嘅，我愿借嚟贡献过列位，而且望列位实行个四句题辞嘅意思，对于（香港大学文科，华文系）赞襄尽力，务底于成，个四句题辞话，（怀旧之蓄念，发思古之幽情，光祖宗之玄灵，大汉之发天声，）
Ladies and gentlemen, improve your Chinese studies, Zhou Jueshen, Lai Taishi, have been fully utilized today, there is no need for me to go into detail, I think there are three reasons why I cannot do anything about this matter, and now I want to talk to you, (first) Chinese people should take care of their own motherland's knowledge, Hong Kong place, Chinese residents, the majority, Hong Kong University students, Chinese children, at most, if in this university, it is futile to focus on foreign scientific texts, and for the grand scriptures passed down in China through generations, the reversal is regarded as equal. Isn't it a big regret to regard it as an insignificant study, so for the Chinese residents of Hong Kong, for the Chinese students of the university, this subject really can't be ignored, (second) the Chinese should sort out the national history, Chinese things articles, originally have great value, but because the text is too difficult, so except for the children of scholars and extremely talented people, there are really very few who can appreciate the mystery, for this reason, in recent years, Chinese scholars have sung higher and higher for (sorting out national history). Hong Kong, separated from Chinese mainland, is only separated by water, if the Chinese discipline advocated today can be completely established, and in the future, a group of people who will gather from the university will sort out all the difficulties that have always been present, one by one, and open a light path for young scholars, wouldn't it be extremely comforting, so for China to carry forward the national glory, this subject must be done, (third) to make Chinese morality popularize the world, since China's trade, the Chinese have learned language and writing, and they have become general, although they are back-to-back. However, there are still very few foreigners who are proficient in Sinology, and Chinese who are proficient in foreign sciences and can translate and introduce advanced scholarship from various countries in Chinese language. There must be more doors and walls, competing for self-cleaning, Chinese and foreign feelings, naturally stronger, there is no such thing as a barrier, so for Chinese learning and the world, this subject cannot be left out, gentlemen, I remember that more than ten years ago, there was a group of Chinese foreign students, because they wanted to study Chinese studies, and they also published a (Hanfeng magazine), individual magazines, written inscriptions, there are four sentences of selected sentences, very moving, I am willing to borrow it to contribute to the ranks, and I hope that the columns will implement the meaning of the four sentences of the inscription, for (the University of Hong Kong Liberal Arts, Chinese Department) praises Xiang for his best efforts, and the bottom is to succeed, four sentences of inscription, (nostalgic thoughts, thoughts of ancient feelings, the mysterious spirit of the ancestors, and the voice of the Han Dynasty,)略注:
Brief Note:这里的括弧，间亦以代曲钩之用。爵绅盖有爵的绅士，不知其详。呢＝这。而家＝而今。嘅＝的。系＝是。唔＝无，不。哓＝了。同埋＝和。咩＝呢。啫＝呵。唔哙有乜野＝不会有什么。嚟＝来。过＝给。话＝说。
The parentheses here are sometimes used to replace curved hooks. The noble gentleman is a gentleman with a title, but the details are unknown. What = this. Now = now. of = of . Yes = Yes. No = no, no. Wow = done. And = and. What = what. Just = huh. Something=nothing. Come = come. Pass = give. words = words.注毕不免又要发感慨了。《汉风杂志》我没有拜读过；但我记得一点旧事。前清光绪末年，我在日本东京留学，亲自看见的。那时的留学生中，很有一部分抱着革命的思想，而所谓革命者，其实是种族革命，要将土地从异族的手里取得，归还旧主人。除实行的之外，有些人是办报，有些人是钞旧书。所钞的大抵是中国所没有的禁书，所讲的大概是明末清初的情形，可以使青年猛省的。久之印成了一本书，因为是《湖北学生界》的特刊，所以名曰《汉声》，那封面上就题着四句古语:摅怀旧之蓄念，发思古之幽情，光祖宗之玄灵，振大汉之天声！
After the note, I can't help but sigh again. I have not read "Hanfeng Magazine"; But I remember a little bit of old things. At the end of the Guangxu period of the former Qing Dynasty, I studied in Tokyo, Japan, and saw it with my own eyes. At that time, a large part of the international students held revolutionary ideas, and the so-called revolutionaries were actually racial revolutions, who wanted to take land from foreign races and return it to their old masters. In addition to the practice, some people run newspapers, and some people are old books. Most of the banknotes are banned books that China does not have, and what they are talking about is probably the situation in the late Ming and early Qing dynasties, which can make young people save a lot. After a long time, it was printed into a book, because it was a special issue of "Hubei Student Circle", so it was called "Hansheng", and the cover was inscribed with four ancient sayings: nostalgic thoughts, thinking about the deep feelings of the ancients, glorifying the mysterious spirit of the ancestors, and revitalizing the heavenly voice of the Han Dynasty!这是明明白白，叫我们想想汉族繁荣时代，和现状比较一下，看是如何，——必须“光复旧物”。说得露骨些，就是“排满”；推而广之，就是“排外”。不料二十年后，竟变成在香港大学保存国粹，而使“中外感情，自然更加浓浃”的标语了。我实在想不到这四句“集《文选》句”，竟也会被外国人所引用。
This is clear, asking us to think about the era of Han prosperity and compare it with the current situation to see how ,—— must "restore the old things". To put it more explicitly, it is "full"; By extension, it is "xenophobia". Unexpectedly, twenty years later, it became the slogan of preserving the essence of the country at the University of Hong Kong, making "Chinese and foreign feelings naturally stronger". I really didn't expect that these four sentences of "Selected Writings" would also be quoted by foreigners.这样的感慨，在现今的中国，发起来是可以发不完的。还不如讲点有趣的事做收梢，算是“余兴”。从予先生在《一般》杂志（目录上说是独逸）上批评我的小说道:“作者的笔锋……并且颇多诙谐的意味，所以有许多小说，人家看了，只觉得发松可笑。换言之，即因为此故，至少是使读者减却了不少对人生的认识。”悲夫，这“只觉得”也！但我也确有这种的毛病，什么事都不能正正经经。便是感慨，也不肯一直发到底。只是我也自有我的苦衷。因为整年的发感慨，倘是假的，岂非无聊？倘真，则我早已感愤而死了，那里还有议论。我想，活着而想称“烈士”，究竟是不容易的。
Such feelings can be endlessly expressed in today's China. It's better to talk about something interesting to finish off, which can be regarded as "afterfun". Mr. Yu criticized my novel in "General" magazine (the catalog says it is unique): "The author's pen is sharp...... And there are a lot of humorous meanings, so there are many novels, and people only feel ridiculous when they read them. In other words, because of this, at least the reader has reduced a lot of understanding of life. "Sad man, this "only feels" too! But I do have this problem, I can't take anything seriously. Even if he is emotional, he refuses to send it to the end. It's just that I have my own difficulties. Because of the emotion of the whole year, if it is fake, isn't it boring? If it is true, then I would have died of anger, and there is still discussion there. I think it is not easy to live and want to be called a "martyr".我以为有趣，想要介绍的也不过是一个广告。港报上颇多特别的广告，而这一个最奇。我第一天看《循环日报》，便在第一版上看见的了，此后每天必见，我每见必要想一想，而直到今天终于想不通是怎么一回事：
I thought it was interesting, but what I wanted to introduce was nothing more than an advertisement. There are many special advertisements in Hong Kong newspapers, and this one is the most strange. I read the "Circulation Daily" on the first day, and I saw it on the first page, and I have to see it every day since then, and I have to think about it every time I see it, and until today I finally can't figure out what is going on:
香港城余蕙卖文
Hong Kong City Yu Hui sells literature人和旅店余蕙屏联榜幅发售
People and hotels Yu Huiping joint list for sale香港对联　香港七律
Hong Kong couplets Seven laws of Hong Kong香港七绝　青山七律
Hong Kong's Seven Wonders and the Seven Laws of Green Mountains荻海对联　荻海七绝
Dihai couplet Dihai Seven Absolutes花地七绝　花地七律
Seven absolutes of flower land Seven laws of flower land日本七绝　圣经五绝
Seven wonders of Japan Five wonders of the Bible英皇七绝　英太子诗
The Seven Wonders of the Emperor The Poem of the British Prince戏子七绝　广昌对联
Seven unique Guangchang couplets三金六十员
Three golds and sixty members五金五十员
There are 50 hardware七金四十员
Seven golds and forty people屏条加倍
The screen strip is doubled人和旅店主人谨启
People and innkeepers are respectfully advised小店在香港上环海傍门牌一百一十八号
The shop is located at 118 Waterfront in Sheung Wan, Hong Kong
七月十一日，于广州东堤。
July 11 at the East Dike in Guangzhou.

读书杂谈　——七月十六日在广州知用中学讲

读书杂谈Reading and Miscellaneous Talk ——七月十六日在广州知用中学讲 - Lecture at Guangzhou Zhiyong Middle School on July 16
因为知用中学的先生们希望我来演讲一回，所以今天到这里和诸君相见。不过我也没有什么东西可讲。忽而想到学校是读书的所在，就随便谈谈读书。是我个人的意见，姑且供诸君的参考，其实也算不得什么演讲。
Because the gentlemen of Zhiyong Middle School want me to give a speech, I am here to meet you today. But I don't have anything to say. Suddenly I thought that school was where reading was placed, so I just talked about reading. It is my personal opinion, for your reference, in fact, it is not a speech.说到读书，似乎是很明白的事，只要拿书来读就是了，但是并不这样简单。至少，就有两种：一是职业的读书，一是嗜好的读书。所谓职业的读书者，譬如学生因为升学，教员因为要讲功课，不翻翻书，就有些危险的就是。我想在坐的诸君之中一定有些这样的经验，有的不喜欢算学，有的不喜欢博物，然而不得不学，否则，不能毕业，不能升学，和将来的生计便有妨碍了。我自己也这样，因为做教员，有时即非看不喜欢看的书不可，要不这样，怕不久便会于饭碗有妨。我们习惯了，一说起读书，就觉得是高尚的事情，其实这样的读书，和木匠的磨斧头，裁缝的理针线并没有什么分别，并不见得高尚，有时还很苦痛，很可怜。你爱做的事，偏不给你做，你不爱做的，倒非做不可。这是由于职业和嗜好不能合一而来的。倘能够大家去做爱做的事，而仍然各有饭吃，那是多么幸福。但现在的社会上还做不到，所以读书的人们的最大部分，大概是勉勉强强的，带着苦痛的为职业的读书。
When it comes to reading, it seems to be very clear, as long as you take a book to read, but it is not that simple. At least, there are two kinds: one is professional reading, and the other is hobby reading. The so-called professional readers, such as students because they go on to higher education, and teachers do not turn books because they have to do their homework, which is a bit dangerous. I think some of you must have had this experience, some don't like arithmetic, some don't like natural history, but they have to learn, otherwise, they can't graduate, they can't go on to higher education, and their future livelihood will be hindered. I am like this myself, because as a teacher, sometimes I have to read books that I don't like, otherwise I am afraid that it will soon be a hindrance to my job. We are used to it, when we talk about reading, we think it is a noble thing, in fact, this kind of reading is no different from a carpenter's sharpening of an axe or a tailor's needle and thread, it is not necessarily noble, sometimes it is very painful, very pitiful. What you love to do, but not for you, what you don't like to do, you have to do it. This is due to the fact that professions and hobbies cannot be united. How happy it would be if everyone could do what they love and still have their own food. But it is not possible in today's society, so the biggest part of people who read are probably reluctantly and painfully reading for their careers.现在再讲嗜好的读书罢。那是出于自愿，全不勉强，离开了利害关系的。——我想，嗜好的读书，该如爱打牌的一样，天天打，夜夜打，连续的去打，有时被公安局捉去了，放出来之后还是打。诸君要知道真打牌的人的目的并不在赢钱，而在有趣。牌有怎样的有趣呢，我是外行，不大明白。但听得爱赌的人说，它妙在一张一张的摸起来，永远变化无穷。我想，凡嗜好的读书，能够手不释卷的原因也就是这样。他在每一叶每一叶里，都得着深厚的趣味。自然，也可以扩大精神，增加智识的，但这些倒都不计及，一计及，便等于意在赢钱的博徒了，这在博徒之中，也算是下品。
Now let's talk about reading as a hobby. It was voluntary, not forced, and left the stakes. ——I think that reading as a hobby should be like a person who loves to play cards, playing every day, night at night, and continuously. You must know that the purpose of real card players is not to win money, but to have fun. What kind of fun is the card, I am a layman and don't understand it. But I heard people who love gambling say that the beauty of it is that it is touched one by one, and it is always changing. I think this is the reason why anyone who likes to read can never put down the book. In every leaf, he gets a deep interest. Naturally, you can also expand your spirit and increase your intellect, but these are not taken into account, and once you take them into account, they are equivalent to gamblers who intend to win, which is also considered inferior among gamblers.不过我的意思，并非说诸君应该都退了学，去看自己喜欢看的书去，这样的时候还没有到来；也许终于不会到，至多，将来可以设法使人们对于非做不可的事发生较多的兴味罢了。我现在是说，爱看书的青年，大可以看看本分以外的书，即课外的书，不要只将课内的书抱住。但请不要误解，我并非说，譬如在国文讲堂上，应该在抽屉里暗看《红楼梦》之类；乃是说，应做的功课已完而有余暇，大可以看看各样的书，即使和本业毫不相干的，也要泛览。譬如学理科的，偏看看文学书，学文学的，偏看看科学书，看看别个在那里研究的，究竟是怎么一回事。这样子，对于别人，别事，可以有更深的了解。现在中国有一个大毛病，就是人们大概以为自己所学的一门是最好，最妙，最要紧的学问，而别的都无用，都不足道的，弄这些不足道的东西的人，将来该当饿死。其实是，世界还没有如此简单，学问都各有用处，要定什么是头等还很难。也幸而有各式各样的人，假如世界上全是文学家，到处所讲的不是“文学的分类”便是“诗之构造”，那倒反而无聊得很了。
But what I mean is that you should all drop out of school and go to read your favorite books, because the time has not yet come; It may not come in the end, at most, in the future we can try to make people more interested in what they have to do. I am now saying that young people who love to read can read books outside of their duty, that is, books outside of class, and not just hold on to books in class. But please don't get me wrong, I'm not saying, for example, in the Chinese lecture hall, you should secretly read "Dream of Red Mansions" in the drawer; It means that when the homework that should be done is completed and there is leisure, you can read all kinds of books, even if they have nothing to do with your own business. For example, those who study science look at literature books, those who study literature, and those who study science books look at other people who study there. In this way, you can have a deeper understanding of others and other things. Now there is a big problem in China, that is, people probably think that what they have learned is the best, the best, and the most important knowledge, while nothing else is useless and useless. In fact, the world is not so simple, knowledge is useful, and it is difficult to determine what is first-class. Fortunately, there are all kinds of people, if the world is full of writers, and it is not "the classification of literature" or "the structure of poetry" everywhere, it will be very boring.不过以上所说的，是附带而得的效果，嗜好的读书，本人自然并不计及那些，就如游公园似的，随随便便去，因为随随便便，所以不吃力，因为不吃力，所以会觉得有趣。如果一本书拿到手，就满心想道，“我在读书了！”“我在用功了！”那就容易疲劳，因而减掉兴味，或者变成苦事了。
However, what is said above is an incidental effect, hobby reading, I naturally don't take into account those, just like visiting a park, just go casually, because it's casual, so it's not difficult, because it's not hard, so it will be interesting. If you get a book, you will be full of thoughts, "I'm reading!" "I'm working hard!" Then it is easy to get tired, so it loses interest or becomes a hard work.我看现在的青年，为兴味的读书的是有的，我也常常遇到各样的询问。此刻就将我所想到的说一点，但是只限于文学方面，因为我不明白其他的。
I see that there are young people today who read for interest, and I often encounter all kinds of inquiries. At this moment, I will say a little bit of what I think, but only in terms of literature, because I don't understand anything else.第一，是往往分不清文学和文章。甚至于已经来动手做批评文章的，也免不了这毛病。其实粗粗的说，这是容易分别的。研究文章的历史或理论的，是文学家，是学者；做做诗，或戏曲小说的，是做文章的人，就是古时候所谓文人，此刻所谓创作家。创作家不妨毫不理会文学史或理论，文学家也不妨做不出一句诗。然而中国社会上还很误解，你做几篇小说，便以为你一定懂得小说概论，做几句新诗，就要你讲诗之原理。我也尝见想做小说的青年，先买小说法程和文学史来看。据我看来，是即使将这些书看烂了，和创作也没有什么关系的。
First, it is often difficult to distinguish between literature and literature. Even those who have already come to do critical articles are inevitable to this problem. In fact, roughly speaking, this is easy to distinguish. those who study the history or theory of articles are writers and scholars; Those who write poetry or opera novels are the people who make articles, the so-called literati in ancient times, and the so-called creators at this moment. Creators may wish to ignore literary history or theory, and writers may not be able to write a single poem. However, there is still a misunderstanding in Chinese society, you make a few novels, you think you must understand the introduction to novels, and if you make a few new poems, you will be asked to talk about the principles of poetry. I have also seen young people who want to write novels, and first buy novels and literary history to read. In my opinion, even if you read these books badly, it has nothing to do with creation.事实上，现在有几个做文章的人，有时也确去做教授。但这是因为中国创作不值钱，养不活自己的缘故。听说美国小名家的一篇中篇小说，时价是二千美金；中国呢，别人我不知道，我自己的短篇寄给大书铺，每篇卖过二十元。当然要寻别的事，例如教书，讲文学。研究是要用理智，要冷静的，而创作须情感，至少总得发点热，于是忽冷忽热，弄得头昏，——这也是职业和嗜好不能合一的苦处。苦倒也罢了，结果还是什么都弄不好。那证据，是试翻世界文学史，那里面的人，几乎没有兼做教授的。
In fact, there are a few people who make articles now, and sometimes they do become professors. But this is because Chinese creation is worthless and cannot support itself. I heard that a novella by a famous American artist is priced at $2,000; What about China, I don't know others, my own short stories are sent to big bookstores, and each one sells for 20 yuan. Of course, you have to look for other things, such as teaching and teaching literature. Research is to use reason and calmness, and creation must be emotional, at least it must be a little hot, so it is hot and cold, making you dizzy,—— which is also the pain of not being able to unite professions and hobbies. It's just bitter, but I can't get anything right. The evidence is to try to read the history of world literature, and there are almost no people who are also professors.还有一种坏处，是一做教员，未免有顾忌；教授有教授的架子，不能畅所欲言。这或者有人要反驳：那么，你畅所欲言就是了，何必如此小心。然而这是事前的风凉话，一到有事，不知不觉地他也要从众来攻击的。而教授自身，纵使自以为怎样放达，下意识里总不免有架子在。所以在外国，称为“教授小说”的东西倒并不少，但是不大有人说好，至少，是总难免有令人发烦的炫学的地方。
Another disadvantage is that once you become a teacher, you will inevitably have scruples; The professor has the shelf of a professor and cannot speak freely. This may be something that someone wants to refute: then, you can just speak freely, why be so careful. However, this is a sarcastic remark in advance, and when something happens, he will unknowingly attack from the crowd. And the professor himself, no matter how he thinks he is open, subconsciously there will always be a shelf. Therefore, in foreign countries, there are not many things called "professor novels", but not many people say that it is good, at least, there are always annoying places to show off their learning.所以我想，研究文学是一件事，做文章又是一件事。
So I think studying literature is one thing, and writing articles is another.第二，我常被询问：要弄文学，应该看什么书？这实在是一个极难回答的问题。先前也曾有几位先生给青年开过一大篇书目。但从我看来，这是没有什么用处的，因为我觉得那都是开书目的先生自己想要看或者未必想要看的书目。我以为倘要弄旧的呢，倒不如姑且靠着张之洞的《书目答问》去摸门径去。倘是新的，研究文学，则自己先看看各种的小本子，如本间久雄的《新文学概论》，厨川白村的《苦闷的象征》，瓦浪斯基们的《苏俄的文艺论战》之类，然后自己再想想，再博览下去。因为文学的理论不像算学，二二一定得四，所以议论很纷歧。如第三种，便是俄国的两派的争论，——我附带说一句，近来听说连俄国的小说也不大有人看了，似乎一看见“俄”字就吃惊，其实苏俄的新创作何尝有人绍介，此刻译出的几本，都是革命前的作品，作者在那边都已经被看作反革命的了。倘要看看文艺作品呢，则先看几种名家的选本，从中觉得谁的作品自己最爱看，然后再看这一个作者的专集，然后再从文学史上看看他在史上的位置；倘要知道得更详细，就看一两本这人的传记，那便可以大略了解了。如果专是请教别人，则各人的嗜好不同，总是格不相入的。
Second, I am often asked: What books should I read if I want to get literature? This is a very difficult question to answer. Several gentlemen have also opened a large bibliography to young people before. But from my point of view, this is useless, because I think they are all bibliographies that the teacher who opened the bibliography wants to read or may not want to read. I thought that if I wanted to get an old one, it would be better to rely on Zhang Zhidong's "Bibliographic Q&A" to find the door. If it is new and studies literature, you should first read various small books, such as Hisao Honma's "Introduction to New Literature", Kurukawa Shiramura's "Symbol of Distress", Wallansky's "Literary and Art Debate in Soviet Russia", etc., and then think about it yourself and then read it again. Because the theory of literature is not like arithmetic, two two must be four, so the discussion is very diverse. As for the third type, it is the dispute between the two factions in Russia,—— I will add that recently I heard that even Russian novels are not read by many people, and it seems that they are surprised when they see the word "Russia". If you want to look at literary and artistic works, you should first look at the selections of several famous writers, from which you think whose work you like the most, then read the special collection of this author, and then look at his position in history from the history of literature; If you want to know more details, just read one or two biographies of this person, then you can get a rough understanding. If you only ask others for advice, then everyone's hobbies are different and always incompatible.第三，说几句关于批评的事。现在因为出版物太多了，——其实有什么呢，而读者因为不胜其纷纭，便渴望批评，于是批评家也便应运而起。批评这东西，对于读者，至少对于和这批评家趣旨相近的读者，是有用的。但中国现在，似乎应该暂作别论。往往有人误以为批评家对于创作是操生杀之权，占文坛的最高位的，就忽而变成批评家；他的灵魂上挂了刀。但是怕自己的立论不周密，便主张主观，有时怕自己的观察别人不看重，又主张客观；有时说自己的作文的根柢全是同情，有时将校对者骂得一文不值。凡中国的批评文字，我总是越看越胡涂，如果当真，就要无路可走。印度人是早知道的，有一个很普通的比喻。他们说：一个老翁和一个孩子用一匹驴子驮着货物去出卖，货卖去了，孩子骑驴回来，老翁跟着走。但路人责备他了，说是不晓事，叫老年人徒步。他们便换了一个地位，而旁人又说老人忍心；老人忙将孩子抱到鞍鞒上，后来看见的人却说他们残酷；于是都下来，走了不久，可又有人笑他们了，说他们是呆子，空着现成的驴子却不骑。于是老人对孩子叹息道，我们只剩了一个办法了，是我们两人抬着驴子走。无论读，无论做，倘若旁征博访，结果是往往会弄到抬驴子走的。
Third, say a few words about criticism. Now because there are too many publications,—— what is actually there, and readers are eager to criticize because they are overwhelmed, so critics have emerged. Criticism is useful for readers, at least for readers who are similar to the critic's purpose. But now, it seems that China should put aside the discussion for a while. Often some people mistakenly think that critics have the right to control life and death for creation, and those who occupy the highest position in the literary world suddenly become critics; A knife hung on his soul. but they are afraid that their own arguments are not thorough, so they advocate subjectivity, and sometimes they are afraid that others will not value their own observations, and they advocate objectivity; Sometimes he says that his composition is all sympathy, and sometimes he scolds the proofreader as worthless. The more I read Chinese criticism, the more nonsense I get, and if I take it seriously, I will have no way out. Indians have long known that there is a very common metaphor. They said: An old man and a child used a donkey to carry the goods to sell, the goods were sold, the child rode back on a donkey, and the old man followed. But passers-by blamed him, saying that he didn't know what was going on, and asked the elderly to hike. They changed their status, and others said that the old man was patient; The old man hurriedly carried the child to the saddle, but the people who saw it later said that they were cruel; So they all came down and walked for a while, but some people laughed at them again, saying that they were fools, and they didn't ride empty ready-made donkeys. So the old man sighed to the child and said, we only have one way left, which is for the two of us to carry the donkey. No matter how you read or do, if you look around, the result is often to carry a donkey.不过我并非要大家不看批评，不过说看了之后，仍要看看本书，自己思索，自己做主。看别的书也一样，仍要自己思索，自己观察。倘只看书，便变成书厨，即使自己觉得有趣，而那趣味其实是已在逐渐硬化，逐渐死去了。我先前反对青年躲进研究室，也就是这意思，至今有些学者，还将这话算作我的一条罪状哩。
However, I don't want everyone to stop reading criticism, but after reading it, they still have to read this book, think for themselves, and make their own decisions. The same goes for reading other books, you still have to think and observe by yourself. If you only read books, you will become a book chef, even if you find it interesting, but that interest is actually gradually hardening and gradually dying. I used to oppose young people hiding in the research room, which is what it means, and some scholars still count this as one of my crimes.听说英国的培那特萧（Bernard Shaw），有过这样意思的话：世间最不行的是读书者。因为他只能看别人的思想艺术，不用自己。这也就是勖本华尔（Schopenhauer）之所谓脑子里给别人跑马。较好的是思索者。因为能用自己的生活力了，但还不免是空想，所以更好的是观察者，他用自己的眼睛去读世间这一部活书。
I heard that Bernard Shaw in England once said this: The worst thing in the world is a reader. Because he can only look at other people's thoughts and art, not himself. This is what Schopenhauer called running horses for others in his head. The better ones are thinkers. Because he can use his own life force, but it is inevitable that it is a fantasy, so it is better to be an observer, who uses his own eyes to read this living book in the world.这是的确的，实地经验总比看，听，空想确凿。我先前吃过干荔支，罐头荔支，陈年荔支，并且由这些推想过新鲜的好荔支。这回吃过了，和我所猜想的不同，非到广东来吃就永不会知道。但我对于萧的所说，还要加一点骑墙的议论。萧是爱尔兰人，立论也不免有些偏激的。我以为假如从广东乡下找一个没有历练的人，叫他从上海到北京或者什么地方，然后问他观察所得，我恐怕是很有限的，因为他没有练习过观察力。所以要观察，还是先要经过思索和读书。
This is true, field experience is better than seeing, listening, and fantasizing. I have eaten dried lychees, canned lychees, and aged lychees before, and I have inferred from these that fresh and good lychees. I ate it this time, and unlike what I guessed, I would never know if I didn't come to Guangdong to eat it. But what I said about Xiao also adds a little discussion about riding the wall. Xiao is Irish, and his arguments are inevitably a bit extreme. I thought that if I found an inexperienced person from the countryside of Guangdong, asked him to go from Shanghai to Beijing or somewhere, and asked him what he had observed, I was afraid that it would be very limited, because he had not practiced observation. So to observe, you still have to think and read first.总之，我的意思是很简单的：我们自动的读书，即嗜好的读书，请教别人是大抵无用，只好先行泛览，然后决择而入于自己所爱的较专的一门或几门；但专读书也有弊病，所以必须和实社会接触，使所读的书活起来。
In short, what I mean is very simple: it is almost useless for us to read automatically, that is, to read books as a hobby, and then decide to enter one or several more specialized courses that we love; However, there are also drawbacks to reading exclusively, so we must contact the real society to make the books we read come alive.

通信

通信

通信

correspondence小峰兄：
Brother Xiaofeng:收到了几期《语丝》，看见有《鲁迅在广东》的一个广告，说是我的言论之类，都收集在内。后来的另一广告上，却变成“鲁迅著”了。我以为这不大好。
I received several issues of "Yusi" and saw an advertisement for "Lu Xun in Guangdong", saying that my remarks were collected. Later, in another advertisement, it became "Lu Xun". I thought it wasn't good.我到中山大学的本意，原不过是教书。然而有些青年大开其欢迎会。我知道不妙，所以首先第一回演说，就声明我不是什么“战士”，“革命家”。倘若是的，就应该在北京，厦门奋斗；但我躲到“革命后方”的广州来了，这就是并非“战士”的证据。
My original intention of coming to Sun Yat-sen University was just to teach. However, some young people held a welcome party. I knew it was not good, so I first stated that I was not a "soldier" or "revolutionary" in my first speech. If so, we should strive in Beijing and Xiamen; But I hid in Guangzhou, which was "behind the revolution", which is evidence that I am not a "soldier".不料主席的某先生——他那时是委员——接着演说，说这是我太谦虚，就我过去的事实看来，确是一个战斗者，革命者。于是礼堂上劈劈拍拍一阵拍手，我的“战士”便做定了。拍手之后，大家都已走散，再向谁去推辞？我只好咬着牙关，背了“战士”的招牌走进房里去，想到敝同乡秋瑾姑娘，就是被这种劈劈拍拍的拍手拍死的。我莫非也非“阵亡”不可么？
Unexpectedly, a certain gentleman of the chairman, who was a member of the committee at that time, went on to speak and said that I was too modest, and that I was indeed a fighter, a revolutionary, from the facts of my past. So there was a clapping of hands in the auditorium, and my "warrior" was decided. After clapping their hands, everyone has been separated, who can I refuse? I had no choice but to grit my teeth, carry the "Warrior" sign and walk into the room, thinking that my fellow townsman Qiu Jin girl was slapped to death by this kind of splitting and slapping. Am I also "killed"?没有法子，姑且由它去罢。然而苦矣！访问的，研究的，谈文学的，侦探思想的，要做序，题签的，请演说的，闹得个不亦乐乎。我尤其怕的是演说，因为它有指定的时候，不听拖延。临时到来一班青年，连劝带逼，将你绑了出去。而所说的话是大概有一定的题目的。命题作文，我最不擅长。否则，我在清朝不早进了秀才了么？然而不得已，也只好起承转合，上台去说几句。但我自有定例：至多以十分钟为限。可是心里还是不舒服，事前事后，我常常对熟人叹息说：不料我竟到“革命的策源地”来做洋八股了。
There is no way, let it go. However, it is bitter! Interviews, research, literature, detective thoughts, prefaces, titles, and speeches, all made a lot of noise. I am especially afraid of speech, because it has a designated time and does not listen to delays. A group of young people came temporarily, persuaded and forced, and tied you out. And what is said is probably a certain topic. Proposition composition, I am the least good at it. Otherwise, wouldn't I have entered the scholar earlier in the Qing Dynasty? However, as a last resort, I had no choice but to turn around and go on stage to say a few words. But I have my own rules: at most ten minutes. But I still felt uncomfortable, and before and after, I often sighed to my acquaintances and said: Unexpectedly, I went to the "source of the revolution" to do foreign eight shares.还有一层，我凡有东西发表，无论讲义，演说，是必须自己看过的。但那时太忙，有时不但稿子没有看，连印出了之后也没有看。这回变成书了，我也今天才知道，而终于不明白究竟是怎么一回事，里面是怎样的东西。现在我也不想拿什么费话来捣乱，但以我们多年的交情，希望你最好允许我实行下列三样——
There is also a layer that whenever I publish something, whether it is a handout or a speech, I must read it myself. But I was too busy at that time, and sometimes I didn't read the manuscript, but I didn't even read it after it was printed. This time it became a book, and I only found out today, but I finally didn't understand what was going on and what was inside. Now I don't want to make trouble with anything, but with our years of friendship, I hope you better allow me to do the following three things -一，将书中的我的演说，文章等都删去。
First, delete my speeches, articles, etc. in the book.二，将广告上的著者的署名改正。
2. Correct the author's signature on the advertisement.三，将这信在《语丝》上发表。
Third, publish this letter in "Yusi".这样一来，就只剩了别人所编的别人的文章，我当然心安理得，无话可说了。但是，还有一层，看了《鲁迅在广东》，是不足以很知道鲁迅之在广东的。我想，要后面再加上几十页白纸，才可以称为“鲁迅在广东”。
In this way, there are only other people's articles edited by others, and of course I feel at ease and have nothing to say. However, there is another layer, after reading "Lu Xun in Guangdong", it is not enough to know Lu Xun in Guangdong. I think that dozens of pages of white paper must be added to the back to be called "Lu Xun in Guangdong".回想起我这一年的境遇来，有时实在觉得有味。在厦门，是到时静悄悄，后来大热闹；在广东，是到时大热闹，后来静悄悄。肚大两头尖，像一个橄榄。我如有作品，题这名目是最好的，可惜被郭沫若先生占先用去了。但好在我也没有作品。
Looking back on my situation this year, sometimes I feel really interesting. In Xiamen, it was quiet at that time, and then it was very lively; In Guangdong, it was very lively at that time, and then it was quiet. The belly is large and pointed at both ends, like an olive. If I have a work, the title is the best, but unfortunately it was used by Mr. Guo Moruo first. But fortunately, I don't have any works either.至于那时关于我的文字，大概是多的罢。我还记得每有一篇登出，某教授便魂不附体似的对我说道：“又在恭维你了！看见了么？”我总点点头，说，“看见了。”谈下去，他照例说，“在西洋，文学是只有女人看的。”我也点点头，说，“大概是的罢。”心里却想： 战士和革命者的虚衔，大约不久就要革掉了罢。
As for the words about me at that time, there were probably a lot of them. I still remember that every time an article was published, a professor said to me as if he was not possessed: "I'm complimenting you again!" Did you see it? I always nodded and said, "I saw it." As he continued, he said, "In the West, literature is only read by women. I nodded and said, "Probably yes." But I thought in my heart: The false titles of soldiers and revolutionaries will be abolished soon.照那时的形势看来，实在也足令认明了我的“纸糊的假冠”的才子们生气。但那形势是另有缘故的，以非急切，姑且不谈。现在所要说的，只是报上所表见的，乃是一时的情形；此刻早没有假冠了，可惜报上并不记载。但我在广东的鲁迅自己，是知道的，所以写一点出来，给憎恶我的先生们平平心——
According to the situation at that time, it was really enough to make the talents who recognized my "papier-mâché fake crown" angry. But there is another reason for that situation, so let's not talk about it because it is not urgent. What I want to say now is only what is shown in the newspaper, but it is a temporary situation; At this moment, there are no fake crowns, but unfortunately they are not recorded in the newspaper. But Lu Xun himself in Guangdong knows it, so I write a little about it to calm down the gentlemen who hate me -一，“战斗”和“革命”，先前几乎有修改为“捣乱”的趋势，现在大约可以免了。但旧衔似乎已经革去。
First, "fighting" and "revolution", which had almost been revised to "make trouble" before, can now be almost avoided. But the old title seems to have been abolished.二，要我做序的书，已经托故取回。期刊上的我的题签，已经撤换。
Second, the book that asked me to write a preface has been retrieved under the pretext. My title in the journal has been replaced.三，报上说我已经逃走，或者说我到汉口去了。写信去更正，就没收。
Third, the newspaper said that I had escaped, or that I had gone to Hankou. Write to correct it, and it will be confiscated.四，有一种报上，竭力不使它有“鲁迅”两字出现，这是由比较两种报上的同一记事而知道的。
Fourth, there is a kind of newspaper that tries its best not to have the word "Lu Xun" appear, which is known by comparing the same account in the two newspapers.五，一种报上，已给我另定了一种头衔，曰：杂感家。评论是“特长即在他的尖锐的笔调，此外别无可称。”然而他希望我们和《现代评论》合作。为什么呢？他说：“因为我们细考两派文章思想，初无什么大别。”（此刻我才知道，这篇文章是转录上海的《学灯》的。原来如此，无怪其然。写完之后，追注。）
Fifth, a newspaper has given me another title, namely: Miscellaneous Sensors. The comment is "the specialty is his sharp tone, and there is nothing else to be praised." "However, he wants us to work with Modern Review. Why? He said: "Because we carefully examined the ideas of the two schools of writing, there was no big difference at first. (At this moment, I learned that this article was transcribed from Shanghai's "Learning Lanterns".) So that's the case, no wonder. After writing, add a note. ）六，一个学者，已经说是我的文字损害了他，要将我送官了，先给我一个命令道：“暂勿离粤，以俟开审！”
Sixth, a scholar who has already said that my words have damaged him and is going to send me to the authorities, first give me an order: "Don't leave Guangdong for the time being, until the trial begins!" ”阿呀，仁兄，你看这怎么得了呀！逃掉了五色旗下的“铁窗斧钺风味”，而在青天白日之下又有“缧绁之忧”了。“孔子曰：‘非其罪也。’以其子妻之。”怕未必有这样侥幸的事罢，唉唉，呜呼！
Oh, Brother Ren, look at how this is done! escaped the "iron window axe and axe flavor" under the five-color banner, and there was a "worry of imprisonment" under the blue sky and daylight. "Confucius said, 'It is not his fault.' He married his son to him. "I'm afraid there may not be such a fluke, alas, alas!但那是其实没有什么的，以上云云，真是“小病呻吟”。我之所以要声明，不过希望大家不要误解，以为我是坐在高台上指挥“思想革命”而已。尤其是有几位青年，纳罕我为什么近来不开口。你看，再开口，岂不要永“勿离粤，以俟开审”了么？语有之曰：是非只为多开口，烦恼皆因强出头。此之谓也。
But that's actually nothing, it's really a "moaning of a minor illness". The reason why I want to declare is that I hope everyone will not misunderstand that I am just sitting on a high platform and directing the "ideological revolution". Especially a few young people, why haven't I spoken recently. You see, if you open your mouth again, don't you always "don't leave Guangdong until the trial begins"? There is a saying: right and wrong are just to open up more, and troubles are all because of the forced head. This is precisely the principle being discussed.我所遇见的那些事，全是社会上的常情，我倒并不觉得怎样。我所感到悲哀的，是有几个同我来的学生，至今还找不到学校进，还在颠沛流离。我还要补足一句，是：他们都不是共产党，也不是亲共派。其吃苦的原因，就在和我认得。所以有一个，曾得到他的同乡的忠告道：“你以后不要再说你是鲁迅的学生了罢。”在某大学里，听说尤其严厉，看看《语丝》，就要被称为“语丝派”；和我认识，就要被叫为“鲁迅派”的。
What I encountered was all common sense in society, and I didn't think much of it. What I feel sad about is that there are a few students who have come with me, and they have not been able to find a school to enter so far, and they are still displaced. I would like to add that they are neither communists nor pro-communists. The reason for his hardships lies in my recognition. So there was one who had been advised by his fellow villagers: "Don't say that you are a student of Lu Xun in the future." "In a certain university, I heard that it was particularly strict, and if you look at "Yusi", you will be called the "Yusi School"; If you know me, you will be called the "Lu Xun School".这样子，我想，已经够了，大足以平平正人君子之流的心了。但还要声明一句，这是一部分的人们对我的情形。此外，肯忘掉我，或者至今还和我来往，或要我写字或讲演的人，偶然也仍旧有的。
In this way, I think, it is enough, enough to level the hearts of ordinary gentlemen. But I would like to state that this is the situation of some people towards me. In addition, there are still occasional people who are willing to forget me, or who still associate with me, or who ask me to write or give lectures.《语丝》我仍旧爱看，还是他能够破破我的岑寂。但据我看来，其中有些关于南边的议论，未免有一点隔膜。譬如，有一回，似乎颇以“正人君子”之南下为奇，殊不知《现代》在这里，一向是销行很广的。相距太远，也难怪。我在厦门，还只知道一个共产党的总名，到此以后，才知道其中有CP和CY之分。一直到近来，才知道非共产党而称为什么Y什么Y的，还不止一种。我又仿佛感到有一个团体，是自以为正统，而喜欢监督思想的。我似乎也就在被监督之列，有时遇见盘问式的访问者，我往往疑心就是他们。但是否的确如此，也到底摸不清，即使真的，我也说不出名目，因为那些名目，多是我所没有听到过的。
I still love to read "Yusi", or he can break my silence. But in my opinion, there is a bit of a gap in some of the discussions about the south. For example, once, it seemed that it was quite surprising that "upright gentlemen" went south, but they didn't know that "Modern" has always been widely sold here. It's no wonder that they are so far apart. When I was in Xiamen, I only knew the general name of the Communist Party, and only then did I know that there was a distinction between CP and CY. It wasn't until recently that I knew why it was called Y or Y when it was not the Communist Party, and there were more than one kind. I also felt that there was a group that thought it was orthodox and liked to supervise thoughts. I also seem to be under supervision, and sometimes I encounter interrogative visitors, and I often suspect them. But whether this is true or not, I can't figure it out, even if it is, I can't say the name, because most of those names are things I have never heard.以上算是牢骚。但我觉得正人君子这回是可以审问我了：“你知道苦了罢？你改悔不改悔？”大约也不但正人君子，凡对我有些好意的人，也要问的。我的仁兄，你也许即是其一。我可以即刻答复：“一点不苦，一点不悔。而且倒很有趣的。”
The above is a complaint. But I think a righteous gentleman can interrogate me this time: "You know it's bitter, right? Do you repent? "It's probably not only a decent gentleman, but anyone who has some kindness to me should also ask. My benevolent brother, you may be one of them. I can reply immediately: "No bitterness, no regrets." And it's funny. ”土耳其鸡的鸡冠似的彩色的变换，在“以俟开审”之暇，随便看看，实在是有趣的。你知道没有？一群正人君子，连拜服“孤桐先生”的陈源教授即西滢，都舍弃了公理正义的栈房的东吉祥胡同，到青天白日旗下来“服务”了。《民报》的广告在我的名字上用了“权威”两个字，当时陈源教授多么挖苦呀。这回我看见《闲话》出版的广告，道：“想认识这位文艺批评界的权威的，——尤其不可不读《闲话》！”这真使我觉得飘飘然，原来你不必“请君入瓮”，自己也会爬进来！
The color change like the comb of the Turkish chicken is really interesting to look at casually in the spare time of "waiting for the trial". Did you know what? A group of upright gentlemen, even Professor Chen Yuan, who worshipped "Mr. Gu Tong", that is, Xi Ying, abandoned the East Auspicious Hutong of the axiomatic and righteous stack house and came to "serve" under the banner of the blue sky and white sun. The advertisement of "Minbao" used the word "authority" in my name, how sarcastic Professor Chen Yuan was at that time. This time I saw the advertisement for the publication of "Gossip" and said: "If you want to know this authoritative ,—— in the literary and art criticism circle, you must especially read "Gossip"! This really makes me feel fluttering, it turns out that you don't have to "invite you into the urn", you will climb in yourself!但那广告上又举出一个曾经被称为“学棍”的鲁迅来，而这回偏尊之曰“先生”，居然和这“文艺批评界的权威”并列，却确乎给了我一个不小的打击。我立刻自觉：阿呀，痛哉，又被钉在木板上替“文艺批评界的权威”做广告了。两个“权威”，一个假的和一个真的，一个被“权威”挖苦的“权威”和一个挖苦“权威”的“权威”。呵呵！
But the advertisement mentioned another Lu Xun, who was once called a "school stick", and this time he was respected as "Mr.", which was actually juxtaposed with this "authority in the literary and art criticism circles", but it did give me a big blow. I immediately realized: Ah, it hurts, I was nailed to the board again to advertise for the "authority of literary and art criticism". Two "authorities", one fake and one true, one "authority" ridiculed by "authority" and one "authority" ridiculed "authority". Hehe!祝你安好。我是好的。
I wish you well. I'm good.鲁迅。九，三。
Lu Xun. Nine, three.

答有恒先生

答有恒先生

答有恒先生

Answer Mr. Youheng有恒先生：
Mr. Youheng:你的许多话，今天在《北新》上看见了。我感谢你对于我的希望和好意，这是我看得出来的。现在我想简略地奉答几句，并以寄和你意见相仿的诸位。
Many of your words were seen in "Beixin" today. I thank you for your hope and kindness to me, which I can see. Now I would like to give you a few brief replies and send them to those who share your views.我很闲，决不至于连写字工夫都没有。但我的不发议论，是很久了，还是去年夏天决定的，我豫定的沉默期间是两年。我看得时光不大重要，有时往往将它当作儿戏。
I am very idle, and I will never even have time to write. But my silence has been a long time, and it was decided last summer, and my predetermined silence period is two years. I see that time is not very important, and sometimes I often treat it as child's play.但现在沉默的原因，却不是先前决定的原因，因为我离开厦门的时候，思想已经有些改变。这种变迁的径路，说起来太烦，姑且略掉罢，我希望自己将来或者会发表。单就近时而言，则大原因之一，是：我恐怖了。而且这种恐怖，我觉得从来没有经验过。
But the reason for the silence now is not the reason for the previous decision, because when I left Xiamen, my mind had changed a little. This path of change is too annoying to say, so let's skip it, I hope I may publish it in the future. In the near future alone, one of the main reasons is: I am terrified. And this kind of horror, I don't think I've ever experienced it.我至今还没有将这“恐怖”仔细分析。姑且说一两种我自己已经诊察明白的，则：
I have not yet carefully analyzed this "horror". Let's talk about one or two things that I have already diagnosed and understood, then:一，我的一种妄想破灭了。我至今为止，时时有一种乐观，以为压迫，杀戮青年的，大概是老人。这种老人渐渐死去，中国总可比较地有生气。现在我知道不然了，杀戮青年的，似乎倒大概是青年，而且对于别个的不能再造的生命和青春，更无顾惜。如果对于动物，也要算“暴殄天物”。我尤其怕看的是胜利者的得意之笔：“用斧劈死”呀，……“乱枪刺死”呀……。我其实并不是急进的改革论者，我没有反对过死刑。但对于凌迟和灭族，我曾表示过十分的憎恶和悲痛，我以为二十世纪的人群中是不应该有的。斧劈枪刺，自然不说是凌迟，但我们不能用一粒子弹打在他后脑上么？结果是一样的，对方的死亡。但事实是事实，血的游戏已经开头，而角色又是青年，并且有得意之色。我现在已经看不见这出戏的收场。
First, one of my delusions was shattered. So far, I have always had a sense of optimism that it is probably the old people who oppress and kill young people. This kind of old man is gradually dying, and China is always relatively alive. Now I know that it is not so, it seems that it is probably the young people who kill the youth, and they have no regrets about the lives and youth that cannot be recreated by others. If it is for animals, it should also be regarded as "violent destruction". I am especially afraid of watching the victors' proud strokes: "Kill with an axe" ,...... "stab to death with a gun"....... I am not a radical reformist, and I have never opposed the death penalty. But I have expressed great hatred and grief for Ling Chi and the genocide, and I think it should not be among the people of the twentieth century. The axe splits and spears, naturally not Ling Chi, but can't we hit him on the back of the head with a bullet? The result is the same, the death of the other party. But the fact is that the game of blood has begun, and the characters are young and proud. I can't see the end of this play now.二，我发见了我自己是一个……。是什么呢？我一时定不出名目来。我曾经说过：中国历来是排着吃人的筵宴，有吃的，有被吃的。被吃的也曾吃人，正吃的也会被吃。但我现在发见了，我自己也帮助着排筵宴。先生，你是看我的作品的，我现在发一个问题：看了之后，使你麻木，还是使你清楚；使你昏沉，还是使你活泼？倘所觉的是后者，那我的自己裁判，便证实大半了。中国的筵席上有一种“醉虾”，虾越鲜活，吃的人便越高兴，越畅快。我就是做这醉虾的帮手，弄清了老实而不幸的青年的脑子和弄敏了他的感觉，使他万一遭灾时来尝加倍的苦痛，同时给憎恶他的人们赏玩这较灵的苦痛，得到格外的享乐。我有一种设想，以为无论讨赤军，讨革军，倘捕到敌党的有智识的如学生之类，一定特别加刑，甚于对工人或其他无智识者。为什么呢，因为他可以看见更锐敏微细的痛苦的表情，得到特别的愉快。倘我的假设是不错的，那么，我的自己裁判，便完全证实了。
Second, I found myself a ....... What is it? I can't name it for a while. I once said: China has always been a cannibal banquet, with some eating and some being eaten. Those who are eaten have also eaten people, and those who are being eaten will also be eaten. But now I find out, and I myself help arrange the feast. Sir, you are reading my work, and I am now asking you a question: after reading it, it will numb you or make you clear; Make you drowsy or lively? If what I feel is the latter, then my own judgment has confirmed most of it. There is a kind of "drunken shrimp" at Chinese banquets, and the fresher the shrimp, the happier and happier the people who eat it. I am the helper of this drunken shrimp, who has clarified the mind of the honest and unfortunate young man and sensitized his senses, so that he may experience double the pain in case of disaster, and at the same time give the people who hate him to enjoy this more spiritual pain and get extra pleasure. I have an idea that whether it is against the Red Army or the Revolutionary Army, if the enemy party is captured, such as students, the punishment will be given more than that of workers or other unintelligent people. Why, because he can see more acute and subtle expressions of pain, and get special pleasure. If my assumption is correct, then my own judgment is completely confirmed.所以，我终于觉得无话可说。
So, I finally felt like I had nothing to say.倘若再和陈源教授之流开玩笑罢，那是容易的，我昨天就写了一点。然而无聊，我觉得他们不成什么问题。他们其实至多也不过吃半只虾或呷几口醉虾的醋。况且听说他们已经别离了最佩服的“孤桐先生”，而到青天白日旗下来革命了。我想，只要青天白日旗插远去，恐怕“孤桐先生”也会来革命的。不成问题了，都革命了，浩浩荡荡。
If you joke with Professor Chen Yuan and the like, it will be easy, I wrote a little yesterday. However, boredom, I don't think they are a problem. In fact, at most, they only eat half a shrimp or a few bites of drunken shrimp vinegar. Moreover, I heard that they have parted ways with the "Mr. Gutong" they admire the most, and have come to the revolution under the banner of the blue sky and white sun. I think that as long as the blue sky and white sun flag are planted far away, I am afraid that "Mr. Gu Tong" will also come to the revolution. It's not a problem, it's all revolutionary, it's mighty.问题倒在我自己的落伍。还有一点小事情。就是，我先前的弄“刀笔”的罚，现在似乎降下来了。种牡丹者得花，种蒺藜者得刺，这是应该的，我毫无怨恨。但不平的是这罚仿佛太重一点，还有悲哀的是带累了几个同事和学生。
The problem lies in my own outdatedness. And a little more small thing. That is, my previous punishment for "knife and pen" seems to have been lowered now. Those who plant peonies get flowers, and those who plant thistles get thorns, this is what it should be, I have no resentment. But the unfair punishment seems to be too heavy, and the sad thing is that it has tired several colleagues and students.他们什么罪孽呢，就因为常常和我往来，并不说我坏。凡如此的，现在就要被称为“鲁迅党”或“语丝派”，这是“研究系”和“现代派”宣传的一个大成功。所以近一年来，鲁迅已以被“投诸四裔”为原则了。不说不知道，我在厦门的时候，后来是被搬在一所四无邻居的大洋楼上了，陪我的都是书，深夜还听到楼下野兽“唔唔”地叫。但我是不怕冷静的，况且还有学生来谈谈。然而来了第二下的打击：三个椅子要搬去两个，说是什么先生的少爷已到，要去用了。这时我实在很气愤，便问他：倘若他的孙少爷也到，我就得坐在楼板上么？不行！没有搬去，然而来了第三下的打击，一个教授微笑道：又发名士脾气了。厦门的天条，似乎是名士才能有多于一个的椅子的。“又”者，所以形容我常发名士脾气也，《春秋》笔法，先生，你大概明白的罢。还有第四下的打击，那是我临走的时候了，有人说我之所以走，一因为没有酒喝，二因为看见别人的家眷来了，心里不舒服。这还是根据那一次的“名士脾气”的。
What sins do they have, because they often associate with me, and do not say that I am bad. All of this is now called the "Lu Xun Party" or "Yusi School", which is a great success of the propaganda of the "Research Department" and the "Modernist". Therefore, in the past year, Lu Xun has taken the principle of "being thrown into the four descendants". I don't know if I don't know, when I was in Xiamen, I was later moved to a western-style building with no neighbors, and I was accompanied by books, and I heard the beast downstairs barking "whoa" late at night. But I'm not afraid to be calm, and there are students to talk about. However, there was a second blow: two of the three chairs were to be moved, saying that Mr. Some's young master had arrived and was going to use it. At this time, I was really angry, so I asked him: If his young master Sun also arrives, do I have to sit on the floor? No way! did not move, but when the third blow came, a professor smiled and said: The celebrity has lost his temper again. Xiamen's Tiantiao seems to be a chair with more than one celebrity talent. "And" is the one that describes me as often expressing the temper of a famous person, "Spring and Autumn" penmanship, sir, you probably understand. There was also the fourth blow, which was when I was leaving, and some people said that the reason why I left was because I didn't have any wine to drink, and secondly, because I felt uncomfortable when I saw other people's family members coming. This is still based on the "celebrity temper" of that time.这不过随便想到一件小事。但，即此一端，你也就可以原谅我吓得不敢开口之情有可原了罢。我知道你是不希望我做醉虾的。我再斗下去，也许会“身心交病”。然而“身心交病”，又会被人嘲笑的。自然，这些都不要紧。但我何苦呢，做醉虾？
It's just a small thing. But, at this end, you can forgive me for being too scared to speak. I know you don't want me to be a drunken shrimp. If I continue to fight, I may be "physically and mentally ill". However, "physical and mental illness" will be ridiculed again. Naturally, none of this matters. But why bother to be a drunken shrimp?不过我这回最侥幸的是终于没有被做成为共产党。曾经有一位青年，想以独秀办《新青年》，而我在那里做过文章这一件事，来证成我是共产党。但即被别一位青年推翻了，他知道那时连独秀也还未讲共产。退一步，“亲共派”罢，终于也没有弄成功。倘我一出中山大学即离广州，我想，是要被排进去的；但我不走，所以报上“逃走了”“到汉口去了”的闹了一通之后，倒也没有事了。天下究竟还有光明，没有人说我有“分身法”。现在是，似乎没有什么头衔了，但据“现代派”说，我是“语丝派的首领”。这和生命大约并无什么直接关系，或者倒不大要紧的，只要他们没有第二下。倘如“主角”唐有壬似的又说什么“墨斯科的命令”，那可就又有些不妙了。
But the luckiest thing for me this time was that I was not made a Communist Party in the end. There was once a young man who wanted to run "New Youth" with his own show, and I did an article there to prove that I was a Communist. But he was overthrown by another young man, and he knew that even Duxiu had not talked about communism at that time. Taking a step back, the "pro-communist" faction finally did not succeed. If I leave Guangzhou as soon as I leave Sun Yat-sen University, I think I will be included in it; But I didn't leave, so after the newspaper "ran away" and "went to Hankou", it was fine. There is still light in the world, and no one says that I have a "doppelganger". Now, it seems that there is no title anymore, but according to the "modernists", I am the "leader of the Yusi school". This has nothing to do with life, or it doesn't really matter, as long as they don't have a second strike. If the "protagonist" Tang Youren says something like "Mesco's order", it will be a bit bad.笔一滑，话说远了，赶紧回到“落伍”问题去。我想，先生，你大约看见的，我曾经叹息中国没有敢“抚哭叛徒的吊客”。而今何如？你也看见，在这半年中，我何尝说过一句话？虽然我曾在讲堂上公表过我的意思，虽然我的文章那时也无处发表，虽然我是早已不说话，但这都不足以作我的辩解。总而言之，现在倘再发那些四平八稳的“救救孩子”似的议论，连我自己听去，也觉得空空洞洞了。
The pen slipped, and the words were far away, so hurry back to the "outdated" issue. I think, sir, as you have probably seen, I once lamented that China did not dare to "cry the traitor's mourner". What about now? You also see that in the past six months, I have said a word? Although I had announced my intentions in the lecture hall, although my articles were nowhere to be published at that time, and although I had long stopped speaking, this was not enough for my defense. All in all, if I post those stable "save the children" discussions now, even I feel empty when I listen to them.还有，我先前的攻击社会，其实也是无聊的。社会没有知道我在攻击，倘一知道，我早已死无葬身之所了。试一攻击社会的一分子的陈源之类，看如何？而况四万万也哉？我之得以偷生者，因为他们大多数不识字，不知道，并且我的话也无效力，如一箭之入大海。否则，几条杂感，就可以送命的。民众的罚恶之心，并不下于学者和军阀。近来我悟到凡带一点改革性的主张，倘于社会无涉，才可以作为“废话”而存留，万一见效，提倡者即大概不免吃苦或杀身之祸。古今中外，其揆一也。即如目前的事，吴稚晖先生不也有一种主义的么？而他不但不被普天同愤，且可以大呼“打倒……严办”者，即因为赤党要实行共产主义于二十年之后，而他的主义却须数百年之后或者才行，由此观之，近于废话故也。人那有遥管十余代以后的灰孙子时代的世界的闲情别致也哉？
Also, my previous attacks on society were actually boring. Society doesn't know that I'm attacking, and if I do, I'll be dead and have no place to bury myself. Try Chen Yuan, who attacks a member of society, how about it? How much more so forty million? I have survived because most of them are illiterate, ignorant, and my words are ineffective, like an arrow into the sea. Otherwise, a few miscellaneous feelings can lead to death. The people's desire to punish evil is no less than that of scholars and warlords. Recently, I have realized that any reformist idea can be preserved as "nonsense" if it has nothing to do with society, and if it works, the advocate will probably suffer or die. The principles of ancient and modern times are the same. Even as the current situation is, doesn't Mr. Wu Zhihui also have a kind of doctrine? And not only is he not angry with the whole world, but he can shout "down down...... "strict management" means that the Red Party wants to implement communism in 20 years, but his doctrine will take hundreds of years to be implemented, which is close to nonsense. How can people have the leisure and chic of the world of the gray grandson era more than ten generations later?话已经说得不少，我想收梢了。我感于先生的毫无冷笑和恶意的态度，所以也诚实的奉答，自然，一半也借此发些牢骚。但我要声明，上面的说话中，我并不含有谦虚，我知道我自己，我解剖自己并不比解剖别人留情面。好几个满肚子恶意的所谓批评家，竭力搜索，都寻不出我的真症候。所以我这回自己说一点，当然不过一部分，有许多还是隐藏着的。
I've said a lot, I want to finish it. I felt that Mr. had no sneer or malicious attitude, so I also answered honestly, and naturally, half of them also complained about this. But I want to declare that I do not contain modesty in the above words, I know myself, and I dissect myself more than dissecting others. Several so-called critics full of malice searched hard, but they couldn't find my true symptoms. So I will say one thing myself this time, of course, only a part, many of which are still hidden.我觉得我也许从此不再有什么话要说，恐怖一去，来的是什么呢，我还不得而知，恐怕不见得是好东西罢。但我也在救助我自己，还是老法子：一是麻痹，二是忘却。一面挣扎着，还想从以后淡下去的“淡淡的血痕中”看见一点东西，誊在纸片上。
I think I may not have anything to say from now on, when the horror is gone, I don't know what it is, I'm afraid it may not be a good thing. But I am also saving myself, still the old way: one is paralysis, the other is forgetting. While struggling, I also wanted to see something from the "faint bloodstains" that would fade in the future, transcribed on a piece of paper.鲁迅。九，四。
Lu Xun. Nine, four.

辞“大义”

辞“大义”

辞“大义”

Decline "Great Righteousness"我自从去年得罪了正人君子们的“孤桐先生”，弄得六面碰壁，只好逃出北京以后，默默无语，一年有零。以为正人君子们忘记了这个“学棍”了罢，——哈哈，并没有。
Since I offended the "Mr. Gu Tong" of the upright gentlemen last year, I have been silent and have zero a year. I thought that the righteous gentlemen had forgotten this "school stick",—— haha, no.印度有一个泰戈尔。这泰戈尔到过震旦来，改名竺震旦。因为这竺震旦做过一本《新月集》，所以这震旦就有了一个新月社，——中间我不大明白了——现在又有一个叫作新月书店的。这新月书店要出版的有一本《闲话》，这本《闲话》的广告里有下面这几句话：
India has a Tagore. This Tagore came to Aurora and changed his name to Zhu Zhendan. Because this Zhu Aurora made a "New Moon Collection", this Aurora has a Crescent Society,—— I don't understand it well - now there is another one called the Crescent Bookstore. This Crescent Bookstore is going to publish a book "Gossip", and the advertisement for this "Gossip" has the following sentences:“……鲁迅先生（语丝派首领）所仗的大义，他的战略，读过《华盖集》的人，想必已经认识了。但是现代派的义旗，和它的主将——西滢先生的战略，我们还没有明了。……”
“…… The righteousness and strategy of Mr. Lu Xun (the leader of the Yusi School) must have been known to those who have read the "Huagai Collection". But we still don't understand the modernist banner and the strategy of its main general, Mr. Xiying. ……”“派”呀，“首领”呀，这种谥法实在有些可怕。不远就又会有人来诮骂。甲道：看哪！鲁迅居然称为首领了。天下有这种首领的么？乙道：他就专爱虚荣。人家称他首领，他就满脸高兴。我亲眼看见的。
"Pai", "leader", this kind of posthumous law is really a bit scary. Soon someone will come to scold again. Jia Dao: Behold! Lu Xun was actually called the leader. Is there such a leader in the world? B: He loves vanity. When people call him the leader, he is full of joy. I saw it with my own eyes.但这是我领教惯的教训了，并不为奇。这回所觉得新鲜而惶恐的，是忽而将宝贵的“大义”硬塞在我手里，给我竖起大旗来，叫我和“现代派”的“主将”去对垒。我早已说过：公理和正义，都被正人君子夺去了，所以我已经一无所有。大义么，我连它是圆柱形的呢还是椭圆形的都不知道，叫我怎么“仗”？
But this is a lesson I am used to, and it is not surprising. What I felt fresh and frightened this time was that he suddenly stuffed the precious "righteousness" into my hands, raised a big flag for me, and asked me to confront the "main general" of the "modernist". I have already said: Axiom and justice have been taken away by righteous gentlemen, so I have nothing. I don't even know if it's cylindrical or oval, how do I "fight"?“主将”呢，自然以有“义旗”为体面罢。不过我没有这么冠冕。既不成“派”，也没有做“首领”，更没有“仗”过“大义”。更没有用什么“战略”，因为我未见广告以前，竟没有知道西滢先生是“现代派”的“主将”，——我总当他是一个喽罗儿。
As for the "main general", it is natural to have a "righteous flag" as decent. But I don't have such a crown. neither became a "faction", nor was he a "leader", let alone "fought" a "righteousness". There is no "strategy", because before I saw the advertisement, I didn't know that Mr. Xiying was the "main general" of the "modernist",—— I always thought he was a minion.我对于我自己，所知道的是这样的。我想，“孤桐先生”尚在，“现代派”该也未必忘了曾有人称我为“学匪”，“学棍”，“刀笔吏”的，而今忽假“鲁迅先生”以“大义”者，但为广告起见而已。
Here's what I know about myself. I think that "Mr. Gu Tong" is still there, and the "modernists" may not have forgotten that some people once called me a "student bandit", "student stick", and "knife and pen official", and now I suddenly fake "Mr. Lu Xun" to "righteousness", but it is just for the sake of advertising.呜呼，鲁迅鲁迅，多少广告，假汝之名以行！
Alas, Lu Xun, how many advertisements, in your name!九月三日。
September 3rd.

反“漫谈”

反“漫谈”

反“漫谈”

Anti-"rambling"我一向对于《语丝》没有恭维过，今天熬不住要说几句了：的确可爱。真是《语丝》之所以为《语丝》。
I have never complimented "Yusi", and I can't stand it today and have to say a few words: it is indeed cute. It is really the reason why "Yusi" is "Yusi".像我似的“世故的老人”是已经不行，有时不敢说，有时不愿说，有时不肯说，有时以为无须说。有此工夫，不如吃点心。但《语丝》上却总有人出来发迂论，如《教育漫谈》，对教育当局去谈教育，即其一也。
"Sophisticated old people" like me are no longer good, sometimes they dare not speak, sometimes they don't want to say it, sometimes they refuse to say it, and sometimes they think they don't need to say it. With this effort, it is better to have snacks. However, there are always people who come out to make roundabout comments on "Yusi", such as "Education Ramblings", which is one of them to talk about education to the education authorities.“不可与言而与之言”，即是“知其不可为而为之”，一定要有这种人，世界才不寂寞。这一点，我是佩服的。但也许因为“世故”作怪罢，不知怎地佩服中总带一些腹诽，还夹几分伤惨。徐先生是我的熟人，所以再三思维，终于决定贡献一点意见。这一种学识，乃是我身做十多年官僚，目睹一打以上总长，这才陆续地获得，轻易是不肯说的。
"Don't talk to it", that is, "know what you can't do and do it", there must be such a person, the world is not lonely. I admire this. But maybe because of the "sophistication", somehow I admire Zhong Zongtai with some belly slander, and a little sadness. Mr. Xu is an acquaintance of mine, so after thinking about it repeatedly, I finally decided to contribute a little opinion. This kind of knowledge is obtained one after another after I have been a bureaucrat for more than ten years and have witnessed more than a dozen chiefs, and I am not willing to say it easily.对“教育当局”谈教育的根本误点，是在将这四个字的力点看错了：以为他要来办“教育”。其实不然，大抵是来做“当局”的。
The fundamental mistake of the "education authorities" in talking about education is to misread the emphasis of these four words: thinking that he is going to run "education". In fact, it is probably not the case, it is probably here to be the "authorities".这可以用过去的事实证明。因为重在“当局”，所以——
This can be proven with past facts. Because the focus is on the "authorities", so-一　学校的会计员，可以做教育总长。
1. The school's accountant can be the chief of education.二　教育总长，可以忽而化为内务总长。
2. The chief of education can suddenly become the chief of internal affairs.三　司法，海军总长，可以兼任教育总长。
3. The judiciary, the chief of the navy, may also serve as the chief of education.曾经有一位总长，听说，他的出来就职，是因为某公司要来立案，表决时可以多一个赞成者，所以再作冯妇的。但也有人来和他谈教育。我有时真想将这老实人一把抓出来，即刻勒令他回家陪太太喝茶去。
There was once a general manager who heard that he came out to take office because a company was going to file a case, and there could be one more person in favor of the vote, so he became Feng's wife again. But there are also people who come to talk to him about education. Sometimes I really want to catch this honest man out and immediately order him to go home and drink tea with his wife.所以：教育当局，十之九是意在“当局”，但有些是意并不在“当局”。
Therefore: nine out of ten educational authorities are intended to be "authorities", but some are not intended to be "authorities".这时候，也许有人要问：那么，他为什么有举动呢？
At this time, some people may ask: So, why did he make a move?我于是勃然大怒道：这就是他在“当局”呀！说得露骨一点，就是“做官”！不然，为什么叫“做”？
I was furious and said: This is him in the "authorities"! To put it bluntly, it is "being an official"! Otherwise, why is it called "doing"?我得到这一种彻底的学识，也不是容易事，所以难免有一点学者的高傲态度，请徐先生恕之。以下是略述我所以得到这学识的历史——
It is not easy for me to obtain this kind of thorough knowledge, so it is inevitable that there will be a little arrogant attitude of scholars, please forgive Mr. Xu. The following is a brief history of how I got this knowledge—我所目睹的一打以上的总长之中，有两位是喜欢属员上条陈的。于是听话的属员，便纷纷大上其条陈。久而久之，全如石沉大海。我那时还没有现在这么聪明，心里疑惑：莫非这许多条陈一无可取，还是他没有工夫看呢？但回想起来，我“上去”（这是专门术语，小官进去见大官也）的时候，确是常见他正在危坐看条陈；谈话之间，也常听到“我还要看条陈去”，“我昨天晚上看条陈”等类的话。那究竟是怎么一回事呢？
Among the more than a dozen chiefs I have witnessed, two of them like to be subordinate to Chen. So the obedient subordinates made a big statement. Over time, it was like a stone sinking into the sea. I wasn't as smart as I am now, and I wondered in my heart: Could it be that these many articles are useless, or does he have no time to read them? But in retrospect, when I "went up" (this is a special term, the junior official went in to see the big official), it was indeed common for him to sit upright and read the article; During conversations, I often hear words such as "I still want to see Tiao Chen", "I read Tiao Chen last night" and so on. So what is going on?有一天，我正从他的条陈桌旁走开，跨出门槛，不知怎的忽蒙圣灵启示，恍然大悟了——
One day, I was walking away from his desk and stepping out of the threshold, when somehow I was suddenly inspired by the Holy Spirit and suddenly realized -哦！原来他的“做官课程表”上，有一项是“看条陈”的。因为要“看”，所以要“条陈”。为什么要“看条陈”？就是“做官”之一部分。如此而已。还有另外的奢望，是我自己的胡涂！
Oh! It turned out that there was an item in his "official curriculum" that was "looking at the article". Because we want to "see", we must "make a statement". Why "look at the article"? It is part of "being an official". So much for. There is another extravagant hope, which is my own Hutu!“于我来了一道光”，从此以后，我自己觉得颇聪明，近于老官僚了。后来终于被“孤桐先生”革掉，那是另外一回事。
"A light came to me", and since then, I have felt quite smart, close to an old bureaucrat. Later, he was finally dismissed by "Mr. Gutong", which is another matter.“看条陈”和“办教育”，事同一例，都应该只照字面解，倘再有以上或更深的希望或要求，不是书呆子，就是不安分。
"Look at the article" and "running education", the same case, should only be taken literally, if there are any more hopes or demands, they are either nerds or restless.我还要附加一句警告：倘遇漂亮点的当局，恐怕连“看漫谈”也可以算作他的一种“做”——其名曰“留心教育”——但和“教育”还是没有关系的。
I would also like to add a warning: if you encounter a more beautiful authorities, I am afraid that even "watching ramblings" can be counted as a kind of "doing" - its name is "paying attention to education" - but it has nothing to do with "education".九月四日。
September 4th.

忧“天乳”

忧“天乳”

忧“天乳”

Worry about "heavenly milk"《顺天时报》载北京辟才胡同女附中主任欧阳晓澜女士不许剪发之女生报考，致此等人多有望洋兴叹之概云云。是的，情形总要到如此，她不能别的了。但天足的女生尚可投考，我以为还有光明。不过也太嫌“新”一点。
The Shuntian Times reported that Ms. Ouyang Xiaolan, director of the Beijing Bicai Hutong Girls' High School, did not allow girls with haircuts to apply for the exam, so that many of these people were expected to be excited. Yes, it will always be like this, she can't do anything else. But girls from Tianzu can still take the exam, I thought there was still light. But it's too "new".男男女女，要吃这前世冤家的头发的苦，是只要看明末以来的陈迹便知道的。我在清末因为没有辫子，曾吃了许多苦，所以我不赞成女子剪发。北京的辫子，是奉了袁世凯的命令而剪的，但并非单纯的命令，后面大约还有刀。否则，恐怕现在满城还拖着。女子剪发也一样，总得有一个皇帝（或者别的名称也可以），下令大家都剪才行。自然，虽然如此，有许多还是不高兴的，但不敢不剪。一年半载，也就忘其所以了；两年以后，便可以到大家以为女人不该有长头发的世界。这时长发女生，即有“望洋兴叹”之忧。倘只一部分人说些理由，想改变一点，那是历来没有成功过。
Men and women who want to suffer from the hair of their enemies in their previous lives can only know by looking at the deeds since the end of the Ming Dynasty. I suffered a lot in the late Qing Dynasty because I didn't have braids, so I didn't approve of women's haircuts. The braids in Beijing were cut on Yuan Shikai's order, but not simply by order, and there was probably a knife behind it. Otherwise, I'm afraid the city is still dragging it all over the city. The same goes for women's haircuts, there must always be an emperor (or other names are acceptable) who orders everyone to cut them. Naturally, despite this, many are still unhappy, but they dare not cut it. After a year and a half, I forgot why; In two years, we will be able to go to a world where everyone thinks that women should not have long hair. At this time, long-haired girls have the worry of "looking at the ocean and sighing". If only some people say some reasons and want to change a little, it has never been successful.但现在的有力者，也有主张女子剪发的，可惜据地不坚。同是一处地方，甲来乙走，丙来甲走，甲要短，丙要长，长者剪，短了杀。这几年似乎是青年遭劫时期，尤其是女性。报载有一处是鼓吹剪发的，后来别一军攻入了，遇到剪发女子，即慢慢拔去头发，还割去两乳……。这一种刑罚，可以证明男子短发，已为全国所公认。只是女人不准学。去其两乳，即所以使其更像男子而警其妄学男子也。以此例之，欧阳晓澜女士盖尚非甚严欤？
But now there are also powerful people who advocate women's haircuts, but unfortunately the ground is not strong. In the same place, A comes to B, C comes to A, A wants to be short, C wants to be long, the elder is cut, and the short is killed. These years seem to have been a period of robbery for young people, especially women. The report reported that there was a place where people advocated hair cutting, and later another army invaded and met a woman who cut her hair, that is, slowly pulled out her hair and cut off both breasts ....... This punishment can prove that the man's short hair has been recognized throughout the country. It's just that women are not allowed to learn. Removing both breasts is to make her look more like a man and warn her of being a man who is trying to imitate men. For example, Ms. Ouyang Xiaolan is probably not very strict, right?今年广州在禁女学生束胸，违者罚洋五十元。报章称之曰“天乳运动”。有人以不得樊增祥作命令为憾。公文上不见“鸡头肉”等字样，盖殊不足以餍文人学士之心。此外是报上的俏皮文章，滑稽议论。我想，如此而已，而已终古。
This year, Guangzhou banned female students from binding their breasts, and violators were fined 50 yuan. The newspaper called it the "Milk Movement". Some people regretted that Fan Zengxiang could not give orders. The words "chicken head meat" are not seen on official documents, which is not enough to satisfy the hearts of literati and scholars. In addition, there are playful articles in the newspaper, funny discussions. I think that's all, but it's eternal.我曾经也有过“杞天之虑”，以为将来中国的学生出身的女性，恐怕要失去哺乳的能力，家家须雇乳娘。但仅只攻击束胸是无效的。第一，要改良社会思想，对于乳房较为大方；第二，要改良衣装，将上衣系进裙里去。旗袍和中国的短衣，都不适于乳的解放，因为其时即胸部以下掀起，不便，也不好看的。
I once had "unfounded worries", thinking that in the future, Chinese students would lose the ability to breastfeed, and every family would have to hire a wet nurse. However, attacking the chest only is ineffective. First, it is necessary to improve social thinking and be more generous with breasts; Second, improve the costume and tie the top into the skirt. Qipao and Chinese short clothes are not suitable for the liberation of breasts, because they are lifted below the chest, which is inconvenient and not good-looking.还有一个大问题，是会不会乳大忽而算作犯罪，无处投考？我们中国在中华民国未成立以前，是只有“不齿于四民之列”者，才不准考试的。据理而言，女子断发既以失男女之别，有罪，则天乳更以加男女之别，当有功。但天下有许多事情，是全不能以口舌争的。总要上谕，或者指挥刀。
There is also a big question, will it be counted as a crime and there is nowhere to take the exam? Before the founding of the Republic of China, only those who were "disdainful of the four peoples" were not allowed to take the exam. It is reasonable to say that since a woman's hair cutting is a crime that violates the distinction between men and women, then natural breasts should be used to add gender distinction, and it should be meritorious. But there are many things in the world that cannot be argued with words. You must always be educated or commanded.否则，已经有了“短发犯”了，此外还要增加“天乳犯”，或者也许还有“天足犯”。呜呼，女性身上的花样也特别多，而人生亦从此多苦矣。
Otherwise, there are already "short-haired criminals", in addition to adding "heavenly milk criminals", or maybe "heavenly foot criminals". Alas, there are a lot of tricks on women, and life has been so hard since then.我们如果不谈什么革新，进化之类，而专为安全着想，我以为女学生的身体最好是长发，束胸，半放脚（缠过而又放之，一名文明脚）。因为我从北而南，所经过的地方，招牌旗帜，尽管不同，而对于这样的女人，却从不闻有一处仇视她的。
If we don't talk about innovation, evolution, etc., but for safety, I think it is best for a female student to have long hair, a chest, and half-legged feet (wrapped and released, a civilized foot). Because from north to south, the places I passed, the signboards and flags, although different, never heard of a woman like this.九月四日。
September 4th.

革“首领”

革“首领”

革“首领”

Revolution "leader"这两年来，我在北京被“正人君子”杀退，逃到海边；之后，又被“学者”之流杀退，逃到另外一个海边；之后，又被“学者”之流杀退，逃到一间西晒的楼上，满身痱子，有如荔支，兢兢业业，一声不响，以为可以免于罪戾了罢。阿呀，还是不行。一个学者要九月间到广州来，一面做教授，一面和我打官司，还豫先叫我不要走，在这里“以俟开审”哩。
In the past two years, I have been killed by "righteous gentlemen" in Beijing and fled to the seaside; After that, he was killed by "scholars" and fled to another beach; After that, he was killed by the "scholars" and fled to a western-dried upstairs, covered with prickly heat, like lychees, conscientious, silent, thinking that he could be spared from sin. Oh, still not. A scholar is going to come to Guangzhou in September, and while being a professor, he is fighting a lawsuit with me, and he also told me not to leave, and he is here "waiting for the trial".以为在五色旗下，在青天白日旗下，一样是华盖罩命，晦气临头罢，却又不尽然。不知怎地，于不知不觉之中，竟在“文艺界”里高升了。谓予不信，有陈源教授即西滢的《闲话》广告为证，节抄无趣，剪而贴之——
I thought that under the five-color banner, under the blue sky and white sun, it was the same canopy covering life, and bad luck was coming, but it was not entirely so. Somehow, unknowingly, he has risen to prominence in the "literary and artistic circles". If you don't believe me, there is Professor Chen Yuan's "Gossip" advertisement as evidence, which is boring, cut and pasted——“徐丹甫先生在《学灯》里说：‘北京究是新文学的策源地，根深蒂固，隐隐然执全国文艺界的牛耳。’究竟什么是北京文艺界？质言之，前一两年的北京文艺界，便是现代派和语丝派交战的场所。鲁迅先生（语丝派首领）所仗的大义，他的战略，读过《华盖集》的人，想必已经认识了。但是现代派的义旗，和它的主将——西滢先生的战略，我们还没有明了。现在我们特地和西滢先生商量，把《闲话》选集起来，印成专书，留心文艺界掌故的人，想必都以先睹为快。
"Mr. Xu Danfu said in "Xue Lantern": 'Beijing is the source of new literature, deeply rooted, and faintly grasps the bull's ears of the national literary and art circles.' What exactly is Beijing's literary and artistic circles? In short, the literary and artistic circles in Beijing in the past year or two were the places where modernists and the Yusi faction fought. The righteousness and strategy of Mr. Lu Xun (the leader of the Yusi School) must have been known to those who have read the "Huagai Collection". But we still don't understand the modernist banner and the strategy of its main general, Mr. Xiying. Now we have specially discussed with Mr. Xiying to select "Gossip" and print it as a special book, and pay attention to the people in the literary and artistic circles, presumably all of them are happy to see it.“可是单把《闲话》当作掌故又错了。想——
But it is wrong to regard "Gossip" as a palm story. Think——欣赏西滢先生的文笔的，
Those who appreciate Mr. Xiying's writing,研究西滢先生的思想的，
Those who study Mr. Xiying's thoughts,想认识这位文艺批评界的权威的——
Those who want to know this authority in the literary and art criticism circle -尤其不可不读《闲话》！”
Especially you must read "Gosip"! ”这很像“诗哲”徐志摩先生的，至少，是“诗哲”之流的“文笔”，所以如此飘飘然，连我看了也几乎想要去买一本。但，只是想到自己，却又迟疑了。两三个年头，不算太长久。被“正人君子”指为“学匪”，还要“投畀豺虎”，我是记得的。做了一点杂感，有时涉及这位西滢先生，我也记得的。这些东西，“诗哲”是看也不看，西滢先生是即刻叫它“到应该去的地方去”，我也记得的。后来终于出了一本《华盖集》，也是实情。然而我竟不知道有一个“北京文艺界”，并且我还做了“语丝派首领”，仗着“大义”在这“文艺界”上和“现代派主将”交战。虽然这“北京文艺界”已被徐丹甫先生在《学灯》上指定，隐隐然不可动摇了，而我对于自己的被说得有声有色的战绩，却还是莫名其妙，像着了狐狸精的迷似的。
This is very similar to Mr. Xu Zhimo, at least, it is the "writing" of "poetry and philosophy", so it is so fluttering that even I almost want to buy a copy after reading it. However, just thinking of myself, I hesitated again. Two or three years, not too long. I remember being referred to as a "scholar bandit" by a "righteous gentleman" and "throwing it to the jackal". I did a little miscellaneous feeling, sometimes involving this Mr. Xiying, and I also remember. These things, "Shi Zhe" didn't look at them, and Mr. Xi Ying immediately called them "to go where they should go", and I also remember it. Later, a book "Huagai Collection" was finally published, which is also the truth. However, I didn't know that there was a "Beijing literary and art circle", and I also became the "leader of the Yusi School", relying on "righteousness" to fight against the "modernist generals" in this "literary and artistic circle". Although this "Beijing literary and artistic circle" has been designated by Mr. Xu Danfu in "Learning the Lantern", it is faintly unshakable, and I am still inexplicable about my achievements, like a vixen.现代派的文艺，我一向没有留心，《华盖集》里从何提起。只有某女士窃取“琵亚词侣”的画的时候，《语丝》上（也许是《京报副刊》上）有人说过几句话，后来看“现代派”的口风，仿佛以为这话是我写的。我现在郑重声明：那不是我。我自从被杨荫榆女士杀败之后，即对于一切女士都不敢开罪，因为我已经知道得罪女士，很容易引起“男士”的义侠之心，弄得要被“通缉”都说不定的，便不再开口。所以我和现代派的文艺，丝毫无关。
I have never paid attention to the literature and art of modernism, where is it mentioned in the "Huagai Collection"? Only when a certain lady stole the painting of "Pia Poetry Couple", someone said a few words in "Yusi" (maybe in the "Beijing News Supplement"), and later looked at the "modernist" tone, as if I thought I wrote it. I now solemnly declare: That's not me. Since I was killed by Ms. Yang Yinyu, I did not dare to offend all the ladies, because I already knew that offending the ladies would easily arouse the righteous heart of "men", so I would not be "wanted", so I stopped speaking. So I have nothing to do with modernist literature and art.但终于交了好运了，升为“首领”，而且据说是曾和现代派的“主将”在“北京文艺界”上交过战了。好不堂哉皇哉。本来在房里面有喜色，默认不辞，倒也有些阔气的。但因为我近来被人随手抑扬，忽而“权威”，忽而不准做“权威”，只准做“前驱”；忽而又改为“青年指导者”；甲说是“青年叛徒的领袖”罢，乙又来冷笑道：“哼哼哼。”自己一动不动，故我依然，姓名却已经经历了几回升沉冷暖。人们随意说说，将我当作一种材料，倒也罢了，最可怕的是广告底恭维和广告底嘲骂。简直是膏药摊上挂着的死蛇皮一般。所以这回虽然蒙现代派追封，但对于这“首领”的荣名，还只得再来公开辞退。不过也不见得回回如此，因为我没有这许多闲工夫。
But finally handed over good luck, was promoted to "leader", and it is said that he had fought with the "main general" of the modernist school in the "Beijing literary and art circles". It's really impressive. Originally, there was joy in the room, and he didn't say goodbye by default, but he was a little generous. But because I have been casually promoted recently, I suddenly become "authoritative", suddenly not allowed to be "authoritative", only allowed to be a "pioneer"; suddenly changed to "youth mentor"; A said that he was the "leader of the young traitors", and B sneered again: "Hmph." "I am motionless, so I am still, but my name has experienced several ups and downs. People talk about me casually, treating me as a material, but the most terrifying thing is the compliments and ridicule under the advertisements. It's like a dead snake skin hanging on a plaster stall. So this time, although he was posthumously honored by the modernists, he had to publicly dismiss the honorary title of this "leader" again. But it doesn't have to be like this, because I don't have so much free time.背后插着“义旗”的“主将”出马，对手当然以阔一点的为是。我们在什么演义上时常看见：“来将通名！我的宝刀不斩无名之将！”主将要来“交战”而将我升为“首领”，大概也是“不得已也”的。但我并不然，没有这些大架子，无论吧儿狗，无论臭茅厕，都会唾过几口吐沫去，不必定要脊梁上插着五张尖角旗（义旗？）的“主将”出台，才动我的“刀笔”。假如有谁看见我攻击茅厕的文字，便以为也是我的劲敌，自恨于它的气味还未明了，再要去嗅一嗅，那是我不负责任的。恐怕有人以这广告为例，所以附带声明，以免拖累。
The "main general" with the "righteous flag" behind him came out, and the opponent was of course a little wider. We often see in some romances: "Come and name it!" My sword does not kill the nameless general! The lord is going to "fight" and promotes me to "leader", which is probably also a "last resort". But I don't think so, without these big shelves, no matter the dog, no matter the stinky toilet, I will spit a few mouthfuls and foam, and I don't have to have five pointed flags (righteous flags?) on my backbone. The "main general" of the "main general" was introduced, and my "knife and pen" were moved. If anyone sees my text attacking the toilet, they think that it is also my fierce enemy, and they hate that its smell is not clear yet, and they want to sniff it again, which is irresponsible for me. I'm afraid someone will take this advertisement as an example, so I will attach a statement so as not to drag it down.至于西滢先生的“文笔”，“思想”，“文艺批评界的权威”，那当然必须“欣赏”，“研究”而且“认识”的。只可惜要“欣赏”……这些，现在还只有一本《闲话》。但我以为咱们的“主将”的一切“文艺”中，最好的倒是登在《晨报副刊》上的，给志摩先生的大半痛骂鲁迅的那一封信。那是发热的时候所写，所以已经脱掉了绅士的黑洋服，真相跃如了。而且和《闲话》比较起来，简直是两样态度，证明着两者之中，有一种是虚伪。这也是要“研究”……西滢先生的“文笔”等等的好东西。
As for Mr. Xiying's "writing", "thought", and "authority in the literary and art criticism circle", of course, it must be "appreciated", "studied" and "known". It's a pity to "appreciate"...... There is only one "Gossip" now. But I think that among all the "literature and art" of our "main general", the best is the letter published in the "Morning News Supplement" to Mr. Shima that scolded Lu Xun for most of the time. It was written when I was in a fever, so I had already taken off the gentleman's black clothes, and the truth jumped out. And compared with "Gossip", it is simply two attitudes, proving that one of the two is hypocritical. This is also to be "studied"...... Mr. Xiying's "writing" and other good things.然而虽然是这一封信之中，也还须分别观之。例如：“志摩，……前面是遥遥茫茫荫在薄雾的里面的目的地”之类。据我看来，其实并无这样的“目的地”，倘有，却不怎么“遥遥茫茫”。这是因为热度还不很高的缘故，倘使发到九十度左右，我想，那便可望连这些“遥遥茫茫”都一扫而光，近于纯粹了。
However, although it is in this letter, it must be looked at separately. For example: "Shima,...... In front of it is a destination in the mist that is far away." In my opinion, there is actually no such "destination", and if there is, it is not very "far away". This is because the heat is not very high, if it reaches about 90 degrees, I think it can be expected that even these "distant places" will be swept away, close to pure.九月九日，广州。
September 9, Guangzhou.

谈“激烈”

谈“激烈”

谈“激烈”

Talking about "intense"带了书籍杂志过“香江”，有被视为“危险文字”而尝“铁窗斧钺风味”之险，我在《略谈香港》里已经说过了。但因为不知道怎样的是“危险文字”，所以时常耿耿于心。为什么呢？倒也并非如上海保安会所言，怕“中国元气太损”，乃是自私自利，怕自己也许要经过香港，须得留神些。
I have already said in "A Brief Talk about Hong Kong" that I have brought books and magazines to "Hong Kong", and there is a risk of being regarded as a "dangerous word" and tasting the "flavor of iron windows and axes". But because I don't know what kind of "dangerous text" is, I often worry about it. Why? It is not that they are afraid that "China's vitality is too damaged" as the Shanghai Security Association said, but that they are selfish, afraid that they may have to pass through Hong Kong, so they must be careful.今年似乎是青年特别容易死掉的年头。“千里不同风，百里不同俗。”这里以为平常的，那边就算过激，滚油煎指头。今天正是正当的，明天就变犯罪，藤条打屁股。倘是年青人，初从乡间来，一定要被煎得莫明其妙，以为现在是时行这样的制度了罢。至于我呢，前年已经四十五岁了，而且早已“身心交病”，似乎无须这么宝贵生命，思患豫防。但这是别人的意见，若夫我自己，还是不愿意吃苦的。敢乞“新时代的青年”们鉴原为幸。
This year seems to be a year when young people are particularly prone to death. "Thousands of miles are different winds, and a hundred miles are different customs." I think it's normal here, but it's too much over there, and I fry my fingers in oil. Today is justified, tomorrow it will become a crime, rattan spanking. If you are a young person, you must be fried to the point where you think it is now a system like Shixing. As for me, I was forty-five years old the year before last, and I had already been "physically and mentally ill", so I didn't seem to need such a precious life, so I thought about it and was on guard. But this is someone else's opinion, and I myself am still unwilling to endure hardship. Dare to beg the "young people of the new era" to learn from the original.所以，留神而又留神。果然，“天助自助者”，今天竟在《循环日报》上遇到一点参考资料了。事情是一个广州执信学校的学生，路过（！）香港，“在尖沙嘴码头，被一五七号华差截搜行李，在其木杠（谨案：箱也）之内，搜获激烈文字书籍七本。计开：执信学校印行之《宣传大纲》六本，又《侵夺中国史》一本。此种激烈文字，业经华民署翻译员择译完竣，昨日午乃解由连司提讯，控以怀有激烈文字书籍之罪。……”抄报太麻烦，说个大略罢，是：“择译”时期，押银五百元出外；后来因为被告供称书系朋友托带，所以“姑判从轻罚银二十五元，书籍没收焚毁”云。
So, be careful and pay attention. Sure enough, the "God helps the self-helper", today I actually encountered a little reference material in the "Circulation Daily". The incident was a student of Guangzhou Zhixin School, passing by (!) Hong Kong, "At the Tsim Sha Tsui Wharf, the luggage was intercepted and searched by the No. 157 Chinese police officer, and seven books of fierce writing were found in its wooden bar. The plan is to open six copies of the "Propaganda Outline" printed by the Zhixin School, as well as one copy of "History of the Occupation of China". This kind of fierce text has been selected and translated by the translator of the Chinese People's Bureau, and yesterday noon it was released by the joint division for interrogation, accused of possessing fierce texts and books. ...... "Copying newspapers is too troublesome, just to put it bluntly, is: during the "selection of translation" period, 500 yuan of silver is deposited out; Later, because the defendant confessed that the book was entrusted by a friend, "the court sentenced him to a lighter fine of 25 yuan, and the book was confiscated and burned."执信学校是广州的平正的学校，既是“清党”之后，则《宣传大纲》不外三民主义可知，但一到“尖沙嘴”，可就“激烈”了；可怕。惟独对于友邦，竟敢用“侵夺”字样，则确也未免“激烈”一点，因为忘了他们正在替我们“保存国粹”之恩故也。但“侵夺”上也许还有字，记者不敢写出来。
Zhixin School is a fair school in Guangzhou, which is after the "Qing Party", so the "Propaganda Outline" is nothing more than the Three People's Principles, but when it comes to "Tsim Sha Tsui", it is "intense"; Terrible. However, for friendly countries, it is indeed a little more "intense" to dare to use the word "encroachment", because they have forgone the grace of "preserving the essence of the country" for us. But there may still be words on "encroachment", and reporters dare not write it.我曾经提起过几回元朝，今夜思之，还不很确。元朝之于中文书籍，未尝如此留心。这一著倒要推清朝做模范。他不但兴过几回“文字狱”，大杀叛徒，且于宋朝人所做的“激烈文字”，也曾细心加以删改。同胞之热心“复古”及友邦之赞助“复古”者，似当奉为师法者也。
I have mentioned the Yuan Dynasty several times, but thinking about it tonight, it is not very accurate. The Yuan Dynasty did not pay such attention to Chinese books. This is to push the Qing Dynasty to be a model. Not only did he build a "literary prison" several times and kill traitors, but he also carefully deleted the "fierce texts" made by the Song Dynasty people. The enthusiasm of compatriots for "retro" and the sponsorship of friends for "retro" seem to be the ones who should be regarded as teachers.清朝人改宋人书，我曾经举出过《茅亭客话》。但这书在《琳琅秘室丛书》里，现在时价每部要四十元，倘非小阔人，那能得之哉？近来却另有一部了，是商务印书馆印的《鸡肋编》，宋庄季裕著，每本只要五角，我们可以看见清朝的文澜阁本和元钞本有如何不同。今摘数条如下：
The Qing Dynasty people changed the Song people's books, and I once cited "Maoting Hakka Words". But this book is in the "Linlang Secret Room Series", and the current price is 40 yuan each. Recently, there is another one, which is the "Chicken Rib Compilation" printed by the Commercial Press, written by Song Zhuang Jiyu, each book only needs five corners, we can see how the Wenlan Pavilion version of the Qing Dynasty is different from the Yuan banknote. Here are a few excerpts as follows:“燕地……女子……冬月以栝蒌涂面，……至春暖方涤去，久不为风日所侵，故洁白如玉也。今使中国妇女，尽污于殊俗，汉唐和亲之计，盖未为屈也。”（清人将“今使中国”以下二十二字，改作“其异于南方如此”七字。）
“燕地…… 女子…… 冬月以栝蒌涂面，…… 至春暖方涤去，久不为风日所侵，故洁白如玉也。 今使中国妇女，尽污于殊俗，汉唐和亲之计，盖未为屈也。 ”（清人将“今使中国”以下二十二字，改作“其异于南方如此”七字。 ）“自古兵乱，郡邑被焚毁者有之，虽盗贼残暴，必赖室庐以处，故须有存者。靖康之后，金虏侵凌中国，露居异俗，凡所经过，尽皆焚燹。如曲阜先圣旧宅，自鲁共王之后，但有增葺。莽卓巢温之徒，犹假崇儒，未尝敢犯。至金寇，遂为烟尘。指其像而诟曰‘尔是言夷狄之有君者！’中原之祸，自书契以来，未之有也。”（清朝的改本，可大不同了，是“孔子宅在今僊源故鲁城中归德门内阙里之中。……遭汉中微，盗贼奔突，自西京未央建章之殿，皆见隳坏，而灵光岿然独存。今其遗址，不复可见。而先圣旧宅，近日亦遭兵燹之厄，可叹也夫。”）
“自古兵乱，郡邑被焚毁者有之，虽盗贼残暴，必赖室庐以处，故须有存者。 靖康之后，金虏侵凌中国，露居异俗，凡所经过，尽皆焚燹。 如曲阜先圣旧宅，自鲁共王之后，但有增葺。 莽卓巢温之徒，犹假崇儒，未尝敢犯。 至金寇，遂为烟尘。 指其像而诟曰‘尔是言夷狄之有君者！’中原之祸，自书契以来，未之有也。 ”（清朝的改本，可大不同了，是“孔子宅在今僊源故鲁城中归德门内阙里之中。 …… 遭汉中微，盗贼奔突，自西京未央建章之殿，皆见隳坏，而灵光岿然独存。 今其遗址，不复可见。 而先圣旧宅，近日亦遭兵燹之厄，可叹也夫。 ”）抄书也太麻烦，还是不抄下去了。但我们看第二条，就很可以悟出上海保安会所切望的“循规蹈矩”之道。即：原文带些愤激，是“激烈”，改本不过“可叹也夫”，是“循规蹈矩”的。何以故呢？愤激便有揭竿而起的可能，而“可叹也夫”则瘟头瘟脑，即使全国一同叹气，其结果也不过是叹气，于“治安”毫无妨碍的。
Copying books is too troublesome, so I still don't copy them. But if we look at the second article, we can realize the way of "following the rules" that the Shanghai Security Association longs for. That is, the original text is indignant, which is "intense", and the revised version is only "lamentable" and "follows the rules". Why? Even if the whole country sighs together, the result is nothing more than a sigh, and there is no hindrance to "public security".但我还要给青年们一个警告：勿以为我们以后只做“可叹也夫”的文章，便可以安全了。新例我还未研究好，单看清朝的老例，则准其叹气，乃是对于古人的优待，不适用于今人的。因为奴才都叹气，虽无大害，主人看了究竟不舒服。必须要如罗素所称赞的杭州的轿夫一样，常是笑嘻嘻。
But I would also like to warn young people: don't think that we will only be safe if we only make "lamentable" articles in the future. I haven't studied the new case yet, just looking at the old example of the Qing Dynasty, I will allow it to sigh, which is a preferential treatment for the ancients, not applicable to today's people. Because the servants sighed, although there was no big harm, the master was uncomfortable when he saw it. It must be like the sedan chair driver in Hangzhou praised by Russell, often smiling.但我还要给自己解释几句：我虽然对于“笑嘻嘻”仿佛有点微词，但我并非意在鼓吹“阶级斗争”，因为我知道我的这一篇，杭州轿夫是不会看见的。况且“讨赤”诸君子，都不肯笑嘻嘻的去抬轿，足见以抬轿为苦境，也不独“乱党”为然。而况我的议论，其实也不过“可叹也夫”乎哉！
But I also want to explain to myself: Although I seem to be a little bitter about "smiling hee", I do not mean to advocate "class struggle", because I know that my article will not be seen by the Hangzhou bearers. Moreover, the gentlemen who "seek red" refused to carry the sedan chair with a smile, which shows that carrying the sedan chair is a misery, and it is not only the "chaotic party". Moreover, my discussion is actually nothing more than "lamentable"!现在的书籍往往“激烈”，古人的书籍也不免有违碍之处。那么，为中国“保存国粹”者，怎么办呢？我还不大明白。仅知道澳门是正在“征诗”，共收卷七千八百五十六本，经“江霞公太史（孔殷）评阅”，取录二百名。第一名的诗是：
Today's books are often "intense", and the books of the ancients are inevitably contradictory. So, what should those who "preserve the quintessence" of China do? I don't quite understand yet. It is only known that Macau is "collecting poems", with a total of 7,856 volumes, and 200 people were admitted after the "Jiang Xia Gong Taishi (Kong Yin) Review". The first place poem is:南中多乐日高会……　良时厚意愿得常……
南中多乐日高会…… 良时厚意愿得常……陵松万章发文彩……　百年贵寿齐辉光……
陵松万章发文彩…… 百年贵寿齐辉光……这是从香港报上照抄下来的，一连三圈，也原本如此，我想大概是密圈之意。这诗大约还有一种“格”，如“嵌字格”之类，但我是外行，只好不谈。所给我益处的，是我居然从此悟出了将来的“国粹”，当以诗词骈文为正宗。史学等等，恐怕未必发达。即要研究，也必先由老师宿儒，先加一番改定工夫。唯独诗词骈文，可以少有流弊。故骈文入神的饶汉祥一死，日本人也不禁为之慨叹，而“狂徒”又须挨骂了。
This is copied from the Hong Kong newspaper, three circles in a row, and it was originally like this, I think it probably means a secret circle. There is probably a kind of "grid" in this poem, such as "embedded grid", but I am a layman, so I have to leave it out. What has benefited me is that I have actually realized the "quintessence of the country" in the future, and I should take poetry and literature as authentic. Historiography, etc., may not be developed. Even if you want to study, you must first be revised by the teacher. Only poetry and literature can be less flawed. Therefore, when Rao Hanxiang, who was fascinated by the text, died, the Japanese couldn't help but sigh, and the "fanatic" had to be scolded.日本人拜服骈文于北京，“金制军”“整理国故”于香港，其爱护中国，恐其沦亡，可谓至矣。然而裁厘加税，大家都不赞成者何哉？盖厘金乃国粹，而关税非国粹也。“可叹也夫”！
日本人拜服骈文于北京，“金制军”“整理国故”于香港，其爱护中国，恐其沦亡，可谓至矣。 然而裁厘加税，大家都不赞成者何哉？盖厘金乃国粹，而关税非国粹也。 “可叹也夫”！今是中秋，璧月澄澈，叹气既完，还不想睡。重吟“征诗”，莫名其妙，稿有余纸，因录“江霞公太史”评语，俾读者咸知好处，但圈点是我僭加的——
It's the Mid-Autumn Festival, the moon is clear, and I don't want to sleep yet. Re-reciting the "Zheng Shi", inexplicable, the manuscript has more than paper, so I recorded the comments of "Jiang Xia Gong Tai Shi", so that readers can know the benefits, but the circle is my overstepping -“以谢启为题，寥寥二十八字。既用古诗十九首中字，复嵌全限内字。首二句是赋，三句是兴，末句是兴而比。步骤井然，举重若轻，绝不吃力。虚室生白，吉祥止止。洵属巧中生巧，难上加难。至其胎息之高古，意义之纯粹，格调之老苍，非寝馈汉魏古诗有年，未易臻斯境界。”
With the title of Xie Qi, there are only twenty-eight words. It uses nineteen Chinese characters from ancient poems, and also embeds words within the full limit. The first two lines are fu, the third line is prosperity, and the last sentence is prosperity and comparison. The steps are orderly, and the weight is light, and it is not strenuous. The empty room is white, and auspiciousness is halted. It is even more difficult to create ingenuity in the midst of skill. As for the antiquity, the purity of meaning, and the old style of the old style, it is not easy to reach this state without the ancient poetry of the Han and Wei dynasties. ”九月十一日，广州。
September 11, Guangzhou.

扣丝杂感

扣丝杂感

扣丝杂感

Buttons and threads are mixed以下这些话，是因为见了《语丝》（一四七期）的《随感录》（二八）而写的。
The following words were written because I saw the "Sui Gan Lu" (28) of "Yu Si" (No. 147).这半年来，凡我所看的期刊，除《北新》外，没有一种完全的：《莽原》，《新生》，《沉钟》。甚至于日本文的《斯文》，里面所讲的都是汉学，末尾附有《西游记传奇》，我想和演义来比较一下，所以很切用，但第二本即缺少，第四本起便杳然了。至于《语丝》，我所没有收到的统共有六期，后来多从市上的书铺里补得，惟有一二六和一四三终于买不到，至今还不知道内容究竟是怎样。
In the past six months, all the periodicals I have read, except for "Beixin", have none complete: "Mangyuan", "New Life", and "Shenzhong". Even the Japanese "Swen", which talks about sinology, is accompanied by "The Legend of Journey to the West" at the end, I want to compare it with the romance, so it is very useful, but the second book is missing, and the fourth book is missing. As for "Yusi", there are a total of six issues that I did not receive, and later I made up for it from bookstores in the city, but I couldn't buy 126 and 143 in the end, and I still don't know what the content is.这些收不到的期刊，是遗失，还是没收的呢？我以为两者都有。没收的地方，是北京，天津，还是上海，广州呢？我以为大约也各处都有。至于没收的缘故，那可是不得而知了。
Are these journals that cannot be received lost or confiscated? I thought it was both. Where is the confiscated place Beijing, Tianjin, or Shanghai or Guangzhou? I thought it was probably everywhere. As for the reason for the confiscation, it is unknown.我所确切知道的，有这样几件事。是《莽原》也被扣留过一期，不过这还可以说，因为里面有俄国作品的翻译。那时只要一个“俄”字，已够惊心动魄，自然无暇顾及时代和内容。但韦丛芜的《君山》，也被扣留。这一本诗，不但说不到“赤”，并且也说不到“白”，正和作者的年纪一样，是“青”的，而竟被禁锢在邮局里。黎锦明先生早有来信，说送我《烈火集》，一本是托书局寄的，怕他们忘记，自己又寄了一本。但至今已将半年，一本也没有到。我想，十之九都被没收了，因为火色既“赤”，而况又“烈”乎，当然通不过的。
What I know for sure is that there are a few things. It was "Mangyuan" that was also detained for one issue, but this can be said because there are translations of Russian works in it. At that time, only one word "Russia" was thrilling enough, and naturally there was no time to take into account the times and content. But Wei Congwu's "Junshan" was also detained. This poem not only cannot be said to be "red", but also cannot be said to be "white", it is the same age as the author, it is "green", and it is imprisoned in the post office. Mr. Li Jinming had already written to me, saying that he sent me a copy of "Fire Collection", one of which was sent by the bookstore, and he was afraid that they would forget, so he sent another one. But it has been half a year now, and not a single book has arrived. I think nine out of ten have been confiscated, because the color of the fire is both "red" and "fierce", of course it doesn't work.《语丝》一三二期寄到我这里的时候是出版后约六星期，封皮上写着两个绿色大字道：“扣留”，另外还有检查机关的印记和封条。打开看时，里面是《猓猓人的创世记》，《无题》，《寂寞札记》，《撒园荽》，《苏曼殊及其友人》，都不像会犯禁。我便看《来函照登》，是讲“情死”“情杀”的，不要紧，目下还不管这些事。只有《闲话拾遗》了。这一期特别少，共只两条。一是讲日本的，大约也还不至于犯禁。一是说来信告诉“清党”的残暴手段的，《语丝》此刻不想登。莫非因为这一条么？但不登何以又不行呢？莫明其妙。然而何以“扣留”而又放行了呢？也莫明其妙。
When the 132nd issue of "Yusi" was sent to me about six weeks after publication, it was written on the cover in two large green characters: "Detained", as well as the seal and seal of the inspection agency. When I opened it, it was "The Genesis of the Monkey", "Untitled", "Lonely Notes", "Saying Garden Grass", "Su Manshu and His Friends", all of which did not seem to be prohibited. I read "Letter Zhaodeng", which is about "love death" and "love killing", it doesn't matter, I don't care about these things at the moment. There is only "Gossip Pickup". This issue is particularly small, only two in total. First, if you talk about Japan, it will probably not be prohibited. First, the letter told the brutal methods of the "Qing Party", and "Yusi" did not want to publish it at the moment. Could it be because of this? But why can't you not climb it? No one understands the mystery. However, why was it "detained" and then released? I don't understand the mystery.这莫明其妙的根源，我以为在于检查的人员。
I thought the source of this inexplicable lies in the inspectors.中国近来一有事，首先就检查邮电。这检查的人员，有的是团长或区长，关于论文诗歌之类，我觉得我们不必和他多谈。但即使是读书人，其实还是一样的说不明白，尤其是在所谓革命的地方。直截痛快的革命训练弄惯了，将所有革命精神提起，如油的浮在水面一般，然而顾不及增加营养。所以，先前是刊物的封面上画一个工人，手捏铁铲或鹤嘴锹，文中有“革命！革命！”“打倒！打倒！”者，一帆风顺，算是好的。现在是要画一个少年军人拿旗骑在马上，里面“严办！严办！”这才庶几免于罪戾。至于什么“讽刺”，“幽默”，“反语”，“闲谈”等类，实在还是格不相入。从格不相入，而成为视之懵然，结果即不免有些弄得乱七八糟，谁也莫明其妙。
Whenever something happens in China recently, the first thing to do is to check posts and telecommunications. Some of the people who inspect this are the head of the regiment or the district, and I don't think we need to talk to him more about papers and poems. But even scholars still can't understand the same, especially in the so-called revolutionary place. I got used to the straightforward and happy revolutionary training, and lifted all the revolutionary spirit like oil floating on the water, but I didn't care about increasing nutrition. Therefore, the cover of the publication was previously painted with a worker holding a shovel or a crane's bill shovel, and the text had the words "Revolution! Revolution! "Down down! Overthrow! "It's smooth sailing, it's good. Now I want to draw a young soldier riding a horse with a flag, and inside it is "Strict handling!" Strict handling! This is almost exempt from guilt. As for what kind of "irony", "humor", "irony", "gossip", etc., they are really incompatible. From the grid to the inconsistency, and becoming confused, the result is inevitably a bit messy, and no one understands the mystery.还有一层，是终日检查刊物，不久就会头昏眼花，于是讨厌，于是生气，于是觉得刊物大抵可恶——尤其是不容易了然的——而非严办不可。我记得书籍不切边，我也是作俑者之一，当时实在是没有什么恶意的。后来看见方传宗先生的通信（见本《丝》一二九），竟说得要毛边装订的人有如此可恶，不觉满肚子冤屈。但仔细一想，方先生似乎是图书馆员，那么，要他老是裁那并不感到兴趣的毛边书，终于不免生气而大骂毛边党，正是毫不足怪的事。检查员也同此例，久而久之，就要发火，开初或者看得详细点，但后来总不免《烈火集》也可怕，《君山》也可疑，——只剩了一条最稳当的路：扣留。
There is also a layer of checking publications all day long, and soon they will be dizzy, so they hate it, so they get angry, so they feel that publications are generally hateful—especially those that are not easy to understand—rather than strictly enforceable. I remember that the books were not cut to the edge, and I was also one of the figurines, and there was really no malice at that time. Later, when I saw Mr. Fang Chuanzong's correspondence (see this "Silk" 129), I actually said that the person who wanted to bind it with raw edge was so hateful, and I didn't feel wronged. But if you think about it carefully, Mr. Fang seems to be a librarian, so it is not surprising that he always cuts the rough edge books that he is not interested in, and finally gets angry and scolds the Mao Edge Party. The inspector is the same, over time, he will get angry, and at the beginning or look at it in detail, but then it is inevitable that "Fire Collection" is also terrible, and "Junshan" is also suspicious,—— and there is only one safest way left: detention.两个月前罢，看见报上记着某邮局因为扣下的刊物太多，无处存放了，一律焚毁。我那时实在感到心痛，仿佛内中很有几本是我的东西似的。呜呼哀哉！我的《烈火集》呵。我的《西游记传奇》呵。我的……。
Two months ago, I saw a newspaper that a post office had nowhere to store it because it had detained too many publications, so they were all burned. I really felt heartbroken at that time, as if there were a few books in it that belonged to me. Alas! My "Fire Collection" huh. My "Legend of Journey to the West" huh. It's mine.......附带还要说几句关于毛边的牢骚。我先前在北京参与印书的时候，自己暗暗地定下了三样无关紧要的小改革，来试一试。一，是首页的书名和著者的题字，打破对称式；二，是每篇的第一行之前，留下几行空白；三，就是毛边。现在的结果，第一件已经有恢复香炉烛台式的了；第二件有时无论怎样叮嘱，而临印的时候，工人终于将第一行的字移到纸边，用“迅雷不及掩耳的手段”，使你无可挽救；第三件被攻击最早，不久我便有条件的降伏了。与李老板约：别的不管，只是我的译著，必须坚持毛边到底！但是，今竟如何？老板送给我的五部或十部，至今还确是毛边。不过在书铺里，我却发见了毫无“毛”气，四面光滑的《彷徨》之类。归根结蒂，他们都将彻底的胜利。所以说我想改革社会，或者和改革社会有关，那是完全冤枉的，我早已瘟头瘟脑，躺在板床上吸烟卷——彩凤牌——了。
A few more complaints about the raw edge. When I participated in the printing of books in Beijing, I secretly decided on three irrelevant small reforms to try. First, it is the title of the book on the first page and the author's inscription, breaking the symmetry; second, leave a few blank lines before the first line of each article; Third, it is the raw edge. As a result, the first one has been restored to the incense burner candlestick style; The second thing is sometimes no matter how you are advised, and when it is about to be printed, the worker finally moves the words of the first line to the edge of the paper, using "lightning speed" to make you irreparable; The third was attacked the earliest, and soon I surrendered conditionally. Make an appointment with Boss Li: Nothing else, it's just my translation, and I must stick to the rough edge to the end! But what is it now? The five or ten copies given to me by the boss are still rough. However, in the bookstore, I found "Wandering" and the like that had no "hair" and smooth sides. In the final analysis, they will all be outright victorious. So I want to reform society, or have something to do with it, that is completely unjust, I have already been in a state of madness, lying on the bed and smoking a cigarette - Caifeng brand - .言归正传。刊物的暂时要碰钉子，也不但遇到检查员，我恐怕便是读书的青年，也还是一样。先已说过，革命地方的文字，是要直截痛快，“革命！革命！”的，这才是“革命文学”。我曾经看见一种期刊上登载一篇文章，后有作者的附白，说这一篇没有谈及革命，对不起读者，对不起对不起。但自从“清党”以后，这“直截痛快”以外，却又增添了一种神经过敏。“命”自然还是要革的，然而又不宜太革，太革便近于过激，过激便近于共产党，变了“反革命”了。所以现在的“革命文学”，是在顽固这一种反革命和共产党这一种反革命之间。
Back to the point. The publication has to hit a nail for the time being, and not only do I encounter inspectors, I am afraid that I am still a young man studying. As I have said before, the words in revolutionary places should be straightforward and cheerful, "Revolution!" Revolution! This is "revolutionary literature". I once saw an article published in a journal with the author's postscript saying that this article did not talk about revolution, sorry readers, sorry, sorry. But since the "purge of the party", in addition to this "straightforward and happy", it has added a kind of nervousness. "Life" naturally still needs to be revolutionized, but it should not be too revolutionary, too revolutionary will be close to excessive, and excessive will be close to the Communist Party, and it will become a "counter-revolution". Therefore, the current "revolutionary literature" is between the stubborn counter-revolution and the Communist Party.于是又发生了问题，便是“革命文学”站在这两种危险物之间，如何保持她的纯正——正宗。这势必至于必须防止近于赤化的思想和文字，以及将来有趋于赤化之虑的思想和文字。例如，攻击礼教和白话，即有趋于赤化之忧。因为共产派无视一切旧物，而白话则始于《新青年》，而《新青年》乃独秀所办。今天看见北京教育部禁止白话的消息，我逆料《语丝》必将有几句感慨，但我实在是无动于中。我觉得连思想文字，也到处都将窒息，几句白话黑话，已经没有什么大关系了。
So the question arises again, that is, how "revolutionary literature" stands between these two dangerous things and maintains its purity - authenticity. This inevitably leads to the need to prevent thoughts and writings that are close to reddening, as well as thoughts and writings that tend to become reddened in the future. For example, attacking etiquette and vernacular is a risk of becoming red. Because the communists ignore all the old things, and the vernacular begins with "New Youth", and "New Youth" is run by Duxiu. Today, when I saw the news that the Ministry of Education in Beijing banned the vernacular, I expected that "Yusi" would have a few words of emotion, but I was really indifferent. I think even thoughts and words will be suffocated everywhere, and a few words in plain and black words no longer have much to do with it.那么，谈谈风月，讲讲女人，怎样呢？也不行。这是“不革命”。“不革命”虽然无罪，然而是不对的！
So, how about talking about the wind and moon and women? Neither can it. This is "non-revolutionary". Although "non-revolution" is not guilty, it is wrong!现在在南边，只剩了一条“革命文学”的独木小桥，所以外来的许多刊物，便通不过，扑通！扑通！都掉下去了。
Now in the south, there is only a single-log bridge of "revolutionary literature" left, so many foreign publications can't pass through, plop! Thump! All fell.但这直捷痛快和神经过敏的状态，其实大半也还是视指挥刀的指挥而转移的。而此时刀尖的挥动，还是横七竖八。方向有个一定之后，或者可以好些罢。然而也不过是“好些”，内中的骨子，恐怕还不外乎窒息，因为这是先天性的遗传。
But this state of straightforwardness and nervousness is actually mostly transferred according to the command of the commanding knife. At this time, the swing of the tip of the knife was still horizontal and vertical. After a certain direction, maybe it can be better. However, it is only "better", and the bones inside are probably nothing more than suffocation, because this is congenital heredity.先前偶然看见一种报上骂郁达夫先生，说他《洪水》上的一篇文章，是不怀好意，恭维汉口。我就去买《洪水》来看，则无非说旧式的崇拜一个英雄，已和现代潮流不合，倒也看不出什么恶意来。这就证明着眼光的钝锐，我和现在的青年文学家已很不同了。所以《语丝》的莫明其妙的失踪，大约也许只是我们自己莫明其妙，而上面的检查员云云，倒是假设的恕词。
I happened to see a newspaper scolding Mr. Yu Dafu, saying that an article in his "Flood" was ill-intentioned and complimented Hankou. I went to buy "Flood" to watch, and it was nothing more than the old-fashioned worship of a hero, which was no longer in line with the modern trend, and I couldn't see any malice. This proves that the vision is dull, and I am very different from today's young writers. Therefore, the inexplicable disappearance of "Yusi" may just be our own incomprehensible, and the inspector Yunyun above is a hypothetical forgiveness.至于一四五期以后，这里是全都收到的，大约惟在上海者被押。假如真的被押，我却以为大约也与吴老先生无关。“打倒……打倒……严办……严办……”，固然是他老先生亲笔的话，未免有些责任，但有许多动作却并非他的手脚了。在中国，凡是猛人（这是广州常用的话，其中可以包括名人，能人，阔人三种），都有这种的运命。
As for the first, fourth, and fifth periods, all of them were received here, and probably only those in Shanghai were detained. If he was really detained, I thought it probably had nothing to do with Mr. Wu. "Down with ...... Overthrow...... Strict ...... Strictly handle ......", although it is his old husband's handwriting, there are some responsibilities, but there are many actions that are not his hands and feet. In China, all fierce people (this is commonly used in Guangzhou, which can include celebrities, capable people, and broad people) have this fate.无论是何等样人，一成为猛人，则不问其“猛”之大小，我觉得他的身边便总有几个包围的人们，围得水泄不透。那结果，在内，是使该猛人逐渐变成昏庸，有近乎傀儡的趋势。在外，是使别人所看见的并非该猛人的本相，而是经过了包围者的曲折而显现的幻形。至于幻得怎样，则当视包围者是三棱镜呢，还是凸面或凹面而异。假如我们能有一种机会，偶然走到一个猛人的近旁，便可以看见这时包围者的脸面和言动，和对付别的人们的时候有怎样地不同。我们在外面看见一个猛人的亲信，谬妄骄恣，很容易以为该猛人所爱的是这样的人物。殊不知其实是大谬不然的。猛人所看见的他是娇嫩老实，非常可爱，简直说话会口吃，谈天要脸红。老实说一句罢，虽是“世故的老人”如不佞者，有时从旁看来也觉得倒也并不坏。
No matter what kind of person he is, once he becomes a fierce man, he doesn't care about the size of his "fierce", I think there are always a few people around him, surrounded by impenetrable water. The result, including this, is to make the fierce man gradually become mediocre and have a tendency to be almost a puppet. Outside, what others see is not the true face of the fierce man, but the transformation that appears after the twists and turns of the surrounders. As for how the illusion is, it depends on whether the surrounder is a triangular prism or a convex or concave surface. If we had the opportunity to walk up to a fierce man by chance, we could see how the face and words and actions of the surrounded person were different from when dealing with other people. We see a fierce man's cronies outside, arrogant and arrogant, and it is easy to think that the fierce man loves such a person. As everyone knows, it is actually a big mistake. The fierce man saw that he was delicate and honest, very cute, he could stutter when he spoke, and he would blush when talking. To be honest, although he is a "worldly old man", he sometimes thinks that it is not bad from the side.但同时也就发生了胡乱的矫诏和过度的巴结，而晦气的人物呀，刊物呀，植物呀，矿物呀，则于是乎遭灾。但猛人大抵是不知道的。凡知道一点北京掌故的，该还记得袁世凯做皇帝时候的事罢。要看日报，包围者连报纸都会特印了给他看，民意全部拥戴，舆论一致赞成。直要待到蔡松坡云南起义，这才阿呀一声，连一连吃了二十多个馒头都自己不知道。但这一出戏也就闭幕，袁公的龙驭上宾于天了。
But at the same time, there were also random corrections and excessive flattery, and bad characters, publications, plants, and minerals suffered disasters. But the fierce man probably doesn't know. Anyone who knows a little about Beijing's history should remember what happened when Yuan Shikai was emperor. If you want to read the daily newspaper, the besiegers will even print the newspaper for him to see, and the public opinion is all supported, and the public opinion is unanimous. It was until Cai Songpo's Yunnan Uprising that he didn't even know that he had eaten more than 20 steamed buns in a row. But this play also came to an end, and Yuan Gong's dragon chariot was a guest of honor.包围者便离开了这一株已倒的大树，去寻求别一个新猛人。
The besiegers left the fallen tree and went to find another new fierce man.我曾经想做过一篇《包围新论》，先述包围之方法，次论中国之所以永是走老路，原因即在包围，因为猛人虽有起仆兴亡，而包围者永是这一伙。次更论猛人倘能脱离包围，中国就有五成得救。结末是包围脱离法。——然而终于想不出好的方法来，所以这新论也还没有敢动笔。
I once wanted to write an article "New Theory of Encirclement", first describing the method of encirclement, and then discussing the reason why China always follows the old path, the reason is encirclement, because although the fierce people have the rise and fall of falls, the besiegers will always be this group. Furthermore, if the fierce people can get out of the encirclement, China will be saved by 50%. The ending is the encirclement and detachment method. ——However, I finally couldn't think of a good way, so I didn't dare to write about this new theory yet.爱国志士和革命青年幸勿以我为懒于筹画，只开目录而没有文章。我思索是也在思索的，曾经想到了两样法子，但反复一想，都无用。一，是猛人自己出去看看外面的情形，不要先“清道”。然而虽不“清道”，大家一遇猛人，大抵也会先就改变了本然的情形，再也看不出真模样。二，是广接各样的人物，不为一定的若干人所包围。然而久而久之，也终于有一群制胜，而这最后胜利者的包围力则最强大，归根结蒂，也还是古已有之的运命：龙驭上宾于天。
Patriots and revolutionary youth should not think that I am lazy to plan, only open the catalog and have no articles. I was thinking about it, and I thought of two ways, but after thinking about it repeatedly, it was useless. First, it is the fierce man who goes out to see the situation outside, and does not "clear the way" first. However, although it is not "cleared", when everyone encounters a fierce person, they will probably change their original situation first, and they will no longer be able to see their true appearance. Second, it is to connect with a wide range of characters, not to be surrounded by a certain number of people. However, over time, there was finally a group of winners, and the encirclement of the final winner was the strongest, and in the final analysis, it was still the fate that existed in ancient times: the dragon was a guest in the sky.世事也还是像螺旋。但《语丝》今年特别碰钉子于南方，仿佛得了新境遇，这又是什么缘故呢？这一点，我自以为是容易解答的。
The world is still like a spiral. But "Yusi" hit a nail in the south this year, as if it had a new situation, what is the reason for this? I think this is easy to answer.“革命尚未成功”，是这里常见的标语。但由我看来，这仿佛已经成了一句谦虚话，在后方的一大部分的人们的心里，是“革命已经成功”或“将近成功”了。既然已经成功或将近成功，自己又是革命家，也就是中国的主人翁，则对于一切，当然有管理的权利和义务。刊物虽小事，自然也在看管之列。有近于赤化之虑者无论矣，而要说不吉利语，即可以说是颇有近于“反革命”的气息了，至少，也很令人不欢。而《语丝》，是每有不肯凑趣的坏脾气的，则其不免于有时失踪也，盖犹其小焉者耳。
"The revolution has not yet succeeded" is a common slogan here. But in my opinion, this seems to have become a modest phrase, and in the hearts of a large part of the people in the rear, it is "the revolution has succeeded" or "is about to succeed". Since he has succeeded or is about to succeed, and he is a revolutionary, that is, the master of China, he certainly has the right and obligation to manage everything. Although the publication is a small matter, it is naturally in the list of caretakers. There are no concerns about being close to reddening, but if you want to say unlucky words, it can be said that it has an atmosphere close to "counter-revolution", at least, it is also very unpleasant. And "Words" is a bad temper that refuses to be funny, so it is inevitable that it will disappear from time to time, because it is still a small part.九月十五日。
September 15th.

“公理”之所在

“公理”之所在

“公理”之所在

Where is the "axiom"在广州的一个“学者”说，“鲁迅的话已经说完，《语丝》不必看了。”这是真的，我的话已经说完，去年说的，今年还适用，恐怕明年也还适用。但我诚恳地希望他不至于适用到十年二十年之后。倘这样，中国可就要完了，虽然我倒可以自慢。
A "scholar" in Guangzhou said, "Lu Xun's words have been spoken, and there is no need to read "Yusi". "It's true, my words have been said, what I said last year, it still applies this year, and I'm afraid it will still apply next year. But I sincerely hope that it will not apply to ten or twenty years from now. If this is the case, China will be over, although I can be proud.公理和正义都被“正人君子”拿去了，所以我已经一无所有。这是我去年说过的话，而今年确也还是如此。然而我虽然一无所有，寻求是还在寻求的，正如每个穷光棍，大抵不会忘记银钱一样。
Both axioms and justice have been taken away by "righteous gentlemen", so I have nothing. This is what I said last year, and it is true this year. However, although I have nothing, I still seek, just as every poor bachelor probably does not forget money.话也还没有说完。今年，我竟发见了公理之所在了。或者不能说发见，只可以说证实。北京中央公园里不是有一座白石牌坊，上面刻着四个大字道，“公理战胜”么？——Yes，就是这个。
The words are not finished yet. This year, I actually discovered where the axioms lie. Or it cannot be said to have been discovered, but can only be said to be confirmed. Isn't there a white stone archway in Beijing's Central Park, with four big characters engraved on it, "Axiom wins"? - Yes, this is it.这四个字的意思是“有公理者战胜”，也就是“战胜者有公理”。
These four words mean "the axiomatic overcome", that is, "the overcomer has axioms".段执政有卫兵，“孤桐先生”秉政，开枪打败了请愿的学生，胜矣。于是东吉祥胡同的“正人君子”们的“公理”也蓬蓬勃勃。慨自执政退隐，“孤桐先生”“下野”之后，——呜呼，公理亦从而零落矣。那里去了呢？枪炮战胜了投壶，阿！有了，在南边了。于是乎南下，南下，南下……
Duan Ruling had guards, and "Mr. Gutong" was in power, shooting and defeating the petitioning students, and he won. As a result, the "axioms" of the "righteous gentlemen" in Dongjixiang Hutong are also flourishing. After the retirement of the ruling party, after "Mr. Gutung" and "Shianye",—— alas, the axioms have also fallen. Where did it go? The guns defeated the pot thrower, ah! Yes, it's in the south. So I went south, south, south......于是乎“正人君子”们又和久违的“公理”相见了。
So the "righteous gentlemen" met the long-lost "axiom" again.《现代评论》的一千元津贴事件，我一向没有插过嘴，而“主将”也将我拉在里面，乱骂一通，——大约以为我是“首领”之故罢。横竖说也被骂，不说也被骂，我就回敬一杯，问问你们所自称为“现代派”者，今年可曾幡然变计，另外运动，收受了新的战胜者的津贴没有？
I have never interjected about the 1,000 yuan allowance incident of the "Modern Review", and the "main general" also pulled me in and scolded me indiscriminately,—— probably thinking that I was the "leader". I will return the favor and ask your self-proclaimed "modernists" if they have changed their minds this year, and have they received allowances for new victors in other sports?还有一问，是：“公理”几块钱一斤？
Another question is: "How many dollars a pound is an axiom"?

可恶罪

可恶罪

可恶罪

Heal sin这是一种新的“世故”。
This is a new kind of "sophistication".我以为法律上的许多罪名，都是花言巧语，只消以一语包括之，曰： 可恶罪。
I think that many crimes in the law are rhetoric, and they are only included in one sentence: heinous crime.譬如，有人觉得一个人可恶，要给他吃点苦罢，就有这样的法子。倘在广州而又是“清党”之前，则可以暗暗地宣传他是无政府主义者。那么，共产青年自然会说他“反革命”，有罪。若在“清党”之后呢，要说他是CP或CY，没有证据，则可以指为“亲共派”。那么，清党委员会自然会说他“反革命”，有罪。再不得已，则只好寻些别的事由，诉诸法律了。但这比较地麻烦。
For example, if someone thinks a person is hateful and wants to give him some suffering, there is such a way. If he was in Guangzhou and before the "Qing Party", he could secretly advertise that he was an anarchist. Then, the communist youth will naturally say that he is "counter-revolutionary" and guilty. If after the "Qing Party", if you want to say that he is CP or CY, and there is no evidence, you can be referred to as a "pro-communist". Then, the Qing Party Committee would naturally say that he was a "counter-revolutionary" and guilty. If you have no choice, you have to find some other reasons and resort to the law. But this is more troublesome.我先前总以为人是有罪，所以枪毙或坐监的。现在才知道其中的许多，是先因为被人认为“可恶”，这才终于犯了罪。许多罪人，应该称为“可恶的人”。
I used to think that people were guilty, so they were shot or imprisoned. Only now do we know that many of them were first considered "hateful" and then finally committed crimes. Many sinners should be called "abominable people".九，十四。
IX, XIV.

“意表之外”

“意表之外”

“意表之外”

"Unexpected"有恒先生在《北新周刊》上诧异我为什么不说话，我已经去信公开答复了。还有一层没有说。这也是一种新的“世故”。
Mr. Youheng was surprised why I didn't speak in the "Beixin Weekly", and I have already written a public reply. There is another layer that is not said. This is also a new kind of "sophistication".我的杂感常不免于骂。但今年发见了，我的骂对于被骂者是大抵有利的。
My mixed feelings are often scolded. But this year, I found out that my scolding is generally beneficial to the scolded.拿来做广告，显而易见，不消说了。还有：
It is obvious that it is used for advertising. And also:1，天下以我为可恶者多，所以有一个被我所骂的人要去运动一个以我为可恶的人，只要摊出我的杂感来，便可以做他们的“兰谱”，“相视而笑，莫逆于心”了。“咱们一伙儿”。
1. There are many people in the world who think I am a hate, so there is a person who is scolded by me to exercise a person who thinks I am a hate, as long as I spread out my miscellaneous feelings, I can do their "Lan Pu", "look at each other and laugh, do not go against my heart". "Let's be together".2，假如有一个人在办一件事，自然是不会好的。但我一开口，他却可以归罪于我了。譬如办学校罢，教员请不到，便说：这是鲁迅说了坏话的缘故；学生闹一点小乱子罢，又是鲁迅说了坏话的缘故。他倒干干净净。
2. If one person is doing something, it will naturally not be good. But as soon as I spoke, he could blame me. For example, if a school is run and the teacher can't invite it, he says: This is because Lu Xun said bad things; The students made a little trouble, and it was because Lu Xun said bad things. He was clean.我又不学耶稣，何苦替别人来背十字架呢？
I don't learn from Jesus, so why bother to carry the cross for others?但“江山好改，本性难移”，也许后来还要开开口。可是定了“新法”了，除原先说过的“主将”之类以外，新的都不再说出他的真姓名，只叫“一个人”，“某学者”，“某教授”，“某君”。这么一来，他利用的时候便至少总得费点力，先须加说明。
But "the country is easy to change, but the nature is difficult to change", maybe I will open my mouth later. However, the "new law" was decided, and except for the original "main general" and the like, the new ones no longer said his real name, only called "a person", "a certain scholar", "a certain professor", and "a certain gentleman". In this way, he always has to use it with at least some effort, and he must explain it first.你以为“骂”决非好东西罢，于有些人还是有利的。人类究竟是可怕的东西。就是能够咬死人的毒蛇，商人们也会将它浸在酒里，什么“三蛇酒”，“五蛇酒”，去卖钱。
You think that "scolding" is by no means a good thing, but it is still beneficial to some people. Humans are terrible things. Even if it is a poisonous snake that can bite people, merchants will also soak it in wine, what "three snake wine" and "five snake wine" to sell for money.这种办法实在比“交战”厉害得多，能使我不敢写杂感。但再来一回罢，写“不敢写杂感”的杂感。
This method is really much more powerful than "fighting", and it can make me dare not write about miscellaneous feelings. But again, write the miscellaneous feeling of "dare not write about miscellaneous feelings".

新时代的放债法

新时代的放债法

新时代的放债法

Money lending laws in the new era还有一种新的“世故”。
There is also a new kind of "sophistication".先前，我总以为做债主的人是一定要有钱的，近来才知道无须。在“新时代”里，有一种精神的资本家。
Previously, I always thought that creditors must be rich, but recently I realized that there is no need. In the "new era", there is a kind of spiritual capitalist.你倘说中国像沙漠罢，这资本家便乘机而至了，自称是喷泉。你说社会冷酷罢，他便自说是热；你说周围黑暗罢，他便自说是太阳。
If you say that China is like a desert, this capitalist will take the opportunity to come and call himself a fountain. If you say that society is cold, he will say that he is hot; You say it's dark around, and he says it's the sun.阿！世界上冠冕堂皇的招牌，都被拿去了。岂但拿去而已哉。他还润泽，温暖，照临了你。因为他是喷泉，热，太阳呵！
Pander to! The world's high-sounding signboards have been taken away. It's not just about taking it away. He is also moist and warm, shining on you. Because he is a fountain, hot, sun!这是一宗恩典。
It is a grace.不但此也哩。你如有一点产业，那是他赏赐你的。为什么呢？因为倘若他一提倡共产，你的产业便要充公了，但他没有提倡，所以你能有现在的产业。那自然是他赏赐你的。
Not only that. If you have a little inheritance, it is a reward from Him. Why? Because if he advocates communism, your property will be confiscated, but he did not advocate it, so you can have the industry you have now. Naturally, he rewarded you.你如有一个爱人，也是他赏赐你的。为什么呢？因为他是天才而且革命家，许多女性都渴仰到五体投地。他只要说一声“来！”便都飞奔过去了，你的当然也在内。但他不说“来！”所以你得有现在的爱人。那自然也是他赏赐你的。
If you have a lover, he will reward you. Why? Because he was a genius and a revolutionary, many women admired him to the point of falling to the ground. He just needs to say "Come on!" "Then they all rushed over, and of course yours was included. But he doesn't say, "Come on!" "So you have to have your current lover. Naturally, that is also what He rewarded you.这又是一宗恩典。
This is another grace.还不但此也哩！他到你那里来的时候，还每回带来一担同情！一百回就是一百担——你如果不知道，那就因为你没有精神的眼睛——经过一年，利上加利，就是二三百担……
And that's not all! When he comes to you, he brings a load of sympathy every time! A hundred times is one hundred loads—if you don't know, it's because you don't have spiritual eyes—after a year, profit increases to profit, which is two or three hundred loads......阿阿！这又是一宗大恩典。
Oh! This is another great grace.于是乎是算账了。不得了，这么雄厚的资本，还不够买一个灵魂么？但革命家是客气的，无非要你报答一点，供其使用——其实也不算使用，不过是“帮忙”而已。
So it's settled. Isn't such a strong capital enough to buy a soul? But revolutionaries are polite, and they just want you to repay them for their use - in fact, they are not used, they are just "helping".倘不如命地“帮忙”，当然，罪大恶极了。先将忘恩负义之罪，布告于天下。而且不但此也，还有许多罪恶，写在账簿上哩，一旦发布，你便要“身败名裂”了。想不“身败名裂”么，只有一条路，就是赶快来“帮忙”以赎罪。
If you don't "help" as you are destined, of course, it is a heinous sin. First, the crime of ungratefulness and injustice was announced to the world. And not only that, but there are also many sins written in the account book, and once published, you will be "ruined". Don't you want to "ruin your reputation", there is only one way, which is to hurry up and "help" to atone for your sins.然而我不幸竟看见了“新时代的新青年”的身边藏着这许多账簿，而他们自己对于“身败名裂”又怀着这样天大的恐慌。
However, I unfortunately saw that there were so many account books hidden around the "new youth of the new era", and they themselves had such a great panic about "ruining their reputation".于是乎又得新“世故”：关上门，塞好酒瓶，捏紧皮夹。这倒于我很保存了一些润泽，光和热——我是只看见物质的。
So there is a new "worldly old": close the door, stuff the wine bottle, and squeeze the wallet. This is because I have saved some moisture, light and heat - I only see matter.九，十四。
IX, XIV.

魏晋风度及文章与药及酒之关系　——九月间在广州夏期学术演讲会讲

魏晋风度及文章与药及酒之关系Wei and Jin demeanor and the relationship between articles and medicine and wine——九月间在广州夏期学术演讲会讲 - Lectured at the Guangzhou Summer Academic Lecture in September
我今天所讲的，就是黑板上写着的这样一个题目。
What I am talking about today is such a topic written on the blackboard.中国文学史，研究起来，可真不容易，研究古的，恨材料太少，研究今的，材料又太多，所以到现在，中国较完全的文学史尚未出现。今天讲的题目是文学史上的一部分，也是材料太少，研究起来很有困难的地方。因为我们想研究某一时代的文学，至少要知道作者的环境，经历和著作。
The history of Chinese literature is really not easy to study, studying the ancients, hating too little material, studying the present, and too much material, so until now, a more complete literary history in China has not yet appeared. The topic I am talking about today is a part of the history of literature, and it is also a place where there is too little material and it is very difficult to study. Because if we want to study the literature of a certain era, we must at least know the author's environment, experience and writings.汉末魏初这个时代是很重要的时代，在文学方面起一个重大的变化，因当时正在黄巾和董卓大乱之后，而且又是党锢的纠纷之后，这时曹操出来了。——不过我们讲到曹操，很容易就联想起《三国志演义》，更而想起戏台上那一位花面的奸臣，但这不是观察曹操的真正方法。现在我们再看历史，在历史上的记载和论断有时也是极靠不住的，不能相信的地方很多，因为通常我们晓得，某朝的年代长一点，其中必定好人多；某朝的年代短一点，其中差不多没有好人。为什么呢？因为年代长了，做史的是本朝人，当然恭维本朝的人物，年代短了，做史的是别朝人，便很自由地贬斥其异朝的人物，所以在秦朝，差不多在史的记载上半个好人也没有。曹操在史上年代也是颇短的，自然也逃不了被后一朝人说坏话的公例。其实，曹操是一个很有本事的人，至少是一个英雄，我虽不是曹操一党，但无论如何，总是非常佩服他。
The era of the late Han Dynasty and the beginning of the Wei Dynasty was a very important era, and there was a major change in literature, because it was after the chaos between the Yellow Turbans and Dong Zhuo, and after the dispute between the party and the party, Cao Cao came out at this time. ——However, when we talk about Cao Cao, it is easy to think of "Romance of the Three Kingdoms", and even more so of the traitor with a flowery face on the stage, but this is not the real way to observe Cao Cao. Now if we look at history again, the records and judgments in history are sometimes extremely unreliable, and there are many things that cannot be believed, because usually we know that the age of a certain dynasty is longer, and there must be many good people among them; The age of a certain dynasty is a little shorter, and there are almost no good people in it. Why? Because the age is long, it is the people of this dynasty who make history, of course, the characters of this dynasty are complimented, and the age is short, and the people who make history are people from other dynasties, so they are very free to criticize the figures of other dynasties, so in the Qin Dynasty, there are almost no good people in the records of history. Cao Cao's age in history is also quite short, and naturally he cannot escape the common practice of being spoken ill of by the later dynasty. In fact, Cao Cao is a very capable person, at least a hero, although I am not Cao Cao's party, but no matter what, I always admire him very much.研究那时的文学，现在较为容易了，因为已经有人做过工作： 在文集一方面有清严可均辑的《全上古三代秦汉三国晋南北朝文》。其中于此有用的，是《全汉文》，《全三国文》，《全晋文》。
It is easier to study the literature of that time now, because someone has already done the work: On the one hand, there is the "All the Ancient Three Dynasties of Qin and Han Dynasty Jin, Northern and Southern Dynasties". Among them, the useful ones here are "All Chinese Literature", "All Three Kingdoms Text", and "All Jin Text".在诗一方面有丁福保辑的《全汉三国晋南北朝诗》。——丁福保是做医生的，现在还在。
On the one hand, there is the "Poems of the Three Kingdoms of the Southern and Northern Dynasties of the Han Dynasty" compiled by Ding Fubao. ——Ding Fubao was a doctor and is still there.辑录关于这时代的文学评论有刘师培编的《中国中古文学史》。这本书是北大的讲义，刘先生已死，此书由北大出版。
The literary criticism of this era includes "History of Medieval Chinese Literature" edited by Liu Shipei. This book is a handout from Peking University, Mr. Liu is dead, and this book is published by Peking University.上面三种书对于我们的研究有很大的帮助。能使我们看出这时代的文学的确有点异彩。
The above three books are of great help to our research. It can make us see that the literature of this era is indeed a bit brilliant.我今天所讲，倘若刘先生的书里已详的，我就略一点；反之，刘先生所略的，我就较详一点。
What I am talking about today, if it is detailed in Mr. Liu's book, I will omit it; On the contrary, what Mr. Liu omitted, I will be more detailed.董卓之后，曹操专权。在他的统治之下，第一个特色便是尚刑名。他的立法是很严的，因为当大乱之后，大家都想做皇帝，大家都想叛乱，故曹操不能不如此。曹操曾自己说过：“倘无我，不知有多少人称王称帝！”这句话他倒并没有说谎。因此之故，影响到文章方面，成了清峻的风格。——就是文章要简约严明的意思。
After Dong Zhuo, Cao Cao was in power. Under his rule, the first feature was Shang Xingming. His legislation was very strict, because after the chaos, everyone wanted to be emperor, everyone wanted to rebel, so Cao Cao couldn't help but be like this. Cao Cao once said himself: "If there is no me, I don't know how many people are called kings and emperors!" He didn't lie about this. Therefore, it has affected the article and has become a clear style. ——It means that the article should be simple and strict.此外还有一个特点，就是尚通脱。他为什么要尚通脱呢？自然也与当时的风气有莫大的关系。因为在党锢之祸以前，凡党中人都自命清流，不过讲“清”讲得太过，便成固执，所以在汉末，清流的举动有时便非常可笑了。
In addition, there is another feature, that is, Shang Tongtuo. Why did he want to take off? Naturally, it also has a lot to do with the atmosphere at that time. Because before the disaster of party confinement, all party members called themselves Qingliu, but if they talked too much about "Qing", they would become stubborn, so at the end of the Han Dynasty, Qingliu's actions were sometimes very ridiculous.比方有一个有名的人，普通的人去拜访他，先要说几句话，倘这几句话说得不对，往往会遭倨傲的待遇，叫他坐到屋外去，甚而至于拒绝不见。
For example, if a famous person visits him, he must first say a few words, and if these words are not right, he will often be treated arrogantly, asking him to sit outside the house, or even refuse to see him.又如有一个人，他和他的姊夫是不对的，有一回他到姊姊那里去吃饭之后，便要将饭钱算回给姊姊。她不肯要，他就于出门之后，把那些钱扔在街上，算是付过了。
Another person who is wrong with his brother-in-law once went to his sister's house for dinner and then asked to return the money for the meal to his sister. She refused to ask for it, so after he went out, he threw the money on the street, which was considered to have been paid.个人这样闹闹脾气还不要紧，若治国平天下也这样闹起执拗的脾气来，那还成甚么话？所以深知此弊的曹操要起来反对这种习气，力倡通脱。通脱即随便之意。此种提倡影响到文坛，便产生多量想说甚么便说甚么的文章。
It doesn't matter if an individual has such a noisy temper, if he governs the country and the world also has such a stubborn temper, what is the point? Therefore, Cao Cao, who was well aware of this drawback, wanted to rise up against this habit and advocate liberation. Tongtong means casual. This kind of advocacy has affected the literary world, resulting in a large number of articles that say whatever they want.更因思想通脱之后，废除固执，遂能充分容纳异端和外来的思想，故孔教以外的思想源源引入。
Moreover, because after the ideology was liberated, stubbornness was abolished, so that heresy and foreign ideas could be fully accommodated, so ideas other than Confucianism were introduced in a steady stream.总括起来，我们可以说汉末魏初的文章是清峻，通脱。在曹操本身，也是一个改造文章的祖师，可惜他的文章传的很少。他胆子很大，文章从通脱得力不少，做文章时又没有顾忌，想写的便写出来。
To sum up, we can say that the articles of the late Han Dynasty and the beginning of the Wei Dynasty are clear and clear. In Cao Cao himself, he was also an ancestor who transformed the article, but unfortunately his articles were rarely circulated. He is very bold, his articles are very powerful, and he has no scruples when making articles, and he writes what he wants to write.所以曹操征求人才时也是这样说，不忠不孝不要紧，只要有才便可以。这又是别人所不敢说的。曹操做诗，竟说是“郑康成行酒伏地气绝”，他引出离当时不久的事实，这也是别人所不敢用的。还有一样，比方人死时，常常写点遗令，这是名人的一件极时髦的事。当时的遗令本有一定的格式，且多言身后当葬于何处何处，或葬于某某名人的墓旁；操独不然，他的遗令不但没有依着格式，内容竟讲到遗下的衣服和伎女怎样处置等问题。
Therefore, Cao Cao also said this when soliciting talents, it doesn't matter if you are disloyal or unfilial, as long as you have talent. This is something that others dare not say. Cao Cao wrote a poem and said that "Zheng Kangcheng was drunk and died", and he brought out the fact that it was not long before that time, which was also something that others did not dare to use. Another thing, for example, when a person dies, he often writes a will, which is a very fashionable thing for celebrities. At that time, the will had a certain format, and it was said that he should be buried where he should be buried after his death, or next to the tomb of a certain celebrity; Cao Du Otherwise, not only did his will not follow the format, but the content actually talked about the clothes left behind and how to dispose of the courtesans.陆机虽然评曰“贻尘谤于后王”，然而我想他无论如何是一个精明人，他自己能做文章，又有手段，把天下的方士文士统统搜罗起来，省得他们跑在外面给他捣乱。所以他帷幄里面，方士文士就特别地多。
Although Lu Ji commented that he was "slandered by the later king", I think he is a shrewd person anyway, he can make a fuss himself, and he has the means to collect all the alchemists and scribes in the world, so that they don't have to run outside to make trouble for him. Therefore, there are a lot of alchemists and scribes in his tent.孝文帝曹丕，以长子而承父业，篡汉而即帝位。他也是喜欢文章的。其弟曹植，还有明帝曹叡，都是喜欢文章的。不过到那个时候，于通脱之外，更加上华丽。丕著有《典论》，现已失散无全本，那里面说：“诗赋欲丽”，“文以气为主”。《典论》的零零碎碎，在唐宋类书中；一篇整的《论文》，在《文选》中可以看见。
Emperor Xiaowen Cao Pi, as the eldest son, inherited his father's legacy and usurped the throne of the Han dynasty. He also likes articles. His brother Cao Zhi and Emperor Ming Cao Rui both liked articles. But by that time, in addition to the general escape, it would be even more gorgeous. Pi wrote "Dian Lun", which has now been lost and has no complete version, which says: "Poetry is beautiful" and "Literature is mainly based on qi". The fragments of "Dian Lun" are in the Tang and Song books; A whole "Treatise" can be seen in the "Anthology".后来有一般人很不以他的见解为然。他说诗赋不必寓教训，反对当时那些寓训勉于诗赋的见解，用近代的文学眼光看来，曹丕的一个时代可说是“文学的自觉时代”，或如近代所说是为艺术而艺术（Art for Art’s Sake）的一派。所以曹丕做的诗赋很好，更因他以“气”为主，故于华丽以外，加上壮大。归纳起来，汉末，魏初的文章，可说是：“清峻，通脱，华丽，壮大。”在文学的意见上，曹丕和曹植表面上似乎是不同的。曹丕说文章事可以留名声于千载；但子建却说文章小道，不足论的。据我的意见，子建大概是违心之论。这里有两个原因，第一，子建的文章做得好，一个人大概总是不满意自己所做而羡慕他人所为的，他的文章已经做得好，于是他便敢说文章是小道；第二，子建活动的目标在于政治方面，政治方面不甚得志，遂说文章是无用了。
Later, some people disagreed with his opinion. He said that poetry does not have to be a lesson, opposing the views of those who encouraged poetry at that time, and from a modern literary perspective, Cao Pi's era can be said to be the "conscious age of literature", or as modern people say, Art for Art's Sake. Therefore, Cao Pi's poetry is very good, and because he is mainly "qi", in addition to gorgeousness, he adds strength. To sum up, the articles of the late Han Dynasty and the beginning of Wei can be said to be: "Clear, clear, gorgeous, and strong." In terms of literary opinions, Cao Pi and Cao Zhi seem to be different on the surface. Cao Pi said that articles can leave a reputation for thousands of years; But Zijian said that the article is trivial, not worth mentioning. In my opinion, Zijian is probably against his heart. There are two reasons here, first, Zijian's article is done well, a person is probably always dissatisfied with what he has done and envies what others have done, his article has been done well, so he dares to say that the article is a grapevine; Second, the goal of Zijian's activities is political, and the political aspect is not very successful, so it is said that the article is useless.曹操曹丕以外，还有下面的七个人：孔融，陈琳，王粲，徐幹，阮瑀，应瑒，刘桢，都很能做文章，后来称为“建安七子”。七人的文章很少流传，现在我们很难判断；但，大概都不外是“慷慨”，“华丽”罢。华丽即曹丕所主张，慷慨就因当天下大乱之际，亲戚朋友死于乱者特多，于是为文就不免带着悲凉，激昂和“慷慨”了。
In addition to Cao Cao Cao Pi, there are the following seven people: Kong Rong, Chen Lin, Wang Can, Xu Gan, Ruan Yu, Ying Chang, Liu Zhen, all of whom are very good at making articles, and were later called the "Seven Sons of Jian'an". The articles of the seven are rarely circulated, and now it is difficult for us to judge; However, it is probably nothing more than "generous" and "gorgeous". Huality is what Cao Pi advocated, and generosity is because when the world was in chaos, many relatives and friends died in the chaos, so Weiwen couldn't help but be sad, passionate and "generous".七子之中，特别的是孔融，他专喜和曹操捣乱。曹丕《典论》里有论孔融的，因此他也被拉进“建安七子”一块儿去。其实不对，很两样的。不过在当时，他的名声可非常之大。孔融作文，喜用讥嘲的笔调，曹丕很不满意他。孔融的文章现在传的也很少，就他所有的看起来，我们可以瞧出他并不大对别人讥讽，只对曹操。比方操破袁氏兄弟，曹丕把袁熙的妻甄氏拿来，归了自己，孔融就写信给曹操，说当初武王伐纣，将妲己给了周公了。操问他的出典，他说，以今例古，大概那时也是这样的。又比方曹操要禁酒，说酒可以亡国，非禁不可，孔融又反对他，说也有以女人亡国的，何以不禁婚姻？
Among the seven sons, the special one is Kong Rong, who likes to make trouble with Cao Cao. Cao Pi's "Dian Lun" discusses Kong Rong, so he was also pulled into the "Seven Sons of Jian'an". In fact, it is not true, it is very different. But at that time, his reputation was very great. Kong Rong composed his essays, liked to use a mocking tone, and Cao Pi was very dissatisfied with him. Kong Rong's articles are rarely circulated now, and from all his appearances, we can see that he is not very sarcastic to others, only to Cao Cao. For example, when Cao Cao defeated the Yuan brothers, Cao Pi brought Yuan Xi's wife Zhen and returned it to himself, and Kong Rong wrote to Cao Cao, saying that King Wu had given Daji to the Duke of Zhou when he attacked Zhou. Cao asked him about his origin, and he said, taking the present as an example, it was probably the same at that time. For example, Cao Cao wanted to ban alcohol, saying that wine can destroy the country, and it must be banned, Kong Rong opposed him, saying that there are also women who will destroy the country, why can't marriage be prohibited?其实曹操也是喝酒的。我们看他的“何以解忧？惟有杜康”的诗句，就可以知道。为什么他的行为会和议论矛盾呢？此无他，因曹操是个办事人，所以不得不这样做；孔融是旁观的人，所以容易说些自由话。曹操见他屡屡反对自己，后来借故把他杀了。他杀孔融的罪状大概是不孝。因为孔融有下列的两个主张：
In fact, Cao Cao also drank. Let's look at his "How to relieve worries?" Only Du Kang", you can know. Why does his behavior contradict his arguments? There is no other way, because Cao Cao is a clerk, so he has to do this; Kong Rong is a bystander, so it is easy to speak some free words. Cao Cao saw that he repeatedly opposed him, and later killed him under the pretext of being killed. His crime of killing Kong Rong was probably unfilial. Because Kong Rong has the following two propositions:第一，孔融主张母亲和儿子的关系是如瓶之盛物一样，只要在瓶内把东西倒了出来，母亲和儿子的关系便算完了。第二，假使有天下饥荒的一个时候，有点食物，给父亲不给呢？孔融的答案是：倘若父亲是不好的，宁可给别人。——曹操想杀他，便不惜以这种主张为他不忠不孝的根据，把他杀了。倘若曹操在世，我们可以问他，当初求才时就说不忠不孝也不要紧，为何又以不孝之名杀人呢？然而事实上纵使曹操再生，也没人敢问他，我们倘若去问他，恐怕他把我们也杀了！
First, Kong Rong advocates that the relationship between mother and son is like a bottle, as long as the thing is poured out of the bottle, the relationship between mother and son is over. Second, if there is a famine in the world, what if you don't give some food to your father? Kong Rong's answer is: If the father is bad, he would rather give it to others. ——Cao Cao wanted to kill him, so he did not hesitate to use this proposition as the basis for his disloyalty and unfilial piety, and killed him. If Cao Cao were alive, we could ask him, when he first sought talents, he said that it didn't matter if he was disloyal or unfilial, why did he kill people in the name of unfilial piety? However, in fact, even if Cao Cao is reborn, no one dares to ask him, if we ask him, I am afraid he will kill us too!与孔融一同反对曹操的尚有一个祢衡，后来给黄祖杀掉的。祢衡的文章也不错，而且他和孔融早是“以气为主”来写文章的了。故在此我们又可知道，汉文慢慢壮大起来，是时代使然，非专靠曹操父子之功的。但华丽好看，却是曹丕提倡的功劳。
There was also a You Heng who opposed Cao Cao with Kong Rong, who was later killed by Huang Zu. You Heng's article is also good, and he and Kong Rong have long been "qi-oriented" to write articles. Therefore, we can also know here that the slow growth of Chinese literature is due to the times, not solely by the merits of Cao Cao and his son. But gorgeous and good-looking is the credit of Cao Pi's advocacy.这样下去一直到明帝的时候，文章上起了个重大的变化，因为出了一个何晏。
This continued until the time of Emperor Ming, when there was a major change in the article, because there was a He Yan.何晏的名声很大，位置也很高，他喜欢研究《老子》和《易经》。至于他是怎样的一个人呢？那真相现在可很难知道，很难调查。因为他是曹氏一派的人，司马氏很讨厌他，所以他们的记载对何晏大不满。因此产生许多传说，有人说何晏的脸上是搽粉的，又有人说他本来生得白，不是搽粉的。但究竟何晏搽粉不搽粉呢？我也不知道。
He Yan has a great reputation and a high position, and he likes to study Laozi and the Book of Changes. As for what kind of person he is? The truth is difficult to know now, and it is difficult to investigate. Because he was a member of the Cao faction, the Sima clan hated him very much, so their records were very dissatisfied with He Yan. As a result, many legends have arisen, some people say that He Yan's face is powdered, and some people say that he was born white, not powdered. But what about He Yan and not? I don't know.但何晏有两件事我们是知道的。第一，他喜欢空谈，是空谈的祖师；第二，他喜欢吃药，是吃药的祖师。
But He Yan has two things we know. First, he likes empty talk and is the ancestor of empty talk; Second, he likes to take medicine and is the ancestor of medicine.此外，他也喜欢谈名理。他身子不好，因此不能不服药。他吃的不是寻常的药，是一种名叫“五石散”的药。
In addition, he also likes to talk about fame and reason. He was not in good health, so he had to take medicine. What he took was not an ordinary medicine, but a medicine called "Wushi San".“五石散”是一种毒药，是何晏吃开头的。汉时，大家还不敢吃，何晏或者将药方略加改变，便吃开头了。五石散的基本，大概是五样药：石钟乳，石硫黄，白石英，紫石英，赤石脂；另外怕还配点别样的药。但现在也不必细细研究它，我想各位都是不想吃它的。
"Wushi San" is a poison, which He Yan started with. In the Han Dynasty, everyone did not dare to eat it, He Yan or changed the prescription slightly, and then ate the beginning. The basics of Wushi San are probably five medicines: stone stalactites, stone sulfur, white quartz, purple quartz, and red stone resin; In addition, I am afraid that there will be some other medicine. But there is no need to study it in detail now, I think you don't want to eat it.从书上看起来，这种药是很好的，人吃了能转弱为强。因此之故，何晏有钱，他吃起来了；大家也跟着吃。那时五石散的流毒就同清末的鸦片的流毒差不多，看吃药与否以分阔气与否的。现在由隋巢元方做的《诸病源候论》的里面可以看到一些。据此书，可知吃这药是非常麻烦的，穷人不能吃，假使吃了之后，一不小心，就会毒死。先吃下去的时候，倒不怎样的，后来药的效验既显，名曰“散发”。倘若没有“散发”，就有弊而无利。因此吃了之后不能休息，非走路不可，因走路才能“散发”，所以走路名曰“行散”。比方我们看六朝人的诗，有云：“至城东行散”，就是此意。后来做诗的人不知其故，以为“行散”即步行之意，所以不服药也以“行散”二字入诗，这是很笑话的。
From the book, it seems that this medicine is very good, and people can turn weak into strong after taking it. Therefore, He Yan was rich, and he ate it; Everyone also ate. At that time, the poison of Wushi San was similar to the poison of opium in the late Qing Dynasty, and it depended on whether to take medicine or not. Now you can see some of them in the "Theory of the Origins of Diseases" made by Sui Chao Yuanfang. According to this book, it can be seen that taking this medicine is very troublesome, and the poor cannot take it, if they eat it, if they are not careful, they will be poisoned to death. When you eat it first, it is not much, but later the effect of the medicine is obvious, and it is called "dispersion". If there is no "distribution", there will be disadvantages and no benefits. Therefore, after eating, you can't rest, you have to walk, because walking can "dissipate", so walking is called "walking away". For example, when we look at the poems of the people of the Six Dynasties, there is a saying: "To the east of the city to scatter", which is the meaning. Later, the poet did not know why, thinking that "Xingsan" means walking, so he did not take medicine and also used the word "Xingsan" into the poem, which is a joke.走了之后，全身发烧，发烧之后又发冷。普通发冷宜多穿衣，吃热的东西。但吃药后的发冷刚刚要相反：衣少，冷食，以冷水浇身。倘穿衣多而食热物，那就非死不可。因此五石散一名寒食散。只有一样不必冷吃的，就是酒。
After leaving, the whole body had a fever, and the fever followed by chills. Ordinary colds should dress more and eat hot things. But the chills after taking the medicine are just the opposite: less clothing, cold food, and cold water on the body. If you wear a lot of clothes and eat hot food, you must die. Therefore, Wushi San is also known as Cold Food San. There is only one thing that doesn't have to be eaten cold, and that is wine.吃了散之后，衣服要脱掉，用冷水浇身；吃冷东西；饮热酒。这样看起来，五石散吃的人多，穿厚衣的人就少；比方在广东提倡，一年以后，穿西装的人就没有了。因为皮肉发烧之故，不能穿窄衣。为豫防皮肤被衣服擦伤，就非穿宽大的衣服不可。现在有许多人以为晋人轻裘缓带，宽衣，在当时是人们高逸的表现，其实不知他们是吃药的缘故。一班名人都吃药，穿的衣都宽大，于是不吃药的也跟着名人，把衣服宽大起来了！
After eating, take off your clothes and pour cold water on your body; eat something cold; Drink hot wine. In this way, there are many people who eat five stones loosely, and there are fewer people who wear thick clothes; For example, in Guangdong, it is advocated that after a year, there will be no one wearing a suit. Because of the fever of the flesh, you cannot wear narrow clothes. In order to prevent the skin from being scratched by clothes, it is necessary to wear wide clothes. Now many people think that the Jin people's light fur and loose belts and wide clothes were a manifestation of people's noble elegance at that time, but in fact they didn't know that they were taking medicine. A group of celebrities took medicine and wore wide clothes, so those who didn't take medicine also followed the celebrities and made their clothes wider!还有，吃药之后，因皮肤易于磨破，穿鞋也不方便，故不穿鞋袜而穿屐。所以我们看晋人的画像或那时的文章，见他衣服宽大，不鞋而屐，以为他一定是很舒服，很飘逸的了，其实他心里都是很苦的。
Also, after taking medicine, because the skin is easy to wear out and it is inconvenient to wear shoes, so I wear clogs instead of shoes and socks. So when we look at the portraits of the Jin people or the articles of that time, we see that he has wide clothes and no shoes but clogs, thinking that he must be very comfortable and elegant, but in fact, he is very bitter in his heart.更因皮肤易破，不能穿新的而宜于穿旧的，衣服便不能常洗。因不洗，便多虱。所以在文章上，虱子的地位很高，“扪虱而谈”，当时竟传为美事。比方我今天在这里演讲的时候，扪起虱来，那是不大好的。但在那时不要紧，因为习惯不同之故。这正如清朝是提倡抽大烟的，我们看见两肩高耸的人，不觉得奇怪。现在就不行了，倘若多数学生，他的肩成为一字样，我们就觉得很奇怪了。
Moreover, because the skin is fragile, it is not suitable to wear new clothes but old ones, so clothes cannot be washed frequently. If you don't wash it, you will get lice. Therefore, in the article, the status of lice is very high, and "touching lice and talking" was rumored to be a good thing at that time. For example, when I give a speech here today, I pick up lice, which is not good. But it doesn't matter then, because the habits are different. This is just like the Qing Dynasty advocated smoking, and we don't find it strange to see people with high shoulders. Not now, if most students have a word on their shoulders, we will find it strange.此外可见服散的情形及其他种种的书，还有葛洪的《抱朴子》。
In addition, it can be seen that the situation of service and dispersion and various other books, as well as Ge Hong's "Baopuzi".到东晋以后，作假的人就很多，在街旁睡倒，说是“散发”以示阔气。就像清时尊读书，就有人以墨涂唇，表示他是刚才写了许多字的样子。故我想，衣大，穿屐，散等等，后来效之，不吃也学起来，与理论的提倡实在是无关的。
After the Eastern Jin Dynasty, there were many people who faked and fell asleep on the street, saying that they were "emitting" to show their generosity. Just like when Qing Shizun was reading, someone painted his lips with ink, indicating that he had just written a lot of words. Therefore, I think that wearing big clothes, wearing clogs, loosening, etc., and later imitating it, learning without eating is really irrelevant to the promotion of theory.又因“散发”之时，不能肚饿，所以吃冷物，而且要赶快吃，不论时候，一日数次也不可定。因此影响到晋时“居丧无礼”。——本来魏晋时，对于父母之礼是很繁多的。比方想去访一个人，那么，在未访之前，必先打听他父母及其祖父母的名字，以便避讳。否则，嘴上一说出这个字音，假如他的父母是死了的，主人便会大哭起来——他记得父母了——给你一个大大的没趣。晋礼居丧之时，也要瘦，不多吃饭，不准喝酒。但在吃药之后，为生命计，不能管得许多，只好大嚼，所以就变成“居丧无礼”了。
And because of the "dispersion", you can't be hungry, so you eat cold food, and you have to eat it quickly, no matter the time, how many times a day you can't decide. Therefore, it affected the "mourning rudeness" of the Jin Dynasty. ——Originally, during the Wei and Jin dynasties, there were many gifts for parents. For example, if you want to visit a person, you must first ask for the names of his parents and grandparents before visiting to avoid taboos. Otherwise, if his parents are dead, the master will cry - he remembers his parents - and give you a big uninteresting. When Jin Li was in mourning, he was also thin, did not eat much, and was not allowed to drink. But after taking the medicine, for the sake of life, I couldn't manage much, so I had to chew a lot, so it became "mourning rude".居丧之际，饮酒食肉，由阔人名流倡之，万民皆从之，因为这个缘故，社会上遂尊称这样的人叫作名士派。
居丧之际，饮酒食肉，由阔人名流倡之，万民皆从之，因为这个缘故，社会上遂尊称这样的人叫作名士派。吃散发源于何晏，和他同志的，有王弼和夏侯玄两个人，与晏同为服药的祖师。有他三人提倡，有多人跟着走。他们三人多是会做文章，除了夏侯玄的作品流传不多外，王何二人现在我们尚能看到他们的文章。他们都是生于正始的，所以又名曰“正始名士”。但这种习惯的末流，是只会吃药，或竟假装吃药，而不会做文章。
Eating and distributing hair originated from He Yan, and his comrades, including Wang Bi and Xiahou Xuan, were the ancestors of taking medicine with Yan. There are three of them advocating, and many people follow. Most of the three of them can make articles, except for Xiahou Xuan's works, which are not widely circulated, Wang He and the two can still see their articles now. They were all born in the beginning, so they were also called "Zhengshi Mingshi". But the end of this habit is to only take medicine, or pretend to take medicine without making a fuss.东晋以后，不做文章而流为清谈，由《世说新语》一书里可以看到。此中空论多而文章少，比较他们三个差得远了。三人中王弼二十余岁便死了，夏侯何二人皆为司马懿所杀。因为他二人同曹操有关系，非死不可，犹曹操之杀孔融，也是借不孝做罪名的。
After the Eastern Jin Dynasty, it was not an article but a clear talk, which can be seen in the book "The New Language of the World". There are many hollow theories and few articles, which is far worse than the three of them. Among the three, Wang Bi died in his twenties, and Xiahou He and Xiahou He were both killed by Sima Yi. Because the two of them had a relationship with Cao Cao, they had to die, just like Cao Cao's killing of Kong Rong, he was also charged with unfilial piety.二人死后，论者多因其与魏有关而骂他，其实何晏值得骂的就是因为他是吃药的发起人。这种服散的风气，魏，晋，直到隋，唐，还存在着，因为唐时还有“解散方”，即解五石散的药方，可以证明还有人吃，不过少点罢了。唐以后就没有人吃，其原因尚未详，大概因其弊多利少，和鸦片一样罢？
After the death of the two, most commentators scolded him for his association with Wei, but in fact, He Yan was worthy of scolding because he was the initiator of taking medicine. This trend of taking dispersion still existed in Wei, Jin, Sui and Tang, because in the Tang Dynasty, there was also a "dissolution formula", that is, the prescription for solving Wushi San, which can prove that there are still people who eat it, but it is less. No one has eaten it since the Tang Dynasty, and the reason is not yet known, probably because it has more disadvantages and less benefits, just like opium?晋名人皇甫谧作一书曰《高士传》，我们以为他很高超。但他是服散的，曾有一篇文章，自说吃散之苦。因为药性一发，稍不留心，即会丧命，至少也会受非常的苦痛，或要发狂；本来聪明的人，因此也会变成痴呆。所以非深知药性，会解救，而且家里的人多深知药性不可。晋朝人多是脾气很坏，高傲，发狂，性暴如火的，大约便是服药的缘故。比方有苍蝇扰他，竟至拔剑追赶；就是说话，也要胡胡涂涂地才好，有时简直是近于发疯。但在晋朝更有以痴为好的，这大概也是服药的缘故。
The famous Jin dynasty Huangfu Mi wrote a book called "The Biography of Gao Shi", and we thought he was very superb. But he is a scattered person, and there was an article in which he said that he was suffering from scattering. Because once the medicinal properties are released, if you are not careful, you will die, at least you will suffer a lot of pain, or go crazy; People who are originally smart will also become demented. Therefore, if you do not know the medicinal properties well, you will be rescued, and the people in the family know the medicinal properties very well. Most of the people in the Jin Dynasty were very bad-tempered, arrogant, crazy, and violent, probably because of taking medicine. For example, if a fly disturbs him, he will draw his sword and chase after him; Even if you talk, you have to be foolish, sometimes it's almost crazy. But in the Jin Dynasty, it was better to be foolish, which was probably also because of taking medicine.魏末，何晏他们以外，又有一个团体新起，叫做“竹林名士”，也是七个，所以又称“竹林七贤”。正始名士服药，竹林名士饮酒。竹林的代表是嵇康和阮籍。但究竟竹林名士不纯粹是喝酒的，嵇康也兼服药，而阮籍则是专喝酒的代表。但嵇康也饮酒，刘伶也是这里面的一个。他们七人中差不多都是反抗旧礼教的。
At the end of the Wei Dynasty, in addition to He Yan and others, there was a new group called "Bamboo Forest Celebrities", which was also seven, so it was also called the "Seven Sages of the Bamboo Forest". In the first period, famous scholars took medicine, and famous scholars in the bamboo grove drank wine. The representatives of the bamboo forest are Ji Kang and Ruan Ji. But in the end, the bamboo forest celebrities are not purely drinking, Ji Kang also takes medicine, and Ruan Ji is a representative of drinking. But Ji Kang also drinks, and Liu Ling is also one of them. Almost all seven of them rebelled against the old etiquette.这七人中，脾气各有不同。嵇阮二人的脾气都很大；阮籍老年时改得很好，嵇康就始终都是极坏的。
Among these seven people, their temperaments are different. Ji and Ruan both have a big temper; Ruan Ji changed very well in his old age, but Ji Kang was always extremely bad.阮年青时，对于访他的人有加以青眼和白眼的分别。白眼大概是全然看不见眸子的，恐怕要练习很久才能够。青眼我会装，白眼我却装不好。
When Ruan was young, he made a difference between blue eyes and white eyes for those who visited him. The white eyes are probably completely invisible, and I am afraid it will take a long time to practice. I can pretend to have blue eyes, but I can't pretend to be white.后来阮籍竟做到“口不臧否人物”的地步，嵇康却全不改变。结果阮得终其天年，而嵇竟丧于司马氏之手，与孔融何晏等一样，遭了不幸的杀害。这大概是因为吃药和吃酒之分的缘故：吃药可以成仙，仙是可以骄视俗人的；饮酒不会成仙，所以敷衍了事。
Later, Ruan Ji actually reached the point of "not praising and criticizing people", but Ji Kang did not change at all. As a result, Ruan was killed at the hands of Sima, and like Kong Rong and He Yan, he was unfortunately killed. This is probably because of the difference between taking medicine and drinking: taking medicine can make you an immortal, and immortals can look down on ordinary people; Drinking alcohol will not make you an immortal, so it is perfunctory.他们的态度，大抵是饮酒时衣服不穿，帽也不带。若在平时，有这种状态，我们就说无礼，但他们就不同。居丧时不一定按例哭泣；子之于父，是不能提父的名，但在竹林名士一流人中，子都会叫父的名号。旧传下来的礼教，竹林名士是不承认的。即如刘伶——他曾做过一篇《酒德颂》，谁都知道——他是不承认世界上从前规定的道理的，曾经有这样的事，有一次有客见他，他不穿衣服。人责问他；他答人说，天地是我的房屋，房屋就是我的衣服，你们为什么进我的裤子中来？至于阮籍，就更甚了，他连上下古今也不承认，在《大人先生传》里有说：“天地解兮六合开，星辰陨兮日月颓，我腾而上将何怀？”他的意思是天地神仙，都是无意义，一切都不要，所以他觉得世上的道理不必争，神仙也不足信，既然一切都是虚无，所以他便沉湎于酒了。然而他还有一个原因，就是他的饮酒不独由于他的思想，大半倒在环境。其时司马氏已想篡位，而阮籍名声很大，所以他讲话就极难，只好多饮酒，少讲话，而且即使讲话讲错了，也可以借醉得到人的原谅。只要看有一次司马懿求和阮籍结亲，而阮籍一醉就是两个月，没有提出的机会，就可以知道了。
Their attitude is probably that they don't wear clothes or hats when drinking. If there is this state in normal times, we will say rude, but they are different. do not necessarily cry as usual during mourning; The son cannot mention the father's name to the father, but among the first-class people in the bamboo forest, the son will call the father's name. The old etiquette passed down is not recognized by the famous scholars of the bamboo forest. For example, Liu Ling - he once wrote a "Ode to the Virtue of Wine", everyone knows - he does not recognize the principles stipulated in the world in the past, there was such a thing, once a guest saw him, he did not wear clothes. People reproach him; He answered, "Heaven and earth are my houses, and houses are my clothes, so why do you come into my pants?" As for Ruan Ji, it is even worse, he does not even admit the past and the present, and there is a saying in the "Biography of Mr. Adult": "The heavens and the earth are unsolved, the sun and the moon are falling, what will I think of soaring?" He meant that the gods of heaven and earth were meaningless, and he didn't want anything, so he felt that there was no need to fight about the truth in the world, and the gods were not enough to believe, since everything was nothing, so he indulged in wine. However, he also has another reason, that is, his drinking is not only due to his thoughts, but mostly due to the environment. At that time, Sima Shi had already wanted to usurp the throne, and Ruan Ji had a great reputation, so it was extremely difficult for him to speak, so he had to drink more, speak less, and even if he spoke wrong, he could get forgiven by others by getting drunk. Just look at the fact that once Sima Yi asked to marry Ruan Ji, and Ruan Ji was drunk for two months, and there was no opportunity to raise it, you can know.阮籍作文章和诗都很好，他的诗文虽然也慷慨激昂，但许多意思都是隐而不显的。宋的颜延之已经说不大能懂，我们现在自然更很难看得懂他的诗了。他诗里也说神仙，但他其实是不相信的。嵇康的论文，比阮籍更好，思想新颖，往往与古时旧说反对。孔子说：“学而时习之，不亦说乎？”嵇康做的《难自然好学论》，却道，人是并不好学的，假如一个人可以不做事而又有饭吃，就随便闲游不喜欢读书了，所以现在人之好学，是由于习惯和不得已。还有管叔蔡叔，是疑心周公，率殷民叛，因而被诛，一向公认为坏人的。而嵇康做的《管蔡论》，就也反对历代传下来的意思，说这两个人是忠臣，他们的怀疑周公，是因为地方相距太远，消息不灵通。
Ruan Ji's articles and poems are very good, and although his poems are also impassioned, many meanings are hidden and invisible. Song's Yan Yanzhi can no longer understand it, and it is naturally even more difficult for us to understand his poems now. He also talks about immortals in his poems, but he doesn't actually believe it. Ji Kang's papers are better than Ruan Ji's, novel in thought, and often oppose the old theories of ancient times. Confucius said: "Isn't it also true that you learn and learn from time to time? Ji Kang's "Theory of Difficult Nature and Good Learning" said that people are not easy to learn, if a person can not do anything and have food, he will wander casually and don't like to read, so now people's eagerness to learn is due to habit and last resort. There is also Uncle Guan Cai, who was suspicious of the Duke of Zhou and led the Yin people to rebel, so he was killed, and he has always been recognized as a bad person. And Ji Kang's "Guan Cai Lun" also opposes the meaning passed down through the ages, saying that these two people are loyal ministers, and their suspicion of the Duke of Zhou is because the places are too far away and the news is not well-informed.但最引起许多人的注意，而且于生命有危险的，是《与山巨源绝交书》中的“非汤武而薄周孔”。司马懿因这篇文章，就将嵇康杀了。非薄了汤武周孔，在现时代是不要紧的，但在当时却关系非小。汤武是以武定天下的；周公是辅成王的；孔子是祖述尧舜，而尧舜是禅让天下的。嵇康都说不好，那么，教司马懿篡位的时候，怎么办才是好呢？没有办法。在这一点上，嵇康于司马氏的办事上有了直接的影响，因此就非死不可了。嵇康的见杀，是因为他的朋友吕安不孝，连及嵇康，罪案和曹操的杀孔融差不多。魏晋，是以孝治天下的，不孝，故不能不杀。为什么要以孝治天下呢？因为天位从禅让，即巧取豪夺而来，若主张以忠治天下，他们的立脚点便不稳，办事便棘手，立论也难了，所以一定要以孝治天下。但倘只是实行不孝，其实那时倒不很要紧的，嵇康的害处是在发议论；阮籍不同，不大说关于伦理上的话，所以结局也不同。
But the one that has attracted the attention of many people and is dangerous to life is the "not Tang Wu but Bo Zhou Kong" in the "Book of Severing Relations with Shan Juyuan". Sima Yi killed Ji Kang because of this article. It doesn't matter if Tang Wu Zhou Kong is thin in the current era, but it was not small at that time. Tang Wu ruled the world with martial arts; The Duke of Zhou assisted King Cheng; Confucius was the ancestor of Yao and Shun, and Yao and Shun gave way to the world. Ji Kang couldn't say it well, so what should he do when he teaches Sima Yi to usurp the throne? There is no way. At this point, Ji Kang had a direct influence on Sima's affairs, so he had to die. Ji Kang's murder was because his friend Lu An was unfilial, and even Ji Kang was implicated, and the crime was similar to Cao Cao's killing of Kong Rong. Wei and Jin ruled the world with filial piety, and they were unfilial, so they could not avoid killing. Why rule the world with filial piety? Because the throne of heaven comes from abdication, that is, clever robbery, if they advocate ruling the world with loyalty, their foothold will be unstable, things will be tricky, and it will be difficult to establish arguments, so they must rule the world with filial piety. But if it is just a practice of unfilial piety, it is actually not very important at that time, Ji Kang's harm is to make a discussion; Ruan Ji is different, and he doesn't say much about ethics, so the ending is also different.但魏晋也不全是这样的情形，宽袍大袖，大家饮酒。反对的也很多。在文章上我们还可以看见裴的《崇有论》，孙盛的《老子非大贤论》，这些都是反对王何们的。在史实上，则何曾劝司马懿杀阮籍有好几回，司马懿不听他的话，这是因为阮籍的饮酒，与时局的关系少些的缘故。
But the Wei and Jin dynasties were not all like this, with wide robes and large sleeves, and everyone drank. There are also many objections. In the article, we can also see Pei's "Theory of Worship" and Sun Sheng's "Theory of Lao Tzu and the Great Sage", which are all against Wang He. In terms of historical facts, He once persuaded Sima Yi to kill Ruan Ji several times, but Sima Yi did not listen to him, because Ruan Ji's drinking had less to do with the current situation.然而后人就将嵇康阮籍骂起来，人云亦云，一直到现在，一千六百多年。季札说：“中国之君子，明于礼义而陋于知人心。”这是确的，大凡明于礼义，就一定要陋于知人心的，所以古代有许多人受了很大的冤枉。例如嵇阮的罪名，一向说他们毁坏礼教。但据我个人的意见，这判断是错的。魏晋时代，崇奉礼教的看来似乎很不错，而实在是毁坏礼教，不信礼教的。表面上毁坏礼教者，实则倒是承认礼教，太相信礼教。因为魏晋时所谓崇奉礼教，是用以自利，那崇奉也不过偶然崇奉，如曹操杀孔融，司马懿杀嵇康，都是因为他们和不孝有关，但实在曹操司马懿何尝是著名的孝子，不过将这个名义，加罪于反对自己的人罢了。于是老实人以为如此利用，亵黩了礼教，不平之极，无计可施，激而变成不谈礼教，不信礼教，甚至于反对礼教。——但其实不过是态度，至于他们的本心，恐怕倒是相信礼教，当作宝贝，比曹操司马懿们要迂执得多。现在说一个容易明白的比喻罢，譬如有一个军阀，在北方——在广东的人所谓北方和我常说的北方的界限有些不同，我常称山东山西直隶河南之类为北方——那军阀从前是压迫民党的，后来北伐军势力一大，他便挂起了青天白日旗，说自己已经信仰三民主义了，是总理的信徒。这样还不够，他还要做总理的纪念周。这时候，真的三民主义的信徒，去呢，不去呢？不去，他那里就可以说你反对三民主义，定罪，杀人。但既然在他的势力之下，没有别法，真的总理的信徒，倒会不谈三民主义，或者听人假惺惺的谈起来就皱眉，好像反对三民主义模样。所以我想，魏晋时所谓反对礼教的人，有许多大约也如此。他们倒是迂夫子，将礼教当作宝贝看待的。
However, later generations scolded Ji Kang and Ruan Ji, and people said that until now, for more than 1,600 years. Ji Zha said: "Chinese gentlemen know propriety and righteousness but are not good at knowing people's hearts. This is true, anyone who understands propriety and righteousness must be inferior to knowing people's hearts, so many people in ancient times suffered great injustices. For example, Ji Ruan's crimes have always been said to be that they destroy etiquette. But in my personal opinion, this judgment is wrong. In the Wei and Jin dynasties, those who worshipped etiquette seemed to be very good, but they really destroyed etiquette and did not believe in etiquette. On the surface, those who destroy etiquette actually admit etiquette and believe in etiquette too much. Because the so-called worship of etiquette in the Wei and Jin dynasties was used for self-interest, and the worship was only accidental, such as Cao Cao killing Kong Rong and Sima Yi killing Ji Kang, all because they were related to unfilial piety, but in fact, Cao Cao and Sima Yi were famous filial sons, but in this name, they were just punished by those who opposed them. So honest people think that they have used it in this way, desecrated the etiquette, and the injustice is extremely unfair, and there is nothing to do, and it provokes it into not talking about etiquette, not believing in etiquette, and even opposing etiquette. ——But in fact, it is just an attitude, as for their original intentions, I am afraid that they believe in etiquette and treat them as treasures, which is much more pedantic than Cao Cao and Sima Yi. Now let's talk about an easy-to-understand analogy, for example, there is a warlord in the north - in Guangdong people say that the so-called north is somewhat different from what I often call the north, I often call Shandong, Shanxi, Zhili Henan and the like the north - the warlord used to oppress the People's Party, and later when the Northern Expeditionary Army became powerful, he hung up the blue sky and white sun flag, saying that he had believed in the Three People's Principles and was a believer in the prime minister. As if that wasn't enough, he also had to do the prime minister's anniversary week. At this time, the true believers of the Three People's Doctrines, what about going or not? If you don't go, he can say that you oppose the Three People's Principles, convict, and kill. But since there is no other way under his power, the true prime minister's believers will not talk about the Three People's Principles, or frown when they hear people talk about them, as if they are against the Three People's Principles. So I think that many of the so-called people who opposed etiquette in the Wei and Jin dynasties were probably the same. They are pedantic masters and treat etiquette as treasures.还有一个实证，凡人们的言论，思想，行为，倘若自己以为不错的，就愿意天下的别人，自己的朋友都这样做。但嵇康阮籍不这样，不愿意别人来模仿他。竹林七贤中有阮咸，是阮籍的侄子，一样的饮酒。阮籍的儿子阮浑也愿加入时，阮籍却道不必加入，吾家已有阿咸在，够了。假若阮籍自以为行为是对的，就不当拒绝他的儿子，而阮籍却拒绝自己的儿子，可知阮籍并不以他自己的办法为然。至于嵇康，一看他的《绝交书》，就知道他的态度很骄傲的；有一次，他在家打铁——他的性情是很喜欢打铁的——钟会来看他了，他只打铁，不理钟会。钟会没有意味，只得走了。其时嵇康就问他：“何所闻而来，何所见而去？”钟会答道：“闻所闻而来，见所见而去。”这也是嵇康杀身的一条祸根。但我看他做给他的儿子看的《家诫》——当嵇康被杀时，其子方十岁，算来当他做这篇文章的时候，他的儿子是未满十岁的——就觉得宛然是两个人。他在《家诫》中教他的儿子做人要小心，还有一条一条的教训。有一条是说长官处不可常去，亦不可住宿；官长送人们出来时，你不要在后面，因为恐怕将来官长惩办坏人时，你有暗中密告的嫌疑。又有一条是说宴饮时候有人争论，你可立刻走开，免得在旁批评，因为两者之间必有对与不对，不批评则不像样，一批评就总要是甲非乙，不免受一方见怪。还有人要你饮酒，即使不愿饮也不要坚决地推辞，必须和和气气的拿着杯子。我们就此看来，实在觉得很希奇：嵇康是那样高傲的人，而他教子就要他这样庸碌。因此我们知道，嵇康自己对于他自己的举动也是不满足的。所以批评一个人的言行实在难，社会上对于儿子不像父亲，称为“不肖”，以为是坏事，殊不知世上正有不愿意他的儿子像自己的父亲哩。试看阮籍嵇康，就是如此。这是，因为他们生于乱世，不得已，才有这样的行为，并非他们的本态。但又于此可见魏晋的破坏礼教者，实在是相信礼教到固执之极的。
There is also empirical evidence that if people think that people's speech, thoughts, and behaviors are good, they are willing to do the same for others in the world and their friends. But Ji Kang and Ruan Ji were not like this, and they didn't want others to imitate him. Among the Seven Sages of the Bamboo Forest, Ruan Xian, who is Ruan Ji's nephew, drinks the same wine. When Ruan Ji's son Ruan Hun was also willing to join, Ruan Ji said that he didn't have to join, my family already had Ah Xian, which was enough. If Ruan Ji thinks that his behavior is right, he should not reject his son, but Ruan Ji rejects his own son, which shows that Ruan Ji does not think of his own methods. As for Ji Kang, as soon as he looked at his "Book of Breaking Relations", he knew that his attitude was very proud; Once, when he was working at home - his temperament is very fond of iron - Zhong Hui came to see him, he only made iron and ignored Zhong Hui. Zhong Hui was meaningless and had to leave. At that time, Ji Kang asked him: "What did you hear and what did you see?" Zhong Hui replied: "Come when you hear what you hear, and go when you see what you see." This is also a bane of Ji Kang's killing. But when I looked at the "Family Commandments" he showed to his son—when Ji Kang was killed, his son was ten years old, and when he wrote this article, his son was less than ten years old—and I felt like two people. He taught his son to be careful in his "Family Commandments", and there were lessons one by one. One is that the governor should not go often or stay; When the officials send people out, you should not be behind, because I am afraid that when the officials punish the bad people in the future, you will be suspected of secretly informing. Another thing is that if someone argues at a banquet, you can walk away immediately to avoid criticism, because there must be right and wrong between the two, and if you don't criticize, you won't be good. If someone wants you to drink, even if you don't want to drink, don't resolutely refuse, you must hold the cup in a friendly manner. From this point of view, we really find it strange: Ji Kang is such an arrogant person, and he wants his son to be so mediocre. Therefore, we know that Ji Kang himself is not satisfied with his own actions. Therefore, it is really difficult to criticize a person's words and deeds, and society thinks that it is a bad thing for a son who is not like his father, calling him "unworthy", but he doesn't know that there are people in the world who do not want his son to be like his father. Just look at Ruan Ji Ji Kang, that's it. This is because they were born in troubled times and had no choice but to behave like this, which is not their true nature. But it can be seen that the destroyers of etiquette in the Wei and Jin dynasties really believed in etiquette to the extreme.不过何晏王弼阮籍嵇康之流，因为他们的名位大，一般的人们就学起来，而所学的无非是表面，他们实在的内心，却不知道。因为只学他们的皮毛，于是社会上便很多了没意思的空谈和饮酒。许多人只会无端的空谈和饮酒，无力办事，也就影响到政治上，弄得玩“空城计”，毫无实际了。在文学上也这样，嵇康阮籍的纵酒，是也能做文章的，后来到东晋，空谈和饮酒的遗风还在，而万言的大文如嵇阮之作，却没有了。刘勰说：“嵇康师心以遣论，阮籍使气以命诗。”这“师心”和“使气”，便是魏末晋初的文章的特色。正始名士和竹林名士的精神灭后，敢于师心使气的作家也没有了。
However, He Yan, Wang Bi, Ruan Ji, Ji Kang and others, because of their great status, ordinary people learn it, and what they learn is nothing more than the surface, but they don't know what they really do. Because they only learn their skin, there is a lot of boring talk and drinking in society. Many people will only talk and drink for no reason, and they will not be able to do things, which will affect politics and make them play "empty city tricks", which is practical. In literature, it is also the same, Ji Kang Ruan's indulgence can also make a fortune, and later in the Eastern Jin Dynasty, the legacy of empty talk and drinking is still there, but the great article of ten thousand words is like Ji Ruan's work, but it is gone. Liu Xie said: "Master Ji Kang is dismissed, and Ruan Ji is angry with poetry." This "teacher's heart" and "anger" are the characteristics of the articles of the late Wei and early Jin dynasties. After the spirit of the famous scholars and the famous scholars of the bamboo forest disappeared, the writers who dared to be angry were gone.到东晋，风气变了。社会思想平静得多，各处都夹入了佛教的思想。再至晋末，乱也看惯了，篡也看惯了，文章便更和平。代表平和的文章的人有陶潜。他的态度是随便饮酒，乞食，高兴的时候就谈论和作文章，无尤无怨。所以现在有人称他为“田园诗人”，是个非常和平的田园诗人。他的态度是不容易学的，他非常之穷，而心里很平静。家常无米，就去向人家门口求乞。他穷到有客来见，连鞋也没有，那客人给他从家丁取鞋给他，他便伸了足穿上了。虽然如此，他却毫不为意，还是“采菊东篱下，悠然见南山”。这样的自然状态，实在不易模仿。他穷到衣服也破烂不堪，而还在东篱下采菊，偶然抬起头来，悠然的见了南山，这是何等自然。现在有钱的人住在租界里，雇花匠种数十盆菊花，便做诗，叫作“秋日赏菊效陶彭泽体”，自以为合于渊明的高致，我觉得不大像。
By the Eastern Jin Dynasty, the atmosphere changed. Social thought is much calmer, and Buddhist ideas are interspersed everywhere. At the end of the Jin Dynasty, the chaos was also accustomed to the usurpation, and the article was more peaceful. The person who represents the peaceful article is Tao Qian. His attitude is to drink casually, beg for food, talk and write when he is happy, without complaint. So now some people call him a "pastoral poet", a very peaceful pastoral poet. His attitude is not easy to learn, he is very poor, but his heart is very calm. There is no rice at home, so I go to beg at the door of others. He was so poor that a guest came to see him, and he didn't even have shoes, so the guest took shoes from his servant for him, and he stretched out his feet and put them on. Despite this, he didn't care, or "picked chrysanthemums under the east fence and leisurely saw Nanshan". Such a natural state is really not easy to imitate. He was so poor that his clothes were tattered, and he was still picking chrysanthemums under the east fence, and he accidentally raised his head and saw Nanshan leisurely, how natural it was. Now rich people live in the concession, hire florists to plant dozens of pots of chrysanthemums, and make poems, called "Autumn Chrysanthemums to Imitate Tao Pengze Ti", thinking that it is in line with Yuanming's nobility, I don't think it is very similar.陶潜之在晋末，是和孔融于汉末与嵇康于魏末略同，又是将近易代的时候。但他没有什么慷慨激昂的表示，于是便博得“田园诗人”的名称。但《陶集》里有《述酒》一篇，是说当时政治的。这样看来，可见他于世事也并没有遗忘和冷淡，不过他的态度比嵇康阮籍自然得多，不至于招人注意罢了。还有一个原因，先已说过，是习惯。因为当时饮酒的风气相沿下来，人见了也不觉得奇怪，而且汉魏晋相沿，时代不远，变迁极多，既经见惯，就没有大感触，陶潜之比孔融嵇康和平，是当然的。例如看北朝的墓志，官位升进，往往详细写着，再仔细一看，他是已经经历过两三个朝代了，但当时似乎并不为奇。
Tao Qianzhi was at the end of the Jin Dynasty, which was roughly the same as Kong Rong at the end of the Han Dynasty and Ji Kang at the end of the Wei Dynasty, and it was the time when the era was approaching. But he didn't have any impassioned expressions, so he won the title of "pastoral poet". But there is an article "Narrative of Wine" in the "Tao Ji", which is about the politics of the time. From this point of view, it can be seen that he has not forgotten and indifferent to the world, but his attitude is much more natural than that of Ji Kang and Ruan Ji, and it will not attract attention. There is another reason, as I said earlier, is habit. Because the trend of drinking at that time was followed, people did not feel strange when they saw it, and the Han, Wei, and Jin dynasties followed, the times were not far away, and there were many changes. For example, if you look at the epitaph of the Northern Dynasty, the official position is promoted, often written in detail, and if you look closely, he has already experienced two or three dynasties, but it did not seem surprising at the time.据我的意思，即使是从前的人，那诗文完全超于政治的所谓“田园诗人”，“山林诗人”，是没有的。完全超出于人间世的，也是没有的。既然是超出于世，则当然连诗文也没有。诗文也是人事，既有诗，就可以知道于世事未能忘情。譬如墨子兼爱，杨子为我。墨子当然要著书；杨子就一定不著，这才是“为我”。因为若做出书来给别人看，便变成“为人”了。
According to my meaning, even in the past, there were no so-called "pastoral poets" and "mountain poets" whose poetry and literature were completely beyond politics. There is nothing that is completely beyond the human world. Since it is beyond the world, of course there is not even poetry. Poetry is also a human matter, and with poetry, we can know that we have not forgotten our feelings in the world. For example, Mozi loves both and Yangzi is for me. Of course, Mozi wanted to write books; Yang Zi must not be there, this is "for me". Because if you make a book to show to others, you will become a "human being".由此可知陶潜总不能超于尘世，而且，于朝政还是留心，也不能忘掉“死”，这是他诗文中时时提起的。用别一种看法研究起来，恐怕也会成一个和旧说不同的人物罢。
It can be seen from this that Tao Qian cannot transcend the world, and moreover, Yu Chaozheng is still attentive and cannot forget "death", which is often mentioned in his poems. If you study it with another point of view, I am afraid that it will become a character that is different from the old theory.自汉末至晋末文章的一部分的变化与药及酒之关系，据我所知的大概是这样。但我学识太少，没有详细的研究，在这样的热天和雨天费去了诸位这许多时光，是很抱歉的。现在这个题目总算是讲完了。
From the end of the Han Dynasty to the end of the Jin Dynasty, some of the changes in the article and the relationship between medicine and wine are probably like this as far as I know. But I have too little knowledge and no detailed research, and I am sorry that I have spent so much time on such a hot and rainy day. Now this topic is finally finished.

小杂感

小杂感

小杂感

A little miscellaneous蜜蜂的刺，一用即丧失了它自己的生命；犬儒的刺，一用则苟延了他自己的生命。
The bee's stinger loses its own life as soon as it is used; The cynic's thorn prolonged his own life when he used it.他们就是如此不同。
They are so different.
约翰穆勒说：专制使人们变成冷嘲。
John Mueller said: Autocracy turns people into cynics.而他竟不知道共和使人们变成沉默。
And he didn't know that the republic silenced people.
要上战场，莫如做军医；要革命，莫如走后方；要杀人，莫如做刽子手。既英雄，又稳当。
If you want to go to the battlefield, it is better to be a military doctor; If you want to revolutionize, it is better to go to the rear; If you want to kill, it is better to be an executioner. Both heroic and stable.
与名流学者谈，对于他之所讲，当装作偶有不懂之处。太不懂被看轻，太懂了被厌恶。偶有不懂之处，彼此最为合宜。
When talking to celebrities and scholars, you should pretend that you don't understand what he says. I don't know how to be looked down upon, and I know how to be hated. Occasionally, if there is something you don't understand, it is the most suitable for each other.世间大抵只知道指挥刀所以指挥武士，而不想到也可以指挥文人。
Most people in the world only know how to command the sword, so they command the samurai, but they don't think that they can also command the literati.
又是演讲录，又是演讲录。
It's a speech again, and it's a speech again.但可惜都没有讲明他何以和先前大两样了；也没有讲明他演讲时，自己是否真相信自己的话。
But unfortunately, it didn't explain why he was so different from before; nor did he say whether he really believed his words when he gave his speech.
阔的聪明人种种譬如昨日死。
A wide and intelligent person is like yesterday's death.不阔的傻子种种实在昨日死。
All kinds of fools who are not wide died yesterday.
曾经阔气的要复古，正在阔气的要保持现状，未曾阔气的要革新。
What was once generous should be retro, what is being generous should maintain the status quo, and what has not been generous should be innovative.大抵如是。大抵！
That's probably how it is. Probably!
他们之所谓复古，是回到他们所记得的若干年前，并非虞夏商周。
Their so-called retro is to go back to a few years ago as they remember, not to Yu, Xia, Shang and Zhou.
女人的天性中有母性，有女儿性；无妻性。
There is motherhood and daughterhood in women's nature; He had no wife.妻性是逼成的，只是母性和女儿性的混合。
Wife sex is forced, just a mixture of motherhood and daughterhood.
防被欺。
Prevent being bullied.自称盗贼的无须防，得其反倒是好人；自称正人君子的必须防，得其反则是盗贼。
自称盗贼的无须防，得其反倒是好人；自称正人君子的必须防，得其反则是盗贼。
楼下一个男人病得要死，那间壁的一家唱着留声机；对面是弄孩子。楼上有两人狂笑；还有打牌声。河中的船上有女人哭着她死去的母亲。
A man downstairs was sick to death, and a family on the wall was singing a gramophone; On the opposite side is playing with children. There were two people laughing wildly upstairs; There is also the sound of playing cards. There was a woman crying for her dead mother on a boat in the river.人类的悲欢并不相通，我只觉得他们吵闹。
Human joys and sorrows are not the same, I just think they are noisy.
每一个破衣服人走过，叭儿狗就叫起来，其实并非都是狗主人的意旨或使嗾。
Every person in ragged clothes walks by, and the dog barks, but in fact, it is not the will or urge of the dog owner.叭儿狗往往比它的主人更严厉。
The bark dog tends to be harsher than its owner.
恐怕有一天总要不准穿破布衫，否则便是共产党。
I'm afraid that one day you will never be allowed to wear rags, otherwise it will be the Communist Party.
革命，反革命，不革命。
Revolution, counter-revolution, not revolutionary.革命的被杀于反革命的。反革命的被杀于革命的。不革命的或当作革命的而被杀于反革命的，或当作反革命的而被杀于革命的，或并不当作什么而被杀于革命的或反革命的。
The revolutionary was killed by the counter-revolutionary. Counter-revolutionaries were killed by revolutionaries. Those who are not revolutionary or are killed as revolutionaries by counter-revolutions, or who are killed by revolutionaries as counter-revolutionaries, or who are killed by revolutionaries or counter-revolutionaries for not doing anything.革命，革革命，革革革命，革革……。
Revolution, revolution, revolution.......
人感到寂寞时，会创作；一感到干净时，即无创作，他已经一无所爱。
When people feel lonely, they will create; When he feels clean, he has no creation, and he has nothing to love.创作总根于爱。
Creation is always rooted in love.杨朱无书。
Yang Zhu had no books.创作虽说抒写自己的心，但总愿意有人看。
Although creation expresses one's own heart, it is always willing to be seen by someone.创作是有社会性的。
Creation is social.但有时只要有一个人看便满足：好友，爱人。
But sometimes only one person is satisfied: a friend, a lover.
人往往憎和尚，憎尼姑，憎回教徒，憎耶教徒，而不憎道士。
People often hate monks, nuns, Muslims, and Jews, but they don't hate Taoists.懂得此理者，懂得中国大半。
Those who understand this principle understand most of China.
要自杀的人，也会怕大海的汪洋，怕夏天死尸的易烂。
People who want to commit suicide will also be afraid of the ocean and the fragility of dead bodies in summer.但遇到澄静的清池，凉爽的秋夜，他往往也自杀了。
But when encountering a clear pond and a cool autumn night, he often committed suicide.
凡为当局所“诛”者皆有“罪”。
Anyone who is "killed" by the authorities is guilty.
刘邦除秦苛暴，“与父老约，法三章耳。”
Liu Bang removed the harshness of the Qin Dynasty, "and made an agreement with the elders, and the law was three chapters." ”而后来仍有族诛，仍禁挟书，还是秦法。
Later, there were still clan killings, and it was still forbidden to carry books, which was still Qin law.法三章者，话一句耳。
The three chapters of the law are just one sentence.
一见短袖子，立刻想到白臂膊，立刻想到全裸体，立刻想到生殖器，立刻想到性交，立刻想到杂交，立刻想到私生子。
When I saw the short sleeves, I immediately thought of white arms, immediately thought of full nudity, immediately thought of genitals, immediately thought of sexual intercourse, immediately thought of hybridization, and immediately thought of illegitimate children.中国人的想像惟在这一层能够如此跃进。
The Chinese imagination can only make such a leap forward at this level.九月二十四日。
September 24th.

再谈香港

再谈香港

再谈香港

Let's talk about Hong Kong again我经过我所视为“畏途”的香港，算起来九月二十八日是第三回。
I passed through Hong Kong, which I regarded as a "fearful road", and September 28 was the third time.第一回带着一点行李，但并没有遇见什么事。第二回是单身往来，那情状，已经写过一点了。这回却比前两次仿佛先就感到不安，因为曾在《创造月刊》上王独清先生的通信中，见过英国雇用的中国同胞上船“查关”的威武：非骂则打，或者要几块钱。而我是有十只书箱在统舱里，六只书箱和衣箱在房舱里的。
The first time I brought a little luggage, but I didn't encounter anything. The second time is a single relationship, and the situation has already been written a little. This time, it seemed to be uneasy before the previous two times, because in the correspondence of Mr. Wang Duqing in the "Creation Monthly", I saw the power of Chinese compatriots hired by the British to board the ship to "check customs": either scolding or beating, or asking for a few dollars. And I have ten bookcases in the cabin, and six bookcases and clothes boxes in the cabin.看看挂英旗的同胞的手腕，自然也可说是一种经历，但我又想，这代价未免太大了，这些行李翻动之后，单是重行整理捆扎，就须大半天；要实验，最好只有一两件。然而已经如此，也就随他如此罢。只是给钱呢，还是听他逐件查验呢？倘查验，我一个人一时怎么收拾呢？
Looking at the wrists of the compatriots who hang the British flag, it can naturally be said to be an experience, but I also think that this price is too great, after these luggage are turned over, it will take most of the day just to reorganize and bundle them; To experiment, it is better to have only one or two pieces. However, this is already the case, so let him do it. Just give money, or let him inspect it piece by piece? If it is checked, how will I clean up alone?船是二十八日到香港的，当日无事。第二天午后，茶房匆匆跑来了，在房外用手招我道：
The ship arrived in Hong Kong on the 28th, and there was nothing to do that day. The next afternoon, the tea room hurriedly came and waved to me outside the room:“查关！开箱子去！”
"Check the customs! Open the box and go! ”我拿了钥匙，走进统舱，果然看见两位穿深绿色制服的英属同胞，手执铁签，在箱堆旁站着。我告诉他这里面是旧书，他似乎不懂，嘴里只有三个字：
I took the key, walked into the command cabin, and sure enough, I saw two British compatriots in dark green uniforms, holding iron sticks in their hands, standing next to the pile of boxes. I told him that it was an old book, but he didn't seem to understand, and there were only three words in his mouth:“打开来！”
"Open it!"“这是对的，”我想，“他怎能相信漠不相识的我的话呢。”自然打开来，于是靠了两个茶房的帮助，打开来了。
"That's right," I thought, "how can he believe my words when I don't know him?" "Naturally, it opened, so with the help of two tea rooms, it was opened.他一动手，我立刻觉得香港和广州的查关的不同。我出广州，也曾受过检查。但那边的检查员，脸上是有血色的，也懂得我的话。每一包纸或一部书，抽出来看后，便放在原地方，所以毫不凌乱。的确是检查。而在这“英人的乐园”的香港可大两样了。检查员的脸是青色的，也似乎不懂我的话。他只将箱子的内容倒出，翻搅一通，倘是一个纸包，便将包纸撕破，于是一箱书籍，经他搅松之后，便高出箱面有六七寸了。
As soon as he took action, I immediately felt that the customs inspection in Hong Kong and Guangzhou was different. I came out of Guangzhou and was also inspected. But the inspector over there had a bloody face and understood my words. Each pack of paper or a book, after taking it out and looking at it, put it in its original place, so it is not messy. It is indeed an inspection. And Hong Kong, which is a "paradise for the British", is different. The inspector's face was blue and didn't seem to understand me. He only poured out the contents of the box, stirred it, and if it was a paper package, he would tear the wrapping paper, so that a box of books, after he stirred it, was six or seven inches higher than the surface of the box.“打开来！”
"Open it!"其次是第二箱。我想，试一试罢。
This is followed by the second box. I thought, give it a try.“可以不看么？”我低声说。
"Can I not look at it?" I whispered.“给我十块钱。”他也低声说。他懂得我的话的。
"Give me ten dollars." He also whispered. He understands my words.“两块。”我原也肯多给几块的，因为这检查法委实可怕，十箱书收拾妥帖，至少要五点钟。可惜我一元的钞票只有两张了，此外是十元的整票，我一时还不肯献出去。
"Two pieces." I was willing to give a few more yuan, because this inspection method is really terrible, and it will take at least five o'clock to pack up ten boxes of books. It's a pity that I only have two one-yuan bills, and the other is a whole bill of ten yuan, and I refuse to give it away for a while.“打开来！”
"Open it!"两个茶房将第二箱抬到舱面上，他如法泡制，一箱书又变了一箱半，还撕碎了几个厚纸包。一面“查关”，一面磋商，我添到五元，他减到七元，即不肯再减。其时已经开到第五箱，四面围满了一群看热闹的旁观者。
The two tea rooms carried the second box to the cabin, and he brewed it in the same way, and a box of books changed into a box and a half, and tore up a few thick paper bags. While "checking" and negotiating, I added five yuan, and he reduced it to seven yuan, that is, he refused to reduce it again. At that time, the fifth box had been opened, surrounded by a group of spectators watching the excitement.箱子已经开了一半了，索性由他看去罢，我想着，便停止了商议，只是“打开来”。但我的两位同胞也仿佛有些厌倦了似的，渐渐不像先前一般翻箱倒箧，每箱只抽二三十本书，抛在箱面上，便画了查讫的记号了。其中有一束旧信札，似乎颇惹起他们的兴味，振了一振精神，但看过四五封之后，也就放下了。此后大抵又开了一箱罢，他们便离开了乱书堆：这就是终结。
The box was already halfway opened, so I just let him look at it, I thought, so I stopped discussing it and just "opened it". But my two compatriots also seemed to be a little tired, and gradually they didn't rummage through the boxes as before, and only took out twenty or thirty books from each box, threw them on the surface of the box, and drew a mark that the check was completed. Among them was a bundle of old letters, which seemed to arouse their interest and cheer them up, but after reading four or five letters, they put them down. After that, they probably opened another box, and they left the pile of books: this is the end.我仔细一看，已经打开的是八箱，两箱丝毫未动。而这两个硕果，却全是伏园的书箱，由我替他带回上海来的。至于我自己的东西，是全部乱七八糟。
I took a closer look and saw that eight boxes had been opened, and two boxes had not been moved at all. And these two fruits are all Fuyuan's bookcase, which I brought back to Shanghai for him. As for my own things, they are all messy.“吉人自有天相，伏园真福将也！而我的华盖运却还没有走完，噫吁唏……”我想着，蹲下去随手去拾乱书。拾不几本，茶房又在舱口大声叫我了：
"The auspicious people have their own natural appearance, and the Fuyuan is a true blessing! But my canopy luck is not finished yet, sighing...... "I thought, squatting down and picking up the messy books." After picking up a few books, the tea room called me loudly at the hatch again:“你的房里查关，开箱子去！”
"Check your room and open the box!"我将收拾书箱的事托了统舱的茶房，跑回房舱去。果然，两位英属同胞早在那里等我了。床上的铺盖已经掀得稀乱，一个凳子躺在被铺上。我一进门，他们便搜我身上的皮夹。我以为意在看看名刺，可以知道姓名。然而并不看名刺，只将里面的两张十元钞票一看，便交还我了。还嘱咐我好好拿着，仿佛很怕我遗失似的。
I entrusted the matter of packing the bookcase to the tea room in the cabin and ran back to the cabin. Sure enough, the two British compatriots were already waiting for me there. The bed cover was already lifted, and a stool was lying on the bed. As soon as I entered, they searched my wallet. I thought I was looking at the business card and I could know the name. However, he didn't look at the business card, only looked at the two ten-yuan bills inside, and handed them back to me. He also told me to hold it well, as if he was afraid that I would lose it.其次是开提包，里面都是衣服，只抖开了十来件，乱堆在床铺上。其次是看提篮，有一个包着七元大洋的纸包，打开来数了一回，默然无话。还有一包十元的在底里，却不被发见，漏网了。其次是看长椅子上的手巾包，内有角子一包十元，散的四五元，铜子数十枚，看完之后，也默然无话。其次是开衣箱。这回可有些可怕了。我取锁匙略迟，同胞已经捏着铁签作将要毁坏铰链之势，幸而钥匙已到，始庆安全。里面也是衣服，自然还是照例的抖乱，不在话下。
The second is to open the bag, which is full of clothes, and only shakes off a dozen pieces and piles them up on the bed. The second is to look at the basket, there is a paper bag wrapped in seven yuan ocean, open it and count it, silent. There was also a pack of ten yuan in the bottom, but it was not found and escaped the net. The second is to look at the handkerchief bag on the bench, which contains ten yuan for a pack of slots, four or five yuan for loose coins, and dozens of copper pieces. The second is the open suitcase. This time it's a bit scary. I was a little late to get the key, and my compatriots were already holding the iron stick to destroy the hinge, but fortunately, the key had arrived, and I was happy to be safe. There are also clothes inside, so naturally they are still shaking as usual, which is not a problem.“你给我们十块钱，我们不搜查你了。”一个同胞一面搜衣箱，一面说。
"You give us ten dollars, we won't search you." A compatriot said while searching the suitcase.我就抓起手巾包里的散角子来，要交给他。但他不接受，回过头去再“查关”。
I grabbed the loose corners in my handkerchief bag and handed them to him. But he didn't accept it and went back to "check" again.话分两头。当这一位同胞在查提包和衣箱时，那一位同胞是在查网篮。但那检查法，和在统舱里查书箱的时候又两样了。那时还不过捣乱，这回却变了毁坏。他先将鱼肝油的纸匣撕碎，掷在地板上，还用铁签在蒋径三君送我的装着含有荔枝香味的茶叶的瓶上钻了一个洞。一面钻，一面四顾，在桌上见了一把小刀。这是在北京时用十几个铜子从白塔寺买来，带到广州，这回削过杨桃的。事后一量，连柄长华尺五寸三分。然而据说是犯了罪了。
The words are divided into two ends. When this compatriot was checking the bag and suitcase, the compatriot was checking the basket. But the inspection method is different from checking the bookcase in the command cabin. At that time, it was just a mess, but this time it turned into destruction. He first tore up the paper box of cod liver oil, threw it on the floor, and drilled a hole in the bottle containing tea leaves containing the scent of lychee given to me by Jiang Jingsanjun with an iron skewer. While drilling, he looked around and saw a knife on the table. This was bought from the White Pagoda Temple with more than a dozen copper pieces in Beijing and brought to Guangzhou, and this time the star fruit was shaved. After the fact, the handle was measured to be 1 foot 5 inches and 3 inches long. However, it is said that he has committed a crime.“这是凶器，你犯罪的。”他拿起小刀来，指着向我说。
"This is a murder weapon, you committed a crime." He picked up a knife and pointed to me.我不答话，他便放下小刀，将盐煮花生的纸包用指头挖了一个洞。接着又拿起一盒蚊烟香。
I didn't answer, so he put down his knife and dug a hole in the paper bag of salted peanuts with his fingers. Then he picked up a box of mosquito cigarettes.“这是什么？”
"What is this?"“蚊烟香。盒子上不写着么？”我说。
"Mosquito smoke. Isn't it written on the box? I said.“不是。这有些古怪。”
"No. It's a bit weird. ”他于是抽出一枝来，嗅着。后来不知如何，因为这一位同胞已经搜完衣箱，我须去开第二只了。这时却使我非常为难，那第二只里并不是衣服或书籍，是极其零碎的东西：照片，钞本，自己的译稿，别人的文稿，剪存的报章，研究的资料……。我想，倘一毁坏或搅乱，那损失可太大了。而同胞这时忽又去看了一回手巾包。我于是大悟，决心拿起手巾包里十元整封的角子，给他看了一看。他回头向门外一望，然后伸手接过去，在第二只箱上画了一个查讫的记号，走向那一位同胞去。大约打了一个暗号罢，——然而奇怪，他并不将钱带走，却塞在我的枕头下，自己出去了。
He then pulled out a branch and sniffed it. Later, I don't know what to do, because this compatriot has already searched the suitcase, and I have to open a second one. At this time, I was very embarrassed, and the second one was not clothes or books, but extremely fragmentary things: photographs, banknotes, my own translations, other people's manuscripts, newspapers clippings, research materials, ....... I think if it is destroyed or disturbed, the loss will be too great. And the compatriots suddenly went to see the handkerchief bag again. I then realized and decided to pick up the ten-yuan slot in the handkerchief bag and show him it. He looked back at the door, then reached out to take it, drew a mark on the second box to complete the inspection, and walked towards the compatriot. About a code,—— but strangely, he didn't take the money away, but stuffed it under my pillow and went out by himself.这时那一位同胞正在用他的铁签，恶狠狠地刺入一个装着饼类的坛子的封口去。我以为他一听到暗号，就要中止了。而孰知不然。他仍然继续工作，挖开封口，将盖着的一片木板摔在地板上，碎为两片，然后取出一个饼，捏了一捏，掷入坛中，这才也扬长而去了。
At this time, the compatriot was using his iron stick to viciously pierce the seal of a jar containing cakes. I thought he was going to stop as soon as he heard the code. But who knows otherwise. He continued to work, dug open the seal, threw a piece of the board on the floor, broke it into two pieces, then took out a loaf, pinched it, threw it into the altar, and then went away.天下太平。我坐在烟尘陡乱，乱七八糟的小房里，悟出我的两位同胞开手的捣乱，倒并不是恶意。即使议价，也须在小小乱七八糟之后，这是所以“掩人耳目”的，犹言如此凌乱，可见已经检查过。王独清先生不云乎？同胞之外，是还有一位高鼻子，白皮肤的主人翁的。当收款之际，先看门外者大约就为此。但我一直没有看见这一位主人翁。
The world is at peace. I sat in a small room with a steep and dusty mess, and realized that the trouble caused by my two compatriots was not malicious. Even if the price is negotiated, it must be after a little mess, which is why it is "hidden from people's eyes", and it is said that it is so messy, it can be seen that it has been checked. Didn't Mr. Wang Duqing say that? In addition to his compatriots, there is also a high-nosed, white-skinned master. When it comes time to collect money, the first person to look outside the door is probably for this. But I never saw this master.后来的毁坏，却很有一点恶意了。然而也许倒要怪我自己不肯拿出钞票去，只给银角子。银角子放在制服的口袋里，沉垫垫地，确是易为主人翁所发见的，所以只得暂且放在枕头下。我想，他大概须待公事办毕，这才再来收账罢。
The later destruction was a little malicious. However, maybe I was blamed for not taking out the banknotes and only giving silver slots. The silver slot was placed in the pocket of the uniform, and the cushion was indeed easy for the master to discover, so it had to be placed under the pillow for the time being. I think he will probably have to wait until his official business is done before he comes back to collect the bills.皮鞋声橐橐地自远而近，停在我的房外了，我看时，是一个白人，颇胖，大概便是两位同胞的主人翁了。
The sound of leather shoes came from far and near, and stopped outside my house, and when I saw it, it was a white man, quite fat, probably the master of the two compatriots.“查过了？”他笑嘻嘻地问我。
"Have you checked?" He asked me with a smile.的确是的，主人翁的口吻。但是，一目了然，何必问呢？或者因为看见我的行李特别乱七八糟，在慰安我，或在嘲弄我罢。
Indeed, it is the tone of the master. But, at a glance, why ask? Or because they saw that my luggage was very messy, comforting me, or mocking me.他从房外拾起一张《大陆报》附送的图画，本来包着什物，由同胞撕下来抛出去的，倚在壁上看了一回，就又慢慢地走过去了。
He picked up a picture attached to the "Continental Daily" from outside the room, which was originally wrapped in things, tore it off and threw it out by his compatriots, leaned against the wall and looked at it, and then slowly walked over again.我想，主人翁已经走过，“查关”该已收场了，于是先将第一只衣箱整理，捆好。
I thought that the protagonist had already gone through and the "customs check" should be over, so I sorted out the first wardrobe and tied it up first.不料还是不行。一个同胞又来了，叫我“打开来”，他要查。接着是这样的问答——
Unexpectedly, it still didn't work. A compatriot came again and told me to "open it" and he wanted to check. Then there is this question and answer -“他已经看过了。”我说。
"He's already seen it." I say.“没有看过。没有打开过。打开来！”
"I haven't seen it. It has never been opened. Open it! ”“我刚刚捆好的。”
"I just tied it up."“我不信。打开来！”
"I don't believe it. Open it! ”“这里不画着查过的符号么？”
"Isn't there a symbol that has been checked here?"“那么，你给了钱了罢？你用贿赂……”
"So, you gave the money? You bribed ......"“…………”
“你给了多少钱？”
"How much did you give?"“你去问你的一伙去。”
"You go and ask your gang."他去了。不久，那一个又忙忙走来，从枕头下取了钱，此后便不再看见，——真正天下太平。
He went. Soon, the one hurriedly walked over and took money from under the pillow, and after that, he no longer saw ,—— real peace in the world.我才又慢慢地收拾那行李。只见桌子上聚集着几件东西，是我的一把剪刀，一个开罐头的家伙，还有一把木柄的小刀。大约倘没有那十元小洋，便还要指这为“凶器”，加上“古怪”的香，来恐吓我的罢。但那一枝香却不在桌子上。
I slowly packed the luggage again. I saw a few things gathered on the table, including my scissors, a guy who opened a can, and a knife with a wooden handle. If there is no ten yuan Xiaoyang, it will be pointed out that this is a "murder weapon" and a "strange" incense to intimidate me. But that stick of incense was not on the table.船一走动，全船反显得更闲静了，茶房和我闲谈，却将这翻箱倒箧的事，归咎于我自己。
As soon as the boat moved, the whole ship seemed quieter, and the tea room chatted with me, but blamed myself for rummaging through boxes.“你生得太瘦了，他疑心你是贩雅片的。”他说。
"You are too thin, and he suspects that you are selling elegant films." He said.我实在有些愕然。真是人寿有限，“世故”无穷。我一向以为和人们抢饭碗要碰钉子，不要饭碗是无妨的。去年在厦门，才知道吃饭固难，不吃亦殊为“学者”所不悦，得了不守本分的批评。胡须的形状，有国粹和欧式之别，不易处置，我是早经明白的。今年到广州，才又知道虽颜色也难以自由，有人在日报上警告我，叫我的胡子不要变灰色，又不要变红色。至于为人不可太瘦，则到香港才省悟，先前是梦里也未曾想到的。
I was really stunned. It is really a limited life, and the "sophistication" is endless. I have always thought that it is okay to hit a nail in grabbing a job with people, and it is okay not to have a job. Last year in Xiamen, I realized that eating is difficult, and not eating is particularly disliked by "scholars", and I have been criticized for not keeping my duty. The shape of the beard is different from the national essence and the European style, and it is not easy to dispose of, I have long understood. When I went to Guangzhou this year, I realized that although the color is difficult to be free, someone warned me in the daily newspaper not to turn gray or red. As for not being too thin, he only realized it when he arrived in Hong Kong, which he had never dreamed of before.的确，监督着同胞“查关”的一个西洋人，实在吃得很肥胖。
Indeed, a Westerner who supervised the "customs check" of his compatriots was really fat.香港虽只一岛，却活画着中国许多地方现在和将来的小照：中央几位洋主子，手下是若干颂德的“高等华人”和一伙作伥的奴气同胞。此外即全是默默吃苦的“土人”，能耐的死在洋场上，耐不住的逃入深山中，苗瑶是我们的前辈。
Although Hong Kong is only an island, it vividly paints small photos of the present and future of many parts of China: several foreign masters in the center, a number of "high Chinese" who praise virtue and a group of slave compatriots. In addition, they are all "natives" who endured hardships silently, who died on the foreign field and fled into the mountains impatiently, Miao Yao is our predecessor.九月二十九之夜。海上。
On the night of September 29th. Maritime.

革命文学

革命文学

革命文学

Revolutionary literature今年在南方，听得大家叫“革命”，正如去年在北方，听得大家叫“讨赤”的一样盛大。
This year, in the south, everyone heard it was called "revolution", just as it was in the north last year, everyone heard it called "seeking red".而这“革命”还侵入文艺界里了。
And this "revolution" has also invaded the literary and artistic circles.最近，广州的日报上还有一篇文章指示我们，叫我们应该以四位革命文学家为师法：意大利的唐南遮，德国的霍普德曼，西班牙的伊本纳兹，中国的吴稚晖。
Recently, there was an article in the Guangzhou daily newspaper instructing us that we should learn from four revolutionary writers: Don Nanzio of Italy, Hopdemann of Germany, Ibn Naz of Spain, and Wu Zhihui of China.两位帝国主义者，一位本国政府的叛徒，一位国民党救护的发起者，都应该作为革命文学的师法，于是革命文学便莫名其妙了，因为这实在是至难之业。
Two imperialists, a traitor to their own government, and an initiator of the Kuomintang rescue, should all be used as teachers of revolutionary literature, so revolutionary literature is inexplicable, because this is really a very difficult task.于是不得已，世间往往误以两种文学为革命文学：一是在一方的指挥刀的掩护之下，斥骂他的敌手的；一是纸面上写着许多“打，打”，“杀，杀”，或“血，血”的。
Therefore, as a last resort, the world often mistakenly regards two types of literature as revolutionary literature: one is under the cover of one side's command sword, rebuking his opponent; First, there are many "beating, beating", "killing, killing", or "blood, blood" written on the paper.如果这是“革命文学”，则做“革命文学家”，实在是最痛快而安全的事。
If this is "revolutionary literature", then being a "revolutionary writer" is really the most enjoyable and safe thing.从指挥刀下骂出去，从裁判席上骂下去，从官营的报上骂开去，真是伟哉一世之雄，妙在被骂者不敢开口。而又有人说，这不敢开口，又何其怯也？对手无“杀身成仁”之勇，是第二条罪状，斯愈足以显革命文学家之英雄。所可惜者只在这文学并非对于强暴者的革命，而是对于失败者的革命。
Scolding from under the commanding knife, scolding from the referee's seat, and scolding from the official newspaper, it is really a great hero, and the beauty is that the scolded person does not dare to speak. And some people say, how timid is this not daring to speak? The opponent's lack of the courage to "kill oneself and become benevolent" is the second crime, which is enough to show the heroism of revolutionary writers. It is a pity that this literature is not a revolution for the rapists, but a revolution for the losers.唐朝人早就知道，穷措大想做富贵诗，多用些“金”“玉”“锦”“绮”字面，自以为豪华，而不知适见其寒蠢。真会写富贵景象的，有道：“笙歌归院落，灯火下楼台”，全不用那些字。“打，打”，“杀，杀”，听去诚然是英勇的，但不过是一面鼓。即使是鼙鼓，倘若前面无敌军，后面无我军，终于不过是一面鼓而已。
The people of the Tang Dynasty have long known that they want to make rich poems, and use more words of "gold", "jade", "brocade" and "qi", thinking that they are luxurious, but they don't know how to see their cold stupidity. There is a saying: "Shengge returns to the courtyard, and the lights go down the building", without using those words. "Fight, fight", "kill, kill", it sounds heroic, but it is just a drum. Even if it is a drum, if there is no invincible army in front and no army in the back, it is just a drum in the end.我以为根本问题是在作者可是一个“革命人”，倘是的，则无论写的是什么事件，用的是什么材料，即都是“革命文学”。从喷泉里出来的都是水，从血管里出来的都是血。“赋得革命，五言八韵”，是只能骗骗盲试官的。
I think the fundamental problem is that the author is a "revolutionary", and if so, no matter what event he writes or what material he uses, it is all "revolutionary literature". All water comes out of the fountain, and all blood comes out of the veins. "Giving revolution and five words and eight rhymes" can only deceive blind examiners.但“革命人”就希有。俄国十月革命时，确曾有许多文人愿为革命尽力。但事实的狂风，终于转得他们手足无措。显明的例是诗人叶遂宁的自杀，还有小说家梭波里，他最后的话是：“活不下去了！”
But "revolutionaries" are rare. During the October Revolution in Russia, there were indeed many literati who were willing to do their best for the revolution. But the wind of facts finally turned them at a loss. A clear example is the suicide of the poet Ye Suining, and the novelist Sopoli, whose last words were: "I can't live anymore!" ”在革命时代有大叫“活不下去了”的勇气，才可以做革命文学。
In the revolutionary era, only those who have the courage to shout "I can't live anymore" can do revolutionary literature.叶遂宁和梭波里终于不是革命文学家。为什么呢，因为俄国是实在在革命。革命文学家风起云涌的所在，其实是并没有革命的。
Ye Suining and Sopoli were not revolutionary writers after all. Why, because Russia is a real revolution. Where revolutionary writers are surging, there is actually no revolution.

《尘影》题辞

《尘影》题辞

《尘影》题辞

"Dust Shadow" inscription在我自己，觉得中国现在是一个进向大时代的时代。但这所谓大，并不一定指可以由此得生，而也可以由此得死。
In my own opinion, China is now an era of great progress. But this so-called big does not necessarily mean that you can live from it, but you can also die from it.许多为爱的献身者，已经由此得死。在其先，玩着意中而且意外的血的游戏，以愉快和满意，以及单是好看和热闹，赠给身在局内而旁观的人们；但同时也给若干人以重压。
Many devotees of love have died because of this. First, play the game of blood that is intentional and unexpected, and give it to the people who are watching in the game with pleasure and satisfaction, as well as just good looks and liveliness; But at the same time, it also puts a lot of pressure on several people.这重压除去的时候，不是死，就是生。这才是大时代。
When this pressure is removed, it is either death or life. This is the big era.在异性中看见爱，在百合花中看见天堂，在拾煤渣的老妇人的魂灵中看见拜金主义，世界现在常为受机关枪拥护的仁义所治理，在此时此地听到这样的消息，我委实身心舒服，如喝好酒。然而《尘影》所赍来的，却是重压。
Seeing love in the opposite sex, heaven in the lilies, seeing money worship in the spirit of an old woman picking up cinders, the world is now often ruled by benevolence and righteousness supported by machine guns, and hearing such news here and now, I am truly physically and mentally comfortable, like drinking good wine. However, what "Dust Shadow" brings is heavy pressure.现在的文艺，是往往给人不舒服的，没有法子。要不然，只好使自己逃出文艺，或者从文艺推出人生。
Today's literature and art are often uncomfortable and there is no way. Otherwise, you have to escape from literature and art, or push your life out of literature and art.谁更为仁义和钞票写照，为三道血的“难看”传神呢？我看见一篇《尘影》，它的愉快和重压留与各色的人们。
Who is more benevolent and righteous and banknotes, and conveys the "ugly" of the three bloods? I saw a piece of "Dust Shadow", and its joy and weight were left with people of all colors.然而在结末的“尘影”中却又给我喝了一口好酒。
However, in the "dust shadow" at the end, he gave me another sip of good wine.他将小宝留下，不告诉我们后来是得死，还是得生。作者不愿意使我们太受重压罢。但这是好的，因为我觉得中国现在是进向大时代的时代。
He left Xiaobao behind and did not tell us whether he would die or live later. The author does not want to put us under too much pressure. But this is good because I think China is now in the era of the big era.一九二七年十二月七日，鲁迅记于上海。
On December 7, 1927, Lu Xun recorded in Shanghai.

当陶元庆君的绘画展览时　我所要说的几句话

当陶元庆君的绘画展览时When Tao Yuanqingjun's paintings were exhibited我所要说的几句话, I would like to say a few words
陶元庆君绘画的展览，我在北京所见的是第一回。记得那时曾经说过这样意思的话：他以新的形，尤其是新的色来写出他自己的世界，而其中仍有中国向来的魂灵——要字面免得流于玄虚，则就是：民族性。
The exhibition of Tao Yuanqingjun's paintings is the first one I have seen in Beijing. I remember saying that he used to write his own world in new forms, especially new colors, and there was still the soul of China in it - literally, so as not to be mysterious, that is: national character.我觉得我的话在上海也没有改正的必要。
I don't think there is any need to correct my words in Shanghai.中国现今的一部分人，确是很有些苦闷。我想，这是古国的青年的迟暮之感。世界的时代思潮早已六面袭来，而自己还拘禁在三千年陈的桎梏里。于是觉醒，挣扎，反叛，要出而参与世界的事业——我要范围说得小一点：文艺之业。倘使中国之在世界上不算在错，则这样的情形我以为也是对的。
Some people in China today are indeed very distressed. I think this is the twilight feeling of the youth of the ancient country. The world's trend of thought has already struck from all sides, and he is still imprisoned in the shackles of three thousand years old. So awakening, struggle, rebellion, and going out to participate in the cause of the world - I want to put it in a smaller way: the literary industry. If China is not wrong in the world, then I think this situation is also correct.然而现在外面的许多艺术界中人，已经对于自然反叛，将自然割裂，改造了。而文艺史界中人，则舍了用惯的向来以为是“永久”的旧尺，另以各时代各民族的固有的尺，来量各时代各民族的艺术，于是向埃及坟中的绘画赞叹，对黑人刀柄上的雕刻点头，这往往使我们误解，以为要再回到旧日的桎梏里。而新艺术家们勇猛的反叛，则震惊我们的耳目，又往往不能不感服。但是，我们是迟暮了，并未参与过先前的事业，于是有时就不过敬谨接收，又成了一种可敬的身外的新桎梏。
However, many people in the art world outside have rebelled against nature, separated it, and transformed it. However, people in the literary and artistic history circles abandoned the old ruler that they had always thought to be "permanent", and used the inherent ruler of each era and ethnic group to measure the art of each era and ethnic group, so they admired the paintings in the Egyptian tombs and nodded at the carvings on the handle of the black sword, which often misled us into thinking that we wanted to return to the shackles of the past. The brave rebellion of new artists shocks our ears and eyes, and we often cannot help but be impressed. However, we are late and have not participated in our previous careers, so sometimes we are just respectful and acceptable, and it has become a respectable new shackle outside the body.陶元庆君的绘画，是没有这两重桎梏的。就因为内外两面，都和世界的时代思潮合流，而又并未梏亡中国的民族性。
Tao Yuanqingjun's paintings do not have these two shackles. Just because both internal and external aspects merge with the world's ideological trends, but they do not shackle China's national character.我于艺术界的事知道得极少，关于文字的事较为留心些。就如白话，从中，更就世所谓“欧化语体”来说罢。有人斥道：你用这样的语体，可惜皮肤不白，鼻梁不高呀！诚然，这教训是严厉的。但是，皮肤一白，鼻梁一高，他用的大概是欧文，不是欧化语体了。正唯其皮不白，鼻不高而偏要“的呵吗呢”，并且一句里用许多的“的”字，这才是为世诟病的今日的中国的我辈。
I know very little about the art world, and I pay more attention to words. Just like the vernacular, from the middle, let's talk about the so-called "Europeanized language" in the world. Someone reprimanded: You use such a language, but unfortunately your skin is not white and the bridge of your nose is not high! True, the lesson is harsh. However, when his skin was white and the bridge of his nose was high, he probably used Irving, not European. It is only because its skin is not white, the nose is not high, but it wants "huh", and many "of" words are used in one sentence, which is our generation in today's China that is criticized by the world.但我并非将欧化文来比拟陶元庆君的绘画。意思只在说：他并非“之乎者也”，因为用的是新的形和新的色；而又不是“Yes”“No”，因为他究竟是中国人。所以，用密达尺来量，是不对的，但也不能用什么汉朝的虑傂尺或清朝的营造尺，因为他又已经是现今的人。我想，必须用存在于现今想要参与世界上的事业的中国人的心里的尺来量，这才懂得他的艺术。
But I am not comparing Ouhuawen to Tao Yuanqingjun's paintings. It only means that he is not "the one who is also the one who does it", because he uses new shapes and new colors; And it is not "Yes" and "No", because he is Chinese. Therefore, it is not right to use the Mida ruler to measure, but it is also not possible to use the Han Dynasty's ruler or the Qing Dynasty's construction ruler, because he is already a person today. I think we must measure it with the ruler of the hearts of Chinese people who want to participate in the cause of the world today, so that we can understand his art.一九二七年十二月十三日，鲁迅于上海记。
On December 13, 1927, Lu Xun recorded in Shanghai.

卢梭和胃口

卢梭和胃口

卢梭和胃口

Rousseau and appetite做过《民约论》的卢梭，自从他还未死掉的时候起，便受人们的责备和迫害，直到现在，责备终于没有完。连在和“民约”没有什么关系的中华民国，也难免这一幕了。
Rousseau, who wrote the "Treatise on the People's Covenant", has been reproached and persecuted by people since he was not dead, and until now, the reproach has not ended. Even in the Republic of China, which has nothing to do with the "People's Covenant", this scene is inevitable.例如商务印书馆出版的《爱弥尔》中文译本的序文上，就说——
For example, in the preface to the Chinese translation of "Emil" published by the Commercial Press, it is said -“……本书的第五编即女子教育，他的主张非但不彻底，而且不承认女子的人格，与前四编的尊重人类相矛盾。……所以在今日看来，他对于人类正当的主张，可说只树得一半……。”
“…… The fifth part of this book, women's education, is not only incomplete, but also does not recognize women's personality, which contradicts the respect for human beings in the first four parts. …… Therefore, in today's view, his legitimate claim to mankind can only be said to be half ....... ”然而复旦大学出版的《复旦旬刊》创刊号上梁实秋教授的意思，却“稍微有点不同”了。其实岂但“稍微”而已耶，乃是“卢梭论教育，无一是处，唯其论女子教育，的确精当。”因为那是“根据于男女的性质与体格的差别而来”的。而近代生物学和心理学研究的结果，又证明着天下没有两个人是无差别。怎样的人就该施以怎样的教育。所以，梁先生说——
However, the meaning of Professor Liang Shiqiu in the first issue of "Fudan Xunan" published by Fudan University is "slightly different". In fact, it is not just "slightly", but "Rousseau's theory of education is useless, but his discussion of women's education is indeed accurate." Because it is "based on the difference in nature and physique between men and women." The results of modern biology and psychological research prove that there are no two people in the world who are indistinguishable. What kind of education should be given to people. Therefore, Mr. Liang said -“我觉得‘人’字根本的该从字典里永远注销，或由政府下令永禁行使。因为‘人’字的意义太糊涂了。聪明绝顶的人，我们叫他做人，蠢笨如牛的人，也一样的叫做人，弱不禁风的女子，叫做人，粗横强大的男人，也叫做人，人里面的三流九等，无一非人。近代的德谟克拉西的思想，平等的观念，其起源即由于不承认人类的差别。近代所谓的男女平等运动，其起源即由于不承认男女的差别。人格是一个抽象名词，是一个人的身心各方面的特点的总和。人的身心各方面的特点既有差别，实即人格上亦有差别。所谓侮辱人格的，即是不承认一个人特有的人格，卢梭承认女子有女子的人格，所以卢梭正是尊重女子的人格。抹杀女子所特有之特性者，才是侮辱女子人格。”
"I think the word 'person' should be forever written off from the dictionary, or the government should order it to be banned forever. Because the meaning of the word 'people' is too confusing. A person who is extremely smart, we call him a person, a person who is as stupid as a cow is also called a person, a weak woman who can't help the wind, a man who is rough and powerful, also called a person, and the third and ninth ranks in a person are all human. The modern idea of Democracy, the concept of equality, has its origin in the non-recognition of human differences. The origin of the so-called gender equality movement in modern times is due to the non-recognition of differences between men and women. Personality is an abstract term, the sum of the characteristics of a person's body and mind. There are differences in the characteristics of human body and mind, and in fact, there are also differences in personality. The so-called insult to personality is not to recognize a person's unique personality, Rousseau admits that a woman has a woman's personality, so Rousseau respects the personality of a woman. erasing the unique characteristics of women is insulting the female personality. ”于是势必至于得到这样的结论——
So it is bound to come to such a conclusion -“……正当的女子教育应该是使女子成为完全的女子。”
“…… Proper women's education should make women perfect women. ”那么，所谓正当的教育者，也应该是使“弱不禁风”者，成为完全的“弱不禁风”，“蠢笨如牛”者，成为完全的“蠢笨如牛”，这才免于侮辱各人——此字在未经从字典里永远注销，政府下令永禁行使之前，暂且使用——的人格了。卢梭《爱弥尔》前四编的主张不这样，其“无一是处”，于是可以算无疑。
Then, the so-called legitimate educator should also make those who are "weak and unable to resist the wind" become completely "weak and unbearable", "stupid as cows", and become completely "stupid as cows", so as not to insult everyone—this word is temporarily used before it is forever written off from the dictionary and the government orders it to be banned forever. The first four parts of Rousseau's "Emil" are not like this, and their "uselessness" can be regarded as undoubted.但这所谓“无一是处”者，也只是对于“聪明绝顶的人”而言；在“蠢笨如牛的人”，却是“正当”的教育。因为看了这样的议论，可以使他更渐近于完全“蠢笨如牛”。这也就是尊重他的人格。
But this so-called "nothing" is only for "extremely smart people"; In "people who are stupid as cows", it is a "legitimate" education. Because reading such discussions can make him closer to being completely "stupid as a cow". This is to respect his personality.然而这种议论还是不会完结的。为什么呢？一者，因为即使知道说“自然的不平等”，而不容易明白真“自然”和“因积渐的人为而似自然”之分。二者，因为凡有学说，往往“合吾人之胃口者则容纳之，且从而宣扬之”也。
However, this discussion will not end. Why? First, because even if we know about "natural inequality", it is not easy to understand the difference between true "nature" and "natural because of accumulation of artificiality". Second, because all doctrines are often "accepted and promoted if they meet our appetites."上海一隅，前二年大谈亚诺德，今年大谈白璧德，恐怕也就是胃口之故罢。
In a corner of Shanghai, two years ago there was a lot of talk about Arnold, and this year there was a lot of talk about Bai Bide, I'm afraid it was because of the appetite.许多问题大抵发生于“胃口”，胃口的差别，也正如“人”字一样的——其实这两字也应该呈请政府“下令永禁行使”。我且抄一段同是美国的Upton Sinclair的，以尊重另一种人格罢——
Many problems mostly arise from "appetite", and the difference in appetite is the same as the word "person" - in fact, these two words should also petition the government to "order a permanent ban". I will copy a passage from Upton Sinclair, also from the United States, to honor another person—“无论在那一个卢梭的批评家，都有首先应该解决的唯一的问题。为什么你和他吵闹的？要为他的到达点的那自由，平等，调协开路么？还是因为畏惧卢梭所发向世界上的新思想和新感情的激流呢？使对于他取了为父之劳的个人主义运动的全体怀疑，将我们带到子女服从父母，奴隶服从主人，妻子服从丈夫，臣民服从教皇和皇帝，大学生毫不发生疑问，而佩服教授的讲义的善良的古代去，乃是你的目的么？
"No matter which Rousseau critic is, there is only one problem that should be solved first. Why are you arguing with him? To open the way for the freedom, equality, and coordination of his destination? Or is it because they are afraid of Rousseau's torrent of new ideas and feelings into the world? Is it your purpose to make all doubts about the individualistic movement of his father's labor, to bring us to the ancient times where children obey their parents, slaves obey their masters, wives obey their husbands, subjects obey the pope and emperor, and the university students have no doubts, and admire the goodness of the professor's lectures?“阿嶷夫人曰：‘最后的一句，好像是对于白璧德教授的一箭似的。’
"Mrs. Ah Yi said: 'The last sentence seems to be an arrow to Professor Bai Bide.'“‘奇怪呀，’她的丈夫说。‘斯人也而有斯姓也……那一定是上帝的审判了。’”
"'It's strange,' said her husband. This person has such a surname...... It must be God's judgment. ’”不知道和原意可有错误，因为我是从日本文重译的。书的原名是《Mammonart》，在California的Pasadena作者自己出版，胃口相近的人们自己弄来看去罢。Mammon是希腊神话里的财神，art谁都知道是艺术。可以译作“财神艺术”罢。日本的译名是“拜金艺术”，也行。因为这一个字是作者生造的，政府既没有下令颁行，字典里也大概未曾注入，所以姑且在这里加一点解释。
I don't know if there is a mistake in the original meaning, because I retranslated it from Japanese. The original title of the book was "Mammonart", and the author published it himself in Pasadena, California, and people with similar appetites got it for themselves. Mammon is the god of wealth in Greek mythology, and everyone knows that art is art. It can be translated as "God of Wealth Art". The Japanese translation is "gold worship art", which is also fine. Because this word was created by the author, the government neither ordered it to be promulgated, nor was it probably injected into the dictionary, so I will add a little explanation here.十二，二一。
Twelve, 21.

文学和出汗

文学和出汗

文学和出汗

Literature and sweating上海的教授对人讲文学，以为文学当描写永远不变的人性，否则便不久长。例如英国，莎士比亚和别的一两个人所写的是永久不变的人性，所以至今流传，其余的不这样，就都消灭了云。
Professors in Shanghai talk about literature, thinking that literature should describe the ever-changing human nature, otherwise it will not last long. For example, in England, Shakespeare and one or two others wrote about the permanent and unchanging human nature, so it has been passed down to this day, and the rest have disappeared if they are not like this.这真是所谓“你不说我倒还明白，你越说我越胡涂”了。英国有许多先前的文章不流传，我想，这是总会有的，但竟没有想到它们的消灭，乃因为不写永久不变的人性。现在既然知道了这一层，却更不解它们既已消灭，现在的教授何从看见，却居然断定它们所写的都不是永久不变的人性了。
This is really the so-called "I understand if you don't say it, the more you say it, the more nonsense I get". There are many previous articles in the UK that have not been circulated, and I think there will always be, but I did not expect their extinction because they did not write about permanent and unchanging human nature. Now that I know this layer, I am even more puzzled that since they have been eliminated, how can the current professor see it, but actually conclude that what they write is not permanent and unchanging human nature.只要流传的便是好文学，只要消灭的便是坏文学；抢得天下的便是王，抢不到天下的便是贼。莫非中国式的历史论，也将沟通了中国人的文学论欤？
As long as it is circulated, it is good literature, and as long as it is destroyed, it is bad literature; The one who can grab the world is the king, and the one who can't grab the world is the thief. Could it be that the Chinese-style theory of history also communicates with the Chinese literary theory?而且，人性是永久不变的么？
Moreover, is human nature permanent?类人猿，类猿人，原人，古人，今人，未来的人，……如果生物真会进化，人性就不能永久不变。不说类猿人，就是原人的脾气，我们大约就很难猜得着的，则我们的脾气，恐怕未来的人也未必会明白。要写永久不变的人性，实在难哪。
great apes, apes, primitive people, ancient people, modern people, and future people,...... If living things really evolve, human nature cannot remain unchanged. Not to mention the ape-like people, it is the temper of the original people, which is probably difficult for us to guess, so I am afraid that our temper may not be understood by people in the future. It is really difficult to write about permanent and unchanging human nature.譬如出汗罢，我想，似乎于古有之，于今也有，将来一定暂时也还有，该可以算得较为“永久不变的人性”了。然而“弱不禁风”的小姐出的是香汗，“蠢笨如牛”的工人出的是臭汗。不知道倘要做长留世上的文字，要充长留世上的文学家，是描写香汗好呢，还是描写臭汗好？这问题倘不先行解决，则在将来文学史上的位置，委实是“岌岌乎殆哉”。
For example, sweating, I think, seems to have existed in ancient times, there are also in the present, and there must be temporarily in the future, which should be regarded as more "permanent and unchanging human nature". However, the "weak and windy" lady sweats, and the "stupid as a cow" worker sweats. I don't know if it is better to write about the fragrant sweat or the stinky sweat if you want to be a writer who will remain in the world for a long time? If this problem is not solved first, its position in the history of literature in the future will be "precarious".听说，例如英国，那小说，先前是大抵写给太太小姐们看的，其中自然是香汗多；到十九世纪后半，受了俄国文学的影响，就很有些臭汗气了。那一种的命长，现在似乎还在不可知之数。
I heard that, for example, in England, the novel was probably written for ladies and ladies before, and naturally there was a lot of fragrance; In the second half of the nineteenth century, under the influence of Russian literature, it was very sweaty. The length of life of that kind still seems to be unknown.在中国，从道士听论道，从批评家听谈文，都令人毛孔痉挛，汗不敢出。然而这也许倒是中国的“永久不变的人性”罢。
In China, listening to Taoist teachings from Taoist priests and critics to talk about them makes people cramp and sweat. However, this may be China's "permanent and unchanging humanity".二七，一二，二三。
27, 12, 23.

文艺和革命

文艺和革命

文艺和革命

Literature and Revolution欢喜维持文艺的人们，每在革命地方，便爱说“文艺是革命的先驱”。
People who like to maintain literature and art like to say that "literature and art are the forerunners of the revolution" whenever they are in a revolutionary place.我觉得这很可疑。或者外国是如此的罢；中国自有其特别国情，应该在例外。现在妄加编排，以质同志——
I think it's suspicious. Or is it like this in foreign countries; China has its own special national conditions and should be an exception. Now I am arranging it to challenge comrades -1，革命军。 先要有军，才能革命，凡已经革命的地方，都是军队先到的：这是先驱。大军官们也许到得迟一点，但自然也是先驱，无须多说。
1. Revolutionary Army. Wherever the revolution has been made, the army will arrive first: this is the pioneer. The officers may arrive a little late, but they are naturally pioneers, needless to say.（这之前，有时恐怕也有青年潜入宣传，工人起来暗助，但这些人们大抵已经死掉，或则无从查考了，置之不论。）
(Before this, I am afraid that sometimes young people infiltrate propaganda and workers rise up to help secretly, but these people are probably dead, or there is no way to investigate, and they are ignored.) ）2，人民代表。 军官们一到，便有人民代表群集车站欢迎，手执国旗，嘴喊口号，“革命空气，非常浓厚”：这是第二先驱。
2. People's representatives. As soon as the officers arrived, the people's deputies gathered at the station to welcome them, holding the national flag and shouting slogans, "The revolutionary air is very strong": this is the second pioneer.3，文学家。 于是什么革命文学，民众文学，同情文学，飞腾文学都出来了，伟大光明的名称的期刊也出来了，来指导青年的：这是——可惜得很，但也不要紧——第三先驱。
3. Writers. So what kind of revolutionary literature, popular literature, sympathy literature, and soaring literature all came out, and periodicals with great and bright names came out to guide the youth: this is - a pity, but it doesn't matter - the third pioneer.外国是革命军兴以前，就有被迫出国的卢梭，流放极边的珂罗连珂……。
Before the rise of the revolutionary army, there were Rousseau who was forced to go abroad and Korolenko who was exiled to the extreme .......好了。倘若硬要乐观，也可以了。因为我们常听到所谓文学家将要出国的消息，看见新闻上的记载，广告；看见诗；看见文。虽然尚未动身，却也给我们一种“将来学成归国，了不得呀！”的豫感，——希望是谁都愿意有的。
All right. If you insist on being optimistic, it's okay. Because we often hear the news that so-called writers are going abroad, and we see records and advertisements in the news; See poetry; See the text. Although he has not yet left, he also gives us a sense of "returning to China after completing his studies in the future, which is amazing!" I hope that everyone is willing to have it,——十二月二十四夜零点一分五秒。
December 24 night 0.1:05.

谈所谓“大内档案”

谈所谓“大内档案”

谈所谓“大内档案”

Talking about the so-called "Inner Archives"所谓“大内档案”这东西，在清朝的内阁里积存了三百多年，在孔庙里塞了十多年，谁也一声不响。自从历史博物馆将这残余卖给纸铺子，纸铺子转卖给罗振玉，罗振玉转卖给日本人，于是乎大有号咷之声，仿佛国宝已失，国脉随之似的。前几年，我也曾见过几个人的议论，所记得的一个是金梁，登在《东方杂志》上；还有罗振玉和王国维，随时发感慨。最近的是《北新半月刊》上的《论档案的售出》，蒋彝潜先生做的。
The so-called "Inner Archives" have been accumulated in the cabinet of the Qing Dynasty for more than 300 years, and have been stuffed in the Confucius Temple for more than ten years, and no one has made a sound. Since the history museum sold this remnant to the paper shop, the paper shop resold it to Luo Zhenyu, and Luo Zhenyu resold it to the Japanese, so there was a loud noise, as if the national treasure had been lost and the national vein followed. A few years ago, I also saw several people's discussions, and the one I remember was Jin Liang, which was published in "Oriental Magazine"; There are also Luo Zhenyu and Wang Guowei, who sigh at any time. The most recent one is "On the Sale of Archives" in the "Beixin Semi-Monthly", which was done by Mr. Jiang Yiqian.我觉得他们的议论都不大确。金梁，本是杭州的驻防旗人，早先主张排汉的，民国以来，便算是遗老了，凡有民国所做的事，他自然都以为很可恶。罗振玉呢，也算是遗老，曾经立誓不见国门，而后来仆仆京津间，痛责后生不好古，而偏将古董卖给外国人的，只要看他的题跋，大抵有“广告”气扑鼻，便知道“于意云何”了。独有王国维已经在水里将遗老生活结束，是老实人；但他的感喟，却往往和罗振玉一鼻孔出气，虽然所出的气，有真假之分。所以他被弄成夹广告的Sandwich，是常有的事，因为他老实到像火腿一般。蒋先生是例外，我看并非遗老，只因为Sentimental一点，所以受了罗振玉辈的骗了。你想，他要将这卖给日本人，肯说这不是宝贝的么？
I don't think their arguments are very accurate. Jin Liang, who was originally the garrison flag man of Hangzhou, had previously advocated the exclusion of Han, and since the Republic of China, he has been regarded as an old man, and he naturally thinks that everything that the Republic of China has done is very hateful. Luo Zhenyu, who can also be regarded as an old man, once swore not to see the country, and then served in Beijing and Tianjin, blaming the younger generation for not being good at antiquity, and selling antiques to foreigners, as long as you look at his inscription, there is probably an "advertisement", and you will know "what does it mean". Only Wang Guowei has ended his life in the water and is an honest person; But his feelings are often the same as Luo Zhenyu's nostrils, although the anger he exhales is true and false. So it's not uncommon for him to be made into a Sandwich with an advertisement, because he's as honest as a ham. Mr. Jiang is an exception, I don't think he is an old man, just because he is a little sentimental, so he was deceived by Luo Zhenyu and his generation. Do you think he wants to sell this to the Japanese, and will he say that this is not a treasure?那么，这不是好东西么？不好，怎么你也要买，我也要买呢？我想，这是谁也要发的质问。
So, isn't this a good thing? It's not good, why do you want to buy it, and I want to buy it too? I think this is a question that everyone has to ask.答曰：唯唯，否否。这正如败落大户家里的一堆废纸，说好也行，说无用也行的。因为是废纸，所以无用；因为是败落大户家里的，所以也许夹些好东西。况且这所谓好与不好，也因人的看法而不同，我的寓所近旁的一个垃圾箱，里面都是住户所弃的无用的东西，但我看见早上总有几个背着竹篮的人，从那里面一片一片，一块一块，检了什么东西去了，还有用。更何况现在的时候，皇帝也还尊贵，只要在“大内”里放几天，或者带一个“宫”字，就容易使人另眼相看的，这真是说也不信，虽然在民国。
Answer: Yes, no, no. This is like a pile of waste paper in the home of a fallen family, which can be said to be good or useless. Because it is waste paper, it is useless; Because it is from a wealthy family, maybe it will pick up some good things. A garbage bin near my apartment was full of useless things thrown away by the residents, but I saw that there were always a few people carrying bamboo baskets in the morning, from which they checked something one by one, piece by piece, and it was still useful. What's more, now, the emperor is still noble, as long as he puts it in the "inner palace" for a few days, or brings a word "palace", it is easy to make people look at each other differently, which is really unbelievable, although in the Republic of China.“大内档案”也者，据深通“国朝”掌故的罗遗老说，是他的“国朝”时堆在内阁里的乱纸，大家主张焚弃，经他力争，这才保留下来的。但到他的“国朝”退位，民国元年我到北京的时候，它们已经被装为八千（？）麻袋，塞在孔庙之中的敬一亭里了，的确满满地埋满了大半亭子。其时孔庙里设了一个历史博物馆筹备处，处长是胡玉缙先生。“筹备处”云者，即里面并无“历史博物”的意思。
The "Inner Archives", according to Luo Yilao, who was in charge of the "National Dynasty", were the messy papers piled up in the cabinet during his "National Dynasty", and everyone advocated burning them, and after his efforts, they were preserved. But by the time he abdicated in the "National Dynasty" and I arrived in Beijing in the first year of the Republic of China, they had already been pretended to be 8,000 (?) The sack, stuffed in the Jingyi Pavilion in the Confucius Temple, is indeed full of most of the pavilion. At that time, there was a history museum preparatory office in the Confucius Temple, and the director was Mr. Hu Yujin. The "preparatory office" is clouded, that is, there is no meaning of "historical museum" in it.我却在教育部，因此也就和麻袋们发生了一点关系，眼见它们的升沉隐显。可气可笑的事是有的，但多是小玩意；后来看见外面的议论说得天花乱坠起来，也颇想做几句记事，叙出我所目睹的情节。可是胆子小，因为牵涉着的阔人很有几个，没有敢动笔。这是我的“世故”，在中国做人，骂民族，骂国家，骂社会，骂团体，……都可以的，但不可涉及个人，有名有姓。广州的一种期刊上说我只打叭儿狗，不骂军阀。殊不知我正因为骂了叭儿狗，这才有逃出北京的运命。泛骂军阀，谁来管呢？军阀是不看杂志的，就靠叭儿狗嗅，候补叭儿狗吠。阿，说下去又不好了，赶快带住。
I was in the Ministry of Education, so I had a little relationship with the sacks, and I saw their rise and fall. There are ridiculous things, but most of them are gadgets; Later, I saw that the discussion outside was so wild, and I wanted to make a few notes to describe the plot I witnessed. But he was timid, because there were a few broad people involved, and he didn't dare to write. This is my "sophistication", being a person in China, scolding the nation, the country, society, and the group,...... It is possible, but it must not involve individuals, names and surnames. A journal in Guangzhou said that I only beat dogs and did not scold warlords. As everyone knows, it is precisely because I scolded the dog that I had the fate of escaping from Beijing. Scolding the warlords, who will take care of it? Warlords don't read magazines, they rely on the sniffing of the dog and the barking of the waiting dog. Ah, it's not good to keep talking, hurry up and take it.现在是寓在南方，大约不妨说几句了，这些事情，将来恐怕也未必另外有人说。但我对于有关面子的人物，仍然都不用真姓名，将罗马字来替代。既非欧化，也不是“隐恶扬善”，只不过“远害全身”。这也是我的“世故”，不要以为自己在南方，他们在北方，或者不知所在，就小觑他们。他们是突然会在你眼前阔起来的，真是神奇得很。这时候，恐怕就会死得连自己也莫明其妙了。所以要稳当，最好是不说。但我现在来“折衷”，既非不说，而不尽说，而代以罗马字，——如果这样还不妥，那么，也只好听天由命了。上帝安我魂灵！
Now that I live in the south, I might as well say a few words, and I am afraid that no one else will say these things in the future. But for face-saving characters, I still don't use real names and replace them with Roman characters. It is neither Europeanization, nor is it "hiding evil and promoting good", but it is "far from harming the whole body". This is also my "sophistication", don't think that you are in the south, they are in the north, or you don't know where they are, just underestimate them. It's amazing that they suddenly widen in front of your eyes. At this time, I am afraid that I will die so much that even I don't understand it. So be steady, it's best not to say it. But now I come to "compromise", neither to say nor to say everything, but to replace it with Roman characters,—— if this is not appropriate, then I have to resign myself to fate. God peace my soul!却说这些麻袋们躺在敬一亭里，就很令历史博物馆筹备处长胡玉缙先生担忧，日夜提防工役们放火。为什么呢？这事谈起来可有些繁复了。弄些所谓“国学”的人大概都知道，胡先生原是南菁书院的高材生，不但深研旧学，并且博识前朝掌故的。他知道清朝武英殿里藏过一副铜活字，后来太监们你也偷，我也偷，偷得“不亦乐乎”，待到王爷们似乎要来查考的时候，就放了一把火。自然，连武英殿也没有了，更何况铜活字的多少。而不幸敬一亭中的麻袋，也仿佛常常减少，工役们不是国学家，所以他将内容的宝贝倒在地上，单拿麻袋去卖钱。胡先生因此想到武英殿失火的故事，深怕麻袋缺得多了之后，敬一亭也照例烧起来；就到教育部去商议一个迁移，或整理，或销毁的办法。
However, it is said that these sacks are lying in Jingyi Pavilion, which worries Mr. Hu Yujin, director of the preparatory department of the History Museum, and beware of the laborers setting fire day and night. Why? This matter is a bit complicated to talk about. Anyone who gets some so-called "Chinese studies" probably knows that Mr. Hu was originally a top student at Nanjing Academy, not only deeply studying the old studies, but also knowledgeable about the history of the previous dynasty. He knew that there was a pair of copper movable characters hidden in the Wuying Hall of the Qing Dynasty, and later the eunuchs also stole it, and I also stole it, and it was "very happy" to steal it, and when the princes seemed to come to investigate, they set a fire. Naturally, even the Wuying Hall is gone, not to mention the amount of copper movable type. Unfortunately, the sacks in Jingyi Pavilion seem to be decreasing often, and the laborers are not Chinese scholars, so he poured the treasure of the content on the ground and took the sack to sell it for money. Mr. Hu therefore thought of the story of the fire in the Wuying Hall, and was afraid that after the sack was much shorter, Jing Yiting also burned as usual; Go to the Ministry of Education to discuss a method of relocation, sorting, or destruction.专管这一类事情的是社会教育司，然而司长是夏曾佑先生。弄些什么“国学”的人大概也都知道的，我们不必看他另外的论文，只要看他所编的两本《中国历史教科书》，就知道他看中国人有怎地清楚。他是知道中国的一切事万不可“办”的；即如档案罢，任其自然，烂掉，霉掉，蛀掉，偷掉，甚而至于烧掉，倒是天下太平；倘一加人为，一“办”，那就舆论沸腾，不可开交了。结果是办事的人成为众矢之的，谣言和谗谤，百口也分不清。所以他的主张是“这个东西万万动不得”。
The Department of Social Education is in charge of this kind of matter, but the director is Mr. Xia Zengyou. We don't have to look at his other papers, just look at the two "Chinese History Textbooks" he compiled, we know how clearly he sees Chinese. He knows that everything in China must not be "done"; That is, if you let it be natural, it will rot, mold, moth, steal, and even burn, but the world will be peaceful; If one adds artificially and "does", then public opinion will boil and it will not be open. As a result, the people who do the things have become the target of public criticism, and rumors and slander cannot be distinguished by a hundred mouths. So his idea is that "this thing must not be moved".这两位熟于掌故的“要办”和“不办”的老先生，从此都知道各人的意思，说说笑笑，……但竟拖延下去了。于是麻袋们又安稳地躺了十来年。
These two old gentlemen who are familiar with the story of "to do" and "not to do" have since known what each person meant, talking and laughing,...... But it was delayed. So the sacks lay peacefully for more than ten years.这回是F先生来做教育总长了，他是藏书和“考古”的名人。我想，他一定听到了什么谣言，以为麻袋里定有好的宋版书——“海内孤本”。这一类谣言是常有的，我早先还听得人说，其中且有什么妃的绣鞋和什么王的头骨哩。有一天，他就发一个命令，教我和G主事试看麻袋。即日搬了二十个到西花厅，我们俩在尘埃中看宝贝，大抵是贺表，黄绫封，要说好是也可以说好的，但太多了，倒觉得不希奇。还有奏章，小刑名案子居多，文字是半满半汉，只有几个是也特别的，但满眼都是了，也觉得讨厌。殿试卷是一本也没有；另有几箱，原在教育部，不过都是二三甲的卷子，听说名次高一点的在清朝便已被人偷去了，何况乎状元。至于宋版书呢，有是有的，或则破烂的半本，或是撕破的几张。也有清初的黄榜，也有实录的稿本。朝鲜的贺正表，我记得也发见过一张。
This time it is Mr. F who is the chief of education, and he is a celebrity in book collection and "archaeology". I think he must have heard some rumor, thinking that there must be a good Song version of the book in the sack - "the only book in the world". This kind of rumor is common, and I heard people say earlier that there are embroidered shoes of concubines and skulls of kings. One day, he gave an order to teach me and Director G to try the sacks. Twenty were moved to the Xihua Hall that day, and the two of us looked at the treasures in the dust, probably a congratulatory watch, a yellow silk seal, if you want to say it is good, you can say it is good, but there are too many, but I don't think it's surprising. There are also memorials, most of which are small criminal cases, and the text is half full and half Han, and only a few are special, but the eyes are full of them, and they feel annoying. there is not a single palace examination paper; There are also a few boxes, originally in the Ministry of Education, but they are all second- and third-class papers, and I heard that the higher rankings have been stolen in the Qing Dynasty, let alone the champions. As for the Song version of the book, there are some, or a tattered half, or a few torn sheets. There are also yellow lists in the early Qing Dynasty, as well as manuscripts of actual records. I remember sending a congratulatory table in North Korea.我们后来又看了两天，麻袋的数目，记不清楚了，但奇怪，这时以考察欧美教育驰誉的Y次长，以讲大话出名的C参事，忽然都变为考古家了。他们和F总长，都“念兹在兹”，在尘埃中间和破纸旁边离不开。凡有我们检起在桌上的，他们总要拿进去，说是去看看。等到送还的时候，往往比原先要少一点，上帝在上，那倒是真的。
We looked at it for two more days, and I can't remember the number of sacks, but strangely, at this time, Deputy Minister Y, who was famous for inspecting European and American education, and Counselor C, who was famous for talking big, suddenly became archaeologists. They and Chief F are both "thinking about this", and they can't do without it in the dust and next to the broken paper. Whatever we picked up on the table, they always took it in and said they were going to take a look. When it is returned, it is often a little less than the original, and God is on top, and that is true.大约是几叶宋版书作怪罢，F总长要大举整理了，另派了部员几十人，我倒幸而不在内。其时历史博物馆筹备处已经迁在午门，处长早换了YT；麻袋们便在午门上被整理。YT是一个旗人，京腔说得极漂亮，文字从来不谈的，但是，奇怪之至，他竟也忽然变成考古家了，对于此道津津有味。后来还珍藏着一本宋版的什么《司马法》，可惜缺了角，但已经都用古色纸补了起来。
It was about a few leaves of the Song version of the book to make a fuss, and Chief F was going to sort it out on a large scale, and sent dozens of other members, but I was fortunately not included. At that time, the Preparatory Office of the History Museum had moved to Wumen, and the director had already changed YT; The sacks were sorted out at the noon gate. YT is a bannerman, he speaks very beautifully, and the text is never talked about, but strangely, he suddenly became an archaeologist, and he is interested in this. Later, there was also a treasured copy of the Song version of "Sima Law", which unfortunately lacked corners, but it had been made up with antique paper.那时的整理法我不大记得了，要之，是分为“保存”和“放弃”，即“有用”和“无用”的两部分。从此几十个部员，即天天在尘埃和破纸中出没，渐渐完工——出没了多少天，我也记不清楚了。“保存”的一部分，后来给北京大学又分了一大部分去。其余的仍藏博物馆。不要的呢，当时是散放在午门的门楼上。
I don't remember much about the organization method at that time, in short, it was divided into two parts: "preservation" and "abandonment", that is, "useful" and "useless". Since then, dozens of members have been haunting dust and torn paper every day, and they have gradually been completed - I can't remember how many days they have been there. Part of the "preservation" was later distributed to Peking University. The rest are still in museums. No, it was scattered on the gatehouse of the noon gate at that time.那么，这些不要的东西，应该可以销毁了罢，免得失火。不，据“高等做官教科书”所指示，不能如此草草的。派部员几十人办理，虽说倘有后患，即应由他们负责，和总长无干。但究竟还只一部，外面说起话来，指摘的还是某部，而非某部的某某人。既然只是“部”，就又不能和总长无干了。
Then, these unwanted things should be destroyed to avoid fire. No, according to the instructions of the "Textbook of Higher Officials", it cannot be so hasty. Dozens of members were dispatched to handle it, although if there were future troubles, they should be responsible and had nothing to do with the chief. But in the end, there is only one part, and when it comes to talking outside, it is still a certain department, not a certain department. Since it is just a "ministry", it cannot have nothing to do with the chief.于是办公事，请各部都派员会同再行检查。这宗公事是灵的，不到两星期，各部都派来了，从两个至四个，其中很多的是新从外洋回来的留学生，还穿着崭新的洋服。于是济济跄跄，又在灰土和废纸之间钻来钻去。但是，说也奇怪，好几个崭新的留学生又都忽然变了考古家了，将破烂的纸张，绢片，塞到洋裤袋里——但这是传闻之词，我没有目睹。
Therefore, the office requested all ministries to send personnel to inspect again. In less than two weeks, all the ministries were sent, from two to four, many of whom were students who had just returned from overseas, and were wearing brand new clothes. So they staggered, and drilled around between the gray soil and waste paper. However, it is strange to say that several brand new international students suddenly became archaeologists, stuffing tattered papers and pieces of silk into their trouser pockets - but this is a rumor, and I have not witnessed it.这一种仪式既经举行，即倘有后患，各部都该负责，不能超然物外，说风凉话了。从此午门楼上的空气，便再没有先前一般紧张，只见一大群破纸寂寞地铺在地面上，时有一二工役，手执长木棍，搅着，拾取些黄绫表签和别的他们所要的东西。
This kind of ceremony has been held, that is, if there is any future trouble, all departments should be responsible, and they cannot be transcendent and say sarcastic things. From then on, the air on the noon gate tower was no longer as tense as before, only to see a large group of broken paper spread lonely on the ground, and from time to time, there were one or two laborers, holding long wooden sticks in their hands, stirring, picking up some yellow silk watches and other things they wanted.那么，这些不要的东西，应该可以销毁了罢，免得失火。不。F总长是深通“高等做官学”的，他知道万不可烧，一烧必至于变成宝贝，正如人们一死，讣文上即都是第一等好人一般。况且他的主义本来并不在避火，所以他便不管了，接着，他也就“下野”了。
Then, these unwanted things should be destroyed to avoid fire. No. Chief F is deeply versed in "higher official studies", and he knows that it must not be burned, and it will become a treasure, just as when people die, they are all first-class good people in their obituaries. Moreover, his doctrine was not avoiding fire, so he didn't care, and then, he "went to the wilderness".这些废纸从此便又没有人再提起，直到历史博物馆自行卖掉之后，才又掀起了一阵神秘的风波。
These waste papers have not been mentioned since then, and it was not until the history museum sold them on its own that a mysterious storm was set off again.我的话实在也未免有些煞风景，近乎说，这残余的废纸里，已没有什么宝贝似的。那么，外面惊心动魄的什么唐画呀，蜀石经呀，宋版书呀，何从而来的呢？我想，这也是别人必发的质问。
My words were really a bit unpleasant, almost saying that there was nothing like a treasure in this remnant waste paper. So, what are the thrilling Tang paintings, Shu stone classics, and Song versions of books outside, where did they come from? I think this is also a question that others must ask.我想，那是这样的。残余的破纸里，大约总不免有所谓东西留遗，但未必会有蜀刻和宋版，因为这正是大家所注意搜索的。现在好东西的层出不穷者，一，是因为阔人先前陆续偷去的东西，本不敢示人，现在却得了可以发表的机会；二，是许多假造的古董，都挂了出于八千麻袋中的招牌而上市了。
I thought, that's what it is. In the remaining broken paper, there will probably always be so-called things left, but there may not be Shu carvings and Song editions, because this is exactly what everyone pays attention to searching. Nowadays, good things are emerging one after another, first, because the things that the broad people have stolen one after another before, they did not dare to show them, but now they have the opportunity to publish them; Second, many counterfeit antiques have been listed on the market with signs in the 8,000 sacks.还有，蒋先生以为国立图书馆“五六年来一直到此刻，每次战争的胜来败去总得糟蹋得很多。”那可也不然的。从元年到十五年，每次战争，图书馆从未遭过损失。只当袁世凯称帝时，曾经几乎遭一个皇室中人攘夺，然而幸免了。它的厄运，是在好书被有权者用相似的本子来掉换，年深月久，弄得面目全非，但我不想在这里多说了。
Also, Mr. Chiang thought that the National Library "has been ruined a lot in every war for five or six years until now." "That's not the case. From the first year to the fifteenth year, the library has never suffered losses in every war. Only when Yuan Shikai became emperor, he was almost robbed by a member of the royal family, but he was spared. Its bad luck is that good books are replaced by those in power with similar notebooks, and over the years, they have been unrecognizable, but I don't want to say more here.中国公共的东西，实在不容易保存。如果当局者是外行，他便将东西糟完，倘是内行，他便将东西偷完。而其实也并不单是对于书籍或古董。
China's public things are really not easy to preserve. If the authorities are laymen, they will spoil things, and if they are experts, they will steal things. And it's not just about books or antiques.一九二七，一二，二四。
1927, 12, 24.

拟预言　——一九二九年出现的琐事

拟预言Proposed to predict ——一九二九年出现的琐事 - trivia that appeared in 1929
有公民某甲上书，请每县各设大学一所，添设监狱两所。被斥。
A citizen wrote a petition requesting the establishment of a university in each county and two additional prisons. was reprimanded.有公民某乙上书，请将共产主义者之产业作为公产，女眷作为公妻，以惩一儆百。半年不批。某乙忿而反革命，被好友告发，逃入租界。
A citizen wrote to ask for the communists' property to be regarded as public property and the female relatives as public wives to punish a hundred. No approval for half a year. A certain B was angry and counter-revolutionary, was accused by a friend, and fled into the concession.有大批名人学者及文艺家，从外洋回国，于外洋一切政俗学术文艺，皆已比本国者更为深通，受有学位。但其尤为高超者未入学校。
A large number of celebrity scholars and writers have returned from overseas and have become more proficient in all politics, customs, academics, literature and art abroad than those in their own countries, and have received degrees. But the most outstanding ones have not entered school.科学，文艺，军事，经济的连合战线告成。
The scientific, literary, military, and economic united front was completed.正月初一，上海有许多新的期刊出版，本子最长大者，为——
On the first day of the first lunar month, many new periodicals were published in Shanghai, and the largest one was -文艺又复兴。文艺真正老复兴。宇宙。其大无外。至高无上。太太阳。光明之极。白热以上。新新生命。新新新生命。同情。正义。义旗。刹那。飞狮。地震。阿呀。真真美善。……等等。
Renaissance and art are revived. Literature and art are truly revived. Universe. There is no other way out. Supreme. Taiyang. The brightest of the light. White fever or higher. New new life. New new life. Sympathize. Justice. Flag of righteousness. Moment. Flying lion. Earthquake. Oh dear. It's really good. …… Wait a minute.同日，美国富豪们联名电贺北京检煤渣老婆子等，称为“同志”，无从投递，次日退回。
On the same day, the rich people in the United States jointly sent a telegram to congratulate the old woman of the coal slag inspection in Beijing, calling them "comrades", and they could not deliver it and returned it the next day.正月初三，哲学与小说同时灭亡。
On the third day of the first month, philosophy and novels perished at the same time.有提倡“一我主义”者，几被查禁。后来查得议论并不新异，着无庸议，听其自然。
Some advocated "one selfism" and were almost banned. Later, Chad's discussions were not new, and there was no need to discuss them, just let them be.有公民某丙著论，谓当“以党治国”，即被批评家们痛驳，谓“久已如此，而还要多说，实属不明大势，昏愦胡涂”。
A citizen wrote an article that said that the party should "govern the country", which was harshly refuted by critics, saying that "it has been like this for a long time, and it is necessary to say more, which is really unclear and foolish".谣传有男女青年四万一千九百二十六人失踪。
Rumor has it that 41,926 young men and women are missing.蒙古亲近赤俄，公决革出五族，以侨华白俄补缺，仍为“五族共和”，各界提灯庆祝。
Mongolia was close to Red Russia, and the referendum was to abolish the five ethnic groups, filling the vacancy with overseas Chinese and white Russians, and it was still a "five-ethnic republic", and all walks of life celebrated with lanterns.《小说月报》出“列入世界文学两周年纪念”号，定购全年者，各送优待券一张，购书照定价八五折。
"Novel Monthly" published the issue of "Included in the Second Anniversary of World Literature", and those who order throughout the year will receive a preferential coupon each, and the price of the book photo will be 85% off.《古今史疑大全》出版，有名人学者往来信札函件批语颂辞共二千五百余封，编者自传二百五十余叶，广告登在《艺术界》，谓所费邮票，即已不赀，其价值可想。
The publication of "The Complete Collection of Ancient and Modern History" has more than 2,500 letters, letters, comments, and praises from celebrities and scholars, and more than 250 pages of the editor's autobiography.美国开演《玉堂春》影片，白璧德教授评为决非卢梭所及。
The film "Jade Hall Spring" was screened in the United States, and Professor Bai Bide commented that it was definitely beyond Rousseau's reach.有中国的法斯德挑同情一担，访郭沫若，见郭穷极，失望而去。
A Chinese faster took a burden of sympathy and visited Guo Moruo, but when he saw Guo Poor, he was disappointed and left.有在朝者数人下野；有在野者多人下坑。
Several people in the court went to the field; Many people in the wild went down to the pit.绑票公司股票涨至三倍半。
The shares of the binding company rose three and a half times.女界恐乳大或有被割之险，仍旧束胸，家长多被罚洋五十元，国帑更裕。
The women's community is worried that breast cancer may be at risk of being circumcised, so they still bind their breasts, and parents are often fined $50, and the national treasury is more prosperous.有博士讲“经济学精义”，只用两句，云：“铜板换角子，角子换大洋。”全世界敬服。
A doctor lectured on "The Essence of Economics", using only two sentences, saying: "Copper plates are exchanged for slots, and slots are exchanged for oceans." The whole world admires it.有革命文学家将马克思学说推翻，这只用一句，云：“什么马克斯牛克斯。”全世界敬服，犹太人大惭。
A revolutionary writer overthrew Marx's theory, which was only in one sentence: "What Max Niux." "The whole world admires it, and the Jews are very ashamed.新诗“雇人哭丧假哼哼体”流行。
The new poem "Hiring someone to cry for funeral" is popular.茶店，浴堂，麻花摊，皆寄售《现代评论》。
Tea shops, bathhouses, and twist stalls are all consigned, according to the Modern Review.赤贼完全消灭，安那其主义将于四百九十八年后实行。
赤贼完全消灭，安那其主义将于四百九十八年后实行。

附录

附录

附录

appendix大衍发微
大衍发微三月十八日段祺瑞，贾德耀，章士钊们使卫兵枪杀民众，通缉五个所谓“暴徒首领”之后，报上还流传着一张他们想要第二批通缉的名单。对于这名单的编纂者，我现在并不想研究。但将这一批人的籍贯职务调查开列起来，却觉得取舍是颇为巧妙的。先开前六名，但所任的职务，因为我见闻有限，所以也许有遗漏：
On March 18, after Duan Qirui, Jia Deyao, and Zhang Shizhao had the guards shoot the people and wanted five so-called "mob leaders", there was also a list of people they wanted in the newspaper. I don't want to study the compilers of this list right now. However, listing the place of origin and job survey of this group of people feels that the choice is quite clever. The top six are opened, but the position I hold may be omitted because I have limited experience:一　徐　谦（安徽）俄国退还庚子赔款委员会委员，中俄大学校长，广东外交团代表主席。
1. Xu Qian (Anhui) Member of the Committee for the Return of Gengzi Reparations from Russia, President of Sino-Russian University, and Chairman of the Guangdong Diplomatic Corps.二　李大钊（直隶）国立北京大学教授，校长室秘书。
2. Li Dazhao (directly subordinate) Professor of National Peking University and secretary of the President's Office.三　吴敬恒（江苏）清室善后委员会监理。
3. Wu Jingheng (Jiangsu) Supervisor of the Qing Room Aftermath Committee.四　李煜瀛（直隶）俄款委员会委员长，清室善后委员会委员长，中法大学代理校长，北大教授。
4. Li Yuying (Zhili) Chairman of the Russian Committee, Chairman of the Qing Room Aftermath Committee, Acting President of Sino-French University, and Professor of Peking University.五　易培基（湖南）前教育总长，现国立北京女子师范大学校长。
5. Yi Peiji (Hunan) Former Chief of Education, now President of National Beijing Women's Normal University.六　顾兆熊（直隶）俄款委员会委员，北大教务长，北京教育会会长。
6. Gu Zhaoxiong (directly under the Central Committee) Member of the Russian Committee, Dean of Peking University, President of Beijing Education Association.四月九日《京报》云：“姓名上尚有圈点等符号，其意不明。……徐李等五人名上各有三圈，吴稚晖虽列名第三，而仅一点。余或两圈一圈或一点，不记其详。”于是就有人推测，以为吴老先生之所以仅有一点者，因章士钊还想引以为重，以及别的原因云云。案此皆未经开列职务，以及未见陈源《闲话》之故也。只要一看上文，便知道圈点之别，不过表明“差缺”之是否“优美”。监理是点查物件的监督者，又没有什么薪水，所以只配一点；而别人之“差缺”则大矣，自然值得三圈。“不记其详”的余人，依此类推，大约即不至于有大错。将冠冕堂皇的“整顿学风”的盛举，只作如是观，虽然太煞风景，对不住“正人君子”们，然而我的眼光这样，也就无法可想。再写下去罢，计开：
On April 9, the Beijing News said: "There are still circles and other symbols on the name, and its meaning is unclear. …… Xu Li and five others each had three laps on their names, and although Wu Zhihui was third, he was only one point. I sometimes go around two laps or one point, but I don't remember the details. So some people speculate that the reason why Mr. Wu Lao has only one point is because Zhang Shizhao still wants to take it seriously, and for other reasons. This is because they have not been listed in the official position and have not seen the source of the "gossip". As long as you look at the above, you can know the difference between circles, but it shows whether the "difference" is "beautiful". The supervisor is the supervisor who checks the objects, and there is no salary, so he only has a little money; And the "gap" of others is great, and it is naturally worth three laps. The rest of the people who "don't remember the details" and so on, probably won't make a big mistake. The grand event of "rectifying the style of study" is only viewed as such, although it is too bad to be sorry for the "upright gentlemen", but my vision is like this, and it is unimaginable. Just write it down again, and the plan will begin:七　　陈友仁（广东）前《民报》英文记者，现《国民新报》英文记者。
7. Chen Youren (Guangdong) is a former English reporter for Min Bao and now an English reporter for National News.八　　陈启修（四川）中俄大学教务长，北大教授，女师大教授，《国民新报副刊》编辑。
8. Chen Qixiu (Sichuan) Provost of Sino-Russian University, Professor of Peking University, Professor of Women's Normal University, Editor of the National News Supplement.九　　朱家骅（浙江）北大教授。
9. Zhu Jiahua (Zhejiang) Professor of Peking University.十　　蒋梦麟（浙江）北大教授，代理校长。
10 Jiang Menglin (Zhejiang) Professor of Peking University, Acting President.十一　马裕藻（浙江）北大国文系主任，师大教授，前女师大总务长现教授。
11. Ma Yuzao (Zhejiang) Director of the Department of Literature of Peking University, professor of Normal University, former general secretary of Women's Normal University, and current professor.十二　许寿裳（浙江）教育部编审员，前女师大教务长现教授。
12 Xu Shoushang (Zhejiang) Editor of the Ministry of Education, former provost of Women's Normal University and now professor.十三　沈兼士（浙江）北大国文系教授，清室善后委员会委员，女师大教授。
13. Shen Jianshi (Zhejiang) Professor of the Department of Literature of Peking University, member of the Qing Room Aftermath Committee, and professor of Women's Normal University.十四　陈　垣（广东）前教育次长，现清室善后委员会委员，北大导师。
14 Chen Yuan (Guangdong) Former Deputy Minister of Education, now a member of the Qing Dynasty Aftermath Committee, and a tutor at Peking University.十五　马叙伦（浙江）前教育次长，教育特税督办，现国立师范大学教授，北大讲师。
15 Ma Xulun (Zhejiang) Former Deputy Minister of Education, Supervisor of Special Education Tax, now a professor at National Normal University and a lecturer at Peking University.十六　邵振青（浙江）《京报》总编辑。
16 Shao Zhenqing (Zhejiang) Editor-in-Chief of Beijing News.十七　林玉堂（福建）北大英文系教授，女师大教务长，《国民新报》英文部编辑，《语丝》撰稿者。
17 Lin Yutang (Fujian) Professor of the Department of English of Peking University, Provost of Women's Normal University, Editor of the English Department of "National News", and contributor to "Yusi".十八　萧子升（湖南）前《民报》编辑，教育部秘书，《猛进》撰稿者。
18 Xiao Zisheng (Hunan) Former editor of "Minbao", secretary of the Ministry of Education, writer of "Mengjin".十九　李玄伯（直隶）北大法文系教授，《猛进》撰稿者。
十九 李玄伯（直隶）北大法文系教授，《猛进》撰稿者。二十　徐炳昶（河南）北大哲学系教授，女师大教授，《猛进》撰稿者。
二十 徐炳昶（河南）北大哲学系教授，女师大教授，《猛进》撰稿者。二十一　周树人（浙江）教育部佥事，女师大教授，北大国文系讲师，中国大学讲师，《国副》编辑，《莽原》编辑，《语丝》撰稿者。
21 Zhou Shuren (Zhejiang) Assistant Director of the Ministry of Education, Professor of Women's Normal University, Lecturer of the Department of Literature of Peking University, Lecturer of China University, Editor of "National Deputy", Editor of "Mangyuan", Writer of "Yusi".二十二　周作人（浙江）北大国文系教授，女师大教授，燕京大学副教授，《语丝》撰稿者。
22 Zhou Zuoren (Zhejiang) Professor of the Department of Literature of Peking University, Professor of Women's Normal University, Associate Professor of Yenching University, and Contributor of "Yusi".二十三　张凤举（江西）北大国文系教授，女师大讲师，《国副》编辑，《猛进》及《语丝》撰稿者。
23 Zhang Fengju (Jiangxi) Professor of the Department of Literature of Peking University, lecturer of Women's Normal University, editor of "National Vice", and writer of "Mengjin" and "Yusi".二十四　陈大齐（浙江）北大哲学系教授，女师大教授。
24 Chen Daqi (Zhejiang) Professor of the Department of Philosophy of Peking University and Professor of Women's Normal University.二十五　丁维汾（山东）国民党。
25 Ding Weifen (Shandong) Kuomintang.二十六　王法勤（直隶）国民党，议员。
26 Wang Faqin (directly subordinate) Kuomintang, member of parliament.二十七　刘清扬（直隶）国民党妇女部长。
27 Liu Qingyang (directly subordinate) Kuomintang women's minister.二十八　潘廷干
28 Pantingan二十九　高　鲁（福建）中央观象台长，北大讲师。
29 Director of the Central Observatory of Gaolu (Fujian) and lecturer of Peking University.三十　谭熙鸿（江苏）北大教授，《猛进》撰稿者。
30 Tan Xihong (Jiangsu) Professor of Peking University, writer of "Mengjin".三十一　陈彬和（江苏）前平民中学教务长，前天津南开学校总务长，现中俄大学总务长。
31 Chen Binhe (Jiangsu) Former provost of Civilian Middle School, former general secretary of Tianjin Nankai School, and current general secretary of Sino-Russian University.三十二　孙伏园（浙江）北大讲师，《京报副刊》编辑。
32 Sun Fuyuan (Zhejiang) Lecturer at Peking University, editor of the Beijing News Supplement.三十三　高一涵（安徽）北大教授，中大教授，《现代评论》撰稿者。
33 Gao Yihan (Anhui) Professor of Peking University, Professor of CUHK, Writer of Modern Review.三十四　李书华（直隶）北大教授，《猛进》撰稿者。
34 Li Shuhua (Zhili) Professor of Peking University and writer of "Fierce Progress".三十五　徐宝璜（江西）北大教授，《猛进》撰稿者。
35 Xu Baohuang (Jiangxi) Professor of Peking University and writer of "Mengjin".三十六　李麟玉（直隶）北大教授，《猛进》撰稿者。
36 Li Linyu (Zhili) Professor of Peking University and writer of "Mengjin".三十七　成　平（湖南）《世界日报》及《晚报》总编辑，女师大讲师。
37 Cheng Ping (Hunan) Editor-in-Chief of the World Journal and Evening News, Lecturer of Women's Normal University.三十八　潘蕴巢（江苏）《益世报》记者。
Thirty-eight Pan Yunchao (Jiangsu) "Yishi Daily" reporter.三十九　罗敦伟（湖南）《国民晚报》记者。
39 Luo Dunwei (Hunan) "National Evening News" reporter.四十　邓飞黄（湖南）《国民新报》总编辑。
40 Deng Feihuang (Hunan) Editor-in-Chief of "National News".四十一　彭齐群（吉林）中央观象台科长，《猛进》撰稿者。
41 Peng Qiqun (Jilin) Chief of the Central Observatory, writer of "Fierce Progress".四十二　徐　巽（安徽）中俄大学校务委员会委员长。
42 Xu Xun (Anhui) Chairman of the Council of Sino-Russian University.四十三　高　穰（福建）律师，曾担任女师大学生控告章士钊刘百昭事。
43 Gao Rang (Fujian) lawyer, who served as a female normal college student against Zhang Shizhao and Liu Baizhao.四十四　梁　鼎
Forty-four Liang Ding四十五　张平江（四川）女师大学生。
Forty-five Zhang Pingjiang (Sichuan) female normal college student.四十六　姜绍谟（浙江）前教育部秘书。
46 Jiang Shaomo (Zhejiang) Former Secretary of the Ministry of Education.四十七　郭春涛（河南）北大学生。
47 Guo Chuntao (Henan) Peking University student.四十八　纪人庆（云南）大中公学教员。
Forty-eight Ji Renqing (Yunnan) University and Public School teacher.以上只有四十八人，五十缺二，不知是失抄，还是像九六的制钱似的，这就算是足串了。至于职务，除遗漏外，怕又有错误，并且有几位是为我所一时无从查考的。但即此已经足够了，早可以看出许多秘密来——
There are only forty-eight people above, fifty is missing two, I don't know if it is a copy, or like the money of ninety-six, this is considered a full string. As for the position, in addition to the omission, I am afraid that there will be mistakes, and there are a few that I cannot check for a while. But this is enough, many secrets can be seen long ago -甲，改组两个机关：
A. Reorganize two organs:1．俄国退还庚子赔款委员会；
1. The Russian Committee for the Return of Gengzi Reparations;2．清室善后委员会。
2. Cleaning Room Aftermath Committee.乙，“扫除”三个半学校：
B. "Sweep" three and a half schools:1．中俄大学；
1. Sino-Russian University;2．中法大学；
2. Sino-French University;3．女子师范大学；
3. Women's Normal University;4．北京大学之一部分。
4. A part of Peking University.丙，扑灭四种报章：
C. Extinguish the four types of newspapers:1．《京报》；
1. Beijing News;2．《世界日报》及《晚报》；
2. "World Journal" and "Evening News";3．《国民新报》；
3. "National News";4．《国民晚报》。
4. "National Evening News".丁，“逼死”两种副刊：
D, "forced to death" two supplements:1．《京报副刊》；
1. Beijing News Supplement;2．《国民新报副刊》。
2. "National News Supplement".戊，妨害三种期刊：
E. Hinder three types of journals:1．《猛进》；
1. "Rush";2．《语丝》；
2. "Yusi";3．《莽原》。
3. "Mangyuan".“孤桐先生”是“正人君子”一流人，“党同伐异”怕是不至于的，“睚眦之怨”或者也未必报。但是赵子昂的画马，岂不是据说先对着镜子，摹仿形态的么？据上面的镜子，从我的眼睛，还可以看见一些额外的形态——
"Mr. Gu Tong" is a first-class person of "upright gentleman", and "the party fights against differences" is afraid that it will not be so, and the "resentment of the slightest glance" may not be retributed. But isn't Zhao Ziang's painting of horses said to be in front of the mirror first and imitating the form? According to the mirror above, from my eyes, I can also see some additional forms -1．连替女师大学生控告章士钊的律师都要获罪，上面已经说过了。
1. Even the lawyer who sued Zhang Shizhao on behalf of the female normal college students will be convicted, as has been said above.2．陈源“流言”中的所谓“某籍”，有十二人，占全数四分之一。
2. There are twelve so-called "certain nationals" in Chen Yuan's "rumors", accounting for a quarter of the total.3．陈源“流言”中的所谓“某系”（案盖指北大国文系也），计有五人。
3. The so-called "certain system" in Chen Yuan's "rumors" (the case refers to the literature department of Peking University), there are five people.4．曾经发表反章士钊宣言的北大评议员十七人，有十四人在内。
4. Fourteen of the 17 Peking University councilors who once issued the anti-Zhang Shizhao declaration.5．曾经发表反杨荫榆宣言的女师大教员七人，有三人在内，皆“某籍”。
5. Seven female normal university faculty members who once issued anti-Yang Yinyu declarations, including three of them, are all "certain nationalities".这通缉如果实行，我是想要逃到东交民巷或天津去的；能不能自然是别一问题。这种举动虽将为“正人君子”所冷笑，但我却不愿意为要博得这些东西的夸奖，便到“孤桐先生”的麾下去投案。但这且待后来再说，因为近几天是“孤桐先生”也如“政客，富人，和革命猛进者及民众的首领”一般，“安居在东交民巷里”了。
If this arrest is implemented, I want to flee to Dongjiaomin Lane or Tianjin; Whether it can be natural is another question. Although this kind of behavior will be ridiculed by the "upright gentleman", I am unwilling to surrender to the command of "Mr. Gutong" in order to win the praise of these things. But this will be discussed later, because in recent days, "Mr. Gu Tong" has also "settled in Dongjiaomin Alley" like "politicians, rich people, revolutionary progressives and leaders of the people".
这一篇是一九二六年四月十三日作的，就登在那年四月的《京报副刊》上，名单即见于《京报》。用“唯饭史观”的眼光，来探究所以要捉这凑成“大衍之数”的人们的原因，虽然并不出奇，但由今观之，还觉得“不为无见”。本来是要编入《华盖集续编》中的，继而一想，自己虽然走出北京了，但其中的许多人，却还在军阀势力之下，何必重印旧账，使叭儿狗们记得起来呢。于是就抽掉了。但现在情势，却已不同，虽然其中已有两人被杀，数人失踪，而下通缉令之权，则已非段章诸公所有，他们万一不慎，倒可以为先前的被缉者所缉了。先前的有几个被缉者的座前，现在也许倒要有人开单来献，请缉别人了。《现代评论》也不但不再豫料革命之不成功，且登广告云：“现在国民政府收复北平，本周刊又有销行的机会（谨案：妙极）了”了。而浙江省党务指导委员会宣字一二六号令，则将《语丝》“严行禁止”了。此之所以为革命欤。因见语堂的《翦拂集》内，提及此文，便从小箱子里寻出，附存于末，以为纪念。
This article was written on April 13, 1926, and was published in the "Beijing News Supplement" in April of that year, and the list was found in the "Beijing News". From the perspective of "only rice history", to explore the reasons for catching these people who made up the "number of Dayan", although it is not surprising, but from today's point of view, I still feel that "it is not unseen". It was originally intended to be compiled into the "Continuation of the Huagai Collection", and then I thought about it, although I had gone out of Beijing, many of them were still under the power of the warlords, so why reprint the old accounts so that the dogs would remember. So it was withdrawn. But now the situation is different, although two of them have been killed and several are missing, and the right to issue a wanted order is no longer owned by Duan Zhang's lords, and if they are not careful, they can be arrested by the previous arrestees. In front of the seats of several arrested people before, now maybe someone will issue an order to present it and ask others to be arrested. The "Modern Review" not only no longer anticipated the failure of the revolution, but also published an advertisement saying: "Now that the Nationalist government has recaptured Peking, this weekly magazine has another opportunity to sell (caution: wonderful)." The Zhejiang Provincial Party Affairs Steering Committee announced the No. 126 order, which "strictly prohibited" the "Language Silk". This is the reason for the revolution. Because I saw this article mentioned in Yutang's "Collection of Brushes", I found it from a small box and attached it at the end as a souvenir.一九二八年十月二十日，鲁迅记。
October 20, 1928, Lu Xunji.

封面

书名页

版权信息

图书在版编目（CIP）数据
Books in Print (CIP) data
三闲集/鲁迅著．－南京：译林出版社，2014.1
Three Leisure Collection/Lu Xun.-Nanjing: Yilin Publishing House, 2014.1（鲁迅自编文集）
(Lu Xun's self-edited anthology)ISBN 978-7-5447-4501-7
ISBN 978-7-5447-4501-7
Ⅰ．①三…　Ⅱ．①鲁…　Ⅲ．①鲁迅杂文－杂文集　Ⅳ．①I210.4
I..(1) Three... II..(1) Lu... III..(1) Lu Xun's Essays - Essays IV..(1)I210.4
中国版本图书馆CIP数据核字（2013）第238040号
China Version Library CIP Data Verification (2013) No. 238040
书　　名　三闲集
Book title Three leisure collections作　　者　鲁　迅
Author: Lu Xun责任编辑　陆元昶
Editor-in-charge: Lu Yuanchang特约编辑　邓　敏
Special editor Deng Min出版发行　凤凰出版传媒股份有限公司
Published and distributed by Phoenix Publishing and Media Co., Ltd译林出版社
Yilin Publishing House出版社地址　南京市湖南路1号A楼，邮编：210009
Publisher's address Building A, No. 1 Hunan Road, Nanjing, Zip Code: 210009电子信箱　yilin@yilin.com
E-mail yilin@yilin.com出版社网址　http://www.yilin.com
Publisher website http://www.yilin.com印　　刷　北京凯达印务有限公司
Printing Beijing Kaida Printing Co., Ltd开　　本　787×1092毫米　1/32
Volume 787×1092 mm 1/32印　　张　5.25
Print 5.25字　　数　100千字
Word count: 100,000 words版　　次　2014年1月第1版　2014年1月第1次印刷
Edition January 2014 1st edition January 2014 1st printing书　　号　ISBN 978-7-5447-4501-7
ISBN 978-7-5447-4501-7定　　价　13.80元
The price is 13.80 yuan译林版图书若有印装错误可向承印厂调换

If there are printing errors in the translated version of the book, it can be exchanged with the printing factory

Table of Contents

目录

Table of Contents

directory序言 序言
一九二七年 1927
无声的中国 Silent China
怎么写　（夜记之一） How to write (one of the night notes)
在钟楼上　（夜记之二） On the Clock Tower (Night Notes No. 2)
辞顾颉刚教授令“候审”　（并来信） Ci Gu Jiegang's order to "await trial" (and letter)
匪笔三篇 Three pieces of non-pen
某笔两篇 I wrote two articles
述香港恭祝圣诞 Describe Hong Kong's happy Christmas
吊与贺 吊与贺
一九二八年 1928
“醉眼”中的朦胧 The haze in the "drunken eyes"
看司徒乔君的画 Look at the painting of Situ Qiaojun
在上海的鲁迅启事 Lu Xun in Shanghai
文艺与革命　（并冬芬来信） Literature and Revolution (and Dongfen's Letter)
扁 flat
路 road
头 head
通信　（并Y来信） Correspondence (and Y Letter)
太平歌诀 Peace song
铲共大观 Shovel the grand view
我的态度气量和年纪 My attitude, temperament and age
革命咖啡店 Revolution Coffee Shop
文坛的掌故　（并徐匀来信） The story of the literary world (and Xu Yun's letter)
文学的阶级性　（并恺良来信） The Class Nature of Literature (and Letter from Kai Liang)
一九二九年 In 1929
“革命军马前卒”和“落伍者” "Revolutionary Army Pawns" and "Laggards"
《近代世界短篇小说集》小引 A small introduction to the "Collection of Short Stories in the Modern World"
现今的新文学的概观 An overview of today's new literature
“皇汉医学” "Imperial Han Medicine"
《吾国征俄战史之一页》 "A page of the history of our country's war against Russia"
叶永蓁作《小小十年》小引 Ye Yongzhen wrote a small introduction to "Little Ten Years"
柔石作《二月》小引 柔石作《二月》小引
《小彼得》译本序 Preface to the translation of "Little Peter"
流氓的变迁 The change of rogues
新月社批评家的任务 The task of the critics of the Crescent Society
书籍和财色 Books and wealth
我和《语丝》的始终 I and "Yusi" from beginning to end
鲁迅译著书目 Lu Xun translated the bibliography
返回总目录 Return to the General Directory

序言

序言

序言

序言我的第四本杂感《而已集》的出版，算起来已在四年之前了。去年春天，就有朋友催促我编集此后的杂感。看看近几年的出版界，创作和翻译，或大题目的长论文，是还不能说它寥落的，但短短的批评，纵意而谈，就是所谓“杂感”者，却确乎很少见。我一时也说不出这所以然的原因。
My fourth book "Miscellaneous Feelings" was published four years ago. Last spring, a friend urged me to compile the miscellaneous feelings after that. Looking at the publishing industry in recent years, it cannot be said that it is rare in the creation and translation, or long papers on big topics, but short criticisms, even if it is casually talked about, are the so-called "miscellaneous feelings", but it is indeed rare. I couldn't tell for a moment why this was the case.但粗粗一想，恐怕这“杂感”两个字，就使志趣高超的作者厌恶，避之惟恐不远了。有些人们，每当意在奚落我的时候，就往往称我为“杂感家”，以显出在高等文人的眼中的鄙视，便是一个证据。还有，我想，有名的作家虽然未必不改换姓名，写过这一类文字，但或者不过图报私怨，再提恐或玷其令名，或者别有深心，揭穿反有妨于战斗，因此就大抵任其消灭了。
But if you think about it roughly, I am afraid that the word "miscellaneous feelings" will disgust the author with high interests, and he is afraid that it will not be far away. Some people, whenever they intend to ridicule me, often call me a "miscellaneous sensationist" to show their contempt in the eyes of high literati, which is a proof. Also, I think that although famous writers may not change their names and write this kind of text, they may just try to avenge personal grievances, and then mention or tarnish their reputation, or have other deep intentions, exposing them will hinder the battle, so they will probably let them be destroyed.“杂感”之于我，有些人固然看作“死症”，我自己确也因此很吃过一点苦，但编集是还想编集的。只因为翻阅刊物，剪帖成书，也是一件颇觉麻烦的事，因此拖延了大半年，终于没有动过手。一月二十八日之夜，上海打起仗来了，越打越凶，终于使我们只好单身出走，书报留在火线下，一任它烧得精光，我也可以靠这“火的洗礼”之灵，洗掉了“不满于现状”的“杂感家”这一个恶谥。殊不料三月底重回旧寓，书报却丝毫也没有损，于是就东翻西觅，开手编辑起来了，好像大病新愈的人，偏比平时更要照照自己的瘦削的脸，摩摩枯皱的皮肤似的。
For me, "miscellaneous feelings" are certainly regarded by some people as "death disease", and I have indeed suffered a little because of this, but I still want to compile the collection. Just because it was a troublesome thing to read publications and cut them into books, it was also quite troublesome, so I delayed it for more than half a year and finally didn't do it. On the night of January 28, Shanghai started a war, and the more fierce it became, finally we had to run away alone, leaving the books and newspapers under the line of fire, and letting it burn to the ground. Unexpectedly, when he returned to his old residence at the end of March, the books and newspapers were not damaged at all, so he searched around and started editing them, as if a person who had just recovered from a serious illness had to take care of his thin face and wrinkled skin more than usual.我先编集一九二八至二九年的文字，篇数少得很，但除了五六回在北平上海的讲演，原就没有记录外，别的也仿佛并无散失。我记得起来了，这两年正是我极少写稿，没处投稿的时期。我是在二七年被血吓得目瞪口呆，离开广东的，那些吞吞吐吐，没有胆子直说的话，都载在《而已集》里。但我到了上海，却遇见文豪们的笔尖的围剿了，创造社，太阳社，“正人君子”们的新月社中人，都说我不好，连并不标榜文派的现在多升为作家或教授的先生们，那时的文字里，也得时常暗暗地奚落我几句，以表示他们的高明。我当初还不过是“有闲即是有钱”，“封建余孽”或“没落者”，后来竟被判为主张杀青年的棒喝主义者了。这时候，有一个从广东自云避祸逃来，而寄住在我的寓里的廖君，也终于忿忿的对我说道：“我的朋友都看不起我，不和我来往了，说我和这样的人住在一处。”
I first compiled the texts of 1928-29, which are very small, but except for the five or six speeches in Peking and Shanghai, which were not recorded, the others seem to have not been lost. I remember that these two years were the period when I rarely wrote manuscripts and had nowhere to submit. I was stunned by the blood in 27 years and left Guangdong, and those words that were hesitant and did not have the courage to speak directly were all recorded in the "Collected Works". But when I arrived in Shanghai, I met the encirclement and suppression of the pen tip of the literary masters, the Creation Society, the Sun Society, and the people of the Crescent Society of the "Righteous Gentlemen", all of whom said that I was not good, and even the gentlemen who did not advertise the literary school were now promoted to writers or professors, and at that time, they often had to secretly ridicule me a few words to show their brilliance. At the beginning, I was just "idle is rich", "feudal remnant" or "declining", but later I was convicted of being a stick drinker who advocated killing young people. At this time, a Liao Jun who fled from Guangdong to escape disaster and stayed in my apartment finally said to me angrily: "My friends look down on me and don't associate with me, saying that I live with such a person." ”那时候，我是成了“这样的人”的。自己编着的《语丝》，实乃无权，不单是有所顾忌（详见卷末《我和〈语丝〉的始终》），至于别处，则我的文章一向是被“挤”才有的，而目下正在“剿”，我投进去干什么呢。所以只写了很少的一点东西。
At that time, I became "such a person". The "Silk of Language" compiled by myself is actually powerless, not only because I have scruples (see "The Beginning and End of Me and the Silk" at the end of the volume for details), but elsewhere, my articles have always been "squeezed", and now they are being "suppressed", so what am I going to do with it? So only a little bit was written.现在我将那时所做的文字的错的和至今还有可取之处的，都收纳在这一本里。至于对手的文字呢，《鲁迅论》和《中国文艺论战》中虽然也有一些，但那都是峨冠博带的礼堂上的阳面的大文，并不足以窥见全体，我想另外搜集也是“杂感”一流的作品，编成一本，谓之《围剿集》。如果和我的这一本对比起来，不但可以增加读者的趣味，也更能明白别一面的，即阴面的战法的五花八门。这些方法一时恐怕不会失传，去年的“左翼作家都为了卢布”说，就是老谱里面的一着。自问和文艺有些关系的青年，仿照固然可以不必，但也不妨知道知道的。
Now I have included in this book all the mistakes of the words I made at that time and the ones that are still desirable today. As for the opponent's texts, although there are also some in "Lu Xun Theory" and "Chinese Literature and Art Debate", they are all large texts on the sunny side of the auditorium of the Eguan Bodai, which is not enough to get a glimpse of the whole. If you compare it with my book, it can not only increase the interest of readers, but also better understand the variety of tactics on the other side, that is, on the dark side. These methods may not be lost for a while, and last year's "left-wing writers are all for rubles" said, which is one of the old scores. Young people who ask themselves if they have something to do with literature and art may not have to imitate, but they may as well know what they know.其实呢，我自己省察，无论在小说中，在短评中，并无主张将青年来“杀，杀，杀”的痕迹，也没有怀着这样的心思。我一向是相信进化论的，总以为将来必胜于过去，青年必胜于老人，对于青年，我敬重之不暇，往往给我十刀，我只还他一箭。然而后来我明白我倒是错了。这并非唯物史观的理论或革命文艺的作品蛊惑我的，我在广东，就目睹了同是青年，而分成两大阵营，或则投书告密，或则助官捕人的事实！我的思路因此轰毁，后来便时常用了怀疑的眼光去看青年，不再无条件的敬畏了。然而此后也还为初初上阵的青年们呐喊几声，不过也没有什么大帮助。
In fact, I have examined myself, whether in the novel or in the short review, there is no trace of advocating that young people should be "killed, killed, killed", nor did I have such thoughts. I have always believed in evolution, always thinking that the future will be better than the past, the young will be better than the old, and I have no time to respect the young, often giving me ten knives, and I only return one arrow to him. But then I realized that I was wrong. This is not the theory of historical materialism or the works of revolutionary literature and art that bewitch me, I witnessed the fact that they were both young people, and they were divided into two camps, either sending letters to inform, or helping officials arrest people! My thinking was destroyed because of this, and then I often looked at young people with suspicion, and no longer was in awe unconditionally. However, after that, he also shouted a few times for the young people who were just starting out, but it didn't help much.这集子里所有的，大概是两年中所作的全部，只有书籍的序引，却只将觉得还有几句话可供参考之作，选录了几篇。当翻检书报时，一九二七年所写而没有编在《而已集》里的东西，也忽然发见了一点，我想，大约《夜记》是因为原想另成一书，讲演和通信是因为浅薄或不关紧要，所以那时不收在内的。
All in this collection is probably all that was done in two years, only the introduction to the book, but only a few works that I feel are still a few sentences for reference, and a few are selected. When I looked through the books and newspapers, I suddenly discovered something written in 1927 that was not included in the "Collected Works", and I think that "Night Diary" was probably because it was originally intended to be a separate book, and the lectures and correspondence were because they were shallow or irrelevant, so they were not included at that time.但现在又将这编在前面，作为《而已集》的补遗了。我另有了一样想头，以为只要看一篇讲演和通信中所引的文章，便足可明白那时香港的面目。我去讲演，一共两回，第一天是《老调子已经唱完》，现在寻不到底稿了，第二天便是这《无声的中国》，粗浅平庸到这地步，而竟至于惊为“邪说”，禁止在报上登载的。是这样的香港。但现在是这样的香港几乎要遍中国了。
But now this is compiled in front as an addendum to the "Collected Works". I had another idea, thinking that just reading an article quoted in a speech and correspondence would be enough to understand the face of Hong Kong at that time. I went to give a lecture twice, the first day was "The Old Tune Has Been Sung", and now I can't find the manuscript, and the second day is "Silent China", which is so superficial and mediocre that it is shocking that it is "heresy" and is prohibited from being published in the newspaper. That's how Hong Kong is. But now Hong Kong is almost all over China.我有一件事要感谢创造社的，是他们“挤”我看了几种科学底文艺论，明白了先前的文学史家们说了一大堆，还是纠缠不清的疑问。并且因此译了一本蒲力汗诺夫的《艺术论》，以救正我——还因我而及于别人——的只信进化论的偏颇。但是，我将编《中国小说史略》时所集的材料，印为《小说旧闻钞》，以省青年的检查之力，而成仿吾以无产阶级之名，指为“有闲”，而且“有闲”还至于有三个，却是至今还不能完全忘却的。我以为无产阶级是不会有这样锻炼周纳法的，他们没有学过“刀笔”。编成而名之曰《三闲集》，尚以射仿吾也。
One thing I would like to thank the Creation Society for is that they "squeezed" me to read several scientific theories on literature and art, and understood a lot of questions that the previous literary historians had said, but they were still entangled. And for this reason, he translated Pulikhanov's "Theory of Art" to correct the bias of only believing in evolution - and because of me. However, I will print the materials I collected when compiling the "Brief History of Chinese Novels" as "Novel Old News Banknotes", so as to imitate the power of the provincial youth to inspect it, and to imitate me in the name of the proletariat, referring to it as "leisure", and there are three "leisure", but it cannot be completely forgotten to this day. I thought that the proletariat would not exercise the Zhou Na method in this way, and they had not learned the "knife and pen". It was compiled and named "Three Leisure Collections", and it was still used to imitate me.一九三二年四月二十四日之夜，编讫并记。
On the night of April 24, 1932, the compilation was completed and recorded.

一九二七年

一九二七年

一九二七年

1927

无声的中国——二月十六日在香港青年会讲

无声的中国Silent China ——二月十六日在香港青年会讲 – Lecture at the Hong Kong YMCA on February 16
以我这样没有什么可听的无聊的讲演，又在这样大雨的时候，竟还有这许多来听的诸君，我首先应当声明我的郑重的感谢。
With such a boring speech that I have nothing to listen to, and when it rains so heavily, there are so many people who come to listen, I should first express my solemn gratitude.我现在所讲的题目是：《无声的中国》。
The title I am talking about now is: "Silent China".现在，浙江，陕西，都在打仗，那里的人民哭着呢还是笑着呢，我们不知道。香港似乎很太平，住在这里的中国人，舒服呢还是不很舒服呢，别人也不知道。
Now, Zhejiang and Shaanxi are all at war, and we don't know whether the people there are crying or laughing. Hong Kong seems to be very peaceful, and the Chinese living here are comfortable or not, and others don't know.发表自己的思想，感情给大家知道的是要用文章的，然而拿文章来达意，现在一般的中国人还做不到。这也怪不得我们；因为那文字，先就是我们的祖先留传给我们的可怕的遗产。人们费了多年的工夫，还是难于运用。因为难，许多人便不理它了，甚至于连自己的姓也写不清是张还是章，或者简直不会写，或者说道：Chang。虽然能说话，而只有几个人听到，远处的人们便不知道，结果也等于无声。又因为难，有些人便当作宝贝，像玩把戏似的，之乎者也，只有几个人懂，——其实是不知道可真懂，而大多数的人们却不懂得，结果也等于无声。
Expressing your thoughts and feelings to everyone is to use articles, but using articles to convey your intentions is not yet possible for ordinary Chinese. No wonder we are; Because that writing is the terrible legacy left to us by our ancestors. People have spent years of work, but it is still difficult to use. Because it is difficult, many people ignore it, and even their surname cannot be written clearly whether it is Zhang or Zhang, or they can't write it at all, or say: Chang. Although they can speak, only a few people hear them, and people in the distance don't know, and the result is also silent. And because it is difficult, some people treat it as a treasure, like playing a trick, but only a few people understand,—— in fact, they don't know but really understand, and most people don't understand, and the result is also equal to silence.文明人和野蛮人的分别，其一，是文明人有文字，能够把他们的思想，感情，藉此传给大众，传给将来。中国虽然有文字，现在却已经和大家不相干，用的是难懂的古文，讲的是陈旧的古意思，所有的声音，都是过去的，都就是只等于零的。所以，大家不能互相了解，正像一大盘散沙。
The difference between civilized people and barbarians, one is that civilized people have writing and can pass on their thoughts and feelings to the public and the future. Although China has writing, it is now irrelevant to everyone, using difficult ancient texts, speaking old ancient meanings, and all voices are in the past, and they are only equal to zero. Therefore, everyone cannot understand each other, just like a large plate of loose sand.将文章当作古董，以不能使人认识，使人懂得为好，也许是有趣的事罢。但是，结果怎样呢？是我们已经不能将我们想说的话说出来。我们受了损害，受了侮辱，总是不能说出些应说的话。拿最近的事情来说，如中日战争，拳匪事件，民元革命这些大事件，一直到现在，我们可有一部像样的著作？民国以来，也还是谁也不作声。反而在外国，倒常有说起中国的，但那都不是中国人自己的声音，是别人的声音。
It may be interesting to treat articles as antiques, so that they cannot be known and understood. But what was the result? It is that we can no longer say what we want to say. We are damaged, we are insulted, and we are always unable to say what we should say. Take recent events as an example, such as the Sino-Japanese War, the boxing incident, and the Minyuan Revolution, until now, do we have a decent book? Since the Republic of China, no one has made a sound. On the contrary, in foreign countries, there are often people talking about China, but it is not the Chinese's own voice, but someone else's voice.这不能说话的毛病，在明朝是还没有这样厉害的；他们还比较地能够说些要说的话。待到满洲人以异族侵入中国，讲历史的，尤其是讲宋末的事情的人被杀害了，讲时事的自然也被杀害了。所以，到乾隆年间，人民大家便更不敢用文章来说话了。所谓读书人，便只好躲起来读经，校刊古书，做些古时的文章，和当时毫无关系的文章。有些新意，也还是不行的；不是学韩，便是学苏。韩愈苏轼他们，用他们自己的文章来说当时要说的话，那当然可以的。我们却并非唐宋时人，怎么做和我们毫无关系的时候的文章呢。即使做得像，也是唐宋时代的声音，韩愈苏轼的声音，而不是我们现代的声音。然而直到现在，中国人却还耍着这样的旧戏法。人是有的，没有声音，寂寞得很。——人会没有声音的么？没有，可以说：是死了。倘要说得客气一点，那就是：已经哑了。
This problem of not being able to speak was not so powerful in the Ming Dynasty; They are also relatively able to say something to say. When the Manchurians invaded China with foreign races, those who talked about history, especially those who talked about the end of the Song Dynasty, were killed, and those who talked about current affairs were naturally killed. Therefore, by the Qianlong period, the people did not dare to use articles to speak. The so-called scholars had no choice but to hide and read the scriptures, edit ancient books, and make some ancient articles, which had nothing to do with the time. some new ideas, but they still don't work; Either learn from Han or learn from Su. Han Yu and Su Shi and the others, using their own articles to say what they wanted to say at that time, of course they could. We are not from the Tang and Song dynasties, so how can we write articles when they have nothing to do with us? Even if it is made similarly, it is the voice of the Tang and Song dynasties, the voice of Han Yu and Su Shi, not the voice of our modern age. However, until now, the Chinese are still playing such old tricks. There are people, there is no sound, and they are very lonely. ——Will people have no voice? No, it can be said: it is dead. If I want to put it more politely, it is: I am dumb.要恢复这多年无声的中国，是不容易的，正如命令一个死掉的人道：“你活过来！”我虽然并不懂得宗教，但我以为正如想出现一个宗教上之所谓“奇迹”一样。
It is not easy to restore this silent China for many years, just like ordering a dead person: "You come back to life!" "Although I don't know religion, I think it is like wanting a religious "miracle".首先来尝试这工作的是“五四运动”前一年，胡适之先生所提倡的“文学革命”。“革命”这两个字，在这里不知道可害怕，有些地方是一听到就害怕的。但这和文学两字连起来的“革命”，却没有法国革命的“革命”那么可怕，不过是革新，改换一个字，就很平和了，我们就称为“文学革新”罢，中国文字上，这样的花样是很多的。那大意也并不可怕，不过说：我们不必再去费尽心机，学说古代的死人的话，要说现代的活人的话；不要将文章看作古董，要做容易懂得的白话的文章。然而，单是文学革新是不够的，因为腐败思想，能用古文做，也能用白话做。所以后来就有人提倡思想革新。思想革新的结果，是发生社会革新运动。这运动一发生，自然一面就发生反动，于是便酿成战斗……。
The first to try this work was the "literary revolution" advocated by Mr. Hu Shizhi a year before the May Fourth Movement. The word "revolution" is not scary here, and some places are scary when you hear it. But this "revolution" connected with the word literature is not as terrible as the "revolution" of the French revolution, but it is an innovation, and if you change a word, it will be very peaceful, we will call it "literary innovation", and there are many such tricks in Chinese characters. The general idea is not terrible, but it says: we don't have to go to great lengths to learn the words of the dead in ancient times and the words of the living in modern times; Don't treat articles as antiques, but write articles in vernacular that are easy to understand. However, literary innovation alone is not enough, because corrupt ideas can be done in ancient texts and vernaculars. Therefore, some people later advocated ideological innovation. The result of ideological innovation is the social innovation movement. As soon as this movement occurred, there was a reaction on the natural side, which led to the ...... of fighting.但是，在中国，刚刚提起文学革新，就有反动了。不过白话文却渐渐风行起来，不大受阻碍。这是怎么一回事呢？就因为当时又有钱玄同先生提倡废止汉字，用罗马字母来替代。这本也不过是一种文字革新，很平常的，但被不喜欢改革的中国人听见，就大不得了了，于是便放过了比较的平和的文学革命，而竭力来骂钱玄同。白话乘了这一个机会，居然减去了许多敌人，反而没有阻碍，能够流行了。
However, in China, as soon as literary innovation is mentioned, there is a reaction. However, vernacular writing gradually became popular and was not hindered. What's going on? Just because at that time, Mr. Qian Xuantong advocated the abolition of Chinese characters and the replacement of them with Roman letters. This book is just a kind of literary innovation, very ordinary, but it is very big to be heard by Chinese who don't like reform, so they let go of the relatively peaceful literary revolution and try their best to scold Qian Xuantong. The vernacular took advantage of this opportunity to subtract many enemies, but there was no hindrance and it became popular.中国人的性情是总喜欢调和，折中的。譬如你说，这屋子太暗，须在这里开一个窗，大家一定不允许的。但如果你主张拆掉屋顶，他们就会来调和，愿意开窗了。没有更激烈的主张，他们总连平和的改革也不肯行。那时白话文之得以通行，就因为有废掉中国字而用罗马字母的议论的缘故。
The Chinese temperament is always to like to be harmonious and compromised. For example, if you say, this room is too dark, and you have to open a window here, no one will allow it. But if you advocate removing the roof, they will come to reconcile and be willing to open the windows. Without more drastic proposals, they always refuse to carry out peaceful reforms. At that time, vernacular literature was popular because of the discussion of abolishing Chinese characters and using the Roman alphabet.其实，文言和白话的优劣的讨论，本该早已过去了，但中国是总不肯早早解决的，到现在还有许多无谓的议论。例如，有的说：古文各省人都能懂，白话就各处不同，反而不能互相了解了。殊不知这只要教育普及和交通发达就好，那时就人人都能懂较为易解的白话文；至于古文，何尝各省人都能懂，便是一省里，也没有许多人懂得的。有的说：如果都用白话文，人们便不能看古书，中国的文化就灭亡了。其实呢，现在的人们大可以不必看古书，即使古书里真有好东西，也可以用白话来译出的，用不着那么心惊胆战。他们又有人说，外国尚且译中国书，足见其好，我们自己倒不看么？殊不知埃及的古书，外国人也译，非洲黑人的神话，外国人也译，他们别有用意，即使译出，也算不了怎样光荣的事的。
In fact, the discussion of the advantages and disadvantages of classical Chinese and vernacular should have long passed, but China has always refused to solve it early, and there are still many unnecessary discussions. For example, some people say: People in all provinces can understand ancient texts, but the vernacular is different everywhere, but they cannot understand each other. As everyone knows, as long as education is popularized and transportation is developed, everyone can understand the vernacular language that is easier to understand; As for the ancient text, people in all provinces can understand it, even in a province, and not many people understand it. Some people say: If they all use vernacular, people will not be able to read ancient books, and Chinese culture will perish. In fact, people nowadays don't have to read ancient books, even if there are really good things in ancient books, they can be translated in the vernacular, and there is no need to be so frightened. Some of them also say that foreign countries still translate Chinese books, which shows that it is good, don't we read it ourselves? As everyone knows, the ancient books of Egypt are also translated by foreigners, and the myths of black Africans are also translated by foreigners.近来还有一种说法，是思想革新紧要，文字改革倒在其次，所以不如用浅显的文言来作新思想的文章，可以少招一重反对。这话似乎也有理。然而我们知道，连他长指甲都不肯剪去的人，是决不肯剪去他的辫子的。
Recently, there is also a saying that ideological innovation is important, and writing reform is secondary, so it is better to use simple Chinese to write articles on new ideas, which can attract less opposition. This seems to make sense. However, we know that those who refuse to cut off even his long nails will never cut off his braids.因为我们说着古代的话，说着大家不明白，不听见的话，已经弄得像一盘散沙，痛痒不相关了。我们要活过来，首先就须由青年们不再说孔子孟子和韩愈柳宗元们的话。时代不同，情形也两样，孔子时代的香港不这样，孔子口调的“香港论”是无从做起的，“吁嗟阔哉香港也”，不过是笑话。
Because we are talking about ancient times, saying things that everyone doesn't understand or hear, it's already like a plate of loose sand, and the pain and itch are irrelevant. If we want to come back to life, we must first stop talking about Confucius, Mencius, Han Yu, Liu Zongyuan, and others. The "Hong Kong theory" of Confucius's tone is impossible to start, "Oh, Hong Kong is also great", it is just a joke.我们要说现代的，自己的话；用活着的白话，将自己的思想，感情直白地说出来。但是，这也要受前辈先生非笑的。他们说白话文卑鄙，没有价值；他们说年青人作品幼稚，贻笑大方。我们中国能做文言的有多少呢，其余的都只能说白话，难道这许多中国人，就都是卑鄙，没有价值的么？至于幼稚，尤其没有什么可羞，正如孩子对于老人，毫没有什么可羞一样。幼稚是会生长，会成熟的，只不要衰老，腐败，就好。倘说待到纯熟了才可以动手，那是虽是村妇也不至于这样蠢。她的孩子学走路，即使跌倒了，她决不至于叫孩子从此躺在床上，待到学会了走法再下地面来的。
We have to speak modern, our own words; Use living vernacular to speak your thoughts and feelings bluntly. However, this is also ridiculed by the seniors. They speak the vernacular vulgar and have no value; They said that young people's works were childish and generous. How many of us in China can do classical Chinese, and the rest can only speak vernacular, are these many Chinese all despicable and worthless? As for childishness, there is nothing to be ashamed of, just as children have nothing to be ashamed of for the elderly. Childishness will grow and mature, just don't age and corrupt. If you can only do it when you are proficient, it means that even a village woman will not be so stupid. Her child learns to walk, and even if he falls, she will never let him lie in bed until he learns how to walk before getting on the ground.青年们先可以将中国变成一个有声的中国。大胆地说话，勇敢地进行，忘掉了一切利害，推开了古人，将自己的真心的话发表出来。——真，自然是不容易的。譬如态度，就不容易真，讲演时候就不是我的真态度，因为我对朋友，孩子说话时候的态度是不这样的。——但总可以说些较真的话，发些较真的声音。只有真的声音，才能感动中国的人和世界的人；必须有了真的声音，才能和世界的人同在世界上生活。
Young people can turn China into a China with a voice. Speak boldly, proceed bravely, forget all the pros and cons, push away the ancients, and publish your sincere words. ——Really, naturally it is not easy. For example, attitude is not easy to be true, and it is not my true attitude when I speak, because my attitude towards friends and children is not like this. ——But you can always say something more truthful and make a more serious voice. Only true voices can touch the people of China and the world; There must be a real voice to live in the world with the people of the world.我们试想现在没有声音的民族是那几种民族。我们可听到埃及人的声音？可听到安南，朝鲜的声音？印度除了泰戈尔，别的声音可还有？
Let's imagine what kind of peoples are there now. Can we hear the Egyptians? Can you hear the voice of Annan and North Korea? Besides Tagore, does India have any other voices?我们此后实在只有两条路：一是抱着古文而死掉，一是舍掉古文而生存。
We really have only two ways to do it after that: one is to die with the ancient text, and the other is to abandon the ancient text and survive.

怎么写——夜记之一

怎么写How to write ——夜记之一 - one of the night notes
写什么是一个问题，怎么写又是一个问题。
What to write is a question, and how to write is another.今年不大写东西，而写给《莽原》的尤其少。我自己明白这原因。说起来是极可笑的，就因为它纸张好。有时有一点杂感，子细一看，觉得没有什么大意思，不要去填黑了那么洁白的纸张，便废然而止了。好的又没有。我的头里是如此地荒芜，浅陋，空虚。
This year, I don't write a lot of things, and there are especially few things written to "Mangyuan". I understand why. It's ridiculous to say, just because the paper is good. Sometimes there is a little miscellaneous feeling, and when you look closely, you don't think it's very interesting, don't fill in the black white paper, and it will be abandoned. Good and no. My head is so desolate, shallow, and empty.可谈的问题自然多得很，自宇宙以至社会国家，高超的还有文明，文艺。古来许多人谈过了，将来要谈的人也将无穷无尽。但我都不会谈。记得还是去年躲在厦门岛上的时候，因为太讨人厌了，终于得到“敬鬼神而远之”式的待遇，被供在图书馆楼上的一间屋子里。白天还有馆员，钉书匠，阅书的学生，夜九时后，一切星散，一所很大的洋楼里，除我以外，没有别人。我沉静下去了。寂静浓到如酒，令人微醺。望后窗外骨立的乱山中许多白点，是丛冢；一粒深黄色火，是南普陀寺的琉璃灯。前面则海天微茫，黑絮一般的夜色简直似乎要扑到心坎里。我靠了石栏远眺，听得自己的心音，四远还仿佛有无量悲哀，苦恼，零落，死灭，都杂入这寂静中，使它变成药酒，加色，加味，加香。这时，我曾经想要写，但是不能写，无从写。这也就是我所谓“当我沉默着的时候，我觉得充实，我将开口，同时感到空虚”。
There are naturally many issues to talk about, from the universe to the social state, and the superb are civilization and literature and art. Many people have talked about it since ancient times, and the people who will talk about it in the future will be endless. But I won't talk about it. I remember when I was hiding on Xiamen Island last year, because it was too annoying, I finally got the treatment of "respecting ghosts and gods and staying away" and was offered in a room upstairs in the library. During the day, there were librarians, staples, and reading students, and after nine o'clock at night, everything dispersed, and there was no one else in a large western-style building. I calmed down. The silence was as thick as wine, slightly tipsy. Looking out the window, there are many white spots in the mountains that stand tall, which are cluster graves; A deep yellow fire is the glass lamp of Nanputuo Temple. In front of it, the sea and sky were faintly hazy, and the black fluff-like night seemed to hit the heart. I leaned against the stone railing and looked into the distance, hearing my heart's voice, and it seemed that there was immeasurable sorrow, distress, scattering, and death in the distance, all mixed into this silence, turning it into medicinal wine, adding color, flavor, and fragrance. At this time, I wanted to write, but I couldn't write it, and I couldn't write. This is what I call "when I am silent, I feel full, I will open my mouth, and at the same time I feel empty".莫非这就是一点“世界苦恼”么？我有时想。然而大约又不是的，这不过是淡淡的哀愁，中间还带些愉快。我想接近它，但我愈想，它却愈渺茫了，几乎就要发见仅只我独自倚着石栏，此外一无所有。必须待到我忘了努力，才又感到淡淡的哀愁。
Could it be that this is a little "world distress"? I sometimes think. However, it is probably not, this is just a faint sadness, with some happiness in between. I wanted to get close to it, but the more I thought about it, the more elusive it became, and I was almost about to find that I was the only one leaning against the stone railing, and there was nothing else. I had to stay until I forgot my efforts before I felt a faint sadness again.那结果却大抵不很高明。腿上钢针似的一刺，我便不假思索地用手掌向痛处直拍下去，同时只知道蚊子在咬我。什么哀愁，什么夜色，都飞到九霄云外去了，连靠过的石栏也不再放在心里。而且这还是现在的话，那时呢，回想起来，是连不将石栏放在心里的事也没有想到的。仍是不假思索地走进房里去，坐在一把唯一的半躺椅——躺不直的藤椅子——上，抚摩着蚊喙的伤，直到它由痛转痒，渐渐肿成一个小疙瘩。我也就从抚摩转成搔，掐，直到它由痒转痛，比较地能够打熬。
The result is probably not very clever. With a prick like a steel needle on my leg, I slapped my palm straight down to the sore spot without thinking, and at the same time I only knew that the mosquito was biting me. What sorrow, what night, all flew out of the sky, and even the stone railing that was leaning against it was no longer in my heart. And this is still now, at that time, looking back, I didn't even think of not taking the stone railing to heart. Still without thinking, he walked into the room, sat on the only half-recliner - a rattan chair that couldn't lie upright, and stroked the wound of the mosquito's beak until it turned from pain to itch and gradually swollen into a small pimple. I also changed from stroking to scratching and pinching until it turned from itching to pain, and I was able to beat it relatively well.此后的结果就更不高明了，往往是坐在电灯下吃柚子。
The result after that is even less clever, often sitting under the electric light and eating grapefruit.虽然不过是蚊子的一叮，总是本身上的事来得切实。能不写自然更快活，倘非写不可，我想，也只能写一些这类小事情，而还万不能写得正如那一天所身受的显明深切。而况千叮万叮，而况一刀一枪，那是写不出来的。
Although it is just a mosquito bite, it is always a matter of itself. If you can't write about it and live faster, if you have to write, I think you can only write about some small things like this, and you must not write as clearly and deeply as you experienced that day. Moreover, it is impossible to write a thousand dings, and a knife and a shot.尼采爱看血写的书。但我想，血写的文章，怕未必有罢。文章总是墨写的，血写的倒不过是血迹。它比文章自然更惊心动魄，更直截分明，然而容易变色，容易消磨。这一点，就要任凭文学逞能，恰如冢中的白骨，往古来今，总要以它的永久来傲视少女颊上的轻红似的。
Nietzsche loves to read books written in blood. But I think that the article written by blood may not be enough. Articles are always written in ink, and blood is just blood. It is more thrilling and straightforward than the text, but it is easy to change color and wear out. This point must be left to the mercy of literature, just like the white bones in the tomb, from ancient times to the present, always proud of the light red on the girl's cheeks with its permanence.能不写自然更快活，倘非写不可，我想，就是随便写写罢，横竖也只能如此。这些都应该和时光一同消逝，假使会比血迹永远鲜活，也只足证明文人是侥幸者，是乖角儿。但真的血写的书，当然不在此例。
If you can't write it naturally, it will be faster to live, if you have to write, I think, just write casually, horizontally and vertically. These should all disappear with time, and if they will be alive forever than blood, it is enough to prove that the literati are flukes and good actors. But of course, this is not the case for books written in real blood.当我这样想的时候，便觉得“写什么”倒也不成什么问题了。
When I think about it this way, I feel that "what to write" is not a problem.“怎样写”的问题，我是一向未曾想到的。初知道世界上有着这么一个问题，还不过两星期之前。那时偶然上街，偶然走进丁卜书店去，偶然看见一叠《这样做》，便买取了一本。这是一种期刊，封面上画着一个骑马的少年兵士。我一向有一种偏见，凡书面上画着这样的兵士和手捏铁锄的农工的刊物，是不大去涉略的，因为我总疑心它是宣传品。发抒自己的意见，结果弄成带些宣传气味了的伊孛生等辈的作品，我看了倒并不发烦。但对于先有了“宣传”两个大字的题目，然后发出议论来的文艺作品，却总有些格格不入，那不能直吞下去的模样，就和雒诵教训文学的时候相同。但这《这样做》却又有些特别，因为我还记得日报上曾经说过，是和我有关系的。也是凡事切己，则格外关心的一例罢，我便再不怕书面上的骑马的英雄，将它买来了。回来后一检查剪存的旧报，还在的，日子是三月七日，可惜没有注明报纸的名目，但不是《民国日报》，便是《国民新闻》，因为我那时所看的只有这两种。下面抄一点报上的话：
The question of "how to write" has never been thought of by me. I first learned that there was such a problem in the world, only two weeks ago. At that time, I happened to go to the street, walked into Dingbu Bookstore, and happened to see a stack of "Do This Way", so I bought one. It is a type of journal with a young soldier on horseback on the cover. I have always had a prejudice that I don't care about publications that depict such soldiers and peasants and workers with hoes in writing, because I always suspect that they are propaganda. Expressing my opinions, I didn't get annoyed when I read the works of Ibsen and others, which had a bit of a propaganda smell. However, for literary and artistic works that first have the two big words "propaganda" and then issue discussions, they are always a little out of place, and the appearance that cannot be swallowed directly is the same as when Luo recited the lesson of literature. But this "Do It" is a bit special, because I still remember that the daily newspaper once said that it had something to do with me. It is also an example of special concern for everything that is self-interested, so I am no longer afraid of the written horse-riding hero, so I bought it. When I came back, I checked the old newspaper that was cut, and it was still there, the date was March 7th, but unfortunately the name of the newspaper was not indicated, but it was not "Republic of China Daily", it was "National News", because I only read these two at that time. Here is a copy of the newspaper's words:“自鲁迅先生南来后，一扫广州文学之寂寞，先后创办者有《做什么》，《这样做》两刊物。闻《这样做》为革命文学社定期出版物之一，内容注重革命文艺及本党主义之宣传。……”
Since Mr. Lu Xun came south, he has swept away the loneliness of Guangzhou literature, and has successively founded two publications: "What to Do" and "This Way". Wen "Do This" is one of the regular publications of the Revolutionary Literature Society, focusing on the propaganda of revolutionary literature and art and partyism. ……”开首的两句话有些含混，说我都与闻其事的也可以，说因我“南来”了而别人创办的也通。但我是全不知情。当初将日报剪存，大概是想调查一下的，后来却又忘却，搁下了。现在还记得《做什么》出版后，曾经送给我五本。我觉得这团体是共产青年主持的，因为其中有“坚如”，“三石”等署名，该是毕磊，通信处也是他。他还曾将十来本《少年先锋》送给我，而这刊物里面则分明是共产青年所作的东西。果然，毕磊君大约确是共产党，于四月十八日从中山大学被捕。据我的推测，他一定早已不在这世上了，这看去很是瘦小精干的湖南的青年。
The first two sentences are a bit ambiguous, it is okay to say that I am with those who have heard about it, and it is also okay to say that others founded it because I "came from the south". But I don't know anything about it. At the beginning, I cut the daily newspaper, probably because I wanted to investigate, but then I forgot about it and put it down. I still remember that after the publication of "What to Do", he gave me five copies. I think this group is presided over by communist youth, because there are signatures such as "Jianru" and "Sanshi", it should be Bi Lei, and the correspondence office is also him. He also gave me more than a dozen copies of "Young Pioneers", and this publication was clearly made by communist youth. Sure enough, Bi Leijun was probably indeed a communist and was arrested from Sun Yat-sen University on April 18. According to my speculation, he must be no longer in this world, and he seems to be a very thin and capable young man in Hunan.《这样做》却在两星期以前才见面，已经出到七八期合册了。第六期没有，或者说被禁止，或者说未刊，莫衷一是，我便买了一本七八合册和第五期。看日报的记事便知道，这该是和《做什么》反对，或对立的。我拿回来，倒看上去，通讯栏里就这样说：“在一般CP气焰盛张之时，……而你们一觉悟起来，马上退出CP，不只是光退出便了事，尤其值得CP气死的，就是破天荒的接二连三的退出共产党登报声明。……”那么，确是如此了。
"Do This Way" only met two weeks ago and has already been released in seven or eight issues. The sixth issue was not, or banned, or unpublished, so I bought a seven-eight combined volume and the fifth issue. If you look at the daily newspaper, you can see that this should be opposed to "What to Do" or opposed. I took it back, and it looked like this, and the communication column said: "When the general CP is arrogant,...... And as soon as you wake up, you will immediately quit CP, not only just quitting, but especially what is worthy of CP's anger is the unprecedented successive withdrawal from the Communist Party's statements. ...... "Well, that's true."这里又即刻出了一个问题。为什么这么大相反对的两种刊物，都因我“南来”而“先后创办”呢？这在我自己，是容易解答的：因为我新来而且灰色。但要讲起来，怕又有些话长，现在姑且保留，待有相当的机会时再说罢。
Another problem immediately arose here. Why are the two opposite publications "founded" because I "came from the south"? This is easy for me to answer: because I am new and gray. But if you want to talk about it, I'm afraid it's a bit long, so I'll keep it for now and talk about it when I have a good opportunity.这回且说我看《这样做》。看过通讯，懒得倒翻上去了，于是看目录。忽而看见一个题目道：《郁达夫先生休矣》，便又起了好奇心，立刻看文章。这还是切己的琐事总比世界的哀愁关心的老例，达夫先生是我所认识的，怎么要他“休矣”了呢？急于要知道。假使说的是张龙赵虎，或是我素昧平生的伟人，老实说罢，我决不会如此留心。
This time, let's say I read "Do This Thing". After reading the newsletter, I was too lazy to flip through it, so I looked at the table of contents. Suddenly I saw a title that said: "Mr. Yu Dafu is resting", so I became curious again and immediately read the article. This is still an old example of caring about one's own trivial matters more than the sorrow of the world, Mr. Duff is the one I know, why should he "rest"? Eager to know. If it were Zhang Long and Zhao Hu, or a great man I had never known in my life, to be honest, I would never be so careful.原来是达夫先生在《洪水》上有一篇《在方向转换的途中》，说这一次的革命是阶级斗争的理论的实现，而记者则以为是民族革命的理论的实现。大约还有英雄主义不适宜于今日等类的话罢，所以便被认为“中伤”和“挑拨离间”，非“休矣”不可了。
It turned out that Mr. Duff had an article in "On the Way to Change Direction" in "Flood", saying that this revolution was the realization of the theory of class struggle, while the reporter thought it was the realization of the theory of national revolution. There are probably words that heroism is not suitable for today, so it is considered to be "slander" and "sowing discord", and it must be "stopped".我在电灯下回想，达夫先生我见过好几面，谈过好几回，只觉他稳健和平，不至于得罪于人，更何况得罪于国。怎么一下子就这么流于“偏激”了？我倒要看看《洪水》。
I recalled under the electric light that I had met Mr. Duff several times and talked to him several times, but I felt that he was steady and peaceful, so as not to offend others, let alone the country. Why is it so "extreme" all of a sudden? I want to read "Flood".这期刊，听说在广西是被禁止的了，广东倒还有。我得到的是第三卷第二十九至三十二期。照例的坏脾气，从三十二期倒看上去，不久便翻到第一篇《日记文学》，也是达夫先生做的，于是便不再去寻《在方向转换的途中》，变成看谈文学了。我这种模模胡胡的看法，自己也明知道是不对的，但“怎么写”的问题，却就出在那里面。
I heard that this journal is banned in Guangxi, but there is still one in Guangdong. What I got was volume 3, issues 29-32. As usual, the bad temper looked like it was going from the thirty-second issue, and soon I turned to the first "Diary Literature", which was also written by Mr. Duff, so I stopped looking for "On the Way to Change Direction" and became reading literature. I know that my nonsensical view is wrong, but the problem of "how to write" lies there.作者的意思，大略是说凡文学家的作品，多少总带点自叙传的色彩的，若以第三人称来写出，则时常有误成第一人称的地方。而且叙述这第三人称的主人公的心理状态过于详细时，读者会疑心这别人的心思，作者何以会晓得得这样精细？于是那一种幻灭之感，就使文学的真实性消失了。所以散文作品中最便当的体裁，是日记体，其次是书简体。
The author's meaning is roughly to say that the works of writers are more or less somewhat autobiographical, and if they are written in the third person, they are often mistaken for the first person. Moreover, when the psychological state of the third-person protagonist is described in too detail, the reader will be suspicious of the other person's thoughts, how can the author know so finely? So that sense of disillusionment makes the authenticity of literature disappear. Therefore, the most appropriate genre in prose works is the diary style, followed by the simplified script.这诚然也值得讨论的。但我想，体裁似乎不关重要。上文的第一缺点，是读者的粗心。但只要知道作品大抵是作者借别人以叙自己，或以自己推测别人的东西，便不至于感到幻灭，即使有时不合事实，然而还是真实。其真实，正与用第三人称时或误用第一人称时毫无不同。倘有读者只执滞于体裁，只求没有破绽，那就以看新闻记事为宜，对于文艺，活该幻灭。而其幻灭也不足惜，因为这不是真的幻灭，正如查不出大观园的遗迹，而不满于《红楼梦》者相同。倘作者如此牺牲了抒写的自由，即使极小部分，也无异于削足适履的。
This is certainly worth discussing. But I think the genre doesn't seem to matter. The first drawback of the above is the carelessness of readers. But as long as you know that the work is mostly about the author borrowing others to describe himself, or speculating about other people's things, you will not feel disillusioned, even if it is sometimes untrue, but it is still true. Its authenticity is no different from when using the third person or misusing the first person. If some readers are only stuck in the genre and only want to have no flaws, then it is appropriate to watch the news and record events, and for literature and art, they deserve to be disillusioned. And its disillusionment is not a pity, because this is not a real disillusionment, just like those who cannot find the remains of the Grand View Garden and are dissatisfied with "Dream of Red Mansions". If the author sacrifices the freedom of writing in this way, even a very small part is tantamount to cutting his feet to fit the shoes.第二种缺陷，在中国也已经是颇古的问题。纪晓岚攻击蒲留仙的《聊斋志异》，就在这一点。两人密语，决不肯泄，又不为第三人所闻，作者何从知之？所以他的《阅微草堂笔记》，竭力只写事状，而避去心思和密语。但有时又落了自设的陷阱，于是只得以《春秋左氏传》的“浑良夫梦中之噪”来解嘲。他的支绌的原因，是在要使读者信一切所写为事实，靠事实来取得真实性，所以一与事实相左，那真实性也随即灭亡。如果他先意识到这一切是创作，即是他个人的造作，便自然没有一切挂碍了。
The second defect is already a problem in China. Ji Xiaolan attacked Pu Liuxian's "Liao Zhai Zhi Yi", which is at this point. The secret conversation between the two will never be leaked, and it will not be heard by a third party, so how can the author know? Therefore, his "Notes on Reading Micro Caotang" tries his best to only write about the situation, and avoids thoughts and secret words. But sometimes he fell into his own trap, so he could only be ridiculed by the "noise of Hun Liangfu's dream" in the "Spring and Autumn Biography of Zuo". The reason for his slump is to make the reader believe that everything written is true, and to rely on facts to obtain truth, so as soon as it contradicts the facts, the truth will also perish. If he first realizes that all this is creation, that is, his personal creation, then there will naturally be no obstacles.一般的幻灭的悲哀，我以为不在假，而在以假为真。记得年幼时，很喜欢看变戏法，猢狲骑羊，石子变白鸽，最末是将一个孩子刺死，盖上被单，一个江北口音的人向观众装出撒钱模样道：Huazaa！Huazaa！大概是谁都知道，孩子并没有死，喷出来的是装在刀柄里的苏木汁，Huazaa一够，他便会跳起来的。但还是出神地看着，明明意识着这是戏法，而全心沉浸在这戏法中。万一变戏法的定要做得真实，买了小棺材，装进孩子去，哭着抬走，倒反索然无味了。这时候，连戏法的真实也消失了。
The general sadness of disillusionment, I think it is not false, but false as true. I remember when I was young, I liked to watch juggling, monkeys riding sheep, stones turning into white pigeons, and finally stabbing a child to death, covering the sheets, and a person with a Jiangbei accent pretended to throw money to the audience and said: Huazaa! Huazaa！ Probably everyone knows that the child is not dead, what is sprayed out is the sorrel juice in the handle of the knife, and as soon as Huazaa gets enough, he will jump up. But he still watched in a daze, clearly aware that this was a trick, and immersed himself in this trick. In case the trick must be real, buy a small coffin, put it in the child, and carry it away crying, but it will be tasteless. At this time, even the truth of the trick disappeared.我宁看《红楼梦》，却不愿看新出的《林黛玉日记》，它一页能够使我不舒服小半天。《板桥家书》我也不喜欢看，不如读他的《道情》。我所不喜欢的是他题了家书两个字。那么，为什么刻了出来给许多人看的呢？不免有些装腔。幻灭之来，多不在假中见真，而在真中见假。日记体，书简体，写起来也许便当得多罢，但也极容易起幻灭之感；而一起则大抵很厉害，因为它起先模样装得真。
I would rather read "Dream of Red Mansions" than the new "Lin Daiyu Diary", which can make me uncomfortable for half a day. I don't like to read "Banqiao Family Letters", so it's better to read his "Taoism". What I don't like is that he inscribed the word "family letter." So, why was it engraved for many people to see? It is inevitable that there will be some pretense. Disillusionment mostly does not see the truth in the false, but in the truth. The diary style, the simplified book style, may be much easier to write, but it is also very easy to feel disillusioned; And one is probably very powerful, because it looks real at first.《越缦堂日记》近来已极风行了，我看了却总觉得他每次要留给我一点很不舒服的东西。为什么呢？一是钞上谕。大概是受了何焯的故事的影响的，他提防有一天要蒙“御览”。二是许多墨涂。写了尚且涂去，该有许多不写的罢？三是早给人家看，钞，自以为一部著作了。我觉得从中看不见李慈铭的心，却时时看到一些做作，仿佛受了欺骗。翻翻一部小说，虽是很荒唐，浅陋，不合理，倒从来不起这样的感觉的。
"Yuemantang Diary" has become very popular recently, but I always feel that he wants to leave me something very uncomfortable every time. Why? The first is the banknote edict. Probably influenced by He Zhuo's story, he was wary of one day being "imperial". The second is a lot of ink coating. If you write it and erase it, there should be a lot of things that you don't write? The third is to show it to others early, banknotes, and think it is a work. I don't think I can see Li Ciming's heart from it, but I see some artificiality from time to time, as if I have been deceived. Turning over a novel, although it is very absurd, shallow, and unreasonable, I have never felt this way.听说后来胡适之先生也在做日记，并且给人传观了。照文学进化的理论讲起来，一定该好得多。我希望他提前陆续的印出。
I heard that Mr. Hu Shizhi was also doing a diary and passed it on to others. According to the theory of literary evolution, it must be much better. I hope he will print it out in advance.但我想，散文的体裁，其实是大可以随便的，有破绽也不妨。做作的写信和日记，恐怕也还不免有破绽，而一有破绽，便破灭到不可收拾了。与其防破绽，不如忘破绽。
But I think the genre of prose can actually be casual, and it doesn't matter if there are flaws. Contrived letters and diaries may still have flaws, and once there are flaws, they will be shattered out of control. Instead of guarding against flaws, it is better to forget about them.

在钟楼上——夜记之二

在钟楼上On the bell tower ——夜记之二 - Night Diary No. 2
也还是我在厦门的时候，柏生从广州来，告诉我说，爱而君也在那里了。大概是来寻求新的生命的罢，曾经写了一封长信给K委员，说明自己的过去和将来的志望。
When I was in Xiamen, Bai Sheng came from Guangzhou and told me that Ai Erjun was also there. Probably to seek a new life, he once wrote a long letter to Commissioner K, explaining his past and future aspirations.“你知道有一个叫爱而的么？他写了一封长信给我，我没有看完。其实，这种文学家的样子，写长信，就是反革命的！”有一天，K委员对柏生说。
"Do you know that there is a one called love? He wrote me a long letter that I didn't finish. In fact, this kind of writer's appearance, writing long letters, is counter-revolutionary! One day, Commissioner K said to Bai Sheng.又有一天，柏生又告诉了爱而，爱而跳起来道：
Another day, Bai Sheng told Ai Er again, and Ai Er jumped up and said:“怎么？……怎么说我是反革命的呢？！”
"What? …… How can you say that I am a counter-revolutionary?!" ”厦门还正是和暖的深秋，野石榴开在山中，黄的花——不知道叫什么名字——开在楼下。我在用花刚石墙包围着的楼屋里听到这小小的故事，K委员的眉头打结的正经的脸，爱而的活泼中带着沉闷的年青的脸，便一齐在眼前出现，又仿佛如见当K委员的眉头打结的面前，爱而跳了起来，——我不禁从窗隙间望着远天失笑了。
It is still a warm late autumn in Xiamen, wild pomegranates bloom in the mountains, and yellow flowers - I don't know what they are called - bloom downstairs. I heard this little story in the building surrounded by diamond walls, and the serious face of Commissioner K's frown, the lively and dull young face of Commissioner K, appeared in front of me together, and it seemed that I jumped up in love in front of Commissioner K's frown,—— I couldn't help but laugh at the sky from the window gap.但同时也记起了苏俄曾经有名的诗人，《十二个》的作者勃洛克的话来：
But at the same time, I also remember the words of the famous poet of Soviet Russia, the author of "Twelve":“共产党不妨碍做诗，但于觉得自己是大作家的事却有妨碍。大作家者，是感觉自己一切创作的核心，在自己里面保持着规律的。”
"The Communist Party does not prevent me from writing poetry, but it does hinder me from feeling that I am a great writer. A great writer feels the core of all his creations and maintains a regularity within himself. ”共产党和诗，革命和长信，真有这样地不相容么？我想。
Is the Communist Party and poetry, revolution and long-term faith really so incompatible? I think.以上是那时的我想。这时我又想，在这里有插入几句声明的必要：
The above is what I thought at that time. At this time, I thought it was necessary to insert a few sentences here:我不过说是变革和文艺之不相容，并非在暗示那时的广州政府是共产政府或委员是共产党。这些事我一点不知道。只有若干已经“正法”的人们，至今不听见有人鸣冤或冤鬼诉苦，想来一定是真的共产党罢。至于有一些，则一时虽然从一方面得了这样的谥号，但后来两方相见，杯酒言欢，就明白先前都是误解，其实是本来可以合作的。
I am just saying that change and literature and art are incompatible, not implying that the Guangzhou government at that time was a communist government or that the members were communists. I don't know any of these things. Only a few people who have "corrected the law" have not heard anyone complain or complain so far, so I think it must be the real Communist Party. As for some, although they got such a posthumous title from the one hand, when the two parties met and had a glass of wine, they understood that they had misunderstood before, but in fact, they could have cooperated.必要已毕，于是放心回到本题。却说爱而君不久也给了我一封信，通知我已经有了工作了。信不甚长，大约还有被冤为“反革命”的余痛罢。但又发出牢骚来：一，给他坐在饭锅旁边，无聊得很；二，有一回正在按风琴，一个漠不相识的女郎来送给他一包点心，就弄得他神经过敏，以为北方女子太死板而南方女子太活泼，不禁“感慨系之矣”了。
The necessity is over, so I return to the topic with confidence. But he said that Ai Erjun soon gave me a letter informing me that I already had a job. The letter is not very long, and there is probably still the afterglow of being wrongfully accused of being a "counter-revolutionary". But he complained again: first, sit next to the rice pot for him, very bored; Second, once while playing the organ, an unknown girl came to give him a pack of snacks, which made him nervous, thinking that the northern women were too rigid and the southern women were too lively, and he couldn't help but "feel the emotion".关于第一点，我在秋蚊围攻中所写的回信中置之不答。夫面前无饭锅而觉得无聊，觉得苦痛，人之常情也，现在已见饭锅，还要无聊，则明明是发了革命热。老实说，远地方在革命，不相识的人们在革命，我是的确有点高兴听的，然而——没有法子，索性老实说罢，——如果我的身边革起命来，或者我所熟识的人去革命，我就没有这么高兴听。有人说我应该拚命去革命，我自然不敢不以为然，但如叫我静静地坐下，调给我一杯罐头牛奶喝，我往往更感激。但是，倘说，你就死心塌地地从饭锅里装饭吃罢，那是不像样的；然而叫他离开饭锅去拚命，却又说不出口，因为爱而是我的极熟的熟人。于是只好袭用仙传的古法，装聋作哑，置之不问不闻之列。只对于第二点加以猛烈的教诫，大致是说他“死板”和“活泼”既然都不赞成，即等于主张女性应该不死不活，那是万分不对的。
Regarding the first point, I did not answer in the reply letter I wrote during the siege of Qiu Mosquito. It is human nature to feel bored and painful without a rice pot in front of the husband. To be honest, I am indeed a little happy to hear that revolutions are being carried out in distant places, and people I don't know are revolutioning, but - there is no way, just to be honest,—— if there is a revolution around me, or if someone I know goes to the revolution, I am not so happy to hear it. Some people say that I should fight for the revolution, so naturally I dare not disagree, but if I am asked to sit quietly and mix me a glass of canned milk to drink, I am often more grateful. However, if you just put rice out of the rice pot and eat it, it is not decent; However, I told him to leave the rice pot and work hard, but I couldn't say it, because love was my very familiar acquaintance. So I had to follow the ancient method of immortal tradition, pretend to be deaf and mute, and ignore it. Only to give a fierce admonition to the second point is roughly to say that since he does not approve of "rigid" and "lively", it is equivalent to advocating that women should not die or live, which is absolutely wrong.约略一个多月之后，我抱着和爱而一类的梦，到了广州，在饭锅旁边坐下时，他早已不在那里了，也许竟并没有接到我的信。
About a month later, I arrived in Guangzhou with a dream like "love", and when I sat down next to the rice pot, he was no longer there, and maybe he didn't even receive my letter.我住的是中山大学中最中央而最高的处所，通称“大钟楼”。一月之后，听得一个戴瓜皮小帽的秘书说，才知道这是最优待的住所，非“主任”之流是不准住的。但后来我一搬出，又听说就给一位办事员住进去了，莫明其妙。不过当我住在那里的时候，总还是非主任之流即不准住的地方，所以直到知道办事员搬进去了的那一天为止，我总是常常又感激，又惭愧。
I live in the most central and highest place of Sun Yat-sen University, commonly known as the "Big Bell Tower". A month later, I heard a secretary wearing a melon skin hat say that this was the most preferential residence, and non-"directors" were not allowed to live. But then as soon as I moved out, I heard that I gave a clerk a place to live, which was incomprehensible. But when I lived there, it was always a place where non-directors were not allowed to live, so until the day I found out that the clerk had moved in, I was always grateful and ashamed.然而这优待室却并非容易居住的所在，至少的缺点，是不很能够睡觉的。一到夜间，便有十多匹——也许二十来匹罢，我不能知道确数——老鼠出现，驰骋文坛，什么都不管。只要可吃的，它就吃，并且能开盒子盖，广州中山大学里非主任之流即不准住的楼上的老鼠，仿佛也特别聪明似的，我在别地方未曾遇到过。到清晨呢，就有“工友”们大声唱歌，——我所不懂的歌。
However, this preferential treatment room is not an easy place to live, at least the disadvantage is that it is not very sleepable. At night, there were more than ten - maybe twenty, I can't know the exact number - and the rats appeared, galloping in the literary world, and didn't care about anything. As long as it is edible, it will eat, and it can open the lid of the box, and the rats upstairs that are not allowed to live in Guangzhou Sun Yat-sen University are not allowed to live, as if they are also very smart, I have never encountered them anywhere else. In the early morning, there were "workers" singing loudly ,—— songs I didn't understand.白天来访的本省的青年，却大抵怀着非常的好意的。有几个热心于改革的，还希望我对于广州的缺点加以激烈的攻击。这热诚很使我感动，但我终于说是还未熟悉本地的情形，而且已经革命，觉得无甚可以攻击之处，轻轻地推却了。那当然要使他们很失望的。过了几天，尸一君就在《新时代》上说：
The young people in the province who visit during the day are mostly very well-intentioned. There are a few people who are enthusiastic about reform and hope that I will fiercely attack Guangzhou's shortcomings. I was very moved by this enthusiasm, but I finally said that I was not familiar with the local situation and had already revolutionized, and felt that there was nothing to attack, so I gently pushed it away. Of course, it will disappoint them. A few days later, Shi Yijun said in "New Era":“……我们中几个很不以他这句话为然，我们以为我们还有许多可骂的地方，我们正想骂骂自己，难道鲁迅先生竟看不出我们的缺点么？……”
“…… A few of us didn't take his words seriously, we thought we still had a lot to scold, and we were about to scold ourselves, couldn't Mr. Lu Xun see our shortcomings? ……”其实呢，我的话一半是真的。我何尝不想了解广州，批评广州呢，无奈慨自被供在大钟楼上以来，工友以我为教授，学生以我为先生，广州人以我为“外江佬”，孤孑特立，无从考查。而最大的阻碍则是言语。直到我离开广州的时候止，我所知道的言语，除一二三四……等数目外，只有一句凡有“外江佬”几乎无不因为特别而记住的Hanbaran（统统）和一句凡有学习异地言语者几乎无不最容易学得而记住的骂人话Tiu-na-ma而已。
Actually, half of what I said is true. Why don't I want to understand Guangzhou and criticize Guangzhou, helplessly sighing that since I was offered to the big bell tower, the workers regarded me as a professor, the students regarded me as a teacher, and the people of Guangzhou regarded me as a "foreign river man". And the biggest obstacle is words. Until I left Guangzhou, all I knew was one, two, three, four...... In addition to the number, there is only one sentence Hanbaran (all) that almost everyone who has a "foreign riverman" remembers because of its specialness, and a swear word Tiu-na-ma that is the easiest to learn and remember for almost everyone who learns a foreign language.这两句有时也有用。那是我已经搬在白云路寓屋里的时候了，有一天，巡警捉住了一个窃取电灯的偷儿，那管屋的陈公便跟着一面骂，一面打。骂了一大套，而我从中只听懂了这两句。然而似乎已经全懂得，心里想：“他所说的，大约是因为屋外的电灯几乎Hanbaran被他偷去，所以要Tiu-na-ma了。”于是就仿佛解决了一件大问题似的，即刻安心归坐，自去再编我的《唐宋传奇集》。
These two sentences are also useful sometimes. That was when I had already moved to an apartment on Baiyun Road, and one day, the patrol police caught a thief who stole the lights, and Chen Gong, who was in charge of the house, scolded and beat him. I scolded a lot, and I only understood these two sentences. However, he seemed to understand everything and thought to himself: "What he said is probably because almost the lights outside the house were stolen by him, so he wants Tiu-na-ma." So as if I had solved a big problem, I immediately sat down with peace of mind and went to compile my "Tang and Song Legends".但究竟不知道是否真如此。私自推测是无妨的，倘若据以论广州，却未免太卤莽罢。
But I don't know if this is really the case. It doesn't hurt to speculate privately, but if you talk about Guangzhou based on it, it is too reckless.但虽只这两句，我却发见了吾师太炎先生的错处了。记得先生在日本给我们讲文字学时，曾说《山海经》上“其州在尾上”的“州”是女性生殖器。这古语至今还留存在广东，读若Tiu。故Tiuhei二字，当写作“州戏”，名词在前，动词在后的。我不记得他后来可曾将此说记在《新方言》里，但由今观之，则“州”乃动词，非名词也。
But although it was only these two sentences, I found the mistake of my teacher Mr. Taiyan. I remember that when my husband was lecturing on philology in Japan, he said that the "state" in the "Classic of Mountains and Seas" is female genitalia. This ancient saying still exists in Guangdong and is read like Tiu. Therefore, the word Tiuhei should be written as "state opera", with the noun first and the verb last. I don't remember that he could have recorded this in the "New Dialects" later, but from now on, "state" is a verb, not a noun.至于我说无甚可以攻击之处的话，那可的确是虚言。其实是，那时我于广州无爱憎，因而也就无欣戚，无褒贬。我抱着梦幻而来，一遇实际，便被从梦境放逐了，不过剩下些索漠。我觉得广州究竟是中国的一部分，虽然奇异的花果，特别的语言，可以淆乱游子的耳目，但实际是和我所走过的别处都差不多的。倘说中国是一幅画出的不类人间的图，则各省的图样实无不同，差异的只在所用的颜色。黄河以北的几省，是黄色和灰色画的，江浙是淡墨和淡绿，厦门是淡红和灰色，广州是深绿和深红。我那时觉得似乎其实未曾游行，所以也没有特别的骂詈之辞，要专一倾注在素馨和香蕉上。——但这也许是后来的回忆的感觉，那时其实是还没有如此分明的。
As for what I said was nothing to attack, it was indeed a lie. In fact, at that time, I had no love or hate in Guangzhou, so there was no joy or sorrow, no praise or criticism. I came with a dream, and as soon as I encountered reality, I was banished from the dream, but there was only some Somo left. I think Guangzhou is a part of China, although the strange flowers and fruits, special language, can confuse the ears and eyes of wanderers, but in fact it is similar to other places I have been to. If China is a picture that is not like the world, then the patterns of each province are really not different, and the only difference is the colors used. The provinces north of the Yellow River are painted in yellow and gray, Jiangsu and Zhejiang are light ink and light green, Xiamen is light red and gray, and Guangzhou is dark green and crimson. At that time, I felt that there was no parade, so there were no special insults, and I had to focus on frangipani and bananas. ——But this may be a feeling of later memories, which were not so clear at that time.到后来，却有些改变了，往往斗胆说几句坏话。然而有什么用呢？在一处演讲时，我说广州的人民并无力量，所以这里可以做“革命的策源地”，也可以做反革命的策源地……当译成广东话时，我觉得这几句话似乎被删掉了。给一处做文章时，我说青天白日旗插远去，信徒一定加多。但有如大乘佛教一般，待到居士也算佛子的时候，往往戒律荡然，不知道是佛教的弘通，还是佛教的败坏？……然而终于没有印出，不知所往了……。
Later, it changed a little, and I often dared to say a few bad words. But what is the use? In a speech, I said that the people of Guangzhou have no power, so it can be the "source of revolution" or counter-revolution...... When translated into Cantonese, I felt that these sentences seemed to have been deleted. When I write an article about a place, I say that if the blue sky and white sun flag are planted far away, the number of believers will definitely increase. But like Mahayana Buddhism, when a layman is also considered a Buddha's son, the precepts are often lost, and I don't know if it is the promotion of Buddhism or the corruption of Buddhism? …… However, it was not printed in the end, and it was ...... disappeared.广东的花果，在“外江佬”的眼里，自然依然是奇特的。我所最爱吃的是“杨桃”，滑而脆，酸而甜，做成罐头的，完全失却了本味。汕头的一种较大，却是“三廉”，不中吃了。我常常宣传杨桃的功德，吃的人大抵赞同，这是我这一年中最卓著的成绩。
Guangdong's flowers and fruits are naturally still peculiar in the eyes of "Waijiang people". My favorite is "star fruit", which is smooth and crispy, sour and sweet, and is made into a can, completely losing its original taste. Shantou's one is larger, but it is "three integrity", and it is not eaten. I often promote the merits of star fruit, and most of the people who eat it agree, which is my most outstanding achievement this year.在钟楼上的第二月，即戴了“教务主任”的纸冠的时候，是忙碌的时期。学校大事，盖无过于补考与开课也，与别的一切学校同。于是点头开会，排时间表，发通知书，秘藏题目，分配卷子，……于是又开会，讨论，计分，发榜。工友规矩，下午五点以后是不做工的，于是一个事务员请门房帮忙，连夜贴一丈多长的榜。但到第二天的早晨，就被撕掉了，于是又写榜。于是辩论：分数多寡的辩论；及格与否的辩论；教员有无私心的辩论；优待革命青年，优待的程度，我说已优，他说未优的辩论；补救落第，我说权不在我，他说在我，我说无法，他说有法的辩论；试题的难易，我说不难，他说太难的辩论；还有因为有族人在台湾，自己也可以算作台湾人，取得优待“被压迫民族”的特权与否的辩论；还有人本无名，所以无所谓冒名顶替的玄学底辩论……。这样地一天一天的过去，而每夜是十多匹——或二十匹——老鼠的驰骋，早上是三位工友的响亮的歌声。
The second month on the clock tower, when he wears the paper crown of "Dean of Academic Affairs", is a busy period. The major events of the school are probably nothing more than make-up exams and the opening of classes, just like all other schools. So he nodded and held a meeting, arranged the schedule, sent out notices, kept the topics secret, and distributed papers,...... Then there was another meeting, discussion, scoring, and announcements. According to the rules of the workers, they did not work after five o'clock in the afternoon, so a clerk asked the concierge to help and posted a list more than a foot long overnight. But by the next morning, it was torn off, so the list was written again. So the debate: the debate of the number of points; debate on whether to pass or fail; faculty members have selfless debates; Preferential treatment of revolutionary youth, the degree of preferential treatment, I say that it is already excellent, and he says that it is not superior debate; If the remedy fails, I say that the power is not in me, he says it is in me, I say it is impossible, and he says there is a legal debate; I said it was not difficult to debate the difficulty of the test questions, but he said it was too difficult to debate; There is also the debate about whether or not to count as Taiwanese because there are ethnic groups in Taiwan and obtain preferential treatment of "oppressed peoples"; There are also people who are nameless, so there is no need to impost metaphysical debates ....... In this way, day by day, every night is the galloping of more than ten - or twenty - mice, and in the morning it is the loud singing of three workers.现在想起那时的辩论来，人是多么和有限的生命开着玩笑呵。然而那时却并无怨尤，只有一事觉得颇为变得特别：对于收到的长信渐渐有些仇视了。
Now I think about the debate at that time, how much people joke with limited life. However, at that time, there was no complaint, only one thing that made me feel quite special: I gradually became a little hostile to the long letters I received.这种长信，本是常常收到的，一向并不为奇。但这时竟渐嫌其长，如果看完一张，还未说出本意，便觉得烦厌。有时见熟人在旁，就托付他，请他看后告诉我信中的主旨。
This kind of long letter is often received, and it has never been surprising. But at this time, I gradually thought it was too long, and if I finished reading one and didn't say what I meant, I would feel bored. Sometimes when I see an acquaintance around, I entrust him and ask him to read it and tell me the main idea of the letter.“不错。‘写长信，就是反革命的！’”我一面想。
'Not bad.' Writing a long letter is counter-revolutionary! I thought.我当时是否也如K委员似的眉头打结呢，未曾照镜，不得而知。仅记得即刻也自觉到我的开会和辩论的生涯，似乎难以称为“在革命”，为自便计，将前判加以修正了：
I didn't know if I was also knotted with brows like Commissioner K at that time, and I didn't look in the mirror. I only remember that I immediately realized that my career of meetings and debates could hardly be called "revolutionary", and for my own convenience, I amended the previous judgment:“不。‘反革命’太重，应该说是‘不革命’的。然而还太重。其实是，——写长信，不过是吃得太闲空罢了。”
'No.' The 'counter-revolution' is too heavy and should be said to be 'non-revolutionary'. However, it is still too heavy. In fact, ,—— wrote a long letter, but it was too idle. ”有人说，文化之兴，须有余裕，据我在钟楼上的经验，大致是真的罢。闲人所造的文化，自然只适宜于闲人，近来有些人磨拳擦掌，大鸣不平，正是毫不足怪，——其实，便是这钟楼，也何尝不造得蹊跷。但是，四万万男女同胞，侨胞，异胞之中，有的是“饱食终日，无所用心”，有的是“群居终日，言不及义”。怎不造出相当的文艺来呢？只说文艺，范围小，容易些。那结论只好是这样：有余裕，未必能创作；而要创作，是必须有余裕的。故“花呀月呀”，不出于啼饥号寒者之口，而“一手奠定中国的文坛”，亦为苦工猪仔所不敢望也。
Some people say that the prosperity of culture must be marginal, and according to my experience in the bell tower, it is roughly true. The culture created by idlers is naturally only suitable for idlers, and it is not surprising that some people have been grinding their fists and complaining recently,—— in fact, it is this bell tower, why not build a strange one. However, among the 40 million male and female compatriots, overseas Chinese, and foreign compatriots, some are "full of food all day long, with no intention", and some are "living in groups all day long, and words are not righteous". Why not create quite a bit of literature and art? Only literature and art, the scope is small, and it is easier. The conclusion has to be this: if you have room, you may not be able to create; And to create, you must have leeway. Therefore, "flowers and moons" do not come from the mouths of those who cry hungry and cry cold, but "single-handedly lay down China's literary world" is also something that hard workers do not dare to hope for.我以为这一说于我倒是很好的，我已经自觉到自己久已不动笔，但这事却应该归罪于匆忙。
I thought this was good for me, I already realized that I hadn't written for a long time, but I was to blame for the haste.大约就在这时候，《新时代》上又发表了一篇《鲁迅先生往那里躲》，宋云彬先生做的。文中有这样的对于我的警告：
Around this time, another article "Mr. Lu Xun Hiding There" was published in "New Era", which was done by Mr. Song Yunbin. The article contains this warning to me:“他到了中大，不但不曾恢复他‘呐喊’的勇气，并且似乎在说‘在北方时受着种种迫压，种种刺激，到这里来没有压迫和刺激，也就无话可说了’。噫嘻！异哉！鲁迅先生竟跑出了现社会，躲向牛角尖里去了。旧社会死去的苦痛，新社会生出的苦痛，多多少放在他眼前，他竟熟视无睹！他把人生的镜子藏起来了，他把自己回复到过去时代去了，噫嘻！异哉！鲁迅先生躲避了。”
"When he arrived at CUHK, not only did he not regain his courage to 'shout', but he seemed to be saying, 'When I was in the north, I was under all kinds of oppression and stimulation, and when I came here, there was nothing to say'. Oh hey! How strange! Mr. Lu Xun actually ran out of the current society and hid in the tip of the horn. The pain of death in the old society and the pain born in the new society were more or less in front of his eyes, but he turned a blind eye! He hid the mirror of his life, he reverted himself to a bygone era, ah! How strange! Mr. Lu Xun dodged. ”而编辑者还很客气，用案语声明着这是对于我的好意的希望和怂恿，并非恶意的笑骂的文章。这是我很明白的，记得看见时颇为感动。因此也曾想如上文所说的那样，写一点东西，声明我虽不呐喊，却正在辩论和开会，有时一天只吃一顿饭，有时只吃一条鱼，也还未失掉了勇气。《在钟楼上》就是豫定的题目。然而一则还是因为辩论和开会，二则因为篇首引有拉狄克的两句话，另外又引起了我许多杂乱的感想，很想说出，终于反而搁下了。那两句话是：
And the editor was still very polite, stating in the case that this was a hope and encouragement for my good intentions, not a malicious laughing and scolding article. I understand this very well, and I remember being quite moved when I saw it. Therefore, I also wanted to write something as I said above, declaring that although I do not shout, I am debating and meeting, sometimes eating only one meal a day, sometimes eating only one fish, and I have not lost my courage. "On the Bell Tower" is the title of Yude. However, one was still because of the debate and the meeting, and the other was because of the two sentences of Raddick at the beginning of the article, and it caused me a lot of chaotic feelings, and I wanted to say it, but finally put it aside. Those two sentences were:“在一个最大的社会改变的时代，文学家不能做旁观者！”
"In an era of greatest social change, writers cannot be bystanders!"但拉狄克的话，是为了叶遂宁和梭波里的自杀而发的。他那一篇《无家可归的艺术家》译载在一种期刊上时，曾经使我发生过暂时的思索。我因此知道凡有革命以前的幻想或理想的革命诗人，很可有碰死在自己所讴歌希望的现实上的运命；而现实的革命倘不粉碎了这类诗人的幻想或理想，则这革命也还是布告上的空谈。但叶遂宁和梭波里是未可厚非的，他们先后给自己唱了挽歌，他们有真实。他们以自己的沉没，证明着革命的前行。他们到底并不是旁观者。
But Radick's words were sent for the suicide of Ye Suining and Soboli. When his "Homeless Artist" was translated into a journal, it made me think for a while. I thus know that any revolutionary poet who has a fantasy or ideal before the revolution is destined to die in the reality he praises and hopes; If the revolution of reality does not shatter the illusions or ideals of such poets, then this revolution is still empty talk in the proclamation. But Ye Suining and Sopoli are understandable, they have sung elegies to themselves one after another, and they have truth. With their own sinking, they proved the progress of the revolution. They are not bystanders after all.但我初到广州的时候，有时确也感到一点小康。前几年在北方，常常看见迫压党人，看见捕杀青年，到那里可都看不见了。后来才悟到这不过是“奉旨革命”的现象，然而在梦中时是委实有些舒服的。假使我早做了《在钟楼上》，文字也许不如此。无奈已经到了现在，又经过目睹“打倒反革命”的事实，纯然的那时的心情，实在无从追蹑了。现在就只好是这样罢。
But when I first arrived in Guangzhou, I sometimes felt a little well-off. In the past few years, in the north, I often saw oppressors and young people killed, but I couldn't see them there. Later, I realized that this was just a phenomenon of "revolution by order", but in my dream I was really comfortable. If I had made "On the Bell Tower" earlier, the text might not have been like this. Helplessness has reached the present, and after witnessing the fact of "overthrowing the counter-revolution", the pure mood at that time is really impossible to follow. That's all there is to it now.

辞顾颉刚教授令“候审”

辞顾颉刚教授令“候审”

辞顾颉刚教授令“候审”

Professor Gu Jiegang ordered "pending trial"来信
Letter鲁迅先生：
Mr. Lu Xun:顷发一挂号信，以未悉先生住址，由中山大学转奉，嗣恐先生未能接到，特探得尊寓所在，另钞一分奉览。
Recently, a registered letter was sent from Sun Yat-sen University because I did not know Mr. Zhang's address, and Mr. Si was afraid that Mr. Si would not receive it, so he found out the location of your residence and gave me another piece of money to read.敬请大安。
Please be safe.颉刚敬上。十六，七，廿四。
Jie Gang respected the emperor. Sixteen, seven, twenty-four.

辞顾颉刚教授令“候审”

钞件

辞顾颉刚教授令“候审”

Banknotes鲁迅先生：
Mr. Lu Xun:颉刚不知以何事开罪于先生，使先生对于颉刚竟作如此强烈之攻击，未即承教，良用耿耿。前日见汉口《中央日报副刊》上，先生及谢玉生先生通信，始悉先生等所以反对颉刚者，盖欲伸党国大义，而颉刚所作之罪恶直为天地所不容，无任惶骇。诚恐此中是非，非笔墨口舌所可明了，拟于九月中回粤后提起诉讼，听候法律解决。如颉刚确有反革命之事实，虽受死刑，亦所甘心，否则先生等自当负发言之责任。务请先生及谢先生暂勿离粤，以俟开审，不胜感盼。
Jiegang didn't know what to offend Mr. Xiegang, so that Mr. Jiegang actually attacked Jiegang so strongly, and he did not accept the teaching immediately, which was very useful. The day before yesterday, I saw the correspondence between Mr. and Mr. Xie Yusheng in the "Central Daily Supplement" in Hankou, and I learned that the reason why Mr. and others opposed Xie Gang was to uphold the righteousness of the party and the state, and the crimes committed by Mr. Xie Gang were simply intolerable to heaven and earth, and there was no need to be afraid. I am afraid that the right and wrong here cannot be understood by pen and ink, and I plan to file a lawsuit after returning to Guangdong in mid-September and wait for legal resolution. If Jiegang does have the fact of counter-revolution, even if he is sentenced to death, he is willing to do so, otherwise he and others will bear the responsibility of speaking. Please do not leave Guangdong for the time being, waiting for the trial to begin, I am very grateful.敬请大安，谢先生处并候。
Please rest in peace, thank you for waiting for me.中华民国十六年七月廿四日
July 24, 16th year of the Republic of China

辞顾颉刚教授令“候审”

回信

辞顾颉刚教授令“候审”

reply颉刚先生：
Mr. Jie Gang:来函谨悉，甚至于吓得绝倒矣。先生在杭盖已闻仆于八月中须离广州之讯，于是顿生妙计，命以难题。如命，则仆尚须提空囊赁屋买米，作穷打算，恭候偏何来迟，提起诉讼。不如命，则先生可指我为畏罪而逃也；而况加以照例之一传十，十传百乎哉？但我意早决，八月中仍当行，九月已在沪。江浙俱属党国所治，法律当与粤不异，且先生尚未启行，无须特别函挽听审，良不如请即就近在浙起诉，尔时仆必到杭，以负应负之责。倘其典书卖裤，居此生活费綦昂之广州，以俟月余后或将提起之诉讼，天下那易有如此十足笨伯哉！《中央日报副刊》未见；谢君处恕不代达，此种小傀儡，可不做则不做而已，无他秘计也。此复，顺请
The letter was very detailed, and it was even terrifying. Mr. Hangai had heard that I had to leave Guangzhou in mid-August, so he immediately came up with a clever idea and asked me to solve a difficult problem. If ordered, I will still have to take an empty bag to rent a house to buy rice, plan for poverty, and wait for the late arrival to file a lawsuit. If I do not obey orders, then you can accuse me of fleeing for fear of sin; Moreover, how can one pass ten or ten hundred? But I think it will be decided early, and it will still be implemented in mid-August, and it will be in Shanghai in September. Jiangsu and Zhejiang are both governed by the party and the state, and the law should be no different from Guangdong, and Mr. has not yet set out, so there is no need for a special letter to hear the trial. If he sells books and pants, living in Guangzhou, where the cost of living is high, and he is waiting for a lawsuit to be filed in more than a month, how can there be such a stupid man in the world? "Central Daily Supplement" did not see it; Thank you for forgiving me for not being able to do it, this kind of little puppet, if you don't do it, you just don't do it, there is no other secret plan. This reply, in accordance with the request著安！
Peace!鲁迅。Lu Xun.

匪笔三篇

匪笔三篇

匪笔三篇

Three pieces of non-pen今之“正人君子”，论事有时喜欢讲“动机”。案动机，我自己知道，绍介这三篇文章是未免有些有伤忠厚的。旅资将尽，非逐食不可了，许多人已知道我将于八月中走出广州。七月末就收到了一封所谓“学者”的信，说我的文字得罪了他，“拟于九月中回粤后提起诉讼，听候法律解决”。且叫我“暂勿离粤，以俟开审”。命令被告枵腹恭候于异地，以俟自己雍容布置，慢慢开审，真是霸道得可观。第二天偶在报纸上看见飞天虎寄亚妙信，有“提防剑仔”的话，不知怎地忽而欣然独笑，还想到别的两篇东西，要执绍介之劳了。这种拉扯牵连，若即若离的思想，自己也觉得近乎刻薄，——但是，由它去罢，好在“开审”时总会结帐的。
Today's "upright gentlemen" sometimes like to talk about "motives" when talking about things. The motive of the case, I know myself, and Shao Jie's three articles are a bit hurtful. The travel expenses are about to run out, and many people already know that I will leave Guangzhou in mid-August. At the end of July, I received a letter from a so-called "scholar" saying that my words had offended him and that "I plan to file a lawsuit after returning to Guangdong in mid-September and await legal resolution." He also told me not to leave Guangdong for the time being, waiting for the trial." Ordering the defendant to wait in another place for his own graceful arrangement and slowly start the trial is really domineering. The next day, I happened to see a letter from Feitian Tiger in the newspaper, with the words "Beware of the sword boy", and somehow I suddenly laughed happily, and thought of two other things, and I had to take care of Shaojie. This kind of pulling and implication, if you think like a separation, I also feel almost mean,—— but let it go, fortunately, it will always settle the bill when the "trial" begins.在我的估计上，这类文章的价值却并不在文人学者的名文之下。先前也曾收集，得了五六篇，后来只在北京的《平民周刊》上发表过一篇模范监狱里的一个囚人的自序，其余的呢，我跑出北京以后，不知怎样了，现在却还想搜集。要夸大地说起来，则此类文章，于学术上也未始无用；我记得Lombroso所做的一本书——大约是《天才与狂人》，请读者恕我手头无书，不能指实——后面，就附有许多疯子的作品。然而这种金字招牌，我辈却无须挂起来。
In my estimation, the value of such articles is not inferior to the famous writings of literati and scholars. I also collected it before, got five or six, and later only published a preface by a prisoner in a model prison in Beijing's "Civilian Weekly", and the rest, after I ran out of Beijing, I don't know what happened, but now I still want to collect it. To exaggerate, such articles are not useless academically; I remember a book made by Lombroso—about "Genius and a Madman", please forgive me for not having a book at hand, and I can't point it out — with many works by madmen. However, we don't need to hang this kind of golden signboard.这回姑且将现成的三篇介绍，都是从香港《循环日报》上采取的。以其都不是韵文，所以取阮氏《文笔对》之说，名之曰：笔。倘有好事之徒，寄我材料，无任欢迎。但此后拟不限有韵无韵，并且廓大范围，并收土匪，骗子，犯人，疯子等等的创作。但经文人润色，或拟作赝作者不收。
This time, I will tentatively introduce the three ready-made articles, all of which are taken from Hong Kong's "Circulation Daily". Because it is not a rhyme, it is named after Ruan's "Wenbi Pair". If there are good people who send me materials, you are welcome. But since then, it is planned to be not limited to rhyme or no rhyme, and to expand a wide range, and to accept the creations of bandits, liars, prisoners, madmen, etc. However, the scriptures are edited by the author, or the author of the forgery is not accepted.其实，古如陈涉帛书，米巫题字，近如义和团传单，同善社乩笔，也都是这一流。我想，凡见于古书的，也都可以抄出来编为一集，和现在的来比照，看思想手段，有什么不同。
In fact, ancient books such as Chen She's silk books, Mi Wu inscriptions, and similar to Boxer leaflets and Tongshan Society pens are also of this class. I think that everything that is seen in ancient books can also be copied out and compiled into an episode, and compared with the current ones to see what the difference is in terms of ideological means.来件想托北新书局代收，当择尤发表，——但这是我倘不忙于“以俟开审”或下了牢监的话。否则，自己的文章也就是材料，不必旁搜博采了。
I want to ask the Beixin Book Company to collect it, and I will choose you to publish it,—— but this is if I am not busy "waiting for the trial" or going to prison. Otherwise, your own article is the material, and you don't have to search for it.闲话休题，言归正传：
Let's go back to the point:

匪笔三篇

一　撕票布告

匪笔三篇

1. Notice of tearing up tickets潘平
Pan Ping广州佛山缸瓦栏维新码头发现烂艇一艘，有水浸淹其中，用蓑衣覆盖男子尸身一具，露出手足，旁有粗碗一只，白旗一面，书明云云。由六区水警，将该尸艇移泊西医院附近。验得该尸颈旁有一枪孔，直贯其鼻，显系生前轰毙。查死者年约三十岁，乃穿短线衫裤，剪平头装者。
A rotten boat was found at the Weixin Wharf in Foshan, Guangzhou, which was flooded with water, covering a man's body with a raincoat, exposing his hands and feet, with a thick bowl and a white flag beside it. The Marine Police of District 6 moved the boat to the vicinity of the Western Hospital. An autopsy revealed a gunshot hole next to the body's neck, which went straight through his nose, indicating that he was shot dead during his lifetime. The deceased was about 30 years old, wearing a short-length shirt and pants, with a flat-cut top.南海紫洞潘平布告。
Pan Ping announced in the Purple Cave of the South China Sea.为布告事：昨四月念六日，在禄步共掳得乡人十余名，困留月余，并望赎音。兹提出禄步笋洞沙乡，姓许名进洪一名，枪毙示众，以儆其余。四方君子，特字周知，切勿视财如命！此布。　（据七月十三日《循环报》。）
为布告事：昨四月念六日，在禄步共掳得乡人十余名，困留月余，并望赎音。 兹提出禄步笋洞沙乡，姓许名进洪一名，枪毙示众，以儆其余。 四方君子，特字周知，切勿视财如命！此布。 （据七月十三日《循环报》。 ）

匪笔三篇

二　致信女某书

匪笔三篇

2. Letter to a certain woman金吊桶
Gold bucket广西梧州洞天酒店相命家金吊桶，原名黄卓生，新会人，日前有行骗陈社恩，黄心，黄作梁夫妇银钱单据，为警备司令部将其捕获，又搜获一封固之信，内空白信笺一张，以火烘之，发现字迹如下：
Guangxi Wuzhou Dongtian Hotel Xiang Mingjia Golden Hanging Bucket, formerly known as Huang Zhuosheng, a native of Xinhui, recently defrauded Chen Sheen, Huang Xin, Huang Zuoliang and his wife money receipts, and was captured by the security command, and a letter of Gu Zhi was found, with a blank letterhead, baked with fire, and the handwriting was found as follows:今日民国十六年五月二十九日，吕纯阳先师下降，查明汝信女系广西人。汝今生为人，心善清洁，今天上玉皇赐横财四千五百两银过你，汝信享福养儿育女。但此财分作八回中足，今年七月尾只中白鸽票七百五十元左右。老来结局有个子，第三位有官星发达，有官太做。但汝终身要派大三房妾伴，不能坐正位。今生条命极好。汝前世犯了白虎五鬼天狗星，若想得横财旺子，要用六元六毫交与金吊桶先生代汝解除，方得平安无事。若不信解除，汝条命得来十分无夫福无子福，有子死子，有夫死夫。但见字要求先生共汝解去此凶星为要可也。汝想得财得子者，为夫福者，有夫权者，要求先生共汝行礼，交合阴阳一二回，方可平安。如有不顺从先生者，汝条命冇好处，无安乐也。……　（据七月二十六日《循环报》。）
Today, on May 29, the sixteenth year of the Republic of China, Master Lu Chunyang descended and found out that Ru Xin's daughter was from Guangxi. You are a person in this life, with a good and pure heart, and today the Jade Emperor has given you a windfall of 4,500 taels of silver, and you believe in blessings and raising children. However, this fiscal year was divided into eight rounds, and at the end of July this year, only about $750 for white pigeon tickets. In old age, there is a man in the ending, and the third has an official star who is developed, and there is an official who is too doing. But you have to send a concubine to the third room for the rest of your life, and you can't sit in the right position. This life is very good. You have committed the White Tiger Five Ghosts Tengu Star in your previous life, if you want to get a windfall, you must use six yuan and six cents to hand over to Mr. Jin Hanging Bucket to relieve it on your behalf, so that you can be safe. If you don't believe in liberation, your life will be very blessed with no husband or son, with a son dead son, and a husband dead husband. As long as you see the word, you can help you solve this malevolent star. If you want to have wealth and children, for the blessing of the husband, and for the power of the husband, ask the gentleman to bow with you, and the yin and yang will be one or two times before you can be safe. If anyone disobeys you, your life will not be good, and there will be no peace. …… (According to the July 26 "Circulation".) ）

匪笔三篇

三　诘妙嫦书

匪笔三篇

3. Questioning the wonderful Changshu飞天虎
Flying tiger香港永乐街如意茶楼女招待妙嫦，年仅双十，寓永吉街三十号二楼。七月二十九日晚十一时许，散工之后，偕同女侍三数人归家，道经大道中永吉街口，遇大汉三四人，要截于途，诘妙嫦曰：汝其为妙玲乎？嫦不敢答，闪避而行。讵大汉不使去，逞凶殴之，凡两拳，且曰：汝虽不语，固认识汝之面目者也！嫦被殴，大哭不已，归家后，以为大汉等所殴者为妙玲，故尚自怨无辜被辱，不料翌早复接恐吓信一通，按址由邮局投至，遂知昨晚之被殴，确为寻己，乃将事密报侦探，并告以所疑之人，务使就捕雪恨云。
香港永乐街如意茶楼女招待妙嫦，年仅双十，寓永吉街三十号二楼。 七月二十九日晚十一时许，散工之后，偕同女侍三数人归家，道经大道中永吉街口，遇大汉三四人，要截于途，诘妙嫦曰：汝其为妙玲乎？嫦不敢答，闪避而行。 讵大汉不使去，逞凶殴之，凡两拳，且曰：汝虽不语，固认识汝之面目者也！嫦被殴，大哭不已，归家后，以为大汉等所殴者为妙玲，故尚自怨无辜被辱，不料翌早复接恐吓信一通，按址由邮局投至，遂知昨晚之被殴，确为寻己，乃将事密报侦探，并告以所疑之人，务使就捕雪恨云。亚妙女招待看！启者：久在如意茶楼，用诸多好言，殴辱我兄弟，及用滚水来陆之兄弟，灵端相劝，置之不理，与续大发雌雄，反口相齿，亦所谓恶不甚言矣。昨晚在此二人殴打已捶，亦非介意，不过小小之用。刻下限你一星期内答复，妥讲此事，若有无答复，早夜出入，提防剑仔，决列对待，及难保性命之虞，勿怪书不在先，至于死地之险也。诸多未及，难解了言，顺候，此询危险。七月初一晚，卅六友飞天虎谨。　（据八月一日《循环报》。）亚妙女招待看！启者：久在如意茶楼，用诸多好言，殴辱我兄弟，及用滚水来陆之兄弟，灵端相劝，置之不理，与续大发雌雄，反口相齿，亦所谓恶不甚言矣。 昨晚在此二人殴打已捶，亦非介意，不过小小之用。 刻下限你一星期内答复，妥讲此事，若有无答复，早夜出入，提防剑仔，决列对待，及难保性命之虞，勿怪书不在先，至于死地之险也。 诸多未及，难解了言，顺候，此询危险。 七月初一晚，卅六友飞天虎谨。 （据八月一日《循环报》。 ）

某笔两篇

某笔两篇

某笔两篇

I wrote two articles昨天又得幸逢了两种奇特的广告，仍敢执绍介之劳。标点是我所加的，以醒眉目。该称什么笔呢，想了两天两夜，没有好结果。姑且称为“某笔”，以俟博雅君子教正。这回的“动机”比较地近于纯正，除希望“有目共赏”外，似乎并不含有其他的副作用了。但又发生了一种妄想。记得前清时，曾有一种专选各种报上较好的论说的，叫作《选报》。现在如有好事之徒，也还可以办这一类的刊物。每省须有访员数人，专收该地报上奇特的社论，记事，文艺，广告等等，汇刊成册，公之于世。则其显示各种“社会相”也，一定比游记之类要深切得多。不知CF男士以为何如？一九二七年九月二十二日午饭之前。
Yesterday, I was fortunate to encounter two strange advertisements, and I still dare to take on the work of Shaojie. I added punctuation to make it clear. What kind of pen should I call, I thought about it for two days and two nights, but there was no good result. For now, let's call it "a certain pen" to wait for the liberal gentlemen to correct it. This time, the "motive" is relatively pure, and it seems that there are no other side effects except for the hope of "appreciation". But another delusion occurred. I remember that in the former Qing Dynasty, there was a special selection of good theories in various newspapers, called "Selected Newspapers". Nowadays, if there are good people, they can also run this kind of publication. Each province must have several interviewers, who collect peculiar editorials, memoirs, literature, advertisements, etc. in the local newspaper, and publish them into a book and publish them to the world. Then it shows various "social aspects", which must be much deeper than travelogues. I wonder what CF men think? Before lunch on September 22, 1927.

某笔两篇

其一

某笔两篇

One of them熊仲卿　榜名文蔚。历任民国县长，所长，处长，局长，厅长。通儒，显宦，兼作良医，尤擅女科。住本港跑马地黄泥涌道门牌五十五号一楼中医熊寓，每日下午应诊及出诊。电话总局五二七零。
Xiong Zhongqing is named Wen Wei. He has successively served as the county magistrate, director, director, director and director of the Republic of China. He was well-versed in Confucianism, held a prominent position, and also served as a good doctor, especially excelling in women's studies. He lives at the Chinese medicine practitioner Xiong Yue, 1/F, No. 55 Wong Nai Chung Road, Happy Valley, Hong Kong, and attends and visits every afternoon. Telephone 5270.（右一则见九月二十一日香港《循环日报》。）
(The first one on the right can be found in the Hong Kong "Circulation Daily" on September 21.) ）谨案：以吾所闻，向来或称世医，以其数代为医也；或称儒医，以其曾做八股也；或称官医，以其亦为官家所雇也；或称御医，以其曾经走进（？）太医院也。若夫“县长，所长，处长，局长，厅长。通儒，显宦”，而又“兼作良医”，则诚旷古未有者矣。而五“长”做全，尤为难得云。
谨案：以吾所闻，向来或称世医，以其数代为医也；或称儒医，以其曾做八股也；或称官医，以其亦为官家所雇也；或称御医，以其曾经走进（？）太医院也。 若夫“县长，所长，处长，局长，厅长。 通儒，显宦”，而又“兼作良医”，则诚旷古未有者矣。 而五“长”做全，尤为难得云。

某笔两篇

其二

某笔两篇

Second征求父母广告　余现已授中等教育有年，品行端正，纯无嗜好。因不幸父母相继逝世，余独取家资，来学广州。自思自觉单身儿子，有非常之寂寞。于是自愿甘心为人儿子。并自愿倾家产而从四方人事而无儿子者。有相当之家庭，且欲儿子者，请来函报告（家庭状况经济地位若何），并写明通讯地址。俟我回复，方接洽面商。阅报诸君而能介绍我好事成功者，应以百金敬酬。不成功者，当有谢谢。申一〇六
Advertisement for parents Yu has been teaching secondary education for many years, has good conduct, and has no hobbies. Unfortunately, my parents passed away one after another, so I took my family money and came to Guangzhou to study. I think I feel that my single son is very lonely. So he volunteered to be a son. And those who voluntarily donate their family property and follow the people of the four directions without children. If you have a considerable family and want a son, please write a letter to report (what is the family situation and economic status) and write down the correspondence address. I will contact you when I reply. If you can introduce me to a successful good deed, I will be rewarded with a hundred taels of silver. If you don't succeed, you should be thankful. Deuteronomy 106通讯处　广东省立第一中学校余希成具。
Communications Office Yu Xicheng of Guangdong Provincial No. 1 Middle School.（右一则见同日广州《民国日报》。）
(The right one is seen in the Guangzhou "Republic of China Daily" on the same day.) ）谨案：我辈生当浇漓之世，于“征求伴侣”等类广告，早经司空见惯，不以为奇。昔读茅泮林所辑《古孝子传》，见有三男皆无母，乃共迎养一不相干之老妪，当作母亲一事，颇以为奇。然那时孝廉方正，可以做官，故尚能疑为别有作用也。而此广告则挟家资以求亲，悬百金而待荐，雒诵之余，乌能不欣人心之复返于淳古，表而出之，以为留心世道者告，而为打爹骂娘者劝哉？特未知阅报诸君，可知广州有欲儿子者否？要知道倘为介绍，即使好事不成，亦有“谢谢”者也。谨案：我辈生当浇漓之世，于“征求伴侣”等类广告，早经司空见惯，不以为奇。 昔读茅泮林所辑《古孝子传》，见有三男皆无母，乃共迎养一不相干之老妪，当作母亲一事，颇以为奇。 然那时孝廉方正，可以做官，故尚能疑为别有作用也。 而此广告则挟家资以求亲，悬百金而待荐，雒诵之余，乌能不欣人心之复返于淳古，表而出之，以为留心世道者告，而为打爹骂娘者劝哉？特未知阅报诸君，可知广州有欲儿子者否？要知道倘为介绍，即使好事不成，亦有“谢谢”者也。

述香港恭祝圣诞

述香港恭祝圣诞

述香港恭祝圣诞

Describe Hong Kong's happy Christmas记者先生：
Mr. Reporter:文宣王大成至圣先师孔夫子圣诞，香港恭祝，向称极盛。盖北方仅得东邻鼓吹，此地则有港督督率，实事求是，教导有方。侨胞亦知崇拜本国至圣，保存东方文明，故能发扬光大，盛极一时也。今年圣诞，尤为热闹，文人雅士，则在陶园雅集，即席挥毫，表示国粹。各学校皆行祝圣礼，往往欢迎各界参观，夜间或演新剧，或演电影，以助圣兴。超然学校每年祝圣，例有新式对联，贴于门口，而今年所制，尤为高超。今敬谨录呈，乞昭示内地，以愧意欲打倒帝国主义者：
The Christmas of Confucius, the most holy teacher of King Wenxuan, was celebrated in Hong Kong, and it was said to be very prosperous. Because the north only has the advocacy of the eastern neighbor, here there is a port governor who is pragmatic and teaches well. Overseas Chinese also know how to worship the most holy of their country and preserve Eastern civilization, so they can carry forward and flourish for a while. This Christmas, it is particularly lively, and the literati and scholars are in the pottery garden, improvising their pens to express the quintessence of the country. All schools hold consecration ceremonies, and they often welcome visitors from all walks of life, and at night they either perform new plays or movies to help the Holy Prosperity. Transcendent School celebrates every year, and there are usually new couplets pasted at the door, and this year's design is particularly superb. Today, I respectfully present it to the interior, and I ask you to show it to the mainland that I am ashamed of those who want to overthrow the imperialists:乾　男校门联乾 男校门联
本鲁史，作《春秋》，罪齐田恒，地义天经，打倒贼子乱臣，免得赤化宣传，讨父仇孝，共产公妻，破坏纲常伦纪。
本鲁史，作《春秋》，罪齐田恒，地义天经，打倒贼子乱臣，免得赤化宣传，讨父仇孝，共产公妻，破坏纲常伦纪。堕三都，出藏甲，诛少正卯，风行雷厉，铲除贪官悍吏，训练青年德育，修身齐家，爱亲敬长，挽回世道人心。
Fall into the three capitals, out of the Tibetan armor, kill Shao Zhengmao, the wind is vigorous, eradicate corrupt officials and fierce officials, train young people to moral education, cultivate themselves and their families, love their relatives and respect their elders, and win the hearts of the world.坤　女校门联Kun Girls' School Gate Couplet
母凭子贵，妻藉夫荣，方今祝圣诚心，正宜遵懔三从，岂可开口自由，埋口自由，一味误会自由，趋附潮流成水性。
A mother relies on her son to be noble, and a wife relies on her husband's honor. Now that the saint is sincere, it is appropriate to follow the three obediences, how can one speak freely, bury one's mouth free, blindly misunderstand freedom, and tend to follow the tide to become watery.男禀乾刚，女占坤顺，此际尊孔主义，切勿反违四德，动说有乜所谓，冇乜所谓，至则不知所谓，随同社会出风头。
Men are strong and strong, women are obedient to Kunshun, at this time respect Confucianism, do not go against the four virtues, what is the matter, what does it matter, it doesn't matter, and when it comes, it doesn't matter what it means, and it is in the limelight with the society.埋犹言合，乜犹言何，冇犹言无，盖女子小人，不知雅训，故用俗字耳。舆论之类，琳琅尤多，今仅将载于《循环日报》者录出一篇，以见大概：
埋犹言合，乜犹言何，冇犹言无，盖女子小人，不知雅训，故用俗字耳。 舆论之类，琳琅尤多，今仅将载于《循环日报》者录出一篇，以见大概：

述香港恭祝圣诞

孔诞祝圣言感

述香港恭祝圣诞

孔诞祝圣言感佩蘅
佩蘅金风送爽。凉露惊秋。转瞬而孔诞时期届矣。迩来圣教衰落。邪说嚣张。礼孔之举。惟港中人士。犹相沿奉行。至若内地。大多数不甚注意。盖自新学说出。而旧道德日即于沦亡。自新人物出。而古圣贤胥归于淘汰。一般学子。崇持列宁马克思种种谬说。不惜举二千年来炳若日星之圣教。摧陷而廓清之。其诋人也。不曰腐化即曰老朽。实则若曹少不更事。卤莽灭裂。不惜假新学说以便其私图。而古人之大义微言。俨如肉中刺。眼中钉。必欲拔除之而后快。孔子且在于打倒之列。更何有孔诞之可言。呜呼。长此以往。势不至等人道于禽兽不止。何幸此海隅之地。古风未泯。经教犹存。当此祝圣时期。济济跄跄一时称盛耶。虽然。吾人祝圣。特为此形式上之纪念耳。尤当注重孔教之精神。孔教重伦理。重实行。所谓齐家治国平天下。由近及远。由内及外。皆有轨道之可循。天不变道亦不变。自有碻凿之理由在。虽暴民嚣张。摧残圣教。然浮云之翳。何伤日月之明。吾人当蒙泉剥果之余。伤今思古。首当发挥大义。羽翼微言。子舆氏谓能言距杨墨者。圣人之徒。生今之世。群言淆乱。异说争鸣。众口铄金。积非成是。与圣教为难者。向只杨墨。就贵词而辟之。为吾道作干城。树中流之砥柱。若乎张皇耳目。涂饰仪文。以敷衍为心。作例行之举。则非吾所望于祝圣诸公也。感而书之如此。
金风送爽。 凉露惊秋。 转瞬而孔诞时期届矣。 迩来圣教衰落。 邪说嚣张。 礼孔之举。 惟港中人士。 犹相沿奉行。 至若内地。 大多数不甚注意。 盖自新学说出。 而旧道德日即于沦亡。 自新人物出。 而古圣贤胥归于淘汰。 一般学子。 崇持列宁马克思种种谬说。 不惜举二千年来炳若日星之圣教。 摧陷而廓清之。 其诋人也。 不曰腐化即曰老朽。 实则若曹少不更事。 卤莽灭裂。 不惜假新学说以便其私图。 而古人之大义微言。 俨如肉中刺。 眼中钉。 必欲拔除之而后快。 孔子且在于打倒之列。 更何有孔诞之可言。 呜呼。 长此以往。 势不至等人道于禽兽不止。 何幸此海隅之地。 古风未泯。 经教犹存。 当此祝圣时期。 济济跄跄一时称盛耶。 虽然。 吾人祝圣。 特为此形式上之纪念耳。 尤当注重孔教之精神。 孔教重伦理。 重实行。 所谓齐家治国平天下。 由近及远。 由内及外。 皆有轨道之可循。 天不变道亦不变。 自有碻凿之理由在。 虽暴民嚣张。 摧残圣教。 然浮云之翳。 何伤日月之明。 吾人当蒙泉剥果之余。 伤今思古。 首当发挥大义。 羽翼微言。 子舆氏谓能言距杨墨者。 圣人之徒。 生今之世。 群言淆乱。 异说争鸣。 众口铄金。 积非成是。 与圣教为难者。 向只杨墨。 就贵词而辟之。 为吾道作干城。 树中流之砥柱。 若乎张皇耳目。 涂饰仪文。 以敷衍为心。 作例行之举。 则非吾所望于祝圣诸公也。 感而书之如此。
香港孔圣会则于是日在太平戏院日夜演大尧天班。其广告云：
The Hong Kong Confucius Church performed the Dayao Tianban day and night at the Taiping Theater on that day. The advertisement says:祝大成之圣节，乐奏钧天，彰正教于人群，欢腾大地。我国数千年来，崇奉孔教，诚以圣道足以维持风化，挽救人心者也。本会定期本月廿七日演大尧天班。是日演《加官大送子》，《游龙戏凤》。夜通宵先演《六国大封相》及《风流皇后》新剧。查《风流皇后》一剧，情节新奇，结构巧妙。惟此剧非演通宵，不能结局，故是晚经港政府给发数特别执照。演至通宵。……预日沽票处在荷李活道中华书院孔圣会办事所。
Wishing the Holy Day of Great Success, the music plays the heavens, showing the Orthodox Church to the crowd, and rejuvenating the earth. For thousands of years, our country has advocated Confucianism, and it is true that the holy way is enough to maintain the customs and save people's hearts. The Association regularly performs the Dayao Tian class on the 27th of this month. On that day, he performed "The Great Sending Off the Officials" and "The Dragon and the Phoenix." The new dramas "The Great Sealing of the Six Kingdoms" and "The Merry Queen" were performed all night. Check the drama "Merry Queen", the plot is novel and the structure is ingenious. However, this play could not end without an all-night performance, so it was issued several special licenses by the Hong Kong government that night. The performance lasted all night. …… The pre-sale ticket office is located at the Confucius Church office of the Chinese College on Hollywood Road.丁卯年八月廿四日，　香港孔圣会谨启。
On August 24, the Confucius Church in Hong Kong hereby invited.《风流皇后》之名，虽欠雅驯，然“子见南子”，《论语》不讳，惟此“海隅之地，古风未泯”者，能知此意耳。余如各种电影，亦复美不胜收，新戏院则演《济公传》四集，预告者尚有《齐天大圣大闹天宫》，新世界有《武松杀嫂》，全系国粹，足以发扬国光。皇后戏院之《假面新娘》虽出邻邦，然观其广告云：“孔子有言，‘始吾于人也，听其言而信其行，今吾于人也，听其言而观其行，于予与改是。’请君今日来看《假面新娘》以证孔子之言，然后知圣人一言而为天下法，所以不愧称为万世师表也。”则固亦有裨圣教者耳。
《风流皇后》之名，虽欠雅驯，然“子见南子”，《论语》不讳，惟此“海隅之地，古风未泯”者，能知此意耳。 余如各种电影，亦复美不胜收，新戏院则演《济公传》四集，预告者尚有《齐天大圣大闹天宫》，新世界有《武松杀嫂》，全系国粹，足以发扬国光。 皇后戏院之《假面新娘》虽出邻邦，然观其广告云：“孔子有言，‘始吾于人也，听其言而信其行，今吾于人也，听其言而观其行，于予与改是。 ’请君今日来看《假面新娘》以证孔子之言，然后知圣人一言而为天下法，所以不愧称为万世师表也。 ”则固亦有裨圣教者耳。嗟夫！乘桴浮海，曾闻至圣之微言，崇正辟邪，幸有大英之德政。爱国劬古之士，当亦必额手遥庆，恨不得受一廛而为氓也。专此布达，即颂　辑祺。
嗟夫！乘桴浮海，曾闻至圣之微言，崇正辟邪，幸有大英之德政。 爱国劬古之士，当亦必额手遥庆，恨不得受一廛而为氓也。 专此布达，即颂 辑祺。圣诞后一日，华约瑟谨启。圣诞后一日，华约瑟谨启。

吊与贺

吊与贺

吊与贺

吊与贺《语丝》在北京被禁之后，一个相识者寄给我一块剪下的报章，是十一月八日的北京《民国晚报》的《华灯》栏，内容是这样的：
After "Yusi" was banned in Beijing, an acquaintance sent me a cut newspaper, which was the "Huadeng" column of the Beijing "Republic of China Evening News" on November 8, and the content was as follows:

吊与贺

吊丧文

吊与贺

Condolences and funeral texts孔伯尼
Kong Bernie顷闻友云：“《语丝》已停”，其果然欤？查《语丝》问世，三年于斯，素无余润，常经风波。以久特闻，迄未少衰焉。方期益臻坚壮，岂意中道而崩？“闲话”失慎，“随感”伤风欤？抑有他故耶？岂明老人再不兴风作浪，叛徒首领无从发令施威；忠臣孝子，或可少申余愤；义士仁人，大宜下井投石。“语丝派”已亡，众怒少息，“拥旗党”犹在，五色何忧？从此狂澜平静，邪说歼绝。有关风化，良匪浅鲜！则《语丝》之停也，岂不懿欤？所惜者余孽未尽，祸根犹存，复萌故态，诚堪预防！自宜除恶务尽，何容姑息养奸？兴仁义师，招抚并用；设文字狱，赏罚分明。打倒异端，惩办祸首；以安民心，而属众望。岂惟功垂不朽；曷止德及黎庶？抑亦国旗为荣耶？效《狂飙》之往例，草《语丝》之哀辞，当仁不让，舍我其谁？朝野君子，乞勿忽之。
顷闻友云：“《语丝》已停”，其果然欤？查《语丝》问世，三年于斯，素无余润，常经风波。 以久特闻，迄未少衰焉。 方期益臻坚壮，岂意中道而崩？“闲话”失慎，“随感”伤风欤？抑有他故耶？岂明老人再不兴风作浪，叛徒首领无从发令施威；忠臣孝子，或可少申余愤；义士仁人，大宜下井投石。 “语丝派”已亡，众怒少息，“拥旗党”犹在，五色何忧？从此狂澜平静，邪说歼绝。 有关风化，良匪浅鲜！则《语丝》之停也，岂不懿欤？所惜者余孽未尽，祸根犹存，复萌故态，诚堪预防！自宜除恶务尽，何容姑息养奸？兴仁义师，招抚并用；设文字狱，赏罚分明。 打倒异端，惩办祸首；以安民心，而属众望。 岂惟功垂不朽；曷止德及黎庶？抑亦国旗为荣耶？效《狂飙》之往例，草《语丝》之哀辞，当仁不让，舍我其谁？朝野君子，乞勿忽之。未废标点，已禁语体之秋，阳历晦日，杏坛上。
Punctuation has not been abolished, and the autumn of the language style has been banned.先前没有想到，这回却记得起来了。去年我在厦门岛上时，也有一个朋友剪寄我一片报章，是北京的《每日评论》，日子是“丙寅年十二月二十……”，阳历的日子被剪掉了。内容是这一篇：
I didn't expect it before, but this time I remembered. When I was on Xiamen Island last year, a friend also cut and sent me a newspaper, which was Beijing's "Daily Review", and the day was "December 20......, Bingyin Year", and the day of the solar calendar was cut off. The content is this:

吊与贺

挽狂飙

吊与贺

Turn the storm燕生
Yan Sheng不料我刚作了《读狂飙》一文之后，《狂飙》疾终于上海正寝的讣闻随着就送到了。本来《狂飙》的不会长命百岁，是我们早已料到的，但它夭折的这样快，却确乎“出人意表之外”。尤其是当这与“思想界的权威者”正在宣战的时候，而突然得到如此的结果，多心的人也许会猜疑到权威者的反攻战略上面，“这话当然不确”，“不过”自由批评家所走不到的光华书局，“思想界的权威”也许竟能走得到了，于是乎《狂飙》乃停，于是乎《狂飙》乃不得不停。
Unexpectedly, after I just wrote the article "Reading Hurricane", the obituary of "Hurricane" finally arrived in Shanghai. Originally, we had already expected that "Hurricane" would not live a long life, but it died so quickly, but it was indeed "unexpected". Especially when this is declaring war on the "authorities in the intellectual world", and suddenly getting such a result, people who are thoughtful may suspect the counteroffensive strategy of the authorities, "Of course this is not true", "but "the authority of the ideological world" may be able to go to Guanghua Bookstore, which free critics cannot go, so "Hurricane" has to stop, so "Hurricane" has to stop.但当今之世，权威亦多矣，《狂飙》所得罪者不知是南方之强欤？北方之强欤？抑……欤？
But in today's world, there are many authorities, and I don't know if the people who are punished by "Hurricane" are the strong in the south. Is it the strength of the north? Repress...... Is it?思想家究竟不如武人爽快，《狂飙》虽停，而长虹终于能安然走到北京，这个，我们倒要向长虹道贺。
Thinkers are not as refreshing as warriors, although "Hurricane" has stopped, and Changhong can finally walk to Beijing safely, this, we have to congratulate Changhong.呜呼！回想非宗教大同盟轰轰烈烈之际，则有五教授慨然署名于拥护思想自由之宣言，曾几何时，而自由批评已成为反动者唯一之口号矣。自由乎！自由乎！其随线装书以入于毛厕坑中乎！嘻嘻！咄咄！
Alack! Recall that when the African Grand League was vigorous, five professors signed a manifesto in support of freedom of thought, and for a time when liberal criticism had become the only slogan of the reactionaries. Freedom! Freedom! Maybe he loaded the book with the line and put it in the pit of the wool toilet! Hehe! Oh no!《语丝》本来并非选定了几个人，加以恭维或攻击或诅咒之后，便将作者和刊物的荣枯存灭，都推在这几个人的身上的出版物。但这回的禁终于燕京北寝的讣闻，却“也许”不“会猜疑到权威者的反攻战略上面”去了罢。诚然，我亦觉得“思想家究竟不如武人爽快”也！
"Yusi" was not originally a publication that selected a few people, complimented, attacked, or cursed, and then pushed the rise and fall of the author and the publication on these people. But this time, the ban finally went to the obituary of the Yanjing North Bedroom, but "maybe" not "will be suspicious of the counteroffensive strategy of the authority". It is true that I also think that "thinkers are not as cheerful as martial artists"!但是，这个，我倒要向燕生和五色国旗道贺。
However, for this, I would like to congratulate Yan Sheng and the five-color national flag.十二月四日，于上海正寝。On December 4, he was officially laid to rest in Shanghai.

一九二八年

一九二八年

一九二八年

1928

“醉眼”中的朦胧

“醉眼”中的朦胧

“醉眼”中的朦胧

The haze in the "drunken eyes"旧历和新历的今年似乎于上海的文艺家们特别有着刺激力，接连的两个新正一过，期刊便纷纷而出了。他们大抵将全力用尽在伟大或尊严的名目上，不惜将内容压杀。连产生了不止一年的刊物，也显出拚命的挣扎和突变来。作者呢，有几个是初见的名字，有许多却还是看熟的，虽然有时觉得有些生疏，但那是因为停笔了一年半载的缘故。他们先前在做什么，为什么今年一齐动笔了？说起来怕话长。要而言之，就因为先前可以不动笔，现在却只好来动笔，仍如旧日的无聊的文人，文人的无聊一模一样。这是有意识或无意识地，大家都有些自觉的，所以总要向读者声明“将来”：不是“出国”，“进研究室”，便是“取得民众”。功业不在目前，一旦回国，出室，得民之后，那可是非同小可了。自然，倘有远识的人，小心的人，怕事的人，投机的人，最好是此刻豫致“革命的敬礼”。一到将来，就要“悔之晚矣”了。
This year of the old calendar and the new calendar seems to be particularly exciting for writers and artists in Shanghai, and as soon as the two new calendars have passed, journals have come out one after another. They will probably exhaust all their strength in the name of greatness or dignity, and will not hesitate to crush the content. Even the publications that have been produced for more than a year also show desperate struggles and mutations. As for the author, several of them are names that I have never seen before, and many are still familiar, although sometimes I feel a little rusty, but that is because I have stopped writing for a year and a half. What were they doing before, and why did they start writing together this year? I'm afraid of talking too long. In short, just because I could not write before, but now I have to start writing, it is still exactly the same as the boring literati of the past, and the boredom of the literati. This is consciously or unconsciously, and everyone is somewhat conscious, so we must always declare to the reader the "future": either "going abroad", "entering the research laboratory", or "gaining the people". The achievements are not in the present, once you return to China, leave the house, and gain the people, it will be a big deal. Naturally, if there are far-sighted people, careful people, people who are afraid of things, and people who speculate, it is best to give a "revolutionary salute" in advance at this moment. When the future comes, it will be "too late to regret".然而各种刊物，无论措辞怎样不同，都有一个共通之点，就是：有些朦胧。这朦胧的发祥地，由我看来，——虽然是冯乃超的所谓“醉眼陶然”——也还在那有人爱，也有人憎的官僚和军阀。和他们已有瓜葛，或想有瓜葛的，笔下便往往笑迷迷，向大家表示和气，然而有远见，梦中又害怕铁锤和镰刀，因此也不敢分明恭维现在的主子，于是在这里留着一点朦胧。和他们瓜葛已断，或则并无瓜葛，走向大众去的，本可以毫无顾忌地说话了，但笔下即使雄纠纠，对大家显英雄，会忘却了他们的指挥刀的傻子是究竟不多的，这里也就留着一点朦胧。于是想要朦胧而终于透漏色彩的，想显色彩而终于不免朦胧的，便都在同地同时出现了。
However, all kinds of publications, no matter how different the wording, have one thing in common, that is: they are a little hazy. This hazy birthplace, from my point of view,—— although it is Feng Naichao's so-called "drunken eyes" - there are still bureaucrats and warlords who are loved and hated. If you already have something to do with them, or want to have something to do with them, your pen will often laugh and show kindness to everyone, but you have a vision, and you are afraid of hammers and sickles in your dreams, so you don't dare to compliment your current master clearly, so you keep a little hazy here. Those who have nothing to do with them, or have nothing to do with them, and go to the public, could have spoken without scruples, but even if the pen is entangled and heroic to everyone, there are not many fools who will forget their command of the knife, and there is a little haze here. So those who want to be hazy and finally reveal the color, and those who want to show color but finally can't help but be hazy, all appear in the same place at the same time.其实朦胧也不关怎样紧要。便在最革命的国度里，文艺方面也何尝不带些朦胧。然而革命者决不怕批判自己，他知道得很清楚，他们敢于明言。惟有中国特别，知道跟着人称托尔斯泰为“卑汙的说教人”了，而对于中国“目前的情状”，却只觉得在“事实上，社会各方面亦正受着乌云密布的势力的支配”，连他的“剥去政府的暴力，裁判行政的喜剧的假面”的勇气的几分之一也没有；知道人道主义不彻底了，但当“杀人如草不闻声”的时候，连人道主义式的抗争也没有。剥去和抗争，也不过是“咬文嚼字”，并非“直接行动”。我并不希望做文章的人去直接行动，我知道做文章的人是大概只能做文章的。
In fact, it doesn't matter what it is about being hazy. Even in the most revolutionary country, literature and art are not a little hazy. However, revolutionaries are never afraid to criticize themselves, they know it very well, they dare to speak out. Only China is special and knows how to call Tolstoy a "vile preacher", but for China's "current situation", it only feels that "in fact, all aspects of society are also under the control of dark clouds", and not even a fraction of his courage to "strip away the violence of the government and the comedy of the adjudication of the administration"; I know that humanitarianism is not thorough, but when "killing people is silent", there is not even a humanitarian resistance. Stripping and fighting is just "chewing words", not "direct action". I don't want the person who makes the article to act directly, I know that the person who makes the article can probably only make the article.可惜略迟了一点，创造社前年招股本，去年请律师，今年才揭起“革命文学”的旗子，复活的批评家成仿吾总算离开守护“艺术之宫”的职掌，要去“获得大众”，并且给革命文学家“保障最后的胜利”了。这飞跃也可以说是必然的。弄文艺的人们大抵敏感，时时也感到，而且防着自己的没落，如漂浮在大海里一般，拚命向各处抓攫。二十世纪以来的表现主义，踏踏主义，什么什么主义的此兴彼衰，便是这透露的消息。现在则已是大时代，动摇的时代，转换的时代，中国以外，阶级的对立大抵已经十分锐利化，农工大众日日显得着重，倘要将自己从没落救出，当然应该向他们去了。何况“呜呼！小资产阶级原有两个灵魂。……”虽然也可以向资产阶级去，但也能够向无产阶级去的呢。
Unfortunately, it was a little late, the prospectus of the Creation Society the year before last, hired a lawyer last year, and only unveiled the banner of "revolutionary literature" this year, and the resurrected critic Cheng Fangwu finally left the responsibility of guarding the "palace of art" to "win the public" and "guarantee the final victory" for the revolutionary writers. This leap can also be said to be inevitable. People who engage in literature and art are mostly sensitive, and they always feel it, and they are guarding against their own decline, as if they are floating in the sea, desperately grabbing everywhere. The rise and fall of expressionism, treadflem, and other isms since the twentieth century is the news revealed. Now it is a great era, an era of wavering, an era of transformation, outside of China, the class antagonism has probably become very sharp, and the peasants and workers are paying attention to it every day. What's more, "Oh! The petty bourgeoisie originally had two souls. ...... "Although you can go to the bourgeoisie, you can also go to the proletariat."这类事情，中国还在萌芽，所以见得新奇，须做《从文学革命到革命文学》那样的大题目，但在工业发达，贫富悬隔的国度里，却已是平常的事情。或者因为看准了将来的天下，是劳动者的天下，跑过去了；或者因为倘帮强者，宁帮弱者，跑过去了；或者两样都有，错综地作用着，跑过去了。也可以说，或者因为恐怖，或者因为良心。成仿吾教人克服小资产阶级根性，拉“大众”来作“给与”和“维持”的材料，文章完了，却正留下一个不小的问题：
This kind of thing is still in its infancy in China, so it is novel to see and must do a big topic like "From Literary Revolution to Revolutionary Literature", but in a country with developed industry and a gap between the rich and the poor, it is already a common thing. Or because they saw the future world, which was the world of workers, they ran over; Or because if you help the strong, you would rather help the weak and run over; Or both, intricately functioning, running over. It can also be said that it is either because of horror or because of conscience. Cheng Fangwu taught people to overcome the petty-bourgeois roots and pull the "masses" to make materials for "giving" and "maintaining", but the article is over, but it is leaving a big problem:倘若难于“保障最后的胜利”，你去不去呢？
If it is difficult to "guarantee the final victory", will you go?这实在还不如在成仿吾的祝贺之下，也从今年产生的《文化批判》上的李初梨的文章，索性主张无产阶级文学，但无须无产者自己来写；无论出身是什么阶级，无论所处是什么环境，只要“以无产阶级的意识，产生出来的一种的斗争的文学”就是，直截爽快得多了。但他一看见“以趣味为中心”的可恶的“语丝派”的人名就不免曲折，仍旧“要问甘人君，鲁迅是第几阶级的人？”
This is really not as good as under Cheng Fangwu's congratulations, and from Li Chuli's article in "Cultural Criticism" produced this year, he simply advocated proletarian literature, but there was no need for the proletarians to write it themselves; No matter what class you come from or what environment you are in, as long as "a kind of literature of struggle is produced with the consciousness of the proletariat", it is much more straightforward and refreshing. But as soon as he saw the names of the hateful "Yusi School" who were "interest-centered", he couldn't help but twist and turn, and still "I want to ask Gan Renjun, what class of people is Lu Xun?" ”我的阶级已由成仿吾判定：“他们所矜持的是‘闲暇，闲暇，第三个闲暇’；他们是代表着有闲的资产阶级，或者睡在鼓里的小资产阶级。……如果北京的乌烟瘴气不用十万两无烟火药炸开的时候，他们也许永远这样过活的罢。”
My class has been judged by Cheng Fangwu: "What they hold is 'leisure, leisure, the third leisure'; they represent the idle bourgeoisie, or the petty bourgeoisie sleeping in the dark." …… If Beijing's smoky miasma didn't explode without 100,000 taels of smokeless gunpowder, they might live like this forever. ”我们的批判者才将创造社的功业写出，加以“否定的否定”，要去“获得大众”的时候，便已梦想“十万两无烟火药”，并且似乎要将我挤进“资产阶级”去（因为“有闲就是有钱”云），我倒颇也觉得危险了。后来看见李初梨说：“我以为一个作家，不管他是第一第二……第百第千阶级的人，他都可以参加无产阶级文学运动；不过我们先要审察他们的动机。……”这才有些放心，但可虑的是对于我仍然要问阶级。“有闲便是有钱”；倘使无钱，该是第四阶级，可以“参加无产阶级文学运动”了罢，但我知道那时又要问“动机”。总之，最要紧是“获得无产阶级的阶级意识”，——这回可不能只是“获得大众”便算完事了。横竖缠不清，最好还是让李初梨去“由艺术的武器到武器的艺术”，让成仿吾去坐在半租界里积蓄“十万两无烟火药”，我自己是照旧讲“趣味”。
When our critics wrote about the achievements of the Creation Society and gave it "negative negation", when they wanted to "gain the masses", they already dreamed of "100,000 taels of smokeless gunpowder", and seemed to squeeze me into the "bourgeoisie" (because "free is rich"), and I also felt that it was dangerous. Later, when I saw Li Chuli, he said: "I thought a writer, no matter if he was the first or second...... people of the hundredth and thousandth classes can participate in the proletarian literary movement; But let's first examine their motives. ...... "This is a little reassuring, but what worries me is that I still have to ask about class." "If you have leisure, you will have money"; If there is no money, it should be the fourth class and can "participate in the proletarian literary movement", but I know that at that time I have to ask about "motive". In short, the most important thing is to "gain the class consciousness of the proletariat",—— this time it cannot just "gain the masses" and be done. It is best to let Li Chuli go "from the weapon of art to the art of weapons", and let Cheng Fangwu sit in the semi-concession to accumulate "100,000 taels of smokeless gunpowder", and I myself am still talking about "fun".那成仿吾的“闲暇，闲暇，第三个闲暇”的切齿之声，在我是觉得有趣的。因为我记得曾有人批评我的小说，说是“第一个是冷静，第二个是冷静，第三个还是冷静”，“冷静”并不算好批判，但不知怎地竟像一板斧劈着了这位革命的批评家的记忆中枢似的，从此“闲暇”也有三个了。倘有四个，连《小说旧闻钞》也不写，或者只有两个，见得比较地忙，也许可以不至于被“奥伏赫变”（“除掉”的意思，Aufheben的创造派的译音，但我不解何以要译得这么难写，在第四阶级，一定比照描一个原文难）罢，所可惜的是偏偏是三个。但先前所定的不“努力表现自己”之罪，大约总该也和成仿吾的“否定的否定”，一同勾消了。
The sound of "leisure, leisure, the third leisure" that imitates me is interesting to me. Because I remember someone criticizing my novel, saying that "the first is calm, the second is calm, and the third is still calm", "calm" is not easy to criticize, but somehow it was like an axe that cut the memory center of this revolutionary critic, and since then there have been three "leisure". If there are four, even the "Novel Old Banknotes" are not written, or there are only two, and they are relatively busy, they may not be "Aufheben" (meaning "get rid of", the translation of Aufheben's creationism, but I don't understand why it is so difficult to translate, in the fourth class, it must be more difficult than describing the original text), but unfortunately there are three. However, the previously determined crime of not "trying to express oneself" should probably be erased together with Cheng Fangwu's "negative negation".创造派“为革命而文学”，所以仍旧要文学，文学是现在最紧要的一点，因为将“由艺术的武器，到武器的艺术”，一到“武器的艺术”的时候，便正如“由批判的武器，到用武器的批判”的时候一般，世界上有先例，“徘徊者变成同意者，反对者变成徘徊者”了。
Literature is the most important point now, because when it comes to "from the weapon of art to the art of weapons", it is like the time of "from the weapon of criticism to the criticism of the use of weapons", there is a precedent in the world, "the prowler becomes the agreer, and the opponent becomes the prowler".但即刻又有一点不小的问题：为什么不就到“武器的艺术”呢？
But there is a big question right now: why not go to "The Art of Weapons"?这也很像“有产者差来的苏秦的游说”。但当现在“无产者未曾从有产者意识解放以前”，这问题是总须起来的，不尽是资产阶级的退兵或反攻的毒计。因为这极彻底而勇猛的主张，同时即含有可疑的萌芽了。那解答只好是这样：
This is also very similar to "Su Qin's lobbying sent by the producer". But now "before the liberation of the proletariat from the consciousness of the proletariat", this problem must always arise, and it is not all a poisonous plan of the bourgeoisie to withdraw troops or counterattack. Because this is an extremely thorough and courageous proposition, it also contains suspicious germs. The answer has to be this:因为那边正有“武器的艺术”，所以这边只能“艺术的武器”。
Because there is "art of weapons" over there, there can only be "weapons of art" here.这艺术的武器，实在不过是不得已，是从无抵抗的幻影脱出，坠入纸战斗的新梦里去了。但革命的艺术家，也只能以此维持自己的勇气，他只能这样。倘他牺牲了他的艺术，去使理论成为事实，就要怕不成其为革命的艺术家。因此必然的应该坐在无产阶级的阵营中，等待“武器的铁和火”出现。这出现之际，同时拿出“武器的艺术”来。倘那时铁和火的革命者已有一个“闲暇”，能静听他们自叙的功勋，那也就成为一样的战士了。最后的胜利。然而文艺是还是批判不清的，因为社会有许多层，有先进国的史实在；要取目前的例，则《文化批判》已经拖住Upton Sinclair，《创造月刊》也背了Vigny在“开步走”了。
This weapon of art is really just a last resort, escaping from the phantom without resistance and falling into a new dream of paper battle. But the revolutionary artist can only maintain his courage in this way, and he can only do this. If he sacrifices his art to make theory a fact, he must be afraid that he will not become a revolutionary artist. Therefore, it is inevitable to sit in the camp of the proletariat and wait for the emergence of "iron and fire of weapons". This came at the same time to take out the "art of weapons". If the revolutionaries of iron and fire already had a "leisure" at that time and could listen to their self-recounting of their merits, they would have become the same soldiers. The final victory. However, literature and art are still unclear, because there are many layers of society, and there are historical facts of advanced countries; To take the current example, Cultural Criticism has dragged Upton Sinclair, and Creation Monthly has also backed Vigny in "starting to walk".倘使那时不说“不革命便是反革命”，革命的迟滞是“语丝派”之所为，给人家扫地也还可以得到半块面包吃，我便将于八时间工作之暇，坐在黑房里，续钞我的《小说旧闻钞》，有几国的文艺也还是要谈的，因为我喜欢。所怕的只是成仿吾们真像符拉特弥尔·伊力支一般，居然“获得大众”；那么，他们大约更要飞跃又飞跃，连我也会升到贵族或皇帝阶级里，至少也总得充军到北极圈内去了。译著的书都禁止，自然不待言。
If I hadn't said at that time that "no revolution is counter-revolution", and that the delay of the revolution was the work of the "Yusi School", and I could still get half a piece of bread to eat if I swept the floor, I would sit in a dark room in my spare time from work for eight hours, renew my "Novel Old News Banknotes", and the literature and art of several countries would still have to be discussed, because I liked it. What I am afraid of is that we are really like Vlatmir Ilizhi, and we actually "gain the masses"; Then, they will probably leap and leap, and even I will rise to the aristocracy or emperor class, or at least I will have to be conscripted into the Arctic Circle. Translated books are banned, so naturally it goes without saying.不远总有一个大时代要到来。现在创造派的革命文学家和无产阶级作家虽然不得已而玩着“艺术的武器”，而有着“武器的艺术”的非革命武学家也玩起这玩意儿来了，有几种笑迷迷的期刊便是这。他们自己也不大相信手里的“武器的艺术”了罢。那么，这一种最高的艺术——“武器的艺术”现在究竟落在谁的手里了呢？只要寻得到，便知道中国的最近的将来。
There will always be a big era coming in the near future. Although the revolutionary writers and proletarian writers of the Creationist school have no choice but to play with the "weapons of art", the non-revolutionary martial artists who have the "art of weapons" have also played this thing, and there are several journals that laugh at it. They themselves don't believe in the "art of weapons" in their hands. So, who is this highest art, the "art of weapons", in the hands of now? As long as you can find it, you will know China's recent future.二月二十三日，上海。
February 23, Shanghai.

看司徒乔君的画

看司徒乔君的画

看司徒乔君的画

Look at the painting of Situ Qiaojun我知道司徒乔君的姓名还在四五年前，那时是在北京，知道他不管功课，不寻导师，以他自己的力，终日在画古庙，土山，破屋，穷人，乞丐……。
I know that Situ Qiaojun's name was still four or five years ago, when he was in Beijing, and I knew that he didn't care about his homework, didn't look for a mentor, and with his own strength, he was painting ancient temples, earthen hills, dilapidated houses, poor people, beggars, ...... all day long.这些自然应该最会打动南来的游子的心。在黄埃漫天的人间，一切都成土色，人于是和天然争斗，深红和绀碧的栋宇，白石的栏干，金的佛像，肥厚的棉袄，紫糖色脸，深而多的脸上的皱纹……。凡这些，都在表示人们对于天然并不降服，还在争斗。
These should naturally touch the hearts of wanderers from the south the most. In the world full of yellow dust, everything becomes earthy, and people fight with nature, with crimson and azure buildings, white stone railings, golden Buddha statues, fat padded jackets, purple sugar faces, and deep and many wrinkles on the face....... All of this shows that people do not surrender to nature and are still fighting.在北京的展览会里，我已经见过作者表示了中国人的这样的对于天然的倔强的魂灵。我曾经得到他的一幅“四个警察和一个女人”。现在还记得一幅“耶稣基督”，有一个女性的口，在他荆冠上接吻。
At the exhibition in Beijing, I have seen the author express the stubborn soul of the Chinese towards nature. I once got one of his paintings of "four policemen and a woman". I still remember a picture of "Jesus Christ" with a woman's mouth kissing on his crown.这回在上海相见，我便提出质问：
When we met in Shanghai this time, I asked:“那女性是谁？”
"Who is that woman?"“天使，”他回答说。
"Angel," he replied.这回答不能使我满足。
This answer does not satisfy me.因为这回我发见了作者对于北方的景物——人们和天然苦斗而成的景物——又加以争斗，他有时将他自己所固有的明丽，照破黄埃。至少，是使我觉得有“欢喜”（Joy）的萌芽，如胁下的矛伤，尽管流血，而荆冠上却有天使——照他自己所说——的嘴唇。无论如何，这是胜利。
Because this time I discovered that the author fought again with the scenery of the north - the scenery formed by the struggle between people and nature, and he sometimes broke through the yellow dust with his own inherent brightness. At least, it was the sprout that made me feel that there was a spear wound under the rib, and in spite of the bleeding, there was an angel on the crown of the thorn, as he himself said, the lips. In any case, it was a victory.后来所作的爽朗的江浙风景，热烈的广东风景，倒是作者的本色。和北方风景相对照，可以知道他挥写之际，盖谂熟而高兴，如逢久别的故人。但我却爱看黄埃，因为由此可见这抱着明丽之心的作者，怎样为人和天然的苦斗的古战场所惊，而自己也参加了战斗。
The hearty scenery of Jiangsu and Zhejiang and the warm scenery of Guangdong made later are the author's true colors. Compared with the northern scenery, it can be seen that when he writes, he is familiar and happy, like an old friend who has been away for a long time. But I love to watch Huang Dust, because it shows how this author with a bright heart was shocked by the ancient battlefield of human and natural struggle, and he himself participated in the battle.中国全土必须沟通。倘将来不至于割据，则青年的背着历史而竭力拂去黄埃的中国色彩，我想，首先是这样的。
All of China must communicate. If there is no separatism in the future, then young people will try their best to brush off the Chinese color of yellow dust with history on their backs, I think, first of all.一九二八年三月十四日夜，于上海。
On the night of March 14, 1928, in Shanghai.

在上海的鲁迅启事

在上海的鲁迅启事

在上海的鲁迅启事

Lu Xun in Shanghai大约一个多月以前，从开明书店转到M女士的一封信，其中有云：
About a month ago, a letter from Kaiming Bookstore to Ms. M said:“自一月十日在杭州孤山别后，多久没有见面了。前蒙允时常通讯及指导……。”
"Since we parted in Gushan, Hangzhou on January 10, we haven't seen each other for a long time. Previously, Meng Yun often corresponded and guided ....... ”我便写了一封回信，说明我不到杭州，已将十年，决不能再孤山和别人作别，所以她所看见的，是另一人。两礼拜前，蒙M女士和两位曾经听过我的讲义的同学见访，三面证明，知道在孤山者，确是别一“鲁迅”。但M女士又给我看题在曼殊师坟旁的四句诗：
I wrote a reply letter, explaining that I had been in Hangzhou for ten years, and I must not say goodbye to others again, so what she saw was another person. Two weeks ago, Ms. Meng M and two classmates who had listened to my handouts visited, proving from three sides that those who knew in Gushan were indeed different "Lu Xun". But Ms. M showed me four poems inscribed next to Master Manshu's grave:“我来君寂居，唤醒谁氏魂？”
"I came to your lonely residence to awaken whose soul is it?"飘萍山林迹，待到它年随公去。
The traces of the mountains and forests will be gone with you until the next year.鲁迅游杭　吊老友
Lu Xun traveled to Hangzhou to hang his old friend曼殊句
Manshu sentence“一，一〇，十七年。”
"One, ten, seventeen years."我于是写信去打听寓杭的H君，前天得到回信，说确有人见过这样的一个人，就在城外教书，自说姓周，曾做一本《彷徨》，销了八万部，但自己不满意，不远将有更好的东西发表云云。
I then wrote to inquire about Mr. H, who lived in Hangzhou, and received a reply the day before yesterday, saying that someone had indeed seen such a person, teaching outside the city, claiming to be surnamed Zhou, and had made a book "Wandering", which sold 80,000 copies, but he was not satisfied, and there would be better things to be published in the near future.中国另有一个本姓周或不姓周，而要姓周，也名鲁迅，我是毫没法子的。但看他自叙，有大半和我一样，却有些使我为难。那首诗的不大高明，不必说了，而硬替人向曼殊说“待到它年随公去”，也未免太专制。“去”呢，自然总有一天要“去”的，然而去“随”曼殊，却连我自己也梦里都没有想到过。但这还是小事情，尤其不敢当的，倒是什么对别人豫约“指导”之类……。
There is another person in China whose original surname is Zhou or not, but who wants to be surnamed Zhou, also known as Lu Xun, I have no way. But looking at his self-description, most of them are the same as me, but some of them make it difficult for me. That poem is not very clever, needless to say, and it is too authoritarian to say to Manshu "Stay until it is with you". As for "going", naturally one day I will "go", but going to "follow" Manshu has never even dreamed of myself. But this is still a small thing, especially not daring to do it, but what is the ...... of "guidance" to others.我自到上海以来，虽有几种报纸说我“要开书店”，或“游了杭州”。其实我是书店也没有开，杭州也没有去，不过仍旧躲在楼上译一点书。因为我不会拉车，也没有学制无烟火药，所以只好这样用笔来混饭吃。因为这样在混饭吃，于是忽被推为“前驱”，忽被挤为“落伍”，那还可以说是自作自受，管他娘的去。但若再有一个“鲁迅”，替我说教，代我题诗，而结果还要我一个人来担负，那可真不能“有闲，有闲，第三个有闲”，连译书的工夫也要没有了。
Since I arrived in Shanghai, although several newspapers have said that I "want to open a bookstore" or "traveled to Hangzhou". In fact, I didn't open a bookstore, and I didn't go to Hangzhou, but I still hid upstairs to translate some books. Because I can't pull a cart and don't have a smokeless gunpowder system, I have to use a pen to mix food. Because of this, he was suddenly pushed as a "pioneer" and suddenly squeezed out as "outdated", which can be said to be self-inflicted and fucking. But if there is another "Lu Xun" who preaches for me and writes poems on my behalf, and the result is that I have to bear it alone, then it really can't be "idle, there is leisure, and the third one is free", and there will be no time to translate the book.所以这回再登一个启事。要声明的是：我之外，今年至少另外还有一个叫“鲁迅”的在，但那些个“鲁迅”的言动，和我也曾印过一本《彷徨》而没有销到八万本的鲁迅无干。
So this time I posted another notice. What I want to declare is: In addition to me, there is at least another person named "Lu Xun" this year, but the words and actions of those "Lu Xun" have nothing to do with Lu Xun, who also printed a copy of "Wandering" but did not sell 80,000 copies.三月二十七日，在上海。
March 27, in Shanghai.

文艺与革命

文艺与革命

文艺与革命

Literature and Revolution来信
Letter鲁迅先生：
Mr. Lu Xun:在《新闻报》的《学海》栏内，读到你底一篇《文学和政治的歧途》的讲演，解释文学者和政治者之背离不合，其原因在政治者以得到目前的安宁为满足，这满足，在感觉锐敏的文学者看去，一样是胡涂不彻底，表示失望，终于遭政治家之忌，潦倒一生，站不住脚。我觉得这是世界各国成为定例的事实。最近又在《语丝》上读到《民众主义和天才》和你底《“醉眼”中的朦胧》两篇文字，确实提醒了此刻现在做着似是而非的平凡主义和革命文学的迷梦的人们之朦胧不少，至少在我是这样。
In the "Learning Sea" column of the "Newspaper", I read your last lecture "The Wrong Path of Literature and Politics", explaining the divergence between literary scholars and politicians, the reason for which is that politicians are satisfied with the current peace, and this satisfaction, in the eyes of sensitive literary scholars, is also nonsense and incompleteness, expressing disappointment, and finally being taboo by politicians, depressed all his life, untenable. I think this is a fact that has become a rule in countries around the world. Recently, I read two texts on "Yusi" and "The Haze in the Drunken Eyes", which really reminded me that there are many people who are now dreaming of plausible mediocrity and revolutionary literature, at least for me.我相信文艺思潮无论变到怎样，而艺术本身有无限的价值等级存在，这是不得否认的。这是说，文艺之流，从最初的什么主义到现在的什么主义，所写着的内容，如何不同，而要有精刻熟练的才技，造成一篇优美无媲的文艺作品，终是一样。一条长江，上流和下流所呈现的形相，虽然不同，而长江还是一条长江。我们看它那下流的广大深缓，足以灌田亩，驶巨舶，便忘记了给它形成这广大深缓的来源，已觉糊涂到透顶。若再断章取义，说：此刻现在，我们所要的是长江的下流，因为可以利用，增加我们的财富，上流的长江可以不要，有着简直无用。这是完全以经济价值去评断长江本身整个的价值了。这种评断，出于着眼在经济价值的商人之口，不足为怪；出于着眼在艺术价值的文艺家之口，未免昏乱至于无可救药了。因为拿艺术价值去评断长江之上流，未始没有意义，或竟比之下流较为自然奇伟，也未可知。
I believe that no matter how the literary and artistic trends change, it is undeniable that art itself has an infinite hierarchy of value. This means that the content of literature and art, from the initial doctrine to the current doctrine, is different, and it is necessary to have precise and skilled talents to create a beautiful and unrivaled literary and artistic work, which is ultimately the same. A Yangtze River, although the upstream and downstream appearances are different, and the Yangtze River is still a Yangtze River. When we look at its vast and deep downstream, which is enough to irrigate the fields and sail the giant ship, we forget to form the source of this vast depth and slowness for it, and we feel confused to the top. If we take it out of context and say: At this moment, what we want is the lower reaches of the Yangtze River, because it can be used to increase our wealth, and the upstream Yangtze River can be dispensed without, which is simply useless. This is completely based on economic value to judge the entire value of the Yangtze River itself. This judgment is not surprising from the mouth of a businessman who focuses on economic value; From the mouth of writers and artists who focus on artistic value, it is inevitable that it will be confused to the point of hopelessness. Because it is meaningless to judge the upper reaches of the Yangtze River by artistic value, or it is more natural and magnificent than the lower reaches, and it is unknown.真与美是构成一件成功的艺术品的两大要素。而构成这真与美至于最高等级，便是造成一件艺术品，使它含有最高级的艺术价值，那便非赖最高级的天才不可了。如果这个论断可以否认，那末我们为什么称颂荷马，但丁，沙士比亚和歌德呢？我们为什么不能创造和他们同等的文艺作品呢，我们也有观察现象的眼，有运用文思的脑，有握管伸纸的手？
Truth and beauty are the two elements that make up a successful work of art. And to constitute this truth and beauty as for the highest level is to create a work of art, so that it contains the highest artistic value, and that must rely on the highest genius. If this assertion can be denied, then why do we praise Homer, Dante, Shakespeare and Goethe? Why can't we create literary and artistic works equal to them, we also have eyes to observe phenomena, brains to use literary thought, and hands to hold pipes and stretch paper?在现在，离开人生说艺术，固然有躲在象牙塔里忘记时代之嫌；而离开艺术说人生，那便是政治家和社会运动家的本相，他们无须谈艺术了。由此说，热心革命的人，尽可投入革命的群众里去，冲锋也好，做后方的工作也好，何必拿文艺作那既稳当又革命的勾当？
Nowadays, leaving life to talk about art is certainly suspicious of hiding in an ivory tower and forgetting the times; And talking about life without art is the true nature of politicians and social activists, and they don't need to talk about art. In this way, people who are enthusiastic about revolution can devote themselves to the revolutionary masses, whether they are charging or doing work in the rear, why bother with literature and art as a stable and revolutionary deed?我觉得许多提倡革命文学的所谓革命文艺家，也许是把表现人生这句话误解了。他们也许以为十九世纪以来的文艺，所表现的都是现实的人生，在那里面，含有显著的时代精神。文艺家自惊醒了所谓“象牙之塔”的梦以后，都应该跟着时代环境奔走；离开时代而创造文艺，便是独善主义或贵族主义的文艺了。他们看到易卜生之伟大，看到陀斯妥以夫斯奇的深刻，尤其看到俄国革命时期内的作家叶遂宁和戈理基们的热切动人；便以为现在此后的文艺家都须拿当时的生活现象来诅咒，刻划，予社会以改造革命的机会，使文艺变为民众的和革命的文艺。生在所谓“世纪末”的现代社会里面的人，除非是神经麻木了的，未始不会感到苦闷和悲哀。文艺家终比一般人感觉锐敏一点。摆在他们眼前的既是这么一个社会，蕴在他们心中的当有怎么一种情绪呢！他们有表现或刻划的才技，他们便要如实地写了出来，便无意地成为这时代的社会的呼声了。然而他们还是忠于自己，忠于自己的艺术，忠于自己的情知。易卜生被称颂为改革社会的先驱，陀思妥以夫斯奇被称为人道主义的极致者，还须赖他们自己特有的精妙的才技，经几个真知灼见的批评者为之阐扬而后可。然而，真能懂得他们的艺术的，究竟还是少数。至于叶遂宁是碰死在自己的希望碑上不必说了，戈理基呢，听人说，已有点灰色了。这且不说。便是以艺术本身而论，他何常不崇尚真切精到的才技？我曾看到他的一首讥笑那不切实的诗人的诗。况且我们以艺术价值去衡量他的作品，是否他已是了不得的作家了，究竟还是疑问呵。
I think many so-called revolutionary writers and artists who advocate revolutionary literature may have misunderstood the phrase "expressing life." They may think that literature and art since the 19th century have expressed real life, and in it, there is a significant spirit of the times. Since the so-called "ivory tower" dream woke up, writers and artists should follow the environment of the times; Leaving the times to create literature and art is the literature and art of individualism or aristocracy. They saw the greatness of Ibsen, the profundity of Dostoevsky, and especially the eagerness and moving of the writers Ye Suining and Goliki during the Russian Revolution; It is thought that now and future writers and artists must use the phenomena of life at that time to curse, portray, and give society the opportunity to transform the revolution, so that literature and art can become the people's and revolutionary literature and art. People born in the so-called "end of the century" modern society, unless their nerves are numb, will not feel distressed and sad. Writers and artists are finally a little more sensitive than ordinary people. What is in front of them is such a society, what kind of emotion is contained in their hearts! If they have the talent to express or portray, they have to write it truthfully, and they will unintentionally become the voice of society in this era. Yet they are still loyal to themselves, to their art, and to their own feelings. Ibsen was hailed as a pioneer of social reform, and Dostow Evsky was known as the ultimate of humanism, but he had to rely on their own unique and exquisite talents, which were expounded by several insightful critics. However, there are still a few who can really understand their art. As for Ye Suining, needless to say, he died on his own monument of hope, as for Gorici, I heard that it was a little gray. Not to mention. In terms of art itself, why doesn't he often advocate real and refined talents? I once saw one of his poems ridiculing the unrealistic poet. Moreover, if we measure his works by artistic value, whether he is already a great writer is still questionable.实在说，文艺家是不会抛弃社会的，他们是站在民众里面的。有一位否认有条件的文艺批评者，对于泰奴（Taine）的时间条件，认为不确，其理由是：文艺家是看前五十年。我想，看前五十年的文艺家，还是站在那时候，以那时候的生活环境做地盘而出发，所以他毕竟是那时候的民众之一员，而能在朦胧平安中看出残缺和破败。他们便以熟练的才技，写出这种残缺和破败，于艺术上达到高级的价值为止，在他们自己的能力范围之内。在创造时，他们也许只顾到艺术的精细微妙，并没想到如何激动民众，予民众以强烈的刺激，使他们血脉偾张，而从事于革命。
To be honest, writers and artists will not abandon society, they stand among the people. There is a literary critic who denies the condition of the condition, and thinks that Taine's time conditions are inaccurate, on the grounds that writers and artists look at the first fifty years. I think that the writers and artists of the first fifty years still stood at that time and started from the living environment at that time, so after all, he was a member of the people at that time, and he could see the incompleteness and dilapidation in the hazy peace. They write this incompleteness and dilapidation with skillful talent, within their own ability until they reach a high artistic value. When creating, they may only care about the subtleties of art, and do not think about how to excite the people, give them strong stimulation, make their blood flow, and engage in revolution.我们如果承认艺术有独立的无限的价值，艺术家有完成艺术本身最终目的之必要，那末我们便不能而且不应该撇开艺术价值去指摘艺术家的态度，这和拿艺术家的现实行为去评断他的艺术作品者一样可笑。波特来耳的诗并不因他的狂放而稍减其价值。浅薄者许要咒他为人群的蛇蝎，却不知道他底厌弃人生，正是他的渴慕人生之反一面的表白。我们平常讥刺一个人，还须观察到他的深处，否则便见得浮薄可鄙。至于拿了自己的似是而非的标准，既没有看到他的深处，又抛弃了衡量艺术价值的尺度，便无的放矢地攻刺一个忠于艺术的人，真的糊涂呢还是别有用意！这不过使我们觉到此刻现在的中国文艺界真不值一谈，因为以批评成名而又是创造自许的所谓文艺家者，还是这样地崇奉功利主义呵！
If we admit that art has independent and infinite value, and that it is necessary for the artist to fulfill the ultimate purpose of art itself, then we cannot and should not set aside the value of art to criticize the artist's attitude, which is as ridiculous as judging the artist's work of art by his actual behavior. Portreil's poems do not diminish their value because of his wildness. The shallow person wants to curse him as a snake and scorpion of the crowd, but he doesn't know that he hates life, which is the confession of his desire for the opposite side of life. We usually ridicule a person, but we must also observe the depths of him, otherwise we will see it superficial and contemptible. As for taking his own plausible standard, he neither saw his depths, nor abandoned the scale of measuring the value of art, and attacked a person who is loyal to art aimlessly. This only makes us feel that the current Chinese literary and artistic circles are really not worth talking about at this moment, because the so-called writers and artists who are famous for their criticism and are self-proclaimed still advocate utilitarianism like this!我——自然不是什么文艺家——喜欢读些高级的文艺作品，颇多古旧的东西，很有人说这是迷旧的时代摈弃者。他们告诉我，现在是民众文艺当世了，崭新的专为第四阶级玩味的文艺当世了。我为之愕然者久之，便问他们：民众文艺怎样写法？文艺家用什么手段，使民众都能玩味？现在民众文艺已产生了若干部？革了命之后的民众能够赏识所谓民众文艺者已有几分之几？莫非现在有许多新《三字经》，或新《神童诗》出版了么？我真不知民众化的文艺如何化法，化在内容呢，那我们本有表现民众生活的文艺了的；化在技艺上吧，那末一首国民革命歌尽够充数了，你听：“国民革命成功……齐欢唱……”多么宏壮而明白呵！我们为什么还要别的文艺？他们不能明确地回答，而我也糊涂到而今。此刻现在，才从《民众主义与天才》一文里得了答案，是：
I—naturally not a writer and artist—like to read some high-end literary and artistic works, a lot of old things, and many people say that this is an outcast of the old times. They told me that it is now the world of popular literature and art, and a new world of literature and art specially designed for the fourth class. I was stunned for a long time, and then I asked them: How to write people's literature and art? What means do writers and artists use to make the people playful? Now how many popular literature and art have been produced? How many of the people after the revolution can appreciate the so-called popular literature and art? Could it be that there are many new "Three Character Classics" or new "Prodigy Poems" published? I really don't know how popular literature and art are transformed into laws and contents, then we have literature and art that expresses people's lives; Let's turn it into skills, then the last national revolution song is enough, you listen: "The national revolution is successful...... Qi Huan sang ...... "How magnificent and clear!" Why do we need other literature and art? They couldn't answer clearly, and I was confused to this day. At this moment, I just got the answer from the article "Populism and Genius", which is:“无论民众艺术如何地主张艺术的普遍性或平等性，但艺术作品无论如何自有无限的价值等差，这个事实是不可否认的。所谓普遍性啦，平等性啦这一类话，意思不外乎是说艺术的内容是关于广众的民间生活或关于人生的普遍事象，而有这种内容的艺术，始可以供给一般民众的玩味。艺术备有像这种意味的普遍性和平等性不待说是不可以否认的，然而艺术作品既有无限的价值等级存在。以上，那些比较高级的艺术品，好，就可以说多少能够供给一般民众的玩味，若要说一切人都能够一样的精细，一样的深刻，一样的微妙——换句话说，绝对平等的来玩味它，那无论如何是不得有的事实。”
"No matter how much popular art claims the universality or equality of art, the fact that works of art have infinite value is undeniable. The so-called universality and equality mean nothing more than that the content of art is about the folk life of the masses or the general events of life, and art with this content can provide the general public with play. It is undeniable that art has such universality and equality, but works of art have infinite hierarchies of value. If you want to say that everyone can be the same fine, the same profound, the same subtlety—in other words, absolutely equal to play with it, then it is a fact that cannot exist in any case. ”记得有人说过这样的话：最先进的思想只有站在最高层的先进的少数人能够了解，等到这种思想透入群众里去的时候，已经不是先进的思想了。这些话，是告诉我们芸芸众生，到底有一大部分感觉不敏的。世界上有这样的不平等，除了诅咒造物的不公，我们还能怨谁呢？这是事实。如果不是事实，人类的演进史，可以一笔抹杀，而革命也不能发生了。世界文化的推进，全赖少数先觉之冲锋陷阵，如果各个人的聪明才智，都是相等，文化也早就发达到极致了，世界也就大同了，所谓“螺旋式进行”一句话，还不是等于废话？艺术是文化的一部，文化有进退，艺术自不能除外。民众化的艺术，以艺术本身有无限的价值等差来说，简直不能成立。自然，借文艺以革命这梦呓，也终究是一种梦呓罢了！
I remember someone saying this: The most advanced ideas can only be understood by a few advanced people standing at the highest level, and when such ideas penetrate into the masses, they are no longer advanced ideas. These words tell us that there are a large part of all living beings who are insensitive. There is such inequality in the world, who can we blame except curse the injustice of creation? This is a fact. If it were not a fact, the history of human evolution could be erased in one stroke, and revolution could not have happened. If everyone's intelligence is equal, culture has long been developed to the extreme, and the world will be the same. Art is a part of culture, and culture has advances and retreats, and art cannot be excluded. Popular art cannot be established in terms of the infinite value difference of art itself. Naturally, the dream of revolution through literature and art is just a dream after all!以上是我的意思，未知先生以为如何？
The above is what I mean, I don't know what you think?一九二八，三，二五，冬芬。
1928, 3, 25, winter fen.

文艺与革命

回信

文艺与革命

reply冬芬先生：
Mr. Dongfen:我不是批评家，因此也不是艺术家，因为现在要做一个什么家，总非自己或熟人兼做批评不可，没有一伙，是不行的，至少，在现在的上海滩上。因为并非艺术家，所以并不以为艺术特别崇高，正如自己不卖膏药，便不来打拳赞药一样。我以为这不过是一种社会现象，是时代的人生记录，人类如果进步，则无论他所写的是外表，是内心，总要陈旧，以至灭亡的。不过近来的批评家，似乎很怕这两个字，只想在文学上成仙。
I am not a critic, and therefore I am not an artist, because if I want to be a person now, I have to criticize myself or an acquaintance. Because he is not an artist, he does not think that art is particularly noble, just as if he does not sell plasters, he does not come to punch and praise medicine. I thought this was just a social phenomenon, a record of life in the times, and if human beings progressed, no matter what they wrote on the outside or on the inside, they would always become obsolete and even perish. However, critics these days seem to be afraid of these two words and just want to become an immortal in literature.各种主义的名称的勃兴，也是必然的现象。世界上时时有革命，自然会有革命文学。世界上的民众很有些觉醒了，虽然有许多在受难，但也有多少占权，那自然也会有民众文学——说得彻底一点，则第四阶级文学。
The rise of the names of various isms is also an inevitable phenomenon. There are revolutions in the world all the time, and there will naturally be revolutionary literature. The people of the world are very awakened, although many are suffering, but there are also some occupations, so naturally there will be popular literature - to put it more thoroughly, fourth-class literature.中国的批评界怎样的趋势，我却不大了然，也不很注意。就耳目所及，只觉得各专家所用的尺度非常多，有英国美国尺，有德国尺，有俄国尺，有日本尺，自然又有中国尺，或者兼用各种尺。有的说要真正，有的说要斗争，有的说要超时代，有的躲在人背后说几句短短的冷话。还有，是自己摆着文艺批评家的架子，而憎恶别人的鼓吹了创作。倘无创作，将批评什么呢，这是我最所不能懂得他的心肠的。
I don't know much about the trend of Chinese criticism, and I don't pay much attention to it. As far as I can see, I feel that there are many scales used by various experts, including the British and American rulers, the German ruler, the Russian ruler, the Japanese ruler, and naturally the Chinese ruler, or a combination of various rulers. Some say to be real, some say to fight, some say to be ahead of the times, and some hide behind people and say a few short cold words. Also, it is he who puts on the shelf of a literary critic and hates others for advocating creation. If there is no creation, what will be criticized, this is the last thing I can understand his heart.别的此刻不谈。现在所号称革命文学家者，是斗争和所谓超时代。超时代其实就是逃避，倘自己没有正视现实的勇气，又要挂革命的招牌，便自觉地或不自觉地必然地要走入那一条路的。身在现世，怎么离去？这是和说自己用手提着耳朵，就可以离开地球者一样地欺人。社会停滞着，文艺决不能独自飞跃，若在这停滞的社会里居然滋长了，那倒是为这社会所容，已经离开革命，其结果，不过多卖几本刊物，或在大商店的刊物上挣得揭载稿子的机会罢了。
Nothing else at this moment. What is now called revolutionary writers is struggle and the so-called super-era. If you do not have the courage to face reality and want to hang up the sign of revolution, you will consciously or unconsciously inevitably enter that path. In this world, how to leave? This is the same as saying that you can leave the earth with your ears in your hands. If it actually grows in this stagnant society, it is accepted by this society, and it has left the revolution, and the result is just to sell a few more publications, or earn the opportunity to publish manuscripts in the publications of large stores.斗争呢，我倒以为是对的。人被压迫了，为什么不斗争？正人君子者流深怕这一着，于是大骂“偏激”之可恶，以为人人应该相爱，现在被一班坏东西教坏了。他们饱人大约是爱饿人的，但饿人却不爱饱人，黄巢时候，人相食，饿人尚且不爱饿人，这实在无须斗争文学作怪。我是不相信文艺的旋乾转坤的力量的，但倘有人要在别方面应用他，我以为也可以。譬如“宣传”就是。
As for the struggle, I think it's right. People are oppressed, why not fight? The upright gentlemen were deeply afraid of this, so they scolded the hatred of "extreme", thinking that everyone should love each other, but now they have been taught by a group of bad things. They are full of people about love the hungry, but the hungry people do not love the hungry people, when the yellow nest was in the past, people cannibalized, and the hungry people did not love the hungry people, which really did not need to be troubled by struggle literature. I don't believe in the power of literature and art, but if someone wants to apply it in other ways, I think it's okay. For example, "propaganda" is.美国的辛克来儿说：一切文艺是宣传。我们的革命的文学者曾经当作宝贝，用大字印出过，而严肃的批评家又说他是“浅薄的社会主义者”。但我——也浅薄——相信辛克来儿的话。一切文艺，是宣传，只要你一给人看。即使个人主义的作品，一写出，就有宣传的可能，除非你不作文，不开口。那么，用于革命，作为工具的一种，自然也可以的。
Sinclair in the United States said: All literature and art are propaganda. Our revolutionary writers were once used as treasures, printed in large letters, and serious critics called him a "shallow socialist". But I - and shallowly - believed Sinclair's words. All literature and art are propaganda, as long as you show them to others. Even if an individualistic work is written, it has the possibility of publicity, unless you don't write or speak. Then, it can be used for revolution, as a kind of tool, naturally too.但我以为当先求内容的充实和技巧的上达，不必忙于挂招牌。“稻香村”“陆稿荐”，已经不能打动人心了，“皇太后鞋店”的顾客，我看见也并不比“皇后鞋店”里的多。一说“技巧”，革命文学家是又要讨厌的。但我以为一切文艺固是宣传，而一切宣传却并非全是文艺，这正如一切花皆有色（我将白也算作色），而凡颜色未必都是花一样。革命之所以于口号，标语，布告，电报，教科书……之外，要用文艺者，就因为它是文艺。
But I think we should first seek the enrichment of content and the improvement of skills, and we don't have to be busy hanging signs. "Daoxiang Village" and "Lu Manuscript Recommendation" can no longer impress people's hearts, and I see no more customers in the "Empress Dowager Shoe Store" than in the "Queen's Shoe Store". When it comes to "skills", revolutionary writers have to hate it again. But I think that all literature and art are propaganda, but all propaganda is not all literature and art, just like all flowers have color (I count white as color), and all colors are not necessarily flowers. The revolution was carried out in slogans, slogans, proclamations, telegrams, textbooks...... In addition, those who want to use literature and art are because it is literature and art.但中国之所谓革命文学，似乎又作别论。招牌是挂了，却只在吹嘘同伙的文章，而对于目前的暴力和黑暗不敢正视。作品虽然也有些发表了，但往往是拙劣到连报章记事都不如；或则将剧本的动作辞句都推到演员的“昨日的文学家”身上去。那么，剩下来的思想的内容一定是很革命底了罢？我给你看两句冯乃超的剧本的结末的警句：
But China's so-called revolutionary literature seems to be a different story. The signboard is hung, but it is only boasting about the articles of the accomplices, and does not dare to face up to the current violence and darkness. Although some of his works have been published, they are often so clumsy that they are not even as good as newspaper records; Or push the action and phrases of the script to the actor's "yesterday's writer". So, the content of the remaining ideas must be very revolutionary, right? Let me show you two aphorisms at the end of Feng Naichao's script:“野雉：我再不怕黑暗了。
"Wild Pheasant: I'm no longer afraid of the dark.偷儿：我们反抗去！”
Thief: Let's resist! ”四月四日。鲁迅。April 4th. Lu Xun.

扁

扁

扁

flat中国文艺界上可怕的现象，是在尽先输入名词，而并不绍介这名词的函义。
The terrible phenomenon in the Chinese literary and artistic circles is to enter the noun first, but not to introduce the meaning of the term.于是各各以意为之。看见作品上多讲自己，便称之为表现主义；多讲别人，是写实主义；见女郎小腿肚作诗，是浪漫主义；见女郎小腿肚不准作诗，是古典主义；天上掉下一颗头，头上站着一头牛，爱呀，海中央的青霹雳呀……是未来主义……等等。
So each person did it according to their own wishes. When you see more about yourself in your works, you call it expressionism; talking more about others is realism; seeing the girl's calf and composing poetry is romanticism; seeing the girl's calf is not allowed to write poetry, which is classicism; A head fell from the sky, and a cow stood on its head, love, a green thunderbolt in the middle of the sea...... Is it futuristic...... Wait a minute.还要由此生出议论来。这个主义好，那个主义坏……等等。
It also gives rise to discussion. This doctrine is good, that doctrine is bad...... Wait a minute.乡间一向有一个笑谈：两位近视眼要比眼力，无可质证，
There has always been a joke in the countryside: two myopic eyes are better than eyesight, and there is no verifiable.便约定到关帝庙去看这一天新挂的扁额。他们都先从漆匠探得字句。但因为探来的详略不同，只知道大字的那一个便不服，争执起来了，说看见小字的人是说谎的。又无可质证，只好一同探问一个过路的人。那人望了一望，回答道：“什么也没有。扁还没有挂哩。”
So he agreed to go to the Guandi Temple to see the newly hung plaque on this day. They all first found the words from the lacquer craftsman. But because of the slightly different details, the one who only knew the big characters was not convinced and argued, saying that the person who saw the small characters was lying. There was no evidence to prove, so they had to ask a passerby together. The man looked at it and replied, "Nothing." Flat hasn't hung it yet. ”我想，在文艺批评上要比眼力，也总得先有那块扁额挂起来才行。空空洞洞的争，实在只有两面自己心里明白。
I think that in literary and artistic criticism, we must first have that flat forehead to hang up. There are only two sides to the empty dispute, and I really understand it in my heart.四月十日。
April 10th.

路

路

路

road又记起了Gogol做的《巡按使》的故事：
I also remembered the story of "Inspector" made by Gogol:中国也译出过的。一个乡间忽然纷传皇帝使者要来私访了，官员们都很恐怖，在客栈里寻到一个疑似的人，便硬拉来奉承了一通。等到奉承十足之后，那人跑了，而听说使者真到了，全台演了一个哑口无言剧收场。
It has also been translated in China. A country suddenly rumored that the emperor's envoy was coming for a private visit, and the officials were very terrified, and when they found a suspicious person in the inn, they forced them to flatter them. After the flattery was full, the man ran away, and when he heard that the messenger had really arrived, the whole Taiwan staged a dumb and speechless drama.上海的文界今年是恭迎无产阶级文学使者，沸沸扬扬，说是要来了。问问黄包车夫，车夫说并未派遣。这车夫的本阶级意识形态不行，早被别阶级弄歪曲了罢。另外有人把握着，但不一定是工人。于是只好在大屋子里寻，在客店里寻，在洋人家里寻，在书铺子里寻，在咖啡馆里寻……。
Shanghai's literary circles welcomed the proletarian literary messengers this year, and they were boiling, saying that they were coming. When asked about the rickshaw driver, the driver said he had not been dispatched. The coachman's class ideology is not good, and he has long been distorted by other classes. Others grasp it, but not necessarily the workers. So I had to look for it in a big house, in an inn, in a foreigner's home, in a bookstore, and in a ......café.文艺家的眼光要超时代，所以到否虽不可知，也须先行拥篲清道，或者伛偻奉迎。于是做人便难起来，口头不说“无产”便是“非革命”，还好；“非革命”即是“反革命”，可就险了。这真要没有出路。
The vision of writers and artists must be beyond the times, so although it is unknown whether they will arrive or not, they must first embrace the clear road or bend over to greet them. So it became difficult to be a person, and it was okay not to say that "proletariat" was "non-revolutionary"; "Non-revolution" is "counter-revolution", but it is dangerous. There is really no way out.现在的人间也还是“大王好见，小鬼难当”的处所。出路是有的。何以无呢？只因多鬼祟，他们将一切路都要糟蹋了。这些都不要，才是出路。自己坦坦白白，声明了因为没法子，只好暂在炮屁股上挂一挂招牌，倒也是出路的萌芽。
The world is still a place where "the king is good-looking, but the little ghost is difficult". There is a way out. Why not? Just because of how sneaky they are, they will ruin all the roads. If you don't want any of these, that's the way out. He confessed frankly that because he had no choice, he had to hang a sign on the butt of the cannon temporarily, which was also the germ of a way out.“地火在地下运行，奔突；熔岩一旦喷出，将烧尽一切野草，以及乔木，于是并且无可朽腐。”
"The earth fire runs underground, rushing; Once the lava erupted, it would burn all the weeds and trees, so it would be incorruptible. ”“但我坦然，欣然。我将大笑，我将歌唱。”（《野草》序）
"But I am calm and happy. I will laugh, I will sing. (Preface to "Wild Grass")还只说说，而革命文学家似乎不敢看见了，如果因此觉得没有了出路，那可实在是很可怜，令我也有些不忍再动笔了。
If I feel that there is no way out, it is really pitiful, and I can't bear to write anymore.四月十日。
April 10th.

头

头

头

head三月二十五日的《申报》上有一篇梁实秋教授的《关于卢骚》，以为引辛克来儿的话来攻击白璧德，是“借刀杀人”，“不一定是好方法”。至于他之攻击卢骚，理由之二，则在“卢骚个人不道德的行为，已然成为一般浪漫文人行为之标类的代表，对于卢骚的道德的攻击，可以说即是给一般浪漫的人的行为的攻击。……”
In the March 25 issue of the "Declaration", there was an article by Professor Liang Shiqiu "About Lu Sao", which thought that quoting Sinclair's words to attack Bai Bide was "borrowing a knife to kill" and "not necessarily a good way". As for his attack on Rousseau, the second reason is that "Rousseau's personal immoral behavior has become a representative of the typical behavior of general romantic literati, and the attack on Rousseau's morality can be said to be an attack on the behavior of ordinary romantic people." ……”那么，这虽然并非“借刀杀人”，却成了“借头示众”了。假使他没有成为“一般浪漫文人行为之标类的代表”，就不至于路远迢迢，将他的头挂给中国人看。一般浪漫文人，总算害了遥拜的祖师，给了他一个死后也不安静。他现在所受的罚，是因为影响罪，不是本罪了，可叹也夫！
Then, although this is not "borrowing a knife to kill", it has become "borrowing the head to show the public". If he had not become "a representative of the typical behavior of ordinary romantic literati", he would not have traveled a long way and hung his head for the Chinese to see. The general romantic literati finally harmed the ancestor who worshipped from afar and gave him a quiet post-death sentence. The punishment he is now receiving is because of the sin of influence, not the original sin, alas!以上的话不大“谨饬”，因为梁教授不过要笔伐，并未说须挂卢骚的头，说到挂头，是我看了今天《申报》上载湖南共产党郭亮“伏诛”后，将他的头挂来挂去，“遍历长岳”，偶然拉扯上去的。可惜湖南当局，竟没有写了列宁（或者溯而上之，到马克斯；或者更溯而上之，到黑格尔等等）的道德上的罪状，一同张贴，以正其影响之罪也。湖南似乎太缺少批评家。
The above words are not very "cautious", because Professor Liang just wants to write, and did not say that Lu Sao's head must be hung, when it comes to hanging heads, it is I who saw today's "Declaration" uploaded by Guo Liang of the Hunan Communist Party, hung his head around, "traversed Changyue", and accidentally pulled it up. It's a pity that the Hunan authorities didn't write about Lenin (or go back to Max; Or go back to Hegel and so on) moral crimes, and post them together to correct the crimes of their influence. Hunan seems to be too short of critics.记得《三国志演义》记袁术（？）死后，后人有诗叹道：“长揖横刀出，将军盖代雄，头颅行万里，失计杀田丰。”当三个有闲之暇，也活剥一首来吊卢骚：
I remember that "Romance of the Three Kingdoms" records Yuan Shu (?) After his death, later generations lamented: "The long bow and horizontal knife came out, the general Gai Daixiong, the head traveled thousands of miles, and killed Tian Feng by mistake." When the three of them have free time, they also peel a piece alive to hang Lu Sao:“脱帽怀铅出，先生盖代穷。头颅行万里，失计造儿童。”
"Take off your hat and carry lead out, and the gentleman is poor. The head travels thousands of miles, and the miscalculation is to create children. ”四月十日。
April 10th.

通信

通信

通信

correspondence来信
Letter鲁迅先生：
Mr. Lu Xun:精神和肉体，已被困到这般地步——怕无以复加，也不能形容——的我，不得不撑了病体向“你老”作最后的呼声了！——不，或者说求救，甚而是警告！
My mind and body have been trapped to such a point - I am afraid that there is no more and cannot be described - and I have to support my sick body to make the last cry to "you are old"! - No, or call for help, or even a warning!好在你自己也极明白：你是在给别人安排酒筵，“泡制醉虾”的一个人。我，就是其间被制的一个！
Fortunately, you yourself understand very well: you are a person who arranges a banquet for others and "soaks drunken shrimp". I am the one who is controlled in the meantime!我，本来是个小资产阶级里的骄子，温乡里的香花。有吃有着，尽可安闲地过活。只要梦想着的“方帽子”到手了也就满足，委实一无他求。
I was originally a proud son of the petty bourgeoisie, a fragrant flower in the countryside. There is food and clothing, and you can live a leisurely life. As long as the dream "square hat" is in hand, it will be satisfied, and there is nothing else to ask for.《呐喊》出版了，《语丝》发行了（可怜《新青年》时代，我尚看不懂呢），《说胡须》，《论照相之类》一篇篇连续地戟刺着我的神经。当时，自己虽是青年中之尤青者，然而因此就感到同伴们的浅薄和盲目。“革命！革命！”的叫卖，在马路上呐喊得洋溢，随了所谓革命的势力，也奔腾澎湃了。我，确竟被其吸引。当然也因我嫌弃青年的浅薄，且想在自己生命上找一条出路。那知竟又被我认识了人类的欺诈，虚伪，阴险……的本性！果然，不久，军阀和政客们弃了身上的蒙皮，而显出本来的狰狞面目！我呢，也随了所谓“清党”之声而把我一颗沸腾着的热烈的心清去。当时想：“素以敦厚诚朴”的第四阶级，和那些“遁世之士”的“居士”们，或许尚足为友吧？——唉，真的，“令弟”岂明先生说得是：“中国虽然有阶级，可是思想是相同的，都是升官发财”，而且我几疑置身在纪元前的社会里了，那种愚蠢比鹿豕还要愚蠢的言动（或者国粹家正以为这是国粹呢！），真不禁令我茫然——茫然于叫我究竟怎么办呢？
"Scream" was published, "Language Silk" was released (poor "New Youth" era, I still can't understand it), "Talking Beard", "On Photography and the Like" continuously stabbed my nerves. At that time, although I was the youngest among the youth, I felt the shallowness and blindness of my peers. "Revolution! Revolution! The shouting on the road was overflowing, and with the so-called revolutionary forces, it also surged. I was indeed attracted to it. Of course, it is also because I dislike the shallowness of young people and want to find a way out in my life. I actually learned about human fraud, hypocrisy, and insidiousness...... The nature of the game! Sure enough, soon, the warlords and politicians abandoned the skin on their bodies and showed their original hideous faces! As for me, I also cleared my boiling and enthusiastic heart with the voice of the so-called "party purge". At that time, I thought: "The fourth class, which has always been honest and simple", and those "laymen" who are "escape from the world", may still be friends, right? ——Alas, really, Mr. "Lingdi" Mr. Qi Ming said: "Although there are classes in China, the ideas are the same, they are all promoted and rich", and I am almost suspicious of being in a pre-era society, that kind of stupid words and actions are even more stupid than deer and pigs (or the nationalist thinks this is the quintessence of the country!). I really can't help but be at a loss - I am confused about what to do.利，莫利于失望之矢。我失望，失望之矢贯穿了我的心，于是乎吐血。转辗床上不能动已几个月！
Profit is better than the arrow of disappointment. I was disappointed, and the arrow of disappointment pierced my heart, so I vomited blood. I can't move in bed for months!不错，没有希望之人应该死，然而我没有勇气，而且自己还年青，仅仅廿一岁。还有爱人。不死，则精神和肉体，都在痛苦中挨生活，差不多每秒钟，爱人亦被生活所压迫着。我自己，薄薄的遗产已被“革命”革去了。所以非但不能相慰，相对亦徒唏嘘！
Yes, those who have no hope should die, but I don't have the courage, and I am still young, only twenty-one years old. And lovers. If you don't die, then your mind and body are living in pain, and almost every second, your lover is also oppressed by life. For myself, my thin legacy has been eliminated by the "revolution". So not only can we not comfort each other, but we are also embarrassed!不识不知幸福了，我因之痛苦。然而施这毒药者是先生，我实完全被先生所“泡制”。先生，我既已被引至此，索性请你指示我所应走的最终的道路。不然，则请你麻痹了我的神经，因为不识不知是幸福的，好在你是习医，想必不难“还我头来”！我将效梁遇春先生（？）之言而大呼。
I don't know happiness, and I suffer because of it. However, the person who applied this poison was Mr., and I was completely "soaked" by him. Sir, since I have been led here, I simply ask you to show me the final path I should take. Otherwise, please paralyze my nerves, because ignorance is happiness, but fortunately, you are a doctor, so it must not be difficult to "return my head"! I will emulate Mr. Liang Yuchun (?) And shouted.末了，更劝告你的：“你老”现在可以歇歇了，再不必为军阀们赶制适口的鲜味，保全几个像我这样的青年。倘为生活问题所驱策，则可以多做些“拥护”和“打倒”的文章，以你先生之文名，正不愁富贵之不及，“委员”“主任”，如操左券也。
Finally, I advise you: "You are old" can rest now, and there is no need to rush to make delicious umami for the warlords and save a few young people like me. If you are driven by life problems, you can do more articles that "support" and "defeat", and in the name of your husband's writing, you don't have to worry about being too rich and noble, "committee member" and "director", such as holding a left ticket.快呀，请指示我！莫要“为德不卒”！
Hurry up, please instruct me! Don't "do not die for virtue"!或《北新》，或《语丝》上答复均可。能免，莫把此信刊出，免笑。
Either the "Beixin" or the "Yusi" reply is acceptable. If you can avoid it, don't publish this letter, so as not to laugh.原谅我写得草率，因病中，乏极！
Forgive me for writing hastily, because I am sick, and I am extremely tired!一个被你毒害的青年Y。枕上书。
A young man Y poisoned by you. Pillow letter.三月十三日。
March 13.
Y先生：
Mr. Y:我当答复之前，先要向你告罪，因为我不能如你的所嘱，不将来信发表。来信的意思，是要我公开答复的，那么，倘将原信藏下，则我的一切所说，便变成“无题诗N百韵”，令人莫名其妙了。况且我的意见，以为这也不足耻笑。自然，中国很有为革命而死掉的人，也很有虽然吃苦，仍在革命的人，但也有虽然革命，而在享福的人……。革命而尚不死，当然不能算革命到底，殊无以对死者，但一切活着的人，该能原谅的罢，彼此都不过是靠侥幸，或靠狡滑，巧妙。他们只要用镜子略略一照，大概就可以收起那一副英雄嘴脸来的。
Before I answer, I will apologize to you, because I cannot publish the letter as you have instructed. The meaning of the letter is to ask me to reply publicly, so if I hide the original letter, everything I say will become "untitled poem N hundred rhymes", which is inexplicable. Moreover, in my opinion, I think this is not a shameful laugh. Naturally, there are many people in China who died for the revolution, and there are also people who are still revolutionizing despite suffering, but there are also people who are enjoying happiness despite the revolution...... The revolution is not dead, of course, it cannot be regarded as a revolution to the end, and there is nothing to do with the dead, but all living people should be forgiven, and each other is just a fluke, or cunning, and ingenious. As long as they take a slight look in the mirror, they can probably put away that heroic face.我在先前，本来也还无须卖文糊口的，拿笔的开始，是在应朋友的要求。不过大约心里原也藏着一点不平，因此动起笔来，每不免露些愤言激语，近于鼓动青年的样子。段祺瑞执政之际，虽颇有人造了谣言，但我敢说，我们所做的那些东西，决不沾别国的半个卢布，阔人的一文津贴，或者书铺的一点稿费。我也不想充“文学家”，所以也从不连络一班同伙的批评家叫好。几本小说销到上万，是我想也没有想到的。
I didn't have to sell literature to make a living before, and I started taking a pen at the request of a friend. However, there was probably a little injustice hidden in his heart, so when he started writing, he couldn't help but show some indignation, which was close to encouraging young people. When Duan Qirui was in power, although there were quite a few rumors, I dare to say that the things we do will never be touched by half a ruble from another country, a penny allowance from a generous person, or a little manuscript fee from a bookstore. I also don't want to be a "writer", so I never contact a group of critics who are accomplices to applaud. Several novels sold tens of thousands, which I never thought of.至于希望中国有改革，有变动之心，那的确是有一点的。虽然有人指定我为没有出路——哈哈，出路，中状元么——的作者，“毒笔”的文人，但我自信并未抹杀一切。我总以为下等人胜于上等人，青年胜于老头子，所以从前并未将我的笔尖的血，洒到他们身上去。我也知道一有利害关系的时候，他们往往也就和上等人老头子差不多了，然而这是在这样的社会组织之下，势所必至的事。对于他们，攻击的人又正多，我何必再来助人下石呢，所以我所揭发的黑暗是只有一方面的，本意实在并不在欺蒙阅读的青年。
As for the hope that China will reform and change, it is indeed a little. Although some people have designated me as the author of no way out - haha, the way out, the champion - a literati with a "poisonous pen", I am confident that I have not erased everything. I always thought that the lower class was better than the upper class, and the young man was better than the old man, so I didn't spill the blood of my pen tip on them before. I also know that when there is a stake, they are often similar to upper-class old men, but this is inevitable under such a social organization. For them, there are many people who attack, why should I help others get off the rock, so the darkness I exposed is only one aspect, and the original intention is not to deceive the young people who read.以上是我尚在北京，就是成仿吾所谓“蒙在鼓里”做小资产阶级时候的事。但还是因为行文不慎，饭碗敲破了，并且非走不可了，所以不待“无烟火药”来轰，便辗转跑到了“革命策源地”。住了两月，我就骇然，原来往日所闻，全是谣言，这地方，却正是军人和商人所主宰的国土。于是接着是清党，详细的事实，报章上是不大见的，只有些风闻。我正有些神经过敏，于是觉得正像是“聚而歼旃”，很不免哀痛。虽然明知道这是“浅薄的人道主义”，不时髦已经有两三年了，但因为小资产阶级根性未除，于心总是戚戚。那时我就想到我恐怕也是安排筵宴的一个人，就在答有恒先生的信中，表白了几句。
The above is what happened when I was still in Beijing, when I was "in the dark" and was a petty bourgeoisie. But because of careless writing, the rice bowl was broken, and he had to leave, so he didn't wait for the "smokeless gunpowder" to bombard, so he ran to the "source of the revolution". After living for two months, I was shocked that what I had heard in the past was all rumors, but this place was the land dominated by soldiers and merchants. So then came the purge of the party, detailed facts, which were not common in the newspapers, only some rumors. I was a little nervous, so I felt like I was "gathering and annihilating", and I couldn't help but feel sad. Although I know that this is "shallow humanitarianism" and has been unfashionable for two or three years, I am always worried because the petty-bourgeois nature has not been removed. At that time, I thought that I was probably also the one who arranged the banquet, so I confessed a few words in response to Mr. Youheng's letter.先前的我的言论，的确失败了，这还是因为我料事之不明。那原因，大约就在多年“坐在玻璃窗下，醉眼朦胧看人生”的缘故。然而那么风云变幻的事，恐怕世界上是不多有的，我没有料到，未曾描写，可见我还不很有“毒笔”。但是，那时的情形，却连在十字街头，在民间，在官间，前看五十年的超时代的革命文学家也似乎没有看到，所以毫不先行“理论斗争”。否则，该可以救出许多人的罢。我在这里引出革命文学家来，并非要在事后讥笑他们的愚昧，不过是说，我的看不到后来的变幻，乃是我还欠刻毒，因此便发生错误，并非我和什么人协商，或自己要做什么，立意来欺人。
My previous remarks did fail, but it was because I didn't know what was happening. The reason is probably because of many years of "sitting under the glass window, drunkenly looking at life". However, such a changeable thing, I am afraid that there are not many things in the world, I did not expect it, I have not described it, it can be seen that I am not very "poisonous". However, the situation at that time did not seem to be seen even in the cross streets, among the people, among the officials, and the revolutionary writers who looked at the past fifty years ago, so they did not first engage in "theoretical struggle". Otherwise, many people should be saved. I am here to introduce revolutionary writers, not to ridicule their ignorance afterwards, but to say that I cannot see the changes later, but that I still owe the viciousness, so I made a mistake, not because I negotiated with anyone or what I wanted to do, and intended to deceive others.但立意怎样，于事实是无干的。我疑心吃苦的人们中，或不免有看了我的文章，受了刺戟，于是挺身出而革命的青年，所以实在很苦痛。但这也因为我天生的不是革命家的缘故，倘是革命巨子，看这一点牺牲，是不算一回事的。第一是自己活着，能永远做指导，因为没有指导，革命便不成功了。你看革命文学家，就都在上海租界左近，一有风吹草动，就有洋鬼子造成的铁丝网，将反革命文学的华界隔离，于是从那里面掷出无烟火药——约十万两——来，轰然一声，一切有闲阶级便都“奥伏赫变”了。
But what the intention is has nothing to do with the facts. Among the people I suspect and suffer, there may be young people who read my articles and have been stabbed and have stepped forward to revolutionize, so it is really painful. But this is also because I was not born a revolutionary, and if I am a revolutionary giant, it is not the same thing to see this sacrifice. The first is to live by yourself and be guided forever, because without guidance, the revolution will not succeed. You see, revolutionary writers are all close to the Shanghai Concession, and as soon as there is a disturbance, there is a barbed wire fence created by foreign devils to isolate the Chinese boundary of counter-revolutionary literature, so smokeless gunpowder - about 100,000 taels - is thrown from it, and with a bang, all the idle classes "Ovoch change".那些革命文学家，大抵是今年发生的，有一大串。虽然还在互相标榜，或互相排斥，我也分不清是“革命已经成功”的文学家呢，还是“革命尚未成功”的文学家。不过似乎说是因为有了我的一本《呐喊》或《野草》，或我们印了《语丝》，所以革命还未成功，或青年懒于革命了。这口吻却大家大略一致的。这是今年革命文学界的舆论。对于这些舆论，我虽然又好气又好笑，但也颇有些高兴。因为虽然得了延误革命的罪状，而一面却免去诱杀青年的内疚了。那么，一切死者，伤者，吃苦者，都和我无关。先前真是擅负责任。我先前是立意要不讲演，不教书，不发议论，使我的名字从社会上死去，算是我的赎罪的，今年倒心里轻松了，又有些想活动。不料得了你的信，却又使我的心沉重起来。
Those revolutionary writers, probably happened this year, and there is a large list. Although they are still flaunting each other or excluding each other, I can't tell whether they are writers who "have succeeded in the revolution" or those who "have not yet succeeded". However, it seems that it is because of my copy of "Scream" or "Weeds", or we printed "Silk of Words", so the revolution has not yet succeeded, or the young people are lazy to revolutionize. This tone is roughly the same for everyone. This is the public opinion of this year's revolutionary literary circles. Although I am angry and funny about these public opinions, I am also quite happy. Because although he was charged with delaying the revolution, he was spared the guilt of booby-trapping young people. Then, all the dead, the wounded, and the suffering have nothing to do with me. I was really good at being responsible before. I had previously intended not to give lectures, teach, or make discussions, so that my name would die from society, which was my atonement, but this year I felt relieved and wanted to be active. I didn't expect your letter to weigh on my heart again.但我已经没有去年那么沉重。近大半年来，征之舆论，按之经验，知道革命与否，还在其人，不在文章的。你说我毒害了你了，但这里的批评家，却明明说我的文字是“非革命”的。假使文学足以移人，则他们看了我的文章，应该不想做革命文学了，现在他们已经看了我的文章，断定是“非革命”，而仍不灰心，要做革命文学者，可见文字于人，实在没有什么影响，——只可惜是同时打破了革命文学的牌坊。不过先生和我素昧平生，想来决不至于诬栽我，所以我再从别一面来想一想。第一，我以为你胆子太大了，别的革命文学家，因为我描写黑暗，便吓得屁滚尿流，以为没有出路了，所以他们一定要讲最后的胜利，付多少钱终得多少利，像人寿保险公司一般。而你并不计较这些，偏要向黑暗进攻，这是吃苦的原因之一。既然太大胆，那么，第二，就是太认真。革命是也有种种的。你的遗产被革去了，但也有将遗产革来的，但也有连性命都革去的，也有只革到薪水，革到稿费，而倒捐了革命家的头衔的。这些英雄，自然是认真的，但若较原先更有损了，则我以为其病根就在“太”。第三，是你还以为前途太光明，所以一碰钉子，便大失望，如果先前不期必胜，则即使失败，苦痛恐怕会小得多罢。
But I'm not as heavy as last year. In the past six months, we have asked public opinion and experience to know whether it is revolutionary or not, but it is still in the person, not in the article. You say I poisoned you, but the critics here clearly say that my words are "non-revolutionary". If literature is enough to move people, then they should not want to do revolutionary literature after reading my article, and now they have read my article and concluded that it is "non-revolutionary", but they are still not discouraged, and if they want to be revolutionary writers, it can be seen that words have no impact on people,—— but it is a pity that they have broken the archway of revolutionary literature at the same time. However, my husband and I have never known each other in our lives, and I will never frame me, so I will think about it from another side. First, I thought you were too bold, other revolutionary writers, because I described darkness, were so frightened that they thought there was no way out, so they must talk about the final victory, how much money they pay, how much profit they get, like a life insurance company. And you don't care about this, but attack the darkness, which is one of the reasons for suffering. Since it is too bold, then, secondly, it is too serious. There are all kinds of revolutions. Your inheritance has been abolished, but there are also those who have lost their lives, and there are those who have only received their salaries and manuscript fees, but have donated the title of revolutionary. These heroes are naturally serious, but if they are more damaged than before, I think the root of their disease lies in "Tai". Third, you still think that the future is too bright, so when you touch a nail, you will be disappointed, and if you don't expect to win before, even if you fail, the pain may be much less.那么，我没有罪戾么？有的，现在正有许多正人君子和革命文学家，用明枪暗箭，在办我革命及不革命之罪，将来我所受的伤的总计，我就划一部分赔偿你的尊“头”。
So, am I not guilty? Yes, there are many righteous gentlemen and revolutionary writers who are using open guns and hidden arrows to deal with my revolutionary and non-revolutionary crimes, and I will compensate you for the total injuries I have suffered in the future.这里添一点考据：“还我头来”这话，据《三国志演义》，是关云长夫子说的，似乎并非梁遇春先生。
Here is a little evidence: "Give me back my head", according to the "Romance of the Three Kingdoms", it was said by Master Guan Yunchang, and it seems that it is not Mr. Liang Yuchun.以上其实都是空话。一到先生个人问题的阵营，倒是十分难于动手了，这决不是什么“前进呀，杀呀，青年呵”那样英气勃勃的文字所能解决的。真话呢，我也不想公开，因为现在还是言行不大一致的好。但来信没有住址，无法答复，只得在这里说几句。第一，要谋生，谋生之道，则不择手段。且住，现在很有些没分晓汉，以为“问目的不问手段”是共产党的口诀，这是大错的。人们这样的很多，不过他们不肯说出口。苏俄的学艺教育人民委员卢那却尔斯奇所作的《被解放的吉诃德先生》里，将这手段使一个公爵使用，可见也是贵族的东西，堂皇冠冕。第二，要爱护爱人。这据舆论，是大背革命之道的。但不要紧，你只要做几篇革命文字，主张革命青年不该讲恋爱就好了。只是假如有一个有权者或什么敌前来问罪的时候，这也许仍要算一条罪状，你会后悔轻信了我的话。因此，我得先行声明：等到前来问罪的时候，倘没有这一节，他们就会找别一条的。盖天下的事，往往决计问罪在先，而搜集罪状（普通是十条）在后也。
The above is actually empty words. Once you get to the camp of Mr. Xiang's personal problems, it is very difficult to do it, which is by no means something that can be solved by heroic words like "Advance, kill, young man". The truth, I don't want to make it public, because it's still better to be inconsistent with words and deeds. But the letter had no address and could not be replied to, so I had to say a few words here. First, to make a living, the way to make a living is to do whatever it takes. Wait a minute, now there are a lot of ignorant Han, thinking that "asking about the purpose but not the means" is the Communist Party's mantra, which is a big mistake. There are a lot of people like this, but they refuse to say it. In "Mr. Quixote Liberated" written by Luna Chersky, the People's Commissar of Academic and Artistic Education of Soviet Russia, this method was used by a duke, which can be seen as a noble thing, and it is a grand crown. Second, we must love our lovers. According to public opinion, this is a big departure from the way of revolution. But it doesn't matter, you just need to make a few revolutionary texts and advocate that revolutionary youth should not talk about love. It's just that if a powerful person or some enemy comes to ask for forgiveness, it may still be counted as a crime, and you will regret believing my words. Therefore, I must declare that when they come to ask for forgiveness, if there is no this verse, they will find another one. In fact, in the world, the decision to investigate the crime comes first, and the collection of crimes (usually ten articles) comes later.先生，我将这样的话写出，可以略蔽我的过错了罢。因为只这一点，我便可以又受许多伤。先是革命文学家就要哭骂道：“虚无主义者呀，你这坏东西呀！”呜呼，一不谨慎，又在新英雄的鼻子上抹了一点粉了。趁便先辩几句罢：无须大惊小怪，这不过不择手段的手段，还不是主义哩。即使是主义，我敢写出，肯写出，还不算坏东西。等到我坏起来，就一定将这些宝贝放在肚子里，手头集许多钱，住在安全地带，而主张别人必须做牺牲。
Sir, I write these words to cover up my faults. Because of this alone, I can get hurt many more. First, the revolutionary writer was about to cry and scold: "Nihilist, you bad thing!" "Oh, if you are not careful, you will smear a little powder on the nose of the new hero. Let's take the opportunity to argue a few words first: no need to make a fuss, this is just an unscrupulous means, not a doctrine. Even if it is a doctrine, I dare to write it, and I am willing to write it, it is not a bad thing. When I get bad, I will definitely put these treasures in my stomach, save a lot of money on hand, live in a safe area, and insist that others must make sacrifices.先生，我也劝你暂时玩玩罢，随便弄一点糊口之计，不过我并不希望你永久“没落”，有能改革之处，还是随时可以顺手改革的，无论大小。我也一定遵命，不但“歇歇”，而且玩玩。但这也并非因为你的警告，实在是原有此意的了。我要更加讲趣味，寻闲暇，即使偶然涉及什么，那是文字上的疏忽，若论“动机”或“良心”，却也许并不这样的。
Sir, I also advise you to play around for the time being and make a living, but I don't want you to "decline" permanently, and if there is something that can be reformed, it can be reformed at any time, no matter how big or small. I will definitely obey the order, not only "rest", but also play. But this is not because of your warning, it is really the original intention. I want to be more interesting, looking for leisure, even if it happens to involve something, it is a literal negligence, if it is about "motive" or "conscience", it may not be like this.纸完了，回信也即此为止。并且顺颂
The paper is finished, and the reply ends here. And sing in accordance with the hymns痊安，又祝
He was well recovered, and prayed again令爱人不挨饿。So that the lover does not starve.

太平歌诀

太平歌诀

太平歌诀

Peace song四月六日的《申报》上有这样的一段记事：
There is such a passage in the "Declaration" on April 6:“南京市近日忽发现一种无稽谣传，谓总理墓行将工竣，石匠有摄收幼童灵魂，以合龙口之举。市民以讹传讹，自相惊扰，因而家家幼童，左肩各悬红布一方，上书歌诀四句，借避危险。其歌诀约有三种：（一）人来叫我魂，自叫自当承。叫人叫不着，自己顶石坟。（二）石叫石和尚，自叫自承当。急早回家转，免去顶坟坛。（三）你造中山墓，与我何相干？一叫魂不去，再叫自承当。”（后略）
Nanjing City recently discovered a nonsensical rumor that the premier's tomb was about to be completed, and the stonemason had taken the souls of young children to close the dragon's mouth. Citizens were disturbed by rumors, so every young child hung a red cloth on each left shoulder and wrote four verses of the song to avoid danger. There are about three types of songs: (1) When people come to call my soul, I call myself self-accepting. If you can't call it, you can top the stone grave yourself. (2) The stone is called the stone monk, and he calls himself self-assured. Hurry home early to avoid the top of the grave. (3) What does your construction of the Zhongshan Tomb have to do with me? One call the soul does not leave, and the second call is self-acceptance. (Omitted)这三首中的无论那一首，虽只寥寥二十字，但将市民的见解：对于革命政府的关系，对于革命者的感情，都已经写得淋漓尽致。虽有善于暴露社会黑暗面的文学家，恐怕也难有做到这么简明深切的了。“叫人叫不着，自己顶石坟”。则竟包括了许多革命者的传记和一部中国革命的历史。
No matter which of these three poems, although it is only twenty words, the opinions of the citizens: the relationship between the revolutionary government and the feelings of the revolutionaries have been vividly written. Although there are writers who are good at exposing the dark side of society, I am afraid it is difficult to be so concise and profound. "If you can't call it, you can top the stone grave yourself." It actually includes the biographies of many revolutionaries and a history of the Chinese revolution.看看有些人们的文字，似乎硬要说现在是“黎明之前”。然而市民是这样的市民，黎明也好，黄昏也好，革命者们总不能不背着这一伙市民进行。鸡肋，弃之不甘，食之无味，就要这样地牵缠下去。五十一百年后能否就有出路，是毫无把握的。
Looking at the words of some people, it seems that they insist that it is "before dawn". However, the citizens are such citizens, whether it is dawn or dusk, the revolutionaries cannot help but carry this group of citizens behind their backs. Chicken ribs, abandoned unwillingly, tasteless to eat, will be entangled like this. It is uncertain whether there will be a way out after fifty or one hundred years.近来的革命文学家往往特别畏惧黑暗，掩藏黑暗，但市民却毫不客气，自己表现了。那小巧的机灵和这厚重的麻木相撞，便使革命文学家不敢正视社会现象，变成婆婆妈妈，欢迎喜鹊，憎厌枭鸣，只检一点吉祥之兆来陶醉自己，于是就算超出了时代。
Revolutionary writers in recent times are often particularly afraid of the dark and hide the darkness, but the citizens are unceremonious, and they show themselves. The collision of that small cleverness and this heavy numbness made revolutionary writers dare not face up to social phenomena, become mothers-in-law, welcome magpies, hate owls, and only check a little auspicious omen to intoxicate themselves, so even if they are beyond the times.恭喜的英雄，你前去罢，被遗弃了的现实的现代，在后面恭送你的行旌。
Congratulations to the hero, you go, the abandoned reality of the modern era, and send you off your banner behind.但其实还是同在。你不过闭了眼睛。不过眼睛一闭，“顶石坟”却可以不至于了，这就是你的“最后的胜利”。
But in fact, they are still together. You just close your eyes. But as soon as you close your eyes, the "Capstone Tomb" can be gone, this is your "final victory".四月十日。
April 10th.

铲共大观

铲共大观

铲共大观

Shovel the grand view仍是四月六日的《申报》上，又有一段《长沙通信》，叙湘省破获共产党省委会，“处死刑者三十余人，黄花节斩决八名”。其中有几处文笔做得极好，抄一点在下面：
Still in the "Declaration" on April 6, there was another paragraph of "Changsha Communication", Xuxiang Province broke the Communist Party Provincial Committee, "more than 30 people were executed, and 8 were executed during the Yellow Flower Festival." There are a few places that are very well done, and I copy a little below:“……是日执行之后，因马（淑纯，十六岁；志纯，十四岁）傅（凤君，二十四岁）三犯，系属女性，全城男女往观者，终日人山人海，拥挤不通。加以共魁郭亮之首级，又悬之司门口示众，往观者更众。司门口八角亭一带，交通为之断绝。计南门一带民众，则看郭亮首级后，又赴教育会看女尸。北门一带民众，则在教育会看女尸后，又往司门口看郭首级。全城扰攘，铲共空气，为之骤张；直至晚间，观者始不似日间之拥挤。”
“…… After the execution of the day, because of the horse (Shuchun, sixteen years old; Zhichun, 14 years old) Fu (Fengjun, 24 years old) three offenders, belonging to women, the whole city of men and women to watch, crowded all day long, crowded. In addition, the head of the co-leader Guo Liang was hung at the entrance of the office for the public to see, and more people came to watch. The area around the octagonal pavilion at the entrance of the office was cut off from traffic. The people in the area of the south gate looked at Guo Liang's head and went to the education meeting to see the female corpse. The people in the North Gate area went to the gate to see Guo Shou after seeing the female corpse at the education meeting. The whole city was in turmoil, shoveling the air, and suddenly expanding; Until the evening, the audience did not feel as crowded as during the day. ”抄完之后，觉得颇不妥。因为我就想发一点议论，然而立刻又想到恐怕一面有人疑心我在冷嘲（有人说，我是只喜欢冷嘲的），一面又有人责罚我传播黑暗，因此咒我灭亡，自己带着一切黑暗到地底里去。但我熬不住，——别的议论就少发一点罢，单从“为艺术的艺术”说起来，你看这不过一百五六十字的文章，就多么有力。我一读，便仿佛看见司门口挂着一颗头，教育会前列着三具不连头的女尸。而且至少是赤膊的，——但这也许我猜得不对，是我自己太黑暗之故。而许多“民众”，一批是由北往南，一批是由南往北，挤着，嚷着……。再添一点蛇足，是脸上都表现着或者正在神往，或者已经满足的神情。在我所见的“革命文学”或“写实文学”中，还没有遇到过这么强有力的文学。批评家罗喀绥夫斯奇说的罢：“安特列夫竭力要我们恐怖，我们却并不怕；契诃夫不这样，我们倒恐怖了。”这百余字实在抵得上小说一大堆，何况又是事实。
After copying, I felt quite inappropriate. Because I wanted to make a little comment, but then I thought that on the one hand, someone would suspect that I was sneering (some people say that I only like to be cynical), and on the other hand, someone would punish me for spreading darkness, so they cursed me to perish and take all darkness to the depths of the earth. But I can't stand it,—— so I'll post less about other discussions, just from the perspective of "art for art", you can see how powerful this article is only 150 or 60 words. As soon as I read it, I seemed to see a head hanging at the entrance of the office, and three female corpses without heads in front of the education meeting. And at least shirtless,—— but maybe I guessed wrong, because I was too dark. And many "people", one from north to south, and one from south to north, squeezed and shouted ....... Add a little snake feet, which is a look on the face that shows fascination or satisfaction. Among the "revolutionary literature" or "realistic literature" I have seen, I have never encountered such a powerful literature. The critic Rokasowski said: "Antrev tried his best to terrorize us, but we were not afraid; Chekhov is not like this, we are terrified. These more than 100 words are really worth a lot of novels, not to mention facts.且住。再说下去，恐怕有些英雄们又要责我散布黑暗，阻碍革命了。一理是也有一理的，现在易犯嫌疑，忠实同志被误解为共党，或关或释的，报上向来常见。万一不幸，沉冤莫白，那真是……。倘使常常提起这些来，也许未免会短壮士之气。但是，革命被头挂退的事是很少有的，革命的完结，大概只由于投机者的潜入。也就是内里蛀空。这并非指赤化，任何主义的革命都如此。但不是正因为黑暗，正因为没有出路，所以要革命的么？倘必须前面贴着“光明”和“出路”的包票，这才雄赳赳地去革命，那就不但不是革命者，简直连投机家都不如了。虽是投机，成败之数也不能预卜的。
Stay for a moment. If I continue, I am afraid that some heroes will blame me for spreading darkness and hindering the revolution. It is common for newspapers to be misunderstood as the Communist Party, or to be closed or released. In case of misfortune, the injustice is unclear, it is really ....... If you mention these often, you may be short-sighted. However, it is rare for the revolution to be retreated, and the end of the revolution is probably only due to the infiltration of speculators. That is, the inside is hollow. This does not mean reddening, as is the case with any revolution of ism. But isn't it because of darkness and because there is no way out that we want to revolutionize? If you have to affix the "light" and "way out" package in front of you before you can go to the revolution majestically, then you are not only not a revolutionary, but even a speculator. Although it is speculative, the number of success or failure cannot be predicted.我临末还要揭出一点黑暗，是我们中国现在（现在！不是超时代的）的民众，其实还不很管什么党，只要看“头”和“女尸”。只要有，无论谁的都有人看，拳匪之乱，清末党狱，民二，去年和今年，在这短短的二十年中，我已经目睹或耳闻了好几次了。
At the end of my life, I want to reveal a little darkness, which is our China now (now!) is not beyond the times), in fact, they don't care much about the party, just look at the "head" and "female corpse". As long as there is, no matter who it is, there are people to watch, the rebellion of the boxers, the party prison at the end of the Qing Dynasty, the second people, last year and this year, in these short twenty years, I have witnessed or heard several times.四月十日。
April 10th.

我的态度气量和年纪

我的态度气量和年纪

我的态度气量和年纪

My attitude, temperament and age英勇的刊物是层出不穷，“文艺的分野”上的确热闹起来了。日报广告上的《战线》这名目就惹人注意，一看便知道其中都是战士。承蒙一个朋友寄给我三本，才得看见了一点枪烟，并且明白弱水做的《谈中国现在的文学界》里的有一粒弹子，是瞄准着我的。为什么呢？因为先是《“醉眼”中的朦胧》做错了。据说错处有三：一是态度，二是气量，三是年纪。复述易于失真，还是将这粒子弹移置在下面罢：
Heroic publications emerged one after another, and the "division of literature and art" was indeed lively. The name "Front" in the daily newspaper advertisement is eye-catching, and you can tell at a glance that it is full of soldiers. Thanks to a friend who sent me three copies, I had to see a little gun smoke, and I understood that there was a bullet in "On China's Current Literary Circle" made by Ruoshui, which was aimed at me. Why? Because first of all, "The Hazy in "Drunken Eyes" did it wrong. It is said that there are three mistakes: one is attitude, the second is temperament, and the third is age. The retelling is easy to distort, so let's move this particle bomb below:“鲁迅那篇，不敬得很，态度太不兴了。我们从他先后的论战上看来，不能不说他的量气太窄了。最先（据所知）他和西滢战，继和长虹战，我们一方面觉得正直是在他这面，一方面又觉得辞锋太有点尖酸刻薄，现在又和创造社战，辞锋仍是尖酸，正直却不一定落在他这面。是的，仿吾和初梨两人对他的批评是可以有反驳的地方，但这应庄严出之，因为他们所走的方向不能算不对，冷嘲热刺，只有对于冥顽不灵者为必要，因为是不可理喻。对于热烈猛进的绝对不合用这种态度。他那种态度，虽然在他自己亦许觉得骂得痛快，但那种口吻，适足表出‘老头子’的确不行吧了。好吧，这事本该是没有勉强的必要和可能，让各人走各人的路去好了。我们不禁想起了五四时的林琴南先生了！”
Lu Xun's article is very disrespectful and has a very unhappy attitude. From his successive debates, we cannot help but say that his temperament is too narrow. First (as far as known) he fought with Xiying, and then with Changhong, on the one hand, we felt that integrity was on his side, on the other hand, we felt that Ci Feng was too bitter, and now we were fighting with the creation of society, Ci Feng was still bitter, but integrity did not necessarily fall on his side. Yes, the criticism of him by Fangwu and Chuli can be refuted, but this should be solemn, because the direction they are taking cannot be considered wrong, and the sneering Tottenham Hotspur is only necessary for those who are stubborn, because it is unreasonable. This attitude is absolutely not appropriate for enthusiastic progress. His attitude, although he may feel happy to scold himself, but that kind of tone is enough to show that the 'old man' is indeed not good. Well, this should not have been forced and possible, let everyone go their own way. We can't help but think of Mr. Lin Qinnan in May Fourth! ”这一段虽然并不涉及是非，只在态度，量气，口吻上，断定这“老头子的确不行”，从此又自然而然地抹杀我那篇文字，但粗粗一看，却很像第三者从旁的批评。从我看来，“尖酸刻薄”之处也不少，作者大概是青年，不会有“老头子”气的，这恐怕因为我“冥顽不灵”，不得已而用之的罢，或者便是自己不觉得。不过我要指摘，这位隐姓埋名的弱水先生，其实是创造社那一面的。我并非说，这些战士，大概是创造社里常见他的脚踪，或在艺术大学里兼有一只饭碗，不过指明他们是相同的气类。因此，所谓《战线》，也仍不过是创造社的战线。所以我和西滢长虹战，他虽然看见正直，却一声不响，今和创造社战，便只看见尖酸，忽然显战士身而出现了。其实所断定的先两回的我的“正直”，也还是死了已经两千多年了的老头子老聃先师的“将欲取之必先与之”的战略，我并不感服这类的公评。陈西滢也知道这种战法的，他因为要打倒我的短评，便称赞我的小说，以见他之公正。
Although this paragraph does not involve right and wrong, but only in terms of attitude, temperament, and tone, it concludes that this "old man is indeed not good", and since then it has naturally erased my text, but at a rough glance, it looks very much like a third-party criticism. From my point of view, there are many "bitter" places, the author is probably a young man, and he will not have an "old man" spirit, which is probably because I am "stubborn", so I have to use it, or I don't think so. However, I want to point out that this incognito Mr. Weak Water is actually on the side of the Creation Society. I'm not saying that these warriors are probably common in the Creation Society, or have a job in the art university, but they are of the same type. Therefore, the so-called "Front" is still just the front of the Creation Society. So I fought with Xiying Changhong, although he saw the integrity, but he didn't make a sound, and now he and the creation of the social war, he only saw the bitterness, and suddenly appeared as a warrior. In fact, I am not impressed by this kind of public comment on my "integrity" that I concluded twice before, and the strategy of "giving it to the old man who has been dead for more than 2,000 years". Chen Xiying also knew this kind of tactics, and because he wanted to knock down my short comments, he praised my novels to see his fairness.即使真以为先两回是正直在我这面的罢，也还是因为这位弱水先生是不和他们同系，同社，同派，同流……。从他们那一面看来，事情可就两样了。我“和西滢战”了以后，现代系的唐有壬曾说《语丝》的言论，是受了墨斯科的命令；“和长虹战”了以后，狂飙派的常燕生曾说《狂飙》的停版，也许因为我的阴谋。但除了我们两方以外，恐怕不大有人注意或记得了罢。事不干己，是很容易滑过去的。
Even if I really thought that the first two times were on my side, it was still because this Mr. Weak Water was not of the same family, the same society, the same faction, and the same ...... as them. From their side, things are different. After I "fought with Xiying", Tang Youren of the modern department once said that the remarks of "Yusi" were ordered by Mosco; After "fighting with Changhong", Chang Yansheng of the Hurricane faction once said that the suspension of "Hurricane" may be because of my conspiracy. But apart from the two of us, I'm afraid not many people have paid attention to or remembered it. If you don't do things yourself, it's easy to slip over.这次对于创造社，是的，“不敬得很”，未免有些不“庄严”；即使在我以为是直道而行，他们也仍可认为“尖酸刻薄”。于是“论战”便变成“态度战”，“量气战”，“年龄战”了。但成仿吾辈的对我的“态度”，战士们虽然不屑留心到，在我本身是明白的。我有兄弟，自以为算不得就是我“不可理喻”，而这位批评家于《呐喊》出版时，即加以讥刺道：“这回由令弟编了出来，真是好看得多了”。这传统直到五年之后，再见于冯乃超的论文，说是“无聊赖地跟他弟弟说几句人道主义的美丽的说话”。我的主张如何且不论，即使相同，何以说话相同便是“无聊赖地”？莫非一有“弟弟”，就必须反对，一个讲革命，一个即该讲保皇，一个学地理，一个就得学天文么？还有，我合印一年的杂感为《华盖集》，另印先前所钞的小说史料为《小说旧闻钞》，是并不相干的。这位成仿吾先生却加以编排道：“我们的鲁迅先生坐在华盖之下正在抄他的‘小说旧闻’。”这使李初梨很高兴，今年又抄在《文化批判》里，还乐得不可开交道，“他（成仿吾）这段文章，比‘趣味文学’还更有趣些。”但是还不够，他们因为我生在绍兴，绍兴出酒，便说“醉眼陶然”；因为我年纪比他们大了，便说“老生”，还要加注道：“若许我用文学的表现。”而这一个“老”的错处，还给《战线》上的弱水先生作为“的确不行”的根源。我自信对于创造社，还不至于用了他们的籍贯，家族，年纪，来作奚落的资料，不过今年偶然做了一篇文章，其中第一次指摘了他们文字里的矛盾和笑话而已。但是“态度”问题来了，“量气”问题也来了，连战士也以为尖酸刻薄。莫非必须我学革命文学家所指为“卑污”的托尔斯泰，毫无抵抗，或者上一呈文：“小资产阶级或有产阶级臣鲁迅诚惶诚恐谨呈革命的‘印贴利更追亚’老爷麾下”，这才不至于“的确不行”么？
This time for the Creation Society, yes, it is "very disrespectful", which is a little un"solemn"; Even if I think they are going straight, they can still be considered "bitter". So the "debate" became a "war of attitude", a "war of quantity", and a "war of age". But imitating my generation's "attitude" towards me, although the soldiers disdain to pay attention to it, I understand it myself. I have a brother who thinks that I am "unreasonable", and when "The Scream" was published, the critic sarcastically said: "This time it was made up by my brother, which is really much better." This tradition was not seen until five years later, when Feng Naichao's thesis was "bored to say a few beautiful words of humanitarianism to his brother." No matter what my proposition is, even if it is the same, why is it "boring" to speak the same way? Could it be that as soon as there is a "younger brother", we must oppose it, one should talk about revolution, the other should talk about royalism, one should study geography, and the other must learn astronomy? Also, the miscellaneous feelings I co-printed for a year were "Huagai Collection", and the historical materials of the novels I had previously printed were "Novel Old News Banknotes", which is irrelevant. This Mr. Cheng Fangwu choreographed: "Our Mr. Lu Xun is sitting under the canopy and copying his 'old novels'. This made Li Chuli very happy, and this year he copied it in "Cultural Criticism", and he was very happy, "His (Cheng Fangwu) article is more interesting than 'interesting literature'." But it wasn't enough, because I was born in Shaoxing, Shaoxing made wine, so they said "drunken eyes"; Because I am older than them, I say "old student" and add: "If I am allowed to use literary performance." And this "old" mistake also gave Mr. Weak Water on "Frontline" as the root cause of "indeed not good". I am confident that I will not use their place of origin, family, and age as ridiculous information for the Creation Society, but this year I made an article by chance, in which for the first time I pointed out the contradictions and jokes in their texts. But the problem of "attitude" came, and so did the problem of "measuring qi", and even the soldiers thought it was bitter. Could it be that we must learn from Tolstoy, who is referred to as "despicable" by revolutionary writers, without resistance, or in the previous submission: "The petty bourgeois or proletarian minister Lu Xun is sincerely afraid that he will be under the command of the revolutionary 'Yin Tieli and Chase Ya'", so that it will not be "indeed not possible"?至于我是“老头子”，却的确是我的不行。“和长虹战”的时候，他也曾指出我这一条大错处，此外还嘲笑我的生病。而且也是真的，我的确生过病，这回弱水这一位“小头子”对于这一节没有话说，可见有些青年究竟还怀着纯朴的心，很是厚道的。所以他将“冷嘲热刺”的用途，也瓜分开来，给“热烈猛进的”制定了优待条件。可惜我生得太早，已经不属于那一类，不能享受同等待遇了。但幸而我年青时没有真上战线去，受过创伤，倘使身上有了残疾，那就又添一件话柄，现在真不知道要受多少奚落哩。这是“不革命”的好处，应该感谢自己的。
As for me being an "old man", it is indeed mine. When "fighting with Changhong", he also pointed out my big mistake and laughed at my illness. And it's also true, I did get sick, this time the "little head" of Weak Water has nothing to say about this section, it can be seen that some young people still have a simple heart and are very kind. So he also divided the use of "cynicism" and set preferential conditions for the "enthusiastic and vigorous". It's a pity that I was born too early and no longer belong to that category, so I can't enjoy the same treatment. But fortunately, I didn't really go to the front line when I was young, I was traumatized, and if I had a disability, it would add another story, and now I really don't know how much ridicule I have to suffer. This is the benefit of "non-revolution", which should be thanked for itself.其实这回的不行，还只是我不行，无关年纪的。托尔斯泰，克罗颇特庚，马克斯，虽然言行有“卑污”与否之分，但毕竟都苦斗了一生，我看看他们的照相，全有大胡子。因为我一个而抹杀一切“老头子”，大约是不算公允的。然而中国呢，自然不免又有些特别，不行的多。少年尚且老成，老年当然成老。林琴南先生是确乎应该想起来的，他后来真是暮年景象，因为反对白话，不能论战，便从横道儿来做一篇影射小说，使一个武人痛打改革者，——说得“美丽”一点，就是神往于“武器的文艺”了。旧的和新的，往往有极其相同之点——如：个人主义者和社会主义者往往都反对资产阶级，保守者和改革者往往都主张为人生的艺术，都讳言黑暗，棒喝主义者和共产主义者都厌恶人道主义等——林琴南先生的事也正是一个证明。至于所以不行之故，其关键就全在他生得更早，不知道这一阶级将被“奥服赫变”，及早变计，于是归根结蒂，分明现出Fascist本相了。但我以为“老头子”如此，是不足虑的，他总比青年先死。林琴南先生就早已死去了。可怕的是将为将来柱石的青年，还象他的东拉西扯。
In fact, this time it doesn't work, it's just me who can't do it, it has nothing to do with age. Tolstoy, Kropot, Max, although there are "despicable" and "dirty" words and deeds, but after all, they have all struggled all their lives, and I look at their photos, they all have big beards. It is probably not fair to erase all the "old men" because of me. However, China, naturally, is a little special, and there are many things that can't be done. Young people are still mature, and old age is of course old. Mr. Lin Qinnan should indeed be remembered, he was really in his twilight years, because he opposed the vernacular and could not argue, so he made an allusion novel from the horizontal road, so that a warrior beat the reformer,—— to put it more "beautifully", that is, fascinated by the "literature and art of weapons". The old and the new are often very similar—for example: individualists and socialists tend to oppose the bourgeoisie, conservatives and reformers tend to advocate the art of life and avoid darkness, stickmen and communists hate humanitarianism, etc. As for the reason why it didn't work, the key was that he was born earlier, and he didn't know that this class would be "changed by the Olympic service" and change his plan early, so in the final analysis, the true nature of Fascist was clearly revealed. But I think that the "old man" is like this, there is no need to worry, he always dies before the young man. Mr. Lin Qinnan is already dead. The scary thing is that the young man who will be the pillar of the future is still like his pulling around.又来说话，量气又太小了，再说下去，就要更小，“正直”岂但“不一定”在这一面呢，还要一定不在这一面。而且所说的又都是自己的事，并非“大贫”的民众……。但是，即使所讲的只是个人的事，有些人固然只看见个人，有些人却也看见背景或环境。例如《鲁迅在广东》这一本书，今年战士们忽以为编者和被编者希图不朽，于是看得“烦躁”，也给了一点对于“冥顽不灵”的冷嘲。我却以为这太偏于唯心论了，无所谓不朽，不朽又干吗，这是现代人大抵知道的。所以会有这一本书，其实不过是要黑字印在白纸上，订成一本，作商品出售罢了。无论是怎样泡制法，所谓“鲁迅”也者，往往不过是充当了一种的材料。这种方法，便是“所走的方向不能算不对”的创造社也在所不免的。托罗兹基虽然已经“没落”，但他曾说，不含利害关系的文章，当在将来另一制度的社会里。我以为他这话却还是对的。
Speaking again, the measure is too small, and if you continue to talk about it, it will be even smaller, "integrity" is not only "not necessarily" on this side, but also must not be on this side. And what they say is their own business, not the ...... of the "poor" people. However, even if it is only a personal matter, some people see only the individual, and some people see the background or the environment. For example, in the book "Lu Xun in Guangdong", this year's soldiers suddenly thought that the editor and the editor wanted to be immortal, so they read it "irritable", and also gave a little cynicism about "stubbornness". I think this is too idealistic, it doesn't matter if it is immortal, why is it immortal, this is what modern people probably know. So there will be this book, but in fact, it is just to be printed in black on white paper, ordered into a copy, and sold as a commodity. No matter how it is brewed, the so-called "Lu Xun" is often just a kind of material. This method is inevitable for the Creation Society, which "cannot be considered wrong in the direction it is taking". Although Trotsky has "declined", he once said that articles without interests should be in a society with another system in the future. I thought he was right.四月二十日。
April 20.

革命咖啡店

革命咖啡店

革命咖啡店

Revolution Coffee Shop革命咖啡店的革命底广告式文字，昨天在报章上看到了，仗着第四个“有闲”，先抄一段在下面：
The revolutionary bottom advertising text of the revolutionary coffee shop was seen in the newspaper yesterday, relying on the fourth "leisure", I copied a paragraph below:“……但是读者们，我却发现了这样一家我们所理想的乐园，我一共去了两次，我在那里遇见了我们今日文艺界上的名人，龚冰庐，鲁迅，郁达夫等。并且认识了孟超，潘汉年，叶灵凤等，他们有的在那里高谈着他们的主张，有的在那里默默沉思，我在那里领会到不少教益呢。……”
“…… But readers, I found such an ideal paradise, I went there twice, where I met our celebrities in today's literary and art circles, Gong Binglu, Lu Xun, Yu Dafu, etc. And I met Meng Chao, Pan Hannian, Ye Lingfeng, etc., some of them talked about their ideas there, some meditated silently there, and I learned a lot of lessons there. ……”遥想洋楼高耸，前临阔街，门口是晶光闪灼的玻璃招牌，楼上是“我们今日文艺界上的名人”，或则高谈，或则沉思，面前是一大杯热气蒸腾的无产阶级咖啡，远处是许许多多“龌龊的农工大众”，他们喝着，想着，谈着，指导着，获得着，那是，倒也实在是“理想的乐园”。
Imagine the towering Western-style buildings, facing Broad Street, with a shining glass sign at the door, and "our celebrities in today's literary and artistic circles" upstairs, either talking high, or contemplating, in front of a large cup of steaming proletarian coffee, and in the distance are many "dirty peasants and workers", who drink, think, talk, guide, and obtain, that is, it is really an "ideal paradise".何况既喝咖啡，又领“教益”呢？上海滩上，一举两得的买卖本来多。大如弄几本杂志，便算革命；小如买多少钱书籍，即赠送真丝光袜或请吃冰淇淋——虽然我至今还猜不透那些惠顾的人们，究竟是意在看书呢，还是要穿丝光袜。至于咖啡店，先前只听说不过可以兼看舞女，使女，“以饱眼福”罢了。谁料这回竟是“名人”，给人“教益”，还演“高谈”“沉思”种种好玩的把戏，那简直是现实的乐园了。
What's more, drink coffee and receive "teachings"? On the beach, there are many deals that kill two birds with one stone. If you get a few magazines, it is considered a revolution; For example, how much money is spent on books, that is, real silk stockings or ice cream - although I still can't guess whether those patrons are meant to read books or wear silk stockings. As for the coffee shop, I only heard that you can also watch dancers and maids, "to feast your eyes". Who would have thought that this time he was actually a "celebrity", giving people "teachings", and also performing all kinds of fun tricks of "talking high" and "contemplating", which was simply a paradise of reality.但我又有几句声明——
But I have a few more statements—就是：这样的咖啡店里，我没有上去过，那一位作者所“遇见”的，又是别一人。因为：一，我是不喝咖啡的，我总觉得这是洋大人所喝的东西（但这也许是我的“时代错误”），不喜欢，还是绿茶好。二，我要抄“小说旧闻”之类，无暇享受这样乐园的清福。三，这样的乐园，我是不敢上去的，革命文学家，要年青貌美，齿白唇红，如潘汉年叶灵凤辈，这才是天生的文豪，乐园的材料；如我者，在《战线》上就宣布过一条“满口黄牙”的罪状，到那里去高谈，岂不亵渎了“无产阶级文学”么？还有四，则即使我要上去，也怕走不到，至多，只能在店后门远处彷徨彷徨，嗅嗅咖啡渣的气息罢了。你看这里面不很有些在前线的文豪么，我却是“落伍者”，决不会坐在一屋子里的。
That is: I have never been to such a coffee shop, and the author "met" someone else. Because: First, I don't drink coffee, I always feel that this is what foreigners drink (but this may be my "anachronism"), I don't like it, or green tea is better. Second, I want to copy "old novels" and the like, and I have no time to enjoy the bliss of such a paradise. Third, I dare not go to such a paradise, revolutionary writers, young and beautiful, white teeth and red lips, such as Pan Hannian Ye Lingfeng and others, this is the natural writer, the material of the paradise; For example, I announced a crime of "full of yellow teeth" on the "Front", and if I go there to talk about it, wouldn't it blaspheme "proletarian literature"? and fourth, even if I want to go up, I am afraid that I won't be able to walk, at most, I can only wander in the distance at the back door of the store, sniffing the smell of coffee grounds. Don't you think there are many literary heroes on the front line, but I am a "laggard" and will never sit in a room.以上都是真话。叶灵凤革命艺术家曾经画过我的像，说是躲在酒坛的后面。这事的然否我不谈。现在所要声明的，只是这乐园中我没有去，也不想去，并非躲在咖啡杯后面在骗人。
The above is all true. Ye Lingfeng, a revolutionary artist, once painted a portrait of me, saying that he was hiding behind the wine altar. I won't talk about whether this matter is right or wrong. What I want to declare now is that I didn't go to this paradise, and I didn't want to go, and I wasn't hiding behind a coffee cup to deceive people.杭州另外有一个鲁迅时，我登了一篇启事，“革命文学家”就挖苦了。但现在仍要自己出手来做一回，一者因为我不是咖啡，不愿意在革命店里做装点；二是我没有创造社那么阔，有一点事就一个律师，两个律师。
When there was another Lu Xun in Hangzhou, I posted a notice, and the "revolutionary writer" sarcastically said. But now I still have to do it myself, one is because I am not coffee, and I don't want to decorate it in the revolutionary shop; Second, I am not as broad as the Creation Society, and there is only one lawyer and two lawyers for a little thing.八月十日。
August 10th.

文坛的掌故

文坛的掌故

文坛的掌故

The story of the literary world来信
Letter编者先生：
Mr. Editor:由最近一个上海的朋友告诉我，“沪上的文艺界，近来为着革命文学的问题，闹得十分嚣。”有趣极了！这问题，在去年中秋前后，成都的文艺界，同样也剧烈的争论过。但闹得并不“嚣”，战区也不见扩大，便结束。大约除了成都，别处是很少知道有这一回事的。
A friend in Shanghai recently told me, "The literary and artistic circles in Shanghai have been making a lot of noise about the issue of revolutionary literature recently. "It's fun! This issue was also fiercely debated in Chengdu's literary and artistic circles around the Mid-Autumn Festival last year. But the trouble was not "noisy", and the theater of war did not expand, so it ended. Except for Chengdu, few other places know about this.现在让我来简约地说一说。
Now let me talk about it simply.这争论的起原，已经过了长时期的酝酿。双方的主体——赞成革命文学的，是国民日报社。——怀疑他们所谓革命文学的，是九五日报社。最先还仅是暗中的鼎峙；接着因了国民政府在长江一带逐渐发展，成都的革命文学家，便投机似的成立了“革命文艺研究社”，来竭力鼓吹无产阶级的文学。而凑巧有个署名张拾遗君的《谈谈革命文学》一篇论文在那时出现。于是挑起了一班革命文学家的怒，两面的战争，便开始攻击。
The origin of this controversy has been brewing for a long time. The main body of both sides, the one in favor of revolutionary literature, is the National Daily. ——The one who doubted their so-called revolutionary literature was the 95th Daily Newspaper. At first, it was only a secret standoff; Then, due to the gradual development of the Nationalist government in the Yangtze River area, the revolutionary writers in Chengdu speculatively established the "Revolutionary Literature and Art Research Society" to advocate proletarian literature. And it just so happened that a paper signed by Zhang Shiyijun "On Revolutionary Literature" appeared at that time. So it provoked the anger of a group of revolutionary writers, and the war on both sides began to attack.至于两方面的战略：革命文学者以为一切都应该革命，要革命才有进步，才顺潮流。不革命便是封建社会的余孽，帝国主义的爪牙。同样和创造社是以唯物史观为根据的。——可是又无他们的彻底，而把“文学革命”与“革命文学”并为一谈。——反对者承认“革命文学”和“平民文学”“贵族文学”同为文学上一种名词，与文学革命无关，而怀疑其像煞有介事的神圣不可侵犯。且文学不应如此狭义；何况革命的题材，未必多。即有，隔靴搔痒的写来，也未必好。是近乎有些“为艺术而艺术”的说法。加入这战团的，革命文学方面，多为“清一色”的会员；而反对系，则半属不相识的朋友。
As for the two strategies: revolutionary writers think that everything should be revolutionary, and only by revolution can there be progress and follow the trend. Non-revolution is the remnant of feudal society, the minions of imperialism. Similarly, the Creation Society is based on historical materialism. ——But without their thoroughness, "literary revolution" and "revolutionary literature" are discussed together. - Opponents admit that "revolutionary literature", "civilian literature" and "aristocratic literature" are both literary terms and have nothing to do with the literary revolution, and suspect that they are like the sacredness of the matter. And literature should not be so narrow; What's more, there may not be many revolutionary themes. Even if there is, it may not be good to write it through the boot. It is almost a saying of "art for art's sake". Most of the members who joined this battle group were "all" members in terms of revolutionary literature; The opposition department is half of the friends who do not know each other.这一场混战的结果，是由“革命文艺研究社”不欲延长战线，自愿休兵。但何故休兵，局外人是不能猜测的。
The result of this melee was that the "Revolutionary Literature and Art Research Society" did not want to extend the front line and voluntarily ceased hostilities. But why the truce is beyond outsider guess.关于那次的文件，因“文献不足”，只好从略。
The documents about that time had to be omitted due to "insufficient literature".上海这次想必一定很可观。据我的朋友抄来的目录看，已颇有洋洋乎之概！可惜重庆方面，还没有看这些刊物的眼福！
Shanghai must be very impressive this time. According to the catalog copied by my friend, it is already quite exaggerated! It's a pity that Chongqing has not yet read these publications!这信只算预备将来“文坛的掌故”起见，并无挑拨，拥护任何方面的意思。
This letter is only considered to be in preparation for the future "literary history", and does not provoke and supports any meaning.废话已说得不少，就此打住，敬祝
I've said a lot of nonsense, stop here, blessings撰安！
Write An!徐匀。十七年七月八日，于重庆。
Slowly even. On July 8 of the seventeenth year, in Chongqing.

文坛的掌故

回信

文坛的掌故

reply徐匀先生：
Mr. Xu Yun:多谢你写寄“文坛的掌故”的美意。
Thank you for writing the "Story of the Literary World".从年月推算起来，四川的“革命文学”，似乎还是去年出版的一本《革命文学论集》（书名大概如此，记不确切了，是丁丁编的）的余波。上海今年的“革命文学”，不妨说是又一幕。至于“嚣”与不“嚣”，那是要凭耳闻者的听觉的锐钝而定了。
Judging from the years and months, Sichuan's "revolutionary literature" seems to be the aftermath of a "Treatise on Revolutionary Literature" published last year (the title of the book is roughly like this, I can't remember exactly, it was edited by Ding Ding). Shanghai's "revolutionary literature" this year may be said to be another scene. As for whether it is "noisy" or not, it depends on the sharpness of the hearer's hearing.我在“革命文学”战场上，是“落伍者”，所以中心和前面的情状，不得而知。但向他们屁股那面望过去，则有成仿吾司令的《创造月刊》，《文化批判》，《流沙》，蒋光X（恕我还不知道现在已经改了那一字）拜帅的《太阳》，王独清领头的《我们》，青年革命艺术家叶灵凤独唱的《戈壁》；也是青年革命艺术家潘汉年编撰的《现代小说》和《战线》；再加一个真是“跟在弟弟背后说漂亮话”的潘梓年的速成的《洪荒》。但前几天看见K君对日本人的谈话（见《战旗》七月号），才知道潘叶之流的“革命文学”是不算在内的。
I am a "laggard" on the battlefield of "revolutionary literature", so the situation in the center and in front is unknown. But looking at their buttocks, there are Commander Cheng Fangwu's "Creation Monthly", "Cultural Criticism", "Quicksand", Jiang Guangx's "Sun" (forgive me for not knowing that the word has been changed now), "We" led by Wang Duqing, and "Gobi" sung by young revolutionary artist Ye Lingfeng; it is also "Modern Novel" and "Frontline" compiled by young revolutionary artist Pan Hannian; Add another quick "Flood Wilderness" by Pan Zinian, who really "speaks beautiful words behind his brother's back". But a few days ago, I saw Mr. K's conversation with the Japanese (see the July issue of "Battle Flag"), and I realized that Pan Ye's "revolutionary literature" is not included.含混地只讲“革命文学”，当然不能彻底，所以今年在上海所挂出来的招牌却确是无产阶级文学，至于是否以唯物史观为根据，则因为我是外行，不得而知。但一讲无产阶级文学，便不免归结到斗争文学，一讲斗争，便只能说是最高的政治斗争的一翼。这在俄国，是正当的，因为正是劳农专政；在日本也还不打紧，因为究竟还有一点微微的出版自由，居然也还说可以组织劳动政党。中国则不然，所以两月前就变了相，不但改名“新文艺”，并且根据了资产社会的法律，请律师大登其广告，来吓唬别人了。
Of course, it cannot be completely said that only "revolutionary literature" is vaguely spoken, so the signboard hung in Shanghai this year is indeed proletarian literature. But when talking about proletarian literature, it inevitably comes down to struggle literature, and when talking about struggle, it can only be said to be one of the highest wings of political struggle. This is justified in Russia, because it is the dictatorship of the workers and peasants; In Japan, it is not a big deal, because there is still a little freedom of the press, and it is said that it can organize a labor party. China is not like that, so it changed its appearance two months ago, not only changing its name to "New Literature and Art", but also asking lawyers to advertise it in accordance with the laws of the bourgeois society to scare others.向“革命的智识阶级”叫打倒旧东西，又拉旧东西来保护自己，要有革命者的名声，却不肯吃一点革命者往往难免的辛苦，于是不但笑啼俱伪，并且左右不同，连叶灵凤所抄袭来的“阴阳脸”，也还不足以淋漓尽致地为他们自己写照，我以为这是很可惜，也觉得颇寂寞的。
To the "revolutionary intellectual class" to knock down the old things, and pull the old things to protect themselves, to have the reputation of revolutionaries, but refuse to eat a little of the often inevitable hard work of revolutionaries, so not only laughing and crying, but also different left and right, even the "yin and yang faces" copied by Ye Lingfeng are not enough to vividly portray themselves, I think this is a pity, and I feel quite lonely.但这是就大局而言，倘说个人，却也有已经得到好结果的。例如成仿吾，做了一篇“开步走”和“打发他们去”，又改换姓名（石厚生）做了一点“珰鲁迅”之后，据日本的无产文艺月刊《战旗》七月号所载，他就又走在修善寺温泉的近旁（可不知洗了澡没有），并且在那边被尊为“可尊敬的普罗塔利亚特作家”，“从支那的劳动者农民所选出的他们的艺术家”了。
But this is in terms of the overall situation, if we talk about individuals, there are also those who have already achieved good results. For example, after Cheng Fangwu wrote an article "Letting Go" and "Sending Them Away", and changed his name (Shi Housheng) to make a little "Dong Lu Xun", according to the July issue of the Japanese proletarian literature and art monthly magazine "War Flag", he walked near the hot springs of Shuzenji Temple (but I don't know if he took a bath), and was revered there as "a respectable protagalia writer" and "their artists selected from the laborers and peasants of China".鲁迅。八月十日。Lu Xun. August 10th.

文学的阶级性

文学的阶级性

文学的阶级性

The class nature of literature来信
Letter鲁迅先生：
Mr. Lu Xun:侍桁先生译林癸未夫著的《文学上之个人性与阶级性》，本来这是一篇绝好的文章，但可惜篇末涉及唯物史观的问题，理论未免是勉强一点，也许是著者的误解唯物史观。他说：
Mr. Shi Ting's translation of "Individuality and Class in Literature" by Lin Guiweifu was originally an excellent article, but unfortunately the end of the article involves the issue of historical materialism, and the theory is a little reluctant, perhaps because the author misunderstands historical materialism. He said:“以这种理由若推论下去，有产者的个人性与无产者的个人性，‘全个’是不相同的了。就是说不承认有产者与无产者之间有共同的人性。再换一句话说，有产者与无产者只是有阶级性，而全然缺少个人性的。”
"If we continue to infer from this reason, the individuality of the proletarian and the individuality of the proletariat, 'whole' are not the same. That is to say, it does not recognize the common humanity between the proletarian and the proletarian. In other words, the proletariat and the proletariat only have class characteristics, but lack individuality at all. ”这是什么话！唯物史观的理论，岂是这样简单的。它的理论并不否认个人性，因此，也不否认思想，道德，感情，艺术。但以性格，思想，道德，感情，艺术，都是受支配于经济的。林氏的文章是着意于个人性，我们就以个人性而论。譬如农村经济宗法社会里拿妻子为男子的财产，但是文化进步到今日的社会，就承认妻子有相当的人格。这个观念，当然是有产者和无产者所共同的。虽然是共同，却并非天赋的，仍然逃不了经济的支配。有产者和无产者物质生活上受经济的影响而有差等，个人性同样地受经济的影响而却是共同的。并不是有产者和无产者人性的共同而就是不受经济制度的影响了。
What is this! The theory of historical materialism is not so simple. Its theory does not deny individuality and, therefore, thought, morality, feelings, art. But character, thought, morality, feelings, and art are all governed by the economy. Lin's article focuses on individuality, so let's talk about individuality. For example, in rural economic patriarchal society, wives are regarded as men's property, but cultural progress to today's society recognizes that wives have considerable personalities. This concept is of course common to both the proletariat and the proletariat. Although it is common, it is not talented, and it still cannot escape the domination of the economy. The material life of the proletarian and the proletarian is affected by the economy, etc., and the individuality is also affected by the economy but is common. It is not that the human nature of the proletariat and the proletariat is common, but that it is not affected by the economic system.林氏以此而可以驳唯物史观，那末，何以不拿“人是同样的是圆顶方趾，要吃饭，要睡觉，是有产者和无产者所共同的”而来驳唯物史观，爽快得多了。
Lin can refute historical materialism in this way, so why not refute historical materialism with "people are the same with round toes, eat and sleep, which are common to the proletariat and the proletariat".最后，我须声明：我是个资本主义制度下的职工。因为是职工，所以学识的谫陋是谁都可以肯定的。这文中自然有不少不能达意和不妥之处。但我希望有更了解马克思学说的人来为唯物史观打一打仗。
Finally, I must declare: I am a worker under the capitalist system. Because he is an employee, anyone can be sure of the ignorance of knowledge. Naturally, there are many unsatisfactory and inappropriate points in this article. But I hope that someone who knows more about Marx's doctrine will fight a war against historical materialism.因为避学者嫌疑起见，以信底形式而写给鲁迅先生。能否发表，是编者的特权了。
In order to avoid the suspicion of scholars, it was written to Mr. Lu Xun in the form of a letter. Whether it can be published is the prerogative of the editor.恺良于上海，一九二八，七，二八。
Kai Liang in Shanghai, 1928, 7, 28.

文学的阶级性

回信

文学的阶级性

reply恺良先生：
Mr. Kailiang:我对于唯物史观是门外汉，不能说什么。但就林氏的那一段文字而论，他将话两次一换，便成为“只有”和“全然缺少”，却似乎决定得太快一点了。大概以弄文学而又讲唯物史观的人，能从基本的书籍上一一钩剔出来的，恐怕不很多，常常是看几本别人的提要就算。而这种提要，又因作者的学识意思而不同，有些作者，意在使阶级意识明了锐利起来，就竭力增强阶级性说，而别一面就也容易招人误解。作为本文根据的林氏别一篇论文，我没有见，不能说他是否因此而走了相反的极端，但中国却有此例，竟会将个性，共同的人性（即林氏之所谓个人性），个人主义即利己主义混为一谈，来加以自以为唯物史观底申斥，倘再有人据此来论唯物史观，那真是糟糕透顶了。
I am a layman for historical materialism and cannot say anything. But as far as Lin's text is concerned, he changed his words twice and became "only" and "completely lacking", but it seemed to be decided too quickly. Probably people who are good at literature and talk about historical materialism can pick out a few basic books one by one, and often just read a few other people's summaries. And this kind of summary is different depending on the author's knowledge and meaning, some authors, intending to make the class consciousness clear and sharp, try their best to enhance the class theory, while the other side is also easy to misunderstand. I have not seen another paper by Lin as the basis for this article, and I cannot say whether he went to the opposite extreme because of this, but there is an example in China, which will confuse individuality, common humanity (that is, Lin's so-called individuality), and individualism that is, egoism, to denounce it as a self-proclaimed historical materialism.来信的“吃饭睡觉”的比喻，虽然不过是讲笑话，但脱罗兹基曾以对于“死之恐怖”为古今人所共同，来说明文学中有不带阶级性的分子，那方法其实是差不多的。在我自己，是以为若据性格感情等，都受“支配于经济”（也可以说根据于经济组织或依存于经济组织）之说，则这些就一定都带着阶级性。但是“都带”，而非“只有”。所以不相信有一切超乎阶级，文章如日月的永久的大文豪，也不相信住洋房，喝咖啡，却道“唯我把握住了无产阶级意识，所以我是真的无产者”的革命文学者。
Although the metaphor of "eating and sleeping" in the letter is just a joke, Torodsky once used the "horror of death" as common to ancient and modern people to illustrate that there are non-class elements in literature, and the method is actually similar. Personally, I think that if they are all "governed by the economy" (which can also be said to be based on or dependent on economic organizations) according to personality and feelings, then these must all have a class character. But "all bring", not "only". Therefore, I do not believe that there are permanent great writers who transcend class and write articles like the sun and moon, nor do I believe in revolutionary writers who live in bungalows and drink coffee, but say, "Only I have grasped the consciousness of the proletariat, so I am really a proletarian".有马克斯学识的人来为唯物史观打仗，在此刻，我是不赞成的。我只希望有切实的人，肯译几部世界上已有定评的关于唯物史观的书——至少，是一部简单浅显的，两部精密的——还要一两本反对的著作。那么，论争起来，可以省说许多话。
At this moment, I do not approve of people with Max's knowledge who come to fight for historical materialism. I only hope that there will be practical people who will translate a few books on historical materialism that have been evaluated in the world - at least, one simple and two sophisticated - and one or two works that oppose it. Then, when arguing, you can save a lot of words.鲁迅。八月十日。Lu Xun. August 10th.

一九二九年

一九二九年

一九二九年

In 1929

“革命军马前卒”和“落伍者”

“革命军马前卒”和“落伍者”

“革命军马前卒”和“落伍者”

"Revolutionary Army Pawns" and "Laggards"西湖博览会上要设先烈博物馆了，在征求遗物。这是不可少的盛举，没有先烈，现在还拖着辫子也说不定的，更那能如此自在。
The West Lake Expo is going to set up a martyrs' museum, which is soliciting relics. This is an indispensable grand event, there are no martyrs, and it may be possible to drag braids now, let alone be so comfortable.但所征求的，末后又有“落伍者的丑史”，却有些古怪了。仿佛要令人于饮水思源以后，再喝一口脏水，历亲芳烈之余，添嗅一下臭气似的。
But what is solicited is that there is a "scandalous history of the laggards" at the end, but it is a bit strange. It seems that after drinking water and thinking about the source, drink another sip of dirty water, and smell the stench after experiencing the fragrance.而所征求的“落伍者的丑史”的目录中，又有“邹容的事实”，那可更加有些古怪了。如果印本没有错而邹容不是别一人，那么，据我所知道，大概是这样的——
In the catalog of "The Ugly History of the Stragglers" solicited for it, there is "Zou Rong's Facts", which is even more bizarre. If the printed copy is not wrong and Zou Rong is not someone else, then, as far as I know, it is probably like this——他在满清时，做了一本《革命军》，鼓吹排满，所以自署曰“革命军马前卒邹容”。后来从日本回国，在上海被捕，死在西牢里了，其时盖在一九〇二年。自然，他所主张的不过是民族革命，未曾想到共和，自然更不知道三民主义，当然也不知道共产主义。但这是大家应该原谅他的，因为他死得太早了，他死了的明年，同盟会才成立。
When he was in the Manchu Qing Dynasty, he made a book of "Revolutionary Army", advocating that it was full, so he signed himself "Zou Rong, a soldier of the Revolutionary Army". Later, he returned from Japan, was arrested in Shanghai, and died in the Western Prison, which was in 1902. Naturally, what he advocated was nothing more than a national revolution, never thinking of a republic, and naturally he did not know the Three People's Principles, and of course he did not know communism. But this is something that everyone should forgive him, because he died too early, and the Alliance was established the year after his death.听说中山先生的自叙上就提起他的，开目录的诸公，何妨于公余之暇，去查一查呢？
I heard that Mr. Sun Yat-sen's autobiography mentioned him, and the gentlemen who opened the catalogue didn't dare to check it in their spare time?后烈实在前进得快，二十五年前的事，就已经茫然了，可谓美史也已。
Hou Lie is really moving forward quickly, and what happened twenty-five years ago is already at a loss, which can be described as American history.二月十七日。
February 17th.

《近代世界短篇小说集》小引

《近代世界短篇小说集》小引

《近代世界短篇小说集》小引

A small introduction to the "Collection of Short Stories in the Modern World"一时代的纪念碑底的文章，文坛上不常有；即有之，也什九是大部的著作。以一篇短的小说而成为时代精神所居的大宫阙者，是极其少见的。
Articles at the bottom of monuments of an era are not often found in the literary world; Even if there is, nine out of ten are most of the works. It is extremely rare for a short novel to become a great palace where the spirit of the times lives.但至今，在巍峨灿烂的巨大的纪念碑底的文学之旁，短篇小说也依然有着存在的充足的权利。不但巨细高低，相依为命，也譬如身入大伽蓝中，但见全体非常宏丽，眩人眼睛，令观者心神飞越，而细看一雕阑一画础，虽然细小，所得却更为分明，再以此推及全体，感受遂愈加切实，因此那些终于为人所注重了。
But to this day, next to the literature at the base of the majestic and splendid monument, short stories still have the full right to exist. Not only is it high and small, dependent on each other, but it is also like entering a large temple, but seeing the whole is very magnificent, dazzling to the eyes, making the viewer's mind fly over, and looking closely at a carved railing and a painting base, although small, the result is more clear, and then pushed to the whole, the feeling becomes more and more real, so those are finally paid attention to.在现在的环境中，人们忙于生活，无暇来看长篇，自然也是短篇小说的繁生的很大原因之一。只顷刻间，而仍可借一斑略知全豹，以一目尽传精神，用数顷刻，遂知种种作风，种种作者，种种所写的人和物和事状，所得也颇不少的。而便捷，易成，取巧……这些原因还在外。
In the current environment, people are busy with life and have no time to read long stories, which is naturally one of the main reasons for the proliferation of short stories. In just a moment, you can still get a little idea of the whole leopard with a glimpse, and convey the spirit at a glance, and in a few moments, you can know all kinds of styles, all kinds of authors, all kinds of people, things and things written, and you can get a lot. It is convenient, easy to complete, and clever...... These reasons are still out.中国于世界所有的大部杰作很少译本，翻译短篇小说的却特别的多者，原因大约也为此。我们——译者的汇印这书，则原因就在此。贪图用力少，绍介多，有些不肯用尽呆气力的坏处，是自问恐怕也在所不免的。但也有一点只要能培一朵花，就不妨做做会朽的腐草的近于不坏的意思。还有，是要将零星的小品，聚在一本里，可以较不容易于散亡。
China has very few translations of all the masterpieces in the world, but the translation of short stories is particularly large, and the reason is probably for this reason. This is the reason why we, the translator, printed this book. The disadvantages of being greedy for less effort, more Shaojie, and some refusal to use all their strength are inevitable to ask yourself. But there is also a point that as long as you can cultivate a flower, you might as well make rotten grass that is close to not bad. Also, it is necessary to gather sporadic sketches in one book, which can be less difficult to scatter.我们——译者，都是一面学习，一面试做的人，虽于这一点小事，力量也还很不够，选的不当和译的错误，想来是一定不免的。我们愿受读者和批评者的指正。
We, translators, are people who study and try to do at the same time, although this small thing, the strength is still not enough, and the improper choice and translation mistakes must be inevitable. We would like to be corrected by readers and critics.一九二九年四月二十六日，朝花社同人识。
On April 26, 1929, he met the same person as the Morning Flower Society.

现今的新文学的概观——五月二十二日在燕京大学国文学会讲

现今的新文学的概观An Overview of Today's New Literature ——五月二十二日在燕京大学国文学会讲 - Lecture at the Chinese Literature Society of Yenching University on May 22
这一年多，我不很向青年诸君说什么话了，因为革命以来，言论的路很窄小，不是过激，便是反动，于大家都无益处。这一次回到北平，几位旧识的人要我到这里来讲几句，情不可却，只好来讲几句。但因为种种琐事，终于没有想定究竟来讲什么——连题目都没有。
For more than a year, I haven't said anything to the young people, because since the revolution, the road for speech has been very narrow, either radical or reactionary, and it is not beneficial to everyone. This time back in Peking, several old acquaintances asked me to come here to say a few words, but I couldn't refuse, so I had to say a few words. But because of all kinds of trivial matters, I finally didn't think about what to talk about - I didn't even have a topic.那题目，原是想在车上拟定的，但因为道路坏，汽车颠起来有尺多高，无从想起。我于是偶然感到，外来的东西，单取一件，是不行的，有汽车也须有好道路，一切事总免不掉环境的影响。文学——在中国的所谓新文学，所谓革命文学，也是如此。
The topic was originally planned in the car, but because the road was broken, the car was so high that I couldn't remember it. I accidentally felt that it was not possible to take a single piece of foreign things, and that there must be good roads with cars, and everything would inevitably be affected by the environment. Literature - the so-called new literature in China, the so-called revolutionary literature, is the same.中国的文化，便是怎样的爱国者，恐怕也大概不能不承认是有些落后。新的事物，都是从外面侵入的。新的势力来到了，大多数的人们还是莫名其妙。北平还不到这样，譬如上海租界，那情形，外国人是处在中央，那外面，围着一群翻译，包探，巡捕，西崽……之类，是懂得外国话，熟悉租界章程的。这一圈之外，才是许多老百姓。
Chinese culture, what kind of patriot it is, I am afraid that it cannot but admit that it is a little backward. New things are intruding from the outside. New forces have arrived, and most people are still puzzled. Peiping is not like this, for example, in the Shanghai Concession, the foreigner is in the center, and outside, surrounded by a group of interpreters, scouts, patrols, and cubs...... and so on, they know foreign languages and are familiar with the concession charter. Outside this circle, there are many ordinary people.老百姓一到洋场，永远不会明白真实情形，外国人说“Yes”，翻译道，“他在说打一个耳光”，外国人说“No”，翻出来却是他说“去枪毙”。倘想要免去这一类无谓的冤苦，首先是在知道得多一点，冲破了这一个圈子。
When the people arrive at the foreign market, they will never understand the real situation, foreigners say "Yes", translated, "he is talking about slapping a slap", foreigners say "No", but when it turns out, he says "go shoot". If you want to avoid this kind of unnecessary injustice, you must first know a little more and break through this circle.在文学界也一样，我们知道得太不多，而帮助我们知识的材料也太少。梁实秋有一个白璧德，徐志摩有一个泰戈尔胡适之有一个杜威，——是的，徐志摩还有一个曼殊斐儿，他到她坟上去哭过，——创造社有革命文学，时行的文学。不过附和的，创作的很有，研究的却不多，直到现在，还是给几个出题目的人们圈了起来。
The same is true in literature, where we know too little and too little material to help us with knowledge. Liang Shiqiu had a Bai Bide, Xu Zhimo had a Tagore, Hu Shizhi had a Dewey,—— Yes, Xu Zhimo also had a Manshu Feier, he went to her grave to cry,—— The Creation Society had revolutionary literature, Shixing's literature. However, there is a lot of creation, but not much research, and until now, I have circled a few people who have raised the topic.各种文学，都是应环境而产生的，推崇文艺的人，虽喜欢说文艺足以煽起风波来，但在事实上，却是政治先行，文艺后变。倘以为文艺可以改变环境，那是“唯心”之谈，事实的出现，并不如文学家所豫想。所以巨大的革命，以前的所谓革命文学者还须灭亡，待到革命略有结果，略有喘息的余裕，这才产生新的革命文学者。为什么呢，因为旧社会将近崩坏之际，是常常会有近似带革命性的文学作品出现的，然而其实并非真的革命文学。例如：或者憎恶旧社会，而只是憎恶，更没有对于将来的理想；或者也大呼改造社会，而问他要怎样的社会，却是不能实现的乌托邦；或者自己活得无聊了，便空泛地希望一大转变，来作刺戟，正如饱于饮食的人，想吃些辣椒爽口；更下的是原是旧式人物，但在社会里失败了，却想另挂新招牌，靠新兴势力获得更好的地位。
All kinds of literature are produced in response to the environment, and people who admire literature and art, although they like to say that literature and art are enough to stir up turmoil, but in fact, it is politics first, literature and art change later. If you think that literature and art can change the environment, it is a "idealistic" statement, and the appearance of facts is not as writers imagined. Therefore, the great revolution, the so-called revolutionary writers in the past must perish, and only when the revolution has some results and a little breathing room will new revolutionary writers be produced. Why, because when the old society was about to collapse, there were often literary works that were almost revolutionary, but in fact they were not really revolutionary literature. For example: or hate the old society, but only hate it, and have no ideals for the future; or shouting to reform society, but asking him what kind of society he wants, but it is an unattainable utopia; Or if you are bored of your life, you vaguely hope for a big change to be a thorn, just like a person who is full of food wants to eat some chili peppers to refresh; What's worse is that he was originally an old-style figure, but failed in society, but he wanted to put up a new signboard and rely on emerging forces to gain a better position.希望革命的文人，革命一到，反而沉默下去的例子，在中国便曾有过的。即如清末的南社，便是鼓吹革命的文学团体，他们叹汉族的被压制，愤满人的凶横，渴望着“光复旧物”。但民国成立以后，倒寂然无声了。我想，这是因为他们的理想，是在革命以后，“重见汉官威仪”，峨冠博带。而事实并不这样，所以反而索然无味，不想执笔了。俄国的例子尤为明显，十月革命开初，也曾有许多革命文学家非常惊喜，欢迎这暴风雨的袭来，愿受风雷的试炼。但后来，诗人叶遂宁，小说家索波里自杀了，近来还听说有名的小说家爱伦堡有些反动。这是什么缘故呢？就因为四面袭来的并不是暴风雨，来试炼的也并非风雷，却是老老实实的“革命”。空想被击碎了，人也就活不下去，这倒不如古时候相信死后灵魂上天，坐在上帝旁边吃点心的诗人们福气。因为他们在达到目的之前，已经死掉了。
There have been examples in China of literati who hope for revolution and remain silent when the revolution comes. For example, the Nanshe in the late Qing Dynasty was a literary group advocating revolution, lamenting the suppression of the Han people, angry at the ferocity of the people, and longing to "restore the old things". But after the founding of the Republic of China, it was silent. I think this is because their ideal is to "see the majesty of Han officials again" after the revolution. But this is not the case, so it is boring and I don't want to write. The example of Russia is particularly obvious, at the beginning of the October Revolution, there were many revolutionary writers who were very surprised, welcomed the storm, and were willing to be tested by wind and thunder. But later, the poet Ye Suining, the novelist Sopoli committed suicide, and recently I heard that the famous novelist Ehrenberg was somewhat reactionary. What is the reason for this? Just because it is not a storm that strikes from all sides, and it is not the wind and thunder that come to test, but an honest "revolution". If the fantasy is shattered, people will not be able to live, which is not as blessed as the poets who believed that the soul went to heaven after death and sat next to God to eat snacks. Because they are dead before they can achieve their goal.中国，据说，自然是已经革了命，——政治上也许如此罢，但在文艺上，却并没有改变。有人说，“小资产阶级文学之抬头”了，其实是，小资产阶级文学在那里呢，连“头”也没有，那里说得到“抬”。这照我上面所讲的推论起来，就是文学并不变化和兴旺，所反映的便是并无革命和进步，——虽然革命家听了也许不大喜欢。
China, it is said that it has naturally been revolutionized,—— politically it may be so, but in literature and art, it has not changed. Some people say that "the rise of petty-bourgeois literature" is actually that petty-bourgeois literature is there, not even a "head", and it can be said to be "raised" there. According to what I said above, literature does not change and prosper, but reflects that there is no revolution or progress,—— although revolutionaries may not like it very much.至于创造社所提倡的，更彻底的革命文学——无产阶级文学，自然更不过是一个题目。这边也禁，那边也禁的王独清的从上海租界里遥望广州暴动的诗，“Pong Pong Pong”，铅字逐渐大了起来，只在说明他曾为电影的字幕和上海的酱园招牌所感动，有模仿勃洛克的《十二个》之志而无其力和才。郭沫若的《一只手》是很有人推为佳作的，但内容说一个革命者革命之后失了一只手，所余的一只还能和爱人握手的事，却未免“失”得太巧。五体，四肢之中，倘要失去其一，实在还不如一只手；一条腿就不便，头自然更不行了。只准备失去一只手，是能减少战斗的勇往之气的；我想，革命者所不惜牺牲的，一定不只这一点。《一只手》也还是穷秀才落难，后来终于中状元，谐花烛的老调。
As for the more thorough revolutionary literature advocated by the Creation Society, proletarian literature, it is naturally nothing more than a topic. Wang Duqing, who is also forbidden here, is also forbidden there, looking at the Guangzhou riots from the Shanghai Concession, "Pong Pong Pong", the lead words gradually become larger, only to show that he was moved by the subtitles of the movie and the signboard of Shanghai's sauce garden, and had the ambition to imitate Bullock's "Twelve" but had no strength and talent. Guo Moruo's "One Hand" is highly regarded as a masterpiece, but the content says that a revolutionary loses a hand after the revolution, and the remaining one can still shake hands with his lover, but it is too coincidental to "lose". Among the five bodies and limbs, if one is lost, it is really not as good as a hand; One leg is inconvenient, and the head is naturally even worse. Preparing to lose only one hand can reduce the courage to fight; I think that revolutionaries must have sacrificed more than this. "One Hand" was still a poor scholar in trouble, and later finally won the champion, harmonizing with the old tune of flower candles.但这些却也正是中国现状的一种反映。新近上海出版的革命文学的一本书的封面上，画着一把钢叉，这是从《苦闷的象征》的书面上取来的，叉的中间的一条尖刺上，又安一个铁锤，这是从苏联的旗子上取来的。然而这样地合了起来，却弄得既不能刺，又不能敲，只能在表明这位作者的庸陋，——也正可以做那些文艺家的徽章。
But these are also a reflection of China's current situation. On the cover of a book on revolutionary literature recently published in Shanghai, a steel fork is drawn, taken from the text of "The Symbol of Distress", and a hammer is placed on a spike in the middle of the fork, which is taken from the Soviet flag. However, when put together like this, it can neither be stabbed nor knocked, and it can only show the author's mediocrity,—— and it can also be used as a badge for those writers and artists.从这一阶级走到那一阶级去，自然是能有的事，但最好是意识如何，便一一直说，使大众看去，为仇为友，了了分明。不要脑子里存着许多旧的残滓，却故意瞒了起来，演戏似的指着自己的鼻子道，“惟我是无产阶级！”现在的人们既然神经过敏，听到“俄”字便要气绝，连嘴唇也快要不准红了，对于出版物，这也怕，那也怕；而革命文学家又不肯多绍介别国的理论和作品，单是这样的指着自己的鼻子，临了便会像前清的“奉旨申斥”一样，令人莫名其妙的。
It is naturally possible to go from this class to that class, but it is best to keep saying it all the time, so that the public can see that it is an enemy and a friend. Don't keep a lot of old residues in your mind, but deliberately hide it, point to your nose as if acting, and say, "But I am a proletarian!" Since people are nervous now, they will die when they hear the word "Russia", and even their lips are about to turn red. And revolutionary writers are unwilling to introduce more theories and works of other countries, just pointing at their own noses like this will be like the "reprimand" of the former Qing Dynasty, which is inexplicable.对于诸君，“奉旨申斥”大概还须解释几句才会明白罢。这是帝制时代的事。一个官员犯了过失了，便叫他跪在一个什么门外面，皇帝差一个太监来斥骂。这时须得用一点化费，那么，骂几句就完；倘若不用，他便从祖宗一直骂到子孙。这算是皇帝在骂，然而谁能去问皇帝，问他究竟可是要这样地骂呢？去年，据日本的杂志上说，成仿吾是由中国的农工大众选他往德国研究戏曲去了，我们也无从打听，究竟真是这样地选了没有。
For everyone, "by order to reprimand" probably needs to be explained a few sentences to understand. This was in the imperial era. An official made a mistake, so he was told to kneel outside a door, and the emperor sent a eunuch to scold. At this time, you have to use a little fee, then just scold a few words; If he didn't use it, he would scold from his ancestors to his descendants. This is the emperor scolding, but who can ask the emperor if he wants to scold like this? Last year, according to a Japanese magazine, Cheng Fangwu was chosen by the Chinese peasants and workers to study opera in Germany, and we had no way of asking whether he was really chosen this way.所以我想，倘要比较地明白，还只好用我的老话，“多看外国书”，来打破这包围的圈子。这事，于诸君是不甚费力的。关于新兴文学的英文书或英译书，即使不多，然而所有的几本，一定较为切实可靠。多看些别国的理论和作品之后，再来估量中国的新文艺，便可以清楚得多了。更好是绍介到中国来；翻译并不比随便的创作容易，然而于新文学的发展却更有功，于大家更有益。
So I think that if I want to understand it more clearly, I have to use my old saying, "read more foreign books", to break this circle of encirclement. This matter is not very laborious for you. There are not many English books or English translations of emerging literature, but all of them must be more reliable and reliable. After reading more theories and works of other countries, it will be much clearer to evaluate China's new literature and art. Better is to introduce to China; Translation is not easier than casual creation, but it is more beneficial to the development of new literature and beneficial to everyone.

“皇汉医学”

“皇汉医学”

“皇汉医学”

"Imperial Han Medicine"革命成功之后，“国术”“国技”“国花”“国医”闹得乌烟瘴气之时，日本人汤本求真做的《皇汉医学》译本也将乘时出版了。广告上这样说——
After the success of the revolution, when "national art", "national skills", "national flowers" and "traditional medicine" were in turmoil, the translation of "Imperial Han Medicine" made by the Japanese Yumoto Qiuzhen would also be published in time. The advertisement says this -“日医汤本求真氏于明治三十四年卒业金泽医学专门学校后应世多年觉中西医术各有所长短非比较同异舍短取长不可爰发愤学汉医历十八年之久汇集吾国历来诸家医书及彼邦人士研究汉医药心得之作著《皇汉医学》一书引用书目多至一百余种旁求博考洵大观也……”
"Japanese doctor Tang Benqiu Zhen graduated from Kanazawa Medical College in the 34th year of Meiji, and after many years of life, he felt that Chinese and Western medicine had their own strengths and weaknesses, not comparing similarities and differences, abandoning shortcomings and taking strengths, so he studied Chinese medicine for eighteen years......我们“皇汉”人实在有些怪脾气的：外国人论及我们缺点的不欲闻，说好处就相信，讲科学者不大提，有几个说神见鬼的便绍介。这也正是同例，金泽医学专门学校卒业者何止数千人，做西洋医学的也有十几位了，然而我们偏偏刮目于可入《无双谱》的汤本先生的《皇汉医学》。
We "imperial Han" people are really a little strange-tempered: foreigners don't want to hear about our shortcomings, they believe when they say the benefits, they don't mention scientists, and a few people say that they see gods and ghosts. This is exactly the same case, there are thousands of graduates of Kanazawa Medical College, and there are more than a dozen people who are doing Western medicine, but we are impressed by Mr. Yumoto's "Imperial Han Medicine", which can be included in the "Peerless Spectrum".小朋友梵儿在日本东京，化了四角钱在地摊上买到一部冈千仞作的《观光纪游》，是明治十七年（一八八四）来游中国的日记。他看过之后，在书头卷尾写了几句牢骚话，寄给我了。来得正好，钞一段在下面：
In Tokyo, Japan, the child Fan'er spent four dimes to buy a copy of Oka's "Sightseeing Chronicles" written by Oka Qianren at a street stall, which was a diary of a visit to China in the seventeenth year of Meiji (1884). After reading it, he wrote a few complaints at the end of the book and sent it to me. Just in time, a piece of banknote is below:“二十三日，梦香竹孙来访。……梦香盛称多纪氏医书。余曰，‘敝邦西洋医学盛开，无复手多纪氏书者，故贩原板上海书肆，无用陈余之刍狗也。’曰，‘多纪氏书，发仲景氏微旨，他年日人必悔此事。’曰，‘敝邦医术大开，译书续出，十年之后，中人争购敝邦译书，亦不可知。’梦香默然。余因以为合信氏医书（案：盖指《全体新论》），刻于宁波，宁波距此咫尺，而梦香满口称多纪氏，无一语及合信氏者，何故也？……”（卷三《苏杭日记》下二页。）
“二十三日，梦香竹孙来访。 …… 梦香盛称多纪氏医书。 余曰，‘敝邦西洋医学盛开，无复手多纪氏书者，故贩原板上海书肆，无用陈余之刍狗也。 ’曰，‘多纪氏书，发仲景氏微旨，他年日人必悔此事。 ’曰，‘敝邦医术大开，译书续出，十年之后，中人争购敝邦译书，亦不可知。 ’梦香默然。 余因以为合信氏医书（案：盖指《全体新论》），刻于宁波，宁波距此咫尺，而梦香满口称多纪氏，无一语及合信氏者，何故也？……”（卷三《苏杭日记》下二页。 ）冈氏于此等处似乎终于不明白。这是“四千余年古国古”的人民的“收买废铜烂铁”脾气，所以文人则“盛称多纪氏”，武人便大买旧炮和废枪，给外国“无用陈余之刍狗”有一条出路。
Gang seems to have finally understood this. This is the temper of the people of "more than 4,000 years of ancient countries and ancient countries" to "buy scrap copper and rotten iron", so the literati are "called the Duoji clan", and the warriors buy old cannons and waste guns to give foreign "useless Chen Yu's fodder" a way out.冈氏距明治维新后不久，还有改革的英气，所以他的日记里常有好意的苦言。革命底批评家或云与其看世纪末的烦琐隐晦没奈何之言，不如上观任何民族开国时文字，证以此事，是颇有一理的。
Shortly after the Meiji Restoration, Gang still had the heroic spirit of reform, so his diary often contained well-intentioned bitter words. Critics of the revolution may say that instead of looking at the cumbersome and obscure words of the end of the century, it is better to look at the writings of any nation at the founding of the country to prove that this matter is quite reasonable.七月二十八日。
July 28.

《吾国征俄战史之一页》

《吾国征俄战史之一页》

《吾国征俄战史之一页》

"A page of the history of our country's war against Russia"大家都说要打俄国，或者“愿为前驱”，或者“愿作后盾”，连中国文学所赖以不坠的新月书店，也登广告出卖关于俄国的书籍两种，则举国之同仇敌忾也可知矣。自然，大势如此，执笔者也应当做点应时的东西，庶几不至于落伍。我于是在七月廿六日《新闻报》的《快活林》里，遇见一篇题作《吾国征俄战史之一页》的叙述详细而昏不可当的文章，可惜限于篇幅，只能摘抄：
Everyone said that they wanted to fight Russia, or "willing to be the vanguard", or "willing to be the backing", and even the Crescent Bookstore, on which Chinese literature resides, also advertised to sell two kinds of books about Russia, so the hatred of the whole country can also be known. Naturally, the general trend is like this, and the writer should also do something timely, so as not to be outdated. So on July 26, in the "Happy Forest" of the "News", I came across a detailed and unstoppable article titled "A Page of Our Country's History of the War against Russia", but unfortunately it was limited in space, so I could only excerpt:“……乃尝读史至元成吉思汗。起自蒙古。入主中夏。开国以后。奄有钦察阿速诸部。命速不合征蔑里吉。复引兵绕宽田吉思海。转战至太和岭。洎太宗七年。又命速不台为前驱。随诸王拔都。皇子贵由。皇侄哥等伐西域。十年乃大举征俄。直逼耶烈赞城。而陷莫斯科。太祖长子术赤遂于其地即汗位。可谓破前古未有之纪载矣。夫一代之英主。开创之际。战胜攻取。用其兵威。不难统一区宇。史册所叙。纵极铺张。要不过禹域以内。讫无西至流沙。举朔北辽绝之地而空之。不特唯是。犹复鼓其余勇。进逼欧洲内地。而有欧亚混一之势者。谓非吾国战史上最有光彩最有荣誉之一页得乎……”
“…… 乃尝读史至元成吉思汗。 起自蒙古。 入主中夏。 开国以后。 奄有钦察阿速诸部。 命速不合征蔑里吉。 复引兵绕宽田吉思海。 转战至太和岭。 洎太宗七年。 又命速不台为前驱。 随诸王拔都。 皇子贵由。 皇侄哥等伐西域。 十年乃大举征俄。 直逼耶烈赞城。 而陷莫斯科。 太祖长子术赤遂于其地即汗位。 可谓破前古未有之纪载矣。 夫一代之英主。 开创之际。 战胜攻取。 用其兵威。 不难统一区宇。 史册所叙。 纵极铺张。 要不过禹域以内。 讫无西至流沙。 举朔北辽绝之地而空之。 不特唯是。 犹复鼓其余勇。 进逼欧洲内地。 而有欧亚混一之势者。 谓非吾国战史上最有光彩最有荣誉之一页得乎……”那结论是：
那结论是：“……质言之。元时之兵锋。不仅足以扼欧亚之吭。而有席卷包举之气象。有足以壮吾国后人之勇气者。固自有在。余故备述之。以告应付时局而固边圉者。”
“…… 质言之。 元时之兵锋。 不仅足以扼欧亚之吭。 而有席卷包举之气象。 有足以壮吾国后人之勇气者。 固自有在。 余故备述之。 以告应付时局而固边圉者。 ”这只有这作者“清癯”先生是蒙古人，倒还说得过去。否则，成吉思汗“入主中夏”，术赤在墨斯科“即可汗位”，那时咱们中俄两国的境遇正一样，就是都被蒙古人征服的。为什么中国人现在竟来硬霸“元人”为自己的先人，仿佛满脸光彩似的，去骄傲同受压迫的斯拉夫种的呢？
This is only the author, Mr. "Qingxian", is Mongolian, which is reasonable. Otherwise, Genghis Khan "entered China", and Jochi "could be Khan" in Mexico, and at that time, the situation of China and Russia was the same, that is, they were both conquered by the Mongols. Why are the Chinese now coming to dominate the "Yuan people" as their ancestors, as if their faces are full of brilliance, to be proud of the oppressed Slavs?倘照这样的论法，俄国人就也可以作“吾国征华史之一页”，说他们在元代奄有中国的版图。
If this argument is followed, the Russians can also make a page in the history of our country's conquest of China, saying that they occupied China's territory in the Yuan Dynasty.倘照这样的论法，则即使俄人此刻“入主中夏”，也就有“欧亚混一之势”，“有足以壮吾国后人”之后人“之勇气者”矣。
If this is the case, even if the Russians "enter China" at this moment, they will have the "trend of Eurasian unification" and "the courage of our descendants".嗟乎，赤俄未征，白痴已出，殊“非吾国战史上最有光彩最有荣誉之一页”也！
Alas, before the Red Army was conquered, the idiot had already appeared, especially "not the most glorious and honorable page in the history of our country's war"!七月二十八日。
July 28.

叶永蓁作《小小十年》小引

叶永蓁作《小小十年》小引

叶永蓁作《小小十年》小引

Ye Yongzhen wrote a small introduction to "Little Ten Years"这是一个青年的作者，以一个现代的活的青年为主角，描写他十年中的行动和思想的书。
This is a book by a young man who describes his actions and thoughts in the decade with a modern living youth as the protagonist.旧的传统和新的思潮，纷纭于他的一身，爱和憎的纠缠，感情和理智的冲突，缠绵和决撒的迭代，欢欣和绝望的起伏，都逐着这“小小十年”而开展，以形成一部感伤的书，个人的书。但时代是现代，所以从旧家庭所希望的“上进”而渡到革命，从交通不大方便的小县而渡到“革命策源地”的广州，从本身的婚姻不自由而渡到伟大的社会改革——但我没有发见其间的桥梁。
The entanglement of love and hate, the conflict of feelings and reason, the iteration of lingering and decisive, the ups and downs of joy and despair, all unfold according to this "little decade" to form a sentimental book, a personal book. But the times are modern, so from the "progress" that the old family hoped for to the revolution, from the small county with inconvenient transportation to Guangzhou, the "source of the revolution", from the unfree marriage to the great social reform - but I did not see the bridge between them.一个革命者，将——而且实在也已经（！）——为大众的幸福斗争，然而独独宽恕首先压迫自己的亲人，将枪口移向四面是敌，但又四不见敌的旧社会；一个革命者，将为人我争解放，然而当失去爱人的时候，却希望她自己负责，并且为了革命之故，不愿自己有一个情敌，——志愿愈大，希望愈高，可以致力之处就愈少，可以自解之处也愈多。——终于，则甚至闪出了惟本身目前的刹那间为惟一的现实一流的阴影。在这里，是屹然站着一个个人主义者，遥望着集团主义的大纛，但在“重上征途”之前，我没有发见其间的桥梁。
A revolutionary will - and really has (!) - Fight for the happiness of the masses, but forgive the relatives who oppress them first, and move the muzzle of the gun to the old society where the enemy is on all sides, but the enemy is not seen on all sides; A revolutionary will fight for liberation for others, but when she loses her lover, she hopes that she will be responsible, and for the sake of the revolution, she does not want to have a love rival,—— the greater the will, the higher the hope, the less she can devote herself to, and the more she can solve herself. ——Finally, it even flashed the shadow of the only reality first-class in its own moment. Here, there is an individualist standing tall, looking at the banner of collectivism, but I have not seen the bridge between them until I "return to the journey".释迦牟尼出世以后，割肉喂鹰，投身饲虎的是小乘，渺渺茫茫地说教的倒算是大乘，总是发达起来，我想，那机微就在此。
After Shakyamuni was born, it was the Hinayana who cut meat to feed the eagle and devoted himself to feeding the tiger, and the one who preached vaguely was the Mahayana, which always developed.然而这书的生命，却正在这里。他描出了背着传统，又为世界思潮所激荡的一部分的青年的心，逐渐写来，并无遮瞒，也不装点，虽然间或有若干辩解，而这些辩解，却又正是脱去了自己的衣裳。至少，将为现在作一面明镜，为将来留一种记录，是无疑的罢。多少伟大的招牌，去年以来，在文摊上都挂过了，但不到一年，便以变相和无物，自己告发了全盘的欺骗，中国如果还会有文艺，当然先要以这样直说自己所本有的内容的著作，来打退骗局以后的空虚。因为文艺家至少是须有直抒己见的诚心和勇气的，倘不肯吐露本心，就更谈不到什么意识。
However, the life of this book is here. He depicted the hearts of young people who were carrying tradition and being stirred up by the world's ideological trends, and gradually wrote without concealment or embellishment, although there were occasional excuses, and these justifications were precisely to take off their own clothes. At least, it will be a mirror for the present and a record for the future, which is undoubtedly true. How many great signboards have been hung on the stalls since last year, but in less than a year, they have denounced the complete deception in disguise and nothingness. Because writers and artists must at least have the sincerity and courage to express their opinions, if they refuse to express their true feelings, they will not be able to talk about any consciousness.我觉得最有意义的是渐向战场的一段，无论意识如何，总之，许多青年，从东江起，而上海，而武汉，而江西，为革命战斗了，其中的一部分，是抱着种种的希望，死在战场上，再看不见上面摆起来的是金交椅呢还是虎皮交椅。种种革命，便都是这样地进行，所以掉弄笔墨的，从实行者看来，究竟还是闲人之业。
I think the most meaningful part is the section that gradually moves towards the battlefield, no matter what the consciousness is, in short, many young people, starting from Dongjiang, and Shanghai, and Wuhan, and Jiangxi, have fought for the revolution, and part of them are holding all kinds of hopes, dying on the battlefield, and no longer can see whether it is a golden chair or a tiger skin chair on it. All kinds of revolutions are carried out in this way, so those who mess with pen and ink, from the perspective of practitioners, are still the work of idlers.这部书的成就，是由于曾经革命而没有死的青年。我想，活着，而又在看小说的人们，当有许多人发生同感。
The achievement of this book is due to the youth who did not die after the revolution. I think that many people who are alive and reading novels feel the same way.技术，是未曾矫揉造作的。因为事情是按年叙述的，所以文章也倾泻而下，至使作者在《后记》里，不愿称之为小说，但也自然是小说。我所感到累赘的只是说理之处过于多，校读时删节了一点，倘使反而损伤原作了，那便成了校者的责任。还有好像缺点而其实是优长之处，是语汇的不丰，新文学兴起以来，未忘积习而常用成语如我的和故意作怪而乱用谁也不懂的生语如创造社一流的文字，都使文艺和大众隔离，这部书却加以扫荡了，使读者可以更易于了解，然而从中作梗的还有许多新名词。
Technology has not been pretentious. Because things are narrated by year, the article also pours down, so that the author does not want to call it a novel in the "Afterword", but it is naturally a novel. What I find cumbersome is that there are too many reasoning, and if it is deleted a little during proofreading, if it damages the original work, it becomes the responsibility of the proofreader. Since the rise of new literature, it has not forgotten the habits and commonly used idioms such as mine and deliberately mischievous and abused new words that no one understands, such as the first-class words of the Creation Society, all of which have isolated literature and art from the public, but this book has been swept away, making it easier for readers to understand, but there are many new terms that hinder it.通读了这部书，已经在一月之前了，因为不得不写几句，便凭着现在所记得的写了这些字。我不是什么社的内定的“斗争”的“批评家”之一员，只能直说自己所愿意说的话。我极欣幸能绍介这真实的作品于中国，还渴望看见“重上征途”以后之作的新吐的光芒。
I read through this book, already a month ago, because I had to write a few sentences, so I wrote these words based on what I remember now. I am not a member of the "critics" of the "struggle" of the society, and I can only say what I want to say. I am very happy to be able to introduce this real work to China, and I am eager to see the new light of the work after "Re-embarking on the Journey".一九二九年七月二十八日，于上海，鲁迅记。
一九二九年七月二十八日，于上海，鲁迅记。

柔石作《二月》小引

柔石作《二月》小引

柔石作《二月》小引

柔石作《二月》小引冲锋的战士，天真的孤儿，年青的寡妇，热情的女人，各有主义的新式公子们，死气沉沉而交头接耳的旧社会，倒也并非如蜘蛛张网，专一在待飞翔的游人，但在寻求安静的青年的眼中，却化为不安的大苦痛。这大苦痛，便是社会的可怜的椒盐，和战士孤儿等辈一同，给无聊的社会一些味道，使他们无聊地持续下去。
Charging soldiers, naïve orphans, young widows, enthusiastic women, new sons with their own doctrines, and the old society that is lifeless and whispering to each other are not like spiders spreading webs, waiting for tourists to fly, but in the eyes of young people who seek quiet, they have turned into great uneasy pain. This great pain is the poor salt and pepper of society, together with the soldiers and orphans, giving a boring society some flavor and making them boring continue.浊浪在拍岸，站在山冈上者和飞沫不相干，弄潮儿则于涛头且不在意，惟有衣履尚整，徘徊海滨的人，一溅水花，便觉得有所沾湿，狼狈起来。这从上述的两类人们看来，是都觉得诧异的。但我们书中的青年萧君，便正落在这境遇里。他极想有为，怀着热爱，而有所顾惜，过于矜持，终于连安住几年之处，也不可得。他其实并不能成为一小齿轮，跟着大齿轮转动，他仅是外来的一粒石子，所以轧了几下，发几声响，便被挤到女佛山——上海去了。
The turbid waves are crashing on the shore, and those standing on the hills have nothing to do with the droplets, while the tide makers don't care about the waves, but the clothes and shoes are still neat, and the people wandering on the seashore feel wet and embarrassed when they splash water. This is surprising from the above two types of people. But the young Xiao Jun in our book is in this situation. He wanted to be promising, with love, but he cared about something, was too reserved, and finally couldn't even get a place to live for a few years. He actually can't be a small gear, he rotates with the big gear, he is just a pebble from outside, so after a few rolls and a few sounds, he was squeezed to the female Buddha Mountain - Shanghai.他幸而还坚硬，没有变成润泽齿轮的油。
Fortunately, he was still hard and did not turn into oil to moisten the gears.但是，矍昙（释迦牟尼）从夜半醒来，目睹宫女们睡态之丑，于是慨然出家，而霍善斯坦因以为是醉饱后的呕吐。那么，萧君的决心遁走，恐怕是胃弱而禁食的了，虽然我还无从明白其前因，是由于气质的本然，还是战后的暂时的劳顿。
However, Gautan (Shakyamuni) woke up in the middle of the night and witnessed the ugliness of the palace maids' sleeping state, so he became a monk, and Hoshanstein thought it was vomiting after being drunk. Then, Xiao Jun's determination to escape is probably due to a weak stomach and fasting, although I still have no way of understanding the antecedent, whether it is due to the nature of temperament or temporary fatigue after the war.我从作者用了工妙的技术所写成的草稿上，看见了近代青年中这样的一种典型，周遭的人物，也都生动，便写下一些印象，算是序文。大概明敏的读者，所得必当更多于我，而且由读时所生的诧异或同感，照见自己的姿态的罢？那实在是很有意义的。
From the draft written by the author with ingenious techniques, I saw such a typical example of modern youth, and the characters around me were also vivid, so I wrote down some impressions, which was regarded as a preface. Probably a discerning reader will gain more than I do, and the surprise or sympathy generated when reading it will reflect his own posture. That's really meaningful.一九二九年八月二十日，鲁迅记于上海。
On August 20, 1929, Lu Xun recorded in Shanghai.

《小彼得》译本序

《小彼得》译本序

《小彼得》译本序

Preface to the translation of "Little Peter"这连贯的童话六篇，原是日本林房雄的译本（一九二七年东京晓星阁出版），我选给译者，作为学习日文之用的。逐次学过，就顺手译出，结果是成了这一部中文的书。但是，凡学习外国文字的，开手不久便选读童话，我以为不能算不对，然而开手就翻译童话，却很有些不相宜的地方，因为每容易拘泥原文，不敢意译，令读者看得费力。这译本原先就很有这弊病，所以我当校改之际，就大加改译了一通，比较地近于流畅了。——这也就是说，倘因此而生出不妥之处来，也已经是校改者的责任。
These six coherent fairy tales were originally translated by Fusuo Hayashi of Japan (published in Hyoseikaku in Tokyo in 1927), and I chose them for the translator for learning Japanese. After learning it one by one, I translated it easily, and the result was this Chinese book. However, I think it is not wrong for anyone who learns foreign languages to read fairy tales soon after starting, but translating fairy tales is very inappropriate, because it is easy to stick to the original text and dare not translate it, which makes it difficult for readers to read. This translation originally had this problem, so when I was proofreading, I made a big revision, and it was relatively smooth. ——In other words, if something inappropriate arises because of this, it is already the responsibility of the school reformer.作者海尔密尼亚·至尔·妙伦（Hermynia Zur Muehlen），看姓氏好像德国或奥国人，但我不知道她的事迹。据同一原译者所译的同作者的别一本童话《真理之城》（一九二八年南宋书院出版）的序文上说，则是匈牙利的女作家，但现在似乎专在德国做事，一切战斗的科学底社会主义的期刊——尤其是专为青年和少年而设的页子上，总能够看见她的姓名。作品很不少，致密的观察，坚实的文章，足够成为真正的社会主义作家之一人，而使她有世界的名声者，则大概由于那独创底的童话云。
The author, Hermynia Zur Muehlen, looks like a German or Austrian surname, but I don't know her deeds. According to the preface to another fairy tale by the same author, "The City of Truth" (published in 1928 by the Southern Song Dynasty Academy), she was a Hungarian female writer, but now it seems that she is working exclusively in Germany, and her name can always be seen in all the scientifically based socialist journals - especially those dedicated to young people and teenagers. There are many works, meticulous observations, solid articles, enough to become one of the real socialist writers, and the one who makes her world-famous is probably because of the original fairy tale cloud.不消说，作者的本意，是写给劳动者的孩子们看的，但输入中国，结果却又不如此。首先的缘故，是劳动者的孩子们轮不到受教育，不能认识这四方形的字和格子布模样的文章，所以在他们，和这是毫无关系，且不说他们的无钱可买书和无暇去读书。但是，即使在受过教育的孩子们的眼中，那结果也还是和在别国不一样。为什么呢？第一，还是因为文章，故事第五篇中所讽刺的话法的缺点，在我们的文章中可以说是几乎全篇都是。第二，这故事前四篇所用的背景，是：煤矿，森林，玻璃厂，染色厂；读者恐怕大多数都未曾亲历，那么，印象也当然不能怎样地分明。第三，作者所被认为“真正的社会主义作家”者，我想，在这里，有主张大家的生存权（第二篇），主张一切应该由战斗得到（第六篇之末）等处，可以看出，但披上童话的花衣，而就遮掉些斑斓的血汗了。尤其是在中国仅有几本这种的童话孤行，而并无基本底，坚实底的文籍相帮的时候。并且，我觉得，第五篇中银茶壶的话，太富于纤细的，琐屑的，女性底的色彩，在中国现在，或者更易得到共鸣罢，然而却应当忽略的。第四，则故事中的物件，在欧美虽然很普通，中国却纵是中产人家，也往往未曾见过。火炉即是其一；水瓶和杯子，则是细颈大肚的玻璃瓶和长圆的玻璃杯，在我们这里，只在西洋菜馆的桌上和汽船的二等舱中，可以见到。破雪草也并非我们常见的植物，有是有的，药书上称为“獐耳细辛”（多么烦难的名目呵！），是一种毛茛科的小草，叶上有毛，冬末就开白色或淡红色的小花，来“报告冬天就要收场的好消息”。日本称为“雪割草”，就为此。破雪草又是日本名的意译，我曾用在《桃色的云》上，现在也袭用了，似乎较胜于“獐耳细辛”之古板罢。
Needless to say, the author's original intention was to write it to the children of the workers, but when it was imported into China, the result was not. The first reason is that the children of the workers are not educated, and they cannot recognize the square characters and plaid-like articles, so for them, it has nothing to do with this, not to mention that they have no money to buy books and no time to study. But even in the eyes of educated children, the result is not the same as in other countries. Why? First, it is because of the shortcomings of the satirical words in the fifth part of the story, which can be said to be almost all in our article. second, the background used in the first four parts of this story is: coal mines, forests, glass factories, dyeing factories; I'm afraid most readers haven't experienced it firsthand, so of course the impression can't be very clear. Third, the author is considered a "true socialist writer", I think, here, there are those who advocate everyone's right to exist (Part 2) and that everything should be obtained by fighting (at the end of Part 6), etc., as can be seen, but wearing the flower clothes of fairy tales covers up some colorful blood and sweat. Especially when there are only a few fairy tales of this kind in China, and there is no basic foundation, and there is no solid foundation to help with literature. Moreover, I think that the words of the silver teapot in the fifth article are too slender, trivial, and feminine, and may be more resonant in China now, but they should be ignored. Fourth, although the objects in the story are very common in Europe and the United States, even middle-class families in China have often never seen them. The stove is one of them; Water bottles and cups, as for glass bottles with thin necks and big bellies, can only be seen in the tables of Western restaurants and the second-class cabins of steamboats. Breaking the snow is not a common plant for us, there are some of them, and the medicine book calls it "deer ear Xixin" (what a troublesome name!). ), is a small grass of the ranunculaceae family, with hairs on the leaves, and white or reddish flowers at the end of winter to "report the good news that winter is coming to an end". Japan calls it "snow mowing", and that's it. Breaking the snow grass is also a paraphrase of the Japanese name, I used it in "Peach Clouds", and now I have also used it, which seems to be better than the old-fashioned "roe deer ear Xixin".总而言之，这作品一经搬家，效果已大不如作者的意料。倘使硬要加上一种意义，那么，至多，也许可以供成人而不失赤子之心的，或并未劳动而不忘勤劳大众的人们的一览，或者给留心世界文学的人们，报告现代劳动者文学界中，有这样的一位作家，这样的一种作品罢了。
All in all, once this work was moved, the effect was not as good as the author expected. If one insists on adding a meaning, then, at most, it may be for an adult without losing a pure heart, or for a glance at people who have not labored and forgetting the industrious masses, or to those who pay attention to world literature, to report that there is such a writer and such a work in the literary circles of modern workers.原译本有六幅乔治·格罗斯（George Grosz）的插图，现在也加上了，但因为几经翻印，和中国制版术的拙劣，制版者的不负责任，已经几乎全失了原作的好处，——尤其是如第二图，——只能算作一个空名的绍介。格罗斯是德国人，原属踏踏主义（Dadaismus）者之一人，后来却转了左翼。据匈牙利的批评家玛察（I．Matza）说，这是因为他的艺术要有内容——思想，已不能被踏踏主义所牢笼的缘故。欧洲大战时候，大家用毒瓦斯来打仗，他曾画了一幅讽刺画，给钉在十字架上的耶稣的嘴上，也蒙上一个避毒的嘴套，于是很受了一场罚，也是有名的事，至今还颇有些人记得的。
The original translation has six illustrations by George Grosz, which have now been added, but due to several reprints, the clumsiness of Chinese plate-making, and the irresponsibility of the platemakers, the benefits of the original have been almost completely lost,—— especially as the second picture,—— can only be regarded as an empty name. Gross was a German, originally a member of the Dadaismus, but later turned to the left. According to the Hungarian critic I. Matza, this is because his art must have content, ideas, and can no longer be imprisoned by treadfulism. During the European War, everyone used poisonous gas to fight, and he once painted a satirical painting and covered the mouth of Jesus crucified with a muzzle to prevent poison, so he was punished, and it is also a famous thing, and many people still remember it.一九二九年九月十五日，校讫记。
On September 15, 1929, the proofreading was completed.

流氓的变迁

流氓的变迁

流氓的变迁

The change of rogues孔墨都不满于现状，要加以改革，但那第一步，是在说动人主，而那用以压服人主的家伙，则都是“天”。
Confucius and Mo were dissatisfied with the status quo and wanted to reform it, but the first step was to move the lord, and the guy who used it to suppress the lord was "heaven".孔子之徒为儒，墨子之徒为侠。“儒者，柔也”，当然不会危险的。惟侠老实，所以墨者的末流，至于以“死”为终极的目的。到后来，真老实的逐渐死完，止留下取巧的侠，汉的大侠，就已和公侯权贵相馈赠，以备危急时来作护符之用了。
Confucius's disciples were Confucian scholars, while Mozi's disciples were chivalrous. "Confucianism, softness", of course, it will not be dangerous. Only chivalry is honest, so the end of the Mohists, as for the ultimate goal of "death". Later, the honest ones gradually died, leaving only the heroes who took tricks, and the heroes of the Han Dynasty had already given gifts to the princes and dignitaries in case of emergencies to be used as talismans.司马迁说：“儒以文乱法，而侠以武犯禁”，“乱”之和“犯”，决不是“叛”，不过闹点小乱子而已，而况有权贵如“五侯”者在。
Sima Qian said: "Confucianism disrupts the law with literature, while chivalry violates the prohibition with martial arts", and the sum of "chaos" and "crime" are by no means "rebellion", but just a little trouble, and there are powerful people such as the "Five Marquises".“侠”字渐消，强盗起了，但也是侠之流，他们的旗帜是“替天行道”。他们所反对的是奸臣，不是天子，他们所打劫的是平民，不是将相。李逵劫法场时，抡起板斧来排头砍去，而所砍的是看客。一部《水浒》，说得很分明：因为不反对天子，所以大军一到，便受招安，替国家打别的强盗——不“替天行道”的强盗去了。终于是奴才。
The word "chivalry" gradually disappeared, and the robbers rose, but they were also chivalrous, and their banner was "acting for the sky". What they oppose is traitors, not the Son of Heaven, and what they rob are civilians, not generals. When Li Kui robbed the Dharma field, he picked up the axe and cut it down, and it was the spectators who were chopped. A "Water Margin" says very clearly: because they did not oppose the Son of Heaven, as soon as the army arrived, they were recruited to fight other robbers for the country - robbers who did not "act for heaven". In the end, he was a servant.满洲入关，中国渐被压服了，连有“侠气”的人，也不敢再起盗心，不敢指斥奸臣，不敢直接为天子效力，于是跟一个好官员或钦差大臣，给他保镳，替他捕盗，一部《施公案》，也说得很分明，还有《彭公案》，《七侠五义》之流，至今没有穷尽。他们出身清白，连先前也并无坏处，虽在钦差之下，究居平民之上，对一方面固然必须听命，对别方面还是大可逞雄，安全之度增多了，奴性也跟着加足。
Manchuria entered the customs, China was gradually subdued, and even those with "chivalry" did not dare to steal again, dare not accuse traitors, and did not dare to directly serve the emperor, so they followed a good official or imperial envoy to give him bodyguards and catch thieves for him. Although they were under the imperial envoy, they were above the common people, and they had to obey orders on the one hand, but they were still able to show off on the other, and their safety increased, and their servility also increased.然而为盗要被官兵所打，捕盗也要被强盗所打，要十分安全的侠客，是觉得都不妥当的，于是有流氓。和尚喝酒他来打，男女通奸他来捉，私娼私贩他来凌辱，为的是维持风化；乡下人不懂租界章程他来欺侮，为的是看不起无知；剪发女人他来嘲骂，社会改革者他来憎恶，为的是宝爱秩序。但后面是传统的靠山，对手又都非浩荡的强敌，他就在其间横行过去。现在的小说，还没有写出这一种典型的书，惟《九尾龟》中的章秋谷，以为他给妓女吃苦，是因为她要敲人们竹杠，所以给以惩罚之类的叙述，约略近之。
However, thieves must be beaten by officers and soldiers, and thieves must also be beaten by robbers. He beats monks for drinking, he catches adultery between men and women, and he humiliates prostitutes and traffickers, in order to maintain weathering; The countryman did not understand the concession charter, and he came to bully in order to look down on ignorance; He mocks women with haircuts, and he hates social reformers in order to cherish order. But behind him was the traditional backer, and the opponent was not a mighty enemy, so he ran rampant in the middle. In today's novels, this kind of typical book has not yet been written, but Zhang Qiugu in "Nine-Tailed Turtle" thinks that he gave the prostitute suffering because she wanted to knock on people's bamboo poles, so he punished them, which is slightly closer.由现状再降下去，大概这一流人将成为文艺书中的主角了，我在等候“革命文学家”张资平“氏”的近作。
From the status quo, probably this class of people will become the protagonists of literary and art books, and I am waiting for the recent works of the "revolutionary writer" Zhang Ziping.

新月社批评家的任务

新月社批评家的任务

新月社批评家的任务

The task of the critics of the Crescent Society新月社中的批评家，是很憎恶嘲骂的，但只嘲骂一种人，是做嘲骂文章者。新月社中的批评家，是很不以不满于现状的人为然的，但只不满于一种现状，是现在竟有不满于现状者。
Critics in the Crescent Society hate ridicule, but they only mock one kind of person, and they are those who write ridicule articles. The critics in the Crescent Society are very dissatisfied with the status quo, but they are only dissatisfied with the status quo, and there are people who are dissatisfied with the status quo now.这大约就是“即以其人之道，还治其人之身”，挥泪以维持治安的意思。
This is roughly the meaning of "that is, in the way of others, and also treat others", shedding tears to maintain public order.譬如，杀人，是不行的。但杀掉“杀人犯”的人，虽然同是杀人，又谁能说他错？打人，也不行的。但大老爷要打斗殴犯人的屁股时，皂隶来一五一十的打，难道也算犯罪么？新月社批评家虽然也有嘲骂，也有不满，而独能超然于嘲骂和不满的罪恶之外者，我以为就是这一个道理。
For example, killing is not acceptable. But the person who kills the "murderer", even if it is also a murderer, who can say that he is wrong? It's not okay to hit someone. But when the eldest master wanted to fight the prisoner's buttocks, the soap slave came to beat him one by one, was it also a crime? Although the critics of the Crescent Society also have ridicule and dissatisfaction, I think this is the truth that can only transcend the evil of ridicule and dissatisfaction.但老例，刽子手和皂隶既然做了这样维持治安的任务，在社会上自然要得到几分的敬畏，甚至于还不妨随意说几句话，在小百姓面前显显威风，只要不大妨害治安，长官向来也就装作不知道了。
But as an old example, since the executioners and soap slaves have done such a task of maintaining public order, they naturally have to get a little awe in society, and they may even wish to say a few words at will to show their authority in front of the common people, as long as they do not interfere with public order, the governor has always pretended not to know.现在新月社的批评家这样尽力地维持了治安，所要的却不过是“思想自由”，想想而已，决不实现的思想。而不料遇到了别一种维持治安法，竟连想也不准想了。从此以后，恐怕要不满于两种现状了罢。
Now the critics of the Crescent Society have tried their best to maintain public order, but all they want is "freedom of thought", thinking about it, and never realizing it. Unexpectedly, I encountered another law of maintaining public order, and I couldn't even think about it. From now on, I am afraid that I will be dissatisfied with the two status quo.

书籍和财色

书籍和财色

书籍和财色

Books and wealth今年在上海所见，专以小孩子为对手的糖担，十有九带了赌博性了，用一个铜元，经一种手续，可有得到一个铜元以上的糖的希望。但专以学生为对手的书店，所给的希望却更其大，更其多——因为那对手是学生的缘故。
As I saw in Shanghai this year, nine out of ten sugar burdens that are dedicated to children are gambling, and with a copper dollar, after a procedure, there is hope of getting more than a copper dollar. But bookstores that specialize in students give more hope - because the opponent is the students.书籍用实价，废去“码洋”的陋习，是始于北京的新潮社——北新书局的，后来上海也多仿行，盖那时改革潮流正盛，以为买卖两方面，都是志在改进的人（书店之以介绍文化者自居，至今还时见于广告上），正不必先定虚价，再打折扣，玩些互相欺骗的把戏。然而将麻雀牌送给世界，且以此自豪的人民，对于这样简捷了当，没有意外之利的办法，是终于耐不下去的。于是老病出现了，先是小试其技：送画片。继而打折扣，自九折以至对折，但自然又不是旧法，因为总有一个定期和原因，或者因为学校开学，或者因为本店开张一年半的纪念之类。花色一点的还有赠丝袜，请吃冰淇淋，附送一只锦盒，内藏十件宝贝，价值不资。更加见得切实，然而确是惊人的，是定一年报或买几本书，便有得到“劝学奖金”一百元或“留学经费”二千元的希望。洋场上的“轮盘赌”，付给赢家的钱，最多也不过每一元付了三十六元，真不如买书，那“希望”之大，远甚远甚。
The bad habit of abolishing the "code foreign" of books at real prices began in Beijing's Xinchao Society - Beixin Bookstore, and later Shanghai also imitated it, because at that time, the trend of reform was in full swing, thinking that both buying and selling were people who were interested in improving (bookstores claim to introduce culture, and they are still seen in advertisements), so there is no need to set a false price first, and then discount, and play some tricks to deceive each other. However, the people who gave the mahjong card to the world and were proud of it finally couldn't stand such a simple and unexpected way. So the old disease appeared, and first of all, he tried his skills: sending pictures. Then discounts, from 90% off to half discounts, but naturally it is not the old method, because there is always a fixed period and reason, either because of the opening of the school, or because of the anniversary of the opening of the store for one and a half years. There are also free stockings, please eat ice cream, and a brocade box with ten treasures inside, which is worth nothing. It is even more realistic, but what is really amazing is that if you set a yearly newspaper or buy a few books, you will have the hope of getting a "scholarship bonus" of 100 yuan or a "study abroad fund" of 2,000 yuan. The "roulette" on the foreign field pays the winner at most, and the money paid is only thirty-six yuan per yuan, which is really not as good as buying a book, and the "hope" is far greater.我们的古人有言，“书中自有黄金屋”，现在渐在实现了。但后一句，“书中自有颜如玉”呢？
Our ancients said, "There is a golden house in the book", and now it is gradually being realized. But what about the latter sentence, "There is Yan Ruyu in the book"?日报所附送的画报上，不知为了什么缘故而登载的什么“女校高材生”和什么“女士在树下读书”的照相之类，且作别论，则买书一元，赠送裸体画片的勾当，是应该举为带着“颜如玉”气味的一例的了。在医学上，“妇人科”虽然设有专科，但在文艺上，“女作家”分为一类却未免滥用了体质的差别，令人觉得有些特别的。但最露骨的是张竞生博士所开的“美的书店”，曾经对面呆站着两个年青脸白的女店员，给买主可以问她“《第三种水》出了没有？”等类，一举两得，有玉有书。可惜“美的书店”竟遭禁止。张博士也改弦易辙，去译《卢骚忏悔录》，此道遂有中衰之叹了。
In the pictorial attached to the daily newspaper, I don't know what kind of "top student in the girls' school" and what "lady reading under the tree" photos were published for some reason, and apart from that, the act of buying a book for one yuan and giving away nude paintings should be cited as an example with the smell of "Yan Ruyu". In medicine, although "gynecology" has a specialty, in literature and art, "female writers" are divided into a category, but they inevitably abuse the difference in physique, which makes people feel a little special. But the most explicit is the "Beauty Bookstore" opened by Dr. Zhang Jingsheng, where two young and fair-faced female clerks once stood opposite, giving the buyer a chance to ask her, "Is "The Third Water" out? "Kill two birds with one stone, there are jade and books. Unfortunately, "Midea Bookstore" was banned. Dr. Zhang also changed his course and went to translate the "Confessions of Lu Sao", and this path has a sigh of decline.书籍的销路如果再消沉下去，我想，最好是用女店员卖女作家的作品及照片，仍然抽彩，给买主又有得到“劝学”，“留学”的款子的希望。
If the sales of books continue to decline, I think it is best to use female clerks to sell the works and photos of female writers, and still draw lots, so that buyers can have the hope of getting "persuasion" and "studying abroad" funds.

我和《语丝》的始终

我和《语丝》的始终

我和《语丝》的始终

I and "Yusi" from beginning to end同我关系较为长久的，要算《语丝》了。
The one who has a long-term relationship with me is "Yusi".大约这也是原因之一罢，“正人君子”们的刊物，曾封我为“语丝派主将”，连急进的青年所做的文章，至今还说我是《语丝》的“指导者”。去年，非骂鲁迅便不足以自救其没落的时候，我曾蒙匿名氏寄给我两本中途的《山雨》，打开一看，其中有一篇短文，大意是说我和孙伏园君在北京因被晨报馆所压迫，创办《语丝》，现在自己一做编辑，便在投稿后面乱加按语，曲解原意，压迫别的作者了，孙伏园君却有绝好的议论，所以此后鲁迅应该听命于伏园。这听说是张孟闻先生的大文，虽然署名是另外两个字。看来好像一群人，其实不过一两个，这种事现在是常有的。
Probably this is one of the reasons, the publications of the "righteous gentlemen" once named me the "main general of the Yusi school", and even the articles written by radical young people still say that I am the "instructor" of "Yusi". Last year, when it was not enough to scold Lu Xun to save himself from its decline, I was sent two halfway copies of "Mountain Rain" to me by an anonymous person, and when I opened it, there was a short article to the effect that Sun Fuyuanjun and I were oppressed by the Morning News Office in Beijing and founded "Yusi". I heard that this is Mr. Zhang Mengwen's big text, although the signature is two other words. It seems like a group of people, but in fact there are only one or two, and this kind of thing is common now.自然，“主将”和“指导者”，并不是坏称呼，被晨报馆所压迫，也不能算是耻辱，老人该受青年的教训，更是进步的好现象，还有什么话可说呢。但是，“不虞之誉”，也和“不虞之毁”一样地无聊，如果生平未曾带过一兵半卒，而有人拱手颂扬道，“你真像拿破仑呀！”则虽是志在做军阀的未来的英雄，也不会怎样舒服的。我并非“主将”的事，前年早已声辩了——虽然似乎很少效力——这回想要写一点下来的，是我从来没有受过晨报馆的压迫，也并不是和孙伏园先生两个人创办了《语丝》。这的创办，倒要归功于伏园一位的。
Naturally, "main general" and "guide" are not bad names, oppressed by the morning newspaper, it cannot be regarded as a shame, the old man should be taught by the youth, it is a good phenomenon of progress, what else can be said. However, "unexpected reputation" is as boring as "unexpected destruction", if you have never brought a soldier and a half in your life, and someone praises, "You are really like Napoleon!" Even if he is a future hero who aspires to be a warlord, he will not be very comfortable. I am not the "main general", I have already argued the year before last - although it seems to have little effect - what I want to write down this time is that I have never been oppressed by the Morning Newspaper, and I did not start "Yusi" with Mr. Sun Fuyuan. The establishment of this is due to Fu Yuan.那时伏园是《晨报副刊》的编辑，我是由他个人来约，投些稿件的人。
At that time, Fu Yuan was the editor of the "Morning News Supplement", and I was personally invited by him to submit some manuscripts.然而我并没有什么稿件，于是就有人传说，我是特约撰述，无论投稿多少，每月总有酬金三四十元的。据我所闻，则晨报馆确有这一种太上作者，但我并非其中之一，不过因为先前的师生——恕我僭妄，暂用这两个字——关系罢，似乎也颇受优待：一是稿子一去，刊登得快；二是每千字二元至三元的稿费，每月底大抵可以取到；三是短短的杂评，有时也送些稿费来。但这样的好景象并不久长，伏园的椅子颇有不稳之势。因为有一位留学生（不幸我忘掉了他的名姓）新从欧洲回来，和晨报馆有深关系，甚不满意于副刊，决计加以改革，并且为战斗计，已经得了“学者”的指示，在开手看Anatole France的小说了。
However, I didn't have any manuscripts, so there was a legend that I was a special writer, and no matter how much I submitted, I always had a monthly remuneration of thirty or forty yuan. As far as I know, the Morning News Office does have this kind of supreme author, but I am not one of them, but because of the relationship between the previous teachers and students—forgive my arrogance, I will temporarily use these two words—it seems to be treated quite favorably: first, once the manuscript is gone, it is published quickly; second, the manuscript fee of 2 to 3 yuan per 1,000 words, which can be obtained at the end of each month; The third is short miscellaneous comments, and sometimes some manuscript fees are also sent. But such a good scene did not last long, and Fu Yuan's chair was quite unstable. Because there was an international student (unfortunately I forgot his name) who had just returned from Europe and had a deep relationship with the Morning Newspaper, he was very dissatisfied with the supplement, decided to reform it, and for the sake of fighting, he had already received instructions from the "scholars" to start reading Anatole France's novels.那时的法兰斯，威尔士，萧，在中国是大有威力，足以吓倒文学青年的名字，正如今年的辛克莱儿一般，所以以那时而论，形势实在是已经非常严重。不过我现在无从确说，从那位留学生开手读法兰斯的小说起到伏园气忿忿地跑到我的寓里来为止的时候，其间相距是几月还是几天。
At that time, France, Wales, and Xiao were powerful enough to intimidate the names of literary youth in China, just like Sinclair this year, so at that time, the situation was really very serious. But I can't say for sure what months or days it was from the time the international student started reading France's novel to the time when Fu Yuan angrily ran to my apartment.“我辞职了。可恶！”
"I resigned. Damn it! ”这是有一夜，伏园来访，见面后的第一句话。那原是意料中事，不足异的。第二步，我当然要问问辞职的原因，而不料竟和我有了关系。他说，那位留学生乘他外出时，到排字房去将我的稿子抽掉，因此争执起来，弄到非辞职不可了。但我并不气忿，因为那稿子不过是三段打油诗，题作《我的失恋》，是看见当时“阿呀阿唷，我要死了”之类的失恋诗盛行，故意做一首用“由她去罢”收场的东西，开开玩笑的。这诗后来又添了一段，登在《语丝》上，再后来就收在《野草》中。而且所用的又是另一个新鲜的假名，在不肯登载第一次看见姓名的作者的稿子的刊物上，也当然很容易被有权者所放逐的。
This is the first sentence after one night when Fu Yuan came to visit and met. That was expected, not surprising. The second step, of course, I had to ask the reason for my resignation, but unexpectedly it had something to do with me. He said that when the international student was out, he went to the typesetting room to remove my manuscript, so he argued and had to resign. But I was not angry, because the manuscript was just three limericks, titled "My Broken Love", which was a joke when I saw that lovelorn poems such as "Ah, ah, I'm going to die" were prevalent at that time. This poem was later added to the "Silk of Words", and later included in "Weeds". Moreover, it is a new pseudonym, and it is of course easy to be banished by those in power in publications that refuse to publish the manuscript of the author whose name is seen for the first time.但我很抱歉伏园为了我的稿子而辞职，心上似乎压了一块沉重的石头。几天之后，他提议要自办刊物了，我自然答应愿意竭力“呐喊”。至于投稿者，倒全是他独力邀来的，记得是十六人，不过后来也并非都有投稿。于是印了广告，到各处张贴，分散，大约又一星期，一张小小的周刊便在北京——尤其是大学附近——出现了。这便是《语丝》。
But I am sorry that Fuyuan resigned for my manuscript, and it seems that a heavy stone has been pressed on my heart. A few days later, he proposed to run his own publication, and I naturally agreed to do my best to "shout". As for the contributors, they were all invited by him alone, I remember that there were sixteen people, but not all of them contributed later. So advertisements were printed, posted everywhere, dispersed, and about a week later, a small weekly magazine appeared in Beijing, especially near the university. This is "Yusi".那名目的来源，听说，是有几个人，任意取一本书，将书任意翻开，用指头点下去，那被点到的字，便是名称。那时我不在场，不知道所用的是什么书，是一次便得了《语丝》的名，还是点了好几次，而曾将不像名称的废去。但要之，即此已可知这刊物本无所谓一定的目标，统一的战线；那十六个投稿者，意见态度也各不相同，例如顾颉刚教授，投的便是“考古”稿子，不如说，和《语丝》的喜欢涉及现在社会者，倒是相反的。不过有些人们，大约开初是只在敷衍和伏园的交情的罢，所以投了两三回稿，便取“敬而远之”的态度，自然离开。连伏园自己，据我的记忆，自始至今，也只做过三回文字，末一回是宣言从此要大为《语丝》撰述，然而宣言之后，却连一个字也不见了。于是《语丝》的固定的投稿者，至多便只剩了五六人，但同时也在不意中显了一种特色，是：任意而谈，无所顾忌，要催促新的产生，对于有害于新的旧物，则竭力加以排击，——但应该产生怎样的“新”，却并无明白的表示，而一到觉得有些危急之际，也还是故意隐约其词。陈源教授痛斥“语丝派”的时候，说我们不敢直骂军阀，而偏和握笔的名人为难，便由于这一点。但是，叱吧儿狗险于叱狗主人，我们其实也知道的，所以隐约其词者，不过要使走狗嗅得，跑去献功时，必须详加说明，比较地费些力气，不能直捷痛快，就得好处而已。
The source of the name, I heard, is that there are several people who take a book at will, open it at will, and click it down with their fingers, and the word that is pointed out is the name. I was not present at that time, and I didn't know what kind of book I was using, whether I got the name of "Yusi" at one time, or if I ordered it several times, and I abolished it like the name. But in short, it can be seen that this publication does not have a certain goal, a united front; The sixteen contributors also have different opinions and attitudes, such as Professor Gu Jiegang, who submitted "archaeological" manuscripts, which is the opposite of the "Silk" that involves the current society. However, some people, at the beginning, were only perfunctory and Fuyuan's friendship, so after two or three drafts, they took the attitude of "staying away" and left naturally. Even Fuyuan himself, as far as I remember, has only written three times since the beginning, and the last time was a declaration that he would write a lot for "Yusi" from now on, but after the declaration, not even a word was missing. As a result, there are only five or six fixed contributors to "Yusi" at most, but at the same time, they also unintentionally show a characteristic, that is: talk arbitrarily, without scruples, urge the new to be produced, and try their best to reject the new and old things that are harmful to the new,—— but what kind of "new" should be produced, but there is no clear expression, and when it comes to feeling a little critical, it is still deliberately vague. When Professor Chen Yuan denounced the "Silk School", he said that we did not dare to scold the warlords directly, but were embarrassed by the celebrities who held the pen, which was because of this. However, the dog is dangerous to the owner of the dog, we actually know, so the vague word, but to make the lackey sniff, when running to give merit, it must be explained in detail, it takes some effort, and it can't be straightforward and happy, so it's just a benefit.当开办之际，努力确也可惊，那时做事的，伏园之外，我记得还有小峰和川岛，都是乳毛还未褪尽的青年，自跑印刷局，自去校对，自叠报纸，还自己拿到大众聚集之处去兜售，这真是青年对于老人，学生对于先生的教训，令人觉得自己只用一点思索，写几句文章，未免过于安逸，还须竭力学好了。
When it was launched, the hard work was indeed shocking, at that time, outside the Fuyuan, I remember that there were also Xiaofeng and Kawashima, both young people who had not yet faded their milk, running their own printing bureau, proofreading, stacking newspapers, and taking them to the place where the public gathered to sell, which was really a lesson for young people to the elderly and students to their teachers, which made people feel that they only used a little thinking and wrote a few sentences, which was too comfortable, and they had to try their best to learn well.但自己卖报的成绩，听说并不佳，一纸风行的，还是在几个学校，尤其是北京大学，尤其是第一院（文科）。理科次之。在法科，则不大有人顾问。倘若说，北京大学的法，政，经济科出身诸君中，绝少有《语丝》的影响，恐怕是不会很错的。至于对于《晨报》的影响，我不知道，但似乎也颇受些打击，曾经和伏园来说和，伏园得意之余，忘其所以，曾以胜利者的笑容，笑着对我说道：
However, I heard that the results of selling newspapers were not good, and the paper was still popular in several schools, especially Peking University, especially the First College (liberal arts). Science is second. In the legal department, there are not many consultants. If it is said that among the law, politics, and economics majors of Peking University, there are very few who have the influence of "Yusi", I am afraid it will not be very wrong. As for the impact of the "Morning Post", I don't know, but it seems to have been quite a blow, once made peace with Fu Yuan, Fu Yuan was proud, forgot why, once said to me with a smile of a winner:“真好，他们竟不料踏在炸药上了！”
"It's great, they didn't expect to step on the explosives!"这话对别人说是不算什么的。但对我说，却好像浇了一碗冷水，因为我即刻觉得这“炸药”是指我而言，用思索，做文章，都不过使自己为别人的一个小纠葛而粉身碎骨，心里就一面想：
This is nothing to others. But to me, it was like pouring a bowl of cold water, because I immediately felt that this "dynamite" meant that for me, thinking and making a sentence would only make myself shattered by a small entanglement of others, and I thought in my heart:“真糟，我竟不料被埋在地下了！”
"It's so bad, I was buried in the ground unexpectedly!"我于是乎“彷徨”起来。
I then "wandered".谭正璧先生有一句用我的小说的名目，来批评我的作品的经过的极伶俐而省事的话道：“鲁迅始于‘呐喊’而终于‘彷徨’”（大意），我以为移来叙述我和《语丝》由始以至此时的历史，倒是很确切的。
Mr. Tan Zhengbi has a very clever and trouble-free sentence in the name of my novel to criticize the process of my work: "Lu Xun began with 'shouting' and ended with 'hesitation'" (to the effect), I thought it was very accurate to narrate the history of me and "Yusi" from the beginning to this time.但我的“彷徨”并不用许多时，因为那时还有一点读过尼采的《Zarathustra》的余波，从我这里只要能挤出——虽然不过是挤出——文章来，就挤了去罢，从我这里只要能做出一点“炸药”来，就拿去做了罢，于是也就决定，还是照旧投稿了——虽然对于意外的被利用，心里也耿耿了好几天。
But my "hesitation" didn't take much time, because there was still a little aftermath of reading Nietzsche's "Zarathustra" at that time, as long as I could squeeze out the article, I would squeeze it out, and as long as I could make a little "dynamite" from me, I would just do it, so I decided to submit it as usual - although I was worried about being taken advantage of by accident for several days.《语丝》的销路可只是增加起来，原定是撰稿者同时负担印费的，我付了十元之后，就不见再来收取了，因为收支已足相抵，后来并且有了赢余。于是小峰就被尊为“老板”，但这推尊并非美意，其时伏园已另就《京报副刊》编辑之职，川岛还是捣乱小孩，所以几个撰稿者便只好搿住了多眼而少开口的小峰，加以荣名，勒令拿出赢余来，每月请一回客。这“将欲取之，必先与之”的方法果然奏效，从此市场中的茶居或饭铺的或一房门外，有时便会看见挂着一块上写“语丝社”的木牌。倘一驻足，也许就可以听到疑古玄同先生的又快又响的谈吐。但我那时是在避开宴会的，所以毫不知道内部的情形。
The sales of "Yusi" only increased, and it was originally planned that the writer would bear the printing fee at the same time, but after I paid ten yuan, I didn't come to collect it again, because the income and expenditure were enough to offset it, and then there was a surplus. At that time, Fuyuan had already taken on the position of editor of the "Beijing News Supplement", and Kawashima was still making trouble with the children, so several writers had to hold Xiaofeng, who had more eyes and few mouths, and gave him an honorary name, ordered him to take out the surplus and invite guests back once a month. From then on, outside the tea house or restaurant or one-room door in the market, you can sometimes see a wooden sign with the words "Language Silk Society" hanging on it. If you stop, you may be able to hear Mr. Yigu Xuantong's fast and loud conversation. But I was avoiding the banquet at that time, so I didn't know what's going on.我和《语丝》的渊源和关系，就不过如此，虽然投稿时多时少。但这样地一直继续到我走出了北京。到那时候，我还不知道实际上是谁的编辑。
My relationship with "Yusi" is just like that, although there are many times when I submit it. But this continued until I walked out of Beijing. At that point, I didn't know who actually edited it.到得厦门，我投稿就很少了。一者因为相离已远，不受催促，责任便觉得轻；二者因为人地生疏，学校里所遇到的又大抵是些念佛老妪式口角，不值得费纸墨。倘能做《鲁宾孙教书记》或《蚊虫叮卵脬论》，那也许倒很有趣的，而我又没有这样的“天才”，所以只寄了一点极琐碎的文字。这年底到了广州，投稿也很少。第一原因是和在厦门相同的；第二，先是忙于事务，又看不清那里的情形，后来颇有感慨了，然而我不想在它的敌人的治下去发表。
When I arrived in Xiamen, I had very few contributions. First, because they are far away and not urged, their responsibilities feel light; The two are unfamiliar, and most of the old women encountered in school are arguments like chanting Buddhism, which is not worth the paper and ink. If I could do "Rubin's Sun Teaching Secretary" or "The Theory of Mosquito Biting Eggs", it might be interesting, and I don't have such a "genius", so I only sent a little extremely trivial text. At the end of this year, I arrived in Guangzhou, and there were very few submissions. The first reason is the same as in Xiamen; Second, at first I was busy with affairs, and I couldn't see the situation there, and then I was quite emotional, but I didn't want to publish it under the rule of its enemies.不愿意在有权者的刀下，颂扬他的威权，并奚落其敌人来取媚，可以说，也是“语丝派”一种几乎共同的态度。所以《语丝》在北京虽然逃过了段祺瑞及其吧儿狗们的撕裂，但终究被“张大元帅”所禁止了，发行的北新书局，且同时遭了封禁，其时是一九二七年。
Unwilling to praise his authority under the knife of the powerful and ridicule his enemies to flatter them, it can be said that it is also an almost common attitude of the "Yusi faction". Therefore, although "Yusi" escaped the tearing of Duan Qirui and his bardogs in Beijing, it was eventually banned by "Marshal Zhang", and the Beixin Bookstore that issued it was banned at the same time, which was in 1927.这一年，小峰有一回到我的上海的寓居，提议《语丝》就要在上海印行，且嘱我担任做编辑。以关系而论，我是不应该推托的。于是担任了。从这时起，我才探问向来的编法。那很简单，就是：凡社员的稿件，编辑者并无取舍之权，来则必用，只有外来的投稿，由编辑者略加选择，必要时且或略有所删除。所以我应做的，不过后一段事，而且社员的稿子，实际上也十之九直寄北新书局，由那里径送印刷局的，等到我看见时，已在印钉成书之后了。所谓“社员”，也并无明确的界限，最初的撰稿者，所余早已无多，中途出现的人，则在中途忽来忽去。因为《语丝》是又有爱登碰壁人物的牢骚的习气的，所以最初出阵，尚无用武之地的人，或本在别一团体，而发生意见，借此反攻的人，也每和《语丝》暂时发生关系，待到功成名遂，当然也就淡漠起来。至于因环境改变，意见分歧而去的，那自然尤为不少。因此所谓“社员”者，便不能有明确的界限。前年的方法，是只要投稿几次，无不刊载，此后便放心发稿，和旧社员一律待遇了。但经旧的社员绍介，直接交到北新书局，刊出之前，为编辑者的眼睛所不能见者，也间或有之。
This year, Xiaofeng returned to my residence in Shanghai, proposed that "Yusi" be printed in Shanghai, and asked me to be the editor. In terms of relationships, I should not shirk it. So he served. From this point on, I inquired about the traditional weaving method. That is very simple, that is: all members' manuscripts, the editor has no right to choose, and must be used when they come, only external submissions, which are slightly selected by the editor, and deleted slightly if necessary. So what I should do is the latter part, and the manuscripts of the members are actually sent directly to the Beixin Book Company, and from there they are sent directly to the printing bureau, and by the time I see them, they are already printed and stapled. The so-called "members" do not have clear boundaries, and there are not many people left for the original writers, and those who appear in the middle come and go in the middle. Because "Yusi" has the complaining habit of Aiden's characters, people who are not yet useful at the beginning, or who are originally in another group, and have opinions and counterattack, often have a temporary relationship with "Yusi", and when they become famous, of course, they will become indifferent. As for those who left due to changes in the environment and differences of opinion, there were naturally many of them. Therefore, the so-called "members" cannot have clear boundaries. The method of the previous year was to submit a few submissions, all of which would be published, and then they would be published with confidence, and they would be treated the same as the old members. However, after being introduced by the old members, it was directly handed over to the Beixin Book Company, and before it was published, it was not visible to the eyes of the editor, and there were occasional cases.经我担任了编辑之后，《语丝》的时运就很不济了，受了一回政府的警告，遭了浙江当局的禁止，还招了创造社式“革命文学”家的拚命的围攻。警告的来由，我莫名其妙，有人说是因为一篇戏剧；禁止的缘故也莫名其妙，有人说是因为登载了揭发复旦大学内幕的文字，而那时浙江的党务指导委员老爷却有复旦大学出身的人们。至于创造社派的攻击，那是属于历史底的了，他们在把守“艺术之宫”，还未“革命”的时候，就已经将“语丝派”中的几个人看作眼中钉的，叙事夹在这里太冗长了，且待下一回再说罢。
After I served as an editor, the fortune of "Yusi" was very unlucky, and it was warned by the government, banned by the Zhejiang authorities, and desperately besieged by the creators of social "revolutionary literature". The reason for the warning, I am inexplicable, some people say it is because of a drama; The reason for the ban is also inexplicable, some people say that it is because of the publication of the text exposing the inside story of Fudan University, but at that time, the party steering committee of Zhejiang had people from Fudan University. As for the attack of the Creation Society, it belongs to history, they guarded the "palace of art", and before the "revolution", they had already regarded several people in the "Silk School" as a thorn in their side, and the narrative was too lengthy here, and I will talk about it next time.但《语丝》本身，却确实也在消沉下去。一是对于社会现象的批评几乎绝无，连这一类的投稿也少有，二是所余的几个较久的撰稿者，过时又少了几个了。前者的原因，我以为是在无话可说，或有话而不敢言，警告和禁止，就是一个实证。后者，我恐怕是其咎在我的。举一点例罢，自从我万不得已，选登了一篇极平和的纠正刘半农先生的“林则徐被俘”之误的来信以后，他就不再有片纸只字；江绍原先生绍介了一篇油印的《冯玉祥先生……》来，我不给编入之后，绍原先生也就从此没有投稿了。并且这篇油印文章不久便在也是伏园所办的《贡献》上登出，上有郑重的小序，说明着我托辞不载的事由单。
But "Yusi" itself is indeed depressed. First, there is almost no criticism of social phenomena, and even this kind of contribution is rare, and second, there are a few remaining long-term contributors, and a few are outdated. The reason for the former, I think is that there is nothing to say, or there is something to say but dare not speak, warnings and prohibitions are an empirical proof. The latter, I am afraid that it is my fault. For example, since I had no choice but to publish a letter in a very peaceful way to correct Mr. Liu Bannong's mistake of "Lin Zexu was captured", he no longer had a single word on a piece of paper; Mr. Jiang Shaoyuan introduced a mimeographed "Mr. Feng Yuxiang ......", and after I did not compile it, Mr. Shaoyuan did not submit it since. And this mimeographed article was soon published in the "Contribution" organized by Fuyuan, with a solemn preface, explaining the list of reasons I did not record.还有一种显著的变迁是广告的杂乱。看广告的种类，大概是就可以推见这刊物的性质的。例如“正人君子”们所办的《现代评论》上，就会有金城银行的长期广告，南洋华侨学生所办的《秋野》上，就能见“虎标良药”的招牌。虽是打着“革命文学”旗子的小报，只要有那上面的广告大半是花柳药和饮食店，便知道作者和读者，仍然和先前的专讲妓女戏子的小报的人们同流，现在不过用男作家，女作家来替代了倡优，或捧或骂，算是在文坛上做工夫。《语丝》初办的时候，对于广告的选择是极严的，虽是新书，倘社员以为不是好书，也不给登载。因为是同人杂志，所以撰稿者也可行使这样的职权。听说北新书局之办《北新半月刊》，就因为在《语丝》上不能自由登载广告的缘故。但自从移在上海出版以后，书籍不必说，连医生的诊例也出现了，袜厂的广告也出现了，甚至于立愈遗精药品的广告也出现了。固然，谁也不能保证《语丝》的读者决不遗精，况且遗精也并非恶行，但善后办法，却须向《申报》之类，要稳当，则向《医药学报》的广告上去留心的。我因此得了几封诘责的信件，又就在《语丝》本身上登了一篇投来的反对的文章。
Another significant change is the clutter of advertising. Looking at the type of advertisement, we can probably infer the nature of this publication. For example, in the "Modern Review" run by "upright gentlemen", there will be long-term advertisements for Jincheng Bank, and on "Qiu Ye" run by overseas Chinese students in Nanyang, you can see the sign of "Tiger Label Good Medicine". Although it is a tabloid under the banner of "revolutionary literature", as long as most of the advertisements on it are flowers and willow medicines and restaurants, it is known that the author and readers are still in the same flow as the previous tabloids that specialized in prostitutes and dramas. When "Yusi" was first launched, the selection of advertisements was extremely strict, even if it was a new book, if the members thought it was not a good book, it would not be published. Because it is a doujin magazine, the writer can also exercise such authority. I heard that Beixin Bookstore runs the "Beixin Semi-Monthly" because it cannot freely publish advertisements on "Yusi". But since it was published in Shanghai, not to mention books, even doctors' consultations, advertisements for sock factories, and even advertisements for Liyu nocturnal medicines have also appeared. Of course, no one can guarantee that the readers of "Yusi" will never leave sperm, and nocturnal sperm is not an evil deed, but the aftermath must be to be applied to the "Declaration", etc., and to be stable, pay attention to the advertisements of the "Journal of Medicine". As a result, I received several letters of reproach, and I published an opposing article on "Yusi" itself.但以前我也曾尽了我的本分。当袜厂出现时，曾经当面质问过小峰，回答是“发广告的人弄错的”；遗精药出现时，是写了一封信，并无答复，但从此以后，广告却也不见了。我想，在小峰，大约还要算是让步的，因为这时对于一部分的作家，早由北新书局致送稿费，不只负发行之责，而《语丝》也因此并非纯粹的同人杂志了。
But I have also done my duty before. When the sock factory appeared, he once questioned Xiaofeng in person, and the answer was that "the person who posted the advertisement made a mistake"; When the nocturnal medicine appeared, it was written in a letter and there was no reply, but since then, the advertisement has disappeared. I think that in Xiaofeng, it is probably a concession, because at this time, for some writers, the Beixin Book Company has already paid the manuscript fee, and is not only responsible for distribution, but also "Yusi" is not a pure fan magazine.积了半年的经验之后，我就决计向小峰提议，将《语丝》停刊，没有得到赞成，我便辞去编辑的责任。小峰要我寻一个替代的人，我于是推举了柔石。
After accumulating half a year of experience, I decided to propose to Xiaofeng to suspend the publication of "Yusi", but I resigned from my editorial responsibilities because it was not approved. Xiaofeng asked me to find a replacement, so I recommended Roushi.但不知为什么，柔石编辑了六个月，第五卷的上半卷一完，也辞职了。
But for some reason, Rou Shi edited for six months, and as soon as the first half of the fifth volume was finished, he also resigned.以上是我所遇见的关于《语丝》四年中的琐事。试将前几期和近几期一比较，便知道其间的变化，有怎样的不同，最分明的是几乎不提时事，且多登中篇作品了，这是因为容易充满页数而又可免于遭殃。虽然因为毁坏旧物和戳破新盒子而露出里面所藏的旧物来的一种突击之力，至今尚为旧的和自以为新的人们所憎恶，但这力是属于往昔的了。
The above are the trivia I encountered about "Yusi" in the four years. If you compare the previous issues with the recent ones, you will know how the changes are different, the most obvious is that there is almost no mention of current affairs, and most of them are published in novellas, because it is easy to fill the pages and avoid disaster. Although the power of an assault that reveals the old things hidden in the old by destroying old things and popping new boxes is still hated by the old and the new people, this power belongs to the past.十二月二十二日。
December 22.

鲁迅译著书目

鲁迅译著书目

鲁迅译著书目

Lu Xun translated the bibliography一九二一年
1921《工人绥惠略夫》（俄国M·阿尔志跋绥夫作中篇小说。商务印书馆印行《文学研究会丛书》之一，后归北新书局，为《未名丛刊》之一，今绝版。）
"Worker Sui Huiliov" (novella by M. Alzhiv of Russia. The Commercial Press printed one of the "Literary Research Association Series", which was later returned to the Beijing New Book Company, as one of the "Unnamed Series", which is now out of print. ）

鲁迅译著书目

一九二二年

鲁迅译著书目

1922《一个青年的梦》（日本武者小路实笃作戏曲。商务印书馆印行《文学研究会丛书》之一，后归北新书局，为《未名丛刊》之一，今绝版。）
"A Youth's Dream" (Japanese Musha Koji Minoru opera. The Commercial Press printed one of the "Literary Research Association Series", which was later returned to the Beijing New Book Company, as one of the "Unnamed Series", which is now out of print. ）《爱罗先珂童话集》（商务印书馆印行《文学研究会丛书》之一。）
"Ailuo Xianke Fairy Tale Collection" (one of the "Literary Research Association Series" printed by the Commercial Press. ）

鲁迅译著书目

一九二三年

鲁迅译著书目

1923《桃色的云》（俄国V．爱罗先珂作童话剧。北新书局印行《未名丛刊》之一。
"Peachy Clouds" (Russian V. Eroshenko as a fairy tale drama. Beixin Book Company prints one of the "Unnamed Series".《呐喊》（短篇小说集，一九一八至二二年作，共十四篇。印行所同上。）
"The Scream" (a collection of short stories, written in 1918-22, a total of fourteen pieces). The printing office is the same as above. ）《中国小说史略》上册（改订之北京大学文科讲义。印行所同上。）
The first volume of "A Brief History of Chinese Novels" (revised Peking University Liberal Arts Lecture Notes. The printing office is the same as above. ）

鲁迅译著书目

一九二四年

鲁迅译著书目

1924《苦闷的象征》（日本厨川白村作论文。北新书局印行《未名丛刊》之一。）
"Symbol of Distress" (Japanese chef Kawa Shiramura essay. Beixin Book Company prints one of the "Unnamed Series". ）《中国小说史略》下册（印行所同上。后合上册为一本。）
The second volume of "A Brief History of Chinese Novels" (the same as the printing office. The first volume was later compiled into one book. ）

鲁迅译著书目

一九二五年

鲁迅译著书目

1925《热风》（一九一八至二四年的短评。印行所同上。）
"Hot Wind" (short review of 1918-24. The printing office is the same as above. ）

鲁迅译著书目

一九二六年

鲁迅译著书目

1926《彷徨》（短篇小说集之二，一九二四至二五年作，共十一篇。印行所同上。）
"Wandering" (the second collection of short stories, written in 1924-25, a total of eleven pieces). The printing office is the same as above. ）《华盖集》（短评集之二，皆一九二五年作。印行所同上。）
"Canopy Collection" (the second collection of short comments, both written in 1925. The printing office is the same as above. ）《华盖集续编》（短评集之三，皆一九二六年作。印行所同上。）
"The Continuation of the Canopy Collection" (the third collection of short reviews, all written in 1926). The printing office is the same as above. ）《小说旧闻钞》（辑录旧文，间有考正。印行所同上。）
"Novel Old News Banknote" (compilation of old texts, occasionally corrected. The printing office is the same as above. ）《出了象牙之塔》（日本厨川白村作随笔，选译。未名社印行《未名丛刊》之一，今归北新书局。）
"Out of the Ivory Tower" (Japanese chef Kawa Shiramura wrote an essay, selected translation. One of the unnamed series printed by the unnamed society, now belongs to the North New Book Company. ）

鲁迅译著书目

一九二七年

鲁迅译著书目

1927《坟》（一九〇七至二五年的论文及随笔。未名社印行。今版被抵押，不能印。）
"Grave" (1907-25 essays and essays. It is not printed by the company. The current edition is mortgaged and cannot be printed. ）《朝华夕拾》（回忆文十篇。未名社印行《未名新集》之一。今版被抵押，由北新书局另排印行。）
"Morning and Evening Collection" (ten memoirs. The unnamed society prints one of the "unnamed new collections". This edition is mortgaged and printed separately by the Beixin Book Company. ）《唐宋传奇集》十卷（辑录并考正。北新书局印行。）
"Tang and Song Legends" ten volumes (compiled and corrected. Printed by Beixin Book Company. ）

鲁迅译著书目

一九二八年

鲁迅译著书目

1928《小约翰》（荷兰F．望·蔼覃作长篇童话。未名社印行《未名丛刊》之一。今版被抵押，不能印。）
"Little John" (a long fairy tale written by F. Wang Ai Tan of the Netherlands. The unnamed society prints one of the "Unnamed Series". The current edition is mortgaged and cannot be printed. ）《野草》（散文小诗。北新书局印行。）
"Wild Grass" (prose poem. Printed by Beixin Book Company. ）《而已集》（短评集之四，皆一九二七年作。印行所同上。）
"The Collection" (the fourth in a collection of short reviews, all written in 1927). The printing office is the same as above. ）《思想山水人物》（日本鹤见祐辅作随笔，选译。印行所同上，今绝版。）
"Thoughts and Landscape Figures" (Essay by Yusuke Tsurumi in Japan, selected translation. The printing office is the same as above, and is now out of print. ）

鲁迅译著书目

一九二九年

鲁迅译著书目

In 1929《壁下译丛》（译俄国及日本作家与批评家之论文集。印行所同上。）
"Translation Series" (Translation of essays by Russian and Japanese writers and critics. The printing office is the same as above. ）《近代美术史潮论》（日本板垣鹰穗作。印行所同上。）
"Trend Theory of Modern Art History" (by Takaho Itagaki, Japan. The printing office is the same as above. ）《蕗谷虹儿画选》（并译题词。朝华社印行《艺苑朝华》之一，今绝版。）
"Selected Paintings of Rainbow Grass in the Valley" (and translated inscriptions. One of the "Art Garden Chaohua" printed by Chaohua Society, which is now out of print. ）《无产阶级文学的理论与实际》（日本片上伸作。大江书店印行《文艺理论小丛书》之一。）
"Theory and Practice of Proletarian Literature" (Shinsaku Katakami, Japan. Dajiang Bookstore prints one of the "Literary and Art Theory Series". ）《艺术论》（苏联A．卢那卡尔斯基作。印行所同上。）
"On Art" (by Soviet A. Lunakarsky. The printing office is the same as above. ）

鲁迅译著书目

一九三〇年

鲁迅译著书目

1930《艺术论》（俄国G．蒲力汗诺夫作。光华书局印行《科学的艺术论丛书》之一。
"On Art" (by G. Pulkhanov of Russia. Guanghua Bookstore printed one of the "Scientific Art Theory Series".《文艺与批评》（苏联卢那卡尔斯基作论文及演说。水沫书店印行同丛书之一。）
"Literature and Criticism" (Essays and speeches by Luna Karsky of the Soviet Union. Water Foam Bookstore prints one of the same series. ）《文艺政策》（苏联关于文艺的会议录及决议。并同上。）
"Literary and Art Policy" (Proceedings and resolutions of Soviet conferences on literature and art. All are the same as above. ）《十月》（苏联A．雅各武莱夫作长篇小说。神州国光社收稿为《现代文艺丛书》之一，今尚未印。）
"October" (Soviet Union, A. Yakov Vulev, novel. The manuscript received by the Shenzhou Guoguang Society is one of the "Modern Literature and Art Series", which has not yet been printed. ）

鲁迅译著书目

一九三一年

鲁迅译著书目

1931《药用植物》（日本刈米达夫作。商务印书馆收稿，分载《自然界》中。）
"Medicinal Plants" (by Tafu Karami, Japan. The manuscript received by the Commercial Press and was published in "Nature". ）《毁灭》（苏联A·法捷耶夫作长篇小说。三闲书屋印行。）
"Destruction" (Soviet A. Fadeev novel. Printed by the three idle bookstores. ）

鲁迅译著书目

译著之外，又有

鲁迅译著书目

In addition to translations, there are more所校勘者，为：
The proofreaders are:唐刘恂《岭表录异》三卷（以唐宋类书所引校《永乐大典》本，并补遗。未印。）
唐刘恂《岭表录异》三卷（以唐宋类书所引校《永乐大典》本，并补遗。 未印。 ）魏中散大夫《嵇康集》十卷（校明丛书堂钞本，并补遗。未印。）
魏中散大夫《嵇康集》十卷（校明丛书堂钞本，并补遗。 未印。 ）所纂辑者，为：
所纂辑者，为：《古小说钩沈》三十六卷（辑周至隋散逸小说。未印。）
Thirty-six volumes of "Ancient Novels Hook Shen" (compiled from Zhou to Sui Sanyi novels. Not printed. ）谢承《后汉书》辑本五卷（多于汪文台辑本。未印。）
Xie Cheng's "Book of the Later Han Dynasty" compiled in five volumes (more than Wang Wentai's edition. Not printed. ）所编辑者，为：
The edits are:《莽原》（周刊。北京《京报》附送，后停刊。）
"Mangyuan" (Weekly. Beijing's "Beijing News" attached it, and later stopped publishing. ）《语丝》（周刊。所编为在北平被禁，移至上海出版后之第四卷至第五卷之半。北新书局印行，后废刊。）
"Yusi" (Weekly. The compilation was banned in Peiping and moved to the fourth to fifth volumes after being published in Shanghai. Printed by the Northern New Book Company, and later discontinued. ）《奔流》（自一卷一册起，至二卷五册停刊。北新书局印行。）
"Torrent" (from volume 1 to volume 2 and 5 volumes. Printed by Beixin Book Company. ）《文艺研究》（季刊。只出第一册。大江书店印行。）
"Literature and Art Research" (quarterly. Only the first volume was published. Printed by Dajiang Bookstore. ）所选定，校字者，为：
The selected proofreaders are:《故乡》（许钦文作短篇小说集。北新书局印行《乌合丛书》之一。）
"Hometown" (a collection of short stories written by Xu Qinwen. Beixin Book Company printed one of the "Rabble Series". ）《心的探险》（长虹作杂文集。同上。）
"The Adventure of the Heart" (Changhong's essay collection. Ditto. ）《飘渺的梦》（向培良作短篇小说集。同上。）
"Ethereal Dreams" (a collection of short stories written by Xiang Peiliang. Ditto. ）《忘川之水》（真吾诗选。北新书局印行。）
"The Water of the Forgotten River" (Selected Poems of Zhenwu. Printed by Beixin Book Company. ）所校订，校字者，为：
The editors and proofreaders are:《苏俄的文艺论战》（苏联褚沙克等论文，附《蒲力汗诺夫与艺术问题》，任国桢译。北新书局印行《未名丛刊》之一。）
"The Literary and Art Debate in Soviet Russia" (Soviet Chushak et al., with "Pulikhanov and Art Problems", translated by Ren Guozhen). Beixin Book Company prints one of the "Unnamed Series". ）《十二个》（苏联A．勃洛克作长诗，胡译。同上。）
"Twelve" (Soviet A. Bullock wrote a long poem, translated by Hu. Ditto. ）《争自由的波浪》。（俄国V．但兼珂等作短篇小说集，董秋芳译。同上。）
"The Wave of Freedom". (A collection of short stories written by Russian V. Dan Jianke and others, translated by Dong Qiufang.) Ditto. ）《勇敢的约翰》（匈牙利裴多菲·山大作民间故事诗，孙用译。湖风书局印行。）
"Brave John" (Hungarian Pedolfi Sanda's folk tale poem, translated by Sun Yong. Printed by Hufeng Bookstore. ）《夏娃日记》（美国马克·土温作小说，李兰译。湖风书局印行《世界文学名著译丛》之一。）
"Eve's Diary" (American novel by Mark Twain, translated by Li Lan). Hufeng Bookstore printed one of the "Translation Series of World Literary Masterpieces". ）所校订者，为：
The edits are:《二月》（柔石作中篇小说。朝华社印行，今绝版。）
"February" (novella by Rou Shi. Printed by Chaohua Society, now out of print. ）《小小十年》（叶永蓁作长篇小说。春潮书局印行。）
"Little Ten Years" (Ye Yongzhen wrote a novel. Printed by Chunchao Bookstore. ）《穷人》（俄国F．陀思妥夫斯基作小说，韦丛芜译。未名社印行《未名丛书》之一。）
"The Poor Man" (novel by F. Dostovsky in Russia, translated by Wei Congwu. The Unnamed Society prints one of the "Unnamed Series". ）《黑假面人》（俄国L．安特来夫作戏曲，李霁野译。同上。）
"Black Masked Man" (Russian opera by L. Antreev, translated by Li Jiye). Ditto. ）《红笑》（前人作小说，梅川译。商务印书馆印行。）
"Red Smile" (novel by predecessors, translated by Meichuan. Printed by the Commercial Press. ）《小彼得》（匈牙利H．至尔·妙伦作童话，许霞译。朝华社印行，今绝版。）
"Little Peter" (Fairy tale written by H. Zhier Miaolun of Hungary, translated by Xu Xia. Printed by Chaohua Society, now out of print. ）《进化与退化》（周建人所译生物学的论文选集。光华书局印行。）
"Evolution and Degradation" (Selected papers on biology translated by Zhou Jianren. Printed by Guanghua Bookstore. ）《浮士德与城》（苏联A．卢那卡尔斯基作戏曲，柔石译。神州国光社印行《现代文艺丛书》之一。）
"Faust and the City" (Soviet opera by A. Lunakarsky, translated by Rou Shi. Shenzhou Guoguang Society printed one of the "Modern Literature and Art Series". ）《静静的顿河》（苏联M．唆罗诃夫作长篇小说，第一卷，贺非译。同上。）
"The Quiet Don River" (novel by M. Sorokhov of the Soviet Union, Volume 1, translated by He Fei. Ditto. ）《铁甲列车第一四——六九》（苏联V．伊凡诺夫作小说，侍桁译。同上，未出。）
"Ironclad Train No. 14-69" (novel by V. Ivanov of the Soviet Union, translated by Shi Zhen. Ibid., not released. ）所印行者，为：
The printed and circulated are:《士敏土之图》（德国C．梅斐尔德木刻十幅。珂罗版印。
"Picture of the Smyin Soil" (10 woodcuts by C. Mayfield, Germany. Coro print.《铁流》（苏联A．绥拉菲摩维支作长篇小说，曹靖华译。）
"Iron Flow" (Soviet A. Suerafimovitz novel, translated by Cao Jinghua. ）《铁流之图》（苏联Ⅰ．毕斯凯莱夫木刻四幅。印刷中，被炸毁。）
"Picture of the Iron Flow" (Soviet Union I. Biskelev woodcut 4 pieces. In print, it was blown up. ）我所译著的书，景宋曾经给我开过一个目录，载在《关于鲁迅及其著作》里，但是并不完全的。这回因载在为开手编集杂感，打开了装着和我有关的书籍的书箱，就顺便另抄了一张书目，如上。
The book I translated, Jing Song once opened a catalog for me, which was contained in "On Lu Xun and His Writings", but it was not complete. This time, because I was writing a collection of miscellaneous feelings for the sake of handwriting, I opened the bookcase containing books related to me, and copied another bibliography by the way, as above.我还要将这附在《三闲集》的末尾。这目的，是为着自己，也有些为着别人。据书目察核起来，我在过去的近十年中，费去的力气实在也并不少，即使校对别人的译著，也真是一个字一个字的看下去，决不肯随便放过，敷衍作者和读者的，并且毫不怀着有所利用的意思。虽说做这些事，原因在于“有闲”，但我那时却每日必须将八小时为生活而出卖，用在译作和校对上的，全是此外的工夫，常常整天没有休息。倒是近四五年没有先前那么起劲了。
I will also attach this to the end of the "Three Leisure Collection". This purpose is for himself and some for others. According to the bibliography, I have spent a lot of effort in the past ten years, even if I proofread other people's translations, I really read them word by word, and I will never let them go casually, perfunctory to the author and readers, and have no intention of taking advantage of them. Although the reason for doing these things was "leisure", I had to sell eight hours a day for my life, and I spent all my time on translation and proofreading, and I often had no rest all day. However, in the past four or five years, I have not been as energetic as before.但这些陆续用去了的生命，实不只成为徒劳，据有些批评家言，倒都是应该从严发落的罪恶。做了“众矢之的”者，也已经四五年，开首是“作恶”，后来是“受报”了，有几位论客，还几分含讥，几分恐吓，几分快意的这样“忠告”我。然而我自己却并不全是这样想，我以为我至今还是存在，只有将近十年没有创作，而现在还有人称我为“作者”，却是很可笑的。
But these lives that have been used one after another have not only become in vain, but according to some critics, they are all sins that should be dealt with severely. Those who have been "the target of public criticism" have been for four or five years, starting with "doing evil", and then "being rewarded", and there are several commentators who are a little ridiculous, a little intimidating, and a little happy to "advise" me. However, I don't think so, I think I still exist, I haven't created for nearly ten years, and now some people call me "author", which is ridiculous.我想，这缘故，有些在我自己，有些则在于后起的青年的。在我自己的，是我确曾认真译著，并不如攻击我的人们所说的取巧，的投机。所出的许多书，功罪姑且弗论，即使全是罪恶罢，但在出版界上，也就是一块不小的斑痕，要“一脚踢开”，必须有较大的腿劲。凭空的攻击，似乎也只能一时收些效验，而最坏的是他们自己又忽而影子似的淡去，消去了。
I think that for this reason, some of it is in myself, and some of it is in the rising youth. In my own case, I did translate it seriously, and it was not as clever and speculative as those who attacked me said. Many books published, regardless of merit and demerit, even if they are all sinful, but in the publishing industry, it is a big spot, and in order to "kick it away", it must have a lot of leg strength. Attacks out of thin air seem to have only some effect for a while, and the worst thing is that they themselves suddenly faded away like a shadow and disappeared.但是，试再一检我的书目，那些东西的内容也实在穷乏得可以。最致命的，是：创作既因为我缺少伟大的才能，至今没有做过一部长篇；翻译又因为缺少外国语的学力，所以徘徊观望，不敢译一种世上著名的巨制。后来的青年，只要做出相反的一件，便不但打倒，而且立刻会跨过的。但仅仅宣传些在西湖苦吟什么出奇的新诗，在外国创作着百万言的小说之类却不中用。因为言太夸则实难副，志极高而心不专，就永远只能得传扬一个可惊可喜的消息；然而静夜一想，自觉空虚，便又不免焦躁起来，仍然看见我的黑影遮在前面，好像一块很大的“绊脚石”了。
However, when I checked my bibliography again, the content of those things was really poor. The most fatal thing is: because I lack great talent, I have not made a long story so far; Because of the lack of academic ability in foreign Chinese, the translator hesitated and did not dare to translate a world-famous masterpiece. Later young people, as long as they do the opposite, will not only be defeated, but will immediately cross over. But it is useless to just promote some surprising new poems in West Lake and create million-word novels in foreign countries. Because it is difficult to match the words that are too exaggerated, and the ambition is extremely high and the heart is not focused, you can only spread a surprising and gratifying news; However, when Jingye thought about it, she felt empty, and she couldn't help but become anxious again, and still saw my black shadow covering the front, like a big "stumbling block".对于为了远大的目的，并非因个人之利而攻击我者，无论用怎样的方法，我全都没齿无怨言。但对于只想以笔墨问世的青年，我现在却敢据几年的经验，以诚恳的心，进一个苦口的忠告。那就是：不断的（！）努力一些，切勿想以一年半载，几篇文字和几本期刊，便立了空前绝后的大勋业。还有一点，是：不要只用力于抹杀别个，使他和自己一样的空无，而必须跨过那站着的前人，比前人更加高大。初初出阵的时候，幼稚和浅薄都不要紧，然而也须不断的（！）生长起来才好。并不明白文艺的理论而任意做些造谣生事的评论，写几句闲话便要扑灭异己的短评，译几篇童话就想抹杀一切的翻译，归根结蒂，于己于人，还都是“可怜无益费精神”的事，这也就是所谓“聪明误”了。
I have no complaints about those who attack me for a great purpose, not for personal gain, no matter what method is used. But for young people who just want to come out with pen and ink, I now dare to give a bitter advice based on a few years of experience and with a sincere heart. That is: constant (!) Work harder, don't think that in a year and a half, a few articles and a few journals, you will make unprecedented achievements. Another point is: do not only try to erase the other person, so that he is as empty as yourself, but must step over the standing predecessor, taller than the predecessor. When you first go into battle, it doesn't matter if you are naïve or shallow, but you must continue (!) It is good to grow. Do not understand the theory of literature and art and arbitrarily make some rumor-mongering comments, write a few gossip to extinguish the short comments of dissidents, and translate a few fairy tales to erase all translations.当我被“进步的青年”们所口诛笔伐的时候，我“还不到五十岁”，现在却真的过了五十岁了，据卢南（E．Renan）说，年纪一大，性情就会苛刻起来。我愿意竭力防止这弱点，因为我又明明白白地知道：世界决不和我同死，希望是在于将来的。但灯下独坐，春夜又倍觉凄清，便在百静中，信笔写了这一番话。
When I was criticized by the "progressive youth", I was "not yet fifty years old", but now I am really over fifty, and according to E. Renan, the older I get, the more harsh my temperament becomes. I am willing to do my best to prevent this weakness, because I know very clearly that the world will never die with me, and hope is in the future. But sitting alone under the lamp, the spring night felt desolate, so I wrote these words in silence.一九三二年四月二十九日，鲁迅于沪北寓楼记。
On April 29, 1932, Lu Xun recorded in the building of his residence in northern Shanghai.

封面

书名页

版权信息

图书在版编目（CIP）数据
Books in Print (CIP) data二心集/鲁迅著．—南京：译林出版社，2013.11
Erxin Collection/Lu Xun.—Nanjing: Yilin Publishing House, 2013.11（鲁迅自编文集）
(Lu Xun's self-edited anthology)ISBN 978-7-5447-4372-3
ISBN 978-7-5447-4372-3Ⅰ．①二…　Ⅱ．①鲁…　Ⅲ．①鲁迅杂文－杂文集　Ⅳ．①I210.4
I..(1) II... II..(1) Lu... III..(1) Lu Xun's Essays - Essays IV..(1)I210.4中国版本图书馆CIP数据核字（2013）第211107号
China Version Library CIP Data Verification (2013) No. 211107
书　　名　二心集
Book title: Erxin Collection作　　者　鲁　迅
Author: Lu Xun责任编辑　王振华
Editor-in-charge: Wang Zhenhua特约编辑　史会美
Special editor Shi Huimei出版发行　凤凰出版传媒股份有限公司
Published and distributed by Phoenix Publishing and Media Co., Ltd译林出版社
Yilin Publishing House出版社地址　南京市湖南路1号A楼，邮编：210009
Publisher's address Building A, No. 1 Hunan Road, Nanjing, Zip Code: 210009电子信箱　yilin@yilin.com
E-mail yilin@yilin.com出版社网址　http://www.yilin.com
Publisher website http://www.yilin.com印　　刷　北京凯达印务有限公司
Printing Beijing Kaida Printing Co., Ltd开　　本　787×1092毫米　1/32
Volume 787×1092 mm 1/32印　　张　6.5
Print 6.5字　　数　116千字
Word count: 116,000 words版　　次　2013年11月第1版　2013年11月第1次印刷
Edition November 2013 1st edition November 2013 1st printing标准书号　ISBN 978-7-5447-4372-3
ISBN 978-7-5447-4372-3定　　价　16.80元
The price is 16.80 yuan译林版图书若有印装错误可向承印厂调换

If there are printing errors in the translated version of the book, it can be exchanged with the printing factory

Table of Contents

目录

Table of Contents

directory序言 序言
一九三〇年 1930
“硬译”与“文学的阶级性” "Hard Translation" and "Class Nature of Literature"
习惯与改革 Habits and reforms
非革命的急进革命论者 Non-revolutionary radical revolutionaries
张资平氏的“小说学” Zhang Ziping's "Novelology"
对于左翼作家联盟的意见 Opinion on the Left Writers' Union
我们要批评家 We want critics
“好政府主义” "Good governmentism"
“丧家的”“资本家的乏走狗” "The bereaved family" and "the capitalist's lackey"
《进化和退化》小引 "Evolution and Degradation" is a small introduction
《艺术论》译本序 Preface to the translation of "Art Theory"
做古文和做好人的秘诀（夜记之五，不完。） The secret of doing ancient texts and being a good person (Night Diary No. 5, endless. ）
一九三一年 1931
关于《唐三藏取经诗话》的版本 About the version of "Tang Seng's Poems"
柔石小传 A short biography of Roushi
中国无产阶级革命文学和前驱的血 Chinese proletarian revolutionary literature and the blood of the forerunners
黑暗中国的文艺界的现状 The current situation of the literary and artistic circles in dark China
上海文艺之一瞥 A glimpse of Shanghai literature and art
一八艺社习作展览会小引 A small introduction to the 18th Art Society's study exhibition
答文艺新闻社问 Answer a question from the Literary and Art News Agency
“民族主义文学”的任务和运命 The task and destiny of "nationalist literature"
沉滓的泛起 The dregs rose
以脚报国 Serve the country with your feet
唐朝的钉梢 The nail tip of the Tang Dynasty
《夏娃日记》小引 A small introduction to "Eve's Diary"
新的“女将” The new "female general"
宣传与做戏 Publicity and acting
知难行难 Knowing the difficulty is difficult
几条“顺”的翻译 Several translations of "Shun"
风马牛 Wind horses and cattle
再来一条“顺”的翻译 Another translation of "smooth"
中华民国的新“堂·吉诃德”们 The new "Don Quixote" of the Republic of China
《野草》英文译本序 Preface to the English translation of "Wild Grass"
“智识劳动者”万岁 Long live the "intellectual workers"
“友邦惊诧”论 "Friendly countries are surprised" theory
答中学生杂志社问 Answer questions from middle school students
答北斗杂志社问 Answer a question from Beidou Magazine
关于小说题材的通信（并Y及T来信） Correspondence on the subject matter of the novel (and letters from Y and T)
关于翻译的通信（并J．K．来信） Correspondence on translation (and J.K. letter)
现代电影与有产阶级（译文，并附记） Modern Cinema and the Proletariat (Translation, with Notes)
返回总目录 Return to the General Directory

序言

序言

序言

序言这里是一九三〇年与三一年两年间的杂文的结集。
Here is a collection of essays from 1930 and 31.当三〇年的时候，期刊已渐渐的少见，有些是不能按期出版了，大约是受了逐日加紧的压迫。《语丝》和《奔流》，则常遭邮局的扣留，地方的禁止，到底也还是敷延不下去。那时我能投稿的，就只剩了一个《萌芽》，而出到五期，也被禁止了，接着是出了一本《新地》。所以在这一年内，我只做了收在集内的不到十篇的短评。
In the past 30 years, journals have gradually become rare, and some of them cannot be published on schedule, probably due to increasing oppression day by day. "Yusi" and "Torrent" are often detained by the post office, and the local prohibition still cannot be extended in the end. At that time, there was only one "Sprout" left to submit, and it was also banned in the fifth issue, followed by a book "New Land". So during this year, I only made less than ten short reviews included in the collection.此外还曾经在学校里演讲过两三回，那时无人记录，讲了些什么，此刻连自己也记不清楚了。只记得在有一个大学里演讲的题目，是《象牙塔和蜗牛庐》。大意是说，象牙塔里的文艺，将来决不会出现于中国，因为环境并不相同，这里是连摆这“象牙之塔”的处所也已经没有了；不久可以出现的，恐怕至多只有几个“蜗牛庐”。蜗牛庐者，是三国时所谓“隐逸”的焦先曾经居住的那样的草窠，大约和现在江北穷人手搭的草棚相仿，不过还要小，光光的伏在那里面，少出，少动，无衣，无食，无言。因为那时是军阀混战，任意杀掠的时候，心里不以为然的人，只有这样才可以苟延他的残喘。但蜗牛界里那里会有文艺呢，所以这样下去，中国的没有文艺，是一定的。这样的话，真可谓已经大有蜗牛气味的了，不料不久就有一位勇敢的青年在政府机关的上海《民国日报》上给我批评，说我的那些话使他非常看不起，因为我没有敢讲共产党的话的勇气。谨案在“清党”以后的党国里，讲共产主义是算犯大罪的，捕杀的网罗，张遍了全中国，而不讲，却又为党国的忠勇青年所鄙视。这实在只好变了真的蜗牛，才有“庶几得免于罪戾”的幸福了。
In addition, I once gave two or three speeches in school, but no one recorded what I said, and I can't even remember what I said at the moment. I only remember the title of a speech in a university, which was "Ivory Tower and Snail House". The gist is that the literature and art in the ivory tower will never appear in China in the future, because the environment is different, and there is no place to place this "ivory tower" here; I am afraid that there will be only a few "snail huts" that can appear soon. The snail hut is the grass nest where the so-called "reclusive" Jiao Xian once lived during the Three Kingdoms, which is about the same as the grass hut built by the poor in Jiangbei now, but it is smaller, and the light lies on it, less out, less movement, no clothes, no food, and no words. Because it was a time when the warlords were fighting and killing and plundering at will, the people who didn't think it was the only way to survive his breathing. But there will be literature and art in the snail world, so if this continues, there will be no literature and art in China, which is certain. Unexpectedly, a brave young man criticized me in the Shanghai "Republic of China Daily" of the government agency, saying that his words made him look down on me very much, because I did not have the courage to speak the words of the Communist Party. In the party and state after the "purge of the party", talking about communism is considered a great crime, and the snare of hunting and killing has spread throughout China, but it is despised by the loyal and brave youth of the party and the state. This really has to become a real snail in order to have the happiness of "almost being exempted from sin".而这时左翼作家拿着苏联的卢布之说，在所谓“大报”和小报上，一面又纷纷的宣传起来，新月社的批评家也从旁很卖了些力气。有些报纸，还拾了先前的创造社派的几个人的投稿于小报上的话，讥笑我为“投降”，有一种报则载起《文坛贰臣传》来，第一个就是我，——但后来好像并不再做下去了。
At this time, left-wing writers took the Soviet ruble theory and promoted it in the so-called "broadsheets" and tabloids, and the critics of the Crescent Society also sold some strength from the side. Some newspapers also picked up the words of several people who had previously created the Society in the tabloids, ridiculing me for "surrendering", and one newspaper carried the "Biography of the Second Minister of the Literary World", the first one was me,—— but then it seemed that it was no longer done.卢布之谣，我是听惯了的。大约六七年前，《语丝》在北京说了几句涉及陈源教授和别的“正人君子”们的话的时候，上海的《晶报》上就发表过“现代评论社主角”唐有壬先生的信札，说是我们的言动，都由于墨斯科的命令。这又正是祖传的老谱，宋末有所谓“通虏”，清初又有所谓“通海”，向来就用了这类的口实，害过许多人们的。所以含血喷人，已成了中国士君子的常经，实在不单是他们的识见，只能够见到世上一切都靠金钱的势力。至于“贰臣”之说，却是很有些意思的，我试一反省，觉得对于时事，即使未尝动笔，有时也不免于腹诽，“臣罪当诛兮天皇圣明”，腹诽就决不是忠臣的行径。但御用文学家的给了我这个徽号，也可见他们的“文坛”上是有皇帝的了。
I am used to hearing the ballad of the ruble. About six or seven years ago, when "Yusi" said a few words involving Professor Chen Yuan and other "upright gentlemen" in Beijing, Shanghai's "Jingbao" published a letter from Mr. Tang Youren, the "protagonist of the Modern Review Society", saying that our words and actions were all due to Musco's orders. This is the ancestral genealogy, there was the so-called "Tonglu" at the end of the Song Dynasty, and the so-called "Tonghai" in the early Qing Dynasty, which has always used this kind of excuse and harmed many people. Therefore, spraying people with blood has become a common scripture for Chinese gentlemen, not only their knowledge, but also the power of money that everything in the world can see. As for the saying of "second minister", it is very interesting, I try to reflect on it, and I feel that for current affairs, even if I have not written about it, sometimes it is inevitable to slander, "the sin of the minister should be punished by the emperor's wisdom", and slander is by no means the act of a loyal minister. But the imperial writers gave me this badge, which also shows that there are emperors in their "literary world".去年偶然看见了几篇梅林格（Franz Mehring）的论文，大意说，在坏了下去的旧社会里，倘有人怀一点不同的意见，有一点携贰的心思，是一定要大吃其苦的。而攻击陷害得最凶的，则是这人的同阶级的人物。他们以为这是最可恶的叛逆，比异阶级的奴隶造反还可恶，所以一定要除掉他。我才知道中外古今，无不如此，真是读书可以养气，竟没有先前那样“不满于现状”了，并且仿《三闲集》之例而变其意，拾来做了这一本书的名目。然而这并非在证明我是无产者。一阶级里，临末也常常会自己互相闹起来的，就是《诗经》里说过的那“兄弟阋于墙”，——但后来却未必“外御其侮”。例如同是军阀，就总在整年的大家相打，难道有一面是无产阶级么？而且我时时说些自己的事情，怎样地在“碰壁”，怎样地在做蜗牛，好像全世界的苦恼，萃于一身，在替大众受罪似的：也正是中产的智识阶级分子的坏脾气。只是原先是憎恶这熟识的本阶级，毫不可惜它的溃灭，后来又由于事实的教训，以为惟新兴的无产者才有将来，却是的确的。
Last year, I happened to see a few papers by Franz Mehring, to the effect that in the old society that was broken, if someone had a little different opinion or a little distraction, they would have to suffer a lot. And the one who attacked and framed the most was the person of the same class as this person. They thought this was the most hateful rebellion, even more hateful than the rebellion of slaves of different classes, so they must get rid of him. I just knew that ancient and modern times at home and abroad, all of them are like this, it is really reading can nourish qi, and I am not as "dissatisfied with the status quo" as before, and I changed my mind by imitating the example of "Sanxian Collection", and picked up the name of this book. However, this does not prove that I am a proletarian. In the first class, at the end of the day, they often quarrel with each other, which is the "brothers quarrel against the wall" mentioned in the "Book of Songs",—— but later they may not be "insulted by the outside". For example, if you are a warlord, you always fight each other all year round, is there a side of the proletariat? And I always talk about my own things, how I am "hitting a wall" and how I am being a snail, as if the suffering of the whole world is converging and suffering for the masses: it is also the bad temper of the intellectual class members of the middle class. It is only that at first it was a hatred of this familiar class, and it was not a pity for its collapse, and later, because of the lessons of facts, it was thought that only the emerging proletariat had a future, but it was true.自从一九三一年二月起，我写了较上年更多的文章，但因为揭载的刊物有些不同，文字必得和它们相称，就很少做《热风》那样简短的东西了；而且看看对于我的批评文字，得了一种经验，好像评论做得太简括，是极容易招得无意的误解，或有意的曲解似的。又，此后也不想再编《坟》那样的论文集，和《壁下译丛》那样的译文集，这回就连较长的东西也收在这里面，译文则选了一篇《现代电影与有产阶级》附在末尾，因为电影之在中国，虽然早已风行，但这样扼要的论文却还少见，留心世事的人们，实在很有一读的必要的。还有通信，如果只有一面，读者也往往很不容易了然，所以将紧要一点的几封来信，也擅自一并编进去了。
Since February 1931, I have written more articles than the previous year, but because the publications published are somewhat different, the text must be commensurate with them, and I rarely do something as short as "Hot Wind"; And looking at my criticism, I have gained an experience that it seems that comments are too concise, and it is very easy to attract unintentional misunderstandings or intentional misinterpretations. In addition, I did not want to compile a collection of essays like "Grave" or a collection of translations like "Under the Wall", this time even the longer ones were included in it, and the translation text was selected as "Modern Cinema and the Proletariat" at the end, because although films have long been popular in China, such concise papers are still rare, and people who pay attention to world affairs are really necessary to read. There is also correspondence, if there is only one side, it is often not easy for readers to understand, so several more important letters are also compiled together without authorization.一九三二年四月三十日之夜，编讫并记。
On the night of April 30, 1932, it was compiled and recorded.

一九三〇年

一九三〇年

一九三〇年

1930

“硬译”与“文学的阶级性”

“硬译”与“文学的阶级性”

“硬译”与“文学的阶级性”

"Hard Translation" and "Class Nature of Literature"一
One听说《新月》月刊团体里的人们在说，现在销路好起来了。这大概是真的，以我似的交际极少的人，也在两个年青朋友的手里见过第二卷第六七号的合本。顺便一翻，是争“言论自由”的文字和小说居多。近尾巴处，则有梁实秋先生的一篇《论鲁迅先生的“硬译”》，以为“近于死译”。而“死译之风也断不可长”，就引了我的三段译文，以及在《文艺与批评》的后记里所说：“但因为译者的能力不够，和中国文本来的缺点，译完一看，晦涩，甚而至于难解之处也真多；倘将仂句拆下来呢，又失了原来的语气。在我，是除了还是这样的硬译之外，只有束手这一条路了，所余的惟一的希望，只在读者还肯硬着头皮看下去而已”这些话，细心地在字旁加上圆圈，还在“硬译”两字旁边加上套圈，于是“严正”地下了“批评”道：“我们‘硬着头皮看下去’了，但是无所得。‘硬译’和‘死译’有什么分别呢？”
I heard people in the "Crescent" monthly group saying that sales are getting better now. This is probably true, people like me who have very little communication have also seen the combined copy of Volume 2, No. 6 and No. 7 in the hands of two young friends. By the way, most of the texts and novels are about "freedom of speech". Near the tail, there is a piece by Mr. Liang Shiqiu "On Mr. Lu Xun's "Hard Translation"", which is considered "close to dead translation". And "the wind of dead translation must not last", quoted my three translations, and said in the afterword of "Literature and Art and Criticism": "But because of the translator's insufficient ability and the shortcomings of the Chinese text, there are many obscure and even difficult to understand after the translation; If the sentence is removed, it will lose its original tone. For me, in addition to such a hard translation, there is only one way to tie up, and the only hope left is that the reader is willing to bite the bullet and read it", carefully adding a circle next to the word, and adding a ferrule next to the word "hard translation", so "solemnly" underwent "criticism": "We 'bite the bullet and look at it', but we got nothing." What is the difference between 'hard translation' and 'dead translation'? ”新月社的声明中，虽说并无什么组织，在论文里，也似乎痛恶无产阶级式的“组织”，“集团”这些话，但其实是有组织的，至少，关于政治的论文，这一本里都互相“照应”；关于文艺，则这一篇是登在上面的同一批评家所作的《文学是有阶级性的吗？》的余波。在那一篇里有一段说：“……但是不幸得很，没有一本这类的书能被我看懂。……最使我感得困难的是文字，……简直读起来比天书还难。……现在还没有一个中国人，用中国人所能看得懂的文字，写一篇文章告诉我们无产文学的理论究竟是怎么一回事。”字旁也有圆圈，怕排印麻烦，恕不照画了。总之，梁先生自认是一切中国人的代表，这些书既为自己所不懂，也就是为一切中国人所不懂，应该在中国断绝其生命，于是出示曰“此风断不可长”云。
In the statement of the Crescent Society, although there is no organization, in the paper, it seems to hate the words "organization" and "group" of the proletariat, but in fact it is organized, at least, the papers on politics are "caring" each other; Regarding literature and art, this article is the same critic who posted above, "Is Literature Class-Oriented?" The aftermath of ". In that passage there is a passage that says: "...... But unfortunately, there is no book of this kind that I can understand. …… What makes me most difficult is the words,...... It's even harder to read than a heavenly book. …… There is not a Chinese person who writes an article in a text that the Chinese can understand to tell us what the theory of proletarian literature is all about. There is also a circle next to the word, for fear of trouble in typesetting, I will not follow the picture. In short, Mr. Liang considers himself to be the representative of all Chinese, and these books are not understood by himself, that is, they are not understood by all Chinese, and their lives should be cut off in China, so he showed them and said, "This wind must not last".别的“天书”译著者的意见我不能代表，从我个人来看，则事情是不会这样简单的。第一，梁先生自以为“硬着头皮看下去”了，但究竟硬了没有，是否能够，还是一个问题。以硬自居了，而实则其软如棉，正是新月社的一种特色。第二，梁先生虽自来代表一切中国人了，但究竟是否全国中的最优秀者，也是一个问题。这问题从《文学是有阶级性的吗？》这篇文章里，便可以解释。Proletary这字不必译音，大可译义，是有理可说的。但这位批评家却道：“其实翻翻字典，这个字的涵义并不见得体面，据《韦白斯特大字典》，Proletary的意思就是：A citizen of the lowest class who served the state not with property，but only by having children。……普罗列塔利亚是国家里只会生孩子的阶级！（至少在罗马时代是如此）”其实正无须来争这“体面”，大约略有常识者，总不至于以现在为罗马时代，将现在的无产者都看作罗马人的。这正如将Chemie译作“舍密学”，读者必不和埃及的“炼金术”混同，对于“梁”先生所作的文章，也决不会去考查语源，误解为“独木小桥”竟会动笔一样。连“翻翻字典”（《韦白斯特大字典》！）也还是“无所得”，一切中国人未必全是如此的罢。
I cannot represent the opinions of other translators of the "Book of Heaven", but from my personal point of view, things will not be so simple. First, Mr. Liang thinks he has "bitten the bullet and watched it", but whether it is hard and whether it can be is still a question. It is a characteristic of the Crescent Society. Second, although Mr. Liang has always represented all Chinese, whether he is the best in the country is also a question. This question begins with "Is literature class-oriented?" In this article, it can be explained. The word Proletary does not need to be translated, it can be translated, and it is reasonable. But the critic said: "In fact, if you look at the dictionary, the meaning of this word is not necessarily decent, according to the Webster Dictionary, Proletary means: A citizen of the lowest class who served the state not with property, but only by having children." …… Proletaria is the class in the country that only gives birth to children! (at least in Roman times) "In fact, there is no need to fight for this "decency", and those with a little common sense will not regard the present as the Roman era and regard the present proletariat as Romans. This is just like translating Chemie as "esotericism", readers will not confuse it with Egyptian "alchemy", and will never examine the etymology of the article written by Mr. "Liang", misunderstanding that "single-log bridge" will actually start writing. Even "flipping through the dictionary" ("Webster's Great Dictionary"!) It is still "nothing", and all Chinese people may not be like this.

“硬译”与“文学的阶级性”

二

“硬译”与“文学的阶级性”

Two但于我最觉得有兴味的，是上节所引的梁先生的文字里，有两处都用着一个“我们”，颇有些“多数”和“集团”气味了。自然，作者虽然单独执笔，气类则决不只一人，用“我们”来说话，是不错的，也令人看起来较有力量，又不至于一人双肩负责。然而，当“思想不能统一”时，“言论应该自由”时，正如梁先生的批评资本制度一般，也有一种“弊病”。就是，既有“我们”便有我们以外的“他们”，于是新月社的“我们”虽以为我的“死译之风断不可长”了，却另有读了并不“无所得”的读者存在，而我的“硬译”，就还在“他们”之间生存，和“死译”还有一些区别。
But what I find most interesting is that in Mr. Liang's text quoted in the previous section, there is a "we" used in two places, which is quite a bit of "majority" and "group" smell. Naturally, although the author writes alone, there is no one person, and it is good to use "we" to speak, and it also makes people look more powerful, and it is not so much that one person is responsible for both shoulders. However, when "ideas cannot be unified" and "speech should be free", just as Mr. Liang criticizes the capital system, there is also a "shortcoming". That is, there are "us" and "them" other than us, so although the "we" of the Crescent Society think that my "wind of dead translation will never last", there are other readers who read it and do not "gain nothing", and my "hard translation" still survives among "them", and there are still some differences from "dead translation".我也就是新月社的“他们”之一，因为我的译作和梁先生所需的条件，是全都不一样的。
I am also one of the "them" of the Crescent Society, because my translation is completely different from Mr. Liang's requirements.那一篇《论硬译》的开头论误译胜于死译说：“一部书断断不会完全曲译……部分的曲译即使是错误，究竟也还给你一个错误，这个错误也许真是害人无穷的，而你读的时候究竟还落个爽快。”末两句大可以加上夹圈，但我却从来不干这样的勾当。我的译作，本不在博读者的“爽快”，却往往给以不舒服，甚而至于使人气闷，憎恶，愤恨。读了会“落个爽快”的东西，自有新月社的人们的译著在：徐志摩先生的诗，沈从文凌叔华先生的小说，陈西滢（即陈源）先生的闲话，梁实秋先生的批评，潘光旦先生的优生学，还有白璧德先生的人文主义。
The beginning of the "On Hard Translation" argues that mistranslation is better than dead translation: "A book will not be completely mistranslated...... Even if some of the translations are wrong, they will give you a mistake, and this mistake may be really harmful, and you will still be happy when you read it. The last two sentences can be added to the circle, but I never do such a thing. My translations are not intended to be "refreshing" for readers, but they often give people discomfort, and even make people feel depressed, hateful, and resentful. After reading something that will "make you feel refreshed", the translations of the people of the Crescent Society are: Mr. Xu Zhimo's poems, Mr. Shen Congwen's novels by Ling Shuhua, the gossip of Mr. Chen Xiying (i.e. Chen Yuan), the criticism of Mr. Liang Shiqiu, the eugenics of Mr. Pan Guangdan, and the humanism of Mr. Bai Bide.所以，梁先生后文说：“这样的书，就如同看地图一般，要伸着手指来寻找句法的线索位置”这些话，在我也就觉得是废话，虽说犹如不说了。是的，由我说来，要看“这样的书”就如同看地图一样，要伸着手指来找寻“句法的线索位置”的。看地图虽然没有看《杨妃出浴图》或《岁寒三友图》那么“爽快”，甚而至于还须伸着手指（其实这恐怕梁先生自己如此罢了，看惯地图的人，是只用眼睛就可以的），但地图并不是死图；所以“硬译”即使有同一之劳，照例子也就和“死译”有了些“什么区别”。识得ABCD者自以为新学家，仍旧和化学方程式无关，会打算盘的自以为数学家，看起笔算的演草来还是无所得。现在的世间，原不是一为学者，便与一切事都会有缘的。
Therefore, Mr. Liang later said: "Such a book is like looking at a map, you have to stretch out your fingers to find the location of syntactic clues", these words are nonsense to me, although it is as if I don't say it. Yes, from my point of view, reading "such a book" is like looking at a map, you have to stretch out your fingers to find the "location of syntactic clues". Although looking at the map is not as "refreshing" as reading "Yang Fei Out of the Bathing Map" or "The Three Friends of the Cold Year", and even you have to stretch out your fingers (in fact, this is probably Mr. Liang himself, people who are used to reading maps can only use their eyes), but the map is not a dead map; Therefore, even if "hard translation" has the same effect, it is "somewhat different" from "dead translation" according to the example. Those who know ABCD think they are new scientists, but they still have nothing to do with chemical equations, and they think they are mathematicians, and they still have nothing to gain from the evolution of pen calculations. In today's world, it is not that as soon as you are a scholar, you will have a fate with everything.然而梁先生有实例在，举了我三段的译文，虽然明知道“也许因为没有上下文的缘故，意思不能十分明了”。在《文学是有阶级性的吗？》这篇文章中，也用了类似手段，举出两首译诗来，总评道：“也许伟大的无产文学还没有出现，那么我愿意等着，等着，等着。”这些方法，诚然是很“爽快”的，但我可以就在这一本《新月》月刊里的创作——是创作呀！——《搬家》第八页上，举出一段文字来——
However, Mr. Liang has an example and gave me a translation of three paragraphs, although he knew that "perhaps because there is no context, the meaning cannot be very clear". In "Is Literature Class-Oriented?" In this article, a similar method was also used, citing two translated poems, and the general commented: "Maybe the great proletarian literature has not yet appeared, then I am willing to wait, wait, wait." These methods are indeed very "refreshing", but I can create in this "New Moon" monthly magazine - it's creation! ——On page 8 of "Moving", a passage is cited -“小鸡有耳朵没有？”
"Do chicks have ears?"“我没看见过小鸡长耳朵的。”
"I've never seen a chick with ears."“它怎样听见我叫它呢？”她想到前天四婆告诉她的耳朵是管听东西，眼是管看东西的。
"How did it hear me call it?" She thought of what the fourth woman had told her the day before yesterday that her ears listen to things, and her eyes see things.“这个蛋是白鸡黑鸡？”枝儿见四婆没答她，站起来摸着蛋子又问。
"Is this egg a white chicken and a black chicken?" Seeing that the fourth woman didn't answer her, Zhi'er stood up and touched the egg and asked again.“现在看不出来，等孵出小鸡才知道。”
"I can't see it now, I won't know until the chicks hatch."“婉儿姊说小鸡会变大鸡，这些小鸡也会变大鸡么？”
"Sister Wan'er said that chickens will become big chickens, will these chickens also become big chickens?"“好好的喂它就会长大了，像这个鸡买来时还没有这样大吧？”
"Feed it well and it will grow up, like this chicken wasn't so big when I bought it, right?"也够了，“文字”是懂得的，也无须伸出手指来寻线索，但我不“等着”了，以为就这一段看，是既不“爽快”，而且和不创作是很少区别的。
It's enough, I understand "words", and I don't need to stretch out my fingers to find clues, but I don't "wait", thinking that looking at this paragraph is neither "refreshing" nor "refreshing", and there is little difference between not creating.临末，梁先生还有一个诘问：“中国文和外国文是不同的，……翻译之难即在这个地方。假如两种文中的文法句法词法完全一样，那么翻译还成为一件工作吗？……我们不妨把句法变换一下，以使读者能懂为第一要义，因为‘硬着头皮’不是一件愉快的事，并且‘硬译’也不见得能保存‘原来的精悍的语气’。假如‘硬译’而还能保存‘原来的精悍的语气’，那真是一件奇迹，还能说中国文是有‘缺点’吗？”我倒不见得如此之愚，要寻求和中国文相同的外国文，或者希望“两种文中的文法句法词法完全一样”。我但以为文法繁复的国语，较易于翻译外国文，语系相近的，也较易于翻译，而且也是一种工作。荷兰翻德国，俄国翻波兰，能说这和并不工作没有什么区别么？日本语和欧美很“不同”，但他们逐渐添加了新句法，比起古文来，更宜于翻译而不失原来的精悍的语气，开初自然是须“找寻句法的线索位置”，很给了一些人不“愉快”的，但经找寻和习惯，现在已经同化，成为己有了。中国的文法，比日本的古文还要不完备，然而也曾有些变迁，例如《史》《汉》不同于《书经》，现在的白话文又不同于《史》《汉》；有添造，例如唐译佛经，元译上谕，当时很有些“文法句法词法”是生造的，一经习用，便不必伸出手指，就懂得了。现在又来了“外国文”，许多句子，即也须新造，——说得坏点，就是硬造。据我的经验，这样译来，较之化为几句，更能保存原来的精悍的语气，但因为有待于新造，所以原先的中国文是有缺点的。有什么“奇迹”，干什么“吗”呢？但有待于“伸出手指”，“硬着头皮”，于有些人自然“不是一件愉快的事”。不过我是本不想将“爽快”或“愉快”来献给那些诸公的，只要还有若干的读者能够有所得，梁实秋先生“们”的苦乐以及无所得，实在“于我如浮云”。
At the end of the day, Mr. Liang also asked: "Chinese and foreign languages are different,...... The difficulty of translation is in this place. If the grammar, syntax, and lexical grammar in the two texts are exactly the same, then does translation still become a job? …… We might as well change the syntax so that the reader can understand the first point, because 'biting the bullet' is not a pleasant thing, and 'hard translation' may not be able to preserve the 'original sharp tone'. If the 'hard translation' can still preserve the 'original sharp tone', it is really a miracle, can it be said that Chinese has 'shortcomings'? I am not necessarily so foolish to seek the same foreign language as Chinese, or hope that "the grammar, syntax, and grammar of the two texts are exactly the same". I just think that Chinese with complex grammar is easier to translate into foreign languages, and similar language families are also easier to translate, and it is also a kind of work. The Netherlands turned to Germany, Russia turned to Poland, can it be said that this is no different from not working? Japanese is very "different" from Europe and the United States, but they gradually add new syntax, which is more suitable for translation than ancient Chinese without losing the original sharp tone. Chinese grammar is more complete than the ancient Japanese text, but there have been some changes, such as "Shi" and "Han" are different from "Book of Documents", and the current vernacular is different from "Shi" and "Han"; There are additions, such as the Tang translation of Buddhist scriptures, the Yuan translation of the upper edict, at that time, there were many "grammar syntactic and lexical grams" that were created, and once practiced, they did not have to stretch out their fingers to understand. Now there is "foreign language", and many sentences must be newly created,—— to put it badly, that is, hard fabrication. According to my experience, this translation can better preserve the original sharp tone than a few sentences, but because it needs to be recreated, the original Chinese has shortcomings. What is the "miracle", and what is "it"? But waiting to "stick out the finger" and "bite the bullet", for some people, it is naturally "not a pleasant thing". However, I didn't want to dedicate "refreshing" or "happy" to those gentlemen, as long as there are still a few readers who can gain something, the bitterness and joy and nothingness of Mr. Liang Shiqiu's "people" are really "like floating clouds for me".但梁先生又有本不必求助于无产文学理论，而仍然很不了了的地方，例如他说，“鲁迅先生前些年翻译的文学，例如厨川白村的《苦闷的象征》，还不是令人看不懂的东西，但是最近翻译的书似乎改变风格了。”只要有些常识的人就知道：“中国文和外国文是不同的”，但同是一种外国文，因为作者各人的做法，而“风格”和“句法的线索位置”也可以很不同。句子可繁可简，名词可常可专，决不会一种外国文，易解的程度就都一式。我的译《苦闷的象征》，也和现在一样，是按板规逐句，甚而至于逐字译的，然而梁实秋先生居然以为不能看懂者，乃是原文原是易解的缘故，也因为梁实秋先生是中国新的批评家了的缘故，也因为其中硬造的句法，是比较地看惯了的缘故。若在三家村里，专读《古文观止》的学者们，看起来又何尝不比“天书”还难呢。
For example, he said, "The literature translated by Mr. Lu Xun in previous years, such as Chuchuchuan Shiramun's "Symbol of Distress", is not incomprehensible, but the recent translations of books seem to have changed their style. As long as there is some common sense, people will know: "Chinese and foreign languages are different", but they are the same foreign language, because of the author's approach, and the "style" and "syntactic clue position" can also be very different. Sentences can be complex or simplified, nouns can be often or specialized, and they will never be a foreign language, and the degree of ease of understanding will be the same. My translation of "The Symbol of Distress", as it is now, is sentence by sentence, and even word by word, but Mr. Liang Shiqiu actually thinks that he cannot understand it because the original text is easy to understand, because Mr. Liang Shiqiu is a new critic in China, and because the syntax in it is relatively familiar to him. If in Sanjia Village, scholars who specialize in reading "Ancient Texts and Observations" seem to be no more difficult than the "Book of Heaven".

“硬译”与“文学的阶级性”

三

“硬译”与“文学的阶级性”

Three但是，这回的“比天书还难”的无产文学理论的译本们，却给了梁先生不小的影响。看不懂了，会有影响，虽然好像滑稽，然而是真的，这位批评家在《文学是有阶级性的吗？》里说：“我现在批评所谓无产文学理论，也只能根据我所能了解的一点材料而已。”这就是说：因此而对于这理论的知识，极不完全了。
However, this time, the translations of the proletarian literary theory that are "more difficult than the Book of Heaven" have had a great influence on Mr. Liang. If you don't understand it, it will have an impact, although it seems funny, but it is true, this critic in "Is Literature Class? "I now criticize the so-called proletarian literary theory, and I can only rely on the little material I can understand. This means that the knowledge of this theory is therefore extremely incomplete.但对于这罪过，我们（包含一切“天书”译者在内，故曰“们”）也只能负一部分的责任，一部分是要作者自己的胡涂或懒惰来负的。“什么卢那卡尔斯基，蒲力汗诺夫”的书我不知道，若夫“婆格达诺夫之类”的三篇论文和托罗兹基的半部《文学与革命》，则确有英文译本的了。英国没有“鲁迅先生”，译文定该非常易解。梁先生对于伟大的无产文学的产生，曾经显示其“等着，等着，等着”的耐心和勇气，这回对于理论，何不也等一下子，寻来看了再说呢。不知其有而不求曰胡涂，知其有而不求曰懒惰，如果单是默坐，这样也许是“爽快”的，然而开起口来，却很容易咽进冷气去了。
But for this sin, we (including all the translators of the "Book of Heaven", hence the "we") can only bear part of the responsibility, and part of it is borne by the author's own foolishness or laziness. I don't know about the book "What Lunakarsky, Pulkhanov", but the three treatises of "Bogdanov and the like" and half of Trotsky's "Literature and Revolution" do have English translations. There is no "Mr. Lu Xun" in the UK, and the translation should be very easy to understand. Mr. Liang once showed his patience and courage to "wait, wait, wait" for the production of great proletarian literature. If you just sit silently, it may be "refreshing", but when you open your mouth, it is easy to swallow the cold air.例如就是那篇《文学是有阶级性的吗？》的高文，结论是并无阶级性。要抹杀阶级性，我以为最干净的是吴稚晖先生的“什么马克斯牛克斯”以及什么先生的“世界上并没有阶级这东西”的学说。那么，就万喙息响，天下太平。但梁先生却中了一些“什么马克斯”毒了，先承认了现在许多地方是资产制度，在这制度之下则有无产者。不过这“无产者本来并没有阶级的自觉。是几个过于富同情心而又态度褊激的领袖把这个阶级观念传授了给他们”，要促起他们的联合，激发他们争斗的欲念。不错，但我以为传授者应该并非由于同情，却因了改造世界的思想。况且“本无其物”的东西，是无从自觉，无从激发的，会自觉，能激发，足见那是原有的东西。原有的东西，就遮掩不久，即如格里莱阿说地体运动，达尔文说生物进化，当初何尝不或者几被宗教家烧死，或者大受保守者攻击呢，然而现在人们对于两说，并不为奇者，就因为地体终于在运动，生物确也在进化的缘故。承认其有而要掩饰为无，非有绝技是不行的。
For example, the article "Is literature class-oriented?" The conclusion is that there is no class. To erase class nature, I think the cleanest ones are Mr. Wu Zhihui's "What Max Niux" and Mr. He's "There is no such thing as class in the world". Then, there will be a thousand breaths, and the world will be peaceful. But Mr. Liang was poisoned by some "what Max" and first admitted that many places are now bourgeois, and under this system there are proletarians. However, this "proletarian originally did not have class consciousness." It was a few overly sympathetic and narrow-minded leaders who taught them this class concept", to promote their unity and stimulate their desire to fight. Yes, but I think the teaching should not be out of sympathy, but because of the idea of transforming the world. Moreover, things that "have no such thing" cannot be conscious, cannot be stimulated, will be conscious, can be stimulated, which shows that it is the original thing. The original things were soon hidden, that is, as Grillaea said about the movement of the earth, and Darwin said that the evolution of living things, why not be burned to death by religious people at the beginning, or attacked by conservatives, but now people are not surprised by these two theories, because the earth is finally moving, and the living things are indeed evolving. Admitting that it exists and trying to cover it up as nothing, it is impossible to have a stunt.但梁先生自有消除斗争的办法，以为如卢梭所说：“资产是文明的基础”，“所以攻击资产制度，即是反抗文明”，“一个无产者假如他是有出息的，只消辛辛苦苦诚诚实实的工作一生，多少必定可以得到相当的资产。这才是正当的生活斗争的手段。”我想，卢梭去今虽已百五十年，但当不至于以为过去未来的文明，都以资产为基础。（但倘说以经济关系为基础，那自然是对的。）希腊印度，都有文明，而繁盛时俱非在资产社会，他大概是知道的；倘不知道，那也是他的错误。至于无产者应该“辛辛苦苦”爬上有产阶级去的“正当”的方法，则是中国有钱的老太爷高兴时候，教导穷工人的古训，在实际上，现今正在“辛辛苦苦诚诚实实”想爬上一级去的“无产者”也还多。然而这是还没有人“把这个阶级观念传授了给他们”的时候。一经传授，他们可就不肯一个一个的来爬了，诚如梁先生所说，“他们是一个阶级了，他们要有组织了，他们是一个集团了，于是他们便不循常轨的一跃而夺取政权财权，一跃而为统治阶级。”但可还有想“辛辛苦苦诚诚实实工作一生，多少必定可以得到相当的资产”的“无产者”呢？自然还有的。然而他要算是“尚未发财的有产者”了。梁先生的忠告，将为无产者所呕吐了，将只好和老太爷去互相赞赏而已了。
However, Mr. Liang has his own way of eliminating the struggle, believing that, as Rousseau said: "Assets are the foundation of civilization", "Therefore, attacking the bourgeois system is resisting civilization", and "If a proletarian is promising, he will only have to work hard and honestly for a lifetime, and he will definitely get considerable assets." This is the means of legitimate life struggle. "I think that although Rousseau has been gone for 150 years, we should not think that the civilizations of the past and the future are based on assets. (But if it is based on economic relations, it is naturally correct.) Greece and India all have civilizations, but they are not in a bourgeois society when they are prosperous, he probably knows; If he doesn't know, it's his mistake. As for the "legitimate" way for the proletariat to "work hard" to climb to the upper class of the proletariat, it is the ancient motto of the rich old lady in China to teach the poor workers when they are happy, but in fact, there are many "proletarians" who are "working hard, honestly, and honestly" to climb to the next level. However, this is when no one has yet "taught them this class concept". As Mr. Liang said, "They are a class, they have to be organized, they are a group, so they jump out of the way and seize the political power and property, and become the ruling class." But what about the "proletarians" who think that "if you work hard and honestly all your life, you will definitely get considerable assets"? Naturally, there are others. However, he is considered a "wealthy man who has not yet made a fortune". Mr. Liang's advice will be vomited by the proletariat, and he will have to praise each other with the old lady.那么，此后如何呢？梁先生以为是不足虑的。因为“这种革命的现象不能是永久的，经过自然进化之后，优胜劣败的定律又要证明了，还是聪明才力过人的人占优越的地位，无产者仍是无产者”。但无产阶级大概也知道“反文明的势力早晚要被文明的势力所征服”，所以“要建立所谓‘无产阶级文化’，……这里面包括文艺学术”。
So, what happens after that? Mr. Liang thought it was not a cause for concern. Because "this revolutionary phenomenon cannot be permanent, after natural evolution, the law of the fittest must be proved again, or the intelligent and talented occupy a superior position, and the proletariat is still the proletarian." But the proletariat probably also knows that "the anti-civilization forces will be conquered by the forces of civilization sooner or later", so "we must establish the so-called 'proletarian culture',...... This includes literature and art scholarship."自此以后，这才入了文艺批评的本题。
Since then, this has entered the topic of literary and artistic criticism.

“硬译”与“文学的阶级性”

四

“硬译”与“文学的阶级性”

Four梁先生首先以为无产者文学理论的错误，是“在把阶级的束缚加在文学上面”，因为一个资本家和一个劳动者，有不同的地方，但还有相同的地方，“他们的人性（这两字原本有套圈）并没有两样”，例如都有喜怒哀乐，都有恋爱（但所“说的是恋爱的本身，不是恋爱的方式”），“文学就是表现这最基本的人性的艺术”。这些话是矛盾而空虚的。既然文明以资产为基础，穷人以竭力爬上去为“有出息”，那么，爬上是人生的要谛，富翁乃人类的至尊，文学也只要表现资产阶级就够了，又何必如此“过于富同情心”，一并包括“劣败”的无产者？况且“人性”的“本身”，又怎样表现的呢？譬如原质或杂质的化学底性质，有化合力，物理学底性质有硬度，要显示这力和度数，是须用两种物质来表现的，倘说要不用物质而显示化合力和硬度的单单“本身”，无此妙法；但一用物质，这现象即又因物质而不同。文学不借人，也无以表示“性”，一用人，而且还在阶级社会里，即断不能免掉所属的阶级性，无需加以“束缚”，实乃出于必然。自然，“喜怒哀乐，人之情也”，然而穷人决无开交易所折本的懊恼，煤油大王那会知道北京检煤渣老婆子身受的酸辛，饥区的灾民，大约总不去种兰花，像阔人的老太爷一样，贾府上的焦大，也不爱林妹妹的。“汽笛呀！”“列宁呀！”固然并不就是无产文学，然而“一切东西呀！”“一切人呀！”“可喜的事来了，人喜了呀！”也不是表现“人性”的“本身”的文学。倘以表现最普通的人性的文学为至高，则表现最普遍的动物性——营养，呼吸，运动，生殖——的文学，或者除去“运动”，表现生物性的文学，必当更在其上。倘说，因为我们是人，所以以表现人性为限，那么，无产者就因为是无产阶级，所以要做无产文学。
Mr. Liang first thought that the mistake of the proletarian literary theory was to "impose class shackles on literature", because a capitalist and a laborer have different places, but there are also the same places, "their human nature (these two words originally have ferrules) are not different", for example, there are joys, sorrows, and sorrows, and love (but "what is said is love itself, not the way of love"), "literature is the art of expressing this most basic human nature". These words are contradictory and empty. Since civilization is based on assets and the poor strive to climb up as "promising", then climbing up is the essence of life, the rich are the supreme of mankind, and literature only needs to express the bourgeoisie. Moreover, how is the "itself" of "human nature" expressed? For example, the chemical base properties of the original material or impurities have the combined force, and the physical base properties have hardness, and to show this force and degree, it is necessary to use two substances to express it. But once a substance is used, this phenomenon is different depending on the substance. Literature does not borrow people, nor can it express "sex", once a person is employed, and it is still in the class society, that is, it is absolutely impossible to avoid the class nature to which it belongs, and there is no need to "restrict", which is actually out of necessity. Naturally, "joy, anger, sorrow, and happiness, human feelings", but the poor will never have the chagrin of opening a trading exchange, and the kerosene king will know the bitterness and bitterness suffered by the old woman of the Beijing cinder inspection, and the victims in the starving area probably never go to plant orchids, like the old lady of the broad man, Jiao Da on the Jia Mansion does not love Sister Lin. "Whistle!" "Lenin!" Although it is not proletarian literature, "everything!" "Everyone!" "The gratifying thing is coming, and people are happy!" nor is it literature that expresses the "itself" of "human nature". If literature that expresses the most ordinary human nature is the supreme, then literature that expresses the most common animal nature—nutrition, respiration, movement, reproduction—or literature that excludes "movement" and expresses biological nature, must be even higher. If we say that because we are human beings, we are limited to expressing human nature, then the proletariat is because we are the proletariat, so we must do proletarian literature.其次，梁先生说作者的阶级，和作品无关。托尔斯泰出身贵族，而同情于贫民，然而并不主张阶级斗争；马克斯并非无产阶级中的人物；终身穷苦的约翰孙博士，志行吐属，过于贵族。所以估量文学，当看作品本身，不能连累到作者的阶级和身分。这些例子，也全不足以证明文学的无阶级性的。托尔斯泰正因为出身贵族，旧性荡涤不尽，所以只同情于贫民而不主张阶级斗争。马克斯原先诚非无产阶级中的人物，但也并无文学作品，我们不能悬拟他如果动笔，所表现的一定是不用方式的恋爱本身。至于约翰孙博士终身穷苦，而志行吐属，过于王侯者，我却实在不明白那缘故，因为我不知道英国文学和他的传记。也许，他原想“辛辛苦苦诚诚实实的工作一生，多少必定可以得到相当的资产”，然后再爬上贵族阶级去，不料终于“劣败”，连相当的资产也积不起来，所以只落得摆空架子，“爽快”了罢。
Secondly, Mr. Liang said that the author's class has nothing to do with the work. Tolstoy was born into an aristocratic family and sympathized with the poor, but did not advocate class struggle; Max is not a figure in the proletariat; Dr. Johnson, who has been poor all his life, is more ambitious and vocal than aristocratic. Therefore, when evaluating literature, when looking at the work itself, it cannot be related to the author's class and identity. These examples are not enough to prove the classlessness of literature. Tolstoy was born into an aristocratic family and his old nature could not be cleansed, so he only sympathized with the poor and did not advocate class struggle. Max was not originally a proletarian figure, but he also had no literary works, and we cannot suspense that if he started writing, what he would show must be love itself without any way. As for Dr. Johnson, who was poor all his life, and whose ambitions were more than princes, I really did not understand the reason, because I did not know English literature and his biography. Perhaps, he originally thought that "hard and honest work for a lifetime, he would definitely get considerable assets", and then climbed up to the aristocratic class, but unexpectedly he was finally "inferior" and could not even accumulate considerable assets, so he only ended up emptying the shelf and "refreshing".其次，梁先生说，“好的作品永远是少数人的专利品，大多数永远是蠢的，永远是和文学无缘”，但鉴赏力之有无却和阶级无干，因为“鉴赏文学也是天生的一种福气”，就是，虽在无产阶级里，也会有这“天生的一种福气”的人。由我推论起来，则只要有这一种“福气”的人，虽穷得不能受教育，至于一字不识，也可以赏鉴《新月》月刊，来作“人性”和文艺“本身”原无阶级性的证据。但梁先生也知道天生这一种福气的无产者一定不多，所以另定一种东西（文艺？）来给他们看，“例如什么通俗的戏剧，电影，侦探小说之类”，因为“一般劳工劳农需要娱乐，也许需要少量的艺术的娱乐”的缘故。这样看来，好像文学确因阶级而不同了，但这是因鉴赏力之高低而定的，这种力量的修养和经济无关，乃是上帝之所赐——“福气”。所以文学家要自由创造，既不该为皇室贵族所雇用，也不该受无产阶级所威胁，去做讴功颂德的文章。这是不错的，但在我们所见的无产文学理论中，也并未见过有谁说或一阶级的文学家，不该受皇室贵族的雇用，却该受无产阶级的威胁，去做讴功颂德的文章，不过说，文学有阶级性，在阶级社会中，文学家虽自以为“自由”，自以为超了阶级，而无意识底地，也终受本阶级的阶级意识所支配，那些创作，并非别阶级的文化罢了。例如梁先生的这篇文章，原意是在取消文学上的阶级性，张扬真理的。但以资产为文明的祖宗，指穷人为劣败的渣滓，只要一瞥，就知道是资产家的斗争的“武器”，——不，“文章”了。无产文学理论家以主张“全人类”“超阶级”的文学理论为帮助有产阶级的东西，这里就给了一个极分明的例证。至于成仿吾先生似的“他们一定胜利的，所以我们去指导安慰他们去”，说出“去了”之后，便来“打发”自己们以外的“他们”那样的无产文学家，那不消说，是也和梁先生一样地对于无产文学的理论，未免有“以意为之”的错误的。
Secondly, Mr. Liang said, "Good works are always the patent of a few, most of them are always stupid, and they will always have nothing to do with literature", but the existence of appreciation has nothing to do with class, because "appreciating literature is also a natural blessing", that is, even in the proletariat, there will also be people who are "born with a blessing". From my inference, as long as people with this kind of "blessing", although they are too poor to be educated, as for not being able to read a word, they can also appreciate the monthly magazine "New Moon" as evidence of the original lack of class nature of "human nature" and literature and art "itself". But Mr. Liang also knew that there must not be many proletarians who were born with this kind of blessing, so he decided on another thing (literature and art?). Come and show them, "for example, popular dramas, movies, detective novels, etc.", because "ordinary laborers and peasants need entertainment, and perhaps a small amount of artistic entertainment". In this way, it seems that literature is indeed different depending on class, but this is determined by the level of appreciation, and the cultivation of this power has nothing to do with economics, but is a gift from God - "blessing". Therefore, writers should create freely, neither employed by the royal family nor threatened by the proletariat to write articles praising merits. This is good, but in the theory of proletarian literature that we have seen, I have not seen anyone say that or a class of writers should not be employed by the royal family, but should be threatened by the proletariat to do articles praising merit, but in a class society, although writers think they are "free" and think that they are beyond the class, they are unconsciously dominated by the class consciousness of their own class, and those creations are not the culture of other classes. For example, Mr. Liang's article was originally intended to abolish the class nature in literature and publicize the truth. But the ancestors who regarded bourgeoisie as civilization and the dregs of the poor as inferior dregs only need to glance to know that they are the "weapons" of the struggle of the bourgeoisie,—— no, "articles". Proletarian literary theorists use literary theories that advocate "all mankind" and "superclass" to help the proletariat, and here is a very clear example. As for Mr. Cheng Fangwu, "They will definitely win, so we will guide and comfort them", and after saying "go", they will "send" "them" other than themselves.又其次，梁先生最痛恨的是无产文学理论家以文艺为斗争的武器，就是当作宣传品。他“不反对任何人利用文学来达到另外的目的”，但“不能承认宣传式的文字便是文学”。我以为这是自扰之谈。据我所看过的那些理论，都不过说凡文艺必有所宣传，并没有谁主张只要宣传式的文字便是文学。诚然，前年以来，中国确曾有许多诗歌小说，填进口号和标语去，自以为就是无产文学。但那是因为内容和形式，都没有无产气，不用口号和标语，便无从表示其“新兴”的缘故，实际上也并非无产文学。今年，有名的“无产文学底批评家”钱杏邨先生在《拓荒者》上还在引卢那卡尔斯基的话，以为他推重大众能解的文学，足见用口号标语之未可厚非，来给那些“革命文学”辩护。但我觉得那也和梁实秋先生一样，是有意的或无意的曲解。卢那卡尔斯基所谓大众能解的东西，当是指托尔斯泰做了分给农民的小本子那样的文体，工农一看便会了然的语法，歌调，诙谐。只要看台明·培特尼（Demian Bednii）曾因诗歌得到赤旗章，而他的诗中并不用标语和口号，便可明白了。
Secondly, what Mr. Liang hates most is that proletarian literary theorists use literature and art as a weapon of struggle, that is, as propaganda materials. He "does not object to anyone using literature for other purposes", but "cannot admit that propaganda writing is literature". I thought this was self-disturbing talk. According to the theories I have seen, they only say that all literature and art must be propaganda, and no one advocates that only propaganda words are literature. It is true that since the year before last, there have indeed been many poetry and novels in China, filled in with entrance numbers and slogans, thinking that they are proletarian literature. But that is because the content and form are not proletarian, and without slogans and slogans, it is impossible to express its "emerging", and it is not actually proletarian literature. This year, Mr. Qian Xingcun, a famous "critic of proletarian literature", was still quoting Lunakarski's words in "Pioneer", thinking that he was promoting literature that could be understood by the masses, which shows that it is understandable to use slogans to defend those "revolutionary literature". But I think that's the same as Mr. Liang Shiqiu, intentional or unintentional misinterpretation. What Lunakarsky said the public could understand was that Tolstoy made a small book for the peasants, and the workers and peasants would understand the grammar, song, and humor at a glance. Just look at the fact that Demian Bednii once received a red flag for his poetry, and his poems did not use slogans and slogans.最后，梁先生要看货色。这不错的，是最切实的办法；但抄两首译诗算是在示众，是不对的。《新月》上就曾有《论翻译之难》，何况所译的文是诗。就我所见的而论，卢那卡尔斯基的《被解放的堂·吉诃德》，法兑耶夫的《溃灭》，格拉特珂夫的《水门汀》，在中国这十一年中，就并无可以和这些相比的作品。这是指“新月社”一流的蒙资产文明的余荫，而且衷心在拥护它的作家而言。于号称无产作家的作品中，我也举不出相当的成绩。但钱杏邨先生也曾辩护，说新兴阶级，于文学的本领当然幼稚而单纯，向他们立刻要求好作品，是“布尔乔亚”的恶意。这话为农工而说，是极不错的。这样的无理要求，恰如使他们冻饿了好久，倒怪他们为什么没有富翁那么肥胖一样。但中国的作者，现在却实在并无刚刚放下锄斧柄子的人，大多数都是进过学校的智识者，有些还是早已有名的文人，莫非克服了自己的小资产阶级意识之后，就连先前的文学本领也随着消失了么？不会的。俄国的老作家亚历舍·托尔斯泰和威垒赛耶夫，普理希文，至今都还有好作品。中国的有口号而无随同的实证者，我想，那病根并不在“以文艺为阶级斗争的武器”，而在“借阶级斗争为文艺的武器”，在“无产者文学”这旗帜之下，聚集了不少的忽翻筋斗的人，试看去年的新书广告，几乎没有一本不是革命文学，批评家又但将辩护当作“清算”，就是，请文学坐在“阶级斗争”的掩护之下，于是文学自己倒不必着力，因而于文学和斗争两方面都少关系了。
Finally, Mr. Liang wants to look at the goods. This is good and the most practical way; But copying two translated poems is considered to be for the public, which is not right. There was "On the Difficulty of Translation" in "New Moon", not to mention that the translated text was a poem. As far as I can see, Lunakarsky's "Don Quixote the Liberated", Faduev's "Colapse", and Gratkov's "Watergate" have no works that can be compared with them in the past eleven years in China. This refers to the remnants of the first-class Mongolian asset civilization of the "Crescent Society", and for the writers who wholeheartedly support it. In the works of so-called proletarian writers, I can't give comparable results. However, Mr. Qian Xingcun also defended that the emerging class, of course, was naïve and simple in terms of literary skills, and that it was the malice of "bourgeois" to immediately ask them for good works. This is very good for agricultural workers. Such unreasonable demands are just like making them cold and hungry for a long time, and blame them for not being as fat as the rich man. But Chinese authors, now there are really no people who have just put down the handle of the hoe and axe, most of them are intellectuals who have entered school, and some are literati who have long been famous. No, it won't. The old Russian writers Alexei Tolstoy and Willeseyev and Prishvin still have good works. I think that the root of the problem is not "using literature and art as a weapon of class struggle", but "using class struggle as a weapon of literature and art", under the banner of "proletarian literature", many people who have somersaulted have gathered, try to look at last year's new book advertisement, almost none of them are not revolutionary literature, and critics regard the defense as a "reckoning", that is, please let literature sit under the cover of "class struggle", so literature itself does not have to focus on it. Therefore, there is little relationship between literature and struggle.但中国目前的一时现象，当然毫不足作无产文学之新兴的反证的。梁先生也知道，所以他临末让步说，“假如无产阶级革命家一定要把他的宣传文学唤做无产文学，那总算是一种新兴文学，总算是文学国土里的新收获，用不着高呼打倒资产的文学来争夺文学的领域，因为文学的领域太大了，新的东西总有它的位置的。”但这好像“中日亲善，同存共荣”之说，从羽毛未丰的无产者看来，是一种欺骗。愿意这样的“无产文学者”，现在恐怕实在也有的罢，不过这是梁先生所谓“有出息”的要爬上资产阶级去的“无产者”一流，他的作品是穷秀才未中状元时候的牢骚，从开手到爬上以及以后，都决不是无产文学。无产者文学是为了以自己们之力，来解放本阶级并及一切阶级而斗争的一翼，所要的是全般，不是一角的地位。就拿文艺批评界来比方罢，假如在“人性”的“艺术之宫”（这须从成仿吾先生处租来暂用）里，向南面摆两把虎皮交椅，请梁实秋钱杏邨两位先生并排坐下，一个右执“新月”，一个左执“太阳”，那情形可真是“劳资”媲美了。
However, the current phenomenon in China is certainly not enough to counter the emerging proletarian literature. Mr. Liang also knew, so he made concessions at the end of the day, saying, "If the proletarian revolutionaries must call their propaganda literature proletarian literature, it is finally an emerging literature, and it is finally a new harvest in the literary land. But this seems to be the saying of "friendship between China and Japan, coexistence and common prosperity", which is a kind of deception from the perspective of the proletarians who are not yet feathered. I am afraid that there are really such "proletarian writers" who are willing to do so, but this is Mr. Liang's so-called "promising" "proletarian" who wants to climb up to the bourgeoisie. Proletarian literature is a wing of the struggle for the liberation of its own class and all classes with its own strength. Take the literary and art criticism circle as an analogy, if in the "palace of art" of "human nature" (which must be rented from Mr. Cheng Fangwu for temporary use), two tiger skin chairs are placed to the south, and the two gentlemen of Liang Shiqiu Qian Xing Village are invited to sit side by side, one holding the "new moon" on the right and the other holding the "sun" on the left, then the situation is really comparable to "labor and capital".

“硬译”与“文学的阶级性”

五

“硬译”与“文学的阶级性”

Five到这里，又可以谈到我的“硬译”去了。
At this point, we can talk about my "hard translation" again.推想起来，这是很应该跟着发生的问题：无产文学既然重在宣传，宣传必须多数能懂，那么，你这些“硬译”而难懂的理论“天书”，究竟为什么而译的呢？不是等于不译么？
In retrospect, this is a question that should follow: since proletarian literature focuses on propaganda, propaganda must be understood by most people, so why did you translate these "hard translations" and difficult theoretical "heavenly books"? Isn't it the same as not translating?我的回答，是：为了我自己，和几个以无产文学批评家自居的人，和一部分不图“爽快”，不怕艰难，多少要明白一些这理论的读者。
My answer is: for myself, for myself, and for a few people who call themselves proletarian literary critics, and some readers who do not want to be "refreshed", who are not afraid of difficulties, and who understand this theory to some extent.从前年以来，对于我个人的攻击是多极了，每一种刊物上，大抵总要看见“鲁迅”的名字，而作者的口吻，则粗粗一看，大抵好像革命文学家。但我看了几篇，竟逐渐觉得废话太多了。解剖刀既不中腠理，子弹所击之处，也不是致命伤。例如我所属的阶级罢，就至今还未判定，忽说小资产阶级，忽说“布尔乔亚”，有时还升为“封建余孽”，而且又等于猩猩（见《创造月刊》上的“东京通信”）；有一回则骂到牙齿的颜色。在这样的社会里，有封建余孽出风头，是十分可能的，但封建余孽就是猩猩，却在任何“唯物史观”上都没有说明，也找不出牙齿色黄，即有害于无产阶级革命的论据。我于是想，可供参考的这样的理论，是太少了，所以大家有些胡涂。对于敌人，解剖，咬嚼，现在是在所不免的，不过有一本解剖学，有一本烹饪法，依法办理，则构造味道，总还可以较为清楚，有味。人往往以神话中的Prometheus比革命者，以为窃火给人，虽遭天帝之虐待不悔，其博大坚忍正相同。但我从别国里窃得火来，本意却在煮自己的肉的，以为倘能味道较好，庶几在咬嚼者那一面也得到较多的好处，我也不枉费了身躯：出发点全是个人主义，并且还夹杂着小市民性的奢华，以及慢慢地摸出解剖刀来，反而刺进解剖者的心脏里去的“报复”。梁先生说“他们要报复！”其实岂只“他们”，这样的人在“封建余孽”中也很有的。然而，我也愿意于社会上有些用处，看客所见的结果仍是火和光。这样，首先开手的就是《文艺政策》，因为其中含有各派的议论。
Since the year before last, there have been many attacks on me personally, and in every kind of publication, the name of "Lu Xun" is almost always seen, and the author's tone is roughly like a revolutionary writer. But after reading a few articles, I gradually felt that there was too much nonsense. The scalpel did not hit the pores, and the place where the bullet hit was not fatal. For example, the class to which I belong has not yet been determined, suddenly talking about the petty bourgeoisie, sometimes saying "bourgeois", sometimes being elevated to "feudal remnants", and equal to orangutans (see "Tokyo News" in "Creation Monthly"); Once he scolded the color of his teeth. In such a society, it is very possible for feudal remnants to be in the limelight, but the feudal remnants are orangutans, but they are not explained in any "historical materialism", and there is no argument that the yellow teeth are harmful to the proletarian revolution. I thought that there were too few such theories for reference, so everyone was a little foolish. For the enemy, dissection, biting, it is now inevitable, but there is a book of anatomy, there is a book of cooking methods, and if it is handled according to the law, the structure of the taste can always be clearer and more flavorful. People often compare the mythical Prometheus to the revolutionaries, thinking that they stole fire to give to others, and although they were abused by the emperor, they did not regret it, but their breadth and perseverance were exactly the same. But I stole fire from another country, but my intention was to cook my own meat, thinking that if it tasted better, I might get more benefits on the side of the biter, and I didn't waste my body: the starting point was all individualism, and it was mixed with the luxury of a small citizen, and the "revenge" of slowly taking out the scalpel and stabbing it into the heart of the anatomist. Mr. Liang said, "They want to take revenge!" In fact, it is not only "them", such people are also very common among the "feudal remnants". However, I am also willing to be of some use in society, and the result of what the spectators see is still fire and light. In this way, the first thing to start is the "Literary and Art Policy", because it contains the discussions of various factions.郑伯奇先生现在是开书铺，印Hauptmann和Gregory夫人的剧本了，那时他还是革命文学家，便在所编的《文艺生活》上，笑我的翻译这书，是不甘没落，而可惜被别人着了先鞭。翻一本书便会浮起，做革命文学家真太容易了，我并不这样想。有一种小报，则说我的译《艺术论》是“投降”。是的，投降的事，为世上所常有。但其时成仿吾元帅早已爬出日本的温泉，住进巴黎的旅馆了，在这里又向谁去输诚呢。今年，说法又两样了，在《拓荒者》和《现代小说》上，都说是“方向转换”。我看见日本的有些杂志中，曾将这四字加在先前的新感觉派片冈铁兵上，算是一个好名词。其实，这些纷纭之谈，也还是只看名目，连想也不肯想的老病。译一本关于无产文学的书，是不足以证明方向的，倘有曲译，倒反足以为害。我的译书，就也要献给这些速断的无产文学批评家，因为他们是有不贪“爽快”，耐苦来研究这些理论的义务的。
Mr. Zheng Boqi is now opening a bookstore and printing the scripts of Hauptmann and Mrs. Gregory, when he was still a revolutionary writer, and in his "Literary Life", he laughed at my translation of this book, which was unwilling to decline, but unfortunately he was whipped by others. It is so easy to be a revolutionary writer, I don't think so. There is a tabloid that says that my translation of "Art Theory" is "surrender". Yes, surrender is common in the world. But at that time, Marshal Cheng Fangwu had already climbed out of the hot springs in Japan and stayed in a hotel in Paris. This year, there are two different statements, in "Pioneer" and "Modern Novel", it is said to be a "change of direction". I saw that some Japanese magazines had added these four words to the previous new sense faction Kataoka Teppei, which was a good term. In fact, these controversial talks are still old diseases that only look at the name and refuse to even think about it. Translating a book on proletarian literature is not enough to prove the direction, and if there is a distorted translation, it is enough to cause harm. My translation is also dedicated to these quick-witted proletarian literary critics, because they have the obligation not to be greedy for "refreshment" and to study these theories patiently.但我自信并无故意的曲译，打着我所不佩服的批评家的伤处了的时候我就一笑，打着我的伤处了的时候我就忍疼，却决不肯有所增减，这也是始终“硬译”的一个原因。自然，世间总会有较好的翻译者，能够译成既不曲，也不“硬”或“死”的文章的，那时我的译本当然就被淘汰，我就只要来填这从“无有”到“较好”的空间罢了。
But I am confident that I have no intentional translation, I smile when I am hurt by critics I don't admire, and I endure the pain when I hit my wounds, but I will never add or subtract, which is also one of the reasons why I always "hard translate". Naturally, there will always be better translators in the world who can translate articles that are neither distorted, nor "hard" or "dead", and then of course my translation will be eliminated, and I just need to fill in the space from "nothing" to "better".然而世间纸张还多，每一文社的人数却少，志大力薄，写不完所有的纸张，于是一社中的职司克敌助友，扫荡异类的批评家，看见别人来涂写纸张了，便喟然兴叹，不胜其摇头顿足之苦。上海的《申报》上，至于称社会科学的翻译者为“阿狗阿猫”，其愤愤有如此。在“中国新兴文学的地位，早为读者所共知”的蒋光Z先生，曾往日本东京养病，看见藏原惟人，谈到日本有许多翻译太坏，简直比原文还难读……他就笑了起来，说：“……那中国的翻译界更要莫名其妙了，近来中国有许多书籍都是译自日文的，如果日本人将欧洲人那一国的作品带点错误和删改，从日文译到中国去，试问这作品岂不是要变了一半相貌么？……”（见《拓荒者》也就是深不满于翻译，尤其是重译的表示。不过梁先生还举出书名和坏处，蒋先生却只嫣然一笑，扫荡无余，真是普遍得远了。藏原惟人是从俄文直接译过许多文艺理论和小说的，于我个人就极有裨益。我希望中国也有一两个这样的诚实的俄文翻译者，陆续译出好书来，不仅自骂一声“混蛋”就算尽了革命文学家的责任。
However, there is still a lot of paper in the world, but the number of people in each literary society is small, and the ambition is weak, and it is impossible to write all the paper, so the officials in the society defeat enemies and help friends, sweep away heterogeneous critics, and when they see others coming to scribble paper, they sigh and can't bear the pain of shaking their heads and stomping their feet. In Shanghai's "Declaration", as for calling the translators of social sciences "dogs and cats", they are so indignant. Mr. Jiang Guangz, who "has long been known to readers as the status of China's emerging literature", once went to Tokyo, Japan to recuperate, saw Kurahara Weihito, and said that many translations in Japan are too bad and are even more difficult to read than the original text...... He laughed and said, "...... Recently, many books in China have been translated from Japanese, if the Japanese translate the works of Europeans from that country from Japanese to China, wouldn't this work change half of its appearance? ......" (See "Pioneers", which means that he is deeply dissatisfied with translation, especially the retranslation. However, Mr. Liang also listed the title and disadvantages of the book, but Mr. Jiang only smiled and swept away, which is really far from common. Zangyuan Yuito has directly translated many literary and artistic theories and novels from Russian, which is very beneficial to me personally. I hope that there will be one or two such honest Russian translators in China who will translate good books one after another, not only calling themselves "bastards" but also fulfilling their responsibilities as revolutionary writers.然而现在呢，这些东西，梁实秋先生是不译的，称人为“阿狗阿猫”的伟人也不译，学过俄文的蒋先生原是最为适宜的了，可惜养病之后，只出了一本《一周间》，而日本则早已有了两种的译本。中国曾经大谈达尔文，大谈尼采，到欧战时候，则大骂了他们一通，但达尔文的著作的译本，至今只有一种，尼采的则只有半部，学英德文的学者及文豪都不暇顾及，或不屑顾及，拉倒了。所以暂时之间，恐怕还只好任人笑骂，仍从日文来重译，或者取一本原文，比照了日译本来直译罢。我还想这样做，并且希望更多有这样做的人，来填一填彻底的高谈中的空虚，因为我们不能像蒋先生那样的“好笑起来”，也不该如梁先生的“等着，等着，等着”了。
However, now, Mr. Liang Shiqiu does not translate these things, and the great man who calls people "Dog and Cat" does not translate, and Mr. Jiang, who has learned Russian, was originally the most suitable, but unfortunately after recovering from illness, only one "Week" was published, while Japan already has two translations. China used to talk a lot about Darwin and Nietzsche, but when it came to the European War, it scolded them, but there is only one translation of Darwin's works so far, and only half of Nietzsche's. So for the time being, I am afraid that I have no choice but to be ridiculed and scolded, still retranslated from Japanese, or take the original text and translate it literally according to the Japanese translation. I also want to do this, and I hope that more people who do this will fill the void in the complete high talk, because we can't be like Mr. Jiang's "funny", nor should we be like Mr. Liang's "waiting, waiting, waiting".

“硬译”与“文学的阶级性”

六

“硬译”与“文学的阶级性”

Six我在开头曾有“以硬自居了，而实则其软如棉，正是新月社的一种特色”这些话，到这里还应该简短地补充几句，就作为本篇的收场。
At the beginning, I had the words "I think I am hard, but in fact it is as soft as cotton, which is a characteristic of the Crescent Society", and I should add a few sentences briefly here as the end of this article.《新月》一出世，就主张“严正态度”，但于骂人者则骂之，讥人者则讥之。这并不错，正是“即以其人之道，还治其人之身”，虽然也是一种“报复”，而非为了自己。到二卷六七号合本的广告上，还说“我们都保持‘容忍’的态度（除了‘不容忍’的态度是我们所不能容忍以外），我们都喜欢稳健的合乎理性的学说”。上两句也不错，“以眼还眼，以牙还牙”，和开初仍然一贯。然而从这条大路走下去，一定要遇到“以暴力抗暴力”，这和新月社诸君所喜欢的“稳健”也不能相容了。
As soon as "New Moon" came out, it advocated a "strict attitude", but it scolded those who scolded people and ridiculed those who ridiculed it. This is not bad, it is "to treat others in their own way", although it is also a kind of "revenge", not for oneself. In the advertisement of the second volume of No. 6 and No. 7, it is also said that "we all maintain an attitude of 'tolerance' (except that the attitude of 'intolerance' is intolerable to us), and we all like a stable rational doctrine." The first two sentences are also good, "an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth", which is still consistent with the beginning. However, if you go down this road, you must encounter "fighting violence with violence", which is incompatible with the "stability" that the members of the Crescent Society like.这一回，新月社的“自由言论”遭了压迫，照老办法，是必须对于压迫者，也加以压迫的，但《新月》上所显现的反应，却是一篇《告压迫言论自由者》，先引对方的党义，次引外国的法律，终引东西史例，以见凡压迫自由者，往往臻于灭亡：是一番替对方设想的警告。
This time, the "free speech" of the Crescent Society was oppressed, and according to the old method, it was necessary to oppress the oppressors, but the reaction shown in the "New Moon" was an article "Accusing the Oppressors of Freedom of Speech", first quoting the other party's righteousness, then quoting foreign laws, and finally quoting the historical examples of the East and the West, so as to see that those who oppress freedom often lead to destruction: it is a warning conceived for the other party.所以，新月社的“严正态度”，“以眼还眼”法，归根结蒂，是专施之力量相类，或力量较小的人的，倘给有力者打肿了眼，就要破例，只举手掩住自己的脸，叫一声“小心你自己的眼睛！”
Therefore, the "solemn attitude" of the Crescent Society, the "eye for eye" method, in the final analysis, is a person with similar or less powerful power, if the eyes of the powerful are swollen, they must make an exception, only raise their hands to cover their faces, and shout "Be careful of your own eyes!" ”

习惯与改革

习惯与改革

习惯与改革

Habits and reforms体质和精神都已硬化了的人民，对于极小的一点改革，也无不加以阻挠，表面上好像恐怕于自己不便，其实是恐怕于自己不利，但所设的口实，却往往见得极其公正而且堂皇。
On the surface, it seems that they are afraid of their own inconvenience, but in fact they are afraid of being detrimental to themselves, but the excuses they set up are often extremely fair and dignified.今年的禁用阴历，原也是琐碎的，无关大体的事，但商家当然叫苦连天了。不特此也，连上海的无业游民，公司雇员，竟也常常慨然长叹，或者说这很不便于农家的耕种，或者说这很不便于海船的候潮。他们居然因此念起久不相干的乡下的农夫，海上的舟子来。这真像煞有些博爱。
This year's ban on the lunar calendar was originally trivial and irrelevant, but of course the merchants complained. Not only that, but even the unemployed vagrants and company employees in Shanghai often sighed, or that this was very inconvenient for farmers' farming, or that it was very inconvenient for sea ships to wait for the tide. They actually thought of the farmer in the countryside who had been irrelevant for a long time, and the boat on the sea. This is really a bit of fraternity.一到阴历的十二月二十三，爆竹就到处毕毕剥剥。我问一家的店伙：“今年仍可以过旧历年，明年一准过新历年么？”那回答是：“明年又是明年，要明年再看了。”他并不信明年非过阳历年不可。但日历上，却诚然删掉了阴历，只存节气。然而一面在报章上，则出现了《一百二十年阴阳合历》的广告。好，他们连曾孙玄孙时代的阴历，也已经给准备妥当了，一百二十年！
As soon as the 23rd day of the twelfth month of the lunar calendar arrives, firecrackers are peeled everywhere. I asked a shopkeeper: "Can we still celebrate the old calendar year this year, and will we celebrate the new calendar year next year?" The answer was: "Next year is next year, and I will watch it again next year." He didn't believe that next year had to be a solar year. But on the calendar, it is true that the lunar calendar is deleted, and only the solar terms are kept. However, on the other hand, in the newspaper, there was an advertisement for "One Hundred and Twenty Years of Lunar and Yang Calendar". Okay, they have even prepared the lunar calendar of the great-grandson era, one hundred and twenty years!梁实秋先生们虽然很讨厌多数，但多数的力量是伟大，要紧的，有志于改革者倘不深知民众的心，设法利导，改进，则无论怎样的高文宏议，浪漫古典，都和他们无干，仅止于几个人在书房中互相叹赏，得些自己满足。假如竟有“好人政府”，出令改革乎，不多久，就早被他们拉回旧道上去了。
Although Mr. Liang Shiqiu hates the majority, the power of the majority is great and important, and if those who are interested in reforming do not know the hearts of the people and try to guide and improve, then no matter what kind of high-literary grand discussions, romantic and classical discussions have nothing to do with them, only a few people admire each other in the study and get some satisfaction for themselves. If there was a "good people's government" and ordered reform, it would not be long before they would have been pulled back to the old road.真实的革命者，自有独到的见解，例如乌略诺夫先生，他是将“风俗”和“习惯”，都包括在“文化”之内的，并且以为改革这些，很为困难。我想，但倘不将这些改革，则这革命即等于无成，如沙上建塔，顷刻倒坏。中国最初的排满革命，所以易得响应者，因为口号是“光复旧物”，就是“复古”，易于取得保守的人民同意的缘故。但到后来，竟没有历史上定例的开国之初的盛世，只枉然失了一条辫子，就很为大家所不满了。
Real revolutionaries have their own unique opinions, such as Mr. Ulonov, who includes "customs" and "habits" in "culture" and thinks that it is very difficult to reform them. I think that if these reforms are not carried out, this revolution will be equivalent to nothing, like building a tower on the sand and collapsing in an instant. China's initial platoon revolution made it easy to get responders, because the slogan was "restore the old", that is, "retro", and it was easy to obtain the consent of the conservative people. But later, there was no historical rule at the beginning of the founding of the country, and only a braid was lost in vain, which was very dissatisfied with everyone.以后较新的改革，就著著失败，改革一两，反动十斤，例如上述的一年日历上不准注阴历，却来了阴阳合历一百二十年。
For example, the above-mentioned one-year calendar is not allowed to note the lunar calendar, but the lunar calendar has been combined, but the lunar calendar has been combined.这种合历，欢迎的人们一定是很多的，因为这是风俗和习惯所拥护，所以也有风俗和习惯的后援。别的事也如此，倘不深入民众的大层中，于他们的风俗习惯，加以研究，解剖，分别好坏，立存废的标准，而于存于废，都慎选施行的方法，则无论怎样的改革，都将为习惯的岩石所压碎，或者只在表面上浮游一些时。
There must be many people who welcome this kind of calendar, because this is supported by customs and habits, so there is also the support of customs and habits. The same is true for other things, if we do not go deep into the great layer of the people, study and dissect their customs and habits, distinguish between good and bad, establish standards for survival and waste, and carefully choose the method of implementation in existence and waste, then no matter what kind of reform it may be, it will be crushed by the rocks of habit, or only float on the surface.现在已不是在书斋中，捧书本高谈宗教，法律，文艺，美术……等等的时候了，即使要谈论这些，也必须先知道习惯和风俗，而且有正视这些的黑暗面的勇猛和毅力。因为倘不看清，就无从改革。仅大叫未来的光明，其实是欺骗怠慢的自己和怠慢的听众的。
Now it is no longer in the study, holding books and talking about religion, law, literature and art...... It's time to wait, even if you want to talk about this, you must first know the habits and customs, and have the courage and perseverance to face the dark side of them. Because if you don't see it clearly, you can't reform. Only shouting about the brightness of the future is actually deceiving the negligent self and the negligent listeners.

非革命的急进革命论者

非革命的急进革命论者

非革命的急进革命论者

Non-revolutionary radical revolutionaries倘说，凡大队的革命军，必须一切战士的意识，都十分正确，分明，这才是真的革命军，否则不值一哂。这言论，初看固然是很正当，彻底似的，然而这是不可能的难题，是空洞的高谈，是毒害革命的甜药。
If it is said that the revolutionary army of any brigade must have the consciousness of all soldiers very correct and clear, this is the real revolutionary army, otherwise it is not worth it. At first glance, this remark seems to be very legitimate and thorough, but it is an impossible problem, an empty rhetoric, and a sweet medicine to poison the revolution.譬如在帝国主义的主宰之下，必不容训练大众个个有了“人类之爱”，然后笑嘻嘻地拱手变为“大同世界”一样，在革命者们所反抗的势力之下，也决不容用言论或行动，使大多数人统得到正确的意识。所以每一革命部队的突起，战士大抵不过是反抗现状这一种意思，大略相同，终极目的是极为歧异的。或者为社会，或者为小集团，或者为一个爱人，或者为自己，或者简直为了自杀。然而革命军仍然能够前行。因为在进军的途中，对于敌人，个人主义者所发的子弹，和集团主义者所发的子弹是一样地能够制其死命；任何战士死伤之际，便要减少些军中的战斗力，也两者相等的。但自然，因为终极目的的不同，在行进时，也时时有人退伍，有人落荒，有人颓唐，有人叛变，然而只要无碍于进行，则愈到后来，这队伍也就愈成为纯粹，精锐的队伍了。
For example, under the dominance of imperialism, it is not allowed to train the masses to have "human love" and then smile and bow their hands to become a "world of great harmony", and under the forces resisted by revolutionaries, words or actions must not be used to make the majority of people gain correct consciousness. Therefore, the soldiers of each revolutionary unit are probably just resisting the status quo, which is roughly the same, and the ultimate purpose is extremely different. Or for society, or for a small group, or for a lover, or for oneself, or simply for suicide. However, the revolutionary army was still able to move forward. For on the march, against the enemy, the bullets fired by the individualists are the same as the bullets fired by the corporatists; When any soldier is killed or wounded, the combat effectiveness of the army must be reduced, and the two are equal. But naturally, because of the difference in ultimate purpose, when marching, there are always people who are discharged from the army, some people are abandoned, some people are decadent, and some people are rebellious, but as long as it does not hinder the progress, the more later, this team will become a pure and elite team.我先前为叶永蓁君的《小小十年》作序，以为已经为社会尽了些力量，便是这意思。书中的主角，究竟上过前线，当过哨兵（虽然连放枪的方法也未曾被教），比起单是抱膝哀歌，握笔愤叹的文豪们来，实在也切实得远了。倘若要现在的战士都是意识正确，而且坚于钢铁之战士，不但是乌托邦的空想，也是出于情理之外的苛求。
I previously wrote a preface to Ye Yongzhen's "Little Ten Years", thinking that I had done some strength for society, and that is what I meant. The protagonist in the book, who has been on the front line and worked as a sentinel (although he has not even been taught how to shoot a gun), is really far more practical than the literary heroes who just hugged their knees and lamented and held their pens and lamented. If the current warriors are all correct in consciousness and strong in steel, it is not only a utopian fantasy, but also out of unreasonable demands.但后来在《申报》上，却看见了更严厉，更彻底的批评，因为书中的主角的从军，动机是为了自己，所以深加不满。《申报》是最求和平，最不鼓动革命的报纸，初看仿佛是很不相称似的，我在这里要指出貌似彻底的革命者，而其实是极不革命或有害革命的个人主义的论客来，使那批评的灵魂和报纸的躯壳正相适合。
But later, in the "Declaration", I saw harsher and more thorough criticism, because the protagonist in the book joined the army, and his motivation was for himself, so he was deeply dissatisfied. The "Declaration" is the most peace-seeking and least revolutionary newspaper, and at first glance it seems very disproportionate, and I would like to point out here that it seems to be a complete revolutionary, but in fact it is an individualistic commentator who is extremely non-revolutionary or harmful to the revolution, so that the soul of criticism and the body of the newspaper are just right.其一是颓废者，因为自己没有一定的理想和无力，便流落而求刹那的享乐；一定的享乐，又使他发生厌倦，则时时寻求新刺戟，而这刺戟又须利害，这才感到畅快。革命便也是那颓废者的新刺戟之一，正如饕餮者餍足了肥甘，味厌了，胃弱了，便要吃胡椒和辣椒之类，使额上出一点小汗，才能送下半碗饭去一般。他于革命文艺，就要彻底的，完全的革命文艺，一有时代的缺陷的反映，就使他皱眉，以为不值一哂。和事实离开是不妨的，只要一个爽快。法国的波特莱尔，谁都知道是颓废的诗人，然而他欢迎革命，待到革命要妨害他的颓废生活的时候，他才憎恶革命了。所以革命前夜的纸张上的革命家，而且是极彻底，极激烈的革命家，临革命时，便能够撕掉他先前的假面，——不自觉的假面。这种史例，是也应该献给一碰小钉子，一有小地位（或小款子），便东窜东京，西走巴黎的成仿吾那样“革命文学家”的。
One is the decadent, because they do not have certain ideals and powerlessness, they fall into exile and seek momentary pleasure; A certain amount of pleasure makes him tired of it, so he always seeks new spears, and this spear must be interested, so he feels happy. The revolution is also one of the new thorns of the decadent, just as the gluttonous eater has enough fat and sweetness, is tired of taste, and has a weak stomach, so he has to eat pepper and chili peppers, so that he sweats a little on his forehead before he can send half a bowl of rice. He must be thorough and completely revolutionary in revolutionary literature and art, and as soon as there is a reflection of the flaws of the times, he frowns and thinks that it is not worth it. It's okay to leave with the facts, as long as it's refreshing. Baudelaire of France was known to everyone as a decadent poet, but he welcomed the revolution and hated it when it was about to hinder his decadent life. Therefore, the revolutionary on the paper on the eve of the revolution, and the extremely thorough and fierce revolutionary, was able to tear off his previous mask ,—— unconscious mask when the revolution was about to occur. This kind of historical example should also be dedicated to "revolutionary writers" like Cheng Fangwu, who touched a small nail and fled east to Tokyo and west to Paris as soon as he had a small status (or a small sum).其一，我还定不出他的名目。要之，是毫无定见，因而觉得世上没有一件对，自己没有一件不对，归根结蒂，还是现状最好的人们。他现为批评家而说话的时候，就随便捞到一种东西以驳诘相反的东西。要驳互助说时用争存说，驳争存说时用互助说；反对和平论时用阶级争斗说，反对斗争时就主张人类之爱。论敌是唯心论者呢，他的立场是唯物论，待到和唯物论者相辩难，他却又化为唯心论者了。要之，是用英尺来量俄里，又用法尺来量密达，而发见无一相合的人。因为别的一切，无一相合，于是永远觉得自己是“允执厥中”，永远得到自己满足。从这些人们的批评的指示，则只要不完全，有缺陷，就不行。但现在的人，的事，那里会有十分完全，并无缺陷的呢，为万全计，就只好毫不动弹。然而这毫不动弹，却也就是一个大错。总之，做人之道，是非常之烦难了，至于做革命家，那当然更不必说。
First, I can't name him yet. In short, they have no fixed opinion, so they feel that there is nothing right in the world, and there is nothing wrong with themselves, in the final analysis, they are still the best people in the current situation. When he speaks for critics now, he finds something to refute the opposite. It is necessary to use the theory of dispute when refuting the theory of mutual assistance, and use the theory of mutual assistance when refuting the theory of existence; When opposing peace, he used class struggle to argue, and when opposing struggle, he advocated human love. When it comes to arguing with materialists, he becomes an idealist again. In short, it is to measure the number of versts in feet and the ruler to measure the denseness, but it is found that there is no one who agrees. Because everything else is in harmony, I will always feel that I am "in the middle" and will always be satisfied by myself. From the instructions of these people's criticism, as long as they are incomplete and defective, they will not work. But nowadays, people's affairs will be very complete and flawless, so for the sake of perfection, they have no choice but to remain motionless. However, this is a big mistake. In short, the way of being a person is very troublesome, and as for being a revolutionary, of course, it is not to mention.《申报》的批评家对于《小小十年》虽然要求彻底的革命的主角，但于社会科学的翻译，是加以刻毒的冷嘲的，所以那灵魂是后一流，而略带一些颓废者的对于人生的无聊，想吃些辣椒来开开胃的气味。
Although the critics of "Declaration" demand the protagonist of a complete revolution in "Little Ten Years", the translation of the social sciences is a bitter and cynical, so the soul is second-class, and there is a slight sense of decadent people's boredom in life and want to eat some chili peppers to appetize them.

张资平氏的“小说学”

张资平氏的“小说学”

张资平氏的“小说学”

Zhang Ziping's "Novelology"张资平氏据说是“最进步”的“无产阶级作家”，你们还在“萌芽”，还在“拓荒”，他却已在收获了。这就是进步，拔步飞跑，望尘莫及。然而你如果追踪而往呢，就看见他跑进“乐群书店”中。
Zhang Ziping is said to be the "most progressive" "proletarian writer", you are still "sprouting" and "pioneering", but he is already reaping. This is progress, and it is out of reach. However, if you follow it, you will see him running into the "Lequn Bookstore".张资平氏先前是三角恋爱小说作家，并且看见女的性欲，比男人还要熬不住，她来找男人，贱人呀贱人，该吃苦。这自然不是无产阶级小说。但作者一转方向，则一人得道，鸡犬飞升，何况神仙的遗蜕呢，《张资平全集》还应该看的。这是收获呀，你明白了没有？
Zhang Ziping was previously a writer of love triangle novels, and saw that the sexual desire of women was even more unbearable than men, she came to find men, bitches, bitches, deserve hardships. This is naturally not a proletarian novel. But as soon as the author turns around, one person will gain the way, and the chickens and dogs will soar, not to mention the shedding of the gods, "The Complete Works of Zhang Ziping" should also be read. This is a gain, do you understand?"还有收获哩。《申报》报告，今年的大夏学生，敬请“为青年所崇拜的张资平先生”去教“小说学”了。中国老例，英文先生是一定会教外国史的，国文先生是一定会教伦理学的，何况小说先生，当然满肚子小说学。要不然，他做得出来吗？我们能保得定荷马没有“史诗作法”，沙士比亚没有“戏剧学概论”吗？
There is also a catch. According to the "Declaration" report, this year's Daxia students are invited to teach "novel studies" by "Mr. Zhang Ziping, who is admired by young people". In the old Chinese example, Mr. English will definitely teach foreign history, and Mr. Chinese will definitely teach ethics, not to mention Mr. Novel, of course, he is full of novels. Otherwise, could he do it? Can we be sure that Homer did not have an "epic approach" and Shakespeare did not have an "introduction to dramatism"?呜呼，听讲的门徒是有福了，从此会知道如何三角，如何恋爱，你想女人吗，不料女人的性欲冲动比你还要强，自己跑来了。朋友，等着罢。但最可怜的是不在上海，只好遥遥“崇拜”，难以身列门墙的青年，竟不能恭听这伟大的“小说学”。现在我将《张资平全集》和“小说学”的精华，提炼在下面，遥献这些崇拜家，算是“望梅止渴”云。
Alas, blessed are the disciples who listened to the lecture, from now on they will know how to triangle, how to fall in love, do you miss women, but unexpectedly, women's sexual impulses are stronger than yours, and they came by themselves. Friends, just wait. But the most pitiful thing is that he is not in Shanghai, so he has to "worship" from afar, and the young people who are difficult to stand on the wall cannot listen to this great "novel study". Now I have refined the essence of "The Complete Works of Zhang Ziping" and "Novelology" below, and dedicated these admirers from afar, which can be regarded as "looking at plums to quench thirst".那就是——△
That is——△二月二十二日。
February 22.

对于左翼作家联盟的意见——三月二日在左翼作家联盟成立大会讲

对于左翼作家联盟的意见——三月二日在左翼作家联盟成立大会讲

对于左翼作家联盟的意见——三月二日在左翼作家联盟成立大会讲

Opinions on the Left Writers' Union - Speech at the inaugural meeting of the Left Writers' Union on March 2有许多事情，有人在先已经讲得很详细了，我不必再说。我以为在现在，“左翼”作家是很容易成为“右翼”作家的。为什么呢？第一，倘若不和实际的社会斗争接触，单关在玻璃窗内做文章，研究问题，那是无论怎样的激烈，“左”，都是容易办到的；然而一碰到实际，便即刻要撞碎了。关在房子里，最容易高谈彻底的主义，然而也最容易“右倾”。西洋的叫做“Salon的社会主义者”，便是指这而言。“Salon”是客厅的意思，坐在客厅里谈谈社会主义，高雅得很，漂亮得很，然而并不想到实行的。这种社会主义者，毫不足靠。并且在现在，不带点广义的社会主义的思想的作家或艺术家，就是说工农大众应该做奴隶，应该被虐杀，被剥削的这样的作家或艺术家，是差不多没有了，除非墨索里尼，但墨索里尼并没有写过文艺作品。（当然，这样的作家，也还不能说完全没有，例如中国的新月派诸文学家，以及所说的墨索里尼所宠爱的邓南遮便是。）
There are many things that have been explained in detail before, and I don't need to say more. I thought that nowadays, "left-wing" writers can easily become "right-wing" writers. Why? First, if you do not come into contact with the actual social struggle, and only make articles and study problems in the glass window, no matter how fierce it is, it is easy to do "left"; However, as soon as it encounters reality, it is about to be shattered. Locked in the house, it is easiest to talk about radical doctrine, but it is also the easiest to "lean to the right". The Western so-called "Salon socialist" refers to this. "Salon" means living room, sitting in the living room and talking about socialism, very elegant and beautiful, but I don't think about it. This kind of socialist is not reliable. And now, writers or artists who do not have a broad socialist idea, that is, the masses of workers and peasants who should be slaves, should be slaughtered, and exploited, are almost gone, except for Mussolini, who did not write literary works. (Of course, such writers cannot be said to be completely absent, such as the Chinese Crescent writers and the so-called D'Annunzio favored by Mussolini.) ）第二，倘不明白革命的实际情形，也容易变成“右翼”。革命是痛苦，其中也必然混有污秽和血，决不是如诗人所想像的那般有趣，那般完美；革命尤其是现实的事，需要各种卑贱的，麻烦的工作，决不如诗人所想像的那般浪漫；革命当然有破坏，然而更需要建设，破坏是痛快的，但建设却是麻烦的事。所以对于革命抱着浪漫谛克的幻想的人，一和革命接近，一到革命进行，便容易失望。听说俄国的诗人叶遂宁，当初也非常欢迎十月革命，当时他叫道，“万岁，天上和地上的革命！”又说“我是一个布尔塞维克了！”然而一到革命后，实际上的情形，完全不是他所想像的那么一回事，终于失望，颓废。叶遂宁后来是自杀了的，听说这失望是他的自杀的原因之一。又如毕力涅克和爱伦堡，也都是例子。在我们辛亥革命时也有同样的例，那时有许多文人，例如属于“南社”的人们，开初大抵是很革命的，但他们抱着一种幻想，以为只要将满洲人赶出去，便一切都恢复了“汉官威仪”，人们都穿大袖的衣服，峨冠博带，大步地在街上走。谁知赶走满清皇帝以后，民国成立，情形却全不同，所以他们便失望，以后有些人甚至成为新的运动的反动者。但是，我们如果不明白革命的实际情形，也容易和他们一样的。
Second, if you do not understand the actual situation of the revolution, you can easily become a "right-wing". Revolution is pain, and there must be filth and blood mixed in it, and it is by no means as interesting and perfect as the poet imagines; Revolution, especially practical things, requires all kinds of lowly and troublesome work, which is by no means as romantic as the poet imagines; Of course, the revolution has destruction, but it needs to be built. Therefore, those who have romantic illusions about the revolution are easy to be disappointed as soon as they are close to the revolution and when the revolution is in progress. I heard that the Russian poet Ye Suining also welcomed the October Revolution very much, when he shouted, "Long live, revolution in heaven and on earth!" He also said, "I am a Bolshevik!" However, after the revolution, the actual situation was not at all what he imagined, and he was finally disappointed and decadent. Ye Suining later committed suicide, and I heard that this disappointment was one of the reasons for his suicide. Another example is Bilinek and Ehrenburgh, which are also examples. There was a similar example in our Xinhai Revolution, when there were many literati, such as those who belonged to the "Southern Society", who were probably very revolutionary at the beginning, but they had a fantasy that as long as the Manchurians were driven out, everything would be restored to the "dignity of Han officials". Who knew that after driving away the Manchu emperor, the Republic of China was established, but the situation was completely different, so they were disappointed, and some even became reactionaries of the new movement in the future. However, if we do not understand the actual situation of the revolution, we are prone to the same as them.还有，以为诗人或文学家高于一切人，他底工作比一切工作都高贵，也是不正确的观念。举例说，从前海涅以为诗人最高贵，而上帝最公平，诗人在死后，便到上帝那里去，围着上帝坐着，上帝请他吃糖果。在现在，上帝请吃糖果的事，是当然无人相信的了，但以为诗人或文学家，现在为劳动大众革命，将来革命成功，劳动阶级一定从丰报酬，特别优待，请他坐特等车，吃特等饭，或者劳动者捧着牛油面包来献他，说：“我们的诗人，请用吧！”这也是不正确的；因为实际上决不会有这种事，恐怕那时比现在还要苦，不但没有牛油面包，连黑面包都没有也说不定，俄国革命后一二年的情形便是例子。如果不明白这情形，也容易变成“右翼”。事实上，劳动者大众，只要不是梁实秋所说“有出息”者，也决不会特别看重知识阶级者的，如我所译的《溃灭》中的美谛克（知识阶级出身），反而常被矿工等所嘲笑。不待说，知识阶级有知识阶级的事要做，不应特别看轻，然而劳动阶级决无特别例外地优待诗人或文学家的义务。
Also, it is also incorrect to think that a poet or writer is above all people, and that his work is more noble than all work. For example, Heine thought that the poet was the noblest and the fairest, and after the poet died, he went to God and sat around God, and God invited him to eat candy. Nowadays, of course, no one believes in God's invitation to eat sweets, but they think that poets or writers, now for the revolution of the working masses, and if the revolution succeeds in the future, the working class will definitely receive generous rewards and special preferential treatment, invite him to take a special car, eat a special meal, or the laborers will offer him butter bread, saying, "Our poet, please use it!" "This is also incorrect; For in reality it would never have happened, I am afraid it was even more bitter then than it is now, not only without butter bread, but also without brown bread, as was the case in the year or two after the Russian Revolution. If you don't understand this situation, you can easily become a "right-wing". In fact, the working masses, as long as they are not the "promising" people Liang Shiqiu said, will never attach special importance to the intellectual class, such as Mei Dike (from the intellectual class) in my translation of "Collapse", but is often ridiculed by miners and others. Needless to say, the intellectual class has the work of the intellectual class to do, and should not be particularly underestimated, but the working class has the obligation to give preferential treatment to poets or writers without special exception.现在，我说一说我们今后应注意的几点。
Now, let me talk about a few points that we should pay attention to in the future.第一，对于旧社会和旧势力的斗争，必须坚决，持久不断，而且注重实力。旧社会的根柢原是非常坚固的，新运动非有更大的力不能动摇它什么。并且旧社会还有它使新势力妥协的好办法，但它自己是决不妥协的。在中国也有过许多新的运动了，却每次都是新的敌不过旧的，那原因大抵是在新的一面没有坚决的广大的目的，要求很小，容易满足。譬如白话文运动，当初旧社会是死力抵抗的，但不久便容许白话文底存在，给它一点可怜地位，在报纸的角头等地方可以看见用白话写的文章了，这是因为在旧社会看来，新的东西并没有什么，并不可怕，所以就让它存在，而新的一面也就满足，以为白话文已得到存在权了。又如一二年来的无产文学运动，也差不多一样，旧社会也容许无产文学，因为无产文学并不厉害，反而他们也来弄无产文学，拿去做装饰，仿佛在客厅里放着许多古董磁器以外，放一个工人用的粗碗，也很别致；而无产文学者呢，他已经在文坛上有个小地位，稿子已经卖得出去了，不必再斗争，批评家也唱着凯旋歌：“无产文学胜利！”但除了个人的胜利，即以无产文学而论，究竟胜利了多少？况且无产文学，是无产阶级解放斗争底一翼，它跟着无产阶级的社会的势力的成长而成长，在无产阶级的社会地位很低的时候，无产文学的文坛地位反而很高，这只是证明无产文学者离开了无产阶级，回到旧社会去罢了。
First, the struggle against the old society and the old forces must be resolute, persistent, and focus on strength. The foundation of the old society is very strong, and the new movement cannot shake it unless it has greater force. And the old society still has a good way to compromise the new forces, but it itself will never compromise. There have been many new movements in China, but each time the new one is no match for the old, and the reason is that the new side does not have a resolute and broad purpose, and the requirements are small and easy to meet. For example, in the vernacular movement, the old society resisted desperately, but soon allowed the existence of the vernacular text, giving it a pitiful status, and articles written in the vernacular could be seen in the corners of newspapers and other places, because in the eyes of the old society, there was nothing new and not terrible, so it was allowed to exist, and the new side was satisfied, thinking that the vernacular had gained the right to exist. Another example is the proletarian literature movement in the past year or two, the old society also allowed proletarian literature, because proletarian literature was not powerful, but they also came to get proletarian literature and use it for decoration, as if in addition to many antique porcelain in the living room, put a thick bowl for workers, which is also very chic; As for the proletarian writer, he already has a small position in the literary world, the manuscript has been sold, there is no need to fight anymore, and critics also sing triumphant songs: "Proletarian literature wins!" But apart from personal victories, that is, in terms of proletarian literature, how many victories have been won? Moreover, proletarian literature is a wing of the proletarian liberation struggle, it grows with the growth of the forces of the proletarian society, and when the social status of the proletariat is very low, the literary status of proletarian literature is very high, which only proves that the proletarians left the proletariat and returned to the old society.第二，我以为战线应该扩大。在前年和去年，文学上的战争是有的，但那范围实在太小，一切旧文学旧思想都不为新派的人所注意，反而弄成了在一角里新文学者和新文学者的斗争，旧派的人倒能够闲舒地在旁边观战。
Second, I think the front should be expanded. In the year before last and last year, there were literary wars, but the scope was too small, and all the old literature and old ideas were not noticed by the people of the new school, but became a struggle between the new writers and the new writers in a corner, and the people of the old school were able to watch the battle leisurely.第三，我们应当造出大群的新的战士。因为现在人手实在太少了，譬如我们有好几种杂志，单行本的书也出版得不少，但做文章的总同是这几个人，所以内容就不能不单薄。一个人做事不专，这样弄一点，那样弄一点，既要翻译，又要做小说，还要做批评，并且也要做诗，这怎么弄得好呢？这都因为人太少的缘故，如果人多了，则翻译的可以专翻译，创作的可以专创作，批评的专批评；对敌人应战，也军势雄厚，容易克服。关于这点，我可带便地说一件事。前年创造社和太阳社向我进攻的时候，那力量实在单薄，到后来连我都觉得有点无聊，没有意思反攻了，因为我后来看出了敌军在演“空城计”。那时候我的敌军是专事于吹擂，不务于招兵练将的，攻击我的文章当然很多，然而一看就知道都是化名，骂来骂去都是同样的几句话。我那时就等待有一个能操马克斯主义批评的枪法的人来狙击我的，然而他终于没有出现。在我倒是一向就注意新的青年战士底养成的，曾经弄过好几个文学团体，不过效果也很小。但我们今后却必须注意这点。
Third, we should create a large group of new warriors. Because there are too few people now, for example, we have several magazines, and many books have been published, but these are the people who make articles, so the content cannot be thin. A person is not dedicated to doing things, doing a little like this, doing a little like that, not only translating, but also making novels, but also criticizing, and also making poetry, how can this be done well? This is all because there are too few people, if there are too many people, the translator can be specialized, the creator can be specialized, and the criticism can be specialized; In response to the enemy, it is also strong and easy to overcome. I can say one thing about this. When the Creation Society and the Sun Society attacked me the year before last, the strength was really thin, and later even I felt a little bored and had no intention of counterattacking, because I later saw that the enemy was acting out an "empty city plan". At that time, my enemy army was dedicated to blowing, not recruiting and training generals, and of course there were many articles attacking me, but at a glance I knew that they were all pseudonyms, and the scolding was the same few words. I was waiting for someone who could use Marxist criticism to snipe me, but he never showed up. I have always paid attention to the development of new young soldiers, and I have done several literary groups, but the effect is also very small. But we must pay attention to this in the future.我们急于要造出大群的新的战士，但同时，在文学战线上的人还要“韧”。所谓韧，就是不要像前清做八股文的“敲门砖”似的办法。前清的八股文，原是“进学”做官的工具，只要能做“起承转合”，借以进了“秀才举人”，便可丢掉八股文，一生中再也用不到它了，所以叫做“敲门砖”，犹之用一块砖敲门，门一敲进，砖就可抛弃了，不必再将它带在身边。这种办法，直到现在，也还有许多人在使用，我们常常看见有些人出了一二本诗集或小说集以后，他们便永远不见了，到那里去了呢？是因为出了一本或二本书，有了一点小名或大名，得到了教授或别的什么位置，功成名遂，不必再写诗写小说了，所以永远不见了。这样，所以在中国无论文学或科学都没有东西，然而在我们是要有东西的，因为这于我们有用。（卢那卡尔斯基是甚至主张保存俄国的农民美术，因为可以造出来卖给外国人，在经济上有帮助。我以为如果我们文学或科学上有东西拿得出去给别人，则甚至于脱离帝国主义的压迫的政治运动上也有帮助。）但要在文化上有成绩，则非韧不可。
We are eager to create a large group of new fighters, but at the same time, people on the literary front must also be "resilient". The so-called tenacity is not to be like the "stepping stone" of the previous Qing Dynasty. As long as you can do "start and intake and combine", in order to enter the "scholar and scholar", you can throw away the eight-strand text, and you will never use it again in your life, so it is called "stepping on the door", just like knocking on the door with a brick, as soon as the door is knocked in, the brick can be abandoned, and you don't have to take it with you anymore. We often see that some people have published one or two collections of poetry or novels, and then they disappear forever. It is because one or two books have been published, with a little nickname or big name, obtained a professor or some other position, and become famous, and no longer need to write poems and novels, so they will never be gone. In this way, there is nothing in China whether it is literature or science, but in us there must be something, because it is useful to us. (Lunakarsky even advocated preserving Russian peasant art because it could be made and sold to foreigners, which was economically helpful.) I thought that if we had something literary or scientific to give to others, it would be helpful even for political movements free from imperialist oppression. But to achieve cultural results, you must be resilient.最后，我以为联合战线是以有共同目的为必要条件的。我记得好像曾听到过这样一句话：“反动派且已经有联合战线了，而我们还没有团结起来！”其实他们也并未有有意的联合战线，只因为他们的目的相同，所以行动就一致，在我们看来就好像联合战线。而我们战线不能统一，就证明我们的目的不能一致，或者只为了小团体，或者还其实只为了个人，如果目的都在工农大众，那当然战线也就统一了。
Finally, I believe that a united front is necessary for a common purpose. I remember hearing the saying: "The reactionaries already have a united front, and we are not united yet!" "In fact, they don't have an intentional united front, just because they have the same purpose, so their actions are the same, which seems to us to be like a united front. And if our front cannot be united, it proves that our goals cannot be consistent, or only for small groups, or in fact only for individuals.

我们要批评家

我们要批评家

我们要批评家

We want critics看大概的情形（我们这里得不到确凿的统计），从去年以来，挂着“革命的”的招牌的创作小说的读者已经减少，出版界的趋势，已在转向社会科学了。这不能不说是好现象。最初，青年的读者迷于广告式批评的符咒，以为读了“革命的”创作，便有出路，自己和社会，都可以得救，于是随手拈来，大口吞下，不料许多许多是并不是滋养品，是新袋子里的酸酒，红纸包里的烂肉，那结果，是吃得胸口痒痒的，好像要呕吐。
Looking at the general situation (we can't get conclusive statistics here), since last year, the number of readers of creative novels with "revolutionary" signs has decreased, and the trend in the publishing industry has shifted to social sciences. This cannot but be said to be a good phenomenon. At first, young readers were fascinated by the charm of advertising-style criticism, thinking that after reading the "revolutionary" creation, there would be a way out, and they and society could be saved, so they picked it up and swallowed it in a big gulp.得了这一种苦楚的教训之后，转而去求医于根本的，切实的社会科学，自然，是一个正当的前进。
After learning this painful lesson, turning to the fundamental and practical social sciences is naturally a legitimate step forward.然而，大部分是因为市场的需要，社会科学的译著又蜂起云涌了，较为可看的和很要不得的都杂陈在书摊上，开始寻求正确的知识的读者们已经在惶惑。然而新的批评家不开口，类似批评家之流便趁势一笔抹杀：“阿狗阿猫”。
However, most of them are due to the needs of the market, and social science translations have surged again, and the more interesting and very important ones are mixed on the bookstalls, and readers who have begun to seek correct knowledge are already confused. However, the new critics did not speak, and similar critics took advantage of the situation to erase them: "A dog and a cat".到这里，我们所需要的，就只得还是几个坚实的，明白的，真懂得社会科学及其文艺理论的批评家。
At this point, all we need is a few solid, understanding, and really understanding critics of social science and its literary and artistic theories.批评家的发生，在中国已经好久了。每一个文学团体中，大抵总有一套文学的人物。至少，是一个诗人，一个小说家，还有一个尽职于宣传本团体的光荣和功绩的批评家。这些团体，都说是志在改革，向旧的堡垒取攻势的，然而还在中途，就在旧的堡垒之下纷纷自己扭打起来，扭得大家乏力了，这才放开了手，因为不过是“扭”而已矣，所以大创是没有的，仅仅喘着气。一面喘着气，一面各自以为胜利，唱着凯歌。旧堡垒上简直无须守兵，只要袖手俯首，看这些新的敌人自己所唱的喜剧就够。他无声，但他胜利了。
Critics have been happening in China for a long time. In every literary group, there is always a set of literary figures. At least, a poet, a novelist, and a critic who devoted himself to promoting the glory and merits of his group. These groups are said to be aiming for reform and taking an offensive against the old fortress, but in the middle, they scuffled under the old fortress one after another, and everyone was weak, so they let go, because it was just a "twist", so there was no big wound, just panting. While panting, each thought they were victorious and sang triumphant songs. There were no guards on the old fortress, just sit back and watch the comedy of these new enemies themselves. He was silent, but he won.这两年中，虽然没有极出色的创作，然而据我所见，印成本子的，如李守章的《跋涉的人们》，台静农的《地之子》，叶永蓁的《小小十年》前半部，柔石的《二月》及《旧时代之死》，魏金枝的《七封信的自传》，刘一梦的《失业以后》，总还是优秀之作。可惜我们的有名的批评家，梁实秋先生还在和陈西滢相呼应，这里可以不提；成仿吾先生是怀念了创造社过去的光荣之后，摇身一变而成为“石厚生”，接着又流星似的消失了；钱杏邨先生近来又只在《拓荒者》上，搀着藏原惟人，一段又一段的，在和茅盾扭结。每一个文学团体以外的作品，在这样忙碌或萧闲的战场，便都被“打发”或默杀了。
In the past two years, although there have been no outstanding creations, as far as I can see, the printed ones, such as Li Shouzhang's "Trekking People", Tai Jingnong's "Children of the Earth", Ye Yongzhen's "Little Ten Years" first half, Rou Shi's "February" and "The Death of the Old Era", Wei Jinzhi's "Autobiography of Seven Letters", Liu Yimeng's "After Unemployment", are always excellent works. It's a pity that our famous critic, Mr. Liang Shiqiu, is still echoing Chen Xiying, so I can't mention it here; After Mr. Cheng Fangwu missed the glory of the past of the Creation Society, he transformed into "Shi Housheng", and then disappeared like a meteor; Mr. Qian Xingcun has only been on "Pioneers" recently, holding Tibetan Weiren, and he is kinked with Mao Dun one after another. Every work outside the literary group is "sent" or silently killed on such a busy or idle battlefield.这回的读书界的趋向社会科学，是一个好的，正当的转机，不惟有益于别方面，即对于文艺，也可催促它向正确，前进的路。但在出品的杂乱和旁观者的冷笑中，是极容易凋谢的，所以现在所首先需要的，也还是——
This time the reading world's trend towards social science is a good and legitimate turning point, which is not only beneficial to other aspects, that is, for literature and art, but also can urge it to move forward on the right path. But in the clutter of the production and the sneer of bystanders, it is very easy to wither, so the first thing you need now is still -几个坚实的，明白的，真懂得社会科学及其文艺理论的批评家。
A few solid, understanding, and really understood the social sciences and their literary and artistic theories.

“好政府主义”

“好政府主义”

“好政府主义”

"Good governmentism"梁实秋先生这回在《新月》的“零星”上，也赞成“不满于现状”了，但他以为“现在有智识的人（尤其是夙来有‘前驱者’‘权威’‘先进’的徽号的人），他们的责任不仅仅是冷讥热嘲地发表一点‘不满于现状’的杂感而已，他们应该更进一步的诚诚恳恳地去求一个积极医治‘现状’的药方”。
Mr. Liang Shiqiu also agreed to "dissatisfaction with the status quo" in the "sporadic" of "New Moon" this time, but he believed that "the responsibility of intelligent people (especially those who have always had the emblem of 'pioneer', 'authority' and 'advanced') is not just to express a little bit of 'dissatisfaction with the status quo' with sarcasm, they should go further and sincerely seek a prescription for actively healing the 'status quo'."为什么呢？因为有病就须下药，“三民主义是一副药，——梁先生说，——共产主义也是一副药，国家主义也是一副药，无政府主义也是一副药，好政府主义也是一副药”，现在你“把所有的药方都褒贬得一文不值，都挖苦得不留余地，……这可是什么心理呢？”
Why? Because if you are sick, you must take medicine, "the Three People's Principles are a medicine,—— Mr. Liang said,—— Communism is also a medicine, nationalism is also a medicine, anarchism is also a medicine, and good anarchism is also a medicine,...... What kind of psychology is this? ”这种心理，实在是应该责难的。但在实际上，我却还未曾见过这样的杂感，譬如说，同一作者，而以为三民主义者是违背了英美的自由，共产主义者又收受了俄国的卢布，国家主义太狭，无政府主义又太空……。所以梁先生的“零星”，是将他所见的杂感的罪状夸大了。
This kind of psychology should really be blamed. But in reality, I have never seen such a mixed feeling, for example, the same author, thinking that the Three People's Liberalists violated the freedom of Britain and the United States, and the communists accepted the Russian ruble, nationalism is too narrow, anarchism is space-....... Therefore, Mr. Liang's "sporadic" is an exaggeration of the crimes of the miscellaneous feelings he saw.其实是，指摘一种主义的理由的缺点，或因此而生的弊病，虽是并非某一主义者，原也无所不可的。有如被压榨得痛了，就要叫喊，原不必在想出更好的主义之前，就定要咬住牙关。但自然，能有更好的主张，便更成一个样子。
In fact, it is possible to point out the shortcomings of a doctrine or the drawbacks that arise from it, even if it is not a certain doctrine. It is like being squeezed in pain, and you have to shout, and you don't have to grit your teeth before coming up with a better doctrine. But naturally, if you can have a better proposition, it will be more like that.不过我以为梁先生所谦逊地放在末尾的“好政府主义”，却还得更谦逊地放在例外的，因为自三民主义以至无政府主义，无论它性质的寒温如何，所开的究竟还是药名，如石膏，肉桂之类，——至于服后的利弊，那是另一个问题。独有“好政府主义”这“一副药”，他在药方上所开的却不是药名，而是“好药料”三个大字，以及一些唠唠叨叨的名医架子的“主张”。不错，谁也不能说医病应该用坏药料，但这张药方，是不必医生才配摇头，谁也会将他“褒贬得一文不值”（“褒”是“称赞”之意，用在这里，不但“不通”，也证明了不识“褒”字，但这是梁先生的原文，所以姑仍其旧）的。
However, I think that the "good governmentism" that Mr. Liang humbly puts at the end has to be more humbly placed as an exception, because from the Three People's Doctrine to anarchism, no matter what the nature of the cold and temperature is, the prescription is still the name of the medicine, such as gypsum, cinnamon,——, etc., as for the pros and cons after taking it, that is another question. Uniquely, "good governmentism" is a "pair of medicine", but what he prescribes on the prescription is not the name of the drug, but the three big words "good medicine", as well as the "proposition" of some nagging famous doctors. Yes, no one can say that doctors should use bad medicines, but this prescription does not need a doctor to shake his head, and anyone will "praise and criticize him worthless" ("praise" means "praise", used here, not only "does not work", but also proves that he does not know the word "praise", but this is Mr. Liang's original text, so it is still the same).倘这医生羞恼成怒，喝道：“你嘲笑我的好药料主义，就开出你的药方来！”那就更是大可笑的“现状”之一，即使并不根据什么主义，也会生出杂感来的。杂感之无穷无尽，正因为这样的“现状”太多的缘故。
If the doctor became angry and shouted, "If you laugh at my good medicine, prescribe your prescription!" That is one of the ridiculous "status quo", even if it is not based on any doctrine, it will give rise to miscellaneous feelings. The miscellaneous feelings are endless, precisely because there are too many such "status quo".一九三〇，四，十七。
1930, 4, 17.

“丧家的”“资本家的乏走狗”

“丧家的”“资本家的乏走狗”

“丧家的”“资本家的乏走狗”

"The bereaved family" and "the capitalist's lackey"梁实秋先生为了《拓荒者》上称他为“资本家的走狗”，就做了一篇自云“我不生气”的文章。先据《拓荒者》第二期第六七二页上的定义，“觉得我自己便有点像是无产阶级里的一个”之后，再下“走狗”的定义，为“大凡做走狗的都是想讨主子的欢心因而得到一点恩惠”，于是又因而发生疑问道——
In order to call him "the lackey of the capitalist" in "Pioneer", Mr. Liang Shiqiu made an article saying "I am not angry". First, according to the definition on page 672 of the second issue of "Pioneer", "I feel a bit like a member of the proletariat", and then the definition of "lackey" is made, for "all lackeys want to please their masters and get a little favor", so the question arises -“《拓荒者》说我是资本家的走狗，是那一个资本家，还是所有的资本家？我还不知道我的主子是谁，我若知道，我一定要带着几分杂志去到主子面前表功，或者还许得到几个金镑或卢布的赏赉呢。……我只知道不断的劳动下去，便可以赚到钱来维持生计，至于如何可以做走狗，如何可以到资本家的帐房去领金镑，如何可以到××党去领卢布，这一套本领，我可怎么能知道呢？……”
""Pioneers" says that I am the lackey of the capitalists, which capitalist, or all the capitalists? I don't know who my master is yet, but if I do, I must go to the master with a few magazines to show my merits, or maybe get a few gold pounds or rubles as a reward. …… I only know that if I continue to work, I can earn money to make ends meet, and how to be a lackey, how to go to the capitalist's account to receive gold pounds, how to go to the ×× party to receive rubles, how can I know this set of skills? ……”这正是“资本家的走狗”的活写真。凡走狗，虽或为一个资本家所豢养，其实是属于所有的资本家的，所以它遇见所有的阔人都驯良，遇见所有的穷人都狂吠。不知道谁是它的主子，正是它遇见所有阔人都驯良的原因，也就是属于所有的资本家的证据。即使无人豢养，饿的精瘦，变成野狗了，但还是遇见所有的阔人都驯良，遇见所有的穷人都狂吠的，不过这时它就愈不明白谁是主子了。
This is exactly the living portrait of the "capitalist's lackey". All lackeys, although they may be raised by a capitalist, actually belong to all capitalists, so they are tame when they meet all the broad people, and bark wildly when they meet all the poor people. I don't know who is its master, but it is the reason why it meets all the broad people and is tame, that is, the evidence that belongs to all capitalists. Even if no one kept it, it was hungry and thin, and it became a wild dog, but it still met all the broad people and barked wildly, but at this time it didn't understand who the master was.梁先生既然自叙他怎样辛苦，好像“无产阶级”（即梁先生先前之所谓“劣败者”），又不知道“主子是谁”，那是属于后一类的了，为确当计，还得添几个字，称为“丧家的”“资本家的走狗”。
Since Mr. Liang describes how hard he worked, like a "proletariat" (that is, Mr. Liang's previous so-called "inferior loser"), and does not know "who the master is", it belongs to the latter category.然而这名目还有些缺点。梁先生究竟是有智识的教授，所以和平常的不同。他终于不讲“文学是有阶级性的吗？”了，在《答鲁迅先生》那一篇里，很巧妙地插进电杆上写“武装保护苏联”，敲碎报馆玻璃那些句子去，在上文所引的一段里又写出“到××党去领卢布”字样来，那故意暗藏的两个×，是令人立刻可以悟出的“共产”这两字，指示着凡主张“文学有阶级性”，得罪了梁先生的人，都是在做“拥护苏联”，或“去领卢布”的勾当，和段祺瑞的卫兵枪杀学生，《晨报》却道学生为了几个卢布送命，自由大同盟上有我的名字，《革命日报》的通信上便说为“金光灿烂的卢布所买收”，都是同一手段。在梁先生，也许以为给主子嗅出匪类（“学匪”），也就是一种“批评”，然而这职业，比起“刽子手”来，也就更加下贱了。
However, there are some shortcomings to this name. Mr. Liang is an intellectual professor, so he is different from the usual. He finally stopped talking about "Is literature class-oriented?" In the article "Answer to Mr. Lu Xun", the sentences "armed protection of the Soviet Union" were cleverly inserted into the electric pole, the sentences of "armed protection of the Soviet Union" were broken, and in the paragraph quoted above, the words "to the ×× Party to receive rubles" were written, and the two deliberately hidden × were the words "communism" that people could immediately realize, indicating that anyone who advocated "literature has a class nature" and offended Mr. Liang was doing the act of "supporting the Soviet Union" or "receiving rubles", and Duan Qirui's guards shot and killed students, "Morning News" But the students died for a few rubles, my name was on the Freedom League, and the correspondence of the "Revolutionary Daily" said that it was "bought by the golden ruble", all by the same means. In Mr. Liang, he may think that sniffing out bandits ("student bandits") for his master is a kind of "criticism", but this profession is even more despicable than "executioner".我还记得，“国共合作”时代，通信和演说，称赞苏联，是极时髦的，现在可不同了，报章所载，则电杆上写字和“××党”，捕房正在捉得非常起劲，那么，为将自己的论敌指为“拥护苏联”或“××党”，自然也就髦得合时，或者还许会得到主子的“一点恩惠”了。但倘说梁先生意在要得“恩惠”或“金镑”，是冤枉的，决没有这回事，不过想借此助一臂之力，以济其“文艺批评”之穷罢了。所以从“文艺批评”方面看来，就还得在“走狗”之上，加上一个形容字：“乏”。
I still remember that in the era of "Kuomintang-Communist cooperation", correspondence and speeches, praising the Soviet Union, were very fashionable, but now it is different, the newspapers are written on the poles and "×× party", and the arrest room is catching very vigorously, then, in order to point out one's opponent as "supporting the Soviet Union" or "×× party", it is naturally fashionable, or maybe you will get a "little favor" from the master. But if Mr. Liang intends to get "favors" or "gold pounds", it is unjust, and there is no such thing, but he just wants to use this to help his "literary criticism". Therefore, from the perspective of "literary criticism", we have to add an adjective on top of "lackey": "lack".一九三〇，四，一九。
1930, 4, 19.

《进化和退化》小引

《进化和退化》小引

《进化和退化》小引

"Evolution and Degradation" is a small introduction这是译者从十年来所译的将近百篇的文字中，选出不很专门，大家可看之作，集在一处，希望流传较广的本子。一，以见最近的进化学说的情形，二，以见中国人将来的运命。
This is a book selected by the translator from nearly 100 texts translated in the past ten years, which is not very special, and can be read by everyone, collected in one place, hoping to be widely circulated. First, to see the situation of recent evolutionary theories, and second, to see the future fate of the Chinese.进化学说之于中国，输入是颇早的，远在严复的译述赫胥黎《天演论》。但终于也不过留下一个空泛的名词，欧洲大战时代，又大为论客所误解，到了现在，连名目也奄奄一息了。其间学说几经迁流，兑佛黎斯的突变说兴而又衰，兰麻克的环境说废而复振，我们生息于自然中，而于此等自然大法的研究，大抵未尝加意。此书首尾的各两篇，即由新兰麻克主义立论，可以窥见大概，略弥缺憾的。
The theory of evolution was imported quite early in China, far away in Yan Fu's translation of Huxley's "Theory of Heavenly Evolution". But in the end, it was only an empty term, and during the European War, it was greatly misunderstood by commentators, and now, even the name is dying. During this period, the theory has changed several times, the mutation theory of Du Fries has risen and fallen, and the environmental theory of Lanmack has been abolished and revived. The first and last two chapters of this book are established by New Lancastrianism, which can give a glimpse of the general situation and slightly fill in the gaps.但最要紧的是末两篇。沙漠之逐渐南徙，营养之已难支持，都是中国人极重要，极切身的问题，倘不解决，所得的将是一个灭亡的结局。可以解中国古史难以探索的原因，可以破中国人最能耐苦的谬说，还不过是副次的收获罢了。林木伐尽，水泽湮枯，将来的一滴水，将和血液等价，倘这事能为现在和将来的青年所记忆，那么，这书所得的酬报，也就非常之大了。
But the most important thing is the last two. The gradual southward migration of the desert and the difficult support of nutrition are extremely important and urgent problems for the Chinese, and if they are not solved, what they will get will be a doomed ending. It can solve the reasons why ancient Chinese history is difficult to explore, and it can break the fallacy that Chinese people are the most able to endure hardship, but it is just a secondary gain. If this matter can be remembered by the young people of the present and in the future, then the reward for this book will be very great.然而自然科学的范围，所说就到这里为止，那给与的解答，也只是治水和造林。这是一看好像极简单，容易的事，其实却并不如此的。我可以引史沫得列女士在《中国乡村生活断片》中的两段话作证——
However, the scope of natural science ends here, and the answers given are only water control and afforestation. This seems to be a very simple and easy thing at first glance, but it is not like that. I can quote two passages from Ms. Smedele's "Fragments of Chinese Rural Life" to testify -“她（使女）说，明天她要到南苑去运动狱吏释放她的亲属。这人，同六十个别的乡人，男女都有，在三月以前被捕和收监，因为当别的生活资料都没有了以后，他们曾经砍过树枝或剥过树皮。他们这样做，并非出于捣乱，只因为他们可以卖掉木头来买粮食。
She (the maid) said that tomorrow she would go to Nanyuan to exercise the jailers to release her relatives. This man, along with sixty other villagers, both men and women, had been arrested and imprisoned before March, because they had cut branches or stripped bark when there was no other means of subsistence. They did not do this out of trouble, but because they could sell the wood to buy food.“……南苑的人民，没有收成，没有粮食，没有工做，就让有这两亩田又有什么用处？……一遇到些少的扰乱，就把整千的人投到灾民的队伍里去。……南苑在那时（军阀混战时）除了树木之外什么都没有了，当乡民一对着树木动手的时候，警察就把他们捉住并且监禁起来。”（《萌芽月刊》五期一七七页。）
“…… The people of Nanyuan have no harvest, no food, and no work, so what is the use of having these two acres of land? …… As soon as there was a little disturbance, thousands of people were thrown into the ranks of the victims. …… At that time (during the warlord scuffle) there was nothing but trees, and when the villagers attacked the trees, the police caught them and imprisoned them. ("Sprout Monthly" No. 5, p. 177.) ）所以这样的树木保护法，结果是增加剥树皮，掘草根的人民，反而促进沙漠的出现。但这书以自然科学为范围，所以没有顾及了。接着这自然科学所论的事实之后，更进一步地来加以解决的，则有社会科学在。
Therefore, such a tree protection law has resulted in an increase in the number of people who peel bark and dig up grass roots, which will promote the emergence of deserts. But this book is within the scope of natural science, so it is not taken into account. After the facts discussed by the natural sciences, there are social sciences that go further to solve them.一九三〇年五月五日。
May 5, 1930.

《艺术论》译本序

《艺术论》译本序

《艺术论》译本序

Preface to the translation of "Art Theory"一
One蒲力汗诺夫（George Valentinovitch Plekhanov）以一八五七年，生于坦木皤夫省的一个贵族的家里。自他出世以至成年之间，在俄国革命运动史上，正是智识阶级所提倡的民众主义自兴盛以至凋落的时候。他们当初的意见，以为俄国的民众，即大多数的农民，是已经领会了社会主义，在精神上，成着不自觉的社会主义者的，所以民众主义者的使命，只在“到民间去”，向他们说明那境遇，善导他们对于地主和官吏的嫌憎，则农民便将自行蹶起，实现自由的自治制，即无政府主义底社会的组织。
George Valentinovitch Plekhanov was born in 1857 in the Tammukov province into a noble family. From his birth to adulthood, in the history of the Russian revolutionary movement, it was the time when the populism advocated by the intellectual class flourished and withered. Their original opinion was that the Russian people, that is, the majority of the peasants, had already understood socialism and became unconscious socialists in spirit, so the mission of the populists was only to "go to the people", explain the situation to them, and guide them in their dislike of the landlords and officials, then the peasants would rise up on their own and realize free autonomy, that is, the organization of an anarchist society.但农民却几乎并不倾听民众主义者的鼓动，倒是对于这些进步的贵族的子弟，怀抱着不满。皇帝亚历山大二世的政府，则于他们临以严峻的刑罚，终使其中的一部分，将眼光从农民离开，来效法西欧先进国，为有产者所享有的一切权利而争斗了。于是从“土地与自由党”分裂为“民意党”，从事于政治底斗争，但那手段，却非一般底社会运动，而是单独和政府相斗争，尽全力于恐怖手段——暗杀。
But the peasants hardly listened to the populist agitation, but were dissatisfied with the children of these progressive aristocrats. The government of Emperor Alexander II imposed severe punishments on them, and finally caused some of them to turn away from the peasants and follow the example of the advanced countries of Western Europe, fighting for all the rights enjoyed by the proletarians. So it split from the "Land and Freedom Party" to the "Party of People's Opinion" and engaged in political struggles, but that method was not an ordinary social movement, but a separate struggle against the government, and did its best to use terrorist means - assassination.青年的蒲力汗诺夫，也大概在这样的社会思潮之下，开始他革命底活动的。但当分裂时，尚复固守农民社会主义的根本底见解，反对恐怖主义，反对获得政治底公民底自由，别组“均田党”，惟属望于农民的叛乱。然而他已怀独见，以为智识阶级独斗政府，革命殊难于成功，农民固多社会主义底倾向，而劳动者亦殊重要。他在那《革命运动上的俄罗斯工人》中说，工人者，是偶然来到都会，现于工厂的农民。要输社会主义入农村中，这农民工人便是最适宜的媒介者。因为农民相信他们工人的话，是在智识阶级之上的。
The young Pulikhanov probably began his revolutionary activities under such a social trend. However, when it was divided, Shang Fu adhered to the fundamental views of peasant socialism, opposed terrorism, opposed the acquisition of political and civil freedoms, and formed a separate "Juntian Party", hoping for a peasant rebellion. However, he has a unique view, believing that the revolution is difficult to succeed in the government by the intellectual class, and that the peasants have many socialist tendencies, and the workers are also very important. In "Russian Workers in the Revolutionary Movement", he said that workers are peasants who come to the city by chance and are now in factories. To export socialism into the countryside, the peasant workers are the most suitable mediums. Because the peasants believe the words of their workers above the intellectual class.事实也并不很远于他的豫料。一八八一年恐怖主义者竭全力所实行的亚历山大二世的暗杀，民众未尝蹶起，公民也不得自由，结果是有力的指导者或死或囚，“民意党”殆濒于消灭。连不属此党而倾向工人的社会主义的蒲力汗诺夫等，也终被政府所压迫，不得不逃亡国外了。
The truth is not far from what he expected. The assassination of Alexander II carried out by terrorists in 1881 did not cause the people to rise up, and the citizens were not free. Even Pulikhanov, who did not belong to this party but leaned towards socialism for workers, was finally oppressed by the government and had to flee abroad.他在这时候，遂和西欧的劳动运动相亲，遂开始研究马克斯的著作。
At this time, he became acquainted with the labor movement in Western Europe and began to study Max's writings.马克斯之名，俄国是早经知道的；《资本论》第一卷，也比别国早有译本；许多“民意党”的人们，还和他个人底地相知，通信。然而他们所竭尽尊敬的马克斯的思想，在他们却仅是纯粹的“理论”，以为和俄国的现实不相合，和俄人并无关系的东西，因为在俄国没有资本主义，俄国的社会主义，将不发生于工厂而出于农村的缘故。但蒲力汗诺夫是当回忆在彼得堡的劳动运动之际，就发生了关于农村的疑惑的，由原书而精通马克斯主义文献，又增加了这疑惑。他于是搜集当时所有的统计底材料，用真正的马克斯主义底方法，来研究它，终至确信了资本主义实在君临着俄国。一八八四年，他发表叫作《我们的对立》的书，就是指摘民众主义的错误，证明马克斯主义的正当的名作。他在这书里，即指示着作为大众的农民，现今已不能作社会主义的支柱。在俄国，那时都会工业正在发达，资本主义制度已在形成了。必然底地随此而起者，是资本主义之敌，就是绝灭资本主义的无产者。所以在俄国也如在西欧一样，无产者是对于政治底改造的最有意味的阶级。从那境遇上说，对于坚执而有组织的革命，已比别的阶级有更大的才能，而且作为将来的俄国革命的射击兵，也是最为适当的阶级。
The name of Max has long been known in Russia; The first volume of "Capital" also had translations earlier than other countries; Many people of the "People's Party" also knew and corresponded with him personally. However, the ideas of Max, which they respected with all their might, were only pure "theories" for them, thinking that they did not match the reality of Russia and had nothing to do with the Russians, because there was no capitalism in Russia, and socialism in Russia would not occur in the factories but in the countryside. But Pulikhanov had doubts about the countryside when he recalled the labor movement in Petersburg, and his mastery of Marxist literature from the original book added to this doubt. He then collected all the statistical materials of the time, studied it with the true Marxist method, and finally became convinced that capitalism really reigned in Russia. In 1884, he published a book called "Our Opposite", which was a masterpiece that pointed out the mistakes of populism and justified Marxism. In this book, he indicated that the peasants, as the masses, could no longer be the pillars of socialism today. In Russia, urban industry was developing at that time, and the capitalist system was already taking shape. Those who inevitably arise from this ground are the enemies of capitalism and the proletarians who exterminate capitalism. Therefore, in Russia, as in Western Europe, the proletariat is the most meaningful class for political transformation. From that circumstance, it has greater talent than other classes for a persistent and organized revolution, and it is also the most appropriate class as a marksman for the future Russian revolution.自此以来，蒲力汗诺夫不但本身成了伟大的思想家，并且也作了俄国的马克斯主义者的先驱和觉醒了的劳动者的教师和指导者了。
Since then, Pulikhanov has not only become a great thinker in his own right, but also a pioneer of Russian Marxists and a teacher and guide of awakened workers.

《艺术论》译本序

二

《艺术论》译本序

Two但蒲力汗诺夫对于无产阶级的殊勋，最多是在所发表的理论的文字，他本身的政治底意见，却不免常有动摇的。
However, Pulikhanov's special achievements for the proletariat are at most in the theoretical texts he publishes, and his own political opinions are often shaken.一八八九年，社会主义者开第一次国际会议于巴黎，蒲力汗诺夫在会上说，“俄国的革命运动，只有靠着劳动者的运动才能胜利，此外并无解决之道”的时候，是连欧洲有名的许多社会主义者们，也完全反对这话的；但不久，他的业绩显现出来了。文字方面，则有《历史上的一元底观察的发展》（或简称《史底一元论》），出版于一八九五年，从哲学底领域方面，和民众主义者战斗，以拥护唯物论，而马克斯主义的全时代，也就受教于此，借此理解战斗底唯物论的根基。后来的学者，自然也尝加以指摘的批评，但什维诺夫却说，“倒不如将这大可注目的书籍，向新时代的人们来说明，来讲解，实为更好的工作”云。次年，在事实方面，则因他的弟子们和民众主义者斗争的结果，终使纺纱厂的劳动者三万人的大同盟罢工，勃发于彼得堡，给俄国的历史划了新时期，俄国无产阶级的革命底价值，始为大家所认识，那时开在伦敦的社会主义者的第四次国际会议，也对此大加惊叹，欢迎了。
In 1889, when the first international conference of socialists was held in Paris, Pulkhanov said that "the revolutionary movement in Russia can only be won by the movement of the workers, and there is no other solution", even many famous socialists in Europe were completely opposed to this; But soon, his performance showed. In terms of text, there is "The Development of Monistic Observation in History" (or simply "Historical Monism"), published in 1895, from the perspective of philosophical base, fighting with populists to support materialism, and the whole era of Marxism was taught here, so as to understand the foundation of materialism in the battle. Later scholars naturally criticized it, but Shvinov said, "It would be better to explain and explain this remarkable book to the people of the new era." The following year, as a result of the struggle between his disciples and the populists, the general alliance of 30,000 workers in the spinning mills finally went on strike in Petersburg, marking a new period in Russian history.然而蒲力汗诺夫究竟是理论家。十九世纪末，列宁才开始活动，也比他年青，而两个人之间，就自然而然地行了未尝商量的分业。他所擅长的是理论方面，对于敌人，便担当了哲学底论战。列宁却从最先的著作以来，即专心于社会政治底问题，党和劳动阶级的组织的。他们这时的以辅车相依的形态，所编辑发行的报章，是Iskra（《火花》），撰者们中，虽然颇有不纯的分子，但在当时，却尽了重大的职务，使劳动者和革命者的或一层因此而奋起，使民众主义派智识者发生了动摇。
However, Pulikhanov is a theorist after all. At the end of the nineteenth century, Lenin began to act and was younger than him, and between the two, there was a natural division of labor without discussion. What he was good at was theory, and he took on the philosophical debate against the enemy. Lenin, however, has been concentrating on the social and political underlying issues, the organization of the party and the working class, since his first writings. At this time, they edited and distributed a newspaper in the form of auxiliary vehicles, which was Iskra ("Spark"), and although there were quite impure elements among the writers, at that time, they played an important role, causing the workers and revolutionaries to rise up and shake the populist intellectuals.尤其重要的是那文字底和实际的活动。当时（一九〇〇年至一九〇一年），革命家是都惯于藏身在自己的小圈子中，不明白全国底展望的，他们不悟到靠着全国底展望，才能有所达成，也没有准确的计算，也不想到须用多大的势力，才能得怎样的成果。在这样的时代，要试行中央集权底党，统一全无产阶级的全俄底政治组织的观念，是新异而且难行的。《火花》却不独在论说上申明这观念，还组织了“火花”的团体，有当时铮铮的革命家一百人至一百五十人的“火花”派，加在这团体中，以实行蒲力汗诺夫在报章上用文字底形式所展开的计划。
What is especially important is the literal background and the actual activity. At that time (1900-1901), revolutionaries were accustomed to hiding in their own small circles, did not understand the national bottom prospects, did not realize that they could achieve anything by relying on the national bottom prospects, and did not have accurate calculations, nor did they think about how much power they had to use to achieve what kind of results. In such an era, it is novel and difficult to try to implement the concept of centralizing the party and unifying the political organization of the whole proletariat. "Spark" not only affirmed this concept in its arguments, but also organized a group of "Sparks", including the "Spark" faction of 100 to 150 revolutionaries who were prominent at that time, to carry out the plan developed by Pulkhanov in the form of text in the newspaper.但到一九〇三年，俄国的马克斯主义者分裂为布尔塞维克（多数派）和门塞维克（少数派）了，列宁是前者的指导者，蒲力汗诺夫则是后者。从此两人即时离时合，如一九〇四年日俄战争时的希望俄皇战败，一九〇七至一九〇九年的党的受难时代，他皆和列宁同心。尤其是后一时，布尔塞维克的势力的大部分，已经不得不逃亡国外，到处是堕落，到处有奸细，大家互相注目，互相害怕，互相猜疑了。在文学上，则淫荡文学盛行，《赛宁》即在这时出现。这情绪且侵入一切革命底圈子中。党员四散，化为个个小团体，门塞维克的取消派，已经给布尔塞维克唱起挽歌来了。这时大声叱咤，说取消派主义应该击破，以支持布尔塞维克的，却是身为门塞维克的权威的蒲力汗诺夫，且在各种报章上，国会中，加以勇敢的援助。于是门塞维克的别派，便嘲笑“他垂老而成了地下室的歌人”了。
But by 1903, the Marxists in Russia had split into the Bolsheviks (majority) and the Menseviks (minority), with Lenin as the instructor of the former and Pulikhanov as the latter. From then on, the two immediately separated from each other, such as the defeat of the Russian emperor during the Russo-Japanese War in 1904, and the party suffering era from 1907 to 1909, he was with Lenin. Especially in the latter period, most of the Bolshevik forces had to flee abroad, depraved everywhere, spies everywhere, everyone looked at each other, feared each other, and suspected each other. In literature, lewd literature is prevalent, and "Saining" appeared at this time. This emotion invades all revolutionary circles. The party members scattered and turned into small groups, and Menshevik's cancellations had already sung an elegy to the Bolsheviks. At this time, it was Pulikhanov, who was the authority of Mensevek who shouted loudly, saying that cancellationism should be defeated in order to support the Bolsheviks, and bravely assisted him in various newspapers and in the National Assembly. So Mensevik's faction laughed at "he grew old and became a singer in the basement".企图革命的复兴，从新组织的报章，是一九一〇年开始印行的Zvezda（《星》），蒲力汗诺夫和列宁，都从国外投稿，所以是两派合作的机关报，势不能十分明示政治上的方针。但当这报章和政治运动关系加紧之际，就渐渐失去提携的性质，蒲力汗诺夫的一派终于完全匿迹，报章尽成为布尔塞维克的战斗底机关了。一九一二年两派又合办日报Pravda（《真理》），而当事件展开时，蒲力汗诺夫派又于极短时期中悉被排除，和在Zvezda那时走了同一的运道。
In an attempt to revive the revolution, the newly organized newspaper was Zvezda ("Star"), which began to be printed in 1910, and Pulikhanov and Lenin both contributed from abroad, so it was an organ newspaper of cooperation between the two factions, and it was impossible to express its political policy very clearly. However, when the relationship between the newspaper and the political movement intensified, it gradually lost its supporting nature, and Pulkhanov's faction finally disappeared completely, and the newspapers became the fighting organs of the Bolsheviks. In 1912, the two factions jointly founded the daily newspaper Pravda ("Truth"), and when the events unfolded, the Pulikhanovs were excluded for a very short time, and took the same path as they did in Zvezda.殆欧洲大战起，蒲力汗诺夫遂以德意志帝国主义为欧洲文明和劳动阶级的最危险的仇敌，和第二国际的指导者们一样，站在爱国的见地上，为了和最可憎恶的德国战斗，竟不惜和本国的资产阶级和政府相提携，相妥协了。一九一七年二月革命后，他回到本国，组织了一个社会主义底爱国者的团体，曰“协同”。然而在俄国的无产阶级之父蒲力汗诺夫的革命底感觉，这时已经没有了打动俄国劳动者的力量，布勒斯特的媾和后，他几乎全为劳农俄国所忘却，终在一九一八年五月三十日，孤独地死于那时正被德军所占领的芬兰了。相传他临终的谵语中，曾有疑问云：“劳动者阶级可觉察着我的活动呢？”
Since the beginning of the European War, Pulikhanov regarded German imperialism as the most dangerous enemy of European civilization and the working class, and like the leaders of the Second International, he stood on a patriotic point of view, and in order to fight the most hateful Germany, he did not hesitate to cooperate with the bourgeoisie and government of his own country and compromised with it. After the February Revolution of 1917, he returned to his country and organized a group of socialist patriots called "Synergy". However, under the revolutionary feeling of Pulikhanov, the father of the Russian proletariat, there was no power to impress the Russian workers, and after the peace of Brest, he was almost completely forgotten by the workers and peasants, and finally died alone on May 30, 1918, in Finland, which was then occupied by the German army. According to legend, in his dying delirium, there was a question: "Can the working class be aware of my activities?" ”

《艺术论》译本序

三

《艺术论》译本序

Three他死后，Inprekol（第八年第五十四号）上有一篇《G．V．蒲力汗诺夫和无产阶级运动》，简括地评论了他一生的功过——
After his death, there was an article in Inprekol (No. 54 of the eighth year) entitled "G. V. Pulikhanov and the Proletarian Movement", briefly commented on his life's merits and demerits -“……其实，蒲力汗诺夫是应该怀这样的疑问的。为什么呢？因为年少的劳动者阶级，对他所知道的，是作为爱国社会主义者，作为门塞维克党员，作为帝国主义的追随者，作为主张革命底劳动者和在俄国的资产阶级的指导者密柳珂夫互相妥协的人。因为劳动者阶级的路和蒲力汗诺夫的路，是决然地离开的了。
“…… In fact, Pulikhanov should have such a question. Why? Because the young working class knew to him as a patriotic socialist, as a member of the Menshevik Party, as a follower of imperialism, as a person who advocated revolutionary workers and Milyukov, the leader of the bourgeoisie in Russia, who compromised with each other. Because the road of the working class and the path of Pulkhanov were resolutely separated.然而，我们毫不迟疑，将蒲力汗诺夫算进俄国劳动者阶级的，不，国际劳动者阶级的最大的恩师们里面去。
However, we do not hesitate to count Pulikhanov among the greatest mentors of the Russian working class, no, the international working class.怎么可以这样说呢？当决定底的阶级战的时候，蒲力汗诺夫不是在防线的那面的么？是的，确是如此。然而他在这些决定战的很以前的活动，他的理论上的诸劳作，在蒲力汗诺夫的遗产中，是成着贵重的东西的。
How can this be said? When the class war was decided, wasn't Pulikhanov on the other side of the defense line? Yes, it is. However, his activities long before these decisive battles, his theoretical labors, became valuable in Pulkhanov's legacy.惟为了正确的阶级底世界观而战的斗争，在阶级战的诸形态中，是最为重要的之一。蒲力汗诺夫由那理论上的诸劳作，亘几世代，养成了许多劳动者革命家们。他又借此在俄国劳动者阶级的政治底自主上，尽了出色的职务。
However, the struggle for a correct class worldview is one of the most important forms of class warfare. Pulkhanov has cultivated many working revolutionaries over several generations through theoretical labor. He also took this opportunity to perform an outstanding role in the political autonomy of the Russian working class.蒲力汗诺夫的伟大的功绩，首先，是对于民意党，即在前世纪的七十年代，相信着俄国的发达，是走着一种特别的，就是，非资本主义底的路的那些智识阶级的一伙的他的斗争。那七十年代以后的数十年中，在俄国的资本主义的堂堂的发展情形，是怎样地显示了民意党人中的见解之误，而蒲力汗诺夫的见解之对呵。
Pulikhanov's great achievements, first of all, are his struggle against the People's Party, that is, in the seventies of the last century, those members of the intellectual class who believed in the development of Russia and followed a special non-capitalist path. In the decades after the seventies, the dignified development of capitalism in Russia showed the wrong opinions among the public opinion parties, and the correct opinions of Pulikhanov.一八八四年由蒲力汗诺夫所编成的“以劳动解放为目的”的团体（劳动者解放团）的纲领，正是在俄国的劳动者党的最初的宣言，而且也是对于一八七八年至七九年劳动者之动摇的直接的解答。
The program of the group "for the liberation of labor" (the Workers' Liberation Corps), organized by Pulikhanov in 1884, was the original manifesto of the workers' party in Russia, and it was also a direct answer to the wavering of the workers in 1878-79.他说着——
He said——‘惟有竭力迅速地形成一个劳动者党，在解决现今在俄国的经济底的，以及政治底的一切的矛盾上，是惟一的手段。’
Only by striving to form a workers' party quickly and quickly is the only means of resolving all the contradictions in Russia today in the economic and political background. ’一八八九年，蒲力汗诺夫在开在巴黎的国际社会主义党大会上，说道——
In 1889, Pulkhanov said at the International Socialist Party Congress in Paris -‘在俄国的革命底运动，只有靠着革命底劳动者运动，才能得到胜利。我们此外并无解决之道，且也不会有的。’
The revolutionary movement in Russia can only be won by relying on the revolutionary workers' movement. We have no other solution, and we won't. ’这，蒲力汗诺夫的有名的话，决不是偶然的。蒲力汗诺夫以那伟大的天才，拥护这在市民底民众主义的革命中的无产阶级的主权，至数十年之久，而同时也发表了自由主义底有产者在和帝制的斗争中，竟懦怯地成为奸细，化为游移之至的东西的思想了。
This, Pulikhanov's famous words, is by no means accidental. With his great genius, Pulkhanov defended the sovereignty of the proletariat in the revolution of populism for decades, and at the same time expressed the idea that the liberal proletariat had cowardly become spies in the struggle against the imperial system, turning into something that wandered to the extreme.蒲力汗诺夫和列宁一同，是《火花》的创办指导者。关于为了创立在俄国的政党底组织体而战的斗争，《火花》所尽的伟大的组织上的任务，是广大地为人们所知道的。
Pulkhanov, along with Lenin, was the founding director of "Spark". The great organizational task of the Spark is widely known about the struggle for the creation of a political party organization in Russia.从一九〇三年至一九一七年的蒲力汗诺夫，生了几回大动摇，倒是总和革命底的马克斯主义违反，并且走向门塞维克去了。惹起他违反革命底的马克斯主义的诸问题，大抵是什么呢？
From 1903 to 1917, Pulkhanov had several major shakes, but he violated Marxism at the bottom of the revolution and went to Menseverk. What are the problems that caused him to violate the Marxism of the revolution?首先，是对于农民层的革命底的可能力的过少评价。蒲力汗诺夫在对于民意党人的有害方面的斗争中，竟看不见农民层的种种革命底的努力了。
First of all, there is too little evaluation of the potential of the peasant class for revolution. In the struggle against the harmful aspects of the public opinion party, Pulkhanov could not see the revolutionary efforts of the peasant class.其次，是国家的问题。他没有理解市民底民众主义的本质。就是他没有理解无论如何，有粉碎资产阶级的国家机关的必要。
Secondly, it is a national problem. He did not understand the essence of populism under the citizens. It is that he does not understand that in any case, there is a need to crush the bourgeois state organs.最后，是他没有理解那作为资本主义的最后阶段的帝国主义的问题，以及帝国主义战争的性质的问题。
Finally, it is his failure to understand the problem of imperialism as the final stage of capitalism and the nature of imperialist war.要而言之，——蒲力汗诺夫是于列宁的强处，有着弱处的。他不能成为‘在帝国主义和无产阶级革命时代的马克斯主义者’。所以他之为马克斯主义者，也就全体到了收场。蒲力汗诺夫于是一步一步，如罗若·卢森堡之所说，成为一个‘可尊敬的化石’了。
In short,—— Pulikhanov is Lenin's strength and weakness. He cannot be a 'Marxist in the era of imperialism and proletarian revolution'. So he is a Marxist, and it all comes to an end. Step by step, Pulkhanov became a 'respectable fossil', as Rojo Luxembourg said.在俄国的马克斯主义建设者蒲力汗诺夫，决不仅是马克斯和恩格斯的经济学，历史学，以及哲学的单单的媒介者。他涉及这些全领域，贡献了出色的独自的劳作。使俄国的劳动者和智识阶级，确实明白马克斯主义是人类思索的全史的最高的科学底完成，蒲力汗诺夫是与有力量的。惟蒲力汗诺夫的种种理论上的研究，在他的观念形态的遗产里，无疑地是最为贵重的东西。列宁曾经正当地常劝青年们去研究蒲力汗诺夫的书。——‘倘不研究这个（蒲力汗诺夫的关于哲学的叙述），就谁也决不会是意识底的，真实的共产主义者的。因为这是在国际底的一切马克斯主义文献中，最为杰出之作的缘故。’——列宁说。”
Pulikhanov, the builder of Marxism in Russia, was by no means the only medium of economics, history, and philosophy of Marx and Engels. He was involved in all of these fields and contributed excellent solo work. So that the Russian workers and intellectual class truly understood that Marxism was the highest scientific basis of the whole history of human thinking, and Pulkhanov was powerful. However, Pulikhanov's theoretical research is undoubtedly the most valuable thing in his conceptual and morphological legacy. Lenin used to rightly persuade young people to study Pulikhanov's books. ——'If you do not study this (Pulikhanov's narrative on philosophy), no one will ever be a conscious, real communist. Because this is the most outstanding work among all Marxist literature in the world. ' - said Lenin. ”

《艺术论》译本序

四

《艺术论》译本序

Four蒲力汗诺夫也给马克斯主义艺术理论放下了基础。他的艺术论虽然还未能俨然成一个体系，但所遗留的含有方法和成果的著作，却不只作为后人研究的对象，也不愧称为建立马克斯主义艺术理论，社会学底美学的古典底文献的了。
Pulikhanov also laid the foundation for Marxist art theory. Although his art theory has not yet become a system, the works he left behind containing methods and results are not only the object of study for future generations, but also worthy of being called the classical literature that establishes Marxist art theory and sociological aesthetics.这里的三篇信札体的论文，便是他的这类著作的只鳞片甲。
The three letter-style treatises here are just a few scales of his works.第一篇《论艺术》首先提出“艺术是什么”的问题，补正了托尔斯泰的定义，将艺术的特质，断定为感情和思想的具体底形象底表现。于是进而申明艺术也是社会现象，所以观察之际，也必用唯物史观的立场，并于和这违异的唯心史观（St．Simon，Comte，Hegel）加以批评，而绍介又和这些相对的关于生物的美底趣味的达尔文的唯物论底见解。他在这里假设了反对者的主张由生物学来探美感的起源的提议，就引用达尔文本身的话，说明“美的概念，……在种种的人类种族中，很有种种，连在同一人种的各国民里，也会不同”。这意思，就是说，“在文明人，这样的感觉，是和各种复杂的观念以及思想的连锁结合着”。也就是说，“文明人的美的感觉，……分明是就为各种社会底原因所限定”了。
The first "On Art" first raises the question of "what is art", corrects Tolstoy's definition, and concludes that the characteristics of art are the specific underlying expressions of feelings and thoughts. Therefore, it is further affirmed that art is also a social phenomenon, so when observing, it must also use the position of historical materialism and criticize it with the idealistic view of history (St. Simon, Comte, Hegel), which is contrary to this idealistic view of history, and Shao Jie and these relative Darwinian materialist views on the beauty and taste of living things. Here he assumes that the opponent's proposal to explore the origin of beauty through biology is to quote Darwin himself to explain "the concept of beauty,...... Among all kinds of human races, there are many kinds, and even among the peoples of the same race, they will be different." This means that "in civilized people, this feeling is combined with a chain of various complex concepts and ideas." In other words, "the feeling of beauty of civilized people,...... It is clearly limited by various social reasons."于是就须“从生物学到社会学去”，须从达尔文的领域的那将人类作为“物种”的研究，到这物种的历史底运命的研究去。倘只就艺术而言，则是人类的美底感情的存在的可能性（种的概念），是被那为它移向现实的条件（历史底概念）所提高的。这条件，自然便是该社会的生产力的发展阶段。但蒲力汗诺夫在这里，却将这作为重要的艺术生产的问题，解明了生产力和生产关系的矛盾以及阶级间的矛盾，以怎样的形式，作用于艺术上；而站在该生产关系上的社会的艺术，又怎样地取了各别的形态，和别社会的艺术显出不同。就用了达尔文的“对立的根源的作用”这句话，博引例子，以说明社会底条件之关于与美底感情的形式；并及社会的生产技术和韵律，谐调，均整法则之相关；且又批评了近代法兰西艺术论的发展（Staёl，Guizot，Taine）。
Therefore, it is necessary to "go from biology to sociology", from the study of human beings as a "species" in Darwin's field to the study of the historical fate of this species. If art is only concerned, the possibility of the existence of human feelings (the concept of species) is enhanced by the conditions that move it to reality (the concept of history). This condition is naturally the stage of development of the productive forces of the society. But here, Pulkhanov regards this as an important issue of artistic production, and explains in what form the contradictions between productive forces and production relations and the contradictions between classes act on art; and how the art of the society standing on the relations of production takes different forms and shows the difference from the art of other societies. Darwin's sentence "the role of the root of opposition" is used, and examples are cited to illustrate the form of social conditions related to feelings with beauty; and the relationship between social production technology and rhythm, harmony, and the law of uniformity; He also criticized the development of modern French art theory (Staёl, Guizot, Taine).生产技术和生活方法，最密接地反映于艺术现象上者，是在原始民族的时候。蒲力汗诺夫就想由解明这样的原始民族的艺术，来担当马克斯主义艺术论中的难题。第二篇《原始民族的艺术》先据人类学者，旅行家等实见之谈，从薄墟曼，韦陀，印地安以及别的民族引了他们的生活，狩猎，农耕，分配财货这些事为例子，以证原始狩猎民族实为共产主义的结合，且以见毕海尔所说之不足凭。第三篇《再论原始民族的艺术》则批判主张游戏本能，先于劳动的人们之误，且用丰富的实证和严正的论理，以究明有用对象的生产（劳动），先于艺术生产这一个唯物史观的根本底命题。详言之，即蒲力汗诺夫之所究明，是社会人之看事物和现象，最初是从功利底观点的，到后来才移到审美底观点去。在一切人类所以为美的东西，就是于他有用——于为了生存而和自然以及别的社会人生的斗争上有着意义的东西。功用由理性而被认识，但美则凭直感底能力而被认识。享乐着美的时候，虽然几乎并不想到功用，但可由科学底分析而被发见。所以美底享乐的特殊性，即在那直接性，然而美底愉乐的根柢里，倘不伏着功用，那事物也就不见得美了。并非人为美而存在，乃是美为人而存在的。——这结论，便是蒲力汗诺夫将唯心史观者所深恶痛绝的社会，种族，阶级的功利主义底见解，引入艺术里去了。
The production technology and living methods that are most closely reflected in artistic phenomena are in the time of primitive peoples. Pulkhanov wanted to take on the difficult problem in Marxist art theory by explaining the art of such a primitive people. The second article, "The Art of Primitive Peoples", is based on the actual opinions of anthropologists, travelers, etc., and cites their lives, hunting, farming, and distribution of goods from the Boxuman, Veto, Indians and other peoples as examples, to prove that the primitive hunting peoples are actually a combination of communism, and to see that Bihail's words are not sufficient. The third article, "On the Art of Primitive Peoples", criticizes the mistake of people who advocate the instinct of play and precedes labor, and uses rich empirical evidence and solemn reasoning to investigate the fundamental proposition of historical materialism, which is that the production (labor) of useful objects precedes artistic production. In detail, that is, what Pulikhanov investigated is that social people see things and phenomena, which initially moved from a utilitarian point of view, and then moved to an aesthetic point of view. In everything that man considers beautiful, it is useful to him—what is meaningful in the struggle against nature and other social life for survival. Function is recognized by reason, but beauty is recognized by intuitive ability. When we enjoy beauty, although we hardly think of function, it can be discovered through scientific analysis. Therefore, the particularity of the pleasure of the bottom of the beauty lies in its directness, but in the root of the pleasure of the beauty of the bottom, if it does not have a function, then things are not necessarily beautiful. It is not that people exist for beauty, but that beauty exists for people. ——This conclusion is that Pulikhanov introduced into art the utilitarian views of society, race, and class, which are deeply hated by idealistic historians.看第三篇的收梢，则蒲力汗诺夫豫备继此讨论的，是人种学上的旧式的分类，是否合于实际。但竟没有作，这里也只好就此算作完结了。
Looking at the end of the third article, Pulikhanov is prepared to discuss whether the old ethnographic classification is in line with reality. But it didn't work, and it had to be counted as the end here.

《艺术论》译本序

五

《艺术论》译本序

Five这书所据的本子，是日本外村史郎的译本。在先已有林柏修先生的翻译，本也可以不必再译了，但因为丛书的目录早经决定，只得仍来做这一番很近徒劳的工夫。当翻译之际，也常常参考林译的书，采用了些比日译更好的名词，有时句法也大约受些影响，而且前车可鉴，使我屡免于误译，这是应当十分感谢的。
The book on which this book is based is a translation by Shiro Totomura of Japan. There was already a translation by Mr. Lin Baixiu, and there was no need to translate it again, but because the catalog of the series had already been decided, I had to do this almost futile effort. When translating, I often refer to Lin Yi's books, using some better terms than the Japanese translation, and sometimes the syntax is also slightly affected, and I can learn from the past, so that I can avoid mistranslations many times, which I should be very grateful for.序言的四节中，除第三节全出于翻译外，其余是杂采什维诺夫的《露西亚社会民主劳动党史》，山内封介的《露西亚革命运动史》和《普罗列塔利亚艺术教程》余录中的《蒲力汗诺夫和艺术》而就的。临时急就，错误必所不免，只能算一个粗略的导言。至于最紧要的关于艺术全般，在此却未曾涉及者，因为在先已有瓦勒夫松的《蒲力汗诺夫与艺术问题》，附印在《苏俄的文艺论战》（《未名丛刊》之一）之后，不久又将有列什涅夫《文艺批评论》和雅各武莱夫的《蒲力汗诺夫论》（皆是本丛书之一）出版，或则简明，或则浩博，决非译者所能企及其万一，所以不如不说，希望读者自去研究他们的文章。
Of the four prefaces, except for the third section, which is all translated, the rest are Zatsesvinov's History of the Social Democratic Labor Party of Lucia, Yamauchi Fengsuke's History of the Lucian Revolutionary Movement, and Pulkhanov and Art in the remnants of the Proletarian Art Tutorial. Temporary haste, mistakes are inevitable, and can only be regarded as a rough introduction. As for the most important thing about art in general, it has not been covered here, because after Valevsson's "Pulikhanov and the Problem of Art" was printed in "The Debate on Literature and Art in Soviet Russia" (one of the "Unnamed Series"), Leshnev's "Literary and Art Critique" and Yakov Vullev's "Pulikhanov's Treatise" (both of which are one of the books in this series) will be published.最末这一篇，是译自藏原惟人所译的《阶级社会的艺术》，曾在《春潮月刊》上登载过的。其中有蒲力汗诺夫自叙对于文艺的见解，可作本书第一篇的互证，便也附在卷尾了。
The last one is translated from "The Art of Class Society" translated by Zangyuan Weiren, which was published in "Spring Tide Monthly". Among them, there is Pulikhanov's own opinion on literature and art, which can be used as a mutual proof of the first chapter of this book, and is also attached at the end of the volume.但自省译文，这回也还是“硬译”，能力只此，仍须读者伸指来寻线索，如读地图：这实在是非常抱歉的。
However, the self-reflection translation, this time it is still a "hard translation", the ability is only this, and the reader still has to stretch out his fingers to find clues, such as reading a map: this is really sorry.一九三〇年五月八日之夜，鲁迅校毕记于上海闸北寓庐。
On the night of May 8, 1930, Lu Xun finished his diary in his residence in Zhabei, Shanghai.

做古文和做好人的秘诀——夜记之五

做古文和做好人的秘诀——夜记之五

做古文和做好人的秘诀——夜记之五

The secret of doing ancient texts and being a good person - the fifth night note从去年以来一年半之间，凡有对于我们的所谓批评文字中，最使我觉得气闷的滑稽的，是常燕生先生在一种月刊叫作《长夜》的上面，摆出公正脸孔，说我的作品至少还有十年生命的话。记得前几年，《狂飙》停刊时，同时这位常燕生先生也曾有文章发表，大意说《狂飙》攻击鲁迅，现在书店不愿出版了，安知（！）不是鲁迅运动了书店老板，加以迫害？于是接着大大地颂扬北洋军阀度量之宽宏。我还有些记性，所以在这回的公正脸孔上，仍然隐隐看见刺着那一篇锻炼文字；一面又想起陈源教授的批评法：先举一些美点，以显示其公平，然而接着是许多大罪状——由公平的衡量而得的大罪状。将功折罪，归根结蒂，终于是“学匪”，理应枭首挂在“正人君子”的旗下示众。所以我的经验是：毁或无妨，誉倒可怕，有时候是极其“汲汲乎殆哉”的。更何况这位常燕生先生满身五色旗气味，即令真心许我以作品的不灭，在我也好像宣统皇帝忽然龙心大悦，钦许我死后谥为“文忠”一般。于满肚气闷中的滑稽之余，仍只好诚惶诚恐，特别脱帽鞠躬，敬谢不敏之至了。
In the past year and a half since last year, among all the so-called criticisms of us, the funny one that made me feel most depressed was Mr. Chang Yansheng put on a fair face on a monthly magazine called "Long Night" and said that my work still has at least ten years to live. I remember that a few years ago, when "Hurricane" was suspended, at the same time, Mr. Chang Yansheng also published an article, to the effect that "Hurricane" attacked Lu Xun, and now the bookstore is unwilling to publish it. Didn't Lu Xun campaign the bookstore owner and persecute him? So he then greatly praised the magnanimity of the Beiyang warlords. I still have some memory, so on the fair face this time, I still faintly see the exercise text stabbed in it; On the other hand, I think of Professor Chen Yuan's criticism: first give some beautiful points to show fairness, but then there are many major crimes - major crimes obtained by fair measurement. In the final analysis, the "student bandit" should be beheaded under the banner of "upright gentleman" to show the public. So my experience is: it doesn't matter if it's ruined, but the reputation is terrible, and sometimes it's extremely "desperate". What's more, this Mr. Chang Yansheng was full of the smell of five-colored flags, which made me sincerely promise the immortality of my work, and I was also like Emperor Xuantong suddenly fell into great joy and promised me to be posthumously honored as "Wenzhong" after my death. In addition to being ridiculous in his stomach, he still had to be sincerely afraid, especially taking off his hat and bowing, thanking him for being insensitive.但在同是《长夜》的另一本上，有一篇刘大杰先生的文章——这些文章，似乎《中国的文艺论战》上都未收载——我却很感激的读毕了，这或者就因为正如作者所说，和我素不相知，并无私人恩怨，夹杂其间的缘故。然而尤使我觉得有益的，是作者替我设法，以为在这样四面围剿之中，不如放下刀笔，暂且出洋；并且给我忠告，说是在一个人的生活史上留下几张白纸，也并无什么紧要。在仅仅一个人的生活史上，有了几张白纸，或者全本都是白纸，或者竟全本涂成黑纸，地球也决不会因此炸裂，我是早知道的。这回意外地所得的益处，是三十年来，若有所悟，而还是说不出简明扼要的纲领的做古文和做好人的方法，因此恍然抓住了辔头了。
But in another book of "Long Night", there is an article by Mr. Liu Dajie - these articles seem to be not included in "China's Literary and Art Debate" - but I read it very gratefully, or because, as the author said, I have never known each other, and there is no personal grudge, and it is mixed in. However, what I find particularly beneficial is that the author tried to find a way for me, thinking that in such an encirclement and suppression, it would be better to put down the knife and pen and go abroad for the time being; And give me advice, saying that it doesn't matter if you leave a few blank sheets of paper in a person's life history. In the history of a person's life, if there are a few blank sheets of paper, or all of them are white, or all of them are painted black, the earth will never explode because of this, I knew it long ago. The benefit I unexpectedly gained this time is that in the past thirty years, if I have realized something, but I still can't say a concise program of how to do ancient texts and be a good person, so I suddenly grabbed the reins.其口诀曰：要做古文，做好人，必须做了一通，仍旧等于一张的白纸。
His mantra is: To be an ancient text, to be a good person, you must make a copy, which is still equal to a blank piece of paper.从前教我们作文的先生，并不传授什么《马氏文通》，《文章作法》之流，一天到晚，只是读，做，读，做；做得不好，又读，又做。他却决不说坏处在那里，作文要怎样。一条暗胡同，一任你自己去摸索，走得通与否，大家听天由命。但偶然之间，也会不知怎么一来——真是“偶然之间”而且“不知怎么一来”，——卷子上的文章，居然被涂改的少下去，留下的，而且有密圈的处所多起来了。于是学生满心欢喜，就照这样——真是自己也莫名其妙，不过是“照这样”——做下去，年深月久之后，先生就不再删改你的文章了，只在篇末批些“有书有笔，不蔓不枝”之类，到这时候，即可以算作“通”。——自然，请高等批评家梁实秋先生来说，恐怕是不通的，但我是就世俗一般而言，所以也姑且从俗。
In the past, the gentleman who taught us composition did not teach anything like "Ma's Wentong" or "Writing Method", all day long, just reading, doing, reading, doing; If you don't do it well, you read and do. But he never said that the bad thing is and what to do with the composition. A dark alley, you can explore it yourself, whether it works or not, everyone is left to fate. But by chance, it will come somehow - it is really "accidental" and "somehow",—— the articles on the paper have actually been altered less, and there are more places with dense circles. So the students were full of joy, and they did it like this - it was really inexplicable, but it was "like this" - and after a long time, the teacher no longer deleted your article, and only commented at the end of the article some "there is a book and a pen, no vines and no branches", and at this time, it can be counted as "communication". ——Naturally, I am afraid it doesn't make sense to ask the high-ranking critic Mr. Liang Shiqiu, but I am in terms of the secular in general, so I will follow the customs.这一类文章，立意当然要清楚的，什么意见，倒在其次。譬如说，做《工欲善其事，必先利其器论》罢，从正面说，发挥“其器不利，则工事不善”固可，即从反面说，偏以为“工以技为先，技不纯，则器虽利，而事亦不善”也无不可。就是关于皇帝的事，说“天皇圣明，臣罪当诛”固可，即说皇帝不好，一刀杀掉也无不可的，因为我们的孟夫子有言在先，“闻诛独夫纣矣，未闻弑君也”，现在我们圣人之徒，也正是这一个意思儿。但总之，要从头到底，一层一层说下去，弄得明明白白，还是天皇圣明呢，还是一刀杀掉，或者如果都不赞成，那也可以临末声明：“虽穷淫虐之威，而究有君臣之分，君子不为已甚，窃以为放诸四裔可矣”的。这样的做法，大概先生也未必不以为然，因为“中庸”也是我们古圣贤的教训。
This type of article, of course, must be clear in its intention, and what opinions are secondary. For example, if you want to do a good job, you must first sharpen your tools", from the positive point of view, it is possible to play "if the tool is not good, then the work is not good", that is, from the negative side, it is also possible to think that "the craft is the first to do things, and the skills are not pure, then although the tools are good, the things are not good". It is about the emperor, it is possible to say that "the emperor is wise, and the minister's crimes should be punished", that is, the emperor is not good, and it is okay to kill him with a knife, because our Meng Confucius said first, "I have heard of the killing of the only husband, but I have not heard of the killing of the king", and now our saints are exactly this meaning. But in short, to start from the beginning to the end, layer by layer, to make it clear, or the emperor is wise, or to kill with a knife, or if you do not agree, then you can also make a final statement: "Although the power of lewdness and cruelty, there is a distinction between ruler and subject, and the gentleman is not too much, and I think it is okay to put it in the four descendants." This approach may not be unacceptable, because the "golden mean" is also the lesson of our ancient sages.然而，以上是清朝末年的话，如果在清朝初年，倘有什么人去一告密，那可会“灭族”也说不定的，连主张“放诸四裔”也不行，这时他不和你来谈什么孟子孔子了。现在革命方才成功，情形大概也和清朝开国之初相仿。（不完）
However, the above is the end of the Qing Dynasty, if in the early years of the Qing Dynasty, if someone went to snitch, it might be "exterminated", and it was not even possible to advocate "releasing the four descendants", at this time he would not talk to you about Mencius and Confucius. Now that the revolution has succeeded, the situation is probably similar to the beginning of the founding of the Qing Dynasty. (endless)这是“夜记”之五的小半篇。“夜记”这东西，是我于一九二七年起，想将偶然的感想，在灯下记出，留为一集的，那年就发表了两篇。到得上海，有感于屠戮之凶，又做了一篇半，题为《虐杀》，先讲些日本幕府的磔杀耶教徒，俄国皇帝的酷待革命党之类的事。但不久就遇到了大骂人道主义的风潮，我也就借此偷懒，不再写下去，现在连稿子也不见了。
This is the fifth part of "Night Notes". The "Night Diary" was written by me in 1927 to write down my accidental impressions under the lamp and keep them as an episode, and I published two articles that year. When I arrived in Shanghai, I felt the murder of the massacre, so I wrote another article and a half, entitled "Massacre", first talking about the crucifixion of the Japanese shogunate and the cruelty of the Russian emperor to the revolutionary party. But soon I encountered a trend of scolding humanitarianism, so I took this opportunity to be lazy and stopped writing, and now I don't even have the manuscript.到得前年，柔石要到一个书店去做杂志的编辑，来托我做点随随便便，看起来不大头痛的文章。这一夜我就又想到做“夜记”，立了这样的题目。大意是想说，中国的作文和做人，都要古已有之，但不可直钞整篇，而须东拉西扯，补缀得看不出缝，这才算是上上大吉。所以做了一大通，还是等于没有做，而批评者则谓之好文章或好人。社会上的一切，什么也没有进步的病根就在此。当夜没有做完，睡觉去了。第二天柔石来访，将写下来的给他看，他皱皱眉头，以为说得太噜苏一点，且怕过占了篇幅。于是我就约他另译一篇短文，将这放下了。
The year before last, Rou Shi wanted to go to a bookstore to work as a magazine editor, and asked me to do some casual articles that didn't seem like a big headache. This night, I thought of making a "night note" again, and set such a topic. The gist is to say that Chinese composition and life must have existed in ancient times, but it should not be directly related to the whole article, but it must be pulled around, and the patches cannot be seen, which is considered a great fortune. Therefore, doing a lot is still the same as not doing it, and critics call it a good article or a good person. The root cause of everything in society and no progress is here. I didn't finish the night and went to sleep. The next day, Rou Shi came to visit and showed him what he had written, and he frowned, thinking that he was saying it too much, and he was afraid that it would take up too much space. So I asked him to translate another short article and put it down.现在去柔石的遇害，已经一年有余了，偶然从乱纸里检出这稿子来，真不胜其悲痛。我想将全文补完，而终于做不到，刚要下笔，又立刻想到别的事情上去了。所谓“人琴俱亡”者，大约也就是这模样的罢。现在只将这半篇附录在这里，以作柔石的记念。
It has been more than a year since the murder of Rou Shi, and it is really sad to accidentally check out this manuscript from the messy paper. I wanted to finish the full text, but finally I couldn't do it, and just as I was about to write, I immediately thought of something else. The so-called "death of the piano" is probably what it looks like. Now only this half of the appendix is here as a memory of Rou Shi.一九三二年四月二十六日之夜，记。
On the night of April 26, 1932, recorded.

一九三一年

一九三一年

一九三一年

1931

关于《唐三藏取经诗话》的版本——寄开明书店中学生杂志社

关于《唐三藏取经诗话》的版本——寄开明书店中学生杂志社

关于《唐三藏取经诗话》的版本——寄开明书店中学生杂志社

About the version of "Tang Seng's Poems on the Scriptures" - sent to the middle school student magazine of Enlightened Bookstore编辑先生：
Mr. Editor:这一封信，不知道能否给附载在《中学生》上？
I don't know if this letter can be attached to "Middle School Students"?事情是这样的——
Here's the thing –《中学生》新年号内，郑振铎先生的大作《宋人话本》中关于《唐三藏取经诗话》，有如下的一段话：
In the New Year's issue of "Middle School Students", Mr. Zheng Zhenduo's masterpiece "Song People's Words" about "Tang Seng's Poems" has the following passage:“此话本的时代不可知，但王国维氏据书末：‘中瓦子张家印’数字，而断定其为宋椠，语颇可信。故此话本，当然亦必为宋代的产物。但也有人加以怀疑的。不过我们如果一读元代吴昌龄的《西游记》杂剧，便知这部原始的取经故事其产生必定是远在于吴氏《西游记》杂剧之前的。换一句话说，必定是在元代之前的宋代的。而‘中瓦子’的数字恰好证实其为南宋临安城中所出产的东西，而没有什么疑义。”
"The era of this book is unknown, but Wang Guowei concluded that it was Song Yu according to the number at the end of the book: 'Zhongwazi Zhang Jiayin', which is quite credible. Therefore, of course, this script must also be a product of the Song Dynasty. But there are also those who doubt it. However, if we read Wu Changling's "Journey to the West" miscellaneous drama in the Yuan Dynasty, we will know that this original story must have been produced long before Wu's "Journey to the West" miscellaneous drama. In other words, it must be in the Song Dynasty before the Yuan Dynasty. The number of 'Zhongwazi' just confirms that it is something produced in Lin'an City in the Southern Song Dynasty, and there is no doubt. ”我先前作《中国小说史略》时，曾疑此书为元椠，甚招收藏者德富苏峰先生的不满，著论辟谬，我也略加答辨，后来收在杂感集中。所以郑振铎先生大作中之所谓“人”，其实就是“鲁迅”，于唾弃之中，仍寓代为遮羞的美意，这是我万分惭而且感的。但我以为考证固不可荒唐，而亦不宜墨守，世间许多事，只消常识，便得了然。藏书家欲其所藏版本之古，史家则不然。故于旧书，不以缺笔定时代，如遗老现在还有将儀字缺末笔者，但现在确是中华民国；也不专以地名定时代，如我生于绍兴，然而并非南宋人，因为许多地名，是不随朝代而改的；也不仅据文意的华朴巧拙定时代，因为作者是文人还是市人，于作品是大有分别的。
When I wrote "A Brief History of Chinese Novels" before, I suspected that this book was Yuan Zhen, which even aroused the dissatisfaction of the collector, Mr. Defu Su Feng, and I also defended it slightly, and later included it in the collection of miscellaneous feelings. Therefore, the so-called "people" in Mr. Zheng Zhenduo's masterpiece are actually "Lu Xun", and in the midst of spurning, he still embodies the beauty of covering up shame, which I am extremely ashamed and feeling. But I think that research should not be absurd, and it should not be adhered to, many things in the world can be understood only with common sense. Bibliophiles want their editions to be old, but historians do not. Therefore, in old books, the era is not determined by the lack of pen, such as the old man still has the last writer of the Yi character, but now it is indeed the Republic of China; For example, I was born in Shaoxing, but I am not a Southern Song Dynasty person, because many place names do not change with dynasties; It is not only according to the literary meaning of the Hua Pu clumsy era, because the author is a literati or a city person, and there is a big difference in the work.所以倘无积极的确证，《唐三藏取经诗话》似乎还可怀疑为元椠。即如郑振铎先生所引据的同一位“王国维氏”，他别有《两浙古刊本考》两卷，民国十一年序，收在遗书第二集中。其卷上“杭州府刊版”的“辛，元杂本”项下，有这样的两种在内——
Therefore, if there is no positive confirmation, "Tang Seng's Poems" seems to be suspected to be Yuan Li. That is, as Mr. Zheng Zhenduo cited, the same "Wang Guowei clan", he has two volumes of "Examination of the Ancient Publications of Liangzhejiang", the preface of the eleventh year of the Republic of China, which is included in the second collection of the suicide note. Under the "Xin, Yuan Miscellaneous Edition" of the "Hangzhou Prefecture Edition" on its volume, there are two such -《京本通俗小说》
"Kyomoto Popular Novel"《大唐三藏取经诗话》三卷
"Tang Sanzang Poetry and Words" in three volumes是不但定《取经诗话》为元椠，且并以《通俗小说》为元本了。《两浙古本考》虽然并非僻书，但中学生诸君也并非专治文学史者，恐怕未必有暇涉猎。所以录寄贵刊，希为刊载，一以略助多闻，二以见单文孤证，是难以“必定”一种史实而常有“什么疑义”的。
It is not only the "Poems of the Classics" as the original text, but also the "Popular Novel" as the original version. Although "Ancient Books of Liangzhejiang" is not a rare book, middle school students are not specialized in literary history, and I am afraid they may not have time to dabble in it. Therefore, it is difficult to "certainly" a historical fact and often have "any doubts" because it is recorded in your journal, one is to help you hear more, and the other is to see a single article and isolated evidence.专此布达，并请
Specifically for this announcement, please do so撰安。
Written by An.鲁迅启上。一月十九日夜。
Lu Xun reported to the emperor. On the night of January 19th.

柔石小传

柔石小传

柔石小传

A short biography of Roushi柔石，原名平复，姓赵，以一九〇一年生于浙江省台州宁海县的市门头。前几代都是读书的，到他的父亲，家景已不能支，只好去营小小的商业，所以他直到十岁，这才能入小学。一九一七年赴杭州，入第一师范学校；一面为杭州晨光社之一员，从事新文学运动。毕业后，在慈溪等处为小学教师，且从事创作，有短篇小说集《疯人》一本，即在宁波出版，是为柔石作品印行之始。一九二三年赴北京，为北京大学旁听生。
Rou Shi, formerly known as Pingfu, surnamed Zhao, was born in 1901 in Shimentou, Ninghai County, Taizhou, Zhejiang Province. The previous generations were all educated, and by the time of his father, the family could no longer support him, so he had to run a small business, so he could not enter elementary school until he was ten years old. In 1917, he went to Hangzhou and entered the First Normal School; On the other hand, he is a member of the Hangzhou Chenguang Society and is engaged in the New Literature Movement. After graduation, he worked as a primary school teacher in Cixi and other places, and was engaged in creation, and had a collection of short stories "Madman", which was published in Ningbo, which was the beginning of the printing of Roushi's works. In 1923, he went to Beijing and was an auditor at Peking University.回乡后，于一九二五年春，为镇海中学校务主任，抵抗北洋军阀的压迫甚力。秋，咯血，但仍力助宁海青年，创办宁海中学，至次年，竟得募集款项，造成校舍；一面又任教育局局长，改革全县的教育。
After returning to his hometown, in the spring of 1925, he served as the director of school affairs at Zhenhai Middle School and resisted the oppression of the Beiyang warlords very strongly. In the autumn, he coughed up blood, but still helped the youth of Ninghai to establish Ninghai Middle School, and the following year, he was able to raise funds to build a school building; On the other hand, he also served as the director of the Education Bureau, reforming the education of the county.一九二八年四月，乡村发生暴动，失败后，到处反动，较新的全被摧毁，宁海中学既遭解散，柔石也单身出走，寓居上海，研究文艺。十二月为《语丝》编辑，又与友人设立朝华社，于创作之外，并致力于绍介外国文艺，尤其是北欧，东欧的文学与版画，出版的有《朝华》周刊二十期，旬刊十二期，及《艺苑朝华》五本。后因代售者不付书价，力不能支，遂中止。
In April 1928, there was a riot in the countryside, and after the failure, there was reaction everywhere, and the newer ones were all destroyed, Ninghai Middle School was disbanded, and Rou Shi also ran away alone, living in Shanghai to study literature and art. In December, he became the editor of "Yusi", and set up the Chaohua Society with his friends, in addition to creation, he is committed to promoting foreign literature and art, especially the literature and printmaking of Northern Europe and Eastern Europe, and has published 20 issues of "Chaohua" weekly, 12 issues of ten issues, and five copies of "Yiyuan Chaohua". Later, because the seller did not pay for the book, he could not afford it, so he stopped it.一九三〇年春，自由运动大同盟发动，柔石为发起人之一；不久，左翼作家联盟成立，他也为基本构成员之一，尽力于普罗文学运动。先被选为执行委员，次任常务委员编辑部主任；五月间，以左联代表的资格，参加全国苏维埃区域代表大会，毕后，作《一个伟大的印象》一篇。
In the spring of 1930, the Grand Alliance of Freedom Movements was launched, with Roushi as one of the initiators; Soon, the Left Writers' Union was established, and he was also one of the basic members, doing his best to support the popular literary movement. He was first elected as an executive member, and then as the director of the editorial department of the standing committee; In May, as a representative of the Left Alliance, he participated in the National Soviet Regional Congress, and after completing it, he wrote an article "A Great Impression".一九三一年一月十七日被捕，由巡捕房经特别法庭移交龙华警备司令部，二月七日晚，被秘密枪决，身中十弹。
Arrested on January 17, 1931, handed over from the patrol room to the Longhua Garrison Command through the special court, and on the evening of February 7, he was secretly shot and shot ten times.柔石有子二人，女一人，皆幼。文学上的成绩，创作有诗剧《人间的喜剧》，未印，小说《旧时代之死》，《三姊妹》，《二月》，《希望》，翻译有卢那卡尔斯基的《浮士德与城》，戈理基的《阿尔泰莫诺夫氏之事业》及《丹麦短篇小说集》等。
Roushi had two sons and a daughter, both young. His literary achievements include the poetic drama "The Comedy of the World", unprinted, the novels "The Death of the Old Age", "Three Sisters", "February", "Hope", translated Luna Karsky's "Faust and the City", Golike's "The Cause of the Artemonov Family" and "Danish Short Stories".

中国无产阶级革命文学和前驱的血

中国无产阶级革命文学和前驱的血

中国无产阶级革命文学和前驱的血

Chinese proletarian revolutionary literature and the blood of the forerunners中国的无产阶级革命文学在今天和明天之交发生，在诬蔑和压迫之中滋长，终于在最黑暗里，用我们的同志的鲜血写了第一篇文章。
China's proletarian revolutionary literature took place at the turn of today and tomorrow, grew in slander and oppression, and finally wrote its first article in the darkest with the blood of our comrades.我们的劳苦大众历来只被最剧烈的压迫和榨取，连识字教育的布施也得不到，惟有默默地身受着宰割和灭亡。繁难的象形字，又使他们不能有自修的机会。智识的青年们意识到自己的前驱的使命，便首先发出战叫。这战叫和劳苦大众自己的反叛的叫声一样地使统治者恐怖，走狗的文人即群起进攻，或者制造谣言，或者亲作侦探，然而都是暗做，都是匿名，不过证明了他们自己是黑暗的动物。
Our toiling masses have always been oppressed and exploited only the most violently, and they have not even received the alms of literacy education, but have been silently slaughtered and destroyed. The difficult hieroglyphs make them unable to have the opportunity to study on their own. The wise youth realized the mission of their pioneers and were the first to cry out for battle. This war cry terrorizes the ruler as much as the rebellious cry of the toiling masses themselves, and the lackey literati attack in groups, or spread rumors, or act as detectives themselves, but all in secret, all anonymous, but proving themselves to be dark animals.统治者也知道走狗的文人不能抵挡无产阶级革命文学，于是一面禁止书报，封闭书店，颁布恶出版法，通缉著作家，一面用最末的手段，将左翼作家逮捕，拘禁，秘密处以死刑，至今并未宣布。这一面固然在证明他们是在灭亡中的黑暗的动物，一面也在证实中国无产阶级革命文学阵营的力量，因为如传略所罗列，我们的几个遇害的同志的年龄，勇气，尤其是平日的作品的成绩，已足使全队走狗不敢狂吠。
The rulers also knew that lackey literati could not resist proletarian revolutionary literature, so they banned books and newspapers, closed bookstores, promulgated evil publishing laws, and wanted writers, while using the last resort to arrest, detain, and secretly sentence left-wing writers to death, which has not been announced so far. On the one hand, this proves that they are dark animals in extinction, and on the other hand, it also confirms the strength of the Chinese proletarian revolutionary literary camp, because as listed in the biography, the age, courage, and especially the achievements of the works of our slain comrades are enough to make the lackeys of the whole team dare not bark.然而我们的这几个同志已被暗杀了，这自然是无产阶级革命文学的若干的损失，我们的很大的悲痛。但无产阶级革命文学却仍然滋长，因为这是属于革命的广大劳苦群众的，大众存在一日，壮大一日，无产阶级革命文学也就滋长一日。我们的同志的血，已经证明了无产阶级革命文学和革命的劳苦大众是在受一样的压迫，一样的残杀，作一样的战斗，有一样的运命，是革命的劳苦大众的文学。
However, these comrades of ours have been assassinated, which is naturally a number of losses to the revolutionary literature of the proletariat, and we are very saddened. However, proletarian revolutionary literature still grows, because it belongs to the vast number of toiling masses of the revolution. The blood of our comrades has proved that the literature of the proletarian revolution and the toiling masses of the revolution are suffering the same oppression, the same killing, the same fighting, and the same fate.现在，军阀的报告，已说虽是六十岁老妇，也为“邪说”所中，租界的巡捕，虽对于小学儿童，也时时加以检查；他们除从帝国主义得来的枪炮和几条走狗之外，已将一无所有了，所有的只是老老小小——青年不必说——的敌人。而他们的这些敌人，便都在我们的这一面。
Now, the warlord's report has said that although she is a sixty-year-old woman, she is also hit by "heresy", and the patrols of the concession are checked from time to time, even for primary school children; They will have nothing but guns and a few lackeys from imperialism, and all they have is the enemies of old and young - young people needless to say. And these enemies of theirs are on our side.我们现在以十分的哀悼和铭记，纪念我们的战死者，也就是要牢记中国无产阶级革命文学的历史的第一页，是同志的鲜血所记录，永远在显示敌人的卑劣的凶暴和启示我们的不断的斗争。
We now commemorate our war dead with great condolences and remembrance, that is, to remember the first page of the history of Chinese proletarian revolutionary literature, which is recorded by the blood of comrades, always showing the despicable ferocity of the enemy and the continuous struggle that enlightens us.

黑暗中国的文艺界的现状——为美国《新群众》作

黑暗中国的文艺界的现状——为美国《新群众》作

黑暗中国的文艺界的现状——为美国《新群众》作

The current situation of the literary and artistic circles in dark China: for the American "New Masses"现在，在中国，无产阶级的革命的文艺运动，其实就是惟一的文艺运动。因为这乃是荒野中的萌芽，除此以外，中国已经毫无其他文艺。属于统治阶级的所谓“文艺家”，早已腐烂到连所谓“为艺术的艺术”以至“颓废”的作品也不能生产，现在来抵制左翼文艺的，只有诬蔑，压迫，囚禁和杀戮；来和左翼作家对立的，也只有流氓，侦探，走狗，刽子手了。
At present, in China, the revolutionary literary and artistic movement of the proletariat is actually the only literary and artistic movement. Because this is the sprout in the wilderness, there is no other literature and art in China other than that. The so-called "writers and artists" belonging to the ruling class have long been so rotten that they cannot even produce so-called "art for art" or even "decadent" works, and now the only thing that comes to resist left-wing literature and art is slander, oppression, imprisonment and killing; The only people who come to oppose left-wing writers are hooligans, detectives, lackeys, and executioners.这一点，已经由两年以来的事实，证明得十分明白。
This has been proven very clearly by the facts of the past two years.前年，最初绍介蒲力汗诺夫（Plekhanov）和卢那卡尔斯基（Lunacharsky）的文艺理论进到中国的时候，先使一位白璧德先生（Mr．Prof．Irving Babbitt）的门徒，感觉锐敏的“学者”愤慨，他以为文艺原不是无产阶级的东西，无产者倘要创作或鉴赏文艺，先应该辛苦地积钱，爬上资产阶级去，而不应该大家浑身褴褛，到这花园中来吵嚷。并且造出谣言，说在中国主张无产阶级文学的人，是得了苏俄的卢布。这方法也并非毫无效力，许多上海的新闻记者就时时捏造新闻，有时还登出卢布的数目。但明白的读者们并不相信它，因为比起这种纸上的新闻来，他们却更切实地在事实上看见只有从帝国主义国家运到杀戮无产者的枪炮。
The year before last, when the literary and artistic theories of Plekhanov and Lunacharsky were first introduced to China, a disciple of Mr. Prof. Irving Babbitt felt the indignation of a keen "scholar", who thought that literature and art were not originally proletarian things, and that if the proletariat wanted to create or appreciate literature and art, he should first work hard to save money and climb up to the bourgeoisie, rather than everyone in rags. Come and make noise in this garden. And spread rumors that those who advocated proletarian literature in China got Soviet Russian rubles. This method is not without effect, and many journalists in Shanghai fabricate news from time to time, sometimes publishing the number of rubles. But the readers who understand do not believe it, because they see in fact only guns that are transported from imperialist countries to kill the proletariat more than this kind of paper news.统治阶级的官僚，感觉比学者慢一点，但去年也就日加迫压了。禁期刊，禁书籍，不但内容略有革命性的，而且连书面用红字的，作者是俄国的，绥拉菲摩维支（A．Serafimovitch），伊凡诺夫（V．Ivanov）和奥格涅夫（N．Ognev）不必说了，连契诃夫（A．Chekhov）和安特来夫（L．Andreev）的有些小说也都在禁止之列。于是使书店只好出算学教科书和童话，如Mr．Cat和Miss Rose谈天，称赞春天如何可爱之类——因为至尔妙伦（H．Zur Mühlen）所作的童话的译本也已被禁止，所以只好竭力称赞春天。但现在又有一位将军发怒，说动物居然也能说话而且称为Mr．，有失人类的尊严了。
The bureaucrats of the ruling class feel a little slower than the scholars, but they have been under increasing pressure last year. Banned periodicals and books, not only were the content slightly revolutionary, but even the written in red letters, the authors were Russian, not to mention A. Serafimovitch, V. Ivanov and N. Ognev, and even some novels by A. Chekhov and L. Andreev were also banned. So the bookstore had no choice but to publish arithmetic textbooks and fairy tales, such as Mr.Cat talking to Miss Rose and praising how cute spring is—because translations of fairy tales by H. Zur Mühlen have also been banned, so they have to praise spring as much as possible. But now another general is angry, saying that animals can actually talk and are called Mr., which is a loss of human dignity.单是禁止，还不是根本的办法，于是今年有五个左翼作家失了踪，经家族去探听，知道是在警备司令部，然而不能相见，半月以后，再去问时，却道已经“解放”——这是“死刑”的嘲弄的名称——了，而上海的一切中文和西文的报章上，绝无记载。接着是封闭曾出新书或代售新书的书店，多的时候，一天五家，——但现在又陆续开张了，我们不知道是怎么一回事，惟看书店的广告，知道是在竭力印些英汉对照，如斯蒂文生（Robert Stevenson），槐尔特（Oscar Wilde）等人的文章。
Prohibition alone is not the fundamental solution, so this year five left-wing writers disappeared, and after the family went to inquire, they knew that they were at the garrison headquarters, but they could not meet, and half a month later, when they asked again, they said that they had been "liberated" - this is the mocking name of the "death penalty" - and there was no record in all Chinese and Western newspapers in Shanghai. Then there is the closure of bookstores that have published new books or sold new books, sometimes five a day,—— but now they are opening one after another, we don't know what's going on, but looking at the advertisements in the bookstore, we know that they are trying their best to print some English-Chinese comparisons, such as Robert Stevenson, Oscar Wilde and others.然而统治阶级对于文艺，也并非没有积极的建设。一方面，他们将几个书店的原先的老板和店员赶开，暗暗换上肯听嗾使的自己的一伙。但这立刻失败了。因为里面满是走狗，这书店便像一座威严的衙门，而中国的衙门，是人民所最害怕最讨厌的东西，自然就没有人去。喜欢去跑跑的还是几只闲逛的走狗。这样子，又怎能使门市热闹呢？但是，还有一方面，是做些文章，印行杂志，以代被禁止的左翼的刊物，至今为止，已将十种。然而这也失败了。最有妨碍的是这些“文艺”的主持者，乃是一位上海市的政府委员和一位警备司令部的侦缉队长，他们的善于“解放”的名誉，都比“创作”要大得多。他们倘做一部“杀戮法”或“侦探术”，大约倒还有人要看的，但不幸竟在想画画，吟诗。这实在譬如美国的亨利·福特（Henry Ford）先生不谈汽车，却来对大家唱歌一样，只令人觉得非常诧异。
However, the ruling class is not without active construction of literature and art. On the one hand, they drove away the original owners and clerks of several bookstores and secretly replaced them with their own group who were willing to listen to the instigation. But this immediately failed. Because it is full of lackeys, this bookstore is like a majestic yamen, and the Chinese yamen is the thing that the people fear and hate the most, so naturally no one goes. There are still a few lackeys who like to run. In this way, how can the store be lively? However, there is also the need to make articles and print magazines to replace the banned left-wing publications, and so far, there have been ten types. However, this also failed. The most obstructive thing is that the hosts of these "literature and art" are a Shanghai government member and a detective captain of the garrison command, and their reputation for being good at "liberation" is much greater than that of "creation". If they do a "killing method" or "detective technique", there are probably still people who want to see it, but unfortunately they are thinking about painting and reciting poetry. This is really like Mr. Henry Ford in the United States (Henry Ford) did not talk about cars, but came to sing to everyone, which is only very surprising.官僚的书店没有人来，刊物没有人看，救济的方法，是去强迫早经有名，而并不分明左倾的作者来做文章，帮助他们的刊物的流布。那结果，是只有一两个胡涂的中计，多数却至今未曾动笔，有一个竟吓得躲到不知道什么地方去了。
No one came to the bureaucratic bookstore, no one read the publications, and the remedy was to force authors who were famous for their early days and were not clearly left-leaning to write articles and help the circulation of their publications. The result was that there were only one or two nonsense, but most of them had not written so far, and one of them was so frightened that he hid somewhere.现在他们里面的最宝贵的文艺家，是当左翼文艺运动开始，未受迫害，为革命的青年所拥护的时候，自称左翼，而现在爬到他们的刀下，转头来害左翼作家的几个人。为什么被他们所宝贵的呢？因为他曾经是左翼，所以他们的有几种刊物，那面子还有一部分是通红的，但将其中的农工的图，换上了毕亚兹莱（Aubrey Beardsley）的个个好像病人的图画了。
Now the most valuable writers and artists among them are those who called themselves leftists when the left-wing literary and artistic movement began, were not persecuted, and were supported by revolutionary youth, but now they climb under their knives and turn their backs to harm left-wing writers. Why are they precious? Because he used to be a left-winger, they had several publications, and some of their faces were red, but they replaced the pictures of farm workers with pictures of Aubrey Beardsley, who looked like patients.在这样的情形之下，那些读者们，凡是一向爱读旧式的强盗小说的和新式的肉欲小说的，倒并不觉得不便。然而较进步的青年，就觉得无书可读，他们不得已，只得看看空话很多，内容极少——这样的才不至于被禁止——的书，姑且安慰饥渴，因为他们知道，与其去买官办的催吐的毒剂，还不如喝喝空杯，至少，是不至于受害。但一大部分革命的青年，却无论如何，仍在非常热烈地要求，拥护，发展左翼文艺。
Under such circumstances, those readers, who have always loved to read old robber novels and new sensual novels, do not find it inconvenient. However, the more progressive young people felt that there were no books to read, and they had no choice but to read books with a lot of empty words and very little content—so that they would not be banned—and comforted their hunger, because they knew that instead of buying government-run emetic poisons, it was better to drink empty cups, at least, not to be victimized. However, a large part of the revolutionary youth, in any case, are still very enthusiastically demanding, supporting, and developing left-wing literature and art.所以，除官办及其走狗办的刊物之外，别的书店的期刊，还是不能不设种种方法，加入几篇比较的急进的作品去，他们也知道专卖空杯，这生意决难久长。左翼文艺有革命的读者大众支持，“将来”正属于这一面。
Therefore, in addition to the publications run by the government and its lackeys, the periodicals of other bookstores still have to set up various methods to add a few more radical works, and they also know that it is difficult to last a long time in this business to monopolize empty cups. Left-wing literature and art have the support of revolutionary readers, and the "future" belongs to this side.这样子，左翼文艺仍在滋长。但自然是好像压于大石之下的萌芽一样，在曲折地滋长。
In this way, left-wing literature and art are still growing. But nature is like a sprout pressed under a big stone, growing in a tortuous way.所可惜的，是左翼作家之中，还没有农工出身的作家。一者，因为农工历来只被迫压，榨取，没有略受教育的机会；二者，因为中国的象形——现在是早已变得连形也不像了——的方块字，使农工虽是读书十年，也还不能任意写出自己的意见。这事情很使拿刀的“文艺家”喜欢。他们以为受教育能到会写文章，至少一定是小资产阶级，小资产者应该抱住自己的小资产，现在却反而倾向无产者，那一定是“虚伪”。惟有反对无产阶级文艺的小资产阶级的作家倒是出于“真”心的。“真”比“伪”好，所以他们的对于左翼作家的诬蔑，压迫，囚禁和杀戮，便是更好的文艺。
Unfortunately, among the left-wing writers, there are no writers with agricultural and industrial backgrounds. First, because agricultural workers have always been forced to press and extract, and have no opportunity to receive education; Second, because of the Chinese pictographs, which have long since become shapeless and inconsistent, peasants and workers cannot write their opinions arbitrarily even after ten years of study. This matter is very popular with the "literary and artistic people" with knives. They think that if they are educated enough to write articles, they must be at least petty bourgeoisie, and petty bourgeoisie should hold on to their petty bourgeoisie, but now they are inclined to the proletariat, which must be "hypocrisy". Only petty-bourgeois writers who oppose proletarian literature and art are out of "sincerity". "True" is better than "false", so their slander, oppression, imprisonment and killing of left-wing writers is better literature and art.但是，这用刀的“更好的文艺”，却在事实上，证明了左翼作家们正和一样在被压迫被杀戮的无产者负着同一的运命，惟有左翼文艺现在在和无产者一同受难（Passion），将来当然也将和无产者一同起来。单单的杀人究竟不是文艺，他们也因此自己宣告了一无所有了。
However, this "better literature and art" with a knife proves in fact that left-wing writers are suffering the same fate as the proletarians who are also oppressed and killed, and that only left-wing literature and art are now suffering with the proletariat (Passion), and of course will rise with the proletariat in the future. Killing alone is not literature and art, and they have declared that they have nothing.

上海文艺之一瞥——八月十二日在社会科学研究会讲

上海文艺之一瞥——八月十二日在社会科学研究会讲

上海文艺之一瞥——八月十二日在社会科学研究会讲

A glimpse of Shanghai literature and art - lectured at the Social Science Research Association on August 12上海过去的文艺，开始的是《申报》。要讲《申报》，是必须追溯到六十年以前的，但这些事我不知道。我所能记得的，是三十年以前，那时的《申报》，还是用中国竹纸的，单面印，而在那里做文章的，则多是从别处跑来的“才子”。
Shanghai's literature and art in the past began with the "Declaration". To talk about the "Declaration", it must go back 60 years, but I don't know these things. What I can remember is that thirty years ago, the "Declaration" at that time was still made of Chinese bamboo paper and printed on one side, and most of the people who made articles there were "talents" who came from elsewhere.那时的读书人，大概可以分他为两种，就是君子和才子。君子是只读四书五经，做八股，非常规矩的。而才子却此外还要看小说，例如《红楼梦》，还要做考试上用不着的古今体诗之类。这是说，才子是公开的看《红楼梦》的，但君子是否在背地里也看《红楼梦》，则我无从知道。有了上海的租界，——那时叫作“洋场”，也叫“夷场”，后来有怕犯讳的，便往往写作“彝场”——有些才子们便跑到上海来，因为才子是旷达的，那里都去；君子则对于外国人的东西总有点厌恶，而且正在想求正路的功名，所以决不轻易的乱跑。孔子曰，“道不行，乘桴浮于海”，从才子们看来，就是有点才子气的，所以君子们的行径，在才子就谓之“迂”。
Scholars at that time could probably be divided into two types, that is, gentlemen and talents. A gentleman only reads four books and five classics, and does eight strands, which is unconventional. In addition, talented people also have to read novels, such as "Dream of Red Mansions", and do ancient and modern poems that are not needed in exams. This means that the talent openly watches "Dream of Red Mansions", but I have no way of knowing whether the gentleman also watches "Dream of Red Mansions" behind his back. With the Shanghai Concession,—— it was called "Yangchang" at that time, also called "Yichang", and later those who were afraid of taboo often wrote "Yichang" - some talents came to Shanghai, because the talents were open-minded and went everywhere; A gentleman is always a little disgusted with foreigners, and he is trying to seek fame on the right path, so he will never run around easily. Confucius said, "The way is not good, and the raft floats in the sea", from the perspective of the talents, it is a bit talented, so the behavior of the gentlemen is called "roundabout" in the talents.才子原是多愁多病，要闻鸡生气，见月伤心的。一到上海，又遇见了婊子。去嫖的时候，可以叫十个二十个的年青姑娘聚集在一处，样子很有些像《红楼梦》，于是他就觉得自己好像贾宝玉；自己是才子，那么婊子当然是佳人，于是才子佳人的书就产生了。内容多半是，惟才子能怜这些风尘沦落的佳人，惟佳人能识坎轲不遇的才子，受尽千辛万苦之后，终于成了佳偶，或者是都成了神仙。
The talent was originally troubled and sick, and he wanted to smell the chicken angry and see the moon sad. As soon as I arrived in Shanghai, I met the bitch again. When he went to prostitution, he could call ten or twenty young girls to gather in one place, which looked a bit like "Dream of Red Mansions", so he felt like Jia Baoyu; If you are a talent, then the bitch is of course a beauty, so the book of the talented and beautiful woman was born. Most of the content is that only talents can pity these beauties who have fallen into the dust, and only beauties can recognize the talents who have not met the ups and downs, and after suffering a lot, they finally become good couples, or they all become immortals.他们又帮申报馆印行些明清的小品书出售，自己也立文社，出灯谜，有入选的，就用这些书做赠品，所以那流通很广远。也有大部书，如《儒林外史》，《三宝太监西洋记》，《快心编》等。现在我们在旧书摊上，有时还看见第一页印有“上海申报馆仿聚珍板印”字样的小本子，那就都是的。
They also helped the declaration hall print some Ming and Qing sketch books for sale, and they also established a literary society to produce lantern riddles, and if they were selected, they used these books as gifts, so the circulation was very wide. There are also many books, such as "The History of Confucianism", "The Western Records of the Three Treasures Eunuchs", "Kuaixin Compilation" and so on. Now we sometimes see small books printed on the first page of the old bookstall with the words "Shanghai Declaration Hall Imitation Collector Plate Print", and they are all there.佳人才子的书盛行的好几年，后一辈的才子的心思就渐渐改变了。他们发见了佳人并非因为“爱才若渴”而做婊子的，佳人只为的是钱。然而佳人要才子的钱，是不应该的，才子于是想了种种制伏婊子的妙法，不但不上当，还占了她们的便宜。叙述这各种手段的小说就出现了，社会上也很风行，因为可以做嫖学教科书去读。这些书里面的主人公，不再是才子＋（加）呆子，而是在婊子那里得了胜利的英雄豪杰，是才子＋流氓。
The books of beautiful talents have been popular for several years, and the minds of the next generation of talents have gradually changed. They found that the beauty was not a bitch because she was "thirsty for talent", and that the beauty was only for money. However, it is not appropriate for a beauty to ask for money from a talent, so the talent thought of all kinds of wonderful ways to subdue the bitches, not only did not fall for it, but also took advantage of them. Novels that describe these various means appeared, and they were also very popular in society, because they could be used as prostitution textbooks to read. The protagonists in these books are no longer talented + (plus) nerds, but heroes and heroes who have won victories from bitches, and they are talents + hooligans.在这之前，早已出现了一种画报，名目就叫《点石斋画报》，是吴友如主笔的，神仙人物，内外新闻，无所不画，但对于外国事情，他很不明白，例如画战舰罢，是一只商船，而舱面上摆着野战炮；画决斗则两个穿礼服的军人在客厅里拔长刀相击，至于将花瓶也打落跌碎。然而他画“老鸨虐妓”，“流氓拆梢”之类，却实在画得很好的，我想，这是因为他看得太多了的缘故；就是在现在，我们在上海也常常看到和他所画一般的脸孔。这画报的势力，当时是很大的，流行各省，算是要知道“时务”——这名称在那时就如现在之所谓“新学”——的人们的耳目。前几年又翻印了，叫作《吴友如墨宝》，而影响到后来也实在利害，小说上的绣像不必说了，就是在教科书的插画上，也常常看见所画的孩子大抵是歪戴帽，斜视眼，满脸横肉，一副流氓气。在现在，新的流氓画家又出了叶灵凤先生，叶先生的画是从英国的毕亚兹莱（Aubrey Beardsley）剥来的，毕亚兹莱是“为艺术的艺术”派，他的画极受日本的“浮世绘”（Ukiyoe）的影响。浮世绘虽是民间艺术，但所画的多是妓女和戏子，胖胖的身体，斜视的眼睛——Erotic（色情的）眼睛。不过毕亚兹莱画的人物却瘦瘦的，那是因为他是颓废派（Decadence）的缘故。颓废派的人们多是瘦削的，颓丧的，对于壮健的女人他有点惭愧，所以不喜欢。我们的叶先生的新斜眼画，正和吴友如的老斜眼画合流，那自然应该流行好几年。但他也并不只画流氓的，有一个时期也画过普罗列塔利亚，不过所画的工人也还是斜视眼，伸着特别大的拳头。但我以为画普罗列塔利亚应该是写实的，照工人原来的面貌，并不须画得拳头比脑袋还要大。
Before this, there had already been a kind of pictorial, called "Dian Shizhai Pictorial", which was written by Wu Youru, and he painted everything about immortal characters, internal and external news, but he didn't understand foreign things, for example, he painted a battleship, which was a merchant ship, and there were field guns on the cabin; In the painting duel, two soldiers in dresses drew long knives and fought each other in the living room, as for knocking down and smashing the vase. However, he painted "old bustards abusing prostitutes", "gangsters demolishing the tips", etc., but they were really well painted, I think, this is because he saw too much; Even now, we often see faces like those painted by him in Shanghai. The power of this pictorial was very large at that time, and it was popular in the provinces, and it was regarded as the eyes and ears of people who wanted to know "current affairs", which at that time was what is now called "new learning". Needless to say, the embroidered portraits in the novel are often seen wearing hats crookedly, squinting, full of flesh, and hooliganism. Now, a new rogue painter has emerged, Mr. Ye Lingfeng, whose paintings were stripped from Aubrey Beardsley in England, a school of "art for art", and his paintings were heavily influenced by the Japanese "Ukiyoe". Although ukiyo-e is folk art, it mostly depicts prostitutes and actors, chubby bodies, and squinting eyes - erotic (erotic) eyes. However, Piazlai's characters are thin, and that is because he is a decadence. Most of the people in the decadent faction are thin and decadent, and he is a little ashamed of strong women, so he doesn't like them. Our Mr. Ye's new squint painting is merging with Wu Youru's old squint painting, which should naturally be popular for several years. But he didn't just paint rogues, there was a period when he also painted Proletaria, but the workers he painted were still squinting and stretching out their fists. But I think that painting Proletaria should be realistic, according to the original appearance of the workers, it is not necessary to paint a fist bigger than a head.现在的中国电影，还在很受着这“才子＋流氓”式的影响，里面的英雄，作为“好人”的英雄，也都是油头滑脑的，和一些住惯了上海，晓得怎样“拆梢”，“揩油”，“吊膀子”的滑头少年一样。看了之后，令人觉得现在倘要做英雄，做好人，也必须是流氓。
The heroes in it, as "good guys", are also oily-headed, just like some slippery teenagers who are accustomed to living in Shanghai and know how to "remove the tips", "wipe the oil", and "hang their arms". After reading it, people feel that if you want to be a hero and be a good person, you must also be a rogue.才子＋流氓的小说，但也渐渐的衰退了。那原因，我想，一则因为总是这一套老调子——妓女要钱，嫖客用手段，原不会写不完的；二则因为所用的是苏白，如什么倪＝我，耐＝你，阿是＝是否之类，除了老上海和江浙的人们之外，谁也看不懂。
A novel of talent + rogue, but it is also gradually declining. The reason, I think, is that it is always this old tune - prostitutes ask for money, and prostitutes use means, which will not be endless; the second is because it is Su Bai, such as what Ni = me, Nai = you, Ah yes = no, etc., no one can understand it except for the people of old Shanghai and Jiangsu and Zhejiang.然而才子＋佳人的书，却又出了一本当时震动一时的小说，那就是从英文翻译过来的《迦茵小传》（H．R．Haggard：Joan Haste）。但只有上半本，据译者说，原本从旧书摊上得来，非常之好，可惜觅不到下册，无可奈何了。果然，这很打动了才子佳人们的芳心，流行得很广很广。后来还至于打动了林琴南先生，将全部译出，仍旧名为《迦茵小传》。而同时受了先译者的大骂，说他不该全译，使迦茵的价值降低，给读者以不快的。于是才知道先前之所以只有半部，实非原本残缺，乃是因为记着迦茵生了一个私生子，译者故意不译的。其实这样的一部并不很长的书，外国也不至于分印成两本。但是，即此一端，也很可以看出当时中国对于婚姻的见解了。
However, the book of talent + beauty published another novel that was shocking at the time, that is, "The Biography of Gain" (H.R. Haggard: Joan Haste) translated from English. But only the first half of the book, according to the translator, was originally obtained from the old bookstall, which was very good, but unfortunately I couldn't find the second volume, so there was nothing I could do. Sure enough, this touched the hearts of talented women and became very popular. Later, as for impressing Mr. Lin Qinnan, he translated it all, and it was still called "The Biography of Jia Yin". At the same time, he was scolded by the first translator, saying that he should not translate it in full, which reduced the value of Cain and made the reader unhappy. Only then did I realize that the reason why there was only half of it before was not originally incomplete, but because it was recorded that Cain gave birth to an illegitimate child, and the translator deliberately did not translate it. In fact, such a book is not very long, and foreign countries will not print it in two copies. However, at this end, it is also very clear that China had views on marriage at that time.这时新的才子＋佳人小说便又流行起来，但佳人已是良家女子了，和才子相悦相恋，分拆不开，柳阴花下，像一对胡蝶，一双鸳鸯一样，但有时因为严亲，或者因为薄命，也竟至于偶见悲剧的结局，不再都成神仙了，——这实在不能不说是一个大进步。到了近来是在制造兼可擦脸的牙粉了的天虚我生先生所编的月刊杂志《眉语》出现的时候，是这鸳鸯胡蝶式文学的极盛时期。后来《眉语》虽遭禁止，势力却并不消退，直待《新青年》盛行起来，这才受了打击。这时有伊孛生的剧本的绍介和胡适之先生的《终身大事》的别一形式的出现，虽然并不是故意的，然而鸳鸯胡蝶派作为命根的那婚姻问题，却也因此而诺拉（Nora）似的跑掉了。
At this time, the new talent + beauty novel became popular again, but the beauty was already a good family woman, and the talent fell in love, inseparable, under the willow shade, like a pair of butterflies, a pair of mandarin ducks, but sometimes because of strict relatives, or because of the thin life, it was even the end of the tragedy, and they were no longer all immortals,—— which really can't help but be said to be a big improvement. Recently, when the monthly magazine "Meiyu" edited by Mr. Tianxu Wosheng, who was making tooth powder that could wipe his face, appeared, it was the heyday of this mandarin duck and butterfly literature. Later, although "Meiyu" was banned, its power did not subside, and it was not until "New Youth" became popular that it was hit. At this time, there was the appearance of another form of Shaosuke in the script of Ibosheng and Mr. Hu Shizhi's "Life Events", although it was not intentional, but the marriage problem of the Mandarin Duck Hudie Sect as the lifeblood of the Mandarin Duck and Hu Butterfly faction also ran away like Nora.这后来，就有新才子派的创造社的出现。创造社是尊贵天才的，为艺术而艺术的，专重自我的，崇创作，恶翻译，尤其憎恶重译的，与同时上海的文学研究会相对立。那出马的第一个广告上，说有人“垄断”着文坛，就是指着文学研究会。文学研究会却也正相反，是主张为人生的艺术的，是一面创作，一面也看重翻译的，是注意于绍介被压迫民族文学的，这些都是小国度，没有人懂得他们的文字，因此也几乎全都是重译的。并且因为曾经声援过《新青年》，新仇夹旧仇，所以文学研究会这时就受了三方面的攻击。一方面就是创造社，既然是天才的艺术，那么看那为人生的艺术的文学研究会自然就是多管闲事，不免有些“俗”气，而且还以为无能，所以倘被发见一处误译，有时竟至于特做一篇长长的专论。一方面是留学过美国的绅士派，他们以为文艺是专给老爷太太们看的，所以主角除老爷太太之外，只配有文人，学士，艺术家，教授，小姐等等，要会说Yes，No，这才是绅士的庄严，那时吴宓先生就曾经发表过文章，说是真不懂为什么有些人竟喜欢描写下流社会。第三方面，则就是以前说过的鸳鸯胡蝶派，我不知道他们用的是什么方法，到底使书店老板将编辑《小说月报》的一个文学研究会会员撤换，还出了《小说世界》，来流布他们的文章。这一种刊物，是到了去年才停刊的。
Later, there was the emergence of the Creation Society of the New Talent School. The Creation Society is a noble genius, artistic for art's sake, self-focused, advocating creation, hating translation, especially hating retranslation, and opposing the Literary Research Association in Shanghai at the same time. In the first advertisement, it was said that someone "monopolized" the literary world, referring to the Literary Research Association. The Literary Research Association, on the contrary, advocates the art of life, and on the other hand, it also attaches importance to translation, and pays attention to the literature of the oppressed nations. And because it once supported "New Youth", the new grudge was combined with the old grudge, so the Literary Research Association was attacked from three sides at this time. On the one hand, it is the Creation Society, since it is the art of genius, then the literary research society that looks at the art of life is naturally nosy, inevitably a little "vulgar", and thinks it is incompetent, so if it is found to be mistranslated, sometimes it will be a long monograph. On the one hand, there are gentlemen who have studied in the United States, they think that literature and art are exclusively for the old ladies, so in addition to the old lady, the protagonist is only equipped with literati, scholars, artists, professors, ladies, etc., if you can say Yes, No, this is the solemnity of a gentleman. I don't know what method they used to make the bookstore owner replace a member of a literary research association who edited the "Novel Monthly", and also published "Novel World" to circulate their articles. This kind of publication was only discontinued last year.创造社的这一战，从表面看来，是胜利的。许多作品，既和当时的自命才子们的心情相合，加以出版者的帮助，势力雄厚起来了。势力一雄厚，就看见大商店如商务印书馆，也有创造社员的译著的出版，——这是说，郭沫若和张资平两位先生的稿件。这以来，据我所记得，是创造社也不再审查商务印书馆出版物的误译之处，来作专论了。这些地方，我想，是也有些才子＋流氓式的。然而，“新上海”是究竟敌不过“老上海”的，创造社员在凯歌声中，终于觉到了自己就在做自己们的出版者的商品，种种努力，在老板看来，就等于眼镜铺大玻璃窗里纸人的眼，不过是“以广招徕”。待到希图独立出版的时候，老板就给吃了一场官司，虽然也终于独立，说是一切书籍，大加改订，另行印刷，从新开张了，然而旧老板却还是永远用了旧版子，只是印，卖，而且年年是什么纪念的大廉价。
On the surface, this battle of the Creation Society was victorious. Many works were not only in line with the mood of the self-proclaimed talents at that time, but also became powerful with the help of publishers. As soon as the power is strong, you will see large shops such as the Commercial Press, and there are also the publication of translations of the members,—— that is, the manuscripts of Mr. Guo Moruo and Mr. Zhang Ziping. Since then, as far as I remember, the Creation Society has stopped reviewing the mistranslations of the publications of the Commercial Press. These places, I think, are also some talents + hooligans. However, "New Shanghai" is no match for "Old Shanghai", and the creative members finally realized that they were doing their own publisher's products in the triumphant song, and all kinds of efforts, in the eyes of the boss, were equivalent to the eyes of paper people in the large glass window of glasses, but "to recruit widely". When Xitu published independently, the boss ate a lawsuit, although it was finally independent, saying that all the books were greatly revised, printed separately, and opened from anew, but the old boss still used the old edition forever, just printed, sold, and cheap every year.商品固然是做不下去的，独立也活不下去。创造社的人们的去路，自然是在较有希望的“革命策源地”的广东。在广东，于是也有“革命文学”这名词的出现，然而并无什么作品，在上海，则并且还没有这名词。
Of course, commodities cannot be made, and independence cannot survive. The way for the people of the Creation Society is naturally in Guangdong, which is a more promising "source of revolution". In Guangdong, there is also the appearance of the term "revolutionary literature", but there are no works, and in Shanghai, there is no such term.到了前年，“革命文学”这名目这才旺盛起来了，主张的是从“革命策源地”回来的几个创造社元老和若干新份子。革命文学之所以旺盛起来，自然是因为由于社会的背景，一般群众，青年有了这样的要求。当从广东开始北伐的时候，一般积极的青年都跑到实际工作去了，那时还没有什么显著的革命文学运动，到了政治环境突然改变，革命遭了挫折，阶级的分化非常显明，国民党以“清党”之名，大戮共产党及革命群众，而死剩的青年们再入于被迫压的境遇，于是革命文学在上海这才有了强烈的活动。所以这革命文学的旺盛起来，在表面上和别国不同，并非由于革命的高扬，而是因为革命的挫折；虽然其中也有些是旧文人解下指挥刀来重理笔墨的旧业，有些是几个青年被从实际工作排出，只好借此谋生，但因为实在具有社会的基础，所以在新份子里，是很有极坚实正确的人存在的。但那时的革命文学运动，据我的意见，是未经好好的计划，很有些错误之处的。例如，第一，他们对于中国社会，未曾加以细密的分析，便将在苏维埃政权之下才能运用的方法，来机械的地运用了。再则他们，尤其是成仿吾先生，将革命使一般人理解为非常可怕的事，摆着一种极左倾的凶恶的面貌，好似革命一到，一切非革命者就都得死，令人对革命只抱着恐怖。其实革命是并非教人死而是教人活的。这种令人“知道点革命的厉害”，只图自己说得畅快的态度，也还是中了才子＋流氓的毒。
By the year before last, the name "revolutionary literature" became vigorous, advocating several elders of the Creation Society and several new elements who had returned from the "source of the revolution". The reason why revolutionary literature flourished was naturally because of the social background, the general masses and young people had such requirements. When the Northern Expedition began in Guangdong, the general active young people went to practical work, and there was no significant revolutionary literary movement at that time, but when the political environment suddenly changed, the revolution suffered setbacks, and the class division was very obvious. Therefore, the prosperity of this revolutionary literature is different from other countries on the surface, not because of the exaltation of the revolution, but because of the setbacks of the revolution; Although some of them are old literati who have relieved their old profession of commanding the knife to reorganize their pen and ink, and some are a few young people who have been expelled from practical work and have to make a living through this, because they really have a social foundation, there are very solid and correct people among the newcomers. But the revolutionary literary movement at that time, in my opinion, was not well planned and had some mistakes. For example, first, without a detailed analysis of Chinese society, they mechanically used the methods that could only be used under Soviet power. Furthermore, they, especially Mr. Cheng Fangwu, understood the revolution as a very terrible thing for ordinary people, and put on a fierce appearance of extreme leftism, as if when the revolution came, all non-revolutionaries would have to die, which made people only have fear of the revolution. In fact, revolution does not teach people to die, but to teach them to live. This kind of attitude that makes people "know the power of revolution" and only want to speak freely is still poisoned by talents + hooligans.激烈得快的，也平和得快，甚至于也颓废得快。倘在文人，他总有一番辩护自己的变化的理由，引经据典。譬如说，要人帮忙时候用克鲁巴金的互助论，要和人争闹的时候就用达尔文的生存竞争说。无论古今，凡是没有一定的理论，或主张的变化并无线索可寻，而随时拿了各种各派的理论来作武器的人，都可以称之为流氓。例如上海的流氓，看见一男一女的乡下人在走路，他就说，“喂，你们这样子，有伤风化，你们犯了法了！”他用的是中国法。倘看见一个乡下人在路旁小便呢，他就说，“喂，这是不准的，你犯了法，该捉到捕房去！”这时所用的又是外国法。但结果是无所谓法不法，只要被他敲去了几个钱就都完事。
It is intense quickly, peaceful quickly, and even decadent quickly. If he is a literati, he always has a reason to defend his change and quote the classics. For example, when asking for help, use Klubakin's theory of mutual assistance, and when you want to quarrel with others, use Darwin's theory of survival competition. Regardless of ancient or modern times, anyone who does not have a certain theory or changes in their propositions is not traceable, and who uses various theories as weapons at any time can be called hooligans. For example, a gangster in Shanghai saw a man and a woman walking in the countryside and said, "Hey, you are like this, you are offensive, you have broken the law!" He used Chinese law. If you see a country man urinating on the side of the road, he will say, "Hey, this is not allowed, you have broken the law, you should be caught in the arrest room!" At this time, foreign law was used. But the result is that it doesn't matter if it's illegal or illegal, as long as he knocks out a few money, it's over.在中国，去年的革命文学者和前年很有点不同了。这固然由于境遇的改变，但有些“革命文学者”的本身里，还藏着容易犯到的病根。“革命”和“文学”，若断若续，好像两只靠近的船，一只是“革命”，一只是“文学”，而作者的每一只脚就站在每一只船上面。当环境较好的时候，作者就在革命这一只船上踏得重一点，分明是革命者，待到革命一被压迫，则在文学的船上踏得重一点，他变了不过是文学家了。所以前年的主张十分激烈，以为凡非革命文学，统得扫荡的人，去年却记得了列宁爱看冈却罗夫（I．A．Gontcharov）的作品的故事，觉得非革命文学，意义倒也十分深长；还有最彻底的革命文学家叶灵凤先生，他描写革命家，彻底到每次上茅厕时候都用我的《呐喊》去揩屁股，现在却竟会莫名其妙的跟在所谓民族主义文学家屁股后面了。
In China, last year's revolutionary writers were a little different from the year before. This is certainly due to the change of circumstances, but some "revolutionary writers" themselves still hide the root of diseases that are easy to commit. "Revolution" and "literature" are intermittent, like two approaching boats, one is "revolution" and the other is "literature", and each foot of the author stands on each boat. When the environment is better, the author steps heavier on the boat of revolution, clearly a revolutionary, and when the revolution is oppressed, he steps heavier on the ship of literature, and he becomes nothing more than a writer. Therefore, the proposition of the year before last was very fierce, thinking that anyone who was not revolutionary literature and was swept away remembered last year that Lenin loved to read the story of I.A. Gontcharov's works, and felt that non-revolutionary literature had a very profound meaning; and the most thorough revolutionary writer, Mr. Ye Lingfeng, who described revolutionaries so thoroughly that he used my "scream" to wipe his buttocks every time he went to the toilet, but now he would inexplicably follow the buttocks of the so-called nationalist writers.类似的例，还可以举出向培良先生来。在革命渐渐高扬的时候，他是很革命的；他在先前，还曾经说，青年人不但嗥叫，还要露出狼牙来。这自然也不坏，但也应该小心，因为狼是狗的祖宗，一到被人驯服的时候，是就要变而为狗的。向培良先生现在在提倡人类的艺术了，他反对有阶级的艺术的存在，而在人类中分出好人和坏人来，这艺术是“好坏斗争”的武器。狗也是将人分为两种的，豢养它的主人之类是好人，别的穷人和乞丐在它的眼里就是坏人，不是叫，便是咬。然而这也还不算坏，因为究竟还有一点野性，如果再一变而为吧儿狗，好像不管闲事，而其实在给主子尽职，那就正如现在的自称不问俗事的为艺术而艺术的名人们一样，只好去点缀大学教室了。
A similar example can also be cited from Mr. Xiang Peiliang. when the revolution was gradually rising, he was very revolutionary; He had previously said that young people not only howled, but also showed wolf teeth. This is naturally not bad, but you should also be careful, because wolves are the ancestors of dogs, and when they are tamed, they will turn into dogs. Mr. Xiang Peiliang is now advocating human art, he opposes the existence of class art, and separating good and bad people among human beings, this art is a weapon of "good and bad struggle". Dogs also divide people into two types, the owner who raises it is a good person, and other poor people and beggars are bad people in its eyes, either barking or biting. However, this is not bad, because there is still a little wildness, if it changes into a dog, as if it doesn't care about idle things, but is actually doing its duty to the master, then just like the current celebrities who claim to be art for art's sake who don't care about worldly things, they have to embellish the university classroom.这样的翻着筋斗的小资产阶级，即使是在做革命文学家，写着革命文学的时候，也最容易将革命写歪；写歪了，反于革命有害，所以他们的转变，是毫不足惜的。当革命文学的运动勃兴时，许多小资产阶级的文学家忽然变过来了，那时用来解释这现象的，是突变之说。但我们知道，所谓突变者，是说A要变B，几个条件已经完备，而独缺其一的时候，这一个条件一出现，于是就变成了B。譬如水的结冰，温度须到零点，同时又须有空气的振动，倘没有这，则即便到了零点，也还是不结冰，这时空气一振动，这才突变而为冰了。所以外面虽然好像突变，其实是并非突然的事。倘没有应具的条件的，那就是即使自说已变，实际上却并没有变，所以有些忽然一天晚上自称突变过来的小资产阶级革命文学家，不久就又突变回去了。
Such a somersaulting petty bourgeoisie, even when he is a revolutionary writer and writes revolutionary literature, is most likely to write the revolution crookedly; Writing crookedly is harmful to the revolution, so their transformation is not worth regretting. When the revolutionary literary movement flourished, many petty-bourgeois writers suddenly changed, and the theory of mutation was used to explain this phenomenon. But we know that the so-called mutant means that A wants to become B, and several conditions are complete, and when one is missing, as soon as this condition appears, it becomes B. For example, when water freezes, the temperature must reach zero point, and at the same time, there must be air vibration, if there is no this, even if it reaches zero point, it will still not freeze, and when the air vibrates, it will suddenly turn into ice. So although it seems to be a mutation outside, it is actually not sudden. If there are no necessary conditions, it is that even if they say they have changed, they have not changed in fact, so some petty-bourgeois revolutionary writers who suddenly claimed to have mutated one night will soon mutate back.去年左翼作家联盟在上海的成立，是一件重要的事实。因为这时已经输入了蒲力汗诺夫，卢那卡尔斯基等的理论，给大家能够互相切磋，更加坚实而有力，但也正因为更加坚实而有力了，就受到世界上古今所少有的压迫和摧残，因为有了这样的压迫和摧残，就使那时以为左翼文学将大出风头，作家就要吃劳动者供献上来的黄油面包了的所谓革命文学家立刻现出原形，有的写悔过书，有的是反转来攻击左联，以显出他今年的见识又进了一步。这虽然并非左联直接的自动，然而也是一种扫荡，这些作者，是无论变与不变，总写不出好的作品来的。
The establishment of the Left Writers' Union in Shanghai last year is an important fact. Because at this time, the theories of Pulikhanov, Lunakarsky, etc. have been imported, so that everyone can learn from each other, more solid and powerful, but it is precisely because it is more solid and powerful that it is oppressed and destroyed, which is rare in the world in ancient and modern times. To show that his knowledge this year has taken another step. Although this is not a direct automatic of the left alliance, it is also a kind of sweep, and these authors, no matter whether they change or not, can never write good works.但现存的左翼作家，能写出好的无产阶级文学来么？我想，也很难。这是因为现在的左翼作家还都是读书人——智识阶级，他们要写出革命的实际来，是很不容易的缘故。日本的厨川白村（H．Kuriyagawa）曾经提出过一个问题，说：作家之所描写，必得是自己经验过的么？他自答道，不必，因为他能够体察。所以要写偷，他不必亲自去做贼，要写通奸，他不必亲自去私通。但我以为这是因为作家生长在旧社会里，熟悉了旧社会的情形，看惯了旧社会的人物的缘故，所以他能够体察；对于和他向来没有关系的无产阶级的情形和人物，他就会无能，或者弄成错误的描写了。所以革命文学家，至少是必须和革命共同着生命，或深切地感受着革命的脉搏的。（最近左联的提出了“作家的无产阶级化”的口号，就是对于这一点的很正确的理解。）
But can existing left-wing writers write good proletarian literature? I think it's also difficult. This is because today's left-wing writers are still scholars, the intellectual class, and it is not easy for them to write about the reality of the revolution. Japan's H. Kuriyagawa once raised a question: What a writer describes must be his own experience? He replied to himself, "No, because he can perceive." Therefore, if he wants to write about stealing, he does not have to be a thief himself, and if he wants to write about adultery, he does not have to personally commit adultery. But I think this is because the writer grew up in the old society, was familiar with the situation of the old society, and was used to seeing the characters of the old society, so he was able to understand; He will be incompetent or misrepresent the situation and people of the proletariat who have never had anything to do with him. Therefore, revolutionary writers must at least share their lives with the revolution, or deeply feel the pulse of the revolution. (The recent slogan of "proletarianization of writers" by the Left Union is a very correct understanding of this.) ）在现在中国这样的社会中，最容易希望出现的，是反叛的小资产阶级的反抗的，或暴露的作品。因为他生长在这正在灭亡着的阶级中，所以他有甚深的了解，甚大的憎恶，而向这刺下去的刀也最为致命与有力。固然，有些貌似革命的作品，也并非要将本阶级或资产阶级推翻，倒在憎恨或失望于他们的不能改良，不能较长久的保持地位，所以从无产阶级的见地看来，不过是“兄弟阋于墙”，两方一样是敌对。但是，那结果，却也能在革命的潮流中，成为一粒泡沫的。对于这些的作品，我以为实在无须称之为无产阶级文学，作者也无须为了将来的名誉起见，自称为无产阶级的作家的。
In a society like China today, the easiest thing to hope for is the rebellious petty bourgeoisie resistance or exposed works. Because he grew up in this dying class, he had a deep understanding, a great hatred, and the knife that stabbed it was the deadliest and most powerful. Of course, some seemingly revolutionary works are not intended to overthrow the class or the bourgeoisie, but to hate or be disappointed in their inability to improve and maintain their status for a long time, so from the point of view of the proletariat, they are nothing more than "brothers fighting against the wall", and the two sides are equally hostile. However, the result can also become a bubble in the trend of revolution. For these works, I think there is really no need to call them proletarian literature, and the author does not need to call himself a proletarian writer for the sake of future fame.但是，虽是仅仅攻击旧社会的作品，倘若知不清缺点，看不透病根，也就于革命有害，但可惜的是现在的作家，连革命的作家和批评家，也往往不能，或不敢正视现社会，知道它的底细，尤其是认为敌人的底细。随手举一个例罢，先前的《列宁青年》上，有一篇评论中国文学界的文章，将这分为三派，首先是创造社，作为无产阶级文学派，讲得很长，其次是语丝社，作为小资产阶级文学派，可就说得短了，第三是新月社，作为资产阶级文学派，却说得更短，到不了一页。这就在表明：这位青年批评家对于愈认为敌人的，就愈是无话可说，也就是愈没有细看。自然，我们看书，倘看反对的东西，总不如看同派的东西的舒服，爽快，有益；但倘是一个战斗者，我以为，在了解革命和敌人上，倒是必须更多的去解剖当面的敌人的。要写文学作品也一样，不但应该知道革命的实际，也必须深知敌人的情形，现在的各方面的状况，再去断定革命的前途。惟有明白旧的，看到新的，了解过去，推断将来，我们的文学的发展才有希望。我想，这是在现在环境下的作家，只要努力，还可以做得到的。
However, although it is a work that only attacks the old society, if you do not know the shortcomings and see through the root of the disease, it will be harmful to the revolution, but unfortunately, today's writers, even revolutionary writers and critics, often cannot or dare not face up to the current society and know its details, especially those who think the enemy. To give an example, in the previous "Lenin Youth", there was an article commenting on the Chinese literary circles, which divided it into three factions, the first is the Creation Society, as a proletarian literary school, which is very long, the second is the Language Silk Society, as a petty-bourgeois literary school, but it is short, and the third is the Crescent Society, as a bourgeois literary school, but it is even shorter and cannot reach a page. This shows that the more the young critic thinks of the enemy, the more he has nothing to say, that is, the less he looks closely. Naturally, when we read books, if we look at things that we oppose, it is better to read things of the same school than to read things of the same school. But if you are a fighter, I think that in understanding the revolution and the enemy, you must dissect the enemy in front of you more. The same is true for writing literary works, not only should we know the reality of the revolution, but we must also know the enemy's situation and the current situation in all aspects, and then judge the future of the revolution. Only by understanding the old, seeing the new, understanding the past, and inferring the future can there be hope for the development of our literature. I think this is something that writers in the current environment can do as long as they work hard.在现在，如先前所说，文艺是在受着少有的压迫与摧残，广泛地现出了饥馑状态。文艺不但是革命的，连那略带些不平色彩的，不但是指摘现状的，连那些攻击旧来积弊的，也往往就受迫害。这情形，即在说明至今为止的统治阶级的革命，不过是争夺一把旧椅子。去推的时候，好像这椅子很可恨，一夺到手，就又觉得是宝贝了，而同时也自觉了自己正和这“旧的”一气。二十多年前，都说朱元璋（明太祖）是民族的革命者，其实是并不然的，他做了皇帝以后，称蒙古朝为“大元”，杀汉人比蒙古人还利害。奴才做了主人，是决不肯废去“老爷”的称呼的，他的摆架子，恐怕比他的主人还十足，还可笑。这正如上海的工人赚了几文钱，开起小小的工厂来，对付工人反而凶到绝顶一样。
Now, as mentioned earlier, literature and art are suffering from rare oppression and destruction, and a state of famine is widely manifested. Literature and art are not only revolutionary, but also those who are slightly unfair, not only criticize the status quo, but even those who attack the old evils are often persecuted. This situation shows that the revolution of the ruling class so far is nothing more than a fight for an old chair. When I went to push it, it seemed that this chair was very hateful, and as soon as I got it, I felt that it was a treasure again, and at the same time, I felt that I was in the same breath with this "old". More than 20 years ago, it was said that Zhu Yuanzhang (Ming Taizu) was a national revolutionary, but this was not the case, and after he became emperor, he called the Mongol Dynasty "Dayuan", and killing the Han people was more beneficial than the Mongols. The servant became the master, and he would never abolish the title of "master", and his arrogance was probably more complete than his master, and it was ridiculous. This is just like the workers in Shanghai earn a few pennies and open a small factory, but they are extremely fierce against the workers.在一部旧的笔记小说——我忘了它的书名了——上，曾经载有一个故事，说明朝有一个武官叫说书人讲故事，他便对他讲檀道济——晋朝的一个将军，讲完之后，那武官就吩咐打说书人一顿，人问他什么缘故，他说道：“他既然对我讲檀道济，那么，对檀道济是一定去讲我的了。”现在的统治者也神经衰弱到像这武官一样，什么他都怕，因而在出版界上也布置了比先前更进步的流氓，令人看不出流氓的形式而却用着更厉害的流氓手段：用广告，用诬陷，用恐吓；甚至于有几个文学者还拜了流氓做老子，以图得到安稳和利益。因此革命的文学者，就不但应该留心迎面的敌人，还必须防备自己一面的三翻四复的暗探了，较之简单地用着文艺的斗争，就非常费力，而因此也就影响到文艺上面来。
In an old notebook novel - I forgot its title - there was a story that said that there was a military attaché in the dynasty who asked a storyteller to tell a story, and he told him about Tan Daoji, a general of the Jin Dynasty, and after speaking, the military attaché ordered the storyteller to be beaten, and when people asked him why, he said: "Since he told me about Tan Daoji, then he must tell me about Tan Daoji." The current ruler is also so nervous that he is afraid of anything like this military attaché, so he has also arranged more progressive hooligans in the publishing world than before, so that people cannot see the form of hooliganism but use more powerful hooligan methods: advertising, framing, and intimidation; Even a few literary scholars worshipped hooligans as Lao Tzu in order to gain stability and benefits. Therefore, revolutionary writers should not only pay attention to the oncoming enemy, but also guard against their own side of the repeated secret probes.现在上海虽然还出版着一大堆的所谓文艺杂志，其实却等于空虚。以营业为目的的书店所出的东西，因为怕遭殃，就竭力选些不关痛痒的文章，如说“命固不可以不革，而亦不可以太革”之类，那特色是在令人从头看到末尾，终于等于不看。至于官办的，或对官场去凑趣的杂志呢，作者又都是乌合之众，共同的目的只在捞几文稿费，什么“英国维多利亚朝的文学”呀，“论刘易士得到诺贝尔奖金”呀，连自己也并不相信所发的议论，连自己也并不看重所做的文章。所以，我说，现在上海所出的文艺杂志都等于空虚，革命者的文艺固然被压迫了，而压迫者所办的文艺杂志上也没有什么文艺可见。然而，压迫者当真没有文艺么？有是有的，不过并非这些，而是通电，告示，新闻，民族主义的“文学”，法官的判词等。例如前几天，《申报》上就记着一个女人控诉她的丈夫强迫鸡奸并殴打得皮肤上成了青伤的事，而法官的判词却道，法律上并无禁止丈夫鸡奸妻子的明文，而皮肤打得发青，也并不算毁损了生理的机能，所以那控诉就不能成立。现在是那男人反在控诉他的女人的“诬告”了。法律我不知道，至于生理学，却学过一点，皮肤被打得发青，肺，肝，或肠胃的生理的机能固然不至于毁损，然而发青之处的皮肤的生理的机能却是毁损了的。这在中国的现在，虽然常常遇见，不算什么稀奇事，但我以为这就已经能够很明白的知道社会上的一部分现象，胜于一篇平凡的小说或长诗了。
Although there are still a lot of so-called literary and art magazines published in Shanghai, it is actually equivalent to emptiness. The things produced by bookstores for the purpose of business, because they are afraid of suffering, try their best to choose some articles that are not painful, such as "life must not be changed, but it cannot be too revolutionary", etc., which is characterized by making people see the end from the beginning, and finally equal not to reading. As for the government-run magazines or the officialdom to make fun, the authors are all rabble, and the common purpose is only to make a few manuscript fees, what "British Victorian literature", "on Lewis getting the Nobel Prize", even he does not believe in the discussions made, and even he does not value the articles he has done. Therefore, I said that the literary and art magazines published in Shanghai are now empty, and the literature and art of the revolutionaries are certainly oppressed, and there is no literature and art visible in the literary and art magazines run by the oppressors. However, do the oppressors really have no literature and art? There are yes, but not these, but electricity, notices, news, nationalist "literature", judges' judgments, etc. For example, a few days ago, the "Declaration" recorded a woman accusing her husband of forcing sodomy and beating her to the point of bruising her skin, but the judge's judgment said that there is no explicit provision in the law prohibiting a husband from sodomy of his wife, and the bruising of the skin does not damage the physiological function, so the accusation cannot be established. Now it's the man who is accusing his woman of "false accusations". I don't know the law, but as for physiology, I have learned a little, the skin is beaten blue, and the physiological functions of the lungs, liver, or stomach are not damaged, but the physiological functions of the skin where the bluish is damaged are. Although it is not uncommon to encounter this in China now, I think it is already possible to know a part of the phenomenon in society very clearly, which is better than an ordinary novel or a long poem.除以上所说之外，那所谓民族主义文学，和闹得已经很久了的武侠小说之类，是也还应该详细解剖的。但现在时间已经不够，只得待将来有机会再讲了。今天就这样为止罢。
In addition to the above, the so-called nationalist literature and martial arts novels that have been in trouble for a long time should also be dissected in detail. But now there is not enough time, so I have to wait until I have the opportunity to talk about it in the future. That's all for today.

一八艺社习作展览会小引

一八艺社习作展览会小引

一八艺社习作展览会小引

A small introduction to the 18th Art Society's study exhibition现在有自以为大有见识的人，在说“为人类的艺术”。然而这样的艺术，在现在的社会里，是断断没有的。看罢，这便是在说“为人类的艺术”的人，也已将人类分为对的和错的，或好的和坏的，而将所谓错的或坏的加以叫咬了。
Now there are people who think they are knowledgeable and say "art for mankind". However, such art is absolutely absent in today's society. After all, those who are saying "art for mankind" have also divided human beings into right and wrong, or good and bad, and called the so-called wrong or bad.所以，现在的艺术，总要一面得到蔑视，冷遇，迫害，而一面得到同情，拥护，支持。
Therefore, today's art must always be despised, coldly treated, and persecuted on the one hand, and sympathized, supported, and supported on the other.一八艺社也将逃不出这例子。因为它在这旧社会里，是新的，年青的，前进的。
The 18 Art Society will not escape this example. Because in this old society, it is new, young, and forward.中国近来其实也没有什么艺术家。号称“艺术家”者，他们的得名，与其说在艺术，倒是在他们的履历和作品的题目——故意题得香艳，漂渺，古怪，雄深。连骗带吓，令人觉得似乎了不得。然而时代是在不息地进行，现在新的，年青的，没有名的作家的作品站在这里了，以清醒的意识和坚强的努力，在榛莽中露出了日见生长的健壮的新芽。
There are actually no artists in China these days. Known as "artists", their names are not so much in art, but in their resumes and the titles of their works - deliberately fragrant, ethereal, eccentric, and majestic. Even deception and scare make people feel amazing. However, the times are constantly progressing, and now the works of new, young, and unknown writers stand here, with clear consciousness and strong efforts, revealing strong new shoots that grow day by day in the hazel.自然，这，是很幼小的。但是，惟其幼小，所以希望就正在这一面。
Naturally, this is very young. However, it is only young, so hope is on this side.我的话，也就是只对这一面说的，如上。
My words are only for this side, as above.一九三一年五月二十二日。
May 22, 1931.

答文艺新闻社问——日本占领东三省的意义

答文艺新闻社问——日本占领东三省的意义

答文艺新闻社问——日本占领东三省的意义

Answer to the question of the Literature and Art News Agency - the significance of Japan's occupation of the three eastern provinces这在一面，是日本帝国主义在“膺惩”他的仆役——中国军阀，也就是“膺惩”中国民众，因为中国民众又是军阀的奴隶；在另一面，是进攻苏联的开头，是要使世界的劳苦群众，永受奴隶的苦楚的方针的第一步。
On the one hand, this is the Japanese imperialism that is "punishing" his servants - the Chinese warlords, that is, "punishing" the Chinese people, because the Chinese people are slaves to the warlords; On the other hand, it was the beginning of the attack on the Soviet Union, and it was the first step of the policy of making the world's toiling masses suffer forever as slaves.九月二十一日。
September 21st.

“民族主义文学”的任务和运命

“民族主义文学”的任务和运命

“民族主义文学”的任务和运命

The task and destiny of "nationalist literature"一
One殖民政策是一定保护，养育流氓的。从帝国主义的眼睛看来，惟有他们是最要紧的奴才，有用的鹰犬，能尽殖民地人民非尽不可的任务：一面靠着帝国主义的暴力，一面利用本国的传统之力，以除去“害群之马”，不安本分的“莠民”。所以，这流氓，是殖民地上的洋大人的宠儿，——不，宠犬，其地位虽在主人之下，但总在别的被统治者之上的。
Colonial policy is certain to protect and nurture hooligans. From the perspective of imperialism, only they are the most important servants, useful hawks and dogs, who can fulfill the tasks that the colonial people must fulfill: relying on imperialist violence and using the traditional power of their own country to get rid of the "black sheep" and the "weedy people" who are uneasy about their duty. Therefore, this hooligan is the darling of the foreigners in the colony,—— no, the pet dog, although its status is below the owner, but it is always above the other ruled.上海当然也不会不在这例子里。巡警不进帮，小贩虽自有小资本，但倘不另寻一个流氓来做债主，付以重利，就很难立足。到去年，在文艺界上，竟也出现了“拜老头”的“文学家”。
Of course, Shanghai is not in this example. Although the patrol police do not join the gang, although the hawker has his own small capital, if he does not find another gangster to be a creditor and pay a lot of profit, it will be difficult to gain a foothold. By last year, in the literary and artistic circles, there were also "writers" who "worshipped the old man".但这不过是一个最露骨的事实。其实是，即使并非帮友，他们所谓“文艺家”的许多人，是一向在尽“宠犬”的职分的，虽然所标的口号，种种不同，艺术至上主义呀，国粹主义呀，民族主义呀，为人类的艺术呀，但这仅如巡警手里拿着前膛枪或后膛枪，来福枪，毛瑟枪的不同，那终极的目的却只一个：就是打死反帝国主义即反政府，亦即“反革命”，或仅有些不平的人民。
But this is nothing more than the most explicit fact. Although the slogans they slogan are different, artistic supremacy, nationalism, nationalism, and art for mankind, this is only like a patrol officer holding a muzzle-loading gun or a breech-loading gun, a rifle gun, and a Mauser gun, but the ultimate purpose is only one: to kill anti-imperialism, that is, anti-government, that is, "counter-revolutionary", or just a little unjust people.那些宠犬派文学之中，锣鼓敲得最起劲的，是所谓“民族主义文学”。但比起侦探，巡捕，刽子手们的显著的勋劳来，却还有很多的逊色。这缘故，就因为他们还只在叫，未行直接的咬，而且大抵没有流氓的剽悍，不过是飘飘荡荡的流尸。然而这又正是“民族主义文学”的特色，所以保持其“宠”的。
Among those pet dog literature, the most vigorous gongs and drums are the so-called "nationalist literature". But compared to the remarkable merits of detectives, patrols, and executioners, there are still many inferiorities. For this reason, because they are still only screaming, they have not bitten directly, and they are probably not as fierce as hooligans, but just floating corpses. However, this is the characteristic of "nationalist literature", so it remains "favored".翻一本他们的刊物来看罢，先前标榜过各种主义的各种人，居然凑合在一起了。这是“民族主义”的巨人的手，将他们抓过来的么？并不，这些原是上海滩上久已沉沉浮浮的流尸，本来散见于各处的，但经风浪一吹，就漂集一处，形成一个堆积，又因为各个本身的腐烂，就发出较浓厚的恶臭来了。
Flipping through their publications, all kinds of people who had previously flaunted various doctrines actually made do with each other. Is this the hand of the giant of "nationalism" that has captured them? No, these were originally the drifting corpses that had been sinking and floating on Shanghai Beach for a long time, and they were originally scattered everywhere, but when the wind and waves blew, they floated together in one place, forming a pile of them, and because of the decay of each itself, it emitted a thick stench.这“叫”和“恶臭”有能够较为远闻的特色，于帝国主义是有益的，这叫做“为王前驱”，所以流尸文学仍将与流氓政治同在。
This "call" and "stench" have the characteristics of being more distant, which is beneficial to imperialism, which is called "precursor to the king", so the literature of the exiled corpse will still be with rogue politics.

“民族主义文学”的任务和运命

二

“民族主义文学”的任务和运命

Two但上文所说的风浪是什么呢？这是因无产阶级的勃兴而卷起的小风浪。先前的有些所谓文艺家，本未尝没有半意识的或无意识的觉得自身的溃败，于是就自欺欺人的用种种美名来掩饰，曰高逸，曰放达（用新式话来说就是“颓废”），画的是裸女，静物，死，写的是花月，圣地，失眠，酒，女人。一到旧社会的崩溃愈加分明，阶级的斗争愈加锋利的时候，他们也就看见了自己的死敌，将创造新的文化，一扫旧来的污秽的无产阶级，并且觉到了自己就是这污秽，将与在上的统治者同其运命，于是就必然漂集于为帝国主义所宰制的民族中的顺民所竖起的“民族主义文学”的旗帜之下，来和主人一同做一回最后的挣扎了。
But what are the wind and waves mentioned above? This is a small storm caused by the rise of the proletariat. Some of the so-called writers and artists in the past did not feel their own defeat half-consciously or unconsciously, so they deceived themselves with various good names to cover up, called Gao Yi, called Fang Da (in the new style of "decadence"), painted nude women, still lifes, death, and wrote about flowers and moons, holy places, insomnia, wine, and women. As soon as the collapse of the old society became more and more distinct and the class struggle became sharper, they also saw their sworn enemy, who would create a new culture and sweep away the old filthy proletariat, and felt that they were this filth and would share the fate of the rulers above.所以，虽然是杂碎的流尸，那目标却是同一的：和主人一样，用一切手段，来压迫无产阶级，以苟延残喘。不过究竟是杂碎，而且多带着先前剩下的皮毛，所以自从发出宣言以来，看不见一点鲜明的作品，宣言是一小群杂碎胡乱凑成的杂碎，不足为据的。
Therefore, although it is a miscellaneous corpse, the goal is the same: to oppress the proletariat by all means, just like the master, in order to survive. However, it is actually a chop piece, and most of it carries the remaining fur from before, so since the declaration was issued, there has been no distinctive work, and the declaration is a small group of miscellaneous pieces made up of random pieces, which is not enough to substantiate.但在《前锋月刊》第五号上，却给了我们一篇明白的作品，据编辑者说，这是“参加讨伐阎冯军事的实际描写”。描写军事的小说并不足奇，奇特的是这位“青年军人”的作者所自述的在战场上的心绪，这是“民族主义文学家”的自画像，极有郑重引用的价值的——
But in the fifth issue of "Forward Monthly", it gave us a clear work, which, according to the editor, was "an actual description of participating in the crusade against Yan Feng's army". It is not surprising that novels describing military affairs are strange and what is strange is the self-described feelings of the author of the "young soldier" on the battlefield, which is a self-portrait of a "nationalist writer", which is very worthy of solemn quotation -“每天晚上站在那闪烁的群星之下，手里执着马枪，耳中听着虫鸣，四周飞动着无数的蚊子，那样都使人想到法国‘客军’在菲洲沙漠里与阿剌伯人争斗流血的生活。”（黄震遐：《陇海线上》）
"Standing under the twinkling stars every night, holding a spear in my hand, listening to the sound of insects in my ears, and countless mosquitoes flying around, it reminds me of the bloody life of the French 'guest army' fighting the Arabs in the Philippine desert." (Huang Zhenxia: "On the Longhai Line")原来中国军阀的混战，从“青年军人”，从“民族主义文学者”看来，是并非驱同国人民互相残杀，却是外国人在打别一外国人，两个国度，两个民族，在战地上一到夜里，自己就飘飘然觉得皮色变白，鼻梁加高，成为腊丁民族的战士，站在野蛮的菲洲了。那就无怪乎看得周围的老百姓都是敌人，要一个一个的打死。法国人对于菲洲的阿剌伯人，就民族主义而论，原是不必爱惜的。仅仅这一节，大一点，则说明了中国军阀为什么做了帝国主义的爪牙，来毒害屠杀中国的人民，那是因为他们自己以为是“法国的客军”的缘故；小一点，就说明中国的“民族主义文学家”根本上只同外国主子休戚相关，为什么倒称“民族主义”，来朦混读者，那是因为他们自己觉得有时好像腊丁民族，条顿民族了的缘故。
It turned out that the melee of the Chinese warlords, from the perspective of "young soldiers" and "nationalist writers", was not driving the people of the same country to kill each other, but foreigners were fighting against a foreigner, two countries, two nations, and at night on the battlefield, they felt that their skin color had turned white, the bridge of their nose had increased, and they had become warriors of the Lading nation, standing in the barbaric Philippines. Then it is no wonder that the people around him are all enemies and want to be killed one by one. The French did not have to cherish the Arabs in the Philippines in terms of nationalism. This section alone, a little bigger, explains why the Chinese warlords became imperialist minions to poison and slaughter the Chinese people, because they themselves thought they were "French guest troops"; A little smaller shows that China's "nationalist writers" are fundamentally only related to foreign masters, and why they are called "nationalists" to confuse readers, it is because they themselves feel that sometimes they are like the Latin nation and the Teutonic nation.

“民族主义文学”的任务和运命

三

“民族主义文学”的任务和运命

Three黄震遐先生写得如此坦白，所说的心境当然是真实的，不过据他小说中所显示的智识推测起来，却还有并非不知而故意不说的一点讳饰。这，是他将“法国的安南兵”含糊的改作“法国的客军”了，因此就较远于“实际描写”，而且也招来了上节所说的是非。
Mr. Huang Zhenxia wrote so frankly, and the state of mind he said was of course true, but according to the wisdom shown in his novel, there was still a bit of taboo that he did not know and deliberately did not say. This is because he vaguely changed "French Annan soldiers" to "French guest army", so it is far from the "actual description", and it also attracts the right and wrong mentioned in the previous section.但作者是聪明的，他听过“友人傅彦长君平时许多谈论……许多地方不可讳地是受了他的熏陶”，并且考据中外史传之后，接着又写了一篇较切“民族主义”这个题目的剧诗，这回不用法兰西人了，是《黄人之血》（《前锋月刊》七号）。
But the author is smart, he has heard "my friend Fu Yanchangjun usually talk a lot...... Many places are undeniably influenced by him", and after examining the historical biography of China and foreign countries, he then wrote a drama poem on the topic of "nationalism", this time without the French, it was "Blood of the Yellow Man" ("Forward Monthly" No. 7).这剧诗的事迹，是黄色人种的西征，主将是成吉思汗的孙子拔都元帅，真正的黄色种。所征的是欧洲，其实专在斡罗斯（俄罗斯）——这是作者的目标；联军的构成是汉，鞑靼，女真，契丹人——这是作者的计划；一路胜下去，可惜后来四种人不知“友谊”的要紧和“团结的力量”，自相残杀，竟为白种武士所乘了——这是作者的讽喻，也是作者的悲哀。
The deeds of this drama are the western expedition of the yellow race, and the main general will be Genghis Khan's grandson, Marshal Batu, the real yellow race. The campaign is Europe, but in fact it is specifically in Oros (Russia) - this is the author's goal; The composition of the coalition forces was Han, Tatar, Jurchen, Khitan - this was the author's plan; Winning all the way, it is a pity that later the four people did not know the importance of "friendship" and the "power of unity", and killed each other, and were actually taken advantage of by the Caucasian warriors - this is the author's irony and the author's sadness.但我们且看这黄色军的威猛和恶辣罢——
But let's look at the might and viciousness of this yellow army——…………………… 
恐怖呀，煎着尸体的沸油； Horror, the boiling oil that frying the corpse; 
可怕呀，遍地的腐骸如何凶丑； Terrible, how ugly the rotten corpses are everywhere; 
死神捉着白姑娘拚命地搂； The god of death grabbed the white girl and hugged her desperately; 
美人螓首变成狞猛的髑髅； The beauty head turns into a fierce skull; 
野兽般的生番在故宫里蛮争恶斗； The beastly life fought fiercely in the Forbidden City; 
十字军战士的脸上充满了哀愁； The face of the crusaders was full of sorrow; 
千年的棺材泄出它凶秽的恶臭； The thousand-year-old coffin exudes its foul stench; 
铁蹄践着断骨，骆驼的鸣声变成怪吼； The iron hooves trample on the broken bones, and the camel's cry becomes a strange roar; 
上帝已逃，魔鬼扬起了火鞭复仇； God has fled, and the devil has raised his whip of fire for vengeance; 
黄祸来了！黄祸来了！ The Yellow Peril is coming! The Yellow Peril is coming! 
亚细亚勇士们张大吃人的血口。 The warriors of Asia opened their mouths to eat human blood.
这德皇威廉因为要鼓吹“德国德国，高于一切”而大叫的“黄祸”，这一张“亚细亚勇士们张大”的“吃人的血口”，我们的诗人却是对着“斡罗斯”，就是现在无产者专政的第一个国度，以消灭无产阶级的模范——这是“民族主义文学”的目标；但究竟因为是殖民地顺民的“民族主义文学”，所以我们的诗人所奉为首领的，是蒙古人拔都，不是中华人赵构，张开“吃人的血口”的是“亚细亚勇士们”，不是中国勇士们，所希望的是拔都的统驭之下的“友谊”，不是各民族间的平等的友爱——这就是露骨的所谓“民族主义文学”的特色，但也是青年军人的作者的悲哀。
This Kaiser Wilhelm shouted "Yellow Peril" because he wanted to advocate "Germany, Germany, above all else", this "cannibal blood mouth" of "Asian warriors are magnificent", but our poet is facing "Oros", the first country of the current dictatorship of the proletariat, in order to eliminate the model of the proletariat - this is the goal of "nationalist literature"; But because it is the "nationalist literature" of the colonial people, what our poets regard as the leader is the Mongol Batu, not the Chinese Zhao Gou, and it is the "Asian warriors" who open the "blood-eating mouth", not the Chinese warriors, what they hope for is the "friendship" under the control of Batu, not the equal friendship between all ethnic groups - this is the characteristic of the explicit so-called "nationalist literature", but it is also the sadness of the author of the young soldiers.

“民族主义文学”的任务和运命

四

“民族主义文学”的任务和运命

Four拔都死了；在亚细亚的黄人中，现在可以拟为那时的蒙古的只有一个日本。日本的勇士们虽然也痛恨苏俄，但也不爱抚中华的勇士，大唱“日支亲善”虽然也和主张“友谊”一致，但事实又和口头不符，从中国“民族主义文学者”的立场上，在已觉得悲哀，对他加以讽喻，原是势所必至，不足诧异的。
Batu is dead; Among the yellow people in Asia, there is only one Japan that can now be compared to Mongolia at that time. Although the Japanese warriors also hated Soviet Russia, they did not caress the Chinese warriors, and although the singing of "Japan-China goodwill" was also consistent with the advocacy of "friendship", the facts did not match the words.果然，诗人的悲哀的豫感好像证实了，而且还坏得远。当“扬起火鞭”焚烧“斡罗斯”将要开头的时候，就像拔都那时的结局一样，朝鲜人乱杀中国人，日本人“张大吃人的血口”，吞了东三省了。莫非他们因为未受傅彦长先生的熏陶，不知“团结的力量”之重要，竟将中国的“勇士们”也看成菲洲的阿剌伯人了吗？！
Sure enough, the poet's sad premonition seems to be confirmed, and it is far worse. When the "fire whip" burned the "Oros" was about to begin, just like the ending of Batu, the Koreans killed the Chinese indiscriminately, and the Japanese "opened up the blood of people" and swallowed the three eastern provinces. Could it be that because they were not influenced by Mr. Fu Yanchang and did not know the importance of "the power of unity", they actually regarded the Chinese "warriors" as the Arabs of the Philippines? !

“民族主义文学”的任务和运命

五

“民族主义文学”的任务和运命

Five这实在是一个大打击。军人的作者还未喊出他勇壮的声音，我们现在所看见的是“民族主义”旗下的报章上所载的小勇士们的愤激和绝望。这也是势所必至，无足诧异的。理想和现实本来易于冲突，理想时已经含了悲哀，现实起来当然就会绝望。于是小勇士们要打仗了——
This is really a big blow. The writer of the soldier has not yet shouted his brave voice, what we are seeing now is the indignation and despair of the little warriors in the newspapers under the banner of "nationalism". This is also inevitable and not surprising. Ideals and reality are easy to conflict, and ideals already contain sadness, and of course they will be desperate when they become real. So the little warriors are going to war——战啊，下个最后的决心，Fight, the next last determination, 
杀尽我们的敌人， Kill all our enemies, 
你看敌人的枪炮都响了， Look at the enemy's guns are going off, 
快上前，把我们的肉体筑一座长城。 Hurry up and build a great wall with our flesh. 
雷电在头上咆哮， Thunder and lightning roared overhead, 
浪涛在脚下吼叫， Waves roared under our feet, 
热血在心头燃烧， Blood burned in our hearts, and 
我们向前线奔跑。 We ran to the front.
（苏凤：《战歌》。《民国日报》载。）
(Su Feng: "War Song".) "Republic of China Daily" recorded. ）去，战场上去，Go, go to the battlefield, 
我们的热血在沸腾， Our blood is boiling, 
我们的肉身好像疯人， Our flesh is like madmen, 
我们去把热血锈住贼子的枪头， We go and rust the thief's spearhead, 
我们去把肉身塞住仇人的炮口。 We go and plug the enemy's muzzle with our flesh. 
去，战场上去， Go, go to the battlefield, 
凭着我们一股勇气， with our courage, 
凭着我们一点纯爱的精灵， with our little elf of pure love, 
去把仇人驱逐， to expel the enemy, 
不，去把仇人杀尽。 no, to kill the enemy.
（甘豫庆：《去上战场去》。《申报》载。）
(Gan Yuqing: "Go to the Battlefield".) The "Declaration" contains. ）同胞，醒起来罢，Wake up, compatriots, 
踢开了弱者的心， kicks the hearts of the weak, 
踢开了弱者的脑。 kicks the brains of the weak. 
看，看，看， Look, look, look, 
看同胞们的血喷出来了， See the blood of the compatriots spurt out, 
看同胞们的肉割开来了， See the flesh of the compatriots cut open, 
看同胞们的尸体挂起来了。 See the corpses of the compatriots hanging.
（邵冠华：《醒起来罢同胞》。同上。）
(Shao Guanhua: "Wake Up and Stop Compatriots".) Ditto. ）这些诗里很明显的是作者都知道没有武器，所以只好用“肉体”，用“纯爱的精灵”，用“尸体”。这正是《黄人之血》的作者的先前的悲哀，而所以要追随拔都元帅之后，主张“友谊”的缘故。武器是主子那里买来的，无产者已都是自己的敌人，倘主子又不谅其衷，要加以“惩膺”，那么，惟一的路也实在只有一个死了——
What is obvious in these poems is that the author knows that there is no weapon, so he has to use "body", "elf of pure love", and "corpse". This is the previous sadness of the author of "Yellow Blood", and the reason why he wants to follow Marshal Batu and advocate "friendship". The weapons were bought from the master, and the proletariat was already his own enemy, and if the master did not forgive him and wanted to "punish" him, then the only way was really dead -我们是初训练的一队，We are a team of beginners, 
有坚卓的志愿， has strong volunteers, 
有沸腾的热血， has boiling blood, and 
来扫除强暴的歹类。 is here to wipe out the violent gangsters. 
同胞们，亲爱的同胞们， compatriots, dear compatriots, 
快起来准备去战， get up and prepare to fight, 
快起来奋斗， get up and fight, 
战死是我们生路。 die in battle is our way of life.
（沙珊：《学生军》。同上。）
(Shasan: "Student Army".) Ditto. ）天在啸，The sky is roaring, 
地在震， the earth is shaking, 
人在冲，兽在吼， people are rushing, beasts are roaring, 
宇宙间的一切在咆哮，朋友哟， everything in the universe is roaring, friends, 
准备着我们的头颅去给敌人砍掉。 is preparing our heads to be cut off by the enemy.
（徐之津：《伟大的死》。同上。）
(Xu Zhijin: "The Great Death".) Ditto. ）一群是发扬踔厉，一群是慷慨悲歌，写写固然无妨，但倘若真要这样，却未免太不懂得“民族主义文学”的精义了，然而，却也尽了“民族主义文学”的任务。
One group is to carry forward, the other is to be generous and lamentative, it is okay to write, but if this is really the case, it is too unclear of the essence of "nationalist literature", however, it has also fulfilled the task of "nationalist literature".

“民族主义文学”的任务和运命

六

“民族主义文学”的任务和运命

Six《前锋月刊》上用大号字题目的《黄人之血》的作者黄震遐诗人，不是早已告诉我们过理想的元帅拔都了吗？这诗人受过傅彦长先生的熏陶，查过中外的史传，还知道“中世纪的东欧是三种思想的冲突点”，岂就会偏不知道赵家末叶的中国，是蒙古人的淫掠场？拔都元帅的祖父成吉思皇帝侵入中国时，所至淫掠妇女，焚烧庐舍，到山东曲阜看见孔老二先生像，元兵也要指着骂道：“说‘夷狄之有君，不如诸夏之无也’的，不就是你吗？”夹脸就给他一箭。这是宋人的笔记里垂涕而道的，正如现在常见于报章上的流泪文章一样。黄诗人所描写的“斡罗斯”那“死神捉着白姑娘拚命地搂……”那些妙文，其实就是那时出现于中国的情形。但一到他的孙子，他们不就携手“西征”了吗？现在日本兵“东征”了东三省，正是“民族主义文学家”理想中的“西征”的第一步，“亚细亚勇士们张大吃人的血口”的开场。不过先得在中国咬一口。因为那时成吉思皇帝也像对于“斡罗斯”一样，先使中国人变成奴才，然后赶他打仗，并非用了“友谊”，送柬帖来敦请的。所以，这沈阳事件，不但和“民族主义文学”毫无冲突，而且还实现了他们的理想境，倘若不明这精义，要去硬送头颅，使“亚细亚勇士”减少，那实在是很可惜的。
Didn't the poet Huang Zhenxia, the author of "Yellow Man's Blood" in the "Forward Monthly", already tell us about the ideal marshal Batu? This poet has been influenced by Mr. Fu Yanchang, has checked Chinese and foreign historical biographies, and knows that "medieval Eastern Europe was a point of conflict between the three ideas". When Marshal Batu's grandfather, Emperor Genghis, invaded China, he raped women and burned houses, and when he went to Qufu, Shandong Province, he saw the portrait of Mr. Kong Laoer, and the Yuan soldiers also pointed at him and scolded: "Isn't it you who says, 'The barbarians have a king, it is not as good as the lack of Xia'? "Give him an arrow when he pinched his face. This is what the Song people wept about, just like the tearful articles that are now common in newspapers. The wonderful texts of "Oros" described by the poet Huang in "Death grabbed the white girl and hugged her desperately...... were actually the situation that appeared in China at that time. But as soon as his grandson arrived, didn't they join hands to "march west"? Now the Japanese soldiers have "marched east" to the three eastern provinces, which is the first step of the "western expedition" in the ideal of "nationalist writers" and the beginning of "the Asian warriors cannibalizing the blood". But you have to take a bite in China first. Because at that time, Emperor Genghis also did the same as "Oros", first turning the Chinese into slaves, and then driving him to fight, not using "friendship" to send invitations to urge them. Therefore, this Shenyang incident not only has no conflict with "nationalist literature", but also realizes their ideal situation.那么，“民族主义文学”无须有那些呜呼阿呀死死活活的调子吗？谨对曰：要有的，他们也一定有的。否则不抵抗主义，城下之盟，断送土地这些勾当，在沉静中就显得更加露骨。必须痛哭怒号，摩拳擦掌，令人被这扰攘嘈杂所惑乱，闻悲歌而泪垂，听壮歌而愤泄，于是那“东征”即“西征”的第一步，也就悄悄的隐隐的跨过去了。落葬的行列里有悲哀的哭声，有壮大的军乐，那任务是在送死人埋入土中，用热闹来掩过了这“死”，给大家接着就得到“忘却”。现在“民族主义文学”的发扬踔厉，或慷慨悲歌的文章，便是正在尽着同一的任务的。
So, does "nationalist literature" need to have those whoosh-ah-ah-a-dead tones? I respectfully replied: If there is something, they must have it. Otherwise, non-resistance, alliances under the city, and ruining land will be even more explicit in silence. It is necessary to cry and cry angrily, to prepare their hands, to be confused by this noise, to cry when they hear the sad song, and to vent their anger when they hear the magnificent song, so the first step of the "Eastern Expedition", that is, the "Western Expedition", has quietly and faintly crossed. There are sad cries in the procession of burial, there are strong military music, and the task is to bury the dead in the ground, cover up this "death" with liveliness, and then get "forgetful" for everyone. Now the vigorous development of "nationalist literature" or the generous and lamentative articles are fulfilling the same task.但这之后，“民族主义文学者”也就更加接近了他的哀愁。因为有一个问题，更加临近，就是将来主子是否不至于再蹈拔都元帅的覆辙，肯信用而且优待忠勇的奴才，不，勇士们呢？这实在是一个很要紧，很可怕的问题，是主子和奴才能否“同存共荣”的大关键。
But after that, the "nationalist writer" came closer to his sorrow. Because there is a question, which is closer, that is, will the master not repeat the mistakes of Marshal Batu in the future, and will he trust and give preferential treatment to the loyal and brave servants, no, what about the warriors? This is really a very important and terrible question, and it is the key to whether masters and slaves can "coexist and prosper".历史告诉我们：不能的。这，正如连“民族主义文学者”也已经知道一样，不会有这一回事。他们将只尽些送丧的任务，永含着恋主的哀愁，须到无产阶级革命的风涛怒吼起来，刷洗山河的时候，这才能脱出这沉滞猥劣和腐烂的运命。
History tells us: no. This, as even "nationalist writers" already know, will not happen. They will only do some funeral tasks, forever containing the sorrow of loving the Lord, and only when the wind and waves of the proletarian revolution roar and wash away the mountains and rivers can they escape this stagnant, obscene and rotten fate.

沉滓的泛起

沉滓的泛起

沉滓的泛起

The dregs rose日本占据了东三省以后的在上海一带的表示，报章上叫作“国难声中”。在这“国难声中”，恰如用棍子搅了一下停滞多年的池塘，各种古的沉滓，新的沉滓，就都翻着筋斗漂上来，在水面上转一个身，来趁势显示自己的存在了。
After Japan occupied the three eastern provinces, the Shanghai area was called "in the voice of national crisis" in the newspaper. In this "sound of national crisis", it is like stirring a pond that has been stagnant for many years with a stick, and all kinds of ancient and new sediment float up in a somersault, turning around on the water to take advantage of the situation to show their existence.自信现在可以说能打仗的，是要操练久不想起的洋枪了，但也有现在也不想说去打仗的，那就照欧洲大战时候的德意志帝国的例，来“头脑动员”，以尽“国民一份子”的义务。有的去查《唐书》，说日本古名“倭奴”；有的去翻字典，说倭是矮小之意；有的记得了文天祥，岳飞，林则徐，——但自然，更积极的是新的文艺界。
Those who are confident that they can now say that they can fight are to practice foreign guns that they haven't remembered for a long time, but there are also those who don't want to talk about fighting now, so follow the example of the German Empire during the European War to "mobilize their minds" to fulfill their obligations as a "member of the people". some went to check the "Book of Tang" and said that the ancient name of Japan was "Wa slave"; some went to the dictionary and said that Wa means short; Some remember Wen Tianxiang, Yue Fei, Lin Zexu,—— but naturally, the more active is the new literary and artistic circles.先说一点另外的事罢，这叫作“和平声中”。在这样的声中，是“胡展堂先生”到了上海，据说还告诫青年，教他们要养“力”勿使“气”。灵药就有了。第二天在报上便见广告道：“胡汉民先生说，对日外交，应确定一坚强之原则，并劝勉青年须养力，毋泄气，养力就是强身，泄气就是悲观，要强身袪悲观，须先心花怒放，大笑一次。”但这样的宝贝是什么呢？是美国的一张旧影片，将探险滑稽化以博小市民一笑的《两亲家游非洲》。
Let's talk about something else, which is called "in the voice of peace." In such a voice, it was "Mr. Hu Zhantang" who arrived in Shanghai and said that he also warned young people to teach them to cultivate "strength" and not "anger". The elixir is there. The next day, I saw an advertisement in the newspaper: "Mr. Hu Hanmin said that in diplomacy with Japan, a strong principle should be determined, and he advised young people to cultivate strength, not to be discouraged, to cultivate strength is to strengthen the body, to be discouraged is to be pessimistic, to strengthen the body and be pessimistic, to be pessimistic, you must first be happy and laugh once." "But what is such a baby? It is an old American film that comically turns the adventure into a laugh for the common people.至于真的“国难声中的兴奋剂”呢，那是“爱国歌舞表演”，自己说，“是民族性的活跃，是歌舞界的精髓，促进同胞的努力，达到最后的胜利”的。倘有知道这立奏奇功的大明星是谁么？曰：王人美，薛玲仙，黎莉莉。
As for the real "stimulant in the voice of national crisis", it is a "patriotic song and dance performance", which he said "is the activity of the national character, the essence of the song and dance world, promoting the efforts of compatriots and achieving the final victory". If anyone knows who the big star of this amazing performance is? They are: Wang Renmei, Xue Lingxian, Li Lili.然而终于“上海文艺界大团结”了。《草野》（六卷七号）上记着盛况道：“上海文艺界同人，平时很少联络，在严重时期，除各个参加其他团体的工作外，复由谢六逸，朱应鹏，徐蔚南三人发起，……集会讨论。在十月六日下午三点钟，已陆续到了东亚食堂，……略进茶点，即开始讨论，颇多发挥，……最后定名为上海文艺界救国会”云。
However, finally "Shanghai's literary and artistic circles are united". "Grass Field" (Volume 6, No. 7) records the grand occasion: "The Shanghai literary and art circles rarely contact, and in severe periods, in addition to participating in the work of other groups, they were initiated by Xie Liuyi, Zhu Yingpeng, and Xu Weinan,...... Assembly discussion. At three o'clock in the afternoon on October 6, they had arrived at the East Asian Canteen one after another,...... After a little refreshment, the discussion began, and it played a lot,...... Finally, it was named the Shanghai Literary and Art Circle Salvation Association."“发挥”我们还无从知道，仅据眼前的方法看起来，是先看《两亲家游非洲》以养力，又看“爱国的歌舞表演”以兴奋，更看《日本小品文选》和《艺术三家言》并且略进茶点而发挥。那么，中国就得救了。
We still don't know how to "play", but according to the method in front of us, it seems that we first watch "Two Parents' Family Tour of Africa" to nourish our strength, then watch the "Patriotic Song and Dance Performance" to get excited, and then watch "Selected Japanese Sketches" and "Three Words of Art" and play with a little refreshment. Then, China is saved.不成。这恐怕不必文学青年，就是文学小囡囡，也未必会相信。没有法子，只得再加上两个另外的好消息，就是目前的爱国文艺家所主宰的《申报》所发表出来的——
Not. I'm afraid this doesn't have to be a literary youth, even a literary girl, and they may not believe it. There is no way, so I have to add two other good news, which is the "Declaration" dominated by the current patriotic writers and artists -十月五日的《自由谈》里叶华女士云：“无办法之国民，如何有有办法之政府。国联绝望矣。……际兹一发千钧，全国国民宜各立所志，各尽所能，各抒所见，余也不才，谨以战犬问题商诸国人。……各犬中，要以德国警犬最称职，余极主张吾国可选择是犬作战……”
In the October 5 issue of "Freedom Talk", Ms. Ye Hua said: "How can there be a government with a way for a people who have no way? The National League is desperate. …… At this moment, the people of the country should set their own aspirations, do their best, express their opinions, and I am not talented, so I would like to discuss the issue of war dogs with the people of the country. …… Among the dogs, the German police dog is the most competent, and I strongly advocate that our country can choose to fight with dogs......同月二十五日也是《自由谈》里“苏民自汉口寄”云：“日者寓书沪友王子仲良，间及余之病状，而以不能投身义勇军为憾。王子……竟以灵药一裹见寄，云为培生制药公司所出益金草，功能治肺痨咳血，可一试之。……余立行试服，则咳果止，兼旬而后，体气渐复，因念……一旦国家有事，吾必身列戎行，一展平生之壮志，灭此朝食，行有日矣。……”
同月二十五日也是《自由谈》里“苏民自汉口寄”云：“日者寓书沪友王子仲良，间及余之病状，而以不能投身义勇军为憾。 王子…… 竟以灵药一裹见寄，云为培生制药公司所出益金草，功能治肺痨咳血，可一试之。 …… 余立行试服，则咳果止，兼旬而后，体气渐复，因念…… 一旦国家有事，吾必身列戎行，一展平生之壮志，灭此朝食，行有日矣。 ……”那是连病夫也立刻可以当兵，警犬也将帮同爱国，在爱国文艺家的指导之下，真是大可乐观，要“灭此朝食”了。只可惜不必是文学青年，就是文学小囡囡，也会觉得逐段看去，即使不称为“广告”的，也都不过是出卖旧货的新广告，要趁“国难声中”或“和平声中”将利益更多的榨到自己的手里的。
That is, even the sick can be a soldier immediately, and the police dogs will also help patriotism, under the guidance of patriotic writers and artists, it is really optimistic, and it is necessary to "destroy this breakfast". It's a pity that it doesn't have to be a literary youth, even a literary girl, and I will feel that looking at it paragraph by paragraph, even if it is not called "advertising", it is just a new advertisement for selling old goods, and it is necessary to take advantage of the "national crisis" or "peace" to squeeze more benefits into their own hands.因为要这样，所以都得在这个时候，趁势在表面来泛一下，明星也有，文艺家也有，警犬也有，药也有……也因为趁势，泛起来就格外省力。但因为泛起来的是沉滓，沉滓又究竟不过是沉滓，所以因此一泛，他们的本相倒越加分明，而最后的运命，也还是仍旧沉下去。
Because of this, we all have to take advantage of the situation at this time to take advantage of the situation to flip on the surface, there are stars, writers and artists, police dogs, and medicines...... Also because of the situation, it is particularly labor-saving to flood. But because what is flooded is the dregs, and the dregs are just the dregs, so when they are generalized, their true nature becomes more and more distinct, and the final fate still sinks.十月二十九日。
October 29th.

以脚报国

以脚报国

以脚报国

Serve the country with your feet今年八月三十一日《申报》的《自由谈》里，又看见了署名“寄萍”的《杨缦华女士游欧杂感》，其中的一段，我觉得很有趣，就照抄在下面：
In the "Free Talk" of the "Declaration" on August 31 this year, I saw "Ms. Yang Manhua's Miscellaneous Feelings about Ms. Yang Manhua's Travel to Europe" signed "Ji Ping", one of which I think is very interesting, so I copied it below:“……有一天我们到比利时一个乡村里去。许多女人争着来看我的脚。我伸起脚来给伊们看。才平服伊们好奇的疑窦。一位女人说‘我们也向来不曾见过中国人。但从小就听说中国人是有尾巴的（即辫发）。都要讨姨太太的。女人都是小脚。跑起路来一摇一摆的。如今才明白这话不确实。请原谅我们的错念。’还有一人自以为熟悉东亚情形的，带着讥笑的态度说：‘中国的军阀如何专横。到处闹的是兵匪。人民过着地狱的生活。’这种似是而非的话，说了一大堆。我说‘此种传说。全无根据。’同行的某君，也报以很滑稽的话。‘我看你们那里会知道立国数千年的大中华民国，等我们革命成功之后，简直要把显微镜来照你们比利时呢。’就此一笑而散。”
“…… One day we went to a village in Belgium. Many women rushed to see my feet. I stretched out my feet and showed them them. Only then did they settle their curious doubts. One woman said, 'We have never seen Chinese either.' But since childhood I heard that Chinese people have tails (i.e. braided hair). I have to ask my aunt. Women have small feet. It swayed when it ran. Only now do I realize that this is not true. Please forgive us for our mistakes. Another person who thought he was familiar with the situation in East Asia said with a sneer: 'How arrogant the Chinese warlords are. There were soldiers and bandits everywhere. The people lived a hellish life. This kind of plausible thing said a lot. I said, 'This kind of legend. It's completely unfounded. A certain gentleman who was traveling with me also replied that it was very funny. I think you will know the Republic of China, which has been established for thousands of years, and after our revolution succeeds, we will simply shine a microscope on your Belgium. They laughed and dispersed. ”我们的杨女士虽然用她的尊脚征服了比利时女人，为国增光，但也有两点“错念”。其一，是我们中国人的确有过尾巴（即辫发）的，缠过小脚的，讨过姨太太的，虽现在也在讨。其二，是杨女士的脚不能代表一切中国女人的脚，正如留学的女生不能代表一切中国的女性一般。留学生大多数是家里有钱，或由政府派遣，为的是将来给家族或国家增光，贫穷和受不到教育的女人怎么能同日而语。所以，虽在现在，其实是缠着小脚，“跑起路来一摇一摆的”女人还不少。
Although our Ms. Yang conquered Belgian women with her dignified feet and added glory to the country, she also had two "wrong thoughts". First, we Chinese do have tails (i.e., braided hair), wrapped small feet, and begged for aunts, although they are still begging for them. Second, Ms. Yang's feet cannot represent all Chinese women's feet, just as girls studying abroad cannot represent all Chinese women. Most of the international students are rich in their families or sent by the government in order to add glory to their families or countries in the future. Therefore, although it is now, there are still many women who are wrapped around their little feet and "run and sway".至于困苦，那是用不着多谈，只要看同一的《申报》上，记载着多少“呼吁和平”的文电，多少募集急赈的广告，多少兵变和绑票的记事，留学外国的少爷小姐们虽然相隔太远，可以说不知道，但既然能想到用显微镜，难道就不能想到用望远镜吗？况且又何必用望远镜呢，同一的《杨缦华女士游欧杂感》里就又说：
As for hardship, there is no need to talk about it, as long as you look at the same "Declaration", how many "call for peace" are recorded, how many advertisements for urgent relief, how many mutiny and kidnapping notes, although the young masters and ladies studying abroad are too far apart, it can be said that they don't know, but since they can think of using a microscope, can't they think of using a telescope? Besides, why use a telescope, the same "Ms. Yang Manhua's Miscellaneous Feelings in Europe" said:“……据说使领馆的穷困，不自今日始。不过近几年来，有每况愈下之势。譬如逢到我国国庆或是重大纪念日，照例须招待外宾，举行盛典，意思是庆祝国运方兴，兼之联络各友邦的感情。以前使领馆必备盛宴，款待上宾，到了去年，为馆费支绌，改行茶会，以目前的形势推测，将后恐怕连茶会都开不成呢。在国际上最讲究体面的，要算日本国，他们政府行政费的预算，宁可特别节省，惟独于驻外使领馆的经费，十分充足。单就这一点来比较，我们已相形见拙了。”
“…… It is said that the poverty of the embassy and consulate does not begin today. However, in recent years, there has been a trend of deterioration. For example, on our country's National Day or major anniversaries, foreign guests must be entertained and grand ceremonies must be held as usual, which means to celebrate the prosperity of the national fortune and to contact the feelings of various friends. In the past, the embassy and consulate had a must-have feast to entertain distinguished guests, but last year, due to the shortage of embassy fees, the tea party was changed. The most decent thing in the world is Japan, and their government budget for administrative expenses is preferably saved, but the funds of embassies and consulates abroad are very sufficient. In this comparison alone, we are already dwarfed. ”使馆和领事馆是代表本国，如杨女士所说，要“庆祝国运方兴”的，而竟有“每况愈下之势”，孟子曰，“百姓不足，君孰与足？”则人民的过着什么生活，也就可想而知了。然而小国比利时的女人们究竟是单纯的，终于请求了原谅，假使她们真“知道立国数千年的大中华民国”的国民，往往有自欺欺人的不治之症，那可真是没有面子了。
Embassies and consulates represent their own countries, as Ms. Yang said, to "celebrate the rise of the national fortune", but there is actually a "deteriorating trend", Mencius said, "The people are insufficient, who is the king and the king?" Then you can imagine what kind of life the people live. However, the women of the small country of Belgium were innocent and finally asked for forgiveness, and if they really "knew the Republic of China, which has been founded for thousands of years", often had an incurable disease of self-deception, then it was really faceless.假如这样，又怎么办呢？我想，也还是“就此一笑而散”罢。
If so, what should we do? I think it's better to "laugh it off and leave".

唐朝的钉梢

唐朝的钉梢

唐朝的钉梢

The nail tip of the Tang Dynasty上海的摩登少爷要勾搭摩登小姐，首先第一步，是追随不舍，术语谓之“钉梢”。“钉”者，坚附而不可拔也，“梢”者，末也，后也，译成文言，大约可以说是“追蹑”。据钉梢专家说，那第二步便是“扳谈”；即使骂，也就大有希望，因为一骂便可有言语来往，所以也就是“扳谈”的开头。我一向以为这是现在的洋场上才有的，今看《花间集》，乃知道唐朝就已经有了这样的事，那里面有张泌的《浣溪纱》调十首，其九云：
The first step for the modern young master in Shanghai to hook up with Miss Modern is to follow the reluctance, which is called "nail tip". "Nail" means firmly attached and unpullable, and "tip" means the end, and the latter, translated into Chinese language, can be roughly said to be "chasing". According to the nail tip expert, the second step is to "talk"; Even if you scold, there is great hope, because there can be verbal exchanges when you scold, so it is the beginning of the "talk". I always thought that this was only available in the current foreign field, but now I look at the "Flower Collection", I know that there was already such a thing in the Tang Dynasty, where there are ten songs of Zhang Bi's "Huanxi Yarn", nine of which say:晚逐香车入凤城，东风斜揭绣帘轻，慢回娇眼笑盈盈。消息未通何计是，便须佯醉且随行，依稀闻道“太狂生”。
In the evening, I chased the fragrant carriage into the capital, where the east wind lifted the embroidered curtain lightly, and the delicate eyes were smiling. If the news is not communicated, what can be done, so you have to pretend to be drunk and go with you, vaguely hearing that "too crazy".这分明和现代的钉梢法是一致的。倘要译成白话诗，大概可以是这样：
This is clearly consistent with the modern nail tip method. If it is translated into vernacular poetry, it can probably be like this:夜赶洋车路上飞，Flying on the road at night, 
东风吹起印度绸衫子，显出腿儿肥， The east wind blows up the Indian silk shirt, showing off the fat legs, 
乱丢俏眼笑迷迷。 throwing pretty eyes and smiling. 
难以扳谈有什么法子呢？ is difficult to discuss? 
只能带着油腔滑调且钉梢， can only be smooth and nailed, 
好像听得骂道“杀千刀！” seems to hear the scolding "Kill a thousand knives!" ”
但恐怕在古书上，更早的也还能够发见，我极希望博学者见教，因为这是对于研究“钉梢史”的人，极有用处的。
But I am afraid that in ancient books, it can still be found earlier, and I very much hope that polymaths will see it, because this is very useful for those who study the "history of nails".

《夏娃日记》小引

《夏娃日记》小引

《夏娃日记》小引

A small introduction to "Eve's Diary"玛克·土温（Mark Twain）无须多说，只要一翻美国文学史，便知道他是前世纪末至现世纪初有名的幽默家（Humorist）。不但一看他的作品，要令人眉开眼笑，就是他那笔名，也含有一些滑稽之感的。
Needless to say, Mark Twain is a famous humorist from the end of the last century to the beginning of the present century. Not only does it make people smile when they look at his works, but even his pseudonym also contains some funny feelings.他本姓克莱门斯（Samuel Langhorne Clemens，1835—1910），原是一个领港，在发表作品的时候，便取量水时所喊的讹音，用作了笔名。作品很为当时所欢迎，他即被看作讲笑话的好手；但到一九一六年他的遗著《The Mysterious Stranger》一出版，却分明证实了他是很深的厌世思想的怀抱者了。
His original surname was Samuel Langhorne Clemens (1835-1910), and he was originally a pilot, and when he published his works, he took the mispronunciation shouted when measuring water and used it as a pseudonym. His works were very popular at the time, and he was regarded as a good joke teller; But by 1916, when his posthumous book "The Mysterious Stranger" was published, it was clearly confirmed that he was a deeply world-weary person.含着哀怨而在嘻笑，为什么会这样的？
Laughing with grief, why is this happening?我们知道，美国出过亚伦·坡（Edgar Allan Poe），出过霍桑（N．Hawthorne），出过惠德曼（W．Whitman），都不是这么表里两样的。然而这是南北战争以前的事。这之后，惠德曼先就唱不出歌来，因为这之后，美国已成了产业主义的社会，个性都得铸在一个模子里，不再能主张自我了。如果主张，就要受迫害。这时的作家之所注意，已非应该怎样发挥自己的个性，而是怎样写去，才能有人爱读，卖掉原稿，得到声名。连有名如荷惠勒（W．D．Howells）的，也以为文学者的能为世间所容，是在他给人以娱乐。于是有些野性未驯的，便站不住了，有的跑到外国，如詹谟士（Henry James），有的讲讲笑话，就是玛克·土温。
We know that the United States has produced Edgar Allan Poe, N. Hawthorne, and W. Whitman, and they are not so different. However, this was before the Civil War. After that, Whitman couldn't sing at first, because after that, the United States had become an industrialist society, and its personality had to be cast in a mold, and it could no longer assert itself. If you claim it, you will be persecuted. At this time, the writer's attention is not how to give full play to his personality, but how to write, so that people can love to read, sell the original manuscript, and gain fame. Even famous people like W.D. Howells think that the reason why literary scholars can be accepted by the world is that they entertain people. So some wild and untamed people couldn't stand still, some ran to foreign countries, such as Henry James, and some told jokes, that is, Mark Twain.那么，他的成了幽默家，是为了生活，而在幽默中又含着哀怨，含着讽刺，则是不甘于这样的生活的缘故了。因为这一点点的反抗，就使现在新土地里的儿童，还笑道：玛克·土温是我们的。
Then, he became a humorist for life, and there is sadness and irony in humor, which is because he is not willing to live such a life. Because of this little resistance, the children in the new land now laughed and said: Mark Twain is ours.这《夏娃日记》（Eve's Diary）出版于一九〇六年，是他的晚年之作，虽然不过一种小品，但仍是在天真中露出弱点，叙述里夹着讥评，形成那时的美国姑娘，而作者以为是一切女性的肖像，但脸上的笑影，却分明是有了年纪的了。幸而靠了作者的纯熟的手腕，令人一时难以看出，仍不失为活泼泼地的作品；又得译者将丰神传达，而且朴素无华，几乎要令人觉得倘使夏娃用中文来做日记，恐怕也就如此一样：更加值得一看了。
This "Eve's Diary" (Eve's Diary) was published in 1906 and is his later work, although it is just a sketch, but it still shows weaknesses in innocence, and the narrative is interspersed with ridicule, forming the American girl at that time, and the author thinks it is a portrait of all women, but the smile on the face is clearly old. Fortunately, relying on the author's skillful skills, it is difficult to see for a while, but it is still a lively work; The translator conveys the abundance of spirits, and it is unpretentious, almost making people think that if Eve had made a diary in Chinese, it would have been the same: it would be even more worth reading.莱勒孚（Lester Ralph）的五十余幅白描的插图，虽然柔软，却很清新，一看布局，也许很容易使人记起中国清季的任渭长的作品，但他所画的是仙侠高士，瘦削怪诞，远不如这些的健康；而且对于中国现在看惯了斜眼削肩的美女图的眼睛，也是很有澄清的益处的。
Lester Ralph's more than fifty white illustrations, although soft, are very fresh, at a glance at the layout, it may be easy to remember the works of Ren Weichang in the Qing Dynasty of China, but what he paints is Xianxia Gaoshi, thin and grotesque, far less healthy than these; And for the eyes of Chinese people who are now accustomed to seeing beautiful pictures with slanted eyes and shaved shoulders, it is also very beneficial to clarify.一九三一年九月二十七夜，记。
On the night of September 27, 1931, recorded.

新的“女将”

新的“女将”

新的“女将”

The new "female general"在上海制图版，比别处便当，也似乎好些，所以日报的星期附录画报呀，书店的什么什么月刊画报呀，也出得比别处起劲。这些画报上，除了一排一排的坐着大人先生们的什么什么会开会或闭会的纪念照片而外，还一定要有“女士”。
In Shanghai, the cartographic board seems to be better than other places, so the weekly appendix pictorial of the daily newspaper and the monthly pictorial of the bookstore are also more energetic than other places. In addition to the commemorative photos of adults and gentlemen sitting in rows at the meeting or closing meeting, there must also be "ladies" on these pictorials.“女士”的尊容，为什么要绍介于社会的呢？我们只要看那说明，就可以明白了。例如：
Why should the dignity of "ladies" be introduced to society? We only need to look at the explanation to understand. For example:“A女士，B女校皇后，性喜音乐。”
"Ms. A, the queen of the girls' school, love music."“C女士，D女校高材生，爱养叭儿狗。”
"Ms. C, a top student at D Girls' School, loves to raise a dog."“E女士，F大学肄业，为G先生之第五女公子。”
"Ms. E, a graduate of F University, is the fifth daughter of Mr. G."再看装束：春天都是时装，紧身窄袖；到夏天，将裤脚和袖子都撤掉了，坐在海边，叫作“海水浴”，天气正热，那原是应该的；入秋，天气凉了，不料日本兵恰恰侵入了东三省，于是画报上就出现了白长衫的看护服，或托枪的戎装的女士们。
Let's look at the costume: spring is all fashion, tight and narrow sleeves; In the summer, the trouser hem and sleeves were removed, and sitting on the seashore was called "sea bathing", and the weather was hot, which was supposed to be; In autumn, the weather was cold, but the Japanese soldiers invaded the three eastern provinces, so the pictorial appeared in the pictorial with white gowns and nurses, or ladies in military uniforms with guns.这是可以使读者喜欢的，因为富于戏剧性。中国本来喜欢玩把戏，乡下的戏台上，往往挂着一副对子，一面是“戏场小天地”，一面是“天地大戏场”。做起戏来，因为是乡下，还没有《乾隆帝下江南》之类，所以往往是《双阳公主追狄》，《薛仁贵招亲》，其中的女战士，看客称之为“女将”。她头插雉尾，手执双刀（或两端都有枪尖的长枪），一出台，看客就看得更起劲。明知不过是做做戏的，然而看得更起劲了。
This is something that readers can like because it is full of drama. China originally liked to play tricks, and on the stage in the countryside, there was often a pair hanging, one side was the "small world of the theater" and the other side was the "big theater of heaven and earth". When it comes to playing, because it is a countryside, there is no such thing as "Emperor Qianlong Goes to Jiangnan", so it is often "Princess Shuangyang Chasing Di", "Xue Rengui Recruiting Relatives", and the female soldiers in it, the audience calls them "female generals". She has a pheasant tail on her head and holds a double knife (or a spear with a spear at both ends), and as soon as she comes out, the spectators watch more energetically. Knowing that it was just a show, but watching it was more energetic.练了多年的军人，一声鼓响，突然都变了无抵抗主义者。于是远路的文人学士，便大谈什么“乞丐杀敌”，“屠夫成仁”，“奇女子救国”一流的传奇式古典，想一声锣响，出于意料之外的人物来“为国增光”。而同时，画报上也就出现了这些传奇的插画。但还没有提起剑仙的一道白光，总算还是切实的。
Soldiers who have been practicing for many years, with a drumbeat, suddenly become non-resisters. So the literati and scholars who traveled far away talked about the first-class legendary classics of "beggars killing the enemy", "butchers becoming benevolent", and "strange women saving the country". At the same time, these legendary illustrations also appeared in pictorials. But there was not a single white light from the sword immortal yet, and it was finally real.但愿不要误解。我并不是说，“女士”们都得在绣房里关起来；我不过说，雄兵解甲而密斯托枪，是富于戏剧性的而已。
I hope don't get me wrong. I am not saying that the "ladies" have to be locked up in the embroidery room; I'm just saying that the male soldiers disarm and the mist guns, which is full of drama.还有事实可以证明。一，谁也没有看见过日本的“惩膺中国军”的看护队的照片；二，日本军里是没有女将的。然而确已动手了。这是因为日本人是做事是做事，做戏是做戏，决不混合起来的缘故。
There are also facts to prove. First, no one has seen a photo of Japan's "punishing the Chinese army" guards; Second, there are no female generals in the Japanese army. However, it has indeed been done. This is because the Japanese do things and do things, and they do things and never mix.

宣传与做戏

宣传与做戏

宣传与做戏

Publicity and acting就是那刚刚说过的日本人，他们做文章论及中国的国民性的时候，内中往往有一条叫作“善于宣传”。看他的说明，这“宣传”两字却又不像是平常的“Propaganda”，而是“对外说谎”的意思。
It is the Japanese I just mentioned, when they make articles about China's national character, there is often one of them called "good at propaganda". Looking at his explanation, the word "propaganda" does not seem like the usual "Propaganda", but means "lying to the outside world".这宗话，影子是有一点的。譬如罢，教育经费用光了，却还要开几个学堂，装装门面；全国的人们十之九不识字，然而总得请几位博士，使他对西洋人去讲中国的精神文明；至今还是随便拷问，随便杀头，一面却总支撑维持着几个洋式的“模范监狱”，给外国人看看。还有，离前敌很远的将军，他偏要大打电报，说要“为国前驱”。连体操班也不愿意上的学生少爷，他偏要穿上军装，说是“灭此朝食”。
In this case, there is a little shadow. For example, the education fund is exhausted, but a few schools are still needed to open and decorate the façade; Nine out of ten people in the country are illiterate, but they always have to invite a few doctors to tell Westerners about China's spiritual civilization; To this day, it is still casually tortured and beheaded, but on the one hand, it always supports and maintains several Western-style "model prisons" for foreigners to see. Also, for generals who are far away from the former enemy, he wants to send a telegram, saying that he wants to "be the forerunner of the country". The young master of the student who didn't even want to go to the gymnastics class, he wanted to put on a military uniform, saying that it was "destroying this breakfast".不过，这些究竟还有一点影子；究竟还有几个学堂，几个博士，几个模范监狱，几个通电，几套军装。所以说是“说谎”，是不对的。这就是我之所谓“做戏”。
However, there is still a little shadow of these; How many schools, how many doctors, how many model prisons, how many electrifications, and how many sets of military uniforms. So it is not right to say that it is "lying". This is what I call "acting".但这普遍的做戏，却比真的做戏还要坏。真的做戏，是只有一时；戏子做完戏，也就恢复为平常状态的。杨小楼做《单刀赴会》，梅兰芳做《黛玉葬花》，只有在戏台上的时候是关云长，是林黛玉，下台就成了普通人，所以并没有大弊。倘使他们扮演一回之后，就永远提着青龙偃月刀或锄头，以关老爷，林妹妹自命，怪声怪气，唱来唱去，那就实在只好算是发热昏了。
But this common acting is worse than real acting. Really acting is only temporary; After the actor finished the play, he returned to his normal state. Yang Xiaolou did "Single Knife Meeting", Mei Lanfang did "Daiyu Funeral Flowers", only when he was on the stage, it was Guan Yunchang, it was Lin Daiyu, and he became an ordinary person when he stepped down, so there was no big problem. If they play it once, they will always carry the Qinglong Yanyue knife or hoe, call themselves Master Guan and Sister Lin, and sing around in strange voices, then they will really have to be fever and faint.不幸因为是“天地大戏场”，可以普遍的做戏者，就很难有下台的时候，例如杨缦华女士用自己的天足，踢破小国比利时女人的“中国女人缠足说”，为面子起见，用权术来解围，这还可以说是很该原谅的。但我以为应该这样就拉倒。现在回到寓里，做成文章，这就是进了后台还不肯放下青龙偃月刀；而且又将那文章送到中国的《申报》上来发表，则简直是提着青龙偃月刀一路唱回自己的家里来了。难道作者真已忘记了中国女人曾经缠脚，至今也还有正在缠脚的么？还是以为中国人都已经自己催眠，觉得全国女人都已穿了高跟皮鞋了呢？
For example, Ms. Yang Manhua used her natural feet to kick through the "Chinese women's foot binding theory" of Belgian women in a small country, and for the sake of face, she used power techniques to relieve the siege, which can be said to be very forgivable. But I thought I should pull it down like this. Now back in the apartment and making an article, this is when I enter the backstage and refuse to put down the Qinglong Yanyue Knife; And when he sent the article to China's "Declaration" for publication, he simply sang all the way back to his home with the Qinglong Yanyue Knife. Has the author really forgotten that Chinese women used to bind their feet, and there are still people who are binding their feet? Or do you think that Chinese people have hypnotized themselves and think that women all over the country have worn high-heeled leather shoes?这不过是一个例子罢了，相像的还多得很，但恐怕不久天也就要亮了。
This is just an example, there are many similarities, but I'm afraid the sky will be bright soon.

知难行难

知难行难

知难行难

Knowing the difficulty is difficult中国向来的老例，做皇帝做牢靠和做倒霉的时候，总要和文人学士扳一下子相好。做牢靠的时候是“偃武修文”，粉饰粉饰；做倒霉的时候是又以为他们真有“治国平天下”的大道，再问问看，要说得直白一点，就是见于《红楼梦》上的所谓“病笃乱投医”了。
As an old example in China, when you are an emperor, you must always get along with the literati and scholars. when it is reliable, it is "Yanwu Xiuwen", whitewashing; When they were unlucky, they thought that they really had the road of "governing the country and pacifying the world", and then asked, to put it bluntly, it was the so-called "sick and indiscriminately going to the doctor" seen in "Dream of Red Mansions".当“宣统皇帝”逊位逊到坐得无聊的时候，我们的胡适之博士曾经尽过这样的任务。
When the "Xuantong Emperor" abdicated to the point of boredom, our Dr. Hu Shizhi once performed such a task.见过以后，也奇怪，人们不知怎的先问他们怎样的称呼，博士曰：
After seeing them, it was strange that people somehow asked them what they called them first, and the doctor said:“他叫我先生，我叫他皇上。”
"He calls me sir, and I call him emperor."那时似乎并不谈什么国家大计，因为这“皇上”后来不过做了几首打油白话诗，终于无聊，而且还落得一个赶出金銮殿。现在可要阔了，听说想到东三省再去做皇帝呢。而在上海，又以“蒋召见胡适之丁文江”闻：
At that time, it seemed that there was no talk of any national plan, because this "emperor" later only made a few oil vernacular poems, and finally got bored, and ended up being kicked out of the Golden Luan Palace. Now it's wide, I heard that I want to be the emperor of the three eastern provinces. In Shanghai, it is known for "Jiang summoned Hu Shizhi Ding Wenjiang":“南京专电：丁文江，胡适，来京谒蒋，此来系奉蒋召，对大局有所垂询。……”（十月十四日《申报》。）
"Nanjing Special Telegram: Ding Wenjiang, Hu Shi, came to Beijing to pay respects to Jiang, and this time he was summoned by Jiang to inquire about the overall situation. ......" ("Declaration" on October 14. ）现在没有人问他怎样的称呼。
No one asks him what he is called now.为什么呢？因为是知道的，这回是“我称他主席……”！
Why? Because I know, this time it is "I call him chairman......"!安徽大学校长刘文典教授，因为不称“主席”而关了好多天，好容易才交保出外，老同乡，旧同事，博士当然是知道的，所以，“我称他主席”！
Professor Liu Wendian, president of Anhui University, was imprisoned for many days because he did not call himself "chairman", and it was easy to hand over the bail.也没有人问他“垂询”些什么。
No one asked him what he was "asking".为什么呢？因为这也是知道的，是“大局”。而且这“大局”也并无“国民党专政”和“英国式自由”的争论的麻烦，也没有“知难行易”和“知易行难”的争论的麻烦，所以，博士就出来了。
Why? Because this is also known, it is the "big picture". Moreover, this "overall situation" does not have the trouble of the debate between "Kuomintang dictatorship" and "British freedom", nor is there the trouble of the debate between "knowing the difficult is easy to do" and "knowing the easy is to do", so the doctor came out.“新月派”的罗隆基博士曰：“根本改组政府，……容纳全国各项人才代表各种政见的政府，……政治的意见，是可以牺牲的，是应该牺牲的。”（《沈阳事件》。）
Dr. Luo Longji of the "Crescent School" said: "Fundamentally reorganize the government,...... A government that accommodates all kinds of talents from all over the country and represents various political views,...... Political opinions can and should be sacrificed. ("Shenyang Incident".) ）代表各种政见的人才，组成政府，又牺牲掉政治的意见，这种“政府”实在是神妙极了。但“知难行易”竟“垂询”于“知难，行亦不易”，倒也是一个先兆。
Talents representing various political views form a government and sacrifice political opinions, this kind of "government" is really wonderful. However, "knowing the difficulty and doing it is easy" is actually "inquiring" to "knowing the difficulty, it is not easy to do", which is also a precursor.

几条“顺”的翻译

几条“顺”的翻译

几条“顺”的翻译

Several translations of "Shun"在这一个多年之中，拚死命攻击“硬译”的名人，已经有了三代：首先是祖师梁实秋教授，其次是徒弟赵景深教授，最近就来了徒孙杨晋豪大学生。但这三代之中，却要算赵教授的主张最为明白而且彻底了，那精义是——
In the past few years, there have been three generations of celebrities who desperately attacked "hard translation": the first is the ancestor Professor Liang Shiqiu, the second is the apprentice Professor Zhao Jingshen, and recently the apprentice Yang Jinhao college student has come. But among these three generations, Professor Zhao's proposition is the clearest and most thorough, and the essence is -“与其信而不顺，不如顺而不信。”
“与其信而不顺，不如顺而不信。 ”这一条格言虽然有些希奇古怪，但对于读者是有效力的。因为“信而不顺”的译文，一看便觉得费力，要借书来休养精神的读者，自然就会佩服赵景深教授的格言。至于“顺而不信”的译文，却是倘不对照原文，就连那“不信”在什么地方都不知道。然而用原文来对照的读者，中国有几个呢。这时候，必须读者比译者知道得更多一点，才可以看出其中的错误，明白那“不信”的所在。否则，就只好胡里胡涂的装进脑子里去了。我对于科学是知道得很少的，也没有什么外国书，只好看看译本，但近来往往遇见疑难的地方。随便举几个例子罢。《万有文库》里的周太玄先生的《生物学浅说》里，有这样的一句——
Although this maxim is a bit strange, it is effective for readers. Because the translation of "believe but not follow" feels laborious at first glance, readers who want to borrow books to recuperate their spirits will naturally admire Professor Zhao Jingshen's maxims. As for the translation of "obedience and unbelief", if you do not compare it with the original text, even the "disbelief" does not know where it is. However, there are several readers in China who use the original text to compare. At this time, the reader must know a little more than the translator in order to see the error and understand the "unbelief". Otherwise, I have no choice but to put it in my head. I know very little about science, and I don't have any foreign books, so I have to look at translations, but I often encounter difficult things recently. Just give a few examples. In Mr. Zhou Taixuan's "Brief Explanation of Biology" in "Wanyou Library", there is such a sentence -“最近如尼尔及厄尔两氏之对于麦……”
"Recently, as Neil and Earl have done to McT......"据我所知道，在瑞典有一个生物学名家Nilsson-Ehle是考验小麦的遗传的，但他是一个人而兼两姓，应该译作“尼尔生厄尔”才对。现在称为“两氏”，又加了“及”，顺是顺的，却很使我疑心是别的两位了。不过这是小问题，虽然，要讲生物学，连这些小节也不应该忽略，但我们姑且模模胡胡罢。
As far as I know, there is a famous biologist in Sweden who tested the genetics of wheat, but he is a person with two surnames, which should be translated as "Nilsson-Ehle". Now it is called "two clans", and "and" is added, which is smooth, but it makes me very suspicious that it is the other two. But this is a small problem, although if you want to talk about biology, even these subsections should not be ignored, but let's just ignore it.今年的三月号《小说月报》上冯厚生先生译的《老人》里，又有这样的一句——
In the March issue of "Novel Monthly" this year, Mr. Feng Housheng's translation of "The Old Man" has this sentence -“他由伤寒病变为流行性的感冒（Influenza）的重病……”
"He went from typhoid fever to a serious illness of Influenza......"这也是很“顺”的，但据我所知道，流行性感冒并不比伤寒重，而且一个是呼吸系病，一个是消化系病，无论你怎样“变”，也“变”不过去的。须是“伤风”或“中寒”，这才变得过去。但小说不比《生物学浅说》，我们也姑且模模胡胡罢。这回另外来看一个奇特的实验。
This is also very "smooth", but as far as I know, influenza is not worse than typhoid fever, and one is a respiratory disease and the other is a digestive disease. It must be "cold" or "moderate cold" to become a pass. But the novel is not as good as "Biology", so let's just imitate it. This time let's look at another peculiar experiment.这一种实验，是出在何定杰及张志耀两位合译的美国Conklin所作的《遗传与环境》里面的。那译文是——
This kind of experiment is from "Genetics and Environment" co-translated by He Dingjie and Zhang Zhiyao in the United States. The translation is—“……他们先取出兔眼睛内髓质之晶体，注射于家禽，等到家禽眼中生成一种‘代晶质’，足以透视这种外来的蛋白质精以后，再取出家禽之血清，而注射于受孕之雌兔。雌兔经此番注射，每不能堪，多遭死亡，但是他们的眼睛或晶体并不见有若何之伤害，并且他们卵巢内所蓄之卵，亦不见有什么特别之伤害，因为就他们以后所生的小兔看来，并没有生而具残缺不全之眼者。”
“…… They first took out the crystals of the medulla in the rabbit's eyes and injected them into the poultry, and waited until a 'substitute crystal' was formed in the eyes of the poultry, which was enough to see through this foreign protein essence, and then took out the poultry serum and injected it into the pregnant female rabbit. After this injection, the female rabbits were often unable to bear it and often died, but their eyes or crystals were not harmed, and the eggs stored in their ovaries did not cause any special damage, because as far as the rabbits they gave birth to later were concerned, they were not born with incomplete eyes. ”这一段文章，也好像是颇“顺”，可以懂得的。但仔细一想，却不免不懂起来了。一，“髓质之晶体”是什么？因为水晶体是没有髓质皮质之分的。二，“代晶质”又是什么？三，“透视外来的蛋白质”又是怎么一回事？我没有原文能对，实在苦恼得很，想来想去，才以为恐怕是应该改译为这样的——
This article also seems to be quite "smooth" and understandable. But if you think about it carefully, you can't help but understand. 1. What is the "medullary crystal"? Because the lens is not divided into medullary cortex. Second, what is "generation crystalline"? 3. What is the matter of "seeing through foreign proteins"? I don't have the original text to get it right, I was really distressed, and after thinking about it, I thought that I should probably change it to this——“他们先取兔眼内的制成浆状（以便注射）的水晶体，注射于家禽，等到家禽感应了这外来的蛋白质（即浆状的水晶体）而生‘抗晶质’（即抵抗这浆状水晶体的物质）。然后再取其血清，而注射于怀孕之雌兔。……”
"They first took the slurry (for injection) crystals in the rabbit's eyes and injected them into poultry, and when the poultry sensed the foreign protein (i.e., the slurry crystal) and produced 'anticrystalline' (i.e., the substance that resists the slurry crystal). The serum is then taken and injected into the pregnant female rabbit. ……”以上不过随手引来的几个例，此外情随事迁，忘却了的还不少，有许多为我所不知道的，那自然就都溜过去，或者照样错误地装在我的脑里了。但即此几个例子，我们就已经可以决定，译得“信而不顺”的至多不过看不懂，想一想也许能懂，译得“顺而不信”的却令人迷误，怎样想也不会懂，如果好像已经懂得，那么你正是入了迷途了。
The above are just a few examples that were casually attracted, and there are many things that I have forgotten, and there are many things that I don't know, so naturally they all slip by, or they are still mistakenly put in my head. But in these few examples, we can already decide that the translation of "believing but not believing" is at most incomprehensible, thinking about it, you may be able to understand, but the translation of "obedient but not believing" is misleading, no matter how you think about it, you will not understand, if you seem to understand, then you are lost.

风马牛

风马牛

风马牛

Wind horses and cattle主张“顺而不信”译法的大将赵景深先生，近来却并没有译什么大作，他大抵只在《小说月报》上，将“国外文坛消息”，来介绍给我们。这自然是很可感谢的。那些消息，是译来的呢，还是介绍者自去打听来，研究来的？我们无从捉摸。即使是译来的罢，但大抵没有说明出处，我们也无从考查。自然，在主张“顺而不信”译法的赵先生，这是都不必注意的，如果有些“不信”，倒正是贯彻了宗旨。
Mr. Zhao Jingshen, a general who advocates the translation of "obedience and not belief", has not translated any masterpieces recently, and he has probably only introduced "foreign literary news" to us in the "Novel Monthly". This is naturally very grateful. Were those news translated, or were they inquired and studied by the introducer himself? We are unpredictable. Even if it is translated, it probably does not indicate the source, and we have no way to verify it. Naturally, Mr. Zhao, who advocates the translation of "obedience and not believing", does not need to pay attention to this, if there is some "disbelief", it is the implementation of the purpose.然而，疑难之处，我却还是遇到的。
However, I still encountered difficulties.在二月号的《小说月报》里，赵先生将“新群众作家近讯”告诉我们，其一道：“格罗泼已将马戏的图画故事《Alay Oop》脱稿。”这是极“顺”的，但待到看见了这本图画，却不尽是马戏。借得英文字典来，将书名下面注着的两行英文“Life and Love Among the Acrobats Told Entirely in Pictures”查了一通，才知道原来并不是“马戏”的故事，而是“做马戏的戏子们”的故事。这么一说，自然，有些“不顺”了。但内容既然是这样的，另外也没有法子想。必须是“马戏子”，这才会有“Love”。
In the February issue of Novel Monthly, Mr. Zhao told us about the "New Mass Writer News", one of which was: "Gropp has undrafted the circus picture story "Alay Oop". This is very "smooth", but when I saw this picture, it was not all a circus. Borrowing an English dictionary, I looked up the two lines of English "Life and Love Among the Acrobats Told Entirely in Pictures" under the title of the book, and found out that it was not the story of "circus", but the story of "circus actors". Saying this, naturally, it was a little "unsmooth". But since the content is like this, there is no way to think about it. It must be a "circus" for there to be "Love".《小说月报》到了十一月号，赵先生又告诉了我们“塞意斯完成四部曲”，而且“连最后的一册《半人半牛怪》（Der Zentaur）也已于今年出版”了。这一下“Der”，就令人眼睛发白，因为这是茄门话，就是想查字典，除了同济学校也几乎无处可借，那里还敢发生什么贰心。然而那下面的一个名词，却不写尚可，一写倒成了疑难杂症。这字大约是源于希腊的，英文字典上也就有，我们还常常看见用它做画材的图画，上半身是人，下半身却是马，不是牛。牛马同是哺乳动物，为了要“顺”，固然混用一回也不关紧要，但究竟马是奇蹄类，牛是偶蹄类，有些不同，还是分别了好，不必“出到最后的一册”的时候，偏来“牛”一下子的。
In the November issue of "Novel Monthly", Mr. Zhao told us that "Seyce completed the tetralogy" and that "even the last volume, Der Zentaur, was published this year." This "Der" makes people's eyes turn white, because this is the Qimen dialect, that is, I want to look up the dictionary, except for Tongji School, there is almost nowhere to borrow, and there is no second thought. However, the following noun is not written as acceptable, and it has become an intractable disease. This word is probably of Greek origin, and it is also found in the English dictionary, and we often see pictures of people using it as painting materials, the upper body is a person, but the lower body is a horse, not a cow. Cattle and horses are both mammals, in order to be "smooth", of course, it doesn't matter if they are mixed once, but in the end, horses are odd-hoofed and cows are artiodactyls, which are somewhat different, or they are different, and there is no need to "go out to the last book", but the "cow" is all of a sudden.“牛”了一下之后，使我联想起赵先生的有名的“牛奶路”来了。这很像是直译或“硬译”，其实却不然，也是无缘无故的“牛”了进去的。这故事无须查字典，在图画上也能看见。却说希腊神话里的大神宙斯是一位很有些喜欢女人的神，他有一回到人间去，和某女士生了一个男孩子。物必有偶，宙斯太太却偏又是一个很有些嫉妒心的女神。她一知道，拍桌打凳的（？）大怒了一通之后，便将那孩子取到天上，要看机会将他害死。然而孩子是天真的，他满不知道，有一回，碰着了宙太太的乳头，便一吸，太太大吃一惊，将他一推，跌落到人间，不但没有被害，后来还成了英雄。但宙太太的乳汁，却因此一吸，喷了出来，飞散天空，成为银河，也就是“牛奶路”，——不，其实是“神奶路”。但白种人是一切“奶”都叫“Milk”的，我们看惯了罐头牛奶上的文字，有时就不免于误译，是的，这也是无足怪的事。
After "cow" for a while, it reminded me of Mr. Zhao's famous "Milk Road". This is very similar to a literal translation or a "hard translation", but in fact, it is not the case, and it is also a "cow" for no reason. This story does not need to be looked up in a dictionary, it can be seen on the picture. But it is said that Zeus, the great god in Greek mythology, was a god who liked women very much, and once he returned to the world, he gave birth to a boy with a certain lady. There must be coincidences, but Mrs. Zeus is a very jealous goddess. As soon as she found out, the (?) After being furious, they took the child to heaven to see if the opportunity was to kill him. However, the child was naïve, he didn't know it, once, touched Mrs. Zhou's nipple, he sucked it, the wife was surprised, pushed him, and fell into the world, not only was he not killed, but later became a hero. But Mrs. Zhou's milk was sucked out because of this, spurted out, and flew into the sky, becoming the Milk Galaxy, which is the "Milk Road",—— no, it is actually the "Divine Milk Road". But Caucasians call all "milk" "Milk", we are used to seeing the words on canned milk, and sometimes we are inevitably mistranslated, yes, this is not surprising.但以对于翻译大有主张的名人，而遇马发昏，爱牛成性，有些“牛头不对马嘴”的翻译，却也可当作一点谈助。——不过当作别人的一点谈助，并且借此知道一点希腊神话而已，于赵先生的“与其信而不顺，不如顺而不信”的格言，却还是毫无损害的。这叫作“乱译万岁！”
However, as a celebrity who has a lot of ideas about translation, and when he encounters a horse and loves cattle, some translations of "the bull's head is not the horse's mouth" can also be used as a little talk. ——However, as a little help for others, and to know a little Greek mythology, Mr. Zhao's maxim "It is better to obey than to believe in it" is still unharmed. This is called "Long live the scrambled translation!" ”

再来一条“顺”的翻译

再来一条“顺”的翻译

再来一条“顺”的翻译

Another translation of "smooth"这“顺”的翻译出现的时候，是很久远了；而且是大文学家和大翻译理论家，谁都不屑注意的。但因为偶然在我所搜集的“顺译模范文大成”稿本里，翻到了这一条，所以就再来一下子。
When this translation of "Shun" appeared, it was a long time ago; And he is a great writer and a great translation theorist, and no one disdains to pay attention. But because I happened to turn to this one in the manuscript of "Shun Translation Model Wen Dacheng" that I collected, I will do it again.却说这一条，是出在中华民国十九年八月三日的《时报》里的，在头号字的《针穿两手……》这一个题目之下，做着这样的文章：
However, this article was published in the "Times" of August 3, the 19th year of the Republic of China, under the title of "Needle Piercing Two Hands......", which made such an article:“被共党捉去以钱赎出由长沙逃出之中国商人，与从者二名，于昨日避难到汉，彼等主仆，均鲜血淋漓，语其友人曰，长沙有为共党作侦探者，故多数之资产阶级，于廿九日晨被捕，予等系于廿八夜捕去者，即以针穿手，以秤秤之，言时出其两手，解布以示其所穿之穴，尚鲜血淋漓。……（汉口二日电通电）”
“被共党捉去以钱赎出由长沙逃出之中国商人，与从者二名，于昨日避难到汉，彼等主仆，均鲜血淋漓，语其友人曰，长沙有为共党作侦探者，故多数之资产阶级，于廿九日晨被捕，予等系于廿八夜捕去者，即以针穿手，以秤秤之，言时出其两手，解布以示其所穿之穴，尚鲜血淋漓。 …… （汉口二日电通电）”这自然是“顺”的，虽然略一留心，即容或会有多少可疑之点。譬如罢，其一，主人是资产阶级，当然要“鲜血淋漓”的了，二仆大概总是穷人，为什么也要一同“鲜血淋漓”的呢？其二，“以针穿手，以秤秤之”干什么，莫非要照斤两来定罪名么？但是，虽然如此，文章也还是“顺”的，因为在社会上，本来说得共党的行为是古里古怪；况且只要看过《玉历钞传》，就都知道十殿阎王的某一殿里，有用天秤来秤犯人的办法，所以“以秤秤之”，也还是毫不足奇。只有秤的时候，不用称钩而用“针”，却似乎有些特别罢了。
This is naturally "smooth", although if you pay a little attention, there may be a lot of suspicious points. For example, first, the master is a bourgeoisie, of course he must be "bloody", and the second servant is probably always poor, so why should he be "bloody" together? Second, what is the purpose of "piercing the hand with a needle and weighing it with a scale", is it necessary to convict according to the pound? However, despite this, the article is still "smooth", because in society, the behavior of the Communist Party is ancient and strange; Moreover, as long as you have read the "Jade Calendar Banknote", you know that in a certain hall of the Ten Halls of Yama, there is a method of using scales to weigh prisoners, so it is not surprising to "weigh it with a scale". When there is only a scale, there is no need to weigh the hook but use a "needle", but it seems to be a little special.幸而，我在同日的一种日本文报纸《上海日报》上，也偶然见到了电通社的同一的电报，这才明白《时报》是因为译者不拘拘于“硬译”，而又要“顺”，所以有些不“信”了。倘若译得“信而不顺”一点，大略是应该这样的：
Fortunately, I also happened to see the same telegram from Dentsu News Agency in a Japanese newspaper "Shanghai Daily" on the same day, and then I realized that the "Times" was a little "unbelievable" because the translator was not bound by "hard translation" but wanted to "follow it". If the translation is a little "believe but not smooth", it should be roughly like this:“……彼等主仆，将为恐怖和鲜血所渲染之经验谈，语该地之中国人曰，共产军中，有熟悉长沙之情形者，……予等系于廿八日之半夜被捕，拉去之时，则在腕上刺孔，穿以铁丝，数人或数十人为一串。言时即以包着沁血之布片之手示之……”
“…… Their masters and servants will talk about the experience of terror and blood, and tell the Chinese there that there are people in the communist army who are familiar with the situation in Changsha,...... We were arrested in the middle of the night on the 28th, and when we were taken away, we had holes in our wrists pierced and wires threaded through them, and several or dozens of people were strung together. When he spoke, he showed him his hand covered in blood......这才分明知道，“鲜血淋漓”的并非“彼等主仆”，乃是他们的“经验谈”，两位仆人，手上实在并没有一个洞。穿手的东西，日本文虽然写作“针金”，但译起来须是“铁丝”，不是“针”，针是做衣服的。至于“以秤秤之”，却连影子也没有。
Only then did I clearly know that it was not "their master and servant" who were "bloody", but their "experience talk", and the two servants really did not have a hole in their hands. Although the Japanese word for "needle" is written as "needle", it must be translated as "wire", not "needle", and the needle is used to make clothes. As for "weighing it with a scale", there is not even a shadow.我们的“友邦”好友，顶喜欢宣传中国的古怪事情，尤其是“共党”的；四年以前，将“裸体游行”说得像煞有介事，于是中国人也跟着叫了好几个月。其实是，警察用铁丝穿了殖民地的革命党的手，一串一串的牵去，是所谓“文明”国民的行为，中国人还没有知道这方法，铁丝也不是农业社会的产品。从唐到宋，因为迷信，对于“妖人”虽然曾有用铁索穿了锁骨，以防变化的法子，但久已不用，知道的人也几乎没有了。文明国人将自己们所用的文明方法，硬栽到中国来，不料中国人却还没有这样文明，连上海的翻译家也不懂，偏不用铁丝来穿，就只照阎罗殿上的办法，“秤”了一下完事。
Our "friendly" friends like to promote China's weird things, especially the "Communist"; Four years ago, the "nude parade" was described as a serious matter, so the Chinese also followed suit for several months. In fact, the police pierced the hands of the revolutionary party in the colonies with wires and led them one by one, which was the behavior of the so-called "civilized" citizens, and the Chinese did not know this method, and the wire was not a product of the agricultural society. From the Tang Dynasty to the Song Dynasty, because of superstition, although the "demons" had used iron cables to pierce the collarbone to prevent changes, they had not been used for a long time, and almost no one knew about them. The civilized people planted their civilized methods in China, but the Chinese did not yet have such a civilization, and even the translators in Shanghai did not understand it, so they did not use wires to wear them, so they only "weighed" the matter according to the method on the Yama Hall.造谣的和帮助造谣的，一下子都显出本相来了。
Those who spread rumors and those who help spread rumors all of a sudden showed their true colors.

中华民国的新“堂·吉诃德”们

中华民国的新“堂·吉诃德”们

中华民国的新“堂·吉诃德”们

The new "Don Quixote" of the Republic of China十六世纪末尾的时候，西班牙的文人西万提斯做了一大部小说叫作《堂·吉诃德》，说这位吉先生，看武侠小说看呆了，硬要去学古代的游侠，穿一身破甲，骑一匹瘦马，带一个跟丁，游来游去，想斩妖服怪，除暴安良。谁知当时已不是那么古气盎然的时候了，因此只落得闹了许多笑话，吃了许多苦头，终于上个大当，受了重伤，狼狈回来，死在家里，临死才知道自己不过一个平常人，并不是什么大侠客。
At the end of the sixteenth century, the Spanish literati Sivantes made a large novel called "Don Quixote", saying that this Mr. Ji, who was stunned by martial arts novels, insisted on learning from the ancient rangers, wearing torn armor, riding a thin horse, and taking a follower, swimming around, wanting to kill monsters and eliminate violence and peace. Who knew that it was not such an ancient time at that time, so he only ended up with a lot of jokes, suffered a lot, and finally got a big fool, was seriously injured, came back in embarrassment, died at home, and before he died, he realized that he was just an ordinary person, not a hero.这一个古典，去年在中国曾经很被引用了一回，受到这个谥法的名人，似乎还有点很不高兴的样子。其实是，这种书呆子，乃是西班牙书呆子，向来爱讲“中庸”的中国，是不会有的。西班牙人讲恋爱，就天天到女人窗下去唱歌，信旧教，就烧杀异端，一革命，就捣烂教堂，踢出皇帝。然而我们中国的文人学子，不是总说女人先来引诱他，诸教同源，保存庙产，宣统在革命之后，还许他许多年在宫里做皇帝吗？
This classic was quoted once in China last year, and the celebrities who received this posthumous title seemed to be a little unhappy. In fact, this kind of nerd is a Spanish nerd, and China, which has always loved to talk about "moderation", will not exist. When the Spaniards talk about love, they go to women's windows every day to sing, believe in the old religion, burn heretics, and destroy churches and kick out the emperor as soon as there is a revolution. However, don't we Chinese literati always say that women come to seduce him first, that all religions have the same origin, preserve temple property, and that after the revolution, Xuantong allowed him to be emperor in the palace for many years?记得先前的报章上，发表过几个店家的小伙计，看剑侠小说入了迷，忽然要到武当山去学道的事，这倒很和“堂·吉诃德”相像的。但此后便看不见一点后文，不知道是也做出了许多奇迹，还是不久就又回到家里去了？以“中庸”的老例推测起来，大约以回了家为合式。
I remember that in the previous newspaper, a young man from a few shops published a story about reading a swordsman novel and suddenly going to Wudang Mountain to learn Taoism, which is very similar to "Don Quixote". But after that, I couldn't see a little bit of the afterword, I don't know if he also did many miracles, or did he return home soon? Based on the old example of "moderation", it is estimated that it is about to go home.这以后的中国式的“堂·吉诃德”的出现，是“青年援马团”。不是兵，他们偏要上战场；政府要诉诸国联，他们偏要自己动手；政府不准去，他们偏要去；中国现在总算有一点铁路了，他们偏要一步一步的走过去；北方是冷的，他们偏只穿件夹袄；打仗的时候，兵器是顶要紧的，他们偏只着重精神。这一切等等，确是十分“堂·吉诃德”的了。然而究竟是中国的“堂·吉诃德”，所以他只一个，他们是一团；送他的是嘲笑，送他们的是欢呼；迎他的是诧异，而迎他们的也是欢呼；他驻扎在深山中，他们驻扎在真茹镇；他在磨坊里打风磨，他们在常州玩梳篦，又见美女，何幸如之（见十二月《申报》《自由谈》）。其苦乐之不同，有如此者，呜呼！
After that, the emergence of the Chinese-style "Don Quixote" was the "Youth Horse Aid Group". Not soldiers, they prefer to go to the battlefield; The government wants to resort to the League of Nations, and they prefer to do it themselves; The government is not allowed to go, they want to go; China finally has a little railway now, and they have to go step by step; It is cold in the north, and they only wear jackets; When fighting, weapons are the most important, and they only focus on spirit. All this and so on are indeed very "Don Quixote". However, it is China's "Don Quixote", so he is only one, they are a group; What is given to him is ridicule, and what is given to them is cheering; He was greeted with surprise, and cheered as he greeted them; He was stationed in the deep mountains, and they were stationed in Zhenru Town; He was grinding in the mill, they were playing with the comb in Changzhou, and they saw beautiful women, how lucky they were (see "Declaration" and "Free Talk" in December). The difference in joy and sorrow between them is like this, alas!不错，中外古今的小说太多了，里面有“舆榇”，有“截指”，有“哭秦庭”，有“对天立誓”。耳濡目染，诚然也不免来抬棺材，砍指头，哭孙陵，宣誓出发的。然而五四运动时胡适之博士讲文学革命的时候，就已经要“不用古典”，现在在行为上，似乎更可以不用了。
Yes, there are too many novels in ancient and modern China and abroad, including "coffin", "amputated fingers", "crying Qin Ting", and "swearing to heaven". It is true that they will come to carry the coffin, cut off their fingers, cry Sun Ling, and swear to set off. However, when Dr. Hu Shizhi talked about the literary revolution during the May Fourth Movement, he already wanted to "do not use the classics", and now it seems that he can not do without it in terms of behavior.讲二十世纪战事的小说，旧一点的有雷马克的《西线无战事》，棱的《战争》，新一点的有绥拉菲摩维支的《铁流》，法捷耶夫的《毁灭》，里面都没有这样的“青年团”，所以他们都实在打了仗。
Novels about war in the 20th century, the old ones include Remarque's "All Quiet on the Western Front", Ling's "War", and the newer ones include Suerafimovitz's "Iron Stream" and Fadeev's "Destruction".

《野草》英文译本序

《野草》英文译本序

《野草》英文译本序

Preface to the English translation of "Wild Grass"冯Y．S．先生由他的友人给我看《野草》的英文译本，并且要我说几句话。可惜我不懂英文，只能自己说几句。但我希望，译者将不嫌我只做了他所希望的一半的。
Mr. Feng Y.S. showed me the English translation of "Weeds" by his friend and asked me to say a few words. Unfortunately, I don't understand English, so I can only say a few words myself. But I hope that the translator will not think that I have only done half of what he hoped.这二十多篇小品，如每篇末尾所注，是一九二四至二六年在北京所作，陆续发表于期刊《语丝》上的。大抵仅仅是随时的小感想。因为那时难于直说，所以有时措辞就很含糊了。
These more than 20 essays, as noted at the end of each article, were written in Beijing from 1924 to 26 and were successively published in the journal "Yusi". It's probably just a small impression at any time. Because it was difficult to say it directly at that time, sometimes the wording was very vague.现在举几个例罢。因为讽刺当时盛行的失恋诗，作《我的失恋》，因为憎恶社会上旁观者之多，作《复仇》第一篇，又因为惊异于青年之消沉，作《希望》。《这样的战士》，是有感于文人学士们帮助军阀而作。《腊叶》，是为爱我者的想要保存我而作的。段祺瑞政府枪击徒手民众后，作《淡淡的血痕中》，其时我已避居别处；奉天派和直隶派军阀战争的时候，作《一觉》，此后我就不能住在北京了。
Let's give a few examples. Because of the satire of the popular lovelorn poems at that time, he wrote "My Broken Love", because he hated the number of bystanders in society, he wrote the first article of "Revenge", and because he was amazed by the depression of youth, he wrote "Hope". "Such a Warrior" was written in response to the literati and scholars helping the warlords. "La Ye" is made for those who love me to save me. After the Duan Qirui government shot unarmed people, he wrote "In the Light Bloodstains", at that time I had taken refuge elsewhere; During the warlord war between the Fengtian faction and the Zhili faction, I wrote "One Awakening", and I couldn't live in Beijing after that.所以，这也可以说，大半是废弛的地狱边沿的惨白色小花，当然不会美丽。但这地狱也必须失掉。这是由几个有雄辩和辣手，而那时还未得志的英雄们的脸色和语气所告诉我的。我于是作《失掉的好地狱》。
Therefore, it can also be said that most of them are pale white flowers on the edge of the ruined hell, and of course they will not be beautiful. But this hell must also be lost. This was told to me by the faces and tones of several eloquent and hot-handed heroes who were not yet successful at that time. So I wrote "The Good Hell Lost".后来，我不再作这样的东西了。日在变化的时代，已不许这样的文章，甚而至于这样的感想存在。我想，这也许倒是好的罢。为译本而作的序言，也应该在这里结束了。
Later, I stopped doing such things. In the era of daily change, such articles are no longer allowed, and even such feelings exist. I think this may be a good thing. The preface to the translation should also end here.十一月五日。
November 5th.

“智识劳动者”万岁

“智识劳动者”万岁

“智识劳动者”万岁

Long live the "intellectual workers"“劳动者”这句话成了“罪人”的代名词，已经足足四年了。压迫罢，谁也不响；杀戮罢，谁也不响；文学上一提起这句话，就有许多“文人学士”和“正人君子”来笑骂，接着又有许多他们的徒子徒孙来笑骂。劳动者呀劳动者，真要永世不得翻身了。
The phrase "laborer" has become synonymous with "sinner" for four years. oppression, no one sounds; After killing, no one makes a sound; When this sentence is mentioned in literature, there are many "literati and scholars" and "upright gentlemen" who laugh and scold, and then many of their disciples and grandchildren laugh and scold. Laborers, laborers, really never turn over.不料竟又有人记得你起来。
Unexpectedly, someone remembered you again.不料帝国主义老爷们还嫌党国屠杀得不赶快，竟来亲自动手了，炸的炸，轰的轰。称“人民”为“反动分子”，是党国的拿手戏，而不料帝国主义老爷也有这妙法，竟称不抵抗的顺从的党国官军为“贼匪”，大加以“膺惩”！冤乎枉哉，这真有些“顺”“逆”不分，玉石俱焚之慨了！
Unexpectedly, the imperialist masters still thought that the party-state was not in a hurry to massacre, so they came to do it themselves, blowing up and bombing. Calling "people" "reactionaries" is the specialty of the party and the state, but unexpectedly, the imperialist master also had this wonderful method, and even called the unresisting and obedient party-state officials and soldiers "bandits" and "punished"! It's unjust, this is really a bit "smooth" and "reverse", and the jade and stone are burned!于是又记得了劳动者。
So I remembered the laborers again.于是久不听到了的“亲爱的劳动者呀！”的亲热喊声，也在文章上看见了；久不看见了的“智识劳动者”的奇妙官衔，也在报章上发见了，还因为“感于有联络的必要”，组织了“协会”，举了干事樊仲云，汪馥泉呀这许多新任“智识劳动者”先生们。
So I haven't heard it for a long time, "Dear laborer!" The affectionate shouts were also seen in the article; The wonderful official title of "intellectual laborer" that I had not seen for a long time was also published in the newspaper, and because I "felt the need to contact", I organized an "association" and raised many new "intellectual workers" gentlemen such as Fan Zhongyun and Wang Fuquan.有什么“智识”？有什么“劳动”？“联络”了干什么？“必要”在那里？这些这些，暂且不谈罢，没有“智识”的体力劳动者，也管不着的。
What is "intellect"? What is "labor"? What are you doing when you "contact"? Where is the "necessary"? Putting aside these things for the time being, manual workers without "intellect" cannot control them.“亲爱的劳动者”呀！你们再替这些高贵的“智识劳动者”起来干一回罢！给他们仍旧可以坐在房里“劳动”他们那高贵的“智识”。即使失败，失败的也不过是“体力”，“智识”还在着的！
"Dear laborers"! You should stand up and do it for these noble "intellectual workers" again! Give them the ability to still sit in the room and "labor" their noble "intellect". Even if you fail, what fails is only "physical strength", and "intellect" is still there!“智识”劳动者万岁！
Long live the "intellectual" workers!

“友邦惊诧”论

“友邦惊诧”论

“友邦惊诧”论

"Friendly countries are surprised" theory只要略有知觉的人就都知道：这回学生的请愿，是因为日本占据了辽吉，南京政府束手无策，单会去哀求国联，而国联却正和日本是一伙。读书呀，读书呀，不错，学生是应该读书的，但一面也要大人老爷们不至于葬送土地，这才能够安心读书。报上不是说过，东北大学逃散，冯庸大学逃散，日本兵看见学生模样的就枪毙吗？放下书包来请愿，真是已经可怜之至。不道国民党政府却在十二月十八日通电各地军政当局文里，又加上他们“捣毁机关，阻断交通，殴伤中委，拦劫汽车，攒击路人及公务人员，私逮刑讯，社会秩序，悉被破坏”的罪名，而且指出结果，说是“友邦人士，莫名惊诧，长此以往，国将不国”了！
As long as anyone with a slight awareness knows: this time, the student's petition is because Japan occupies Liaoji, and the Nanjing government is helpless and will only beg the League of Nations, but the League of Nations is in the same league as Japan. Reading, reading, yes, students should read, but on the other hand, the adults and masters should not bury the land, so that they can study with peace of mind. Didn't the newspaper say that Northeastern University fled, Feng Yong University fled, and Japanese soldiers shot and killed when they saw the students? It is really pitiful to put down your schoolbag and petition. Unexpectedly, the Kuomintang government sent a telegram to the military and political authorities in various places on December 18, adding that they were guilty of "destroying organs, blocking traffic, injuring the Central Committee, stopping cars, attacking passers-by and civil servants, arresting and torturing privately, and destroying social order", and pointed out the result, saying that "friendly people are inexplicably surprised, and in the long run, the country will be gone"!好个“友邦人士”！日本帝国主义的兵队强占了辽吉，炮轰机关，他们不惊诧；阻断铁路，追炸客车，捕禁官吏，枪毙人民，他们不惊诧。中国国民党治下的连年内战，空前水灾，卖儿救穷，砍头示众，秘密杀戮，电刑逼供，他们也不惊诧。在学生的请愿中有一点纷扰，他们就惊诧了！
What a "friendly person"! The Japanese imperialist troops forcibly occupied Liaoji and bombarded the organs, and they were not surprised; They were not surprised when railways were blocked, buses were chased, officials were arrested, and people were shot. They were not surprised by the years of civil wars under the rule of the Chinese Kuomintang, unprecedented floods, selling children to save the poor, beheading the public, secretly killing, and electrocution to extract confessions. They were surprised by the student's petition!好个国民党政府的“友邦人士”！是些什么东西！
What a "friend" of the Kuomintang government! What is it!即使所举的罪状是真的罢，但这些事情，是无论那一个“友邦”也都有的，他们的维持他们的“秩序”的监狱，就撕掉了他们的“文明”的面具。摆什么“惊诧”的臭脸孔呢？
Even if the crimes alleged are true, these things are also present in any of the "friends", and their prisons that maintain their "order" have torn off the mask of their "civilization". What kind of "surprised" stinky face?可是“友邦人士”一惊诧，我们的国府就怕了，“长此以往，国将不国”了，好像失了东三省，党国倒愈像一个国，失了东三省谁也不响，党国倒愈像一个国，失了东三省只有几个学生上几篇“呈文”，党国倒愈像一个国，可以博得“友邦人士”的夸奖，永远“国”下去一样。
However, when the "friendly people" were surprised, our national government was afraid, "in the long run, the country will not be a country", as if the three eastern provinces were lost, the party state became more and more like a country, and no one made a sound when the three eastern provinces were lost, and the party state became more and more like a country, and only a few students wrote a few "submissions" in the three eastern provinces, and the party and the state became more like a country, which could win the praise of "friendly people" and always "go on as if the country" would go on.几句电文，说得明白极了：怎样的党国，怎样的“友邦”。“友邦”要我们人民身受宰割，寂然无声，略有“越轨”，便加屠戮；党国是要我们遵从这“友邦人士”的希望，否则，他就要“通电各地军政当局”，“即予紧急处置，不得于事后借口无法劝阻，敷衍塞责”了！
A few messages are very clear: what kind of party-state, what kind of "friendly country". "Friends" want our people to be slaughtered, silent, and slaughter at the slightest "deviance"; The party and the state want us to follow the hopes of this "friendly person", otherwise, he will "electrify the military and political authorities in various places" and "immediately deal with it urgently, and must not be dissuaded or perfunctory under the pretext of being unable to dissuade after the fact"!因为“友邦人士”是知道的：日兵“无法劝阻”，学生们怎会“无法劝阻”？每月一千八百万的军费，四百万的政费，作什么用的呀，“军政当局”呀？
Because the "friendly people" know: the Japanese soldiers "cannot be dissuaded", how can the students "not be dissuaded"? What is the use of military expenditure of 18 million per month and government expenditure of 4 million, "military and political authorities"?写此文后刚一天，就见二十一日《申报》登载南京专电云：“考试院部员张以宽，盛传前日为学生架去重伤。兹据张自述，当时因车夫误会，为群众引至中大，旋出校回寓，并无受伤之事。至行政院某秘书被拉到中大，亦当时出来，更无失踪之事。”而“教育消息”栏内，又记本埠一小部分学校赴京请愿学生死伤的确数，则云：“中公死二人，伤三十人，复旦伤二人，复旦附中伤十人，东亚失踪一人（系女性），上中失踪一人，伤三人，文生氏死一人，伤五人……”可见学生并未如国府通电所说，将“社会秩序，破坏无余”，而国府则不但依然能够镇压，而且依然能够诬陷，杀戮。“友邦人士”，从此可以不必“惊诧莫名”，只请放心来瓜分就是了。
Just one day after writing this article, I saw that the "Declaration" on the 21st published the Nanjing Special Telegram: "Zhang Yikuan, a member of the examination institute, is rumored to have seriously injured a student the day before. According to Zhang's own account, at that time, due to a misunderstanding by the driver, he was led to Zhongda by the crowd, and soon left the school and returned to his residence, and there were no injuries. When a secretary of the Executive Yuan was taken to CUHK, he also came out at that time, and there was no disappearance. In the "Education News" column, it is also recorded that a small number of schools in this port went to Beijing to petition for students to be killed and injured, and it said: "Two people died and 30 people were injured in Fudan, two people were injured in Fudan, ten people were injured in Fudan, one person was missing in East Asia (female), one person was missing in Shangzhong, three people were injured, one person was killed and five people were injured in Wensheng...... It can be seen that the students did not "destroy the social order as the state government said", and the state government can not only still suppress it, but also still be able to frame and kill. "Friendly people", from now on, you don't have to be "surprised and inexplicable", just rest assured to divide it.

答中学生杂志社问

答中学生杂志社问

答中学生杂志社问

Answer questions from middle school students“假如先生面前站着一个中学生，处此内忧外患交迫的非常时代，将对他讲怎样的话，作努力的方针？”
"If there is a middle school student standing in front of you, in this extraordinary era of internal and external troubles, what kind of words will you say to him and make an effort policy?"编辑先生：
Mr. Editor:请先生也许我回问你一句，就是：我们现在有言论的自由么？假如先生说“不”，那么我知道一定也不会怪我不作声的。假如先生竟以“面前站着一个中学生”之名，一定要逼我说一点，那么，我说：第一步要努力争取言论的自由。
Please sir, maybe I will ask you back, that is: Do we have freedom of speech now? If the gentleman says "no", then I know that I will not blame me for being silent. If the teacher actually insists on forcing me to say something in the name of "a middle school student standing in front of me", then I say: The first step is to strive for freedom of speech.

答北斗杂志社问——创作要怎样才会好？

答北斗杂志社问——创作要怎样才会好？

答北斗杂志社问——创作要怎样才会好？

Answer Beidou Magazine's question - how can creation be good?编辑先生：
Mr. Editor:来信的问题，是要请美国作家和中国上海教授们做的，他们满肚子是“小说法程”和“小说作法”。我虽然做过二十来篇短篇小说，但一向没有“宿见”，正如我虽然会说中国话，却不会写“中国语法入门”一样。不过高情难却，所以只得将自己所经验的琐事写一点在下面——
The question of the letter was to be asked by American writers and professors in Shanghai, China, who were full of "novel methods" and "novel methods". Although I have written more than 20 short stories, I have never had "prejudices", just as although I can speak Chinese, I will not write "Introduction to Chinese Grammar". However, it is difficult to refuse, so I have to write down a little bit of the trivial things I have experienced below——一，留心各样的事情，多看看，不看到一点就写。
First, pay attention to all kinds of things, read more, and write if you don't see a little.二，写不出的时候不硬写。
Second, don't write hard when you can't write.三，模特儿不用一个一定的人，看得多了，凑合起来的。
Third, the model does not need a certain person, he has seen a lot and made do.四，写完后至少看两遍，竭力将可有可无的字，句，段删去，毫不可惜。宁可将可作小说的材料缩成Sketch，决不将Sketch材料拉成小说。
Fourth, read it at least twice after writing, and try your best to delete dispensable words, sentences, and paragraphs, without regret. I would rather reduce the material that can be written into Sketch than pull the Sketch material into a novel.五，看外国的短篇小说，几乎全是东欧及北欧作品，也看日本作品。
Fifth, read foreign short stories, almost all of which are Eastern European and Nordic works, but also Japanese works.六，不生造除自己之外，谁也不懂的形容词之类。
Sixth, do not create adjectives that no one understands except yourself.七，不相信“小说作法”之类的话。
7. Don't believe in words like "novel practice".八，不相信中国的所谓“批评家”之类的话，而看看可靠的外国批评家的评论。
8. Don't believe the so-called "critics" in China, but look at the comments of reliable foreign critics.现在所能说的，如此而已。此复，即请
That's all I can say now. This reply, please do so编安！
Edit An!十二月二十七日。
December 27th.

关于小说题材的通信

关于小说题材的通信

关于小说题材的通信

Correspondence on the subject matter of the novel来信
LetterL．S．先生：
Mr. L.S.:要这样冒昧地麻烦先生的心情，是抑制得很久的了，但像我们心目中的先生，大概不会淡漠一个热忱青年的请教的吧。这样几度地思量之后，终于唐突地向你表示我们在文艺上——尤其是短篇小说上的迟疑和犹豫了。
It has been suppressed for a long time to take the liberty of troublening Mr. like this, but like the gentleman in our minds, he probably would not be indifferent to the advice of an enthusiastic young man. After thinking about it several times, I finally abruptly show you our hesitation and hesitation in literature and art, especially in short stories.我们曾手写了好几篇短篇小说，所采取的题材：一个是专就其熟悉的小资产阶级的青年，把那些在现时代所显现和潜伏的一般的弱点，用讽刺的艺术手腕表示出来；一个是专就其熟悉的下层人物——在现时代大潮流冲击圈外的下层人物，把那些在生活重压下强烈求生的欲望的朦胧反抗的冲动，刻划在创作里面。——不知这样内容的作品，究竟对现时代，有没有配说得上有贡献的意义？我们初则迟疑，继则提起笔又犹豫起来了。这须请先生给我们一个指示，因为我们不愿意在文艺上的努力，对于目前的时代，成为白费气力，毫无意义的。
We have written several short stories by hand, and the subject matter is that one is dedicated to the petty-bourgeois youth they are familiar with, expressing with satirical artistic skills those general weaknesses that appear and lurk in the present era; One is to depict in the creation the vague impulse of those who are strongly willing to survive under the pressure of life. ——I wonder if works with such content have the significance of contributing to the current era? We hesitated at first, and then picked up the pen and hesitated again. This requires the gentleman to give us an instruction, because our unwillingness to make literary and artistic efforts has become a waste of effort and meaningless for the present era.我们决定在这一个时代里，把我们的精力放在有意义的文艺上，借此表示我们应有的助力和贡献，并不是先生所说的那一辈略有小名，便去而之他的文人。因此，目前如果先生愿给我们以指示，这指示便会影响到我们终身的。虽然也曾看见过好些普罗作家的创作，但总不愿把一些虚构的人物使其翻一个身就革命起来，却喜欢捉几个熟悉的模特儿，真真实实地刻划出来——这脾气是否妥当，确又没有十分的把握了。所以三番五次的思维，只有冒昧地来唐突先生了。即祝
We decided to focus our energy on meaningful literature and art in this era, so as to show that we should help and contribute, not the generation that Mr. said with a slight nickname, so we went to his literati. Therefore, if you wish to give us instructions, this instruction will affect us for life. Although I have seen the creations of many ordinary writers, I am always reluctant to revolutionize some fictional characters, but I like to catch a few familiar models and portray them realistically - I am not very sure whether this temper is appropriate. So after thinking again and again, I can only take the liberty of coming to Mr. Tang Tu. He prayed近好！
Close to good!Ts－c．Y．及Y－f．T．上　十一月廿九日。
Ts-c.Y. and Y-f.T. on November 29.

关于小说题材的通信

回信

关于小说题材的通信

replyY及T先生：
Mr. Y and Mr. T:接到来信后，未及回答，就染了流行性感冒，头重眼肿，连一个字也不能写，近几天总算好起来了，这才来写回信。同在上海，而竟拖延到一个月，这是非常抱歉的。
After receiving the letter, before I could answer, I contracted the flu, my head was heavy and my eyes were swollen, and I couldn't even write a word. I'm very sorry to be in Shanghai and delayed for a month.两位所问的，是写短篇小说的时候，取来应用的材料的问题。而作者所站的立场，如信上所写，则是小资产阶级的立场。如果是战斗的无产者，只要所写的是可以成为艺术品的东西，那就无论他所描写的是什么事情，所使用的是什么材料，对于现代以及将来一定是有贡献的意义的。为什么呢？因为作者本身便是一个战斗者。
The two of them asked about the material used when writing short stories. The position of the author, as written in the letter, is that of the petty bourgeoisie. If he is a proletarian in battle, as long as what he writes can become a work of art, then no matter what he describes or what materials he uses, it must be of great significance to the present and the future. Why? Because the author himself is a fighter.但两位都并非那一阶级，所以当动笔之先，就发生了来信所说似的疑问。我想，这对于目前的时代，还是有意义的，然而假使永是这样的脾气，却是不妥当的。
But neither of them was of that class, so when they started writing, questions like those mentioned in the letter arose. I think this is still meaningful for the current era, but if it is always such a temper, it is inappropriate.别阶级的文艺作品，大抵和正在战斗的无产者不相干。小资产阶级如果其实并非与无产阶级一气，则其憎恶或讽刺同阶级，从无产者看来，恰如较有聪明才力的公子憎恨家里的没出息子弟一样，是一家子里面的事，无须管得，更说不到损益。例如法国的戈兼，痛恨资产阶级，而他本身还是一个道道地地资产阶级的作家。倘写下层人物（我以为他们是不会“在现时代大潮流冲击圈外”的）罢，所谓客观其实是楼上的冷眼，所谓同情也不过空虚的布施，于无产者并无补助。而且后来也很难言。例如也是法国人的波特莱尔，当巴黎公社初起时，他还很感激赞助，待到势力一大，觉得于自己的生活将要有害，就变成反动了。但就目前的中国而论，我以为所举的两种题材，却还有存在的意义。如第一种，非同阶级是不能深知的，加以袭击，撕其面具，当比不熟悉此中情形者更加有力。如第二种，则生活状态，当随时代而变更，后来的作者，也许不及看见，随时记载下来，至少也可以作这一时代的记录。所以对于现在以及将来，还是都有意义的。不过即使“熟悉”，却未必便是“正确”，取其有意义之点，指示出来，使那意义格外分明，扩大，那是正确的批评家的任务。
The literary and artistic works of other classes are probably irrelevant to the fighting proletarians. If the petty bourgeoisie is not actually in harmony with the proletariat, it hates or satirizes the same class, and from the point of view of the proletariat, just as a more intelligent young man hates the unproductive children in the family, there is no need to control the affairs of the family, let alone profit and loss. For example, Gogan in France hates the bourgeoisie, and he himself is a true bourgeois writer. If you write about the lower class of characters (I don't think they will be "outside the circle of the current trend"), the so-called objectivity is actually the cold eyes of the upper floor, and the so-called sympathy is nothing more than empty almsgiving, and it does not help the proletariat. And it was hard to say later. For example, Baudelaire, who was also French, was very grateful for the sponsorship when the Paris Commune first rose, and when he became powerful, he felt that his life would be harmful, so he became reactionary. But as far as China is concerned, I think the two themes mentioned still have the meaning of existence. For example, in the first case, non-class people cannot know it well, and attacking and tearing off their masks should be more powerful than those who are not familiar with this situation. For example, the state of life should change with the times, and later authors may not have time to see it, but it can be recorded at any time, at least it can be recorded as a record of this era. So it is still meaningful for the present and the future. However, even if it is "familiar", it may not be "correct", and it is the task of the correct critic to take its meaningful points, indicate them, and make the meaning particularly clear and expanded.因此我想，两位是可以各就自己现在能写的题材，动手来写的。不过选材要严，开掘要深，不可将一点琐屑的没有意思的事故，便填成一篇，以创作丰富自乐。这样写去，到一个时候，我料想必将觉得写完，——虽然这样的题材的人物，即使几十年后，还有作为残滓而存留，但那时来加以描写刻划的，将是别一种作者，别一样看法了。然而两位都是向着前进的青年，又抱着对于时代有所助力和贡献的意志，那时也一定能逐渐克服自己的生活和意识，看见新路的。
Therefore, I think that the two of you can each write about the topics you can write about now. However, the selection of materials should be strict, the excavation should be deep, and a little trivial and boring accident should not be filled into an article to enrich oneself with creation. Writing like this, at some point, I expect to feel that I have finished writing,—— although the characters of such a subject will still remain as remnants even decades later, but at that time, it will be a different kind of author who will describe and portray them, and they will have a different opinion. However, both of them are young people who are moving forward, and they have the will to help and contribute to the times, and they will definitely be able to gradually overcome their lives and consciousness and see a new path at that time.总之，我的意思是：现在能写什么，就写什么，不必趋时，自然更不必硬造一个突变式的革命英雄，自称“革命文学”；但也不可苟安于这一点，没有改革，以致沉没了自己——也就是消灭了对于时代的助力和贡献。此复，即颂
In short, what I mean is: what can be written now, there is no need to follow the trends, and naturally there is no need to create a mutant revolutionary hero and call himself "revolutionary literature"; But we must not settle for this, without reform, so that we sink ourselves - that is, to eliminate the help and contribution to the times. This reply is a song近佳。
Recently, it was good.L．S．启。十二月二十五日。
L.S. Qi. December 25th.

关于翻译的通信

关于翻译的通信

关于翻译的通信

Communication about translation来信
Letter敬爱的同志：
Dear comrades,你译的《毁灭》出版，当然是中国文艺生活里面的极可纪念的事迹。翻译世界无产阶级革命文学的名著，并且有系统的介绍给中国读者，（尤其是苏联的名著，因为它们能够把伟大的十月，国内战争，五年计画的“英雄”，经过具体的形象，经过艺术的照耀，而供献给读者。）——这是中国普罗文学者的重要任务之一。虽然，现在做这件事的，差不多完全只是你个人和Z同志的努力；可是，谁能够说：这是私人的事情？！谁？！《毁灭》《铁流》等等的出版，应当认为一切中国革命文学家的责任。每一个革命的文学战线上的战士，每一个革命的读者，应当庆祝这一个胜利；虽然这还只是小小的胜利。
The publication of your translation of "Destruction" is, of course, a very memorable deed in Chinese literary and artistic life. Translating the famous works of the world's proletarian revolutionary literature and systematically introducing them to Chinese readers, (especially the famous works of the Soviet Union, because they can dedicate the "heroes" of the great October, the civil war, and the five-year plan to readers through concrete images and the illumination of art.) This is one of the important tasks of Chinese popular writers. Although, what you are doing now is almost entirely the efforts of you and Comrade Z; But who can say: this is a private matter?! Who?! The publication of "Destruction", "Tie Liu", etc. should be considered the responsibility of all Chinese revolutionary writers. Every soldier on the literary front of the revolution and every reader of the revolution should celebrate this victory; Although this is only a small victory.你的译文，的确是非常忠实的，“决不欺骗读者”这一句话，决不是广告！这也可见得一个诚挚，热心，为着光明而斗争的人，不能够不是刻苦而负责的。二十世纪的才子和欧化名士可以用“最少的劳力求得最大的”声望；但是，这种人物如果不彻底的脱胎换骨，始终只是“纱笼”（Salon）里的哈叭狗。现在粗制滥造的翻译，不是这班人干的，就是一些书贾的投机。你的努力——我以及大家都希望这种努力变成团体的，——应当继续，应当扩大，应当加深。所以我也许和你自己一样，看着这本《毁灭》，简直非常的激动：我爱它，像爱自己的儿女一样。咱们的这种爱，一定能够帮助我们，使我们的精力增加起来，使我们的小小的事业扩大起来。
Your translation is indeed very faithful, and the phrase "never deceive readers" is by no means an advertisement! This also shows that a sincere, enthusiastic, and person who fights for the light cannot be hard and responsible. The talents and European celebrities of the twentieth century can use "the least labor to get the greatest" prestige; However, if this kind of character is not completely reborn, it will always be just a dog in the "Salon". Nowadays, shoddy translations are either done by these people or speculated by some booksellers. Your efforts, which I and all of us hope to become a community,—— should continue, expand, deepen. So I may be like yourself, looking at this book "Destruction", I am simply very excited: I love it like my own children. Our love will definitely help us, increase our energy, and expand our small career.翻译——除出能够介绍原本的内容给中国读者之外——还有一个很重要的作用：就是帮助我们创造出新的中国的现代言语。中国的言语（文字）是那么穷乏，甚至于日常用品都是无名氏的。中国的言语简直没有完全脱离所谓“姿势语”的程度——普通的日常谈话几乎还离不开“手势戏”。自然，一切表现细腻的分别和复杂的关系的形容词，动词，前置词，几乎没有。宗法封建的中世纪的余孽，还紧紧的束缚着中国人的活的言语，（不但是工农群众！）这种情形之下，创造新的言语是非常重大的任务。欧洲先进的国家，在二三百年四五百年以前已经一般的完成了这个任务。就是历史上比较落后的俄国，也在一百五六十年以前就相当的结束了“教堂斯拉夫文”。他们那里，是资产阶级的文艺复兴运动和启蒙运动做了这件事。例如俄国的洛莫洛莎夫……普希金。中国的资产阶级可没有这个能力。固然，中国的欧化的绅商，例如胡适之之流，开始了这个运动。但是，这个运动的结果等于它的政治上的主人。因此，无产阶级必须继续去彻底完成这个任务，领导这个运动。翻译，的确可以帮助我们造出许多新的字眼，新的句法，丰富的字汇和细腻的精密的正确的表现。因此，我们既然进行着创造中国现代的新的言语的斗争，我们对于翻译，就不能够不要求：绝对的正确和绝对的中国白话文。这是要把新的文化的言语介绍给大众。
Translation—in addition to introducing the original content to Chinese readers—also has a very important role: it helps us create a new modern Chinese language. Chinese language (writing) is so poor that even daily necessities are anonymous. Chinese language is not completely separated from the so-called "posture language" - ordinary daily conversation is almost inseparable from "gesture play". Naturally, all adjectives, verbs, prepositions, which express delicate distinctions and complex relationships, are almost none. The remnants of the patriarchal feudal Middle Ages still tightly bind the living language of the Chinese, (not only the workers and peasants!). In this case, creating new words is a very important task. Advanced European countries have generally completed this task two or three hundred years ago, four or five hundred years ago. Even Russia, which was relatively backward in history, also ended the "church Slavonic" quite a year ago 150 or 60 years ago. There, it was the bourgeois Renaissance and Enlightenment movements that did this. For example, Lomo Loshav in Russia...... Pushkin. The Chinese bourgeoisie does not have this ability. Of course, China's Europeanized gentry merchants, such as Hu Shizhi and others, started this movement. However, the result of this movement is equal to its political master. Therefore, the proletariat must continue to complete this task and lead the movement. Translation can indeed help us create many new words, new syntax, rich vocabulary and delicate and precise correct expressions. Therefore, since we are engaged in the struggle to create a new language for modern China, we cannot fail to demand absolute correctness and absolute Chinese vernacular for translation. This is to introduce the language of a new culture to the public.严几道的翻译，不用说了。他是：
Yan Jidao's translation, needless to say. He is:译须信雅达，
Translator Xu Xin Yada,文必夏殷周。
The literature must be from the Xia and Yin dynasties.其实，他是用一个“雅”字打消了“信”和“达”。最近商务还翻印“严译名著”，我不知道这是“是何居心”！这简直是拿中国的民众和青年来开玩笑。古文的文言怎么能够译得“信”，对于现在的将来的大众读者，怎么能够“达”！
In fact, he used the word "Ya" to dispel "Xin" and "Da". Recently, the business has also reprinted the "Yan Yi Masterpiece", I don't know what this is "what is the intention"! This is simply a joke about the Chinese people and youth. How can the ancient Chinese be translated as "faith", and how can it be "reached" for the current and future mass readers!现在赵景深之流，又来要求：
Now Zhao Jingshen and others have come to demand again:宁错而务顺，
Rather be wrong than smooth,毋拗而仅信！
Don't be stubborn, just believe it!赵老爷的主张，其实是和城隍庙里演说西洋故事的，一鼻孔出气。这是自己懂得了（？）外国文，看了些书报，就随便拿起笔来乱写几句所谓通顺的中国文。这明明白白的欺侮中国读者，信口开河的来乱讲海外奇谈。第一，他的所谓“顺”，既然是宁可“错”一点儿的“顺”，那么，这当然是迁就中国的低级言语而抹杀原意的办法。这不是创造新的言语，而是努力保存中国的野蛮人的言语程度，努力阻挡它的发展。第二，既然要宁可“错”一点儿，那就是要朦蔽读者，使读者不能够知道作者的原意。所以我说：赵景深的主张是愚民政策，是垄断智识的学阀主义，——一点儿也没有过分的。还有，第三，他显然是暗示的反对普罗文学（好个可怜的“特殊走狗”）！他这是反对普罗文学，暗指着普罗文学的一些理论著作的翻译和创作的翻译。这是普罗文学敌人的话。
Master Zhao's proposition was actually to speak Western stories with the City God Temple, and he was angry with one nostril. This is something I understand (?) After reading some books and newspapers, I casually picked up a pen and wrote a few so-called smooth Chinese sentences. This is a clear bullying of Chinese readers, and they are talking nonsense about overseas stories. First, since his so-called "smooth" is a "smooth" that would rather be "wrong", then this is of course a way to accommodate China's low-level words and erase the original meaning. This is not about creating new speech, but about trying to preserve the level of speech of China's barbarians and try to stop its development. Second, since it is better to be "wrong", it is to obscure the reader, so that the reader cannot know the author's original intention. So I said: Zhao Jingshen's proposition is the policy of ignoring the people, and it is the monopoly of intellectual factionalism,—— which is not excessive at all. And, thirdly, he is clearly implicitly against popular literature (what a poor "special lackey")! He is opposed to popular literature, alluding to the translation and creation of some theoretical works of popular literature. These are the words of the enemy of popular literature.但是，普罗文学的中文书籍之中，的确有许多翻译是不“顺”的。这是我们自己的弱点，敌人乘这个弱点来进攻。我们的胜利的道路当然不仅要迎头痛打，打击敌人的军队，而且要更加整顿自己的队伍。我们的自己批评的勇敢，常常可以解除敌人的武装。现在，所谓翻译论战的结论，我们的同志却提出了这样的结语：
However, among the Chinese books of popular literature, there are indeed many translations that are not "smooth". This is our own weakness, and the enemy takes advantage of this weakness to attack. Of course, our road to victory must not only fight head-on and strike the enemy's army, but also further reorganize our ranks. The courage of our own criticism can often disarm the enemy. Now, at the conclusion of the so-called translation debate, our comrades put forward the following conclusion:“翻译绝对不容许错误。可是，有时候，依照译品内容的性质，为着保存原作精神，多少的不顺，倒可以容忍。”
"There is no room for error in translation. However, sometimes, according to the nature of the content of the translation, in order to preserve the spirit of the original, some inadequacies can be tolerated. ”这是只是个“防御的战术”。而蒲力汗诺夫说：辩证法的唯物论者应当要会“反守为攻”。第一，当然我们首先要说明：我们所认识的所谓“顺”，和赵景深等所说的不同。第二，我们所要求的是：绝对的正确和绝对的白话。所谓绝对的白话，就是朗诵起来可以懂得的。第三，我们承认：一直到现在，普罗文学的翻译还没有做到这个程度，我们要继续努力。第四，我们揭穿赵景深等自己的翻译，指出他们认为是“顺”的翻译，其实只是梁启超和胡适之交媾出来的杂种——半文不白，半死不活的言语，对于大众仍旧是不“顺”的。
This is just a "defensive tactic". Pulkhanov said: Dialectical materialists should be able to "turn defense into attack". First, of course, we must first explain: the so-called "smooth" we know is different from what Zhao Jingshen and others said. Second, what we demand is: absolute correctness and absolute vernacular. The so-called absolute vernacular is what can be understood by recitation. Third, we admit that until now, the translation of popular literature has not reached this level, and we must continue to work hard. Fourth, we debunk Zhao Jingshen and others' translations, pointing out that the translations they think are "smooth" are actually just hybrids made by Liang Qichao and Hu Shizhi - half-literate, half-dead words, which are still not "smooth" for the public.这里，讲到你最近出版的《毁灭》，可以说：这是做到了“正确”，还没有做到“绝对的白话”。
Here, when it comes to your recently published "Destruction", it can be said that this has been done "correctly", but it has not yet achieved "absolute vernacular".翻译要用绝对的白话，并不就不能够“保存原作的精神”。固然，这是很困难，很费功夫的。但是，我们是要绝对不怕困难，努力去克服一切的困难。
If the translation must be in absolute vernacular, it does not mean that it is impossible to "preserve the spirit of the original work". Of course, this is very difficult and labor-intensive. However, we must be absolutely not afraid of difficulties and strive to overcome all difficulties.一般的说起来，不但翻译，就是自己的作品也是一样，现在的文学家，哲学家，政论家，以及一切普通人，要想表现现在中国社会已经有的新的关系，新的现象，新的事物，新的观念，就差不多人人都要做“仓颉”。这就是说，要天天创造新的字眼，新的句法。实际生活的要求是这样。难道一九二五年初我们没有在上海小沙渡替群众造出“罢工”这一个字眼吗？还有“游击队”，“游击战争”，“右倾”，“左倾”，“尾巴主义”，甚至于普通的“团结”，“坚决”，“动摇”等等等类……这些说不尽的新的字眼，渐渐的容纳到群众的口头上的言语里去了，即使还没有完全容纳，那也已经有了可以容纳的可能了。讲到新的句法，比较起来要困难一些，但是，口头上的言语里面，句法也已经有了很大的改变，很大的进步。只要拿我们自己演讲的言语和旧小说里的对白比较一下，就可以看得出来。可是，这些新的字眼和句法的创造，无意之中自然而然的要遵照着中国白话的文法公律。凡是“白话文”里面，违反这些公律的新字眼，新句法，——就是说不上口的——自然淘汰出去，不能够存在。
Generally speaking, not only translations, but also their own works, today's writers, philosophers, political commentators, and all ordinary people, if they want to express the new relationships, new phenomena, new things, and new concepts that already exist in Chinese society, almost everyone has to do "Cangjie". This means that new words and syntax must be created every day. The requirements of practical life are like this. Didn't we coin the word "strike" for the masses in Xiaoshadu in Shanghai at the beginning of 1925? There are also "guerrillas", "guerrilla warfare", "right-leaning", "left-leaning", "tail-ism", and even ordinary "unity", "resolute", "wavering" and so on...... These indescribable new words have gradually been accepted into the verbal words of the masses, and even if they have not yet been fully accommodated, they are already possible to accommodate them. When it comes to new syntax, it is more difficult to compare, but in oral speech, the syntax has also changed a lot and made great progress. Just compare the words of our own speeches with the dialogues in old novels. However, the creation of these new words and syntax inadvertently and naturally follows the grammatical public laws of the Chinese vernacular. In the "vernacular text", new words and new syntax that violate these public laws ,—— just unpalatable - they are naturally eliminated and cannot exist.所以说到什么是“顺”的问题，应当说：真正的白话就是真正通顺的现代中国文，这里所说的白话，当然不限于“家务琐事”的白话，这是说：从一般人的普通谈话，直到大学教授的演讲的口头上的白话。中国人现在讲哲学，讲科学，讲艺术……显然已经有了一个口头上的白话。难道不是如此？如果这样，那么，写在纸上的说话（文字），就应当是这一种白话，不过组织得比较紧凑，比较整齐罢了。这种文字，虽然现在还有许多对于一般识字很少的群众，仍旧是看不懂的，因为这种言语，对于一般不识字的群众，也还是听不懂的。——可是，第一，这种情形只限于文章的内容，而不在文字的本身，所以，第二，这种文字已经有了生命，它已经有了可以被群众容纳的可能性。它是活的言语。
Therefore, when it comes to the question of what is "smooth", it should be said: the real vernacular is the truly smooth modern Chinese, and the vernacular spoken here is of course not limited to the vernacular of "housework", which means that from the ordinary conversation of ordinary people to the verbal vernacular of university professors' speeches. Chinese now talk about philosophy, science, and art...... Apparently there is already a verbal vernacular. Isn't that so? If this is the case, then the speech (text) written on paper should be this kind of vernacular, but it is more compactly organized and neat. Although there are still many people who are very literate in this kind of writing, they still cannot understand it, because this kind of speech is still incomprehensible to the general illiterate masses. ——However, first, this situation is limited to the content of the article, not to the text itself, so second, this kind of text has come to life, and it already has the possibility of being accepted by the masses. It is living speech.所以，书面上的白话文，如果不注意中国白话的文法公律，如果不就着中国白话原来有的公律去创造新的，那就很容易走到所谓“不顺”的方面去。这是在创造新的字眼新的句法的时候，完全不顾普通群众口头上说话的习惯，而用文言做本位的结果。这样写出来的文字，本身就是死的言语。
Therefore, if the written vernacular does not pay attention to the grammatical public laws of the Chinese vernacular, and if we do not create new ones based on the original public laws of the Chinese vernacular, it is easy to go to the so-called "unsmooth" side. This is the result of creating new words and new syntax, completely ignoring the habits of ordinary people speaking orally, and using classical Chinese as the standard. The words written in this way are dead words in themselves.因此，我觉得对于这个问题，我们要有勇敢的自己批评的精神，我们应当开始一个新的斗争。你以为怎么样？
Therefore, I think we must have a brave spirit of self-criticism on this issue, and we should start a new struggle. What do you think?我的意见是：翻译应当把原文的本意，完全正确的介绍给中国读者，使中国读者所得到的概念等于英俄日德法……读者从原文得来的概念，这样的直译，应当用中国人口头上可以讲得出来的白话来写。为着保存原作的精神，并用不着容忍“多少的不顺”。相反的，容忍着“多少的不顺”（就是不用口头上的白话），反而要多少的丧失原作的精神。
My opinion is that the translation should introduce the original meaning of the original text to Chinese readers completely and correctly, so that the concepts obtained by Chinese readers are equal to those of English, Russian, Japanese, German and French...... The concept that the reader gets from the original text, such a literal translation, should be written in the vernacular that the Chinese can speak orally. In order to preserve the spirit of the original work, there is no need to tolerate "how much trouble". On the contrary, tolerating "how much disturbance" (that is, not using verbal vernacular) will lead to a loss of the spirit of the original work.当然，在艺术的作品里，言语上的要求是更加苛刻，比普通的论文要更加来得精细。这里有各种人不同的口气，不同的字眼，不同的声调，不同的情绪，……并且这并不限于对白。这里，要用穷乏的中国口头上的白话来应付，比翻译哲学，科学……的理论著作，还要来得困难。但是，这些困难只不过愈加加重我们的任务，可并不会取消我们的这个任务的。
Of course, in works of art, the verbal requirements are more demanding, and they are more refined than ordinary papers. There are all kinds of people with different tones, different words, different tones, different emotions,...... And it's not limited to dialogue. Here, it is necessary to deal with the poor Chinese oral vernacular, rather than translating philosophy and science...... Theoretical works are still difficult. However, these difficulties only aggravate our task, but they do not cancel our mission.现在，请你允许我提出《毁灭》的译文之中的几个问题。我还没有能够读完，对着原文读的只有很少几段。这里，我只把茀理契序文里引的原文来校对一下。（我顺着序文里的次序，编着号码写下去，不再引你的译文，请你自己照着号码到书上去找罢。序文的翻译有些错误，这里不谈了。）
Now, allow me to ask a few questions in the translation of Destruction. I haven't been able to finish reading it yet, and I have only read a few paragraphs in the original text. Here, I will only proofread the original text quoted in the preface of Fu Liqi. (I will follow the order in the preface and write it down with the number, and I will not quote your translation, please follow the number to the book yourself.) The translation of the preface is somewhat incorrect, so I won't talk about it here. ）（一）结算起来，还是因为他心上有一种——
(1) Settle it, or because he has a kind of -“对于新的极好的有力量的慈善的人的渴望，这种渴望是极大的，无论什么别的愿望都比不上的。”
"The desire for a new and superb charitable person is so great that no other desire can compare."更正确些：
More correct:结算起来，还是因为他心上——
When it was settled, it was still because of his heart -“渴望着一种新的极好的有力量的慈善的人，这个渴望是极大的，无论什么别的愿望都比不上的。”
"The desire for a new and superb powerful charity is so great that no other desire can compare."（二）“在这种时候，极大多数的几万万人，还不得不过着这种原始的可怜的生活，过着这种无聊得一点儿意思都没有的生活，——怎么能够谈得上什么新的极好的人呢。”
(2) "At such a time, the vast majority of tens of millions of people still have to live this primitive and pitiful life, living such a boring and meaningless life,—— how can we talk about any new and excellent people?" ”（三）“他在世界上，最爱的始终还是他自己，——他爱他自己的雪白的肮脏的没有力量的手，他爱他自己的唉声叹气的声音，他爱他自己的痛苦，自己的行为——甚至于那些最可厌恶的行为。”
(3) "He loves himself most in the world,—— he loves his own snow-white, dirty, powerless hands, he loves his own sighing voice, he loves his own pain, his own actions—even the most disgusting acts." ”（四）“这算收场了，一切都回到老样子，仿佛什么也不曾有过，——华理亚想着，——又是旧的道路，仍旧是那一些纠葛——一切都要到那一个地方……可是，我的上帝，这是多么没有快乐呵！”
(4) "This is the end, everything is back to the same way, as if nothing had ever been,—— Valia thinks,—— It's the old road again, it's still the entanglements - everything has to go to that place...... But, my God, how unhappy this is! ”（五）“他自己都从没有知道过这种苦恼，这是忧愁的疲倦的，老年人似的苦恼，——他这样苦恼着的想：他已经二十七岁了，过去的每一分钟，都不能够再回过来，重新换个样子再过它一过，而以后，看来也没有什么好的……（这一段，你的译文有错误，也就特别来得“不顺”。）现在木罗式加觉得，他一生一世，用了一切力量，都只是竭力要走上那样的一条道路，他看起来是一直的明白的正当的道路，像莱奋生，巴克拉诺夫，图皤夫那样的人，他们所走的正是这样的道路；然而似乎有一个什么人在妨碍他走上这样的道路呢。而因为他无论什么时候也想不到这个仇敌就在他自己的心里面，所以，他想着他的痛苦是因为一般人的卑鄙，他就觉得特别的痛快和伤心。”
(5) "He himself has never known this kind of distress, it is the weary of sorrow, the distress of an old man,—— he thinks in distress: he is twenty-seven years old, and every minute of the past can not come back, change his appearance and pass it again, and after that, it seems that there is nothing good...... (In this paragraph, if there is an error in your translation, it will be particularly "unsmooth".) Now Muroshiga feels that all his life, with all his strength, he has only tried to follow that path, and he seems to have always understood the right path, like Laifenshen, Bakranov, Tuhoov, they are on this path; However, there seems to be someone who is preventing him from embarking on such a path. And because he could never imagine that this enemy was in his own heart at any time, he thought that his pain was because of the meanness of ordinary people, and he felt particularly happy and sad. ”（六）“他只知道一件事——工作。所以，这样正当的人，是不能够不信任他，不能够不服从他的。”
(6) "He only knows one thing - work." Therefore, such a legitimate person cannot distrust him or disobey him. ”（七）“开始的时候，他对于他生活的这方面的一些思想，很不愿意去思索，然而，渐渐的他起劲起来了，他竟写了两张纸……在这两张纸上，居然有许多这样的字眼——谁也想不到莱奋生会知道这些字眼的。”（这一段，你的译文里比俄文原文多了几句副句，也许是你引了相近的另外一句了罢？或者是你把茀理契空出的虚点填满了？）
(7) "At the beginning, he was very reluctant to think about some of his thoughts on this aspect of his life, but gradually he got energetic and wrote two pieces of paper...... On these two sheets of paper, there are actually many such words - no one would have thought that Lai Fensheng would know these words. (In this paragraph, your translation has a few more subsentences than the original Russian text, maybe you quoted another sentence that is similar?) Or did you fill in the empty spots left by the contract? ）（八）“这些受尽磨难的忠实的人，对于他是亲近的，比一切其他的东西都更加亲近，甚至于比他自己还要亲近。”
(8) "These faithful who have suffered are close to him, closer to him than to all other things, even closer than to himself. ”（九）“……沉默的，还是潮湿的眼睛，看了一看那些打麦场上的疏远的人，——这些人，他应当很快就把他们变成功自己的亲近的人，像那十八个人一样，像那不做声的，在他后面走着的人一样。”（这里，最后一句，你的译文有错误。）
(9) "...... Silent, still damp eyes, looked at the alienated people in the threshing floor,—— these people who should soon turn them into his close ones, like the eighteen, like the silent ones who walked behind him. (Here, the last sentence, your translation is wrong.) ）这些译文请你用日本文和德文校对一下，是否是正确的直译，可以比较得出来的。我的译文，除出按照中国白话的句法和修辞法，有些比起原文来是倒装的，或者主词，动词，宾词是重复的，此外，完完全全是直译的。
Please proofread these translations in Japanese and German to see if they are correct literal translations. My translations, except for the syntax and rhetoric of the Chinese vernacular, are inverted compared to the original text, or the subject, verb, and object are repeated, and in addition, they are completely literal.这里，举一个例：第（八）条“……甚至于比他自己还要亲近。”这句话的每一个字母都和俄文相同的。同时，这在口头上说起来的时候，原文的口气和精神完全传达得出。而你的译文：“较之自己较之别人，还要亲近的人们”，是有错误的（也许是日德文的错误）。错误是在于：（一）丢掉了“甚至于”这一个字眼；（二）用了中国文言的文法，就不能够表现那句话的神气。
Here, let's give an example: Article (8) "...... Even closer than himself. Every letter of this sentence is the same as in Russian. At the same time, when this is said orally, the tone and spirit of the original text are fully conveyed. And your translation: "People who are closer than oneself than others" is wrong (perhaps a Japanese-German error). The mistake lies in: (1) losing the word "even"; (2) If you use the grammar of Chinese classical Chinese, you will not be able to express the spirit of that sentence.所有这些话，我都这样不客气的说着，仿佛自称自赞的。对于一班庸俗的人，这自然是“没有礼貌”。但是，我们是这样亲密的人，没有见面的时候就这样亲密的人。这种感觉，使我对于你说话的时候，和对自己说话一样，和自己商量一样。
All these words, I said unceremoniously, as if I was self-praised. For a group of vulgar people, this is naturally "rude". However, we are such close people, people who are so close when we don't meet. This feeling makes me speak to you as I speak to myself, and to consult with myself.再则，还有一个例子，比较重要的，不仅仅关于翻译方法的。这就是第（一）条的“新的……人”的问题。
Furthermore, there is another example, which is more important, not only about translation methods. This is the "new...... of Article (1) people".《毁灭》的主题是新的人的产生。这里，茀理契以及法捷耶夫自己用的俄文字眼，是一个普通的“人”字的单数。不但不是人类，而且不是“人”字的复数。这意思是指着革命，国内战争……的过程之中产生着一种新式的人，一种新的“路数”（Type）——文雅的译法叫做典型，这是在全部《毁灭》里面看得出来的。现在，你的译文，写着“人类”。莱奋生渴望着一种新的……人类。这可以误会到另外一个主题。仿佛是一般的渴望着整个的社会主义的社会。而事实上，《毁灭》的“新人”，是当前的战斗的迫切的任务：在斗争过程之中去创造，去锻炼，去改造成一种新式的人物，和木罗式加，美谛克……等等不同的人物。这可是现在的人，是一些人，是做群众之中的骨干的人，而不是一般的人类，不是笼统的人类，正是群众之中的一些人，领导的人，新的整个人类的先辈。
The theme of "Destruction" is the creation of new people. Here, the Russian words used by Fu Richie and Fadeev himself are the singular of the ordinary word "person". Not only is it not human, but it is not the plural of the word "human". This means revolution, civil war...... In the process, a new type of person is produced, a new "type" - elegantly translated as typical, which can be seen in all of "Destruction". Now, your translation says "human." Lai Fensheng longed for a new ...... Mankind. This can lead to another topic. It seems to be a general desire for the whole socialist society. In fact, the "newcomer" of "Destruction" is the urgent task of the current battle: to create, to train, to transform into a new style of character in the process of struggle, and Mu Luo, Mei Di Ke...... and other different characters. This is the current people, some people, the backbone of the masses, not ordinary human beings, not general human beings, but some people in the masses, the leaders, and the ancestors of the new entire human race.这一点是值得特别提出来说的。当然，译文的错误，仅仅是一个字眼上的错误：“人”是一个字眼，“人类”是另外一个字眼。整本的书仍旧在我们面前，你的后记也很正确的了解到《毁灭》的主题。可是翻译要精确，就应当估量每一个字眼。
This point deserves special mention. Of course, the error in the translation is only a mistake in one word: "man" is one word, and "human" is another word. The whole book is still in front of us, and your afterword also correctly understands the theme of "Destruction". But to be precise, you should measure every word.《毁灭》的出版，始终是值得纪念的。我庆祝你。希望你考虑我的意见，而对于翻译问题，对于一般的言语革命问题，开始一个新的斗争。
The publication of "Destruction" is always memorable. I celebrate you. I hope you will consider my opinion and start a new struggle on the issue of translation, on the issue of the speech revolution in general.J．K．　一九三一，十二，五。
J.K. 1931, 12, 5.

关于翻译的通信

回信

关于翻译的通信

reply敬爱的J．K．同志：
Dear Comrade J.K.,看见你那关于翻译的信以后，使我非常高兴。从去年的翻译洪水泛滥以来，使许多人攒眉叹气，甚而至于讲冷话。我也是一个偶而译书的人，本来应该说几句话的，然而至今没有开过口。“强聒不舍”虽然是勇壮的行为，但我所奉行的，却是“不可与言而与之言，失言”这一句古老话。况且前来的大抵是纸人纸马，说得耳熟一点，那便是“阴兵”，实在是也无从迎头痛击。就拿赵景深教授老爷来做例子罢，他一面专门攻击科学的文艺论译本之不通，指明被压迫的作家匿名之可笑，一面却又大发慈悲，说是这样的译本，恐怕大众不懂得。好像他倒天天在替大众计划方法，别的译者来搅乱了他的阵势似的。这正如俄国革命以后，欧美的富家奴去看了一看，回来就摇头皱脸，做出文章，慨叹着工农还在怎样吃苦，怎样忍饥，说得满纸凄凄惨惨。仿佛惟有他却是极希望一个筋斗，工农就都住王宫，吃大菜，躺安乐椅子享福的人。谁料还是苦，所以俄国不行了，革命不好了，阿呀阿呀了，可恶之极了。对着这样的哭丧脸，你同他说什么呢？假如觉得讨厌，我想，只要拿指头轻轻的在那纸糊架子上挖一个窟窿就可以了。
I was very happy when I saw your letter about translation. Since last year's flood of translations, many people have frowned and sighed, and even spoke coldly. I am also an occasional translator, and I should have said a few words, but I have not spoken so far. Although "strong noise" is a brave act, what I pursue is the ancient saying "do not speak with words, and make a mistake". Moreover, most of the people who came were paper people and paper horses, and to put it a little more familiarly, they were "yin soldiers", and there was really no way to hit them head-on. Take Professor Zhao Jingshen as an example, on the one hand, he specifically attacked the incomprehensibility of scientific literary and artistic translations, pointing out the ridiculousness of the anonymity of oppressed writers, but on the other hand, he was very compassionate, saying that such a translation was probably not understood by the public. It was as if he was planning methods for the public every day, and other translators were disrupting his position. This is just like after the Russian Revolution, rich slaves in Europe and the United States went to see it, shook their heads and frowned, and wrote articles, lamenting how the workers and peasants were still enduring hardships and how they endured hunger. It seems that he is the only one who desperately hopes for a somersault, and the workers and peasants all live in the palace, eat big dishes, and lie down on comfortable chairs to enjoy themselves. Who would have thought that it was still bitter, so Russia was not good, the revolution was not good, ah, ah, it was extremely hateful. What do you tell him about such a crying face? If you feel annoyed, I think you can just gently dig a hole in the paper paste shelf with your finger.赵老爷评论翻译，拉了严又陵，并且替他叫屈，于是累得他在你的信里也挨了一顿骂。但由我看来，这是冤枉的，严老爷和赵老爷，在实际上，有虎狗之差。极明显的例子，是严又陵为要译书，曾经查过汉晋六朝翻译佛经的方法，赵老爷引严又陵为地下知己，却没有看这严又陵所译的书。现在严译的书都出版了，虽然没有什么意义，但他所用的工夫，却从中可以查考。据我所记得，译得最费力，也令人看起来最吃力的，是《穆勒名学》和《群己权界论》的一篇作者自序，其次就是这论，后来不知怎地又改称为《权界》，连书名也很费解了。最好懂的自然是《天演论》，桐城气息十足，连字的平仄也都留心，摇头晃脑的读起来，真是音调铿锵，使人不自觉其头晕。这一点竟感动了桐城派老头子吴汝纶，不禁说是“足与周秦诸子相上下”了。然而严又陵自己却知道这太“达”的译法是不对的，所以他不称为“翻译”，而写作“侯官严复达恉”；序例上发了一通“信达雅”之类的议论之后，结末却声明道：“什法师云，‘学我者病’。来者方多，慎勿以是书为口实也！”好像他在四十年前，便料到会有赵老爷来谬托知己，早已毛骨悚然一样。仅仅这一点，我就要说，严赵两大师，实有虎狗之差，不能相提并论的。
Master Zhao commented on the translation, pulled Yan Youling, and cried for him, so tired that he was also scolded in your letter. But in my opinion, this is unjust, Master Yan and Master Zhao, in fact, there is a difference between tiger and dog. A very obvious example is that Yan Youling once checked the method of translating Buddhist scriptures in the six dynasties of the Han and Jin dynasties, and Master Zhao introduced Yan Youling as an underground confidant, but did not read the book translated by Yan Youling. Now that Yan Yi's books have been published, although it is meaningless, the work he used can be examined from it. As far as I remember, the most laborious translation and the most difficult thing to look at was the author's preface to "Müller's Famous Studies" and "The Theory of the Boundaries of Groups and Selfs", followed by this theory, which was later somehow renamed "The Realm of Power", and even the title of the book was very puzzling. The best thing to understand is naturally "Tianyan Lun", Tongcheng is full of atmosphere, even the flatness of the words is also paying attention, shaking your head to read it, it is really sonorous, making people unconsciously dizzy. This actually moved Wu Rulun, the old man of the Tongcheng Sect, and he couldn't help but say that it was "comparable to the sons of Zhou and Qin". However, Yan Youling himself knew that the translation of this "Da" was wrong, so he did not call it "translation", but wrote "Hou Guan Yan Fuda Yi"; After a discussion such as "Xindaya" was posted in the preface, it was declared at the end: "Master Shi said, 'Those who learn from me are sick'. There are many people coming, so don't use this book as a word of mouth! It seems that he expected that Master Zhao would come to pretend to be a confidant forty years ago, and he was already creepy. At this point alone, I have to say that the two masters Yan and Zhao are really different from tigers and dogs, and they cannot be compared.那么，他为什么要干这一手把戏呢？答案是：那时的留学生没有现在这么阔气，社会上大抵以为西洋人只会做机器——尤其是自鸣钟——留学生只会讲鬼子话，所以算不了“士”人的。因此他便来铿锵一下子，铿锵得吴汝纶也肯给他作序，这一序，别的生意也就源源而来了，于是有《名学》，有《法意》，有《原富》等等。但他后来的译本，看得“信”比“达雅”都重一些。
So, why did he do this trick? The answer is: At that time, international students were not as generous as they are now, and the society generally thought that Westerners could only make machines - especially self-ringing bells - and international students could only speak devil language, so they could not be considered "scholars". Therefore, he came to sonorous all of a sudden, and Wu Rulun was also willing to give him a preface, and in this preface, other businesses also came in a steady stream, so there was "Mingxue", "Fayi", "Yuan Fu" and so on. But in his later translations, "Xin" is heavier than "Daya".他的翻译，实在是汉唐译经历史的缩图。中国之译佛经，汉末质直，他没有取法。六朝真是“达”而“雅”了，他的《天演论》的模范就在此。唐则以“信”为主，粗粗一看，简直是不能懂的，这就仿佛他后来的译书。译经的简单的标本，有金陵刻经处汇印的三种译本《大乘起信论》，也是赵老爷的一个死对头。
His translation is really a microcosm of the history of Han and Tang translations. The Chinese translation of Buddhist scriptures was straightforward at the end of the Han Dynasty, and he did not take the method. The Six Dynasties are really "Da" and "Ya", and the model of his "Tianyan Lun" is here. Tang is mainly based on "letters", which are simply incomprehensible at a glance, just like his later translations. Simple specimens of the translation of scriptures, including the three translations of "Mahayana Theory of Faith" printed by the Jinling Scripture Engraving Office, are also a sworn enemy of Master Zhao.但我想，我们的译书，还不能这样简单，首先要决定译给大众中的怎样的读者。将这些大众，粗粗的分起来：甲，有很受了教育的；乙，有略能识字的；丙，有识字无几的。而其中的丙，则在“读者”的范围之外，启发他们是图画，演讲，戏剧，电影的任务，在这里可以不论。但就是甲乙两种，也不能用同样的书籍，应该各有供给阅读的相当的书。供给乙的，还不能用翻译，至少是改作，最好还是创作，而这创作又必须并不只在配合读者的胃口，讨好了，读的多就够。至于供给甲类的读者的译本，无论什么，我是至今主张“宁信而不顺”的。自然，这所谓“不顺”，决不是说“跪下”要译作“跪在膝之上”，“天河”要译作“牛奶路”的意思，乃是说，不妨不像吃茶淘饭一样几口可以咽完，却必须费牙来嚼一嚼。这里就来了一个问题：为什么不完全中国化，给读者省些力气呢？这样费解，怎样还可以称为翻译呢？我的答案是：这也是译本。这样的译本，不但在输入新的内容，也在输入新的表现法。中国的文或话，法子实在太不精密了，作文的秘诀，是在避去熟字，删掉虚字，就是好文章，讲话的时候，也时时要辞不达意，这就是话不够用，所以教员讲书，也必须借助于粉笔。这语法的不精密，就在证明思路的不精密，换一句话，就是脑筋有些胡涂。倘若永远用着胡涂话，即使读的时候，滔滔而下，但归根结蒂，所得的还是一个胡涂的影子。要医这病，我以为只好陆续吃一点苦，装进异样的句法去，古的，外省外府的，外国的，后来便可以据为己有。这并不是空想的事情。远的例子，如日本，他们的文章里，欧化的语法是极平常的了，和梁启超做《和文汉读法》时代，大不相同；近的例子，就如来信所说，一九二五年曾给群众造出过“罢工”这一个字眼，这字眼虽然未曾有过，然而大众已都懂得了。
But I think our translation of books cannot be so simple, and we must first decide what kind of readers we will translate it to. These masses are roughly divided: A, some are very educated; B, who can read slightly; C, there are few literate. And C, outside the scope of "readers", inspires them to be the task of drawing, speech, drama, and film, and can be ignored here. But even A and B cannot use the same books, and each should have its own equivalent books for reading. For those who supply B, they cannot use translation, at least they are rewritten, and it is best to create, and this creation must not only meet the reader's appetite, but also please and read more. As for the translation for Category A readers, no matter what, I still advocate "preferring to believe rather than obey". Naturally, this so-called "unsmooth" does not mean that "kneeling" should be translated as "kneeling on the knees", and "Tianhe" should be translated as "milk road", but that it is not as good as eating tea and rice, but it must be chewed with teeth. Here comes the question: why not completely sinicize and save some effort for readers? How can such a confusion be called translation? My answer is: this is also a translation. Such a translation is not only entering new content, but also entering new expressions. The secret of composition is to avoid familiar words, delete virtual words, that is, good articles, when speaking, you always have to say that you can't convey the meaning, this is not enough, so teachers must also use chalk to tell stories. The imprecision of this grammar proves the imprecision of the thinking, in other words, the brain is a little foolish. If you always use nonsense, even if you read it, you will gushing it down, but in the final analysis, what you get is still a shadow of nonsense. To cure this disease, I thought I had to endure a little hardship one after another, and put it into a strange syntax, ancient, from other provinces and foreign governments, and later I could take it as my own. This is not a fantasy. For example, in Japan, the Europeanized grammar in their articles is very common, which is very different from the era when Liang Qichao made "Hewen Chinese Reading"; For example, as mentioned in the letter, in 1925 the word "strike" was coined for the masses, although this word had never existed, but the masses already understood it.我还以为即便为乙类读者而译的书，也应该时常加些新的字眼，新的语法在里面，但自然不宜太多，以偶尔遇见，而想一想，或问一问就能懂得为度。必须这样，群众的言语才能够丰富起来。
I also think that even books translated for Category B readers should often add some new words and new grammar to them, but naturally there should not be too many, so that you can understand it by thinking about it or asking a question. Only in this way can the words of the masses be enriched.什么人全都懂得的书，现在是不会有的，只有佛教徒的“唵”字，据说是“人人能解”，但可惜又是“解各不同”。就是数学或化学书，里面何尝没有许多“术语”之类，为赵老爷所不懂，然而赵老爷并不提及者，太记得了严又陵之故也。
There is no book that everyone understands now, only the Buddhist word "Om" is said to be "everyone can understand", but unfortunately it is "different interpretations". It is a mathematics or chemistry book, why not have many "terms" in it, which Master Zhao does not understand, but Master Zhao does not mention it, because he remembers Yan Youling too much.说到翻译文艺，倘以甲类读者为对象，我是也主张直译的。我自己的译法，是譬如“山背后太阳落下去了”，虽然不顺，也决不改作“日落山阴”，因为原意以山为主，改了就变成太阳为主了。虽然创作，我以为作者也得加以这样的区别。一面尽量的输入，一面尽量的消化，吸收，可用的传下去了，渣滓就听他剩落在过去里。所以在现在容忍“多少的不顺”，倒并不能算“防守”，其实也还是一种的“进攻”。在现在民众口头上的话，那不错，都是“顺”的，但为民众口头上的话搜集来的话胚，其实也还是要顺的，因此我也是主张容忍“不顺”的一个。
When it comes to translating literature and art, if it is aimed at Category A readers, I also advocate literal translation. My own translation is for example, "The sun sets behind the mountain", although it is not smooth, it will never be changed to "sunset mountain shade", because the original meaning is mainly mountain, but if it is changed, it will become the sun. Although it is created, I think the author must also make such a distinction. While trying to input, while trying to digest and absorb as much as possible, the available is passed on, and the scum listens to him remaining in the past. Therefore, tolerating "how much trouble" is not "defense" now, but it is actually a kind of "offense". In the current oral words of the people, they are all "smooth", but the embryos collected for the people's oral words are actually still smooth, so I am also one who advocates tolerating "unsmooth".但这情形也当然不是永远的，其中的一部分，将从“不顺”而成为“顺”，有一部分，则因为到底“不顺”而被淘汰，被踢开。这最要紧的是我们自己的批判。如来信所举的译例，我都可以承认比我译得更“达”，也可推定并且更“信”，对于译者和读者，都有很大的益处。不过这些只能使甲类的读者懂得，于乙类的读者是太艰深的。由此也可见现在必须区别了种种的读者层，有种种的译作。
But of course, this situation is not forever, part of it will change from "not smooth" to "smooth", and some will be eliminated and kicked away because of "unsmooth" in the end. The most important thing is our own criticism. As for the translation examples given in the letter, I can admit that they are more "understanding" than my translation, and they can also be presumed and more "believed", which is of great benefit to both the translator and the reader. However, these can only be understood by readers of category A, and it is too difficult for readers of category B. It can also be seen that it is now necessary to distinguish between various readers and various translations.为乙类读者译作的方法，我没有细想过，此刻说不出什么来。但就大体看来，现在也还不能和口语——各处各种的土话——合一，只能成为一种特别的白话，或限于某一地方的白话。后一种，某一地方以外的读者就看不懂了，要它分布较广，势必至于要用前一种，但因此也就仍然成为特别的白话，文言的分子也多起来。我是反对用太限于一处的方言的，例如小说中常见的“别闹”“别说”等类罢，假使我没有到过北京，我一定解作“另外捣乱”“另外去说”的意思，实在远不如较近文言的“不要”来得容易了然，这样的只在一处活着的口语，倘不是万不得已，也应该回避的。还有章回体小说中的笔法，即使眼熟，也不必尽是采用，例如“林冲笑道：原来，你认得。”和“原来，你认得。——林冲笑着说。”这两条，后一例虽然看去有些洋气，其实我们讲话的时候倒常用，听得“耳熟”的。但中国人对于小说是看的，所以还是前一例觉得“眼熟”，在书上遇见后一例的笔法，反而好像生疏了。没有法子，现在只好采说书而去其油滑，听闲谈而去其散漫，博取民众的口语而存其比较的大家能懂的字句，成为四不像的白话。这白话得是活的，活的缘故，就因为有些是从活的民众的口头取来，有些是要从此注入活的民众里面去。
I haven't thought about the method of translating for Category B readers, and I can't say anything at the moment. But in general, it cannot be integrated with the colloquial language, various vernacular dialects everywhere, and can only become a special vernacular, or a vernacular limited to a certain place. The latter type is not understood by readers outside a certain place, and if it is widely distributed, it is bound to use the former one, but it still becomes a special vernacular, and there are more elements in classical Chinese. If I had not been to Beijing, I would definitely interpret it as "make trouble in another" and "say it elsewhere", which is far less easy than the "don't" in the closer classical Chinese. There are also brushstrokes in Zhang Hui's novels, even if they are familiar, they don't have to be all used, for example, Lin Chong smiled and said: It turns out that you recognize it. And "It turns out, you recognize it." - Lin Chong said with a smile. Although the latter one looks a bit foreign, in fact, we often use it when we speak, and it sounds "familiar". But Chinese people read novels, so the previous case still feels "familiar", and the brushwork of the latter case in the book seems to be rusty. There is no way, so now we have to take the story and remove its slippery, listen to the gossip and get rid of its looseness, win the colloquial language of the people and save the words that everyone can understand, and become the four different vernaculars. This vernacular must be alive, and for the sake of living, because some of it is taken from the mouth of the living people, and some of it is to be injected into the living people.临末，我很感谢你信末所举的两个例子。一，我将“……甚至于比自己还要亲近”译成“较之自己较之别人，还要亲近的人们”，是直译德日两种译本的说法的。这恐怕因为他们的语法中，没有像“甚至于”这样能够简单而确切地表现这口气的字眼的缘故，转几个弯，就成为这么拙笨了。二，将“新的……人”的“人”字译成“人类”，那是我的错误，是太穿凿了之后的错误。莱奋生望见的打麦场上的人，他要造他们成为目前的战斗的人物，我是看得很清楚的，但当他默想“新的……人”的时候，却也很使我默想了好久：（一）“人”的原文，日译本是“人间”，德译本是“Mensch”，都是单数，但有时也可作“人们”解；（二）他在目前就想有“新的极好的有力量的慈善的人”，希望似乎太奢，太空了。我于是想到他的出身，是商人的孩子，是智识分子，由此猜测他的战斗，是为了经过阶级斗争之后的无阶级社会，于是就将他所设想的目前的人，跟着我的主观的错误，搬往将来，并且成为“人们”——人类了。在你未曾指出之前，我还自以为这见解是很高明的哩，这是必须对于读者，赶紧声明改正的。
At the end of the letter, I am grateful for the two examples you gave at the end of your letter. First, I will "...... Even closer than oneself "translated as "people who are closer than oneself and closer than others" is a literal translation of the German and Japanese translations. This is probably because there is no word in their grammar that can simply and accurately express this tone like "even", and it becomes so clumsy after turning a few turns. Second, the "new ...... The word "human" in "person" is translated as "human", which is my mistake, a mistake after being too drilled. I can see very clearly the people on the threshing field that Lai Fensheng sainted, and he wants to make them the characters of the current battle, but when he meditates on "new...... people", but it also made me meditate for a long time: (1) The original text of "people", the Japanese translation is "people", and the German translation is "Mensch", both are singular, but sometimes they can also be interpreted as "people"; (2) He wants to have "new and superb and powerful charitable people" at present, and hope seems too extravagant and space. I then thought that he was born as a merchant's child and an intellectual, and thus guessed that his fight was for a classless society after the class struggle, so I moved the current person he envisioned to the future with my subjective mistake and became "people" - human beings. Before you point it out, I think this opinion is very clever, and it must be corrected to the reader as soon as possible.总之，今年总算将这一部纪念碑的小说，送在这里的读者们的面前了。译的时候和印的时候，颇经过了不少艰难，现在倒也退出了记忆的圈外去，但我真如你来信所说那样，就像亲生的儿子一般爱他，并且由他想到儿子的儿子。还有《铁流》，我也很喜欢。这两部小说，虽然粗制，却并非滥造，铁的人物和血的战斗，实在够使描写多愁善病的才子和千娇百媚的佳人的所谓“美文”，在这面前淡到毫无踪影。不过我也和你的意思一样，以为这只是一点小小的胜利，所以也很希望多人合力的更来绍介，至少在后三年内，有关于内战时代和建设时代的纪念碑的的文学书八种至十种，此外更译几种虽然往往被称为无产者文学，然而还不免含有小资产阶级的偏见（如巴比塞）和基督教社会主义的偏见（如辛克莱）的代表作，加上了分析和严正的批评，好在那里，坏在那里，以备对比参考之用，那么，不但读者的见解，可以一天一天的分明起来，就是新的创作家，也得了正确的师范了。
In short, this year I finally sent this monumental novel to the readers here. When I translated and printed, I went through a lot of difficulties, and now I have withdrawn from the circle of memory, but I really love him like my own son, as you said in your letter, and he thinks of my son's son. There is also "Tie Liu", which I also like. These two novels, although crude, are not indiscriminate, and the iron characters and bloody battles are really enough to make the so-called "beautiful writings" describing sentimental talents and charming beauties fade away in front of this. But I also agree with you, thinking that this is just a small victory, so I also hope that many people will work together to introduce it, at least in the next three years, there will be eight to ten kinds of literary books on monuments in the era of civil war and construction, and several masterpieces that are often called proletarian literature, but also contain petty-bourgeois prejudices (such as Babisey) and Christian socialist prejudices (such as Sinclair), plus analysis and serious criticism, good there, bad there, For comparison and reference, not only can the reader's opinions be clarified day by day, but also the new creator has also gained the correct teacher.鲁迅　一九三一，十二，二八。
Lu Xun 1931, 12, 28.

现代电影与有产阶级

现代电影与有产阶级

现代电影与有产阶级

Modern cinema and the proletariat〔日本〕岩崎·昶　作
[Japan] by Iwasaki Chang

现代电影与有产阶级

一　电影与观众

现代电影与有产阶级

1. Film and audience电影的发明，是新的印刷术的起源。曾经借着活字和纸张，而输运开去，复制出来的思想，是有着使中世的封建底、旧教底社会意识，归于坏灭的力量的。
The invention of cinema is the origin of new printing technology. The ideas that were once transported and copied by movable type and paper have the power to destroy the social consciousness of the feudal and old religions in the Middle Ages.有产者底社会的勃兴，宗教改革，那些重大的历史底契机，由此得了结果了。现在，在思想的输运上，在观念形态的决定上，电影所负的任务，就更加积极底，更加意识底了。它是阶级社会的拥护，也是新的“宗教改革”。
The rise of the proletarian society, the Reformation, and those major historical opportunities have come to fruition. Now, in terms of the transportation of ideas and the determination of conceptual forms, the tasks of films are more positive and conscious. It is the embrace of class society and the new "Reformation".这新的印刷术，是由于将运动的照相的一系列，印在Zelluloid的薄膜上而成立的。那活字，并非将概念传给读者，却给以动作和具象。这在直接地是视觉底的这一种意义上，是无上的通俗底的而同时也是感铭底的活字，在原则底地没有言语这一种意义上，则是国际底活字。作为宣传，煽动手段的电影的效用，就在这一点。
This new printing technique was established by printing a series of photographs of movement on the film of Zelluloid. The movable type does not convey the concept to the reader, but gives action and concreteness. In the sense that this is directly the visual base, it is the supreme popular and at the same time the movable type of the emotional base, and in the sense that there is no speech under the principle, it is the international movable type. The utility of cinema as a means of propaganda and incitement lies in this.当考察作为宣传，煽动手段的电影之际，比什么都重大的，是电影和在那影响之下的大众的关联。
When examining films as propaganda and incitement, what is more important than anything else is the relationship between the film and the public under its influence.我想用了具体底的数目字来描写它。
I want to describe it with specific numbers.据英国的电影杂志《The Cinema》所发表的统计，则一星期中的电影看客之数，其非常之多如下。
According to statistics published by the British film magazine "The Cinema", the number of moviegoers in a week is very large as follows.

亚美利加American Canada

常设馆数The number of permanent libraries
15,000

人口population
106,000,000

每星期的看客数Number of spectators per week
47,000,000

对于人口的比率For the ratio of the population
45％45％

英吉利English

常设馆数The number of permanent libraries
3,800

人口population
44,000,000

每星期的看客数Number of spectators per week
14,000,000

对于人口的比率For the ratio of the population
33.3％33.3％

德意志Deutsche

常设馆数The number of permanent libraries
3,600

人口population
63,000,000

每星期的看客数Number of spectators per week
6,000,000

对于人口的比率For the ratio of the population
10.5％10.5％

（Hans Buchner—Im Banne des Films S.21.）
（Hans Buchner—Im Banne des Films S.21.）又，这些常设馆的收容力的总计，是可以看作每日看客数目的平均底数字的，如下表所示——
In addition, the total capacity of these permanent halls can be regarded as the average base number of the number of visitors per day, as shown in the table below-

常设馆与收容力Permanent pavilions and shelter capacity

常设馆数The number of permanent libraries
收容人员Containment personnel

亚美利加American Canada
15,000
8,000,000

德意志Deutsche
3,600
1,500,000

英吉利English
3,800　
1,250,000

于这些数字，乘以365则得
Multiply these numbers by 365 to get the result8,000,000×365＝2,920,000,000（亚美利加）
8,000,000×365=2,920,000,000 (Americas)1,500,000×365＝547,500,000（德意志）
1,500,000×365=547,500,000 (Germany)1,250,000×365＝456,250,000（英吉利）
1,250,000×365=456,250,000 (English)就可以算作一年间的看客总额的大概。
It can be counted as the approximate total number of spectators in a year.但这些数字，还是一九二五年度的调查，若据较新的统计，则世界各国的常设馆数，总计约在六万五千以上。
However, these figures are still from the 1925 survey, and according to more recent statistics, the total number of permanent museums in various countries around the world is about 65,000 or more.

内计——Internal plan——

亚美利加American Canada
20,000

德意志Deutsche
4,000

法兰西France
3,000

俄罗斯Russia
10,000

意大利Italy
2,000

西班牙Spain
2,000

英吉利English
4,000

日本Japan
1,100

（Léon Moussinac—Panoramique du Cinéma，p.17）
(Léon Moussinac—Panoramique du Cinéma, p.17)由此看来，则美，德，英三国，在馆数上，显示着约三成至一成增加。于看客数，也可以想定为大约同率的增加；于这三国以外的诸国，也可以推为同样的增加率。
From this point of view, the United States, Germany, and the United Kingdom show an increase of about 30% to 10% in the number of museums. In terms of the number of spectators, it can also be assumed to be an increase of about the same rate; The same rate of increase can also be inferred from countries other than these three countries.就是，虽在一九二五年度的统计，一年间的电影看客的总额，就已经到了在亚美利加是约二十九亿，在欧罗巴是二十亿，在亚细亚，腊丁·亚美利加，加拿大，亚非利加等是十亿，总计五十九亿那样的好像传奇的空想底数字了。
That is, although in 1925, the total number of moviegoers in a year has reached about 2.9 billion in America, 2 billion in Europa, and 1 billion in Asia, Ladin America, Canada, Asia and Africa, etc., a total of 5.9 billion, which seems to be a legendary fantasy figure.电影所支配的这庞大的观众，以及电影形式的直接性，国际性，——就证明着电影在分量上，在实质上，都是用于大众底宣传，煽动的绝好的容器。
The huge audience dominated by the film, as well as the directness and international ,—— of the film form, prove that the film is an excellent container for public propaganda and agitation in terms of weight and substance.

现代电影与有产阶级

二　电影与宣传

现代电影与有产阶级

2. Film and propaganda要正当地认识那作为宣传，煽动手段的电影的价值，必须知道所谓“宣传电影”这一句熟语，以及那概念之无意义。
To properly understand the value of cinema as a means of propaganda and incitement, we must know the idiom of "propaganda film" and the meaninglessness of the concept.为了介绍日本的好风景于外国，以招致游客而作的电影，富士山，艺妓，日光，温泉等等，我们常常称之为宣传电影，凡这些，有时是因了教导疾病的预防法，奖励邮政储金，劝诱保险之类的目的而照的。那时候，我们便立刻感到装在那些软片之中的目的，领会了肺结核之可怕，开始贮金，加入生命保险去。然而利用了公会堂，小学校讲堂之类来开演的宣传电影，往往是不收费用的，既然白给人看，便会立刻发生疑惑，以为来演的那一面，一定有着白给人看的根由。这种宣传电影，目的意识就马上被看透。
In order to introduce the beautiful scenery of Japan to foreign countries, we often call it a propaganda movie to attract tourists, such as Mt. Fuji, geisha, Nikko, hot springs, etc., and these are sometimes taken for the purpose of teaching about the prevention of disease, rewarding postal savings, and persuading insurance. At that time, we immediately felt the purpose of those soft films, understood the horror of tuberculosis, and began to save money and join life insurance. However, propaganda films that use guild halls, primary school lecture halls, etc. to start are often free of charge, since they are shown to people for free, they will immediately have doubts, thinking that the side of the performance must have a reason for showing it for nothing. This kind of propaganda movie, the sense of purpose is immediately seen through.有着衰老而盲目的母亲的独养子一太郎君，得了召集令，将母亲放在她的一切衰老和盲目之中，“为了君国”，出征去“膺惩可恶的仇敌”了。勇壮的日章旗，万岁，一太郎呀！我们往往被给看这种军国美谈的东西。而这些东西，乃是×××电影公司所制的商业电影，当开演时，也并不叨公会堂和小学校讲堂的光，收取着有名誉的观览费，在普通的常设馆里堂皇地开映。一到这样，善良而无疑的看客，便不觉得这是宣传电影了。他们就将自己的付过正当的观览费这一个事实，做了那影片并非宣传电影的证明。其实，单纯的看客，是没有觉到陷于被那巧妙地布置了的宣传所煽动，所欺骗，然而对于那欺骗，还要付钱的二重欺骗的。
The only adopted son of an aging and blind mother, Ichitaro-kun, received a summons order to put his mother in all her aging and blindness, "for the sake of the monarchy", and went on an expedition to "punish the hateful enemy". Brave Japanese flag, long live, Ichitaro! We are often shown this kind of military beauty. And these things are commercial films produced by ××× film companies, and when they start, they do not care about the light of the guild hall and the primary school lecture hall, and charge a prestigious viewing fee, and they are grandly screened in ordinary permanent halls. At this point, the kind and undoubted audience doesn't think it's a propaganda movie. They used the fact that they had paid a fair viewing fee to prove that the film was not a promotional film. In fact, the simple spectators do not feel that they are incited and deceived by the cleverly arranged propaganda, but for that deception, they have to pay for the double deception.在市民底的用语惯例上的“宣传电影”的无意义，大略就如此。为什么呢，因为没有目的的电影，因而就不是宣传电影的电影之类的东西，不过是幻想的缘故。
The meaninglessness of "propaganda films" in the terminology conventions of the citizens is roughly like this. Why, because a movie without a purpose, is not a movie that promotes a movie, but because of fantasy.我们能够就现在所制成的一切影片，将那隐微的目的——有时这还未意识底地到了目的地步，止是倾向以至趣味的程度罢了，但那倾向以至趣味，结果也是一个重要的宣传价值——摘发出来。那或是向帝国主义战争的进军喇叭，或是爱国主义，君权主义的鼓吹，或是利用了宗教的反动宣传，或是资产者社会的拥护，是对于革命的压抑，是劳资调和的提倡，是向小市民底社会底无关心的催眠药，——要之，是只为了资本主义底秩序的利益，专心安排了的思想底布置。
We can extract the subtle purpose of all the films that are now made—sometimes unconsciously reaching the destination, just the degree of tendency and interest, but that tendency and interest, and the result is also an important propaganda value. It is either the trumpeter of the march to imperialist war, or the advocacy of patriotism and monarchism, or the use of reactionary propaganda of religion, or the support of bourgeois society, the suppression of revolution, the promotion of labor-management reconciliation, the hypnotic drug to the indifferent society of the petty citizens,—— or in short, it is a thoughtful arrangement of ideological arrangements only for the interests of the capitalist order.在一九二八年，开在墨斯科的中央委员会的席上，关于电影，有了
In 1928, at the meeting of the Central Committee in Mesco, about cinema, there was“将电影放在劳动者阶级的手中，关于苏维埃教化和文化的进步的任务，作为指导，教育，组织大众的手段。”
"Putting cinema in the hands of the working class, the task of Soviet indoctrination and cultural progress, as a means of guiding, educating, organizing the masses."的决议了。苏维埃电影的任务，即在在世界的电影市场上，抗拒着资本主义底宣传的澎湃的波浪，而作×××××宣传。
The resolution has been. The task of Soviet cinema is to resist the surging waves of capitalist propaganda in the world film market, and to make ××××× propaganda.世界现今是正在作为第二次大战的准备的，观念形态斗争的涡中。而电影，是和那五十九亿的看客一同，可以在这斗争的秤盘上，加上决定底的重量去的。
The world is now in the midst of a struggle for ideas and forms as preparations for World War II. And the movie, together with the 5.9 billion spectators, can add the weight of the decision to the scale of this struggle.

现代电影与有产阶级

三　电影和战争

现代电影与有产阶级

3. Cinema and War资本主义底宣传电影之中，占着最重要的部门的，是战争影片。
Among the capitalist propaganda films, the most important sector is war films.将战争收入电影里去，已经颇早了。当电影刚要脱离襁褓的时候，我们就看见了罗马，巴比伦，埃及之类的兵卒的打仗。这是那时的电影对于舞台的唯一的长处，为了要使利用了自由的Location（就地摄影）和巨大的Set（场内陈设）和大众摄影的光景的魅力，发现到最大限度，所以设法出来的。辉煌的古代的铠甲，环以城垣的都市，神祠，奇怪的偶像，枪，盾，矛，火箭，石弩，这样异域情调的，而在当时，又是壮丽的布置，便忽然眩惑了对于电影还很幼稚的大众的眼，正合了时尚了。
It was quite early to include the war in the movie. When the movie is about to be released from swaddling clothes, we see the battles of soldiers in Rome, Babylon, Egypt and so on. This is the only strength of the movie for the stage at that time, and I managed to find out the charm of the scene that makes the most of the free location (on-site photography) and the huge set (in-venue furnishings) and the scene of mass photography. The glorious ancient armor, the city surrounded by city walls, shrines, strange idols, guns, shields, spears, rockets, stone crossbows, such exoticism, and at that time, it was a magnificent arrangement, which suddenly dazzled the eyes of the public who were still very naïve about movies, which was just in fashion.但在初期的这类的战争，归根结蒂，和大排场的马戏，比武之类的把戏，也并无区别。古代罗马和凯尔达戈，都不是现代电影看客的祖国。战争也不过仗了那动底的煽情底的视觉，使他们兴奋，有趣罢了。
But in the early days, this kind of war, in the final analysis, is no different from the pompous circus, competition and other tricks. Ancient Rome and Keldago, neither the motherland of modern moviegoers. War is just a visual reliance on the sensationalism that moves the bottom to make them excited and interesting.引进近代的战争去，而在那里面分明地装入有意识的宣传底要素的最初的电影制作者，我以为恐怕是葛蕾菲士（D．W．Griffith）罢。他在取材于南北战争的《一民族之诞生》（Birth of a Nation），《亚美利加》（America）这些影片上，赞美北军的英雄主义，将所谓合众国建国的精神，化为正当，化为美丽了。凡这些，虽不如后出的许多好战底影片那样，积极底地鼓吹了对外战争，但那目的，则仍在对于国民中有着驳杂分子的人种博物馆一般的合众国和其居民，涵养其确固的国家底概念，爱国心。“十足的亚美利加人”这一句口号，流行起来，成为“亚美利加化”运动的有力的武器，对于从爱尔兰来的巡警，从昔昔利来的菜商，于黑人，于美洲印第安，也都想印上这脸谱去了。
The original filmmaker who introduced modern warfare and clearly incorporated conscious propaganda elements into it, I thought it was probably D.W. Griffith. In films such as "Birth of a Nation" and "America", which are based on the Civil War, he praised the heroism of the Union Army and turned the so-called spirit of the founding of the United States into legitimacy and beauty. Although these are not as active as many later warlike films, they still cultivate their solid concept of national foundation and patriotism for the United States and its inhabitants, which are like ethnic museums with mixed elements among the people. The slogan "Full American" became popular and became a powerful weapon for the "Americanization" movement, and the patrol officers from Ireland, the vegetable merchants from Xixili, the blacks, and the American Indians all wanted to print this face.“亚美利加化”的历程，以欧洲大战的勃发，亚美利加的参战，以及和这相伴的急速的帝国主义化为契机，而告了完成。
The process of "Americanization" was completed with the outbreak of the European War, the entry of America into the war, and the rapid imperialization that accompanied it.亚美利加和对德宣战同时，还必须送一百万军队到法兰西去，于是开始了速成的募兵，施行了速成的海军扩张。奏着煽动底的进行曲的军乐队，在各处都市的大街上往来，各十字路口帖着传单，报纸独于此时候说些“亚美利加市民”的义务。易受煽动的青年们，或者为着不去应募，将被恋人所鄙弃，或者为着对于生活，觉得厌倦，或者又为着“进了海军去看看世界”，就来当募兵了。当此之际，亚美利加政府之宣传，也是有史以来的最大规模，而且最见效果的了。
At the same time as America declared war on Germany, it had to send a million troops to France, so it began a rapid recruitment and implemented a rapid naval expansion. Marching bands playing incitement marches on the streets of various cities, leaflets are posted at intersections, and newspapers are the only ones at this time to say the obligation of "American citizens". Young people who are easily incited either because they do not enlist and will be despised by their lovers, or because they are tired of life, or because they want to "join the navy to see the world", they come to recruit. At this time, the propaganda of the American government was also the largest and most effective in history.在这宣传之战，充了最主要的脚色的，是新闻和电影。当这时期，在本来的意义上的战争电影，这才制作出来了。
In this propaganda battle, the most important thing is news and movies. During this period, war films in the original sense were produced.在以根据西班牙的发狂底反对德国者伊本纳支（Blasco Ibáñez）的原作《默示录的四骑士》（Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse），《我们的海》（Mare Nostrum）为代表作品的战争影片上，亚美利加的支配阶级便描写出德国军队的如何凶残，德国潜艇的如何非人道，巧妙地煽动了单纯的花旗人。
In the war films represented by Blasco Ibáñez, who opposed the Germans based on Spain's madness, the ruling class of America depicted how ferocious, how inhumane the German submarines were, and subtly incited the simple Citi people.然而花旗帝国主义开始呈露它本来的锐锋，却在欧战收场之后，懂得了大众的军国化，是应该在平时不断地安排的时候。
However, Citi imperialism began to show its original sharpness, but after the end of the European War, it understood that the militarization of the masses should be constantly arranged in peacetime.在一九二〇年代的前半，切实地支配了全世界人类的脑子的，首先是活泼泼的战争的记忆。于是发生一种欲望，要符世界大战这一个重大的历史底事件，在国民底叙事诗的形态上，艺术底地再现出来，正是自然的事。而所作的电影，就切实地倾向大众的兴味和感情上去，也正是自然的事。将这有利的情势，忽然利用了的，是花旗帝国主义。战争的叙事法，便以最为好战底的煽动企图，创作出来了。
In the first half of the 1920s, the first thing that truly dominated the minds of mankind around the world was the lively memory of war. Thus, a desire to conform to the major historical event of the world war is reproduced artistically in the form of national narrative poetry, which is a natural thing. And it is natural for the movies made to really tend to the public's interest and emotions. It is Citi imperialism that suddenly takes advantage of this favorable situation. The narrative method of war was created with the most belligerent incitement attempt.战争影片的不绝的系列，产生了。《战地之花》（Big Parade），《飞机大战》（Wings）以下，许多反动底宣传影片，列举名目就不胜其烦。不消说，那些电影是没有战时的纯粹的煽动影片一般地露骨的，制作之法，是添些乐剧式恋爱的适当的甘甜，以及掩饰些人道主义底的战争批评的药料，弄得易于下咽，使能在较自然，较暗默之中，达到宣传的目的。但虽然是十分小心的假面，而其究竟目的之所在，则同是将遮眼的东西给与大众，使不明帝国主义底战争的本质，以及赞美亚美利加军队的英雄主义，有时还宣传军队生活的放恣和有趣罢了。（我深惜在这里没有揭出这种战争影片的完全的目录，以那代表底的几个例子，来使我的叙述更加具体起来的纸面和时间了。但我相信将来会有补正的机会的。）
An endless series of war films was produced. "Big Parade", "Wings", and many other reactionary propaganda films, it is annoying to list the names. Needless to say, those films are not as explicit as pure incitement films in wartime, and the production method is to add some appropriate sweetness of musical-style love, and to cover up some humanitarian criticism of war, so that it is easy to swallow, so that it can achieve the purpose of propaganda in a more natural and silent way. But although it is a very careful mask, its ultimate purpose is to give the public something blindfolded, so that the nature of the imperialist war is not understood, and the heroism of the American army is praised, and sometimes it is just to promote the indulgence and fun of military life. (I regret that I have not revealed a complete catalogue of such war films here, but I will use a few representative examples to make my narrative more concrete.) But I believe there will be opportunities to make corrections in the future. ）就战争和电影所历叙的这些事实，那自然，也决不是惟亚美利加所独有的特别现象。倒是在别的一切帝国主义强国里，都在争先兴办的。德国将《大战巡洋舰》（Emden）《世界大战》（Weltkrieg）等呈在我们的眼前，法国是制作了《凡尔登——历史的幻想》（Verdun—Vision d'histoire）《蔼克巴什》（L'Equipage）等，英国则以《黎明》（Dawn），日本则以《炮烟弹雨》，《地球在回旋》和《蔚山洋西的海战》等，竭力用心于“军事思想”的普及。
As far as these facts are concerned about the war and the film, it is by no means a special phenomenon unique to America. On the contrary, all other imperialist powers are scrambling to be the first to do so. Germany presented "Emden" and "Weltkrieg" (Weltkrieg), France produced "Verdun-Vision d'histoire" and "L'Equipage", etc., Britain made "Dawn", and Japan made "Rain of Smoke and Bombs", "The Earth is Spinning" and "The Naval Battle in the West of Ulsan", etc., and tried their best to popularize "military thought".当叙述完战争电影之际，而没有提及作为几个例外底现象的反对战争的倾向，怕是不妥当的罢。
When the war movie is narrated, it is probably inappropriate not to mention the tendency to oppose war as an exception.我们在《战地之花》里，在几个段落里，虽然是太感伤底的，然而总算也看见了描写着诅咒战争的心情。那心理，在《战地鹃声》（What Price Glory）中，就更为积极底地表白着。但在这些影片上，对于战争的确然的批评和态度，并无一定。只有着和卓别林（Charlie Chaplin）曾在《从军梦》（Shoulder Arms）里，将战争化为谑画了那样的同一程度的认识。
In "Flowers of the Battlefield", although we are too sentimental in a few paragraphs, we finally see the mood that describes the cursed war. That psychology is expressed more positively in "What Price Glory". However, there is no definite criticism or attitude towards war in these films. Only the same level of understanding as Charlie Chaplin once turned war into a joke in "Shoulder Arms".和这比较起来，技术上非常卓拔的战争影片《帝国旅馆》（Hotel Imperial）的导演者Erich Pommer所作的《铁条网》（Barbed Wire），倘临末没有那高唱人类爱的可笑的夸张，则和猛烈地讽刺了帝国主义战争的名喜剧《阵后谐兵》（Behind the Front）一同，大概是可以属于反战争电影的范畴的了。
In comparison, "Barbed Wire" by Erich Pommer, director of the technically brilliant war film "Hotel Imperial", could probably fall into the category of anti-war films if it did not have the ridiculous exaggeration of human love at the end, along with the famous comedy "Behind the Front", which fiercely satirizes the imperialist war.

现代电影与有产阶级

四　电影与爱国主义

现代电影与有产阶级

4. Cinema and patriotism爱国底宣传电影，也是世界大战后的显著的现象。为什么呢？因为这种电影，虽有外形上的差违，但终极之点，是在向帝国主义战争的意识的准备，鼓舞，在那君权主义上，在那好战性上，和战争影片是本质底地相关联的。
Patriotic propaganda films are also a significant phenomenon after the world war. Why? Because this kind of film, although there are differences in appearance, the ultimate point is to prepare and inspire the consciousness of imperialist war, and it is essentially related to war films in terms of monarchism and belligerence.那么，那目的是在那里呢？
So, what is the purpose?直接地，是宣传团体观念，国旗之尊严，间接地，是奖励暴力，使民心倾向右翼政党，当和外国争夺资本市场之际，即刻有军事行动的事，成为妥当化。
Directly, it is to promote the concept of the group, the dignity of the national flag, and indirectly, it is to reward violence, so that the people's hearts are inclined towards right-wing parties, and when they compete with foreign countries for the capital market, military action becomes justified.这种影片的最活泼的影响，大抵见于选举国会议员，选举大总统的时期，如德国的国权党，尤其是能够仗了爱国主义的电影，博得许多的投票。
The most lively influence of this kind of film is probably seen in the period of election of parliamentarians and presidents, such as the National Rights Party in Germany, especially the film that can rely on patriotism and win a lot of votes.例如叫作《腓立大王》（Fridericus Rex，这在日本，是大加短缩，改题为《莱因悲怆曲》了）的普鲁士勃兴的历史影片，是其中的最获成功的。那正是大战后的张皇的时代，且正值跟着德国革命的失败而来的反动的火头上，这是有产阶级的巧妙的宣传。穷极，饿透了的小市民们，在这影片中，看见精锐的腓立大王的禁军的行进，看见七年战争的冠冕堂皇的胜利，于是想起了往日的皇帝的治世，便在无智的廉价的感激中，鼓掌蹈足，吹起口笛来了。
For example, the Prussian historical film called "Fridericus Rex" (in Japan, it is greatly abbreviated and retitled "Rhine's Sorment") is the most successful of them. It was the era of Zhang Huang after the Great War, and it was on the fire of reactionary fire that followed the defeat of the German revolution, which was a clever propaganda of the proletariat. In this film, the impoverished and hungry citizens, seeing the march of the elite Philip the Great's forbidden army and the high-sounding victory of the Seven Years' War, thought of the reign of the emperors of the past, and applauded and blew their whistles in the ignorant and cheap gratitude.接着这个，而国民底英雄俾士麦的传记，化成电影了，兴登堡的传记，化成电影了。
Then this, and the biography of the national hero Bismarck turned into a movie, and the biography of Hindenburg turned into a movie.《俾士麦》（Bismarck）者，单为了那制作，就设起俾士麦电影公司来，照成了两部二十余卷的巨制，凡在这帝国主义底政治家一生中的一切爱国底，煽情底的要素，都一无遗漏地填进在那里面。
"Bismarck" (Bismarck), just for that production, set up the Bismarck Film Company, and it was made into two masterpieces of more than 20 volumes, and all the patriotic and sensational elements in the life of this imperialist politician were filled in without omission.《兴登堡》（Hindenburg）者，是乘这老将军当选为大统领——这叨光于影片《腓立大王》和《俾士麦》之处是多么的大呵。——之机，为了他的收罗人心而作的。
"Hindenburg" (Hindenburg) is the election of this old general as the commander - this is a great reflection of the films "Philip the Great" and "Bismarck". ——The opportunity was made for him to win people's hearts.一九二七年春，德意志国权党领袖之一，奥古斯德·霞尔书店的事实上的所有者福干培克，乘德国大公司之一乌发公司的财政危机，买进了那股票的过半，坐了乌发公司总经理的交椅了。于是德国的电影事业和那影响力，便全捏在国权党的手里。福干培克立刻在乌发公司的出品计划上，露骨地显示了他的政治底主张。那最是世界底的例子，是《世界大战》（Weltkrieg）的二部作。
In the spring of 1927, one of the leaders of the German National Rights Party, the de facto owner of the bookstore Auguste Charles, Fogg, took advantage of the financial crisis of the Ufa Company, one of the largest German companies, to buy more than half of the shares and took the position of general manager of the Ufa Company. So Germany's film industry and its influence were all in the hands of the National Rights Party. Fuganpek immediately blatantly showed his political propositions on the production plan of Wufa Company. The most world-class example is the second part of "Weltkrieg".对于这，社会民主党的内阁便即刻取了牵制底手段。就是，使德意志银行来对抗福干培克，投资于乌发公司。为了使德国的独占底大电影公司不成为国权党宣传机关，这是不得已的方法。
In response, the cabinet of the Social Democrats immediately took the measure of containment. That is, to make Deutsche Bank fight against Fugan Peck and invest in Ufa. In order to prevent Germany's monopoly film companies from becoming propaganda organs of the National Power Party, this is a last resort.《世界大战》已有删节的片子，绍介于日本（译者按：在上海，去年也大演了一通），那是有着怎样的倾向和主张的事，大约现在早可以无须详说了罢。
"War of the Worlds" has been abridged, and it is set in Japan (translator's note: in Shanghai, it was also performed last year), and what kind of tendencies and propositions it has is probably not necessary to go into detail now.在表面上所标榜的，《世界大战》是将一九一四年至一九一七年的战争中所摄的各国（大抵是德法）的照片，凭了纯粹的历史底客观而编辑的留在软片上的记录。
On the surface, "The War of the Worlds" is a record of the photographs taken in the war from 1914 to 1917 (mainly Germany and France) and objectively edited on the film based on pure historical background.而且这比起专一描写本国军队的胜利的，勇敢的，爱国的亚美利加式电影来，也真好像近于写实。然而注意较深的观察者，却即刻可以看见。从丹南培克之战起，常只将兴登堡将军的胜利，重复地映出了好几回。而且和写着“在战时屡救祖国的将军，当平和时，也作为大统领而尽力于祖国”等语的字幕一同，这电影也就完结了。
And this really seems close to realism compared to the brave, patriotic American-Canadian movies that depict the victory of the country's army. However, the observer who pays deep attention can see it immediately. From the Battle of Dannampek, the victory of General Hindenburg was often repeatedly reflected several times. And with the subtitles that say, "The general who repeatedly saved the motherland in wartime, and when peace, he also did his best for the motherland as a great commander", the movie ended.

现代电影与有产阶级

五　电影和宗教

现代电影与有产阶级

5. Cinema and religion通一切时代，宗教一向在供支配阶级的御用，是已经证明了许多次数的。
Throughout all times, religion has always been used by the ruling class, and it has been proven many times.这在东洋，则教人以佛教底的忍从和蔑视现世，在西方，则成为基督教底平和主义，想阻止现存的阶级社会的积极底改革。
In the East, it teaches people to endure and despise the world with Buddhism, and in the West, it becomes Christian pacifism, trying to prevent the active reform of the existing class society.到二十世纪，宗教虽然已经失却了昔日的权威和信仰，但倒是因为失却，所以对于那支配阶级的奴仆状态，也就愈加露骨，故意起来了。
By the twentieth century, although religion had lost its former authority and belief, it had become more and more explicit and deliberate about the slavery of the ruling class.在物质文明发达较迟的国度中，宗教还有着大大的宣传煽动力。资本主义于是将宗教和电影相结合，能够同时利用了。
In countries with late development of material civilization, religion also has a great propaganda and incitement force. Capitalism then combined religion and cinema to make use of it at the same time.例如，《十诫》（The Ten Commandments），《基督教徒》（Christian），《宾汉》（Ben Hur），《万王之王》（King of Kings），《犹太之王，拿撒勒的耶稣》（I．N．R．I．）之类的基督教宣传电影，《亚细亚之光》（Die Leuchte Asiens），《大圣日莲》之类的佛教电影，是和感激之泪一同，从全世界的愚夫愚妇，善男信女的衣袋里，赚得确实的布施，从商业底方面看起来，也是利益最多的影片。一切宗派中，罗马加特力教会是最留意于电影的利用的，每年开一回电影会议，议定着那一年中全世界底宣传的计划。
For example, Christian propaganda films such as "The Ten Commandments", "Christian", "Ben Hur", "King of Kings", "Jesus of Nazareth" (I.N.R.I.), "Die Leuchte Asiens" (Light of Asia), "Great Saint Nichiren" and other Buddhist films are along with tears of gratitude, From the pockets of foolish men and women all over the world, good men and women, it is also the film with the most benefits from the perspective of business. Of all the denominations, the Roman Carthelle Church paid the most attention to the use of cinema, holding a film conference every year to decide on a plan for worldwide propaganda during that year.在我们的周围，宗教之力早已几乎视若无物了。至多，也不过本愿寺，日莲宗之流，组织了巡行电影团，竭力想维系些乡下农民的信仰。然而因此便推定宗教的世界底无力，是不可以的。只要看在苏维埃的文化革命的历程中，还不能放掉对于宗教的斗争，而在实行的事实，大概就可以明白其间情势了。
Around us, the power of religion has long been almost nonexistent. At most, it is no more than Honganji Temple, Nichiren Buddhism, and other groups organized touring film troupes to try their best to maintain the faith of some rural farmers. However, it is not permissible to assume that religion is powerless in the world. As long as we look at the course of the Soviet Cultural Revolution, we cannot let go of the struggle against religion, but in the facts of its implementation, we can probably understand the situation in between.

现代电影与有产阶级

六　电影和有产阶级

现代电影与有产阶级

6. Cinema and the proletariat为资本主义底生产方法和有产者政府的监视所拘束的现今电影的一切，几乎都被用于拥护有产阶级的事，我相信是已经很明显了的。
I believe it is already clear that almost everything in today's cinema, constrained by the capitalist method of production and the surveillance of the proletarian government, is used to support the proletariat.但在这里，却将电影和有产阶级的关系，限于较狭的意义，只来论及直接服役于市民有产阶级的光荣和支配的电影这一种。
However, here, the relationship between film and the proletariat is limited to a narrower meaning, and only the glory and domination of the proletariat are discussed.这种电影，可以分成三样概括底区别。
This kind of movie can be divided into three general differences.那第一种，是和封建底，乃至贵族底社会相对抗，而尽讴歌有产阶级之胜利的任务的。因此那全部，几乎都是取材于市民底社会的勃兴的历史影片。××，或者××的野兽底横暴，在其下尝着涂炭之苦的农民，工商阶级。到影片的第七卷，而有产阶级终于蜂起，将电影底的极顶（Climax）和壮大的群集（mob scene），在这里大行展开，这是那典型底的结构。但在大多数的影片上，有产阶级是决不作为一个阶级底总体而蹶起的，大抵由一个（往往是贵族出身，年青，而又眉目秀丽的！）英雄所指导，力点就放在那个人底的英雄主义上。作为那最是性格底的作品，读者只要记起《罗宾汉》（Robin Hood），《斯凯拉谟修》（Scaramouche），《定情之夕》（A Night of Love）来，大约就足够了。在日本的时代剧，尤其是剑剧影片之中，我们也有那不少的例子。
The first is to oppose the feudal and even aristocratic society, and to praise the task of the victory of the proletariat. Therefore, almost all of them are historical films based on the rise of civil society. ××, or the ×× beast, the peasants, the industrial and commercial class who are suffering under it. By the seventh volume of the film, the proletariat finally rose up, and the climax and the large cluster (mob scene) of the film unfolded here, which is the typical structure of the bottom. But in most films, the proletariat is never raised as a class as a whole, and is probably made up of a (often aristocratic, young, and beautiful!) The hero is guided, and the focus is on the heroism of that person. As the most characteristic work, it is probably enough for readers to remember "Robin Hood", "Scaramouche", and "A Night of Love". In Japanese period dramas, especially sword drama films, we also have many examples.但是，我们又能够在那历史底时代，发见新兴有产阶级所演的革命的脚色，和现在的无产阶级的斗争，其间有很大的类似（Analogie）。倘作者将意识底的强音（Akzent）集中于此的时候，是可以产生优秀的作品的。如《熊的结婚》，《农奴之翼》，《斯各丁城》，《忠次旅行日记》等，便是那仅少的代表。
However, we can also find that the revolution played by the emerging proletariat in that historical era is very similar to the struggle of the proletariat today. If the author concentrates the strong sound (Akzent) at the bottom of his consciousness here, he can produce excellent works. For example, "The Marriage of the Bear", "Serf Wings", "Scotting City", "Tadaji's Travel Diary", etc., are the few representatives.
第二种，是反对无产阶级革命的电影。
The second type is a film against the proletarian revolution.《党人魂》（Volga Boatman）是当内务省检阅之际，惹起了大问题，终于遭了警视厅来制限其开映的忧患的影片，但那内容是什么呢？
"Volga Boatman" is a film that caused a big problem when it was reviewed by the Ministry of the Interior, and was finally restricted by the Metropolitan Police Department to restrict its release, but what is the content?《大暴动》（Tempest；译者按：在上海映演时，名《狂风暴雨》）也靠了长有数卷的小插画，这才好容易得以许可开演的影片，然而那所选的是怎样的主题呢？
"Tempest; Translator's note: When it was screened in Shanghai, it was called "Storm") also relied on several volumes of vignettes, so it was easy to get permission to start the film, but what kind of theme was chosen?这些影片，是只在用俄国的无产阶级革命为背景这一点上，因而遭了禁止，或重大的删剪的。但要之，那所描写，是将无产阶级革命当作了无统制的暴民的一揆。无教育而不道德的农民和劳动者，倚恃着多数，攻入贵族的城堡去，破坏家具，××美丽的少女，酗酒，单喜欢流血。那是在无产阶级的胜利上，特地蒙上暴虐的假面，涂些污泥，使小市民变成反革命起见而作的有产阶级的××。我们于此，看见了如拥护有产者社会而设的宣传电影，却被×××××××的××所禁止的那种奇怪而且愉快的现象了。
These films were banned or significantly deleted only because they were based on the Russian proletarian revolution. But in short, the description is a manifestation of the proletarian revolution as a mob without command. Uneducated and immoral peasants and laborers, relying on the majority, invaded the castles of the nobility, destroyed furniture, ×× beautiful girls, drank heavily, and only liked to bleed. It was on the victory of the proletariat that they specially covered the mask of tyranny and smeared some sludge to turn the small townspeople into proletarian ×× for the sake of counter-revolution. Here we see the strange and pleasant phenomenon of propaganda films designed to support the society of the proletariat, but are banned by ××××××× ××.固然，在《约翰南伊之爱》（Liebe der Jeanne Ney）和《最后的命令》（The Last Command）上，剪去了十月革命，那却是检阅者十分做了他所该做的事的。
Of course, the October Revolution was cut out in "Liebe der Jeanne Ney" and "The Last Command", but the reviewer did what he was supposed to do.
最后，就来了以《大都会》（Metropolis；译者按：在上海映演时，名《科学世界》）为典型的劳资调和电影的一连串。
Finally, there is the "Metropolis; Translator's note: When it was screened in Shanghai, it was called "Science World") is a series of typical labor-management reconciliation films.关于《大都会》，现在已经无须在这里缕述了。那是揭着“头和手之间，非有心脏不可”这标语的社会民主主义者，宣讲着资本家和劳动者可以不由战争，但靠相互底的协力与爱，即能建设新社会云云的巴培尔塔以前的童话。
There is no need to elaborate on "Metropolis" here. It was the social democrats who unveiled the slogan "Between the head and the hand, there must be a heart", preaching the fairy tale before the capitalists and workers that could build a new society without war, but by mutual cooperation and love.

现代电影与有产阶级

七 电影与小市民

现代电影与有产阶级

7. Movies and Little Citizens有产阶级的电影底宣传，一到阶级间的对立逐渐鲜明地，决定底地尖锐起来，也就陷在无可避免的绝地里了。
The proletarian film propaganda, as soon as the opposition between classes gradually becomes clear, decides to become sharp, and it will fall into the inevitable Jedi.在实际上，电影是以大多数的小市民和无产阶级为看客的。而他们，小市民和无产阶级，早已渐渐地觉察出有产阶级的诡计来了。就是，已经注意于“支配阶级制作了宣布那服从于己的观念形态的影片，而以此来做掠取无产者的衣袋的手段”这事实的真相了。
In practice, the film is aimed at the majority of the small townspeople and the proletariat. And they, the petty citizens and the proletariat, have already gradually become aware of the trickery of the proletariat. It has already paid attention to the fact that "the ruling class has made a film that proclaims the ideological form subordinate to itself, and uses it as a means of plundering the pockets of the proletariat".卢那卡尔斯基关于苏维埃电影，曾经说明过“拙劣的煽动，却招致反对的结果”这原则，在这里，却被有产者底地应用了。
Lunakarsky once stated the principle of "clumsy incitement leads to opposition" in Soviet cinema, but here it is applied by the proletarians.露骨的宣传是停止了。最所希望的，是使电影的看客看不见“阶级”这观念。至少，是坐在银幕之前的数小时中，使他们忘却了一切社会底对立。
The explicit propaganda is stopped. What I hope most is to make the concept of "class" invisible to the audience of the film. At least, it is the hours of sitting in front of the screen that make them forget all social antagonism.这样子，就产生了小市民的影片。
In this way, a film of small citizens was produced.在小市民家庭剧中，有两种特征底的倾向——
In the family drama of the small citizen, there are two tendencies of the bottom of the characteristics -一，是那罗曼主义。
First, it is Romanticism.二，是那弄玄妙（Sophistication）。
Second, it is the Sophistication.粗粗一看，则现在的电影，尤其是电影剧，乃是写实主义底的。而且许多人们，都抱着这样的幻想。但其实，除了极少数的第一流作品以外，一切全没有什么现实底的申诉的。
At a glance, today's movies, especially film dramas, are based on realism. And many people have such illusions. But in fact, except for a very few first-rate works, there is no realistic complaint at all.自然，虽说是罗曼主义，但和给十九世纪时有产阶级革命的艺术以特征的那生着火焰之翼的罗曼主义，是不一样的。这是为了平庸，近视，乐天底的小市民们而设的，也是平庸，近视，乐天底的罗曼主义。这于迭克萨的农民，芝加各的公司人员，亚理梭那的牧童，纽借那的送牛奶人，纽约的速记生，毕兹巴格的野球选手，东京的中学生，横滨的水手，无不相宜。说起来，就是Ready-made（现成）的罗曼主义。作为那象征底的形相，则有珂林·谟亚（Collin Moore），瑙玛·希拉（Norma Shearer），克莱拉·宝（Clara Bow），从一九二六年起，顺次登场来了。就是那样程度的罗曼主义。
Naturally, although it is romanticism, it is not the same as the romanticism with wings of flame that characterized the art of the proletarian revolution in the nineteenth century. This is for mediocre, myopic, optimistic citizens, and mediocre, myopia, optimistic romanticism. This is suitable for farmers in Dixa, company workers in Chigako, shepherd boys in Arizona, milkmen in New York, stenographers in New York, baseball players in Bizbarger, junior high school students in Tokyo, sailors in Yokohama, etc. Speaking of which, it is ready-made romanticism. As the symbolic figure, there are Collin Moore, Norma Shearer, and Clara Bow, who have appeared in turn since 1926. That's the level of romanticism.每星期薪水（美金）二十五元的大学生出身的公司职员和美尔顿百货公司的娇娃的恋爱故事。珂尼·爱兰特。新福特式的跑车。爵兹乐舞。打猎。
The love story of a college student who earns a salary of 25 yuan a week (US dollars) and a beautiful baby in Milton Department Store. Kenny Ehrant. A new Ford-style sports car. Honor this music and dance. Hunt.至于这花旗罗曼主义上所必要的此外的布置和氛围气，则读者倘一看《Vanity Fair》的广告栏，更所希望的，是往就近的电影馆，一赏鉴任何的亚美利加影片，大约便能自己领悟的罢。
As for the other arrangements and atmospheres necessary for this Citi romanticism, if the reader looks at the advertising board of "Vanity Fair", what he hopes is to go to the nearest cinema and appreciate any American film, he will probably be able to understand it himself.读者必须明白，这小市民底的罗曼主义，是和亚美利加资本主义还在走着上行线的这一个公式底认识，有不可分的关联的。这事实，在一方面，是每年将九十亿元的国帑，撒在有产阶级的怀中，而使发生了叫作所谓“Four Hundreds”的有闲阶级，利子生活者的大群。
The reader must understand that the romanticism of this petty citizen is inseparably related to the understanding of the formula that American capitalism is still on the upward line. On the one hand, this fact is that 9 billion yuan of national treasury is scattered in the arms of the proletariat every year, resulting in a large group of idle classes called the "Four Hundreds", who live on profit.而且有闲阶级，利子生活者的大群，则使他本身的消费底文化，娱乐机关，极端地发达起来了。而从那消费底文化的母胎中，就酦酵了为一切文化烂熟期之特色的一种像煞有介事，通人趣味，低徊趣味，讽刺，冷嘲等。这过度地洗炼了的生活感情，他们称之为Sophistication。卖弄巴黎式的Chic，以及花旗式地解释了的hard-boiled之类的话，都和这相关联，而为人们所欢喜。
Moreover, the large group of idle class and profit-making people has made his own consumer base culture and entertainment institutions extremely developed. And from the womb of the consumer culture, it is fermented as a characteristic of the mature period of all cultures, such as being serious, interesting, low-minded, sarcastic, cynical, etc. This is an overly refined feeling of life, which they call Sophistication. Words like Parisian Chic and Citi-style explanations like hard-boiled are associated with this and are appreciated by people.卓别林在《巴黎一妇人》（A Woman of Paris）里，居然表现了那Sophistication的模范（Prototype）。刘别谦（Ernst Lubitsch）在《婚姻范围》（Marriage Circle）里，表现于一套片子上面了。蒙太·培尔，玛尔·辛克莱儿，泰巴第·达赖尔等许多后继者们，都发挥了电影界的玄妙家腔调。
Chaplin actually showed the prototype of Sophistication in "A Woman of Paris". Ernst Lubitsch appeared in a set of films in "Marriage Circle". Monta-Pehr, Mar Sinclair, Thai Dalil and many other successors have played the mysterious tone of the film industry.但是，亚美利加虽在那一切的资本主义底兴隆，但本身之中，却已经包藏着到底消除不尽的内底矛盾，而在苦闷。消费不能相副的一面底生产，失了投资市场的大金融资本，荷佛政府的积极底外交，拥抱着五百万失业者的天国亚美利加，现在是正踏在不可掩饰的阶级底对立的顶上了。
However, although America is prosperous under all capitalism, it already contains inexhaustible internal contradictions and is distressed. The positive diplomacy of the Hofer government, which embraces the heavenly land of five million unemployed people, is now stepping on the top of the unconcealable class opposition.这社会情势，将怎样地反映在亚美利加影片之中呢，那是很有兴味的将来的问题。
How this social situation will be reflected in American films is a very interesting question for the future.

现代电影与有产阶级

译者附记

现代电影与有产阶级

Translator notes这一篇文章的题目，原是《作为宣传，煽动手段的电影》。所谓“宣传，煽动”者，本是指支配阶级那一面而言，和“造反”并无关系。但这些字面，现在有许多人都不大喜欢，尤其是在支配阶级那方面。那原因，只要看本文第七章《电影与小市民》的前几段，就明白了。
The title of this article was originally "Films as a means of propaganda and incitement". The so-called "propaganda and incitement" originally refers to the side of the ruling class, and has nothing to do with "rebellion". But these liters are not liked by many people now, especially in terms of the ruling class. The reason is understood by reading the first few paragraphs of Chapter 7 of this article, "Movies and Little Citizens".本文又原是《电影和资本主义》中的一部分，但全书尚未完成，这是据发表在《新兴艺术》第一，第二号上的初稿译出来的。作者在篇末有几句声明，现在也译在下面：
This article was originally part of "Cinema and Capitalism", but the whole book has not yet been completed, which was translated from the first draft published in "Emerging Art" No. 1 and No. 2. The author has a few statements at the end of the article, which are now also translated below:“我的，《电影和资本主义》，原要接着本稿，更以社会底逃避的电影，无产阶级方面所作的宣传电影等，作为顺次的问题，臻于完成的。但现在，则仅以对于有产阶级电影的如上的研究，暂且搁笔。
"Mine, "Cinema and Capitalism", was originally to continue this draft, and it was completed with films that escaped from the bottom of society, propaganda films made by the proletariat, etc., as sequential issues. But now, I will only put aside the above research on proletarian films.“又，本稿不过是对于每一项目，各能写出独立的研究那样的浩瀚的材料，给了极概括底的一瞥，在这一端，是全篇过于常识底了。请许我声明我自己颇以为憾的事。”
In addition, this manuscript is just a vast material for each project, each capable of writing independent research, giving a very general glimpse, and at this end, the whole article is too common sense. Please allow me to state what I regret. ”但我偶然读到了这一篇，却觉得于自己很有裨益。上海的日报上，电影的广告每天大概总有两大张，纷纷然竞夸其演员几万人，费用几百万，“非常的风情，浪漫，香艳（或哀艳），肉感，滑稽，恋爱，热情，冒险，勇壮，武侠，神怪……空前巨片”，真令人觉得倘不前去一看，怕要死不瞑目似的。现在用这小镜子一照，就知道这些宝贝，十之九都可以归纳在文中所举的某一类，用意如何，目的何在，都明明白白了。但那些影片，本非以中国人为对象而作，所以运入中国的目的，也就和制作时候的用意不同，只如将陈旧枪炮，卖给武人一样，多吸收一些金钱而已。而中国人对于这些的见解，当然也和他们的本国人两样，只看广告中借以吸引看客的句子，便分明可知，于各类影片，大抵都只见其“非常风情，浪漫，香艳（或哀艳），肉感……”了。然而，冥冥中也还有功效在，看见他们“勇壮武侠”的战事巨片，不意中也会觉得主人如此英武，自己只好做奴才，看见他们“非常风情浪漫”的爱情巨片，便觉得太太如此“肉感”，真没有法子办——自惭形秽，虽然嫖白俄妓女以自慰，现在是还可以做到的。非洲土人顶喜欢白人的洋枪，美洲黑人常要强奸白人的妇女，虽遭火刑，也不能吓绝，就因看了他们的实际上的“巨片”的缘故。然而文野不同，中国人是古文明国人，大约只是心折而不至于实做的了。
But I read this article by chance and felt that it was very beneficial to me. In the Shanghai Daily, there are always about two large advertisements for movies every day, and they have praised their actors by tens of thousands and costing millions, "very charming, romantic, fragrant (or sad), sensual, funny, in love, passionate, adventurous, brave, martial arts, monsters...... Unprecedented blockbuster", it really makes people feel that if they don't go to see it, they are afraid of dying. Now with this small mirror, you can know that nine out of ten of these treasures can be summarized in a certain category listed in the article, and the intention and purpose are all clear. But those films were not made for Chinese, so the purpose of transporting them into China was different from the intention at the time of production, just like selling old guns to warriors, just to absorb more money. And Chinese opinions on these are of course different from their own people, just look at the sentences in the advertisement to attract the audience, and it is clear that in all kinds of films, they are mostly "very charming, romantic, fragrant (or sad), and sensual ......". However, there is also an effect in the dark, seeing their "brave martial arts" war blockbuster, unintentionally feeling that the master is so heroic, he has to be a slave, seeing their "very romantic and romantic" love blockbuster, I feel that the wife is so "fleshy", there is really no way to do it - ashamed of myself, although I prostitute a white Russian prostitute to masturbate, I can still do it now. African natives like white people's foreign guns, and black Americans often rape white women, even if they are burned at the stake, they cannot be frightened, just because they have seen their actual "blockbuster movies". However, Wen Ye is different, the Chinese are ancient civilizations, and they are probably just heartbroken and not practical.因为自己看过之后，大略发生了如上的感想，因此也想介绍给一部分的读者，费去许多工夫，译出来了。原文本是很简短的，只因为我于电影一道是门外汉，虽是平常的术语，也须查考，这就比别人烦难得多，即如有几个题目，便是从去年的旧报上翻出来的，查不到的，则只好“硬译”，而且误译之处，也恐怕决不能免。但就大体而言，我相信于读者总可以有一些贡献。
Because after reading it, I roughly had the above impressions, so I also wanted to introduce it to some readers, and it took a lot of effort to translate it. The original text is very short, just because I am a layman in the movie, although it is an ordinary term, it must be checked, which is much more troublesome than others, that is, if there are a few topics, they are turned out from last year's old newspaper, and if they cannot be found, they have to be "hard translated", and the mistranslation is probably inevitable. But in general, I believe that readers can always have some contributions.去年，美国的“武侠明星”范朋克（Douglas Fairbanks）因为美金积得太多，到东洋来游历了。上海有几个团体便豫备欢迎。中国本来有“捧戏子”的脾气，加以唐宋以来，偷生的小市民就已崇拜替自己打不平的“剑侠”，于是《七侠五义》，《七剑十八侠》，《荒山怪侠》，《荒林女侠》，……层出不穷；看了电影，就佩服洋《七侠五义》即《三剑客》之类。古洋侠客往矣，只好佩服扮洋侠客的洋戏子，算是“过屠门而大嚼，虽不得肉，亦且快意”，正如捧梅兰芳者，和他所扮的天女，黛玉等辈，决不能说无关一样，原是不足怪的。但有些人们反对了，说他在演《月宫宝盒》（The Thief of Bagdad）时摔死蒙古太子，辱没了中国。其实呢，《月宫宝盒》中的英雄，以一偷儿连爬了两段阶级的梯子，终于做了驸马，正是译文第七章细注里所说，要使小市民或无产者“为这飞腾故事所激励，觉得要誓必尽忠于有产阶级”的玩艺，决不是意在辱没中国的东西。况且故事出于《一千一夜》，范朋克并非作家，也不是导演，我们又不是蒙古太子的子孙或奴才，正不必对于他，为美金而演剧的个人，如此之忿忿。但既然无端忿忿了，这也是中国常有的惯例，不足怪的，——在见惯者。后来范朋克到了，终于有团体要欢迎，然而大碰钉子，“范氏代表谓范氏绝对不允赴公共宴会”，竟不能得到瞻仰洋侠客的光荣。待到范朋克“到日本后，一切游程，均由日人代为规定，且到东京后，将赴影戏院，与日本民众相见”（见十八年十二月十九日《申报》），我们这里的蒙古王孙乃更不胜其没落之感，上海电影公会有一封宛转抑扬的信，寄给这“大艺术家”。全文是极有可供研究的处所的，但这里限于纸面，只好摘录了一点——
Last year, American "martial arts star" Douglas Fairbanks traveled to the East because he had accumulated too much US dollars. Several groups in Shanghai are ready to welcome it. China originally had the temper of "holding the actor", and since the Tang and Song dynasties, the small citizens who have survived have worshipped the "swordsman" who fought for them, so "Seven Heroes and Five Righteousness", "Seven Swords and Eighteen Heroes", "Strange Heroes of the Barren Mountain", "Woman of the Wilderness Forest",...... Endless; After watching the movie, I admired Yang's "Seven Heroes and Five Righteousness", that is, "The Three Musketeers". The ancient foreign knights are gone, so I have to admire the foreign actors who play the foreign knights, which can be regarded as "chewing through the butcher's door, although they can't get meat, but they are also happy", just like the one who holds Mei Lanfang, and the heavenly maiden he pretended to be, Daiyu and others, must not be said to be irrelevant, it is not surprising. But some people objected, saying that he had humiliated China by killing a Mongolian prince while performing "The Thief of Bagdad." In fact, the hero in "The Treasure Box of the Moon Palace", who climbed two ladders of class in a row as a thief, finally became a son-in-law, which is exactly what is said in the detailed note of Chapter 7 of the translation, to make the small citizens or proletarians "inspired by this soaring story and feel that they must swear to be loyal to the proletariat", is by no means intended to humiliate China. Moreover, the story is from "One Thousand and One Nights", Fan Punk is not a writer, nor a director, and we are not the descendants or servants of the Mongolian prince, so there is no need to be so angry with him, the individual who acts for the US dollar. But since there is unwarranted anger, this is also a common practice in China, and it is not surprising that ,—— are accustomed to it. Later, Fan Punk arrived, and finally a group wanted to welcome him, but he hit the nail, "Fan's representative said that Fan was absolutely not allowed to go to a public banquet", and he could not get the honor of paying homage to foreign knights. When Fan Punk "arrives in Japan, all the itinerary is stipulated by the Japanese, and after arriving in Tokyo, he will go to the cinema to meet the Japanese people" (see the "Declaration" of December 19, 18th year), and our Mongolian prince Sun Nai here is even more overwhelmed by his sense of decline, and the Shanghai Film Guild has a twisted and intonated letter sent to this "great artist". The full text is very suitable for research, but this is limited to paper, so I have to excerpt a little -“曾忆《月宫宝盒》剧中，有一蒙古太子，其表演状态，至为恶劣，足使观者之未知东方历史，未悉东方民族性质者，发生不良之印象，而能成为人类相爱进程上绝大之阻碍。因东方中华民国人民之状态，并不如其所表演之恶劣也。敝会同人，深知电影艺术之能力，转辗为全世界一切民情风俗智识学问之介绍，换言之，亦能引导全世界人彼此之相爱，及世界人类彼此之相憎。敝会同人以爱先生故，以先生为大艺术家故，愿先生为向善之努力，不愿先生如他人之对世界为不真实之介绍，而为盛誉之累也。”
I once recalled that in the play "Moon Palace Treasure Box", there was a Mongolian prince, whose performance state was extremely bad, enough to make the audience not know the history of the East and the nature of the oriental nation, and have a bad impression, and can become a huge obstacle to the process of human love. Because the state of the people of the Republic of China in the East is not as bad as the performance is as bad as it is. Our fellow people are well aware of the ability of film art, and it has turned into an introduction to all the people's customs, customs, and knowledge in the world, in other words, it can also guide people all over the world to love each other and the world's human beings to hate each other. Because we love Mr. Tai and Mr. Ye are great artists, we hope that Mr. Trump will strive for goodness, and we do not want Mr. Trump to be an untrue introduction to the world like others, and will be a burden to his reputation. ”文中说电影对于看客的力量的伟大，是很不错的，但以为蒙古太子就是“中华民国人民”，却与反对欢迎者流，同一错误。尤其错误的是要劝范朋克去引“全世界人彼此之相爱”，忘却了他是花旗国里发了财的电影员。因此一念之差，所以竟弄到低声下气，托他去绍介真实的“四千余年历史文化所训练的精神”于世界了——
The article says that the greatness of the movie for the audience is very good, but thinking that the Mongolian prince is the "people of the Republic of China" is the same mistake as opposing the welcome. It is particularly wrong to persuade Fan Punk to lead "people all over the world to love each other", forgetting that he is a filmmaker who made a fortune in Citi Country. Therefore, the difference in thought, so he actually made a low voice and asked him to introduce the real "spirit trained by more than 4,000 years of history and culture" to the world——“敝会同人更敢以经过四千余年历史文化训练之精神，大声以告先生。我中华人民之尊重美德，深用礼仪，初不异于贵国之人民。更以贵国政府常能于世界国际间主持公道，故为我中华人民所敬爱。先生于此次东游小住中，想已见到真实之证据。今日我中华政治之状态，方在革命完成应经历之过程中，有国内之战争，有不安静之纷扰，然中华人民对于外来宾客如先生者，仍能不忘应有之礼节，表示爱人之风度。此种情形，先生当能于耳目交接之间，为真实之明了。虽间有表示不同之言论者，然此种言论，皆为先生代表以及代表引为己助参加发言者不合礼节隔离人情之宣言及表示所造成。……
"Our members dare to tell Mr. Loudly in the spirit of more than 4,000 years of historical and cultural training. Our Chinese people respect virtue and use etiquette deeply, which is no different from the people of your country. Moreover, because your government can often uphold justice in the world and internationally, it is respected and loved by our Chinese people. During this short stay in the east, Mr. thought he had seen real evidence. Today, the state of Chinese politics is in the process of completing the revolution, there are domestic wars and unquiet turmoil, but the Chinese people can still remember the proper etiquette and show their love for foreign guests such as Mr. In this situation, you should be able to understand the truth between the ears and eyes. Although there are occasional expressions of different remarks, such remarks are caused by Mr. Representative and the representative who is used as his own assistant to participate in the speech and the declaration and expression of impropriety and isolation. ……“希望先生于东游之后，以所得真实之情状，介绍于贵国之同业，进而介绍于世界，使世界之人类与中华所有四万万余之人民为相爱之亲近，勿为相憎之背驰，以形成世界不良之情状，使我中华人民之敬爱先生，一如敬爱美国之政府。”
"I hope that after the journey to the east, Mr. will introduce the real situation to your country's colleagues, and then introduce it to the world, so that the human beings in the world and all the more than 40 million people in China will be close to each other, and do not turn away from each other, so as to form a bad situation in the world, so that our Chinese people will respect Mr. as much as the government of the United States."但所说明的精神，一言以蔽之，是咱们蒙古王孙即使国内如何战争，纷扰，而对于洋大人是极其有礼的。就是这一点。
But the spirit of the explanation is, in a word, that no matter how our Mongolian princes and grandsons are at war and disturbing in the country, they are extremely polite to foreigners. That's it.这正是被压服的古国人民的精神，尤其是在租界上。因为被压服了，所以自视无力，只好托人向世界去宣传，而不免有些谄；但又因为自以为是“经过四千余年历史文化训练”的，还可以托人向世界去宣传，所以仍然有些骄。骄和谄相纠结的，是没落的古国人民的精神的特色。
This is the spirit of the people of the ancient country who were suppressed, especially in the concession. Because he was suppressed, he thought he was powerless, so he had to ask others to publicize it to the world, which was inevitably a little flattering; But because he thinks that he has "undergone more than 4,000 years of historical and cultural training" and can still ask others to publicize it to the world, he is still a little arrogant. Pride and flattery are entangled in the spirit of the people of the declining ancient country.欧美帝国主义者既然用了废枪，使中国战争，纷扰，又用了旧影片使中国人惊异，胡涂。更旧之后，便又运入内地，以扩大其令人胡涂的教化。我想，如《电影和资本主义》那样的书，现在是万不可少了！
Since the European and American imperialists used scrap guns to make China war and disturbance, they also used old films to surprise the Chinese and make them foolish. After the old ones, they were transported to the mainland to expand their foolish education. I think books like "Cinema and Capitalism" are now indispensable!一九三〇，一，十六，L。

1930, 1, 16, L.

封面

书名页

版权信息

图书在版编目（CIP）数据
Books in Print (CIP) data南腔北调集／鲁迅著．—南京：译林出版社，2014.1
Collection of Southern Accents and Northern Diagonals/by Lu Xun.—Nanjing: Yilin Publishing House, 2014.1（鲁迅自编文集）
(Lu Xun's self-edited anthology)ISBN 978-7-5447-4601-4
ISBN 978-7-5447-4601-4Ⅰ．①南…　Ⅱ．①鲁…　Ⅲ．①鲁迅杂文－选集　Ⅳ．①I210.4
I..(1) South... II..(1) Lu... III..(1) Lu Xun's Miscellaneous Essays - Selected Works IV..(1)I210.4中国版本图书馆CIP数据核字（2013）第256399号
China Version Library CIP Data Verification (2013) No. 256399书　　名　南腔北调集
Book title Collection of Southern Accents and North Tunes作　　者　鲁　迅
Author: Lu Xun责任编辑　陆元昶
Editor-in-charge: Lu Yuanchang特约编辑　刘　佳　邓　敏
Special editors Liu Jia and Deng Min出版发行　凤凰出版传媒股份有限公司 
Published and distributed by Phoenix Publishing and Media Co., Ltd译林出版社
Yilin Publishing House出版社地址　南京市湖南路1号A楼，邮编：210009
Publisher's address Building A, No. 1 Hunan Road, Nanjing, Zip Code: 210009电子信箱　yilin@yilin.com
E-mail yilin@yilin.com出版社网址　http://www.yilin.com
Publisher website http://www.yilin.com印　　刷　北京凯达印务有限公司
Printing Beijing Kaida Printing Co., Ltd开　　本　787×1092毫米　　1/32
Volume 787×1092 mm 1/32印　　张　6.375
Print 6.375字　　数　121千字
Word count: 121,000 words版　　次　2014年1月第1版　2014年1月第1次印刷
Edition January 2014 1st edition January 2014 1st printing标准书号　ISBN 978-7-5447-4601-4
ISBN 978-7-5447-4601-4定　　价　16.00元
The price is 16.00 yuan译林版图书若有印装错误可向承印厂调换

If there are printing errors in the translated version of the book, it can be exchanged with the printing factory

Table of Contents

目录

Table of Contents

directory题记 Inscription
一九三二年 1932
“非所计也” “非所计也”
林克多《苏联闻见录》序 Link has a preface to "Soviet Hearings and Observations"
我们不再受骗了 We are no longer deceived
《竖琴》前记 "Harp" preface
论“第三种人” On the "third kind of person"
“连环图画”辩护 "Comic strip" defense
辱骂和恐吓决不是战斗 Abuse and intimidation are never fights
《自选集》自序 "Selected Collection" self-introduction
《两地书》序言 Preface to the Book of Two Places
祝中俄文字之交 I wish you a friendship between Chinese and Russian characters
一九三三年 In 1933
听说梦 Hear about dreams
论“赴难”和“逃难” On "going to trouble" and "fleeing"
学生和玉佛 Students and the Emerald Buddha
为了忘却的记念 For the memory of oblivion
谁的矛盾 Whose contradiction
看萧和“看萧的人们”记 Look at Xiao and "People Who Watch Xiao"
《萧伯纳在上海》序 Preface to "George Bernard Shaw in Shanghai"
由中国女人的脚，推定中国人之非中庸，又由此推定孔夫子有胃病——“学匪”派考古学之一 From the feet of Chinese women, it is presumed that the Chinese are not moderate, and it is also assumed that Confucius has stomach problems - one of the archaeology of the "Xue Bandit" school
我怎么做起小说来 How do I start a novel?
关于女人 About women
真假堂吉诃德 Real and false Don Quixote
《守常全集》题记 Inscription of "The Complete Works of Conservatism"
谈金圣叹 Talking about the golden sage
又论“第三种人” He also discussed the "third kind of people"
“蜜蜂”与“蜜” "Bee" and "Honey"
经验 experience
谚语 proverb
大家降一级试试看 Let's try it down
沙 sand
给文学社信 Letter to the Literary Society
关于翻译 About translation
《一个人的受难》序 Preface to "The Passion of a Man"
祝《涛声》 Wishing "The Sound of the Waves"
上海的少女 A girl in Shanghai
上海的儿童 Children in Shanghai
“论语一年” "One Year of the Analects"
小品文的危机 The crisis of sketches
九一八 918
偶成 Accidentally
漫与 Casual and
世故三昧 The world is samadhi
谣言世家 Rumor family
关于妇女解放 On women's liberation
火 fire
论翻印木刻 On reprinting woodcuts
《木刻创作法》序 Preface to "Woodcut Creation Method"
作文秘诀 Writing secrets
捣鬼心传 Pounding ghost hearts
家庭为中国之基本 Family is the foundation of China
《总退却》序 Preface to "General Retreat"
答杨邨人先生公开信的公开信 Answer: An open letter from Mr. Yang Cunren
返回总目录 Return to the General Directory

题记

题记

题记

Inscription一两年前，上海有一位文学家，现在是好像不在这里了，那时候，却常常拉别人为材料，来写她的所谓“素描”。我也没有被赦免。据说，我极喜欢演说，但讲话的时候是口吃的，至于用语，则是南腔北调。前两点我很惊奇，后一点可是十分佩服了。真的，我不会说绵软的苏白，不会打响亮的京腔，不入调，不入流，实在是南腔北调。而且近几年来，这缺点还有开拓到文字上去的趋势；《语丝》早经停刊，没有了任意说话的地方，打杂的笔墨，是也得给各个编辑者设身处地地想一想的，于是文章也就不能划一不二，可说之处说一点，不能说之处便罢休。即使在电影上，不也有时看得见黑奴怒形于色的时候，一有同是黑奴而手里拿着皮鞭的走过来，便赶紧低下头去么？我也毫不强横。
A year or two ago, there was a writer in Shanghai, but now it seems that he is no longer here, but at that time, he often used others as materials to write her so-called "sketches". I am not forgiven either. It is said that I like to speak very much, but I stutter when I speak, and as for the language, it is a southern accent and a northern accent. I was surprised by the first two points, but I admired the last one very much. Really, I won't say that the soft Su Bai, the loud Beijing accent, not in the tune, not in the flow, it is really the southern accent and the north. And in recent years, this shortcoming has also been expanded to words; "Yusi" has long been discontinued, there is no place to speak arbitrarily, and the miscellaneous pen and ink have to be put in the shoes of each editor, so the article cannot be uniform. Even in movies, isn't there sometimes a time when you can see the black slave angry, as soon as someone who is also a black slave and comes over with a leather whip in his hand, he quickly lowers his head? I am not overbearing.一俯一仰，居然又到年底，邻近有几家放鞭爆，原来一过夜，就要“天增岁月人增寿”了。静着没事，有意无意的翻出这两年所作的杂文稿子来，排了一下，看看已经足够印成一本，同时记得了那上面所说的“素描”里的话，便名之曰《南腔北调集》，准备和还未成书的将来的《五讲三嘘集》配对。我在私塾里读书时，对过对，这积习至今没有洗干净，题目上有时就玩些什么《偶成》，《漫与》，《作文秘诀》，《捣鬼心传》，这回却闹到书名上来了。这是不足为训的。
It turned out that as soon as it stayed overnight, it would be "increasing the years and increasing the life expectancy". Quietly and nothing, intentionally or unintentionally, I dug out the miscellaneous manuscripts I had made in the past two years, arranged them for a while, and saw that they were enough to print into a book, and at the same time remembered the words in the "sketch" mentioned above, so I named it "Collection of Southern Accents and Northern Tunes", ready to be paired with the future "Five Lectures and Three Hush Collection" that has not yet been written. When I was studying in a private school, yes, this habit has not been washed away so far, and the topics sometimes play something "Occasional Success", "Manyu", "Composition Secret", "The Legend of the Heart of a Ghost", but this time it came to the title of the book. This is not enough to teach.其次，就自己想：今年印过一本《伪自由书》，如果这也付印，那明年就又有一本了。于是自己觉得笑了一笑。这笑，是有些恶意的，因为我这时想到了梁实秋先生，他在北方一面做教授，一面编副刊，一位喽罗儿就在那副刊上说我和美国的门肯（H. L. Mencken）相像，因为每年都要出一本书。每年出一本书就会像每年也出一本书的门肯，那么，吃大菜而做教授，真可以等于美国的白璧德了。低能好像是也可以传授似的。但梁教授极不愿意因他而牵连白璧德，是据说小人的造谣；不过门肯却正是和白璧德相反的人，以我比彼，虽出自徒孙之口，骨子里却还是白老夫子的鬼魂在作怪。指头一拨，君子就翻一个筋斗，我觉得我到底也还有手腕和眼睛。
Secondly, I thought to myself: I printed a copy of the "Pseudo-Freedom Book" this year, and if this is also printed, then there will be another one next year. So I felt a smile. This laughter is a bit malicious, because I thought of Mr. Liang Shiqiu, who was a professor in the north and edited a supplement at the same time, and a servant said in that supplement that I and H. L. Mencken, because a book is published every year. Publishing a book every year will be like Menken, which also publishes a book every year, so eating big dishes and being a professor can really be equal to Bai Bide in the United States. It seems that imbecile can also be taught. However, Professor Liang is extremely unwilling to implicate Bai Bide because of him, which is said to be a rumor spread by villains; However, Menken is the opposite of Bai Bide, comparing me to him, although it comes from the mouth of the disciple, but the ghost of the old master Bai is still causing trouble in his bones. With a flick of his fingers, the gentleman flipped a somersault, and I think I still have wrists and eyes.不过这是小事情。举其大者，则一看去年一月八日所写的《“非所计也”》，就好像着了鬼迷，做了恶梦，胡里胡涂，不久就整两年。怪事随时袭来，我们也随时忘却，倘不重温这些杂感，连我自己做过短评的人，也毫不记得了。一年要出一本书，确也可以使学者们摇头的，然而只有这一本，虽然浅薄，却还借此存留一点遗闻逸事，以中国之大，世变之亟，恐怕也未必就算太多了罢。
But it's a small thing. To name a few, I looked at "It's Not Worth It" written on January 8 last year, as if I was obsessed with ghosts, had nightmares, and was foolish, and soon it would be two whole years. Strange things strike at any time, and we forget them at any time, and if we don't relive these miscellaneous feelings, even the people who have made short reviews myself will not remember them. Publishing a book a year can indeed make scholars shake their heads, but only this one, although shallow, still preserves a little anecdote, with the size of China and the rapid changes in the world, I am afraid it may not be too much.两年来所作的杂文，除登在《自由谈》上者外，几乎都在这里面；书的序跋，却只选了自以为还有几句可取的几篇。曾经登载这些的刊物，是《十字街头》，《文学月报》，《北斗》，《现代》，《涛声》，《论语》，《申报月刊》，《文学》等，当时是大抵用了别的笔名投稿的；但有一篇没有发表过。
Almost all the essays written in the past two years, except for those published in "Free Talk", are here; The preface to the book only chose a few sentences that I thought were still desirable. The publications that once published these were "Cross Street", "Literary Monthly", "Beidou", "Modern", "Taosheng", "Analects", "Declaration Monthly", "Literature", etc., which were mostly submitted under other pseudonyms at that time; But one article was never published.一九三三年十二月三十一日之夜，于上海寓斋记。
一九三三年十二月三十一日之夜，于上海寓斋记。

一九三二年

一九三二年

一九三二年

1932

“非所计也”

“非所计也”

“非所计也”

“非所计也”新年第一回的《申报》（一月七日）用“要电”告诉我们：“闻陈（外交总长印友仁）与芳泽友谊甚深，外交界观察，芳泽回国任日外长，东省交涉可望以陈之私人感情，得一较好之解决云。”
The first "Declaration" (January 7) of the new year told us with a "telegram": "Wen Chen (Foreign Minister Yin Youren) and Fang Ze have a deep friendship, and the diplomatic circles observe that Fang Ze returned to China to serve as foreign minister, and the negotiations in the eastern province are expected to be resolved with Chen's personal feelings." ”中国的外交界看惯了在中国什么都是“私人感情”，这样的“观察”，原也无足怪的。但从这一个“观察”中，又可以“观察”出“私人感情”在政府里之重要。
China's diplomatic circles are accustomed to seeing everything as "private feelings" in China, and such "observations" are not surprising. But from this "observation", we can also "observe" the importance of "private feelings" in the government.然而同日的《申报》上，又用“要电”告诉了我们：“锦州三日失守，连山绥中续告陷落，日陆战队到山海关在车站悬日旗……”
However, on the same day, the "Declaration" told us with a "telegram": "Jinzhou fell on the third day, Lianshan Suizhong continued to fall, and the Japanese Marine Corps went to Shanhaiguan to hang the Japanese flag at the station......"而同日的《申报》上，又用“要闻”告诉我们“陈友仁对东省问题宣言”云：“……前日已命令张学良固守锦州，积极抵抗，今后仍坚持此旨，决不稍变，即不幸而挫败，非所计也。……”
On the same day, the "Declaration" used "important news" to tell us that "Chen Youren's Declaration on the Eastern Province Issue" said: "...... The day before yesterday, Zhang Xueliang was ordered to stick to Jinzhou and actively resist, and he will continue to adhere to this decree in the future, and will never change in the slightest, that is, it is unfortunate and frustrated, which is not a plan. ……”然则“友谊”和“私人感情”，好像也如“国联”以及“公理”，“正义”之类一样的无效，“暴日”似乎不像中国，专讲这些的，这真只得“不幸而挫败，非所计也”了。
However, "friendship" and "private feelings" seem to be as invalid as "League of Nations", "Axiom", "Justice" and so on, and "Violent Japan" does not seem to be like China, which is really "unfortunate and frustrated, and it is not worth considering".也许爱国志士，又要上京请愿了罢。当然，“爱国热忱”，是“殊堪嘉许”的，但第一自然要不“越轨”，第二还是自己想一想，和内政部长卫戍司令诸大人“友谊”怎样，“私人感情”又怎样。倘不“甚深”，据内政界观察，是不但难“得一较好之解决”，而且——请恕我直言——恐怕仍旧要有人“自行失足落水淹死”的。
Maybe patriots want to go to Beijing to petition again. Of course, "patriotic enthusiasm" is "commendable", but the first is naturally not "deviant", and the second is to think about what the "friendship" is with the Minister of the Interior and the garrison commanders, and what is the "personal feelings". If it is not "very deep", according to the observation of domestic political circles, it will not only be difficult to "get a better solution", but - please forgive me - I am afraid that some people will still "fall into the water and drown".所以未去之前，最好是拟一宣言，结末道：“即不幸而‘自行失足落水淹死’，非所计也！”然而又要觉悟这说的是真话。
So before going, it is best to draft a declaration and conclude: "Even if you are unfortunate and 'fall into the water and drown', it is not a good idea!" However, you must realize that this is the truth.一月八日。
January 8th.

林克多《苏联闻见录》序

林克多《苏联闻见录》序

林克多《苏联闻见录》序

Link has a preface to "Soviet Hearings and Observations"大约总归是十年以前罢，我因为生了病，到一个外国医院去请诊治，在那待诊室里放着的一本德国《星期报》（Die Woche）上，看见了一幅关于俄国十月革命的漫画，画着法官，教师，连医生和看护妇，也都横眉怒目，捏着手枪。这是我最先看见的关于十月革命的讽刺画，但也不过心里想，有这样凶暴么，觉得好笑罢了。后来看了几个西洋人的旅行记，有的说是怎样好，有的又说是怎样坏，这才莫名其妙起来。但到底也是自己断定：这革命恐怕对于穷人有了好处，那么对于阔人就一定是坏的，有些旅行者为穷人设想，所以觉得好，倘若替阔人打算，那自然就都是坏处了。
About ten years ago, when I was sick and went to a foreign hospital for treatment, I saw a cartoon of the October Revolution in Russia in a German newspaper Die Woche in the waiting room, depicting judges, teachers, even doctors and nurses, all glaring and holding pistols. This was the first satirical painting I saw about the October Revolution, but I just thought to myself, is there such a ferocity, I just think it's funny. Later, I read the travel notes of several Westerners, some said how good it was, and some said how bad it was, which made me inexplicable. But in the end, I also concluded that this revolution may be good for the poor, so it must be bad for the broad people.但后来又看见一幅讽刺画，是英文的，画着用纸版剪成的工厂，学校，育儿院等等，竖在道路的两边，使参观者坐着摩托车，从中间驶过。这是针对着做旅行记述说苏联的好处的作者们而发的，犹言参观的时候，受了他们的欺骗。政治和经济的事，我是外行，但看去年苏联煤油和麦子的输出，竟弄得资本主义文明国的人们那么骇怕的事实，却将我多年的疑团消释了。我想：假装面子的国度和专会杀人的人民，是决不会有这么巨大的生产力的，可见那些讽刺画倒是无耻的欺骗。
But then I saw a caricature, in English, depicting factories, schools, nurseries, etc., cut out of paper plates, erected on both sides of the road, so that visitors could ride motorcycles through the middle. This was directed at the authors who made travel accounts about the benefits of the Soviet Union, and when they visited, they were deceived by them. I am a layman in political and economic matters, but the fact that last year's exports of kerosene and wheat from the Soviet Union made people in capitalist civilized countries so frightened has dispelled my doubts for many years. I think: A country that pretends to save face and a people who specialize in killing people will never have such a huge productivity, which shows that those satirical paintings are shameless deception.不过我们中国人实在有一点小毛病，就是不大爱听别国的好处，尤其是清党之后，提起那日有建设的苏联。一提到罢，不是说你意在宣传，就是说你得了卢布。而且宣传这两个字，在中国实在是被糟蹋得太不成样子了，人们看惯了什么阔人的通电，什么会议的宣言，什么名人的谈话，发表之后，立刻无影无踪，还不如一个屁的臭得长久，于是渐以为凡有讲述远处或将来的优点的文字，都是欺人之谈，所谓宣传，只是一个为了自利，而漫天说谎的雅号。
However, we Chinese really have a little problem, that is, we don't like to listen to the benefits of other countries, especially after the Qing Party, when it comes to the Soviet Union that was built that day. When it comes to it, it doesn't mean that you intend to promote it, or that you get rubles. People are used to seeing what kind of electrification, what conference declarations, and what celebrity conversations, after they are published, they immediately disappear, and it is not as good as a fart that stinks for a long time, so they gradually think that any text that talks about the advantages of the distance or the future is deceptive, and the so-called propaganda is just a nickname that lies all over the sky for self-interest.自然，在目前的中国，这一类的东西是常有的，靠了钦定或官许的力量，到处推销无阻，可是读的人们却不多，因为宣传的事，是必须在现在或到后来有事实来证明的，这才可以叫作宣传。而中国现行的所谓宣传，则不但后来只有证明这“宣传”确凿就是说谎的事实而已，还有一种坏结果，是令人对于凡有记述文字逐渐起了疑心，临末弄得索性不看。即如我自己就受了这影响，报章上说的什么新旧三都的伟观，南北两京的新气，固然只要看见标题就觉得肉麻了，而且连讲外国的游记，也竟至于不大想去翻动它。
Naturally, in the current China, this kind of thing is common, relying on the power of the imperial decree or official permission, it is sold everywhere without hindrance, but not many people read it, because the propaganda must be proven by facts now or later, so that it can be called propaganda. The current so-called propaganda in China not only later only proved that this "propaganda" was a lie, but also had a bad result, which gradually made people suspicious of all written texts, and simply ignored them at the end. Even if I myself was affected by this, the grandeur of the old and new capitals mentioned in the newspaper, and the new atmosphere of the north and south capitals, although I felt numb as long as I saw the headline, and even when I talked about foreign travelogues, I didn't really want to turn it over.但这一年内，也遇到了两部不必用心戒备，居然看完了的书，一是胡愈之先生的《莫斯科印象记》，一就是这《苏联闻见录》。因为我的辨认草字的力量太小的缘故，看下去很费力，但为了想看看这自说“为了吃饭问题，不得不去做工”的工人作者的见闻，到底看下去了。虽然中间遇到好像讲解统计表一般的地方，在我自己，未免觉得枯燥，但好在并不多，到底也看下去了。那原因，就在作者仿佛对朋友谈天似的，不用美丽的字眼，不用巧妙的做法，平铺直叙，说了下去，作者是平常的人，文章是平常的文章，所见所闻的苏联，是平平常常的地方，那人民，是平平常常的人物，所设施的正是合于人情，生活也不过像了人样，并没有什么希奇古怪。倘要从中猎艳搜奇，自然免不了会失望，然而要知道一些不搽粉墨的真相，却是很好的。
But during this year, I also encountered two books that I didn't have to be wary of, and I actually finished reading, one is Mr. Hu Yuzhi's "Impressions of Moscow" and the other is "Soviet News and Observations". Because my ability to identify cursive characters is too small, it is very laborious to read, but in order to see the experience of this worker author who said that he had to work for the sake of eating, I read it to the end. Although I encountered a place that seemed to explain the statistical table in the middle, I couldn't help but feel bored, but fortunately, there weren't many, and I read it in the end. The reason is that the author seems to be talking to a friend, without beautiful words, without clever methods, flat and straightforward, the author is an ordinary person, the article is an ordinary article, what he sees and hears in the Soviet Union is an ordinary place, the people are ordinary characters, what they are equipped with is in line with human feelings, and life is just like a human being, and there is nothing strange about it. If you want to hunt for beauty and search for curiosity from it, you will naturally be disappointed, but it is good to know some truths that do not apply powder.而且由此也可以明白一点世界上的资本主义文明国之定要进攻苏联的原因。工农都像了人样，于资本家和地主是极不利的，所以一定先要歼灭了这工农大众的模范。苏联愈平常，他们就愈害怕。前五六年，北京盛传广东的裸体游行，后来南京上海又盛传汉口的裸体游行，就是但愿敌方的不平常的证据。据这书里面的记述，苏联实在使他们失望了。为什么呢？因为不但共妻，杀父，裸体游行等类的“不平常的事”，确然没有而已，倒是有了许多极平常的事实，那就是将“宗教，家庭，财产，祖国，礼教……一切神圣不可侵犯”的东西，都像粪一般抛掉，而一个簇新的，真正空前的社会制度从地狱底里涌现而出，几万万的群众自己做了支配自己命运的人。这种极平常的事情，是只有“匪徒”才干得出来的。该杀者，“匪徒”也。
And from this, we can also understand the reason why the capitalist civilized countries in the world must attack the Soviet Union. Workers and peasants are like human beings, which is extremely unfavorable to capitalists and landlords, so we must first annihilate this model of workers and peasants. The more ordinary the Soviet Union, the more afraid they were. In the first five or six years, the naked parades in Guangdong were popular in Beijing, and later in Nanjing and Shanghai, and the naked parades in Hankou were popular in Nanjing, which was evidence of the enemy's unusualness. According to the account in this book, the Soviet Union really disappointed them. Why? Because not only are there "unusual things" such as co-wife, father-killing, naked parades, etc., but there are many very common facts, that is, "religion, family, property, motherland, etiquette...... Everything that is "sacrosanct" is thrown away like dung, and a cluster of new, truly unprecedented social systems emerge from the bottom of hell, and tens of millions of people themselves become the ones who control their own destiny. This kind of extremely ordinary thing can only be done by "bandits". The killer is a "bandit."但作者的到苏联，已在十月革命后十年，所以只将他们之“能坚苦，耐劳，勇敢与牺牲”告诉我们，而怎样苦斗，才能够得到现在的结果，那些故事，却讲得很少。这自然是别种著作的任务，不能责成作者全都负担起来，但读者是万不可忽略这一点的，否则，就如印度的《譬喻经》所说，要造高楼，而反对在地上立柱，据说是因为他要造的，是离地的高楼一样。
However, the author's arrival in the Soviet Union was ten years after the October Revolution, so he only told us how they were "hardworking, hardworking, brave and sacrificed", and how to fight hard to get the current results, those stories are told very little. This is naturally the task of other works, and the author cannot be tasked with bearing all of them, but the reader must not ignore this, otherwise, as the Indian "Parables" says, it is said that it is because he wants to build a tall building and oppose the erection of pillars on the ground.我不加戒备的将这读完了，即因为上文所说的原因。而我相信这书所说的苏联的好处的，也还有一个原因，那就是十来年前，说过苏联怎么不行怎么无望的所谓文明国人，去年已在苏联的煤油和麦子面前发抖。而且我看见确凿的事实：他们是在吸中国的膏血，夺中国的土地，杀中国的人民。他们是大骗子，他们说苏联坏，要进攻苏联，就可见苏联是好的了。这一部书，正也转过来是我的意见的实证。
I read it unguarded, for the reasons mentioned above. And I believe that there is another reason why I believe in the benefits of the Soviet Union mentioned in this book, that is, the so-called civilized people who said that the Soviet Union could not do and was hopeless more than ten years ago were trembling in front of the kerosene and wheat of the Soviet Union last year. And I see the conclusive fact: they are sucking China's blood, seizing China's land, and killing China's people. They are big liars, they say that the Soviet Union is bad, and if they want to attack the Soviet Union, it can be seen that the Soviet Union is good. This book, Zhengya, is the empirical evidence of my opinion.一九三二年四月二十日，鲁迅于上海闸北寓楼记。
On April 20, 1932, Lu Xun recorded his residence in Zhabei, Shanghai.

我们不再受骗了

我们不再受骗了

我们不再受骗了

We are no longer deceived帝国主义是一定要进攻苏联的。苏联愈弄得好，它们愈急于要进攻，因为它们愈要趋于灭亡。
Imperialism must attack the Soviet Union. The better the Soviet Union did it, the more eager they were to attack, because the more they were destined to perish.我们被帝国主义及其侍从们真是骗得长久了。十月革命之后，它们总是说苏联怎么穷下去，怎么凶恶，怎么破坏文化。但现在的事实怎样？小麦和煤油的输出，不是使世界吃惊了么？正面之敌的实业党的首领，不是也只判了十年的监禁么？列宁格勒，墨斯科的图书馆和博物馆，不是都没有被炸掉么？文学家如绥拉菲摩维支，法捷耶夫，革拉特珂夫，绥甫林娜，唆罗诃夫等，不是西欧东亚，无不赞美他们的作品么？关于艺术的事我不大知道，但据乌曼斯基（K. Umansky）说，一九一九年中，在墨斯科的展览会就有二十次，列宁格勒两次（《Neue Kunst in Russland》），则现在的旺盛，更是可想而知了。然而谣言家是极无耻而且巧妙的，一到事实证明了他的话是撒谎时，他就躲下，另外又来一批。
We have been deceived by imperialism and its entourage for a long time. After the October Revolution, they always said how the Soviet Union was poor, how vicious it was, and how it destroyed culture. But what are the facts now? Didn't the export of wheat and kerosene surprise the world? Didn't the leader of the Industrial Party, who was a frontal enemy, only sentenced to ten years in prison? Leningrad, Mexico's libraries and museums, weren't they all blown up? Writers such as Suerafimovich, Fadeev, Gratkov, Suevlina, Sorokhov, etc., are not Western Europe and East Asia, all praise their works? I don't know much about art, but according to K. Umansky. Umansky said that in mid-1919, there were 20 exhibitions in Moscow and two in Leningrad ("Neue Kunst in Russland"), and the current vigor can be imagined. However, the rumor is extremely shameless and ingenious, and when it turns out that his words are lying, he hides and another batch comes.新近我看见一本小册子，是说美国的财政有复兴的希望的，序上说，苏联的购领物品，必须排成长串，现在也无异于从前，仿佛他很为排成长串的人们抱不平，发慈悲一样。
Recently, I saw a pamphlet saying that there is hope for the revival of the United States' finances, and in the preface, the Soviet Union's purchases must be lined up in a long string, and now it is no different from before, as if he was very grieving and showing mercy to the people in the long row.这一事，我是相信的，因为苏联内是正在建设的途中，外是受着帝国主义的压迫，许多物品，当然不能充足。但我们也听到别国的失业者，排着长串向饥寒进行；中国的人民，在内战，在外侮，在水灾，在榨取的大罗网之下，排着长串而进向死亡去。
I believe this, because the Soviet Union is in the process of construction, and the outside is oppressed by imperialism, and many items are of course not sufficient. But we also hear about the unemployed from other countries, marching in long lines to hunger and cold; The Chinese people, in civil wars, foreign insults, floods, and under the net of extraction, marched in long rows to death.然而帝国主义及其奴才们，还来对我们说苏联怎么不好，好像它倒愿意苏联一下子就变成天堂，人们个个享福。现在竟这样子，它失望了，不舒服了。——这真是恶鬼的眼泪。
However, imperialism and its minions still come to tell us how bad the Soviet Union is, as if it wants the Soviet Union to become a paradise at once and people will enjoy themselves. Now that it's like this, it's disappointed and uncomfortable. - These are really evil spirit tears.一睁开眼，就露出恶鬼的本相来的，——它要去惩办了。
As soon as he opened his eyes, he revealed the true nature of an evil ghost,—— he was going to punish him.它一面去惩办，一面来诳骗。正义，人道，公理之类的话，又要满天飞舞了。但我们记得，欧洲大战时候，飞舞过一回的，骗得我们的许多苦工，到前线去替它们死，接着是在北京的中央公园里竖了一块无耻的，愚不可及的“公理战胜”的牌坊（但后来又改掉了）。现在怎样？“公理”在那里？这事还不过十六年，我们记得的。
It punishes and deceives on the other hand. Words like justice, humanity, and axioms are going to fly all over the sky again. But we remember that during the European War, it flew once, deceived many of our hard laborers, went to the front line to die for them, and then erected a shameless, foolish "axiom victory" archway in Beijing's Central Park (but later changed it). How now? Where is the "axiom"? It's only been sixteen years, we remember.帝国主义和我们，除了它的奴才之外，那一样利害不和我们正相反？我们的痈疽，是它们的宝贝，那么，它们的敌人，当然是我们的朋友了。它们自身正在崩溃下去，无法支持，为挽救自己的末运，便憎恶苏联的向上。谣诼，诅咒，怨恨，无所不至，没有效，终于只得准备动手去打了，一定要灭掉它才睡得着。但我们干什么呢？我们还会再被骗么？
Imperialism and us, except for its minions, are not the same interests as ours? Our carbuncles are their treasures, so their enemies are, of course, our friends. They themselves are collapsing, unable to support it, and in order to save their own fate, they hate the Soviet Union's upward movement. Rumors, curses, resentment, everything, no effect, finally I had to prepare to fight, I had to destroy it to sleep. But what do we do? Will we still be deceived again?“苏联是无产阶级专政的，智识阶级就要饿死。”——一位有名的记者曾经这样警告我。是的，这倒恐怕要使我也有些睡不着了。但无产阶级专政，不是为了将来的无阶级社会么？只要你不去谋害它，自然成功就早，阶级的消灭也就早，那时就谁也不会“饿死”了。不消说，排长串是一时难免的，但到底会快起来。
"The Soviet Union was a dictatorship of the proletariat, and the intellectual class was going to starve to death." - A famous journalist once warned me like this. Yes, this is probably going to make me a little sleepless. But isn't the dictatorship of the proletariat for the future classless society? As long as you don't murder it, you will naturally succeed sooner, and the class will be eliminated sooner, and no one will "starve to death" at that time. Needless to say, the long queue is inevitable for a while, but it will be fast in the end.帝国主义的奴才们要去打，自己（！）跟着它的主人去打去就是。我们人民和它们是利害完全相反的。我们反对进攻苏联。我们倒要打倒进攻苏联的恶鬼，无论它说着怎样甜腻的话头，装着怎样公正的面孔。
The imperialist minions are going to fight, and they (!) Just follow its owner to fight. We the people have completely opposite interests with them. We opposed attacking the USSR. We must defeat the evil spirit that attacked the Soviet Union, no matter how sweet its words and its fair face may be.这才也是我们自己的生路！
This is also our own way of life!五月六日。
May 6th.

《竖琴》前记

《竖琴》前记

《竖琴》前记

"Harp" preface俄国的文学，从尼古拉斯二世时候以来，就是“为人生”的，无论它的主意是在探究，或在解决，或者堕入神秘，沦于颓唐，而其主流还是一个：为人生。
Russian literature, since the time of Nicholas II, has been "for life", whether its idea is to explore, or to solve, or to fall into mystery and decadence, and its mainstream is still one: for life.这一种思想，在大约二十年前即与中国一部分的文艺绍介者合流，陀思妥夫斯基，都介涅夫，契诃夫，托尔斯泰之名，渐渐出现于文字上，并且陆续翻译了他们的一些作品，那时组织的介绍“被压迫民族文学”的是上海的文学研究会，也将他们算作为被压迫者而呼号的作家的。
This kind of thinking merged with some literary and artistic introducers in China about twenty years ago, and the names of Dostovsky, Dujienev, Chekhov, and Tolstoy gradually appeared in writing, and some of their works were translated one after another.凡这些，离无产者文学本来还很远，所以凡所绍介的作品，自然大抵是叫唤，呻吟，困穷，酸辛，至多，也不过是一点挣扎。
All of this is still far from the original proletarian literature, so all the works introduced are naturally screaming, groaning, being poor, bitter, and at most, it is just a little struggle.但已经使又一部分人很不高兴了，就招来了两标军马的围剿。创造社竖起了“为艺术的艺术”的大旗，喊着“自我表现”的口号，要用波斯诗人的酒杯，“黄书”文士的手杖，将这些“庸俗”打平。还有一标是那些受过了英国的小说在供绅士淑女的欣赏，美国的小说家在迎合读者的心思这些“文艺理论”的洗礼而回来的，一听到下层社会的叫唤和呻吟，就使他们眉头百结，扬起了带着白手套的纤手，挥斥道：这些下流都从“艺术之宫”里滚出去！
But it has already made another part of the people very unhappy, so they have attracted the encirclement and suppression of two standard troops and horses. The Creation Society raised the banner of "art for art", shouted the slogan of "self-expression", and used the wine glasses of Persian poets and the canes of "yellow books" scribes to level these "vulgarities". Another mark is that those who have received British novels for the appreciation of gentlemen and ladies, and American novelists who have come back from the baptism of these "literary and artistic theories" to cater to the minds of readers, as soon as they hear the cries and groans of the lower classes, they frown, raise their slender hands with white gloves, and scold: These obscene people are all out of the "palace of art"!而且中国原来还有着一标布满全国的旧式的军马，这就是以小说为“闲书”的人们。小说，是供“看官”们茶余酒后的消遣之用的，所以要优雅，超逸，万不可使读者不欢，打断他消闲的雅兴。此说虽古，但却与英美时行的小说论合流，于是这三标新旧的大军，就不约而同的来痛剿了“为人生的文学”——俄国文学。
Moreover, China originally had an old-style military horse all over the country, which is the people who use novels as "idle books". Novels are for the "officials" to have fun after tea and drinking, so they should be elegant and transcendent, and must not make the reader unhappy and interrupt his leisure and elegance. Although this theory is ancient, it merges with the novel theory of the British and American times, so these three new and old armies have invariably suppressed "literature for life" - Russian literature.然而还是有着不少共鸣的人们，所以它在中国仍然是宛转曲折的生长着。
However, there are still many people who resonate with it, so it is still growing in China.但它在本土，却突然凋零下去了。在这以前，原有许多作者企望着转变的，而十月革命的到来，却给了他们一个意外的莫大的打击。于是有梅垒什珂夫斯基夫妇（D. S. Merezhikovski i Z. N. Hippius），库普林（A. I. Kuprin），蒲宁（I. A. Bunin），安特来夫（L. N. Andreev）之流的逃亡，阿尔志跋绥夫（M. P. Artzy-bashev），梭罗古勃（Fiodor Sologub）之流的沉默，旧作家的还在活动者，只剩了勃留梭夫（Valeri Briusov），惠垒赛耶夫（V. Veresaiev），戈理基（Maxim Gorki），玛亚珂夫斯基（V. V. Mayakovski）这几个人，到后来，还回来了一个亚历舍·托尔斯泰（Aleksei N. Tolstoi）。此外也没有什么显著的新起的人物，在国内战争和列强封锁中的文苑，是只见萎谢和荒凉了。
But in the mainland, it suddenly withered. Before this, many original authors hoped for change, but the arrival of the October Revolution gave them an unexpected and great blow. So there were Mr. and Mrs. Mereshkovsky (D. S. Merezhikovski i Z. N. Hippius), Kuplin (A. I. Kuprin), I. Kuprin (I. Kuprin). A. Bunin), L. Anderson (L. Bunin) N. Andreev) and others, M. P. Artzy-bashev), Fiodor Sologub and others, and the old writers who are still active, only Valeri Briusov, V. Veresaiev), Maxim Gorki, Mayakovsky (V. V. Mayakovski), and later, returned an Aleksei N. Tolstoi. In addition, there are no significant new figures, and the literary garden in the civil war and the blockade of the great powers is only wilted and desolate.至一九二〇年顷，新经济政策实行了，造纸，印刷，出版等项事业的勃兴，也帮助了文艺的复活，这时的最重要的枢纽，是一个文学团体“绥拉比翁的兄弟们”（Serapionsbrüder）。
By 1920, the New Economic Policy had been implemented, and the rise of papermaking, printing, publishing and other undertakings also helped to revive literature and art, and the most important hub at this time was the literary group "Serapionsbrüder" (Brothers of Serapionsbrüder).这一派的出现，表面上是始于二一年二月一日，在列宁格拉“艺术府”里的第一回集会的，加盟者大抵是年青的文人，那立场是在一切立场的否定。淑雪兼珂说过：“从党人的观点看起来，我是没有宗旨的人物。这不很好么？自己说起自己来，则我既不是共产主义者，也不是社会革命党员，也不是帝制主义者。我只是一个俄国人，而且对于政治，是没有操持的。大概和我最相近的，是布尔塞维克，和他们一同布尔塞维克化，我是赞成的。……但我爱农民的俄国。”这就很明白的说出了他们的立场。
The emergence of this school ostensibly began on February 1, 21, at the first meeting in the Leningrad "Art House", and the members were probably young literati, and their position was the denial of all positions. Shuxue Jianke said: "From the point of view of the party members, I am a person without a purpose. Isn't that good? Speaking of myself, I am neither a communist, nor a member of the Socialist Revolutionary, nor an imperialist. I am just a Russian, and I have no control over politics. Probably the closest to me is the Bolsheviks, and I am in favor of the Bolsheviks with them. …… But I love peasant Russia. This clearly states their position.但在那时，这一个文学团体的出现，却确是一种惊异，不久就几乎席卷了全国的文坛。在苏联中，这样的非苏维埃的文学的勃兴，是很足以令人奇怪的。然而理由很简单：当时的革命者，正忙于实行，惟有这些青年文人发表了较为优秀的作品者其一；他们虽非革命者，而身历了铁和火的试练，所以凡所描写的恐怖和战栗，兴奋和感激，易得读者的共鸣者其二；其三，则当时指挥文学界的瓦浪斯基，是很给他们支持的。讬罗茨基也是支持者之一，称之为“同路人”。同路人者，谓因革命中所含有的英雄主义而接受革命，一同前行，但并无彻底为革命而斗争，虽死不惜的信念，仅是一时同道的伴侣罢了。这名称，由那时一直使用到现在。
But at that time, the emergence of this literary group was indeed a surprise, and soon it almost swept the literary world across the country. In the Soviet Union, the rise of such non-Soviet literature was strange. However, the reason is simple: the revolutionaries at that time were busy implementing it, and only these young literati published excellent works; Although they are not revolutionaries, they have experienced the trials of iron and fire, so the horror and trembling, excitement and gratitude described are easy to resonate with readers; Third, Walansky, who was in command of the literary world at that time, was very supportive of them. Rotsky was also one of the supporters, calling him a "fellow traveler". Fellow travelers are those who accept the revolution because of the heroism contained in the revolution and move forward together, but do not completely fight for the revolution. This name has been used since then until now.然而，单说是“爱文学”而没有明确的观念形态的徽帜的“绥拉比翁的兄弟们”，也终于逐渐失掉了作为团体的存在的意义，始于涣散，继以消亡，后来就和别的同路人们一样，各各由他个人的才力，受着文学上的评价了。
However, the "brothers of Surabión", who only "love literature" without a clear conceptual form, finally gradually lost the meaning of their existence as a group, began to disperse, then died, and later, like other fellow travelers, each was evaluated by literature according to his own personal talents.在四五年以前，中国又曾盛大的绍介了苏联文学，然而就是这同路人的作品居多。这也是无足异的。一者，此种文学的兴起较为在先，颇为西欧及日本所赏赞和介绍，给中国也得了不少转译的机缘；二者，恐怕也还是这种没有立场的立场，反而易得介绍者的赏识之故了，虽然他自以为是“革命文学者”。
Four or five years ago, China had introduced Soviet literature in a grand way, but most of the works were by this fellow traveler. This is also no surprise. First, the rise of this kind of literature was relatively early, and it was appreciated and introduced by Western Europe and Japan, and China also got a lot of opportunities for translation; Second, I am afraid that it is still this position without a position, but it is easy to gain the appreciation of the introducer, although he thinks he is a "revolutionary writer".我向来是想介绍东欧文学的一个人，也曾译过几篇同路人作品，现在就合了十个人的短篇为一集，其中的三篇，是别人的翻译，我相信为很可靠的。可惜的是限于篇幅，不能将有名的作家全都收罗在内，使这本书较为完善，但我相信曹靖华君的《烟袋》和《四十一》，是可以补这缺陷的。
I have always wanted to introduce Eastern European literature, and I have translated several works of fellow travelers, and now I have combined ten short stories into one episode, three of which are translations by others, which I believe are very reliable. Unfortunately, due to space limitations, it is not possible to include all famous writers to make this book more complete, but I believe that Cao Jinghuajun's "Tobacco Bag" and "Forty-One" can make up for this defect.至于各个作者的略传，和各篇作品的翻译或重译的来源，都写在卷末的《后记》里，读者倘有兴致，自去翻检就是了。
As for the brief biographies of each author and the sources of translations or retranslations of each work, they are all written in the "Postscript" at the end of the volume, and readers can check them if they are interested.一九三二年九月九日，鲁迅记于上海。
On September 9, 1932, Lu Xun recorded in Shanghai.

论“第三种人”

论“第三种人”

论“第三种人”

On the "third kind of person"这三年来，关于文艺上的论争是沉寂的，除了在指挥刀的保护之下，挂着“左翼”的招牌，在马克斯主义里发见了文艺自由论，列宁主义里找到了杀尽共匪说的论客的“理论”之外，几乎没有人能够开口，然而，倘是“为文艺而文艺”的文艺，却还是“自由”的，因为他决没有收了卢布的嫌疑。但在“第三种人”，就是“死抱住文学不放的人”，又不免有一种苦痛的豫感：左翼文坛要说他是“资产阶级的走狗”。
In the past three years, the debate on literature and art has been silent, except for the protection of the commanding knife, the "left-wing" signboard, the theory of literary and artistic freedom in Marxism, and the "theory" of the critics who kill all the communists in Leninism, almost no one can speak. But the "third type of person", that is, "the person who clings to literature", inevitably has a painful premonition: the left-wing literary world wants to say that he is a "lackey of the bourgeoisie".代表了这一种“第三种人”来鸣不平的，是《现代》杂志第三和第六期上的苏汶先生的文章（我在这里先应该声明：我为便利起见，暂且用了“代表”，“第三种人”这些字眼，虽然明知道苏汶先生的“作家之群”，是也如拒绝“或者”，“多少”，“影响”这一类不十分决定的字眼一样，不要固定的名称的，因为名称一固定，也就不自由了）。他以为左翼的批评家，动不动就说作家是“资产阶级的走狗”，甚至于将中立者认为非中立，而一非中立，便有认为“资产阶级的走狗”的可能，号称“左翼作家”者既然“左而不作”，“第三种人”又要作而不敢，于是文坛上便没有东西了。然而文艺据说至少有一部分是超出于阶级斗争之外的，为将来的，就是“第三种人”所抱住的真的，永久的文艺。——但可惜，被左翼理论家弄得不敢作了，因为作家在未作之前，就有了被骂的豫感。
Representing this "third type of person" is Mr. Su Wen's article in the third and sixth issues of "Modern" magazine (I should first state here: for the sake of convenience, I have temporarily used the words "representative" and "third type of person", although I know that Mr. Su Wen's "group of writers" is also like rejecting words such as "or", "how much", and "influence", and do not have a fixed name, because once the name is fixed, it is not free). He thought that left-wing critics would say that writers were "bourgeois lackeys" at every turn, and even regarded neutrals as non-neutral, and once they were non-neutral, there was a possibility that they would think they were "bourgeois lackeys". However, literature and art are said to be at least partly beyond the class struggle, and for the future, it is the real and permanent literature and art embraced by the "third kind of people". ——But unfortunately, I was made afraid by left-wing theorists, because the writer had a premonition of being scolded before he did it.我相信这种豫感是会有的，而以“第三种人”自命的作家，也愈加容易有。我也相信作者所说，现在很有懂得理论，而感情难变的作家。然而感情不变，则懂得理论的度数，就不免和感情已变或略变者有些不同，而看法也就因此两样。苏汶先生的看法，由我看来，是并不正确的。
I believe that this feeling will be there, and writers who call themselves "third people" are becoming more and more likely to have it. I also believe what the author said, there are now writers who understand theory and have difficult feelings to change. However, if the feelings remain unchanged, then understanding the degree of theory will inevitably be a little different from those whose feelings have changed or changed slightly, and the views are therefore different. Mr. Su Wen's view, in my opinion, is not correct.自然，自从有了左翼文坛以来，理论家曾经犯过错误，作家之中，也不但如苏汶先生所说，有“左而不作”的，并且还有由左而右，甚至于化为民族主义文学的小卒，书坊的老板，敌党的探子的，然而这些讨厌左翼文坛了的文学家所遗下的左翼文坛，却依然存在，不但存在，还在发展，克服自己的坏处，向文艺这神圣之地进军。苏汶先生问过：克服了三年，还没有克服好么？回答是：是的，还要克服下去，三十年也说不定。然而一面克服着，一面进军着，不会做待到克服完成，然后行进那样的傻事的。但是，苏汶先生说过“笑话”：左翼作家在从资本家取得稿费；现在我来说一句真话，是左翼作家还在受封建的资本主义的社会的法律的压迫，禁锢，杀戮。所以左翼刊物，全被摧残，现在非常寥寥，即偶有发表，批评作品的也绝少，而偶有批评作品的，也并未动不动便指作家为“资产阶级的走狗”，而且不要“同路人”。左翼作家并不是从天上掉下来的神兵，或国外杀进来的仇敌，他不但要那同走几步的“同路人”，还要招致那站在路旁看看的看客也一同前进。
Naturally, since the establishment of the left-wing literary world, theorists have made mistakes, and among the writers, not only are there those who "do not do on the left", as Mr. Su Wen said, but also from left to right, and even become pawns of nationalist literature, the owners of bookstores, and spies of the enemy party. Mr. Su Wen asked: After three years of overcoming, has it not been overcome? The answer is: Yes, it will take 30 years to overcome it. However, while overcoming, marching, they will not do such stupid things as waiting until the overcoming is completed. However, Mr. Su Wen said a "joke": left-wing writers are getting fees from capitalists; Now let me tell you the truth, left-wing writers are still oppressed, imprisoned, and killed by the laws of feudal capitalist society. Therefore, left-wing publications, all destroyed, are now very few, that is, they are occasionally published, and there are very few critics of works, and occasionally criticize works, and they do not refer to writers as "lackeys of the bourgeoisie" at every turn, and do not "fellow travelers". Left-wing writers are not divine soldiers who fall from the sky or enemies who come in from abroad, they not only want the "fellow travelers" who walk a few steps together, but also attract the spectators who stand on the side of the road to move forward together.但现在要问：左翼文坛现在因为受着压迫，不能发表很多的批评，倘一旦有了发表的可能，不至于动不动就指“第三种人”为“资产阶级的走狗”么？我想，倘若左翼批评家没有宣誓不说，又只从坏处着想，那是有这可能的，也可以想得比这还要坏。不过我以为这种豫测，实在和想到地球也许有破裂之一日，而先行自杀一样，大可以不必的。
But now I have to ask: the left-wing literary world is now oppressed and cannot publish a lot of criticism, if once there is a possibility of publication, will it not be called the "third kind of person" as a "bourgeois lackey" at every turn? I think that if left-wing critics do not swear and do not swear, and only think about the bad, it is possible, and it can be considered worse than this. However, I think this kind of prediction is really unnecessary, just like thinking that the earth may rupture one day and commit suicide first.然而苏汶先生的“第三种人”，却据说是为了这未来的恐怖而“搁笔”了。未曾身历，仅仅因为心造的幻影而搁笔，“死抱住文学不放”的作者的拥抱力，又何其弱呢？两个爱人，有因为豫防将来的社会上的斥责而不敢拥抱的么？
However, Mr. Su Wen's "third kind of person" is said to have "put down his pen" for the horror of this future. How weak is the embrace of the author who has never experienced it, just because of the phantom created by the heart, and "clings to literature"? Do the two lovers dare not hug because of the future social reprimand?其实，这“第三种人”的“搁笔”，原因并不在左翼批评的严酷。真实原因的所在，是在做不成这样的“第三种人”，做不成这样的人，也就没有了第三种笔，搁与不搁，还谈不到。
In fact, the reason for the "pen shelving" of this "third type of person" is not the harshness of left-wing criticism. The real reason is that if you can't be such a "third kind of person", if you can't be such a person, you won't have a third kind of pen, and you can't talk about it whether you put it aside or not.生在有阶级的社会里而要做超阶级的作家，生在战斗的时代而要离开战斗而独立，生在现在而要做给与将来的作品，这样的人，实在也是一个心造的幻影，在现实世界上是没有的。要做这样的人，恰如用自己的手拔着头发，要离开地球一样，他离不开，焦躁着，然而并非因为有人摇了摇头，使他不敢拔了的缘故。
Born in a class society and want to be a super-class writer, born in an era of fighting and want to leave the battle and become independent, born in the present and want to make works for the future, such a person is really a phantom made by the mind, which does not exist in the real world. To be such a person is like pulling out his hair with his own hands and leaving the earth, he cannot do without it, anxious, but not because someone shook his head and made him dare not pull it out.所以虽是“第三种人”，却还是一定超不出阶级的，苏汶先生就先在豫料阶级的批评了，作品里又岂能摆脱阶级的利害；也一定离不开战斗的，苏汶先生就先以“第三种人”之名提出抗争了，虽然“抗争”之名又为作者所不愿受；而且也跳不过现在的，他在创作超阶级的，为将来的作品之前，先就留心于左翼的批判了。
Therefore, although he is a "third kind of person", he still cannot transcend the class, and Mr. Su Wen first anticipates the criticism of the class, and how can he get rid of the interests of class in his works; It must be inseparable from the battle, so Mr. Su Wen first proposed to fight in the name of "the third kind of person", although the name of "resistance" was unwilling to be accepted by the author; And he can't skip the present, he pays attention to left-wing criticism before creating super-class, future works.这确是一种苦境。但这苦境，是因为幻影不能成为实有而来的。即使没有左翼文坛作梗，也不会有这“第三种人”，何况作品。但苏汶先生却又心造了一个横暴的左翼文坛的幻影，将“第三种人”的幻影不能出现，以至将来的文艺不能发生的罪孽，都推给它了。
This is indeed a difficult situation. But this predicament comes because the phantom cannot become real. Even if there is no left-wing literary obstruction, there will be no such "third kind of people", let alone works. But Mr. Su Wen has created a phantom of the tyrannical left-wing literary world, and pushed the phantom of the "third kind of person" to it, and even the sins that cannot occur in literature and art in the future.左翼作家诚然是不高超的，连环图画，唱本，然而也不到苏汶先生所断定那样的没出息。左翼也要托尔斯泰，弗罗培尔。但不要“努力去创造一些属于将来（因为他们现在是不要的）的东西”的托尔斯泰和弗罗培尔。他们两个，都是为现在而写的，将来是现在的将来，于现在有意义，才于将来会有意义。尤其是托尔斯泰，他写些小故事给农民看，也不自命为“第三种人”，当时资产阶级的多少攻击，终于不能使他“搁笔”。左翼虽然诚如苏汶先生所说，不至于蠢到不知道“连环图画是产生不出托尔斯泰，产生不出弗罗培尔来”，但却以为可以产出密开朗该罗，达文希那样伟大的画手。而且我相信，从唱本说书里是可以产生托尔斯泰，弗罗培尔的。现在提起密开朗该罗们的画来，谁也没有非议了，但实际上，那不是宗教的宣传画，《旧约》的连环图画么？而且是为了那时的“现在”的。
Left-wing writers are certainly not superb, comic strips, and songbooks, but they are not as unpromising as Mr. Su Wen concluded. The left also wants Tolstoy and Froppel. But don't "strive to create something that belongs to the future (because they don't want it now)" Tolstoy and Froppel. Both of them are written for the present, and the future is the future of the present, and it is meaningful in the present, and it will be meaningful in the future. Especially Tolstoy, he wrote some short stories to show the peasants, and did not call himself a "third kind of person", and the number of attacks by the bourgeoisie at that time finally could not make him "put down his pen". Although the left, as Mr. Su Wen said, is not so stupid that they do not know that "comic strips cannot produce Tolstoy or Fropel", they think that they can produce great painters like Michelangelo and Leonardo da Vinci. And I believe that Tolstoy and Fropel can be produced from the songbook. Now, when it comes to the paintings of Michelangelo, no one criticizes them, but in fact, isn't that a religious propaganda poster, a comic strip of the Old Testament? And for the "now" of that time.总括起来说，苏汶先生是主张“第三种人”与其欺骗，与其做冒牌货，倒还不如努力去创作，这是极不错的。
To sum up, Mr. Su Wen advocates that the "third kind of people" should work hard to create instead of deceiving and being impostors, which is very good.“定要有自信的勇气，才会有工作的勇气！”这尤其是对的。
"You must have the courage to be confident in order to have the courage to work!" This is especially true.然而苏汶先生又说，许多大大小小的“第三种人”们，却又因为豫感了不祥之兆——左翼理论家的批评而“搁笔”了！
However, Mr. Su Wen also said that many "third people", large and small, have "put down their pens" because they have foreshadowed the ominous sign, the criticism of left-wing theorists!“怎么办呢”？
"What should I do"?十月十日。
October 10th.

“连环图画”辩护

“连环图画”辩护

“连环图画”辩护

"Comic strip" defense我自己曾经有过这样一个小小的经验。有一天，在一处筵席上，我随便的说：用活动电影来教学生，一定比教员的讲义好，将来恐怕要变成这样的。话还没有说完，就埋葬在一阵哄笑里了。
I myself had such a small experience. One day, at a banquet, I casually said: Teaching students with activity films must be better than the teacher's handouts, and I am afraid it will become like this in the future. Before he finished speaking, he was buried in a burst of laughter.自然，这话里，是埋伏着许多问题的，例如，首先第一，是用的是怎样的电影，倘用美国式的发财结婚故事的影片，那当然不行。但在我自己，却的确另外听过采用影片的细菌学讲义，见过全部照相，只有几句说明的植物学书。所以我深信不但生物学，就是历史地理，也可以这样办。
Naturally, there are many questions lurking in this statement, for example, first of all, what kind of movie is used, if you use an American-style film about a rich marriage story, of course not. But myself, I have indeed heard of bacteriology handouts using films, and I have seen botany books with all the photos and only a few sentences of explanation. Therefore, I firmly believe that not only biology, but also history and geography can also do the same.然而许多人的随便的哄笑，是一枝白粉笔，它能够将粉涂在对手的鼻子上，使他的话好像小丑的打诨。
However, the casual laughter of many people is a white chalk that can apply powder to the opponent's nose, making his words look like a clown's joke.前几天，我在《现代》上看见苏汶先生的文章，他以中立的文艺论者的立场，将“连环图画”一笔抹杀了。自然，那不过是随便提起的，并非讨论绘画的专门文字，然而在青年艺术学徒的心中，也许是一个重要的问题，所以我再来说几句。
A few days ago, I saw Mr. Su Wen's article in "Modern", and he erased the "comic strip" from the standpoint of a neutral literary and art theorist. Naturally, it is just a casual mention, not a special text to discuss painting, but in the minds of young art apprentices, it may be an important issue, so I will say a few more words.我们看惯了绘画史的插图上，没有“连环图画”，名人的作品的展览会上，不是“罗马夕照”，就是“西湖晚凉”，便以为那是一种下等物事，不足以登“大雅之堂”的。但若走进意大利的教皇宫——我没有游历意大利的幸福，所走进的自然只是纸上的教皇宫——去，就能看见凡有伟大的壁画，几乎都是《旧约》，《耶稣传》，《圣者传》的连环图画，艺术史家截取其中的一段，印在书上，题之曰《亚当的创造》，《最后之晚餐》，读者就不觉得这是下等，这在宣传了，然而那原画，却明明是宣传的连环图画。
We are used to seeing illustrations in the history of painting, there is no "comic strip", and the exhibition of famous people's works is either "Roman sunset" or "West Lake evening coolness", so we think that it is a kind of inferior thing, not enough to enter the "Hall of Elegance". But if you walk into the Papal Palace in Italy - I did not travel to Italy with happiness, and what I walked into was naturally only the Papal Palace on paper - you can see that almost all the great frescoes are comic strips of the Old Testament, the Biography of Jesus, and the Biography of the Saints.在东方也一样。印度的阿强陀石窟，经英国人摹印了壁画以后，在艺术史上发光了；中国的《孔子圣迹图》，只要是明版的，也早为收藏家所宝重。这两样，一是佛陀的本生，一是孔子的事迹，明明是连环图画，而且是宣传。
The same is true in the East. The Achanta Grottoes in India shone in the history of art after the British copied the murals; China's "Confucius Sacred Relics", as long as it is a Ming edition, has long been treasured by collectors. These two, one is the Buddha's Jataka, and the other is the deeds of Confucius, which are obviously comic strips and propaganda.书籍的插画，原意是在装饰书籍，增加读者的兴趣的，但那力量，能补助文字之所不及，所以也是一种宣传画。这种画的幅数极多的时候，即能只靠图像，悟到文字的内容，和文字一分开，也就成了独立的连环图画。最显著的例子是法国的陀莱（Gustave Doré），他是插图版画的名家，最有名的是《神曲》，《失乐园》，《吉诃德先生》，还有《十字军记》的插画，德国都有单印本（前二种在日本也有印本），只靠略解，即可以知道本书的梗概。然而有谁说陀莱不是艺术家呢？
The original intention of book illustrations is to decorate books and increase readers' interest, but that power can make up for what words cannot reach, so it is also a kind of propaganda poster. When the number of such paintings is extremely large, it can only rely on images to realize the content of the text, and once it is separated from the text, it becomes an independent comic strip. The most notable example is Gustave Doré of France, who is a famous illustrator of printmaking, the most famous is "The Divine Comedy", "Paradise Lost", "Mr. Quixote", and the illustrations of "Crusade", both of which are in single print in Germany (the first two are also printed in Japan), and you can know the outline of the book only by a little explanation. But who says that Torai is not an artist?宋人的《唐风图》和《耕织图》，现在还可找到印本和石刻；至于仇英的《飞燕外传图》和《会真记图》，则翻印本就在文明书局发卖的。凡这些，也都是当时和现在的艺术品。
The Song people's "Tang Feng Tu" and "Cultivation and Weaving Map" can still be found in prints and stone carvings; As for Qiu Ying's "Feiyan Gaiden Tu" and "Huizhen Ji Tu", the reprints were sold at the Civilization Bookstore. All of these are works of art at that time and now.自十九世纪后半以来，版画复兴了，许多作家，往往喜欢刻印一些以几幅画汇成一帖的“连作”（Blattfolge）。这些连作，也有并非一个事件的。现在为青年的艺术学徒计，我想写出几个版画史上已经有了地位的作家和有连续事实的作品在下面：
Since the second half of the nineteenth century, printmaking has been revived, and many writers often like to engrave some "Blattfolge" (Blattfolge), which is a combination of several paintings. These series of works are also not an event. Now for the art apprenticeship of young people, I would like to write a few works that have established themselves in the history of printmaking and have continuous facts below:首先应该举出来的是德国的珂勒惠支（Käthe Kollwitz）夫人。她除了为霍普德曼的《织匠》（Die Weber）而刻的六幅版画外，还有三种，有题目，无说明——
The first thing that should be mentioned is Mrs. Käthe Kollwitz of Germany. In addition to the six prints she engraved for Hopdemann's "Die Weber", there are three more types, with titles and no descriptions -一，《农民斗争》（Bauernkrieg），金属版七幅；
1. "Peasant Struggle" (Bauernkrieg), seven metal plates;二，《战争》（Der Krieg），木刻七幅；
2. "War" (Der Krieg), seven woodcuts;三，《无产者》（Proletariat），木刻三幅。
3. "Proletariat", three woodcuts.以《士敏土》的版画，为中国所知道的梅斐尔德（Carl Meffert），是一个新进的青年作家，他曾为德译本斐格纳尔的《猎俄皇记》（Die Jagd nach Zaren von Wera Figner）刻过五幅木版图，又有两种连作——
Carl Meffert, known in China for his prints of "Shimin Tu", is a new young writer who has engraved five woodblock prints for the German translation of Fignaar's "Die Jagd nach Zaren von Wera Figner" (Die Jagd nach Zaren von Wera Figner), and there are two consecutive works -一，《你的姊妹》（Deine Schwester），木刻七幅，题诗一幅；
1. "Your Sister" (Deine Schwester), seven woodcuts, one poem;二，《养护的门徒》（原名未详），木刻十三幅。
2. "Disciple of Conservation" (original name unknown), thirteen woodcuts.比国有一个麦绥莱勒（Frans Masereel），是欧洲大战时候，像罗曼罗兰一样，因为非战而逃出过外国的。他的作品最多，都是一本书，只有书名，连小题目也没有。现在德国印出了普及版（Bei Kurt Wolff，München），每本三马克半，容易到手了。我所见过的是这几种——
Belgium has a Frans Masereel, who, like Romain Rolland, fled abroad because of non-war during the European War. His most works are all books, only book titles, not even subtitles. Now Germany has printed a popular version (Bei Kurt Wolff, München), each three and a half marks, which is easy to get. What I have seen is these-一，《理想》（Die Idee），木刻八十三幅；
1. "Die Idee", 83 woodcuts;二，《我的祷告》（Mein Stundenbuch），木刻一百六十五幅；
2. "Mein Stundenbuch", 165 woodcuts;三，《没字的故事》（Geschichte ohne Worte），木刻六十幅；
3. "The Story Without Words" (Geschichte ohne Worte), 60 woodcuts;四，《太阳》（Die Sonne），木刻六十三幅；
4. "Sun" (Die Sonne), 63 woodcuts;五，《工作》（Das Werk），木刻，幅数失记；
5. "Work" (Das Werk), woodcut, number of errors;六，《一个人的受难》（Die Passion eines Menschen），木刻二十五幅。
6. "Die Passion eines Menschen" (Die Passion eines Menschen), 25 woodcuts.美国作家的作品，我曾见过希该尔木刻的《巴黎公社》（The Paris Commune，A Story in Pictures by William Siegel），是纽约的约翰李特社（John Reed Club）出版的。还有一本石版的格罗沛尔（W. Gropper）所画的书，据赵景深教授说，是“马戏的故事”，另译起来，恐怕要“信而不顺”，只好将原名照抄在下面——
The work of an American writer, I have seen in the woodcut "The Paris Commune, A Story in Pictures by William Siegel", was published by the John Reed Club in New York. There is also a lithograph of W. Gropel (W. Gropper), according to Professor Zhao Jingshen, is a "circus story", and when translated separately, I am afraid that it will be "believed but not smooth", so I have to copy the original name below——《Alay-Oop》（Life and Love Among the Acrobats.）
《Alay-Oop》（Life and Love Among the Acrobats.）英国的作家我不大知道，因为那作品定价贵。但曾经有一本小书，只有十五幅木刻和不到二百字的说明，作者是有名的吉宾斯（Robert Gibbings），限印五百部，英国绅士是死也不肯重印的，现在恐怕已将绝版，每本要数十元了罢。那书是——
I don't know much about British writers because they are expensive. But there was once a small book, only fifteen woodcuts and less than 200 words of instructions, the author was the famous Robert Gibbings, limited to 500 copies, British gentlemen refused to reprint even if they died, and now I am afraid it will be out of print, each cost tens of yuan. That book is—《第七人》（The 7th Man）。
"The 7th Man".以上，我的意思是总算举出事实，证明了连环图画不但可以成为艺术，并且已经坐在“艺术之宫”的里面了。至于这也和其他的文艺一样，要有好的内容和技术，那是不消说得的。
What I mean above is that the facts have finally been cited to prove that comic strips can not only become art, but also sit in the "palace of art". As for this, like other literature and art, it goes without saying that it must have good content and technology.我并不劝青年的艺术学徒蔑弃大幅的油画或水彩画，但是希望一样看重并且努力于连环图画和书报的插图；自然应该研究欧洲名家的作品，但也更注意于中国旧书上的绣像和画本，以及新的单张的花纸。这些研究和由此而来的创作，自然没有现在的所谓大作家的受着有些人们的照例的叹赏，然而我敢相信：对于这，大众是要看的，大众是感激的！
I do not advise young art apprentices to abandon large-scale oil paintings or watercolors, but I hope to value and strive for comic strips and illustrations in books and newspapers; Naturally, we should study the works of famous European artists, but we should also pay more attention to the embroidery and painting books in old Chinese books, as well as the new single flower paper. These studies and the resulting creations are naturally not as admired by some people as the current so-called great writers, but I dare to believe that the public wants to see this, and the public is grateful!十月二十五日。
October 25th.

辱骂和恐吓决不是战斗

辱骂和恐吓决不是战斗

辱骂和恐吓决不是战斗

Abuse and intimidation are never fights——致《文学月报》编辑的一封信
——A letter to the editor of "Literary Monthly"起应兄：
Brother Qiying:前天收到《文学月报》第四期，看了一下。我所觉得不足的，并非因为它不及别种杂志的五花八门，乃是总还不能比先前充实。但这回提出了几位新的作家来，是极好的，作品的好坏我且不论，最近几年的刊物上，倘不是姓名曾经排印过了的作家，就很有不能登载的趋势，这么下去，新的作者要没有发表作品的机会了。现在打破了这局面，虽然不过是一种月刊的一期，但究竟也扫去一些沉闷，所以我以为是一种好事情。但是，我对于芸生先生的一篇诗，却非常失望。
The day before yesterday, I received the fourth issue of "Literary Monthly" and read it. What I find lacking is not that it is not as diverse as other magazines, but that it is not as substantial as before. But this time several new writers are proposed, which is excellent, regardless of the quality of the work, in recent years, if it is not a writer whose name has been printed, there is a tendency not to publish it, so if it continues, the new author will not have the opportunity to publish his work. Now that this situation has been broken, although it is just an issue of a monthly magazine, it has also swept away some of the dullness, so I think it is a good thing. However, I was very disappointed with a poem by Mr. Yunsheng.这诗，一目了然，是看了前一期的别德纳衣的讽刺诗而作的。然而我们来比一比罢，别德纳衣的诗虽然自认为“恶毒”，但其中最甚的也不过是笑骂。这诗怎么样？有辱骂，有恐吓，还有无聊的攻击：其实是大可以不必作的。
This poem, which is clear at a glance, was written after reading the satirical poem of Bednar Yi in the previous issue. However, let's compare, although Bedner's poems consider themselves "vicious", the worst of them is just laughter and scolding. How about this poem? There are abuses, intimidation, and boring attacks: in fact, it is not necessary.例如罢，开首就是对于姓的开玩笑。一个作者自取的别名，自然可以窥见他的思想，譬如“铁血”，“病鹃”之类，固不妨由此开一点小玩笑。但姓氏籍贯，却不能决定本人的功罪，因为这是从上代传下来的，不能由他自主。我说这话还在四年之前，当时曾有人评我为“封建余孽”，其实是捧住了这样的题材，欣欣然自以为得计者，倒是十分“封建的”的。不过这种风气，近几年颇少见了，不料现在竟又复活起来，这确不能不说是一个退步。
For example, the beginning is a joke about the surname. An author's own alias can naturally give a glimpse of his thoughts, such as "iron-blooded", "sick cuckoo", etc., so you might as well make a little joke about it. However, the surname and place of origin cannot determine one's merits and faults, because this is passed down from the previous generation and cannot be independently by him. I said this four years ago, when someone commented that I was a "feudal remnant", but in fact, it was very "feudal" to hold such a theme and happily think that it was a good idea. However, this kind of atmosphere has been quite rare in recent years, but now it has been revived, which cannot but be said to be a step backwards.尤其不堪的是结末的辱骂。现在有些作品，往往并非必要而偏在对话里写上许多骂语去，好像以为非此便不是无产者作品，骂詈愈多，就愈是无产者作品似的。其实好的工农之中，并不随口骂人的多得很，作者不应该将上海流氓的行为，涂在他们身上的。即使有喜欢骂人的无产者，也只是一种坏脾气，作者应该由文艺加以纠正，万不可再来展开，使将来的无阶级社会中，一言不合，便祖宗三代的闹得不可开交。况且即是笔战，就也如别的兵战或拳斗一样，不妨伺隙乘虚，以一击制敌人的死命，如果一味鼓噪，已是《三国志演义》式战法，至于骂一句爹娘，扬长而去，还自以为胜利，那简直是“阿Q”式的战法了。
Especially unbearable is the insults at the end. Nowadays, some works are often unnecessary and often write a lot of scolding in the dialogue, as if thinking that it is not a proletarian work, and the more scolding, the more it is a proletarian work. In fact, among the good workers and peasants, there are not many people who scold people casually, and the author should not apply the behavior of Shanghai hooligans to them. Even if there are proletarians who like to scold people, it is just a bad temper, and the author should correct it by literature and art, and must not unfold it again, so that in the future classless society, if there is a disagreement, the three generations of ancestors will be in trouble. Moreover, even if it is a pen battle, it is like other military battles or fist fights, you might as well wait for an opportunity to take advantage of the situation and control the enemy's death with one blow, if you blindly shout, it is already a "Romance of the Three Kingdoms" style of tactics, as for scolding a parent, walking away, and thinking that you are victorious, it is simply a "Ah Q" style of tactics.接着又是什么“剖西瓜”之类的恐吓，这也是极不对的，我想。无产者的革命，乃是为了自己的解放和消灭阶级，并非因为要杀人，即使是正面的敌人，倘不死于战场，就有大众的裁判，决不是一个诗人所能提笔判定生死的。现在虽然很有什么“杀人放火”的传闻，但这只是一种诬陷。中国的报纸上看不出实话，然而只要一看别国的例子也就可以恍然：德国的无产阶级革命（虽然没有成功），并没有乱杀人；俄国不是连皇帝的宫殿都没有烧掉么？而我们的作者，却将革命的工农用笔涂成一个吓人的鬼脸，由我看来，真是卤莽之极了。
Then there is some kind of intimidation such as "splitting watermelon", which is also extremely wrong, I think. The revolution of the proletariat is for its own liberation and the elimination of the class, not because it wants to kill, even if it is a frontal enemy, if it does not die on the battlefield, there will be the judgment of the masses, and it is by no means something that a poet can write to judge life and death. Although there are many rumors of "murder and arson" now, this is just a false accusation. The truth cannot be seen in Chinese newspapers, but as long as you look at the examples of other countries, you can suddenly understand: the German proletarian revolution (although it was not successful) did not kill people indiscriminately; Didn't Russia even burn down the emperor's palace? Our author, on the other hand, painted a frightening grimace with the pen of the revolutionary workers and peasants, which, in my opinion, is really reckless.自然，中国历来的文坛上，常见的是诬陷，造谣，恐吓，辱骂，翻一翻大部的历史，就往往可以遇见这样的文章，直到现在，还在应用，而且更加厉害。但我想，这一份遗产，还是都让给叭儿狗文艺家去承受罢，我们的作者倘不竭力的抛弃了它，是会和他们成为“一丘之貉”的。
Naturally, in China's literary circles, it is common to frame, spread rumors, intimidate, insult, and look through most of the history, and you can often encounter such articles, which are still being applied until now, and they are even more powerful. But I think that this inheritance should still be borne by the Ba'ergou writers and artists, and if our authors do not try their best to abandon it, they will become "a raccoon dog on a hill".不过我并非主张要对敌人陪笑脸，三鞠躬。我只是说，战斗的作者应该注重于“论争”；倘在诗人，则因为情不可遏而愤怒，而笑骂，自然也无不可。但必须止于嘲笑，止于热骂，而且要“喜笑怒骂，皆成文章”，使敌人因此受伤或致死，而自己并无卑劣的行为，观者也不以为污秽，这才是战斗的作者的本领。
But I am not advocating smiling and bowing three times to the enemy. I am just saying that the author of the battle should focus on the "argument"; If it is a poet, it is natural to be angry because of the uncontrollable emotion, and laugh and scold. But it must stop at ridicule, stop at scolding, and "laugh and curse, all become articles", so that the enemy is injured or killed because of this, and he has no despicable behavior, and the viewer does not think it is dirty, which is the skill of the author of the battle.刚才想到了以上的一些，便写出寄上，也许于编辑上可供参考。总之，我是极希望此后的《文学月报》上不再有那样的作品的。
I just thought of some of the above, so I wrote it down and sent it, maybe it can be used as an editorial reference. In short, I really hope that there will be no more such works in the "Literary Monthly" in the future.专此布达，并问
Specifically for this announcement, ask questions好。
Good.鲁迅。十二月十日。
Lu Xun. December 10th.

《自选集》自序

《自选集》自序

《自选集》自序

"Selected Collection" self-introduction我做小说，是开手于一九一八年，《新青年》上提倡“文学革命”的时候的。这一种运动，现在固然已经成为文学史上的陈迹了，但在那时，却无疑地是一个革命的运动。
I started writing novels in 1918, when "New Youth" advocated a "literary revolution". Although this movement has now become a relic in the history of literature, it was undoubtedly a revolutionary movement at that time.我的作品在《新青年》上，步调是和大家大概一致的，所以我想，这些确可以算作那时的“革命文学”。
My works on "New Youth" are roughly the same as everyone else, so I think these can indeed be counted as "revolutionary literature" at that time.然而我那时对于“文学革命”，其实并没有怎样的热情。见过辛亥革命，见过二次革命，见过袁世凯称帝，张勋复辟，看来看去，就看得怀疑起来，于是失望，颓唐得很了。民族主义的文学家在今年的一种小报上说，“鲁迅多疑”，是不错的，我正在疑心这批人们也并非真的民族主义文学者，变化正未可限量呢。不过我却又怀疑于自己的失望，因为我所见过的人们，事件，是有限得很的，这想头，就给了我提笔的力量。
However, I didn't have much enthusiasm for the "literary revolution" at that time. I have seen the Xinhai Revolution, I have seen the Second Revolution, I have seen Yuan Shikai proclaimed himself emperor, and Zhang Xun has been restored. Nationalist writers said in a tabloid this year, "Lu Xun is suspicious", which is good, but I am suspicious that this group of people is not really nationalist writers, and the changes are limitless. However, I doubted my own disappointment, because the people and events I had seen were very limited, and this thought gave me the strength to write a pen.“绝望之为虚妄，正与希望相同。”
“绝望之为虚妄，正与希望相同。 ”既不是直接对于“文学革命”的热情，又为什么提笔的呢？想起来，大半倒是为了对于热情者们的同感。这些战士，我想，虽在寂寞中，想头是不错的，也来喊几声助助威罢。首先，就是为此。自然，在这中间，也不免夹杂些将旧社会的病根暴露出来，催人留心，设法加以疗治的希望。但为达到这希望计，是必须与前驱者取同一的步调的，我于是删削些黑暗，装点些欢容，使作品比较的显出若干亮色，那就是后来结集起来的《呐喊》，一共有十四篇。
It is not a direct enthusiasm for the "literary revolution", so why did you write it? Come to think of it, most of it is for the sympathy of the enthusiasts. These soldiers, I think, although in loneliness, think well, and come to shout a few cheers. First of all, it is for this. Naturally, in the middle, there is inevitably some hope that the root cause of the old society will be exposed, and people will be careful and try to cure it. But in order to achieve this hope, it was necessary to keep pace with the pioneers, so I cut out some darkness and decorated some joy, so that the work showed a few bright colors, that is, "The Scream", which was later compiled, a total of fourteen pieces.这些也可以说，是“遵命文学”。不过我所遵奉的，是那时革命的前驱者的命令，也是我自己所愿意遵奉的命令，决不是皇上的圣旨，也不是金元和真的指挥刀。
These can also be said to be "obedience literature". However, what I obeyed was the order of the pioneers of the revolution at that time, and it was also the order I was willing to obey, by no means the emperor's imperial decree, nor was it Jin Yuanhe's real commanding knife.后来《新青年》的团体散掉了，有的高升，有的退隐，有的前进，我又经验了一回同一战阵中的伙伴还是会这么变化，并且落得一个“作家”的头衔，依然在沙漠中走来走去，不过已经逃不出在散漫的刊物上做文字，叫作随便谈谈。有了小感触，就写些短文，夸大点说，就是散文诗，以后印成一本，谓之《野草》。得到较整齐的材料，则还是做短篇小说，只因为成了游勇，布不成阵了，所以技术虽然比先前好一些，思路也似乎较无拘束，而战斗的意气却冷得不少。新的战友在那里呢？我想，这是很不好的。于是集印了这时期的十一篇作品，谓之《彷徨》，愿以后不再这模样。
Later, the group of "New Youth" dispersed, some were promoted, some retired, and some moved forward, and I experienced that my partners in the same battlefield would still change like this, and ended up with the title of "writer", still walking around in the desert, but I could not escape writing in scattered publications, which was called casual talk. If you have a small feeling, write some short articles, exaggerate it, that is, prose poems, and later print them into a book, called "Weeds". If you get more neat materials, you will still make short stories, just because you have become a wandering warrior and you can't form a formation, so although the technology is better than before, the thinking seems to be more unrestrained, and the fighting spirit is a lot colder. Where are the new comrades-in-arms? I think this is very bad. So he collected and printed eleven works from this period, called "Wandering", hoping that he would not look like this again in the future.“路漫漫其修远兮，吾将上下而求索。”
"The road is long and long, and I will search up and down."不料这大口竟夸得无影无踪。逃出北京，躲进厦门，只在大楼上写了几则《故事新编》和十篇《朝花夕拾》。前者是神话，传说及史实的演义，后者则只是回忆的记事罢了。
Unexpectedly, this big mouth was boasted without a trace. escaped from Beijing and hid in Xiamen, and only wrote a few "New Stories" and ten "Morning Flowers and Evening Collections" on the building. The former is a romance of myths, legends and historical facts, while the latter is just a memory of memories.此后就一无所作，“空空如也”。
After that, he did nothing, "empty".可以勉强称为创作的，在我至今只有这五种，本可以顷刻读了的，但出版者要我自选一本集。推测起来，恐怕因为这么一办，一者能够节省读者的费用，二则，以为由作者自选，该能比别人格外明白罢。对于第一层，我没有异议；至第二层，我却觉得也很难。因为我向来就没有格外用力或格外偷懒的作品，所以也没有自以为特别高妙，配得上提拔出来的作品。没有法，就将材料，写法，都有些不同，可供读者参考的东西，取出二十二篇来，凑成了一本，但将给读者一种“重压之感”的作品，却特地竭力抽掉了。这是我现在自有我的想头的：
It can be barely called creation, but I only have these five so far, and I could have read it in an instant, but the publisher asked me to choose a collection of my own. I speculate that because of this, one can save the reader's money, and the other is that the author chooses himself, which should be more understandable than others. For the first layer, I have no objection; On the second floor, I find it difficult. Because I have never had works that are particularly hard or lazy, I do not think that works are particularly exquisite and worthy of being promoted. There is no way, so the materials and writing methods are a little different, and the things that can be used for readers' reference are taken out and made into a book, but the works that will give readers a "sense of pressure" are specially removed. This is what I have my own thoughts now:“并不愿将自以为苦的寂寞，再来传染给也如我那年青时候似的正做着好梦的青年。”
"I don't want to infect the loneliness I think is suffering to young people who are dreaming like I did when I was young."然而这又不似做那《呐喊》时候的故意的隐瞒，因为现在我相信，现在和将来的青年是不会有这样的心境的了。
However, this is not like the deliberate concealment when doing "The Scream", because now I believe that young people now and in the future will not have such a state of mind.一九三二年十二月十四日，鲁迅于上海寓居记。
On December 14, 1932, Lu Xun lived in Shanghai.

《两地书》序言

《两地书》序言

《两地书》序言

Preface to the Book of Two Places这一本书，是这样地编起来的 ——
This book is compiled like this -一九三二年八月五日，我得到霁野，静农，丛芜三个人署名的信，说漱园于八月一日晨五时半，病殁于北平同仁医院了，大家想搜集他的遗文，为他出一本纪念册，问我这里可还藏有他的信札没有。这真使我的心突然紧缩起来。因为，首先，我是希望着他能够痊愈的，虽然明知道他大约未必会好；其次，是我虽然明知道他未必会好，却有时竟没有想到，也许将他的来信统统毁掉了，那些伏在枕上，一字字写出来的信。
On August 5, 1932, I received a letter signed by Jiye, Jingnong, and Cong Wu, saying that Shuyuan died of illness at 5:30 a.m. on August 1 in Tongren Hospital in Peking. This really made my heart shrink suddenly. Because, first of all, I hope that he will be cured, although I know that he may not be well; Secondly, although I knew that he might not be good, sometimes I didn't expect that I might destroy all his letters, those letters that were written word by word on the pillow.我的习惯，对于平常的信，是随复随毁的，但其中如果有些议论，有些故事，也往往留起来。直到近三年，我才大烧毁了两次。
My habit is to destroy ordinary letters at will, but if there are some discussions and stories, they are often kept. It wasn't until the past three years that I burned it twice.五年前，国民党清党的时候，我在广州，常听到因为捕甲，从甲这里看见乙的信，于是捕乙，又从乙家搜得丙的信，于是连丙也捕去了，都不知道下落。古时候有牵牵连连的“瓜蔓抄”，我是知道的，但总以为这是古时候的事，直到事实给了我教训，我才分明省悟了做今人也和做古人一样难。然而我还是漫不经心，随随便便，待到一九三〇年我签名于自由大同盟，浙江省党部呈请中央通缉“堕落文人鲁迅等”的时候，我在弃家出走之前，忽然心血来潮，将朋友给我的信都毁掉了。这并非为了消灭“谋为不轨”的痕迹，不过以为因通信而累及别人，是很无谓的，况且中国的衙门是谁都知道只要一碰着，就有多么的可怕。后来逃过了这一关，搬了寓，而信札又积起来，我又随随便便了，不料一九三一年一月，柔石被捕，在他的衣袋里搜出有我名字的东西来，因此听说就在找我。自然罗，我只得又弃家出走，但这回是心血来潮得更加明白，当然先将所有信札完全烧掉了。
Five years ago, when the Kuomintang was purging the party, I was in Guangzhou, and I often heard that because of the arrest of A, I saw B's letter from A, so I arrested B, and found C's letter from B's house, so even C was arrested, and I didn't know his whereabouts. In ancient times, there were implicated "melon vine copying", I knew it, but I always thought that this was an ancient thing, until the facts taught me a lesson, I clearly realized that being a modern person is as difficult as being an ancient person. However, I was still careless and casual, and when I signed the Freedom League in 1930 and the Zhejiang Provincial Party Department petitioned the central government to arrest "degenerate literati Lu Xun and others", I suddenly destroyed all the letters my friend gave me on a whim before I ran away from home. This is not to eliminate the traces of "conspiracy", but it is very meaningless to think that it will affect others because of communication, and everyone in China's yamen knows how terrible it is as long as they touch it. Unexpectedly, in January 1931, Rou Shi was arrested and found something with my name in his pocket, so I heard that he was looking for me. Naturally, I had to run away from home again, but this time it was a whim to understand better, of course, I burned all the letters completely.因为有过这样的两回事，所以一得到北平的来信，我就担心，怕大约未必有，但还是翻箱倒箧的寻了一通，果然无踪无影。朋友的信一封也没有，我们自己的信倒寻出来了。这也并非对于自己的东西特别看作宝贝，倒是因为那时时间很有限，而自己的信至多也不过蔓在自身上，因此放下了的。此后这些信又在枪炮的交叉火线下，躺了二三十天，也一点没有损失。其中虽然有些缺少，但恐怕是自己当时没有留心， 早经遗失，并不是由于什么官灾兵燹的。
Because of these two things, as soon as I got a letter from Peiping, I was worried, afraid that it might not be there, but I still rummaged through the boxes and found it, and sure enough, there was no trace. There was not a single letter from a friend, but our own letter was found. This is not because he regards his own things as treasures, but because time was very limited at that time, and his letters were only on himself at most, so he let go. After that, these letters lay under the crossfire of guns and guns for twenty or thirty days, and there was no loss at all. Although there are some shortcomings, I am afraid that I did not pay attention at that time, and it was lost early, not due to some official disaster.一个人如果一生没有遇到横祸，大家决不另眼相看，但若坐过牢监，到过战场，则即使他是一个万分平凡的人，人们也总看得特别一点。我们对于这些信，也正是这样。先前是一任他垫在箱子底下的，但现在一想起他曾经几乎要打官司，要遭炮火，就觉得他好像有些特别，有些可爱似的了。夏夜多蚊，不能静静的写字，我们便略照年月，将他编了起来，因地而分为三集，统名之曰《两地书》。
If a person has not encountered a misfortune in his life, everyone will never look at him differently, but if he has been in prison and on the battlefield, even if he is an extremely ordinary person, people will always look at him specially. That's exactly what we do with these letters. He used to be under the box, but now when he remembers that he was almost going to a lawsuit and being fired, he felt that he was a little special and cute. There are many mosquitoes on summer nights, and we can't write quietly, so we compiled him according to the years, divided into three episodes according to the place, collectively called "Book of Two Places".这是说：这一本书，在我们自己，一时是有意思的，但对于别人，却并不如此。其中既没有死呀活呀的热情，也没有花呀月呀的佳句；文辞呢，我们都未曾研究过“尺牍精华”或“书信作法”，只是信笔写来，大背文律，活该进“文章病院”的居多。所讲的又不外乎学校风潮，本身情况，饭菜好坏，天气阴晴，而最坏的是我们当日居漫天幕中，幽明莫辨，讲自己的事倒没有什么，但一遇到推测天下大事，就不免胡涂得很，所以凡有欢欣鼓舞之词，从现在看起来，大抵成了梦呓了。如果定要恭维这一本书的特色，那么，我想，恐怕是因为他的平凡罢。这样平凡的东西，别人大概是不会有，即有也未必存留的，而我们不然，这就只好谓之也是一种特色。
This means that this book is interesting for a while, but not for others. There is neither the enthusiasm of death or life, nor the good sentences of flowers and moons; As for the writing, we have never studied the "essence of the ruler" or "the method of letters", but most of them are written with a letter pen, and they deserve to be in the "literary hospital". What is said is nothing more than the school trend, its own situation, the quality of the food, the weather is cloudy, and the worst thing is that we live in the sky that day, it is indistinguishable, and there is nothing to talk about ourselves, but when we encounter speculation about the major events in the world, we will inevitably be very foolish, so whenever there are words of joy and encouragement, from now on, it seems that it has probably become a dream. If I had to compliment the characteristics of this book, then, I think, it was probably because of his ordinaryness. Such an ordinary thing is probably not something that others will have, and even if it exists, it may not exist, but we don't, so we have to call it a characteristic.然而奇怪的是竟又会有一个书店愿意来印这一本书。要印，印去就是，这倒仍然可以随随便便，不过因此也就要和读者相见了，却使我又得加上两点声明在这里，以免误解。其一，是：我现在是左翼作家联盟中之一人，看近来书籍的广告，大有凡作家一旦向左，则旧作也即飞升，连他孩子时代的啼哭也合于革命文学之概，不过我们的这书是不然的，其中并无革命气息。其二，常听得有人说，书信是最不掩饰，最显真面的文章，但我也并不，我无论给谁写信，最初，总是敷敷衍衍，口是心非的，即在这一本中，遇有较为紧要的地方，到后来也还是往往故意写得含胡些，因为我们所处，是在“当地长官”，邮局，校长……，都可以随意检查信件的国度里。但自然，明白的话，是也不少的。
However, it is strange that there will be another bookstore willing to print this book. If you want to print it, you can still do it casually, but because of this, you have to meet the reader, but I have to add two more statements here to avoid misunderstanding. First, I am now a member of the Left-wing Writers' Union, and when I read the advertisements for books recently, I found that once a writer goes to the left, his old works will soar, and even the crying of his childhood is in line with the general idea of revolutionary literature, but this is not the case with our book, there is no revolutionary atmosphere in it. Second, I often hear people say that letters are the most unabashed and sincere articles, but I am not, no matter who I write to, at first, I am always perfunctory and duplicitous, that is, in this book, when there is a more important place, I often write deliberately in a nonsense, because we are in a country where "local governors", post offices, principals, ......, can check letters at will. But naturally, if you understand, there are quite a few.还有一点，是信中的人名，我将有几个改掉了，用意有好有坏，并不相同。此无他，或则怕别人见于我们的信里，于他有些不便，或则单为自己，省得又是什么“听候开审”之类的麻烦而已。
Another point is that I will change a few of the names in the letter, the intentions are good and bad, but they are not the same. There is no other way, or we are afraid that others will see it in our letters, which will be inconvenient for him, or it is just for ourselves, so as not to save any trouble such as "waiting for trial".回想六七年来，环绕我们的风波也可谓不少了，在不断的挣扎中，相助的也有，下石的也有，笑骂诬蔑的也有，但我们紧咬了牙关，却也已经挣扎着生活了六七年。其间，含沙射影者都逐渐自己没入更黑暗的处所去了，而好意的朋友也已有两个不在人间，就是漱园和柔石。我们以这一本书为自己记念，并以感谢好意的朋友，并且留赠我们的孩子，给将来知道我们所经历的真相，其实大致是如此的。
In the continuous struggle, there are those who help each other, there are those who get off the stone, and there are those who laugh and slander us, but we grit our teeth, but we have been struggling to live for six or seven years. In the meantime, the sand projectors gradually disappeared into darker places, and two well-meaning friends were already out of the world, namely Shuyuan and Roushi. We remember this book as a reminder of ourselves, as a thank you to our well-meaning friends, and as a gift to our children, so that we can know the truth of what we have experienced in the future.一九三二年十二月十六日，鲁迅。
December 16, 1932, Lu Xun.

祝中俄文字之交

祝中俄文字之交

祝中俄文字之交

I wish you a friendship between Chinese and Russian characters十五年前，被西欧的所谓文明国人看作半开化的俄国，那文学，在世界文坛上，是胜利的；十五年以来，被帝国主义者看作恶魔的苏联，那文学，在世界文坛上，是胜利的。这里的所谓“胜利”，是说：以它的内容和技术的杰出，而得到广大的读者，并且给与了读者许多有益的东西。
Fifteen years ago, Russia, which was regarded as a semi-civilized Russia by the so-called civilized people of Western Europe, was a victory in the world literary world; For fifteen years, the Soviet Union, which was regarded as a demon by the imperialists, was victorious in the world literary world. The so-called "victory" here means that it has won a wide range of readers with its outstanding content and technology, and has given readers many useful things.它在中国，也没有出于这例子之外。
It is not in China, nor is it out of this example.我们曾在梁启超所办的《时务报》上，看见了《福尔摩斯包探案》的变幻，又在《新小说》上，看见了焦士威奴（Jules Verne）所做的号称科学小说的《海底旅行》之类的新奇。后来林琴南大译英国哈葛德（H. Rider Haggard）的小说了，我们又看见了伦敦小姐之缠绵和菲洲野蛮之古怪。至于俄国文学，却一点不知道，——但有几位也许自己心里明白，而没有告诉我们的“先觉”先生，自然是例外。不过在别一方面，是已经有了感应的。那时较为革命的青年，谁不知道俄国青年是革命的，暗杀的好手？尤其忘不掉的是苏菲亚，虽然大半也因为她是一位漂亮的姑娘。现在的国货的作品中，还常有“苏菲”一类的名字，那渊源就在此。
We have seen the changes in "Sherlock Holmes Detective" in Liang Qichao's "Current Affairs", and in "New Novel", we have seen novelties such as "Journey Under the Sea", which is known as a science fiction by Jules Verne. Later, Lin Qinnan translated the English Haggard (H. Rider Haggard), we see the lingering of Miss London and the barbarism of the Philippines. As for Russian literature, I don't know anything,—— but there are a few "pre-enlightened" gentlemen who may have understood it in their hearts but did not tell us, and naturally they are exceptions. But on the other hand, there is already a sense. At that time, the more revolutionary youth, who didn't know that the Russian youth were revolutionary and good assassins? Especially unforgettable is Sophia, although most of it is also because she is a beautiful girl. In today's domestic works, there are often names such as "Sophie", and this is the origin.那时——十九世纪末——的俄国文学，尤其是陀思妥夫斯基和托尔斯泰的作品，已经很影响了德国文学，但这和中国无关，因为那时研究德文的人少得很。最有关系的是英美帝国主义者，他们一面也翻译了陀思妥夫斯基，都介涅夫，托尔斯泰，契诃夫的选集了，一面也用那做给印度人读的读本来教我们的青年以拉玛和吉利瑟那（Rama and Krishna）的对话，然而因此也携带了阅读那些选集的可能。包探，冒险家，英国姑娘，菲洲野蛮的故事，是只能当醉饱之后，在发胀的身体上搔搔痒的，然而我们的一部分的青年却已经觉得压迫，只有痛楚，他要挣扎，用不着痒痒的抚摩，只在寻切实的指示了。
At that time, at the end of the nineteenth century, Russian literature, especially the works of Dostovsky and Tolstoy, had already influenced German literature, but this had nothing to do with China, because there were very few people studying German at that time. The most relevant were the Anglo-American imperialists, who on the one hand translated the anthologies of Dostovsky, Dugeniev, Tolstoy, and Chekhov, and on the other hand, they also used the readings for Indians to teach our youth the dialogues of Rama and Krishna, but thus also carried the possibility of reading those anthologies. The story of the detective, the adventurer, the English girl, and the savage of the Philippines can only be used as a drunken and full one, scratching the swollen body, but some of our young people already feel oppressed, only pain, and they have to struggle, without the need for tickling stroking, only looking for practical instructions.那时就看见了俄国文学。
That's when I saw Russian literature.那时就知道了俄国文学是我们的导师和朋友。因为从那里面，看见了被压迫者的善良的灵魂，的酸辛，的挣扎；还和四十年代的作品一同烧起希望，和六十年代的作品一同感到悲哀。我们岂不知道那时的大俄罗斯帝国也正在侵略中国，然而从文学里明白了一件大事，是世界上有两种人：压迫者和被压迫者！
It was then that I knew that Russian literature was our mentor and friend. Because from there, we can see the good souls, sorrows, and struggles of the oppressed; It also burns hope with the works of the forties and feels sad with the works of the sixties. Don't we know that the Great Russian Empire was also invading China at that time, but we understand from literature that there are two kinds of people in the world: the oppressor and the oppressed!从现在看来，这是谁都明白，不足道的，但在那时，却是一个大发见，正不亚于古人的发见了火的可以照暗夜，煮东西。
From now on, everyone understands that this is insignificant, but at that time, it was a great discovery, no less than the ancients who discovered that fire can shine in the dark night and cook things.俄国的作品，渐渐的绍介进中国来了，同时也得了一部分读者的共鸣，只是传布开去。零星的译品且不说罢，成为大部的就有《俄国戏曲集》十种和《小说月报》增刊的《俄国文学研究》一大本，还有《被压迫民族文学号》两本，则是由俄国文学的启发，而将范围扩大到一切弱小民族，并且明明点出“被压迫”的字样来了。
Russian works gradually entered China, and at the same time, they also resonated with some readers, but they were just spread. Not to mention the sporadic translations, most of them are "Russian Opera Collection" and a large volume of "Russian Literary Studies" supplemented by "Novel Monthly", as well as two copies of "Literature of Oppressed Nations", which were inspired by Russian literature and expanded the scope to all weak ethnic groups, and clearly pointed out the word "oppressed".于是也遭了文人学士的讨伐，有的主张文学的“崇高”，说描写下等人是鄙俗的勾当，有的比创作为处女，说翻译不过是媒婆，而重译尤令人讨厌。的确，除了《俄国戏曲集》以外，那时所有的俄国作品几乎都是重译的。
As a result, they were also attacked by literati and scholars, some advocated the "sublime" of literature, saying that describing people was a vulgar act, and some were more virgins than creation, saying that translation was just a matchmaker, and retranslation was particularly annoying. Indeed, with the exception of the "Russian Opera Collection", almost all Russian works at that time were retranslated.但俄国文学只是绍介进来，传布开去。
But Russian literature was only introduced and spread.作家的名字知道得更多了，我们虽然从安特来夫（L. Andreev）的作品里遇到了恐怖，阿尔志跋绥夫（M. Artsybashev）的作品里看见了绝望和荒唐，但也从珂罗连珂（V. Korolenko）学得了宽宏，从戈理基（Maxim Gorky）感受了反抗。读者大众的共鸣和热爱，早不是几个论客的自私的曲说所能掩蔽，这伟力，终于使先前膜拜曼殊斐儿（Katherine Mansfield）的绅士也重译了都介涅夫的《父与子》，排斥“媒婆”的作家也重译着托尔斯泰的《战争与和平》了。
The name of the writer is known better, although we know it from L. Andreev's work encounters horror, and M. Artsybashev's work shows despair and absurdity, but it also shows the difference between V. Korolenko and V. Korolenko) learned magnanimity and felt resistance from Maxim Gorky. The resonance and love of the readers and the masses could no longer be covered up by the selfish distortions of a few commentators, and this great power finally made the gentlemen who had previously worshipped Katherine Mansfield retranslate Dugehnev's "Fathers and Sons", and the writers who rejected the "matchmaker" also retranslated Tolstoy's "War and Peace".这之间，自然又遭了文人学士和流氓警犬的联军的讨伐。对于绍介者，有的说是为了卢布，有的说是意在投降，有的笑为“破锣”，有的指为共党，而实际上的对于书籍的禁止和没收，还因为是秘密的居多，无从列举。
In the meantime, it was naturally attacked by the coalition of literati scholars and rogue police dogs. For those who introduce, some say it is for rubles, some say it is intended to surrender, some laugh at it as "broken gong", some refer to it as the Communist Party, and the actual ban and confiscation of books are mostly secret, so it is impossible to enumerate.但俄国文学只是绍介进来，传布开去。
But Russian literature was only introduced and spread.有些人们，也译了《莫索里尼传》，也译了《希特拉传》，但他们绍介不出一册现代意国或德国的白色的大作品，《战后》是不属于希特拉的卐字旗下的，《死的胜利》又只好以“死”自傲。但苏联文学在我们却已有了里培进斯基的《一周间》，革拉特珂夫的《士敏土》，法捷耶夫的《毁灭》，绥拉菲摩微支的《铁流》；此外中篇短篇，还多得很。凡这些，都在御用文人的明枪暗箭之中，大踏步跨到读者大众的怀里去，给一一知道了变革，战斗，建设的辛苦和成功。
Some people also translated "The Biography of Mussolini" and "The Biography of Hitler", but they could not produce a large volume of white works in modern Italy or Germany, "After the War" did not belong to Hitler's swastika, and "The Victory of Death" had to be proud of "death". But Soviet literature already has Lipekinsky's "Between a Week", Gratkov's "Smintu", Fadeev's "Destruction", and Suirafimo Weizhi's "Iron Flow"; In addition, there are many short novellas. All of these are in the open and hidden arrows of the imperial literati, and they have strode into the arms of the readers and the public, and have known the hard work and success of change, battle, and construction one by one.但一月以前，对于苏联的“舆论”，刹时都转变了，昨夜的魔鬼，今朝的良朋，许多报章，总要提起几点苏联的好处，有时自然也涉及文艺上：“复交”之故也。然而，可祝贺的却并不在这里。自利者一淹在水里面，将要灭顶的时候，只要抓得着，是无论“破锣”破鼓，都会抓住的，他决没有所谓“洁癖”。然而无论他终于灭亡或幸而爬起，始终还是一个自利者。随手来举一个例子罢，上海称为“大报”的《申报》，不是一面甜嘴蜜舌的主张着“组织苏联考察团”（三二年十二月二十八日时评），而一面又将林克多的《苏联闻见录》称为“反动书籍”（同二十七日新闻）么？
But before a month, the "public opinion" of the Soviet Union changed in an instant, and the devil of last night, the good friends of today, and many newspapers always mentioned a few points of the benefits of the Soviet Union, and sometimes it naturally involved literary and artistic reasons: "re-enactment of diplomatic relations". However, the congratulations are not here. When a self-interested person is drowning in the water and is about to perish, as long as he can catch it, he will catch it no matter whether he "breaks the gong" or the drum, and he will never have the so-called "cleanliness fetish". However, whether he finally perished or fortunately rose up, he was still a self-interested person. To give an example, didn't the "Declaration" called "Big News" in Shanghai sweetly advocate "organizing a Soviet delegation" (Times Review on December 28, 32), and on the other hand, called Linkdor's "Soviet News and Observations" a "reactionary book" (same as the news on the 27th)?可祝贺的，是在中俄的文字之交，开始虽然比中英，中法迟，但在近十年中，两国的绝交也好，复交也好，我们的读者大众却不因此而进退；译本的放任也好，禁压也好，我们的读者也决不因此而盛衰。不但如常，而且扩大；不但虽绝交和禁压还是如常，而且虽绝交和禁压而更加扩大。这可见我们的读者大众，是一向不用自私的“势利眼”来看俄国文学的。我们的读者大众，在朦胧中，早知道这伟大肥沃的“黑土”里，要生长出什么东西来，而这“黑土”却也确实生长了东西，给我们亲见了：忍受，呻吟，挣扎，反抗，战斗，变革，战斗，建设，战斗，成功。
What can be congratulated is that although the writing friendship between China and Russia began later than China, Britain, China and France, in the past ten years, whether the two countries have broken off diplomatic relations or resumed diplomatic relations, our readers and the public have not been forced to advance or retreat because of this; Whether the translation is laissez-faire or suppressed, our readers will never prosper or decline because of this. Not only as usual, but also expanded; Not only is it still the same as usual, but it has been further expanded despite the severance of diplomatic relations and the ban. This shows that our readers have never looked at Russian literature without selfish "snobbery". Our readers, in the haze, already know what will grow in this great and fertile "black soil", but this "black soil" has indeed grown something, and we have seen it with our own eyes: enduring, groaning, struggling, resisting, fighting, changing, fighting, building, fighting, and succeeding.在现在，英国的萧，法国的罗兰，也都成为苏联的朋友了。这，也是当我们中国和苏联在历来不断的“文字之交”的途中，扩大而与世界结成真的“文字之交”的开始。
Now, Xiao of Britain and Roland of France have also become friends of the Soviet Union. This is also the beginning of the "literary friendship" between China and the Soviet Union that has been expanding and forming a real "friendship with the world" on the way of continuous "literary friendship".这是我们应该祝贺的。
This is something we should congratulate.十二月三十日。
December 30th.

一九三三年

一九三三年

一九三三年

In 1933

听说梦

听说梦

听说梦

Hear about dreams做梦，是自由的，说梦，就不自由。做梦，是做真梦的，说梦，就难免说谎。
Dreaming is free, but dreaming is not free. Dreaming is a real dream, and if you say a dream, you will inevitably lie.大年初一，就得到一本《东方杂志》新年特大号，临末有“新年的梦想”，问的是“梦想中的未来中国”和“个人生活”，答的有一百四十多人。记者的苦心，我是明白的，想必以为言论不自由，不如来说梦，而且与其说所谓真话之假，不如来谈谈梦话之真，我高兴的翻了一下，知道记者先生却大大的失败了。
On the first day of the Lunar New Year, I got a New Year's extra large copy of "Oriental Magazine", and at the end of the year, there was a "New Year's Dream", asking about "Dream Future China" and "Personal Life", and more than 140 people answered. I understand the hard work of the reporter, I must think that speech is not free, it is better to talk about dreams, and instead of telling the so-called truth and falsehood, it is better to talk about the truth of dreams.当我还未得到这本特大号之前，就遇到过一位投稿者，他比我先看见印本，自说他的答案已被资本家删改了，他所说的梦其实并不如此。这可见资本家虽然还没法禁止人们做梦，而说了出来，倘为权力所及，却要干涉的，决不给你自由。这一点，已是记者的大失败。
Before I got this extra-large book, I met a contributor who saw the print before I did, and said that his answer had been edited by the capitalist, and that the dream he was talking about was not like that. This shows that although the capitalists have not yet forbidden people from dreaming, they have said that if they are within the reach of power, they will never give you freedom if they want to interfere. This is already a big failure for journalists.但我们且不去管这改梦案子，只来看写着的梦境罢，诚如记者所说，来答复的几乎全部是智识分子。首先，是谁也觉得生活不安定，其次，是许多人梦想着将来的好社会，“各尽所能”呀，“大同世界”呀，很有些“越轨”气息了（末三句是我添的，记者并没有说）。
But let's not worry about this dream change case, just look at the dream written, as the reporter said, almost all of the answers are intellectuals. First of all, no one feels that life is unstable, and secondly, many people dream of a good society in the future, "each doing their best", "Datong world", there is a bit of a "deviant" atmosphere (the last three sentences were added by me, the reporter did not say).但他后来就有点“痴”起来，他不知从那里拾来了一种学说，将一百多个梦分为两大类，说那些梦想好社会的都是“载道”之梦，是“异端”，正宗的梦应该是“言志”的，硬把“志”弄成一个空洞无物的东西。然而，孔子曰，“盍各言尔志”，而终于赞成曾点者，就因为其“志”合于孔子之“道”的缘故也。
But he later became a little "crazy", he picked up a doctrine from somewhere, divided more than a hundred dreams into two categories, saying that those who dream of a good society are all dreams of "carrying the way", which is "heresy", and the authentic dream should be "Yanzhi", and the "zhi" is made into an empty thing. However, Confucius said, "Why don't you say your own will", and finally agreed with Zeng Dian, because his "will" was in line with Confucius's "Tao".其实是记者的所以为“载道”的梦，那里面少得很。文章是醒着的时候写的，问题又近于“心理测验”，遂致对答者不能不做出各各适宜于目下自己的职业，地位，身分的梦来（已被删改者自然不在此例），即使看去好像怎样“载道”，但为将来的好社会“宣传”的意思，是没有的。所以，虽然梦“大家有饭吃”者有人，梦“无阶级社会”者有人，梦“大同世界”者有人，而很少有人梦见建设这样社会以前的阶级斗争，白色恐怖，轰炸，虐杀，鼻子里灌辣椒水，电刑……倘不梦见这些，好社会是不会来的，无论怎么写得光明，终究是一个梦，空头的梦，说了出来，也无非教人都进这空头的梦境里面去。
In fact, it is the dream of the reporter to "carry the way", and there are very few of them. The article was written in waking hours, and the questions were close to "psychological tests", so the respondents had to make dreams that were suitable for their current occupations, statuses, and identities (those who have been deleted are naturally not in this case). Therefore, although there are people who dream of "everyone has food", there are people who dream of "classless society", and there are people who dream of "Datong world", few people dream of building such a society before the class struggle, white terror, bombing, torture, pepper water in their noses, and electrocution...... If you don't dream of these, a good society will not come, no matter how brightly it is written, after all, it is a dream, an empty dream, and if you say it, it is nothing more than teaching people to enter this empty dream.然而要实现这“梦”境的人们是有的，他们不是说，而是做，梦着将来，而致力于达到这一种将来的现在。因为有这事实，这才使许多智识分子不能不说好像“载道”的梦，但其实并非“载道”，乃是给“道”载了一下，倘要简洁，应该说是“道载”的。
However, there are people who want to realize this "dream", they do not say, but do, dream of the future, and are committed to achieving this kind of future present. Because of this fact, many intellectuals cannot help but say that it is like a dream of "carrying the Dao", but in fact it is not "carrying the Dao", but carrying the "Dao".为什么会给“道载”呢？曰：为目前和将来的吃饭问题而已。
Why is it given to "Dao Zai"? The answer is: it is just a matter of eating now and in the future.我们还受着旧思想的束缚，一说到吃，就觉得近乎鄙俗。但我是毫没有轻视对答者诸公的意思的。《东方杂志》记者在《读后感》里，也曾引佛洛伊特的意见，以为“正宗”的梦，是“表现各人的心底的秘密而不带着社会作用的”。但佛洛伊特以被压抑为梦的根柢——人为什么被压抑的呢？这就和社会制度，习惯之类连结了起来，单是做梦不打紧，一说，一问，一分析，可就不妥当了。记者没有想到这一层，于是就一头撞在资本家的朱笔上。但引“压抑说”来释梦，我想，大家必已经不以为忤了罢。
We are still bound by old ideas, and when we talk about eating, we feel almost vulgar. But I have no intention of despising the respondents. In "Impressions After Reading", a reporter from "Oriental Magazine" also quoted Freud's opinion, believing that "authentic" dreams are "expressing the secrets of each person's heart without social effect". But Freud took repression as the root of his dream - why is man repressed? This is linked to social systems, habits, etc., and it is not appropriate to just dream, a word, a question, and an analysis. The reporter didn't expect this layer, so he hit the capitalist's red pen. But to quote the "repressive theory" to interpret the dream, I think everyone must have been disobedient.不过，佛洛伊特恐怕是有几文钱，吃得饱饱的罢，所以没有感到吃饭之难，只注意于性欲。有许多人正和他在同一境遇上，就也轰然的拍起手来。诚然，他也告诉过我们，女儿多爱父亲，儿子多爱母亲，即因为异性的缘故。然而婴孩出生不多久，无论男女，就尖起嘴唇，将头转来转去。莫非它想和异性接吻么？不，谁都知道：是要吃东西！
However, Freud probably had a few pennies and was full, so he didn't feel the difficulty of eating, and only paid attention to his sexual desire. Many people were in the same situation as him, and they also clapped their hands. True, he also told us that daughters love their fathers more and sons love their mothers more, that is, because of the opposite sex. However, not long after the baby was born, both men and women pucked their lips and turned their heads around. Could it be that it wants to kiss the opposite sex? No, everyone knows: it's about eating!食欲的根柢，实在比性欲还要深，在目下开口爱人，闭口情书，并不以为肉麻的时候，我们也大可以不必讳言要吃饭。因为是醒着做的梦，所以不免有些不真，因为题目究竟是“梦想”，而且如记者先生所说，我们是“物质的需要远过于精神的追求”了，所以乘着Censors（也引用佛洛伊特语）的监护好像解除了之际，便公开了一部分。其实也是在“梦中贴标语，喊口号”，不过不是积极的罢了，而且有些也许倒和表面的“标语”正相反。
The root of appetite is really deeper than sexual desire, and when we open our mouths to love people, close our mouths, and don't think that we are numb, we don't have to shy away from saying that we want to eat. Because it is a waking dream, it is inevitable that it is a little untrue, because the title is "dream", and as Mr. Reporter said, we are "material needs far more than spiritual pursuits", so we made part of it public when the guardianship of Censors (also quoting Freud) seemed to be lifted. In fact, it is also "sticking slogans and shouting slogans in dreams", but it is not positive, and some of them may be the opposite of the superficial "slogans".时代是这么变化，饭碗是这样艰难，想想现在和将来，有些人也只能如此说梦，同是小资产阶级（虽然也有人定我为“封建余孽”或“土著资产阶级”，但我自己姑且定为属于这阶级），很能够彼此心照，然而也无须秘而不宣的。
The times are so changing, the job is so difficult, thinking about the present and the future, some people can only dream like this, the same petty bourgeoisie (although some people have designated me as a "feudal remnant" or "indigenous bourgeoisie", but I myself have decided to belong to this class), I am very able to understand each other, but there is no need to keep it a secret.至于另有些梦为隐士，梦为渔樵，和本相全不相同的名人，其实也只是豫感饭碗之脆，而却想将吃饭范围扩大起来，从朝廷而至园林，由洋场及于山泽，比上面说过的那些志向要大得远，不过这里不来多说了。
As for some other celebrities who dream of being hermits, dreaming of being fishermen and woodcutters, and who are completely different from their true nature, in fact, they only feel the crispness of the rice bowl, but they want to expand the scope of eating, from the imperial court to the garden, from the foreign farm to the mountains and marshes, which is much bigger than the aspirations mentioned above, but I won't say more here.一月一日。
January 1st.

论“赴难”和“逃难”

论“赴难”和“逃难”

论“赴难”和“逃难”

On "going to trouble" and "fleeing"——寄《涛声》编辑的一封信
——A letter sent to the editor of "The Sound of the Waves"编辑先生：
Mr. Editor:我常常看《涛声》，也常常叫“快哉！”但这回见了周木斋先生那篇《骂人与自骂》，其中说北平的大学生“即使不能赴难，最低最低的限度也应不逃难”，而致慨于五四运动时代式锋芒之销尽，却使我如骨鲠在喉，不能不说几句话。因为我是和周先生的主张正相反，以为“倘不能赴难，就应该逃难”，属于“逃难党”的。
I often watch "The Sound of the Waves", and I often call it "Fast! But this time I saw Mr. Zhou Muzhai's article "Scolding and Self-Insulting", which said that college students in Peking "even if they cannot go to the disaster, they should not flee at the minimum limit", and lamented that the era-style edge of the May Fourth Movement was gone, but it made me feel like a bone in my throat, and I couldn't help but say a few words. Because I am the exact opposite of Mr. Zhou's proposition, I think that "if you can't go to the disaster, you should flee", which belongs to the "fleeing party".周先生在文章的末尾，“疑心是北京改为北平的应验”，我想，一半是对的。那时的北京，还挂着“共和”的假面，学生嚷嚷还不妨事；那时的执政，是昨天上海市十八团体为他开了“上海各界欢迎段公芝老大会”的段祺瑞先生，他虽然是武人，却还没有看过《莫索理尼传》。然而，你瞧，来了呀。有一回，对着请愿的学生毕毕剥剥的开枪了，兵们最爱瞄准的是女学生，这用精神分析学来解释，是说得过去的，尤其是剪发的女学生，这用整顿风俗的学说来解说，也是说得过去的。总之是死了一些“莘莘学子”。然而还可以开追悼会；还可以游行过执政府之门，大叫“打倒段祺瑞”。为什么呢？因为这时又还挂着“共和”的假面。然而，你瞧，又来了呀。现为党国大教授的陈源先生，在《现代评论》上哀悼死掉的学生，说可惜他们为几个卢布送了性命；《语丝》反对了几句，现为党国要人的唐有壬先生在《晶报》上发表一封信，说这些言动是受墨斯科的命令的。这实在已经有了北平气味了。
At the end of the article, Mr. Zhou said, "Doubt is the fulfillment of Beijing's change to Peiping", I think, half of it is right. At that time, Beijing still had the mask of "republic", and students shouted that it was okay; At that time, it was Mr. Duan Qirui, who held the "Shanghai Welcome Duan Gongzhi Old Conference" for him yesterday, although he was a martial artist, he had not yet read "The Biography of Mussolini". However, lo and behold, here it comes. Once, he shot at the petitioning students, and the soldiers' favorite target was female students, which was explained by psychoanalysis, which made sense, especially the female students who cut their hair, which was explained by the doctrine of rectifying customs, and it was also reasonable. In short, some "diligent students" died. However, a memorial service can also be held; You can also march past the gate of the ruling government, shouting "Down with Duan Qirui". Why? Because at this time, there was still a mask of "republic". However, lo and behold, here it is again. Mr. Chen Yuan, who is now a professor at the Party and State University, mourned the dead students in the "Modern Review", saying that it was a pity that they gave their lives for a few rubles; Mr. Tang Youren, who is now an important figure in the party and state, published a letter in the "Crystal Newspaper", saying that these words and actions were ordered by Musco. This really smells like Peking.后来，北伐成功了，北京属于党国，学生们就都到了进研究室的时代，五四式是不对了。为什么呢？因为这是很容易为“反动派”所利用的。为了矫正这种坏脾气，我们的政府，军人，学者，文豪，警察，侦探，实在费了不少的苦心。用诰谕，用刀枪，用书报，用煅炼，用逮捕，用拷问，直到去年请愿之徒，死的都是“自行失足落水”，连追悼会也不开的时候为止，这才显出了新教育的效果。
Later, the Northern Expedition was successful, Beijing belonged to the party-state, and the students all entered the era of entering the research room, and the May Fourth style was wrong. Why? Because this is easy for the "reactionaries" to exploit. In order to correct this bad temper, our government, soldiers, scholars, writers, police, and detectives have really spent a lot of painstaking efforts. With edicts, knives and guns, books and newspapers, with calcination, with arrest, with torture, until last year's petitioners, those who died "fell into the water on their own" and did not even hold a memorial service showed the effect of new education.倘使日本人不再攻榆关，我想，天下是太平了的，“必先安内而后可以攘外”。但可恨的是外患来得太快一点，太繁一点，日本人太不为中国诸公设想之故也，而且也因此引起了周先生的责难。
If the Japanese no longer attack Yuguan, I think the world is peaceful, "we must first settle the internal and then expel the outside." But the hateful thing is that the external troubles came too quickly and too complicated, and the Japanese did not think about the Chinese princes, and this also caused Mr. Zhou's criticism.看周先生的主张，似乎最好是“赴难”。不过，这是难的。倘使早先有了组织，经过训练，前线的军人力战之后，人员缺少了，副司令下令召集，那自然应该去的。无奈据去年的事实，则连火车也不能白坐，而况平日所学的又是债权论，土耳其文学史，最小公倍数之类。去打日本，一定打不过的。大学生们曾经和中国的兵警打过架，但是“自行失足落水”了，现在中国的兵警尚且不抵抗，大学生能抵抗么？我们虽然也看见过许多慷慨激昂的诗，什么用死尸堵住敌人的炮口呀，用热血胶住倭奴的刀枪呀，但是，先生，这是“诗”呵！事实并不这样的，死得比蚂蚁还不如，炮口也堵不住，刀枪也胶不住。孔子曰：“以不教民战，是谓弃之。”我并不全拜服孔老夫子，不过觉得这话是对的，我也正是反对大学生“赴难”的一个。
Looking at Mr. Zhou's proposition, it seems that it is best to "go to the disaster". However, it is difficult. If there had been an organization earlier, after training, and after the frontline soldiers fought, there was a shortage of personnel, and the deputy commander ordered it to be called, then it should naturally go. Unfortunately, according to last year's facts, even the train cannot be sitting in vain, and what I usually study is creditor's theory, Turkish literary history, and the least public multiple. If you go to Japan, you will definitely not be able to beat it. College students have fought with Chinese soldiers and police, but they have "fallen into the water on their own", and now China's soldiers and police are still not resisting, can college students resist? Although we have also seen many impassioned poems, what uses dead corpses to block the enemy's cannon muzzle, and uses blood to glue the swords and guns of Japanese slaves, but, sir, this is "poetry"! In fact, it is not like this, it dies worse than ants, the muzzle cannot be blocked, and the swords and guns cannot be glued. Confucius said, "To fight without teaching the people is to abandon them." "I don't fully admire Master Kong, but I think this is right, and I am also one of those who oppose college students' "going to trouble".那么，“不逃难”怎样呢？我也是完全反对。自然，现在是“敌人未到”的，但假使一到，大学生们将赤手空拳，骂贼而死呢，还是躲在屋里，以图幸免呢？我想，还是前一着堂皇些，将来也可以有一本烈士传。不过于大局依然无补，无论是一个或十万个，至多，也只能又向“国联”报告一声罢了。去年十九路军的某某英雄怎样杀敌，大家说得眉飞色舞，因此忘却了全线退出一百里的大事情，可是中国其实还是输了的。而况大学生们连武器也没有。现在中国的新闻上大登“满洲国”的虐政，说是不准私藏军器，但我们大中华民国人民来藏一件护身的东西试试看，也会家破人亡，——先生，这是很容易“为反动派所利用”的呵。
So, what about "not fleeing"? I am also completely opposed. Naturally, now it is "the enemy has not arrived", but if it arrives, the college students will die with their bare hands, scolding the thief, or hiding in the house in order to escape? I think that the previous one is more dignified, and there can be a biography of martyrs in the future. However, it is still useless to the overall situation, whether it is one or 100,000, at most, it can only be reported to the "League of Nations" again. Last year, everyone talked about how a certain hero of the 19th Route Army killed the enemy, so they forgot the big thing of withdrawing a hundred miles from the whole line, but China actually lost. Moreover, college students don't even have weapons. Now the Chinese news is full of the tyranny of "Manchukuo", saying that it is not allowed to privately hide weapons, but if we people of the Republic of China come to hide a protective thing to try, it will also ruin the family and people will be destroyed,—— Mr. Ah, this is easy to be "used by the reactionaries".施以狮虎式的教育，他们就能用爪牙，施以牛羊式的教育，他们到万分危急时还会用一对可怜的角。然而我们所施的是什么式的教育呢，连小小的角也不能有，则大难临头，惟有兔子似的逃跑而已。自然，就是逃也不见得安稳，谁都说不出那里是安稳之处来，因为到处繁殖了猎狗，诗曰：“趯趯毚兔，遇犬获之”，此之谓也。然则三十六计，固仍以“走”为上计耳。
With liger-like education, they can use their minions and teeth to educate cattle and sheep, and they will use a pair of poor horns when they are extremely critical. However, what kind of education do we give, even small horns cannot be used, then great disaster will come, and we can only run away like rabbits. Naturally, even if you escape, you may not be stable, no one can tell that it is a safe place, because hunting dogs are bred everywhere, and the poem says: "Run the rabbit, meet the dog and catch it", this is what it means. In this case, the thirty-six strategy is still the best strategy to "run".总之，我的意见是：我们不可看得大学生太高，也不可责备他们太重，中国是不能专靠大学生的；大学生逃了之后，却应该想想此后怎样才可以不至于单是逃，脱出诗境，踏上实地去。
In short, my opinion is: we should not look at college students too highly, nor should we blame them for being too heavy. After college students escape, they should think about how they can not just escape, escape from the poetic realm, and set foot on the field.但不知先生以为何如？能给在《涛声》上发表，以备一说否？谨听裁择，并请
I just don't know what you think. Can you give me a chance to publish it in "The Sound of the Waves" for a comment? I will listen to the judgment and request it文安。
Wen'an.罗怃顿首。一月二十八夜。
Luo Yun bowed. January 28 night.再：顷闻十来天之前，北平有学生五十多人因开会被捕，可见不逃的还有，然而罪名是“借口抗日，意图反动”，又可见虽“敌人未到”，也大以“逃难”为是也。
Again: It is said that more than ten days ago, more than 50 students in Peking were arrested for a meeting, which shows that there are still those who do not escape, but the charge is "under the pretext of resisting Japan and intending to reaction", which shows that although "the enemy has not arrived", it is also correct to "flee".二十九日补记。
Supplementary notes on the 29th.

学生和玉佛

学生和玉佛

学生和玉佛

Students and the Emerald Buddha一月二十八日《申报》号外载二十七日北平专电曰：“故宫古物即起运，北宁平汉两路已奉令备车，团城白玉佛亦将南运。”
一月二十八日《申报》号外载二十七日北平专电曰：“故宫古物即起运，北宁平汉两路已奉令备车，团城白玉佛亦将南运。 ”二十九日号外又载二十八日中央社电传教育部电平各大学，略曰：“据各报载榆关告紧之际，北平各大学中颇有逃考及提前放假等情，均经调查确实。查大学生为国民中坚份子，讵容妄自惊扰，败坏校规，学校当局迄无呈报，迹近宽纵，亦属非是。仰该校等迅将学生逃考及提前放假情形，详报核办，并将下学期上课日期，并报为要。”
On the 29th, the Central News Agency also reported that the Ministry of Education was able to level the universities on the 28th, which said: "According to various reports, when Yuguan was in a hurry, there were quite a few evasion and early holidays in the universities in Peking, all of which were confirmed after investigation. Cha college students are the backbone of the people, how can they be arrogant and disturb, corrupt school rules, and the school authorities have not reported it, and it is not right to be lenient. The school will quickly report the situation of students skipping exams and early holidays in detail, and report the class dates for the next semester as important. ”三十日，“堕落文人”周动轩先生见之，有诗叹曰：
三十日，“堕落文人”周动轩先生见之，有诗叹曰：寂寞空城在，仓皇古董迁，The lonely empty city is there, the antiques are moved in a hurry, 
头儿夸大口，面子靠中坚。 The head exaggerates, and the face relies on the backbone. 
惊扰讵云妄？奔逃只自怜： Is it a disturbance? Run away only self-pity: 
所嗟非玉佛，不值一文钱。 What I lament is not the Jade Buddha, it is not worth a penny.

为了忘却的记念

为了忘却的记念

为了忘却的记念

For the memory of oblivion一
One我早已想写一点文字，来记念几个青年的作家。这并非为了别的，只因为两年以来，悲愤总时时来袭击我的心，至今没有停止，我很想借此算是竦身一摇，将悲哀摆脱，给自己轻松一下，照直说，就是我倒要将他们忘却了。
I have long wanted to write a little to remember a few young writers. This is not for anything else, just because in the past two years, grief and anger have always attacked my heart, and it has not stopped so far, I really want to use this as a shaking of my body, getting rid of the sadness, and relaxing myself, to put it bluntly, I want to forget them.两年前的此时，即一九三一年的二月七日夜或八日晨，是我们的五个青年作家同时遇害的时候。当时上海的报章都不敢载这件事，或者也许是不愿，或不屑载这件事，只在《文艺新闻》上有一点隐约其辞的文章。那第十一期（五月二十五日）里，有一篇林莽先生作的《白莽印象记》，中间说：
At this time two years ago, on the night of February 7 or the morning of February 8, 1931, five of our young writers were killed at the same time. At that time, the newspapers in Shanghai did not dare to report this matter, or perhaps they were unwilling or disdainful to publish this matter, and only had a vague article in the "Literature and Art News". In the eleventh issue (May 25), there is an article written by Mr. Lin Mang "Impressions of Bai Mang", which says:“他做了好些诗，又译过匈牙利诗人彼得斐的几首诗，当时的《奔流》的编辑者鲁迅接到了他的投稿，便来信要和他会面，但他却是不愿见名人的人，结果是鲁迅自己跑来找他，竭力鼓励他作文学的工作，但他终于不能坐在亭子间里写，又去跑他的路了。不久，他又一次的被了捕。……”
He wrote many poems and translated several poems by the Hungarian poet Peter Fei, and Lu Xun, the editor of "Rush" at that time, received his submission and wrote to meet him, but he was a person who did not want to see celebrities, and as a result, Lu Xun came to him and tried his best to encourage him to do literary work, but he finally could not sit in the pavilion and write, and went his way again. Soon, he was arrested again. ……”这里所说的我们的事情其实是不确的。白莽并没有这么高慢，他曾经到过我的寓所来，但也不是因为我要求和他会面；我也没有这么高慢，对于一位素不相识的投稿者，会轻率的写信去叫他。我们相见的原因很平常，那时他所投的是从德文译出的《彼得斐传》，我就发信去讨原文，原文是载在诗集前面的，邮寄不便，他就亲自送来了。看去是一个二十多岁的青年，面貌很端正，颜色是黑黑的，当时的谈话我已经忘却，只记得他自说姓徐，象山人；我问他为什么代你收信的女士是这么一个怪名字（怎么怪法，现在也忘却了），他说她就喜欢起得这么怪，罗曼谛克，自己也有些和她不大对劲了。就只剩了这一点。
What we say here is actually untrue. Bai Mang was not so arrogant, he had come to my apartment, but not because I asked to meet him; I am not so arrogant, and I will write to a contributor I don't know to call him carelessly. The reason we met was very ordinary, at that time he submitted the "Biography of Peter Fei" translated from German, and I sent a letter to ask for the original text, which was published in front of the poetry collection, and it was inconvenient to mail, so he sent it himself. It seemed to be a young man in his twenties, with a very upright appearance and a black color, and I have forgotten the conversation at that time, only remembering that he said that his surname was Xu, a native of Xiangshan; I asked him why the lady who received the letter on your behalf had such a strange name (how strange it was, I have forgotten it now), and he said that she likes to act so strangely, Roman Dike, and he has a little bit of a problem with her. That's all that remains.夜里，我将译文和原文粗粗的对了一遍，知道除几处误译之外，还有一个故意的曲译。他像是不喜欢“国民诗人”这个字的，都改成“民众诗人”了。第二天又接到他一封来信，说很悔和我相见，他的话多，我的话少，又冷，好像受了一种威压似的。我便写一封回信去解释，说初次相会，说话不多，也是人之常情，并且告诉他不应该由自己的爱憎，将原文改变。因为他的原书留在我这里了，就将我所藏的两本集子送给他，问他可能再译几首诗，以供读者的参看。他果然译了几首，自己拿来了，我们就谈得比第一回多一些。这传和诗，后来就都登在《奔流》第二卷第五本，即最末的一本里。
At night, I roughly matched the translation with the original text, and knew that in addition to a few mistranslations, there was also a deliberate mistranslation. He didn't seem to like the word "national poet", so he changed it to "people's poet". The next day, I received another letter from him, saying that he regretted meeting me, he talked a lot, I talked little, and it was cold, as if he was under a kind of coercion. I wrote a reply letter to explain, saying that it was human nature to meet for the first time and not talk much, and told him that he should not change the original text because of his own love and hate. Because his original book was left with me, I gave him the two collections I had in my collection and asked him if he might translate a few more poems for readers' reference. He really translated a few songs, brought them himself, and we talked more than the first time. This biography and poem were later published in the fifth book of the second volume of "Ben Liu", that is, the last book.我们第三次相见，我记得是在一个热天。有人打门了，我去开门时，来的就是白莽，却穿着一件厚棉袍，汗流满面，彼此都不禁失笑。这时他才告诉我他是一个革命者，刚由被捕而释出，衣服和书籍全被没收了，连我送他的那两本；身上的袍子是从朋友那里借来的，没有夹衫，而必须穿长衣，所以只好这么出汗。我想，这大约就是林莽先生说的“又一次的被了捕”的那一次了。
The third time we met, I remember it was on a hot day. Someone knocked on the door, and when I went to open the door, it was Bai Mang, but he was wearing a thick cotton robe, sweating profusely, and we couldn't help but laugh at each other. Only then did he tell me that he was a revolutionary, who had just been released from his arrest, and all his clothes and books were confiscated, including the two books I gave him; The robe on his body was borrowed from a friend, and he had to wear a long jacket, so he had to sweat like this. I think this is about the time when Mr. Lin Mang said that he was "arrested again".我很欣幸他的得释，就赶紧付给稿费，使他可以买一件夹衫，但一面又很为我的那两本书痛惜：落在捕房的手里，真是明珠投暗了。那两本书，原是极平常的，一本散文，一本诗集，据德文译者说，这是他搜集起来的，虽在匈牙利本国，也还没有这么完全的本子，然而印在《莱克朗氏万有文库》（Reclam’s Universal-Bibliothek）中，倘在德国，就随处可得，也值不到一元钱。不过在我是一种宝贝，因为这是三十年前，正当我热爱彼得斐的时候，特地托丸善书店从德国去买来的，那时还恐怕因为书极便宜，店员不肯经手，开口时非常惴惴。后来大抵带在身边，只是情随事迁，已没有翻译的意思了，这回便决计送给这也如我的那时一样，热爱彼得斐的诗的青年，算是给它寻得了一个好着落。所以还郑重其事，托柔石亲自送去的。谁料竟会落在“三道头”之类的手里的呢，这岂不冤枉！
I was very happy that he was released, so I quickly paid the manuscript fee so that he could buy a jacket, but on the other hand, I deplored my two books: they fell into the hands of the capture room, which was really a pearl in the dark. The two books, originally very ordinary, were an essay and a collection of poems, according to the German translator, which he had collected, although in Hungary itself, there was no such complete book, but printed in Reclam's Universal-Bibliothek, if in Germany, it was available everywhere, and it was worth less than a dollar. But for me, it was a kind of treasure, because thirty years ago, when I was in love with Peter Fei, I specially asked Maruzen Bookstore to buy it from Germany. Later, I probably took it with me, but my feelings changed with the situation, and there was no meaning of translation, so this time I decided to give it to this young man who loved Peter Fei's poems, just like I did at that time, which was a good place for it. So he also solemnly sent it to Roushi himself. Who would have thought that it would fall into the hands of the "three heads" and the like, wouldn't this be unjust!

为了忘却的记念

二

为了忘却的记念

Two我的决不邀投稿者相见，其实也并不完全因为谦虚，其中含着省事的分子也不少。由于历来的经验，我知道青年们，尤其是文学青年们，十之九是感觉很敏，自尊心也很旺盛的，一不小心，极容易得到误解，所以倒是故意回避的时候多。见面尚且怕，更不必说敢有托付了。但那时我在上海，也有一个惟一的不但敢于随便谈笑，而且还敢于托他办点私事的人，那就是送书去给白莽的柔石。
I never invite contributors to meet, in fact, it is not entirely because of modesty, and there are many trouble-free elements in it. Because of my experience, I know that nine out of ten young people, especially literary youth, are very sensitive and have strong self-esteem. I'm afraid to meet, let alone dare to entrust me. But at that time, I was in Shanghai, and there was only one person who not only dared to talk and laugh casually, but also dared to ask him to do some personal matters, that is, to send books to Bai Mang's Rou Shi.我和柔石最初的相见，不知道是何时，在那里。他仿佛说过，曾在北京听过我的讲义，那么，当在八九年之前了。我也忘记了在上海怎么来往起来，总之，他那时住在景云里，离我的寓所不过四五家门面，不知怎么一来，就来往起来了。大约最初的一回他就告诉我是姓赵，名平复。但他又曾谈起他家乡的豪绅的气焰之盛，说是有一个绅士，以为他的名字好，要给儿子用，叫他不要用这名字了。所以我疑心他的原名是“平福”，平稳而有福，才正中乡绅的意，对于“复”字却未必有这么热心。他的家乡，是台州的宁海，这只要一看他那台州式的硬气就知道，而且颇有点迂，有时会令我忽而想到方孝孺，觉得好像也有些这模样的。
When I first met Rou Shi, I don't know when and where I was. He seemed to have said that he had heard my handouts in Beijing, so it should have been eight or nine years ago. I also forgot how I came and went in Shanghai, in short, he lived in Jingyun at that time, only four or five facades away from my apartment, and somehow he came and went. About the first time he told me that his surname was Zhao and his name was Pingfu. But he also talked about the arrogance of the gentry in his hometown, saying that there was a gentleman who thought his name was good and wanted to use it for his son, and told him not to use this name. So I suspect that his original name was "Pingfu", which was stable and blessed, which was exactly what the squire meant, but he might not be so enthusiastic about the word "Fu". His hometown is Ninghai, Taizhou, which can be known just by looking at his Taizhou-style toughness, and it is quite pedantic, sometimes I suddenly think of Fang Xiaoru, and I feel that there is something like this.他躲在寓里弄文学，也创作，也翻译，我们往来了许多日，说得投合起来了，于是另外约定了几个同意的青年，设立朝华社。目的是在绍介东欧和北欧的文学，输入外国的版画，因为我们都以为应该来扶植一点刚健质朴的文艺。接着就印《朝花旬刊》，印《近代世界短篇小说集》，印《艺苑朝华》，算都在循着这条线，只有其中的一本《蕗谷虹儿画选》，是为了扫荡上海滩上的“艺术家”，即戳穿叶灵凤这纸老虎而印的。
He hid in his apartment to do literature, also create, and translated, and we exchanged for many days, and we agreed, so we agreed with a few young people who agreed to set up the Chaohua Society. The purpose is to introduce the literature of Eastern Europe and Northern Europe, and import foreign prints, because we all think that we should cultivate a little strong and simple literature and art. Then they printed "Chaohua Periodicals", "Collection of Short Stories in the Modern World", and "Yiyuan Chaohua", all of which were all along this line, and only one of them, "Selected Paintings of Wugu Hong'er", was printed to sweep away the "artists" on the beach, that is, to pierce through Ye Lingfeng's paper tiger.然而柔石自己没有钱，他借了二百多块钱来做印本。除买纸之外，大部分的稿子和杂务都是归他做，如跑印刷局，制图，校字之类。可是往往不如意，说起来皱着眉头。看他旧作品，都很有悲观的气息，但实际上并不然，他相信人们是好的。我有时谈到人会怎样的骗人，怎样的卖友，怎样的吮血，他就前额亮晶晶的，惊疑地圆睁了近视的眼睛，抗议道，“会这样的么？——不至于此罢？……”
However, Rou Shi himself had no money, so he borrowed more than 200 yuan to make prints. In addition to buying paper, most of the manuscripts and miscellaneous tasks are done by him, such as running a printing office, drafting, proofreading, etc. But it is often unsatisfactory, and it is frowned upon when it is said. Looking at his old works, they are very pessimistic, but in fact they are not, he believes that people are good. Sometimes I talk about how people can deceive, what kind of betrayal, and how they suck blood, and his forehead is shining, and his myopic eyes widen in surprise, and he protested, "Is this so?" - Won't it end there? ……”不过朝花社不久就倒闭了，我也不想说清其中的原因，总之是柔石的理想的头，先碰了一个大钉子，力气固然白化，此外还得去借一百块钱来付纸账。后来他对于我那“人心惟危”说的怀疑减少了，有时也叹息道，“真会这样的么？……”但是，他仍然相信人们是好的。
However, the Chaohua Society soon went bankrupt, and I don't want to explain the reason, in short, it was Rou Shi's ideal head, first touched a big nail, and the strength was albinotic, and he had to borrow a hundred yuan to pay the paper bill. Later, his doubts about my "people's hearts are in danger" decreased, and sometimes he sighed, "Is this really going to happen?" ...... "However, he still believes that people are good.他于是一面将自己所应得的朝花社的残书送到明日书店和光华书局去，希望还能够收回几文钱，一面就拚命的译书，准备还借款，这就是卖给商务印书馆的《丹麦短篇小说集》和戈理基作的长篇小说《阿尔泰莫诺夫之事业》。但我想，这些译稿，也许去年已被兵火烧掉了。
He then sent the remaining books of the Chaohua Society to Tomorrow Bookstore and Guanghua Bookstore that he deserved, hoping to recover a few pennies, and on the other hand, he desperately translated the books and prepared to repay the loan, which was the "Danish Short Story Collection" sold to the Commercial Press and the novel "The Cause of Artemonov" written by Gorici. But I think these translations may have been burned down last year.他的迂渐渐的改变起来，终于也敢和女性的同乡或朋友一同去走路了，但那距离，却至少总有三四尺的。这方法很不好，有时我在路上遇见他，只要在相距三四尺前后或左右有一个年青漂亮的女人，我便会疑心就是他的朋友。但他和我一同走路的时候，可就走得近了，简直是扶住我，因为怕我被汽车或电车撞死；我这面也为他近视而又要照顾别人担心，大家都苍皇失措的愁一路，所以倘不是万不得已，我是不大和他一同出去的，我实在看得他吃力，因而自己也吃力。
He gradually changed, and finally dared to walk with his female fellow villagers or friends, but the distance was always at least three or four feet. This method is very bad, sometimes I meet him on the road, as long as there is a young and beautiful woman three or four feet away or left or right, I will suspect that it is his friend. But when he walked with me, he got closer, and he was holding me up, for he was afraid that I would be hit by a car or a tram; I am also worried about his myopia and having to take care of others, and everyone is worried all the way, so if it is not a last resort, I don't go out with him.无论从旧道德，从新道德，只要是损己利人的，他就挑选上，自己背起来。
No matter from the old morality or from the new morality, as long as it is harmful to oneself and benefiting others, he will choose it and memorize it himself.他终于决定地改变了，有一回，曾经明白的告诉我，此后应该转换作品的内容和形式。我说：这怕难罢，譬如使惯了刀的，这回要他耍棍，怎么能行呢？他简洁的答道：只要学起来！
He finally decided to change, and once, he clearly told me that the content and form of the work should be changed from now on. I said: This is afraid of difficulties, for example, if a person who is used to using a knife, how can he play with a stick this time? He replied succinctly: Just learn!他说的并不是空话，真也在从新学起来了，其时他曾经带了一个朋友来访我，那就是冯铿女士。谈了一些天，我对于她终于很隔膜，我疑心她有点罗曼谛克，急于事功；我又疑心柔石的近来要做大部的小说，是发源于她的主张的。但我又疑心我自己，也许是柔石的先前的斩钉截铁的回答，正中了我那其实是偷懒的主张的伤疤，所以不自觉地迁怒到她身上去了。——我其实也并不比我所怕见的神经过敏而自尊的文学青年高明。
What he said was not empty words, he was really learning anew, and at that time he once brought a friend to visit me, that is, Ms. Feng Keng. After talking for a while, I finally became very distant from her, and I suspected that she was a bit romantic, eager to do things; I also suspect that Rou Shi's recent novels originated from her ideas. But I was suspicious of myself, perhaps Rou Shi's previous categorical answer, which hit the scar of my claim that I was actually lazy, so I unconsciously vented my anger on her. ——In fact, I am not smarter than the neurotic and self-respecting literary youth I fear.她的体质是弱的，也并不美丽。
Her physique is weak and not beautiful.

为了忘却的记念

三

为了忘却的记念

Three直到左翼作家联盟成立之后，我才知道我所认识的白莽，就是在《拓荒者》上做诗的殷夫。有一次大会时，我便带了一本德译的，一个美国的新闻记者所做的中国游记去送他，这不过以为他可以由此练习德文，另外并无深意。然而他没有来。我只得又托了柔石。
It wasn't until the establishment of the Left-wing Writers' Union that I knew that Bai Mang was Yin Fu, who wrote poetry on "Pioneers". At one conference, I brought him a German translation of a Chinese travelogue written by an American journalist, but I thought he could practice German with it, and it didn't mean much. However, he did not come. I had to hold on to the soft stone again.但不久，他们竟一同被捕，我的那一本书，又被没收，落在“三道头”之类的手里了。
But soon, they were arrested together, and my book was confiscated again and fell into the hands of "three heads" and the like.

为了忘却的记念

四

为了忘却的记念

Four明日书店要出一种期刊，请柔石去做编辑，他答应了；书店还想印我的译著，托他来问版税的办法，我便将我和北新书局所订的合同，抄了一份交给他，他向衣袋里一塞，匆匆的走了。其时是一九三一年一月十六日的夜间，而不料这一去，竟就是我和他相见的末一回，竟就是我们的永诀。
Tomorrow the bookstore will publish a journal, ask Rou Shi to be the editor, and he agreed; The bookstore also wanted to print my translation, so I asked him to ask for royalties, so I copied a copy of the contract I signed with Beixin Bookstore and handed it to him, and he stuffed it into his pocket and left in a hurry. It was the night of January 16, 1931, but this time it was the last time I met him, and it was our eternal farewell.第二天，他就在一个会场上被捕了，衣袋里还藏着我那印书的合同，听说官厅因此正在找寻我。印书的合同，是明明白白的，但我不愿意到那些不明不白的地方去辩解。记得《说岳全传》里讲过一个高僧，当追捕的差役刚到寺门之前，他就“坐化”了，还留下什么“何立从东来，我向西方走”的偈子。这是奴隶所幻想的脱离苦海的惟一的好方法，“剑侠”盼不到，最自在的惟此而已。我不是高僧，没有涅槃的自由，却还有生之留恋，我于是就逃走。
The next day, he was arrested at a venue, and there was still my contract for printing books hidden in his pocket, and I heard that the government was looking for me. The contract for printing books is clear, but I don't want to go to those unclear places to defend myself. I remember that in "The Biography of Yue Quan", there was a high monk who "sat down" before the chasing servant arrived at the temple gate, and left behind a verse "He Li comes from the east, I go to the west". This is the only good way for slaves to escape from the sea of suffering, and the "swordsman" can't look forward to it, and that's the only thing he is most comfortable with. I am not a monk, I don't have the freedom of nirvana, but I still have nostalgia for life, so I ran away.这一夜，我烧掉了朋友们的旧信札，就和女人抱着孩子走在一个客栈里。不几天，即听得外面纷纷传我被捕，或是被杀了，柔石的消息却很少。有的说，他曾经被巡捕带到明日书店里，问是否是编辑；有的说，他曾经被巡捕带往北新书局去，问是否是柔石，手上上了铐，可见案情是重的。但怎样的案情，却谁也不明白。
That night, I burned my friends' old letters and walked in an inn with the woman holding the child. Within a few days, I heard rumors outside that I had been arrested or killed, but there was very little news about Rou Shi. Some said that he was once taken to Tomorrow's Bookstore by patrol and asked if he was an editor; Some said that he was once taken to the Beixin Bookstore by the patrol, asked if it was Rou Shi, and handcuffed his hands, which shows that the case is serious. But no one understands what kind of case it is.他在囚系中，我见过两次他写给同乡的信，第一回是这样的——
In his prison, I have seen his letters to his fellow villagers twice, the first time it was like this——“我与三十五位同犯（七个女的）于昨日到龙华。并于昨夜上了镣，开政治犯从未上镣之纪录。此案累及太大，我一时恐难出狱，书店事望兄为我代办之。现亦好，且跟殷夫兄学德文，此事可告周先生；望周先生勿念，我等未受刑。捕房和公安局，几次问周先生地址，但我那里知道。诸望勿念。祝好！
"I went to Longhua yesterday with 35 co-offenders (seven women). And last night he was shackled, setting a record that political prisoners have never been shackled. This case is too big, and I may not be able to get out of prison for a while, so I hope my brother will take care of the bookstore for me. Now it's good, and learn German from Brother Yinfu, you can tell Mr. Zhou about this; I hope Mr. Zhou will not think about it, we have not been punished. The arrest room and the public security bureau asked Mr. Zhou for his address several times, but I knew it there. Don't think about it. Best wishes!赵少雄　一月二十四日。”
Zhao Shaoxiong January 24. ”以上正面。
Above front.
“洋铁饭碗，要二三只
"Foreign iron rice bowls, two or three如不能见面，可将东西
If you can't meet face-to-face, you can bring something to me望转交赵少雄”
I hope to pass it on to Zhao Shaoxiong."
以上背面。
The back of the above.他的心情并未改变，想学德文，更加努力；也仍在记念我，像在马路上行走时候一般。但他信里有些话是错误的，政治犯而上镣，并非从他们开始，但他向来看得官场还太高，以为文明至今，到他们才开始了严酷。其实是不然的。果然，第二封信就很不同，措词非常惨苦，且说冯女士的面目都浮肿了，可惜我没有抄下这封信。其时传说也更加纷繁，说他可以赎出的也有，说他已经解往南京的也有，毫无确信；而用函电来探问我的消息的也多起来，连母亲在北京也急得生病了，我只得一一发信去更正，这样的大约有二十天。
His mood has not changed, he wants to learn German and work harder; I am still remembering me, as if I were walking on the road. But some of the words in his letter were wrong, and the shackles of political prisoners did not start with them, but he always looked at the officialdom too high, thinking that civilization had not yet begun to be harsh. In fact, it is not. Sure enough, the second letter was very different, the wording was very miserable, and it was said that Ms. Feng's face was swollen, but unfortunately I did not copy the letter. At that time, the legends were even more complicated, some said that he could redeem him, and some said that he had been sent to Nanjing, without any certainty; And there were more people who used letters and telegrams to inquire about my news, and even my mother was so anxious that she was sick in Beijing, so I had to send letters to correct them one by one, which lasted about twenty days.天气愈冷了，我不知道柔石在那里有被褥不？我们是有的。洋铁碗可曾收到了没有？……但忽然得到一个可靠的消息，说柔石和其他二十三人，已于二月七日夜或八日晨，在龙华警备司令部被枪毙了，他的身上中了十弹。
The weather is getting colder, I don't know if Roushi has bedding there? We do. Have you ever received a foreign iron bowl? …… But suddenly I got reliable news that Rou Shi and 23 others had been shot dead at the Longhua Garrison Headquarters on the night of February 7 or 8, and he had been shot ten times.原来如此！……
I see! ……在一个深夜里，我站在客栈的院子中，周围是堆着的破烂的什物；人们都睡觉了，连我的女人和孩子。我沉重的感到我失掉了很好的朋友，中国失掉了很好的青年，我在悲愤中沉静下去了，然而积习却从沉静中抬起头来，凑成了这样的几句：
One late night, I stood in the courtyard of the inn, surrounded by a pile of rags; People are asleep, even my woman and children. I feel heavy that I have lost a good friend, China has lost a good youth, and I have calmed down in grief and anger, but Ji Xi raised his head from the silence and made up a few sentences:惯于长夜过春时，挈妇将雏鬓有丝。Accustomed to spending the long night in spring, I lead my wife to bring the young hair to the hair. 
梦里依稀慈母泪，城头变幻大王旗。 In the dream, there are faint tears of a loving mother, and the king's flag changes at the top of the city. 
忍看朋辈成新鬼，怒向刀丛觅小诗。 I can't bear to see my peers become new ghosts, angrily looking for a poem in the knife bush. 
吟罢低眉无写处，月光如水照缁衣。 After reciting the poem, I lowered my eyebrows and had nowhere to write, and the moonlight was like water shining on my black clothes.
但末二句，后来不确了，我终于将这写给了一个日本的歌人。
But the last two sentences were later inaccurate, and I finally wrote this to a Japanese poet.可是在中国，那时是确无写处的，禁锢得比罐头还严密。我记得柔石在年底曾回故乡，住了好些时，到上海后很受朋友的责备。他悲愤的对我说，他的母亲双眼已经失明了，要他多住几天，他怎么能够就走呢？我知道这失明的母亲的眷眷的心，柔石的拳拳的心。当《北斗》创刊时，我就想写一点关于柔石的文章，然而不能够，只得选了一幅珂勒惠支（Käthe Kollwitz）夫人的木刻，名曰《牺牲》，是一个母亲悲哀地献出她的儿子去的，算是只有我一个人心里知道的柔石的记念。
But in China, there was really no place to write at that time, and the confinement was tighter than canning. I remember that Rou Shi returned to his hometown at the end of the year, lived for a long time, and was very reproached by his friends after arriving in Shanghai. He told me sadly and indignantly that his mother was blind and asked him to stay a few more days, how could he leave? I know the heart of this blind mother, the heart of Rou Shi. When Beidou was launched, I wanted to write a little about Roushi, but I couldn't, so I had to choose a woodcut by Mrs. Käthe Kollwitz, called "Sacrifice", which was a mother who sadly sacrificed her son to her, which is a memory of Roushi that only I know in my heart.同时被难的四个青年文学家之中，李伟森我没有会见过，胡也频在上海也只见过一次面，谈了几句天。较熟的要算白莽，即殷夫了，他曾经和我通过信，投过稿，但现在寻起来，一无所得，想必是十七那夜统统烧掉了，那时我还没有知道被捕的也有白莽。然而那本《彼得斐诗集》却在的，翻了一遍，也没有什么，只在一首《Wahlspruch》（格言）的旁边，有钢笔写的四行译文道：
Among the four young writers who were killed at the same time, I did not meet Li Weisen, and Hu Yepin only met once in Shanghai and talked for a few days. The more familiar one is Bai Mang, that is, Yin Fu, who once wrote to me and submitted a manuscript, but now I found nothing, presumably it was all burned on the night of the seventeenth, and I didn't know that Bai Mang was also arrested at that time. However, the "Peter Fei Poems" was there, and when I flipped through it, there was nothing, only a four-line translation written in pen next to a "Wahlspruch" (aphorism):“生命诚宝贵，"Life is precious, 
爱情价更高； love is more expensive; 
若为自由故， If it's for the sake of freedom, 
二者皆可抛！” can be thrown away! ”
又在第二叶上，写着“徐培根”三个字，我疑心这是他的真姓名。
On the second leaf, the words "Xu Bacon" were written, and I suspected that this was his real name.

为了忘却的记念

五

为了忘却的记念

Five前年的今日，我避在客栈里，他们却是走向刑场了；去年的今日，我在炮声中逃在英租界，他们则早已埋在不知那里的地下了；今年的今日，我才坐在旧寓里，人们都睡觉了，连我的女人和孩子。我又沉重的感到我失掉了很好的朋友，中国失掉了很好的青年，我在悲愤中沉静下去了，不料积习又从沉静中抬起头来，写下了以上那些字。
On this day the year before last, I hid in the inn, but they went to the execution ground; On this day last year, I fled to the British Concession under the sound of artillery, and they were already buried underground without knowing where they were; On this day this year, I was sitting in my old apartment, and everyone was sleeping, including my woman and children. I felt heavy that I had lost a good friend, China had lost a good youth, and I fell silent in grief and anger, but unexpectedly Ji Xi raised his head from the silence and wrote the above words.要写下去，在中国的现在，还是没有写处的。年青时读向子期《思旧赋》，很怪他为什么只有寥寥的几行，刚开头却又煞了尾。然而，现在我懂得了。
If you want to write it, there is still no place to write it in China now. When I was young, I read Xiang Ziqi's "Nostalgia for the Past", and I wondered why he only had a few lines, but at the beginning but at the end. However, now I understand.不是年青的为年老的写记念，而在这三十年中，却使我目睹许多青年的血，层层淤积起来，将我埋得不能呼吸，我只能用这样的笔墨，写几句文章，算是从泥土中挖一个小孔，自己延口残喘，这是怎样的世界呢。夜正长，路也正长，我不如忘却，不说的好罢。但我知道，即使不是我，将来总会有记起他们，再说他们的时候的。……
It is not that the young write memories for the old, but in the past thirty years, I have witnessed the blood of many young people, layer by layer, burying me so that I can't breathe. The night is long, and the road is long, so I might as well forget it and not say it. But I know that even if it is not me, there will always be times when I will remember them and talk about them in the future. ……二月七——八日。
February 7-8.

谁的矛盾

谁的矛盾

谁的矛盾

Whose contradiction萧（George Bernard Shaw）并不在周游世界，是在历览世界上新闻记者们的嘴脸，应世界上新闻记者们的口试，——然而落了第。
George Bernard Shaw is not traveling the world, but is looking at the faces of journalists around the world, and he failed ,—— the oral examination of journalists around the world.他不愿意受欢迎，见新闻记者，却偏要欢迎他，访问他，访问之后，却又都多少讲些俏皮话。
He didn't want to be popular, and when he met a journalist, he wanted to welcome him, interview him, and after the interview, he said some witty things.他躲来躲去，却偏要寻来寻去，寻到之后，大做—通文章，却偏要说他自己善于登广告。
He hid around, but he wanted to look around, and after finding it, he made a big fuss, but he wanted to say that he was good at advertising.他不高兴说话，偏要同他去说话，他不多谈，偏要拉他来多谈，谈得多了，报上又不敢照样登载了，却又怪他多说话。
He was not happy to speak, but wanted to talk to him, he didn't talk much, but wanted to pull him to talk more, talked too much, and didn't dare to publish it in the newspaper, but blamed him for talking more.他说的是真话，偏要说他是在说笑话，对他哈哈的笑，还要怪他自己倒不笑。
He was telling the truth, but he was telling a joke, laughing at him, and blaming himself for not laughing.他说的是直话，偏要说他是讽刺，对他哈哈的笑，还要怪他自以为聪明。
He said bluntly, but he was sarcastic, laughed at him, and blamed him for thinking he was smart.他本不是讽刺家，偏要说他是讽刺家，而又看不起讽刺家，而又用了无聊的讽刺想来讽刺他一下。
He was not a satirist, but he wanted to say that he was a satirist, and he looked down on the satirist, and used boring satire to satirize him.他本不是百科全书，偏要当他百科全书，问长问短，问天问地，听了回答，又鸣不平，好像自己原来比他还明白。
He is not an encyclopedia, but he wants to be his encyclopedia, asking long and short questions, asking heaven and earth, listening to the answers, and complaining, as if he understands better than him.他本是来玩玩的，偏要逼他讲道理，讲了几句，听的又不高兴了，说他是来“宣传赤化”了。
He was here to play, but he wanted to force him to be reasonable, and after a few words, he was unhappy and said that he was here to "publicize red".有的看不起他，因为他不是一个马克思主义文学者，然而倘是马克思主义文学者，看不起他的人可就不要看他了。
Some look down on him because he is not a Marxist writer, but if he is a Marxist writer, those who look down on him should not look at him.有的看不起他，因为他不去做工人，然而倘若做工人，就不会到上海，看不起他的人可就看不见他了。
Some looked down on him because he didn't work as a worker, but if he was a worker, he wouldn't go to Shanghai, and those who looked down on him couldn't see him.有的又看不起他，因为他不是实行的革命者，然而倘是实行者，就会和牛兰一同关在牢监里，看不起他的人可就不愿提他了。
Some looked down on him, because he was not a revolutionary who practiced, but if he was a practitioner, he would be imprisoned with Niu Lan, and those who looked down on him would not want to mention him.他有钱，他偏讲社会主义，他偏不去做工，他偏来游历，他偏到上海，他偏讲革命，他偏谈苏联，他偏不给人们舒服……
He is rich, he talks about socialism, he doesn't work, he travels, he goes to Shanghai, he talks about revolution, he talks about the Soviet Union, he doesn't make people comfortable......于是乎可恶。
This is terrible.身子长也可恶，年纪大也可恶，须发白也可恶，不爱欢迎也可恶，逃避访问也可恶，连和夫人的感情好也可恶。
The long body is hateful, the old age is also hateful, the beard is gray is also hateful, the unwelcome is hateful, the avoidance of visits is also hateful, and even the relationship with the wife is hateful.然而他走了，这一位被人们公认为“矛盾”的萧。
However, he left, and this Xiao was recognized as a "contradiction".然而我想，还是熬一下子，姑且将这样的萧，当作现在的世界的文豪罢，唠唠叨叨，鬼鬼祟祟，是打不倒文豪的。而且为给大家可以唠叨起见，也还是有他在着的好。
However, I think it's better to stay up for a while, and treat such Xiao as a literary hero in the current world. And in order to give everyone a good opinion, it is still good to have him.因为矛盾的萧没落时，或萧的矛盾解决时，也便是社会的矛盾解决的时候，那可不是玩意儿也。
Because when the contradiction of Xiao declines, or when the contradiction of Xiao is resolved, it is also the time when the contradictions in society are resolved, and that is not a thing.二月十九夜。
February 19 night.

看萧和“看萧的人们”记

看萧和“看萧的人们”记

看萧和“看萧的人们”记

Look at Xiao and "People Who Watch Xiao"我是喜欢萧的。这并不是因为看了他的作品或传记，佩服得喜欢起来，仅仅是在什么地方见过一点警句，从什么人听说他往往撕掉绅士们的假面，这就喜欢了他了。还有一层，是因为中国也常有模仿西洋绅士的人物的，而他们却大抵不喜欢萧。被我自己所讨厌的人们所讨厌的人，我有时会觉得他就是好人物。
I like Xiao. This is not because I read his works or biographies, admire and like him, but because I have seen a little aphorism somewhere, and I have heard from someone that he often tears off the masks of gentlemen, which makes me like him. Another layer is because there are often characters who imitate Western gentlemen in China, but they probably don't like Xiao. People who are hated by people I hate, I sometimes feel like he is a good person.现在，这萧就要到中国来，但特地搜寻着去看一看的意思倒也并没有。
Now, this Xiao is about to come to China, but there is no intention to search for it to take a look.十六日的午后，内山完造君将改造社的电报给我看，说是去见一见萧怎么样。我就决定说，有这样地要我去见一见，那就见一见罢。
On the afternoon of the 16th, Uchiyama Wanzaojun showed me the telegram from the Renovation Society, saying that he was going to see Xiao. I decided to say that if I was asked to meet like this, then I would just meet him.十七日的早晨，萧该已在上海登陆了，但谁也不知道他躲着的处所。这样地过了好半天，好像到底不会看见似的。到了午后，得到蔡先生的信，说萧现就在孙夫人的家里吃午饭，教我赶紧去。
On the morning of the 17th, Xiao Gai had landed in Shanghai, but no one knew where he was hiding. After a long time like this, it seemed like I wouldn't see it at all. In the afternoon, I received a letter from Mr. Cai, saying that Xiao Xian was having lunch at Mrs. Sun's house and taught me to go quickly.我就跑到孙夫人的家里去。一走进客厅隔壁的一间小小的屋子里，萧就坐在圆桌的上首，和别的五个人在吃饭。因为早就在什么地方见过照相，听说是世界的名人的，所以便电光一般觉得是文豪，而其实是什么标记也没有。但是，雪白的须发，健康的血色，和气的面貌，我想，倘若作为肖像画的模范，倒是很出色的。
I ran to Mrs. Sun's house. As soon as he walked into a small room next to the living room, Xiao sat at the top of the round table and was eating with five other people. Because I have seen photos somewhere and heard that they are celebrities from all over the world, I generally think that Denguang is a literary master, but in fact there is no mark. However, the snow-white beard and hair, healthy blood, and kind appearance, I think, are excellent if they are used as a model of portraiture.午餐像是吃了一半了。是素菜，又简单。白俄的新闻上，曾经猜有无数的侍者，但只有一个厨子在搬菜。
I felt like I had eaten half of my lunch. It's a vegetarian dish and it's simple. On the news in Belarus, it was once guessed that there were countless waiters, but only one cook was moving the dishes.萧吃得并不多，但也许开始的时候，已经很吃了一通了也难说。到中途，他用起筷子来了，很不顺手，总是夹不住。然而令人佩服的是他竟逐渐巧妙，终于紧紧的夹住了一块什么东西，于是得意的遍看着大家的脸，可是谁也没有看见这成功。
Xiao didn't eat much, but maybe at the beginning, it was hard to say that he had already eaten a lot. Halfway through, he picked up his chopsticks, which was very uncomfortable and always couldn't be caught. However, what is admirable is that he gradually became clever, and finally clamped a piece of something tightly, so he looked at everyone's faces proudly, but no one saw this success.在吃饭时候的萧，我毫不觉得他是讽刺家。谈话也平平常常。例如说：朋友最好，可以久远的往还，父母和兄弟都不是自己自由选择的，所以非离开不可之类。
At dinner, I didn't think he was a satirist. The conversation was also ordinary. For example: friends are the best, they can be returned for a long time, parents and brothers are not freely chosen, so they must leave.午餐一完，照了三张相。并排一站，我就觉得自己的矮小了。虽然心里想，假如再年青三十年，我得来做伸长身体的体操……。
After lunch, I took three photos. Standing side by side, I felt short. Although I thought to myself, if I were thirty years younger, I would have to do gymnastics ...... to stretch my body.两点光景，笔会（Pen Club）有欢迎。也趁了摩托车一同去看时，原来是在叫作“世界学院”的大洋房里。走到楼上，早有为文艺的文艺家，民族主义文学家，交际明星，伶界大王等等，大约五十个人在那里了。合起围来，向他质问各色各样的事，好像翻检《大英百科全书》似的。
Two o'clock scenes, Pen Club (Pen Club) welcomes. When I went to see it on a motorcycle, it turned out to be in a large bungalow called "World Academy". Walking upstairs, there were about fifty people who had already been literary and artistic, nationalist writers, social stars, kings of the entertainment industry, etc. Gather around and ask him all kinds of things, as if flipping through the Encyclopedia Britannica.萧也演说了几句：诸君也是文士，所以这玩艺儿是全都知道的。至于扮演者，则因为是实行的，所以比起自己似的只是写写的人来，还要更明白。此外还有什么可说的呢。总之，今天就如看看动物园里的动物一样，现在已经看见了，这就可以了罢。云云。
Xiao also said a few words: You are also scribes, so you all know this trick. As for the actor, because it is practiced, it is better to understand it than someone who just writes like himself. What else is there to say? In short, today is like looking at the animals in the zoo, and now that you have seen them, that's enough. Yun Yun.大家都哄笑了，大约又以为这是讽刺。
Everyone laughed, probably thinking it was irony.也还有一点梅兰芳博士和别的名人的问答，但在这里，略之。
There is also a little Q&A between Dr. Mei Lanfang and other celebrities, but here, omitted.此后是将赠品送给萧的仪式。这是由有着美男子之誉的邵洵美君拿上去的，是泥土做的戏子的脸谱的小模型，收在一个盒子里。还有一种，听说是演戏用的衣裳，但因为是用纸包好了的，所以没有见。萧很高兴的接受了。据张若谷君后来发表出来的文章，则萧还问了几句话，张君也刺了他一下，可惜萧不听见云。但是，我实在也没有听见。
After that, there was a ceremony to give the gift to Xiao. This was taken by Shao Xunmeijun, who has a reputation as a beautiful man, and it was a small model of the actor's face made of clay, stored in a box. There is also a kind of clothes that I heard are for acting, but because they are wrapped in paper, I haven't seen them. Xiao happily accepted. According to Zhang Ruogujun's later published article, Xiao also asked a few words, and Zhang Jun also stabbed him, but unfortunately Xiao did not hear the clouds. But I really didn't hear it.有人问他菜食主义的理由。这时很有了几个来照照相的人，我想，我这烟卷的烟是不行的，便走到外面的屋子去了。
Someone asked him why he was a vegetarian. At this time, there were a few people who came to take pictures, and I thought, I couldn't smoke this cigarette, so I walked to the outside room.还有面会新闻记者的约束，三点光景便又回到孙夫人的家里来。早有四五十个人在等候了，但放进的却只有一半。首先是木村毅君和四五个文士，新闻记者是中国的六人，英国的一人，白俄一人，此外还有照相师三四个。
There was also the constraint of meeting with news reporters, and at three o'clock, he returned to Mrs. Sun's house. There were already forty or fifty people waiting, but only half of them were put in. First of all, there were Kimura Takeshi and four or five scribes, six journalists from China, one from Britain, one from Belarus, and three or four photographers.在后园的草地上，以萧为中心，记者们排成半圆阵，替代着世界的周游，开了记者的嘴脸展览会。萧又遇到了各色各样的质问，好像翻检《大英百科全书》似的。
On the grass in the back garden, with Xiao as the center, reporters lined up in a semicircle to replace the world's travels and held a reporter's face exhibition. Xiao encountered all kinds of questions, as if he was looking through the "Encyclopedia Britannica".萧似乎并不想多话。但不说，记者们是决不干休的，于是终于说起来了，说得一多，这回是记者那面的笔记的分量，就渐渐的减少了下去。
Xiao didn't seem to want to say more. But not to mention, the reporters will never stop, so they finally started talking, and after talking too much, the weight of the reporter's notes gradually decreased.我想，萧并不是真的讽刺家，因为他就会说得那么多。
I think Xiao is not really a satirist, because he will say so much.试验是大约四点半钟完结的。萧好像已经很疲倦，我就和木村君都回到内山书店里去了。
The trial was completed at about half past four. Xiao seemed to be very tired, so Kimura-kun and I went back to the Uchiyama Bookstore.第二天的新闻，却比萧的话还要出色得远远。在同一的时候，同一的地方，听着同一的话，写了出来的记事，却是各不相同的。似乎英文的解释，也会由于听者的耳朵，而变换花样。例如，关于中国的政府罢，英字新闻的萧，说的是中国人应该挑选自己们所佩服的人，作为统治者；日本字新闻的萧，说的是中国政府有好几个；汉字新闻的萧，说的是凡是好政府，总不会得人民的欢心的。
The news the next day was far better than Xiao's words. At the same time, in the same place, listening to the same words, the notes written are different. It seems that the English interpretation will also change its pattern depending on the listener's ears. For example, about the Chinese government, Xiao of the English news, said that Chinese people should choose the person they admire as rulers; Xiao of Japanese Character News said that there are several Chinese governments; Xiao of Chinese Character News said that any good government will never win the favor of the people.从这一点看起来，萧就并不是讽刺家，而是一面镜。
From this point of view, Xiao is not a satirist, but a mirror.但是，在新闻上的对于萧的评论，大体是坏的。人们是各各去听自己所喜欢的，有益的讽刺去的，而同时也给听了自己所讨厌的，有损的讽刺。于是就各各用了讽刺来讽刺道，萧不过是一个讽刺家而已。
However, the comments on Xiao in the news are generally bad. People listen to their favorite and beneficial satire, and at the same time listen to the harmful satire they hate. So they each used sarcasm to satirize that Xiao was just a satirist.在讽刺竞赛这一点上，我以为还是萧这一面伟大。
In terms of satire competition, I think it is still Xiao's side that is great.我对于萧，什么都没有问；萧对于我，也什么都没有问。不料木村君却要我写一篇萧的印象记。别人做的印象记，我是常看的，写得仿佛一见便窥见了那人的真心一般，我实在佩服其观察之锐敏。至于自己，却连相书也没有翻阅过，所以即使遇见了名人罢，倘要我滔滔的来说印象，可就穷矣了。
I didn't ask anything about Xiao; Xiao didn't ask anything about me. Unexpectedly, Kimura-kun asked me to write an impression of Xiao. I often read the impressions made by others, and I wrote as if I had caught a glimpse of the person's sincerity at first sight, and I really admired his keen observation. As for myself, I haven't even read the photo book, so even if I meet a celebrity, if I talk about my impressions, I will be poor.但是，因为是特地从东京到上海来要我写的，我就只得寄一点这样的东西，算是一个对付。
However, because he came from Tokyo to Shanghai to ask me to write, I had to send a little of this, which was a deal.一九三三年二月二十三夜。
On the night of February 23, 1933.（三月二十五日，许霞译自《改造》四月特辑，更由作者校定。）
(On March 25, Xu Xia translated from the April special edition of "Transformation", and was edited by the author.) ）

《萧伯纳在上海》序

《萧伯纳在上海》序

《萧伯纳在上海》序

Preface to "George Bernard Shaw in Shanghai"现在的所谓“人”，身体外面总得包上一点东西，绸缎，毡布，纱葛都可以。就是穷到做乞丐，至少也得有一条破裤子；就是被称为野蛮人的，小肚前后也多有了一排草叶子。要是在大庭广众之前自己脱去了，或是被人撕去了，这就叫作不成人样子。
Nowadays, the so-called "people" always have to wrap something outside their bodies, such as satin, felt cloth, and gauze. Even if you are poor enough to be a beggar, you must have at least a pair of torn pants; Even if it is called a barbarian, there is also an extra row of grass leaves in front and behind the belly. If you take it off in front of the public, or if it is torn apart, it is called inhuman.虽然不像样，可是还有人要看，站着看的也有，跟着看的也有，绅士淑女们一齐掩住了眼睛，然而从手指缝里偷瞥几眼的也有，总之是要看看别人的赤条条，却小心着自己的整齐的衣裤。
Although it is not decent, there are still people who want to see, some stand and watch, and some follow them, gentlemen and ladies cover their eyes together, but there are also those who peek a few times through their fingers, in short, they want to see other people's naked strips, but they are careful about their own neat clothes.人们的讲话，也大抵包着绸缎以至草叶子的，假如将这撕去了，人们就也爱听，也怕听。因为爱，所以围拢来，因为怕，就特地给它起了一个对于自己们可以减少力量的名目，称说这类的话的人曰“讽刺家”。
People's speeches are mostly wrapped in silk and grass leaves, and if this is torn off, people will love to listen to it and are afraid to listen to it. Because of love, they gathered around, because they were afraid, so they specially gave it a name that they could reduce their strength, and called people who said such things "satirists".伯纳·萧一到上海，热闹得比泰戈尔还利害，不必说毕力涅克（Boris Pilniak）和穆杭（Paul Morand）了，我以为原因就在此。
As soon as Bernard Shaw arrived in Shanghai, it was more lively than Tagore, not to mention Boris Pilniak and Paul Morand, I thought this was the reason.还有一层，是“专制使人们变成冷嘲”，但这是英国的事情，古来只能“道路以目”的人们是不敢的。不过时候也到底不同了，就要听洋讽刺家来“幽默”一回，大家哈哈一下子。
There is another layer, which is that "autocracy turns people into cynicism", but this is a British thing, and people who can only "look at the road" in ancient times did not dare. But the time is different, you have to listen to the foreign satirist to "humor" once, and everyone laughs all of a sudden.还有一层，我在这里不想提。
There is another layer that I don't want to mention here.但先要提防自己的衣裤。于是各人的希望就不同起来了。蹩脚愿意他主张拿拐杖，癞子希望他赞成戴帽子，涂了脂粉的想他讽刺黄脸婆，民族主义文学者要靠他来压服了日本的军队。但结果如何呢？结果只要看唠叨的多，就知道不见得十分圆满了。
But beware of your own clothes and pants first. So everyone's hope is different. The lame man wants him to advocate crutches, the leper wants him to approve of wearing a hat, and the powdered man thinks that he satirizes the yellow-faced woman, and the nationalist writers rely on him to subdue the Japanese army. But what was the result? As a result, as long as you look at the nags a lot, you will know that it is not necessarily very satisfactory.萧的伟大可又在这地方。英系报，日系报，白俄系报，虽然造了一些谣言，而终于全都攻击起来，就知道他决不为帝国主义所利用。至于有些中国报，那是无须多说的，因为原是洋大人的跟丁。这跟也跟得长久了，只在“不抵抗”或“战略关系”上，这才走在他们军队的前面。
Xiao's greatness is in this place again. The British, Japanese, and Belarusian newspapers, although they made up some rumors, finally all attacked, knowing that he would never be used by imperialism. As for some Chinese newspapers, there is no need to say more, because they were originally the followers of foreigners. This has been followed for a long time, and only in terms of "non-resistance" or "strategic relations" is that they are ahead of their army.萧在上海不到一整天，而故事竟有这么多，倘是别的文人，恐怕不见得会这样的。这不是一件小事情，所以这一本书，也确是重要的文献。在前三个部门之中，就将文人，政客，军阀，流氓，叭儿的各式各样的相貌，都在一个平面镜里映出来了。说萧是凹凸镜，我也不以为确凿。
Xiao spent less than a whole day in Shanghai, and there are so many stories, if it were other literati, I am afraid it might not be like this. This is not a trivial matter, so this book is indeed an important document. In the first three departments, the various appearances of literati, politicians, warlords, hooligans, and Ba'er are reflected in a flat mirror. To say that Xiao is a concave and convex mirror, I don't think it's conclusive.余波流到北平，还给大英国的记者一个教训：他不高兴中国人欢迎他。二十日路透电说北平报章多登关于萧的文章，是“足证华人传统的不感觉苦痛性”。胡适博士尤其超脱，说是不加招待，倒是最高尚的欢迎。
The aftermath flowed to Peiping, and also taught the British reporter a lesson: he was not happy that the Chinese welcomed him. On the 20th, Reuters said that many articles about Xiao in Peking newspapers were "sufficient evidence of the Chinese tradition of not feeling painful." Dr. Hu Shi was especially detached, saying that it was not entertaining, but it was the most noble welcome.“打是不打，不打是打！”
"If you don't fight, if you don't fight, if you don't fight, you will fight!"这真是一面大镜子，真是令人们觉得好像一面大镜子的大镜子，从去照或不愿去照里，都装模作样的显出了藏着的原形。在上海的一部分，虽然用笔和舌的还没有北平的外国记者和中国学者的巧妙，但已经有不少的花样。旧传的脸谱本来也有限，虽有未曾收录的，或后来发表的东西，大致恐怕总在这谱里的了。
This is really a big mirror, it really makes people feel like a big mirror, from whether they want to look at it or not, they all pretend to show their hidden true form. In some parts of Shanghai, although the pen and tongue are not as ingenious as the foreign reporters and Chinese scholars in Peking, there are already many tricks. The old legends of the face were originally limited, although there were things that were not included or published later, and I am afraid that they were always in this score.一九三三年二月二十八日灯下，鲁迅。
Under the light, February 28, 1933, Lu Xun.

由中国女人的脚，推定中国人之非中庸，又由此推定孔夫子有胃病

由中国女人的脚，推定中国人之非中庸，又由此推定孔夫子有胃病

由中国女人的脚，推定中国人之非中庸，又由此推定孔夫子有胃病

From the feet of Chinese women, it is presumed that the Chinese are not moderate, and from this, it is assumed that Confucius has stomach problems——“学匪”派考古学之一
——One of the archaeology of the "student bandits" school古之儒者不作兴谈女人，但有时总喜欢谈到女人。例如“缠足”罢，从明朝到清朝的带些考据气息的著作中，往往有一篇关于这事起源的迟早的文章。为什么要考究这样下等事呢，现在不说他也罢，总而言之，是可以分为两大派的，一派说起源早，一派说起源迟。说早的一派，看他的语气，是赞成缠足的，事情愈古愈好，所以他一定要考出连孟子的母亲，也是小脚妇人的证据来。说迟的一派却相反，他不大恭维缠足，据说，至早，亦不过起于宋朝的末年。
The ancient Confucian scholars did not talk about women, but sometimes they always liked to talk about women. For example, in the works of the Ming Dynasty to the Qing Dynasty with some evidence, there is often an article about the origin of this matter sooner or later. Why study such a lowly thing, don't talk about him now, in short, it can be divided into two major schools, one school says that the origin is early, and the other school says that the origin is late. The earlier the faction, looking at his tone, is in favor of foot binding, the older the thing, the better, so he must test the evidence that even Mencius's mother is also a small-footed woman. On the contrary, he did not compliment the binding of his feet, and it is said that at the earliest, it only started at the end of the Song Dynasty.其实，宋末，也可以算得古的了。不过不缠之足，样子却还要古，学者应该“贵古而贱今”，斥缠足者，爱古也。但也有先怀了反对缠足的成见，假造证据的，例如前明才子杨升庵先生，他甚至于替汉朝人做《杂事秘辛》，来证明那时的脚是“底平趾敛”。
In fact, at the end of the Song Dynasty, it can also be regarded as ancient. However, the foot is not wrapped, but the appearance is still ancient, and scholars should "value the ancient and despise the present", denounce those who bind their feet, and love the ancients. However, there are also those who have prejudices against foot binding and forge evidence, such as Mr. Yang Sheng'an, a former Ming talent, who even made "Miscellaneous Secrets" for the Han Dynasty to prove that the feet at that time were "flat and toe".于是又有人将这用作缠足起源之古的材料，说既然“趾敛”，可见是缠的了。但这是自甘于低能之谈，这里不加评论。
So some people used this as an ancient material for the origin of foot binding, saying that since it is "toe binding", it can be seen that it is entangled. But this is self-indulgence and imbecile, and there is no comment here.照我的意见来说，则以上两大派的话，是都错，也都对的。现在是古董出现的多了，我们不但能看见汉唐的图画，也可以看到晋唐古坟里发掘出来的泥人儿。那些东西上所表现的女人的脚上，有圆头履，有方头履，可见是不缠足的。古人比今人聪明，她决不至于缠小脚而穿大鞋子，里面塞些棉花，使自己走得一步一拐。
In my opinion, the above two major factions are both wrong and right. Nowadays, there are more antiques, and we can not only see the pictures of the Han and Tang dynasties, but also the clay figures excavated from the ancient tombs of the Jin and Tang dynasties. The women shown on those things have round-toed shoes and square-toed shoes on their feet, which shows that they are not bound to their feet. The ancients were smarter than today, and she would never wear big shoes with her small feet, stuffed with some cotton, so that she could limp step by step.但是，汉朝就确已有一种“利屣”，头是尖尖的，平常大约未必穿罢，舞的时候，却非此不可。不但走着爽利，“潭腿”似的踢开去之际，也不至于为裙子所碍，甚至于踢下裙子来。那时太太们固然也未始不舞，但舞的究以倡女为多，所以倡伎就大抵穿着“利屣”，穿得久了，也免不了要“趾敛”的。然而伎女的装束，是闺秀们的大成至圣先师，这在现在还是如此，常穿利屣，即等于现在之穿高跟皮鞋，可以俨然居炎汉“摩登女郎”之列，于是乎虽是名门淑女，脚尖也就不免尖了起来。先是倡伎尖，后是摩登女郎尖，再后是大家闺秀尖，最后才是“小家碧玉”一齐尖。待到这些“碧玉”们成了祖母时，就入于利屣制度统一脚坛的时代了。
However, the Han Dynasty did have a kind of "sharp shoe", the head is pointed, and it is usually not necessarily worn, but when dancing, it must be like this. Not only did he walk refreshingly, but when he kicked away like a "pool leg", he would not be hindered by the skirt, and even kicked off the skirt. At that time, the wives did not stop dancing, but most of the dancers were prostitutes, so the prostitutes mostly wore "sharp shoes", and after wearing them for a long time, they would inevitably have to "retract their toes". However, the costume of the courtesan is the most holy teacher of the ladies, which is still the case now, often wearing sharp shoes, that is, wearing high-heeled leather shoes now, can be among the "modern girls" of the Yan Han Dynasty, so although she is a famous lady, her toes will inevitably be pointed. First the prostitute tip, then the modern girl tip, then the lady tip, and finally the "small family jasper" tip. When these "jasper" became grandmothers, they entered the era of the unified football of the Li system and the foot platform.当民国初年，“不佞”观光北京的时候，听人说，北京女人看男人是否漂亮（自按：盖即今之所谓“摩登”也）的时候，是从脚起，上看到头的。所以男人的鞋袜，也得留心，脚样更不消说，当然要弄得齐齐整整，这就是天下之所以有“包脚布”的原因。仓颉造字，我们是知道的，谁造这布的呢，却还没有研究出。但至少是“古已有之”，唐朝张作的《朝野佥载》罢，他说武后朝有一位某男士，将脚裹得窄窄的，人们见了都发笑。可见盛唐之世，就已有了这一种玩意儿，不过还不是很极端，或者还没有很普及。然而好像终于普及了。由宋至清，绵绵不绝，民元革命以后，革了与否，我不知道，因为我是专攻考“古”学的。
In the early years of the Republic of China, when "Bu Ning" was sightseeing in Beijing, I heard that when Beijing women looked at whether a man was beautiful (self-pressed: Gai is the so-called "modern" now), they started from the feet and saw the head. Therefore, men's shoes and socks must also be paid attention to, not to mention the foot shape, of course, it must be made neatly, which is the reason why there is a "foot wrapping cloth" in the world. We know that Cangjie made characters, but who made this cloth has not yet been studied. But at least "there was it in ancient times", Tang Dynasty Zhang Zuo's "Chao and Ye Qianzai", he said that there was a certain man in the Wuhou Dynasty, who wrapped his feet narrowly, and people laughed when they saw it. It can be seen that in the Tang Dynasty, there was already this kind of thing, but it was not very extreme, or it was not very popular. However, it seems to have finally become popular. From the Song Dynasty to the Qing Dynasty, endlessly, after the Minyuan Revolution, I don't know whether it was revolutionized or not, because I specialized in "ancient" studies.然而奇怪得很，不知道怎的（自按：此处似略失学者态度），女士们之对于脚，尖还不够，并且勒令它“小”起来了，最高模范，还竟至于以三寸为度。这么一来，可以不必兼买利屣和方头履两种，从经济的观点来看，是不算坏的，可是从卫生的观点来看，却未免有些“过火”，换一句话，就是“走了极端”了。
However, it is very strange, I don't know how (self-press: it seems to be a little unscholarly here), the ladies are not sharp enough for the foot, and they order it to be "small", the highest model, and even three inches. In this way, you don't have to buy both shoes and square toe shoes, from an economic point of view, it is not bad, but from a health point of view, it is inevitable that it is a little "excessive", in other words, it is "extreme".我中华民族虽然常常的自命为爱“中庸”，行“中庸”的人民，其实是颇不免于过激的。譬如对于敌人罢，有时是压服不够，还要“除恶务尽”，杀掉不够，还要“食肉寝皮”。但有时候，却又谦虚到“侵略者要进来，让他们进来。也许他们会杀了十万中国人。不要紧，中国人有的是，我们再有人上去”。这真教人会猜不出是真痴还是假呆。而女人的脚尤其是一个铁证，不小则已，小则必求其三寸，宁可走不成路，摆摆摇摇。慨自辫子肃清以后，缠足本已一同解放的了，老新党的母亲们，鉴于自己在皮鞋里塞棉花之麻烦，一时也确给她的女儿留了天足。然而我们中华民族是究竟有些“极端”的，不多久，老病复发，有些女士们已在别想花样，用一枝细黑柱子将脚跟支起，叫它离开地球。她到底非要她的脚变把戏不可。由过去以测将来，则四朝（假如仍旧有朝代的话）之后，全国女人的脚趾都和小腿成一直线，是可以有八九成把握的。
Although our Chinese nation often claims to love the "golden mean" and practice the "golden mean", it is actually quite extreme. For example, for the enemy, sometimes it is not enough to suppress and subdue enough, and it is necessary to "eliminate evil and do its best", and if it is not enough to kill, it is also necessary to "eat meat and sleep". But sometimes, it is so modest that "the invaders want to come in, let them in." Maybe they will kill 100,000 Chinese. It doesn't matter, what the Chinese have is that we have someone to go up." This really makes it impossible to guess whether it is true or fake. And a woman's feet are especially an ironclad evidence, if they are not small, they must ask for three inches, and they would rather not walk on the road and sway. Since the eradication of the pigtails, the foot binding has been liberated together, and the mothers of the old and new parties, in view of the trouble of stuffing cotton in their leather shoes, did leave their daughters with natural feet for a while. However, our Chinese nation is a bit "extreme", not long after, old illness recurred, and some ladies were already thinking about tricks, using a thin black pillar to prop up their heels and tell it to leave the earth. She really has to do tricks with her feet. From the past to the future, after the four dynasties (if there are still dynasties), the toes of women across the country will be in line with their calves, which can be eighty or ninety percent certain.然则圣人为什么大呼“中庸”呢？曰：这正因为大家并不中庸的缘故。人必有所缺，这才想起他所需。穷教员养不活老婆了，于是觉到女子自食其力说之合理，并且附带地向男女平权论点头；富翁胖到要发哮喘病了，才去打高而富球，从此主张运动的紧要。我们平时，是决不记得自己有一个头，或一个肚子，应该加以优待的，然而一旦头痛肚泻，这才记起了他们，并且大有休息要紧，饮食小心的议论。倘有谁听了这些议论之后，便贸贸然决定这议论者为卫生家，可就失之十丈，差以亿里了。
So why did the saint shout "moderation"? He said: This is precisely because everyone is not mediocre. A man must lack something, and then he remembers what he needs. The poor teacher could no longer support his wife, so he felt that it was reasonable for the woman to support herself, and incidentally nodded to the argument for equality between men and women; The rich man was so fat that he was about to get asthma, so he went to play high and rich ball, and since then he has advocated the importance of exercise. Usually, we never remember that we have a head or a belly, and we should be treated preferentially, but once we have a headache and diarrhea, we remember them, and there is a lot of talk about resting and eating carefully. If anyone listens to these discussions and hastily decides that the speaker is a hygienist, he can lose ten zhang, a difference of hundreds of millions of miles.倒相反，他是不卫生家，议论卫生，正是他向来的不卫生的结果的表现。孔子曰，“不得中行而与之，必也狂狷乎，狂者进取，狷者有所不为也！”以孔子交游之广，事实上没法子只好寻狂狷相与，这便是他在理想上之所以哼着“中庸，中庸”的原因。
On the contrary, he is an unhygienic person, and talking about hygiene is a manifestation of his usual unhygienic results. Confucius said, "If you can't give it to someone who is in the middle of the road, you must be arrogant and stubborn. The madman is enterprising, and the stubborn person does not do something!" With Confucius's wide range of friends, in fact, he had no choice but to look for madness, which is the reason why he hummed "moderation, moderation" in his ideals.以上的推定假使没有错，那么，我们就可以进而推定孔子晚年，是生了胃病的了。“割不正不食”，这是他老先生的古板规矩，但“食不厌精，脍不厌细”的条令却有些稀奇。他并非百万富翁或能收许多版税的文学家，想不至于这么奢侈的，除了只为卫生，意在容易消化之外，别无解法。况且“不撤姜食”，又简直是省不掉暖胃药了。何必如此独厚于胃，念念不忘呢？曰，以其有胃病之故也。
If the above presumption is not wrong, then we can further presume that Confucius had stomach problems in his later years. "Don't eat if you can't cut it", this is his old gentleman's old-fashioned rule, but the rule of "don't get tired of eating, don't get tired of fine" is a bit strange. He is not a millionaire or a writer who can collect a lot of royalties, and he has no other solution than to be so extravagant except for hygiene and easy digestion. Moreover, "not withdrawing ginger food" simply can't save stomach warming medicine. Why be so generous to your stomach and never forget it? The answer is that it is because he has stomach problems.倘说：坐在家里，不大走动的人们很容易生胃病，孔子周游列国，运动王公，该可以不生病证的了。那就是犯了知今而不知古的错误。盖当时花旗白面，尚未输入，土磨麦粉，多含灰沙，所以分量较今面为重；国道尚未修成，泥路甚多凹凸，孔子如果肯走，那是不大要紧的，而不幸他偏有一车两马。胃里袋着沉重的面食，坐在车子里走着七高八低的道路，一颠一顿，一掀一坠，胃就被坠得大起来，消化力随之减少，时时作痛；每餐非吃“生姜”不可了。所以那病的名目，该是“胃扩张”；那时候，则是“晚年”，约在周敬王十年以后。
If you say: Sitting at home, people who don't move around are prone to stomach problems, Confucius traveled around the world, exercised the princes, should not get sick. That is to make the mistake of knowing the present and not the past. Because at that time, Citi white flour had not yet been imported, and the ground wheat flour contained a lot of gray sand, so the weight was heavier than today's flour; The national highway has not yet been built, and there are many bumps in the dirt road, and if Confucius is willing to go, it doesn't matter, but unfortunately he has a car and two horses. With heavy pasta in his stomach, sitting in the car and walking on the road of seven highs and eight lows, he fell and fell, and his stomach fell bigger, his digestion was reduced, and he was in pain all the time; You have to eat "ginger" at every meal. Therefore, the name of the disease should be "gastric dilatation"; At that time, it was "old age", about ten years after King Jing of Zhou.以上的推定，虽然简略，却都是“读书得间”的成功。但若急于近功，妄加猜测，即很容易陷于“多疑”的谬误。例如罢，二月十四日《申报》载南京专电云：“中执委会令各级党部及人民团体制‘忠孝仁爱信义和平’匾额，悬挂礼堂中央，以资启迪。”看了之后，切不可便推定为各要人讥大家为“忘八”；三月一日《大晚报》载新闻云：“孙总理夫人宋庆龄女士自归国寓沪后，关于政治方面，不闻不问，惟对社会团体之组织非常热心。据本报记者所得报告，前日有人由邮政局致宋女士之索诈信□（自按：原缺）件，业经本市当局派驻邮局检查处检查员查获，当将索诈信截留，转辗呈报市府。”看了之后，也切不可便推定虽为总理夫人宋女士的信件，也常在邮局被当局派员所检查。
The above presumptions, although brief, are all successes of "reading in between". However, if you are in a hurry to achieve success and make random guesses, it is easy to fall into the fallacy of "suspiciousness". For example, on February 14, the "Declaration" contained a special telegram from Nanjing: "The Central Executive Committee ordered party departments and people's organizations at all levels to make plaques of 'loyalty, filial piety, benevolence, trust, righteousness, and peace' and hang them in the center of the auditorium for enlightenment." After reading it, it must not be presumed that the dignitaries ridicule everyone as "forgetting the eight"; On March 1, the "Evening News" reported that "since Premier Sun's wife, Ms. Soong Ching Ling, returned to China to live in Shanghai, she has ignored politics, but she is very enthusiastic about the organization of social groups. According to the report obtained by this reporter, the □ of a fraudulent letter from the post office to Ms. Song from the post office the day before yesterday (self-pressed: original missing) was seized by the inspector of the post office inspection office dispatched by the municipal authorities. After reading it, it must not be assumed that although it is the letter of Ms. Song, the wife of the Prime Minister, it is often inspected by the authorities at the post office.盖虽“学匪派考古学”，亦当不离于“学”，而以“考古”为限的。
Although it is "archaeology of the bandit school", it should not be separated from "learning", but limited to "archaeology".三月四日夜。
On the night of March 4th.

我怎么做起小说来

我怎么做起小说来

我怎么做起小说来

How do I start a novel?我怎么做起小说来？——这来由，已经在《呐喊》的序文上，约略说过了。这里还应该补叙一点的，是当我留心文学的时候，情形和现在很不同：在中国，小说不算文学，做小说的也决不能称为文学家，所以并没有人想在这一条道路上出世。我也并没有要将小说抬进“文苑”里的意思，不过想利用他的力量，来改良社会。
How do I start a novel? ——The reason for this has already been briefly mentioned in the preface to "The Scream". I should also add here that when I paid attention to literature, the situation was very different from now: in China, novels are not literature, and novelists can never be called writers, so no one wants to be born on this path. I don't mean to carry the novel into the "literary garden", but I want to use his power to improve society.但也不是自己想创作，注重的倒是在绍介，在翻译，而尤其注重于短篇，特别是被压迫的民族中的作者的作品。因为那时正盛行着排满论，有些青年，都引那叫喊和反抗的作者为同调的。所以“小说作法”之类，我一部都没有看过，看短篇小说却不少，小半是自己也爱看，大半则因了搜寻绍介的材料。也看文学史和批评，这是因为想知道作者的为人和思想，以便决定应否绍介给中国。和学问之类，是绝不相干的。
But I don't want to create it myself, but I pay attention to the introduction, translation, and especially the short stories, especially the works of authors from oppressed ethnic groups. Because at that time the theory of fullness was prevalent, some young people cited the author who shouted and resisted as the same tune. Therefore, I have never read any of the "novel practices", but I have read a lot of short stories, a small part of which I also love to read, and most of them are because of the search for Shao Jie's materials. Also look at literary history and criticism, because I want to know the author's character and thoughts, so as to decide whether to introduce it to China. It has nothing to do with learning.因为所求的作品是叫喊和反抗，势必至于倾向了东欧，因此所看的俄国，波兰以及巴尔干诸小国作家的东西就特别多。也曾热心的搜求印度，埃及的作品，但是得不到。记得当时最爱看的作者，是俄国的果戈理（N. Gogol）和波兰的显克微支（H. Sienkiewitz）。日本的，是夏目漱石和森鸥外。
Because the works sought are shouting and resistance, they are bound to lean towards Eastern Europe, so there are a lot of writers from Russia, Poland and small Balkan countries. I have also enthusiastically searched for works from India and Egypt, but I can't get them. I remember that my favorite author at that time was the Russian Gogol (N. Gogol) and Poland's H. Sienkiewitz）。 Japanese, it is Natsume Soseki and Mori Ouwai.回国以后，就办学校，再没有看小说的工夫了，这样的有五六年。为什么又开手了呢？——这也已经写在《呐喊》的序文里，不必说了。但我的来做小说，也并非自以为有做小说的才能，只因为那时是住在北京的会馆里的，要做论文罢，没有参考书，要翻译罢，没有底本，就只好做一点小说模样的东西塞责，这就是《狂人日记》。大约所仰仗的全在先前看过的百来篇外国作品和一点医学上的知识，此外的准备，一点也没有。
After returning to China, I ran a school, and I didn't have the time to read novels anymore, for five or six years. Why did you start again? ——This has also been written in the preface to "The Scream", so it goes without saying. But when I came to write novels, I didn't think I had the talent to write novels, just because I was living in a guild hall in Beijing at that time, and I had to make papers, no reference books, no translations, and no originals, so I had to make a little novel-like thing to blame, which is "Diary of a Madman". It relies on about 100 foreign works and a little medical knowledge that I have seen before, and there is no other preparation at all.但是《新青年》的编辑者，却一回一回的来催，催几回，我就做一篇，这里我必得记念陈独秀先生，他是催促我做小说最着力的一个。
But the editor of "New Youth" came to urge me again and again, and after a few times, I would make an article, and here I must remember Mr. Chen Duxiu, who was the one who urged me to write a novel the most.自然，做起小说来，总不免自己有些主见的。例如，说到“为什么”做小说罢，我仍抱着十多年前的“启蒙主义”，以为必须是“为人生”，而且要改良这人生。我深恶先前的称小说为“闲书”，而且将“为艺术的艺术”，看作不过是“消闲”的新式的别号。所以我的取材，多采自病态社会的不幸的人们中，意思是在揭出病苦，引起疗救的注意。所以我力避行文的唠叨，只要觉得够将意思传给别人了，就宁可什么陪衬拖带也没有。中国旧戏上，没有背景，新年卖给孩子看的花纸上，只有主要的几个人（但现在的花纸却多有背景了），我深信对于我的目的，这方法是适宜的，所以我不去描写风月，对话也决不说到一大篇。
Naturally, when you start writing novels, you can't help but have some opinions. For example, when it comes to "why" to write novels, I still hold on to the "enlightenment" of more than ten years ago, thinking that it must be "for life" and to improve this life. I hated the previous call of novels "idle books", and regarded "art for art" as nothing more than a new nickname for "leisure". Therefore, my material is mostly taken from the unfortunate people in a sick society, which means to expose the suffering and attract the attention of healing. So I try to avoid the nagging of the text, as long as I feel that I have enough to convey the meaning to others, I would rather have no foil drag. In the old Chinese drama, there is no background, and on the flower paper sold to children in the New Year, there are only a few main people (but the current flower paper has a lot of background), I am convinced that this method is suitable for my purpose, so I will not describe the wind and moon, and the dialogue will never be a long story.我做完之后，总要看两遍，自己觉得拗口的，就增删几个字，一定要它读得顺口；没有相宜的白话，宁可引古语，希望总有人会懂，只有自己懂得或连自己也不懂的生造出来的字句，是不大用的。这一节，许多批评家之中，只有一个人看出来了，但他称我为Stylist。
After I finish it, I always have to read it twice, and if I feel awkward, I will add and delete a few words, and it must read smoothly; There is no suitable vernacular, I would rather quote ancient words, hoping that someone will always understand, only words and phrases that I understand or don't even understand are useless. This section was seen by only one of the many critics, but he called me a Stylist.所写的事迹，大抵有一点见过或听到过的缘由，但决不全用这事实，只是采取一端，加以改造，或生发开去，到足以几乎完全发表我的意思为止。人物的模特儿也一样，没有专用过一个人，往往嘴在浙江，脸在北京，衣服在山西，是一个拼凑起来的脚色。有人说，我的那一篇是骂谁，某一篇又是骂谁，那是完全胡说的。
The deeds written are probably due to some reason that I have seen or heard, but I never use this fact entirely, but only take one end, transform it, or give it a spark until it is enough to almost completely express my meaning. The same is true for the model of the character, there has never been a dedicated person, often the mouth is in Zhejiang, the face is in Beijing, and the clothes are in Shanxi, which is a patchwork of footage. Some people say, who is my article scolding, and who is scolding in another article, that is complete nonsense.不过这样的写法，有一种困难，就是令人难以放下笔。一气写下去，这人物就逐渐活动起来，尽了他的任务。但倘有什么分心的事情来一打岔，放下许久之后再来写，性格也许就变了样，情景也会和先前所豫想的不同起来。例如我做的《不周山》，原意是在描写性的发动和创造，以至衰亡的，而中途去看报章，见了一位道学的批评家攻击情诗的文章，心里很不以为然，于是小说里就有一个小人物跑到女娲的两腿之间来，不但不必有，且将结构的宏大毁坏了。但这些处所，除了自己，大概没有人会觉到的，我们的批评大家成仿吾先生，还说这一篇做得最出色。
However, there is a difficulty in this way of writing, that is, it is difficult to put down the pen. Writing in one go, the character gradually became active and fulfilled his task. But if there is something distracting to interrupt it, let it go for a long time and then write it, the character may change, and the situation will be different from what was previously expected. For example, my "Buzhou Mountain" was originally intended to describe the initiation and creation of sexuality, and even its decline, but I went to the newspaper halfway through and saw an article by a Taoist critic attacking love poems, and I was very dissatisfied, so there was a small character in the novel who ran between Nuwa's legs, not only did not have it, but also destroyed the grandeur of the structure. But these places, except for themselves, probably no one will notice it, our critic Cheng Fangwu, and said that this article is the best.我想，如果专用一个人做骨干，就可以没有这弊病的，但自己没有试验过。
I think that if one person is dedicated as the backbone, there will be no such drawback, but I have not tried it myself.忘记是谁说的了，总之是，要极省俭的画出一个人的特点，最好是画他的眼睛。我以为这话是极对的，倘若画了全副的头发，即使细得逼真，也毫无意思。我常在学学这一种方法，可惜学不好。
I forgot who said it, in short, to draw a person's characteristics extremely frugally, it is best to draw his eyes. I thought this was very true, if you draw a full set of hair, even if it is realistic, it is meaningless. I often learn this method, but unfortunately I can't learn it well.可省的处所，我决不硬添，做不出的时候，我也决不硬做，但这是因为我那时别有收入，不靠卖文为活的缘故，不能作为通例的。
I will never add a place that can be saved, and when I can't do it, I will never do it, but this is because I had no income at that time and did not make a living by selling literature, so it cannot be used as a common practice.还有一层，是我每当写作，一律抹杀各种的批评。因为那时中国的创作界固然幼稚，批评界更幼稚，不是举之上天，就是按之入地，倘将这些放在眼里，就要自命不凡，或觉得非自杀不足以谢天下的。批评必须坏处说坏，好处说好，才于作者有益。
There is another layer that every time I write, I erase all kinds of criticism. Because at that time, China's creative circles were naïve, and the criticism circles were even more naïve, either lifting them up to the sky or pressing them into the ground. Criticism must be said to be bad and good to be beneficial to the author.但我常看外国的批评文章，因为他于我没有恩怨嫉恨，虽然所评的是别人的作品，却很有可以借镜之处。但自然，我也同时一定留心这批评家的派别。
But I often read foreign criticism, because he has no grudge against me, although he comments on other people's works, but there is a lot to learn from. But naturally, I must also pay attention to this critic's faction.以上，是十年前的事了，此后并无所作，也没有长进，编辑先生要我做一点这类的文章，怎么能呢。拉杂写来，不过如此而已。
The above was ten years ago, and since then I have done nothing, and I have not made any progress. Lazarus wrote it, but that's all.三月五日灯下。
March 5th: Under the lights.

关于女人

关于女人

关于女人

About women国难期间，似乎女人也特别受难些。一些正人君子责备女人爱奢侈，不肯光顾国货。就是跳舞，肉感等等，凡是和女性有关的，都成了罪状。仿佛男人都做了苦行和尚，女人都进了修道院，国难就会得救似的。
During the national crisis, it seems that women also suffer more. Some righteous gentlemen blame women for loving luxury and refusing to patronize domestic products. It is dancing, sensuality, etc., everything related to women has become a crime. It is as if men have become ascetic monks and women have entered monasteries, and the national crisis will be saved.其实那不是女人的罪状，正是她的可怜。这社会制度把她挤成了各种各式的奴隶，还要把种种罪名加在她头上。西汉末年，女人的“堕马髻”，“愁眉啼妆”，也说是亡国之兆。其实亡汉的何尝是女人！不过，只要看有人出来唉声叹气的不满意女人的妆束，我们就知道当时统治阶级的情形，大概有些不妙了。
In fact, it is not the woman's crime, it is her pity. This social system has squeezed her into all kinds of slaves, and all kinds of crimes have been put on her head. At the end of the Western Han Dynasty, women's "fallen horse buns" and "sorrowful makeup" were also said to be signs of the fall of the country. In fact, the dead man is a woman! However, as long as we see someone sighing and sighing dissatisfied with the woman's makeup, we know that the situation of the ruling class at that time was probably a little bad.奢侈和淫靡只是一种社会崩溃腐化的现象，决不是原因。私有制度的社会，本来把女人也当做私产，当做商品。一切国家，一切宗教都有许多稀奇古怪的规条，把女人看做一种不吉利的动物，威吓她，使她奴隶般的服从；同时又要她做高等阶级的玩具。正像现在的正人君子，他们骂女人奢侈，板起面孔维持风化，而同时正在偷偷地欣赏着肉感的大腿文化。
Luxury and obscenity are just a phenomenon of social collapse and corruption, and are by no means the cause. In a society with a private ownership system, women were originally regarded as private property and commodities. All countries and religions have many strange rules, treating a woman as an unlucky animal, intimidating her into slave obedience; At the same time, she was asked to make high-class toys. Just like today's upright gentlemen, they scold women for being extravagant, maintaining their faces to maintain weathering, while secretly admiring the culture of sensual thighs.阿剌伯的一个古诗人说：“地上的天堂是在圣贤的经书上，马背上，女人的胸脯上。”这句话倒是老实的供状。
An ancient poet of Arab said: "Heaven on earth is in the scriptures of the sages, on horseback, on the breasts of women." This sentence is an honest confession.自然，各种各式的卖淫总有女人的份。然而买卖是双方的。没有买淫的嫖男，那里会有卖淫的娼女。所以问题还在买淫的社会根源。这根源存在一天，也就是主动的买者存在一天，那所谓女人的淫靡和奢侈就一天不会消灭。男人是私有主的时候，女人自身也不过是男人的所有品。也许是因此罢，她的爱惜家财的心或者比较的差些，她往往成了“败家精”。何况现在买淫的机会那么多，家庭里的女人直觉地感觉到自己地位的危险。民国初年我就听说，上海的时髦是从长三幺二传到姨太太之流，从姨太太之流再传到太太奶奶小姐。这些“人家人”，多数是不自觉地在和娼妓竞争，——自然，她们就要竭力修饰自己的身体，修饰到拉得住男子的心的一切。这修饰的代价是很贵的，而且一天一天的贵起来，不但是物质上的，而且还有精神上的。
Naturally, all kinds of prostitution always have a woman's share. However, the sale and purchase are mutually exclusive. There are no prostitutes who buy prostitution, there will be prostitutes there. So the problem is still the social root cause of prostitution. This root exists for one day, that is, the active buyer exists for one day, and the so-called women's obscenity and luxury will not disappear for a day. When a man is a private owner, a woman herself is nothing more than a man's possession. Perhaps because of this, her heart for cherishing family wealth or worse is worse, and she often becomes a "prodigal". What's more, there are so many opportunities to buy prostitution now, and women in the family intuitively feel the danger of their status. In the early years of the Republic of China, I heard that Shanghai's fashion was passed down from Chang Sanyao and Yi to the likes of aunts, and from aunts to wives and grandmothers. Most of these "families" are unconsciously competing with prostitutes,—— naturally, they have to try their best to modify their bodies and modify everything that can win a man's heart. The price of this embellishment is very expensive, and it is getting more expensive day by day, not only materially, but also spiritually.美国一个百万富翁说：“我们不怕共匪（原文无匪字，谨遵功令改译），我们的妻女就要使我们破产，等不及工人来没收。”中国也许是惟恐工人“来得及”，所以高等华人的男女这样赶紧的浪费着，享用着，畅快着，那里还管得到国货不国货，风化不风化。然而口头上是必须维持风化，提倡节俭的。
A millionaire in the United States said: "We are not afraid of communist bandits, our wives and daughters will bankrupt us, and we can't wait for the workers to confiscate them." China may be afraid that the workers will "make it too late", so the men and women of the higher Chinese are in a hurry to waste, enjoy, and have fun. However, verbally it is necessary to maintain the weathering and advocate frugality.四月十一日。
April 11th.

真假堂吉诃德

真假堂吉诃德

真假堂吉诃德

Real and false Don Quixote西洋武士道的没落产生了堂·吉诃德那样的戆大。他其实是个十分老实的书呆子。看他在黑夜里仗着宝剑和风车开仗，的确傻相可掬，觉得可笑可怜。
The decline of Western bushido gave rise to Don Quixote's arrogance. He is actually a very honest nerd. Seeing him fighting with a sword and a windmill in the dark night, it was indeed silly and pitiful.然而这是真正的吉诃德。中国的江湖派和流氓种子，却会愚弄吉诃德式的老实人，而自己又假装着堂·吉诃德的姿态。《儒林外史》上的几位公子，慕游侠剑仙之为人，结果是被这种假吉诃德骗去了几百两银子，换来了一颗血淋淋的猪头，——那猪算是侠客的“君父之仇”了。
However, this is the real Quixote. The Chinese charlatans and rogue seeds will fool the Quixote-style honest people, and they themselves will pretend to be Don Quixote. Several sons in the "History of Confucianism", admiring the character of the Ranger Sword Immortal, turned out to be deceived by this fake Quixote for hundreds of taels of silver in exchange for a bloody pig's head,—— which was regarded as the "enemy of the king's father" of the knight.真吉诃德的做傻相是由于自己愚蠢，而假吉诃德是故意做些傻相给别人看，想要剥削别人的愚蠢。
The real Quixote is stupid because of his own stupidity, while the fake Quixote deliberately makes some stupid appearances for others to see, wanting to exploit other people's stupidity.可是中国的老百姓未必都还这么蠢笨，连这点儿手法也看不出来。
But the Chinese people may not be so stupid that they can't even see this little trick.中国现在的假吉诃德们，何尝不知道大刀不能救国，他们却偏要舞弄着，每天“杀敌几百几千”的乱嚷，还有人“特制钢刀九十九，去赠送前敌将士”。可是，为着要杀猪起见，又舍不得飞机捐，于是乎“武器不精良”的宣传，一面作为节节退却或者“诱敌深入”的解释，一面又借此搜括一些杀猪经费。可惜前有慈禧太后，后有袁世凯，——清末的兴复海军捐建设了颐和园，民四的“反日”爱国储金，增加了讨伐当时革命军的军需，——不然的话，还可以说现在发现了一个新发明。
The current fake quijotes in China don't know that the big knife cannot save the country, but they want to dance, shouting "killing hundreds and thousands of enemies" every day, and some people "make ninety-nine special steel knives to give away to the former enemy soldiers". However, in order to kill pigs, they were reluctant to donate planes, so the propaganda of "imperfect weapons" was used as an explanation for retreating or "luring the enemy deeper", and on the other hand, it was used to collect some pig killing funds. Unfortunately, there was Empress Dowager Cixi in front, and Yuan Shikai donated ,—— the revival navy at the end of the Qing Dynasty to build the Summer Palace, and the "anti-Japanese" patriotic reserve fund of Min Si increased the military supplies for the crusade against the revolutionary army at that time,—— otherwise, it can be said that a new invention has been discovered now.他们何尝不知道“国货运动”振兴不了什么民族工业，国际的财神爷扼住了中国的喉咙，连气也透不出，甚么“国货”都跳不出这些财神的手掌心。然而“国货年”是宣布了，“国货商场”是成立了，像煞有介事的，仿佛抗日救国全靠一些戴着假面具的买办多赚几个钱。这钱还是从猪狗牛马身上剥削来的。不听见“增加生产力”，“劳资合作共赴国难”的呼声么？原本不把小百姓当人看待，然而小百姓做了猪狗牛马还是要负“救国责任”！结果，猪肉供给假吉诃德吃，而猪头还是要斫下来，挂出去，以为“捣乱后方”者戒。
They don't know that the "domestic product movement" cannot revitalize any national industry, and the international god of wealth has choked China's throat, and he can't even breathe, and no "domestic product" can jump out of the palm of these gods of wealth. However, the "Year of Domestic Products" was announced, and the "Domestic Shopping Mall" was established, as if the anti-Japanese salvation of the country relied on some compradors wearing masks to make a few more money. This money is still exploited from pigs, dogs, cattle and horses. Don't you hear the call of "increasing productivity" and "labor-management cooperation to go to the national crisis"? Originally, the common people were not treated as human beings, but the common people still had to bear the "responsibility of saving the country" when they became pigs, dogs, cattle and horses! As a result, the pork was supplied to the fake Quixote to eat, and the pig's head still had to be cut off and hung out, thinking that it was a warning to "trouble the rear".他们何尝不知道什么“中国固有文化”咒不死帝国主义，无论念几千万遍“不仁不义”或者金光明咒，也不会触发日本地震，使它陆沉大海。然而他们故意高喊恢复“民族精神”，仿佛得了什么祖传秘诀。意思其实很明白，是要小百姓埋头治心，多读修身教科书。这固有文化本来毫无疑义：是岳飞式的奉旨不抵抗的忠，是听命国联爷爷的孝，是斫猪头，吃猪肉，而又远庖厨的仁爱，是遵守卖身契约的信义，是“诱敌深入”的和平。而且，“固有文化”之外，又提倡什么“学术救国”，引证西哲菲希德之言等类的居心，又何尝不是如此。
They don't know what "China's inherent culture" curse imperialism, no matter how many tens of millions of times "unkind and unjust" or the golden light mantra is recited, it will not trigger the earthquake in Japan and sink it into the sea. However, they deliberately shouted to restore the "national spirit", as if they had some ancestral secret. The meaning is actually very clear, it is to ask the common people to bury their minds and read more self-cultivation textbooks. There is no doubt about this inherent culture: it is Yue Fei's loyalty to the order not to resist, the filial piety of the grandfather of the League of Nations, the benevolence of cutting pigs' heads, eating pork, and staying away from the chef, the faith of abiding by the contract of self-sale, and the peace of "luring the enemy deeper". Moreover, in addition to the "inherent culture", what kind of "academic salvation" is advocated, and the intention of quoting the words of Sizhefishid and so on is not the same.假吉诃德的这些傻相，真教人哭笑不得；你要是把假痴假呆当做真痴真呆，当真认为可笑可怜，那就未免傻到不可救药了。
These silly appearances of fake Quixote really make people laugh and cry; If you regard fake dementia as real dementia, and really think it is ridiculous and pitiful, then you will be hopelessly stupid.四月十一日。
April 11th.

《守常全集》题记

《守常全集》题记

《守常全集》题记

Inscription of "The Complete Works of Conservatism"我最初看见守常先生的时候，是在独秀先生邀去商量怎样进行《新青年》的集会上，这样就算认识了。不知道他其时是否已是共产主义者。总之，给我的印象是很好的：诚实，谦和，不多说话。《新青年》的同人中，虽然也很有喜欢明争暗斗，扶植自己势力的人，但他一直到后来，绝对的不是。
When I first saw Mr. Shouchang, I was invited by Mr. Duxiu to discuss how to conduct the "New Youth" meeting, so that we could know each other. I don't know if he was already a communist at that time. In short, I have a good impression: honest, humble, not talking. Among the fans of "New Youth", although there are also people who like to fight openly and secretly and support their own power, he has never been there until later.他的模样是颇难形容的，有些儒雅，有些朴质，也有些凡俗。所以既像文士，也像官吏，又有些像商人。这样的商人，我在南边没有看见过，北京却有的，是旧书店或笺纸店的掌柜。一九二六年三月十八日，段祺瑞们枪击徒手请愿的学生的那一次，他也在群众中，给一个兵抓住了，问他是何等样人。答说是“做买卖的”。兵道：“那么，到这里来干什么？滚你的罢！”一推，他总算逃得了性命。
His appearance is quite difficult to describe, some elegant, some simple, and a little ordinary. So it looks like a scribe, an official, and a bit like a businessman. I have never seen such a businessman in the south, but there are in Beijing, who are shopkeepers of used bookstores or paper stores. On March 18, 1926, when Duan Qirui and others shot the students who were petitioning with their bare hands, he was also caught by a soldier in the crowd and asked what kind of person he was. He replied that he was "doing business". The soldier said: "So, what are you doing here?" Get out of here! With a push, he finally escaped with his life.倘说教员，那时是可以死掉的。
If you talk about teachers, you can die at that time.然而到第二年，他终于被张作霖们害死了。
However, in the second year, he was finally killed by Zhang Zuolin and others.
段将军的屠戮，死了四十二人，其中有几个是我的学生，我实在很觉得一点痛楚；张将军的屠戮，死的好像是十多人，手头没有记录，说不清楚了，但我所认识的只有一个守常先生。在厦门知道了这消息之后，椭圆的脸，细细的眼睛和胡子，蓝布袍，黑马褂，就时时出现在我的眼前，其间还隐约看见绞首台。痛楚是也有些的，但比先前淡漠了。这是我历来的偏见：见同辈之死，总没有像见青年之死的悲伤。
General Duan's massacre killed forty-two people, several of whom were my students, and I really felt a little pain; General Zhang's massacre seems to have killed more than ten people, and there are no records at hand, so I can't explain it clearly, but I only know one Mr. Shou Chang. After learning the news in Xiamen, the oval face, thin eyes and beard, blue cloth robe, and black horse coat appeared in front of my eyes from time to time, and I could vaguely see the gallows in the meantime. The pain was somewhat indifferent, but it was lighter than before. This is my long-standing prejudice: seeing the death of a peer is not as sad as seeing the death of a young man.
这回听说在北平公然举行了葬式，计算起来，去被害的时候已经七年了。这是极应该的。我不知道他那时被将军们所编排的罪状，——大概总不外乎“危害民国”罢。然而仅在这短短的七年中，事实就铁铸一般的证明了断送民国的四省的并非李大钊，却是杀戮了他的将军！
This time I heard that a funeral was openly held in Peiping, and it had been seven years since I was killed. This is extremely deserved. I don't know what crimes he was compiled by the generals at that time,—— it was probably nothing more than "endangering the Republic of China". However, in these short seven years alone, the facts have proven that it was not Li Dazhao who ruined the four provinces of the Republic of China, but the general who killed him!那么，公然下葬的宽典，该是可以取得的了。然而我在报章上，又看见北平当局的禁止路祭和捕拿送葬者的新闻。我也不知道为什么，但这回恐怕是“妨害治安”了罢。倘其果然，则铁铸一般的反证，实在来得更加神速：看罢，妨害了北平的治安的是日军呢还是人民！
Then, the benevolent burial should be obtainable. However, I saw in the newspaper that the Peking authorities had banned road sacrifices and arrested mourners. I don't know why, but this time I'm afraid it's "disturbing public order". If it is true, then the iron-cast counter-evidence will come even faster: After all, it is the Japanese army or the people who hindered the security of Peiping!但革命的先驱者的血，现在已经并不希奇了。单就我自己说罢，七年前为了几个人，就发过不少激昂的空论，后来听惯了电刑，枪毙，斩决，暗杀的故事，神经渐渐麻木，毫不吃惊，也无言说了。我想，就是报上所记的“人山人海”去看枭首示众的头颅的人们，恐怕也未必觉得更兴奋于看赛花灯的罢。血是流得太多了。
But the blood of the pioneers of the revolution is no longer surprising. Seven years ago, I made a lot of passionate empty theories for a few people, and then I got used to hearing stories of electrocution, shooting, execution, and assassination, and my nerves gradually became numb, and I was not surprised and speechless. I think that the people who go to see the heads of the beheads recorded in the newspapers may not be more excited to watch the lanterns. Too much blood is flowing.不过热血之外，守常先生还有遗文在。不幸对于遗文，我却很难讲什么话。因为所执的业，彼此不同，在《新青年》时代，我虽以他为站在同一战线上的伙伴，却并未留心他的文章，譬如骑兵不必注意于造桥，炮兵无须分神于驭马，那时自以为尚非错误。所以现在所能说的，也不过：一，是他的理论，在现在看起来，当然未必精当的；二，是虽然如此，他的遗文却将永住，因为这是先驱者的遗产，革命史上的丰碑。一切死的和活的骗子的一迭迭的集子，不是已在倒塌下来，连商人也“不顾血本”的只收二三折了么？
But in addition to the blood, Mr. Shouchang still has a posthumous writing. Unfortunately, it is difficult for me to say anything about the posthumous writings. Because their professions were different, in the era of "New Youth", although I regarded him as a partner on the same front, I did not pay attention to his articles, such as cavalry did not have to pay attention to building bridges, artillery did not need to be distracted by horses, and I thought I was not wrong at that time. So all I can say now is that: first, his theory, in the present view, of course, may not be accurate; Second, despite this, his posthumous writings will live forever, because this is the legacy of the pioneers and a monument in the history of the revolution. Isn't the stack of all dead and living liars already collapsing, and even the merchants only charge two or three discounts "regardless of the cost of blood"?以过去和现在的铁铸一般的事实来测将来，洞若观火！
Measure the future with the facts of the past and present, and see the fire!
一九三三年五月二十九夜，鲁迅谨记。
On the night of May 29, 1933, Lu Xun remembered.
这一篇，是T先生要我做的，因为那集子要在和他有关系的G书局出版。我谊不容辞，只得写了这一点，不久，便在《涛声》上登出来。但后来，听说那遗集稿子的有权者另托C书局去印了，至今没有出版，也许是暂时不会出版的罢，我虽然很后悔乱作题记的孟浪，但我仍然要在自己的集子里存留，记此一件公案。十二月三十一夜，附识。
This article was asked by Mr. T to be made by me, because the collection was to be published in G Bookstore, which has a relationship with him. I had to write this, and soon it was published in "The Sound of the Waves". But later, I heard that the person in charge of the manuscript of the collection had asked C Book Company to print it, and it has not been published so far, maybe it will not be published for the time being. On the night of December 31st, he was notified.

谈金圣叹

谈金圣叹

谈金圣叹

Talking about the golden sage讲起清朝的文字狱来，也有人拉上金圣叹，其实是很不合适的。他的“哭庙”，用近事来比例，和前年《新月》上的引据三民主义以自辩，并无不同，但不特捞不到教授而且至于杀头，则是因为他早被官绅们认为坏货了的缘故。就事论事，倒是冤枉的。
Speaking of the literary prison of the Qing Dynasty, some people also pulled Jin Shengsi, which is actually very inappropriate. His "crying temple", proportioned by recent events, is no different from the quotation of the Three People's Doctrine in the "New Moon" the year before last, but not only can he not catch the professor, but as for the beheading, it is because he has long been considered a bad product by the officials and gentry. It is unjust to talk about things.清中叶以后的他的名声，也有些冤枉。他抬起小说传奇来，和《左传》《杜诗》并列，实不过拾了袁宏道辈的唾余；而且经他一批，原作的诚实之处，往往化为笑谈，布局行文，也都被硬拖到八股的作法上。这余荫，就使有一批人，堕入了对于《红楼梦》之类，总在寻求伏线，挑剔破绽的泥塘。
His reputation after the middle of the Qing Dynasty was also a bit unjust. He lifted the legend of the novel and placed it side by side with "Zuo Zhuan" and "Du Shi", but he actually picked up the spit of Yuan Hongdao's generation; And after his batch, the honesty of the original work is often turned into a joke, and the layout of the writing is also dragged to the eight-strand approach. This afterglow has caused a group of people to fall into the mud pond of "Dream of Red Mansions", always looking for foreshadowing and picking on flaws.自称得到古本，乱改《西厢》字句的案子且不说罢，单是截去《水浒》的后小半，梦想有一个“嵇叔夜”来杀尽宋江们，也就昏庸得可以。虽说因为痛恨流寇的缘故，但他是究竟近于官绅的，他到底想不到小百姓的对于流寇，只痛恨着一半：不在于“寇”，而在于“流”。
Not to mention the case of claiming to have obtained an ancient book and randomly changing the words and sentences of "West Chamber", just cutting off the second half of "Water Margin", dreaming of having a "Uncle Ji" to kill Song Jiang, it is too mediocre. Although it is because he hates the bandits, he is close to the officials, and he can't imagine that the common people only hate half of the bandits: not in the "bandits", but in the "flow".百姓固然怕流寇，也很怕“流官”。记得民元革命以后，我在故乡，不知怎地县知事常常掉换了。每一掉换，农民们便愁苦着相告道：“怎么好呢？又换了一只空肚鸭来了！”他们虽然至今不知道“欲壑难填”的古训，却很明白“成则为王，败则为贼”的成语，贼者，流着之王，王者，不流之贼也，要说得简单一点，那就是“坐寇”。中国百姓一向自称“蚁民”，现在为便于譬喻起见，姑升为牛罢，铁骑一过，茹毛饮血，蹄骨狼藉，倘可避免，他们自然是总想避免的，但如果肯放任他们自啮野草，苟延残喘，挤出乳来将这些“坐寇”喂得饱饱的，后来能够比较的不复狼吞虎咽，则他们就以为如天之福。所区别的只在“流”与“坐”，却并不在“寇”与“王”。试翻明末的野史，就知道北京民心的不安，在李自成入京的时候，是不及他出京之际的利害的。
The people are certainly afraid of bandits, and they are also afraid of "flowing officials". I remember that after the Minyuan Revolution, I was in my hometown, and somehow the county governor was often changed. Every time they changed, the farmers complained to each other: "How is it?" Another empty-bellied duck is coming! Although they still do not know the ancient adage of "desire is difficult to fill", they understand very well the idiom of "success is king, failure is a thief", thief, the king of flowing, king, thief of not flowing, to put it simply, that is, "sitting on the bandit". The Chinese people have always called themselves "ant people", and now, for the sake of metaphor, the aunt has been promoted to a cow, and the iron cavalry has passed, the hair drinks blood, and the hooves and bones are messy, if it can be avoided, they naturally always want to avoid it, but if they are willing to let them eat the weeds, survive, and milk out to feed these "sitting bandits" to their heart's content, and then they can compare and no longer gobble up, then they think it is like a blessing from heaven. The difference is only in "flow" and "sitting", but not in "Kou" and "Wang". If you try to look at the wild history of the late Ming Dynasty, you will know that the uneasiness of the people in Beijing was not as good as the stakes when Li Zicheng left Beijing.宋江据有山寨，虽打家劫舍，而劫富济贫，金圣叹却道应该在童贯高俅辈的爪牙之前，一个个俯首受缚，他们想不懂。所以《水浒传》纵然成了断尾巴蜻蜓，乡下人却还要看《武松独手擒方腊》这些戏。
Song Jiang occupied the cottage, although he robbed his house and robbed the rich and helped the poor, but Jin Shengsian said that he should bow his head and be bound one by one before the minions of Tong Guan Gao Qiu, and they couldn't understand it. Therefore, even though "Water Margin" has become a dragonfly with a broken tail, the countrymen still have to watch the dramas "Wu Song Captures Fang La with One Hand".不过这还是先前的事，现在似乎又有了新的经验了。听说四川有一只民谣，大略是“贼来如梳，兵来如篦，官来如剃”的意思。汽车飞艇，价值既远过于大轿马车，租界和外国银行，也是海通以来新添的物事，不但剃尽毛发，就是刮尽筋肉，也永远填不满的。正无怪小百姓将“坐寇”之可怕，放在“流寇”之上了。
But this was still a thing before, and now it seems that there is a new experience. I heard that there is a folk song in Sichuan, which roughly means "thieves come like combs, soldiers come like grates, and officials come like shaves". The value of the car airship is far more than that of large cars, concessions and foreign banks, and it is also a new addition since Haitong. It is no wonder that the common people put the horror of "sitting on the bandits" on top of the "bandits".事实既然教给了这些，仅存的路，就当然使他们想到了自己的力量。
Since the facts taught these things, the only way left certainly made them think of their own strength.五月三十一日。
May 31st.

又论“第三种人”

又论“第三种人”

又论“第三种人”

He also discussed the "third kind of people"戴望舒先生远远的从法国给我们一封通信，叙述着法国A. E. A. R. （革命文艺家协会）得了纪德的参加，在三月二十一日召集大会，猛烈的反抗德国法西斯谛的情形，并且绍介了纪德的演说，发表在六月号的《现代》上。法国的文艺家，这样的仗义执言的举动是常有的：较远，则如左拉为德来孚斯打不平，法朗士当左拉改葬时候的讲演；较近，则有罗曼罗兰的反对战争。但这回更使我感到真切的欢欣，因为问题是当前的问题，而我也正是憎恶法西斯谛的一个。不过戴先生在报告这事实的同时，一并指明了中国左翼作家的“愚蒙”和像军阀一般的横暴，我却还想来说几句话。但希望不要误会，以为意在辩解，希图中国也从所谓“第三种人”得到对于德国的被压迫者一般的声援，——并不是的。中国的焚禁书报，封闭书店，囚杀作者，实在还远在德国的白色恐怖以前，而且也得到过世界的革命的文艺家的抗议了。我现在要说的，不过那通信里的必须指出的几点。
Mr. Dai Wangshu sent us a letter from far away in France, describing the French A. E. A. R. (Revolutionary Writers and Artists Association) convened a congress on March 21 to fiercely resist the German fascist truth, and introduced Gide's speech, which was published in the June issue of Modern. French writers and artists often act righteously and speak-out: farther away, such as Zola's speech when Zola was unfair to Dreyfus, and France when Zola was reburied; Closer, there is Romain Rolland's opposition to the war. But this time I felt genuine joy, because the problem was the current problem, and I was one of the haters of fascism. However, while reporting this fact, Mr. Dai also pointed out the "ignorance" and warlord-like tyranny of Chinese left-wing writers, but I would like to say a few words. But I hope not to misunderstand, thinking that it is intended to justify that China also gets general solidarity with the oppressed in Germany from the so-called "third kind of people",—— it is not. China's burning of books and newspapers, the closure of bookstores, and the imprisonment of authors were really long before the White Terror in Germany, and they were also protested by revolutionary writers and artists around the world. What I want to say now, but there are a few points that must be pointed out in the correspondence.那通信叙述过纪德的加入反抗运动之后，说道——
The correspondence narrated Gide's joining the resistance movement, saying—“在法国文坛中，我们可以说纪德是‘第三种人’，……自从他在一八九一年……起，一直到现在为止，他始终是一个忠实于他的艺术的人。然而，忠实于自己的艺术的作者，不一定就是资产阶级的‘帮闲者’，法国的革命作家没有这种愚蒙的见解（或者不如说是精明的策略），因此，在热烈的欢迎之中，纪德便在群众之间发言了。”
"In the French literary world, we can say that Gide is the 'third kind of person',...... Since he was in 1891...... He has always been a man who is faithful to his art. However, the author who is faithful to his art is not necessarily the 'helper' of the bourgeoisie, and the French revolutionary writers do not have this foolish opinion (or rather, shrewd strategy), so in the midst of a warm welcome, Gide spoke among the masses. ”这就是说：“忠实于自己的艺术的作者”，就是“第三种人”，而中国的革命作家，却“愚蒙”到指这种人为全是“资产阶级的帮闲者”，现在已经由纪德证实，是“不一定”的了。
This means that "the author who is faithful to his art" is the "third kind of person", while the Chinese revolutionary writers are "ignorant" to the point that such people are all "bourgeois helpers", which has now been confirmed by Gide and is "not necessarily".这里有两个问题应该解答。
Here are two questions that should be answered.第一，是中国的左翼理论家是否真指“忠实于自己的艺术的作者”为全是“资产阶级的帮闲者”？据我所知道，却并不然。左翼理论家无论如何“愚蒙”，还不至于不明白“为艺术的艺术”在发生时，是对于一种社会的成规的革命，但待到新兴的战斗的艺术出现之际，还拿着这老招牌来明明暗暗阻碍他的发展，那就成为反动，且不只是“资产阶级的帮闲者”了。至于“忠实于自己的艺术的作者”，却并未视同一律。因为不问那一阶级的作家，都有一个“自己”，这“自己”，就都是他本阶级的一分子，忠实于他自己的艺术的人，也就是忠实于他本阶级的作者，在资产阶级如此，在无产阶级也如此。这是极显明粗浅的事实，左翼理论家也不会不明白的。但这位——戴先生用“忠实于自己的艺术”来和“为艺术的艺术”掉了一个包，可真显得左翼理论家的“愚蒙”透顶了。
First, do left-wing theorists in China really refer to "authors who are faithful to their own art" as "bourgeois helpers"? As far as I know, it is not. No matter how "ignorant" left-wing theorists are, they do not fail to understand that "art for art" is a conventional revolution of society when it occurs, but when the emerging art of fighting appears, it still holds this old sign to openly and implicitly hinder its development, and it becomes a reactionary, not just a "bourgeois helper". As for "authors who are faithful to their own art", they are not regarded as the same. Because regardless of which class of writers they have, they all have a "self", and this "self" is a member of his own class, a person who is faithful to his own art, that is, an author who is faithful to his own class, this is true in the bourgeoisie, and this is also true in the proletariat. This is a very obvious and superficial fact, and left-wing theorists will not fail to understand it. But this one, Mr. Dai, used "faithful to his own art" to "art for art" and dropped a bag, which really seemed to be the "ignorance" of left-wing theorists.第二，是纪德是否真是中国所谓的“第三种人”？我没有读过纪德的书，对于作品，没有加以批评的资格。但我相信：创作和演说，形式虽然不同，所含的思想是决不会两样的。我可以引出戴先生所绍介的演说里的两段来——
Second, is Jide really the so-called "third type of person" in China? I have not read Gide's books, and I have no qualifications to criticize his works. But I believe that although the forms of creation and speech are different, the ideas contained in them will never be the same. I can quote two paragraphs from Mr. Dai's speech -“有人会对我说：‘在苏联也是这样的。’那是可能的事；但是目的却是完全两样的，而且，为了要建设一个新社会起见，为了把发言权给与那些一向做着受压迫者，一向没有发言权的人们起见，不得已的矫枉过正也是免不掉的事。
"Someone would say to me: 'It was the same in the Soviet Union.' That's possible; But the purpose is completely different, and in order to build a new society, in order to give the right to speak to those who have always been oppressed and have never had the right to speak, it is inevitable that overcorrection will be necessary.“我为什么并怎样会在这里赞同我在那边所反对的事呢？那就是因为我在德国的恐怖政策中，见到了最可叹最可憎的过去底再演，在苏联的社会创设中，我却见到一个未来的无限的允约。”
"Why and how do I agree here with what I oppose over there? It is because I saw the most lamentable and hateful repetition of the past in Germany's policy of terror, but in the social creation of the Soviet Union, I saw an infinite promise of the future. ”这说得清清楚楚，虽是同一手段，而他却因目的之不同而分为赞成或反抗。苏联十月革命后，侧重艺术的“绥拉比翁的兄弟们”这团体，也被称为“同路人”，但他们却并没有这么积极。中国关于“第三种人”的文字，今年已经汇印了一本专书，我们可以查一查，凡自称为“第三种人”的言论，可有丝毫近似这样的意见的么？倘其没有，则我敢决定地说，“不可以说纪德是‘第三种人’”。
This is clearly stated that although it is the same means, he is divided into favor or resistance due to different purposes. After the October Revolution in the Soviet Union, the group "Brothers of Surabion", also known as "fellow travelers", which focused on art, was not so active. China's text on the "third kind of person" has been printed in a special book this year, we can check, can any remarks that call themselves "third kind people" have the slightest similar opinion? If not, then I dare to say decisively, "It cannot be said that Gide is a 'third kind of person'".然而正如我说纪德不像中国的“第三种人”一样，戴望舒先生也觉得中国的左翼作家和法国的大有贤愚之别了。他在参加大会，为德国的左翼艺术家同伸义愤之后，就又想起了中国左翼作家的愚蠢横暴的行为。于是他临末禁不住感慨——
However, just as I said that Ji De is not like the "third kind of people" in China, Mr. Dai Wangshu also feels that there is a big difference between Chinese left-wing writers and French writers. After attending the conference and expressing his righteous indignation for left-wing artists in Germany, he remembered the stupid and tyrannical behavior of Chinese left-wing writers. So he couldn't help but sigh at the end -“我不知道我国对于德国法西斯谛的暴行有没有什么表示。正如我们的军阀一样，我们的文艺者也是勇于内战的。在法国的革命作家们和纪德携手的时候，我们的左翼作家想必还在把所谓‘第三种人’当作唯一的敌手吧！”
"I don't know if our country has any representation for the atrocities of German fascism. Just like our warlords, our literary and artistic people also had the courage to fight civil wars. When the French revolutionary writers joined hands with Gide, our left-wing writers must still regard the so-called 'third kind of man' as their only enemy! ”这里无须解答，因为事实具在：我们这里也曾经有一点表示，但因为和在法国两样，所以情形也不同；刊物上也久不见什么“把所谓‘第三种人’当作唯一的敌手”的文章，不再内战，没有军阀气味了。戴先生的豫料，是落了空的。
There is no need to answer here, because the facts are there: we have also expressed a point here, but because it is different from in France; There has been no article in the publication for a long time that "regards the so-called 'third type of person' as the only enemy", no longer a civil war, and there is no smell of warlords. Mr. Dai's expectations were disappointed.然而中国的左翼作家，这就和戴先生意中的法国左翼作家一样贤明了么？我以为并不这样，而且也不应该这样的。如果声音还没有全被削除的时候，对于“第三种人”的讨论，还极有从新提起和展开的必要。戴先生看出了法国革命作家们的隐衷，觉得在这危急时，和“第三种人”携手，也许是“精明的策略”。但我以为单靠“策略”，是没有用的，有真切的见解，才有精明的行为，只要看纪德的讲演，就知道他并不超然于政治之外，决不能贸贸然称之为“第三种人”，加以欢迎，是不必别具隐衷的。不过在中国的所谓“第三种人”，却还复杂得很。
However, are Chinese left-wing writers as wise as the French left-wing writers that Mr. Dai had in mind? I thought it wasn't, and it shouldn't be. If the voice has not been completely deleted, it is extremely necessary to raise and expand the discussion of the "third type of person" anew. Mr. Dai saw the hidden intentions of the French revolutionary writers and felt that it might be a "shrewd strategy" to join hands with the "third kind of people" in this critical time. But I think that relying on "strategy" alone is useless, with real insights, there is shrewd behavior, as long as you watch Gide's speech, you know that he is not detached from politics, and must not be hastily called a "third kind of person", and there is no need to be secretive to welcome it. However, the so-called "third type of people" in China are still very complicated.所谓“第三种人”，原意只是说：站在甲乙对立或相斗之外的人。但在实际上，是不能有的。人体有胖和瘦，在理论上，是该能有不胖不瘦的第三种人的，然而事实上却并没有，一加比较，非近于胖，就近于瘦。文艺上的“第三种人”也一样，即使好像不偏不倚罢，其实是总有些偏向的，平时有意的或无意的遮掩起来，而一遇切要的事故，它便会分明的显现。如纪德，他就显出左向来了；别的人，也能从几句话里，分明的显出。所以在这混杂的一群中，有的能和革命前进，共鸣；有的也能乘机将革命中伤，软化，曲解。左翼理论家是有着加以分析的任务的。
The so-called "third type of person" originally meant that people who stand outside the opposition or fight between A and B. But in reality, there is no such thing. The human body has fat and thin, in theory, there should be a third type of person who is neither fat nor thin, but in fact there is none. The same is true for the "third type of person" in literature and art, even if it seems to be impartial, in fact, there is always some bias, usually intentionally or unintentionally covered up, and when there is an urgent accident, it will be clearly revealed. For example, Gide appears to be left; Other people can also clearly show it from a few sentences. Therefore, in this mixed group, some can advance and resonate with the revolution; Some can also take the opportunity to slander, soften, and misinterpret the revolution. Left-wing theorists have the task of analyzing them.如果这就等于“军阀”的内战，那么，左翼理论家就必须更加继续这内战，而将营垒分清，拔去了从背后射来的毒箭！
If this is equivalent to a civil war of "warlords", then left-wing theorists must continue this civil war even more, divide the camp, and pull out the poisoned arrows shot from behind!六月四日。
June 4th.

“蜜蜂”与“蜜”

“蜜蜂”与“蜜”

“蜜蜂”与“蜜”

"Bee" and "Honey"陈思先生：
Mr. Chen Si:看了《涛声》上批评《蜜蜂》的文章后，发生了两个意见，要写出来，听听专家的判定。但我不再来辩论，因为《涛声》并不是打这类官司的地方。
After reading the article criticizing "Bee" on "The Sound of the Waves", two opinions arose, to write them out and listen to the judgment of experts. But I don't come to debate anymore, because "The Sound of the Waves" is not the place to fight such lawsuits.村人火烧蜂群，另有缘故，并非阶级斗争的表现，我想，这是可能的。但蜜蜂是否会于虫媒花有害，或去害风媒花呢，我想，这也是可能的。
The villagers burned the bee colony, and for another reason, it was not a manifestation of class struggle, I think, this is possible. But whether bees are harmful to insect-borne flowers, or to wind-borne flowers, I think, is also possible.昆虫有助于虫媒花的受精，非徒无害，而且有益，就是极简略的生物学上也都这样说，确是不错的。但这是在常态时候的事。假使蜂多花少，情形可就不同了，蜜蜂为了采粉或者救饥，在一花上，可以有数匹甚至十余匹一涌而入，因为争，将花瓣弄伤，因为饿，将花心咬掉，听说日本的果园，就有遭了这种伤害的。它的到风媒花上去，也还是因为饥饿的缘故。这时酿蜜已成次要，它们是吃花粉去了。
Insects help the fertilization of insect-borne flowers, which is not only harmless, but also beneficial, even in a minimalist biology, it is indeed good. But this is a normal thing. If there are more bees and fewer flowers, the situation is different, bees can have several or even more than ten horses rushing in on a flower in order to collect pollen or relieve hunger, because of fighting, injuring the petals, because of hunger, biting off the flower heart, I heard that Japanese orchards have suffered this kind of injury. It goes to the wind media flower, but also because of hunger. At this time, honey production has become secondary, and they eat pollen.所以，我以为倘花的多少，足供蜜蜂的需求，就天下太平，否则，便会“反动”。譬如蚁是养护蚜虫的，但倘将它们关在一处，又不另给食物，蚁就会将蚜虫吃掉；人是吃米或麦的，然而遇着饥馑，便吃草根树皮了。
Therefore, I thought that if the amount of flowers was enough to meet the needs of bees, the world would be peaceful, otherwise, it would be "reactionary". For example, ants are for aphids, but if they are kept in one place and not given food, the ants will eat the aphids; People eat rice or wheat, but when they are hungry, they eat grass roots and bark.中国向来也养蜂，何以并无此弊呢？那是极容易回答的：因为少。近来以养蜂为生财之大道，干这事的愈多。然而中国的蜜价，远逊欧美，与其卖蜜，不如卖蜂。又因报章鼓吹，思养蜂以获利者辈出，故买蜂者也多于买蜜。因这缘故，就使养蜂者的目的，不在于使酿蜜而在于使繁殖了。但种植之业，却并不与之俱进，遂成蜂多花少的现象，闹出上述的乱子来了。
China has always kept bees, so why doesn't it have this problem? That's the easy answer: because there are few. Recently, beekeeping has been used as a way to make money, and more and more people are doing this. However, the price of honey in China is far inferior to that of Europe and the United States, and it is better to sell bees than to sell honey. In addition, due to the publicity in the newspapers, there are many people who want to make a profit from beekeeping, so more people buy bees than honey. For this reason, the purpose of beekeepers is not to make honey but to reproduce. However, the planting industry did not keep pace with it, so it became a phenomenon of more bees and fewer flowers, causing the above-mentioned trouble.总之，中国倘不设法扩张蜂蜜的用途，及同时开辟果园农场之类，而一味出卖蜂种以图目前之利，养蜂事业是不久就要到了绝路的。此信甚希发表，以冀有心者留意也。专此，顺请著安。
In short, if China does not try to expand the use of honey and open up orchards and farms at the same time, and blindly sells bee species for current profits, beekeeping will soon reach a dead end. This letter is rarely published, hoping that those who are interested will pay attention. Specifically for this, please be safe.罗怃。六月十一日。
Luo Zhen. June 11.

经验

经验

经验

experience古人所传授下来的经验，有些实在是极可宝贵的，因为它曾经费去许多牺牲，而留给后人很大的益处。
Some of the experience passed down by the ancients is really precious, because it has cost many sacrifices and left great benefits to future generations.偶然翻翻《本草纲目》，不禁想起了这一点。这一部书，是很普通的书，但里面却含有丰富的宝藏。自然，捕风捉影的记载，也是在所不免的，然而大部分的药品的功用，却由历久的经验，这才能够知道到这程度，而尤其惊人的是关于毒药的叙述。我们一向喜欢恭维古圣人，以为药物是由一个神农皇帝独自尝出来的，他曾经一天遇到过七十二毒，但都有解法，没有毒死。这种传说，现在不能主宰人心了。人们大抵已经知道一切文物，都是历来的无名氏所逐渐的造成。建筑，烹饪，渔猎，耕种，无不如此；医药也如此。这么一想，这事情可就大起来了：大约古人一有病，最初只好这样尝一点，那样尝一点，吃了毒的就死，吃了不相干的就无效，有的竟吃到了对证的就好起来，于是知道这是对于某一种病痛的药。这样地累积下去，乃有草创的纪录，后来渐成为庞大的书，如《本草纲目》就是。而且这书中的所记，又不独是中国的，还有阿剌伯人的经验，有印度人的经验，则先前所用的牺牲之大，更可想而知了。
Accidentally flipping through the "Compendium of Materia Medica", I can't help but think of this. This book is a very ordinary book, but it contains a lot of treasures. Naturally, the records of chasing the wind and shadows are also inevitable, but the function of most drugs can only be known to this extent by long-term experience, and what is particularly amazing is the narrative about poison. We have always liked to compliment the ancient sage, thinking that the medicine was tasted by an emperor Shennong alone, who once encountered seventy-two poisons in one day, but there was a solution, and he was not poisoned. This kind of legend can no longer dominate people's hearts. People probably already know that all cultural relics are gradually created by anonymous people in the past. Construction, cooking, fishing and hunting, farming, all of them; The same is true for medicine. When you think about it this way, this matter becomes bigger: when the ancients were sick, they had to taste a little like this and that at first, they would die if they ate poison, and if they ate irrelevant things, they would be ineffective, and some would get better after eating the right ones, so they knew that this was a medicine for a certain kind of disease. In this way, there is a record of the beginning, and later it gradually became a huge book, such as the "Compendium of Materia Medica". Moreover, what is recorded in this book is not only Chinese, but also the experience of the Arabs, and the experience of the Indians, so the great sacrifices used before can be imagined.然而也有经过许多人经验之后，倒给了后人坏影响的，如俗语说“各人自扫门前雪，莫管他家瓦上霜”的便是其一。救急扶伤，一不小心，向来就很容易被人所诬陷，而还有一种坏经验的结果的歌诀，是“衙门八字开，有理无钱莫进来”，于是人们就只要事不干己，还是远远的站开干净。我想，人们在社会里，当初是并不这样彼此漠不相关的，但因豺狼当道，事实上因此出过许多牺牲，后来就自然的都走到这条道路上去了。所以，在中国，尤其是在都市里，倘使路上有暴病倒地，或翻车摔伤的人，路人围观或甚至于高兴的人尽有，肯伸手来扶助一下的人却是极少的。这便是牺牲所换来的坏处。
However, there are also those who have had a bad impact on future generations after the experience of many people, such as the saying "everyone sweeps the snow in front of the door, don't care about the frost on the tiles of his house" is one of them. Emergency healing, if you are not careful, it has always been easy to be framed by others, and there is also a song of the result of bad experience, which is "the yamen is open, and there is no money to come in", so people just don't do things themselves, or stand away from a distance. I think that people in society were not so indifferent to each other at the beginning, but because the jackals were in power, in fact, they made many sacrifices because of this, and then they all naturally came to this road. Therefore, in China, especially in cities, if there are people on the road who fall to the ground suddenly due to illness, or who overturn and fall and are injured, there are passers-by watching or even happy people, but there are very few people who are willing to reach out to help. This is the disadvantage of sacrifice.总之，经验的所得的结果无论好坏，都要很大的牺牲，虽是小事情，也免不掉要付惊人的代价。例如近来有些看报的人，对于什么宣言，通电，讲演，谈话之类，无论它怎样骈四俪六，崇论宏议，也不去注意了，甚而还至于不但不注意，看了倒不过做做嘻笑的资料。这那里有“始制文字，乃服衣裳”一样重要呢，然而这一点点结果，却是牺牲了一大片地面，和许多人的生命财产换来的。生命，那当然是别人的生命，倘是自己，就得不着这经验了。所以一切经验，是只有活人才能有的，我的决不上别人讥刺我怕死，就去自杀或拚命的当，而必须写出这一点来，就为此。而且这也是小小的经验的结果。
In short, the results of experience, whether good or bad, require great sacrifices, and even if it is a small thing, it is inevitable to pay an astonishing price. For example, some people who read newspapers recently do not pay attention to any declarations, telegrams, speeches, conversations, etc., no matter how they are in a state of confusion and grand discussions, and even do not pay attention to them, but they only make laughing materials when they read them. There is as important as "the first writing is the clothing", but this little result is the sacrifice of a large area of land and the lives and property of many people. Life, of course, is someone else's life, if it is yourself, you will not get this experience. Therefore, all experience can only be possessed by living people, and I will never commit suicide or desperately commit suicide when others ridicule me for being afraid of death, but I must write this point, for this reason. And this is also the result of a little experience.六月十二日。
June 12th.

谚语

谚语

谚语

proverb粗略的一想，谚语固然好像一时代一国民的意思的结晶，但其实，却不过是一部分的人们的意思。现在就以“各人自扫门前雪，莫管他家瓦上霜”来做例子罢，这乃是被压迫者们的格言，教人要奉公，纳税，输捐，安分，不可怠慢，不可不平，尤其是不要管闲事；而压迫者是不算在内的。
Roughly speaking, proverbs seem to be the crystallization of the meaning of an era and a nation, but in fact, they are only the meanings of some people. This is the maxim of the oppressed, teaching people to serve the public, pay taxes, pay donations, be at peace, not neglect, not to be unfair, especially not to meddle in other people's affairs; And the oppressors are not included.专制者的反面就是奴才，有权时无所不为，失势时即奴性十足。孙皓是特等的暴君，但降晋之后，简直像一个帮闲；宋徽宗在位时，不可一世，而被掳后偏会含垢忍辱。做主子时以一切别人为奴才，则有了主子，一定以奴才自命：这是天经地义，无可动摇的。
The opposite of a dictator is a slave, who does everything when he has power, and is full of servility when he loses power. Sun Hao was a special tyrant, but after surrendering to Jin, he was like a helper; When Song Huizong was in power, he was invincible, and after being captured, he would endure humiliation. When you are a master, you treat all others as slaves, and if you have a master, you must call yourself a slave: this is natural and unshakable.所以被压制时，信奉着“各人自扫门前雪，莫管他家瓦上霜”的格言的人物，一旦得势，足以凌人的时候，他的行为就截然不同，变为“各人不扫门前雪，却管他家瓦上霜”了。
Therefore, when he was suppressed, the character who believed in the maxim "everyone sweeps the snow in front of the door, don't care about the frost on the tiles of his house", once he gained power and was enough to bully others, his behavior was completely different, and he became "everyone does not sweep the snow in front of the door, but cares about the frost on the tiles of his house".二十年来，我们常常看见：武将原是练兵打仗的，且不问他这兵是用以安内或攘外，总之他的“门前雪”是治军，然而他偏来干涉教育，主持道德；教育家原是办学的，无论他成绩如何，总之他的“门前雪”是学务，然而他偏去膜拜“活佛”，绍介国医。小百姓随军充伕，童子军沿门募款。头儿胡行于上，蚁民乱碰于下，结果是各人的门前都不成样，各家的瓦上也一团糟。
In the past twenty years, we have often seen that military generals were originally training and fighting, and they did not ask him whether this soldier was used to stabilize the country or repel the outside world, in short, his "snow in front of the door" was to govern the army, but he was biased to interfere with education and preside over morality; The educator originally ran a school, no matter what his grades were, in short, his "snow in front of the door" was academic affairs, but he preferred to worship the "living Buddha" and introduce traditional Chinese medicine. The common people followed the army as soldiers, and the Boy Scouts raised money along the door. The head walked nonsense on top, and the ant people bumped on the bottom, and the result was that everyone's door was not in shape, and the tiles of each house were also a mess.女人露出了臂膊和小腿，好像竟打动了贤人们的心，我记得曾有许多人絮絮叨叨，主张禁止过，后来也确有明文禁止了。不料到得今年，却又“衣服蔽体已足，何必前拖后曳，消耗布匹，……顾念时艰，后患何堪设想”起来，四川的营山县长于是就令公安局派队一一剪掉行人的长衣的下截。长衣原是累赘的东西，但以为不穿长衣，或剪去下截，即于“时艰”有补，却是一种特别的经济学。《汉书》上有一句云，“口含天宪”，此之谓也。
The woman showed her arms and calves, as if she had touched the hearts of the sages, and I remember that many people babbled and advocated prohibition, and later it was indeed explicitly prohibited. Unexpectedly, this year, "the clothes cover the body enough, why drag forward and backward, consume cloth,...... Considering the difficulties of the times, how can the future troubles be imagined", the county magistrate of Yingshan County in Sichuan ordered the Public Security Bureau to send a team to cut off the lower parts of the pedestrians' long clothes one by one. The long robe was originally a cumbersome thing, but it was thought that not wearing a long coat, or cutting off the lower section, that is, it would be helpful in "difficult times", but it was a special kind of economics. There is a sentence in the "Book of Han" that says, "The mouth contains the heavenly constitution," which is what it means.某一种人，一定只有这某一种人的思想和眼光，不能越出他本阶级之外。说起来，好像又在提倡什么犯讳的阶级了，然而事实是如此的。谣谚并非全国民的意思，就为了这缘故。古之秀才，自以为无所不晓，于是有“秀才不出门，而知天下事”这自负的漫天大谎，小百姓信以为真，也就渐渐的成了谚语，流行开来。其实是“秀才虽出门，不知天下事”的。秀才只有秀才头脑和秀才眼睛，对于天下事，那里看得分明，想得清楚。清末，因为想“维新”，常派些“人才”出洋去考察，我们现在看看他们的笔记罢，他们最以为奇的是什么馆里的蜡人能够和活人对面下棋。南海圣人康有为，佼佼者也，他周游十一国，一直到得巴尔干，这才悟出外国之所以常有“弑君”之故来了，曰：因为宫墙太矮的缘故。
A certain kind of person must only have this kind of person's thoughts and vision, and cannot go beyond his own class. Speaking of which, it seems that they are advocating some kind of taboo class again, but this is the case. Rumors and proverbs do not mean the whole people, just for this reason. The ancient scholars thought they knew everything, so there was a conceited lie that "the scholar does not go out, but knows the affairs of the world", and the common people believed it to be true, and gradually became a proverb and became popular. In fact, "although the scholar goes out, he doesn't know the affairs of the world". The scholar only has the scholar's mind and the scholar's eyes, and he can see clearly and think clearly about the affairs of the world. At the end of the Qing Dynasty, because they wanted to "reform", they often sent some "talents" to go abroad for inspection, and now let's take a look at their notes, what they are most surprised about is that the wax figures in the museum can play chess against living people. The saint of the South China Sea, Kang Youwei, was also a leader, he traveled around eleven countries, until he got to the Balkans, and then he realized that the reason why foreign countries often "killed kings" came, saying: Because the palace wall was too low.六月十三日。
June 13th.

大家降一级试试看

大家降一级试试看

大家降一级试试看

Let's try it down《文学》第一期的《〈图书评论〉所评文学书部分的清算》，是很有趣味，很有意义的一篇账。这《图书评论》不但是“我们唯一的批评杂志”，也是我们的教授和学者们所组成的唯一的联军。然而文学部分中，关于译注本的批评却占了大半，这除掉那《清算》里所指出的各种之外，实在也还有一个切要的原因，就是在我们学术界文艺界作工的人员，大抵都比他的实力凭空跳高一级。
The first issue of "Literature", "The Liquidation of the Literary Books Reviewed by Book Review", is a very interesting and meaningful account. The Book Review is not only "our only critical magazine", but also the only coalition of our professors and scholars. However, in the literary part, the criticism of the translation and annotation accounts for the majority, which is in addition to the various points pointed out in the "Liquidation", there is also an important reason, that is, the people who work in our academic and literary circles are probably one level higher than his strength.校对员一面要通晓排版的格式，一面要多认识字，然而看现在的出版物，“己”与“已”，“戮”与“戳”，“剌”与“刺”，在很多的眼睛里是没有区别的。版式原是排字工人的事情，因为他不管，就压在校对员的肩膀上，如果他再不管，那就成为和大家不相干。作文的人首先也要认识字，但在文章上，往往以“战慓”为“战慄”，以“巳竟”为“已经”；“非常顽艳”是因妒杀人的情形；“年已鼎盛”的意思，是说这人已有六十多岁了。至于译注的书，那自然，不是“硬译”，就是误译，为了训斥与指正，竟占去了九本《图书评论》中文学部分的书数的一半，就是一个不可动摇的证明。
On the one hand, proofreaders must be familiar with the format of typesetting, and on the other hand, they must know more words, but looking at the current publications, there is no difference between "self" and "already", "killing" and "poking", "pulling" and "tjaking", in many eyes. The layout was originally a typographer's business, because he didn't care, he put it on the shoulders of the proofreader, and if he didn't care, it would become irrelevant to everyone. People who compose essays must first know the words, but in the article, they often use "trembling" as "trembling" and "Sijing" as "already"; "Very stubborn" is a situation of killing people out of jealousy; "In the prime of life" means that the person is in his sixties. As for the translated books, naturally, they are either "hard translations" or mistranslations, and in order to reprimand and correct, they actually account for half of the number of books in the Chinese section of the nine "Book Reviews", which is an unshakable proof.这些错误的书的出现，当然大抵是因为看准了社会上的需要，匆匆的来投机，但一面也实在为了胜任的人，不肯自贬声价，来做这用力多而获利少的工作的缘故。否则，这些译注者是只配埋首大学，去谨听教授们的指示的。只因为能够不至于误译的人们洁身远去，出版界上空荡荡了，遂使小兵也来挂着帅印，辱没了翻译的天下。
The emergence of these wrong books is of course probably because they see the needs of society and come to speculate in a hurry, but on the other hand, they are really for the sake of competent people, who refuse to devalue themselves and do this work with more effort and less profit. Otherwise, these translators are only worthy of immersing themselves in the university and listening to the instructions of the professors. Just because the people who could not mistranslate went away, the publishing world was empty, so that the soldiers also came to hang the handsome seal, humiliating the world of translation.但是，胜任的译注家那里去了呢？那不消说，他也跳了一级，做了教授，成为学者了。“世无英雄，遂使竖子成名”，于是只配做学生的胚子，就乘着空虚，托庇变了译注者。而事同一律，只配做个译注者的胚子，却踞着高座，昂然说法了。杜威教授有他的实验主义，白璧德教授有他的人文主义，从他们那里零零碎碎贩运一点回来的就变了中国的呵斥八极的学者，不也是一个不可动摇的证明么？
But where did the competent translator go? Needless to say, he also jumped a level, became a professor, and became a scholar. "There is no hero in the world, so the boy became famous", so he was only worthy of being a student's embryo, and took advantage of the emptiness to become a translator. And everything is the same, only worthy of being a translator's embryo, but he sits on a high seat and speaks proudly. Isn't it also an unshakable proof that Professor Dewey has his experimentalism and Professor Bai Bide has his humanism, and those who come back from them piece by piece have become Chinese scholars who scold the eight extremes?要澄清中国的翻译界，最好是大家都降下一级去，虽然那时候是否真是都能胜任愉快，也还是一个没有把握的问题。
To clarify the Chinese translation industry, it is best for everyone to go down to a lower level, although it is still a question of uncertainty whether they can really be competent and happy at that time.七月七日。
July 7th.

沙

沙

沙

sand近来的读书人，常常叹中国人好像一盘散沙，无法可想，将倒楣的责任，归之于大家。其实这是冤枉了大部分中国人的。小民虽然不学，见事也许不明，但知道关于本身利害时，何尝不会团结。先前有跪香，民变，造反；现在也还有请愿之类。他们的像沙，是被统治者“治”成功的，用文言来说，就是“治绩”。
Recently, scholars often lament that the Chinese are like a plate of loose sand, and it is unimaginable that they attribute the responsibility for their unluck to everyone. In fact, this is wronging most Chinese. Although the common people do not learn and may not know what is happening, they will not unite when they know their own interests. There were kneeling incense, popular uprising, and rebellion; Now there are also petitions and the like. Their resemblance to sand was successfully "governed" by the ruler, and in literal terms, it was "governance".那么，中国就没有沙么？有是有的，但并非小民，而是大小统治者。
So, is there no sand in China? There are people, but not small people, but rulers of all sizes.人们又常常说：“升官发财”。其实这两件事是不并列的，其所以要升官，只因为要发财，升官不过是一种发财的门径。所以官僚虽然依靠朝廷，却并不忠于朝廷，吏役虽然依靠衙署，却并不爱护衙署，头领下一个清廉的命令，小喽罗是决不听的，对付的方法有“蒙蔽”。他们都是自私自利的沙，可以肥己时就肥己，而且每一粒都是皇帝，可以称尊处就称尊。有些人译俄皇为“沙皇”，移赠此辈，倒是极确切的尊号。财何从来？是从小民身上刮下来的。小民倘能团结，发财就烦难，那么，当然应该想尽方法，使他们变成散沙才好。以沙皇治小民，于是全中国就成为“一盘散沙”了。
People often say: "Get promoted and get rich". In fact, these two things are not parallel, the reason why they want to be promoted is just because they want to get rich, and promotion is just a way to get rich. Therefore, although the bureaucrats rely on the imperial court, they are not loyal to the imperial court, and although the officials rely on the yamen, they do not love the yamen, and the leader will never listen to the orders of integrity, and the methods of dealing with them are "blinded". They are all selfish sand, fattening themselves when they can fatten themselves, and each grain is an emperor, and they can be honored where they can be honored. Some people translate the Russian emperor as "Tsar" and transfer it to this generation, which is a very accurate honorific title. Where does wealth come from? It was scraped off the small people. If the common people can unite and get rich, it will be troublesome, then, of course, they should try their best to turn them into scattered sand. With the tsar to govern the common people, the whole of China became "a plate of loose sand".然而沙漠以外，还有团结的人们在，他们“如入无人之境”的走进来了。
However, beyond the desert, there are united people who walk in "as if in no man's land".这就是沙漠上的大事变。当这时候，古人曾有两句极切贴的比喻，叫作“君子为猿鹤，小人为虫沙”。那些君子们，不是像白鹤的腾空，就如猢狲的上树，“树倒猢狲散”，另外还有树，他们决不会吃苦。剩在地下的，便是小民的蝼蚁和泥沙，要践踏杀戮都可以，他们对沙皇尚且不敌，怎能敌得过沙皇的胜者呢？
This is the big change in the desert. At this time, the ancients had two extremely appointed metaphors, called "the gentleman is the ape and the crane, and the villain is the insect sand". Those gentlemen are not like the white crane soaring into the air, like the monkey climbing the tree, "the tree falls and the monkey scatters", and there are trees, they will never endure hardship. What is left on the ground is the ants and sediment of the common people, who can be trampled and killed, and they are still invincible to the Tsar, how can they compete with the Tsar's winners?然而当这时候，偏又有人摇笔鼓舌，向着小民提出严重的质问道：“国民将何以自处”呢，“问国民将何以善其后”呢？忽然记得了“国民”，别的什么都不说，只又要他们来填亏空，不是等于向着缚了手脚的人，要求他去捕盗么？
However, at this time, some people shook their pens and raised serious questions to the common people: "How will the people deal with themselves", "How will the people do their best"? Suddenly remembering the "nationals", nothing else, just asking them to fill the gap, isn't it equivalent to asking the person who has tied his hands and feet to catch the thief?但这正是沙皇治绩的后盾，是猿鸣鹤唳的尾声，称尊肥己之余，必然到来的末一着。
But this is the backing of the Tsar's achievements, the end of the ape's cry, and the end that will inevitably come in addition to honoring oneself.七月十二日。
July 12.

给文学社信

给文学社信

给文学社信

Letter to the Literary Society编辑先生：
Mr. Editor:《文学》第二号，伍实先生写的《休士在中国》中，开首有这样的一段——
In the second issue of "Literature", "Hughes in China" written by Mr. Wu Shi, there is such a paragraph at the beginning -“……萧翁是名流，自配我们的名流招待，且唯其是名流招待名流，这才使鲁迅先生和梅兰芳博士有千载一时的机会得聚首于一堂。休士呢，不但不是我们的名流心目中的那种名流，且还加上一层肤色上的顾忌！”
“…… Xiao Weng is a celebrity, and he deserves our celebrity hospitality, and only when he is a celebrity entertains celebrities, which gives Mr. Lu Xun and Dr. Mei Lanfang a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to get together. Hughes, not only is he not the kind of celebrity in the minds of our celebrities, but he also has a layer of scruples about skin color! ”是的，见萧的不只我一个，但我见了一回萧，就被大小文豪一直笑骂到现在，最近的就是这回因此就并我和梅兰芳为一谈的名文。然而那时是招待者邀我去的。这回的招待休士，我并未接到通知，时间地址，全不知道，怎么能到？即使邀而不到，也许有别种的原因，当口诛笔伐之前，似乎也须略加考察。现在并未相告，就责我不到，因这不到，就断定我看不起黑种。作者是相信的罢，读者不明事实，大概也可以相信的，但我自己还不相信我竟是这样一个势利卑劣的人！
Yes, I am not the only one who has seen Xiao, but once I saw Xiao, I have been laughed at and scolded by the big and small writers until now, and the most recent is this famous article that I and Mei Lanfang talked about. However, it was the hosts who invited me to go. This time I didn't receive a notice to entertain Hughes, I didn't know the time and address, how could I get there? Even if you can't get invited, there may be other reasons, and it seems that you need to investigate a little before criticizing and writing. Now that I haven't told you, you blame me for not being able to do it, and because I can't do it, I conclude that I look down on the black race. The author believes it, and the reader doesn't know the facts, so he can probably believe it, but I still don't believe that I am such a snobbish and despicable person!给我以诬蔑和侮辱，是平常的事；我也并不为奇：惯了。但那是小报，是敌人。略具识见的，一看就明白。而《文学》是挂着冠冕堂皇的招牌的，我又是同人之一，为什么无端虚构事迹，大加奚落，至于到这地步呢？莫非缺一个势利卑劣的老人，也在文学戏台上跳舞一下，以给观众开心，且催呕吐么？我自信还不至于是这样的脚色，我还能够从此跳下这可怕的戏台。那时就无论怎样诬辱嘲骂，彼此都没有矛盾了。
It is common to slander and insult me; I'm not surprised: I'm used to it. But that's the tabloid, it's the enemy. Those who have a little insight will understand it at a glance. And "Literature" is hung with a high-sounding signboard, and I am one of the same people, why do I make up fictional deeds for no reason and ridicule them, as for this point? Could it be that there is a lack of a snobbish and despicable old man who also dances on the literary stage to make the audience happy and induce vomiting? I am confident that I will not be like this, and I will be able to jump off this terrible stage from now on. At that time, no matter how much they were slandered and ridiculed, there was no contradiction between them.我看伍实先生其实是化名，他一定也是名流，就是招待休士，非名流也未必能够入座。不过他如果和上海的所谓文坛上的那些狐鼠有别，则当施行人身攻击之际，似乎应该略负一点责任，宣布出和他的本身相关联的姓名，给我看看真实的嘴脸。这无关政局，决无危险，况且我们原曾相识，见面时倒是装作十分客气的也说不定的。
I think Mr. Wu Shi is actually a pseudonym, he must also be a celebrity, that is, he entertains Hughes, and non-celebrities may not be able to take a seat. However, if he is different from the so-called foxes and rats in Shanghai's literary world, it seems that he should take a little responsibility when he commits a personal attack, announce the name associated with himself, and show me his real face. This has nothing to do with the political situation, there is no danger, and we have known each other before, so we may pretend to be very polite when we meet.临末，我要求这封信就在《文学》三号上发表。
At the end of the day, I asked this letter to be published in Literature No. 3.鲁迅。七月二十九日。
Lu Xun. July 29.

关于翻译

关于翻译

关于翻译

About translation今年是“国货年”，除“美麦”外，有些洋气的都要被打倒了。四川虽然正在奉令剪掉路人的长衫，上海的一位慷慨家却因为讨厌洋服而记得了袍子和马褂。翻译也倒了运，得到一个笼统的头衔是“硬译”和“乱译”。但据我所见，这些“批评家”中，一面要求着“好的翻译”者，却一个也没有的。
This year is the "Year of Domestic Products", in addition to "American wheat", some foreign ones are going to be knocked down. Although Sichuan was ordered to cut off the long shirts of passers-by, a generous man in Shanghai remembered the robe and horse coat because he hated foreign clothes. Translation is also unlucky, and the general titles are "hard translation" and "random translation". But as far as I can see, none of these "critics" demand "good translators".创作对于自己人，的确要比翻译切身，易解，然而一不小心，也容易发生“硬作”，“乱作”的毛病，而这毛病，却比翻译要坏得多。我们的文化落后，无可讳言，创作力当然也不及洋鬼子，作品的比较的薄弱，是势所必至的，而且又不能不时时取法于外国。所以翻译和创作，应该一同提倡，决不可压抑了一面，使创作成为一时的骄子，反因容纵而脆弱起来。我还记得先前有一个排货的年头，国货家贩了外国的牙粉，摇松了两瓶，装作三瓶，贴上商标，算是国货，而购买者却多损失了三分之一；还有一种痱子药水，模样和洋货完全相同，价钱却便宜一半，然而它有一个大缺点，是搽了之后，毫无功效，于是购买者便完全损失了。
Creation is indeed more relevant and easy to understand than translation, but if you are not careful, it is also easy to have the problem of "hard work" and "mess up", and this problem is much worse than translation. Our culture is backward, there is no denying that our creativity is not as good as that of foreign devils, and the comparison of works is weak, which is inevitable, and we cannot learn from foreign countries from time to time. Therefore, translation and creation should be advocated together, and must not be suppressed, so that creation becomes a temporary pride, but becomes vulnerable because of tolerance. I still remember that there was a year when domestic products sold foreign tooth powder, shook two bottles, pretended to be three bottles, and affixed them with trademarks, which were considered domestic products, but the buyer lost one-third more; There is also a kind of prickly heat potion, which looks exactly the same as foreign products, but the price is half cheaper, but it has a big disadvantage, that is, after applying it, it has no effect, so the buyer completely loses it.注重翻译，以作借镜，其实也就是催进和鼓励着创作。但几年以前，就有了攻击“硬译”的“批评家”，搔下他旧疮疤上的末屑，少得像膏药上的麝香一样，因为少，就自以为是奇珍。而这风气竟传布开来了，许多新起的论者，今年都在开始轻薄着贩来的洋货。比起武人的大买飞机，市民的拚命捐款来，所谓“文人”也者，真是多么昏庸的人物呵。
Paying attention to translation as a reference is actually promoting and encouraging creation. But a few years ago, there were "critics" who attacked the "hard translation", scratching off the scraps on his old scars, as little as musk on plaster, because there were few, they thought they were treasures. And this trend has spread, and many new commentators have begun to sell foreign goods lightly this year. Compared with the big purchase of planes by warriors, the desperate donations of citizens, the so-called "literati", what a mediocre character.我要求中国有许多好的翻译家，倘不能，就支持着“硬译”。理由还在中国有许多读者层，有着并不全是骗人的东西，也许总有人会多少吸收一点，比一张空盘较为有益。而且我自己是向来感谢着翻译的，例如关于萧的毁誉和现在正在提起的题材的积极性的问题，在洋货里，是早有了明确的解答的。关于前者，德国的尉特甫格（Karl Wittvogel）在《萧伯纳是丑角》里说过——
I ask that there are many good translators in China, and if not, they will support "hard translation". The reason is that there are still many readers in China, and there are things that are not all deceptive, and maybe there will always be people who will absorb a little bit, which is more beneficial than an empty disk. And I myself have always been grateful for the translation, for example, the question about Xiao's reputation and the enthusiasm of the subject matter that is being raised now has already been clearly answered in foreign goods. Regarding the former, Germany's Karl Wittvogel said in "George Bernard Shaw is a Harlequin" -“至于说到萧氏是否有意于无产阶级的革命，这并不是一个重要的问题。十八世纪的法国大哲学家们，也并不希望法国的大革命。虽然如此，然而他们都是引导着必至的社会变更的那种精神崩溃的重要势力。”（刘大杰译，《萧伯纳在上海》所载。）
As for whether Shaw was interested in the revolution of the proletariat, this is not an important question. The great French philosophers of the eighteenth century did not want a great revolution in France. However, they are all important forces in the kind of mental breakdown that leads to inevitable social change. (Translated by Liu Dajie, published in "George Bernard Shaw in Shanghai".) ）关于后者，则恩格勒在给明那·考茨基（Minna Kautsky，就是现存的考茨基的母亲）的信里，已有极明确的指示，对于现在的中国，也是很有意义的——
Regarding the latter, Engler has given very clear instructions in his letter to Minna Kautsky (the living Kautsky's mother), which is also very meaningful for today's China -“还有，在今日似的条件之下，小说是大抵对于布尔乔亚层的读者的，所以，由我看来，只要正直地叙述出现实的相互关系，毁坏了罩在那上面的作伪的幻影，使布尔乔亚世界的乐观主义动摇，使对于现存秩序的永远的支配起疑，则社会主义的倾向的文学，也就十足地尽了它的使命了——即使作者在这时并未提出什么特定的解决，或者有时连作者站在那一边也不很明白。”（日本上田进原译，《思想》百三十四号所载。）
"Also, under today's conditions, the novel is generally intended for the bourgeois reader, so it seems to me that as long as the interrelations of reality are honestly narrated, the illusion of fake over it is destroyed, the optimism of the bourgeois world is shaken, and the eternal domination of the existing order is questioned, then the literature of socialist tendencies has fulfilled its mission - even if the author does not propose any specific solution at this time, or sometimes even the author is not very clear on that side." (Translated by Susumu Ueda, Japan, published in Thought No. 134.) ）八月二日。
August 2nd.

《一个人的受难》序

《一个人的受难》序

《一个人的受难》序

Preface to "The Passion of a Man"“连环图画”这名目，现在已经有些用熟了，无须更改；但其实是应该称为“连续图画”的，因为它并非“如环无端”，而是有起有讫的画本。中国古来的所谓“长卷”，如《长江无尽图卷》，如《归去来辞图卷》，也就是这一类，不过联成一幅罢了。
The name "comic strip" is now somewhat familiar and does not need to be changed; But in fact, it should be called a "continuous picture", because it is not "like a ring without cause", but a picture book with a beginning and an end. The so-called "long scrolls" in ancient China, such as the "Yangtze River Endless Scroll" and "Return to the Words Scroll", are of this category, but they are just connected into one.这种画法的起源真是早得很。埃及石壁所雕名王的功绩，“死书”所画冥中的情形，已就是连环图画。别的民族，古今都有，无须细述了。这于观者很有益，因为一看即可以大概明白当时的若干的情形，不比文辞，非熟习的不能领会。到十九世纪末，西欧的画家，有许多很喜欢作这一类画，立一个题，制成画帖，但并不一定连贯的。用图画来叙事，又比较的后起，所作最多的就是麦绥莱勒。我想，这和电影有极大的因缘，因为一面是用图画来替文字的故事，同时也是用连续来代活动的电影。
The origin of this painting method is really very early. The exploits of famous kings carved on the stone walls of Egypt and the situation in the underworld painted by the "Book of Death" are already comic strips. There are other ethnic groups in ancient and modern times, so there is no need to go into detail. This is very beneficial to the viewer, because at a glance you can roughly understand some of the situations at that time, unlike the rhetoric, which cannot be understood by those who are not familiar with it. By the end of the 19th century, many Western European painters liked to make this type of painting, setting a title and making a picture post, but it was not necessarily coherent. Using pictures to narrate, and comparing the latecomers, the one who did the most was Mai Suilele. I think this has a lot to do with movies, because on the one hand, it is a story that uses pictures to replace words, and it is also a film that uses continuous activities to replace activities.麦绥莱勒（Frans Masereel）是反对欧战的一人；据他自己说，以一八九九年七月三十一日生于弗兰兑伦的勃兰勘培克（Blankenberghe in Flandern），幼小时候是很幸福的，因为玩的多，学的少。求学时代是在干德（Gent），在那里的艺术学院里学了小半年；后来就漫游德，英，瑞士，法国去了，而最爱的是巴黎，称之为“人生的学校”。在瑞士时，常投画稿于日报上，摘发社会的隐病，罗曼罗兰比之于陀密埃（Daumier）和戈耶（Goya）。但所作最多的是木刻的书籍上的插图，和全用图画来表现的故事。他是酷爱巴黎的，所以作品往往浪漫，奇诡，出于人情，因以收得惊异和滑稽的效果。独有这《一个人的受难》（Die Passion eines Menschen）乃是写实之作，和别的图画故事都不同。
Frans Masereel was one of the opposition to the European war; According to himself, he was born on July 31, 1899 in Blankenberghe in Flandern, and was very happy when he was a child, because he played more and learned less. I was in Gent, where I studied at the Academy of Arts for half a year; Later, I roamed Germany, England, Switzerland, and France, and my favorite was Paris, which I called "the school of life". When he was in Switzerland, he often submitted his drawings to daily newspapers to expose the hidden diseases of society, and Romain Rolland compared him to Daumier and Goya. But what he did most was illustrations on woodcut books and stories expressed entirely in pictures. He loves Paris, so his works are often romantic, strange, and out of human feelings, so he receives surprising and comical effects. This unique "Die Passion eines Menschen" is a realistic work, which is different from other picture stories.这故事二十五幅中，也并无一字的说明。但我们一看就知道：在桌椅之外，一无所有的屋子里，一个女子怀着孕了（一），生产之后，即被别人所斥逐，不过我不知道斥逐她的是雇主，还是她的父亲（二）。于是她只好在路上彷徨（三），终于跟了别人；先前的孩子，便进了野孩子之群，在街头捣乱（四）。稍大，去学木匠，但那么重大的工作，幼童是不胜任的（五），到底免不了被人踢出，像打跑一条野狗一样（六）。他为饥饿所逼，就去偷面包（七），而立刻被维持秩序的巡警所捕获（八），关进监牢里去了（九）。罚满释出（十），这回却轮到他在热闹的路上彷徨（十一），但幸而也竟找得了修路的工作（十二）。不过，终日挥着鹤嘴锄，是会觉得疲劳的（十三），这时乘机而入的却是恶友（十四），他受了诱惑，去会妓女（十五），去玩跳舞了（十六）。但归途中又悔恨起来（十七），决计进厂做工，而且一早就看书自习（十八）；在这环境里，这才遇到了真的相爱的同人（十九）。但劳资两方冲突了，他登高呼号，联合了工人，和资本家战斗（二十），于是奸细窥探于前（二十一），兵警弹压于后（二十二），奸细又从中离间，他被捕了（二十三）。在受难的“神之子”耶稣像前，这“人之子”就受着裁判（二十四）；自然是死刑，他站着，等候着兵们的开枪（二十五）！
In the twenty-five pictures of this story, there is not a single word of explanation. But we know at a glance: in a room with nothing except tables and chairs, a woman is pregnant (1), and after giving birth, she is rejected by others, but I don't know if it was her employer or her father (2) who reprimanded her. So she had to wander on the road (3) and finally followed others; The previous children joined the group of wild children and caused trouble in the streets (4). When he is a little older, he goes to learn carpentry, but such a major job, young children are not competent (5), and it is inevitable that they will be kicked out, like beating away a wild dog (6). Driven by hunger, he went to steal bread (7), and was immediately caught by the patrolmen who kept the order (8) and put in prison (9). After the punishment was completed (10), this time it was his turn to wander on the busy road (11), but fortunately he found a job to build a road (12). However, he will feel tired from wielding a crane's beak hoe all day long (13), but at this time it is the bad friend (14) who takes the opportunity to enter the room, and he is tempted to meet prostitutes (15) and go to play and dance (16). But on the way back, he regretted it again (17), decided to go to the factory to work, and read books early in the morning to study (18); In this environment, I met a fandom who really loved each other (19). However, when the labor and management clashed, he climbed the shouting sign, united the workers, and fought with the capitalists (20), so the spies spied on the front (21), the soldiers and police suppressed the back (22), and the spies sow discord between them, and he was arrested (23). In front of the image of Jesus, the suffering "Son of God," the "Son of Man" is judged (24); Naturally, it was the death penalty, he stood, waiting for the soldiers to shoot (twenty-five)!耶稣说过，富翁想进天国，比骆驼走过针孔还要难。但说这话的人，自己当时却受难（Passion）了。现在是欧美的一切富翁，几乎都是耶稣的信奉者，而受难的就轮到了穷人。
Jesus said that it is more difficult for a rich man to enter the kingdom of heaven than for a camel to walk through a pinhole. But the person who said this himself suffered passion at that time. Now almost all the rich in Europe and the United States are believers in Jesus, and it is the turn of the poor who suffer.这就是《一个人的受难》中所叙述的。
This is what is narrated in "The Passion of a Man".一九三三年八月六日，鲁迅记。
August 6, 1933, Lu Xunji.

祝《涛声》

祝《涛声》

祝《涛声》

Wishing "The Sound of the Waves"《涛声》的寿命有这么长，想起来实在有点奇怪的。
The lifespan of "The Sound of the Waves" is so long, it's really strange to think about it.大前年和前年，所谓作家也者，还有什么什么会，标榜着什么什么文学，到去年就渺渺茫茫了，今年是大抵化名办小报，卖消息；消息那里有这么多呢，于是造谣言。先前的所谓作家还会联成黑幕小说，现在是联也不会联了，零零碎碎的塞进读者的脑里去，使消息和秘闻之类成为他们的全部大学问。这功绩的褒奖是稿费之外，还有消息奖，“挂羊头卖狗肉”也成了过去的事，现在是在“卖人肉”了。
The year before last and the year before last, the so-called writers, what else can they do, what literature they advertise, by last year it was vague, this year is mostly a pseudonym to run tabloids, sell news; There is so much news there, so rumors are spread. In the past, the so-called writers would also be linked into shady novels, but now they will not be linked, stuffed into the readers' minds piece by piece, so that news and secret news become all their college questions. In addition to the manuscript fee, there is also a news award, and "selling dog meat with sheep's heads" has become a thing of the past, and now it is "selling human meat".于是不“卖人肉”的刊物及其作者们，便成为被卖的货色。这也是无足奇的，中国是农业国，而麦子却要向美国定购，独有出卖小孩，只要几百钱一斤，则古文明国中的文艺家，当然只好卖血，尼采说过：“我爱血写的书”呀。
As a result, publications that do not "sell human flesh" and their authors become the goods that are sold. This is also not surprising, China is an agricultural country, but wheat has to be ordered from the United States, and the only thing that sells children is only a few hundred dollars a pound, then the writers and artists in the ancient civilization country, of course, have to sell blood, Nietzsche said: "I love books written with blood".然而《涛声》尚存，这就是我所谓“想起来实在有点奇怪”。
However, "The Sound of the Waves" still exists, which is what I call "it's a bit strange to think about".这是一种幸运，也是一个缺点。看现在的景况，凡有敕准或默许其存在的，倒往往会被一部分人们摇头。有人批评过我，说，只要看鲁迅至今还活着，就足见不是一个什么好人。这是真的，自民元革命以至现在，好人真不知道被害死了多少了，不过谁也没有记一篇准账。这事实又教坏了我，因为我知道即使死掉，也不过给他们大卖消息，大造谣言，说我的被杀，其实是为了金钱或女人关系。所以，名列于该杀之林则可，悬梁服毒，是不来的。
This is both a stroke of luck and a disadvantage. Looking at the current situation, anyone who has permission or acquiesces to its existence will often be shaken by some people. Someone criticized me, saying that as long as you see that Lu Xun is still alive, it shows that he is not a good person. This is true, since the Minyuan Revolution to the present, good people really don't know how many people have been killed, but no one has kept an account. This fact taught me badly, because I knew that even if I died, I would only sell them the news, spread rumors, and say that I was killed for money or women's relationships. Therefore, it is okay to be listed in the forest of killing, but it is not possible to take poison from the hanging beam.《涛声》上常有赤膊打仗，拚死拚活的文章，这脾气和我很相反，并不是幸存的原因。我想，那幸运而且也是缺点之处，是在总喜欢引古证今，带些学究气。中国人虽然自夸“四千余年古国古”，可是十分健忘的，连民族主义文学家，也会认成吉斯汗为老祖宗，则不宜与之谈古也可见。上海的市侩们更不需要这些，他们感到兴趣的只是今天开奖，邻右争风；眼光远大的也不过要知道名公如何游山，阔人和谁要好之类；高尚的就看什么学界琐闻，文坛消息。总之，是已将生命割得零零碎碎了。
There are often articles on "The Sound of the Waves" about fighting shirtless and fighting to the death, which is the opposite of my temper and is not the reason for survival. I think that luck and disadvantage is that I always like to quote the past and prove the present, with a bit of pedanticism. Although the Chinese boast of "more than 4,000 years of ancient national ancients", they are very forgetful, and even nationalist writers will recognize Genghis Khan as their ancestor, so it is not appropriate to talk about the ancients. The philistines in Shanghai don't need these even more, they are only interested in today's lottery and the neighbors and the right are competing with each other; The far-sighted only knows how the famous man swims in the mountains, and who is good with the broad person; The noble ones look at what academic trivia and literary news they have. In short, life has been cut to pieces.这可以使《涛声》的销路不见得好，然而一面也使《涛声》长寿。文人学士是清高的，他们现在也更加聪明，不再恭维自己的主子，来着痕迹了。他们只是排好暗箭，拿定粪帚，监督着应该俯伏着的奴隶们，看有谁抬起头来的，就射过去，洒过去，结果也许会终于使这人被绑架或被暗杀，由此使民国的国民一律“平等”。《涛声》在销路上的不大出头，也正给它逃了暂时的性命，不过，也还是很难说，因为“不测之威”，也是古来就有的。
This can make the sales of "The Sound of the Waves" not necessarily good, but on the other hand, it also makes "The Sound of the Waves" longevity. Literati and bachelors are noble, and they are smarter now, no longer complimenting their masters, and there are traces. They just lined up the hidden arrows, took the dung broom, supervised the slaves who should be prostrated, and when they saw who raised their heads, they shot and sprinkled them, and the result might finally make the person kidnapped or assassinated, so that the people of the Republic of China were all "equal". "The Sound of the Waves" has not made a big start in sales, and it is also escaping its temporary life, but it is still difficult to say, because the "unpredictable power" has also existed since ancient times.我是爱看《涛声》的，并且以为这样也就好。然而看近来，不谈政治呀，仍谈政治呀，似乎更加不大安分起来，则我的那些忠告，对于“乌鸦为记”的刊物，恐怕也不见得有效。
I love watching "The Sound of the Waves" and think it's okay. However, looking at the recent situation, it seems that not talking about politics but still talking about politics seems to be even more uneasy, so my advice may not be effective for the publication "Crow as a Record".那么，“祝”也还是“白祝”，我也只好看一张，算一张了。昔人诗曰，“丧乱死多门”，信夫！
Then, "Zhu" is still "Bai Zhu", I have to look at one, count one. The ancients wrote in a poem that said, "In chaos and chaos, many people die at the door," and this is indeed true!八月六日。
August 6th.十一月二十五日的《涛声》上，果然发出《休刊辞》来，开首道：“十一月二十日下午，本刊奉令缴还登记证，‘民亦劳止，汔可小康’。我们准备休息一些时了。……”这真是康有为所说似的“不幸而吾言中”，岂不奇而不奇也哉。
On November 25, the "Sound of the Waves" indeed issued a "Closure Speech", which began: "On the afternoon of November 20, this magazine was ordered to return the registration certificate, 'the people are also tired, and they can be well-off'. It's time for us to take a break. ...... this is really what Kang Youwei said, "unfortunately and in my words", isn't it strange and not surprising?十二月三十一夜，补记。
On the night of December 31st, supplementary records.

上海的少女

上海的少女

上海的少女

A girl in Shanghai在上海生活，穿时髦衣服的比土气的便宜。如果一身旧衣服，公共电车的车掌会不照你的话停车，公园看守会格外认真的检查入门券，大宅子或大客寓的门丁会不许你走正门。所以，有些人宁可居斗室，喂臭虫，一条洋服裤子却每晚必须压在枕头下，使两面裤腿上的折痕天天有棱角。
Living in Shanghai, wearing fashionable clothes is cheaper than rustic. If you are wearing old clothes, the conductor of the public tram will stop without your words, the park guards will check the entrance ticket very carefully, and the doorman of the big house or the big guest house will not allow you to go through the main gate. Therefore, some people would rather live in a fighting room and feed bed bugs, but a pair of clothes and pants must be pressed under the pillow every night, so that the creases on the legs of both sides are angular every day.然而更便宜的是时髦的女人。这在商店里最看得出：挑选不完，决断不下，店员也还是很能忍耐的。不过时间太长，就须有一种必要的条件，是带着一点风骚，能受几句调笑。否则，也会终于引出普通的白眼来。
Cheaper, however, are fashionable women. This is most evident in the store: there is no choice but to make a decision, and the clerk is still very patient. But if the time is too long, there must be a necessary condition, which is to be a little coquettish and be able to be ridiculed. Otherwise, it will finally lead to ordinary white eyes.惯在上海生活了的女性，早已分明地自觉着这种自己所具的光荣，同时也明白着这种光荣中所含的危险。所以凡有时髦女子所表现的神气，是在招摇，也在固守，在罗致，也在抵御，像一切异性的亲人，也像一切异性的敌人，她在喜欢，也正在恼怒。这神气也传染了未成年的少女，我们有时会看见她们在店铺里购买东西，侧着头，佯嗔薄怒，如临大敌。自然，店员们是能像对于成年的女性一样，加以调笑的，而她也早明白着这调笑的意义。总之：她们大抵早熟了。
Women who are accustomed to living in Shanghai have long been clearly aware of this glory of themselves, and at the same time understand the dangers contained in this glory. Therefore, the spirit shown by fashionable women is ostentatious, stubborn, Luo Zhi, and resisting, like all relatives of the opposite sex, and like all enemies of the opposite sex, she is liked and angry. This aura also infects underage girls, and we sometimes see them buying things in stores, tilting their heads, pretending to be angry, as if facing a great enemy. Naturally, the clerks can tease them like adult women, and she has long understood the meaning of this teasing. In short: they are probably precocious.然而我们在日报上，确也常常看见诱拐女孩，甚而至于凌辱少女的新闻。
However, we often see news in the daily newspaper about abducting girls and even abusing girls.不但是《西游记》里的魔王，吃人的时候必须童男和童女而已，在人类中的富户豪家，也一向以童女为侍奉，纵欲，鸣高，寻仙，采补的材料，恰如食品的餍足了普通的肥甘，就想乳猪芽茶一样。现在这现象并且已经见于商人和工人里面了，但这乃是人们的生活不能顺遂的结果，应该以饥民的掘食草根树皮为比例，和富户豪家的纵恣的变态是不可同日而语的。
Not only the demon king in "Journey to the West", when eating people, they must be boys and girls, but also the rich families among humans have always served virgins, indulging, singing high, seeking immortals, and collecting materials, just like the food is full of ordinary fat and sweetness, just like suckling pig bud tea. Now this phenomenon has been seen in merchants and workers, but this is the result of people's lives not going smoothly, and it should be proportional to the hungry digging up grass roots and bark, which is not the same as the indulgent perversion of the rich and wealthy.但是，要而言之，中国是连少女也进了险境了。
However, in short, even girls in China are in danger.这险境，更使她们早熟起来，精神已是成人，肢体却还是孩子。俄国的作家梭罗古勃曾经写过这一种类型的少女，说是还是小孩子，而眼睛却已经长大了。然而我们中国的作家是另有一种称赞的写法的：所谓“娇小玲珑”者就是。
This dangerous situation made them even more precocious, their spirits were already adults, but their limbs were still children. The Russian writer Thoreau Gubb once wrote about this type of girl, saying that she was still a child, but her eyes had grown. However, our Chinese writers have another way of praising it: the so-called "petite and exquisite" is.八月十二日。
August 12th.

上海的儿童

上海的儿童

上海的儿童

Children in Shanghai上海越界筑路的北四川路一带，因为打仗，去年冷落了大半年，今年依然热闹了，店铺从法租界搬回，电影院早经开始，公园左近也常见携手同行的爱侣，这是去年夏天所没有的。
The area around North Sichuan Road, where Shanghai crossed the border to build roads, was snubbed for more than half a year last year because of the war, but it is still lively this year, the shops moved back from the French Concession, the cinema began early, and the park was also common to see lovers walking hand in hand, which was not there last summer.倘若走进住家的弄堂里去，就看见便溺器，吃食担，苍蝇成群的在飞，孩子成队的在闹，有剧烈的捣乱，有发达的骂詈，真是一个乱烘烘的小世界。但一到大路上，映进眼帘来的却只是轩昂活泼地玩着走着的外国孩子，中国的儿童几乎看不见了。但也并非没有，只因为衣裤郎当，精神萎靡，被别人压得像影子一样，不能醒目了。
If you walk into the alley of your home, you will see urinals, food burdens, flies flying in groups, children in groups, violent trouble, and developed scolding, it is really a chaotic little world. But when I arrived on the road, I only saw foreign children playing and walking in high spirits, and Chinese children were almost invisible. But it's not nothing, just because of the messy clothes, the spirit is sluggish, and the pressure is like a shadow by others, and it can't be conspicuous.中国中流的家庭，教孩子大抵只有两种法。其一，是任其跋扈，一点也不管，骂人固可，打人亦无不可，在门内或门前是暴主，是霸王，但到外面，便如失了网的蜘蛛一般，立刻毫无能力。其二，是终日给以冷遇或呵斥，甚而至于打扑，使他畏葸退缩，仿佛一个奴才，一个傀儡，然而父母却美其名曰“听话”，自以为是教育的成功，待到放他到外面来，则如暂出樊笼的小禽，他决不会飞鸣，也不会跳跃。
In middle-class Chinese families, there are probably only two ways to teach children. First, it is to let it be domineering, it doesn't matter at all, it's okay to scold people, it's okay to beat people, inside or in front of the door is a tyrant, a tyrant, a tyrant, but outside, like a spider that has lost its web, immediately powerless. Second, he was treated coldly or scolded all day long, and even beaten, making him afraid and flinching, like a servant and a puppet, but his parents called him "obedient", thinking that he was a success in education, and when he was let outside, he was like a bird temporarily out of the cage, he would never fly or jump.现在总算中国也有印给儿童看的画本了，其中的主角自然是儿童，然而画中人物，大抵倘不是带着横暴冥顽的气味，甚而至于流氓模样的，过度的恶作剧的顽童，就是钩头耸背，低眉顺眼，一副死板板的脸相的所谓“好孩子”。这虽然由于画家本领的欠缺，但也是取儿童为范本的，而从此又以作供给儿童仿效的范本。我们试一看别国的儿童画罢，英国沉着，德国粗豪，俄国雄厚，法国漂亮，日本聪明，都没有一点中国似的衰惫的气象。观民风是不但可以由诗文，也可以由图画，而且可以由不为人们所重的儿童画的。
Now there are finally picture books printed for children in China, and the protagonists in them are naturally children, but the characters in the paintings, if they are not with the smell of tyranny and stubbornness, or even the rogue-like and excessive mischievous urchins, are the so-called "good boys" with hooked heads and shrugged backs, low eyebrows and pleasing eyes, and a rigid face. Although this is due to the lack of painter skills, it is also modeled after children, and since then it has been used as a model for children to imitate. Let's try to look at the children's paintings of other countries, Britain is calm, Germany is bold, Russia is strong, France is beautiful, Japan is smart, and there is no declining atmosphere like China. Folk customs can be drawn not only by poetry, but also by pictures, and by children who are not valued by people.顽劣，钝滞，都足以使人没落，灭亡。童年的情形，便是将来的命运。我们的新人物，讲恋爱，讲小家庭，讲自立，讲享乐了，但很少有人为儿女提出家庭教育的问题，学校教育的问题，社会改革的问题。先前的人，只知道“为儿孙作马牛”，固然是错误的，但只顾现在，不想将来，“任儿孙作马牛”，却不能不说是一个更大的错误。
Stubbornness and dullness are enough to make people fall and perish. The situation of childhood is the fate of the future. Our new characters talk about love, small families, self-reliance, and pleasure, but few people raise the issue of family education, school education, and social reform for their children. The previous people only knew that "being a horse and a cow for their children and grandchildren" was certainly wrong, but they only cared about the present and did not want to do it in the future, and "let their children and grandchildren be horses and cattle" could not help but say that it was a bigger mistake.八月十二日。
August 12th.

“论语一年”

“论语一年”

“论语一年”

"One Year of the Analects"——借此又谈萧伯纳
——Let's talk about George Bernard Shaw again说是《论语》办到一年了，语堂先生命令我做文章。这实在好像出了“学而一章”的题目，叫我做一篇白话八股一样。没有法，我只好做开去。
It is said that the "Analects" has been done for a year, and Mr. Yutang ordered me to make an article. This is really like coming up with the topic of "learning a chapter" and asking me to make a vernacular eight-strand. There was no way, so I had to do it.老实说罢，他所提倡的东西，我是常常反对的。先前，是对于“费厄泼赖”，现在呢，就是“幽默”。我不爱“幽默”，并且以为这是只有爱开圆桌会议的国民才闹得出来的玩意儿，在中国，却连意译也办不到。我们有唐伯虎，有徐文长；还有最有名的金圣叹，“杀头，至痛也，而圣叹以无意得之，大奇！”虽然不知道这是真话，是笑话；是事实，还是谣言。但总之：一来，是声明了圣叹并非反抗的叛徒；二来，是将屠户的凶残，使大家化为一笑，收场大吉。我们只有这样的东西，和“幽默”是并无什么瓜葛的。
To be honest, I often oppose what he advocates. Previously, it was for "Fei Erpre", but now, it is "humor". I don't like "humor" and think that this is something that only citizens who love round tables can make, but in China, they can't even do it. we have Tang Bohu and Xu Wenchang; There is also the most famous Jin Shengsi, "Killing the head is the most painful, and the Holy Sigh is unintentional, which is amazing!" "Although I don't know if this is the truth, it is a joke; Is it a fact or a rumor? But in short: first, it is a statement that the holy sigh is not a traitor to resistance; second, it is to turn the murderous butcher into a smile and end well. We only have such things, and it has nothing to do with "humor".况且作者姓氏一大篇，动手者寥寥无几，乃是中国的古礼。在这种礼制之下，要每月说出两本“幽默”来，倒未免有些“幽默”的气息。这气息令人悲观，加以不爱，就使我不大热心于《论语》了。
Moreover, the author's surname is a large piece, and there are very few people who do it, which is an ancient Chinese ritual. Under this etiquette system, it is inevitable that there will be some "humor" in two books every month. This atmosphere is pessimistic, and if I don't love it, I won't be very enthusiastic about the Analects.然而，《萧的专号》是好的。
However, "Xiao's Special Number" is good.它发表了别处不肯发表的文章，揭穿了别处故意颠倒的谈话，至今还使名士不平，小官怀恨，连吃饭睡觉的时候都会记得起来。憎恶之久，憎恶者之多，就是效力之大的证据。
It published articles that refused to be published elsewhere, exposed deliberately upside-down conversations elsewhere, and still made celebrities unfair, and small officials held grudges, even remembering them when they ate and slept. The long hatred and the number of haters are great evidence of effectiveness.莎士比亚虽然是“剧圣”，我们不大有人提起他。五四时代绍介了一个易卜生，名声倒还好，今年绍介了一个萧，可就糟了，至今还有人肚子在发胀。
Although Shakespeare is a "dramatic saint", we don't have many people mention him. In the May Fourth era, Shao introduced an Ibsen, and his reputation was okay, but this year he introduced a Xiao, but it was bad, and there are still people whose stomachs are bloated.为了他笑嘻嘻，辨不出是冷笑，是恶笑，是嘻笑么？并不是的。为了他笑中有刺，刺着了别人的病痛么？也不全是的。列维它夫说得很分明：就因为易卜生是伟大的疑问号（？），而萧是伟大的感叹号（！）的缘故。
For him to laugh, can't you tell if it's a sneer, a bad smile, or a laugh? Not really. For him to laugh and stab other people's pain? Not all. Levitav said it very clearly: just because Ibsen is a great question mark (?) ), and Xiao is the great exclamation mark (!) )他们的看客，不消说，是绅士淑女们居多。绅士淑女们是顶爱面子的人种。易卜生虽然使他们登场，虽然也揭发一点隐蔽，但并不加上结论，却从容的说道“想一想罢，这到底是些什么呢？”绅士淑女们的尊严，确也有一些动摇了，但究竟还留着摇摇摆摆的退走，回家去想的余裕，也就保存了面子。至于回家之后，想了也未，想得怎样，那就不成什么问题，所以他被绍介进中国来，四平八稳，反对的比赞成的少。萧可不这样了，他使他们登场，撕掉了假面具，阔衣装，终于拉住耳朵，指给大家道，“看哪，这是蛆虫！”连磋商的工夫，掩饰的法子也不给人有一点。这时候，能笑的就只有并无他所指摘的病痛的下等人了。在这一点上，萧是和下等人相近的，而也就和上等人相远。
Needless to say, most of their spectators are gentlemen and ladies. Gentlemen and ladies are the most face-saving people. Although Ibsen made them appear, although he also exposed a little concealment, he did not add a conclusion, but calmly said, "Think about it, what is this?" "The dignity of gentlemen and ladies has indeed been shaken a little, but in the end, there is still room to retreat and go home to think, and they save face. As for after returning home, he didn't think about it, and what he thought about it would not be a problem, so he was introduced into China, and he was stable, and there were fewer people who opposed it than those who agreed. Xiao Ke was not like this, he made them appear, tore off their masks, wide clothes, and finally grabbed their ears and pointed to everyone, "Look, this is a maggot!" "Even the time of negotiation and the way to cover it up are not given a little. At this time, the only people who can laugh are the inferior people who do not have the illness he blames. At this point, Xiao is close to the lower class, but far from the upper class.这怎么办呢？仍然有一定的古法在。就是：大家沸沸扬扬的嚷起来，说他有钱，说他装假，说他“名流”，说他“狡猾”，至少是和自己们差不多，或者还要坏。自己是生活在小茅厕里的，他却从大茅厕里爬出，也是一只蛆虫，绍介者胡涂，称赞的可恶。然而，我想，假使萧也是一只蛆虫，却还是一只伟大的蛆虫，正如可以同有许多感叹号，而惟独他是“伟大的感叹号”一样。譬如有一堆蛆虫在这里罢，一律即即足足，自以为是绅士淑女，文人学士，名宦高人，互相点头，雍容揖让，天下太平，那就是全体没有什么高下，都是平常的蛆虫。但是，如果有一只蓦地跳了出来，大喝一声道：“这些其实都是蛆虫！”那么，——自然，它也是从茅厕里爬出来的，然而我们非认它为特别的伟大的蛆虫则不可。
What should I do? There are still certain ancient methods. That is: everyone is clamoring, saying that he is rich, that he is fake, that he is "fake", that he is "cunning", at least that he is similar to them, or worse. He lived in a small toilet, but he crawled out of the big toilet, and he was also a maggot. However, I think that if Xiao is also a maggot, he is still a great maggot, just as there can be many exclamation marks, and he is the only one who is a "great exclamation mark". For example, if there is a bunch of maggots here, they are all satisfied, thinking that they are gentlemen and ladies, literati and scholars, famous eunuchs, nodding to each other, bowing gracefully, and the world is peaceful, that is, all of them are not superior or inferior, they are all ordinary maggots. However, if one jumped out and shouted, "These are actually maggots!" "Naturally, then,—— it also crawls out of the toilet, but we must recognize it as a particularly great maggot.蛆虫也有大小，有好坏的。
Maggots come in sizes, good and bad.生物在进化，被达尔文揭发了，使我们知道了我们的远祖和猴子是亲戚。然而那时的绅士们的方法，和现在是一模一样的：他们大家倒叫达尔文为猴子的子孙。罗广廷博士在广东中山大学的“生物自然发生”的实验尚未成功，我们姑且承认人类是猴子的亲戚罢，虽然并不十分体面。但这同是猴子的亲戚中，达尔文又不能不说是伟大的了。那理由很简单而且平常，就因为他以猴子亲戚的家世，却并不忌讳，指出了人们是猴子的亲戚来。
Creatures are evolving, and Darwin exposed them, so that we know that our distant ancestors and monkeys are relatives. However, the gentlemen's methods at that time were exactly the same as they do now: they all called Darwin a descendant of monkeys. Dr. Luo Guangting's experiment on "spontaneous biological generation" at Sun Yat-sen University in Guangdong has not been successful, so let's admit that humans are relatives of monkeys, although it is not very decent. But among the relatives of the monkey, Darwin cannot but be said to be great. The reason is very simple and ordinary, because he is not taboo about the family background of monkey relatives, and points out that people are relatives of monkeys.猴子的亲戚也有大小，有好坏的。
Monkey relatives also have large and small sizes, good and bad.但达尔文善于研究，却不善于骂人，所以被绅士们嘲笑了小半世。给他来斗争的是自称为“达尔文的咬狗”的赫胥黎，他以渊博的学识，警辟的文章，东冲西突，攻陷了自以为亚当和夏娃的子孙们的最后的堡垒。现在是指人为狗，变成摩登了，也算是一句恶骂。但是，便是狗罢，也不能一例而论的，有的食肉，有的拉橇，有的为军队探敌，有的帮警署捉人，有的在张园赛跑，有的跟化子要饭。将给阔人开心的吧儿和在雪地里救人的猛犬一比较，何如？如赫胥黎，就是一匹有功人世的好狗。
But Darwin was good at research, but not good at scolding, so he was ridiculed by gentlemen for half his life. He was fought by Huxley, who called himself "Darwin's biting dog", and with his profound knowledge and vigilant writings, he rushed east and west to capture the last bastion of the descendants of Adam and Eve. Now it means that people are dogs, and they have become modern, which can be regarded as a bad scolding. However, even if it is a dog, it cannot be said in one case, some eat meat, some pull sleds, some scout the enemy for the army, some help the police station catch people, some race in Zhangyuan, and some ask Huazi for food. How about comparing the bar that makes people happy with the fierce dog that rescues people in the snow? For example, Huxley is a good dog who has made contributions to the world.狗也有大小，有好坏的。
Dogs come in sizes, good and bad.但要明白，首先就要辨别。“幽默处俏皮与正经之间”（语堂语）。不知俏皮与正经之辨，怎么会知道这“之间”？我们虽挂孔子的门徒招牌，却是庄生的私淑弟子。“彼亦一是非，此亦一是非”，是与非不想辨；“不知周之梦为蝴蝶欤，蝴蝶之梦为周欤？”梦与觉也分不清。生活要混沌。如果凿起七窍来呢？庄子曰：“七日而混沌死。”
But to understand, you must first discern. "Humor is between playfulness and seriousness" (Yutang language). I don't know the difference between playfulness and seriousness, how can I know this "between"? Although we hang the sign of Confucius's disciples, we are Zhuang Sheng's private disciples. "He is also right and wrong, and this is also right and wrong", right and wrong do not want to distinguish between right and wrong; "I don't know if Zhou's dream is a butterfly or if a butterfly's dream is Zhou?" Dreams and wakefulness are also indistinguishable. Life should be chaotic. What if you chisel the seven orifices? Zhuangzi said: "Seven days and chaos died. ”这如何容得感叹号？
How can this accommodate an exclamation mark?而且也容不得笑。私塾的先生，一向就不许孩子愤怒，悲哀，也不许高兴。皇帝不肯笑，奴隶是不准笑的。他们会笑，就怕他们也会哭，会怒，会闹起来。更何况坐着有版税可抽，而一年之中，竟“只闻其骚音怨音以及刻薄刁毒之音”呢？
And laughter is not allowed. The teacher of the private school has always not allowed children to be angry, sad, or happy. The emperor refused to laugh, and slaves were not allowed to laugh. They will laugh, and they will cry, get angry, and make trouble. What's more, there are royalties to sit on, but in a year, "only hear its complaining voices and harsh and vicious sounds"?这可见“幽默”在中国是不会有的。
This shows that "humor" will not exist in China.这也可见我对于《论语》的悲观，正非神经过敏。有版税的尚且如此，还能希望那些炸弹满空，河水漫野之处的人们来说“幽默”么？恐怕连“骚音怨音”也不会有，“盛世元音”自然更其谈不到。将来圆桌会议上也许有人列席，然而是客人，主宾之间，用不着“幽默”。甘地一回一回的不肯吃饭，而主人所办的报章上，已有说应该给他鞭子的了。
This also shows that my pessimism about the Analects is not a nervousness. If there are royalties, can you still hope that those people who are full of bombs and rivers are full of "humor"? I'm afraid there won't even be "sorrowful sounds", and "prosperous vowels" are naturally even more incomprehensible. In the future, there may be people present at the round table, but there is no need for "humor" between guests and guest of honor. Gandhi refused to eat again and again, and the newspaper run by the master had already said that he should be whipped.这可见在印度也没有“幽默”。
This shows that there is no "humor" in India either.最猛烈的鞭挞了那主人们的是萧伯纳，而我们中国的有些绅士淑女们可又憎恶他了，这真是伯纳“以无意得之，大奇！”然而也正是办起《孝经》来的好文字：“此士大夫之孝也。”
It was Bernard Shaw who whipped the masters the most violently, and some of our gentlemen and ladies in China hated him again, which was really Bernard's "unintentional, amazing!" However, it is also a good text that comes from the "Classic of Filial Piety": "This is the filial piety of the scholar-officials." ”《中庸》《大学》都已新出，《孝经》是一定就要出来的；不过另外还要有《左传》。在这样的年头，《论语》那里会办得好；二十五本，已经要算是“不亦乐乎”的了。
"The Doctrine of the Mean" and "University" have been newly released, and the "Classic of Filial Piety" is definitely coming out; But there is also "Zuo Zhuan". In such a year, the Analects will do well there; Twenty-five books are already considered "very happy".八月二十三日。
August 23.

小品文的危机

小品文的危机

小品文的危机

The crisis of sketches仿佛记得一两月之前，曾在一种日报上见到记载着一个人的死去的文章，说他是收集“小摆设”的名人，临末还有依稀的感喟，以为此人一死，“小摆设”的收集者在中国怕要绝迹了。
I seem to remember that a month or two ago, I saw an article in a daily newspaper recording the death of a person, saying that he was a celebrity who collected "knick-knacks", and at the end of his life, he still had a vague feeling that once this person died, the collector of "knick-knacks" was afraid that he would disappear in China.但可惜我那时不很留心，竟忘记了那日报和那收集家的名字。
But unfortunately, I didn't pay much attention at that time, and I forgot the name of the daily newspaper and the collector.现在的新的青年恐怕也大抵不知道什么是“小摆设”了。但如果他出身旧家，先前曾有玩弄翰墨的人，则只要不很破落，未将觉得没用的东西卖给旧货担，就也许还能在尘封的废物之中，寻出一个小小的镜屏，玲珑剔透的石块，竹根刻成的人像，古玉雕出的动物，锈得发绿的铜铸的三脚癞虾蟆：这就是所谓“小摆设”。先前，它们陈列在书房里的时候，是各有其雅号的，譬如那三脚癞虾蟆，应该称为“蟾蜍砚滴”之类，最末的收集家一定都知道，现在呢，可要和它的光荣一同消失了。
Today's new young people probably don't know what "knick-knacks" are. But if he was born in an old family and had played with Hanmo before, as long as he was not very broken and did not sell what he thought was useless to the old cargo, he might still be able to find a small mirror screen, exquisite and transparent stones, human figures carved from bamboo roots, animals carved from ancient jade, and rusty green copper cast three-legged toads: this is the so-called "knick-knacks". Previously, when they were displayed in the study, they had their own elegant names, such as the three-legged toad, which should be called "toad inkstone drops", and the last collectors must know that now, it will disappear with its glory.那些物品，自然决不是穷人的东西，但也不是达官富翁家的陈设，他们所要的，是珠玉扎成的盆景，五彩绘画的磁瓶。那只是所谓士大夫的“清玩”。在外，至少必须有几十亩膏腴的田地，在家，必须有几间幽雅的书斋；就是流寓上海，也一定得生活较为安闲，在客栈里有一间长包的房子，书桌一顶，烟榻一张，瘾足心闲，摩挲赏鉴。然而这境地，现在却已经被世界的险恶的潮流冲得七颠八倒，像狂涛中的小船似的了。
Those items are by no means the things of the poor, but they are not the furnishings of the families of dignitaries and wealthy people, what they want is bonsai made of pearls and jade, and magnetic bottles with colorful paintings. That's just the so-called "play" of the scholar-officials. Outside, there must be at least dozens of acres of fertile fields, and at home, there must be a few elegant study; Even if you live in Shanghai, you must live a more leisurely life, and there is a long bag house in the inn, a desk, a smoking couch, addicted to leisure, and rubbing and appreciating. However, this situation has now been swept upside down by the sinister tide of the world, like a boat in a raging wave.然而就是在所谓“太平盛世”罢，这“小摆设”原也不是什么重要的物品。在方寸的象牙版上刻一篇《兰亭序》，至今还有“艺术品”之称，但倘将这挂在万里长城的墙头，或供在云冈的丈八佛像的足下，它就渺小得看不见了，即使热心者竭力指点，也不过令观者生一种滑稽之感。何况在风沙扑面，狼虎成群的时候，谁还有这许多闲工夫，来赏玩琥珀扇坠，翡翠戒指呢。他们即使要悦目，所要的也是耸立于风沙中的大建筑，要坚固而伟大，不必怎样精；即使要满意，所要的也是匕首和投枪，要锋利而切实，用不着什么雅。
However, even in the so-called "peaceful and prosperous era", this "knick-knack" is not an important item. Engraved on the square inch ivory plate of the "Orchid Pavilion Preface", it is still known as a "work of art", but if this is hung on the wall of the Great Wall, or at the foot of the Zhangba Buddha statue in Yungang, it is too small to be seen, even if the enthusiastic try to point it out, it will only make the viewer have a sense of funny. What's more, when the wind and sand are blowing and the wolves and tigers are packed, who still has so much leisure time to enjoy the amber fan pendant and the jade ring. Even if they want to be pleasing to the eye, what they want is a large building towering in the wind and sand, to be strong and great, and it does not need to be elaborate; Even if you want to be satisfied, all you need is a dagger and a throwing gun, which must be sharp and practical, and you don't need anything elegant.美术上的“小摆设”的要求，这幻梦是已经破掉了，那日报上的文章的作者，就直觉的地知道。然而对于文学上的“小摆设”——“小品文”的要求，却正在越加旺盛起来，要求者以为可以靠着低诉或微吟，将粗犷的人心，磨得渐渐的平滑。这就是想别人一心看着《六朝文絜》，而忘记了自己是抱在黄河决口之后，淹得仅仅露出水面的树梢头。
The requirement of "knick-knacks" in art, this dream has been shattered, and the author of the article in the daily newspaper intuitively knows it. However, the requirements for literary "knick-knacks" - "sketch essays" are becoming more and more vigorous, and the demanders think that they can rely on whispers or whispering to gradually smooth out the rough people's hearts. This is to think that others are looking at "Six Dynasties Wen Ji" and forget that they are holding the treetops that are only exposed to the water after the breach of the Yellow River.但这时却只用得着挣扎和战斗。
But at this time, all you have to do is struggle and fight.而小品文的生存，也只仗着挣扎和战斗的。晋朝的清言，早和它的朝代一同消歇了。唐末诗风衰落，而小品放了光辉。但罗隐的《谗书》，几乎全部是抗争和愤激之谈；皮日休和陆龟蒙自以为隐士，别人也称之为隐士，而看他们在《皮子文薮》和《笠泽丛书》中的小品文，并没有忘记天下，正是一榻胡涂的泥塘里的光彩和锋铓。明末的小品虽然比较的颓放，却并非全是吟风弄月，其中有不平，有讽刺，有攻击，有破坏。这种作风，也触着了满洲君臣的心病，费去许多助虐的武将的刀锋，帮闲的文臣的笔锋，直到乾隆年间，这才压制下去了。以后呢，就来了“小摆设”。
And the survival of the essay only depends on struggle and fighting. The Qingyan of the Jin Dynasty has long since disappeared with its dynasties. At the end of the Tang Dynasty, the poetry style declined, but the sketches shone brightly. But Luo Yin's "Book of Slander" is almost all about resistance and indignation; Pi Rixiu and Lu Guimeng thought they were hermits, and others also called them hermits, but looking at their sketches in "Pizi Wenxiu" and "Lizawa Series", they did not forget the world, which was the brilliance and sharpness in a mud pond. Although the sketches at the end of the Ming Dynasty are relatively decadent, they are not all chanting the wind and the moon, which contain injustice, satire, attack, and destruction. This style also touched the heart disease of the Manchurian monarchs and ministers, and it took the blades of many military generals who helped the abuse and the pen of the civil officials who helped them, and it was not until the Qianlong period that it was suppressed. In the future, there will be "knick-knacks".“小摆设”当然不会有大发展。到五四运动的时候，才又来了一个展开，散文小品的成功，几乎在小说戏曲和诗歌之上。这之中，自然含着挣扎和战斗，但因为常常取法于英国的随笔（Essay），所以也带一点幽默和雍容；写法也有漂亮和缜密的，这是为了对于旧文学的示威，在表示旧文学之自以为特长者，白话文学也并非做不到。以后的路，本来明明是更分明的挣扎和战斗，因为这原是萌芽于“文学革命”以至“思想革命”的。但现在的趋势，却在特别提倡那和旧文章相合之点，雍容，漂亮，缜密，就是要它成为“小摆设”，供雅人的摩挲，并且想青年摩挲了这“小摆设”，由粗暴而变为风雅了。
Of course, there will be no big development of "knick-knacks". It was not until the May Fourth Movement that another unfolded, and the success of prose sketches was almost above novels, operas and poems. In this, there are naturally struggles and battles, but because they are often inspired by British essays, they also have a little humor and grace; The writing method is also beautiful and meticulous, which is to demonstrate the old literature, and to show that the old literature is self-proclaimed, and vernacular literature is not impossible. The road ahead was obviously a more distinct struggle and battle, because it originally sprouted from the "literary revolution" to the "ideological revolution". But the current trend is to especially advocate the point that is consistent with the old article, graceful, beautiful, and meticulous, that is, to make it a "knick-knack" for elegant people to rub, and want young people to rub this "knick-knack", from rude to elegant.然而现在已经更没有书桌；雅片虽然已经公卖，烟具是禁止的，吸起来还是十分不容易。想在战地或灾区里的人们来鉴赏罢——谁都知道是更奇怪的幻梦。这种小品，上海虽正在盛行，茶话酒谈，遍满小报的摊子上，但其实是正如烟花女子，已经不能在弄堂里拉扯她的生意，只好涂脂抹粉，在夜里躄到马路上来了。
However, there are no desks now; Although Yapian has been sold to the public, smoking utensils are prohibited, and it is still not easy to smoke. I want people in the battlefield or disaster area to appreciate it - everyone knows that it is a stranger dream. Although this kind of sketch is prevalent in Shanghai, tea and wine talks, all over the stalls of tabloids, but in fact, it is like a fireworks woman, who can no longer pull her business in the alley, so she has to smear grease and powder and stumble onto the road at night.小品文就这样的走到了危机。但我所谓危机，也如医学上的所谓“极期”（Krisis）一般，是生死的分歧，能一直得到死亡，也能由此至于恢复。麻醉性的作品，是将与麻醉者和被麻醉者同归于尽的。生存的小品文，必须是匕首，是投枪，能和读者一同杀出一条生存的血路的东西；但自然，它也能给人愉快和休息，然而这并不是“小摆设”，更不是抚慰和麻痹，它给人的愉快和休息是休养，是劳作和战斗之前的准备。
Sketch has come to a crisis like this. But my so-called crisis, like the so-called "extreme period" (Krisis) in medicine, is the difference between life and death, and you can always get death and recover. Narcotic works are the same as the anesthesiologist and the anesthetized. Survival essays must be daggers, guns, and things that can fight a bloody path of survival with readers; But naturally, it can also give people pleasure and rest, but this is not a "knick-knack", let alone soothing and paralyzing, it gives people pleasure and rest is recuperation, preparation before labor and battle.八月二十七日。
August 27.

九一八

九一八

九一八

918阴天，晌午大风雨。看晚报，已有纪念这纪念日的文章，用风雨作材料了。明天的日报上，必更有千篇一律的作品。空言不如事实，且看看那些记事罢——
Cloudy with strong winds and rain at noon. Looking at the evening newspaper, there are articles commemorating this anniversary, using wind and rain as materials. Tomorrow's daily newspaper will have more uniform works. Empty words are not as good as facts, let's look at those records -

九一八

戴季陶讲如何救国

九一八

Dai Jitao talks about how to save the country（中央社）
(Central News Agency)南京十八日——国府十八日晨举行纪念周，到林森戴季陶陈绍宽朱家骅吕超魏怀暨国府职员等四百余人，林主席领导行礼，继戴讲“如何救国”，略谓本日系九一八两周年纪念，吾人于沉痛之余，应想法达到救国目的，救国之道甚多，如道德救国，教育救国，实业救国等，最近又有所谓航空运动及节约运动，前者之动机在于国防与交通上建设，此后吾人应从根本上设法增强国力，不应只知向外国购买飞机，至于节约运动须一面消极的节省消费，一面积极的将金钱用于生产方面。在此国家危急之秋，吾人应该各就自己的职务上尽力量，根据总理的一贯政策，来做整个三民主义的实施。
Nanjing 18th - The state government held a commemorative week on the morning of the 18th, to Lin Sen, Dai Jitao, Chen Shaokuan, Zhu Jiahua, Lu Chao, Wei Huai and more than 400 people including the staff of the state government, Chairman Lin led the salute, followed by Dai to talk about "how to save the country", roughly saying that today is the second anniversary of 918, in addition to the pain, we should think about achieving the purpose of saving the country, there are many ways to save the country, such as moral salvation, education to save the country, industrial to save the country, etc., and recently there are the so-called aviation movement and the economy movement, the former is motivated by the construction of national defense and transportation. After that, we should fundamentally try to enhance our national strength, not just buy aircraft from foreign countries, and as for the conservation movement, we must passively save consumption and actively use money on production. In this critical autumn of the country, we should do our best in our respective positions and implement the entire Three People's Principles in accordance with the Prime Minister's consistent policy.

九一八

吴敬恒讲纪念意义

九一八

Wu Jingheng spoke about the commemorative significance（中央社）
(Central News Agency)南京十八日——中央十八日晨八时举行九一八二周年纪念大会，到中委汪兆铭陈果夫邵元冲陈公博朱培德贺耀祖王祺等暨中央工作人员共六百余人，汪主席，由吴敬恒演讲以精诚团结充实国力，为纪念九一八之意义，阐扬甚多，并指正爱国之道，词甚警惕，至九时始散。
Nanjing 18th - The Central Committee held a meeting to commemorate the 2nd anniversary of 918 at 8 a.m. on the 18th, and more than 600 people attended the Central Committee Wang Zhaoming, Chen Guofu, Shao Yuanchong, Chen Gongbo, Zhu Peide, He Yaozu, Wang Qi, and other central staff.

九一八

汉口静默停止娱乐

九一八

Hankou silently stopped entertainment（日联社）
(Associated Press)汉口十八日——汉口九一八纪念日华街各户均揭半旗，省市两党部上午十时举行纪念会，各戏院酒馆等一律停业，上午十一时全市人民默祷五分钟。
Hankou 18th - Hankou 918 Memorial Day, all households on Huajie raised flags at half-mast, the provincial and municipal party departments held a commemorative meeting at 10 a.m., all theaters and taverns were closed, and the people of the city prayed silently for five minutes at 11 a.m.

九一八

广州禁止民众游行

九一八

People are prohibited from marching in Guangzhou（路透社）
(Reuters)广州十八日——各公署与公共团体今晨均举行九一八国耻纪念，中山纪念堂晨间行纪念礼，演说者均抨击日本对华之侵略，全城汽笛均大鸣，以警告民众，且有飞机于行礼时散发传单，惟民众大游行，为当局所禁，未能实现。
Guangzhou, 18 February: All public offices and public organizations held a commemoration of the 918 national humiliation this morning, and the Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hall held a commemorative ceremony in the morning, with speakers criticizing Japan's aggression against China, whistles sounding throughout the city to warn the people, and planes distributing leaflets during the salute, but the people's parade was prohibited by the authorities and could not be realized.

九一八

东京纪念祭及犬马

九一八

Tokyo Commemorative Festival and Dogs and Horses（日联社）
(Associated Press)东京十八日——东京本日举行九一八纪念日，下午一时在日比谷公会堂举行阵亡军人遗族慰安会，筑地本愿寺举行军马军犬军鸽等之慰灵祭，在乡军人于下午六时开大会，靖国神社举行阵亡军人追悼会。
Tokyo 18th - Tokyo today held the 918th Memorial Day, a consolation meeting for the families of fallen soldiers was held at 1 p.m. at Hibiya Public Hall, a memorial service for military horses, dogs, pigeons, etc. was held at Tsukiji Honganji Temple, a meeting was held at 6 p.m. for soldiers in the township, and a memorial service for the fallen soldiers was held at Yasukuni Shrine.但在上海怎样呢？先看租界——
But what about in Shanghai? Let's look at the concession first——

九一八

雨丝风片倍觉消沉

九一八

The rain and wind are even more depressing今日之全市，既因雨丝风片之侵袭，愁云惨雾之笼罩，更显黯淡之象。但驾车遍游全市，则殊难得见九一八特殊点缀，似较诸去年今日，稍觉消沉，但此非中国民众之已渐趋于麻木，或者为中国民众已觉悟于过去标语口号之不足恃，只有埋头苦做之一道乎？所以今日之南市闸北以及租界区域，情形异常平安，道途之间，除警务当局多派警探在冲要之区，严密戒备外，简直无甚可以纪述者。
Today's whole city is not only due to the invasion of rain and wind, but also shrouded in sorrowful clouds and fog, which is even more bleak. However, when driving around the city, it is very rare to see the special embellishments of 918, which seems to be a little depressing compared to last year and today, but this is not the gradual numbness of the Chinese people, or because the Chinese people have realized that the slogans of the past are not reliable, and there is only one way to do it? Therefore, today's Nanshi Zhabei and the concession area are extremely safe, and there is nothing to record on the road, except for the police authorities sending more detectives to the key areas and strictly guarding them.以上是见于《大美晚报》的，很为中国人祝福。至华界情状，却须看《大晚报》的记载了——
The above is seen in the "Great American Evening News", which is a blessing for the Chinese. As for the situation in the Chinese world, you have to look at the record of the "Evening News" -

九一八

今日九一八华界戒备公安局据密报防反动

九一八

Today, the 918 China Boundary Security Bureau reported on the prevention of reaction今日为“九一八”，日本侵占东北国难二周纪念，市公安局长文鸿恩，昨据密报，有反动分子，拟借国难纪念为由秘密召集无知工人，乘机开会，企图煽惑捣乱秩序等语，文局长核报后，即训令各区所队，仍照去年“九一八”实施特别戒备办法，除通告该局各科处于今晨十时许，在局长办公厅前召集全体职员，及警察总队第三中队警士，举行“九一八”国难纪念，同时并行纪念周外，并饬督察长李光曾派全体督察员，男女检查员，分赴中华路，民国路，方浜路，南阳桥，唐家湾，斜桥等处，会同各区所警士，在各要隘街衢，及华租界接壤之处，自上午八时至十一时半，中午十一时半至三时，下午三时至六时半，分三班轮流检查行人。南市大吉路公共体育场，沪西曹家渡三角场，闸北谭子湾等处，均派大批巡逻警士，禁止集会游行。制造局路之西，徐家汇区域内主要街道，尤宜特别注意，如遇发生事故，不能制止者，即向丽园路报告市保安处第二团长处置，凡工厂林立处所，加派双岗驻守，红色车巡队，沿城环行驶巡，形势非常壮严。该局侦缉队长卢英，饬侦缉领班陈光炎，陈才福，唐炳祥，夏品山，各率侦缉员，分头密赴曹家渡，白利南路，胶州路及南市公共体育场等处，严密暗探反动分子行动，以资防范，而遏乱萌。公共租界暨法租界两警务处，亦派中西探员出发搜查，以防反动云。
Today is the "918", the second anniversary of the Japanese invasion of the northeast national disaster, the director of the Municipal Public Security Bureau Wen Hongen, yesterday according to secret reports, there are reactionaries, intend to use the commemoration of the national disaster as an excuse to secretly convene ignorant workers, take the opportunity to hold a meeting, in an attempt to incite and disrupt the order, etc., after the director of the Wen bureau verified the report, he immediately instructed the teams of all districts to still implement special vigilance measures in accordance with last year's "918", in addition to notifying the various sections of the bureau at about 10 o'clock this morning, in front of the general office of the director, to summon all the staff, and the sergeants of the third squadron of the police corps to hold the "918" national disaster commemoration. At the same time, in addition to the commemorative week, Inspector General Li Guangzeng sent all inspectors, male and female inspectors, to Zhonghua Road, Republic of China Road, Fangbang Road, Nanyang Bridge, Tangjiawan, Xieqiao and other places, together with the police sergeants of various districts, in each important street and the border of the Chinese Concession, from 8 a.m. to 11:30 a.m., from 11:30 p.m. to 3 p.m., and from 3 p.m. to 6:30 p.m., they took turns inspecting pedestrians in three shifts. A large number of patrol police officers were dispatched to prohibit assemblies and parades at the public stadium on Daji Road in Nanshi, Caojiadu Triangle Field in western Shanghai, and Tanziwan in Zhabei. In the west of the Manufacturing Bureau Road, the main street in the Xujiahui area, special attention should be paid to, in case of an accident, those who cannot be stopped, that is, report to Liyuan Road to the second regiment of the Municipal Security Department for disposal. Lu Ying, the detective captain of the bureau, and the detective foreman Chen Guangyan, Chen Caifu, Tang Bingxiang, and Xia Pinshan, each led the detectives to secretly go to Caojiadu, Baili South Road, Jiaozhou Road and Nanshi Public Stadium to closely spy on the actions of reactionaries to prevent and curb the emergence of chaos. The two police departments of the Public Concession and the French Concession also sent Chinese and Western agents to search to prevent reactionary clouds.“红色车”是囚车，中国人可坐，然而从中国人看来，却觉得“形势非常壮严”云。记得前两天（十六日）出版的《生活》所载的《两年的教训》里，有一段说——
The "red car" is a prison car, and Chinese people can sit on it, but from the Chinese point of view, they feel that "the situation is very serious". I remember that in the "Two Years of Lessons" contained in "Life" published two days ago (16th), there is a passage that says——“第二，我们明白谁是友谁是仇了。希特勒在德国民族社会党大会中说：‘德国的仇敌，不在国外，而在国内。’北平整委会主席黄郛说：‘和共抗日之说，实为谬论；剿共和外方为救时救党上策。’我们却要说‘民族的仇敌，不仅是帝国主义，而是出卖民族利益的帝国主义走狗们。’民族反帝的真正障碍在那里，还有比这过去两年的事实指示得更明白吗？
"Second, we understand who is a friend and who is an enemy. Hitler said at the congress of the German National Socialist Party: 'Germany's enemies are not abroad, but at home. Huang Cheng, chairman of the Peking Rectification Committee, said: 'The theory of peace and anti-Japanese resistance is really a fallacy; Suppressing Republican foreign parties is the best strategy to save the time and save the party. But we have to say: 'The enemy of the nation is not only imperialism, but also imperialist lackeys who betray national interests. 'Is there a real obstacle to national anti-imperialism more clearly than the facts of the past two years?现在再来一个切实的注脚：分明的铁证还有上海华界的“红色车”！是一天里的大教训！
Now there is another practical footnote: there is clear ironclad evidence and the "red car" of Shanghai Huajie! It was a great lesson in the day!年年的这样的情状，都被时光所埋没了，今夜作此，算是纪念文，倘中国人而终不至被害尽杀绝，则以贻我们的后来者。
This situation every year has been buried by time, and tonight is a commemorative article, if the Chinese are not killed in the end, it will be given to our latecomers.是夜，记。
That night, I remembered.

偶成

偶成

偶成

Accidentally九月二十日的《申报》上，有一则嘉善地方的新闻，摘录起来，就是——
In the "Declaration" on September 20, there was a piece of news from Jiashan Place, which was excerpted, that is——“本县大窑乡沈和声与子林生，被著匪石塘小弟绑架而去，勒索三万元。沈姓家以中人之产，迁延未决。讵料该帮股匪乃将沈和声父子及苏境方面绑来肉票，在丁棚北，北荡滩地方，大施酷刑。法以布条遍贴背上，另用生漆涂敷，俟其稍干，将布之一端，连皮揭起，则痛彻心肺，哀号呼救，惨不忍闻。时为该处居民目睹，恻然心伤，尽将惨状报告沈姓，速即往赎，否则恐无生还。帮匪手段之酷，洵属骇闻。”
Shen Hesheng and Zi Linsheng in Dayao Township, this county, were kidnapped by the bandit Shitang brother and extorted 30,000 yuan. The Shen family delayed the decision because it was a middle-class property. Unexpectedly, the gang bandits tied up Shen Hesheng's father and son and the Soviet side with meat tickets, and tortured them in the north of Dingpeng and Beidangtan. The method is to apply strips of cloth to the back, and then apply raw lacquer. When it dries slightly, lift one end of the cloth and lift it with the skin, causing pain to the heart, and the pain is unbearable. At that time, the residents of the place witnessed it, and they were sad, and they reported the tragedy to the Shen surname, and quickly ran for it, otherwise they might not survive. The cruelty of the gang's methods is shocking. ”“酷刑”的记载，在各地方的报纸上是时时可以看到的，但我们只在看见时觉得“酷”，不久就忘记了，而实在也真是记不胜记。然而酷刑的方法，却决不是突然就会发明，一定都有它的师承或祖传，例如这石塘小弟所采用的，便是一个古法，见于士大夫未必肯看，而下等人却大抵知道的《说岳全传》一名《精忠传》上，是秦桧要岳飞自认“汉奸”，逼供之际所用的方法，但使用的材料，却是麻条和鱼鳔。我以为生漆之说，是未必的确的，因为这东西很不容易干燥。
The record of "torture" can be seen in newspapers everywhere from time to time, but we only think it is "cool" when we see it, and we soon forget it, and we really can't remember it. For example, the method used by this little brother of Shitang is an ancient method, which may not be seen by scholars and officials, but the lower class people probably know that the "Biography of Yue Quan" is a method used by Qin Hui to ask Yue Fei to admit himself as a "traitor" and force a confession, but the materials used are hemp strips and fish bladders. I think the statement of raw lacquer may not be true, because this thing is not easy to dry.“酷刑”的发明和改良者，倒是虎吏和暴君，这是他们唯一的事业，而且也有工夫来考究。这是所以威民，也所以除奸的，然而《老子》说得好，“为之斗斛以量之，则并与斗斛而窃之，……”有被刑的资格的也就来玩一个“剪窃”。张献忠的剥人皮，不是一种骇闻么？但他之前已有一位剥了“逆臣”景清的皮的永乐皇帝在。
The inventors and reformers of "torture" were tiger officials and tyrants, which were their only career, and they also had the time to study them. This is why the people are weimin, and it is also the reason for the elimination of treachery, but "Lao Tzu" said it well, "If you measure it for it, you will steal it with a bucket of hu,......" Those who are qualified to be punished will also play a "cutting and stealing". Isn't Zhang Xianzhong's skinning a kind of horror? But before him, there was already a Yongle Emperor who had skinned the "traitor" Jingqing.奴隶们受惯了“酷刑”的教育，他只知道对人应该用酷刑。
The slaves were accustomed to being educated in "torture", and he only knew that torture should be used against people.但是，对于酷刑的效果的意见，主人和奴隶们是不一样的。主人及其帮闲们，多是智识者，他能推测，知道酷刑施之于敌对，能够给与怎样的痛苦，所以他会精心结撰，进步起来。奴才们却一定是愚人，他不能“推己及人”，更不能推想一下，就“感同身受”。只要他有权，会采用成法自然也难说，然而他的主意，是没有智识者所测度的那么惨厉的。绥拉菲摩维支在《铁流》里，写农民杀掉了一个贵人的小女儿，那母亲哭得很凄惨，他却诧异道，哭什么呢，我们死掉多少小孩子，一点也没哭过。他不是残酷，他一向不知道人命会这么宝贵，他觉得奇怪了。
However, opinions about the effects of torture were different between masters and slaves. The master and his helpers, most of whom are intellectuals, can speculate and know what kind of pain torture can inflict on hostilities, so he will carefully compose and improve. The servants must be fools, they cannot "push themselves and others", let alone "empathize" if they think about it. As long as he has the power, it is naturally difficult to say that he will adopt the law, but his idea is not as tragic as that measured by intellectuals. In "Tie Liu", Suerafi Movizhi wrote that the peasant killed the little daughter of a nobleman, and the mother cried miserably, but he was surprised, what are we crying, how many children have died, and we have never cried at all. He was not cruel, he had never known that human life would be so precious, he thought it was strange.奴隶们受惯了猪狗的待遇，他只知道人们无异于猪狗。
The slaves were used to being treated like pigs and dogs, and he only knew that people were tantamount to pigs and dogs.用奴隶或半奴隶的幸福者，向来只怕“奴隶造反”，真是无怪的。
It is not surprising that happy people who use slaves or semi-slaves have always been afraid of "slave rebellion".要防“奴隶造反”，就更加用“酷刑”，而“酷刑”却因此更到了末路。在现代，枪毙是早已不足为奇了，枭首陈尸，也只能博得民众暂时的鉴赏，而抢劫，绑架，作乱的还是不减少，并且连绑匪也对于别人用起酷刑来了。酷的教育，使人们见酷而不再觉其酷，例如无端杀死几个民众，先前是大家就会嚷起来的，现在却只如见了日常茶饭事。人民真被治得好像厚皮的，没有感觉的癞象一样了，但正因为成了癞皮，所以又会踏着残酷前进，这也是虎吏和暴君所不及料，而即使料及，也还是毫无办法的。
To prevent "slave rebellion", "torture" is used even more, and "torture" has come to an end. In modern times, it is not surprising that shooting is no exception, and beheading and displaying corpses can only win the people's temporary appreciation, while robbery, kidnapping, and rebellion are still not reduced, and even kidnappers use torture against others. Cool education makes people see cool and no longer feel cool, such as killing a few people for no reason, which everyone would shout about before, but now it is just like seeing daily tea and rice. The people are really treated like thick-skinned leprosy without feeling, but it is precisely because they have become leprosy that they will move forward with cruelty, which is also unexpected by tiger officials and tyrants, and even if they are expected, there is still no way.九月二十日。
September 20.

漫与

漫与

漫与

Casual and地质学上的古生代的秋天，我们不大明白了，至于现在，却总是相差无几。假使前年是肃杀的秋天，今年就成了凄凉的秋天，那么，地球的年龄，怕比天文学家所豫测的最短的数目还要短得多多罢。但人事却转变得真快，在这转变中的人，尤其是诗人，就感到了不同的秋，将这感觉，用悲壮的，或凄惋的句子，传给一切平常人，使彼此可以应付过去，而天地间也常有新诗存在。
We don't understand the geological autumn of the Paleozoic era, but now, it is always the same. If the year before last was a slashing autumn, this year will be a bleak autumn, then the age of the earth is probably much shorter than the shortest number predicted by astronomers. But people change so quickly, and people in this change, especially poets, feel different autumns, and pass on this feeling to all ordinary people with tragic or sad sentences, so that they can cope with the past, and there are often new poems between heaven and earth.前年实在好像是一个悲壮的秋天，市民捐钱，青年拚命，笳鼓的声音也从诗人的笔下涌出，仿佛真要“投笔从戎”似的。然而诗人的感觉是锐敏的，他未始不知道国民的赤手空拳，所以只好赞美大家的殉难，因此在悲壮里面，便埋伏着一点空虚。我所记得的，是邵冠华先生的《醒起来罢同胞》（《民国日报》所载）里的一段——
The year before last really seemed to be a tragic autumn, citizens donated money, young people worked hard, and the sound of jia and drums also poured out from the poet's pen, as if they really wanted to "throw their pen into the army". However, the poet's feelings are sharp, and he did not know the bare hands of the people, so he had to praise everyone's martyrdom, so in the tragedy, there was a little emptiness. What I remember is a passage from Mr. Shao Guanhua's "Wake Up and Stop Compatriots" (published in the Republic of China Daily) -“同胞，醒起来罢，"Wake up, compatriots, 
踢开了弱者的心， kicked open the hearts of the weak, 
踢开了弱者的脑， kicked the brains of the weak, 
看，看，看， looked, looked, 
看同胞们的血喷出来了， saw the blood of the compatriots spurted out, 
看同胞们的肉割开来了， saw the flesh of the compatriots cut open, 
看同胞们的尸体挂起来了。” saw the corpses of the compatriots hung."
鼓鼙之声要在前线，当进军的时候，是“作气”的，但尚且要“再而衰，三而竭”，倘在并无进军的准备的处所，那就完全是“散气”的灵丹了，倒使别人的紧张的心情，由此转成弛缓。所以我曾比之于“嚎丧”，是送死的妙诀，是丧礼的收场，从此使生人又可以在别一境界中，安心乐意的活下去。历来的文章中，化“敌”为“皇”，称“逆”为“我朝”，这样的悲壮的文章就是其间的“蝴蝶铰”，但自然，作手是不必同出于一人的。然而从诗人看来，据说这些话乃是一种“狂吠”。
The sound of drums and drums should be on the front line, and when marching, it is "angry", but it must still be "declining again and again, three and exhausted", if it is in a place where there is no preparation for marching, it is completely a panacea for "dissipating qi", but it will make other people's nervous mood turn into relaxation. Therefore, I have compared it to "howling", which is the secret to death and the end of the funeral, so that the living can live with peace of mind and happiness in another realm. In the past articles, the "enemy" is called "emperor" and the "reverse" is called "my dynasty", and such tragic articles are the "butterfly hinges" in between, but naturally, the author does not have to come from the same person. However, from the poet's point of view, it is said that these words are a kind of "barking".不过事实真也比评论更其不留情面，仅在这短短的两年中，昔之义军，已名“匪徒”，而有些“抗日英雄”，却早已侨寓姑苏了，而且连捐款也发生了问题。九一八的纪念日，则华界但有囚车随着武装巡捕梭巡，这囚车并非“意图”拘禁敌人或汉奸，而是专为“意图乘机捣乱”的“反动分子”所豫设的宝座。天气也真是阴惨，狂风骤雨，报上说是“飓风”，是天地在为中国饮泣，然而在天地之间——人间，这一日却“平安”的过去了。
However, the facts are really more merciless than the comments, in just two years, the former rebels have been called "bandits", and some "anti-Japanese heroes" have long lived in Gusu, and even donations have problems. On the anniversary of 918, there was a prison car in the Chinese world with an armed patrol shuttle, which was not "intended" to detain the enemy or traitors, but was specially set up for "reactionaries" who "intended to take advantage of the opportunity to cause trouble". The weather is really gloomy, the wind and rain are said to be "hurricanes", it is heaven and earth weeping for China, but between heaven and earth - in the world, this day has passed "safely".于是就成了虽然有些惨淡，却很“平安”的秋天，正是一个丧家届了除服之期的景象。但这景象，却又与诗人非常适合的，我在《醒起来罢同胞》的同一作家的《秋的黄昏》（九月二十五日《时事新报》所载）里，听到了幽咽而舒服的声调——
So it became a somewhat bleak, but very "safe" autumn, which was a scene of a bereaved family in the period of removal. But this scene is very suitable for the poet, I heard a sobbing and comfortable tone in the same writer's "Autumn Twilight" (published in the "Jiji Xinbao" on September 25) of the same writer of "Wake Up and Stop Compatriots" -“我到了秋天便会伤感；到了秋天的黄昏，便会流泪，我已很感觉到我的伤感是受着秋风的波动而兴奋地展开，同时自己又像会发现自己的环境是最适合于秋天，细细地抚摩着秋天在自然里发出的音波，我知道我的命运使我成为秋天的人。……”
"I will be sad in the fall; At dusk in autumn, I will shed tears, I already feel that my sadness is excited by the fluctuations of the autumn wind, and at the same time, I feel as if I will find that my environment is most suitable for autumn, carefully caressing the sound waves emitted by autumn in nature, I know that my fate makes me a person of autumn. ……”钉梢，现在中国所流行的，是无赖子对于摩登女郎，和侦探对于革命青年的钉梢，而对于文人学士们，却还很少见。假使追蹑几月或几年试试罢，就会看见许多怎样的情随事迁，到底头头是道的诗人。
Nail tips, which are popular in China now, are the nails of scoundrels for modern girls and detectives for revolutionary youth, but for literati and scholars, they are still rare. If you try to follow it for a few months or years, you will see many poets who change with the situation.一个活人，当然是总想活下去的，就是真正老牌的奴隶，也还在打熬着要活下去。然而自己明知道是奴隶，打熬着，并且不平着，挣扎着，一面“意图”挣脱以至实行挣脱的，即使暂时失败，还是套上了镣铐罢，他却不过是单单的奴隶。如果从奴隶生活中寻出“美”来，赞叹，抚摩，陶醉，那可简直是万劫不复的奴才了，他使自己和别人永远安住于这生活。就因为奴群中有这一点差别，所以使社会有平安和不安的差别，而在文学上，就分明的显现了麻醉的和战斗的的不同。
A living person, of course, always wants to live, even a really old slave is still struggling to survive. However, he knew that he was a slave, and he was beating, and he was uneven, struggling, and while "intending" to break free and even break free, even if he failed temporarily, he was still shackled, but he was just a slave. If he finds "beauty" from the life of a slave, admires, caresses, and intoxicates, he is simply a servant who will never return, and he makes himself and others live in this life forever. It is precisely because of this difference in the slave group that there is a difference between peace and unrest in society, and in literature, the difference between anesthesia and combat is clearly revealed.九月二十七日。
September 27th.

世故三昧

世故三昧

世故三昧

The world is samadhi人世间真是难处的地方，说一个人“不通世故”，固然不是好话，但说他“深于世故”也不是好话。“世故”似乎也像“革命之不可不革，而亦不可太革”一样，不可不通，而亦不可太通的。
It is not a good thing to say that a person is "not sophisticated", but it is not a good thing to say that he is "deeper than the world". "Sophistication" also seems to be like "revolution must be revolutionized, but it must not be too revolutionary", it must be understood, but it cannot be too comprehensible.然而据我的经验，得到“深于世故”的恶谥者，却还是因为“不通世故”的缘故。
However, according to my experience, those who get the evil title of "deeper than the world" are still because of "ignorance of the world".现在我假设以这样的话，来劝导青年人——
Now I assume that in this way, I will persuade young people -“如果你遇见社会上有不平事，万不可挺身而出，讲公道话，否则，事情倒会移到你头上来，甚至于会被指作反动分子的。如果你遇见有人被冤枉，被诬陷的，即使明知道他是好人，也万不可挺身而出，去给他解释或分辩，否则，你就会被人说是他的亲戚，或得了他的贿赂；倘使那是女人，就要被疑为她的情人的；如果他较有名，那便是党羽。例如我自己罢，给一个毫不相干的女士做了一篇信札集的序，人们就说她是我的小姨；绍介一点科学的文艺理论，人们就说得了苏联的卢布。亲戚和金钱，在目下的中国，关系也真是大，事实给与了教训，人们看惯了，以为人人都脱不了这关系，原也无足深怪的。
"If you encounter injustice in society, you must not stand up and speak fairly, otherwise, things will move to your head, and you will even be accused of being a reactionary. If you meet someone who has been wronged or falsely accused, even if you know that he is a good person, you must not come forward to explain or defend him, otherwise, you will be said to be his relative, or you will be bribed by him; If it is a woman, she will be suspected of being her lover; If he is more famous, he is a henchman. For example, I wrote a preface to a collection of letters to an unrelated lady, and people said she was my aunt; With a little scientific literary and artistic theory, people can say the Soviet ruble. Relatives and money, in China at present, the relationship is really big, the facts have taught a lesson, people are used to it, thinking that everyone can't get out of this relationship, and it is not surprising.“然而，有些人其实也并不真相信，只是说着玩玩，有趣有趣的。即使有人为了谣言，弄得凌迟碎剐，像明末的郑鄤那样了，和自己也并不相干，总不如有趣的紧要。这时你如果去辨正，那就是使大家扫兴，结果还是你自己倒楣。我也有一个经验，那是十多年前，我在教育部里做“官僚”，常听得同事说，某女学校的学生，是可以叫出来嫖的，连机关的地址门牌，也说得明明白白。有一回我偶然走过这条街，一个人对于坏事情，是记性好一点的，我记起来了，便留心着那门牌，但这一号，却是一块小空地，有一口大井，一间很破烂的小屋，是几个山东人住着卖水的地方，决计做不了别用。待到他们又在谈着这事的时候，我便说出我的所见来，而不料大家竟笑容尽敛，不欢而散了，此后不和我谈天者两三月。我事后才悟到打断了他们的兴致，是不应该的。
However, some people don't really believe it, they just talk and play, it's fun. Even if someone makes Ling Chi shredded for the sake of rumors, like Zheng Yu at the end of the Ming Dynasty, it has nothing to do with himself, and it is better to be interesting. At this time, if you try to correct it, you will disappoint everyone, and the result will be your own misfortune. I also have an experience, that was more than ten years ago, when I was a "bureaucrat" in the Ministry of Education, I often heard my colleagues say that students from a girls' school can be called out for prostitution, and even the address of the agency is clearly stated. Once I happened to walk through this street, a person has a better memory for bad things, I remembered, so I paid attention to the door number, but this number was a small open space, a big well, a very dilapidated hut, a place where several Shandong people lived and sold water, and I couldn't do it. When they were talking about this again, I told what I saw, but everyone smiled and broke up unhappily, and after that, they didn't talk to me for two or three months. I realized afterwards that it was not appropriate to interrupt their interest.“所以，你最好是莫问是非曲直，一味附和着大家；但更好是不开口；而在更好之上的是连脸上也不显出心里的是非的模样来……”
"Therefore, you'd better not ask about the merits and blindly agree with everyone; But it's better not to speak; And even better is that the face does not show the right and wrong in the heart......"这是处世法的精义，只要黄河不流到脚下，炸弹不落在身边，可以保管一世没有挫折的。但我恐怕青年人未必以我的话为然；便是中年，老年人，也许要以为我是在教坏了他们的子弟。呜呼，那么，一片苦心，竟是白费了。
This is the essence of the law of life, as long as the Yellow River does not flow to your feet and the bomb does not fall on your side, you can keep it for a lifetime without setbacks. But I fear that young people may not take my word for it; Even middle-aged, elderly people may think that I am teaching their children badly. Alas, then, a piece of hard work was in vain.然而倘说中国现在正如唐虞盛世，却又未免是“世故”之谈。耳闻目睹的不算，单是看看报章，也就可以知道社会上有多少不平，人们有多少冤抑。但对于这些事，除了有时或有同业，同乡，同族的人们来说几句呼吁的话之外，利害无关的人的义愤的声音，我们是很少听到的。这很分明，是大家不开口；或者以为和自己不相干；或者连“以为和自己不相干”的意思也全没有。“世故”深到不自觉其“深于世故”，这才真是“深于世故”的了。这是中国处世法的精义中的精义。
However, if China is now like the prosperous era of Tang and Yu, it is inevitable that it is a "sophisticated" talk. Just by looking at the newspapers, you can know how much injustice there is in society and how many grievances people have. But for these things, except for a few appeals from people of the same profession, fellow townsman, and clan, we rarely hear the voices of righteous indignation from people who have nothing to do with it. This is very clear, everyone does not speak; or think that it has nothing to do with themselves; Or even "think it has nothing to do with yourself" at all. "Sophisticated" is so deep that it is unconsciously "deeper than sophisticated", which is really "deeper than sophisticated". This is the essence of the essence of the Chinese law of life.而且，对于看了我的劝导青年人的话，心以为非的人物，我还有一下反攻在这里。他是以我为狡猾的。但是，我的话里，一面固然显示着我的狡猾，而且无能，但一面也显示着社会的黑暗。他单责个人，正是最稳妥的办法，倘使兼责社会，可就得站出去战斗了。责人的“深于世故”而避开了“世”不谈，这是更“深于世故”的玩艺，倘若自己不觉得，那就更深更深了，离三昧境盖不远矣。
Moreover, for the characters who read my words of persuasion to young people and feel wrong, I have a counterattack here. He thinks I'm cunning. However, my words certainly show my cunning and incompetence, but on the other hand, they also show the darkness of society. He is responsible for the individual, which is the safest way, if he is also responsible for the society, he has to stand up and fight. Blaming people for being "deeper than the world" and avoiding the "world" is a more "deeper than the world" play, if you don't feel it, then it is deeper and deeper, not far from the samadhi realm.不过凡事一说，即落言筌，不再能得三昧。说“世故三昧”者，即非“世故三昧”。三昧真谛，在行而不言；我现在一说“行而不言”，却又失了真谛，离三昧境盖益远矣。
不过凡事一说，即落言筌，不再能得三昧。 说“世故三昧”者，即非“世故三昧”。 三昧真谛，在行而不言；我现在一说“行而不言”，却又失了真谛，离三昧境盖益远矣。一切善知识，心知其意可也，唵！
一切善知识，心知其意可也，唵！十月十三日。
October 13th.

谣言世家

谣言世家

谣言世家

Rumor family双十佳节，有一位文学家大名汤增敭先生的，在《时事新报》上给我们讲光复时候的杭州的故事。他说那时杭州杀掉许多驻防的旗人，辨别的方法，是因为旗人叫“九”为“钩”的，所以要他说“九百九十九”，一露马脚，刀就砍下去了。
During the Double Ten Festival, a famous writer, Mr. Tang Zengyu, told us the story of Hangzhou during the restoration in the "Current Affairs News". He said that at that time, Hangzhou killed many flag men stationed there, and the way to distinguish it was because the flag man called "nine" as "hook", so he asked him to say "nine hundred and ninety-nine", and as soon as he showed his feet, the knife was cut down.这固然是颇武勇，也颇有趣的。但是，可惜是谣言。
This is certainly quite brave and quite interesting. However, unfortunately, it is a rumor.中国人里，杭州人是比较的文弱的人。当钱大王治世的时候，人民被刮得衣裤全无，只用一片瓦掩着下部，然而还要追捐，除被打得麂一般叫之外，并无贰话。不过这出于宋人的笔记，是谣言也说不定的。但宋明的末代皇帝，带着没落的阔人，和暮气一同滔滔的逃到杭州来，却是事实，苟延残喘，要大家有刚决的气魄，难不难。到现在，西子湖边还多是摇摇摆摆的雅人；连流氓也少有浙东似的“白刀子进红刀子出”的打架。自然，倘有军阀做着后盾，那是也会格外的撒泼的，不过当时实在并无敢于杀人的风气，也没有乐于杀人的人们。我们只要看举了老成持重的汤蛰仙先生做都督，就可以知道是不会流血的了。
Among Chinese, Hangzhou people are relatively weak people. When King Qian ruled the world, the people were scraped to the point of being completely naked, and only covered the lower part with a piece of tile, but they still had to chase donations, except for being beaten like a deer, and there was no second word. However, this is from the notes of the Song people, and it may be a rumor. But the last emperor of the Song and Ming dynasties, with the declining broad people, fled to Hangzhou with the twilight, but it is a fact. Up to now, there are still many swaying elegant people by Xizi Lake; Even hooligans rarely have fights like in eastern Zhejiang. Naturally, if there is a warlord as a backing, it will be particularly extravagant, but at that time there was really no atmosphere of daring to kill, and there were no people who were willing to kill. As long as we see the mature and prudent Mr. Tang Zhixian as the governor, we can know that there will be no bloodshed.不过战事是有的。革命军围住旗营，开枪打进去，里面也有时打出来。然而围得并不紧，我有一个熟人，白天在外面逛，晚上却自进旗营睡觉去了。
But there is war. The revolutionary army surrounded the flag camp and shot in, and sometimes it was shot inside. However, the circle was not tight, I had an acquaintance who was out during the day, but went to sleep in the flag camp at night.虽然如此，驻防军也终于被击溃，旗人降服了，房屋被充公是有的，却并没有杀戮。口粮当然取消，各人自寻生计，开初倒还好，后来就遭灾。
Despite this, the garrison was finally defeated, the bannermen surrendered, and the houses were confiscated, but they were not killed. Of course, the rations were canceled, and everyone was looking for their own livelihood.怎么会遭灾的呢？就是发生了谣言。
How could it be a disaster? It was a rumor.杭州的旗人一向优游于西子湖边，秀气所钟，是聪明的，他们知道没有了粮，只好做生意，于是卖糕的也有，卖小菜的也有。杭州人是客气的，并不歧视，生意也还不坏。然而祖传的谣言起来了，说是旗人所卖的东西，里面都藏着毒药。这一下子就使汉人避之惟恐不远，但倒是怕旗人来毒自己，并不是自己想去害旗人。结果是他们所卖的糕饼小菜，毫无生意，只得在路边出卖那些不能下毒的家具。家具一完，途穷路绝，就一败涂地了。这是杭州驻防旗人的收场。
The bannermen of Hangzhou have always roamed the shores of Xizi Lake, and they are smart, they know that there is no food, so they have to do business, so there are cakes and side dishes. Hangzhou people are polite, do not discriminate, and the business is not bad. However, ancestral rumors arose, saying that the things sold by the bannermen contained poison. This suddenly made the Han people avoid it, but they were afraid that the flag man would poison them, not that they wanted to harm the flag man. As a result, the pastries and small dishes they sold had no business, so they had to sell furniture that could not be poisoned on the side of the road. As soon as the furniture is finished, the road is cut off, and it is a complete failure. This is the end of the Hangzhou garrison flag man.笑里可以有刀，自称酷爱和平的人民，也会有杀人不见血的武器，那就是造谣言。但一面害人，一面也害己，弄得彼此懵懵懂懂。古时候无须提起了，即在近五十年来，甲午战败，就说是李鸿章害的，因为他儿子是日本的驸马，骂了他小半世；庚子拳变，又说洋鬼子是挖眼睛的，因为造药水，就乱杀了一大通。下毒学说起于辛亥光复之际的杭州，而复活于近来排日的时候。我还记得每有一回谣言，就总有谁被诬为下毒的奸细，给谁平白打死了。
There can be knives in the smile, and people who claim to love peace will also have weapons that kill without blood, that is, rumors. But on the one hand, they harm others and themselves, making each other confused. In ancient times, there was no need to mention it, that is, in the past fifty years, the defeat of the Sino-Japanese War was said to have been caused by Li Hongzhang, because his son was a Japanese son-in-law and scolded him for half his life; Gengzi fist changed, and it was said that the foreign devils were gouging out their eyes, because they made potions, so they killed a lot of people. The theory of poisoning originated in Hangzhou at the time of the restoration of Xinhai, and was resurrected in the recent era of Japan. I still remember that every time there was a rumor, someone was falsely accused of being a poisoned spy and beaten to death for nothing.谣言世家的子弟，是以谣言杀人，也以谣言被杀的。
The children of the rumor family killed people with rumors and were also killed by rumors.至于用数目来辨别汉满之法，我在杭州倒听说是出于湖北的荆州的，就是要他们数一二三四，数到“六”字，读作上声，便杀却。但杭州离荆州太远了，这还是一种谣言也难说。
As for the method of using numbers to identify Hanman, I heard in Hangzhou that it came from Jingzhou in Hubei, that is, they were asked to count one, two, three, four, count to the word "six", read it as the upper sound, and kill it. But Hangzhou is too far from Jingzhou, and it is difficult to say that this is still a rumor.我有时也不大能够分清那句是谣言，那句是真话了。
Sometimes I can't tell if that sentence is a rumor or that sentence is true.十月十三日。
October 13th.

关于妇女解放

关于妇女解放

关于妇女解放

On women's liberation孔子曰：“唯女子与小人为难养也，近之则不逊，远之则怨。”女子与小人归在一类里，但不知道是否也包括了他的母亲。后来的道学先生们，对于母亲，表面上总算是敬重的了，然而虽然如此，中国的为母的女性，还受着自己儿子以外的一切男性的轻蔑。
Confucius said: "Only women and petty people are difficult to raise; if they are close to them, they will be disrespectful, and if they are far away, they will resent." "The woman and the villain are in the same category, but I don't know if his mother is also included. Later Taoist gentlemen finally respected their mothers on the surface, but even so, Chinese mothers were still despised by all men except their own sons.辛亥革命后，为了参政权，有名的沈佩贞女士曾经一脚踢倒过议院门口的守卫。不过我很疑心那是他自己跌倒的，假使我们男人去踢罢，他一定会还踢你几脚。这是做女子便宜的地方。还有，现在有些太太们，可以和阔男人并肩而立，在码头或会场上照一个照相；或者当汽船飞机开始行动之前，到前面去敲碎一个酒瓶（这或者非小姐不可也说不定，我不知道那详细）了，也还是做女子的便宜的地方。此外，又新有了各样的职业，除女工，为的是她们工钱低，又听话，因此为厂主所乐用的不算外，别的就大抵只因为是女子，所以一面虽然被称为“花瓶”，一面也常有“一切招待，全用女子”的光荣的广告。男子倘要这么突然的飞黄腾达，单靠原来的男性是不行的，他至少非变狗不可。
After the Xinhai Revolution, in order to participate in political affairs, the famous Ms. Shen Peizhen once kicked down the guards at the gate of the parliament. But I suspect that he fell by himself, and if we men go to kick it, he will definitely kick you a few more times. This is where it is cheap to be a woman. Also, now some wives can stand side by side with the broad man and take a photo on the pier or venue; Or when the steamboat plane starts moving, go to the front to break a wine bottle (this may be a must for the young lady, I don't know the details), or it is still a cheap place for women. In addition, there are new professions, except for female workers, because they have low wages and are obedient, so they are not used by factory owners, and the others are probably only because they are women, so although they are called "vases" on the one hand, there are often glorious advertisements of "all hospitality, all women". If a man wants to rise to prominence so suddenly, he can't rely on the original man alone, he must at least become a dog.这是五四运动后，提倡了妇女解放以来的成绩。不过我们还常常听到职业妇女的痛苦的呻吟，评论家的对于新式女子的讥笑。她们从闺阁走出，到了社会上，其实是又成为给大家开玩笑，发议论的新资料了。
This is the achievement of women's liberation after the May Fourth Movement. However, we often hear the painful moans of professional women and the ridicule of critics for new women. When they came out of the boudoir and into society, they actually became new materials for everyone to joke and discuss.这是因为她们虽然到了社会上，还是靠着别人的“养”；要别人“养”，就得听人的唠叨，甚而至于侮辱。我们看看孔夫子的唠叨，就知道他是为了要“养”而“难”，“近之”“远之”都不十分妥帖的缘故。这也是现在的男子汉大丈夫的一般的叹息。也是女子的一般的苦痛。在没有消灭“养”和“被养”的界限以前，这叹息和苦痛是永远不会消灭的。
This is because although they have entered society, they still rely on the "support" of others; If you want others to "raise", you have to listen to people's nagging, and even insults. If we look at Confucius's nagging, we know that he is "difficult" for the sake of "raising", and "near" and "far" are not very appropriate. This is also the general sigh of today's manly men. It is also the general pain of women. This sigh and pain will never be eliminated until the boundary between "raising" and "being raised" is not eliminated.这并未改革的社会里，一切单独的新花样，都不过一块招牌，实际上和先前并无两样。拿一匹小鸟关在笼中，或给站在竿子上，地位好像改变了，其实还只是一样的在给别人做玩意，一饮一啄，都听命于别人。俗语说：“受人一饭，听人使唤”，就是这。所以一切女子，倘不得到和男子同等的经济权，我以为所有好名目，就都是空话。自然，在生理和心理上，男女是有差别的；即在同性中，彼此也都不免有些差别，然而地位却应该同等。必须地位同等之后，才会有真的女人和男人，才会消失了叹息和苦痛。
In this unreformed society, all the new unique tricks are just a signboard, and they are actually no different from before. Take a bird in a cage, or stand on a pole, the status seems to have changed, but in fact, it is still the same as making things for others, drinking and pecking, all obeying others' orders. As the saying goes: "Accept a meal from others, listen to others", this is it. Therefore, if all women do not get the same economic rights as men, I think all good names are empty words. Naturally, there is a difference between men and women physically and psychologically; Even in the same sex, there are inevitably some differences between each other, but the status should be the same. Only after equal status can there be real women and men, and sighs and pain will disappear.在真的解放之前，是战斗。但我并非说，女人应该和男人一样的拿枪，或者只给自己的孩子吸一只奶，而使男子去负担那一半。我只以为应该不自苟安于目前暂时的位置，而不断的为解放思想，经济等等而战斗。解放了社会，也就解放了自己。但自然，单为了现存的惟妇女所独有的桎梏而斗争，也还是必要的。
Before real liberation, there is battle. But I am not saying that women should hold guns like men, or suck only one milk for their children, and let men bear the half. I just thought that I should not settle for my current temporary position, but constantly fight for the emancipation of the mind, the economy, etc. Liberating society also liberates oneself. But naturally, it is necessary to fight only for the shackles that exist only for women.我没有研究过妇女问题，倘使必须我说几句，就只有这一点空话。
I have not studied women's issues, and if I had to say a few words, it would be just this empty word.十月二十一日。
October 21st.

火

火

火

fire普洛美修斯偷火给人类，总算是犯了天条，贬入地狱。但是，钻木取火的燧人氏却似乎没有犯窃盗罪，没有破坏神圣的私有财产——那时候，树木还是无主的公物。然而燧人氏也被忘却了，到如今只见中国人供火神菩萨，不见供燧人氏的。
Prometheus stole fire from mankind, and finally violated the law of heaven and was demoted to hell. However, the Suiren clan who drilled wood for fire did not seem to have committed theft or destroyed sacred private property - at that time, trees were still ownerless public property. However, the Suiren clan has also been forgotten, and now only the Chinese offer to the Fire God Bodhisattva, but not the Suiren clan.火神菩萨只管放火，不管点灯。凡是火着就有他的份。因此，大家把他供养起来，希望他少作恶。然而如果他不作恶，他还受得着供养么，你想？
The Vulcan Bodhisattva just sets fire, regardless of lighting the lights. Wherever there is fire, he has his share. Therefore, everyone made offerings to him, hoping that he would do less evil. However, if he does not do evil, can he still bear to be provided, do you think?点灯太平凡了。从古至今，没有听到过点灯出名的名人，虽然人类从燧人氏那里学会了点火已经有五六千年的时间。放火就不然。秦始皇放了一把火——烧了书没有烧人；项羽入关又放了一把火——烧的是阿房宫不是民房（？——待考）。……罗马的一个什么皇帝却放火烧百姓了；中世纪正教的僧侣就会把异教徒当柴火烧，间或还灌上油。这些都是一世之雄。现代的希特拉就是活证人。如何能不供养起来。何况现今是进化时代，火神菩萨也代代跨灶的。
The lighting is too ordinary. From ancient times to the present, there has been no famous celebrity who has been famous for lighting lamps, although humans have learned to light fires from the flint people for five or six thousand years. It's not like setting fire. Qin Shi Huang set a fire - burned books but did not burn people; Xiang Yu set fire again when he entered the customs - it was the Epang Palace that was burned, not a private house (?). ——To be examined). …… What emperor in Rome set fire to the people; Medieval Orthodox monks would burn pagans as firewood and occasionally pour oil on them. These are all heroes of a lifetime. Hitler in modern times is a living witness. How can you not provide for it? What's more, now is the age of evolution, and the Vulcan Bodhisattva has also crossed the stove from generation to generation.譬如说罢，没有电灯的地方，小百姓不顾什么国货年，人人都要买点洋货的煤油，晚上就点起来：那么幽黯的黄澄澄的光线映在纸窗上，多不大方！不准，不准这么点灯！你们如果要光明的话，非得禁止这样“浪费”煤油不可。煤油应当扛到田地里去，灌进喷筒，呼啦呼啦的喷起来……一场大火，几十里路的延烧过去，稻禾，树木，房舍——尤其是草棚——一会儿都变成飞灰了。还不够，就有燃烧弹，硫磺弹，从飞机上面扔下来，像上海一二八的大火似的，够烧几天几晚。那才是伟大的光明呵。
For example, in places where there are no electric lights, the common people don't care about the domestic year, everyone has to buy some foreign kerosene, and light it up at night: so the dim yellow light is reflected on the paper window, how generous! No, don't light up like this! If you want to be bright, you must prohibit such "waste" of kerosene. Kerosene should be carried to the field, poured into the nozzle, and sprayed up...... A fire spread for dozens of miles, and the rice, trees, and houses - especially the grass sheds - turned into fly ash for a while. If it wasn't enough, there were incendiary bombs and sulfur bombs, which were thrown down from the plane, like the fire of Shanghai 128, enough to burn for several days and nights. That's the great light.火神菩萨的威风是这样的。可是说起来，他又不承认：火神菩萨据说原是保佑小民的，至于火灾，却要怪小民自不小心，或是为非作歹，纵火抢掠。
The majesty of the Vulcan Bodhisattva is like this. But speaking of which, he did not admit it: the Vulcan Bodhisattva is said to have blessed the common people, but as for the fire, he has to blame the common people for being careless, or doing evil, and setting fire and looting.谁知道呢？历代放火的名人总是这样说，却未必总有人信。
Who knows? Celebrities who have set fires throughout the ages have always said this, but not always people believe it.我们只看见点灯是平凡的，放火是雄壮的，所以点灯就被禁止，放火就受供养。你不见海京伯马戏团么：宰了耕牛喂老虎，原是这年头的“时代精神”。
We only see that lighting is ordinary, and setting fire is majestic, so lighting is forbidden, and setting fire is offered. Don't you see the Haijingbo Circus: slaughtering cattle to feed tigers is originally the "spirit of the times" these days.十一月二日。
November 2nd.

论翻印木刻

论翻印木刻

论翻印木刻

On reprinting woodcuts麦绥莱勒的连环图画四种出版并不久，日报上已有了种种的批评，这是向来的美术书出版后未能遇到的盛况，可见读书界对于这书，是十分注意的。但议论的要点，和去年已不同：去年还是连环图画是否可算美术的问题，现在却已经到了看懂这些图画的难易了。
Not long after the publication of Mai Suilele's comic strips, there have been various criticisms in the daily newspaper, which is a grand occasion that has not been encountered after the publication of art books, which shows that the reading community is very careful about this book. But the main point of the discussion is different from last year: last year it was still a question of whether comic strips can be considered art, but now it has reached the point where it is difficult to understand these pictures.出版界的进行可没有评论界的快。其实，麦绥莱勒的木刻的翻印，是还在证明连环图画确可以成为艺术这一点的。现在的社会上，有种种读者层，出版物自然也就有种种，这四种是供给智识者层的图画。然而为什么有许多地方很难懂得呢？我以为是由于经历之不同。同是中国人，倘使曾经见过飞机救国或“下蛋”，则在图上看见这东西，即刻就懂，但若历来未尝躬逢这些盛典的人，恐怕只能看作风筝或蜻蜓罢了。
The publishing industry is not as fast as the critics. In fact, the reproduction of Mai Suilele's woodcut still proves that comic strips can indeed become art. In today's society, there are all kinds of readers, and there are naturally all kinds of publications, and these four are pictures for the intellectuals. However, why are there so many places that are difficult to understand? I think it's because of the different experiences. If you are also Chinese, if you have ever seen a plane to save the country or "lay eggs", you will see this thing on the picture and understand it immediately, but if you have never experienced these ceremonies, I am afraid you can only see it as a kite or a dragonfly.有一种自称“中国文艺年鉴社”，而实是匿名者们所编的《中国文艺年鉴》在它的所谓“鸟瞰”中，曾经说我所发表的《连环图画辩护》虽将连环图画的艺术价值告诉了苏汶先生，但“无意中却把要是德国板画那类艺术作品搬到中国来，是否能为一般大众所理解，即是否还成其为大众艺术的问题忽略了过去，而且这种解答是对大众化的正题没有直接意义的”。这真是倘不是能编《中国文艺年鉴》的选家，就不至于说出口来的聪明话，因为我本也“不”在讨论将“德国板画搬到中国来，是否为一般大众所理解”；所辩护的只是连环图画可以成为艺术，使青年艺术学徒不被曲说所迷，敢于创作，并且逐渐产生大众化的作品而已。假使我真如那编者所希望，“有意的”来说德国板画是否就是中国的大众艺术，这可至少也得归入“低能”一类里去了。
There is a kind of "Chinese Literature and Art Yearbook" that calls itself the "China Literature and Art Yearbook", but in fact it is compiled by anonymous people, in its so-called "bird's eye view", it was once said that although the "Defense of Comic Strips" I published told Mr. Su Wen about the artistic value of comic strips, "I inadvertently moved works of art such as German panel paintings to China, whether they could be understood by the general public, that is, whether they were still popular art, ignoring the past, and this answer had no direct meaning for the main topic of popularization." This is really a clever thing that if I were not a selector who could compile the "Chinese Literature and Art Yearbook", I would not have said it wisely, because I was not discussing whether "moving German panel paintings to China would be understood by the general public"; What is defended is that comic strips can become art, so that young art apprentices are not fascinated by distortions, dare to create, and gradually produce popular works. If I were to "intentionally" say whether German panel painting is Chinese popular art as the editor hoped, it would at least be classified as "imbecile".但是，假使一定要问：“要是德国板画那类艺术作品搬到中国来，是否能为一般大众所理解”呢？那么，我也可以回答：假使不是立方派，未来派等等的古怪作品，大概该能够理解一点。所理解的可以比看一本《中国文艺年鉴》多，也不至于比看一本《西湖十景》少。风俗习惯，彼此不同，有些当然是莫明其妙的，但这是人物，这是屋宇，这是树木，却能够懂得，到过上海的，也就懂得画里的电灯，电车，工厂。尤其合式的是所画的是故事，易于讲通，易于记得。古之雅人，曾谓妇人俗子，看画必问这是什么故事，大可笑。中国的雅俗之分就在此：雅人往往说不出他以为好的画的内容来，俗人却非问内容不可。从这一点看，连环图画是宜于俗人的，但我在《连环图画辩护》中，已经证明了它是艺术，伤害了雅人的高超了。
However, if we must ask, "If a work of art such as German panel painting moves to China, will it be understood by the general public"? Then, I can also answer: if it is not a cube, futurist, etc. eccentric work, it should probably be understood a little. You can understand more than reading a "Chinese Literature and Art Yearbook", and it will not be less than reading a "Ten Views of West Lake". Customs and habits are different from each other, some of which are of course incomprehensible, but these are characters, this is the house, this is the tree, but they can understand, and those who have been to Shanghai also know the lights, trams, and factories in the painting. What is especially appropriate is that what is drawn is a story, which is easy to tell and remember. The ancient elegant people once said that women and vulgar people would ask what kind of story this is when they looked at the painting, which was ridiculous. This is the difference between elegance and vulgarity in China: elegant people often can't tell the content of what they think is a good painting, but ordinary people have to ask about the content. From this point of view, comic strips are suitable for laypeople, but in "The Defense of Comic Strips", I have proven that it is art and hurts the superiority of elegant people.然而，虽然只对于智识者，我以为绍介了麦绥莱勒的作品也还是不够的。同是木刻，也有刻法之不同，有思想之不同，有加字的，有无字的，总得翻印好几种，才可以窥见现代外国连环图画的大概。而翻印木刻画，也较易近真，有益于观者。我常常想，最不幸的是在中国的青年艺术学徒了，学外国文学可看原书，学西洋画却总看不到原画。自然，翻板是有的，但是，将一大幅壁画缩成明信片那么大，怎能看出真相？大小是很有关系的，假使我们将象缩小如猪，老虎缩小如鼠，怎么还会令人觉得原先那种气魄呢。木刻却小品居多，所以翻刻起来，还不至于大相远。
However, although it is only for the intellectual, I think it is not enough to introduce Mai Suilele's works. The same woodcut also has different engraving methods, different ideas, some with additional words, some without words, and there are always several kinds of reprints to get a glimpse of the general idea of modern foreign comic strips. Reprinting woodcuts is also easier to approach, which is beneficial to the viewer. I often think that the most unfortunate thing is that young art apprentices in China can read original books when they learn foreign literature, but they can never see the original paintings when they learn Western paintings. Naturally, there is a flap, but how can you see the truth by shrinking a large mural to the size of a postcard? Size is very related, if we shrink like an elephant like a pig and a tiger as small as a mouse, how can we still feel the original courage? The woodcuts are mostly sketches, so they are not far from each other.但这还仅就绍介给一般智识者的读者层而言，倘为艺术学徒设想，锌板的翻印也还不够。太细的线，锌板上是容易消失的，即使是粗线，也能因强水浸蚀的久暂而不同，少浸太粗，久浸就太细，中国还很少制板适得其宜的名工。要认真，就只好来用玻璃板，我翻印的《士敏土之图》二百五十本，在中国便是首先的试验。施蛰存先生在《大晚报》附刊的《火炬》上说：“说不定他是像鲁迅先生印珂罗版本木刻图一样的是私人精印本，属于罕见书之列”，就是在讥笑这一件事。我还亲自听到过一位青年在这“罕见书”边说，写着只印二百五十部，是骗人的，一定印的很多，印多报少，不过想抬高那书价。
But this is only for the readership of the general intellectual, and if it is conceived for art apprentices, the reproduction of zinc plates is not enough. Too thin lines, zinc plates are easy to disappear, even thick wires, can be different due to the long time of strong water erosion, less immersion is too thick, long soaking is too fine, China still has few suitable famous craftsmen for making plates. If you want to be serious, you have to use a glass plate, and the 250 copies of "The Map of Shimin Soil" that I reprinted were the first experiments in China. Mr. Shi Zhicun said in the "Torch" supplement to the "Great Evening News": "Maybe he is a private fine print like Mr. Lu Xun's woodcut of the Keluo version, which belongs to the list of rare books", which is ridiculing this matter. I also personally heard a young man say on this "rare book" that it was written that only 250 copies were printed, which was a lie, and he must have printed a lot, printed more and reported less, but he wanted to raise the price of the book.他们自己没有做过“私人精印本”的可笑事，这些笑骂是都无足怪的。我只因为想供给艺术学徒以较可靠的木刻翻本，就用原画来制玻璃版，但制这版，是每制一回只能印三百幅的，多印即须另制，假如每制一幅则只印一张或多至三百张，制印费都是三元，印三百以上到六百张即需六元，九百张九元，外加纸张费。倘在大书局，大官厅，即使印一万二千本原也容易办，然而我不过一个“私人”；并非繁销书，而竟来“精印”，那当然不免为财力所限，只好单印一板了。但幸而还好，印本已经将完，可知还有人看见；至于为一般的读者，则早已用锌板复制，插在译本《士敏土》里面了，然而编辑兼批评家却不屑道。
They themselves have not done the ridiculous thing of "private hard print", and these ridicules and scoldings are not surprising. I only want to provide art apprentices with more reliable woodcut copies, so I use the original painting to make glass plates, but to make this plate, only 300 sheets can be printed at a time, and if you print more than 300 sheets, you have to make another one, if you make one or more than 300 sheets, the printing fee is 3 yuan, and if you print more than 300 to 600 sheets, you need 6 yuan, 900 sheets 9 yuan, plus paper costs. If you are in a big bookstore, a big official hall, even if you print 12,000 originals, it is easy to do, but I am just a "private person"; It is not a popular book, but it is "fine printed", of course, it is inevitable that it will be limited by financial resources, so it has to be printed on a single board. But fortunately, the print is almost finished, and it can be seen that there are still people who see it; As for the general reader, it has already been copied on a zinc plate and inserted into the translation of "Shimintu", but the editor and critic dismisses it.人不严肃起来，连指导青年也可以当作开玩笑，但仅印十来幅图，认真地想过几回的人却也有的，不过自己不多说。我这回写了出来，是在向青年艺术学徒说明珂罗板一板只印三百部，是制板上普通的事，并非故意要造“罕见书”，并且希望有更多好事的“私人”，不为不负责任的话所欺，大家都来制造“精印本”。
People are not serious, and even instructing young people can be taken as a joke, but there are people who have only printed a dozen pictures and seriously thought about it a few times, but they don't say much. I wrote it this time, explaining to the young art apprentices that only 300 copies of the Koro board are printed, which is a common thing in board making, and I do not deliberately want to make "rare books", and I hope that there will be more "private people" who do good things, and will not be deceived by irresponsible words, and everyone will make "hard prints".十一月六日。
November 6th.

《木刻创作法》序

《木刻创作法》序

《木刻创作法》序

Preface to "Woodcut Creation Method"地不问东西，凡木刻的图版，向来是画管画，刻管刻，印管印的。中国用得最早，而照例也久经衰退；清光绪中，英人傅兰雅氏编印《格致汇编》，插图就已非中国刻工所能刻，精细的必需由英国运了图版来。那就是所谓“木口木刻”，也即“复制木刻”，和用在编给印度人读的英文书，后来也就移给中国人读的英文书上的插画，是同类的。那时我还是一个儿童，见了这些图，便震惊于它的精工活泼，当作宝贝看。到近几年，才知道西洋还有一种由画家一手造成的版画，也就是原画，倘用木版，便叫作“创作木刻”，是艺术家直接的创作品，毫不假手于刻者和印者的。现在我们所要绍介的，便是这一种。
The earth does not care about things, and all woodcut plates have always been painted tube paintings, carved tube carvings, and printed tube prints. China used it the earliest, and as usual, it has been in decline for a long time; In the Guangxu period of the Qing Dynasty, the British Fu Lanya compiled and printed the "Gezhi Compilation", and the illustrations were no longer engraved by Chinese engravers, and the fine plates had to be transported from the UK. That is, the so-called "woodcuts", that is, "copying woodcuts", and the illustrations used in English books for Indians and later transferred to Chinese books, are of the same kind. At that time, I was still a child, and when I saw these pictures, I was shocked by their exquisiteness and liveliness, and I looked at them as treasures. It was not until recent years that I learned that there is also a kind of printmaking made by painters in the West, that is, the original painting, if woodblock is used, it is called "creative woodcut", which is the artist's direct creation, without pretending to be the engraver and the printer. Now what we want to introduce is this one.为什么要绍介呢？据我个人的私见，第一是因为好玩。说到玩，自然好像有些不正经，但我们钞书写字太久了，谁也不免要息息眼，平常是看一会窗外的天。假如有一幅挂在墙壁上的画，那岂不是更其好？倘有得到名画的力量的人物，自然是无须乎此的，否则，一张什么复制缩小的东西，实在远不如原版的木刻，既不失真，又省耗费。自然，也许有人要指为“要以‘今雅’立国”的，但比起“古雅”来，不是已有“古”“今”之别了么？
Why do you want to introduce it? In my personal opinion, the first is because it's fun. When it comes to playing, it naturally seems a bit unorthodox, but we have been writing for too long, and no one can help but breathe, usually looking at the sky outside the window for a while. Wouldn't it be better if there was a painting hanging on the wall? If there is a character who has the power of a famous painting, it is naturally unnecessary, otherwise, a copy and reduction of something is really far inferior to the original woodcut, which is neither distorted nor cost-effective. Naturally, some people may want to refer to it as "building a country with 'modern elegance'", but compared with "quaintness", isn't there a difference between "ancient" and "modern"?第二，是因为简便。现在的金价很贵了，一个青年艺术学徒想画一幅画，画布颜料，就得化一大批钱；画成了，倘使没法展览，就只好请自己看。木刻是无需多化钱的，只用几把刀在木头上划来划去——这也许未免说得太容易了——就如印人的刻印一样，可以成为创作，作者也由此得到创作的欢喜。印了出来，就能将同样的作品，分给别人，使许多人一样的受到创作的欢喜。总之，是比别种作法的作品，普遍性大得远了。
Second, it is because of simplicity. The price of gold is very expensive now, and a young art apprentice wants to paint a painting, canvas paint, he has to spend a lot of money; The painting is done, and if it cannot be exhibited, it can only be seen by yourself. Woodcuts do not require extra money, just use a few knives to scratch around the wood - this may be too easy to say - just like the engraving of the printer, it can become a creation, and the author gets the joy of creation. When printed, the same work can be distributed to others, so that many people can be happy with creation. In short, it is far more universal than other works.第三，是因为有用。这和“好玩”似乎有些冲突，但其实也不尽然的，要看所玩的是什么。打马将恐怕是终于没有出息的了；用火药做花炮玩，推广起来却就可以造枪炮。大炮，总算是实用不过的罢，而安特莱夫一有钱，却将它装在自己的庭园里当玩艺。木刻原是小富家儿艺术，然而一用在刊物的装饰，文学或科学书的插画上，也就成了大家的东西，是用不着多说的。
Third, it is because it is useful. This seems to be a bit in conflict with "fun", but in fact, it is not necessarily the case, it depends on what you are playing. I am afraid that the horse will finally have no future; Use gunpowder to make fireworks, but you can make guns when promoted. The cannon is finally practical, but when Antleif is rich, he puts it in his garden as a plaything. Woodcuts were originally the art of the little rich, but once they were used in the decoration of publications and the illustrations of literary or scientific books, they became everyone's thing, and there was no need to say more.这实在是正合于现代中国的一种艺术。
This is really an art that fits modern China.但是至今没有一本讲说木刻的书，这才是第一本。虽然稍简略，却已经给了读者一个大意。由此发展下去，路是广大得很。题材会丰富起来的，技艺也会精炼起来的，采取新法，加以中国旧日之所长，还有开出一条新的路径来的希望。那时作者各将自己的本领和心得，贡献出来，中国的木刻界就会发生光焰。这书虽然因此要成为不过一粒星星之火，但也够有历史上的意义了。
But there is no book about woodcuts so far, and this is the first one. Although it is a little brief, it has already given the reader a general idea. From this development, the road is very vast. The theme will be enriched, the skills will also be refined, and there is hope to open a new path by adopting new methods, adding China's old strengths. At that time, the authors contributed their own skills and experiences, and the Chinese woodcut industry would have a flame. Although this book is only a spark, it is also historically significant.一九三三年十一月九日，鲁迅记。
November 9, 1933, Lu Xun recorded.

作文秘诀

作文秘诀

作文秘诀

Writing secrets现在竟还有人写信来问我作文的秘诀。
Now there are people writing to me asking me about the secret of composition.我们常常听到：拳师教徒弟是留一手的，怕他学全了就要打死自己，好让他称雄。在实际上，这样的事情也并非全没有，逢蒙杀羿就是一个前例。逢蒙远了，而这种古气是没有消尽的，还加上了后来的“状元瘾”，科举虽然久废，至今总还要争“唯一”，争“最先”。遇到有“状元瘾”的人们，做教师就危险，拳棒教完，往往免不了被打倒，而这位新拳师来教徒弟时，却以他的先生和自己为前车之鉴，就一定留一手，甚而至于三四手，于是拳术也就“一代不如一代”了。
We often hear: boxers teach their disciples to keep one hand, for fear that if he learns everything, he will beat himself to death so that he can dominate. In fact, such things are not all non-existent, and Feng Meng's killing of Yi is a precedent. Fengmeng is far away, and this ancient atmosphere has not been eliminated, and the later "champion addiction" has been added, although the imperial examination has been abandoned for a long time, it still has to fight for the "only" and "first". When encountering people with "champion addiction", it is dangerous to be a teacher, and after teaching the fist stick, it is often inevitable to be knocked down, but when this new boxer came to teach his disciples, he took his husband and himself as a lesson from the past, so he must keep a hand, or even three or four hands, so boxing is "not as good as a generation".还有，做医生的有秘方，做厨子的有秘法，开点心铺子的有秘传，为了保全自家的衣食，听说这还只授儿妇，不教女儿，以免流传到别人家里去。“秘”是中国非常普遍的东西，连关于国家大事的会议，也总是“内容非常秘密”，大家不知道。但是，作文却好像偏偏并无秘诀，假使有，每个作家一定是传给子孙的了，然而祖传的作家很少见。自然，作家的孩子们，从小看惯书籍纸笔，眼格也许比较的可以大一点罢，不过不见得就会做。目下的刊物上，虽然常见什么“父子作家”“夫妇作家”的名称，仿佛真能从遗嘱或情书中，密授一些什么秘诀一样，其实乃是肉麻当有趣，妄将做官的关系，用到作文上去了。
In addition, there are secret recipes for doctors, secret methods for cooks, and secret traditions for opening dim sum shops. "Secret" is a very common thing in China, and even meetings on national affairs are always "very secret", and everyone does not know about it. However, the composition seems to have no secret, if there is, every writer must have passed it on to his descendants, but ancestral writers are rare. Naturally, the children of writers are accustomed to reading books, paper and pen since childhood, and their eyes may be a little bigger, but they may not be able to do it. In the current publications, although the names of "father and son writers" and "husband and wife writers" are common, as if they can really teach some secrets from wills or love letters, they are actually very interesting, and the relationship between being officials is used in compositions.那么，作文真就毫无秘诀么？却也并不。我曾经讲过几句做古文的秘诀，是要通篇都有来历，而非古人的成文；也就是通篇是自己做的，而又全非自己所做，个人其实并没有说什么；也就是“事出有因”，而又“查无实据”。到这样，便“庶几乎免于大过也矣”了。简而言之，实不过要做得“今天天气，哈哈哈……”而已。
So, is there really no secret to composition? But not either. I once said a few words about the secret of making ancient texts, which is to have a source throughout the text, not the writings of the ancients; That is, the whole article is done by myself, but not by myself, and I don't actually say anything; That is, "there is a reason for the incident" and "there is no evidence". In this way, "it is almost free from major mistakes". In short, it's just about doing "today's weather, hahaha......".这是说内容。至于修辞，也有一点秘诀：一要蒙胧，二要难懂。那方法，是：缩短句子，多用难字。譬如罢，作文论秦朝事，写一句“秦始皇乃始烧书”，是不算好文章的，必须翻译一下，使它不容易一目了然才好。这时就用得着《尔雅》，《文选》了，其实是只要不给别人知道，查查《康熙字典》也不妨的。动手来改，成为“始皇始焚书”，就有些“古”起来，到得改成“政俶燔典”，那就简直有了班马气，虽然跟着也令人不大看得懂。但是这样的做成一篇以至一部，是可以被称为“学者”的，我想了半天，只做得一句，所以只配在杂志上投稿。
This is about content. As for rhetoric, there is also a secret: one must be obscure, and the other must be difficult to understand. The method is: shorten sentences and use more difficult words. For example, writing an essay on the affairs of the Qin Dynasty and writing a sentence "Qin Shi Huang was the first to burn books" is not a good article, and it must be translated so that it is not easy to understand at a glance. At this time, "Erya" and "Anthology" are used, in fact, as long as they are not known to others, it is okay to check the "Kangxi Dictionary". If you change it and become "the first emperor began to burn books", it will be a little "ancient", and it will be changed to "Zheng Chu Burning Code", then it will be simply a banma, although it is not very understandable. But this kind of article or even one can be called a "scholar", I thought for a long time, and I only did one sentence, so I only deserved to submit it to the magazine.我们的古之文学大师，就常常玩着这一手。班固先生的“紫色鼃声，余分闰位”，就将四句长句，缩成八字的；扬雄先生的“蠢迪检柙”，就将“动由规矩”这四个平常字，翻成难字的。《绿野仙踪》记塾师咏“花”，有句云：“媳钗俏矣儿书废，哥罐闻焉嫂棒伤。”自说意思，是儿妇折花为钗，虽然俏丽，但恐儿子因而废读；下联较费解，是他的哥哥折了花来，没有花瓶，就插在瓦罐里，以嗅花香，他嫂嫂为防微杜渐起见，竟用棒子连花和罐一起打坏了。这算是对于冬烘先生的嘲笑。然而他的作法，其实是和扬班并无不合的，错只在他不用古典而用新典。这一个所谓“错”，就使《文选》之类在遗老遗少们的心眼里保住了威灵。
Our ancient literary masters often play this hand. Mr. Ban Gu's "purple shrew's sound, extra leap position" shortened four long sentences into eight characters; Mr. Yang Xiong's "Stupid Di Inspection" translates the four ordinary words of "moving by rules" into difficult words. "The Wizard of Oz" records the teacher's poem "Flower", and there is a line: "The daughter-in-law is pretty, the children's book is useless, and the brother can hears the sister-in-law's stick injury. "Speaking of meaning, it is the daughter-in-law who folds flowers into hairpins, although it is beautiful, but I am afraid that my son will stop reading because of this; The lower couplet is more puzzling, it was his brother who broke the flowers, there was no vase, so he put it in the clay pot to smell the fragrance of the flowers, and his sister-in-law actually used a stick to break the flowers and the jar in order to prevent micro-development. This is a ridicule of Mr. Donghuan. However, his approach is actually in line with Yangban, and the fault is only that he uses the new classics instead of the classics. This so-called "mistake" has preserved the power of the "Anthology" in the eyes of the elderly and young.做得蒙胧，这便是所谓“好”么？答曰：也不尽然，其实是不过掩了丑。但是，“知耻近乎勇”，掩了丑，也就仿佛近乎好了。摩登女郎披下头发，中年妇人罩上面纱，就都是蒙胧术。人类学家解释衣服的起源有三说：一说是因为男女知道了性的羞耻心，用这来遮羞；一说却以为倒是用这来刺激；还有一种是说因为老弱男女，身体衰瘦，露着不好看，盖上一些东西，借此掩掩丑的。从修辞学的立场上看起来，我赞成后一说。现在还常有骈四俪六，典丽堂皇的祭文，挽联，宣言，通电，我们倘去查字典，翻类书，剥去它外面的装饰，翻成白话文，试看那剩下的是怎样的东西呵！？
If you do it in a hazy way, is this the so-called "good"? Answer: Not necessarily, in fact, it is just a cover up of ugliness. However, "knowing shame is almost brave", covering up ugliness, it seems to be almost good. Modern girls put their hair down, and middle-aged women put on their veils, all of which are masking techniques. Anthropologists explain the origin of clothes in three ways: one is because men and women know the shame of sex and use it to cover their shame; I thought it was used to stimulate it; Another is that because the old and weak men and women are thin and unsightly, they cover up some things to hide their ugliness. From the standpoint of rhetoric, I agree with the latter. If we go to look up the dictionary, flip through the book, strip off the decoration on the outside, and turn it into vernacular, let's see what kind of things are left!?不懂当然也好的。好在那里呢？即好在“不懂”中。但所虑的是好到令人不能说好丑，所以还不如做得它“难懂”：有一点懂，而下一番苦功之后，所懂的也比较的多起来。我们是向来很有崇拜“难”的脾气的，每餐吃三碗饭，谁也不以为奇，有人每餐要吃十八碗，就郑重其事的写在笔记上；用手穿针没有人看，用脚穿针就可以搭帐篷卖钱；一幅画片，平淡无奇，装在匣子里，挖一个洞，化为西洋镜，人们就张着嘴热心的要看了。况且同是一事，费了苦功而达到的，也比并不费力而达到的的可贵。譬如到什么庙里去烧香罢，到山上的，比到平地上的可贵；三步一拜才到庙里的庙，和坐了轿子一径抬到的庙，即使同是这庙，在到达者的心里的可贵的程度是大有高下的。作文之贵乎难懂，就是要使读者三步一拜，这才能够达到一点目的的妙法。
Of course it's okay if you don't understand. Where is the good thing? That is, fortunately, in "I don't understand". But what I am worried about is that it is so good that people cannot say that it is ugly, so it is better to make it "difficult to understand": if you understand a little, after the next hard work, you will understand more. We have always had a temper to worship "difficult", eating three bowls of rice at each meal, no one is surprised, some people want to eat eighteen bowls per meal, and they solemnly write it down in their notes; no one sees the needle with your hands, and you can set up a tent and sell it for money with your feet; A painting, plain, is packed in a box, digs a hole, turns into a diorama, and people open their mouths to see it enthusiastically. Moreover, the same thing is more valuable than what is achieved with great effort. For example, if you go to a temple to burn incense, going to the mountain is more valuable than going to the flat ground; It takes three steps and one bow to reach the temple in the temple, and the temple that is carried all the way to the temple by sedan chair, even if it is the same temple, the degree of value in the hearts of the arrival is very different. The value of composition is difficult to understand, that is, to make the reader bow in three steps, so that it can achieve a little goal.写到这里，成了所讲的不但只是做古文的秘诀，而且是做骗人的古文的秘诀了。但我想，做白话文也没有什么大两样，因为它也可以夹些僻字，加上蒙胧或难懂，来施展那变戏法的障眼的手巾的。倘要反一调，就是“白描”。
Writing here, it has become not only the secret of making ancient texts, but also the secrets of deceiving ancient texts. But I think there is no big difference in doing vernacular text, because it can also contain some obscure words, add obscure or difficult to understand, to perform the trick of the blinding handkerchief. If you want to go the other way, it is "white description".“白描”却并没有秘诀。如果要说有，也不过是和障眼法反一调：有真意，去粉饰，少做作，勿卖弄而已。
"White Drawing" has no secret. If you want to say that there is, it is just the opposite of the blindfold: have a true meaning, remove embellishment, be less pretentious, and don't show off.十一月十日。
November 10th.

捣鬼心传

捣鬼心传

捣鬼心传

Pounding ghost hearts中国人又很有些喜欢奇形怪状，鬼鬼祟祟的脾气，爱看古树发光比大麦开花的多，其实大麦开花他向来也没有看见过。于是怪胎畸形，就成为报章的好资料，替代了生物学的常识的位置了。最近在广告上所见的，有像所谓两头蛇似的两头四手的胎儿，还有从小肚上生出一只脚来的三脚汉子。固然，人有怪胎，也有畸形，然而造化的本领是有限的，他无论怎么怪，怎么畸，总有一个限制：孪儿可以连背，连腹，连臀，连胁，或竟骈头，却不会将头生在屁股上；形可以骈拇，枝指，缺肢，多乳，却不会两脚之外添出一只脚来，好像“买两送一”的买卖。天实在不及人之能捣鬼。
Chinese people also like strange shapes and sneaky tempers, and love to see ancient trees shine more than barley flowers, in fact, he has never seen barley bloom. So the freak deformity became a good source of information in the newspaper, replacing the position of common sense in biology. Recently, I have seen in advertisements that there are fetuses with two heads and four hands like so-called two-headed snakes, and three-legged men who give birth to one foot from their belly. Of course, there are freaks and deformities, but the ability of creation is limited, no matter how strange or deformed he is, there is always a limit: twins can have a back, belly, buttocks, ribs, or even a head, but they will not have their heads on their buttocks; The shape can be a toe, a branch finger, a missing limb, and a lot of breasts, but it will not add a foot in addition to the two feet, like a "buy two get one free" deal. Heaven is really not as good as human beings can pound ghosts.但是，人的捣鬼，虽胜于天，而实际上本领也有限。因为捣鬼精义，在切忌发挥，亦即必须含蓄。盖一加发挥，能使所捣之鬼分明，同时也生限制，故不如含蓄之深远，而影响却又因而模胡了。“有一利必有一弊”，我之所谓“有限”者以此。
However, although people's troublemakers are better than the sky, their skills are actually limited. Because the essence of troublemakers must not be exerted, that is, it must be implicit. Because OnePlus can make the ghost of the game clear, but at the same time create restrictions, so it is not as far-reaching as implicit, but the impact is so dull. "There must be a benefit and a disadvantage", which is what I mean by "limited".清朝人的笔记里，常说罗两峰的《鬼趣图》，真写得鬼气拂拂；后来那图由文明书局印出来了，却不过一个奇瘦，一个矮胖，一个臃肿的模样，并不见得怎样的出奇，还不如只看笔记有趣。小说上的描摹鬼相，虽然竭力，也都不足以惊人，我觉得最可怕的还是晋人所记的脸无五官，浑沦如鸡蛋的山中厉鬼。因为五官不过是五官，纵使苦心经营，要它凶恶，总也逃不出五官的范围，现在使它浑沦得莫名其妙，读者也就怕得莫名其妙了。然而其“弊”也，是印象的模胡。不过较之写些“青面獠牙”，“口鼻流血”的笨伯，自然聪明得远。
In the notes of the Qing Dynasty people, it is often said that Luo Liangfeng's "Ghost Fun Picture" is really ghostly written; Later, the picture was printed by Civilization Bookstore, but it was just a very thin, a short fat, and a bloated appearance, which was not necessarily surprising, and it was not as interesting as just looking at the notes. The depiction of ghosts in the novel, although I try my best, is not enough to be amazing, I think the most terrifying thing is the ghost in the mountains whose face has no facial features and is as muddy as an egg. Because the five senses are just the five senses, even if you work hard to make it vicious, you will never be able to escape the scope of the five senses. However, its "disadvantage" is also the ambiguity of the impression. However, compared to writing some "blue-faced fangs" and "bleeding mouth and nose", he is naturally far smarter.中华民国人的宣布罪状大抵是十条，然而结果大抵是无效。古来尽多坏人，十条不过如此，想引人的注意以至活动是决不会的。骆宾王作《讨武曌檄》，那“入宫见嫉，蛾眉不肯让人，掩袖工谗，狐媚偏能惑主”这几句，恐怕是很费点心机的了，但相传武后看到这里，不过微微一笑。是的，如此而已，又怎么样呢？声罪致讨的明文，那力量往往远不如交头接耳的密语，因为一是分明，一是莫测的。我想假使当时骆宾王站在大众之前，只是攒眉摇头，连称“坏极坏极”，却不说出其所谓坏的实例，恐怕那效力会在文章之上的罢。“狂飙文豪”高长虹攻击我时，说道劣迹多端，倘一发表，便即身败名裂，而终于并不发表，是深得捣鬼正脉的；但也竟无大效者，则与广泛俱来的“模胡”之弊为之也。
The declaration of crimes by the people of the Republic of China is about ten, but the result is mostly invalid. There have been many bad people in ancient times, but the ten rules are just like this, and they will never try to attract people's attention or even activities. King Luo Bin wrote "Seeking Wu Zhao Proclamation", and the sentences of "entering the palace to be jealous, moth eyebrows refusing to let people, covering up sleeves and slander, and fox charm can confuse the lord" are probably very scheming, but it is said that Wu Zetian saw this, but smiled slightly. Yes, that's all, so what? The clear text of accusation is often far less powerful than the secret words that are heard from each other, because one is clear and the other is unfathomable. I think if Luo Binwang stood in front of the public at that time, just frowned and shook his head, and even called it "extremely bad", but did not name his so-called bad examples, I am afraid that the effect would be on the article. When the "Hurricane Writer" Gao Changhong attacked me, he said that there were many bad deeds, and if he published it, he would be ruined, and finally he would not publish it, which was deeply troublesome; However, it has not had a significant effect, which is due to the widespread "mold" problem.明白了这两例，便知道治国平天下之法，在告诉大家以有法，而不可明白切实的说出何法来。因为一说出，即有言，一有言，便可与行相对照，所以不如示之以不测。不测的威棱使人萎伤，不测的妙法使人希望——饥荒时生病，打仗时做诗，虽若与治国平天下不相干，但在莫明其妙中，却能令人疑为跟着自有治国平天下的妙法在——然而其“弊”也，却还是照例的也能在模胡中疑心到所谓妙法，其实不过是毫无方法而已。
If you understand these two cases, you will know that the law of governing the country and pacifying the world is telling everyone that there is a law, but you cannot understand what method to actually say. Because once you say it, you have words, and as soon as you say something, you can compare it with your actions, so it is better to show it unexpectedly. The unpredictable majesty makes people wither, and the unpredictable wonderful method makes people hope - getting sick during famine and writing poetry during war, although it has nothing to do with governing the country and pacifying the world, but in the incomprehensible, it can make people suspect that there is a wonderful method of governing the country and pacifying the world with its own - but its "drawback" is also as usual, but it can still be suspicious of the so-called wonderful method in the most, but in fact, there is no way.捣鬼有术，也有效，然而有限，所以以此成大事者，古来无有。
There are methods for striking ghosts, and they are also effective, but they are limited, so there has never been a way to achieve great things in ancient times.十一月二十二日。
November 22.

家庭为中国之基本

家庭为中国之基本

家庭为中国之基本

Family is the foundation of China中国的自己能酿酒，比自己来种鸦片早，但我们现在只听说许多人躺着吞云吐雾，却很少见有人像外国水兵似的满街发酒疯。唐宋的踢球，久已失传，一般的娱乐是躲在家里彻夜叉麻雀。从这两点看起来，我们在从露天下渐渐的躲进家里去，是无疑的。古之上海文人，已尝慨乎言之，曾出一联，索人属对，道：“三鸟害人鸦雀鸽”，“鸽”是彩票，雅号奖券，那时却称为“白鸽票”的。但我不知道后来有人对出了没有。
China can make wine earlier than it grows opium itself, but now we only hear that many people lie down and swallow clouds, but it is rare to see people who are drunk and crazy like foreign sailors. The kicking of the Tang and Song dynasties has been lost for a long time, and the general entertainment is to hide at home and sparrows. From these two points, it seems that we are gradually hiding in the house from the open sun, which is undoubted. The ancient Shanghai literati have once said that they once made a couplet, asking for a pair of people, saying: "Three birds harm people and birds and pigeons", "pigeons" are lottery tickets, elegant lottery tickets, but at that time they were called "white pigeon tickets". But I don't know if anyone came up with it later.不过我们也并非满足于现状，是身处斗室之中，神驰宇宙之外，抽鸦片者享乐着幻境，叉麻雀者心仪于好牌。檐下放起爆竹，是在将月亮从天狗嘴里救出；剑仙坐在书斋里，哼的一声，一道白光，千万里外的敌人可被杀掉了，不过飞剑还是回家，钻进原先的鼻孔去，因为下次还要用。这叫做千变万化，不离其宗。所以学校是从家庭里拉出子弟来，教成社会人才的地方，而一闹到不可开交的时候，还是“交家长严加管束”云。
However, we are not satisfied with the status quo, we are in the fighting room, outside the universe, the opium smoker enjoys the illusion, and the sparrow fork sparrow likes the good cards. setting off firecrackers under the eaves is rescuing the moon from the mouth of the tengu; The sword immortal sat in the study, snorted, a white light, the enemy tens of millions of miles away could be killed, but the flying sword still went home and got into the original nostril, because it would be used next time. This is called ever-changing, and it is inseparable from its root. Therefore, the school is a place to pull out children from the family and teach them to become social talents, and when the trouble reaches the point of being inseparable, it is still "handed over to parents to strictly control".“骨肉归于土，命也；若夫魂气，则无不之也，无不之也！”一个人变了鬼，该可以随便一点了罢，而活人仍要烧一所纸房子，请他住进去，阔气的还有打牌桌，鸦片盘。成仙，这变化是很大的，但是刘太太偏舍不得老家，定要运动到“拔宅飞升”，连鸡犬都带了上去而后已，好依然的管家务，饲狗，喂鸡。
"Flesh and blood return to the earth, and life is also; As for the soul, there is nothing that cannot be done, and there is nothing that cannot be done! "A person has become a ghost, he should be able to do it casually, and the living still have to burn a paper house, invite him to live in it, and there are also card tables and opium plates. Becoming an immortal, this change is a big change, but Mrs. Liu is reluctant to let go of her hometown, and she must exercise to "pull the house and ascend", and even bring the chickens and dogs up, so that she can still take care of the housework, feed the dogs, and feed the chickens.我们的古今人，对于现状，实在也愿意有变化，承认其变化的。变鬼无法，成仙更佳，然而对于老家，却总是死也不肯放。我想，火药只做爆竹，指南针只看坟山，恐怕那原因就在此。
Our ancient and modern people are really willing to change the status quo and admit its changes. It is impossible to become a ghost, and it is better to become an immortal, but for his hometown, he always refuses to let go. I think gunpowder only makes firecrackers, and the compass only looks at graves, I'm afraid that's why.现在是火药蜕化为轰炸弹，烧夷弹，装在飞机上面了，我们却只能坐在家里等他落下来。自然，坐飞机的人是颇有了的，但他那里是远征呢，他为的是可以快点回到家里去。
Now the gunpowder has been transformed into bombs, incendiary bombs, and put on airplanes, but we can only sit at home and wait for him to fall. Naturally, there are quite a few people who fly, but he is on an expedition there, so he can go home quickly.家是我们的生处，也是我们的死所。
Home is our place of birth and our place of death.十二月十六日。
December 16th.

《总退却》序

《总退却》序

《总退却》序

Preface to "General Retreat"中国久已称小说之类为“闲书”，这在五十年前为止，是大概真实的，整日价辛苦做活的人，就没有工夫看小说。所以凡看小说的，他就得有余暇，既有余暇，可见是不必怎样辛苦做活的了，成仿吾先生曾经断之曰：“有闲，即是有钱！”者以此。诚然，用经济学的眼光看起来，在现制度之下，“闲暇”恐怕也确是一种“富”。但是，穷人们也爱小说，他们不识字，就到茶馆里去听“说书”，百来回的大部书，也要每天一点一点的听下去。不过比起整天做活的人们来，他们也还是较有闲暇的。要不然，又那有工夫上茶馆，那有闲钱做茶钱呢？
China has long called novels "idle books", which was probably true until fifty years ago, and people who work hard all day long have no time to read novels. Therefore, anyone who reads novels must have leisure, and since he has leisure, it can be seen that he does not have to work hard, Mr. Cheng Fangwu once said: "If you have leisure, you are rich!" This is the reason. It is true that from the perspective of economics, under the current system, "leisure" may indeed be a kind of "wealth". However, the poor also love novels, they are illiterate, so they go to the teahouse to listen to "storytelling", and most of the books are listened to little by little every day. However, compared to people who work all day, they are still more leisurely. Otherwise, how can there be time to go to the teahouse, and how can there be spare money for tea?小说之在欧美，先前又何尝不这样。后来生活艰难起来了，为了维持，就缺少余暇，不再能那么悠悠忽忽。只是偶然也还想借书来休息一下精神，而又耐不住唠叨不已，破费工夫，于是就使短篇小说交了桃花运。这一种洋文坛上的趋势，也跟着古人之所谓“欧风美雨”，冲进中国来，所以“文学革命”以后，所产生的小说，几乎以短篇为限。但作者的才力不能构成巨制，自然也是一个很大的原因。
Novels in Europe and the United States have never been like this before. Later, life became difficult, and in order to maintain it, there was a lack of leisure, and I could no longer be so leisurely. It's just that by chance, I also want to borrow books to rest my spirits, but I can't stand the nagging and spend a lot of time, so I made the short story peach blossom luck. This trend in the foreign literary world also followed the so-called "European wind and rain" of the ancients and rushed into China, so after the "literary revolution", the novels produced were almost limited to short stories. But the author's talent cannot constitute a masterpiece, which is naturally a big reason.而且书中的主角也变换了。古之小说，主角是勇将策士，侠盗赃官，妖怪神仙，佳人才子，后来则有妓女嫖客，无赖奴才之流。“五四”以后的短篇里却大抵是新的智识者登了场，因为他们是首先觉到了在“欧风美雨”中的飘摇的，然而总还不脱古之英雄和才子气。现在可又不同了，大家都已感到飘摇，不再要听一个特别的人的运命。某英雄在柏林拊髀看天，某天才在泰山捶胸泣血，还有谁会转过脸去呢？他们要知道，感觉得更广大，更深邃了。
And the protagonist in the book has also changed. In ancient novels, the protagonists are brave generals and strategists, thieves and corrupt officials, monsters and immortals, beauties, and later prostitutes and rogues. In the short stories after the "May Fourth", it is probably new intellectuals who appear, because they are the first to feel the swaying in the "European wind and rain", but they are still the heroes and talents of the ancients. Now it's different, everyone has felt shaken and no longer wants to listen to the fate of a special person. A hero patted his thighs in Berlin and looked at the sky, and one day he beat his chest and cried blood on Mount Tai, who else would turn his face? They need to know that they feel broader and deeper.这一本集子就是这一时代的出产品，显示着分明的蜕变，人物并非英雄，风光也不旖旎，然而将中国的眼睛点出来了。我以为作者的写工厂，不及她的写农村，但也许因为我先前较熟于农村，否则，是作者较熟于农村的缘故罢。
This collection is a product of this era, showing a clear transformation, the characters are not heroes, and the scenery is not beautiful, but it points out China's eyes. I thought that the author's writing factory was not as good as her writing about the countryside, but maybe it was because I was more familiar with the countryside before, otherwise, it was because the author was more familiar with the countryside.一九三三年十二月二十五夜，鲁迅记。
On the night of December 25, 1933, Lu Xun recorded.

答杨邨人先生公开信的公开信

答杨邨人先生公开信的公开信

答杨邨人先生公开信的公开信

Answer: An open letter from Mr. Yang Cunren《文化列车》破格的开到我的书桌上面，是十二月十日开车的第三期，托福使我知道了近来有这样一种杂志，并且使我看见了杨邨人先生给我的公开信，还要求着答复。对于这一种公开信，本没有一定给以答复的必要的，因为它既是公开，那目的其实是在给大家看，对我个人倒还在其次。但是，我如果要回答也可以，不过目的也还是在给大家看，要不然，不是只要直接寄给个人就完了么？因为这缘故，所以我在回答之前，应该先将原信重抄在下面——
The TOEFL made me know that there is such a magazine recently, and I saw an open letter from Mr. Yang Cunren to me, and asked for an answer. There is no need to give a reply to this kind of open letter, because since it is public, the purpose is actually to show everyone, and for me personally, it is secondary. However, if I want to answer, it's okay, but the purpose is still to show everyone, otherwise, wouldn't it be enough to just send it directly to the individual? Because of this, before I answer, I should re-copy the original letter below——鲁迅先生：
Mr. Lu Xun:读了李儵先生（不知道是不是李又燃先生，抑或曹聚仁先生的笔名）的《读伪自由书》一文，近末一段说：
After reading the article "Reading the Pseudo-Freedom Book" by Mr. Li Yan (I don't know if it is Mr. Li Youran or Mr. Cao Juren's pseudo-name), the last paragraph says:“读着鲁迅《伪自由书》，便想到鲁迅先生的人。那天，见鲁迅先生吃饭，咀嚼时牵动着筋肉，连胸肋骨也拉拉动的，鲁迅先生是老了！我当时不禁一股酸味上心头。记得从前看到父亲的老态时有过这样的情绪，现在看了鲁迅先生的老态又重温了一次。这都是使司马懿之流，快活的事，何况旁边早变心了魏延。”（这末一句照原文十个字抄，一字无错，确是妙文！）
"Reading Lu Xun's "Pseudo-Freedom Book", I thought of Mr. Lu Xun's people. That day, seeing Mr. Lu Xun eating, he pulled his muscles when chewing, and even his chest and ribs were pulled, Mr. Lu Xun was old! I couldn't help but feel a sour taste in my heart at that time. I remember having such emotions when I saw my father's old age in the past, but now I have seen Mr. Lu Xun's old age and relived it again. This is all a happy thing for Sima Yi and the like, not to mention that Wei Yan has already changed his mind next to him. (This last sentence is copied in ten words according to the original text, and there is no mistake in every word, it is indeed a wonderful article!) ）不禁令人起了两个感想：一个是我们敬爱的鲁迅先生老了，一个是我们敬爱的鲁迅先生为什么是诸葛亮？先生的“旁边”那里来的“早变心了魏延”？无产阶级大众何时变成了阿斗？
I can't help but have two thoughts: one is that our beloved Mr. Lu Xun is old, and the other is why our beloved Mr. Lu Xun is Zhuge Liang? Where did the gentleman's "side" come from, "Wei Yan has already changed his mind"? When did the proletarian masses become Ah Dou?第一个感想使我惶恐万分！我们敬爱的鲁迅先生老了，这是多么令人惊心动魄的事！记得《呐喊》在北京最初出版的时候（大概总在十年前），我拜读之后，景仰不置，曾为文介绍颂扬，揭登于张东荪先生编的《学灯》，在当时我的敬爱先生甚于敬爱创造社四君子。其后一九二八年《语丝》上先生为文讥诮我们，虽然两方论战绝无感情，可是论战是一回事，私心敬爱依然如昔。一九三〇年秋先生五十寿辰的庆祝会上，我是参加庆祝的一个，而且很亲切地和先生一起谈天，私心很觉荣幸。左联有一次大会在一个日本同志家里开着，我又和先生见面，十分快乐。可是今年我脱离共产党以后，在左右夹攻的当儿，《艺术新闻》与《出版消息》都登载着先生要“嘘”我的消息，说是书名定为：《北平五讲与上海三嘘》，将对我“用嘘的方式加以袭击”，而且将我与梁实秋张若谷同列，这自然是引起我的反感，所以才有《新儒林外史第一回》之作。但在《新儒林外史第一回》里头只说先生出阵交战用的是大刀一词加以反攻的讽刺而已。其中引文的情绪与态度都是敬爱先生的。文中的意义却是以为先生对我加以“嘘”的袭击未免看错了敌人吧了。到了拜读大著《两地书》以后为文介绍，笔下也十分恭敬并没半点谩骂的字句，可是先生于《我的种痘》一文里头却有所误会似地顺笔对我放了两三枝冷箭儿，特别地说是有人攻击先生的老，在我呢，并没有觉得先生老了，而且那篇文章也没有攻击先生的老，先生自己认为是老了吧了。伯纳萧的年纪比先生还大，伯纳萧的鬓毛比先生还白如丝吧，伯纳萧且不是老了，先生怎么这样就以为老了呢？我是从来没感觉到先生老了的，我只感觉到先生有如青年而且希望先生永久年青。然而，读了李儵先生的文章，我惶恐，我惊讶，原来先生真的老了。李儵先生因为看了先生老了而“不禁一股酸味上心头”有如看他的令尊的老态的时候有过的情绪，我虽然也时常想念着我那年老的父亲，但并没有如人家攻击我那样地想做一个“孝子”，不过是天性所在有时未免兴感而想念着吧了，所以我看了李儵先生的文章并没有联想到我的父亲上面去。然而先生老了，我是惶恐与惊讶。我惶恐与惊讶的是，我们敬爱的文坛前辈老了，他将因为生理上的缘故而要停止他的工作了！在这敬爱的心理与观念上，我将今年来对先生的反感打个粉碎，竭诚地请先生训诲。可是希望先生以严肃的态度出之，如“嘘”，如放冷箭儿等却请慎重，以令对方心服。
The first thought made me terrified! Our beloved Mr. Lu Xun is old, what a thrilling thing! I remember that when "The Scream" was first published in Beijing (probably ten years ago), after I read it, I admired it, and once introduced and praised the article, and published it in the "Learning Lantern" edited by Mr. Zhang Dongsun. Later, in 1928, Mr. Shangsheng ridiculed us in an article, although the debate between the two parties was absolutely emotionless, but the debate was the same thing, and the private love was still the same. At the celebration of Mr. Zhao's 50th birthday in the autumn of 1930, I was one of the participants in the celebration, and I was very honored to talk with him very cordially. There was a meeting of the Left League at the home of a Japanese comrade, and I met my husband again, and I was very happy. However, after I broke away from the Communist Party this year, when I was attacking from the left and right, both "Art News" and "Publishing News" published the news that Mr. wanted to "boo" me, saying that the title of the book was set as: "Five Lectures in Peking and Three Hushes in Shanghai", which would "attack me in a booing way", and put me in the same line as Liang Shiqiu and Zhang Ruogu, which naturally aroused my disgust, so there was "The First History of New Confucianism". But in "The First History of Neo-Confucianism", it is only said that Mr. went into battle and used the word "big sword" to counterattack the irony. The emotions and attitudes of the quotations are all beloved by Mr. Respect. The meaning of the article is that I think that the gentleman's attack on me is a misunderstanding of the enemy. After reading the masterpiece "The Book of Two Places", I introduced it to the article, and the pen was also very respectful and did not have the slightest abusive words, but in the article "My Pox", Mr. put two or three cold arrows on me as if he had misunderstood, especially when someone attacked Mr. Old, in my case, I didn't feel that Mr. was old, and that article did not attack Mr. Old, Mr. himself thought he was old. Bernard Shaw is older than Mr. Bernard Shaw, Bernard Shaw's sideburns are whiter than Mr. Silk, Bernard Shaw is not old, why does Mr. think he is old like this? I never felt that my husband was old, I only felt that my husband was like a young man and hoped that he would be young forever. However, after reading Mr. Li Yan's article, I was terrified and surprised, it turned out that Mr. Li was really old. Although I often miss my old father, I don't want to be a "filial son" like people attack me, but it is my nature that sometimes I can't help but feel interested and miss it, so I read Mr. Li Yan's article and did not think of my father. However, when my husband is old, I am frightened and surprised. I am terrified and surprised that our beloved literary senior is old, and he will stop his work because of physiological reasons! In this beloved psychology and concept, I will smash my disgust towards you this year, and I will sincerely ask you to teach me. But I hope that Mr. will come out with a serious attitude, such as "shh", such as putting cold arrows, etc., but please be cautious to convince the other party.第二个感想使我……因为那是李儵先生的事，这里不愿有扰清听。
The second thought made me ...... Because that is Mr. Li Yan's business, I don't want to disturb the hearing here.假如这信是先生觉得有答复的价值的话，就请寄到这里《文化列车》的编者将它发表，否则希望先生为文给我一个严正的批判也可以。发表的地方我想随处都欢迎的。
If this letter is worthy of a reply by Mr. Wen, please send it here to the editor of "Culture Train" to publish it, otherwise I hope Mr. Wei Wei can give me a serious criticism. I think everywhere I publish it.专此并竭诚地恭敬地问了一声安好并祝
Hereby, I sincerely and respectfully asked for well-being and wishes康健。
Healthy.杨邨人谨启。一九三三，一二，三。
The people of Yang Village respectfully report. 1933, 12, 3.末了附带声明一句，我作这信是出诸至诚，并非因为鬼儿子骂我和先生打笔墨官司变成小鬼以后向先生求和以……“大鬼”的意思。邨人又及。
Finally, with a side statement, I wrote this letter out of sincerity, not because the ghost son scolded me and my husband for fighting a lawsuit and became a little ghost, and then asked for peace from Mr. to ...... the meaning of "big ghost". The villagers also caught up.以下算是我的回信。因为是信的形式，所以开头照例是——
The following is my reply. Because it is in the form of a letter, the beginning is, as usual——邨人先生：
Mr. Estateman:先生给我的信是没有答复的价值的。我并不希望先生“心服”，先生也无须我批判，因为近二年来的文字，已经将自己的形象画得十分分明了。自然，我决不会相信“鬼儿子”们的胡说，但我也不相信先生。
The letter to me from my husband is worthless of an answer. I don't want my husband to be "convinced", and he doesn't need me to criticize, because the words in the past two years have drawn his image very clearly. Naturally, I will never believe the nonsense of the "ghost sons", but I also don't believe sir.这并非说先生的话是一样的叭儿狗式的狺狺；恐怕先生是自以为永久诚实的罢，不过因为急促的变化，苦心的躲闪，弄得左支右绌，不能自圆其说，终于变成废话了，所以在听者的心中，也就失去了重量。例如先生的这封信，倘使略有自知之明，其实是不必写的。
This is not to say that Mr. Trump's words are the same as dog-like dogs; I'm afraid that the gentleman thinks he is permanently honest, but because of the rapid changes and painstaking dodging, he is so confused that he can't justify himself, and finally it becomes nonsense, so in the hearts of the listeners, it loses weight. For example, this letter from Mr. does not need to be written if he is a little self-aware.先生首先问我“为什么是诸葛亮？”这就问得稀奇。李儵先生我曾经见过面，并非曹聚仁先生，至于是否李又燃先生，我无从确说，因为又燃先生我是没有豫先见过的。我“为什么是诸葛亮”呢？别人的议论，我不能，也不必代为答复，要不然，我得整天的做答案了。也有人说我是“人群的蟊贼”的。“为什么？”——我都由它去。但据我所知道，魏延变心，是在诸葛亮死后，我还活着，诸葛亮的头衔是不能加到我这里来的，所以“无产阶级大众何时变成了阿斗？”的问题也就落了空。那些废话，如果还记得《三国志演义》或吴稚晖先生的话，是不至于说出来的，书本子上及别人，并未说过人民是阿斗。现在请放心罢。但先生站在“小资产阶级文学革命”的旗下，还是什么“无产阶级大众”，自己的眼睛看见了这些字，不觉得可羞或可笑么？不要再提这些字，怎么样呢？
The teacher first asked me, "Why Zhuge Liang?" This is a strange question. I have met Mr. Li Yan before, not Mr. Cao Juren, as for whether it is Mr. Li Youran, I can't say for sure, because I have not met Mr. Youran before. Why am I "Zhuge Liang"? I can't, and don't have to answer other people's comments, otherwise, I have to answer all day long. Some people also say that I am a "thief of the crowd". "Why?" - I'll let it go. But as far as I know, Wei Yan changed his mind after Zhuge Liang's death, I was still alive, and Zhuge Liang's title could not be added to me, so "When did the proletarian masses become Ah Dou?" The question was also lost. Those nonsense, if you still remember "Romance of the Three Kingdoms" or Mr. Wu Zhihui's words, will not be said, and the book and others have never said that the people are Adou. Now don't worry. But when the gentleman stands under the banner of the "petty-bourgeois literary revolution", or is it some "proletarian masses", don't you feel ashamed or ridiculous when you see these words with your own eyes? Don't mention these words again, how about it?其次是先生“惊心动魄”于我的老，可又“惊心动魄”得很稀奇。我没有修炼仙丹，自然的规则，一定要使我老下去，丝毫也不足为奇的，请先生还是镇静一点的好。而且我后来还要死呢，这也是自然的规则，豫先声明，请千万不要“惊心动魄”，否则，逐渐就要神经衰弱，愈加满口废话了。我即使老，即使死，却决不会将地球带进棺材里去，它还年青，它还存在，希望正在将来，目前也还可以插先生的旗子。这一节我敢保证，也请放心工作罢。
Secondly, my husband is "thrilling" in my old age, but he is also "thrilling" and very strange. I haven't cultivated the elixir, the rules of nature, must make me old, it's not surprising at all, please calm down, sir." And I will die later, this is also a natural rule, Yu Xian declared, please don't be "thrilled", otherwise, you will gradually have a nervous breakdown and become more and more full of nonsense. Even if I am old, even if I die, I will never bring the earth into the coffin, it is still young, it still exists, I hope that in the future, I can still plant my husband's flag. I guarantee this section, please rest assured to work.于是就要说到“三嘘”问题了。这事情是有的，但和新闻上所载的有些两样。那时是在一个饭店里，大家闲谈，谈到有几个人的文章，我确曾说：这些都只要以一嘘了之，不值得反驳。这几个人们中，先生也在内。我的意思是，先生在那冠冕堂皇的“自白”里，明明的告白了农民的纯厚，小资产阶级的智识者的动摇和自私，却又要来竖起小资产阶级革命文学的旗，就自己打着自己的嘴。不过也并未说出，走散了就算完结了。但不知道是辗转传开去的呢，还是当时就有新闻记者在座，不久就张大其辞的在报上登了出来，并请读者猜测。近五六年来，关于我的记载多极了，无论为毁为誉，是假是真，我都置之不理，因为我没有聘定律师，常登广告的巨款，也没有遍看各种刊物的工夫。况且新闻记者为要哄动读者，会弄些夸张的手段，是大家知道的，甚至于还全盘捏造。例如先生还在做“革命文学家”的时候，用了“小记者”的笔名，在一种报上说我领到了南京中央党部的文学奖金，大开筵宴，祝孩子的周年，不料引起了郁达夫先生对于亡儿的记忆，悲哀了起来。这真说得栩栩如生，连出世不过一年的婴儿，也和我一同被喷满了血污。然而这事实的全出于创作，我知道，达夫先生知道，记者兼作者的您杨邨人先生当然也不会不知道的。
So let's talk about the "three boos" issue. There is such a thing, but it is somewhat different from what is reported in the news. At that time, it was in a restaurant, everyone was chatting, and when it came to the articles of several people, I did say: These are just a boo, not worth refuting. Among these people, Mr. is also included. I mean, in that high-sounding "confession", the gentleman clearly confessed the innocence of the peasants and the wavering and selfishness of the petty-bourgeois intellectuals, but he wanted to raise the banner of petty-bourgeois revolutionary literature, so he slapped his own mouth. But he didn't say it, and it was over even if he was separated. But I don't know if it was spread around, or if there were journalists present at the time, and soon it was published in the newspaper and asked readers to guess. In the past five or six years, there have been many records about me, whether it is for slander or reputation, whether it is false or true, I have ignored it, because I have not hired a lawyer, often advertised a huge amount of money, and I have not had the time to read various publications. Moreover, in order to coax readers, news reporters will use some exaggerated means, which everyone knows, and even fabricate them completely. For example, when Mr. was still a "revolutionary writer", he used the pseudonym of "little reporter" and said in a newspaper that I had received a literary bonus from the Nanjing Central Party Department, held a banquet, and wished the child an anniversary. This is really vivid, even the baby who was only a year old was sprayed with blood with me. However, this fact is all about creation, I know, Mr. Duff knows, and you, Mr. Yang Cunren, the journalist and author, certainly will not know it.当时我一声不响。为什么呢？革命者为达目的，可用任何手段的话，我是以为不错的，所以即使因为我罪孽深重，革命文学的第一步，必须拿我来开刀，我也敢于咬着牙关忍受。杀不掉，我就退进野草里，自己舐尽了伤口的血痕，决不烦别人傅药。但是，人非圣人，为了麻烦而激动起来的时候也有的，我诚然讥诮过先生“们”，这些文章，后来都收在《三闲集》中，一点也不删去，然而和先生“们”的造谣言和攻击文字的数量来比一比罢，不是不到十分之一么？不但此也，在讲演里，我有时也曾嘲笑叶灵凤先生或先生，先生们以“前卫”之名，雄赳赳出阵的时候，我是祭旗的牺牲，则战不数合便从火线上爬了开去之际，我以为实在也难以禁绝我的一笑。无论在阶级的立场上，在个人的立场上，我都有一笑的权利的。然而我从未傲然的假借什么“良心”或“无产阶级大众”之名，来凌压敌手，我接着一定声明：这是因为我和他有些个人的私怨的。先生，这还不够退让么？
At that time, I didn't make a sound. Why? I think it is good if revolutionaries can use any means to achieve their goals, so even if because of my deep sins and the first step of revolutionary literature, I must be stabbed, I dare to grit my teeth and endure it. If I can't kill it, I will retreat into the weeds, lick the blood stains on the wound myself, and never bother others to apply medicine. However, people are not saints, and there are times when they get excited for trouble, and I have indeed ridiculed the gentlemen "men", these articles, which were later included in the "Three Leisure Collection", were not deleted at all, but compared with the number of rumors and attacks on the words of the gentlemen "men", isn't it less than one-tenth? Not only that, but in my speeches, I sometimes laughed at Mr. Ye Lingfeng or Mr. Ye, when the gentlemen went out in the name of "avant-garde", I was a sacrifice of the flag, and when I climbed out of the line of fire in the name of the battle, I thought it was really difficult to stop my laughter. Whether from a class standpoint or an individual standpoint, I have the right to laugh. However, I never proudly used the name of "conscience" or "the masses of the proletariat" to overwhelm my opponent, and I must then declare that this was because I had some personal grudges with him. Sir, isn't that enough concession?但为了不能使我负责的新闻记事，竟引起先生的“反感”来了，然而仍蒙破格的优待，在《新儒林外史》里，还赏我拿一柄大刀。在礼仪上，我是应该致谢的，但在实际上，却也如大张筵宴一样，我并无大刀，只有一枝笔，名曰“金不换”。这也并不是在广告不收卢布的意思，是我从小用惯，每枝五分的便宜笔。我确曾用这笔碰着了先生，不过也只如运用古典一样，信手拈来，涉笔成趣而已，并不特别含有报复的恶意。但先生却又给我挂上“三枝冷箭”了。这可不能怪先生的，因为这只是陈源教授的余唾。然而，即使算是我在报复罢，由上面所说的原因，我也还不至于走进“以怨报德”的队伍里面去。
But in order not to make the news record I was responsible for, it actually aroused the "disgust" of the gentleman, but I was still treated exceptionally, and in the "History of the New Confucian Forest", I was rewarded with a big knife. In terms of etiquette, I should be grateful, but in reality, like a big banquet, I don't have a big sword, only a pen, called "gold is not exchanged". This does not mean that the advertisement does not charge rubles, it is a cheap pen that I have been used to since I was a child, and each is five cents per pen. I did use this pen to meet Mr. Zhao, but it was only like using classics, and it was just a matter of getting involved in the pen, and it did not contain any malice of revenge. But my husband hung up "three cold arrows" on me again. This can't be blamed by Mr., because this is just Professor Chen Yuan's spit. However, even if I am taking revenge, for the reasons mentioned above, I will not enter the ranks of "repaying kindness with resentment".至于所谓《北平五讲与上海三嘘》，其实是至今没有写，听说北平有一本《五讲》出版，那可并不是我做的，我也没有见过那一本书。不过既然闹了风潮，将来索性写一点也难说，如果写起来，我想名为《五讲三嘘集》，但后一半也未必正是报上所说的三位。先生似乎羞与梁实秋张若谷两位先生为伍，我看是排起来倒也并不怎样辱没了先生，只是张若谷先生比较的差一点，浅陋得很，连做一“嘘”的材料也不够，我大概要另换一位的。
As for the so-called "Five Lectures in Peking and Three Hushes in Shanghai", in fact, it has not been written so far, and I heard that there is a "Five Lectures" published in Peking, but it was not made by me, and I have not seen that book. However, since there is a trend, it is difficult to say that it will be written in the future, if it is written, I think it will be called "Five Lectures and Three Hustles", but the second half may not be exactly the three mentioned in the newspaper. Mr. seems to be ashamed to be in the company of Mr. Liang Shiqiu and Zhang Ruogu, I think it is not very insulting to Mr. in line, but Mr. Zhang Ruogu is a little worse, very shallow, and there is not enough material to make a "shh", I will probably change to another one.对于先生，照我此刻的意见，写起来恐怕也不会怎么坏。我以为先生虽是革命场中的一位小贩，却并不是奸商。我所谓奸商者，一种是国共合作时代的阔人，那时颂苏联，赞共产，无所不至，一到清党时候，就用共产青年，共产嫌疑青年的血来洗自己的手，依然是阔人，时势变了，而不变其阔；一种是革命的骁将，杀土豪，倒劣绅，激烈得很，一有蹉跌，便称为“弃邪归正”，骂“土匪”，杀同人，也激烈得很，主义改了，而仍不失其骁。先生呢，据“自白”，革命与否以亲之苦乐为转移，有些投机气味是无疑的，但并没有反过来做大批的买卖，仅在竭力要化为“第三种人”，来过比革命党较好的生活。既从革命阵线上退回来，为辩护自己，做稳“第三种人”起见，总得有一点零星的忏悔，对于统治者，其实是颇有些益处的，但竟还至于遇到“左右夹攻的当儿”者，恐怕那一方面，还嫌先生门面太小的缘故罢，这和银行雇员的看不起小钱店伙计是一样的。先生虽然觉得抱屈，但不信“第三种人”的存在不独是左翼，却因先生的经验而证明了，这也是一种很大的功德。
For Mr., according to my opinion at the moment, I am afraid it will not be too bad to write. I thought that although Mr. was a hawker in the revolutionary field, he was not a profiteer. When it came time to clear the party, he used the blood of communist youth and suspected communists to wash his hands, and he was still a broad person, and the times changed, but he did not change his breadth; One is the revolutionary general, who kills the local tyrants and the bad gentry, and is very fierce, and when he stumbles, he is called "abandoning evil and returning to the right path", scolding "bandits", killing his colleagues, and is also very fierce, and the doctrine has changed, but he still does not lose his bravery. As for the gentleman, according to the "confession", whether the revolution is transferred by the bitterness and joy of relatives, there is no doubt that there is some speculative smell, but it has not done a large number of transactions in turn, but only strives to become a "third kind of person" and live a better life than the revolutionary party. After retreating from the revolutionary front, in order to defend oneself and be a stable "third kind of person", there must be a little sporadic repentance, which is actually quite beneficial to the rulers, but it is actually quite beneficial to the rulers, but as for those who encounter "left and right attacks", I am afraid that on the one hand, it is because the façade of the gentleman is too small, which is the same as the bank employee who looks down on the small money shop guy. Although he felt aggrieved, he did not believe that the existence of the "third type of person" was not only left-wing, but his experience proved that this was also a great merit.平心而论，先生是不算失败的，虽然自己觉得被“夹攻”，但现在只要没有马上杀人之权的人，有谁不遭人攻击。生活当然是辛苦的罢，不过比起被杀戮，被囚禁的人们来，真有天渊之别；文章也随处能够发表，较之被封锁，压迫，禁止的作者，也自由自在得远了。和阔人骁将比，那当然还差得很远，这就因为先生并不是奸商的缘故。这是先生的苦处，也是先生的好处。
To be fair, Mr. is not a failure, although he feels that he is being "attacked", but now as long as there is no right to kill immediately, who is not attacked. Of course, life is hard, but compared to being killed and imprisoned, there is a real difference between people; Articles can also be published anywhere, and they are far more free than authors who are blocked, oppressed, and banned. Compared with the broad generals, of course, it is still far away, because Mr. is not a profiteer. This is the suffering of the gentleman, and it is also the benefit of the gentleman.话已经说得太多了，就此完结。总之，我还是和先前一样，决不肯造谣说谎，特别攻击先生，但从此改变另一种态度，却也不见得，本人的“反感”或“恭敬”，我是毫不打算的。请先生也不要因为我的“将因为生理上的缘故而要停止工作”而原谅我，为幸。
Too much has been said, and this is the end. In short, I still refuse to spread rumors and lies, especially attack my husband, but since then I have changed my attitude, but I have no intention of "disgust" or "respect" myself. Please don't forgive me for "stopping work for physiological reasons", fortunately.专此奉答，并请
I would like to respond specifically to this and request it著安。
Wearing peace.鲁迅。一九三三，一二，二八。
Lu Xun. 1933, 12, 28.

封面

书名页

版权信息

图书在版编目（CIP）数据
Books in Print (CIP) data伪自由书／鲁迅著．—南京：译林出版社，2013.11
Pseudo-Free Book/by Lu Xun.—Nanjing: Yilin Publishing House, 2013.11（鲁迅自编文集）
(Lu Xun's self-edited anthology)ISBN 978-7-5447-4454-6
ISBN 978-7-5447-4454-6Ⅰ．①伪…　Ⅱ．①鲁…　Ⅲ．鲁迅杂文－杂文集　Ⅳ．①I210.4
I..(1) Pseudo... II..(1) Lu... III. Lu Xun's Essays - Miscellaneous Essays IV. (1) I210.4中国版本图书馆CIP数据核字（2013）第223190号
China Version Library CIP Data Verification (2013) No. 223190
书　　名　伪自由书
Book title Pseudo-free book作　　者　鲁　迅
Author: Lu Xun责任编辑　陆元昶
Editor-in-charge: Lu Yuanchang特约编辑　史会美
Special editor Shi Huimei出版发行　凤凰出版传媒股份有限公司
Published and distributed by Phoenix Publishing and Media Co., Ltd译林出版社
Yilin Publishing House出版社地址　南京市湖南路1号A楼，邮编：210009
Publisher's address Building A, No. 1 Hunan Road, Nanjing, Zip Code: 210009电子邮箱　yilin@yilin.com
Email yilin@yilin.com出版社网址　http://www.yilin.com
Publisher website http://www.yilin.com印　　刷　北京凯达印务有限公司
Printing Beijing Kaida Printing Co., Ltd开　　本　787×1092毫米　1/32
Volume 787×1092 mm 1/32印　　张　5.375
Print 5.375字　　数　96千字
Word count: 96,000 words版　　次　2013年11月第1版　2013年11月第1次印刷
Edition November 2013 1st edition November 2013 1st printing书　　号　ISBN 978-7-5447-4454-6
ISBN 978-7-5447-4454-6定　　价　12.80元
The price is 12.80 yuan译林版图书若有印装错误可向承印厂调换

If there are printing errors in the translated version of the book, it can be exchanged with the printing factory

Table of Contents

目录

Table of Contents

directory前记 Previously
一九三三年 In 1933
观斗 Watch the fight
逃的辩护 The defense of escape
崇实 Chongshi
电的利弊 The pros and cons of electricity
航空救国三愿 Aviation saves the country with three wishes
不通两种 There are not two types
【因此引起的通论】：“最通的”文艺（王平陵） [General theory caused by this]: "The most popular" literature and art (Wang Pingling)
【通论的拆通】：官话而已 [Dismantling of the general theory]: It's just an official language
赌咒 swear
战略关系 Strategic relationships
【备考】：奇文共赏（周敬侪） [Remarks]: Strange Articles (Zhou Jingli)
颂萧 Praise Xiao
【又招恼了大主笔】：萧伯纳究竟不凡（大晚报） [Annoyed the chief writer again]: Bernard Shaw is extraordinary (Evening News)
【也不佩服大主笔】：前文的案语 [I don't admire the chief writer]: The case of the previous article
对于战争的祈祷 Prayer for war
从讽刺到幽默 From sarcasm to humor
从幽默到正经 From humor to seriousness
王道诗话 The king's poetry
伸冤 Seek justice
曲的解放 The liberation of the song
文学上的折扣 Literary discounts
迎头经 Head-to-head scriptures
“光明所到……” "Where the light goes......"
止哭文学 Stop crying literature
【备考】：提倡辣椒救国（王慈） [Remarks]: Advocating chili peppers to save the country (Wang Ci)
【硬要用辣椒止哭】：不要乱咬人（王慈） [Insist on using chili peppers to stop crying]: Don't bite people indiscriminately (Wang Ci)
【但到底是不行的】：这叫作愈出愈奇 [But in the end, it doesn't work]: This is called getting more and more strange
“人话” "People talk."
出卖灵魂的秘诀 The secret to selling your soul
文人无文 Literati have no literature
【备考】：恶癖（若谷） [Remarks]: Bad habit (Ruogu)
【风凉话？】：第四种人（周木斋） [Sarcastic words? 】: The fourth type of person (Zhou Muzhai)
【乘凉】：两误一不同 [Enjoying the coolness]: Two mistakes and one difference
最艺术的国家 The most artistic country
现代史 Modern
推背图 Push back picture
《杀错了人》异议 "Killing the Wrong Person" objected
【备考】：杀错了人（曹聚仁） [Preparation]: Killing the wrong person (Cao Jureng)
中国人的生命圈 Chinese life circle
内外 inside and outside
透底 Through the bottom
【来信】：（祝秀侠） [Letter] :(Zhu Xiuxia)
【回信】 [Reply]
“以夷制夷” "Defeat the barbarians with barbarians"
【跳踉】：“以华制华”（李家作） [Jumping]: "Using China to Control China" (Li Jiazuo)
【摇摆】：过而能改（傅红蓼） [Swing]: Can be changed (Fu Hongliao)
【只要几句】：案语 [Just a few sentences]: Case language
言论自由的界限 The boundaries of free speech
大观园的人才 Talents of Grand View Garden
文章与题目 Articles and titles
新药 Drug
“多难之月” "Difficult Moon"
不负责任的坦克车 Irresponsible tanks
从盛宣怀说到有理的压迫 From Sheng Xuanhuai to reasonable oppression
王化 Wang Hua
天上地下 Heaven and earth
保留 retain
再谈保留 Let's talk about reservations
“有名无实”的反驳 The rebuttal of "nominal and unsubstantiated"
不求甚解 I don't want to understand it very much
后记 postscript
返回总目录 Return to the General Directory

前记

前记

前记

Previously这一本小书里的，是从本年一月底起至五月中旬为止的寄给《申报》上的《自由谈》的杂感。
In this small book, there are miscellaneous feelings of "Free Talk" sent to the "Declaration" from the end of January to mid-May this year.我到上海以后，日报是看的，却从来没有投过稿，也没有想到过，并且也没有注意过日报的文艺栏，所以也不知道《申报》在什么时候开始有了《自由谈》，《自由谈》里是怎样的文字。大约是去年的年底罢，偶然遇见郁达夫先生，他告诉我说，《自由谈》的编辑新换了黎烈文先生了，但他才从法国回来，人地生疏，怕一时集不起稿子，要我去投几回稿。我就漫应之曰：那是可以的。
After I arrived in Shanghai, I read the daily newspaper, but I never submitted a manuscript, I never thought about it, and I didn't pay attention to the literary and art column of the daily newspaper, so I don't know when the "Declaration" began to have "Free Talk" and what kind of text was in "Free Talk". At about the end of last year, I met Mr. Yu Dafu by chance, and he told me that the editor of "Free Talk" had just changed Mr. Li Liewen, but he had just returned from France. I casually replied: That's fine.对于达夫先生的嘱咐，我是常常“漫应之曰：那是可以的”的。直白的说罢，我一向很回避创造社里的人物。这也不只因为历来特别的攻击我，甚而至于施行人身攻击的缘故，大半倒在他们的一副“创造”脸。虽然他们之中，后来有的化为隐士，有的化为富翁，有的化为实践的革命者，有的也化为奸细，而在“创造”这一面大纛之下的时候，却总是神气十足，好像连出汗打嚏，也全是“创造”似的。我和达夫先生见面得最早，脸上也看不出那么一种创造气，所以相遇之际，就随便谈谈；对于文学的意见，我们恐怕是不能一致的罢，然而所谈的大抵是空话。但这样的就熟识了，我有时要求他写一篇文章，他一定如约寄来，则他希望我做一点东西，我当然应该漫应曰可以。但应而至于“漫”，我已经懒散得多了。
For Mr. Duff's instructions, I often "casually answer: that's okay". To put it bluntly, I have always avoided the characters in the creation society. This is not only because they have always attacked me, but even because of their personal attacks, most of them have fallen on their "creative" faces. Although some of them later became hermits, some became rich people, some turned into practical revolutionaries, and some also became spies, but under the banner of "creation", they were always full of energy, as if even sweating and sneezing were all "creation". I met Mr. Duff at the earliest, and I couldn't see such a creative spirit on my face, so when we met, we talked casually; I am afraid that we cannot agree on the opinions of literature, but what we are talking about is probably empty words. But this is familiar, sometimes I ask him to write an article, he will definitely send it as promised, then he wants me to do something, of course I should say yes. But when it comes to "comic", I am already much lazy.但从此我就看看《自由谈》，不过仍然没有投稿。不久，听到了一个传闻，说《自由谈》的编辑者为了忙于事务，连他夫人的临蓐也不暇照管，送在医院里，她独自死掉了。几天之后，我偶然在《自由谈》里看见一篇文章，其中说的是每日使婴儿看看遗照，给他知道曾有这样一个孕育了他的母亲。我立刻省悟了这就是黎烈文先生的作品，拿起笔，想做一篇反对的文章，因为我向来的意见，是以为倘有慈母，或是幸福，然若生而失母，却也并非完全的不幸，他也许倒成为更加勇猛，更无挂碍的男儿的。但是也没有竟做，改为给《自由谈》的投稿了，这就是这本书里的第一篇《崇实》；又因为我旧日的笔名有时不能通用，便改题了“何家干”，有时也用“干”或“丁萌”。
But since then I have read "Free Talk", but I still haven't submitted. Soon, I heard a rumor that the editor of "Free Talk" was busy with affairs, and even his wife's mother was too busy to take care of it, so she was sent to the hospital, and she died alone. A few days later, I happened to see an article in "Free Talk", which said that the baby looked at the posthumous photo every day and let him know that there was such a mother who gave birth to him. I immediately realized that this was Mr. Li Liewen's work, and I picked up the pen and wanted to write an article against it, because my opinion was that if there was a loving mother, or happiness, but if he was born without a mother, it was not completely unfortunate, he might become a braver and more unhindered man. But I didn't do it, and instead submitted to "Free Talk", which is the first "Chongshi" in this book; And because my old pseudonym sometimes couldn't be used, I changed the title to "He Jiagan", and sometimes used "Gan" or "Ding Meng".这些短评，有的由于个人的感触，有的则出于时事的刺戟，但意思都极平常，说话也往往很晦涩，我知道《自由谈》并非同人杂志，“自由”更当然不过是一句反话，我决不想在这上面去驰骋的。我之所以投稿，一是为了朋友的交情，一则在给寂寞者以呐喊，也还是由于自己的老脾气。然而我的坏处，是在论时事不留面子，砭锢弊常取类型，而后者尤与时宜不合。盖写类型者，于坏处，恰如病理学上的图，假如是疮疽，则这图便是一切某疮某疽的标本，或和某甲的疮有些相像，或和某乙的疽有点相同。而见者不察，以为所画的只是他某甲的疮，无端侮辱，于是就必欲制你画者的死命了。例如我先前的论叭儿狗，原也泛无实指，都是自觉其有叭儿性的人们自来承认的。这要制死命的方法，是不论文章的是非，而先问作者是那一个；也就是别的不管，只要向作者施行人身攻击了。自然，其中也并不全是含愤的病人，有的倒是代打不平的侠客。总之，这种战术，是陈源教授的“鲁迅即教育部佥事周树人”开其端，事隔十年，大家早经忘却了，这回是王平陵先生告发于前，周木斋先生揭露于后，都是做着关于作者本身的文章，或则牵连而至于左翼文学者。此外为我所看见的还有好几篇，也都附在我的本文之后，以见上海有些所谓文学家的笔战，是怎样的东西，和我的短评本身，有什么关系。但另有几篇，是因为我的感想由此而起，特地并存以便读者的参考的。
These short comments, some of which are due to personal feelings, some are from the stabbing halberd of current affairs, but the meaning is very ordinary, and the words are often very obscure, I know that "Free Talk" is not a fan magazine, and "freedom" is of course just an irony, and I definitely don't want to gallop on it. The reason why I posted is for the friendship of friends, and the other is to shout at the lonely, or because of my old temper. However, my disadvantage is that I do not save face when discussing current affairs, and I often choose the type, and the latter is especially out of step with the times. If it is a sores, then this diagram is a specimen of all sores, or somewhat similar to a certain sore of a certain A, or a bit like a certain boil of a certain B. And the viewer doesn't notice, thinking that what he painted is just a sore on a certain piece of his armor, an unwarranted insult, so he will definitely want to control the death of your painter. For example, my previous discussion on the dog was originally not a real meaning, and it was admitted by people who felt that they had the character of a dog. The way to control this is to ask the author first, regardless of whether the article is right or wrong; That is, nothing else, as long as the author is physically attacked. Naturally, not all of them are angry patients, but some are chivalrous people who fight on behalf of others. In short, this tactic was started by Professor Chen Yuan's "Lu Xun is Zhou Shuren, the assistant minister of the Ministry of Education", and after ten years, everyone has long forgotten it, this time it was Mr. Wang Pingling who reported it before, and Mr. Zhou Muzhai exposed it later, all of which were doing articles about the author himself, or implicating left-wing literary scholars. In addition, there are several articles that I have seen, all of which are attached to my article, to see what kind of writing battles of some so-called writers in Shanghai are and what they have to do with my short comments themselves. But there are a few others, because my impressions arise from this, and they coexist for the reader's reference.我的投稿，平均每月八九篇，但到五月初，竟接连的不能发表了，我想，这是因为其时讳言时事而我的文字却常不免涉及时事的缘故。这禁止的是官方检查员，还是报馆总编辑呢，我不知道，也无须知道。现在便将那些都归在这一本里，其实是我所指摘，现在都已由事实来证明的了，我那时不过说得略早几天而已。是为序。
My submissions averaged eight or nine articles a month, but by the beginning of May, I couldn't publish them one after another, I think this was because I avoided talking about current affairs at that time, and my words often involved current affairs. Whether this is prohibited by the official inspector or the editor-in-chief of the newspaper, I don't know, and I don't need to know. Now I will put them all in this book, which is actually my criticism, and now it has been proven by facts, and I only said it a few days earlier. This is the preface.一九三三年七月十九夜，于上海寓庐，鲁迅记。
On the night of July 19, 1933, at his residence in Shanghai, Lu Xun remembered.

一九三三年

一九三三年

一九三三年

In 1933

观斗

观斗

观斗

Watch the fight我们中国人总喜欢说自己爱和平，但其实，是爱斗争的，爱看别的东西斗争，也爱看自己们斗争。
We Chinese always like to say that we love peace, but in fact, we love to fight, we love to see other things fight, and we also love to watch ourselves struggle.最普通的是斗鸡，斗蟋蟀，南方有斗黄头鸟，斗画眉鸟，北方有斗鹌鹑，一群闲人们围着呆看，还因此赌输赢。古时候有斗鱼，现在变把戏的会使跳蚤打架。看今年的《东方杂志》，才知道金华又有斗牛，不过和西班牙却两样的，西班牙是人和牛斗，我们是使牛和牛斗。
The most common is cockfighting, cricket fighting, there are yellow-headed birds and thrushes in the south, and quails in the north. In ancient times, there were betta fish, but now the trick will make fleas fight. Looking at this year's "Oriental Magazine", I learned that Jinhua has bullfights again, but it is different from Spain, Spain is fighting with people, and we are making cattle and bulls.任他们斗争着，自己不与斗，只是看。
Let them fight, don't fight with them, just watch.军阀们只管自己斗争着，人民不与闻，只是看。
The warlords only care about their own struggles, and the people don't hear about it, they just watch.然而军阀们也不是自己亲身在斗争，是使兵士们相斗争，所以频年恶战，而头儿个个终于是好好的，忽而误会消释了，忽而杯酒言欢了，忽而共同御侮了，忽而立誓报国了，忽而……。不消说，忽而自然不免又打起来了。
However, the warlords were not fighting themselves, but the soldiers were fighting against each other, so they fought fiercely for many years, and the leaders were finally good, suddenly the misunderstanding was resolved, suddenly a glass of wine and talking, suddenly resisting insults together, suddenly swearing to serve the country, and suddenly ....... Needless to say, suddenly and naturally it was inevitable to fight again.然而人民一任他们玩把戏，只是看。
However, the people let them play tricks, just watching.但我们的斗士，只有对于外敌却是两样的：近的，是“不抵抗”，远的，是“负弩前驱”云。
But our fighters are only two kinds of foreign enemies: the near ones are "non-resisting", and the far ones are the "crossbow vanguard".“不抵抗”在字面上已经说得明明白白。“负弩前驱”呢，弩机的制度早已失传了，必须待考古学家研究出来，制造起来，然后能够负，然后能够前驱。
"Non-resistance" is already very clear in the literal sense. As for the "negative crossbow precursor", the system of the crossbow machine has long been lost, and it must be studied and manufactured by archaeologists, and then it can be negative, and then it can be driven.还是留着国产的兵士和现买的军火，自己斗争下去罢。中国的人口多得很，暂时总有一些孑遗在看着的。但自然，倘要这样，则对于外敌，就一定非“爱和平”不可。
It's better to keep domestic soldiers and ready-bought arms and fight by yourself. China has a large population, and there are always some remnants watching for the time being. But naturally, if this is the case, then for foreign enemies, it must be "love peace".一月二十四日。
January 24th.

逃的辩护

逃的辩护

逃的辩护

The defense of escape古时候，做女人大晦气，一举一动，都是错的，这个也骂，那个也骂。现在这晦气落在学生头上了，进也挨骂，退也挨骂。
In ancient times, being a woman was very unlucky, and every move was wrong, scolding this and scolding that. Now this bad luck has fallen on the students, and they are scolded for entering and retreating.我们还记得，自前年冬天以来，学生是怎么闹的，有的要南来，有的要北上，南来北上，都不给开车。待到到得首都，顿首请愿，却不料“为反动派所利用”，许多头都恰巧“碰”在刺刀和枪柄上，有的竟“自行失足落水”而死了。
We also remember how the students have been making trouble since the winter of the previous year, some want to come south, some want to go north, and they don't drive from the south. When they arrived in the capital, they bowed their heads and petitioned, but unexpectedly they were "used by the reactionaries", and many of their heads happened to "touch" the bayonets and the hilts of guns, and some actually "fell into the water on their own" and died.验尸之后，报告书上说道，“身上五色”。我实在不懂。
After the autopsy, the report said, "There are five colors on the body." I really don't understand.谁发一句质问，谁提一句抗议呢？有些人还笑骂他们。
Who asks a question, who raises a protest? Some people laughed and scolded them.还要开除，还要告诉家长，还要劝进研究室。一年以来，好了，总算安静了。但不料榆关失了守，上海还远，北平却不行了，因为连研究室也有了危险。住在上海的人们想必记得的，去年二月的暨南大学，劳动大学，同济大学……，研究室里还坐得住么？
You have to be expelled, you have to tell your parents, and you have to persuade them to enter the research room. For a year, it's finally quiet. But unexpectedly, Yuguan was lost, Shanghai was still far away, but Peiping was not good, because even the research room was in danger. People living in Shanghai must remember that in February last year, Jinan University, Labor University, and Tongji University ......, can you still sit in the research room?北平的大学生是知道的，并且有记性，这回不再用头来“碰”刺刀和枪柄了，也不再想“自行失足落水”，弄得“身上五色”了，却发明了一种新方法，是：大家走散，各自回家。
The college students in Peking knew and had a memory, and this time they no longer used their heads to "touch" bayonets and gun handles, nor did they want to "fall into the water on their own" and make their "bodies colorful", but they invented a new method, which is: everyone was separated and went home.这正是这几年来的教育显了成效。
This is exactly what education has paid off in recent years.然而又有人来骂了。童子军还在烈士们的挽联上，说他们“遗臭万年”。
However, someone came to scold again. The Boy Scouts also wrote on the martyrs' elegy, saying that they "stinked for ten thousand years".但我们想一想罢：不是连语言历史研究所里的没有性命的古董都在搬家了么？不是学生都不能每人有一架自备的飞机么？能用本国的刺刀和枪柄“碰”得瘟头瘟脑，躲进研究室里去的，倒能并不瘟头瘟脑，不被外国的飞机大炮，炸出研究室外去么？
But let's think about it: Aren't even the lifeless antiques in the Institute of Language History moving? Isn't it possible for students to have their own plane? Can those who can "touch" their own bayonets and gun handles and hide in the laboratory not be mad and not be blown out of the research room by foreign aircraft and artillery?阿弥陀佛！
Amitabha!一月二十四日。
January 24th.

崇实

崇实

崇实

Chongshi事实常没有字面这么好看。
Facts are often not as good as they sound.例如这《自由谈》，其实是不自由的，现在叫作《自由谈》，总算我们是这么自由地在这里谈着。
For example, this "Free Talk" is actually not free, and now it is called "Free Talk", and we are finally talking here so freely.又例如这回北平的迁移古物和不准大学生逃难，发令的有道理，批评的也有道理，不过这都是些字面，并不是精髓。
For example, the migration of antiquities in Peking and the prohibition of college students from fleeing make sense in the order and the criticism are reasonable, but these are all literal, not the essence.倘说，因为古物古得很，有一无二，所以是宝贝，应该赶快搬走的罢。这诚然也说得通的。但我们也没有两个北平，而且那地方也比一切现存的古物还要古。禹是一条虫，那时的话我们且不谈罢，至于商周时代，这地方却确是已经有了的。为什么倒撇下不管，单搬古物呢？说一句老实话，那就是并非因为古物的“古”，倒是为了它在失掉北平之后，还可以随身带着，随时卖出铜钱来。
If it is said that because the antiquities are very old and unique, they are treasures and should be moved away quickly. This certainly makes sense. But we don't have two Pekings, and that place is older than all the existing antiquities. Yu was a worm, let's not talk about it at that time, but as for the Shang and Zhou dynasties, this place did already exist. Why leave it alone and move the antiquities alone? To be honest, it is not because of the "ancient" of antiquities, but because it can still be carried with you after losing Peiping and sell copper coins at any time.大学生虽然是“中坚分子”，然而没有市价，假使欧美的市场上值到五百美金一名口，也一定会装了箱子，用专车和古物一同运出北平，在租界上外国银行的保险柜子里藏起来的。
Although college students are the "backbone", there is no market price, and if the market value in Europe and the United States reaches 500 US dollars, they will definitely be packed into boxes, transported out of Peiping by special cars and antiquities, and hidden in the safes of foreign banks in the concession.但大学生却多而新，惜哉！
But there are many new college students, what a pity!费话不如少说，只剥崔颢《黄鹤楼》诗以吊之，曰——
It is better to say less, only strip Cui Hao's poem "Yellow Crane Tower" to hang it, saying——阔人已骑文化去，此地空余文化城。The broad people have ridden the culture, and this place is empty of the cultural city. 
文化一去不复返，古城千载冷清清。 Culture is gone, and the ancient city has been deserted for thousands of years. 
专车队队前门站，晦气重重大学生。 The front gate of the convoy is a major student in bad luck. 
日薄榆关何处抗，烟花场上没人惊。 Where is the sun setting at Elm Pass, and no one is surprised at the fireworks field.
一月三十一日。
January 31st.

电的利弊

电的利弊

电的利弊

The pros and cons of electricity日本幕府时代，曾大杀基督教徒，刑罚很凶，但不准发表，世无知者。到近几年，乃出版当时的文献不少。曾见《切利支丹殉教记》，其中记有拷问教徒的情形，或牵到温泉旁边，用热汤浇身；或周围生火，慢慢的烤炙，这本是“火刑”，但主管者却将火移远，改死刑为虐杀了。
During the Japanese shogunate era, Christians were killed, and the punishment was very severe, but it was not allowed to be published, and no one in the world knew about it. In recent years, many documents have been published at that time. I have seen the "Martyrdom of Celizhdan", which records the torture of believers, or the torture of believers, or the fact that they were taken to the hot springs and doused with hot water; Or light a fire around and slowly roast it, which was originally "burning at the stake", but the supervisor moved the fire away and changed the death penalty to torture.中国还有更残酷的。唐人说部中曾有记载，一县官拷问犯人，四周用火遥焙，口渴，就给他喝酱醋，这是比日本更进一步的办法。现在官厅拷问嫌疑犯，有用辣椒煎汁灌入鼻孔去的，似乎就是唐朝遗下的方法，或则是古今英雄，所见略同。曾见一个囚在反省院里的青年的信，说先前身受此刑，苦痛不堪，辣汁流入肺脏及心，已成不治之症，即释放亦不免于死云云。此人是陆军学生，不明内脏构造，其实倒挂灌鼻，可以由气管流入肺中，引起致死之病，却不能进入心中；大约当时因在苦楚中，知觉瞀乱，遂疑为已到心脏了。
China has even more cruelty. The Tang people said that there was a record in the Ministry that a county official tortured a prisoner, roasted it with fire all around, and when he was thirsty, he gave him soy sauce and vinegar, which was a further method than Japan. Now the official office tortures suspects and pours chili decoction into their nostrils, which seems to be the method left by the Tang Dynasty, or the heroes of ancient and modern times, and the view is similar. I once saw a letter from a young man who was imprisoned in a reflection hospital, saying that he had suffered this punishment before, and the pain was unbearable, and the spicy juice flowed into his lungs and heart, which had become an incurable disease, and he would die even if he was released. This person is an army student, unaware of the structure of internal organs, in fact, the nose is hung upside down, which can flow into the lungs from the trachea, causing fatal diseases, but cannot enter the heart; At that time, because he was in agony, his consciousness was confused, and he suspected that he had reached his heart.但现在之所谓文明人所造的刑具，残酷又超出于此种方法万万。上海有电刑，一上，即遍身痛楚欲裂，遂昏去，少顷又醒，则又受刑。闻曾有连受七八次者，即幸而免死，亦从此牙齿皆摇动，神经亦变钝，不能复原。前年纪念爱迪生，许多人赞颂电报电话之有利于人，却没有想到同是一电，而有人得到这样的大害，福人用电气疗病，美容，而被压迫者却以此受苦，丧命也。
But the torture instruments made by so-called civilized people today are cruel and beyond this method. In Shanghai, there was an electric torture; as soon as he went up, he was in pain all over his body, so he fainted, and after a while, he woke up again and was tortured again. I heard that there were people who had been subjected to it seven or eight times in a row, and even if they were lucky enough to avoid death, their teeth would shake and their nerves would become dull, making it impossible to recover. In memory of Edison the year before last, many people praised the telegraph and telephone for their benefit, but they did not expect that they were the same electricity, and some people got such great harm, and the blessed people used electricity to treat diseases and beautify them, while the oppressed suffered and lost their lives.外国用火药制造子弹御敌，中国却用它做爆竹敬神；外国用罗盘针航海，中国却用它看风水；外国用鸦片医病，中国却拿来当饭吃。同是一种东西，而中外用法之不同有如此，盖不但电气而已。
Foreign countries use gunpowder to make bullets to defend against enemies, but China uses it to make firecrackers to worship the gods; Foreign countries use the compass needle to sail, but China uses it to read feng shui; Foreign countries use opium to treat diseases, but China uses it as food. The same thing, but the differences in usage between China and abroad are so great, probably not just electrical.一月三十一日。
January 31st.

航空救国三愿

航空救国三愿

航空救国三愿

Aviation saves the country with three wishes现在各色的人们大喊着各种的救国，好像大家突然爱国了似的。其实不然，本来就是这样，在这样地救国的，不过现在喊了出来罢了。
Now people of all kinds are shouting all kinds of national salvation, as if everyone has suddenly become patriotic. In fact, it was originally like this, saving the country like this, but now it is just shouted out.所以银行家说贮蓄救国，卖稿子的说文学救国，画画儿的说艺术救国，爱跳舞的说寓救国于娱乐之中，还有，据烟草公司说，则就是吸吸马占山将军牌香烟，也未始非救国之一道云。
Therefore, bankers say that saving savings to save the country, those who sell manuscripts say that literature saves the country, those who paint say that art saves the country, those who love to dance say that they save the country in entertainment, and according to the tobacco company, it is to smoke Ma Zhanshan's general brand cigarettes, which is not a way to save the country.这各种救国，是像先前原已实行过来一样，此后也要实行下去的，决不至于五分钟。
These kinds of national salvation are the same as those that have been implemented before, and they will continue to be implemented in the future, and they will never last five minutes.只有航空救国较为别致，是应该刮目相看的，那将来也很难预测，原因是在主张的人们自己大概不是飞行家。
Only aviation to save the country is more unique and should be impressed, and it is difficult to predict the future, because the people who are advocating it are probably not aviators themselves.那么，我们不妨预先说出一点愿望来。
So, we might as well say a little wish in advance.看过去年此时的上海报的人们恐怕还记得，苏州不是有一队飞机来打仗的么？后来别的都在中途“迷失”了，只剩下领队的洋烈士的那一架，双拳不敌四手，终于给日本飞机打落，累得他母亲从美洲路远迢迢的跑来，痛哭一场，带几个花圈而去。听说广州也有一队出发的，闺秀们还将诗词绣在小衫上，赠战士以壮行色。然而，可惜得很，好像至今还没有到。
People who read the posters at this time last year may remember that there was not a fleet of planes in Suzhou to fight? Later, everything else was "lost" in the middle, and only the foreign martyr who led the team was left, and his fists were defeated by four hands, and he was finally shot down by the Japanese plane, so tired that his mother ran all the way from the Americas, cried bitterly, and took a few wreaths. I heard that there was also a team in Guangzhou, and the ladies also embroidered poems on their shirts to give the soldiers a heroic color. However, unfortunately, it seems that it has not arrived yet.所以我们应该在防空队成立之前，陈明两种愿望——
So we should state two wishes before the establishment of the air defense force -一，路要认清；
First, the road must be recognized;二，飞得快些。
Second, fly faster.还有更要紧的一层，是我们正由“不抵抗”以至“长期抵抗”而入于“心理抵抗”的时候，实际上恐怕一时未必和外国打仗，那时战士技痒了，而又苦于英雄无用武之地，不知道会不会炸弹倒落到手无寸铁的人民头上来的？
There is also a more important layer, when we are moving from "non-resistance" to "long-term resistance" to "psychological resistance", in fact, I am afraid that we may not be fighting with foreign countries for a while.所以还得战战兢兢的陈明一种愿望，是——
Therefore, Chen Ming, who still has to tremble, has a wish, which is——三，莫杀人民！
Third, don't kill the people!二月三日。
February 3rd.

不通两种

不通两种

不通两种

There are not two types人们每当批评文章的时候，凡是国文教员式的人，大概是着眼于“通”或“不通”，《中学生》杂志上还为此设立了病院。然而做中国文其实是很不容易“通”的，高手如太史公司马迁，倘将他的文章推敲起来，无论从文字，文法，修辞的任何一种立场去看，都可以发见“不通”的处所。
Whenever people criticize articles, all Chinese teacher-style people probably focus on "understanding" or "not understanding", and the magazine "Middle School Students" has set up a hospital for this. However, it is not easy to "understand" Chinese literature, and masters such as Ma Qian of Taishi Company, if you scrutinize his articles, no matter from any position of text, grammar, and rhetoric, you can find the place where you "don't understand".不过现在不说这些；要说的只是在笼统的一句“不通”之中，还可由原因而分为几种。大概的说，就是：有作者本来还没有通的，也有本可以通，而因了种种关系，不敢通，或不愿通的。
But let's not talk about that now; What I want to say is that in the general sentence "incomprehensible", it can also be divided into several types according to the reasons. Roughly speaking, there are authors who have not yet understood, and there are those who can understand, but due to various relationships, they dare not understand or are unwilling to understand.例如去年十月三十一日《大晚报》的记载“江都清赋风潮”，在《乡民二度兴波作浪》这一个巧妙的题目之下，述陈友亮之死云：
For example, on October 31 last year, the "Evening News" recorded "Jiangdu Qingfu Trend", under the ingenious title of "The Villagers Rise Waves for the Second Time", describing Chen Youliang's death:“陈友亮见官方军警中，有携手枪之刘金发，竟欲夺刘之手枪，当被子弹出膛，饮弹而毙，警察队亦开空枪一排，乡民始后退。……”
Chen Youliang saw that among the official military and police, there was Liu Jinfa who was holding a gun, and he wanted to take Liu's pistol, but when he was ejected by a bullet, he drank the bullet and died, and the police team also fired a row of empty guns, and the villagers began to retreat. ……”“军警”上面不必加上“官方”二字之类的费话，这里也且不说。最古怪的是子弹竟被写得好像活物，会自己飞出膛来似的。但因此而累得下文的“亦”字不通了。必须将上文改作“当被击毙”，才妥。倘要保存上文，则将末两句改为“警察队空枪亦一齐发声，乡民始后退”，这才铢两悉称，和军警都毫无关系。——虽然文理总未免有点希奇。
There is no need to add the word "official" to "military police", and I won't talk about it here. The strangest thing is that the bullet is written as if it were a living creature and would fly out of the chamber by itself. But because of this, the word "also" below is not understandable. The above must be changed to "when killed". If the above is to be saved, the last two sentences should be changed to "The police team's empty guns also spoke together, and the villagers began to retreat", which is said to have nothing to do with the military and police. ——Although the arts and sciences are always a bit strange.现在，这样的希奇文章，常常在刊物上出现。不过其实也并非作者的不通，大抵倒是恐怕“不准通”，因而先就“不敢通”了的缘故。头等聪明人不谈这些，就成了“为艺术的艺术”家；次等聪明人竭力用种种法，来粉饰这不通，就成了“民族主义文学”者，但两者是都属于自己“不愿通”，即“不肯通”这一类里的。
Nowadays, such strange articles often appear in publications. However, in fact, it is not that the author does not understand, but probably because he is afraid that he is "not allowed to understand", so he "does not dare to understand" first. The first class of smart people do not talk about this, and become "art for art"; Inferior intelligent people try their best to whitewash this incomprehension, and become "nationalist literature", but both belong to their own category of "unwillingness", that is, "refusal to understand".二月三日。
February 3rd.

不通两种

【因此引起的通论】：[General theory caused by this]: “最通的”文艺"The most popular" literature and art
王平陵
King Pingling鲁迅先生最近常常用何家干的笔名，在黎烈文主编的《申报》的《自由谈》，发表不到五百字长的短文。好久不看见他老先生的文了，那种富于幽默性的讽刺的味儿，在中国的作家之林，当然还没有人能超过鲁迅先生。不过，听说现在的鲁迅先生已跑到十字街头，站在革命的队伍里去了。那么，像他这种有闲阶级的幽默的作风，严格言之，实在不革命。我以为也应该转变一下才是！譬如：鲁迅先生不喜欢第三种人，讨厌民族主义的文艺，他尽可痛快地直说，何必装腔做势，吞吞吐吐，打这么许多湾儿。在他最近所处的环境，自然是除了那些恭颂苏联德政的献词以外，便没有更通的文艺的。他认为第三种人不谈这些，是比较最聪明的人；民族主义文艺者故意找出理由来文饰自己的不通，是比较次聪明的人。其言可谓尽深刻恶毒之能事。不过，现在最通的文艺，是不是仅有那些对苏联当局摇尾求媚的献词，不免还是疑问。如果先生们真是为着解放劳苦大众而呐喊，犹可说也；假使，仅仅是为着个人的出路，故意制造一块容易招摇的金字商标，以资号召而已。那么，我就看不出先生们的苦心孤行，比到被你们所不齿的第三种人，以及民族主义文艺者，究竟是高多少。
Recently, Mr. Lu Xun often used the pseudonym He Jiagan to publish short articles of less than 500 words in the "Free Talk" edited by Li Liewen. I haven't seen his old man's article for a long time, and the taste of humorous irony, in the forest of Chinese writers, of course, no one can surpass Mr. Lu Xun. However, I heard that Mr. Lu Xun has now run to the cross street and stood in the ranks of the revolution. Then, the humorous style of the leisure class like his, strictly speaking, is really not revolutionary. I thought I should change it too! For example: Mr. Lu Xun does not like the third type of people, hates nationalist literature and art, and he can say happily, why pretend, hesitate, and play so many bays. In his recent environment, naturally, there was no more literary and artistic than those dedications praising the virtue of the Soviet Union. He believes that the third type of person is the smartest person without talking about these; Nationalist writers and artists deliberately find reasons to cover up their incomprehensibility, and they are relatively sub-intelligent people. His words can be said to be a deep and vicious thing. However, it is still questionable whether the most popular literature and art now are only those dedications that wagged their tails to the Soviet authorities. If gentlemen really shout for the liberation of the toiling masses, it can still be said; If it is just for the sake of personal outlet, deliberately create a gold trademark that is easy to ostentatious, in order to call for it. Then, I can't see how much higher the gentlemen's painstaking actions are compared to the third kind of people you despise and the nationalist writers and artists.其实，先生们个人的生活，由我看来，并不比到被你们痛骂的小资作家更穷苦些。当然，鲁迅先生是例外，大多数的所谓革命的作家，听说，常常在上海的大跳舞场，拉斐花园里，可以遇见他们伴着娇美的爱侣，一面喝香槟，一面吃朱古力，兴高采烈地跳着狐步舞，倦舞意懒，乘着雪亮的汽车，奔赴预定的香巢，度他们真个消魂的生活。明天起来，写工人呵！斗争呵！之类的东西，拿去向书贾们所办的刊物换取稿费，到晚上，照样是生活在红绿的灯光下，沉醉着，欢唱着，热爱着。像这种优裕的生活，我不懂先生们还要叫什么苦，喊什么冤，你们的猫哭耗子的仁慈，是不是能博得劳苦大众的同情，也许，在先生们自己都不免是绝大的疑问吧！
In fact, the personal life of the gentlemen, in my opinion, is no poorer than the petty bourgeois writers who are scolded by you. Of course, Mr. Lu Xun is an exception, most of the so-called revolutionary writers, I have heard that they can often be seen in Shanghai's big dance hall, in the Raphael Garden, you can meet them with their beautiful lovers, drinking champagne, eating chocolate, happily dancing foxtrot, tired of dancing, riding in a snowy car, rushing to the predetermined incense nest, and living their real soul-stuffing life. Get up tomorrow and write about the workers! Fight! At night, they still live under the red and green lights, intoxicated, singing, and loving. I don't know what kind of suffering and injustice the gentlemen have to cry for, whether the kindness of your cat crying mouse can win the sympathy of the toiling masses, perhaps, in the gentlemen themselves, it is a great question!如果中国人不能从文化的本身上做一点基础的工夫，就这样大家空喊一阵口号，糊闹一阵，我想，把世界上无论那种最新颖最时髦的东西拿到中国来，都是毫无用处。我们承认现在的苏俄，确实是有了他相当的成功，但，这不是偶然。他们从前所遗留下来的一部分文化的遗产，是多么丰富，我们回溯到十月革命以前的俄国文学，音乐，美术，哲学，科学，那一件不是已经到达国际文化的水准。他们有了这些充实的根基，才能产生现在这些学有根蒂的领袖。我们仅仅渴慕人家的成功而不知道努力文化的根本的建树，再等十年百年，乃至千年万年，中国还是这样，也许比现在更坏。
If the Chinese can't do a little basic work from the culture itself, and everyone shouts slogans and confuses for a while, I think it is useless to bring the most novel and fashionable things in the world to China. We admit that the current Soviet Russia has indeed achieved considerable success with him, but this is not accidental. How rich is the cultural heritage of some of the cultures they left behind, we trace back to Russian literature, music, art, philosophy, and science before the October Revolution, which has not reached the level of international culture. With these substantial foundations, they can produce these leaders who have learned the roots of today. We only yearn for the success of others and do not know the fundamental achievements of the culture of hard work, and if we wait for ten years, a hundred years, or even a thousand years, China will still be like this, perhaps worse than it is now.不错，中国的文化运动，也已有二十年的历史了。但是，在这二十年中，在文化上究竟收获到什么。欧美的名著，在中国是否能有一册比较可靠的译本，文艺上的各种派别，各种主义，我们是否都拿得出一种代表作，其他如科学上的发明，思想上的创造，是否能有一种值得我们记忆。唉！中国的文化低落到这步田地，还谈得到什么呢！
Yes, China's cultural movement has a history of 20 years. However, what have been gained culturally in these two decades? Whether there is a more reliable translation of European and American masterpieces in China, whether we can get a masterpiece of various schools and isms in literature and art, and whether there is a kind of masterpiece in others, such as scientific inventions and ideological creations, can there be one worthy of our memory. Alas! China's culture has declined to this point, what else can we talk about!要是中国的文艺工作者，如不能从今天起，大家立誓做一番基本的工夫，多多地转运一些文艺的粮食，多多地树艺一些文艺的种子，我敢断言：在现代的中国，决不会产生“最通的”文艺的。
If Chinese literary and artistic workers cannot vow to do some basic work from today onwards, transfer more literary and artistic grain, and plant more literary and artistic seeds, I dare to assert that in modern China, there will never be the "most popular" literary and artistic ones.二月二十日《武汉日报》的《文艺周刊》。
February 20 "Wuhan Daily" Literature and Art Weekly.

不通两种

【通论的拆通】：[General theory of dismantling]: 官话而已 is just an official language
家干
Family dry这位王平陵先生我不知道是真名还是笔名？但看他投稿的地方，立论的腔调，就明白是属于“官方”的。一提起笔，就向上司下属，控告了两个人，真是十足的官家派势。
I don't know if this Mr. Wang Pingling is his real name or a pseudonym? But looking at the place where he submitted and the tone of his argument, it is clear that it belongs to the "official". As soon as he picked up the pen, he accused his superiors and subordinates of two people, which was really a complete bureaucratic power.说话弯曲不得，也是十足的官话。植物被压在石头底下，只好弯曲的生长，这时俨然自傲的是石头。什么“听说”，什么“如果”，说得好不自在。听了谁说？如果不“如果”呢？“对苏联当局摇尾求媚的献词”是那些篇，“倦舞意懒，乘着雪亮的汽车，奔赴预定的香巢”的“所谓革命作家”是那些人呀？是的，曾经有人当开学之际，命大学生全体起立，向着鲍罗廷一鞠躬，拜得他莫名其妙；也曾经有人做过《孙中山与列宁》，说得他们俩真好像没有什么两样；至于聚敛享乐的人们之多，更是社会上大家周知的事实，但可惜那都并不是我们。平陵先生的“听说”和“如果”，都成了无的放矢，含血喷人了。
Speech cannot be bent, and it is also a full official language. The plant was pressed under the stone and had to grow bently, and it was the stone that was proud of it. What "heard", what "if", said so uncomfortable. Who did you hear? What if not "what if"? "A dedication to the Soviet authorities" are those articles, and who are the "so-called revolutionary writers" who are "tired of dancing and lazy, riding in a snowy car, and rushing to the predetermined incense nest"? Yes, there was once a time when the school was about to start, ordered all the college students to stand up and bow to Borodin, worshiping him inexplicably; Someone once made "Sun Yat-sen and Lenin", saying that the two of them really seem to be no different; As for the number of people who gather pleasure, it is a well-known fact in society, but unfortunately it is not us. Mr. Pingling's "hearing" and "if" have become aimless and bloody.于是乎还要说到“文化的本身”上。试想就是几个弄弄笔墨的青年，就要遇到监禁，枪毙，失踪的灾殃，我做了六篇“不到五百字”的短评，便立刻招来了“听说”和“如果”的官话，叫作“先生们”，大有一网打尽之概。则做“基本的工夫”者，现在舍官许的“第三种人”和“民族主义文艺者”之外还能靠谁呢？“唉！”
So we also have to talk about "culture itself". Just imagine that a few young people who play with pen and ink will encounter the disaster of imprisonment, shooting, and disappearance, and I made six short comments of "less than 500 words", which immediately attracted the official words of "heard" and "if", called "gentlemen", and there was a great generalization. Those who do "basic work", who else can they rely on besides the "third kind of people" and "nationalist writers and artists" who are now allowed by the officials? "Alas!"然而他们是做不出来的。现在只有我的“装腔作势，吞吞吐吐”的文章，倒正是这社会的产物。而平陵先生又责为“不革命”，好像他乃是真正老牌革命党，这可真是奇怪了。——但真正老牌的官话也正是这样的。
However, they can't do it. Now only my "pretending and hesitating" articles are a product of this society. And Mr. Pingling blamed him for "not revolutionary", as if he was a real veteran revolutionary party, which is really strange. ——But the real old official language is exactly like this.七月十九日。July 19th.

赌咒

赌咒

赌咒

swear“天诛地灭，男盗女娼”——是中国人赌咒的经典，几乎像诗云子曰一样。现在的宣誓，“誓杀敌，誓死抵抗，誓……”似乎不用这种成语了。
"Heaven punishes the earth, men steal and women prostitutes" - it is a classic of Chinese gambling curses, almost like the poem Yunzi said. The current oath, "swear to kill the enemy, swear to resist to the death, swear to ......" does not seem to use this idiom.但是，赌咒的实质还是一样，总之是信不得。他明知道天不见得来诛他，地也不见得来灭他，现在连人参都“科学化地”含起电气来了，难道“天地”还不科学化么！至于男盗和女娼，那是非但无害，而且有益：男盗——可以多刮几层地皮，女娼——可以多弄几个“裙带官儿”的位置。
However, the essence of the gambling curse is still the same, in short, it is unbelievable. He knows that the sky may not come to kill him, and the earth may not come to destroy him, and now even the ginseng has "scientifically" contained electricity, isn't "heaven and earth" scientific? As for male thieves and female prostitutes, they are not only harmless, but also beneficial: male thieves - can scrape a few more layers of land, and female prostitutes - can get a few more "nepotism" positions.我的老朋友说：你这个“盗”和“娼”的解释都不是古义。我回答说——你知道现在是什么时代！现在是盗也摩登，娼也摩登，所以赌咒也摩登，变成宣誓了。
My old friend said: Your explanation of "thief" and "prostitute" is not an ancient meaning. I replied – you know what era it is! Now thieves are modern, prostitutes are modern, so gambling curses are also modern, and they have become oaths.二月九日。
二月九日。

战略关系

战略关系

战略关系

Strategic relationships首都《救国日报》上有句名言：
There is a famous saying in the capital's "National Salvation Daily":“浸使为战略关系，须暂时放弃北平，以便引敌深入……应严厉责成张学良，以武力制止反对运动，虽流血亦所不辞。”（见《上海日报》二月九日转载。）
"For the sake of strategic relations, it is necessary to temporarily abandon Peiping in order to lure the enemy deeper...... Zhang Xueliang should be severely instructed to stop the opposition movement by force, even if it means bloodshed. (See Shanghai Daily, February 9.) ）虽流血亦所不辞！勇敢哉战略大家也！
Even if it is bloodshed, it will not be rejected! Brave strategists!血的确流过不少，正在流的更不少，将要流的还不知道有多多少少。这都是反对运动者的血。为着什么？为着战略关系。
A lot of blood has indeed flowed, and a lot is being shed, and I don't know how much will be shed. This is all the blood of the opposition activists. Why? For strategic relationships.战略家在去年上海打仗的时候，曾经说：“为战略关系，退守第二道防线”，这样就退兵；过了两天又说，为战略关系，“如日军不向我军射击，则我军不得开枪，着士兵一体遵照”，这样就停战。此后，“第二道防线”消失，上海和议开始，谈判，签字，完结。那时候，大概为着战略关系也曾经见过血；这是军机大事，小民不得而知，——至于亲自流过血的虽然知道，他们又已经没有了舌头。究竟那时候的敌人为什么没有“被诱深入”？
When the strategist fought in Shanghai last year, he once said: "For strategic relations, retreat to the second line of defense", so that the troops will retreat; Two days later, he said that for the sake of strategic relations, "if the Japanese army does not shoot at our army, our army shall not shoot, and the soldiers will follow it", so that the war will cease. After that, the "second line of defense" disappeared, and the Shanghai peace negotiations began, negotiated, signed, and ended. At that time, I probably saw blood for strategic relationships; This is a major military event, and the common people do not know,—— as for those who have shed blood in person, although they know it, they have no tongues. Why didn't the enemy at that time "be lured deep"?现在我们知道了：那次敌人所以没有“被诱深入”者，决不是当时战略家的手段太不高明，也不是完全由于反对运动者的血流得“太少”，而另外还有个原因：原来英国从中调停——暗地里和日本有了谅解，说是日本呀，你们的军队暂时退出上海，我们英国更进一步来帮你的忙，使满洲国不至于被国联否认，——这就是现在国联的什么什么草案，什么什么委员的态度。这其实是说，你不要在这里深入，——这里是有赃大家分，——你先到北方去深入再说。深入还是要深入，不过地点暂时不同。
Now we know: the reason why the enemy was not "lured deeper" that time was by no means because the strategists at that time were too unclever, nor was it entirely because the blood of the opposition activists was "too little", but there was another reason: it turned out that Britain mediated - secretly had an understanding with Japan, saying that it was Japan, your army temporarily withdrew from Shanghai, and we Britain went further to help you, so that Manchukuo would not be denied by the League of Nations,—— this is the attitude of the current draft and members of the League of Nations. This actually means that you don't go deep here,—— there are stolen goods here,—— you go to the north first. It is still necessary to go deeper, but the location is temporarily different.因此，“诱敌深入北平”的战略目前就需要了。流血自然又要多流几次。
Therefore, the strategy of "luring the enemy deep into Peking" is currently needed. Bleeding naturally has to be shed several times.其实，现在一切准备停当，行都陪都色色俱全，文化古物，和大学生，也已经各自乔迁。无论是黄面孔，白面孔，新大陆，旧大陆的敌人，无论这些敌人要深入到什么地方，都请深入罢。至于怕有什么反对运动，那我们的战略家：“虽流血亦所不辞”！放心，放心。
In fact, now everything is ready to stop, and the travel is all colorful, cultural antiquities, and college students have also moved away. Whether it is the yellow face, the white face, the enemies of the New World, or the Old World, no matter where these enemies want to go, please go deeper. As for the fear of any opposition movement, then our strategist: "I will not hesitate even if I shed blood"! Don't worry, don't worry.二月九日。
二月九日。

战略关系

【备考】：【备考】：奇文共赏奇文共赏
周敬侪
周敬侪大人先生们把“故宫文物”看得和命（当然不是小百姓的命）一般坚决南迁，无非因为“古物”价值不止“连城”，并且容易搬动，容易变钱的原故，这也值得你们大惊小怪，冷嘲热讽！我正这样想着的时候，居然从首都一家报纸上见到赞成“古物南迁”的社论；并且建议“武力制止反对”，“流血在所不辞”，请求政府“保持威信”，“贯彻政策”！这样的宏词高论，我实在不忍使它湮没无闻，因特不辞辛苦，抄录出来，献给大众：
The adults and gentlemen regard the "Forbidden City cultural relics" as fate (of course, not the lives of the common people) and resolutely move south, just because the value of "antiquities" is not only "Liancheng", but also easy to move and easy to turn into money, which is also worthy of your fuss and cynicism! While I was thinking this, I actually saw an editorial in a newspaper in the capital in favor of "antiquities moving south"; He also suggested "stopping opposition by force", "bloodshed is unavoidable", and requesting the government to "maintain prestige" and "implement policies"! I really can't bear to make it obscured, so I took the trouble to copy it and dedicate it to the public:“……北平各团体之反对古物南迁，为有害北平将来之繁荣，此种自私自利完全蔑视国家利益之理由，北平各团体竟敢说出，吾人殊服其厚颜无耻，彼等只为北平之繁荣，必须以数千年古物冒全被敌人劫夺而去之大危险，所见未免太小，使政府为战略关系，须暂时放弃北平，以便引敌深入，聚而歼之，则古物必被敌人劫夺而去，试问将来北平之繁荣何由维持，故不如先行迁移，俟打倒日本，北平安如泰山后，再行迁回，北平各团体自私自利，固可恶可耻，其无远虑，亦可怜也，其反对迁移之又一理由，则谓政府应先顾全土地，此言似是而实非，盖放弃一部分土地供敌人一时之占领，以歼灭敌人，然后再行恢复，古今中外，其例甚多，如一八一二年之役，俄人不但放弃莫斯科，且将莫斯科烧毁，以困拿破仑，欧战时，比利时，塞尔维亚，皆放弃全部领土，供敌人蹂躏，卒将强德击破，盖领土被占，只须不与敌人媾和，签字于割让条约，则敌人固无如该土何，至于故宫古物，若不迁移，设不幸北平被敌人占领，将古物劫夺而去，试问中国将何法以恢复之，行见中国文明结晶，供敌人战利品，可耻孰甚，……最后吾人奉告政府，政府迁移古物之政策，既已决定，则不论遇如何阻碍，应求其贯彻，若一经无见识无远虑之群愚反对，即行中止，政府威信何在，故吾主张严责张学良，使以武力制止反对运动，若不得已，虽流血亦所不辞……”
“…… The opposition of the Peking groups to the south of the antiquities, in order to harm the future prosperity of Peiping, this kind of selfishness and self-interest completely despise the reason for the national interests, the Peking groups dare to say that we are very convinced of their brazenness, they are only for the prosperity of Peiping, they must risk the great danger of thousands of years of antiquities being robbed by the enemy, what they see is too small, so that the government is a strategic relationship, must temporarily abandon Peking, in order to lure the enemy deeper, gather and annihilate it, then the antiquities will be robbed by the enemy, and ask how the prosperity of Peiping will be maintained in the future, so it is better to move first. Another reason for their opposition to the relocation is that the government should first take care of the whole land, which is plausible but not true, because they gave up part of the land for the enemy's temporary occupation to annihilate the enemy, and then recovered, ancient and modern China and abroad, there are many examples, such as the Battle of 1812, the Russians not only abandoned Moscow, but also burned Moscow to trap Napoleon, during the European War, Belgium, Serbia, All give up all the territory for the enemy to ravage, and finally break the strong virtue, because the territory is occupied, as long as it does not make peace with the enemy and signs the cession treaty, then the enemy has nothing to do with the land, as for the antiquities of the Forbidden City, if they are not moved, if Peiping is unfortunately occupied by the enemy and the antiquities are robbed, I would like to ask China what method to restore it, and see the crystallization of Chinese civilization and provide the enemy's spoils, which is shameful,...... Finally, I advise the government that the government's policy of relocating antiquities has been decided, so no matter how it is hindered, it should be implemented, and if it is opposed by a group of ignorant people who have no knowledge and foresight, it will be suspended, where is the prestige of the government, so I advocate strictly reprimanding Zhang Xueliang to stop the opposition movement by force, and if it is necessary, even if it is bloody, I will not hesitate......二月十三日，《申报》《自由谈》。February 13, "Declaration" and "Free Talk".

颂萧

颂萧

颂萧

Praise Xiao萧伯纳未到中国之前，《大晚报》希望日本在华北的军事行动会因此而暂行停止，呼之曰“和平老翁”。
Before George Bernard Shaw arrived in China, the "Evening News" hoped that Japan's military operations in North China would be temporarily stopped because of this, calling him the "Old Man of Peace".萧伯纳既到香港之后，各报由“路透电”译出他对青年们的谈话，题之曰“宣传共产”。
After George Bernard Shaw arrived in Hong Kong, the newspapers translated his conversation with young people by Reuters, entitled "Propaganda of Communism".萧伯纳“语路透访员曰，君甚不像华人，萧并以中国报界中人全无一人访之为异，问曰，彼等其幼稚至于未识余乎？”（十一日路透电）
萧伯纳“语路透访员曰，君甚不像华人，萧并以中国报界中人全无一人访之为异，问曰，彼等其幼稚至于未识余乎？”（十一日路透电）我们其实是老练的，我们很知道香港总督的德政，上海工部局的章程，要人的谁和谁是亲友，谁和谁是仇雠，谁的太太的生日是那一天，爱吃的是什么。但对于萧，——惜哉，就是作品的译本也只有三四种。
We are actually sophisticated, we know very well the virtue of the governor of Hong Kong, the constitution of the Shanghai Ministry of Works, who is a relative and friend, who is an enemy, whose wife's birthday is that day, and what they love to eat. But for Xiao ,—— Xi, there are only three or four translations of the work.所以我们不能识他在欧洲大战以前和以后的思想，也不能深识他游历苏联以后的思想。但只就十四日香港“路透电”所传，在香港大学对学生说的“如汝在二十岁时不为赤色革命家，则在五十岁时将成不可能之僵石，汝欲在二十岁时成一赤色革命家，则汝可得在四十岁时不致落伍之机会”的话，就知道他的伟大。
Therefore, we cannot know his thoughts before and after the European War, nor can we know his thoughts after his trip to the Soviet Union. But only according to Hong Kong's "Reuters" on the 14th, the University of Hong Kong said to students, "If you are not a red revolutionary at the age of 20, you will become an impossible stone at the age of 50, and if you want to become a red revolutionary at the age of 20, you will not have the opportunity to fall behind at the age of 40".但我所谓伟大的，并不在他要令人成为赤色革命家，因为我们有“特别国情”，不必赤色，只要汝今天成为革命家，明天汝就失掉了性命，无从到四十岁。我所谓伟大的，是他竟替我们二十岁的青年，想到了四五十岁的时候，而且并不离开了现在。
But what I call greatness is not that he wants people to become red revolutionaries, because we have "special national conditions", and there is no need to be red, as long as you become a revolutionary today, tomorrow you will lose your life, and you will not be able to reach the age of forty. What I call great is that he actually thought about our twenty-year-old youth, when he was forty or fifty years old, and did not leave the present.阔人们会搬财产进外国银行，坐飞机离开中国地面，或者是想到明天的罢；“政如飘风，民如野鹿”，穷人们可简直连明天也不能想了，况且也不准想，不敢想。
Broad people will move their property into foreign banks, take planes out of China, or think about tomorrow; "The government is like a whirlwind, and the people are like wild deer", the poor people can't even think about tomorrow, let alone think about it, and they dare not think about it.又何况二十年，三十年之后呢？这问题极平常，然而是伟大的。
Not to mention twenty or thirty years later? This is a very common problem, yet great.此之所以为萧伯纳！
This is why George Bernard Shaw is here!二月十五日。
February 15th.

颂萧

【又招恼了大主笔】：[Annoyed the chief writer again]: 萧伯纳究竟不凡 Shaw is extraordinary
《大晚报》社论
"Big Evening News" editorial“你们批评英国人做事，觉得没有一件事怎样的好，也没有一件事怎样的坏；可是你们总找不出那一件事给英国人做坏了。他做事多有主义的。他要打你，他提倡爱国主义来；他要抢你，他提出公事公办的主义；他要奴役你，他提出帝国主义大道理；他要欺侮你，他又有英雄主义的大道理；他拥护国王，有忠君爱国的主义，可是他要斫掉国王的头，又有共和主义的道理。他的格言是责任；可是他总不忘记一个国家的责任与利益发生了冲突就要不得了。”
"You criticize the British for doing things, thinking that nothing is good or bad; But you can't find that one thing that has been done badly to the British. He is very principled in doing things. He wants to beat you, he advocates patriotism; He wants to rob you, he puts forward the principle of public affairs; He wants to enslave you, he puts forward the great principle of imperialism; He wants to bully you, and he has the great principle of heroism; He supports the king and has the doctrine of loyalty to the king and patriotism, but he wants to cut off the king's head, and he has the principle of republicanism. His maxim is responsibility; But he never forgot that a country's responsibilities and interests are in conflict. ”这是萧伯纳老先生在《命运之人》中批评英国人的尖刻语。我们举这一个例来介绍萧先生，要读者认识大伟人之所以伟大，也自有其秘诀在。这样子的冷箭，充满在萧氏的作品中，令受者难堪，听者痛快，于是萧先生的名言警句，家传户诵，而一代文豪也确定了他的伟大。
This is Mr. Shaw's scathing criticism of the British in "The Man of Destiny". We will take this example to introduce Mr. Xiao, so that readers can understand the reason why great people are great, and they also have their own secrets. Such cold arrows are full of Xiao's works, embarrassing the recipient and happy to the listener, so Mr. Xiao's famous aphorisms are recited from family to family, and a generation of literary heroes also determined his greatness.借主义，成大名，这是现代学者一时的风尚，萧先生有嘴说英国人，可惜没有眼估量自己。我们知道萧先生是泛平主义的先进，终身拥护这渐进社会主义，他的戏剧，小说，批评，散文中充塞着这种主义的宣传品，萧先生之于社会主义，可说是个彻头彻尾的忠实信徒。然而，我们又知道，萧先生是铢锱必较的积产专家，是反对慈善事业最力的理论家，结果，他坐拥着百万巨资面团团早成了个富家翁。萧先生唱着平均资产的高调，为被压迫的劳工鸣不平，向寄生物性质的资产家冷嘲热讽，因此而赢得全民众的同情，一书出版，大家抢着买，一剧登场，一百多场做下去，不愁没有人看，于是萧先生坐在提倡共产主义的安乐椅里，笑嘻嘻地自鸣得意，借主义以成名，挂羊头卖狗肉的戏法，究竟巧妙无穷。
Borrowing doctrine and becoming famous is a fashion of modern scholars, Mr. Xiao has a mouth to say that he is British, but unfortunately he has no eyes to measure himself. We know that Mr. Xiao is an advanced of pan-flatteningism, a lifelong supporter of this progressive socialism, and his plays, novels, criticisms, and prose are full of propaganda materials for this doctrine. However, we also know that Mr. Xiao is an expert in accumulating wealth and the most powerful theorist against philanthropy, and as a result, he has become a rich man with a million-dollar dough ball. Mr. Xiao sang the high-profile of the average asset, complained about the oppressed laborers, and sneered at the parasitic bourgeoisie, so he won the sympathy of the whole people, and a book was published, everyone rushed to buy it, a play appeared, and more than a hundred performances were done, without worrying that no one would watch, so Mr. Xiao sat in the easy chair advocating communism, smiling and smug, borrowing doctrine to become famous, and hanging sheep's heads to sell dog meat, which was infinitely ingenious.现在，萧先生功成名就，到我们穷苦的中国来玩玩了。多谢他提携后进的热诚，在香港告诉我们学生道：“二十岁不为赤色革命家，五十岁要成僵石；二十岁做了赤色革命家，四十岁可不致落伍。”原来做赤色革命家的原因，只为自己怕做僵石，怕落伍而已；主义本身的价值如何，本来与个人的前途没有多大关系；我们要在社会里混出头，只求不僵，只求不落伍，这是现代人立身处世的名言，萧先生坦白言之，安得不叫我们五体投地，真不愧“圣之时者也”的现代孔子了。
Now, Mr. Xiao has become famous and has come to our poor China to play. Thank you for his enthusiasm to support the younger generation, and told our students in Hong Kong: "If you are not a red revolutionary at the age of twenty, you will become a stiff stone at the age of fifty; At the age of twenty, he became a red revolutionary, and at the age of forty, he would not be left behind. "It turns out that the reason for being a red revolutionary is only because I am afraid of being a stiff stone and being left behind; The value of doctrine itself has little to do with the future of the individual; We want to stand out in society, just seek not to be stiff, only to not be outdated, this is the famous saying of modern people in the world, Mr. Xiao frankly said, how can we not make us bow to the ground, really worthy of the modern Confucius of "the holy time".然而，萧先生可别小看了这老大的中国，像你老先生这样时髦的学者，我们何尝没有。坐在安乐椅里发着尖刺的冷箭来宣传什么主义的，不须先生指教，戏法已耍得十分纯熟了。我想先生知道了，一定要莞尔而笑曰：“我道不孤！”
However, Mr. Xiao should not underestimate this boss China, why don't we have a fashionable scholar like your old gentleman? Sitting in the easy chair with spiked cold arrows to promote any doctrine, without the advice of the gentleman, the trick has been played very skillfully. I think the gentleman knows, and he must smile and say, "I am not alone!" ”然而，据我们愚蠢的见解，伟大人格的素质，重要的是个诚字。你信仰什么主义，就该诚挚地力行，不该张大了嘴唱着好听。若说，萧先生和他的同志，真信仰共产主义的，就请他散尽了家产再说话。可是，话也得说回来，萧先生散尽了家产，真穿着无产同志的褴褛装束，坐着三等舱来到中国，又有谁去睬他呢？这样一想：萧先生究竟不凡。
However, according to our foolish opinion, the quality of a great personality is the word sincerity. Whatever doctrine you believe in, you should practice it sincerely, and you should not sing with your mouth wide open. If Mr. Xiao and his comrades really believe in communism, ask him to disperse his family property before talking. However, then again, Mr. Xiao lost his family property, and he really came to China in the ragged clothes of a proletarian comrade in a third-class cabin, who would pay attention to him? Think about it this way: Mr. Xiao is extraordinary.二月十七日。
February 17th.

颂萧

【也不佩服大主笔】：[I don't admire the chief writer]: 前文的案语 The text of the previous text
乐雯
Lewen这种“不凡”的议论的要点是：（一）尖刻的冷箭，“令受者难堪，听者痛快”，不过是取得“伟大”的秘诀；（二）这秘诀还在于“借主义，成大名，挂羊头，卖狗肉的戏法”；（三）照《大晚报》的意见，似乎应当为着自己的“主义”——高唱“神武的大文”，“张开血盆似的大口”去吃人，虽在二十岁就落伍，就变为僵石，亦所不惜；（四）如果萧伯纳不赞成这种“主义”，就不应当坐安乐椅，不应当有家财，赞成了那种主义，当然又当别论。
The main points of this "extraordinary" discussion are: (1) the sharp cold arrow, which "embarrass the recipient and makes the listener happy", is just the secret to achieving "greatness"; (2) The secret also lies in "borrowing doctrine, becoming a big name, hanging sheep's heads, and selling dog meat"; (3) According to the opinion of the "Evening News", it seems that one should eat people for their own "ism" - singing "Shenwu's great text" and "opening a big mouth like a basin of blood". (4) If George Bernard Shaw did not approve of this "doctrine", he should not sit in an easy chair, should not have family wealth, and of course he agreed with that doctrine.可惜，这世界的崩溃，偏偏已经到了这步田地：——小资产的知识阶层分化出一些爱光明不肯落伍的人，他们向着革命的道路上开步走。他们利用自己的种种可能，诚恳的赞助革命的前进。他们在以前，也许客观上是资本主义社会关系的拥护者。但是，他们偏要变成资产阶级的“叛徒”。而叛徒常常比敌人更可恶。
Unfortunately, the collapse of this world has reached this point: the petty bourgeois intellectual class has divided into some people who love the light and refuse to be left behind, and they are moving towards the road of revolution. They used all their possibilities to sincerely sponsor the advancement of the revolution. They were before, perhaps objectively, adherents of capitalist social relations. However, they prefer to become "traitors" of the bourgeoisie. And traitors are often more hateful than enemies.卑劣的资产阶级心理，以为给了你“百万家财”，给了你世界的大名，你还要背叛，你还有什么不满意，“实属可恶之至”。这自然是“借主义，成大名”了。对于这种卑劣的市侩，每一件事情一定有一种物质上的荣华富贵的目的。这是道地的“唯物主义”——名利主义。萧伯纳不在这种卑劣心理的意料之中，所以可恶之至。
The despicable bourgeois psychology thinks that if you have given you "millions of wealth" and the world's name, you will betray you, and what dissatisfaction do you have, "it is really hateful". This is naturally "borrowing doctrine and becoming a big name". For this kind of despicable philistine, everything must have a purpose of material glory and wealth. This is authentic "materialism" - fame and fortune. George Bernard Shaw was not expected by this despicable psychology, so it was extremely hateful.而《大晚报》还推论到一般的时代风尚，推论到中国也有“坐在安乐椅里发着尖刺的冷箭来宣传什么什么主义的，不须先生指教”。这当然中外相同的道理，不必重新解释了。可惜的是：独有那吃人的“主义”，虽然借用了好久，然而还是不能够“成大名”，呜呼！
The "Evening News" also deduced to the general fashion of the times, and inferred that China also "sits in an easy chair with spiked cold arrows to promote something, without the advice of the gentleman." Of course, this is the same principle at home and abroad, and there is no need to re-explain it. It's a pity that the unique cannibalistic "ism", although it has been borrowed for a long time, still can't "become a big name", woohoo!至于可恶可怪的萧，——他的伟大，却没有因为这些人“受着难堪”，就缩小了些。所以像中国历代的离经叛道的文人似的，活该被皇帝判决“抄没家财”。
As for the hateful and strange Xiao ,—— his greatness, he did not shrink because these people were "embarrassed". Therefore, like the deviant literati of China, he deserved to be sentenced by the emperor to "confiscate his family wealth".《萧伯纳在上海》。"George Bernard Shaw in Shanghai".

对于战争的祈祷——读书心得

对于战争的祈祷Prayer for War——读书心得 - Reading experience
热河的战争开始了。
The war in Rehe began.三月一日——上海战争的结束的“纪念日”，也快到了。“民族英雄”的肖像一次又一次的印刷着，出卖着；而小兵们的血，伤痕，热烈的心，还要被人糟蹋多少时候？回忆里的炮声和几千里外的炮声，都使得我们带着无可如何的苦笑，去翻开一本无聊的，但是，倒也很有几句“警句”的闲书。这警句是：
March 1, the "anniversary" of the end of the Shanghai War, is also approaching. the portraits of "national heroes" are printed and sold again and again; And how long will the blood, scars, and warm hearts of the soldiers be ruined? The sound of cannons in memories and the sound of cannons thousands of miles away make us open a boring book with a helpless wry smile, but there are also a few "aphorisms" in the idle book. This aphorism is:“喂，排长，我们到底上那里去哟？”——其中的一个问。
"Hey, platoon leader, where are we going?" - One of them asked.“走吧。我也不晓得。”
"Let's go. I don't know. ”“丢那妈，死光就算了，走什么！”
"Lose that mother, forget it, what are you going!"“不要吵，服从命令！”
"Don't make noise, obey orders!"“丢那妈的命令！”
"Lose that damn order!"然而丢那妈归丢那妈，命令还是命令，走也当然还是走。四点钟的时候，中山路复归于沉寂，风和叶儿沙沙的响，月亮躲在青灰色的云海里，睡着，依旧不管人类的事。
However, losing that mother is still an order, and of course it is still going. At four o'clock, Zhongshan Road returned to silence, the wind and the rustling of leaves, and the moon hid in the blue-gray sea of clouds, asleep, still ignoring human affairs.这样，十九路军就向西退去。
In this way, the 19th Route Army retreated westward.（黄震遐：《大上海的毁灭》。）
(Huang Zhenxia: "The Destruction of Shanghai".) ）什么时候“丢那妈”和“命令”不是这样各归各，那就得救了。
When "throwing that mother" and "ordering" are not like this, then you are saved.不然呢？还有“警句”可以回答这个问题：
Otherwise? There are also "aphorisms" that can answer this question:十九路军打，是告诉我们说，除掉空说以外，还有些事好做！
The 19th Route Army is telling us that in addition to empty words, there are still some things to do!十九路军胜利，只能增加我们苟且，偷安与骄傲的迷梦！
The victory of the 19th Route Army can only increase our dreams of being complacent, stealing peace and pride!十九路军死，是警告我们活得可怜，无趣！
The death of the 19th Route Army is a warning to us that we are pitiful and boring!十九路军失败，才告诉我们非努力，还是做奴隶的好！
The failure of the 19th Route Army told us that it is better to be a slave than to work hard!（见同书。）
(See ibid.) ）这是警告我们，非革命，则一切战争，命里注定的必然要失败。现在，主战是人人都会的了——这是一二八的十九路军的经验：打是一定要打的，然而切不可打胜，而打死也不好，不多不少刚刚适宜的办法是失败。“民族英雄”对于战争的祈祷是这样的。而战争又的确是他们在指挥着，这指挥权是不肯让给别人的。战争，禁得起主持的人预定着打败仗的计画么？好像戏台上的花脸和白脸打仗，谁输谁赢是早就在后台约定了的。呜呼，我们的“民族英雄”！
This is a warning to us that without revolution, all wars are destined to fail. Now, everyone can fight the main battle - this is the experience of the 128th Nineteenth Route Army: it must be fought, but it must not be won, and it is not good to kill, no more, no less than the appropriate way is to lose. The prayer of the "national hero" for war is like this. And the war is indeed commanded, and this command authority is unwilling to be given to others. Can the person who presided over the war plan to win the war? It seems that the flower face and the white face on the stage are fighting, and who loses and who wins has long been agreed backstage. Alas, our "national heroes"!二月二十五日。
February 25th.

从讽刺到幽默

从讽刺到幽默

从讽刺到幽默

From sarcasm to humor讽刺家，是危险的。
Cynics, it is dangerous.假使他所讽刺的是不识字者，被杀戮者，被囚禁者，被压迫者罢，那很好，正可给读他文章的所谓有教育的智识者嘻嘻一笑，更觉得自己的勇敢和高明。然而现今的讽刺家之所以为讽刺家，却正在讽刺这一流所谓有教育的智识者社会。
If what he satirizes is the illiterate, the killed, the imprisoned, and the oppressed, it is very good, and it can give the so-called educated intellectuals who read his articles a smile and feel that they are brave and clever. However, the reason why today's satirists are satirists is that they are satirizing this so-called educated intellectual society.因为所讽刺的是这一流社会，其中的各分子便各各觉得好像刺着了自己，就一个个的暗暗的迎出来，又用了他们的讽刺，想来刺死这讽刺者。
Because the irony was this first-class society, each of the elements felt as if they had stabbed themselves, so they secretly greeted them one by one, and used their irony to stab the satirist to death.最先是说他冷嘲，渐渐的又七嘴八舌的说他谩骂，俏皮话，刻毒，可恶，学匪，绍兴师爷，等等，等等。然而讽刺社会的讽刺，却往往仍然会“悠久得惊人”的，即使捧出了做过和尚的洋人或专办了小报来打击，也还是没有效，这怎不气死人也么哥呢！
At first, he said that he was sneering, and gradually he said that he was abusive, witty, vicious, hateful, student bandits, Shaoxing master, etc., etc. However, the satire of satirizing society is often still "amazingly long", even if foreigners who have been monks or tabloids are set up to crack down, it is still ineffective.枢纽是在这里：他所讽刺的是社会，社会不变，这讽刺就跟着存在，而你所刺的是他个人，他的讽刺倘存在，你的讽刺就落空了。
The pivot is here: what he satirizes is society, society remains unchanged, this irony exists, and what you satirize is him, and if his irony exists, your irony will fail.所以，要打倒这样的可恶的讽刺家，只好来改变社会。
Therefore, to defeat such a hateful satirist, we have to change society.然而社会讽刺家究竟是危险的，尤其是在有些“文学家”明明暗暗的成了“王之爪牙”的时代。人们谁高兴做“文字狱”中的主角呢，但倘不死绝，肚子里总还有半口闷气，要借着笑的幌子，哈哈的吐他出来。笑笑既不至于得罪别人，现在的法律上也尚无国民必须哭丧着脸的规定，并非“非法”，盖可断言的。
However, social satirists are dangerous, especially in an era when some "writers" have become "king's minions" openly and secretly. Who is happy to be the protagonist in the "literary prison", but if he doesn't die, there will always be half a stuffy breath in his stomach, and he will vomit out under the guise of laughter. Xiaoxiao will not offend others, and there is no provision in the law that citizens must cry and mourn, which is not "illegal", and it can be asserted.我想：这便是去年以来，文字上流行了“幽默”的原因，但其中单是“为笑笑而笑笑”的自然也不少。
I think: This is the reason why "humor" has become popular in words since last year, but there are naturally many of them who are "laughing for the sake of laughing".然而这情形恐怕是过不长久的，“幽默”既非国产，中国人也不是长于“幽默”的人民，而现在又实在是难以幽默的时候。于是虽幽默也就免不了改变样子了，非倾于对社会的讽刺，即堕入传统的“说笑话”和“讨便宜”。
However, this situation may not last long, "humor" is neither domestically produced, and Chinese people are not good at "humor", and now is really difficult to be humorous. Therefore, even if humor is inevitable, it is inevitable to change its appearance, and it is not inclined to satire on society, that is, it has fallen into the traditional "telling jokes" and "bargaining".三月二日。
March 2nd.

从幽默到正经

从幽默到正经

从幽默到正经

From humor to seriousness“幽默”一倾于讽刺，失了它的本领且不说，最可怕的是有些人又要来“讽刺”，来陷害了，倘若堕于“说笑话”，则寿命是可以较为长远，流年也大致顺利的，但愈堕愈近于国货，终将成为洋式徐文长。当提倡国货声中，广告上已有中国的“自造舶来品”，便是一个证据。
The most terrible thing is that some people are going to "satirize" again, to frame them, if they fall into "telling jokes", the life span can be relatively long, and the passage of time is roughly smooth, but the more it falls, the closer it is to domestic products, and it will eventually become a Western-style Xu Wenchang. When advocating domestic products, there are Chinese "self-made imported products" in advertisements, which is a proof.而况我实在恐怕法律上不久也就要有规定国民必须哭丧着脸的明文了。笑笑，原也不能算“非法”的。但不幸东省沦陷，举国骚然，爱国之士竭力搜索失地的原因，结果发见了其一是在青年的爱玩乐，学跳舞。当北海上正在嘻嘻哈哈的溜冰的时候，一个大炸弹抛下来，虽然没有伤人，冰却已经炸了一个大窟窿，不能溜之大吉了。
Moreover, I am really afraid that there will soon be a clear provision in the law that stipulates that citizens must cry and mourn. Xiaoxiao, it can't be considered "illegal". But unfortunately, the eastern province fell, the whole country was in turmoil, and patriots tried their best to search for the reason for the lost land, and the result was that one of them was the love of youth and learning to dance. When the North Sea was giggling and skating, a big bomb was dropped, and although it did not hurt anyone, the ice had already exploded a big hole, and it could not be slipped away.又不幸而榆关失守，热河吃紧了，有名的文人学士，也就更加吃紧起来，做挽歌的也有，做战歌的也有，讲文德的也有，骂人固然可恶，俏皮也不文明，要大家做正经文章，装正经脸孔，以补“不抵抗主义”之不足。
Unfortunately, Yuguan fell, Rehe was tight, and the famous literati and scholars became even tighter, some made elegies, some made war songs, and some talked about literary virtue.但人类究竟不能这么沉静，当大敌压境之际，手无寸铁，杀不得敌人，而心里却总是愤怒的，于是他就不免寻求敌人的替代。这时候，笑嘻嘻的可就遭殃了，因为他这时便被叫作：“陈叔宝全无心肝”。所以知机的人，必须也和大家一样哭丧着脸，以免于难。“聪明人不吃眼前亏”，亦古贤之遗教也，然而这时也就“幽默”归天，“正经”统一了剩下的全中国。
But human beings can't be so calm, when the enemy is pressing, he is defenseless and can't kill the enemy, but his heart is always angry, so he can't help but seek a replacement for the enemy. At this time, Xiaoxie suffered, because he was called "Chen Shubao has no heart at all". Therefore, those who know the opportunity must also cry and lose their faces like everyone else to avoid disaster. "Smart people do not suffer immediate losses", which is also the legacy of the ancient sages, but at this time, "humor" returned to heaven, and "seriousness" unified the rest of China.明白这一节，我们就知道先前为什么无论贞女与淫女，见人时都得不笑不言；现在为什么送葬的女人，无论悲哀与否，在路上定要放声大叫。
Understanding this verse, we know why both virgin and adulterous women did not smile when they saw people; Why do women who go to the funeral now, whether sad or not, must scream on the road?这就是“正经”。说出来么，那就是“刻毒”。
This is "seriousness". If you say it, it is "carving poison".三月二日。
March 2nd.

王道诗话

王道诗话

王道诗话

The king's poetry“人权论”是从鹦鹉开头的。据说古时候有一只高飞远走的鹦哥儿，偶然又经过自己的山林，看见那里大火，它就用翅膀蘸着些水洒在这山上；人家说它那一点儿水怎么救得熄这样的大火，它说：“我总算在这里住过的，现在不得不尽点儿心。”（事出《栎园书影》，见胡适《人权论集》序所引。）鹦鹉会救火，人权可以粉饰一下反动的统治。这是不会没有报酬的。胡博士到长沙去演讲一次，何将军就送了五千元程仪。价钱不算小，这“叫做”实验主义。
The "theory of human rights" begins with the parrot. It is said that in ancient times, there was a parrot that flew far away, and when he happened to pass by his own mountain forest and saw a fire there, he dipped his wings in some water and sprinkled it on the mountain; People say how its little water can extinguish such a fire, and it says: "I have finally lived here, and now I have to do my best." (The matter is from "Oak Garden Book Shadow", see the preface to Hu Shi's "Human Rights Collection".) Parrots can put out fires, and human rights can whitewash reactionary rule. This will not be without remuneration. Dr. Hu went to Changsha to give a speech, and General He gave 5,000 yuan to Cheng Yi. The price is not small, this is "called" experimentalism.但是，这火怎么救，在“人权论”时期（一九二九——三〇年），还不十分明白，五千元一次的零卖价格做出来之后，就不同了。最近（今年二月二十一日）《字林西报》登载胡博士的谈话说：
However, how to put out this fire was not very clear during the "human rights theory" period (1929-30), and it was different after the fractional price of 5,000 yuan was made. Recently, (February 21 this year), the "Zilin Xi Bao" published Dr. Hu's conversation, saying:“任何一个政府都应当有保护自己而镇压那些危害自己的运动的权利，固然，政治犯也和其他罪犯一样，应当得着法律的保障和合法的审判……”
"Any government should have the right to protect itself and suppress those movements that endanger itself, and political prisoners, like other criminals, should be protected by the law and tried legally......"这就清楚得多了！这不是在说“政府权”了么？自然，博士的头脑并不简单，他不至于只说：“一只手拿着宝剑，一只手拿着经典！”如什么主义之类。他是说还应当拿着法律。
This is much clearer! Isn't this talking about "government power"? Naturally, the doctor's mind is not simple, and he will not just say: "One hand holds a sword, the other holds a classic!" "Such as whatism. He said that the law should still be held.中国的帮忙文人，总有这一套秘诀，说什么王道，仁政。你看孟夫子多么幽默，他教你离得杀猪的地方远远的，嘴里吃得着肉，心里还保持着不忍人之心，又有了仁义道德的名目。不但骗人，还骗了自己，真所谓心安理得，实惠无穷。
China's help literati always have this set of secrets, what is the royal way, benevolent government. Look at how humorous Meng Fuzi is, he taught you to be far away from the place where you kill pigs, you can eat meat in your mouth, and you still maintain an intolerable heart in your heart, and you have the name of benevolence, righteousness and morality. Not only did he deceive others, but he also deceived himself, which is really called peace of mind and infinite benefits.诗曰：
The poem says:文化班头博士衔，人权抛却说王权，The title of the head of the cultural class, human rights abandoned the royal power, 
朝廷自古多屠戮，此理今凭实验传。 The court has been massacred since ancient times, and this principle is now based on experiments.  
人权王道两翻新，为感君恩奏圣明， Human rights and royal ways have been renewed, and in order to thank the emperor for his grace, 
虐政何妨援律例，杀人如草不闻声。 The tyrannical government does not have to invoke the law, and the murder is silent.  
先生熟读圣贤书，君子由来道不孤， Mr. is familiar with the books of the sages, and the gentleman has never been alone, 
千古同心有孟子，也教肉食远庖厨。 There is Mencius in the same heart throughout the ages, and he also teaches meat to be far from the kitchen.  
能言鹦鹉毒于蛇，滴水微功漫自夸， can say that parrots are more poisonous than snakes, and the dripping water boasts of its small achievements, 
好向侯门卖廉耻，五千一掷未为奢。 It is good to sell shame to the nobles, and it is not a luxury to throw five thousand a toast.
三月五日。
March 5th.

伸冤

伸冤

伸冤

Seek justice李顿报告书采用了中国人自己发明的“国际合作以开发中国的计划”，这是值得感谢的，——最近南京市各界的电报已经“谨代表京市七十万民众敬致慰念之忱”，称他“不仅为中国好友，且为世界和平及人道正义之保障者”（三月一日南京中央社电）了。
The Lytton report adopted the "plan of international cooperation to develop China" that Chinese himself invented, which is worth thanking,—— Recently, telegrams from all walks of life in Nanjing have "expressed their condolences on behalf of the 700,000 people in Beijing", calling him "not only a friend of China, but also a guarantor of world peace and humanitarian justice" (Nanjing Central News Agency, March 1).然而李顿也应当感谢中国才好：第一，假使中国没有“国际合作学说”，李顿爵士就很难找着适当的措辞来表示他的意思。岂非共管没有了学理上的根据？第二，李顿爵士自己说的：“南京本可欢迎日本之扶助以拒共产潮流”，他就更应当对于中国当局的这种苦心孤诣表示诚恳的敬意。
However, Lytton should also be grateful to China: first, if China did not have a "doctrine of international cooperation", it would be difficult for Sir Lytton to find the right words to express his meaning. Isn't there no theoretical basis for co-management? Second, Sir Lytton himself said: "Nanjing could have welcomed Japan's assistance to resist the communist trend", and he should have expressed sincere respect for this painstaking effort of the Chinese authorities.但是，李顿爵士最近在巴黎的演说（路透社二月二十日巴黎电），却提出了两个问题，一个是：“中国前途，似系于如何，何时及何人对于如此伟大人力予以国家意识的统一力量，日内瓦乎，莫斯科乎？”还有一个是：“中国现在倾向日内瓦，但若日本坚持其现行政策，而日内瓦失败，则中国纵非所愿，亦将变更其倾向矣。”这两个问题都有点儿侮辱中国的国家人格。国家者政府也。李顿说中国还没有“国家意识的统一力量”，甚至于还会变更其对于日内瓦之倾向！这岂不是不相信中国国家对于国联的忠心，对于日本的苦心？
However, Sir Lytton's recent speech in Paris (Reuters, February 20) raised two questions: "China's future seems to depend on how, when and by whom to give such a great force to the unifying force of national consciousness, Geneva or Moscow?" Another is: "China is now inclined to Geneva, but if Japan sticks to its current policy and Geneva fails, China will change its tendency even if it does not want to." "Both of these issues are a bit insulting to China's national personality. The state is the government. Lytton said that China does not yet have a "unified force of national consciousness", and will even change its tendency towards Geneva! Isn't this not believing in the Chinese country's loyalty to the League of Nations and its painstaking efforts towards Japan?为着中国国家的尊严和民族的光荣起见，我们要想答复李顿爵士已经好多天了，只是没有相当的文件。这使人苦闷得很。今天突然在报纸上发见了一件宝贝，可以拿来答复李大人：这就是“汉口警部三月一日的布告”。这里可以找着“铁一样的事实”，来反驳李大人的怀疑。
For the sake of the dignity of the Chinese state and the glory of the nation, we have been trying to reply to Sir Lytton for many days, but there are no equivalent documents. This is very distressing. Today I suddenly found a treasure in the newspaper, which can be used to reply to Lord Li: This is the "Hankou Police Department's announcement on March 1st". Here you can find "iron facts" to refute Master Li's suspicions.例如这布告（原文见《申报》三月一日汉口专电）说：“在外资下劳力之劳工，如劳资间有未解决之正当问题，应禀请我主管机关代表为交涉或救济，绝对不得直接交涉，违者拿办，或受人利用，故意以此种手段，构成严重事态者，处死刑。”这是说外国资本家遇见“劳资间有未解决之正当问题”，可以直接任意办理，而劳工方面如此这般者……就要处死刑。这样一来，我们中国就只剩得“用国家意识统一了的”劳工了。因为凡是违背这“意识”的，都要请他离开中国的“国家”——到阴间去。李大人难道还能够说中国当局不是“国家意识的统一力量”么？
For example, this announcement (the original text is found in the Hankou Special Telegram of March 1 of the "Declaration") said: "Workers who are laboring under foreign capital, if there are legitimate problems between labor and management, should be reported to the representative of our competent authority for negotiation or relief, and must never negotiate directly. This means that foreign capitalists can directly handle "unresolved legitimate problems between labor and management" when they encounter them, while this is the case with labor...... is to be sentenced to death. In this way, we in China are left with only laborers who are "unified by national consciousness". Because anyone who violates this "consciousness" must be asked to leave China's "country" - to the underworld. Can Master Li still say that the Chinese authorities are not a "unifying force of national consciousness"?再则统一这个“统一力量”的，当然是日内瓦，而不是莫斯科。“中国现在倾向日内瓦”，——这是李顿大人自己说的。我们这种倾向十二万分的坚定，例如那布告上也说：“如有奸民流痞受人诱买勾串，或直受驱使，或假托名义，以图破坏秩序安宁，与构成其他不利于我国家社会之重大犯行者，杀无赦。”这是保障“日内瓦倾向”的坚决手段，所谓“虽流血亦所不辞”。而且“日内瓦”是讲世界和平的，因此，中国两年以来都没有抵抗，因为抵抗就要破坏和平；直到一二八，中国也不过装出挡挡炸弹枪炮的姿势；最近的热河事变，中国方面也同样的尽在“缩短阵线”。不但如此，中国方面埋头剿匪，已经宣誓在一两个月内肃清匪共，“暂时”不管热河。这一切都是要证明“日本……见中国南方共产潮流渐起，为之焦虑”是不必的，日本很可以无须亲自出马。中国方面这样辛苦的忍耐的工作着，无非是为着要感动日本，使它悔悟，达到远东永久和平的目的，国际资本可以在这里分工合作。而李顿爵士要还怀疑中国会“变更其倾向”，这就未免太冤枉了。
Furthermore, it is of course Geneva that unites this "unifying force", not Moscow. "China is now leaning towards Geneva",—— this is what Lord Lytton himself said. For example, the proclamation also said: "If any traitor is lured by others to collude with others, or is directly driven, or under the guise of pretending, in an attempt to undermine order and tranquility, and constitutes other major crimes that are not conducive to our country and society, he will be killed without mercy." This is a resolute means to guarantee the "Geneva tendency", the so-called "bloodshed". Moreover, "Geneva" is about world peace, so China has not resisted for two years, because resistance will destroy peace; Until 128, China only pretended to block bombs and guns; In the recent Rehe Incident, the Chinese side is also "shortening the front". Not only that, the Chinese side has pledged to eliminate the bandits and the Communist Party within a month or two, and "temporarily" ignore Rehe. All this is to prove that "Japan...... Seeing the gradual rise of communism in southern China, I was anxious about it, "It is not necessary, Japan does not need to personally step in." China's hard and patient work is nothing more than to move Japan, make it repent, and achieve the goal of permanent peace in the Far East, where international capital can divide labor and cooperate. And Sir Lytton still suspects that China will "change its tendencies", which is too unjust.总之，“处死刑，杀无赦”，是回答李顿爵士的怀疑的历史文件。请放心罢，请扶助罢。
In short, "the death penalty, the unforgivable killing" is a historical document that answers Sir Leighton's doubts. Please rest assured, please help me.三月七日。
March 7th.

曲的解放

曲的解放

曲的解放

The liberation of the song“词的解放”已经有过专号，词里可以骂娘，还可以“打打麻将”。
"Liberation of Words" has already had a special number, in which you can scold your mother and "play mahjong".曲为什么不能解放，也来混账混账？不过，“曲”一解放，自然要“直”，——后台戏搬到前台——未免有失诗人温柔敦厚之旨，至于平仄不调，声律乖谬，还在其次。
Why can't Qu be liberated, and come to bastard? However, once the "song" is liberated, it is natural to move the backstage drama to the foreground ,—— the poet is inevitably lost.《平津会》杂剧
"Pingjin Meeting" miscellaneous drama
（生上）：连台好戏不寻常：攘外期间安内忙。只恨(Shang): The good show is unusual: the internal affairs are busy during the foreign expulsion. I just hate that 
热汤滚得快，未敲锣鼓已收场。（唱）： The hot soup boils so fast that it ends before the gongs and drums are beaten. (Singing):
〔短柱天净纱〕热汤混账——逃亡！[Short Pillar Tianjing Yarn] hot soup bastard - escape! 
装腔抵抗——何妨？ Resistance - what's the matter?
（旦上唱）：模仿中央榜样：(Dan Shang): Imitate the central example: 
——整装西望， - Dressed up and looking west, 
商量奔向咸阳。 discussed and rushed to Xianyang.
（生）：你你你……低声！你看咱们那汤儿呀，他那里(Student): You, you, you...... Whispered! Look at our soup, he 
无心串演，我这里有口难分，一出好戏，就此 has no intention of stringing in, I have a mouth here, a good show, this 
糟糕，好不麻烦人也！ is bad, it's not a nuisance!
（旦）：那有什么：再来一出“查办”好了。咱们一夫(Dan): What is there: Let's do another "investigation". We have a husband 
一妇，一正一副，也还够唱的。 and a woman, one is upright and one pair, and it is enough to sing.
（生）：好罢！（唱）：
(Student): Okay! (Singing):〔颠倒阳春曲〕人前指定可憎张，[Upside down Yangchun song] In front of people, I designate the hateful Zhang, 
骂一声，不抵抗！ scolded, and did not resist!
（旦背人唱）：百忙里算甚糊涂账？(Dan Bei People): What is the confuse account in your busy schedule? 
只不过假装腔， is just pretending, so what's the point of 
便骂骂又何妨？ scolding?
（丑携包裹急上）：阿呀呀，哙哙不得了了！
(Ugly with the package rushed): Ah, it's amazing!（旦抱丑介）：我儿呀，你这么心慌！你应当在前面多(Dan Bao Choujie): My son, you are so flustered! You should have more 
挡这么几挡，让我们好收拾收拾。（唱）： in front of you so that we can clean up. (Singing):
〔颠倒阳春曲〕背人搂定可怜汤，The person behind the back of the person hugged the poor soup, 
骂一声，枉抵抗。 scolded, and resisted in vain. 
戏台上露甚慌张相？ What kind of panic did you show on the stage? 
只不过理行装， is just a matter of packaging, so what's the point of 
便等等又何妨？ and so on?
（丑哭介）：你们倒要理行装！我的行装先就不全了，(Ugly crying): You have to dress up! My luggage is not complete first, 
你瞧。（指包裹介。） You see. (Refers to the package introduction.) ）
（旦）：我儿快快走扶桑，
(Dan): My son, hurry up and go to Fusang,（生）：雷厉风行查办忙。
(Student): Vigorous and resolute investigation and busy.（丑）：如此牺牲还值得，堂堂大汉有风光。（同下。）
(Ugly): Such a sacrifice is worth it, and the dignified man has scenery. (Ibid.) ）
三月九日。
March 9th.

文学上的折扣

文学上的折扣

文学上的折扣

Literary discounts有一种无聊小报，以登载诬蔑一部分人的小说自鸣得意，连姓名也都给以影射的，忽然对于投稿，说是“如含攻讦个人或团体性质者恕不揭载”了，便不禁想到了一些事——
There is a kind of boring tabloid, which is proud of publishing novels that slander some people, and even the names are insinuated, and suddenly for the submission, it is said that "if it contains an attack on the nature of an individual or group, it will not be exposed", and I can't help but think of something -凡我所遇见的研究中国文学的外国人中，往往不满于中国文章之夸大。这真是虽然研究中国文学，恐怕到死也还不会懂得中国文学的外国人。倘是我们中国人，则只要看过几百篇文章，见过十来个所谓“文学家”的行径，又不是刚刚“从民间来”的老实青年，就决不会上当。因为我们惯熟了，恰如钱店伙计的看见钞票一般，知道什么是通行的，什么是该打折扣的，什么是废票，简直要不得。
Among the foreigners I have met who study Chinese literature, they are often dissatisfied with the exaggeration of Chinese articles. This is really a foreigner who studies Chinese literature, but I am afraid that he will not understand Chinese literature until he dies. If we are Chinese, as long as we have read hundreds of articles and seen the behavior of more than a dozen so-called "writers", and are not honest young people who have just "come from the people", we will never be fooled. Because we are used to it, just like the money shop guy sees banknotes, knowing what is acceptable, what should be discounted, and what is invalid, it is simply unnecessary.譬如说罢，称赞贵相是“两耳垂肩”，这时我们便至少将他打一个对折，觉得比通常也许大一点，可是决不相信他的耳朵像猪猡一样。说愁是“白发三千丈”，这时我们便至少将他打一个二万扣，以为也许有七八尺，但决不相信它会盘在顶上像一个大草囤。这种尺寸，虽然有些模胡，不过总不至于相差太远。反之，我们也能将少的增多，无的化有，例如戏台上走出四个拿刀的瘦伶仃的小戏子，我们就知道这是十万精兵；刊物上登载一篇俨乎其然的像煞有介事的文章，我们就知道字里行间还有看不见的鬼把戏。
For example, if we praise Guixiang for "two ears and drooping shoulders", we will at least fold him in half, thinking that it may be a little bigger than usual, but we will never believe that his ears are like pigs. Saying that sorrow is "three thousand feet of white hair", we will beat him at least twenty thousand buckles, thinking that it may be seven or eight feet, but we never believe that it will be coiled on top like a big grass mound. This size, although a bit ambiguous, is not too far apart. On the contrary, we can also increase the less and turn the nothing, for example, when four thin little actors with knives walk out of the stage, we know that this is a hundred thousand elite soldiers; When an article is published in a publication that seems to be a serious matter, we know that there are invisible ghost tricks between the lines.又反之，我们并且能将有的化无，例如什么“枕戈待旦”呀，“卧薪尝胆”呀，“尽忠报国”呀，我们也就即刻会看成白纸，恰如还未定影的照片，遇到了日光一般。
On the contrary, we can also turn what we have into nothingness, such as "waiting for the dawn", "lying down and tasting courage", and "serving the country loyally", and we will immediately see it as a blank sheet of paper, just like a photo that has not yet been fixed, as if it has encountered daylight.但这些文章，我们有时也还看。苏东坡贬黄州时，无聊之至，有客来，便要他谈鬼。客说没有。东坡道：“你姑且胡说一通罢。”我们的看，也不过这意思。但又可知道社会上有这样的东西，是费去了多少无聊的眼力。人们往往以为打牌，跳舞有害，实则这种文章的害还要大，因为一不小心，就会给它教成后天的低能儿的。
But we also read these articles sometimes. When Su Dongpo was demoted to Huangzhou, he was so bored that when a guest came, he asked him to talk about ghosts. The guest said no. Dongpo said: "You just talk nonsense." "That's just what we see. But you can also know how much boring eyesight it takes to have such a thing in society. People often think that playing cards and dancing is harmful, but in fact, this kind of article is even more harmful, because if you are not careful, you will teach it to be an acquired imbecile.《颂》诗早已拍马，《春秋》已经隐瞒，战国时谈士蜂起，不是以危言耸听，就是以美词动听，于是夸大，装腔，撒谎，层出不穷。现在的文人虽然改著了洋服，而骨髓里却还埋着老祖宗，所以必须取消或折扣，这才显出几分真实。
The poems "Song" have long been slapped, the "Spring and Autumn Annals" have been concealed, and during the Warring States period, the talkers surged, either with alarmist words or with beautiful words, so they exaggerated, pretended, lied, and emerged endlessly. Although today's literati have changed their clothes, their ancestors are still buried in their bone marrow, so they must be canceled or discounted, which shows a bit of truth.“文学家”倘不用事实来证明他已经改变了他的夸大，装腔，撒谎……的老脾气，则即使对天立誓，说是从此要十分正经，否则天诛地灭，也还是徒劳的。因为我们也早已看惯了许多家都钉着“假冒王麻子灭门三代”的金漆牌子的了，又何况他连小尾巴也还在摇摇摇呢。
If the "writer" does not use facts to prove that he has changed his exaggeration, pretense, and lie...... Even if you swear to the heavens that you will be very serious from now on, otherwise it will be in vain to punish the heavens and the earth. Because we have long been accustomed to seeing many families nailed with gold lacquer brands of "fake Wang Mazi exterminating three generations", not to mention that even his little tail is still shaking.三月十二日。
March 12th.

迎头经

迎头经

迎头经

Head-to-head scriptures中国现代圣经——迎头经曰：“我们……要迎头赶上去，不要向后跟着。”
The modern Chinese Bible - the first scripture says: "We...... Catch up head-on, don't follow behind. ”传曰：追赶总只有向后跟着，普通是无所谓迎头追赶的，然而圣经决不会错，更不会不通，何况这个年头一切都是反常的呢。所以赶上偏偏说迎头，向后跟着，那就说不行！
It is said that the only way to catch up is to follow backwards, and it usually doesn't matter if you catch up head-on, but the Bible will never be wrong, let alone misunderstandable, not to mention that everything is abnormal these days. So if you catch up and say head-on and follow backward, then you can't say no!现在通行的说法是：“日军所至，抵抗随之”，至于收复失地与否，那么，当然“既非军事专家，详细计画，不得而知”。不错呀，“日军所至，抵抗随之”，这不是迎头赶上是什么！日军一到，迎头而“赶”：日军到沈阳，迎头赶上北平；日军到闸北，迎头赶上真茹；日军到山海关，迎头赶上塘沽；日军到承德，迎头赶上古北口……以前有过行都洛阳，现在有了陪都西安，将来还有“汉族发源地”昆仑山——西方极乐世界。至于收复失地云云，则虽非军事专家亦得而知焉，于经有之，曰“不要向后跟着”也。证之已往的上海战事，每到日军退守租界的时候，就要“严饬所部切勿越界一步”。这样，所谓迎头赶上和勿向后跟，都是不但见于经典而且证诸实验的真理了。右传之一章。
As for whether or not to regain lost territory, then, of course, "neither a military expert nor a detailed plan, it is unknown." Yes, "wherever the Japanese army arrives, resistance follows", this is not catching up! As soon as the Japanese army arrived, they "rushed" head-on: the Japanese army arrived in Shenyang and caught up with Peiping; The Japanese army arrived in Zhabei and caught up with Zhenru; The Japanese army arrived at Shanhaiguan and caught up with Tanggu; The Japanese army arrived in Chengde and caught up with Gubeikou...... In the past, there was Luoyang, the capital of the Xingdu, and now there is the capital Xi'an, and in the future, there will be Kunlun Mountain, the "birthplace of the Han people" - the Western Paradise. As for recovering lost territory, even non-military experts know this, and there is a saying in the scriptures that "don't follow backwards." As evidenced by the past war in Shanghai, whenever the Japanese army retreated to the concession, it was necessary to "strictly warn the troops not to cross the line". In this way, the so-called catching up and not following behind are truths that are not only found in the scriptures but also proved by experiments. A chapter from the right biography.传又曰：迎头赶和勿后跟，还有第二种的微言大义——
The biography also says: Catch up and don't follow, and there is a second kind of subtle righteousness -报载热河实况曰：“义军皆极勇敢，认扰乱及杀戮日军为兴奋之事……唯张作相接收义军之消息发表后，张作相既不亲往抚慰，热汤又停止供给义军汽油，运输中断，义军大都失望，甚至有认替张作相立功为无谓者。”“日军既至凌源，其时张作相已不在，吾人闻讯出走，热汤扣车运物已成目击之事实，证以日军从未派飞机至承德轰炸……可知承德实为妥协之放弃。”（张慧冲君在上海东北难民救济会席上所谈。）虽然据张慧冲君所说，“享名最盛之义军领袖，其忠勇之精神，未能悉如吾人之意想”，然而义军的兵士的确是极勇敢的小百姓。正因为这些小百姓不懂得圣经，所以也不知道迎头式的策略。于是小百姓自己，就自然要碰见迎头的抵抗了：热汤放弃承德之后，北平军委分会下令“固守古北口，如义军有欲入口者，即开枪迎击之”。这是说，我的“抵抗”只是随日军之所至，你要换个样子去抵抗，我就抵抗你；何况我的退后是预先约好了的，你既不肯妥协，那就只有“不要你向后跟着”而要把你“迎头赶上”梁山了。右传之二章。
The report reported the situation of Rehe: "The rebels were extremely brave and recognized the disturbance and killing of the Japanese army as exciting...... Only after the news of Zhang Zuoxiang's receipt of the rebels was published, Zhang Zuoxiang neither went to comfort him in person, and the hot soup stopped supplying gasoline to the rebels, and the transportation was interrupted. "When the Japanese army arrived in Lingyuan, Zhang Zuoxiang was no longer there, and we heard the news and left, and the fact that the hot soup detained the car and transported goods had become a witness, proving that the Japanese army had never sent planes to Chengde to bomb...... It can be seen that Chengde is actually a compromise abandonment. (Zhang Huichongjun spoke at the Northeast Shanghai Refugee Relief Association.) Although according to Zhang Huichongjun, "the most famous rebel leader, his loyal and brave spirit is not as we imagined", the soldiers of the rebel army are indeed extremely brave people. Because these common people did not understand the Bible, they did not know the strategy of head-on. So the common people themselves naturally had to meet the head-on resistance: after the hot soup abandoned Chengde, the branch of the Peking Military Commission ordered to "stick to Gubeikou, and if the rebels wanted to enter the mouth, they would shoot at it." This means that my "resistance" is only with the Japanese army, and if you want to resist in a different way, I will resist you; What's more, my retreat was pre-agreed, and since you refused to compromise, you would only have to "don't want you to follow behind" and "catch up" with Liangshan. The second chapter of the above commentary.诗云：“惶惶”大军，迎头而奔，“嗤嗤”小民，勿向后跟！赋也。
The poem says: "Panic" army, rush head-on, "sneer" the common people, don't follow back! It is a poem.三月十四日。
March 14th.这篇文章被检查员所指摘，经过改正，这才能在十九日的报上登出来了。
This article was criticized by the inspector, and after correction, it was published in the newspaper on the 19th.原文是这样的——
The original text is like this -第三段“现在通行的说法”至“当然既”，原文为“民国廿二年春×三月某日，当局谈话曰：‘日军所至，抵抗随之……至收复失地及反攻承德，须视军事进展如何而定，余’”。又“不得而知”下有注云：（《申报》三月十二日第三张）。
The third paragraph, "The current prevailing statement" to "of course", the original text is "On a certain day in March of the twenty-second year of the Republic of China× the authorities said: 'Wherever the Japanese army arrives, resistance will follow...... As for recovering lost territory and counterattacking Chengde, it depends on the military progress, Yu'". There is also a note under "Unknown": ("Declaration" March 12, 3rd).第五段“报载热河……”上有“民国廿二年春×三月”九字。
In the fifth paragraph, "Reporting Rehe ......", there are nine characters "March of the twenty-second year of the Republic of China" in × spring.三月十九夜记。
March 19 Night Record.

“光明所到……”

“光明所到……”

“光明所到……”

"Where the light goes......"中国监狱里的拷打，是公然的秘密。上月里，民权保障同盟曾经提起了这问题。
Torture in Chinese prisons is an open secret. Last month, the Civil Rights Defense League raised this issue.但外国人办的《字林西报》就揭载了二月十五日的《北京通信》，详述胡适博士曾经亲自看过几个监狱，“很亲爱的”告诉这位记者，说“据他的慎重调查，实在不能得最轻微的证据，……他们很容易和犯人谈话，有一次胡适博士还能够用英国话和他们会谈。监狱的情形，他（胡适博士——干注）说，是不能满意的，但是，虽然他们很自由的（哦，很自由的——干注）诉说待遇的恶劣侮辱，然而关于严刑拷打，他们却连一点儿暗示也没有。……”
However, the foreigner-run "Zilin Xi Bao" published the "Beijing News Agency" on February 15, detailing that Dr. Hu Shi had personally visited several prisons, and "very dear" told the reporter, "According to his careful investigation, I really can't get the slightest evidence,...... They were easy to talk to the prisoners, and once Dr. Hu Shi was able to talk to them in English. The conditions in prison, he said, were not satisfactory, but although they were very free (oh, very free) to speak of the terrible insults of treatment, they did not even hint at the slightest hint about torture. ……”我虽然没有随从这回的“慎重调查”的光荣，但在十年以前，是参观过北京的模范监狱的。虽是模范监狱，而访问犯人，谈话却很不“自由”，中隔一窗，彼此相距约三尺，旁边站一狱卒，时间既有限制，谈话也不准用暗号，更何况外国话。
Although I did not have the honor of following this "careful investigation", ten years ago, I visited the model prison in Beijing. Although it is a model prison, the conversation is not "free" when interviewing prisoners, separated by a window, about three feet apart from each other, and a jailer standing next to it.而这回胡适博士却“能够用英国话和他们会谈”，真是特别之极了。莫非中国的监狱竟已经改良到这地步，“自由”到这地步；还是狱卒给“英国话”吓倒了，以为胡适博士是李顿爵士的同乡，很有来历的缘故呢？
But this time Dr. Hu Shi was "able to talk to them in English", which was really special. Could it be that China's prisons have been improved to this extent, "free" to this extent; Or was it because the jailer was frightened by the "English dialect" and thought that Dr. Hu Shi was Sir Lytton's fellow townsman and had a long history?幸而我这回看见了《招商局三大案》上的胡适博士的题辞：
Fortunately, I saw Dr. Hu Shi's inscription on the "Three Major Cases of China Merchants" this time:“公开检举，是打倒黑暗政治的唯一武器，光明所到，黑暗自消。”（原无新式标点，这是我僭加的——干注。）
"Public reporting is the only weapon to defeat dark politics, and where the light goes, the darkness will disappear by itself." (There is no new punctuation, which I added - dry note.) ）我于是大彻大悟。监狱里是不准用外国话和犯人会谈的，但胡适博士一到，就开了特例，因为他能够“公开检举”，他能够和外国人“很亲爱的”谈话，他就是“光明”，所以“光明”所到，“黑暗”就“自消”了。他于是向外国人“公开检举”了民权保障同盟，“黑暗”倒在这一面。
I was enlightened. It is not allowed to talk to prisoners in foreign languages in prison, but as soon as Dr. Hu Shi arrived, he made a special case, because he could "publicly report", he could talk to foreigners "very dear", he was "light", so wherever the "light" arrived, the "darkness" "disappeared by itself". He then "publicly reported" the Civil Rights Protection League to foreigners, and the "darkness" fell on this side.但不知这位“光明”回府以后，监狱里可从此也永远允许别人用“英国话”和犯人会谈否？
But I don't know if after this "bright" returns home, will the prison always allow others to talk to prisoners in "English"?如果不准，那就是“光明一去，黑暗又来”了也。
If not, it is "the light is gone, and the darkness is coming again".而这位“光明”又因为大学和庚款委员会的事务忙，不能常跑到“黑暗”里面去，在第二次“慎重调查”监狱之前，犯人们恐怕未必有“很自由的”再说“英国话”的幸福了罢。呜呼，光明只跟着“光明”走，监狱里的光明世界真是暂时得很！
And this "light" is busy with the affairs of the university and the Geng Money Committee, so he can't often go into the "darkness", and before the second "careful investigation" of the prison, the prisoners may not have the happiness of "very free" and "English". Alas, the light only follows the "light", and the bright world in prison is really temporary!但是，这是怨不了谁的，他们千不该万不该是自己犯了“法”。“好人”就决不至于犯“法”。倘有不信，看这“光明”！
However, this is not to blame anyone, they should never have violated the "law" themselves. "Good people" will never break the "law". If you don't believe it, look at this "light"!三月十五日。
March 15th.

止哭文学

止哭文学

止哭文学

Stop crying literature前三年，“民族主义文学”家敲着大锣大鼓的时候，曾经有一篇《黄人之血》说明了最高的愿望是在追随成吉思皇帝的孙子拔都元帅之后，去剿灭“斡罗斯”。斡罗斯者，今之苏俄也。那时就有人指出，说是现在的拔都的大军，就是日本的军马，而在“西征”之前，尚须先将中国征服，给变成从军的奴才。
In the first three years, when "nationalist literature" writers were beating gongs and drums, there was once a "Yellow Man's Blood" that illustrated that the highest wish was to follow the grandson of Emperor Genghis Genghis Khan, Marshal Batu, to exterminate the "Oros". Oros is what is now Soviet Russia. At that time, some people pointed out that the current army of Batu was the Japanese military horse, and before the "Western Expedition", it was necessary to conquer China first and turn it into a slave in the army.当自己们被征服时，除了极少数人以外，是很苦痛的。这实例，就如东三省的沦亡，上海的爆击，凡是活着的人们，毫无悲愤的怕是很少很少罢。但这悲愤，于将来的“西征”是大有妨碍的。于是来了一部《大上海的毁灭》，用数目字告诉读者以中国的武力，决定不如日本，给大家平平心；而且以为活着不如死亡（“十九路军死，是警告我们活得可怜，无趣！”），但胜利又不如败退（“十九路军胜利，只能增加我们苟且，偷安与骄傲的迷梦！”）。总之，战死是好的，但战败尤其好，上海之役，正是中国的完全的成功。
When they are conquered, it is painful except for a very few. In this example, just like the fall of the three eastern provinces and the critical attack in Shanghai, all living people are afraid that there are very few people without grief and anger. But this grief and anger will greatly hinder the future "Western Expedition". So came a "Destruction of Shanghai", which used a number of words to tell readers that China's military power was not as good as Japan, so that everyone could be calm; And think that living is worse than death ("The death of the 19th Route Army is a warning that we are pitiful and boring!") But victory is not as good as defeat ("The victory of the 19th Route Army can only increase our dream of being complacent, stealing peace and pride!") ”）。 In short, it is good to die in battle, but defeat is especially good, and the Battle of Shanghai is China's complete success.现在第二步开始了。据中央社消息，则日本已有与满洲国签订一种“中华联邦帝国密约”之阴谋。那方案的第一条是：“现在世界只有两种国家，一种系资本主义，英，美，日，意，法，一种系共产主义，苏俄。现在要抵制苏俄，非中日联合起来……不能成功”云（详见三月十九日《申报》）。
Now the second step begins. According to the Central News Agency, Japan has signed a conspiracy with Manchukuo to sign a "secret treaty with the Empire of the Chinese Federation". The first of the plan was: "There are only two countries in the world now, one is capitalism, Britain, the United States, Japan, Italy, France, and the other is communism, Soviet Russia." Now we must boycott Soviet Russia and unite with China and Japan...... It cannot be successful" (see the March 19 "Declaration" for details).要“联合起来”了。这回是中日两国的完全的成功，是从“大上海的毁灭”走到“黄人之血”路上去的第二步。
It's time to "unite". This time it was a complete success for China and Japan, and it was the second step on the road from the "destruction of Shanghai" to the "blood of the yellow people".固然，有些地方正在爆击，上海却自从遭到爆击之后，已经有了一年多，但有些人民不悟“西征”的必然的步法，竟似乎还没有完全忘掉前年的悲愤。这悲愤，和目前的“联合”就大有妨碍的。在这景况中，应运而生的是给人们一点爽利和慰安，好像“辣椒和橄榄”的文学。这也许正是一服苦闷的对症药罢。为什么呢？就因为是“辣椒虽辣，辣不死人，橄榄虽苦，苦中有味”的。明乎此，也就知道苦力为什么吸鸦片。
Of course, some places are being bombed, but Shanghai has been hit for more than a year since it was bombed, but some people do not understand the inevitable footwork of the "Western Expedition", and it seems that they have not completely forgotten the grief and anger of the previous year. This grief and anger are greatly hindered by the current "union". In this situation, what came into being was to give people a little refreshment and comfort, like the literature of "chili peppers and olives". This may be just a symptomatic remedy for distress. Why? Just because it is "chili peppers are spicy, spicy is not deadly, olives are bitter, bitter and flavorful". Knowing this, we know why coolies smoke opium.而且不独无声的苦闷而已，还据说辣椒是连“讨厌的哭声”也可以停止的。王慈先生在《提倡辣椒救国》这一篇名文里告诉我们说：
And not only is it silent bitterness, but it is also said that peppers can stop even "nasty crying". Mr. Wang Ci told us in the famous article "Advocating Chili Pepper to Save the Country":“……还有北方人自小在母亲怀里，大哭的时候，倘使母亲拿一只辣茄子给小儿咬，很灵验的可以立止大哭……
“…… There are also northerners who have been in their mother's arms since they were children, and when they cry, if the mother takes a spicy eggplant to bite the child, it is very effective to stop crying immediately......“现在的中国，仿佛是一个在大哭时的北方婴孩，倘使要制止他讨厌的哭声，只要多多的给辣茄子他咬。”（《大晚报》副刊第十二号）
"Today's China is like a northern baby crying, if you want to stop his hated crying, just give him a lot of spicy eggplants." (Supplement No. 12 of the "Great Evening News")辣椒可以止小儿的大哭，真是空前绝后的奇闻，倘是真的，中国人可实在是一种与众不同的特别“民族”了。然而也很分明的看见了这种“文学”的企图，是在给人一辣而不死，“制止他讨厌的哭声”，静候着拔都元帅。
Chili peppers can stop children from crying, which is really an unprecedented anecdote, if true, the Chinese are really a special "nation" that is different from others. However, it is also very clear that this kind of "literary" attempt is to give people a spicy but not die, "stop his hated cry", and wait for Marshal Batu.不过，这是无效的，远不如哭则“格杀勿论”的灵验。此后要防的是“道路以目”了，我们等待着遮眼文学罢。
However, this is ineffective, far less effective than crying. After that, what we need to guard against is "the road is eyed", and we are waiting for blindfolded literature.三月二十日。
March 20.

止哭文学

【备考】：[Note]: 提倡辣椒救国 advocates chili peppers to save the country
王慈
Wang Ci记得有一次跟着一位北方朋友上天津点心馆子里去，坐定了以后，堂倌跑过来问道：
I remember once I followed a northern friend to a dim sum restaurant in Tianjin, and after sitting down, the cousin ran over and asked:“老乡！吃些什么东西？”
"Fellow countryman! What to eat? ”“两盘锅贴儿！”那位北方朋友用纯粹的北方口音说。
"Two plates of potstickers!" The northern friend said in a pure northern accent.随着锅贴儿端来的，是一盆辣椒。
Along with the potstickers, there was a pot of chili peppers.我看见那位北方朋友把锅贴和着多量的辣椒津津有味的送进嘴里去，触起了我的好奇心，探险般的把一个锅贴悄悄的蘸上一点儿辣椒，送下肚去，只觉得舌尖顿时麻木得失了知觉，喉间痒辣得怪难受，眼眶里不自主涌着泪水，这时，我大大的感觉到痛苦。
I saw the northern friend put the potsticker and a large amount of chili peppers into his mouth with relish, which touched my curiosity, and quietly dipped a potsticker in a little chili pepper like an expedition and sent it down to my stomach, only to feel that the tip of my tongue suddenly numbed and lost consciousness, the throat was itchy and uncomfortable, and tears welled up in my eyes, at this time, I felt great pain.那位北方朋友看见了我这个样子，大笑了起来，接着他告诉我，北方人的善吃辣椒是出于天性，他们是抱着“饭菜可以不要，辣椒不能不吃”的主义的；他们对于辣椒已经是仿佛吸鸦片似的上了瘾！还有北方人自小在母亲怀里，大哭的时候，倘使母亲拿一只辣茄子给小儿咬，很灵验的可以立止大哭……
The northern friend saw me like this and laughed, and then he told me that northerners are good at eating chili peppers out of nature, and they hold the principle of "you can not eat food, you can't eat chili peppers"; They are already addicted to chili peppers as if they were smoking opium! There are also northerners who have been in their mother's arms since they were children, and when they cry, if the mother takes a spicy eggplant to bite the child, it is very effective to stop crying immediately......*　*　*
现在的中国，仿佛是一个大哭时的北方婴孩，倘使要制止他讨厌的哭声，只要多多的给辣茄子他咬。
Today's China is like a northern baby when he cries loudly, if he wants to stop his hated crying, just give him a lot of spicy eggplants.中国的人们，等于我的那位北方朋友，不吃辣椒是不会兴奋的！
Chinese people, who are equal to my northern friends, will not be excited if they don't eat chili peppers!三月十二日，《大晚报》副刊《辣椒与橄榄》。
On March 12, the "Big Evening News" supplement "Chili and Olive".

止哭文学

【硬要用辣椒止哭】：[Insist on using chili peppers to stop crying]: 不要乱咬人 Don't bite indiscriminately
王慈
Wang Ci当心咬着辣椒
Watch out for biting peppers上海近来多了赵大爷赵秀才一批的人，握了尺棒，拚命想找到“阿Q相”的人来出气。还好，这一批文人从有色的近视眼镜里望出来认为“阿Q相”的，偏偏不是真正的阿Q。
Recently, there have been a group of people in Shanghai who have been holding a ruler stick and desperately trying to find someone who "Ah Q Xiang" to vent their anger. Fortunately, this group of literati looked out of the colored myopic glasses and thought that they were "Ah Q", but they were not the real Ah Q.不知道是什么来历的何家干，看了我的《提倡辣椒救国》（见本刊十二号），认北方小孩的爱嗜辣椒，为“空前绝后”的“奇闻”。倘使我那位北方朋友告诉我，是吹的牛皮，那末，的确可以说空前。而何家干既不是数千年前的刘伯温，在某报上做文章，却是像在造《推背图》。北方小孩子爱嗜辣椒，若使可以算是“奇闻”，那么吸鸦片的父母，生育出来的婴孩，为什么也有烟瘾呢？
He Jiagan, who doesn't know where he came from, read my "Advocating Chili Peppers to Save the Country" (see No. 12 of this magazine), and recognized the love of chili peppers of northern children as "unprecedented" "anecdotes". If my northern friend told me that it was a bragging, then it could indeed be said to be unprecedented. And He Jiagan is not Liu Bowen thousands of years ago, making an article in a certain newspaper, but it is like making a "push back map". If the children in the north love chili peppers, if they can be regarded as "strange stories", then why do the parents who smoke opium and the babies born also have smoking addiction?何家干既抓不到可以出气的对象，他在扑了一个空之后，却还要振振有词，说什么：“倘使是真的，中国人可实在是一种与众不同的特别民族了。”
He Jiagan couldn't catch the object of his anger, and after he threw himself into the air, he still had to cheer up and say: "If it is true, the Chinese are really a special nation that is different." ”敢问何家干，戴了有色近视眼镜捧读《提倡辣椒救国》的时候，有没有看见“北方”两个字？（何家干既把有这两个字的句子，录在他的谈话里，显然的是看到了。）既已看到了，那末，请问斯德丁是不是可以代表整个的日耳曼？亚伯丁是不是可以代表整个的不列颠群岛？
Dare to ask He Jiagan, when he wore colored myopic glasses and read "Advocating Pepper to Save the Country", did he see the word "northern"? (He Jiagan recorded the sentence with these two words in his conversation, and obviously saw it.) Since we have seen it, can Stettin represent the whole of Germania? Can Aberdeen represent the whole British Isles?在这里我真怀疑，何家干的脑筋，怎的是这么简单？会前后矛盾到这个地步！
Here I really doubt, how can He Jiagan's brain be so simple? Will be inconsistent to this point!赵大爷和赵秀才一类的人，想结党来乱咬人。我可以先告诉他们：我和《辣椒与橄榄》的编者是素不相识的，我也从没有写过《黄人之血》，请何家干若使一定要咬我一口，我劝他再架一副可以透视的眼镜，认清了目标再咬。否则咬着了辣椒，哭笑不得的时候，我不能负责。
People like Uncle Zhao and Zhao Xiucai want to form a party to bite people. I can tell them first: I don't know the editor of "Peppers and Olives", and I have never written "Yellow Man's Blood", and I asked He Jiagan to bite me if he made it, and I advised him to put up another pair of glasses that could see through and recognize the target before biting. Otherwise, when I bite the pepper and cry or laugh, I can't be responsible.三月二十八日，《大晚报》副刊《辣椒与橄榄》。
On March 28, the "Great Evening News" supplement "Peppers and Olives" was issued.

止哭文学

【但到底是不行的】：[But it doesn't work in the end]: 这叫作愈出愈奇 This is called more and more strange
家干
Family dry斯德丁实在不可以代表整个的日耳曼的，北方也实在不可以代表全中国。然而北方的孩子不能用辣椒止哭，却是事实，也实在没有法子想。
Stettine really can't represent the whole of Germanic, and the north really can't represent all of China. However, it is a fact that children in the north cannot stop crying with chili peppers, and there is really no way to think about it.吸鸦片的父母生育出来的婴孩，也有烟瘾，是的确的。然而嗜辣椒的父母生育出来的婴孩，却没有辣椒瘾，和嗜醋者的孩子，没有醋瘾相同。这也是事实，无论谁都没有法子想。
Babies born to parents who smoke opium also have smoking addiction, yes, that's right. However, the baby born to a chili lover parent does not have a chili addiction, which is the same as the children of a jealous person who do not have a vinegar addiction. This is also a fact, no one has a way to think about it.凡事实，靠发少爷脾气是还是改不过来的。格里莱阿说地球在回旋，教徒要烧死他，他怕死，将主张取消了。但地球仍然在回旋。为什么呢？就因为地球是实在在回旋的缘故。
All facts cannot be changed by relying on the young master's temper. Grillaea said that the earth was spinning and that the cultists were going to burn him, and he was afraid of death and canceled the claim. But the earth is still spinning. Why? Because the earth is really whirlwinding.所以，即使我不反对，倘将辣椒塞在哭着的北方（！）孩子的嘴里，他不但不止，还要哭得更加厉害的。
So, even if I don't object, if you stuff the pepper in the crying north (!) In the child's mouth, not only did he cry even harder.七月十九日。July 19th.

“人话”

“人话”

“人话”

"People talk."记得荷兰的作家望蔼覃（F．Van Eeden）——可惜他去年死掉了——所做的童话《小约翰》里，记着小约翰听两种菌类相争论，从旁批评了一句“你们俩都是有毒的”，菌们便惊喊道：“你是人么？这是人话呵！”
I remember the fairy tale "Little John" made by the Dutch writer F. Van Eeden - unfortunately he died last year - in which little John listened to two fungi arguing and criticized "You both are poisonous", and the fungi exclaimed: "Are you human? This is human words! ”从菌类的立场看起来，的确应该惊喊的。人类因为要吃它们，才首先注意于有毒或无毒，但在菌们自己，这却完全没有关系，完全不成问题。
From the standpoint of the fungus, it should indeed be exclaimed. Because humans want to eat them, they first pay attention to whether they are poisonous or non-toxic, but in the bacteria themselves, this is completely irrelevant and not a problem at all.虽是意在给人科学知识的书籍或文章，为要讲得有趣，也往往太说些“人话”。这毛病，是连法布耳（J．H．Fabre）做的大名鼎鼎的《昆虫记》（Souvenirs Entomologiques），也是在所不免的。随手抄撮的东西不必说了。近来在杂志上偶然看见一篇教青年以生物学上的知识的文章，内有这样的叙述——
Although books or articles are intended to give people scientific knowledge, in order to be interesting, they often speak too much "human language". This problem is inevitable even in J.H. Fabre's famous "Souvenirs Entomologiques". Needless to say, what is copied casually. Recently, I happened to see an article in a magazine teaching young people about biology, which contained this narrative -“鸟粪蜘蛛……形体既似鸟粪，又能伏着不动，自己假做鸟粪的样子。”
"Guano spider...... The body is like bird droppings, and it can lie still and pretend to be bird droppings. ”“动物界中，要残食自己亲丈夫的很多，但最有名的，要算前面所说的蜘蛛和现今要说的螳螂了。……”
"In the animal kingdom, there are many people who want to eat their own husbands, but the most famous ones are the spiders mentioned above and the mantis that we are talking about today. ……”这也未免太说了“人话”。鸟粪蜘蛛只是形体原像鸟粪，性又不大走动罢了，并非它故意装作鸟粪模样，意在欺骗小虫豸。螳螂界中也尚无五伦之说，它在交尾中吃掉雄的，只是肚子饿了，在吃东西，何尝知道这东西就是自己的家主公。但经用“人话”一写，一个就成了阴谋害命的凶犯，一个是谋死亲夫的毒妇了。实则都是冤枉的。
This is too much "human language". The guano spider is just like bird droppings in its original form, and it doesn't move around much, not that it deliberately pretends to be bird droppings, intending to deceive the little bugs. There is no theory of the five ethics in the mantis world, it eats the male in mating, but it is hungry, eating, how can it know that this thing is its own master. But after writing in "human words", one became a murderer who conspired to kill, and the other was a poisonous woman who murdered her husband. In fact, they are all wronged.“人话”之中，又有各种的“人话”：有英人话，有华人话。华人话中又有各种：有“高等华人话”，有“下等华人话”。浙西有一个讥笑乡下女人之无知的笑话——
Among the "human dialects", there are various "human dialects": there are British dialects and Chinese dialects. There are various Chinese dialects: there are "higher Chinese dialects" and "lower Chinese dialects". There is a joke in western Zhejiang that ridicules the ignorance of rural women -“是大热天的正午，一个农妇做事做得正苦，忽而叹道：‘皇后娘娘真不知道多么快活。这时还不是在床上睡午觉，醒过来的时候，就叫道：太监，拿个柿饼来！’”
"It was noon on a hot day, and a peasant woman was working hard, and suddenly sighed: 'The queen really doesn't know how happy she is. At this time, he was not taking a nap in bed, and when he woke up, he shouted: Eunuch, bring me a persimmon! ’”然而这并不是“下等华人话”，倒是高等华人意中的“下等华人话”，所以其实是“高等华人话”。在下等华人自己，那时也许未必这么说，即使这么说，也并不以为笑话的。
However, this is not "inferior Chinese", but "inferior Chinese" in the minds of higher Chinese, so it is actually "Higher Chinese". The inferior Chinese themselves may not have said this at that time, and even if they said so, they didn't think it was a joke.再说下去，就要引起阶级文学的麻烦来了，“带住”。
If you continue, you will cause trouble with class literature, "bring it".现在很有些人做书，格式是写给青年或少年的信。自然，说的一定是“人话”了。但不知道是那一种“人话”？为什么不写给年龄更大的人们？年龄大了就不屑教诲么？还是青年和少年比较的纯厚，容易诓骗呢？
Nowadays, many people make books in the form of letters to youth or teenagers. Naturally, it must be "human words". But I don't know what kind of "human language" it is? Why not write for older people? Do you disdain to teach when you are old? Or is it that young people and teenagers are more pure and easy to deceive?三月二十一日。
March 21.

出卖灵魂的秘诀

出卖灵魂的秘诀

出卖灵魂的秘诀

The secret to selling your soul几年前，胡适博士曾经玩过一套“五鬼闹中华”的把戏，那是说：这世界上并无所谓帝国主义之类在侵略中国，倒是中国自己该着“贫穷”，“愚昧”……等五个鬼，闹得大家不安宁。现在，胡适博士又发见了第六个鬼，叫做仇恨。这个鬼不但闹中华，而且祸延友邦，闹到东京去了。因此，胡适博士对症发药，预备向“日本朋友”上条陈。
A few years ago, Dr. Hu Shi played a trick of "five ghosts making trouble in China", that is, he said: There is no so-called imperialism in this world that is invading China, but China itself should be "poor" and "ignorant"...... and five other ghosts, making everyone uneasy. Now, Dr. Hu Shi has discovered a sixth ghost, called hatred. This ghost not only caused trouble in China, but also caused trouble for friendly countries and went to Tokyo. Therefore, Dr. Hu Shi prescribed the right medicine and prepared to report to his "Japanese friend".据博士说：“日本军阀在中国暴行所造成之仇恨，到今日已颇难消除”，“而日本决不能用暴力征服中国”（见报载胡适之的最近谈话，下同）。这是值得忧虑的：难道真的没有方法征服中国么？不，法子是有的。“九世之仇，百年之友，均在觉悟不觉悟之关系头上，”——“日本只有一个方法可以征服中国，即悬崖勒马，彻底停止侵略中国，反过来征服中国民族的心。”
According to the doctor, "the hatred caused by the atrocities of the Japanese warlords in China is quite difficult to eliminate today", and "Japan must not conquer China by violence" (see Hu Shizhi's recent conversation, the same below). This is worrying: Is there really no way to conquer China? No, there is a way. "The feud of nine generations and the friend of a hundred years are all at the head of the relationship between enlightenment and unenlightenment," - "Japan has only one way to conquer China, that is, to rein in the precipice, completely stop aggression against China, and in turn conquer the heart of the Chinese nation. ”这据说是“征服中国的唯一方法”。不错，古代的儒教军师，总说“以德服人者王，其心诚服也”。胡适博士不愧为日本帝国主义的军师。但是，从中国小百姓方面说来，这却是出卖灵魂的唯一秘诀。中国小百姓实在“愚昧”，原不懂得自己的“民族性”，所以他们一向会仇恨，如果日本陛下大发慈悲，居然采用胡博士的条陈，那么，所谓“忠孝仁爱信义和平”的中国固有文化，就可以恢复：——因为日本不用暴力而用软功的王道，中国民族就不至于再生仇恨，因为没有仇恨，自然更不抵抗，因为更不抵抗，自然就更和平，更忠孝……中国的肉体固然买到了，中国的灵魂也被征服了。
This is said to be "the only way to conquer China". Yes, the ancient Confucian military strategists always said that "the king who convinces people with virtue is also sincerely convinced". Dr. Hu Shi is worthy of being a military advisor to Japanese imperialism. However, from the perspective of the Chinese people, this is the only secret to selling their souls. If His Majesty the Japanese show great mercy and actually adopt Dr. Hu's statement, then the so-called "loyalty, filial piety, benevolence, trust, righteousness, and peace" Chinese inherent culture can be restored: ——Because Japan does not use violence but uses soft skills, the Chinese nation will not regenerate hatred, because there is no hatred, naturally there will be no resistance, because there is no resistance, naturally it will be more peaceful and more loyal and filial...... Although the Chinese body was bought, the Chinese soul was also conquered.可惜的是这“唯一方法”的实行，完全要靠日本陛下的觉悟。如果不觉悟，那又怎么办？胡博士回答道：“到无可奈何之时，真的接受一种耻辱的城下之盟”好了。那真是无可奈何的呵——因为那时候“仇恨鬼”是不肯走的，这始终是中国民族性的污点，即为日本计，也非万全之道。
Unfortunately, the implementation of this "only method" depends entirely on the consciousness of His Majesty Japan. If you don't realize it, what will you do? Dr. Hu replied, "When there is no choice, really accept a shameful alliance under the city." That's really helpless - because at that time, the "hatred ghosts" refused to leave, which was always a stain on China's national character, even for Japan, and it was not a foolproof way.因此，胡博士准备出席太平洋会议，再去“忠告”一次他的日本朋友：征服中国并不是没有法子的，请接受我们出卖的灵魂罢，何况这并不难，所谓“彻底停止侵略”，原只要执行“公平的”李顿报告——仇恨自然就消除了！
Therefore, Dr. Hu is ready to attend the Pacific Conference and "advise" his Japanese friends again: There is no way to conquer China, please accept our betrayed souls, not to mention that this is not difficult, the so-called "complete cessation of aggression", as long as the "fair" Lytton report is implemented - the hatred will naturally be eliminated!三月二十二日。
March 22.

文人无文

文人无文

文人无文

Literati have no literature在一种姓“大”的报的副刊上，有一位“姓张的”在“要求中国有为的青年，切勿借了‘文人无行’的幌子，犯着可诟病的恶癖。”这实在是对透了的。但那“无行”的界说，可又严紧透顶了。据说：“所谓无行，并不一定是指不规则或不道德的行为，凡一切不近人情的恶劣行为，也都包括在内。”
In the supplement of a newspaper surnamed "Da", there was a "surnamed Zhang" who asked promising young people in China not to commit reprehensible vices under the guise of 'literati are incompetent'. "This is really right. But the boundary of "no action" is strict again. It is said: "The so-called inaction does not necessarily refer to irregular or immoral behavior, but also includes all impersonal and bad behavior." ”接着就举了一些日本文人的“恶癖”的例子，来作中国的有为的青年的殷鉴，一条是“宫地嘉六爱用指爪搔头发”，还有一条是“金子洋文喜舐嘴唇”。
Then I gave some examples of the "vices" of Japanese literati to serve as a mirror of China's promising youth, one is "Miyaji Yoroku loves to scratch his hair with his fingernails", and the other is "Kaneko Hirofumi likes to lick his lips".自然，嘴唇干和头皮痒，古今的圣贤都不称它为美德，但好像也没有斥为恶德的。不料一到中国上海的现在，爱搔喜舐，即使是自己的嘴唇和头发罢，也成了“不近人情的恶劣行为”了。如果不舒服，也只好熬着。要做有为的青年或文人，真是一天一天的艰难起来了。
Naturally, dry lips and itchy scalp are not called virtues by ancient and modern sages, but they do not seem to denounce them as vices. Unexpectedly, as soon as I arrived in Shanghai, China, I love to scratch and lick, even my lips and hair, which has become "impersonal and bad behavior". If you don't feel comfortable, you have to endure. To be a promising young man or literati is really difficult day by day.但中国文人的“恶癖”，其实并不在这些，只要他写得出文章来，或搔或舐，都不关紧要，“不近人情”的并不是“文人无行”，而是“文人无文”。
But the "vices" of Chinese literati are actually not these, as long as he can write articles, or scratch or lick, it doesn't matter, what is "unkind" is not "literati have no virtue", but "literati have no literature".我们在两三年前，就看见刊物上说某诗人到西湖吟诗去了，某文豪在做五十万字的小说了，但直到现在，除了并未预告的一部《子夜》而外，别的大作都没有出现。
Two or three years ago, we saw in publications that a certain poet went to West Lake to recite poetry, and a certain writer was writing a novel of 500,000 words, but until now, except for the unannounced "Midnight", no other masterpieces have appeared.拾些琐事，做本随笔的是有的；改首古文，算是自作的是有的。讲一通昏话，称为评论；编几张期刊，暗捧自己的是有的。收罗猥谈，写成下作；聚集旧文，印作评传的是有的。甚至于翻些外国文坛消息，就成为世界文学史家；凑一本文学家辞典，连自己也塞在里面，就成为世界的文人的也有。然而，现在到底也都是中国的金字招牌的“文人”。
There are some who pick up trivial matters and make essays; Changing the ancient text is considered to be self-made. Talking a foolish word is called a comment; Edit a few journals, and secretly praise your own. collect obscene talk and write it into the next work; There are old texts that are collected and printed as commentaries. even flipping through some foreign literary news, he became a world literary historian; Make up a dictionary of literati, and even stuff yourself into it, and you will become the literati of the world. However, now they are all "literati" of China's golden signboard.文人不免无文，武人也一样不武。说是“枕戈待旦”的，到夜还没有动身，说是“誓死抵抗”的，看见一百多个敌兵就逃走了。只是通电宣言之类，却大做其骈体，“文”得异乎寻常。“偃武修文”，古有明训，文星全照到营子里去了。于是我们的“文人”，就只好不舐嘴唇，不搔头发，揣摩人情，单落得一个“有行”完事。
Literati are inevitably uncultured, and warriors are also not martial arts. It was said that he was "waiting for dawn", but he did not set off at night, and he said that he was "swearing to resist to the death", and fled when he saw more than a hundred enemy soldiers. It's just an electrified declaration, but it is a big way, and the "culture" is extraordinary. "Yanwu Xiuwen", there was a clear instruction in ancient times, and the literary stars were all illuminated into the camp. So our "literati" had no choice but not to lick their lips, not scratch their hair, figure out human feelings, and end up with a "good deed".三月二十八日。
March 28.

文人无文

【备考】：[Remarks]: 恶癖 Bad habit
若谷
Ruo Gu“文人无行”久为一般人所诟病。
"Literati have no virtue" has long been criticized by ordinary people.所谓“无行”，并不一定是不规则或不道德的行为，凡一切不近人情的恶劣行为，也都包括在内。
The so-called "no deeds" are not necessarily irregular or immoral behavior, but also include all impersonal and bad behavior.只要是人，谁都容易沾染不良的习惯，特别是文人，因为专心文字著作的缘故，在日常生活方面，自然免不了有怪异的举动，而且，或者也因为工作劳苦的缘故，十人中九人是染着不良嗜好，最普通的，是喜欢服用刺激神经的兴奋剂，卷烟与咖啡，是成为现代文人流行的嗜好品了。
As long as it is a person, everyone is prone to bad habits, especially literati, because of concentrating on written works, in daily life, it is inevitable that there will be strange behaviors, and, or because of hard work, nine out of ten people are infected with bad habits, the most common is to like to take stimulants that stimulate the nerves, cigarettes and coffee, which have become popular hobbies of modern literati.现代的日本文人，除了抽烟喝咖啡之外，各人都犯着各样的怪奇恶癖。前田河广一郎爱酒若命，醉后呶鸣不休；谷崎润一郎爱闻女人的体臭和尝女人的痰涕；今东光喜欢自炫学问宣传自己；金子洋文喜舐嘴唇；细田源吉喜作猥谈，朝食后熟睡二小时；宫地嘉六爱用指爪搔头发；宇野浩二醺醉后侮慢侍妓；林房雄有奸通癖；山本有三乘电车时喜横膝斜坐；胜本清一郎谈话时喜用拇指挖鼻孔。形形色色，不胜枚举。
Modern Japanese literati, in addition to smoking and drinking coffee, all commit all kinds of strange and vicious habits. Maeda Kawa Hiroichiro loves wine like his life, and he keeps screaming after getting drunk; Junichiro Tanizaki loves to smell women's body odor and taste women's phlegm; Jin Dongguang likes to show off his knowledge and promote himself; Kaneko Hirofumi likes to lick his lips; Genkichi Hosoda liked to talk lewdly and fell asleep for two hours after breakfast; Miyaji Jialoku loves to scratch his hair with his fingers; Uno Koji insulted the prostitute after getting drunk; Lin Fangxiong has an adulterous habit; Yamamoto has three trains and likes to sit cross-legged when he sits cross-legged; Seiichiro Katsumoto likes to pick his nose with his thumb when talking. The list goes on.日本现代文人所犯的恶癖，正和中国旧时文人辜鸿鸣喜闻女人金莲同样的可厌，我要求现代中国有为的青年，不但是文人，都要保持着健全的精神，切勿借了“文人无行”的幌子，再犯着和日本文人同样可诟病的恶癖。
I ask the promising young people of modern China, not only literati, but also to maintain a sound spirit, and never use the guise of "literati have no virtue" and commit the same reprehensible vices as Japanese literati.三月九日，《大晚报》副刊《辣椒与橄榄》。
On March 9, the "Big Evening News" supplement "Peppers and Olives".

文人无文

【风凉话？】：[Sarcastic words? ]:第四种人 The fourth type of person
周木斋
Zhou Muzhai四月四日《申报》《自由谈》，载有何家干先生《文人无文》一文，论中国的文人，有云：
On April 4, the "Declaration" and "Free Talk" contained Mr. He Jiagan's article "Literati Without Literature", discussing Chinese literati, and there are words:“‘不近人情’的并不是‘文人无行’，而是‘文人无文’。拾些琐事，做本随笔的是有的；改首古文，算是自作是有的。进一通昏话，称为评论；编几张期刊，暗捧自己的是有的。收罗猥谈，写成下作；聚集旧文，印作评传的是有的。甚至于翻些外国文坛消息，就成为世界文学史专家；凑一本文学家辞典，连自己也塞在里面，就成为世界的文人的也有。然而，现在到底也都是中国的金字招牌的文人。”
"What is 'unkind' is not 'literati have no virtue', but 'literati have no literature'. There are some who pick up trivial matters and make essays; Changing the ancient text is considered self-made. a faint conversation is called a comment; Edit a few journals, and secretly praise your own. collect obscene talk and write it into the next work; There are old texts that are collected and printed as commentaries. even flipping through some foreign literary news, he became an expert in the history of world literature; Make up a dictionary of literati, and even stuff yourself into it, and you will become the literati of the world. However, they are all literati with China's golden signboards. ”诚如这文所说，“这实在是对透了的”。
As this article says, "This is really true".然而例外的是：
However, the exceptions are:“直到现在，除了并未预告的一部《子夜》而外，别的大作却没有出现。”
"Until now, except for the unannounced "Midnight", no other masterpieces have appeared.“文”的“界说”，也可借用同文的话，“可又严紧透顶了”。
The "boundary theory" of "Wen" can also be borrowed from the same text, "but it is strict again".这文的动机，从开首的几句，可以知道直接是因“一种姓‘大’的副刊上一位‘姓×的’”关于“文人无行”的话而起的。此外，听说“何家干”就是鲁迅先生的笔名。
The motivation of this article, from the first few sentences, can be seen directly from the words of "a 'surname ×' in a supplement surnamed 'Da'" about "literati have no virtue". In addition, I heard that "He Jiagan" is the pseudonym of Mr. Lu Xun.可是议论虽“对透”，“文”的“界说”虽“严紧透顶”，但正惟因为这样，却不提防也把自己套在里面了；纵然鲁迅先生是以“第四种人”自居的。
However, although the discussion is "transparent", and although the "boundary theory" of "literature" is "strict and thorough", it is precisely because of this that it does not guard against it and puts itself in it; Even though Mr. Lu Xun considers himself a "fourth kind of person".中国文坛的充实而又空虚，无可讳言也不必讳言。不过在矮子中间找长人，比较还是有的。我们企望先进比企图谁某总要深切些，正因熟田比荒地总要容易收获些。以鲁迅先生的素养及过去的造就，总还不失为中国的金钢钻招牌的文人吧。但近年来又是怎样？单就他个人的发展而言，却中画了，现在不下一道罪己诏，顶倒置身事外，说些风凉话，这是“第四种人”了。名的成人！
The richness and emptiness of the Chinese literary world are undeniable and needless to say. However, there are still comparisons between short people and tall people. We hope to be advanced more deeply than to try someone, because ripe fields are always easier to harvest than wasteland. With Mr. Lu Xun's quality and past achievements, he is always a literati who is China's diamond signboard. But what about in recent years? As far as his personal development is concerned, he has been in the middle of the painting, and now he does not make a crime edict, stands upside down from the matter, and says some sarcastic words, which is the "fourth type of person". The name of the adult!“不近人情”的固是“文人无文”，最要紧的还是“文人不行”（“行”为动词）。“进，吾往也！”
"Unkind" is "literati are not literate", and the most important thing is "literati are not good" ("line" is a verb). "Come in, I'll go!"四月十五日，《涛声》二卷十四期。
April 15, "The Sound of the Waves", Vol. 2, No. 14.

文人无文

【乘凉】：[Enjoying the coolness]: 两误一不同 The two mistakes are different
家干
Family dry这位木斋先生对我有两种误解，和我的意见有一点不同。
This Mr. Muzhai has two misunderstandings about me, which are a little different from my opinion.第一是关于“文”的界说。我的这篇杂感，是由《大晚报》副刊上的《恶癖》而来的，而那篇中所举的文人，都是小说作者。这事木斋先生明明知道，现在混而言之者，大约因为作文要紧，顾不及这些了罢，《第四种人》这题目，也实在时新得很。
The first is the theory of the world of "literature". My miscellaneous feelings came from "Vice" in the supplement of the "Evening News", and the literati mentioned in that article are all novel authors. Mr. Muzhai clearly knows that the current confuse is probably because the composition is important, and he doesn't care about these, and the topic of "The Fourth Kind of People" is really very new.第二是要我下“罪己诏”。我现在作一个无聊的声明：何家干诚然就是鲁迅，但并没有做皇帝。不过好在这样误解的人们也并不多。
The second is to ask me to issue an "edict to blame myself". I will now make a boring statement: He Jiagan is indeed Lu Xun, but he is not an emperor. But fortunately, there are not many people who misunderstand this.意见不同之点，是：凡有所指责时，木斋先生以自己包括在内为“风凉话”；我以自己不包括在内为“风凉话”，如身居上海，而责北平的学生应该赴难，至少是不逃难之类。
The differences of opinion are: when there is an accusation, Mr. Muzhai uses his own inclusion as "sarcastic remarks"; I think that I am not included as a "sarcastic remark", such as living in Shanghai, and blaming the students in Peking for going to the disaster, at least not fleeing.但由这一篇文章，我可实在得了很大的益处。就是：凡有指摘社会全体的症结的文字，论者往往谓之“骂人”。先前我是很以为奇的。至今才知道一部分人们的意见，是认为这类文章，决不含自己在内，因为如果兼包自己，是应该自下罪己诏的，现在没有诏书而有攻击，足见所指责的全是别人了，于是乎谓之“骂”。且从而群起而骂之，使其人背着一切所指摘的症结，沉入深渊，而天下于是乎太平。
But from this article, I really benefited a lot. That is, any text that points out the crux of society as a whole is often called "scolding" by commentators. I was very surprised before. I have only known that some people's opinions are that this kind of article will never include themselves, because if they include themselves, they should be punished by themselves, and now there is no edict and there is an attack, which shows that all the accusations are others, so it is called "scolding". And then they rose up and scolded him, so that he carried all the crux of the accusations and sank into the abyss, and the world was peaceful.七月十九日。July 19th.

最艺术的国家

最艺术的国家

最艺术的国家

The most artistic country我们中国的最伟大最永久，而且最普遍的“艺术”是男人扮女人。这艺术的可贵，是在于两面光，或谓之“中庸”——男人看见“扮女人”，女人看见“男人扮”。表面上是中性，骨子里当然还是男的。然而如果不扮，还成艺术么？譬如说，中国的固有文化是科举制度，外加捐班之类。当初说这太不像民权，不合时代潮流，于是扮成了中华民国。然而这民国年久失修，连招牌都已经剥落殆尽，仿佛花旦脸上的脂粉。同时，老实的民众真个要起政权来了，竟想革掉科甲出身和捐班出身的参政权。这对于民族是不忠，对于祖宗是不孝，实属反动之至。现在早已回到恢复固有文化的“时代潮流”，那能放任这种不忠不孝。因此，更不能不重新扮过一次，草案如下：第一，谁有代表国民的资格，须由考试决定。第二，考出了举人之后，再来挑选一次，此之谓选（动词）举人；而被挑选的举人，自然是被选举人了。照文法而论，这样的国民大会的选举人，应称为“选举人者”，而被选举人，应称为“被选之举人”。但是，如果不扮，还成艺术么？因此，他们得扮成宪政国家的选举的人和被选举人，虽则实质上还是秀才和举人。这草案的深意就在这里：叫民众看见是民权，而民族祖宗看见是忠孝——忠于固有科举的民族，孝于制定科举的祖宗。此外，像上海已经实现的民权，是纳税的方有权选举和被选，使偌大上海只剩四千四百六十五个大市民。这虽是捐班——有钱的为主，然而他们一定会考中举人，甚至不补考也会赐同进士出身的，因为洋大人膝下的榜样，理应遵照，何况这也并不是一面违背固有文化，一面又扮得很像宪政民权呢？此其一。
The greatest, most permanent and most common "art" in China is that men pretend to be women. The value of this art lies in the two sides of light, or the so-called "golden mean" - men see "pretending to be women", and women see "men pretending". On the surface, he is neutral, but of course he is still male in his bones. However, if you don't pretend, is it still art? For example, China's inherent culture is the imperial examination system, plus class donations. At the beginning, it was said that this was too unlike civil rights and not in line with the trend of the times, so it was pretended to be the Republic of China. However, the Republic of China has been in disrepair, and even the signboard has peeled off, like the powder on Hua Dan's face. At the same time, the honest people really want to come to power, and they actually want to abolish the right to participate in politics from the first class and the donation class. This is disloyal to the nation and unfilial to the ancestors, which is really reactionary. Now it has long returned to the "trend of the times" to restore the inherent culture, which can allow this kind of disloyalty and unfilial piety. Therefore, it is impossible not to redress it once, and the draft is as follows: First, who has the qualifications to represent the people must be determined by the examination. second, after the examination of the candidate, select again, which is called selecting (verb) the candidate; And the selected scholar is naturally the elected. According to the law, the electors of such a national congress should be called "electors", and the electors should be called "elected candidates". But if you don't pretend, is it still art? Therefore, they have to pretend to be elected and elected in a constitutional state, although they are essentially scholars and scholars. The deep meaning of this draft is here: let the people see that it is civil rights, and the ancestors of the nation see that it is loyalty and filial piety - loyal to the nation that is loyal to the inherent imperial examination, and filial piety to the ancestors who formulated the imperial examination. In addition, civil rights like those that have been realized in Shanghai are the right of taxpayers to vote and be elected, leaving only 4,465 citizens in the huge Shanghai. Although this is a donation class - the rich are the main, but they will definitely pass the examination, and even if they do not make up the exam, they will be given the same Jinshi background, because the example under the knees of foreigners should be followed, not to mention that this is not against the inherent culture, and on the other hand, it is very similar to constitutional civil rights? This is one of them.其二，一面交涉，一面抵抗：从这一方面看过去是抵抗，从那一面看过来其实是交涉。其三，一面做实业家，银行家，一面自称“小贫而已”。其四，一面日货销路复旺，一面对人说是“国货年”……诸如此类，不胜枚举，而大都是扮演得十分巧妙，两面光滑的。
Second, negotiate and resist on the other: from this side, it is resistance in the past, but from that side, it is actually negotiation. Third, while being an industrialist and banker, he claims to be "just a little poor". Fourth, on the one hand, the sales of Japanese goods are booming, and on the other hand, it is said to be the "year of domestic products"...... And so on, and so on, and most of them are very cleverly played and smooth on both sides.呵，中国真是个最艺术的国家，最中庸的民族。
Oh, China is really the most artistic country and the most moderate nation.然而小百姓还要不满意，呜呼，君子之中庸，小人之反中庸也！
However, the common people are still dissatisfied, alas, the doctrine of the gentleman, and the anti-moderation of the villain!三月三十日。
March 30th.

现代史

现代史

现代史

Modern从我有记忆的时候起，直到现在，凡我所曾经到过的地方，在空地上，常常看见有“变把戏”的，也叫作“变戏法”的。
From the time I can remember, until now, wherever I have been, in the open space, I often see "tricks", also called "tricks".这变戏法的，大概只有两种——
There are probably only two kinds of tricks -一种，是教一个猴子戴起假面，穿上衣服，耍一通刀枪；骑了羊跑几圈。还有一匹用稀粥养活，已经瘦得皮包骨头的狗熊玩一些把戏。末后是向大家要钱。
One is to teach a monkey to wear a mask, put on clothes, and play a knife and gun; Ride a sheep for a few laps. There is also a bear that is fed with gruel and is already skinny. In the end, it is to ask everyone for money.一种，是将一块石头放在空盒子里，用手巾左盖右盖，变出一只白鸽来；还有将纸塞在嘴巴里，点上火，从嘴角鼻孔里冒出烟焰。其次是向大家要钱。要了钱之后，一个人嫌少，装腔作势的不肯变了，一个人来劝他，对大家说再五个。果然有人抛钱了，于是再四个，三个……
One is to put a stone in an empty box, cover it with a handkerchief on the left and right, and conjure up a white dove; There is also the paper stuffed in the mouth, the fire is lit, and smoke comes out of the nostrils of the corner of the mouth. The second is to ask everyone for money. After asking for money, one person was too little, and he refused to change, so one person came to persuade him and said five more to everyone. Sure enough, someone threw money, so four more, three ......抛足之后，戏法就又开了场。这回是将一个孩子装进小口的坛子里面去，只见一条小辫子，要他再出来，又要钱。收足之后，不知怎么一来，大人用尖刀将孩子刺死了，盖上被单，直挺挺躺着，要他活过来，又要钱。
After throwing the foot, the trick started again. This time I put a child into a small jar, and I saw a pigtail, asking him to come out again and ask for money. After collecting his feet, somehow, the adult stabbed the child to death with a sharp knife, covered him with a sheet, lay up straight, and asked him to come back to life and ask for money.“在家靠父母，出家靠朋友……Huazaa！Huazaa！”变戏法的装出撒钱的手势，严肃而悲哀的说。
"Rely on your parents at home, rely on your friends when you become a monk...... Huazaa！ Huazaa！ The trick pretended to be a gesture of throwing money, and said seriously and sadly.别的孩子，如果走近去想仔细的看，他是要骂的；再不听，他就会打。
Other children, if they get closer and look closely, they will scold them; If you don't listen, he will fight.果然有许多人Huazaa了。待到数目和预料的差不多，他们就检起钱来，收拾家伙，死孩子也自己爬起来，一同走掉了。
Sure enough, there are many people who are Huazaa. When the number was about the same as expected, they picked up the money, packed up the guys, and the dead child got up and walked away together.看客们也就呆头呆脑的走散。
The spectators were also separated in a daze.这空地上，暂时是沉寂了。过了些时，就又来这一套。俗语说，“戏法人人会变，各有巧妙不同。”其实是许多年间，总是这一套，也总有人看，总有人Huazaa，不过其间必须经过沉寂的几日。
In this open space, there was silence for the time being. After a while, this set came again. As the saying goes, "Everyone will change, and each has its own ingenuity." "In fact, for many years, it is always this set, and there are always people watching, and there are always people who are Huazaa, but there must be a few days of silence in between.我的话说完了，意思也浅得很，不过说大家Huazaa Huazaa一通之后，又要静几天了，然后再来这一套。
After my words are finished, the meaning is very shallow, but it is said that after everyone Huazaa Huazaa, it will be quiet for a few more days, and then come to this set.到这里我才记得写错了题目，这真是成了“不死不活”的东西。
Only then did I remember that I wrote the wrong title, which really became a "dead and not alive" thing.四月一日。
April 1st.

推背图

推背图

推背图

Push back picture我这里所用的“推背”的意思，是说：从反面来推测未来的情形。
The meaning of "pushing back" here is to speculate on the future situation from the opposite side.上月的《自由谈》里，就有一篇《正面文章反看法》，这是令人毛骨悚然的文字。因为得到这一个结论的时候，先前一定经过许多苦楚的经验，见过许多可怜的牺牲。本草家提起笔来，写道：砒霜，大毒。字不过四个，但他却确切知道了这东西曾经毒死过若干性命的了。
In last month's "Free Talk", there was an article "Positive Articles and Negative Views", which is a creepy text. Because when you come to this conclusion, you must have gone through many painful experiences and seen many pitiful sacrifices. The herbalist picked up the pen and wrote: Arsenic, great poison. There were only four words, but he knew exactly that this thing had poisoned several lives.里巷间有一个笑话：某甲将银子三十两埋在地里面，怕人知道，就在上面竖一块木板，写道：“此地无银三十两。”隔壁的阿二因此却将这掘去了，也怕人发觉，就在木板的那一面添上一句道，“隔壁阿二勿曾偷。”这就是在教人“正面文章反看法”。
There is a joke in the alley: a certain person buried thirty taels of silver in the ground, afraid that people would find out, so he erected a wooden board on it and wrote: "There is no thirty taels of silver here." Ah Er next door dug it up because of this, and he was afraid that people would find out, so he added a sentence on the other side of the board, "Don't steal Ah Er next door." This is teaching people to "positive articles and negative views".但我们日日所见的文章，却不能这么简单。有明说要做，其实不做的；有明说不做，其实要做的；有明说做这样，其实做那样的；有其实自己要这么做，倒说别人要这么做的；有一声不响，而其实倒做了的。然而也有说这样，竟这样的。难就在这地方。
But the articles we see every day cannot be so simple. There are things that are clearly said to be done, but are not actually done; There are things that are clearly said not to be done, but in fact to be done; You say to do this, but in fact do that; In fact, I want to do this, but I say that others want to do it; There was a silence, but in fact, it was done the other way around. However, there are also those who say this, and they are like this. The difficulty lies in this place.例如近几天报章上记载着的要闻罢：
For example, the news recorded in the newspapers in recent days:一，××军在××血战，杀敌××××人。
First, the ×× army fought bloody battles in ×× and killed ×××× enemies.二，××谈话：决不与日本直接交涉，仍然不改初衷，抵抗到底。
2. ×× talk: Never negotiate directly with Japan, still do not change its original intention, and resist to the end.三，芳泽来华，据云系私人事件。
Third, Fangze came to China, which is said to be a private matter.四，共党联日，该伪中央已派干部××赴日接洽。
Fourth, on the day of the Communist Party, the puppet central government has sent cadres ×× to Japan to contact.五，××××……
V, ××××......倘使都当反面文章看，可就太骇人了。但报上也有“莫干山路草棚船百余只大火”，“××××廉价只有四天了”等大概无须“推背”的记载，于是乎我们就又胡涂起来。
If you read it as a negative article, it will be too scary. But there are also records in the newspaper that "more than 100 thatched hut boats on Moganshan Road caught fire", "×××× cheap is only four days", etc., so we started to scribble again.听说，《推背图》本是灵验的，某朝某帝怕他淆惑人心，就添了些假造的在里面，因此弄得不能预知了，必待事实证明之后，人们这才恍然大悟。
I heard that the "Tui Bei Tu" was originally effective, and a certain emperor of a certain dynasty was afraid that he would confuse people's hearts, so he added some fakes to it, so it was impossible to predict, and it had to be proven before people suddenly realized.我们也只好等着看事实，幸而大概是不很久的，总出不了今年。
We have to wait to see the facts, but fortunately, it won't be long, and it won't be this year.四月二日。
April 2nd.

《杀错了人》异议

《杀错了人》异议

《杀错了人》异议

"Killing the Wrong Person" objected看了曹聚仁先生的一篇《杀错了人》，觉得很痛快，但往回一想，又觉得有些还不免是愤激之谈了，所以想提出几句异议——
After reading Mr. Cao Juren's article "Killing the Wrong Person", I felt very happy, but when I thought about it, I felt that some of it was inevitably indignant, so I wanted to raise a few objections -袁世凯在辛亥革命之后，大杀党人，从袁世凯那方面看来，是一点没有杀错的，因为他正是一个假革命的反革命者。
Yuan Shikai killed party members after the Xinhai Revolution, and from Yuan Shikai's point of view, he was not wrong at all, because he was a counter-revolutionary of a false revolution.错的是革命者受了骗，以为他真是一个筋斗，从北洋大臣变了革命家了，于是引为同调，流了大家的血，将他浮上总统的宝位去。到二次革命时，表面上好像他又是一个筋斗，从“国民公仆”变了吸血魔王似的。其实不然，他不过又显了本相。
The wrong thing is that the revolutionary was deceived, thinking that he was really a somersault, and changed from a minister of Beiyang to a revolutionary, so he was introduced as a conspirator, shed everyone's blood, and floated him to the throne of the president. By the time of the Second Revolution, it seemed as if he was a somersault again, from a "servant of the people" to a vampire demon king. In fact, he just showed his true self.于是杀，杀，杀。北京城里，连饭店客栈中，都满布了侦探；还有“军政执法处”，只见受了嫌疑而被捕的青年送进去，却从不见他们活着走出来；还有，《政府公报》上，是天天看见党人脱党的广告，说是先前为友人所拉，误入该党，现在自知迷谬，从此脱离，要洗心革面的做好人了。
So kill, kill, kill. In Beijing, even hotels and inns are full of detectives; There is also the "Military and Political Law Enforcement Office", where young people who were arrested on suspicion were sent in, but they were never seen come out alive; In addition, in the "Government Gazette", I saw advertisements for party members leaving the party every day, saying that they had been pulled by friends and mistakenly joined the party, but now they know that they are mistaken, and they will break away from it and be a good person with a change of heart.不久就证明了袁世凯杀人的没有杀错，他要做皇帝了。
Soon it was proved that Yuan Shikai did not kill people wrong, and he was going to be emperor.这事情，一转眼竟已经是二十年，现在二十来岁的青年，那时还在吸奶，时光是多么飞快呵。
This matter has been twenty years in the blink of an eye, and now the young man in his twenties was still pumping milk at that time, how fast time was.但是，袁世凯自己要做皇帝，为什么留下他真正对头的旧皇帝呢？这无须多议论，只要看现在的军阀混战就知道。他们打得你死我活，好像不共戴天似的，但到后来，只要一个“下野”了，也就会客客气气的，然而对于革命者呢，即使没有打过仗，也决不肯放过一个。他们知道得很清楚。
However, Yuan Shikai himself wanted to be the emperor, so why did he leave the old emperor who was his real opponent? There is no need to talk about this, just look at the current warlord melee. They fight to the death, as if they are not in the same league, but later, as long as one "goes to the wild", they will be polite, but for the revolutionaries, even if they have not fought a war, they will never let one go. They know it very well.所以我想，中国革命的闹成这模样，并不是因为他们“杀错了人”，倒是因为我们看错了人。
So I think that the Chinese revolution became like this not because they "killed the wrong person", but because we saw the wrong person.临末，对于“多杀中年以上的人”的主张，我也有一点异议，但因为自己早在“中年以上”了，为避免嫌疑起见，只将眼睛看着地面罢。
At the end of the day, I also had a little objection to the idea of "killing more middle-aged and older people", but because I was already "middle-aged and older", in order to avoid suspicion, I only looked at the ground.四月十日。
April 10th.记得原稿在“客客气气的”之下，尚有“说不定在出洋的时候，还要大开欢送会”这类意思的句子，后被删去了。
I remember that under the "polite" in the original manuscript, there were sentences with the meaning of "maybe when you go abroad, you will have a farewell party", which was later deleted.四月十二日记。
Diary of April 12.

《杀错了人》异议

【备考】：[Notes]: 杀错了人 killed the wrong person
曹聚仁
Cao Juren前日某报载某君述长春归客的谈话，说：日本人在伪国已经完成“专卖鸦片”和“统一币制”的两大政策。这两件事，从前在老张小张时代，大家认为无法整理，现在他们一举手之间，办得有头有绪。所以某君叹息道：“愚尝与东北人士论币制紊乱之害，咸以积重难返，诿为难办；何以日人一刹那间，即毕乃事？‘是不为也，非不能也。’此为国人一大病根！”
The day before yesterday, a newspaper reported a conversation about a returning guest from Changchun, saying: The Japanese have completed the two major policies of "monopoly on opium" and "unified currency system" in the puppet country. These two things, in the era of Lao Zhang and Xiao Zhang, everyone thought they could not sort them out, but now they have done it in a single gesture. Therefore, a certain gentleman sighed: "I once discussed the harm of currency system disorder with the people of the Northeast, and they all thought that it was difficult to return and difficult to handle; Why can a person finish their work in an instant? 'It's not that I can't do it, but it's not impossible.' This is a major problem for the Chinese people! ”岂独“病根”而已哉！中华民族的灭亡和中华民国的颠覆，也就在这肺痨病上。一个社会，一个民族，到了衰老期，什么都“积重难返”，所以非“革命”不可。革命是社会的突变过程；在过程中，好人，坏人，与不好不坏的人，总要杀了一些。杀了一些人，并不是没有代价的：于社会起了隔离作用，旧的社会和新的社会截然分成两段，恶的势力不会传染到新的组织中来。所以革命杀人应该有标准，应该多杀中年以上的人，多杀代表旧势力的人。法国大革命的成功，即在大恐慌时期的扫荡旧势力。
Is it just the "root of the disease"? The demise of the Chinese nation and the subversion of the Republic of China are also in this tuberculosis. A society and a nation, when it reaches the age of aging, everything is "difficult to return", so it must be a "revolution". Revolution is a process of mutation in society; In the process, good people, bad people, and bad people always have to kill some. Killing some people is not without a price: it has a role in isolating society, the old society and the new society are divided into two parts, and the evil forces will not spread to the new organization. Therefore, there should be a standard for revolutionary killing, and more middle-aged and older people should be killed, and more people representing the old forces should be killed. The success of the French Revolution, that is, the sweep of the old forces during the Great Depression.可是中国每一回的革命，总是反了常态。许多青年因为参加革命运动，做了牺牲；革命进程中，旧势力一时躲开去，一些也不曾铲除掉；革命成功以后，旧势力重复涌了出来，又把青年来做牺牲品，杀了一大批。孙中山先生辛辛苦苦做了十来年革命工作，辛亥革命成功了，袁世凯拿大权，天天杀党人，甚至连十五六岁的孩子都要杀；这样的革命，不但不起隔离作用，简直替旧势力作保镖；因此民国以来，只有暮气，没有朝气，任何事业，都不必谈改革，一谈改革，必“积重难返，诿为难办”。其恶势力一直注到现在。
But every revolution in China is always against the norm. Many young people have made sacrifices because they participated in the revolutionary movement; In the process of revolution, the old forces avoided for a while, and some were not eradicated; After the success of the revolution, the old forces repeatedly poured out, and the young people were sacrificed and killed a large number of people. Mr. Sun Yat-sen worked hard for more than ten years of revolutionary work, and the Xinhai Revolution was successful, Yuan Shikai took power, killed party members every day, and even killed children aged fifteen or sixteen; Such a revolution not only does not have an isolating effect, but simply acts as a bodyguard for the old forces; Therefore, since the Republic of China, there has been only twilight, no vitality, and there is no need to talk about reform in any cause. Its evil forces have been pouring into the present.这种反常状态，我名之曰“杀错了人”。我常和朋友说：“不流血的革命是没有的，但‘流血’不可流错了人。早杀溥仪，多杀郑孝胥之流，方是邦国之大幸。若乱杀二十五岁以下的青年，倒行逆施，斫丧社会元气，就可以得‘亡国灭种’的‘眼前报’。”
This abnormal state is what I call "killing the wrong person". I often say to my friends: "There is no bloodless revolution, but 'bloodshed' must not be shed by the wrong person." Killing Puyi early and killing many like Zheng Xiaoxu was a great fortune for the state. If you kill young people under the age of 25 indiscriminately, go against the grain and lose the vitality of society, you can get the 'immediate retribution' of 'subjugation of the country and the extinction of the species'. ”《自由谈》，四月十日。"Free Talk", April 10.

中国人的生命圈

中国人的生命圈

中国人的生命圈

Chinese life circle“蝼蚁尚知贪生”，中国百姓向来自称“蚁民”，我为暂时保全自己的生命计，时常留心着比较安全的处所，除英雄豪杰之外，想必不至于讥笑我的罢。
"Ants still know to be greedy for life", the Chinese people have always called themselves "ant people", in order to temporarily preserve my life, I often pay attention to relatively safe places, except for heroes and heroes, I must not laugh at me.不过，我对于正面的记载，是不大相信的，往往用一种另外的看法。例如罢，报上说，北平正在设备防空，我见了并不觉得可靠；但一看见载着古物的南运，却立刻感到古城的危机，并且由这古物的行踪，推测中国乐土的所在。
However, I don't believe in positive records, and often use a different view. For example, the newspaper said that Peiping was equipping air defense, and I didn't think it was reliable when I saw it; But as soon as he saw the southern transport carrying antiquities, he immediately felt the crisis of the ancient city, and speculated about the location of China's paradise from the whereabouts of this antiquity.现在，一批一批的古物，都集中到上海来了，可见最安全的地方，到底也还是上海的租界上。
Now, batches of antiquities have been concentrated in Shanghai, which shows that the safest place is still in the Shanghai Concession.然而，房租是一定要贵起来的了。
However, the rent must be expensive.这在“蚁民”，也是一个大打击，所以还得想想另外的地方。
This is also a big blow to "Ant People", so we have to think about other places.想来想去，想到了一个“生命圈”。这就是说，既非“腹地”，也非“边疆”，是介乎两者之间，正如一个环子，一个圈子的所在，在这里倒或者也可以“苟延性命于×世”的。
After thinking about it, I thought of a "circle of life". This means that it is neither a "hinterland" nor a "frontier", but between the two, just like a ring, a circle, where it may or can also "survive in the × world".“边疆”上是飞机抛炸弹。据日本报，说是在剿灭“兵匪”；据中国报，说是屠戮了人民，村落市廛，一片瓦砾。“腹地”里也是飞机抛炸弹。据上海报，说是在剿灭“共匪”，他们被炸得一塌胡涂；“共匪”的报上怎么说呢，我们可不知道。但总而言之，边疆上是炸，炸，炸；腹地里也是炸，炸，炸。虽然一面是别人炸，一面是自己炸，炸手不同，而被炸则一。只有在这两者之间的，只要炸弹不要误行落下来，倒还有可免“血肉横飞”的希望，所以我名之曰“中国人的生命圈”。
On the "frontier" are planes dropping bombs. According to the Japanese newspaper, it is said that it is exterminating "soldiers and bandits"; According to the China Daily, it is said that the people were slaughtered, and the villages and markets were in rubble. There are also planes dropping bombs in the "hinterland". According to the poster, it is said that they are exterminating the "communist bandits", and they were blown up to a pulp; We don't know what the newspaper says about the "communist bandits". But all in all, the frontier is bombing, blowing, blowing; The hinterland is also fried, fried, fried. Although one side is bombed by others and the other side is bombed by oneself, the bombers are different, and the bombing is one. Only between the two, as long as the bomb does not fall by mistake, there is still hope to avoid "flesh and blood", so I named it "Chinese Life Circle".再从外面炸进来，这“生命圈”便收缩而为“生命线”；再炸进来，大家便都逃进那炸好了的“腹地”里面去，这“生命圈”便完结而为“生命〇”。
and then blow in from the outside, and this "circle of life" shrinks into a "lifeline"; If it explodes in again, everyone will flee into the "hinterland" that has been blown up, and this "circle of life" will end and become "life 〇".其实，这预感是大家都有的，只要看这一年来，文章上不大见有“我中国地大物博，人口众多”的套话了，便是一个证据。而有一位先生，还在演说上自己说中国人是“弱小民族”哩。
In fact, everyone has this premonition, as long as you look at the past year, there is not much cliché in the article "I am a big country in China and a large population", which is a proof. And there is a gentleman who even said in his speech that the Chinese are a "weak nation".但这一番话，阔人们是不以为然的，因为他们不但有飞机，还有他们的“外国”！
But the people of Kuoyang disagreed with these words, because they not only had planes, but also their "foreign countries"!四月十日。
April 10th.

内外

内外

内外

inside and outside古人说内外有别，道理各各不同。丈夫叫“外子”，妻叫“贱内”。伤兵在医院之内，而慰劳品在医院之外，非经查明，不准接收。对外要安，对内就要攘，或者嚷。
The ancients said that there is a difference between inside and outside, and the truth is different. The husband is called "the son", and the wife is called the "cheap wife". Wounded soldiers are in the hospital, but the consolation items are outside the hospital, and they are not allowed to be accepted without ascertainment. If you want to be safe externally, you have to rob or shout internally.
何香凝先生叹气：“当年唯恐其不起者，今日唯恐其不死。”然而死的道理也是内外不同的。
Mr. He Xiangning sighed: "Back then, I was afraid that he would not die, but today I am afraid that he will not die." However, the principle of death is also different inside and outside.
庄子曰，“哀莫大于心死，而身死次之。”次之者，两害取其轻也。所以，外面的身体要它死，而内心要它活；或者正因为那心活，所以把身体治死。此之谓治心。
Zhuangzi said, "There is no greater sorrow than death in the heart, and death in the body is secondary." "The second is to choose the lesser of the two harms. Therefore, the outer body wants it to die, but the inner body wants it to live; Or it is precisely because of that heart that the body is killed. This is called managing the heart.
治心的道理很玄妙：心固然要活，但不可过于活。
The principle of treating the mind is very mysterious: the heart must live, but it must not be too alive.
心死了，就明明白白地不抵抗，结果，反而弄得大家不镇静。心过于活了，就胡思乱想，当真要闹抵抗：这种人，“绝对不能言抗日”。
When the heart is dead, it clearly does not resist, but as a result, it makes everyone uncalm. If the heart is too alive, it will think wildly and really want to resist: this kind of person "absolutely cannot speak of resisting Japan".
为要镇静大家，心死的应该出洋，留学是到外国去治心的方法。
In order to calm everyone, those who are heartless should go abroad, and studying abroad is a way to cure their hearts in a foreign country.而心过于活的，是有罪，应该严厉处置，这才是在国内治心的方法。
And if the heart is too alive, it is guilty and should be dealt with severely, which is the way to cure the heart in China.
何香凝先生以为“谁为罪犯是很成问题的”，——这就因为她不懂得内外有别的道理。
Mr. He Xiangning thinks that "who is a criminal is very problematic",—— because she doesn't understand that there is a difference between inside and outside.四月十一日。
April 11th.

透底

透底

透底

Through the bottom凡事彻底是好的，而“透底”就不见得高明。因为连续的向左转，结果碰见了向右转的朋友，那时候彼此点头会意，脸上会要辣辣的。要自由的人，忽然要保障复辟的自由，或者屠杀大众的自由，——透底是透底的了，却连自由的本身也漏掉了，原来只剩得一个无底洞。
Everything is completely good, but "thoroughly" is not necessarily clever. Because of the continuous turn to the left, I met a friend who turned right, and at that time nodded to each other, and his face would be spicy. Those who want freedom suddenly want to guarantee the freedom of restoration or the freedom to slaughter the masses,—— but even freedom itself is missed, and there is only a bottomless pit left.譬如反对八股是极应该的。八股原是蠢笨的产物。一来是考官嫌麻烦——他们的头脑大半是阴沉木做的，——甚么代圣贤立言，甚么起承转合，文章气韵，都没有一定的标准，难以捉摸，因此，一股一股地定出来，算是合于功令的格式，用这格式来“衡文”，一眼就看得出多少轻重。二来，连应试的人也觉得又省力，又不费事了。这样的八股，无论新旧，都应当扫荡。但是，这是为着要聪明，不是要更蠢笨些。
For example, it is very appropriate to oppose the eight shares. The eight strands were originally the product of stupidity. First, the examiners find it troublesome - most of their minds are made of gloomy wood,—— what is said on behalf of the sages, what is the beginning and end, and the charm of the article, there is no certain standard and elusive, so it is determined one by one, which is a format that is in line with the merit order, and using this format to "balance the text", you can see how much weight it is at a glance. Second, even the candidates feel that it is labor-saving and trouble-free. Such eight strands, whether old or new, should be swept away. However, this is to be smart, not to be more stupid.不过要保存蠢笨的人，却有一种策略。他们说：“我不行，而他和我一样。”——大家活不成，拉倒大吉！而等“他”拉倒之后，旧的蠢笨的“我”却总是偷偷地又站起来，实惠是属于蠢笨的。好比要打倒偶像，偶像急了，就指着一切活人说，“他们都像我”，于是你跑去把貌似偶像的活人，统统打倒；回来，偶像会赞赏一番，说打倒偶像而打倒“打倒”者，确是透底之至。其实，这时候更大的蠢笨，笼罩了全世界。
But there is a strategy to save stupid people. They said, "I can't, and he's the same as me." ——Everyone can't live, pull down the big luck! And after "he" pulls down, the old stupid "I" always stands up secretly, and the benefits are stupid. For example, if you want to overthrow an idol, the idol is anxious and you point to all the living people and say, "They are all like me," so you run to knock down all the living people who look like idols. When they come back, the idol will praise it, saying that it is indeed the bottom line to defeat the idol and defeat the "knockdown". In fact, at this time, even greater stupidity enveloped the world.开口诗云子曰，这是老八股；而有人把“达尔文说，蒲力汗诺夫曰”也算做新八股。于是要知道地球是圆的，人人都要自己去环游地球一周；要制造汽机的，也要先坐在开水壶前格物……。这自然透底之极。其实，从前反对卫道文学，原是说那样吃人的“道”不应该卫，而有人要透底，就说什么道也不卫；这“什么道也不卫”难道不也是一种“道”么？所以，真正最透底的，还是下列的一个故事：
The opening poem Yunzi said, this is the old eight strands; And some people call "Darwin," Pulikhanov said, "as a new eight-share." Therefore, we must know that the earth is round, and everyone has to go around the earth by themselves; If you want to make a steam engine, you must first sit in front of the boiling kettle and ...... the grid. This is the ultimate in nature. In fact, in the past, when opposing Guardian literature, it was originally said that the "Tao" that cannibalized people should not be defended, and if someone wants to get to the bottom, they will say that the Tao is not defended; Isn't this "no Tao" also a kind of "Tao"? Therefore, the most thorough is the following story:古时候一个国度里革命了，旧的政府倒下去，新的站上来。旁人说，“你这革命党，原先是反对有政府主义的，怎么自己又来做政府？”那革命党立刻拔出剑来，割下了自己的头；但是，他的身体并不倒，而变成了僵尸，直立着，喉管里吞吞吐吐地似乎是说：这主义的实现原本要等三千年之后呢。
In ancient times, there was a revolution in a country, the old government fell, and a new one stood up. Others said, "Your revolutionary party was originally against anarchism, why did you come to the government again?" The revolutionary party immediately drew his sword and cut off his own head; However, his body did not fall, but turned into a zombie, standing upright, and his throat seemed to say: The realization of this doctrine would have to wait three thousand years later.四月十一日。
April 11th.

透底

【来信】：

透底

[Letter]:家干先生：
Mr. Jiagan:昨阅及大作《透底》一文，有引及晚前发表《论新八股》之处，至为欣幸。惟所“譬”云云，实出误会。鄙意所谓新八股者，系指有一等文，本无充实内容，只有时髦幌子，或利用新时装包裹旧皮囊而言。因为是换汤不换药，所以“这个空虚的宇宙”，仍与“且夫天地之间”同为八股。因为是挂羊头卖狗肉，所以“达尔文说”“蒲力汗诺夫说”，仍与“子曰诗云”毫无二致。故攻击不在“达尔文说”，“蒲力汗诺夫说”，与“这个宇宙”本身（其实“子曰”，“诗云”，如做起一本中国文学史来，仍旧要引用，断无所谓八股之理），而在利用此而成为新八股之形式。先生所举“地球”“机器”之例，“透底”“卫道”之理，三尺之童，亦知其非，以此作比，殊觉曲解。
Yesterday, I read an article on the great work "Thoroughly", which quoted the part of the article "On the New Eight Stocks" published earlier in the evening, and I was very pleased. The only "metaphor" is actually a misunderstanding. I mean that the so-called new eight strands refer to a first-class article that has no substantive content, only a fashionable guise, or a new fashion wrap in an old leather bag. Because it is a change of soup and not a change of medicine, "this empty universe" is still the same as "between heaven and earth". Because it is a sheep's head to sell dog meat, "Darwin said" and "Pulikhanov said" are still no different from "Ziyue Shiyun". Therefore, the attack is not in "Darwin's theory", "Pulikhanov's theory", and "this universe" itself (in fact, "Ziyue" and "Shiyun", if you start a history of Chinese literature, you still have to quote it, and there is no so-called eight-strand reason), but use this to become the form of the new eight-strand. The examples of "earth" and "machine" cited by Mr. Chen, as well as the principles of "thoroughness" and "guardianship," even a three-foot-tall child know they are wrong.今日文坛，虽有蓬勃新气，然一切狐鼠魍魉，仍有改头换面，衣锦逍遥，如礼拜六礼拜五派等以旧货新装出现者，此种新皮毛旧骨髓之八股，未审先生是否认为应在扫除之列？
In today's literary world, although there is a vigorous new atmosphere, all foxes, rats, and ghosts still have a makeover, and they are dressed in splendid clothes, such as Saturday and Friday factions, etc., which appear in old goods and new clothes.又有借时代招牌，歪曲革命学说，口念阿弥，心存罔想者，此种借他人边幅，盖自己臭脚之新八股，未审先生亦是否认为应在扫除之列？
There are also those who use the signboard of the times to distort the revolutionary doctrine, chant Ami, and have no thoughts, this kind of borrowing the margins of others, covering their own stinky feet, I wonder if Mr. also thinks that it should be swept away?“透底”言之，“譬如”古之皇帝，今之主席，在实质上固知大有区别，但仍有今之主席与古之皇帝一模一样者，则在某一意义上非难主席，其意自明，苟非志在捉虱，未必不能两目了然也。
For example, "the ancient emperor and the current chairman know that there is a big difference in substance, but there are still people who are exactly the same as the ancient emperor, so in a sense it is not difficult to be the chairman.予生也晚，不学无术，但虽无“彻底”之聪明，亦不致如“透底”之蠢笨，容或言而未“透”，致招误会耳。尚望赐教到“底”，感“透”感“透”！
I was born late, uneducated and unskilled, but although I did not have the intelligence to be "thorough", I was not as stupid as "thorough", and I could say it but not "thoroughly", which led to misunderstandings. I hope to teach you to the "bottom", feel "penetrating" and "penetrating"!祝秀侠上。
I wish you a good show.

透底

【回信】：

透底

[Reply]:秀侠先生：
Mr. Xiuxia:接到你的来信，知道你所谓新八股是礼拜五六派等流。其实礼拜五六派的病根并不全在他们的八股性。
I received your letter and know that your so-called new eight shares are Friday and Saturday sects. In fact, the root of the problem of Friday and Saturday sects is not all in their eight-stranded nature.八股无论新旧，都在扫荡之列，我是已经说过了；礼拜五六派有新八股性，其余的人也会有新八股性。例如只会“辱骂”“恐吓”甚至于“判决”，而不肯具体地切实地运用科学所求得的公式，去解释每天的新的事实，新的现象，而只抄一通公式，往一切事实上乱凑，这也是一种八股。即使明明是你理直，也会弄得读者疑心你空虚，疑心你已经不能答辩，只剩得“国骂”了。
The eight strands, old and new, are among the sweeps, I have already said; On Fridays and Saturdays, there will be a new eight-strand, and the rest will have a new eight-strand. For example, it is also a kind of eight-strand to only "insult", "intimidate" and even "judgment", but refuses to specifically and effectively use the formulas obtained by science to explain new facts and new phenomena every day. Even if you are obviously justified, it will make readers suspect that you are empty, and you can no longer defend your doubts, and you will only be left with "national scolding".至于“歪曲革命学说”的人，用些“蒲力汗诺夫曰”等来掩盖自己的臭脚，那他们的错误难道就在他写了“蒲……曰”等等么？我们要具体的证明这些人是怎样错误，为什么错误。假使简单地把“蒲力汗诺夫曰”等等和“诗云子曰”等量齐观起来，那就一定必然的要引起误会。先生来信似乎也承认这一点。这就是我那《透底》里所以要指出的原因。
As for those who "distort revolutionary doctrines" and use some "Pulikhanov words" to cover up their stinky feet, then their mistake lies in his writing "Pu...... He said, "Wait? We need to specifically prove how and why these people are wrong. If we simply look at "Pulikhanov" and "Shiyunzi" in equal quantities, it will inevitably cause misunderstandings. Mr. Letter seems to acknowledge this. This is why I want to point out in my "Thorough Ground".最后，我那篇文章是反对一种虚无主义的一般倾向的，你的《论新八股》之中的那一句，不过是许多例子之中的一个，这是必须解除的一个“误会”。而那文章却并不是专为这一个例子写的。
Finally, my article opposes a general tendency to nihilism, and the sentence in your "On the New Eight Strands" is just one of many examples, which is a "misunderstanding" that must be dispeled. And that article was not written specifically for this one example.家干。Family dry.

“以夷制夷”

“以夷制夷”

“以夷制夷”

"Defeat the barbarians with barbarians"我还记得，当去年中国有许多人，一味哭诉国联的时候，日本的报纸上往往加以讥笑，说这是中国祖传的“以夷制夷”的老手段。粗粗一看，也仿佛有些像的，但是，其实不然。那时的中国的许多人，的确将国联看作“青天大老爷”，心里何尝还有一点儿“夷”字的影子。
I still remember that when many people in China blindly cried about the League of Nations last year, Japanese newspapers often ridiculed it, saying that this was the old method of "using barbarians to control barbarians" in China. At first glance, it seems to be a bit similar, but it is not. At that time, many people in China did regard the League of Nations as the "Great Master of the Blue Sky", and there was still a shadow of the word "Yi" in their hearts.倒相反，“青天大老爷”们却常常用着“以华制华”的方法的。
On the contrary, the "Blue Sky Masters" often use the method of "using China to control China".例如罢，他们所深恶的反帝国主义的“犯人”，他们自己倒是不做恶人的，只是松松爽爽的送给华人，叫你自己去杀去。他们所痛恨的腹地的“共匪”，他们自己是并不明白表示意见的，只将飞机炸弹卖给华人，叫你自己去炸去。对付下等华人的有黄帝子孙的巡捕和西崽，对付智识阶级的有高等华人的学者和博士。
For example, the anti-imperialist "prisoners" they hate so much do not become evil people themselves, but simply give them to the Chinese and ask you to kill them yourself. The "communist bandits" in the hinterland they hated did not understand the expression of opinions, and only sold plane bombs to the Chinese and told you to blow them up yourself. The lower Chinese were dealt with by the patrols and western cubs of the descendants of the Yellow Emperor, and the scholars and doctors of the higher Chinese were dealt with by the intellectual class.我们自夸了许多日子的“大刀队”，好像是无法制伏的了，然而四月十五日的《××报》上，有一个用头号字印《我斩敌二百》的题目。粗粗一看，是要令人觉得胜利的，但我们再来看一看本文罢——
We boasted of the "big knife team" for many days, which seemed to be impossible to subdue, but in the "×× News" on April 15, there was a title printed with the number one word "I slay two hundred enemies". At first glance, it is to make people feel victorious, but let's take a look at this article -“（本报今日北平电）昨日喜峰口右翼，仍在滦阳城以东各地，演争夺战。敌出现大刀队千名，系新开到者，与我大刀队对抗。其刀特长，敌使用不灵活。我军挥刀砍抹，敌招架不及，连刀带臂，被我砍落者纵横满地，我军伤亡亦达二百余。……”
Yesterday, the right wing of Xifengkou was still in various places east of Luanyang City, playing a battle. The enemy appeared with a thousand big knives, who were new to the team, and confronted our big knife team. The knife is special, and the enemy is not flexible in use. Our army swung its swords and wiped, and the enemy could not parry, and the knives and arms were cut down all over the ground, and our casualties reached more than 200. ……”那么，这其实是“敌斩我军二百”了，中国的文字，真是像“国步”一样，正在一天一天的艰难起来。但我要指出来的却并不在此。
Then, this is actually "the enemy has killed our army by 200", and China's words are really like "national steps", which is becoming difficult day by day. But that's not what I'm going to point out.我要指出来的是“大刀队”乃中国人自夸已久的特长，日本人虽有击剑，大刀却非素习。现在可是“出现”了，这不必迟疑，就可决定是满洲的军队。满洲从明末以来，每年即大有直隶山东人迁居，数代之后，成为土著，则虽是满洲军队，而大多数实为华人，也决无疑义。现在已经各用了特长的大刀，在滦东相杀起来，一面是“连刀带臂，纵横满地”，一面是“伤亡亦达二百余”，开演了极显著的“以华制华”的一幕了。
I want to point out that the "big knife team" is a long-boasted specialty of the Chinese, and although the Japanese have fencing, the big knife is not a common practice. Now that it has "appeared", it can be decided that it is the Manchurian army without hesitation. Since the end of the Ming Dynasty, Manchuria has been relocated by a large number of directly subordinate Shandong people every year, and after several generations, they have become indigenous people, although they are Manchurian troops, most of them are actually Chinese, and there is no doubt about it. Now they have used their own special swords to kill each other in Luandong, on the one hand, "with knives and arms, all over the ground", and on the other hand, "more than 200 casualties", a very significant scene of "using China to control China" has begun.至于中国的所谓手段，由我看来，有是也应该说有的，但决非“以夷制夷”，倒是想“以夷制华”。然而“夷”又那有这么愚笨呢，却先来一套“以华制华”给你看。
As for China's so-called means, in my opinion, there are and should be said to be, but it is by no means "using barbarians to control barbarians", but wanting to "use barbarians to control China". However, how can "Yi" be so stupid, but let me first show you a set of "China to control China".这例子常见于中国的历史上，后来的史官为新朝作颂，称此辈的行为曰：“为王前驱！”
This example is common in Chinese history, and later historians praised the new dynasty, calling the behavior of this generation "the forerunner of the king!" ”近来的战报是极可诧异的，如同日同报记冷口失守云：“十日以后，冷口方面之战，非常激烈，华军……顽强抵抗，故继续未曾有之大激战”，但由宫崎部队以十余兵士，作成人梯，前仆后继，“卒越过长城，因此宫崎部队牺牲二十三名之多云”。越过一个险要，而日军只死了二十三人，但已云“之多”，又称为“未曾有之大激战”，也未免有些费解。所以大刀队之战，也许并不如我所猜测。但既经写出，就姑且留下以备一说罢。
The recent battle report is extremely surprising, just like the same day reported the loss of Lengkou: "Ten days later, the battle in the cold mouth is very fierce, and the Chinese army ...... Tenacious resistance, so it continued to fight fiercely that had never been seen before", but by the Miyazaki troops with more than ten soldiers, they became human ladders, and the servants followed one after another, "the soldiers crossed the Great Wall, so the Miyazaki troops sacrificed 23 clouds". After crossing a dangerous point, the Japanese army only killed twenty-three people, but it has been said that "many", also known as "unprecedented fierce battle", is also a little puzzling. So the battle of the big knife team may not be as I guessed. But since it has been written, I will leave it for now.四月十七日。
April 17th.

“以夷制夷”

【跳踉】：【跳踉】：“以华制华”“以华制华”
李家作
李家作报纸不可不看。在报上不但可以看到虔修功德如念念阿弥陀佛，选拔国士如征求飞檐走壁之类的“善”文，还可以随时长许多见识。譬如说杀人，以前只知道有斫头绞颈子，现在却知道还有吃人肉，而且还有“以夷制夷”，“以华制华”等等的分别。经明眼人一说，是越想越觉得不错的。
Newspapers must be read. In the newspaper, you can not only see the merits of pious cultivation such as reciting Amitabha Buddha, and the selection of national scholars such as soliciting "good" articles such as soliciting flying eaves and walking on walls, but also gain a lot of knowledge at any time. For example, when it comes to killing people, I used to only know that there was cutting off the head and strangling the neck, but now I know that there is also eating human flesh, and there are also differences such as "using barbarians to control barbarians", "using China to control China" and so on. After being said by a discerning person, the more I thought about it, the better I felt.尤其是“以华制华”，那样的手段真是越想越觉得多的。原因是人太多了，华对华并不会亲热；而且为了自身的利害要坐大交椅，当然非解决别人不可。所以那“制”是，无论如何要“制”的。假如因为制人而能得到好处，或是因为制人而能讨得上头的欢心，那自然更其起劲。这心理，夷人就很善于利用，从侵略土地到卖卖肥皂，都是用的这“华人”善于“制华”的美点。然而，华人对华人，其实也很会利用这种方法，而且非常巧妙。双方不必明言，彼此心照，各得其所；旁人看来，不露痕迹。据说那被利用的人便是哈吧狗，即走狗。但细细甄别起来，倒并不只是哈吧狗一种，另外还有一种是警犬。
Especially "using China to control China", the more I think about such a method, the more I feel it. The reason is that there are too many people, and China will not be affectionate with China; And for the sake of one's own interests, you have to sit in the big chair, of course, you have to solve others. Therefore, the "system" is, no matter what, it must be "controlled". If you can get benefits because of controlling people, or if you can please others because you control people, then you will naturally be more energetic. This psychology is very good at using the barbarians, from invading the land to selling soap, they are all using the beauty of the "Chinese" who are good at "making China". However, the Chinese are actually very good at using this method against the Chinese, and it is very ingenious. The two sides do not have to say it clearly, they understand each other's hearts and get their place; In the eyes of others, there is no trace. It is said that the person who was used was the Haba dog, that is, the lackey. But if you look closely, it is not just a Haba dog, there is another kind of police dog.做哈吧狗与做警犬，当然都是“以华制华”，但其中也不无分别。哈吧狗只能听主人吩咐，向仇人摇摇尾，狂吠几声。他知道他是什么样的身分。警犬则不然：老于世故者往往如此。他只认定自己是一个好汉，是一个权威，是一个执大义以绳天下者。在那门庭间的方寸之地上，只有他可以彷徨彷徨，呐喊呐喊。他的威风没有人敢冒犯，和哈吧狗比较起来，哈吧狗真是浅薄得可怜。但何以也是“以华制华”呢？那是因为虽然老于世故，也不免露出破绽。破绽是：他俨若嫉恶如仇，平时蹲在地上冷眼旁观，一看到有类乎“可杀”的情形时，就踪身向前，猛咬一口；可是，他决不是乱咬，他早已看得分明，凡在他寄身的地段上的（他当然不能不有一个寄身的地方），他决不伤害，有了也只当不看见，以免引起“不便”。他咬，是咬圈子外头的，尤其是，圈子外头最碍眼的仇人。这便是勇，这便是执大义，同时，既可显出自己的权威，又可博得主人底欢心：因为，他所咬的，往往会是他和他东家的共同的敌人。主人对于他所痛恨，自己是并不明白表示意见的，只给你一些供养和地位，叫你自己去咬去。因此有接二连三的奋勇，和吹毛求疵的找机会。旁观者不免有点不明白，觉得这仇太深，却不知道这正是老于世故者的做人之道，所谓向恶社会“搏战”“周旋”是也。那样的用心，真是很苦！
Being a Haba dog and being a police dog are of course both "using China to control China", but there is no difference. The dog could only listen to the owner's instructions, wagging its tail at the enemy and barking a few times. He knows what kind of identity he is. Police dogs are different: they are often older than the world. He only considers himself a good man, an authority, and a person who upholds righteousness to bring justice to the world. In the square inch of land between the courts, only he could hesitate and shout. No one dares to offend his majesty, compared with the Haba dog, the Haba dog is really pitifully shallow. But why is it also "using China to control China"? That's because although he is older than the world, he can't help but show flaws. The flaw is: he is jealous of evil, usually squatting on the ground and watching coldly, and when he sees a situation similar to "killable", he will move forward and bite hard; However, he is by no means biting indiscriminately, he has already seen clearly, he will never hurt anything on the lot where he lives (of course he can't have a place to stay), and if he does, he will only not see it, so as not to cause "inconvenience". He bites, biting the outside of the circle, especially the most eyesore enemy outside the circle. This is courage, this is righteousness, and at the same time, it can not only show its authority, but also win the favor of its master: because what he bites is often the common enemy of him and his owner. The master does not understand the opinion of what he hates, and only gives you some support and status, and tells you to bite yourself. Therefore, there is a series of bravery and nitpicking opportunities. Bystanders can't help but feel a little incomprehensible, feeling that this hatred is too deep, but they don't know that this is the way of life of the old and deceased, the so-called "fighting" and "dealing with" the evil society. That kind of intention is really bitter!所可哀者，为了要挣扎在替天行道的大旗之下，竟然不惜受员外府君之类的供奉，把那旗子斜插在庄院的门楼边，暂且作个“江湖一应水碗不得骚扰”的招贴纸儿。也可见得做中国人的不容易，和“以华制华”的效劳，虽贤者亦不免焉。
The sad thing is that in order to struggle under the banner of acting for the heavens, he did not hesitate to accept offerings such as the lord of the manor, and planted the flag diagonally next to the gatehouse of the manor, temporarily making a poster that said, "The rivers and lakes should not be harassed". It can also be seen that it is not easy to be Chinese, and the service of "using China to control China" is inevitable even for the sages.——二二，四，二一。
— 22, 4, 21.四月二十二日，《大晚报》副刊《火炬》。
On April 22, the "Great Evening News" supplement "Torch".

“以夷制夷”

【摇摆】：[Swing]: 过而能改 can be changed after passing
傅红蓼
Fu Hongsmart孔老夫子，在从前教训着那么许多门生说：“过而能改，善莫大焉！”意思是错误人人都有，只要能够回头。我觉得孔老夫子这句话尚有未尽意处，譬如说：“过而能改，善莫大焉”之后，再加上一句：“知过不改，罪孽深重”，那便觉得天衣无缝了。
Old Master Kong taught so many disciples in the past: "If you can change your mistakes, there is no greater good!" It means that everyone has mistakes, as long as they can turn back. I think there are still unfinished points in this sentence of Master Kong, for example, after saying: "If you can change your mistakes, there is no greater good", and then add a sentence: "If you know your mistakes and do not change, your sins are deep", then I feel seamless.譬如说现在前线打得落花流水的时候，而有人觉得这种为国牺牲是残酷，是无聊，便主张不要打，而且更主张不要讲和，只说索性藏起头来，等个五十年。俗谚常有“十年生聚，十年教训”，看起来五十年的教训，大概什么都够了。凡事有了错误，才有教训，可见中国人尚还有些救药，国事弄得乌烟瘴气到如此，居然大家都恍然大觉大悟自己内部组织的三大不健全，更而发现武器的不充足。眼前须要几十个年头，来作准备。言至此，吾人对于热河一直到滦东的失守，似乎应当有些感到失得不大冤枉。因为吾党（借用）建基以至于今日，由军事而至于宪政，尚还没有人肯认过错，则现在失掉几个国土，使一些负有自信天才的国家栋梁学贯中西的名儒，居然都肯认错，所谓“过而能改，善莫大焉”，塞翁失马，又安知非福的聊以自慰，也只得闭着眼睛喊两声了，不过假使今后“知过尚不能改，罪孽的深重”，比写在讣文上，大概也更要来得使人注目了。
For example, when the front line is fighting in a downward spiral, some people think that this kind of sacrifice for the country is cruel and boring, so they advocate not fighting, and even more advocate not making peace, just saying that they will simply hide their heads and wait for fifty years. There is often a saying "ten years of reunion, ten years of lessons", it seems that fifty years of lessons are probably enough. It can be seen that the Chinese still have some remedies, and the state affairs have made the miasma so smoky, and everyone suddenly realized the three major imperfections of their internal organizations, and even found that the weapons were not sufficient. It takes dozens of years to prepare. At this point, it seems that we should feel a little unjusted about the loss of Rehe all the way to Luandong. Because our party (borrowed) the foundation to this day, from military to constitutional, no one has yet been willing to admit their mistakes, and now they have lost a few lands, so that some famous scholars who are self-confident and genius of the country who have learned both China and the West are actually willing to admit their mistakes.譬如再说，四月二十二日本刊上李家作的“以华制华”里说的警犬。警犬咬人，是蹲在地上冷眼傍观，等到有可杀的时候，便一跃上前，猛咬一口，不过，有的时候那警犬被人们提起棍子，向着当头一棒，也会把专门咬人的警犬，打得藏起头来，伸出舌头在暗地里发急。这种发急，大概便又是所谓“过”了。因为警犬虽然野性，但有时被棍子当头一击，也会被打出自己的错误来的，于是“过而能改”的警犬，在暗地里发急时，自又便会想忏悔，假使是不大晓得改过的警犬，在暗地发急之余，还想乘机再试，这种犬，大概是“罪孽深重”的了。
For example, on April 22, the police dog mentioned in Li Jiazao's "Using China to Control China" was published. When the police dog bites someone, it squats on the ground and watches coldly, and when there is something to kill, it jumps forward and bites violently, but sometimes the police dog is lifted by people with sticks and struck at the head, and it will also beat the police dog that specializes in biting people to hide its head and stick out its tongue to secretly be anxious. This kind of urgency is probably the so-called "passing" again. Because although the police dog is wild, it is sometimes hit in the head by a stick, and it will also be beaten with its own mistakes, so the police dog that "can be corrected", when it is in a hurry in the dark, will want to repent, if it is a police dog that does not know how to change, in addition to secretly anxious, but also wants to take the opportunity to try again, this kind of dog is probably "sinful".中国人只晓得说过而能改，善莫大焉，可惜都忘记了底下那一句。
Chinese people only know what they have said and can change, which is a great good, but unfortunately they have forgotten the sentence below.四月二十六日，《大晚报》副刊《火炬》。
On April 26, the "Great Evening News" supplement "Torch".

“以夷制夷”

【只要几句】：[Just a few sentences]: 案语 case
家干
Family dry以上两篇，是一星期之内，登在《大晚报》附刊《火炬》上的文章，为了我的那篇《“以夷制夷”》而发的，揭开了“以华制华”的黑幕，他们竟有如此的深恶痛嫉，莫非真是太伤了此辈的心么？
The above two articles were published in the "Torch" supplementary to the "Evening News" within a week, and they were published for my article ""Using China to Control the Barbarians"", which unveiled the shady curtain of "using China to control China".但是，不尽然的。大半倒因为我引以为例的《××报》其实是《大晚报》，所以使他们有这样的跳踉和摇摆。然而无论怎样的跳踉和摇摆，所引的记事具在，旧的《大晚报》也具在，终究挣不脱这一个本已扣得紧紧的笼头。
However, not necessarily. Most of them are because the "×× Daily" I cited as an example is actually the "Evening News", so they have such stumbling and swaying. However, no matter what kind of jumping and swaying, the cited notes are there, and the old "Evening News" is also there, and after all, it cannot break free from this already tightly fastened bridle.此外也无须多话了，只要转载了这两篇，就已经由他们自己十足的说明了《火炬》的光明，露出了他们真实的嘴脸。
In addition, there is no need to say more, as long as these two articles are reprinted, they have fully explained the light of "Torch" and revealed their true faces.七月十九日。July 19th.

言论自由的界限

言论自由的界限

言论自由的界限

The boundaries of free speech看《红楼梦》，觉得贾府上是言论颇不自由的地方。焦大以奴才的身分，仗着酒醉，从主子骂起，直到别的一切奴才，说只有两个石狮子干净。结果怎样呢？结果是主子深恶，奴才痛嫉，给他塞了一嘴马粪。
Watching "Dream of Red Mansions", I feel that Jiafu is a place where speech is quite unfree. Jiao Da, as a servant, relied on drunkenness, starting from the master to all the other servants, saying that only two stone lions were clean. The result? As a result, the master hated it, and the servant hated him, and stuffed him with horse manure.其实是，焦大的骂，并非要打倒贾府，倒是要贾府好，不过说主奴如此，贾府就要弄不下去罢了。然而得到的报酬是马粪。所以这焦大，实在是贾府的屈原，假使他能做文章，我想，恐怕也会有一篇《离骚》之类。
In fact, Jiao Da's scolding is not to bring down Jia Fu, but to make Jia Fu good, but to say that the master and slave are like this, Jia Fu will not be able to get it down. However, the reward is horse manure. So this Jiao Da is really Qu Yuan of Jiafu, if he can make a fortune, I think, I am afraid there will also be a "Li Sao" and the like.三年前的新月社诸君子，不幸和焦大有了相类的境遇。他们引经据典，对于党国有了一点微词，虽然引的大抵是英国经典，但何尝有丝毫不利于党国的恶意，不过说：“老爷，人家的衣服多么干净，您老人家的可有些儿脏，应该洗它一洗”罢了。不料“荃不察余之中情兮”，来了一嘴的马粪：国报同声致讨，连《新月》杂志也遭殃。但新月社究竟是文人学士的团体，这时就也来了一大堆引据三民主义，辨明心迹的“离骚经”。现在好了，吐出马粪，换塞甜头，有的顾问，有的教授，有的秘书，有的大学院长，言论自由，《新月》也满是所谓“为文艺的文艺”了。
Three years ago, the gentlemen of the Crescent Society unfortunately had a similar situation to Jiao Da. Although most of the quotes are British classics, there is no malice that is not conducive to the party and the state, but they say: "Sir, how clean people's clothes are, your old man's is a little dirty, you should wash it." Unexpectedly, "Quan didn't notice Yu Zhongxi", and came a mouthful of horse manure: the national newspaper spoke in unison, and even the "New Moon" magazine suffered. But the Crescent Society is a group of literati and scholars, and at this time, there are also a lot of "Li Sao Jing" that quotes the Three People's Principles and identifies the heart. Now it's good, spit out horse manure, change the sweetness, some consultants, some professors, some secretaries, some university deans, freedom of speech, and "New Moon" is also full of so-called "literature and art for literature and art".这就是文人学士究竟比不识字的奴才聪明，党国究竟比贾府高明，现在究竟比乾隆时候光明：三明主义。
This is whether the literati is smarter than the illiterate servants, whether the party and the state are smarter than Jiafu, and whether they are brighter than in Qianlong: the Three Ming Doctrine.然而竟还有人在嚷着要求言论自由。世界上没有这许多甜头，我想，该是明白的罢，这误解，大约是在没有悟到现在的言论自由，只以能够表示主人的宽宏大度的说些“老爷，你的衣服……”为限，而还想说开去。
However, there are still people clamoring for freedom of speech. There are not so many sweets in the world, I think, it should be understood, this misunderstanding is probably because I have not realized the current freedom of speech, and I am only limited to saying "Sir, your clothes are ......" that can show the magnanimity of the master, and I still want to say it.这是断乎不行的。前一种，是和《新月》受难时代不同，现在好像已有的了，这《自由谈》也就是一个证据，虽然有时还有几位拿着马粪，前来探头探脑的英雄。至于想说开去，那就足以破坏言论自由的保障。要知道现在虽比先前光明，但也比先前利害，一说开去，是连性命都要送掉的。即使有了言论自由的明令，也千万大意不得。这我是亲眼见过好几回的，非“卖老”也，不自觉其做奴才之君子，幸想一想而垂鉴焉。
This is absolutely not possible. The former is different from the crucifixion era of "New Moon", and now it seems to exist, and this "Free Talk" is also a proof, although sometimes there are a few heroes who come to probe their brains with horse manure. As for wanting to talk about it, it is enough to undermine the guarantee of freedom of speech. You must know that although it is brighter now than before, it is also more beneficial than before. Even if there is an explicit decree on freedom of speech, you must not be careless. I have seen this with my own eyes several times, not "selling the old", and I don't feel that he is a slave gentleman, but I hope to think about it and learn from it.四月十七日。
April 17th.

大观园的人才

大观园的人才

大观园的人才

Talents of Grand View Garden早些年，大观园里的压轴戏是刘老老骂山门。那是要老旦出场的，老气横秋地大“放”一通，直到裤子后穿而后止。当时指着手无寸铁或者已被缴械的人大喊“杀，杀，杀！”那呼声是多么雄壮。所以它——男角扮的老婆子，也可以算得一个人才。
In the early years, the finale in the Grand View Garden was Liu Lao scolding the mountain gate. That's for Lao Dan to appear, old-fashioned and "put" until the pants are worn later. At that time, pointing to unarmed or disarmed people, he shouted, "Kill, kill, kill!" "How majestic the cry is. So it, the old woman played by the male character, can also be regarded as a talent.而今时世大不同了，手里拿刀，而嘴里却需要“自由，自由，自由”，“开放××”云云。压轴戏要换了。
But now the world is very different, with a knife in hand, but in the mouth it needs "freedom, freedom, freedom" and "openness×× and so on. The finale is about to change.于是人才辈出，各有巧妙不同，出场的不是老旦，却是花旦了，而且这不是平常的花旦，而是海派戏广告上所说的“玩笑旦”。这是一种特殊的人物，他（她）要会媚笑，又要会撒泼，要会打情骂俏，又要会油腔滑调。总之，这是花旦而兼小丑的角色。不知道是时世造英雄（说“美人”要妥当些），还是美人儿多年阅历的结果？
So there are many talents, each with their own ingenuity, the one who appears is not Lao Dan, but Hua Dan, and this is not the usual Hua Dan, but the "joke Dan" mentioned in the Shanghai opera advertisement. This is a special character, he (she) must be able to smile, be splashy, flirt, and be smooth. In short, this is the role of a playboy and a clown. I don't know if it is the creation of heroes in the times (it is more appropriate to say "beauty"), or is it the result of many years of experience of beauty?美人儿而说“多年”，自然是阅人多矣的徐娘了，她早已从窑姐儿升任了老鸨婆；然而她丰韵犹存，虽在卖人，还兼自卖。自卖容易，而卖人就难些。现在不但有手无寸铁的人，而且有了……况且又遇见了太露骨的强奸。要会应付这种非常之变，就非有非常之才不可。你想想：现在的压轴戏是要似战似和，又战又和，不降不守，亦降亦守！这是多么难做的戏。没有半推半就假作娇痴的手段是做不好的。孟夫子说，“以天下与人易。”其实，能够简单地双手捧着“天下”去“与人”，倒也不为难了。问题就在于不能如此。所以要一把眼泪一把鼻涕，哭哭啼啼，而又刁声浪气的诉苦说：我不入火坑，谁入火坑。
When it comes to beauty and "many years", it is naturally Xu Niang who has seen a lot of people, and she has already been promoted from a kiln sister to an old bustard; However, her charm is still there, although she is selling people, she also sells herself. It's easy to sell yourself, but it's harder to sell people. Now not only are there unarmed people, but there are also ...... Moreover, I encountered rape that was too explicit. To be able to cope with this extraordinary change, you must have extraordinary talents. Think about it: The current finale is to be like a war, to fight and to make peace, not to surrender or defend, but also to defend! What a difficult play to make. It is not good to pretend to be a fool without half-pushing. Meng Fuzi said, "It is easy to exchange the world with others." In fact, it is not difficult to simply hold the "world" in both hands and go to "with people". The problem is that it can't be like this. So I have to cry and cry, and complain angrily: I don't enter the fire pit, who will enter the fire pit.然而娼妓说她自己落在火坑里，还是想人家去救她出来；而老鸨婆哭火坑，却未必有人相信她，何况她已经申明：她是敞开了怀抱，准备把一切人都拖进火坑的。虽然，这新鲜压轴戏的玩笑却开得不差，不是非常之才，就是挖空了心思也想不出的。
However, the prostitute said that she fell into the fire pit and still wanted someone to save her; And the old bustard woman cried in the fire pit, but no one may believe her, not to mention that she has affirmed that she has opened her arms and is ready to drag everyone into the fire pit. Although, the joke of this fresh finale is not bad, not very talented, or even if you hollow out your mind, you can't think of it.老旦进场，玩笑旦出场，大观园的人才着实不少！
Lao Dan entered, Joke Dan appeared, and there were really a lot of talents in the Grand View Garden!四月二十四日。
April 24th.

文章与题目

文章与题目

文章与题目

Articles and titles一个题目，做来做去，文章是要做完的，如果再要出新花样，那就使人会觉得不是人话。然而只要一步一步的做下去，每天又有帮闲的敲边鼓，给人们听惯了，就不但做得出，而且也行得通。
A topic, do it back and forth, the article is to be done, if you want to come up with new tricks, it will make people feel that it is not human words. However, as long as you do it step by step, and there are helpful beating drums every day, and people are used to listening to it, not only can it be done, but it will also work.譬如近来最主要的题目，是“安内与攘外”罢，做的也着实不少了。有说安内必先攘外的，有说安内同时攘外的，有说不攘外无以安内的，有说攘外即所以安内的，有说安内即所以攘外的，有说安内急于攘外的。
For example, the most important topic recently is "Stabilizing the Interior and Eliminating Foreign Countries", and a lot has been done. Some say that the internal must be repelled first, some say that the internal and external are repelled at the same time, some say that the outside cannot be repelled, some say that the outside is the reason for the internal security, some say that the internal is the reason for the external repelling, and some say that the internal is the reason for the external repelling, and some say that the internal is eager to repel the outside.做到这里，文章似乎已经无可翻腾了，看起来，大约总可以算是做到了绝顶。
At this point, the article seems to be irrefutable, and it seems that it can be regarded as the pinnacle.所以再要出新花样，就使人会觉得不是人话，用现在最流行的谥法来说，就是大有“汉奸”的嫌疑。为什么呢？就因为新花样的文章，只剩了“安内而不必攘外”，“不如迎外以安内”，“外就是内，本无可攘”这三种了。
Therefore, if you want to come up with new tricks, it will make people feel that it is not human words, and in the most popular posthumous method, it is suspected of being a "traitor". Why? Just because of the new pattern of articles, there are only three left: "Peace inside and not have to be external", "It is better to welcome the outside to settle inside", and "The outside is the inside, and there is nothing to resist".这三种意思，做起文章来，虽然实在希奇，但事实却有的，而且不必远征晋宋，只要看看明朝就够。满洲人早在窥伺了，国内却是草菅民命，杀戮清流，做了第一种。李自成进北京了，阔人们不甘给奴子做皇帝，索性请“大清兵”来打掉他，做了第二种。至于第三种，我没有看过《清史》，不得而知，但据老例，则应说是爱新觉罗氏之先，原是轩辕黄帝第几子之苗裔，于朔方，厚泽深仁，遂有天下，总而言之，咱们原是一家子云。
These three meanings, although it is really strange to start an article, but there are facts, and there is no need to go on an expedition to the Jin and Song dynasties, just look at the Ming Dynasty. The Manchurians had long been watching, but the country was a grassroots people's life, killing the clear stream, and doing the first one. Li Zicheng entered Beijing, and the Kuo people were unwilling to be emperors for their slaves, so they simply asked the "Qing soldiers" to kill him, and did the second one. As for the third type, I have not read the "History of the Qing Dynasty", I don't know, but according to the old example, it should be said that it is the ancestor of the Aixin Jue Luo clan, originally a descendant of the first son of the Xuanyuan Yellow Emperor, Yu Shuo Fang, Hou Ze Shen Benevolence, so there is the world, all in all, we were originally a family.后来的史论家，自然是力斥其非的，就是现在的名人，也正痛恨流寇。但这是后来和现在的话，当时可不然，鹰犬塞途，干儿当道，魏忠贤不是活着就配享了孔庙么？他们那种办法，那时都有人来说得头头是道的。
Later historians naturally strongly refuted it, even the current celebrities are also hating the bandits. But this is the later and now, it was not like that at that time, the eagles and dogs blocked the road, and the dry children were in power, didn't Wei Zhongxian deserve to enjoy the Confucius Temple while he was alive? Their method was said by people at that time.前清末年，满人出死力以镇压革命，有“宁赠友邦，不给家奴”的口号，汉人一知道，更恨得切齿。其实汉人何尝不如此？吴三桂之请清兵入关，便是一想到自身的利害，即“人同此心”的实例了。……
At the end of the Qing Dynasty, the Manchus made a desperate effort to suppress the revolution, with the slogan "Better to give friends than to domestic slaves", and when the Han people knew about it, they hated it even more. In fact, why don't the Han people do this? Wu Sangui's invitation to the Qing soldiers to enter the customs is an example of thinking of his own interests, that is, "people are of the same heart". ……四月二十九日。
April 29th.附记：
Notes:原题是《安内与攘外》。
The original title is "Peace and Resistance".五月五日。
May 5th.

新药

新药

新药

Drug说起来就记得，诚然，自从九一八以后，再没有听到吴稚老的妙语了，相传是生了病。现在刚从南昌专电中，飞出一点声音来，却连改头换面的，也是自从九一八以后，就再没有一丝声息的民族主义文学者们，也来加以冷冷的讪笑。
Speaking of which, I remember, it is true that since 918, I have not heard Wu Zhilao's punchline, and it is said that he was sick. Now just from the Nanchang special telegram, a little sound has flown out, but even the nationalist writers who have not made a sound since 918 have come to ridicule it coldly.为什么呢？为了九一八。
Why? For 918.想起来就记得，吴稚老的笔和舌，是尽过很大的任务的，清末的时候，五四的时候，北伐的时候，清党的时候，清党以后的还是闹不清白的时候。然而他现在一开口，却连躲躲闪闪的人物儿也来冷笑了。九一八以来的飞机，真也炸着了这党国的元老吴先生，或者是，炸大了一些躲躲闪闪的人物儿的小胆子。
When I think about it, I remember that Wu Zhilao's pen and tongue did a great job, in the late Qing Dynasty, during the May Fourth Movement, during the Northern Expedition, when the party was cleared, and after the Qing Party, it was still a time when the party was not clean. However, as soon as he opened his mouth now, even the dodging figure sneered. The planes since 918 have really blown up Mr. Wu, the veteran of the party-state, or rather, the courage of some dodging characters.九一八以后，情形就有这么不同了。
After 918, the situation was so different.旧书里有过这么一个寓言，某朝某帝的时候，宫女们多数生了病，总是医不好。最后来了一个名医，开出神方道：壮汉若干名。皇帝没有法，只得照他办。若干天之后，自去察看时，宫女们果然个个神采焕发了，却另有许多瘦得不像人样的男人，拜伏在地上。皇帝吃了一惊，问这是什么呢？宫女们就嗫嚅的答道：是药渣。
There is such a fable in the old book, when a certain dynasty and emperor were in a certain dynasty, most of the palace maids were sick and could not be cured. Finally, a famous doctor came and prescribed a divine prescription: several strong men. The emperor had no way to do it, so he had to do as he did. A few days later, when I went to inspect, the palace maids were indeed full of energy, but there were many men who were too thin to look like humans, prostrating themselves on the ground. The emperor was taken aback and asked what it was? The palace maids replied in a whisper: It's drug residue.照前几天报上的情形看起来，吴先生仿佛就如药渣一样，也许连狗子都要加以践踏了。然而他是聪明的，又很恬淡，决不至于不顾自己，给人家熬尽了汁水。不过因为九一八以后，情形已经不同，要有一种新药出卖是真的，对于他的冷笑，其实也就是新药的作用。
According to the situation reported a few days ago, Mr. Wu seems to be like drug residue, and maybe even the dog will trample on it. However, he is smart and very calm, and he will never disregard himself and boil out the juice for others. However, because after 918, the situation has been different, and it is true that there is a new drug to sell, and the sneer for him is actually the role of the new drug.这种新药的性味，是要很激烈，而和平。譬之文章，则须先讲烈士的殉国，再叙美人的殉情；一面赞希特勒的组阁，一面颂苏联的成功；军歌唱后，来了恋歌；道德谈完，就讲妓院；因国耻日而悲杨柳，逢五一节而忆蔷薇；攻击主人的敌手，也似乎不满于它自己的主人……总而言之，先前所用的是单方，此后出卖的却是复药了。
The taste of this new drug is to be intense and peaceful. For example, in an article, we must first talk about the martyrdom of the martyrs, and then describe the martyrdom of the beauties; On the one hand, he praised Hitler's cabinet, and on the other hand, he praised the success of the Soviet Union; After the army sang, there was a love song; After talking about morality, talk about brothels; mourn the willows because of the national shame day, and remember the roses on May Day; The enemy who attacks the owner also seems to be dissatisfied with its own owner...... All in all, the previous prescription was used, but since then it has been sold as a compound drug.复药虽然好像万应，但也常无一效的，医不好病，即毒不死人。不过对于误服这药的病人，却能够使他不再寻求良药，拖重了病症而至于胡里胡涂的死亡。
Although the repetition medicine seems to be universal, it is often ineffective. However, for patients who mistakenly take this medicine, it can make him no longer seek good medicine, which will aggravate his illness and lead to his death.四月二十九日。
April 29th.

“多难之月”

“多难之月”

“多难之月”

"Difficult Moon"前月底的报章上，多说五月是“多难之月”。这名目，以前是没有见过的。现在这“多难之月”已经临头了。从经过了的日子来想一想，不错，五一是“劳动节”，可以说很有些“多难”；五三是济南惨案纪念日，也当然属于“多难”之一的。但五四是新文化运动的发扬，五五是革命政府成立的佳日，为什么都包括在“难”字堆里的呢？这可真有点儿希奇古怪！
In the newspapers at the end of last month, it was said that May was a "difficult month". This name has never been seen before. Now this "difficult month" is coming. Thinking about it from the days that have passed, yes, May Day is "Labor Day", which can be said to be a bit "difficult"; May 3rd is the anniversary of the Jinan Massacre, and of course it is one of the "difficulties". But May Fourth is the development of the new cultural movement, and May 5th is a good day for the establishment of the revolutionary government, why are they all included in the pile of "difficult"? This is really a bit weird!不过只要将这“难”字，不作国民“受难”的“难”字解，而作令人“为难”的“难”字解，则一切困难，可就涣然冰释了。
However, as long as the word "difficult" is not interpreted as the word "difficult" for the people, but as the word "difficult" that makes people "difficult", then all difficulties will be completely resolved.时势也真改变得飞快，古之佳节，后来自不免化为难关。先前的开会，是听大众在空地上开的，现在却要防人“乘机捣乱”了，所以只得函请代表，齐集洋楼，还要由军警维持秩序。先前的要人，虽然出来要“清道”（俗名“净街”），但还是走在地上的，现在却更要防人“谋为不轨”了，必得坐着飞机，须到出洋的时候，才能放心送给朋友。名人逛一趟古董店，先前也不算奇事情的，现在却“微服”“微服”的嚷得人耳聋，只好或登名山，或入古庙，比较的免掉大惊小怪。总而言之，可靠的国之柱石，已经多在半空中，最低限度也上了高楼峻岭了，地上就只留着些可疑的百姓，实做了“下民”，且又民匪难分，一有庆吊，总不免“假名滋扰”。向来虽靠“华洋两方当局，先事严防”，没有闹过什么大乱子，然而总比平时费力的，这就令人为难，而五月也成了“多难之月”，纪念的是好是坏，日子的为戚为喜，都不在话下。
The times are really changing rapidly, and the ancient festivals will inevitably turn into difficulties. The previous meeting was held by the public in the open space, but now it is necessary to prevent people from "taking advantage of the opportunity to make trouble", so they had to write to the representatives, gather in the western-style building, and maintain order by the military and police. In the past, although the dignitaries came out to "clear the road" (commonly known as "clean streets"), they still walked on the ground, but now they have to prevent people from "plotting misdeeds", and they must take a plane, and they must go abroad before they can be relieved to give them to their friends. Celebrities visited an antique shop, which was not unusual before, but now the shouts of "micro-service" and "micro-service" are deafening, so they have to either climb famous mountains or enter ancient temples, so as to avoid fuss. All in all, the pillars of a reliable country are already mostly in mid-air, and at least they have gone up to the high-rise mountains, and only some suspicious people remain on the ground, and they have actually become "lower people", and the people and bandits are indistinguishable. Although it has always relied on "the authorities of both China and the West, strict prevention in advance", there has been no big trouble, but it is always more laborious than usual, which is embarrassing, and May has also become a "difficult month", commemorating whether it is good or bad, and the days are happy and joyful, which is not a problem.但愿世界上大事件不要增加起来；但愿中国里惨案不要再有；但愿也不再有什么政府成立；但愿也不再有伟人的生日和忌日增添。否则，日积月累，不久就会成个“多难之年”，不但华洋当局，老是为难，连我们走在地面上的小百姓，也只好永远身带“嫌疑”，奉陪戒严，呜呼哀哉，不能喘气了。
I hope that the major events in the world will not increase; I hope there will be no more tragedies in China; I hope there will be no more governments; I hope there will be no more birthdays and death anniversaries of great men. Otherwise, over time, it will soon become a "difficult year", not only the Chinese and foreign authorities, but also the common people who walk on the ground, have to always carry "suspicion", accompany martial law, alas, can't breathe.五月五日。
May 5th.

不负责任的坦克车

不负责任的坦克车

不负责任的坦克车

Irresponsible tanks新近报上说，江西人第一次看了坦克车。自然，江西人的眼福很好。然而也有人惴惴然，唯恐又要掏腰包，报效坦克捐。我倒记起了另外一件事：
The new newspaper said that Jiangxi people saw tanks for the first time. Naturally, Jiangxi people have good eyes. However, there are also people who are anxious, afraid that they will have to pay for the tank donation again. I remembered another thing:有一个自称姓“张”的说过，“我是拥护言论不自由者……唯其言论不自由，才有好文章做出来，所谓冷嘲，讽刺，幽默和其他形形色色，不敢负言论责任的文体，在压迫钳制之下，都应运产生出来了。”这所谓不负责任的文体，不知道比坦克车怎样？
A person who claimed to be surnamed "Zhang" said, "I am a supporter of freedom of speech...... Only when their speech is not free can good articles be made, and the so-called cynicism, sarcasm, humor and other styles that dare not take responsibility for speech have come into being under oppression. "I don't know how this so-called irresponsible style is compared to a tank?讽刺等类为什么是不负责任，我可不知道。然而听人议论“风凉话”怎么不行，“冷箭”怎么射死了天才，倒也多年了。既然多年，似乎就很有道理。大致是骂人不敢充好汉，胆小。其实，躲在厚厚的铁板——坦克车里面，砰砰碰碰的轰炸，是着实痛快得多，虽然也似乎并不胆大。
I don't know why satire and other kinds are irresponsible. However, it has been many years since I heard people talk about how "sarcastic words" can't be done, and how "cold arrows" shot geniuses to death. Since it has been so many years, it seems to make sense. Roughly speaking, he scolded people for not daring to be a hero, and he was timid. In fact, hiding in a thick iron plate-tank, the bombardment with a bang is really much more enjoyable, although it doesn't seem to be bold.高等人向来就善于躲在厚厚的东西后面来杀人的。古时候有厚厚的城墙，为的要防备盗匪和流寇。现在就有钢马甲，铁甲车，坦克车。就是保障“民国”和私产的法律，也总是厚厚的一大本。甚至于自天子以至卿大夫的棺材，也比庶民的要厚些。至于脸皮的厚，也是合于古礼的。
High people have always been good at hiding behind thick things to kill. In ancient times, there were thick city walls to guard against bandits and bandits. Now there are steel vests, armored vehicles, tanks. Even the law that protects the "Republic of China" and private property is always a thick book. Even the coffins of the emperor and the ministers are thicker than those of the common people. As for the thickness of the skin, it is also in line with ancient etiquette.独有下等人要这么自卫一下，就要受到“不负责任”等类的嘲笑：
If a lowly person wants to defend himself like this, he will be ridiculed as "irresponsible":“你敢出来！出来！躲在背后说风凉话不算好汉！”
"You dare to come out! Come out! Hiding behind your back and saying sarcastic words is not a hero! ”但是，如果你上了他的当，真的赤膊奔上前阵，像许褚似的充好汉，那他那边立刻就会给你一枪，老实不客气，然后，再学着金圣叹批《三国演义》的笔法，骂一声“谁叫你赤膊的”——活该。总之，死活都有罪。足见做人实在很难，而做坦克车要容易得多。
However, if you are fooled by him and really rush to the front shirt and act as a good man like Xu Chu, then he will immediately give you a shot, honestly and unceremoniously, and then learn the brushwork of Jin Shengsi's criticism of "Romance of the Three Kingdoms" and scold "Who told you to be shirtless" - you deserve it. In short, life and death are guilty. It shows that it is really difficult to be a person, and it is much easier to be a tanker.五月六日。
May 6th.

从盛宣怀说到有理的压迫

从盛宣怀说到有理的压迫

从盛宣怀说到有理的压迫

From Sheng Xuanhuai to reasonable oppression盛氏的祖宗积德很厚，他们的子孙就举行了两次“收复失地”的盛典：一次还是在袁世凯的民国政府治下，一次就在当今国民政府治下了。
The ancestors of the Sheng family were very virtuous, and their descendants held two grand ceremonies to "regain lost territory": once under Yuan Shikai's Republic of China government, and once under the current Nationalist government.民元的时候，说盛宣怀是第一名的卖国贼，将他的家产没收了。不久，似乎是二次革命之后，就发还了。那是没有什么奇怪的，因为袁世凯是“物伤其类”，他自己也是卖国贼。不是年年都在纪念五七和五九么？袁世凯签订过二十一条，卖国是有真凭实据的。
During the Minyuan period, it was said that Sheng Xuanhuai was the number one traitor and confiscated his family property. Soon, it seems that after the Second Revolution, it was returned. There is nothing strange about that, because Yuan Shikai is a "material injury", and he himself is also a traitor. Isn't it commemorating May 7th and May 9th every year? Yuan Shikai signed 21 articles, and there is real evidence for betraying the country.最近又在报上发见这么一段消息，大致是说：“盛氏家产早已奉命归还，如苏州之留园，江阴无锡之典当等，正在办理发还手续。”这却叫我吃了一惊。打听起来，说是民国十六年国民革命军初到沪宁的时候，又没收了一次盛氏家产：那次的罪名大概是“土豪劣绅”，绅而至于“劣”，再加上卖国的旧罪，自然又该没收了。可是为什么又发还了呢？
Recently, I saw such a piece of news in the newspaper, which roughly said: "The Sheng family's property has long been ordered to be returned, such as the Lingering Garden in Suzhou, the pawn in Wuxi, Jiangyin, etc., and they are going through the return procedures." This surprised me. It sounds like it was when the National Revolutionary Army first arrived in Shanghai and Nanjing in the sixteenth year of the Republic of China, and the Sheng family's property was confiscated again: that time the crime was probably "local tyrants and inferior gentry", and the gentry were "inferior", coupled with the old crime of betraying the country, it should naturally be confiscated again. But why was it returned?第一，不应当疑心现在有卖国贼，因为并无真凭实据——现在的人早就誓不签订辱国条约，他们不比盛宣怀和袁世凯。第二，现在正在募航空捐，足见政府财政并不宽裕。那末，为什么呢？
First, we should not suspect that there are traitors now, because there is no real evidence - people today have long vowed not to sign treaties of humiliation, and they are not as good as Sheng Xuanhuai and Yuan Shikai. Second, it is now raising aviation donations, which shows that the government is not financially sufficient. So why?学理上研究的结果是——压迫本来有两种：一种是有理的，而且永久有理的，一种是无理的。有理的，就像逼小百姓还高利贷，交田租之类；这种压迫的“理”写在布告上：“借债还钱本中外所同之定理，租田纳税乃千古不易之成规。”无理的，就是没收盛宣怀的家产等等了；这种“压迫”巨绅的手法，在当时也许有理，现在早已变成无理的了。
The result of theoretical research is that there are two types of oppression: one is justified and permanently justified, and the other is unreasonable. Reasonable is like forcing the common people to repay usury, pay land rent, etc.; The "reason" of this oppression is written in the bulletin: "Borrowing to repay money is the same theorem at home and abroad, and renting land and paying taxes is an unchanged rule throughout the ages." "Unreasonable, that is, confiscate Sheng Xuanhuai's family property and so on; This method of "oppressing" the gentry may have been reasonable at the time, but now it has long become unreasonable.初初看见报上登载的《五一告工友书》上说：“反抗本国资本家无理的压迫”，我也是吃了一惊的。这不是提倡阶级斗争么？后来想想也就明白了。这是说，无理的压迫要反对，有理的不在此例。至于怎样有理，看下去就懂得了，下文是说：“必须克苦耐劳，加紧生产……尤应共体时艰，力谋劳资间之真诚合作，消弭劳资间之一切纠纷。”还有说“中国工人没有外国工人那么苦”等等的。
I was also surprised to see the "May Day Letter to the Workers" published in the newspaper saying: "Resist the unreasonable oppression of the capitalists in our country". Isn't this advocating class struggle? Later, when I thought about it, I understood. This means that unreasonable oppression should be opposed, and reasonable oppression should not be in this case. As for how it is reasonable, you will understand it by reading it, and the following says: "We must overcome hardships and work hard and step up production...... In particular, we should work together to seek sincere cooperation between labor and management and eliminate all disputes between labor and management. It is also said that "Chinese workers are not as miserable as foreign workers" and so on.我心上想，幸而没有大惊小怪地叫起来，天下的事情总是有道理的，一切压迫也是如此。何况对付盛宣怀等的理由虽然很少，而对付工人总不会没有的。
I thought to myself, fortunately, there was no fuss, things in the world always make sense, and the same is true for all oppression. What's more, although there are few reasons to deal with Sheng Xuanhuai and others, there will be no reason to deal with workers.五月六日。
May 6th.

王化

王化

王化

Wang Hua中国的王化现在真是“光被四表格于上下”的了。
China's Wang Hua is now really "light up and down".溥仪的弟媳妇跟着一位厨司务，卷了三万多元逃走了。于是中国的法庭把她缉获归案，判定“交还夫家管束”。满洲国虽然“伪”，夫权是不“伪”的。
Puyi's sister-in-law followed a chef and fled with more than 30,000 yuan. So the Chinese court arrested her and ruled that she should be "returned to her husband's custody". Although Manchukuo is "pseudo", husband's power is not "pseudo".新疆的回民闹乱子，于是派出宣慰使。
The Hui people in Xinjiang were in trouble, so they sent envoys.蒙古的王公流离失所了，于是特别组织“蒙古王公救济委员会”。
The Mongolian princes were displaced, so a special organization was organized to organize the "Mongolian Princes Relief Committee".对于西藏的怀柔，是请班禅喇嘛诵经念咒。
For Tibet's Huairou, it is to ask the Panchen Lama to chant scriptures and chant mantras.而最宽仁的王化政策，要算广西对付瑶民的办法。据《大晚报》载，这种“宽仁政策”是在三万瑶民之中杀死三千人，派了三架飞机到瑶洞里去“下蛋”，使他们“惊诧为天神天将而不战自降”。事后，还要挑选瑶民代表到外埠来观光，叫他们看看上国的文化，例如马路上，红头阿三的威武之类。
The most lenient royal policy should be considered Guangxi's way of dealing with the Yao people. According to the "Evening News", this "benevolent policy" killed 3,000 people among the 30,000 Yao people and sent three planes to the Yao cave to "lay eggs", so that they "were amazed to be gods and generals without fighting". Afterwards, representatives of the Yao people were also selected to go to foreign ports for sightseeing, so that they could see the culture of the upper country, such as the majesty of the red-headed Ah San on the road.而红头阿三说的是：勿要哗啦哗啦！
And the red-headed Ah San said: Don't make a fuss!这些久已归化的“夷狄”，近来总是“哗啦哗啦”，原因是都有些怨了。王化盛行的时候，“东面而征西夷怨，南面而征北狄怨。”这原是当然的道理。
These long-time naturalized "barbarians" have always been "wow" recently, and the reason is that they are a little resentful. When kingization was prevalent, "the east conquered the western barbarians, and the south conquered the northern Di resentment." This is a matter of course.不过我们还是东奔西走，南征北剿，决不偷懒。虽然劳苦些，但“精神上的胜利”是属于我们的。
However, we still run around, march south and suppress in the north, and never be lazy. Although it is a little harder, the "spiritual victory" belongs to us.等到“伪”满的夫权保障了，蒙古的王公救济了，喇嘛的经咒念完了，回民真的安慰了，瑶民“不战自降”了，还有什么事可以做呢？自然只有修文德以服“远人”的日本了。这时候，我们印度阿三式的责任算是尽到了。
When the "pseudo" Manchu husband's power was guaranteed, the Mongolian princes were relieved, the lama's chanting was over, the Hui people were really comforted, and the Yao people "surrendered without a fight", what else could be done? Naturally, there is only Japan that cultivates culture and virtue to subdue "distant people". At this time, our Indian Ah Sanshi responsibility has been fulfilled.呜呼，草野小民，生逢盛世，唯有逖听欢呼，闻风鼓舞而已！
呜呼，草野小民，生逢盛世，唯有逖听欢呼，闻风鼓舞而已！五月七日。
May 7th.这篇被新闻检查处抽掉了，没有登出。幸而既非瑶民，又居租界，得免于国货的飞机来“下蛋”，然而“勿要哗啦哗啦”却是一律的，所以连“欢呼”也不许，——然则惟有一声不响，装死救国而已！
This article was removed by the Press Inspection Office and was not published. Fortunately, they are not Yao people, and they live in the concession, so they are exempt from domestic planes to "lay eggs", but "don't make a fuss" is the same, so even "cheers" are not allowed,—— but there is only one silence, pretending to be dead to save the country!十五夜记。
Fifteen Night Records.

天上地下

天上地下

天上地下

Heaven and earth中国现在有两种炸，一种是炸进去，一种是炸进来。
China now has two types of bombing, one is to blow it in, and the other is to blow it in.炸进去之一例曰：“日内除飞机往匪区轰炸外，无战事，三四两队，七日晨迄申，更番成队飞宜黄以西崇仁以南掷百二十磅弹两三百枚，凡匪足资屏蔽处炸毁几平，使匪无从休养。……”（五月十日《申报》南昌专电）
炸进去之一例曰：“日内除飞机往匪区轰炸外，无战事，三四两队，七日晨迄申，更番成队飞宜黄以西崇仁以南掷百二十磅弹两三百枚，凡匪足资屏蔽处炸毁几平，使匪无从休养。 ……”（五月十日《申报》南昌专电）炸进来之一例曰：“今晨六时，敌机炸蓟县，死民十余，又密云今遭敌轰四次，每次二架，投弹盈百，损害正详查中。……”（同日《大晚报》北平电）
An example of the bombing said: "At 6 o'clock this morning, enemy planes bombed Jixian County, killing more than ten people, and it was secretly said that it was bombed by the enemy four times today, two each time, dropping more than 100 bombs, and the damage is under detailed investigation. ......" ("Evening News" Peking Telegraph on the same day)应了这运会而生的，是上海小学生的买飞机，和北平小学生的挖地洞。
In response to this Games, Shanghai primary school students bought planes and Peking primary school students dug holes.这也是对于“非安内无以攘外”或“安内急于攘外”的题目，做出来的两股好文章。
These are also two good articles on the topic of "no internal security can resist the outside" or "the internal eagerness to repel the outside".住在租界里的人们是有福的。但试闭目一想，想得广大一些，就会觉得内是官兵在天上，“共匪”和“匪化”了的百姓在地下，外是敌军在天上，没有“匪化”了的百姓在地下。“损害正详查中”，而太平之区，却造起了宝塔。释迦出世，一手指天，一手指地曰：“天上地下，惟我独尊！”此之谓也。
Blessed are the people who live in the concession. But if you try to close your eyes and think about it more broadly, you will feel that the officers and soldiers are in the sky, the "communist bandits" and "bandits" are underground, the enemy is in the sky outside, and the people who have not been "banditized" are underground. "The damage is being investigated in detail", but in the peaceful area, a pagoda was built. Shakyamuni was born, pointing to the sky with one hand and the earth with the other, and said: "In heaven and on earth, I am the only one!" This is what it means.但又试闭目一想，想得久远一些，可就遇着难题目了。假如炸进去慢，炸进来快，两种飞机遇着了，又怎么办呢？停止了“安内”，回转头来“迎头痛击”呢，还是仍然只管自己炸进去，一任他跟着炸进来，一前一后，同炸“匪区”，待到炸清了，然后再“攘”他们出去呢？……
But try to close your eyes and think about it for a long time, but you will encounter a difficult problem. What if the two planes meet? Stop "Annei", turn around and "attack head-on", or do you still just blow it in, let him blow it in, one after another, blow up the "bandit area" together, wait until it is blown up, and then "steal" them out? ……不过这只是讲笑话，事实是决不会弄到这地步的。即使弄到这地步，也没有什么难解决：外洋养病，名山拜佛，这就完结了。
But this is just a joke, the truth is that it will never get to this point. Even if it gets to this point, there is nothing difficult to solve: recuperating from foreign countries and worshiping Buddha in famous mountains, this is the end.五月十六日。
May 16th.记得末尾的三句，原稿是“外洋养病，脊背生疮，名山上拜佛，小便里有糖，这就完结了。”
I remember the last three sentences, the original manuscript is "Recuperating from foreign countries, sores on the back, worshiping Buddha on famous mountains, and having sugar in the urine, this is the end." ”十九夜补记。
Nineteen nights supplementary notes.

保留

保留

保留

retain这几天的报章告诉我们：新任政务整理委员会委员长黄郛的专车一到天津，即有十七岁的青年刘庚生掷一炸弹，犯人当场捕获，据供系受日人指使，遂于次日绑赴新站外枭首示众云。
The newspapers in the past few days tell us that as soon as the special car of Huang Feng, the new chairman of the Political Affairs Consolidation Committee, arrived in Tianjin, a 17-year-old young man Liu Gengsheng threw a bomb, and the prisoner was captured on the spot.清朝的变成民国，虽然已经二十二年，但宪法草案的民族民权两篇，日前这才草成，尚未颁布。上月杭州曾将西湖抢犯当众斩决，据说奔往赏鉴者有“万人空巷”之概。可见这虽与“民权篇”第一项的“提高民族地位”稍有出入，却很合于“民族篇”第二项的“发扬民族精神”。南北统一，业已八年，天津也来挂一颗小小的头颅，以示全国一致，原也不必大惊小怪的。
Although it has been 22 years since the Qing Dynasty became the Republic of China, the two articles of national civil rights in the draft constitution have only been drafted a few days ago and have not yet been promulgated. Last month, Hangzhou beheaded the West Lake robbers in public, and it is said that those who rushed to appreciate it had the general idea of "10,000 people in an empty alley". It can be seen that although this is slightly different from the "improving national status" in the first item of the "Civil Rights Chapter", it is very much in line with the "carrying forward the national spirit" in the second item of the "Nationality Chapter". It has been eight years since the reunification of the north and south, and Tianjin has also come to hang a small head to show the unity of the whole country, so there is no need to make a fuss.其次，是中国虽说“惟女子与小人为难养也”，但一有事故，除三老通电，二老宣言，九四老人题字之外，总有许多“童子爱国”，“佳人从军”的美谈，使壮年男儿索然无色。我们的民族，好像往往是“小时了了，大未必佳”，到得老年，才又脱尽暮气，据讣文，死的就更其了不得。则十七岁的少年而来投掷炸弹，也不是出于情理之外的。
Secondly, although China says that "only women and villains are difficult to raise", as soon as there is an accident, in addition to the electrification of the three elders, the declaration of the two elders, and the inscription of the ninety-fourth elders, there are always many beautiful stories of "boys and patriots" and "beautiful women in the army", which makes middle-aged men colorless. Our nation seems to be often "when you are young, big is not necessarily good", and when you are old, you will get rid of your twilight again, and according to the obituary, the death is even more terrible. It is not unreasonable for a seventeen-year-old boy to throw a bomb.但我要保留的，是“据供系受日人指使”这一节，因为这就是所谓卖国。二十年来，国难不息，而被大众公认为卖国者，一向全是三十以上的人，虽然他们后来依然逍遥自在。至于少年和儿童，则拚命的使尽他们稚弱的心力和体力，携着竹筒或扑满，奔走于风沙泥泞中，想于中国有些微的裨益者，真不知有若干次数了。虽然因为他们无先见之明，这些用汗血求来的金钱，大抵反以供虎狼的一舐，然而爱国之心是真诚的，卖国的事是向来没有的。
But what I want to keep is the section "according to the confession was instructed by the Japanese", because this is the so-called betrayal. In the past twenty years, the country has been in constant trouble, and the public has always been recognized as a traitor, all of whom are over thirty people, although they are still at ease later. As for teenagers and children, they desperately use their weak mental and physical strength, carrying bamboo tubes or pounce on them, running in the wind and sand mud, thinking that there are some small benefits in China, I really don't know how many times. Although because they have no foresight, the money obtained with sweat and blood is mostly for tigers and wolves, but patriotism is sincere, and betrayal has never been done before.不料这一次却破例了，但我希望我们将加给他的罪名暂时保留，再来看一看事实，这事实不必待至三年，也不必待至五十年，在那挂着的头颅还未烂掉之前，就要明白了：谁是卖国者。
Unexpectedly, this time he made an exception, but I hope we will keep the charges against him for the time being, and then look at the facts, this fact does not have to stay for three years, nor for fifty years, before the hanging head rots, we must understand: who is the traitor.从我们的儿童和少年的头颅上，洗去喷来的狗血罢！
Wash off the dog blood from the heads of our children and teenagers!五月十七日。
May 17th.这一篇和以后的三篇，都没有能够登出。
This one and the next three articles were not able to be logged out.七月十九日。
July 19th.

再谈保留

再谈保留

再谈保留

Let's talk about reservations因为讲过刘庚生的罪名，就想到开口和动笔，在现在的中国，实在也很难的，要稳当，还是不响的好。要不然，就常不免反弄到自己的头上来。
Because I talked about Liu Gengsheng's crimes, I thought of opening my mouth and starting to write, in today's China, it is really difficult, to be stable, it is better not to make a sound. Otherwise, it will often be on your head.举几个例在这里——
Here are a few examples -十二年前，鲁迅作的一篇《阿Q正传》，大约是想暴露国民的弱点的，虽然没有说明自己是否也包含在里面。然而到得今年，有几个人就用“阿Q”来称他自己了，这就是现世的恶报。
Twelve years ago, Lu Xun wrote a "The True Biography of Ah Q", which probably wanted to expose the weaknesses of the people, although it did not explain whether it was also included. However, this year, a few people have used "Ah Q" to call themselves, which is the evil retribution of this world.八九年前，正人君子们办了一种报，说反对者是拿了卢布的，所以在学界捣乱。然而过了四五年，正人又是教授，君子化为主任，靠俄款享福，听到停付，就要力争了。这虽然是现世的善报，但也总是弄到自己的头上来。
Eight or nine years ago, the righteous gentlemen ran a newspaper saying that the opponents took rubles, so they made trouble in the academic world. However, after four or five years, Masato became a professor again, a gentleman turned into a director, relying on Russian money to enjoy happiness, and when he heard that the payment was stopped, he had to fight for it. Although this is a good reward in this world, it always comes to one's own head.不过用笔的人，即使小心，也总不免略欠周到的。最近的例，则如各报章上，“敌”呀，“逆”呀，“伪”呀，“傀儡国”呀，用得沸反盈天。不这样写，实在也不足以表示其爱国，且将为读者所不满。谁料得到“某机关通知：御侮要重实际，逆敌一类过度刺激字面，无裨实际，后宜屏用”，而且黄委员长抵平，发表政见，竟说是“中国和战皆处被动，办法难言，国难不止一端，亟谋最后挽救”（并见十八日《大晚报》北平电）的呢？……
However, people who use pens, even if they are careful, are always a little unthoughtful. Recent examples, such as in various newspapers, are used to say "enemy", "rebel", "pseudo", and "puppet state". If you don't write it like this, it is really not enough to show your patriotism, and it will be dissatisfied with readers. Who would have thought that "a certain organ notified that the insult should be practical, and the excessive stimulation of the enemy is not helpful to reality, and it should be used later", and Chairman Huang resisted the peace and expressed his political opinions, actually saying that "China and the war are passive, the methods are difficult to say, and the national crisis is more than one end, and it is urgent to seek the final salvation" (and see the "Great Evening News" Peking Telegraph on the 18th)? ……幸而还好，报上果然只看见“日机威胁北平”之类的题目，没有“过度刺激字面”了，只是“汉奸”的字样却还有。日既非敌，汉何云奸，这似乎不能不说是一个大漏洞。好在汉人是不怕“过度刺激字面”的，就是砍下头来，挂在街头，给中外士女欣赏，也从来不会有人来说一句话。
Fortunately, the newspaper really only saw titles such as "Japanese planes threaten Peking", and there was no "overstimulation literal", but the words "traitor" were still there. Since the sun is not an enemy, Han He is treacherous, which seems to be a big loophole. Fortunately, the Han people are not afraid of "overstimulating the literal", that is, they cut off their heads, hang them on the streets, and give them to Chinese and foreign men and women to appreciate, and no one will ever say a word.这些处所，我们是知道说话之难的。
In these places, we know how difficult it is to speak.从清朝的文字狱以后，文人不敢做野史了，如果有谁能忘了三百年前的恐怖，只要撮取报章，存其精英，就是一部不朽的大作。但自然，也不必神经过敏，预先改称为“上国”或“天机”的。
Since the literary prison of the Qing Dynasty, the literati did not dare to do wild history, if anyone can forget the horror of three hundred years ago, as long as the newspaper is taken and its elites are preserved, it is an immortal masterpiece. But naturally, there is no need to be nervous, and it will be renamed "Shangguo" or "Tianji" in advance.五月十七日。
May 17th.

“有名无实”的反驳

“有名无实”的反驳

“有名无实”的反驳

The rebuttal of "nominal and unsubstantiated"新近的《战区见闻记》有这么一段记载：
The recent "War Zone Observations" has this passage:“记者适遇一排长，甫由前线调防于此，彼云，我军前在石门寨，海阳镇，秦皇岛，牛头关，柳江等处所做阵地及掩蔽部……化洋三四十万元，木材重价尚不在内……艰难缔造，原期死守，不幸冷口失陷，一令传出，即行后退，血汗金钱所合并成立之阵地，多未重用，弃若敝屣，至堪痛心；不抵抗将军下台，上峰易人，我士兵莫不额手相庆……结果心与愿背。不幸生为中国人！尤不幸生为有名无实之抗日军人！”（五月十七日《申报》特约通信。）
The reporter happened to meet a platoon commander, who had just been transferred from the front line to defend here, and he said that our army had previously made positions and cover departments in Shimenzhai, Haiyang Town, Qinhuangdao, Niutouguan, Liujiang and other places...... The price of wood is not included...... Difficult to create, the original period of death, unfortunately the cold mouth falls, as soon as the order is issued, the line retreats, and the positions formed by the merger of hard-earned money are mostly not reused, abandoned like a shoe, which is very sad; If you do not resist the general's resignation, the peak will change, and our soldiers will celebrate with their hands...... As a result, the heart is contrary to the wish. Unfortunately, I was born Chinese! Especially unfortunately, he was born as a nominal anti-Japanese soldier! (Special correspondence of the "Declaration" on May 17.) ）这排长的天真，正好证明未经“教训”的愚劣人民，不足与言政治。第一，他以为不抵抗将军下台，“不抵抗”就一定跟着下台了。这是不懂逻辑：将军是一个人，而不抵抗是一种主义，人可以下台，主义却可以仍旧留在台上的。第二，他以为化了三四十万大洋建筑了防御工程，就一定要死守的了（总算还好，他没有想到进攻）。这是不懂策略：防御工程原是建筑给老百姓看看的，并不是教你死守的阵地，真正的策略却是“诱敌深入”。第三，他虽然奉令后退，却敢于“痛心”。这是不懂哲学：他的心非得治一治不可！第四，他“额手称庆”，实在高兴得太快了。这是不懂命理：中国人生成是苦命的。如此痴呆的排长，难怪他连叫两个“不幸”，居然自己承认是“有名无实的抗日军人”。其实究竟是谁“有名无实”，他是始终没有懂得的。
The naivety of this platoon leader just proves that the foolish people who have not been "taught" are not enough to talk about politics. First, he thought that if he did not resist the general's resignation, "non-resistance" would definitely follow. This is not understanding logic: the general is a person, and not resisting is a kind of doctrine, and people can step down, but doctrine can remain on the stage. Second, he thought that after turning three or four hundred thousand oceans into a defensive project, he would have to defend it (fortunately, he didn't think of attacking). This is not understanding strategy: the defense project was originally built for the common people to see, not to teach you to hold the position, but the real strategy is to "lure the enemy deeper". Third, although he was ordered to retreat, he dared to "be sad". This is not understanding philosophy: his heart must be cured! Fourth, he was so happy that he was "celebrating with his forehead". This is not understanding numerology: Chinese life is hard. With such a demented platoon commander, it is no wonder that he called two "unfortunate" in a row, and actually admitted that he was a "nominal anti-Japanese soldier". In fact, he never understood who was "famous or not".至于比排长更下等的小兵，那不用说，他们只会“打开天窗说亮话，咱们弟兄，处于今日局势，若非对外，鲜有不哗变者”（同上通信）。这还成话么？古人说，“无敌国外患者，国恒亡。”以前我总不大懂得这是什么意思：既然连敌国都没有了，我们的国还会亡给谁呢？现在照这兵士的话就明白了，国是可以亡给“哗变者”的。
As for the soldiers who are inferior to the platoon commander, needless to say, they will only "open the skylight and say bright words, our brothers, in today's situation, if it is not for the outside world, there are few who do not mutiny" (ibid.). Is this still a statement? The ancients said, "If there are no invincible foreign patients, the country will perish." "I didn't really understand what this meant before: Since there is no enemy country, to whom will our country die? Now according to the words of this soldier, it is clear that the country can be destroyed by the "mutineers".结论：要不亡国，必须多找些“敌国外患”来，更必须多多“教训”那些痛心的愚劣人民，使他们变成“有名有实”。
Conclusion: In order not to destroy the country, we must find more "enemies and foreign troubles", and we must "teach more" those sad foolish people more "lessons" so that they can become "famous and real".五月十八日。
May 18th.

不求甚解

不求甚解

不求甚解

I don't want to understand it very much文章一定要有注解，尤其是世界要人的文章。有些文学家自己做的文章还要自己来注释，觉得很麻烦。至于世界要人就不然，他们有的是秘书，或是私淑弟子，替他们来做注释的工作。然而另外有一种文章，却是注释不得的。
Articles must be annotated, especially articles by world dignitaries. Some writers have to annotate their own articles, which they find very troublesome. As for the world's dignitaries, some of them are secretaries or private disciples who do the annotation work for them. However, there is another article that cannot be annotated.譬如说，世界第一要人美国总统发表了“和平”宣言，据说是要禁止各国军队越出国境。但是，注释家立刻就说：“至于美国之驻兵于中国，则为条约所许，故不在罗斯福总统所提议之禁止内”（十六日路透社华盛顿电）。再看罗氏的原文：“世界各国应参加一庄严而确切之不侵犯公约，及重行庄严声明其限制及减少军备之义务，并在签约各国能忠实履行其义务时，各自承允不派遣任何性质之武装军队越出国境。”要是认真注解起来，这其实是说：凡是不“确切”，不“庄严”，并不“自己承允”的国家，尽可以派遣任何性质的军队越出国境。至少，中国人且慢高兴，照这样解释，日本军队的越出国境，理由还是十足的；何况连美国自己驻在中国的军队，也早已声明是“不在此例”了。可是，这种认真的注释是叫人扫兴的。
For example, the president of the United States, the world's number one dignitary, issued a "peace" declaration, which is said to prohibit the armies of various countries from crossing the border. However, the commentator immediately said: "As for the stationing of U.S. troops in China, it is permitted by the treaty, so it is not within the prohibition proposed by President Roosevelt" (Reuters, Washington, 16th). Let's look at Roche's original text: "All countries in the world should participate in a solemn and definite non-aggression convention, and reaffirm their solemn declaration of their obligation to limit and reduce armaments, and when the signatory countries can faithfully fulfill their obligations, they each promise not to send armed troops of any nature beyond their borders." If you carefully comment on it, this actually means that any country that is not "accurate", not "solemn", and not "self-appropriate" can send troops of any nature beyond the borders. At least, the Chinese are slowly happy, and according to this explanation, the Japanese army crossed the border, and the reason is still full; What's more, even the United States' own troops stationed in China have already stated that it is "not in this case". However, this serious annotation is disappointing.再则，像“誓不签订辱国条约”一句经文，也早已有了不少传注。传曰：“对日妥协，现在无人敢言，亦无人敢行。”这里，主要的是一个“敢”字。但是：签订条约有敢与不敢的分别，这是拿笔杆的人的事，而拿枪杆的人却用不着研究敢与不敢的为难问题——缩短防线，诱敌深入之类的策略是用不着签订的。就是拿笔杆的人也不至于只会签字，假使这样，未免太低能。所以又有一说，谓之“一面交涉”。于是乎注疏就来了：“以不承认为责任者之第三者，用不合理之方法，以口头交涉……清算无益之抗日。”这是日本电通社的消息。这种泄漏天机的注解也是十分讨厌的，因此，这不会不是日本人的“造谣”。
Furthermore, the sentence "swear not to sign a treaty of humiliation" has already been commented on. It is said: "Compromise with Japan, no one dares to say it now, and no one dares to do it. Here, the main thing is the word "dare". However, there is a difference between daring and not daring to sign a treaty, which is the matter of the person holding the pen, and the person holding the barrel of the gun does not need to study the embarrassment of daring and not daring - strategies such as shortening the defense line and luring the enemy deeper do not need to be signed. Even the person holding the pen will not only sign, if so, it is too imbecile. Therefore, there is another saying, called "one-sided negotiation". So the annotation came: "The third party who is responsible for non-recognition uses unreasonable methods to make oral negotiations...... Liquidation of useless anti-Japanese resistance. This is a message from Nippon Telecommunications. This kind of annotation of leaking the secret is also very annoying, so this will not be a "rumor" by the Japanese.总之，这类文章浑沌一体，最妙是不用注解，尤其是那种使人扫兴或讨厌的注解。
In short, this kind of article is chaotic, and the best thing is not to use annotations, especially the kind of annotations that make people disappointed or annoying.小时候读书讲到陶渊明的“好读书不求甚解”，先生就给我讲了，他说：“不求甚解”者，就是不去看注解，而只读本文的意思。注解虽有，确有人不愿意我们去看的。
When I was a child, I read about Tao Yuanming's "good reading does not ask for much understanding", and my teacher told me, he said: "Don't ask for much understanding", that is, do not read the annotations, but only read the meaning of this article. Although there are annotations, there are indeed people who do not want us to see them.五月十八日。
May 18th.

后记

后记

后记

postscript我向《自由谈》投稿的由来，《前记》里已经说过了。到这里，本文已完，而电灯尚明，蚊子暂静，便用剪刀和笔，再来保存些因为《自由谈》和我而起的琐闻，算是一点余兴。
The origin of my contribution to "Free Talk" has already been said in the "Preface". At this point, this article is over, and the electric lights are still bright, and the mosquitoes are temporarily quiet, so I use scissors and pens to save some trivia because of "Free Talk" and me, which is a little afterfun.只要一看就知道，在我的发表短评时中，攻击得最烈的是《大晚报》。这也并非和我前生有仇，是因为我引用了它的文字。但我也并非和它前生有仇，是因为我所看的只有《申报》和《大晚报》两种，而后者的文字往往颇觉新奇，值得引用，以消愁释闷。即如我的眼前，现在就有一张包了香烟来的三月三十日的旧《大晚报》在，其中有着这样的一段——
Just look at it and you can see that among my short comments, the most attacked was the "Great Evening News". This is not a grudge against me in my previous life, but because I quoted its text. But I don't have a grudge against it in my previous life, because I only read "Declaration" and "Evening News", and the latter's text is often quite novel and worth quoting to relieve sorrow and boredom. That is, as in front of my eyes, there is now an old "Evening News" on March 30 with cigarettes wrapped in it, which has such a paragraph -“浦东人杨江生，年已四十有一，貌既丑陋，人复贫穷，向为泥水匠，曾佣于苏州人盛宝山之泥水作场。盛有女名金弟，今方十五龄，而矮小异常，人亦猥琐。昨晚八时，杨在虹口天潼路与盛相遇，杨奸其女。经捕头向杨询问，杨毫不抵赖，承认自去年一二八以后，连续行奸十余次，当派探员将盛金弟送往医院，由医生验明确非处女，今晨解送第一特区地方法院，经刘毓桂推事提审，捕房律师王耀堂以被告诱未满十六岁之女子，虽其后数次皆系该女自往被告家相就，但按法亦应强奸罪论，应请讯究。旋传女父盛宝山讯问，据称初不知有此事，前晚因事责女后，女忽失踪，直至昨晨才归，严诘之下，女始谓留住被告家，并将被告诱奸经过说明，我方得悉，故将被告扭入捕房云。继由盛金弟陈述，与被告行奸，自去年二月至今，已有十余次，每次均系被告将我唤去，并着我不可对父母说知云。质之杨江生供，盛女向呼我为叔，纵欲奸犹不忍下手，故绝对无此事，所谓十余次者，系将盛女带出游玩之次数等语。刘推事以本案尚须调查，谕被告收押，改期再讯。”
Yang Jiangsheng, a native of Pudong, is forty-one years old, ugly, poor, and has been a plasterer, and was once employed in the mud water workshop of Shengbao Mountain in Suzhou. Sheng Sheng had a daughter named Jin Di, who was only fifteen years old, but she was extremely short and had a lewd appearance. At eight o'clock last night, Yang met Sheng on Tiantong Road in Hongkou, and Yang raped his daughter. After questioning Yang by the head of the arrest, Yang did not deny it, admitting that since 128 last year, he had committed rape more than ten times in a row, and when agents were sent to send Sheng Jindi to the hospital, the doctor confirmed that he was not a virgin, and this morning he was sent to the First Special Administrative Region District Court. It was rumored that the girl's father, Sheng Baoshan, was interrogated, and it was said that he did not know about this at first, and after blaming the daughter for the matter the night before, the woman suddenly disappeared, and did not return until yesterday morning. Since February last year, there have been more than ten times, and each time the defendant called me out and told me not to tell my parents. Questioned by Yang Jiangsheng's confession, Sheng Nu used to call me uncle, even if she wanted to rape me, she couldn't bear to do it, so there was absolutely no such thing. Judge Liu believed that this case still needed to be investigated and ordered the defendant to be taken into custody and rescheduled for a new trial. ”在记事里分明可见，盛对于杨，并未说有“伦常”关系，杨供女称之为“叔”，是中国的习惯，年长十年左右，往往称为叔伯的。然而《大晚报》用了怎样的题目呢？是四号和头号字的——
It can be clearly seen from the records that Sheng did not say that there was a "ethics" relationship with Yang, and Yang Gongnu called him "uncle", which is a Chinese habit, and he is about ten years old, often called uncle. However, what kind of title did the "Evening News" use? It is the number four and the number one word -
拦途扭往捕房控诉Blocking the road and turning to the arrest room to accuse 
　　干叔奸侄女 Uncle Gan raped his niece 
　　　　女自称被奸过十余次 The woman claimed to have been raped more than ten times
　　　　　　男指系游玩并非风流 The man pointed out that it was not a romance

它在“叔”上添一“干”字，于是“女”就化为“侄女”，杨江生也因此成了“逆伦”或准“逆伦”的重犯了。中国之君子，叹人心之不古，憎匪人之逆伦，而惟恐人间没有逆伦的故事，偏要用笔铺张扬厉起来，以耸动低级趣味读者的眼目。杨江生是泥水匠，无从看见，见了也无从抗辩，只得一任他们的编排，然而社会批评者是有指斥的任务的。但还不到指斥，单单引用了几句奇文，他们便什么“员外”什么“警犬”的狂嗥起来，好像他们的一群倒是吸风饮露，带了自己的家私来给社会服务的志士。是的，社长我们是知道的，然而终于不知道谁是东家，就是究竟谁是“员外”，倘说既非商办，又非官办，则在报界里是很难得的。但这秘密，在这里不再研究它也好。
It added the word "dry" to "uncle", so the "woman" turned into a "niece", and Yang Jiangsheng became a repeat offender of "rebellious ethics" or quasi-"reverse ethics". Chinese gentlemen, lamenting the imantiquity of people's hearts, hated the rebellious ethics of bandits, but feared that there would be no rebellious stories in the world, so they had to use their pens to exaggerate and exaggerate to sensationally attract the eyes of low-level interesting readers. Yang Jiangsheng is a plasterer, he can't see it, and he can't defend it when he sees it, so he has to let them choreograph it, but social critics have the task of criticizing. But before they were accused, they just quoted a few strange sentences, and they roared wildly, as if they were a group of people who sucked the wind and drank dew and brought their own furniture to serve the society. Yes, we know the president, but finally we don't know who is the owner, that is, who is the "outsider", if it is neither a commercial office nor a government office, it is rare in the newspaper. But this secret, it's okay not to study it here.
和《大晚报》不相上下，注意于《自由谈》的还有《社会新闻》。但手段巧妙得远了，它不用不能通或不愿通的文章，而只驱使着真伪杂糅的记事。即如《自由谈》的改革的原因，虽然断不定所说是真是假，我倒还是从它那第二卷第十三期（二月七日出版）上看来的——
On par with the "Great Evening News", there is also "Social News" that pays attention to "Free Talk". But the means are far more ingenious, it does not need articles that cannot be understood or are unwilling to understand, but only drives a mixture of true and false records. That is, the reason for the reform of "Freedom Talk", although it is certain whether what is said is true or false, I still see it from its second volume, issue thirteen (published on February 7) -从《春秋》与《自由谈》说起
Starting from "Spring and Autumn" and "Free Talk"中国文坛，本无新旧之分，但到了五四运动那年，陈独秀在《新青年》上一声号炮，别树一帜，提倡文学革命，胡适之钱玄同刘半农等，在后摇旗呐喊。这时中国青年外感外侮的压迫，内受政治的刺激，失望与烦闷，为了要求光明的出路，各种新思潮，遂受青年热烈的拥护，使文学革命建了伟大的成功。从此之后，中国文坛新旧的界限，判若鸿沟；但旧文坛势力在社会上有悠久的历史，根深蒂固，一时不易动摇。那时旧文坛的机关杂志，是著名的《礼拜六》，几乎集了天下摇头摆尾的文人，于《礼拜六》一炉！至《礼拜六》所刊的文字，十九是卿卿我我，哀哀唧唧的小说，把民族性陶醉萎靡到极点了！此即所谓鸳鸯蝴蝶派的文字。其中如徐枕亚吴双热周瘦鹃等，尤以善谈鸳鸯蝴蝶著名，周瘦鹃且为礼拜六派之健将。这时新文坛对于旧势力的大本营《礼拜六》，攻击颇力，卒以新兴势力，实力单薄，旧派有封建社会为背景，有恃无恐，两不相让，各行其是。此后新派如文学研究会，创造社等，陆续成立，人材渐众，势力渐厚，《礼拜六》应时势之推移，终至“寿终正寝”！惟礼拜六派之残余分子，迄今犹四出活动，无肃清之望，上海各大报中之文艺编辑，至今大都仍是所谓鸳鸯蝴蝶派所把持。可是只要放眼在最近的出版界中，新兴文艺出版数量的可惊，已有使旧势力不能抬头之势！礼拜六派文人之在今日，已不敢复以《礼拜六》的头衔以相召号，盖已至强弩之末的时期了！最近守旧的《申报》，忽将《自由谈》编辑礼拜六派的巨子周瘦鹃撤职，换了一个新派作家黎烈文，这对于旧势力当然是件非常的变动，遂形成了今日新旧文坛剧烈的冲突。周瘦鹃一方面策动各小报，对黎烈文作总攻击，我们只要看郑逸梅主编的《金刚钻》，主张周瘦鹃仍返《自由谈》原位，让黎烈文主编《春秋》，也足见旧派文人终不能忘情于已失的地盘。而另一方面周瘦鹃在自己编的《春秋》内说：各种副刊有各种副刊的特性，作河水不犯井水之论，也足见周瘦鹃犹惴惴于他现有地位的危殆。周同时还硬拉非苏州人的严独鹤加入周所主持的纯苏州人的文艺团体“星社”，以为拉拢而固地位之计。不图旧派势力的失败，竟以周启其端。据我所闻：周的不能安于其位，也有原因：他平日对于选稿方面，太刻薄而私心，只要是认识的人投去的稿，不看内容，见篇即登；同时无名小卒或为周所陌生的投稿者，则也不看内容，整堆的作为字纸篓的虏俘。因周所编的刊物，总是几个夹袋里的人物，私心自用，以致内容糟不可言！外界对他的攻击日甚，如许啸天主编之《红叶》，也对周有数次剧烈的抨击，史量才为了外界对他的不满，所以才把他撤去。那知这次史量才的一动，周竟作了导火线，造成了今日新旧两派短兵相接战斗愈烈的境界！以后想好戏还多，读者请拭目俟之。
In the Chinese literary world, there is no distinction between old and new, but in the year of the May Fourth Movement, Chen Duxiu sounded a cannon on "New Youth", set it apart, and advocated a literary revolution. At this time, Chinese youth felt oppressed by external insults, stimulated by politics internally, disappointed and bored, and in order to demand a bright way out, various new trends of thought were enthusiastically supported by young people, which made the literary revolution a great success. Since then, the boundary between the old and the new in the Chinese literary world has been like a chasm; However, the old literary forces have a long history in society, are deeply rooted, and are not easy to shake for a while. At that time, the organ magazine of the old literary world was the famous "Saturday", which almost gathered literati from all over the world who shook their heads and tails, and they were furnaceed in "Saturday"! As for the text published in "Saturday", nineteen are the novels of Qingqing and me, mournful and lamenting, which intoxicate the national character to the extreme! This is the text of the so-called Mandarin Duck Butterfly School. Among them, such as Xu Zhenya, Wu Shuangre, Zhou Shoujuan, etc., are especially famous for talking about mandarin ducks and butterflies, and Zhou Shoujuan is also a strong player of the Saturday school. At this time, the new literary world attacked the base camp of the old forces "Saturday", and finally attacked the emerging forces, the strength was weak, and the old school had a feudal society as the background. Since then, new schools such as the Literary Research Association, the Creation Society, etc., have been established one after another, and the number of talents has gradually increased, and the power has gradually increased. However, the remnants of the Saturday faction are still active so far, and there is no hope of purging, and most of the literary and artistic editors in Shanghai's major newspapers are still controlled by the so-called Mandarin Duck Butterfly School. However, as long as we look at the recent publishing industry, the number of emerging literary and artistic publications is shocking, and there is a tendency to make the old forces unable to raise their heads! Today, the literati of the Saturday school no longer dare to call each other with the title of "Saturday", because it is already the end of the strong crossbow period! The recent conservative "Declaration" suddenly dismissed Zhou Shoujuan, the editor of "Free Talk", from his post and replaced him with a new writer Li Liewen, which was of course a very change for the old forces, thus forming a violent conflict between the old and new literary circles today. On the one hand, Zhou Shoujuan instigated various tabloids to make a general attack on Li Liewen, we only need to look at the "Diamond Diamond" edited by Zheng Yimei, advocating that Zhou Shoujuan still return to the original position of "Free Talk", and let Li Liewen edit the "Spring and Autumn Annals", which also shows that the old-school literati cannot forget their love for the lost territory. On the other hand, Zhou Shoujuan said in his own "Spring and Autumn Annals": Various supplements have the characteristics of various supplements, and the theory that river water does not violate well water also shows that Zhou Shoujuan is still worried about the danger of his current position. At the same time, Zhou also forced Yan Duhe, who is not from Suzhou, to join the pure Suzhou people's literary and artistic group "Star Society" presided over by Zhou, as a way to win over and consolidate his position. Unexpectedly, the failure of the old school forces actually started with Zhou. As far as I know, Zhou's can't be content with his position, and there is also a reason: he is too mean and selfish in terms of draft selection, as long as it is a manuscript submitted by someone he knows, he doesn't read the content, and he will publish it as soon as he sees it; At the same time, nobodies or contributors who are unfamiliar to Zhou do not look at the content, and the whole pile is a prisoner of the word basket. Because the publications compiled by Zhou are always characters in a few pockets, selfishly and selfishly, so that the content is terrible! The outside world attacked him day by day, such as Xu Xiaotian's "Red Leaves", and there were several violent attacks on Zhou, and Shi Liang removed him because of the dissatisfaction of the outside world. Knowing that Shi Liangcai's move this time, Zhou actually became the fuse, causing today's situation where the old and new factions are fighting fiercely! There will be many more good shows in the future, readers, please wait and see.〔微知〕
[Know]但到二卷廿一期（三月三日）上，就已大惊小怪起来，为“守旧文化的堡垒”的动摇惋惜——
But by the time of the twenty-first issue of the second volume (March 3), there was already a fuss, and I lamented the shaking of the "fortress of conservative culture" -左翼文化运动的抬头
The rise of left-wing cultural movements水手
mariner关于左翼文化运动，虽然受过各方面严厉的压迫，及其内部的分裂，但近来又似乎渐渐抬起头了。在上海，左翼文化在共产党“联络同路人”的路线之下，的确是较前稍有起色。在杂志方面，甚至连那些第一块老牌杂志，也左倾起来。胡愈之主编的《东方杂志》，原是中国历史最久的杂志，也是最稳健不过的杂志，可是据王云五老板的意见，胡愈之近来太左倾了，所以在愈之看过的样子，他必须再重看一遍。但虽然是经过王老板大刀阔斧的删段以后，《东方杂志》依然还嫌太左倾，于是胡愈之的饭碗不能不打破，而由李某来接他的手了。又如《申报》的《自由谈》在礼拜六派的周某主编之时，陈腐到太不像样，但现在也在“左联”手中了。鲁迅与沈雁冰，现在已成了《自由谈》的两大台柱了。《东方杂志》是属于商务印书馆的，《自由谈》是属于《申报》的，商务印书馆与申报馆，是两个守旧文化的堡垒，可是这两个堡垒，现在似乎是开始动摇了，其余自然是可想而知。此外，还有几个中级的新的书局，也完全在左翼作家手中，如郭沫若高语罕丁晓先与沈雁冰等，都各自抓着了一个书局，而做其台柱，这些都是著名的红色人物，而书局老板现在竟靠他们吃饭了。
Regarding the left-wing cultural movement, although it has been severely oppressed from all sides and its internal divisions, it seems to have gradually raised its head recently. In Shanghai, left-wing culture has indeed improved slightly compared to before under the Communist Party's line of "contacting fellow travelers". In terms of magazines, even those first old magazines are leaning to the left. The "Oriental Magazine" edited by Hu Yuzhi was originally the magazine with the longest history in China and the most stable magazine, but according to the opinion of Wang Yunwu's boss, Hu Yuzhi has been too left-leaning recently, so he must re-read the appearance that Yuzhi has seen. But although it was after Boss Wang's drastic deletion, "Oriental Magazine" still thought it was too left-leaning, so Hu Yuzhi's job could not be broken, and Li took over his hand. Another example is the "Free Talk" of the "Declaration", when it was edited by Zhou of the Saturday faction, it was too old and undecent, but now it is also in the hands of the "Left Alliance". Lu Xun and Shen Yanbing have now become the two pillars of "Free Talk". "Oriental Magazine" belongs to the Commercial Press, "Free Talk" belongs to the "Declaration", the Commercial Press and the Declaration Hall are two fortresses of conservative culture, but these two fortresses seem to have begun to waver now, and the rest can naturally be imagined. In addition, there are several intermediate new bookstores, which are also completely in the hands of left-wing writers, such as Guo Moruo Gao Yuhan Ding Xiaoxian and Shen Yanbing, etc., each holding a bookstore and serving as its pillars, these are all famous red figures, and the bookstore owners now rely on them to eat.…………
过了三星期，便确指鲁迅与沈雁冰为《自由谈》的“台柱”（三月廿四日第二卷第廿八期）——
Three weeks later, Lu Xun and Shen Yanbing were indeed designated as the "pillars" of "Free Talk" (March 24, Volume 2, No. 28) -黎烈文未入文总
Li Liewen did not enter the general text《申报·自由谈》编辑黎烈文，系留法学生，为一名不见于经传之新进作家。自彼接办《自由谈》后，《自由谈》之论调，为之一变，而执笔为文者，亦由星社《礼拜六》之旧式文人，易为左翼普罗作家。现《自由谈》资为台柱者，为鲁迅与沈雁冰两氏，鲁迅在《自由谈》上发表文稿尤多，署名为“何家干”。除鲁迅与沈雁冰外，其他作品，亦什九系左翼作家之作，如施蛰存曹聚仁李辉英辈是。一般人以《自由谈》作文者均系中国左翼文化总同盟（简称文总），故疑黎氏本人，亦系文总中人，但黎氏对此，加以否认，谓彼并未加入文总，与以上诸人仅友谊关系云。
Li Liewen, editor of "Declaration and Free Talk", is a student studying in France and a new writer who is not seen in the classics. Since he took over "Free Talk", the tone of "Free Talk" has changed, and the writers have changed from the old-style writers of the Star Society's "Saturday" to left-wing general writers. Now the pillars of "Free Talk" are Lu Xun and Shen Yanbing, and Lu Xun has published many manuscripts in "Free Talk", signed as "He Jiagan". In addition to Lu Xun and Shen Yanbing, other works are also the works of left-wing writers, such as Shi Zhicun, Cao Juren, Li Huiying, etc. Most people who write about "Free Talk" are from the General Alliance of Chinese Left-wing Culture (referred to as Mr. Wen), so it is suspected that Mr. Li himself is also a member of Mr. Wen, but Mr. Li denied this, saying that he did not join Mr. Wen and was only in a friendship relationship with the above people.〔逸〕
[Yi]又过了一个多月，则发见这两人的“雄图”（五月六日第三卷第十二期）了——
After more than a month, I found the "heroic picture" of these two people (Volume 3, Issue 12 on May 6) -鲁迅沈雁冰的雄图
Lu Xun and Shen Yanbing's grand picture自从鲁迅沈雁冰等以《申报·自由谈》为地盘，发抒阴阳怪气的论调后，居然又能吸引群众，取得满意的收获了。在鲁（？）沈的初衷，当然这是一种有作用的尝试，想复兴他们的文化运动。现在，听说已到组织团体的火候了。
Since Lu Xun, Shen Yanbing and others used "Declaration and Free Talk" as their territory to express the arguments of yin and yang, they have actually been able to attract the masses and achieve satisfactory gains. In Lu (?) Shen's original intention, of course, was a useful attempt to revive their cultural movement. Now, I heard that it is time to organize a group.参加这个运动的台柱，除他们二人外有郁达夫，郑振铎等，交换意见的结果，认为中国最早的文化运动，是以语丝社创造社及文学研究会为中心，而消散之后，语丝创造的人分化太大了，惟有文学研究会的人大部分都还一致，——如王统照叶绍钧徐雉之类。而沈雁冰及郑振铎，一向是文学研究派的主角，于是决定循此路线进行。最近，连田汉都愿意率众归附，大概组会一事，已在必成，而且可以在这红五月中实现了。
As a result of the exchange of opinions, the pillars of this movement, in addition to the two of them, Yu Dafu, Zheng Zhenduo, etc., exchanged opinions, and believed that the earliest cultural movement in China was centered on the Language Silk Society Creation Society and the Literary Research Association, and after dissipation, the people created by the language silk were too differentiated, and most of the people in the Literary Research Association were still unanimous,——such as Wang Tongzhao, Ye Shaojun, and Xu Pheasant. Shen Yanbing and Zheng Zhenduo have always been the protagonists of the literary research school, so they decided to follow this route. Recently, even Tian Han is willing to lead the people to submit, and it is estimated that the matter of forming a meeting has already been completed, and it can be realized in this red May.〔农〕
[Agriculture]这些记载，于编辑者黎烈文是并无损害的，但另有一种小报式的期刊所谓《微言》，却在《文坛进行曲》里刊了这样的记事——
These records are not harmful to the editor Li Liewen, but there is another tabloid-style periodical, the so-called "Weiyan", which publishes such a record in the "March of the Literary World" -“曹聚仁经黎烈文等绍介，已加入左联。”（七月十五日，九期。）
"Cao Juren has joined the Left League through Li Liewen and others." (July 15, Issue 9.) ）这两种刊物立说的差异，由于私怨之有无，是可不言而喻的。但《微言》却更为巧妙：只要用寥寥十五字，便并陷两者，使都成为必被压迫或受难的人们。
The difference between these two publications is self-evident due to the existence of private grievances. But "Weiyan" is even more ingenious: as long as only fifteen words are used, both are trapped, making them people who will be oppressed or suffered.到五月初，对于《自由谈》的压迫，逐日严紧起来了，我的投稿，后来就接连的不能发表。但我以为这并非因了《社会新闻》之类的告状，倒是因为这时正值禁谈时事，而我的短评却时有对于时局的愤言；也并非仅在压迫《自由谈》，这时的压迫，凡非官办的刊物，所受之度大概是一样的。但这时候，最适宜的文章是鸳鸯蝴蝶的游泳和飞舞，而《自由谈》可就难了，到五月廿五日，终于刊出了这样的启事——
By the beginning of May, the oppression of "Free Talk" became stricter day by day, and my submissions could not be published one after another. But I think this is not because of complaints such as "Social News", but because it is a time when current affairs are prohibited, and my short comments are often indignant about the current situation; It is not only the oppression of "Freedom Talk", and the degree of oppression at this time is probably the same for all non-government-run publications. But at this time, the most suitable article is the swimming and flying of mandarin ducks and butterflies, and "Free Talk" is difficult, and by May 25, such a notice was finally published——编辑室
Newsroom这年头，说话难，摇笔杆尤难。这并不是说：“祸福无门，惟人自召”，实在是“天下有道”，“庶人”相应“不议”。编者谨掬一瓣心香，吁请海内文豪，从兹多谈风月，少发牢骚，庶作者编者，两蒙其休。若必论长议短，妄谈大事，则塞之字簏既有所不忍，布之报端又有所不能，陷编者于两难之境，未免有失恕道。语云：识时务者为俊杰，编者敢以此为海内文豪告。区区苦衷，伏乞矜鉴！
这年头，说话难，摇笔杆尤难。 这并不是说：“祸福无门，惟人自召”，实在是“天下有道”，“庶人”相应“不议”。 编者谨掬一瓣心香，吁请海内文豪，从兹多谈风月，少发牢骚，庶作者编者，两蒙其休。 若必论长议短，妄谈大事，则塞之字簏既有所不忍，布之报端又有所不能，陷编者于两难之境，未免有失恕道。 语云：识时务者为俊杰，编者敢以此为海内文豪告。 区区苦衷，伏乞矜鉴！编者
editor这现象，好像很得了《社会新闻》群的满足了，在第三卷廿一期（六月三日）里的“文化秘闻”栏内，就有了如下的记载——
This phenomenon seems to have been very satisfied by the "Social News" group, and in the "Cultural Secrets" column of the third volume and twenty-one issue (June 3), there is the following record -《自由谈》态度转变
"Free Talk" attitude changed《申报·自由谈》自黎烈文主编后，即吸收左翼作家鲁迅沈雁冰及乌鸦主义者曹聚仁等为基本人员，一时论调不三不四，大为读者所不满。且因嘲骂“礼拜五派”，而得罪张若谷等；抨击“取消式”之社会主义理论，而与严灵峰等结怨；腰斩《时代与爱的歧途》，又招张资平派之反感，计黎主编《自由谈》数月之结果，已形成一种壁垒，而此种壁垒，乃营业主义之《申报》所最忌者。又史老板在外间亦耳闻有种种不满之论调，乃特下警告，否则为此则惟有解约。最后结果伙计当然屈伏于老板，于是“老话”，“小旦收场”之类之文字，已不复见于近日矣。
Since Li Liewen was the editor-in-chief of "Declaration and Freedom Talk", it has absorbed left-wing writers Lu Xun and Shen Yanbing and crowist Cao Juren as basic personnel. and offended Zhang Ruogu and others because of ridiculing the "Friday faction"; criticized the "canceled" socialist theory and made a grudge with Yan Lingfeng and others; The cut of "The Wrong Way of the Times and Love" has attracted the disgust of Zhang Ziping's faction, and the results of several months of edited "Free Talk" by Ji Li have formed a kind of barrier, and this kind of barrier is the most taboo of the "Declaration" of businessism. In addition, Boss Shi also heard all kinds of dissatisfied comments outside, so he issued a special warning, otherwise he would have to terminate the contract. In the end, the guy succumbed to the boss, so words such as "old words" and "Xiao Dan ended" have disappeared recently.〔闻〕
[Hear]而以前的五月十四日午后一时，还有了丁玲和潘梓年的失踪的事，大家多猜测为遭了暗算，而这猜测也日益证实了。谣言也因此非常多，传说某某也将同遭暗算的也有，接到警告或恐吓信的也有。我没有接到什么信，只有一连五六日，有人打电话到内山书店的支店去询问我的住址。我以为这些信件和电话，都不是实行暗算者们所做的，只不过几个所谓文人的鬼把戏，就是“文坛”上，自然也会有这样的人的。但倘有人怕麻烦，这小玩意是也能发生些效力，六月九日《自由谈》上《蘧庐絮语》之后有一条下列的文章，我看便是那些鬼把戏的见效的证据了——
In the past, at one o'clock in the afternoon on May 14th, there was also the disappearance of Ding Ling and Pan Zinian, and everyone speculated that they had been plotted, and this speculation was increasingly confirmed. There are also many rumors, and legends say that so-and-so will also be plotted, and some have received warnings or threatening letters. I didn't receive any letters, only for five or six days, someone called the branch of Uchiyama Bookstore to ask for my address. I thought that these letters and phone calls were not done by those who practiced conspiracies, but a few so-called literati's ghost tricks, that is, in the "literary world", there will naturally be such people. But if someone is afraid of trouble, this gadget can also have some effect, and there is a following article after "Qu Lu Whisper" on June 9 in "Free Talk", which I think is evidence of the effectiveness of those ghost tricks -编者附告：昨得子展先生来信，现以全力从事某项著作，无暇旁骛，《蘧庐絮语》，就此完结。
Editor's note: Yesterday I received a letter from Mr. Zizhan, who is now fully engaged in a certain work and has no time to disturb it.终于，《大晚报》静观了月余，在六月十一的傍晚，从它那文艺附刊的《火炬》上发出毫光来了，它愤慨得很——
Finally, the "Evening News" watched quietly for more than a month, and on the evening of June 11, it emitted a light from its "Torch" in the literary and artistic supplementary periodical, and it was very indignant -到底要不要自由
Do you want to be free?法鲁
Faro久不曾提起的“自由”这问题，近来又有人在那里大论特谈，因为国事总是热辣辣的不好惹，索性莫谈，死心再来谈“风月”，可是“风月”又谈得不称心，不免喉底里喃喃地漏出几声要“自由”，又觉得问题严重，喃喃几句倒是可以，明言直语似有不便，于是正面问题不敢直接提起来论，大刀阔斧不好当面幌起来，却弯弯曲曲，兜着圈子，叫人摸不着棱角，摸着正面，却要把它当做反面看，这原是看“幽默”文字的方法也。
The issue of "freedom" that has not been mentioned for a long time has been talked about there recently, because state affairs are always hot and not easy to mess with, simply don't talk about it, and talk about "Fengyue" again, but "Fengyue" is not satisfactory, and it is inevitable that a few murmurs from the bottom of the throat will leak out of the bottom of the throat for "freedom", and feel that the problem is serious, and it is okay to murmur a few words, and it seems inconvenient to speak bluntly, so the positive problem does not dare to be mentioned directly, and it is not easy to cover it up in person, but it is curved, circling in circles, so that people can't touch the edges and corners, touch the front, But to look at it as the opposite, this is originally a way to read "humorous" words.心要自由，口又不明言，口不能代表心，可见这只口本身已经是不自由的了。因为不自由，所以才讽讽刺刺，一回儿“要自由”，一回儿又“不要自由”，过一回儿再“要不自由的自由”和“自由的不自由”，翻来复去，总叫头脑简单的人弄得“神经衰弱”，把捉不住中心。到底要不要自由呢？说清了，大家也好顺风转舵，免得闷在葫芦里，失掉听懂的自由。照我这个不是“雅人”的意思，还是粗粗直直地说：“咱们要自由，不自由就来拚个你死我活！”
The heart must be free, but the mouth does not speak, and the mouth cannot represent the heart, which shows that the mouth itself is no longer free. Because it is not free, it is ironic, once "I want to be free", once "I don't want freedom", and then "I want freedom that is not free" and "freedom that is not free", over and over again, always making simple-minded people "nervous breakdown" and unable to grasp the center. Do you want to be free? To be clear, everyone should turn the rudder with the wind, so as not to be stuffy in the gourd and lose the freedom to understand. According to me, who is not a "elegant person", he still said roughly and straightforwardly: "We want to be free, if we are not free, we will fight to the death!" ”本来“自由”并不是个非常问题，给大家一谈，倒严重起来了。——问题到底是自己弄严重的，如再不使用大刀阔斧，将何以冲破这黑漆一团？细针短刺毕竟是雕虫小技，无助于大题，讥刺嘲讽更已属另一年代的老人所发的呓语。我们聪明的智识份子又何尝不知道讽刺在这时代已失去效力，但是要想弄起刀斧，却又觉左右掣肘，在这一年代，科学发明，刀斧自然不及枪炮；生贱于蚁，本不足惜，无奈我们无能的智识份子偏吝惜他的生命何！
Originally, "freedom" was not a very problem, but when I talk to you, it became serious. ——The problem is that you are serious, if you don't use drastic measures, how will you break through this black paint? After all, fine needles and short thorns are trivial skills, which do not help the big topic, and the ridicule is already a murmur made by the old people of another era. We clever intellectuals do not know that satire has lost its effectiveness in this era, but if you want to get a knife and axe, you feel constrained left and right. It is not a pity to be born as an ant, but we incompetent intellectuals are stingy with his life!这就是说，自由原不是什么稀罕的东西，给你一谈，倒谈得难能可贵起来了。你对于时局，本不该弯弯曲曲的讽刺。现在他对于讽刺者，是“粗粗直直地”要求你去死亡。作者是一位心直口快的人，现在被别人累得“要不要自由”也摸不着头脑了。
This means that freedom is not a rare thing, and if you talk about it, it will be valuable. You shouldn't be a twisted irony about the current situation. Now he is asking you to die "roughly and straightly" to the satirist. The author is an outspoken person, and now he is so tired of others that he can't even scratch his head about whether he wants to be free.然而六月十八日晨八时十五分，是中国民权保障同盟的副会长杨杏佛（铨）遭了暗杀。
However, at 8:15 a.m. on June 18, Yang Xingfo (Quan), vice president of the China Civil Rights Protection League, was assassinated.这总算拚了个“你死我活”，法鲁先生不再在《火炬》上说亮话了。只有《社会新闻》，却在第四卷第一期（七月三日出）里，还描出左翼作家的懦怯来——
This finally ended up "you die and I live", and Mr. Faro no longer spoke brightly on "Torch". Only "Social News", in the first issue of Volume 4 (published on July 3), also depicts the cowardice of left-wing writers -左翼作家纷纷离沪
Left-wing writers have left Shanghai在五月，上海的左翼作家曾喧闹一时，好像什么都要染上红色，文艺界全归左翼。但在六月下旬，情势显然不同了，非左翼作家的反攻阵线布置完成，左翼的内部也起了分化，最近上海暗杀之风甚盛，文人的脑筋最敏锐，胆子最小而脚步最快，他们都以避暑为名离开了上海。据确讯，鲁迅赴青岛，沈雁冰在浦东乡间，郁达夫杭州，陈望道回家乡，连蓬子，白薇之类的踪迹都看不见了。
In May, left-wing writers in Shanghai were noisy for a while, as if everything was going to be dyed red, and the literary and artistic circles were all left-wing. But in late June, the situation was obviously different, the counteroffensive front of non-left-wing writers was arranged, and the left-wing was also divided. According to confirmed information, Lu Xun went to Qingdao, Shen Yanbing was in the countryside of Pudong, Yu Dafu was in Hangzhou, and Chen Wangdao returned to his hometown, and even Pengzi, Bai Wei and other traces were invisible.〔道〕
[Dao]西湖是诗人避暑之地，牯岭乃阔老消夏之区，神往尚且不敢，而况身游。杨杏佛一死，别人也不会突然怕热起来的。听说青岛也是好地方，但这是梁实秋教授传道的圣境，我连遥望一下的眼福也没有过。“道”先生有道，代我设想的恐怖，其实是不确的。否则，一群流氓，几枝手枪，真可以治国平天下了。
West Lake is a place for poets to escape the heat, and Guling is a place for the old and summer. Once Yang Xingfo dies, others will not suddenly be afraid of heat. I heard that Qingdao is also a good place, but this is the holy place where Professor Liang Shiqiu preached, and I didn't even look at it from a distance. Mr. "Dao" has a Tao, and the horror he imagined on my behalf is actually inaccurate. Otherwise, a group of hooligans and a few pistols can really govern the country and pacify the world.但是，嗅觉好像特别灵敏的《微言》，却在第九期（七月十五日出）上载着另一种消息——
However, "Weiyan", which seems to have a particularly sensitive sense of smell, has another news in the ninth issue (July 15th) -自由的风月
Free wind and moon顽石
Stone黎烈文主编之《自由谈》，自宣布“只谈风月，少发牢骚”以后，而新进作家所投真正谈风月之稿，仍拒登载，最近所载者非老作家化名之讽刺文章，即其刺探们无聊之考古。闻此次辩论旧剧中的锣鼓问题，署名“罗复”者，即陈子展，“何如”者，即曾经被捕之黄素。此一笔糊涂官司，颇骗得稿费不少。
"Free Talk" edited by Li Liewen, since announcing that "only talk about the wind and moon, less complaining", and the manuscripts submitted by new writers to really talk about the wind and moon are still refused to be published. Hearing the debate on the gongs and drums in the old play, the person who signed "Luo Fu" is Chen Zizhan, and the "how" is Huang Su, who has been arrested. This confused lawsuit cheated a lot of manuscript fees.这虽然也是一科“牢骚”，但“真正谈风月”和“曾经被捕”等字样，我觉得是用得很有趣的。惜“化名”为“顽石”，灵气之不钟于鼻子若我辈者，竟莫辨其为“新进作家”抑“老作家”也。
Although this is also a "complaint", I think the words "really talk about the wind and moon" and "once arrested" are very interesting. Unfortunately, the "pseudonym" is a "stubborn stone", and the aura is not in the nose like us, and it is impossible to distinguish whether it is a "new writer" or an "old writer".
《后记》本来也可以完结了，但还有应该提一下的，是所谓“腰斩张资平”案。
The "Postscript" could have been finished, but there is another thing that should be mentioned, which is the so-called "beheading of Zhang Ziping in half" case.《自由谈》上原登着这位作者的小说，没有做完，就被停止了，有些小报上，便轰传为“腰斩张资平”。当时也许有和编辑者往复驳难的文章的，但我没有留心，因此就没有收集。现在手头的只有《社会新闻》，第三卷十三期（五月九日出）里有一篇文章，据说是罪魁祸首又是我，如下——
"Free Talk" originally published the author's novel, but it was stopped before it was finished, and some tabloids were bombarded with "cutting Zhang Ziping in half". At that time, there may have been articles that I refuted with the editor, but I didn't pay attention to it, so I didn't collect it. Now I only have "Social News", and there is an article in the third volume of the thirteenth issue (published on May 9), which is said to be the culprit and me, as follows -张资平挤出《自由谈》
Zhang Ziping squeezed out "Free Talk"粹公
Duke Cui今日的《自由谈》，是一块有为而为的地盘，是“乌鸦”“阿Q”的播音台，当然用不着“三角四角恋爱”的张资平混迹其间，以至不得清一。
Today's "Free Talk" is a territory for promising, a broadcasting station for "crows" and "Ah Q", and of course, there is no need for Zhang Ziping, who is "in love with the triangle and four corners", so that he can't be cleared.然而有人要问：为什么那个色欲狂的“迷羊”——郁达夫却能例外？他不是同张资平一样发源于创造吗？一样唱着“妹妹我爱你”吗？我可以告诉你，这的确是例外。因为郁达夫虽则是个色欲狂，但他能流入“左联”，认识“民权保障”的大人物，与今日《自由谈》的后台老板鲁（？）老夫子是同志，成为“乌鸦”“阿Q”的伙伴了。
However, some people have to ask: Why is the lustful "lost sheep" - Yu Dafu an exception? Didn't he originate from creation like Zhang Ziping? Do you sing "Sister, I love you" the same? I can tell you that this is indeed an exception. Because although Yu Dafu is a lustful maniac, he can flow into the "Left Alliance", know the big people of "Civil Rights Protection", and have a good relationship with the backstage boss of today's "Free Talk" Lu (?). The old master is a comrade and has become a partner of "Crow" and "Ah Q".据《自由谈》主编人黎烈文开革张资平的理由，是读者对于《时代与爱的歧路》一文，发生了不满之感，因此中途腰斩，这当然是一种遁词。在肥胖得走油的申报馆老板，固然可以不惜几千块钱，买了十洋一千字的稿子去塞纸簏，但在靠卖文为活的张资平，却比宣布了死刑都可惨，他还得见见人呢！
According to the reason why Li Liewen, the editor-in-chief of "Free Talk", reformed Zhang Ziping, was that readers were dissatisfied with the article "The Crossroads of Times and Love", so they were cut in half, which is of course a kind of evasion. Although the owner of the declaration hall, who is obese and oily, can certainly spend thousands of dollars to buy a manuscript of ten oceans and a thousand words to stuff the paper box, but Zhang Ziping, who lives by selling articles, is worse than announcing the death penalty, and he has to meet people!而且《自由谈》的写稿，是在去年十一月，黎烈文请客席上，请他担任的，即使鲁（？）先生要扫清地盘，似乎也应当客气一些，而不能用此辣手。问题是这样的，鲁先生为了要复兴文艺（？）运动，当然第一步先须将一切的不同道者打倒，于是乃有批评曾今可张若谷章衣萍等为“礼拜五派”之举；张资平如若识相，自不难感觉到自己正酣卧在他们榻旁，而立刻滚蛋！无如十洋一千使他眷恋着，致触了这个大霉头。当然，打倒人是愈毒愈好，管他是死刑还是徒刑呢！
Moreover, the draft of "Free Talk" was written in November last year, when Li Liewen invited him to serve as a guest, even if Lu (?) If you want to clear the territory, it seems that you should be more polite, and you can't use this hot hand. The problem is this, in order to revive literature and art (?) The movement, of course, the first step must first defeat all dissenting believers, so there are criticisms of Zeng Jinke, Zhang Ruogu, Zhang Yiping, etc. as "worship five factions"; Zhang Ziping seemed to know each other, and it was not difficult to feel that he was lying next to their bed, and he immediately got out! There is nothing like a thousand oceans that make him nostalgic, which has touched this big bad luck. Of course, the more poisonous the better, whether he is the death penalty or imprisonment!在张资平被挤出《自由谈》之后，以常情论，谁都咽不下这口冷水，不过张资平的阘懦是著名的，他为了老婆小孩子之故，是不能同他们斗争，而且也不敢同他们摆好了阵营的集团去斗争，于是，仅仅在《中华日报》的《小贡献》上，发了一条软弱无力的冷箭，以作遮羞。
After Zhang Ziping was squeezed out of "Free Talk", in common sense, no one could swallow this cold water, but Zhang Ziping's cowardice was famous, he could not fight with them for the sake of his wife and children, and he did not dare to fight with the group that had set up camp with them, so he only sent a weak cold arrow to cover up his shame on the "Small Contribution" of the "China Daily".现在什么事都没有了，《红萝卜须》已代了他的位置，而沈雁冰新组成的文艺观摹团，将大批的移殖到《自由谈》来。
Now that there is nothing left, "Carrot Whisker" has taken his place, and Shen Yanbing's newly formed literary and artistic view group has migrated a large number of people to "Free Talk".还有，是《自由谈》上曾经攻击过曾今可的“解放词”，据《社会新闻》第三卷廿二期（六月六日出）说，原来却又是我在闹的了，如下——
According to the third volume of "Social News" No. 22 (published on June 6), it turns out that I am making trouble again, as follows -曾今可准备反攻
Zeng can prepare for a counterattack曾今可之为鲁迅等攻击也，实至体无完肤，固无时不想反攻，特以力薄能鲜，难于如愿耳！且知鲁迅等有“左联”作背景，人多手众，此呼彼应，非孤军抗战所能抵御，因亦着手拉拢，凡曾受鲁等侮辱者更所欢迎。近已拉得张资平，胡怀琛，张凤，龙榆生等十余人，组织一文艺漫谈会，假新时代书店为地盘，计划一专门对付左翼作家之半月刊，本月中旬即能出版。
Zeng Jin can be attacked by Lu Xun and others, but in fact, his body is not intact, and he does not want to counterattack at all times, but it is difficult to do what he wishes because of his weak strength and freshness. Moreover, it is known that Lu Xun and others have a "left alliance" as the background, and there are many people, and they respond to each other, which cannot be resisted by a lone army, so they also start to win over, and those who have been insulted by Lu and others are more welcome. Recently, more than ten people, including Zhang Ziping, Hu Huaichen, Zhang Feng, and Long Yusheng, have been recruited to organize a literary and art talk, using the New Era Bookstore as a site, and plan to publish a semi-monthly magazine dedicated to dealing with left-wing writers, which will be published in the middle of this month.〔如〕
[For example]那时我想，关于曾今可，我虽然没有写过专文，但在《曲的解放》（本书第十五篇）里确曾涉及，也许可以称为“侮辱”罢；胡怀琛虽然和我不相干，《自由谈》上是嘲笑过他的“墨翟为印度人说”的。但张，龙两位是怎么的呢？彼此的关涉，在我的记忆上竟一点也没有。这事直到我看见二卷二十六期的《涛声》（七月八日出），疑团这才冰释了——
At that time, I thought, although I have not written a special article about Zeng Jinke, it has indeed been mentioned in "The Liberation of Qu" (the fifteenth chapter of this book), which may be called an "insult"; Although Hu Huaichen has nothing to do with me, "Free Talk" ridiculed his "Mo Zhai said for the Indians". But what happened to Zhang and Long? There is no relationship between each other in my memory. It wasn't until I saw the second volume and issue 26 of "The Sound of the Waves" (released on July 8) that the suspicion was resolved——“文艺座谈”遥领记
"Literary and Art Symposium" is a remote record聚仁
Gather benevolence《文艺座谈》者，曾词人之反攻机关报也，遥者远也，领者领情也，记者记不曾与座谈而遥领盛情之经过也。
The "Literary and Art Symposium" is a report by the writer who counterattacked the organs, the distant is the distance, the leader is the appreciation, and the reporter remembers that he has not participated in the symposium but has experienced the process of being enthusiastic from afar.解题既毕，乃述本事。
After solving the problem, he began to explain the original story.有一天，我到暨南去上课，休息室的台子上赫然一个请帖；展而恭读之，则《新时代月刊》之请帖也，小子何幸，乃得此请帖！折而藏之，以为传家之宝。
One day, I went to Jinan for class, and there was an invitation on the table in the lounge; I opened it and read it respectfully, and it was an invitation from the "New Era Monthly". He folded it and kept it as a family heirloom.《新时代》请客而《文艺座谈》生焉，而反攻之阵线成焉。报章煌煌记载，有名将在焉。我前天碰到张凤老师，带便问一个口讯；他说：“谁知道什么座谈不座谈呢？他早又没说，签了名，第二天，报上都说是发起人啦。”昨天遇到龙榆生先生，龙先生说：“上海地方真不容易做人，他们再三叫我去谈谈，只吃了一些茶点，就算数了；我又出不起广告费。”我说：“吃了他家的茶，自然是他家人啦！”
The "New Era" invited guests, and the "Literary Symposium" was born, and the counteroffensive front was formed. The newspaper is brilliantly recorded, and the name will be there. I met Teacher Zhang Feng the day before yesterday and asked for a message; He said: "Who knows what is not a discussion? He didn't say it earlier, signed it, and the next day, the newspaper said that he was the initiator. Yesterday I met Mr. Long Yusheng, Mr. Long said: "Shanghai is really not easy to be a person, they repeatedly asked me to talk, I only ate some refreshments, and it was counted; I can't afford to pay for advertising. I said, "After eating his tea, it is naturally his family!" ”我幸而没有去吃茶，免于被强奸，遥领盛情，志此谢谢！
Fortunately, I didn't go to eat tea, so I was spared from being raped, and I received the hospitality from afar, thank you!"但这“文艺漫谈会”的机关杂志《文艺座谈》第一期，却已经罗列了十多位作家的名字，于七月一日出版了。其中的一篇是专为我而作的——
However, the first issue of the "Literary and Art Symposium", the organ magazine of the "Literary and Art Symposium", has already listed the names of more than ten writers and published it on July 1. One of them was made just for me—内山书店小坐记
Uchiyama Bookstore Small Sitting Notes白羽遐
White feathers are far away某天的下午，我同一个朋友在上海北四川路散步。走着走着，就走到北四川路底了。我提议到虹口公园去看看，我的朋友却说先到内山书店去看看有没有什么新书。我们就进了内山书店。
One afternoon, I was walking with a friend on North Sichuan Road in Shanghai. As I walked, I walked to the bottom of North Sichuan Road. I proposed to go to Hongkou Park, but my friend said to go to Uchiyama Bookstore first to see if there were any new books. We entered the Uchiyama Bookstore.内山书店是日本浪人内山完造开的，他表面是开书店，实在差不多是替日本政府做侦探。他每次和中国人谈了点什么话，马上就报告日本领事馆。这也已经成了“公开的秘密”了，只要是略微和内山书店接近的人都知道。
Uchiyama Bookstore was opened by the Japanese ronin Uchiyama Wanzo, who opened a bookstore on the surface, but he was almost a detective for the Japanese government. Every time he talked to the Chinese about something, he immediately reported it to the Japanese consulate. This has also become an "open secret", as long as anyone who is slightly close to Uchiyama Bookstore knows.我和我的朋友随便翻看着书报。内山看见我们就连忙跑过来和我们招呼，请我们坐下来，照例地闲谈。因为到内山书店来的中国人大多数是文人，内山也就知道点中国的文化。他常和中国人谈中国文化及中国社会的情形，却不大谈到中国的政治，自然是怕中国人对他怀疑。
My friend and I flipped through the newspapers casually. When Uchiyama saw us, he hurriedly ran over to greet us, asked us to sit down, and chatted as usual. Because most of the Chinese who come to Uchiyama Bookstore are literati, Uchiyama also knows a little bit of Chinese culture. He often talked to Chinese about Chinese culture and Chinese society, but he didn't talk much about Chinese politics, so he was naturally afraid that the Chinese would doubt him.“中国的事都要打折扣，文字也是一样。‘白发三千丈’这就是一个天大的诳！这就得大打其折扣。中国的别的问题，也可以以此类推……哈哈！哈！”
"Things in China have to be discounted, and the same goes for words. White hair three thousand zhang' This is a huge lie! This has to be greatly discounted. Other problems in China can also be applied to the same way...... Ha ha! Ha! ”内山的话我们听了并不觉得一点难为情，诗是不能用科学方法去批评的。内山不过是一个九州角落里的小商人，一个暗探，我们除了用微笑去回答之外，自然不会拿什么话语去向他声辩了。不久以前，在《自由谈》上看到何家干先生的一篇文字，就是内山所说的那些话。原来所谓“思想界的权威”，所谓“文坛老将”，连一点这样的文章都非“出自心裁”！
We don't feel embarrassed at all when we hear Uchiyama's words, and poetry cannot be criticized by scientific methods. Uchiyama is just a small businessman in the corner of Kyushu, a spy who naturally won't use any words to defend him except for answering with a smile. Not long ago, I saw a text by Mr. He Jiagan in "Free Talk", which was the words said by Uchiyama. It turns out that the so-called "authority in the ideological world" and the so-called "literary veterans" are not even "ingenious" at all!内山还和我们谈了好些，“航空救国”等问题都谈到，也有些是已由何家干先生抄去在《自由谈》发表过的。我们除了勉强敷衍他之外，不大讲什么话，不想理他。因为我们知道内山是个什么东西，而我们又没有请他救过命，保过险，以后也决不预备请他救命或保险。
Uchiyama also talked to us a lot, talking about issues such as "saving the country by aviation", and some of them had been copied and published in "Free Talk" by Mr. He Jiagan. We don't say much except for barely perfunctory him, and we don't want to pay attention to him. Because we know what Uchiyama is, and we have not asked him to save his life, we have not taken any risks, and we will never be prepared to ask him for help or insurance in the future.我同我的朋友出了内山书店，又散步散到虹口公园去了。
My friend and I left the Uchiyama Bookstore and went for a walk to Hongkou Park.不到一礼拜（七月六日），《社会新闻》（第四卷二期）就加以应援，并且廓大到“左联”去了。其中的“茅盾”，是本该写作“鲁迅”的故意的错误，为的是令人不疑为出于同一人的手笔——
In less than a week (July 6), "Social News" (Volume 4, Issue 2) supported it, and it expanded to the "Left Alliance". The "Mao Dun" in it is a deliberate mistake that should have been written as "Lu Xun", in order to make people doubt that it is from the same person's handiwork -内山书店与“左联”
Uchiyama Bookstore and "Zuo Lian"《文艺座谈》第一期上说，日本浪人内山完造在上海开书店，是侦探作用，这是确属的，而尤其与“左联”有缘。记得郭沫若由汉逃沪，即匿内山书店楼上，后又代为买船票渡日。茅盾在风声紧急时，亦以内山书店为惟一避难所。然则该书店之作用究何在者？盖中国之有共匪，日本之利也，所以日本杂志所载调查中国匪情文字，比中国自身所知者为多，而此类材料之获得，半由受过救命之恩之共党文艺份子所供给；半由共党自行送去，为张扬势力之用，而无聊文人为其收买甘愿为其刺探者亦大有人在。闻此种侦探机关，除内山以外，尚有日日新闻社，满铁调查所等，而著名侦探除内山完造外，亦有田中，小岛，中村等。
In the first issue of "Literary and Art Symposium", it was said that the Japanese ronin Uchiyama Wanzo opened a bookstore in Shanghai, which was a detective role, which is true, and it is especially related to the "Left Alliance". I remember that Guo Moruo fled to Shanghai from the Han Dynasty, that is, he hid upstairs in the Neishan Bookstore, and later bought a ferry ticket for him to cross the day. Mao Dun also used Uchiyama Bookstore as the only refuge when the wind was urgent. So what is the role of the bookstore? Because there are communist bandits in China, it is also in the interest of Japan, so there are more articles investigating Chinese bandits in Japanese magazines than China itself knows, and half of the acquisition of such materials is provided by the literary and artistic elements of the Communist Party who have received the grace of saving their lives; Half of them were sent by the Communist Party themselves to publicize their power, and there were many boring literati who were willing to spy on them. It is said that in addition to Uchiyama, there are also the Nichiri Shimbun, Mantetsu Investigation Institute, etc., and the famous detectives are not only Uchiyama Wanzo, but also Tanaka, Kojima, Nakamura, etc.〔新皖〕
[Xinwan]这两篇文章中，有两种新花样：一，先前的诬蔑者，都说左翼作家是受苏联的卢布的，现在则变了日本的间接侦探；二，先前的揭发者，说人抄袭是一定根据书本的，现在却可以从别人的嘴里听来，专凭他的耳朵了。至于内山书店，三年以来，我确是常去坐，检书谈话，比和上海的有些所谓文人相对还安心，因为我确信他做生意，是要赚钱的，却不做侦探；他卖书，是要赚钱的，却不卖人血：这一点，倒是凡有自以为人，而其实是狗也不如的文人们应该竭力学学的！
In these two articles, there are two new tricks: first, the previous slanderers all said that left-wing writers were subject to Soviet rubles, and now they have become indirect detectives in Japan; Second, the previous whistleblower said that plagiarism must be based on books, but now it can be heard from other people's mouths, relying solely on his ears. As for the Uchiyama Bookstore, for the past three years, I have indeed often sat down, checked books and talked, and I am relatively more at ease than with some so-called literati in Shanghai, because I am sure that he is doing business to make money, but not to be a detective; He sells books to make money, but he does not sell human blood: this is what all literati who think they are human beings, but in fact are not as good as dogs, should try their best to learn!但也有人来抱不平了，七月五日的《自由谈》上，竟揭载了这样的一篇文字——
But there are also people who are dissatisfied, and on July 5th, "Free Talk" actually revealed such a text -谈“文人无行”
Talking about "literati have no virtue"谷春帆
Gu Chunfan虽说自己也忝列于所谓“文人”之“林”，但近来对于“文人无行”这句话，却颇表示几分同意，而对于“人心不古”，“世风日下”的感喟，也不完全视为“道学先生”的偏激之言。实在，今日“人心”险毒得太令人可怕了，尤其是所谓“文人”，想得出，做得到，种种卑劣行为如阴谋中伤，造谣诬蔑，公开告密，卖友求荣，卖身投靠的勾当，举不胜举。而在另一方面自吹自擂，觍然以“天才”与“作家”自命，偷窃他人唾余，还沾沾自喜的种种怪象，也是“无丑不备有恶皆臻”，对着这些痛心的事实，我们还能够否认“文人无行”这句话的相当真实吗？（自然，我也并不是说凡文人皆无行。）我们能不兴起“世道人心”的感喟吗？
Although he is also ashamed to be listed as a "forest" of the so-called "literati", he has recently expressed some agreement with the sentence "literati have no virtue", and the feeling of "people's hearts are not ancient" and "the world is declining" is not completely regarded as the extreme words of "Mr. Taoism". In fact, today's "people's hearts" are too terrifying, especially the so-called "literati", who can think of and do all kinds of despicable behaviors such as conspiracy and slander, rumors and slander, public whistleblowing, selling friends for glory, and selling themselves to seek refuge, and there are countless things. On the other hand, all kinds of strange phenomena of boasting, proudly claiming to be a "genius" and "writer", stealing other people's spit, and being complacent are also "ugly, not prepared, and evil is perfect". (Naturally, I am not saying that all literati are incompetent.) Can we not raise the feeling of "the world's moral people"?自然，我这样的感触并不是毫没来由的。举实事来说，过去有曾某其人者，硬以“管他娘”与“打打麻将”等屁话来实行其所谓“词的解放”，被人斥为“轻薄少年”与“色情狂的急色儿”，曾某却唠唠叨叨辩个不休，现在呢，新的事实又证明了曾某不仅是一个轻薄少年，而且是阴毒可憎的蛇蝎，他可以借崔万秋的名字为自己吹牛（见二月崔在本报所登广告），甚至硬把日本一个打字女和一个中学教员派做“女诗人”和“大学教授”，把自己吹捧得无微不至；他可以用最卑劣的手段投稿于小报，指他的朋友为×××，并公布其住址，把朋友公开出卖（见第五号《中外书报新闻》）。这样的大胆，这样的阴毒，这样的无聊，实在使我不能相信这是一个有廉耻有人格的“人”——尤其是“文人”，所能做出。然而曾某却真想得到，真做得出，我想任何人当不能不佩服曾某的大无畏的精神。
Naturally, my feelings are not without reason. To put a practical point in the past, there were people like Zeng who insisted on using such as "his mother" and "playing mahjong" to implement his so-called "liberation of words", and were denounced as "frivolous teenagers" and "nymphomaniac impatient children", but Zeng nagged and argued endlessly, and now, new facts have proved that Zeng is not only a frivolous teenager, but also a vicious and hateful snake and scorpion, he can use Cui Wanqiu's name to brag about himself (see Cui Cui's advertisement in this newspaper in February), and even insist on sending a Japanese typist and a middle school teacher as a "female poet" and "university professors", touting themselves meticulously; He could use the most despicable means to submit to tabloids, calling his friends ×××, publishing his address, and publicly betraying his friends (see No. 5 "Zhongwai Book and News"). Such boldness, such viciousness, and such boredom really make me unable to believe that this is a shameful and personality "person" - especially a "literati". However, Zeng really wanted to get it, really could do it, I think anyone should not admire Zeng's fearless spirit.听说曾某年纪还不大，也并不是没有读书的机会，我想假如曾某能把那种吹牛拍马的精力和那种阴毒机巧的心思用到求实学一点上，所得不是要更多些吗？然而曾某却偏要日以吹拍为事，日以造谣中伤为事，这，一方面固愈足以显曾某之可怕，另一方面亦正见青年自误之可惜。
I heard that Zeng is not very old, and it is not that he has no opportunity to study, I think if Zeng can use that kind of bragging energy and that kind of vicious and clever mind to learn a little more truthfully, wouldn't he get more? However, Zeng prefers to blow the beat every day, and to spread rumors and slander every day, which, on the one hand, is enough to show Zeng's horror, and on the other hand, it is also a pity that young people make mistakes.不过，话说回头，就是受过高等教育的也未必一定能束身自好，比如以专写三角恋爱小说出名，并发了财的张××，彼固动辄以日本某校出身自炫者，然而他最近也会在一些小报上泼辣叫嗥，完全一副满怀毒恨的“弃妇”的脸孔，他会阴谋中伤，造谣挑拨，他会硬派人像布哈林或列宁，简直想要置你于死地，其人格之卑污，手段之恶辣，可说空前绝后，这样看来，高等教育又有何用？还有新出版之某无聊刊物上有署名“白羽遐”者作《内山书店小坐记》一文，公然说某人常到内山书店，曾请内山书店救过命保过险。我想，这种公开告密的勾当，大概也就是一流人化名玩出的花样。
However, in other words, even highly educated people may not necessarily be able to restrain themselves, such as Zhang ××, who is famous for writing love triangle novels and has made a fortune, he often boasts of being born in a certain school in Japan, but he will also shout in some tabloids recently, completely with the face of an "abandoned woman" full of poison and hatred, he will conspire and slander, spread rumors and provoke, he will be a hard-line person like Bukharin or Lenin, he simply wants to put you to death, his personality is despicable, the means are vicious, it can be said that it is unprecedented, so it seems that What is the use of higher education? There is also an article written by a person signed "Bai Yuxia" in a newly published boring publication, openly saying that someone often goes to Uchiyama Bookstore and has asked Uchiyama Bookstore to save his life. I think this kind of public whistleblowing is probably a trick played by a first-class person under a pseudonym.然而无论他们怎样造谣中伤，怎样阴谋陷害，明眼人一见便知，害人不着，不过徒然暴露他们自己的卑污与无人格而已。
However, no matter how they spread rumors and slander, how they conspire to frame them, discerning people will know at a glance, and they will not harm others, but they will only expose their own despicability and impersonality.但，我想，“有行”的“文人”，对于这班丑类，实在不应当像现在一样，始终置之不理，而应当振臂奋起，把它们驱逐于文坛以外，应当在污秽不堪的中国文坛，做一番扫除的工作！
However, I think that the "literati" who are "good" should not always ignore this group of ugly people as they do now, but should raise their arms and expel them from the literary world, and should do some work to clean up the filthy Chinese literary world!于是祸水就又引到《自由谈》上去，在次日的《时事新报》上，便看见一则启事，是方寸大字的标名——
So the disaster water led to "Free Talk" again, and the next day, in the "Current Affairs Newspaper", I saw a notice, which was the name of the square inch big character——张资平启事
Zhang Ziping reported五日《申报·自由谈》之《谈“文人无行”》，后段大概是指我而说的。我是坐不改名，行不改姓的人，纵令有时用其他笔名，但所发表文字，均自负责，此须申明者一；白羽遐另有其人，至《内山小坐记》亦不见是怎样坏的作品，但非出我笔，我未便承认，此须申明者二；我所写文章均出自信，而发见关于政治上主张及国际情势之研究有错觉及乱视者，均不惜加以纠正。至于“造谣伪造信件及对于意见不同之人，任意加以诬毁”皆为我生平所反对，此须申明者三；我不单无资本家的出版者为我后援，又无姊妹嫁作大商人为妾，以谋得一编辑以自豪，更进而行其“诬毁造谣假造信件”等卑劣的行动。我连想发表些关于对政治对国际情势之见解，都无从发表，故凡容纳我的这类文章之刊物，我均愿意投稿。但对于该刊物之其他文字则不能负责，此须申明者四。今后凡有利用以资本家为背景之刊物对我诬毁者，我只视作狗吠，不再答复，特此申明。
The second paragraph of the "Declaration and Free Talk" on the 5th probably refers to me. I am a person who does not change my name or surname, even if I sometimes use other pseudonyms, but I am responsible for the words I publish, which must be affirmed by one person; Bai Yuxia has another person, and I don't see how bad it is in "The Little Sitting in the Inner Mountain", but it is not my pen, I have not admitted it, and this must be affirmed for two reasons; The articles I write are confident, and I do not hesitate to correct those who are delusional and confused in the study of political ideas and the international situation. As for "spreading rumors, forging letters and arbitrarily slandering people with different opinions", they are all opposed by me in my life, and I must affirm three points; Not only did I have no capitalist publishers to support me, but I also had no sisters to marry a big businessman as a concubine, and I was proud to get an editor, and I went on to carry out despicable actions such as "slandering rumors and falsifying letters". I can't even publish some opinions on politics and the international situation, so I am willing to contribute to any publication that accommodates such articles. However, it cannot be responsible for other words of the publication, which must be stated in 4. In the future, anyone who uses publications with a capitalist background to slander me, I will only regard it as a dog barking and will not reply, and I hereby declare.这很明白，除我而外，大部分是对于《自由谈》编辑者黎烈文的。所以又次日的《时事新报》上，也登出相对的启事来——
This is very clear, except for me, most of them are for Li Liewen, the editor of "Free Talk". So the next day, the "Current Affairs News" also published a relative notice -黎烈文启事
Li Liewen's report烈文去岁游欧归来，客居沪上，因《申报》总理史量才先生系世交长辈，故常往访候，史先生以烈文未曾入过任何党派，且留欧时专治文学，故令加入申报馆编辑《自由谈》。不料近两月来，有三角恋爱小说商张资平，因烈文停登其长篇小说，怀恨入骨，常在各大小刊物，造谣诬蔑，挑拨陷害，无所不至，烈文因其手段与目的过于卑劣，明眼人一见自知，不值一辩，故至今绝未置答，但张氏昨日又在《青光》栏上登一启事，含沙射影，肆意诬毁，其中有“又无姊妹嫁作大商人为妾”一语，不知何指。张氏启事既系对《自由谈》而发，而烈文现为《自由谈》编辑人，自不得不有所表白，以释群疑。烈文只胞妹两人，长应元未嫁早死，次友元现在长沙某校读书，亦未嫁人，均未出过湖南一步。且据烈文所知，湘潭黎氏同族姊妹中不论亲疏远近，既无一人嫁人为妾，亦无一人得与“大商人”结婚，张某之言，或系一种由衷的遗憾（没有姊妹嫁作大商人为妾的遗憾），或另有所指，或系一种病的发作，有如疯犬之狂吠，则非烈文所知耳。
Mr. Shi often visited because Mr. Shi Liangcai, the prime minister of the "Declaration", was an elder of the world, and Mr. Shi ordered him to join the Declaration Hall to edit "Free Talk" because Liewen had never joined any party and specialized in literature when he stayed in Europe. Unexpectedly, in the past two months, there has been a love triangle novel dealer Zhang Ziping, because Liewen stopped publishing his novels, with resentment to the bone, often in various large and small publications, spreading rumors and slandering, provoking and framing, everything, Liewen because his means and ends are too despicable, discerning people know at first sight, not worth a debate, so so far there is no answer, but Zhang posted a notice on the "Blue Light" column yesterday, with sand and insinuation, wantonly slandering, which included the phrase "and no sister married a big businessman as a concubine", I don't know what it means. Since Zhang's notice was issued in response to "Free Talk", and Lie Wen is now the editor of "Free Talk", he has to make a statement to dispel the doubts of the masses. Lie Wen has only two sisters, Chang Yingyuan died early before he got married, and Ci Youyuan is now studying in a school in Changsha, nor is he married, and he has never left Hunan. And as far as Lie Wen knows, no matter how close or distant the sisters of the Li clan in Xiangtan are, neither married a concubine, nor did none of them marry a "big businessman".此后还有几个启事，避烦不再剪贴了。总之：较关紧要的问题，是“姊妹嫁作大商人为妾”者是谁？但这事须问“行不改名，坐不改姓”的好汉张资平本人才知道。
After that, there were a few more notices, and I no longer cut and pasted them to avoid trouble. In short: The more important question is, who is the "sister who marries a big businessman as a concubine"? But this matter must be asked by Zhang Ziping, a hero who "does not change his name and does not change his surname".可是中国真也还有好事之徒，竟有人不怕中暑的跑到真茹的“望岁小农居”这洋楼底下去请教他了。《访问记》登在《中外书报新闻》的第七号（七月十五日出）上，下面是关于“为妾”问题等的一段——
But there are really good people in China, and some people are not afraid of heatstroke and run to the western-style building of Zhenru's "Wangsui Small Farmhouse" to ask him for advice. "Interview" was published in the seventh issue of "Chinese and Foreign Book and News" (July 15), and the following is a paragraph about the issue of "being a concubine" -（四）启事中的疑问
(4) Questions in the notice以上这些话还只是讲刊登及停载的经过，接着，我便请他解答启事中的几个疑问。
The above words are only about the process of publication and suspension, and then I asked him to answer a few questions in the notice.“对于你的启事中，有许多话，外人看了不明白，能不能让我问一问？”
"There are many words in your notice that outsiders don't understand, can you let me ask?"“是那几句？”
"Are those words?"“‘姊妹嫁作商人妾’，这不知道有没有什么影射？”
"'Sisters marry merchant concubines', I don't know if there is any insinuation in this?"“这是黎烈文他自己多心，我不过顺便在启事中，另外指一个人。”
"This is Li Liewen's own heart, I just pointed to another person in the notice by the way."“那个人是谁呢？”
"Who is that person?"“那不能公开。”自然他既然说了不能公开的话，也就不便追问了。
"That can't be made public." Naturally, since he said something that could not be made public, it was inconvenient to ask.“还有一点，你所谓‘想发表些关于对政治对国际情势之见解都无从发表’，这又何所指？”
"Another point, what do you mean by 'I want to express some opinions on politics and the international situation'?"“那是讲我在文艺以外的政治见解的东西，随笔一类的东西。”
"That's something about my political opinions outside of literature and art, essays and the like."“是不是像《新时代》上的《望岁小农居日记》一样的东西呢？”（参看《新时代》七月号）我插问。
"Is it something like the "Diary of a Small Farmhouse" in "New Era"? (See the July issue of "New Era") I interjected.“那是对于鲁迅的批评，我所说的是对政治的见解，《文艺座谈》上面有。”（参看《文艺座谈》一卷一期《从早上到下午》。）
"That's a criticism of Lu Xun, what I'm talking about is an opinion on politics, and there is it in the "Literary and Art Symposium". (See "Literary and Art Symposium", Volume 1, "From Morning to Afternoon".) ）“对于鲁迅的什么批评？”
"What criticism of Lu Xun?"“这是题外的事情了，我看关于这个，请你还是不发表好了。”
"This is off topic, I see about this, please don't publish it."这真是“胸中不正，则眸子眊焉”，寥寥几笔，就画出了这位文学家的嘴脸。《社会新闻》说他“阘懦”，固然意在博得社会上“济弱扶倾”的同情，不足置信，但启事上的自白，却也须照中国文学上的例子，大打折扣的（倘白羽遐先生在“某天”又到“内山书店小坐”，一定又会从老板口头听到），因为他自己在“行不改姓”之后，也就说“纵令有时用其他笔名”，虽然“但所发表文字，均自负责”，而无奈“还是不发表好了”何？但既然“还是不发表好了”，则关于我的一笔，我也就不再深论了。
This is really "if the chest is not right, the eyes will be narrow", and with just a few strokes, the face of this writer was drawn. The "Social News" said that he was "cowardly", although it was intended to win the sympathy of the society to "help the weak and support the overturned", which is not believable, but the confession on the notice must also be greatly discounted according to the example in Chinese literature (if Mr. Bai Yuxia goes to "Uchiyama Bookstore for a short time" on "one day", he will definitely hear it from the boss again), because after he himself "does not change his surname", he also said that "even if he sometimes uses other pseudonyms", although "but the published words are all responsible", and he has no choice but to "still not publish" what? But since "it's better not to publish", I won't talk about my stroke in detail.一枝笔不能兼写两件事，以前我实在闲却了《文艺座谈》的座主，“解放词人”曾今可先生了。但写起来却又很简单，他除了“准备反攻”之外，只在玩“告密”的玩艺。
One pen can't write two things at the same time, I used to be the owner of the "Literary and Art Symposium", Mr. Zeng Jinke, the "liberation poet". But it is very simple to write, in addition to "preparing for a counterattack", he is only playing the art of "snitching".崔万秋先生和这位词人，原先是相识的，只为了一点小纠葛，他便匿名向小报投稿，诬陷老朋友去了。不幸原稿偏落在崔万秋先生的手里，制成铜版，在《中外书报新闻》（五号）上精印了出来——
Mr. Cui Wanqiu and this poet originally knew each other, and just for a little entanglement, he anonymously submitted to the tabloids and framed his old friend. Unfortunately, the original manuscript fell into the hands of Mr. Cui Wanqiu, made into a copper plate, and was printed out in "Chinese and Foreign Books and Newspapers News" (No. 5) -崔万秋加入国家主义派
Cui Wanqiu joined the nationalist faction《大晚报》屁股编辑崔万秋自日回国，即住在愚园坊六十八号左舜生家，旋即由左与王造时介绍于《大晚报》工作。近为国家主义及广东方面宣传极力，夜则留连于舞场或八仙桥庄上云。
Cui Wanqiu, the butt editor of the "Great Evening News", returned to China from Japan, that is, he lived at Zuo Shunsheng's house at No. 68 Yuyuanfang, and was immediately introduced to work in the "Great Evening News" by Zuo and Wang Zaoshi. Recently, he has been vigorously propaganda for nationalism and Guangdong, and at night he lingers on the dance hall or the Eight Immortal Bridge Village.有罪案，有住址，逮捕起来是很容易的。而同时又诊出了一点小毛病，是这位词人曾经用了崔万秋的名字，自己大做了一通自己的诗的序，而在自己所做的序里又大称赞了一通自己的诗。轻恙重症，同时夹攻，渐使这柔嫩的诗人兼词人站不住，他要下野了，而在《时事新报》（七月九日）上却又是一个启事，好像这时的文坛是入了“启事时代”似的——
If there is a crime, there is an address, and it is easy to arrest. At the same time, a little problem was diagnosed, that the poet once used Cui Wanqiu's name, made a preface to his own poem, and praised his own poem in the preface he made. Slightly ill and serious, and at the same time attacked, gradually making this tender poet and poet unable to stand, he was going to go to the wild, but in the "Current Affairs News" (July 9) there was another announcement, as if the literary world at this time had entered the "era of announcements" -曾今可启事
I can tell you now鄙人不日离沪旅行，且将脱离文字生活。以后对于别人对我造谣诬蔑，一概置之不理。这年头，只许强者打，不许弱者叫，我自然没有什么话可说。我承认我是一个弱者，我无力反抗，我将在英雄们胜利的笑声中悄悄地离开这文坛。如果有人笑我是“懦夫”，我只当他是尊我为“英雄”。此启。
I will travel to Shanghai soon, and I will be separated from my written life. In the future, I will ignore the rumors and slander made by others. These days, only the strong are allowed to fight, and the weak are not allowed to scream, so naturally I have nothing to say. I admit that I am a weakling, I am powerless to resist, and I will quietly leave this literary world to the laughter of the heroes' victory. If someone laughs at me as a "coward", I only think of me as a "hero". This is the report.这就完了。但我以为文字是有趣的，结末两句，尤为出色。
That's it. But I think the text is interesting, and the last two sentences are particularly outstanding.我剪贴在上面的《谈“文人无行”》，其实就是这曾张两案的合论。但由我看来，这事件却还要坏一点，便也做了一点短评，投给《自由谈》。久而久之，不见登出，索回原稿，油墨手印满纸，这便是曾经排过，又被谁抽掉了的证据，可见纵“无姊妹嫁作大商人为妾”，“资本家的出版者”也还是为这一类名公“后援”的。但也许因为恐怕得罪名公，就会立刻给你戴上一顶红帽子，为性命计，不如不登的也难说。现在就抄在这里罢——
The "Talking about "Literati Without Virtue" that I cut and pasted above is actually the joint theory of Zeng Zhang's two cases. But in my opinion, this incident is a little worse, so I also made a short comment and voted for "Free Talk". Over time, it was not published out, and the original manuscript was retrieved, and the ink handprint was all over the paper, which is the evidence that it had been arranged and was removed by someone, which shows that even if "no sister marries a big businessman as a concubine", the "publisher of the capitalist" still "backs" this type of famous public. But maybe because I am afraid of offending the public, I will immediately put a red hat on you for your life, and it is difficult to say that it is better not to go to the public. Now copy it here -驳“文人无行”
Refuting "literati have no virtue"“文人”这一块大招牌，是极容易骗人的。虽在现在，社会上的轻贱文人，实在还不如所谓“文人”的自轻自贱之甚。看见只要是“人”，就决不肯做的事情，论者还不过说他“无行”，解为“疯人”，恕其“可怜”。其实他们却原是贩子，也一向聪明绝顶，以前的种种，无非“生意经”，现在的种种，也并不是“无行”，倒是他要“改行”了。
The big sign of "literati" is very easy to deceive. Although now, the lowly literati in society are really not as self-deprecating as the so-called "literati". Seeing that as long as he is a "person", he will never do anything, and the commentators only say that he is "incompetent", interpreted as a "madman", and forgive him for being "pitiful". In fact, they were originally dealers, and they have always been extremely smart, all kinds of things in the past are nothing more than "business experience", and now all kinds are not "no line", but he is going to "change his career".生意的衰微使他要“改行”。虽是极低劣的三角恋爱小说，也可以卖掉一批的。我们在夜里走过马路边，常常会遇见小瘪三从暗中来，鬼鬼祟祟的问道：“阿要春宫？阿要春宫？中国的，东洋的，西洋的，都有。阿要勿？”生意也并不清淡。上当的是初到上海的青年和乡下人。然而这至多也不过四五回，他们看过几套，就觉得讨厌，甚且要作呕了，无论你“中国的，东洋的，西洋的，都有”也无效。而且因时势的迁移，读书界也起了变化，一部份是不再要看这样的东西了；一部份是简直去跳舞，去嫖妓，因为所化的钱，比买手淫小说全集还便宜。这就使三角家之类觉得没落。我们不要以为造成了洋房，人就会满足的，每一个儿子，至少还得给他赚下十万块钱呢。
The decline of business made him want to "change careers". Although it is a very inferior love triangle novel, it can also be sold in batches. When we walked along the side of the road at night, we often met Xiao Deflated San coming from the shadows and asked sneakily: "Ah want the Spring Palace?" Do you want the Spring Palace? Chinese, Eastern, and Western. Do you want it? "Business is not light. It was the young people and country people who had just arrived in Shanghai. However, this is only four or five times at most, and after seeing a few sets, they feel annoying, and even nauseous, no matter whether you "Chinese, Eastern, Western, there are them" is invalid. And due to the change of the times, the reading world has also changed, and part of it is that I no longer want to see such things; Part of it is simply dancing and prostitution, because the money is cheaper than buying a complete collection of masturbation novels. This makes the triangle family feel declining. Let's not think that if a bungalow is created, people will be satisfied, and every son has to earn him at least 100,000 yuan.于是乎暴躁起来。然而三角上面，是没有出路了的。于是勾结一批同类，开茶会，办小报，造谣言，其甚者还竟至于卖朋友，好像他们的鸿篇巨制的不再有人赏识，只是因为有几个人用一手掩尽了天下人的眼目似的。但不要误解，以为他真在这样想。他是聪明绝顶，其实并不在这样想的，现在这副嘴脸，也还是一种“生意经”，用三角钻出来的活路。总而言之，就是现在只好经营这一种卖买，才又可以赚些钱。
So he became irritable. However, there is no way out above the triangle. So they colluded with a group of their own kind, held tea parties, ran tabloids, spread rumors, and even sold their friends, as if their masterpieces were no longer appreciated, just because a few people covered the eyes of the people of the world with one hand. But don't get me wrong, think he really thinks so. He is extremely smart, in fact, he doesn't think so, and now this face is still a kind of "business experience", a way to survive with a triangle. All in all, it is now that I have to operate this kind of buying and selling in order to make some money.譬如说罢，有些“第三种人”也曾做过“革命文学家”，借此开张书店，吞过郭沫若的许多版税，现在所住的洋房，有一部份怕还是郭沫若的血汗所装饰的。此刻那里还能做这样的生意呢？此刻要合伙攻击左翼，并且造谣陷害了知道他们的行为的人，自己才是一个干净刚直的作者，而况告密式的投稿，还可以大赚一注钱呢。
For example, some "third types of people" have also been "revolutionary writers", using this to open a bookstore and swallow a lot of Guo Moruo's royalties, and some of the bungalows they live in now are probably still decorated by Guo Moruo's blood and sweat. Where else can such a business be done at this moment? At this moment, if you want to partner to attack the left wing and spread rumors to frame people who know their behavior, you are a clean and upright author, and you can make a lot of money by submitting a whistleblower style.先前的手淫小说，还是下部的勾当，但此路已经不通，必须上进才是，而人们——尤其是他的旧相识——的头颅就危险了。这那里是单单的“无行”文人所能做得出来的？
The previous masturbation novels were still the work of the lower part, but this road is no longer possible, and the heads of people, especially his old acquaintances, are in danger. Is this what a single "no-lined" literati can do?上文所说，有几处自然好像带着了曾今可张资平这一流，但以前的“腰斩张资平”，却的确不是我的意见。这位作家的大作，我自己是不要看的，理由很简单：我脑子里不要三角四角的这许多角。倘有青年来问我可看与否，我是劝他不必看的，理由也很简单：他脑子里也不必有三角四角的那许多角。若夫他自在投稿取费，出版卖钱，即使他无须养活老婆儿子，我也满不管，理由也很简单：我是从不想到他那些三角四角的角不完的许多角的。
As mentioned above, there are a few places that naturally seem to have the same level as Zeng Jinke and Zhang Ziping, but the previous "cutting Zhang Ziping in half" is indeed not my opinion. I don't want to read this writer's masterpiece myself, for a very simple reason: I don't want all these corners of the triangle in my head. If a young man comes to me and asks me if I can see it, I advise him not to read it, and the reason is very simple: he doesn't have to have the many corners of the triangle in his head. If he is free to contribute and publish for money, even if he does not need to support his wife and son, I don't care, and the reason is very simple: I never thought of his endless corners of the triangle.然而多角之辈，竟谓我策动“腰斩张资平”。既谓矣，我乃简直以X光照其五脏六腑了。
然而多角之辈，竟谓我策动“腰斩张资平”。 既谓矣，我乃简直以X光照其五脏六腑了。
《后记》这回本来也真可以完结了，但且住，还有一点余兴的余兴。因为剪下的材料中，还留着一篇妙文，倘使任其散失，是极为可惜的，所以特地将它保存在这里。
"Afterword" could really have ended this time, but for now, there is still a little after-interest. Because there is still a wonderful article left in the cut material, it would be a pity if it was lost, so it was specially preserved here.这篇文章载在六月十七日《大晚报》的《火炬》里——
This article was published in the "Torch" of the "Great Evening News" on June 17 -新儒林外史
Neo-Confucian foreign history柳丝
Willow silk第一回　揭旗扎空营　兴师布迷阵
The first time to unveil the flag and set up an empty camp to set up a maze formation却说卡尔和伊理基两人这日正在天堂以上讨论中国革命问题，忽见下界中国文坛的大戈壁上面，杀气腾腾，尘沙弥漫，左翼防区里面，一位老将紧追一位小将，战鼓震天，喊声四起，忽然那位老将牙缝开处，吐出一道白雾，卡尔闻到气味立刻晕倒，伊理基拍案大怒道，“毒瓦斯，毒瓦斯！”扶着卡尔赶快走开去了。原来下界中国文坛的大戈壁上面，左翼防区里头，近来新扎一座空营，揭起小资产阶级革命文学之旗，无产阶级文艺营垒受了奸人挑拨，大兴问罪之师。这日大军压境，新扎空营的主将兼官佐又兼士兵杨人提起笔枪，跃马相迎，只见得战鼓震天，喊声四起，为首先锋扬刀跃马而来，乃老将鲁迅是也。那杨人打拱，叫声“老将军别来无恙？”老将鲁迅并不答话，跃马直冲扬刀便刺，那杨人笔枪挡住又道：“老将有话好讲，何必动起干戈？小将别树一帜，自扎空营，只因事起仓卒，未及呈请指挥，并非倒戈相向，实则独当一面，此心此志，天人共鉴。老将军试思左翼诸将，空言克服，骄盈自满，战术既不研究，武器又不制造。临阵则军容不整，出马则拖枪而逃，如果长此以往，何以维持威信？老将军整顿纪纲之不暇，劳师远征，窃以为大大对不起革命群众的呵！”老将鲁迅又不答话，圆睁环眼，倒竖虎须，只见得从他的牙缝里头嘘出一道白雾，那小将杨人知道老将放出毒瓦斯，说的迟那时快，已经将防毒面具戴好了，正是：情感作用无理讲，是非不明只天知！欲知老将究竟能不能将毒瓦斯闷死那小将，且待下回分解。
But it is said that Karl and Iliki were discussing the issue of the Chinese revolution above heaven that day, and suddenly saw the Great Gobi of the Chinese literary world in the lower realm, murderous and dusty, in the left-wing defense area, a veteran chased a young general, the war drums shook the sky, shouts were everywhere, suddenly the veteran opened his teeth, spit out a white mist, Karl smelled the smell and immediately fainted, Iliki slapped the case and said angrily, "Poison gas, poison gas!" He helped Karl and walked away quickly. It turned out that on the Great Gobi of the Chinese literary world in the lower realm, in the left-wing defense zone, a new empty camp was recently set up, raising the banner of petty-bourgeois revolutionary literature. On this day, the army pressed the border, and Yang Ren, the main general and officer of the newly established empty camp, raised the pen gun and leaped on horseback to greet him, only to see the war drums shaking the sky, shouting everywhere, and the first to raise his sword and leap on the horse, it was the veteran Lu Xun. The Yang man clasped his hands and shouted, "Old general, don't come safely?" The veteran Lu Xun did not answer, and the prancing horse rushed straight to the knife and stabbed it, and the Yang Ren pen and gun blocked it and said: "The veteran has something to say, why do you have to fight?" The young general set up an empty camp on his own, but because of the sudden incident, he did not have time to petition for command, not to turn against each other, but in fact to be alone. The old general tried to think of the left-wing generals, who overcame empty words, were arrogant and complacent, did not study tactics, and did not manufacture weapons. If you go on the battlefield, the army will be disorganized, and if you go out of the horse, you will drag your gun and flee. The old general was too busy to rectify the discipline and went on an expedition, and I thought I was very sorry for the revolutionary masses! The veteran Lu Xun didn't answer, his eyes widened, and the tiger's beard stood upside down, only to see a white mist coming out of his teeth, and the young general Yang Ren knew that the veteran had released poisonous gas, and he said it too late, and he had already put on the gas mask, exactly: the emotional effect is unreasonable, and the right and wrong are unclear only God knows! If you want to know if the veteran can suffocate the young general with poisonous gas, let's wait for the next time to break it down.第二天就收到一封编辑者的信，大意说：兹署名有柳丝者（“先生读其文之内容或不难想像其为何人”），投一滑稽文稿，题为《新儒林外史》，但并无伤及个人名誉之事，业已决定为之发表，倘有反驳文章，亦可登载云云。使刊物暂时化为战场，热闹一通，是办报人的一种极普通办法，近来我更加“世故”，天气又这么热，当然不会去流汗同翻筋斗的。况且“反驳”滑稽文章，也是一种少有的奇事，即使“伤及个人名誉事”，我也没有办法，除非我也作一部《旧儒林外史》，来辩明“卡尔和伊理基”的话的真假。但我并不是巫师，又怎么看得见“天堂”？“柳丝”是杨人先生还在做“无产阶级革命文学者”时候已经用起的笔名，这无须看内容就知道，而曾几何时，就在“小资产阶级革命文学”的旗子下做着这样的幻梦，将自己写成了这么一副形容了。时代的巨轮，真是能够这么冷酷地将人们辗碎的。但也幸而有这一辗，因为韩侍桁先生倒因此从这位“小将”的腔子里看见了“良心”了。
The next day, I received a letter from the editor, to the effect that the person signed by Liu Si ("Sir, it is not difficult to imagine who he is when reading the content of his article"), submitted a funny manuscript entitled "The History of New Confucianism", but it did not hurt his personal reputation, and he had decided to publish it, and if there was a refutation article, it could also be published. Making the publication temporarily turn into a battlefield, lively is a very ordinary way for newspaper runs, recently I have been more "sophisticated", and the weather is so hot, of course I will not sweat and somersault. Moreover, "refuting" funny articles is also a rare strange thing, even if it "hurts personal reputation", I have no way, unless I also make a "History of Old Confucianism" to distinguish the truth of the words of "Karl and Iliki". But I'm not a wizard, so how can I see "heaven"? "Liu Si" is a pseudonym that Mr. Yang Ren had already used when he was still a "proletarian revolutionary writer", which can be known without looking at the content, and once upon a time, he had such a dream under the banner of "petty-bourgeois revolutionary literature" and wrote himself as such a description. The giant wheel of the times can really crush people so coldly. But fortunately, there was this roll, because Mr. Han Shijiang saw the "conscience" from the voice of this "young general".这作品只是第一回，当然没有完，我虽然毫不想“反驳”，却也愿意看看这有“良心”的文学，不料从此就不见了，迄今已有月余，听不到“卡尔和伊理基”在“天堂”上和“老将”“小将”在地狱里的消息。但据《社会新闻》（七月九日，四卷三期）说，则又是“左联”阻止的——
This work is only the first time, of course, it is not over, although I don't want to "refute", but I am also willing to see this literature with "conscience", but it has been gone since then, and it has been more than a month, and I have not heard the news of "Karl and Iliki" in "heaven" and "veterans" and "young generals" in hell. However, according to "Social News" (July 9, Volume 4, No. 3), it was the "Left Alliance" that prevented it -杨人转入AB团
Yang people transferred to the AB group叛“左联”而写揭小资产战斗之旗的杨邨人，近已由汉来沪，闻寄居于AB团小卒徐翔之家，并已加入该团活动矣。前在《大晚报》署名柳丝所发表的《新封神榜》一文，即杨手笔，内对鲁迅大加讽刺，但未完即止，闻因受“左联”警告云。
The Yang Village people, who rebelled against the "Left Alliance" and wrote the banner of petty bourgeois battle, have recently come to Shanghai from the Han Dynasty, and are said to be living in the home of Xu Xiang, a soldier of the AB Regiment, and have joined the activities of the regiment. The article "New God List" published by Liu Si in the "Evening News" was written by Yang, which satirized Lu Xun inside, but it was not finished, and it was said that he was warned by the "Left Alliance".〔预〕
[Preliminary]“左联”会这么看重一篇“讽刺”的东西，而且仍会给“叛‘左联’而写揭小资产战斗之旗的杨人”以“警告”，这才真是一件奇事。据有些人说，“第三种人”的“忠实于自己的艺术”，是已经因了左翼理论家的凶恶的批评而写不出来了，现在这“小资产战斗”的英雄，又因了“左联”的警告而不再“战斗”，我想，再过几时，则一切割地吞款，兵祸水灾，古物失踪，阔人生病，也要都成为“左联”之罪，尤其是鲁迅之罪了。
It is really strange that the "Left Alliance" would attach so much importance to a "satire" and still "warn" the "Yang people who rebelled against the 'Left Alliance' and wrote the flag of petty bourgeois battle". According to some people, the "third kind of people" who are "loyal to their own art" have been unable to write because of the vicious criticism of left-wing theorists, and now the heroes of this "petty bourgeois battle" are no longer "fighting" because of the warning of the "Left Alliance".现在使我记起了蒋光慈先生。
Now it reminds me of Mr. Jiang Guangci.事情是早已过去，恐怕有四五年了，当蒋光慈先生组织太阳社，和创造社联盟，率领“小将”来围剿我的时候，他曾经做过一篇文章，其中有几句，大意是说，鲁迅向来未曾受人攻击，自以为不可一世，现在要给他知道知道了。其实这是错误的，我自作评论以来，即无时不受攻击，即如这三四月中，仅仅关于《自由谈》的，就已有这许多篇，而且我所收录的，还不过一部份。先前何尝不如此呢，但它们都与如驶的流光一同消逝，无踪无影，不再为别人所觉察罢了。这回趁几种刊物还在手头，便转载一部份到《后记》里，这其实也并非专为我自己，战斗正未有穷期，老谱将不断的袭用，对于别人的攻击，想来也还要用这一类的方法，但自然要改变了所攻击的人名。将来的战斗的青年，倘在类似的境遇中，能偶然看见这记录，我想是必能开颜一笑，更明白所谓敌人者是怎样的东西的。
When Mr. Jiang Guangci organized the Sun Society and the Creation Society Alliance, and led the "young generals" to encircle and suppress me, he once made an article, which had a few sentences, to the effect that Lu Xun had never been attacked by others, and he thought he was invincible, and now he wants to let him know. In fact, this is wrong, since I made my comments, I have been attacked all the time, that is, in the past three or four months, there have been so many articles on "Free Talk" alone, and I have included only a part of them. Why wasn't it like this before, but they all disappeared with the flowing light, without a trace, and were no longer noticed by others. This time, while several publications are still in hand, I reprinted some of them into the "Afterword", which is actually not just for myself, the battle is endless, the old score will continue to be used, and I think I will use this kind of method for other people's attacks, but naturally I have to change the name of the person I attacked. If the young people who fight in the future can see this record by chance in a similar situation, I think they will be able to smile and better understand what the so-called enemy is.所引的文字中，我以为很有些篇，倒是出于先前的“革命文学者”。但他们现在是另一个笔名，另一副嘴脸了。这也是必然的。革命文学者若不想以他的文学，助革命更加深化，展开，却借革命来推销他自己的“文学”，则革命高扬的时候，他正是狮子身中的害虫，而革命一受难，就一定要发现以前的“良心”，或以“孝子”之名，或以“人道”之名，或以“比正在受难的革命更加革命”之名，走出阵线之外，好则沉默，坏就成为叭儿的。这不是我的“毒瓦斯”，这是彼此看见的事实！
Among the quoted texts, I think there are many articles, but they are from the previous "revolutionary writers". But they are now another pseudonym, a different face. This is inevitable. If a revolutionary writer does not want to use his literature to help the revolution deepen and unfold, but uses the revolution to promote his own "literature", then when the revolution is high, he is the pest in the lion's body, and as soon as the revolution suffers, he must find the "conscience" of the past, either in the name of "filial piety", or in the name of "humanity", or in the name of "more revolutionary than the suffering revolution". This is not my "poisonous gas", this is the fact that we see each other!
一九三三年七月二十日午，记。

July 20, 1933 at noon, recorded.

封面

书名页

版权信息

图书在版编目（CIP）数据
Books in Print (CIP) data准风月谈／鲁迅著．—南京：译林出版社，2014.1
Zhun Fengyue Talk/Lu Xun.—Nanjing: Yilin Publishing House, 2014.1（鲁迅自编文集）
(Lu Xun's self-edited anthology)ISBN 978-7-5447-4537-6
ISBN 978-7-5447-4537-6Ⅰ．①准…　Ⅱ．①鲁…　Ⅲ．①鲁迅杂文－杂文集　Ⅳ．①I210.4
I..(1) Quasi... II..(1) Lu... III..(1) Lu Xun's Essays - Essays IV..(1)I210.4中国版本图书馆CIP数据核字（2013）第242956号
China Version Library CIP Data Verification (2013) No. 242956书　　名　准风月谈
Book title: Quasi-Fengyue Talk作　　者　鲁　迅
Author: Lu Xun责任编辑　陆元昶
Editor-in-charge: Lu Yuanchang特约编辑　刘　佳
Special editor Liu Jia出版发行　凤凰出版传媒股份有限公司
Published and distributed by Phoenix Publishing and Media Co., Ltd译林出版社
Yilin Publishing House出版社地址　南京市湖南路1号A楼，邮编：210009
Publisher's address Building A, No. 1 Hunan Road, Nanjing, Zip Code: 210009电子信箱　yilin@yilin.com
E-mail yilin@yilin.com出版社网址　http://www.yilin.com
Publisher website http://www.yilin.com印　　刷　北京凯达印务有限公司
Printing Beijing Kaida Printing Co., Ltd开　　本　787×1092毫米　1/32
Volume 787×1092 mm 1/32印　　张　6.5
Print 6.5字　　数　124千字
Word count: 124,000 words版　　次　2014年1月第1版　2014年1月第1次印刷
Edition January 2014 1st edition January 2014 1st printing书　　号　ISBN 978-7-5447-4537-6
ISBN 978-7-5447-4537-6定　　价　16.80元
The price is 16.80 yuan译林版图书若有印装错误可向承印厂调换

If there are printing errors in the translated version of the book, it can be exchanged with the printing factory

Table of Contents

目录

Table of Contents

directory前记 Previously
一九三三年 In 1933
夜颂 Night Song
推 push
二丑艺术 2. Ugly art
偶成 Accidentally
谈蝙蝠 Talk about bats
“抄靶子” "Copying the target"
“吃白相饭” "Eat white rice"
华德保粹优劣论 Ward's theory of the merits and demerits of conservatives
华德焚书异同论 Ward burned the book to discuss the similarities and differences
我谈“堕民” I talk about "fallen people"
序的解放 The liberation of the order
别一个窃火者 Another person who stole the fire
智识过剩 Excess of intellect
诗和预言 Poetry and prophecy
“推”的余谈 The aftermath of "pushing"
查旧帐 Check the old accounts
晨凉漫记 I remember the coolness of the morning
中国的奇想 Chinese whims
豪语的折扣 Discount on the word
踢 kick
“中国文坛的悲观” "Pessimism in the Chinese literary world"
秋夜纪游 Autumn night travel tour
“揩油” "Wipe the oil."
我们怎样教育儿童的？ How do we educate children?
为翻译辩护 Defend the translation
爬和撞 Crawl and crash
各种捐班 Various donation classes
四库全书珍本 Rare books of the four libraries
新秋杂识 New Autumn Miscellaneous Knowledge
帮闲法发隐 Help the idle method to hide
登龙术拾遗 Ascend to the dragon technique
由聋而哑 由聋而哑
新秋杂识（二） New Autumn Miscellaneous Knowledge (2)
男人的进化 The evolution of men
同意和解释 Agree and explain
文床秋梦 The bed is autumn dreams
电影的教训 Lessons from the movie
关于翻译（上） About Translation (Part I)
关于翻译（下） About Translation (Part II)
新秋杂识（三） New Autumn Miscellaneous Knowledge (3)
礼 courtesy
打听印象 Inquire about impressions
吃教 Eat and teach
喝茶 drink tea
禁用和自造 Prohibition and self-creation
看变戏法 Look at the trick
双十怀古 Double Ten nostalgia
重三感旧 Repeat the old feelings
“感旧”以后（上） After "feeling old" (Part I)
【备考】：《庄子》与《文选》（施蛰存） [Notes]: "Zhuangzi" and "Selected Works" (Shi Zhicun)
“感旧”以后（下） After "feeling the old" (Part II)
黄祸 yellow peril
冲 rush
“滑稽”例解 “滑稽”例解
外国也有 There are also foreign countries
扑空 Empty
【备考】：推荐者的立场（施蛰存） [Remarks]: The position of the recommender (Shi Zhicun)
《扑空》正误（丰之余） "Pounce in the Air" is correct and wrong (Feng Zhiyu)
突围（施蛰存） Breakthrough (Shi Zhicun)
答“兼示” Answer: "Also indicated"
【备考】：致黎烈文先生书（施蛰存） [Remarks]: Letter to Mr. Li Liewen (Shi Zhicun)
中国文与中国人 Chinese and Chinese
野兽训练法 Beast training method
反刍 ruminate
归厚 Gui Hou
难得糊涂 It's hard to be confused
古书中寻活字汇 Find a living word in ancient books
“商定”文豪 "Agreed" on the literary master
青年与老子 青年与老子
后记 postscript
返回总目录 Return to the General Directory

前记

前记

前记

Previously自从中华民国建国二十有二年五月二十五日《自由谈》的编者刊出了“吁请海内文豪，从兹多谈风月”的启事以来，很使老牌风月文豪摇头晃脑的高兴了一大阵，讲冷话的也有，说俏皮话的也有，连只会做“文探”的叭儿们也翘起了它尊贵的尾巴。但有趣的是谈风云的人，风月也谈得，谈风月就谈风月罢，虽然仍旧不能正如尊意。
Since the editor of "Free Talk" published a notice on May 25, the 22nd year of the founding of the Republic of China, "Calling on the writers of the world to talk more about the wind and moon", it has made the old Fengyue writers shake their heads and be happy for a while. But what is interesting is that people who talk about wind and clouds, the wind and the moon can also be talked about, and the wind and moon are just talking about the wind and the moon, although it is still not as you want.想从一个题目限制了作家，其实是不能够的。假如出一个“学而时习之”的试题，叫遗少和车夫来做八股，那做法就决定不一样。自然，车夫做的文章可以说是不通，是胡说，但这不通或胡说，就打破了遗少们的一统天下。古话里也有过：柳下惠看见糖水，说“可以养老”，盗跖见了，却道可以粘门闩。他们是弟兄，所见的又是同一的东西，想到的用法却有这么天差地远。“月白风清，如此良夜何？”好的，风雅之至，举手赞成。但同是涉及风月的“月黑杀人夜，风高放火天”呢，这不明明是一联古诗么？
It is actually impossible to limit writers from one topic. If there is a test question of "learning and learning", and ask Yi Shao and the coachman to do eight strands, then the method will be different. Naturally, the articles made by the coachman can be said to be unreasonable and nonsense, but this does not make sense or nonsense, which breaks the dominance of the young people. There is also an old saying: Liu Xia Hui saw the sugar water and said "you can provide for the elderly", but the thief saw it, but said that he could stick to the door latch. They are brothers, and what they see is the same thing, but the usage they think of is so different. "The moon is white and the wind is clear, what is such a good night?" Okay, elegant, raise your hand in approval. But what about the same "moon dark murdering night, high wind and fire day" involving wind and moon, is this clearly an ancient poem?我的谈风月也终于谈出了乱子来，不过也并非为了主张“杀人放火”。其实，以为“多谈风月”，就是“莫谈国事”的意思，是误解的。“漫谈国事”倒并不要紧，只是要“漫”，发出去的箭石，不要正中了有些人物的鼻梁，因为这是他的武器，也是他的幌子。
My talk about Fengyue finally came out of trouble, but it was not to advocate "murder and arson". In fact, it is misunderstood to think that "talking more about the wind and moon" means "not talking about state affairs". It doesn't matter if you "talk about state affairs", just "talk about state affairs", and the arrows and stones sent out don't hit the bridge of some characters' noses, because this is his weapon and his cover.从六月起的投稿，我就用种种的笔名了，一面固然为了省事，一面也省得有人骂读者们不管文字，只看作者的署名。然而这么一来，却又使一些看文字不用视觉，专靠嗅觉的“文学家”疑神疑鬼，而他们的嗅觉又没有和全体一同进化，至于看见一个新的作家的名字，就疑心是我的化名，对我呜呜不已，有时简直连读者都被他们闹得莫名其妙了。现在就将当时所用的笔名，仍旧留在每篇之下，算是负着应负的责任。
Since June, I have used various pseudonyms, on the one hand, to save trouble, on the other hand, it also saves readers from scolding readers for ignoring the text and only looking at the author's signature. However, this has made some "writers" who read words without sight and rely solely on their sense of smell suspicious, and their sense of smell has not evolved with the whole of them. Now the pseudonym used at that time is still under each article, which is considered to be a responsibility.还有一点和先前的编法不同的，是将刊登时被删改的文字大概补上去了，而且旁加黑点，以清眉目。这删改，是出于编辑或总编辑，还是出于官派的检查员的呢，现在已经无从辨别，但推想起来，改点句子，去些讳忌，文章却还能连接的处所，大约是出于编辑的，而胡乱删削，不管文气的接不接，语意的完不完的，便是钦定的文章。
Another point that is different from the previous compilation method is that the text that was deleted at the time of publication is probably supplemented, and black dots are added next to it to clear the eyebrows. Whether this deletion is from the editor or the editor-in-chief, or from the official inspector, it is impossible to tell now, but when I think about it, I changed some sentences, removed some taboos, but the place where the article can still be connected is probably from the editor, and the random deletion, regardless of whether the literary style is connected or not, the semantic meaning is incomplete, it is the imperial article.日本的刊物，也有禁忌，但被删之处，是留着空白，或加虚线，使读者能够知道的。中国的检查官却不许留空白，必须接起来，于是读者就看不见检查删削的痕迹，一切含胡和恍忽之点，都归在作者身上了。这一种办法，是比日本大有进步的，我现在提出来，以存中国文网史上极有价值的故实。
Japanese publications also have taboos, but they are deleted with blanks or dotted lines so that readers can know. Chinese prosecutors are not allowed to leave blanks, they must be picked up, so readers cannot see the traces of inspection and deletion, and all the beards and dazed points belong to the author. This method is a great improvement over Japan, and I am proposing it now to preserve the extremely valuable facts in the history of the Chinese Literary Network.去年的整半年中，随时写一点，居然在不知不觉中又成一本了。当然，这不过是一些拉杂的文章，为“文学家”所不屑道。然而这样的文字，现在却也并不多，而且“拾荒”的人们，也还能从中检出东西来，我因此相信这书的暂时的生存，并且作为集印的缘故。
In the whole half of last year, I wrote a little at any time, and I actually became another book without realizing it. Of course, this is just some miscellaneous articles that are disdained by "writers". However, there are not many such words now, and people who "pick up waste" can still detect things from them, so I believe that the temporary survival of this book is for the sake of collecting prints.一九三四年三月十日，于上海记。
March 10, 1934, in Shanghai.

一九三三年

一九三三年

一九三三年

In 1933

夜颂

夜颂

夜颂

Night Song游光
Swimming light爱夜的人，也不但是孤独者，有闲者，不能战斗者，怕光明者。
People who love the night are not only lonely, idle, unable to fight, and afraid of the light.人的言行，在白天和在深夜，在日下和在灯前，常常显得两样。夜是造化所织的幽玄的天衣，普覆一切人，使他们温暖，安心，不知不觉的自己渐渐脱去人造的面具和衣裳，赤条条地裹在这无边际的黑絮似的大块里。
People's words and deeds often seem different during the day and late at night, under the sun and in front of the lamp. The night is the mysterious heavenly garment woven by nature, covering everyone, making them warm and at ease, and unconsciously they gradually take off their artificial masks and clothes, and wrap themselves in this boundless black fluff-like lump.虽然是夜，但也有明暗。有微明，有昏暗，有伸手不见掌，有漆黑一团糟。爱夜的人要有听夜的耳朵和看夜的眼睛，自在暗中，看一切暗。君子们从电灯下走入暗室中，伸开了他的懒腰；爱侣们从月光下走进树阴里，突变了他的眼色。夜的降临，抹杀了一切文人学士们当光天化日之下，写在耀眼的白纸上的超然，混然，恍然，勃然，粲然的文章，只剩下乞怜，讨好，撒谎，骗人，吹牛，捣鬼的夜气，形成一个灿烂的金色的光圈，像见于佛画上面似的，笼罩在学识不凡的头脑上。
Although it is night, there is also light and dark. There is faint light, there is darkness, there is a hand that cannot be seen, and there is a pitch black mess. Those who love the night must have ears to listen to the night and eyes to see the night, and be free in the dark and see everything in the dark. The gentlemen walked into the dark room from under the electric light, stretching his lazy waist; The lovers walked into the shade of the trees from the moonlight and changed his eyes. The advent of night erased all the transcendent, confused, sudden, furious, and brilliant articles written on dazzling white paper in broad daylight, leaving only the night air of begging, flattering, lying, deceiving, bragging, and mischievous, forming a brilliant golden aperture, as seen on Buddhist paintings, shrouded in the minds of extraordinary learners.爱夜的人于是领受了夜所给与的光明。
Those who love the night thus receive the light given by the night.高跟鞋的摩登女郎在马路边的电光灯下，阁阁的走得很起劲，但鼻尖也闪烁着一点油汗，在证明她是初学的时髦，假如长在明晃晃的照耀中，将使她碰着“没落”的命运。一大排关着的店铺的昏暗助她一臂之力，使她放缓开足的马力，吐一口气，这时才觉得沁人心脾的夜里的拂拂的凉风。
The modern girl in high heels walked very vigorously under the electric light on the side of the road, but the tip of her nose also flashed a little oil sweat, proving that she was a beginner fashionable, and if she grew up in the bright light, she would encounter the fate of "decline". The darkness of a large row of closed shops helped her to slow down her horsepower and exhale, only then did she feel the cool breeze in the refreshing night.爱夜的人和摩登女郎，于是同时领受了夜所给与的恩惠。
The night lover and the modern girl received the favor given by the night at the same time.一夜已尽，人们又小心翼翼的起来，出来了；便是夫妇们，面目和五六点钟之前也何其两样。从此就是热闹，喧嚣。而高墙后面，大厦中间，深闺里，黑狱里，客室里，秘密机关里，却依然弥漫着惊人的真的大黑暗。
At the end of the night, people got up cautiously and came out; Even the couples looked the same as before five or six o'clock. Since then, it has been lively and noisy. Behind the high walls, in the middle of the building, in the deep boudoir, in the black prison, in the guest rooms, and in the secret organs, there is still an amazing and real darkness.现在的光天化日，熙来攘往，就是这黑暗的装饰，是人肉酱缸上的金盖，是鬼脸上的雪花膏。只有夜还算是诚实的。我爱夜，在夜间作《夜颂》。
In broad daylight now, it is this dark decoration, the golden lid on the human sauce jar, and the alabaster paste on the grimace. Only the night is honest. I love the night, and I write "Ode to the Night" at night.六月八日。
June 8.

推

推

推

push丰之余
Abundant surplus两三月前，报上好像登过一条新闻，说有一个卖报的孩子，踏上电车的踏脚去取报钱，误踹住了一个下来的客人的衣角，那人大怒，用力一推，孩子跌入车下，电车又刚刚走动，一时停不住，把孩子碾死了。
Two or three months ago, there seemed to be a news article in the newspaper, saying that a child who sold newspapers stepped on the tram to get the newspaper money, and accidentally kicked the corner of a customer's clothes when he came down.推倒孩子的人，却早已不知所往。但衣角会被踹住，可见穿的是长衫，即使不是“高等华人”，总该是属于上等的。
The person who knocked down the child has long since disappeared. But the corners of the clothes will be kicked, which shows that they are wearing a long gown, even if they are not "high Chinese", they should always belong to the upper class.我们在上海路上走，时常会遇见两种横冲直撞，对于对面或前面的行人，决不稍让的人物。一种是不用两手，却只将直直的长脚，如入无人之境似的踏过来，倘不让开，他就会踏在你的肚子或肩膀上。这是洋大人，都是“高等”的，没有华人那样上下的区别。一种就是弯上他两条臂膊，手掌向外，像蝎子的两个钳一样，一路推过去，不管被推的人是跌在泥塘或火坑里。这就是我们的同胞，然而“上等”的，他坐电车，要坐二等所改的三等车，他看报，要看专登黑幕的小报，他坐着看得咽唾沫，但一走动，又是推。
When we walk on Shanghai Road, we often encounter two types of people who go on a rampage and never give way to pedestrians opposite or in front of them. One is to step on your long straight feet as if you are in a no-man's land, and if you don't get out of the way, he will step on your stomach or shoulder. These are foreigners, they are all "higher", and there is no difference between the upper and lower levels like the Chinese. One is to bend his two arms and palms outward, like two pincers of a scorpion, pushing all the way, regardless of whether the person being pushed fell into the mud pond or fire pit. This is our compatriot, but the "superior", he takes the tram, he has to take the second-class changed to the third-class car, he reads the newspaper, he wants to read the tabloids that are deliberately shady, he sits and swallows his saliva, but when he walks around, he pushes again.上车，进门，买票，寄信，他推；出门，下车，避祸，逃难，他又推。推得女人孩子都踉踉跄跄，跌倒了，他就从活人上踏过，跌死了，他就从死尸上踏过，走出外面，用舌头舔舔自己的厚嘴唇，什么也不觉得。旧历端午，在一家戏场里，因为一句失火的谣言，就又是推，把十多个力量未足的少年踏死了。死尸摆在空地上，据说去看的又有万余人，人山人海，又是推。
Get in the car, enter the door, buy tickets, send letters, and push others; Go out, get out of the car, avoid trouble, escape, and push again. Pushing women and children staggered, and when he fell, he stepped on the living, and when he fell to death, he stepped on the corpse, went outside, licked his thick lips with his tongue, and felt nothing. In the old calendar, during the Dragon Boat Festival, in a theater, because of a rumor of a fire, it was pushed again, and more than a dozen young people who were not strong enough were trampled to death. The dead body was placed in the open space, and it is said that there were more than 10,000 people who went to see it.推了的结果，是嘻开嘴巴，说道：“阿唷，好白相来希呀！”
As a result of pushing, he opened his mouth and said, "Ah, it's so vain! ”住在上海，想不遇到推与踏，是不能的，而且这推与踏也还要廓大开去。要推倒一切下等华人中的幼弱者，要踏倒一切下等华人。这时就只剩了高等华人颂祝着——
Living in Shanghai, it is impossible not to encounter pushing and stepping, and this pushing and stepping will also have to be expanded. We must overthrow all the weak among the inferior Chinese, and we must trample on all the inferior Chinese. At this time, only the high Chinese were left praising and praying——“阿唷，真好白相来希呀。为保全文化起见，是虽然牺牲任何物质，也不应该顾惜的——这些物质有什么重要性呢！”
"Ah, it's really good. For the sake of preserving culture, even if any material is sacrificed, it should not be cherished - what is the importance of these materials! ”六月八日。
June 8.

二丑艺术

二丑艺术

二丑艺术

2. Ugly art丰之余
Abundant surplus浙东的有一处的戏班中，有一种脚色叫作“二花脸”，译得雅一点，那么，“二丑”就是。他和小丑的不同，是不扮横行无忌的花花公子，也不扮一味仗势的宰相家丁，他所扮演的是保护公子的拳师，或是趋奉公子的清客。总之：身分比小丑高，而性格却比小丑坏。
In a troupe in eastern Zhejiang, there is a kind of foot color called "Erhua Face", which is translated more elegantly, then "Erugou" is. The difference between him and the clown is that he does not pretend to be a rampant playboy, nor does he pretend to be a servant of the prime minister, he plays the role of a boxer who protects the young master, or a clear guest who tends to serve the young master. In short: the status is higher than the clown, but the personality is worse than the clown.义仆是老生扮的，先以谏诤，终以殉主；恶仆是小丑扮的，只会作恶，到底灭亡。而二丑的本领却不同，他有点上等人模样，也懂些琴棋书画，也来得行令猜谜，但倚靠的是权门，凌蔑的是百姓，有谁被压迫了，他就来冷笑几声，畅快一下，有谁被陷害了，他又去吓唬一下，吆喝几声。不过他的态度又并不常常如此的，大抵一面又回过脸来，向台下的看客指出他公子的缺点，摇着头装起鬼脸道：你看这家伙，这回可要倒楣哩！
The righteous servant is pretended to be an old man, first admonishing, and finally martyrdom; Evil servants are dressed as clowns, they will only do evil and perish in the end. But the ability of the two ugly is different, he is a bit of a superior person, he also knows some piano, chess, calligraphy and painting, and he also has to guess the order, but he relies on the power, and the contempt is the people, who is oppressed, he comes to sneer a few times, have a good time, who is framed, he goes to scare again, shout a few times. However, his attitude was not always like this, and he probably turned his face back, pointed out his son's shortcomings to the audience, shook his head and pretended to grime: Look at this guy, this time he is going to be unlucky!这最末的一手，是二丑的特色。因为他没有义仆的愚笨，也没有恶仆的简单，他是智识阶级。他明知道自己所靠的是冰山，一定不能长久，他将来还要到别家帮闲，所以当受着豢养，分着余炎的时候，也得装着和这贵公子并非一伙。
This last hand is the characteristic of the second ugly. Because he does not have the stupidity of a righteous servant or the simplicity of a wicked servant, he is an intellectual class. He knew that he was relying on an iceberg, and he would definitely not last long, and he would have to go to other places to help in the future, so when he was raised and shared with Yu Yan, he had to pretend that he was not in the same group as this noble son.二丑们编出来的戏本上，当然没有这一种脚色的，他那里肯；小丑，即花花公子们编出来的戏本，也不会有，因为他们只看见一面，想不到的。这二花脸，乃是小百姓看透了这一种人，提出精华来，制定了的脚色。
In the script made up by the two uglies, of course, there is no such footwork, he is willing; Jokers, that is, the playbooks made up by the playboys, will not be there, because they only see one side and cannot think of it. These two flowery faces are the footnotes formulated by the common people who have seen through this kind of person, put forward the essence, and formulated the footsteps.世间只要有权门，一定有恶势力，有恶势力，就一定有二花脸，而且有二花脸艺术。我们只要取一种刊物，看他一个星期，就会发见他忽而怨恨春天，忽而颂扬战争，忽而译萧伯纳演说，忽而讲婚姻问题；但其间一定有时要慷慨激昂的表示对于国事的不满：这就是用出末一手来了。
As long as there is power in the world, there must be evil forces, and if there are evil forces, there must be two flower faces, and there must be two flower face art. If we take a publication and look at him for a week, we will find that he suddenly resents spring, praises war, translates George Bernard Shaw's speeches, and suddenly talks about marriage; But in the meantime, there must be times when you have to express your dissatisfaction with state affairs passionately: this is the end of the hand.这最末的一手，一面也在遮掩他并不是帮闲，然而小百姓是明白的，早已使他的类型在戏台上出现了。
This last hand, on the one hand, is also hiding that he is not a helper, but the common people understand that his type has already appeared on the stage.六月十五日。
June 15th.

偶成

偶成

偶成

Accidentally苇索
苇索善于治国平天下的人物，真能随处看出治国平天下的方法来，四川正有人以为长衣消耗布匹，派队剪除；上海又有名公要来整顿茶馆了，据说整顿之处，大略有三：一是注意卫生，二是制定时间，三是施行教育。
People who are good at governing the country and pacifying the world can really see the way to govern the country and pacify the world everywhere, and some people in Sichuan think that long clothes consume cloth and send teams to cut them; It is said that there are roughly three places to rectify: one is to pay attention to hygiene, the second is to formulate time, and the third is to implement education.第一条当然是很好的；第二条，虽然上馆下馆，一一摇铃，好像学校里的上课，未免有些麻烦，但为了要喝茶，没有法，也不算坏。
The first one is certainly good; Second, although going up and down the hall, ringing the bell one by one, like a class in school, it is inevitably a bit troublesome, but in order to drink tea, there is no law, and it is not bad.最不容易是第三条。“愚民”的到茶馆来，是打听新闻，闲谈心曲之外，也来听听《包公案》一类东西的，时代已远，真伪难明，那边妄言，这边妄听，所以他坐得下去。现在倘若改为“某公案”，就恐怕不相信，不要听；专讲敌人的秘史，黑幕罢，这边之所谓敌人，未必就是他们的敌人，所以也难免听得不大起劲。结果是茶馆主人遭殃，生意清淡了。
The least difficult is the third one. The "foolish people" came to the teahouse, in addition to inquiring about the news and chatting about their hearts, they also came to listen to things like "Bao Gong's Case". If it is changed to "a certain public case" now, I am afraid that I will not believe it, don't listen to it; Specializing in the secret history of the enemy, the so-called enemy here may not be their enemy, so it is inevitable that they will not listen to it very energetically. As a result, the owner of the teahouse suffered and the business was light.前清光绪初年，我乡有一班戏班，叫作“群玉班”，然而名实不符，戏做得非常坏，竟弄得没有人要看了。乡民的本领并不亚于大文豪，曾给他编过一支歌：
In the early years of Guangxu in the former Qing Dynasty, there was a troupe in my township called the "Qunyu Class", but the name did not match the reality, and the play was done very badly, so that no one wanted to see it. The villagers' skills are no less than those of the great writers, and they once composed a song for him:“台上群玉班，"The group of jade classes on the stage, 
台下都走散。 The audience is scattered. 
连忙关庙门， hurriedly closed the temple door, 
两边墙壁都爬塌（平声）， The walls on both sides collapsed (flat sound), 
连忙扯得牢， quickly pulled tightly, and 
只剩下一担馄饨担。” was left with only a load of wontons. ”
看客的取舍，是没法强制的，他若不要看，连拖也无益。即如有几种刊物，有钱有势，本可以风行天下的了，然而不但看客有限，连投稿也寥寥，总要隔两月才出一本。讽刺已是前世纪的老人的梦呓，非讽刺的好文艺，好像也将是后世纪的青年的出产了。
The choice of the spectator cannot be forced, if he doesn't want to watch, it is useless to even procrastinate. That is, if there are several publications, rich and powerful, they could have become popular all over the world, but not only are the audiences limited, but there are also few submissions, and it always takes two months to publish one. Satire is already the dream of the old people of the previous century, and the good literature and art that is not satirical seem to be the product of the young people of the next century.六月十五日。
June 15th.

谈蝙蝠

谈蝙蝠

谈蝙蝠

Talk about bats游光
Swimming light人们对于夜里出来的动物，总不免有些讨厌他，大约因为他偏不睡觉，和自己的习惯不同，而且在昏夜的沉睡或“微行”中，怕他会窥见什么秘密罢。
People can't help but hate him for animals that come out at night, probably because he doesn't sleep, which is different from his own habits, and in the deep sleep or "micro-walk" in the middle of the night, he is afraid that he will catch a glimpse of some secrets.蝙蝠虽然也是夜飞的动物，但在中国的名誉却还算好的。这也并非因为他吞食蚊虻，于人们有益，大半倒在他的名目，和“福”字同音。以这么一副尊容而能写入画图，实在就靠着名字起得好。还有，是中国人本来愿意自己能飞的，也设想过别的东西都能飞。道士要羽化，皇帝想飞升，有情的愿作比翼鸟儿，受苦的恨不得插翅飞去。想到老虎添翼，便毛骨耸然，然而青蚨飞来，则眉眼莞尔。至于墨子的飞鸢终于失传，飞机非募款到外国去购买不可，则是因为太重了精神文明的缘故，势所必至，理有固然，毫不足怪的。但虽然不能够做，却能够想，所以见了老鼠似的东西生着翅子，倒也并不诧异，有名的文人还要收为诗料，诌出什么“黄昏到寺蝙蝠飞”那样的佳句来。
Although bats are also night-flying animals, their reputation in China is quite good. This is not because he swallowed mosquitoes and flies, which were beneficial to people, and most of them fell on his name, which is the same as the word "Fu". With such a dignified appearance, it can be written into a picture, and it really depends on the name to get up. Also, it was the Chinese who were willing to be able to fly themselves, and they also imagined that other things could fly. The Taoist priest wants to feathered, the emperor wants to ascend, the affectionate are willing to be winged birds, and the suffering ones want to fly with wings. The thought of the tiger adding wings made my spines tremble, but when the green cicada flew in, it smiled. As for Mozi's flying kite finally lost, the plane must be raised to buy it in a foreign country, because it is too heavy on spiritual civilization, and it is inevitable, and it is not surprising. But although I can't do it, I can think, so I am not surprised to see something like a mouse with wings, and famous literati will also accept it as poetry and come up with a good sentence like "dusk to the temple bat flying".西洋人可就没有这么高情雅量，他们不喜欢蝙蝠。推源祸始，我想，恐怕是应该归罪于伊索的。他的寓言里，说过鸟兽各开大会，蝙蝠到兽类里去，因为他有翅子，兽类不收，到鸟类里去，又因为他是四足，鸟类不纳，弄得他毫无立场，于是大家就讨厌这作为骑墙的象征的蝙蝠了。
Westerners don't have such a high level of elegance, they don't like bats. I think Aesop should be blamed for the origin of the disaster. In his fable, it is said that the birds and beasts held their own meetings, and the bat went to the beasts, because he had wings, and the beasts did not accept them, but went to the birds, and because he was a four-legged man, the birds did not accept him, so he had no position, so everyone hated the bat as a symbol of riding the wall.中国近来拾一点洋古典，有时也奚落起蝙蝠来。但这种寓言，出于伊索，是可喜的，因为他的时代，动物学还幼稚得很。现在可不同了，鲸鱼属于什么类，蝙蝠属于什么类，就是小学生也都知道得清清楚楚。倘若还拾一些希腊古典，来作正经话讲，那就只足表示他的知识，还和伊索时候，各开大会的两类绅士淑女们相同。
China has recently picked up a little foreign classics, and sometimes ridiculed bats. But this kind of fable, from Aesop, is gratifying, because in his time, zoology was still very naïve. Now it's different, what kind of whales belong to, what kind of bats belong to, even elementary school students know clearly. If he picked up some Greek classics to speak seriously, it would only show his knowledge, and it was the same as the two types of gentlemen and ladies who held their own conferences in Aesop's time.大学教授梁实秋先生以为橡皮鞋是草鞋和皮鞋之间的东西，那知识也相仿，假使他生在希腊，位置是说不定会在伊索之下的，现在真可惜得很，生得太晚一点了。
If he was born in Greece, his position might be below Aesop, but now it is a pity that he was born too late.六月十六日。
June 16th.

“抄靶子”

“抄靶子”

“抄靶子”

"Copying the target"旅隼
Traveling Falcon中国究竟是文明最古的地方，也是素重人道的国度，对于人，是一向非常重视的。至于偶有凌辱诛戮，那是因为这些东西并不是人的缘故。皇帝所诛者，“逆”也，官军所剿者，“匪”也，刽子手所杀者，“犯”也。满洲人“入主中夏”，不久也就染了这样的淳风，雍正皇帝要除掉他的弟兄，就先行御赐改称为“阿其那”与“塞思黑”，我不懂满洲话，译不明白，大约是“猪”和“狗”罢。黄巢造反，以人为粮，但若说他吃人，是不对的，他所吃的物事，叫作“两脚羊”。
China is the oldest place of civilization and a country that values humanity, and it has always attached great importance to people. As for the occasional humiliation and killing, it is because these things are not human. The emperor executed those who were "rebels," those suppressed by the government troops were called "bandits," and those killed by executioners were those who committed crimes. The Manchurians "entered Zhongxia", and soon they were infected with such a simple custom, and the Yongzheng Emperor wanted to get rid of his brothers, so he first changed his name to "Aqina" and "Seth Hei", I don't understand the Manchurian dialect, I can't understand the translation, it's about "pig" and "dog". Huang Chao rebelled and used people as food, but it is not right to say that he eats people, and the things he eats are called "two-legged sheep".时候是二十世纪，地方是上海，虽然骨子里永是“素重人道”，但表面上当然会有些不同的。对于中国的有一部分并不是“人”的生物，洋大人如何赐谥，我不得而知，我仅知道洋大人的下属们所给与的名目。
The time is the 20th century, and the place is Shanghai, although it will always be "humane" in its bones, but of course it will be a little different on the surface. I don't know how the foreigners gave the posthumous title to some of the creatures in China that were not "human", I only know the names given by the foreigners' subordinates.假如你常在租界的路上走，有时总会遇见几个穿制服的同胞和一位异胞（也往往没有这一位），用手枪指住你，搜查全身和所拿的物件。倘是白种，是不会指住的；黄种呢，如果被指的说是日本人，就放下手枪，请他走过去；独有文明最古的黄帝子孙，可就“则不得免焉”了。这在香港，叫作“搜身”，倒也还不算很失了体统，然而上海则竟谓之“抄靶子”。
If you often walk on the road of the concession, you will sometimes meet a few uniformed compatriots and a stranger (and often not this one), pointing a pistol at you and searching your whole body and the objects you are holding. If it is a white race, it will not be pointed out; As for Huang Zhong, if the accused is Japanese, put down his pistol and ask him to walk over; The descendants of the Yellow Emperor, who have the oldest unique civilization, can be "inevitable". In Hong Kong, this is called "body search", which is not very out of style, but in Shanghai, it is actually called "copying targets".抄者，搜也，靶子是该用枪打的东西，我从前年九月以来，才知道这名目的的确。四万万靶子，都排在文明最古的地方，私心在侥幸的只是还没有被打着。洋大人的下属，实在给他的同胞们定了绝好的名称了。
The copyist, the searcher, the target is something that should be shot with a gun, and I have only known since September of the previous year that this name is true. Forty million targets are all lined up in the oldest place of civilization, and the selfish ones are just not beaten yet. The subordinates of the foreign lord really gave his compatriots excellent names.然而我们这些“靶子”们，自己互相推举起来的时候却还要客气些。我不是“老上海”，不知道上海滩上先前的相骂，彼此是怎样赐谥的了。但看看记载，还不过是“曲辫子”，“阿木林”。“寿头码子”虽然已经是“猪”的隐语，然而究竟还是隐语，含有宁“雅”而不“达”的高谊。若夫现在，则只要被他认为对于他不大恭顺，他便圆睁了绽着红筋的两眼，挤尖喉咙，和口角的白沫同时喷出两个字来道：猪猡！
However, we "targets" are more polite when we push each other. I am not "old Shanghai", and I don't know how the previous scolding on Shanghai Beach gave each other posthumous titles. But looking at the records, it is just "curved braids" and "Amulin". Although "Shoutou Code" is already a hidden word for "pig", it is still a hidden word, containing the high yi of "elegant" rather than "reaching". Now, as long as he thinks that he is not very disobedient to him, he will open his eyes with red veins, squeeze his throat, and spit out two words at the same time as the foam at the corner of his mouth: Pig!六月十六日。
June 16th.

“吃白相饭”

“吃白相饭”

“吃白相饭”

"Eat white rice"旅隼
Traveling Falcon要将上海的所谓“白相”，改作普通话，只好是“玩耍”；至于“吃白相饭”，那恐怕还是用文言译作“不务正业，游荡为生”，对于外乡人可以比较的明白些。
To change the so-called "white phase" of Shanghai to Mandarin, it has to be "playing"; As for "eating white rice", I am afraid it is still translated in classical Chinese as "not doing a proper job, wandering for a living", which can be more clear to foreigners.游荡可以为生，是很奇怪的。然而在上海问一个男人，或向一个女人问她的丈夫的职业的时候，有时会遇到极直截的回答道：“吃白相饭的。”
It is strange that wandering can make a living. However, when asking a man in Shanghai, or asking a woman about her husband's occupation, sometimes she will encounter a very straightforward answer: "Eat for nothing." ”听的也并不觉得奇怪，如同听到了说“教书”，“做工”一样。倘说是“没有什么职业”，他倒会有些不放心了。
It didn't feel strange to hear it, as if it had heard the words "teaching" and "workmanship". If it is said that "there is no profession", he will be a little uneasy.“吃白相饭”在上海是这么一种光明正大的职业。
"Eating white rice" is such an upright profession in Shanghai.我们在上海的报章上所看见的，几乎常是这些人物的功绩；没有他们，本埠新闻是决不会热闹的。但功绩虽多，归纳起来也不过是三段，只因为未必全用在一件事情上，所以看起来好像五花八门了。
What we see in the Shanghai newspapers is almost always the exploits of these people; Without them, the news in this port would never be lively. But although there are many merits, they can only be summarized in three paragraphs, just because they may not all be used for one thing, so they seem to be varied.第一段是欺骗。见贪人就用利诱，见孤愤的就装同情，见倒霉的则装慷慨，但见慷慨的却又会装悲苦，结果是席卷了对手的东西。
The first paragraph is deception. When you see greedy people, you use temptations, when you see lonely and angry people, you pretend to be sympathetic, when you see unlucky people, you pretend to be generous, but when you see generous people, you will pretend to be miserable, and the result is something that sweeps your opponent.第二段是威压。如果欺骗无效，或者被人看穿了，就脸孔一翻，化为威吓，或者说人无礼，或者诬人不端，或者赖人欠钱，或者并不说什么缘故，而这也谓之“讲道理”，结果还是席卷了对手的东西。
The second paragraph is coercion. If the deception is ineffective, or if it is seen through, it will turn into a threat, or say that the person is rude, or falsely accuse others, or rely on others to owe money, or do not say anything, and this is also called "reasoning", and the result is still something that sweeps the opponent.第三段是溜走。用了上面的一段或兼用了两段而成功了，就一溜烟走掉，再也寻不出踪迹来。失败了，也是一溜烟走掉，再也寻不出踪迹来。事情闹得大一点，则离开本埠，避过了风头再出现。
The third paragraph is to slip away. If you use the above paragraph or both paragraphs and succeed, you will walk away and never be able to find a trace again. If you fail, you will walk away and never be able to find a trace again. If the matter is bigger, he will leave the port and avoid the limelight and reappear.有这样的职业，明明白白，然而人们是不以为奇的。
There is such a profession, obviously, but people are not surprised.“白相”可以吃饭，劳动的自然就要饿肚，明明白白，然而人们也不以为奇。
"Bai Xiang" can eat, and labor will naturally be hungry, obviously, but people are not surprised.但“吃白相饭”朋友倒自有其可敬的地方，因为他还直直落落的告诉人们说，“吃白相饭的”！
But the friend who "eats white rice" has his own respectable place, because he also tells people straight about, "Eat white rice"!六月二十六日。
June 26.

华德保粹优劣论

华德保粹优劣论

华德保粹优劣论

Ward's theory of the merits and demerits of conservatives孺牛
Young cow希特拉先生不许德国境内有别的党，连屈服了的国权党也难以幸存，这似乎颇感动了我们的有些英雄们，已在称赞其“大刀阔斧”。但其实这不过是他老先生及其之流的一面。别一面，他们是也很细针密缕的。有歌为证：
Mr. Hitler did not allow other parties in Germany, and even the succumbed National Power Party could not survive, which seemed to have moved some of our heroes to praise him for his "boldness". But in fact, this is just the side of his old gentleman and his class. On the other hand, they are also very fine-grained. There is a song as proof:跳蚤做了大官了，Flea became a high official, 
带着一伙各处走。 led a group around. 
皇后宫嫔都害怕， The queen and the palace concubines were afraid, and 
谁也不敢来动手。 No one dared to do it. 
即使咬得发了痒罢， Even if it bites it, how can 
要挤烂它也怎么能够。 squeeze it? 
嗳哈哈，嗳哈哈，哈哈，嗳哈哈！ Woohoo, ha, ha, ha!
这是大家知道的世界名曲《跳蚤歌》的一节，可是在德国已被禁止了。当然，这决不是为了尊敬跳蚤，乃是因为它讽刺大官；但也不是为了讽刺是“前世纪的老人的呓语”，却是为着这歌曲是“非德意志的”。华德大小英雄们，总不免偶有隔膜之处。
This is a section of the world-famous song "Flea Song", but it has been banned in Germany. Of course, this is by no means to honor the flea, but because it satirizes the high officials; But it is not for the satire that it is "the murmur of the old man of the last century", but because the song is "non-German". Heroes of all sizes in Huade always have occasional gaps.中华也是诞生细针密缕人物的所在，有时真能够想得入微，例如今年北平社会局呈请市政府查禁女人养雄犬文云：
For example, this year, the Peking Social Bureau petitioned the municipal government to ban women from raising male dogs:“……查雌女雄犬相处，非仅有碍健康，更易发生无耻秽闻，揆之我国礼义之邦，亦为习俗所不许，谨特通令严禁，除门犬猎犬外，凡妇女带养之雄犬，斩之无赦，以为取缔。”
“…… 查雌女雄犬相处，非仅有碍健康，更易发生无耻秽闻，揆之我国礼义之邦，亦为习俗所不许，谨特通令严禁，除门犬猎犬外，凡妇女带养之雄犬，斩之无赦，以为取缔。 ”两国的立脚点，是都在“国粹”的，但中华的气魄却较为宏大，因为德国不过大家不能唱那一出歌而已，而中华则不但“雌女”难以蓄犬，连“雄犬”也将砍头。这影响于叭儿狗，是很大的。由保存自己的本能，和应时势之需要，它必将变成“门犬猎犬”模样。
The foothold of the two countries is the "quintessence of the country", but China's courage is relatively grand, because Germany is just that everyone can't sing that song, and China is not only difficult for "female and female" to keep dogs, but even "male dogs" will be beheaded. This affects the dog a lot. By preserving its own instinct and responding to the needs of the times, it will definitely become a "door hound".六月二十六日。
June 26.

华德焚书异同论

华德焚书异同论

华德焚书异同论

Ward burned the book to discuss the similarities and differences孺牛
Young cow德国的希特拉先生们一烧书，中国和日本的论者们都比之于秦始皇。然而秦始皇实在冤枉得很，他的吃亏是在二世而亡，一班帮闲们都替新主子去讲他的坏话了。
Mr. Hitler in Germany burned books, and Chinese and Japanese commentators compared him to Qin Shi Huang. However, Qin Shi Huang was really wronged, his loss was in the second generation, and a group of helpers all spoke ill of him for the new master.不错，秦始皇烧过书，烧书是为了统一思想。但他没有烧掉农书和医书；他收罗许多别国的“客卿”，并不专重“秦的思想”，倒是博采各种的思想的。秦人重小儿；始皇之母，赵女也，赵重妇人，所以我们从“剧秦”的遗文中，也看不见轻贱女人的痕迹。
Yes, Qin Shi Huang burned books, and the burning of books was to unify thoughts. But he did not burn agricultural books and medical books; He collected many "guest ministers" from other countries, and did not focus on "Qin's thoughts", but adopted various ideas. The Qin people value children; The mother of the first emperor, Zhao Nu, and Zhao Zhong woman, so we cannot see any traces of contempt women from the posthumous writings of "Ju Qin".希特拉先生们却不同了，他所烧的首先是“非德国思想”的书，没有容纳客卿的魄力；其次是关于性的书，这就是毁灭以科学来研究性道德的解放，结果必将使妇人和小儿沉沦在往古的地位，见不到光明。而可比于秦始皇的车同轨，书同文……之类的大事业，他们一点也做不到。
Mr. Hitler was different, he burned first of all books of "non-German thought", which did not contain the courage of Keqing; The second is the book on sexuality, which destroys the liberation of scientific research on sexual morality, and the result will surely make women and children sink into the status of ancient times and see no light. And it can be compared to Qin Shi Huang's car on the same track, and the book is the same text...... They can't do such a big cause at all.阿剌伯人攻陷亚历山德府的时候，就烧掉了那里的图书馆，那理论是：如果那些书籍所讲的道理，和《可兰经》相同，则已有《可兰经》，无须留了；倘使不同，则是异端，不该留了。这才是希特拉先生们的嫡派祖师——虽然阿剌伯人也是“非德国的”——和秦的烧书，是不能比较的。
When the Arabs captured the house of Alexandria, they burned the library there, and the theory was that if the books taught the same doctrine as the Koran, then there was already the Koran, and there was no need to keep it; If it is different, it is heresy and should not be kept. This is the direct patriarch of Mr. Hitler's school - although the Arabs are also "non-German" - and Qin's burning books, which cannot be compared.但是结果往往和英雄们的预算不同。始皇想皇帝传至万世，而偏偏二世而亡，赦免了农书和医书，而秦以前的这一类书，现在却偏偏一部也不剩。希特拉先生一上台，烧书，打犹太人，不可一世，连这里的黄脸干儿们，也听得兴高彩烈，向被压迫者大加嘲笑，对讽刺文字放出讽刺的冷箭来——到底还明白的冷冷的讯问道：你们究竟要自由不要？不自由，无宁死。现在你们为什么不去拚死呢？
But the result is often different from the budget of the heroes. The first emperor wanted the emperor to pass on to all generations, but he died in the second generation, and pardoned agricultural books and medical books, but there is no such book left before the Qin Dynasty. As soon as Mr. Hitler came to power, he burned books and beat Jews, and even the yellow-faced cadres here were delighted, laughing at the oppressed, and releasing sarcastic arrows at the satirical texts - in the end, they asked coldly: Do you want to be free? If you are not free, you will not die. Why don't you fight to the death now?这回是不必二世，只有半年，希特拉先生的门徒们在奥国一被禁止，连党徽也改成三色玫瑰了。最有趣的是因为不准叫口号，大家就以手遮嘴，用了“掩口式”。
This time it was not necessary, only half a year, Mr. Hitler's disciples were banned in Austria, and even the party emblem was changed to a three-color rose. The most interesting thing is that because slogans are not allowed, everyone covers their mouths with their hands and uses "mouth covering".这真是一个大讽刺。刺的是谁，不问也罢，但可见讽刺也还不是“梦呓”，质之黄脸干儿们，不知以为何如？
This is a big irony. Who is stabbing, don't ask, but it can be seen that irony is not a "dream", and the yellow-faced dry children don't know what to think?六月二十八日。
June 28.

我谈“堕民”

我谈“堕民”

我谈“堕民”

I talk about "fallen people"越客
Vietnamese六月二十九日的《自由谈》里，唐弢先生曾经讲到浙东的堕民，并且据《堕民猥谈》之说，以为是宋将焦光瓒的部属，因为降金，为时人所不齿，至明太祖，乃榜其门曰“丐户”，此后他们遂在悲苦和被人轻蔑的环境下过着日子。
In the "Freedom Talk" on June 29, Mr. Tang Tao once talked about the fallen people in eastern Zhejiang, and according to the "Fallen People Obscene Talk", he thought that he was a subordinate of the Song general Jiao Guangzan, who was despised by the people of the time because of the surrender of gold.我生于绍兴，堕民是幼小时候所常见的人，也从父老的口头，听到过同样的他们所以成为堕民的缘起。但后来我怀疑了。因为我想，明太祖对于元朝，尚且不肯放肆，他是决不会来管隔一朝代的降金的宋将的；况且看他们的职业，分明还有“教坊”或“乐户”的余痕，所以他们的祖先，倒是明初的反抗洪武和永乐皇帝的忠臣义士也说不定。还有一层，是好人的子孙会吃苦，卖国者的子孙却未必变成堕民的，举出最近便的例子来，则岳飞的后裔还在杭州看守岳王坟，可是过着很穷苦悲惨的生活，然而秦桧，严嵩……的后人呢？……
I was born in Shaoxing, and the fallen people were common people when I was young, and I also heard from the words of my fathers and elders that they became the origin of the fallen people. But then I doubted. Because I think that Ming Taizu was still unwilling to be presumptuous for the Yuan Dynasty, and he would never come to take care of the Song generals who surrendered to the Jin dynasty in another dynasty; Moreover, looking at their occupations, there are clearly traces of "teaching workshops" or "music households", so their ancestors may be loyal ministers and righteous men who resisted the Hongwu and Yongle emperors in the early Ming Dynasty. There is another layer, the descendants of good people will endure hardships, but the descendants of traitors may not become depraved people, to give a recent example, Yue Fei's descendants are still guarding the tomb of King Yue in Hangzhou, but they live a very poor and miserable life, but Qin Hui and Yan Song...... What about the descendants? ……不过我现在并不想翻这样的陈年账。我只要说，在绍兴的堕民，是一种已经解放了的奴才，这解放就在雍正年间罢，也说不定。所以他们是已经都有别的职业的了，自然是贱业。男人们是收旧货，卖鸡毛，捉青蛙，做戏；女的则每逢过年过节，到她所认为主人的家里去道喜，有庆吊事情就帮忙，在这里还留着奴才的皮毛，但事毕便走，而且有颇多的犒赏，就可见是曾经解放过的了。
But I don't want to turn over such old accounts now. I only need to say that the fallen people in Shaoxing are a kind of slaves who have been liberated, and this liberation was during the Yongzheng period, maybe. So they already have other occupations, so naturally they are cheap jobs. Men collect second-hand goods, sell chicken feathers, catch frogs, and do tricks; The woman goes to the house she thinks is the master's house every New Year, and she helps with the celebration and mourning, and there is still the skin of the servant here, but she leaves after the event, and there are a lot of rewards, which shows that she has been liberated.每一家堕民所走的主人家是有一定的，不能随便走；婆婆死了，就使儿媳妇去，传给后代，恰如遗产的一般；必须非常贫穷，将走动的权利卖给了别人，这才和旧主人断绝了关系。假使你无端叫她不要来了，那就是等于给与她重大的侮辱。我还记得民国革命之后，我的母亲曾对一个堕民的女人说，“以后我们都一样了，你们可以不要来了。”不料她却勃然变色，愤愤的回答道：“你说的是什么话？……我们是千年万代，要走下去的！”
The owner of each fallen family has a certain number of people, and they cannot go casually; When the mother-in-law dies, let the daughter-in-law go and pass it on to the descendants, just like the inheritance; Must be very poor and sell the right to move around to someone else, so that he breaks off relations with the old master. If you tell her not to come for no reason, it is equivalent to giving her a major insult. I still remember that after the Republic of China Revolution, my mother once said to a fallen woman, "We will all be the same in the future, you can not come." Unexpectedly, she changed color and replied angrily: "What are you talking about? …… We are thousands of generations, and we want to go on! ”就是为了一点点犒赏，不但安于做奴才，而且还要做更广泛的奴才，还得出钱去买做奴才的权利，这是堕民以外的自由人所万想不到的罢。
It is for the sake of a little reward, not only to be content to be a slave, but also to be a wider slave, and to get money to buy the right to be a slave, which is something that free people other than the fallen people can never imagine.七月三日。
July 3rd.

序的解放

序的解放

序的解放

The liberation of the order桃椎
Peach vertebrae一个人做一部书，“藏之名山，传之其人”，是封建时代的事，早已过去了。现在是二十世纪过了三十三年，地方是上海的租界上，做买办立刻享荣华，当文学家怎不马上要名利，于是乎有术存焉。
A person makes a book, "hiding it in the famous mountain and passing it on to others", which is a thing of the feudal era, and it has long passed. Now it is thirty-three years after the twentieth century, and the place is in the concession of Shanghai, and being a comprador immediately enjoys glory.那术，是自己先决定自己是文学家，并且有点儿遗产或津贴。接着就自开书店，自办杂志，自登文章，自做广告，自报消息，自想花样……然而不成，诗的解放，先已有人，词的解放，只好骗鸟，于是乎“序的解放”起矣。
That technique is to decide that you are a writer first, and have some inheritance or allowance. Then he opened his own bookstore, ran his own magazine, published his own articles, advertised himself, reported his own news, and thought of his own tricks...... However, the liberation of poetry has already been born, and the liberation of words has to deceive birds, so the "liberation of the preface" began.夫序，原是古已有之，有别人做的，也有自己做的。但这未免太迂，不合于“新时代”的“文学家”的胃口。因为自序难于吹牛，而别人来做，也不见得定规拍马，那自然只好解放解放，即自己替别人来给自己的东西作序，术语曰“摘录来信”，真说得好像锦上添花。“好评一束”还须附在后头，代序却一开卷就看见一大番颂扬，仿佛名角一登场，满场就大喝一声采，何等有趣。倘是戏子，就得先买许多留声机，自己将“好”叫进去，待到上台时候，一面一齐开起来。
The preface originally existed in ancient times, and there were things that others did and things that were done by themselves. But this is too pedantic and not in line with the appetite of "writers" in the "new era". Because it is difficult to brag about self-introduction, and others do it, it may not be fixed, so naturally it has to be liberated, that is, to preface others to their own things, the term is called "excerpt letter", which is really like icing on the cake. "A bunch of praises" must be attached to the end, but as soon as the book is opened, I see a lot of praise, as if as soon as the famous actor appears, the whole audience cheers, how interesting. If you are an actor, you have to buy a lot of gramophones first, call "good" in, and turn them on together when you go on stage.可是这样的玩意儿给人戳穿了又怎么办呢？也有术的。立刻装出“可怜”相，说自己既无党派，也不借主义，又没有帮口，“向来不敢狂妄”，毫没有“座谈”时候的摇头摆尾的得意忘形的气味儿了，倒好像别人乃是反动派，杀人放火主义，青帮红帮，来欺侮了这位文弱而有天才的公子哥儿似的。
But what if such a thing is exposed? There are also techniques. He immediately pretended to be "pitiful", saying that he had neither partisanship, nor doctrine, nor help, "never dared to be arrogant", and did not have the smell of getting carried away with shaking his head and tail during the "discussion", as if others were reactionaries, murderous arsonism, and the green and red gangs to bully this weak and genius young man.更有效的是说，他的被攻击，实乃因为“能力薄弱，无法满足朋友们之要求”。我们倘不知道这位“文学家”的性别，就会疑心到有许多有党派或帮口的人们，向他屡次的借钱，或向她使劲的求婚或什么，“无法满足”，遂受了冤枉的报复的。
More effectively, he was attacked because he was "weak and unable to meet the demands of his friends". If we do not know the gender of this "writer", we will suspect that there are many people with parties or gangs who repeatedly borrow money from him, or propose to her hard to marry her, or something, "cannot be satisfied", and thus suffer unjust retaliation.但我希望我的话仍然无损于“新时代”的“文学家”，也“摘”出一条“好评”来，作为“代跋”罢：
But I hope that my words will still not harm the "writers" of the "new era", and also "pick" a "praise" as a "postscript":“‘藏之名山，传之其人’，早已过去了。二十世纪，有术存焉，词的解放，解放解放，锦上添花，何等有趣？可是别人乃是反动派，来欺侮这位文弱而有天才的公子，实乃因为‘能力薄弱，无法满足朋友们的要求’，遂受了冤枉的报复的，无损于‘新时代’的‘文学家’也。”
"'Hidden in the famous mountain, passed on to the people', has long passed. In the twentieth century, there is a technique, the liberation of words, liberation and liberation, the icing on the cake, how interesting! However, others are reactionaries who come to bully this weak and genius young man, but in fact, because they are 'weak and unable to meet the requirements of their friends', they have been wrongfully retaliated against, and they are not detrimental to the 'new era' of 'writers'. ”七月五日。
July 5th.

别一个窃火者

别一个窃火者

别一个窃火者

Another person who stole the fire丁萌
Ding Meng火的来源，希腊人以为是普洛美修斯从天上偷来的，因此触了大神宙斯之怒，将他锁在高山上，命一只大鹰天天来啄他的肉。
The source of the fire, the Greeks thought it was stolen from heaven by Prometheus, so they provoked the wrath of the great god Zeus, locked him on a high mountain, and ordered a great eagle to peck at his flesh every day.非洲的土人瓦仰安提族也已经用火，但并不是由希腊人传授给他们的。他们另有一个窃火者。
The native people of Africa, the Wayanganti, also used fire, but it was not taught to them by the Greeks. They had another fire thief.这窃火者，人们不能知道他的姓名，或者早被忘却了。他从天上偷了火来，传给瓦仰安提族的祖先，因此触了大神大拉斯之怒，这一段，是和希腊古传相像的。但大拉斯的办法却两样了，并不是锁他在山巅，却秘密的将他锁在暗黑的地窖子里，不给一个人知道。派来的也不是大鹰，而是蚊子，跳蚤，臭虫，一面吸他的血，一面使他皮肤肿起来。这时还有蝇子们，是最善于寻觅创伤的脚色，嗡嗡的叫，拚命的吸吮，一面又拉许多蝇粪在他的皮肤上，来证明他是怎样地一个不干净的东西。
This fire thief, people cannot know his name, or he has long been forgotten. He stole fire from heaven and passed it on to the ancestors of the Wayanganti tribe, so he offended the wrath of the great god Dalas, which is similar to the ancient Greek legend. But Dallas's method was different, not to lock him on the top of the mountain, but to secretly lock him in a dark cellar without anyone knowing. It was not a big eagle that was sent, but mosquitoes, fleas, and bed bugs, which sucked his blood and swollen his skin. At this time, there were also flies, who were the best at finding trauma, buzzing, sucking desperately, and pulling a lot of fly droppings on his skin to prove what an unclean thing he was.然而瓦仰安提族的人们，并不知道这一个故事。他们单知道火乃酋长的祖先所发明，给酋长作烧死异端和烧掉房屋之用的。
However, the people of the Wayanganti people did not know this story. They knew only that fire was invented by the chieftain's ancestors to burn the chieftain to the death of heretics and to burn the houses.幸而现在交通发达了，非洲的蝇子也有些飞到中国来，我从它们的嗡嗡营营声中，听出了这一点点。
Fortunately, now that transportation is developed, some African flies have also flown to China, and I can hear this little from their buzzing sound.七月八日。
July 8th.

智识过剩

智识过剩

智识过剩

Excess of intellect虞明
Yu Ming世界因为生产过剩，所以闹经济恐慌。虽然同时有三千万以上的工人挨饿，但是粮食过剩仍旧是“客观现实”，否则美国不会赊借麦粉给我们，我们也不会“丰收成灾”。
The world is in an economic panic because of overproduction. Although more than 30 million workers are starving at the same time, food surplus is still an "objective reality", otherwise the United States will not lend us wheat flour on credit, and we will not have a "good harvest".然而智识也会过剩的，智识过剩，恐慌就更大了。据说中国现行教育在乡间提倡愈甚，则农村之破产愈速。这大概是智识的丰收成灾了。美国因为棉花贱，所以在铲棉田了。中国却应当铲智识。这是西洋传来的妙法。
However, there will also be an excess of intellect, and if there is too much intellect, the panic will be even greater. It is said that the more China's current education is promoted in the countryside, the faster the countryside will go bankrupt. This is probably a harvest of wisdom. Because cotton is cheap, the United States is shoveling cotton fields. China should shovel its intellect. This is a wonderful method from the West.西洋人是能干的。五六年前，德国就嚷着大学生太多了，一些政治家和教育家，大声疾呼的劝告青年不要进大学。现在德国是不但劝告，而且实行铲除智识了：例如放火烧毁一些书籍，叫作家把自己的文稿吞进肚子去，还有，就是把一群群的大学生关在营房里做苦工，这叫做“解决失业问题”。中国不是也嚷着文法科的大学生过剩吗？其实何止文法科。就是中学生也太多了。要用“严厉的”会考制度，像铁扫帚似的——刷，刷，刷，把大多数的智识青年刷回“民间”去。
Westerners are capable. Five or six years ago, Germany shouted that there were too many college students, and some politicians and educators loudly advised young people not to go to university. Now Germany not only advises, but also implements the eradication of intellect: for example, setting fire to some books, asking writers to swallow their manuscripts, and locking groups of college students in barracks to do hard labor, which is called "solving the problem of unemployment". Isn't China also shouting about the surplus of college students in grammar? In fact, it's not just about grammar. Even there are too many middle school students. It is necessary to use a "strict" examination system, like an iron broom - brush, brush, brush, brush, brush most intellectual young people back to the "folk".智识过剩何以会闹恐慌？中国不是百分之八九十的人还不识字吗？然而智识过剩始终是“客观现实”，而由此而来的恐慌，也是“客观现实”。智识太多了，不是心活，就是心软。心活就会胡思乱想，心软就不肯下辣手。结果，不是自己不镇静，就是妨害别人的镇静。于是灾祸就来了。所以智识非铲除不可。
Why does excess intellect cause panic? Isn't 80 or 90 percent of the people in China still illiterate? However, intellectual excess is always an "objective reality", and the panic that comes from it is also an "objective reality". There is too much knowledge, either the heart is alive or the heart is soft. If you are in your heart, you will think wildly, and if you are soft-hearted, you will refuse to be hot. As a result, either you are not calm or you are disturbing the calmness of others. So woe came. Therefore, wisdom must be eradicated.然而单是铲除还是不够的。必须予以适合实用之教育，第一，是命理学——要乐天知命，命虽然苦，但还是应当乐。第二，是识相学——要“识相点”，知道点近代武器的利害。至少，这两种适合实用的学问是要赶快提倡的。提倡的方法很简单：——古代一个哲学家反驳唯心论，他说，你要是怀疑这碗麦饭的物质是否存在，那最好请你吃下去，看饱不饱。现在譬如说罢，要叫人懂得电学，最好是使他触电，看痛不痛；要叫人知道飞机等类的效用，最好是在他头上驾起飞机，掷下炸弹，看死不死……
However, eradication alone is not enough. It must be given a suitable and practical education, first, numerology - to be happy and know your fate, although life is bitter, you should still be happy. Second, it is physiognomy - to "recognize the point" and know the pros and cons of modern weapons. At least, these two practical studies should be advocated as soon as possible. The method advocated is very simple: - An ancient philosopher refuted idealism, he said, if you doubt whether the substance in this bowl of wheat rice exists, then it is best to invite you to eat it and see if you are full. Now, for example, if you want people to understand electricity, it is best to electrocute them and see if it hurts; To let people know the utility of airplanes and other things, it is best to fly the plane on his head, drop a bomb, and see if he is dead......有了这样的实用教育，智识就不过剩了。亚门！
With such a practical education, there is no need for intellectual knowledge. Subphylum!七月十二日。
July 12.

诗和预言

诗和预言

诗和预言

Poetry and prophecy虞明
Yu Ming预言总是诗，而诗人大半是预言家。然而预言不过诗而已，诗却往往比预言还灵。
Prophecies are always poetry, and poets are mostly prophets. However, prophecy is nothing more than poetry, and poetry is often more effective than prophecy.例如辛亥革命的时候，忽然发现了：
For example, during the Xinhai Revolution, it was suddenly discovered:“手执钢刀九十九，杀尽胡儿方罢手。”
"Ninety-nine steel knives in my hand, I killed all the Hu people before I stopped."这几句《推背图》里的预言，就不过是“诗”罢了。那时候，何尝只有九十九把钢刀？还是洋枪大炮来得厉害：该着洋枪大炮的后来毕竟占了上风，而只有钢刀的却吃了大亏。况且当时的“胡儿”，不但并未“杀尽”，而且还受了优待，以至于现在还有“伪”溥仪出风头的日子。所以当做预言看，这几句歌诀其实并没有应验。——死板的照着这类预言去干，往往要碰壁，好比前些时候，有人特别打了九十九把钢刀，去送给前线的战士，结果，只不过在古北口等处流流血，给人证明国难的不可抗性。——倒不如把这种预言歌诀当做“诗”看，还可以“以意逆志，自谓得之”。
These prophecies in "Tui Bei Tu" are nothing more than "poems". At that time, there were only ninety-nine steel knives. It was still the foreign gun and cannon that came hard: the foreign gun and cannon later had the upper hand after all, but the steel knife suffered a big loss. Moreover, the "Hu'er" at that time not only did not "kill them all", but also received preferential treatment, so that there are still days when the "pseudo" Puyi is in the limelight. So as a prophecy, these few songs have not actually been fulfilled. For example, some time ago, someone specially beat ninety-nine steel knives to give to the soldiers on the front line, and as a result, they only shed blood at Gubeikou and other places, proving the irresistibility of the national crisis. ——It is better to regard this kind of prophecy as a "poem", and you can also "go against your will and think you have it".至于诗里面，却的确有着极深刻的预言。我们要找预言，与其读《推背图》，不如读诗人的诗集。也许这个年头又是应当发现什么的时候了罢，居然找着了这么几句：
As for the poem, it does have a very profound prophecy. We need to find prophecies, and instead of reading "Tui Bei Tu", it is better to read the poet's poetry collection. Maybe it's time to discover something this year, but I actually found these few sentences:“此辈封狼从瘈狗，生平猎人如猎兽，
"These people seal wolves and dogs, and hunters are like hunting beasts in their lives.万人一怒不可回，会看太白悬其首。”
Thousands of people are angry and cannot be turned back, and they will see Venus hanging their heads. ”汪精卫著《双照楼诗词稿》：译嚣俄之《共和二年之战士》
Wang Jingwei's "Manuscript of the Poems of Shuangzhao Tower": Translated from Xiao Russia's "Soldiers of the Second Year of the Republic"这怎么叫人不“拍案叫绝”呢？这里“封狼从瘈狗”，自己明明是畜生，却偏偏把人当做畜生看待：畜生打猎，而人反而被猎！“万人”的愤怒的确是不可挽回的了。嚣俄这诗，是说的一七九三年（法国第一共和二年）的帝制党，他没有料到一百四十年之后还会有这样的应验。
How can this not be "amazing"? Here, "sealing the wolf from the dog", he is obviously a beast, but he treats people as beasts: beasts hunt, and people are hunted instead! The anger of "10,000 people" is indeed irreparable. The poem of Xiaoru is about the imperial party in 1793 (the second year of the First Republic of France), and he did not expect such a fulfillment one hundred and forty years later.汪先生译这几首诗的时候，不见得会想到二三十年之后中国已经是白话的世界。现在，懂得这种文言诗的人越发少了，这很可惜。然而预言的妙处，正在似懂非懂之间，叫人在事情完全应验之后，方才“恍然大悟”。这所谓“天机不可泄漏也”。
When Mr. Wang translated these poems, he did not necessarily think that twenty or thirty years later, China would already be a vernacular world. Nowadays, there are fewer and fewer people who understand this kind of classical Chinese poetry, which is a pity. However, the beauty of prophecy is that it seems to be understood but not understood, so that people can "suddenly realize" after the matter is fully fulfilled. This is the so-called "heavenly secret must not be leaked".七月二十日。
July 20.

“推”的余谈

“推”的余谈

“推”的余谈

The aftermath of "pushing"丰之余
Abundant surplus看过了《第三种人的“推”》，使我有所感：的确，现在“推”的工作已经加紧，范围也扩大了。三十年前，我也常坐长江轮船的统舱，却还没有这样的“推”得起劲。
After reading "The "Push" of the Third Kind, I felt something: indeed, the work of "pushing" has been intensified and the scope has been expanded. Thirty years ago, I often took the command cabin of the Yangtze River steamer, but I didn't have the strength to "push" like this.那时候，船票自然是要买的，但无所谓“买铺位”，买的时候也有，然而是另外一回事。假如你怕占不到铺位，一早带着行李下船去罢，统舱里全是空铺，只有三五个人们。但要将行李搁下空铺去，可就窒碍难行了，这里一条扁担，那里一束绳子，这边一卷破席，那边一件背心，人们中就跑出一个人来说，这位置是他所占有的。但其时可以开会议，崇和平，买他下来，最高的价值大抵是八角。假如你是一位战斗的英雄，可就容易对付了，只要一声不响，坐在左近，待到铜锣一响，轮船将开，这些地盘主义者便抓了扁担破席之类，一溜烟都逃到岸上去，抛下了卖剩的空铺，一任你悠悠然搁上行李，打开睡觉了。倘或人浮于铺，没法容纳，我们就睡在铺旁，船尾，“第三种人”是不来“推”你的。只有歇在房舱门外的人们，当账房查票时却须到统舱里去避一避。
At that time, the ferry ticket was naturally to be bought, but it didn't matter if you "bought a bunk", you also had it when you bought it, but it was a different matter. If you are afraid that you won't be able to occupy a berth, just get off the ship with your luggage early in the morning, and the cabin is full of empty bunks, with only three or five people. But it is difficult to put the luggage on the empty bunk, a flat pole here, a bundle of rope there, a roll of broken mat here, a vest over there, and a person from among the people runs out and says that this position is occupied by him. But at that time, you can hold a meeting, advocate peace, and buy him, and the highest value is probably octagon. If you are a hero of battle, it is easy to deal with, as long as there is no sound, sit nearby, wait until the gong sounds, the ship is about to leave, these turtirists grab the flat pole and break the mat, etc., and flee to the shore with a smoke, leaving behind the remaining empty shops, and let you leisurely put your luggage on the baggage and open it to sleep. If people float on the bunk and can't accommodate it, we will sleep next to the bunk, stern, and the "third type of person" will not come to "push" you. Only people resting outside the cabin door had to go to the unified cabin to avoid it when checking the tickets in the accounting room.至于没有买票的人物，那是要被“推”无疑的。手续是没收物品之后，吊在桅杆或什么柱子上，作要打之状，但据我的目击，真打的时候是极少的，这样的到了最近的码头，便把他“推”上去。据茶房说，也可以“推”入货舱，运回他下船的原处，但他们不想这么做，因为“推”上最近的码头，他究竟走了一个码头，一个一个的“推”过去，虽然吃些苦，后来也就到了目的地了。
As for the characters who did not buy tickets, they were undoubtedly "pushed". The procedure is to confiscate the items and hang them on a mast or some pillar as if they are going to be beaten, but according to my eyewitness, there are very few real fights, so when they reach the nearest pier, they "push" him up. According to the tea room, they can also "push" into the cargo hold and transport it back to the place where he got off the ship, but they don't want to do this, because "pushing" to the nearest wharf, he walked to a wharf, "pushed" one by one, although he suffered some hardships, and then arrived at his destination.古之“第三种人”，好像比现在的仁善一些似的。
The "third kind of people" in ancient times seem to be more benevolent than the current ones.生活的压迫，令人烦冤，胡涂中看不清冤家，便以为家人路人，在阻碍了他的路，于是乎“推”。这不但是保存自己，而且是憎恶别人了，这类人物一阔气，出来的时候是要“清道”的。
The oppression of life is annoying, and Hu Tuzhong can't see the enemy clearly, so he thinks that his family is a passerby, blocking his way, so he "pushes". This is not only to save oneself, but also to hate others, this kind of character is arrogant, and when he comes out, he wants to "clear the way".我并非眷恋过去，不过说，现在“推”的工作已经加紧，范围也扩大了罢了。但愿未来的阔人，不至于把我“推”上“反动”的码头去——则幸甚矣。
I am not attached to the past, but now the work of "pushing" has been intensified and the scope has expanded. I hope that the future broad people will not "push" me to the "reactionary" dock - that would be a good thing.七月二十四日。
July 24.

查旧帐

查旧帐

查旧帐

Check the old accounts旅隼
Traveling Falcon这几天，听涛社出了一本《肉食者言》，是现在的在朝者，先前还是在野时候的言论，给大家“听其言而观其行”，知道先后有怎样的不同。那同社出版的周刊《涛声》里，也常有同一意思的文字。
In the past few days, the Tingtao Society has published a book "The Words of the Meat Eater", which is the remarks of the current people in the court, and the remarks of the previous and opposition parties, giving everyone to "listen to their words and observe their deeds" and know what the difference is in the past. In the weekly magazine "Tao Sheng" published by the same company, there are often words with the same meaning.这是查旧帐，翻开帐簿，打起算盘，给一个结算，问一问前后不符，是怎么的，确也是一种切实分明，最令人腾挪不得的办法。然而这办法之在现在，可未免太“古道”了。
This is to check the old accounts, open the account books, make an abacus, give a settlement, and ask what is the inconsistency, and it is indeed a practical and most indispensable method. However, this method is too "ancient way" now.古人是怕查这种旧帐的，蜀的韦庄穷困时，做过一篇慷慨激昂，文字较为通俗的《秦妇吟》，真弄得大家传诵，待到他显达之后，却不但不肯编入集中，连人家的钞本也想设法消灭了。当时不知道成绩如何，但看清朝末年，又从敦煌的山洞中掘出了这诗的钞本，就可见是白用心机了的，然而那苦心却也还可以想见。
When Weizhuang of Shu was poor, he made an impassioned and popular "Qin Women's Yin", which really made everyone recite it, but after he became prominent, he not only refused to compile it into the collection, but even tried to destroy other people's banknotes. I didn't know what the results were at the time, but looking at the end of the Qing Dynasty, I dug out the banknote of this poem from the cave in Dunhuang, which shows that it was in vain, but the painstaking effort can still be imagined.不过这是古之名人。常人就不同了，他要抹杀旧帐，必须砍下脑袋，再行投胎。斩犯绑赴法场的时候，大叫道，“过了二十年，又是一条好汉！”为了另起炉灶，从新做人，非经过二十年不可，真是麻烦得很。
But this is an ancient celebrity. Ordinary people are different, if he wants to erase the old account, he must cut off his head and then be reincarnated. When the executioner was tied up to the court, he shouted, "Twenty years later, he is a good man again!" "In order to start anew and start anew, it must take twenty years, which is really troublesome.不过这是古今之常人。今之名人就又不同了，他要抹杀旧帐，从新做人，比起常人的方法来，迟速真有邮信和电报之别。不怕迂缓一点的，就出一回洋，造一个寺，生一场病，游几天山；要快，则开一次会，念一卷经，演说一通，宣言一下，或者睡一夜觉，做一首诗也可以；要更快，那就自打两个嘴巴，淌几滴眼泪，也照样能够另变一人，和“以前之我”绝无关系。净坛将军摇身一变，化为鲫鱼，在女妖们的大腿间钻来钻去，作者或自以为写得出神入化，但从现在看起来，是连新奇气息也没有的。
But this is an ordinary person in ancient and modern times. Today's celebrities are different, he wants to erase the old account and start anew, compared with the method of ordinary people, there is really a difference between post and telegram. If you are not afraid of being a little more slow, you will go back to the ocean, build a temple, get sick, and travel to the mountains for a few days; If you want to be fast, you can hold a meeting, read a scroll of scriptures, give a speech, make a declaration, or sleep for a night and make a poem; If you want to be faster, then you can slap yourself in the mouth and shed a few tears, and you can still change another person, which has nothing to do with the "former me". The general of the pure altar transformed into a crucian carp, drilling between the thighs of the banshees, and the author may think that he can write it brilliantly, but from now on, it seems that there is not even a novel atmosphere.如果这样变法，还觉得麻烦，那就白一白眼，反问道：“这是我的帐？”如果还嫌麻烦，那就眼也不白，问也不问，而现在所流行的却大抵是后一法。
If you change the law like this and still feel troublesome, then roll your eyes and ask, "Is this my account?" If it is still troublesome, then do not look at it and ask without asking, but what is popular now is probably the latter method.“古道”怎么能再行于今之世呢？竟还有人主张读经，真不知是什么意思？然而过了一夜，说不定会主张大家去当兵的，所以我现在经也没有买，恐怕明天兵也未必当。
How can the "ancient road" be practiced in today's world? There are still people who advocate reading the Bible, I really don't know what it means? However, after one night, I might advocate that everyone become a soldier, so I haven't bought it now, and I'm afraid I won't be a soldier tomorrow.七月二十五日。
July 25th.

晨凉漫记

晨凉漫记

晨凉漫记

I remember the coolness of the morning孺牛
Young cow关于张献忠的传说，中国各处都有，可见是大家都很以他为奇特的，我先前也便是很以他为奇特的人们中的一个。
There are legends about Zhang Xianzhong everywhere in China, which shows that everyone thinks he is very peculiar, and I was one of the people who thought he was very peculiar before.儿时见过一本书，叫作《无双谱》，是清初人之作，取历史上极特别无二的人物，各画一像，一面题些诗，但坏人好像是没有的。因此我后来想到可以择历来极其特别，而其实是代表着中国人性质之一种的人物，作一部中国的“人史”，如英国嘉勒尔的《英雄及英雄崇拜》，美国亚懋生的《伟人论》那样。惟须好坏俱有，有啮雪苦节的苏武，舍身求法的玄奘，有“鞠躬尽瘁，死而后已”的孔明，但也有呆信古法，“死而后已”的王莽，有半当真半取笑的变法的王安石；张献忠当然也在内。但现在是毫没有动笔的意思了。
When I was a child, I saw a book called "Wushuang Spectrum", which was the work of the early Qing Dynasty, taking very special and unique characters in history, drawing a portrait of each and inscribing some poems on the other, but the bad guys seemed to be none. Therefore, I later thought that I could choose a character who is extremely special in history and actually represents a kind of Chinese nature to make a Chinese "human history", such as Garrell's "Heroes and Hero Worship" in the United Kingdom and "The Theory of Great Men" by Ya Maosheng in the United States. There are both good and bad, there are Su Wu who bites snow, Xuanzang who sacrifices himself to seek the law, Kong Ming who "bows down and does his best, and dies after death", but there are also Wang Mang who believes in ancient laws and "dies after death", and Wang Anshi who changes the law half-seriously and half-ridiculed; Zhang Xianzhong is of course included. But now there is no intention of writing.《蜀碧》一类的书，记张献忠杀人的事颇详细，但也颇散漫，令人看去仿佛他是像“为艺术而艺术”的一样，专在“为杀人而杀人”了。他其实是别有目的的。他开初并不很杀人，他何尝不想做皇帝。后来知道李自成进了北京，接着是清兵入关，自己只剩了没落这一条路，于是就开手杀，杀……他分明的感到，天下已没有自己的东西，现在是在毁坏别人的东西了，这和有些末代的风雅皇帝，在死前烧掉了祖宗或自己所搜集的书籍古董宝贝之类的心情，完全一样。他还有兵，而没有古董之类，所以就杀，杀，杀人，杀……
Books such as "Shu Bi" record Zhang Xianzhong's murder in great detail, but it is also quite scattered, making people seem as if he is like "art for art's sake", specializing in "killing for the sake of killing". He actually has a different purpose. He didn't kill very much at the beginning, so why didn't he want to be an emperor. Later, he knew that Li Zicheng had entered Beijing, and then the Qing soldiers entered the customs, and he was left with only the road of decline, so he started to kill and kill...... He clearly felt that there was no one in the world of his own, and now he was destroying other people's things, which was exactly the same as the mood of some of the last elegant emperors who burned their ancestors or the books and antique treasures they had collected before they died. He still has soldiers, but no antiques or anything like that, so he kills, kills, kills, kills......但他还要维持兵，这实在不过是维持杀。他杀得没有平民了，就派许多较为心腹的人到兵们中间去，设法窃听，偶有怨言，即跃出执之，戮其全家（他的兵像是有家眷的，也许就是掳来的妇女）。以杀治兵，用兵来杀，自己是完了，但要这样的达到一同灭亡的末路。我们对于别人的或公共的东西，不是也不很爱惜的么？
But he still has to maintain the soldiers, which is really nothing more than a maintenance kill. He killed no more civilians, so he sent many of his confidants to the soldiers to eavesdrop, and occasionally complained, that is, he jumped out and arrested them, killing their entire families (his soldiers seemed to have families, maybe captive women). Killing and killing with soldiers is the end of oneself, but to achieve the end of destruction together. Don't we cherish other people's or public things very much?所以张献忠的举动，一看虽然似乎古怪，其实是极平常的。古怪的倒是那些被杀的人们，怎么会总是束手伸颈的等他杀，一定要清朝的肃王来射死他，这才作为奴才而得救，而还说这是前定，就是所谓“吹箫不用竹，一箭贯当胸”。但我想，这豫言诗是后人造出来的，我们不知道那时的人们真是怎么想。
Therefore, Zhang Xianzhong's actions, although they seem strange at first glance, are actually very ordinary. The strange thing is that those who were killed, how could they always stretch their hands and necks and wait for him to kill, and they must be shot dead by King Su of the Qing Dynasty, so that he could be saved as a slave, and he also said that this was a predetermination, that is, the so-called "blowing the flute does not use bamboo, and an arrow is pierced into the chest". But I think this prophetic poem was created by later generations, and we don't know what people really thought at that time.七月二十八日。
July 28.

中国的奇想

中国的奇想

中国的奇想

Chinese whims游光
Swimming light外国人不知道中国，常说中国人是专重实际的。其实并不，我们中国人是最有奇想的人民。
Foreigners do not know China, and it is often said that Chinese people are practical. In fact, no, we Chinese are the most whimsical people.无论古今，谁都知道，一个男人有许多女人，一味纵欲，后来是不但天天喝三鞭酒也无效，简直非“寿（？）终正寝”不可的。可是我们古人有一个大奇想，是靠了“御女”，反可以成仙，例子是彭祖有多少女人而活到几百岁。这方法和炼金术一同流行过，古代书目上还剩着各种的书名。不过实际上大约还是到底不行罢，现在似乎再没有什么人们相信了，这对于喜欢渔色的英雄，真是不幸得很。
No matter ancient or modern, everyone knows that a man has many women, blindly indulging, and later not only drinking three whips of wine every day is also ineffective, which is simply not "longevity (?)". Finally, it is not possible. But our ancients had a great idea, relying on the "imperial maiden", they could become immortals, for example, how many women Peng Zu had and lived to be hundreds of years old. This method was popular along with alchemy, and there are still various titles left in the ancient bibliography. But in fact, it is probably not good, and now it seems that no one believes in it anymore, which is really unfortunate for heroes who like fishing color.然而还有一种小奇想。那就是哼的一声，鼻孔里放出一道白光，无论路的远近，将仇人或敌人杀掉。白光可又回来了，摸不着是谁杀的，既然杀了人，又没有麻烦，多么舒适自在。这种本领，前年还有人想上武当山去寻求，直到去年，这才用大刀队来替代了这奇想的位置。现在是连大刀队的名声也寂寞了。对于爱国的英雄，也是十分不幸的。
However, there is also a small whim. That was a snort, and a white light emitted from the nostrils, killing the enemy or the enemy, regardless of the distance of the road. Bai Guang is back again, I can't touch who killed him, since he killed someone, there is no trouble, how comfortable and comfortable. This kind of skill, the year before last, there were still people who wanted to go to Wudang Mountain to seek it, but it was not until last year that the big knife team was used to replace the position of this whim. Now even the reputation of the Dadao team is lonely. It is also very unfortunate for patriotic heroes.然而我们新近又有了一个大奇想。那是一面救国，一面又可以发财，虽然各种彩票，近似赌博，而发财也不过是“希望”。不过这两种已经关联起来了却是真的。固然，世界上也有靠聚赌抽头来维持的摩那科王国，但就常理说，则赌博大概是小则败家，大则亡国；救国呢，却总不免有一点牺牲，至少，和发财之路总是相差很远的。然而发见了一致之点的是我们现在的中国，虽然还在试验的途中。
However, we recently had a big idea. That is to save the country on the one hand, and on the other hand, you can get rich, although all kinds of lotteries are similar to gambling, and getting rich is just "hope". However, these two are already related, but they are true. Of course, there is also the kingdom of Monaco in the world that relies on gambling to maintain it, but in terms of common sense, gambling is probably a small loser, and a big one is ruined; As for saving the country, there is always a little sacrifice, at least, it is always far from the road to wealth. However, what has found the same point is that our current China is still in the process of experimenting.然而又还有一种小奇想。这回不用一道白光了，要用几回启事，几封匿名的信件，几篇化名的文章，使仇头落地，而血点一些也不会溅着自己的洋房和洋服。并且映带之下，使自己成名获利。这也还在试验的途中，不知道结果怎么样，但翻翻现成的文艺史，看不见半个这样的人物，那恐怕也还是枉用心机的。
However, there is also a small whim. This time there is no need for a white light, it is necessary to use several notices, a few anonymous letters, and a few pseudonymous articles to make the enemy fall to the ground, and some blood will not splash on his bungalow and clothes. And under the shadow, make yourself famous and profitable. This is still in the process of experimenting, I don't know what the result will be, but if you look through the ready-made literary and artistic history and can't see half of such a character, then I'm afraid it's still in vain.狂赌救国，纵欲成仙，袖手杀敌，造谣买田，倘有人要编续《龙文鞭影》的，我以为不妨添上这四句。
Gambling to save the country, indulging in immortality, killing the enemy with his sleeves, spreading rumors and buying land, if someone wants to compile "Dragon Whip Shadow", I think I might as well add these four sentences.八月四日。
August 4th.

豪语的折扣

豪语的折扣

豪语的折扣

Discount on the word苇索
苇索豪语的折扣其实也就是文学上的折扣，凡作者的自述，往往须打一个扣头，连自白其可怜和无用也还是并非“不二价”的，更何况豪语。
The discount of the heroic language is actually the discount of literature, and the author's self-statement often has to be buttoned up, and even the confession of its pity and uselessness is still not "the same price", let alone the heroic language.仙才李太白的善作豪语，可以不必说了；连留长了指甲，骨瘦如柴的鬼才李长吉，也说“见买若耶溪水剑，明朝归去事猿公”起来，简直是毫不自量，想学刺客了。这应该折成零，证据是他到底并没有去。南宋时候，国步艰难，陆放翁自然也是慷慨党中的一个，他有一回说：“老子犹堪绝大漠，诸君何至泣新亭。”他其实是去不得的，也应该折成零。——但我手头无书，引诗或有错误，也先打一个折扣在这里。
The immortal talent Li Taibai's good words go without saying; Even Li Changji, a ghost talent with long nails and skinny, also said, "Seeing the purchase of Ruoye Creek water sword, the Ming Dynasty will return to serve the ape lord", he simply did not measure himself and wanted to learn to be an assassin. This should be broken into zero, and the proof is that he didn't go in the end. During the Southern Song Dynasty, the country was difficult, and Lu Fangweng was naturally one of the generous parties, and he once said: "Lao Tzu is still in the desert, why do you cry in the new pavilion." "He can't actually go, and he should be folded into zero. ——But I don't have a book on hand, and there may be mistakes in quoting poems, so I will give a discount here.其实，这故作豪语的脾气，正不独文人为然，常人或市侩，也非常发达。市上甲乙打架，输的大抵说：“我认得你的！”这是说，他将如伍子胥一般，誓必复仇的意思。不过总是不来的居多，倘是智识分子呢，也许另用一些阴谋，但在粗人，往往这就是斗争的结局，说的是有口无心，听的也不以为意，久成为打架收场的一种仪式了。
In fact, this pretending to be a boastful temper is not only for literati, but also for ordinary people or philistines, and it is also very developed. When A and B fight in the city, most of them say, "I recognize you!" This means that he will be like Wu Zixu, vowing revenge. But most of them don't come, if they are intellectuals, maybe they use some other conspiracies, but in rough people, often this is the end of the struggle, saying that there is no intention, and the listener doesn't care, and it has long become a ritual that ends in a fight.旧小说家也早已看穿了这局面，他写暗娼和别人相争，照例攻击过别人的偷汉之后，就自序道：“老娘是指头上站得人，臂膊上跑得马……”底下怎样呢？他任别人去打折扣。他知道别人是决不那么胡涂，会十足相信的，但仍得这么说，恰如卖假药的，包纸上一定印着“存心欺世，雷殛火焚”一样，成为一种仪式了。
The old novelist has already seen through this situation, he wrote about secret prostitutes fighting with others, and after attacking other people's thieves as usual, he prefaced: "The old lady is standing on her head and running on her arms...... He let others discount it. He knew that others would never be so foolish, and he would believe it completely, but he still had to say this, just like those who sell counterfeit medicines, the wrapping paper must be printed with "deliberately deceiving the world, lightning and burning", which has become a ritual.但因时势的不同，也有立刻自打折扣的。例如在广告上，我们有时会看见自说“我是坐不改名，行不改姓的人”，真要蓦地发生一种好像见了《七侠五义》中人物一般的敬意，但接着就是“纵令有时用其他笔名，但所发表文章，均自负责”，却身子一扭，土行孙似的不见了。予岂好“用其他笔名”哉？予不得已也。上海原是中国的一部分，当然受着孔子的教化的。便是商家，柜内的“不二价”的金字招牌也时时和屋外“大廉价”的大旗互相辉映，不过他总有一个缘故：不是提倡国货，就是纪念开张。
But due to different times, there are also those that immediately discount themselves. For example, in advertisements, we sometimes see ourselves saying, "I am a person who does not change my name or surname", and it really happens that I have seen the characters in "Seven Heroes and Five Righteousness", but then "even if I sometimes use other pseudonyms, but the published articles are all responsible for myself", but my body twisted and disappeared like a grandson. Do I prefer to "use other pseudonyms"? I have no choice. Shanghai was originally part of China, and of course it was educated by Confucius. Even if it is a merchant, the golden sign of "no two prices" in the cabinet also always reflects the banner of "big and cheap" outside the house, but he always has a reason: either advocating domestic products or commemorating the opening.所以，自打折扣，也还是没有打足的，凡“老上海”，必须再打它一下。
Therefore, since the discount, there is still no sufficient hit, and all "old Shanghai" must be beaten again.八月四日。
August 4th.

踢

踢

踢

kick丰之余
Abundant surplus两月以前，曾经说过“推”，这回却又来了“踢”。
Two months ago, I used to say "push", but this time it came to "kick" again.本月九日《申报》载六日晚间，有漆匠刘明山，杨阿坤，顾洪生三人在法租界黄浦滩太古码头纳凉，适另有数人在左近聚赌，由巡逻警察上前驱逐，而刘，顾两人，竟被俄捕弄到水里去，刘明山竟淹死了。由俄捕说，自然是“自行失足落水”的。但据顾洪生供，却道：“我与刘，杨三人，同至太古码头乘凉，刘坐铁凳下地板上，……我立在旁边，……俄捕来先踢刘一脚，刘已立起要避开，又被踢一脚，以致跌入浦中，我要拉救，已经不及，乃转身拉住俄捕，亦被用手一推，我亦跌下浦中，经人救起的。”推事问：“为什么要踢他？”答曰：“不知。”
On the evening of the 6th, the "Declaration" on the 9th of this month recorded that on the evening of the 6th, lacquer craftsmen Liu Mingshan, Yang Akun, and Gu Hongsheng were cooling off at the Taikoo Wharf in Huangpu Beach in the French Concession, and several other people gathered to gamble on the left and right, and the patrol police stepped forward to expel them, and Liu and Gu were actually caught by Russia and thrown into the water, and Liu Mingshan drowned. According to the Russian arrest, it was natural to "fall into the water on its own". But according to Gu Hongsheng's confession, he said: "Liu and Yang and I went to Taikoo Pier to cool off together, and Liu sat on the floor under the iron bench,...... I stood beside me,...... The Russian catcher kicked Liu first, Liu had already stood up to avoid it, and was kicked again, so that he fell into the pool, I wanted to rescue him, but it was too late, so he turned around and grabbed the Russian catcher, and was also pushed with his hand, and I also fell down into the pool, and was rescued by someone. The judge asked, "Why kick him?" He replied, "I don't know." ”“推”还要抬一抬手，对付下等人是犯不着如此费事的，于是乎有“踢”。而上海也真有“踢”的专家，有印度巡捕，有安南巡捕，现在还添了白俄巡捕，他们将沙皇时代对犹太人的手段，到我们这里来施展了。我们也真是善于“忍辱负重”的人民，只要不“落浦”，就大抵用一句滑稽化的话道：“吃了一只外国火腿”，一笑了之。
"Push" also has to raise your hand, and it is not so troublesome to deal with inferior people, so there is a "kick". And Shanghai really has experts who "kick", there are Indian patrols, Annan patrols, and now Belarusian patrols, who have brought the methods of the tsarist era against the Jews to us. We are also really good at "enduring humiliation and bearing weight" people, as long as we do not "fall into the pool", we will probably use a funny sentence to say: "Eat a foreign ham" and laugh it off.苗民大败之后，都往山里跑，这是我们的先帝轩辕氏赶他的。南宋败残之余，就往海边跑，这据说也是我们的先帝成吉思汗赶他的，赶到临了，就是陆秀夫背着小皇帝，跳进海里去。我们中国人，原是古来就要“自行失足落水”的。
After the defeat of the Miao people, they all ran into the mountains, which was driven by our late emperor Xuanyuan. After the defeat of the Southern Song Dynasty, he ran to the seaside, which is said to have been driven by our late emperor Genghis Khan, and when he arrived, it was Lu Xiufu who carried the little emperor on his back and jumped into the sea. We Chinese have always had to "stumble and fall into the water" since ancient times.有些慷慨家说，世界上只有水和空气给与穷人。此说其实是不确的，穷人在实际上，那里能够得到和大家一样的水和空气。即使在码头上乘乘凉，也会无端被“踢”，送掉性命的：落浦。要救朋友，或拉住凶手罢，“也被用手一推”：也落浦。如果大家来相帮，那就有“反帝”的嫌疑了，“反帝”原未为中国所禁止的，然而要预防“反动分子乘机捣乱”，所以结果还是免不了“踢”和“推”，也就是终于是落浦。
Some generous people say that the only thing in the world is water and air for the poor. This statement is actually incorrect, because the poor can actually get the same water and air as everyone else. Even if you take a ride on the pier to enjoy the coolness, you will be "kicked" for no reason and lose your life: Luopu. To save a friend, or to catch the murderer, "also pushed by the hand": also fall. If everyone comes to help, then there is a suspicion of "anti-imperialism", which was not originally banned by China, but to prevent "reactionaries from taking the opportunity to make trouble", so the result is still inevitable to "kick" and "push", that is, finally fall.时代在进步，轮船飞机，随处皆是，假使南宋末代皇帝而生在今日，是决不至于落海的了，他可以跑到外国去，而小百姓以“落浦”代之。
The times are progressing, ships and airplanes are everywhere, if the last emperor of the Southern Song Dynasty was born today, he would never fall into the sea, he could go to foreign countries, and the common people would replace it with "Luopu".这理由虽然简单，却也复杂，故漆匠顾洪生曰：“不知。”
Although this reason is simple, it is also complicated, so the lacquer maker Gu Hongsheng said: "I don't know." ”八月十日。
August 10th.

“中国文坛的悲观”

“中国文坛的悲观”

“中国文坛的悲观”

"Pessimism in the Chinese literary world"旅隼
Traveling Falcon文雅书生中也真有特别善于下泪的人物，说是因为近来中国文坛的混乱，好像军阀割据，便不禁“呜呼”起来了，但尤其痛心诬陷。
There are really characters who are particularly good at shedding tears among the elegant scholars, saying that because of the recent chaos in the Chinese literary world, it seems that the warlords are separatist, so they can't help but "woo", but they are especially sad to frame.其实是作文“藏之名山”的时代一去，而有一个“坛”，便不免有斗争，甚而至于谩骂，诬陷的。明末太远，不必提了；清朝的章实斋和袁子才，李莼客和赵叔，就如水火之不可调和；再近些，则有《民报》和《新民丛报》之争，《新青年》派和某某派之争，也都非常猛烈。当初又何尝不使局外人摇头叹气呢，然而胜负一明，时代渐远，战血为雨露洗得干干净净，后人便以为先前的文坛是太平了。在外国也一样，我们现在大抵只知道嚣俄和霍普德曼是卓卓的文人，但当时他们的剧本开演的时候，就在戏场里捉人，打架，较详的文学史上，还载着打架之类的图。
In fact, the era of the composition "hidden famous mountain" is gone, and there is an "altar", which inevitably leads to struggles, and even abuse and false accusations. The end of the Ming Dynasty is too far away, so there is no need to mention it; Zhang Shizhai and Yuan Zicai of the Qing Dynasty, Li Yingke and Uncle Zhao, are like water and fire are irreconcilable; Closer, there is the dispute between "Minbao" and "Xinmin Congbao", and the dispute between the "New Youth" faction and so-and-so faction, which are also very fierce. At the beginning, why didn't outsiders shake their heads and sigh, but as soon as the victory and defeat were clear, the times gradually faded away, and the blood of war was washed clean by the rain and dew, and later generations thought that the previous literary world was peaceful. The same is true in foreign countries, we now probably only know that Xiao Russian and Hopmann are Zhuo Zhuo's literati, but when their scripts were performed, they were catching people in the theater, fighting, and in the more detailed literary history, there are also pictures of fights and so on.所以，无论中外古今，文坛上是总归有些混乱，使文雅书生看得要“悲观”的。但也总归有许多所谓文人和文章也者一定灭亡，只有配存在者终于存在，以证明文坛也总归还是干净的处所。增加混乱的倒是有些悲观论者，不施考察，不加批判，但用“彼亦一是非，此亦一是非”的论调，将一切作者，诋为“一丘之貉”。这样子，扰乱是永远不会收场的。然而世间却并不都这样，一定会有明明白白的是非之别，我们试想一想，林琴南攻击文学革命的小说，为时并不久，现在那里去了？
Therefore, no matter ancient or modern, there is always some confusion in the literary world, which makes elegant scholars look "pessimistic". But there are always many so-called literati and writers who must perish, and only those who deserve existence finally exist to prove that the literary world is still a clean place. What adds to the confusion are some pessimists, who do not investigate or criticize, but use the argument that "he is also right and wrong, and this is also right and wrong" to denigrate all authors as "a raccoon on a hill". In this way, the disturbance will never end. However, not all of the world is like this, there will be a clear difference between right and wrong, let's think about it, Lin Qinnan's novel attacking the literary revolution, not long ago, where is it now?只有近来的诬陷，倒像是颇为出色的花样，但其实也并不比古时候更厉害，证据是清初大兴文字之狱的遗闻。况且闹这样玩意的，其实并不完全是文人，十中之九，乃是挂了招牌，而无货色，只好化为黑店，出卖人肉馒头的小盗；即使其中偶然有曾经弄过笔墨的人，然而这时却正是露出原形，在告白他自己的没落，文坛决不因此混乱，倒是反而越加清楚，越加分明起来了。
Only the recent slander seems to be quite an excellent trick, but in fact it is not more powerful than in ancient times, and the evidence is the rumors of the prison of Daxing in the early Qing Dynasty. Moreover, the people who make such a thing are not entirely literati, nine out of ten, but they have hung up signboards, but have no goods, so they have to turn into black shops and sell human meat steamed buns; Even if there are occasionally people who have done pen and ink, but at this time they are revealing their true forms, confessing their own decline, and the literary world will never be confused because of this, but it will become clearer and clearer.历史决不倒退，文坛是无须悲观的。悲观的由来，是在置身事外不辨是非，而偏要关心于文坛，或者竟是自己坐在没落的营盘里。
History will never go backwards, and there is no need to be pessimistic in the literary world. The origin of pessimism is to stay out of the matter and not distinguish right from wrong, but to care about the literary world, or to sit in a declining camp.八月十日。
August 10th.

秋夜纪游

秋夜纪游

秋夜纪游

Autumn night travel tour游光
Swimming light秋已经来了，炎热也不比夏天小，当电灯替代了太阳的时候，我还是在马路上漫游。
Autumn has come, and the heat is no less than summer, and when the electric light replaces the sun, I still roam the road.危险？危险令人紧张，紧张令人觉到自己生命的力。在危险中漫游，是很好的。
Dangerous? Danger makes people nervous, and nervousness makes people feel the power of their own life. Roaming in danger, it's good.租界也还有悠闲的处所，是住宅区。但中等华人的窟穴却是炎热的，吃食担，胡琴，麻将，留声机，垃圾桶，光着的身子和腿。相宜的是高等华人或无等洋人住处的门外，宽大的马路，碧绿的树，淡色的窗幔，凉风，月光，然而也有狗子叫。
The concession also has leisurely places, which are residential areas. But the cave of the middle Chinese is hot, eating food burdens, huqin, mahjong, gramophones, trash cans, bare bodies and legs. Outside the door of the residence of high-class Chinese or non-equal foreigners, there are wide roads, turquoise trees, light-colored curtains, cool breezes, moonlight, but there are also barking dogs.我生长农村中，爱听狗子叫，深夜远吠，闻之神怡，古人之所谓“犬声如豹”者就是。倘或偶经生疏的村外，一声狂嗥，巨獒跃出，也给人一种紧张，如临战斗，非常有趣的。
I grew up in the countryside, I loved to listen to dogs barking, barking late at night, and it was pleasant to hear it, as the ancients called "the sound of a dog like a leopard". If you occasionally pass by the unfamiliar village, a wild howl, the giant mastiff jumps out, which also gives people a sense of nervousness, as if in battle, which is very interesting.但可惜在这里听到的是吧儿狗。它躲躲闪闪，叫得很脆：汪汪！
But unfortunately, it was the dog that was heard here. It dodged and screamed very crisply: Wow!我不爱听这一种叫。
I don't like to hear this kind of call.我一面漫步，一面发出冷笑，因为我明白了使它闭口的方法，是只要去和它主子的管门人说几句话，或者抛给它一根肉骨头。这两件我还能的，但是我不做。
I sneered as I strolled, for I understood that the way to silence it was to just say a few words to its master's gatekeeper or throw it a piece of meat. I can still do these two things, but I don't do them.它常常要汪汪。
It often has to bark.我不爱听这一种叫。
I don't like to hear this kind of call.我一面漫步，一面发出恶笑了，因为我手里拿着一粒石子，恶笑刚敛，就举手一掷，正中了它的鼻梁。
As I strolled, I grinned wickedly, because I was holding a stone in my hand, and as soon as I stopped laughing, I raised my hand and threw it, hitting the bridge of its nose.呜的一声，它不见了。我漫步着，漫步着，在少有的寂寞里。
With a whine, it was gone. I strolled, strolled, in a rare loneliness.秋已经来了，我还是漫步着。叫呢，也还是有的，然而更加躲躲闪闪了，声音也和先前不同，距离也隔得远了，连鼻子都看不见。
Autumn has come, and I still stroll. There are still some calls, but they are even more dodging, and their voices are different from before, and the distance is so far away that they can't even see their noses.我不再冷笑，不再恶笑了，我漫步着，一面舒服的听着它那很脆的声音。
I no longer sneered, no longer smirked, I strolled, listening comfortably to its crisp sound.八月十四日。
August 14th.

“揩油”

“揩油”

“揩油”

"Wipe the oil."苇索
苇索“揩油”，是说明着奴才的品行全部的。
"Rubbing oil" shows the whole character of the servant.这不是“取回扣”或“取佣钱”，因为这是一种秘密；但也不是偷窃，因为在原则上，所取的实在是微乎其微。因此也不能说是“分肥”；至多，或者可以谓之“舞弊”罢。然而这又是光明正大的“舞弊”，因为所取的是豪家，富翁，阔人，洋商的东西，而且所取又不过一点点，恰如从油水汪洋的处所，揩了一下，于人无损，于揩者却有益的，并且也不失为损富济贫的正道。设法向妇女调笑几句，或乘机摸一下，也谓之“揩油”，这虽然不及对于金钱的名正言顺，但无大损于被揩者则一也。
This is not a "kickback" or "commission money" because it is a secret; But it is not stealing, because in principle, the takeaway is really minimal. Therefore, it cannot be said to be "fattening"; At most, it can be called "fraud". However, this is also an upright "fraud", because what is taken is the things of wealthy families, rich people, wealthy people, and foreign merchants, and the only thing taken is a little bit, just like wiping it from a place full of oil and water, which is not harmful to people, but beneficial to those who wipe it, and it is also the right way to reduce the rich and help the poor. Trying to tease a few words to women, or taking the opportunity to touch them, is also called "wiping oil", although this is not as justifiable as money, but it does not cause much harm to the person being wiped.表现得最分明的是电车上的卖票人。纯熟之后，他一面留心着可揩的客人，一面留心着突来的查票，眼光都练得像老鼠和老鹰的混合物一样。付钱而不给票，客人本该索取的，然而很难索取，也很少见有人索取，因为他所揩的是洋商的油，同是中国人，当然有帮忙的义务，一索取，就变成帮助洋商了。这时候，不但卖票人要报你憎恶的眼光，连同车的客人也往往不免显出以为你不识时务的脸色。
The most obvious is the ticket seller on the tram. After becoming proficient, he paid attention to the guests who could be wiped and the sudden ticket check, and his vision was like a mixture of a mouse and an eagle. Paying money without giving a ticket, the guest should have asked for it, but it is difficult to ask for it, and it is rare for anyone to ask for it, because he is the oil of a foreign businessman, and he is also Chinese, of course, he has the obligation to help. At this time, not only will the ticket seller report your hateful eyes, but also the guests in the car will often show a face that thinks you don't know the current affairs.然而彼一时，此一时，如果三等客中有时偶缺一个铜元，你却只好在目的地以前下车，这时他就不肯通融，变成洋商的忠仆了。
However, at that time, at this time, if a copper dollar is sometimes missing among the third-class guests, you have to get off the bus before the destination, and then he refuses to be accommodating and becomes a loyal servant of foreign merchants.在上海，如果同巡捕，门丁，西崽之类闲谈起来，他们大抵是憎恶洋鬼子的，他们多是爱国主义者。然而他们也像洋鬼子一样，看不起中国人，棍棒和拳头和轻蔑的眼光，专注在中国人的身上。
In Shanghai, if you talk to patrols, doors, and Xizai, they probably hate foreign devils, and most of them are patriots. However, they are also like foreign devils, looking down on the Chinese, sticks, fists and contemptuous eyes, focusing on the Chinese.“揩油”的生活有福了。这手段将更加展开，这品格将变成高尚，这行为将认为正当，这将算是国民的本领，和对于帝国主义的复仇。打开天窗说亮话，其实，所谓“高等华人”也者，也何尝逃得出这模子。
Blessed is the life of "wiping oil". This means will be further developed, this character will become noble, this act will be considered justified, and this will be regarded as the skill of the people and the revenge of imperialism. Open the skylight to say bright words, in fact, the so-called "high Chinese" also can't escape this mold.但是，也如“吃白相饭”朋友那样，卖票人是还有他的道德的。倘被查票人查出他收钱而不给票来了，他就默然认罚，决不说没有收过钱，将罪案推到客人身上去。
However, just like his friends who "eat white rice", the ticket seller still has his morals. If the ticket checker finds out that he has collected money without giving a ticket, he will silently accept the punishment, never say that he has not received money, and push the crime onto the guest.八月十四日。
August 14th.

我们怎样教育儿童的？

我们怎样教育儿童的？

我们怎样教育儿童的？

How do we educate children?旅隼
Traveling Falcon看见了讲到“孔乙己”，就想起中国一向怎样教育儿童来。
When I saw the talk of "Kong Yiji", I remembered how China has always educated children.现在自然是各式各样的教科书，但在村塾里也还有《三字经》和《百家姓》。清朝末年，有些人读的是“天子重英豪，文章教尔曹，万般皆下品，惟有读书高”的《神童诗》，夸着“读书人”的光荣；有些人读的是“混沌初开，乾坤始奠，轻清者上浮而为天，重浊者下凝而为地”的《幼学琼林》，教着做古文的滥调。再上去我可不知道了，但听说，唐末宋初用过《太公家教》，久已失传，后来才从敦煌石窟中发现，而在汉朝，是读《急就篇》之类的。
Nowadays, there are naturally all kinds of textbooks, but there are also "Three Character Classics" and "Hundred Family Surnames" in the village school. At the end of the Qing Dynasty, some people read the "Prodigy Poem" that "the Son of Heaven values heroes, the article teaches Ercao, everything is inferior, only reading is high", boasting the glory of "scholars"; Some people read "Preschool Qionglin", which "chaos begins to open, the universe begins to be laid, the light and clear rise to the sky, and the heavy turbid ones condense into the earth", teaching the cliché of making ancient texts. I don't know if I went up again, but I heard that the "Taigong Tutoring" was used in the late Tang and early Song dynasties, which has been lost for a long time, and was later discovered from the Dunhuang Grottoes, and in the Han Dynasty, it was read "Urgent Chapter" and the like.就是所谓“教科书”，在近三十年中，真不知变化了多少。忽而这么说，忽而那么说，今天是这样的宗旨，明天又是那样的主张，不加“教育”则已，一加“教育”，就从学校里造成了许多矛盾冲突的人，而且因为旧的社会关系，一面也还是“混沌初开，乾坤始奠”的老古董。
It is the so-called "textbook", which has changed much in the past thirty years. Suddenly saying this, suddenly saying that, today is such a purpose, tomorrow is such a proposition, without adding "education", once "education" is added, many people have caused conflicts and conflicts from the school, and because of the old social relations, on the one hand, it is still an old antique of "chaos begins to open, and the universe begins to be laid".中国要作家，要“文豪”，但也要真正的学究。倘有人作一部历史，将中国历来教育儿童的方法，用书，作一个明确的记录，给人明白我们的古人以至我们，是怎样的被熏陶下来的，则其功德，当不在禹（虽然他也许不过是一条虫）下。
China wants writers, "literary masters", but also true pedants. If someone makes a history of China's traditional methods of educating children, using books, to make a clear record, and to give people an understanding of how our ancients and even we were educated, then his merit should not be under Yu (although he may be just a worm).《自由谈》的投稿者，常有博古通今的人，我以为对于这工作，是很有胜任者在的。不知亦有有意于此者乎？现在提出这问题，盖亦知易行难，遂只得空口说白话，而望垦辟于健者也。
The contributors of "Free Talk" are often people who are knowledgeable about the past and the present, and I think there are very competent people for this work. I wonder if there are people who are interested in this? Now that this question is raised, it is probably easy to do, but it is difficult to do, so I have to speak the vernacular and hope to cultivate it in the strong.八月十四日。
August 14th.

为翻译辩护

为翻译辩护

为翻译辩护

Defend the translation洛文
Lowen今年是围剿翻译的年头。
This year is the year of encirclement and suppression translation.或曰“硬译”，或曰“乱译”，或曰“听说现在有许多翻译家……翻开第一行就译，对于原作的理解，更无从谈起”，所以令人看得“不知所云”。
Some say "hard translation", some say "random translation", or "I heard that there are many translators now...... Turning the first line and translating, there is no way to talk about the understanding of the original work", so people "don't know what to say".这种现象，在翻译界确是不少的，那病根就在“抢先”。中国人原是喜欢“抢先”的人民，上落电车，买火车票，寄挂号信，都愿意是一到便是第一个。翻译者当然也逃不出这例子的。而书店和读者，实在也没有容纳同一原本的两种译本的雅量和物力，只要已有一种译稿，别一译本就没有书店肯接收出版了，据说是已经有了，怕再没有人要买。
This phenomenon is indeed quite common in the translation industry, and the root of the problem lies in "preemption". Chinese people who liked to "be the first", getting on and off the tram, buying train tickets, and sending registered letters, were willing to be the first as soon as they arrived. The translator certainly cannot escape this example. As long as there is already a translation, no bookstore will be willing to accept and publish another translation.举一个例在这里：现在已经成了古典的达尔文的《物种由来》，日本有两种翻译本，先出的一种颇多错误，后出的一本是好的。中国只有一种马君武博士的翻译，而他所根据的却是日本的坏译本，实有另译的必要。然而那里还会有书店肯出版呢？除非译者同时是富翁，他来自己印。不过如果是富翁，他就去打算盘，再也不来弄什么翻译了。
For example, here is an example: Now it has become a classic Darwin's "The Origin of Species", there are two translations in Japan, the first one has many errors, and the latter one is good. There is only one translation by Dr. Ma Junwu in China, but he is based on a bad Japanese translation, so there is a need for another translation. But will there be bookstores willing to publish there? Unless the translator is also a rich man, he will print it himself. But if he is a rich man, he will go to plan and never come to get any translation again.还有一层，是中国的流行，实在也过去得太快，一种学问或文艺介绍进中国来，多则一年，少则半年，大抵就烟消火灭。靠翻译为生的翻译家，如果精心作意，推敲起来，则到他脱稿时，社会上早已无人过问。中国大嚷过托尔斯泰，屠格纳夫，后来又大嚷过辛克莱，但他们的选集却一部也没有。去年虽然还有以郭沫若先生的盛名，幸而出版的《战争与和平》，但恐怕仍不足以挽回读书和出版界的惰气，势必至于读者也厌倦，译者也厌倦，出版者也厌倦，归根结蒂是不会完结的。
There is another layer, which is the popularity of China, which has passed too quickly, and a kind of knowledge or literature and art has been introduced into China, at most for a year, or at least half a year, and it will probably disappear. A translator who makes a living by translating will no longer be cared about by the time he leaves the manuscript. China shouted Tolstoy, Turgnave, and later Sinclair, but none of their anthologies were available. Although "War and Peace" was published last year with Mr. Guo Moruo's fame, I am afraid it is still not enough to restore the inertia of the reading and publishing circles, and it is bound to be tired of readers, translators, and publishers, and in the final analysis, it will not end.翻译的不行，大半的责任固然该在翻译家，但读书界和出版界，尤其是批评家，也应该分负若干的责任。要救治这颓运，必须有正确的批评，指出坏的，奖励好的，倘没有，则较好的也可以。然而这怎么能呢；指摘坏翻译，对于无拳无勇的译者是不要紧的，倘若触犯了别有来历的人，他就会给你带上一顶红帽子，简直要你的性命。这现象，就使批评家也不得不含胡了。
If the translation is not good, most of the responsibility should lie with the translator, but the reading and publishing circles, especially the critics, should also share some responsibilities. To remedy this bad luck, there must be correct criticism, pointing out the bad, rewarding the good, and if not, the better can also be done. However, how can this be; It doesn't matter if you criticize a bad translator who has no fists or courage, if you offend someone with a different background, he will bring you a red hat, which is simply deadly. This phenomenon makes critics have to bear it.此外，现在最普通的对于翻译的不满，是说看了几十行也还是不能懂。但这是应该加以区别的。倘是康德的《纯粹理性批判》那样的书，则即使德国人来看原文，他如果并非一个专家，也还是一时不能看懂。自然，“翻开第一行就译”的译者，是太不负责任了，然而漫无区别，要无论什么译本都翻开第一行就懂的读者，却也未免太不负责任了。
In addition, the most common dissatisfaction with translation now is that after reading dozens of lines, they still can't understand it. But this should be differentiated. If it is a book like Kant's "Critique of Pure Reason", even if a German reads the original text, if he is not an expert, he will still not be able to understand it for a while. Naturally, it is too irresponsible for a translator who "turns the first line and translates", but it makes no difference, and it is too irresponsible for readers who understand it as soon as they open the first line of any translation.八月十四日。
August 14th.

爬和撞

爬和撞

爬和撞

Crawl and crash荀继
Xun Ji从前梁实秋教授曾经说过：穷人总是要爬，往上爬，爬到富翁的地位。不但穷人，奴隶也是要爬的，有了爬得上的机会，连奴隶也会觉得自己是神仙，天下自然太平了。
Professor Liang Shiqiu once said: The poor always have to climb, climb up, and climb to the status of the rich. Not only the poor, but also slaves have to climb, and with the opportunity to climb, even slaves will feel that they are immortals, and the world will naturally be peaceful.虽然爬得上的很少，然而个个以为这正是他自己。这样自然都安分的去耕田，种地，拣大粪或是坐冷板凳，克勤克俭，背着苦恼的命运，和自然奋斗着，拚命的爬，爬，爬。可是爬的人那么多，而路只有一条，十分拥挤。老实的照着章程规规矩矩的爬，大都是爬不上去的。聪明人就会推，把别人推开，推倒，踏在脚底下，踹着他们的肩膀和头顶，爬上去了。大多数人却还只是爬，认定自己的冤家并不在上面，而只在旁边——是那些一同在爬的人。他们大都忍耐着一切，两脚两手都着地，一步步的挨上去又挤下来，挤下来又挨上去，没有休止的。
Although he could rarely climb up, everyone thought it was himself. In this way, they naturally go to cultivate the fields, farm, pick dung or sit on the cold bench, be diligent and thrifty, carry the fate of distress, struggle with nature, and climb, climb, climb desperately. But there are so many people climbing, and there is only one road, which is very crowded. Honestly climbing according to the rules of the constitution, most of them can't climb up. Smart people will push, push others away, push them down, step under their feet, kick their shoulders and heads, and climb up. Most people are still just crawling, thinking that their enemies are not on top, but only next to them - those who are climbing together. Most of them endured everything, their feet and hands on the ground, step by step up and down, squeezed down and up, endlessly.然而爬的人太多，爬得上的太少，失望也会渐渐的侵蚀善良的人心，至少，也会发生跪着的革命。于是爬之外，又发明了撞。
However, if there are too many people climbing and too few can climb, disappointment will gradually erode the hearts of good people, at least, there will be a kneeling revolution. So in addition to crawling, he invented collision.这是明知道你太辛苦了，想从地上站起来，所以在你的背后猛然的叫一声：撞罢。一个个发麻的腿还在抖着，就撞过去。这比爬要轻松得多，手也不必用力，膝盖也不必移动，只要横着身子，晃一晃，就撞过去。撞得好就是五十万元大洋，妻，财，子，禄都有了。撞不好，至多不过跌一交，倒在地下。那又算得什么呢，——他原本是伏在地上的，他仍旧可以爬。何况有些人不过撞着玩罢了，根本就不怕跌交的。
This is because he knows that you are working too hard and wants to get up from the ground, so he suddenly screams behind your back: Crash. One by one, the numb legs were still shaking, so they crashed over. This is much easier than climbing, you don't have to use your hands, you don't have to move your knees, just lie sideways, shake it, and hit it. If you hit it well, it is 500,000 yuan of ocean, and you have a wife, wealth, children, and salary. If you don't hit it well, you will fall to the ground at most. So what,—— he was originally lying on the ground, but he could still climb. What's more, some people just bump into each other and are not afraid of falling at all.爬是自古有之。例如从童生到状元，从小瘪三到康白度。撞却似乎是近代的发明。要考据起来，恐怕只有古时候“小姐抛彩球”有点像给人撞的办法。小姐的彩球将要抛下来的时候，——一个个想吃天鹅肉的男子汉仰着头，张着嘴，馋涎拖得几尺长……可惜，古人究竟呆笨，没有要这些男子汉拿出几个本钱来，否则，也一定可以收着几万万的。
Crawlers have existed since ancient times. For example, from Tongsheng to Zhuangyuan, from Xiao Deflated to Kangbaidu. Collision seems to be a modern invention. If you want to examine it, I am afraid that only in ancient times, "Miss Throwing Colored Balls" was a bit like a way to hit people. When the young lady's colored ball was about to be thrown down,—— men who wanted to eat swan meat raised their heads, opened their mouths, and dragged their saliva several feet long...... It's a pity that the ancients were stupid and didn't ask these men to come up with a few capitals, otherwise, they would definitely be able to collect tens of millions.爬得上的机会越少，愿意撞的人就越多，那些早已爬在上面的人们，就天天替你们制造撞的机会，叫你们化些小本钱，而预约着你们名利双收的神仙生活。所以撞得好的机会，虽然比爬得上的还要少得多，而大家都愿意来试试的。这样，爬了来撞，撞不着再爬……鞠躬尽瘁，死而后已。
Those who have already climbed on top will create opportunities for you to collide every day, asking you to make some small capital, and make an appointment for your immortal life of fame and fortune. So the chance of hitting a good collision is much less than climbing, and everyone is willing to try. In this way, if you crawl and bump into it, you can't climb again...... Bow and do your best, and only stop after death.八月十六日。
August 16th.

各种捐班

各种捐班

各种捐班

Various donation classes洛文
Lowen清朝的中叶，要做官可以捐，叫做“捐班”的便是这一伙。财主少爷吃得油头光脸，忽而忙了几天，头上就有一粒水晶顶，有时还加上一枝蓝翎，满口官话，说是“今天天气好”了。
In the middle of the Qing Dynasty, if you want to be an official, you can donate, and it is this group called "donation class". The rich young master ate oily and bare-faced, and suddenly after a few days, he had a crystal top on his head, and sometimes added a blue feather, full of official words, saying that "the weather is good today".到得民国，官总算说是没有了捐班，然而捐班之途，实际上倒是开展了起来，连“学士文人”也可以由此弄得到顶戴。开宗明义第一章，自然是要有钱。只要有钱，就什么都容易办了。譬如，要捐学者罢，那就收买一批古董，结识几个清客，并且雇几个工人，拓出古董上面的花纹和文字，用玻璃板印成一部书，名之曰“什么集古录”或“什么考古录”。李富孙做过一部《金石学录》，是专载研究金石的人们的，然而这倒成了“作俑”，使清客们可以一续再续，并且推而广之，连收藏古董，贩卖古董的少爷和商人，也都一榻括子的收进去了，这就叫作“金石家”。
In the Republic of China, the official finally said that there was no donation class, but the road to donating classes was actually carried out, and even "scholars and literati" could get support from this. The first chapter of the opening is naturally to be rich. As long as you have money, everything is easy. For example, if you want to donate to scholars, buy a batch of antiques, get to know a few Qing guests, and hire a few workers to engrave the patterns and words on the antiques, and print them into a book with glass plates, called "What Collection of Ancient Records" or "What Archaeological Records". Li Fusun made a "Record of Epigraphy", which was dedicated to people who studied epigraphy, but this became a "figurine", so that the Qing guests could continue again and again, and by extension, even the young masters and merchants who collected antiques and sold antiques were also collected in one couch, which was called the "Jinshi Family".捐做“文学家”也用不着什么新花样。只要开一只书店，拉几个作家，雇一些帮闲，出一种小报，“今天天气好”是也须会说的，就写了出来，印了上去，交给报贩，不消一年半载，包管成功。但是，古董的花纹和文字的拓片是不能用的了，应该代以电影明星和摩登女子的照片，因为这才是新时代的美术。“爱美”的人物在中国还多得很，而“文学家”或“艺术家”也就这样的起来了。
Donating to be a "writer" doesn't need any new tricks. As long as you open a bookstore, pull a few writers, hire some helpers, and publish a kind of tabloid, "the weather is good today" must be able to say, write it out, print it, and hand it over to the newspaper seller, and it will take less than a year and a half to ensure success. However, rubbings of antique patterns and texts are no longer usable, and should be replaced by photos of movie stars and modern women, because this is the art of the new era. There are still many people who "love beauty" in China, and "writers" or "artists" have become like this.捐官可以希望刮地皮，但捐学者文人也不会折本。印刷品固然可以卖现钱，古董将来也会有洋鬼子肯出大价的。
Donating officials can hope to scrape the land, but donating scholars and literati will not lose money. Although printed materials can be sold for cash, antiques will also have foreign devils willing to pay a lot of money in the future.这又叫作“名利双收”。不过先要能“投资”，所以平常人做不到，要不然，文人学士也就不大值钱了。
This is also called "fame and fortune". However, you must be able to "invest" first, so ordinary people can't do it, otherwise, the literati bachelor will not be worth much.而现在还值钱，所以也还会有人忙着做人名辞典，造文艺史，出作家论，编自传。我想，倘作历史的著作，是应该像将文人分为罗曼派，古典派一样，另外分出一种“捐班”派来的，历史要“真”，招些忌恨也只好硬挺，是不是？
And now it is still valuable, so there will be people who are busy making dictionaries of personal names, making literary and artistic histories, publishing essays, and compiling autobiographies. I think that if you write a historical work, you should divide the literati into Romantics and classics, and divide them into a kind of "donation class".八月二十四日。
August 24th.

四库全书珍本

四库全书珍本

四库全书珍本

Rare books of the four libraries丰之余
Abundant surplus现在除兵争，政争等类之外，还有一种倘非闲人，就不大注意的影印《四库全书》中的“珍本”之争。官商要照原式，及早印成，学界却以为库本有删改，有错误，如果有别本可得，就应该用别的“善本”来替代。
Nowadays, in addition to military disputes, political disputes, etc., there is also a dispute over the "rare books" in the "Four Libraries" that if you are not an idler, you will not pay much attention to it. Officials and businessmen should print it as soon as possible according to the original form, but the academic circles think that the library version has been deleted and corrected, and there are errors, and if there are other copies available, they should be replaced with other "rare books".但是，学界的主张，是不会通过的，结果总非依照《钦定四库全书》不可。这理由很分明，就因为要赶快。四省不见，九岛出脱，不说也罢，单是黄河的出轨举动，也就令人觉得岌岌乎不可终日，要做生意就得赶快。况且“钦定”二字，至今也还有一点威光，“御医”“贡缎”，就是与众不同的意思。便是早已共和了的法国，拿破仑的藏书在拍卖场上还是比平民的藏书值钱；欧洲的有些著名的“支那学者”，讲中国就会引用《钦定图书集成》，这是中国的考据家所不肯玩的玩艺。但是，也可见印了“钦定”过的“珍本”，在外国，生意总可以比“善本”好一些。
However, the proposition of the academic circles will not be adopted, and the result must be in accordance with the "Four Libraries of the Imperial Dynasty". The reason for this is very clear, because it is necessary to hurry. The four provinces are gone, and the nine islands are out, not to mention, the derailment of the Yellow River alone makes people feel that it is precarious, and they have to hurry up to do business. Moreover, the word "imperial decree" still has a bit of prestige, "imperial doctor" and "tribute satin", which means different. In France, which has long been a republic, Napoleon's collection of books is still more valuable than that of commoners at auction; Some famous "Chinese scholars" in Europe will quote the "Collection of Imperial Books" when talking about China, which is a trick that Chinese scholars refuse to play. However, it can also be seen that the "rare books" that have been printed "imperial decrees" can always be better than the "rare books" in foreign countries.即使在中国，恐怕生意也还是“珍本”好。因为这可以做摆饰，而“善本”却不过能合于实用。能买这样的书的，决非穷措大也可想，则买去之后，必将供在客厅上也亦可知。这类的买主，会买一个商周的古鼎，摆起来；不得已时，也许买一个假古鼎，摆起来；但他决不肯买一个沙锅或铁镬，摆在紫檀桌子上。因为他的目的是在“珍”而并不在“善”，更不在是否能合于实用的。
Even in China, I'm afraid business is still "rare". Because this can be used as decoration, but the "rare book" can only be practical. If you can buy such a book, it is by no means a big deal, and it is also known that after buying it, it will be provided in the living room. This kind of buyer will buy an ancient tripod of the Shang Zhou Dynasty and put it up; As a last resort, maybe buy a fake ancient tripod and put it up; But he would never buy a clay pot or an iron pot and put it on the rosewood table. Because his purpose is to "treasure" and not "good", let alone whether it can be practical.明末人好名，刻古书也是一种风气，然而往往自己看不懂，以为错字，随手乱改。不改尚可，一改，可就反而改错了，所以使后来的考据家为之摇头叹气，说是“明人好刻古书而古书亡”。这回的《四库全书》中的“珍本”是影印的，决无改错的弊病，然而那原本就有无意的错字，有故意的删改，并且因为新本的流布，更能使善本湮没下去，将来的认真的读者如果偶尔得到这样的本子，恐怕总免不了要有摇头叹气第二回。
At the end of the Ming Dynasty, people had good names, and it was also a trend to engrave ancient books, but they often couldn't understand it, thinking that it was a typo, and changed it randomly. It is okay not to change, but once it is changed, it will be wrong, so the later examiners shook their heads and sighed, saying that "the Ming people are good at carving ancient books and the ancient books are dead". This time, the "rare books" in the "Four Libraries Complete Book" are photocopied, and there is no problem of correcting mistakes, but there are unintentional typos, deliberate deletions, and because of the circulation of new books, it can make rare books obscured, and if serious readers in the future occasionally get such a book, I am afraid that they will inevitably have to shake their heads and sigh for the second time.然而结果总非依照《钦定四库全书》不可。因为“将来”的事，和现在的官商是不相干了。
However, the result must be in accordance with the "Four Libraries of the Imperial Dynasty". Because the "future" has nothing to do with the current officials and businessmen.八月二十四日。
August 24th.

新秋杂识

新秋杂识

新秋杂识

New Autumn Miscellaneous Knowledge旅隼
Traveling Falcon门外的有限的一方泥地上，有两队蚂蚁在打仗。
On the limited mud outside the door, there were two teams of ants fighting.童话作家爱罗先珂的名字，现在是已经从读者的记忆上渐渐淡下去了，此时我却记起了他的一种奇异的忧愁。他在北京时，曾经认真的告诉我说：我害怕，不知道将来会不会有人发明一种方法，只要怎么一来，就能使人们都成为打仗的机器的。
The name of the fairy tale writer Ai Luo Xianke has now faded from the reader's memory, but at this time I remember his strange melancholy. When he was in Beijing, he once told me seriously: I am afraid that someone will invent a method in the future, as long as it is done, it can make people become war machines.其实是这方法早经发明了，不过较为烦难，不能“怎么一来”就完事。我们只要看外国为儿童而作的书籍，玩具，常常以指教武器为大宗，就知道这正是制造打仗机器的设备，制造是必须从天真烂漫的孩子们入手的。
In fact, this method has been invented a long time ago, but it is more troublesome and cannot be done "how". As long as we look at foreign books and toys made for children, often teaching weapons, we know that this is the equipment used to make war machines, and the manufacturing must start with innocent children.不但人们，连昆虫也知道。蚂蚁中有一种武士蚁，自己不造窠，不求食，一生的事业，是专在攻击别种蚂蚁，掠取幼虫，使成奴隶，给它服役的。但奇怪的是它决不掠取成虫，因为已经难施教化。它所掠取的一定只限于幼虫和蛹，使在盗窟里长大，毫不记得先前，永远是愚忠的奴隶，不但服役，每当武士蚁出去劫掠的时候，它还跟在一起，帮着搬运那些被侵略的同族的幼虫和蛹去了。
Not only people, but even insects know it. Among the ants, there is a kind of warrior ant, which does not build nests, does not seek food, and its life's career is dedicated to attacking other species of ants, plundering the larvae, making them slaves, and serving them. But the strange thing is that it never preys on adults, because it is already difficult to educate. What it plundered must be limited to larvae and pupae, so that it grew up in the robbers' den, forgetting that before, it was always a foolish and loyal slave, not only serving, but whenever the warrior ants went out to plunder, it also followed and helped carry the larvae and pupae of the invaded clan.但在人类，却不能这么简单的造成一律。这就是人之所以为“万物之灵”。
But in humans, it cannot be so simple to create uniformity. This is the reason why people are the "spirit of all things".然而制造者也决不放手。孩子长大，不但失掉天真，还变得呆头呆脑，是我们时时看见的。经济的雕敝，使出版界不肯印行大部的学术文艺书籍，不是教科书，便是儿童书，黄河决口似的向孩子们滚过去。但那里面讲的是什么呢？要将我们的孩子们造成什么东西呢？却还没有看见战斗的批评家论及，似乎已经不大有人注意将来了。
However, the maker will never let go. When children grow up, they not only lose their innocence, but also become dazed, which we see all the time. The economic deterioration has made the publishing industry refuse to print most of the academic and artistic books, either textbooks or children's books, and the Yellow River rolls over to the children like a breach. But what is it about? What do we want to make of our children? But the critics who have not yet seen the battle discuss it, and it seems that few people are paying attention to the future.反战会议的消息不很在日报上看到，可见打仗也还是中国人的嗜好，给它一个冷淡，正是违反了我们的嗜好的证明。自然，仗是要打的，跟着武士蚁去搬运败者的幼虫，也还不失为一种为奴的胜利。但是，人究竟是“万物之灵”，这样那里能就够。仗自然是要打的，要打掉制造打仗机器的蚁冢，打掉毒害小儿的药饵，打掉陷没将来的阴谋：这才是人的战士的任务。
The news of the anti-war conference is not very common in the daily newspapers, which shows that fighting is still a Chinese hobby, and giving it a cold taste is proof that it violates our hobbies. Naturally, the battle is to be fought, and following the warrior ants to carry the larvae of the loser is also a kind of victory for slavery. However, man is the "spirit of all things", so that what can be done is enough. Naturally, the battle must be fought, and it is necessary to destroy the anthills that make war machines, the medicine baits that poison children, and the conspiracy that will trap the future: this is the task of human warriors.八月二十八日。
八月二十八日。

帮闲法发隐

帮闲法发隐

帮闲法发隐

Help the idle method to hide桃椎
Peach vertebrae吉开迦尔是丹麦的忧郁的人，他的作品，总是带着悲愤。不过其中也有很有趣味的，我看见了这样的几句——
Jikaigar is a melancholic man in Denmark, and his works are always filled with grief and indignation. But there are also interesting ones, I saw a few sentences like this -“戏场里失了火。丑角站在戏台前，来通知了看客。大家以为这是丑角的笑话，喝采了。丑角又通知说是火灾。但大家越加哄笑，喝采了。我想，人世是要完结在当作笑话的开心的人们的大家欢迎之中的罢。”
"There was a fire in the theater. The harlequin stood in front of the stage and came to inform the audience. Everyone thought it was a joke of the harlequin and applauded. Harlequin also informed that it was a fire. But everyone laughed more and more, cheered. I think the world is meant to end in the welcome of happy people who treat it as a joke. ”不过我的所以觉得有趣的，并不专在本文，是在由此想到了帮闲们的伎俩。帮闲，在忙的时候就是帮忙，倘若主子忙于行凶作恶，那自然也就是帮凶。但他的帮法，是在血案中而没有血迹，也没有血腥气的。
But what I find interesting is not limited to this article, but because I thought of the tricks of the helpers. If the master is busy committing evil, then he is naturally an accomplice. But his method of helping is in a bloody case without blood, and there is no blood.譬如罢，有一件事，是要紧的，大家原也觉得要紧，他就以丑角身份而出现了，将这件事变为滑稽，或者特别张扬了不关紧要之点，将人们的注意拉开去，这就是所谓“打诨”。如果是杀人，他就来讲当场的情形，侦探的努力；死的是女人呢，那就更好了，名之曰“艳尸”，或介绍她的日记。如果是暗杀，他就来讲死者的生前的故事，恋爱呀，遗闻呀……人们的热情原不是永不弛缓的，但加上些冷水，或者美其名曰清茶，自然就冷得更加迅速了，而这位打诨的脚色，却变成了文学者。
For example, there is one thing that is important, and everyone originally thought it was important, so he appeared as a harlequin, turning this matter into a funny thing, or particularly publicizing irrelevant points and drawing people's attention away, which is the so-called "joke". If it is murder, he will talk about the situation on the spot, the efforts of the detective; If it is a woman who dies, it is even better, called "Yan Shi", or introduce her diary. If it is an assassination, he will tell the story of the deceased's lifetime, love, and anecdotes...... People's enthusiasm is not undulating, but with some cold water, or as it is called tea, it naturally cools down even faster, and this joke has become a literary scholar.假如有一个人，认真的在告警，于凶手当然是有害的，只要大家还没有僵死。但这时他就又以丑角身份而出现了，仍用打诨，从旁装着鬼脸，使告警者在大家的眼里也化为丑角，使他的警告在大家的耳边都化为笑话。耸肩装穷，以表现对方之阔，卑躬叹气，以暗示对方之傲；使大家心里想：这告警者原来都是虚伪的。幸而帮闲们还多是男人，否则它简直会说告警者曾经怎样调戏它，当众罗列淫辞，然后作自杀以明耻之状也说不定。周围捣着鬼，无论如何严肃的说法也要减少力量的，而不利于凶手的事情却就在这疑心和笑声中完结了。它呢？这回它倒是道德家。
If there is a person who is seriously calling the police, it is of course harmful to the murderer, as long as everyone is not dead. But at this time, he appeared as a harlequin again, still using jokes and grimacing from the side, so that the informant turned into a harlequin in everyone's eyes, and his warnings turned into jokes in everyone's ears. Shrugged shoulders and pretending to be poor to show the other party's breadth, bowing and sighing to hint at the other party's pride; It made everyone think in their hearts: This informant turned out to be hypocritical. Fortunately, most of the helpers are men, otherwise it may simply say how the informant has molested it, listed obscene words in public, and then committed suicide to show shame. There are ghosts around, no matter how serious the words are, they have to reduce their power, and things that are not conducive to the murderer end in this suspicion and laughter. What about it? This time it is a moralist.当没有这样的事件时，那就七日一报，十日一谈，收罗废料，装进读者的脑子里去，看过一年半载，就满脑都是某阔人如何摸牌，某明星如何打嚏的典故。开心是自然也开心的。但是，人世却也要完结在这些欢迎开心的开心的人们之中的罢。
When there is no such incident, then report every seven days, talk every ten days, collect waste, put it into the reader's mind, and after a year and a half, your mind will be full of allusions to how a certain person touches cards and how a certain celebrity sneezes. Happiness is naturally happy. However, the world must also end among these happy people who welcome happiness.八月二十八日。
八月二十八日。

登龙术拾遗

登龙术拾遗

登龙术拾遗

Ascend to the dragon technique苇索
苇索章克标先生做过一部《文坛登龙术》，因为是预约的，而自己总是悠悠忽忽，竟失去了拜诵的幸运，只在《论语》上见过广告，解题和后记。但是，这真不知是那里来的“烟士披里纯”，解题的开头第一段，就有了绝妙的名文——
Mr. Zhang Kebiao made a "Literary Dragon Climbing Technique", because it was an appointment, and he was always leisurely, and he lost the luck of recitation, and only saw advertisements, problem solving and postscripts in the "Analects". However, I really don't know where this is the "Yanshi Pi Li Chun", and in the first paragraph of the beginning of the problem, there is a wonderful famous text -“登龙是可以当作乘龙解的，于是登龙术便成了乘龙的技术，那是和骑马驾车相类似的东西了。但平常乘龙就是女婿的意思，文坛似非女性，也不致于会要招女婿，那么这样解释似乎也有引起别人误会的危险。……”
"Climbing the dragon can be used as a dragon riding solution, so the dragon riding technique has become the technique of riding the dragon, which is similar to riding a horse and driving. But usually riding the dragon means son-in-law, the literary world does not seem to be a woman, and it will not recruit a son-in-law, so this explanation seems to be in danger of causing misunderstandings among others. ……”确实，查看广告上的目录，并没有“做女婿”这一门，然而这却不能不说是“智者千虑”的一失，似乎该有一点增补才好，因为文坛虽然“不致于会要招女婿”，但女婿却是会要上文坛的。
Indeed, looking at the catalog on the advertisement, there is no such thing as "being a son-in-law", but this cannot but be said to be a mistake of "a wise man", it seems that there should be a little addition, because although the literary world "will not recruit a son-in-law", the son-in-law will be in the literary world.术曰：要登文坛，须阔太太，遗产必需，官司莫怕。穷小子想爬上文坛去，有时虽然会侥幸，终究是很费力气的；做些随笔或茶话之类，或者也能够捞几文钱，但究竟随人俯仰。最好是有富岳家，有阔太太，用赔嫁钱，作文学资本，笑骂随他笑骂，恶作我自印之。“作品”一出，头衔自来，赘婿虽能被妇家所轻，但一登文坛，即声价十倍，太太也就高兴，不至于自打麻将，连眼梢也一动不动了，这就是“交相为用”。但其为文人也，又必须是唯美派，试看王尔德遗照，盘花钮扣，镶牙手杖，何等漂亮，人见犹怜，而况令阃。可惜他的太太不行，以至滥交顽童，穷死异国，假如有钱，何至于此。所以倘欲登龙，也要乘龙，“书中自有黄金屋”，早成古话，现在是“金中自有文学家”当令了。
Shu said: If you want to enter the literary world, you must have a wife, and the inheritance is necessary, so don't be afraid of lawsuits. Poor boys want to climb into the literary world, although sometimes they will be lucky, it is very laborious after all; Do some essays or tea parties, or you can make a few cents, but it depends on people. It is best to have a rich family and a wide wife, using the dowry money to make literary capital, laughing and scolding as he laughs and scolds, and pranks me to print it myself. As soon as the "work" came out, the title came, although the son-in-law could be looked down upon by the wife's family, but as soon as he appeared in the literary world, that is, the price was ten times, and the wife was happy, so as not to play mahjong by herself, and even the tips of her eyes were motionless, which was "mutual use". But if he is a literati, he must also be an aesthetician, just look at Wilde's posthumous photos, flower buttons, and toothed canes, how beautiful they are, people will feel sorry for them, let alone the magistrate. It's a pity that his wife can't do it, so that he promiscuously has naughty children and dies in a foreign country. Therefore, if you want to ascend to the dragon, you must also ride the dragon, "the book has its own golden house", which has long become an old saying, and now it is the order of "the writer in the gold".但也可以从文坛上去做女婿。其术是时时留心，寻一个家里有些钱，而自己能写几句“阿呀呀，我悲哀呀”的女士，做文章登报，尊之为“女诗人”。待到看得她有了“知己之感”，就照电影上那样的屈一膝跪下，说道“我的生命呵，阿呀呀，我悲哀呀！”——则由登龙而乘龙，又由乘龙而更登龙，十分美满。然而富女诗人未必一定爱穷男文士，所以要有把握也很难，这一法，在这里只算是《登龙术拾遗》的附录，请勿轻用为幸。
But you can also be a son-in-law from the literary world. The technique is to always pay attention, find a lady who has some money at home, and can write a few sentences "Ah, I'm sad", write articles in the newspaper, and respect her as a "poetess". When I saw that she had a "sense of confidant", she knelt down on one knee like in the movie and said, "My life, ah, I am sad!" —— From the dragon to the dragon, and from the dragon to the dragon, it is very happy. However, rich female poets may not necessarily love poor male scribes, so it is difficult to be sure, this method is only regarded as an appendix to the "Collection of the Art of Climbing the Dragon", please do not use it lightly.八月二十八日。
八月二十八日。

由聋而哑

由聋而哑

由聋而哑

由聋而哑洛文
Lowen医生告诉我们：有许多哑子，是并非喉舌不能说话的，只因为从小就耳朵聋，听不见大人的言语，无可师法，就以为谁也不过张着口呜呜哑哑，他自然也只好呜呜哑哑了。所以勃兰兑斯叹丹麦文学的衰微时，曾经说：文学的创作，几乎完全死灭了。人间的或社会的无论怎样的问题，都不能提起感兴，或则除在新闻和杂志之外，绝不能惹起一点论争。我们看不见强烈的独创的创作。加以对于获得外国的精神生活的事，现在几乎绝对的不加顾及。于是精神上的“聋”，那结果，就也招致了“哑”来。（《十九世纪文学的主潮》第一卷自序）
The doctor told us: There are many mute people, not mouthpieces who can't speak, just because they have been deaf since childhood, can't hear the words of adults, and have no way to learn from them, so they think that no one is just whining and whining with their mouths open, and he naturally has to whining and dumb. Therefore, when Brandus lamented the decline of Danish literature, he once said: The creation of literature is almost completely dead. No matter what kind of human or social problems are raised, or they must not be provoked at all except in the news and magazines. We do not see strong original creations. In addition, there is almost no consideration for obtaining a foreign spiritual life. So the mental "deafness" also caused "dumbness". (Preface to the first volume of "The Main Tide of Nineteenth-Century Literature")这几句话，也可以移来批评中国的文艺界，这现象，并不能全归罪于压迫者的压迫，五四运动时代的启蒙运动者和以后的反对者，都应该分负责任的。前者急于事功，竟没有译出什么有价值的书籍来，后者则故意迁怒，至骂翻译者为媒婆，有些青年更推波助澜，有一时期，还至于连人地名下注一原文，以便读者参考时，也就诋之曰“衒学”。
These few sentences can also be moved to criticize China's literary and artistic circles, this phenomenon cannot be entirely attributed to the oppression of the oppressors, and the enlightenment activists in the era of the May Fourth Movement and the opponents in the future should be responsible. The former was eager to do his job and did not translate any valuable books, while the latter deliberately vented his anger, even scolding the translator as a matchmaker, and some young people even contributed to the situation.今竟何如？三开间店面的书铺，四马路上还不算少，但那里面满架是薄薄的小本子，倘要寻一部巨册，真如披沙拣金之难。自然，生得又高又胖并不就是伟人，做得多而且繁也决不就是名著，而况还有“剪贴”。但是，小小的一本“什么ABC”里，却也决不能包罗一切学术文艺的。一道浊流，固然不如一杯清水的干净而澄明，但蒸溜了浊流的一部分，却就有许多杯净水在。
What is the situation now? There are not a few bookstores in the three-bay storefront, but there are not many books on the four roads, but the shelves are full of thin small books, if you want to find a huge book, it is really difficult to pick gold through the sand. Naturally, being tall and fat is not a great man, and doing a lot and being complicated is by no means a masterpiece, let alone "cutting and pasting". However, a small book of "ABCs" must not include all academic literature and art. A turbid stream is certainly not as clean and clear as a glass of water, but there are many cups of clean water that distills a part of the turbid stream.因为多年买空卖空的结果，文界就荒凉了，文章的形式虽然比较的整齐起来，但战斗的精神却较前有退无进。文人虽因捐班或互捧，很快的成名，但为了出力的吹，壳子大了，里面反显得更加空洞。于是误认这空虚为寂寞，像煞有介事的说给读者们；其甚者还至于摆出他心的腐烂来，算是一种内面的宝贝。散文，在文苑中算是成功的，但试看今年的选本，便是前三名，也即令人有“貂不足，狗尾续”之感。用秕谷来养青年，是决不会壮大的，将来的成就，且要更渺小，那模样，可看尼采所描写的“末人”。
Because of the results of years of short buying and selling, the literary world has become desolate, and although the form of the article has become relatively neat, the fighting spirit has retreated from the past. Although the literati quickly became famous because of donating classes or supporting each other, in order to blow their efforts, the shell became bigger, and the inside looked even more empty. So he mistook this emptiness for loneliness, and told the readers as if he was serious; What's more, it even shows the rot of his heart, which can be regarded as an inner treasure. Prose is considered a success in the literary garden, but if you look at this year's selection, it is the top three, that is, it makes people feel that "mink is not enough, dog tail continues". Using chaff to feed young people will never grow, and the future achievements will be even smaller.但绍介国外思潮，翻译世界名作，凡是运输精神的粮食的航路，现在几乎都被聋哑的制造者们堵塞了，连洋人走狗，富户赘郎，也会来哼哼的冷笑一下。他们要掩住青年的耳朵，使之由聋而哑，枯涸渺小，成为“末人”，非弄到大家只能看富家儿和小瘪三所卖的春宫，不肯罢手。甘为泥土的作者和译者的奋斗，是已经到了万不可缓的时候了，这就是竭力运输些切实的精神的粮食，放在青年们的周围，一面将那些聋哑的制造者送回黑洞和朱门里面去。
But Shao Jiao's foreign trends of thought, translating world masterpieces, and all the routes for transporting spiritual food are now almost blocked by deaf and mute makers, and even foreign lackeys, rich households, will come to hum and sneer. They want to cover the ears of young people, so that they can go from deaf to mute, withered and small, and become "last people". The struggle of the author and translator of the soil has reached an absolute point where it cannot be delayed, which is to try to transport some tangible spiritual food around the young people, while sending those deaf and mute makers back into the black hole and the red gate.八月二十九日。
August 29th.

新秋杂识　（二）

新秋杂识New Autumn Miscellaneous Knowledge （二） (2)
旅隼
Traveling Falcon八月三十日的夜里，远远近近，都突然劈劈拍拍起来，一时来不及细想，以为“抵抗”又开头了，不久就明白了那是放爆竹，这才定了心。接着又想：大约又是什么节气了罢？……待到第二天看报纸，才知道原来昨夜是月蚀，那些劈劈拍拍，就是我们的同胞，异胞（我们虽然大家自称为黄帝子孙，但蚩尤的子孙想必也未尝死绝，所以谓之“异胞”）在示威，要将月亮从天狗嘴里救出。
On the night of August 30th, far and near, they suddenly cracked and slapped, and I didn't have time to think about it for a while, thinking that "resistance" had started again, and soon I understood that it was firecrackers, and then I made up my mind. Then I thought: What solar term is it about? …… When I read the newspaper the next day, I realized that it was a lunar eclipse last night, and those splits and beats were our compatriots, aliens (although we all call ourselves descendants of the Yellow Emperor, but Chi You's descendants must not have died, so they are called "aliens") are demonstrating to rescue the moon from the mouth of the tengu.再前几天，夜里也很热闹。街头巷尾，处处摆着桌子，上面有面食，西瓜；西瓜上面叮着苍蝇，青虫，蚊子之类，还有一桌和尚，口中念念有词：“回猪猡普米呀吽！唵呀吽！吽！！”这是在放焰口，施饿鬼。到了盂兰盆节了，饿鬼和非饿鬼，都从阴间跑出，来看上海这大世面，善男信女们就在这时尽地主之谊，托和尚“唵呀吽”的弹出几粒白米去，请它们都饱饱的吃一通。
A few days ago, it was also very lively at night. In the streets and alleys, there are tables everywhere, with pasta and watermelon; There were flies, green worms, mosquitoes, etc. on the watermelon, and there was a table of monks who muttered the words: "Return to the pig and the pumi!" Ahhhh Bellow!! "This is setting off flames, giving hungry ghosts. When it came to Obon, hungry ghosts and non-hungry ghosts all ran out of the underworld to see the world of Shanghai, and the good men and women did their best to be landlords at this time, asking the monk to pop out a few grains of white rice and ask them to eat their fill.我是一个俗人，向来不大注意什么天上和阴间的，但每当这些时候，却也不能不感到我们的还在人间的同胞们和异胞们的思虑之高超和妥帖。别的不必说，就在这不到两整年中，大则四省，小则九岛，都已变了旗色了，不久还有八岛。不但救不胜救，即使想要救罢，一开口，说不定自己就危险（这两句，印后成了“于势也有所未能”）。所以最妥当是救月亮，那怕爆竹放得震天价响，天狗决不至于来咬，月亮里的酋长（假如有酋长的话）也不会出来禁止，目为反动的。救人也一样，兵灾，旱灾，蝗灾，水灾……灾民们不计其数，幸而暂免于灾殃的小民，又怎么能有一个救法？那自然远不如救魂灵，事省功多，和大人先生的打醮造塔同其功德。这就是所谓“人无远虑，必有近忧”；而“君子务其大者远者”，亦此之谓也。
I am a layman, and I have never paid much attention to heaven and the underworld, but at these times, I cannot help but feel the superb and proper thoughts of our compatriots and strangers who are still on earth. Needless to say, in less than two whole years, the four provinces as large as the big and the nine islands have changed their flag colors, and soon there will be eight islands. Not only can it be saved, but even if you want to save it, as soon as you open your mouth, you may be in danger (these two sentences have become "I can't do anything in the situation"). Therefore, the most appropriate thing is to save the moon, even if the firecrackers are set off at a sky-high price, the tengu will never come to bite, and the chief in the moon (if there is a chief) will not come out to prohibit it, and it is regarded as reactionary. The same goes for saving people, such as wars, droughts, locusts, and floods...... There are countless victims, but how can the people who are fortunate to be temporarily spared from the disaster have a way to save them? Naturally, it is far inferior to saving souls, saving a lot of effort, and its merits are the same as that of Mr. Lord's sacrificial tower. This is the so-called "if a person has no foresight, he will have immediate worries"; And "a gentleman strives for the great and the far-reaching" is also the meaning.而况“庖人虽不治庖，尸祝不越尊俎而代之”，也是古圣贤的明训，国事有治国者在，小民是用不着吵闹的。不过历来的圣帝明王，可又并不卑视小民，倒给与了更高超的自由和权利，就是听你专门去救宇宙和魂灵。这是太平的根基，从古至今，相沿不废，将来想必也不至先便废。记得那是去年的事了，沪战初停，日兵渐渐的走上兵船和退进营房里面去，有一夜也是这么劈劈拍拍起来，时候还在“长期抵抗”中，日本人又不明白我们的国粹，以为又是第几路军前来收复失地了，立刻放哨，出兵……乱烘烘的闹了一通，才知道我们是在救月亮，他们是在见鬼。“哦哦！成程（Naruhodo＝原来如此）！”惊叹和佩服之余，于是恢复了平和的原状。今年呢，连哨也没有放，大约是已被中国的精神文明感化了。
Moreover, "although the chef does not cook, the corpse priest does not exceed the honor and replace it", which is also the teaching of the ancient sages. However, the holy emperors and wise kings of the past did not despise the common people, but gave them higher freedom and rights, that is, they listened to you to save the universe and souls. This is the foundation of peace, from ancient times to the present, it has not been abolished, and it will not be abolished in the future. I remember that it was last year, when the war in Shanghai had just stopped, the Japanese soldiers gradually walked onto the warships and retreated into the barracks, and one night they were also like this, and when they were still in "long-term resistance", the Japanese did not understand our national essence, thinking that it was the other army that came to regain lost territory, so they immediately set off a sentry and sent troops...... After making a lot of noise, I realized that we were saving the moon and they were seeing ghosts. "Oh! Naruhodo = I see)! In addition to being amazed and admired, the peace was restored. This year, there is not even a whistle, probably because it has been influenced by China's spiritual civilization.现在的侵略者和压迫者，还有像古代的暴君一样，竟连奴才们的发昏和做梦也不准的么？……
Are the current aggressors and oppressors, and like the tyrants of ancient times, even the dizziness and dreaming of the servants not allowed? ……八月三十一日。
August 31st.

男人的进化

男人的进化

男人的进化

The evolution of men虞明
Yu Ming说禽兽交合是恋爱未免有点亵渎。但是，禽兽也有性生活，那是不能否认的。它们在春情发动期，雌的和雄的碰在一起，难免“卿卿我我”的来一阵。固然，雌的有时候也会装腔做势，逃几步又回头看，还要叫几声，直到实行“同居之爱”为止。禽兽的种类虽然多，它们的“恋爱”方式虽然复杂，可是有一件事是没有疑问的：就是雄的不见得有什么特权。
It is a bit blasphemous to say that animal mating is love. However, animals also have a sexual life, which cannot be denied. When they are in the spring period, the female and the male touch each other, and it is inevitable that "Qingqing me" will come for a while. Of course, females sometimes pretend to be posture, running away a few steps and looking back, and screaming a few times until they practice "cohabitation love". Although there are many types of animals and their "love" methods are complicated, there is no doubt about one thing: males do not necessarily have any privileges.人为万物之灵，首先就是男人的本领大。最初原是马马虎虎的，可是因为“知有母不知有父”的缘故，娘儿们曾经“统治”过一个时期，那时的祖老太太大概比后来的族长还要威风。后来不知怎的，女人就倒了霉：项颈上，手上，脚上，全都锁上了链条，扣上了圈儿，环儿，——虽则过了几千年这些圈儿环儿大都已经变成了金的银的，镶上了珍珠宝钻，然而这些项圈，镯子，戒指等等，到现在还是女奴的象征。既然女人成了奴隶，那就男人不必征求她的同意再去“爱”她了。古代部落之间的战争，结果俘虏会变成奴隶，女俘虏就会被强奸。那时候，大概春情发动期早就“取消”了，随时随地男主人都可以强奸女俘虏，女奴隶。现代强盗恶棍之流的不把女人当人，其实是大有酋长式武士道的遗风的。
Man is the spirit of all things, first of all, the man's ability is great. At first, it was so-so, but because of "knowing that there is a mother but not knowing a father", the ladies once "ruled" for a period of time, when the ancestral old lady was probably more majestic than the later patriarch. Later, somehow, the woman was unlucky: the neck, the hands, the feet, all locked with chains, buckled rings, rings,—— although after thousands of years, most of these rings have become gold and silver, inlaid with pearls and diamonds, but these collars, bracelets, rings, etc., are still symbols of slave girls. Since the woman became a slave, the man did not have to ask her for her consent to "love" her. In ancient wars between tribes, as a result, captives would become slaves, and female captives would be raped. At that time, it was probably "canceled" long ago, and the male master could rape female prisoners and female slaves anytime and anywhere. Modern robbers and villains do not treat women as human beings, in fact, they have the legacy of chieftain-style bushido.但是，强奸的本领虽然已经是人比禽兽“进化”的一步，究竟还只是半开化。你想，女的哭哭啼啼，扭手扭脚，能有多大兴趣？自从金钱这宝贝出现之后，男人的进化就真的了不得了。天下的一切都可以买卖，性欲自然并非例外。男人化几个臭钱，就可以得到他在女人身上所要得到的东西。而且他可以给她说：我并非强奸你，这是你自愿的，你愿意拿几个钱，你就得如此这般，百依百顺，咱们是公平交易！蹂躏了她，还要她说一声“谢谢你，大少”。这是禽兽干得来的么？所以嫖妓是男人进化的颇高的阶段了。
However, although the ability to rape is already a step in the "evolution" of humans compared to beasts, it is still only semi-civilized. Do you think a woman can be interested in crying and twisting her hands and feet? Since the emergence of the treasure of money, the evolution of men has been really amazing. Everything in the world can be bought and sold, and sexual desire is naturally no exception. A man can get what he wants from a woman by making a few stinky money. And he can tell her: I didn't rape you, this is your will, you are willing to take a few money, you have to be like this, obedient, we are fair deals! ravaged her, and asked her to say "thank you, big young master". Is this what beasts can do? Therefore, prostitution is a high stage of man's evolution.同时，父母之命媒妁之言的旧式婚姻，却要比嫖妓更高明。这制度之下，男人得到永久的终身的活财产。当新妇被人放到新郎的床上的时候，她只有义务，她连讲价钱的自由也没有，何况恋爱。不管你爱不爱，在周公孔圣人的名义之下，你得从一而终，你得守贞操。男人可以随时使用她，而她却要遵守圣贤的礼教，即使“只在心里动了恶念，也要算犯奸淫”的。如果雄狗对雌狗用起这样巧妙而严厉的手段来，雌的一定要急得“跳墙”。然而人却只会跳井，当节妇，贞女，烈女去。礼教婚姻的进化意义，也就可想而知了。
At the same time, the old-style marriage of the matchmaker's words is more intelligent than that of prostitutes. Under this system, men are given permanent living property. When the bride is put on the groom's bed, she only has obligations, and she doesn't even have the freedom to bargain, let alone fall in love. Whether you love it or not, in the name of Confucius of Zhou, you have to start from one to the end, and you have to keep chastity. Men can use her at any time, but she has to abide by the etiquette of the sages, even if "only evil thoughts are moved in her heart, she is considered to have committed adultery". If the male dog uses such clever and harsh means against the female dog, the female must be anxious to "jump over the wall". However, people will only jump into wells, and when they become chaste women, virgins, and martyrs, they will go. The evolutionary significance of etiquette marriage can be imagined.至于男人会用“最科学的”学说，使得女人虽无礼教，也能心甘情愿地从一而终，而且深信性欲是“兽欲”，不应当作为恋爱的基本条件；因此发明“科学的贞操”，——那当然是文明进化的顶点了。
As for men who will use the "most scientific" doctrine, women can willingly end up with one even if they are not etiquette, and they are convinced that sexual desire is "animal desire" and should not be used as a basic condition for love; Therefore,—— the invention of "scientific chastity" is of course the pinnacle of civilization evolution.呜呼，人——男人——之所以异于禽兽者！
Alas, the reason why humans—men—are different from beasts!自注：这篇文章是卫道的文章。
Self-note: This article is an article by Wei Dao.九月三日。
September 3rd.

同意和解释

同意和解释

同意和解释

Agree and explain虞明
Yu Ming上司的行动不必征求下属的同意，这是天经地义。但是，有时候上司会对下属解释。
It is natural that the boss does not have to ask for the consent of his subordinates. However, sometimes the boss will explain to the subordinates.新进的世界闻人说：“原人时代就有威权，例如人对动物，一定强迫它们服从人的意志，而使它们抛弃自由生活，不必征求动物的同意。”这话说得透彻。不然，我们那里有牛肉吃，有马骑呢？人对人也是这样。
The new world heard people say: "In the era of primitive humans, there was authority, for example, people must force them to obey human will, and they must abandon their free life without asking the consent of animals." This is said thoroughly. Otherwise, we have beef to eat and horses to ride? It's the same for people to people.日本耶教会主教最近宣言日本是圣经上说的天使：“上帝要用日本征服向来屠杀犹太人的白人……以武力解放犹太人，实现《旧约》上的豫言。”这也显然不征求白人的同意的，正和屠杀犹太人的白人并未征求过犹太人的同意一样。日本的大人老爷在中国制造“国难”，也没有征求中国人民的同意。——至于有些地方的绅董，却去征求日本大人的同意，请他们来维持地方治安，那却又当别论。总之，要自由自在的吃牛肉，骑马等等，就必须宣布自己是上司，别人是下属；或是把人比做动物，或是把自己作为天使。
The bishop of the Church of Japan recently declared that Japan is an angel of the Bible: "God will use Japan to conquer the white people who have always slaughtered the Jews...... Liberate the Jews by force and fulfill the prophecies of the Old Testament. This is also obviously not asking for the consent of the white people, just as the white people who slaughtered the Jews did not ask for the consent of the Jews. Japan's lord created a "national crisis" in China and did not seek the consent of the Chinese people. ——As for the gentry and directors in some places, they went to ask the consent of Japanese adults and asked them to maintain local security, but that is a different matter. In short, if you want to eat beef, ride horses, etc. freely, you must declare yourself a boss and others are subordinates; Or compare people to animals, or to think of themselves as angels.但是，这里最要紧的还是“武力”，并非理论。不论是社会学或是基督教的理论，都不能够产生什么威权。原人对于动物的威权，是产生于弓箭等类的发明的。至于理论，那不过是随后想出来的解释。这种解释的作用，在于制造自己威权的宗教上，哲学上，科学上，世界潮流上的根据，使得奴隶和牛马恍然大悟这世界的公律，而抛弃一切翻案的梦想。
However, the most important thing here is "force", not theory. Neither sociology nor Christian theory can produce any authority. The authoritarianism of primitive people over animals arose from the invention of bows and arrows. As for the theory, it is just an explanation that comes up later. The role of this explanation is to create its own authoritarian religious, philosophical, scientific, and world trend basis, so that slaves and cattle and horses suddenly realize the public laws of the world and abandon all dreams of overturning the case.当上司对于下属解释的时候，你做下属的切不可误解这是在征求你的同意，因为即使你绝对的不同意，他还是干他的。他自有他的梦想，只要金银财宝和飞机大炮的力量还在他手里，他的梦想就会实现；而你的梦想却终于只是梦想，——万一实现了，他还说你抄袭他的动物主义的老文章呢。
When your boss explains to your subordinates, you must not misunderstand that this is asking for your consent, because even if you absolutely disagree, he will still do it. He has his own dream, as long as the power of gold and silver treasures and aircraft and cannons is still in his hands, his dream will come true; And your dream is finally just a dream,—— if it comes true, he still says that you plagiarized his old animalistic article.据说现在的世界潮流，正是庞大权力的政府的出现，这是十九世纪人士所梦想不到的。意大利和德意志不用说了；就是英国的国民政府，“它的实权也完全属于保守党一党”。“美国新总统所取得的措置经济复兴的权力，比战争和戒严时期还要大得多”。大家做动物，使上司不必征求什么同意，这正是世界的潮流。懿欤盛哉，这样的好榜样，那能不学？
It is said that the current world trend is the emergence of a government with huge power, which people in the 19th century could not have dreamed of. Needless to say, Italy and Germany; It is the British national government, "its real power also belongs entirely to the Conservative Party." "The new president of the United States has gained much more power to revive the economy than during the war and martial law." Everyone is an animal, so that the boss does not have to ask for any consent, which is the trend of the world. How can such a good example not be learned?不过，我这种解释还有点美中不足：中国自己的秦始皇帝焚书坑儒，中国自己的韩退之等说：“民不出米粟麻丝以事其上则诛”。这原是国货，何苦违背着民族主义，引用外国的学说和事实——长他人威风，灭自己志气呢？
However, my explanation is a bit of a fly in the ointment: China's own Qin Shi Huang burned books and pitted Confucians, and China's own Han Tuizhi and others said: "If the people do not produce rice, corn, and hemp to serve them, they will be punished." This is originally a domestic product, why bother to go against nationalism and quote foreign doctrines and facts - to increase the prestige of others and destroy one's own ambition?九月三日。
September 3rd.

文床秋梦

文床秋梦

文床秋梦

The bed is autumn dreams游光
Swimming light春梦是颠颠倒倒的。“夏夜梦”呢？看沙士比亚的剧本，也还是颠颠倒倒。中国的秋梦，照例却应该“肃杀”，民国以前的死囚，就都是“秋后处决”的，这是顺天时。天教人这么着，人就不能不这么着。所谓“文人”当然也不至于例外，吃得饱饱的睡在床上，食物不能消化完，就做梦；而现在又是秋天，天就教他的梦威严起来了。
The spring dream is upside down. What about "Summer Night Dream"? Looking at Shakespeare's play, it is still upside down. China's autumn dream, as usual, should be "killed", and the death row inmates before the Republic of China were all "executed after autumn", which was Shuntianshi. If God teaches people to do this, they can't help but do this. The so-called "literati" are of course no exception, sleeping in bed with a full meal, dreaming when the food cannot be digested; And now it's autumn again, and the sky has taught him that his dream is majestic.二卷三十一期（八月十二日出版）的《涛声》上，有一封自名为“林丁”先生的给编者的信，其中有一段说——
In the third issue of Volume 2 (published on August 12), there is a letter to the editor by Mr. "Lin Ding", in which a passage says—“……之争，孰是孰非，殊非外人所能详道。然而彼此摧残，则在傍观人看来，却不能不承是整个文坛的不幸。……我以为各人均应先打屁股百下，以儆效尤，余事可一概不提。……”
“…… The debate over which is right and which is wrong is beyond the scope of outsiders to explain in detail. However, the destruction of each other is unfortunate in the eyes of bystanders. …… I think everyone should spank a hundred times first to set an example, and I can ignore the rest. ……”前两天，还有某小报上的不署名的社谈，它对于早些日子余赵的剪窃问题之争，也非常气愤——
Two days ago, there was also an unsigned editorial in a tabloid, which was also very angry about Yu Zhao's dispute over the plagiarism issue in the early days -“……假使我一朝大权在握，我一定把这般东西捉了来，判他们罚作苦工，读书十年；中国文坛，或尚有干净之一日。”
“…… If I were in power, I would definitely catch such a thing and sentence them to hard labor and study for ten years; The Chinese literary world may still have a clean day. ”张献忠自己要没落了，他的行动就不问“孰是孰非”，只是杀。清朝的官员，对于原被两造，不问青红皂白，各打屁股一百或五十的事，确也偶尔会有的，这是因为满洲还想要奴才，供搜刮，就是“林丁”先生的旧梦。某小报上的无名子先生可还要比较的文明，至少，它是已经知道了上海工部局“判罚”下等华人的方法的了。
Zhang Xianzhong himself was about to decline, and his actions did not ask "who is right and who is wrong", but just killed. Officials of the Qing Dynasty, for the original two made, regardless of whether they were blue or white, each spanked one hundred or fifty times, it was indeed occasional, because Manchuria still wanted slaves for looting, which was the old dream of Mr. "Lin Ding". Mr. Anonymous in a tabloid is more civilized, at least, he already knows the method of "punishing" inferior Chinese by the Shanghai Ministry of Works.但第一个问题是在怎样才能够“一朝大权在握”？文弱书生死样活气，怎么做得到权臣？先前，还可以希望招驸马，一下子就飞黄腾达，现在皇帝没有了，即使满脸涂着雪花膏，也永远遇不到公主的青睐；至多，只可以希图做一个富家的姑爷而已。而捐官的办法，又早经取消，对于“大权”，还是只能像狐狸的遇着高处的葡萄一样，仰着白鼻子看看。文坛的完整和干净，恐怕实在也到底很渺茫。
But the first question is, how can we "hold power once in power"? How can a weak scholar be a powerful minister? Previously, you could also hope to recruit a son-in-law, and you will soar all of a sudden, but now the emperor is gone, even if his face is covered with alabaster paste, he will never meet the favor of the princess; At most, you can only try to be a rich uncle. The method of donating officials has long been canceled, and for the "power", it can only look up with its white nose like a fox meeting a grape in a high place. The integrity and cleanliness of the literary world are probably very slim.五四时候，曾经在出版界上发现了“文丐”，接着又发现了“文氓”，但这种威风凛凛的人物，却是我今年秋天在上海新发见的，无以名之，姑且称为“文官”罢。看文学史，文坛是常会有完整而干净的时候的，但谁曾见过这文坛的澄清，会和这类的“文官”们有丝毫关系的呢。
During the May Fourth period, "literary beggars" were discovered in the publishing industry, and then "literary people" were discovered, but this majestic figure was newly discovered in Shanghai this fall. Looking at the history of literature, the literary world often has a complete and clean time, but who has ever seen this clarification in the literary world has nothing to do with such "civil officials".不过，梦是总可以做的，好在没有什么关系，而写出来也有趣。请安息罢，候补的少大人们！
However, dreams can always be done, fortunately, it doesn't matter, and it's fun to write them down. Please rest in peace, young adults on the standby!九月五日。
September 5th.

电影的教训

电影的教训

电影的教训

Lessons from the movie孺牛
Young cow当我在家乡的村子里看中国旧戏的时候，是还未被教育成“读书人”的时候，小朋友大抵是农民。爱看的是翻筋斗，跳老虎，一把烟焰，现出一个妖精来；对于剧情，似乎都不大和我们有关系。大面和老生的争城夺地，小生和正旦的离合悲欢，全是他们的事，捏锄头柄人家的孩子，自己知道是决不会登坛拜将，或上京赴考的。但还记得有一出给了感动的戏，好像是叫作《斩木诚》。一个大官蒙了不白之冤，非被杀不可了，他家里有一个老家丁，面貌非常相像，便代他去“伏法”。那悲壮的动作和歌声，真打动了看客的心，使他们发见了自己的好模范。因为我的家乡的农人，农忙一过，有些是给大户去帮忙的。为要做得像，临刑时候，主母照例的必须去“抱头大哭”，然而被他踢开了，虽在此时，名分也得严守，这是忠仆，义士，好人。
When I watched old Chinese operas in my hometown village, I was not yet educated as "scholars", and the children were probably farmers. I love to watch somersaults, jumping tigers, a handful of smoke, and a fairy; For the plot, it doesn't seem to have much to do with us. The battle between Da Mian and Lao Sheng for city and land, the joys and sorrows of Xiaosheng and New Year's Day, are all their business, and the children who hold the hoe know that they will never go to the altar to worship the general, or go to Beijing to take the exam. But I still remember a play that moved me, it seems to be called "Cutting Wood Makoto". A high-ranking official was wronged and had to be killed, and there was an old servant in his family who looked very similar, so he went to "surrender" on his behalf. The tragic movements and singing really touched the hearts of the spectators and made them discover their own good examples. Because the farmers in my hometown are busy farming, some of them go to help the big households. In order to do it like this, when the mistress was about to be executed, the mistress had to "hug her head and cry" as usual, but she was kicked away by him, although at this time, the title must also be strictly guarded, this is a loyal servant, a righteous man, and a good person.但到我在上海看电影的时候，却早是成为“下等华人”的了，看楼上坐着白人和阔人，楼下排着中等和下等的“华胄”，银幕上现出白色兵们打仗，白色老爷发财，白色小姐结婚，白色英雄探险，令看客佩服，羡慕，恐怖，自己觉得做不到。但当白色英雄探险非洲时，却常有黑色的忠仆来给他开路，服役，拚命，替死，使主子安然的回家；待到他豫备第二次探险时，忠仆不可再得，便又记起了死者，脸色一沉，银幕上就现出一个他记忆上的黑色的面貌。黄脸的看客也大抵在微光中把脸色一沉：他们被感动了。
But by the time I watched a movie in Shanghai, I had already become a "low-class Chinese", watching white people and broad people sitting upstairs, and lined up with medium and inferior "Chinese soldiers" downstairs, and white soldiers fighting on the screen, white masters getting rich, white misses getting married, and white heroes expediting, which made the audience admire, envious, and terrifying, and they felt that they couldn't do it. But when the white hero explores Africa, there are often black loyal servants who come to open the way for him, serve, desperately, and die for him, so that his master can return home safely; When he was preparing for the second expedition, the loyal servant could not get it again, so he remembered the deceased again, and when his face darkened, a black face appeared on the screen in his memory. The yellow-faced spectators probably darkened their faces in the dim light: they were moved.幸而国产电影也在挣扎起来，耸身一跳，上了高墙，举手一扬，掷出飞剑，不过这也和十九路军一同退出上海，现在是正在准备开映屠格纳夫的《春潮》和茅盾的《春蚕》了。当然，这是进步的。但这时候，却先来了一部竭力宣传的《瑶山艳史》。
Fortunately, domestic films are also struggling, jumping, climbing high walls, raising their hands, and throwing flying swords, but this also withdrew from Shanghai with the 19th Route Army, and now it is preparing to screen Turgenave's "Spring Tide" and Mao Dun's "Spring Silkworm". Of course, this is progressive. But at this time, there was a "History of Yaoshan" that was trying its best to promote.这部片子，主题是“开化瑶民”，机键是“招驸马”，令人记起《四郎探母》以及《双阳公主追狄》这些戏本来。中国的精神文明主宰全世界的伟论，近来不大听到了，要想去开化，自然只好退到苗瑶之类的里面去，而要成这种大事业，却首先须“结亲”，黄帝子孙，也和黑人一样，不能和欧亚大国的公主结亲，所以精神文明就无法传播。这是大家可以由此明白的。
The theme of this film is "Enlightening the Yao People", and the key is "Recruiting the Son-in-law", which reminds people of the dramas "Shilang Visits Mother" and "Princess Shuangyang Chases Di". If you want to enlighten, you naturally have to retreat to Miao Yao and the like, and to achieve such a great cause, you must first "get married", and the descendants of the Yellow Emperor, like blacks, cannot marry the princess of the Eurasian powers, so spiritual civilization cannot spread. This is what everyone can understand from this.九月七日。
September 7th.

关于翻译　（上）

关于翻译About translating （上） (above)
洛文
Lowen因为我的一篇短文，引出了穆木天先生的《从〈为翻译辩护〉谈到楼译〈二十世纪之欧洲文学〉》（九日《自由谈》所载），这在我，是很以为荣幸的，并且觉得凡所指摘，也恐怕都是实在的错误。但从那作者的案语里，我却又想起一个随便讲讲，也许并不是毫无意义的问题来了。那是这样的一段——
Because of one of my short articles, I am very honored to have Mr. Mu Mutian's "From 'Defending Translation' to Lou's translation of 'European Literature in the Twentieth Century'" (published in "Free Talk" on the 9th), and I feel that everything I criticize is probably a real mistake. But from the author's words, I remembered a question that was casually talked about, perhaps not meaningless. It was like this—“在一百九十九页，有‘在这种小说之中，最近由学术院（译者：当系指著者所属的俄国共产主义学院）所选的鲁易倍尔德兰的不朽的诸作，为最优秀’。在我以为此地所谓‘Academie’者，当指法国翰林院。苏联虽称学艺发达之邦，但不会为帝国主义作家作选集罢？我不知为什么楼先生那样地滥下注解？”
"On page 199, there is 'among such novels, the immortal works of Louis Berderain, which have recently been selected by the Academy, are the best.' In my opinion, the so-called 'Academie' here should refer to the French Academy. Although the Soviet Union was known as a country with developed learning and art, it would not make an anthology of imperialist writers? I don't know why Mr. Lou commented so indiscriminately? ”究竟是那一国的Academia呢？我不知道。自然，看作法国的翰林院，是万分近理的，但我们也不能决定苏联的大学院就“不会为帝国主义作家作选集”。倘在十年以前，是决定不会的，这不但为物力所限，也为了要保护革命的婴儿，不能将滋养的，无益的，有害的食品都漫无区别的乱放在他前面。现在却可以了，婴儿已经长大，而且强壮，聪明起来，即使将鸦片或吗啡给他看，也没有什么大危险，但不消说，一面也必须有先觉者来指示，说吸了就会上瘾，而上瘾之后，就成一个废物，或者还是社会上的害虫。
Which country is Academia? I do not know. Naturally, it is very reasonable to regard it as the Hanlin Academy in France, but we cannot decide that the graduate schools of the Soviet Union "will not make anthologies of imperialist writers". If it was decided not to do it ten years ago, it would not be possible not only because of material constraints, but also because of the protection of revolutionary babies, nourishing, useless, and harmful foods could not be placed in front of him indiscriminately. Now it is possible, the baby has grown up, and is strong and intelligent, even if opium or morphine is shown to him, there is no great danger, but it goes without saying that there must be a pre-enlightened person to instruct that if you smoke it, you will become addicted, and after addiction, you will become a waste, or a pest in society.在事实上，我曾经见过苏联的Academia新译新印的阿剌伯的《一千一夜》，意大利的《十日谈》，还有西班牙的《吉诃德先生》，英国的《鲁滨孙漂流记》；在报章上，则记载过在为托尔斯泰印选集，为歌德编全集——更完全的全集。倍尔德兰不但是加特力教的宣传者，而且是王朝主义的代言人，但比起十九世纪初德意志布尔乔亚的文豪歌德来，那作品也不至于更加有害。所以我想，苏联来给他出一本选集，实在是很可能的。不过在这些书籍之前，想来一定有详序，加以仔细的分析和正确的批评。
In fact, I have seen Academia in the Soviet Union, Arab's "One Thousand and One Nights", Italy's "Decameron", Spain's "Mr. Quixote", and the British "Robinson Crusoe"; In the newspapers, it was recorded that he printed anthologies for Tolstoy and compiled complete works for Goethe - a more complete complete collection. Belderland was not only a propagandist of Gatlet, but also a spokesperson for dynastisticism, but his work was no more harmful than Goethe, the German writer of the early nineteenth century. So I think it is very likely that the Soviet Union will give him an anthology. However, before these books, there must be a detailed preface, careful analysis and correct criticism.凡作者，和读者因缘愈远的，那作品就于读者愈无害。古典的，反动的，观念形态已经很不相同的作品，大抵即不能打动新的青年的心（但自然也要有正确的指示），倒反可以从中学学描写的本领，作者的努力。恰如大块的砒霜，欣赏之余，所得的是知道它杀人的力量和结晶的模样：药物学和矿物学上的知识了。可怕的倒在用有限的砒霜，和在食物中间，使青年不知不觉的吞下去，例如似是而非的所谓“革命文学”，故作激烈的所谓“唯物史观的批评”，就是这一类。这倒是应该防备的。
The farther the author and the reader, the more harmless the work is to the reader. Classical, reactionary, and conceptual works that are already very different in conceptual form probably cannot touch the hearts of new young people (but naturally there must be correct instructions), but can learn from the ability to describe and the author's efforts from middle school. Just like a large piece of arsenic, what you gain is to know its murderous power and crystallization: knowledge of pharmacology and mineralogy. The terrible thing is to use limited arsenic and in the middle of food, so that young people can swallow it unconsciously, such as the plausible so-called "revolutionary literature" and the fierce so-called "criticism of historical materialism", which is this category. This should be guarded against.我是主张青年也可以看看“帝国主义者”的作品的，这就是古语的所谓“知己知彼”。青年为了要看虎狼，赤手空拳的跑到深山里去固然是呆子，但因为虎狼可怕，连用铁栅围起来了的动物园里也不敢去，却也不能不说是一位可笑的愚人。有害的文学的铁栅是什么呢？批评家就是。
I advocate that young people can also look at the works of "imperialists", which is the so-called "knowing oneself and knowing one's enemy" as the old saying goes. In order to see the tigers and wolves, the young man ran into the mountains with his bare hands, but because the tigers and wolves were terrifying, he didn't even dare to go to the zoo surrounded by iron fences, but he couldn't help but say that he was a ridiculous fool. What is the iron fence of harmful literature? Critics are.九月十一日。
September 11.补记：这一篇没有能够刊出。
Note: This article was not published.九月十五日。
September 15th.

关于翻译　（下）

关于翻译About translating （下） (bottom)
洛文
Lowen但我在那《为翻译辩护》中，所希望于批评家的，实在有三点：一，指出坏的；二，奖励好的；三，倘没有，则较好的也可以。而穆木天先生所实做的是第一句。以后呢，可能有别的批评家来做其次的文章，想起来真是一个大疑问。
But in "In Defense of Translation", I really hope for three points from critics: first, point out the bad; 2. Good rewards; Third, if not, it is better to do it. And what Mr. Mu Mutian did was the first sentence. In the future, there may be other critics to do the second article, which is really a big question when I think about it.所以我要再来补充几句：倘连较好的也没有，则指出坏的译本之后，并且指明其中的那些地方还可以于读者有益处。
So I will add a few more words: if there are no better ones, then point out the bad translations and point out those parts that may be useful to the reader.此后的译作界，恐怕是还要退步下去的。姑不论民穷财尽，即看地面和人口，四省是给日本拿去了，一大块在水淹，一大块在旱，一大块在打仗，只要略略一想，就知道读者是减少了许许多了。因为销路的少，出版界就要更投机，欺骗，而拿笔的人也因此只好更投机，欺骗。即有不愿意欺骗的人，为生计所压迫，也总不免比较的粗制滥造，增出些先前所没有的缺点来。走过租界的住宅区邻近的马路，三间门面的水果店，晶莹的玻璃窗里是鲜红的苹果，通黄的香蕉，还有不知名的热带的果物。但略站一下就知道：这地方，中国人是很少进去的，买不起。我们大抵只好到同胞摆的水果摊上去，化几文钱买一个烂苹果。
After that, the translation industry may have to regress. Regardless of the people's poverty and wealth, that is, looking at the land and population, the four provinces were taken to Japan, a large part was flooded, a large piece was in drought, and a large piece was fighting. Because of the small sales, the publishing industry will be more speculative and deceitful, and the people who hold the pen will have to be more speculative and deceitful. Even if there are people who are unwilling to deceive and are oppressed by their livelihoods, they will inevitably be more shoddy and add some shortcomings that did not exist before. Walking through the road adjacent to the residential area of the concession, there are three façade fruit shops, bright red apples, yellow bananas, and unknown tropical fruits in the crystal glass windows. But if you stand for a moment, you will know: Chinese rarely enter this place and cannot afford it. We probably have no choice but to go to the fruit stall set up by our compatriots and spend a few pennies to buy a rotten apple.苹果一烂，比别的水果更不好吃，但是也有人买的，不过我们另外还有一种相反的脾气：首饰要“足赤”，人物要“完人”。一有缺点，有时就全部都不要了。爱人身上生几个疮，固然不至于就请律师离婚，但对于作者，作品，译品，却总归比较的严紧，萧伯纳坐了大船，不好；巴比塞不算第一个作家，也不好；译者是“大学教授，下职官员”，更不好。好的又不出来，怎么办呢？我想，还是请批评家用吃烂苹果的方法，来救一救急罢。
When apples rot, they are worse than other fruits, but some people buy them, but we also have the opposite temper: jewelry should be "red feet", and characters should be "perfect". If there are shortcomings, sometimes you don't want them all. If your lover has a few sores on his body, he will not ask a lawyer for divorce, but for the author, works, and translations, he is always more strict, George Bernard Shaw took a big boat, which is not good; Barbise was not the first writer, nor was he good; The translator is "a university professor, a junior official", which is even worse. If it doesn't come out, what should I do? I think it is better to ask critics to use the method of eating rotten apples to save the emergency.我们先前的批评法，是说，这苹果有烂疤了，要不得，一下子抛掉。然而买者的金钱有限，岂不是大冤枉，而况此后还要穷下去。所以，此后似乎最好还是添几句，倘不是穿心烂，就说：这苹果有着烂疤了，然而这几处没有烂，还可以吃得。这么一办，译品的好坏是明白了，而读者的损失也可以小一点。
Our previous criticism was that this apple had a rotten scar, or throw it away all at once. However, the buyer's money is limited, isn't it a great injustice, and he will be poor in the future. Therefore, it seems that it is best to add a few sentences after that, if it is not rotten, just say: This apple has rotten scars, but these places are not rotten, and it can still be eaten. In this way, the quality of the translation is understood, and the reader's loss can be smaller.但这一类的批评，在中国还不大有，即以《自由谈》所登的批评为例，对于《二十世纪之欧洲文学》，就是专指烂疤的；记得先前有一篇批评邹韬奋先生所编的《高尔基》的短文，除掉指出几个缺点之外，也没有别的话。前者我没有看过，说不出另外可有什么可取的地方，但后者却曾经翻过一遍，觉得除批评者所指摘的缺点之外，另有许多记载作者的勇敢的奋斗，胥吏的卑劣的阴谋，是很有益于青年作家的，但也因为有了烂疤，就被抛在筐子外面了。
However, this kind of criticism is not very common in China, that is, taking the criticism published in "Free Talk" as an example, for "European Literature in the Twentieth Century", it refers specifically to rotten scars; I remember that there was a short article criticizing "Gorky" edited by Mr. Zou Taofen, and there was nothing else except to point out a few shortcomings. I haven't read the former, and I can't tell what else is commendable, but the latter has been flipped over and feels that in addition to the shortcomings pointed out by critics, there are many other records of the author's brave struggle and the despicable conspiracies of clerks, which are very beneficial to young writers, but they are also thrown out of the basket because of their rotten scars.所以，我又希望刻苦的批评家来做剜烂苹果的工作，这正如“拾荒”一样，是很辛苦的，但也必要，而且大家有益的。
Therefore, I hope that hard critics will do the work of chopping rotten apples, which is very hard, but also necessary, and beneficial to everyone, just like "scavenging".九月十一日。
September 11.

新秋杂识　（三）

新秋杂识New Autumn Miscellaneous Knowledge （三） (3)
旅隼
Traveling Falcon“秋来了！”
"Autumn is coming!"秋真是来了，晴的白天还好，夜里穿着洋布衫就觉得凉飕飕。报章上满是关于“秋”的大小文章：迎秋，悲秋，哀秋，责秋……等等。为了趋时，也想这么的做一点，然而总是做不出。我想，就是想要“悲秋”之类，恐怕也要福气的，实在令人羡慕得很。
Autumn is really coming, it's okay during the sunny day, but wearing a cloth shirt at night makes you feel cool. The newspapers are full of large and small articles about "autumn": welcoming autumn, sad autumn, mourning autumn, blaming autumn...... Wait a minute. In order to keep up with the times, I also want to do this, but I always can't do it. I think that if you want something like "sad autumn", I am afraid you will also be blessed, which is really enviable.记得幼小时，有父母爱护着我的时候，最有趣的是生点小毛病，大病却生不得，既痛苦，又危险的。生了小病，懒懒的躺在床上，有些悲凉，又有些娇气，小苦而微甜，实在好像秋的诗境。呜呼哀哉，自从流落江湖以来，灵感卷逃，连小病也不生了。偶然看看文学家的名文，说是秋花为之惨容，大海为之沉默云云，只是愈加感到自己的麻木。我就从来没有见过秋花为了我在悲哀，忽然变了颜色；只要有风，大海是总在呼啸的，不管我爱闹还是爱静。
I remember when I was young, when my parents loved me, the most interesting thing was to have a small problem, but I couldn't have a serious illness, which was both painful and dangerous. I was a little sick, lying lazily on the bed, a little sad, a little squeamish, a little bitter and slightly sweet, really like the poetry of autumn. Alas, since I wandered into the rivers and lakes, my inspiration has fled, and I have not even had a minor illness. Occasionally reading the famous articles of writers, it is said that the autumn flowers are miserable, and the sea is silent for them, but they feel more and more numb. I have never seen autumn flowers suddenly change color because I am sad; As long as there is wind, the sea is always roaring, whether I like to make noise or be quiet.冰莹女士的佳作告诉我们：“晨是学科学的，但在这一刹那，完全忘掉了他的志趣，存在他脑海中的只有一个尽量地享受自然美景的目的。……”这也是一种福气。科学我学的很浅，只读过一本生物学教科书，但是，它那些教训，花是植物的生殖机关呀，虫鸣鸟啭，是在求偶呀之类，就完全忘不掉了。昨夜闲逛荒场，听到蟋蟀在野菊花下鸣叫，觉得好像是美景，诗兴勃发，就做了两句新诗——
Ms. Bingying's masterpiece tells us: "Chen studied science, but at this moment, he completely forgot his interests, and there was only one purpose in his mind to enjoy the natural beauty as much as possible." ...... "It's also a blessing." I have only read one biology textbook, but I can't forget its lessons, flowers are the reproductive organs of plants, insects and birds are courtship, etc. Last night, I was wandering around the wasteland, and when I heard crickets chirping under the wild chrysanthemums, I felt that it was a beautiful scenery, and the poem was booming, so I made two new poems -野菊的生殖器下面，Under the genitals of the wild chrysanthemum, 
蟋蟀在吊膀子。 crickets are hanging their arms.
写出来一看，虽然比粗人们所唱的俚歌要高雅一些，而对于新诗人的由“烟士披离纯”而来的诗，还是“相形见绌”。写得太科学，太真实，就不雅了，如果改作旧诗，也许不至于这样。生殖机关，用严又陵先生译法，可以谓之“性官”；“吊膀子”呢，我自己就不懂那语源，但据老于上海者说，这是因西洋人的男女挽臂同行而来的，引伸为诱惑或追求异性的意思。吊者，挂也，亦即相挟持。那么，我的诗就译出来了——
When I wrote it, although it was more elegant than the slang songs sung by rough people, it was still "dwarfed" to the poems of the new poets from "Smokers Covered by Chun". If it is written too scientifically and too real, it will be indecent, and if it is changed into an old poem, it may not be like this. The reproductive organs, translated by Mr. Yan Youling, can be called "sexual officials"; As for "hanging arms", I don't understand the etymology myself, but according to those who are older than Shanghai, it comes from the fact that Westerners walk arm in arm, which is extended to the meaning of temptation or pursuit of the opposite sex. The so-called "hanging" means to hang up, which means to hold each other hostage. Then, my poem was translated -野菊性官下，Wild chrysanthemums are lower than officials, 
鸣蛩在悬肘。 crickets are hanging on the elbows.
虽然很有些费解，但似乎也雅得多，也就是好得多。人们不懂，所以雅，也就是所以好，现在也还是一个做文豪的秘诀呀。质之“新诗人”邵洵美先生之流，不知以为何如？
Although it is a little puzzling, it seems to be much more elegant, that is, much better. People don't understand, so elegant, that is, so good, and it is still a secret to being a writer. I don't know what the "new poet" Mr. Shao Xunmei thinks?九月十四日。
September 14th.

礼

礼

礼

courtesy苇索
苇索看报，是有益的，虽然有时也沉闷。例如罢，中国是世界上国耻纪念最多的国家，到这一天，报上照例得有几块记载，几篇文章。但这事真也闹得太重叠，太长久了，就很容易千篇一律，这一回可用，下一回也可用，去年用过了，明年也许还可用，只要没有新事情。即使有了，成文恐怕也仍然可以用，因为反正总只能说这几句话。所以倘不是健忘的人，就会觉得沉闷，看不出新的启示来。
Reading newspapers is beneficial, although sometimes dull. For example, China is the country with the most national humiliation in the world, and on this day, there must be a few records and articles in the newspaper as usual. But this matter is really too overlapping, too long, it is easy to be the same, this time it is available, the next time it is also available, last year it was used, and it may still be available next year, as long as there is nothing new. Even if there is, the written text may still be usable, because these few sentences can only be said anyway. Therefore, if you are not a forgetful person, you will feel dull and cannot see new revelations.然而我还是看。今天偶然看见北京追悼抗日英雄邓文的记事，首先是报告，其次是演讲，最末，是“礼成，奏乐散会”。
However, I still watch. Today, I happened to see Beijing's memorial to the anti-Japanese hero Deng Wen, first of all, the report, followed by the speech, and finally, "the ceremony is completed, the music is adjourned".我于是得了新的启示：凡纪念，“礼”而已矣。
I then received a new revelation: all commemoration is just a "ceremony".中国原是“礼义之邦”，关于礼的书，就有三大部，连在外国也译出了，我真特别佩服《仪礼》的翻译者。事君，现在可以不谈了；事亲，当然要尽孝，但殁后的办法，则已归入祭礼中，各有仪：就是现在的拜忌日，做阴寿之类。新的忌日添出来，旧的忌日就淡一点，“新鬼大，故鬼小”也。我们的纪念日也是对于旧的几个比较的不起劲，而新的几个之归于淡漠，则只好以俟将来，和人家的拜忌辰是一样的。有人说，中国的国家以家族为基础，真是有识见。
China was originally a "country of propriety and righteousness", and there were three major books on etiquette, which were even translated in foreign countries, and I really admired the translators of "Rituals". Shijun, you can not talk about it now; To serve relatives, of course, filial piety must be fulfilled, but the method after death has been classified into the sacrificial rites, each with its own rituals: it is the current death anniversary, doing yin longevity and the like. When a new death day is added, the old death day is a little lighter, "the new ghost is big, the old ghost is small". Our anniversaries are also less energetic than the old ones, while the new ones are indifferent, so we have to wait for the future, which is the same as other people's anniversaries. Some people say that China's country is based on the family, which is really insightful.中国又原是“礼让为国”的，既有礼，就必能让，而愈能让，礼也就愈繁了。总之，这一节不说也罢。
China was originally "courteous for the country", and if there is courtesy, it must be able to yield, and the more it can be conceded, the more complicated the etiquette. In short, this section is not to be mentioned.古时候，或以黄老治天下，或以孝治天下。现在呢，恐怕是入于以礼治天下的时期了，明乎此，就知道责备民众的对于纪念日的淡漠是错的，《礼》曰：“礼不下庶人”；舍不得物质上的什么东西也是错的，孔子不云乎：“赐也尔爱其羊，我爱其礼！”
In ancient times, some ruled the world with Huang Lao, while others ruled the world with filial piety. Now, I am afraid that we have entered the period of ruling the world with etiquette, and if you understand this, you will know that it is wrong to blame the people for their indifference to anniversaries, and the "Li" says: "Etiquette is not inferior to the common people"; It is also wrong to be reluctant to give up material things, Confucius did not say: "Give you to love its sheep, I love its gifts!" ”“非礼勿视，非礼勿听，非礼勿言，非礼勿动”，静静的等着别人的“多行不义，必自毙”，礼也。
"Don't look at injustice, don't listen to injustice, don't say injustice, don't move injustice", quietly waiting for others' "do more injustice, you will kill yourself", etiquette.九月二十日。
September 20.

打听印象

打听印象

打听印象

Inquire about impressions桃椎
Peach vertebrae五四运动以后，好像中国人就发生了一种新脾气，是：倘有外国的名人或阔人新到，就喜欢打听他对于中国的印象。
After the May Fourth Movement, it seems that a new temper has occurred among Chinese, that is: if there is a foreign celebrity or a new arrival, he likes to inquire about his impression of China.罗素到中国讲学，急进的青年们开会欢宴，打听印象。罗素道：“你们待我这么好，就是要说坏话，也不好说了。”急进的青年愤愤然，以为他滑头。
Russell went to China to give lectures, and the radical young people held a meeting and banquet to inquire about their impressions. Russell said: "You treat me so well, even if you want to say bad things, it's not easy to say." The radical young man was indignant, thinking that he was slippery.萧伯纳周游过中国，上海的记者群集访问，又打听印象。萧道：“我有什么意见，与你们都不相干。假如我是个武人，杀死个十万条人命，你们才会尊重我的意见。”革命家和非革命家都愤愤然，以为他刻薄。
George Bernard Shaw traveled around China, and reporters from Shanghai visited in groups to inquire about their impressions. Xiao said: "What opinion do I have, it has nothing to do with you." If I were a warrior and killed a hundred thousand people, you would respect my opinion. Revolutionaries and non-revolutionaries alike were indignant, thinking he was mean.这回是瑞典的卡尔亲王到上海了，记者先生也发表了他的印象：“……足迹所经，均蒙当地官民殷勤招待，感激之余，异常愉快。今次游览观感所得，对于贵国政府及国民，有极度良好之印象，而永远不能磨灭者也。”这最稳妥，我想，是不至于招出什么是非来的。
This time it was Prince Karl of Sweden who came to Shanghai, and Mr. Reporter also expressed his impression: "...... Wherever they passed, they were hospitalized by local officials and people, and they were very happy to be grateful. The experience gained from this visit has an extremely good impression on your government and people, and it will never be erased. "This is the safest, I think, so as not to invite anything wrong.其实是，罗萧两位，也还不算滑头和刻薄的，假如有这么一个外国人，遇见有人问他印象时，他先反问道：“你先生对于自己中国的印象怎么样？”那可真是一篇难以下笔的文章。
In fact, Luo Xiao and the two are not slippery and mean, if there is such a foreigner, when he meets someone asking him about his impression, he first asks: "What is your husband's impression of China?" "That's really a difficult article.我们是生长在中国的，倘有所感，自然不能算“印象”；但意见也好；而意见又怎么说呢？说我们像浑水里的鱼，活得胡里胡涂，莫名其妙罢，不像意见。说中国好得很罢，恐怕也难。这就是爱国者所悲痛的所谓“失掉了国民的自信”，然而实在也好像失掉了，向各人打听印象，就恰如求签问卜，自己心里先自狐疑着了的缘故。
We grew up in China, and if we feel it, it naturally cannot be regarded as an "impression"; But opinions are good; And what do opinions say? It is inexplicable to say that we are like fish in muddy waters, living a messy life, inexplicably, not like opinions. It is difficult to say that China is very good. This is the so-called "loss of national self-confidence" that patriots grieve about, but it really seems to have been lost, and asking everyone about their impressions is just like asking for a sign and asking for divination, because they are suspicious in their hearts.我们里面，发表意见的固然也有的，但常见的是无拳无勇，未曾“杀死十万条人命”，倒是自称“小百姓”的人，所以那意见也无人“尊重”，也就是和大家“不相干”。至于有位有势的大人物，则在野时候，也许是很急进的罢，但现在呢，一声不响，中国“待我这么好，就是要说坏话，也不好说了”。看当时欢宴罗素，而愤愤于他那答话的由新潮社而发迹的诸公的现在，实在令人觉得罗素并非滑头，倒是一个先知的讽刺家，将十年后的心思豫先说去了。
Among us, there are certainly those who express opinions, but what is common is that they have no fists and no courage, and they have never "killed 100,000 lives", but they are people who call themselves "ordinary people", so their opinions are not "respected" by anyone, that is, they are "irrelevant" to everyone. As for a powerful figure, when he was in the opposition, he may have been very radical, but now, without making a sound, China "treats me so well, even if I want to say bad things, it is not easy to say." Looking at the banquet Russell at that time, and the current indignation of the gentlemen who made a fortune from the Xinchao Society in his answer, it really makes people feel that Russell is not a slippery head, but a prophetic satirist, and he will say his thoughts ten years later.这是我的印象，也算一篇拟答案，是从外国人的嘴上抄来的。
This is my impression, and it can be regarded as a draft answer, copied from the mouth of a foreigner.九月二十日。
September 20.

吃教

吃教

吃教

Eat and teach丰之余
Abundant surplus达一先生在《文统之梦》里，因刘勰自谓梦随孔子，乃始论文，而后来做了和尚，遂讥其“贻羞往圣”。其实是中国自南北朝以来，凡有文人学士，道士和尚，大抵以“无特操”为特色的。晋以来的名流，每一个人总有三种小玩意，一是《论语》和《孝经》，二是《老子》，三是《维摩诘经》，不但采作谈资，并且常常做一点注解。唐有三教辩论，后来变成大家打诨；所谓名儒，做几篇伽蓝碑文也不算什么大事。宋儒道貌岸然，而窃取禅师的语录。清呢，去今不远，我们还可以知道儒者的相信《太上感应篇》和《文昌帝君阴骘文》，并且会请和尚到家里来拜忏。
In "The Dream of Wentong", Mr. Dayi ridiculed Liu Xie for "shame and saint" because Liu Xie thought that he dreamed of following Confucius, so he began to write papers, and later became a monk. In fact, since the Northern and Southern Dynasties in China, all literati, scholars, Taoist monks and monks have generally been characterized by "no special conduct". Since the Jin Dynasty, everyone has always had three kinds of gadgets, one is the Analects and the Classic of Filial Piety, the second is Laozi, and the third is the Vimalakirti Sutra, which is not only used as a talking point, but also often makes a little annotation. Tang had a debate on the three teachings, which later became a joke among everyone; The so-called famous Confucian scholars are not a big deal to make a few Jialan inscriptions. Song Confucianism was sanctimonious and stole the quotations of the Zen master. In the Qing Dynasty, not far from today, we can also know that Confucians believe in the "Supreme Induction" and "Wenchang Emperor Yin Luwen", and will invite monks to their homes to worship.耶稣教传入中国，教徒自以为信教，而教外的小百姓却都叫他们是“吃教”的。这两个字，真是提出了教徒的“精神”，也可以包括大多数的儒释道教之流的信者，也可以移用于许多“吃革命饭”的老英雄。
When Jesus was introduced to China, the believers thought they were religious, but the people outside the religion called them "eating teachings". These two words really put forward the "spirit" of believers, and can also include most believers in Confucianism, Buddhism, and Taoism, and can also be transferred to many old heroes who "eat revolutionary food".清朝人称八股文为“敲门砖”，因为得到功名，就如打开了门，砖即无用。近年则有杂志上的所谓“主张”。《现代评论》之出盘，不是为了迫压，倒因为这派作者的飞腾；《新月》的冷落，是老社员都“爬”了上去，和月亮距离远起来了。这种东西，我们为要和“敲门砖”区别，称之为“上天梯”罢。
The Qing Dynasty called the eight-strand text a "stepping stone", because if you get fame, it is like opening a door, and the brick is useless. In recent years, there have been so-called "propositions" in magazines. The release of "Modern Review" is not for pressure, but because of the soaring of this school of authors; The snub of "New Moon" is that the old members have "climbed" up and become farther away from the moon. This kind of thing, in order to distinguish it from the "stepping stone", is called "ladder to heaven".“教”之在中国，何尝不如此。讲革命，彼一时也；讲忠孝，又一时也；跟大拉嘛打圈子，又一时也；造塔藏主义，又一时也。有宜于专吃的时代，则指归应定于一尊，有宜合吃的时代，则诸教亦本非异致，不过一碟是全鸭，一碟是杂拌儿而已。刘勰亦然，盖仅由“不撤姜食”一变而为吃斋，于胃脏里的分量原无差别，何况以和尚而注《论语》《孝经》或《老子》，也还是不失为一种“天经地义”呢？
"Education" is not like this in China. Talking about revolution is also a moment; Talking about loyalty and filial piety is another time; Playing in circles with the Great Lama is another time; The creation of the Tazang doctrine is another time. There is an era suitable for exclusive eating, which means that it should be determined in one zone, and there is an era that is suitable for eating, so the various religions are not different, but one plate is a whole duck and a plate is a mixed mix. The same is true for Liu Xie, because it is only changed from "not withdrawing ginger food" to eating fasting, and there is no difference in the weight in the stomach, not to mention that it is still a kind of "natural righteousness" to annotate the "Analects", "Classic of Filial Piety" or "Laozi" as a monk?九月二十七日。
September 27th.

喝茶

喝茶

喝茶

drink tea丰之余
Abundant surplus某公司又在廉价了，去买了二两好茶叶，每两洋二角。开首泡了一壶，怕它冷得快，用棉袄包起来，却不料郑重其事的来喝的时候，味道竟和我一向喝着的粗茶差不多，颜色也很重浊。
A certain company is cheap again, so I went to buy two taels of good tea, every two taels of foreign dial. At the beginning, I brewed a pot, afraid that it would get cold quickly, so I wrapped it in a padded jacket, but when I came to drink it solemnly, the taste was similar to the coarse tea I had always drunk, and the color was also very heavy and turbid.我知道这是自己错误了，喝好茶，是要用盖碗的，于是用盖碗。果然，泡了之后，色清而味甘，微香而小苦，确是好茶叶。但这是须在静坐无为的时候的，当我正写着《吃教》的中途，拉来一喝，那好味道竟又不知不觉的滑过去，像喝着粗茶一样了。
I knew that this was my mistake, and to drink good tea, I had to use a gaiwan, so I used a gaiwan. Sure enough, after soaking, the color is clear and sweet, slightly fragrant and slightly bitter, it is indeed a good tea. But this is when I have to sit quietly and do nothing, when I was writing "Eating Teachings", I pulled it and drank it, and the good taste slipped over unconsciously, like drinking coarse tea.有好茶喝，会喝好茶，是一种“清福”。不过要享这“清福”，首先就须有工夫，其次是练习出来的特别的感觉。由这一极琐屑的经验，我想，假使是一个使用筋力的工人，在喉干欲裂的时候，那么，即使给他龙井芽茶，珠兰窨片，恐怕他喝起来也未必觉得和热水有什么大区别罢。所谓“秋思”，其实也是这样的，骚人墨客，会觉得什么“悲哉秋之为气也”，风雨阴晴，都给他一种刺戟，一方面也就是一种“清福”，但在老农，却只知道每年的此际，就要割稻而已。
If you have good tea to drink, you can drink good tea, which is a kind of "happiness". However, to enjoy this "pure blessing", first of all, you must have work, and secondly, you must practice the special feeling. From this extremely trivial experience, I think that if a worker who uses muscle strength is about to crack his throat, then even if he is given Longjing bud tea and Zhulan yao tablets, I am afraid that he may not feel that there is much difference between it and hot water. The so-called "autumn thoughts" are actually like this, the poet and the writer will feel what "sad autumn is also angry", wind and rain, cloudy and sunny, all give him a kind of thorn halberd, on the one hand, it is also a kind of "Qingfu", but in the old farmers, they only know that at this time of the year, they have to cut rice.于是有人以为这种细腻锐敏的感觉，当然不属于粗人，这是上等人的牌号。然而我恐怕也正是这牌号就要倒闭的先声。我们有痛觉，一方面是使我们受苦的，而一方面也使我们能够自卫。假如没有，则即使背上被人刺了一尖刀，也将茫无知觉，直到血尽倒地，自己还不明白为什么倒地。但这痛觉如果细腻锐敏起来呢，则不但衣服上有一根小刺就觉得，连衣服上的接缝，线结，布毛都要觉得，倘不穿“无缝天衣”，他便要终日如芒刺在身，活不下去了。但假装锐敏的，自然不在此例。
So some people think that this delicate and sensitive feeling certainly does not belong to rough people, this is the grade of a superior person. However, I am afraid that this brand is also the precursor to the collapse of this brand. We have pain sensations that, on the one hand, make us suffer, and on the other hand, allow us to defend ourselves. If not, even if someone is stabbed in the back, he will be unconscious until he falls to the ground with all the blood, and he still doesn't understand why he fell to the ground. But if this pain sensation becomes delicate and sensitive, not only will there be a small thorn on the clothes, but even the seams, threads, and wool on the clothes will feel it. But pretending to be sharp is naturally not an example.感觉的细腻和锐敏，较之麻木，那当然算是进步的，然而以有助于生命的进化为限。如果不相干，甚而至于有碍，那就是进化中的病态，不久就要收梢。我们试将享清福，抱秋心的雅人，和破衣粗食的粗人一比较，就明白究竟是谁活得下去。喝过茶，望着秋天，我于是想：不识好茶，没有秋思，倒也罢了。
The delicacy and sensitivity of the senses are of course progressive compared to numbness, but they are limited to the evolution of life. If it is irrelevant, or even hindered, it is an evolutionary pathology that will soon come to an end. Let's try to compare the elegant people who enjoy the blessings and have autumn hearts with the rough people who are broken and eat rough food, and we will understand who can survive. After drinking tea and looking at autumn, I thought: I don't know good tea, I don't have autumn thoughts, it's okay.九月三十日。
September 30th.

禁用和自造

禁用和自造

禁用和自造

Prohibition and self-creation孺牛
Young cow据报上说，因为铅笔和墨水笔进口之多，有些地方已在禁用，改用毛笔了。
It was reported that due to the large number of pencils and pens imported, some places have banned them and have switched to brushes.我们且不说飞机大炮，美棉美麦，都非国货之类的迂谈，单来说纸笔。
Let's not talk about airplanes and cannons, American cotton and wheat, which are not domestic products, just paper and pen.我们也不说写大字，画国画的名人，单来说真实的办事者。在这类人，毛笔却是很不便当的。砚和墨可以不带，改用墨汁罢，墨汁也何尝有国货。而且据我的经验，墨汁也并非可以常用的东西，写过几千字，毛笔便被胶得不能施展。倘若安砚磨墨，展纸舔笔，则即以学生的抄讲义而论，速度恐怕总要比用墨水笔减少三分之一，他只好不抄，或者要教员讲得慢，也就是大家的时间，被白费了三分之一了。
We don't talk about celebrities who write big characters and paint Chinese paintings, but only talk about real people. In this kind of person, the brush is very inconvenient. The inkstone and ink can be without, but instead use ink, and the ink has never been a domestic product. And according to my experience, ink is not something that can be used frequently, and after writing thousands of words, the brush is glued to the point where it cannot be used. If An Yan grinds ink and spreads paper and licks the pen, then in terms of students' copying of handouts, the speed is probably reduced by one-third compared to using an ink pen, and he has to stop copying, or ask the instructor to speak slowly, that is, everyone's time is wasted by one-third.所谓“便当”，并不是偷懒，是说在同一时间内，可以由此做成较多的事情。这就是节省时间，也就是使一个人的有限的生命，更加有效，而也即等于延长了人的生命。古人说，“非人磨墨墨磨人”，就在悲愤人生之消磨于纸墨中，而墨水笔之制成，是正可以弥这缺憾的。
The so-called "bento" is not lazy, it means that more things can be done in the same time. This is to save time, that is, to make a person's limited life more effective, which is equivalent to prolonging human life. The ancients said that "non-human grinding ink and grinding people" is in the sadness and anger of life in paper and ink, and the production of ink pen can make up for this shortcoming.但它的存在，却必须在宝贵时间，宝贵生命的地方。中国不然，这当然不会是国货。进出口货，中国是有了帐簿的了，人民的数目却还没有一本帐簿。一个人的生养教育，父母化去的是多少物力和气力呢，而青年男女，每每不知所终，谁也不加注意。区区时间，当然更不成什么问题了，能活着弄弄毛笔的，或者倒是幸福也难说。
But its existence must be in a precious time and a precious place of life. China is not, of course, this will not be a domestic product. China has an account book for importing and exporting goods, but the number of people does not yet have an account book. How much material strength and energy does a parent have turned into a person's birth and education education, and young men and women often don't know what will happen, and no one pays attention. It's just time, of course, it's not a problem, it's hard to say that you can live to play with the brush, or it's happiness.和我们中国一样，一向用毛笔的，还有一个日本。然而在日本，毛笔几乎绝迹了，代用的是铅笔和墨水笔，连用这些笔的习字帖也很多。为什么呢？就因为这便当，省时间。然而他们不怕“漏巵”么？不，他们自己来制造，而且还要运到中国来。
Like us in China, there is also a Japan that has always used brushes. However, in Japan, brushes are almost extinct, and pencils and ink pens are used instead, and there are even many calligraphy books using these pens. Why? Just because of this bento, save time. However, aren't they afraid of "leaking"? No, they make it themselves, and they have to ship it to China.优良而非国货的时候，中国禁用，日本仿造，这是两国截然不同的地方。
When it is good and not domestic, China bans it, and Japan imitates it, which is the difference between the two countries.九月三十日。
September 30th.

看变戏法

看变戏法

看变戏法

Look at the trick游光
Swimming light我爱看“变戏法”。
I love watching "juggling".他们是走江湖的，所以各处的戏法都一样。为了敛钱，一定有两种必要的东西：一只黑熊，一个小孩子。
They are in the rivers and lakes, so the tricks are the same everywhere. In order to collect money, there must be two necessary things: a black bear and a child.黑熊饿得真瘦，几乎连动弹的力气也快没有了。自然，这是不能使它强壮的，因为一强壮，就不能驾驭。现在是半死不活，却还要用铁圈穿了鼻子，再用索子牵着做戏。有时给吃一点东西，是一小块水泡的馒头皮，但还将勺子擎得高高的，要它站起来，伸头张嘴，许多工夫才得落肚，而变戏法的则因此集了一些钱。
The black bear was so hungry that he almost lost the strength to move. Naturally, this cannot make it strong, because once it is strong, it cannot be controlled. Now he is half dead, but he still has to pierce his nose with an iron ring and then lead him with a rope to play. Sometimes it is a small piece of blistered steamed bun scalp, but the spoon is held high, and it takes a lot of effort to stand up, stretch its head and open its mouth, and the juggler collects some money because of this.这熊的来源，中国没有人提到过。据西洋人的调查，说是从小时候，由山里捉来的；大的不能用，因为一大，就总改不了野性。但虽是小的，也还须“训练”，这“训练”的方法，是“打”和“饿”；而后来，则是因虐待而死亡。我以为这话是的确的，我们看它还在活着做戏的时候，就瘪得连熊气息也没有了，有些地方，竟称之为“狗熊”，其被蔑视至于如此。
The source of this bear has not been mentioned by anyone in China. According to Westerners' investigations, it is said that it was caught from the mountains when he was a child; The big one can't be used, because the big one can't change the wildness. But even if it is small, it still needs to be "trained", and the method of "training" is "fighting" and "starving"; Later, he died of abuse. I thought this was true, when we saw that it was still alive and acting, it was deflated to the point where it didn't even have the breath of a bear, and in some places, it was called "bear", and it was despised to such an extent.孩子在场面上也要吃苦，或者大人踏在他肚子上，或者将他的两手扭过来，他就显出很苦楚，很为难，很吃重的相貌，要看客解救。六个，五个，再四个，三个……而变戏法的就又集了一些钱。
The child also has to endure hardships on the scene, or adults step on his stomach, or twist his hands, he shows a very painful, embarrassed, and heavy appearance, and he wants to be rescued by the spectators. Six, five, four more, three...... And the jugglers raised some money.他自然也曾经训练过，这苦痛是装出来的，和大人串通的勾当，不过也无碍于赚钱。
Naturally, he had also trained, and this pain was pretended, colluding with adults, but it did not hinder making money.下午敲锣开场，这样的做到夜，收场，看客走散，有化了钱的，有终于不化钱的。
In the afternoon, the gong begins, so that it is night, the end, the spectators are separated, some have made money, and some have finally not made money.每当收场，我一面走，一面想：两种生财家伙，一种是要被虐待至死的，再寻幼小的来；一种是大了之后，另寻一个小孩子和一只小熊，仍旧来变照样的戏法。
Whenever it ends, I think as I go: two kinds of wealthy guys, one is going to be abused to death, and then look for the young; One is to find another child and a bear when they grow up, and they still come to play the same trick.事情真是简单得很，想一下，就好像令人索然无味。然而我还是常常看。此外叫我看什么呢，诸君？
It's so simple, and when you think about it, it's boring. However, I still read it often. Besides, what do you want me to see, gentlemen?十月一日。
October 1st.

双十怀古　
——民国二二年看十九年秋

双十怀古Double Ten Nostalgia 
——民国二二年看十九年秋 - Republic of China 22 Autumn 19
史癖
Historical fetish小引
Small quote
要做“双十”的循例的文章，首先必须找材料。找法有二，或从脑子里，或从书本中。我用的是后一法。但是，翻完《描写字典》，里面无之；觅遍《文章作法》，其中也没有。幸而“吉人自有天相”，竟在破纸堆里寻出一卷东西来，是中华民国十九年十月三日到十日的上海各种大报小报的拔萃。去今已经整整的三个年头了，剪贴着做什么用的呢，自己已经记不清；莫非就给我今天做材料的么，一定未必是。但是，“废物利用”——既经检出，就抄些目录在这里罢。不过为节省篇幅计，不再注明广告，记事，电报之分，也略去了报纸的名目，因为那些文字，大抵是各报都有的。
To do the "Double Ten" article, you must first find materials. There are two ways to find it, either from the brain or from the book. I use the latter method. However, after reading the "Dictionary of Description", there is nothing in it; I searched all over the "Writing Method", but there was no one in it. Fortunately, "Ji people have their own heavenly appearance", they actually found a scroll of things in the pile of broken paper, which was the best of various large newspapers and tabloids in Shanghai from October 3 to 10 in the 19th year of the Republic of China. It's been three years since I left, and I can't remember what it's used for; Could it be that he made materials for me today, it must not be the case. However, "waste utilization" - since it has been detected, copy some catalogs here. However, in order to save space, the distinction between advertisements, notes, and telegrams was no longer indicated, and the name of the newspaper was omitted, because those words were probably found in all newspapers.看了什么用呢？倒也说不出。倘若一定要我说，那就说是譬如看自己三年前的照相罢。
What is the use of reading it? I can't say. If I had to say it, it would be like looking at a photo of myself three years ago.
十月三日
October 3rd
江湾赛马。Jiangwan horse racing. 
中国红十字会筹募湖南辽西各省急振。 The Chinese Red Cross Society raised funds for the rapid relief of the provinces of Hunan and Liaoxi. 
中央军克陈留。 The Central Army captured Chenliu. 
辽宁方面筹组副司令部。 Liaoning side organized a deputy headquarters. 
礼县土匪屠城。 Li County bandits slaughtered the city. 
六岁女孩受孕。 Conception of a six-year-old girl. 
辛博森伤势沉重。 Simpson is seriously injured. 
汪精卫到太原。 Wang Jingwei arrived in Taiyuan. 
卢兴邦接洽投诚。 Lu Xingbang contacted and surrendered. 
加派师旅入赣剿共。 Additional divisions and brigades were sent into Jiangxi to suppress the Communist Party. 
裁厘展至明年一月。 will be extended to January next year. 
墨西哥拒侨胞，五十六名返国。 Mexico refuses to return to its homeland with 56 expatriates returned. 
墨索里尼提倡艺术。 Mussolini advocated art. 
谭延闿轶事。 Tan Yankai's anecdote. 
战士社代社员征婚。 Warrior Society recruits on behalf of the members.

十月四日
October 4
齐天大舞台始创杰构积极改进《西游记》，准中秋节开幕。The founder of the Qitian Grand Stage actively improved "Journey to the West" and opened the Mid-Autumn Festival. 
前进的，民族主义的，唯一的，文艺刊物《前锋月刊》创刊号准双十节出版。 Forward, nationalist, and the only one published in the first issue of the literary and artistic publication "Forward Monthly". 
空军将再炸邕。 The Air Force will bomb Yong again. 
剿匪声中一趣史。 An interesting history in the sound of suppressing bandits.

十月五日
October 5th
蒋主席电国府请大赦政治犯。President Chiang Kai-shek sent a telegram to the State Government requesting amnesty for political prisoners. 
程艳秋登台盛况。 Cheng Yanqiu took the stage. 
卫乐园之保证金。 Guarantee for the Guardian Park.

十月六日
October 6th
樊迪文讲演小记。Fan Diwen's speech. 
诸君阅至此，请虔颂南无阿弥陀佛…… Everyone, please praise Namo Amitabha Buddha here...... 
大家错了，中秋是本月六日。 Everyone is wrong, the Mid-Autumn Festival is the sixth day of this month. 
查封赵戴文财产问题。 Seize Zhao Daiwen's property. 
鄂省党部祝贺克复许汴。 The Party Department of Ezhou Province congratulated the recapture of Xu Bian. 
取缔民间妄用党国旗。 Ban the unauthorized use of the party flag by the people.

十月七日
October 7
响应政府之廉洁运动。Respond to the government's integrity campaign. 
津浦全线将通车。 The entire line of Jinpu will be opened to traffic. 
平津党部行将恢复。 The Pingjin Party Department will be restored. 
法轮殴毙栈伙交涉。王士珍举殡记。 Falun beat and killed the stack gang to negotiate. Wang Shizhen held the funeral record. 
冯阎部下全解体。 Feng Yan's subordinates were all disbanded. 
湖北来凤苗放双穗。 Hubei Feng seedlings put out double ears. 
冤魂为厉，未婚夫索命。 The wronged soul is fierce, and the fiancé is asking for his life. 
鬼击人背。 Ghost hits on the back.

十月八日
October 8
闽省战事仍烈。The fighting in Fujian Province was still fierce. 
八路军封锁柳州交通。 The Eighth Route Army blocked traffic in Liuzhou. 
安德思考古队自蒙古返北平。 The Anders team returned to Peking from Mongolia. 
国货时装展览。 Domestic fashion exhibition. 
哄动南洋之萧信庵案。 The case of Xiao Xin'an in Nanyang was stirred up. 
学校当注重国文论。 Schools should pay attention to the theory of Chinese literature. 
追记郑州飞机劫。 Postscript of the plane hijacking in Zhengzhou. 
谭宅挽联择尤录。 Tan Zhai Couplet Selection Youlu. 
汪精卫突然失踪。 Wang Jingwei suddenly disappeared.
十月九日
October 9
西北军已解体。The Northwest Army has been disbanded. 
外部发表英退庚款换文。 External publication of the British Withdrawal Fund Exchange Document. 
京卫戍部枪决人犯。 The Beijing garrison department shoots and kills people. 
辛博森渐有起色。 Simpson is gradually improving. 
国货时装展览。 Domestic fashion exhibition. 
上海空前未有之跳舞游艺大会。 Shanghai's unprecedented dancing and entertainment conference.

十月十日
October 10
举国欢腾庆祝双十。The whole country celebrated Double Ten with jubilation. 
叛逆削平，全国欢祝国庆，蒋主席昨凯旋参与盛典。 The rebellion was quelled, the whole country celebrated the National Day, and President Chiang Kai-shek triumphantly participated in the ceremony yesterday. 
津浦路暂仍分段通车。 Jinpu Road is still open to traffic in sections. 
首都枪决共犯九名。 Nine accomplices shot and killed in the capital. 
林埭被匪洗劫。 Lindai was looted by bandits. 
老陈圩匪祸惨酷。 The old Chenwei bandits were brutal. 
海盗骚扰丰利。 Pirates harass Fengli. 
程艳秋庆祝国庆。 Cheng Yanqiu celebrates the National Day. 
蒋丽霞不忘双十。 Jiang Lixia does not forget the double ten. 
南昌市取缔赤足。 Nanchang City banned barefoot. 
伤兵怒斥孙祖基。 The wounded soldier angrily reprimanded Sun Zuji. 
今年之双十节，可欣可贺，尤甚从前。 This year's Double Tenth Festival is exciting and celebratory, especially more than ever.

结语
epilogue
我也说“今年之双十节，可欣可贺，尤甚从前”罢。
I also said, "This year's Double Tenth Festival is gratifying, especially more than before."十月一日。
October 1st.附记：这一篇没有能够刊出，大约是被谁抽去了的，盖双十盛典，“伤今”固难，“怀古”也不易了。
P.S. This article was not published, it was probably taken away by someone, covering the Double Ten Ceremony, it is difficult to "hurt the present", and it is not easy to "nostalgia for the past".十月十三日。
October 13th.

重三感旧　
——一九三三年忆光绪朝末

重三感旧Three feelings of the old 
——一九三三年忆光绪朝末 - 1933 reminiscing about the end of the Guangxu Dynasty
丰之余
Abundant surplus我想赞美几句一些过去的人，这恐怕并不是“骸骨的迷恋”。
I would like to praise some people in the past, this is probably not a "skeleton obsession".所谓过去的人，是指光绪末年的所谓“新党”，民国初年，就叫他们“老新党”。甲午战败，他们自以为觉悟了，于是要“维新”，便是三四十岁的中年人，也看《学算笔谈》，看《化学鉴原》；还要学英文，学日文，硬着舌头，怪声怪气的朗诵着，对人毫无愧色，那目的是要看“洋书”，看洋书的缘故是要给中国图“富强”，现在的旧书摊上，还偶有“富强丛书”出现，就如目下的“描写字典”“基本英语”一样，正是那时应运而生的东西。连八股出身的张之洞，他托缪荃孙代做的《书目答问》也竭力添进各种译本去，可见这“维新”风潮之烈了。
The so-called people in the past refer to the so-called "new party" in the late years of Guangxu, and in the early years of the Republic of China, they were called "old new parties". After the defeat of the Sino-Japanese War, they thought they were enlightened, so they wanted to "renovate", that is, middle-aged people in their thirties and forties, and also read "Learning and Calculating Writing" and "Chemistry Identification Origin"; The purpose is to read "foreign books", and the reason for reading foreign books is to give China a picture of "prosperity and strength". Even Zhang Zhidong, who was born in eight shares, and the "Bibliographic Q&A" made by Miao Quan's grandson also tried his best to add various translations, which shows the strength of this "Restoration" trend.然而现在是别一种现象了。有些新青年，境遇正和“老新党”相反，八股毒是丝毫没有染过的，出身又是学校，也并非国学的专家，但是，学起篆字来了，填起词来了，劝人看《庄子》《文选》了，信封也有自刻的印板了，新诗也写成方块了，除掉做新诗的嗜好之外，简直就如光绪初年的雅人一样，所不同者，缺少辫子和有时穿穿洋服而已。
However, it is a different phenomenon now. Some new young people, the situation is the opposite of the "old new party", the eight poisons have not been stained at all, they are from school, and they are not experts in Chinese studies, but they have learned seal characters, filled in words, persuaded people to read "Zhuangzi" and "Anthology", the envelope also has a self-engraved printing plate, and the new poems are also written into squares, except for the hobby of making new poems, it is simply like the elegant people in the early years of Guangxu, the difference is that there is a lack of braids and sometimes wearing clothes.近来有一句常谈，是“旧瓶不能装新酒”。这其实是不确的。旧瓶可以装新酒，新瓶也可以装旧酒，倘若不信，将一瓶五加皮和一瓶白兰地互换起来试试看，五加皮装在白兰地瓶子里，也还是五加皮。这一种简单的试验，不但明示着“五更调”“攒十字”的格调，也可以放进新的内容去，且又证实了新式青年的躯壳里，大可以埋伏下“桐城谬种”或“选学妖孽”的喽罗。
Recently, there is a common saying that "old bottles cannot hold new wine". This is actually not true. If you don't believe it, try swapping a bottle of five-plus skin with a bottle of brandy, and the five-plus skin is in a brandy bottle, and it is still five plus skin. This simple experiment not only clarifies the style of "five watches" and "saving crosses", but also can be put into new content, and it also confirms that in the shell of the new youth, it can ambush the "Tongcheng Fallacy" or "Selection of Demons".“老新党”们的见识虽然浅陋，但是有一个目的：图富强。所以他们坚决，切实；学洋话虽然怪声怪气，但是有一个目的：求富强之术。所以他们认真，热心。待到排满学说播布开来，许多人就成为革命党了，还是因为要给中国图富强，而以为此事必自排满始。
Although the knowledge of the "old and new parties" is shallow, they have one purpose: to get rich and strong. So they are resolute and practical; Although learning foreign dialect is strange, it has a purpose: to seek wealth and strength. So they are serious and enthusiastic. When the doctrine of Paiman was spread, many people became revolutionary parties, or because they wanted to make China rich and strong, thinking that this matter would start from Paiman.排满久已成功，五四早经过去，于是篆字，词，《庄子》，《文选》，古式信封，方块新诗，现在是我们又有了新的企图，要以“古雅”立足于天地之间了。假使真能立足，那倒是给“生存竞争”添一条新例的。
The arrangement has been successful for a long time, and the May Fourth has passed early, so seal characters, words, "Zhuangzi", "Anthology", ancient envelopes, square new poems, and now we have a new attempt to stand between heaven and earth with "quaintness". If it can really gain a foothold, it will add a new precedent to "survival competition".十月一日。
October 1st.

“感旧”以后　（上）

“感旧”以后After "nostalgic" （上） (above)
丰之余
Abundant surplus又不小心，感了一下子旧，就引出了一篇施蛰存先生的《〈庄子〉与〈文选〉》来，以为我那些话，是为他而发的，但又希望并不是为他而发的。
Accidentally, I felt old for a while, so I led up a piece of Mr. Shi Zhicun's "Zhuangzi and Anthology", thinking that my words were for him, but I hope they were not for him.我愿意有几句声明：那篇《感旧》，是并非为施先生而作的，然而可以有施先生在里面。
I would like to make a few statements: That "Nostalgia for the Past" was not written for Mr. Shi, but Mr. Shi can be in it.倘使专对个人而发的话，照现在的摩登文例，应该调查了对手的籍贯，出身，相貌，甚而至于他家乡有什么出产，他老子开过什么铺子，影射他几句才算合式。我的那一篇里可是毫没有这些的。内中所指，是一大队遗少群的风气，并不指定着谁和谁；但也因为所指的是一群，所以被触着的当然也不会少，即使不是整个，也是那里的一肢一节，即使并不永远属于那一队，但有时是属于那一队的。现在施先生自说了劝过青年去读《庄子》与《文选》，“为文学修养之助”，就自然和我所指摘的有点相关，但以为这文为他而作，却诚然是“神经过敏”，我实在并没有这意思。
If it is sent specifically to an individual, according to the current modern literary example, the opponent's origin, origin, appearance, and even what products are produced in his hometown, what shop he has opened, and a few words alluding to him are considered appropriate. There is nothing like this in my article. What is referred to in the middle is the atmosphere of a large group of young people, and it does not specify who and whom; But also because it refers to a group, of course there will be no less people who are touched, even if it is not the whole group, it is a limb and a section there, even if it does not always belong to that team, but sometimes it belongs to that team. Now Mr. Shi himself said that he had persuaded young people to read "Zhuangzi" and "Anthology" "to help with literary accomplishment", which is naturally a bit related to what I pointed out, but I thought that this article was written for him, but it was indeed "nervous", and I really didn't mean it.不过这是在施先生没有说明他的意见之前的话，现在却连这“相关”也有些疏远了，因为我所指摘的，倒是比较顽固的遗少群，标准还要高一点。
However, this was before Mr. Shi explained his opinion, and now even this "related" is a little alienated, because what I am pointing out is a relatively stubborn group of young people, and the standard is a little higher.现在看了施先生自己的解释，（一）才知道他当时的情形，是因为稿纸太小了，“倘再宽阔一点的话”，他“是想多写几部书进去的”；（二）才知道他先前的履历，是“从国文教员转到编杂志”，觉得“青年人的文章太拙直，字汇太少”了，所以推举了这两部古书，使他们去学文法，寻字汇，“虽然其中有许多字是已死了的”，然而也只好去寻觅。我想，假如庄子生在今日，则被劈棺之后，恐怕要劝一切有志于结婚的女子，都去看《烈女传》的罢。
Now that I have read Mr. Shi's own explanation, (1) I know that his situation at that time was because the manuscript paper was too small, "if it was a little wider", he "wanted to write a few more books in it"; (2) Only then did I know that his previous resume was "transferred from a Chinese language teacher to a magazine editor", and he felt that "young people's articles were too clumsy and straight, and there were too few vocabulary", so he recommended these two ancient books to let them learn grammar and find vocabulary, "although many of them are dead", but they had to look for them. I think that if Zhuangzi were born today, after being split in the coffin, I am afraid that all women who are interested in marriage should be persuaded to read "The Biography of the Martyr".还有一点另外的话——
And one more thing -（一）施先生说我用瓶和酒来比“文学修养”是不对的，但我并未这么比方过，我是说有些新青年可以有旧思想，有些旧形式也可以藏新内容。我也以为“新文学”和“旧文学”这中间不能有截然的分界，然而有蜕变，有比较的偏向，而且正因为不能以“何者为分界”，所以也没有了“第三种人”的立场。
(1) Mr. Shi said that it is wrong for me to compare bottles and wine with "literary accomplishments", but I did not compare it to this, I mean that some new young people can have old ideas, and some old forms can also hide new content. I also think that there can be no sharp boundary between "new literature" and "old literature", but there is a transformation and a comparative bias, and it is precisely because it cannot be divided by "which is the boundary", so there is no position of "third type of person".（二）施先生说写篆字等类，都是个人的事情，只要不去勉强别人也做一样的事情就好，这似乎是很对的。然而中学生和投稿者，是他们自己个人的文章太拙直，字汇太少，却并没有勉强别人都去做字汇少而文法拙直的文章，施先生为什么竟大有所感，因此来劝“有志于文学的青年”该看《庄子》与《文选》了呢？做了考官，以词取士，施先生是不以为然的，但一做教员和编辑，却以《庄子》与《文选》劝青年，我真不懂这中间有怎样的分界。
(2) Mr. Shi said that writing seal characters and other things is a personal matter, as long as you don't force others to do the same thing, which seems to be very right. However, middle school students and contributors, their own personal articles are too clumsy and straight, and the vocabulary is too small, but they do not force others to do articles with little vocabulary and clumsy grammar. As an examiner and a scholar by words, Mr. Shi disagreed, but as a teacher and editor, he used "Zhuangzi" and "Anthology" to persuade young people, and I really didn't understand what kind of dividing line there was.（三）施先生还举出一个“鲁迅先生”来，好像他承接了庄子的新道统，一切文章，都是读《庄子》与《文选》读出来的一般。“我以为这也有点武断”的。他的文章中，诚然有许多字为《庄子》与《文选》中所有，例如“之乎者也”之类，但这些字眼，想来别的书上也不见得没有罢。再说得露骨一点，则从这样的书里去找活字汇，简直是胡涂虫，恐怕施先生自己也未必。
(3) Mr. Shi also cited a "Mr. Lu Xun", as if he had inherited Zhuangzi's new Taoism, and all the articles were read by reading "Zhuangzi" and "Anthology". "I thought it was a bit arbitrary too." It is true that there are many words in his articles that are all in "Zhuangzi" and "Selected Works", such as "Zhihu Zhe", but these words may not be found in other books. To put it more explicitly, it is simply nonsense to find a movable word vocabulary from such a book, and I am afraid that Mr. Shi himself may not be.十月十二日。
October 12th.

“感旧”以后　（上）

【备考】：

“感旧”以后　（上）

[Remarks]:《庄子》与《文选》
"Zhuangzi" and "Selected Works"施蛰存
Shi hibernation exists上个月《大晚报》的编辑寄了一张印着表格的邮片来，要我填注两项：（一）目下在读什么书，（二）要介绍给青年的书。
Last month, the editor of the "Evening News" sent me a postcard with a form printed on it, asking me to fill in two items: (1) what book I am reading at the moment, and (2) the book I want to introduce to young people.在第二项中，我写着：《庄子》，《文选》，并且附加了一句注脚：“为青年文学修养之助。”
In the second item, I wrote: "Zhuangzi", "Anthology", and added a footnote: "For the literary cultivation of young people." ”今天看见《自由谈》上丰之余先生的《感旧》一文，不觉有点神经过敏起来，以为丰先生这篇文章是为我而作的了。
Today I saw Mr. Feng Zhiyu's article "Nostalgia for the Old" in "Free Talk", and I felt a little nervous, thinking that Mr. Feng's article was written for me.但是现在我并不想对于丰先生有什么辩难，我只想趁此机会替自己作一个解释。
But now I don't want to argue with Mr. Feng, I just want to take this opportunity to explain for myself.第一，我应当说明我为什么希望青年人读《庄子》和《文选》。近数年来，我的生活，从国文教师转到编杂志，与青年人的文章接触的机会实在太多了。我总感觉到这些青年人的文章太拙直，字汇太少，所以在《大晚报》编辑寄来的狭狭的行格里推荐了这两部书。我以为从这两部书中可以参悟一点做文章的方法，同时也可以扩大一点字汇（虽然其中有许多字是已死了的）。但是我当然并不希望青年人都去做《庄子》，《文选》一类的“古文”。
First, I should explain why I want young people to read Zhuangzi and Selected Works. In recent years, my life has shifted from a Chinese teacher to a magazine editor, and I have had too many opportunities to come into contact with young people's articles. I always felt that the articles of these young people were too clumsy and straight, and the vocabulary was too small, so I recommended these two books in the narrow line sent by the editor of the "Great Evening News". I think that from these two books, I can understand a little about how to write articles, and at the same time, I can also expand my vocabulary a little (although many of the words are dead). But of course I don't want young people to do "ancient texts" such as "Zhuangzi" and "Selected Works".第二，我应当说明我只是希望有志于文学的青年能够读一读这两部书。我以为每一个文学者必须要有所借助于他上代的文学，我不懂得“新文学”和“旧文学”这中间究竟是以何者为分界的。在文学上，我以为“旧瓶装新酒”与“新瓶装旧酒”这譬喻是不对的。倘若我们把一个人的文学修养比之为酒，那么我们可以这样说：酒瓶的新旧没有关系，但这酒必须是酿造出来的。
Second, I should explain that I just hope that young people who are interested in literature can read these two books. I think that every literary scholar must rely on the literature of his previous generation, and I don't know what is the boundary between "new literature" and "old literature". In literature, I think the metaphor of "new wine in old bottles" and "old wine in new bottles" is wrong. If we compare a person's literary accomplishment to wine, then we can say this: it doesn't matter if the bottle is old or new, but the wine must be brewed.我劝文学青年读《庄子》与《文选》，目的在要他们“酿造”，倘若《大晚报》编辑寄来的表格再宽阔一点的话，我是想再多写几部书进去的。
I persuaded literary young people to read "Zhuangzi" and "Anthology", with the aim of asking them to "brew", and if the form sent by the editor of the "Evening News" was a little wider, I would like to write a few more books into it.这里，我们不妨举鲁迅先生来说，像鲁迅先生那样的新文学家，似乎可以算是十足的新瓶了。但是他的酒呢？纯粹的白兰地吗？我就不能相信。没有经过古文学的修养，鲁迅先生的新文章决不会写到现在那样好。所以，我敢说：在鲁迅先生那样的瓶子里，也免不了有许多五加皮或绍兴老酒的成分。
Here, we might as well cite Mr. Lu Xun, a new writer like Mr. Lu Xun seems to be a complete new bottle. But what about his wine? Is it pure brandy? I can't believe it. Without the cultivation of ancient literature, Mr. Lu Xun's new articles would never have been written as well as they are now. Therefore, I dare to say: in a bottle like Mr. Lu Xun, there are inevitably many ingredients of Wujiapi or Shaoxing old wine.至于丰之余先生以为写篆字，填词，用自刻印板的信封，都是不出身于学校，或国学专家们的事情，我以为这也有点武断。这些其实只是个人的事情，如果写篆字的人，不以篆字写信，如果填词的人做了官不以词取士，如果用自刻印板信封的人不勉强别人也去刻一个专用信封，那也无须丰先生口诛笔伐地去认为“谬种”和“妖孽”了。
As for Mr. Feng Zhiyu's belief that writing seal characters, filling in words, and using envelopes with self-engraved plates are all things that are not from school, or Chinese studies experts, I think this is also a bit arbitrary. These are actually just personal matters, if the person who writes seal characters does not write letters in seal characters, if the person who writes the words becomes an official and does not use words to take the scholar, if the person who uses the self-engraved plate envelope does not force others to engrave a special envelope, then there is no need for Mr. Feng to think that it is a "false species" and "demon".新文学家中，也有玩木刻，考究版本，收罗藏书票，以骈体文为白话书信作序，甚至写字台上陈列了小摆设的，照丰先生的意见说来，难道他们是“要以‘今雅’立足于天地之间”吗？我想他们也未必有此企图。
Among the new writers, there are also those who play woodcuts, pay attention to the version, collect book tickets, use parallel texts as the preface to vernacular letters, and even display knick-knacks on the writing desk. I don't think they may have this intention.临了，我希望丰先生那篇文章并不是为我而作的。
I hope Mr. Feng's article is not for me.十月八日，《自由谈》。October 8, "Free Talk".

“感旧”以后　（下）

“感旧”以后After "nostalgic" （下） (bottom)
丰之余
Abundant surplus还要写一点。但得声明在先，这是由施蛰存先生的话所引起，却并非为他而作的。对于个人，我原稿上常是举出名字来，然而一到印出，却往往化为“某”字，或是一切阔人姓名，危险字样，生殖机关的俗语的共同符号“××”了。我希望这一篇中的有几个字，没有这样的变化，以免误解。
I also need to write a little. But I have to state first, this is caused by Mr. Shi Zhicun's words, but not for him. For individuals, I often name them in my original manuscripts, but when they are printed, they often turn into the word "so-and-so", or the common symbol "××" of all broad names, dangerous words, and proverbs of reproductive organs. I hope there are a few words in this article without such changes, so as not to misunderstand.我现在要说的是：说话难，不说亦不易。弄笔的人们，总要写文章，一写文章，就难免惹灾祸，黄河的水向薄弱的堤上攻，于是露臂膊的女人和写错字的青年，就成了嘲笑的对象了，他们也真是无拳无勇，只好忍受，恰如乡下人到上海租界，除了拚出被称为“阿木林”之外，没有办法一样。
What I want to say now is: it is difficult to speak, and it is not easy not to speak. The water of the Yellow River attacked the weak embankment, so the woman with her arms exposed and the young man who wrote the wrong word became the object of ridicule.然而有些是冤枉的，随手举一个例子，就是登在《论语》二十六期上的刘半农先生“自注自批”的《桐花芝豆堂诗集》这打油诗。北京大学招考，他是阅卷官，从国文卷子上发见一个可笑的错字，就来做诗，那些人被挖苦得真是要钻地洞，那些刚毕业的中学生。自然，他是教授，凡所指摘，都不至于不对的，不过我以为有些却还可有磋商的余地。集中有一个“自注”道——
However, some are unjust, and an example is the limerick of Mr. Liu Bannong's "self-annotated and self-criticized" "Tonghua Zhidoutang Poetry Collection" published in the twenty-sixth issue of the Analects. Peking University recruitment, he was a marking officer, and he found a ridiculous typo from the Chinese paper, so he came to write poetry. Naturally, he is a professor, and everything he criticizes is not wrong, but I think there is still room for negotiation in some places. There is a "self-annotation" in the concentration -“有写‘倡明文化’者，余曰：倡即‘娼’字，凡文化发达之处，娼妓必多，谓文化由娼妓而明，亦言之成理也。”
"There is a person who writes 'advocating culture', and I said: Chang is the word 'prostitute', wherever the culture is developed, there must be many prostitutes, and it is reasonable to say that culture is made clear by prostitutes."娼妓的娼，我们现在是不写作“倡”的，但先前两字通用，大约刘先生引据的是古书。不过要引古书，我记得《诗经》里有一句“倡予和女”，好像至今还没有人解作“自己也做了婊子来应和别人”的意思。所以那一个错字，错而已矣，可笑可鄙却不属于它的。还有一句是——
The prostitute of a prostitute, we do not write "advocate" now, but the two words were commonly used before, and Mr. Liu probably quoted an ancient book. However, to quote ancient books, I remember that there is a sentence in the "Book of Songs" that "advocates and women", as if no one has interpreted it as "I also became a bitch to respond to others". So that typo is just wrong, ridiculous and contemptible but does not belong to it. Another sentence is——“幸‘萌科学思想之芽’。”
"Fortunately, 'the germination of scientific thought'."“萌”字和“芽”字旁边都加着一个夹圈，大约是指明着可笑之处在这里的罢，但我以为“萌芽”，“萌蘖”，固然是一个名词，而“萌动”，“萌发”，就成了动词，将“萌”字作动词用，似乎也并无错误。
There is a clip circle next to the word "meng" and "bud", which probably indicates that the ridiculous point is here, but I think that "sprout" and "sprout" are certainly nouns, and "sprout" and "sprout" have become verbs, and it seems that there is no mistake in using the word "meng" as a verb.五四运动时候，提倡（刘先生或者会解作“提起婊子”来的罢）白话的人们，写错几个字，用错几个古典，是不以为奇的，但因为有些反对者说提倡白话者都是不知古书，信口胡说的人，所以往往也做几句古文，以塞他们的嘴。但自然，因为从旧垒中来，积习太深，一时不能摆脱，因此带着古文气息的作者，也不能说是没有的。
During the May Fourth Movement, it was not surprising that people who advocated vernacular (Mr. Liu might interpret it as "mentioning bitches") wrote a few wrong words and used a few classical texts, but because some opponents said that those who advocated vernacular were people who did not know ancient books and talked nonsense, they often made a few sentences of ancient texts to stuff their mouths. But naturally, because it came from the old fortress, the accumulated habits were too deep and could not be gotten rid of for a while, so the author with the atmosphere of ancient literature cannot be said to be non-existent.当时的白话运动是胜利了，有些战士，还因此爬了上去，但也因为爬了上去，就不但不再为白话战斗，并且将它踏在脚下，拿出古字来嘲笑后进的青年了。因为还正在用古书古字来笑人，有些青年便又以看古书为必不可省的工夫，以常用文言的作者为应该模仿的格式，不再从新的道路上去企图发展，打出新的局面来了。
At that time, the vernacular movement was victorious, and some soldiers climbed up because of this, but because they climbed up, not only did they no longer fight for the vernacular, but they also stepped on it and took out ancient characters to ridicule the younger youth. Because they are still using ancient books and ancient characters to laugh at people, some young people take reading ancient books as an essential effort, and use the authors of commonly used classical Chinese as the format that should be imitated, and no longer try to develop from a new road and create a new situation.现在有两个人在这里：一个是中学生，文中写“留学生”为“流学生”，错了一个字；一个是大学教授，就得意洋洋的做了一首诗，曰：“先生犯了弥天罪，罚往西洋把学流，应是九流加一等，面筋熬尽一锅油。”我们看罢，可笑是在那一面呢？
There are two people here now: one is a middle school student, and the text writes "international student" as "flow student", which is a wrong word; One was a university professor, so he triumphantly wrote a poem, saying: "The teacher has committed a heinous crime, and he should be punished to the West to study the flow, which should be nine streams plus one class, and the gluten boils out a pot of oil." "Let's look at it, which side is ridiculous?十月十二日。
October 12th.

黄祸

黄祸

黄祸

yellow peril尤刚
Especially strong现在的所谓“黄祸”，我们自己是在指黄河决口了，但三十年之前，并不如此。
The current so-called "Yellow Peril" refers to the breach of the Yellow River, but thirty years ago, this was not the case.那时是解作黄色人种将要席卷欧洲的意思的，有些英雄听到了这句话，恰如听得被白人恭维为“睡狮”一样，得意了好几年，准备着去做欧洲的主子。
At that time, it was interpreted as the meaning that the yellow race was about to sweep Europe, and some heroes heard this sentence, just like being complimented by white people as "sleeping lion", and they were proud for several years, ready to be the masters of Europe.不过“黄祸”这故事的来源，却又和我们所幻想的不同，是出于德皇威廉的。他还画了一幅图，是一个罗马装束的武士，在抵御着由东方西来的一个人，但那人并不是孔子，倒是佛陀，中国人实在是空欢喜。所以我们一面在做“黄祸”的梦，而有一个人在德国治下的青岛所见的现实，却是一个苦孩子弄脏了电柱，就被白色巡捕提着脚，像中国人的对付鸭子一样，倒提而去了。
However, the source of the story "Yellow Peril" is different from what we imagine, and it comes from Kaiser Wilhelm. He also drew a picture of a warrior dressed in Roman costume, defending against a man from the east and west, but that person was not Confucius, but Buddha, and the Chinese were really happy. So while we are dreaming of the "Yellow Peril", the reality that a person saw in Qingdao under German rule was that a bitter child soiled the telephone pole and was carried by the white patrol officer, like the Chinese dealing with ducks.现在希特拉的排斥非日耳曼民族思想，方法是和德皇一样的。
Now Hitler's rejection of non-Germanic national ideas is the same as that of the Kaiser.德皇的所谓“黄祸”，我们现在是不再梦想了，连“睡狮”也不再提起，“地大物博，人口众多”，文章上也不很看见。倘是狮子，自夸怎样肥大是不妨事的，但如果是一口猪或一匹羊，肥大倒不是好兆头。我不知道我们自己觉得现在好像是什么了？
The so-called "Yellow Peril" of the Kaiser is now no longer dreamed, and even the "sleeping lion" is no longer mentioned. If it is a lion, it is okay to boast about how fat it is, but if it is a pig or a sheep, it is not a good sign to be fat. I don't know what we think is now?我们似乎不再想，也寻不出什么“象征”来，我们正在看海京伯的猛兽戏，赏鉴狮虎吃牛肉，听说每天要吃一只牛。我们佩服国联的制裁日本，我们也看不起国联的不能制裁日本；我们赞成军缩的“保护和平”，我们也佩服希特拉的退出军缩；我们怕别国要以中国作战场，我们也憎恶非战大会。我们似乎依然是“睡狮”。
We don't seem to think about it anymore, and we can't find any "symbols", we are watching Hai Jingbo's beast play, appreciating the ligers eating beef, and hearing that they have to eat a cow every day. We admire the League of Nations sanctioning Japan, and we also look down on the League of Nations for not sanctioning Japan; We are in favor of the "protection of peace" of disarmament, and we also admire Hitler's withdrawal from disarmament; We are afraid that other countries will use China as a battlefield, and we also hate the non-war conference. We still seem to be "sleeping lions".“黄祸”可以一转而为“福”，醒了的狮子也会做戏的。当欧洲大战时，我们有替人拚命的工人，青岛被占了，我们有可以倒提的孩子。
"Yellow Peril" can be turned into "Fu", and the awakened lion will also do the show. When the European war was in power, we had workers who worked hard for others, Qingdao was occupied, and we had children who could be turned upside down.但倘说，二十世纪的舞台上没有我们的份，是不合理的。
But it is unreasonable to say that there is no part of us on the stage of the twentieth century.十月十七日。
十月十七日。

冲

冲

冲

rush旅隼
Traveling Falcon“推”和“踢”只能死伤一两个，倘要多，就非“冲”不可。
"Pushing" and "kicking" can only kill or injure one or two, and if there are many, it must be "rushed".十三日的新闻上载着贵阳通信说，九一八纪念，各校学生集合游行，教育厅长谭星阁临事张皇，乃派兵分据街口，另以汽车多辆，向行列冲去，于是发生惨剧，死学生二人，伤四十余，其中以正谊小学学生为最多，年仅十龄上下耳。……
The news on the 13th reported that Guiyang News Agency said that in the commemoration of 918, students from various schools gathered to march, and Zhang Huang, director of the Department of Education, sent troops to occupy the street entrance, and rushed to the ranks with a number of cars, so a tragedy occurred, two students died and more than 40 were injured, of which the students of Zhengyi Primary School were the most, only about ten years old. ……我先前只知道武将大抵通文，当“枕戈待旦”的时候，就会做骈体电报，这回才明白虽是文官，也有深谙韬略的了。田单曾经用过火牛，现在代以汽车，也确是二十世纪。
I only knew that military generals were generally literate, and when they were "waiting for dawn", they would make parallel telegrams, and this time I realized that although they were civil officials, they were also well versed in strategy. Tian Dan used to use fire bulls, and now they are replaced by cars, which is indeed the twentieth century.“冲”是最爽利的战法，一队汽车，横冲直撞，使敌人死伤在车轮下，多么简截；“冲”也是最威武的行为，机关一扳，风驰电掣，使对手想回避也来不及，多么英雄。各国的兵警，喜欢用水龙冲，俄皇曾用哥萨克马队冲，都是快举。各地租界上我们有时会看见外国兵的坦克车在出巡，这就是倘不恭顺，便要来冲的家伙。
"Rush" is the most refreshing tactic, a team of cars, rampage, causing the enemy to die and wound under the wheels, how simple; "Rushing" is also the most powerful behavior, the mechanism is pulled, the wind is fast, so that the opponent wants to avoid it too late, what a hero. The soldiers and police of various countries like to rush with water dragons, and the Russian emperor once used the Cossack horse team to rush, all of which were quick moves. In the concessions of various places, we sometimes see tanks of foreign soldiers on patrol, which is the guy who will come to rush if he is not obedient.汽车虽然并非冲锋的利器，但幸而敌人却是小学生，一匹疲驴，真上战场是万万不行的，不过在嫩草地上飞跑，骑士坐在上面喑呜叱咤，却还很能胜任愉快，虽然有些人见了，难免觉得滑稽。
Although the car is not a sharp weapon for charging, fortunately the enemy is a primary school student, a tired donkey, it is absolutely impossible to really go to the battlefield, but flying on the tender grass, the knight sits on it and whines, but it is still very competent and pleasant, although some people see it, it is inevitable to find it funny.十龄上下的孩子会造反，本来也难免觉得滑稽的。但我们中国是常出神童的地方，一岁能画，两岁能诗，七龄童做戏，十龄童从军，十几龄童做委员，原是常有的事实；连七八岁的女孩也会被凌辱，从别人看来，是等于“年方花信”的了。
Children around the age of ten will rebel, which is inevitably funny. But we in China are a place where prodigies often emerge, one year old can paint, two years old can write, seven-year-old children can act, ten-year-old children join the army, and teenagers are committee members, which is a common fact; Even seven or eight-year-old girls will be humiliated, and from the perspective of others, it is equivalent to "Nian Fang Hua Xin".况且“冲”的时候，倘使对面是能够有些抵抗的人，那就汽车会弄得不爽利，冲者也就不英雄，所以敌人总须选得嫩弱。流氓欺乡下老，洋人打中国人，教育厅长冲小学生，都是善于克敌的豪杰。
Moreover, when "rushing", if the opposite side is a person who can resist somewhat, then the car will not be pleasant, and the rusher will not be a hero, so the enemy must always choose to be weak. Hooligans bully the old countrymen, foreigners beat Chinese, and the director of the Department of Education rushes to primary school students, all of whom are heroes who are good at defeating the enemy.“身当其冲”，先前好像不过一句空话，现在却应验了，这应验不但在成人，而且到了小孩子。“婴儿杀戮”算是一种罪恶，已经是过去的事，将乳儿抛上空中去，接以枪尖，不过看作一种玩把戏的日子，恐怕也就不远了罢。
"Bearing the brunt" seemed to be just an empty phrase before, but now it has been fulfilled, not only for adults, but also for children. "Infant killing" is a sin, it is a thing of the past, throwing the baby into the air and catching it with the tip of a gun, but if it is regarded as a kind of trick, I am afraid it will not be far away.十月十七日。
十月十七日。

“滑稽”例解

“滑稽”例解

“滑稽”例解

“滑稽”例解苇索
苇索研究世界文学的人告诉我们：法人善于机锋，俄人善于讽刺，英美人善于幽默。这大概是真确的，就都为社会状态所制限。慨自语堂大师振兴“幽默”以来，这名词是很通行了，但一普遍，也就伏着危机，正如军人自称佛子，高官忽挂念珠，而佛法就要涅槃一样。倘若油滑，轻薄，猥亵，都蒙“幽默”之号，则恰如“新戏”之入“×世界”，必已成为“文明戏”也无疑。
Those who study world literature tell us that the French are good at wit, the Russians are good at satire, and the British and Americans are good at humor. This is probably true, but it is limited by the state of society. Since Master Yutang revitalized "humor", this term has been very popular, but once it is common, there is a crisis, just like a soldier claims to be a Buddha, a high-ranking official suddenly hangs a rosary, and Buddhism is about to be nirvana. If it is smooth, frivolous, and obscene, all of which are called "humor", it is just like the "new drama" entering the "× world", and it will undoubtedly become a "civilized drama".这危险，就因为中国向来不大有幽默。只是滑稽是有的，但这和幽默还隔着一大段，日本人曾译“幽默”为“有情滑稽”，所以别于单单的“滑稽”，即为此。那么，在中国，只能寻得滑稽文章了？却又不。中国之自以为滑稽文章者，也还是油滑，轻薄，猥亵之谈，和真的滑稽有别。这“狸猫换太子”的关键，是在历来的自以为正经的言论和事实，大抵滑稽者多，人们看惯，渐渐以为平常，便将油滑之类，误认为滑稽了。
This danger is because China has never had much humor. It's just that there is funny, but this is still a long way from humor, the Japanese once translated "humor" as "sentimental funny", so it is different from just "funny", that is, for this reason. So, in China, you can only find funny articles? But no. China's self-proclaimed funny articles are still smooth, frivolous, and obscene, which is different from real funny. The key to this "civet cat for prince" is that there are many self-righteous remarks and facts in the past, and people are used to it, and gradually think that it is ordinary, so they mistake oil slippery and the like for funny.在中国要寻求滑稽，不可看所谓滑稽文，倒要看所谓正经事，但必须想一想。
In China, if you want to seek funny, you should not read the so-called funny texts, but look at the so-called serious things, but you must think about it.这些名文是俯拾即是的，譬如报章上正正经经的题目，什么“中日交涉渐入佳境”呀，“中国到那里去”呀，就都是的，咀嚼起来，真如橄榄一样，很有些回味。
These famous articles are just like the serious titles in the newspaper, what "Sino-Japanese negotiations are getting better", "China is going there", they are all right, chewed, really like olives, very aftertaste.见于报章上的广告的，也有的是。我们知道有一种刊物，自说是“舆论界的新权威”，“说出一般人所想说而没有说的话”，而一面又在向别一种刊物“声明误会，表示歉意”，但又说是“按双方均为社会有声誉之刊物，自无互相攻讦之理”。“新权威”而善于“误会”，“误会”了而偏“有声誉”，“一般人所想说而没有说的话”却是误会和道歉：这要不笑，是必须不会思索的。
Some are seen in newspaper advertisements. We know that there is a kind of publication that claims to be "the new authority in the world of public opinion" and "says what ordinary people want to say but does not say", and on the other hand, it "declares misunderstanding and apologizes" to another publication, but also says that "according to the publications of both parties with a good reputation in society, there is no reason to attack each other". "New authority" is good at "misunderstanding", "misunderstanding" but "has a reputation", "what ordinary people want to say but not say" is misunderstanding and apology: this must not be thought of.见于报章的短评上的，也有的是。例如九月间《自由谈》所载的《登龙术拾遗》上，以做富家女婿为“登龙”之一术，不久就招来了一篇反攻，那开首道：“狐狸吃不到葡萄，说葡萄是酸的，自己娶不到富妻子，于是对于一切有富岳家的人发生了妒嫉，妒嫉的结果是攻击。”这也不能想一下。一想“的结果”，便分明是这位作者在表明他知道“富妻子”的味道是甜的了。
It is also seen in the short reviews of the newspaper. For example, in the "Collection of the Art of Ascending the Dragon" published in "Free Talk" in September, being the son-in-law of a rich family was one of the techniques of "ascending the dragon", and soon attracted a counterattack, which began: "The fox can't eat grapes, saying that grapes are sour, and he can't marry a rich wife, so he is jealous of all those who have a rich family, and the result of jealousy is an attack." "You can't think about it either. When I think about the "result", it is clear that the author is showing that he knows that the taste of "rich wife" is sweet.诸如此类的妙文，我们也尝见于冠冕堂皇的公文上：而且并非将它漫画化了的，却是它本身原来是漫画。《论语》一年中，我最爱看“古香斋”这一栏，如四川营山县长禁穿长衫令云：“须知衣服蔽体已足，何必前拖后曳，消耗布匹？且国势衰弱，……顾念时艰，后患何堪设想？”又如北平社会局禁女人养雄犬文云：“查雌女雄犬相处，非仅有碍健康，更易发生无耻秽闻，揆之我国礼义之邦，亦为习俗所不许。谨特通令严禁……凡妇女带养之雄犬，斩之无赦，以为取缔！”这那里是滑稽作家所能凭空写得出来的？
We have also seen such wonderful writings in high-sounding official documents: and it is not a caricature, but it itself is originally a caricature. In the year of the Analects, I like to read the column "Guxiangzhai", such as the order of the governor of Yingshan County, Sichuan Province to prohibit the wearing of long gowns: "You must know that the clothes cover the body enough, why drag forward and backward, consume cloth?" Moreover, the country's power is weakening,...... Considering the difficult times, how can we imagine future troubles? Another example is the Peking Social Bureau's article prohibiting women from raising male dogs: "Checking the relationship between male and female male dogs is not only harmful to health, but also prone to shameless scandals, and it is also not allowed by custom in our country's country of propriety and righteousness." It is strictly prohibited by the order...... All male dogs raised by women should be killed without mercy, and they should be banned! "Is this something that a burlesque writer can write out of thin air?不过“古香斋”里所收的妙文，往往还倾于奇诡，滑稽却不如平淡，惟其平淡，也就更加滑稽，在这一标准上，我推选“甜葡萄”说。
However, the wonderful articles collected in "Guxiangzhai" are often bizarre, funny but not as ordinary, but they are plain, and they are even more funny, and on this criterion, I choose "sweet grapes" to say.十月十九日。
October 19th.

外国也有

外国也有

外国也有

There are also foreign countries符灵
Rune凡中国所有的，外国也都有。
Everything that is owned by China is also owned by foreign countries.外国人说中国多臭虫，但西洋也有臭虫；日本人笑中国人好弄文字，但日本人也一样的弄文字。不抵抗的有甘地；禁打外人的有希特拉；狄昆希吸鸦片；陀思妥夫斯基赌得发昏。斯惠夫德带枷，马克斯反动。林白大佐的儿子，就给绑匪绑去了。而裹脚和高跟鞋，相差也不见得有多么远。
Foreigners say that there are many bed bugs in China, but there are also bed bugs in the West; The Japanese laugh at the Chinese for being good at writing, but the Japanese also play with words. Those who do not resist are Gandhi; Hitler was forbidden to beat outsiders; Di Quinn smoked opium; Dostovsky gambled into a coma. Swiff was shackled, and Max was reactionary. Colonel Lin Bai's son was kidnapped by the kidnappers. And the difference between wrapped feet and high heels is not necessarily that far.只有外国人说我们不问公益，只知自利，爱金钱，却还是没法辩解。民国以来，有过许多总统和阔官了，下野之后，都是面团团的，或赋诗，或看戏，或念佛，吃着不尽，真也好像给批评者以证据。不料今天却被我发见了：外国也有的！
Only foreigners say that we don't care about public welfare, we only know self-interest, and we love money, but we still can't defend ourselves. Since the Republic of China, there have been many presidents and officials, and after going to the field, they are all doughy, or composing poems, or watching plays, or chanting Buddha, eating endlessly, which really seems to give evidence to critics. Unexpectedly, I found it today: there are also in foreign countries!“十七日哈伐那电——避居加拿大之古巴前总统麦查度……在古巴之产业，计值八百万美元，凡能对渠担保收回此项财产者，无论何人，渠愿与以援助。又一消息，谓古巴政府已对麦及其旧僚属三十八人下逮捕令，并扣押渠等之财产，其数达二千五百万美元。……”
"Havana Electricity 17 - Former Cuban President Machado who took refuge in Canada...... The property in Cuba is worth $8 million, and anyone who can guarantee the recovery of this property is willing to help anyone. In another news, it is said that the Cuban government has issued arrest warrants for Mai and 38 of his former associates, as well as seized the property of McCain and others, amounting to $25 million. ……”以三十八人之多，而财产一共只有这区区二千五百万美元，手段虽不能谓之高，但有些近乎发财却总是确凿的，这已足为我们的“上峰”雪耻。不过我还希望他们在外国买有地皮，在外国银行里另有存款，那么，我们和外人折冲樽俎的时候，就更加振振有辞了。
With as many as 38 people, and the total wealth is only 25 million US dollars, although the means cannot be said to be high, but some of them are almost rich but always conclusive, which is enough to avenge our "peak". However, I also hope that they will buy land in foreign countries and have other deposits in foreign banks, so that when we negotiate with outsiders, we will be even more excited.假使世界上只有一家有臭虫，而遭别人指摘的时候，实在也不大舒服的，但捉起来却也真费事。况且北京有一种学说，说臭虫是捉不得的，越捉越多。即使捉尽了，又有什么价值呢，不过是一种消极的办法。最好还是希望别家也有臭虫，而竟发见了就更好。发见，这是积极的事业。哥仑布与爱迪生，也不过有了发见或发明而已。
If there is only one family in the world with bed bugs, and it is really uncomfortable when others criticize them, but it is really troublesome to catch them. Moreover, there is a theory in Beijing that bed bugs cannot be caught, and the more they are caught, the more they are caught. Even if you catch them all, what is the value, but it is a negative method. It's best to hope that other people also have bed bugs, and it's even better if you find them. It is found that this is a positive cause. Columbus and Edison only made discoveries or inventions.与其劳心劳力，不如玩跳舞，喝咖啡。外国也有的，巴黎就有许多跳舞场和咖啡店。
Instead of working hard, it is better to play dancing and drink coffee. There are also many dance halls and coffee shops in Paris.即使连中国都不见了，也何必大惊小怪呢，君不闻迦勒底与马基顿乎？——外国也有的！
Even if China is gone, why make a fuss, haven't you heard of Chaldea and Macedonia? ——There are also foreign countries!十月十九日。
October 19th.

扑空

扑空

扑空

Empty丰之余
Abundant surplus自从《自由谈》上发表了我的《感旧》和施蛰存先生的《〈庄子〉与〈文选〉》以后，《大晚报》的《火炬》便在征求展开的讨论。首先征到的是施先生的一封信，题目曰《推荐者的立场》，注云“《庄子》与《文选》的论争”。
Since the publication of my "Nostalgia for the Past" and Mr. Shi Zhicun's "Zhuangzi and Anthology" in "Free Talk", the "Torch" of the "Great Evening News" has been soliciting discussions. The first thing I received was a letter from Mr. Shi, titled "The Position of the Recommender", with the note "The Controversy between Zhuangzi and the Anthology".但施先生又并不愿意“论争”，他以为两个人作战，正如弧光灯下的拳击手，无非给看客好玩。这是很聪明的见解，我赞成这一肢一节。不过更聪明的是施先生其实并非真没有动手，他在未说退场白之前，早已挥了几拳了。挥了之后，飘然远引，倒是最超脱的拳法。现在只剩下一个我了，却还得回一手，但对面没人也不要紧，我算是在打“逍遥游”。
But Mr. Shi is not willing to "argue", he thinks that two people fighting, just like a boxer under the arc light, is nothing more than fun for the spectators. This is a very clever opinion, and I agree with this section. But what's smarter is that Mr. Shi didn't really do anything, he had already thrown a few punches before he said his exit. After swinging, it floated away, but it was the most transcendent boxing technique. Now there is only one me left, but I have to take a hand back, but it doesn't matter if there is no one on the other side, I am playing "Getaway".施先生一开首就说我加以“训诲”，而且派他为“遗少的一肢一节”。上一句是诬赖的，我的文章中，并未对于他个人有所劝告。至于指为“遗少的一肢一节”，却诚然有这意思，不过我的意思，是以为“遗少”也并非怎么很坏的人物。新文学和旧文学中间难有截然的分界，施先生是承认的，辛亥革命去今不过二十二年，则民国人中带些遗少气，遗老气，甚而至于封建气，也还不算甚么大怪事，更何况如施先生自己所说，“虽然不敢自认为遗少，但的确已消失了少年的活力”的呢，过去的余气当然要有的。但是，只要自己知道，别人也知道，能少传授一点，那就好了。
Mr. Shi said at the beginning that I would "instruct" him, and sent him as "a limb and a section of the missing". The previous sentence was false, and in my article, I did not give him any advice personally. As for referring to "one limb and one section of the young man", it does mean this, but what I mean is that I think that "young people" are not very bad characters. It is difficult to have a sharp boundary between new literature and old literature, Mr. Shi admits that the Xinhai Revolution has only been 22 years since then, and the people of the Republic of China have some youth, old spirit, and even feudal spirit, which is not a big strange thing, not to mention that as Mr. Shi himself said, "Although I dare not think that I am a young man, but the vitality of the youth has indeed disappeared", of course there must be a residual atmosphere in the past. However, as long as you know, others know, and you can teach a little less, that's fine.我早经声明，先前的文字是并非专为他个人而作的，而且自看了《〈庄子〉与〈文选〉》之后，则连这“一肢一节”也已经疏远。为什么呢，因为在推荐给青年的几部书目上，还题出着别一个极有意味的问题：其中有一种是《颜氏家训》。这《家训》的作者，生当乱世，由齐入隋，一直是胡势大张的时候，他在那书里，也谈古典，论文章，儒士似的，却又归心于佛，而对于子弟，则愿意他们学鲜卑语，弹琵琶，以服事贵人——胡人。这也是庚子义和拳败后的达官，富翁，巨商，士人的思想，自己念佛，子弟却学些“洋务”，使将来可以事人：便是现在，抱这样思想的人恐怕还不少。而这颜氏的渡世法，竟打动了施先生的心了，还推荐于青年，算是“道德修养”。他又举出自己在读的书籍，是一部英文书和一部佛经，正为“鲜卑语”和《归心篇》写照。只是现代变化急速，没有前人的悠闲，新旧之争，又正剧烈，一下子看不出什么头绪，他就也只好将先前两代的“道德”，并萃于一身了。假使青年，中年，老年，有着这颜氏式道德者多，则在中国社会上，实是一个严重的问题，有荡涤的必要。自然，这虽为书目所引起，问题是不专在个人的，这是时代思潮的一部。但因为连带提出，表面上似有太关涉了某一个人之观，我便不敢论及了，可以和他相关的只有“劝人看《庄子》《文选》了”八个字，对于个人，恐怕还不能算是不敬的。但待到看了《〈庄子〉与〈文选〉》，却实在生了一点不敬之心，因为他辩驳的话比我所豫料的还空虚，但仍给以正经的答复，那便是《感旧以后》（上）。
I have already stated that the previous text was not written for him personally, and since reading "Zhuangzi" and "Selected Works", even this "limb and section" has been alienated. Why, because in several books recommended to young people, there is another very meaningful question: one of them is "Yan's Family Instructions". The author of this "Family Instruction", born in troubled times, from Qi to Sui, has always been when Hu Shi is strong, in that book, he also talks about the classics, on articles, like a Confucian, but he is devoted to Buddhism, and for his children, he is willing to learn Xianbei language, play the pipa, and serve the nobles - Hu people. This is also the thinking of dignitaries, rich people, giant businessmen, and scholars after the defeat of Gengzi Yihe, who chanted Buddha by themselves, but their children learned some "foreign affairs", so that they could serve others in the future: even now, I am afraid that there are still many people with such thoughts. And this Yan's method of crossing the world actually touched Mr. Shi's heart, and he also recommended it to young people, which can be regarded as "moral cultivation". He also cited the books he was reading, an English book and a Buddhist scripture, which were portrayed as "Xianbei language" and "Returning to the Heart". It's just that modern times are changing rapidly, there is no leisure of the predecessors, and the dispute between the old and the new is fierce, and he can't see any clue at once, so he has to concentrate the "morality" of the previous two generations into one. If there are many young people, middle-aged people, and old people who have this Yan's morality, it is really a serious problem in Chinese society, and it is necessary to clean it up. Naturally, although this is caused by the bibliography, the problem is not limited to the individual, this is a part of the trend of the times. But because it was jointly proposed, it seemed to be too related to a certain person's view on the surface, so I didn't dare to discuss it, and the only words that could be related to him were "persuading people to read "Zhuangzi" and "Anthology", which may not be disrespectful to individuals. But when I read "Zhuangzi" and "Selected Works", I really felt a little disrespectful, because his arguments were more empty than I expected, but he still gave a serious answer, which was "After Feeling the Past" (Part I).然而施先生的写在看了《感旧以后》（上）之后的那封信，却更加证明了他和我所谓“遗少”的疏远。他虽然口说不来拳击，那第一段却全是对我个人而发的。现在介绍一点在这里，并且加以注解。
However, Mr. Shi's letter after reading "After Feeling the Old" (Part I) further proves the estrangement between him and my so-called "young people". Although he couldn't say boxing, the first paragraph was all about me personally. Now I will introduce a little bit here and annotate it.施先生说：“据我想起来，劝青年看新书自然比劝他们看旧书能够多获得一些群众。”这是说，劝青年看新书的，并非为了青年，倒是为自己要多获些群众。
Mr. Shi said: "As far as I can remember, persuading young people to read new books is naturally more popular than persuading them to read old books. This means that persuading young people to read new books is not for the sake of young people, but for themselves to gain more masses.施先生说：“我想借贵报的一角篇幅，将……书目改一下：我想把《庄子》与《文选》改为鲁迅先生的《华盖集》正续编及《伪自由书》。我想，鲁迅先生为当代‘文坛老将’，他的著作里是有着很广大的活字汇的，而且据丰之余先生告诉我，鲁迅先生文章里的确也有一些从《庄子》与《文选》里出来的字眼，譬如‘之乎者也’之类。这样，我想对于青年人的效果也是一样的。”这一大堆的话，是说，我之反对推荐《庄子》与《文选》，是因为恨他没有推荐《华盖集》正续编与《伪自由书》的缘故。
Mr. Shi said: "I want to use a corner of your newspaper to make ...... Change the bibliography: I would like to change "Zhuangzi" and "Anthology" to the continuation of Mr. Lu Xun's "Huagai Collection" and "Pseudo-Free Book". I think that Mr. Lu Xun is a contemporary 'literary veteran', and his works have a large collection of movable words, and according to Mr. Feng Zhiyu, Mr. Lu Xun's articles do have some words from "Zhuangzi" and "Anthology", such as 'Zhihu Ye'. In this way, I think the effect is the same for young people. This large number of words means that my opposition to recommending "Zhuangzi" and "Anthology" is because I hate that he did not recommend the continuation of the "Huagai Collection" and the "Pseudo-Freedom Book".施先生说：“本来我还想推荐一二部丰之余先生的著作，可惜坊间只有丰子恺先生的书，而没有丰之余先生的书，说不定他是像鲁迅先生印珂罗版木刻图一样的是私人精印本，属于罕见书之列，我很惭愧我的孤陋寡闻，未能推荐矣。”这一段话，有些语无伦次了，好像是说：我之反对推荐《庄子》与《文选》，是因为恨他没有推荐我的书，然而我又并无书，然而恨他不推荐，可笑之至矣。
Mr. Shi said: "Originally, I wanted to recommend one or two of Mr. Feng Zhiyu's works, but unfortunately there are only Mr. Feng Zikai's books in the market, and there is no Mr. Feng Zhiyu's book, maybe he is like Mr. Lu Xun's printing of the Keluo version of the woodcut, which is a private hard print, which belongs to the rare books, and I am ashamed of my ignorance and ignorance, and I have not been able to recommend it." This passage is a bit incoherent, as if to say: I oppose recommending "Zhuangzi" and "Anthology" because I hate him for not recommending my book, but I don't have a book, but I hate him for not recommending it, which is ridiculous.这是“从国文教师转到编杂志”，劝青年去看《庄子》与《文选》，《论语》，《孟子》，《颜氏家训》的施蛰存先生，看了我的《感旧以后》（上）一文后，“不想再写什么”而终于写出来了的文章，辞退做“拳击手”，而先行拳击别人的拳法。但他竟毫不提主张看《庄子》与《文选》的较坚实的理由，毫不指出我那《感旧》与《感旧以后》（上）两篇中间的错误，他只有无端的诬赖，自己的猜测，撒娇，装傻。几部古书的名目一撕下，“遗少”的肢节也就跟着渺渺茫茫，到底是现出本相：明明白白的变了“洋场恶少”了。
This is "from a Chinese teacher to a magazine", persuading young people to read "Zhuangzi" and "Anthology", "Analects", "Mencius", "Yan's Family Teachings" Mr. Shi Zhicun, after reading my article "After Feeling the Old" (Part I), "I don't want to write anything more" and finally wrote an article, dismissed as a "boxer", and boxed other people's boxing first. But he didn't mention the more solid reasons for advocating reading "Zhuangzi" and "Anthology", and did not point out the mistakes in the middle of my two articles, "Feeling the Old" and "After Feeling the Old" (Part I), he only had groundless false accusations, his own guesses, coquettishness, and pretending to be stupid. As soon as the names of several ancient books are torn off, the limbs and joints of the "relics" are also vague, and they show their true nature: they have clearly changed into "foreign villains".十月二十日。
October 20th.

扑空

【备考】：

扑空

[Remarks]:推荐者的立场The position of the recommender ——《庄子》与《文选》之论争 - the debate between "Zhuangzi" and "Selected Works"
施蛰存
Shi hibernation exists万秋先生：
Mr. Wan Qiu:我在贵报向青年推荐了两部旧书，不幸引起了丰之余先生的训诲，把我派做“遗少中的一肢一节”。自从读了他老人家的《感旧以后》（上）一文后，我就不想再写什么，因为据我想起来，劝新青年看新书自然比劝他们看旧书能够多获得一些群众。丰之余先生毕竟是老当益壮，足为青年人的领导者。至于我呢，虽然不敢自认为遗少，但的确已消失了少年的活力，在这万象皆秋的环境中，即使丰之余先生那样的新精神，亦已不够振拔我的中年之感了。所以，我想借贵报一角篇幅，将我在九月二十九日贵报上发表的推荐给青年的书目改一下：我想把《庄子》与《文选》改为鲁迅先生的《华盖集》正续编及《伪自由书》。我想，鲁迅先生为当代“文坛老将”，他的著作里是有着很广大的活字汇的，而且据丰之余先生告诉我，鲁迅先生文章里的确也有一些从《庄子》与《文选》里出来的字眼，譬如“之乎者也”之类。这样，我想对于青年人的效果也是一样的。本来我还想推荐一二部丰之余先生的著作，可惜坊间只有丰子恺先生的书，而没有丰之余先生的书，说不定他是像鲁迅先生印珂罗版木刻图一样的是私人精印本，属于罕见书之列，我很惭愧我的孤陋寡闻，未能推荐矣。
I recommended two old books to young people in your newspaper, but unfortunately it caused Mr. Feng Zhiyu's admonition and sent me as "a limb and a section among the young people". Since reading his old man's article "After Feeling the Old" (Part I), I don't want to write anything more, because as far as I can remember, persuading new young people to read new books is naturally more popular than persuading them to read old books. After all, Mr. Feng Zhiyu is a leader of young people. As for me, although I dare not consider myself a young man, I have indeed lost the vitality of a young man, and in this environment where everything is autumn, even a new spirit like Mr. Feng Zhiyu is no longer enough to lift my middle-aged feeling. Therefore, I would like to take advantage of a corner of your newspaper to change the bibliography I recommended to young people published in your newspaper on September 29: I would like to change "Zhuangzi" and "Selected Works" to the main continuation of Mr. Lu Xun's "Huagai Collection" and "Pseudo-Free Book". I think that Mr. Lu Xun is a contemporary "literary veteran", and his works have a large vocabulary of movable characters, and according to Mr. Feng Zhiyu, Mr. Lu Xun's articles do have some words from "Zhuangzi" and "Anthology", such as "Zhihu Ye". In this way, I think the effect is the same for young people. Originally, I wanted to recommend one or two of Mr. Feng Zhiyu's works, but unfortunately there are only Mr. Feng Zikai's books, and there are no books by Mr. Feng Zhiyu, maybe he is a private fine print like Mr. Lu Xun's printing of the Keluo edition, which belongs to the rare books, and I am ashamed of my ignorance and failure to recommend it.此外，我还想将丰之余先生介绍给贵报，以后贵报倘若有关于征求意见之类的计划，大可设法寄一份表格给丰之余先生，我想一定能够供给一点有价值的意见的。不过，如果那征求是与“遗少的一肢一节”有关系的话，那倒不妨寄给我。
In addition, I would like to introduce Mr. Feng Zhiyu to your newspaper, and if your newspaper has plans to solicit opinions in the future, you can try to send a form to Mr. Feng Zhiyu, and I think I will be able to provide some valuable opinions. However, if the solicitation is related to "one limb and one section of the missing person", then you might as well send it to me.看见昨天的贵报，知道你预备将这桩公案请贵报的读者来参加讨论。我不知能不能请求你取销这个计划。我常常想，两个人在报纸上作文字战，其情形正如弧光灯下的拳击手，而报纸编辑正如那赶来赶去的瘦裁判，读者呢，就是那些在黑暗里的无理智的看客。瘦裁判总希望拳击手一回合又一回合地打下去，直到其中的一个倒了下来，One，Two，Three……站不起来，于是跑到那喘着气的胜者身旁去，举起他的套大皮手套的膀子，高喊着“Mr．X Win the Champion．”你试想想看，这岂不是太滑稽吗？现在呢，我不幸而自己做了这两个拳击手中间的一个，但是我不想为了瘦裁判和看客而继续扮演这滑稽戏了。并且也希望你不要做那瘦裁判。你不看见今天《自由谈》上止水先生的文章中引着那几句俗语吗？“舌头是扁的，说话是圆的”，难道你以为从读者的讨论中会得有真是非产生出来呢？
Seeing yesterday's newspaper, I know that you are going to invite the readers of your newspaper to participate in the discussion of this case. I don't know if I can ask you to cancel this plan. I often think that two people are fighting a word war in a newspaper, like a boxer under an arc light, and the newspaper editor is like the thin referee rushing around, and the readers are those irrational spectators in the dark. The skinny referee always wants the boxer to fight round after round until one of them falls, one, two, three...... Unable to stand up, he ran to the panting winner, raised his arm with big leather gloves, and shouted "Mr. X Win the Champion." Just think about it, isn't that too funny? Now, I have the misfortune of being one of these two boxers myself, but I don't want to continue playing this burlesque for the sake of thin referees and spectators. And I also hope you don't be that thin referee. Don't you see those sayings quoted in Mr. Shishui's article on "Free Talk" today? "The tongue is flat, and the speech is round", do you think that there will be truth and non-truth from the reader's discussion?施蛰存。十月十八日。
Shi hibernation exists. October 18th.十月十九日，《大晚报》《火炬》。
October 19, "Big Evening News" "Torch".《扑空》正误
"Flying in the air" is wrong丰之余
Abundant surplus前几天写《扑空》的时候，手头没有书，涉及《颜氏家训》之处，仅凭记忆，后来怕有错误，设法觅得原书来查了一查，发见对于颜之推的记述，是我弄错了。其《教子篇》云：“齐朝有一士大夫，尝谓吾曰：我有一儿，年已十七，颇晓书疏，教其鲜卑语，及弹琵琶，稍欲通解，以此伏事公卿，无不宠爱，亦要事也。吾时俛而不答。异哉此人之教子也。若由此业，自致卿相，亦不愿汝曹为之。”
When I wrote "Fluttering" a few days ago, I didn't have a book at hand, and it involved the "Yan's Family Instructions", based only on memory, and later I was afraid of making mistakes, so I managed to find the original book to check, and found that I made a mistake in the account of Yan Zhitui. His "Teaching the Son" says: "In the Qi Dynasty, there was a scholar and official who once said to me: I have a son, seventeen years old, who is quite knowledgeable in books, taught him Xianbei language, and played the pipa, hoping to understand a little, so that he could serve the nobles, and everyone was favored, which was also important. I sometimes bowed down and did not answer. It's strange that this person teaches his son. If you become a minister because of this profession, I do not want you to do it. ”然则齐士的办法，是庚子以后官商士绅的办法，施蛰存先生却是合齐士与颜氏的两种典型为一体的，也是现在一部分的人们的办法，可改称为“北朝式道德”，也还是社会上的严重的问题。
However, the method of Qi Shi is the method of officials, businessmen, and gentry after Gengzi, but Mr. Shi Zhicun is a combination of the two typical examples of Qi Shi and the Yan family, and it is also the method of some people now, which can be renamed "Northern Dynasty-style morality", which is still a serious problem in society.对于颜氏，本应该十分抱歉的，但他早经死去了，谢罪与否都不相干，现在只在这里对于施先生和读者订正我的错误。
For Yan, I should have been very sorry, but he died a long time ago, and it doesn't matter whether he apologizes or not, and now I am only here to correct my mistakes for Mr. Shi and readers.十月二十五日。
October 25th.突围
Breakthrough施蛰存
Shi hibernation exists（八）对于丰之余先生，我的确曾经“打了几拳”，这也许会成为我毕生的遗憾。但是丰先生作《扑空》，其实并未“空”，还是扑的我，站在丰先生那一方面（或者说站在正邪说那方面）的文章却每天都在“剿”我，而我却真有“一个人的受难”之感了。
(8) For Mr. Feng Zhiyu, I did "punch a few times", which may become my lifelong regret. But Mr. Feng's "Empty" is actually not "empty", but still pounces on me, and the articles on Mr. Feng's side (or on the side of good and evil) are "suppressing" me every day, but I really have a sense of "one person's suffering".但是，从《扑空》一文中我发现了丰先生作文的逻辑，他说“我早经声明，先前的文字并非专为他个人而发的”。但下文却有“因为他辩驳的话比我所预料的还空虚”。不专为我而发，但已经预料我会辩驳，这又该作何解？
However, I found the logic of Mr. Feng's composition from the article "Fluttering", he said, "I have already stated that the previous text was not written for him personally." But the following is "because his arguments are more empty than I expected". It's not just for me, but I already expect that I will argue, so what should I do?因为被人“指摘”了，我也觉得《庄子》与《文选》这两本书诚有不妥处，于是在给《大晚报》编辑的信里，要求他许我改两部新文学书，事实确是如此的。我并不说丰先生是恨我没有推荐这两部新文学书而“反对《庄子》与《文选》”的，而丰先生却说我存着这样的心思，这又岂是“有伦次”的话呢？
Because I was "criticized", I also felt that the two books "Zhuangzi" and "Anthology" were indeed inappropriate, so in a letter to the editor of the "Evening News", I asked him to allow me to change two new literary books, and this is indeed the case. I don't say that Mr. Feng hates me for not recommending these two new literary books and "opposes Zhuangzi" and "Selected Works", but Mr. Feng said that I have such a mind, how can this be a "coherent" word?丰先生又把话题搭到《颜氏家训》，又搭到我自己正在读的两本书，并为一谈，说推荐《颜氏家训》是在教青年学鲜卑语，弹琵琶，以服事贵人，而且我还以身作则，在读一本洋书；说颜之推是“儒士似的，却又归心于佛”，因而我也看一本佛书；从丰先生的解释看起来，竟连我自己也失笑了，天下事真会这样巧！
Mr. Feng also put the topic on "Yan's Family Instructions", and then to the two books I am reading, and said that recommending "Yan's Family Teachings" is teaching young people to learn Xianbei language, play the pipa, and serve the nobles, and I am also leading by example, reading a foreign book; said that Yan Zhitui was "like a Confucian scholar, but he was devoted to Buddha", so I also read a Buddhist book; From Mr. Feng's explanation, even I laughed myself, things in the world are really so coincidental!我明明记得，《颜氏家训》中的确有一个故事，说有人教子弟学鲜卑语，学琵琶，但我还记得底下有一句：“亦不愿汝曹为之”，可见颜之推并不劝子弟读外国书。今天丰先生有“正误”了，他把这故事更正了之后，却说：“施蛰存先生却是合齐士与颜氏的两种典型为一体的。”这个，我倒不懂了，难道我另外还介绍过一本该“齐士”的著作给青年人吗？如果丰先生这逻辑是根据于“自己读外国书即劝人学鲜卑语”，那我也没话可说了。
I clearly remember that there is indeed a story in the "Yan's Family Instructions", saying that someone taught his children to learn Xianbei language and pipa, but I still remember a sentence at the bottom: "I don't want you to do it", which shows that Yan Zhitui did not persuade his children to read foreign books. Today, Mr. Feng has a "right and wrong", and after he corrected the story, he said: "Mr. Shi Zhicun is one of the two typical examples of Qi Shi and Yan." "I don't understand this, have I introduced another book that should be "Qi Shi" to young people? If Mr. Feng's logic is based on "persuading others to learn Xianbei by reading foreign books", then I have nothing to say.丰先生似乎是个想为儒家争正统的人物，不然何以对于颜之推受佛教影响如此之鄙薄呢？何以对于我自己看一本《释迦传》如此之不满呢？这里，有两点可以题出来：（一）《颜氏家训》一书之价值是否因《归心篇》而完全可以抹杀？况且颜氏虽然为佛教张目，但他倒并不鼓吹出世，逃避现实，他也不过列举佛家与儒家有可以并行不悖之点，而采佛家报应之说，以补儒家道德教训之不足，这也可以说等于现在人引《圣经》或《可兰经》中的话一样。（二）我看一本《佛本行经》，其意义也等于看一本《谟罕默德传》或《基督传》，既无皈佛之心，更无劝人学佛之行，而丰先生的文章却说是我的“渡世法”，妙哉言乎，我不免取案头的一本某先生舍金上梓的《百喻经》而引为同志矣。
Mr. Feng seems to be a figure who wants to fight for Confucianism for orthodoxy, otherwise why is Yan Zhitui so despicable of being influenced by Buddhism? Why am I so dissatisfied with reading a copy of "The Biography of Shakyamuni"? Here, two points can be asked: (1) Can the value of the book "Yan's Family Instructions" be completely erased by "Returning to the Heart"? Moreover, although Yan Shi is open for Buddhism, he does not advocate being born and escaping reality, and he only lists the points that Buddhism and Confucianism can go hand in hand, and adopts the Buddhist theory of retribution to make up for the lack of Confucian moral teachings, which can also be said to be equivalent to quoting the words in the Bible or the Koran now. (2) I read a copy of the "Buddha's Conduct Sutra", and its meaning is equivalent to reading a "Biography of Mohammed" or "The Biography of Christ", which has neither the heart of converting to Buddhism, nor the act of persuading people to learn Buddhism, but Mr. Feng's article says that it is my "method of crossing the world".我以前对于丰先生，虽然文字上有点太闹意气，但的确还是表示尊敬的，但看到《扑空》这一篇，他竟骂我为“洋场恶少”了，切齿之声俨若可闻，我虽“恶”，却也不敢再恶到以相当的恶声相报了。我呢，套一句现成诗：“十年一觉文坛梦，赢得洋场恶少名”，原是无足重轻，但对于丰先生，我想该是会得后悔的。今天读到《〈扑空〉正误》，则又觉得丰先生所谓“无端的诬赖，自己的猜测，撒娇，装傻”，又正好留着给自己“写照”了。
I used to respect Mr. Feng, although the text was a little too noisy, but I still respected him, but when I saw the article "Puff in the Sky", he actually scolded me as a "villain in the foreign field", and the sound of gnashing my teeth was audible, although I was "evil", I didn't dare to repay it with a considerable bad voice. As for me, a ready-made poem: "Ten years of literary dreams, winning the name of a villain in the foreign field", it was originally insignificant, but for Mr. Feng, I think he will regret it. Today, when I read "The Right and Wrong of 'Punching the Sky'", I feel that Mr. Feng's so-called "groundless slander, his own guesses, acting coquettishly, and pretending to be stupid" is just reserved for himself to "portray".（附注）《大晚报》上那两个标题并不是我自己加的，我并无“立场”，也并不愿意因我之故而使《庄子》与《文选》这两部书争吵起来。
(Note) The two headlines in the "Evening News" were not added by myself, I have no "position", and I do not want to quarrel with the two books "Zhuangzi" and "Anthology" because of me.右答丰之余先生。（二十七日）。
The right answer is Mr. Feng Zhiyu. (27th).十月三十一日，十一月一日，《自由谈》。October 31, November 1, "Free Talk".

答“兼示”

答“兼示”

答“兼示”

Answer: "Also indicated"丰之余
Abundant surplus前几天写了一篇《扑空》之后，对于什么“《庄子》与《文选》”之类，本也不想再说了。第二天看见了《自由谈》上的施蛰存先生《致黎烈文先生书》，也是“兼示”我的，就再来说几句。因为施先生驳复我的三项，我觉得都不中肯——
After writing an article "Pukong" a few days ago, I didn't want to say anything more about "Zhuangzi" and "Anthology". The next day, I saw Mr. Shi Zhicun's "Letter to Mr. Li Liewen" in "Free Talk", which also "showed" me, so I will say a few more words. Because Mr. Shi refuted my three items, I don't think they are all pertinent -（一）施先生说，既然“有些新青年可以有旧思想，有些旧形式也可以藏新内容”，则像他似的“遗少之群中的一肢一节”的旧思想也可以存而不论，而且写《庄子》那样的古文也不妨了。自然，倘要这样写，也可以说“不妨”的，宇宙决不会因此破灭。但我总以为现在的青年，大可以不必舍白话不写，却另去熟读了《庄子》，学了它那样的文法来写文章。至于存而不论，那固然也可以，然而论及又有何妨呢？施先生对于青年之文法拙直，字汇少，和我的《感旧》，不是就不肯“存而不论”么？
(1) Mr. Shi said that since "some new young people can have old ideas, and some old forms can also hide new content", the old ideas of "one limb and one section in the group of leftovers" like him can also be preserved and ignored, and it is not a bad idea to write ancient texts like "Zhuangzi". Naturally, if you want to write like this, you can also say "it might be fine", and the universe will never be destroyed because of this. But I always think that today's young people don't have to give up the vernacular and not write, but they have read "Zhuangzi" and learned its grammar to write articles. As for whether it exists or not, it is certainly possible, but what harm is there in discussing it? Didn't Mr. Shi refuse to "save and ignore" the young man's clumsy and straightforward grammar, few words, and my "nostalgia"?（二）施先生以为“以词取士”，和劝青年看《庄子》与《文选》有“强迫”与“贡献”之分，我的比例并不对。但我不知道施先生做国文教员的时候，对于学生的作文，是否以富有《庄子》文法与《文选》字汇者为佳文，转为编辑之后，也以这样的作品为上选？假使如此，则倘作“考官”，我看是要以《庄子》与《文选》取士的。
(2) Mr. Shi thinks that "taking scholars by words" and persuading young people to read "Zhuangzi" and "Anthology" are divided into "forced" and "contributed", but my ratio is not right. But I don't know if when Mr. Shi was a Chinese teacher, did he choose those who are rich in the grammar of "Zhuangzi" and the vocabulary of "Selected Works" for students' compositions, and after becoming an editor, he also chose such works? If this is the case, then if you are an "examiner", I think you should use "Zhuangzi" and "Selected Works" to select scholars.（三）施先生又举鲁迅的话，说他曾经说过：一，“少看中国书，其结果不过不能作文而已。”可见是承认了要能作文，该多看中国书；二，“……我以为倘要弄旧的呢，倒不如姑且靠着张之洞的《书目答问》去摸门径去。”就知道没有反对青年读古书过。这是施先生忽略了时候和环境。他说一条的那几句的时候，正是许多人大叫要作白话文，也非读古书不可之际，所以那几句是针对他们而发的，犹言即使恰如他们所说，也不过不能作文，而去读古书，却比不能作文之害还大。至于二，则明明指定着研究旧文学的青年，和施先生的主张，涉及一般的大异。倘要弄中国上古文学史，我们不是还得看《易经》与《书经》么？
(3) Mr. Shi also cited Lu Xun's words, saying that he once said: 1. "Read less Chinese books, and the result is just that you can't write." It can be seen that it is admitted that if you want to be able to write, you should read more Chinese books; 2. "...... I thought that if I wanted to get an old one, it would be better to rely on Zhang Zhidong's "Bibliographic Q&A" to find the door. "I know that I have never opposed young people reading ancient books. This is Mr. Shi's neglect of time and environment. When he said a few sentences, it was the time when many people shouted that they wanted to write vernacular texts, and they had to read ancient books, so those sentences were addressed to them, just as they said that even if they were right, they could not write, and reading ancient books was more harmful than not being able to write. As for the second, it clearly designates young people who study old literature, and Mr. Shi's ideas involve general differences. If we want to get the history of ancient Chinese literature, don't we have to read the "I Ching" and the "Book of Books"?其实，施先生说当他填写那书目的时候，并不如我所推测那样的严肃，我看这话倒是真实的。我们试想一想，假如真有这样的一个青年后学，奉命惟谨，下过一番苦功之后，用了《庄子》的文法，《文选》的语汇，来写发挥《论语》《孟子》和《颜氏家训》的道德的文章，“这岂不是太滑稽吗”？
In fact, Mr. Shi said that when he filled out the bibliography, it was not as serious as I guessed, but I think this is true. Let's think about it, if there is such a young scholar, who is ordered to be cautious, and after a lot of hard work, he uses the grammar of "Zhuangzi" and the vocabulary of "Anthology" to write articles that give full play to the morality of the "Analects", "Mencius" and "Yan's Family Teachings", "Isn't this too funny"?然而我的那篇《怀旧》是严肃的。我并非为要“多获群众”，也不是因为恨施先生没有推荐《华盖集》正续编及《伪自由书》；更不是别有“动机”，例如因为做学生时少得了分数，或投稿时被没收了稿子，现在就借此来报私怨。
However, my "Nostalgia" is serious. I am not trying to "win more people", nor is it because I hate Mr. Shi for not recommending the continuation of the "Huagai Collection" and the "Pseudo-Freedom Book"; It is not that there is no other "motive", such as because you got less points when you were a student, or because your manuscript was confiscated when you submitted it, and now you use this to take revenge.十月二十一日。
October 21st.

答“兼示”

【备考】：

答“兼示”

[Remarks]:致黎烈文先生书Letter to Mr. Li Liewen ——兼示丰之余先生 - Also to Mr. Feng Zhiyu
施蛰存
Shi hibernation exists烈文兄：
Brother Liewen:那天电车上匆匆一晤，我因为要到民九社书铺去买一本看中意了的书，所以在王家沙下车了。但那本书终于因价钱不合，没有买到，徒然失去了一个与你多谈一刻的机会，甚怅怅。
I hurriedly met on the tram that day, and I got off at Wangjiasha because I was going to go to the Minjiu Society bookstore to buy a book I liked. But the book was finally not bought due to the price, and I lost an opportunity to talk to you for a moment, which was very disappointing.关于“《庄子》与《文选》”问题，我决不再想说什么话。本来我当时填写《大晚报》编辑部寄来的那张表格的时候，并不含有如丰先生的意见所看出来的那样严肃。我并不说每一个青年必须看这两部书，也不是说每一个青年只要看这两部书，也并不是说我只有这两部书想推荐。大概报纸副刊的编辑，想借此添一点新花样，而填写者也大都是偶然觉得有什么书不妨看看，就随手写下了。早知这一写竟会闯出这样大的文字纠纷来，即使《大晚报》副刊编者崔万秋先生给我磕头我也不肯写的。今天看见《涛声》第四十期上有一封曹聚仁先生给我的信，最后一句是：“没有比这两部书更有利于青年了吗？敢问。”这一问真问得我啼笑皆非了。（曹聚仁先生的信态度很真挚，我将有一封复信给他，也许他会得刊在《涛声》上，我希望你看一看。）
Regarding the issue of "Zhuangzi and Anthology", I never want to say anything again. Originally, when I filled out the form sent by the editorial office of the "Evening News", it was not as serious as Mr. Feng's opinion suggested. I am not saying that every young person must read these two books, nor that every young person only needs to read these two books, nor that I only want to recommend these two books. Probably the editors of newspaper supplements want to add a little new trick to this, and most of the people who fill in it accidentally think that there are books that they might as well read, so they write them down. If I had known that this writing would cause such a big text dispute, even if Mr. Cui Wanqiu, the editor of the supplement of the "Evening News", kowtowed to me, I would not have written it. Today I saw a letter from Mr. Cao Juren to me in the 40th issue of "The Sound of the Waves", the last sentence of which was: "Isn't it more beneficial to young people than these two books?" I dare to ask. This question really made me laugh. (Mr. Cao Juren's letter attitude is very sincere, I will have a reply to him, maybe he will have to be published in "The Sound of the Waves", I hope you will take a look.) ）对于丰之余先生我也不愿再冒犯他，不过对于他在《感旧》（上）那一篇文章里三点另外的话觉得还有一点意见——
I don't want to offend Mr. Feng Zhiyu again, but I have a little opinion about his three other words in the article "Nostalgia for the Past" (Part 1) -（一）丰先生说：“有些新青年可以有旧思想，有些旧形式也可以藏新内容。”是的，新青年尚且可以有旧思想，那么像我这种“遗少之群中的一肢一节”之有旧思想似乎也可以存而不论的了。至于旧形式也可以藏新内容，则似乎写《庄子》那样的古文也不妨，只要看它的内容如何罢了。
(1) Mr. Feng said: "Some new young people can have old ideas, and some old forms can also hide new content. Yes, new young people can still have old ideas, so it seems that old ideas like me can also be left untouched. As for the old form can also hide new content, it seems that it is okay to write an ancient text like "Zhuangzi", as long as it depends on its content.（二）丰先生说不懂我劝青年看《庄子》与《文选》与做了考官以词取士有何分界，这其实是明明有着分界的。前者是以一己的意见供献给青年，接受不接受原在青年的自由；后者却是代表了整个阶级（注：做官的阶级也），几乎是强迫青年全体去填词了。（除非这青年不想做官。）
(2) Mr. Feng said that he didn't understand what the boundary between persuading young people to read "Zhuangzi" and "Anthology" and being an examiner was to use words to select scholars, which was actually a clear boundary. The former is to offer one's own opinions to young people, accepting or not accepting the freedom of the original youth; The latter represents the entire class (note: the class of officials is also the class), and almost forces all young people to fill in the lyrics. (Unless the young man doesn't want to be an official.) ）（三）说鲁迅先生的文章是从《庄子》与《文选》中来的，这确然是滑稽的，我记得我没有说过那样的话。我的文章里举出鲁迅先生来作例，其意只想请不反对青年从古书求得一点文学修养的鲁迅先生来帮帮忙。鲁迅先生虽然一向是劝青年多读外国书的，但这是他以为从外国书中可以训练出思想新锐的青年来；至于像我那样给青年从做文章（或说文学修养）上着想，则鲁迅先生就没有反对青年读古书过。举两个证据来罢：一，“少看中国书，其结果不过不能作文而已。”（见北新版《华盖集》第四页。）这可见鲁迅先生也承认要能作文，该多看中国书了。而这所谓中国书，从上文看来，似乎并不是指的白话文书。二，“我常被询问，要弄文学，应该看什么书？……我以为倘要弄旧的呢，倒不如姑且靠着张之洞的《书目答问》去摸门径去。”（见北新版《而已集》第四十五页。）
(3) It is indeed funny to say that Mr. Lu Xun's article came from "Zhuangzi" and "Selected Works", and I remember that I did not say such a thing. In my article, I will give Mr. Lu Xun as an example, and I just want to ask Mr. Lu Xun, who does not oppose young people seeking a little literary accomplishment from ancient books, to help. Although Mr. Lu Xun has always persuaded young people to read more foreign books, this is because he thinks that young people with new ideas can be trained from foreign books; As for thinking about young people from the perspective of writing articles (or literary accomplishments) like me, Mr. Lu Xun has never objected to young people reading ancient books. Let's give two pieces of evidence: First, "Read less Chinese books, and the result is just that you can't write." (See page 4 of the Beixin edition of "Huagai Collection".) It can be seen that Mr. Lu Xun also admitted that if you want to be able to write, you should read more Chinese books. And this so-called Chinese book, from the above point of view, does not seem to refer to the vernacular document. 2. "I am often asked, what books should I read if I want to get literature?" …… I thought that if I wanted to get an old one, it would be better to rely on Zhang Zhidong's "Bibliographic Q&A" to find the door. (See page 45 of the Beixin edition of "The Collection".) ）现在，我想我应该在这里“带住”了，我曾有一封信给《大晚报》副刊的编者，为了尊重丰之余先生的好意，我曾请求允许我换两部书介绍给青年。除了我还写一封信给曹聚仁先生之外，对于这“《庄子》与《文选》”的问题我没有要说的话了。我曾经在《自由谈》的壁上，看过几次的文字争，觉得每次总是愈争愈闹意气，而离本题愈远，甚至到后来有些参加者的动机都是可以怀疑的，我不想使自己不由自主地被卷入漩涡，所以我不再说什么话了。昨晚套了一个现成偈语：
Now, I think I should "stay" here, I once wrote a letter to the editor of the supplement of the "Evening News", in order to respect Mr. Feng Zhiyu's kindness, I asked permission to change two books to introduce to young people. Except for writing a letter to Mr. Cao Juren, I have nothing to say on the issue of "Zhuangzi and Anthology". I once saw several literary disputes on the wall of "Free Talk", and I felt that each time I always became more and more angry, and the farther away from the topic, the more I could doubt the motives of some participants, and I didn't want to be involuntarily involved in the whirlpool, so I didn't say anything anymore. Last night, I set a ready-made verse:此亦一是非　彼亦一是非此亦一是非 彼亦一是非
唯无是非观　庶几免是非 唯无是非观 庶几免是非
倘有人能写篆字者乎？颇想一求法挥，张之素壁。
倘有人能写篆字者乎？颇想一求法挥，张之素壁。施蛰存上（十九日）。
施蛰存上（十九日）。十月二十日，《申报》《自由谈》。十月二十日，《申报》《自由谈》。

中国文与中国人

中国文与中国人

中国文与中国人

Chinese and Chinese余铭
Remaining inscriptions最近出版了一本很好的翻译：高本汉著的《中国语和中国文》。高本汉先生是个瑞典人，他的真姓是珂罗倔伦（Karlgren）。他为什么“贵姓”高呢？那无疑的是因为中国化了。他的确对于中国语文学有很大的供献。
A good translation has recently been published: "Chinese and Chinese" by Gao Benhan. Mr. Gobenham is a Swede, and his real name is Karlgren. Why is his "noble surname" high? That is undoubtedly because of Sinicization. He did have a great contribution to Chinese literature.但是，他对于中国人似乎更有研究，因此，他很崇拜文言，崇拜中国字，以为对中国人是不可少的。
However, he seems to have studied Chinese more, so he worships classical Chinese and Chinese characters, believing that they are indispensable to the Chinese.他说：“近来——按高氏这书是一九二三年在伦敦出版的——某几种报纸，曾经试用白话，可是并没有多大的成功；因此也许还要触怒多数定报人，以为这样，就是讽示著他们不能看懂文言报呢！”
He said: "Recently—according to Gao's book, published in London in 1923—some newspapers have tried the vernacular, but with little success; Therefore, it may also anger most of the people who are fixed to be reported, thinking that this is an irony that they cannot understand the classical Chinese newspaper! ”“西洋各国里有许多伶人，在他们表演中，他们几乎随时可以插入许多‘打诨’，也有许多作者，滥引文书；但是大家都认这种是劣等的风味。这在中国恰好相反，正认为高妙的文雅而表示绝艺的地方。”
"There are many performers in Western countries, and in their performances, they can insert a lot of 'jokes' almost at any time, and there are also many authors who quote documents indiscriminately; but everyone thinks this is an inferior flavor. This is exactly the opposite in China, which is considered to be a place where it is considered to be exquisite and elegant. ”中国文的“含混的地方，中国人不但不因之感受了困难，反而愿意养成它。”
The Chinese language "ambiguous place", Chinese not only do not feel difficulties because of it, but are willing to develop it. ”但高先生自己却因此受够了侮辱：“本书的著者和亲爱的中国人谈话，所说给他的，很能完全了解；但是，他们彼此谈话的时候，他几乎一句也不懂。”这自然是那些“亲爱的中国人”在“讽示”他不懂上流社会的话，因为“外国人到了中国来，只要注意一点，他就可以觉得：他自己虽然熟悉了普通人的语言，而对于上流社会的谈话，还是莫名其妙的。”
But Mr. Gao himself had enough of the insults: "The author of this book talked to the dear Chinese, and what was said to him was very understandable; However, when they talked to each other, he hardly understood a word. This is naturally those "dear Chinese" who are "ironic" that he does not understand the words of the upper class, because "when a foreigner comes to China, as long as he pays attention, he can feel that although he is familiar with the language of ordinary people, he is still inexplicable about the conversation of the upper class." ”于是他就说：“中国文字好像一个美丽可爱的贵妇，西洋文字好像一个有用而不美的贱婢。”
So he said: "Chinese characters are like a beautiful and lovely lady, and Western characters are like a useful but not beautiful lowly maid. ”美丽可爱而无用的贵妇的“绝艺”，就在于“插诨”的含混。这使得西洋第一等的学者，至多也不过抵得上中国的普通人，休想爬进上流社会里来。这样，我们“精神上胜利了”。为要保持这种胜利，必须有高妙文雅的字汇，而且要丰富！五四白话运动的“没有多大成功”，原因大抵就在上流社会怕人讽示他们不懂文言。
The "unique art" of the beautiful, cute and useless lady lies in the ambiguity of "interjecting". This makes the first-class scholars in the West at most only worthy of ordinary Chinese people, and they do not want to climb into the upper class. In this way, we "won spiritually". In order to maintain this kind of victory, there must be a wonderful and elegant vocabulary, and it must be rich! The reason why the May Fourth Vernacular Movement "did not have much success" was probably that the upper class was afraid of being ridiculed that they did not understand classical Chinese.虽然，“此亦一是非，彼亦一是非”——我们还是含混些好了。否则，反而要感受困难的。
Although, "this is also right and wrong, and that is also right and wrong" - we should be a little ambiguous. Otherwise, you will have to feel difficult.十月二十五日。
October 25th.

野兽训练法

野兽训练法

野兽训练法

Beast training method余铭
Remaining inscriptions最近还有极有益的讲演，是海京伯马戏团的经理施威德在中华学艺社的三楼上给我们讲“如何训练动物？”可惜我没福参加旁听，只在报上看见一点笔记。但在那里面，就已经够多着警辟的话了——
Recently, there was also a very useful lecture, which was Shi Weide, the manager of Haijingbo Circus, who told us on the third floor of the Chinese Art Club "How to train animals?" "It's a pity that I didn't have the blessing to participate in the audit, and I only saw a few notes in the newspaper. But in it, there are enough warning words -“有人以为野兽可以用武力拳头去对付它，压迫它，那便错了，因为这是从前野蛮人对付野兽的办法，现在训练的方法，便不是这样。”
"Some people think that the beast can use its fists to deal with it and oppress it, but that is wrong, because this is the way barbarians used to deal with beasts, but now the training method is not like this."“现在我们所用的方法，是用爱的力量，获取它们对于人的信任，用爱的力量，温和的心情去感动它们。……”
"The method we use now is to use the power of love to gain their trust in people, and to use the power of love and a gentle mood to move them. ……”这一些话，虽然出自日耳曼人之口，但和我们圣贤的古训，也是十分相合的。用武力拳头去对付，就是所谓“霸道”。然而“以力服人者，非心服也”，所以文明人就得用“王道”，以取得“信任”：“民无信不立”。
Although these words come from the mouths of the Germanic people, they are also very consistent with the ancient teachings of our sages. Using force to deal with it is the so-called "hegemony". However, "those who win people by force are not convinced by their hearts", so civilized people have to use the "royal way" to gain "trust": "the people cannot stand without trust".但是，有了“信任”以后，野兽可要变把戏了——
However, after "trust", the beast is going to change its trick -“教练者在取得它们的信任以后，然后可以从事教练它们了：第一步，可以使它们认清坐的，站的位置；再可以使它们跳浜，站起来……”
"After the coaches have gained their trust, they can then engage in coaching: the first step is to make them recognize where they are sitting and standing; Then you can make them jump and stand up......"训兽之法，通于牧民，所以我们的古之人，也称治民的大人物曰“牧”。然而所“牧”者，牛羊也，比野兽怯弱，因此也就无须乎专靠“信任”，不妨兼用着拳头，这就是冠冕堂皇的“威信”。
The method of training beasts is common to herders, so our ancient people also called the big people who ruled the people "pastor". However, the "shepherds", cattle and sheep, are also weaker than beasts, so there is no need to rely solely on "trust", you might as well use fists, which is the high-sounding "prestige".由“威信”治成的动物，“跳浜，站起来”是不够的，结果非贡献毛角血肉不可，至少是天天挤出奶汁来，——如牛奶，羊奶之流。
Animals cured by "prestige" are not enough to "jump on the beach and stand up", and the result is that they must contribute their hair and horns, at least milk is expressed every day,—— such as milk and goat's milk.然而这是古法，我不觉得也可以包括现代。
However, this is an ancient method, and I don't think it can also include modern methods.施威德讲演之后，听说还有余兴，如“东方大乐”及“踢毽子”等，报上语焉不详，无从知道底细了，否则，我想，恐怕也很有意义。
After Schweed's speech, I heard that there were still after-interests, such as "Oriental Music" and "Kicking the Shuttlecock", etc., and the words in the report were vague, and there was no way to know the details, otherwise, I think, I am afraid it would be very meaningful.十月二十七日。
October 27.

反刍

反刍

反刍

ruminate元艮
Yuan Gen关于“《庄子》与《文选》”的议论，有些刊物上早不直接提起应否大家研究这问题，却拉到别的事情上去了。他们是在嘲笑那些反对《文选》的人们自己却曾做古文，看古书。
Regarding the discussion of "Zhuangzi and Anthology", some publications have not directly mentioned whether everyone should study this issue, but they have pulled it on other things. They are laughing at those who oppose the "Anthology" but have written ancient texts and read ancient books.这真利害。大约就是所谓“以子之矛，攻子之盾”罢——对不起，“古书”又来了！
This is really interesting. It's about the so-called "spear of the son, shield of the attack" - sorry, the "ancient book" is here again!不进过牢狱的那里知道牢狱的真相。跟着阔人，或者自己原是阔人，先打电话，然后再去参观的，他只看见狱卒非常和气，犯人还可以用英语自由的谈话。倘要知道得详细，那他一定是先前的狱卒，或者是释放的犯人。自然，他还有恶习，但他教人不要钻进牢狱去的忠告，却比什么名人说模范监狱的教育卫生，如何完备，比穷人的家里好得多等类的话，更其可信的。
Those who have not been in prison know the truth of prison. Following Kuo Ren, or he was originally a Kuo Ren, he called first and then went to visit, only to see that the jailer was very kind, and the prisoner could also talk freely in English. If you want to know in detail, then he must be a former jailer or a prisoner who has been released. Naturally, he still had vices, but his advice not to go to prison was more credible than any famous person who said that the education and hygiene of a model prison were perfect, and that they were much better than the homes of the poor.然而自己沾了牢狱气，据说就不能说牢狱坏，狱卒或囚犯，都是坏人，坏人就不能有好话。只有好人说牢狱好，这才是好话。读过《文选》而说它无用，不如不读《文选》而说它有用的可听。反“反《文选》”的诸君子，自然多是读过的了，但未读的也有，举一个例在这里罢——“《庄子》我四年前虽曾读过，但那时还不能完全读懂……《文选》则我完全没有见过。”然而他结末说，“为了浴盘的水糟了，就连小宝宝也要倒掉，这意思是我们不敢赞同的。”（见《火炬》）他要保护水中的“小宝宝”，可是没有见过“浴盘的水”。
However, if you are stained with prison energy, it is said that you cannot say that the prison is bad, the jailer or prisoner is a bad person, and the bad person cannot have good words. Only good people say that prison is good, and this is a good thing. It is better not to read the "Anthology" and say that it is useless, but not to read the "Anthology" and say that it is useful and audible. Most of the gentlemen who oppose the "anti-"Anthology" have naturally read it, but there are also those who have not read it, for example, here is an example - "Although I read "Zhuangzi" four years ago, I could not fully understand it at that time...... I had never seen "Anthology" at all. However, he concluded, "For the sake of the water in the bathtub, even the baby has to be thrown away, which means we dare not agree." He wanted to protect the "little baby" in the water, but he had never seen the "water in the bathtub".五四运动的时候，保护文言者是说凡做白话文的都会做文言文，所以古文也得读。现在保护古书者是说反对古书的也在看古书，做文言，——可见主张的可笑。永远反刍，自己却不会呕吐，大约真是读透了《庄子》了。
During the May Fourth Movement, those who protected the classical Chinese said that anyone who did vernacular would do classical Chinese, so the ancient Chinese had to be read. Now those who protect ancient books say that those who oppose ancient books are also reading ancient books, and the ,—— of doing classical Chinese shows the ridiculousness of their claims. Always ruminate, but I won't vomit, I have probably read "Zhuangzi" thoroughly.十一月四日。
November 4th.

归厚

归厚

归厚

Gui Hou罗怃
Luo Zhen在洋场上，用一瓶强水去洒他所恨的女人，这事早经绝迹了。用些秽物去洒他所恨的律师，这风气只继续了两个月。最长久的是造了谣言去中伤他们所恨的文人，说这事已有了好几年，我想，是只会少不会多的。
On the foreign field, using a bottle of strong water to sprinkle the woman he hated had long been extinct. Sprinkle some filth on the lawyer he hated, and this trend only lasted for two months. The longest is to create rumors to slander the literati they hate, saying that this has been going on for several years, and I think it will only be less, not more.洋场上原不少闲人，“吃白相饭”尚且可以过活，更何况有时打几圈马将。小妇人的嘁嘁喳喳，又何尝不可以消闲。我就是常看造谣专门杂志之一人，但看的并不是谣言，而是谣言作家的手段，看他有怎样出奇的幻想，怎样别致的描写，怎样险恶的构陷，怎样躲闪的原形。造谣，也要才能的，如果他造得妙，即使造的是我自己的谣言，恐怕我也会爱他的本领。
There are many idlers on the foreign field, and they can still live by "eating white rice", not to mention sometimes playing a few laps of horses. The little woman's chirping is not a way to relax. I am one of the people who often reads magazines specializing in rumor-mongering, but what I read is not rumors, but the methods of rumor writers, to see what kind of surprising fantasies he has, what kind of unique descriptions, what kind of sinister frames, and how he dodges the original form. If he makes it well, even if it is my own rumor, I am afraid I will love his skills.但可惜大抵没有这样的才能，作者在谣言文学上，也还是“滥竽充数”。这并非我个人的私见。讲什么文坛故事的小说不流行，什么外史也不再做下去，可见是人们多已摇头了。讲来讲去总是这几套，纵使记性坏，多听了也会烦厌的。想继续，这时就得要才能；否则，台下走散，应该换一出戏来叫座。
But unfortunately, most of them do not have such talent, and the author is still "indiscriminately filled" in rumor literature. This is not my personal opinion. Novels that tell literary stories are not popular, and no foreign history is anymore, which shows that most people have shaken their heads. Talking about these sets, even if you have a bad memory, you will get bored if you listen to it more. If you want to continue, you have to be talented; Otherwise, the audience will be separated and should be replaced with a play to call the seats.譬如罢，先前演的是《杀子报》罢，这回就须是《三娘教子》，“老东人呀，唉，唉，唉！”
For example, the previous performance was "Killing the Son", but this time it must be "Sanniang Godson", "Old Eastern, alas, alas, alas! ”而文场实在也如戏场，果然已经渐渐的“民德归厚”了，有的还至于自行声明，更换办事人，说是先前“揭载作家秘史，虽为文坛佳话，然亦有伤忠厚。以后本刊停登此项稿件。……以前言责，……概不负责。”（见《微言》）为了“忠厚”而牺牲“佳话”，虽可惜，却也可敬的。
And the literary field is really like a theater, and sure enough, it has gradually "returned to the people's morality", and some even declared themselves and changed the clerk, saying that it was before "revealing the secret history of the writer, although it is a good story in the literary world, but it is also hurtful and loyal." This manuscript will be stopped in the future. …… Previous criticism,...... Not responsible. (See "Weiyan") Sacrificing "good stories" for the sake of "loyalty" is a pity, but it is also respectable.尤其可敬的是更换办事人。这并非敬他的“概不负责”，而是敬他的彻底。古时候虽有“放下屠刀，立地成佛”的人，但因为也有“放下官印，立地念佛”而终于又“放下念珠，立地做官”的人，这一种玩意儿，实在已不足以昭大信于天下：令人办事有点为难了。
What is particularly respectable is the change of clerks. This is not "not responsible" for respecting him, but respecting him thoroughly. Although there were people who "put down the butcher's knife and became a Buddha" in ancient times, because there were also people who "put down the official seal and chant the Buddha" and finally "put down the prayer beads and become an official", this kind of thing is really not enough to show the faith of the world: it is a bit difficult for people to do things.不过，尤其为难的是忠厚文学远不如谣言文学之易于号召读者，所以须有才能更大的作家，如果一时不易搜求，那刊物就要减色。我想，还不如就用先前打诨的二丑挂了长须来唱老生戏，那么，暂时之间倒也特别而有趣的。
However, what is particularly difficult is that loyal literature is far less than rumor literature that is easy to appeal to readers, so there must be more talented writers. I think it would be better to use the two ugly people who joked before to sing the old drama, then it will be special and interesting for the time being.十一月四日。
November 4th.附记：这一篇没有能够发表。
P.S. This article was not published.次年六月十九日记。
Diary on June 19 of the following year.

难得糊涂

难得糊涂

难得糊涂

It's hard to be confused子明
His son was named Ming因为有人谈起写篆字，我倒记起郑板桥有一块图章，刻着“难得糊涂”。那四个篆字刻得叉手叉脚的，颇能表现一点名士的牢骚气。足见刻图章写篆字也还反映着一定的风格，正像“玩”木刻之类，未必“只是个人的事情”：“谬种”和“妖孽”就是写起篆字来，也带着些“妖谬”的。
Because someone talked about writing seal characters, I remembered that Zheng Banqiao had a stamp engraved with "rare confusion". The four seal characters are engraved with crossed hands and feet, which can quite express a little of the complaint of celebrities. It can be seen that the writing of seal characters also reflects a certain style, just like "playing" woodcuts, which may not be "just a personal matter": "false species" and "demon" are written in seal characters, and they also carry some "demonic fallacies".然而风格和情绪，倾向之类，不但因人而异，而且因事而异，因时而异。郑板桥说“难得糊涂”，其实他还能够糊涂的。现在，到了“求仕不获无足悲，求隐而不得其地以窜者，毋亦天下之至哀欤”的时代，却实在求糊涂而不可得了。
However, styles, moods, tendencies, etc., not only vary from person to person, but also from event to event and from time to time. Zheng Banqiao said that it was "rare to be confused", but in fact, he could still be confused. Now, in the era of "there is no sadness in seeking an official position, and those who seek seclusion and cannot escape to the right place are the saddest in the world", but it is really confusing and unattainable.糊涂主义，唯无是非观等等——本来是中国的高尚道德。你说他是解脱，达观罢，也未必。他其实在固执着，坚持着什么，例如道德上的正统，文学上的正宗之类。这终于说出来了：——道德要孔孟加上“佛家报应之说”（老庄另帐登记），而说别人“鄙薄”佛教影响就是“想为儒家争正统”，原来同善社的三教同源论早已是正统了。文学呢？要用生涩字，用词藻，秾纤的作品，而且是新文学的作品，虽则他“否认新文学和旧文学的分界”；而大众文学“固然赞成”，“但那是文学中的一个旁支”。正统和正宗，是明显的。
Confusingism, only the view of right and wrong, etc. - it was originally China's noble morality. You say he is liberated, and he is a master, but it may not be. He is actually stubborn and insists on something, such as moral orthodoxy, literary authenticity, etc. This finally came out: - morality requires Confucius and Mencius to add the "Buddhist theory of retribution" (Lao Zhuang registered separately), and to say that others "despise" the influence of Buddhism is to "want to fight for Confucianism". What about literature? It is necessary to use jerky words, use words, and slender works, and they are works of new literature, although he "denies the boundary between new literature and old literature"; Popular literature "certainly agrees", "but it is a side branch in literature". Orthodoxy and authenticity, are obvious.对于人生的倦怠并不糊涂！活的生活已经那么“穷乏”，要请青年在“佛家报应之说”，在“《文选》，《庄子》，《论语》，《孟子》”里去求得修养。后来，修养又不见了，只剩得字汇。“自然景物，个人情感，宫室建筑，……之类，还不妨从《文选》之类的书中去找来用。”从前严几道从甚么古书里——大概也是《庄子》罢——找着了“幺匿”两个字来译Unit，又古雅，又音义双关的。但是后来通行的却是“单位”。严老先生的这类“字汇”很多，大抵无法复活转来。现在却有人以为“汉以后的词，秦以前的字，西方文化所带来的字和词，可以拼成功我们的光芒的新文学”。这光芒要是只在字和词，那大概像古墓里的贵妇人似的，满身都是珠光宝气了。人生却不在拼凑，而在创造，几千百万的活人在创造。可恨的是人生那么骚扰忙乱，使一些人“不得其地以窜”，想要逃进字和词里去，以求“庶免是非”，然而又不可得。真要写篆字刻图章了！
There is no confusion about burnout in life! Life is already so "poor", and young people should be invited to seek self-cultivation in the "Buddhist Theory of Retribution" and in "Anthology", "Zhuangzi", "Analects", and "Mencius". Later, the cultivation disappeared again, leaving only the vocabulary. "Natural scenery, personal emotions, palace architecture,...... You might as well find it from books such as "Anthology". In the past, Yan Jidao found the word "Yao Ni" in some ancient book - probably "Zhuangzi" - to translate Unit, which is quaint and pun. But later it was the "unit" that was popular. Mr. Yan Lao has a lot of such "vocabulary", and it is probably impossible to resurrect it. Now some people think that "the words after the Han Dynasty, the words before the Qin Dynasty, and the words and words brought by Western culture can spell out the new literature of our light". If this light was only in words and words, it would probably be like a noble lady in an ancient tomb, full of pearls. Life is not piecing together, but creating, and tens of millions of living people are creating. What is hateful is that life is so harassing and chaotic, so that some people "run away" and want to escape into words and words in order to "avoid right and wrong", but it is not possible. I really want to write seal letters and engrave stamps!十一月六日。
November 6th.

古书中寻活字汇

古书中寻活字汇

古书中寻活字汇

Find a living word in ancient books罗怃
Luo Zhen古书中寻活字汇，是说得出，做不到的，他在那古书中，寻不出一个活字汇。
Looking for a living word in an ancient book can be said, but it can't be done, and he can't find a living word in that ancient book.假如有“可看《文选》的青年”在这里，就是高中学生中的几个罢，他翻开《文选》来，一心要寻活字汇，当然明知道那里面有些字是已经死了的。然而他怎样分别那些字的死活呢？大概只能以自己的懂不懂为标准。但是，看了六臣注之后才懂的字不能算，因为这原是死尸，由六臣背进他脑里，这才算是活人的，在他脑里即使复活了，在未“可看《文选》的青年”的眼前却还是死家伙。所以他必须看白文。
If there is a "young man who can read the Anthology" here, it is just a few of the high school students, and he opens the "Anthology" and is bent on looking for a living word, of course, knowing that some of the words in it are dead. But how does he distinguish between life and death of those words? Probably only based on whether you understand it or not. However, the words that I understood after reading the comments of the six ministers cannot be counted, because this was originally a dead corpse, carried into his mind by the six ministers, and this is considered a living person, and even if he is resurrected in his mind, he is still a dead guy in front of the eyes of the "young man who can read the "Anthology". So he had to read the white text.诚然，不看注，也有懂得的，这就是活字汇。然而他怎会先就懂得的呢？这一定是曾经在别的书上看见过，或是到现在还在应用的字汇，所以他懂得。那么，从一部《文选》里，又寻到了什么？
It is true that if you don't look at the notes, there are also people who understand, this is a movable word collection. But how could he understand it first? This must be a vocabulary that he has seen in other books or is still using to this day, so he understands. So, what else was found in a "Selected Works"?然而施先生说，要描写宫殿之类的时候有用处。这很不错，《文选》里有许多赋是讲到宫殿的，并且有什么殿的专赋。倘有青年要做汉晋的历史小说，描写那时的宫殿，找《文选》是极应该的，还非看“四史”《晋书》之类不可。然而所取的僻字也不过将死尸抬出来，说得神秘点便名之曰“复活”。如果要描写的是清故宫，那可和《文选》的瓜葛就极少了。
However, Mr. Shi said that it is useful when describing palaces and the like. This is very good, there are many poems in the "Anthology" that talk about the palace, and what kind of palace is the special fu. If a young man wants to make a historical novel of the Han and Jin dynasties, describing the palace at that time, it is very appropriate to look for the "Anthology", and he must read the "Four Histories" and "Book of Jin". However, the rare word taken is only to carry out the dead body, and to put it mysteriously, it is called "resurrection". If you want to describe the Qing Forbidden City, it has very little to do with the "Anthology".倘使连清故宫也不想描写，而豫备工夫却用得这么广泛，那实在是徒劳而仍不足。因为还有《易经》和《仪礼》，里面的字汇，在描写周朝的卜课和婚丧大事时候是有用处的，也得作为“文学修养之根基”，这才更像“文学青年”的样子。
If even the Qing Forbidden City does not want to describe, but the preparation work is used so extensively, it is really futile and still insufficient. Because there are also "I Ching" and "Ritual Rites", the vocabulary in them is useful when describing the divination classes and wedding and funeral events of the Zhou Dynasty, and it must also be used as the "foundation of literary accomplishment", which is more like a "literary youth".十一月六日。
November 6th.

“商定”文豪

“商定”文豪

“商定”文豪

"Agreed" on the literary master白在宣
White is in Xuan笔头也是尖的，也要钻。言路的窄，现在也正如活路一样，所以（以上十五字，刊出时作“别的地方钻不进，”）只好对于文艺杂志广告的夸大，前去刺一下。
The pen tip is also pointed, and it must also be drilled. The narrowness of the way of speech is now like the way to live, so (the above fifteen words, when published, it was written as "I can't get in anywhere else,") I had to go and stab the exaggeration of literary and art magazine advertisements.一看杂志的广告，作者就个个是文豪，中国文坛也真好像光焰万丈，但一面也招来了鼻孔里的哼哼声。然而，著作一世，藏之名山，以待考古团的掘出的作家，此刻早已没有了，连自作自刻，订成薄薄的一本，分送朋友的诗人，也已经不大遇得到。现在是前周作稿，次周登报，上月剪贴，下月出书，大抵仅仅为稿费。倘说，作者是饿着肚子，专心在为社会服务，恐怕说出来有点要脸红罢。就是笑人需要稿费的高士，他那一篇嘲笑的文章也还是不免要稿费。但自然，另有薪水，或者能靠女人奁资养活的文豪，都不属于这一类。
As soon as I looked at the advertisements in the magazine, the authors were all literary heroes, and the Chinese literary world really seemed to be full of flames, but on the other hand, it also attracted a hum in the nostrils. However, the writers who wrote a lifetime, hidden in famous mountains, and waiting for the archaeological team to dig up are long gone at this moment, and even poets who made their own carvings, ordered a thin book, and distributed them to friends are no longer available. Now I write a manuscript last week, publish it in the newspaper the next week, cut and paste it last month, and publish a book next month, which is probably just a manuscript fee. If the author is hungry and concentrating on serving the society, I am afraid that he will blush a little when he says it. Even Coats who laughs at people needs manuscript fees, and his ridiculous articles still inevitably require manuscript fees. But naturally, writers who have a salary or can rely on women's dowry do not belong to this category.就大体而言，根子是在卖钱，所以上海的各式各样的文豪，由于“商定”，是“久已夫，已非一日矣”的了。
Generally speaking, the root is selling money, so all kinds of literary heroes in Shanghai, due to "agreement", are "long gone, not a day".商家印好一种稿子后，倘那时封建得势，广告上就说作者是封建文豪，革命行时，便是革命文豪，于是封定了一批文豪们。别家的书也印出来了，另一种广告说那些作者并非真封建或真革命文豪，这边的才是真货色，于是又封定了一批文豪们。别一家又集印了各种广告的论战，一位作者加上些批评，另出了一位新文豪。
After the merchant printed a manuscript, if the feudal power was in power at that time, the advertisement said that the author was a feudal writer, and when the revolution was in place, he was a revolutionary writer, so a group of writers were sealed. Other books were also printed, and another advertisement said that those authors were not real feudal or true revolutionary writers, and that the ones here were the real ones, so a group of writers were sealed. Another family collected and printed various advertisements in a debate, one author added some criticism, and another new writer came out.还有一法是结合一套脚色，要几个诗人，几个小说家，一个批评家，商量一下，立一个什么社，登起广告来，打倒彼文豪，抬出此文豪，结果也总可以封定一批文豪们，也是一种的“商定”。
Another method is to combine a set of characters, ask a few poets, a few novelists, and a critic to discuss, set up a society, put up an advertisement, overthrow the other writer, and carry out this writer, and the result can always seal a group of writers, which is also a kind of "agreement".就大体而言，根子是在卖钱，所以后来的书价，就不免指出文豪们的真价值，照价二折，五角一堆，也说不定的。不过有一种例外：虽然铺子出盘，作品贱卖，却并不是文豪们走了末路，那是他们已经“爬了上去”，进大学，进衙门，不要这踏脚凳了。
Generally speaking, the root is selling money, so the later book prices inevitably point out the true value of the writers. However, there is an exception: although the shop is out of the market and the works are sold cheaply, it is not that the writers have come to an end, that is, they have "climbed up", entered the university, entered the yamen, and did not want this stepstool.十一月七日。
November 7th.

青年与老子

青年与老子

青年与老子

青年与老子敬一尊
敬一尊听说，“慨自欧风东渐以来”，中国的道德就变坏了，尤其是近时的青年，往往看不起老子。这恐怕真是一个大错误，因为我看了几个例子，觉得老子的对于青年，有时确也很有用处，很有益处，不仅足为“文学修养”之助的。
I heard that "since the European wind has gradually moved east", China's morality has deteriorated, especially young people in recent times, who often look down on Lao Tzu. This is probably a big mistake, because I have seen a few examples and feel that Lao Tzu's is sometimes very useful and beneficial for young people, not only enough to help with "literary accomplishment".有一篇旧文章——我忘记了出于什么书里的了——告诉我们，曾有一个道士，有长生不老之术，自说已经百余岁了，看去却“美如冠玉”，像二十左右一样。有一天，这位活神仙正在大宴阔客，突然来了一个须发都白的老头子，向他要钱用，他把他骂出去了。大家正惊疑间，那活神仙慨然的说道，“那是我的小儿，他不听我的话，不肯修道，现在你们看，不到六十，就老得那么不成样子了。”大家自然是很感动的，但到后来，终于知道了那人其实倒是道士的老子。
There is an old article - I forgot what book it came from - tells us that there was once a Taoist priest who had the art of immortality and said that he was more than a hundred years old, but he looked "as beautiful as a crown of jade", like a twenty-something man. One day, the living immortal was feasting on guests when suddenly an old man with white hair and beard came and asked him for money, and he scolded him out. While everyone was suspicious, the living immortal said with emotion, "That's my child, he didn't listen to me, he refused to practice Taoism, and now you see, before sixty, he is so old." Naturally, everyone was very moved, but later, they finally learned that the man was actually a Taoist priest.还有一篇新文章——杨某的自白——却告诉我们，他是一个有志之士，学说是很正确的，不但讲空话，而且去实行，但待到看见有些地方的老头儿苦得不像样，就想起自己的老子来，即使他的理想实现了，也不能使他的父亲做老太爷，仍旧要吃苦。于是得到了更正确的学说，抛去原有的理想，改做孝子了。假使父母早死，学说那有这么圆满而堂皇呢？这不也就是老子对于青年的益处么？
There is also a new article - Yang's confession - but tells us that he is a man of lofty ideals, and his doctrine is very correct, not only speaking empty words, but also practicing them, but when he sees that the old man in some places is not decent, he thinks of his own old man, even if his ideal is realized, he cannot make his father an old lady, and he still has to endure hardships. So he got a more correct doctrine, abandoned his original ideals, and changed to a filial son. If the parents died early, how could the doctrine be so complete and magnificent? Isn't this Lao Tzu's benefit to young people?那么，早已死了老子的青年不是就没有法子么？我以为不然，也有法子想。这还是要查旧书。另有一篇文章——我也忘了出在什么书里的了——告诉我们，一个老女人在讨饭，忽然来了一位大阔人，说她是自己的久经失散了的母亲，她也将错就错，做了老太太。后来她的儿子要嫁女儿，和老太太同到首饰店去买金器，将老太太已经看中意的东西自己带去给太太看一看，一面请老太太还在拣，——可是，他从此就不见了。
So, isn't there no way for the young man who has long died? I don't think so, but there are ways to think about it. This still has to look up old books. Another article—I forgot what book it was in—tells us that an old woman was begging for food, and suddenly a big man came, saying that she was his long-lost mother, and that she would also be wrong and become an old lady. Later, her son was going to marry his daughter, and he went to the jewelry store with the old lady to buy gold, and took the things that the old lady had already liked to show his wife, while asking the old lady to still choose,—— but he has never been seen since.不过，这还是学那道士似的，必须实物时候的办法，如果单是做做自白之类，那是实在有无老子，倒并没有什么大关系的。先前有人提倡过“虚君共和”，现在又何妨有“没亲孝子”？张宗昌很尊孔，恐怕他府上也未必有“四书”“五经”罢。
However, this is still like learning from that Taoist priest, it must be a method when the real thing, if it is just a confession or the like, it really has nothing to do with Lao Tzu or not. Some people have advocated a "virtual republic" before, but now why not have "no filial son"? Zhang Zongchang respects Confucius very much, and I am afraid that he may not have the "Four Books" and "Five Classics" in his house.十一月七日。
November 7th.

后记

后记

后记

postscript这六十多篇杂文，是受了压迫之后，从去年六月起，另用各种的笔名，障住了编辑先生和检查老爷的眼睛，陆续在《自由谈》上发表的。不久就又蒙一些很有“灵感”的“文学家”吹嘘，有无法隐瞒之势，虽然他们的根据嗅觉的判断，有时也并不和事实相符。但不善于改悔的人，究竟也躲闪不到那里去，于是不及半年，就得着更厉害的压迫了，敷衍到十一月初，只好停笔，证明了我的笔墨，实在敌不过那些带着假面，从指挥刀下挺身而出的英雄。
These more than 60 essays were published in "Free Talk" one after another after being oppressed, using various pseudonyms since June last year, blocking the eyes of the editor and the inspector. Soon it was boasted by some very "inspired" "writers" that it could not be hidden, although their judgment based on the sense of smell sometimes did not match the facts. But those who are not good at repentance can't dodge there, so in less than half a year, they were even more oppressed, and they had to stop writing until the beginning of November, proving that my pen and ink are really no match for those heroes who stand up from under the command knife with masks.不做文章，就整理旧稿，在年底里，粘成了一本书，将那时被人删削或不能发表的，也都添进去了，看起分量来，倒比这以前的《伪自由书》要多一点。今年三月间，才想付印，做了一篇序，慢慢的排，校，不觉又过了半年，回想离停笔的时候，已是一年有余了，时光真是飞快，但我所怕的，倒是我的杂文还好像说着现在或甚而至于明年。
At the end of the year, he glued it into a book, and added all the things that were deleted or could not be published at that time. In March of this year, I just wanted to print it, made a preface, slowly arranged it, proofread, and unconsciously another half year passed, looking back on the time when I stopped writing, it was already more than a year, time really flies, but what I am afraid of is that my essays still seem to be talking about now or even next year.
记得《伪自由书》出版的时候，《社会新闻》曾经有过一篇批评，说我的所以印行那一本书的本意，完全是为了一条尾巴——《后记》。这其实是误解的。我的杂文，所写的常是一鼻，一嘴，一毛，但合起来，已几乎是或一形象的全体，不加什么原也过得去的了。但画上一条尾巴，却见得更加完全。所以我的要写后记，除了我是弄笔的人，总要动笔之外，只在要这一本书里所画的形象，更成为完全的一个具象，却不是“完全为了一条尾巴”。
I remember that when the "Pseudo-Freedom Book" was published, there was a criticism in the "Social News", saying that my original intention of printing that book was entirely for the sake of a tail - "Afterword". This is actually a misunderstanding. My essays are often written with a nose, a mouth, and a hair, but when combined, they are almost the whole of an image, and it is passable without adding anything. But drawing a tail makes it more complete. So I want to write an afterword, except that I am a person who makes a pen and always has to start writing, but I only want the image drawn in this book to become a complete concrete, but not "completely for a tail".内容也还和先前一样，批评些社会的现象，尤其是文坛的情形。因为笔名改得勤，开初倒还平安无事。然而“江山好改，秉性难移”，我知道自己终于不能安分守己。《序的解放》碰着了曾今可，《豪语的折扣》又触犯了张资平，此外在不知不觉之中得罪了一些别的什么伟人，我还自己不知道。但是，待到做了《各种捐班》和《登龙术拾遗》以后，这案件可就闹大了。
The content is also the same as before, criticizing some social phenomena, especially the situation in the literary world. Because the pen name was changed diligently, it was safe at the beginning. However, "the country is easy to change, and the temperament is difficult to change", and I know that I finally can't keep to myself. "The Liberation of the Preface" met Zeng Jinke, and "The Discount of the Heroic Language" offended Zhang Ziping, and unknowingly offended some other great people, I don't know myself. However, after doing "Various Donation Classes" and "Dragon Technique Collection", the case became bigger.
去年八月间，诗人邵洵美先生所经营的书店里，出了一种《十日谈》，这位诗人在第二期（二十日出）上，飘飘然的论起“文人无行”来了，先分文人为五类，然后作结道——
In August last year, in the bookstore run by the poet Mr. Shao Xunmei, a kind of "Decameron" was published, and the poet talked about "literati without virtue" in the second issue (20th of the 20th), first dividing literati into five categories, and then making a conclusion -除了上述五类外，当然还有许多其他的典型；但其所以为文人之故，总是因为没有饭吃，或是有了饭吃不饱。因为做文人不比做官或是做生意，究竟用不到多少本钱。一枝笔，一些墨，几张稿纸，便是你所要预备的一切。呒本钱生意，人人想做，所以文人便多了。此乃是没有职业才做文人的事实。
In addition to the above five categories, there are of course many other typical; But the reason why he is a literati is always because he has no food to eat, or he can't eat enough. Because being a literati is not as good as being an official or doing business, it doesn't take much capital. A pen, some ink, and a few sheets of manuscript paper are all you need to prepare. Everyone wants to do capital business, so there are more literati. This is the fact that there is no profession to be a literati.我们的文坛便是由这种文人组织成的。
Our literary world is organized by this kind of literati.因为他们是没有职业才做文人，因此他们的目的仍在职业而不在文人。他们借着文艺宴会的名义极力地拉拢大人物；借文艺杂志或是副刊的地盘，极力地为自己做广告：但求闻达，不顾羞耻。
Because they are literati without a profession, their purpose is still a profession and not a literati. They tried their best to win over big people in the name of literary banquets; Borrow the territory of literary magazines or supplements to advertise yourself as much as possible: but seek fame and disregard shame.谁知既为文人矣，便将被目为文人；既被目为文人矣，便再没有职业可得，这般东西便永远在文坛里胡闹。
谁知既为文人矣，便将被目为文人；既被目为文人矣，便再没有职业可得，这般东西便永远在文坛里胡闹。文人的确穷的多，自从迫压言论和创作以来，有些作者也的确更没有饭吃了。而邵洵美先生是所谓“诗人”，又是有名的巨富“盛宫保”的孙婿，将污秽泼在“这般东西”的头上，原也十分平常的。但我以为作文人究竟和“大出丧”有些不同，即使雇得一大群帮闲，开锣喝道，过后仍是一条空街，还不及“大出丧”的虽在数十年后，有时还有几个市侩传颂。穷极，文是不能工的，可是金银又并非文章的根苗，它最好还是买长江沿岸的田地。然而富家儿总不免常常误解，以为钱可使鬼，就也可以通文。使鬼，大概是确的，也许还可以通神，但通文却不成，诗人邵洵美先生本身的诗便是证据。我那两篇中的有一段，便是说明官可捐，文人不可捐，有裙带官儿，却没有裙带文人的。
Literati are indeed poorer, and since the suppression of speech and creation, some authors have indeed had no food to eat. And Mr. Shao Xunmei is the so-called "poet" and the grandson-in-law of the famous "Sheng Gongbao", and it is very common to splash filth on the head of "such a thing". But I think that the composer is a little different from the "big funeral", even if a large group of helpers are hired and the gong is shouted, it is still an empty street after that, and it is not as good as the "big funeral" Although decades later, there are sometimes a few philistines who praise it. Extremely poor, the article cannot work, but gold and silver are not the roots of the article, it is better to buy the fields along the Yangtze River. However, rich people often misunderstand, thinking that money can make ghosts, and they can also understand literature. It is probably true that it can communicate with spirits, but it is not possible to communicate with the poet, and the poem of the poet Mr. Shao Xunmei itself is the evidence. One of my two articles is that officials can donate, literati cannot donate, there are nepotism officials, but there are nepotism literati.然而，帮手立刻出现了，还出在堂堂的《中央日报》（九月四日及六日）上——
However, helpers appeared immediately, and in the dignified "Central Daily" (September 4 and 6) -女婿问题
son-in-law problem如是
so最近的《自由谈》上，有两篇文章都是谈到女婿的，一篇是孙用的《满意和写不出》，一篇是苇索的《登龙术拾遗》。后一篇九月一日刊出，前一篇则不在手头，刊出日期大约在八月下旬。
In the recent "Free Talk", there are two articles about sons-in-law, one is Sun Yong's "Satisfaction and Can't Write", and the other is Wei Suo's "Climbing the Dragon Technique". The last one was published on September 1st, and the previous one was not at hand, and the publication date was about late August.苇索先生说：“文坛虽然不致于要招女婿，但女婿却是会要上文坛的。”后一句“女婿却是会要上文坛的”，立论十分牢靠，无瑕可击。我们的祖父是人家的女婿，我们的父亲也是人家的女婿，我们自己，也仍然不免是人家的女婿。比如今日在文坛上“北面”而坐的鲁迅茅盾之流，都是人家的女婿，所以“女婿会要上文坛的”是不成问题的，至于前一句“文坛虽然不致于要招女婿”，这句话就简直站不住了。我觉得文坛无时无刻不在招女婿，许多中国作家现在都变成了俄国的女婿了。
Mr. Wei Suo said: "Although the literary world does not want to recruit a son-in-law, the son-in-law will go to the literary world. The latter sentence "The son-in-law will go to the literary world" is very solid and flawless. Our grandfather is someone else's son-in-law, our father is also someone else's son-in-law, and we ourselves are still someone else's son-in-law. For example, Lu Xun and Mao Dun, who are sitting "in the north" in the literary world today, are all sons-in-law, so "the son-in-law will go to the literary world" is not a problem, as for the previous sentence "Although the literary world does not want to recruit a son-in-law", this sentence is simply untenable. I think the literary world is recruiting sons-in-law all the time, and many Chinese writers have now become sons-in-law in Russia.又说：“有富岳家，有阔太太，用赔嫁钱，作文学资本，……”能用妻子的赔嫁钱来作文学资本，我觉得这种人应该佩服，因为用妻子的钱来作文学资本，总比用妻子的钱来作其他一切不正当的事情好一些。况且凡事必须有资本，文学也不能例外，如没有钱，便无从付印刷费，则杂志及集子都出不成，所以要办书店，出杂志，都得是大家拿一些私蓄出来，妻子的钱自然也是私蓄之一。况且做一个富家的女婿并非罪恶，正如做一个报馆老板的亲戚之并非罪恶为一样，如其一个报馆老板的亲戚，回国后游荡无事，可以依靠亲戚的牌头，夺一个副刊来编编，则一个富家的女婿，因为兴趣所近，用些妻子的赔嫁钱来作文学资本，当然也无不可。
He also said: "There is a rich family, there is a wide wife, and the dowry money is used as literary capital,...... "I think this kind of person should be admired, because it is better to use the wife's money as literary capital than to use the wife's money to do all other improper things." If there is no money, there is no way to pay for printing, then magazines and collections cannot be published, so if you want to open a bookstore and publish a magazine, you have to take out some private savings, and the wife's money is naturally one of the private savings. Moreover, being a son-in-law of a rich family is not a sin, just as being a relative of a newspaper owner is not a sin, such as a relative of a newspaper owner, who wanders around after returning to China, can rely on his relatives' card heads to grab a supplement to compile, then a son-in-law of a rich family, because of his close interests, uses some of his wife's dowry money as literary capital, of course.“女婿”的蔓延
The spread of "son-in-law"圣闲
Saint leisure狐狸吃不到葡萄，说葡萄是酸的，自己娶不到富妻子，于是对于一切有富岳家的人发生了妒忌，妒忌的结果是攻击。
The fox couldn't eat grapes, saying that grapes were sour, and he couldn't marry a rich wife, so he became jealous of everyone who had a rich family, and the result of jealousy was an attack.假如做了人家的女婿，是不是还可以做文人的呢？答案自然是属于正面的，正如前天如是先生在本园上他的一篇《女婿问题》里说过，今日在文坛上最有声色的鲁迅茅盾之流，一方面身为文人，一方面仍然不免是人家的女婿，不过既然做文人同时也可以做人家的女婿，则此女婿是应该属于穷岳家的呢，还是属于富岳家的呢？关于此层，似乎那些老牌作家，尚未出而主张，不知究竟应该“富倾”还是“穷倾”才对，可是《自由谈》之流的撰稿人，既经对于富岳家的女婿取攻击态度，则我们感到，好像至少做富岳家的女婿的似乎不该再跨上这个文坛了，“富岳家的女婿”和“文人”仿佛是冲突的，二者只可任择其一。
If you become someone else's son-in-law, can you still be a literati? The answer is naturally positive, as Mr. Ru said in his "Son-in-law Problem" in this garden the day before yesterday, the most famous Lu Xun and Mao Dun in the literary world today, on the one hand, are literati, on the other hand, they are still the son-in-law of others, but since they can also be the son-in-law of others at the same time, should this son-in-law belong to the poor Yue family, or to the rich Yue family? Regarding this layer, it seems that those veteran writers have not yet come out to advocate whether they should be "rich" or "poor", but the writers of "Free Talk", after taking an attack on the son-in-law of the Fuyue family, we feel that at least those who are the sons-in-law of the Fuyue family should no longer step into this literary world, and the "son-in-law of the Fuyue family" and "literati" seem to be in conflict, and the two can only choose one of them.目下中国文坛似乎有这样一个现象，不必检查一个文人他本身在文坛上的努力的成绩，而唯斤斤于追究那个文人的家庭琐事，如是否有富妻子或穷妻子之类。要是你今天开了一家书店，则这家书店的本钱，是否出乎你妻子的赔嫁钱，也颇劳一些尖眼文人，来调查打听，以此或作攻击讥讽。
At present, there seems to be a phenomenon in the Chinese literary world, there is no need to check the achievements of a literati in the literary world, but only to investigate the family trivialities of the literati, such as whether he has a rich wife or a poor wife. If you open a bookstore today, whether the capital of this bookstore is more than your wife's dowry money, it also takes a lot of sharp-eyed literati to investigate and inquire, so as to attack and ridicule.我想将来中国的文坛，一定还会进步到有下种情形：穿陈嘉庚橡皮鞋者，方得上文坛，如穿皮鞋，便属贵族阶级，而入于被攻击之列了。
I think that in the future, China's literary world will definitely progress to the following situation: those who wear Chen Jiageng's rubber shoes can enter the literary world, and if they wear leather shoes, they belong to the aristocratic class and are among the attacked.现在外国回来的留学生失业的多得很。回国以后编一个副刊也并非一件羞耻事情，编那个副刊，是否因亲戚关系，更不成问题，亲戚的作用，本来就在这种地方。自命以扫除文坛为己任的人，如其人家偶而提到一两句自己的不愿意听的话，便要成群结队的来反攻，大可不必。如其常常骂人家为狂吠的，则自己切不可也落入于狂吠之列。
Now many international students who have returned from abroad are unemployed. It is not a shame to write a supplement after returning to China, and it is not a question of whether it is because of relatives, and the role of relatives is originally in this kind of place. People who claim to be sweeping away the literary world, if they occasionally mention one or two words they don't want to listen to, they will come to counterattack in droves, which is not necessary. If he often scolds others as barking, he must not fall into the ranks of barking.这两位作者都是富家女婿崇拜家，但如是先生是凡庸的，背出了他的祖父，父亲，鲁迅，茅盾之后，结果不过说着“鲁迅拿卢布”那样的滥调；打诨的高手要推圣闲先生，他竟拉到我万想不到的诗人太太的味道上去了。戏剧上的二丑帮忙，倒使花花公子格外出丑，用的便是这样的说法，我后来也引在《“滑稽”例解》中。
Both of these authors are rich sons-in-law worshipers, but Mr. Ru is mediocre, and after reciting his grandfather, father, Lu Xun, and Mao Dun, the result is just a cliché like "Lu Xun takes rubles"; The master of jokes wanted to push Mr. Shengxian, and he actually pulled the taste of a poet's wife that I could never have imagined. The help of the two ugly in the drama made the playboy particularly ugly, and this is the saying, which I later quoted in "Funny" Examples".但邵府上也有恶辣的谋士的。今年二月，我给日本的《改造》杂志做了三篇短论，是讥评中国，日本，满洲的。邵家将却以为“这回是得之矣”了。就在也是这甜葡萄棚里产生出来的《人言》（三月三日出）上，扮出一个译者和编者来，译者算是只译了其中的一篇《谈监狱》，投给了《人言》，并且前有“附白”，后有“识”——
But there are also vicious advisors in the Shao Mansion. In February of this year, I wrote three short articles for Japan's "Transformation" magazine, which were ridiculing China, Japan, and Manchuria. The Shao family general thought that "this time he got it". On "Human Words" (published on March 3rd), which was also produced in this sweet grape shed, a translator and editor were pretended to be translated, and the translator only translated one of them, "Talking about Prison", and voted for "Human Words", and there was "attached white" in front and "knowledge" in the back——
谈监狱
Talk about prisons鲁迅
Lu Xun
（顷阅日文杂志《改造》三月号，见载有我们文坛老将鲁迅翁之杂文三篇，比较翁以中国文发表之短文，更见精彩，因迻译之，以寄《人言》。惜译者未知迅翁寓所，问内山书店主人丸造氏，亦言未详，不能先将译稿就正于氏为憾。但请仍用翁的署名发表，以示尊重原作之意。——译者井上附白。）
(I recently read the March issue of the Japanese magazine "Transformation", and I saw three essays by our literary veteran Lu Xun Weng, which were more wonderful than the short articles published by Weng in Chinese, so I translated them and sent them to "Human Words".) Unfortunately, the translator did not know the residence of Xun Weng, so he asked the owner of the Uchiyama bookstore, Mr. Maruzo, who also said that he did not know and regretted that he could not correct the translation first. However, please still publish it with Weng's signature to show respect for the original work. ——Translator Inoue Fubai. ）人的确是由事实的启发而获得新的觉醒，并且事情也是因此而变革的。从宋代到清朝末年，很久长的时间中，专以代圣贤立言的“制艺”文章，选拔及登用人才。到同法国打了败仗，才知这方法的错误，于是派遣留学生到西洋，设立武器制造局，作为改正的手段。同日本又打了败仗之后，知道这还不彀，这一回是大大地设立新式的学校。于是学生们每年大闹风潮。清朝覆亡，国民党把握了政权之后，又明白了错误，而作为改正手段，是大造监狱。
People are indeed inspired by facts to gain a new awakening, and things change because of it. From the Song Dynasty to the end of the Qing Dynasty, for a long time, the "art-making" articles that were established on behalf of the sages were used to select and appoint talents. After losing the battle with France, he realized the mistake of this method, so he sent international students to the West and set up a weapons manufacturing bureau as a means of correction. After losing the war with Japan again, I knew that this was not enough, and this time I set up a new school this time. So the students make a big fuss every year. After the fall of the Qing Dynasty and the Kuomintang seized power, it understood its mistakes, and as a means of correction, it was to build a large prison.国粹式的监狱，我们从古以来，各处早就有的，清朝末年也稍造了些西洋式的，就是所谓文明监狱。那是特地造来给旅行到中国来的外人看的，该与为同外人讲交际而派出去学习文明人的礼节的留学生属于同一种类。囚人却托庇了得着较好的待遇，也得洗澡，有得一定分量的食品吃，所以是很幸福的地方。而且在二三星期之前，政府因为要行仁政，便发布了囚人口粮不得刻扣的命令。此后当是益加幸福了。
We have had national-style prisons everywhere since ancient times, and at the end of the Qing Dynasty, some Western-style prisons were also built, which are the so-called civilized prisons. It was specially made for outsiders traveling to China, and should belong to the same category as international students sent out to learn the etiquette of civilized people in order to communicate with outsiders. The prisoners were sheltered and treated better, and they had to take a bath, and they had a certain amount of food to eat, so it was a very happy place. And two or three weeks ago, the government issued an order that prisoners' rations should not be deducted because they wanted to practice benevolent governance. After that, I should be happier.至于旧式的监狱，像是取法于佛教的地狱，所以不但禁锢人犯，而且有要给他吃苦的责任。有时还有榨取人犯亲属的金钱使他们成为赤贫的职责。而且谁都以为这是当然的。倘使有不以为然的人，那即是帮助人犯，非受犯罪的嫌疑不可。但是文明程度很进步了，去年有官吏提倡，说人犯每年放归家中一次，给予解决性欲的机会，是很人道主义的说法。老实说：他不是他对于人犯的性欲特别同情，因为决不会实行的望头，所以特别高声说话，以见自己的是官吏。但舆论甚为沸腾起来。某批评家说，这样之后，大家见监狱将无畏惧，乐而赴之，大为为世道人心愤慨。受了圣贤之教，如此悠久，尚不像那个官吏那么狡猾，是很使人心安，但对于人犯不可不虐待的信念，却由此可见。
As for the old-style prison, it is like a Buddhist hell, so it not only imprisons the prisoner, but also has the responsibility to give him hardship. Sometimes the money extracted from the relatives of prisoners made them destitute. And everyone takes it for granted. If there are people who disagree, it is helping the offender, and it must be suspected of committing a crime. But the level of civilization has improved very much, and last year some officials advocated that it was a very humane statement to release prisoners once a year and give them the opportunity to solve their sexual desires. To be honest: he is not particularly sympathetic to the sexual desire of prisoners, because he will never practice it, so he speaks very loudly to see that he is an official. But public opinion is very boiling. A critic said that after this, everyone saw that the prison would be fearless and happy to go there, which was very indignant for the world. Having been taught by the sages, for such a long time, it is not as cunning as that official, which is very reassuring, but the belief that criminals must be abused can be seen from this.从另一方面想来，监狱也确有些像以安全第一为标语的人的理想乡。火灾少，盗贼不进来，土匪也决不来掠夺。即使有了战事，也没有以监狱为目标而来爆击的傻瓜，起了革命，只有释放人犯的例，没有屠杀的事。这回福建独立的时候，说释人犯出外之后，那些意见不同的却有了行踪不明的谣传，但这种例子是前所未见的。总之，不像是很坏的地方。只要能容许带家眷，那么即使现在不是水灾，饥荒，战争，恐怖的时代，请求去转居的人，也决不会没有。所以虐待是必要了吧。
On the other hand, prisons are indeed a bit like the utopia of people with the slogan of safety first. There are few fires, thieves do not come in, and bandits will never come to plunder. Even if there was a war, there were no fools who came to target prisons, and there was a revolution, only examples of releasing prisoners, and there were no massacres. This time, when Fujian became independent, it was said that after the prisoners were released, there were rumors of unknown whereabouts of those who had different opinions, but this kind of example was unprecedented. In short, it doesn't look like a bad place. As long as family members are allowed, then even if it is not a time of floods, famines, wars, and terror, there will never be no people who ask to relocate. So abuse is necessary.牛兰夫妻以宣传赤化之故，收容于南京的监狱，行了三四次的绝食，什么效力也没有。这是因为他不了解中国的监狱精神之故。某官吏说他自己不要吃，同别人有什么关系，很讶奇这事。不但不关系于仁政，且节省伙食，反是监狱方面有利。甘地的把戏，倘使不选择地方，就归于失败。
Niu Lan and his wife were detained in a prison in Nanjing for propaganda and reddening, and went on hunger strike three or four times, but to no avail. This is because he does not understand the Chinese prison spirit. An official said that he didn't want to eat it himself, and he was surprised that it had nothing to do with others. Not only is it not related to benevolent governance, but it also saves food, but it is beneficial to prisons. Gandhi's trick is a failure if you don't choose a place.但是，这样近于完美的监狱，还留着一个缺点，以前对于思想上的事情，太不留意了。为补这个缺点，近来新发明有一种“反省院”的特种监狱，而施行教育。我不曾到其中去反省过，所以不详细其中的事情，总之对于人犯时时讲授三民主义，使反省他们自己的错误。而且还要做出排击共产主义的论文。倘使不愿写或写不出则当然非终生反省下去不行，但做得不好，也得反省到死。在目下，进去的有，出来的也有，反省院还有新造的，总是进去的人多些。试验完毕而出来的良民也偶有会到的，可是大抵总是萎缩枯槁的样子，恐怕是在反省和毕业论文上面把心力用尽了。那是属于前途无望的。
However, such a near-perfect prison still has a drawback, and I didn't pay much attention to ideological things before. In order to make up for this shortcoming, a special prison of the "Reflection Institute" has been newly invented recently, and education is implemented. I have never been to reflect on it, so I will not go into detail about it, in short, I will teach people the Three People's Principles from time to time, so that they can reflect on their own mistakes. And he also had to make a thesis on rejecting communism. If you don't want to write or can't write it, of course you have to reflect on it for the rest of your life, but if you don't do it well, you have to reflect on it to death. At present, there are people who go in, there are people who come out, and there are new ones in the reflection courtyard, and there are always more people going in. The good people who come out of the experiment will occasionally arrive, but they are usually shrunk and withered, and I am afraid that they have exhausted their energy in reflection and graduation thesis. That is a hopeless future.（此外尚有《王道》及《火》二篇，如编者先生认为可用，当再译寄。——译者识。）(In addition, there are two articles, "The Royal Road" and "Fire", if the editor thinks it is available, it should be translated again.) ——Translator knows. ）
姓虽然冒充了日本人，译文却实在不高明，学力不过如邵家帮闲专家章克标先生的程度，但文字也原是无须译得认真的，因为要紧的是后面的算是编者的回答——
Although the surname pretended to be Japanese, the translation was really not clever, and his academic ability was only as good as Mr. Zhang Kebiao, an expert in the Shao family, but the text did not need to be translated seriously, because the important thing was that the latter was the editor's answer——编者注：鲁迅先生的文章，最近是在查禁之列。此文译自日文，当可逃避军事裁判。但我们刊登此稿目的，与其说为了文章本身精美或其议论透彻；不如说举一个被本国迫逐而托庇于外人威权之下的论调的例子。鲁迅先生本来文章极好，强辞夺理亦能说得头头是道，但统观此文，则意气多于议论，捏造多于实证，若非译笔错误，则此种态度实为我所不取也。登此一篇，以见文化统制治下之呼声一般。《王道》与《火》两篇，不拟再登，转言译者，可勿寄来。
Editor's note: Mr. Lu Xun's article has recently been banned. This text is translated from Japanese, which should be able to escape military judgment. But the purpose of publishing this article is not so much for the exquisite article itself or for its thorough discussion; It is better to give an example of the argument of being forced out by one's own country and sheltered under the authoritarian power of outsiders. Mr. Lu Xun originally had an excellent article, and he could say the head well even if he forced his words, but looking at this article as a whole, there is more enthusiasm than discussion, and more fabrication than empirical evidence. Publishing this article shows the call for cultural control and governance. The two articles "The Royal Road" and "Fire" are not intended to be published again, but the translator should not send them back.这编者的“托庇于外人威权之下”的话，是和译者的“问内山书店主人丸造氏”相应的；而且提出“军事裁判”来，也是作者极高的手笔，其中含着甚深的杀机。我见这富家儿的鹰犬，更深知明季的向权门卖身投靠之辈是怎样的阴险了。他们的主公邵诗人，在赞扬美国白诗人的文章中，贬落了黑诗人，“相信这种诗是走不出美国的，至少走不出英国语的圈子。”（《现代》五卷六期）我在中国的富贵人及其鹰犬的眼中，虽然也不下于黑奴，但我的声音却走出去了。这是最可痛恨的。但其实，黑人的诗也走出“英国语的圈子”去了。美国富翁和他的女婿及其鹰犬也是奈何它不得的。
The editor's words of "sheltering under the authoritarianism of outsiders" correspond to the translator's "ask the owner of the Uchiyama bookstore, Mr. Maruzou"; Moreover, the proposal of "military judgment" is also the author's extremely high handwriting, which contains a deep murderous intent. I saw the hawks and dogs of this rich family, and I knew more about the insidious people who sold themselves to the powerful in the Ming Dynasty. Their lord, the poet Shao, in an article praising the white poet in the United States, belittled the black poet, "I believe that this kind of poetry cannot get out of the United States, at least not out of the English and Chinese circles." ("Modern", Volume 5, Issue 6) In the eyes of the rich and noble people in China and their hawks and dogs, although I am no less than the black slaves, my voice has gone out. This is the most hateful. But in fact, black poetry has also gone out of the "Chinese circle". The American rich man and his son-in-law and his hawk dog are also helpless.但这种鹰犬的这面目，也不过以向“鲁迅先生的文章，最近是在查禁之列”的我而已，只要立刻能给一个嘴巴，他们就比吧儿狗还驯服。现在就引一个也曾在《“滑稽”例解》中提过，登在去年九月二十一日《申报》上的广告在这里罢——
But this kind of hawk dog is just to tell me that "Mr. Lu Xun's article has recently been banned", as long as they can give a mouth immediately, they are more tame than the bar. Now I will quote an advertisement that was also mentioned in the "Funny" Examples" and published in the "Declaration" on September 21 last year -
十日谈向晶报声明误会表示歉意
Ten days talked about apologizing for the misunderstanding to Jingbao敬启者十日谈第二期短评有朱霁青亦将公布捐款一文后段提及晶报系属误会本刊措词不善致使晶报对邵洵美君提起刑事自诉按双方均为社会有声誉之刊物自无互相攻讦之理兹经章士钊江容平衡诸君诠释已得晶报完全谅解除由晶报自行撤回诉讼外特此登报声明表示歉意
Dear Reader: In the second issue of the Ten Days Talk, there is a short comment that Zhu Jiqing will also announce the donation, and mentioned in the latter paragraph that Jingbao is a misunderstanding, and the poor wording of this journal has caused Jingbao to file a criminal private prosecution against Shao Xunmeijun, according to the fact that both parties are publications with a reputation in the society, there is no reason to attack each other, and this has been interpreted by Zhang Shizhao and Jiang Rongbao, and Jingbao has fully forgiven Jingbao, and Jingbao has withdrawn the lawsuit on its own, and hereby publishes a statement to apologize“双方均为社会有声誉之刊物，自无互相攻讦之理”，此“理”极奇，大约是应该攻讦“最近是在查禁之列”的刊物的罢。金子做了骨髓，也还是站不直，在这里看见铁证了。
"Both sides are publications with a good reputation in society, and there is no reason to attack each other", this "reason" is extremely strange, and it is probably the only one that should attack publications that are "recently banned". The gold is the bone marrow, but it still can't stand upright, and I see ironclad evidence here.
给“女婿问题”纸张费得太多了，跳到别一件，这就是“《庄子》和《文选》”。
It costs too much paper for the "son-in-law problem", so I jumped to another one, which is "Zhuangzi and Anthology".这案件的往复的文字，已经收在本文里，不再多谈；别人的议论，也为了节省纸张，都不剪帖了。其时《十日谈》也大显手段，连漫画家都出了马，为了一幅陈静生先生的《鲁迅翁之笛》，还在《涛声》上和曹聚仁先生惹起过一点辩论的小风波。但是辩论还没有完，《涛声》已被禁止了，福人总永远有福星照命……
The text of this case has been included in this article, and I will not talk about it further; Other people's discussions, and in order to save paper, they don't cut the post. At that time, "Decameron" also showed great means, and even cartoonists came out to create a small storm with Mr. Cao Juren on "The Sound of the Waves" for a picture of Mr. Chen Jingsheng's "The Flute of Lu Xunweng". But the debate is not over yet, "The Sound of the Waves" has been banned, and the lucky people will always have a lucky star to follow their fate......然而时光是不留情面的，所谓“第三种人”，尤其是施蛰存和杜衡即苏汶，到今年就各自露出他本来的嘴脸来了。
However, time is merciless, and the so-called "third kind of people", especially Shi Zhicun and Du Heng, that is, Su Wen, have each revealed their original faces this year.这回要提到末一篇，流弊是出在用新典。
This time, I want to mention the last article, and the problem is that it is due to the use of the new code.听说，现在是连用古典有时也要被检查官禁止了，例如提起秦始皇，但去年还不妨，不过用新典总要闹些小乱子。我那最末的《青年与老子》，就因为碰着了杨邨人先生（虽然刊出的时候，那名字已给编辑先生删掉了），后来在《申报》本埠增刊的《谈言》（十一月二十四日）上引得一篇妙文的。不过颇难解，好像是在说我以孝子自居，却攻击他做孝子，既“投井”，又“下石”了。因为这是一篇我们的“改悔的革命家”的标本作品，弃之可惜，谨录全文，一面以见杨先生倒是现代“语录体”作家的先驱，也算是我的《后记》里的一点余兴罢——
I heard that even the use of classical music is sometimes banned by inspectors, such as mentioning Qin Shi Huang, but last year it was okay, but there was always some small trouble with the new classics. My last "Youth and Lao Tzu" was because I met Mr. Yang Cunren (although the name had been deleted by the editor when it was published), and later I got a wonderful article in the "Tanyan" (November 24) supplement of the "Declaration". However, it is quite difficult to understand, as if to say that I consider myself a filial son, but I attack him as a filial son, which is both "throwing into the well" and "going down the stone". Because this is a specimen work of our "repentant revolutionary", it is a pity to abandon it, and I will copy the full text, while seeing that Mr. Yang is a pioneer of modern "quotation style" writers, and it can be regarded as a little aftertaste in my "Afterword" -
聪明之道
The way of intelligence邨人
Villagers
畴昔之夜，拜访世故老人于其庐：庐为三层之楼，面街而立，虽电车玲玲轧轧，汽车呜呜哑哑，市嚣扰人而不觉，俨然有如隐士，居处晏如，悟道深也。老人曰，“汝来何事？”对曰，“敢问聪明之道。”谈话有主题，遂成问答。
畴昔之夜，拜访世故老人于其庐：庐为三层之楼，面街而立，虽电车玲玲轧轧，汽车呜呜哑哑，市嚣扰人而不觉，俨然有如隐士，居处晏如，悟道深也。 老人曰，“汝来何事？”对曰，“敢问聪明之道。 ”谈话有主题，遂成问答。“难矣哉，聪明之道也！孔门贤人如颜回，举一隅以三隅反，孔子称其聪明过人，于今之世能举一隅以三隅反者尚非聪明之人，汝问聪明之道，其有意难余老瞆者耶？”
“难矣哉，聪明之道也！孔门贤人如颜回，举一隅以三隅反，孔子称其聪明过人，于今之世能举一隅以三隅反者尚非聪明之人，汝问聪明之道，其有意难余老瞆者耶？”“不是不是，你老人家误会了我的问意了！我并非要请教关于思辨之术。我是生性拙直愚笨，处世无方，常常碰壁，敢问关于处世的聪明之道。”
"No, no, you old man misunderstood my question! I am not asking about the art of thinking. I am clumsy and stupid by nature, I am unruly in the world, and I often hit a wall, so I dare to ask about the smart way of life. ”“噫嘻，汝诚拙直愚笨也，又问处世之道！夫今之世，智者见智，仁者见仁，阶级不同，思想各异，父子兄弟夫妇姊妹因思想之各异，一家之内各有主张各有成见，虽属骨肉至亲，乖离冲突，背道而驰；古之所谓英雄豪杰，各事其君而为仇敌，今之所谓志士革命家，各为阶级反目无情，甚至只因立场之不同，骨肉至亲格杀无赦，投机取巧或能胜利于一时，终难立足于世界，聪明之道实则已穷，且唯既愚且鲁之徒方能享福无边也矣。……”
“噫嘻，汝诚拙直愚笨也，又问处世之道！夫今之世，智者见智，仁者见仁，阶级不同，思想各异，父子兄弟夫妇姊妹因思想之各异，一家之内各有主张各有成见，虽属骨肉至亲，乖离冲突，背道而驰；古之所谓英雄豪杰，各事其君而为仇敌，今之所谓志士革命家，各为阶级反目无情，甚至只因立场之不同，骨肉至亲格杀无赦，投机取巧或能胜利于一时，终难立足于世界，聪明之道实则已穷，且唯既愚且鲁之徒方能享福无边也矣。 ……”“老先生虽然说的头头是道，理由充足，可是，真的聪明之道就没有了吗？”
"Although the old gentleman said that the beginning is the Tao, and the reason is sufficient, is there really no smart way?"“然则仅有投机取巧之道也矣。试为汝言之：夫投机取巧之道要在乎滑头，而滑头已成为专门之学问，西欧学理分门别类有所谓科学哲学者，滑头之学问实可称为滑头学。滑头学如依大学教授之编讲义，大可分成若干章，每章分成若干节，每节分成若干项，引古据今，中西合璧，其理论之深奥有甚于哲学，其引证之广大举凡中外历史，物理化学，艺术文学，经商贸易之直，诱惑欺骗之术，概属必列，包罗万象，自大学预科以至大学四年级此一讲义仅能讲其千分之一，大学毕业各科及格，此滑头学则无论何种聪明绝顶之学生皆不能及格，且大学教授本人恐亦知其然不知其所以然，其难学也可想而知之矣。余处世数十年，头顶已秃，须发已白，阅历不为不广，教训不为不多，然而余着手编辑滑头学讲义，仅能编其第一章之第一节，第一节之第一项也。此第一章之第一节，第一节之第一项其纲目为‘顺水行舟’，即人云亦云，亦即人之喜者喜之，人之恶者恶之是也，举一例言之，如人之恶者为孝子，所谓封建宗法社会之礼教遗孽之一，则汝虽曾经为父侍汤服药问医求卜出诸天性以事亲人，然论世之出诸天性以事亲人者则引‘孝子’之名以责难之，惟求青年之鼓掌称快，勿管本心见解及自己行动之如何也。被责难者处于时势潮流之下，百辞莫辩，辩则反动更为证实，从此青年鸣鼓而攻，体无完肤，汝之胜利不但已操左券，且为青年奉为至圣大贤，小品之集有此一篇，风行海内洛阳纸贵，于是名利双收，富贵无边矣。其第一章之第一节，第一节之第二项为‘投井下石’，余本亦知一二，然偶一忆及投井下石之人，殊觉头痛，实无心编之也。然而滑头学虽属聪明之道，实乃左道旁门，汝实不足学也。”
"In this case, there is only a way to opportunist. Let me tell you: the way of opportunistic ingenuity lies in the slippery head, and the slippery head has become a specialized discipline, and there is a so-called philosophy of science in Western European science, and the science of the slippery head can actually be called the slippery head. If the handouts are compiled by university professors, the slippery head study can be divided into several chapters, each chapter is divided into several sections, each section is divided into several items, citing the past and the present, the combination of Chinese and Western, its theory is more profound than philosophy, its citations are vast, all Chinese and foreign history, physical chemistry, art and literature, business and trade, temptation and deception, all must be listed, all-encompassing, from the pre-university course to the fourth year of college, this lecture can only talk about one thousandth of it, and all subjects after graduating from the university are passed, and this slippery head study is not passed by any kind of smart and extremely clever student. Moreover, university professors themselves may know this and do not know why, and it is easy to imagine how difficult it is to learn. I have been in this world for decades, the top of my head is bald, my beard and hair are white, my experience is not insignificant, and my lessons are not small, but I have started editing the handouts of the slippery head, and I can only edit the first section of the first chapter and the first item of the first section. For example, if a person is a filial son, one of the so-called remnants of the rites and teachings of feudal patriarchal society, then although you have served your father with soup and medicine, seeking medical advice and seeking divination to serve your relatives, you will use the name of 'filial son' to criticize and criticize those who serve their relatives with all their natures, only seeking the applause and applause of young people, regardless of their own opinions and actions. The accused are under the trend of the times, indisputable, and the argument is more confirmed, and since then, the young people have beaten the drum to attack, and the body is not intact, your victory has not only held the left ticket, but also worshipped as the most holy sage for the youth, and the collection of sketches has this article, which is popular in the world and Luoyang paper is expensive, so fame and fortune are harvested, and wealth is boundless. The first section of the first chapter and the second item of the first section are 'throwing stones into the well', and I know a thing or two, but I occasionally remember the person who threw the stone into the well, and I felt a headache, so I really didn't want to make it up. However, although the slippery head study is a clever way, it is actually a side door, and you really don't need to learn. ”“老先生所言想亦很有道理，现在社会上将这种学问作敲门砖混饭吃的人实在不少，他们也实在到处逢源，名利双收，可是我是一个拙直愚笨的人，恐怕就要学也学不了吧？”
"What the old gentleman said is also very reasonable, now there are many people in the society who use this kind of knowledge as a stepping stone to eat, and they are really everywhere, fame and fortune, but I am a clumsy and stupid person, I'm afraid I can't learn it, right?"“呜呼汝求聪明之道，而不学之，虽属可取，然碰壁也宜矣！”
"Alas, you seek the way of wisdom, but do not learn it, although it is desirable, but it is also appropriate to hit a wall!"是夕问道于世故老人，归来依然故我，呜呼噫嘻！
That night, I asked the old man of the world, and when I returned, I was still the same as before, ah!
但我们也不要一味赏鉴“呜呼噫嘻”，因为这之前，有些地方演了“全武行”。
But let's not blindly appreciate "woo woo hee", because before that, some places performed "full martial arts".也还是剪报好，我在这里剪一点记的最为简单的——
It's better to cut newspapers, and it's the simplest for me to cut a little here -
艺华影片公司被“影界铲共同志会”捣毁
Yihua Film Company was destroyed by the "Film Industry Shovel Common Ambition Association"昨晨九时许，艺华公司在沪西康脑脱路金司徒庙附近新建之摄影场内，忽来行动突兀之青年三人，向该公司门房伪称访客，一人正在持笔签名之际，另一人遂大呼一声，则预伏于外之暴徒七八人，一律身穿蓝布短衫裤，蜂拥夺门冲入，分投各办事室，肆行捣毁写字台玻璃窗以及椅凳各器具，然后又至室外，打毁自备汽车两辆，晒片机一具，摄影机一具，并散发白纸印刷之小传单，上书“民众起来一致剿灭共产党”，“打倒出卖民众的共产党”，“扑灭杀人放火的共产党”等等字样，同时又散发一种油印宣言，最后署名为“中国电影界铲共同志会”。约逾七分钟时，由一人狂吹警笛一声，众暴徒即集合列队而去，迨该管六区闻警派警士侦缉员等赶至，均已远扬无踪。该会且宣称昨晨之行动，目的仅在予该公司一警告，如该公司及其他公司不改变方针，今后当准备更激烈手段应付，联华，明星，天一等公司，本会亦已有严密之调查矣云云。
At about 9 o'clock yesterday morning, Yihua Company was in the newly built photography studio near the Jinsu Temple on Kangnaotuo Road, western Shanghai, three young people suddenly came to act abruptly, pretending to be visitors to the company's concierge, one was holding a pen to sign, the other person shouted, and there were seven or eight thugs lurking outside, all wearing blue cloth shorts and pants, swarming to rush in, throwing into each office, wantonly smashing the glass windows of the writing desk and the utensils of the chairs and benches, and then going outside, destroying two self-prepared cars, a film dryer, and a camera. He also distributed small leaflets printed on white paper, with the words "The people rise up to unanimously exterminate the Communist Party", "Down with the Communist Party that betrays the people", "Extinguish the Communist Party that kills and sets fires", etc., and at the same time distributes a mimeographed declaration, and finally signed as "Chinese Film Industry Shoveling Common Ambition Association". After about seven minutes, a man blew the siren, and the rioters gathered and left, and by the time the police sent sergeants and detectives to arrive, they had all disappeared. The association also claimed that the purpose of yesterday's action was only to give the company a warning, if the company and other companies do not change their policy, they should prepare more drastic measures to deal with it in the future, Lianhua, Xingxing, Tianyi and other companies, and the association has also been closely investigated.据各报所载该宣言之内容称，艺华公司系共党宣传机关，普罗文化同盟为造成电影界之赤化，以该公司为大本营，如出品《民族生存》等片，其内容为描写阶级斗争者，但以向南京检委会行贿，故得通过发行。又称该会现向教育部，内政部，中央党部及本市政府发出呈文，要求当局命令该公司，立即销毁业已摄成各片，自行改组公司，清除所有赤色份子，并对受贿之电影检委会之责任人员，予以惩处等语。
According to the contents of the declaration published in various newspapers, Yihua Company is the propaganda organ of the Communist Party, and the Pu Cultural League used the company as its base camp in order to cause the reddening of the film industry, such as producing films such as "National Survival", which depict class struggle, but because of bribery to the Nanjing Procuratorial Committee, it was approved for distribution. It is also said that the association has now issued a petition to the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of the Interior, the Central Party Department and the municipal government, requesting the authorities to order the company to immediately destroy the films that have been filmed, reorganize the company on its own, remove all red elements, and punish the responsible personnel of the Film Inspection Committee for accepting bribes.事后，公司坚称，实系被劫，并称已向曹家渡六区公安局报告。记者得讯，前往调查时，亦仅见该公司内部布置被毁无余，桌椅东倒西歪，零乱不堪，内幕究竟如何，想不日定能水落石出也。
Afterwards, the company insisted that it was actually robbed and said that it had reported to the Public Security Bureau of Caojiadu District 6. The reporter learned that when he went to investigate, he only saw that the company's internal layout was completely destroyed, the tables and chairs were crooked, and they were messy.十一月十三日，《大美晚报》。
November 13, "Great American Evening News".
影界铲共会The film industry shovels the meeting
警戒电影院
Vigilant cinema拒演田汉等之影片Refused to perform in films such as Tian Han
自从艺华公司被击以后，上海电影界突然有了一番新的波动，从制片商已经牵涉到电影院，昨日本埠大小电影院同时接到署名上海影界铲共同志会之警告函件，请各院拒映田汉等编制导演主演之剧本，其原文云：
Since the attack on Yihua Company, the Shanghai film industry has suddenly had a new fluctuation, from the producer has been involved in the cinema, yesterday the large and small cinemas in this port received a warning letter signed by the Shanghai Film Industry Shovel Association, asking each theater to refuse to screen the script starring Tian Han and other directors, the original text of which said:敝会激于爱护民族国家心切，并不忍电影界为共产党所利用，因有警告赤色电影大本营——艺华影片公司之行动，查贵院平日对于电影业，素所热心，为特严重警告，祈对于田汉（陈瑜），沈端先（即蔡叔声，丁谦之），卜万苍，胡萍，金焰等所导演，所编制，所主演之各项鼓吹阶级斗争贫富对立的反动电影，一律不予放映，否则必以暴力手段对付，如艺华公司一样，决不宽假，此告。上海影界铲共同志会。十一，十三。
Because of the action of warning the red film base - Yihua Film Company, Cha Guiyuan has always been enthusiastic about the film industry on weekdays, and is a particularly serious warning, praying that Tian Han (Chen Yu), Shen Duanxian (i.e., Cai Shusheng, Ding Qianzhi), Bu Wancang, Hu Ping, Jin Yan and other directed, compiled, and starred in all kinds of reactionary films advocating class struggle and the opposition between the rich and the poor will not be screened, otherwise they will be dealt with by violent means, such as Yihua Company. I will never give you a leave of absence, this notice. Shanghai Film Industry Shovel Common Association. Eleven, thirteen.十一月十六日，《大美晚报》。
November 16, "Great American Evening News".但“铲共”又并不限于“影界”，出版界也同时遭到覆面英雄们的袭击了。又剪报——
But the "shoveling of the Communist Party" is not limited to the "film industry", and the publishing industry has also been attacked by masked heroes at the same time. Another newspaper clipping——
今晨良友图书公司This morning, Liangyou Book Company
突来一怪客A strange person suddenly appeared
手持铁锤击碎玻璃窗
Holding a hammer to break the glass window扬长而去捕房侦查中
The arrest room is under investigation►……光华书局请求保护►…… Guanghua Bookstore requested protection
沪西康脑脱路艺华影片公司，昨晨九时许，忽被状似工人等数十名，闯入摄影场中，并大发各种传单，署名“中国电影界铲共同志会”等字样，事后扬长而去。不料一波未平，一波又起，今日上午十一时许，北四川路八百五十一号良友图书印刷公司，忽有一男子手持铁锤，至该公司门口，将铁锤击入该店门市大玻璃窗内，击成一洞。该男子见目的已达，立即逃避。该管虹口捕房据报后，立即派员前往调查一过，查得良友公司经售各种思想左倾之书籍，与捣毁艺华公司一案，不无关联。今日上午四马路光华书局据报后，惊骇异常，即自投该管中央捕房，请求设法保护，而免意外，惟至记者截稿时尚未闻发生意外之事云。
At about 9 o'clock yesterday morning, dozens of workers broke into the photography studio and distributed various leaflets, signing the words "China Film Industry Shoveling Common Ambition Association", and left afterwards. At about 11 o'clock this morning, at Liangyou Book and Printing Company, No. 851 North Sichuan Road, a man suddenly came to the door of the company with a hammer and smashed the hammer into the large glass window of the store, making a hole. Seeing that the goal had been achieved, the man immediately fled. After the report was reported, the Guan Hongkou arrest house immediately sent personnel to investigate, and found that Liangyou Company sold various left-leaning books, which was not unrelated to the case of destroying Yihua Company. This morning, after the report of the Guanghua Bookstore on Sima Road, it was extremely shocked, that is, it surrendered to the central arrest room of the jurisdiction, requesting to find a way to protect it from accidents, but by the time of the reporter's deadline, there had been no news of the accident.十一月十三日，《大晚报》。
November 13, The Great Evening News.捣毁中国论坛
Destroy the China Forum印刷所已被捣毁
The printing house has been destroyed编辑间未受损失The editorial room was not damaged
承印美人伊罗生编辑之《中国论坛报》勒佛尔印刷所，在虹口天潼路，昨晚有暴徒潜入，将印刷间捣毁，其编辑间则未受损失。
The printing house of the "China Tribune" edited by the beauty Irosheng, on Tiantong Road in Hongkou, was infiltrated last night by a rioter and destroyed the printing room, but its editorial room was not damaged.十一月十五日，《大美晚报》。
November 15, "Great American Evening News".
袭击神州国光社Attack on the Shenzhou Guoguang Society
昨夕七时四人冲入总发行所
At 7 p.m. last night, four people rushed into the main distribution office铁锤挥击打碎橱窗损失不大The hammer swing broke the window, and the loss was not much
河南路五马路口神州国光社总发行所，于昨晚七时，正欲打烊时，突有一身衣长袍之顾客入内，状欲购买书籍。不料在该客甫入门后，背后即有三人尾随而进。该长袍客回头见三人进来，遂即上前将该书局之左面走廊旁墙壁上所挂之电话机摘断。而同时三短衣者即实行捣毁，用铁锤乱挥，而长衣者亦加入动手，致将该店之左橱窗打碎，四人即扬长而逸。而该店时有三四伙友及学徒，亦惊不能作声。然长衣者方出门至相距不数十步之泗泾路口，为站岗巡捕所拘，盖此长衣客因打橱窗时玻璃倒下，伤及自己面部，流血不止，渠因痛而不能快行也。
At 7 o'clock last night, just as it was about to close, a customer in a long robe suddenly entered the office, pretending to buy books. Unexpectedly, as soon as the guest entered, three people followed behind him. The robe guest turned around and saw three people coming in, so he immediately stepped forward and cut off the telephone hanging on the wall next to the corridor on the left side of the bookstore. At the same time, the three people in short clothes smashed and swung with a hammer, and the people in long clothes also joined in, causing the left window of the store to be smashed, and the four of them ran away. At that time, there were three or four friends and apprentices in the store, and they were also shocked and couldn't make a sound. However, the man in long clothes was detained by the patrol guard at the intersection of Sijing Road, which was less than a few dozen steps away, because the man in long clothes fell on the glass when he hit the window, injured his face, bleeding profusely, and he could not walk fast because of the pain.该长衣者当即被拘入四马路中央巡捕房后，竭力否认参加捣毁，故巡捕已将此人释放矣。
After the man in long clothes was immediately detained in the central patrol room of Sima Road, he tried his best to deny participating in the demolition, so the patrol officer has released the person.十二月一日，《大美晚报》。
December 1, "Great American Evening News".美国人办的报馆捣毁得最客气，武官们开的书店捣毁得最迟。“扬长而逸”，写得最有趣。
The newspapers run by the Americans were destroyed the most politely, and the bookstores opened by military attachés were destroyed the latest. "Promoting the long and escaped", the most interesting to write.捣毁电影公司，是一面撒些宣言的，有几种报上登过全文；对于书店和报馆却好像并无议论，因为不见有什么记载。然而也有，是一种钢笔版蓝色印的警告，店名或馆名空着，各各填以墨笔，笔迹并不像读书人，下面是一长条紫色的木印。我幸而藏着原本，现在订定标点，照样的抄录在这里——
Destroying the film company is a manifesto on one side, and several newspapers have published the full text; There seems to be no discussion about bookstores and newspapers, because there is no record of it. However, there is also a warning of a pen version of the blue print, the name of the store or the name of the museum is empty, each filled with an ink pen, the handwriting does not look like a scholar, and there is a long purple wooden seal below. Fortunately, I have hidden the original, and now I have set the punctuation and transcribe it here -敝会激于爱护民族国家心切，并不忍文化界与思想界为共党所利用，因有警告赤色电影大本营——艺华公司之行动。现为贯彻此项任务计，拟对于文化界来一清算，除对于良友图书公司给予一初步的警告外，于所有各书局各刊物均已有精密之调查。素知
Our association is eager to love the nation and the state, and cannot bear to be used by the Communist Party in the cultural and ideological circles, because there is a warning about the action of Yihua Company, the base camp of red films. In order to implement this task, it is planned to liquidate the cultural circles, and in addition to giving a preliminary warning to Liangyou Book Company, a detailed investigation has been conducted in all bookstores and publications. I always know贵……对于文化事业，热心异人，为特严重警告，对于赤色作家所作文字，如鲁迅，茅盾，蓬子，沈端先，钱杏邨及其他赤色作家之作品，反动文字，以及反动剧评，苏联情况之介绍等，一律不得刊行，登载，发行。如有不遵，我们必以较对付艺华及良友公司更激烈更彻底的手段对付你们，决不宽假！此告
Expensive...... For cultural undertakings, enthusiastic outsiders, for the sake of a serious warning, the writings written by red writers, such as Lu Xun, Mao Dun, Pengzi, Shen Duanxian, Qian Xingcun and other red writers, reactionary texts, as well as reactionary drama reviews, introductions to the Soviet Union, etc., are not allowed to be published, published, or distributed. If you do not comply, we will use more drastic and thorough means to deal with you than against Yihua and Liangyou Company, and we will never be lenient! This notice…………
上海影界铲共同志会　十一，十三。
Shanghai Film Industry Shovel Common Society 11, 13.一个“志士”，纵使“对于文化事业，热心异人”，但若会在不知何时，飞来一个锤子，打破值银数百两的大玻璃；“如有不遵”，更会在不知何时，飞来一顶红帽子，送掉他比大玻璃更值钱的脑袋，那他当然是也许要灰心的。然则书店和报馆之有些为难，也就可想而知了。我既是被“扬长而去”的英雄们指定为“赤色作家”，还是莫害他人，放下笔，静静的看一会把戏罢，所以这一本里面的杂文，以十一月七日止，因为从七日到恭逢警告的那时候——十一月十三日，我也并没有写些什么的。
A "man of ambition", even if he is "enthusiastic about cultural undertakings", if at some point, a hammer will fly and break a large glass worth hundreds of taels of silver; "If you don't comply", at some point, a red hat will fly in and give away his head that is more valuable than big glass, then of course he may be discouraged. However, it is easy to imagine that bookstores and newspapers are somewhat difficult. Since I was designated as a "red writer" by the heroes who "drove away", I still didn't harm others, put down my pen, and quietly watched the trick for a while, so the essays in this book ended on November 7th, because from the seventh to the time of the warning - November 13th, I didn't write anything.但是，经验使我知道，我在受着武力征伐的时候，是同时一定要得到文力征伐的。文人原多“烟士披离纯”，何况现在嗅觉又特别发达了，他们深知道要怎样“创作”才合式。这就到了我不批评社会，也不论人，而人论我的时期了，而我的工作是收材料。材料尽有，妙的却不多。纸墨更该爱惜，这里仅选了六篇。官办的《中央日报》讨伐得最早，真是得风气之先，不愧为“中央”；《时事新报》正当“全武行”全盛之际，最合时宜，却不免非常昏愦；《大晚报》和《大美晚报》起来得最晚，这是因为“商办”的缘故，聪明，所以小心，小心就不免迟钝，他刚才决计合伙来讨伐，却不料几天之后就要过年，明年是先行检查书报，以惠商民，另结新样的网，又是一个局面了。
However, experience has taught me that when I am conquered by force, I must also be conquered by civil force. The literati used to be "smokers who are pure and pure", not to mention that now the sense of smell is particularly developed, and they know how to "create" to fit the style. This is the time when I don't criticize society or people, but people talk about me, and my job is to collect materials. The materials are all there, but there are not many wonderful things. Paper and ink should be cherished even more, and only six articles have been selected here. The government-run "Central Daily" was the earliest to crusade, and it was really the first to gain the trend, worthy of being called the "Central Committee"; "Shishi Xinbao" is the most timely at the time of the heyday of "Quan Wuxing", but it is inevitably very confused; "The Great Evening News" and the "Great American Evening News" got up the latest, this is because of the "commercial office", smart, so be careful, careful will inevitably be dull, he just decided to partner to crusade, but unexpectedly a few days later it will be the New Year, next year is to check the books and newspapers first, to benefit the merchants and people, and to form a new kind of network, which is another situation.现在算是还没有过年，先来《中央日报》的两篇罢——
It's not the New Year yet, let's start with the two articles of the Central Daily——
杂感
Mixed feelings洲
continent
近来有许多杂志上都在提倡小文章。《申报月刊》《东方杂志》以及《现代》上，都有杂感随笔这一栏。好像一九三三真要变成一个小文章年头了。目下中国杂感家之多，远胜于昔，大概此亦鲁迅先生一人之功也。中国杂感家老牌，自然要推鲁迅。他的师爷笔法，冷辣辣的，有他人所不及的地方。《热风》，《华盖集》，《华盖续集》，去年则还出了什么三心《二心》之类。照他最近一年来“干”的成绩而言大概五心六心也是不免的。鲁迅先生久无创作出版了，除了译一些俄国黑面包之外，其余便是写杂感文章了。杂感文章，短短千言，自然可以一挥而就。则于抽卷烟之际，略转脑子，结果就是十元千字。大概写杂感文章，有一个不二法门。不是热骂，便是冷嘲。如能热骂后再带一句冷嘲或冷嘲里夹两句热骂，则更佳矣。
Recently, many magazines have been promoting small articles. "Declaration Monthly", "Oriental Magazine" and "Modern" all have a miscellaneous essay column. It seems that 1933 is really going to become a small article year. At present, there are far more mixed sensations in China than in the past, and this is probably also the work of Mr. Lu Xun alone. The old Chinese sensation artist naturally wants to push Lu Xun. His master's penmanship is cold and spicy, and there are things that others can't match. "Hot Wind", "Canopy Collection", "Canopy Sequel", and last year there were also three hearts and "Two Hearts". According to his achievements in "working" in the past year, it is probably inevitable that he will be heartbroken. Mr. Lu Xun has not created and published for a long time, except for translating some Russian black bread, the rest is writing miscellaneous articles. Mixed feelings of writing, just a thousand words, can naturally be completed in one stroke. When he was smoking a cigarette, he turned his mind a little, and the result was ten yuan and a thousand words. There is probably a way to write miscellaneous articles. It's either a hot scolding or a cynicism. It would be better if you could scold with a sneer or two sneers in it.不过普通一些杂感，自然是冷嘲的多。如对于某事物有所不满，自然就不满（迅案：此字似有误）有冷嘲的文章出来。鲁迅先生对于这样也看不上眼，对于那样也看不上眼，所以对于这样又有感想，对于那样又有感想了。
However, ordinary miscellaneous feelings are naturally more cynical. If you are dissatisfied with something, you will naturally be dissatisfied (Xun Case: this word seems to be wrong) and there will be a sarcastic article. Mr. Lu Xun can't look down on this, nor does he look down on that, so he has feelings about this and that.我们村上有个老女人，丑而多怪。一天到晚专门爱说人家的短处，到了东村头摇了一下头，跑到了西村头叹了一口气。好像一切总不合她的胃。但是，你真的问她倒底要怎样呢，她又说不出。我觉得她倒有些像鲁迅先生，一天到晚只是讽刺，只是冷嘲，只是不负责任的发一点杂感。当真你要问他究竟的主张，他又从来不给我们一个鲜明的回答。
There is an old woman in our village, ugly and weird. All day long, he loved to talk about other people's shortcomings, shook his head when he arrived at the East Village, and ran to the West Village Head and sighed. It seems that everything is not in her stomach. However, if you really ask her what to do, she can't say. I think she is a bit like Mr. Lu Xun, just sarcastic, just sneering, just irresponsibly sending a little miscellaneous feeling. If you really want to ask him what he thinks, he never gives us a clear answer.十月三十一日，《中央日报》的《中央公园》。
October 31, "Central Park" of the "Central Daily".
文坛与擂台
Literary world and ring鸣春
Ming Chun
上海的文坛变成了擂台。鲁迅先生是这擂台上的霸王。鲁迅先生好像在自己的房间里带了一付透视一切的望远镜，如果发现文坛上那一个的言论与行为有些瑕疵，他马上横枪跃马，打得人家落花流水。因此，鲁迅先生就不得不花去可贵的时间，而去想如何锋利他的笔端，如何达到挖苦人的顶点，如何要打得人家永不得翻身。
Shanghai's literary scene has become a ring. Mr. Lu Xun is the overlord of this ring. Mr. Lu Xun seems to have brought a telescope in his room to see through everything, and if he finds that there are some flaws in the remarks and behaviors of the one in the literary world, he will immediately leap on his horse and beat people to the ground. Therefore, Mr. Lu Xun had to spend precious time thinking about how to sharpen his pen, how to reach the pinnacle of sarcasm, and how to beat people so that they could never turn over.关于这，我替鲁迅先生想想有些不大合算。鲁迅先生你先要认清了自己的地位，就是反对你的人，暗里总不敢否认你是中国顶出色的作家；既然你的言论，可以影响青年，那么你的言论就应该慎重。请你自己想想，在写《阿Q传》之后，有多少时间浪费在笔战上？而这种笔战，对一般青年发生了何种影响？
Regarding this, I think it's not very cost-effective for Mr. Lu Xun. Mr. Lu Xun, you must first recognize your status, that is, those who oppose you, and secretly dare not deny that you are the best writer in China; Since your remarks can affect young people, then your remarks should be cautious. Please think for yourself, after writing "The Biography of Ah Q", how much time was wasted on writing battles? And what impact does this pen war have on ordinary young people?第一流的作家们既然常时混战，则一般文艺青年少不得在这战术上学许多乖，流弊所及，往往越淮北而变枳，批评人的人常离开被批评者的言论与思想，笔头一转而去骂人家的私事，说人家眼镜带得很难看，甚至说人家皮鞋前面破了个小洞；甚至血偾脉张要辱及人家的父母，甚至要丢下笔杆动拳头。我说，养成现在文坛上这种浮嚣，下流，粗暴等等的坏习气，像鲁迅先生这一般人多少总要负一点儿责任的。
Since the first-class writers are always in scuffles, the general literary and artistic youth must learn a lot of good things in this tactic, and the evils often become orange in the north of the Huai River, and the critics often leave the remarks and thoughts of the critics, and turn the pen to scold other people's private affairs, saying that people's glasses are ugly, and even saying that there is a small hole in the front of people's leather shoes; Even the blood is about to humiliate other people's parents, and even drop the pen and move their fists. I said that to develop this kind of bad habit of being arrogant, obscene, rude, etc. in the literary world, people like Mr. Lu Xun always have to bear a little responsibility.其实，有许多笔战，是不需要的，譬如有人提倡词的解放，你就是不骂，不见得有人去跟他也填一首“管他娘”的词；有人提倡读《庄子》与《文选》，也不见得就是教青年去吃鸦片烟，你又何必咬紧牙根，横睁两眼，给人以难堪呢？
In fact, there are many pen battles, which are unnecessary, for example, if someone advocates the liberation of words, you just don't scold, and someone may not fill in a word with him to "him"; Some people advocate reading "Zhuangzi" and "Selected Works", but it is not necessarily to teach young people to eat opium cigarettes, so why do you grit your teeth and open your eyes to embarrass people?我记得一个精通中文的俄国文人B．A．Vassiliev对鲁迅先生的《阿Q传》曾经下过这样的批评：“鲁迅是反映中国大众的灵魂的作家，其幽默的风格，是使人流泪，故鲁迅不独为中国的作家，同时亦为世界的一员。”鲁迅先生，你现在亦垂垂老矣，你念起往日的光荣，当你现在阅历最多，观察最深，生活经验最丰富的时候，更应当如何去发奋多写几部比《阿Q传》更伟大的著作？伟大的著作，虽不能传之千年不朽，但是笔战的文章，一星期后也许人就要遗忘。青年人佩服一个伟大的文学家，实在更胜于佩服一个擂台上的霸主。我们读的是莎士比亚，托尔斯泰，哥德，这般人的文章，而并没有看到他们的“骂人文选”。
I remember that a Russian literati who was proficient in Chinese, B.A. Vassiliev, once criticized Mr. Lu Xun's "Biography of Ah Q": "Lu Xun is a writer who reflects the soul of the Chinese public, and his humorous style makes people cry, so Lu Xun is not only a Chinese writer, but also a member of the world. "Mr. Lu Xun, you are now old, you think of the glory of the past, when you have the most experience, the deepest observation, and the most life experience, how should you strive to write more works that are greater than "The Biography of Ah Q"? Although great works cannot be passed down for thousands of years, the articles of the pen battle may be forgotten after a week. Young people admire a great writer more than a hegemon in the ring. We read the articles of Shakespeare, Tolstoy, Goth, and so on, but we did not see their "Anthology of Scolding".十一月十六日，《中央日报》的《中央公园》。
November 16, "Central Park" of the "Central Daily".这两位，一位比我为老丑的女人，一位愿我有“伟大的著作”，说法不同，目的却一致的，就是讨厌我“对于这样又有感想，对于那样又有感想”，于是而时时有“杂文”。这的确令人讨厌的，但因此也更见其要紧，因为“中国的大众的灵魂”，现在是反映在我的杂文里了。
These two, one is uglier than me, and the other wishes me to have "great writings", with different statements but the same purpose, that is, they hate me for "having feelings about this and that", so there are "essays" from time to time. This is indeed annoying, but it is also more important, because the "soul of the Chinese public" is now reflected in my essays.洲先生刺我不给他们一个鲜明的主张，这用意，我是懂得的；但颇诧异鸣春先生的引了莎士比亚之流一大串。不知道为什么，近一年来，竟常常有人诱我去学托尔斯泰了，也许就因为“并没有看到他们的‘骂人文选’”，给我一个好榜样。可是我看见过欧战时候他骂皇帝的信，在中国，也要得到“养成现在文坛上这种浮嚣，下流，粗暴等等的坏习气”的罪名的。托尔斯泰学不到，学到了也难做人，他生存时，希腊教徒就年年诅咒他落地狱。
Mr. Zhou stabbed me and did not give them a clear proposition, I understand this intention; But I was quite surprised that Mr. Mingchun quoted a large list of Shakespeare and others. I don't know why, in the past year, people have often tempted me to learn Tolstoy, maybe because "I didn't see their 'scolding anthology'", giving me a good example. But I have seen his letter scolding the emperor during the European War, and in China, he will also be charged with "developing this kind of bad habit of arrogance, obscenity, rudeness, etc. in the literary world". Tolstoy couldn't learn, and it was difficult to be a human being if he did, and when he was alive, the Greeks cursed him to hell every year.中间就夹两篇《时事新报》上的文章——
In the middle, there are two articles from the "Current Affairs Newspaper" -
略论告密
Briefly discuss informants陈代
Chen Dynasty
最怕而且最恨被告密的可说是鲁迅先生，就在《伪自由书》，“一名：《不三不四集》”的《前记》与《后记》里也常可看到他在注意到这一点。可是鲁迅先生所说的告密，并不是有人把他的住处，或者什么时候，他在什么地方，去密告巡捕房（或者什么要他的“密”的别的机关？）以致使他被捕的意思。他的意思，是有人把“因为”他“旧日的笔名有时不能通用，便改题了”的什么宣说出来，而使人知道“什么就是鲁迅”。
The one who is most afraid and hates the accusation secret can be said to be Mr. Lu Xun, and he can often be seen noticing this in the "Preface" and "Postscript" of "The Pseudo-Freedom Book". However, what Mr. Lu Xun said about informing did not mean that someone had told him where he lived, or when, where he was going to the patrol room (or what other organs that wanted his "secret"?). So that he was arrested. What he means is that someone declares something that "because "his" old pseudonym sometimes cannot be used, so the topic is changed", so that people know "what is Lu Xun".“这回，”鲁迅先生说，“是王平陵先生告发于前，周木斋先生揭露于后”；他却忘了说编者暗示于鲁迅先生尚未上场之先。因为在何家干先生和其他一位先生将上台的时候，编者先介绍说，这将上场的两位是文坛老将。于是人家便提起精神来等那两位文坛老将的上场。要是在异地，或者说换过一个局面，鲁迅先生是也许会说编者是在放冷箭的。
"This time," Mr. Lu Xun said, "it was Mr. Wang Pingling who reported it first, and Mr. Zhou Muzhai exposed it later"; He forgot to say that the editor hinted that Mr. Lu Xun had not yet appeared. Because when Mr. He Jiagan and another gentleman were about to take the stage, the editor first introduced that the two who would appear were veterans in the literary world. So people lifted their spirits and waited for the two literary veterans to play. If it were in a different place, or if the situation had changed, Mr. Lu Xun might have said that the editor was putting a cold arrow.看到一个生疏的名字在什么附刊上出现，就想知道那个名字是真名呢，还是别的熟名字的又一笔名，想也是人情之常。即就鲁迅先生说，他看完了王平陵先生的《“最通的”文艺》，便禁不住问：“这位王平陵先生我不知道是真名还是笔名？”要是他知道了那是谁的笔名的话，他也许会说出那就是谁来的。这不会是怎样的诬蔑，我相信，因为于他所知道的他不是在实说“柳丝是杨邨人先生……的笔名”，而表示着欺不了他？
When I see an unfamiliar name appearing in some supplementary journal, I want to know whether the name is my real name or another pseudonym of another familiar name, which I think is also a common occurrence. That is, Mr. Lu Xun said that after reading Mr. Wang Pingling's "The Most Popular" Literature and Art, he couldn't help but ask: "I don't know if this Mr. Wang Pingling is his real name or a pseudonym? If he knew whose pseudonym it was, he might have said who it was. This would not be a slander, I believe, because as far as he knew, he was not telling the truth, "Liu Si is Mr. Yang Cunren...... Pseudonym", which means that he can't be bullied?还有，要是要告密，为什么一定要出之“公开的”形式？秘密的不是于告密者更为安全？我有些怀疑告密者的聪敏，要是真有这样的告密者的话。
Also, if you want to whistlebring, why do you have to give it in a "public" form? Isn't it safer for whistleblowers to keep secrets? I doubt the intelligence of the whistleblower, if there is such a whistleblower.而在那些用这个那个笔名零星发表的文章，剪贴成集子的时候，作者便把这许多名字紧缩成一个，看来好像作者自己是他的最后的告密者。
And when the articles published sporadically under this and that pseudonym were cut and pasted into collections, the author condensed these many names into one, as if the author himself was his last informer.十一月二十一日，《时事新报》的《青光》。
November 21, "Current Affairs News" "Blue Light".
略论放暗箭
Briefly discuss the release of hidden arrows陈代
Chen Dynasty
前日读了鲁迅先生的《伪自由书》的《前记》与《后记》，略论了告密的，现在读了唐弢先生的《新脸谱》，止不住又要来略论放暗箭。
The day before yesterday, I read the "Preface" and "Afterword" of Mr. Lu Xun's "Pseudo-Freedom Book", briefly discussed the informant, and now I have read Mr. Tang Tao's "New Face", and I can't stop talking about the hidden arrow again.在《新脸谱》中，唐先生攻击的方面是很广的，而其一方是“放暗箭”。可是唐先生的文章又几乎全为“暗箭”所织成，虽然有许多箭标是看不大清楚的。
In "New Face", Mr. Tang attacks a wide range of aspects, and one side is "putting hidden arrows". However, Mr. Tang's articles are almost entirely woven with "hidden arrows", although there are many arrow markers that are not very clear.“说是受着潮流的影响，文舞台的戏儿一出出换了。脚色虽然依旧，而脸谱却是簇新的。”——是暗箭的第一条。虽说是暗箭，射倒射中了的。因为现在的确有许多文脚色，为要博看客的喝采起见，放着演惯的旧戏不演演新戏，嘴上还“说是受着潮流的影响”，以表示他的不落后。还有些甚至不要说脚色依旧，就是脸谱也并不簇新，只是换了一个新的题目，演的还是那旧的一套：如把《薛平贵西凉招亲》改题着《穆薛姻缘》之类，内容都一切依旧。
It is said that it is influenced by the trend, and the play on the literary stage has been changed as soon as it comes out. Although the footsteps are still the same, the face is new. —— is the first of the hidden arrows. Although it was a hidden arrow, it was shot backwards. Because there are indeed many literary works now, in order to win the applause of the audience, he puts the old plays he is used to acting instead of acting in new plays, and he also "says that he is influenced by the trend" to show that he is not lagging behind. There are also some that don't even say that the footsteps are still the same, even the face is not new, but a new title is changed, and the performance is still the same as the old one: such as changing the title of "Xue Pinggui Xiliang Marriage" to "Mu Xue Marriage", etc., the content is the same.第二箭是——不，不能这样写下去，要这样写下去，是要有很广博的识见的，因为那文章一句一箭，或者甚至一句数箭，看得人眼花头眩，竟无从把它把捉住，比读硬性的翻译还难懂得多。
The second arrow is - no, you can't write like this, you have to have a very broad insight to write like this, because the article is sentence by sentence, or even counts arrows one sentence at a time, which is dazzling to see, and it is impossible to catch it, which is much more difficult to understand than reading a hard translation.可是唐先生自己似乎又并不满意这样的态度，不然为什么要骂人家“怪声怪气地吆喝，妞妞妮妮的挑战”？然而，在事实上，他是在“怪声怪气地吆喝，妞妞妮妮的挑战”。
But Mr. Tang himself doesn't seem to be satisfied with such an attitude, otherwise why should he scold others for "shouting strangely, Niu Ni Ni Ni Ni's challenge"? However, in fact, he was "shouting strangely, Niu Ni Nini's challenge".或者说，他并不是在挑战，只是放放暗箭，因为“鏖战”，即使是“拉拉扯扯的”，究竟吃力，而且“败了”“再来”的时候还得去“重画”脸谱。放暗箭多省事，躲在隐暗处，看到了什么可射的，便轻展弓弦，而箭就向前舒散地直飞。可是他又在骂放暗箭。
In other words, he is not challenging, he is just letting go of hidden arrows, because "fierce battles", even if they are "pulling and pulling", are difficult, and they have to "redraw" their faces when they "lose" and "come again". It is easier to put a hidden arrow, hide in a hidden place, see something to shoot, and lightly stretch the bowstring, and the arrow will fly forward comfortably. But he was scolding the hidden arrow again.要自己先能放暗箭，然后才能骂人放。
You have to be able to shoot hidden arrows first, and then you can scold others.十一月二十二日，《时事新报》的《青光》。
November 22, "Current Affairs News" "Blue Light".这位陈先生是讨伐军中的最低能的一位，他连自己后来的说明和别人豫先的揭发的区别都不知道。倘使我被谋害而终于不死，后来竟得“寿终×寝”，他是会说我自己乃是“最后的凶手”的。
This Mr. Chen was the least capable of the crusade army, and he didn't even know the difference between his later explanation and the revelation of others in advance. If I was murdered and finally did not die, and then I had to "die × life", he would say that I was the "last murderer".他还问：要是要告密，为什么一定要出之“公开的”形式？答曰：这确是比较的难懂一点，但也就是因为要告得像个“文学家”的缘故呀，要不然，他就得下野，分明的排进探坛里去了。有意的和无意的的区别，我是知道的。我所谓告密，是指着叭儿们，我看这“陈代”先生就正是其中的一匹。你想，消息不灵，不是反而不便当么？
He also asked: If you want to whistleb, why must it be in a "public" form? Answer: This is indeed a bit more difficult to understand, but it is because he wants to sue like a "writer", otherwise, he will have to go to the field and be clearly lined up in the exploration altar. I know the difference between intentional and unintentional. By whistleblowing, I am referring to the ba'er, and I think this "Chen Dai" Mr. is one of them. Do you think that if the news is not effective, isn't it inconvenient?第二篇恐怕只有他自己懂。我只懂得一点：他这回嗅得不对，误以唐弢先生为就是我了。采在这里，只不过充充自以为我的论敌的标本的一种而已。
The second article is probably only understood by him. I only know one thing: he didn't smell right this time and mistakenly thought that Mr. Tang Tao was me. Picking here is just a kind of specimen that thinks it is my enemy.其次是要剪一篇《大晚报》上的东西——
The second is to cut something from the "Evening News" -
钱基博之鲁迅论
Qian Jibo's Lu Xun theory戚施
Qi Shi
近人有裒集关于批评鲁迅之文字而为《鲁迅论》一书者，其中所收，类皆称颂鲁迅之辞，其实论鲁迅之文者，有毁有誉，毁誉互见，乃得其真。顷见钱基博氏所著《现代中国文学史》，长至三十万言，其论白话文学，不过一万余字，仅以胡适入选，而以鲁迅徐志摩附焉。于此诸人，大肆訾謷。迩来旧作文家，品藻文字，裁量人物，未有若钱氏之大胆者，而新人未尝注意及之。兹特介绍其“鲁迅论”于此，是亦文坛上之趣闻也。
近人有裒集关于批评鲁迅之文字而为《鲁迅论》一书者，其中所收，类皆称颂鲁迅之辞，其实论鲁迅之文者，有毁有誉，毁誉互见，乃得其真。 顷见钱基博氏所著《现代中国文学史》，长至三十万言，其论白话文学，不过一万余字，仅以胡适入选，而以鲁迅徐志摩附焉。 于此诸人，大肆訾謷。 迩来旧作文家，品藻文字，裁量人物，未有若钱氏之大胆者，而新人未尝注意及之。 兹特介绍其“鲁迅论”于此，是亦文坛上之趣闻也。钱氏之言曰，有摹仿欧文而谥之曰欧化的国语文学者，始倡于浙江周树人之译西洋小说，以顺文直译之为尚，斥意译之不忠实，而摹欧文以国语，比鹦鹉之学舌，托于象胥，斯为作俑。效颦者乃至造述抒志，亦竞欧化，《小说月报》，盛扬其焰。然而诘屈聱牙，过于周诰，学士费解，何论民众？上海曹慕管笑之曰，吾侪生愿读欧文，不愿见此妙文也！比于时装妇人着高底西女式鞋，而跬步倾跌，益增丑态矣！崇效古人，斥曰奴性，摹仿外国，独非奴性耶。反唇之讥，或谑近虐！然始之创白话文以期言文一致，家喻户晓者，不以欧化的国语文学之兴而荒其志耶？斯则矛盾之说，无以自圆者矣，此于鲁迅之直译外国文学，及其文坛之影响，而加以訾謷者也。平心论之，鲁迅之译品，诚有难读之处，直译当否是一问题，欧化的国语文学又是一问题，借曰二者胥有未当，谁尸其咎，亦难言之也。钱先生而谓鄙言为不然耶？
Qian's words say that there are Chinese writers who imitate European and posthumously call them European, and began to advocate the translation of Western novels by Zhou Shuren in Zhejiang, advocating for literal translation of Shunwen and refuting the dishonesty of Italian translation Chinese. Those who imitate the frowns and even create narratives and express their aspirations are also competing for Europeanization, and the "Novel Monthly" is full of flames. However, the question of Qu Ya is more than the Zhou Gao, and the scholar is incomprehensible, so what is the people? Cao Muguan from Shanghai laughed and said, "We want to read Irving, but we don't want to see this wonderful article!" Compared to fashion women wearing high-soled Western women's shoes, and the step is even more ugly! He imitated the ancients, denounced it as slavery, and imitated foreign people, but it was not slavery. The irony of the lips may be close to abuse! However, those who initially created vernacular literature in the hope of unity of language and literature, and who became well-known to everyone, did not abandon their ambitions due to the rise of Europeanized Chinese literature? This is a contradictory statement that cannot be justified, which is a slander of Lu Xun's literal translation of foreign literature and its influence on the literary world. To be fair, Lu Xun's translation is indeed difficult to read, whether the literal translation is appropriate is one question, and the Europeanized Chinese literature is another problem. Mr. Qian, do you think my words are not correct?钱先生又曰，自胡适之创白话文学也，所持以号于天下者，曰平民文学也！非贵族文学也。一时景附以有大名者，周树人以小说著。树人颓废，不适于奋斗。树人所著，只有过去回忆，而不知建设将来，只见小己愤慨，而不图福利民众，若而人者，彼其心目，何尝有民众耶！钱先生因此而断之曰，周树人徐志摩为新文艺之右倾者。是则于鲁迅之创作亦加以訾謷，兼及其思想矣。至目鲁迅为右倾，亦可谓独具只眼，别有鉴裁者也！既不满意于郭沫若蒋光赤之左倾，又不满意于鲁迅徐志摩之右倾，而惟倾慕于所谓“让清”遗老之流风余韵，低徊感喟而不能自已，钱先生之志，皎然可睹矣。当今之世，左右做人难，是非无定质，亦于钱先生之论鲁迅见之也！
钱先生又曰，自胡适之创白话文学也，所持以号于天下者，曰平民文学也！非贵族文学也。 一时景附以有大名者，周树人以小说著。 树人颓废，不适于奋斗。 树人所著，只有过去回忆，而不知建设将来，只见小己愤慨，而不图福利民众，若而人者，彼其心目，何尝有民众耶！钱先生因此而断之曰，周树人徐志摩为新文艺之右倾者。 是则于鲁迅之创作亦加以訾謷，兼及其思想矣。 至目鲁迅为右倾，亦可谓独具只眼，别有鉴裁者也！既不满意于郭沫若蒋光赤之左倾，又不满意于鲁迅徐志摩之右倾，而惟倾慕于所谓“让清”遗老之流风余韵，低徊感喟而不能自已，钱先生之志，皎然可睹矣。 当今之世，左右做人难，是非无定质，亦于钱先生之论鲁迅见之也！钱氏此书出版于本年九月，尚有上年十二月之跋记云。
Qian's book was published in September of this year, and there is also a postscript in December of the previous year.十二月二十九日，《大晚报》的《火炬》。
December 29, "Torch" of the "Great Evening News".这篇大文，除用戚施先生的话，赞为“独具只眼”之外，是不能有第二句的。真“评”得连我自己也不想再说什么话，“颓废”了。然而我觉得它很有趣，所以特别的保存起来，也是以备“鲁迅论”之一格。
This great article, except for Mr. Qi Shi's words, praises it as "unique eye", there can be no second sentence. It's so "evaluated" that even I don't want to say anything more, it's "decadent". However, I think it is interesting, so I specially preserved it for the "Lu Xun Theory".最后是《大美晚报》，出台的又是曾经有过文字上的交涉的王平陵先生——
Finally, the "Great American Evening News", which was introduced by Mr. Wang Pingling, who had had written negotiations -
骂人与自供
Curse and confess王平陵
King Pingling
学问之事，很不容易说，一般通材硕儒每不屑与后生小子道长论短，有所述作，无不讥为“浅薄无聊”；同样，较有修养的年轻人，看着那般通材硕儒们言必称苏俄，文必宗普鲁，亦颇觉得如嚼青梅，齿颊间酸不可耐。
It is not easy to say that the general scholars often disdain to discuss the shortcomings with the younger children, and the works mentioned are all ridiculed as "shallow and boring"; Similarly, the more cultivated young people, looking at the well-rounded scholars who must be called Soviet Russia, and Wen Bizong Pulu, also feel that they are chewing green plums, and the sour between their teeth and cheeks is unbearable.世界上无论什么纷争，都有停止的可能，惟有人类思想的冲突，因为多半是近于意气，断没有终止的时候的。有些人好像把毁谤人家故意找寻人家的错误当作是一种职业；而以直接否认一切就算是间接抬高自己的妙策了。至于自己究竟是什么东西，那只许他们自己知道，别人是不准过问的。其实，有时候这些人意在对人而发的阴险的暗示，倒并不适切；而正是他们自己的一篇不自觉的供状。
No matter what kind of strife in the world there is a possibility of stopping, only the conflict of human thought, because most of them are close to will, and there is no end to it. Some people seem to regard slandering others as a profession to deliberately find mistakes; And directly denying everything is a brilliant strategy to indirectly elevate oneself. As for what they are, they are only allowed to know, and others are not allowed to ask. In fact, sometimes the insidious hints that these people intend to make to people are not appropriate; And it was their own involuntary confession.圣经里好像有这样一段传说：一群街头人捉着一个偷汉的淫妇，大家要把石块打死她。耶稣说：“你们反省着！只有没有犯过罪的人，才配打死这个淫妇。”群众都羞愧地走开了。今之文坛，可不是这样？自己偷了汉，偏要指说人家是淫妇。如同鲁迅先生惯用的一句刻毒的评语，就就骂人是代表官方说话；我不知道他老先生是代表什么“方”说话！
There seems to be a legend in the Bible that a group of street men caught a thief and wanted to stone her to death. Jesus said, "Reflect on yourself! Only those who have not committed sins are worthy of killing this harlot. The crowd walked away in shame. Is this not the case in today's literary world? I stole the man, but I want to accuse others of being prostitutes. Just like Mr. Lu Xun's usual vicious comment, he scolded people for speaking on behalf of the official; I don't know what kind of "square" his old gentleman represents!本来，不想说话的人，是无话可说；有话要说；有话要说的人谁也不会想到是代表那一方。鲁迅先生常常“以己之心，度人之心”，未免“躬自薄而厚责于人”了。
Originally, those who didn't want to speak had nothing to say; There is something to say; No one who has something to say would think of representing that side. Mr. Lu Xun often "saves people's hearts with his own heart", and inevitably "bows down and blames others".像这样的情形，文坛有的是，何止是鲁迅先生。
In such a situation, there are more than Mr. Lu Xun in the literary world.十二月三十日，《大美晚报》的《火树》。
December 30, "Fire Tree" of the "Great American Evening News".记得在《伪自由书》里，我曾指王先生的高论为属于“官方”，这回就是对此而发的，但意义却不大明白。由“自己偷了汉，偏要指说人家是淫妇”的话看起来，好像是说我倒是“官方”，而不知“有话要说的人谁也不会想到是代表那一方”的。所以如果想到了，那么，说人反动的，他自己正是反动，说人匪徒的，他自己正是匪徒……且住，又是“刻毒的评语”了，耶稣不说过“你们反省着”吗？——为消灾计，再添一条小尾：这坏习气只以文坛为限，与官方无干。
I remember that in the "Pseudo-Freedom Book", I once pointed out that Mr. Wang's high argument belonged to the "official", and this time I issued it for this, but the meaning was not very clear. From the words "I stole the Han, but I want to say that others are prostitutes", it seems to mean that I am "official", but I don't know that "no one who has something to say will think of representing that party". So if you think of it, then if you say that people are reactionary, you are reactionary yourself, and if you say that people are bandits, you are a bandit yourself...... Wait, it's another "harsh comment", didn't Jesus say, "You reflect"? ——In order to eliminate disasters, add another small tail: This bad habit is only limited to the literary world and has nothing to do with the officials.王平陵先生是电影检查会的委员，我应该谨守小民的规矩。
Mr. Wang Pingling is a member of the Film Inspection Committee, and I should abide by the rules of the common people.
真的且住。写的和剪贴的，也就是自己的和别人的，化了大半夜工夫，恐怕又有八九千字了。这一条尾巴又并不小。
Really stay. Written and cut-and-pasted, that is, my own and others', took a lot of time in the middle of the night, and I am afraid there are eight or nine thousand words. This tail is not small.时光，是一天天的过去了，大大小小的事情，也跟着过去，不久就在我们的记忆上消亡；而且都是分散的，就我自己而论，没有感到和没有知道的事情真不知有多少。但即此写了下来的几十篇，加以排比，又用《后记》来补叙些因此而生的纠纷，同时也照见了时事，格局虽小，不也描出了或一形象了么？——而现在又很少有肯低下他仰视莎士比亚，托尔斯泰的尊脸来，看看暗中，写它几句的作者。因此更使我要保存我的杂感，而且它也因此更能够生存，虽然又因此更招人憎恶，但又在围剿中更加生长起来了。呜呼，“世无英雄，遂使竖子成名”，这是为我自己和中国的文坛，都应该悲愤的。
Time passes day by day, big and small things also follow, and soon they will disappear in our memory; And they are all scattered, as far as I am concerned, there are really many things that I don't feel and don't know. But the dozens of articles written down are compared, and the "Afterword" is used to supplement some of the disputes that arise from this, and at the same time, it also reflects current affairs. ——And now few people are willing to lower their heads to look up at Shakespeare, Tolstoy's respectable face, and look at the author who secretly wrote a few words of it. Therefore, I have to preserve my distractions even more, and it is also more able to survive, although it is more hateful because of this, but it has grown even more in the encirclement and suppression. Alas, "there are no heroes in the world, so the boy becomes famous", this is for myself and the Chinese literary world, I should be sad and indignant.文坛上的事件还多得很：献检查之秘计，施离析之奇策，起谣诼兮中权，藏真实兮心曲，立降幡于往年，温故交于今日……然而都不是做这《准风月谈》时期以内的事，在这里也且不提及，或永不提及了。还是真的带住罢，写到我的背脊已经觉得有些痛楚的时候了！
There are many events in the literary world: offering the secret plan of inspection, the clever strategy of separation, the rumor of the central power, the hidden truth of the heart, the flag of the past years, and the friendship of the old in today...... However, it is not something that is done within the period of "Quasi-Fengyue Talk", and it will not be mentioned here, or never mentioned. Or really take it, write until my back is already feeling some pain!一九三四年十月十六夜，鲁迅记于上海。
On the night of October 16, 1934, Lu Xun recorded in Shanghai.

封面

书名页

版权信息

图书在版编目（CIP）数据
Books in Print (CIP) data花边文学／鲁迅著．—南京：译林出版社，2014.1
Lace Literature/by Lu Xun.—Nanjing: Yilin Publishing House, 2014.1（鲁迅自编文集）
(Lu Xun's self-edited anthology)ISBN 978-7-5447-4556-7
ISBN 978-7-5447-4556-7Ⅰ．①花…　Ⅱ．①鲁…　Ⅲ．①鲁迅杂文－杂文集　Ⅳ．①I210.4
I..(1) Flowers... II..(1) Lu... III..(1) Lu Xun's Essays - Essays IV..(1)I210.4中国版本图书馆CIP数据核字（2013）第246133号
China Version Library CIP Data Verification (2013) No. 246133
书　　　名　花边文学
Book title Lace literature作　　　者　鲁　迅
Author: Lu Xun责 任 编 辑　王振华
Editor-in-charge Wang Zhenhua特 约 编 辑　刘　佳　邓　敏
Special editors Liu Jia and Deng Min出 版 发 行　凤凰出版传媒股份有限公司
Published by Phoenix Publishing and Media Co., Ltd译林出版社
Yilin Publishing House出版社地址　南京市湖南路1号A楼，邮编：210009
Publisher's address Building A, No. 1 Hunan Road, Nanjing, Zip Code: 210009电 子 信 箱　yilin@yilin.com
Electronic mailbox yilin@yilin.com出版社网址　http://www.yilin.com
Publisher website http://www.yilin.com印　　　刷　北京凯达印务有限公司
Printing Beijing Kaida Printing Co., Ltd开　　　本　787×1092毫米　1/32
Volume 787×1092 mm 1/32印　　　张　4.75
Print 4.75字　　　数　91千字
Word count: 91,000 words版　　　次　2014年1月第1版　2014年1月第1次印刷
Edition January 2014 1st edition January 2014 1st printing标 准 书 号　ISBN 978-7-5447-4556-7
ISBN ISBN 978-7-5447-4556-7定　　　价　12.80元
The price is 12.80 yuan译林版图书若有印装错误可向承印厂调换

If there are printing errors in the translated version of the book, it can be exchanged with the printing factory

未知

注释
exegesis 

□□□□□
□□□□□ 

本书中所出现的如上方框同原版纸书。

The box above is the same as the original paper book.

Table of Contents

目录

Table of Contents

directory序言 序言
一九三四年 1934
未来的光荣 The glory of the future
女人未必多说谎 Women may not lie much
批评家的批评家 Critics of critics
漫骂 obloquy
“京派”与“海派” "Beijing school" and "Shanghai school"
北人与南人 Northerners and Southerners
《如此广州》读后感 After reading "So Guangzhou"
过年 Spring festival
运命 Destiny
大小骗 Big and small scams
“小童挡驾” “小童挡驾”
古人并不纯厚 The ancients were not pure
法会和歌剧 Puja and opera
洋服的没落 The decline of the dress
朋友 Friend
清明时节 Qingming season
小品文的生机 The vitality of the sketch
刀“式”辩 The knife "style" argument
化名新法 Pseudonym New Law
读几本书 Read a few books
一思而行 Think about it
推己及人 Push yourself and others
偶感 Occasional feeling
论秦理斋夫人事 On the matter of Mrs. Qin Lizhai
“……”“□□□□”论补 "......" and "□□□□" are supplemented
谁在没落？ Who is declining?
倒提 Lift upside down
【附录】：论“花边文学”（林默） [Appendix]: On "Lace Literature" (Lin Mo)
玩具 toy
零食 snacks
“此生或彼生” "This life or that life"
正是时候 Just the right time
论重译 论重译
再论重译 Let's talk about retranslation
“彻底”的底子 "Thorough" foundation
知了世界 I know the world
算账 Accounts
水性 Waterborne
玩笑只当它玩笑（上） Joke Just Treat It as a Joke (Part 1)
【附录】：文公直给康伯度的信 [Appendix]: Wen Gongzhi's letter to Kang Bodu
康伯度答文公直 康伯度答文公直
玩笑只当它玩笑（下） 玩笑只当它玩笑（下）
做文章 Fuss
看书琐记 Read the book trivia
看书琐记（二） Reading Trivia (2)
趋时和复古 Trendy and retro
安贫乐道法 The law of being content with poverty and happiness
奇怪 odd
奇怪（二） Strange (2)
迎神和咬人 Welcome the gods and bite
看书琐记（三） Reading Trivia (3)
“大雪纷飞” "Heavy snow"
汉字和拉丁化 Chinese characters and Latinization
“莎士比亚” "Shakespeare"
商贾的批评 Criticism from merchants
中秋二愿 Mid-Autumn Festival two wishes
考场三丑 The examination room is three ugly
又是“莎士比亚” It's "Shakespeare" again
点句的难 It's hard to point out sentences
奇怪（三） Strange (3)
略论梅兰芳及其他（上） A brief discussion of Mei Lanfang and others (Part I)
略论梅兰芳及其他（下） A brief discussion of Mei Lanfang and others (below)
骂杀与捧杀 Curse and kill
读书忌 Reading taboo
返回总目录 Return to the General Directory

序言

序言

序言

序言我的常常写些短评，确是从投稿于《申报》的《自由谈》上开头的；集一九三三年之所作，就有了《伪自由书》和《准风月谈》两本。后来编辑者黎烈文先生真被挤轧得苦，到第二年，终于被挤出了，我本也可以就此搁笔，但为了赌气，却还是改些作法，换些笔名，托人抄写了去投稿，新任者不能细辨，依然常常登了出来。一面又扩大了范围，给《中华日报》的副刊《动向》，小品文半月刊《太白》之类，也间或写几篇同样的文字。聚起一九三四年所写的这些东西来，就是这一本《花边文学》。
I often write short comments, which do start with "Free Talk" submitted to the "Declaration"; The collection of works made in 1933 has two books, "Pseudo-Freedom Book" and "Quasi-Fengyue Talk". Later, the editor Mr. Li Liewen was really squeezed out, and in the second year, he was finally squeezed out, and I could have put down my pen, but in order to be angry, I still changed some practices, changed some pseudonyms, and asked someone to copy and submit. On the one hand, it expanded the scope, and occasionally wrote several similar texts for the supplement "Trends" of "China Daily" and the semi-monthly magazine "Taibai". Gathering these things written in 1934, it is this book "Lace Literature".这一个名称，是和我在同一营垒里的青年战友，换掉姓名挂在暗箭上射给我的。那立意非常巧妙：一，因为这类短评，在报上登出来的时候往往围绕一圈花边以示重要，使我的战友看得头疼；二，因为“花边”也是银元的别名，以见我的这些文章是为了稿费，其实并无足取。至于我们的意见不同之处，是我以为我们无须希望外国人待我们比鸡鸭优，他却以为应该待我们比鸡鸭优，我在替西洋人辩护，所以是“买办”。那文章就附在《倒提》之下，这里不必多说。此外，倒也并无什么可记之事。只为了一篇《玩笑只当它玩笑》，又曾引出过一封文公直先生的来信，笔伐的更严重了，说我是“汉奸”，现在和我的复信都附在本文的下面。其余的一些鬼鬼祟祟，躲躲闪闪的攻击，离上举的两位还差得很远，这里都不转载了。
This name was given to me by a young comrade-in-arms in the same camp as me, who changed his name and hung it on the hidden arrow. The idea is very ingenious: First, because of this kind of short commentary, when published in the newspaper, it often revolves around a circle of lace to show its importance, which gives my comrades-in-arms a headache; Second, because "lace" is also another name for silver dollars, it is not worth it to see that my articles are for manuscript fees. As for our differences of opinion, I think we don't need to expect foreigners to treat us better than chickens and ducks, but he thinks that we should be treated better than chickens and ducks, and I am defending Westerners, so I am a "comprador". The article is attached to "Upside Down", so there is no need to say more here. In addition, there is nothing to remember. Just for the sake of an article "Joke Only Treat It as a Joke", I once led to a letter from Mr. Wen Gongzhi, which was even more serious, saying that I was a "traitor", and now my reply letter is attached to the bottom of this article. The rest of the sneaky, dodging attacks, are still far from the two above, and they will not be reproduced here.“花边文学”可也真不行。一九三四年不同一九三五年，今年是为了《闲话皇帝》事件，官家的书报检查处忽然不知所往，还革掉七位检查官，日报上被删之处，也好像可以留着空白（术语谓之“开天窗”）了。但那时可真厉害，这么说不可以，那么说又不成功，而且删掉的地方，还不许留下空隙，要接起来，使作者自己来负吞吞吐吐，不知所云的责任。在这种明诛暗杀之下，能够苟延残喘，和读者相见的，那么，非奴隶文章是什么呢？
"Lace literature" is really not good. Unlike 1935, this year for the "Gossip Emperor" incident, the official book and newspaper inspection office suddenly disappeared, and seven inspectors were dismissed, and the deleted places in the daily newspaper seemed to be left blank (the term is called "opening the skylight"). But at that time, it was really powerful, so it was not possible, then it was unsuccessful, and the deleted places were not allowed to leave gaps, and they had to be picked up, so that the author himself would bear the responsibility of hesitating and not knowing what to say. Under this kind of open assassination, what is a non-slave article that can survive and meet readers?我曾经和几个朋友闲谈。一个朋友说：现在的文章，是不会有骨气的了，譬如向一种日报上的副刊去投稿罢，副刊编辑先抽去几根骨头，总编辑又抽去几根骨头，检查官又抽去几根骨头，剩下来还有什么呢？我说：我是自己先抽去了几根骨头的，否则，连“剩下来”的也不剩。所以，那时发表出来的文字，有被抽四次的可能，——现在有些人不在拚命表彰文天祥方孝孺么，幸而他们是宋明人，如果活在现在，他们的言行是谁也无从知道的。
I used to chat with a few friends. A friend said: The current article will not have a backbone, for example, if you submit it to a supplement in a daily newspaper, the editor of the supplement will first remove a few bones, the editor-in-chief will remove a few bones, and the inspector will remove a few more bones. I said: I took out a few bones myself first, otherwise, there would be no "left" left. Therefore, the words published at that time may be drawn four times,—— now some people are not desperately commending Wen Tianxiang Fang Xiaoru, fortunately they are Song Ming people, if they live now, no one knows their words and deeds.因此除了官准的有骨气的文章之外，读者也只能看看没有骨气的文章。我生于清朝，原是奴隶出身，不同二十五岁以内的青年，一生下来就是中华民国的主子，然而他们不经世故，偶尔“忘其所以”也就大碰其钉子。我的投稿，目的是在发表的，当然不给它见得有骨气，所以被“花边”所装饰者，大约也确比青年作家的作品多，而且奇怪，被删掉的地方倒很少。一年之中，只有三篇，现在补全，仍用黑点为记。我看《论秦理斋夫人事》的末尾，是申报馆的总编辑删的，别的两篇，却是检查官删的：这里都显着他们不同的心思。
Therefore, in addition to official articles with backbone, readers can only read articles without spine. I was born in the Qing Dynasty, originally a slave, unlike young people under the age of twenty-five, who were born as masters of the Republic of China, but they were not sophisticated, and occasionally "forgot why" and hit their nails. My submission is intended to be published, of course, it does not give it a backbone, so it is indeed more decorated with "lace" than the works of young writers, and strangely, very few places have been deleted. In a year, there are only three articles, and now they are completed, still using black dots as marks. I read that at the end of "On the Affairs of Mrs. Qin Lizhai", it was deleted by the editor-in-chief of the declaration hall, and the other two articles were deleted by the inspector: here they all show their different thoughts.今年一年中，我所投稿的《自由谈》和《动向》，都停刊了；《太白》也不出了。我曾经想过：凡是我寄文稿的，只寄开初的一两期还不妨，假使接连不断，它就总归活不久。于是从今年起，我就不大做这样的短文，因为对于同人，是回避他背后的闷棍，对于自己，是不愿做开路的呆子，对于刊物，是希望它尽可能的长生。所以有人要我投稿，我特别敷延推宕，非“摆架子”也，是带些好意——然而有时也是恶意——的“世故”：这是要请索稿者原谅的。
This year, the "Free Talk" and "Trends" I submitted were suspended; "Taibai" also came out. I once thought: Whenever I send a manuscript, it might be okay to send only one or two issues at the beginning, but if it continues, it will always live for a short time. So from this year onwards, I won't do such short articles, because for the same person, it is to avoid the stuffy stick behind him, for myself, I am a fool who does not want to open the way, and for the publication, I hope it will live as long as possible. Therefore, when someone asks me to submit, I am particularly procrastinating, not "putting on a show", but with some good intentions—but sometimes malice—"sophistication": this is to ask the requester to forgive me.一直到了今年下半年，这才看见了新闻记者的“保护正当舆论”的请愿和智识阶级的言论自由的要求。要过年了，我不知道结果怎么样。然而，即使从此文章都成了民众的喉舌，那代价也可谓大极了：是北五省的自治。这恰如先前的不敢恳请“保护正当舆论”和要求言论自由的代价之大一样：是东三省的沦亡。不过这一次，换来的东西是光明的。然而，倘使万一不幸，后来又复换回了我做“花边文学”一样的时代，大家试来猜一猜那代价该是什么罢……
It was not until the second half of this year that we saw the petition of journalists to "protect legitimate public opinion" and the demand for freedom of speech from the intellectual class. It's coming up for the New Year, and I don't know what the outcome will be. However, even if the article has become the mouthpiece of the people since then, the price can be described as great: it is the autonomy of the five northern provinces. This is just as the price of not daring to plead for "protection of legitimate public opinion" and demanding freedom of speech: the fall of the three eastern provinces. But this time, the exchange was bright. However, if I am unfortunate and later return to the era when I did "lace literature", let's try to guess what the price should be......一九三五年十二月二十九之夜，鲁迅记。
On the night of December 29, 1935, Lu Xun remembered.

一九三四年

一九三四年

一九三四年

1934

未来的光荣

未来的光荣

未来的光荣

The glory of the future张承禄
Zhang Chenglu现在几乎每年总有外国的文学家到中国来，一到中国，总惹出一点小乱子。前有萧伯纳，后有德哥派拉；只有伐扬古久列，大家不愿提，或者不能提。
Nowadays, almost every year, foreign writers come to China, and when they arrive in China, they always cause a little trouble. George Bernard Shaw in the front, De Cooper in the back; Only Fayang Gujiule, everyone does not want to mention it, or cannot mention it.德哥派拉不谈政治，本以为可以跳在是非圈外的了，不料因为恭维了食与色，又挣得“外国文氓”的恶谥，让我们的论客，在这里议论纷纷。他大约就要做小说去了。
De Gopala didn't talk about politics, he thought he could jump out of the circle of right and wrong, but unexpectedly, because he complimented food and sex, he earned the bad title of "foreign literati", which made our commentators talk a lot here. He is about to write a novel.鼻子生得平而小，没有欧洲人那么高峻，那是没有法子的，然而倘使我们身边有几角钱，却一样的可以看电影。侦探片子演厌了，爱情片子烂熟了，战争片子看腻了，滑稽片子无聊了，于是乎有《人猿泰山》，有《兽林怪人》，有《斐洲探险》等等，要野兽和野蛮登场。然而在蛮地中，也还一定要穿插一点蛮婆子的蛮曲线。如果我们也还爱看，那就可见无论怎样奚落，也还是有些恋恋不舍的了，“性”之于市侩，是很要紧的。
The nose is born flat and small, not as tall as Europeans, which is not possible, but if we have a few dimes around us, we can still watch movies. Detective films are tired of acting, romance films are familiar, war movies are tired, and burlesque films are boring, so there are "Tarzan of the Apes", "The Monster of the Beast Forest", "The Adventure of Feizhou", etc., to make the appearance of beasts and savagery. However, in the barbarian land, there must also be a little barbarian curve interspersed. If we still love to watch it, it can be seen that no matter how ridiculed it is, there is still some reluctance, and "sex" is very important to philistines.文学在西欧，其碰壁和电影也并不两样；有些所谓文学家也者，也得找寻些奇特的（grotesque），色情的（erotic）东西，去给他们的主顾满足，因此就有探险式的旅行，目的倒并不在地主的打拱或请酒。然而倘遇呆问，则以笑话了之，他其实也知道不了这些，他也不必知道。德哥派拉不过是这些人们中的一人。
In Western Europe, literature hits a wall and movies are no different; Some so-called writers also have to find something grotesque and erotic to satisfy their patrons, so they have adventure-like trips, and the purpose is not to make arches or invite wine. However, if he is dumbfounded, he will make a joke, he actually can't know this, and he doesn't have to know. De Gopala was just one of these people.但中国人，在这类文学家的作品里，是要和各种所谓“土人”一同登场的，只要看报上所载的德哥派拉先生的路由单就知道——中国，南洋，南美。英，德之类太平常了。我们要觉悟着被描写，还要觉悟着被描写的光荣还要多起来，还要觉悟着将来会有人以有这样的事为有趣。
But the Chinese, in the works of such writers, are to appear with all kinds of so-called "natives", as long as you look at Mr. de Gopala's route list in the newspaper - China, Nanyang, South America. Britain, Germany, etc. are too common. We must be aware of being described, and we must be aware that there will be more glory to be described, and we must also be aware that there will be people in the future who will find such things interesting.一月八日。
January 8th.

女人未必多说谎

女人未必多说谎

女人未必多说谎

Women may not lie much赵令仪
Zhao Lingyi侍桁先生在《谈说谎》里，以为说谎的原因之一是由于弱，那举证的事实，是：“因此为什么女人讲谎话要比男人来得多。”
In "Talking about Lies", Mr. Shi Zhen thought that one of the reasons for lying was because of weakness, and the fact that he gave evidence was: "Therefore, why women lie more than men." ”那并不一定是谎话，可是也不一定是事实。我们确也常常从男人们的嘴里，听说是女人讲谎话要比男人多，不过却也并无实证，也没有统计。叔本华先生痛骂女人，他死后，从他的书籍里发见了医梅毒的药方；还有一位奥国的青年学者，我忘记了他的姓氏，做了一大本书，说女人和谎话是分不开的，然而他后来自杀了。我恐怕他自己正有神经病。
That is not necessarily a lie, but it is not necessarily a fact either. We do often hear from men that women lie more than men, but there is no evidence or statistics. Mr. Schopenhauer scolded the woman, and after his death, he found a prescription for syphilis in his books; There was also a young scholar from Austria, I forgot his surname, and made a large book saying that women and lies are inseparable, but he later committed suicide. I'm afraid he has a mental illness himself.我想，与其说“女人讲谎话要比男人来得多”，不如说“女人被人指为‘讲谎话要比男人来得多’的时候来得多”，但是，数目字的统计自然也没有。
I think that rather than saying "women lie more often than men", it is better to say that "women are accused of lying more often than men", but there is naturally no statistics on the number of words.譬如罢，关于杨妃，禄山之乱以后的文人就都撒着大谎，玄宗逍遥事外，倒说是许多坏事情都由她，敢说“不闻夏殷衰，中自诛褒妲”的有几个。就是妲己，褒姒，也还不是一样的事？女人的替自己和男人伏罪，真是太长远了。
For example, about Yang Fei, the literati after the Lushan Rebellion all lied big lies, and Xuanzong was carefree, but said that many bad things were done by her, and there were a few who dared to say that "I didn't hear the decline of Xia Yin, and I killed Bao Da in the middle". Even Daji and Bao Si are not the same thing? It is too long-term for women to confess for themselves and men.今年是“妇女国货年”，振兴国货，也从妇女始。不久，是就要挨骂的，因为国货也未必因此有起色，然而一提倡，一责骂，男人们的责任也尽了。
This year is the "Year of Women's National Goods", and the revitalization of domestic products also starts with women. Soon, it will be scolded, because domestic products may not improve because of this, but as soon as they advocate and scold, the men's responsibilities have been fulfilled.记得某男士有为某女士鸣不平的诗道：“君王城上竖降旗，妾在深宫那得知？二十万人齐解甲，更无一个是男儿！”快哉快哉！
I remember that a certain man wrote a poem about a certain lady: "The flag is raised on the king's city, how did I know it in the deep palace?" Two hundred thousand people disarmed, and not a single one was a man! "Exciting, so exciting!一月八日。
January 8th.

批评家的批评家

批评家的批评家

批评家的批评家

Critics of critics倪朔尔
Ni Shuoer情势也转变得真快，去年以前，是批评家和非批评家都批评文学，自然，不满的居多，但说好的也有。去年以来，却变了文学家和非文学家都翻了一个身，转过来来批评批评家了。
The situation is also changing so quickly, before last year, critics and non-critics both criticized literature, naturally, most of them were dissatisfied, but there were also good ones. Since last year, both literary and non-literary scholars have turned around and turned to criticize critics.这一回可是不大有人说好，最彻底的是不承认近来有真的批评家。即使承认，也大大的笑他们胡涂。为什么呢？因为他们往往用一个一定的圈子向作品上面套，合就好，不合就坏。
This time, not many people say it is good, and the most thorough thing is not to admit that there are real critics recently. Even if you admit it, you laugh at them for being foolish. Why? Because they often use a certain circle to cover the work, it is good to fit, and it is bad if it does not fit.但是，我们曾经在文艺批评史上见过没有一定圈子的批评家吗？都有的，或者是美的圈，或者是真实的圈，或者是前进的圈。没有一定的圈子的批评家，那才是怪汉子呢。办杂志可以号称没有一定的圈子，而其实这正是圈子，是便于遮眼的变戏法的手巾。譬如一个编辑者是唯美主义者罢，他尽可以自说并无定见，单在书籍评论上，就足够玩把戏。倘是一种所谓“为艺术的艺术”的作品，合于自己的私意的，他就选登一篇赞成这种主义的批评，或读后感，捧着它上天；要不然，就用一篇假急进的好像非常革命的批评家的文章，捺它到地里去。读者这就被迷了眼。但在个人，如果还有一点记性，却不能这么两端的，他须有一定的圈子。我们不能责备他有圈子，我们只能批评他这圈子对不对。
However, have we ever seen critics without a certain circle in the history of literary and artistic criticism? There are all of them, or the circle of beauty, or the circle of reality, or the circle of progress. If there is no certain circle of critics, then it is a strange man. Running a magazine can claim to be that there is no certain circle, but in fact, this is the circle, a hand towel that is easy to cover your eyes. For example, an editor is an aestheticist, he can say that he has no fixed opinion, and book reviews alone are enough to play tricks. If it is a work of so-called "art for art" that suits his own private intentions, he will choose a criticism in favor of this doctrine, or after reading it, he will hold it to heaven; Otherwise, use an article by a fake radical critic who seems to be very revolutionary and push it into the ground. The reader was fascinated. But personally, if he still has a little memory, but he can't be so ambivalent, he must have a certain circle. We can't blame him for having a circle, we can only criticize his circle or not.然而批评家的批评家会引出张献忠考秀才的古典来：先在两柱之间横系一条绳子，叫应考的走过去，太高的杀，太矮的也杀，于是杀光了蜀中的英才。这么一比，有定见的批评家即等于张献忠，真可以使读者发生满心的憎恨。但是，评文的圈，就是量人的绳吗？论文的合不合，就是量人的长短吗？引出这例子来的，是诬陷，更不是什么批评。
However, critics' critics will lead to Zhang Xianzhong's classic examination of scholars: first tie a rope horizontally between the two pillars, and ask the candidates to walk over, kill those who are too tall, and kill those who are too short, so that all the talents in Shu are killed. In this comparison, a critic with a fixed opinion is equivalent to Zhang Xianzhong, which can really make readers full of hatred. However, is the circle of commentary a rope to measure people? Is the compatibility of the paper a measure of the length of the person? What leads to this example is a false accusation, not a criticism.一月十七日。
January 17th.

漫骂

漫骂

漫骂

obloquy倪朔尔
Ni Shuoer还有一种不满于批评家的批评，是说所谓批评家好“漫骂”，所以他的文字并不是批评。
There is also a kind of criticism that is dissatisfied with critics, that is, the so-called critics are good at "scolding", so his words are not criticism.这“漫骂”，有人写作“嫚骂”，也有人写作“谩骂”，我不知道是否是一样的函义。但这姑且不管它也好。现在要问的是怎样的是“漫骂”。
This "scolding", some people write "insults", some people write "insults", I don't know if it is the same meaning. But that's okay for the time being. Now the question is what kind of "scolding" is.假如指着一个人，说道：这是婊子！如果她是良家，那就是漫骂；倘使她实在是做卖笑生涯的，就并不是漫骂，倒是说了真实。诗人没有捐班，富翁只会计较，因为事实是这样的，所以这是真话，即使称之为漫骂，诗人也还是捐不来，这是幻想碰在现实上的小钉子。
If you point to a person and say: This is a bitch! If she is a good family, it is a scolding; If she is really doing a career of laughing, it is not a scolding, but telling the truth. The poet did not donate to the class, the rich man only accounted, because the fact is like this, so this is the truth, even if it is called a scolding, the poet still can't donate, this is a small nail in reality that fantasy touches.有钱不能就有文才，比“儿女成行”并不一定明白儿童的性质更明白。“儿女成行”只能证明他两口子的善于生，还会养，却并无妄谈儿童的权利。要谈，只不过不识羞。这好像是漫骂，然而并不是。倘说是的，就得承认世界上的儿童心理学家，都是最会生孩子的父母。
Having money does not mean having literary talent, which is more understandable than "children traveling" does not necessarily understand the nature of children. "Children Travel" can only prove that the couple is good at giving birth and can raise them, but they do not talk about children's rights. If you want to talk, you just don't know how to be shy. This seems to be a scolding, but it is not. If yes, we have to admit that the child psychologists in the world are the parents who are the most good at having children.说儿童为了一点食物就会打起来，是冤枉儿童的，其实是漫骂。儿童的行为，出于天性，也因环境而改变，所以孔融会让梨。打起来的，是家庭的影响，便是成人，不也有争家私，夺遗产的吗？孩子学了样了。
To say that children will fight for a little food is to wrongfully accuse children, but in fact it is a scolding. Children's behavior changes by nature and environment, so Kong Rong will let the pear go. Those who fight are the influence of the family, that is, adults, don't they also fight for furniture and inheritance? The child learned the sample.漫骂固然冤屈了许多好人，但含含胡胡的扑灭“漫骂”，却包庇了一切坏种。
Although the scolding has wronged many good people, the scolding of the "scolding" has covered all the bad things.一月十七日。
January 17th.

“京派”与“海派”

“京派”与“海派”

“京派”与“海派”

"Beijing school" and "Shanghai school"栾廷石
Luan Tingshi自从北平某先生在某报上有扬“京派”而抑“海派”之言，颇引起了一番议论。最先是上海某先生在某杂志上的不平，且引别一某先生的陈言，以为作者的籍贯，与作品并无关系，要给北平某先生一个打击。
Since a certain Mr. in Peking published a statement in a newspaper promoting the "Beijing school" and suppressing the "Shanghai school", it has caused a lot of discussion. First of all, Mr. Shanghai's injustice in a magazine, and quoted Mr. Yi's statement, thinking that the author's place of origin had nothing to do with the work, and wanted to give a blow to Mr. Beiping.其实，这是不足以服北平某先生之心的。所谓“京派”与“海派”，本不指作者的本籍而言，所指的乃是一群人所聚的地域，故“京派”非皆北平人，“海派”亦非皆上海人。梅兰芳博士，戏中之真正京派也，而其本贯，则为吴下。但是，籍贯之都鄙，固不能定本人之功罪，居处的文陋，却也影响于作家的神情，孟子曰：“居移气，养移体”，此之谓也。北京是明清的帝都，上海乃各国之租界，帝都多官，租界多商，所以文人之在京者近官，没海者近商，近官者在使官得名，近商者在使商获利，而自己也赖以糊口。要而言之，不过“京派”是官的帮闲，“海派”则是商的帮忙而已。但从官得食者其情状隐，对外尚能傲然，从商得食者其情状显，到处难于掩饰，于是忘其所以者，遂据以有清浊之分。而官之鄙商，固亦中国旧习，就更使“海派”在“京派”的眼中跌落了。
In fact, this is not enough to convince Mr. Beiping. The so-called "Beijing school" and "Shanghai school" do not refer to the author's original home, but to the area where a group of people gather, so the "Beijing school" is not all Peking people, and the "Shanghai school" is not all Shanghainese. Dr. Mei Lanfang is the real Beijing school in the play, and his roots are Wu Xia. However, the place of origin is contemptible, of course, it cannot determine one's merits and faults, and the ugliness of the residence also affects the writer's expression, Mencius said: "Move the qi, nourish the body", this is what it means. Beijing is the imperial capital of the Ming and Qing dynasties, Shanghai is the concession of various countries, the imperial capital has many officials, and the concession is more merchants, so the literati in Beijing are close to the officials, the sea is close to the merchants, the officials are named in the envoys, and the merchants are making profits from the merchants, and they also rely on them for their livelihood. In short, the "Beijing school" is the help of officials, and the "Shanghai school" is just the help of merchants. However, the situation of those who get food from the government is hidden, and they can still be arrogant to the outside world, while those who get food from the business are obvious, and it is difficult to cover it up everywhere, so they forget the reason for it, so they use it to distinguish between clean and turbid. And the official's contempt for business, of course, is also an old Chinese habit, which makes the "Shanghai school" fall in the eyes of the "Beijing school".而北京学界，前此固亦有其光荣，这就是五四运动的策动。现在虽然还有历史上的光辉，但当时的战士，却“功成，名遂，身退”者有之，“身稳”者有之，“身升”者更有之，好好的一场恶斗，几乎令人有“若要官，杀人放火受招安”之感。“昔人已乘黄鹤去，此地空余黄鹤楼”，前年大难临头，北平的学者们所想援以掩护自己的是古文化，而惟一大事，则是古物的南迁，这不是自己彻底的说明了北平所有的是什么了吗？
The Beijing academic circles have their glory before, which is the instigation of the May Fourth Movement. Although there is still the glory of history, the soldiers at that time had "success, fame, and retirement", "stable", and even more "rising". "The ancients have gone on the Yellow Crane, and the Yellow Crane Tower is empty here", the year before last, the great disaster came, and the scholars of Peking wanted to cover themselves with ancient culture, and the only major event was the southward migration of antiquities.但北平究竟还有古物，且有古书，且有古都的人民。在北平的学者文人们，又大抵有着讲师或教授的本业，论理，研究或创作的环境，实在是比“海派”来得优越的，我希望着能够看见学术上，或文艺上的大著作。
But there are still antiquities in Peking, ancient books, and the people of the ancient capital. The scholars and literati in Peking probably have the profession of lecturers or professors, and the environment for theory, research or creation is really superior to that of the "Shanghai School", and I hope to see the great works of academics or literature and art.一月三十日。
January 30th.

北人与南人

北人与南人

北人与南人

Northerners and Southerners栾廷石
Luan Tingshi这是看了“京派”与“海派”的议论之后，牵连想到的——
This is what I thought of after reading the discussion between the "Beijing school" and the "Shanghai school" -北人的卑视南人，已经是一种传统。这也并非因为风俗习惯的不同，我想，那大原因，是在历来的侵入者多从北方来，先征服中国之北部，又携了北人南征，所以南人在北人的眼中，也是被征服者。
It is already a tradition for northerners to look down on southerners. This is not because of the difference in customs and habits, I think the main reason is that most of the invaders have always come from the north, first conquered the north of China, and then brought the northerners to the south, so the southerners are also conquered in the eyes of the northerners.二陆入晋，北方人士在欢欣之中，分明带着轻薄，举证太烦，姑且不谈罢。容易看的是，羊之的《洛阳伽蓝记》中，就常诋南人，并不视为同类。至于元，则人民截然分为四等，一蒙古人，二色目人，三汉人即北人，第四等才是南人，因为他是最后投降的一伙。最后投降，从这边说，是矢尽援绝，这才罢战的南方之强，从那边说，却是不识顺逆，久梗王师的贼。孑遗自然还是投降的，然而为奴隶的资格因此就最浅，因为浅，所以班次就最下，谁都不妨加以卑视了。到清朝，又重理了这一篇账，至今还流衍着余波；如果此后的历史是不再回旋的，那真不独是南人的如天之福。
Erlu entered Jin, and the northerners were in joy, clearly frivolous, and the evidence was too cumbersome, so let's not talk about it. It is easy to see that in Yang Zhi's "Luoyang Garan Ji", he often slanders the southerners and does not regard them as the same kind. As for the Yuan, the people are divided into four classes, one Mongolian, two colored people, three Han people, and the fourth class is the southerners, because he is the last to surrender. In the end, surrendered, from this side, it was the strength of the south that stopped fighting, but from that side, it was a thief who did not know obedience and rebellion, and had been blocking the royal army for a long time. The widow naturally surrendered, but the qualification to be a slave was therefore the shallowest, because it was shallow, so the shift was the lowest, and no one might as well look down on it. In the Qing Dynasty, this account was reorganized, and there are still aftermaths to this day; If history will no longer be revolving after that, it is really not only a blessing for southerners.当然，南人是有缺点的。权贵南迁，就带了腐败颓废的风气来，北方倒反而干净。性情也不同，有缺点，也有特长，正如北人的兼具二者一样。据我所见，北人的优点是厚重，南人的优点是机灵。但厚重之弊也愚，机灵之弊也狡，所以某先生曾经指出缺点道：北方人是“饱食终日，无所用心”；南方人是“群居终日，言不及义”。就有闲阶级而言，我以为大体是的确的。
Of course, southerners have shortcomings. The move of the powerful to the south brought with it a corrupt and decadent atmosphere, but the north was clean. The temperament is also different, with shortcomings and strengths, just like the northerners have both. As far as I can see, the advantage of northerners is that they are heavy, and the advantage of southerners is cleverness. But the disadvantages of thickness are also foolish, and the disadvantages of cleverness are also cunning, so a certain gentleman once pointed out the shortcomings and said: Northerners are "full of food all day long and have no intention"; Southerners are "living in groups all day long, and words are not as good as righteousness". As far as the idle class is concerned, I think it is generally true.缺点可以改正，优点可以相师。相书上有一条说，北人南相，南人北相者贵。我看这并不是妄语。北人南相者，是厚重而又机灵，南人北相者，不消说是机灵而又能厚重。昔人之所谓“贵”，不过是当时的成功，在现在，那就是做成有益的事业了。这是中国人的一种小小的自新之路。
Disadvantages can be corrected, and advantages can be learned. There is a saying in the book that northerners look at the south, and southerners are precious. I don't think this is a lie. The northerners and the southerners are thick and clever, and the southerners and the northerners are not to be said to be clever and heavy. The so-called "expensive" of the ancients was just a success at that time, and now, it is a beneficial business. This is a small road of self-renewal for the Chinese.不过做文章的是南人多，北方却受了影响。北京的报纸上，油嘴滑舌，吞吞吐吐，顾影自怜的文字不是比六七年前多了吗？这倘和北方固有的“贫嘴”一结婚，产生出来的一定是一种不祥的新劣种！
However, there are many people in the south who make a fuss, but the north is affected. In the newspapers in Beijing, isn't there more words of slippery tongue and hesitation, and Gu Ying is self-pity than six or seven years ago? If this marries the inherent "poor mouth" in the north, it must produce an ominous new bad species!一月三十日。
January 30th.

《如此广州》读后感

《如此广州》读后感

《如此广州》读后感

After reading "So Guangzhou"越客
Vietnamese前几天，《自由谈》上有一篇《如此广州》，引据那边的报章，记店家做起玄坛和李逵的大像来，眼睛里嵌上电灯，以镇压对面的老虎招牌，真写得有声有色。自然，那目的，是在对于广州人的迷信，加以讥刺的。
A few days ago, there was an article in "So Guangzhou" in "Free Talk", quoting the newspaper over there, remembering that the store made a statue of Xuantan and Li Kui, with electric lights embedded in its eyes to suppress the tiger sign on the opposite side, which was really written beautifully. Naturally, the purpose was to ridicule the superstitions of Guangzhou people.广东人的迷信似乎确也很不小，走过上海五方杂处的衖堂，只要看毕毕剥剥在那里放鞭炮的，大门外的地上点着香烛的，十之九总是广东人，这很可以使新党叹气。然而广东人的迷信却迷信得认真，有魄力，即如那玄坛和李逵大像，恐怕就非百来块钱不办。汉求明珠，吴征大象，中原人历来总到广东去刮宝贝，好像到现在也还没有被刮穷，为了对付假老虎，也能出这许多力。要不然，那就是拚命，这却又可见那迷信之认真。
The superstition of Cantonese people seems to be indeed not small, walking through the halls of Shanghai's five parties, as long as you see Bi Bi peeling firecrackers there and lighting incense candles on the ground outside the gate, nine out of ten are always Cantonese, which can make the new party sigh. However, the superstitions of Cantonese people are superstitious and courageous, that is, like the Xuantan and Li Kui statues, I am afraid that they will have to pay a hundred yuan. Han Qiu Mingzhu, Wu Zheng Elephant, the people of the Central Plains have always gone to Guangdong to scrape the treasure, it seems that they have not been scraped until now, and in order to deal with the fake tiger, they can also use a lot of strength. Otherwise, it would be desperate, but this shows the seriousness of the superstition.其实，中国人谁没有迷信，只是那迷信迷得没出息了，所以别人倒不注意。譬如罢，对面有了老虎招牌，大抵的店家，是总要不舒服的。不过，倘在江浙，恐怕就不肯这样的出死力来斗争，他们会只化一个铜元买一条红纸，写上“姜太公在此百无禁忌”或“泰山石敢当”，悄悄的贴起来，就如此的安身立命。迷信还是迷信，但迷得多少小家子相，毫无生气，奄奄一息，他连做《自由谈》的材料也不给你。
In fact, who in Chinese is not superstitious, but that superstition is so unpromising, so others don't pay attention. For example, if there is a tiger sign opposite, most stores will always be uncomfortable. However, if they are in Jiangsu and Zhejiang, I am afraid they will not fight with such a dead force, and they will only turn a copper dollar into a piece of red paper, write "Jiang Taigong has no taboos here" or "Taishan stone dares to be", and quietly paste it, and settle down like this. Superstition is still superstition, but how many small family appearances are fascinated, lifeless, dying, he doesn't even give you the materials for "Free Talk".与其迷信，模胡不如认真。倘若相信鬼还要用钱，我赞成北宋人似的索性将铜钱埋到地里去，现在那么的烧几个纸锭，却已经不但是骗别人，骗自己，而且简直是骗鬼了。中国有许多事情都只剩下一个空名和假样，就为了不认真的缘故。
Instead of being superstitious, it is better to be serious. If you believe that ghosts still need money, I agree with the Northern Song Dynasty people simply burying copper coins in the ground, but now burning a few paper ingots is not only deceiving others and deceiving themselves, but also simply deceiving ghosts. There are many things in China that are left with only empty names and fakes, just because they are not serious.广州人的迷信，是不足为法的，但那认真，是可以取法，值得佩服的。
The superstition of Guangzhou people is not enough to be legal, but it is serious and can be learned, which is worthy of admiration.二月四日。
February 4th.

过年

过年

过年

Spring festival张承禄
Zhang Chenglu今年上海的过旧年，比去年热闹。
This year's New Year in Shanghai is more lively than last year.文字上和口头上的称呼，往往有些不同：或者谓之“废历”，轻之也；或者谓之“古历”，爱之也。但对于这“历”的待遇是一样的：结账，祀神，祭祖，放鞭炮，打马将，拜年，“恭喜发财”！
The literal and verbal titles are often somewhat different: or called "abolished calendar", which is also light; Some people call it the "ancient calendar" because they love it. But the treatment of this "calendar" is the same: checkout, worship the gods, worship the ancestors, set off firecrackers, beat the horses, pay New Year's greetings, and "Wishing you prosperity"!虽过年而不停刊的报章上，也已经有了感慨；但是，感慨而已，到底胜不过事实。有些英雄的作家，也曾经叫人终年奋发，悲愤，纪念。但是，叫而已矣，到底也胜不过事实。中国的可哀的纪念太多了，这照例至少应该沉默；可喜的纪念也不算少，然而又怕有“反动分子乘机捣乱”，所以大家的高兴也不能发扬。几经防遏，几经淘汰，什么佳节都被绞死，于是就觉得只有这仅存残喘的“废历”或“古历”还是自家的东西，更加可爱了。那就格外的庆贺——这是不能以“封建的余意”一句话，轻轻了事的。
Although the newspapers do not stop publishing during the New Year, there are already feelings; However, emotion is not better than facts. Some heroic writers have also made people work hard, grieve and commemorate all year round. However, it is just a call, and it is not better than the facts. There are too many sad commemorations in China, which should at least be silent as usual; There are not a few gratifying commemorations, but they are afraid that "reactionaries will take the opportunity to make trouble", so everyone's happiness cannot be carried forward. After several preventions and eliminations, all festivals have been hanged, so I feel that only this remaining "waste calendar" or "ancient calendar" is still my own thing, which is even more cute. Then it is a special celebration - this cannot be done lightly with the sentence "feudal residual meaning".叫人整年的悲愤，劳作的英雄们，一定是自己毫不知道悲愤，劳作的人物。在实际上，悲愤者和劳作者，是时时需要休息和高兴的。古埃及的奴隶们，有时也会冷然一笑。这是蔑视一切的笑。不懂得这笑的意义者，只有主子和自安于奴才生活，而劳作较少，并且失了悲愤的奴才。
The heroes who make people sad and angry all year round must be people who do not know the grief and anger and work of themselves. In fact, grievances and laborers need rest and rejoice all the time. The slaves of ancient Egypt sometimes smiled coldly. This is a laugh that defies everything. Those who do not understand the meaning of this smile are only masters and slaves who live comfortably as slaves, work less, and lose their grief and anger.我不过旧历年已经二十三年了，这回却连放了三夜的花爆，使隔壁的外国人也“嘘”了起来：这却和花爆都成了我一年中仅有的高兴。
It's been 23 years since I last had a long calendar year, but this time I played three nights of flower explosions, which made the foreigners next door "boo": this and the flower explosion have become my only joy in the year.二月十五日。
February 15th.

运命

运命

运命

Destiny倪朔尔
Ni Shuoer电影“《姊妹花》中的穷老太婆对她的穷女儿说：‘穷人终是穷人，你要忍耐些！’”宗汉先生慨然指出，名之曰“穷人哲学”（见《大晚报》）。
The poor old woman in the movie "Sister Flowers" said to her poor daughter: 'The poor are poor after all, you have to be patient!' Mr. Zonghan pointed out with emotion that it was called "Philosophy of the Poor" (see "Evening News").自然，这是教人安贫的，那根据是“运命”。古今圣贤的主张此说者已经不在少数了，但是不安贫的穷人也“终是”很不少。“智者千虑，必有一失”，这里的“失”，是在非到盖棺之后，一个人的运命“终是”不可知。
Naturally, this is to teach people to be poor, and the basis is "fate". There are not a few sages of ancient and modern times who advocate this statement, but there are also many poor people who are not poor. "A wise man thinks a thousand times, there must be a loss", the "loss" here is that after the coffin is covered, a person's fate is "ultimately" unknowable.豫言运命者也未尝没有人，看相的，排八字的，到处都是。然而他们对于主顾，肯断定他穷到底的是很少的，即使有，大家的学说又不能相一致，甲说当穷，乙却说当富，这就使穷人不能确信他将来的一定的运命。
There are no people who predict fate, those who look at fortunes, those who line up horoscopes, everywhere. However, there are very few of them who are willing to conclude that he is poor to the end, and even if there is, everyone's doctrine cannot be consistent, A says to be poor, but B says to be rich, which makes the poor man unable to be sure of his future destiny.不信运命，就不能“安分”，穷人买奖券，便是一种“非分之想”。但这于国家，现在是不能说没有益处的。不过“有一利必有一弊”，运命既然不可知，穷人又何妨想做皇帝，这就使中国出现了《推背图》。据宋人说，五代时候，许多人都看了这图给自己的儿子取名字，希望应着将来的吉兆，直到宋太宗（？）抽乱了一百本，与别本一同流通，读者见次序多不相同，莫衷一是，这才不再珍藏了。然而九一八那时，上海却还大卖着《推背图》的新印本。
If you don't believe in fate, you can't "settle down", and the poor buy lottery tickets, which is a kind of "non-profit thought". But this cannot be said to be of no benefit to the country now. However, "there must be a benefit and a disadvantage", since fate is unknown, why not want to be an emperor, which led to the emergence of the "Tui Bei Tu" in China. According to the Song people, during the Five Dynasties, many people looked at this picture and named their sons, hoping to respond to the auspicious omens of the future, until Song Taizong (?) A hundred copies were randomly drawn and circulated with other books, and readers saw that the order was different, and they were inconsistent, so they no longer treasured it. However, at that time in 918, Shanghai was still selling a new print of "Tui Bei Tu".“安贫”诚然是天下太平的要道，但倘使无法指定究竟的运命，总不能令人死心塌地。现在的优生学，本可以说是科学的了，中国也正有人提倡着，冀以济运命说之穷，而历史又偏偏不挣气，汉高祖的父亲并非皇帝，李白的儿子也不是诗人；还有立志传，絮絮叨叨的在对人讲西洋的谁以冒险成功，谁又以空手致富。
"Poverty and poverty" is indeed the key to peace in the world, but if the ultimate fate cannot be specified, it cannot make people give up. The current eugenics can be said to be scientific, and some people in China are also advocating it, hoping to save the destiny of the poor, and history is not angry, Han Gaozu's father is not an emperor, and Li Bai's son is not a poet; There is also the biography of ambition, which is nagging to people about who succeeds in the West and who gets rich empty-handed.运命说之毫不足以治国平天下，是有明明白白的履历的。倘若还要用它来做工具，那中国的运命可真要“穷”极无聊了。
Fate is not enough to govern the country and pacify the world, and there is a clear resume. If it is still used as a tool, then China's fate will really be "poor" and extremely boring.二月二十三日。
February 23.

大小骗

大小骗

大小骗

Big and small scams邓当世
Deng Dangshi“文坛”上的丑事，这两年来真也揭发得不少了：剪贴，瞎抄，贩卖，假冒。不过不可究诘的事情还有，只因为我们看惯了，不再留心它。
The scandals in the "literary world" have really been exposed a lot in the past two years: cutting and pasting, copying, selling, and counterfeiting. But there are still things that cannot be investigated, just because we are used to seeing it and no longer pay attention to it.名人的题签，虽然字不见得一定写的好，但只在表示这书的作者或出版者认识名人，和内容并无关系，是算不得骗人的。可疑的是“校阅”。校阅的脚色，自然是名人，学者，教授。然而这些先生们自己却并无关于这一门学问的著作。所以真的校阅了没有是一个问题；即使真的校阅了，那校阅是否真的可靠又是一个问题。但再加校阅，给以批评的文章，我们却很少见。
Although the words of celebrities are not necessarily well written, they only mean that the author or publisher of the book knows the celebrity and has nothing to do with the content, which is not deceptive. What is suspicious is "proofreading". The foot of the review is naturally celebrities, scholars, and professors. However, these gentlemen themselves have no writings on this subject. So it is not a problem to really proofread; Even if it is really proofread, whether it is really reliable is another question. But we rarely see articles that are reviewed and criticized.还有一种是“编辑”。这编辑者，也大抵是名人，因这名，就使读者觉得那书的可靠。但这是也很可疑的。如果那书上有些序跋，我们还可以由那文章，思想，断定它是否真是这人所编辑，但市上所陈列的书，常有翻开便是目录，叫你一点也摸不着头脑的。这怎么靠得住？至于大部的各门类的刊物的所谓“主编”，那是这位名人竟上至天空，下至地底，无不通晓了，“无为而无不为”，倒使我们无须再加以揣测。
There is also an "edit". This editor is probably a celebrity, and because of this name, the reader feels that the book is reliable. But this is also suspicious. If there is some preface to the book, we can also judge whether it was really edited by this person from the article and thought, but the books on display in the market often open the table of contents, so that you will not be able to scratch your head at all. How can this be reliable? As for the so-called "editor-in-chief" of most of the various types of publications, it is that this celebrity is so knowledgeable that he knows everything from the sky to the ground, "doing nothing and doing everything", so that we don't need to speculate anymore.还有一种是“特约撰稿”。刊物初出，广告上往往开列一大批特约撰稿的名人，有时还用凸版印出作者亲笔的签名，以显示其真实。这并不可疑。然而过了一年半载，可就渐有破绽了，许多所谓特约撰稿者的东西一个字也不见。是并没有约，还是约而不来呢，我们无从知道；但可见那些所谓亲笔签名，也许是从别处剪来，或者简直是假造的了。要是从投稿上取下来的，为什么见签名却不见稿呢？
The other is "special writer". When publications first came out, advertisements often listed a large number of celebrities who wrote for them, and sometimes the author's autograph was printed with letterpress to show their authenticity. This is not suspicious. However, after a year and a half, there were gradually flaws, and many of the so-called contributors did not say a word. Whether there is no appointment, or whether the appointment does not come, we have no way of knowing; But it can be seen that those so-called autographs may have been cut from elsewhere, or they are simply fake. If it is taken from the submission, why is it that the signature is seen but not the manuscript?这些名人在卖着他们的“名”，不知道可是领着“干薪”的？倘使领的，自然是同意的自卖，否则，可以说是被“盗卖”。“欺世盗名”者有之，盗卖名以欺世者又有之，世事也真是五花八门。然而受损失的却只有读者。
These celebrities are selling their "name", I don't know if they are receiving "dry salaries"? If you receive it, it is naturally a self-sale with consent, otherwise, it can be said that it is "stolen and sold". There are people who "deceive the world and steal names", and there are also people who steal and sell names to deceive the world, and the world is really diverse. However, only the reader suffers.三月七日。
March 7th.

“小童挡驾”

“小童挡驾”

“小童挡驾”

“小童挡驾”宓子章
Mi Zizhang近五六年来的外国电影，是先给我们看了一通洋侠客的勇敢，于是而野蛮人的陋劣，又于是而洋小姐的曲线美。但是，眼界是要大起来的，终于几条腿不够了，于是一大丛；又不够了，于是赤条条。这就是“裸体运动大写真”，虽然是正正堂堂的“人体美与健康美的表现”，然而又是“小童挡驾”的，他们不配看这些“美”。
In the past five or six years, foreign movies have shown us the bravery of foreign knights, then the ugliness of savages, and then the curvaceous beauty of foreign misses. However, the vision is to be bigger, and finally a few legs are not enough, so there is a big bush; It wasn't enough, so I went red. This is the "nude sports photo", although it is a dignified "expression of human beauty and healthy beauty", but it is also a "child blocking the driving", and they are not worthy of seeing these "beauty".为什么呢？宣传上有这样的文字——
Why? There is such a text on the propaganda -“一个绝顶聪明的孩子说：她们怎不回过身子儿来呢？”
"A very smart child said: Why don't they turn around?"“一位十足严正的爸爸说：怪不得戏院对孩子们要挡驾了！”
A completely serious father said: No wonder the theater is blocking the children!"这当然只是文学家虚拟的妙文，因为这影片是一开始就标榜着“小童挡驾”的，他们无从看见。但假使真给他们去看了，他们就会这样的质问吗？我想，也许会的。然而这质问的意思，恐怕和张生唱的“咍，怎不回过脸儿来”完全两样，其实倒在电影中人的态度的不自然，使他觉得奇怪。中国的儿童也许比较的早熟，也许性感比较的敏，但总不至于比成年的他的“爸爸”，心地更不干净的。倘其如此，二十年后的中国社会，那可真真可怕了。但事实上大概决不至于此，所以那答话还不如改一下：
Of course, this is just a virtual wonderful article by a writer, because this film advertises "children blocking the car" from the beginning, and they can't see it. But if they really went to see it, would they question it like this? I think, maybe. However, the meaning of this question is probably completely different from Zhang Sheng's singing "Wow, why don't you turn your face", in fact, the unnatural attitude of the people in the movie makes him feel strange. Chinese children may be more precocious and sexy, but they are not as clean as their adult "father". If this is the case, Chinese society in 20 years will be really terrible. But in fact, it probably won't be like this, so it's better to change the answer:“因为要使我过不了瘾，可恶极了！”
"Because I can't get enough of it, it's terrible!"不过肯这样说的“爸爸”恐怕也未必有。他总要“以己之心，度人之心”，度了之后，便将这心硬塞在别人的腔子里，装作不是自己的，而说别人的心没有他的干净。裸体女人的都“不回过身子儿来”，其实是专为对付这一类人物的。她们难道是白痴，连“爸爸”的眼色，比他孩子的更不规矩都不知道吗？
But I'm afraid there may not be a "dad" who is willing to say this. He always wants to "save the heart of others with his own heart", and after he has done so, he will force this heart into other people's mouths, pretending that it is not his own, and saying that other people's hearts are not as clean as his. Naked women "don't turn back", in fact, they are specifically designed to deal with this type of character. Are they idiots, don't they even know that the eyes of "Dad" are more unruly than his children?但是，中国社会还是“爸爸”类的社会，所以做起戏来，是“妈妈”类献身，“儿子”类受谤。即使到了紧要关头，也还是什么“木兰从军”，“汪踦卫国”，要推出“女子与小人”去搪塞的。“吾国民其何以善其后欤？”
However, Chinese society is still a "father" society, so when it comes to playing, it is the "mother" type who dedicates himself and the "son" class is slandered. Even at a critical juncture, it is still some "Mulan in the army", "Wang Wei Guo", and wants to launch "women and villains" to prevaricate. "How can our people improve their future?"四月五日。
April 5th.

古人并不纯厚

古人并不纯厚

古人并不纯厚

The ancients were not pure翁隼
Weng Falcon老辈往往说：古人比今人纯厚，心好，寿长。我先前也有些相信，现在这信仰可是动摇了。达赖啦嘛总该比平常人心好，虽然“不幸短命死矣”，但广州开的耆英会，却明明收集过一大批寿翁寿媪，活了一百零六岁的老太太还能穿针，有照片为证。
The elders often say: The ancients were pure, good-hearted, and long-lived than today's people. I used to believe a little, but now this faith has been shaken. The Dalai Lama should always be better than ordinary people, although "unfortunately died short-lived", but the Senior Citizens Association held in Guangzhou has clearly collected a large number of longevity elders and elderly women, and the old lady who lived one hundred and six years old can still thread needles, as evidenced by photos.古今的心的好坏，较为难以比较，只好求教于诗文。古之诗人，是有名的“温柔敦厚”的，而有的竟说：“时日曷丧，予及汝偕亡！”你看够多么恶毒？更奇怪的是孔子“校阅”之后，竟没有删，还说什么“诗三百，一言以蔽之，曰：思无邪”哩，好像圣人也并不以为可恶。
It is difficult to compare the quality of the heart in ancient and modern times, so I have to seek advice from poetry and literature. The ancient poets were famous for their "gentle and honest", and some actually said: "Time is lost, and I will die with you!" "How vicious have you seen enough? What's even more strange is that after Confucius "reviewed", he did not delete it, and said "three hundred poems, in a word, say: Si Wu Xie", as if the sage did not think it was hateful.还有现存的最通行的《文选》，听说如果青年作家要丰富语汇，或描写建筑，是总得看它的，但我们倘一调查里面的作家，却至少有一半不得好死，当然，就因为心不好。经昭明太子一挑选，固然好像变成语汇祖师了，但在那时，恐怕还有个人的主张，偏激的文字。否则，这人是不传的，试翻唐以前的史上的文苑传，大抵是禀承意旨，草檄作颂的人，然而那些作者的文章，流传至今者偏偏少得很。
I heard that if young writers want to enrich their vocabulary or describe architecture, they must look at it, but if we investigate the writers in it, at least half of them will not die well, of course, because of a bad heart. After being selected by Prince Zhaoming, it seems that he has become the ancestor of vocabulary, but at that time, I am afraid that there are still personal opinions and extreme words. Otherwise, this person will not be passed on, and if you try to turn over the literary biography in the history before the Tang Dynasty, it is probably a person who follows the will and drafts a proclamation, but the articles of those authors have been passed down to this day.由此看来，翻印整部的古书，也就不无危险了。近来偶尔看见一部石印的《平斋文集》，作者，宋人也，不可谓之不古，但其诗就不可为训。如咏《狐鼠》云：“狐鼠擅一窟，虎蛇行九逵，不论天有眼，但管地无皮……。”又咏《荆公》云：“养就祸胎身始去，依然钟阜向人青”。那指斥当路的口气，就为今人所看不惯。“八大家”中的欧阳修，是不能算作偏激的文学家的罢，然而那《读李翱文》中却有云：“呜呼，在位而不肯自忧，又禁它人使皆不得忧，可叹也夫！”也就悻悻得很。
From this point of view, it is not without danger to reprint the entire ancient book. Recently, I occasionally saw a lithograph of the "Pingzhai Collection", the author, a Song person, cannot be said to be not ancient, but his poems cannot be taught. For example, the poem "Fox and Mouse" says: "The fox and the rat are good at a cave, the tiger and snake are nine Kui, no matter the sky has eyes, but there is no skin ...... the earth." He also recited "Jing Gong": "Raising the womb of misfortune begins to go, and it is still Zhongfu to the green of the people." The tone of criticizing the authorities is not accustomed to today's people. Ouyang Xiu in the "Eight Masters" cannot be regarded as an extreme writer, but there is a cloud in "Reading Li Aowen": "Alas, it is lamentable that he refuses to worry about himself while in power, and forbids others from worrying about himself!" It's very frustrating.但是，经后人一番选择，却就纯厚起来了。后人能使古人纯厚，则比古人更为纯厚也可见。清朝曾有钦定的《唐宋文醇》和《唐宋诗醇》，便是由皇帝将古人做得纯厚的好标本，不久也许会有人翻印，以“挽狂澜于既倒”的。
However, after the choice of later generations, it became pure. If later generations can make the ancients pure and thick, it can be seen that they are more pure and thick than the ancients. The Qing Dynasty once had the "Tang and Song Literary Alcohol" and "Tang and Song Poetry Alcohol", which were good specimens made by the emperor of the ancients, and soon someone may reprint them to "turn the tide".四月十五日。
April 15th.

法会和歌剧

法会和歌剧

法会和歌剧

Puja and opera孟弧
Meng arc《时轮金刚法会募捐缘起》中有这样的句子：“古人一遇灾祲，上者罪己，下者修身……今则人心浸以衰矣，非仗佛力之加被，末由消除此浩劫。”恐怕现在也还有人记得的罢。这真说得令人觉得自己和别人都半文不值，治水除蝗，完全无益，倘要“或消自业，或淡他灾”，只好请班禅大师来求佛菩萨保佑了。
There is such a sentence in "The Origin of Kalachakra Puja Fundra Fundraising": "When the ancients encountered disasters, the upper ones sinned themselves, and the lower ones cultivated themselves...... Now, the people's hearts are gradually declining, and it is not for the power of Buddha to eliminate this catastrophe. "I'm afraid there are still people who remember it now. This really makes people feel that they and others are worthless, and it is completely useless to control floods and eliminate locusts.坚信的人们一定是有的，要不然，怎么能募集一笔巨款。
There must be people who firmly believe in it, otherwise, how can they raise a huge amount of money.然而究竟好像是“人心浸以衰矣”了，中央社十七日杭州电云：“时轮金刚法会将于本月二十八日在杭州启建，并决定邀梅兰芳，徐来，胡蝶，在会期内表演歌剧五天。”梵呗圆音，竟将为轻歌曼舞所“加被”，岂不出于意表也哉！
However, it seems that "people's hearts are declining", the Central News Agency said on the 17th: "The Kalachakra Puja will be built in Hangzhou on the 28th of this month, and it has been decided to invite Mei Lanfang, Xu Lai, and Hu Die to perform opera for five days during the period." "The round sound of Sanskrit will be "added" by the light song and dance, isn't it unexpected?盖闻昔者我佛说法，曾有天女散花，现在杭州启会，我佛大概未必亲临，则恭请梅郎权扮天女，自然尚无不可。但与摩登女郎们又有什么关系呢？莫非电影明星与标准美人唱起歌来，也可以“消除此浩劫”的么？
It is said that in the past, my Buddha said that there was a heavenly maiden scattering flowers, and now Hangzhou is opening, and my Buddha may not come in person, so I respectfully invite Mei Langquan to pretend to be a heavenly maiden, which is naturally not impossible. But what does it have to do with the modern girls? Could it be that movie stars and standard beauties can also "eliminate this catastrophe"?大约，人心快要“浸衰”之前，拜佛的人，就已经喜欢兼看玩艺的了，款项有限，法会不大的时候，和尚们便自己来飞钹，唱歌，给善男子，善女人们满足，但也很使道学先生们摇头。班禅大师只“印可”开会而不唱《毛毛雨》，原是很合佛旨的，可不料同时也唱起歌剧来了。
Probably, before the people's hearts were about to "decline", people who worshipped Buddha already liked to watch the art at the same time, and when the money was limited and the puja was not large, the monks would come to fly cymbals and sing to satisfy the good men and women, but it also made the Taoist gentlemen shake their heads. The Panchen Lama only "Yinke" held a meeting and did not sing "Drizzle", which was originally very in line with the Buddha's will, but unexpectedly he also sang opera at the same time.原人和现代人的心，也许很有些不同，倘相去不过几百年，那恐怕即使有些差异，也微乎其微的。赛会做戏文，香市看娇娇，正是“古已有之”的把戏。既积无量之福，又极视听之娱，现在未来，都有好处，这是向来兴行佛事的号召的力量。否则，黄胖和尚念经，参加者就未必踊跃，浩劫一定没有消除的希望了。
The hearts of the original people and modern people may be very different, if they are only a few hundred years apart, then I am afraid that even if there are some differences, they are insignificant. The competition will make dramas, and the fragrant market will look at Jiaojiao, which is the trick of "ancient times". It is not only the accumulation of immeasurable blessings, but also the great audio-visual entertainment, and the present and the future, all of which are beneficial, which is the power of the call to practice Buddhist rituals that has always been promoted. Otherwise, if the yellow fat monk chants, the participants may not be enthusiastic, and there will be no hope of eliminating the catastrophe.但这种安排，虽然出于婆心，却仍是“人心浸以衰矣”的征候。这能够令人怀疑：我们自己是不配“消除此浩劫”的了，但此后该靠班禅大师呢，还是梅兰芳博士，或是密斯徐来，密斯胡蝶呢？
But this arrangement, although out of the mother-in-law's heart, is still a symptom of "the people's hearts are declining". This can make people doubt: we ourselves are not worthy of "eliminating this catastrophe", but after that, should we rely on Master Panchen, Dr. Mei Lanfang, or Miss Xulai, or Miss Hudie?四月二十日。
April 20.

洋服的没落

洋服的没落

洋服的没落

The decline of the dress韦士繇
Wei Shiyao几十年来，我们常常恨着自己没有合意的衣服穿。清朝末年，带些革命色采的英雄不但恨辫子，也恨马褂和袍子，因为这是满洲服。一位老先生到日本去游历，看见那边的服装，高兴的了不得，做了一篇文章登在杂志上，叫作《不图今日重见汉官仪》。他是赞成恢复古装的。
For decades, we often hated ourselves for not having clothes to wear. At the end of the Qing Dynasty, heroes with some revolutionary colors not only hated braids, but also hated horse coats and robes, because this was a Manchurian uniform. An old gentleman traveled to Japan, saw the costumes there, was very happy, and made an article in a magazine called "I don't want to see Han Guanyi again today". He was in favor of restoring the costume.然而革命之后，采用的却是洋装，这是因为大家要维新，要便捷，要腰骨笔挺。少年英俊之徒，不但自己必洋装，还厌恶别人穿袍子。那时听说竟有人去责问樊山老人，问他为什么要穿满洲的衣裳。樊山回问道：“你穿的是那里的服饰呢？”少年答道：“我穿的是外国服。”樊山道：“我穿的也是外国服。”
However, after the revolution, dresses were adopted, because everyone wanted to be reformed, convenient, and straight. Young handsome people not only have to dress themselves, but also hate others wearing robes. At that time, I heard that someone actually questioned the old man of Fanshan and asked him why he wore Manchurian clothes. Fan Shan asked back: "Are you wearing the clothes there?" The boy replied: "I am wearing a foreign dress." Fan Shan said: "I am also wearing foreign clothes." ”这故事颇为传诵一时，给袍褂党扬眉吐气。不过其中是带一点反对革命的意味的，和近日的因为卫生，因为经济的大两样。后来，洋服终于和华人渐渐的反目了，不但袁世凯朝，就定袍子马褂为常礼服，五四运动之后，北京大学要整饬校风，规定制服了，请学生们公议，那议决的也是：袍子和马褂！
This story was quite recited for a while, raising its eyebrows to the robe party. However, there is a bit of opposition to the revolution, which is different from the recent one because of health and because of the economy. Later, the clothes finally turned against the Chinese, not only Yuan Shikai dynasty, but also set the robe and horse coat as the usual dress, after the May Fourth Movement, Peking University wanted to rectify the school spirit, stipulate the uniform, and invite the students to discuss it, and the decision was also: robe and horse coat!这回的不取洋服的原因却正如林语堂先生所说，因其不合于卫生。造化赋给我们的腰和脖子，本是可以弯曲的，弯腰曲背，在中国是一种常态，逆来尚须顺受，顺来自然更当顺受了。所以我们是最能研究人体，顺其自然而用之的人民。脖子最细，发明了砍头；膝关节能弯，发明了下跪；臀部多肉，又不致命，就发明了打屁股。违反自然的洋服，于是便渐渐的自然的没落了。
The reason for not taking clothes this time is as Mr. Lin Yutang said, because it is not hygienic. The waist and neck given to us by nature can be bent, bending over and bending the back, which is the norm in China. Therefore, we are the people who can best study the human body and use it naturally. the neck is the thinnest, and the head is invented; the knee joint can be bent, and kneeling was invented; The buttocks are fleshy and not fatal, so spanking was invented. Clothes that violate nature, so they gradually declined naturally.这洋服的遗迹，现在已只残留在摩登男女的身上，恰如辫子小脚，不过偶然还见于顽固男女的身上一般。不料竟又来了一道催命符，是镪水悄悄从背后洒过来了。
The remains of this dress now only remain on the bodies of modern men and women, just like braided feet, but occasionally they are seen on the bodies of stubborn men and women. Unexpectedly, another life-reminder came, and it was the water that quietly spilled from behind.这怎么办呢？
What should I do?恢复古制罢，自黄帝以至宋明的衣裳，一时实难以明白；学戏台上的装束罢，蟒袍玉带，粉底皂靴，坐了摩托车吃番菜，实在也不免有些滑稽。所以改来改去，大约总还是袍子马褂牢稳。虽然也是外国服，但恐怕是不会脱下的了——这实在有些稀奇。
The restoration of the ancient system, from the Yellow Emperor to the Song and Ming Dynasty, is really difficult to understand for a while; After learning the costumes on the stage, python robes and jade belts, foundation and black boots, and eating foreign dishes on a motorcycle, it is really a bit funny. So when I change it, it's probably always the robe and horse coat. Although it is also a foreign costume, I am afraid it will not be taken off - this is really a bit strange.四月二十一日。
April 21st.

朋友

朋友

朋友

Friend黄凯音
Huang Kaiyin我在小学的时候，看同学们变小戏法，“耳中听字”呀，“纸人出血”呀，很以为有趣。庙会时就有传授这些戏法的人，几枚铜元一件，学得来时，倒从此索然无味了。进中学是在城里，于是兴致勃勃的看大戏法，但后来有人告诉了我戏法的秘密，我就不再高兴走近圈子的旁边。去年到上海来，才又得到消遣无聊的处所，那便是看电影。
When I was in elementary school, I watched my classmates do tricks, "listening to words in my ears" and "paper man bleeding", which I thought was very interesting. There were people who taught these tricks at the temple fair, and a few copper dollars were a piece, and when they could learn it, it was boring from then on. When I entered middle school, I was in the city, so I watched the big trick with great interest, but then someone told me the secret of the trick, and I was no longer happy to approach the side of the circle. When I came to Shanghai last year, I got a boring place to spend time, and that was watching movies.但不久就在书上看到一点电影片子的制造法，知道了看去好像千丈悬崖者，其实离地不过几尺，奇禽怪兽，无非是纸做的。这使我从此不很觉得电影的神奇，倒往往只留心它的破绽，自己也无聊起来，第三回失掉了消遣无聊的处所。有时候，还自悔去看那一本书，甚至于恨到那作者不该写出制造法来了。
But soon I saw a little bit of the manufacturing method of the movie in the book, and I knew that it looked like a thousand-foot cliff, but in fact it was only a few feet above the ground, and the strange birds and monsters were nothing more than made of paper. This made me never feel the magic of the movie very much, but often only paid attention to its flaws, and I became bored, and lost the boring place for the third time. Sometimes, I regret reading that book, and even hate that the author shouldn't have written how to make it.暴露者揭发种种隐秘，自以为有益于人们，然而无聊的人，为消遣无聊计，是甘于受欺，并且安于自欺的，否则就更无聊赖。因为这，所以使戏法长存于天地之间，也所以使暴露幽暗不但为欺人者所深恶，亦且为被欺者所深恶。
The exposer exposes all kinds of secrets and thinks that it is beneficial to people, but the bored person, for the sake of boredom, is willing to be deceived, and is content with self-deception, otherwise it will be even more boring. Because of this, the trick lasts forever between heaven and earth, and it is also made to expose the darkness not only to be hated by the deceived, but also deeply hated by the deceived.暴露者只在有为的人们中有益，在无聊的人们中便要灭亡。自救之道，只在虽知一切隐秘，却不动声色，帮同欺人，欺那自甘受欺的无聊的人们，任它无聊的戏法一套一套的，终于反反复复的变下去。周围是总有这些人会看的。
The exposed are only beneficial among the promising and perish among the bored. The way to save oneself is only to know all the secrets, but remain calm, help deceive others, bully the boring people who are willing to be deceived, let its boring tricks go on and on, and finally change over and over again. There are always these people around.变戏法的时时拱手道：“……出家靠朋友！”有几分就是对着明白戏法的底细者而发的，为的是要他不来戳穿西洋镜。
The juggling technique always clasped his hands and said, "...... Become a monk by relying on friends! Some points are sent to those who understand the details of the tricks, so that he does not come to poke through the diorama.“朋友，以义合者也”，但我们向来常常不作如此解。
"Friends are also united by righteousness", but we have never understood it this way.四月二十二日。
April 22.

清明时节

清明时节

清明时节

Qingming season孟弧
Meng arc清明时节，是扫墓的时节，有的要进关内来祭祖，有的是到陕西去上坟，或则激论沸天，或则欢声动地，真好像上坟可以亡国，也可以救国似的。
The Qingming Festival is the season of sweeping graves, some want to enter the pass to worship their ancestors, some go to Shaanxi to go to the grave, or the excitement is boiling, or the joy is shaking, it is really as if going to the grave can destroy the country or save the country.坟有这么大关系，那么，掘坟当然是要不得的了。
The grave has such a big relationship, so of course digging the grave is not necessary.元朝的国师八合思巴罢，他就深相信掘坟的利害。他掘开宋陵，要把人骨和猪狗骨同埋在一起，以使宋室倒楣。后来幸而给一位义士盗走了，没有达到目的，然而宋朝还是亡。曹操设了“摸金校尉”之类的职员，专门盗墓，他的儿子却做了皇帝，自己竟被谥为“武帝”，好不威风。这样看来，死人的安危，和生人的祸福，又仿佛没有关系似的。
The national teacher of the Yuan Dynasty, Bahe Siba, deeply believed in the benefits of digging graves. He dug up the Song Mausoleum and buried the human bones and pig and dog bones together to make the Song Dynasty unlucky. Later, fortunately, it was stolen by a righteous man and did not achieve its goal, but the Song Dynasty still died. Cao Cao set up staff such as the "Golden Captain", who specialized in tomb robbery, but his son became the emperor, and he was posthumously honored as "Emperor Wu", which was not majestic. In this way, the safety of the dead and the fortunes and misfortunes of the living seem to have nothing to do with each other.相传曹操怕死后被人掘坟，造了七十二疑冢，令人无从下手。于是后之诗人曰：“遍掘七十二疑冢，必有一冢葬君尸。”于是后之论者又曰：阿瞒老奸巨猾，安知其尸实不在此七十二冢之内乎。真是没有法子想。
相传曹操怕死后被人掘坟，造了七十二疑冢，令人无从下手。 于是后之诗人曰：“遍掘七十二疑冢，必有一冢葬君尸。 ”于是后之论者又曰：阿瞒老奸巨猾，安知其尸实不在此七十二冢之内乎。 真是没有法子想。阿瞒虽是老奸巨猾，我想，疑冢之流倒未必安排的，不过古来的冢墓，却大抵被发掘者居多，冢中人的主名，的确者也很少，洛阳邙山，清末掘墓者极多，虽在名公巨卿的墓中，所得也大抵是一块志石和凌乱的陶器，大约并非原没有贵重的殉葬品，乃是早经有人掘过，拿走了，什么时候呢，无从知道。总之是葬后以至清末的偷掘那一天之间罢。
Although Ah Man is an old cunning and cunning, I think that the suspicious tomb may not be arranged, but the ancient tomb is mostly excavated, and the main name of the person in the tomb is indeed very few, Luoyang Mangshan, there are a lot of tomb diggers in the late Qing Dynasty, although in the tomb of the famous Duke Juqing, the harvest is probably a piece of stone and messy pottery, probably not the original no valuable funerary goods, but someone has dug it up long ago, taken away, when, there is no way to know. In short, it was between the day after the burial and the day of the excavation in the late Qing Dynasty.至于墓中人究竟是什么人，非掘后往往不知道。即使有相传的主名的，也大抵靠不住。中国人一向喜欢造些和大人物相关的名胜，石门有“子路止宿处”，泰山上有“孔子小天下处”；一个小山洞，是埋着大禹，几堆大土堆，便葬着文武和周公。
As for who the people in the tomb are, they often don't know until they dig. Even if there is a name passed down, it is probably unreliable. Chinese people have always liked to build some scenic spots related to big people, Shimen has "Zilu Accommodation", and Mount Tai has "Confucius Little World"; A small cave is buried with Dayu, and a few large mounds of earth bury Wen Wu and Duke Zhou.如果扫墓的确可以救国，那么，扫就要扫得真确，要扫文武周公的陵，不要扫着别人的土包子，还得查考自己是否周朝的子孙。于是乎要有考古的工作，就是掘开坟来，看看有无葬着文王武王周公旦的证据，如果有遗骨，还可照《洗冤录》的方法来滴血。但是，这又和扫墓救国说相反，很伤孝子顺孙的心了。不得已，就只好闭了眼睛，硬着头皮，乱拜一阵。
If sweeping the tomb can indeed save the country, then sweeping must be done accurately, to sweep the tombs of the Duke of Zhou and Wu, not to sweep other people's dirt buns, and to check whether you are a descendant of the Zhou Dynasty. Therefore, there must be archaeological work, that is, dig up the grave to see if there is evidence of burying King Wen and King Wu of Zhou Gongdan, and if there are bones, you can also drip blood according to the method of "Washing Wrongs". However, this is the opposite of the saying that sweeping the tomb to save the country, and it hurts the hearts of filial sons and grandchildren. As a last resort, I had to close my eyes, bite the bullet, and worship for a while.“非其鬼而祭之，谄也！”单是扫墓救国术没有灵验，还不过是一个小笑话而已。
"Sacrificing it to someone who is not a ghost is flattery!" The tomb sweeping technique alone has no effect, it is just a small joke.四月二十六日。
April 26th.

小品文的生机

小品文的生机

小品文的生机

The vitality of the sketch崇巽
Chongxun去年是“幽默”大走鸿运的时候，《论语》以外，也是开口幽默，闭口幽默，这人是幽默家，那人也是幽默家。不料今年就大塌其台，这不对，那又不对，一切罪恶，全归幽默，甚至于比之文场的丑脚。骂幽默竟好像是洗澡，只要来一下，自己就会干净似的了。
Last year was the time when "humor" was a big luck, in addition to the Analects, it was also humorous and humorous, this person was a humorist, and that person was also a humorist. Unexpectedly, this year collapsed, this is not right, that is not right, all the sins are all humorous, even compared to the ugly feet of the literary world. Scolding humor is like taking a bath, as long as you come, you will be clean.倘若真的是“天地大戏场”，那么，文场上当然也一定有丑脚——然而也一定有黑头。丑脚唱着丑脚戏，是很平常的，黑头改唱了丑脚戏，那就怪得很，但大戏场上却有时真会有这等事。这就使直心眼人跟着歪心眼人嘲骂，热情人愤怒，脆情人心酸。为的是唱得不内行，不招人笑吗？并不是的，他比真的丑脚还可笑。
If it is really a "big theater of heaven and earth", then of course there must be ugly feet in the literary field - but there must also be black heads. It is very common for the ugly foot to sing the ugly foot play, and it is very strange that the black head sings the ugly foot play, but sometimes there is such a thing in the big theater. This makes straight-eyed people follow crooked people to ridicule, enthusiastic people are angry, and fragile lovers are sad. Is it because you are not good at singing and not to make people laugh? No, he is more ridiculous than the real ugly feet.那愤怒和心酸，为的是黑头改唱了丑脚之后，事情还没有完。串戏总得有几个脚色：生，旦，末，丑，净，还有黑头。要不然，这戏也唱不久。为了一种原因，黑头只得改唱丑脚的时候，照成例，是一定丑脚倒来改唱黑头的。不但唱工，单是黑头涎脸扮丑脚，丑脚挺胸学黑头，戏场上只见白鼻子的和黑脸孔的丑脚多起来，也就滑天下之大稽。然而，滑稽而已，并非幽默。或人曰：“中国无幽默。”这正是一个注脚。
That anger and sadness, because after the blackhead changed to the ugly foot, the matter was not over. There must always be several characters in the series: raw, dan, end, ugly, clean, and blackhead. Otherwise, this play will not be sung for long. For one reason, when the blackhead had to change to the ugly foot, according to the usual practice, the ugly foot must have changed to the blackhead. Not only the singer, but also the black-headed saliva face pretends to be ugly, the ugly feet stick out of the chest to learn the blackhead, and there are more ugly feet with white noses and black faces in the theater, which is also ridiculous. However, it is just funny, not humorous. Some people say, "China has no humor. "This is exactly a footnote.更可叹的是被谥为“幽默大师”的林先生，竟也在《自由谈》上引了古人之言，曰：“夫饮酒猖狂，或沉寂无闻，亦不过洁身自好耳。今世癞鳖，欲使洁身自好者负亡国之罪，若然则‘今日乌合，明日鸟散，今日倒戈，明日凭轼，今日为君子，明日为小人，今日为小人，明日复为君子’之辈可无罪。”虽引据仍不离乎小品，但去“幽默”或“闲适”之道远矣。这又是一个注脚。
What is even more lamentable is that Mr. Lin, who is posthumously honored as the "Master of Humor", actually quoted the words of the ancients in "Free Talk", saying: "The husband drinks rampantly, or is silent, but he is just clean and self-satisfied." If this is the case, then 'today is a rabble, tomorrow the birds are scattered, today is a rebellion, tomorrow is a gentleman, tomorrow is a villain, today is a villain, and tomorrow is a gentleman' can be innocent. Although the citation is still not separated from the sketch, it is far from the way of "humor" or "leisure". This is another footnote.但林先生以谓新近各报上之攻击《人间世》，是系统的化名的把戏，却是错误的，证据是不同的论旨，不同的作风。其中固然有虽曾附骥，终未登龙的“名人”，或扮作黑头，而实是真正的丑脚的打诨，但也有热心人的谠论。世态是这么的纠纷，可见虽是小品，也正有待于分析和攻战的了，这或者倒是《人间世》的一线生机罢。
However, Mr. Lin believes that the recent attacks on "The Human World" in various newspapers are a systematic pseudonymity trick, but it is wrong, and the evidence is different arguments and different styles. Among them, there are "celebrities" who have been attached to Ji but have never ascended to the dragon, or pretend to be blackheads, but are actually real ugly jokes, but there are also the honesty of enthusiastic people. The state of the world is such a dispute, it can be seen that although it is a sketch, it is still waiting to be analyzed and attacked, which may be a glimmer of hope for "The Human World".四月二十六日。
April 26th.

刀“式”辩

刀“式”辩

刀“式”辩

The knife "style" argument黄棘
Yellow thorns本月六日的《动向》上，登有一篇阿芷先生指明杨昌溪先生的大作《鸭绿江畔》，是和法捷耶夫的《毁灭》相像的文章，其中还举着例证。这恐怕不能说是“英雄所见略同”罢。因为生吞活剥的模样，实在太明显了。
In the "Trend" on the 6th of this month, there was an article published by Mr. Ah Zhi pointing out that Mr. Yang Changxi's masterpiece "On the Banks of the Yalu River" is similar to Fadeev's "Destruction", which also gives examples. This may not be said to be "the hero's view is slightly the same". Because the appearance of swallowing and peeling alive is too obvious.但是，生吞活剥也要有本领，杨先生似乎还差一点。例如《毁灭》的译本，开头是——
However, there is also a skill to swallow and peel alive, and Mr. Yang seems to be a little short. For example, the translation of "Destruction" begins with -“在阶石上锵锵地响着有了损伤的日本指挥刀，莱奋生走到后院去了，……”
"The wounded Japanese command knife rang out on the steps, and Lai Fensheng went to the backyard,......"而《鸭绿江畔》的开头是——
And the beginning of "On the Banks of the Yalu River" is——“当金蕴声走进庭园的时候，他那损伤了的日本式的指挥刀在阶石上噼啪地响着。……”
When Jin Yunsheng walked into the garden, his damaged Japanese-style command knife crackled on the steps. ……”人名不同了，那是当然的；响声不同了，也没有什么关系，最特别的是他在“日本”之下，加了一个“式”字。这或者也难怪，不是日本人，怎么会挂“日本指挥刀”呢？一定是照日本式样，自己打造的了。
The names of people are different, of course; The sound is different, it doesn't matter, the most special thing is that he added a "style" word under "Japan". This may be no wonder, if you are not Japanese, how can you hang the "Japanese command sword"? It must have been made by yourself according to the Japanese style.但是，我们再来想一想：莱奋生所带的是袭击队，自然是袭击敌人，但也夺取武器。自己的军器是不完备的，一有所得，便用起来。所以他所挂的正是“日本的指挥刀”，并不是“日本式”。
However, let's think about it again: Lai Fensheng led an assault team, naturally attacking the enemy, but also seizing weapons. His own weapons are incomplete, and as soon as he gets something, he uses it. So what he hung was the "Japanese command sword", not the "Japanese style".文学家看小说，并且豫备抄袭的，可谓关系密切的了，而尚且如此粗心，岂不可叹也夫！
Writers who read novels and are prepared to plagiarize can be described as closely related, and they are still so careless, isn't it lamentable!五月七日。
May 7th.

化名新法

化名新法

化名新法

Pseudonym New Law白道
White way杜衡和苏汶先生在今年揭破了文坛上的两种秘密，也是坏风气：一种是批评家的圈子，一种是文人的化名。
Du Heng and Mr. Su Wen have revealed two secrets in the literary world this year, which are also bad customs: one is the circle of critics, and the other is the pseudonym of literati.但他还保留着没有说出的秘密——
But he still kept a secret that he didn't tell -圈子中还有一种书店编辑用的橡皮圈子，能大能小，能方能圆，只要是这一家书店出版的书籍，这边一套，“行”，那边一套，也“行”。
There is also a kind of rubber ring for bookstore editors in the circle, which can be big or small, square or round, as long as it is a book published by this bookstore, one set here, "okay", one set over there, also "okay".化名则不但可以变成别一个人，还可以化为一个“社”。这个“社”还能够选文，作论，说道只有某人的作品，“行”，某人的创作，也“行”。
A pseudonym can not only become another person, but also a "society". This "society" can also select articles, write essays, and say that only someone's work is "okay", and someone's creation is also "okay".例如“中国文艺年鉴社”所编的《中国文艺年鉴》前面的“鸟瞰”。据它的“瞰”法，是：苏汶先生的议论，“行”，杜衡先生的创作，也“行”。
For example, the "bird's eye view" in front of the "China Literature and Art Yearbook" compiled by the "China Literature and Art Yearbook". According to its "view" method, it is: Mr. Su Wen's discussion, "Xing", and Mr. Du Heng's creation is also "Xing".但我们在实际上再也寻不着这一个“社”。
But in fact, we can no longer find this "society".查查这“年鉴”的总发行所：现代书局；看看《现代》杂志末一页上的编辑者：施蛰存，杜衡。
Check the general distribution office of this "yearbook": Modern Bookstore; Look at the editors on the last page of Modern magazine: Shi Zhicun, Du Heng.Oho！
Oho！孙行者神通广大，不单会变鸟兽虫鱼，也会变庙宇，眼睛变窗户，嘴巴变庙门，只有尾巴没处安放，就变了一枝旗竿，竖在庙后面。但那有只竖一枝旗竿的庙宇的呢？它的被二郎神看出来的破绽就在此。
Sun Xingzhe has great powers, not only can he turn into birds, beasts, insects and fish, but also into temples, his eyes become windows, his mouth into temple doors, only his tail has nowhere to put it, so he turns into a flagpole and stands behind the temple. But what about the temple with only one flagpole? This is the flaw that was seen by Erlang God.“除了万不得已之外”，“我希望”一个文人也不要化为“社”，倘使只为了自吹自捧，那真是“就近又有点卑劣了”。
"Except as a last resort", "I hope" that a literati will not turn into a "society", if it is only for boasting, it is really "a bit despicable to be nearby".五月十日。
May 10th.

读几本书

读几本书

读几本书

Read a few books邓当世
Deng Dangshi读死书会变成书呆子，甚至于成为书厨，早有人反对过了，时光不绝的进行，反读书的思潮也愈加彻底，于是有人来反对读任何一种书。他的根据是叔本华的老话，说是倘读别人的著作，不过是在自己的脑里给作者跑马。
Reading dead books will become nerds, and even become book chefs, some people have long opposed it, and as time goes on, the anti-reading trend has become more and more thorough, so some people have come to oppose reading any kind of book. His basis is Schopenhauer's old saying, that if you read other people's works, you are just running for the author in your own head.这对于读死书的人们，确是一下当头棒，但为了与其探究，不如跳舞，或者空暴躁，瞎牢骚的天才起见，却也是一句值得绍介的金言。不过要明白：死抱住这句金言的天才，他的脑里却正被叔本华跑了一趟马，踏得一塌胡涂了。
This is indeed a blow to people who read dead books, but in order to dance instead of exploring, it is better to dance, or for the sake of grumpy and complaining geniuses, but it is also a golden sentence worth introducing. But you must understand: the genius who clings to this golden sentence, but his mind is being ridden by Schopenhauer and trampled on a mess.现在是批评家在发牢骚，因为没有较好的作品；创作家也在发牢骚，因为没有正确的批评。张三说李四的作品是象征主义，于是李四也自以为是象征主义，读者当然更以为是象征主义。然而怎样是象征主义呢？向来就没有弄分明，只好就用李四的作品为证。所以中国之所谓象征主义，和别国之所谓Symbolism是不一样的，虽然前者其实是后者的译语，然而听说梅特林是象征派的作家，于是李四就成为中国的梅特林了。此外中国的法朗士，中国的白璧德，中国的吉尔波丁，中国的高尔基……还多得很。然而真的法朗士他们的作品的译本，在中国却少得很。莫非因为都有了“国货”的缘故吗？
Now the critics are complaining because there are no better works; Creators are also complaining because there is no right criticism. Zhang San said that Li Si's works were symbolism, so Li Si also thought he was symbolism, and the reader certainly thought it was symbolism. But what is symbolism? I have never been clear, so I have to use Li Si's works as proof. Therefore, the so-called symbolism in China is different from the so-called Symbolism in other countries, although the former is actually a translation of the latter, but I heard that Maitlin was a writer of the Symbolist school, so Li Si became the Maitlin of China. In addition, China's Frances, China's Bai Bide, China's Gilbertin, China's Gorky...... There are many. However, there are very few translations of the works of the real Francens in China. Could it be because they all have "domestic products"?在中国的文坛上，有几个国货文人的寿命也真太长；而洋货文人的可也真太短，姓名刚刚记熟，据说是已经过去了。易卜生大有出全集之意，但至今不见第三本；柴霍甫和莫泊桑的选集，也似乎走了虎头蛇尾运。但在我们所深恶痛疾的日本，《吉诃德先生》和《一千一夜》是有全译的；沙士比亚，歌德，……都有全集；托尔斯泰的有三种，陀思妥也夫斯基的有两种。
In China's literary world, there are several domestic literati who have a really long lifespan; And the foreign literati are really too short, the name has just been remembered, and it is said that it has passed. Ibsen had the intention of publishing a complete collection, but the third book has not been seen so far; The anthologies of Chai Huofu and Maupassant also seem to have gone anticlimactic. But in Japan, which we hate so much, "Mr. Quixote" and "One Thousand and One Nights" have been fully translated; Shakespeare, Goethe,...... There are complete works; There are three of Tolstoy's and two of Dostoevsky's.读死书是害己，一开口就害人；但不读书也并不见得好。至少，譬如要批评托尔斯泰，则他的作品是必得看几本的。自然，现在是国难时期，那有工夫译这些书，看这些书呢，但我所提议的是向着只在暴躁和牢骚的大人物，并非对于正在赴难或“卧薪尝胆”的英雄。因为有些人物，是即使不读书，也不过玩着，并不去赴难的。
Reading dead books is harmful to oneself, and as soon as you open your mouth, you will harm others; But not reading is not necessarily good. At least, if you want to criticize Tolstoy, you must read a few of his works. Naturally, now is a time of national crisis, so I have the time to translate these books and read these books, but what I am proposing is to the big people who are only irritable and complaining, not to the heroes who are in trouble or "lying down and trying their courage". Because there are some characters who don't read, they just play and don't go to trouble.五月十四日。
May 14th.

一思而行

一思而行

一思而行

Think about it曼雪
Manxue只要并不是靠这来解决国政，布置战争，在朋友之间，说几句幽默，彼此莞尔而笑，我看是无关大体的。就是革命专家，有时也要负手散步；理学先生总不免有儿女，在证明着他并非日日夜夜，道貌永远的俨然。小品文大约在将来也还可以存在于文坛，只是以“闲适”为主，却稍嫌不够。
As long as it is not based on this to solve state affairs, arrange wars, say a few words of humor among friends, and smile at each other, I think it is irrelevant. Even revolutionary experts sometimes have to walk with their hands on their backs; Mr. Li always has children, which proves that he is not day and night, and his appearance will always be the same. Sketches can probably still exist in the literary world in the future, but they are mainly "leisurely", but they are a little insufficient.人间世事，恨和尚往往就恨袈裟。幽默和小品的开初，人们何尝有贰话。然而轰的一声，天下无不幽默和小品，幽默那有这许多，于是幽默就是滑稽，滑稽就是说笑话，说笑话就是讽刺，讽刺就是漫骂。油腔滑调，幽默也；“天朗气清”，小品也；看郑板桥《道情》一遍，谈幽默十天，买袁中郎尺牍半本，作小品一卷。有些人既有以此起家之势，势必有想反此以名世之人，于是轰然一声，天下又无不骂幽默和小品。其实，则趁队起哄之士，今年也和去年一样，数不在少的。
In the world, I hate monks and often hate the robe. At the beginning of humor and sketches, people had no second words. However, with a bang, there is humor and sketches in the world, and there are so many humorous ones, so humor is funny, funny is telling jokes, jokes are sarcasm, and sarcasm is scolding. The oil cavity is smooth and humorous; "The sky is clear and the air is clear", the sketch also; Read Zheng Banqiao's "Daoqing" once, talk about humor for ten days, buy half a copy of Yuan Zhonglang's letter, and write a volume of sketches. Some people have the tendency to start with this, and there must be people who want to do the opposite to make a name for themselves, so there is a bang, and the world is all scolding humor and sketches. In fact, there are not a few people who take advantage of the team to make a fuss this year, just like last year.手拿黑漆皮灯笼，彼此都莫名其妙。总之，一个名词归化中国，不久就弄成一团糟。伟人，先前是算好称呼的，现在则受之者已等于被骂；学者和教授，前两三年还是干净的名称；自爱者闻文学家之称而逃，今年已经开始了第一步。但是，世界上真的没有实在的伟人，实在的学者和教授，实在的文学家吗？并不然，只有中国是例外。
Holding black patent leather lanterns in their hands, they are inexplicable to each other. In short, a term naturalized in China will soon become a mess. Great men, who used to be called good, are now equivalent to being scolded; Scholars and professors, the first two or three years are still clean names; Self-lovers fled after hearing the title of writer, and this year has begun the first step. However, is there really no real great man, real scholars and professors, and real writers in the world? No, only China is an exception.假使有一个人，在路旁吐一口唾沫，自己蹲下去，看着，不久准可以围满一堆人；又假使又有一个人，无端大叫一声，拔步便跑，同时准可以大家都逃散。真不知是“何所闻而来，何所见而去”，然而又心怀不满，骂他的莫名其妙的对象曰“妈的”！但是，那吐唾沫和大叫一声的人，归根结蒂还是大人物。当然，沉着切实的人们是有的。不过伟人等等之名之被尊视或鄙弃，大抵总只是做唾沫的替代品而已。
If there is a person who spits on the side of the road, squats down and watches, he will soon be surrounded by a bunch of people; If there is another person who screams for no reason, he will run away, and everyone will escape at the same time. I really don't know if it's "what I hear and what I see", but I was dissatisfied and scolded his inexplicable object as "damn"! However, the person who spits and screams is still a big man in the final analysis. Of course, there are people who are calm and practical. However, the names of great men and so on are respected or despised, and they are usually just substitutes for spit.社会仗这添些热闹，是值得感谢的。但在乌合之前想一想，在云散之前也想一想，社会未必就冷静了，可是还要像样一点点。
The social war adds some excitement to the situation, which is worth thanking. But think about it before the rabble, and think about it before the clouds disperse, society may not be calm, but it needs to be a little more decent.五月十四日。
May 14th.

推己及人

推己及人

推己及人

Push yourself and others梦文
Dream text忘了几年以前了，有一位诗人开导我，说是愚众的舆论，能将天才骂死，例如英国的济慈就是。我相信了。去年看见几位名作家的文章，说是批评家的漫骂，能将好作品骂得缩回去，使文坛荒凉冷落。自然，我也相信了。
I forgot that a few years ago, a poet enlightened me, saying that it was the public opinion of the fools that could scold geniuses to death, such as Keats in England. I believed it. Last year, I saw articles by several famous writers, saying that they were critics' scolding, which could scold good works and make the literary world desolate and neglected. Naturally, I also believed it.我也是一个想做作家的人，而且觉得自己也确是一个作家，但还没有获得挨骂的资格，因为我未曾写过创作。并非缩回去，是还没有钻出来。这钻不出来的原因，我想是一定为了我的女人和两个孩子的吵闹，她们也如漫骂批评家一样，职务是在毁灭真天才，吓退好作品的。
I am also a person who wants to be a writer, and I feel that I am indeed a writer, but I have not yet qualified to be scolded because I have never written. It's not that it has retracted, it hasn't come out yet. The reason why I can't get out of this, I think, must be because of the noise of my woman and two children, who are also like critics, and their position is to destroy true geniuses and scare away good works.幸喜今年正月，我的丈母要见见她的女儿了，她们三个就都回到乡下去。我真是耳目清静，猗欤休哉，到了产生伟大作品的时代。可是不幸得很，现在已是废历四月初，足足静了三个月了，还是一点也写不出什么来。假使有朋友问起我的成绩，叫我怎么回答呢？还能归罪于她们的吵闹吗？
Fortunately, in the first month of this year, my mother-in-law was going to see her daughter, and all three of them went back to the countryside. I am really quiet and refreshing, and I have reached the era of producing great works. But unfortunately, it is now the beginning of April of the abolition calendar, and it has been quiet for three months, and I still can't write anything at all. If a friend asks about my grades, how do you ask me to answer? Can they still be blamed for their noise?于是乎我的信心有些动摇。
So my faith was a little shaken.我疑心我本不会有什么好作品，和她们的吵闹与否无关。而且我又疑心到所谓名作家也未必会有什么好作品，和批评家的漫骂与否无涉。
I suspect that I won't have any good works, and it has nothing to do with whether they are noisy or not. And I suspect that the so-called famous writers may not have any good works, and it has nothing to do with the critics' scolding.不过，如果有人吵闹，有人漫骂，倒可以给作家的没有作品遮羞，说是本来是要有的，现在给他们闹坏了。他于是就像一个落难小生，纵使并无作品，也能从看客赢得一掬一掬的同情之泪。
However, if someone makes a fuss and someone scolds, they can cover up the writer's lack of works, saying that they were supposed to have them, but now they are making trouble. He is like a student in distress, even if he does not have a work, he can win handfuls of tears of sympathy from the audience.假使世界上真有天才，那么，漫骂的批评，于他是有损的，能骂退他的作品，使他不成其为作家。然而所谓漫骂的批评，于庸才是有益的，能保持其为作家，不过据说是吓退了他的作品。
If there is really a genius in the world, then the criticism of the scolding is detrimental to him, and it can scold his works and make him not a writer. However, the so-called scolding criticism is beneficial for Yu Yong, who can keep him as a writer, but it is said that he scared away his works.在这三足月里，我仅仅有了一点“烟士披离纯”，是套罗兰夫人的腔调的：“批评批评，世间多少作家，借汝之骂以存！”
In these three full months, I only had a little bit of "smoker Pi Li Chun", which was Mrs. Roland's tone: "Criticism and criticism, how many writers in the world survive by your scolding!" ”五月十四日。
May 14th.

偶感

偶感

偶感

Occasional feeling公汗
Public sweat还记得东三省沦亡，上海打仗的时候，在只闻炮声，不愁炮弹的马路上，处处卖着《推背图》，这可见人们早想归失败之故于前定了。三年以后，华北华南，同濒危急，而上海却出现了“碟仙”。前者所关心的还是国运，后者却只在问试题，奖券，亡魂。着眼的大小，固已迥不相同，而名目则更加冠冕，因为这“灵乩”是中国的“留德学生白同君所发明”，合于“科学”的。
I still remember that when the three eastern provinces fell, when Shanghai was fighting a war, there were "Tui Bei Tu" sold everywhere on the road where only the sound of cannons could be heard and there was no need to worry about shells. Three years later, North and South China were in danger, but Shanghai had a "disc fairy". The former is still concerned about the national fortune, while the latter is only asking about test questions, lottery tickets, and souls. The size of the focus is already very different, but the name is even more crowned, because this "spiritual girl" was invented by Bai Tongjun, a student studying in Germany, in line with "science".“科学救国”已经叫了近十年，谁都知道这是很对的，并非“跳舞救国”“拜佛救国”之比。青年出国去学科学者有之，博士学了科学回国者有之。不料中国究竟自有其文明，与日本是两样的，科学不但并不足以补中国文化之不足，却更加证明了中国文化之高深。风水，是合于地理学的，门阀，是合于优生学的，炼丹，是合于化学的，放风筝，是合于卫生学的。“灵乩”的合于“科学”，亦不过其一而已。
"Science to save the country" has been called for nearly ten years, and everyone knows that this is very right, not the comparison of "dancing to save the country" and "worshiping Buddha to save the country". There are young people who go abroad to study disciplines, and there are doctors who have studied science and return to China. Science is not only not enough to make up for the shortcomings of Chinese culture, but also proves the profundity of Chinese culture. Feng Shui is in line with geography, gate valve is in line with eugenics, alchemy is in line with chemistry, and kite flying is in line with hygiene. "Lingqi" is in line with "science", and it is only one of them.五四时代，陈大齐先生曾作论揭发过扶乩的骗人，隔了十六年，白同先生却用碟子证明了扶乩的合理，这真叫人从那里说起。
In the May Fourth era, Mr. Chen Daqi once wrote an article exposing the deception of Fu Yi, and after sixteen years, Mr. Bai Tong used a saucer to prove the reasonableness of Fu Yi, which really made people start from there.而且科学不但更加证明了中国文化的高深，还帮助了中国文化的光大。马将桌边，电灯替代了蜡烛，法会坛上，镁光照出了喇嘛，无线电播音所日日传播的，不往往是《狸猫换太子》，《玉堂春》，《谢谢毛毛雨》吗？
Moreover, science not only proves the profundity of Chinese culture, but also helps to promote Chinese culture. At the horse general's table, electric lights replaced candles, and on the puja altar, magnesium light shone out of the lama, and what the radio broadcast spread every day was not often "Tanuki for the Prince", "Yutang Chun", "Thank You Drizzle"?老子曰：“为之斗斛以量之，则并与斗斛而窃之。”罗兰夫人曰：“自由自由，多少罪恶，假汝之名以行！”每一新制度，新学术，新名词，传入中国，便如落在黑色染缸，立刻乌黑一团，化为济私助焰之具，科学，亦不过其一而已。
老子曰：“为之斗斛以量之，则并与斗斛而窃之。 ”罗兰夫人曰：“自由自由，多少罪恶，假汝之名以行！”每一新制度，新学术，新名词，传入中国，便如落在黑色染缸，立刻乌黑一团，化为济私助焰之具，科学，亦不过其一而已。此弊不去，中国是无药可救的。
If this problem is not eliminated, China will have no cure.五月二十日。
May 20th.

论秦理斋夫人事

论秦理斋夫人事

论秦理斋夫人事

On the matter of Mrs. Qin Lizhai公汗
Public sweat这几年来，报章上常见有因经济的压迫，礼教的制裁而自杀的记事，但为了这些，便来开口或动笔的人是很少的。只有新近秦理斋夫人及其子女一家四口的自杀，却起过不少的回声，后来还出了一个怀着这一段新闻记事的自杀者，更可见其影响之大了。我想，这是因为人数多。单独的自杀，盖已不足以招大家的青睐了。
In recent years, there have been common reports of suicides due to economic oppression and etiquette sanctions in newspapers, but for these reasons, very few people have come to speak or write. Only the recent suicide of Mrs. Qin Lizhai and her children's family of four has had a lot of echoes, and later there was a suicide with this news record, which shows its great impact. I think it's because of the large number of people. Suicide alone is no longer enough to win everyone's favor.一切回声中，对于这自杀的主谋者——秦夫人，虽然也加以恕辞；但归结却无非是诛伐。因为——评论家说——社会虽然黑暗，但人生的第一责任是生存，倘自杀，便是失职，第二责任是受苦，倘自杀，便是偷安。进步的评论家则说人生是战斗，自杀者就是逃兵，虽死也不足以蔽其罪。这自然也说得下去的，然而未免太笼统。
In all the echoes, the mastermind of this suicide, Mrs. Qin, although she also forgave her; But in the end, it is nothing more than a punishment. Because—critics say—although society is dark, the first responsibility of life is to survive, if you commit suicide, it is dereliction of duty, the second responsibility is to suffer, and if you commit suicide, it is to steal peace. Progressive commentators say that life is a battle, and that suicides are deserters, and even if they die, they are not enough to cover up their crimes. This is naturally reasonable, but it is too general.人间有犯罪学者，一派说，由于环境；一派说，由于个人。现在盛行的是后一说，因为倘信前一派，则消灭罪犯，便得改造环境，事情就麻烦，可怕了。而秦夫人自杀的批判者，则是大抵属于后一派。
There are criminologists in the world, one school says, because of the environment; One school says that due to the individual. The latter is now prevalent, because if you believe in the former faction, you will have to eliminate the criminals and change the environment, and things will be troublesome and terrible. The critics of Mrs. Qin's suicide probably belong to the latter faction.诚然，既然自杀了，这就证明了她是一个弱者。但是，怎么会弱的呢？要紧的是我们须看看她的尊翁的信札，为了要她回去，既耸之以两家的名声，又动之以亡人的乩语。我们还得看看她的令弟的挽联：“妻殉夫，子殉母……”不是大有视为千古美谈之意吗？以生长及陶冶在这样的家庭中的人，又怎么能不成为弱者？我们固然未始不可责以奋斗，但黑暗的吞噬之力，往往胜于孤军，况且自杀的批判者未必就是战斗的应援者，当他人奋斗时，挣扎时，败绩时，也许倒是鸦雀无声了。穷乡僻壤或都会中，孤儿寡妇，贫女劳人之顺命而死，或虽然抗命，而终于不得不死者何限，但曾经上谁的口，动谁的心呢？真是“自经于沟渎而莫之知也”！
True, since she committed suicide, this proves that she is a weakling. But how can it be weak? The important thing is that we must look at her father's letter, in order to get her back, not only to raise the reputation of the two families, but also to move the words of the dead. We also have to look at her brother's elegy: "Wife martyrdom husband, son martyrdom mother......" Isn't it a great meaning to regard it as a beautiful story through the ages? How can a person who grows up and cultivate in such a family not become a weak person? Although we are not blamed for struggle, the devouring power of darkness is often better than a lone army, and the critic of suicide may not be the supporter of the battle, and when others struggle, struggle, and lose, they may be silent. In poor villages or cities, orphans and widows, poor women and laborers die obediently, or although they disobey orders, they finally have to die, but whose mouth and heart have they touched? It's really "hanging yourself in a ditch and not knowing"!人固然应该生存，但为的是进化；也不妨受苦，但为的是解除将来的一切苦；更应该战斗，但为的是改革。责别人的自杀者，一面责人，一面正也应该向驱人于自杀之途的环境挑战，进攻。倘使对于黑暗的主力，不置一辞，不发一矢，而但向“弱者”唠叨不已，则纵使他如何义形于色，我也不能不说——我真也忍不住了——他其实乃是杀人者的帮凶而已。
Of course, people should live, but in order to evolve; they may as well suffer, but in order to relieve all suffering in the future; We should fight, but for reform. Blaming others for suicides should challenge and attack the environment that drives people to commit suicide. If he doesn't say a word or shoot an arrow at the main force of darkness, but only nags at the "weak", no matter how righteous he is, I can't help but say - I really can't help it - he is actually just an accomplice of the murderer.五月二十四日。
May 24th.

“……”“□□□□”论补

“……”“□□□□”论补

“……”“□□□□”论补

"......" and "□□□□" are supplemented曼雪
Manxue徐先生在《人间世》上，发表了这样的题目的论。对于此道，我没有那么深造，但“愚者千虑，必有一得”，所以想来补一点，自然，浅薄是浅薄得多了。
Mr. Xu published such a thesis in "The World on Earth". I don't have that much further study on this path, but "a fool thinks a thousand times, and there must be a gain", so I want to make up for it, naturally, shallow is much shallow.“……”是洋货，五四运动之后这才输入的。先前林琴南先生译小说时，夹注着“此语未完”的，便是这东西的翻译。在洋书上，普通用六点，吝啬的却只用三点。然而中国是“地大物博”的，同化之际，就渐渐的长起来，九点，十二点，以至几十点；有一种大作家，则简直至少点上三四行，以见其中的奥义，无穷无尽，实在不可以言语形容。读者也大抵这样想，有敢说觉不出其中的奥义的罢，那便是低能儿。
"......" is a foreign product, which was only imported after the May Fourth Movement. Previously, when Mr. Lin Qinnan translated the novel, it was the translation of this thing that was marked with "this word is not finished". In foreign books, six points are usually used, but only three points are used for stingy ones. However, China is "vast and rich", and when assimilated, it gradually grew, nine o'clock, twelve o'clock, and even dozens of o'clock; There is a kind of great writer who simply dots on at least three or four lines to see the mystery in it, which is endless and cannot be described in words. Readers probably think like this, and those who dare to say that they can't feel the mystery in it are imbecile.然而归根结蒂，也好像终于是安徒生童话里的“皇帝的新衣”，其实是一无所有；不过须是孩子，才会照实的大声说出来。孩子不会看文学家的“创作”，于是在中国就没有人来道破。但天气是要冷的，光着身子不能整年在路上走，到底也得躲进宫里去，连点几行的妙文，近来也不大看见了。
However, in the final analysis, it seems that the "emperor's new clothes" in Hans Christian Andersen's fairy tale are actually nothing; But you have to be a child to say it out loud. Children do not read the "creations" of writers, so no one in China comes to explain it. But the weather is going to be cold, you can't walk on the road all year round naked, and you have to hide in the palace in the end.“□□”是国货，《穆天子传》上就有这玩意儿，先生教我说：是阙文。这阙文也闹过事，曾有人说“口生垢，口戕口”的三个口字，也是阙文，又给谁大骂了一顿。不过先前是只见于古人的著作里的，无法可补，现在却见于今人的著作上了，欲补不能。到目前，则渐有代以“××”的趋势。这是从日本输入的。这东西多，对于这著作的内容，我们便预觉其激烈。但是，其实有时也并不然。胡乱×它几行，印了出来，固可使读者佩服作家之激烈，恨检查员之峻严，但送检之际，却又可使检查员爱他的顺从，许多话都不敢说，只×得这么起劲。一举两得，比点它几行更加巧妙了。中国正在排日，这一条锦囊妙计，或者不至于模仿的罢。
"□□" is a domestic product, and there is this thing in "The Biography of Mu Tianzi", and my teacher taught me that it is a que. This Que Wen has also made trouble, and someone once said that the three words "mouth dirt, mouth killing" are also Que Wen, and who scolded him. However, it was only seen in the writings of the ancients before and could not be supplemented, but now it is seen in the writings of today's people, and it cannot be supplemented. Up to now, there is a trend of "××". This is imported from Japan. There are many things like this, and we have a premonition that the content of this work will be intense. However, sometimes this is not the case. × a few lines randomly and printed it out, which can certainly make the reader admire the fierceness of the writer and hate the severity of the inspector, but when it is sent for inspection, it can make the inspector love his obedience, and he does not dare to say many words, but he × so energetic. Killing two birds with one stone is more ingenious than clicking on a few lines of it. China is arranging Japan, and this clever plan may not be imitated.现在是什么东西都要用钱买，自然也就都可以卖钱。但连“没有东西”也可以卖钱，却未免有些出乎意表。不过，知道了这事以后，便明白造谣为业，在现在也还要算是“货真价实，童叟无欺”的生活了。
Now everything has to be bought with money, so naturally it can be sold for money. But even "nothing" can be sold for money, which is a bit unexpected. However, after knowing this, I understood that rumor-mongering is a business, and now it can be regarded as a "genuine and honest" life.五月二十四日。
May 24th.

谁在没落？

谁在没落？

谁在没落？

Who is declining?常庚
Chang Geng五月二十八日的《大晚报》告诉了我们一件文艺上的重要的新闻：
The "Evening News" on May 28 told us an important news in literature and art:“我国美术名家刘海粟徐悲鸿等，近在苏俄莫斯科举行中国书画展览会，深得彼邦人士极力赞美，揄扬我国之书画名作，切合苏俄正在盛行之象征主义作品。爰苏俄艺术界向分写实与象征两派，现写实主义已渐没落，而象征主义则经朝野一致提倡，引成欣欣向荣之概。自彼邦艺术家见我国之书画作品深合象征派后，即忆及中国戏剧亦必采取象征主义。因拟……邀中国戏曲名家梅兰芳等前往奏艺。此事已由俄方与中国驻俄大使馆接洽，同时苏俄驻华大使鲍格莫洛夫亦奉到训令，与我方商洽此事。……”
"Liu Haisu, Xu Beihong, and other famous artists in our country recently held a Chinese calligraphy and painting exhibition in Moscow, Soviet Russia, which was highly praised by people in other countries, praising our country's calligraphy and painting masterpieces, and in line with the symbolism works that are prevalent in Soviet Russia. The Soviet and Russian art circles were divided into realism and symbolism, and now realism has gradually declined, while symbolism has been unanimously advocated by the government and the opposition, leading to a prosperous concept. Since the artists of other countries saw that our country's calligraphy and painting works were deeply in line with the symbolism, they recalled that Chinese drama must also adopt symbolism. Therefore, he drafted a ...... Invited Chinese opera master Mei Lanfang and others to perform the art. This matter has been contacted by the Russian side and the Chinese Embassy in Russia, and at the same time, the Soviet Ambassador to China Bogmolov has also been instructed to discuss this matter with our side. ……”这是一个喜讯，值得我们高兴的。但我们当欣喜于“发扬国光”之后，还应该沉静一下，想到以下的事实——
This is good news and deserves our joy. But when we are happy to "carry forward the national light", we should calm down and think of the following facts -一，倘说：中国画和印象主义有一脉相通，那倒还说得下去的，现在以为“切合苏俄正在盛行之象征主义”，却未免近于梦话。半枝紫藤，一株松树，一个老虎，几匹麻雀，有些确乎是不像真的，但那是因为画不像的缘故，何尝“象征”着别的什么呢？
First, if Chinese painting and impressionism are in the same vein, then it can be said that it is "in line with the symbolism that is prevalent in Soviet Russia", but it is close to a dream. Half a wisteria, a pine tree, a tiger, a few sparrows, some of them are indeed not real, but that is because the painting is not like it, how can it "symbolize" something else?二，苏俄的象征主义的没落，在十月革命时，以后便崛起了构成主义，而此后又渐为写实主义所排去。所以倘说：构成主义已渐没落，而写实主义“引成欣欣向荣之概”，那是说得下去的。不然，便是梦话。苏俄文艺界上，象征主义的作品有些什么呀？
Second, the decline of symbolism in Soviet Russia, during the October Revolution, later rose to constructivism, and then gradually fell into the hands of realism. Therefore, if it is said that constructivism has gradually declined, and realism "leads to a prosperous generalization", it can be said. Otherwise, it is a dream. In the Soviet and Russian literary and artistic circles, what are the works of symbolism?三，脸谱和手势，是代数，何尝是象征。它除了白鼻梁表丑脚，花脸表强人，执鞭表骑马，推手表开门之外，那里还有什么说不出，做不出的深意义？
Third, face and gestures are algebra, not symbols. In addition to the white nose bridge to show ugly feet, the flowery face to show the strong man, the whip to ride a horse, and the watch to open the door, what is the deep meaning that cannot be said or done?欧洲离我们也真远，我们对于那边的文艺情形也真的不大分明，但是，现在二十世纪已经度过了三分之一，粗浅的事是知道一点的了，这样的新闻倒令人觉得是“象征主义作品”，它象征着他们的艺术的消亡。
Europe is really far away from us, and we really don't know much about the literary and artistic situation there, but now that a third of the twentieth century has passed, we know a little about superficial things, and such news makes people feel that it is a "symbolist work", which symbolizes the demise of their art.五月三十日。
May 30.

倒提

倒提

倒提

Lift upside down公汗
Public sweat西洋的慈善家是怕看虐待动物的，倒提着鸡鸭走过租界就要办。所谓办，虽然也不过是罚钱，只要舍得出钱，也还可以倒提一下，然而究竟是办了。于是有几位华人便大鸣不平，以为西洋人优待动物，虐待华人，至于比不上鸡鸭。
Western philanthropists are afraid of animal cruelty, so they have to do it when they walk through the concession with chickens and ducks. The so-called doing, although it is just a fine, as long as you are willing to give up the money, you can also mention it backwards, but it is done in the end. As a result, several Chinese complained, thinking that Westerners treated animals preferentially and abused Chinese, so that they were not as good as chickens and ducks.这其实是误解了西洋人。他们鄙夷我们，是的确的，但并未放在动物之下。自然，鸡鸭这东西，无论如何，总不过送进厨房，做成大菜而已，即顺提也何补于归根结蒂的运命。然而它不能言语，不会抵抗，又何必加以无益的虐待呢？西洋人是什么都讲有益的。我们的古人，人民的“倒悬”之苦是想到的了，而且也实在形容得切帖，不过还没有察出鸡鸭的倒提之灾来，然而对于什么“生刲驴肉”“活烤鹅掌”这些无聊的残虐，却早经在文章里加以攻击了。这种心思，是东西之所同具的。
This is actually a misunderstanding of Westerners. They despise us, yes, but they don't put us under animals. Naturally, chicken and duck, no matter what, are just sent to the kitchen and made into a big dish, even if it is shunted, it is of no help to the fate of the root cause. But it cannot speak, it cannot resist, so why abuse it uselessly? Westerners talk about everything that is beneficial. Our ancients, the people's suffering of "hanging upside down" was thought of, and it was really described aptly, but the disaster of chickens and ducks was not detected, but for the boring cruelty of "raw donkey meat" and "live roasted goose feet", they have long been attacked in the article. This kind of mind is the same as that of things.但对于人的心思，却似乎有些不同。人能组织，能反抗，能为奴，也能为主，不肯努力，固然可以永沦为舆台，自由解放，便能够获得彼此的平等，那运命是并不一定终于送进厨房，做成大菜的。愈下劣者，愈得主人的爱怜，所以西崽打叭儿，则西崽被斥，平人忤西崽，则平人获咎，租界上并无禁止苛待华人的规律，正因为我们该自有力量，自有本领，和鸡鸭绝不相同的缘故。
But for people's minds, it seems to be a little different. People can organize, resist, be slaves, and masters, and refuse to work hard, although they can be reduced to public opinion forever, free and liberated, and can obtain equality with each other, then fate may not necessarily finally be sent to the kitchen and made into a big dish. The worse the concession, the more the love of the master, so if the Xi cub beats the child, the Xi cub will be reprimanded, and if the ordinary person offends the Xi cub, the ordinary person will be blamed, and there is no law on the concession that prohibits the harsh treatment of the Chinese, precisely because we should have our own strength, our own skills, and it is by no means the same as chickens and ducks.然而我们从古典里，听熟了仁人义士，来解倒悬的胡说了，直到现在，还不免总在想从天上或什么高处远处掉下一点恩典来，其甚者竟以为“莫作乱离人，宁为太平犬”，不妨变狗，而合群改革是不肯的。自叹不如租界的鸡鸭者，也正有这气味。
However, from the classics, we have heard the benevolent and righteous men to solve the upside-down nonsense, and until now, we can't help but think that a little grace will fall from the sky or some high place, and even think that "don't cause chaos and leave people, it's better to be a peace dog", and you might as well become a dog, but gregarious reform is unwilling. Those who sigh that they are not as good as the chickens and ducks in the concession also have this smell.这类的人物一多，倒是大家要被倒悬的，而且虽在送往厨房的时候，也无人暂时解救。这就因为我们究竟是人，然而是没出息的人的缘故。
There are many characters like this, but everyone is going to be hung upside down, and even when they are sent to the kitchen, no one is temporarily rescued. This is because we are human beings, but we are unpromising people.六月三日。
June 3rd.

倒提

【附录】：[Appendix]: 论“花边文学” on "lace literature"
林默
Lin Mo近来有一种文章，四周围着花边，从一些副刊上出现。这文章，每天一段，雍容闲适，缜密整齐，看外形似乎是“杂感”，但又像“格言”，内容却不痛不痒，毫无着落。似乎是小品或语录一类的东西。今天一则“偶感”，明天一段“据说”，从作者看来，自然是好文章，因为翻来复去，都成了道理，颇尽了八股的能事的。但从读者看，虽然不痛不痒，却往往渗有毒汁，散布了妖言。譬如甘地被刺，就起来作一篇“偶感”，颂扬一番“摩哈达麻”，咒骂几通暴徒作乱，为圣雄出气禳灾，顺便也向读者宣讲一些“看定一切”，“勇武和平”的不抵抗说教之类。这种文章无以名之，且名之曰“花边体”或“花边文学”罢。
Recently there is an article with lace all around, from some supplements. This article, one paragraph a day, is graceful and leisurely, meticulous and neat, and the appearance seems to be a "miscellaneous feeling", but it is like a "maxim", but the content is not painful or itchy, and there is no place. It seems to be something like a sketch or a quote. Today's "occasional feeling", tomorrow's paragraph "It is said", from the author's point of view, is naturally a good article, because it has become a truth over and over again, and it has done its best. But from the reader's point of view, although it is not painful or itchy, it often seeps poisonous juice and spreads demonic words. For example, when Gandhi was assassinated, he got up and wrote an "occasional feeling", praising a "Mahadama", cursing a few mobs to rebel, venting anger for the Mahatma to ward off disasters, and by the way, he also preached to readers some non-resistance sermons of "seeing everything" and "brave and peaceful". This kind of article is indescribable, and it is called "lace style" or "lace literature".这花边体的来源，大抵是走入鸟道以后的小品文变种。据这种小品文的拥护者说是会要流传下去的（见《人间世》：《关于小品文》）。我们且来看看他们的流传之道罢。六月念八日《申报》《自由谈》载有这样一篇文章，题目叫《倒提》。大意说西洋人禁止倒提鸡鸭，华人颇有鸣不平的，因为西洋人虐待华人，至于比不上鸡鸭。
The source of this lace body is probably a variant of the sketch after entering the bird path. According to the proponents of this kind of sketch essay, it will be passed down (see "The World of the World": "About Sketch Essays"). Let's take a look at their circulation. On the 8th of June, the "Declaration" and "Free Talk" contained such an article, titled "Upside Down". To the effect, Westerners forbid to mention chickens and ducks, and the Chinese are quite complaining, because Westerners abuse the Chinese, so that they are not as good as chickens and ducks.于是这位花边文学家发议论了，他说：“这其实是误解了西洋人。他们鄙夷我们是的确的，但并未放在动物之下。”
So the lace writer made a comment, saying: "This is actually a misunderstanding of Westerners. They despise us, yes, but they don't put us under animals. ”为什么“并未”呢？据说是“人能组织，能反抗，……自有力量，自有本领，和鸡鸭绝不相同的缘故。”所以租界上没有禁止苛待华人的规律。不禁止虐待华人，当然就是把华人看在鸡鸭之上了。
Why "not"? It is said that "people can organize and resist,...... It has its own strength, its own skills, and it is by no means the same as chickens and ducks. Therefore, there is no law prohibiting harsh treatment of Chinese in the concession. Not forbidding the abuse of Chinese is of course to regard Chinese as chickens and ducks.倘要不平么，为什么不反抗呢？
If it is unfair, why not resist?而这些不平之士，据花边文学家从古典里得来的证明，断为“不妨变狗”之辈，没有出息的。
And these unjust people, according to the proof obtained from the classics by lace writers, are judged to be "might as well become dogs" and have no prospects.这意思极明白，第一是西洋人并未把华人放在鸡鸭之下，自叹不如鸡鸭的人，是误解了西洋人。第二是受了西洋人这种优待，不应该再鸣不平。第三是他虽也正面的承认人是能反抗的，叫人反抗，但他实在是说明西洋人为尊重华人起见，这虐待倒不可少，而且大可进一步。第四，倘有人要不平，他能从“古典”来证明这是华人没有出息。
The first is that Westerners do not put the Chinese under chickens and ducks, and those who sigh that they are inferior to chickens and ducks misunderstand Westerners. The second is that they have received such preferential treatment from Westerners, and they should no longer complain. Third, although he also positively admits that people can resist and make people resist, he really shows that Westerners respect the Chinese, and this abuse is indispensable, and it can be further developed. Fourth, if someone wants to be unfair, he can prove from the "classics" that the Chinese are unpromising.上海的洋行，有一种帮洋人经营生意的华人，通称叫“买办”，他们和同胞做起生意来，除开夸说洋货如何比国货好，外国人如何讲礼节信用，中国人是猪猡，该被淘汰以外，还有一个特点，是口称洋人曰：“我们的东家”。我想这一篇《倒提》的杰作，看他的口气，大抵不出于这般人为他们的东家而作的手笔。因为第一，这般人是常以了解西洋人自夸的，西洋人待他很客气；第二，他们往往赞成西洋人（也就是他们的东家）统治中国，虐待华人，因为中国人是猪猡；第三，他们最反对中国人怀恨西洋人。抱不平，从他们看来，更是危险思想。
In addition to boasting about how foreign goods are better than domestic products, how foreigners talk about etiquette and credit, Chinese are pigs, should be eliminated, there is also a characteristic, which is to call foreigners "our owner". I think this masterpiece of "Upside Down", looking at his tone, is probably not from the handwriting of such a person for their owner. Because first, such a person often boasts of understanding Westerners, and Westerners treat him very politely; second, they often favor Westerners (that is, their owners) ruling China and mistreating the Chinese, because the Chinese are pigs; Third, they are most opposed to the Chinese hating Westerners. From their point of view, it is even more dangerous.从这般人或希望升为这般人的笔下产出来的就成了这篇“花边文学”的杰作。但所可惜是不论这种文人，或这种文字，代西洋人如何辩护说教，中国人的不平，是不可免的。因为西洋人虽然不曾把中国放在鸡鸭之下，但事实上也似乎并未放在鸡鸭之上。香港的差役把中国犯人倒提着从二楼摔下来，已是久远的事；近之如上海，去年的高丫头，今年的蔡洋其辈，他们的遭遇，并不胜过于鸡鸭，而死伤之惨烈有过而无不及。这些事实我辈华人是看得清清楚楚，不会转背就忘却的，花边文学家的嘴和笔怎能朦混过去呢？
What is produced from the pen of such a person or who hopes to rise to such a person has become a masterpiece of this "lace literature". But unfortunately, no matter how this kind of literati or this kind of writing defends and preaches on behalf of Westerners, the injustice of the Chinese is inevitable. Because although Westerners have never put China below chickens and ducks, in fact they do not seem to be above chickens and ducks. It has been a long time since Hong Kong police officers carried Chinese prisoners upside down and dropped them from the second floor; As close as Shanghai, last year's tall girl, this year's Cai Yangqi, their experiences are not better than chickens and ducks, and the deaths and injuries are tragic. These facts are clearly seen by our generation of Chinese, and we will not forget them when we turn our backs, how can the mouth and pen of lace writers be confused?抱不平的华人果真如花边文学家的“古典”证明，一律没有出息的么？倒也不的。我们的古典里，不是有九年前的五卅运动，两年前的一二八战争，至今还在艰苦支持的东北义勇军么？谁能说这些不是由于华人的不平之气聚集而成的勇敢的战斗和反抗呢？
Are the disgruntled Chinese really like the "classical" proof of lace writers, and they are all unpromising? Not really. In our classics, isn't there the May Thirtieth Movement nine years ago, the 128 War two years ago, and the Northeast Volunteer Army that is still working hard to support? Who can say that these are not the brave battles and resistances that are not caused by the gathering of Chinese injustice?“花边体”文章赖以流传的长处都在这里。如今虽然在流传着，为某些人们所拥护。但相去不远，就将有人来唾弃他的。现在是建设“大众语”文学的时候，我想“花边文学”，不论这种形式或内容，在大众的眼中，将有流传不下去的一天罢。
The advantages of the "lace style" article are all here. Although it is circulating today, it is supported by some people. But not far away, someone will spurn him. Now is the time to build "popular language" literature, and I think that "lace literature", no matter in this form or content, will not be able to circulate in the eyes of the public.
这篇文章投了好几个地方，都被拒绝。莫非这文章又犯了要报私仇的嫌疑么？但这“授意”却没有的。就事论事，我觉得实有一吐的必要。文中过火之处，或者有之，但说我完全错了，却不能承认。倘得罪的是我的先辈或友人，那就请谅解这一点。
This article was submitted in several places, but it was rejected. Could it be that this article is suspected of avenging personal revenge again? But this "instruction" is not. On the other hand, I think there is a need to vomit. There may be excesses in the article, but I can't admit that I am completely wrong. If it is my ancestors or friends who have offended me, please forgive me.笔者附识。
The author attaches the knowledge.七月三日《大晚报》《火炬》。July 3 "Big Evening News" "Torch".

玩具

玩具

玩具

toy宓子章
Mi Zizhang今年是儿童年。我记得的，所以时常看看造给儿童的玩具。
This year is the Year of the Children. I remember, so I often look at toys made for children.马路旁边的洋货店里挂着零星小物件，纸上标明，是从法国运来的，但我在日本的玩具店看见一样的货色，只是价钱更便宜。在担子上，在小摊上，都卖着渐吹渐大的橡皮泡，上面打着一个印子道：“完全国货”，可见是中国自己制造的了。然而日本孩子玩着的橡皮泡上，也有同样的印子，那却应该是他们自己制造的。
There are scattered small items hanging in the foreign goods store next to the road, which are marked on paper as being shipped from France, but I saw the same goods in a toy store in Japan, but the price was cheaper. On the burden and at the stalls, they are selling rubber bubbles that are getting bigger and bigger, with a mark on them that says: "Completely domestic", which shows that it is made by China itself. However, the rubber bubbles played by Japanese children also have the same marks, but they should have made them themselves.大公司里则有武器的玩具：指挥刀，机关枪，坦克车……。然而，虽是有钱人家的小孩，拿着玩的也少见。公园里面，外国孩子聚沙成为圆堆，横插上两条短树干，这明明是在创造铁甲炮车了，而中国孩子是青白的，瘦瘦的脸，躲在大人的背后，羞怯的，惊异的看着，身上穿着一件斯文之极的长衫。
In large companies, there are toys with weapons: command knives, machine guns, tanks, ....... However, even if it is a child from a rich family, it is rare to play with it. In the park, foreign children gathered sand into a round pile, with two short tree trunks inserted across it, which was obviously creating an ironclad artillery carriage, while the Chinese children were pale and white, with thin faces, hiding behind the adults, shy and astonished, wearing an extremely refined robe.我们中国是大人用的玩具多：姨太太，雅片枪，麻雀牌，《毛毛雨》，科学灵乩，金刚法会，还有别的，忙个不了，没有工夫想到孩子身上去了。虽是儿童年，虽是前年身历了战祸，也没有因此给儿童创出一种纪念的小玩意，一切都是照样抄。然则明年不是儿童年了，那情形就可想。
We in China have a lot of toys used by adults: aunts, elegant guns, sparrow cards, "Drizzle", scientific spirits, Vajra pujas, and others. Although it was a children's year, although it experienced the scourge of war the year before last, it did not create a commemorative gadget for children, and everything was copied as usual. In this case, next year is not the Year of Children, and the situation can be imagined.但是，江北人却是制造玩具的天才。他们用两个长短不同的竹筒，染成红绿，连作一排，筒内藏一个弹簧，旁边有一个把手，摇起来就格格的响。这就是机关枪！也是我所见的惟一的创作。我在租界边上买了一个，和孩子摇着在路上走，文明的西洋人和胜利的日本人看见了，大抵投给我们一个鄙夷或悲悯的苦笑。
However, Jiangbei people are geniuses in making toys. They used two bamboo tubes of different lengths, dyed red and green, in a row, with a spring hidden in the tube and a handle next to it, which made a sound when shaken. This is the machine gun! It is also the only creation I have seen. I bought one on the edge of the concession, and walked on the road with my children, and when the civilized Westerners and the victorious Japanese saw it, they probably gave us a bitter smile of contempt or pity.然而我们摇着在路上走，毫不愧恧，因为这是创作。前年以来，很有些人骂着江北人，好像非此不足以自显其高洁，现在沉默了，那高洁也就渺渺然，茫茫然。而江北人却创造了粗笨的机枪玩具，以坚强的自信和质朴的才能与文明的玩具争。他们，我以为是比从外国买了极新式的武器回来的人物，更其值得赞颂的，虽然也许又有人会因此给我一个鄙夷或悲悯的冷笑。
However, we walk on the road without shame, because this is creation. Since the year before last, many people have scolded the people of Jiangbei, as if it is not enough to show their nobility, but now they are silent, and their nobility is vague and vague. However, Jiangbei people have created clumsy machine gun toys, competing with civilized toys with strong self-confidence and simple talents. They are, I think, more commendable than those who have bought very new weapons from abroad, although perhaps someone will give me a sneer of contempt or pity for this.六月十一日。
June 11.

零食

零食

零食

snacks莫朕
Don't be me出版界的现状，期刊多而专书少，使有心人发愁，小品多而大作少，又使有心人发愁。人而有心，真要“日坐愁城”了。
The current situation in the publishing industry, there are many periodicals and few special books, which makes people worry, and there are many sketches and few big works, which makes people worry. People have hearts, and they really want to "sit in the city of sorrow every day".但是，这情形是由来已久的，现在不过略有变迁，更加显著而已。
However, this situation has been around for a long time, and now it has only changed slightly, and it is more significant.上海的居民，原就喜欢吃零食。假使留心一听，则屋外叫卖零食者，总是“实繁有徒”。桂花白糖伦教糕，猪油白糖莲心粥，虾肉馄饨面，芝麻香蕉，南洋芒果，西路（暹罗）蜜橘，瓜子大王，还有蜜饯，橄榄，等等。只要胃口好，可以从早晨直吃到半夜，但胃口不好也不妨，因为这又不比肥鱼大肉，分量原是很少的。那功效，据说，是在消闲之中，得养生之益，而且味道好。
Shanghai residents used to like to eat snacks. If you pay attention, the snack sellers outside the house are always "really numerous". Osmanthus white sugar Lun Jiao cake, lard white sugar lotus heart porridge, shrimp wonton noodles, sesame bananas, Nanyang mangoes, Xilu (Siamese) tangerines, melon seed king, as well as candied fruits, olives, and so on. As long as you have a good appetite, you can eat from morning until midnight, but if you have a bad appetite, you may not wish to eat it, because it is not as big as fatty fish, and the portion is very small. The effect, it is said, is to get the benefits of health preservation in leisure, and it tastes good.前几年的出版物，是有“养生之益”的零食，或曰“入门”，或曰“ABC”，或曰“概论”，总之是薄薄的一本，只要化钱数角，费时半点钟，便能明白一种科学，或全盘文学，或一种外国文。意思就是说，只要吃一包五香瓜子，便能使这人发荣滋长，抵得吃五年饭。试了几年，功效不显，于是很有些灰心了。一试验，如果有名无实，是往往不免灰心的，例如现在已经很少有人修仙或炼金，而代以洗温泉和买奖券，便是试验无效的结果。于是放松了“养生”这一面，偏到“味道好”那一面去了。自然，零食也还是零食。上海的居民，和零食是死也分拆不开的。
The publications of the past few years are snacks with "health benefits", or "introduction", or "ABC", or "introduction", in short, it is a thin book, as long as you turn money into a few corners, it takes half an o'clock, you can understand a science, or a whole literature, or a foreign language. This means that as long as you eat a pack of five-spice melon seeds, you can make this person prosperous and grow, and it is worth eating for five years. After trying for a few years, the effect was not obvious, so I was a little discouraged. For example, there are few people who cultivate immortality or alchemy, and instead of bathing hot springs and buying lottery tickets, it is the result of ineffective experiments. So I relaxed the "health" side and went to the "good taste" side. Naturally, snacks are still snacks. The residents of Shanghai and snacks are inseparable from death.于是而出现了小品，但也并不是新花样。当老九章生意兴隆的时候，就有过《笔记小说大观》之流，这是零食一大箱；待到老九章关门之后，自然也跟着成了一小撮。分量少了，为什么倒弄得闹闹嚷嚷，满城风雨的呢？我想，这是因为在担子上装起了篆字的和罗马字母合璧的年红电灯的招牌。
So there was a sketch, but it was not a new trick. When Lao Jiuzhang's business was booming, there were "Notes and Novels", which was a large box of snacks; After the old nine chapters closed, they naturally became a small handful. The weight is less, why is it making a fuss and the city is full of wind and rain? I think this is because the burden is equipped with a sign of a red lamp with seal characters and Roman letters.然而，虽然仍旧是零食，上海居民的感应力却比先前敏捷了，否则又何至于闹嚷嚷。但这也许正因为神经衰弱的缘故。假使如此，那么，零食的前途倒是可虑的。
However, although it is still a snack, the sensitivity of Shanghai residents is more agile than before, otherwise why would it be noisy. But this may be because of a nervous breakdown. If so, then the future of snacks is worrying.六月十一日。
June 11.

“此生或彼生”

“此生或彼生”

“此生或彼生”

"This life or that life"白道
White way“此生或彼生”。
"This life or that life".现在写出这样五个字来，问问读者：是什么意思？
Now write these five words and ask the reader: What does it mean?倘使在《申报》上，见过汪懋祖先生的文章，“……例如说‘这一个学生或是那一个学生’，文言只须‘此生或彼生’即已明了，其省力为何如？……”的，那就也许能够想到，这就是“这一个学生或是那一个学生”的意思。
If you have seen Mr. Wang Maozu's article in the "Declaration", "...... For example, if it is said that 'this student or that student', the literary language only needs 'this life or that student' to be understood, how is it labor-saving? ......", then you may be able to think that this is the meaning of "this student or that student".否则，那回答恐怕就要迟疑。因为这五个字，至少还可以有两种解释：一，这一个秀才或是那一个秀才（生员）；二，这一世或是未来的别一世。
Otherwise, I am afraid that the answer will be hesitant. Because of these five words, there can be at least two interpretations: first, this scholar or that scholar (student); 2. This life or another life in the future.文言比起白话来，有时的确字数少，然而那意义也比较的含胡。我们看文言文，往往不但不能增益我们的智识，并且须仗我们已有的智识，给它注解，补足。待到翻成精密的白话之后，这才算是懂得了。如果一径就用白话，即使多写了几个字，但对于读者，“其省力为何如”？
Compared with the vernacular, the number of words is sometimes smaller, but the meaning is also more bearded. When we look at classical Chinese, we often not only cannot increase our knowledge, but we also have to rely on our existing knowledge to annotate and supplement it. After translating it into a precise vernacular, I can be considered to understand. If you use the vernacular in one way, even if you write a few more words, but for the reader, "how is it labor-saving"?我就用主张文言的汪懋祖先生所举的文言的例子，证明了文言的不中用了。
I used the example of classical Chinese given by Mr. Wang Maozu, who advocates classical Chinese, to prove that Classical Chinese is useless.六月二十三日。
六月二十三日。

正是时候

正是时候

正是时候

Just the right time张承禄
Zhang Chenglu“山梁雌雉，时哉时哉！”东西是自有其时候的。
"The mountain beam female pheasant, time, time!" Things have their own time.圣经，佛典，受一部分人们的奚落已经十多年了，“觉今是而昨非”，现在就是复兴的时候。关岳，是清朝屡经封赠的神明，被民元革命所闲却；从新记得，是袁世凯的晚年，但又和袁世凯一同盖了棺；而第二次从新记得，则是在现在。
The Bible and Buddhist scriptures have been ridiculed by some people for more than ten years, "realizing that today is right and yesterday is wrong", now is the time for revival. Guan Yue was a god who was repeatedly granted by the Qing Dynasty, but was neglected by the Minyuan Revolution; I remember that it was Yuan Shikai's later years, but he built a coffin with Yuan Shikai; The second time I remember it is now.这时候，当然要重文言，掉文袋，标雅致，看古书。
At this time, of course, it is necessary to pay attention to the classical Chinese, drop the paper bag, mark it elegantly, and read ancient books.如果是小家子弟，则纵使外面怎样大风雨，也还要勇往直前，拚命挣扎的，因为他没有安稳的老巢可归，只得向前干。虽然成家立业之后，他也许修家谱，造祠堂，俨然以旧家子弟自居，但这究竟是后话。倘是旧家子弟呢，为了逞雄，好奇，趋时，吃饭，固然也未必不出门，然而只因为一点小成功，或者一点小挫折，都能够使他立刻退缩。这一缩而且缩得不小，简直退回家，更坏的是他的家乃是一所古老破烂的大宅子。
If it is a small family, no matter how stormy it is outside, he still has to move forward bravely and struggle desperately, because he has no stable nest to return to, so he has to move forward. Although after starting a family, he may repair the family tree and build an ancestral hall, as if he were a child of the old family, but this is a later story. If it is a child of the old family, in order to show off, be curious, trendy, and eat, of course, he may not go out, but just because of a small success, or a little setback, can make him retreat immediately. This shrinkage is not small, it is simply a retreat home, and what's worse is that his home is an old and dilapidated mansion.这大宅子里有仓中的旧货，有壁角的灰尘，一时实在搬不尽。倘有坐食的余闲，还可以东寻西觅，那就修破书，擦古瓶，读家谱，怀祖德，来消磨他若干岁月。如果是穷极无聊了，那就更要修破书，擦古瓶，读家谱，怀祖德，甚而至于翻肮脏的墙根，开空虚的抽屉，想发见连他自己也莫名其妙的宝贝，来救这无法可想的贫穷。这两种人，小康和穷乏，是不同的，悠闲和急迫，是不同的，因而收场的缓促，也不同的，但当这时候，却都正在古董中讨生活，所以那主张和行为，便无不同，而声势也好像见得浩大了。
There are old goods in the warehouse in this big house, and there is dust in the corners, which cannot be moved for a while. If you have leisure to sit and eat, you can still look around, then repair the book, wipe the ancient bottle, read the family tree, and reminisce about the ancestral virtues to spend a few years with him. If it is extremely boring, then it is even more necessary to repair broken books, wipe ancient bottles, read family trees, cherish ancestral virtues, and even rummage through dirty walls, open empty drawers, and want to find treasures that even he himself is inexplicable to save this unimaginable poverty. These two types of people, well-off and poor, are different, leisurely and urgent, are different, so the slowness of the end is also different, but at this time, they are both begging for a life in antiques, so the propositions and behaviors are no different, and the momentum seems to be huge.于是就又影响了一部分的青年们，以为在古董中真可以寻出自己的救星。他看看小康者，是这么闲适，看看急迫者，是这么专精，这，就总应该有些道理。会有仿效的人，是当然的。然而，时光也绝不留情，他将终于得到一个空虚，急迫者是妄想，小康者是玩笑。主张者倘无特操，无灼见，则说古董应该供在香案上或掷在茅厕里，其实，都不过在尽一时的自欺欺人的任务，要寻前例，是随处皆是的。
So it affected some young people, thinking that they could really find their savior in antiques. He looked at the well-off, so leisurely, and looked at the urgent, so specialized, there should always be some truth. Of course, there will be people who follow suit. However, time is by no means merciful, and he will finally get an emptiness, the urgent is delusion, and the well-off is a joke. If the advocate has no special conduct or insight, then he says that antiques should be offered on the incense table or thrown in the toilet, but in fact, they are just doing the task of self-deception for a while, and they are everywhere to find precedents.六月二十三日。
六月二十三日。

论重译

论重译

论重译

论重译史贲
Shi Ben穆木天先生在二十一日的《火炬》上，反对作家的写无聊的游记之类，以为不如给中国介绍一点上起希腊罗马，下至现代的文学名作。我以为这是很切实的忠告。但他在十九日的《自由谈》上，却又反对间接翻译，说“是一种滑头办法”，虽然还附有一些可恕的条件。这是和他后来的所说冲突的，也容易启人误会，所以我想说几句。
In "Torch" on the 21st, Mr. Mu Mutian opposed the writer's writing boring travelogues, thinking that it would be better to introduce China to a little bit of literary masterpieces from Greece and Rome to modern times. I thought this was very practical advice. But in the "Free Talk" on the 19th, he opposed indirect translation, saying that it was "a slippery method", although there were some forgivable conditions. This is in conflict with what he said later, and it is easy to misunderstand, so I would like to say a few words.重译确是比直接译容易。首先，是原文的能令译者自惭不及，怕敢动笔的好处，先由原译者消去若干部分了。译文是大抵比不上原文的，就是将中国的粤语译为京语，或京语译成沪语，也很难恰如其分。在重译，便减少了对于原文的好处的踌躇。其次，是难解之处，忠实的译者往往会有注解，可以一目了然，原书上倒未必有。但因此，也常有直接译错误，而间接译却不然的时候。
Retranslation is indeed easier than direct translation. First of all, the original text can make the translator feel ashamed of himself, and he is afraid of the benefits of daring to write, so the original translator will erase some parts first. The translation is probably not as good as the original text, even if it is translated from Chinese Cantonese into Beijing, or Beijing into Shanghai, it is difficult to be appropriate. In retranslation, the hesitation about the benefits of the original text is reduced. Secondly, it is difficult to understand, faithful translators often have annotations, which can be understood at a glance, but may not be in the original book. However, there are often direct translation errors and indirect translations are not.懂某一国文，最好是译某一国文学，这主张是断无错误的，但是，假使如此，中国也就难有上起希罗，下至现代的文学名作的译本了。中国人所懂的外国文，恐怕是英文最多，日文次之，倘不重译，我们将只能看见许多英美和日本的文学作品，不但没有伊卜生，没有伊本涅支，连极通行的安徒生的童话，西万提司的《吉诃德先生》，也无从看见了。这是何等可怜的眼界。自然，中国未必没有精通丹麦，诺威，西班牙文字的人们，然而他们至今没有译，我们现在的所有，都是从英文重译的。连苏联的作品，也大抵是从英法文重译的。
It is absolutely wrong to understand a certain language and preferably translate a certain country's literature, but if this is the case, it will be difficult for China to have translations of literary masterpieces from Greece to modern times. Chinese If we do not retranslate, we will only be able to see many British, American and Japanese literary works, not only without Ibsen, without Ibenech, but also without the popular fairy tales of Hans Christian Andersen, and Sivantes' "Mr. Quixote". What a pitiful vision this is. Naturally, China may not have people who are proficient in Danish, Norwegian and Spanish scripts, but they have not translated it so far, and everything we have now is retranslated from English. Even Soviet works are mostly retranslated from English and French.所以我想，对于翻译，现在似乎暂不必有严峻的堡垒。最要紧的是要看译文的佳良与否，直接译或间接译，是不必置重的；是否投机，也不必推问的。深通原译文的趋时者的重译本，有时会比不甚懂原文的忠实者的直接译本好，日本改造社译的《高尔基全集》，曾被有一些革命者斥责为投机，但革命者的译本出，却反而显出前一本的优良了。不过也还要附一个条件，并不很懂原译文的趋时者的速成译本，可实在是不可恕的。
So I think that for translation, it seems that there is no need to have a stern fortress for the time being. The most important thing is to look at the quality of the translation, whether it is a direct translation or an indirect translation, there is no need to pay attention to it; Whether it is speculative or not, there is no need to ask. The retranslation of the "Complete Works of Gorky" translated by the Japan Transformation Society was once reprimanded by some revolutionaries as speculative, but the translation of the revolutionary showed the excellence of the previous one. However, there is also a condition, the quick translation of the original translation is really unforgivable.待到将来各种名作有了直接译本，则重译本便是应该淘汰的时候，然而必须那译本比旧译本好，不能但以“直接翻译”当作护身的挡牌。
When there are direct translations of various masterpieces in the future, it is time for the retranslation to be eliminated, but the translation must be better than the old translation, and the "direct translation" cannot be used as a shield.六月二十四日。
June 24th.

再论重译

再论重译

再论重译

Let's talk about retranslation史贲
Shi Ben看到穆木天先生的《论重译及其他》下篇的末尾，才知道是在释我的误会。我却觉得并无什么误会，不同之点，只在倒过了一个轻重，我主张首先要看成绩的好坏，而不管译文是直接或间接，以及译者是怎样的动机。
When I saw the end of the second part of Mr. Mu Mutian's "On Retranslation and Others", I realized that I was explaining my misunderstanding. I advocate that the first thing to look at is the quality of the grades, regardless of whether the translation is direct or indirect, and what the translator's motivation is.木天先生要译者“自知”，用自己的长处，译成“一劳永逸”的书。要不然，还是不动手的好。这就是说，与其来种荆棘，不如留下一片白地，让别的好园丁来种可以永久观赏的佳花。但是，“一劳永逸”的话，有是有的，而“一劳永逸”的事却极少，就文字而论，中国的这方块字便决非“一劳永逸”的符号。况且白地也决不能永久的保留，既有空地，便会生长荆棘或雀麦。最要紧的是有人来处理，或者培植，或者删除，使翻译界略免于芜杂。这就是批评。
Mr. Mutian wants the translator to "know himself" and use his own strengths to translate it into a "once and for all" book. Otherwise, it's better not to do it. This means that instead of planting thorns, it is better to leave a piece of white land for other good gardeners to plant beautiful flowers that can be enjoyed forever. However, there are words of "once and for all", but there are very few things about "once and for all", and in terms of words, this square word in China is by no means a symbol of "once and for all". Moreover, white land must not be kept permanently, and if there is open space, thorns or sparrows will grow. The most important thing is that someone will deal with it, or cultivate it, or delete it, so that the translation community is slightly free from confusion. That's criticism.然而我们向来看轻着翻译，尤其是重译。对于创作，批评家是总算时时开口的，一到翻译，则前几年还偶有专指误译的文章，近来就极其少见；对于重译的更其少。但在工作上，批评翻译却比批评创作难，不但看原文须有译者以上的工力，对作品也须有译者以上的理解。如木天先生所说，重译有数种译本作参考，这在译者是极为便利的，因为甲译本可疑时，能够参看乙译本。直接译就不然了，一有不懂的地方，便无法可想，因为世界上是没有用了不同的文章，来写两部意义句句相同的作品的作者的。重译的书之多，这也许是一种原因，说偷懒也行，但大约也还是语学的力量不足的缘故。遇到这种参酌各本而成的译本，批评就更为难了，至少也得能看各种原译本。如陈源译的《父与子》，鲁迅译的《毁灭》，就都属于这一类的。
However, we have always looked down on translation, especially retranslation. When it comes to translation, there have been occasional articles specifically referring to mistranslations in previous years, which are extremely rare recently. Even less for retranslations. However, in terms of work, criticizing translation is more difficult than criticizing creation, not only to read the original text requires more than the translator's work, but also to have more than the translator's understanding of the work. As Mr. Mu Tian said, there are several translations for reference, which is extremely convenient for translators, because when translation A is suspicious, they can refer to translation B. If there is something you don't understand, you can't think of it, because there are no authors in the world who use different articles to write two works with the same meaning. The number of retranslated books may be one reason, it is okay to be lazy, but it is probably also because of the lack of power of linguistics. When encountering this kind of translation that refers to each version, it is even more difficult to criticize, at least you have to be able to read various original translations. For example, Chen Yuan's translation of "Fathers and Sons" and Lu Xun's translation of "Destruction" all belong to this category.我以为翻译的路要放宽，批评的工作要着重。倘只是立论极严，想使译者自己慎重，倒会得到相反的结果，要好的慎重了，乱译者却还是乱译，这时恶译本就会比稍好的译本多。
I thought that the road of translation should be relaxed, and the work of criticism should be emphasized. If you only make a very strict argument and want the translator to be cautious, you will get the opposite result.临末还有几句不大紧要的话。木天先生因为怀疑重译，见了德译本之后，连他自己所译的《塔什干》，也定为法文原译是删节本了。其实是不然的。德译本虽然厚，但那是两部小说合订在一起的，后面的大半，就是绥拉菲摩维支的《铁流》。所以我们所有的汉译《塔什干》，也并不是节本。
There are a few more words that don't matter at the end. Because Mr. Mutian was suspicious of the retranslation, after seeing the German translation, even his own translation of "Tashkent" was determined to be an abridged version of the original French translation. In fact, it is not. Although the German translation is thick, it is a combination of the two novels, and the latter half is Suelafimovitch's "Iron Flow". Therefore, all our Chinese translations of "Tashkent" are not abridged versions.七月三日。
July 3rd.

“彻底”的底子

“彻底”的底子

“彻底”的底子

"Thorough" foundation公汗
Public sweat现在对于一个人的立论，如果说它是“高超”，恐怕有些要招论者的反感了，但若说它是“彻底”，是“非常前进”，却似乎还没有什么。
Now, if a person's argument is "superb", I am afraid that some critics will be disgusted, but if it is "thorough" and "very advanced", it seems that there is nothing yet.现在也正是“彻底”的，“非常前进”的议论，替代了“高超”的时光。
Now it is also the "thorough" and "very forward" discussion that has replaced the "superb" time.文艺本来都有一个对象的界限。譬如文学，原是以懂得文字的读者为对象的，懂得文字的多少有不同，文章当然要有深浅。而主张用字要平常，作文要明白，自然也还是作者的本分。然而这时“彻底”论者站出来了，他却说中国有许多文盲，问你怎么办？这实在是对于文学家的当头一棍，只好立刻闷死给他看。
Literature and art originally have a boundary of objects. For example, literature was originally aimed at readers who understand words, and the amount of understanding of words is different, and of course the articles must have depths. It is naturally the author's duty to advocate that the words should be ordinary and the composition should be clear. However, at this time, the "thorough" theorist stood up, but he said that there are many illiterates in China, and asked what to do? This was really a blow to the writer, so I had to suffocate him immediately.不过还可以另外请一枝救兵来，也就是辩解。因为文盲是已经在文学作用的范围之外的了，这时只好请画家，演剧家，电影作家出马，给他看文字以外的形象的东西。然而这还不足以塞“彻底”论者的嘴的，他就说文盲中还有色盲，有瞎子，问你怎么办？于是艺术家们也遭了当头一棍，只好立刻闷死给他看。
But you can also invite another rescuer, that is, to justify. Because illiteracy is already outside the scope of literature, at this time I have to ask painters, dramatists, and film writers to come in and show him images other than words. However, this is not enough to stuff the mouth of the "thorough" theorist, he said that there are also color blindness among the illiterate, there are blind people, and he asks what you should do? So the artists were also beaten to the head, and had to suffocate him immediately.那么，作为最后的挣扎，说是对于色盲瞎子之类，须用讲演，唱歌，说书罢。说是也说得过去的。然而他就要问你：莫非你忘记了中国还有聋子吗？
Then, as the last struggle, it is said that for the colorblind and the like, we must use lectures, singing, and storytelling. It makes sense to say yes. However, he will ask you: Have you forgotten that there are still deaf people in China?又是当头一棍，闷死，都闷死了。
Another blow to the head, suffocated, suffocated.于是“彻底”论者就得到一个结论：现在的一切文艺，全都无用，非彻底改革不可！
So the "thorough" theorists came to a conclusion: all current literature and art are useless, and they must be completely reformed!他立定了这个结论之后，不知道到那里去了。谁来“彻底”改革呢？那自然是文艺家。然而文艺家又是不“彻底”的多，于是中国就永远没有对于文盲，色盲，瞎子，聋子，无不有效的——“彻底”的好的文艺。
After he made this conclusion, he didn't know where he went. Who will "thoroughly" reform? That is naturally a writer and artist. However, there are many writers and artists who are not "thorough", so China will never have a "thorough" good literature and art that is effective for illiterate, colorblind, blind, and deaf.但“彻底”论者却有时又会伸出头来责备一顿文艺家。
But the "thorough" theorists sometimes stick out their heads and reproach the writers.弄文艺的人，如果遇见这样的大人物而不能撕掉他的鬼脸，那么，文艺不但不会前进，并且只会萎缩，终于被他消灭的。切实的文艺家必须认清这一种“彻底”论者的真面目！
If a person who plays literature and art meets such a big man and cannot tear off his grimace, then literature and art will not only not move forward, but will only shrink, and will finally be eliminated by him. Practical writers and artists must recognize the true face of this kind of "thorough" theorist!七月八日。
July 8th.

知了世界

知了世界

知了世界

I know the world邓当世
Deng Dangshi中国的学者们，多以为各种智识，一定出于圣贤，或者至少是学者之口；连火和草药的发明应用，也和民众无缘，全由古圣王一手包办：燧人氏，神农氏。所以，有人以为“一若各种智识，必出诸动物之口，斯亦奇矣”，是毫不足奇的。
Chinese scholars mostly think that all kinds of wisdom must come from the mouths of sages, or at least scholars; Even the invention and application of fire and herbs have no chance with the people, and they are all arranged by the ancient sage kings: Suiren and Shennong. Therefore, it is not surprising that some people think that "if all kinds of intelligence come from the mouths of animals, it is strange".况且，“出诸动物之口”的智识，在我们中国，也常常不是真智识。天气热得要命，窗门都打开了，装着无线电播音机的人家，便都把音波放到街头，“与民同乐”。咿咿唉唉，唱呀唱呀。外国我不知道，中国的播音，竟是从早到夜，都有戏唱的，它一会儿尖，一会儿沙，只要你愿意，简直能够使你耳根没有一刻清净。同时开了风扇，吃着冰淇淋，不但和“水位大涨”“旱象已成”之处毫不相干，就是和窗外流着油汗，整天在挣扎过活的人们的地方，也完全是两个世界。
Moreover, the wisdom that "comes from the mouth of animals" is often not true wisdom in our China. The weather was so hot that the windows and doors were open, and the people with radio radios put sound waves on the streets to "have fun with the people." Babbling, singing, singing. I don't know in foreign countries, but China's broadcasting is actually sung from morning to night, it is sharp for a while, sandy for a while, as long as you want, it can make your ears clean for a moment. At the same time, turning on the fan and eating ice cream has nothing to do with the "water level rise" and "drought has formed", but also the place where people sweating outside the window and struggling to live all day long are completely two worlds.我在咿咿唉唉的曼声高唱中，忽然记得了法国诗人拉芳丁的有名的寓言：《知了和蚂蚁》。也是这样的火一般的太阳的夏天，蚂蚁在地面上辛辛苦苦地作工，知了却在枝头高吟，一面还笑蚂蚁俗。然而秋风来了，凉森森的一天比一天凉，这时知了无衣无食，变了小瘪三，却给早有准备的蚂蚁教训了一顿。这是我在小学校“受教育”的时候，先生讲给我听的。我那时好像很感动，至今有时还记得。
In the midst of my babbling singing, I suddenly remembered the famous fable of the French poet Lafontine: "Knowing and Ants". It is also such a fiery summer of the sun, ants work the ground, but when they know it, they sing on the branches, while laughing at the ants vulgar. However, the autumn wind came, and the cool day was getting colder day by day, and at this time, I knew that I had no food and clothing, and I became a little deflated, but I taught the ants who had been prepared a lesson. This is what my husband told me when I was "educated" in elementary school. I was very moved at that time, and I still remember it sometimes.但是，虽然记得，却又因了“毕业即失业”的教训，意见和蚂蚁已经很不同。秋风是不久就来的，也自然一天凉比一天，然而那时无衣无食的，恐怕倒正是现在的流着油汗的人们；洋房的周围固然静寂了，但那是关紧了窗门，连音波一同留住了火炉的暖气，遥想那里面，大约总依旧是咿咿唉唉，《谢谢毛毛雨》。
However, although I remember, because of the lesson of "graduation is unemployment", my opinion is already very different from that of ants. The autumn wind will come soon, and it will naturally be cooler day by day, but at that time, those who had no food and clothing were probably the people who were sweating and sweating now; The surroundings of the bungalow were silent, but it was because the windows and doors were closed, and even the sound waves kept the heating of the stove.“出诸动物之口”的智识，在我们中国岂不是往往不适用的么？
Isn't the wisdom "from the mouth of animals" often inapplicable in our China?中国自有中国的圣贤和学者。“劳心者治人，劳力者治于人；治于人者食（去声）人，治人者食于人”，说得多么简截明白。如果先生早将这教给我，我也不至于有上面的那些感想，多费纸笔了。这也就是中国人非读中国古书不可的一个好证据罢。
China has its own Chinese sages and scholars. "Those who work hard govern people, and those who work hard govern people; those who govern people eat (remove the sound) people, and those who govern people eat people", how concise and clear it is. If my husband had taught me this earlier, I wouldn't have had the above impressions and wasted more paper and pen. This is a good proof that Chinese people must read ancient Chinese books.七月八日。
July 8th.

算账

算账

算账

Accounts莫朕
Don't be me说起清代的学术来，有几位学者总是眉飞色舞，说那发达是为前代所未有的。证据也真够十足：解经的大作，层出不穷，小学也非常的进步；史论家虽然绝迹了，考史家却不少；尤其是考据之学，给我们明白了宋明人决没有看懂的古书……
Speaking of the scholarship of the Qing Dynasty, several scholars always danced their eyebrows, saying that the development was unprecedented in previous generations. The evidence is really full: the masterpieces of exegesis are emerging one after another, and the primary school is also very progressive; Although historians are extinct, there are many historians; In particular, the study of evidence gives us an understanding of the ancient books that the Song and Ming people never understood......但说起来可又有些踌躇，怕英雄也许会因此指定我是犹太人，其实，并不是的。我每遇到学者谈起清代的学术时，总不免同时想：“扬州十日”，“嘉定三屠”这些小事情，不提也好罢，但失去全国的土地，大家十足做了二百五十年奴隶，却换得这几页光荣的学术史，这买卖，究竟是赚了利，还是折了本呢？
But I was a little hesitant to say it, afraid that the hero might designate me as a Jew because of this, but in fact, it wasn't. Whenever I meet scholars talking about the scholarship of the Qing Dynasty, I can't help but think at the same time: "Ten days in Yangzhou" and "Three massacres in Jiading", it is okay not to mention these small things, but losing the land of the whole country, everyone has been a slave for 250 years, but in exchange for these few pages of glorious academic history, is this trade profitable, or is it a loss?可惜我又不是数学家，到底没有弄清楚。但我直觉的感到，这恐怕是折了本，比用庚子赔款来养成几位有限的学者，亏累得多了。
It's a pity that I'm not a mathematician, so I haven't figured it out. But I intuitively feel that this is probably a loss, which is much more tiring than using Gengzi reparations to cultivate a few limited scholars.但恐怕这又不过是俗见。学者的见解，是超然于得失之外的。虽然超然于得失之外，利害大小之辨却又似乎并非全没有。大莫大于尊孔，要莫要于崇儒，所以只要尊孔而崇儒，便不妨向任何新朝俯首。对新朝的说法，就叫作“反过来征服中国民族的心”。
But I'm afraid this is just a common opinion. Scholars' opinions are beyond gains and losses. Although it is transcendent beyond gains and losses, it seems that there is no distinction between the big and the small. There is nothing greater than respecting Confucius, or respecting Confucianism, so as long as you respect Confucius and Confucianism, you might as well bow to any new dynasty. The term "conquering the heart of the Chinese nation" in turn is called "conquering the heart of the Chinese nation in turn".而这中国民族的有些心，真也被征服得彻底，到现在，还在用兵燹，疠疫，水旱，风蝗，换取着孔庙重修，雷峰塔再建，男女同行犯忌，四库珍本发行这些大门面。
And some of the hearts of this Chinese nation have really been completely conquered, and until now, they are still using troops, epidemics, floods and droughts, wind locusts, in exchange for the reconstruction of the Confucius Temple, the reconstruction of the Leifeng Pagoda, the taboo of men and women, and the issuance of rare books in the four libraries.我也并非不知道灾害不过暂时，如果没有记录，到明年就会大家不提起，然而光荣的事业却是永久的。但是，不知怎地，我虽然并非犹太人，却总有些喜欢讲损益，想大家来算一算向来没有人提起过的这一笔账。——而且，现在也正是这时候了。
I am not unaware of disasters, but for the time being, if there is no record, everyone will not mention it next year, but the glorious cause is permanent. However, somehow, although I am not a Jew, I always like to talk about profit and loss, and I want you to calculate this account that no one has ever mentioned. - Moreover, now is the time.七月十七日。
July 17th.

水性

水性

水性

Waterborne公汗
Public sweat天气接连的大热了近二十天，看上海报，几乎每天都有下河洗浴，淹死了人的记载。这在水村里，是很少见的。
The weather has been hot for nearly 20 days, and looking at the posters, there are records of people drowning in the river almost every day. This is rare in the water village.水村多水，对于水的知识多，能浮水的也多。倘若不会浮水，是轻易不下水去的。这一种能浮水的本领，俗语谓之“识水性”。
There is a lot of water in the water village, and there are many people who know more about water and can float on water. If it doesn't float, it won't go into the water easily. This ability to float is commonly known as "knowing water".这“识水性”，如果用了“买办”的白话文，加以较详的说明，则：一，是知道火能烧死人，水也能淹死人，但水的模样柔和，好像容易亲近，因而也容易上当；二，知道水虽能淹死人，却也能浮起人，现在就设法操纵它，专来利用它浮起人的这一面；三，便是学得操纵法，此法一熟，“识水性”的事就完全了。
This "water awareness", if the vernacular of "comprador" is used to explain it in more detail, then: First, it is to know that fire can burn people, and water can also drown people, but the appearance of water is soft, as if it is easy to get close, so it is easy to be deceived; second, knowing that water can drown people, it can also float people, so try to manipulate it now and use it to float people's side; Third, it is to learn the manipulation method, and once this method is mastered, the matter of "knowing water" will be complete.但在都会里的人们，却不但不能浮水，而且似乎连水能淹死人的事情也都忘却了。平时毫无准备，临时又不先一测水的深浅，遇到热不可耐时，便脱衣一跳，倘不幸而正值深处，那当然是要死的。而且我觉得，当这时候，肯设法救助的人，好像都会里也比乡下少。
But people in the city not only can't float on water, but they also seem to have forgotten that water can drown people. Usually unprepared, temporarily without first measuring the depth of the water, when encountering unbearable heat, he strips off his clothes and jumps, if he is unfortunate and in the depths, of course he will die. And I think that at this time, there seem to be fewer people willing to try to rescue in the city than in the countryside.但救都会人恐怕也较难，因为救者固然必须“识水性”，被救者也得相当的“识水性”的。他应该毫不用力，一任救者托着他的下巴，往浅处浮。倘若过于性急，拚命的向救者的身上爬，则救者倘不是好手，便只好连自己也沉下去。
But it may be more difficult to save the people in the city, because the rescuer must be "water-knowing", and the rescued must also be quite "water-knowing". He should have been able to hold his chin without any effort, and let the rescuer float to the shallows. If you are too impatient and desperately crawl on the rescuer's body, if the rescuer is not a good hand, he will have to sink even himself.所以我想，要下河，最好是预先学一点浮水工夫，不必到什么公园的游泳场，只要在河滩边就行，但必须有内行人指导。其次，倘因了种种关系，不能学浮水，那就用竹竿先探一下河水的浅深，只在浅处敷衍敷衍；或者最稳当是舀起水来，只在河边冲一冲，而最要紧的是要知道水有能淹死不会游泳的人的性质，并且还要牢牢的记住！
So I think that if you want to go down the river, it is best to learn a little floating work in advance, you don't have to go to the swimming pool in any park, as long as you are by the river beach, but you must be guided by an insider. secondly, if you can't learn to float water due to various relationships, then use a bamboo pole to explore the depth of the river first, and only perfunctory in the shallow places; Or the safest thing is to scoop up the water and only rush by the river, and the most important thing is to know that water has the property of drowning people who can't swim, and remember it firmly!现在还要主张宣传这样的常识，看起来好像发疯，或是志在“花边”罢，但事实却证明着断断不如此。许多事是不能为了讨前进的批评家喜欢，一味闭了眼睛作豪语的。
Now it seems that it is crazy or aiming for "lace", but the facts prove that this is not the case. Many things cannot be liked by advancing critics and blindly close their eyes and make boastful words.七月十七日。
July 17th.

玩笑只当它玩笑（上）

玩笑只当它玩笑（上）

玩笑只当它玩笑（上）

Joke Just Treat It as a Joke (Part 1)康伯度
Cumberdo不料刘半农先生竟忽然病故了，学术界上又短少了一个人。这是应该惋惜的。但我于音韵学一无所知，毁誉两面，都不配说一句话。我因此记起的是别一件事，是在现在的白话将被“扬弃”或“唾弃”之前，他早是一位对于那时的白话，尤其是欧化式的白话的伟大的“迎头痛击”者。
Unexpectedly, Mr. Liu Bannong suddenly died of illness, and there was one person missing in the academic world. This should be regretted. But I don't know anything about phonology, and I don't deserve to say a word. What I remember is another thing, before the current vernacular will be "abandoned" or "spurned", he was a great "head-on" to the vernacular at that time, especially the Europeanized vernacular.他曾经有过极不费力，但极有力的妙文：
He once had a very effortless but powerful wonderful article:“我现在只举一个简单的例：
"I'll just give you a simple example:子曰：‘学而时习之，不亦悦乎？’
Confucius said: 'Isn't it pleasant to learn and practice from time to time?' ’这太老式了，不好！
It's too old-fashioned, it's not good!‘学而时习之，’子曰，‘不亦悦乎？’
'Learn and practice from time to time,' the son said, 'Isn't it also a pleasure?' ’这好！
This is good!‘学而时习之，不亦悦乎？’子曰。
'Isn't it fun to learn and practice from time to time?' The son said.这更好！为什么好？欧化了。但‘子曰’终没有能欧化到‘曰子’！”
It's even better! Why is it good? Europeanized. But 'Ziyue' has never been able to Europeanize to 'Zi'! ”这段话见于《中国文法通论》中，那书是一本正经的书；作者又是《新青年》的同人，五四时代“文学革命”的战士，现在又成了古人了。中国老例，一死是常常能够增价的，所以我想从新提起，并且提出他终于也是《论语》社的同人，有时不免发些“幽默”；原先也有“幽默”，而这些“幽默”，又不免常常掉到“开玩笑”的阴沟里去的。
This passage is found in "General Theory of Chinese Grammar", which is a serious book; The author is also a fan of "New Youth", a warrior of the "literary revolution" of the May Fourth era, and now he has become an ancient person again. As an old example in China, death can often increase the price, so I want to start anew, and propose that he is finally a fellow of the "Analects" society, and sometimes he can't help but send some "humor"; There used to be "humor", and these "humors" often fell into the gutter of "joking".实例也就是上面所引的文章，其实是，那论法，和顽固先生，市井无赖，看见青年穿洋服，学外国话了，便冷笑道：“可惜鼻子还低，脸孔也不白”的那些话，并没有两样的。
The example is the article quoted above, in fact, the argument is no different from the words of the stubborn gentleman, the scoundrel in the market, who saw the young man wearing a foreign dress and learning a foreign language: "It's a pity that the nose is still low and the face is not white".自然，刘先生所反对的是“太欧化”。但“太”的范围是怎样的呢？他举出的前三法，古文上没有，谈话里却能有的，对人口谈，也都可以懂。只有将“子曰”改成“曰子”是决不能懂的了。然而他在他所反对的欧化文中也寻不出实例来，只好说是“‘子曰’终没有能欧化到‘曰子’！”那么，这不是“无的放矢”吗？
Naturally, what Mr. Liu opposes is "too Europeanization". But what is the scope of "too"? The first three methods he cited are not in ancient texts, but they can be found in conversation, and they can also be understood in oral conversation. Only changing "Ziyue" to "Yuezi" is absolutely incomprehensible. However, he could not find an example in the European text he opposed, so he had to say that "'Ziyue' could not be Europeanized to 'Yuzi'!" So, isn't this "aimless"?欧化文法的侵入中国白话中的大原因，并非因为好奇，乃是为了必要。国粹学家痛恨鬼子气，但他住在租界里，便会写些“霞飞路”，“麦特赫司脱路”那样的怪地名；评论者何尝要好奇，但他要说得精密，固有的白话不够用，便只得采些外国的句法。比较的难懂，不像茶淘饭似的可以一口吞下去是真的，但补这缺点的是精密。胡适先生登在《新青年》上的《易卜生主义》，比起近时的有些文艺论文来，的确容易懂，但我们不觉得它却又粗浅，笼统吗？
The main reason for the invasion of European grammar into the Chinese vernacular is not because of curiosity, but because of necessity. The nationalist hates the devil, but when he lives in the concession, he will write some strange place names such as "Joffre Road" and "Metherst Road"; The commentator should be curious, but if he wants to speak precisely, the inherent vernacular is not enough, so he has to adopt some foreign syntax. It's more difficult to understand, unlike tea and rice, it is true that you can swallow it in one bite, but what makes up for this shortcoming is precision. Mr. Hu Shi's "Ibsenism" published in "New Youth" is indeed easier to understand than some recent literary and artistic papers, but don't we think it is superficial and general?如果嘲笑欧化式白话的人，除嘲笑之外，再去试一试绍介外国的精密的论著，又不随意改变，删削，我想，他一定还能够给我们更好的箴规。
If people who ridicule the Europeanized vernacular, in addition to ridiculing, try to introduce foreign sophisticated treatises, and do not change or delete them at will, I think he will be able to give us better admonitions.用玩笑来应付敌人，自然也是一种好战法，但触着之处，须是对手的致命伤，否则，玩笑终不过是一种单单的玩笑而已。
Using jokes to deal with the enemy is naturally a good tactic, but where it touches, it must be the opponent's fatal wound, otherwise, the joke will be just a simple joke in the end.七月十八日。
July 18th.

玩笑只当它玩笑（上）

【附录】：[Appendix]: 文公直给康伯度的信 Wen Gongzhi's letter to Cumberdo
伯度先生：今天读到先生在《自由谈》刊布的大作，知道为西人侵略张目的急先锋（汉奸）仍多，先生以为欧式文化的风行，原因是“必要”。这我真不知是从那里说起？中国人虽无用，但是话总是会说的。如果一定要把中国话取消，要乡下人也“密司忒”起来，这不见得是中国文化上的“必要”吧。譬如照华人的言语说：张甲说：“今天下雨了。”李乙说：“是的，天凉了。”若照尊论的主张，就应该改做：“今天下雨了，”张甲说。“天凉了，——是的；”李乙说。这个算得是中华民国全族的“必要”吗？一般翻译大家的欧化文笔，已足阻尽中西文化的通路，使能读原文的人也不懂译文。再加上先生的“必要”，从此使中国更无可读的西书了。陈子展先生提倡的“大众语”，是天经地义的。中国人间应该说中国话，总是绝对的。而先生偏要说欧化文法是必要！毋怪大名是“康伯度”，真十足加二的表现“买办心理”了。刘半农先生说：“翻译是要使不懂外国文的人得读”；这是确切不移的定理。而先生大骂其半农，认为非使全中国人都以欧化文法为“必要”的性命不可！先生，现在暑天，你歇歇吧！帝国主义的灭绝华人的毒气弹，已经制成无数了。先生要做买办尽管做，只求不必将全个民族出卖。我是一个不懂颠倒式的欧化文式的愚人！对于先生的盛意提倡，几乎疑惑先生已不是敝国人了。今特负责请问先生为甚么投这文化的毒瓦斯？是否受了帝国主义者的指使？总之，四万万四千九百万（陈先生以外）以内的中国人对于先生的主张不敢领教的！幸先生注意。
Mr. Bodu: Today I read your masterpiece published in "Free Talk", and I know that there are still many vanguards (traitors) who invade Zhang Gu for the purpose of Westerners. I really don't know where to start? Although Chinese are useless, they will always speak. If the Chinese language must be canceled and the countrymen are also "mistheirs", this is not necessarily a "necessity" in Chinese culture. For example, in the words of the Chinese: Zhang Jia said: "It's raining today." Li Yi said: "Yes, it's cold." If we follow the proposition of the theory of respect, it should be changed to "It's raining today," Zhang Jia said. "It's cold,—— yes;" Li Yi said. Is this considered a "necessity" for the entire ethnic group of the Republic of China? The Europeanized writing of ordinary translators has blocked the channels of Chinese and Western cultures, so that people who can read the original text do not understand the translation. Coupled with Mr. Zhao's "necessity", China has no Western books to read from now on. The "popular language" advocated by Mr. Chen Zizhan is a matter of course. Chinese should speak Chinese, which is always absolute. And Mr. wants to say that European grammar is necessary! No wonder the name is "Cumberdo", which is really full of plus two expressions of "comprador psychology". Mr. Liu Bannong said: "Translation is to make people who do not understand foreign languages read"; This is the unchanging theorem. And the gentleman scolded him for being half a farmer, believing that all Chinese people must take Europeanized grammar as a "necessary" life! Sir, it's summer now, you can rest! The imperialist gas bomb to exterminate the Chinese has been made countless times. If you want to be a comprador, you just don't have to betray the whole nation. I am a fool who does not understand the inverted European style! For Mr. Sincere's advocacy, I almost doubt that Mr. is no longer a member of our country. Today, I am in charge of asking why you threw the poisonous gas of this culture? Was he instructed by the imperialists? In short, the Chinese within 44,900,000 (except Mr. Chen) did not dare to understand Mr. Chen's proposition! I hope you pay attention.文公直　七月二十五日。
文公直 七月二十五日。八月七日《申报》《自由谈》。
八月七日《申报》《自由谈》。

玩笑只当它玩笑（上）

康伯度答文公直

玩笑只当它玩笑（上）

康伯度答文公直公直先生：中国语法里要加一点欧化，是我的一种主张，并不是“一定要把中国话取消”，也没有“受了帝国主义者的指使”，可是先生立刻加给我“汉奸”之类的重罪名，自己代表了“四万万四千九百万（陈先生以外）以内的中国人”，要杀我的头了。我的主张也许会错的，不过一来就判死罪，方法虽然很时髦，但也似乎过分了一点。况且我看“四万万四千九百万（陈先生以外）以内的中国人”，意见也未必都和先生相同，先生并没有征求过同意，你是冒充代表的。
Mr. Gongzhi: It is one of my propositions to add a little Europeanization to the Chinese language, not "the Chinese language must be canceled", nor "instructed by the imperialists", but Mr. Gongzhi immediately added serious crimes such as "traitor" to me, and he represented "44,900,000 Chinese (other than Mr. Chen)" and wanted to kill my head. My proposition may be wrong, but the method of sentencing the death penalty as soon as it comes is very fashionable, but it also seems to be a little excessive. Moreover, I see that "Chinese within 44,900,000 (other than Mr. Chen)" may not all have the same opinion as Mr. Chen, who has not asked for consent, and you are pretending to be a representative.中国语法的欧化并不就是改学外国话，但这些粗浅的道理不想和先生多谈了。我不怕热，倒是因为无聊。不过还要说一回：我主张中国语法上有加些欧化的必要。这主张，是由事实而来的。中国人“话总是会说的”，一点不错，但要前进，全照老样却不够。眼前的例，就如先生这几百个字的信里面，就用了两回“对于”，这和古文无关，是后来起于直译的欧化语法，而且连“欧化”这两个字也是欧化字；还用着一个“取消”，这是纯粹日本词；一个“瓦斯”，是德国字的原封不动的日本人的音译。都用得很惬当，而且是“必要”的。譬如“毒瓦斯”罢，倘用中国固有的话的“毒气”，就显得含混，未必一定是毒弹里面的东西了。所以写作“毒瓦斯”，的确是出乎“必要”的。
The Europeanization of Chinese language and law is not to change to a foreign language, but I don't want to talk more about these superficial truths with my teacher. I'm not afraid of the heat, but because I'm bored. But I have to say it again: I advocate the need to add some Europeanization to Chinese Chinese law. This proposition comes from facts. Chinese "always say words", which is a good thing, but it is not enough to move forward. In the case at hand, such as Mr. in this letter of hundreds of words, "for" is used twice, which has nothing to do with ancient text, but is a Europeanized grammar that later originated from literal translation, and even the word "Europeanization" is also a Europeanized word; There is also a "cancel", which is a purely Japanese word; A "gas" is the original Japanese transliteration of the German word. They are all very comfortable and "necessary". For example, if you use the "poison gas" in China's inherent language, it will seem ambiguous and may not necessarily be the content of the poison bomb. Therefore, writing "poisonous gas" is indeed "necessary".先生自己没有照镜子，无意中也证明了自己也正是用欧化语法，用鬼子名词的人，但我看先生决不是“为西人侵略张目的急先锋（汉奸）”，所以也想由此证明我也并非那一伙。否则，先生含狗血喷人，倒先污了你自己的尊口了。
The gentleman himself did not look in the mirror, and inadvertently proved that he was also the one who used Europeanized grammar and devil nouns, but I think the gentleman is by no means a "vanguard (traitor) for the invasion of the Westerners", so I also want to prove that I am not that gang. Otherwise, sir will spit on people with dog blood, but you will first stain your own mouth.我想，辩论事情，威吓和诬陷，是没有用处的。用笔的人，一来就发你的脾气，要我的性命，更其可笑得很。先生还是不要暴躁，静静的再看看自己的信，想想自己，何如？
I think it is useless to debate things, intimidate and frame people. The person who uses the pen will lose your temper and take my life, which is even more ridiculous. Sir, don't be irritable, quietly look at your letter and think about yourself, how about it?专此布复，并请
Specifically for this announcement, please do so热安。
Hot peace.弟康伯度脱帽鞠躬。八月五日。
弟康伯度脱帽鞠躬。 八月五日。八月七日《申报》《自由谈》。八月七日《申报》《自由谈》。

玩笑只当它玩笑（下）

玩笑只当它玩笑（下）

玩笑只当它玩笑（下）

玩笑只当它玩笑（下）康伯度
Cumberdo别一枝讨伐白话的生力军，是林语堂先生。他讨伐的不是白话的“反而难懂”，是白话的“鲁里鲁苏”，连刘先生似的想白话“返朴归真”的意思也全没有，要达意，只有“语录式”（白话的文言）。
Another new force against the vernacular is Mr. Lin Yutang. What he was crusading against was not the vernacular "but difficult to understand", but the vernacular "Luli Lusu", and even Mr. Liu's desire to "return to simplicity and return to the truth" in the vernacular had no meaning at all.林先生用白话武装了出现的时候，文言和白话的斗争早已过去了，不像刘先生那样，自己是混战中的过来人，因此也不免有感怀旧日，慨叹末流的情绪。他一闪而将宋明语录，摆在“幽默”的旗子下，原也极其自然的。
When Mr. Lin appeared armed with the vernacular, the struggle between the literary Chinese and the vernacular had long passed, unlike Mr. Liu, who was a person who had been in the melee, so he couldn't help but feel nostalgic for the old days and lament the last emotion. He flashed Song Ming's quotations under the banner of "humor", which was extremely natural.这“幽默”便是《论语》四十五期里的《一张字条的写法》，他因为要问木匠讨一点油灰，写好了一张语录体的字条，但怕别人说他“反对白话”，便改写了白话的，选体的，桐城派的三种，然而都很可笑，结果是差“书僮”传话，向木匠讨了油灰来。
This "humor" is the "Writing of a Note" in the forty-fifth issue of the Analects, because he wanted to ask the carpenter for a little putty, he wrote a note in the form of a quotation, but he was afraid that others would say that he was "against the vernacular", so he rewrote the vernacular, the selection, and the Tongcheng school, but they were all ridiculous, and the result was that the "book boy" sent a message and asked the carpenter for putty.《论语》是风行的刊物，这里省烦不抄了。总之，是：不可笑的只有语录式的一张，别的三种，全都要不得。但这四个不同的脚色，其实是都是林先生自己一个人扮出来的，一个是正生，就是“语录式”，别的三个都是小丑，自装鬼脸，自作怪相，将正生衬得一表非凡了。
The Analects is a popular publication, so I won't copy it here. In short, it is: the only thing that is ridiculous is a quotation-style one, and the other three are not allowed. But these four different characters are actually pretended by Mr. Lin himself, one is Zhengsheng, which is "quotation-style", and the other three are clowns, pretending to be funny and making their own strange appearances, which makes Zhengsheng extraordinary.但这已经并不是“幽默”，乃是“顽笑”，和市井间的在墙上画一乌龟，背上写上他的所讨厌的名字的战法，也并不两样的。不过看见的人，却往往不问是非，就嗤笑被画者。
But this is no longer "humor", but "naughty laughter", which is no different from the tactic of drawing a turtle on the wall in the market and writing his hated name on the back. However, those who see it often laugh at the person being painted without asking about right or wrong.“幽默”或“顽笑”，也都要生出结果来的，除非你心知其意，只当它“顽笑”看。
"Humor" or "naughty laughter" also have results, unless you know what it means and only treat it as a "naughty smile".因为事实会并不如文章，例如这语录式的条子，在中国其实也并未断绝过种子。假如有工夫，不妨到上海的弄口去看一看，有时就会看见一个摊，坐着一位文人，在替男女工人写信，他所用的文章，决不如林先生所拟的条子的容易懂，然而分明是“语录式”的。这就是现在从新提起的语录派的末流，却并没有谁去涂白过他的鼻子。
Because the facts will not be as good as the article, such as this quote-style note, the seeds have not actually been cut off in China. If you have time, you might as well go to the alley in Shanghai to take a look, and sometimes you will see a stall sitting a literati writing letters for male and female workers, and the articles he uses are by no means as easy to understand as the notes drafted by Mr. Lin, but they are clearly "quotation-style". This is the end of the quotation school that is being mentioned from now on, but no one has whitewashed his nose.这是一个具体的“幽默”。
This is a specific "humor".但是，要赏识“幽默”也真难。我曾经从生理学来证明过中国打屁股之合理：假使屁股是为了排泄或坐坐而生的罢，就不必这么大，脚底要小得远，不是足够支持全身了么？我们现在早不吃人了，肉也用不着这么多。那么，可见是专供打打之用的了。有时告诉人们，大抵以为是“幽默”。但假如有被打了的人，或自己遭了打，我想，恐怕那感应就不能这样了罢。
However, it is really difficult to appreciate "humor". I once proved the rationality of spanking in China from physiology: if the buttocks are born for excretion or sitting, they don't have to be so big, and the soles of the feet should be far away, isn't it enough to support the whole body? We don't eat people anymore, and we don't need so much meat. Then, it can be seen that it is exclusively for fighting. Sometimes I tell people that I think it's "humor". But if someone is beaten, or if they are beaten, I think that induction cannot be like this.没有法子，在大家都不适意的时候，恐怕终于是“中国没有幽默”的了。
There is no way, when everyone is uncomfortable, I am afraid that "China has no humor" in the end.七月十八日。
July 18th.

做文章

做文章

做文章

Fuss朔尔
Shuoer沈括的《梦溪笔谈》里，有云：“往岁士人，多尚对偶为文，穆修张景辈始为平文，当时谓之‘古文’。穆张尝同造朝，待旦于东华门外，方论文次，适见有奔马，践死一犬，二人各记其事以较工拙。穆修曰：‘马逸，有黄犬，遇蹄而毙。’张景曰：‘有犬，死奔马之下。’时文体新变，二人之语皆拙涩，当时已谓之工，传之至今。”
沈括的《梦溪笔谈》里，有云：“往岁士人，多尚对偶为文，穆修张景辈始为平文，当时谓之‘古文’。 穆张尝同造朝，待旦于东华门外，方论文次，适见有奔马，践死一犬，二人各记其事以较工拙。 穆修曰：‘马逸，有黄犬，遇蹄而毙。 ’张景曰：‘有犬，死奔马之下。 ’时文体新变，二人之语皆拙涩，当时已谓之工，传之至今。 ”骈文后起，唐虞三代是不骈的，称“平文”为“古文”便是这意思。由此推开去，如果古者言文真是不分，则称“白话文”为“古文”，似乎也无所不可，但和林语堂先生的指为“白话的文言”的意思又不同。两人的大作，不但拙涩，主旨先就不一，穆说的是马踏死了犬，张说的是犬给马踏死了，究竟是着重在马，还是在犬呢？较明白稳当的还是沈括的毫不经意的文章：“有奔马，践死一犬。”
The three generations of Tang and Yu are not parallel, and this is what it means to call "plain text" "ancient text". From this, if the ancient Chinese is really indistinguishable, it seems that it is possible to call "vernacular Chinese" "ancient Chinese", but it is different from the meaning of Mr. Lin Yutang's referral to "vernacular Chinese". Mu said that the horse trampled the dog to death, and Zhang said that the dog trampled the horse to death, is it focused on the horse, or is it on the dog? What is more clear and stable is Shen Kuo's casual article: "There is a galloping horse, trampling a dog to death." ”因为要推倒旧东西，就要着力，太着力，就要“做”，太“做”，便不但“生涩”，有时简直是“格格不吐”了，比早经古人“做”得圆熟了的旧东西还要坏。而字数论旨，都有些限制的“花边文学”之类，尤其容易生这生涩病。
Because if you want to overthrow the old things, you have to focus on it, and if you focus too hard, you have to "do", and if you "do", it will not only be "jerky", but sometimes it is simply "not spitting out", which is worse than the old things that have been "done" by the ancients for a long time. The word count theory is somewhat restricted, such as "lace literature", which is especially prone to this jerky disease.太做不行，但不做，却又不行。用一段大树和四枝小树做一只凳，在现在，未免太毛糙，总得刨光它一下才好。但如全体雕花，中间挖空，却又坐不来，也不成其为凳子了。高尔基说，大众语是毛胚，加了工的是文学。我想，这该是很中肯的指示了。
It's not okay to do too much, but if you don't do it, you can't do it. Using a large tree and four small trees to make a stool, now, it is too rough, and it has to be planed away. But like all the carvings, the middle is hollowed out, but it can't sit down, and it is not a stool. Gorky said that popular language is the embryo of hair, and the work is literature. I think this should be a very pertinent instruction.七月二十日。
July 20.

看书琐记

看书琐记

看书琐记

Read the book trivia焉于
Yanyu高尔基很惊服巴尔札克小说里写对话的巧妙，以为并不描写人物的模样，却能使读者看了对话，便好像目睹了说话的那些人。（八月份《文学》内《我的文学修养》）
Gorky was amazed by the ingenuity of writing dialogues in Balzac's novels, thinking that although they did not describe the appearance of the characters, they could make the reader see the dialogue as if they had witnessed the people speaking. ("My Literary Accomplishment" in "Literature" in August)中国还没有那样好手段的小说家，但《水浒》和《红楼梦》的有些地方，是能使读者由说话看出人来的。其实，这也并非什么奇特的事情，在上海的弄堂里，租一间小房子住着的人，就时时可以体验到。他和周围的住户，是不一定见过面的，但只隔一层薄板壁，所以有些人家的眷属和客人的谈话，尤其是高声的谈话，都大略可以听到，久而久之，就知道那里有那些人，而且仿佛觉得那些人是怎样的人了。
There are no novelists in China who have such good means, but there are some parts of "Water Margin" and "Dream of Red Mansions" that allow readers to see people from their words. In fact, this is not a strange thing, in the alleys of Shanghai, people who rent a small house can experience it from time to time. He and the surrounding residents may not have met each other, but they are only separated by a thin board wall, so the conversations between some people's relatives and guests, especially loud conversations, can be roughly heard.如果删除了不必要之点，只摘出各人的有特色的谈话来，我想，就可以使别人从谈话里推见每个说话的人物。但我并不是说，这就成了中国的巴尔札克。
If we remove unnecessary points and only pick out each person's characteristic conversation, I think we can make others see each person from the conversation. But I'm not saying that this has become China's Balzac.作者用对话表现人物的时候，恐怕在他自己的心目中，是存在着这人物的模样的，于是传给读者，使读者的心目中也形成了这人物的模样。但读者所推见的人物，却并不一定和作者所设想的相同，巴尔札克的小胡须的清瘦老人，到了高尔基的头里，也许变了粗蛮壮大的络腮胡子。不过那性格，言动，一定有些类似，大致不差，恰如将法文翻成了俄文一样。要不然，文学这东西便没有普遍性了。
When the author expresses the character with dialogue, I am afraid that in his own mind, the appearance of this character exists, so it is passed on to the reader, so that the appearance of this character is also formed in the reader's mind. But the characters inferred by the reader are not necessarily the same as the author imagined, and the thin old man with Balzac's beard may have turned into a rough and strong beard in Gorky's head. However, the character, words and deeds must be somewhat similar, roughly not bad, just like translating French into Russian. Otherwise, literature would not be universal.文学虽然有普遍性，但因读者的体验的不同而有变化，读者倘没有类似的体验，它也就失去了效力。譬如我们看《红楼梦》，从文字上推见了林黛玉这一个人，但须排除了梅博士的“黛玉葬花”照相的先入之见，另外想一个，那么，恐怕会想到剪头发，穿印度绸衫，清瘦，寂寞的摩登女郎；或者别的什么模样，我不能断定。但试去和三四十年前出版的《红楼梦图咏》之类里面的画像比一比罢，一定是截然两样的，那上面所画的，是那时的读者的心目中的林黛玉。
Although literature is universal, it changes according to the different experiences of readers, and if readers do not have similar experiences, it will lose its effectiveness. For example, when we watch "Dream of Red Mansions", we can infer Lin Daiyu from the text, but we must eliminate the preconceived notion of Dr. Mei's "Daiyu Funeral Flower" photo, and think of another one, then, I am afraid that we will think of a modern girl who cuts her hair, wears an Indian silk shirt, is thin, and lonely; Or something else, I can't say. But if you try to compare it with the portraits in "Dream of Red Mansions" published thirty or forty years ago, they must be completely different, and the painting on it is Lin Daiyu in the minds of readers at that time.文学有普遍性，但有界限；也有较为永久的，但因读者的社会体验而生变化。北极的遏斯吉摩人和菲洲腹地的黑人，我以为是不会懂得“林黛玉型”的；健全而合理的好社会中人，也将不能懂得，他们大约要比我们的听讲始皇焚书，黄巢杀人更其隔膜。一有变化，即非永久，说文学独有仙骨，是做梦的人们的梦话。
Literature has universality, but there are boundaries; There are also more permanent ones, but they change due to the reader's social experience. The Esjimos in the Arctic and the blacks in the hinterland of the Philippines, I thought they would not understand the "Lin Daiyu type"; People in a sound and reasonable good society will not be able to understand that they are probably more separated than we heard about the first emperor's burning of books and Huang Chao's murder. As soon as there is a change, that is, it is not permanent, it is said that literature has a unique fairy bone, which is the dream of dreamers.八月六日。
August 6th.

看书琐记（二）

看书琐记（二）

看书琐记（二）

Reading Trivia (2)焉于
Yanyu就在同时代，同国度里，说话也会彼此说不通的。
Even in the same era, in the same country, they would not make sense to each other.巴比塞有一篇很有意思的短篇小说，叫作《本国话和外国话》，记的是法国的一个阔人家里招待了欧战中出死入生的三个兵，小姐出来招呼了，但无话可说，勉勉强强的说了几句，他们也无话可答，倒只觉坐在阔房间里，小心得骨头疼。直到溜回自己的“猪窠”里，他们这才遍身舒齐，有说有笑，并且在德国俘虏里，由手势发见了说他们的“我们的话”的人。
Barbisé has a very interesting short story called "National and Foreign", which records that a wealthy man in France entertained three soldiers who died in the European war, and the young lady came out to greet them, but there was nothing to say, and they barely said a few words, and they had nothing to answer, but they only felt that sitting in a large room, they were careful and had a headache. It wasn't until they slipped back into their "pigsty" that they were all comfortable, talking and laughing, and among the German prisoners, they met the people who said their "our words" by gestures.因了这经验，有一个兵便模模胡胡的想：“这世间有两个世界。一个是战争的世界。别一个是有着保险箱门一般的门，礼拜堂一般干净的厨房，漂亮的房子的世界。完全是另外的世界。另外的国度。那里面，住着古怪想头的外国人。”
Because of this experience, one soldier thought nonsense: "There are two worlds in this world." One is the world of war. The other is a door like a safe door, a clean kitchen like a chapel, and a beautiful house. It's a completely different world. Another country. There, there are strange foreigners living there. ”那小姐后来就对一位绅士说的是：“和他们是连话都谈不来的。好像他们和我们之间，是有着跳不过的深渊似的。”
The young lady later said to a gentleman: "I can't even talk to them." It seems that there is an insurmountable abyss between them and us. ”其实，这也无须小姐和兵们是这样。就是我们——算作“封建余孽”或“买办”或别的什么而论都可以——和几乎同类的人，只要什么地方有些不同，又得心口如一，就往往免不了彼此无话可说。不过我们中国人是聪明的，有些人早已发明了一种万应灵药，就是“今天天气……哈哈哈！”倘是宴会，就只猜拳，不发议论。
In fact, this doesn't need to be the case with the young ladies and soldiers. It is that we—counted as "feudal remnants" or "compradors" or whatever—and almost the same kind of people, as long as they are a little different and have the same heart, often have nothing to say to each other. But we are Chinese smart, and some people have already invented a panacea, which is "today's weather...... Hahaha! "If it's a banquet, just guess the fist and don't talk about it.这样看来，文学要普遍而且永久，恐怕实在有些艰难。“今天天气……哈哈哈！”虽然有些普遍，但能否永久，却很可疑，而且也不大像文学。于是高超的文学家便自己定了一条规则，将不懂他的“文学”的人们，都推出“人类”之外，以保持其普遍性。文学还有别的性，他是不肯说破的，因此也只好用这手段。然而这么一来，“文学”存在，“人”却不多了。
From this point of view, it may be a bit difficult for literature to be universal and permanent. "Today's weather ...... Hahaha! "Although it is somewhat common, it is doubtful whether it can be permanent, and it is not very much like literature. So the superb writer set a rule for himself to push people who did not understand his "literature" out of "humans" to maintain its universality. Literature has other natures, and he refuses to break it, so he has to use this method. However, in this way, "literature" exists, but there are not many "people".于是而据说文学愈高超，懂得的人就愈少，高超之极，那普遍性和永久性便只汇集于作者一个人。然而文学家却又悲哀起来，说是吐血了，这真是没有法子想。
Therefore, it is said that the more superb the literature, the fewer people understand, and the greater the superb, the universality and permanence are only concentrated in the author alone. However, the writer became sad again, saying that he vomited blood, which was really impossible to think.八月六日。
August 6th.

趋时和复古

趋时和复古

趋时和复古

Trendy and retro康伯度
Cumberdo半农先生一去世，也如朱湘庐隐两位作家一样，很使有些刊物热闹了一番。这情形，会延得多么长久呢，现在也无从推测。但这一死，作用却好像比那两位大得多：他已经快要被封为复古的先贤，可用他的神主来打“趋时”的人们了。
As soon as Mr. Bannon died, like the two writers Zhu Xianglu Yin, some publications were very lively. How long this situation will be delayed is now impossible to speculate. But this death seems to have a much greater effect than those two: he is about to be named a retro sage, and he can use his god to fight the "trendy" people.这一打是有力的，因为他既是作古的名人，又是先前的新党，以新打新，就如以毒攻毒，胜于搬出生锈的古董来。然而笑话也就埋伏在这里面。为什么呢？就为了半农先生先就是一位以“趋时”而出名的人。
This fight is powerful, because he is not only an ancient celebrity, but also a former new party. However, jokes are also lurking in this. Why? Just because Mr. Bannon is a person who is famous for "trending".古之青年，心目中有了刘半农三个字，原因并不在他擅长音韵学，或是常做打油诗，是在他跳出鸳蝴派，骂倒王敬轩，为一个“文学革命”阵中的战斗者。然而那时有一部分人，却毁之为“趋时”。时代到底好像有些前进，光阴流过去，渐渐将这谥号洗掉了，自己爬上了一点，也就随和一些，于是终于成为干干净净的名人。但是，“人怕出名猪怕壮”，他这时也要成为包起来作为医治新的“趋时”病的药料了。
The reason why the ancient youth had the three words Liu Bannong in his mind was not because he was good at phonology, or often made limericks, but because he jumped out of the mandarin butterfly faction and scolded Wang Jingxuan as a fighter in the "literary revolution" formation. However, at that time, some people dismissed it as "trendy". In the end, the times seem to have moved forward a little, time has passed, and gradually the posthumous title has been washed away, and I have climbed up a little, and I have been more easy-going, so I finally became a clean celebrity. However, "people are afraid of being famous, pigs are afraid of being strong", and he will also become a medicine to cure the new "trendy" disease.这并不是半农先生独个的苦境，旧例着实有。广东举人多得很，为什么康有为独独那么有名呢，因为他是公车上书的头儿，戊戌政变的主角，趋时；留英学生也不希罕，严复的姓名还没有消失，就在他先前认真的译过好几部鬼子书，趋时；清末，治朴学的不止太炎先生一个人，而他的声名，远在孙诒让之上者，其实是为了他提倡种族革命，趋时，而且还“造反”。后来“时”也“趋”了过来，他们就成为活的纯正的先贤。但是，晦气也夹屁股跟到，康有为永定为复辟的祖师，袁皇帝要严复劝进，孙传芳大帅也来请太炎先生投壶了。原是拉车前进的好身手，腿肚大，臂膊也粗，这回还是请他拉，拉还是拉，然而是拉车屁股向后，这里只好用古文，“呜呼哀哉，尚飨”了。
This is not Mr. Bannong's unique predicament, the old precedent is real. There are many people in Guangdong, why is Kang Youwei so famous, because he is the head of the book on the bus, the protagonist of the Wuxu coup, and the trend; Students studying in the UK are not rare, Yan Fu's name has not disappeared, just before he has seriously translated several devil books, trendy; At the end of the Qing Dynasty, Mr. Taiyan was not the only one who studied Pu, and his reputation, far above Sun Yirang, was actually for him to advocate racial revolution, trendy, and "rebellious". Later, the "time" also "tent" over, and they became living and pure sages. However, bad luck also followed with his buttocks, Kang Youwei Yongding was the patriarch of the restoration, Emperor Yuan wanted Yan Fu to persuade him, and Marshal Sun Chuanfang also came to invite Mr. Taiyan to throw a pot. It turned out to be a good skill for pulling the cart forward, with big legs and bellies, and thick arms, but this time he was still asked to pull, pull or pull, but it was pulled backwards, so I had to use the ancient text, "Oh sadness, still feast".我并不在讥刺半农先生曾经“趋时”，我这里所用的是普通所谓“趋时”中的一部分：“前驱”的意思。他虽然自认“没落”，其实是战斗过来的，只要敬爱他的人，多发挥这一点，不要七手八脚，专门把他拖进自己所喜欢的油或泥里去做金字招牌就好了。
I am not ridiculing Mr. Bannong's "trend", I am using a part of the ordinary so-called "trend": the meaning of "forerunner". Although he thinks he is "declining", he actually fights, as long as the people who love him give more play to this, don't be messy, just drag him into the oil or mud he likes to make a golden signboard.八月十三日。
八月十三日。

安贫乐道法

安贫乐道法

安贫乐道法

The law of being content with poverty and happiness史贲
Shi Ben孩子是要别人教的，毛病是要别人医的，即使自己是教员或医生。但做人处世的法子，却恐怕要自己斟酌，许多别人开来的良方，往往不过是废纸。
Children are taught by others, and problems are treated by others, even if they are teachers or doctors. But the way to live in the world is probably to be considered by yourself, and many good prescriptions prescribed by others are often just waste paper.劝人安贫乐道是古今治国平天下的大经络，开过的方子也很多，但都没有十全大补的功效。因此新方子也开不完，新近就看见了两种，但我想：恐怕都不大妥当。
Persuading people to be content with poverty is the great meridian of governing the country and pacifying the world in ancient and modern times, and there are many prescriptions, but none of them have the effect of perfecting the tonic effect. Therefore, there are endless new prescriptions, and I have seen two recently, but I think: I'm afraid they are not very appropriate.一种是教人对于职业要发生兴趣，一有兴趣，就无论什么事，都乐此不倦了。当然，言之成理的，但到底须是轻松一点的职业。且不说掘煤，挑粪那些事，就是上海工厂里做工至少每天十点的工人，到晚快边就一定筋疲力倦，受伤的事情是大抵出在那时候的。“健全的精神，宿于健全的身体之中”，连自己的身体也顾不转了，怎么还会有兴趣？——除非他爱兴趣比性命还利害。倘若问他们自己罢，我想，一定说是减少工作的时间，做梦也想不到发生兴趣法的。
One is to teach people to be interested in their careers, and once they are interested, they will be happy to do anything. Of course, it makes sense, but it must be a more relaxed profession. Not to mention the things of digging coal and picking up dung, that is, the workers who work at least ten o'clock every day in the Shanghai factory must be exhausted at night, and the injuries are probably caused at that time. "A sound spirit dwells in a sound body", and even your own body can't take care of it, how can you still be interested? ——Unless he loves interests more than his life. If you ask them themselves, I think it must be said that it is to reduce the time of work, and I would never have dreamed of the occurrence of interest law.还有一种是极其彻底的：说是大热天气，阔人还忙于应酬，汗流浃背，穷人却挟了一条破席，铺在路上，脱衣服，浴凉风，其乐无穷，这叫作“席卷天下”。这也是一张少见的富有诗趣的药方，不过也有煞风景在后面。快要秋凉了，一早到马路上去走走，看见手捧肚子，口吐黄水的就是那些“席卷天下”的前任活神仙。大约眼前有福，偏不去享的大愚人，世上究竟是不多的，如果精穷真是这么有趣，现在的阔人一定首先躺在马路上，而现在的穷人的席子也没有地方铺开来了。
There is also an extremely thorough one: it is said that it is a hot day, and the broad people are still busy socializing and sweating, but the poor people have a broken mat, spread it on the road, take off their clothes, take off their clothes, take a cool breeze, and have endless fun, which is called "sweeping the world". This is also a rare poetic prescription, but there is also a bad scenery behind. It was almost cool in autumn, and I went for a walk on the road early in the morning, and saw those who held their stomachs in their hands and spat out yellow water in their mouths were those former living immortals who "swept the world". If the poor are really so interesting, the current broad people must lie on the road first, and the mats of the poor now have no place to spread out.上海中学会考的优良成绩发表了，有《衣取蔽寒食取充腹论》，其中有一段——
The excellent results of the Shanghai Secondary School Entrance Examination were published, including "Clothing to Cover Cold Food and Fill the Belly", which has a paragraph -“……若德业已立，则虽饔飧不继，捉襟肘见，而其名德足传于后，精神生活，将充分发展，又何患物质生活之不足耶？人生真谛，固在彼而不在此也。……”（由《新语林》第三期转录）
“…… If virtue has been established, then although the food is not enough and the elbow is seen, its name and virtue will be passed down to future generations, and the spiritual life will be fully developed, so why worry about the lack of material life? The true meaning of life is there, not here. ......" (transcribed from the third issue of "New Language Forest")这比题旨更进了一步，说是连不能“充腹”也不要紧的。但中学生所开的良方，对于大学生就不适用，同时还是出现了要求职业的一大群。
This goes one step further than the title, saying that it doesn't matter if you can't even "fill your stomach". However, the good prescriptions prescribed by middle school students are not applicable to college students, and at the same time, there is still a large group of people who demand careers.事实是毫无情面的东西，它能将空言打得粉碎。有这么的彰明较著，其实，据我的愚见，是大可以不必再玩“之乎者也”了——横竖永远是没有用的。
Facts are ruthless things, they can smash empty words. In fact, in my humble opinion, there is no need to play "Zhi Hu Ye" anymore - horizontal and vertical are always useless.八月十三日。
八月十三日。

奇怪

奇怪

奇怪

odd白道
White way世界上有许多事实，不看记载，是天才也想不到的。非洲有一种土人，男女的避忌严得很，连女婿遇见丈母娘，也得伏在地上，而且还不够，必须将脸埋进土里去。这真是虽是我们礼义之邦的“男女七岁不同席”的古人，也万万比不上的。
There are many facts in the world that even geniuses cannot imagine without reading the records. There is a kind of natives in Africa, and the taboos of men and women are very strict, even when the son-in-law meets the mother-in-law, he has to lie on the ground, and it is not enough, he must bury his face in the soil. This is really incomparable to the ancients of our country of propriety and righteousness, "men and women are not sitting at the same table for seven years".这样看来，我们的古人对于分隔男女的设计，也还不免是低能儿；现在总跳不出古人的圈子，更是低能之至。不同泳，不同行，不同食，不同做电影，都只是“不同席”的演义。低能透顶的是还没有想到男女同吸着相通的空气，从这个男人的鼻孔里呼出来，又被那个女人从鼻孔里吸进去，淆乱乾坤，实在比海水只触着皮肤更为严重。对于这一个严重问题倘没有办法，男女的界限就永远分不清。
From this point of view, our ancients were inevitably imbecile in the design of separating men and women; Now I can't jump out of the circle of the ancients, and I am even more imbecile. Different swimming, different walks, different foods, and different movies are all just the romance of "different seats". The imbecile thing is that he has not yet thought that men and women breathe air together, exhale it from this man's nostrils, and be sucked in by that woman from his nostrils, confusing the world, which is really more serious than seawater only touching the skin. If there is no way to solve this serious problem, the boundaries between men and women will never be clear.我想，这只好用“西法”了。西法虽非国粹，有时却能够帮助国粹的。例如无线电播音，是摩登的东西，但早晨有和尚念经，却不坏；汽车固然是洋货，坐着去打麻将，却总比坐绿呢大轿，好半天才到的打得多几圈。以此类推，防止男女同吸空气就可以用防毒面具，各背一个箱，将养气由管子通到自己的鼻孔里，既免抛头露面，又兼防空演习，也就是“中学为体，西学为用”。凯末尔将军治国以前的土耳其女人的面幕，这回可也万万比不上了。
I think this has to be "West Law". Although Western law is not the quintessence, it can sometimes help the quintessence. For example, radio broadcasting is a modern thing, but it is not bad if there is a monk chanting in the morning; Although the car is a foreign product, it is better to sit and play mahjong than to sit in a green sedan chair, and it takes a long time to play a few more laps. By analogy, to prevent men and women from breathing air together, they can use gas masks, carry a box each, and pass the nostrils from the tube to their nostrils, which not only avoids showing their faces, but also serves as an air defense exercise, that is, "middle school as the body, Western learning as the use". The face of the Turkish women before General Kemal's rule is never comparable this time.假使现在有一个英国的斯惠夫德似的人，做一部《格利佛游记》那样的讽刺的小说，说在二十世纪中，到了一个文明的国度，看见一群人在烧香拜龙，作法求雨，赏鉴“胖女”，禁杀乌龟；又一群人在正正经经的研究古代舞法，主张男女分途，以及女人的腿应该不许其露出。那么，远处，或是将来的人，恐怕大抵要以为这是作者贫嘴薄舌，随意捏造，以挖苦他所不满的人们的罢。
If there is a person like Swiff in England who makes a satirical novel like "Gulliver's Travels", saying that in the middle of the twentieth century, when he arrived in a civilized country, he saw a group of people burning incense and worshiping dragons, praying for rain, appreciating "fat women", and forbidding the killing of turtles; Another group of people are seriously studying ancient dance methods, advocating the separation of men and women, and that women's legs should not be exposed. Then, people from afar or in the future will probably think that this is the author's poor tongue and fabrication at will to satirize the people he is dissatisfied with.然而这的确是事实。倘没有这样的事实，大约无论怎样刻薄的天才作家也想不到的。幻想总不能怎样的出奇，所以人们看见了有些事，就有叫作“奇怪”这一句话。
However, this is indeed true. Without such a fact, no matter how mean a genius writer would have imagined. Fantasy can't be so surprising, so when people see something, they call it "strange".八月十四日。
August 14th.

奇怪（二）

奇怪（二）

奇怪（二）

Strange (2)白道
White way尤墨君先生以教师的资格参加着讨论大众语，那意见是极该看重的。他主张“使中学生练习大众语”，还举出“中学生作文最喜用而又最误用的许多时髦字眼”来，说“最好叫他们不要用”，待他们将来能够辨别时再说，因为是与其“食新不化，何如禁用于先”的。现在摘一点所举的“时髦字眼”在这里——
Mr. You Mojun participated in the discussion of popular language as a teacher, and that opinion should be highly valued. He advocated "allowing middle school students to practice popular language", and also cited "many fashionable words that middle school students like to use the most and most misused", saying that "it is better to tell them not to use them", and talk about it when they can discern it in the future, because it is better to "eat new and not change, why not ban it first". Now I will pick up the "fashionable words" mentioned here -共鸣　对象　气压　温度　结晶　彻底　趋势　理智　现实　下意识　相对性　绝对性　纵剖面　横剖面　死亡率……（《新语林》三期）
Resonance Object Air Pressure Temperature Crystallization Thorough Trend Reason Reality Subconscious Relativity Absoluteness Longitudinal Profile Horizontal Profile Mortality ...... ("New Language Forest" Issue 3)但是我很奇怪。
But I was strange.那些字眼，几乎算不得“时髦字眼”了。如“对象”“现实”等，只要看看书报的人，就时常遇见，一常见，就会比较而得其意义，恰如孩子懂话，并不依靠文法教科书一样；何况在学校中，还有教员的指点。至于“温度”“结晶”“纵剖面”“横剖面”等，也是科学上的名词，中学的物理学矿物学植物学教科书里就有，和用于国文上的意义并无不同。现在竟“最误用”，莫非自己既不思索，教师也未给指点，而且连别的科学也一样的模胡吗？
Those words are hardly "fashionable words". For example, "object" and "reality", as long as you read books and newspapers, you will often meet them, and when they are common, they will compare and get their meaning, just like children understand words and do not rely on grammar textbooks; What's more, in school, there is also the guidance of teachers. As for "temperature", "crystallization", "longitudinal profile", "horizontal section", etc., they are also scientific terms, which are found in middle school physics, mineralogy, and botany textbooks, and are no different from the meaning used in Chinese. Now it is "the most misused", could it be that he has neither thought about it, nor has the teacher given guidance, and even other sciences are the same?那么，单是中途学了大众语，也不过是一位中学出身的速成大众，于大众有什么用处呢？大众的需要中学生，是因为他教育程度比较的高，能够给大家开拓知识，增加语汇，能解明的就解明，该新添的就新添；他对于“对象”等等的界说，就先要弄明白，当必要时，有方言可以替代，就译换，倘没有，便教给这新名词，并且说明这意义。如果大众语既是半路出家，新名词也还不很明白，这“落伍”可真是“彻底”了。
So, just learning popular language in the middle is just a quick public from middle school, what is the use of the public? The public needs middle school students because they have a relatively high level of education, can open up knowledge and increase vocabulary for everyone, explain what can be explained, and add new things that should be added; He first understood that when necessary, if there was a dialect that could be replaced, he would translate it, and if not, he would teach the new term and explain its meaning. If the popular language is not only a monk halfway, and the new noun is not well understood, this "outdated" is really "complete".我想，为大众而练习大众语，倒是不该禁用那些“时髦字眼”的，最要紧的是教给他定义，教师对于中学生，和将来中学生的对于大众一样。譬如“纵断面”和“横断面”，解作“直切面”和“横切面”，就容易懂；倘说就是“横锯面”和“直锯面”，那么，连木匠学徒也明白了，无须识字。禁，是不好的，他们中有些人将永远模胡，“因为中学生不一定个个能升入大学而实现其做文豪或学者的理想的”。
I think that practicing popular language for the sake of the public should not ban those "fashionable words", the most important thing is to teach him the definition, teachers for middle school students is the same for future middle school students to the public. For example, "longitudinal section" and "cross-section" are interpreted as "straight section" and "cross-section", which is easy to understand; If it is a "horizontal saw surface" and a "straight saw surface", then even the carpenter apprentice understands that there is no need to be literate. Prohibition is not good, and some of them will always be foolish, "because not all middle school students can enter university and realize their ideals of being writers or scholars."八月十四日。
August 14th.

迎神和咬人

迎神和咬人

迎神和咬人

Welcome the gods and bite越侨
Overseas Chinese报载余姚的某乡，农民们因为旱荒，迎神求雨，看客有带帽的，便用刀棒乱打他一通。
It was reported that in a certain township in Yuyao, farmers prayed for rain because of drought, and the spectators had hats, so they beat him with knives and sticks.这是迷信，但是有根据的。汉先儒董仲舒先生就有祈雨法，什么用寡妇，关城门，乌烟瘴气，其古怪与道士无异，而未尝为今儒所订正。虽在通都大邑，现在也还有天师作法，长官禁屠，闹得沸反盈天，何尝惹出一点口舌？至于打帽，那是因为恐怕神看见还很有人悠然自得，不垂哀怜；一面则也憎恶他的不与大家共患难。
It's superstition, but it's well-founded. Mr. Dong Zhongshu, a scholar of the Han Dynasty, had a method of praying for rain, what to use a widow, closing the city gate, and the miasma, which was strange and no different from Taoists, but it was not corrected by modern Confucians. Although it is in Tongdu Dayi, there are still heavenly masters who practice it, and the governor prohibits slaughtering, making a lot of noise, so why provoke a little tongue? As for hatting, it is because God is afraid that there are still many people who are leisurely and do not show mercy. On the other hand, he also hates him for not sharing hardships with everyone.迎神，农民们的本意是在救死的——但可惜是迷信，——但除此之外，他们也不知道别一样。
The peasants were meant to save lives - but unfortunately they were superstitious,—— but other than that, they didn't know anything else.报又载有一个六十多岁的老党员，出面劝阻迎神，被大家一顿打，终于咬断了喉管，死掉了。
The newspaper also reported that an old party member in his sixties came forward to dissuade Yingshen, was beaten by everyone, and finally bit off his throat and died.这是妄信，但是也有根据的。《精忠说岳全传》说张俊陷害忠良，终被众人咬死，人心为之大快。因此乡间就向来有一个传说，谓咬死了人，皇帝必赦，因为怨恨而至于咬，则被咬者之恶，也就可想而知了。我不知道法律，但大约民国以前的律文中，恐怕也未必有这样的规定罢。
This is a delusion, but it is also well-founded. "Jingzhong Shuo Yue Quan's Biography" said that Zhang Jun framed Zhongliang and was finally bitten to death by everyone, and people's hearts were very happy. Therefore, there has always been a legend in the countryside that if someone is bitten to death, the emperor will forgive him, and if he bites because of resentment, then the evil of the bitten person can be imagined. I don't know the law, but I am afraid that there may not be such a provision in the legal texts before the Republic of China.咬人，农民们的本意是在逃死的——但可惜是妄信，——但除此之外，他们也不知道别一样。
Biting, the peasants intended to escape to death - but unfortunately they believed it,—— but other than that, they didn't know anything else.想救死，想逃死，适所以自速其死，哀哉！
I want to save my life, I want to escape death, and I just hasten my own death, how tragic!自从由帝国成为民国以来，上层的改变是不少了，无教育的农民，却还未得到一点什么新的有益的东西，依然是旧日的迷信，旧日的讹传，在拚命的救死和逃死中自速其死。
Since the empire became the Republic of China, there have been many changes at the top, and the uneducated peasants have not yet received anything new and useful, and they are still the superstitions of the past, the rumors of the past, and they are desperately trying to save their lives and escape death.这回他们要得到“天讨”。他们要骇怕，但因为不解“天讨”的缘故，他们也要不平。待到这骇怕和不平忘记了，就只有迷信讹传剩着，待到下一次水旱灾荒的时候，依然是迎神，咬人。
This time they want to get "heavenly begging". They want to be frightened, but because they don't understand the "heavenly retribution", they also want to be unfair. When this fear and injustice are forgotten, only superstitions and rumors remain, and when the next flood and drought disaster occurs, it will still be to welcome the gods and bite people.这悲剧何时完结呢？
When will this tragedy end?八月十九日。
August 19th.附记：
Notes:旁边加上黑点的三句，是印了出来的时候，全被删去了的。是总编辑，还是检查官的斧削，虽然不得而知，但在自己记得原稿的作者，却觉得非常有趣。他们的意思，大约是以为乡下人的意思——虽然是妄信——还不如不给大家知道，要不然，怕会发生流弊，有许多喉管也要危险的。
The three sentences with black dots next to them were all deleted when they were printed. Whether it was the editor-in-chief or the prosecutor's axe, although it is unknown, it is very interesting in the author who remembers the original manuscript. They probably thought that the countryman's intentions—although they were delusional—might as well not let everyone know, otherwise, they would be afraid of corruption and many pipes would be dangerous.八月二十二日。
August 22.

看书琐记（三）

看书琐记（三）

看书琐记（三）

Reading Trivia (3)焉于
Yanyu创作家大抵憎恶批评家的七嘴八舌。
Creators generally hate critics' tongue-in-cheek.记得有一位诗人说过这样的话：诗人要做诗，就如植物要开花，因为他非开不可的缘故。如果你摘去吃了，即使中了毒，也是你自己错。
I remember a poet once said: A poet wants to write poetry, just like a plant wants to bloom, because he must bloom. If you pick it and eat it, even if you are poisoned, it is your own fault.这比喻很美，也仿佛很有道理的。但再一想，却也有错误。错的是诗人究竟不是一株草，还是社会里的一个人；况且诗集是卖钱的，何尝可以白摘。一卖钱，这就是商品，买主也有了说好说歹的权利了。
This metaphor is beautiful and seems to make sense. But when I think about it again, there are mistakes. What is wrong is whether the poet is not a grass or a person in society; Moreover, poetry collections are sold for money, so how can they be picked for nothing? As soon as the money is sold, this is the commodity, and the buyer also has the right to say what is good or bad.即使真是花罢，倘不是开在深山幽谷，人迹不到之处，如果有毒，那是园丁之流就要想法的。花的事实，也并不如诗人的空想。
Even if it is really a flower, if it does not bloom in a deep mountain valley and out of reach of human traffic, if it is poisonous, it is what gardeners and others have to think of. The fact of flowers is not as imaginary as the poet imagines.现在可是换了一个说法了，连并非作者，也憎恶了批评家，他们里有的说道：你这么会说，那么，你倒来做一篇试试看！
Now it's a different statement, even those who are not authors hate critics, and some of them say: You are so good at saying, then, you can try to write one!这真要使批评家抱头鼠窜。因为批评家兼能创作的人，向来是很少的。
This really makes critics run away. Because there have always been very few people who can both criticize and create.我想，作家和批评家的关系，颇有些像厨司和食客。厨司做出一味食品来，食客就要说话，或是好，或是歹。厨司如果觉得不公平，可以看看他是否神经病，是否厚舌苔，是否挟夙嫌，是否想赖账。或者他是否广东人，想吃蛇肉；是否四川人，还要辣椒。于是提出解说或抗议来——自然，一声不响也可以。但是，倘若他对着客人大叫道：“那么，你去做一碗来给我吃吃看！”那却未免有些可笑了。
I think the relationship between writers and critics is a bit like a chef and a diner. When the chef makes a food, the diner has to talk, whether it's good or bad. If the chef feels unfair, you can see if he is neurotic, whether he has a thick tongue, whether he has a grudge, and if he wants to be in debt. Or whether he is from Guangdong and wants to eat snake meat; Whether you are from Sichuan or not, you still need chili peppers. So I put forward an explanation or protest - naturally, it is okay to make a sound. However, if he yells at the guests, "Then, make a bowl for me to eat!" That's a bit ridiculous.诚然，四五年前，用笔的人以为一做批评家，便可以高踞文坛，所以速成和乱评的也不少，但要矫正这风气，是须用批评的批评的，只在批评家这名目上，涂上烂泥，并不是好办法。不过我们的读书界，是爱平和的多，一见笔战，便是什么“文坛的悲观”呀，“文人相轻”呀，甚至于不问是非，统谓之“互骂”，指为“漆黑一团糟”。果然，现在是听不见说谁是批评家了。但文坛呢，依然如故，不过它不再露出来。
It is true that four or five years ago, people who used pens thought that as soon as they became critics, they could dominate the literary world, so there were many quick and random comments, but to correct this atmosphere, it was necessary to use criticism to criticize, and it was not a good way to smear mud only in the name of critics. However, our reading circle is much more peaceful, and when we see the pen battle, it is what kind of "pessimism in the literary world", "literati look down on each other", and even do not ask about right and wrong, collectively called "scolding each other", referring to "pitch black mess". Sure enough, I can't hear who the critics are now. But the literary world is still the same, but it is no longer revealed.文艺必须有批评；批评如果不对了，就得用批评来抗争，这才能够使文艺和批评一同前进，如果一律掩住嘴，算是文坛已经干净，那所得的结果倒是要相反的。
literature and art must have criticism; If criticism is wrong, it must be fought with criticism, so that literature and art and criticism can move forward together.八月二十二日。
August 22.

“大雪纷飞”

“大雪纷飞”

“大雪纷飞”

"Heavy snow"张沛
Zhang Pei人们遇到要支持自己的主张的时候，有时会用一枝粉笔去搪对手的脸，想把他弄成丑角模样，来衬托自己是正生。但那结果，却常常适得其反。
When people encounter a point of support for their own ideas, they sometimes use a branch of chalk to scratch the opponent's face, trying to make him look like a harlequin to set off that he is a positive person. But the result is often counterproductive.章士钊先生现在是在保障民权了，段政府时代，他还曾经保障文言。他造过一个实例，说倘将“二桃杀三士”用白话写作“两个桃子杀了三个读书人”，是多么的不行。这回李焰生先生反对大众语文，也赞成“静珍君之所举，‘大雪纷飞’，总比那‘大雪一片一片纷纷的下着’来得简要而有神韵，酌量采用，是不能与提倡文言文相提并论”的。
Mr. Zhang Shizhao is now protecting civil rights, and during the Duan administration, he also protected Wenyan. He once made an example of how bad it would be if "two peaches killed three scholars" were written in the vernacular as "two peaches killed three scholars". This time, Mr. Li Yansheng opposed popular Chinese, and also agreed that "Jing Zhenjun's recommendation, 'heavy snow' is more concise and charming than the 'heavy snow falling one by one', and it cannot be compared with advocating classical Chinese."我也赞成必不得已的时候，大众语文可以采用文言，白话，甚至于外国话，而且在事实上，现在也已经在采用。但是，两位先生代译的例子，却是很不对劲的。那时的“士”，并非一定是“读书人”，早经有人指出了；这回的“大雪纷飞”里，也没有“一片一片”的意思，这不过特地弄得累坠，掉着要大众语丢脸的枪花。
I also agree that when it is absolutely necessary, popular languages can be used in classical Chinese, vernacular, and even foreign languages, and in fact, they are already being adopted. However, the example of the two gentlemen translating on behalf of them is very wrong. At that time, the "scholars" were not necessarily "scholars", as it was pointed out earlier; In this "heavy snow", there is no meaning of "piece by piece", which is just a special tired fall and a gun that makes the public say embarrassed.白话并非文言的直译，大众语也并非文言或白话的直译。在江浙，倘要说出“大雪纷飞”的意思来，是并不用“大雪一片一片纷纷的下着”的，大抵用“凶”，“猛”或“厉害”，来形容这下雪的样子。倘要“对证古本”，则《水浒传》里的一句“那雪正下得紧”，就是接近现代的大众语的说法，比“大雪纷飞”多两个字，但那“神韵”却好得远了。
The vernacular is not a literal translation of classical Chinese, and the popular language is not a literal translation of classical Chinese or vernacular. In Jiangsu and Zhejiang, if you want to say the meaning of "heavy snow", you don't use "heavy snow falling one by one", but "fierce", "fierce" or "powerful" to describe the appearance of the snow. If you want to "prove the ancient text", then the sentence "the snow is falling tightly" in "Water Margin" is close to the modern popular language, which is two more words than "heavy snow flying", but the "charm" is far better.一个人从学校跳到社会的上层，思想和言语，都一步一步的和大众离开，那当然是“势所不免”的事。不过他倘不是从小就是公子哥儿，曾经多少和“下等人”有些相关，那么，回心一想，一定可以记得他们有许多赛过文言文或白话文的好话。如果自造一点丑恶，来证明他的敌对的不行，那只是他从隐蔽之处挖出来的自己的丑恶，不能使大众羞，只能使大众笑。大众虽然智识没有读书人的高，但他们对于胡说的人们，却有一个谥法：绣花枕头。这意义，也许只有乡下人能懂的了，因为穷人塞在枕头里面的，不是鸭绒：是稻草。
It is of course "inevitable" for a person to jump from school to the upper echelons of society, and his thoughts and words leave the public step by step. However, if he hadn't been a young man since he was a child, and he had something to do with "inferior people", then, looking back, he would definitely remember that they had a lot of good words in classical Chinese or vernacular. If he creates a little ugliness to prove that his hostility is not good, it is just his own ugliness dug out from a hidden place, which cannot make the public ashamed, but can only make the public laugh. Although the public is not as intellectual as the scholars, they have a posthumous method for people who talk nonsense: embroidered pillows. This meaning may only be understood by country people, because what the poor stuff into their pillows is not duck down: it is straw.八月二十二日。
August 22.

汉字和拉丁化

汉字和拉丁化

汉字和拉丁化

Chinese characters and Latinization仲度
Zhongdu反对大众语文的人，对主张者得意地命令道：“拿出货色来看！”一面也真有这样的老实人，毫不问他是诚意，还是寻开心，立刻拚命的来做标本。
Those who opposed popular language proudly ordered the advocates: "Take out the goods and see!" On the one hand, there is really such an honest person, who doesn't ask him whether he is sincere or looking for happiness, and immediately desperately comes to make a specimen.由读书人来提倡大众语，当然比提倡白话困难。因为提倡白话时，好好坏坏，用的总算是白话，现在提倡大众语的文章却大抵不是大众语。但是，反对者是没有发命令的权利的。虽是一个残废人，倘在主张健康运动，他绝对没有错；如果提倡缠足，则即使是天足的壮健的女性，她还是在有意的或无意的害人。美国的水果大王，只为改良一种水果，尚且要费十来年的工夫，何况是问题大得多多的大众语。倘若就用他的矛去攻他的盾，那么，反对者该是赞成文言或白话的了，文言有几千年的历史，白话有近二十年的历史，他也拿出他的“货色”来给大家看看罢。
It is certainly more difficult for scholars to advocate popular language than to advocate vernacular language. Because when advocating vernacular, good or bad, the vernacular is finally used, but now the articles advocating popular language are probably not popular language. However, the opponent has no right to issue orders. Although he is a disabled person, if he advocates healthy exercise, he is absolutely not wrong; If foot binding is advocated, even a strong woman with natural feet is still intentionally or unintentionally harming others. The fruit king of the United States only takes more than ten years to improve a fruit, not to mention the popular language that is much more problematic. If he uses his spear to attack his shield, then the opponents should be in favor of the literary language or the vernacular, which has a history of thousands of years, and the vernacular has a history of nearly 20 years, and he also took out his "goods" to show everyone.但是，我们也不妨自己来试验，在《动向》上，就已经有过三篇纯用土话的文章，胡绳先生看了之后，却以为还是非土话所写的句子来得清楚。其实，只要下一番工夫，是无论用什么土话写，都可以懂得的。据我个人的经验，我们那里的土话，和苏州很不同，但一部《海上花列传》，却教我“足不出户”的懂了苏白。先是不懂，硬着头皮看下去，参照记事，比较对话，后来就都懂了。自然，很困难。这困难的根，我以为就在汉字。每一个方块汉字，是都有它的意义的，现在用它来照样的写土话，有些是仍用本义的，有些却不过借音，于是我们看下去的时候，就得分析它那几个是用义，那几个是借音，惯了不打紧，开手却非常吃力了。
However, we might as well experiment ourselves, in "Trends", there have already been three articles in pure vernacular, and after Mr. Hu Sheng read it, he thought that the sentences written in non-vernacular were clear. In fact, as long as you put in a little effort, you can understand it no matter what vernacular you write. According to my personal experience, our local dialect is very different from Suzhou, but a "Biography of Flowers on the Sea" taught me to understand Su Bai "without leaving home". At first, I didn't understand, so I bit the bullet and read it, referred to the notes, compared the dialogue, and then I understood everything. Naturally, it is difficult. I think the root of this difficulty lies in Chinese characters. Every square Chinese character has its meaning, and now it is used to write the vernacular dialect as usual, some are still in the original meaning, and some are just borrowed sounds, so when we look at it, we have to analyze which of them are used in meaning, and those are borrowed sounds.例如胡绳先生所举的例子，说“回到窝里向罢”也许会当作回到什么狗“窝”里去，反不如说“回到家里去”的清楚。那一句的病根就在汉字的“窝”字，实际上，恐怕是不该这么写法的。我们那里的乡下人，也叫“家里”作Uwao-li，读书人去抄，也极容易写成“窝里”的，但我想，这Uwao其实是“屋下”两音的拼合，而又讹了一点，决不能用“窝”字随便来替代，如果只记下没有别的意义的音，就什么误解也不会有了。
For example, the example given by Mr. Hu Sheng may be regarded as returning to some dog "den", but it is better to say "go back to home". The root of the problem of that sentence lies in the word "nest" in Chinese characters, in fact, I am afraid it should not be written this way. Our countrymen there also call "home" as Uwao-li, and it is very easy for scholars to copy it as "nest", but I think that this Uwao is actually a combination of the two sounds of "under the house", and it is a little wrong, and it must not be replaced by the word "nest" casually, if you only write down the sound that has no other meaning, there will be no misunderstanding.大众语文的音数比文言和白话繁，如果还是用方块字来写，不但费脑力，也很费工夫，连纸墨都不经济。为了这方块的带病的遗产，我们的最大多数人，已经几千年做了文盲来殉难了，中国也弄到这模样，到别国已在人工造雨的时候，我们却还是拜蛇，迎神。如果大家还要活下去，我想：是只好请汉字来做我们的牺牲了。
The number of sounds in popular language is more complex than that of classical Chinese and vernacular, and if you still write in square characters, it is not only brain-intensive, but also labor-intensive, and even paper and ink are not economical. For the sake of this square's diseased legacy, most of us have been illiterate for thousands of years to be martyred, and China has also achieved this. If everyone wants to live, I think: we have to ask Chinese characters to make our sacrifices.现在只还有“书法拉丁化”的一条路。这和大众语文是分不开的。也还是从读书人首先试验起，先绍介过字母，拼法，然后写文章。开手是，像日本文那样，只留一点名词之类的汉字，而助词，感叹词，后来连形容词，动词也都用拉丁拼音写，那么，不但顺眼，对于了解也容易得远了。至于改作横行，那是当然的事。
Now there is only one way to "Latinize calligraphy". This is inseparable from popular language. It is also from the beginning of the scholar's experiment, first introduce the letters, spell, and then write the article. The beginning is, like in Japanese, only a few Chinese characters such as nouns are left, and particles, interjections, and later even adjectives and verbs are written in Latin pinyin, so it is not only pleasing to the eye, but also far easier to understand. As for the change to rampant, that is a matter of course.这就是现在马上来实验，我以为也并不难。
This is the experiment now, I thought it was not difficult.不错，汉字是古代传下来的宝贝，但我们的祖先，比汉字还要古，所以我们更是古代传下来的宝贝。为汉字而牺牲我们，还是为我们而牺牲汉字呢？这是只要还没有丧心病狂的人，都能够马上回答的。
Yes, Chinese characters are treasures passed down from ancient times, but our ancestors are older than Chinese characters, so we are treasures passed down from ancient times. Sacrifice us for Chinese characters, or sacrifice Chinese characters for us? This is something that anyone who is not yet crazy can answer immediately.八月二十三日。
August 23.

“莎士比亚”

“莎士比亚”

“莎士比亚”

"Shakespeare"苗挺
Miao Ting严复提起过“狭斯丕尔”，一提便完；梁启超说过“莎士比亚”，也不见有人注意；田汉译了这人的一点作品，现在似乎不大流行了。到今年，可又有些“莎士比亚”“莎士比亚”起来，不但杜衡先生由他的作品证明了群众的盲目，连拜服约翰生博士的教授也来译马克斯“牛克斯”的断片。为什么呢？将何为呢？
Yan Fu mentioned "Narrow Spear", and it was over when he mentioned it; Liang Qichao said "Shakespeare", but no one paid attention; Tian Han translated a little of this person's work, which seems to be no longer popular. By this year, there have been some "Shakespeare" and "Shakespeare", not only Mr. Du Heng proved the blindness of the masses with his works, but even the professor who admired Dr. Johnson also translated fragments of Max "Niux". Why? What will it do?而且听说，连苏俄也要排演原本“莎士比亚”剧了。
And I heard that even Soviet Russia was going to rehearse the original "Shakespeare" play.不演还可，一要演，却就给施蛰存先生看出了“丑态”——
It's okay not to act, but as soon as he wants to act, he shows Mr. Shi Zhicun the "ugliness" -“……苏俄最初是‘打倒莎士比亚’，后来是‘改编莎士比亚’，现在呢，不是要在戏剧季中‘排演原本莎士比亚’了吗？（而且还要梅兰芳去演《贵妃醉酒》呢！）这种以政治方策运用之于文学的丑态，岂不令人齿冷！”（《现代》五卷五期，施蛰存《我与文言文》。）
“…… Soviet Russia was originally 'down with Shakespeare', and later 'adapted Shakespeare', and now, isn't it going to 'rehearse the original Shakespeare' in the drama season? (And Mei Lanfang is also asked to play "The Concubine Drunk"!) Isn't this ugliness of applying political tactics to literature chilling! ("Modern" Volume 5, Issue 5, Shi Zhicun's "I and Classical Chinese".) ）苏俄太远，演剧季的情形我还不了然，齿的冷暖，暂且听便罢。但梅兰芳和一个记者的谈话，登在《大晚报》的《火炬》上，却没有说要去演《贵妃醉酒》。
Soviet Russia is too far away, and I still don't know the situation of the acting season. But Mei Lanfang's conversation with a reporter was published on the "Torch" of the "Evening News", but she did not say that she wanted to play "The Concubine Drunk".施先生自己说：“我自有生以来三十年，除幼稚无知的时代以外，自信思想及言行都是一贯的。……”（同前）这当然非常之好。不过他所“言”的别人的“行”，却未必一致，或者是偶然也会不一致的，如《贵妃醉酒》，便是目前的好例。
Mr. Shi himself said: "In the thirty years since I was born, except for the era of naivety and ignorance, I have been consistent in my confident thoughts, words and deeds. ......" (Ibid.) This is of course very good. However, the "deeds" of others he "said" may not be consistent, or may be inconsistent occasionally, such as "The Concubine Drunk", which is a good example at present.其实梅兰芳还没有动身，施蛰存先生却已经指定他要在“无产阶级”面前赤膊洗澡。这么一来，他们岂但“逐渐沾染了资产阶级的‘余毒’”而已呢，也要沾染中国的国粹了。他们的文学青年，将来要描写宫殿的时候，会在“《文选》与《庄子》”里寻“词汇”也未可料的。
In fact, Mei Lanfang had not yet left, but Mr. Shi Zhicun had already designated him to take a shirtless bath in front of the "proletariat". In this way, they will not only be "gradually contaminated with the 'residual poison' of the bourgeoisie", but also contaminated with the quintessence of China. It is not surprising that their literary youth, when they want to describe the palace in the future, will look for "vocabulary" in "Anthology" and "Zhuangzi".但是，做《贵妃醉酒》固然使施先生“齿冷”，不做一下来凑趣，也使豫言家倒霉。两面都要不舒服，所以施先生又自己说：“在文艺上，我一向是个孤独的人，我何敢多撄众怒？”（同前）
However, doing "The Concubine Drunk" certainly made Mr. Shi "cold-toothed", and not doing it to make fun also made the prophecylist unlucky. Both sides were uncomfortable, so Mr. Shi said to himself: "In literature and art, I have always been a lonely person, how dare I provoke public anger?" (Ibid.)末一句是客气话，赞成施先生的其实并不少，要不然，能堂而皇之的在杂志上发表吗？——这“孤独”是很有价值的。
The last sentence is a kind word, there are actually not a lot of people in favor of Mr. Shi, otherwise, can it be published in a magazine? ——This "loneliness" is very valuable.九月二十日。
September 20.

商贾的批评

商贾的批评

商贾的批评

Criticism from merchants及锋
And the edge中国现今没有好作品，早已使批评家或胡评家不满，前些时还曾经探究过它的所以没有的原因。结果是没有结果。但还有新解释。林希隽先生说是因为“作家毁掉了自己，以投机取巧的手腕”去作“杂文”了，所以也害得做不成莘克莱或托尔斯泰（《现代》九月号）。还有一位希隽先生，却以为“在这资本主义的社会里头，……作家无形中也就成为商贾了。……为了获利较多的报酬起见，便也不得不采用‘粗制滥造’的方法，再没有人殚精竭虑用苦工夫去认真创作了。”（《社会月报》九月号）
There are no good works in China today, which has long dissatisfied critics or critics, and some time ago I explored the reason why it did not exist. The result is no result. But there are new explanations. Mr. Lin Xijun said that it was because "the writer destroyed himself and used opportunistic skills to write "essays", so he could not be a Sinclair or Tolstoy (September issue of "Modern"). There is also a Mr. Xijun, but he thinks that "in this capitalist society,...... The writer has become a merchant invisibly. …… In order to make more profits, they had to adopt the method of 'shoddy production', and no one worked hard to create seriously. (September issue of Social Monthly)着眼在经济上，当然可以说是进了一步。但这“殚精竭虑用苦工夫去认真创作”出来的学说，和我们只有常识的见解是很不一样的。我们向来只以为用资本来获利的是商人，所以在出版界，商人是用钱开书店来赚钱的老板。到现在才知道用文章去卖有限的稿费的也是商人，不过是一种“无形中”的商人。农民省几斗米去出售，工人用筋力去换钱，教授卖嘴，妓女卖淫，也都是“无形中”的商人。只有买主不是商人了，但他的钱一定是用东西换来的，所以也是商人。于是“在这资本主义社会里头”，个个都是商人，但可分为在“无形中”和有形中的两大类。
Focusing on the economy, of course, it can be said that it is a step further. But this doctrine of "painstaking and hard work to create seriously" is very different from our common sense opinion. We have always thought that it is businessmen who use capital to make profits, so in the publishing industry, businessmen are bosses who use money to open bookstores to make money. Only now do I know that it is also businessmen who use articles to sell limited manuscript fees, but they are a kind of "invisible" businessmen. Peasants save a few buckets of rice to sell, workers use their strength to exchange for money, professors sell their mouths, and prostitutes prostitute are all "invisible" businessmen. Only the buyer is not a businessman, but his money must have been exchanged for something, so he is also a businessman. Therefore, "in this capitalist society", everyone is a businessman, but it can be divided into two categories: "invisible" and tangible.用希隽先生自己的定义来断定他自己，自然是一位“无形中”的商人；如果并不以卖文为活，因此也无须“粗制滥造”，那么，怎样过活呢，一定另外在做买卖，也许竟是有形中的商人了，所以他的见识，无论怎么看，总逃不脱一个商人见识。
Using Mr. Xijun's own definition to conclude that he is naturally an "invisible" businessman; If you don't make a living by selling literature, so you don't need to be "shoddy and indiscriminate", then how to live, you must be doing business elsewhere, maybe you are actually a tangible businessman, so his knowledge, no matter how you look at it, always can't escape the knowledge of a businessman.“杂文”很短，就是写下来的工夫，也决不要写“和平与战争”（这是照林希隽先生的文章抄下来的，原名其实是《战争与和平》）的那么长久，用力极少，是一点也不错的。不过也要有一点常识，用一点苦工，要不然，就是“杂文”，也不免更进一步的“粗制滥造”，只剩下笑柄。作品，总是有些缺点的。亚波理奈尔咏孔雀，说它翘起尾巴，光辉灿烂，但后面的屁股眼也露出来了。所以批评家的指摘是要的，不过批评家这时却也就翘起了尾巴，露出他的屁眼。但为什么还要呢，就因为它正面还有光辉灿烂的羽毛。不过倘使并非孔雀，仅仅是鹅鸭之流，它应该想一想翘起尾巴来，露出的只有些什么！
The "essays" are very short, even if they are written down, they should never write "Peace and War" (this is copied from Mr. Lin Xijun's article, the original name is actually "War and Peace"), which is not bad at all. However, you must also have a little common sense and use a little hard work, otherwise, it will be a "miscellaneous essay", and it will inevitably be further "shoddy and indiscriminate", leaving only a laughing stock. Works always have some shortcomings. Apollinaire sang about the peacock, saying that it raised its tail and was brilliant, but the back of the butt eye was also exposed. So the critic's criticism is wanted, but the critic also raised his tail and exposed his asshole. But why not, because it still has glorious feathers on the front. But if it is not a peacock, but just a goose and duck, it should think about raising its tail and revealing only something!九月二十五日。
September 25th.

中秋二愿

中秋二愿

中秋二愿

Mid-Autumn Festival two wishes白道
White way前几天真是“悲喜交集”。刚过了国历的九一八，就是“夏历”的“中秋赏月”，还有“海宁观潮”。因为海宁，就又有人来讲“乾隆皇帝是海宁陈阁老的儿子”了。这一个满洲“英明之主”，原来竟是中国人掉的包，好不阔气，而且福气。不折一兵，不费一矢，单靠生殖机关便革了命，真是绝顶便宜。
A few days ago, it was really a mixture of joys and sorrows. Just after the 918th of the national calendar, it is the "Mid-Autumn Festival Moon Appreciation" of the "Summer Calendar", and the "Haining Tide Watching". Because of Haining, some people came to say that "Emperor Qianlong is the son of Chen Ge Lao in Haining". This Manchurian "wise lord" turned out to be a bag dropped by the Chinese, so generous and blessed. Without losing a soldier, without spending an arrow, relying on the reproductive organs alone to kill people, it is really extremely cheap.中国人是尊家族，尚血统的，但一面又喜欢和不相干的人们去攀亲，我真不知道是什么意思。从小以来，什么“乾隆是从我们汉人的陈家悄悄的抱去的”呀，“我们元朝是征服了欧洲的”呀之类，早听的耳朵里起茧了，不料到得现在，纸烟铺子的选举中国政界伟人投票，还是列成吉思汗为其中之一人；开发民智的报章，还在讲满洲的乾隆皇帝是陈阁老的儿子。
Chinese people respect the family and still have blood, but on the other hand, they like to get married with unrelated people, I really don't know what it means. Since I was a child, what "Qianlong was quietly carried from the Chen family of our Han people", "our Yuan Dynasty conquered Europe", etc., the ears of the ears of the early listeners were calloused, but now, the election of the great men of Chinese politics in the paper tobacco shop voted, or listed Genghis Khan as one of them; The newspaper that developed Minzhi still said that the Qianlong Emperor in Manchuria was the son of Chen Ge Lao.古时候，女人的确去和过番；在演剧里，也有男人招为番邦的驸马，占了便宜，做得津津有味。就是近事，自然也还有拜侠客做干爷，给富翁当赘婿，陡了起来的，不过这不能算是体面的事情。男子汉，大丈夫，还当别有所能，别有所志，自恃着智力和另外的体力。要不然，我真怕将来大家又大说一通日本人是徐福的子孙。
In ancient times, women did go to and fan the time; In the play, there are also men who recruit as the son-in-law of Fanbang, take advantage of it, and do it with relish. Even if it is a recent matter, naturally there are also worshippers who are godfathers and sons-in-law for rich people, which has become steep, but this cannot be regarded as a decent thing. A man, a man, should have other abilities and ambitions, relying on his own intelligence and other physical strength. Otherwise, I am really afraid that in the future, everyone will say that the Japanese are descendants of Xu Fu.一愿：从此不再胡乱和别人去攀亲。
One wish: I will never go to the family with others indiscriminately.但竟有人给文学也攀起亲来了，他说女人的才力，会因与男性的肉体关系而受影响，并举欧洲的几个女作家，都有文人做情人来作证据。于是又有人来驳他，说这是弗洛伊特说，不可靠。其实这并不是弗洛伊特说，他不至于忘记梭格拉第太太全不懂哲学，托尔斯泰太太不会做文章这些反证的。况且世界文学史上，有多少中国所谓“父子作家”“夫妇作家”那些“肉麻当有趣”的人物在里面？因为文学和梅毒不同，并无霉菌，决不会由性交传给对手的。至于有“诗人”在钓一个女人，先捧之为“女诗人”，那是一种讨好的手段，并非他真传染给她了诗才。
He said that women's talents will be affected by physical relationships with men, and several female writers in Europe have literati as lovers as evidence. So someone came to refute him, saying that this was Freud's statement and unreliable. In fact, this is not Freud's statement, he will not forget that Mrs. Socrates does not understand philosophy at all, and Mrs. Tolstoy will not make a fuss. Moreover, in the history of world literature, how many Chinese so-called "father-son writers" and "couple writers" are among the "fleshy and interesting" characters? Because literature is different from syphilis, there is no mold, and it will never be passed on from sexual intercourse to the opponent. As for having a "poet" fishing for a woman, it is a means of pleasing her, not that he really infected her with poetry.二愿：从此眼光离开脐下三寸。
Second wish: From now on, look three inches below the navel.九月二十五日。
September 25th.

考场三丑

考场三丑

考场三丑

The examination room is three ugly黄棘
Yellow thorns古时候，考试八股的时候，有三样卷子，考生是很失面子的，后来改考策论了，恐怕也还是这样子。第一样是“缴白卷”，只写上题目，做不出文章，或者简直连题目也不写。然而这最干净，因为别的再没有什么枝节了。第二样是“钞刊文”，他先已有了侥幸之心，读熟或带进些刊本的八股去，倘或题目相合，便即照钞，想瞒过考官的眼。品行当然比“缴白卷”的差了，但文章大抵是好的，所以也没有什么另外的枝节。第三样，最坏的是瞎写，不及格不必说，还要从瞎写的文章里，给人寻出许多笑话来。人们在茶余酒后作为谈资的，大概是这一种。
In ancient times, when taking the eight-share exam, there were three papers, and the candidates were very disgraced. The first is to "submit a blank paper", which only writes the title, but cannot make an article, or even does not write the title. However, this is the cleanest, because there is nothing else. The second is the "banknote publication", he already has a sense of luck, read it familiarly or bring in some of the eight shares of the publication, if the title matches, he will copy the banknote, trying to hide it from the examiner's eyes. Of course, the conduct is worse than that of "paying blank papers", but the article is generally good, so there is no other branch. Third, the worst thing is to write blindly, not to mention failing, and to find many jokes from the articles written blindly. This is probably the kind that people use as a topic of conversation after tea and drink.“不通”还不在其内，因为即使不通，他究竟是在看题目做文章了；况且做文章做到不通的境地也就不容易，我们对于中国古今文学家，敢保证谁决没有一句不通的文章呢？有些人自以为“通”，那是因为他连“通”“不通”都不了然的缘故。
"Not understanding" is not among them, because even if it doesn't work, he is actually reading the topic and making a fuss; Moreover, it is not easy to make an article that does not work, and we can guarantee that no one will have an article that does not make sense to Chinese writers in ancient and modern times? Some people think they are "comprehensive" because they don't even understand "understand" and "don't understand".今年的考官之流，颇在讲些中学生的考卷的笑柄。其实这病源就在于瞎写。那些题目，是只要能够钞刊文，就都及格的。例如问“十三经”是什么，文天祥是那朝人，全用不着自己来挖空心思做，一做，倒糟糕。于是使文人学士大叹国学之衰落，青年之不行，好像惟有他们是文林中的硕果似的，像煞有介事了。
This year's examiners are quite talking about the laughing stock of middle school students' exam papers. In fact, the source of this disease lies in blind writing. Those topics are all passed as long as they can be published in print. For example, if you ask what the "Thirteen Classics" are, Wen Tianxiang is a person from that dynasty, and he doesn't need to hollow out his mind to do it. As a result, the literati and scholars lamented the decline of Chinese studies and the inability of young people, as if they were the only fruits in the literary world, as if they were in trouble.但是，钞刊文可也不容易。假使将那些考官们锁在考场里，骤然问他几条较为陌生的古典，大约即使不瞎写，也未必不缴白卷的。我说这话，意思并不在轻议已成的文人学士，只以为古典多，记不清不足奇，都记得倒古怪。古书不是很有些曾经后人加过注解的么？那都是坐在自己的书斋里，查群籍，翻类书，穷年累月，这才脱稿的，然而仍然有“未详”，有错误。现在的青年当然无力指摘它了，但作证的却有别人的什么“补正”在；而且补而又补，正而又正者，也时或有之。
However, it is not easy to publish papers. If you lock those examiners in the examination room and suddenly ask them a few more unfamiliar classics, they may not not submit blank papers even if they don't write blindly. When I say this, I don't mean to discuss the established literati and scholars, I just think that there are many classics, and it is not surprising that I can't remember them clearly, and I remember them strangely. Aren't there some ancient books that have been annotated by later generations? They were all sitting in their own study, checking group records, flipping through books, and after many years, they finally got out of the manuscript, but there were still "unknowns" and errors. Of course, today's young people are powerless to criticize it, but there is something else to "correct" that others have to testify; And there are times when it is supplemented and supplemented, and it is correct and correct.由此看来，如果能钞刊文，而又敷衍得过去，这人便是现在的大人物；青年学生有一些错，不过是常人的本分而已，但竟为世诟病，我很诧异他们竟没有人呼冤。
From this point of view, if you can publish articles and be perfunctory, this person is the current big man; The young students have some mistakes, but they are just ordinary people's duty, but they are criticized by the world, and I am surprised that no one has complained about them.九月二十五日。
September 25th.

又是“莎士比亚”

又是“莎士比亚”

又是“莎士比亚”

It's "Shakespeare" again苗挺
Miao Ting苏俄将排演原本莎士比亚，可见“丑态”；马克思讲过莎士比亚，当然错误；梁实秋教授将翻译莎士比亚，每本大洋一千元；杜衡先生看了莎士比亚，“还再需要一点做人的经验”了。
Soviet Russia will rehearse the original Shakespeare, which shows the "ugliness"; Marx said Shakespeare, of course, wrong; Professor Liang Shiqiu will translate Shakespeare, 1,000 yuan per book; Mr. Du Heng read Shakespeare and said, "I still need a little more experience in life."我们的文学家杜衡先生，好像先前是因为没有自己觉得缺少“做人的经验”，相信群众的，但自从看了莎氏的《凯撒传》以来，才明白“他们没有理性，他们没有明确的利害观念；他们底感情是完全被几个煽动家所控制着，所操纵着”。（杜衡：《莎剧凯撒传里所表现的群众》，《文艺风景》创刊号所载。）自然，这是根据“莎剧”的，和杜先生无关，他自说现在也还不能判断它对不对，但是，觉得自己“还再需要一点做人的经验”，却已经明白无疑了。
Our writer Mr. Du Heng seems to have believed in the masses because he did not feel that he lacked "experience in being a person", but since reading Shakespeare's "Biography of Caesar", he has understood that "they are not rational, they do not have a clear concept of interests; Their underlying feelings are completely controlled and manipulated by a few agitators." (Du Heng: "The Masses Represented in the Biography of Caesar in Shakespeare", published in the first issue of "Literary and Art Landscape".) Naturally, this is based on "Shakespeare", which has nothing to do with Mr. Du, who said that he still can't judge whether it is right or not, but he feels that he "needs a little more experience in life", but he has understood it.这是“莎剧凯撒传里所表现的群众”对于杜衡先生的影响。但杜文《莎剧凯撒传里所表现的群众》里所表现的群众，又怎样呢？和《凯撒传》里所表现的也并不两样——
This is the influence of "the masses expressed in Shakespeare's biography of Julius Caesar" on Mr. Du Heng. But what about the masses expressed in Du Wen's "The Masses Represented in Shakespeare's Julius Caesar"? It is no different from what is shown in "The Biography of Caesar" -“……这使我们想起在近几百年来的各次政变中所时常看到的，“鸡来迎鸡，狗来迎狗”式……那些可痛心的情形。……人类底进化究竟在那儿呢？抑或我们这个东方古国至今还停滞在二千年前的罗马所曾经过的文明底阶段上呢？”
“…… This reminds us of the "chicken comes to greet the chicken, the dog comes to greet the dog" style that we often see in the coups in recent hundreds of years...... Those sad situations. …… Where is the underlying evolution of human beings? Or is our ancient oriental country still stagnant at the bottom stage of civilization that Rome went through 2,000 years ago? ”真的，“发思古之幽情”，往往为了现在。这一比，我就疑心罗马恐怕也曾有过有理性，有明确的利害观念，感情并不被几个煽动家所控制，所操纵的群众，但是被驱散，被压制，被杀戮了。莎士比亚似乎没有调查，或者没有想到，但也许是故意抹杀的，他是古时候的人，有这一手并不算什么玩把戏。
Really, "thinking about the ancient feelings" is often for the present. In this comparison, I suspect that Rome may have had a rational and clear concept of interests, and its feelings were not controlled by a few demagogues, and the masses were manipulated, but they were dispersed, suppressed, and killed. Shakespeare did not seem to investigate, or did not think of it, but perhaps he deliberately erased it, he was a person of ancient times, and having this hand is not a trick.不过经他的贵手一取舍，杜衡先生的名文一发挥，却实在使我们觉得群众永远将是“鸡来迎鸡，狗来迎狗”的材料，倒还是被迎的有出息；“至于我，老实说”，还竟有些以为群众之无能与可鄙，远在“鸡”“狗”之上的“心情”了。自然，这是正因为爱群众，而他们太不争气了的缘故——自己虽然还不能判断，但是，“这位伟大的剧作者是把群众这样看法的”呀，有谁不信，问他去罢！
However, after his noble hand made a choice, Mr. Du Heng's famous article was played, but it really made us feel that the masses would always be the material of "chickens come to greet chickens, dogs come to greet dogs", but they were still welcomed; "As for me, to be honest", some people actually think that the incompetence and contemptibility of the masses are far above the "mood" of "chickens" and "dogs". Naturally, this is precisely because they love the masses, and they are too unsatisfactory - although they can't judge yet, "this great playwright thinks the masses this way", who doesn't believe it, ask him!十月一日。
October 1st.

点句的难

点句的难

点句的难

It's hard to point out sentences张沛
Zhang Pei看了《袁中郎全集校勘记》，想到了几句不关重要的话，是：断句的难。
After reading "Yuan Zhonglang's Complete Works Proofreading", I thought of a few unimportant words, which are: the difficulty of breaking sentences.前清时代，一个塾师能够不查他的秘本，空手点完了“四书”，在乡下就要算一位大学者，这似乎有些可笑，但是很有道理的。常买旧书的人，有时会遇到一部书，开首加过句读，夹些破句，中途却停了笔：他点不下去了。这样的书，价钱可以比干净的本子便宜，但看起来也真教人不舒服。
In the pre-Qing Dynasty, a tutor could finish the "Four Books" empty-handed without checking his secret books, and he would be considered a scholar in the countryside, which seems a bit ridiculous, but it makes sense. People who often buy old books sometimes encounter a book, add a sentence at the beginning, and insert some broken sentences, but stop writing in the middle: he can't click on it. Such a book can be cheaper than a clean book, but it also looks really uncomfortable.标点古书，印了出来，是起于“文学革命”时候的；用标点古文来试验学生，我记得好像是同时开始于北京大学，这真是恶作剧，使“莘莘学子”闹出许多笑话来。
Punctuated ancient books and printed them began during the "literary revolution"; Using punctuation ancient texts to test students, I remember that it seemed to start at Peking University at the same time, which was really a prank and made many jokes among the "students".这时候，只好一任那些反对白话，或并不反对白话而兼长古文的学者们讲风凉话。然而，学者们也要“技痒”的，有时就自己出手。一出手，可就有些糟了，有几句点不断，还有可原，但竟连极平常的句子也点了破句。
At this time, I had no choice but to let those scholars who opposed the vernacular, or did not oppose the vernacular but were also good at ancient texts, speak sarcastically. However, scholars also have to "itch" and sometimes take action themselves. As soon as he made a move, it was a little bad, there were a few sentences that were continuous, and they were forgivable, but even the most ordinary sentences were broken.古文本来也常常不容易标点，譬如《孟子》里有一段，我们大概是这样读法的：“有冯妇者，善搏虎，卒为善士。则之野，有众逐虎。虎负嵎，莫之敢撄。望见冯妇，趋而迎之。冯妇攘臂下车，众皆悦之，其为士者笑之。”但也有人说应该断为“卒为善，士则之，野有众逐虎……”的。这“笑”他的“士”，就是先前“则”他的“士”，要不然，“其为士”就太鹘突了。但也很难决定究竟是那一面对。
Ancient texts are often not easy to punctuate, for example, there is a paragraph in "Mencius", which we probably read like this: "There is a Feng woman, who is good at fighting tigers, and is a good man." When he went to the wilderness, a crowd chased after the tiger. The tiger carries the cuckoo, and no one dares to touch it. Seeing Feng's wife, he hurried over to greet her. Feng's wife rolled up her sleeves and got out of the carriage, and everyone was very pleased, while the scholars laughed at her. But some people say that it should be judged that "the soldier is good, the scholar is good, and the wild has many people chasing the tiger......". This "laughing" of his "scholar" is his "scholar" before, otherwise, "he is a scholar" is too abrupt. But it is also difficult to decide which one to face.不过倘使是调子有定的词曲，句子相对的骈文，或并不艰深的明人小品，标点者又是名人学士，还要闹出一些破句，可未免令人不遭蚊子叮，也要起疙瘩了。嘴里是白话怎么坏，古文怎么好，一动手，对古文就点了破句，而这古文又是他正在竭力表扬的古文。破句，不就是看不懂的分明的标记么？说好说坏，又从那里来的？
However, if it is a lyric and music with a fixed tone, a parallel text with relative sentences, or a Mingren sketch that is not difficult, and the punctuator is a celebrity scholar, and he has to make some broken sentences, it is inevitable that people will not be bitten by mosquitoes and have pimples. How bad the vernacular is, how good the ancient text is, as soon as he does it, he clicks on the ancient text, and this ancient text is the ancient text he is trying his best to praise. Isn't a broken sentence just a clear mark that you can't understand? Good and bad, where did it come from?标点古文真是一种试金石，只消几点几圈，就把真颜色显出来了。
Punctuation of ancient texts is really a touchstone, and it only takes a few points and a few turns to reveal the true color.但这事还是不要多谈好，再谈下去，我怕不久会有更高的议论，说标点是“随波逐流”的玩意，有损“性灵”，应该排斥的。
But don't talk about this matter too much, and if you continue to talk about it, I'm afraid that there will be higher discussions soon, saying that punctuation is a thing that "goes with the flow", which is detrimental to the "spirit" and should be rejected.十月二日。
October 2nd.

奇怪（三）

奇怪（三）

奇怪（三）

Strange (3)白道
White way“中国第一流作家”叶灵凤和穆时英两位先生编辑的《文艺画报》的大广告，在报上早经看见了。半个多月之后，才在店头看见这“画报”。既然是“画报”，看的人就自然也存着看“画报”的心，首先来看“画”。
The big advertisement of "Literary and Art Pictorial" edited by Mr. Ye Lingfeng and Mu Shiying, "China's first-class writers", has long been seen in the newspaper. It took more than half a month to see this "pictorial" in the store. Since it is a "pictorial", the reader naturally has the heart to read the "pictorial", and first look at the "painting".不看还好，一看，可就奇怪了。
It's okay not to look at it, but it's strange when you look at it.戴平万先生的《沈阳之旅》里，有三幅插图有些像日本人的手笔，记了一记，哦，原来是日本杂志店里，曾经见过的在《战争版画集》里的料治朝鸣的木刻，是为记念他们在奉天的战胜而作的，日本记念他对中国的战胜的作品，却就是被战胜国的作者的作品的插图——奇怪一。
In Mr. Dai Pingwan's "Journey to Shenyang", there are three illustrations that are somewhat like Japanese handwriting, and I remembered, oh, it turned out to be a Japanese magazine store, and the woodcut of Liaozhi Chaoming that I had seen in the "War Print Collection" was made to commemorate their victory in Fengtian, and the work of Japan to commemorate his victory over China was an illustration of the work of the author of the victorious country - Strange One.再翻下去是穆时英先生的《墨绿衫的小姐》里，有三幅插画有些像麦绥莱勒的手笔，黑白分明，我曾从良友公司翻印的四本小书里记得了他的作法，而这回的木刻上的署名，也明明是FM两个字。莫非我们“中国第一流作家”的这作品，是豫先翻成法文，托麦绥莱勒刻了插画来的吗？——奇怪二。
Further down is Mr. Mu Shiying's "Miss in the Dark Green Shirt", there are three illustrations that are somewhat like Mai Suilele's handwriting, black and white, I have remembered his method from the four small books reprinted by Liangyou Company, and the signature on the woodcut this time is also obviously the word FM. Could it be that this work of our "China's first-class writer" was translated into French by Yu Xian, and illustrated by Tomai Suilele? ——Strange two.这回是文字，《世界文坛了望台》了。开头就说，“法国的龚果尔奖金，去年出人意外地（白注：可恨！）颁给了一部以中国作题材的小说《人的命运》，它的作者是安得烈马尔路”，但是，“或者由于立场的关系，这书在文字上总是受着赞美，而在内容上却一致的被一般报纸评论攻击，好像惋惜像马尔路这样才干的作家，何必也将文艺当作了宣传的工具”云。这样一“了望”，“好像”法国的为龚果尔奖金审查文学作品的人的“立场”，乃是赞成“将文艺当作了宣传工具”的了——奇怪三。
This time it is a text, "The World Literary Observatory". At the beginning, it was said, "France's Gongore bonus, last year was unexpectedly (white note: hateful!) ) was awarded a novel "The Fate of Man" with the theme of China, and its author is Andre Marlou", but "or because of the position, the book is always praised in text, but in terms of content it is consistently attacked by general newspaper reviews, as if it is a pity that a writer as talented as Marru should also use literature and art as a tool for propaganda." Such a "look" is "like" the "position" of the French people who censor literary works for the Gongor prize is in favor of "using literature and art as a propaganda tool" - Strange 3.不过也许这只是我自己的“少见多怪”，别人倒并不如此的。先前的“见怪者”，说是“见怪不怪，其怪自败”，现在的“怪”却早已声明着，叫你“见莫怪”了。开卷就有《编者随笔》在——
But maybe this is just my own "rare and strange", others are not like this. The previous "monster" said that "seeing the monster is not strange, and the monster is self-defeating", but now the "monster" has already stated that you are "not surprised". There is an "Editor's Essay" in the opening of the book——“只是每期供给一点并不怎样沉重的文字和图画，使对于文艺有兴趣的读者能醒一醒被其他严重的问题所疲倦了的眼睛，或者破颜一笑，只是如此而已。”
"It's just that each issue provides a little less heavy text and pictures, so that readers who are interested in literature and art can wake up their tired eyes from other serious problems, or smile with a broken face, that's all."原来“中国第一流作家”的玩着先前活剥“琵亚词侣”，今年生吞麦绥莱勒的小玩艺，是在大才小用，不过要给人“醒一醒被其他严重的问题所疲倦了的眼睛，或者破颜一笑”。如果再从这醒眼的“文艺画”上又发生了问题，虽然并不“严重”，不是究竟也辜负了两位“中国第一流作家”献技的苦心吗？
It turns out that the "first-class writers in China" played the previous live stripping of the "Pia Lyrics", and this year's small trick of swallowing Mai Suilele is of great use, but it is necessary to give people "wake up the eyes that are tired of other serious problems, or smile with a broken face". If there is another problem with this eye-catching "literary painting", although it is not "serious", wouldn't it have failed the painstaking efforts of the two "first-class writers in China"?那么，我也来“破颜一笑”吧——
So, let's "smile a smile" too——哈！
Ha!十月二十五日。
October 25th.

略论梅兰芳及其他（上）

略论梅兰芳及其他（上）

略论梅兰芳及其他（上）

A brief discussion of Mei Lanfang and others (Part I)张沛
Zhang Pei崇拜名伶原是北京的传统。辛亥革命后，伶人的品格提高了，这崇拜也干净起来。先只有谭叫天在剧坛上称雄，都说他技艺好，但恐怕也还夹着一点势利，因为他是“老佛爷”——慈禧太后赏识过的。虽然没有人给他宣传，替他出主意，得不到世界的名声，却也没有人来为他编剧本。我想，这不来，是带着几分“不敢”的。
Worshiping famous actors was originally a tradition in Beijing. After the Xinhai Revolution, the character of the performers improved, and this cult became clean. First of all, only Tan Weitian dominated the theater world, and they all said that he was good at skills, but I am afraid that he still had a little snobbery, because he was "Galeries Lafayette" - Empress Dowager Cixi appreciated. Although no one promoted him, gave him ideas, and did not gain fame in the world, no one wrote the script for him. I think this is not coming, with a bit of "dare".后来有名的梅兰芳可就和他不同了。梅兰芳不是生，是旦，不是皇家的供奉，是俗人的宠儿，这就使士大夫敢于下手了。士大夫是常要夺取民间的东西的，将竹枝词改成文言，将“小家碧玉”作为姨太太，但一沾着他们的手，这东西也就跟着他们灭亡。他们将他从俗众中提出，罩上玻璃罩，做起紫檀架子来。教他用多数人听不懂的话，缓缓的《天女散花》，扭扭的《黛玉葬花》，先前是他做戏的，这时却成了戏为他而做，凡有新编的剧本，都只为了梅兰芳，而且是士大夫心目中的梅兰芳。雅是雅了，但多数人看不懂，不要看，还觉得自己不配看了。
Later, the famous Mei Lanfang was different from him. Mei Lanfang is not a student, a dan, not a royal offering, but a darling of the layman, which makes the scholar-officials dare to attack. Scholars and officials often wanted to seize things from the people, changing the bamboo branch words into classical Chinese, and taking "small family jasper" as their aunt, but as soon as they got into their hands, this thing perished with them. They lifted him out of the world, covered him with a glass cover, and made a rosewood shelf. Teach him to use words that most people can't understand, the slow "Heavenly Maiden Scattering Flowers", the twisted "Daiyu Funeral Flowers", he was doing the play before, but now it became a play for him, all new scripts are only for Mei Lanfang, and it is Mei Lanfang in the minds of the scholar-officials. Ya is elegant, but most people can't understand it, don't read it, and feel that they are not worthy of reading it.士大夫们也在日见其消沉，梅兰芳近来颇有些冷落。
The scholars and officials are also seeing their depression day by day, and Mei Lanfang has been quite neglected recently.因为他是旦角，年纪一大，势必至于冷落的吗？不是的，老十三旦七十岁了，一登台，满座还是喝采。为什么呢？就因为他没有被士大夫据为己有，罩进玻璃罩。
Because he is a Danjiao, he is old, is he bound to be snubbed? No, the old thirteenth Dan is seventy years old, and as soon as he takes the stage, the whole audience is still applauding. Why? Just because he was not taken as his own by the scholar-officials and covered in a glass cover.名声的起灭，也如光的起灭一样，起的时候，从近到远，灭的时候，远处倒还留着余光。梅兰芳的游日，游美，其实已不是光的发扬，而是光在中国的收敛。他竟没有想到从玻璃罩里跳出，所以这样的搬出去，还是这样的搬回来。
The rise and fall of fame is like the rise and fall of light, when it rises, from near to far, and when it is extinguished, there is still afterglow in the distance. Mei Lanfang's tour of Japan and the United States is actually not the development of light, but the convergence of light in China. He didn't expect to jump out of the glass cover, so he moved out like this, or moved back like this.他未经士大夫帮忙时候所做的戏，自然是俗的，甚至于猥下，肮脏，但是泼剌，有生气。待到化为“天女”，高贵了，然而从此死板板，矜持得可怜。看一位不死不活的天女或林妹妹，我想，大多数人是倒不如看一个漂亮活动的村女的，她和我们相近。
The scenes he did without the help of scholars and officials were naturally vulgar, even obscene and dirty, but they were splashy and angry. When she turned into a "heavenly maiden", she became noble, but from then on she was rigid and pitiful. Looking at a heavenly maiden or Sister Lin who is neither dead nor alive, I think most people are not as good as watching a beautiful and active village girl, who is similar to us.然而梅兰芳对记者说，还要将别的剧本改得雅一些。
However, Mei Lanfang told reporters that she had to change other scripts to be more elegant.十一月一日。
November 1st.

略论梅兰芳及其他（下）

略论梅兰芳及其他（下）

略论梅兰芳及其他（下）

A brief discussion of Mei Lanfang and others (below)张沛
Zhang Pei而且梅兰芳还要到苏联去。
And Mei Lanfang is going to the Soviet Union.议论纷纷。我们的大画家徐悲鸿教授也曾到莫斯科去画过松树——也许是马，我记不真切了——国内就没有谈得这么起劲。这就可见梅兰芳博士之在艺术界，确是超人一等的了。
Talk. Our great painter Professor Xu Beihong also went to Moscow to paint pine trees - maybe horses, I don't remember exactly, but there was no such vigorous talk in China. This shows that Dr. Mei Lanfang is indeed superhuman in the art world.而且累得《现代》的编辑室里也紧张起来。首座编辑施蛰存先生曰：“而且还要梅兰芳去演《贵妃醉酒》呢！”（《现代》五卷五期。）要这么大叫，可见不平之极了，倘不豫先知道性别，是会令人疑心生了脏躁症的。次座编辑杜衡先生曰：“剧本鉴定的工作完毕，则不妨选几个最前进的戏先到莫斯科去宣传为梅兰芳先生‘转变’后的个人的创作。……因为照例，到苏联去的艺术家，是无论如何应该事先表示一点‘转变’的。”（《文艺画报》创刊号。）这可冷静得多了，一看就知道他手段高妙，足使齐如山先生自愧弗及，赶紧来请帮忙——帮忙的帮忙。
And the editorial office of "Modern" was so tired that it became tense. The first editor, Mr. Shi Zhicun, said: "And Mei Lanfang is also asked to play "The Concubine is Drunk"! ("Modern" Volume 5, Issue 5.) If you don't know the gender first, it will make people suspect that you have dirty mania. Mr. Du Heng, the second editor, said: "After the script appraisal is completed, we might as well choose a few of the most advanced plays to go to Moscow to promote Mr. Mei Lanfang's personal creations after 'transformation'. …… Because as usual, artists who go to the Soviet Union should express a little 'transformation' in advance. (The first issue of "Literary and Art Pictorial".) This is much calmer, and at a glance you can see that his methods are exquisite, which is enough to make Mr. Qi Rushan feel ashamed, so he hurriedly came to ask for help - help, help.但梅兰芳先生却正在说中国戏是象征主义，剧本的字句要雅一些，他其实倒是为艺术而艺术，他也是一位“第三种人”。
But Mr. Mei Lanfang is saying that Chinese opera is symbolism, and the words of the script are more elegant, but he is actually art for art's sake, and he is also a "third kind of person".那么，他是不会“表示一点‘转变’的”，目前还太早一点。他也许用别一个笔名，做一篇剧本，描写一个知识阶级，总是专为艺术，总是不问俗事，但到末了，他却究竟还在革命这一方面。这就活动得多了，不到末了，花呀光呀，倘到末了，做这篇东西的也就是我呀，那不就在革命这一方面了吗？
Then, he will not "indicate a little 'transformation'", it is still too early. He may use another pseudonym to make a script to describe an intellectual class, always dedicated to art and always ignoring mundane matters, but in the end, he is still in the revolution. If it comes to the end, I am the one who made this thing, isn't it on the side of revolution?但我不知道梅兰芳博士可会自己做了文章，却用别一个笔名，来称赞自己的做戏；或者虚设一社，出些什么“戏剧年鉴”，亲自作序，说自己是剧界的名人？倘使没有，那可是也不会玩这一手的。
But I didn't know that Dr. Mei Lanfang would write an article by himself, but use another pseudonym to praise his play; Or make a fictitious society, publish some "drama yearbook", personally write a preface, and say that you are a celebrity in the theater industry? If not, then I wouldn't have played this hand.倘不会玩，那可真要使杜衡先生失望，要他“再亮些”了。
If he can't play, it will really disappoint Mr. Du Heng and ask him to "be brighter".还是带住罢，倘再“略论”下去，我也要防梅先生会说因为被批评家乱骂，害得他演不出好戏来。
If I continue to "talk about it briefly", I also have to guard against Mr. Mei saying that because he was scolded by critics, he couldn't perform well.十一月一日。
November 1st.

骂杀与捧杀

骂杀与捧杀

骂杀与捧杀

Curse and kill阿法
Alpha现在有些不满于文学批评的，总说近几年的所谓批评，不外乎捧与骂。
Nowadays, some people who are dissatisfied with literary criticism always say that the so-called criticism in recent years is nothing more than praise and scolding.其实所谓捧与骂者，不过是将称赞与攻击，换了两个不好看的字眼。指英雄为英雄，说娼妇是娼妇，表面上虽像捧与骂，实则说得刚刚合式，不能责备批评家的。批评家的错处，是在乱骂与乱捧，例如说英雄是娼妇，举娼妇为英雄。
In fact, the so-called praise and scolding are just praise and attack, replacing two ugly words. Referring to heroes as heroes and saying that prostitutes are prostitutes, although it seems to praise and scold on the surface, in fact it is just in line with the critics. The critic's mistake is to scold and praise indiscriminately, for example, to say that the hero is a prostitute and to cite a prostitute as a hero.批评的失了威力，由于“乱”，甚而至于“乱”到和事实相反，这底细一被大家看出，那效果有时也就相反了。所以现在被骂杀的少，被捧杀的却多。
Criticism loses its power, because of "chaos", and even "chaos" to the opposite of the facts, once this detail is seen by everyone, the effect is sometimes the opposite. So now there are fewer people who are scolded and killed, but more people who are praised and killed.人古而事近的，就是袁中郎。这一班明末的作家，在文学史上，是自有他们的价值和地位的。而不幸被一群学者们捧了出来，颂扬，标点，印刷，“色借，日月借，烛借，青黄借，眼色无常。声借，钟鼓借，枯竹窍借……”“借”得他一榻胡涂，正如在中郎脸上，画上花脸，却指给大家看，啧啧赞叹道：“看哪，这多么‘性灵’呀！”对于中郎的本质，自然是并无关系的，但在未经别人将花脸洗清之前，这“中郎”总不免招人好笑，大触其霉头。
The one who is ancient and close is Yuan Zhonglang. This group of writers at the end of the Ming Dynasty has their own value and status in the history of literature. Unfortunately, it was held out by a group of scholars, praised, punctuated, printed, "color borrowed, sun and moon borrowed, candle borrowed, green and yellow borrowed, and eyes were impermanent." Sound borrowing, bell and drum borrowing, dry bamboo hole borrowing ......" "borrowed" him to get a bed of foolish painting, just like on Zhonglang's face, drawing a flower face, but pointing it out to everyone, tsk-tsk praise: "Look, what a 'spirit' this is!" "Naturally, it has nothing to do with the essence of Zhonglang, but before others wash away the flower face, this "Zhonglang" will inevitably be funny and touch its mold.人近而事古的，我记起了泰戈尔。他到中国来了，开坛讲演，人给他摆出一张琴，烧上一炉香，左有林长民，右有徐志摩，各各头戴印度帽。徐诗人开始绍介了：“唵！叽哩咕噜，白云清风，银磬……当！”说得他好像活神仙一样，于是我们的地上的青年们失望，离开了。神仙和凡人，怎能不离开呢？但我今年看见他论苏联的文章，自己声明道：“我是一个英国治下的印度人。”他自己知道得明明白白。大约他到中国来的时候，决不至于还胡涂，如果我们的诗人诸公不将他制成一个活神仙，青年们对于他是不至于如此隔膜的。现在可是老大的晦气。
People are close and ancient, I remember Tagore. When he came to China, he gave a speech, and people put out a piano for him and burned a burner of incense, with Lin Changmin on the left and Xu Zhimo on the right, each wearing an Indian hat. Poet Xu began to introduce: "Om! Gurgling, white clouds and clear wind, silver chimes...... While! He said that he was like a living god, so our young people on earth were disappointed and left. How can immortals and mortals not leave? But this year I saw his article on the Soviet Union and declared himself: "I am an Indian under British rule. He knew it clearly. When he came to China, he would never return to Hutu, and if our poets and gentlemen did not make him a living immortal, the young people would not be so separated from him. Now it's the boss's bad luck.以学者或诗人的招牌，来批评或介绍一个作者，开初是很能够蒙混旁人的，但待到旁人看清了这作者的真相的时候，却只剩了他自己的不诚恳，或学识的不够了。然而如果没有旁人来指明真相呢，这作家就从此被捧杀，不知道要多少年后才翻身。
It is very easy to confuse others at the beginning to criticize or introduce an author under the sign of a scholar or poet, but when others see the truth of the author clearly, only his own insincerity or lack of knowledge remains. However, if there is no one else to point out the truth, the writer will be killed from then on, and I don't know how many years it will take to turn over.十一月十九日。
November 19th.

读书忌

读书忌

读书忌

Reading taboo焉于
Yanyu记得中国的医书中，常常记载着“食忌”，就是说，某两种食物同食，是于人有害，或者足以杀人的，例如葱与蜜，蟹与柿子，落花生与王瓜之类。但是否真实，却无从知道，因为我从未听见有人实验过。
I remember that in Chinese medical books, it is often recorded that "food taboos", that is, eating two foods together is harmful to people, or enough to kill, such as green onions and honey, crabs and persimmons, peanuts and king melons, etc. But whether it is true or not, I don't know because I have never heard anyone experiment.读书也有“忌”，不过与“食忌”稍不同。这就是某一类书决不能和某一类书同看，否则两者中之一必被克杀，或者至少使读者反而发生愤怒。例如现在正在盛行提倡的明人小品，有些篇的确是空灵的。枕边厕上，车里舟中，这真是一种极好的消遣品。然而先要读者的心里空空洞洞，混混茫茫。假如曾经看过《明季稗史》，《痛史》，或者明末遗民的著作，那结果可就不同了，这两者一定要打起仗来，非打杀其一不止。我自以为因此很了解了那些憎恶明人小品的论者的心情。
There is also a "taboo" in reading, but it is slightly different from the "food taboo". This is why a certain type of book must not be read at the same time as a certain type of book, otherwise one of the two will be killed, or at least the reader will be angry. For example, some of the Ming people's sketches that are now popular are indeed ethereal. On the toilet by the pillow, in the car and on the boat, this is really an excellent pastime. However, first of all, the reader's heart is empty and confused. If you have read the "History of Barnyard Grass in the Ming Dynasty", "History of Pain", or the writings of the remnants of the late Ming Dynasty, the result will be different. I think I understand the feelings of those who hate Ming people's sketches.这几天偶然看见一部屈大均的《翁山文外》，其中有一篇戊申（即清康熙七年）八月做的《自代北入京记》。他的文笔，岂在中郎之下呢？可是很有些地方是极有重量的，抄几句在这里——
In the past few days, I happened to see a copy of Qu Dajun's "Wengshan Wenwai", which included a "Record of Entering Beijing from the North of the Dynasty" made in August of Wushen (that is, the seventh year of Kangxi in the Qing Dynasty). Is his writing below Zhonglang? But there are many places that are extremely heavy, so I will copy a few sentences here——“……沿河行，或渡或否。往往见西夷毡帐，高低不一，所谓穹庐连属，如冈如阜者。男妇皆蒙古语；有卖干湿酪者，羊马者，牦皮者，卧两骆驼中者，坐奚车者，不鞍而骑者，三两而行，被戒衣，或红或黄，持小铁轮，念《金刚秽咒》者。其首顶一柳筐，以盛马粪及木炭者，则皆中华女子。皆盘头跣足，垢面，反被毛袄。人与牛羊相枕藉，腥臊之气，百余里不绝。……”
“…… 沿河行，或渡或否。 往往见西夷毡帐，高低不一，所谓穹庐连属，如冈如阜者。 男妇皆蒙古语；有卖干湿酪者，羊马者，牦皮者，卧两骆驼中者，坐奚车者，不鞍而骑者，三两而行，被戒衣，或红或黄，持小铁轮，念《金刚秽咒》者。 其首顶一柳筐，以盛马粪及木炭者，则皆中华女子。 皆盘头跣足，垢面，反被毛袄。 人与牛羊相枕藉，腥臊之气，百余里不绝。 ……”我想，如果看过这样的文章，想像过这样的情景，又没有完全忘记，那么，虽是中郎的《广庄》或《瓶史》，也断不能洗清积愤的，而且还要增加愤怒。因为这实在比中郎时代的他们互相标榜还要坏，他们还没有经历过扬州十日，嘉定三屠！
I think that if you have read such an article and imagined such a scene, and have not completely forgotten it, then even if it is Zhonglang's "Guangzhuang" or "Bottle History", you will definitely not be able to wash away the accumulated anger, and you will increase your anger. Because this is really worse than what they advertised to each other in the Zhonglang era, they have not experienced the ten days in Yangzhou and the three massacres in Jiading!明人小品，好的；语录体也不坏，但我看《明季稗史》之类和明末遗民的作品却实在还要好，现在也正到了标点，翻印的时候了：给大家来清醒一下。
Ming people's sketches, okay; The style of the quotation is not bad, but I look at the works of "The History of Barnyard in the Ming Dynasty" and the remnants of the late Ming Dynasty are really better, and now it is time to punctuate and reprint: give everyone a wake-up.十一月二十五日。

November 25th.

封面

书名页

版权信息

图书在版编目（CIP）数据
Books in Print (CIP) data且介亭杂文/鲁迅著．—南京：译林出版社，2013.11
And Jieting Miscellaneous Essays/Lu Xun.—Nanjing: Yilin Publishing House, 2013.11（鲁迅自编文集）
(Lu Xun's self-edited anthology)ISBN 978-7-5447-4380-8
ISBN 978-7-5447-4380-8
Ⅰ．①且…　Ⅱ．①鲁…　Ⅲ．鲁迅杂文－杂文集　Ⅳ．①I210.4
I..(1) and... II..(1) Lu... III. Lu Xun's Essays - Miscellaneous Essays IV. (1) I210.4
中国版本图书馆CIP数据核字（2013）第211121号
China Version Library CIP Data Verification (2013) No. 211121
书　　名　且介亭杂文
Book title and essays作　　者　鲁　迅
Author: Lu Xun责任编辑　陆元昶
Editor-in-charge: Lu Yuanchang特约编辑　史会美
Special editor Shi Huimei出版发行　凤凰出版传媒股份有限公司
Published and distributed by Phoenix Publishing and Media Co., Ltd译林出版社
Yilin Publishing House出版社地址　南京市湖南路1号A楼，邮编：210009
Publisher's address Building A, No. 1 Hunan Road, Nanjing, Zip Code: 210009电子邮箱　yilin@yilin.com
Email yilin@yilin.com出版社网址　　http://www.yilin.com
Publisher website http://www.yilin.com印　　刷　北京凯达印务有限公司
Printing Beijing Kaida Printing Co., Ltd开　　本　787×1092毫米　　1/32
Volume 787×1092 mm 1/32印　　张　6.125
Print 6.125字　　数　112千字
Word count: 112,000 words版　　次　2013年11月第1版　2013年11月第1次印刷
Edition November 2013 1st edition November 2013 1st printing书　　号　ISBN 978-7-5447-4380-8
ISBN 978-7-5447-4380-8定　　价　13.80元
The price is 13.80 yuan译林版图书若有印装错误可向承印厂调换

If there are printing errors in the translated version of the book, it can be exchanged with the printing factory

Table of Contents

目录

Table of Contents

directory序言 序言
一九三四年 1934
关于中国的两三件事 Two or three things about China
答国际文学社问 Answer questions from the International Literary Society
《草鞋脚》小引 "Straw Shoes Foot" small introduction
论“旧形式的采用” On the "Adoption of Old Forms"
连环图画琐谈 Comic strip trivia
儒术 Confucianism
《看图识字》 "Reading Pictures and Literacy"
拿来主义 Takeism
隔膜 diaphragm
《木刻纪程》小引 A small introduction to the "Woodcut Chronicle"
难行和不信 Difficult to walk and unbelievable
买《小学大全》记 Buy the "Complete Elementary School" record
韦素园墓记 Wei Suyuan's epitaph
忆韦素园君 忆韦素园君
忆刘半农君 I think of Liu Bannong
答曹聚仁先生信 Answer to Mr. Cao Juren's letter
从孩子的照相说起 Let's start with the child's photo
门外文谈 Outside the door, there is a discussion
不知肉味和不知水味 I don't know the taste of meat or water
中国语文的新生 Freshman in Chinese and Chinese
中国人失掉自信力了吗 Have the Chinese lost their self-confidence?
“以眼还眼” "An eye for an eye"
说“面子” Say "face"
运命 Destiny
脸谱臆测 Facebook speculation
随便翻翻 Whatever you want
拿破仑与隋那 Napoleon and Suina
答《戏》周刊编者信 Answer to the editor's letter of "Play" Weekly
寄《戏》周刊编者信 Letter to the editor of "Play" Weekly
中国文坛上的鬼魅 Ghosts in the Chinese literary world
关于新文字 About the new text
病后杂谈 After the illness, we chatted
病后杂谈之余 After the illness, we talked about it
河南卢氏曹先生教泽碑文 河南卢氏曹先生教泽碑文
《集外集》序 Preface to "Collection of Outer Collections"
阿金 Kim
论俗人应避雅人 It is argued that ordinary people should avoid elegant people
附记 P.S
返回总目录 Return to the General Directory

序言

序言

序言

序言近几年来，所谓“杂文”的产生，比先前多，也比先前更受着攻击。例如自称“诗人”邵洵美，前“第三种人”施蛰存和杜衡即苏汶，还不到一知半解程度的大学生林希隽之流，就都和杂文有切骨之仇，给了种种罪状的。然而没有效，作者多起来，读者也多起来了。
In recent years, the so-called "essays" have been produced more than before, and they have been more attacked than before. For example, the self-proclaimed "poet" Shao Xunmei, the former "third kind of people" Shi Zhicun and Du Heng, that is, Su Wen, and Lin Xijun, a college student who is not yet half-aware, all have a deep feud with the essays and have given various crimes. However, it didn't work, there were more authors, and so were readers.其实“杂文”也不是现在的新货色，是“古已有之”的，凡有文章，倘若分类，都有类可归，如果编年，那就只按作成的年月，不管文体，各种都夹在一处，于是成了“杂”。分类有益于揣摩文章，编年有利于明白时势，倘要知人论世，是非看编年的文集不可的，现在新作的古人年谱的流行，即证明着已经有许多人省悟了此中的消息。况且现在是多么切迫的时候，作者的任务，是在对于有害的事物，立刻给以反响或抗争，是感应的神经，是攻守的手足。潜心于他的鸿篇巨制，为未来的文化设想，固然是很好的，但为现在抗争，却也正是为现在和未来的战斗的作者，因为失掉了现在，也就没有了未来。
In fact, "miscellaneous essays" are not the new colors of today, they are "ancient ones", where there are articles, if they are classified, there are categories to behold, if they are chronicled, then only according to the year and month of creation, regardless of the style, all kinds are sandwiched in one place, so it becomes "miscellaneous". Classification is conducive to figuring out the article, chronicle is conducive to understanding the current situation, if you want to know people and discuss the world, you must read the chronicle collection, and now the popularity of the new chronology of the ancients proves that many people have realized the news in this. Moreover, how urgent it is now, the author's task is to immediately respond or fight against harmful things, to be the nerves of induction, and the siblings of attack and defense. It is good to devote himself to his masterpieces and envision the culture of the future, but to fight for the present is also the author of the battle for the present and the future, because if you lose the present, there will be no future.战斗一定有倾向。这就是邵施杜林之流的大敌，其实他们所憎恶的是内容，虽然披了文艺的法衣，里面却包藏着“死之说教者”，和生存不能两立。
There must be a tendency to fight. This is the great enemy of Shaw and Dulin, in fact, what they hate is the content, although they are dressed in the vestments of literature and art, they contain "dead preachers", which are incompatible with survival.这一本集子和《花边文学》，是我在去年一年中，在官民的明明暗暗，软软硬硬的围剿“杂文”的笔和刀下的结集，凡是写下来的，全在这里面。当然不敢说是诗史，其中有着时代的眉目，也决不是英雄们的八宝箱，一朝打开，便见光辉灿烂。我只在深夜的街头摆着一个地摊，所有的无非几个小钉，几个瓦碟，但也希望，并且相信有些人会从中寻出合于他的用处的东西。
This collection and "Lace Literature" are the collection of my pen and knife in the open, light, and dark, soft and hard encirclement and suppression of "miscellaneous essays" by officials and the people last year. Of course, I dare not say that it is the history of poetry, which has the eyebrows of the times, and it is by no means the eight treasure chests of heroes. I only set up a street stall on the street late at night, all of which were nothing more than a few small nails and a few tiles, but I also hoped and believed that some people would find something useful for him.一九三五年十二月三十日，记于上海之且介亭。
On December 30, 1935, he was recorded at the Qiejie Pavilion in Shanghai.

一九三四年

一九三四年

一九三四年

1934

关于中国的两三件事

关于中国的两三件事

关于中国的两三件事

Two or three things about China一　关于中国的火
1. About China's fire希腊人所用的火，听说是在一直先前，普洛美修斯从天上偷来的，但中国的却和它不同，是燧人氏自家所发见——或者该说是发明罢。因为并非偷儿，所以拴在山上，给老雕去啄的灾难是免掉了，然而也没有普洛美修斯那样的被传扬，被崇拜。
The fire used by the Greeks is said to have been stolen from heaven by Prometheus a long time ago, but the Chinese one is different from it, it was discovered by the Suiren themselves - or should I say it was invented. Because he was not a thief, the disaster of being tied to the mountain and pecking at the old eagle was avoided, but it was not as preached and worshipped as Prometheus.中国也有火神的。但那可不是燧人氏，而是随意放火的莫名其妙的东西。
There is also a god of fire in China. But that was not the flint clan, but the inexplicable thing that set fire at will.自从燧人氏发见，或者发明了火以来，能够很有味的吃火锅，点起灯来，夜里也可以工作了，但是，真如先哲之所谓“有一利必有一弊”罢，同时也开始了火灾，故意点上火，烧掉那有巢氏所发明的巢的了不起的人物也出现了。
Since the discovery of the Suiren clan, or the invention of fire, it is possible to eat hot pot with great taste, light the lamp, and work at night, but as the sages said, "there must be a benefit and a disadvantage", and at the same time, the fire also started, deliberately lit a fire, and burned the nest invented by the Chao clan.和善的燧人氏是该被忘却的。即使伤了食，这回是属于神农氏的领域了，所以那神农氏，至今还被人们所记得。至于火灾，虽然不知道那发明家究竟是什么人，但祖师总归是有的，于是没有法，只好漫称之曰火神，而献以敬畏。看他的画像，是红面孔，红胡须，不过祭祀的时候，却须避去一切红色的东西，而代之以绿色。他大约像西班牙的牛一样，一看见红色，便会亢奋起来，做出一种可怕的行动的。
The kind Suiren clan should be forgotten. Even if it hurts food, this time it belongs to the realm of Shennong, so that Shennong is still remembered by people. As for the fire, although I don't know who the inventor is, the patriarch always has it, so there is no way, so I have to call it the god of fire and offer it in awe. Looking at his portrait, he has a red face and a red beard, but when he sacrifices, he must avoid all red things and replace them with green. He was about like a Spanish cow, and when he saw red, he would get excited and make a terrible action.他因此受着崇祀。在中国，这样的恶神还很多。
He was worshipped for this. In China, there are many such evil gods.然而，在人世间，倒似乎因了他们而热闹。赛会也只有火神的，燧人氏的却没有。倘有火灾，则被灾的和邻近的没有被灾的人们，都要祭火神，以表感谢之意。被了灾还要来表感谢之意，虽然未免有些出于意外，但若不祭，据说是第二回还会烧，所以还是感谢了的安全。而且也不但对于火神，就是对于人，有时也一样的这么办，我想，大约也是礼仪的一种罢。
However, in the world, it seems to be lively because of them. The competition only belongs to the god of fire, but not to the flint clan. If there is a fire, the affected and the neighbors who are not affected must worship the fire god to express their gratitude. Although it is a little out of surprise, if you don't sacrifice, it is said that it will be burned the second time, so you are still grateful for the safety. And not only for the god of fire, but also for people, sometimes the same is done, I think, it is probably a kind of etiquette.其实，放火，是很可怕的，然而比起烧饭来，却也许更有趣。外国的事情我不知道，若在中国，则无论查检怎样的历史，总寻不出烧饭和点灯的人们的列传来。在社会上，即使怎样的善于烧饭，善于点灯，也毫没有成为名人的希望。然而秦始皇一烧书，至今还俨然做着名人，至于引为希特拉烧书事件的先例。假使希特拉太太善于开电灯，烤面包罢，那么，要在历史上寻一点先例，恐怕可就难了。但是，幸而那样的事，是不会哄动一世的。
In fact, setting fire is very scary, but it may be more interesting than cooking. I don't know about foreign affairs, but if you are in China, no matter what kind of history you check, you will never be able to find the biographies of people who cook rice and light lamps. In society, no matter how good you are at cooking and lighting lights, you have no hope of becoming a celebrity. However, when Qin Shi Huang burned books, he still seems to be a celebrity, as for the precedent of Hitler's book burning incident. If Mrs. Hitler was good at turning on the light and baking bread, then it would be difficult to find a precedent in history. However, fortunately, such a thing will not stir up a lifetime.烧掉房子的事，据宋人的笔记说，是开始于蒙古人的。因为他们住着帐篷，不知道住房子，所以就一路的放火。然而，这是诳话。蒙古人中，懂得汉文的很少，所以不来更正的。其实，秦的末年就有着放火的名人项羽在，一烧阿房宫，便天下闻名，至今还会在戏台上出现，连在日本也很有名。然而，在未烧以前的阿房宫里每天点灯的人们，又有谁知道他们的名姓呢？
The burning of the house, according to the notes of the Song people, began with the Mongols. Because they lived in tents and didn't know what to do, they set fire all the way. However, this is a lie. Among the Mongols, there are very few who understand Chinese, so they do not come to correct it. In fact, in the last years of the Qin Dynasty, there was a famous Xiang Yu who set fire, and as soon as he burned the Epang Palace, he became famous all over the world, and he still appears on the stage, even famous in Japan. However, who knows the names of the people who lit lamps every day in the Epang Palace before the burning?现在是爆裂弹呀，烧夷弹呀之类的东西已经做出，加以飞机也很进步，如果要做名人，就更加容易了。而且如果放火比先前放得大，那么，那人就也更加受尊敬，从远处看去，恰如救世主一样，而那火光，便令人以为是光明。
Now things like explosive bombs and incendiary bombs have been made, and airplanes are also very advanced, so if you want to be a celebrity, it's even easier. And if the fire is bigger than before, then the person is also more respected, and from a distance, it looks like a savior, and the fire makes people think it is light.

关于中国的两三件事

二　关于中国的王道

关于中国的两三件事

2. About China's royal road在前年，曾经拜读过中里介山氏的大作《给支那及支那国民的信》。只记得那里面说，周汉都有着侵略者的资质。而支那人都讴歌他，欢迎他了。连对于朔北的元和清，也加以讴歌了。只要那侵略，有着安定国家之力，保护民生之实，那便是支那人民所渴望的王道，于是对于支那人的执迷不悟之点，愤慨得非常。
The year before last, I read Nakazato Jieyama's masterpiece "Letter to China and the Chinese People". I only remember that it said that Zhou and Han had the qualifications of an aggressor. And the people of China praised him and welcomed him. Even the Yuan and Qing dynasties in Shuobei were praised. As long as the aggression has the power to stabilize the country and protect people's livelihood, that is the royal road that the Chinese people aspire to, so they are very indignant about the obsession of the Chinese people.那“信”，在满洲出版的杂志上，是被译载了的，但因为未曾输入中国，所以像是回信的东西，至今一篇也没有见。只在去年的上海报上所载的胡适博士的谈话里，有的说，“只有一个方法可以征服中国，即彻底停止侵略，反过来征服中国民族的心。”不消说，那不过是偶然的，但也有些令人觉得好像是对于那信的答复。
The "letter" was translated in a magazine published in Manchuria, but because it was not imported into China, it seemed to be a reply letter, and not a single one has been seen so far. In Dr. Hu Shi's speech in last year's poster, some said, "There is only one way to conquer China, that is, to stop aggression altogether, and in turn to conquer the heart of the Chinese nation." Needless to say, it was just a coincidence, but it also felt like a reply to that letter.征服中国民族的心，这是胡适博士给中国之所谓王道所下的定义，然而我想，他自己恐怕也未必相信自己的话的罢。在中国，其实是彻底的未曾有过王道，“有历史癖和考据癖”的胡博士，该是不至于不知道的。
Conquering the heart of the Chinese nation is the definition given by Dr. Hu Shi to the so-called royal way of China, but I think he himself may not believe his own words. In China, in fact, Dr. Hu, who has never had a royal way at all, should not be unaware of it.不错，中国也有过讴歌了元和清的人们，但那是感谢火神之类，并非连心也全被征服了的证据。如果给与一个暗示，说是倘不讴歌，便将更加虐待，那么，即使加以或一程度的虐待，也还可以使人们来讴歌。四五年前，我曾经加盟于一个要求自由的团体，而那时的上海教育局长陈德征氏勃然大怒道，在三民主义的统治之下，还觉得不满么？那可连现在所给与着的一点自由也要收起了。而且，真的是收起了的。每当感到比先前更不自由的时候，我一面佩服着陈氏的精通王道的学识，一面有时也不免想，真该是讴歌三民主义的。然而，现在是已经太晚了。
Yes, there are people in China who have praised the Yuan and Qing dynasties, but it is thanks to the god of fire and the like, not even the heart is conquered. If a hint is given that if it is not praised, it will be more abusive, then even if it is abused, it can still make people praise. Four or five years ago, I joined a group that demanded freedom, and Chen Dezheng, the director of the Shanghai Education Bureau at that time, was furious and said, under the rule of the Three People's Principles, do you still feel dissatisfied? That would put away even the little freedom that was given to him now. Moreover, it is really put away. Whenever I feel less free than before, while admiring Chen's knowledge of mastering the royal way, I sometimes can't help but think that it should really be a praise of the Three People's Principles. However, it is already too late.在中国的王道，看去虽然好像是和霸道对立的东西，其实却是兄弟，这之前和之后，一定要有霸道跑来的。人民之所讴歌，就为了希望霸道的减轻，或者不更加重的缘故。
In China's royal road, although it seems to be the opposite of domineering, it is actually a brother. The people praise it just because they hope that the hegemony will be reduced, or not heavier.汉的高祖，据历史家说，是龙种，但其实是无赖出身，说是侵略者，恐怕有些不对的。至于周的武王，则以征伐之名入中国，加以和殷似乎连民族也不同，用现代的话来说，那可是侵略者。然而那时的民众的声音，现在已经没有留存了。孔子和孟子确曾大大的宣传过那王道，但先生们不但是周朝的臣民而已，并且周游历国，有所活动，所以恐怕是为了想做官也难说。说得好看一点，就是因为要“行道”，倘做了官，于行道就较为便当，而要做官，则不如称赞周朝之为便当的。然而，看起别的记载来，却虽是那王道的祖师而且专家的周朝，当讨伐之初，也有伯夷和叔齐扣马而谏，非拖开不可；纣的军队也加反抗，非使他们的血流到漂杵不可。接着是殷民又造了反，虽然特别称之曰“顽民”，从王道天下的人民中除开，但总之，似乎究竟有了一种什么破绽似的。好个王道，只消一个顽民，便将它弄得毫无根据了。
Han Gaozu, according to historians, was a dragon species, but in fact he was born as a scoundrel, and it is probably wrong to say that he was an aggressor. As for King Wu of Zhou, he entered China in the name of conquest, and it seems that even the ethnicity of Yin is different, and in modern terms, it is an aggressor. However, the voice of the people at that time is no longer preserved. Confucius and Mencius did greatly promote the royal way, but the gentlemen were not only subjects of the Zhou Dynasty, but also traveled around the country and had activities, so I am afraid that it is difficult to say that they want to be officials. To put it more nicely, it is because of the desire to "practice the way", if you become an official, it is more convenient to practice the way, and if you want to be an official, it is better to praise the Zhou Dynasty as a convenience. However, looking at other records, although the Zhou Dynasty, which was the ancestor of the royal way and an expert, at the beginning of the crusade, there were also Bo Yi and Shu Qi who detained their horses and advised, and they had to be dragged away; Zhou's army also resisted, and their blood had to flow to the pestle. Then Yin Min rebelled again, although he was specially called "stubborn people", removed from the people of the royal world, but in short, it seemed that there was some kind of flaw. What a king's way is that only one stubborn person can make it unfounded.儒士和方士，是中国特产的名物。方士的最高理想是仙道，儒士的便是王道。但可惜的是这两件在中国终于都没有。据长久的历史上的事实所证明，则倘说先前曾有真的王道者，是妄言，说现在还有者，是新药。孟子生于周季，所以以谈霸道为羞，倘使生于今日，则跟着人类的智识范围的展开，怕要羞谈王道的罢。
Confucian scholars and alchemists are famous Chinese specialties. The highest ideal of the alchemist is the immortal way, and the Confucian scholar is the royal way. But unfortunately, these two pieces are finally not available in China. According to the facts of long history, if there was a real royal way before, it is a lie, and if there is still a new medicine. Mencius was born in the late Zhou Dynasty, so he was ashamed to talk about hegemony, and if he was born today, he would follow the expansion of the scope of human knowledge, and he was afraid that he would be ashamed to talk about the royal way.

关于中国的两三件事

三　关于中国的监狱

关于中国的两三件事

3. About China's prisons我想，人们是的确由事实而从新省悟，而事情又由此发生变化的。从宋朝到清朝的末年，许多年间，专以代圣贤立言的“制艺”这一种烦难的文章取士，到得和法国打了败仗，这才省悟了这方法的错误。于是派留学生到西洋，开设兵器制造局，作为那改正的手段。省悟到这还不够，是在和日本打了败仗之后，这回是竭力开起学校来。于是学生们年年大闹了。从清朝倒掉，国民党掌握政权的时候起，才又省悟了这错误，作为那改正的手段的，是除了大造监狱之外，什么也没有了。
I think people are indeed awakened by facts, and things change because of it. From the Song Dynasty to the end of the Qing Dynasty, for many years, the troublesome article of "making art" on behalf of the sages was used to select scholars, and it was only after losing the battle with France that they realized the mistake of this method. So he sent international students to the West and opened a weapons manufacturing bureau as a means of correction. Realizing that this was not enough, after losing the war with Japan, this time he tried his best to open a school. So the students made a big fuss every year. From the fall of the Qing Dynasty and the seizure of power by the Kuomintang, this mistake was realized again, and as a means of correction, there was nothing but the construction of prisons.在中国，国粹式的监狱，是早已各处都有的，到清末，就也造了一点西洋式，即所谓文明式的监狱。那是为了示给旅行到此的外国人而建造，应该与为了和外国人好互相应酬，特地派出去，学些文明人的礼节的留学生，属于同一种类的。托了这福，犯人的待遇也还好，给洗澡，也给一定分量的饭吃，所以倒是颇为幸福的地方。但是，就在两三礼拜前，政府因为要行仁政了，还发过一个不准克扣囚粮的命令。从此以后，可更加幸福了。
In China, national-style prisons have long been everywhere, and by the end of the Qing Dynasty, a little Western-style, the so-called civilized prison, was also built. It was built to show foreigners who traveled here, and it should be the same kind of international students who were sent out to learn the etiquette of civilized people in order to socialize with foreigners. Thanks to this blessing, the prisoners are treated well, bathing, and giving a certain amount of food, so it is quite a happy place. However, just two or three weeks ago, the government issued an order not to deduct prisoners' food because it was going to practice benevolent governance. From then on, I was happier.至于旧式的监狱，则因为好像是取法于佛教的地狱的，所以不但禁锢犯人，此外还有给他吃苦的职掌。挤取金钱，使犯人的家属穷到透顶的职掌，有时也会兼带的。但大家都以为应该。如果有谁反对罢，那就等于替犯人说话，便要受恶党的嫌疑。然而文明是出奇的进步了，所以去年也有了提倡每年该放犯人回家一趟，给以解决性欲的机会的，颇是人道主义气味之说的官吏。其实，他也并非对于犯人的性欲，特别表着同情，不过因为总不愁竟会实行的，所以也就高声嚷一下，以见自己的作为官吏的存在。然而舆论颇为沸腾了。有一位批评家，还以为这么一来，大家便要不怕牢监，高高兴兴的进去了，很为世道人心愤慨了一下。受了所谓圣贤之教那么久，竟还没有那位官吏的圆滑，固然也令人觉得诚实可靠，然而他的意见，是以为对于犯人，非加虐待不可，却也因此可见了。
As for the old-style prison, because it seems to be inspired by the Buddhist hell, it not only imprisons the prisoner, but also gives him the duty to endure hardships. Squeezing money and making the prisoner's family extremely poor is also a responsibility, sometimes both. But everyone thought it should. If anyone objects, it is equivalent to speaking for the prisoner, and he will be suspected of being a villain. However, civilization has made surprising progress, so last year there were also officials who advocated that prisoners should be released home once a year to give them a chance to solve their sexual desires. In fact, he did not show special sympathy for the sexual desire of the prisoner, but because he was not worried about it, he would do it, so he shouted loudly to see his existence as an official. However, public opinion is quite boiling. There was a critic who thought that in this way, everyone would not be afraid of prison and happily went in, which was very indignant for the world. After being taught by the so-called sages for so long, he did not have the smoothness of that official, which certainly made people feel honest and reliable, but his opinion was that prisoners must be abused, but it was also visible.从别一条路想，监狱确也并非没有不像以“安全第一”为标语的人们的理想乡的地方。火灾极少，偷儿不来，土匪也一定不来抢。即使打仗，也决没有以监狱为目标，施行轰炸的傻子；即使革命，有释放囚犯的例，而加以屠戮的是没有的。当福建独立之初，虽有说是释放犯人，而一到外面，和他们自己意见不同的人们倒反而失踪了的谣言，然而这样的例子，以前是未曾有过的。总而言之，似乎也并非很坏的处所。只要准带家眷，则即使不是现在似的大水，饥荒，战争，恐怖的时候，请求搬进去住的人们，也未必一定没有的。于是虐待就成为必不可少了。
Thinking about it from another way, prisons are indeed not without their utopia like the slogan "safety first". There are very few fires, thieves don't come, and bandits definitely don't come to rob. Even if there is a war, there will never be a fool who targets prisons and bombs; Even if there is a revolution, there are examples of releasing prisoners, but there are no massacres. At the beginning of Fujian's independence, although there were rumors that prisoners were released, people who disagreed with their own opinions disappeared when they went outside, but such an example had never happened before. All in all, it doesn't seem to be a very bad place. As long as you are allowed to bring your family, even if it is not the current flood, famine, war, or terror, people who ask to move in may not necessarily be absent. So abuse becomes essential.牛兰夫妇，作为赤化宣传者而关在南京的监狱里，也绝食了三四回了，可是什么效力也没有。这是因为他不知道中国的监狱的精神的缘故。有一位官员诧异的说过：他自己不吃，和别人有什么关系呢？岂但和仁政并无关系而已呢，省些食料，倒是于监狱有益的。甘地的把戏，倘不挑选兴行场，就毫无成效了。
Niu Lan and his wife, who were imprisoned in Nanjing prison as red propagandists, also went on hunger strike three or four times, but there was no effect. This is because he does not know the spirit of Chinese prisons. An official said in surprise: If he doesn't eat it himself, what does it have to do with others? Not only does it have nothing to do with benevolent governance, but saving some food is beneficial to prisons. Gandhi's tricks are useless if they do not choose the entertainment venue.然而，在这样的近于完美的监狱里，却还剩着一种缺点。至今为止，对于思想上的事，都没有很留心。为要弥补这缺点，是在近来新发明的叫作“反省院”的特种监狱里，施着教育。我还没有到那里面去反省过，所以并不知道详情，但要而言之，好像是将三民主义时时讲给犯人听，使他反省着自己的错误。听人说，此外还得做排击共产主义的论文。如果不肯做，或者不能做，那自然，非终身反省不可了，而做得不够格，也还是非反省到死则不可。现在是进去的也有，出来的也有，因为听说还得添造反省院，可见还是进去的多了。考完放出的良民，偶尔也可以遇见，但仿佛大抵是萎靡不振，恐怕是在反省和毕业论文上，将力气使尽了罢。那前途，是在没有希望这一面的。
However, in such a near-perfect prison, there is still a shortcoming. So far, I have not paid much attention to ideological matters. In order to compensate for this shortcoming, education is provided in a special prison called the "Reflection Institute", which has recently been invented. I haven't been there to reflect on it yet, so I don't know the details, but in short, it seems that the Three People's Principles are told to the prisoner from time to time, making him reflect on his mistakes. I heard that in addition, I had to write a paper on combating communism. If you refuse to do it, or if you can't do it, then naturally, you have to reflect on it for life, and if you don't do it enough, you still have to reflect until death. Now there are those who go in and those who come out, because I heard that they have to add a reflection institute, so it can be seen that there are still many people who go in. The good people who are released after the exam can occasionally be met, but it seems that they are probably sluggish, and I am afraid that they have exhausted their strength in reflection and graduation thesis. That future is hopeless.

答国际文学社问

答国际文学社问

答国际文学社问

Answer questions from the International Literary Society原问——
Original question -一、苏联的存在与成功，对于你怎样（苏维埃建设的十月革命，对于你的思想的路径和创作的性质，有什么改变）？
1. What did the existence and success of the Soviet Union do to you (how did the Soviet-built October Revolution change the path of your thinking and the nature of your creation)?二、你对于苏维埃文学的意见怎样？
2. What is your opinion on Soviet literature?三、在资本主义的各国，什么事件和种种文化上的进行，特别引起你的注意？
3. What events and cultural developments in capitalist countries have particularly attracted your attention?一，先前，旧社会的腐败，我是觉到了的，我希望着新的社会的起来，但不知道这“新的”该是什么；而且也不知道“新的”起来以后，是否一定就好。待到十月革命后，我才知道这“新的”社会的创造者是无产阶级，但因为资本主义各国的反宣传，对于十月革命还有些冷淡，并且怀疑。现在苏联的存在和成功，使我确切的相信无阶级社会一定要出现，不但完全扫除了怀疑，而且增加许多勇气了。但在创作上，则因为我不在革命的旋涡中心，而且久不能到各处去考察，所以我大约仍然只能暴露旧社会的坏处。
First, I was aware of the corruption of the old society before, and I hope for the rise of the new society, but I don't know what this "new" should be; And I don't know if it will be good after the "new" is built. It was not until after the October Revolution that I learned that the creator of this "new" society was the proletariat, but because of the counter-propaganda of capitalist countries, I was still a little cold and skeptical of the October Revolution. The existence and success of the Soviet Union now makes me firmly believe that a classless society must emerge, which not only completely dispells doubt, but also increases a lot of courage. But in terms of creation, because I am not at the center of the vortex of the revolution, and I have not been able to go everywhere for a long time, I can probably only expose the evils of the old society.二，我只能看别国——德国，日本——的译本。我觉得现在的讲建设的，还是先前的讲战斗的——如《铁甲列车》，《毁灭》，《铁流》等——于我有兴趣，并且有益。我看苏维埃文学，是大半因为想绍介给中国，而对于中国，现在也还是战斗的作品更为紧要。
Second, I can only read translations from other countries - Germany, Japan. I think the current talk about construction, or the previous combat - such as "Ironclad Train", "Destruction", "Iron Flow", etc. - is interesting and beneficial to me. I read Soviet literature mostly because I wanted to introduce it to China, and for China, it is still more important to fight works.三，我在中国，看不见资本主义各国之所谓“文化”；我单知道他们和他们的奴才们，在中国正在用力学和化学的方法，还有电气机械，以拷问革命者，并且用飞机和炸弹以屠杀革命群众。
Third, I can't see the so-called "culture" of capitalist countries in China; I only know that they and their minions are using mechanics and chemistry, as well as electrical machinery, in China to torture revolutionaries, and to slaughter the revolutionaries with planes and bombs.

《草鞋脚》（英译中国短篇小说集）小引

《草鞋脚》（英译中国短篇小说集）小引

《草鞋脚》（英译中国短篇小说集）小引

"Straw Shoes Feet" (English translation of Chinese short story collection) small introduction在中国，小说是向来不算文学的。在轻视的眼光下，自从十八世纪末的《红楼梦》以后，实在也没有产生什么较伟大的作品。小说家的侵入文坛，仅是开始“文学革命”运动，即一九一七年以来的事。自然，一方面是由于社会的要求的，一方面则是受了西洋文学的影响。
In China, novels have never been considered literature. Under the contemptuous eye, since "Dream of Red Mansions" at the end of the eighteenth century, there have really been no great works. The invasion of novelists into the literary world was only the beginning of the "literary revolution" movement, that is, since 1917. Naturally, on the one hand, it is due to the requirements of society, and on the other hand, it is influenced by Western literature.但这新的小说的生存，却总在不断的战斗中。最初，文学革命者的要求是人性的解放，他们以为只要扫荡了旧的成法，剩下来的便是原来的人，好的社会了，于是就遇到保守家们的迫压和陷害。大约十年之后，阶级意识觉醒了起来，前进的作家，就都成了革命文学者，而迫害也更加厉害，禁止出版，烧掉书籍，杀戮作家，有许多青年，竟至于在黑暗中，将生命殉了他的工作了。
But the survival of this new novel is always in constant battle. Initially, the demand of the literary revolutionaries was the liberation of human nature, thinking that as long as the old laws were swept away, what was left was the original people and a good society, so they encountered the oppression and framing of conservatives. About ten years later, the class consciousness awakened, and the writers who advanced became revolutionary writers, and the persecution became even more severe, banning publications, burning books, killing writers, and many young people even sacrificed their lives in the dark.这一本书，便是十五年来的，“文学革命”以后的短篇小说的选集。因为在我们还算是新的尝试，自然不免幼稚，但恐怕也可以看见它恰如压在大石下面的植物一般，虽然并不繁荣，它却在曲曲折折地生长。
This book is an anthology of short stories after the "literary revolution" in the past fifteen years. Because it is still a new attempt, it is naturally naïve, but I am afraid that it can also be seen as a plant pressed under a boulder, although it is not prosperous, it is growing in twists and turns.至今为止，西洋人讲中国的著作，大约比中国人民讲自己的还要多。不过这些总不免只是西洋人的看法，中国有一句古谚，说：“肺腑而能语，医师面如土。”我想，假使肺腑真能说话，怕也未必一定完全可靠的罢，然而，也一定能有医师所诊察不到，出乎意外，而其实是十分真实的地方。
So far, Westerners have talked about more Chinese works than Chinese people have talked about themselves. However, these are inevitably just the views of Westerners, there is an ancient Chinese proverb that says: "The heart is able to speak, and the physician's face is like soil." "I think that if the heart can really speak, I am afraid it may not be completely reliable, but there must be a place that the doctor cannot detect, unexpectedly, but in fact it is very real.一九三四年三月二十三日，鲁迅记于上海。
On March 23, 1934, Lu Xun recorded in Shanghai.

论“旧形式的采用”

论“旧形式的采用”

论“旧形式的采用”

On the "Adoption of Old Forms"“旧形式的采用”的问题，如果平心静气的讨论起来，在现在，我想是很有意义的，但开首便遭到了耳耶先生的笔伐。“类乎投降”，“机会主义”，这是近十年来“新形式的探求”的结果，是克敌的咒文，至少先使你惹一身不干不净。但耳耶先生是正直的，因为他同时也在译《艺术底内容和形式》，一经登完，便会洗净他激烈的责罚；而且有几句话也正确的，是他说新形式的探求不能和旧形式的采用机械的地分开。
The issue of "adoption of the old form" is considered very meaningful if discussed calmly now, but it was attacked by Mr. Earle at the beginning. "Surrender", "opportunism", this is the result of the "new form of exploration" in the past decade, and it is a spell to defeat the enemy, at least to make you unclean. But Mr. Earle is upright, because he is also translating "The Content and Form of Art", and once it is published, it will wash away his fierce punishment; And a few words are also true when he says that the new form of search cannot be mechanically separated from the old form.不过这几句话已经可以说是常识；就是说内容和形式不能机械的地分开，也已经是常识；还有，知道作品和大众不能机械的地分开，也当然是常识。旧形式为什么只是“采用”——但耳耶先生却指为“为整个（!）旧艺术捧场”——就是为了新形式的探求。采取若干，和“整个”捧来是不同的，前进的艺术家不能有这思想（内容）。然而他会想到采取旧艺术，因为他明白了作品和大众不能机械的地分开。以为艺术是艺术家的“灵感”的爆发，像鼻子发痒的人，只要打出喷嚏来就浑身舒服，一了百了的时候已经过去了，现在想到，而且关心了大众。这是一个新思想（内容），由此而在探求新形式，首先提出的是旧形式的采取，这采取的主张，正是新形式的发端，也就是旧形式的蜕变，在我看来，是既没有将内容和形式机械的地分开，更没有看得《姊妹花》叫座，于是也来学一套的投机主义的罪案的。
However, these few sentences can already be said to be common sense; That is to say, content and form cannot be mechanically separated, which is already common sense; Also, it is common sense to know that works cannot be mechanically separated from the public. Why the old form is only "adopted" - but Mr. Earle refers to it as "supporting the whole (!) old art" - is for the exploration of the new form. Taking a few, which is different from the "whole" holding, the advancing artist cannot have this idea (content). However, he would think of adopting old art because he understood that the work and the public could not be mechanically separated. I think art is an outburst of "inspiration" for artists, like a person with an itchy nose, as long as he sneezes, he feels comfortable, and the time has passed, and now he thinks about it, and cares about the public. This is a new idea (content), and thus it is exploring a new form, and the first thing to put forward is the adoption of the old form, which is the beginning of the new form, that is, the transformation of the old form, in my opinion, it neither mechanically separates the content and the form, let alone the popularity of "Sister Flower", so it also comes to learn a set of opportunistic crimes.自然，旧形式的采取，或者必须说新形式的探求，都必须艺术学徒的努力的实践，但理论家或批评家是同有指导，评论，商量的责任的，不能只斥他交代未清之后，便可逍遥事外。我们有艺术史，而且生在中国，即必须翻开中国的艺术史来。采取什么呢？我想，唐以前的真迹，我们无从目睹了，但还能知道大抵以故事为题材，这是可以取法的；在唐，可取佛画的灿烂，线画的空实和明快，宋的院画，萎靡柔媚之处当舍，周密不苟之处是可取的，米点山水，则毫无用处。后来的写意画（文人画）有无用处，我此刻不敢确说，恐怕也许还有可用之点的罢。这些采取，并非断片的古董的杂陈，必须溶化于新作品中，那是不必赘说的事，恰如吃用牛羊，弃去蹄毛，留其精粹，以滋养及发达新的生体，决不因此就会“类乎”牛羊的。
Naturally, the adoption of old forms, or the search for new forms, must be practiced by the efforts of art apprentices, but theorists or critics have the same responsibility to guide, comment, and consult. We have art history, and we were born in China, which means we must open up Chinese art history. What to take? I think that we have no way to witness the authentic works before the Tang Dynasty, but we can still know that most of them are based on stories, which can be learned; In the Tang Dynasty, the splendor of Buddhist paintings, the emptiness and brightness of line paintings, the courtyard paintings of the Song Dynasty, the wilting and softness should be abandoned, the meticulous places are desirable, and the rice point of the landscape is useless. I dare not say for sure whether later freehand paintings (literati paintings) are useful or not, but I am afraid that there may still be points that can be used. These takes, not fragments of antiques, must be dissolved in new works, which is needless to say, just like eating cattle and sheep, discarding the hoof hair, leaving its essence, in order to nourish and develop a new living body, it will never be "like" to cattle and sheep.只是上文所举的，亦即我们现在所能看见的，都是消费的艺术。它一向独得有力者的宠爱，所以还有许多存留。但既有消费者，必有生产者，所以一面有消费者的艺术，一面也有生产者的艺术。古代的东西，因为无人保护，除小说的插画以外，我们几乎什么也看不见了。至于现在，却还有市上新年的花纸，和猛克先生所指出的连环图画。这些虽未必是真正的生产者的艺术，但和高等有闲者的艺术对立，是无疑的。但虽然如此，它还是大受着消费者艺术的影响，例如在文学上，则民歌大抵脱不开七言的范围，在图画上，则题材多是士大夫的故事，然而已经加以提炼，成为明快，简捷的东西了。这也就是蜕变，一向则谓之“俗”。注意于大众的艺术家，来注意于这些东西，大约也未必错，至于仍要加以提炼，那也是无须赘说的。
However, what we can see now is the art of consumption. It has always been favored by the powerful, so many still remain. But there are both consumers and producers, so there is the art of consumers on the one hand, and there is also the art of producers on the other. Ancient things, because they are unprotected, we can hardly see anything except the illustrations of novels. As for now, there are still New Year's flower papers on the market and the comic strips pointed out by Mr. Mengke. Although these may not be the art of real producers, they are undoubtedly opposed to the art of the higher idlers. But even so, it is still greatly influenced by consumer art, for example, in literature, folk songs are probably inseparable from the scope of seven words, and in pictures, the theme is mostly the story of scholar-officials, but it has been refined into a bright and simple thing. This is also transformation, which has always been called "vulgar". It is probably not wrong for artists who pay attention to the masses to pay attention to these things, and as for refining them, there is no need to say more.但中国的两者的艺术，也有形似而实不同的地方，例如佛画的满幅云烟，是豪华的装璜，花纸也有一种硬填到几乎不见白纸的，却是惜纸的节俭；唐伯虎画的细腰纤手的美人，是他一类人们的欲得之物，花纸上也有这一种，在赏玩者却只以为世间有这一类人物，聊资博识，或满足好奇心而已。为大众的画家，都无须避忌。
However, the art of the two in China also has similarities but real differences, such as the clouds and smoke of Buddhist paintings, which are luxurious decorations, and the flower paper is also filled so hard that there is almost no white paper, but it is the frugality of cherishing paper; The beauty with a slender waist and slender hands painted by Tang Bohu is something that people like him want, and there is also this kind on the flower paper, but the appreciator only thinks that there is this kind of character in the world, just to be knowledgeable or to satisfy curiosity. For the masses, there is no need to avoid taboos.至于谓连环图画不过图画的种类之一，与文学中之有诗歌，戏曲，小说相同，那自然是不错的。但这种类之别，也仍然与社会条件相关联，则我们只要看有时盛行诗歌，有时大出小说，有时独多短篇的史实便可以知道。因此，也可以知道即与内容相关联。现在社会上的流行连环图画，即因为它有流行的可能，且有流行的必要，着眼于此，因而加以导引，正是前进的艺术家的正确的任务；为了大众，力求易懂，也正是前进的艺术家正确的努力。旧形式是采取，必有所删除，既有删除，必有所增益，这结果是新形式的出现，也就是变革。而且，这工作是决不如旁观者所想的容易的。
As for saying that comic strips are just one of the types of pictures, it is the same as poetry, opera, and novels in literature, which is naturally good. However, this kind of difference is still related to social conditions, so we only need to look at the historical facts that sometimes prevail in poetry, sometimes in novels, and sometimes in short stories. Therefore, it is also possible to know that it is associated with the content. The popular comic strips in society now, because they have the possibility of popularity and the need to be popular, focus on this, and guide them, which is the correct task of the advancing artists; For the sake of the public, striving for ease of understanding is also the correct effort of the advancing artists. The old form is adopted, it must be deleted, and if it is deleted, it must be gained, and the result is the emergence of a new form, that is, change. Moreover, this work is by no means as easy as the bystanders think.但就是立有了新形式罢，当然不会就是很高的艺术。艺术的前进，还要别的文化工作的协助，某一文化部门，要某一专家唱独脚戏来提得特别高，是不妨空谈，却难做到的事，所以专责个人，那立论的偏颇和偏重环境的是一样的。
But if there is a new form, of course, it will not be a very high art. The advancement of art also requires the assistance of other cultural work, a certain cultural department, a certain expert to sing a one-man show to raise it particularly high, is a matter of empty talk, but it is difficult to do, so it is responsible for the individual, the bias of the argument is the same as the bias of the environment.五月二日。
May 2nd.

连环图画琐谈

连环图画琐谈

连环图画琐谈

Comic strip trivia“连环图画”的拥护者，看现在的议论，是“启蒙”之意居多的。
Advocates of "comic strips", looking at the current discussion, are mostly "enlightenment".古人“左图右史”，现在只剩下一句话，看不见真相了，宋元小说，有的是每页上图下说，却至今还有存留，就是所谓“出相”；明清以来，有卷头只画书中人物的，称为“绣像”。有画每回故事的，称为“全图”。那目的，大概是在诱引未读者的购读，增加阅读者的兴趣和理解。
The ancients "left picture and right history", now there is only one sentence left, the truth is invisible, Song and Yuan novels, some are said on each page on the picture and below, but there is still a trace, which is the so-called "appearance"; Since the Ming and Qing dynasties, there have been books that only draw characters in books, which are called "embroidered portraits". Those who draw each story are called "full pictures". The purpose is probably to lure unreaders to buy and increase readers' interest and understanding.但民间另有一种《智灯难字》或《日用杂字》，是一字一像，两相对照，虽可看图，主意却在帮助识字的东西，略加变通，便是现在的《看图识字》。文字较多的是《圣谕像解》，《二十四孝图》等，都是借图画以启蒙，又因中国文字太难，只得用图画来济文字之穷的产物。
However, there is another kind of "Zhideng Difficult Words" or "Daily Miscellaneous Words" among the people, which is a word and an image, two comparisons, although you can see the picture, but the idea is to help the literate thing, and it is slightly flexible, which is the current "Looking at the Picture and Literacy". The more texts are "Sacred Edict Image Explanation", "Twenty-Four Filial Piety Pictures", etc., all of which are the product of enlightenment through pictures, and because Chinese characters are too difficult, they have to use pictures to help the poor of words.“连环图画”便是取“出相”的格式，收《智灯难字》的功效的，倘要启蒙，实在也是一种利器。
"Comic Picture" is to take the format of "out of the phase" and receive the effect of "Wisdom Lantern Difficult Words", if you want to enlighten, it is really a sharp weapon.但要启蒙，即必须能懂。懂的标准，当然不能俯就低能儿或白痴，但应该着眼于一般的大众，譬如罢，中国画是一向没有阴影的，我所遇见的农民，十之九不赞成西洋画及照相，他们说：人脸那有两边颜色不同的呢？西洋人的看画，是观者作为站在一定之处的，但中国的观者，却向不站在定点上，所以他说的话也是真实。那么，作“连环图画”而没有阴影，我以为是可以的；人物旁边写上名字，也可以的，甚至于表示做梦从人头上放出一道毫光来，也无所不可。观者懂得了内容之后，他就会自己删去帮助理解的记号。这也不能谓之失真，因为观者既经会得了内容，便是有了艺术上的真，倘必如实物之真，则人物只有二三寸，就不真了，而没有和地球一样大小的纸张，地球便无法绘画。
But to be enlightened, you must be able to understand. The standard of understanding, of course, cannot be imbecile or idiot, but it should focus on the general public, for example, Chinese painting has always had no shadow, and nine out of ten peasants I met did not approve of Western painting and photography, they said: What about the color difference on both sides of the human face? Westerners look at paintings as the viewer stands at a certain place, but the Chinese viewer never stands at a fixed point, so what he says is also true. Then, I think it is possible to make a "comic strip" without shadows; It is also possible to write the name next to the character, or even to say that the dream emits a ray of light from the person's head, which is anything. After the viewer understands the content, he will delete the marks that help him understand. This cannot be called distortion, because the viewer has experienced the content, that is, there is artistic truth, if it must be like the real thing, then the figure is only two or three inches, it is not real, and without the same size of paper as the earth, the earth cannot be painted.艾思奇先生说：“若能够触到大众真正的切身问题，那恐怕愈是新的，才愈能流行。”这话也并不错。不过要商量的是怎样才能够触到，触到之法，“懂”是最要紧的，而且能懂的图画，也可以仍然是艺术。
Mr. Ai Siqi said: "If it can touch the real pressing problems of the public, I am afraid that the newer it is, the more popular it will be." This is not bad either. However, what needs to be discussed is how to touch it, how to touch it, "understanding" is the most important, and the picture that can be understood can still be art.五月九日。
May 9th.

儒术

儒术

儒术

Confucianism元遗山在金元之际，为文宗，为遗献，为愿修野史，保存旧章的有心人，明清以来，颇为一部分人士所爱重。然而他生平有一宗疑案，就是为叛将崔立颂德者，是否确实与他无涉，或竟是出于他的手笔的文章。
Yuan Yishan was in the Jin Yuan Dynasty, for Emperor Wenzong, for the legacy, for the willingness to repair the wild history, and to preserve the old chapters, since the Ming and Qing dynasties, it has been loved and respected by some people. However, there is a suspicious case in his life, that is, whether the traitor Cui Li praises virtue has nothing to do with him, or whether it is actually an article written by him.金天兴元年（一二三二），蒙古兵围洛阳；次年，安平都尉京城西面元帅崔立杀二丞相，自立为郑王，降于元。惧或加以恶名，群小承旨，议立碑颂功德，于是在文臣间，遂发生了极大的惶恐，因为这与一生的名节相关，在个人是十分重要的。
In the first year of Jin Tianxing (1232), the Mongolian soldiers besieged Luoyang; The following year, Cui Li, the marshal of the western capital of Anping, killed the two prime ministers, declared himself the King of Zheng, and surrendered to the Yuan Dynasty. Fearing or being infamous, the small people accepted the decree and decided to erect a monument to praise the merits, so among the civil officials, there was great fear, because it was related to the reputation of a lifetime and was very important to the individual.当时的情状，《金史》《王若虚传》这样说——
The situation at that time, "History of Jin" and "The Biography of Wang Ruoxu" said like this -“天兴元年，哀宗走归德。明年春，崔立变，群小附和，请为立建功德碑。翟奕以尚书省命，召若虚为文。时奕辈恃势作威，人或少许，则谗立见屠灭。若虚自分必死，私谓左右司员外郎元好问曰，‘今召我作碑，不从则死，作之则名节扫地，不若死之为愈。虽然，我姑以理谕之。’……奕辈不能夺，乃召太学生刘祁麻革辈赴省，好问张信之喻以立碑事曰，‘众议属二君，且已白郑王矣！二君其无让。’祁等固辞而别。数日，促迫不已，祁即为草定，以付好问。好问意未惬，乃自为之，既成，以示若虚，乃共删定数字，然止直叙其事而已。后兵入城，不果立也。”
“天兴元年，哀宗走归德。 明年春，崔立变，群小附和，请为立建功德碑。 翟奕以尚书省命，召若虚为文。 时奕辈恃势作威，人或少许，则谗立见屠灭。 若虚自分必死，私谓左右司员外郎元好问曰，‘今召我作碑，不从则死，作之则名节扫地，不若死之为愈。 虽然，我姑以理谕之。 ’…… 奕辈不能夺，乃召太学生刘祁麻革辈赴省，好问张信之喻以立碑事曰，‘众议属二君，且已白郑王矣！二君其无让。 ’祁等固辞而别。 数日，促迫不已，祁即为草定，以付好问。 好问意未惬，乃自为之，既成，以示若虚，乃共删定数字，然止直叙其事而已。 后兵入城，不果立也。 ”碑虽然“不果立”，但当时却已经发生了“名节”的问题，或谓元好问作，或谓刘祁作，文证具在清凌廷堪所辑的《元遗山先生年谱》中，兹不多录。经其推勘，已知前出的《王若虚传》文，上半据元好问《内翰王公墓表》，后半却全取刘祁自作的《归潜志》，被诬攀之说所蒙蔽了。凌氏辩之云，“夫当时立碑撰文，不过畏崔立之祸，非必取文辞之工，有京叔属草，已足塞立之请，何取更为之耶？”然则刘祁之未尝决死如王若虚，固为一生大玷，但不能更有所推诿，以致成为“塞责”之具，却也可以说是十分晦气的。
Although the stele was "not established", the problem of "fame" had already occurred at that time, or Yuan Haowen, or Liu Qi, and the documentary evidence is in the "Chronology of Mr. Yuan Yishan" compiled by Ling Tingkan of the Qing Dynasty, which is not recorded here. After its investigation, it is known that the previous "Biography of Wang Ruoxu" is based on Yuan Haowen's "Neihan Wang Cemetery Table", but the second half is all based on Liu Qi's own "Gui Qianzhi", which is deceived by the theory of false climbing. Ling argued, "At that time, the monument was erected and written, but it was afraid of Cui Li's disaster, and it was not necessary to take the skill of the word, but there was Jing Shu's grass, which was enough to block the request of Cui Li, so why do you want to do it again?" However, Liu Qizhi did not die like Wang Ruoxu, which was certainly a great stain in his life, but he could not shirk more, so that he became a tool for "blocking responsibility", but it could also be said to be very unlucky.然而，元遗山生平还有一宗大事，见于《元史》《张德辉传》——
However, there is another major event in Yuan Yishan's life, which is seen in the "History of the Yuan Dynasty" and "The Biography of Zhang Dehui" -“世祖在潜邸，……访中国人材。德辉举魏璠，元裕，李冶等二十余人。……壬子，德辉与元裕北觐，请世祖为儒教大宗师，世祖悦而受之。因启：累朝有旨蠲儒户兵赋，乞令有司遵行。从之。”
“世祖在潜邸，…… 访中国人材。 德辉举魏璠，元裕，李冶等二十余人。 …… 壬子，德辉与元裕北觐，请世祖为儒教大宗师，世祖悦而受之。 因启：累朝有旨蠲儒户兵赋，乞令有司遵行。 从之。 ”以拓跋魏的后人，与德辉请蒙古小酋长为“汉儿”的“儒教大宗师”，在现在看来，未免有些滑稽，但当时却似乎并无訾议。盖蠲除兵赋，“儒户”均沾利益，清议操之于士，利益既沾，虽已将“儒教”呈献，也不想再来开口了。
As a descendant of Tuoba Wei, and Dehui's invitation to the Mongolian little chieftain as the "great master of Confucianism" seems a bit funny now, but it seems that there was no criticism at that time. The military tax was abolished, and the "Confucian households" were all benefited, and the Qing discussion was practiced by the scholars, and the interests were both affected, although the "Confucianism" had been presented, and they did not want to speak again.由此士大夫便渐渐的进身，然终因不切实用，又渐渐的见弃。但仕路日塞，而南北之士的相争却也日甚了。余阙的《青阳先生文集》卷四《杨君显民诗集序》云——
As a result, the scholar-officials gradually entered, but in the end, they were gradually abandoned because they were impractical. However, the official path is becoming more and more congested, and the competition between the north and south is also intensifying. Yu Que's "Collected Works of Mr. Qingyang" Volume 4 "Preface to Yang Jun Xianmin's Poetry Collection" -“我国初有金宋，天下之人，惟才是用之，无所专主，然用儒者为居多也。自至元以下，始浸用吏，虽执政大臣，亦以吏为之，……而中州之士，见用者遂浸寡。况南方之地远，士多不能自至于京师，其抱才缊者，又往往不屑为吏，故其见用者尤寡也。及其久也，则南北之士亦自町畦以相訾，甚若晋之与秦，不可与同中国，故夫南方之士微矣。”
“我国初有金宋，天下之人，惟才是用之，无所专主，然用儒者为居多也。 自至元以下，始浸用吏，虽执政大臣，亦以吏为之，…… 而中州之士，见用者遂浸寡。 况南方之地远，士多不能自至于京师，其抱才缊者，又往往不屑为吏，故其见用者尤寡也。 及其久也，则南北之士亦自町畦以相訾，甚若晋之与秦，不可与同中国，故夫南方之士微矣。 ”然在南方，士人其实亦并不冷落。同书《送范立中赴襄阳诗序》云——
然在南方，士人其实亦并不冷落。 同书《送范立中赴襄阳诗序》云——“宋高宗南迁，合淝遂为边地，守臣多以武臣为之。……故民之豪杰者，皆去而为将校，累功多至节制。郡中衣冠之族，惟范氏，商氏，葛氏三家而已。……皇元受命，包裹兵革，……诸武臣之子弟，无所用其能，多伏匿而不出。春秋月朔，郡太守有事于学，衣深衣，戴乌角巾，执笾豆罍爵，唱赞道引者，皆三家之子孙也，故其材皆有所成就，至学校官，累累有焉。……虽天道忌满恶盈，而儒者之泽深且远，从古然也。”
“宋高宗南迁，合淝遂为边地，守臣多以武臣为之。 …… 故民之豪杰者，皆去而为将校，累功多至节制。 郡中衣冠之族，惟范氏，商氏，葛氏三家而已。 …… 皇元受命，包裹兵革，…… 诸武臣之子弟，无所用其能，多伏匿而不出。 春秋月朔，郡太守有事于学，衣深衣，戴乌角巾，执笾豆罍爵，唱赞道引者，皆三家之子孙也，故其材皆有所成就，至学校官，累累有焉。 …… 虽天道忌满恶盈，而儒者之泽深且远，从古然也。 ”这是“中国人才”们献教，卖经以来，“儒户”所食的佳果。虽不能为王者师，且次于吏者数等，而究亦胜于将门和平民者一等，“唱赞道引”，非“伏匿”者所敢望了。
这是“中国人才”们献教，卖经以来，“儒户”所食的佳果。 虽不能为王者师，且次于吏者数等，而究亦胜于将门和平民者一等，“唱赞道引”，非“伏匿”者所敢望了。中华民国二十三年五月二十日及次日，上海无线电播音由冯明权先生讲给我们一种奇书：《抱经堂勉学家训》（据《大美晚报》）。这是从未前闻的书，但看见下署“颜子推”，便可以悟出是颜之推《家训》中的《勉学篇》了。曰“抱经堂”者，当是因为曾被卢文印入《抱经堂丛书》中的缘故。所讲有这样的一段——
On May 20 and the next day of the 23rd year of the Republic of China, Mr. Feng Mingquan told us a strange book: "Baojing Tang Encourage Scholars to Teach" (according to the "Great American Evening News"). This is a book that has never been heard of before, but when you see the "Yan Zitui" under the office, you can realize that it is the "Encouragement Chapter" in Yan Zhitui's "Family Instructions". The name "Baojing Hall" is because it was printed in the "Baojing Hall Series" by Lu Wen. There is such a passage -“有学艺者，触地而安。自荒乱已来，诸见俘虏，虽百世小人，知读《论语》《孝经》者，尚为人师；虽千载冠冕，不晓书记者，莫不耕田养马。以此观之，汝可不自勉耶？若能常保数百卷书，千载终不为小人也。……谚曰，‘积财千万，不如薄伎在身。’伎之易习而可贵者，无过读书也。”
“有学艺者，触地而安。 自荒乱已来，诸见俘虏，虽百世小人，知读《论语》《孝经》者，尚为人师；虽千载冠冕，不晓书记者，莫不耕田养马。 以此观之，汝可不自勉耶？若能常保数百卷书，千载终不为小人也。 …… 谚曰，‘积财千万，不如薄伎在身。 ’伎之易习而可贵者，无过读书也。 ”这说得很透彻：易习之伎，莫如读书，但知读《论语》《孝经》，则虽被俘虏，犹能为人师，居一切别的俘虏之上。这种教训，是从当时的事实推断出来的，但施之于金元而准，按之于明清之际而亦准。现在忽由播音，以“训”听众，莫非选讲者已大有感于方来，遂绸缪于未雨么？
This is very clear: the best trick to learn is to read, but if you know how to read the Analects and the Classic of Filial Piety, even if you are captured, you can still be a teacher and be above all other captives. This lesson is inferred from the facts of the time, but it is accurate when applied to the Jin Yuan, and it is also accurate according to the Ming and Qing dynasties. Now, suddenly by broadcasting, to "train" the audience, could it be that the speakers have been greatly moved by the future and are preparing for the rain?“儒者之泽深且远”，即小见大，我们由此可以明白“儒术”，知道“儒效”了。
"The grace of Confucianism is deep and far-reaching", that is, the small sees the big, and we can understand "Confucianism" and know "Confucianism".五月二十七日。
May 27th.

《看图识字》

《看图识字》

《看图识字》

"Reading Pictures and Literacy"凡一个人，即使到了中年以至暮年，倘一和孩子接近，便会踏进久经忘却了的孩子世界的边疆去，想到月亮怎么会跟着人走，星星究竟是怎么嵌在天空中。但孩子在他的世界里，是好像鱼之在水，游泳自如，忘其所以的，成人却有如人的凫水一样，虽然也觉到水的柔滑和清凉，不过总不免吃力，为难，非上陆不可了。
Anyone who is close to a child, even in middle age or twilight, will step into the frontier of the forgotten children's world, thinking about how the moon follows people and how the stars are embedded in the sky. But in his world, the child is like a fish in the water, swimming freely, forgetting why, but an adult is like a human duck water, although he also feels the smoothness and coolness of the water, but it is inevitable that it will be difficult, and it must be landed.月亮和星星的情形，一时怎么讲得清楚呢，家境还不算精穷，当然还不如给一点所谓教育，首先是识字。上海有各国的人们，有各国的书铺，也有各国的儿童用书。但我们是中国人，要看中国书，识中国字。这样的书也有，虽然纸张，图画，色彩，印订，都远不及别国，但有是也有的。我到市上去，给孩子买来的是民国二十一年十一月印行的“国难后第六版”的《看图识字》。
How can I explain the situation of the moon and the stars clearly for a while, the family background is not yet poor, of course, it is better to give a little so-called education, first of all, literacy. Shanghai has people from all over the world, bookstores from all over the world, and children's books from all over the world. But we are Chinese, and we must read Chinese books and know Chinese characters. There are also such books, although the paper, pictures, colors, and printing are far inferior to other countries, but there are also them. When I went to the city, I bought for my child the "Sixth Edition after the National Crisis" printed in November of the 21st year of the Republic of China.先是那色彩就多么恶浊，但这且不管他。图画又多么死板，这且也不管他。出版处虽然是上海，然而奇怪，图上有蜡烛，有洋灯，却没有电灯；有朝靴，有三镶云头鞋，却没有皮鞋。跪着放枪的，一脚拖地；站着射箭的，两臂不平，他们将永远不能达到目的，更坏的是连钓竿，风车，布机之类，也和实物有些不同。
First of all, the color was so ugly, but it didn't matter to him. How rigid the picture is, it doesn't matter to him. Although the publishing office is Shanghai, it is strange that there are candles and foreign lamps on the picture, but there are no electric lights; There are morning boots, three cloud-headed shoes, but no leather shoes. those who kneel and put their guns on their knees will mop the floor with one foot; Those who stand and shoot arrows, their arms are uneven, they will never achieve their goal, and even worse, even fishing rods, windmills, cloth machines, etc., are also a little different from the real thing.我轻轻的叹了一口气，记起幼小时候看过的《日用杂字》来。这是一本教育妇女婢仆，使她们能够记账的书，虽然名物的种类并不多，图画也很粗劣，然而很活泼，也很像。为什么呢？就因为作画的人，是熟悉他所画的东西的，一个“萝卜”，一只鸡，在他的记忆里并不含胡，画起来当然就切实。现在我们只要看《看图识字》里所画的生活状态——洗脸，吃饭，读书——就知道这是作者意中的读者，也是作者自己的生活状态，是在租界上租一层屋，装了全家，既不阔绰，也非精穷的，埋头苦干一日，才得维持生活一日的人，孩子得上学校，自己须穿长衫，用尽心神，撑住场面，又那有余力去买参考书，观察事物，修炼本领呢？况且，那书的末叶上还有一行道：“戊申年七月初版”。查年表，才知道那就是清朝光绪三十四年，即西历一九〇八年，虽是前年新印，书却成于二十七年前，已是一部古籍了，其奄奄无生气，正也不足为奇的。
I sighed softly, remembering the "Daily Miscellaneous Words" I read when I was a child. This is a book that educates women and servants so that they can keep accounts, although there are not many types of famous things, and the pictures are also very crude, but they are very lively and very similar. Why? Just because the painter is familiar with what he paints, a "radish", a chicken, does not contain a beard in his memory, and of course it is practical to paint. Now we only need to look at the living conditions depicted in "Looking at Pictures and Literacy" - washing faces, eating, reading - to know that this is the author's intended reader, but also the author's own living state, is to rent a one-story house on the concession, install the whole family, neither generous nor poor, immersed in hard work for a day, to maintain a day's life, children have to go to school, they have to wear long gowns, use all their minds, support the scene, and have the spare energy to buy reference books, observe things, and cultivate skills? Moreover, there is a line on the end of the book: "The first edition of July in the year of Wushen". Looking at the chronology, I found out that it was the thirty-fourth year of Guangxu of the Qing Dynasty, that is, in 1908 AD, although it was newly printed the year before last, but the book was written twenty-seven years ago, which is already an ancient book, and it is not surprising that it is dying.孩子是可以敬服的，他常常想到星月以上的境界，想到地面下的情形，想到花卉的用处，想到昆虫的言语；他想飞上天空，他想潜入蚁穴……所以给儿童看的图书就必须十分慎重，做起来也十分烦难。即如《看图识字》这两本小书，就天文，地理，人事，物情，无所不有。其实是，倘不是对于上至宇宙之大，下至苍蝇之微，都有些切实的知识的画家，决难胜任的。
Children can be admired, he often thinks of the realm above the stars and moon, the situation under the ground, the usefulness of flowers, and the words of insects; He wants to fly into the sky, he wants to dive into an anthill...... Therefore, books for children must be very careful and very difficult to do. That is, the two small books "Looking at Pictures and Literacy" have everything in terms of astronomy, geography, human affairs, and material conditions. In fact, if it weren't for the painter who had some practical knowledge of the universe and the smallest flies, it would be difficult to be competent.然而我们是忘却了自己曾为孩子时候的情形了，将他们看作一个蠢才，什么都不放在眼里。即使因为时势所趋，只得施一点所谓教育，也以为只要付给蠢才去教就足够。于是他们长大起来，就真的成了蠢才，和我们一样了。
However, we have forgotten what we were like when we were children, and we regard them as fools and don't pay attention to anything. Even if because of the trend of the times, I have to give a little so-called education, and I think it is enough to pay the fools to teach. So when they grow up, they really become fools, just like us.然而我们这些蠢才，却还在变本加厉的愚弄孩子。只要看近两三年的出版界，给“小学生”，“小朋友”看的刊物，特别的多就知道。中国突然出了这许多“儿童文学家”了么？我想：是并不然的。
However, we fools are still intensifying our fooling of children. Just look at the publishing industry in the past two or three years, and there are many publications for "primary school students" and "children". Has there suddenly been such a large number of "children's writers" in China? I think: it is not.五月三十日。
May 30.

拿来主义

拿来主义

拿来主义

Takeism中国一向是所谓“闭关主义”，自己不去，别人也不许来。自从给枪炮打破了大门之后，又碰了一串钉子，到现在，成了什么都是“送去主义”了。别的且不说罢，单是学艺上的东西，近来就先送一批古董到巴黎去展览，但终“不知后事如何”；还有几位“大师”们捧着几张古画和新画，在欧洲各国一路的挂过去，叫作“发扬国光”。听说不远还要送梅兰芳博士到苏联去，以催进“象征主义”，此后是顺便到欧洲传道。我在这里不想讨论梅博士演艺和象征主义的关系，总之，活人替代了古董，我敢说，也可以算得显出一点进步了。
China has always been a so-called "retreat", and if you don't go, others won't come. Since breaking the door for the guns, it has hit a string of nails, and now, everything has become "send-off". Not to mention anything else, just the things in the arts, recently sent a batch of antiques to Paris for exhibition, but in the end "I don't know what will happen next"; There are also several "masters" holding several ancient and new paintings, which are hung all the way in European countries, called "carrying forward the national light". I heard that Dr. Mei Lanfang would be sent to the Soviet Union not far to promote "symbolism", and then he went to Europe to preach. I don't want to discuss the relationship between Dr. Mei's acting and symbolism here, in short, the living have replaced antiques, and I dare say that it can be regarded as a little progress.但我们没有人根据了“礼尚往来”的仪节，说道：拿来！
But none of us said according to the etiquette of "etiquette exchange": Bring it!当然，能够只是送出去，也不算坏事情，一者见得丰富，二者见得大度。尼采就自诩过他是太阳，光热无穷，只是给与，不想取得。然而尼采究竟不是太阳，他发了疯。中国也不是，虽然有人说，掘起地下的煤来，就足够全世界几百年之用。但是，几百年之后呢？几百年之后，我们当然是化为魂灵，或上天堂，或落了地狱，但我们的子孙是在的，所以还应该给他们留下一点礼品。要不然，则当佳节大典之际，他们拿不出东西来，只好磕头贺喜，讨一点残羹冷炙做奖赏。
Of course, being able to just give it away is not a bad thing, one is rich, and the other is generous. Nietzsche boasted that he was the sun, infinite in light and heat, but he just gave it and did not want to get it. However, Nietzsche was not the sun, he went crazy. China is not, although some people say that digging up underground coal is enough for the world to use for hundreds of years. But what about hundreds of years later? Hundreds of years later, of course, we will become souls, or go to heaven or hell, but our children and grandchildren are there, so we should also leave them a little gift. Otherwise, when the festival ceremony is held, they can't take out anything, so they have to kowtow to congratulate them and ask for a little leftovers as a reward.这种奖赏，不要误解为“抛来”的东西，这是“抛给”的，说得冠冕些，可以称之为“送来”，我在这里不想举出实例。
This kind of reward, don't misunderstand as something "thrown", this is "toss", to put it more seriously, it can be called "sent", I don't want to give examples here.我在这里也并不想对于“送去”再说什么，否则太不“摩登”了。我只想鼓吹我们再吝啬一点，“送去”之外，还得“拿来”，是为“拿来主义”。
I don't want to say anything more about "sending" here, otherwise it would be too "modern". I just want to advocate that we be a little more stingy, and in addition to "sending away", we must also "take", which is for the sake of "take-it-it-all".但我们被“送来”的东西吓怕了。先有英国的鸦片，德国的废枪炮，后有法国的香粉，美国的电影，日本的印着“完全国货”的各种小东西。于是连清醒的青年们，也对于洋货发生了恐怖。其实，这正是因为那是“送来”的，而不是“拿来”的缘故。
But we were frightened by what was "sent". First there was British opium, German waste guns, then French incense powder, American movies, and all kinds of small things printed with "completely domestic products" in Japan. So even sober young people were terrified of foreign goods. In fact, this is precisely because it is "sent", not "brought".所以我们要运用脑髓，放出眼光，自己来拿！
So we have to use our brains, let go of our vision, and take it ourselves!譬如罢，我们之中的一个穷青年，因为祖上的阴功（姑且让我这么说说罢），得了一所大宅子，且不问他是骗来的，抢来的，或合法继承的，或是做了女婿换来的。那么，怎么办呢？我想，首先是不管三七二十一，“拿来”！但是，如果反对这宅子的旧主人，怕给他的东西染污了，徘徊不敢走进门，是孱头；勃然大怒，放一把火烧光，算是保存自己的清白，则是昏蛋。不过因为原是羡慕这宅子的旧主人的，而这回接受一切，欣欣然的蹩进卧室，大吸剩下的鸦片，那当然更是废物。“拿来主义”者是全不这样的。
For example, a poor young man among us, because of the yin of his ancestors (let me say this), got a big house, and I don't ask if he was deceived, snatched, or legally inherited, or became a son-in-law. So, what to do? I think, first of all, regardless of three, seven, twenty-one, "bring it"! However, if the old owner of this house is afraid that the things given to him will be contaminated, and he hesitates and does not dare to enter the door, he is a coward; In a fit of rage, he set a fire and burned it all, which was regarded as preserving his innocence, but it was a faint. But because he was originally envious of the old owner of this house, and this time he accepted everything, happily went into the bedroom, and sucked the remaining opium, which was of course even more useless. The "fetishism" is not like this at all.他占有，挑选。看见鱼翅，并不就抛在路上以显其“平民化”，只要有养料，也和朋友们像萝卜白菜一样的吃掉，只不用它来宴大宾；看见鸦片，也不当众摔在毛厕里，以见其彻底革命，只送到药房里去，以供治病之用，却不弄“出售存膏，售完即止”的玄虚。只有烟枪和烟灯，虽然形式和印度，波斯，阿剌伯的烟具都不同，确可以算是一种国粹，倘使背着周游世界，一定会有人看，但我想，除了送一点进博物馆之外，其余的是大可以毁掉的了。还有一群姨太太，也大以请她们各自走散为是，要不然，“拿来主义”怕未免有些危机。
He possesses, picks. When you see shark fin, you don't just throw it on the road to show its "civilianization", as long as there is nourishment, you can eat it like radish cabbage with your friends, but you don't need it to feast on the guests; When he saw opium, he did not throw it in the toilet in public, so as to see its complete revolution, and only sent it to the pharmacy for treatment, but did not make the mystery of "selling the ointment, while supplies last". Only bongs and smoke lamps, although the form is different from the smoking utensils of India, Persia, and Arab, can indeed be regarded as a kind of national essence, if you travel around the world on your back, someone will definitely see it, but I think that except for sending a little to the museum, the rest can be destroyed. There is also a group of aunts who are also very interested in asking them to go apart, otherwise, "take-it" is afraid that there will be some crisis.总之，我们要拿来。我们要或使用，或存放，或毁灭。那么，主人是新主人，宅子也就会成为新宅子。然而首先要这人沉着，勇猛，有辨别，不自私。没有拿来的，人不能自成为新人，没有拿来的，文艺不能自成为新文艺。
In short, we're going to take it. We want to use, store, or destroy. Then, the owner is the new owner, and the house will become a new house. However, first of all, this person must be calm, brave, discerning, and not selfish. Without it, people cannot become new people by themselves, and without what is brought, literature and art cannot become new literature and art.六月四日。
June 4th.

隔膜

隔膜

隔膜

diaphragm清朝初年的文字之狱，到清朝末年才被从新提起。最起劲的是“南社”里的有几个人，为被害者辑印遗集；还有些留学生，也争从日本搬回文证来。待到孟森的《心史丛刊》出，我们这才明白了较详细的状况，大家向来的意见，总以为文字之祸，是起于笑骂了清朝。然而，其实是不尽然的。
The literary prison in the early years of the Qing Dynasty was not mentioned until the end of the Qing Dynasty. The most energetic thing is that there are several people in the "Southern Society" who compile and print posthumous collections for the victims; There are also some international students who are also scrambling to move back documents from Japan. It was not until Mengsen's "Heart History Series" was published that we understood the more detailed situation, and everyone's opinion always thought that the disaster of words was caused by laughing and scolding the Qing Dynasty. However, this is not always the case.这一两年来，故宫博物院的故事似乎不大能够令人敬服，但它却印给了我们一种好书，曰《清代文字狱档》，去年已经出到八辑。其中的案件，真是五花八门，而最有趣的，则莫如乾隆四十八年二月“冯起炎注解易诗二经欲行投呈案”。
In the past two years, the story of the Palace Museum seems to be not very admirable, but it has printed us a good book, called "Qing Dynasty Text Prison Files", which has been published in eight volumes last year. Among them, the cases are really varied, and the most interesting one is the "Feng Qiyan's Annotation of the Two Classics of Yi Poetry Wants to Submit the Case" in February of the forty-eighth year of Qianlong.冯起炎是山西临汾县的生员，闻乾隆将谒泰陵，便身怀著作，在路上徘徊，意图呈进，不料先以“形迹可疑”被捕了。那著作，是以《易》解《诗》，实则信口开河，在这里犯不上抄录，惟结尾有“自传”似的文章一大段，却是十分特别的——
Feng Qiyan was a student in Linfen County, Shanxi Province, and when he heard that Qianlong was going to visit Tailing, he wandered on the road with his writings, intending to present it, but he was arrested for "suspicious behavior". That work is to interpret the "Poems" with the "I Ching", but in fact it is a mouthful, and it cannot be copied here, but there is a large paragraph of the article that looks like an "autobiography" at the end, but it is very special -“又，臣之来也，不愿如何如何，亦别无愿求之事，惟有一事未决，请对陛下一叙其缘由。臣……名曰冯起炎，字是南州，尝到臣张三姨母家，见一女，可娶，而恨不足以办此。此女名曰小女，年十七岁，方当待字之年，而正在未字之时，乃原籍东关春牛厂长兴号张守忭之次女也。又到臣杜五姨母家，见一女，可娶，而恨力不足以办此。此女名小凤，年十三岁，虽非必字之年，而已在可字之时，乃本京东城闹市口瑞生号杜月之次女也。若以陛下之力，差干员一人，选快马一匹，克日长驱到临邑，问彼临邑之地方官：‘其东关春牛厂长兴号中果有张守忭一人否？’诚如是也，则此事谐矣。再问：‘东城闹市口瑞生号中果有杜月一人否？’诚如是也，则此事谐矣。二事谐，则臣之愿毕矣。然臣之来也，方不知陛下纳臣之言耶否耶，而必以此等事相强乎？特进言之际，一叙及之。”
“又，臣之来也，不愿如何如何，亦别无愿求之事，惟有一事未决，请对陛下一叙其缘由。 臣…… 名曰冯起炎，字是南州，尝到臣张三姨母家，见一女，可娶，而恨不足以办此。 此女名曰小女，年十七岁，方当待字之年，而正在未字之时，乃原籍东关春牛厂长兴号张守忭之次女也。 又到臣杜五姨母家，见一女，可娶，而恨力不足以办此。 此女名小凤，年十三岁，虽非必字之年，而已在可字之时，乃本京东城闹市口瑞生号杜月之次女也。 若以陛下之力，差干员一人，选快马一匹，克日长驱到临邑，问彼临邑之地方官：‘其东关春牛厂长兴号中果有张守忭一人否？’诚如是也，则此事谐矣。 再问：‘东城闹市口瑞生号中果有杜月一人否？’诚如是也，则此事谐矣。 二事谐，则臣之愿毕矣。 然臣之来也，方不知陛下纳臣之言耶否耶，而必以此等事相强乎？特进言之际，一叙及之。 ”这何尝有丝毫恶意？不过着了当时通行的才子佳人小说的迷，想一举成名，天子做媒，表妹入抱而已。不料事实的结局却不大好，署直隶总督袁守侗拟奏的罪名是“阅其呈首，胆敢于圣主之前，混讲经书，而呈尾措词，尤属狂妄。核其情罪，较冲突仪仗为更重。冯起炎一犯，应从重发往黑龙江等处，给披甲人为奴。俟部复到日，照例解部刺字发遣。”这位才子，后来大约终于单身出关做西崽去了。
How could there be the slightest malice in this? However, I was a fan of the popular novels of talented women at that time, and I wanted to become famous in one fell swoop, the emperor was the matchmaker, and my cousin was in the embrace. Unexpectedly, the outcome of the facts was not very good, and the crime proposed by Yuan Shoutong, the acting governor of Zhili Province, was to "read his head, dare to speak before the holy lord, mix the scriptures, and the words at the end are particularly arrogant." The crime of the crime is more serious than the conflict with the ceremonial guard. Feng Qiyan should be sent to Heilongjiang and other places from the repetition to be enslaved by the armored man. When the ministry returns to the capital, the department's card will be released and dispatched as usual. "This talented man finally went out of the customs alone to be a cub.此外的案情，虽然没有这么风雅，但并非反动的还不少。有的是卤莽；有的是发疯；有的是乡曲迂儒，真的不识讳忌；有的则是草野愚民，实在关心皇家。而运命大概很悲惨，不是凌迟，灭族，便是立刻杀头，或者“斩监候”，也仍然活不出。
In addition, although the case is not so elegant, there are many that are not reactionary. some are reckless; some are crazy; some are pedantic in the countryside and really don't know taboos; Some are foolish people in the grasslands and really care about the royal family. And fate is probably very tragic, either Ling Chi, extermination, or immediate beheading, or "beheading", and still unable to live.凡这等事，粗略的一看，先使我们觉得清朝的凶虐，其次，是死者的可怜。但再来一想，事情是并不这么简单的。这些惨案的来由，都只为了“隔膜”。
All these things, at a cursory glance, first make us feel the cruelty of the Qing Dynasty, and secondly, the pity of the dead. But when I think about it again, it's not that simple. The origin of these tragedies is only for the sake of "diaphragm".满洲人自己，就严分着主奴，大臣奏事，必称“奴才”，而汉人却称“臣”就好。这并非因为是“炎黄之胄”，特地优待，锡以嘉名的，其实是所以别于满人的“奴才”，其地位还下于“奴才”数等。奴隶只能奉行，不许言议；评论固然不可，妄自颂扬也不可，这就是“思不出其位”。譬如说：主子，您这袍角有些儿破了，拖下去怕更要破烂，还是补一补好。进言者方自以为在尽忠，而其实却犯了罪，因为另有准其讲这样的话的人在，不是谁都可说的。一乱说，便是“越俎代谋”，当然“罪有应得”。倘自以为是“忠而获咎”，那不过是自己的胡涂。
The Manchurians themselves strictly distinguish between masters and slaves, and ministers must be called "servants" when they report things, but the Han people are called "ministers". This is not because it is the "Zhou of Yan Huang", which is specially treated preferentially and given a good name, but in fact, it is different from the "slaves" of the Manchus, and its status is still lower than that of the "slaves". Slaves can only obey and are not allowed to speak; Commenting is certainly not allowed, nor is it possible to praise oneself, which is "not thinking of its place". For example: Master, the corner of your robe is a little torn, and if you drag it down, you may be even more torn, so it's better to make up for it. The speaker thinks he is being loyal, but in fact he has committed a sin, because there are other people who allow him to say such things, and not everyone can say them. In nonsense, it is "overstepping the bounds of the conspiracy", and of course "the crime deserves it". If you think you are "loyal and blamed", it is just your own nonsense.但是，清朝的开国之君是十分聪明的，他们虽然打定了这样的主意，嘴里却并不照样说，用的是中国的古训：“爱民如子”，“一视同仁”。一部分的大臣，士大夫，是明白这奥妙的，并不敢相信。但有一些简单愚蠢的人们却上了当，真以为“陛下”是自己的老子，亲亲热热的撒娇讨好去了。他那里要这被征服者做儿子呢？于是乎杀掉。不久，儿子们吓得不再开口了，计划居然成功；直到光绪时康有为们的上书，才又冲破了“祖宗的成法”。然而这奥妙，好像至今还没有人来说明。
However, the founding kings of the Qing Dynasty were very smart, and although they made up their minds, they did not say the same in their mouths, using the ancient Chinese motto: "Love the people as children" and "treat everyone equally". Some ministers, scholar-officials, understood this mystery and couldn't believe it. But some simple and stupid people were fooled, really thinking that "Your Majesty" was their own old man, and they were affectionate and coquettish. Where did he want this conquered to be his son? So kill it. Soon, the sons were so frightened that they stopped talking, and the plan was successful; It was not until the Guangxu period that Kang Youwei's letter broke through the "ancestral law". However, it seems that no one has explained this mystery yet.施蛰存先生在《文艺风景》创刊号里，很为“忠而获咎”者不平，就因为还不免有些“隔膜”的缘故。这是《颜氏家训》或《庄子》《文选》里所没有的。
In the first issue of "Literary and Art Landscape", Mr. Shi Zhicun was very upset about those who were "loyal and blamed", because there were inevitably some "diaphragms". This is not found in "Yan's Family Instructions" or "Zhuangzi" and "Anthology".六月十日。
June 10th.

《木刻纪程》小引

《木刻纪程》小引

《木刻纪程》小引

A small introduction to the "Woodcut Chronicle"中国木刻图画，从唐到明，曾经有过很体面的历史。但现在的新的木刻，却和这历史不相干。新的木刻，是受了欧洲的创作木刻的影响的。创作木刻的绍介，始于朝花社，那出版的《艺苑朝华》四本，虽然选择印造，并不精工，且为艺术名家所不齿，却颇引起了青年学徒的注意。到一九三一年夏，在上海遂有了中国最初的木刻讲习会。又由是蔓衍而有木铃社，曾印《木铃木刻集》两本。又有野穗社，曾印《木刻画》一辑。有无名木刻社，曾印《木刻集》。但木铃社早被毁灭，后两社也未有继续或发展的消息。前些时在上海还剩有M．K．木刻研究社，是一个历史较长的小团体，曾经屡次展览作品，并且将出《木刻画选集》的，可惜今夏又被私怨者告密。社员多遭捕逐，木版也为工部局所没收了。
Chinese woodcut drawings, from the Tang Dynasty to the Ming Dynasty, once had a very respectable history. But the new woodcuts now have nothing to do with this history. The new woodcuts were influenced by European woodcuts. Shao Jie, who created woodcuts, began with the Chaohua Society, and the four copies of "Yiyuan Chaohua" were published, although they were chosen to be printed, not exquisite, and despised by famous artists, but they attracted the attention of young apprentices. By the summer of 1931, China's first woodcut workshop was held in Shanghai. From then on, the Wooden Bell Society was established, which once printed two copies of the "Wooden Bell Woodcut Collection". There is also the Wild Spike Society, which once printed a series of "Woodcut Paintings". There is an unnamed woodcut society that once printed the "Woodcut Collection". However, the Wooden Bell Society was destroyed long ago, and there was no news of the continuation or development of the latter two societies. Some time ago, there was still the M.K. Woodcut Research Society in Shanghai, which is a small group with a long history, which has repeatedly exhibited works and will publish the "Woodcut Anthology", but unfortunately it was reported by private enemies this summer. Many members were arrested, and the woodblocks were confiscated by the Ministry of Works.据我们所知道，现在似乎已经没有一个研究木刻的团体了。但尚有研究木刻的个人。如罗清桢，已出《清桢木刻集》二辑；如又村，最近已印有《廖坤玉故事》的连环图。这是都值得特记的。
As far as we know, there doesn't seem to be a single group that studies woodcuts anymore. But there are still individuals who study woodcuts. For example, Luo Qingzhen has published the second series of "Qingzhen Woodcut Collection"; Ruyou Village has recently been printed with a comic strip of "Liao Kunyu's Story". This is worth mentioning.而且仗着作者历来的努力和作品的日见其优良，现在不但已得中国读者的同情，并且也渐渐的到了跨出世界上去的第一步。虽然还未坚实，但总之，是要跨出去了。不过，同时也到了停顿的危机。因为倘没有鼓励和切磋，恐怕也很容易陷于自足。本集即愿做一个木刻的路程碑，将自去年以来，认为应该流布的作品，陆续辑印，以为读者的综观，作者的借镜之助。但自然，只以收集所及者为限，中国的优秀之作，是决非尽在于此的。
And with the author's past efforts and the quality of his works, he has not only won the sympathy of Chinese readers, but has also gradually reached the first step to go out of the world. Although it is not solid yet, in short, it is about to step out. However, at the same time, there is also a crisis of pause. Because if there is no encouragement and competition, I am afraid it is easy to fall into self-sufficiency. This collection is willing to be a woodcut monument, and since last year, the works that are thought to be circulated will be printed one after another, so as to help readers review and the author's reference. But naturally, only the collection is limited, and China's excellent works are by no means all here.别的出版者，一方面还正在绍介欧美的新作，一方面则在复印中国的古刻，这也都是中国的新木刻的羽翼。采用外国的良规，加以发挥，使我们的作品更加丰满是一条路；择取中国的遗产，融合新机，使将来的作品别开生面也是一条路。如果作者都不断的奋发，使本集能一程一程的向前走，那就会知道上文所说，实在不仅是一种奢望的了。
Other publishers, on the one hand, are still promoting new works from Europe and the United States, and on the other hand, they are copying ancient Chinese carvings, which are also the wings of China's new woodcuts. It is a way to adopt foreign good rules and give full play to make our works fuller; It is also a way to choose China's heritage, integrate new opportunities, and make future works unique. If the authors continue to work hard to make this episode move forward one by one, then they will know that what is said above is not only a luxury.一九三四年六月中，铁木艺术社记。
In mid-June 1934, the Ironwood Art Society recorded it.

难行和不信

难行和不信

难行和不信

Difficult to walk and unbelievable中国的“愚民”——没有学问的下等人，向来就怕人注意他。如果你无端的问他多少年纪，什么意见，兄弟几个，家景如何，他总是支吾一通之后，躲了开去。有学识的大人物，很不高兴他们这样的脾气。然而这脾气总不容易改，因为他们也实在从经验而来的。
China's "foolish people", the uneducated inferior people, have always been afraid of being noticed. If you ask him for no reason how old he is, what opinions he has, how many brothers he has, and what his family situation is, he always hesitates and avoids it. Learned big people are very unhappy with their temper. However, this temper is not easy to change, because they also come from experience.假如你被谁注意了，一不小心，至少就不免上一点小当，譬如罢，中国是改革过的了，孩子们当然早已从“孟宗哭竹”“王祥卧冰”的教训里蜕出，然而不料又来了一个崭新的“儿童年”，爱国之士，因此又想起了“小朋友”，或者用笔，或者用舌，不怕劳苦的来给他们教训。一个说要用功，古时候曾有“囊萤照读”“凿壁偷光”的志士；一个说要爱国，古时候曾有十几岁突围请援，十四岁上阵杀敌的奇童。这些故事，作为闲谈来听听是不算很坏的，但万一有谁相信了，照办了，那就会成为乳臭未干的吉诃德。你想，每天要捉一袋照得见四号铅字的萤火虫，那岂是一件容易事？但这还只是不容易罢了，倘去凿壁，事情就更糟，无论在那里，至少是挨一顿骂之后，立刻由爸爸妈妈赔礼，雇人去修好。
For example, China has been reformed, and of course the children have long since shed out of the lessons of "Meng Zong Crying Bamboo" and "Wang Xiang Lying on the Ice", but unexpectedly a new "Year of Children" has come, patriots, so they think of "children", or with pens, or with tongues, not afraid of hard work to teach them a lesson. One said that it was necessary to work hard, and in ancient times, there were ambitious people who "read the fireflies in the bag" and "chiseled the wall to steal the light"; One said to be patriotic, in ancient times, there were teenagers who broke through and asked for help, and went into battle at the age of fourteen to kill the enemy. These stories are not bad to listen to as idle talk, but if anyone believes it and does it, it will become a milky quijote. Do you think it is not easy to catch a bag of fireflies that can see the number 4 lead every day? But it's just not easy, if you go to chisel the wall, things will be even worse, no matter there, at least after being scolded, your parents will immediately apologize and hire someone to fix it.请援，杀敌，更加是大事情，在外国，都是三四十岁的人们所做的。他们那里的儿童，着重的是吃，玩，认字，听些极普通，极紧要的常识。中国的儿童给大家特别看得起，那当然也很好，然而出来的题目就因此常常是难题，仍如飞剑一样，非上武当山寻师学道之后，决计没法办。到了二十世纪，古人空想中的潜水艇，飞行机，是实地上成功了，但《龙文鞭影》或《幼学琼林》里的模范故事，却还有些难学。我想，便是说教的人，恐怕自己也未必相信罢。
Asking for help and killing the enemy is a big thing, and in foreign countries, it is done by people in their thirties and forties. The children there focus on eating, playing, reading, and listening to some very ordinary and important common sense. Chinese children are particularly valued by everyone, of course, it is also very good, but the questions that come out are often difficult problems, still like flying swords, and there is no way to do it unless you go to Wudang Mountain to find a teacher to learn the way. In the twentieth century, the submarines and flying planes imagined by the ancients were successful on the ground, but the model stories in "Longwen Whip Shadow" or "Kindergarten Qionglin" were still a bit difficult to learn. I think that even if you are a preacher, I am afraid you may not believe it.所以听的人也不相信。我们听了千多年的剑仙侠客，去年到武当山去的只有三个人，只占全人口的五百兆分之一，就可见。古时候也许还要多，现在是有了经验，不大相信了，于是照办的人也少了。——但这是我个人的推测。
So the listeners don't believe it. We have listened to the sword immortal knights for more than a thousand years, and there were only three people who went to Wudang Mountain last year, accounting for only one in five hundred trillion of the total population, which can be seen. In ancient times, there may be more, but now there is experience, and I don't believe it, so there are fewer people who do it. – But this is my personal speculation.不负责任的，不能照办的教训多，则相信的人少；利己损人的教训多，则相信的人更其少。“不相信”就是“愚民”的远害的堑壕，也是使他们成为散沙的毒素。然而有这脾气的也不但是“愚民”，虽是说教的士大夫，相信自己和别人的，现在也未必有多少。例如既尊孔子，又拜活佛者，也就是恰如将他的钱试买各种股票，分存许多银行一样，其实是那一面都不相信的。
If there are many lessons that cannot be followed, there will be fewer people who believe in them; There are many lessons about self-interest and harm to others, and there are even fewer people who believe. "Unbelief" is the trench of the "foolish people", and it is also the toxin that makes them scattered sand. However, it is not only the "foolish people" who have this temper, although they are preaching scholars, and there may not be many who believe in themselves and others now. For example, a person who respects Confucius and worships the living Buddha is just like trying to buy various stocks with his money and depositing it in many banks, but in fact, that side does not believe it.七月一日。
July 1st.

买《小学大全》记

买《小学大全》记

买《小学大全》记

Buy the "Complete Elementary School" record线装书真是买不起了。乾隆时候的刻本的价钱，几乎等于那时的宋本。明版小说，是五四运动以后飞涨的；从今年起，洪运怕要轮到小品文身上去了。至于清朝禁书，则民元革命后就是宝贝，即使并无足观的著作，也常要百余元至数十元。我向来也走走旧书坊，但对于这类宝书，却从不敢作非分之想。端午节前，在四马路一带闲逛，竟在无意之间买到了一种，曰《小学大全》，共五本，价七角，看这名目，是不大有人会欢迎的，然而，却是清朝的禁书。
Wire-bound books are really unaffordable. The price of the engraved version during the Qianlong period was almost equal to the Song version at that time. The Ming version of the novel soared after the May Fourth Movement; From this year onwards, Hong Yun is afraid that it will be the turn of the sketch text. As for the books banned in the Qing Dynasty, they were treasures after the Minyuan Revolution, and even if they were not worth seeing, they often cost more than 100 yuan to tens of yuan. I have always walked to the old bookstore, but I never dare to think about this kind of treasure book. Before the Dragon Boat Festival, wandering around the Four Roads, I accidentally bought a kind, called "Primary School Collection", a total of five copies, priced at seven jiao, looking at this name, few people will welcome it, however, it is a banned book of the Qing Dynasty.这书的编纂者尹嘉铨，博野人；他父亲尹会一，是有名的孝子，乾隆皇帝曾经给过褒扬的诗。他本身也是孝子，又是道学家，官又做到大理寺卿稽察觉罗学。还请令旗籍子弟也讲读朱子的《小学》，而“荷蒙朱批：所奏是。钦此。”这部书便成于两年之后的，加疏的《小学》六卷，《考证》和《释文》，《或问》各一卷，《后编》二卷，合成一函，是为《大全》。也曾进呈，终于在乾隆四十二年九月十七日奉旨：“好！知道了。钦此。”那明明是得了皇帝的嘉许的。
The compiler of this book is Yin Jiaquan, a native of Boye; His father, Yin Huiyi, was a famous filial son, and the Qianlong Emperor once gave a poem of praise. He himself is also a filial son, a Taoist, and an official who has become the Minister of Dali Temple. Please also order the children of the banner to also read Zhu Zi's "Primary School", and "He Meng Zhu Pi: What is played." Respectfully this. This book was completed two years later, with six volumes of "Primary School", one volume each of "Research" and "Interpretation", one volume each of "Or Questions", and two volumes of "Post-Compilation", combined into a letter, which is the "Daquan". It was also presented, and finally on September 17, the forty-second year of Qianlong, he was ordered: "Okay! Got it. Respectfully this. "That was obviously praised by the emperor.到乾隆四十六年，他已经致仕回家了，但真所谓“及其老也，戒之在得”罢，虽然欲得的乃是“名”，也还是一样的招了大祸。这年三月，乾隆行经保定，尹嘉铨便使儿子送了一本奏章，为他的父亲请谥，朱批是“与谥乃国家定典，岂可妄求。此奏本当交部治罪，念汝为父私情，姑免之。若再不安分家居，汝罪不可逭矣！钦此。”不过他豫先料不到会碰这样的大钉子，所以接着还有一本，是请许“我朝”名臣汤斌范文程李光地顾八代张伯行等从祀孔庙，“至于臣父尹会一，既蒙御制诗章褒嘉称孝，已在德行之科，自可从祀，非臣所敢请也。”这回可真出了大岔子，三月十八日的朱批是：“竟大肆狂吠，不可恕矣！钦此。”
By the forty-sixth year of Qianlong, he had retired and returned home, but the so-called "and his old age, the warning is to get it", although what he wanted was "fame", it was still the same disaster. In March of this year, Qianlong passed through Baoding, and Yin Jiaquan asked his son to send a memorial to ask for a posthumous title for his father. This memorial should have been handed over to the Ministry of Justice for punishment, but considering that you are your father's personal feelings, I will temporarily pardon it. If you continue to be restless at home, you will be guilty of unavoidable consequences. Respectfully this. However, he did not expect to touch such a big nail, so there was another one, which was to ask the famous minister Tang Bin, Fan Wencheng, Li Guangdi, Gu Gu, Zhang Boxing, etc. to worship the Confucius Temple in the eighth generation, "As for the father Yin Huiyi, he was praised by the imperial poem and called filial piety, and he was already in the subject of virtue, and he could be worshipped, and he did not dare to ask me." This time there was really a big mistake, and the Zhu Pi on March 18 was: "It is unforgivable to bark wildly!" Respectfully this. ”乾隆时代的一定办法，是凡以文字获罪者，一面拿办，一面就查抄，这并非着重他的家产，乃在查看藏书和另外的文字，如果别有“狂吠”，便可以一并治罪。因为乾隆的意见，是以为既敢“狂吠”，必不止于一两声，非彻底根究不可的。尹嘉铨当然逃不出例外，和自己的被捕同时，他那博野的老家和北京的寓所，都被查抄了。藏书和别项著作，实在不少，但其实也并无什么干碍之作。不过那时是决不能这样就算的，经大学士三宝等再三审讯之后，定为“相应请旨将尹嘉铨照大逆律凌迟处死”，幸而结果很宽大：“尹嘉铨著加恩免其凌迟之罪，改为处绞立决，其家属一并加恩免其缘坐”就完结了。
A certain method in the Qianlong era was to check the book collection and other texts, and if there was no "barking", it could be punished together. Because Qianlong's opinion was that if he dared to "bark", he would not stop at one or two sounds, and he had to thoroughly investigate it. Of course, Yin Jiaquan could not escape the exception, and at the same time as his arrest, his hometown in Boye and his apartment in Beijing were raided. There are a lot of books and other works, but in fact, there is nothing to hinder them. However, at that time, it was absolutely impossible to do this, and after repeated interrogation by Grand Scholar Sanbao and others, it was decided that "Yin Jiaquan should be executed according to the law of treason", but fortunately, the result was very lenient: "Yin Jiaquan was exempted from his crime of Lingchi, and was sentenced to hanging, and his family members were also exempted from his crimes" and it ended.这也还是名儒兼孝子的尹嘉铨所不及料的。
This is also unexpected by Yin Jiaquan, a famous Confucian and filial son.这一回的文字狱，只绞杀了一个人，比起别的案子来，决不能算是大狱，但乾隆皇帝却颇费心机，发表了几篇文字。从这些文字和奏章（均见《清代文字狱档》第六辑）看来，这回的祸机虽然发于他的“不安分”，但大原因，却在既以名儒自居，又请将名臣从祀：这都是大“不可恕”的地方。清朝虽然尊崇朱子，但止于“尊崇”，却不许“学样”，因为一学样，就要讲学，于是而有学说，于是而有门徒，于是而有门户，于是而有门户之争，这就足为“太平盛世”之累。况且以这样的“名儒”而做官，便不免以“名臣”自居，“妄自尊大”。乾隆是不承认清朝会有“名臣”的，他自己是“英主”，是“明君”，所以在他的统治之下，不能有奸臣，既没有特别坏的奸臣，也就没有特别好的名臣，一律都是不好不坏，无所谓好坏的奴子。
This time the literary prison only strangled one person, which could never be regarded as a big prison compared to other cases, but the Qianlong Emperor took great care and published several articles. Judging from these words and memorials (all see the sixth series of "Qing Dynasty Text Prison Files"), although the disaster this time came from his "restlessness", the main reason was that he not only regarded himself as a famous scholar, but also asked to worship famous ministers: these are all great "unforgivable" places. Although the Qing Dynasty respected Zhu Zi, it stopped at "respect", but did not allow "learning from examples", because as soon as you learn from it, you have to give lectures, so there are doctrines, so there are disciples, so there are doors, and there are door disputes, which is enough to be a burden of "peace and prosperity". Moreover, if you are an official with such a "famous Confucian", you will inevitably consider yourself a "famous minister" and "arrogant". Qianlong did not admit that there would be "famous ministers" in the Qing Dynasty, he himself was a "British lord" and a "wise ruler", so under his rule, there could be no traitors, neither particularly bad traitors nor particularly good famous ministers, all of whom were neither good nor bad, and they were all slaves who were neither good nor bad, and it didn't matter whether they were good or bad.特别攻击道学先生，所以是那时的一种潮流，也就是“圣意”。我们所常见的，是纪昀总纂的《四库全书总目提要》和自著的《阅微草堂笔记》里的时时的排击。这就是迎合着这种潮流的，倘以为他秉性平易近人，所以憎恨了道学先生的刻，那是一种误解。大学士三宝们也很明白这潮流，当会审尹嘉铨时，曾奏道：“查该犯如此狂悖不法，若即行定罪正法，尚不足以泄公愤而快人心。该犯曾任三品大员，相应遵例奏明，将该犯严加夹讯，多受刑法，问其究属何心，录取供词，具奏，再请旨立正典刑，方足以昭炯戒。”后来究竟用了夹棍没有，未曾查考，但看所录供词，却于用他的“丑行”来打倒他的道学的策略，是做得非常起劲的。现在抄三条在下面——
Especially attacked Mr. Taoism, so it was a trend at that time, that is, "holy will". What we often see is the constant rejection in Ji Yun's "Summary of the Four Libraries of the Complete Book" and his self-authored "Notes on Reading Wei Caotang". This is catering to this trend, if you think that he is approachable by nature, so he hates Mr. Taoism, it is a misunderstanding. The Grand Scholar Sanbao also understood this trend, and when Yin Jiaquan was interrogated, he once said: "The criminal is so arrogant and lawless, if he is convicted and punished immediately, it is not enough to vent public anger and make people happy." The criminal had served as a third-rank official, and he reported that the criminal would be strictly interrogated and subjected to criminal law, and he would be asked what his intention was, accept the confession, make a report, and then request an imperial decree to establish a punishment, which was enough to make a warning. Later, whether he used a clamp stick or not, it was not investigated, but looking at the recorded confession, he did a very good job in using his "ugly behavior" to defeat his Taoist strategy. Now copy three below——“问：尹嘉铨！你所书李孝女暮年不字事一篇，说‘年逾五十，依然待字，吾妻李恭人闻而贤之，欲求淑女以相助，仲女固辞不就’等语。这处女既立志不嫁，已年过五旬，你为何叫你女人遣媒说合，要他做妾？这样没廉耻的事，难道是讲正经人干的么？据供：我说的李孝女年逾五十，依然待字，原因素日间知道雄县有个姓李的女子，守贞不字。吾女人要聘他为妾，我那时在京候补，并不知道；后来我女人告诉我，才知道的，所以替他做了这篇文字，要表扬他，实在我并没有见过他的面。但他年过五十，我还将要他做妾的话，做在文字内，这就是我廉耻丧尽，还有何辩。
"Q: Yin Jiaquan! You wrote an article about Li Xiaonu in her twilight years, saying, 'Over fifty years old, still waiting for words, my wife Li Gongren heard about it and was virtuous, and wanted a lady to help her, but the second daughter refused' and so on. Since this virgin is determined not to marry, she is over fifty years old, why did you ask your woman to send a matchmaker to negotiate and ask him to be a concubine? Is such a shameless thing done by serious people? According to the confession: The Li Xiaonu I said is over fifty years old and still waiting for words, and the original factor knows that there is a woman surnamed Li in Xiong County during the day, and she keeps her chastity and does not write. My woman wanted to hire him as a concubine, and I was waiting in Beijing at that time, so I didn't know; Later, my woman told me that I knew, so I made this text for him to praise him, but I really haven't met him. But when he is over fifty years old, I will still want him to be a concubine, and if I do it in the text, this is my shame, what argument is there?“问：你当时在皇上跟前讨赏翎子，说是没有翎子，就回去见不得你妻小。你这假道学怕老婆，到底皇上没有给你翎子，你如何回去的呢？据供：我当初在家时，曾向我妻子说过，要见皇上讨翎子，所以我彼时不辞冒昧，就妄求恩典，原想得了翎子回家，可以夸耀。后来皇上没有赏我，我回到家里，实在觉得害羞，难见妻子。这都是我假道学，怕老婆，是实。
"Question: You were in front of the emperor at that time to ask for a reward for the feathers, saying that there were no feathers, so you went back and couldn't see your wife and children. You are afraid of your wife, the emperor didn't give you feathers, how did you go back? According to the confession: When I was at home, I told my wife that I wanted to see the emperor to ask for a feather, so I took the liberty at that time and asked for grace. Later, the emperor did not reward me, and when I returned home, I felt really shy and difficult to see my wife. This is all my false Taoism, afraid of my wife, it is true.“问：你女人平日妒悍，所以替你娶妾，也要娶这五十岁女人给你，知道这女人断不肯嫁，他又得了不妒之名。总是你这假道学居常做惯这欺世盗名之事，你女人也学了你欺世盗名。你难道不知道么？供：我女人要替我讨妾，这五十岁李氏女子既已立志不嫁，断不肯做我的妾，我女人是明知的，所以借此要得不妒之名。总是我平日所做的事，俱系欺世盗名，所以我女人也学做此欺世盗名之事，难逃皇上洞鉴。”
"Q: Your woman is usually jealous, so if you marry a concubine for you, you will also marry this fifty-year-old woman to you. It's always your false Taoism that you are used to doing this kind of deception and stealing your name, and your woman has also learned from you to deceive the world and steal your name. Don't you know? Confession: My woman wants to ask for a concubine for me, this fifty-year-old Li woman has made up her mind not to marry, and she will never be my concubine. It is always what I do on weekdays to deceive the world and steal my name, so my women also learn to do this deception and stealing their names, and it is difficult to escape the emperor's insight. ”还有一件要紧事是销毁和他有关的书。他的著述也真太多，计应“销毁”者有书籍八十六种，石刻七种，都是著作；应“撤毁”者有书籍六种，都是古书，而有他的序跋。《小学大全》虽不过“疏辑”，然而是在“销毁”之列的。
Another important thing is to destroy the books related to him. There are really too many of his writings, and there are 86 kinds of books and 7 kinds of stone carvings that should be "destroyed", all of which are works; There are six kinds of books that should be "removed", all of which are ancient books, and there is his preface. Although the "Complete Primary School" is nothing more than a "compilation", it is among the "destruction".但我所得的《小学大全》，却是光绪二十二年开雕，二十五年刊竣，而“宣统丁巳”（实是中华民国六年）重校的遗老本，有张锡恭跋云：“世风不古若矣，愿读是书者，有以转移之。……”又有刘安涛跋云：“晚近凌夷，益加甚焉，异言喧，显与是书相悖，一唱百和，……驯致家与国均蒙其害，唐虞三代以来先圣先贤蒙以养正之遗意，扫地尽矣。剥极必复，天地之心见焉。……”为了文字狱，使士子不敢治史，尤不敢言近代事，但一面却也使昧于掌故，乾隆朝所竭力“销毁”的书，虽遗老也不复明白，不到一百三十年，又从新奉为宝典了。这莫非也是“剥极必复”么？恐怕是遗老们的乾隆皇帝所不及料的罢。
But the "Primary School Encyclopedia" I got was carved in the 22nd year of Guangxu and published in 25 years, and the old book of "Xuantong Dingsi" (actually the sixth year of the Republic of China) was re-edited, and Zhang Xigong said: "The world is not ancient, and I hope that those who read this book will have a way to transfer it." ......" There is also Liu Antao's postscript: "In the evening, it is close to the barbarians, and it is even more severe, and the noise of different words is obviously contrary to this book, and it is a song of a hundred harmony,...... The family and the country have suffered from it, and since the Tang and Yu dynasties, the sages and sages have been ignorant of the will of the righteous people, and they have been swept away. Peeling away the extreme will inevitably lead to repetition, and the heart of heaven and earth will be revealed. ...... "For the sake of the literary prison, the scholars did not dare to study history, especially not to talk about modern events, but on the other hand, they also made the books that the Qianlong Dynasty tried their best to "destroy", even if they were old, they no longer understood, and in less than 130 years, they were newly regarded as treasure books. Isn't this also "stripped and restored"? I'm afraid it was the Qianlong Emperor who left behind the old people who didn't expect it.但是，清的康熙，雍正和乾隆三个，尤其是后两个皇帝，对于“文艺政策”或说得较大一点的“文化统制”，却真尽了很大的努力的。文字狱不过是消极的一方面，积极的一面，则如钦定四库全书，于汉人的著作，无不加以取舍，所取的书，凡有涉及金元之处者，又大抵加以修改，作为定本。此外，对于“七经”，“二十四史”，《通鉴》，文士的诗文，和尚的语录，也都不肯放过，不是鉴定，便是评选，	文苑中实在没有不被蹂躏的处所了。而且他们是深通汉文的异族的君主，以胜者的看法，来批评被征服的汉族的文化和人情，也鄙夷，但也恐惧，有苛论，但也有确评，文字狱只是由此而来的辣手的一种，那成果，由满洲这方面言，是的确不能说它没有效的。
However, the three emperors of the Qing Dynasty, Kangxi, Yongzheng and Qianlong, especially the latter two emperors, really made great efforts for the "literary and artistic policy" or the larger "cultural control". The literary prison is only a negative aspect, and the positive side, such as the Imperial Four Libraries Complete Book, the writings of the Han people are all trade-offs, and the books taken, whenever there are places involving the Jin Yuan, are mostly modified as definitive versions. In addition, for the "Seven Classics", "Twenty-Four Histories", "Tongjian", the poems of scribes, and the quotations of monks, they are not willing to let go, either appraisal or selection, and there is really no place in the literary garden that is not ravaged. Moreover, they are foreign monarchs who are deeply knowledgeable in Chinese, and from the perspective of the winner, they criticize the culture and human feelings of the conquered Han people, and they also despise it, but they are also afraid, there are harsh comments, but there are also positive comments, and the literary prison is just a kind of hot hand that comes from this, and the result, from the Manchurian side, yes, it cannot be said that it is ineffective.现在这影响好像是淡下去了，遗老们的重刻《小学大全》，就是一个证据，但也可见被愚弄了的性灵，又终于并不清醒过来。近来明人小品，清代禁书，市价之高，决非穷读书人所敢窥，但《东华录》，《御批通鉴辑览》，《上谕八旗》，《雍正朱批谕旨》……等，却好像无人过问，其低廉为别的一切大部书所不及。倘有有心人加以收集，一一钩稽，将其中的关于驾御汉人，批评文化，利用文艺之处，分别排比，辑成一书，我想，我们不但可以看见那策略的博大和恶辣，并且还能够明白我们怎样受异族主子的驯扰，以及遗留至今的奴性的由来的罢。
Now this effect seems to have faded, and the re-engraved "Primary School Encyclopedia" by the elders is a piece of evidence, but it can also be seen that the fooled spirit has finally not woken up. Recently, the Ming people's sketches, the banned books of the Qing Dynasty, and the high market price are by no means dared to be seen by poor readers, but "Donghua Lu", "Imperial Approval Tongjian Compilation", "Eight Banners", "Yongzheng Zhu Pi Edict"...... etc., but it seems that no one cares, and its low price is unmatched by most other books. If someone who is interested in collecting it, checking it one by one, and compiling it into a book about controlling the Han people, criticizing culture, and using literature and art, I think we can not only see the breadth and viciousness of that strategy, but also understand how we are tamed by foreign masters and the origin of the servility that has been left to this day.自然，这决不及赏玩性灵文字的有趣，然而借此知道一点演成了现在的所谓性灵的历史，却也十分有益的。
Naturally, this is by no means as interesting as enjoying the words of the spirit, but it is also very beneficial to know a little about the history that has evolved into the current so-called spirit.七月十日。
July 10th.

韦素园墓记

韦素园墓记

韦素园墓记

Wei Suyuan's epitaph韦君素园之墓。
Wei Jun's grave in the plain garden.君以一九又二年六月十八日生，一九三二年八月一日卒。呜呼，宏才远志，厄于短年。文苑失英，明者永悼。弟丛芜，友静农，霁野立表；鲁迅书。
君以一九又二年六月十八日生，一九三二年八月一日卒。 呜呼，宏才远志，厄于短年。 文苑失英，明者永悼。 弟丛芜，友静农，霁野立表；鲁迅书。

忆韦素园君

忆韦素园君

忆韦素园君

忆韦素园君我也还有记忆的，但是，零落得很。我自己觉得我的记忆好像被刀刮过了的鱼鳞，有些还留在身体上，有些是掉在水里了，将水一搅，有几片还会翻腾，闪烁，然而中间混着血丝，连我自己也怕得因此污了赏鉴家的眼目。
I still have memories, but they are very fragmented. I myself feel that my memory is like fish scales scraped by a knife, some are still on my body, some are dropped into the water, and when I stir the water, a few pieces will churn and flicker, but there are bloodshots in the middle, and even I am afraid that it will stain the eyes of the connoisseur.现在有几个朋友要纪念韦素园君，我也须说几句话。是的，我是有这义务的。我只好连身外的水也搅一下，看看泛起怎样的东西来。
Now a few friends want to commemorate Wei Suyuanjun, and I have to say a few words. Yes, I have an obligation to do so. I had to stir the water outside my body to see what kind of thing was floating.怕是十多年之前了罢，我在北京大学做讲师，有一天，在教师豫备室里遇见了一个头发和胡子统统长得要命的青年，这就是李霁野。我的认识素园，大约就是霁野绍介的罢，然而我忘记了那时的情景。现在留在记忆里的，是他已经坐在客店的一间小房子里计画出版了。
I'm afraid it was more than ten years ago, I was a lecturer at Peking University, and one day, in the teacher's preparation room, I met a young man with terrible hair and beard, this is Li Jiye. I knew Suyuan, and it was probably Shosuke Jiye, but I forgot the scene at that time. What remains in my memory now is that he is already sitting in a small house in the inn planning to publish.这一间小房子，就是未名社。
This small house is the Weiming Society.
那时我正在编印两种小丛书，一种是《乌合丛书》，专收创作，一种是《未名丛刊》，专收翻译，都由北新书局出版。出版者和读者的不喜欢翻译书，那时和现在也并不两样，所以《未名丛刊》是特别冷落的。恰巧，素园他们愿意绍介外国文学到中国来，便和李小峰商量，要将《未名丛刊》移出，由几个同人自办。小峰一口答应了，于是这一种丛书便和北新书局脱离。稿子是我们自己的，另筹了一笔印费，就算开始。因这丛书的名目，连社名也就叫了“未名”——但并非“没有名目”的意思，是“还没有名目”的意思，恰如孩子的“还未成丁”似的。
At that time, I was compiling and printing two small series, one was the "Rabble Series", which was dedicated to creation, and the other was the "Unnamed Series", which was specially translated, both published by Beixin Book Company. Publishers and readers don't like translated books, and it's no different then than now, so the "Unnamed Series" is particularly neglected. It happened that Su Yuan and the others were willing to introduce foreign literature to China, so they discussed with Li Xiaofeng that they would move the "Unnamed Series" out and run it by a few fellow people. Xiaofeng agreed, so this series of books was separated from Beixin Bookstore. The manuscript is our own, and another printing fee is raised, even if it starts. Because of the name of this series of books, even the name of the society is called "unnamed" - but not "without a name", but "without a name", just like a child's "not yet adult".未名社的同人，实在并没有什么雄心和大志，但是，愿意切切实实的，点点滴滴的做下去的意志，却是大家一致的。而其中的骨干就是素园。
The fans of Weiming Society really don't have any ambitions and ambitions, but their willingness to do it bit by bit is unanimous. And the backbone of it is Suyuan.
于是他坐在一间破小屋子，就是未名社里办事了，不过小半好像也因为他生着病，不能上学校去读书，因此便天然的轮着他守寨。
So he sat in a dilapidated hut, that is, in the Weiming Society, but Xiao Ban seemed to be unable to go to school because he was sick, so he naturally took turns guarding the village.我最初的记忆是在这破寨里看见了素园，一个瘦小，精明，正经的青年，窗前的几排破旧外国书，在证明他穷着也还是钉住着文学。然而，我同时又有了一种坏印象，觉得和他是很难交往的，因为他笑影少。“笑影少”原是未名社同人的一种特色，不过素园显得最分明，一下子就能够令人感得。但到后来，我知道我的判断是错误了，和他也并不难于交往。他的不很笑，大约是因为年龄的不同，对我的一种特别态度罢，可惜我不能化为青年，使大家忘掉彼我，得到确证了。这真相，我想，霁野他们是知道的。
My first memory was to see Su Yuan in this dilapidated village, a thin, shrewd, serious young man, with rows of worn-out foreign books in front of the window, proving that he was poor but still nailed literature. However, I also had a bad impression that it was difficult to associate with him because he had few smiles. "Less laughing shadows" was originally a characteristic of the unnamed society fans, but Suyuan was the most distinct, and it could be felt at once. But later, I knew that my judgment was wrong, and it was not difficult to get along with him. He is not very funny, probably because of the difference in age, it is a special attitude towards me, but unfortunately I cannot turn into a young man, so that everyone forgets the other and me, and I get confirmation. I think Jiye and the others know this truth.但待到我明白了我的误解之后，却同时又发见了一个他的致命伤：他太认真；虽然似乎沉静，然而他激烈。认真会是人的致命伤的么？至少，在那时以至现在，可以是的。一认真，便容易趋于激烈，发扬则送掉自己的命，沉静着，又啮碎了自己的心。
But when I understood my misunderstanding, I also discovered one of his fatal wounds: he was too serious; Although he seems to be calm, he is fierce. Will seriousness be fatal to a person? At least, then and now, it can be. When you are serious, it is easy to become intense, and if you carry it forward, you will lose your life, be calm, and crush your heart.
这里有一点小例子。——我们是只有小例子的。
Here's a small example. - We only have small examples.那时候，因为段祺瑞总理和他的帮闲们的迫压，我已经逃到厦门，但北京的狐虎之威还正是无穷无尽。段派的女子师范大学校长林素园，带兵接收学校去了，演过全副武行之后，还指留着的几个教员为“共产党”。这个名词，一向就给有些人以“办事”上的便利，而且这方法，也是一种老谱，本来并不希罕的。但素园却好像激烈起来了，从此以后，他给我的信上，有好一晌竟憎恶“素园”两字而不用，改称为“漱园”。同时社内也发生了冲突，高长虹从上海寄信来，说素园压下了向培良的稿子，叫我讲一句话。我一声也不响。于是在《狂飙》上骂起来了，先骂素园，后是我。素园在北京压下了培良的稿子，却由上海的高长虹来抱不平，要在厦门的我去下判断，我颇觉得是出色的滑稽，而且一个团体，虽是小小的文学团体罢，每当光景艰难时，内部是一定有人起来捣乱的，这也并不希罕。然而素园却很认真，他不但写信给我，叙述着详情，还作文登在杂志上剖白。在“天才”们的法庭上，别人剖白得清楚的么？——我不禁长长的叹了一口气，想到他只是一个文人，又生着病，却这么拚命的对付着内忧外患，又怎么能够持久呢。自然，这仅仅是小忧患，但在认真而激烈的个人，却也相当的大的。
At that time, because of the pressure of Premier Duan Qirui and his helpers, I had already fled to Xiamen, but the power of Beijing's foxes and tigers was still endless. Lin Suyuan, the president of the Duan faction's Women's Normal University, led the troops to take over the school, and after performing full martial arts, he also pointed out that several instructors who remained were "Communists". This term has always given some people the convenience of "doing things", and this method is also an old spectrum, which is not rare. But Suyuan seemed to have become intense, and since then, in his letter to me, he hated the word "Suyuan" for a long time and did not use it, and changed it to "Shuyuan". At the same time, there was also a conflict within the company, Gao Changhong sent a letter from Shanghai, saying that Suyuan had suppressed Xiang Peiliang's manuscript and asked me to say a word. I didn't make a sound. So I scolded on "Hurricane", first scolding Su Yuan, and then me. Suyuan suppressed Pei Liang's manuscript in Beijing, but Gao Changhong from Shanghai was unfair, and I had to judge it in Xiamen, I think it was quite funny, and a group, although it is a small literary group, whenever the situation is difficult, there must be someone inside who will make trouble, which is not uncommon. However, Su Yuan was very serious, not only wrote to me, describing the details, but also composing an article to confess in the magazine. In the court of the "geniuses", did others explain it clearly? ——I couldn't help but sigh longly, thinking that he was just a literati and sick, but how could he last so desperately dealing with internal and external troubles. Naturally, this is only a small worry, but in a serious and fierce individual, it is also quite big.不久，未名社就被封，几个人还被捕。也许素园已经咯血，进了病院了罢，他不在内。但后来，被捕的释放，未名社也启封了，忽封忽启，忽捕忽放，我至今还不明白这是怎么的一个玩意。
Soon, the Weiming Society was sealed, and several people were arrested. Maybe Su Yuan has already coughed up blood and entered the hospital, but he is not included. But later, the arrest was released, and the Weiming Society was also unsealed, and I still don't understand what kind of thing this is.
我到广州，是第二年——一九二七年的秋初，仍旧陆续的接到他几封信，是在西山病院里，伏在枕头上写就的，因为医生不允许他起坐。他措辞更明显，思想也更清楚，更广大了，但也更使我担心他的病。有一天，我忽然接到一本书，是布面装订的素园翻译的《外套》。我一看明白，就打了一个寒噤：这明明是他送给我的一个纪念品，莫非他已经自觉了生命的期限了么？
When I arrived in Guangzhou, the second year, in the early autumn of 1927, I still received several letters from him, written on a pillow in Xishan Hospital, because the doctor did not allow him to sit up. His words were more obvious, his thoughts were clearer and broader, but it also made me worry more about his illness. One day, I suddenly received a book, "Coat" translated by Su Yuan bound on canvas. As soon as I understood, I shuddered: This is obviously a souvenir he gave me, could it be that he has already realized the limit of his life?我不忍再翻阅这一本书，然而我没有法。
I couldn't bear to read this book again, but I couldn't.我因此记起，素园的一个好朋友也咯过血，一天竟对着素园咯起来，他慌张失措，用了爱和忧急的声音命令道：“你不许再吐了！”我那时却记起了伊孛生的《勃兰特》。他不是命令过去的人，从新起来，却并无这神力，只将自己埋在崩雪下面的么？……
I remembered that a good friend of Suyuan also coughed up blood, and one day he giggled at Suyuan, and he panicked and ordered in a voice of love and worry: "Don't vomit anymore!" "I remembered Ibsen's "Brandt" at that time. Didn't he order the people of the past to rise anew, but without this divine power, he only buried himself under the snowfall? ……我在空中看见了勃兰特和素园，但是我没有话。
I saw Brandt and Suyuan in the air, but I didn't say anything.
一九二九年五月末，我最以为侥幸的是自己到西山病院去，和素园谈了天。他为了日光浴，皮肤被晒得很黑了，精神却并不萎顿。我们和几个朋友都很高兴。但我在高兴中，又时时夹着悲哀：忽而想到他的爱人，已由他同意之后，和别人订了婚；忽而想到他竟连绍介外国文学给中国的一点志愿，也怕难于达到；忽而想到他在这里静卧着，不知道他自以为是在等候全愈，还是等候灭亡；忽而想到他为什么要寄给我一本精装的《外套》？……
At the end of May 1929, I thought it was a fluke that I went to Xishan Hospital and talked with Suyuan. In order to sunbathe, his skin was tanned very much, but his spirit was not weakened. We were happy with a few friends. But in my joy, I was always filled with sadness: suddenly I thought of his lover, who had been engaged to someone else after his consent; Suddenly thinking that he was afraid that even a little volunteer for Shaojie foreign literature would be difficult to achieve; Suddenly thinking of him lying here quietly, I don't know if he thinks he is waiting for full recovery or destruction; Suddenly I thought why he sent me a hardcover copy of "Coat"? ……壁上还有一幅陀思妥也夫斯基的大画像。对于这先生，我是尊敬，佩服的，但我又恨他残酷到了冷静的文章。他布置了精神上的苦刑，一个个拉了不幸的人来，拷问给我们看。现在他用沉郁的眼光，凝视着素园和他的卧榻，好像在告诉我：这也是可以收在作品里的不幸的人。
There is also a large portrait of Dostoevsky on the wall. I respect and admire this gentleman, but I hate his cruel and calm articles. He arranged mental torture, pulled the unfortunate people one by one, and tortured them to show us. Now he stares at Su Yuan and his couch with gloomy eyes, as if telling me: This is also an unfortunate person who can be included in the work.自然，这不过是小不幸，但在素园个人，是相当的大的。
Naturally, this is just a small misfortune, but in Suyuan, it is quite a big one.一九三二年八月一日晨五时半，素园终于病殁在北平同仁医院里了，一切计画，一切希望，也同归于尽。我所抱憾的是因为避祸，烧去了他的信札，我只能将一本《外套》当作唯一的纪念，永远放在自己的身边。
At half past five in the morning on August 1, 1932, Suyuan finally died of illness in Tongren Hospital in Peking, and all plans and hopes were also exhausted. What I regret is that because I avoided disaster, I burned his letter, and I can only keep a copy of "Coat" as the only souvenir and keep it by my side forever.
自素园病殁之后，转眼已是两年了，这其间，对于他，文坛上并没有人开口。这也不能算是希罕的，他既非天才，也非豪杰，活的时候，既不过在默默中生存，死了之后，当然也只好在默默中泯没。但对于我们，却是值得记念的青年，因为他在默默中支持了未名社。
Since Suyuan's death, it has been two years in the blink of an eye, and during this time, no one in the literary world has spoken about him. This cannot be regarded as a rare thing, he is neither a genius nor a hero, when he lives, he neither survives in silence, and after death, of course, he has to disappear in silence. But for us, he is a young man worth remembering, because he silently supported the Weiming Society.未名社现在是几乎消灭了，那存在期，也并不长久。然而自素园经营以来，绍介了果戈理（N．Gogol），陀思妥也夫斯基（F．Dostoevsky），安特列夫（L．Andreev），绍介了望·蔼覃（F．van Eeden），绍介了爱伦堡（I．Ehrenburg）的《烟袋》和拉夫列涅夫（B．Lavrenev）的《四十一》。还印行了《未名新集》，其中有丛芜的《君山》，静农的《地之子》和《建塔者》，我的《朝华夕拾》，在那时候，也都还算是相当可看的作品。事实不为轻薄阴险小儿留情，曾几何年，他们就都已烟消火灭，然而未名社的译作，在文苑里却至今没有枯死的。
The Weiming Society is almost extinct now, and its existence is not long. However, since the operation of the plain garden, it has introduced N. Gogol, F. Dostoevsky, L. Andreev, F. van Eeden, I. Ehrenburg's "Tobacco Bag" and B. Lavrenev's "Forty-One". I also printed "Weiming New Collection", which included Cong Wu's "Junshan", Jingnong's "Son of the Earth" and "The Tower Builder", and my "Chaohua and Xishi", which were also quite worth looking at at that time. The facts are not merciful for frivolous and insidious children, and once upon a time, they were all extinguished, but the translation of the Weiming Society has not died in the literary garden so far.是的，但素园却并非天才，也非豪杰，当然更不是高楼的尖顶，或名园的美花，然而他是楼下的一块石材，园中的一撮泥土，在中国第一要他多。他不入于观赏者的眼中，只有建筑者和栽植者，决不会将他置之度外。
Yes, but Suyuan is not a genius, nor a hero, of course, not the spire of a high-rise building, or a beautiful flower in a famous garden, but he is a stone downstairs, and a handful of soil in the garden is the first in China to ask for more. He is not in the eyes of the viewer, only the builders and planters, will never leave him out.文人的遭殃，不在生前的被攻击和被冷落，一瞑之后，言行两亡，于是无聊之徒，谬托知己，是非蜂起，既以自，又以卖钱，连死尸也成了他们的沽名获利之具，这倒是值得悲哀的。现在我以这几千字纪念我所熟识的素园，但愿还没有营私肥己的处所，此外也别无话说了。
The suffering of literati is not attacked and neglected during their lifetime, but after a death, both words and deeds are lost, so bored people, falsely claiming to be confidants, right and wrong are rising, both for themselves and for selling money, and even the corpse has become a tool for them to make a profit, which is sad. Now I use these thousands of words to commemorate the Suyuan I know, hoping that there is no place to enrich myself for personal gain, and there is nothing else to say.我不知道以后是否还有记念的时候，倘止于这一次，那么，素园，从此别了！
I don't know if there will be times to remember it in the future, if it stops at this time, then, Suyuan, farewell from now on!一九三四年七月十六之夜，鲁迅记。
On the night of July 16, 1934, Lu Xun recorded.

忆刘半农君

忆刘半农君

忆刘半农君

I think of Liu Bannong这是小峰出给我的一个题目。
This is a question given to me by Xiaofeng.这题目并不出得过分。半农去世，我是应该哀悼的，因为他也是我的老朋友。但是，这是十来年前的话了，现在呢，可难说得很。
This question is not excessive. I should mourn the death of Bannon, because he is also an old friend of mine. However, this was more than ten years ago, and it is difficult to say now.我已经忘记了怎么和他初次会面，以及他怎么能到了北京。他到北京，恐怕是在《新青年》投稿之后，由蔡孑民先生或陈独秀先生去请来的，到了之后，当然更是《新青年》里的一个战士。他活泼，勇敢，很打了几次大仗。譬如罢，答王敬轩的双信，“她”字和“牠”字的创造，就都是的。这两件，现在看起来，自然是琐屑得很，但那是十多年前，单是提倡新式标点，就会有一大群人“若丧考妣”，恨不得“食肉寝皮”的时候，所以的确是“大仗”。现在的二十左右的青年，大约很少有人知道三十年前，单是剪下辫子就会坐牢或杀头的了。然而这曾经是事实。
I have forgotten how I first met him and how he got to Beijing. When he arrived in Beijing, I am afraid that after the submission of "New Youth", Mr. Cai Jiemin or Mr. Chen Duxiu invited him, and after arriving, of course, he was a soldier in "New Youth". He was lively, brave, and fought several big battles. For example, in response to Wang Jingxuan's double letter, the creation of the word "she" and the word "it" are both true. These two pieces, now it seems, are naturally very trivial, but that was more than ten years ago, just by advocating a new style of punctuation, there would be a large group of people who "lost their mothers" and wanted to "eat meat and sleep skin", so it was indeed a "big battle". Today's young people in their twenties, about few people know that thirty years ago, just cutting their braids would lead to jail time or beheading. However, this was once a fact.但半农的活泼，有时颇近于草率，勇敢也有失之无谋的地方。但是，要商量袭击敌人的时候，他还是好伙伴，进行之际，心口并不相应，或者暗暗的给你一刀，他是决不会的。倘若失了算，那是因为没有算好的缘故。
But Bannong's liveliness is sometimes quite close to sloppiness, and his bravery also has his mistakes. However, when it comes to discussing attacking the enemy, he is still a good partner, and when he is doing it, his heart does not correspond, or he secretly gives you a knife, he will never do it. If you lose your calculation, it is because you have not calculated well.《新青年》每出一期，就开一次编辑会，商定下一期的稿件。其时最惹我注意的是陈独秀和胡适之。假如将韬略比作一间仓库罢，独秀先生的是外面竖一面大旗，大书道：“内皆武器，来者小心！”但那门却开着的，里面有几枝枪，几把刀，一目了然，用不着提防。适之先生的是紧紧的关着门，门上粘一条小纸条道：“内无武器，请勿疑虑。”这自然可以是真的，但有些人——至少是我这样的人——有时总不免要侧着头想一想。半农却是令人不觉其有“武库”的一个人，所以我佩服陈胡，却亲近半农。
Every time "New Youth" is published, an editorial meeting is held to agree on the manuscript for the next issue. At that time, the ones that caught my attention the most were Chen Duxiu and Hu Shizhi. If Tao Lue is compared to a warehouse, Mr. Duxiu is to erect a big flag outside, and the big book says: "There are weapons inside, be careful of those who come!" But the door was open, and there were a few guns and knives inside, which were clear at a glance and didn't need to be guarded. Mr. Shizhi closed the door tightly, and a small note was glued to the door and said, "There are no weapons inside, please don't doubt." This can be true, of course, but some people – at least people like me – sometimes have to tilt their heads and think about it. Bannong is a person who makes people feel that he has an "arsenal", so I admire Chen Hu, but I am close to Bannong.所谓亲近，不过是多谈闲天，一多谈，就露出了缺点。几乎有一年多，他没有消失掉从上海带来的才子必有“红袖添香夜读书”的艳福的思想，好容易才给我们骂掉了。但他好像到处都这么的乱说，使有些“学者”皱眉。有时候，连到《新青年》投稿都被排斥。他很勇于写稿，但试去看旧报去，很有几期是没有他的。那些人们批评他的为人，是：浅。
The so-called closeness is just talking more about idle days, and talking more reveals shortcomings. For almost more than a year, he did not disappear the idea that the talents brought from Shanghai must have the beauty of "reading at night with red sleeves", and it was easy for us to scold him. But he seems to be talking nonsense everywhere, which makes some "scholars" frown. Sometimes, even submissions to "New Youth" are rejected. He was very brave in writing, but when he tried to read old newspapers, there were many issues without him. Those who criticized him for being a shallow person.不错，半农确是浅。但他的浅，却如一条清溪，澄澈见底，纵有多少沉渣和腐草，也不掩其大体的清。倘使装的是烂泥，一时就看不出它的深浅来了；如果是烂泥的深渊呢，那就更不如浅一点的好。
Yes, semi-agricultural is indeed shallow. But his shallowness is like a clear stream, crystal clear, no matter how much sediment and rotten grass there is, it does not hide its general clarity. If it is filled with mud, it will not be possible to see its depth for a while; If it is a muddy abyss, it is even better to be shallow.但这些背后的批评，大约是很伤了半农的心的，他的到法国留学，我疑心大半就为此。我最懒于通信，从此我们就疏远起来了。他回来时，我才知道他在外国钞古书，后来也要标点《何典》，我那时还以老朋友自居，在序文上说了几句老实话，事后，才知道半农颇不高兴了，“驷不及舌”，也没有法子。另外还有一回关于《语丝》的彼此心照的不快活。五六年前，曾在上海的宴会上见过一回面，那时候，我们几乎已经无话可谈了。
But the criticism behind these probably hurt Bannong's heart very much, and I suspected that most of his study in France was for this. I was the laziest to communicate, and since then we have become estranged. When he came back, I learned that he was in a foreign banknote ancient book, and later he also had to punctuate the "He Dian", I still regarded myself as an old friend at that time, and said a few honest words in the preface, and afterwards, I realized that Bannong was quite unhappy, "not as good as the tongue", and there was no way. There is also a tacit unhappiness about "Yusi". Five or six years ago, we met again at a banquet in Shanghai, and at that time, we had almost nothing to talk about.近几年，半农渐渐的据了要津，我也渐渐的更将他忘却；但从报章上看见他禁称“蜜斯”之类，却很起了反感：我以为这些事情是不必半农来做的。从去年来，又看见他不断的做打油诗，弄烂古文，回想先前的交情，也往往不免长叹。我想，假如见面，而我还以老朋友自居，不给一个“今天天气……哈哈哈”完事，那就也许会弄到冲突的罢。
In recent years, Ban Nong has gradually occupied the main position, and I have gradually forgotten about him; But when I saw in the newspapers that he forbade the name "Mis" and the like, I was very disgusted: I thought these things didn't have to be done by half-farmers. Since last year, I have seen him constantly making limericks, ruining ancient texts, and recalling his previous friendships, and he often sighs. I think that if we meet, and I still consider myself an old friend, I won't give a "weather today...... Hahaha "It's over, then maybe it will lead to conflict."不过，半农的忠厚，是还使我感动的。我前年曾到北平，后来有人通知我，半农是要来看我的，有谁恐吓了他一下，不敢来了。这使我很惭愧，因为我到北平后，实在未曾有过访问半农的心思。
However, Bannong's loyalty still moved me. I went to Peiping the year before last, and then someone informed me that Ban Nong was coming to see me, and someone intimidated him and did not dare to come. This made me very ashamed, because after I arrived in Peking, I really never had the intention of visiting Bannong.现在他死去了，我对于他的感情，和他生时也并无变化。我爱十年前的半农，而憎恶他的近几年。这憎恶是朋友的憎恶，因为我希望他常是十年前的半农，他的为战士，即使“浅”罢，却于中国更为有益。我愿以愤火照出他的战绩，免使一群陷沙鬼将他先前的光荣和死尸一同拖入烂泥的深渊。
Now that he is dead, my feelings for him have not changed from when he was alive. I love Ban Nong ten years ago, but hate him in recent years. This hatred is the hatred of friends, because I hope he is often a half-farmer ten years ago, and his soldier, even if it is "shallow", is more beneficial to China. I wish to shine his achievements with anger, lest a group of sand trappers drag his former glory and corpses into the abyss of mud.八月一日。
August 1st.

答曹聚仁先生信

答曹聚仁先生信

答曹聚仁先生信

Answer to Mr. Cao Juren's letter聚仁先生：
Mr. Ju Ren:关于大众语的问题，提出得真是长久了，我是没有研究的，所以一向没有开过口。但是现在的有些文章觉得不少是“高论”，文章虽好，能说而不能行，一下子就消灭，而问题却依然如故。
The question of popular language has been raised for a long time, and I have not studied it, so I have never spoken about it. But some articles now feel that many of them are "high arguments", although the articles are good, they can be said but not done, and they are eliminated all at once, but the problems are still the same.现在写一点我的简单的意见在这里：
Now write a little bit of my simple opinion here:一，汉字和大众，是势不两立的。
First, Chinese characters and the public are incompatible.二，所以，要推行大众语文，必须用罗马字拼音（即拉丁化，现在有人分为两件事，我不懂是怎么一回事），而且要分为多少区，每区又分为小区（譬如绍兴一个地方，至少也得分为四小区），写作之初，纯用其地的方言，但是，人们是要前进的，那时原有方言一定不够，就只好采用白话，欧字，甚而至于语法。但，在交通繁盛，言语混杂的地方，又有一种语文，是比较普通的东西，它已经采用着新字汇，我想，这就是“大众语”的雏形，它的字汇和语法，即可以输进穷乡僻壤去。中国人是无论如何，在将来必有非通几种中国语不可的运命的，这事情，由教育与交通，可以办得到。
Second, so, to promote popular language, it is necessary to use Romanization (that is, Latinization, now some people are divided into two things, I don't know what is going on), and how many districts must be divided, and each district is divided into communities (for example, a place in Shaoxing, at least divided into four communities), at the beginning of writing, purely the dialect of the place, but people are going to move forward, at that time the original dialect must not be enough, so they have to use vernacular, European characters, and even grammar. However, in places where traffic is prosperous and language is mixed, there is another language, which is a relatively ordinary thing, and it has adopted new vocabulary, I think, this is the prototype of "popular language", and its vocabulary and grammar can be exported to poor and remote areas. In any case, Chinese people will have the fate of not being able to speak several Chinese languages in the future, and this can be done by education and transportation.三，普及拉丁化，要在大众自掌教育的时候。现在我们所办得到的是：（甲）研究拉丁化法；（乙）试用广东话之类，读者较多的言语，做出东西来看；（丙）竭力将白话做得浅豁，使能懂的人增多，但精密的所谓“欧化”语文，仍应支持，因为讲话倘要精密，中国原有的语法是不够的，而中国的大众语文，也决不会永久含胡下去。譬如罢，反对欧化者所说的欧化，就不是中国固有字，有些新字眼，新语法，是会有非用不可的时候的。
Third, the popularization of Latinization should be done when the masses are in charge of their own education. What we can do now is: (a) study Latinization; (b) Try Cantonese and other words, with more readers, and make things to see; (c) Strive to make the vernacular simple and open-minded, so that more people can understand it, but the so-called so-called "Europeanized" language should still be supported, because if the speech is to be precise, China's original grammar is not enough, and China's popular language will never be permanently bearded. For example, the Europeanization mentioned by those who oppose Europeanization is not an inherent word in China, and there will be times when some new words and new grammar must be used.四，在乡僻处启蒙的大众语，固然应该纯用方言，但一面仍然要改进。譬如“妈的”一句话罢，乡下是有许多意义的，有时骂骂，有时佩服，有时赞叹，因为他说不出别样的话来。先驱者的任务，是在给他们许多话，可以发表更明确的意思，同时也可以明白更精确的意义。如果也照样的写着“这妈的天气真是妈的，妈的再这样，什么都要妈的了”，那么于大众有什么益处呢？
Fourth, the popular language enlightened in remote places should certainly use dialects, but it still needs to be improved. For example, the word "damn" has many meanings, sometimes scolding, sometimes admiring, sometimes admiring, because he can't say anything else. The task of the pioneers is to give them many words that can express clearer meanings and at the same time understand more precise meanings. If it is also written as "This damn weather is really damned, damn it, everything will be", then what is the benefit to the public?五，至于已有大众语雏形的地方，我以为大可以依此为根据而加以改进，太僻的土语，是不必用的。例如上海叫“打”为“吃生活”，可以用于上海人的对话，却不必特用于作者的叙事中，因为说“打”，工人也一样的能够懂。有些人以为如“像煞有介事”之类，已经通行，也是不确的话，北方人对于这句话的理解，和江苏人是不一样的，那感觉并不比“俨乎其然”切实。
Fifth, as for the places where the popular language has already taken shape, I think it can be improved based on this, and it is not necessary to use too remote native languages. For example, Shanghai calls "fighting" as "eating life", which can be used in the dialogue of Shanghainese, but it does not have to be used specifically in the author's narrative, because when it is said to "fight", workers can also understand it. Some people think that things like "like a serious matter" have been popular, but it is also inaccurate, and the understanding of this sentence by northerners is different from that of Jiangsu people, and the feeling is not more practical than "as it is".语文和口语不能完全相同；讲话的时候，可以夹许多“这个这个”“那个那个”之类，其实并无意义，到写作时，为了时间，纸张的经济，意思的分明，就要分别删去的，所以文章一定应该比口语简洁，然而明了，有些不同，并非文章的坏处。
Language and spoken language cannot be exactly the same; When speaking, you can include a lot of "this" and "that", etc., in fact, it is meaningless, and when writing, for the sake of time, the economy of the paper, and the clear meaning, it must be deleted separately, so the article must be more concise than the spoken word, but it is clear, some differences, not a bad thing about the article.所以现在能够实行的，我以为是（一）制定罗马字拼音（赵元任的太繁，用不来的）；（二）做更浅显的白话文，采用较普通的方言，姑且算是向大众语去的作品，至于思想，那不消说，该是“进步”的；（三）仍要支持欧化文法，当作一种后备。
So what can be implemented now, I think it is (1) formulating Roman character pinyin (Zhao Yuanren's is too complicated to use); (2) Doing a more simple vernacular text, using a more ordinary dialect, is a work that goes to the popular language, as for thought, needless to say, it should be "progressive"; (3) It is still necessary to support Europeanized grammar as a kind of backup.还有一层，是文言的保护者，现在也有打了大众语的旗子的了，他一方面，是立论极高，使大众语悬空，做不得；别一方面，借此攻击他当面的大敌——白话。这一点也须注意的。要不然，我们就会自己缴了自己的械。专此布复，即颂时绥。
On the one hand, he has a very high argument, so that the popular language is suspended and cannot be done; On the other hand, use this to attack his immediate enemy - vernacular. This also needs to be noted. Otherwise, we will surrender our own weapons. Focusing on this repetition, it is a praise of the peace of the times.迅上。八月二日。
Quickly ascended. August 2nd.

从孩子的照相说起

从孩子的照相说起

从孩子的照相说起

Let's start with the child's photo因为长久没有小孩子，曾有人说，这是我做人不好的报应，要绝种的。房东太太讨厌我的时候，就不准她的孩子们到我这里玩，叫作“给他冷清冷清，冷清得他要死！”但是，现在却有了一个孩子，虽然能不能养大也很难说，然而目下总算已经颇能说些话，发表他自己的意见了。不过不会说还好，一会说，就使我觉得他仿佛也是我的敌人。
Because I have not had children for a long time, some people once said that this is the retribution for my bad behavior and will be extinct. When the landlady hated me, she didn't allow her children to come to me to play, calling it "Give him a desert, so cold that he will die!" However, now that he has a child, although it is difficult to say whether he can raise it or not, he is finally able to say something and express his own opinions. But it's okay if you can't say it, but once you say it, it makes me feel as if he is also my enemy.他有时对于我很不满，有一回，当面对我说：“我做起爸爸来，还要好……”甚而至于颇近于“反动”，曾经给我一个严厉的批评道：“这种爸爸，什么爸爸！？”
He was sometimes dissatisfied with me, and once, in front of me, he said: "I want to be a father, but I want to be better......" and even close to "reactionary", and once gave me a severe criticism: "This kind of dad, what kind of dad!? ”我不相信他的话。做儿子时，以将来的好父亲自命，待到自己有了儿子的时候，先前的宣言早已忘得一干二净了。况且我自以为也不算怎么坏的父亲，虽然有时也要骂，甚至于打，其实是爱他的。所以他健康，活泼，顽皮，毫没有被压迫得瘟头瘟脑。如果真的是一个“什么爸爸”，他还敢当面发这样反动的宣言么？
I don't believe him. When he was a son, he regarded himself as a good father in the future, and when he had a son, he had already forgotten the previous declaration. Besides, I think my father is not very bad, although sometimes he scolds and even beats, but he actually loves him. So he was healthy, lively, naughty, and not oppressed at all. If he was really a "father", would he dare to make such a reactionary declaration in person?但那健康和活泼，有时却也使他吃亏，九一八事件后，就被同胞误认为日本孩子，骂了好几回，还挨过一次打——自然是并不重的。这里还要加一句说的听的，都不十分舒服的话：近一年多以来，这样的事情可是一次也没有了。
After the 918 incident, he was mistaken for a Japanese child by his compatriots, scolded several times, and beaten once - naturally it was not serious. Here is another sentence that is not very comfortable to hear: in the past year or so, such a thing has not happened once.中国和日本的小孩子，穿的如果都是洋服，普通实在是很难分辨的。但我们这里的有些人，却有一种错误的速断法：温文尔雅，不大言笑，不大动弹的，是中国孩子；健壮活泼，不怕生人，大叫大跳的，是日本孩子。
If Chinese and Japanese children wear Western clothes, it is really difficult to tell the difference. But some of us here have a wrong quick judgment: those who are gentle, not smiling, and not moving are Chinese children; Strong and lively, not afraid of strangers, shouting and jumping, it is a Japanese child.然而奇怪，我曾在日本的照相馆里给他照过一张相，满脸顽皮，也真像日本孩子；后来又在中国的照相馆里照了一张相，相类的衣服，然而面貌很拘谨，驯良，是一个道地的中国孩子了。
However, strangely, I once took a picture of him in a photo studio in Japan, his face was full of mischief, and he really looked like a Japanese child; Later, he took a photo in a photo studio in China, with similar clothes, but his appearance was very restrained, docile, and he was an authentic Chinese child.为了这事，我曾经想了一想。
I once thought about it.这不同的大原因，是在照相师的。他所指示的站或坐的姿势，两国的照相师先就不相同，站定之后，他就瞪了眼睛，机摄取他以为最好的一刹那的相貌。孩子被摆在照相机的镜头之下，表情是总在变化的，时而活泼，时而顽皮，时而驯良，时而拘谨，时而烦厌，时而疑惧，时而无畏，时而疲劳……。照住了驯良和拘谨的一刹那的，是中国孩子相；照住了活泼或顽皮的一刹那的，就好像日本孩子相。
The big reason for this difference is the photographer. The standing or sitting posture he instructed, the photographer of the two countries was not the same at first, and after standing still, he stared, and  took what he thought was the best moment. When children are placed under the lens of the camera, their expressions are always changing, sometimes lively, sometimes naughty, sometimes docile, sometimes restrained, sometimes annoying, sometimes suspicious, sometimes fearless, sometimes tired ....... The moment of tame and restraint is the appearance of a Chinese child; It shines on a lively or playful moment, just like a Japanese child.驯良之类并不是恶德。但发展开去，对一切事无不驯良，却决不是美德，也许简直倒是没出息。“爸爸”和前辈的话，固然也要听的，但也须说得有道理。假使有一个孩子，自以为事事都不如人，鞠躬倒退；或者满脸笑容，实际上却总是阴谋暗箭，我实在宁可听到当面骂我“什么东西”的爽快，而且希望他自己是一个东西。
Taming is not a vice. But if you develop and are tame in everything, it is by no means a virtue, and it may be simply unpromising. The words of "Dad" and seniors must be listened to, but they must also be reasonable. If there is a child who thinks that he is inferior to others in everything, he bows and goes backwards; Or with a smile on his face, but in fact he is always a conspiracy and a hidden arrow, I would rather hear the cheerfulness of scolding me in person for "something", and hope that he is a thing himself.但中国一般的趋势，却只在向驯良之类——“静”的一方面发展，低眉顺眼，唯唯诺诺，才算一个好孩子，名之曰“有趣”。活泼，健康，顽强，挺胸仰面……凡是属于“动”的，那就未免有人摇头了，甚至于称之为“洋气”。又因为多年受着侵略，就和这“洋气”为仇；更进一步，则故意和这“洋气”反一调：他们活动，我偏静坐；他们讲科学，我偏扶乩；他们穿短衣，我偏着长衫；他们重卫生，我偏吃苍蝇；他们壮健，我偏生病……这才是保存中国固有文化，这才是爱国，这才不是奴隶性。
However, the general trend in China is only developing towards the tame and the like - "quiet", low eyebrows are pleasing to the eye, only yes, is a good child, called "interesting". Lively, healthy, tenacious, chest up, back...... Anything that belongs to "movement" will inevitably shake its head, and even call it "foreign". and because of the invasion for many years, it is a grudge against this "foreign spirit"; Further, it deliberately contradicts this "foreign atmosphere": they are active, and I tend to sit quietly; They talk about science, and I support them; They wear short clothes, and I wear long clothes; They pay attention to hygiene, and I prefer to eat flies; They are strong, but I am sick...... This is the preservation of China's inherent culture, this is patriotism, and this is not slavery.其实，由我看来，所谓“洋气”之中，有不少是优点，也是中国人性质中所本有的，但因了历朝的压抑，已经萎缩了下去，现在就连自己也莫名其妙，统统送给洋人了。这是必须拿它回来——恢复过来的——自然还得加一番慎重的选择。
In fact, in my opinion, there are many advantages in the so-called "foreign atmosphere", which are also inherent in the nature of the Chinese, but due to the suppression of the past dynasties, they have shrunk, and now even they are inexplicably given to foreigners. This is a must to be brought back—recovered—and naturally a careful choice.即使并非中国所固有的罢，只要是优点，我们也应该学习。即使那老师是我们的仇敌罢，我们也应该向他学习。我在这里要提出现在大家所不高兴说的日本来，他的会摹仿，少创造，是为中国的许多论者所鄙薄的，但是，只要看看他们的出版物和工业品，早非中国所及，就知道“会摹仿”决不是劣点，我们正应该学习这“会摹仿”的。“会摹仿”又加以有创造，不是更好么？否则，只不过是一个“恨恨而死”而已。
Even if it is not inherent in China, as long as it is an advantage, we should learn from it. Even if the teacher is our enemy, we should learn from him. I would like to point out here that Japan, which everyone is not happy to say now, will imitate and create less, which is despised by many Chinese commentators, but as long as you look at their publications and industrial products, which are far beyond China's reach, you will know that "imitation" is by no means a bad thing, and we should learn from this "imitation". Isn't it better to "imitate" and create it? Otherwise, it is just a "death of hatred".我在这里还要附一句像是多余的声明：我相信自己的主张，决不是“受了帝国主义者的指使”，要诱中国人做奴才；而满口爱国，满身国粹，也于实际上的做奴才并无妨碍。
I would like to add a statement that seems redundant here: I believe that my proposition is by no means "instructed by the imperialists" to lure the Chinese into slaves; And full of patriotism and national essence does not hinder being a slave in fact.八月七日。
August 7th.

门外文谈

门外文谈

门外文谈

Outside the door, there is a discussion一　开头
1. Beginning听说今年上海的热，是六十年来所未有的。白天出去混饭，晚上低头回家，屋子里还是热，并且加上蚊子。这时候，只有门外是天堂。因为海边的缘故罢，总有些风，用不着挥扇。虽然彼此有些认识，却不常见面的寓在四近的亭子间或搁楼里的邻人也都坐出来了，他们有的是店员，有的是书局里的校对员，有的是制图工人的好手。大家都已经做得筋疲力尽，叹着苦，但这时总还算有闲的，所以也谈闲天。
I heard that this year's fever in Shanghai is unprecedented in 60 years. Go out to mix during the day, bow your head and go home at night, the house is still hot, and mosquitoes are added. At this time, only heaven is outside the door. Because of the seaside, there is always some wind, so there is no need to wave a fan. Although they knew each other a little, the neighbors who lived in the nearby pavilions or shelves who did not see each other often also sat down, some of them were clerks, some were proofreaders in the bookstore, and some were good draftsmen. Everyone is exhausted and sighing, but at this time they are still idle, so they also talk about leisure.闲天的范围也并不小：谈旱灾，谈求雨，谈吊膀子，谈三寸怪人干，谈洋米，谈裸腿，也谈古文，谈白话，谈大众语。因为我写过几篇白话文，所以关于古文之类他们特别要听我的话，我也只好特别说的多。这样的过了两三夜，才给别的话岔开，也总算谈完了。不料过了几天之后，有几个还要我写出来。
The scope of idle days is not small: talking about drought, talking about praying for rain, talking about hanging arms, talking about three-inch strange people, talking about foreign rice, talking about bare legs, talking about ancient texts, talking about vernacular, and talking about popular language. Because I have written several vernacular articles, they have to listen to me especially about ancient texts, so I have to say a lot. After two or three nights, I gave up on other words, and the conversation was finally over. Unexpectedly, a few days later, I was asked to write a few of them.他们里面，有的是因为我看过几本古书，所以相信我的，有的是因为我看过一点洋书，有的又因为我看古书也看洋书；但有几位却因此反不相信我，说我是蝙蝠。我说到古文，他就笑道，你不是唐宋八大家，能信么？我谈到大众语，他又笑道：你又不是劳苦大众，讲什么海话呢？
Among them, some believe in me because I have read a few ancient books, some because I have read a little foreign book, and some because I read ancient books and foreign books; But a few people didn't believe me because of this, saying that I was a bat. When I talked about ancient texts, he smiled and said, you are not the eight masters of the Tang and Song dynasties, can you believe it? When I talked about popular language, he smiled again: You are not a working public, what kind of sea language do you speak?这也是真的。我们讲旱灾的时候，就讲到一位老爷下乡查灾，说有些地方是本可以不成灾的，现在成灾，是因为农民懒，不戽水。但一种报上，却记着一个六十老翁，因儿子戽水乏力而死，灾象如故，无路可走，自杀了。老爷和乡下人，意见是真有这么的不同的。那么，我的夜谈，恐怕也终不过是一个门外闲人的空话罢了。
It's also true. When we talked about drought, we talked about an old man who went to the countryside to investigate the disaster, saying that some places could not have been a disaster, but now it is a disaster because the peasants are lazy and do not draw water. But a kind of newspaper remembers a sixty-year-old man who died of his son's weakness in the water, and the disaster was the same, with no way out, and he committed suicide. The opinions of the master and the countryman are really so different. Then, my night talk is probably just the empty words of an idle person outside the door.飓风过后，天气也凉爽了一些，但我终于照着希望我写的几个人的希望，写出来了，比口语简单得多，大致却无异，算是抄给我们一流人看的。当时只凭记忆，乱引古书，说话是耳边风，错点不打紧，写在纸上，却使我很踌躇，但自己又苦于没有原书可对，这只好请读者随时指正了。
After the hurricane, the weather was a little cooler, but I finally wrote it according to the wishes of the few people who wanted me to write it, which was much simpler than spoken words, but it was roughly the same, and it was copied to us first-class people. At that time, I only relied on memory, quoting ancient books, speaking in my ears, and writing on paper made me hesitate, but I was suffering from not having the original book to answer, so I had to ask readers to correct me at any time.一九三四年，八月十六夜，写完并记。
On the night of August 16, 1934, I finished writing and recording.

门外文谈

二　字是什么人造的？

门外文谈

2. What is the word artificial?字是什么人造的？
What is the word man-made?我们听惯了一件东西，总是古时候一位圣贤所造的故事，对于文字，也当然要有这质问。但立刻就有忘记了来源的答话：字是仓颉造的。
We are used to hearing one thing, always a story created by a sage in ancient times, and of course we must have this question about words. But immediately there was an answer that forgot the source: the words were made by Cangjie.这是一般的学者的主张，他自然有他的出典。我还见过一幅这位仓颉的画像，是生着四只眼睛的老头陀。可见要造文字，相貌先得出奇，我们这种只有两只眼睛的人，是不但本领不够，连相貌也不配的。
This is the proposition of ordinary scholars, and he naturally has his source. I also saw a portrait of this Cangjie, an old man with four eyes. It can be seen that if you want to create words, your appearance will be surprising, and people like us who only have two eyes are not only not good enough, but also unworthy of appearance.然而做《易经》的人（我不知道是谁），却比较的聪明，他说：“上古结绳而治，后世圣人易之以书契。”他不说仓颉，只说“后世圣人”，不说创造，只说掉换，真是谨慎得很；也许他无意中就不相信古代会有一个独自造出许多文字来的人的了，所以就只是这么含含胡胡的来一句。
However, the person who made the "I Ching" (I don't know who it was) was relatively smart, he said: "In ancient times, the knot was ruled, and the later sages changed it with a book contract." He didn't say Cangjie, only "the saints of later generations", he didn't talk about creation, he only said that he was replaced, which was really cautious; Maybe he didn't inadvertently believe that there would be a person who created many words alone in ancient times, so he just said it vaguely.但是，用书契来代结绳的人，又是什么脚色呢？文学家？不错，从现在的所谓文学家的最要卖弄文字，夺掉笔杆便一无所能的事实看起来，的确首先就要想到他；他也的确应该给自己的吃饭家伙出点力。然而并不是的。有史以前的人们，虽然劳动也唱歌，求爱也唱歌，他却并不起草，或者留稿子，因为他做梦也想不到卖诗稿，编全集，而且那时的社会里，也没有报馆和书铺子，文字毫无用处。据有些学者告诉我们的话来看，这在文字上用了一番工夫的，想来该是史官了。
But what kind of person is the person who uses the book deed to tie the rope? Litterateur? Yes, from the fact that the current so-called writers are the most flattering of words, and they are powerless to take away the barrel of the pen, it seems that they must think of him first; He should indeed give some strength to his eating guy. However, it is not. Prehistoric people, although labor and singing, courtship also sang, he did not draft or leave manuscripts, because he could not dream of selling poetry manuscripts and compiling complete works, and in the society at that time, there were no newspapers and bookstores, and words were useless. According to what some scholars tell us, this has taken a lot of effort in writing, and I think it should be a historian.原始社会里，大约先前只有巫，待到渐次进化，事情繁复了，有些事情，如祭祀，狩猎，战争……之类，渐有记住的必要，巫就只好在他那本职的“降神”之外，一面也想法子来记事，这就是“史”的开头。况且“升中于天”，他在本职上，也得将记载酋长和他的治下的大事的册子，烧给上帝看，因此一样的要做文章——虽然这大约是后起的事。再后来，职掌分得更清楚了，于是就有专门记事的史官。文字就是史官必要的工具，古人说：“仓颉，黄帝史。”第一句未可信，但指出了史和文字的关系，却是很有意思的。至于后来的“文学家”用它来写“阿呀呀，我的爱哟，我要死了！”那些佳句，那不过是享享现成的罢了，“何足道哉”！
In primitive society, there were only witches before, but when they gradually evolved, things became complicated, and some things such as sacrifices, hunting, and wars ...... and so on, gradually there is a need to remember, so Wu has to think about recording things in addition to his own "séance", which is the beginning of "history". Moreover, in his own office, he had to burn to God the booklet of the chieftain and the great events under his rule, so he had to make the same article—although this was probably a later thing. Later, the responsibilities were more clearly divided, so there were historians who specialized in recording events. Words are the necessary tools for historians, and the ancients said: "Cangjie, the history of the Yellow Emperor." The first sentence is not credible, but it points out the relationship between history and writing, which is very interesting. As for the later "writers" who used it to write "Ah, my love, I'm going to die!" Those good sentences, that's just enjoying the ready-made, "what's the point"!

门外文谈

三　字是怎么来的？

门外文谈

How did the word 3 come about?照《易经》说，书契之前明明是结绳；我们那里的乡下人，碰到明天要做一件紧要事，怕得忘记时，也常常说：“裤带上打一个结！”那么，我们的古圣人，是否也用一条长绳，有一件事就打一个结呢？恐怕是不行的。只有几个结还记得，一多可就糟了。或者那正是伏羲皇上的“八封”之流，三条绳一组，都不打结是“乾”，中间各打一结是“坤”罢？恐怕也不对。八组尚可，六十四组就难记，何况还会有五百十二组呢。只有在秘鲁还有存留的“打结字”（Quippus），用一条横绳，挂上许多直绳，拉来拉去的结起来，网不像网，倒似乎还可以表现较多的意思。我们上古的结绳，恐怕也是如此的罢。但它既然被书契掉换，又不是书契的祖宗，我们也不妨暂且不去管它了。
According to the Book of Changes, the book contract is obviously a knot before it; When we country people have something important to do tomorrow and are afraid of forgetting it, they often say: "Tie a knot on your trouser belt!" "So, did our ancient sages also use a long rope to tie a knot for one thing? I'm afraid not. I only remember a few knots, and too much is bad. Or is that the "eight seals" of Emperor Fuxi, a group of three ropes, none of which are knotted is "dry", and each knot in the middle is "kun"? I'm afraid it's not right. Eight groups are acceptable, but 64 groups are hard to remember, not to mention that there will be 512 groups. Only in Peru do the remaining "quippus" (quippus), with a horizontal rope, hanging many straight ropes, pulling and pulling them into knots, the net is not like a net, but it seems to be more meaningful. I'm afraid the same is true for our ancient knots. But since it has been replaced by the book deed, and it is not the ancestor of the book deed, we might as well leave it alone for the time being.夏禹的“岣嵝碑”是道士们假造的；现在我们能在实物上看见的最古的文字，只有商朝的甲骨和钟鼎文。但这些，都已经很进步了，几乎找不出一个原始形态。只在铜器上，有时还可以看见一点写实的图形，如鹿，如象，而从这图形上，又能发见和文字相关的线索：中国文字的基础是“象形”。
Xia Yu's "Xunjun Stele" was forged by Taoist priests; The oldest writing we can see in real life now is only the oracle bones and bell tripod inscriptions of the Shang Dynasty. But these have been very advanced, and it is almost impossible to find a primitive form. Only on the bronze ware, sometimes you can see a little realistic figure, such as a deer, such as an elephant, and from this figure, you can find clues related to the text: the basis of Chinese characters is "pictographs".画在西班牙的亚勒泰米拉（Altamira）洞里的野牛，是有名的原始人的遗迹，许多艺术史家说，这正是“为艺术的艺术”，原始人画着玩玩的。但这解释未免过于“摩登”，因为原始人没有十九世纪的文艺家那么有闲，他的画一只牛，是有缘故的，为的是关于野牛，或者是猎取野牛，禁咒野牛的事。现在上海墙壁上的香烟和电影的广告画，尚且常有人张着嘴巴看，在少见多怪的原始社会里，有了这么一个奇迹，那轰动一时，就可想而知了。他们一面看，知道了野牛这东西，原来可以用线条移在别的平面上，同时仿佛也认识了一个“牛”字，一面也佩服这作者的才能，但没有人请他作自传赚钱，所以姓氏也就湮没了。但在社会里，仓颉也不止一个，有的在刀柄上刻一点图，有的在门户上画一些画，心心相印，口口相传，文字就多起来，史官一采集，便可以敷衍记事了。中国文字的由来，恐怕也逃不出这例子的。
The bison painted in the caves of Altamira in Spain is the remains of famous primitive people, which many art historians say is "art for art", and primitive people painted and played with it. But this explanation is too "modern", because primitive people are not as leisurely as the literary and artistic figures of the nineteenth century, and his painting of a cow is for a reason, in order to be about bison, or hunting bison, and forbidding bison. Nowadays, cigarettes and movie advertisements on the walls of Shanghai are often watched with open mouths, and in the rare and strange primitive society, there is such a miracle, and the sensation can be imagined. While they looked at it, they knew that the bison could be moved to another plane with lines, and at the same time, they seemed to know the word "cow", and on the other hand, they also admired the author's talent, but no one asked him to make money as an autobiography, so the surname was obscured. But in society, there is more than one Cangjie, some carve a little picture on the handle of the knife, and some draw some paintings on the portal. The origin of Chinese characters may not escape this example.自然，后来还该有不断的增补，这是史官自己可以办到的，新字夹在熟字中，又是象形，别人也容易推测到那字的意义。直到现在，中国还在生出新字来。但是，硬做新仓颉，却要失败的，吴的朱育，唐的武则天，都曾经造过古怪字，也都白费力。现在最会造字的是中国化学家，许多原质和化合物的名目，很不容易认得，连音也难以读出来了。老实说，我是一看见就头痛的，觉得远不如就用万国通用的拉丁名来得爽快，如果二十来个字母都认不得，请恕我直说：那么，化学也大抵学不好的。
Naturally, there should be continuous additions later, which is what the historian himself can do, and the new character is sandwiched in the familiar word, and it is pictographic, and it is easy for others to guess the meaning of the word. Until now, China is still giving birth to new words. However, Zhu Yu of Wu and Wu Zetian of Tang have all made strange characters, and they are all in vain. Now it is the Chinese chemists who know how to make the most words, and the names of many primitives and compounds are not easy to recognize, and even the sound is difficult to read. To be honest, I have a headache when I see it, and I think it's far better to use the universal Latin name, if you can't recognize the twenty letters, please forgive me: then, chemistry is probably not good at learning.

门外文谈

四　写字就是画画

门外文谈

4. Writing is painting《周礼》和《说文解字》上都说文字的构成法有六种，这里且不谈罢，只说些和“象形”有关的东西。
Both the "Rites of Zhou" and "Shuowen Jiezi" say that there are six ways to compose words, and we will not talk about it here, only talking about things related to "pictograms".象形，“近取诸身，远取诸物”，就是画一只眼睛是“目”，画一个圆圈，放几条毫光是“日”，那自然很明白，便当的。但有时要碰壁，譬如要画刀口，怎么办呢？不画刀背，也显不出刀口来，这时就只好别出心裁，在刀口上加一条短棍，算是指明“这个地方”的意思，造了“刃”。这已经颇有些办事棘手的模样了，何况还有无形可象的事件，于是只得来“象意”，也叫作“会意”。一只手放在树上是“采”，一颗心放在屋子和饭碗之间是“”，有吃有住，安了。但要写“可”的，却又得在碗下面放一条线，表明这不过是用了“”的声音的意思。“会意”比“象形”更麻烦，它至少要画两样。如“”字，则要画一个屋顶，一串玉，一个缶，一个，计四样；我看“缶”字还是杵臼两形合成的，那么一共有五样。单单为了画这一个字，就很要破费些工夫。
Pictogram, "take from the body closely, take things from away", that is, draw an eye as an "eye", draw a circle, put a few rays of light is "sun", then it is naturally very clear, it is bento. But sometimes you have to hit a wall, such as drawing a knife edge, what should you do? If you don't draw the back of the knife, you can't show the edge of the knife, so you have to be creative and add a short stick to the edge of the knife, which can be regarded as indicating the meaning of "this place" and creating a "blade". This is already quite tricky, not to mention that there are intangible events, so we have to come to "symbolism", also called "understanding". One hand on the tree is "picking", and one heart is "" between the house and the rice bowl id_00001. But if you want to write  as " can", you have to put a line under the bowl to indicate that this is just the meaning of the sound "". "Understanding" is more troublesome than "pictographic", and it requires at least two drawings. For example, the word "" should be drawn with a roof, a string of jade, a can, and a total; I think the word "can" is still a combination of pestle and mortar, so there are five in total. Just to draw this word, it takes a lot of effort.不过还是走不通，因为有些事物是画不出，有些事物是画不来，譬如松柏，叶样不同，原是可以分出来的，但写字究竟是写字，不能像绘画那样精工，到底还是硬挺不下去。来打开这僵局的是“谐声”，意义和形象离开了关系。这已经是“记音”了，所以有人说，这是中国文字的进步。不错，也可以说是进步，然而那基础也还是画画儿。例如“菜，从草，采声”，画一窠草，一个爪，一株树：三样；“海，从水，每声”，画一条河，一位戴帽（？）的太太，也三样。总之：你如果要写字，就非永远画画不成。
But it still doesn't work, because some things can't be drawn, some things can't be drawn, such as pine and cypress, the leaves are different, they can be separated, but writing is not as exquisite as painting, and it still can't be stiff in the end. What comes to open this impasse is "harmony", meaning and image leave the relationship. This is already "phonetic", so some people say that this is the progress of Chinese characters. Yes, it can also be said to be progress, but the foundation is still painting. For example, "vegetables, from grass, picking sounds", drawing a nest of grass, a claw, and a tree: three; "The sea, from the water, every sound", drawing a river, a man wearing a hat (?) There are also three kinds of wives. In short: if you want to write, you have to never be able to draw.但古人是并不愚蠢的，他们早就将形象改得简单，远离了写实。篆字圆折，还有图画的余痕，从隶书到现在的楷书，和形象就天差地远。不过那基础并未改变，天差地远之后，就成为不象形的象形字，写起来虽然比较的简单，认起来却非常困难了，要凭空一个一个的记住。而且有些字，也至今并不简单，例如“”或“”，去叫孩子写，非练习半年六月，是很难写在半寸见方的格子里面的。
But the ancients were not stupid, they had long changed the image to be simple and far from realism. The seal characters are folded, and there are traces of pictures, from the official script to the current regular script, and the image is very different. However, the foundation has not changed, and after the sky is far away, it has become a non-pictographic hieroglyph, although it is relatively simple to write, it is very difficult to recognize, and it must be remembered one by one out of thin air. And some words are not simple so far, such as "" or "", to ask children to write, it is difficult to write in a half-inch square grid without practicing for half a year and six months.还有一层，是“谐声”字也因为古今字音的变迁，很有些和“声”不大“谐”的了。现在还有谁读“滑”为“骨”，读“海”为“每”呢？
There is another layer, the word "harmonic" is also due to the changes in the pronunciation of ancient and modern characters, and it is not very "harmonious" with "sound". Who else reads "slippery" as "bone" and "sea" as "every"?古人传文字给我们，原是一份重大的遗产，应该感谢的。但在成了不象形的象形字，不十分谐声的谐声字的现在，这感谢却只好踌蹰一下了。
The ancients passed on words to us, which was originally a major heritage and should be thankful. But now that it has become a non-pictographic hieroglyph and a homophonic word that is not very harmonious, this thank you has to hesitate for a moment.

门外文谈

五　古时候言文一致么？

门外文谈

5. Was the Chinese language consistent in ancient times?到这里，我想来猜一下古时候言文是否一致的问题。
At this point, I would like to guess the question of whether the ancient Chinese language was consistent.对于这问题，现在的学者们虽然并没有分明的结论，但听他口气，好像大概是以为一致的；越古，就越一致。不过我却很有些怀疑，因为文字愈容易写，就愈容易写得和口语一致，但中国却是那么难画的象形字，也许我们的古人，向来就将不关重要的词摘去了的。
Although the current scholars do not have a clear conclusion on this issue, they seem to think that they are probably consistent when they listen to his tone; The older it is, the more consistent it is. However, I am a little skeptical, because the easier it is to write, the easier it is to write consistent with the spoken language, but China is such a difficult hieroglyph to draw, perhaps our ancients have always removed unimportant words.《书经》有那么难读，似乎正可作照写口语的证据，但商周人的的确的口语，现在还没有研究出，还要繁也说不定的。至于周秦古书，虽然作者也用一点他本地的方言，而文字大致相类，即使和口语还相近罢，用的也是周秦白话，并非周秦大众语。汉朝更不必说了，虽是肯将《书经》里难懂的字眼，翻成今字的司马迁，也不过在特别情况之下，采用一点俗语，例如陈涉的老朋友看见他为王，惊异道：“夥颐，涉之为王沉沉者”，而其中的“涉之为王”四个字，我还疑心太史公加过修剪的。
The Book of Documents is so difficult to read that it seems to be evidence of copying spoken language, but the true colloquial language of the Shang and Zhou people has not yet been studied, and it may be more complicated. As for the ancient books of Zhou and Qin, although the author also uses a little of his local dialect, and the text is roughly similar, even if it is close to the spoken language, it is also used in the vernacular of Zhou and Qin, not the popular language of Zhou and Qin. Not to mention the Han Dynasty, although Sima Qian, who was willing to translate the incomprehensible words in the "Book of Documents" into today's characters, only under special circumstances, he used a little proverb, such as Chen She's old friend saw him as the king and said in surprise: "Partner, Shezhi is the king of the king", and the four words "Shezhi is the king", I also suspect that Taishi Gong has trimmed it.那么，古书里采录的童谣，谚语，民歌，该是那时的老牌俗语罢。我看也很难说。中国的文学家，是颇有爱改别人文章的脾气的。最明显的例子是汉民间的《淮南王歌》，同一地方的同一首歌，《汉书》和《前汉纪》记的就两样。
Then, the nursery rhymes, proverbs, and folk songs collected in ancient books should be the old sayings of that time. I think it's hard to say. Chinese writers have a temper that loves to change other people's articles. The most obvious example is the Han folk "Song of the King of Huainan", the same song in the same place, the "Book of Han" and the "Chronicles of the Former Han Dynasty" record two things.一面是——
一面是——一尺布，尚可缝；一尺布，尚可缝；
一斗粟，尚可舂。 一斗粟，尚可舂。 
兄弟二人，不能相容。 兄弟二人，不能相容。
一面却是——
一面却是——一尺布，暖童童；一尺布，暖童童；
一斗粟，饱蓬蓬。 一斗粟，饱蓬蓬。 
兄弟二人不相容。 兄弟二人不相容。
比较起来，好像后者是本来面目，但已经删掉了一些也说不定的：只是一个提要。后来宋人的语录，话本，元人的杂剧和传奇里的科白，也都是提要，只是它用字较为平常，删去的文字较少，就令人觉得“明白如话”了。
In comparison, it seems that the latter is the original face, but some things have been deleted: just a summary. Later, the quotations of the Song people, the scripts, the miscellaneous dramas of the Yuan people and the science and white in the legends were also summarized, but the words used were more ordinary, and the deleted words were less, which made people feel "as clear as words".我的臆测，是以为中国的言文，一向就并不一致的，大原因便是字难写，只好节省些。当时的口语的摘要，是古人的文；古代的口语的摘要，是后人的古文。所以我们的做古文，是在用了已经并不象形的象形字，未必一定谐声的谐声字，在纸上描出今人谁也不说，懂的也不多的，古人的口语的摘要来。你想，这难不难呢？
My guess is that Chinese Chinese has always been inconsistent, and the main reason is that the words are difficult to write, so I have to save some money. The summary of the colloquial language at that time was the text of the ancients; The summary of ancient colloquial language is the ancient text of later generations. Therefore, when we make ancient texts, we are using hieroglyphs that are no longer pictographic, and may not necessarily be harmonic, and depict on paper a summary of the colloquial language of the ancients that no one says or understands much. Do you think this is difficult?

门外文谈

六　于是文章成为奇货了

门外文谈

6. So the article became a rare commodity文字在人民间萌芽，后来却一定为特权者所收揽。据《易经》的作者所推测，“上古结绳而治”，则连结绳就已是治人者的东西。待到落在巫史的手里的时候，更不必说了，他们都是酋长之下，万民之上的人。社会改变下去，学习文字的人们的范围也扩大起来，但大抵限于特权者。至于平民，那是不识字的，并非缺少学费，只因为限于资格，他不配。而且连书籍也看不见。中国在刻版还未发达的时候，有一部好书，往往是“藏之秘阁，副在三馆”，连做了士子，也还是不知道写着什么的。
Writing sprouted among the people, but later it must have been taken over by the privileged. According to the author of the "I Ching", "the ancient knot was ruled", so the knot rope is already the thing of the ruler. When it comes to falling into the hands of Wu Shi, not to mention, they are all people under the chieftain and above the people. As society changed, the scope of people learning to write expanded, but it was largely limited to the privileged. As for the civilians, they are illiterate, not because they lack tuition, but because they are limited to qualifications, they are not worthy. And even books are not visible. When engraving was not yet developed in China, there was a good book, often "hidden in the secret pavilion, deputy in the third library", and even as a scholar, he still didn't know what was written.因为文字是特权者的东西，所以它就有了尊严性，并且有了神秘性。中国的字，到现在还很尊严，我们在墙壁上，就常常看见挂着写上“敬惜字纸”的篓子；至于符的驱邪治病，那就靠了它的神秘性的。文字既然含着尊严性，那么，知道文字，这人也就连带的尊严起来了。新的尊严者日出不穷，对于旧的尊严者就不利，而且知道文字的人们一多，也会损伤神秘性的。符的威力，就因为这好像是字的东西，除道士以外，谁也不认识的缘故。所以，对于文字，他们一定要把持。
Because words are the property of the privileged, they have dignity and mystery. Chinese characters are still very dignified, and we often see baskets hanging on the walls with the words "Respect and Cherishment Paper"; As for the exorcism of Fu and the cure of diseases, it depends on its mystery. Since words contain dignity, then, knowing words, this person also has dignity. The new dignity is rising endlessly, which is not good for the old dignity, and the more people who know the word, the more mysterious it will also be damaged. The power of the talisman is because it seems to be a word, and no one knows it except the Taoist priest. Therefore, for words, they must be controlled.欧洲中世，文章学问，都在道院里；克罗蒂亚（Kroatia），是到了十九世纪，识字的还只有教士的，人民的口语，退步到对于旧生活刚够用。他们革新的时候，就只好从外国借进许多新语来。
In the Middle Ages in Europe, literature and learning were all in Taoist temples; In Kroatia, in the nineteenth century, the literate people were still only the clergy, and the spoken language of the people regressed to just enough for the old life. When they innovated, they had to borrow many new words from foreign countries.我们中国的文字，对于大众，除了身分，经济这些限制之外，却还要加上一条高门槛：难。单是这条门槛，倘不费他十来年工夫，就不容易跨过。跨过了的，就是士大夫，而这些士大夫，又竭力的要使文字更加难起来，因为这可以使他特别的尊严，超出别的一切平常的士大夫之上。汉朝的杨雄的喜欢奇字，就有这毛病的，刘歆想借他的《方言》稿子，他几乎要跳黄浦。唐朝呢，樊宗师的文章做到别人点不断，李贺的诗做到别人看不懂，也都为了这缘故。还有一种方法是将字写得别人不认识，下焉者，是从《康熙字典》上查出几个古字来，夹进文章里面去；上焉者是钱坫的用篆字来写刘熙的《释名》，最近还有钱玄同先生的照《说文》字样给太炎先生抄《小学答问》。
Our Chinese writing, for the public, in addition to the restrictions of identity and economy, also has to add a high threshold: difficult. This threshold alone would not be easy to cross if it didn't take him more than ten years of work. It is the scholar-officials who have crossed over, and these scholars and officials try their best to make the words more difficult, because this can make him special dignity above all other ordinary scholars. Yang Xiong of the Han Dynasty liked strange words, and there was this problem, Liu Xin wanted to borrow his "Dialects" manuscript, and he almost jumped Huangpu. In the Tang Dynasty, Master Fan's articles were constantly pointed out by others, and Li He's poems were incomprehensible to others, all for this reason. There is also a way to write the words so that others do not know them, and the next one is to find out a few ancient characters from the "Kangxi Dictionary" and sandwich them into the article; The one who went on the Yan was Qian Qian, who used seal characters to write Liu Xi's "Explanation of Names", and recently Mr. Qian Xuantong copied the "Primary School Q&A" for Mr. Taiyan according to the words "Shuowen".文字难，文章难，这还都是原来的；这些上面，又加以士大夫故意特制的难，却还想它和大众有缘，怎么办得到。但士大夫们也正愿其如此，如果文字易识，大家都会，文字就不尊严，他也跟着不尊严了。说白话不如文言的人，就从这里出发的；现在论大众语，说大众只要教给“千字课”就够的人，那意思的根柢也还是在这里。
Words are difficult, articles are difficult, these are all original; On top of these, there are deliberately special difficulties for scholars and officials, but they still think that it is destined to be with the public, how can it be done? But the scholars and officials also hope that this is the case, if the words are easy to read, everyone will be able to do so, and the words will be not dignified, and he will also be disrespectful. those who speak vernacular is not as good as classical Chinese start from here; Now when it comes to popular language, it is said that the public only needs to teach people who are satisfied with the "thousand-character lesson", and the root of the meaning is still here.

门外文谈

七　不识字的作家

门外文谈

7. Illiterate writers用那么艰难的文字写出来的古语摘要，我们先前也叫“文”，现在新派一点的叫“文学”，这不是从“文学子游子夏”上割下来的，是从日本输入，他们的对于英文Literature的译名。会写写这样的“文”的，现在是写白话也可以了，就叫作“文学家”，或者叫“作家”。
The abstract of the ancient language written in such a difficult language was also called "Wen" before, and now the new school is called "Literature", which is not cut from "Literary Ziyu Zixia", but imported from Japan, their translation of English Literature. Those who can write such "literature" can now write in the vernacular, so they are called "writers" or "writers".文学的存在条件首先要会写字，那么，不识字的文盲群里，当然不会有文学家的了。然而作家却有的。你们不要太早的笑我，我还有话说。我想，人类是在未有文字之前，就有了创作的，可惜没有人记下，也没有法子记下。我们的祖先的原始人，原是连话也不会说的，为了共同劳作，必需发表意见，才渐渐的练出复杂的声音来，假如那时大家抬木头，都觉得吃力了，却想不到发表，其中有一个叫道“杭育杭育”，那么，这就是创作；大家也要佩服，应用的，这就等于出版；倘若用什么记号留存了下来，这就是文学；他当然就是作家，也是文学家，是“杭育杭育派”。不要笑，这作品确也幼稚得很，但古人不及今人的地方是很多的，这正是其一。就是周朝的什么“关关雎鸠，在河之洲，窈窕淑女，君子好逑”罢，它是《诗经》里的头一篇，所以吓得我们只好磕头佩服，假如先前未曾有过这样的一篇诗，现在的新诗人用这意思做一首白话诗，到无论什么副刊上去投稿试试罢，我看十分之九是要被编辑者塞进字纸篓去的。“漂亮的好小姐呀，是少爷的好一对儿！”什么话呢？
The condition for the existence of literature is to be able to write, so of course there will be no writers among the illiterate group. However, writers do. Don't laugh at me too early, I have something to say. I think that human beings created before writing, but unfortunately no one wrote it down, and there was no way to write it down. The primitive people of our ancestors, originally couldn't even speak, in order to work together, they had to express their opinions, so that they gradually practiced complex sounds, if everyone lifted the wood at that time, they all felt that it was difficult, but they couldn't think of publishing, one of them was called "Hang Yu Hang Yu", then this is creation; Everyone should also admire and apply, which is equivalent to publishing; If it is preserved with any mark, it is literature; Of course, he is a writer, a writer, and a "Hangyu Hangyu school". Don't laugh, this work is indeed very naïve, but there are many places where the ancients are inferior to today's people, and this is one of them. It is the first article in the "Book of Songs", so we have to kowtow in admiration, if there has never been such a poem before, the current new poet uses this meaning to make a vernacular poem, and no matter what supplement it is, I think nine out of ten will be stuffed into the paper basket by the editor. "Beautiful and good lady, they are a good couple for the young master!" What are you talking about?就是《诗经》的《国风》里的东西，好许多也是不识字的无名氏作品，因为比较的优秀，大家口口相传的。王官们检出它可作行政上参考的记录了下来，此外消灭的正不知有多少。希腊人荷马——我们姑且当作有这样一个人——的两大史诗，也原是口吟，现存的是别人的记录。东晋到齐陈的《子夜歌》和《读曲歌》之类，唐朝的《竹枝词》和《柳枝词》之类，原都是无名氏的创作，经文人的采录和润色之后，留传下来的。这一润色，留传固然留传了，但可惜的是一定失去了许多本来面目。到现在，到处还有民谣，山歌，渔歌等，这就是不识字的诗人的作品；也传述着童话和故事，这就是不识字的小说家的作品；他们，就都是不识字的作家。
It is the things in the "National Style" of the "Book of Songs", many of which are also illiterate anonymous works, because they are relatively good, and everyone has passed them down by word of mouth. The royal officials found it and recorded it as an administrative reference, and there were unknown numbers of those who were destroyed. The two great epics of the Greek Homer, which we will assume as such a person, were originally recited, but what exists are the records of others. From the Eastern Jin Dynasty to Qi Chen, the "Midnight Song" and "Reading the Song", and the Tang Dynasty's "Bamboo Branch Words" and "Willow Branch Words" were originally created by anonymous people, and were passed down after being collected and polished by scriptures. This polishing, of course, has been left behind, but unfortunately it must have lost a lot of its original face. Up to now, there are folk songs, folk songs, fishing songs, etc., which are the works of illiterate poets; fairy tales and stories are also told, which are the works of illiterate novelists; They are all illiterate writers.但是，因为没有记录作品的东西，又很容易消灭，流布的范围也不能很广大，知道的人们也就很少了。偶有一点为文人所见，往往倒吃惊，吸入自己的作品中，作为新的养料。旧文学衰颓时，因为摄取民间文学或外国文学而起一个新的转变，这例子是常见于文学史上的。不识字的作家虽然不及文人的细腻，但他却刚健，清新。
However, because there is no record of the work, it is easy to destroy, and the scope of circulation is not very wide, and there are very few people who know about it. Occasionally, when a little bit is seen by literati, they are often surprised and inhaled into their own works as new nourishment. When old literature declines, a new transformation occurs due to the ingestion of folk literature or foreign literature, which is common in literary history. Although the illiterate writer is not as delicate as the literati, he is strong and fresh.要这样的作品为大家所共有，首先也就是要这作家能写字，同时也还要读者们能识字以至能写字，一句话：将文字交给一切人。
For such works to be shared by everyone, first of all, the writer must be able to write, and at the same time, readers must be able to read and write, in a word: give the text to everyone.

门外文谈

八　怎么交代？

门外文谈

8. How to explain?将文字交给大众的事实，从清朝末年就已经有了的。
The fact of handing over words to the public has existed since the end of the Qing Dynasty.“莫打鼓，莫打锣，听我唱个太平歌……”是钦颁的教育大众的俗歌；此外，士大夫也办过一些白话报，但那主意，是只要大家听得懂，不必一定写得出。《平民千字课》就带了一点写得出的可能，但也只够记账，写信。倘要写出心里所想的东西，它那限定的字数是不够的。譬如牢监，的确是给了人一块地，不过它有限制，只能在这圈子里行立坐卧，断不能跑出设定了的铁栅外面去。
"Don't play drums, don't play gongs, listen to me sing a peaceful song......" is a popular song issued by the emperor to educate the public; In addition, scholars and officials have also run some vernacular newspapers, but the idea is that as long as everyone can understand it, it does not necessarily have to be written. "Civilian Thousand Words Lesson" has a little possibility of writing, but it is only enough to keep accounts and write letters. If you want to write what you think, its limited number of words is not enough. For example, the prison does give people a piece of land, but it has restrictions, and they can only stand, sit and lie down in this circle, and they must not run out of the set iron fence.劳乃宣和王照他两位都有简字，进步得很，可以照音写字了。民国初年，教育部要制字母，他们俩都是会员，劳先生派了一位代表，王先生是亲到的，为了入声存废问题，曾和吴稚晖先生大战，战得吴先生肚子一凹，棉裤也落了下来。但结果总算几经斟酌，制成了一种东西，叫作“注音字母”。那时很有些人，以为可以替代汉字了，但实际上还是不行，因为它究竟不过简单的方块字，恰如日本的“假名”一样，夹上几个，或者注在汉字的旁边还可以，要它拜帅，能力就不够了。写起来会混杂，看起来要眼花。那时的会员们称它为“注音字母”，是深知道它的能力范围的。再看日本，他们有主张减少汉字的，有主张拉丁拼音的，但主张只用“假名”的却没有。再好一点的是用罗马字拼法，研究得最精的是赵元任先生罢，我不大明白。用世界通用的罗马字拼起来——现在是连土耳其也采用了——一词一串，非常清晰，是好的。但教我似的门外汉来说，好像那拼法还太繁。要精密，当然不得不繁，但繁得很，就又变了“难”，有些妨碍普及了。最好是另有一种简而不陋的东西。
Lao Naixuan and Wang Zhao both have simplified characters, and they have made great progress and can write according to the sound. In the early years of the Republic of China, the Ministry of Education wanted to make letters, both of them were members, Mr. Lao sent a representative, Mr. Wang was personal, in order to enter the sound of the problem of preservation and waste, he fought with Mr. Wu Zhihui, and Mr. Wu's stomach was sunken, and his cotton pants also fell. But the result was finally made into something called "phonetic alphabet" after several considerations. At that time, many people thought that they could replace Chinese characters, but in fact they still couldn't, because it was just a simple square character, just like the Japanese "kana", sandwiched with a few, or noted next to the Chinese characters, it was okay, and if you wanted it to be handsome, the ability was not enough. It will be mixed up and look dazzling. At that time, the members called it "phonetic alphabet" and knew the scope of its capabilities. Looking at Japan, some of them advocate reducing Chinese characters, some advocate Latin pinyin, but none advocate only using "kana". What's better is to use Roman characters to spell it, and the best study is Mr. Zhao Yuanren, I don't really understand. Spelling it in the world's common Roman characters - now even Turkey has adopted it - is very clear and good. But for a layman who teaches me, it seems that the spelling is still too complicated. To be precise, of course, it has to be complicated, but if it is very complicated, it will become "difficult" again, which will hinder its popularization. It is better to have something simple and not ugly.这里我们可以研究一下新的“拉丁化”法，《每日国际文选》里有一小本《中国语书法之拉丁化》，《世界》第二年第六七号合刊附录的一份《言语科学》，就都是绍介这东西的。价钱便宜，有心的人可以买来看。它只有二十八个字母，拼法也容易学。“人”就是Rhen，“房子”就是Fangz，“我吃果子”是Wo ch goz，“他是工人”是Ta shgungrhen。现在在华侨里实验，见了成绩的，还只是北方话。但我想，中国究竟还是讲北方话——不是北京话——的人们多，将来如果真有一种到处通行的大众语，那主力也恐怕还是北方话罢。为今之计，只要酌量增减一点，使它合于各该地方所特有的音，也就可以用到无论什么穷乡僻壤去了。
Here we can study the new "Latinization" method, there is a small book "Latinization of Chinese Calligraphy" in the "Daily International Anthology", and a "Speech Science" in the appendix of the sixth and seventh joint issue of the second year of "World", all of which are about this thing. The price is cheap, and those who are interested can buy it. It has only twenty-eight letters and is easy to learn. "People" is Rhen, "house" is Fangz, "I eat fruit" is Wo ch goz, "He is a worker" is Ta shgungrhen. Now in the experiment in overseas Chinese, the results are only Northern dialect. But I think there are still many people in China who speak northern dialect - not Beijing dialect, and if there is really a popular language that is popular everywhere in the future, then the main force will probably still be northern dialect. For now, as long as it is added or subtracted a little as appropriate to make it suitable for the unique sound of each place, it can be used in any poor and remote area.那么，只要认识二十八个字母，学一点拼法和写法，除懒虫和低能外，就谁都能够写得出，看得懂了。况且它还有一个好处，是写得快。美国人说，时间就是金钱；但我想：时间就是性命。无端的空耗别人的时间，其实是无异于谋财害命的。不过像我们这样坐着乘风凉，谈闲天的人们，可又是例外。
Then, as long as you know the twenty-eight letters and learn a little spelling and writing, anyone can write and understand it except for lazy people and imbeciles. Moreover, it has the advantage of being fast. Americans say that time is money; But I think: time is life. wasting other people's time for no reason is actually tantamount to making money and killing people. But people like us who sit and enjoy the wind and talk about leisure are an exception.

门外文谈

九　专化呢，普遍化呢？

门外文谈

9. What about specialization or universalization?到了这里，就又碰着了一个大问题：中国的言语，各处很不同，单给一个粗枝大叶的区别，就有北方话，江浙话，两湖川贵话，福建话，广东话这五种，而这五种中，还有小区别。现在用拉丁字来写，写普通话，还是写土话呢？要写普通话，人们不会；倘写土话，别处的人们就看不懂，反而隔阂起来，不及全国通行的汉字了。这是一个大弊病！
At this point, I encountered another big problem: the Chinese language is very different everywhere, and there are five kinds of northern dialect, Jiangsu and Zhejiang dialect, Lianghu Sichuan dialect, Fujian dialect, and Cantonese dialect, and among these five, there are small differences. Now write in Latin, Mandarin, or vernacular? To write Mandarin, people can't; If you write in the local dialect, people elsewhere will not understand it, but it will be estranged, and it will not be as good as the Chinese characters that are common throughout the country. This is a big drawback!我的意思是：在开首的启蒙时期，各地方各写它的土话，用不着顾到和别地方意思不相通。当未用拉丁写法之前，我们的不识字的人们，原没有用汉字互通着声气，所以新添的坏处是一点也没有的，倒有新的益处，至少是在同一语言的区域里，可以彼此交换意见，吸收智识了——那当然，一面也得有人写些有益的书。问题倒在这各处的大众语文，将来究竟要它专化呢，还是普通化？
What I mean is that in the beginning of the enlightenment period, each place wrote its own dialect, and there was no need to worry about the meaning of the other places. Before the Latin writing method, our illiterate people did not use Chinese characters to communicate with each other, so there was no disadvantage at all, but there was a new benefit, at least in the same language area, we could exchange opinions and absorb knowledge with each other - of course, someone had to write some useful books. The question is whether the popular language here and there will be specialized or generalized in the future?方言土语里，很有些意味深长的话，我们那里叫“炼话”，用起来是很有意思的，恰如文言的用古典，听者也觉得趣味津津。各就各处的方言，将语法和词汇，更加提炼，使他发达上去的，就是专化。这于文学，是很有益处的，它可以做得比仅用泛泛的话头的文章更加有意思。但专化又有专化的危险。言语学我不知道，看生物，是一到专化，往往要灭亡的。未有人类以前的许多动植物，就因为太专化了，失其可变性，环境一改，无法应付，只好灭亡。——幸而我们人类还不算专化的动物，请你们不要愁。大众，是有文学，要文学的，但决不该为文学做牺牲，要不然，他的荒谬和为了保存汉字，要十分之八的中国人做文盲来殉难的活圣贤就并不两样。所以，我想，启蒙时候用方言，但一面又要渐渐的加入普通的语法和词汇去。先用固有的，是一地方的语文的大众化，加入新的去，是全国的语文的大众化。
In the dialect vernacular, there are some meaningful words, which we call "refining words", which is very interesting to use, just like the classical Chinese use, and the listener also finds it interesting. Speaking in various dialects, further refining grammar and vocabulary, making him develop, is specialization. This is very beneficial to literature, and it can be more interesting than articles that only use general words. But specialization also has the danger of specialization. I don't know about linguistics, but looking at biology, once it becomes specialized, it often perishes. Many animals and plants before human beings lost their variability because they were too specialized, and the environment changed, unable to cope with them, and had to perish. ——Fortunately, we humans are not specialized animals, please don't worry. The masses have literature and want literature, but they must not sacrifice for literature, otherwise, his absurdity is no different from the living sages who want eight out of ten Chinese to be illiterate and martyred in order to preserve Chinese characters. Therefore, I think that during enlightenment, dialects are used, but on the other hand, ordinary grammar and vocabulary should be gradually added. The first use of the inherent is the popularization of the language of a place, and the addition of the new one is the popularization of the language of the whole country.几个读书人在书房里商量出来的方案，固然大抵行不通，但一切都听其自然，却也不是好办法。现在在码头上，公共机关中，大学校里，确已有着一种好像普通话模样的东西，大家说话，既非“国语”，又不是京话，各各带着乡音，乡调，却又不是方言，即使说的吃力，听的也吃力，然而总归说得出，听得懂。如果加以整理，帮它发达，也是大众语中的一支，说不定将来还简直是主力。我说要在方言里“加入新的去”，那“新的”的来源就在这地方。待到这一种出于自然，又加人工的话一普遍，我们的大众语文就算大致统一了。
The plan discussed by several scholars in the study is probably not workable, but everything is left to its course, but it is not a good way. Now on the dock, in public institutions, in universities, there is indeed something like Mandarin, everyone speaks, neither "Chinese", nor Beijing, each with their own local dialect, local dialect, but not dialect, even if it is difficult to speak, it is difficult to listen, but it is always possible to speak and understand. If it is sorted out and helped it develop, it is also one of the popular languages, and maybe it will be the main force in the future. I said to "add the new" in the tongue, and the source of the "new" is here. When this kind of natural and artificial language becomes commonplace, our popular language will be roughly unified.此后当然还要做。年深月久之后，语文更加一致，和“炼话”一样好，比“古典”还要活的东西，也渐渐的形成，文学就更加精采了。马上是办不到的。你们想，国粹家当作宝贝的汉字，不是化了三四千年工夫，这才有这么一堆古怪成绩么？
Of course, there is still to be done after that. After a long time, the language became more consistent, as good as "refining words", and things that were more alive than "classical" gradually took shape, and literature became more brilliant. It can't be done right away. Do you think that the Chinese characters that the quintessence of the national family regards as treasures have not been transformed into three or four thousand years of work, so there are so many strange achievements?至于开手要谁来做的问题，那不消说：是觉悟的读书人。有人说：“大众的事情，要大众自己来做！”那当然不错的，不过得看看说的是什么脚色。如果说的是大众，那有一点是对的，对的是要自己来，错的是推开了帮手。倘使说的是读书人呢，那可全不同了：他在用漂亮话把持文字，保护自己的尊荣。
As for the question of who you want to do, it goes without saying: it is an enlightened scholar. Some people say: "The public has to do the things of the public themselves!" "Of course that's good, but we have to see what kind of foot it's about. If we are talking about the public, then one thing is right, the right thing is to do it yourself, and the wrong thing is to push away the helper. If he is talking about a scholar, it is completely different: he is using beautiful words to control the words and protect his own honor.

门外文谈

十　不必恐慌

门外文谈

10. Don't panic但是，这还不必实做，只要一说，就又使另一些人发生恐慌了。
However, this does not have to be practiced, as long as it is said, it will cause panic among other people.首先，是说提倡大众语文的，乃是“文艺的政治宣传员如宋阳之流”，本意在于造反。给带上一顶有色帽，是极简单的反对法。不过一面也就是说，为了自己的太平，宁可中国有百分之八十的文盲。那么，倘使口头宣传呢，就应该使中国有百分之八十的聋子了。但这不属于“谈文”的范围，这里也无须多说。
First of all, it is said that those who advocate popular language are "political propagandists of literature and art such as Song Yang", and the original intention is to rebel. Bringing a colored hat is a very simple opposition. However, on the other hand, for the sake of their own peace, it is better to have 80% illiterate in China. Then, if it is verbal propaganda, it should make 80% of the deaf in China. But this does not fall within the scope of "talk about literature", and there is no need to say more here.专为着文学发愁的，我现在看见有两种。一种是怕大众如果都会读，写，就大家都变成文学家了。这真是怕天掉下来的好人。上次说过，在不识字的大众里，是一向就有作家的。我久不到乡下去了，先前是，农民们还有一点余闲，譬如乘凉，就有人讲故事。不过这讲手，大抵是特定的人，他比较的见识多，说话巧，能够使人听下去，懂明白，并且觉得有趣。这就是作家，抄出他的话来，也就是作品。倘有语言无味，偏爱多嘴的人，大家是不要听的，还要送给他许多冷话——讥刺。我们弄了几千年文言，十来年白话，凡是能写的人，何尝个个是文学家呢？即使都变成文学家，又不是军阀或土匪，于大众也并无害处的，不过彼此互看作品而已。
Specifically for literature, I see two kinds now. One is afraid that if the public can read and write, everyone will become a writer. This is really a good person who is afraid of the sky falling. As I said last time, among the illiterate public, there have always been writers. I haven't been to the countryside for a long time, before, the farmers still had a little leisure, such as enjoying the shade, and someone would tell stories. However, this speaker is probably a specific person, he is more knowledgeable, skillful in speaking, can make people listen, understand, and find it interesting. This is the writer, copying his words, that is, the work. If there is a person who has tasteless language and prefers to talk a lot, everyone should not listen to him, and he will be given a lot of cold words - sarcasm. We have made thousands of years of literary Chinese, more than ten years of vernacular, all those who can write, why are they all writers? Even if they all become writers, they are not warlords or bandits, and they are not harmful to the public, but they just look at each other's works.还有一种是怕文学的低落。大众并无旧文学的修养，比起士大夫文学的细致来，或者会显得所谓“低落”的，但也未染旧文学的痼疾，所以它又刚健，清新。无名氏文学如《子夜歌》之流，会给旧文学一种新力量，我先前已经说过了；现在也有人绍介了许多民歌和故事。还有戏剧，例如《朝花夕拾》所引《目连救母》里的无常鬼的自传，说是因为同情一个鬼魂，暂放还阳半日，不料被阎罗责罚，从此不再宽纵了——
There is also a fear of the decline of literature. The public does not have the cultivation of old literature, and compared with the meticulousness of scholar-official literature, it may appear so-called "low", but it is not infected with the chronic diseases of old literature, so it is strong and fresh. Anonymous literature, such as "Midnight Song", will give old literature a new strength, as I have said before; Now there are also many folk songs and stories. There are also dramas, such as the autobiography of the impermanent ghost in "Mulian Saving the Mother" quoted in "Morning Flowers and Evening Pickup", saying that because he sympathized with a ghost, he was temporarily released to the sun for half a day, but he was punished by Yama and no longer indulged -“那怕你铜墙铁壁！
"Even if you are impregnable!那怕你皇亲国戚！……”
Even if you are a relative of the emperor! ……”何等有人情，又何等知过，何等守法，又何等果决，我们的文学家做得出来么？
How humane, how knowledgeable, how law-abiding, and so decisive, can our writers do it?这是真的农民和手业工人的作品，由他们闲中扮演。借目连的巡行来贯串许多故事，除《小尼姑下山》外，和刻本的《目连救母记》是完全不同的。其中有一段《武松打虎》，是甲乙两人，一强一弱，扮着戏玩。先是甲扮武松，乙扮老虎，被甲打得要命，乙埋怨他了，甲道：“你是老虎，不打，不是给你咬死了？”乙只得要求互换，却又被甲咬得要命，一说怨话，甲便道：“你是武松，不咬，不是给你打死了？”我想：比起希腊的伊索，俄国的梭罗古勃的寓言来，这是毫无逊色的。
This is the work of real farmers and handicraft workers, played by them in their spare time. Borrowing Mu Lian's parade to run through many stories, except for "The Little Nun Descending the Mountain", it is completely different from the engraved version of "Mu Lian Saving the Mother". Among them, there is a paragraph "Wu Song Fights the Tiger", which is two people, one strong and one weak, pretending to play. First of all, A pretended to be Wu Song, B pretended to be a tiger, and was beaten to death by A, B complained about him, A said: "You are a tiger, don't fight, didn't you bite you to death?" B had to ask for a swap, but he was bitten to death by A, and as soon as he complained, A said: "You are Wu Song, if you don't bite, won't you be beaten to death?" "I think: Compared with Aesop in Greece and Thoreau Gub in Russia, this is not inferior to the fables.如果到全国的各处去收集，这一类的作品恐怕还很多。但自然，缺点是有的。是一向受着难文字，难文章的封锁，和现代思潮隔绝。所以，倘要中国的文化一同向上，就必须提倡大众语，大众文，而且书法更必须拉丁化。
If you go to all parts of the country to collect, I am afraid there are many works of this kind. But naturally, there are disadvantages. It has always been blocked by difficult words and articles, and is isolated from modern trends. Therefore, if Chinese culture wants to rise together, it is necessary to advocate popular language, popular literature, and calligraphy must be Latinized.

门外文谈

十一　大众并不如读书人所想像的愚蠢

门外文谈

11. The masses are not as stupid as scholars think但是，这一回，大众语文刚一提出，就有些猛将趁势出现了，来路是并不一样的，可是都向白话，翻译，欧化语法，新字眼进攻。他们都打着“大众”的旗，说这些东西，都为大众所不懂，所以要不得。其中有的是原是文言余孽，借此先来打击当面的白话和翻译的，就是祖传的“远交近攻”的老法术；有的是本是懒惰分子，未尝用功，要大众语未成，白话先倒，让他在这空场上夸海口的，其实也还是文言文的好朋友，我都不想在这里多谈。现在要说的只是那些好意的，然而错误的人，因为他们不是看轻了大众，就是看轻了自己，仍旧犯着古之读书人的老毛病。
However, this time, as soon as the popular language was proposed, some fierce generals took advantage of the situation to appear, and the origins were different, but they all attacked the vernacular, translation, Europeanized grammar, and new words. They all wear the banner of "the public" and say that these things are not understood by the public, so they can't do it. Some of them were originally remnants of classical Chinese, and the first to attack the vernacular and translation in front of them was the ancestral old spell of "distant friendship and close attack"; Some are lazy people, who have not worked hard, and who want the public to speak before they succeed, and let him praise Haikou in this empty field, in fact, they are still good friends of classical Chinese, and I don't want to talk about it here. Now I want to talk about only those well-intentioned, but wrong people, because they either underestimate the public or underestimate themselves, and still commit the old problems of ancient scholars.读书人常常看轻别人，以为较新，较难的字句，自己能懂，大众却不能懂，所以为大众计，是必须彻底扫荡的；说话作文，越俗，就越好。这意见发展开来，他就要不自觉的成为新国粹派。或则希图大众语文在大众中推行得快，主张什么都要配大众的胃口，甚至于说要“迎合大众”，故意多骂几句，以博大众的欢心。这当然自有他的苦心孤诣，但这样下去，可要成为大众的新帮闲的。
Scholars often look down on others, thinking that they can understand newer and more difficult words, but the public cannot understand them, so for the sake of the public, they must be completely swept away; Speaking and composing, the more vulgar, the better. As this opinion develops, he will unconsciously become a new nationalist. Or they hope that popular language will be promoted quickly among the public, advocating that everything should match the appetite of the public, and even saying that it should "cater to the public", deliberately scolding a few more words to win the favor of the public. Of course, this has his own painstaking efforts, but if this continues, he will become a new helper for the public.说起大众来，界限宽泛得很，其中包括着各式各样的人，但即使“目不识丁”的文盲，由我看来，其实也并不如读书人所推想的那么愚蠢。他们是要智识，要新的智识，要学习，能摄取的。当然，如果满口新语法，新名词，他们是什么也不懂；但逐渐的检必要的灌输进去，他们却会接受；那消化的力量，也许还赛过成见更多的读书人。初生的孩子，都是文盲，但到两岁，就懂许多话，能说许多话了，这在他，全部是新名词，新语法。他那里是从《马氏文通》或《辞源》里查来的呢，也没有教师给他解释，他是听过几回之后，从比较而明白了意义的。大众的会摄取新词汇和语法，也就是这样子，他们会这样的前进。所以，新国粹派的主张，虽然好像为大众设想，实际上倒尽了拖住的任务。不过也不能听大众的自然，因为有些见识，他们究竟还在觉悟的读书人之下，如果不给他们随时拣选，也许会误拿了无益的，甚而至于有害的东西。所以，“迎合大众”的新帮闲，是绝对的要不得的。
Speaking of the public, the boundaries are very broad, including all kinds of people, but even the "illiterate" illiterate, in my opinion, is not as stupid as scholars think. They want knowledge, new knowledge, learning, and ingestion. Of course, if the mouth is full of new grammar and new nouns, they don't understand anything; But gradually the necessary indoctrination is instilled, and they will accept it; The power of digestion may have surpassed that of more scholars. Newborn children are all illiterate, but by the age of two, they understand many words and can speak many words, which is all new nouns and new grammar for him. He looked it up from "Ma's Wentong" or "Etymology", and there was no teacher to explain it to him, he understood the meaning from comparison after listening to it several times. The masses will acquire new vocabulary and grammar, and that's how they will move forward. Therefore, although the propositions of the new nationalist faction seem to be conceived for the public, they have actually fulfilled the task of holding back. However, we cannot listen to the nature of the public, because there are some insights, they are still under the enlightened scholars, and if they are not selected at any time, they may mistakenly take things that are useless or even harmful. Therefore, the new helper who "caters to the public" is absolutely necessary.由历史所指示，凡有改革，最初，总是觉悟的智识者的任务。但这些智识者，却必须有研究，能思索，有决断，而且有毅力。他也用权，却不是骗人，他利导，却并非迎合。他不看轻自己，以为是大家的戏子，也不看轻别人，当作自己的喽罗。他只是大众中的一个人，我想，这才可以做大众的事业。
As instructed by history, whenever there is a reform, it is always the task of the enlightened intellectuals at the beginning. But these intellectuals must have research, thinking, decision, and perseverance. He also uses power, but he is not deceiving, he is guiding, but he is not pandering. He doesn't look down on himself, thinking that he is everyone's actor, and he doesn't look down on others, as his own minions. He is just one of the public, and I think this is the only way to do the cause of the public.

门外文谈

十二煞尾

门外文谈

Twelve endings话已经说得不少了。总之，单是话不行，要紧的是做。要许多人做：大众和先驱；要各式的人做：教育家，文学家，言语学家……。这已经迫于必要了，即使目下还有点逆水行舟，也只好拉纤；顺水固然好得很，然而还是少不得把舵的。
A lot has been said. In short, words alone are not enough, the important thing is to do. Many people are to be done: the masses and the pioneers; All kinds of people are required to do it: educators, writers, linguists, ....... This is already necessary, even if there is still a bit of sailing against the current, I have to pull the fiber; Shunshui is certainly very good, but it is still indispensable to steer.这拉纤或把舵的好方法，虽然也可以口谈，但大抵得益于实验，无论怎么看风看水，目的只是一个：向前。
This is a good way to pull fibers or steer, although it can also be talked about, but it is mostly due to experiments, no matter how you look at the wind and water, the purpose is only one: forward.各人大概都有些自己的意见，现在还是给我听听你们诸位的高论罢。
Everyone probably has their own opinions, so let me hear your high opinions now.

不知肉味和不知水味

不知肉味和不知水味

不知肉味和不知水味

I don't know the taste of meat or water今年的尊孔，是民国以来第二次的盛典，凡是可以施展出来的，几乎全都施展出来了。上海的华界虽然接近夷（亦作彝）场，也听到了当年孔子听得“三月不知肉味”的“韶乐”。八月三十日的《申报》报告我们说——
This year's Zun Kong is the second grand ceremony since the Republic of China, and almost everything that can be displayed has been displayed. Although the Chinese border in Shanghai is close to the Yi (also known as Yi) field, it also heard the "Shao music" that Confucius heard "March does not know the taste of meat". The "Declaration" report of August 30 said that -“廿七日本市各界在文庙举行孔诞纪念会，到党政机关，及各界代表一千余人。有大同乐会演奏中和韶乐二章，所用乐器因欲扩大音量起见，不分古今，凡属国乐器，一律配入，共四十种。其谱一仍旧贯，并未变动。聆其节奏，庄严肃穆，不同凡响，令人悠然起敬，如亲三代以上之承平雅颂，亦即我国民族性酷爱和平之表示也。……”
On the twenty-seventh, all walks of life in the city held a commemorative meeting for Confucius's birthday at the Confucian Temple, and more than 1,000 representatives from all walks of life went to the party and government organs. There are two chapters of Zhonghe Shao music played by the Datong Orchestra, and the instruments used are to expand the volume, regardless of ancient or modern, all national musical instruments are included, a total of 40 kinds. The score remains unchanged. Listening to its rhythm, solemn and extraordinary, it is leisurely and respectful, such as the pro-three generations of Chengping Yasong, which is also an expression of our country's national love for peace. ……”乐器不分古今，一律配入，盖和周朝的韶乐，该已很有不同。但为“扩大音量起见”，也只能这么办，而且和现在的尊孔的精神，也似乎十分合拍的。“孔子，圣之时者也”，“亦即圣之摩登者也”，要三月不知鱼翅燕窝味，乐器大约决非“共四十种”不可；况且那时候，中国虽然已有外患，却还没有夷场。
Musical instruments are not divided into ancient and modern, and they are all included, which is very different from the Shao music of the Zhou Dynasty. But for the sake of "expanding the volume", this can only be done, and it seems to be very in line with the current spirit of Zun Kong. "Confucius is the time of the saint", "that is, the modern one of the saints", if you don't know the taste of shark fin and bird's nest in March, the musical instrument must be about "forty kinds in total"; Moreover, at that time, although China already had foreign troubles, it had not yet been barbarized.不过因此也可见时势究竟有些不同了，纵使“扩大音量”，终于还扩不到乡间，同日的《中华日报》上，就记着一则颇伤“承平雅颂，亦即我国民族性酷爱和平之表示”的体面的新闻，最不凑巧的是事情也出在二十七——
On the same day, the "China Daily" remembered a decent news that hurt "Chengping Yasong, that is, the expression of our country's national love for peace", and the most uncoincidental thing was that the matter was also in the twenty-seventh -“（宁波通讯）余姚入夏以来，因天时亢旱，河水干涸，住民饮料，大半均在河畔开凿土井，借以汲取，故往往因争先后，而起冲突。廿七日上午，距姚城四十里之朗霞镇后方屋地方，居民杨厚坤与姚士莲，又因争井水，发生冲突，互相加殴。姚士莲以烟筒头猛击杨头部，杨当即昏倒在地。继姚又以木棍石块击杨中要害，竟遭殴毙。迨邻近闻声施救，杨早已气绝。而姚士莲见已闯祸，知必不能免，即乘机逃避……”
“（宁波通讯）余姚入夏以来，因天时亢旱，河水干涸，住民饮料，大半均在河畔开凿土井，借以汲取，故往往因争先后，而起冲突。 廿七日上午，距姚城四十里之朗霞镇后方屋地方，居民杨厚坤与姚士莲，又因争井水，发生冲突，互相加殴。 姚士莲以烟筒头猛击杨头部，杨当即昏倒在地。 继姚又以木棍石块击杨中要害，竟遭殴毙。 迨邻近闻声施救，杨早已气绝。 而姚士莲见已闯祸，知必不能免，即乘机逃避……”闻韶，是一个世界，口渴，是一个世界。食肉而不知味，是一个世界，口渴而争水，又是一个世界。自然，这中间大有君子小人之分，但“非小人无以养君子”，到底还不可任凭他们互相打死，渴死的。
Wen Shao is a world, and thirst is a world. Eating meat without knowing the taste is a world, and fighting for water when thirsty is another world. Naturally, there are many gentlemen and villains in the middle, but "no villain can raise a gentleman", and in the end, they should not be allowed to fight each other to death and die of thirst.听说在阿拉伯，有些地方，水已经是宝贝，为了喝水，要用血去换。“我国民族性”是“酷爱和平”的，想必不至于如此。但余姚的实例却未免有点怕人，所以我们除食肉者听了而不知肉味的“韶乐”之外，还要不知水味者听了而不想水喝的“韶乐”。
I heard that in Arabia, in some places, water is already a treasure, and in order to drink water, it must be exchanged for blood. "our country's national character" is "peace-loving", and it must not be so. But Yu Yao's example is a bit scary, so in addition to the "Shao Le" that meat eaters listen to but do not know the taste of meat, we also have the "Shao Music" that people who do not know the taste of water listen to but do not want to drink water.八月二十九日。
August 29th.

中国语文的新生

中国语文的新生

中国语文的新生

Freshman in Chinese and Chinese中国现在的所谓中国字和中国文，已经不是中国大家的东西了。
China's current so-called Chinese characters and Chinese characters are no longer the property of all Chinese people.古时候，无论那一国，能用文字的原是只有少数的人的，但到现在，教育普及起来，凡是称为文明国者，文字已为大家所公有。但我们中国，识字的却大概只占全人口的十分之二，能作文的当然还要少。这还能说文字和我们大家有关系么？
In ancient times, no matter which country, only a few people could use writing, but now, education has become popular, and all those who are called civilized countries have written written in the public domain. But in China, literacy only accounts for about two-tenths of the total population, and of course there are even fewer who can write. Can this still be said to have anything to do with all of us?也许有人要说，这十分之二的特别国民，是怀抱着中国文化，代表着中国大众的。我觉得这话并不对。这样的少数，并不足以代表中国人。正如中国人中，有吃燕窝鱼翅的人，有卖红丸的人，有拿回扣的人，但不能因此就说一切中国人，都在吃燕窝鱼翅，卖红丸，拿回扣一样。要不然，一个郑孝胥，真可以把全副“王道”挑到满洲去。
Some people may say that these two-tenths of the special citizens embrace Chinese culture and represent the Chinese public. I don't think that's right. Such a minority is not enough to represent the Chinese. Just as among the Chinese, there are people who eat bird's nest shark fins, people who sell red pills, and people who get kickbacks, but it cannot be said that all Chinese people are eating bird's nest shark fins, selling red pills, and getting kickbacks. Otherwise, a Zheng Xiaoxu can really pick the full "royal road" to Manchuria.我们倒应该以最大多数为根据，说中国现在等于并没有文字。
We should take the majority as the basis that China now has no writing.这样的一个连文字也没有的国度，是在一天一天的坏下去了。我想，这可以无须我举例。
Such a country without even words is getting worse day by day. I think this can be done without me giving an example.单在没有文字这一点上，智识者是早就感到模胡的不安的。清末的办白话报，五四时候的叫“文学革命”，就为此。但还只知道了文章难，没有悟出中国等于并没有文字。今年的提倡复兴文言文，也为此，他明知道现在的机关枪是利器，却因历来偷懒，未曾振作，临危又想侥幸，就只好梦想大刀队成事了。
In the absence of words alone, the intellectuals have long felt uneasy. The vernacular newspaper at the end of the Qing Dynasty was called the "Literary Revolution" during the May Fourth period, and it was for this reason. But I only know that the article is difficult, and I don't realize that China is equivalent to no writing. This year's advocacy of the revival of classical Chinese, and for this reason, he knew that the current machine gun was a sharp weapon, but because he had always been lazy, he had not cheered up, and he wanted to take a chance in the face of danger, so he had to dream of the big knife team to succeed.大刀队的失败已经显然，只有两年，已没有谁来打九十九把钢刀去送给军队。但文言队的显出不中用来，是很慢，很隐的，它还有寿命。
The defeat of the Dadao team has been obvious, only two years, and no one has come to fight ninety-nine steel knives to give to the army. But the appearance of the literary language team is not useful, it is very slow and hidden, and it still has a lifespan.和提倡文言文的开倒车相反，是目前的大众语文的提倡，但也还没有碰到根本的问题：中国等于并没有文字。待到拉丁化的提议出现，这才抓住了解决问题的紧要关键。
Contrary to the reversal of advocating classical Chinese, it is the current advocacy of popular language, but it has not yet encountered the fundamental problem: China is equivalent to no writing. It was not until the proposal of Latinization appeared that the key to solving the problem was grasped.反对，当然大大的要有的，特殊人物的成规，动他不得。格理莱倡地动说，达尔文说进化论，摇动了宗教，道德的基础，被攻击原是毫不足怪的；但哈飞发见了血液在人身中环流，这和一切社会制度有什么关系呢，却也被攻击了一世。然而结果怎样？结果是：血液在人身中环流！
Opposition, of course, is very important, and the conventions of special characters cannot be moved. Gregory advocated the theory of earth movement, and Darwin's theory of evolution shook the foundations of religion and morality, and it is not surprising that they were attacked; But Ha Feifa saw blood circulating in the human body, what does this have to do with all social systems, but he was also attacked for a lifetime. But what was the result? The result: blood circulates through the human body!中国人要在这世界上生存，那些识得《十三经》的名目的学者，“灯红”会对“酒绿”的文人，并无用处，却全靠大家的切实的智力，是明明白白的。那么，倘要生存，首先就必须除去阻碍传布智力的结核：非语文和方块字。如果不想大家来给旧文字做牺牲，就得牺牲掉旧文字。走那一面呢，这并非如冷笑家所指摘，只是拉丁化提倡者的成败，乃是关于中国大众的存亡的。要得实证，我看也不必等候怎么久。
If the Chinese want to survive in this world, those scholars who know the name of the "Thirteen Classics" will be useless to the literati who are "wine green", but it is clear that it depends on everyone's practical intelligence. If we are to survive, then, we must first get rid of the tubercles that hinder the spread of intelligence: non-verbal and square words. If you don't want everyone to sacrifice the old text, you have to sacrifice the old text. On the other hand, this is not as the cynics pointed out, but the success or failure of the Latinization advocates, but about the survival of the Chinese public. If you want to get empirical evidence, I don't think you need to wait long.至于拉丁化的较详的意见，我是大体和《自由谈》连载的华圉作《门外文谈》相近的，这里不多说。我也同意于一切冷笑家所冷嘲的大众语的前途的艰难；但以为即使艰难，也还要做；愈艰难，就愈要做。改革，是向来没有一帆风顺的，冷笑家的赞成，是在见了成效之后，如果不信，可看提倡白话文的当时。
As for the more detailed opinions on Latinization, I am generally similar to Hua Yu's "Outside the Door Talk" serialized in "Free Talk", so I won't say much here. I also agree with the difficulty of the future of the popular language that all cynics scoff; But I thought that even if it was difficult, I still had to do it; The more difficult it is, the more you have to do it. Reform has never been smooth sailing, and the approval of the sneer is after seeing results, if you don't believe it, you can look at the time when the vernacular was advocated.九月二十四日。
September 24th.

中国人失掉自信力了吗

中国人失掉自信力了吗

中国人失掉自信力了吗

Have the Chinese lost their self-confidence?从公开的文字上看起来：两年以前，我们总自夸着“地大物博”，是事实；不久就不再自夸了，只希望着国联，也是事实；现在是既不夸自己，也不信国联，改为一味求神拜佛，怀古伤今了——却也是事实。
From the public text, it seems that two years ago, we always boasted that "the land is vast and the things are rich", which is a fact; Soon he stopped boasting, and only hoped for the League of Nations, which is also a fact; Now I neither praise myself nor believe in the League of Nations, but instead blindly pray to God and worship Buddha, nostalgic for the past and hurt the present - but it is also a fact.于是有人慨叹曰：中国人失掉自信力了。
So some people sighed: The Chinese have lost their self-confidence.如果单据这一点现象而论，自信其实是早就失掉了的。先前信“地”，信“物”，后来信“国联”，都没有相信过“自己”。假使这也算一种“信”，那也只能说中国人曾经有过“他信力”，自从对国联失望之后，便把这他信力都失掉了。
If we talk about this phenomenon, self-confidence has actually been lost a long time ago. I believed in "earth" and "things" before, and later in "League of Nations", but I never believed in "myself". If this is also a kind of "faith", it can only be said that the Chinese once had "Thak credibility", and since they were disappointed in the League of Nations, they have lost all this trustworthiness.失掉了他信力，就会疑，一个转身，也许能够只相信了自己，倒是一条新生路，但不幸的是逐渐玄虚起来了。信“地”和“物”，还是切实的东西，国联就渺茫，不过这还可以令人不久就省悟到依赖它的不可靠。一到求神拜佛，可就玄虚之至了，有益或是有害，一时就找不出分明的结果来，它可以令人更长久的麻醉着自己。
If he loses his trust, he will be suspicious, and once he turns around, he may be able to believe only in himself, but it is a new path, but unfortunately it gradually becomes mysterious. Belief in "land" and "things" is still a tangible thing, and the League of Nations is slim, but it can also make people realize the unreliability of relying on it. As soon as it comes to praying to God and worshiping Buddha, it can be mysterious and void, beneficial or harmful, and you can't find a clear result for a while, which can make people anesthetize themselves for a longer time.中国人现在是在发展着“自欺力”。
Chinese people are now developing "self-deception".“自欺”也并非现在的新东西，现在只不过日见其明显，笼罩了一切罢了。然而，在这笼罩之下，我们有并不失掉自信力的中国人在。
"Self-deception" is not a new thing now, it is just that it is becoming more and more obvious now, enveloping everything. However, under this shroud, we have Chinese people who have not lost their self-confidence.我们从古以来，就有埋头苦干的人，有拚命硬干的人，有为民请命的人，有舍身求法的人，……虽是等于为帝王将相作家谱的所谓“正史”，也往往掩不住他们的光耀，这就是中国的脊梁。
Since ancient times, we have had people who work hard, people who work hard, people who ask for the people's lives, and people who sacrifice themselves to seek the Dharma,...... Although it is equivalent to the so-called "official history" of the genealogy of emperors and generals, it often cannot hide their brilliance, which is the backbone of China.这一类的人们，就是现在也何尝少呢？他们有确信，不自欺；他们在前仆后继的战斗，不过一面总在被摧残，被抹杀，消灭于黑暗中，不能为大家所知道罢了。说中国人失掉了自信力，用以指一部分人则可，倘若加于全体，那简直是诬蔑。
Why are there so few people like this now? They have conviction and do not deceive themselves; They fought one after another, but one side was always destroyed, erased, and destroyed in the dark, and it was not known to everyone. It is okay to say that the Chinese have lost their self-confidence, and it is okay to refer to some people, but if it is applied to the whole, it is simply slanderous.要论中国人，必须不被搽在表面的自欺欺人的脂粉所诓骗，却看看他的筋骨和脊梁。自信力的有无，状元宰相的文章是不足为据的，要自己去看地底下。
To talk about Chinese, we must not be deceived by the self-deceptive powder on the surface, but look at his muscles and backbone. Whether or not there is self-confidence, the article of the champion prime minister is not sufficient, and you have to look at it for yourself.九月二十五日。
September 25th.

“以眼还眼”

“以眼还眼”

“以眼还眼”

"An eye for an eye"杜衡先生在“最近，出于‘与其看一部新的书，还不如看一部旧的书’的心情”，重读了莎士比亚的《凯撒传》。这一读是颇有关系的，结果使我们能够拜读他从读旧书而来的新文章：《莎剧凯撒传里所表现的群众》（见《文艺风景》创刊号）。
Mr. Du Heng reread Shakespeare's "Caesar's Biography" in "Recently, out of the mood of 'it is better to read an old book than to read a new book'". This reading is quite relevant, and as a result, we can read his new article from an old book: "The Masses in Shakespeare's Caesar" (see the first issue of "Literary Landscape").这个剧本，杜衡先生是“曾经用两个月的时间把它翻译出来过”的，就可见读得非常子细。他告诉我们：“在这个剧里，莎氏描写了两个英雄——凯撒，和……勃鲁都斯。……还进一步创造了两位政治家（煽动家）——阴险而卑鄙的卡西乌斯，和表面上显得那么麻木而糊涂的安东尼。”但最后的胜利却属于安东尼，而“很明显地，安东尼底胜利是凭借了群众底力量”，于是更明显地，即使“甚至说，群众是这个剧底无形的主脑，也不嫌太过”了。
This script, Mr. Du Heng "once translated it in two months", which shows that he read it very carefully. He told us: "In this play, Shakespeare describes two heroes - Caesar and ...... Brudus. …… Two politicians (demagogues) were further created - Cassius, who was insidious and despicable, and Antony, who seemed so numb and confused on the surface. But the final victory belonged to Antony, and "it is clear that Antony's victory relied on the strength of the masses", so it is even more obvious that even "it is not too much to say that the masses are the invisible masterminds of this drama".然而这“无形的主脑”是怎样的东西呢？杜衡先生在叙事和引文之后，加以结束——决不是结论，这是作者所不愿意说的——道——
But what kind of thing is this "invisible mastermind"? Mr. Du Heng concludes after the narrative and quotations - by no means a conclusion, which is what the author does not want to say - Tao -“在这许多地方，莎氏是永不忘记把群众表现为一个力量的；不过，这力量只是一种盲目的暴力。他们没有理性，他们没有明确的利害观念；他们底感情是完全被几个煽动家所控制着，所操纵着。……自然，我们不能贸然地肯定这是群众底本质，但是我们倘若说，这位伟大的剧作者是把群众这样看法的，大概不会有什么错误吧。这看法，我知道将使作者大大地开罪于许多把群众底理性和感情用另一种方式来估计的朋友们。至于我，说实话，我以为对这些问题的判断，是至今还超乎我底能力之上，我不敢妄置一词。……”
In many of these places, Shakespeare never forgot to present the masses as a force; However, this power is only a form of blind violence. They have no rationality, they do not have a clear concept of interests; Their underlying feelings are completely controlled and manipulated by several demagogues. …… Naturally, we cannot rashly affirm that this is the essence of the masses, but if we say that this great playwright views the masses in this way, there will probably be no mistake. I know that this view will greatly offend the author to many friends who estimate the rationality and feelings of the masses in another way. As for me, to be honest, I think that the judgment on these issues is still beyond my ability, and I dare not say a word. ……”杜衡先生是文学家，所以这文章做得极好，很谦虚。假如说，“妈的群众是瞎了眼睛的！”即使根据的是“理性”，也容易因了表现的粗暴而招致反感；现在是“这位伟大的剧作者”莎士比亚老前辈“把群众这样看法的”，您以为怎么样呢？“巽语之言，能无说乎”，至少也得客客气气的搔一搔头皮，如果你没有翻译或细读过莎剧《凯撒传》的话——只得说，这判断，更是“超乎我底能力之上”了。
Mr. Du Heng is a writer, so this article is very well done and very modest. Suppose you say, "Damn the masses are blind!" Even if it is based on "rationality", it is easy to incur disgust due to the roughness of the performance; Now it is "this great playwright" Shakespeare's old-timer "sees the masses this way", what do you think? If you haven't translated or read Shakespeare's "The Biography of Julius Caesar" - I have to say that this judgment is "beyond my ability".于是我们都不负责任，单是讲莎剧。莎剧的确是伟大的，仅就杜衡先生所绍介的几点来看，它实在已经打破了文艺和政治无关的高论了。群众是一个力量，但“这力量只是一种盲目的暴力。他们没有理性，他们没有明确的利害观念”，据莎氏的表现，至少，他们就将“民治”的金字招牌踏得粉碎，何况其他？即在目前，也使杜衡先生对于这些问题不能判断了。一本《凯撒传》，就是作政论看，也是极有力量的。
So we are not responsible, just talking about Shakespeare. Shakespeare is indeed great, and judging from the points introduced by Mr. Du Heng, it has really broken the high theory that literature and art have nothing to do with politics. The masses are a force, but "this power is only a blind violence." They have no rationality, they have no clear concept of interests", according to Shakespeare's performance, at least, they will smash the golden sign of "people's rule", let alone others? Even at present, Mr. Du Heng cannot judge these issues. A "Biography of Caesar", even if it is a political theory, is also very powerful.然而杜衡先生却又因此替作者捏了一把汗，怕“将使作者大大地开罪于许多把群众底理性和感情用另一种方式来估计的朋友们”。自然，在杜衡先生，这是一定要想到的，他应该爱惜这一位以《凯撒传》给他智慧的作者。然而肯定的判断了那一种“朋友们”，却未免太不顾事实了。现在不但施蛰存先生已经看见了苏联将要排演莎剧的“丑态”（见《现代》九月号），便是《资本论》里，不也常常引用莎氏的名言，未尝说他有罪么？将来呢，恐怕也如未必有人引《哈孟雷特》来证明有鬼，更未必有人因《哈孟雷特》而责莎士比亚的迷信一样，会特地“吊民伐罪”，和杜衡先生一般见识的。
However, Mr. Du Heng sweated for the author because of this, fearing that "it will greatly offend many friends who estimate the rationality and feelings of the masses in another way." Naturally, in Mr. Du Heng, this must be thought of, and he should cherish this author who gave him wisdom with the "Biography of Caesar". However, judging that kind of "friends" with certainty is too ignorant of the facts. Now not only has Mr. Shi Zhicun seen the "ugliness" of the Soviet Union to rehearse Shakespeare (see the September issue of "Modern"), but also in "Capital", doesn't he often quote Shakespeare's famous sayings and never say that he is guilty? In the future, I am afraid that if someone may not quote "Hamenret" to prove that there is a ghost, let alone someone who blames Shakespeare's superstition because of "Hamenret", he will specially "hang the people and punish the sins", and Mr. Du Heng will have the same knowledge.况且杜衡先生的文章，是写给心情和他两样的人们来读的，因为会看见《文艺风景》这一本新书的，当然决不是怀着“与其看一部新的书，还不如看一部旧的书”的心情的朋友。但是，一看新书，可也就不至于只看一本《文艺风景》了，讲莎剧的书又很多，涉猎一点，心情就不会这么抖抖索索，怕被“政治家”（煽动家）所煽动。那些“朋友们”除注意作者的时代和环境而外，还会知道《凯撒传》的材料是从布鲁特奇的《英雄传》里取来的，而且是莎士比亚从作喜剧转入悲剧的第一部；作者这时是失意了。为什么事呢，还不大明白。但总之，当判断的时候，是都要想到的，又未必有杜衡先生所豫言的痛快，简单。
Moreover, Mr. Du Heng's article is written for people who are in the same mood as him, because those who will see the new book "Literary and Art Landscape" are certainly not friends with the mood of "it is better to read an old book than to read a new book". However, when you read the new book, you won't just read one "Literary Landscape", there are many books about Shakespeare, and if you dabble a little, your mood will not be so shaky, for fear of being incited by "politicians" (agitators). In addition to paying attention to the author's time and environment, those "friends" will also know that the material of "Caesar" is taken from Brutsky's "Legend of Heroes", and it is the first part of Shakespeare's transition from comedy to tragedy; The author was frustrated at this time. I don't really understand why. But in short, when judging, you have to think about it, and it may not be as happy and simple as Mr. Du Heng predicted.单是对于“莎剧凯撒传里所表现的群众”的看法，和杜衡先生的眼睛两样的就有的是。现在只抄一位痛恨十月革命，逃入法国的显斯妥夫（Lev Shestov）先生的见解，而且是结论在这里罢——
The view of "the masses shown in Shakespeare's Julius Caesar" alone is different from Mr. Du Heng's eyes. Now only the opinion of Mr. Lev Shestov, who hated the October Revolution and fled to France, and the conclusion is here—“在《攸里乌斯·凯撒》中活动的人，以上之外，还有一个。那是复合底人物。那便是人民，或说‘群众’。莎士比亚之被称为写实家，并不是无意义的。无论在那一点，他决不阿谀群众，做出凡俗的性格来。他们轻薄，胡乱，残酷。今天跟在彭贝的战车之后，明天喊着凯撒之名，但过了几天，却被他的叛徒勃鲁都斯的辩才所惑，其次又赞成安东尼的攻击，要求着刚才的红人勃鲁都斯的头了。人往往愤慨着群众之不可靠。但其实，岂不是正有适用着‘以眼还眼，以牙还牙’的古来的正义的法则的事在这里吗？劈开底来看，群众原是轻蔑着彭贝，凯撒，安东尼，辛那之辈的，他们那一面，也轻蔑着群众。今天凯撒握着权力，凯撒万岁。明天轮到安东尼了，那就跟在他后面罢。只要他们给饭吃，给戏看，就好。他们的功绩之类，是用不着想到的。他们那一面也很明白，施与些像个王者的宽容，借此给自己收得报答。在拥挤着这些满是虚荣心的人们的连串里，间或夹杂着勃鲁都斯那样的廉直之士，是事实。然而谁有从山积的沙中，找出一粒珠子来的闲工夫呢？群众，是英雄的大炮的食料，而英雄，从群众看来，不过是余兴。在其间，正义就占了胜利，而幕也垂下来了。”（《莎士比亚〔剧〕中的伦理的问题》）
"The person who is active in Eurius Caesar, in addition to the above, there is one. That's a compound character. That is the people, or the 'masses'. It is not meaningless that Shakespeare is called a realist. No matter what point he is, he will never flatter the masses and make a vulgar character. They are frivolous, chaotic, and cruel. Today he followed Pembey's chariot, and tomorrow he shouted the name of Caesar, but after a few days, he was bewitched by the eloquence of his traitor Brudus, and then he agreed with Antony's attack and demanded the head of the red man Brudus. People often complain about the unreliability of the masses. But in fact, isn't there something here that applies the ancient law of justice of 'an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth'? Splitting it open, the masses originally despised Pembe, Caesar, Anthony, Sina, and others, and their side also despised the masses. Caesar holds power today, long live Caesar. Tomorrow it's Anthony's turn, so follow him. As long as they give food and plays, that's fine. Their exploits and the like don't need to be thought of. They also understood that they would give some tolerance like a king to repay themselves. It is a fact that in the crowd of these vanity people, there are sometimes honest people like Brudus. However, who has the leisure to find a bead from the mountains of sand? The masses are the food for the hero's cannon, and the hero, from the perspective of the masses, is just an after-fun. In the meantime, justice prevails, and the curtain falls. ("Ethical Problems in Shakespeare's [Play]")这当然也未必是正确的见解，显斯妥夫就不很有人说他是哲学家或文学家。不过便是这一点点，就很可以看见虽然同是从《凯撒传》来看它所表现的群众，结果却已经和杜衡先生有这么的差别。而且也很可以推见，正不会如杜衡先生所豫料，“将使作者大大地开罪于许多把群众底理性和感情用另一方式来估计的朋友们”了。
Of course, this is not necessarily the correct opinion, and it is not often said that Stove is a philosopher or a writer. However, it is at this point that it is very clear that although the masses expressed in the "Biography of Caesar" are already so different from Mr. Du Heng. And it is also inferred that it will not be as Mr. Du Heng expected, "it will greatly offend many friends who estimate the rationality and feelings of the masses in another way."所以，杜衡先生大可以不必替莎士比亚发愁。彼此其实都很明白：“阴险而卑鄙的卡西乌斯，和表面上显得那么麻木而糊涂的安东尼”，就是在那时候的群众，也“不过是余兴”而已。
Therefore, Mr. Du Heng probably doesn't have to worry about Shakespeare. In fact, they understood each other: "Cassius, who is insidious and despicable, and Antony, who seems so numb and confused on the surface", even the masses at that time were "just afterfun".九月三十日。
September 30th.

说“面子”

说“面子”

说“面子”

Say "face"“面子”，是我们在谈话里常常听到的，因为好像一听就懂，所以细想的人大约不很多。
"Face" is something we often hear in conversations, because it seems to be understood as soon as we hear it, so there are probably not many people who think about it carefully.但近来从外国人的嘴里，有时也听到这两个音，他们似乎在研究。他们以为这一件事情，很不容易懂，然而是中国精神的纲领，只要抓住这个，就像二十四年前的拔住了辫子一样，全身都跟着走动了。相传前清时候，洋人到总理衙门去要求利益，一通威吓，吓得大官们满口答应，但临走时，却被从边门送出去。不给他走正门，就是他没有面子；他既然没有了面子，自然就是中国有了面子，也就是占了上风了。这是不是事实，我断不定，但这故事，“中外人士”中是颇有些人知道的。
But recently, these two sounds are sometimes heard from the mouths of foreigners, and they seem to be studying them. They thought that this matter was not easy to understand, but it was the program of the Chinese spirit, as long as they grabbed this, it was like pulling out the braids 24 years ago, and their whole body would follow. According to legend, in the pre-Qing Dynasty, foreigners went to the prime minister's office to ask for benefits, and a threat frightened the high-ranking officials to agree, but when they left, they were sent out through the side door. If you don't give him the main door, he has no face; Since he has no face, it is natural that China has face, that is, he has the upper hand. Whether this is true or not, I am not sure, but this story is known to many people among "Chinese and foreign people".因此，我颇疑心他们想专将“面子”给我们。
Therefore, I am quite suspicious that they want to give us "face".但“面子”究竟是怎么一回事呢？不想还好，一想可就觉得胡涂。它像是很有好几种的，每一种身份，就有一种“面子”，也就是所谓“脸”。这“脸”有一条界线，如果落到这线的下面去了，即失了面子，也叫作“丢脸”。不怕“丢脸”，便是“不要脸”。但倘使做了超出这线以上的事，就“有面子”，或曰“露脸”。而“丢脸”之道，则因人而不同，例如车夫坐在路边赤膊捉虱子，并不算什么，富家姑爷坐在路边赤膊捉虱子，才成为“丢脸”。但车夫也并非没有“脸”，不过这时不算“丢”，要给老婆踢了一脚，就躺倒哭起来，这才成为他的“丢脸”。这一条“丢脸”律，是也适用于上等人的。这样看来，“丢脸”的机会，似乎上等人比较的多，但也不一定，例如车夫偷一个钱袋，被人发见，是失了面子的，而上等人大捞一批金珠珍玩，却仿佛也不见得怎样“丢脸”，况且还有“出洋考察”，是改头换面的良方。
But what is "face" all about? It's okay if you don't want to, but you feel nonsense when you think about it. It seems to have several kinds, and each identity has a kind of "face", which is the so-called "face". There is a boundary between this "face", and if it falls below this line, it will lose face, which is also called "losing face". If you are not afraid of "losing face", you are "shameless". But if you do something beyond this line, you will "have face" or "show your face". For example, the coachman sits shirtless on the side of the road to catch lice, which is nothing, and the rich aunt sits shirtless on the side of the road to catch lice, which becomes "shameful". But the coachman is not without a "face", but at this time it is not considered a "loss", he has to kick his wife, and then he lies down and cries, which becomes his "shame". This "shameful" law also applies to superiors. In this way, it seems that there are more opportunities for "shame" for upper-class people, but not necessarily, for example, the coachman steals a money bag and is discovered, which is a loss of face, and the upper-class people fish for a batch of gold and jewels, but it seems that they are not necessarily so "embarrassed", and there is also "overseas inspection", which is a good remedy for a makeover.谁都要“面子”，当然也可以说是好事情，但“面子”这东西，却实在有些怪。九月三十日的《申报》就告诉我们一条新闻：沪西有业木匠大包作头之罗立鸿，为其母出殡，邀开“贳器店之王树宝夫妇帮忙，因来宾众多，所备白衣，不敷分配，其时适有名王道才，绰号三喜子，亦到来送殡，争穿白衣不遂，以为有失体面，心中怀恨，……邀集徒党数十人，各执铁棍，据说尚有持手枪者多人，将王树宝家人乱打，一时双方有剧烈之战争，头破血流，多人受有重伤。……”白衣是亲族有服者所穿的，现在必须“争穿”而又“不遂”，足见并非亲族，但竟以为“有失体面”，演成这样的大战了。这时候，好像只要和普通有些不同便是“有面子”，而自己成了什么，却可以完全不管。这类脾气，是“绅商”也不免发露的：袁世凯将要称帝的时候，有人以列名于劝进表中为“有面子”；有一国从青岛撤兵的时候，有人以列名于万民伞上为“有面子”。
Everyone wants "face", of course, it can be said to be a good thing, but "face" is really a bit strange. The "Declaration" on September 30 told us a piece of news: Luo Lihong, a carpenter in western Shanghai, was the head of the big bag, and invited Wang Shubao and his wife to help with the funeral of his mother,...... Dozens of people were invited to join the party, each holding an iron rod, and it is said that there were still many people with pistols, beating Wang Shubao's family indiscriminately, and there was a fierce war between the two sides for a while, with bloody heads and many serious injuries. ...... "White clothes are worn by relatives who have clothes, and now they must "fight to wear" and "fail", which shows that they are not relatives, but they think that they are "undignified", and it has evolved into such a war. At this time, it seems that as long as it is a little different from the ordinary, it is "face", but what you have become can be completely ignored. This kind of temper is inevitably revealed by "gentlemen and businessmen": when Yuan Shikai was about to become emperor, some people listed their names in the persuasion table as "face-saving"; When a country withdrew its troops from Qingdao, some people listed their names on the umbrella of all people as "having face".所以，要“面子”也可以说并不一定是好事情——但我并非说，人应该“不要脸”。现在说话难，如果主张“非孝”，就有人会说你在煽动打父母，主张男女平等，就有人会说你在提倡乱交——这声明是万不可少的。
Therefore, it can be said that "face" is not necessarily a good thing - but I am not saying that people should be "shameless". If you advocate "unfilial piety", some people will say that you are inciting to beat your parents, advocate equality between men and women, and some people will say that you are advocating promiscuity - this statement is indispensable.况且，“要面子”和“不要脸”实在也可以有很难分辨的时候。不是有一个笑话么？一个绅士有钱有势，我假定他叫四大人罢，人们都以能够和他扳谈为荣。有一个专爱夸耀的小瘪三，一天高兴的告诉别人道：“四大人和我讲过话了！”人问他“说什么呢？”答道：“我站在他门口，四大人出来了，对我说：滚开去！”当然，这是笑话，是形容这人的“不要脸”，但在他本人，是以为“有面子”的，如此的人一多，也就真成为“有面子”了。别的许多人，不是四大人连“滚开去”也不对他说么？
Moreover, it can be difficult to distinguish between "saving face" and "shamelessness". Isn't there a joke? A gentleman is rich and powerful, I assume he is called the Four Lords, and people are proud to be able to talk to him. There was a little deflated third who loved to boast, and one day he happily told others: "The four lords have spoken to me!" "What did he say?" He replied: "I stood at his door, and the four adults came out and said to me: Get away!" Of course, this is a joke, to describe this person's "shamelessness", but in himself, he thinks he has "face", and when there are so many people, he really becomes "face-saving". Many other people, didn't the four adults even "get away" and not say to him?在上海，“吃外国火腿”虽然还不是“有面子”，却也不算怎么“丢脸”了，然而比起被一个本国的下等人所踢来，又仿佛近于“有面子”。
In Shanghai, although "eating foreign ham" is not "face-saving", it is not very "embarrassing", but compared to being kicked by a low-class person in his own country, it seems to be close to "having face".中国人要“面子”，是好的，可惜的是这“面子”是“圆机活法”，善于变化，于是就和“不要脸”混起来了。长谷川如是闲说“盗泉”云：“古之君子，恶其名而不饮，今之君子，改其名而饮之。”也说穿了“今之君子”的“面子”的秘密。
It is good for Chinese to want "face", but unfortunately this "face" is a "round machine way of living" and good at change, so it is mixed with "shameless". Hasegawa said of "thieving springs": "The ancient gentlemen hated their names and did not drink, but today's gentlemen change their names and drink them." It also reveals the secret of the "face" of "today's gentleman".十月四日。
October 4th.

运命

运命

运命

Destiny有一天，我坐在内山书店里闲谈——我是常到内山书店去闲谈的，我的可怜的敌对的“文学家”，还曾经借此竭力给我一个“汉奸”的称号，可惜现在他们又不坚持了——才知道日本的丙午年生，今年二十九岁的女性，是一群十分不幸的人。大家相信丙午年生的女人要克夫，即使再嫁，也还要克，而且可以多至五六个，所以想结婚是很困难的。这自然是一种迷信，但日本社会上的迷信也还是真不少。
One day, I sat in the Uchiyama Bookstore and chatted - I often go to the Uchiyama Bookstore to chat, and my poor hostile "writer" used this to try his best to give me the title of "traitor", but unfortunately now they don't insist on it - only to realize that the 29-year-old woman born in Japan is a very unfortunate group. Everyone believes that women born in the year of Bingwu want to get married, even if they remarry, they still have to win, and there can be as many as five or six, so it is very difficult to get married. This is naturally a superstition, but there are still a lot of superstitions in Japanese society.我问：可有方法解除这夙命呢？回答是：没有。
I asked: Is there a way to relieve this fate? The answer is: no.接着我就想到了中国。
Then I thought of China.许多外国的中国研究家，都说中国人是定命论者，命中注定，无可奈何；就是中国的论者，现在也有些人这样说。但据我所知道，中国女性就没有这样无法解除的命运。“命凶”或“命硬”，是有的，但总有法子想，就是所谓“禳解”；或者和不怕相克的命的男子结婚，制住她的“凶”或“硬”。假如有一种命，说是要连克五六个丈夫的罢，那就早有道士之类出场，自称知道妙法，用桃木刻成五六个男人，画上符咒，和这命的女人一同行“结俪之礼”后，烧掉或埋掉，于是真来订婚的丈夫，就算是第七个，毫无危险了。
Many foreign Chinese scholars say that Chinese are fatalists and are destined and helpless; Even Chinese commentators say this now. But as far as I know, Chinese women do not have such an unsolvable fate. There are "fate" or "hard fate", but there is always a way to think, which is the so-called "exorcism"; Or marry a man who is not afraid of a conflicting fate to restrain her "fierce" or "hard". If there is a kind of fate, it is said that it is to conquer five or six husbands, then there have already been Taoist priests and the like, claiming to know the wonderful method, carving five or six men out of peach wood, drawing talismans, and walking with the woman of this life "marriage ceremony", burning or burying it, so the husband who really comes to get engaged, even if it is the seventh, is not in danger.中国人的确相信运命，但这运命是有方法转移的。所谓“没有法子”，有时也就是一种另想道路——转移运命的方法。等到确信这是“运命”，真真“没有法子”的时候，那是在事实上已经十足碰壁，或者恰要灭亡之际了。运命并不是中国人的事前的指导，乃是事后的一种不费心思的解释。
Chinese people do believe in fate, but there is a way to transfer this fate. The so-called "no way" is sometimes a way to think of another way - a way to change fate. When you are convinced that this is "fate" and that there is really "no way", it is when you have in fact hit a wall or are about to perish. Fate is not a Chinese guidance in advance, but a thoughtless explanation afterwards.中国人自然有迷信，也有“信”，但好像很少“坚信”。我们先前最尊皇帝，但一面想玩弄他，也尊后妃，但一面又有些想吊她的膀子；畏神明，而又烧纸钱作贿赂，佩服豪杰，却不肯为他作牺牲。崇孔的名儒，一面拜佛，信甲的战士，明天信丁。宗教战争是向来没有的，从北魏到唐末的佛道二教的此仆彼起，是只靠几个人在皇帝耳朵边的甘言蜜语。风水，符咒，拜祷……偌大的“运命”，只要化一批钱或磕几个头，就改换得和注定的一笔大不相同了——就是并不注定。
Chinese people naturally have superstitions and "beliefs", but they seem to have very few "firm beliefs". We respected the emperor the most before, but on the one hand, we wanted to play with him and respect the concubine, but on the other hand, we wanted to hang her arms; Fearing the gods, he burned paper money as a bribe, admired the heroes, but refused to sacrifice for him. The famous Confucian scholars who worship Confucius worship Buddha on the one hand, and the warriors who believe in armor believe in Ding tomorrow. Religious wars have never existed, and from the Northern Wei Dynasty to the end of the Tang Dynasty, the two religions of Buddhism and Taoism rose one after another, relying only on the sweet words of a few people in the emperor's ears. Feng Shui, charms, prayers...... The huge "fate", as long as you turn a batch of money or kowtow a few times, it will be very different from the destined sum - that is, it is not destined.我们的先哲，也有知道“定命”有这么的不定，是不足以定人心的，于是他说，这用种种方法之后所得的结果，就是真的“定命”，而且连必须用种种方法，也是命中注定的。但看起一般的人们来，却似乎并不这样想。
Our sages also knew that "destiny" was so uncertain that it was not enough to settle people's hearts, so he said that the result obtained after using various methods was really "destined", and even if it was necessary to use various methods, it was also destined. But ordinary people don't seem to think so.人而没有“坚信”，狐狐疑疑，也许并不是好事情，因为这也就是所谓“无特操”。但我以为信运命的中国人而又相信运命可以转移，却是值得乐观的。不过现在为止，是在用迷信来转移别的迷信，所以归根结蒂，并无不同，以后倘能用正当的道理和实行——科学来替换了这迷信，那么，定命论的思想，也就和中国人离开了。
It may not be a good thing for people to be suspicious without "firm belief", because this is the so-called "no special operation". But I think that Chinese people who believe in fate and believe that fate can be transferred are worth being optimistic. But so far, it is using superstition to divert other superstitions, so in the final analysis, there is no difference, if this superstition can be replaced with legitimate reasoning and practice - science in the future, then the idea of fatalism will leave the Chinese.假如真有这一日，则和尚，道士，巫师，星相家，风水先生……的宝座，就都让给了科学家，我们也不必整年的见神见鬼了。
If there really is such a day, it will be monks, Taoists, shamans, astrologers, feng shui teachers...... The throne has been given to scientists, and we don't have to see gods and ghosts all year round.十月二十三日。
October 23.

脸谱臆测

脸谱臆测

脸谱臆测

Facebook speculation对于戏剧，我完全是外行。但遇到研究中国戏剧的文章，有时也看一看。近来的中国戏是否象征主义，或中国戏里有无象征手法的问题，我是觉得很有趣味的。
When it comes to theater, I'm completely a layman. But when I encounter articles on Chinese drama, I sometimes read them. I find it interesting to see whether Chinese opera is symbolic or whether there are symbolic techniques in Chinese opera.伯鸿先生在《戏》周刊十一期（《中华日报》副刊）上，说起脸谱，承认了中国戏有时用象征的手法，“比如白表‘奸诈’，红表‘忠勇’，黑表‘威猛’，蓝表‘妖异’，金表‘神灵’之类，实与西洋的白表‘纯洁清净’，黑表‘悲哀’，红表‘热烈’，黄金色表‘光荣’和‘努力’”并无不同，这就是“色的象征”，虽然比较的单纯，低级。
In the eleventh issue of "Opera" Weekly (a supplement to "China Daily"), Mr. Bohong talked about Facebook and admitted that Chinese opera sometimes uses symbolic techniques, "such as the white table 'treachery', the red table 'loyalty and courage', the black table 'mighty', the blue table 'monster', the gold watch 'god', etc., which is actually no different from the Western white table 'pure and pure', the black table 'sad', the red watch 'warm', and the gold watch 'glorious' and 'hard work'", which is the "symbol of color", although it is relatively simple and low-level.这似乎也很不错，但再一想，却又生了疑问，因为白表奸诈，红表忠勇之类，是只以在脸上为限，一到别的地方，白就并不象征奸诈，红也不表示忠勇了。
This seems to be very good, but when I think about it again, I have doubts, because the white table is treacherous, the red table is loyal and brave, etc., it is only limited to the face, and once it goes to other places, white does not symbolize treachery, and red does not mean loyalty and bravery.对于中国戏剧史，我又是完全的外行。我只知道古时候（南北朝）的扮演故事，是带假面的，这假面上，大约一定得表示出这角色的特征，一面也是这角色的脸相的规定。古代的假面和现在的打脸的关系，好像还没有人研究过，假使有些关系，那么，“白表奸诈”之类，就恐怕只是人物的分类，却并非象征手法了。
For the history of Chinese drama, I am a complete layman. I only know that in ancient times (the Northern and Southern Dynasties), the acting story was masked, and this mask must probably indicate the characteristics of the character, and one side is also the regulation of the character's face. The relationship between the ancient mask and the current face slap seems to have not been studied yet, if there is some relationship, then the "white table treachery" is probably just a classification of characters, but not a symbolic technique.中国古来就喜欢讲“相人术”，但自然和现在的“相面”不同，并非从气色上看出祸福来，而是所谓“诚于中，必形于外”，要从脸相上辨别这人的好坏的方法。一般的人们，也有这一种意见的，我们在现在，还常听到“看他样子就不是好人”这一类话。这“样子”的具体的表现，就是戏剧上的“脸谱”。富贵人全无心肝，只知道自私自利，吃得白白胖胖，什么都做得出，于是白就表了奸诈。红表忠勇，是从关云长的“面如重枣”来的。“重枣”是怎样的枣子，我不知道，要之，总是红色的罢。在实际上，忠勇的人思想较为简单，不会神经衰弱，面皮也容易发红，倘使他要永远中立，自称“第三种人”，精神上就不免时时痛苦，脸上一块青，一块白，终于显出白鼻子来了。黑表威猛，更是极平常的事，整年在战场上驰驱，脸孔怎会不黑，擦着雪花膏的公子，是一定不肯自己出面去战斗的。
Since ancient times, China has liked to talk about "physiognomy", but naturally it is different from the current "physiognomy", not from the complexion to see the fortune and misfortune, but the so-called "sincerity in the middle, must be outside", to distinguish the good and bad of this person from the face. Ordinary people also have this kind of opinion, and we often hear words like "he doesn't look good". The specific manifestation of this "look" is the "face" in the drama. The rich and noble people have no heart and liver, they only know that they are selfish, eat for nothing, and can do anything, so they show treachery. The loyalty and courage of the red table comes from Guan Yunchang's "face like a heavy date". I don't know what kind of jujube "heavy jujube" is, but if you want, it's always red. In fact, a loyal and brave person is relatively simple-minded, will not have a nervous breakdown, and his face is easy to turn red, if he wants to be neutral forever and call himself a "third kind of person", he will inevitably suffer mentally from time to time, and his face will be blue and white, and finally a white nose will appear. The black watch is powerful, it is a very common thing, galloping on the battlefield all year round, how can the face not be black, the young master who wipes the alabaster paste, will definitely refuse to come forward to fight by himself.士君子常在一门一门的将人们分类，平民也在分类，我想，这“脸谱”，便是优伶和看客公同逐渐议定的分类图。不过平民的辨别，感受的力量，是没有士君子那么细腻的。况且我们古时候戏台的搭法，又和罗马不同，使看客非常散漫，表现倘不加重，他们就觉不到，看不清。这么一来，各类人物的脸谱，就不能不夸大化，漫画化，甚而至于到得后来，弄得希奇古怪，和实际离得很远，好像象征手法了。
Scholars and gentlemen often classify people one by one, and commoners are also classifying, I think this "face" is the classification map gradually agreed upon by the actors and spectators. However, the power of civilian discernment and feeling is not as delicate as that of a gentleman. Moreover, the way we set up the stage in ancient times was different from that of Rome, so that the audience was very loose, and if the performance was not aggravated, they would not feel it or see clearly. In this way, the faces of various characters cannot but be exaggerated and caricatured, and even later, they make it strange and far from reality, like a symbolic technique.脸谱，当然自有它本身的意义的，但我总觉得并非象征手法，而且在舞台的构造和看客的程度和古代不同的时候，它更不过是一种赘疣，无须扶持它的存在了。然而用在别一种有意义的玩艺上，在现在，我却以为还是很有兴趣的。
Of course, the face painting has its own meaning, but I always feel that it is not a symbolic technique, and when the structure of the stage and the degree of spectators are different from those of ancient times, it is just a wart, and there is no need to support its existence. However, when used in other meaningful plays, I think I am still very interested.十月三十一日。
October 31st.

随便翻翻

随便翻翻

随便翻翻

Whatever you want我想讲一点我的当作消闲的读书——随便翻翻。但如果弄得不好，会受害也说不定的。
I want to talk about my leisure reading - flip through it casually. But if you don't do it well, you may be harmed.我最初去读书的地方是私塾，第一本读的是《鉴略》，桌上除了这一本书和习字的描红格，对字（这是做诗的准备）的课本之外，不许有别的书。但后来竟也慢慢的认识字了，一认识字，对于书就发生了兴趣，家里原有两三箱破烂书，于是翻来翻去，大目的是找图画看，后来也看看文字。这样就成了习惯，书在手头，不管它是什么，总要拿来翻一下，或者看一遍序目，或者读几叶内容，到得现在，还是如此，不用心，不费力，往往在作文或看非看不可的书籍之后，觉得疲劳的时候，也拿这玩意来作消遣了，而且它也的确能够恢复疲劳。
The first place I went to study was a private school, and the first book I read was "Jianlue", and there were no other books on the table except this book and the red grid for Xi calligraphy, and the textbook for the word (this is the preparation for poetry). But then I slowly learned to understand the words, as soon as I knew the words, I became interested in books, and there were two or three boxes of tattered books at home, so I rummaged through them, the main purpose was to find pictures to read, and later also to look at the text. This has become a habit, the book is at hand, no matter what it is, you always have to take it to flip through it, or read the preface, or read a few leaves of content, until now, it is still like this, careless, effortless, often after composing or reading must-read books, when you feel tired, you also use this thing as a pastime, and it can indeed recover from fatigue.倘要骗人，这方法很可以冒充博雅。现在有一些老实人，和我闲谈之后，常说我书是看得很多的，略谈一下，我也的确好像书看得很多，殊不知就为了常常随手翻翻的缘故，却并没有本本细看。还有一种很容易到手的秘本，是《四库书目提要》，倘还怕繁，那么，《简明目录》也可以，这可要细看，它能做成你好像看过许多书。不过我也曾用过正经工夫，如什么“国学”之类，请过先生指教，留心过学者所开的参考书目。结果都不满意。有些书目开得太多，要十来年才能看完，我还疑心他自己就没有看；只开几部的较好，可是这须看这位开书目的先生了，如果他是一位胡涂虫，那么，开出来的几部一定也是极顶胡涂书，不看还好，一看就胡涂。
If you want to deceive people, this method can be pretended to be a liberal arts. Nowadays, some honest people, after chatting with me, often say that I read a lot of books, and after a little talk, I do seem to read a lot of books, but I don't know that just because I often flip through them, I don't read them carefully. There is also a secret book that is easy to get, which is the "Summary of the Bibliographic Catalogue of the Four Libraries", if you are still afraid of complexity, then the "Concise Catalogue" can also be done, which can be made into a book that you seem to have read many books. However, I have also used serious efforts, such as "Chinese studies", etc., I have asked my teacher for advice and paid attention to the bibliography opened by scholars. The results were not satisfactory. Some books are too open, and it takes more than ten years to read them, and I still suspect that he didn't read them himself; If he is a Hu Tu worm, then the few books that are opened must also be the best Hu Tu books, it's okay not to read them, and they are nonsense at a glance.我并不是说，天下没有指导后学看书的先生，有是有的，不过很难得。
I'm not saying that there are no gentlemen in the world who guide the younger generation to read books, there are, but they are rare.这里只说我消闲的看书——有些正经人是反对的，以为这么一来，就“杂”！“杂”，现在又算是很坏的形容词。但我以为也有好处。譬如我们看一家的陈年账簿，每天写着“豆付三文，青菜十文，鱼五十文，酱油一文”，就知先前这几个钱就可买一天的小菜，吃够一家；看一本旧历本，写着“不宜出行，不宜沐浴，不宜上梁”，就知道先前是有这么多的禁忌。看见了宋人笔记里的“食菜事魔”，明人笔记里的“十彪五虎”，就知道“哦呵，原来‘古已有之’。”但看完一部书，都是些那时的名人轶事，某将军每餐要吃三十八碗饭，某先生体重一百七十五斤半；或是奇闻怪事，某村雷劈蜈蚣精，某妇产生人面蛇，毫无益处的也有。这时可得自己有主意了，知道这是帮闲文士所做的书。凡帮闲，他能令人消闲消得最坏，他用的是最坏的方法。倘不小心，被他诱过去，那就坠入陷阱，后来满脑子是某将军的饭量，某先生的体重，蜈蚣精和人面蛇了。
Here I only say that I read books in my spare time - some serious people are against it, thinking that in this way, it will be "miscellaneous"! "Miscellaneous" is now a very bad adjective. But I thought there were benefits too. For example, if we look at a family's old account book, it is written every day that "beans pay three cents, vegetables ten cents, fish fifty cents, soy sauce one penny", and we know that the previous few dollars can buy a day's side dishes and eat enough for one family; Looking at an old calendar, it is written that "it is not suitable to travel, not to bathe, not to go on the beam", and you know that there were so many taboos before. When I saw the "Demon of Eating Vegetables" in the notes of the Song people and the "Ten Fierce Tigers" in the notes of the Ming people, I knew that "Oh, it turns out that 'there was already one in ancient times'." "But after reading a book, it was all anecdotes of celebrities at that time, a certain general had to eat thirty-eight bowls of rice at each meal, and a certain gentleman weighed one hundred and seventy-five and a half pounds; Or strange things, a certain village thunder struck the centipede spirit, and a certain woman gave birth to a human-faced snake, which was of no benefit. At this time, you have your own idea, knowing that this is a book made by an idle scribe. Whenever he helps, he can make people feel the worst, and he uses the worst methods. If you are not accidentally lured by him, you will fall into a trap, and then your mind will be full of a certain general's food, a certain gentleman's weight, centipede spirits and human-faced snakes.讲扶乩的书，讲婊子的书，倘有机会遇见，不要皱起眉头，显示憎厌之状，也可以翻一翻；明知道和自己意见相反的书，已经过时的书，也用一样的办法。例如杨光先的《不得已》是清初的著作，但看起来，他的思想是活着的，现在意见和他相近的人们正多得很。这也有一点危险，也就是怕被它诱过去。治法是多翻，翻来翻去，一多翻，就有比较，比较是医治受骗的好方子。乡下人常常误认一种硫化铜为金矿，空口是和他说不明白的，或者他还会赶紧藏起来，疑心你要白骗他的宝贝。但如果遇到一点真的金矿，只要用手掂一掂轻重，他就死心塌地：明白了。
If you have the opportunity to meet it, don't frown and show hatred, you can also turn it over; The same method is used for books that know are contrary to one's own opinion and books that are outdated. For example, Yang Guangxian's "Last Resort" was written in the early Qing Dynasty, but it seems that his thoughts are alive, and there are many people with similar opinions to him. This is also a bit dangerous, that is, I am afraid of being lured by it. The treatment method is to turn it over and over, and if you turn it over more, there will be a comparison, which is a good prescription for treating deception. Countrymen often mistake a copper sulfide for a gold mine, and the empty mouth is that he doesn't understand, or he will quickly hide it, suspecting that you want to lie to his treasure in vain. But if he encounters a real gold mine, as long as he weighs the weight with his hands, he will give up: I understand.“随便翻翻”是用各种别的矿石来比的方法，很费事，没有用真的金矿来比的明白，简单。我看现在青年的常在问人该读什么书，就是要看一看真金，免得受硫化铜的欺骗。而且一识得真金，一面也就真的识得了硫化铜，一举两得了。
"Casually rummaging" is a method of comparing various other ores, which is very troublesome, and it is not clear and simple to compare with real gold ores. I see that young people nowadays often ask people what books to read, that is, to look at real gold, so as not to be deceived by copper sulfide. And as soon as you know real gold, you really know copper sulfide, killing two birds with one stone.但这样的好东西，在中国现有的书里，却不容易得到。我回忆自己的得到一点知识，真是苦得可怜。幼小时候，我知道中国在“盘古氏开辟天地”之后，有三皇五帝，……宋朝，元朝，明朝，“我大清”。到二十岁，又听说“我们”的成吉思汗征服欧洲，是“我们”最阔气的时代。到二十五岁，才知道所谓这“我们”最阔气的时代，其实是蒙古人征服了中国，我们做了奴才。直到今年八月里，因为要查一点故事，翻了三部蒙古史，这才明白蒙古人的征服“斡罗思”，侵入匈奥，还在征服全中国之前，那时的成吉思还不是我们的汗，倒是俄人被奴的资格比我们老，应该他们说“我们的成吉思汗征服中国，是我们最阔气的时代”的。
But such good things are not easy to obtain in existing books in China. I recalled that I had gained a little knowledge, and it was really pitiful. When I was a child, I knew that China had three emperors and five emperors after "Pangu opened up the world",...... Song Dynasty, Yuan Dynasty, Ming Dynasty, "I am Qing". By the age of twenty, I heard that "our" Genghis Khan conquered Europe, which was the most generous era of "us". It wasn't until I was twenty-five years old that I realized that the so-called "we" were the most generous era, but in fact, the Mongols conquered China and we became slaves. It wasn't until August this year, because I wanted to check a little story, I turned over three Mongolian histories, and I understood that the Mongols conquered "Oros", invaded Hungary and Austria, and before conquering all of China, Genghis was not our Khan at that time, but the Russians were older than us.我久不看现行的历史教科书了，不知道里面怎么说；但在报章杂志上，却有时还看见以成吉思汗自豪的文章。事情早已过去了，原没有什么大关系，但也许正有着大关系，而且无论如何，总是说些真实的好。所以我想，无论是学文学的，学科学的，他应该先看一部关于历史的简明而可靠的书。但如果他专讲天王星，或海王星，虾蟆的神经细胞，或只咏梅花，叫妹妹，不发关于社会的议论，那么，自然，不看也可以的。
I haven't read the current history textbook for a long time, and I don't know what it says; But in newspapers and magazines, I sometimes see articles proud of Genghis Khan. Things have long passed, there is no big relationship, but maybe there is a big relationship, and no matter what, always say something really good. So I think that whether he is studying literature or science, he should first read a concise and reliable book about history. But if he specializes in Uranus, or Neptune, the nerve cells of the toad, or only sings about plum blossoms, calling his sister, and not discussing society, then, naturally, it is okay not to watch it.我自己，是因为懂一点日本文，在用日译本《世界史教程》和新出的《中国社会史》应应急的，都比我历来所见的历史书类说得明确。前一种中国曾有译本，但只有一本，后五本不译了，译得怎样，因为没有见过，不知道。后一种中国倒先有译本，叫作《中国社会发展史》，不过据日译者说，是多错误，有删节，靠不住的。
Personally, because I know a little Japanese, I am using the Japanese translation of "World History Tutorial" and the new "Chinese Social History" to deal with emergencies, which are clearer than the history books I have ever seen. The former has been translated in China, but there is only one, and the last five have not been translated, how it is translated, because I have not seen it, I don't know. The latter type of Chinese translation is called "History of Chinese Social Development", but according to the Japanese translator, it is full of errors, abridged, and unreliable.我还在希望中国有这两部书。又希望不要一哄而来，一哄而散，要译，就译他完；也不要删节，要删节，就得声明，但最好还是译得小心，完全，替作者和读者想一想。
I still hope that China has these two books. I also hope that they will not come and disperse, and if they want to translate, they will finish translating; Don't abridge, if you want to be abridged, you have to declare, but it's best to translate carefully, completely, and think about it for the author and the reader.十一月二日。
November 2nd.

拿破仑与隋那

拿破仑与隋那

拿破仑与隋那

Napoleon and Suina我认识一个医生，忙的，但也常受病家的攻击，有一回，自解自叹道：要得称赞，最好是杀人，你把拿破仑和隋那（Edward Jenner，1749—1823）去比比看……
I know a doctor who is busy but often attacked by his patients, and once he sighed to himself: If you want to praise, it is better to kill, you compare Napoleon and Sui Na (1749-1823) to Napoleon and Sui Na (1749-1823)......我想，这是真的。拿破仑的战绩，和我们什么相干呢，我们却总敬服他的英雄。甚而至于自己的祖宗做了蒙古人的奴隶，我们却还恭维成吉思；从现在的字眼睛看来，黄人已经是劣种了，我们却还夸耀希特拉。
I thought, it's true. What does Napoleon's achievements have to do with us, but we always admire his heroism. Even though our ancestors became slaves to the Mongols, we still compliment Genghis; From the current point of view, the yellow man is already an inferior species, but we still boast of Hitler.因为他们三个，都是杀人不眨眼的大灾星。
Because the three of them are all catastrophes that kill people without blinking.但我们看看自己的臂膊，大抵总有几个疤，这就是种过牛痘的痕迹，是使我们脱离了天花的危症的。自从有这种牛痘法以来，在世界上真不知救活了多少孩子，——虽然有些人大起来也还是去给英雄们做炮灰，但我们有谁记得这发明者隋那的名字呢？
But when we look at our arms, there are probably a few scars, which are traces of cowpox, which are the ones that have saved us from the critical condition of smallpox. Since this cowpox method, I really don't know how many children have been saved in the world,—— although some people still go to be cannon fodder for heroes when they grow up, but who remembers the name of this inventor Sui?杀人者在毁坏世界，救人者在修补它，而炮灰资格的诸公，却总在恭维杀人者。
The murderer is destroying the world, the savior is mending it, but the cannon fodder qualifications are always complimenting the murderer.这看法倘不改变，我想，世界是还要毁坏，人们也还要吃苦的。
If this view does not change, I think the world will still be destroyed, and people will still suffer.十一月六日。
November 6th.

答《戏》周刊编者信

答《戏》周刊编者信

答《戏》周刊编者信

Answer to the editor's letter of "Play" Weekly鲁迅先生鉴：
Mr. Lu Xun's view:《阿Q》的第一幕已经登完了，搬上舞台实验虽还不是马上可以做到，但我们的准备工作是就要开始发动了。我们希望你能在第一幕刚登完的时候先发表一点意见，一方面对于我们的公演准备或者也有些帮助，另方面本刊的丛书计划一实现也可以把你的意见和《阿Q》剧本同时付印当作一篇序。这是编者的要求，也是作者，读者和演出的同志们的要求。
The first act of "Ah Q" has been completed, and although it is not possible to do it on stage right away, our preparations are about to begin. We hope that you can express your opinions when the first act is just finished, on the one hand, it may be of some help to our performance preparations, and on the other hand, once the book series plan of this magazine is realized, you can also print your opinions and the script of "Ah Q" at the same time as a preface. This is the request of the editor, as well as the author, readers and comrades of the performance.祝健！
Good luck!编者。
Editor.编辑先生——
Mr. Editor——在《戏》周刊上给我的公开信，我早看见了；后来又收到邮寄的一张周刊，我知道这大约是在催促我的答复。对于戏剧，我是毫无研究的，我的最可靠的答复，是一声也不响。但如果先生和读者们都肯豫先了解我不过是一个外行人的随便谈谈，那么，我自然也不妨说一点我个人的意见。
I have already seen the open letter given to me in the weekly "Drama" magazine; Later, I received a weekly magazine in the mail, which I knew was probably urging me to answer. I have no research on drama, and my most reliable answer is that it is silent. But if you and the readers are willing to understand that I am just a layman, then I might as well say a little of my personal opinion.《阿Q》在每一期里，登得不多，每期相隔又有六天，断断续续的看过，也陆陆续续的忘记了。现在回忆起来，只记得那编排，将《呐喊》中的另外的人物也插进去，以显示未庄或鲁镇的全貌的方法，是很好的。但阿Q所说的绍兴话，我却有许多地方看不懂。
"Ah Q" did not appear much in each issue, and there were six days between each issue. Looking back now, I only remember the arrangement, and the method of inserting other characters in "The Scream" to show the whole picture of Weizhuang or Luzhen is very good. But there are many things I can't understand about the Shaoxing dialect spoken by Ah Q.现在我自己想说几句的，有两点——
Now I want to say a few words myself, there are two points -一，未庄在那里？《阿Q》的编者已经决定：在绍兴。我是绍兴人，所写的背景又是绍兴的居多，对于这决定，大概是谁都同意的。但是，我的一切小说中，指明着某处的却少得很。中国人几乎都是爱护故乡，奚落别处的大英雄，阿Q也很有这脾气。那时我想，假如写一篇暴露小说，指定事情是出在某处的罢，那么，某处人恨得不共戴天，非某处人却无异隔岸观火，彼此都不反省，一班人咬牙切齿，一班人却飘飘然，不但作品的意义和作用完全失掉了，还要由此生出无聊的枝节来，大家争一通闲气——《闲话扬州》是最近的例子。为了医病，方子上开人参，吃法不好，倒落得满身浮肿，用萝卜子来解，这才恢复了先前一样的瘦，人参白买了，还空空的折贴了萝卜子。人名也一样，古今文坛消息家，往往以为有些小说的根本是在报私仇，所以一定要穿凿书上的谁，就是实际上的谁。为免除这些才子学者们的白费心思，另生枝节起见，我就用“赵太爷”，“钱大爷”，是《百家姓》上最初的两个字；至于阿Q的姓呢，谁也不十分了然。但是，那时还是发生了谣言。还有排行，因为我是长男，下有两个兄弟，为豫防谣言家的毒舌起见，我的作品中的坏脚色，是没有一个不是老大，或老四，老五的。
1. Where is Weizhuang? The editor of "Ah Q" has decided: in Shaoxing. I am from Shaoxing, and the background of what I write is mostly Shaoxing, and probably everyone agrees with this decision. However, in all my novels, there are very few that point to somewhere. Chinese almost always love their hometown and ridicule the big heroes elsewhere, and Ah Q also has this temper. At that time, I thought that if I wrote an exposé novel and specified that something was somewhere, then people somewhere hated each other, and people who were not from somewhere were no different from watching the fire from the other side, without reflecting on each other, a group of people gritted their teeth, and a group of people were fluttering, not only the meaning and role of the work were completely lost, but also boring branches were born from it, and everyone was idle - "Gossip Yangzhou" is a recent example. In order to treat the disease, the prescription prescribed ginseng, the way to eat it was not good, and the body was swollen, and the radish seeds were used to solve it, so that the same thinness as before was restored. The same goes for people's names, ancient and modern literary informants often think that some novels are basically avenging personal revenge, so they must pierce the whoever is in the book, who is actually who. In order to avoid the waste of these talented scholars and for the sake of other branches, I used "Mr. Zhao" and "Uncle Qian", which are the first two words on "Hundred Family Surnames"; As for Ah Q's surname, no one is very clear. However, rumors still arose at that time. There is also a ranking, because I am the eldest son, and I have two brothers, in order to prevent the poisonous tongue of the rumors, there is no bad character in my works that is not the boss, or the fourth or fifth.上面所说那样的苦心，并非我怕得罪人，目的是在消灭各种无聊的副作用，使作品的力量较能集中，发挥得更强烈。果戈理作《巡按使》，使演员直接对看客道：“你们笑自己！”（奇怪的是中国的译本，却将这极要紧的一句删去了。）我的方法是在使读者摸不着在写自己以外的谁，一下子就推诿掉，变成旁观者，而疑心到像是写自己，又像是写一切人，由此开出反省的道路。但我看历来的批评家，是没有一个注意到这一点的。这回编者的对于主角阿Q所说的绍兴话，取了这样随手胡调的态度，我看他的眼睛也是为俗尘所蔽的。
The painstaking work mentioned above is not that I am afraid of offending people, but that the purpose is to eliminate all kinds of boring side effects, so that the power of the work can be concentrated and exerted more intensely. Gogol wrote "The Inspector", so that the actor said directly to the audience: "You laugh at yourself!" (Strangely, the Chinese translation deleted this extremely important sentence.) My method is to make the reader confuse who is writing about himself, and suddenly shirk and become a bystander, and become suspicious as if he is writing about himself and everyone, thus opening the way for introspection. But I think none of the critics in history have noticed this. This time, the editor took such a casual attitude towards the Shaoxing words spoken by the protagonist Ah Q, and I saw that his eyes were also blinded by the world.但是，指定了绍兴也好。于是跟着起来的是第二个问题——
However, it is also good to designate Shaoxing. So the second question came up -二，阿Q该说什么话？这似乎无须问，阿Q一生的事情既然出在绍兴，他当然该说绍兴话。但是第三个疑问接着又来了——
Second, what should Ah Q say? This seems to be unnecessary, since Ah Q's life is in Shaoxing, of course he should speak Shaoxing dialect. But the third question then came -三，《阿Q》是演给那里的人们看的？倘是演给绍兴人看的，他得说绍兴话无疑。绍兴戏文中，一向是官员秀才用官话，堂倌狱卒用土话的，也就是生，旦，净大抵用官话，丑用土话。我想，这也并非全为了用这来区别人的上下，雅俗，好坏，还有一个大原因，是警句或炼话，讥刺和滑稽，十之九是出于下等人之口的，所以他必用土话，使本地的看客们能够彻底的了解。那么，这关系之重大，也就可想而知了。其实，倘使演给绍兴的人们看，别的脚色也大可以用绍兴话，因为同是绍兴话，所谓上等人和下等人说的也并不同，大抵前者句子简，语助词和感叹词少，后者句子长，语助词和感叹词多，同一意思的一句话，可以冗长到一倍。但如演给别处的人们看，这剧本的作用却减弱，或者简直完全消失了。据我所留心观察，凡有自以为深通绍兴话的外县人，他大抵是像目前标点明人小品的名人一样，并不怎么懂得的；至于北方或闽粤人，我恐怕他听了之后，不会比听外国马戏里的打诨更有所得。
3. Was "Ah Q" performed for the people there? If it is performed for Shaoxing people, he has to speak Shaoxing without a doubt. In Shaoxing dramas, officials and scholars have always used official language, and cousins and jailers used local language, that is, sheng, dan, net mostly used official language, and ugly used local language. I think this is not all to distinguish between people's upper and lower, elegant and vulgar, good and bad, and there is another big reason, it is aphorisms or refined words, sarcasm and funny, and nine out of ten are from the mouths of inferior people, so he must use the vernacular dialect so that the local spectators can understand it thoroughly. Then, the importance of this relationship can be imagined. In fact, if it is shown to the people of Shaoxing, other characters can also use Shaoxing dialect, because it is the same Shaoxing dialect, the so-called superior and inferior people say differently, probably the former sentence is simple, there are few particles and interjections, the latter sentence is long, there are many particles and interjections, and a sentence with the same meaning can be twice as long. But if you show it to people elsewhere, the role of the script is weakened, or it simply disappears altogether. According to my careful observation, anyone from another county who thinks he is well versed in Shaoxing dialect is probably like the celebrities who currently mark people's sketches, and they don't know much about it; As for the northerners or Fujian and Cantonese, I am afraid that after listening to it, he will not gain more than listening to the jokes in foreign circuses.我想，普遍，永久，完全，这三件宝贝，自然是了不得的，不过也是作家的棺材钉，会将他钉死。譬如现在的中国，要编一本随时随地，无不可用的剧本，其实是不可能的，要这样编，结果就是编不成。所以我以为现在的办法，只好编一种对话都是比较的容易了解的剧本，倘在学校之类这些地方扮演，可以无须改动，如果到某一省县，某一乡村里面去，那么，这本子就算是一个底本，将其中的说白都改为当地的土话，不但语言，就是背景，人名，也都可变换，使看客觉得更加切实。譬如罢，如果这演剧之处并非水村，那么，航船可以化为大车，七斤也可以叫作“小辫儿”的。
I think that universal, permanent, and complete, these three treasures are naturally amazing, but they are also the coffin nails of the writer, and they will nail him to death. For example, in China today, it is actually impossible to compile a script that is available anytime and anywhere. If you go to a certain province, county, or village, then even if this book is a base book, the words in it are changed to the local dialect, not only the language, but also the background, the names of the people, can also be changed, so that the audience feels more real. For example, if the place of the play is not a water village, then the ship can be turned into a big car, and the seven pounds can also be called "pigtails".我的意见说完了，总括一句，不过是说，这剧本最好是不要专化，却使大家可以活用。
My opinion is over, but it is better not to be specialized, but to make it available to everyone.临末还有一点尾巴，当然决没有叭儿君的尾巴的有趣。这是我十分抱歉的，不过还是非说不可。记得几个月之前，曾经回答过一个朋友的关于大众语的质问，这信后来被发表在《社会月报》上了，末了是杨人先生的一篇文章。一位绍伯先生就在《火炬》上说我已经和杨人先生调和，并且深深的感慨了一番中国人之富于调和性。这一回，我的这一封信，大约也要发表的罢，但我记得《戏》周刊上已曾发表过曾今可叶灵凤两位先生的文章；叶先生还画了一幅阿Q像，好像我那一本《呐喊》还没有在上茅厕时候用尽，倘不是多年便秘，那一定是又买了一本新的了。如果我被绍伯先生的判决所震慑，这回是应该不敢再写什么的，但我想，也不必如此。只是在这里要顺便声明：我并无此种权力，可以禁止别人将我的信件在刊物上发表，而且另外还有谁的文章，更无从豫先知道，所以对于同一刊物上的任何作者，都没有表示调和与否的意思；但倘有同一营垒中人，化了装从背后给我一刀，则我的对于他的憎恶和鄙视，是在明显的敌人之上的。
There is still a little tail at the end, of course, it is not as interesting as Ba'erjun's tail. I'm very sorry for this, but I still have to say it. I remember that a few months ago, I answered a friend's question about popular language, and this letter was later published in the "Social Monthly", and finally an article by Mr. Yang Ren. A Mr. Shaobo said on "Torch" that I had reconciled with Mr. Yang Ren, and deeply felt the harmony of Chinese. This time, my letter is about to be published, but I remember that the weekly magazine "Opera" has published articles by Mr. Zeng Jinke and Ye Lingfeng; Mr. Ye also drew a portrait of Ah Q, as if my copy of "Scream" had not been used up when I went to the toilet, if it weren't for constipation for many years, I must have bought a new one. If I had been intimidated by Mr. Schaubo's verdict, I would not have dared to write anything more this time, but I think it doesn't have to be. I just want to declare here by the way: I have no such power to prohibit others from publishing my letters in publications, and I have no way of knowing in advance whose other articles there are, so I have no intention of reconciliation or discord with any author in the same publication; But if someone in the same camp disguises himself and gives me a knife from behind, then my hatred and contempt for him are above the obvious enemy.这倒并非个人的事情，因为现在又到了绍伯先生可以施展老手段的时候，我若不声明，则我所说过的各节，纵非买办意识，也是调和论了，还有什么意思呢？
This is not a personal matter, because now it is time for Mr. Shauber to use the old methods, and if I do not declare it, then the sections I have said, even if they are not comprador consciousness, are also conciliators, what else does it mean?专此布复，即请
Specifically for this announcement, please do so文安。
Wen'an.鲁迅。十一月十四日。
Lu Xun. November 14th.

寄《戏》周刊编者信

寄《戏》周刊编者信

寄《戏》周刊编者信

Letter to the editor of "Play" Weekly编辑先生：
Mr. Editor:今天看《戏》周刊第十四期，《独白》上“抱憾”于不得我的回信，但记得这信已于前天送出了，还是病中写的，自以为巴结得很，现在特地声明，算是讨好之意。
Today I read the fourteenth issue of "Opera" Weekly, and I "regretted" that I couldn't reply to the letter on "Monologue", but I remember that this letter was sent the day before yesterday, and it was written while I was sick.在这周刊上，看了几个阿Q像，我觉得都太特别，有点古里古怪。我的意见，以为阿Q该是三十岁左右，样子平平常常，有农民式的质朴，愚蠢，但也很沾了些游手之徒的狡猾。在上海，从洋车夫和小车夫里面，恐怕可以找出他的影子来的，不过没有流氓样，也不像瘪三样。只要在头上给戴上一顶瓜皮小帽，就失去了阿Q，我记得我给他戴的是毡帽。这是一种黑色的，半圆形的东西，将那帽边翻起一寸多，戴在头上的；上海的乡下，恐怕也还有人戴。
In this weekly magazine, I saw a few portraits of Ah Q, and I think they are all too special and a bit strange. In my opinion, I think Ah Q should be about thirty years old, with an ordinary appearance, peasant simplicity, stupidity, but also a bit of idle cunning. In Shanghai, I am afraid that his shadow can be found from the foreign coachman and the small coachman, but he is not a hooligan, nor is he deflated. As long as you put a melon skin hat on your head, you lose Ah Q, and I remember I put a felt hat on him. It was a black, semicircular thing, with the brim of the hat turned up by more than an inch, and worn on the head; In the countryside of Shanghai, I am afraid there are still people wearing it.报上说要图画，我这里有十张，是陈铁耕君刻的，今寄上，如不要，仍请寄回。他是广东人，所用的背景有许多大约是广东。第二，第三之二，第五，第七这四幅，比较刻的好；第三之一和本文不符；第九更远于事实，那时那里有摩托车给阿Q坐呢？该是大车，有些地方叫板车，是一种马拉的四轮的车，平时是载货物的。但绍兴也并没有这种车，我用的是那时的北京的情形，我在绍兴，其实并未见过这样的盛典。
The newspaper said that I wanted a picture, I have ten of them here, which were engraved by Chen Tiegengjun, and I will send them now, if you don't want them, please send them back. He is from Canton, and his background is probably Guangdong. the second, third second, fifth, and seventh paintings are better engraved; The third one is inconsistent with this article; The ninth is further than the facts, where is there a motorcycle for Ah Q to sit on? It should be a big cart, in some places called a pallet cart, which is a kind of horse-drawn four-wheeled car, usually carrying goods. But Shaoxing doesn't have this kind of car, I used the situation in Beijing at that time, I was in Shaoxing, in fact, I have never seen such a grand ceremony.又，今天的《阿Q正传》上说：“小D大约是小董罢？”并不是的。他叫“小同”，大起来，和阿Q一样。
Also, today's "The True Biography of Ah Q" said: "Xiao D is about Xiao Dong?" "Not really. His name is "Xiao Tong", and he is the same as Ah Q.专此布达，并请
Specifically for this announcement, please do so撰安。
Written by An.鲁迅上。十一月十八日。
Lu Xun presented. November 18th.

中国文坛上的鬼魅

中国文坛上的鬼魅

中国文坛上的鬼魅

Ghosts in the Chinese literary world一
One当国民党对于共产党从合作改为剿灭之后，有人说，国民党先前原不过利用他们的，北伐将成的时候，要施行剿灭是豫定的计划。但我以为这说的并不是真实。国民党中很有些有权力者，是愿意共产的，他们那时争先恐后的将自己的子女送到苏联去学习，便是一个证据，因为中国的父母，孩子是他们第一等宝贵的人，他们决不至于使他们去练习做剿灭的材料。不过权力者们好像有一种错误的思想，他们以为中国只管共产，但他们自己的权力却可以更大，财产和姨太太也更多；至少，也总不会比不共产还要坏。
When the Kuomintang changed from cooperation to extermination of the Communist Party, some people said that the Kuomintang could not use them before, and when the Northern Expedition was about to be completed, it was a predetermined plan to implement the extermination. But I thought it wasn't true. There are many powerful people in the Kuomintang who are willing to be communist, and they rushed to send their children to the Soviet Union to study at that time, which is a proof, because Chinese parents and children are their first precious people, and they will never let them practice extermination materials. However, the powerful seem to have a wrong idea, they think that China only cares about communism, but their own power can be greater, and they have more property and concubines; At least, it is no worse than non-communism.我们有一个传说。大约二千年之前，有一个刘先生，积了许多苦功，修成神仙，可以和他的夫人一同飞上天去了，然而他的太太不愿意。为什么呢？她舍不得住着的老房子，养着的鸡和狗。刘先生只好去恳求上帝，设法连老房子，鸡，狗，和他们俩全都弄到天上去，这才做成了神仙。也就是大大的变化了，其实却等于并没有变化。假使共产主义国里可以毫不改动那些权力者的老样，或者还要阔，他们是一定赞成的。然而后来的情形证明了共产主义没有上帝那样的可以通融办理，于是才下了剿灭的决心。孩子自然是第一等宝贵的人，但自己究竟更宝贵。
We have a legend. About 2,000 years ago, there was a Mr. Liu, who had accumulated a lot of hard work and cultivated into an immortal, and could fly to heaven with his wife, but his wife was unwilling. Why? She was reluctant to live in the old house, the chickens and dogs she raised. Mr. Liu had to beg God and managed to get the old house, chickens, dogs, and both of them to heaven, so that he became a god. That is, it has changed a lot, but in fact, it means that there is no change. If the communist country could remain unchanged as those in power, or if it was broader, they would definitely agree. However, later circumstances proved that communism was not as accommodating as God, so he made up his mind to eradicate it. Children are naturally the most precious people, but they are more precious.于是许多青年们，共产主义者及其嫌疑者，左倾者及其嫌疑者，以及这些嫌疑者的朋友们，就到处用自己的血来洗自己的错误，以及那些权力者们的错误。权力者们的先前的错误，是受了他们的欺骗的，所以必得用他们的血来洗干净。然而另有许多青年们，却还不知底细，在苏联学毕，骑着骆驼高高兴兴的由蒙古回来了。我记得有一个外国旅行者还曾经看得酸心，她说，他们竟不知道现在在祖国等候他们的，却已经是绞架。
So many young people, communists and their suspects, leftists and their suspects, and friends of these suspects, went everywhere with their own blood to wash their mistakes and the mistakes of those in power. The previous mistakes of those in power have been deceived by them, so they must be washed clean with their blood. However, many other young people, who still don't know the details, have returned from Mongolia happily on camels after studying in the Soviet Union. I remember a foreign traveler who was sad to see it, and she said that they didn't know that what was waiting for them in their motherland was already a gallows.不错，是绞架。但绞架还不算坏，简简单单的只用绞索套住了颈子，这是属于优待的。而且也并非个个走上了绞架，他们之中的一些人，还有一条路，是使劲的拉住了那颈子套上了绞索的朋友的脚。这就是用事实来证明他内心的忏悔，能忏悔的人，精神是极其崇高的。
Not bad, it's a gallows. But the gallows is not bad, it is simply wrapped around the neck with a noose, which is preferential treatment. And not all of them walked on the gallows, some of them, there was a way to grab the feet of the noose by the neck. This is to use facts to prove his inner repentance, and those who can repent are extremely noble in spirit.

中国文坛上的鬼魅

二

中国文坛上的鬼魅

Two从此而不知忏悔的共产主义者，在中国就成了该杀的罪人。而且这罪人，却又给了别人无穷的便利；他们成为商品，可以卖钱，给人添出职业来了。而且学校的风潮，恋爱的纠纷，也总有一面被指为共产党，就是罪人，因此极容易的得到解决。如果有谁和有钱的诗人辩论，那诗人的最后的结论是：共产党反对资产阶级，我有钱，他反对我，所以他是共产党。于是诗神就坐了金的坦克车，凯旋了。
Since then, communists who do not know how to repent have become sinners to be killed in China. And this sinner has given infinite convenience to others; They become commodities, can be sold for money, and add a career to people. Moreover, there is always a side of school trends and love disputes that are accused of being communists and sinners, so they are very easy to resolve. If anyone debates with a rich poet, the poet's final conclusion is: The Communist Party is against the bourgeoisie, I have money, he is against me, so he is a Communist. So the poet got into Jin's tank and returned triumphantly.但是，革命青年的血，却浇灌了革命文学的萌芽，在文学方面，倒比先前更其增加了革命性。政府里很有些从外国学来，或在本国学得的富于智识的青年，他们自然是觉得的，最先用的是极普通的手段：禁止书报，压迫作者，终于是杀戮作者，五个左翼青年作家就做了这示威的牺牲。然而这事件又并没有公表，他们很知道，这事是可以做，却不可以说的。古人也早经说过，“以马上得天下，不能以马上治之。”所以要剿灭革命文学，还得用文学的武器。
However, the blood of revolutionary youth watered the germ of revolutionary literature, and in terms of literature, it was more revolutionary than before. There are many intellectualized young people in the government who have learned from foreign countries or at home, and they naturally feel that the first to use very ordinary means is to ban books and newspapers, oppress authors, and finally kill authors, and five young left-wing writers made sacrifices in this demonstration. However, this incident was not made public, and they knew very well that this could be done, but not said. The ancients also said long ago, "If you win the world right away, you can't rule it right away." Therefore, to eradicate revolutionary literature, we must use literary weapons.作为这武器而出现的，是所谓“民族文学”。他们研究了世界上各人种的脸色，决定了脸色一致的人种，就得取同一的行为，所以黄色的无产阶级，不该和黄色的有产阶级斗争，却该和白色的无产阶级斗争。他们还想到了成吉思汗，作为理想的标本，描写他的孙子拔都汗，怎样率领了许多黄色的民族，侵入斡罗斯，将他们的文化摧残，贵族和平民都做了奴隶。
As a weapon, it is the so-called "national literature". They studied the faces of all races in the world and decided that people with the same face had to behave the same way, so the yellow proletariat should not fight with the yellow proletariat, but with the white proletariat. They also thought of Genghis Khan, as an ideal specimen, describing how his grandson Batu Khan led many yellow peoples, invaded the Oros, destroyed their culture, and enslaved both nobles and commoners.中国人跟了蒙古的可汗去打仗，其实是不能算中国民族的光荣的，但为了扑灭斡罗斯，他们不能不这样做，因为我们的权力者，现在已经明白了古之斡罗斯，即今之苏联，他们的主义，是决不能增加自己的权力，财富和姨太太的了。然而，现在的拔都汗是谁呢？
The Chinese followed the Mongolian khan to fight, in fact, it cannot be regarded as the glory of the Chinese nation, but in order to extinguish the Oros, they had to do so, because our powerful people have now understood that the ancient Oros, that is, the present-day Soviet Union, their doctrine must not increase their power, wealth and concubines. However, who is Batu Khan now?一九三一年九月，日本占据了东三省，这确是中国人将要跟着别人去毁坏苏联的序曲，民族主义文学家们可以满足的了。但一般的民众却以为目前的失去东三省，比将来的毁坏苏联还紧要，他们激昂了起来。于是民族主义文学家也只好顺风转舵，改为对于这事件的啼哭，叫喊了。许多热心的青年们往南京去请愿，要求出兵；然而这须经过极辛苦的试验，火车不准坐，露宿了几日，才给他们坐到南京，有许多是只好用自己的脚走。到得南京，却不料就遇到一大队曾经训练过的“民众”，手里是棍子，皮鞭，手枪，迎头一顿打，使他们只好脸上或身上肿起几块，当作结果，垂头丧气的回家，有些人还从此找不到，有的是在水里淹死了，据报上说，那是他们自己掉下去的。
In September 1931, Japan occupied the three eastern provinces, which was indeed a prelude to the Chinese following others to destroy the Soviet Union, and nationalist writers could be satisfied. But the general public thought that the current loss of the three eastern provinces was more important than the destruction of the Soviet Union in the future, and they became agitated. So the nationalist writers had no choice but to turn the rudder and cry about this incident instead. Many enthusiastic young people went to Nanjing to petition and ask for troops; However, this had to go through extremely hard experiments, and they were not allowed to sit on the train, and they slept in the open for a few days before they were seated in Nanjing, and many of them had to walk on their own feet. When they arrived in Nanjing, they unexpectedly encountered a large group of "people" who had been trained, with sticks, leather whips, and pistols in their hands, and beat them head-on, so that they had to swell a few pieces on their faces or bodies, and as a result, they went home dejectedly.民族主义文学家们的啼哭也从此收了场，他们的影子也看不见了，他们已经完成了送丧的任务。这正和上海的葬式行列是一样的，出去的时候，有杂乱的乐队，有唱歌似的哭声，但那目的是在将悲哀埋掉，不再记忆起来；目的一达，大家走散，再也不会成什么行列的了。
The cries of nationalist writers have since ended, their shadows are no longer visible, and they have completed the task of mourning. This is the same as the funeral procession in Shanghai, when you go out, there are chaotic bands and crying like singing, but the purpose is to bury the sorrow and no longer remember it; Once the goal is achieved, everyone is separated and will never be in the ranks again.

中国文坛上的鬼魅

三

中国文坛上的鬼魅

Three但是，革命文学是没有动摇的，还发达起来，读者们也更加相信了。
However, revolutionary literature has not wavered, it has developed, and readers have believed it even more.于是别一方面，就出现了所谓“第三种人”，是当然决非左翼，但又不是右翼，超然于左右之外的人物。他们以为文学是永久的，政治的现象是暂时的，所以文学不能和政治相关，一相关，就失去它的永久性，中国将从此没有伟大的作品。不过他们，忠实于文学的“第三种人”，也写不出伟大的作品。为什么呢？是因为左翼批评家不懂得文学，为邪说所迷，对于他们的好作品，都加以严酷而不正确的批评，打击得他们写不出来了。所以左翼批评家，是中国文学的刽子手。
So on the other hand, the so-called "third kind of people" appeared, which are of course not left-wing, but not right-wing, and are transcendent to the left and right. They think that literature is permanent, and political phenomena are temporary, so literature cannot be related to politics, and once it is related, it will lose its permanence, and China will never have great works from now on. However, they, the "third kind of people" who are loyal to literature, cannot write great works. Why? It is because left-wing critics do not understand literature, are fascinated by heresy, and criticize their good works harshly and incorrectly, which hits them so hard that they cannot write them. Therefore, left-wing critics are the executioners of Chinese literature.至于对于政府的禁止刊物，杀戮作家呢，他们不谈，因为这是属于政治的，一谈，就失去他们的作品的永久性了；况且禁压，或杀戮“中国文学的刽子手”之流，倒正是“第三种人”的永久的文学，伟大的作品的保护者。
As for the government's ban on publications and the killing of writers, they don't talk about it, because it is political, and once they talk about it, they lose the permanence of their works; Moreover, the ban on suppression, or the killing of the "executioners of Chinese literature", is the permanent literature of the "third kind of people" and the protector of great works.这一种微弱的假惺惺的哭诉，虽然也是一种武器，但那力量自然是很小的，革命文学并不为它所击退。“民族主义文学”已经自灭，“第三种文学”又站不起来，这时候，只好又来一次真的武器了。
Although this kind of weak and fake cry is also a weapon, its power is naturally very small, and revolutionary literature is not repelled by it. "Nationalist literature" has self-destructed, and the "third literature" cannot stand up, so it has no choice but to use a real weapon again.一九三三年十一月，上海的艺华影片公司突然被一群人们所袭击，捣毁得一塌胡涂了。他们是极有组织的，吹一声哨，动手，又一声哨，停止，又一声哨，散开。临走还留下了传单，说他们的所以征伐，是为了这公司为共产党所利用。而且所征伐的还不止影片公司，又蔓延到书店方面去，大则一群人闯进去捣毁一切，小则不知从那里飞来一块石子，敲碎了值洋二百的窗玻璃。那理由，自然也是因为这书店为共产党所利用。高价的窗玻璃的不安全，是使书店主人非常心痛的。几天之后，就有“文学家”将自己的“好作品”来卖给他了，他知道印出来是没有人看的，但得买下，因为价钱不过和一块窗玻璃相当，而可以免去第二块石子，省了修理窗门的工作。
In November 1933, Shanghai's Yihua Film Company was suddenly attacked by a group of people and destroyed to a complete mess. They are extremely organized, blowing a whistle, doing it, whistling again, stopping, whistling again, dispersing. Before leaving, they also left leaflets saying that their conquest was for the company to be used by the Communist Party. And it was not only the film companies that were conquered, but also the bookstores, with a group of people breaking in and destroying everything, and a small one flying a stone from there and smashing the window glass worth two hundred oceans. The reason is naturally because the bookstore is used by the Communist Party. The insecurity of expensive window panes is very heartbreaking for bookstore owners. A few days later, a "writer" sold his "good works" to him, and he knew that no one would read them when they were printed, but he had to buy them, because the price was only the same as a piece of window glass, and the second stone could be eliminated and the work of repairing the window door could be saved.

中国文坛上的鬼魅

四

中国文坛上的鬼魅

Four压迫书店，真成为最好的战略了。
Oppressing bookstores has really become the best strategy.但是，几块石子是还嫌不够的。中央宣传委员会也查禁了一大批书，计一百四十九种，凡是销行较多的，几乎都包括在里面。中国左翼作家的作品，自然大抵是被禁止的，而且又禁到译本。要举出几个作者来，那就是高尔基（Gorky），卢那卡尔斯基（Lunacharsky），斐定（Fedin），法捷耶夫（Fadeev），绥拉斐摩维支（Serafimovich），辛克莱（Upton Sinclair），甚而至于梅迪林克（Maeterlinck），梭罗古勃（Sologub），斯忒林培克（Strindberg）。
However, a few stones are not enough. The Central Propaganda Committee also banned a large number of books, totaling 149 types, almost all of which were sold well. The works of Chinese left-wing writers are naturally banned, and they are also banned from translation. To name a few, they are Gorky, Lunacharsky, Fedin, Fadeev, Serafimovich, Upton Sinclair, and even Maeterlinck, Sologub, and Strindberg.这真使出版家很为难，他们有的是立刻将书缴出，烧毁了，有的却还想补救，和官厅去商量，结果是免除了一部分。为减少将来的出版的困难起见，官员和出版家还开了一个会议。在这会议上，有几个“第三种人”因为要保护好的文学和出版家的资本，便以杂志编辑者的资格提议，请采用日本的办法，在付印之前，先将原稿审查，加以删改，以免别人也被左翼作家的作品所连累而禁止，或印出后始行禁止而使出版家受亏。这提议很为各方面所满足，当即被采用了，虽然并不是光荣的拔都汗的老方法。
This really made it difficult for publishers, some of them immediately handed over the book and burned it, but some still wanted to remedy it, and discussed it with the government, and the result was that part of it was exempted. In order to reduce the difficulty of future publication, officials and publishers also held a meeting. At this meeting, several "third people" proposed in their capacity as magazine editors to adopt the Japanese method of reviewing and editing the manuscript before printing it, so that others would not be implicated in the works of left-wing writers and banned after printing, and the publisher would suffer losses. This proposal was very satisfactory to all parties, and was immediately adopted, although it was not the old method of the glorious Batu Khan.而且也即开始了实行，今年七月，在上海就设立了书籍杂志检查处，许多“文学家”的失业问题消失了，还有些改悔的革命作家们，反对文学和政治相关的“第三种人”们，也都坐上了检查官的椅子。他们是很熟悉文坛情形的；头脑没有纯粹官僚的胡涂，一点讽刺，一句反语，他们都比较的懂得所含的意义，而且用文学的笔来涂抹，无论如何总没有创作的烦难，于是那成绩，听说是非常之好了。
In July of this year, the Book and Magazine Inspection Office was set up in Shanghai, and the unemployment problem of many "literary scholars" disappeared, and some repentant revolutionary writers, who opposed literature and politics, also sat in the procurator's chair. They are very familiar with the situation in the literary world; There is no pure bureaucratic nonsense in the mind, a little sarcasm, a single irony, they all understand the meaning of the containment, and use the pen of literature to smear, no matter what, there is always no trouble of creation, so the results are said to be very good.但是，他们的引日本为榜样，是错误的。日本固然不准谈阶级斗争，却并不说世界上并无阶级斗争，而中国则说世界上其实无所谓阶级斗争，都是马克思捏造出来的，所以这不准谈，为的是守护真理。日本固然也禁止，删削书籍杂志，但在被删削之处，是可以留下空白的，使读者一看就明白这地方是受了删削，而中国却不准留空白，必须连起来，在读者眼前好像还是一篇完整的文章，只是作者在说着意思不明的昏话。这种在现在的中国读者面前说昏话，是弗理契（Friche），卢那卡尔斯基他们也在所不免的。
However, they are wrong to cite Japan as an example. Although Japan is not allowed to talk about class struggle, it does not say that there is no class struggle in the world, while China says that there is actually no class struggle in the world, it is all fabricated by Marx, so this is not allowed to be talked about, in order to protect the truth. Although Japan also prohibits the deletion of books and magazines, it is possible to leave blanks where they are deleted, so that readers can understand at a glance that this place has been deleted, but China is not allowed to leave blanks, and must be connected. This kind of foolish talk in front of today's Chinese readers is Friche, Lunakarski and others are also unavoidable.于是出版家的资本安全了，“第三种人”的旗子不见了，他们也在暗地里使劲的拉那上了绞架的同业的脚，而没有一种刊物可以描出他们的原形，因为他们正握着涂抹的笔尖，生杀的权力。在读者，只看见刊物的消沉，作品的衰落，和外国一向有名的前进的作家，今年也大抵忽然变了低能者而已。
So the publishers' capital was safe, the banner of the "third kind of people" was gone, and they were secretly trying hard to pull the feet of their colleagues on the gallows, and no publication could depict them in their original form, because they were holding the tip of the pen and the power of life and death. Readers only see the depression of publications, the decline of works, and the writers who have always been famous in foreign countries have suddenly become imbeciles this year.然而在实际上，文学界的阵线却更加分明了。蒙蔽是不能长久的，接着起来的又将是一场血腥的战斗。
In reality, however, the front line of the literary world is more distinct. Blindness cannot last long, and what follows will be a bloody battle.十一月二十一日。
November 21.

关于新文字　——答问

关于新文字About the new text ——答问 - Q&A
比较，是最好的事情。当没有知道拼音字之前，就不会想到象形字的难；当没有看见拉丁化的新文字之前，就很难明确的断定以前的注音字母和罗马字拼法，也还是麻烦的，不合实用，也没有前途的文字。
Comparison is the best thing. When you don't know pinyin characters, you won't think of the difficulty of hieroglyphs; Before seeing the new Latinized script, it is difficult to clearly conclude that the previous phonetic alphabet and Roman alphabet spelling are still troublesome, impractical and have no future.方块汉字真是愚民政策的利器，不但劳苦大众没有学习和学会的可能，就是有钱有势的特权阶级，费时一二十年，终于学不会的也多得很。最近，宣传古文的好处的教授，竟将古文的句子也点错了，就是一个证据——他自己也没有懂。不过他们可以装作懂得的样子，来胡说八道，欺骗不明真相的人。
Not only is it impossible for the working masses to learn and learn, but the rich and powerful privileged class has spent a decade or two, and finally there are many things that cannot be learned. Recently, a professor who promoted the benefits of ancient texts actually clicked the wrong sentences in ancient texts, which is a proof - he himself did not understand it. But they can pretend to understand and talk nonsense to deceive people who don't know the truth.所以，汉字也是中国劳苦大众身上的一个结核，病菌都潜伏在里面，倘不首先除去它，结果只有自己死。先前也曾有过学者，想出拼音字来，要大家容易学，也就是更容易教训，并且延长他们服役的生命，但那些字都还很繁琐，因为学者总忘不了官话，四声，以及这是学者创造出来的字，必需有学者的气息。这回的新文字却简易得远了，又是根据于实生活的，容易学，有用，可以用这对大家说话，听大家的话，明白道理，学得技艺，这才是劳苦大众自己的东西，首先的唯一的活路。
Therefore, Chinese characters are also a tuberculosis in the Chinese working masses, and germs lurk in it, and if you don't get rid of it first, you will only die. There have been scholars before who came up with pinyin characters to make it easier for everyone to learn, that is, to teach lessons, and prolong their life in service, but those words are still very cumbersome, because scholars always can't forget the official language, four tones, and these are words created by scholars, and they must have the breath of scholars. This time, the new text is far simpler, and it is based on real life, easy to learn, useful, you can use this to talk to everyone, listen to everyone, understand the truth, learn skills, this is the work of the masses themselves, the only way to live in the first place.现在正在中国试验的新文字，给南方人读起来，是不能全懂的。现在的中国，本来还不是一种语言所能统一，所以必须另照各地方的言语来拼，待将来再图沟通。反对拉丁化文字的人，往往将这当作一个大缺点，以为反而使中国的文字不统一了，但他却抹杀了方块汉字本为大多数中国人所不识，有些知识阶级也并不真识的事实。
The new text that is now being tested in China cannot be fully understood by southerners. In today's China, it is not yet unified by one language, so it must be spelled according to the language of each place, and we will try to communicate in the future. Those who oppose Latinized script often regard this as a major shortcoming, thinking that it will make the Chinese script ununified, but he erases the fact that the square Chinese characters are unknown to most Chinese, and some intellectual classes do not really know them.然而他们却深知道新文字对于劳苦大众有利，所以在弥漫着白色恐怖的地方，这新文字是一定要受摧残的。现在连并非新文字，而只是更接近口语的“大众语”，也在受着苛酷的压迫和摧残。中国的劳苦大众虽然并不识字，但特权阶级却还嫌他们太聪明了，正竭力的弄麻木他们的思索机关呢，例如用飞机掷下炸弹去，用机关枪送过子弹去，用刀斧将他们的颈子砍断，就都是的。
However, they know that the new text is beneficial to the toiling masses, so in a place where white terror is pervasive, this new text must be destroyed. Now even the "popular language", which is not a new script, but only closer to colloquial language, is also being severely oppressed and destroyed. Although the toiling masses in China are illiterate, the privileged class still thinks they are too smart and are trying their best to numb their thinking mechanisms, such as dropping bombs with airplanes, sending bullets with machine guns, and cutting off their necks with knives and axes.十二月九日。
December 9th.

病后杂谈

病后杂谈

病后杂谈

After the illness, we chatted一
One生一点病，的确也是一种福气。不过这里有两个必要条件：一要病是小病，并非什么霍乱吐泻，黑死病，或脑膜炎之类；二要至少手头有一点现款，不至于躺一天，就饿一天。这二者缺一，便是俗人，不足与言生病之雅趣的。
Being a little sick is indeed a blessing. However, there are two necessary conditions here: first, the disease is a minor disease, not cholera, vomiting, black death, or meningitis; Second, you must have at least a little cash on hand, so as not to lie down for a day and starve for a day. If one of these two is missing, it is a layman, and it is not enough to talk about the elegance of being sick.我曾经爱管闲事，知道过许多人，这些人物，都怀着一个大愿。大愿，原是每个人都有的，不过有些人却模模胡胡，自己抓不住，说不出。他们中最特别的有两位：一位是愿天下的人都死掉，只剩下他自己和一个好看的姑娘，还有一个卖大饼的；另一位是愿秋天薄暮，吐半口血，两个侍儿扶着，恹恹的到阶前去看秋海棠。这种志向，一看好像离奇，其实却照顾得很周到。第一位姑且不谈他罢，第二位的“吐半口血”，就有很大的道理。才子本来多病，但要“多”，就不能重，假使一吐就是一碗或几升，一个人的血，能有几回好吐呢？过不几天，就雅不下去了。
I used to be nosy and knew many people, these characters, all had a big wish. Great wishes are originally something that everyone has, but some people are foolish, they can't grasp it, they can't say it. There are two special of them: one who wants everyone in the world to die, leaving only himself and a beautiful girl, and the other who sells flatbread; The other is willing to vomit half a mouthful of blood at dusk, supported by two waiters, and went to the steps to see the begonias. This kind of ambition may seem bizarre at first glance, but it is actually very thoughtful. Let's not talk about him for the first time, the second person "vomiting half a mouthful of blood" has a lot of truth. If a vomit is a bowl or a few liters, how many times can a person's blood be easy to vomit? After a few days, it won't go any longer.我一向很少生病，上月却生了一点点。开初是每晚发热，没有力，不想吃东西，一礼拜不肯好，只得看医生。医生说是流行性感冒。好罢，就是流行性感冒。但过了流行性感冒一定退热的时期，我的热却还不退。医生从他那大皮包里取出玻璃管来，要取我的血液，我知道他在疑心我生伤寒病了，自己也有些发愁。然而他第二天对我说，血里没有一粒伤寒菌；于是注意的听肺，平常；听心，上等。这似乎很使他为难。我说，也许是疲劳罢；他也不甚反对，只是沉吟着说，但是疲劳的发热，还应该低一点。……
I have rarely been sick, but I gave birth a little last month. At the beginning, I had a fever every night, no strength, didn't want to eat, and refused to get better for a week, so I had to see a doctor. Doctors say it's influenza. Okay, it's influenza. But after the period when the flu must have subsided, my fever did not subside. The doctor took out a glass tube from his big leather bag to take my blood, and I knew he was suspicious that I had typhoid fever, and I was a little worried. However, he told me the next day that there was not a single typhoid bacteria in his blood; So pay attention to listening to the lungs, usually; Listen to the heart, superior. This seemed to be embarrassing for him. I said, maybe it's fatigue; He didn't object much, just muttered and said, but the fever of fatigue should be lower. ……好几回检查了全体，没有死症，不至于呜呼哀哉是明明白白的，不过是每晚发热，没有力，不想吃东西而已，这真无异于“吐半口血”，大可享生病之福了。因为既不必写遗嘱，又没有大痛苦，然而可以不看正经书，不管柴米账，玩他几天，名称又好听，叫作“养病”。从这一天起，我就自己觉得好像有点儿“雅”了；那一位愿吐半口血的才子，也就是那时躺着无事，忽然记了起来的。
After checking all of them several times, there was no death, and it was clear that they would not be sad, but they had a fever every night, had no strength, and didn't want to eat, which was really tantamount to "vomiting half a mouthful of blood", and they could enjoy the blessing of being sick. Because you don't have to write a will, and there is no great pain, but you can not read the serious book, regardless of the firewood and rice account, play with him for a few days, and the name is good, called "recuperation". From this day on, I felt a little "elegant"; The talented man who was willing to vomit half a mouthful of blood suddenly remembered it when he was lying down and had nothing to do.光是胡思乱想也不是事，不如看点不劳精神的书，要不然，也不成其为“养病”。像这样的时候，我赞成中国纸的线装书，这也就是有点儿“雅”起来了的证据。洋装书便于插架，便于保存，现在不但有洋装二十五六史，连《四部备要》也硬领而皮靴了，——原是不为无见的。但看洋装书要年富力强，正襟危坐，有严肃的态度。假使你躺着看，那就好像两只手捧着一块大砖头，不多工夫，就两臂酸麻，只好叹一口气，将它放下。所以，我在叹气之后，就去寻线装书。
Just thinking wildly is not a thing, it is better to read some books that do not require effort, otherwise, it will not be "recuperation". At times like this, I am in favor of Chinese paper wire-bound books, which is evidence that it has become a bit "elegant". Dress books are easy to insert and preserve, and now there are not only twenty-five or six histories of dresses, but even the "Four Essentials" are also hard collars and leather boots,—— which is not unseen. But when reading a dress book, you must be in your prime, sit upright, and have a serious attitude. If you lie down and look at it, it's like holding a big brick in both hands, and without much effort, your arms are sore and numb, so you have to sigh and put it down. So, after I sighed, I went to find a thread to bind the book.一寻，寻到了久不见面的《世说新语》之类一大堆，躺着来看，轻飘飘的毫不费力了，魏晋人的豪放潇洒的风姿，也仿佛在眼前浮动。由此想起阮嗣宗的听到步兵厨善于酿酒，就求为步兵校尉；陶渊明的做了彭泽令，就教官田都种秫，以便做酒，因了太太的抗议，这才种了一点。这真是天趣盎然，决非现在的“站在云端里呐喊”者们所能望其项背。但是，“雅”要想到适可而止，再想便不行。例如阮嗣宗可以求做步兵校尉，陶渊明补了彭泽令，他们的地位，就不是一个平常人，要“雅”，也还是要地位。“采菊东篱下，悠然见南山”是渊明的好句，但我们在上海学起来可就难了。没有南山，我们还可以改作“悠然见洋房”或“悠然见烟囱”的，然而要租一所院子里有点竹篱，可以种菊的房子，租钱就每月总得一百两，水电在外；巡捕捐按房租百分之十四，每月十四两。单是这两项，每月就是一百十四两，每两作一元四角算，等于一百五十九元六。近来的文稿又不值钱，每千字最低的只有四五角，因为是学陶渊明的雅人的稿子，现在算他每千字三大元罢，但标点，洋文，空白除外。那么，单单为了采菊，他就得每月译作净五万三千二百字。吃饭呢？要另外想法子生发，否则，他只好“饥来驱我去，不知竟何之”了。
After searching, I found a lot of "The New Words of the World" that I hadn't seen for a long time, lying down and looking at it, it was light and effortless, and the bold and chic demeanor of the Wei and Jin people seemed to float in front of my eyes. From this, I remembered that Ruan Sizong heard that the infantry chef was good at making wine, so he asked to be an infantry captain; Tao Yuanming made Peng Zeling and planted sorghum in the instructor's field to make wine, but because of his wife's protest, he planted a little. This is really interesting, and it is by no means what the current "standing in the clouds and shouting" can match. However, "Ya" must think of moderation, and then think about it. For example, Ruan Sizong could ask to be an infantry captain, and Tao Yuanming made up for Peng Zeling, and their status was not an ordinary person, and they still wanted to be "elegant" or status. "Picking chrysanthemums under the east fence and leisurely seeing Nanshan" is Yuanming's good sentence, but it is difficult for us to learn it in Shanghai. Without Nanshan, we can also change to "leisurely see the bungalow" or "leisurely see the chimney", but if you want to rent a house with a bamboo fence in the yard and can plant chrysanthemums, the rent will cost a total of 100 taels per month, and water and electricity will be outside; The patrol pays 14% of the rent, which is 14% per month. These two items alone are 114 taels per month, and each tael is calculated as one yuan and four corners, which is equal to one hundred and fifty-nine yuan six. Recent manuscripts are not valuable, and the lowest is only four or five corners per thousand words, because it is a manuscript of a gentleman who learned from Tao Yuanming, and now he is counted as three yuan per thousand words, except for punctuation, foreign text, and blanks. Then, just to pick chrysanthemums, he had to translate a net 53,200 words per month. What about eating? If you want to think of something else, otherwise, he will have to "drive me away with hunger, and I don't know where to go".“雅”要地位，也要钱，古今并不两样的，但古代的买雅，自然比现在便宜；办法也并不两样，书要摆在书架上，或者抛几本在地板上，酒杯要摆在桌子上，但算盘却要收在抽屉里，或者最好是在肚子里。
"Ya" wants status, but also money, ancient and modern are not the same, but the ancient buy Ya is naturally cheaper than now; The method is no different, books should be placed on the shelves, or a few books should be thrown on the floor, wine glasses should be placed on the table, but the abacus should be stored in a drawer, or preferably in the stomach.此之谓“空灵”。
This is called "ethereal".

病后杂谈

二

病后杂谈

Two为了“雅”，本来不想说这些话的。后来一想，这于“雅”并无伤，不过是在证明我自己的“俗”。王夷甫口不言钱，还是一个不干不净人物，雅人打算盘，当然也无损其为雅人。不过他应该有时收起算盘，或者最妙是暂时忘却算盘，那么，那时的一言一笑，就都是灵机天成的一言一笑，如果念念不忘世间的利害，那可就成为“杭育杭育派”了。这关键，只在一者能够忽而放开，一者却是永远执着，因此也就大有了雅俗和高下之分。我想，这和时而“敦伦”者不失为圣贤，连白天也在想女人的就要被称为“登徒子”的道理，大概是一样的。
For the sake of "Ya", I didn't want to say these words. Later, when I thought about it, this was not harmful to "elegance", but it was just proving my own "vulgarity". Wang Yifu doesn't talk about money, he is still a person who doesn't do anything, and the elegant person plans to plate, of course, it doesn't hurt him to be an elegant person. However, he should put away the abacus from time to time, or the best thing is to forget the abacus temporarily, then, every word and smile at that time is a clever word and smile, if you don't forget the interests of the world, then it will become the "Hangyu Hangyu School". The key to this is that only one can suddenly let go, but the other is forever persistent, so there is a big distinction between elegance and vulgarity. I think this is probably the same as the fact that those who sometimes "Dunlun" are sages, and even those who think about women during the day should be called "disciples".所以我恐怕只好自己承认“俗”，因为随手翻了一通《世说新语》，看过“隅跃清池”的时候，千不该万不该的竟从“养病”想到“养病费”上去了，于是一骨碌爬起来，写信讨版税，催稿费。写完之后，觉得和魏晋人有点隔膜，自己想，假使此刻有阮嗣宗或陶渊明在面前出现，我们也一定谈不来的。于是另换了几本书，大抵是明末清初的野史，时代较近，看起来也许较有趣味。第一本拿在手里的是《蜀碧》。
So I'm afraid I have to admit the "vulgarity" myself, because I casually flipped through "The New Words of the World", and when I read "Yu Yue Qingchi", I thought of "recuperation" to "medical expenses", so I got up and wrote a letter asking for royalties and urging fees. After writing, I felt a bit separated from the Wei and Jin people, and I thought to myself, if Ruan Sizong or Tao Yuanming appeared in front of me at this moment, we would definitely not be able to talk about it. So I changed a few books, probably the wild history of the late Ming and early Qing dynasties, which are closer and may look more interesting. The first book in my hand is "Shu Bi".这是蜀宾从成都带来送我的，还有一部《蜀龟鉴》，都是讲张献忠祸蜀的书，其实是不但四川人，而是凡有中国人都该翻一下的著作，可惜刻的太坏，错字颇不少。翻了一遍，在卷三里看见了这样的一条——
This is a book brought to me by Shu Bin from Chengdu, and there is also a "Shu Turtle Mirror", which is a book about Zhang Xianzhong's disaster for Shu, in fact, it is not only Sichuan people, but all Chinese should turn over it, but unfortunately it is too badly engraved, and there are many typos. I flipped through it and saw such a piece in the third volume -“又，剥皮者，从头至尻，一缕裂之，张于前，如鸟展翅，率逾日始绝。有即毙者，行刑之人坐死。”
“又，剥皮者，从头至尻，一缕裂之，张于前，如鸟展翅，率逾日始绝。 有即毙者，行刑之人坐死。 ”也还是为了自己生病的缘故罢，这时就想到了人体解剖。医术和虐刑，是都要生理学和解剖学智识的。中国却怪得很，固有的医书上的人身五脏图，真是草率错误到见不得人，但虐刑的方法，则往往好像古人早懂得了现代的科学。例如罢，谁都知道从周到汉，有一种施于男子的“宫刑”，也叫“腐刑”，次于“大辟”一等。对于女性就叫“幽闭”，向来不大有人提起那方法，但总之，是决非将她关起来，或者将它缝起来。近时好像被我查出一点大概来了，那办法的凶恶，妥当，而又合乎解剖学，真使我不得不吃惊。但妇科的医书呢？几乎都不明白女性下半身的解剖学的构造，他们只将肚子看作一个大口袋，里面装着莫名其妙的东西。
It was also because of his illness, and then he thought of human anatomy. Medical skills and torture require physiological and anatomical knowledge. China is very strange, the inherent pictures of the internal organs of the human body in medical books are really sloppy and wrong, but the methods of torture often seem to have understood modern science long ago. For example, everyone knows that from the Zhou Dynasty to the Han Dynasty, there was a kind of "palace punishment" applied to men, also called "corrupt punishment", which is second only to the "death penalty". For women, it is called "claustrophobia", and no one has ever mentioned that method, but in short, it is absolutely necessary to lock her up or sew it up. Recently, it seems that I have found out a little about it, and I have to be surprised that the method is vicious, appropriate, and in line with the anatomy. But what about gynecological medical books? Almost no one understands the structure of the anatomy of the lower body of women, they only see the belly as a large pocket with inexplicable things in it.单说剥皮法，中国就有种种。上面所抄的是张献忠式；还有孙可望式，见于屈大均的《安龙逸史》，也是这回在病中翻到的。其时是永历六年，即清顺治九年，永历帝已经躲在安隆（那时改为安龙），秦王孙可望杀了陈邦传父子，御史李如月就弹劾他“擅杀勋将，无人臣礼”，皇帝反打了如月四十板。可是事情还不能完，又给孙党张应科知道了，就去报告了孙可望。
Talking about the peeling method alone, there are all kinds of things in China. The above copy is Zhang Xianzhong's style; There is also Sun Kewangshi, which is seen in Qu Dajun's "History of An Longyi", which was also turned over during his illness this time. At that time, it was the sixth year of Yongli, that is, the ninth year of Shunzhi in the Qing Dynasty, Emperor Yongli had already hid in Anlong (then changed to Anlong), the King of Qin Sun Kewang killed Chen Bangchuan and his son, and the imperial historian Li Ruyue impeached him for "killing meritorious generals without authorization, without courtesy", and the emperor hit Kisaragi forty boards. But the matter was not over yet, and Sun Dang Zhang Yingke found out about it, so he went to report to Sun Kewang.“可望得应科报，即令应科杀如月，剥皮示众。俄缚如月至朝门，有负石灰一筐，稻草一捆，置于其前。如月问，‘如何用此？’其人曰，‘是揎你的草！’如月叱曰，‘瞎奴！此株株是文章，节节是忠肠也！’既而应科立右角门阶，捧可望令旨，喝如月跪。如月叱曰，‘我是朝廷命官，岂跪贼令！？’乃步至中门，向阙再拜。……应科促令仆地，剖脊，及臀，如月大呼曰：‘死得快活，浑身清凉！’又呼可望名，大骂不绝。及断至手足，转前胸，犹微声恨骂；至颈绝而死。随以灰渍之，纫以线，后乃入草，移北城门通衢阁上，悬之。……”
“可望得应科报，即令应科杀如月，剥皮示众。 俄缚如月至朝门，有负石灰一筐，稻草一捆，置于其前。 如月问，‘如何用此？’其人曰，‘是揎你的草！’如月叱曰，‘瞎奴！此株株是文章，节节是忠肠也！’既而应科立右角门阶，捧可望令旨，喝如月跪。 如月叱曰，‘我是朝廷命官，岂跪贼令！？’乃步至中门，向阙再拜。 …… 应科促令仆地，剖脊，及臀，如月大呼曰：‘死得快活，浑身清凉！’又呼可望名，大骂不绝。 及断至手足，转前胸，犹微声恨骂；至颈绝而死。 随以灰渍之，纫以线，后乃入草，移北城门通衢阁上，悬之。 ……”张献忠的自然是“流贼”式；孙可望虽然也是流贼出身，但这时已是保明拒清的柱石，封为秦王，后来降了满洲，还是封为义王，所以他所用的其实是官式。明初，永乐皇帝剥那忠于建文帝的景清的皮，也就是用这方法的。大明一朝，以剥皮始，以剥皮终，可谓始终不变；至今在绍兴戏文里和乡下人的嘴上，还偶然可以听到“剥皮揎草”的话，那皇泽之长也就可想而知了。
Zhang Xianzhong's nature is a "thief" style; Although Sun Kewang was also born as a bandit, he was already a pillar of Baoming and Qing at this time, and was named King of Qin, and later surrendered to Manchuria, or was named King of Righteousness, so what he used was actually an official style. At the beginning of the Ming Dynasty, the Yongle Emperor peeled the skin of Jingqing, who was loyal to Emperor Jianwen, and used this method. The Ming Dynasty began with the peeling of the skin and ended with the peeling, which can be said to have never changed; To this day, in Shaoxing dramas and the mouths of country people, you can occasionally hear the words "peeling and pulling grass", and the length of Huangze can be imagined.真也无怪有些慈悲心肠人不愿意看野史，听故事；有些事情，真也不像人世，要令人毛骨悚然，心里受伤，永不全愈的。残酷的事实尽有，最好莫如不闻，这才可以保全性灵，也是“是以君子远庖厨也”的意思。比灭亡略早的晚明名家的潇洒小品在现在的盛行，实在也不能说是无缘无故。不过这一种心地晶莹的雅致，又必须有一种好境遇，李如月仆地“剖脊”，脸孔向下，原是一个看书的好姿势，但如果这时给他看袁中郎的《广庄》，我想他是一定不要看的。这时他的性灵有些儿不对，不懂得真文艺了。
No wonder some compassionate people are unwilling to read wild history and listen to stories; Some things are really not like the human world, they are creepy, hurt in their hearts, and will never heal. There are all the cruel facts, it is best not to hear them, so that the spirit can be preserved, and it also means "it is a gentleman who cooks far away". The chic sketches of the late Ming masters, which were slightly earlier than their demise, are prevalent now, and they cannot be said to be without reason. However, this kind of crystal elegance must have a good situation, Li Ruyue fell to the ground and "cut the spine", her face down, which was originally a good posture for reading a book, but if he showed him Yuan Zhonglang's "Guangzhuang" at this time, I think he would definitely not read it. At this time, his temperament was a little wrong, and he didn't understand true literature and art.然而，中国的士大夫是到底有点雅气的，例如李如月说的“株株是文章，节节是忠肠”，就很富于诗趣。临死做诗的，古今来也不知道有多少。直到近代，谭嗣同在临刑之前就做一绝“闭门投辖思张俭”，秋瑾女士也有一句“秋雨秋风愁杀人”，然而还雅得不够格，所以各种诗选里都不载，也不能卖钱。
However, Chinese scholars and officials are a bit elegant in the end, for example, Li Ruyue said, "Every plant is an article, and every part is a loyal intestine", which is very poetic. I don't know how many people who write poetry before they die in ancient and modern times. Until modern times, Tan Sitong made a unique "closed door to think about Zhang Jian" before his execution, and Ms. Qiu Jin also had a sentence "Autumn rain and autumn wind are sorrowful and murderous", but it was not elegant enough, so it was not included in various poetry anthologies, and it could not be sold for money.

病后杂谈

三

病后杂谈

Three清朝有灭族，有凌迟，却没有剥皮之刑，这是汉人应该惭愧的，但后来脍炙人口的虐政是文字狱。虽说文字狱，其实还含着许多复杂的原因，在这里不能细说；我们现在还直接受到流毒的，是他删改了许多古人的著作的字句，禁了许多明清人的书。
The Qing Dynasty had genocide, Ling Chi, but there was no punishment of skinning, which the Han people should be ashamed of, but later the popular tyranny was the literary prison. Although the literary prison actually contains many complex reasons, it cannot be detailed here; What we are still directly poisoned by is that he deleted the words and sentences of many ancient people's works and banned many books of the Ming and Qing dynasties.《安龙逸史》大约也是一种禁书，我所得的是吴兴刘氏嘉业堂的新刻本。他刻的前清禁书还不止这一种，屈大均的又有《翁山文外》；还有蔡显的《闲渔闲闲录》，是作者因此“斩立决”，还累及门生的，但我细看了一遍，却又寻不出什么忌讳。对于这种刻书家，我是很感激的，因为他传授给我许多知识——虽然从雅人看来，只是些庸俗不堪的知识。但是到嘉业堂去买书，可真难。我还记得，今年春天的一个下午，好容易在爱文义路找着了，两扇大铁门，叩了几下，门上开了一个小方洞，里面有中国门房，中国巡捕，白俄镖师各一位。巡捕问我来干什么的。我说买书。他说账房出去了，没有人管，明天再来罢。我告诉他我住得远，可能给我等一会呢？他说，不成！同时也堵住了那个小方洞。过了两天，我又去了，改作上午，以为此时账房也许不至于出去。但这回所得回答却更其绝望，巡捕曰：“书都没有了！卖完了！不卖了！”
"An Long Yi Shi" is probably also a kind of banned book, and what I got was a new engraving of Wuxing's Liu's Jiaye Hall. He engraved more than this kind of pre-Qing banned book, Qu Dajun's also has "Wengshan Wenwai"; There is also Cai Xian's "Idle Fishing and Leisure Record", which was the author's "decision" and affected his protégés, but I read it carefully, but I couldn't find any taboos. I am very grateful to this kind of calligrapher because he has taught me a lot of knowledge - although from the point of view of Yaren, it is just some vulgar knowledge. But it is really difficult to go to Jiaye Hall to buy books. I still remember that one afternoon this spring, I finally found it on Aiwenyi Road, two large iron doors, knocked a few times, and opened a small square hole in the door, which contained a Chinese concierge, a Chinese patrol, and a Belarusian dart master. The patrol asked me what I was here for. I said buy books. He said that the account room was out, no one took care of it, and he would come back tomorrow. I told him that I live far away, maybe wait for me for a while? He said, no! At the same time, it also blocked the small square hole. Two days later, I went again, and changed it to morning, thinking that the accountant might not go out at this time. But this time the answer was even more desperate, and the patrol said: "The book is gone! Sold out! Not for sale! ”我就没有第三次再去买，因为实在回复的斩钉截铁。现在所有的几种，是托朋友去辗转买来的，好像必须是熟人或走熟的书店，这才买得到。
I didn't buy it a third time, because the reply was categorical. Nowadays, all kinds are bought by friends, as if they must be acquaintances or familiar bookstores to buy them.每种书的末尾，都有嘉业堂主人刘承干先生的跋文，他对于明季的遗老很有同情，对于清初的文祸也颇不满。但奇怪的是他自己的文章却满是前清遗老的口风；书是民国刻的，“儀”字还缺着末笔。我想，试看明朝遗老的著作，反抗清朝的主旨，是在异族的入主中夏的，改换朝代，倒还在其次。所以要顶礼明末的遗民，必须接受他的民族思想，这才可以心心相印。现在以明遗老之仇的满清的遗老自居，却又引明遗老为同调，只着重在“遗老”两个字，而毫不问遗于何族，遗在何时，这真可以说是“为遗老而遗老”，和现在文坛上的“为艺术而艺术”，成为一副绝好的对子了。
At the end of each book, there is a postscript by Mr. Liu Chenggan, the owner of Jiaye Hall, who is very sympathetic to the old people of the Ming Dynasty and quite dissatisfied with the literary disaster in the early Qing Dynasty. But the strange thing is that his own articles are full of the tone of the former Qing Dynasty; The book was engraved in the Republic of China, and the word "Yi" still lacked the last pen. I think that if you look at the writings of the Ming Dynasty elders, the main purpose of resisting the Qing Dynasty was to enter Zhongxia by foreign races, and changing dynasties was secondary. Therefore, to pay homage to the remnants of the late Ming Dynasty, we must accept his national ideas, so that we can be heart-to-heart. Now it is the old man of the Manchu Qing Dynasty who regards himself as the old man of the Ming Dynasty, but he also introduces the old man as the same tune, only focusing on the word "old man", and does not ask which family he left behind, and when he was left behind, which can really be said to be "leaving the old for the sake of the elderly", and the current "art for art's sake" in the literary world, has become an excellent pair.倘以为这是因为“食古不化”的缘故，那可也并不然。中国的士大夫，该化的时候，就未必决不化。就如上面说过的《蜀龟鉴》，原是一部笔法都仿《春秋》的书，但写到“圣祖仁皇帝康熙元年春正月”，就有“赞”道：“……明季之乱甚矣！风终《豳》，雅终《召旻》，托乱极思治之隐忧而无其实事，孰若于臣祖亲见之，臣身亲被之乎？是终以元年正月。终者，非徒谓体元表正，蔑以加兹；生逢　盛世，荡荡难名，一以寄没世不忘之恩，一以见太平之业所由始耳！”
If you think that this is because of "eating the ancients", it is not so. Chinese scholars and officials, when it is time to change, may not be decided. Just like the "Shu Turtle Mirror" mentioned above, it was originally a book with brushwork imitating the "Spring and Autumn Annals", but when it was written that "the first month of the first year of the Kangxi era of the Holy Ancestor Emperor", there was a "like": "...... The chaos at the end of the Ming Dynasty was severe! The "Feng Song" ends with "Bin," and the elegant poem ends with "Zhao Min," pretending to be chaotic and extremely contemplating the hidden worries of governance without practical matters. Is it better to witness it with my grandfather and personally experience it? This was finally in the first month of the first year. The final is not only to say that the body is correct, but also to add to it; Born in a prosperous era, it is difficult to name, one is to send the grace of the world, and the other is to see the beginning of the cause of peace! ”《春秋》上是没有这种笔法的。满洲的肃王的一箭，不但射死了张献忠，也感化了许多读书人，而且改变了“春秋笔法”了。
There is no such brushwork in the "Spring and Autumn Annals". An arrow from King Su of Manchuria not only killed Zhang Xianzhong, but also influenced many scholars, and changed the "Spring and Autumn Brushwork".

病后杂谈

四

病后杂谈

Four病中来看这些书，归根结蒂，也还是令人气闷。但又开始知道了有些聪明的士大夫，依然会从血泊里寻出闲适来。例如《蜀碧》，总可以说是够惨的书了，然而序文后面却刻着一位乐斋先生的批语道：“古穆有魏晋间人笔意。”
Reading these books during illness, in the final analysis, is still depressing. But I began to know that some smart scholars and officials would still find leisure from the pool of blood. For example, "Shu Bi" can always be said to be a miserable book, but the preface is engraved with a comment from Mr. Le Zhai: "Gu Mu has the penmanship of the Wei and Jin dynasties." ”这真是天大的本领！那死似的镇静，又将我的气闷打破了。
This is really a great skill! The deathly composure broke my suffocation again.我放下书，合了眼睛，躺着想想学这本领的方法，以为这和“君子远庖厨也”的法子是大两样的，因为这时是君子自己也亲到了庖厨里。瞑想的结果，拟定了两手太极拳。一，是对于世事要“浮光掠影”，随时忘却，不甚了然，仿佛有些关心，却又并不恳切；二，是对于现实要“蔽聪塞明”，麻木冷静，不受感触，先由努力，后成自然。第一种的名称不大好听，第二种却也是却病延年的要诀，连古之儒者也并不讳言的。这都是大道。还有一种轻捷的小道，是：彼此说谎，自欺欺人。
I put down the book, closed my eyes, lay down and thought about how to learn this skill, thinking that this was the same as the method of "a gentleman is far from the kitchen", because at this time it was the gentleman himself who also kissed the kitchen. As a result of the meditation, two hands of Tai Chi were formulated. First, it is to "glimpse" about the world, forget it at any time, and don't know much, as if you have some concern, but you are not sincere; Second, it is necessary to "blind and clear" the reality, be numb and calm, not be touched, first by effort, and then become natural. The name of the first type is not very good, but the second is also the key to prolonging life, and even the ancient Confucians did not shy away from it. This is all the main road. There is also a light trail, which is: lying to each other and deceiving oneself.有些事情，换一句话说就不大合式，所以君子憎恶俗人的“道破”。其实，“君子远庖厨也”就是自欺欺人的办法：君子非吃牛肉不可，然而他慈悲，不忍见牛的临死的觳觫，于是走开，等到烧成牛排，然后慢慢的来咀嚼。牛排是决不会“觳觫”的了，也就和慈悲不再有冲突，于是他心安理得，天趣盎然，剔剔牙齿，摸摸肚子，“万物皆备于我矣”了。彼此说谎也决不是伤雅的事情，东坡先生在黄州，有客来，就要客谈鬼，客说没有，东坡道：“姑妄言之！”至今还算是一件韵事。
Some things, in other words, are not very appropriate, so gentlemen hate the "Dao Po" of ordinary people. In fact, "a gentleman is far from the kitchen" is a way to deceive himself: a gentleman must eat beef, but he was merciful and couldn't bear to see the cow's dying fear, so he walked away, waited until it was burned into a steak, and then chewed slowly. Steak will never be "afraid", and there will be no more conflict with compassion, so he is at ease, full of fun, picking his teeth, touching his stomach, "everything is ready for me". Lying to each other is by no means a hurtful thing, Mr. Dongpo is in Huangzhou, there is a guest, you have to talk about ghosts, the guest said no, Dongpo said: "Gu is lying!" "It's still a rhyme.撒一点小谎，可以解无聊，也可以消闷气；到后来，忘却了真，相信了谎。也就心安理得，天趣盎然了起来。永乐的硬做皇帝，一部分士大夫是颇以为不大好的。尤其是对于他的惨杀建文的忠臣。和景清一同被杀的还有铁铉，景清剥皮，铁铉油炸，他的两个女儿则发付了教坊，叫她们做婊子。这更使士大夫不舒服，但有人说，后来二女献诗于原问官，被永乐所知，赦出，嫁给士人了。
telling a little lie can relieve boredom or relieve boredom; Later, I forgot the truth and believed the lie. I feel at ease and full of fun. Yongle's hard emperor, some scholars and officials thought it was not very good. Especially for his loyal ministers who killed Jianwen. Killed with Jing Qing were also Tie Xuan, Jing Qing peeled the skin, Tie Xuan fried it, and his two daughters were sent to the teaching workshop to make them bitches. This made the scholar-official even more uncomfortable, but some people said that later the second daughter presented a poem to the original questioner, and was known by Yongle, pardoned, and married a scholar.这真是“曲终奏雅”，令人如释重负，觉得天皇毕竟圣明，好人也终于得救。她虽然做过官妓，然而究竟是一位能诗的才女，她父亲又是大忠臣，为夫的士人，当然也不算辱没。但是，必须“浮光掠影”到这里为止，想不得下去。一想，就要想到永乐的上谕，有些是凶残猥亵，将张献忠祭梓潼神的“咱老子姓张，你也姓张，咱老子和你联了宗罢。尚飨！”的名文，和他的比起来，真是高华典雅，配登西洋的上等杂志，那就会觉得永乐皇帝决不像一位爱才怜弱的明君。况且那时的教坊是怎样的处所？罪人的妻女在那里是并非静候嫖客的，据永乐定法，还要她们“转营”，这就是每座兵营里都去几天，目的是在使她们为多数男性所凌辱，生出“小龟子”和“淫贱材儿”来！所以，现在成了问题的“守节”，在那时，其实是只准“良民”专利的特典。在这样的治下，这样的地狱里，做一首诗就能超生的么？
This is really "the end of the song", which is relieving, and I feel that the emperor is wise after all, and the good people are finally saved. Although she has been an official prostitute, she is a talented woman who can write poetry, and her father is a great loyal minister, and she is a scholar who is a husband, of course, it is not humiliating. However, it must be "glimpsed" to this point, and I can't think of going on. When you think about it, you have to think of Yongle's edict, some of which are murderous and obscene, and Zhang Xianzhong's sacrifice to the god Zitong "Our old man's surname is Zhang, and you are also surnamed Zhang, and our old man and you are united with Zong. Still enjoy! Compared with him, it is really noble and elegant, worthy of being published in high-quality Western magazines, then you will feel that the Yongle Emperor is by no means like a wise ruler who loves talent and pity the weak. Besides, what kind of place was the teaching workshop at that time? According to the Yongle Law, they are also required to "change camps", which means that they go to each barracks for a few days, in order to make them humiliated by most men and give birth to "little turtles" and "obscene and cheap children"! Therefore, it has now become a problematic "observance", and at that time, it was actually a privilege that only "good people" patents were granted. Under such rule, in such hell, can you be reborn by making a poem?我这回从杭世骏的《订讹类编》（续补卷上）里，这才确切的知道了这佳话的欺骗。他说：
This time, from Hang Shijun's "Correction of Errors" (Supplementary Volume), I knew exactly the deception of this good story. He said:“……考铁长女诗，乃吴人范昌期《题老妓卷》作也。诗云：‘教坊落籍洗铅华，一片春心对落花。旧曲听来空有恨，故园归去却无家。云鬟半临青镜，雨泪频弹湿绛纱。安得江州司马在，尊前重为赋琵琶。’昌期，字鸣凤；诗见张士瀹《国朝文纂》。同时杜琼用嘉亦有次韵诗，题曰《无题》，则其非铁氏作明矣。次女诗所谓‘春来雨露深如海，嫁得刘郎胜阮郎’，其论尤为不伦。宗正睦论革除事，谓建文流落西南诸诗，皆好事伪作，则铁女之诗可知。……”
“…… 考铁长女诗，乃吴人范昌期《题老妓卷》作也。 诗云：‘教坊落籍洗铅华，一片春心对落花。 旧曲听来空有恨，故园归去却无家。 云鬟半临青镜，雨泪频弹湿绛纱。 安得江州司马在，尊前重为赋琵琶。 ’昌期，字鸣凤；诗见张士瀹《国朝文纂》。 同时杜琼用嘉亦有次韵诗，题曰《无题》，则其非铁氏作明矣。 次女诗所谓‘春来雨露深如海，嫁得刘郎胜阮郎’，其论尤为不伦。 宗正睦论革除事，谓建文流落西南诸诗，皆好事伪作，则铁女之诗可知。 ……”《国朝文纂》我没有见过，铁氏次女的诗，杭世骏也并未寻出根底，但我以为他的话是可信的，——虽然他败坏了口口相传的韵事。况且一则他也是一个认真的考证学者，二则我觉得凡是得到大杀风景的结果的考证，往往比表面说得好听，玩得有趣的东西近真。
I have not seen the poem of the second daughter of the Tie family, and Hang Shijun has not found the root, but I think his words are credible,—— although he corrupted the rhyme passed down by word of mouth. Moreover, he is also a serious researcher, and secondly, I think that any research that results from the scenery of the massacre is often better than what it looks like on the surface, and the fun is closer to the truth.首先将范昌期的诗嫁给铁氏长女，聊以自欺欺人的是谁呢？我也不知道。但“浮光掠影”的一看，倒也罢了，一经杭世骏道破，再去看时，就很明白的知道了确是咏老妓之作，那第一句就不像现任官妓的口吻。不过中国的有一些士大夫，总爱无中生有，移花接木的造出故事来，他们不但歌颂升平，还粉饰黑暗。关于铁氏二女的撒谎，尚其小焉者耳，大至胡元杀掠，满清焚屠之际，也还会有人单单捧出什么烈女绝命，难妇题壁的诗词来，这个艳传，那个步韵，比对于华屋丘墟，生民涂炭之惨的大事情还起劲。到底是刻了一本集，连自己们都附进去，而韵事也就完结了。
First of all, who married Fan Changqi's poem to the eldest daughter of the Tie family and deceived himself? I don't know. But at a glance at the "glimpse of the light", it was okay, once Hang Shijun broke the road, when he looked at it again, he knew very clearly that it was indeed a work of an old prostitute, and the first sentence was not like the tone of the current official prostitute. However, there are some scholars and officials in China who always love to create stories out of nothing, and they not only praise peace, but also whitewash the darkness. Regarding the lies of the two daughters of the Tie clan, it is still small, as big as Hu Yuan's killing and plundering, and when the Manchu Qing Dynasty burned and slaughtered, there will also be people who will only hold up the poems of the martyrs' desperate and difficult women's inscriptions. In the end, a collection was engraved, and even they were attached to it, and the rhyme was over.我在写着这些的时候，病是要算已经好了的了，用不着写遗书。但我想在这里趁便拜托我的相识的朋友，将来我死掉之后，即使在中国还有追悼的可能，也千万不要给我开追悼会或者出什么记念册。因为这不过是活人的讲演或挽联的斗法场，为了造语惊人，对仗工稳起见，有些文豪们是简直不恤于胡说八道的。结果至多也不过印成一本书，即使有谁看了，于我死人，于读者活人，都无益处，就是对于作者，其实也并无益处，挽联做得好，不过是挽联做得好而已。
As I write this, my illness is considered to be cured, and I don't need to write a suicide note. But I would like to take the opportunity to ask my acquaintances to ask my friends that after I die in the future, even if there is still the possibility of memorial service in China, please do not hold a memorial service or publish any memorial book for me. Because this is just a living person's speech or a fighting field, in order to make amazing words and for the sake of stability, some writers simply don't care about nonsense. The result is only a book at most, even if anyone reads it, it is not beneficial to me to die or to the reader to live, that is, for the author, in fact, it is not beneficial.现在的意见，我以为倘有购买那些纸墨白布的闲钱，还不如选几部明人，清人或今人的野史或笔记来印印，倒是于大家很有益处的。但是要认真，用点工夫，标点不要错。
In my opinion now, I think that if you have spare money to buy those paper, ink and white cloth, it is better to choose a few wild histories or notes of the Ming, Qing or modern people to print, which is very beneficial to everyone. But be serious, use some work, and don't make mistakes.十二月十一日。
December 11th.

病后杂谈之余　——关于“舒愤懑”

病后杂谈之余After the illness, after chatting ——关于“舒愤懑” - about "Shu Anger"
一
One我常说明朝永乐皇帝的凶残，远在张献忠之上，是受了宋端仪的《立斋闲录》的影响的。那时我还是满洲治下的一个拖着辫子的十四五岁的少年，但已经看过记载张献忠怎样屠杀蜀人的《蜀碧》，痛恨着这“流贼”的凶残。后来又偶然在破书堆里发见了一本不全的《立斋闲录》，还是明抄本，我就在那书上看见了永乐的上谕，于是我的憎恨就移到永乐身上去了。
I often explain that the ferocity of the Yongle Emperor was far above Zhang Xianzhong, and was influenced by Song Duanyi's "Lizhai Xianlu". At that time, I was still a fourteen or fifteen-year-old boy dragging braids under Manchurian rule, but I had already read "Shu Bi", which recorded how Zhang Xianzhong slaughtered the Shu people, and hated the ferocity of this "bandit". Later, I accidentally found an incomplete copy of "Lizhai Xianlu" in the pile of broken books, or a copy of the Ming Dynasty, and I saw Yongle's edict on that book, so my hatred moved to Yongle.那时我毫无什么历史知识，这憎恨转移的原因是极简单的，只以为流贼尚可，皇帝却不该，还是“礼不下庶人”的传统思想。至于《立斋闲录》，好像是一部少见的书，作者是明人，而明朝已有抄本，那刻本之少就可想。记得《汇刻书目》说是在明代的一部什么丛书中，但这丛书我至今没有见；清《四库全书总目提要》将它放在“存目”里，那么，《四库全书》里也是没有的，我家并不是藏书家，我真不解怎么会有这明抄本。这书我一直保存着，直到十多年前，因为肚子饿得慌了，才和别的两本明抄和一部明刻的《宫闺秘典》去卖给以藏书家和学者出名的傅某，他使我跑了三四趟之后，才说一总给我八块钱，我赌气不卖，抱回来了，又藏在北平的寓里；但久已没有人照管，不知道现在究竟怎样了。
At that time, I had no historical knowledge, and the reason for this hatred was extremely simple, I thought that bandits were acceptable, but the emperor should not, or the traditional idea of "not being polite to commoners". As for "Lizhai Xianlu", it seems to be a rare book, the author is a Ming person, and the Ming Dynasty already has a copy, so the few engravings can be imagined. I remember that the "Huike Bibliography" said that it was in a series of books in the Ming Dynasty, but I have not seen this series of books so far; The Qing Dynasty's "Summary of the Four Libraries" put it in the "Catalog", then, it is not in the "Four Libraries", my family is not a bibliophile, I really don't understand how there is this Ming copy. I kept this book until more than ten years ago, because I was hungry and panicked, I sold it to Fu, who was famous as a bibliophile and scholar, and he made me run three or four times, and then said that he would always give me eight yuan. But no one has taken care of it for a long time, and I don't know what is going on now.那一本书，还是四十年前看的，对于永乐的憎恨虽然还在，书的内容却早已模模胡胡，所以在前几天写《病后杂谈》时，举不出一句永乐上谕的实例。我也很想看一看《永乐实录》，但在上海又如何能够；来青阁有残本在寄售，十本，实价却是一百六十元，也决不是我辈书架上的书。又是一个偶然：昨天在《安徽丛书》第三集中看见了清俞正燮（1775—1840）《癸巳类稿》的改定本，那《除乐户丐户籍及女乐考附古事》里，却引有永乐皇帝的上谕，是根据王世贞《弇州史料》中的《南京法司所记》的，虽然不多，又未必是精粹，但也足够“略见一斑”，和献忠流贼的作品相比较了。摘录于下——
That book was still read forty years ago, and although the hatred for Yongle is still there, the content of the book has long been muddled, so when I wrote "Miscellaneous Talks After Illness" a few days ago, I couldn't give an example of Yongle's edict. I also want to read "Yongle Shilu", but how can it be in Shanghai; There are fragments on consignment in Laiqingge, ten copies, but the actual price is 160 yuan, and it is definitely not a book on our bookshelf. Another coincidence: yesterday in the third episode of the "Anhui Series", I saw a revised version of Qing Yu Zhengxie's (1775-1840) "Guisi Manuscript", which quoted the Yongle Emperor's edict, which was based on Wang Shizhen's "Yanzhou Historical Materials" in the "Nanjing Legal Division". Excerpted below -“永乐十一年正月十一日，教坊司于右顺门口奏：齐泰姊及外甥媳妇，又黄子澄妹四个妇人，每一日一夜，二十余条汉子看守着，年少的都有身孕，除生子令做小龟子，又有三岁女子，奏请圣旨。奉钦依：由他。不的到长大便是个淫贱材儿？”
“永乐十一年正月十一日，教坊司于右顺门口奏：齐泰姊及外甥媳妇，又黄子澄妹四个妇人，每一日一夜，二十余条汉子看守着，年少的都有身孕，除生子令做小龟子，又有三岁女子，奏请圣旨。 奉钦依：由他。 不的到长大便是个淫贱材儿？”“铁铉妻杨氏年三十五，送教坊司；茅大芳妻张氏年五十六，送教坊司。张氏病故，教坊司安政于奉天门奏。奉圣旨：分付上元县抬出门去，着狗吃了！钦此！”
“铁铉妻杨氏年三十五，送教坊司；茅大芳妻张氏年五十六，送教坊司。 张氏病故，教坊司安政于奉天门奏。 奉圣旨：分付上元县抬出门去，着狗吃了！钦此！”君臣之间的问答，竟是这等口吻，不见旧记，恐怕是万想不到的罢。但其实，这也仅仅是一时的一例。自有历史以来，中国人是一向被同族和异族屠戮，奴隶，敲掠，刑辱，压迫下来的，非人类所能忍受的楚毒，也都身受过，每一考查，真教人觉得不像活在人间。俞正燮看过野史，正是一个因此觉得义愤填膺的人，所以他在记载清朝的解放惰民丐户，罢教坊，停女乐的故事之后，作一结语道——
The question and answer between the monarch and his ministers is actually such a tone, and there is no old memory, I am afraid it is unimaginable. But in fact, this is only a temporary case. Since the beginning of history, Chinese people have always been slaughtered, enslaved, tortured, tortured, and oppressed by their own race and foreign races, and they have also suffered the torture that is not tolerable to human beings. Yu Zhengxie had read the wild history, and he was a person who felt righteous indignation because of this, so after recording the story of the Qing Dynasty's liberation of lazy beggars, the abolition of the teaching workshop, and the cessation of female music, he made a conclusion -“自三代至明，惟宇文周武帝，唐高祖，后晋高祖，金，元，及明景帝，于法宽假之，而尚存其旧。余皆视为固然。本朝尽去其籍，而天地为之廓清矣。汉儒歌颂朝廷功德，自云‘舒愤懑’，除乐户之事，诚可云舒愤懑者：故列古语琐事之实，有关因革者如此。”
“自三代至明，惟宇文周武帝，唐高祖，后晋高祖，金，元，及明景帝，于法宽假之，而尚存其旧。 余皆视为固然。 本朝尽去其籍，而天地为之廓清矣。 汉儒歌颂朝廷功德，自云‘舒愤懑’，除乐户之事，诚可云舒愤懑者：故列古语琐事之实，有关因革者如此。 ”这一段结语，有两事使我吃惊。第一事，是宽假奴隶的皇帝中，汉人居很少数。但我疑心俞正燮还是考之未详，例如金元，是并非厚待奴隶的，只因那时连中国的蓄奴的主人也成了奴隶，从征服者看来，并无高下，即所谓“一视同仁”，于是就好像对于先前的奴隶加以宽假了。第二事，就是这自有历史以来的虐政，竟必待满洲的清才来廓清，使考史的儒生，为之拍案称快，自比于汉儒的“舒愤懑”——就是明末清初的才子们之所谓“不亦快哉！”然而解放乐户却是真的，但又并未“廓清”，例如绍兴的惰民，直到民国革命之初，他们还是不与良民通婚，去给大户服役，不过已有报酬，这一点，恐怕是和解放之前大不相同的了。革命之后，我久不回到绍兴去了，不知道他们怎样，推想起来，大约和三十年前是不会有什么两样的。
In this conclusion, two things surprised me. The first thing is that among the emperors who were lenient with false slaves, there were very few Han people. But I suspect that Yu Zhengxie is still unclear, for example, Jin Yuan did not treat slaves generously, just because at that time even the owners of Chinese slaves became slaves, and from the perspective of the conquerors, there was no superiority, that is, the so-called "equal treatment", so it seemed to be lenient to the previous slaves. The second thing is that this tyranny since the beginning of history must wait for the Qing Dynasty in Manchuria to clear it up, so that the Confucian scholars who examine history will be happy for it, and compare themselves to the "comfort and indignation" of Han Confucianism - that is, the so-called "Isn't it fast" for the talents of the late Ming and early Qing dynasties! For example, the lazy people in Shaoxing, until the beginning of the revolution of the Republic of China, they still did not intermarry with the good people and went to serve the big households, but they were paid, which is probably very different from before liberation. After the revolution, I haven't returned to Shaoxing for a long time, I don't know how they are, but when I think about it, it will be no different from about thirty years ago.

病后杂谈之余　——关于“舒愤懑”

二

病后杂谈之余　——关于“舒愤懑”

Two但俞正燮的歌颂清朝功德，却不能不说是当然的事。他生于乾隆四十年，到他壮年以至晚年的时候，文字狱的血迹已经消失，满洲人的凶焰已经缓和，愚民政策早已集了大成，剩下的就只有“功德”了。那时的禁书，我想他都未必看见。现在不说别的，单看雍正乾隆两朝的对于中国人著作的手段，就足够令人惊心动魄。全毁，抽毁，剜去之类也且不说，最阴险的是删改了古书的内容。乾隆朝的纂修《四库全书》，是许多人颂为一代之盛业的，但他们却不但捣乱了古书的格式，还修改了古人的文章；不但藏之内廷，还颁之文风较盛之处，使天下士子阅读，永不会觉得我们中国的作者里面，也曾经有过很有些骨气的人。（这两句，奉官命改为“永远看不出底细来。”）
But Yu Zhengxie's praise of the merits of the Qing Dynasty cannot but be said to be a matter of course. He was born in the fortieth year of Qianlong, and by his prime and later years, the blood stains of the literary prison had disappeared, the fierceness of the Manchurians had eased, and the policy of ignorant people had already been completed, and all that remained was "merit". I don't think he may have seen the banned books at that time. Now let's not talk about anything else, just looking at the methods of the Yongzheng and Qianlong dynasties for Chinese writings is thrilling enough. Not to mention the complete destruction, destruction, and removal, the most insidious thing is to delete the content of ancient books. The compilation of the "Four Libraries of the Complete Book" of the Qianlong Dynasty was praised by many as a grand cause of a generation, but they not only messed up the format of the ancient books, but also revised the articles of the ancients; Not only is it hidden in the inner court, but it is also issued to a place where the literary style is more prosperous, so that scholars all over the world will never feel that among our Chinese authors, there have been people with some backbone. (These two sentences, by the order of the official, were changed to "You can never see the details.") ”）嘉庆道光以来，珍重宋元版本的风气逐渐旺盛，也没有悟出乾隆皇帝的“圣虑”，影宋元本或校宋元本的书籍很有些出版了，这就使那时的阴谋露了马脚。最初启示了我的是《琳琅秘室丛书》里的两部《茅亭客话》，一是校宋本，一是四库本，同是一种书，而两本的文章却常有不同，而且一定是关于“华夷”的处所。这一定是四库本删改了的；现在连影宋本的《茅亭客话》也已出版，更足据为铁证，不过倘不和四库本对读，也无从知道那时的阴谋。《琳琅秘室丛书》我是在图书馆里看的，自己没有，现在去买起来又嫌太贵，因此也举不出实例来。但还有比较容易的法子在。
Since the Jiaqing Daoguang, the trend of cherishing the Song and Yuan versions has gradually flourished, and the "sacred thoughts" of the Qianlong Emperor have not been realized, and some books of the Song and Yuan versions or the Song and Yuan versions have been published, which has exposed the conspiracy at that time. The first thing that enlightened me were the two "Maoting Hakka Stories" in the "Linlang Secret Room Series", one is the Song version, and the other is the Siku version, which is the same kind of book, but the articles of the two books are often different, and they must be about the place of "Huayi". This must have been deleted from the four libraries; Now even the Song version's "Maoting Hakka" has also been published, which is more evidence-proof, but if you don't read it against the Sikuben, you can't know the conspiracy at that time. I read the "Linlang Secret Room Series" in the library, but I didn't have it, and now it's too expensive to buy, so I can't give an example. But there is an easier way.新近陆续出版的《四部丛刊续编》自然应该说是一部新的古董书，但其中却保存着满清暗杀中国著作的案卷。例如宋洪迈的《容斋随笔》至《五笔》是影宋刊本和明活字本，据张元济跋，其中有三条就为清代刻本中所没有。所删的是怎样内容的文章呢？为惜纸墨计，现在只摘录一条《容斋三笔》卷三里的《北狄俘虏之苦》在这里——
The newly published "Continuation of the Four Serials" should naturally be said to be a new antique book, but it contains the case files of the Manchu Qing Dynasty's assassination of China. For example, Song Hongmai's "Rongzhai Essays" to "Five Strokes" are the Ying Song editions and the Ming movable type, according to Zhang Yuanji's postscripts, three of which are not in the Qing Dynasty engravings. What kind of article is deleted? In order to save paper and ink, now only one excerpt of "The Suffering of Northern Di Prisoners" in the third volume of "Three Strokes of Rongzhai" is here -“元魏破江陵，尽以所俘士民为奴，无分贵贱，盖北方夷俗皆然也。自靖康之后，陷于金虏者，帝子王孙，宦门仕族之家，尽没为奴婢，使供作务。每人一月支稗子五斗，令自舂为米，得一斗八升，用为粮；岁支麻五把，令缉为裘。此外更无一钱一帛之入。男子不能缉者，则终岁裸体。虏或哀之，则使执爨，虽时负火得暖气，然才出外取柴归，再坐火边，皮肉即脱落，不日辄死。惟喜有手艺，如医人绣工之类，寻常只团坐地上，以败席或芦藉衬之，遇客至开筵，引能乐者使奏技，酒阑客散，各复其初，依旧环坐刺绣：任其生死，视如草芥。……”
“元魏破江陵，尽以所俘士民为奴，无分贵贱，盖北方夷俗皆然也。 自靖康之后，陷于金虏者，帝子王孙，宦门仕族之家，尽没为奴婢，使供作务。 每人一月支稗子五斗，令自舂为米，得一斗八升，用为粮；岁支麻五把，令缉为裘。 此外更无一钱一帛之入。 男子不能缉者，则终岁裸体。 虏或哀之，则使执爨，虽时负火得暖气，然才出外取柴归，再坐火边，皮肉即脱落，不日辄死。 惟喜有手艺，如医人绣工之类，寻常只团坐地上，以败席或芦藉衬之，遇客至开筵，引能乐者使奏技，酒阑客散，各复其初，依旧环坐刺绣：任其生死，视如草芥。 ……”清朝不惟自掩其凶残，还要替金人来掩饰他们的凶残。据此一条，可见俞正燮入金朝于仁君之列，是不确的了，他们不过是一扫宋朝的主奴之分，一律都作为奴隶，而自己则是主子。但是，这校勘，是用清朝的书坊刻本的，不知道四库本是否也如此。要更确凿，还有一部也是《四部丛刊续编》里的影旧抄本宋晁说之《嵩山文集》在这里，卷末就有单将《负薪对》一篇和四库本相对比，以见一斑的实证，现在摘录几条在下面，大抵非删则改，语意全非，仿佛宋臣晁说之，已在对金人战栗，嗫嚅不吐，深怕得罪似的了——
The Qing Dynasty not only concealed its ferocity, but also concealed their ferocity for the Jin people. According to this article, it can be seen that Yu Zhengxie's entry into the Jin Dynasty is inaccurate, they are just swept away the master and slave of the Song Dynasty, all as slaves, and themselves are masters. However, this proofreading was engraved in the bookstore of the Qing Dynasty, and I don't know if the Siku version is the same. To be more conclusive, there is also an old manuscript of Song Chao's "Songshan Anthology" that is also in the "Continuation of the Four Serials", and at the end of the volume, there is a single comparison of the "Negative Salary Pair" with the four library versions to see the empirical evidence, and now a few excerpts are below, most of which are either deleted or changed, and the meaning is completely different, as if Song Chen Chao said that he was already trembling at the Jin people, not spitting out, as if he was afraid of offending -

旧抄本旧抄本
四库本四库本

金贼以我疆场之臣无状，金贼以我疆场之臣无状，
金人扰我疆场之地，边城金人扰我疆场之地，边城

斥堠不明，遂豕突河北，斥堠不明，遂豕突河北，
斥堠不明，遂长驱河北，斥堠不明，遂长驱河北，

蛇结河东。蛇结河东。
盘结河东。盘结河东。

犯孔子春秋之大禁，犯孔子春秋之大禁，
为上下臣民之大耻，为上下臣民之大耻，

以百骑却虏枭将，以百骑却虏枭将，
以百骑却辽枭将，以百骑却辽枭将，

彼金贼虽非人类，而犬豕彼金贼虽非人类，而犬豕
彼金人虽甚强盛，而赫然彼金人虽甚强盛，而赫然

亦有掉瓦怖恐之号，顾亦有掉瓦怖恐之号，顾
示之以威令之森严，顾示之以威令之森严，顾

弗之惧哉！弗之惧哉！
弗之惧哉！弗之惧哉！

我取而歼焉可也。我取而歼焉可也。
我因而取之可也。我因而取之可也。

太宗时，女真困于契丹之太宗时，女真困于契丹之
太宗时，女真困于契丹之太宗时，女真困于契丹之

三栅，控告乞援，亦卑三栅，控告乞援，亦卑
三栅，控告乞援，亦和三栅，控告乞援，亦和

恭甚矣。不谓敢眦睨中恭甚矣。 不谓敢眦睨中
好甚矣。不谓竟酿患滋好甚矣。 不谓竟酿患滋

国之地于今日也。国之地于今日也。
祸一至于今日也。祸一至于今日也。

忍弃上皇之子于胡虏乎？忍弃上皇之子于胡虏乎？
忍弃上皇之子于异地乎？忍弃上皇之子于异地乎？

何则：夷狄喜相吞并斗争，何则：夷狄喜相吞并斗争，

是其犬羊狺吠咋啮之性是其犬羊狺吠咋啮之性
（无）（无）

也。唯其富者最先亡。也。 唯其富者最先亡。

古今夷狄族帐，大小见古今夷狄族帐，大小见

于史册者百十，今其存于史册者百十，今其存

者一二，皆以其财富而者一二，皆以其财富而

自底灭亡者也。今此小自底灭亡者也。 今此小

丑不指日而灭亡，是无丑不指日而灭亡，是无

天道也。天道也。

褫中国之衣冠，复夷狄之褫中国之衣冠，复夷狄之
遂其报复之心，肆其凌侮遂其报复之心，肆其凌侮

态度。态度。
之意。之意。

取故相家孙女姊妹，缚马取故相家孙女姊妹，缚马
故相家皆携老襁幼，弃其故相家皆携老襁幼，弃其

上而去，执侍帐中，远近上而去，执侍帐中，远近
籍而去，焚掠之余，远近籍而去，焚掠之余，远近

胆落，不暇寒心。胆落，不暇寒心。
胆落，不暇寒心。胆落，不暇寒心。

即此数条，已可见“贼”“虏”“犬羊”是讳的；说金人的淫掠是讳的；“夷狄”当然要讳，但也不许看见“中国”两个字，因为这是和“夷狄”对立的字眼，很容易引起种族思想来的。但是，这《嵩山文集》的抄者不自改，读者不自改，尚存旧文，使我们至今能够看见晁氏的真面目，在现在说起来，也可以算是令人大“舒愤懑”的了。
That is, these few articles can already be seen that "thief", "captive" and "dog and sheep" are taboo; It is said that the plundering of the Jin people is taboo; Of course, "barbarians" should be avoided, but the word "China" is not allowed to be seen, because this is the opposite of "barbarians", which can easily cause racial ideas. However, the copyists of this "Songshan Collected Works" do not correct themselves, the readers do not correct themselves, and the old texts still exist, so that we can still see the true face of Chao's family, which can be regarded as a great "relief and indignation" now.清朝的考据家有人说过，“明人好刻古书而古书亡”，因为他们妄行校改。我以为这之后，则清人纂修《四库全书》而古书亡，因为他们变乱旧式，删改原文；今人标点古书而古书亡，因为他们乱点一通，佛头着粪：这是古书的水火兵虫以外的三大厄。
Some researchers of the Qing Dynasty once said, "The Ming people are good at carving ancient books and the ancient books are dead", because they recklessly carried out proofreading. I thought that after this, the Qing people compiled the "Four Libraries Complete Book" and the ancient books died, because they changed the old style and deleted the original text; Today's people punctuate ancient books and ancient books die, because they are messed up, and the Buddha's head is dung: these are the three major disasters other than water, fire, soldiers and insects in ancient books.

病后杂谈之余　——关于“舒愤懑”

三

病后杂谈之余　——关于“舒愤懑”

Three对于清朝的愤懑的从新发作，大约始于光绪中，但在文学界上，我没有查过以谁为“祸首”。太炎先生是以文章排满的骁将著名的，然而在他那《訄书》的未改订本中，还承认满人可以主中国，称为“客帝”，比于嬴秦的“客卿”。但是，总之，到光绪末年，翻印的不利于清朝的古书，可是陆续出现了；太炎先生也自己改正了“客帝”说，在再版的《訄书》里，“删而存此篇”；后来这书又改名为《检论》，我却不知道是否还是这办法。留学日本的学生们中的有些人，也在图书馆里搜寻可以鼓吹革命的明末清初的文献。那时印成一大本的有《汉声》，是《湖北学生界》的增刊，面子上题着四句集《文选》句：“抒怀旧之积念，发思古之幽情”，第三句想不起来了，第四句是“振大汉之天声”。无古无今，这种文献，倒是总要在外国的图书馆里抄得的。
The renewed outbreak of resentment towards the Qing Dynasty began around the time of Guangxu, but in the literary world, I have not found out who is the "culprit". Mr. Taiyan is famous for his brave generals full of articles, but in the unrevised version of his "Obituary", it is also admitted that the Manchus can dominate China, called "Ke Di", compared to Ying Qin's "Ke Qing". However, in short, by the end of Guangxu, ancient books that were not conducive to the Qing Dynasty were reprinted, but they appeared one after another; Mr. Taiyan also corrected the "guest emperor" himself, saying that in the republished "Obituary", "delete and save this article"; Later, the book was renamed "Examination Theory", but I don't know if it is still this way. Some of the students studying in Japan also searched the library for documents from the late Ming and early Qing dynasties that could advocate revolution. At that time, a large copy was printed as "Hansheng", which was a supplement to the "Hubei Student Circle", and the face was inscribed with the sentence of the four-sentence collection "Anthology": "Expressing the accumulated thoughts of nostalgia, thinking about the deep feelings of the ancients", the third sentence can't be remembered, and the fourth sentence is "Zhen Dahan's Heavenly Voice". Regardless of ancient or modern, this kind of document always has to be copied in foreign libraries.我生长在偏僻之区，毫不知道什么是满汉，只在饭店的招牌上看见过“满汉酒席”字样，也从不引起什么疑问来。听人讲“本朝”的故事是常有的，文字狱的事情却一向没有听到过，乾隆皇帝南巡的盛事也很少有人讲述了，最多的是“打长毛”。我家里有一个年老的女工，她说长毛时候，她已经十多岁，长毛故事要算她对我讲得最多，但她并无邪正之分，只说最可怕的东西有三种，一种自然是“长毛”，一种是“短毛”，还有一种是“花绿头”。到得后来，我才明白后两种其实是官兵，但在愚民的经验上，是和长毛并无区别的。给我指明长毛之可恶的倒是几位读书人；我家里有几部县志，偶然翻开来看，那时殉难的烈士烈女的名册就有一两卷，同族里的人也有几个被杀掉的，后来封了“世袭云骑尉”，我于是确切的认定了长毛之可恶。然而，真所谓“心事如波涛”罢，久而久之，由于自己的阅历，证以女工的讲述，我竟决不定那些烈士烈女的凶手，究竟是长毛呢，还是“短毛”和“花绿头”了。我真很羡慕“四十而不惑”的圣人的幸福。
I grew up in a remote area, and I didn't know what Manchu and Han was, and I only saw the words "Manchu Han Banquet" on the sign of the hotel, and I never raised any questions. It is common to hear people tell the story of "this dynasty", but the matter of the literary prison has never been heard, and few people have told the grand event of the Qianlong Emperor's southern tour, the most of which is "long hair". There is an old female worker in my family, she said that when she was long-haired, she was already in her teens, and the story of long-haired hair was the most told to me, but she did not distinguish between evil and righteousness, only saying that there are three kinds of the most terrible things, one is naturally "long hair", one is "short hair", and the other is "green hair". It wasn't until later that I realized that the latter two were actually officers and soldiers, but in the experience of the foolish people, they were no different from long-haired people. It was a few scholars who pointed out to me that Long Hair was hateful; I have several county chronicles in my family, and when I opened them by chance, there were one or two volumes of the roster of martyrs and martyrs who were martyred at that time, and a few people from the same clan were also killed, and later they were named "hereditary cloud cavalry lieutenants", so I accurately determined that the long hair was hateful. However, the so-called "heart is like waves", over time, due to my own experience and the narration of female workers, I will never be sure whether the murderers of those martyrs and martyrs are long-haired, "short-haired" and "green-headed". I really envy the happiness of the saint who is "forty but not confused".对我最初提醒了满汉的界限的不是书，是辫子。这辫子，是砍了我们古人的许多头，这才种定了的，到得我有知识的时候，大家早忘却了血史，反以为全留乃是长毛，全剃好像和尚，必须剃一点，留一点，才可以算是一个正经人了。而且还要从辫子上玩出花样来：小丑挽一个结，插上一朵纸花打诨；开口跳将小辫子挂在铁杆上，慢慢的吸烟献本领；变把戏的不必动手，只消将头一摇，劈拍一声，辫子便自会跳起来盘在头顶上，他于是耍起关王刀来了。而且还切于实用：打架的时候可以拔住，挣脱极难；捉人的时候可以拉着，省得绳索，要是被捉的人多呢，只要捏住辫梢头，一个人就可以牵一大串。吴友如画的《申江胜景图》里，有一幅会审公堂，就有一个巡捕拉着犯人的辫子的形象，但是，这是已经算作“胜景”了。
What reminded me of the boundaries of the Manchu and Han dynasties at first was not books, but braids. By the time I had knowledge, everyone had long forgotten the history of blood, but thought that all the hair was long, and the whole shave like a monk, and it must be shaved a little, and a little must be left to be regarded as a serious person. And you have to play tricks from the braids: the clown ties a knot and inserts a paper flower to joke; Hang the pigtails on the iron rod and slowly smoke to show off your skills; The trick didn't have to be done, just shake his head, and with a split, the braid would jump up and coil above his head, so he played the Guan Wang knife. but also practical: it can be pulled out during a fight, and it is extremely difficult to break free; If there are many people caught, as long as you pinch the end of the braid, one person can lead a large string. In Wu Youru's painting "Shenjiang Victory Map", there is a picture of a patrol pulling the prisoner's braids, but this is already counted as a "victory".住在偏僻之区还好，一到上海，可就不免有时会听到一句洋话：Pig-tail——猪尾巴。这一句话，现在是早不听见了，那意思，似乎也不过说人头上生着猪尾巴，和今日之上海，中国人自己一斗嘴，便彼此互骂为“猪猡”的，还要客气得远。不过那时的青年，好像涵养工夫没有现在的深，也还未懂得“幽默”，所以听起来实在觉得刺耳。而且对于拥有二百余年历史的辫子的模样，也渐渐的觉得并不雅观，既不全留，又不全剃，剃去一圈，留下一撮，又打起来拖在背后，真好像做着好给别人来拔着牵着的柄子。对于它终于怀了恶感，我看也正是人情之常，不必指为拿了什么地方的东西，迷了什么斯基的理论的。（这两句，奉官谕改为“不足怪的”。）
It's okay to live in a remote area, but when you arrive in Shanghai, you can't help but hear a foreign saying: Pig-tail - pig-tail. This sentence has not been heard for a long time now, and it seems that it only means that there is a pig's tail on the head, and today's Shanghai, the Chinese themselves quarrel, they scold each other as "pigs", and they are far more polite. However, the young people at that time seemed to not have as deep cultivation as they do now, and they did not know how to "humor", so it sounded really harsh. And for the appearance of the braids with a history of more than 200 years, I gradually felt that it was not elegant, neither all left, nor completely shaved, shaved a circle, left a pinch, and fought and dragged it behind my back, it really seemed to be a handle for others to pull out. I think it is human nature to finally have a bad feeling, and there is no need to point to something taken from somewhere or fascinated by Ski's theory. (These two sentences were changed to "not surprising" by the official edict.) ）我的辫子留在日本，一半送给客店里的一位使女做了假发，一半给了理发匠，人是在宣统初年回到故乡来了。一到上海，首先得装假辫子。这时上海有一个专装假辫子的专家，定价每条大洋四元，不折不扣，他的大名，大约那时的留学生都知道。做也真做得巧妙，只要别人不留心，是很可以不出岔子的，但如果人知道你原是留学生，留心研究起来，那就漏洞百出。夏天不能戴帽，也不大行；人堆里要防挤掉或挤歪，也不行。装了一个多月，我想，如果在路上掉了下来或者被人拉下来，不是比原没有辫子更不好看么？索性不装了，贤人说过的：一个人做人要真实。
My braids were left in Japan, half of which were given to a maid in the inn to make wigs, and half to the barber, who returned to his hometown in the early years of Xuantong. When you arrive in Shanghai, you first have to put on fake braids. At this time, there was an expert in Shanghai who specialized in fake braids, priced at four yuan per ocean, to the letter, and his name was known to international students at that time. As long as others don't pay attention, it is very possible not to go wrong, but if people know that you are an international student and pay attention to research, it will be full of loopholes. In summer, you can't wear a hat, and it's not a big deal; It is not okay to prevent crowding out or crooked. After more than a month, I thought, if it fell off the road or was pulled down, wouldn't it be worse than having no braids? Simply don't pretend, as the sage said: A person must be real.但这真实的代价真也不便宜，走出去时，在路上所受的待遇完全和先前两样了。我从前是只以为访友作客，才有待遇的，这时才明白路上也一样的一路有待遇。最好的是呆看，但大抵是冷笑，恶骂。小则说是偷了人家的女人，因为那时捉住奸夫，总是首先剪去他辫子的，我至今还不明白为什么；大则指为“里通外国”，就是现在之所谓“汉奸”。我想，如果一个没有鼻子的人在街上走，他还未必至于这么受苦，假使没有了影子，那么，他恐怕也要这样的受社会的责罚了。
But the real price is really not cheap, and when you go out, the treatment you receive on the road is completely the same as before. I used to think that I was only treated when I visited friends, but then I realized that there was the same treatment along the way. The best thing is to look at it, but most of it is sneering and scolding. Xiao Ze said that he stole someone else's woman, because at that time, when he caught the adulterer, he always cut off his braids first, and I still don't understand why; The big one refers to "foreign countries", which is now the so-called "traitor". I think that if a person without a nose walks on the street, he may not suffer so much, and if there is no shadow, then he may also be punished by society in this way.我回中国的第一年在杭州做教员，还可以穿了洋服算是洋鬼子；第二年回到故乡绍兴中学去做学监，却连洋服也不行了，因为有许多人是认识我的，所以不管如何装束，总不失为“里通外国”的人，于是我所受的无辫之灾，以在故乡为第一。尤其应该小心的是满洲人的绍兴知府的眼睛，他每到学校来，总喜欢注视我的短头发，和我多说话。
In my first year back in China, I worked as a teacher in Hangzhou, and I could also wear clothes to be considered a foreign devil; The following year, I returned to my hometown of Shaoxing Middle School to work as a school supervisor, but I couldn't even wear clothes, because many people knew me, so no matter how I dressed, I was always a person who was "connected to foreign countries", so the disaster I suffered without braids was the first in my hometown. Especially careful should be the eyes of the Manchurian Shaoxing prefect, who always likes to look at my short hair and talk to me more every time he comes to school.学生们里面，忽然起了剪辫风潮了，很有许多人要剪掉。我连忙禁止。他们就举出代表来诘问道：究竟有辫子好呢，还是没有辫子好呢？我的不假思索的答复是：没有辫子好，然而我劝你们不要剪。学生是向来没有一个说我“里通外国”的，但从这时起，却给了我一个“言行不一致”的结语，看不起了。“言行一致”，当然是很有价值的，现在之所谓文学家里，也还有人以这一点自豪，但他们却不知道他们一剪辫子，价值就会集中在脑袋上。轩亭口离绍兴中学并不远，就是秋瑾小姐就义之处，他们常走，然而忘却了。
Among the students, there was a sudden trend of cutting braids, and many of them wanted to cut them off. I hurriedly banned it. They raised their representatives and asked: Is it better to have braids or no braids? My unthinkable reply was: no braids are good, but I advise you not to cut them. None of the students have ever said that I am "in a foreign country", but from this time on, they gave me an ending sentence of "inconsistency in words and deeds", and I looked down on them. "Consistent words and deeds" is of course very valuable, and there are still people in the so-called writers who are proud of this, but they don't know that once they cut their braids, the value will be concentrated on their heads. Xuantingkou is not far from Shaoxing Middle School, which is where Miss Qiu Jin is righteous, and they often go, but they forget.“不亦快哉！”——到了一千九百十一年的双十，后来绍兴也挂起白旗来，算是革命了，我觉得革命给我的好处，最大，最不能忘的是我从此可以昂头露顶，慢慢的在街上走，再不听到什么嘲骂。几个也是没有辫子的老朋友从乡下来，一见面就摩着自己的光头，从心底里笑了出来道：哈哈，终于也有了这一天了。
"Isn't that exciting?" ——By the Double Tenth of 1911, and later Shaoxing also hung the white flag, which was considered a revolution, and I think the biggest benefit that the revolution gave me, the most unforgettable, is that I can hold my head high and walk slowly on the street from now on, and I will never hear any ridicule. A few old friends who were also without braids came down from the countryside, rubbed their bald heads as soon as they met, and laughed from the bottom of their hearts: Haha, there is finally this day.假如有人要我颂革命功德，以“舒愤懑”，那么，我首先要说的就是剪辫子。
If someone asks me to praise the merits of the revolution to "relieve resentment", then the first thing I want to say is to cut my braids.

病后杂谈之余　——关于“舒愤懑”

四

病后杂谈之余　——关于“舒愤懑”

Four然而辫子还有一场小风波，那就是张勋的“复辟”，一不小心，辫子是又可以种起来的，我曾见他的辫子兵在北京城外布防，对于没辫子的人们真是气焰万丈。幸而不几天就失败了，使我们至今还可以剪短，分开，披落，烫卷……
However, there is also a small turmoil in the braid, that is, Zhang Xun's "restoration", if you are not careful, the braid can be planted again, I have seen his braided soldiers deploying defenses outside Beijing, and it is really arrogant for people without braids. Fortunately, it failed in a few days, so that we can still cut it short, separate, draped and rolled......张勋的姓名已经暗淡，“复辟”的事件也逐渐遗忘，我曾在《风波》里提到它，别的作品上却似乎没有见，可见早就不受人注意。现在是，连辫子也日见稀少，将与周鼎商彝同列，渐有卖给外国人的资格了。
Zhang Xun's name has faded, and the event of the "restoration" has gradually been forgotten, and I have mentioned it in "Storm", but it does not seem to be seen in other works, which shows that it has long been unnoticed. Now, even braids are becoming increasingly rare, and they will be on the same list as Zhou Ding Shangyi, and they will gradually have the qualifications to sell to foreigners.我也爱看绘画，尤其是人物。国画呢，方巾长袍，或短褐椎结，从没有见过一条我所记得的辫子；洋画呢，歪脸汉子，肥腿女人，也从没见过一条我所记得的辫子。这回见了几幅钢笔画和木刻的阿Q像，这才算遇到了在艺术上的辫子，然而是没有一条生得合式的。想起来也难怪，现在的二十岁上下的青年，他生下来已是民国，就是三十岁的，在辫子时代也不过四五岁，当然不会深知道辫子的底细的了。
I also love to look at paintings, especially characters. As for Chinese paintings, square scarves and robes, or short brown knots, I have never seen a single braid that I remember; As for foreign paintings, crooked faces, fat-legged women, I have never seen a single braid that I remember. This time I saw several pen paintings and woodcut portraits of Ah Q, which was considered to have encountered artistic braids, but none of them were born in the right style. It's no wonder that the current young man in his twenties, he was born in the Republic of China, that is, he was thirty years old, and he was only four or five years old in the braid era, of course, he would not know the details of the braid.那么，我的“舒愤懑”，恐怕也很难传给别人，令人一样的愤激，感慨，欢喜，忧愁的罢。
Then, I am afraid that my "comfort and resentment" will be difficult to convey to others, which will make people feel the same indignation, emotion, joy, and sorrow.十二月十七日。
December 17th.一星期前，我在《病后杂谈》里说到铁氏二女的诗。据杭世骏说，钱谦益编的《列朝诗集》里是有的，但我没有这书，所以只引了《订讹类编》完事。今天《四部丛刊续编》的明遗民彭孙贻《茗斋集》出版了，后附《明诗钞》，却有铁氏长女诗在里面。现在就照抄在这里，并将范昌期原作，与所谓铁女诗不同之处，用括弧附注在下面，以便比较。照此看来，作伪者实不过改了一句，并每句各改易一二字而已——
A week ago, I talked about the poem of the two daughters of the Tie family in "Miscellaneous Talk After Illness". According to Hang Shijun, there is it in the "Poetry Collection of Dynasties" edited by Qian Qianyi, but I don't have this book, so I only quoted the "Correction of Errors" to finish the matter. Today, Peng Sunyi, a remnant of the Ming Dynasty in the "Continuation of the Four Serials", published the "Ming Poetry Banknote", but there is a poem of Tie's eldest daughter in it. Now copy it here, and add the differences between Fan Changqi's original work and the so-called Iron Maiden's poem in parentheses below for comparison. From this point of view, the forger only changed one sentence, and changed one or two words in each sentence——教坊献诗
The music workshop presented poetry
教坊脂粉（落籍）洗铅华，一片闲（春）心对落花。旧曲听来犹（空）有恨，故园归去已（却）无家。云鬟半挽（）临妆（青）镜，雨泪空流（频弹）湿绛纱。今日相逢白司马（安得江州司马在），尊前重与诉（为赋）琵琶。教坊脂粉（落籍）洗铅华，一片闲（春）心对落花。 旧曲听来犹（空）有恨，故园归去已（却）无家。 云鬟半挽（）临妆（青）镜，雨泪空流（频弹）湿绛纱。 今日相逢白司马（安得江州司马在），尊前重与诉（为赋）琵琶。
但俞正燮《癸巳类稿》又据茅大芳《希董集》，言“铁公妻女以死殉”；并记或一说云，“铁二子，无女。”那么，连铁铉有无女儿，也都成为疑案了。两个近视眼论扁额上字，辩论一通，其实连扁额也没有挂，原也是能有的事实。不过铁妻死殉之说，我以为是粉饰的。《弇州史料》所记，奏文与上谕具存，王世贞明人，决不敢捏造。
However, Yu Zhengxie's "Gui Si Class Manuscript" is also based on Mao Dafang's "Xi Dong Ji", saying that "Tie Gong's wife and daughter died in death"; And I remember one saying, "Iron two sons, no daughters." Then, even whether Tie Xuan has a daughter or not has become a suspicious case. The two myopic people discussed the words on the flat forehead, and the debate was passed, in fact, even the flat forehead was not hung, which was a fact that could be had. However, I think the iron wife died and martyred, I think it is whitewashed. The memorial and the edict recorded in the "Historical Materials of Yanzhou" are still preserved, and Wang Shizhen is a wise person who would never dare to fabricate it.倘使铁铉真的并无女儿，或有而实已自杀，则由这虚构的故事，也可以窥见社会心理之一斑。就是：在受难者家族中，无女不如其有之有趣，自杀又不如其落教坊之有趣；但铁铉究竟是忠臣，使其女永沦教坊，终觉于心不安，所以还是和寻常女子不同，因献诗而配了士子。这和小生落难，下狱挨打，到底中了状元的公式，完全是一致的。
If Tie Xuan really does not have a daughter, or if he has committed suicide, then this fictional story can also give a glimpse of social psychology. That is: in the family of the victims, no daughter is not as interesting as having it, and suicide is not as interesting as falling into the teaching workshop; But Tie Xuan was a loyal minister after all, so that his daughter fell into the teaching workshop forever, and finally felt uneasy, so he was still different from ordinary women, and he was matched with a scholar because of his poetry. This is completely consistent with the formula of Xiaosheng who was in trouble, imprisoned and beaten, and won the champion in the end.二十三日之夜，附记。
二十三日之夜，附记。

河南卢氏曹先生教泽碑文

河南卢氏曹先生教泽碑文

河南卢氏曹先生教泽碑文

河南卢氏曹先生教泽碑文夫激荡之会，利于乘时，劲风盘空，轻蓬振翮，故以豪杰称一时者多矣，而品节卓异之士，盖难得一。卢氏曹植甫先生名培元，幼承义方，长怀大愿，秉性宽厚，立行贞明。躬居山曲，设校授徒，专心一志，启迪后进，或有未谛，循循诱之，历久不渝，惠流遐迩。又不泥古，为学日新，作时世之前驱，与童冠而俱迈。爰使旧乡丕变，日见昭明，君子自强，永无意必。而韬光里巷，处之怡然。此岂辁才小慧之徒之所能至哉。中华民国二十有三年秋，年届七十，含和守素，笃行如初。门人敬仰，同心立表，冀彰潜德，亦报师恩云尔。铭曰：
夫激荡之会，利于乘时，劲风盘空，轻蓬振翮，故以豪杰称一时者多矣，而品节卓异之士，盖难得一。 卢氏曹植甫先生名培元，幼承义方，长怀大愿，秉性宽厚，立行贞明。 躬居山曲，设校授徒，专心一志，启迪后进，或有未谛，循循诱之，历久不渝，惠流遐迩。 又不泥古，为学日新，作时世之前驱，与童冠而俱迈。 爰使旧乡丕变，日见昭明，君子自强，永无意必。 而韬光里巷，处之怡然。 此岂辁才小慧之徒之所能至哉。 中华民国二十有三年秋，年届七十，含和守素，笃行如初。 门人敬仰，同心立表，冀彰潜德，亦报师恩云尔。 铭曰：华土奥衍，代生英贤，或居或作，历四千年，文物有赫，峙于中天。海涛外薄，黄神徙倚，巧黠因时，枪鹊起，然犹飘风，终朝而已。卓哉先生，遗荣崇实，开拓新流，恢弘文术，诲人不惓，惟精惟一。介立或有，恒久则难，敷教翊化，实邦之翰，敢契贞石，以励后昆。
华土奥衍，代生英贤，或居或作，历四千年，文物有赫，峙于中天。 海涛外薄，黄神徙倚，巧黠因时，枪鹊起，然犹飘风，终朝而已。 卓哉先生，遗荣崇实，开拓新流，恢弘文术，诲人不惓，惟精惟一。 介立或有，恒久则难，敷教翊化，实邦之翰，敢契贞石，以励后昆。会稽后学鲁迅谨撰。
Kuaiji later scholar Lu Xun carefully wrote.

《集外集》序

《集外集》序

《集外集》序

Preface to "Collection of Outer Collections"听说：中国的好作家是大抵“悔其少作”的，他在自定集子的时候，就将少年时代的作品尽力删除，或者简直全部烧掉。我想，这大约和现在的老成的少年，看见他婴儿时代的出屁股，衔手指的照相一样，自愧其幼稚，因而觉得有损于他现在的尊严，——于是以为倘使可以隐蔽，总还是隐蔽的好。但我对于自己的“少作”，愧则有之，悔却从来没有过。出屁股，衔手指的照相，当然是惹人发笑的，但自有婴年的天真，决非少年以至老年所能有。况且如果少时不作，到老恐怕也未必就能作，又怎么还知道悔呢？
I heard that good Chinese writers generally "regret their lack of work", and when they set their own collections, they try their best to delete their youthful works, or simply burn them all. I think this is about the same as the old boy now, who saw the photo of his buttocks sticking out and holding his finger when he was a baby, and felt that it was detrimental to his current dignity,—— so he thought that if he could hide it, it would always be better to hide. But I am ashamed of my "less work", but I have never regretted it. The photo of sticking out the buttocks and holding the finger is of course laughable, but the innocence of infancy is by no means something that teenagers and old age can have. Moreover, if you don't do it when you are young, you may not be able to do it when you are old, so how can you still know how to regret it?先前自己编了一本《坟》，还留存着许多文言文，就是这意思；这意思和方法，也一直至今没有变。但是，也有漏落的：是因为没有留存着底子，忘记了。也有故意删掉的：是或者因为看去好像抄译，却又年远失记，连自己也怀疑；或者因为不过对于一人，一时的事，和大局无关，情随事迁，无须再录；或者因为本不过开些玩笑，或是出于暂时的误解，几天之后，便无意义，不必留存了。
Previously, I compiled a book of "Tomb", and there are still many classical Chinese texts, which is what it means; This meaning and method have not changed to this day. However, there are also omissions: it is because there is no foundation left and forgotten. There are also those who are deliberately deleted: yes or because it looks like a copy, but it is old and forgets, and even I doubt it; Or because it is just for one person, a temporary matter has nothing to do with the overall situation, and the situation changes with the situation, so there is no need to record it again; Or because it was just a joke, or out of a temporary misunderstanding, after a few days, it was meaningless and did not need to be kept.但使我吃惊的是霁云先生竟抄下了这么一大堆，连三十多年前的时文，十多年前的新诗，也全在那里面。这真好像将我五十多年前的出屁股，衔手指的照相，装潢起来，并且给我自己和别人来赏鉴。连我自己也诧异那时的我的幼稚，而且近乎不识羞。但是，有什么法子呢？这的确是我的影像，——由它去罢。
But what surprised me was that Mr. Jiyun copied such a large number of them, even the current texts from more than 30 years ago and the new poems from more than ten years ago. This is really like decorating the photos of my buttocks and fingers more than fifty years ago, and giving them to myself and others to appreciate. Even I myself was surprised at my naivety at that time, and I was almost ashamed. But what can be done? This is indeed my image,—— let it go.不过看起来也引起我一点回忆。例如最先的两篇，就是我故意删掉的。一篇是“雷锭”的最初的绍介，一篇是斯巴达的尚武精神的描写，但我记得自己那时的化学和历史的程度并没有这样高，所以大概总是从什么地方偷来的，不过后来无论怎么记，也再也记不起它们的老家；而且我那时初学日文，文法并未了然，就急于看书，看书并不很懂，就急于翻译，所以那内容也就可疑得很。而且文章又多么古怪，尤其是那一篇《斯巴达之魂》，现在看起来，自己也不免耳朵发热。但这是当时的风气，要激昂慷慨，顿挫抑扬，才能被称为好文章，我还记得“被发大叫，抱书独行，无泪可挥，大风灭烛”是大家传诵的警句。但我的文章里，也有受着严又陵的影响的，例如“涅伏”，就是“神经”的腊丁语的音译，这是现在恐怕只有我自己懂得的了。以后又受了章太炎先生的影响，古了起来，但这集子里却一篇也没有。
But it also seems to evoke a little memory for me. For example, the first two articles were deliberately deleted by me. One is the initial introduction of "Thunder Ingot", and the other is a description of Sparta's martial spirit, but I remember that my chemistry and history at that time were not so high, so they were probably always stolen from somewhere, but no matter how I remember them later, I can no longer remember their hometown; And when I was new to Japanese, I didn't understand the grammar, so I was eager to read the book, and I didn't understand the book very well, so I was eager to translate, so the content was very suspicious. And how strange the article is, especially the "Soul of Sparta", now it seems that my ears are hot. But this was the atmosphere at that time, it was necessary to be passionate and generous, frustrated and intonated, in order to be called a good article, I still remember that "being screamed, holding a book alone, no tears to wave, strong wind extinguishing candles" is an aphorism recited by everyone. But in my articles, there are also those influenced by Yan Youling, such as "Nirvana", which is the transliteration of the Latin word for "nerve", which I am afraid only I understand now. Later, under the influence of Mr. Zhang Taiyan, it became ancient, but there was not a single one in this collection.以后回到中国来，还给日报之类做了些古文，自己不记得究竟是什么了，霁云先生也找不出，我真觉得侥幸得很。
When I returned to China in the future, I also made some ancient texts for daily newspapers and the like, but I don't remember what it was, and Mr. Jiyun couldn't find it, I really felt very lucky.以后是抄古碑。再做就是白话；也做了几首新诗。我其实是不喜欢做新诗的——但也不喜欢做古诗——只因为那时诗坛寂寞，所以打打边鼓，凑些热闹；待到称为诗人的一出现，就洗手不作了。我更不喜欢徐志摩那样的诗，而他偏爱到各处投稿，《语丝》一出版，他也就来了，有人赞成他，登了出来，我就做了一篇杂感，和他开一通玩笑，使他不能来，他也果然不来了。这是我和后来的“新月派”积仇的第一步；《语丝》社同人中有几位也因此很不高兴我。不过不知道为什么没有收在《热风》里，漏落，还是故意删掉的呢，已经记不清，幸而这集子里有，那就是了。
In the future, it will be a copy of ancient monuments. If you do it again, it will be vernacular; also made several new poems. I actually don't like to make new poems - but I don't like to make ancient poems - just because the poetry world was lonely at that time, so I played drums and joined in the fun; When the poet appears, he washes his hands and stops working. I don't like poems like Xu Zhimo even more, and he prefers to submit everywhere, as soon as "Yusi" was published, he came, someone approved of him, and he posted it, so I made a miscellaneous feeling and made a joke with him, so that he couldn't come, and he really didn't come. This was the first step in my feud with the later "Crescent Sect"; Several of the "Yusi" fandom members were also very unhappy with me. But I don't know why it was not included in "Hot Wind", it was omitted, or it was deliberately deleted, I can't remember clearly, but fortunately there is it in this episode, that's it.只有几篇讲演，是现在故意删去的。我曾经能讲书，却不善于讲演，这已经是大可不必保存的了。而记录的人，或者为了方音的不同，听不很懂，于是漏落，错误；或者为了意见的不同，取舍因而不确，我以为要紧的，他并不记录，遇到空话，却详详细细记了一大通；有些则简直好像是恶意的捏造，意思和我所说的正是相反的。凡这些，我只好当作记录者自己的创作，都将它由我这里删掉。
There are only a few lectures, which are now deliberately deleted. I used to be able to lecture, but I was not good at speaking, which is no longer necessary to save. And the person who recorded, or because of the difference in square sound, did not understand very well, so he omitted and made a mistake; Or because of the difference of opinion, the choice is inaccurate, I think it is important, he does not record, encounters empty words, but remembers a lot in detail; Some seem to be malicious fabrications, meaning exactly the opposite of what I said. All of this, I had to delete it from me as the recorder's own creation.我惭愧我的少年之作，却并不后悔，甚而至于还有些爱，这真好像是“乳犊不怕虎”，乱攻一通，虽然无谋，但自有天真存在。现在是比较的精细了，然而我又别有其不满于自己之处。我佩服会用拖刀计的老将黄汉升，但我爱莽撞的不顾利害而终于被部下偷了头去的张翼德；我却又憎恶张翼德型的不问青红皂白，抡板斧“排头砍去”的李逵，我因此喜欢张顺的将他诱进水里去，淹得他两眼翻白。
I am ashamed of my youthful work, but I don't regret it, and even have some love, which is really like "the calf is not afraid of tigers", and the attack is indiscriminate, although there is no strategy, but there is innocence. Now it's more refined, but I have other dissatisfactions with myself. I admire the veteran Huang Hansheng who can use a drag knife, but I love Zhang Yide, who was reckless and finally stolen by his subordinates regardless of interests; But I hate Zhang Yide's type of Li Kui, who doesn't care about red and white, and "chops the head of the line" with an axe, so I like Zhang Shun to lure him into the water, drowning his eyes to roll.一九三四年十二月二十日夜，鲁迅记于上海之卓面书斋。
On the night of December 20, 1934, Lu Xun recorded in the Zhuo Facebook study in Shanghai.

阿金

阿金

阿金

Kim近几时我最讨厌阿金。
Recently, I hate Akin the most.她是一个女仆，上海叫娘姨，外国人叫阿妈，她的主人也正是外国人。
She is a maid, Shanghai is called Aunt, foreigners are called mother, and her master is also a foreigner.她有许多女朋友，天一晚，就陆续到她窗下来，“阿金，阿金！”的大声的叫，这样的一直到半夜。她又好像颇有几个姘头；她曾在后门口宣布她的主张：弗轧姘头，到上海来做啥呢？……
She has many girlfriends, and one night, they come down to her window one after another, "Ah Jin, Ah Jin!" ", until midnight. She seems to have a few sisters-in-law; She once announced her proposition at the back door: Fu Yan, what are you doing in Shanghai? ……不过这和我不相干。不幸的是她的主人家的后门，斜对着我的前门，所以“阿金，阿金！”的叫起来，我总受些影响，有时是文章做不下去了，有时竟会在稿子上写一个“金”字。更不幸的是我的进出，必须从她家的晒台下走过，而她大约是不喜欢走楼梯的，竹竿，木板，还有别的什么，常常从晒台上直摔下来，使我走过的时候，必须十分小心，先看一看这位阿金可在晒台上面，倘在，就得绕远些。自然，这是大半为了我胆子小，看得自己的性命太值钱；但我们也得想一想她的主子是外国人，被打得头破血出，固然不成问题，即使死了，开同乡会，打电报也都没有用的，——况且我想，我也未必能够弄到开起同乡会。
But this has nothing to do with me. Unfortunately the back door of her master's house, diagonally facing my front door, so "Akin, Akin!" I was always affected, sometimes the article couldn't be done, and sometimes I would write a "gold" word on the manuscript. What's even more unfortunate is that I have to walk under the sundeck of her house, and she probably doesn't like to take stairs, bamboo poles, wooden boards, and other things, and often fall straight down from the sundeck, so that when I walk by, I must be very careful, first take a look at this Ah Jinke on the sundeck, if it is, I have to go around. Naturally, this is mostly because I am timid and see that my life is too valuable; But we also have to think about it, her master is a foreigner, and it is not a problem to be beaten to the point of bleeding, even if he dies, it is useless to hold a hometown meeting or send a telegram,—— and I think that I may not be able to get to start a hometown association.半夜以后，是别一种世界，还剩着白天脾气是不行的。有一夜，已经三点半钟了，我在译一篇东西，还没有睡觉。忽然听得路上有人低声的在叫谁，虽然听不清楚，却并不是叫阿金，当然也不是叫我。我想：这么迟了，还有谁来叫谁呢？同时也站起来，推开楼窗去看去了，却看见一个男人，望着阿金的绣阁的窗，站着。他没有看见我。我自悔我的莽撞，正想关窗退回的时候，斜对面的小窗开处，已经现出阿金的上半身来，并且立刻看见了我，向那男人说了一句不知道什么话，用手向我一指，又一挥，那男人便开大步跑掉了。我很不舒服，好像是自己做了甚么错事似的，书译不下去了，心里想：以后总要少管闲事，要炼到泰山崩于前而色不变，炸弹落于侧而身不移！……
After midnight, it is a different world, and it is not okay to have a temper during the day. One night, it was already half past three, and I was translating something and had not slept yet. Suddenly I heard someone on the road whispering who it was, although I couldn't hear it clearly, but it wasn't called Ah Jin, and certainly not me. I thought: It's so late, who else will call whom? At the same time, he stood up, pushed open the window to look, but saw a man standing looking at the window of Ah Jin's embroidered pavilion. He didn't see me. I regretted my recklessness, and when I was about to close the window and retreat, Ah Jin's upper body had already appeared in the opening of the small window diagonally opposite, and immediately saw me, said something I didn't know what to say to the man, pointed at me with his hand, and waved it again, and the man strode away. I was very uncomfortable, as if I had done something wrong, and I couldn't translate the book, thinking to myself: In the future, I will always be nosy, and I will refine until Mount Tai collapses in front of me and does not change, and the bomb falls on the side and does not move! ……但在阿金，却似乎毫不受什么影响，因为她仍然嘻嘻哈哈。不过这是晚快边才得到的结论，所以我真是负疚了小半夜和一整天。这时我很感激阿金的大度，但同时又讨厌了她的大声会议，嘻嘻哈哈了。自有阿金以来，四围的空气也变得扰动了，她就有这么大的力量。这种扰动，我的警告是毫无效验的，她们连看也不对我看一看。有一回，邻近的洋人说了几句洋话，她们也不理；但那洋人就奔出来了，用脚向各人乱踢，她们这才逃散，会议也收了场。这踢的效力，大约保存了五六夜。
But Ah Jin didn't seem to be affected by anything, because she was still giggling. But this is the conclusion I only came to in the evening, so I really feel guilty for the middle of the night and the whole day. At this time, I was grateful for Ah Jin's generosity, but at the same time I hated her loud meetings and giggled. Since Ah Jin, the air around her has also become disturbed, and she has such great power. My warning was ineffective for this kind of disturbance, and they didn't even look at me. Once, the neighboring foreigners said a few foreign words, but they ignored them; But the foreigner ran out and kicked everyone with his feet, and they fled, and the meeting ended. The effectiveness of this kick was preserved for about five or six nights.此后是照常的嚷嚷；而且扰动又廓张了开去，阿金和马路对面一家烟纸店里的老女人开始奋斗了，还有男人相帮。她的声音原是响亮的，这回就更加响亮，我觉得一定可以使二十间门面以外的人们听见。不一会，就聚集了一大批人。论战的将近结束的时候当然要提到“偷汉”之类，那老女人的话我没有听清楚，阿金的答复是：
After that, it was the usual shouting; And the disturbance opened up again, and Ah Jin and the old woman in a cigarette paper shop across the road began to struggle, and there were men to help. Her voice was originally loud, but this time it was even louder, and I thought it would definitely be heard by people outside the twenty facades. After a while, a large number of people gathered. When the debate was about to end, of course, I had to mention "thieves", but I didn't hear the old woman's words clearly, and Ah Jin's reply was:“你这老×没有人要！我可有人要呀！”
"No one wants you old ×! Does anyone want it? ”这恐怕是实情，看客似乎大抵对她表同情，“没有人要”的老×战败了。这时踱来了一位洋巡捕，反背着两手，看了一会，就来把看客们赶开；阿金赶紧迎上去，对他讲了一连串的洋话。洋巡捕注意的听完之后，微笑的说道：
This is probably the truth, the spectators seem to sympathize with her, and the old × who "no one wants it" is defeated. At this time, a foreign patrol came pacing, with his hands behind his back, and after watching for a while, he came to drive the spectators away; Ah Jin hurriedly greeted him and told him a series of foreign words. After listening attentively, the foreign patrol said with a smile:“我看你也不弱呀！”
"I don't think you're weak either!"他并不去捉老×，又反背着手，慢慢的踱过去了。这一场巷战就算这样的结束。但是，人间世的纠纷又并不能解决得这么干脆，那老×大约是也有一点势力的。第二天早晨，那离阿金家不远的也是外国人家的西崽忽然向阿金家逃来。后面追着三个彪形大汉。西崽的小衫已被撕破，大约他被他们诱出外面，又给人堵住后门，退不回去，所以只好逃到他爱人这里来了。爱人的肘腋之下，原是可以安身立命的，伊孛生（H．Ibsen）戏剧里的彼尔·干德，就是失败之后，终于躲在爱人的裙边，听唱催眠歌的大人物。但我看阿金似乎比不上瑙威女子，她无情，也没有魄力。独有感觉是灵的，那男人刚要跑到的时候，她已经赶紧把后门关上了。那男人于是进了绝路，只得站住。这好像也颇出于彪形大汉们的意料之外，显得有些踌蹰；但终于一同举起拳头，两个是在他背脊和胸脯上一共给了三拳，仿佛也并不怎么重，一个在他脸上打了一拳，却使它立刻红起来。这一场巷战很神速，又在早晨，所以观战者也不多，胜败两军，各自走散，世界又从此暂时和平了。然而我仍然不放心，因为我曾经听人说过：所谓“和平”，不过是两次战争之间的时日。
He didn't catch the old ×, but slowly paced over with his hands behind his back. This street battle ended like this. However, disputes in the human world cannot be resolved so simply, and the old × probably has a little power. The next morning, the Xi cub, who was also a foreigner's family not far from Ah Jin's house, suddenly fled to Ah Jin's house. Three burly men were chasing behind. Xi Cub's shirt had been torn, and he was lured out by them, and the back door was blocked, so he couldn't go back, so he had to flee to his lover. Under the armpit of the lover, it was possible to settle down, and the Pier Gander in H. Ibsen's play was the big man who finally hid in the skirt of his lover and listened to the hypnotic song after failing. But I think Akin doesn't seem to be as good as the Nauwei woman, she is ruthless and has no courage. The unique feeling was spiritual, and when the man was about to run, she had already hurriedly closed the back door. The man then went to a dead end and had to stop. This seems to be quite unexpected by the burly men, and it seems a little hesitant; But finally raised their fists together, and two of them gave a total of three punches on his back and chest, as if they were not very heavy, and one punched him in the face, but it immediately turned red. This street battle was very fast, and it was in the morning, so there were not many spectators, and the two armies were defeated and separated, and the world was temporarily peaceful again. However, I am still not at ease, because I have heard people say that the so-called "peace" is only the time between the two wars.但是，过了几天，阿金就不再看见了，我猜想是被她自己的主人所回复。补了她的缺的是一个胖胖的，脸上很有些福相和雅气的娘姨，已经二十多天，还很安静，只叫了卖唱的两个穷人唱过一回“奇葛隆冬强”的《十八摸》之类，那是她用“自食其力”的余闲，享点清福，谁也没有话说的。只可惜那时又招集了一群男男女女，连阿金的爱人也在内，保不定什么时候又会发生巷战。但我却也叨光听到了男嗓子的上低音（barytone）的歌声，觉得很自然，比绞死猫儿似的《毛毛雨》要好得天差地远。
However, after a few days, Ah Jin stopped seeing it, and I guess it was replied by her own master. What made up for her lack was a chubby aunt with a very blessed and elegant face, who had been for more than 20 days, and was still very quiet, and only called the two poor people who sold singing to sing "Eighteen Touches" and the like, which was her leisure of "self-reliance" to enjoy some happiness, and no one had anything to say. It's a pity that a group of men and women were gathered at that time, including Ah Jin's lover, and there was no guarantee that there would be street fights again. But I also heard the barytone singing of the male voice, and I felt that it was very natural, far better than "Drizzle", which was like a hanging cat.阿金的相貌是极其平凡的。所谓平凡，就是很普通，很难记住，不到一个月，我就说不出她究竟是怎么一副模样来了。但是我还讨厌她，想到“阿金”这两个字就讨厌；在邻近闹嚷一下当然不会成这么深仇重怨，我的讨厌她是因为不消几日，她就摇动了我三十年来的信念和主张。
Ah Jin's appearance is extremely ordinary. The so-called ordinary is very ordinary, it is difficult to remember, and in less than a month, I can't tell what she looks like. But I still hate her, and I hate it when I think of the word "Ajin"; Of course, making a fuss in the neighborhood would not lead to such a deep grudge, and I hated her because within a few days, she shook my beliefs and ideas for thirty years.我一向不相信昭君出塞会安汉，木兰从军就可以保隋；也不信妲己亡殷，西施沼吴，杨妃乱唐的那些古老话。我以为在男权社会里，女人是决不会有这种大力量的，兴亡的责任，都应该男的负。但向来的男性的作者，大抵将败亡的大罪，推在女性身上，这真是一钱不值的没有出息的男人。殊不料现在阿金却以一个貌不出众，才不惊人的娘姨，不用一个月，就在我眼前搅乱了四分之一里，假使她是一个女王，或者是皇后，皇太后，那么，其影响也就可以推见了：足够闹出大大的乱子来。
I have never believed that Zhaojun will be in the Han Dynasty when he goes out of the frontier, and Mulan can protect Sui from the army; I don't believe in the old sayings of Daji's death of Yin, Xi Shi Zhao Wu, and Yang Fei's chaos in the Tang Dynasty. I thought that in a patriarchal society, women would never have such great power, and the responsibility for the rise and fall should be borne by men. But the authors of male writers have generally put the great sin of defeat on women, which is really a worthless and unpromising man. Unexpectedly, now Ah Jin is an unoutstanding, not amazing aunt, in less than a month, in front of my eyes, a quarter of the time, if she is a queen, or a queen, the empress dowager, then its impact can also be inferred: enough to make a big mess.昔者孔子“五十而知天命”，我却为了区区一个阿金，连对于人事也从新疑惑起来了，虽然圣人和凡人不能相比，但也可见阿金的伟力，和我的满不行。我不想将我的文章的退步，归罪于阿金的嚷嚷，而且以上的一通议论，也很近于迁怒，但是，近几时我最讨厌阿金，仿佛她塞住了我的一条路，却是的确的。
In the past, Confucius "knew the destiny of heaven at fifty", but for the sake of a mere Ajin, even I had new doubts about personnel, although the saint and mortal could not be compared, but it can also be seen that Ajin's great power is not as good as mine. I don't want to blame Ah Jin's shout for the regression of my article, and the above discussion is also very close to venting anger, but recently I hate Ah Jin the most, as if she blocked one of my paths, but it is true.愿阿金也不能算是中国女性的标本。
May Ah Jin not be a specimen of Chinese women.十二月二十一日。
December 21st.

论俗人应避雅人

论俗人应避雅人

论俗人应避雅人

It is argued that ordinary people should avoid elegant people这是看了些杂志，偶然想到的——
This is what I thought of by chance after reading some magazines -浊世少见“雅人”，少有“韵事”。但是，没有浊到彻底的时候，雅人却也并非全没有，不过因为“伤雅”的人们多，也累得他们“雅”不彻底了。
In turbid worlds, "elegant people" are rare, and "rhyme matters" are rare. However, when it is not completely turbid, it is not all elegant, but because there are many people who "hurt elegance", they are also tired of being "elegant" and not thorough.道学先生是躬行“仁恕”的，但遇见不仁不恕的人们，他就也不能仁恕。所以朱子是大贤，而做官的时候，不能不给无告的官妓吃板子。新月社的作家们是最憎恶骂人的，但遇见骂人的人，就害得他们不能不骂。林语堂先生是佩服“费厄泼赖”的，但在杭州赏菊，遇见“口里含一枝苏俄香烟，手里夹一本什么斯基的译本”的青年，他就不能不“假作无精打彩，愁眉不展，忧国忧家”（详见《论语》五十五期）的样子，面目全非了。
Mr. Taoism practices "benevolence and forgiveness", but when he encounters unkind and unforgivable people, he cannot forgive either. Therefore, Zhu Zi is a great sage, and when he is an official, he cannot help but give the untold official prostitute a board. The writers of the Crescent Society hate scolding the most, but when they meet scolders, they can't help but scold. Mr. Lin Yutang admired "Fei E Plai", but when he was admiring chrysanthemums in Hangzhou and met a young man who "held a Soviet Russian cigarette in his mouth and a translation of Hesky in his hand", he could not help but "pretend to be listless, frowning, and worried about the country and his family" (see the fifty-fifth issue of the Analects for details), which was unrecognizable.优良的人物，有时候是要靠别种人来比较，衬托的，例如上等与下等，好与坏，雅与俗，小器与大度之类。没有别人，即无以显出这一面之优，所谓“相反而实相成”者，就是这。但又须别人凑趣，至少是知趣，即使不能帮闲，也至少不可说破，逼得好人们再也好不下去。例如曹孟德是“尚通”的，但祢正平天天上门来骂他，他也只好生起气来，送给黄祖去“借刀杀人”了。祢正平真是“咎由自取”。
Excellent characters sometimes have to be compared and set off by other people, such as superior and inferior, good and bad, elegant and vulgar, petty and generous, etc. Without others, there is no way to show the superiority of this side, and the so-called "opposite and reality" is this. But it also requires others to make fun, at least to know the fun, even if it can't help, at least not to be broken, forcing good people to get better. For example, Cao Mengde was "Shang Tong", but you Zhengping came to scold him every day, and he had to get angry and send it to Huang Zu to "borrow a knife to kill". You are really "to blame".所谓“雅人”，原不是一天雅到晚的，即使睡的是珠罗帐，吃的是香稻米，但那根本的睡觉和吃饭，和俗人究竟也没有什么大不同；就是肚子里盘算些挣钱固位之法，自然也不能绝无其事。但他的出众之处，是在有时又忽然能够“雅”。倘使揭穿了这谜底，便是所谓“杀风景”，也就是俗人，而且带累了雅人，使他雅不下去，“未能免俗”了。若无此辈，何至于此呢？所以错处总归在俗人这方面。
Even if they sleep in a beaded tent and eat fragrant rice, they are fundamentally different from ordinary people; Even if you plan some ways to make money and retain your position in your stomach, naturally you can't do anything. But his outstanding feature is that he can sometimes be "elegant" at times. If this mystery is exposed, it is the so-called "killing the scenery", that is, the layman, and it tires the elegant people, so that he cannot go down and "cannot escape the vulgar". If there were no such people, how could it be like this? So the fault always lies in the layman's side.譬如罢，有两位知县在这里，他们自然都是整天的办公事，审案子的，但如果其中之一，能够偶然的去看梅花，那就要算是一位雅官，应该加以恭维，天地之间这才会有雅人，会有韵事。如果你不恭维，还可以；一皱眉，就俗；敢开玩笑，那就把好事情都搅坏了。然而世间也偏有狂夫俗子；记得在一部中国的什么古“幽默”书里，有一首“轻薄子”咏知县老爷公余探梅的七绝——
For example, there are two county magistrates here, and they are naturally working all day long to judge cases, but if one of them can accidentally go to see the plum blossoms, then it must be regarded as an elegant official, and it should be complimented. If you're not complimenting, it's okay; frowning, vulgar; Dare to joke, then you will ruin all the good things. However, there are also madmen and vulgar people in the world; I remember that in an ancient Chinese "humorous" book, there was a song "frivolous" about the seven wonders of the county magistrate's grandfather Yu Tanmei -红帽哼兮黑帽呵，风流太守看梅花。Red Riding Hood hums, Black Riding Hood haha, the romantic governor looks at the plum blossoms. 
梅花低首开言道：小底梅花接老爷。 Meihua bowed his head and said: Xiaodi Meihua picked up the master.
这真是恶作剧，将韵事闹得一塌胡涂。而且他替梅花所说的话，也不合式，它这时应该一声不响的，一说，就“伤雅”，会累得“老爷”不便再雅，只好立刻还俗，赏吃板子，至少是给一种什么罪案的。为什么呢？就因为你俗，再不能以雅道相处了。
This is really a prank and makes a mess of rhyme. And what he said for Meihua was not in accordance with the style, it should be silent at this time, as soon as it was said, it would be "hurtful", and it would be so tired that the "master" would be inconvenient to be elegant, so he had to immediately return to the vulgar world, reward the board, at least for some kind of crime. Why? Just because you are vulgar, you can no longer get along with each other in an elegant way.小心谨慎的人，偶然遇见仁人君子或雅人学者时，倘不会帮闲凑趣，就须远远避开，愈远愈妙。假如不然，即不免要碰着和他们口头大不相同的脸孔和手段。晦气的时候，还会弄到卢布学说的老套，大吃其亏。只给你“口里含一枝苏俄香烟，手里夹一本什么斯基的译本”，倒还不打紧，——然而险矣。
Cautious people, when they meet benevolent gentlemen or elegant scholars by chance, if they do not help to make fun of themselves, they must avoid them from a distance, and the farther away the better. If not, it is inevitable that they will encounter faces and methods that are very different from their words. When you are unlucky, you will also get the old-fashioned ruble doctrine and suffer a lot. It is not a big deal to give you "a Soviet Russian cigarette in your mouth and a translation of Hesky in your hand",—— but it is dangerous.大家都知道“贤者避世”，我以为现在的俗人却要避雅，这也是一种“明哲保身”。
Everyone knows that "the sage avoids the world", but I think that the current laypeople want to avoid elegance, which is also a kind of "wise self-preservation".十二月二十六日。
December 26th.

附记

附记

附记

P.S第一篇《关于中国的两三件事》，是应日本的改造社之托而写的，原是日文，即于是年三月，登在《改造》上，改题为《火，王道，监狱》。记得中国北方，曾有一种期刊译载过这三篇，但在南方，却只有林语堂，邵洵美，章克标三位所主编的杂志《人言》上，曾用这为攻击作者之具，其详见于《准风月谈》的后记中，兹不赘。
The first article, "Two or Three Things About China", was written at the request of the Japanese Reform Society, originally in Japanese, that is, in March of that year, it was published in "Transformation" and retitled "Fire, Royal Road, Prison". I remember that in northern China, there was a journal that translated these three articles, but in the south, only Lin Yutang, Shao Xunmei, and Zhang Kebiao used this as a tool to attack the author in the magazine "Human Words", which is detailed in the postscript of "Quasi-Fengyue Tan", which will not be repeated.
《草鞋脚》是现代中国作家的短篇小说集，应伊罗生（H．Isaacs）先生之托，由我和茅盾先生选出，他更加选择，译成英文的。但至今好像还没有出版。
"Straw Shoes" is a collection of short stories by modern Chinese writers, selected by me and Mr. Mao Dun at the request of Mr. H. Isaacs, and he chose it and translated it into English. But it seems that it has not been published yet.
《答曹聚仁先生信》原是我们的私人通信，不料竟在《社会月报》上登出来了，这一登可是祸事非小，我就成为“替杨人氏打开场锣鼓，谁说鲁迅先生器量窄小呢”了。有八月三十一日《大晚报》副刊《火炬》上的文章为证——
"Answer to Mr. Cao Juren's Letter" was originally our private correspondence, but unexpectedly it was published in the "Social Monthly Report", and this publication was not a small disaster, so I became "opening the gongs and drums for Yang Renshi, who said that Mr. Lu Xun has a narrow capacity". There is an article in the supplement "Torch" of the "Great Evening News" on August 31 as evidence-调和
harmony——读《社会月报》八月号
——Read the August issue of "Social Monthly"绍伯
Shaobo“中国人是善于调和的民族”——这话我从前还不大相信，因为那时我年纪还轻，阅历不到，我自己是不大肯调和的，我就以为别人也和我一样的不肯调和。
"Chinese are a nation that is good at reconciliation" - I didn't believe this before, because I was still young and had no experience, and I was unwilling to reconcile myself, so I thought that others would refuse to reconcile just like me.这观念后来也稍稍改正了。那是我有一个亲戚，在我故乡两个军阀的政权争夺战中做了牺牲，我那时对于某军阀虽无好感，却因亲戚之故也感着一种同仇敌忾，及至后来那两军阀到了上海又很快的调和了，彼此过从颇密，我不觉为之呆然，觉得我们亲戚假使仅仅是为着他的“政友”而死，他真是白死了。
This concept was later slightly corrected. It was that I had a relative who made sacrifices in the power struggle between two warlords in my hometown, and although I didn't have a good impression of a warlord at that time, I also felt a kind of hatred because of my relatives, and later the two warlords quickly reconciled when they arrived in Shanghai, and they had a close relationship with each other.后来又听得广东A君告诉我在两广战争后战士们白骨在野碧血还腥的时候，两军主持的太太在香港寓楼时常一道打牌，亲昵逾常，这更使我大彻大悟。
Later, I heard Mr. A from Guangdong tell me that after the Guangdong War, when the bones of the soldiers were still bloody in the wild, the wives of the two armies often played cards together in the Hong Kong apartment, which made me even more enlightened.现在，我们更明白了，这是当然的事，不单是军阀战争如此，帝国主义的分赃战争也作如是观。老百姓整千整万地做了炮灰，各国资本家却可以聚首一堂举着香槟相视而笑。什么“军阀主义”“民主主义”都成了骗人的话。
Now, we understand better that this is a matter of course, not only in warlord wars, but also in imperialist wars of spoils. Thousands of ordinary people have been cannon fodder, but capitalists from all over the world can gather together and look at each other with champagne and smile. All "warlordism" and "democracy" have become deceptive words.然而这是指那些军阀资本家们“无原则的争斗”，若夫真理追求者的“有原则的争斗”应该不是这样！
However, this refers to the "unprincipled struggle" of those warlord capitalists, and the "principled struggle" of truth-seekers should not be like this!最近这几年，青年们追随着思想界的领袖们之后做了许多惨淡的努力，有的为着这还牺牲了宝贵的生命。个人的生命是可宝贵的，但一代的真理更可宝贵，生命牺牲了而真理昭然于天下，这死是值得的，就是不可以太打浑了水，把人家弄得不明不白。
In recent years, young people have made many dismal efforts to follow the leaders of the ideological world, and some have sacrificed their precious lives for this. Personal life is precious, but the truth of a generation is even more precious, life is sacrificed and the truth is clear to the world, this death is worth it, that is, you can't muddy the water too much and make people unclear.后者的例子可求之于《社会月报》。这月刊真可以说是当今最完备的“杂”志了。而最“杂”得有趣的是题为“大众语特辑”的八月号。读者试念念这一期的目录罢，第一位打开场锣鼓的是鲁迅先生（关于大众语的意见），而“压轴子”的是《赤区归来记》作者杨人氏。就是健忘的读者想也记得鲁迅先生和杨人氏有过不小的一点“原则上”的争执罢。鲁迅先生似乎还“嘘”过杨人氏，然而他却可以替杨人氏打开场锣鼓，谁说鲁迅先生器量窄小呢？
An example of the latter can be found in the "Social Monthly". This monthly magazine can really be said to be the most complete "miscellaneous" magazine today. The most "miscellaneous" and interesting is the August issue entitled "Popular Language Special". Readers try to read the table of contents of this issue, the first to open the gongs and drums is Mr. Lu Xun (opinions on popular language), and the "finale" is Yang Renshi, the author of "The Return of the Red Zone". Even forgetful readers will remember that Mr. Lu Xun and Yang Renshi had a lot of "in principle" disputes. Mr. Lu Xun seems to have "booed" Yang Renshi, but he can open the gongs and drums for Yang Renshi, who said that Mr. Lu Xun has a narrow capacity?苦的只是读者，读了鲁迅先生的信，我们知道“汉字和大众不两立”，我们知道应把“交通繁盛言语混杂的地方”的“‘大众语’的雏形，它的字汇和语法输进穷乡僻壤去”。我们知道“先驱者的任务”是在给大众许多话“发表更明确的意思”，同时“明白更精确的意义”；我们知道现在所能实行的是以“进步的”思想写“向大众语去的作品”。但读了最后杨人氏的文章，才知道向大众去根本是一条死路，那里在水灾与敌人围攻之下，破产无余，……“维持已经困难，建设更不要空谈。”还是“归”到都会里“来”扬起小资产阶级文学之旗更靠得住。
After reading Mr. Lu Xun's letter, we know that "Chinese characters and the public are incompatible", and we know that we should export the "prototype of the 'popular language', its vocabulary and grammar to the poor and remote areas" of "places where traffic is prosperous and language is mixed". We know that the "task of the pioneer" is to "express clearer meanings" to the masses and "understand more precise meanings"; We know that what we can do now is to write "works that go to the popular language" with "progressive" ideas. But after reading Yang Ren's article at the end, I realized that going to the public was a dead end, where under the siege of floods and enemies, bankruptcy was ,...... "It is already difficult to maintain, and construction should not be empty talk." It is more reliable to "return" to the city and "come" to raise the banner of petty-bourgeois literature.于是，我们所得的知识前后相销，昏昏沉沉，莫明其妙。
As a result, the knowledge we gain is mutually exclusive, groggy, and incomprehensible.这恐怕也表示中国民族善于调和吧，但是太调和了，使人疑心思想上的争斗也渐渐没有原则了。变成“戟门坝上的儿戏”了。照这样的阵容看，有些人真死的不明不白。
This may also mean that the Chinese nation is good at reconciliation, but it is too harmonious, and the ideological struggle that makes people suspicious is gradually unprincipled. It has become "child's play on the Halberd Gate Dam". According to such a lineup, some people are really dead.关于开锣以后“压轴”以前的那些“中间作家”的文章特别是大众语问题的一些宏论，本想略抒鄙见，但这只好改日再谈了。
I wanted to express some of the grand theories about the articles of the "middle writers" before the "finale" after the gong, especially the popular language issue, but I have to talk about it another day.关于这一案，我到十一月《答〈戏〉周刊编者信》里，这才回答了几句。
Regarding this case, I only answered a few words in the November "Answer to the Editor's Letter of Opera Weekly".
《门外文谈》是用了“华圉”的笔名，向《自由谈》投稿的，每天登一节。但不知道为什么，第一节被删去了末一行，第十节开头又被删去了二百余字，现仍补足，并用黑点为记。
"Outside the Door" uses the pseudonym "Hua Yu" and contributes to "Free Talk", and publishes a section every day. But for some reason, the last line of the first section was deleted, and more than 200 words were deleted at the beginning of the tenth section, which is still made up and marked with black dots.
《不知肉味和不知水味》是写给《太白》的，登出来时，后半篇都不见了，我看这是“中央宣传部书报检查委员会”的政绩。那时有人看了《太白》上的这一篇，当面问我道：“你在说什么呀？”现仍补足，并用黑点为记，使读者可以知道我其实是在说什么。
"I Don't Know the Taste of Meat and Don't Know the Taste of Water" was written to "Taibai", and when it was published, the second half of the article was gone, and I think this is the achievement of the "Central Propaganda Department Book and Newspaper Inspection Committee". At that time, someone read this article in "Taibai" and asked me in person: "What are you talking about?" "I still make up for it, and use black dots as a mark, so that readers can know what I am actually talking about.
《中国人失掉自信力了吗》也是写给《太白》的。凡是对于求神拜佛，略有不敬之处，都被删除，可见这时我们的“上峰”正在主张求神拜佛。现仍补足，并用黑点为记，聊以存一时之风尚耳。
"Have Chinese lost their self-confidence" is also written for "Taibai". All the slightest disrespect to pray to God and worship Buddha has been deleted, which shows that our "Shangfeng" is advocating praying to God and worshiping Buddha at this time. I am still supplementing it now, and I will use black dots as a mark, just to preserve the fashion of the time.
《脸谱臆测》是写给《生生月刊》的，奉官谕：不准发表。我当初很觉得奇怪，待到领回原稿，看见用红铅笔打着杠子的处所，才明白原来是因为得罪了“第三种人”老爷们了。现仍加上黑杠子，以代红杠子，且以警戒新作家。
"Facebook Speculation" was written to "Shengsheng Monthly", and was officially instructed: it is not allowed to be published. I thought it was strange at first, but when I got back the manuscript and saw the place where the red pencil was used to hit the bar, I realized that it was because I had offended the "third type of people". Now the black bar is still added to replace the red bar and to warn new writers.
《答〈戏〉周刊编者信》的末尾，是对于绍伯先生那篇《调和》的答复。听说当时我们有一位姓沈的“战友”看了就呵呵大笑道：“这老头子又发牢骚了！”“头子”而“老”，“牢骚”而“又”，恐怕真也滑稽得很。然而我自己，是认真的。
At the end of the "Letter to the Editor of the Weekly Magazine", there is a reply to Mr. Shaobo's "Reconciliation". I heard that we had a "comrade-in-arms" surnamed Shen at that time, and when he saw it, he laughed and said, "This old man is whining again!" "Head" and "old", "complaining" and "again", I'm afraid it's really funny. However, I am serious.不过向《戏》周刊编者去“发牢骚”，别人也许会觉得奇怪。然而并不，因为编者之一是田汉同志，而田汉同志也就是绍伯先生。
However, if you "complain" to the editor of "Drama" Weekly, others may find it strange. However, no, because one of the editors was Comrade Tian Han, and Comrade Tian Han was also Mr. Shaobo.《中国文坛上的鬼魅》是写给《现代中国》（China Today）的，不知由何人所译，登在第一卷第五期，后来又由英文转译，载在德文和法文的《国际文学》上。
"Ghosts in Chinese Literature" was written for "China Today", translated by an unknown person, published in the fifth issue of the first volume, and later translated from English and published in "International Literature" in German and French.
《病后杂谈》是向《文学》的投稿，共五段；待到四卷二号上登了出来时，只剩下第一段了。后有一位作家，根据了这一段评论我道：鲁迅是赞成生病的。他竟毫不想到检查官的删削。可见文艺上的暗杀政策，有时也还有一些效力的。
"Post-Illness Miscellaneous Talks" is a contribution to "Literature", a total of five paragraphs; By the time it was published on Volume 4, No. 2, only the first paragraph remained. Later, a writer commented on me based on this paragraph: Lu Xun is in favor of being sick. He didn't expect the censor's deletion. It can be seen that the literary and artistic assassination policy sometimes has some effect.
《病后杂谈之余》也是向《文学》的投稿，但不知道为什么，检查官这回却古里古怪了，不说不准登，也不说可登，也不动贵手删削，就是一个支支吾吾。发行人没有法，来找我自己删改了一些，然而听说还是不行，终于由发行人执笔，检查官动口，再删一通，这才能在四卷三号上登出。题目必须改为《病后余谈》，小注“关于舒愤懑”这一句也不准有；改动的两处，我都注在本文之下，删掉的五处，则仍以黑点为记，读者试一想这些讳忌，是会觉得很有趣的。只有不准说“言行一致”云云，也许莫明其妙，现在我应该指明，这是因为又触犯了“第三种人”了。
"After Illness and Miscellaneous Talks" is also a submission to "Literature", but I don't know why, the prosecutor is strange this time, not saying that it is not allowed to be published, nor can it be published, nor is it deleted by your hands, it is just a hesitation. The issuer had no way to do it, so he came to me to delete some of them himself, but I heard that it still didn't work, and finally the issuer took the pen, and the inspector moved his mouth, and deleted it again, so that it could be logged out on Volume 4, No. 3. The title must be changed to "Afterword after Illness", and the sentence "About Shu Indignation" is not allowed; I have noted the two changes under this article, and the five deleted places are still marked with black dots, and readers will find it interesting to think about these taboos. Only it is not allowed to say "consistent in words and deeds", maybe it is incomprehensible, now I should point out that this is because I have offended the "third kind of person" again.
《阿金》是写给《漫画生活》的；然而不但不准登载，听说还送到南京中央宣传会里去了。这真是不过一篇漫谈，毫无深意，怎么会惹出这样大问题来的呢，自己总是参不透。后来索回原稿，先看见第一页上有两颗紫色印，一大一小，文曰“抽去”，大约小的是上海印，大的是首都印，然则必须“抽去”，已无疑义了。再看下去，就又发见了许多红杠子，现在改为黑杠，仍留在本文的旁边。
"Ajin" is written for "Comic Life"; However, not only was it not allowed to be published, but it was also sent to the Nanjing Central Propaganda Conference. This is really just a rambling, without deep meaning, how can it cause such a big problem, I always can't understand it. Later, when I asked for the original manuscript, I first saw two purple seals on the first page, one large and one small, the text was "drawn away", the small one was the Shanghai seal, and the larger one was the capital seal, so it must be "removed", which is undoubtedly righteous. If you look at it again, you will find many red bars, which are now changed to black bars, and they are still left next to this article.看了杠子，有几处是可以悟出道理来的。例如“主子是外国人”，“炸弹”，“巷战”之类，自然也以不提为是。但是我总不懂为什么不能说我死了“未必能够弄到开起同乡会”的缘由，莫非官意是以为我死了会开同乡会的么？
After looking at the bar, there are several places where you can realize the truth. For example, "the master is a foreigner", "bomb", "street fighting", etc., naturally not mentioned. But I don't understand why I can't say that I may not be able to open a hometown association when I die, could it be that the official intention is to think that I will open a hometown association when I die?
我们活在这样的地方，我们活在这样的时代。
We live in such a place, we live in such an era.
一九三五年十二月三十日，编讫记。

December 30, 1935, compiled and completed.

封面

书名页

版权信息

图书在版编目（CIP）数据
Books in Print (CIP) data且介亭杂文二集／鲁迅著．—南京：译林出版社，2013.11
And Jieting Miscellaneous Essays Two Collections/Lu Xun.—Nanjing: Yilin Publishing House, 2013.11（鲁迅自编文集）
(Lu Xun's self-edited anthology)ISBN 978-7-5447-4383-9
ISBN 978-7-5447-4383-9Ⅰ．①且…　Ⅱ．①鲁…　Ⅲ．①鲁迅杂文－杂文集　Ⅳ.①I210.4
I..(1) and... II..(1) Lu... III..(1) Lu Xun's Essays - Essays IV..(1)I210.4中国版本图书馆CIP数据核字（2013）第211080号
China Version Library CIP Data Verification (2013) No. 211080书　　名　且介亭杂文二集
Book title and two collections of essays on Jieting作　　者　鲁　迅
Author: Lu Xun责任编辑　王振华
Editor-in-charge: Wang Zhenhua特约编辑　史会美
Special editor Shi Huimei出版发行　凤凰出版传媒股份有限公司
Published and distributed by Phoenix Publishing and Media Co., Ltd译林出版社
Yilin Publishing House出版社地址　南京市湖南路1号A楼，邮编：210009
Publisher's address Building A, No. 1 Hunan Road, Nanjing, Zip Code: 210009电子信箱　yilin@yilin.com
E-mail yilin@yilin.com出版社网址　http://www.yilin.com
Publisher website http://www.yilin.com印　　刷　北京凯达印务有限公司
Printing Beijing Kaida Printing Co., Ltd开　　本　787×1092毫米　1/32
Volume 787×1092 mm 1/32印　　张　7
Print 7字　　数　130千字
Word count: 130,000 words版　　次　2013年11月第1版　2013年11月第1次印刷
Edition November 2013 1st edition November 2013 1st printing标准书号　ISBN 978-7-5447-4383-9
ISBN 978-7-5447-4383-9定　　价　16.80元
The price is 16.80 yuan译林版图书若有印装错误可向承印厂调换

If there are printing errors in the translated version of the book, it can be exchanged with the printing factory

Table of Contents

目录

Table of Contents

directory序言 序言
一九三五年 1935
叶紫作《丰收》序 Ye Zi wrote the preface to "Harvest."
隐士 hermit
“招贴即扯” "Poster is pulled"
书的还魂和赶造 The return of the soul and the creation of the book
漫谈“漫画” Talking about "comics"
漫画而又漫画 Comics and comics
《中国新文学大系》小说二集序 Preface to the second collection of novels in "The Great Series of Chinese New Literature"
内山完造作《活中国的姿态》序 Uchiyama completed the preface to "The Posture of Living China"
“寻开心” "Looking for happiness"
非有复译不可 There must be a duplicate translation
论讽刺 On satire
从“别字”说开去 Let's start with "other words"
田军作《八月的乡村》序 Tian Jun wrote the preface to "August Countryside"
徐懋庸作《打杂集》序 Xu Maoyong wrote the preface to "Miscellaneous Collection"
人生识字胡涂始 Life begins with literacy
“文人相轻” "Literati look down on each other"
“京派”和“海派” "Beijing School" and "Shanghai School"
田诚一墓记 Tian Chengyi's epitaph
弄堂生意古今谈 The business of the alley is a tale of ancient and modern times
不应该那么写 It shouldn't be written like that
在现代中国的孔夫子 Confucius in modern China
六朝小说和唐代传奇文有怎样的区别？ What is the difference between the novels of the Six Dynasties and the legends of the Tang Dynasty?
什么是“讽刺”？ What is "irony"?
论“人言可畏” On "People Speak Fearfully"
再论“文人相轻” Let's talk about "literati look down on each other"
《全国木刻联合展览会专辑》序 Preface to the "National Woodcut Joint Exhibition Album"
文坛三户 There are three households in the literary world
从帮忙到扯淡 From helping to nonsense
《中国小说史略》日本译本序 Preface to the Japanese translation of "A Brief History of Chinese Novels"
“题未定”草（一至三） "Undecided" draft (1-3)
名人和名言 Celebrities and quotes
“靠天吃饭” "Rely on the sky to eat"
几乎无事的悲剧 A tragedy that almost nothing happened
三论“文人相轻” Three Discussions on "Literacy and Contempt"
【备考】：分明的是非和热烈的好恶（魏金枝） [Preparation]: Clear right and wrong and enthusiastic likes and dislikes (Wei Jinzhi)
四论“文人相轻” 四论“文人相轻”
五论“文人相轻”——明术 五论“文人相轻”——明术
“题未定”草（五） "Undecided" Draft (5)
论毛笔之类 Discuss brushes and the like
逃名 Escape name
六论“文人相轻”——二卖 Sixth, "literati look down on each other" - two selling
七论“文人相轻”——两伤 七论“文人相轻”——两伤
萧红作《生死场》序 Xiao Hong wrote the preface to "The Field of Life and Death."
陀思妥夫斯基的事 Dostovsky's story
孔另境编《当代文人尺牍钞》序 Kong Biejing edited the preface to "Contemporary Literati Letters"
杂谈小品文 Miscellaneous essays
“题未定”草（六至九） "Undecided" draft (6-9)
论新文字 On the new text
《死魂灵百图》小引 A small introduction to "The Hundred Pictures of Dead Souls"
后记 postscript
返回总目录 Return to the General Directory

序言

序言

序言

序言昨天编完了去年的文字，取发表于日报的短论以外者，谓之《且介亭杂文》；今天再来编今年的，因为除做了几篇《文学论坛》，没有多写短文，便都收录在这里面，算是《二集》。
Yesterday, last year's text was compiled, and the short articles published in the daily newspaper were called "Qiejieting Miscellaneous Essays"; Today I will compile this year's article, because except for a few "Literary Forums", I did not write more short articles, and they were all included in it, which is regarded as "Second Collection".过年本来没有什么深意义，随便那天都好，明年的元旦，决不会和今年的除夕就不同，不过给人事借此时时算有一个段落，结束一点事情，倒也便利的。倘不是想到了已经年终，我的两年以来的杂文，也许还不会集成这一本。
The New Year has no deep meaning, no matter what day it is, next year's New Year's Day will never be different from this year's Chinese New Year's Eve, but it is convenient to give personnel an opportunity to have a paragraph at this time and end a little thing. If it weren't for the thought that it was the end of the year, my essays from the past two years might not have been integrated into this book.编完以后，也没有什么大感想。要感的感过了，要写的也写过了，例如“以华制华”之说罢，我在前年的《自由谈》上发表时，曾大受傅公红蓼之流的攻击，今年才又有人提出来，却是风平浪静。一定要到得“不幸而吾言中”，这才大家默默无言，然而为时已晚，是彼此都大可悲哀的。我宁可如邵洵美辈的《人言》之所说：“意气多于议论，捏造多于实证。”
After compiling, I didn't have any big impressions. For example, when I published it in "Free Talk" the year before last, I was attacked by Fu Gong Hongliao and others, and this year someone brought it up again, but it was calm. It must be "unfortunate and in my words", so that everyone is silent, but it is too late, and it is very sad for each other. I would rather be like Shao Xunmei's "Human Words" said: "There is more spirit than discussion, and more fabrication than empirical evidence." ”我有时决不想在言论界求得胜利，因为我的言论有时是枭鸣，报告着大不吉利事，我的言中，是大家会有不幸的。在今年，为了内心的冷静和外力的迫压，我几乎不谈国事了，偶尔触着的几篇，如《什么是讽刺》，如《从帮忙到扯淡》，也无一不被禁止。别的作者的遭遇，大约也是如此的罢，而天下太平，直到华北自治，才见有新闻记者恳求保护正当的舆论。我的不正当的舆论，却如国土一样，仍在日即于沦亡，但是我不想求保护，因为这代价，实在是太大了。
Sometimes I never want to win in the world of speech, because my remarks are sometimes owl, reporting bad luck, and in my words, everyone will be unhappy. This year, for the sake of inner calm and external pressure, I hardly talked about state affairs, and the few articles I occasionally touched, such as "What is Satire" and "From Help to Nonsense", were all banned. The same is probably true for other authors, and the world is peaceful, and it was not until North China was autonomous that some journalists begged to protect legitimate public opinion. My improper public opinion, like the country, is still on the verge of destruction, but I don't want to ask for protection, because the price is too great.单将这些文字，过而存之，聊作今年笔墨的记念罢。
Just keep these words and save them as a memory of this year's pen and ink.一九三五年十二月三十一日，鲁迅记于上海之且介亭。
On December 31, 1935, Lu Xun recorded in the Qiejie Pavilion in Shanghai.

一九三五年

一九三五年

一九三五年

1935

叶紫作《丰收》序

叶紫作《丰收》序

叶紫作《丰收》序

Ye Zi wrote the preface to "Harvest."作者写出创作来，对于其中的事情，虽然不必亲历过，最好是经历过。诘难者问：那么，写杀人最好是自己杀过人，写妓女还得去卖淫么？答曰：不然。我所谓经历，是所遇，所见，所闻，并不一定是所作，但所作自然也可以包含在里面。天才们无论怎样说大话，归根结蒂，还是不能凭空创造。描神画鬼，毫无对证，本可以专靠了神思，所谓“天马行空”似的挥写了，然而他们写出来的，也不过是三只眼，长颈子，就是在常见的人体上，增加了眼睛一只，增长了颈子二三尺而已。这算什么本领，这算什么创造？
The author writes about creation, although he does not have to experience it himself, it is best to experience it. The questioner asked: So, it is best to write about murder if you have killed someone yourself, and do you have to go to prostitution when writing about prostitutes? The answer was: No. What I mean by experience is what I encounter, what I see, and what I hear, which is not necessarily what I do, but what I do can naturally be included in it. No matter how geniuses say big things, in the final analysis, they still cannot create out of thin air. Depicting gods and ghosts, without evidence, could have relied on divine thoughts, the so-called "imaginative" like a wave, but what they wrote was only three eyes, a long neck, that is, on the common human body, one eye was added, and the neck was increased by two or three feet. What kind of skill is this, what kind of creation is this?地球上不只一个世界，实际上的不同，比人们空想中的阴阳两界还利害。这一世界中人，会轻蔑，憎恶，压迫，恐怖，杀戮别一世界中人，然而他不知道，因此他也写不出，于是他自称“第三种人”，他“为艺术而艺术”，他即使写了出来，也不过是三只眼，长颈子而已。“再亮些”？不要骗人罢！你们的眼睛在那里呢？
There is more than one world on earth, and the actual difference is more important than the yin and yang worlds that people imagine. People in this world will despise, hate, oppress, terrorize, and kill people in other worlds, but he doesn't know, so he can't write it, so he calls himself a "third kind of person", he "art for art's sake", and even if he writes it, it's just three eyes and a long neck. "Brighter"? Don't lie! Where are your eyes?伟大的文学是永久的，许多学者们这么说。对啦，也许是永久的罢。但我自己，却与其看薄凯契阿，雨果的书，宁可看契诃夫，高尔基的书，因为它更新，和我们的世界更接近。中国确也还盛行着《三国志演义》和《水浒传》，但这是为了社会还有三国气和水浒气的缘故。《儒林外史》作者的手段何尝在罗贯中下，然而留学生漫天塞地以来，这部书就好像不永久，也不伟大了。伟大也要有人懂。
Great literature is permanent, as many scholars say. Yes, maybe permanently. But myself, I would rather read the books of Chekhov and Gorky than the books of Bokhecia and Hugo, because it is updated and closer to our world. China does still have the "Romance of the Three Kingdoms" and "Water Margin", but this is because the society still has the Three Kingdoms and Water Margin. The author's methods of "The History of Confucianism" are not in Luo Guanzhong, but since the international students are all over the world, this book seems to be not permanent or great. Greatness must also be understood.这里的六个短篇，都是太平世界的奇闻，而现在却是极平常的事情。因为极平常，所以和我们更密切，更有大关系。作者还是一个青年，但他的经历，却抵得太平天下的顺民的一世纪的经历，在转辗的生活中，要他“为艺术而艺术”，是办不到的。但我们有人懂得这样的艺术，一点用不着谁来发愁。
The six short stories here are all anecdotes from the peaceful world, but now they are very common. Because it is very ordinary, it is closer to us and has a greater relationship with us. The author is still a young man, but his experience is worth the experience of the people of the first century of peace in the world, and it is impossible to ask him to "art for art's sake" in the life of turning around. But some of us understand this kind of art, and there is no need for anyone to worry about it.这就是伟大的文学么？不是的，我们自己并没有这么说。“中国为什么没有伟大文学产生？”我们听过许多指导者的教训了，但可惜他们独独忘却了一方面的对于作者和作品的摧残。“第三种人”教训过我们，希腊神话里说什么恶鬼有一张床，捉了人去，给睡在这床上，短了，就拉长他，太长，便把他截短。左翼批评就是这样的床，弄得他们写不出东西来了。现在这张床真的摆出来了，不料却只有“第三种人”睡得不长不短，刚刚合式。仰面唾天，掉在自己的眼睛里，天下真会有这等事。
Is this great literature? No, we didn't say that ourselves. "Why has there been no great literature in China?" We have heard the lessons of many mentors, but unfortunately they have forgotten the destruction of authors and works on one hand. The "third type of man" taught us that in Greek mythology, it is said that an evil spirit has a bed, catches a person, sleeps on this bed, and if it is short, it lengthens him, and if it is too long, he cuts it short. Left-wing criticism is such a bed that makes them unable to write. Now this bed is really set up, but unexpectedly, only the "third type of person" sleeps neither long nor short, just fit. Spit on your back and fall into your own eyes, there will really be such a thing in the world.但我们却有作家写得出东西来，作品在摧残中也更加坚实。不但为一大群中国青年读者所支持，当《电网外》在《文学新地》上以《王伯伯》的题目发表后，就得到世界的读者了。这就是作者已经尽了当前的任务，也是对于压迫者的答复：文学是战斗的！
But we have writers who can write things, and their works are more solid in the midst of destruction. Not only was it supported by a large group of young Chinese readers, but when "Outside the Power Grid" was published in "New Land of Literature" under the title of "Uncle Wang", it gained readers from all over the world. This is the author who has fulfilled his current task and the answer to the oppressor: literature is combat!我希望将来还有看见作者的更多，更好的作品的时候。
I hope to see more and better works by authors in the future.一九三五年一月十六日，鲁迅记于上海。
On January 16, 1935, Lu Xun recorded in Shanghai.

隐士

隐士

隐士

hermit隐士，历来算是一个美名，但有时也当作一个笑柄。最显著的，则有刺陈眉公的“翩然一只云中鹤，飞去飞来宰相衙”的诗，至今也还有人提及。我以为这是一种误解。因为一方面，是“自视太高”，于是别方面也就“求之太高”，彼此“忘其所以”，不能“心照”，而又不能“不宣”，从此口舌也多起来了。
Hermits have always been a good name, but sometimes they are also used as a laughingstock. The most notable is the poem "A crane in the clouds, flying to the prime minister's office" by Chen Meigong, which is still mentioned by some people. I thought it was a misunderstanding. Because on the one hand, it is "too high a self-esteem", so the other side also "asks too high", "forgets each other", cannot "take it to heart", and cannot "not declare", and since then there have been more tongues.非隐士的心目中的隐士，是声闻不彰，息影山林的人物。但这种人物，世间是不会知道的。一到挂上隐士的招牌，则即使他并不“飞去飞来”，也一定难免有些表白，张扬；或是他的帮闲们的开锣喝道——隐士家里也会有帮闲，说起来似乎不近情理，但一到招牌可以换饭的时候，那是立刻就有帮闲的，这叫作“啃招牌边”。这一点，也颇为非隐士的人们所诟病，以为隐士身上而有油可揩，则隐士之阔绰可想了。其实这也是一种“求之太高”的误解，和硬要有名的隐士，老死山林中者相同。凡是有名的隐士，他总是已经有了“悠哉游哉，聊以卒岁”的幸福的。倘不然，朝砍柴，昼耕田，晚浇菜，夜织屦，又那有吸烟品茗，吟诗作文的闲暇？陶渊明先生是我们中国赫赫有名的大隐，一名“田园诗人”，自然，他并不办期刊，也赶不上吃“庚款”，然而他有奴子。汉晋时候的奴子，是不但侍候主人，并且给主人种地，营商的，正是生财器具。所以虽是渊明先生，也还略略有些生财之道在，要不然，他老人家不但没有酒喝，而且没有饭吃，早已在东篱旁边饿死了。
The hermit in the minds of non-hermits is a person who is not well-known and has a shadow in the mountains and forests. But this kind of character will not be known in the world. When it comes to hanging up the hermit's signboard, even if he does not "fly around", it is inevitable that there will be some confessions and publicity; Or the gong of his helpers shouted - there will also be helpers in the hermit's house, which seems unreasonable, but when the sign can be exchanged for food, there will be helpers immediately, which is called "gnawing on the side of the signboard". This point is also quite criticized by people who are not hermits, thinking that if the hermit has oil to wipe off, then the hermit's generosity can be imagined. In fact, this is also a misunderstanding of "asking too high", which is the same as the hermit who insists on being famous, who dies of old age in the mountains and forests. All famous hermits, he always has the happiness of "leisurely wandering, talking about the end of his life". Otherwise, chopping firewood in the morning, plowing the fields during the day, watering vegetables in the evening, weaving shoes at night, how can there be leisure to smoke and drink tea, recite poetry and compose poetry? Mr. Tao Yuanming is a well-known hermit in China, a "pastoral poet", naturally, he does not run a periodical, and he can't catch up with the "Geng money", but he has slaves. The slaves in the Han and Jin dynasties not only served their masters, but also farmed and did business for their masters, which were the tools for making money. So although Mr. Yuanming still has some ways to make money, otherwise, his old man not only has no wine to drink, but also has no food to eat, and he would have starved to death next to the east fence.所以我们倘要看看隐君子风，实际上也只能看看这样的隐君子，真的“隐君子”是没法看到的。古今著作，足以汗牛而充栋，但我们可能找出樵夫渔父的著作来？他们的著作是砍柴和打鱼。至于那些文士诗翁，自称什么钓徒樵子的，倒大抵是悠游自得的封翁或公子，何尝捏过钓竿或斧头柄。要在他们身上赏鉴隐逸气，我敢说，这只能怪自己胡涂。
So if we want to look at the hermit's style, in fact, we can only look at such a hermit, and the real "hermit" cannot be seen. Ancient and modern works are enough to sweat and fill the cows, but we may find the works of woodcutters and fishermen? Their writings were chopping wood and fishing. As for those scribes and poets, who claim to be fishermen and woodcutters, they are probably leisurely Feng Weng or Gongzi, and they have pinched fishing rods or axe handles. If you want to appreciate the seclusion in them, I dare say that you can only blame yourself for this.登仕，是噉饭之道，归隐，也是噉饭之道。假使无法噉饭，那就连“隐”也隐不成了。“飞去飞来”，正是因为要“隐”，也就是因为要噉饭；肩出“隐士”的招牌来，挂在“城市山林”里，这就正是所谓“隐”，也就是噉饭之道。帮闲们或开锣，或喝道，那是因为自己还不配“隐”，所以只好揩一点“隐”油，其实也还不外乎噉饭之道。汉唐以来，实际上是入仕并不算鄙，隐居也不算高，而且也不算穷，必须欲“隐”而不得，这才看作士人的末路。唐末有一位诗人左偃，自述他悲惨的境遇道：“谋隐谋官两无成”，是用七个字道破了所谓“隐”的秘密的。
Becoming an official is the way to eat, and returning to seclusion is also the way to eat. If you can't eat, then you can't even hide it. "Fly and fly", precisely because you want to "hide", that is, because you want to eat; Shouldering the sign of "hermit" and hanging it in the "urban mountains and forests", this is the so-called "hidden", that is, the way to eat. The helpers either opened the gong or shouted, because they were not worthy of "hiding", so they had to wipe a little "hidden" oil, which was actually nothing more than the way of eating. Since the Han and Tang dynasties, in fact, it is not contemptible to enter the officialdom, the seclusion is not high, and it is not poor, and it must be "hidden" but not obtained, which is regarded as the end of scholars. At the end of the Tang Dynasty, there was a poet Zuo Yan, who recounted his tragic situation: "There is no success in conspiracy and official", which broke the secret of the so-called "hidden" in seven words.“谋隐”无成，才是沦落，可见“隐”总和享福有些相关，至少是不必十分挣扎谋生，颇有悠闲的余裕。但赞颂悠闲，鼓吹烟茗，却又是挣扎之一种，不过挣扎得隐藏一些。虽“隐”，也仍然要噉饭，所以招牌还是要油漆，要保护的。泰山崩，黄河溢，隐士们目无见，耳无闻，但苟有议及自己们或他的一伙的，则虽千里之外，半句之微，他便耳聪目明，奋袂而起，好像事件之大，远胜于宇宙之灭亡者，也就为了这缘故。其实连和苍蝇也何尝有什么相关。
It can be seen that "hidden" is always somewhat related to enjoying happiness, at least there is no need to struggle to make a living, and there is quite a leisurely margin. But praising leisure and advocating smoke and tea is a kind of struggle, but the struggle is hidden. Although it is "hidden", it still needs to be eaten, so the sign still needs to be painted and protected. Mount Tai collapsed, the Yellow River overflowed, and the hermits were blind and deaf, but if they discussed themselves or his gang, even if they were thousands of miles away, even if they were half a sentence, he would hear and rise, as if the event was bigger, far better than the perishers of the universe, and it was for this reason. In fact, it has nothing to do with flies.明白这一点，对于所谓“隐士”也就毫不诧异了，心照不宣，彼此都省事。
Understanding this, it is not surprising to the so-called "hermits", tacitly and each other is trouble-free.一月二十五日。
January 25th.

“招贴即扯”

“招贴即扯”

“招贴即扯”

"Poster is pulled"工愁的人物，真是层出不穷。开年正月，就有人怕骂倒了一切古今人，只留下自己的没意思。要是古今中外真的有过这等事，这才叫作希奇，但实际上并没有，将来大约也不会有。岂但一切古今人，连一个人也没有骂倒过。凡是倒掉的，决不是因为骂，却只为揭穿了假面。揭穿假面，就是指出了实际来，这不能混谓之骂。
The characters of labor sorrow are really endless. In the first month of the first month, some people were afraid of scolding all the ancient and modern people, leaving only their own boring. If such a thing really happened in ancient and modern China and abroad, it would be called Xiqi, but in fact there is none, and there will probably not be one in the future. Not only did all the people of ancient and modern times not even scold anyone. Everything that is dumped is by no means because of scolding, but only to expose the mask. To expose the mask is to point out the reality, which cannot be confused with scolding.然而世间往往混为一谈。就以现在最流行的袁中郎为例罢，既然肩出来当作招牌，看客就不免议论这招牌，怎样撕破了衣裳，怎样画歪了脸孔。这其实和中郎本身是无关的，所指的是他的自以为徒子徒孙们的手笔。然而徒子徒孙们就以为骂了他的中郎爷，愤慨和狼狈之状可掬，觉得现在的世界是比五四时代更狂妄了。但是，现在的袁中郎脸孔究竟画得怎样呢？时代很近，文证具存，除了变成一个小品文的老师，“方巾气”的死敌而外，还有些什么？
However, the world is often confused. Take Yuan Zhonglang, the most popular now, as an example, since it is shouldered as a signboard, spectators can't help but talk about this signboard, how to tear clothes, how to draw a crooked face. This actually has nothing to do with Zhonglang itself, but refers to the handwriting of his self-proclaimed disciples and grandchildren. However, the disciples and grandchildren thought that they had scolded his Zhonglang Ye, and their indignation and embarrassment were palpable, and they felt that the current world was more arrogant than the May Fourth era. But how is Yuan Zhonglang's face painted now? The times are very close, the documents are there, in addition to becoming a teacher of small essays, the sworn enemy of "square scarf", what else?和袁中郎同时活在中国的，无锡有一个顾宪成，他的著作，开口“圣人”，闭口“吾儒”，真是满纸“方巾气”。而且疾恶如仇，对小人决不假借。他说：“吾闻之：凡论人，当观其趋向之大体。趋向苟正，即小节出入，不失为君子；趋向苟差，即小节可观，终归于小人。又闻：为国家者，莫要于扶阳抑阴，君子即不幸有诖误，当保护爱惜成就之；小人即小过乎，当早排绝，无令为后患。……”（《自反录》）推而广之，也就是倘要论袁中郎，当看他趋向之大体，趋向苟正，不妨恕其偶讲空话，作小品文，因为他还有更重要的一方面在。正如李白会做诗，就可以不责其喝酒，如果只会喝酒，便以半个李白，或李白的徒子徒孙自命，那可是应该赶紧将他“排绝”的。
There was a Gu Xiancheng in Wuxi who lived in China at the same time as Yuan Zhonglang, and his writings, opening "saints" and closing "Wu Confucianism", were really full of "square scarf qi". And he hates evil like hatred, and will never lend favor to villains. He said: "I have heard that when discussing people, we should look at the general trend of their tendencies. If you tend to be upright, you will be a gentleman; If the trend is wrong, even if the details are observable, it will ultimately be attributed to the villain. I also heard: For the sake of the country, there is nothing to support the yang and suppress the yin, and even if a gentleman is unfortunate enough to make a mistake, he should protect and cherish it; Even if it is a small mistake, it should be eliminated as soon as possible to prevent it from becoming a future problem. ......" ("Self-Reflection") by extension, that is, if you want to talk about Yuan Zhonglang, when you look at the general situation of his tendency and tend to be upright, you might as well forgive him for occasionally talking empty words and writing sketches, because he has a more important aspect. Just as Li Bai can write poetry, he can not be blamed for drinking, and if he only knows how to drink, he will call himself half Li Bai, or Li Bai's disciple and grandson, then he should be quickly "excluded".中郎还有更重要的一方面么？有的。万历三十七年，顾宪成辞官，时中郎“主陕西乡试，发策，有‘过劣巢由’之语。监临者问‘意云何？’袁曰：‘今吴中大贤亦不出，将令世道何所倚赖，故发此感尔。’”（《顾端文公年谱》下）中郎正是一个关心世道，佩服“方巾气”人物的人，赞《金瓶梅》，作小品文，并不是他的全部。
Is there a more important aspect of Zhonglang? Some. In the thirty-seventh year of Wanli, Gu Xiancheng resigned, and Zhonglang "presided over the Shaanxi provincial examination, issued a strategy, and had the words 'bad nest you'." The monitor asked, 'What do you mean?' Yuan said: 'Now that the great sages of Wu Zhong have not appeared, what will the world rely on, so I feel this way.' Zhonglang is a person who cares about the world and admires the characters of "square scarf qi", praises "Jin Ping Mei", and writes sketches, which is not all of him.中郎之不能被骂倒，正如他之不能被画歪。但因此也就不能作他的蛀虫们的永久的巢穴了。
Zhonglang cannot be scolded, just as he cannot be drawn crookedly. But it cannot be a permanent nest for his moths.一月二十六日。
January 26th.

书的还魂和赶造

书的还魂和赶造

书的还魂和赶造

The return of the soul and the creation of the book把大部的丛书印给读者看，是宋朝就有的，一直到现在。缺点是因为部头大，所以价钱贵。好处是把研究一种学问的书汇集在一处，能比一部一部的自去寻求更省力；或者保存单本小种的著作在里面，使它不易于灭亡。但这第二种好处，是也靠着部头大，价钱贵，人们就因此格外珍重的缺点的。
Most of the series of books were printed to readers, which existed in the Song Dynasty and have been there until now. The disadvantage is that the price is expensive because of the large volume. The advantage is that gathering books on a study of a subject in one place can save effort than seeking them one by one; Or keep a single book of Souzhong's work in it so that it is not easy to perish. But this second benefit is also due to the large size and high price, so people cherish the disadvantage.但丛书也有蠹虫。从明末到清初，就时有欺人的丛书出现。那方法之一，是删削内容，轻减刻费，而目录却有一大串，使购买者只觉其种类之多；之二，是不用原题，别立名目，甚至另题撰人，使购买者只觉其收罗之广。如《格致丛书》，《历代小史》，《五朝小说》，《唐人说荟》等，就都是的。现在是大抵消灭了，只有末一种化名为《唐代丛书》，有时还在流毒。
But there are also silverfish in the series. From the end of the Ming Dynasty to the beginning of the Qing Dynasty, there were deceptive series of books from time to time. One of the methods is to delete the content and reduce the cost of engraving, but the catalog has a large string, so that the buyer only feels that there are many types; Second, it does not use the original title, create a separate title, or even a separate author, so that buyers only feel that it has a wide range of collections. For example, "Gezhi Series", "Short History of the Dynasties", "Novels of the Five Dynasties", "Tang People Say Hui", etc., are all there. Now it has been largely eliminated, and only the last one is pseudonymous "Tang Dynasty Series", and sometimes it is still poisoned.然而时代改变，新花样也要跟着出来了。
However, times have changed, and new tricks are coming out.推测起新花样来：其一，是豫先设定一种丛书的大名，罗列目录，大如宇宙，微至苍蝇身上的细菌，无所不包，这才分头觅人，托他译作，限定时日，必须完工，虽然译作者未必定是专家，但总之有许多手同时在稿纸上写字，于是不必穷年累月，一大部煌煌巨制也就出现了；其二，是原有一批零碎的旧译作，一向不甚流行，或者虽曾流行，而现在却已经过了时候，于是聚在一起，略加类别，开成一串五花八门的目录，而一大部煌煌巨制也就出现了。
Speculate on new tricks: First, Yu first set up a series of books, listed the catalog, as big as the universe, as small as the bacteria on the fly, everything is included, then look for people separately, ask him to translate, time limit, must be completed, although the translator may not be an expert, but in short, there are many hands writing on the manuscript paper at the same time, so there is no need to be poor for years, a large number of brilliant masterpieces have appeared; Second, there were originally a batch of fragmentary old translations, which had never been very popular, or although they were popular, but now they have passed, so they gathered together, slightly categorized, and opened into a variety of catalogues, and a large number of brilliant masterpieces appeared.出版者是明白读者们的心想的，有些读者们，苦于不知道什么是必要的书，所以往往以为被选进丛书里的，总该是必要的书籍；而且丛书里的一本，价钱也比单行本便宜，所以看起来好像很上算；加以大小一律，也很合人们爱好整齐的心情。本数又多，一下子可以填满几书架，规模不大的图书馆有这几部，馆员就省下时常留心选购新书的精神了。然而出版者是又很明白购买者们的经济状况的，他深知道现在他们手头已没有这许多钱，所以这些书一定是廉价，使他们拚命的办出来，或者是分期豫约，使他们逐渐的缴进去。
Publishers understand what readers think, and some readers suffer from not knowing what is a necessary book, so they often think that what is selected into the series should always be necessary books; Moreover, the price of one in the series is cheaper than the single book, so it seems to be a good deal; In addition, the size is the same, which is also in line with people's hobby and neat mood. There are many books, which can fill several shelves at once, and there are these few in small libraries, so the librarian saves the spirit of always paying attention to buying new books. However, the publisher is well aware of the financial situation of the buyers, and he knows that they do not have so much money on hand now, so these books must be cheap, so that they can do their best to get them out, or make them pay in installments gradually.汇印新作，当然是很好的，但新作必须是精粹的本子，这才可以救读者们的智识的饥荒。就是重印旧作，也并不算坏，不过这旧作必须已是一种带着文献性的本子，这才足供读者们的研究。如果仅仅是克日速成的草稿，或是栈房角落的存书，改换新装，招摇过市，但以“大”或“多”或“廉”诱人，使读者化去不少的钱，实际上却不过得到一大堆废物，这恶影响之在读书界是很不小的。
Huiyin's new work is of course very good, but the new work must be the essence of the book, so as to save readers from intellectual hunger. Even if it is a reprint of an old work, it is not bad, but this old work must be a kind of book with literature, which is enough for readers to study. If it is just a quick draft, or a book stored in the corner of the stack, changed to a new outfit, and ostentatious to the market, but it is tempting with "big" or "more" or "cheap", so that readers lose a lot of money, but in fact they only get a lot of waste, which has a lot of evil impact in the reading world.凡留心于文化的前进的人，对于这些书应该加以检讨！
Anyone who pays attention to the progress of culture should review these books!二月十五日。
February 15th.

漫谈“漫画”

漫谈“漫画”

漫谈“漫画”

Talking about "comics"孩子们吵架，有一个用木炭——上海是大抵用铅笔了——在墙壁上写道：“小三子可乎之及及也，同同三千三百刀！”这和政治之类是毫不相干的，然而不能算小品文。画也一样，住家的恨路人到对门来小解，就在墙上画一个乌龟，题几句话，也不能叫它作“漫画”。为什么呢？就因为这和被画者的形体或精神，是绝无关系的。
The children quarreled, and one of them used charcoal - Shanghai probably used pencils - and wrote on the wall: "The little three can be reached, the same is 3,300 knives!" This has nothing to do with politics and the like, but it cannot be regarded as a small article. The same goes for painting, when the hated passers-by at home came to the opposite door to relieve themselves, they drew a turtle on the wall and inscribed a few words, but they could not call it a "cartoon". Why? Because this has nothing to do with the form or spirit of the subject.漫画的第一件紧要事是诚实，要确切的显示了事件或人物的姿态，也就是精神。
The first important thing in comics is honesty, which should accurately show the posture of the event or character, that is, the spirit.漫画是Karikatur的译名，那“漫”，并不是中国旧日的文人学士之所谓“漫题”“漫书”的“漫”。当然也可以不假思索，一挥而就的，但因为发芽于诚实的心，所以那结果也不会仅是嬉皮笑脸。这一种画，在中国的过去的绘画里很少见，《百丑图》或《三十六声粉铎图》庶几近之，可惜的是不过戏文里的丑脚的摹写；罗两峰的《鬼趣图》，当不得已时，或者也就算进去罢，但它又太离开了人间。
Comics are the translation of Karikatur, and the "man" is not the "man" of the so-called "comic titles" and "comic books" of the old Chinese literati and scholars. Of course, it can be done in one stroke without thinking, but because it sprouts from an honest heart, the result will not be just a hippie smile. This kind of painting is rare in Chinese past paintings, and "Hundred Ugly Pictures" or "Thirty-six Voices of Pink Bells" are almost the same, but unfortunately it is just a copy of the ugly feet in the drama; Luo Liangfeng's "Ghost Fun Picture", when it is a last resort, or even if it is included, it is too far from the world.漫画要使人一目了然，所以那最普通的方法是“夸张”，但又不是胡闹。无缘无故的将所攻击或暴露的对象画作一头驴，恰如拍马家将所拍的对象做成一个神一样，是毫没有效果的，假如那对象其实并无驴气息或神气息。然而如果真有些驴气息，那就糟了，从此之后，越看越像，比读一本做得很厚的传记还明白。关于事件的漫画，也一样的。所以漫画虽然有夸张，却还是要诚实。“燕山雪花大如席”，是夸张，但燕山究竟有雪花，就含着一点诚实在里面，使我们立刻知道燕山原来有这么冷。如果说“广州雪花大如席”，那可就变成笑话了。
Comics want to make people clear at a glance, so the most common method is "exaggeration", but not nonsense. Painting the object of attack or exposure as a donkey for no reason is like the horse patter making the object a god, which has no effect at all, if the object does not actually have the aura of a donkey or a god. However, if there is really some donkey atmosphere, it will be bad, and from then on, the more you look at it, the more you look like it, and it is better than reading a thick biography. The same goes for cartoons about events. Therefore, although the comics are exaggerated, they still have to be honest. "Yanshan snowflakes are as big as a mat" is an exaggeration, but there is a little honesty in Yanshan, so that we immediately know that Yanshan is so cold. If you say "Guangzhou snowflakes are as big as a mat", it will become a joke.“夸张”这两个字也许有些语病，那么，说是“廓大”也可以的。廓大一个事件或人物的特点固然使漫画容易显出效果来，但廓大了并非特点之处却更容易显出效果。矮而胖的，瘦而长的，他本身就有漫画相了，再给他秃头，近视眼，画得再矮而胖些，瘦而长些，总可以使读者发笑。但一位白净苗条的美人，就很不容易设法，有些漫画家画作一个髑髅或狐狸之类，却不过是在报告自己的低能。有些漫画家却不用这呆法子，他用廓大镜照了她露出的搽粉的臂膊，看出她皮肤的褶皱，看见了这些褶皱中间的粉和泥的黑白画。这么一来，漫画稿子就成功了，然而这是真实，倘不信，大家或自己也用廓大镜去照照去。于是她也只好承认这真实，倘要好，就用肥皂和毛刷去洗一通。
The word "exaggerated" may be a bit of a language problem, so it is okay to say that it is "broad". Although the characteristics of an event or character are enlarged, it is easier to show the effect of comics, but it is easier to show the effect of not being a characteristic. Short and fat, thin and long, he himself has a comic appearance, and then give him baldness, short-sightedness, no matter how short and fat, thin and long, it can always make readers laugh. But a fair and slender beauty is not easy to manage, and some cartoonists draw a skeleton or a fox or the like, but they are just reporting their imbecile. Some cartoonists don't use this stupid method, he looked at her exposed powdered arms with a large mirror, saw the folds of her skin, and saw the black and white paintings of powder and mud in the middle of these folds. In this way, the comic manuscript is successful, but this is true, if you don't believe it, you or yourself will use a large mirror to look at it. So she had to admit that it was true, and if it was good, she would wash it with soap and a brush.因为真实，所以也有力。但这种漫画，在中国是很难生存的。我记得去年就有一位文学家说过，他最讨厌论人用显微镜。
Because it is real, it is also powerful. But this kind of comics are difficult to survive in China. I remember a writer said last year that he hated the microscope for people.欧洲先前，也并不两样。漫画虽然是暴露，讥刺，甚而至于是攻击的，但因为读者多是上等的雅人，所以漫画家的笔锋的所向，往往只在那些无拳无勇的无告者，用他们的可笑，衬出雅人们的完全和高尚来，以分得一枝雪茄的生意。像西班牙的戈雅（Francisco de Goya）和法国的陀密埃（Honoré Daumier）那样的漫画家，到底还是不可多得的。
Europe was no different before. Although comics are exposed, ridiculed, and even attacked, because most of the readers are high-quality elegant people, the direction of the cartoonist's pen is often only in those who have no fists and no courage, and use their ridiculousness to set off the perfection and nobility of the elegant people, in order to get a share of the business of a cigar. Cartoonists like Francisco de Goya in Spain and Honoré Daumier in France are still rare.二月二十八日。
February 28.

漫画而又漫画

漫画而又漫画

漫画而又漫画

Comics and comics德国现代的画家格罗斯（George Grosz），中国已经绍介过好几回，总可以不算陌生人了。从有一方说，他也可以算是漫画家；那些作品，大抵是白地黑线的。
The modern German painter George Grosz has been introduced to China several times, and he can always be considered a stranger. From one side, he can also be regarded as a cartoonist; Those works are mostly black lines on a white background.他在中国的遭遇，还算好，翻印的画虽然制版术太坏了，或者被缩小，黑线白地却究竟还是黑线白地。不料中国“文艺”家的脑子今年反常了，在挂着“文艺”招牌的杂志上绍介格罗斯的黑白画，线条都变了雪白；地子呢，有蓝有红，真是五颜六色，好看得很。
What happened to him in China is not bad, although the plate-making technique is too bad or shrunk, the black line is still a white background. Unexpectedly, the brains of Chinese "literary and artistic" artists have become abnormal this year, and the lines have become snow-white in the black-and-white paintings of Shao Jie Gross in magazines with "literary and art" signs; The land is blue and red, it is really colorful and beautiful.自然，我们看石刻的拓本，大抵是黑地白字的。但翻印的绘画，却还没有见过将青绿山水变作红黄山水，水墨龙化为水粉龙的大改造。有之，是始于二十世纪过了三十五年的上海的“文艺”家。我才知道画家作画时候的调色，配色之类，都是多事。一经中国“文艺”家的手，全无问题，——嗡，嗡，随随便便。
Naturally, when we look at the rubbings of stone carvings, they are probably white characters on a black background. However, the reprinted paintings have not yet seen a major transformation of green landscapes into red and yellow landscapes, and ink dragons into gouache dragons. Yes, it is a "literary and artistic" artist in Shanghai that began in the twentieth century after 35 years. I just learned that the color grading, color matching, etc. when a painter paints are troublesome. Once in the hands of Chinese "literary and artistic", there is no problem,—— buzz, buzz, whatever.这些翻印的格罗斯的画是有价值的，是漫画而又漫画。
These reprints of Gross's paintings are valuable, caricature and caricature.二月二十八日。
February 28.

《中国新文学大系》小说二集序

《中国新文学大系》小说二集序

《中国新文学大系》小说二集序

Preface to the second collection of novels in "The Great Series of Chinese New Literature"一
One凡是关心现代中国文学的人，谁都知道《新青年》是提倡“文学改良”，后来更进一步而号召“文学革命”的发难者。但当一九一五年九月中在上海开始出版的时候，却全部是文言的。苏曼殊的创作小说，陈嘏和刘半农的翻译小说，都是文言。到第二年，胡适的《文学改良刍议》发表了，作品也只有胡适的诗文和小说是白话。后来白话作者逐渐多了起来，但又因为《新青年》其实是一个论议的刊物，所以创作并不怎样著重，比较旺盛的只有白话诗；至于戏曲和小说，也依然大抵是翻译。
Anyone who cares about modern Chinese literature knows that "New Youth" is the initiator of "literary reform" and later went further and called for a "literary revolution". But when it began to be published in Shanghai in mid-September 1915, it was all in classical Chinese. Su Manshu's creative novels and Chen Gu and Liu Bannong's translated novels are all classical Chinese. By the second year, Hu Shi's "Discussion on Literary Improvement" was published, and only Hu Shi's poems and novels were in the vernacular. Later, there were more vernacular authors, but because "New Youth" was actually a publication of discussion, the creation was not very focused, and only vernacular poems were more vigorous; As for opera and novels, they are still mostly translations.在这里发表了创作的短篇小说的，是鲁迅。从一九一八年五月起，《狂人日记》，《孔乙己》，《药》等，陆续的出现了，算是显示了“文学革命”的实绩，又因那时的认为“表现的深切和格式的特别”，颇激动了一部分青年读者的心。然而这激动，却是向来怠慢了绍介欧洲大陆文学的缘故。一八三四年顷，俄国的果戈理（N. Gogol）就已经写了《狂人日记》；一八八三年顷，尼采（Fr. Nietzsche）也早借了苏鲁支（Zarathustra）的嘴，说过“你们已经走了从虫豸到人的路，在你们里面还有许多份是虫豸。你们做过猴子，到了现在，人还尤其猴子，无论比那一个猴子”的。而且《药》的收束，也分明的留着安特莱夫（L. Andreev）式的阴冷。但后起的《狂人日记》意在暴露家族制度和礼教的弊害，却比果戈理的忧愤深广，也不如尼采的超人的渺茫。此后虽然脱离了外国作家的影响，技巧稍为圆熟，刻划也稍加深切，如《肥皂》，《离婚》等，但一面也减少了热情，不为读者们所注意了。
The person who published the short story created here was Lu Xun. Since May 1918, "Diary of a Madman", "Kong Yiji", "Medicine", etc., have appeared one after another, which can be regarded as showing the achievements of the "literary revolution", and because of the belief at that time that "the depth of expression and the special format", it has quite excited the hearts of some young readers. However, this excitement is because it has always neglected the literature of the European continent. In 1834, the Russian governor of Russia, N. Gogol) has already written "Diary of a Madman"; In 1883, Nietzsche (Fr. Nietzsche) also borrowed Zarathustra's mouth and said, "You have already walked the road from insects to people, and there are many among you who are insects." You have been monkeys, and now, people are especially monkeys, no matter which monkey they are." Moreover, the restraint of "Medicine" also clearly retains the retention of L. Andreev) style of coldness. However, the later "Diary of a Madman" is intended to expose the evils of the family system and etiquette, but it is deeper than Gogol's anger, and not as insignificant as Nietzsche's superman. Since then, although he has been separated from the influence of foreign writers, his skills have become slightly more mature, and his portrayal has been slightly deepened, such as "Soap", "Divorce", etc., but on the other hand, his enthusiasm has also decreased and he has not been noticed by readers.从《新青年》上，此外也没有养成什么小说的作家。
From "New Youth", there are also writers who have not developed any novels.较多的倒是在《新潮》上。从一九一九年一月创刊，到次年主干者们出洋留学而消灭的两个年中，小说作者就有汪敬熙，罗家伦，杨振声，俞平伯，欧阳予倩和叶绍钧。自然，技术是幼稚的，往往留存着旧小说上的写法和语调；而且平铺直叙，一泻无余；或者过于巧合，在一刹时中，在一个人上，会聚集了一切难堪的不幸。然而又有一种共同前进的趋向，是这时的作者们，没有一个以为小说是脱俗的文学，除了为艺术之外，一无所为的。他们每作一篇，都是“有所为”而发，是在用改革社会的器械，——虽然也没有设定终极的目标。
More on "New Wave". From its inception in January 1919 to the two years when the main actors went abroad to study abroad and disappeared, the authors of the novel included Wang Jingxi, Luo Jialun, Yang Zhensheng, Yu Pingbo, Ouyang Yuqian and Ye Shaojun. Naturally, technology is naïve, and the writing and intonation of old novels are often preserved; And it is flat and straightforward, and there is no room for it; Or too coincidentally, in an instant, on a person, all embarrassing misfortunes will gather. However, there is another common trend, that is, none of the authors at this time thought that novels were refined literature, and they did nothing but art. Every time they write, they are "doing something", using the tools of social reform,—— although they do not set an ultimate goal.俞平伯的《花匠》以为人们应该屏绝矫揉造作，任其自然，罗家伦之作则在诉说婚姻不自由的苦痛，虽然稍嫌浅露，但正是当时许多智识青年们的公意；输入易卜生（H. Ibsen）的《娜拉》和《群鬼》的机运，这时候也恰恰成熟了，不过还没有想到《人民之敌》和《社会柱石》。杨振声是极要描写民间疾苦的；汪敬熙并且装着笑容，揭露了好学生的秘密和苦人的灾难。但究竟因为是上层的智识者，所以笔墨总不免伸缩于描写身边琐事和小民生活之间。后来，欧阳予倩致力于剧本去了；叶绍钧却有更远大的发展。汪敬熙又在《现代评论》上发表创作，至一九二五年，自选了一本《雪夜》，但他好像终于没有自觉，或者忘却了先前的奋斗，以为他自己的作品，是并无“什么批评人生的意义的”了。序中有云——
Yu Pingbo's "Florist" thought that people should reject pretentiousness and let nature take its course, while Luo Jialun's work told the pain of unfree marriage, although it was a little superficial, but it was the public will of many intellectual young people at that time; Enter Ibsen (H. Ibsen's "Nala" and "Ghosts" are also ripe at this time, but they have not yet thought of "Enemy of the People" and "Social Pillar". Yang Zhensheng is very desperate to describe the suffering of the people; Wang Jingxi also smiled and exposed the secrets of good students and the disasters of suffering people. But because he is an upper-class intellectual, his pen and ink are inevitably expanded and contracted between describing the trivial matters around him and the lives of the common people. Later, Ouyang Yuqian devoted himself to the script; Ye Shaojun has a more ambitious development. Wang Jingxi published his creations in the "Modern Review", and by 1925, he had chosen a book "Snowy Night", but he seemed to have finally lost consciousness, or forgot his previous struggles, thinking that his own works had no "meaning of criticizing life". In the preface, there is a cloud—“我写这些篇小说的时候，是力求着去忠实的描写我所见的几种人生经验。我只求描写的忠实，不搀入丝毫批评的态度。虽然一个人叙述一件事实之时，他的描写是免不了受他的人生观之影响，但我总是在可能的范围之内，竭力保持一种客观的态度。
"When I write these novels, I try to faithfully describe the life experiences I have seen. I only want to be faithful to the description, without the slightest critical attitude. Although when a person describes a fact, his description is inevitably influenced by his outlook on life, but I always try to maintain an objective attitude within the scope of my ability.“因为持了这种客观态度的缘故，我这些短篇小说是不会有什么批评人生的意义。我只写出我所见的几种经验给读者看罢了。读者看了这些小说，心中对于这些种经验有什么评论，是我所不问的。”
Because of this objective attitude, my short stories will not have any meaning in criticizing life. I will only write a few experiences that I have seen for readers. I don't ask what readers have commented on these experiences after reading these novels. ”杨振声的文笔，却比《渔家》更加生发起来，但恰与先前的战友汪敬熙站成对蹠：他“要忠实于主观”，要用人工来制造理想的人物。而且凭自己的理想还怕不够，又请教过几个朋友，删改了几回，这才完成一本中篇小说《玉君》，那自序道——
Yang Zhensheng's writing style is more vivid than "The Fisherman", but it is just in opposition to his former comrade-in-arms Wang Jingxi: he must be "faithful to subjectivity" and use artificially to create ideal characters. And I was afraid that my ideals were not enough, so I consulted a few friends and deleted it several times, and then completed a novella "Yujun", which was self-prefaced——“若有人问玉君是真的，我的回答是没有一个小说家说实话的。说实话的是历史家，说假话的才是小说家。历史家用的是记忆力，小说家用的是想像力。历史家取的是科学态度，要忠实于客观；小说家取的是艺术态度，要忠实于主观。一言以蔽之，小说家也如艺术家，想把天然艺术化，就是要以他的理想与意志去补天然之缺陷。”
If someone asks Yujun if it is true, my answer is that no novelist tells the truth. It is the historian who tells the truth, and the one who tells lies is the novelist. Historians use memory, and novelists use imagination. Historians adopt a scientific attitude and must be faithful to objectivity; Novelists take an artistic attitude and be faithful to subjectivity. In a word, a novelist, like an artist, wants to make up for the defects of nature with his ideals and will. ”他先决定了“想把天然艺术化”，唯一的方法是“说假话”，“说假话的才是小说家”。于是依照了这定律，并且博采众议，将《玉君》创造出来了，然而这是一定的：不过一个傀儡，她的降生也就是死亡。我们此后也不再见这位作家的创作。
He first decided that "I want to make nature artistic", the only way is to "tell lies", "those who tell lies are novelists". So according to this law, and after listening to the opinions of the people, "Jade Lord" was created, but this is certain: it is just a puppet, and her birth is death. We have not seen this writer's work since.二
Two“五四”事件一起，这运动的大营的北京大学负了盛名，但同时也遭了艰险。终于，《新青年》的编辑中枢不得不复归上海，《新潮》群中的健将，则大抵远远的到欧美留学去了，《新潮》这杂志，也以虽有大吹大擂的豫告，却至今还未出版的“名著绍介”收场；留给国内的社员的，是一万部《孑民先生言行录》和七千部《点滴》。创作衰歇了，为人生的文学自然也衰歇了。
With the "May Fourth" incident, Peking University, the camp of this movement, was famous, but at the same time, it also suffered hardships and dangers. Finally, the editorial center of "New Youth" had to return to Shanghai, and the strong players in the "New Wave" group probably went far away to study in Europe and the United States. What was left for domestic members were 10,000 copies of "The Words and Deeds of Mr. Lonely People" and 7,000 copies of "Bits and Drops". Creation has declined, and literature for life has naturally declined.但上海却还有着为人生的文学的一群，不过也崛起了为文学的文学的一群。这里应该提起的，是弥洒社。它在一九二三年三月出版的《弥洒》（Musai）上，由胡山源作的《宣言》（《弥洒临凡曲》）告诉我们说——
But Shanghai still has a group of literature for life, but it has also risen to a group of literature for literature. What should be mentioned here is the Misa Society. In the "Musai" published in March 1923, the "Declaration" ("Misa Linfan Song") written by Hu Shanyuan tells us -
“我们乃是艺文之神；"We are the gods of art and literature; 
我们不知自己何自而生， We don't know where we came from, and 
也不知何为而生： doesn't know what we came from: 
………… ............ 
我们一切作为只知顺着我们的Inspiration！” We only know what we do to follow our Inspiration! ”

到四月出版的第二期，第一页上便分明的标出了这是“无目的无艺术观不讨论不批评而只发表顺灵感所创造的文艺作品的月刊”，即是一个脱俗的文艺团体的刊物。但其实，是无意中有着假想敌的。陈德征的《编辑余谈》说：“近来文学作品，也有商品化的，所谓文学研究者，所谓文人，都不免带有几分贩卖者底色彩！这是我们所深恶而且深以为痛心疾首的一件事。……”就正是和讨伐“垄断文坛”者的大军一鼻孔出气的檄文。这时候，凡是要独树一帜的，总打着憎恶“庸俗”的幌子。
By the second issue published in April, the first page clearly marked that this was "a monthly magazine without purpose, without artistic views, without discussion or criticism, but only publishing literary and artistic works created by inspiration", that is, it was a publication of a refined literary and artistic group. But in fact, there is an imaginary enemy unintentionally. Chen Dezheng's "Editor's Afterword" said: "Recently, literary works have also been commoditized, and the so-called literary researchers and so-called literati inevitably have a bit of a peddler background!" This is something we hate and deeply heartbreak. ......" is exactly the proclamation that is angry with the army of those who "monopolize the literary world". At this time, everything that wants to be unique is always under the guise of hating "vulgarity".一切作品，诚然大抵很致力于优美，要舞得“翩跹回翔”，唱得“宛转抑扬”，然而所感觉的范围却颇为狭窄，不免咀嚼着身边的小小的悲欢，而且就看这小悲欢为全世界。在这刊物上，作为小说作者而出现的，是胡山源，唐鸣时，赵景沄，方企留，曹贵新；钱江春和方时旭，却只能数作速写的作者。从中最特出的是胡山源，他的一篇《睡》，是实践宣言，笼罩全群的佳作，但在《樱桃花下》（第一期），却正如这面的过度的睡觉一样，显出那面的病的神经过敏来了。“灵感”也究竟要露出目的的。赵景沄的《阿美》，虽然简单，虽然好像不能“无所为”，却强有力的写出了连敏感的作者们也忘却了的“丫头”的悲惨短促的一世。
All works, indeed, are mostly very committed to beauty, to dance "fluttering back" and sing "twisting and intonating", but the range of feelings is quite narrow, and I can't help but chew on the small joys and sorrows around me, and I see this little joy and sorrow for the whole world. In this publication, as the author of the novel, it is Hu Shanyuan, Tang Mingshi, Zhao Jingyun, Fang Qiliu, Cao Guixin; Qian Jiangchun and Fang Shixu can only be counted as sketch authors. The most outstanding of them is Hu Shanyuan, whose "Sleep" is a practical manifesto and a masterpiece that envelops the whole group, but in "Under the Cherry Blossoms" (Issue 1), it is like the excessive sleep on this side, showing the nervousness of the disease on that side. "Inspiration" also has to reveal its purpose. Zhao Jingyun's "Ami", although simple, although it seems that it cannot be "done nothing", it powerfully writes the tragic and short life of the "girl" that even sensitive authors have forgotten.一九二四年中发祥于上海的浅草社，其实也是“为艺术而艺术”的作家团体，但他们的季刊，每一期都显示着努力：向外，在摄取异域的营养，向内，在挖掘自己的魂灵，要发见心里的眼睛和喉舌，来凝视这世界，将真和美歌唱给寂寞的人们。韩君格，孔襄我，胡絮若，高世华，林如稷，徐丹歌，顾，莎子，亚士，陈翔鹤，陈炜谟，竹影女士，都是小说方面的工作者；连后来是中国最为杰出的抒情诗人冯至，也曾发表他幽婉的名篇。次年，中枢移入北京，社员好像走散了一些，《浅草》季刊改为篇叶较少的《沉钟》周刊了，但锐气并不稍衰，第一期的眉端就引着吉辛（G. Gissing）的坚决的句子——
The Asakusa Society, which originated in Shanghai in mid-1924, is actually a group of writers who "art for art's sake", but their quarterly magazine, each issue shows their efforts: outward, in ingesting foreign nutrients, inwardly, digging out their own souls, discovering the eyes and mouthpieces in their hearts, to gaze at the world, and to sing truth and beauty to lonely people. Han Junge, Kong Xiangwo, Hu Xuruo, Gao Shihua, Lin Ruji, Xu Dange, Gu, Shazi, Yashi, Chen Xianghe, Chen Weimo, Ms. Zhuying are all novel workers; Even Feng Zhi, who later became China's most outstanding lyric poet, also published his graceful masterpieces. The following year, the center moved to Beijing, and the members seemed to be a little separated, and the quarterly magazine "Asakusa" was changed to the weekly magazine "Shen Zhong" with fewer pages, but the sharpness did not wane slightly, and the eyebrows of the first issue led to the introduction of G. Gissing's resolute sentence -
“而且我要你们一齐都证实……"And I want you all to confirm it together...... 
我要工作啊，一直到我死之一日。” I have to work until the day I die. ”

但那时觉醒起来的智识青年的心情，是大抵热烈，然而悲凉的。即使寻到一点光明，“径一周三”，却更分明的看见了周围的无涯际的黑暗。摄取来的异域的营养又是“世纪末”的果汁：王尔德（Oscar Wilde），尼采（Fr. Nietzsche），波特莱尔（Ch. Baudelaire），安特莱夫（L. Andreev）们所安排的。“沉自己的船”还要在绝处求生，此外的许多作品，就往往“春非我春，秋非我秋”，玄发朱颜，却唱着饱经忧患的不欲明言的断肠之曲。虽是冯至的饰以诗情，莎子的托辞小草，还是不能掩饰的。凡这些，似乎多出于蜀中的作者，蜀中的受难之早，也即此可以想见了。
But the mood of the awakened intellectual youth at that time was mostly warm, but sad. Even if you find a little light, you can see the boundless darkness around you more clearly. The exotic nutrients ingested are the juices of the "end of the century": Oscar Wilde, Nietzsche (Fr. Nietzsche), Baudelaire (Ch. Baudelaire), Antelfe (L. Andreev). "Sink your own ship" has to survive in a desperate place, and many other works are often "spring is not my spring, autumn is not my autumn", with black hair and red face, but singing a heartbroken song that has been troubled and does not want to say it clearly. Although Feng Zhi's poetry is adorned with poetry, Shazi's excuse is still unconcealable. All of these seem to be mostly from the authors of Shu, and the early suffering of Shu Zhong can be imagined.不过这群中的作者们也未尝自馁。陈炜谟在他的小说集《炉边》的“Proem”里说——
However, the authors in this group are not discouraged. Chen Weimo said in the "Proem" of his novel collection "Fireside" -“但我不要这样；生活在我还在刚开头，有许多命运的猛兽正在那边张牙舞爪等着我在。可是这也不用怕。人虽不必去崇拜太阳，但何至于懦怯得连暗夜也要躲避呢？怎的，秃笔不会写在破纸上么？若干年之后，回想此时的我，即不管别人，在自己或也可值眷念罢，如果值得忆念的地方便应该忆念。……”
"But I don't want that; Life is still at the beginning of my life, and there are many beasts of fate waiting for me over there. But don't be afraid. Although people don't have to worship the sun, why are they so timid that they have to hide even in the dark night? Why, won't the bald pen be written on torn paper? A few years later, looking back on me at this time, even if I don't care about others, I may also be missed, and if there is something worth remembering, I should remember it. ……”自然，这仍是无可奈何的自慰的伤心之言，但在事实上，沉钟社却确是中国的最坚韧，最诚实，挣扎得最久的团体。它好像真要如吉辛的话，工作到死掉之一日；如“沉钟”的铸造者，死也得在水底里用自己的脚敲出洪大的钟声。然而他们并不能做到，他们是活着的，时移世易，百事俱非；他们是要歌唱的，而听者却有的睡眠，有的槁死，有的流散，眼前只剩下一片茫茫白地，于是也只好在风尘洞中，悲哀孤寂地放下了他们的箜篌了。
Naturally, this is still a sad word of helpless masturbation, but in fact, Shen Zhong Society is indeed the most tenacious, honest, and longest-struggling group in China. It seems to really want to work until the day of death, as Jisin said; For example, the caster of the "sinking bell" has to knock out the great bell with his feet in the water even if he dies. However, they cannot do it, they are alive, times change, and everything is different; They wanted to sing, but some of the listeners were asleep, some died, some were scattered, and only a vast white land was left in front of them, so they had to put down their konghou in sadness and loneliness in the dusty id_0000 cave.后来以“废名”出名的冯文炳，也是在《浅草》中略见一斑的作者，但并未显出他的特长来。在一九二五年出版的《竹林的故事》里，才见以冲淡为衣，而如著者所说，仍能“从他们当中理出我的哀愁”的作品。可惜的是大约作者过于珍惜他有限的“哀愁”，不久就更加不欲像先前一般的闪露，于是从率直的读者看来，就只见其有意低徊，顾影自怜之态了。
Feng Wenbing, who later became famous for his "abandoned name", was also the author who appeared in "Asakusa", but did not show his strengths. In "The Story of the Bamboo Forest" published in 1925, I saw works that were diluted as clothes, but as the author said, could still "sort out my sorrow from them". It is a pity that the author cherishes his limited "sorrow" too much, and soon he does not want to be as flashy as before, so from the perspective of straightforward readers, he only sees his intentional low-keying and self-pity.冯沅君有一本短篇小说集《卷施》——是“拔心不死”的草名，也是一九二三年起，身在北京，而以“淦女士”的笔名，发表于上海创造社的刊物上的作品。其中的《旅行》是提炼了《隔绝》和《隔绝之后》（并在《卷施》内）的精粹的名文，虽嫌过于说理，却还未伤其自然；那“我很想拉他的手，但是我不敢，我只敢在间或车上的电灯被震动而失去它的光的时候，因为我害怕那些搭客们的注意。可是我们又自己觉得很骄傲的，我们不客气的以全车中最尊贵的人自命。”这一段，实在是五四运动直后，将毅然和传统战斗，而又怕敢毅然和传统战斗，遂不得不复活其“缠绵悱恻之情”的青年们的真实的写照。和“为艺术而艺术”的作品中的主角，或夸耀其颓唐，或衒鬻其才绪，是截然两样的。然而也可以复归于平安。陆侃如在《卷施》再版后记里说：“‘淦’训‘沈’，取《庄子》‘陆沈’之义。现在作者思想变迁，故再版时改署沅君。……只因作者秉性疏懒，故托我代说。”诚然，三年后的《春痕》，就只剩了散文的断片了，更后便是关于文学史的研究。这使我又记起匈牙利的诗人彼兑菲（Petöfi Sándor）题B. Sz.夫人照像的诗来——
Feng Yuanjun has a collection of short stories "Juan Shi" - the grass name of "Pulling Out the Heart and Not Dying", and it is also a work published in the publications of Shanghai Creation Society under the pseudonym "Ms. Gan" in Beijing since 1923. Among them, "Travel" is a famous text that refines the essence of "Isolation" and "After Isolation" (and in "Juan Shi"), although it is considered too reasonable, but it has not yet hurt its nature; "I would love to take his hand, but I don't dare, I only dare when the lights in the car vibrate and lose their light, because I am afraid of the attention of the passengers." But we feel very proud ourselves, and we unceremoniously call ourselves the most noble person in the car. This paragraph is really a true portrayal of the young people who will resolutely fight against tradition immediately after the May Fourth Movement, but are afraid of daring to fight resolutely against tradition, so they have to revive their "lingering feelings". It is completely different from the protagonist in the work of "art for art's sake", either boasting of his decadence, or flattering his talent. However, it can also return to peace. Lu Kanru said in the postscript to the reprint of "Juan Shi": "'Gan' teaches 'Shen', taking the meaning of 'Lu Shen' in 'Zhuangzi'. Now the author's thinking has changed, so the reprint was changed to Yuan Jun. …… It's just because the author is lazy, so I asked him to speak on my behalf. It is true that three years later, "Spring Traces" only left fragments of prose, and then there was the study of literary history. This reminds me of the Hungarian poet Petöfi Sándor's title B. Mrs. Sz.“听说你使你的男人很幸福，我希望不至于此，因为他是苦恼的夜莺，而今沉默在幸福里了。苛待他罢，使他因此常常唱出甜美的歌来。”
"I heard that you have made your man very happy, and I hope it is not, because he is a distressed nightingale, and now he is silent in happiness. He was so harsh that he often sang sweet songs. ”我并不是说：苦恼是艺术的渊源，为了艺术，应该使作家们永久陷在苦恼里。不过在彼兑菲的时候，这话是有些真实的；在十年前的中国，这话也有些真实的。
I am not saying that distress is the source of art, and for the sake of art, writers should be permanently trapped in distress. But in the time of Peter Dufei, this was somewhat true; In China ten years ago, this was somewhat true.三
Three在北京这地方，——北京虽然是“五四运动”的策源地，但自从支持着《新青年》和《新潮》的人们，风流云散以来，一九二〇至二二年这三年间，倒显着寂寞荒凉的古战场的情景。《晨报副刊》，后来是《京报副刊》露出头角来了，然而都不是怎么注重文艺创作的刊物，它们在小说一方面，只绍介了有限的作家：蹇先艾，许钦文，王鲁彦，黎锦明，黄鹏基，尚钺，向培良。
In Beijing,—— although Beijing is the birthplace of the "May Fourth Movement", since the people who supported "New Youth" and "New Wave" dispersed, the three years from 1920 to 22 have remarkably shown the scene of the lonely and desolate ancient battlefield. "Morning News Supplement", later "Beijing News Supplement" came to the fore, but they were not publications that paid much attention to literary and artistic creation, and they only introduced a limited number of writers on the side of novels: Jian Xianai, Xu Qinwen, Wang Luyan, Li Jinming, Huang Pengji, Shang Yue, Xiang Peiliang.蹇先艾的作品是简朴的，如他在小说集《朝雾》里说——
Jian Xianai's works are simple, as he said in the collection of novels "Morning Mist" -“……我已经是满过二十岁的人了，从老远的贵州跑到北京来，灰沙之中彷徨了也快七年，时间不能说不长，怎样混过的，并自身都茫然不知。是这样匆匆地一天一天的去了，童年的影子越发模糊消淡起来，像朝雾似的，袅袅的飘失，我所感到的只有空虚与寂寞。这几个岁月，除近两年信笔涂鸦的几篇新诗和似是而非的小说之外，还做了什么呢？每一回忆，终不免有点凄寥撞击心头。所以现在决然把这个小说集付印了，……借以纪念从此阔别的可爱的童年。……若果不失赤子之心的人们肯毅然光顾，或者从中间也寻得出一点幼稚的风味来罢？……”
“…… I am already over twenty years old, I came to Beijing from Guizhou, and I have been wandering in the gray sand for almost seven years. It went in such a hurry day by day, and the shadow of childhood became more and more blurred and faded, like morning mist, drifting away, and all I felt was emptiness and loneliness. In the past few years, in addition to a few new poems and plausible novels that have been doodled by pen and pen in the past two years, what else have you done? Every memory inevitably hits my heart a little miserable. So now I decided to print this collection of novels,...... To commemorate the lovely childhood that has been separated since then. …… What if people who do not lose their innocence are willing to patronize resolutely, or find a little childish flavor in the middle? ……”诚然，虽然简朴，或者如作者所自谦的“幼稚”，但很少文饰，也足够写出他心曲的哀愁。他所描写的范围是狭小的，几个平常人，一些琐屑事，但如《水葬》，却对我们展示了“老远的贵州”的乡间习俗的冷酷，和出于这冷酷中的母性之爱的伟大，——贵州很远，但大家的情境是一样的。
It is true that although it is simple, or as the author humbly says, it is "naïve", but there is little embellishment, which is enough to write the sorrow of his heart. The scope of his description is narrow, a few ordinary people, some trivial things, but such as "Water Burial", it shows us the coldness of the rural customs of "distant Guizhou", and the great ,—— of maternal love in this coldness is far away from Guizhou, but everyone's situation is the same.这时——一九二四年——偶然发表作品的还有裴文中和李健吾。前者大约并不是向来留心创作的人，那《戎马声中》，却拉杂的记下了游学的青年，为了炮火下的故乡和父母而惊魂不定的实感。后者的《终条山的传说》是绚烂了，虽在十年以后的今日，还可以看见那藏在用口碑织就的华服里面的身体和灵魂。
At this time - 1924 - Pei Wenzhong and Li Jianwu also published works by chance. The former is probably not a person who has always paid attention to creation, but "In the Sound of War and Horses" records the real feeling of young people who travel to study and are shocked for their hometown and parents under artillery fire. The latter's "The Legend of Zhongtiao Mountain" is gorgeous, although ten years later, you can still see the body and soul hidden in the splendid clothes woven by word of mouth.蹇先艾叙述过贵州，裴文中关心着榆关，凡在北京用笔写出他的胸臆来的人们，无论他自称为用主观或客观，其实往往是乡土文学，从北京这方面说，则是侨寓文学的作者。但这又非如勃兰兑斯（G. Brandes）所说的“侨民文学”，侨寓的只是作者自己，却不是这作者所写的文章，因此也只见隐现着乡愁，很难有异域情调来开拓读者的心胸，或者眩耀他的眼界。许钦文自名他的第一本短篇小说集为《故乡》，也就是在不知不觉中，自招为乡土文学的作者，不过在还未开手来写乡土文学之前，他却已被故乡所放逐，生活驱逐他到异地去了，他只好回忆“父亲的花园”，而且是已不存在的花园，因为回忆故乡的已不存在的事物，是比明明存在，而只有自己不能接近的事物较为舒适，也更能自慰的——
Jian Xianai narrated Guizhou, Pei Wenzhong cared about Yuguan, and all the people who wrote his chest with a pen in Beijing, whether he claimed to be subjective or objective, were often local literature, and from the Beijing side, they were the authors of overseas Chinese literature. But this is not like G. Brandeis (G. Brandes) refers to the "diaspora literature", the overseas Chinese only live in the author himself, but not the articles written by the author, so there is only nostalgia faintly, and it is difficult to have an exotic atmosphere to broaden the reader's mind or dazzle his vision. Xu Qinwen called his first collection of short stories "Hometown", that is, unknowingly, he recruited himself as the author of local literature, but before he started writing local literature, he had been banished by his hometown, and life expelled him to a different place, he had to recall the "father's garden", and it was a garden that no longer existed, because recalling the things that no longer existed in his hometown was more comfortable and more masturbating than the things that clearly existed, but only he could not approach——“父亲的花园最盛的几年距今已有几时，已难确切的计算。当时的盛况虽曾照下一像，如今挂在父亲的房里，无奈为时已久，那时乡间的摄影又很幼稚，现已模胡莫辨了。挂在它旁边的芳姊的遗像也已不大清楚，惟有父亲题在像上的字句却很明白：‘性既执拗，遇复可怜，一朝痛割，我独何堪！’
"It is difficult to calculate exactly how many years have passed since the peak years of my father's garden. Although the grand occasion at that time was once photographed, it is now hanging in my father's room, helpless for a long time, and the photography in the countryside was very naïve at that time, and now it is indistinguishable. The portrait of Sister Fang hanging next to it is not very clear, but the words inscribed on the portrait by my father are very clear: 'The sex is stubborn, and it is pitiful, and once it is cut off, how can I bear it!' ’“…………
“我想父亲的花园就是能够重行种起种种的花来，那时的盛况总是不能恢复的了，因为已经没有了芳姊。”
"I think my father's garden is to be able to replant all kinds of flowers, and the grandeur at that time can never be restored, because Sister Fang is gone."无可奈何的悲愤，是令人不得不舍弃的，然而作者仍不能舍弃，没有法，就再寻得冷静和诙谐来做悲愤的衣裳；裹起来了，聊且当作“看破”。并且将这手段用到描写种种人物，尤其是青年人物去。因为故意的冷静，所以也刻深，而终不免带着令人疑虑的嬉笑。“虽有忮心，不怨飘瓦”，冷静要死静；包着愤激的冷静和诙谐，是被观察和被描写者所不乐受的，他们不承认他是一面无生命，无意见的镜子。于是他也往往被排进讽刺文学作家里面去，尤其是使女士们皱起了眉头。
The helpless grief and anger are something that people have to give up, but the author still can't give up, and there is no way, so he will find calmness and witty to make clothes of grief and anger; Wrapped up, let's talk about it as "seeing through". And use this method to describe all kinds of characters, especially young characters. Because of the deliberate calmness, it is also deep, and in the end, it is inevitable to have a suspicious laugh. "Although there is jealousy, do not complain about the floating tiles", calm down to die quietly; The calmness and humor wrapped in indignation are unpleasant to the observers and the described, who do not recognize him as a lifeless and opinionless mirror. So he is often ranked among satirical literary writers, especially to the frowns of ladies.这一种冷静和诙谐，如果滋长起来，对于作者本身其实倒是危险的。他也能活泼的写出民间生活来，如《石宕》，但可惜不多见。
This kind of calmness and humor, if it grows, is actually dangerous for the author himself. He can also write about folk life vividly, such as "Shidang", but unfortunately it is rare.看王鲁彦的一部分的作品的题材和笔致，似乎也是乡土文学的作家，但那心情，和许钦文是极其两样的。许钦文所苦恼的是失去了地上的“父亲的花园”，他所烦冤的却是离开了天上的自由的乐土。他听得“秋雨的诉苦”说——
Looking at the theme and brushwork of some of Wang Luyan's works, it seems that he is also a writer of local literature, but the mood is extremely different from Xu Qinwen. Xu Qinwen was troubled by the loss of his "father's garden" on earth, but what he was troubled by was leaving the paradise of freedom in heaven. He heard "Qiu Yu's complaints" and said——“地太小了，地太脏了，到处都黑暗，到处都讨厌。人人只知道爱金钱，不知道爱自由，也不知道爱美。你们人类的中间没有一点亲爱，只有仇恨。你们人类，夜间像猪一般的甜甜蜜蜜的睡着，白天像狗一般的争斗着，撕打着……
"The land is too small, the ground is too dirty, it is dark everywhere, and it is hated everywhere. Everyone only knows how to love money, freedom, and beauty. There is no love among you humans, only hatred. You humans fall asleep sweetly like pigs at night, and fight and beat like dogs during the day......“这样的世界，我看得惯吗？我为什么不应该哭呢？在野蛮的世界上，让野兽们去生活着罢，但是我不，我们不……唔，我现在要离开这世界，到地底去了……”
"Am I used to seeing such a world? Why shouldn't I cry? In a barbaric world, let the beasts live, but I don't, we don't ...... Well, I'm leaving this world now and going underground......"这和爱罗先珂（V. Eroshenko）的悲哀又仿佛相像的，然而又极其两样。那是地下的土拨鼠，欲爱人类而不得，这是太空的秋雨，要逃避人间而不能。他只好将心还给母亲，才来做“人”，骗得母亲的微笑。秋天的雨，无心的“人”，和人间社会是不会有情愫的。要说冷静，这才真是冷静；这才能够和“托尔斯小”的无抵抗主义一同抹杀“牛克斯”的斗争说；和“达我文”的进化说一并嘲弄“克鲁屁特金”的互助论；对专制不平，但又向自由冷笑。作者是往往想以诙谐之笔出之的，但也因为太冷静了，就又往往化为冷话，失掉了人间的诙谐。
This is very similar to the relationship between V. Eroshenko's sadness is similar, but extremely different. It is an underground groundhog, wanting to love humans but not being able to do so, this is the autumn rain of space, and it is impossible to escape from the world. He had to return his heart to his mother before he came to be a "person" and deceive his mother's smile. Autumn rain, unintentional "people", and human society will not have feelings. If you want to say calm, this is really calm; Only then can we erase the struggle theory of "Niux" together with the non-resistance of "Tolstoy"; Together with the evolutionary theory of "Dawowen", it ridicules the mutual aid theory of "Krutkin"; He was unfair to autocracy, but he sneered at freedom. The author often wants to write with a witty pen, but because he is too calm, he often turns into cold words and loses the humor of the world.然而“人”的心是究竟还不尽的，《柚子》一篇，虽然为湘中的作者所不满，但在玩世的衣裳下，还闪露着地上的愤懑，在王鲁彦的作品里，我以为倒是最为热烈的的了。
However, the heart of "people" is not exhausted, "Grapefruit", although dissatisfied with the author of Xiangzhong, but under the cynical clothes, there is still a flash of resentment on the ground, in Wang Luyan's works, I think it is the most enthusiastic.我所说的这湘中的作家是黎锦明，他大约是自小就离开了故乡的。在作品里，很少乡土气息，但蓬勃着楚人的敏感和热情。他一早就在《社交问题》里，对易卜生一流的解放论者掷了斯忒林培黎（A. Strindberg）式的投枪；但也能精致而明丽的说述儿时的“轻微的印象”。待到一九二六年，他布告不满于自己了，他在《烈火》再版的自序上说——
The writer I am talking about in Hunan is Li Jinming, who left his hometown about a child. In the work, there is little rustic atmosphere, but it is full of the sensitivity and enthusiasm of the Chu people. Early in the morning, he threw a letter to Ibsen's first-class liberation theorist, A. Strindberg) style throwing gun; But it can also delicately and brightly describe the "slight impressions" of childhood. By 1926, he was dissatisfied with himself, and he said in the preface to the reprint of "Fire" -“在北京生活的人们，如其有灵魂，他们的灵魂恐怕未有不染遍了灰色罢，自然，《烈火》即在这情形中写成，当我去年春时来到上海，我的心境完全变了，对于它，只有遗弃的一念。……”
"People living in Beijing, if they have souls, their souls are probably not stained with gray, naturally, "Fire" was written in this situation, when I came to Shanghai last spring, my state of mind completely changed, and there was only a thought of abandonment for it. ……”他判过去的生活为灰色，以早期的作品为童了。果然，在此后的《破垒集》中，的确很换了些披挂，有含讥的轻妙的小品，但尤其显出好的故事作者的特色来：有时如中国的“磊砢山房”主人的瑰奇；有时如波兰的显克微支（H. Sienkiewicz）的警拔，却又不以失望收场，有声有色，总能使读者欣然终卷。但其失，则又即在主旨居陆离光怪的装饰之中，时或永被沉埋，倘一显现，便又见得鹘突了。
He judged his past life to be gray, and his early works were children'id_0000. Sure enough, in the subsequent "Broken Fortress Collection", there are indeed some cloaks and sarcastic and light sketches, but they especially show the characteristics of good story authors: sometimes like the wonder of the owner of China's "Lei Ping Mountain House"; Sometimes it is like the Polish microbranch (H. Sienkiewicz) is alert, but it does not end in disappointment, and it is sound and colorful, which can always make the reader happy to finish the book. But its loss is that it is buried forever in the decoration of the main theme and bizarre decorations, and if it appears, it will be seen again.《现代评论》比起日报的副刊来，比较的着重于文艺，但那些作者，也还是新潮社和创造社的老手居多。凌叔华的小说，却发祥于这一种期刊的，她恰和冯沅君的大胆，敢言不同，大抵很谨慎的，适可而止的描写了旧家庭中的婉顺的女性。即使间有出轨之作，那是为了偶受着文酒之风的吹拂，终于也回复了她的故道了。这是好的，——使我们看见和冯沅君，黎锦明，川岛，汪静之所描写的绝不相同的人物，也就是世态的一角，高门巨族的精魂。
Compared with the supplements of daily newspapers, "Modern Review" focuses more on literature and art, but most of those authors are still veterans of the New Wave Society and the Creation Society. Ling Shuhua's novel, but originated from this kind of periodical, she is different from Feng Yuanjun's boldness and daring to speak, and she is probably very cautious, and it describes the gentle women in the old family in moderation. Even if there are occasional cheating works, it is to be blown by the wind of literature and wine, and finally returned to her old ways. This is a good ,—— allows us to see the characters that are absolutely different from those described by Feng Yuanjun, Li Jinming, Chuan Dao, and Wang Jingzhi, that is, a corner of the world, the spirit of the high-ranking giants.四
Four一九二五年十月间，北京突然有莽原社出现，这其实不过是不满于《京报副刊》编辑者的一群，另设《莽原》周刊，却仍附《京报》发行，聊以快意的团体。奔走最力者为高长虹，中坚的小说作者也还是黄鹏基，尚钺，向培良三个；而鲁迅是被推为编辑的。但声援的很不少，在小说方面，有文炳，沅君，霁野，静农，小酩，青雨等。到十一月，《京报》要停止副刊以外的小幅了，便改为半月刊，由未名社出版，其时所绍介的新作品，是描写着乡下的沉滞的氛围气的魏金枝之作：《留下镇上的黄昏》。
In October 1925, the Mangyuan Society suddenly appeared in Beijing, which was actually just a group of people who were dissatisfied with the editors of the "Beijing News Supplement", and set up a separate weekly magazine "Mangyuan", but still attached to the "Beijing News" to publish it, chatting about pleasure. The most powerful person is Gao Changhong, and the backbone of the novel is still Huang Pengji, Shang Yue, and Xiang Peiliang; And Lu Xun was pushed to be the editor. But there are a lot of supporters, in terms of novels, there are Wen Bing, Yuan Jun, Jiye, Jing Nong, Xiao Mo, Qing Yu, etc. By November, the Beijing News was going to stop writing a small amount other than the supplement, so it was changed to a semi-monthly magazine, published by Weiming Society, and the new work introduced at that time was Wei Jinzhi's work that described the stagnant atmosphere of the countryside: "Leaving the Twilight in the Town".但不久这莽原社内部冲突了，长虹一流，便在上海设立了狂飙社。所谓“狂飙运动”，那草案其实是早藏在长虹的衣袋里面的，常要乘机而出，先就印过几期周刊；那《宣言》，又曾在一九二五年三月间的《京报副刊》上发表，但尚未以“超人”自命，还带着并不自满的声音——
But soon there was a conflict within the Mangyuan Society, and Changhong was first-class, so he set up the Hurricane Society in Shanghai. The so-called "Hurricane Movement", the draft was actually hidden in Changhong's pocket, and he often had to take the opportunity to go out, and he had to print several issues of weekly magazines first; The "Declaration" was published in the "Beijing News Supplement" in March 1925, but it did not yet call itself a "superman", and it still had a voice that was not complacent——“黑沉沉的暗夜，一切都熟睡了，死一般的，没有一点声音，一件动作，阒寂无聊的长夜呵！
"In the dark night, everything is asleep, dead, without a sound, a movement, a long night of silence and boredom!“这样的，几百年几百年的时期过去了，而晨光没有来，黑夜没有止息。
"In this way, hundreds and hundreds of years have passed, but the morning light has not come, and the night has not stopped.“死一般的，一切的人们，都沉沉的睡着了。
"Like death, all the people fell asleep.“于是有几个人，从黑暗中醒来，便互相呼唤着：
So several people, awakening from the darkness, called out to each other:“——时候到了，期待已经够了。
- The time has come, and the anticipation is enough.“——是呵，我们要起来了。我们呼唤着，使一切不安于期待的人们也起来罢。
"——Yes, we're going to get up. We call all those who are disturbed by expectations to rise up.“——若是晨光终于不来，那么，也起来罢。我们将点起灯来，照耀我们幽暗的前途。
——If the morning light doesn't come at all, then get up. We will light the lamp and shine on our dark future.“——软弱是不行的，睡着希望是不行的。我们要作强者，打倒障碍或者被障碍压倒。我们并不惧怯，也不躲避。
- Weakness is not good, hope is not good. We want to be strong, to break down obstacles or be overwhelmed by obstacles. We are not afraid or shy away.“这样呼唤着，虽然是微弱的罢，听呵，从东方，从西方，从南方，从北方，隐隐的来了强大的应声，比我们更要强大的应声。
"Calling like this, although it is faint, listen, from the east, from the west, from the south, from the north, there is a faint powerful response, a stronger response than us.“一滴水泉可以作江河之始流，一片树叶之飘动可以兆暴风之将来，微小的起源可以生出伟大的结果。因为这个缘故，我们的周刊便叫作《狂飙》。”
"A drop of water can be the beginning of a river, the fluttering of a leaf can indicate the future of a storm, and a small origin can produce great results. Because of this, our weekly magazine is called "Hurricane". ”不过后来却日见其自以为“超越”了。然而拟尼采样的彼此都不能解的格言式的文章，终于使周刊难以存在，可记的也仍然只是小说方面的黄鹏基，尚钺，——其实是向培良一个作者而已。
However, later on, he saw that he thought he was "transcending". However, the aphorism-style articles sampled by Ni sampled by each other finally made it difficult for the weekly magazine to exist, and the only thing that can be remembered is still Huang Pengji in the novel, and Shang Yue ,—— actually only an author of Xiang Peiliang.黄鹏基将他的短篇小说印成一本，称为《荆棘》，而第二次和读者相见的时候，已经改名“朋其”了。他是首先明白晓畅的主张文学不必如奶油，应该如刺，文学家不得颓丧，应该刚健的人；他在《刺的文学》（《莽原》周刊二十八期）里，说明了“文学绝不是无聊的东西”，“文学家并不一定就是得天独厚的特等民族”，“也不是成天哭泣的鲛人”。他说——
Huang Pengji printed his short story into a book called "Thorns", and when he met readers for the second time, he had changed his name to "Pengqi". He first understood Xiaochang's idea that literature should not be like butter, it should be like thorns, and writers should not be depressed, but should be strong people; In "The Literature of Thorns" (the twenty-eighth issue of "Mangyuan" Weekly), he explained that "literature is by no means a boring thing", "writers are not necessarily a unique and special nation", and "they are not mermaids who cry all day long". He said—“我以为中国现代的作品，应该是像一丛荆棘。因为在一片沙漠里，憧憬的花都会慢慢地消灭的，社会生出荆棘来，他的叶是有刺的，他的茎是有刺的，以至于他的根也是有刺的。——请不要拿植物生理来反驳我——一篇作品的思想，的结构，的练句，的用字，都应该把我们常感觉到的刺的意味儿表现出来。真的文学家……应该先站起来，使我们不得不站起来。他应该充实自己的力，让人们怎样充实他自己的力，知道他自己的力，表现他自己的力。一篇作品的成功至少要使读者一直读下去，无暇辨文字的美恶，——恶劣的感觉，固然不好，就是美妙的感觉，也算失败。——而要想因循，苟且而不得。怎样抓着他的病的深处，就很利害地刺他一下。一般整饬的结构，平凡的字句，会使他跑到旁处去的，我们应该反对。
"I thought that modern Chinese works should be like a bush of thorns. Because in a desert, the flowers of longing will slowly disappear, and the society will give birth to thorns, and his leaves will be thorny, and his stems will be thorny, so that his roots will also be thorny. ——Please don't use plant physiology to refute me - the ideas, structure, sentences, and words of a work should express the meaning of thorns that we often feel. A real writer...... It should be the first to stand up, so that we have to stand up. He should enrich his own power, how to let people enrich his own power, know his own power, and show his own strength. The success of a work must at least make the reader read it all the time, and there is no time to distinguish the beauty and evil of the text ,—— the bad feeling, which is not good, even if it is a wonderful feeling, it can be regarded as a failure. - And if you want to follow the old ways, you can't do it. How to grasp the depths of his illness, stab him very interestingly. The general structure of rectification and ordinary words will make him run to the side, and we should oppose it.“‘沙漠里遍生了荆棘，中国人就会过人的生活了！’这是我相信的。”
"'The desert is full of thorns, and the Chinese will live a human life!' That's what I believe. ”朋其的作品的确和他的主张并不怎么背驰，他用流利而诙谐的言语，暴露，描画，讽刺着各式人物，尤其是智识者层。他或者装着傻子，说出青年的思想来，或者化为渝腿，跑进阔佬们的家里去。但也许因为力求生动，流利的缘故罢，抉剔就不能深，而且结末的特地装置的滑稽，也往往毁损掉全篇的力量。讽刺文学是能死于自身的故意的戏笑的。不久他又“自招”（《荆棘》卷首）道：“写出‘刺的文学’四字，也不过因了每天对于霸王鞭的欣赏，和自己的‘生也不辰’，未能十分领略花的意味儿，”那可大有徘徊之状了。此后也没有再看见他“刺的文学”。
Pengqi's works do not contradict his ideas much, and he uses fluent and witty words to expose, depict, and satirize various characters, especially the intellectuals. He either pretended to be a fool and said the thoughts of a young man, or turned into a leg and ran into the homes of the broad guys. But perhaps because of the pursuit of vividness and fluency, the selection cannot be deep, and the humor of the special device at the end often destroys the power of the whole piece. Satirical literature can die from its own deliberate jokes. Soon he "recruited himself" (at the beginning of "Thorns"): "Writing the four words 'thorny literature' is only because of the daily appreciation of the overlord whip and his own 'birth is not good', and he has not been able to fully appreciate the meaning of flowers," which is quite wandering. Since then, I have not seen his "thorny literature" again.尚钺的创作，也是意在讥刺，而且暴露，搏击的，小说集《斧背》之名，便是自提的纲要。他创作的态度，比朋其严肃，取材也较为广泛，时时描写着风气未开之处——河南信阳——的人民。可惜的是为才能所限，那斧背就太轻小了，使他为公和为私的打击的效力，大抵失在由于器械不良，手段生涩的不中里。
Shang Yue's creation is also intended to be sarcastic, and exposed, fighting, and the name of the novel collection "Axe Back" is the outline of his own proposal. His creative attitude is more serious than Pengqi, and the materials are also more extensive, and he always describes the people of Xinyang, Henan, a place where the atmosphere has not yet opened. Unfortunately, due to the limitations of his talents, the axe back was too light, so that his effectiveness in attacking the public and private was probably lost due to poor equipment and jerky means.向培良当发表他第一本小说集《飘渺的梦》时，一开首就说——
When Xiang Peiliang published his first collection of novels "Ethereal Dreams", he said at the beginning -“时间走过去的时候，我的心灵听见轻微的足音，我把这个很拙笨地移到纸上去了，这就是我这本小册子的来源罢！”
"As time passed, my mind heard the slight sound of footsteps, and I clumsily moved this to the paper, which is the source of my pamphlet!"的确，作者向我们叙述着他的心灵所听到的时间的足音，有些是借了儿童时代的天真的爱和憎，有些是借着羁旅时候的寂寞的闻和见，然而他并不“拙笨”，却也不矫揉造作，只如熟人相对，娓娓而谈，使我们在不甚操心的倾听中，感到一种生活的色相。但是，作者的内心是热烈的，倘不热烈，也就不能这么平静的娓娓而谈了，所以他虽然间或休息于过去的“已经失去的童心”中，却终于爱了现在的“在强有力的憎恶后面，发现更强有力的爱”的“虚无的反抗者”，向我们绍介了强有力的《我离开十字街头》。下面这一段就是那不知名的反抗者所自述的憎恶——
Indeed, the author narrates to us the footsteps of time heard by his heart, some borrowing the naïve love and hate of childhood, and some through the lonely smell and sight of travel, but he is not "clumsy", but he is not pretentious, just like acquaintances facing each other, talking eloquently, so that we can feel a hue of life in the listening without worrying too much. However, the author's heart is warm, and if he is not warm, he cannot talk so calmly, so although he occasionally rests in the "lost childlike innocence" of the past, he finally loves the current "nihilistic rebel" who "finds stronger love behind strong hatred", and introduces us to the powerful "I Leave the Cross Street". The following paragraph is the self-described hatred of the unknown rebel -“为什么我要跑出北京？这个我也说不出很多的道理。总而言之：我已经讨厌了这古老的虚伪的大城。在这里面游离了四年之后，我已经刻骨地讨厌了这古老的虚伪的大城。在这里面，我只看见请安，打拱，要皇帝，恭维执政——卑怯的奴才！卑劣，怯懦，狡猾，以及敏捷的逃躲，这都是奴才们的绝技！厌恶的深感在我口中，好似生的腥鱼在我口中一般；我需要呕吐，于是提着我的棍走了。”
"Why should I run out of Beijing? I can't say much about this. In short: I already hate this old hypocritical big city. After four years of wandering here, I have hated this ancient hypocritical big city. In this, I only see greetings, arches, emperors, and compliments to the rulers - cowardly servants! Meanness, cowardice, cunning, and agile evasion are all the stunts of the minions! The deep feeling of disgust is in my mouth, like raw fishing fish in my mouth; I needed to vomit, so I took my stick and left. ”在这里听到了尼采声，正是狂飙社的进军的鼓角。尼采教人们准备着“超人”的出现，倘不出现，那准备便是空虚。但尼采却自有其下场之法的：发狂和死。否则，就不免安于空虚，或者反抗这空虚，即使在孤独中毫无“末人”的希求温暖之心，也不过蔑视一切权威，收缩而为虚无主义者（Nihilist）。巴札罗夫（Bazarov）是相信科学的；他为医术而死，一到所蔑视的并非科学的权威而是科学本身，那就成为沙宁（Sanin）之徒，只好以一无所信为名，无所不为为实了。但狂飙社却似乎仅止于“虚无的反抗”，不久就散了队，现在所遗留的，就只有向培良的这响亮的战叫，说明着半绥惠略夫（Sheveriov）式的“憎恶”的前途。
Here I heard Nietzsche's voice, which was the drum and horn of the Hurricane Society's march. Nietzsche taught people to prepare for the appearance of "superman", and if they do not appear, then the preparation is empty. But Nietzsche has his own way of ending: madness and death. Otherwise, it is inevitable to be content with emptiness, or to resist this emptiness, even if there is no "last man" in loneliness to seek warmth, it will only despise all authority and shrink into a nihilist. Bazarov believes in science; He died for medicine, and when he arrived, he despised not the authority of science but science itself, so he became a disciple of Sanin, and had to do everything in the name of believing in nothing. But the Hurricane Society seemed to stop at the "nihilistic resistance", and soon disbanded, and now all that is left is the loud battle cry of Xiang Peiliang, which illustrates the future of the semi-Sui Huiliov-style "abomination".未名社却相反，主持者韦素园，是宁愿作为无名的泥土，来栽植奇花和乔木的人，事业的中心，也多在外国文学的译述。待到接办《莽原》后，在小说方面，魏金枝之外，又有李霁野，以锐敏的感觉创作，有时深而细，真如数着每一片叶的叶脉，但因此就往往不能广，这也是孤寂的发掘者所难以两全的。台静农是先不想到写小说，后不愿意写小说的人，但为了韦素园的奖劝，为了《莽原》的索稿，他挨到一九二六年，也只得动手了。《地之子》的后记里自己说——
On the contrary, the host Wei Suyuan is a person who would rather be a nameless soil to plant strange flowers and trees, and the center of his career is also mostly in the translation of foreign literature. After taking over "Mangyuan", in terms of novels, in addition to Wei Jinzhi, there is Li Jiye, who creates with a sharp feeling, sometimes deep and thin, like counting the veins of each leaf, but therefore it is often not wide, which is also difficult for lonely excavators to have both. Tai Jingnong was a person who did not want to write a novel at first, and then was unwilling to write a novel, but for Wei Suyuan's persuasion and for the manuscript of "Mangyuan", he had to do it until 1926. In the afterword of "Son of the Earth", he said -“那时我开始写了两三篇，预备第二年用。素园看了，他很满意我从民间取材；他遂劝我专在这一方面努力，并且举了许多作家的例子。其实在我倒不大乐于走这一条路。人间的酸辛和凄楚，我耳边所听到的，目中所看见的，已经是不堪了；现在又将它用我的心血细细地写出，能说这不是不幸的事么？同时我又没有生花的笔，能够献给我同时代的少男少女以伟大的欢欣。”
"At that time, I started writing two or three articles, ready to use them for the next year. Su Yuan read it, and he was very satisfied that I took materials from the folk; He advised me to focus on this area and gave examples of many writers. In fact, I am not very happy to take this path. The bitterness and misery of the world, what I hear in my ears and what I see in my eyes, is already unbearable; Now I have written it carefully with my own efforts, can I say that this is not an unfortunate thing? At the same time, I don't have a pen to dedicate to the boys and girls of my generation with great joy. ”此后还有《建塔者》。要在他的作品里吸取“伟大的欢欣”，诚然是不容易的，但他却贡献了文艺；而且在争写着恋爱的悲欢，都会的明暗的那时候，能将乡间的死生，泥土的气息，移在纸上的，也没有更多，更勤于这作者的了。
After that, there was "The Tower Builder". It is true that it is not easy to absorb "great joy" in his works, but he has contributed literature and art; And when I was fighting to write about the joys and sorrows of love, the light and dark of the city, there was no more person who could move the life and death of the countryside and the breath of the soil on paper, and I was more diligent than this author.五
Five临末，是关于选辑的几句话——
At the end, there are a few words about the anthology -一，文学团体不是豆荚，包含在里面的，始终都是豆。大约集成时本已各个不同，后来更各有种种的变化。在这里，一九二六年后之作即不录，此后的作者的作风和思想等，也不论。
First, literary groups are not pods, and what is included in them is always beans. It was already different when it was integrated, and later there were various changes. Here, works after 1926 are not recorded, and the style and thoughts of the authors after that are not included.二，有些作者，是有自编的集子的，曾在期刊上发表过的初期的文章，集子里有时却不见，恐怕是自己不满，删去了。但我间或仍收在这里面，因为我以为就是圣贤豪杰，也不必自惭他的童年；自惭，倒是一个错误。
Second, some authors have self-edited collections, and the early articles published in journals are sometimes not found in the collections, I am afraid that they are dissatisfied and delete them. But I may still accept it here, because I think it is a sage and a hero, and I don't have to be ashamed of his childhood; It's a mistake to be ashamed of yourself.三，自编的集子里的有些文章，和先前在期刊上发表的，字句往往有些不同，这当然是作者自己添削的。但这里却有时采了初稿，因为我觉得加了修饰之后，也未必一定比质朴的初稿好。
Third, some articles in the self-edited collection are often slightly different from those previously published in journals, which are of course corrected by the author himself. But sometimes the first draft is taken here, because I think that after adding embellishments, it may not necessarily be better than the simple first draft.以上两点，是要请作者原谅的。
The above two points are for the author's forgiveness.四，十年中所出的各种期刊，真不知有多少，小说集当然也不少，但见闻有限，自不免有遗珠之憾。至于明明见了集子，却取舍失当，那就即使并非偏心，也一定是缺少眼力，不想来勉强辩解了。
Fourth, I don't know how many journals have been published in ten years, and of course there are many collections of novels, but the knowledge is limited, and I can't help but regret the pearls. As for obviously seeing the collection, but making an inappropriate choice, then even if it is not partial, it must be a lack of eyesight and do not want to reluctantly defend it.一九三五年三月二日写讫。
Completed on March 2, 1935.

内山完造作《活中国的姿态》序

内山完造作《活中国的姿态》序

内山完造作《活中国的姿态》序

Uchiyama completed the preface to "The Posture of Living China"这也并非自己的发见，是在内山书店里听着漫谈的时候拾来的，据说：像日本人那样的喜欢“结论”的民族，就是无论是听议论，是读书，如果得不到结论，心里总不舒服的民族，在现在的世上，好像是颇为少有的，云。
It is said that a nation like the Japanese that likes "conclusions" is a nation that always feels uncomfortable if they can't get a conclusion, whether it is listening to discussions or reading, if they can't get a conclusion, it seems to be quite rare in today's world.接收了这一个结论之后，就时时令人觉得很不错。例如关于中国人，也就是这样的。明治时代的支那研究的结论，似乎大抵受着英国的什么人做的《支那人气质》的影响，但到近来，却也有了面目一新的结论了。一个旅行者走进了下野的有钱的大官的书斋，看见有许多很贵的砚石，便说中国是“文雅的国度”；一个观察者到上海来一下，买几种猥亵的书和图画，再去寻寻奇怪的观览物事，便说中国是“色情的国度”。连江苏和浙江方面，大吃竹笋的事，也算作色情心理的表现的一个证据。然而广东和北京等处，因为竹少，所以并不怎么吃竹笋。倘到穷文人的家里或者寓里去，不但无所谓书斋，连砚石也不过用着两角钱一块的家伙。一看见这样的事，先前的结论就通不过去了，所以观察者也就有些窘，不得不另外摘出什么适当的结论来。于是这一回，是说支那很难懂得，支那是“谜的国度”了。
After receiving this conclusion, it always feels very good. For example, about the Chinese, that is, like this. The conclusions of the study of China in the Meiji era seem to have been largely influenced by the "Chinese Temperament" made by someone in England, but recently, there has been a new conclusion. A traveler walked into the study of a wealthy official in the wilderness, saw many expensive inkstones, and said that China was a "country of elegance"; An observer who came to Shanghai, bought a few obscene books and pictures, and then looked for strange things, said that China was a "country of pornography". Even in Jiangsu and Zhejiang, the eating of bamboo shoots is regarded as evidence of erotic psychology. However, in places like Guangdong and Beijing, because there is little bamboo, bamboo shoots are not eaten much. If you go to the home or apartment of a poor literati, not only does it not matter if it is a study, but even the inkstone is just a guy who uses two dimes a piece. As soon as they saw such a thing, the previous conclusion could not be passed, so the observer was a little embarrassed and had to pick out some appropriate conclusion. So this time, it is difficult to understand that China is a "country of mysteries".据我自己想：只要是地位，尤其是利害一不相同，则两国之间不消说，就是同国的人们之间，也不容易互相了解的。
In my own opinion, as long as the status is different, especially the interests are different, it is not easy for the two countries to understand each other, let alone between people in the same country.例如罢，中国向西洋派遣过许多留学生，其中有一位先生，好像也并不怎样喜欢研究西洋，于是提出了关于中国文学的什么论文，使那边的学者大吃一惊，得了博士的学位，回来了。然而因为在外国研究得太长久，忘记了中国的事情，回国之后，就只好来教授西洋文学。他一看见本国里乞丐之多，非常诧异，慨叹道：他们为什么不去研究学问，却自甘堕落的呢？所以下等人实在是无可救药的。
For example, China has sent many international students to the West, and one of them seems to not like studying the West very much, so he put forward a paper on Chinese literature, which surprised the scholars there, and he got a doctorate and returned. However, because he studied abroad for too long and forgot about China, he had to teach Western literature after returning to China. When he saw the number of beggars in his country, he was very surprised and sighed: Why don't they study knowledge, but they are willing to fall? So the lower class is really hopeless.不过这是极端的例子。倘使长久的生活于一地方，接触着这地方的人民，尤其是接触，感得了那精神，认真的想一想，那么，对于那国度，恐怕也未必不能了解罢。
But this is an extreme example. If you live in one place for a long time, come into contact with the people of this place, especially contact with it, feel that spirit, and think about it seriously, then I am afraid that you may not be able to understand that country.著者是二十年以上，生活于中国，到各处去旅行，接触了各阶级的人们的，所以来写这样的漫文，我以为实在是适当的人物。事实胜于雄辩，这些漫文，不是的确放着一种异彩吗？自己也常常去听漫谈，其实是负有捧场的权利和义务的，但因为已是很久的“老朋友”了，所以也想添几句坏话在这里。其一，是有多说中国的优点的倾向，这是和我的意见相反的，不过著者那一面，也自有他的意见，所以没有法子想。还有一点，是并非坏话也说不定的，就是读起那漫文来，往往颇有令人觉得“原来如此”的处所，而这令人觉得“原来如此”的处所，归根结蒂，也还是结论。幸而卷末没有明记着“第几章：结论”，所以仍不失为漫谈，总算还好的。
The author has lived in China for more than 20 years, traveled everywhere, and came into contact with people from all walks of life, so I think he is really an appropriate character to write such a comic article. Facts speak louder than words, don't these comic texts really have a kind of brilliance? I often listen to ramblings, in fact, I have the right and obligation to support them, but because I have been an "old friend" for a long time, I also want to add a few bad words here. First, there is a tendency to talk more about China's merits, which is the opposite of my opinion, but the author also has his own opinion, so there is no way to think about it. Another point, it may not be a bad thing, that is, when reading the comic text, there are often places that make people feel "so so", and this place that makes people feel "so so", in the final analysis, is still a conclusion. Fortunately, the end of the book does not clearly record "Chapters: Conclusion", so it is still a rambling, and it is finally okay.然而即使力说是漫谈，著者的用心，还是在将中国的一部分的真相，绍介给日本的读者的。但是，在现在，总依然是因了各种的读者，那结果也不一样罢。这是没有法子的事。据我看来，日本和中国的人们之间，是一定会有互相了解的时候的。新近的报章上，虽然又在竭力的说着“亲善”呀，“提携”呀，到得明年，也不知道又将说些什么话，但总而言之，现在却不是这时候。
However, even if it is a nonsense, the author's intention is still to introduce part of the truth of China to Japanese readers. However, now, it is still because of various readers, and the result is different. This is a matter of no way. In my opinion, there will definitely be times when people in Japan and China understand each other. Although the recent newspapers are trying their best to say "goodwill" and "support", I don't know what they will say next year, but all in all, now is not the time.倒不如看看漫文，还要有意思一点罢。
It's better to read the comic text, and it's more interesting.一九三五年三月五日鲁迅记于上海。
On March 5, 1935, Lu Xun recorded in Shanghai.

“寻开心”

“寻开心”

“寻开心”

"Looking for happiness"我有时候想到，忠厚老实的读者或研究者，遇见有两种人的文意，他是会吃冤枉苦头的。一种，是古里古怪的诗和尼采式的短句，以及几年前的所谓未来派的作品。这些大概是用怪字面，生句子，没意思的硬连起来的，还加上好几行很长的点线。作者本来就是乱写，自己也不知道什么意思。但认真的读者却以为里面有着深意，用心的来研究它，结果是到底莫名其妙，只好怪自己浅薄。假如你去请教作者本人罢，他一定不加解释，只是鄙夷的对你笑一笑。这笑，也就愈见其深。
I sometimes think that a loyal and honest reader or researcher will suffer unjustly when he encounters two kinds of people's literary meanings. One is ancient eccentric poems and Nietzschean short sentences, as well as so-called futuristic works from a few years ago. These are probably written in strange words, sentences, and boring hard connections, plus several long lines of dots. The author was originally scribbling, and he didn't know what it meant. But serious readers think that there is a deep meaning in it, and study it with their hearts, but the result is inexplicable, so they have to blame themselves for being shallow. If you ask the author himself, he will definitely not explain, but just smile at you contemptuously. This smile is getting deeper and deeper.还有一种，是作者原不过“寻开心”，说的时候本来不当真，说过也就忘记了。当然和先前的主张会冲突，当然在同一篇文章里自己也会冲突。但是你应该知道作者原以为作文和吃饭不同，不必认真的。你若认真的看，只能怪自己傻。最近的例子就是悍膂先生的研究语堂先生为什么会称赞《野叟曝言》。不错，这一部书是道学先生的悖慢淫毒心理的结晶，和“性灵”缘分浅得很，引了例子比较起来，当然会显出这称赞的出人意外。但其实，恐怕语堂先生之憎“方巾气”，谈“性灵”，讲“潇洒”，也不过对老实人“寻开心”而已，何尝真知道“方巾气”之类是怎么一回事；也许简直连他所称赞的《野叟曝言》也并没有怎么看。所以用本书和他那别的主张来比较研究，是永久不会懂的。自然，两面非常不同，这很清楚，但怎么竟至于称赞起来了呢，也还是一个“不可解”。我的意思是以为有些事情万不要想得太深，想得太忠厚，太老实，我们只要知道语堂先生那时正在崇拜袁中郎，而袁中郎也曾有过称赞《金瓶梅》的事实，就什么骇异之意也没有了。
There is also a kind of author who is not "looking for happiness", and when he said it, he didn't take it seriously, and he forgot it after saying it. Of course, it will conflict with the previous proposition, and of course it will conflict with itself in the same article. But you should know that the author thinks that composition is different from eating, so you don't have to be serious. If you look at it seriously, you can only blame yourself for being stupid. The most recent example is Mr. Huang's research on why Mr. Yutang praised "The Wild Old Man's Exposure". Yes, this book is the crystallization of Mr. Taoism's arrogant and lewd psychology, and the fate of the "sexual spirit" is very shallow. But in fact, I am afraid that Mr. Yutang hates "square scarf qi", talks about "spirit", talks about "chic", and is just "looking for happiness" for honest people, how can he really know what "square scarf qi" is about; Maybe he didn't even think much of the "Wild Old Man's Exposure" he praised. Therefore, if you use this book to compare and study with his other propositions, you will never understand. Naturally, the two sides are very different, which is very clear, but how can it be praised, and it is still "incomprehensible". I mean that we should not think too deeply about some things, think too loyal, and be too honest, as long as we know that Mr. Yutang was worshiping Yuan Zhonglang at that time, and Yuan Zhonglang had also praised the fact of "Jin Ping Mei", there is no sense of horror.还有一个例子。如读经，在广东，听说是从燕塘军官学校提倡起来的；去年，就有官定的小学校用的《经训读本》出版，给五年级用的第一课，却就是“孔子谓曾子曰：身体发肤，受之父母，不敢毁伤，孝之始也。……”那么，“为国捐躯”是“孝之终”么？并不然，第三课还有“模范”，是乐正子春述曾子闻诸夫子之说云：“天之所生，地之所养，无人为大。父母全而生之，子全而归之，可谓孝矣。不亏其体，不辱其身，可谓全矣。故君子顷步而弗敢忘孝也。……”
There is also an example. For example, reading the scriptures, in Guangdong, I heard that it was advocated from the Yantang Military Academy; Last year, the "Jingxun Reader" for official primary schools was published, and the first lesson for the fifth grade was "Confucius said to Zengzi: The body and skin, suffer from the parents, dare not damage it, and filial piety is also the beginning." ......So, is "sacrificing one's life for the country" the "end of filial piety"? Not so, there is also a "model" in the third lesson, which is Le Zhengzi Chun who said Zengzi heard the words of the master: "What is born in heaven, what is raised by the earth, no one is great." Parents are born with a child, and a son is born with a child, which can be called filial piety. It does not harm one's body or humiliate oneself; it can be said to be complete. Therefore, a gentleman does not dare to forget filial piety even if he takes a short step. ……”还有一个最近的例子，就在三月七日的《中华日报》上。那地方记的有“北平大学教授兼女子文理学院文史系主任李季谷氏”赞成《一十宣言》原则的谈话，末尾道：“为复兴民族之立场言，教育部应统令设法标榜岳武穆，文天祥，方孝孺等有气节之名臣勇将，俾一般高官戎将有所法式云”。
There is also a recent example, in the March 7 issue of the China Daily. There is a speech by "Li Jigu, professor of Peking University and director of the Department of Literature and History of the Women's College of Arts and Sciences", in favor of the principles of the "Ten Declarations", and concluded: "In order to rejuvenate the nation, the Ministry of Education should order to try to flaunt Yue Wumu, Wen Tianxiang, Fang Xiaoru and other famous ministers and brave generals with integrity, so that ordinary high-ranking officials and generals will have a legal style."凡这些，都是以不大十分研究为是的。如果想到“全而归之”和将来的临阵冲突，或者查查岳武穆们的事实，看究竟是怎样的结果，“复兴民族”了没有，那你一定会被捉弄得发昏，其实也就是自寻烦恼。语堂先生在暨南大学讲演道：“……做人要正正经经，不好走入邪道，……一走入邪道，……一定失业，……然而，作文，要幽默，和做人不同，要玩玩笑笑，寻开心，……”（据《芒种》本）这虽然听去似乎有些奇特，但其实是很可以启发人的神智的：这“玩玩笑笑，寻开心”，就是开开中国许多古怪现象的锁的钥匙。
All of these are based on the fact that they are not very well studied. If you think of the "return to all" and the future conflict, or check the facts of Yue Wumu and see what the result is, whether the nation has been "revived", then you will definitely be teased and dazed, in fact, you are asking for trouble. Mr. Yutang gave a speech at Jinan University: "...... Be a serious person, and it is not easy to enter the wrong path,...... Once you go down the wrong path,...... Definitely unemployed,...... However, composition, to be humorous, is different from being a person, to play jokes and find happiness ,......" (according to the "Awn Zhong" version) Although this may sound a bit strange, it is actually very enlightening: this "joking and finding happiness" is the key to unlocking the lock of many strange phenomena in China.三月七日。
March 7th.

非有复译不可

非有复译不可

非有复译不可

There must be a duplicate translation好像有人说过，去年是“翻译年”；其实何尝有什么了不起的翻译，不过又给翻译暂时洗去了恶名却是真的。
It seems that someone said that last year was the "year of translation"; In fact, there is no great translation, but it is true that it temporarily washes away the notoriety of the translator.可怜得很，还只译了几个短篇小说到中国来，创作家就出现了，说它是媒婆，而创作是处女。在男女交际自由的时候，谁还喜欢和媒婆周旋呢，当然没落。后来是译了一点文学理论到中国来，但“批评家”幽默家之流又出现了，说是“硬译”，“死译”，“好像看地图”，幽默家还从他自己的脑子里，造出可笑的例子来，使读者们“开心”，学者和大师们的话是不会错的，“开心”也总比正经省力，于是乎翻译的脸上就被他们画上了一条粉。
It was very pitiful, and only a few short stories were translated into China, and the creator appeared, saying that it was a matchmaker, and the creator was a virgin. When men and women are free to communicate, who still likes to deal with matchmakers, of course it is declining. Later, a little literary theory was translated into China, but the "critic" humorist and others appeared again, saying that it was a "hard translation", "dead translation", "like looking at a map", and the humorist also made ridiculous examples from his own mind to make the readers "happy", the words of scholars and masters will not be wrong, and "happiness" is always more serious and labor-saving, so the face of the translator was painted with a powder by them.但怎么又来了“翻译年”呢，在并无什么了不起的翻译的时候？不是夸大和开心，它本身就太轻飘飘，禁不起风吹雨打的缘故么？
But why is there a "translation year" again, when there is no great translation? Isn't it exaggerated and happy, it's too light and fluttering, and it can't withstand the wind and rain?于是有些人又记起了翻译，试来译几篇。但这就又是“批评家”的材料了，其实，正名定分，他是应该叫作“唠叨家”的，是创作家和批评家以外的一种，要说得好听，也可以谓之“第三种”。他像后街的老虔婆一样，并不大声，却在那里唠叨，说是莫非世界上的名著都译完了吗，你们只在译别人已经译过的，有的还译过了七八次。
So some people remembered the translation and tried to translate a few. But this is the material of the "critic" again, in fact, he should be called a "nagging family", which is a kind other than the creator and the critic, and to put it nicely, it can also be called the "third type". He was like an old devout woman in the back street, not loud, but he was nagging there, saying that all the famous books in the world had been translated, and you were only translating what others had already translated, and some had translated it seven or eight times.记得中国先前，有过一种风气，遇见外国——大抵是日本——有一部书出版，想来当为中国人所要看的，便往往有人在报上登出广告来，说“已在开译，请万勿重译为幸”。他看得译书好像订婚，自己首先套上约婚戒指了，别人便莫作非分之想。自然，译本是未必一定出版的，倒是暗中解约的居多；不过别人却也因此不敢译，新妇就在闺中老掉。这种广告，现在是久不看见了，但我们今年的唠叨家，却正继承着这一派的正统。他看得翻译好像结婚，有人译过了，第二个便不该再来碰一下，否则，就仿佛引诱了有夫之妇似的，他要来唠叨，当然罗，是维持风化。但在这唠叨里，他不也活活的画出了自己的猥琐的嘴脸了么？
I remember that there was a trend in China before, when a book was published in a foreign country - probably Japan, I thought it would be for the Chinese to read, and someone would often publish an advertisement in the newspaper, saying, "It has already been translated, please do not retranslate it as a blessing." He saw the translation as if he was engaged, and he put on the engagement ring first, so that others would not think about it. Naturally, translations may not necessarily be published, but most of them are secretly terminated; However, others did not dare to translate because of this, and the bride grew old in the boudoir. I haven't seen this kind of advertisement for a long time, but our nagging family this year is inheriting the orthodoxy of this school. He saw that the translator seemed to be married, and someone had translated it, so the second one should not touch it again, otherwise, it would be like seducing a married woman, and he was going to nag, of course, Luo, to maintain the weather. But in this nagging, didn't he also draw his lewd face alive?前几年，翻译的失了一般读者的信用，学者和大师们的曲说固然是原因之一，但在翻译本身也有一个原因，就是常有胡乱动笔的译本。不过要击退这些乱译，诬赖，开心，唠叨，都没有用处，唯一的好方法是又来一回复译，还不行，就再来一回。譬如赛跑，至少总得有两个人，如果不许有第二人入场，则先在的一个永远是第一名，无论他怎样蹩脚。所以讥笑复译的，虽然表面上好像关心翻译界，其实是在毒害翻译界，比诬赖，开心的更有害，因为他更阴柔。
In the past few years, the translation has lost the credibility of ordinary readers, and the distortion of scholars and masters is certainly one of the reasons, but there is also a reason for the translation itself, that is, there are often translations that are written indiscriminately. However, it is useless to repel these nonsensical translations, slander, happiness, and nagging, and the only good way is to reply to the translation again, and if it doesn't work, do it again. For example, in a race, there must always be at least two people, and if no second person is allowed to enter, the first one will always be the first place, no matter how lame he is. Therefore, those who ridicule the translation, although they seem to care about the translation industry on the surface, are actually poisoning the translation industry, which is more harmful than the false and happy ones, because they are more feminine.而且复译还不止是击退乱译而已，即使已有好译本，复译也还是必要的。曾有文言译本的，现在当改译白话，不必说了。即使先出的白话译本已很可观，但倘使后来的译者自己觉得可以译得更好，就不妨再来译一遍，无须客气，更不必管那些无聊的唠叨。取旧译的长处，再加上自己的新心得，这才会成功一种近于完全的定本。但因言语跟着时代的变化，将来还可以有新的复译本的，七八次何足为奇，何况中国其实也并没有译过七八次的作品。如果已经有，中国的新文艺倒也许不至于现在似的沉滞了。
And retranslation is not only to repel random translations, even if there is a good translation, it is still necessary. There was a classical Chinese translation, but now it should be translated into vernacular, needless to say. Even if the first vernacular translation is already impressive, if the later translators themselves feel that they can translate better, they might as well try it again, without politeness, let alone those boring naggings. Taking the strengths of the old translation, coupled with my own new experience, this will succeed in a near-complete definitive version. However, because the language has changed with the times, it is not surprising that there will be new translations in the future, seven or eight times, not to mention that China has not actually translated works seven or eight times. If there were already one, China's new literature and art might not be as stagnant as it is now.三月十六日。
March 16th.

论讽刺

论讽刺

论讽刺

On satire我们常不免有一种先入之见，看见讽刺作品，就觉得这不是文学上的正路，因为我们先就以为讽刺并不是美德。但我们走到交际场中去，就往往可以看见这样的事实，是两位胖胖的先生，彼此弯腰拱手，满面油晃晃的正在开始他们的扳谈——
We often have a preconceived notion that when we see a satirical work, we think that this is not the right way in literature, because we first think that satire is not a virtue. But when we go to the social field, we can often see the fact that it is two chubby gentlemen, bending over and bowing to each other, their faces full of oil and starting their conversation——“贵姓？……”
"Your surname? ……”“敝姓钱。”
"My surname is money."“哦，久仰久仰！还没有请教台甫……”
"Oh, I've been looking up for a long time! I haven't asked Taifu yet......"“草字阔亭。”
"Cursive character wide pavilion."“高雅高雅。贵处是……？”
"Elegant and elegant. ...... your place? ”“就是上海……”
"It's Shanghai ......"“哦哦，那好极了，这真是……”
"Oh, that's great, this is really ......"谁觉得奇怪呢？但若写在小说里，人们可就会另眼相看了，恐怕大概要被算作讽刺。有好些直写事实的作者，就这样的被蒙上了“讽刺家”——很难说是好是坏——的头衔。例如在中国，则《金瓶梅》写蔡御史的自谦和恭维西门庆道：“恐我不如安石之才，而君有王右军之高致矣！”还有《儒林外史》写范举人因为守孝，连象牙筷也不肯用，但吃饭时，他却“在燕窝碗里拣了一个大虾圆子送在嘴里”，和这相似的情形是现在还可以遇见的；在外国，则如近来已被中国读者所注意了的果戈理的作品，他那《外套》（韦素园译，在《未名丛刊》中）里的大小官吏，《鼻子》（许遐译，在《译文》中）里的绅士，医生，闲人们之类的典型，是虽在中国的现在，也还可以遇见的。这分明是事实，而且是很广泛的事实，但我们皆谓之讽刺。
Who thinks it's strange? But if it is written in a novel, people will look at it differently, and I am afraid it will probably be counted as satire. There are many authors who write directly about the facts, and in this way, they are covered with the title of "satirist" - it is difficult to say whether it is good or bad. For example, in China, "Jin Ping Mei" wrote Cai Yushi's self-humility and compliments Ximen Qing: "I'm afraid I'm not as talented as Anshi, but you have the nobility of Wang Youjun!" There is also "The History of Confucianism" that Fan Juren refused to use even ivory chopsticks because of his filial piety, but when eating, he "picked a prawn ball in the bird's nest bowl and put it in his mouth", which is similar to what can still be encountered now; In foreign countries, such as Gogol's works, which have recently been noticed by Chinese readers, his "Coat" (translated by Wei Suyuan, in the "Unnamed Series"), and the gentlemen, doctors, and idlers in "Nose" (translated by Xu Xia, in the "Translation"), can still be encountered even in China now. This is clearly true, and it is a very broad fact, but we all call it irony.人大抵愿意有名，活的时候做自传，死了想有人分讣文，做行实，甚而至于还“宣付国史馆立传”。人也并不全不自知其丑，然而他不愿意改正，只希望随时消掉，不留痕迹，剩下的单是美点，如曾经施粥赈饥之类，却不是全般。“高雅高雅”，他其实何尝不知道有些肉麻，不过他又知道说过就完，“本传”里决不会有，于是也就放心的“高雅”下去。如果有人记了下来，不给它消灭，他可要不高兴了。于是乎挖空心思的来一个反攻，说这些乃是“讽刺”，向作者抹一脸泥，来掩藏自己的真相。但我们也每不免来不及思索，跟着说，“这些乃是讽刺呀！”上当真可是不浅得很。
People are probably willing to be famous, make autobiographies when they are alive, and want someone to share the obituary and do the truth when they die, and even "announce the biography of the National History Museum". People are not completely unaware of their ugliness, but he is unwilling to correct them, he just hopes to eliminate them at any time, leaving no trace, and the rest is only beautiful, such as giving porridge to relieve hunger, but it is not the whole thing. "Elegant and elegant", he actually didn't know that it was a little numb, but he knew that it was over, and there would never be it in the "biography", so he was relieved to go on "elegant". If someone writes it down and doesn't destroy it, he will be unhappy. So he made a counterattack, saying that these were "irony", and smeared his face with mud to hide his truth. But we often don't have time to think about it, and then say, "This is irony!" "It's really not shallow.同一例子的还有所谓“骂人”。假如你到四马路去，看见雉妓在拖住人，倘大声说：“野鸡在拉客”，那就会被她骂你是“骂人”。骂人是恶德，于是你先就被判定在坏的一方面了；你坏，对方可就好。但事实呢，却的确是“野鸡在拉客”，不过只可心里知道，说不得，在万不得已时，也只能说“姑娘勒浪做生意”，恰如对于那些弯腰拱手之辈，做起文章来，是要改作“谦以待人，虚以接物”的。——这才不是骂人，这才不是讽刺。
The same example is the so-called "scolding". If you go to the four roads and see a pheasant prostitute dragging people, if you say loudly: "The pheasant is soliciting guests", she will scold you for "scolding". scolding people is a vice, so you are judged to be on the bad side first; If you are bad, the other party is good. But the fact is that it is indeed "pheasants soliciting customers", but they can only know in their hearts that they can't say that when it is a last resort, they can only say that "the girl is doing business", just like for those who bend over and bow their hands, when they start writing, they want to change it to "treat people humbly and take things with humility". ——This is not scolding, this is not sarcasm.其实，现在的所谓讽刺作品，大抵倒是写实。非写实决不能成为所谓“讽刺”；非写实的讽刺，即使能有这样的东西，也不过是造谣和诬蔑而已。
In fact, the current so-called satirical works are probably realistic. Non-realism must not be the so-called "irony"; Non-realistic satire, even if there can be such a thing, is nothing more than rumors and slander.三月十六日。
March 16th.

从“别字”说开去

从“别字”说开去

从“别字”说开去

Let's start with "other words"自从议论写别字以至现在的提倡手头字，其间的经过，恐怕也有一年多了，我记得自己并没有说什么话。这些事情，我是不反对的，但也不热心，因为我以为方块字本身就是一个死症，吃点人参，或者想一点什么方法，固然也许可以拖延一下，然而到底是无可挽救的，所以一向就不大注意这回事。
From the discussion of writing other words to the current advocacy of the word at hand, I am afraid that it has been more than a year, and I remember that I did not say anything. I don't object to these things, but I'm not enthusiastic, because I think that the square word itself is a dead disease, eat some ginseng, or think of some way, of course, you may be able to delay it, but in the end it is irreparable, so I have never paid much attention to this matter.前几天在《自由谈》上看见陈友琴先生的《活字与死字》，才又记起了旧事来。他在那里提到北大招考，投考生写了误字，“刘半农教授作打油诗去嘲弄他，固然不应该”，但我“曲为之辩，亦可不必”。那投考生的误字，是以“倡明”为“昌明”，刘教授的打油诗，是解“倡”为“娼妓”，我的杂感，是说“倡”不必一定作“娼妓”解，自信还未必是“曲”说；至于“大可不必”之评，那是极有意思的，一个人的言行，从别人看来，“大可不必”之点多得很，要不然，全国的人们就好像是一个了。
A few days ago, I saw Mr. Chen Youqin's "Living Words and Dead Words" on "Free Talk", and I remembered the old things again. He mentioned the recruitment of Peking University there, and the candidates wrote a typo, "Professor Liu Bannong wrote a limerick to ridicule him, of course, it shouldn't be", but I "argued for it, but it is not necessary". The misspelling of the candidates is to use "Changming" as "Changming", Professor Liu's limerick is to interpret "advocate" as "prostitute", my miscellaneous feeling is that "advocate" does not necessarily have to be interpreted as "prostitute", and self-confidence is not necessarily a "song"; As for the comment of "it is not necessary", it is very interesting, a person's words and deeds, from the perspective of others, there are many points of "no need", otherwise, people in the whole country seem to be one.我还没有明目张胆的提倡过写别字，假如我在做国文教员，学生写了错字，我是要给他改正的，但一面也知道这不过是治标之法。至于去年的指摘刘教授，却和保护别字微有不同。（一）我以为既是学者或教授，年龄至少和学生差十年，不但饭菜多吃了万来碗了，就是每天认一个字，也就要比学生多识三千六百个，比较的高明，是应该的，在考卷里发见几个错字，“大可不必”飘飘然生优越之感，好像得了什么宝贝一样。况且（二）现在的学校，科目繁多，和先前专攻八股的私塾，大不相同了，纵使文字不及从前，正也毫不足怪，先前的不写错字的书生，他知道五洲的所在，原质的名目吗？自然，如果精通科学，又擅文章，那也很不坏，但这不能含含胡胡，责之一般的学生，假使他要学的是工程，那么，他只要能筑堤造路，治河导淮就尽够了，写“昌明”为“倡明”，误“留学”为“流学”，堤防决不会因此就倒塌的。如果说，别国的学生对于本国的文字，决不致闹出这样的大笑话，那自然可以归罪于中国学生的偏偏不肯学，但也可以归咎于先生的不善教，要不然，那就只能如我所说：方块字本身就是一个死症。
If I am a Chinese language teacher and a student writes a typo, I will correct him, but I also know that this is just a way to treat symptoms. As for last year's criticism of Professor Liu, it is slightly different from protecting other words. (1) I think that since I am a scholar or a professor, my age is at least ten years different from that of a student, not only has I eaten more than ten thousand bowls of food, but I have to recognize a word every day, and I have to know 3,600 more than students. Moreover, (2) The current school has a wide variety of subjects, and the previous private school specializing in eight strands, is very different, even if the text is not as good as before, it is not surprising, the previous scholar who did not write a typo, does he know the location of the five continents, the original name? Naturally, if you are proficient in science and good at writing, it is not bad, but this cannot be a student, if he wants to study engineering, then as long as he can build embankments and roads, control rivers and guide Huai River, it is enough, write "Changming" as "advocate", mistakenly "study abroad" as "flow learning", the embankment will never collapse because of this. If students from other countries will never make such a big joke about their own script, then it can naturally be blamed on the Chinese students' refusal to learn, but it can also be blamed on the teacher's poor teaching, otherwise, it can only be as I said: the square character itself is a mortal disease.改白话以至提倡手头字，其实也不过一点樟脑针，不能起死回生的，但这就又受着缠不清的障害，至今没有完。还记得提倡白话的时候，保守者对于改革者的第一弹，是说改革者不识字，不通文，所以主张用白话。对于这些打着古文旗子的敌军，是就用古书作“法宝”，这才打退的，以毒攻毒，反而证明了反对白话者自己的不识字，不通文。要不然，这古文旗子恐怕至今还不倒下。去年曹聚仁先生为别字辩护，战法也是搬古书，弄得文人学士之自以为识得“正字”者，哭笑不得，因为那所谓“正字”就有许多是别字。这确是轰毁旧营垒的利器。现在已经不大有人来辩文的白不白——但“寻开心”者除外——字的别不别了，因为这会引到今文《尚书》，骨甲文字去，麻烦得很。这就是改革者的胜利——至于这改革的损益，自然又作别论。
Changing the vernacular and even advocating the word at hand is actually just a little camphor needle, which cannot be brought back to life, but this is also a tangled obstacle, and it is still not over. I still remember that when advocating the vernacular, the first bullet of conservatives against the reformers was that the reformers were illiterate and illiterate, so they advocated using the vernacular. For these enemy troops under the banner of ancient texts, they used ancient books as "magic weapons", which repelled them, fighting poison against poison, but proved that those who opposed the vernacular themselves were illiterate and illiterate. Otherwise, I am afraid that this ancient flag will not fall to this day. Last year, Mr. Cao Juren defended the other words, and the tactics were also to move ancient books, which made the literati and scholars who thought they knew the "orthography" cry and laugh, because many of the so-called "orthography" were other words. This is indeed a powerful weapon to destroy the old camp. Nowadays, there are not many people who come to argue whether the text is white or not—except for those who are "looking for happiness" - the words are different, because this will lead to the current text of the "Book of Shang", and the bone armor text is very troublesome. This is the victory of the reformers - as for the benefits and losses of this reform, it is naturally a different matter.陈友琴先生的《死字和活字》，便是在这决战之后，重整阵容的最稳的方法，他已经不想从根本上斤斤计较字的错不错，即别不别了。他只问字的活不活；不活，就算错。他引了一段何仲英先生的《中国文字学大纲》来做自己的代表——
Mr. Chen Youqin's "Dead Words and Living Types" is the most stable way to reorganize the lineup after this decisive battle, and he no longer wants to fundamentally care about the mistakes of the words, that is, don't say good. He only asked if the words were alive; If you don't live, you are wrong. He quoted a passage of Mr. He Zhongying's "Outline of Chinese Philology" as his representative -“……古人用通借，也是写别字，也是不该。不过积古相沿，一向通行，到如今没有法子强人改正。假使个个字都能够改正，是《易经》里所说的‘幹父之蛊’。纵使不能，岂可在古人写的别字以外再加许多别字呢？古人写的别字，通行到如今，全国相同，所以还可解得。今人若添写许多别字，各处用各处的方音去写，别省别县的人，就不能懂得了，后来全国的文字，必定彼此不同，这不是一种大障碍么？……”
“…… The ancients used borrowing, and it was also written in other words, and it should not be. However, it has been passed down through the ages, and there is no way to correct it now. If every word can be corrected, it is the 'godfather's Gu' mentioned in the Book of Changes. Even if you can't, how can you add many other words in addition to the other words written by the ancients? The other characters written by the ancients are common to this day, and they are the same throughout the country, so they can still be understood. If people today add a lot of different characters, and write them everywhere with the square sound everywhere, people from other provinces and counties will not be able to understand, and later the characters of the whole country must be different from each other, isn't this a big obstacle? ……”这头几句，恕我老实的说罢，是有些可笑的。假如我们先不问有没有法子强人改正，自己先来改正一部古书试试罢，第一个问题是拿什么做“正字”，《说文》，金文，骨甲文，还是简直用陈先生的所谓“活字”呢？纵使大家愿意依，主张者自己先就没法改，不能“幹父之蛊”。所以陈先生的代表的接着的主张是已经错定了的，就一任他错下去，但是错不得添，以免将来破坏文字的统一。是非不谈，专论利害，也并不算坏，但直白的说起来，却只是维持现状说而已。
These first few sentences, with all due respect to me, are a bit ridiculous. If we don't ask if there is a way to force people to correct it, let's try to correct an ancient book first, the first question is what to use as "orthography", "Shuowen", Jinwen, Gujia text, or simply use Mr. Chen's so-called "movable type"? Even if everyone is willing to comply, the advocate himself cannot change it first, and cannot "his father's Gu". Therefore, Mr. Chen's subsequent proposition is already wrong, so let him be wrong, but he must not add to it, so as not to destroy the unity of the text in the future. Regardless of right and wrong, it is not bad to talk about the pros and cons, but to put it bluntly, it is just to maintain the status quo.维持现状说是任何时候都有的，赞成者也不会少，然而在任何时候都没有效，因为在实际上决定做不到。假使古时候用此法，就没有今之现状，今用此法，也就没有将来的现状，直至辽远的将来，一切都和太古无异。以文字论，则未有文字之时，就不会象形以造“文”，更不会孳乳而成“字”，篆决不解散而为隶，隶更不简单化为现在之所谓“真书”。文化的改革如长江大河的流行，无法遏止，假使能够遏止，那就成为死水，纵不干涸，也必腐败的。当然，在流行时，倘无弊害，岂不更是非常之好？然而在实际上，却断没有这样的事。回复故道的事是没有的，一定有迁移；维持现状的事也是没有的，一定有改变。有百利而无一害的事也是没有的，只可权大小。况且我们的方块字，古人写了别字，今人也写别字，可见要写别字的病根，是在方块字本身的，别字病将与方块字本身并存，除了改革这方块字之外，实在并没有救济的十全好方法。
Maintaining the status quo is always available, and there will be many people in favor, but it is not effective at any time, because in practice it is decided not to do it. If this method was used in ancient times, there would be no current situation, and if this method is used today, there would be no future status quo, and everything would be no different from ancient times until the distant future. In terms of words, when there is no writing, there will be no pictograms to create "texts", let alone breeding into "characters", and the seal will never be dissolved into slaves, and the slaves will not be simplified into the current so-called "real books". Cultural reform, like the popularity of the Yangtze River, cannot be stopped, and if it can be stopped, it will become stagnant water, and even if it does not dry up, it will be corrupt. Of course, when it is popular, if there is no harm, wouldn't it be even better? However, in reality, there is absolutely no such thing. There is no such thing as returning to the old way, there must be migration; There is no such thing as maintaining the status quo, there must be changes. There is no such thing as having a hundred benefits and no harm, only the size of the power. Moreover, our square characters, the ancients wrote other characters, and the modern people also write other characters, which shows that the root of the disease of writing other words is in the square word itself, and the disease of the other word will coexist with the square word itself, in addition to reforming this square word, there is really no perfect way to remedy it.复古是难了，何先生也承认。不过现状却也维持不下去，因为我们现在一般读书人之所谓“正字”，其实不过是前清取士的规定，一切指示，都在薄薄的三本所谓“翰苑分书”的《字学举隅》中，但二十年来，在不声不响中又有了一点改变。从古讫今，什么都在改变，但必须在不声不响中，倘一道破，就一定有窒碍，维持现状说来了，复古说也来了。这些说头自然也无效。但一时不失其为一种窒碍却也是真的，它能够使一部分的有志于改革者迟疑一下子，从招潮者变为乘潮者。
Retro is difficult, Mr. He also admits. However, the status quo cannot be maintained, because the so-called "orthography" of our ordinary scholars now is actually just the regulations of the former Qing Dynasty, and all the instructions are in the thin three so-called "Hanyuan Branches" of the "Character Studies Juyu", but in the past twenty years, there has been a little change in silence. From ancient times to the present, everything is changing, but it must be silent, if it is broken, there must be obstacles, maintaining the status quo is coming, and the retro theory is also coming. These statements are naturally invalid. But it is also true that it is a hindrance for a while, and it can make some aspiring reformers hesitate for a moment, from those who recruit the tide to those who ride the tide.我在这里，要说的只是维持现状说听去好像很稳健，但实际上却是行不通的，史实在不断的证明着它只是一种“并无其事”：仅在这一些。
What I want to say here is just to maintain the status quo and say that it sounds very stable, but in fact it does not work, and history continues to prove that it is just a kind of "nothing": only these are the ones.三月二十一日。
March 21.

田军作《八月的乡村》序

田军作《八月的乡村》序

田军作《八月的乡村》序

Tian Jun wrote the preface to "August Countryside"爱伦堡（Ilia Ehrenburg）论法国的上流社会文学家之后，他说，此外也还有一些不同的人们：“教授们无声无息地在他们的书房里工作着，实验X光线疗法的医生死在他们的职务上，奋身去救自己的伙伴的渔夫悄然沉没在大洋里面。……一方面是庄严的工作，另一方面却是荒淫与无耻。”
After Ilia Ehrenburg commented on the French high society writers, he said that there were also some different people: "Professors work silently in their study, doctors experimenting with X-ray therapy die in their posts, fishermen who fight to save their fellow fishermen quietly sink into the ocean. …… On the one hand, it is a solemn work, but on the other hand, it is absurd and shameless. ”这末两句，真也好像说着现在的中国。然而中国是还有更其甚的呢。手头没有书，说不清见于那里的了，也许是已经汉译了的日本箭内亘氏的著作罢，他曾经一一记述了宋代的人民怎样为蒙古人所淫杀，俘获，践踏和奴使。然而南宋的小朝廷却仍旧向残山剩水间的黎民施威，在残山剩水间行乐；逃到那里，气焰和奢华就跟到那里，颓靡和贪婪也跟到那里。“若要官，杀人放火受招安；若要富，跟着行在卖酒醋。”这是当时的百姓提取了朝政的精华的结语。
These last two sentences really seem to be talking about China now. However, China is even worse. There are no books at hand, and it is impossible to say what is found there, perhaps it is the work of the Japanese Yanai Gen clan, which has been translated into Chinese, and he once recorded how the people of the Song Dynasty were raped, captured, trampled and enslaved by the Mongols. However, the small court of the Southern Song Dynasty still showed its power to the people in the remnants of the mountains and waters, and had fun in the remnants of the mountains and waters; Fleeing there, arrogance and luxury follow, and decadence and greed follow. "If you want to be an official, kill and set fire to be recruited; If you want to be rich, follow the line to sell wine and vinegar. This is the conclusion of the people at that time who extracted the essence of the government.人民在欺骗和压制之下，失了力量，哑了声音，至多也不过有几句民谣。“天下有道，则庶人不议。”就是秦始皇隋炀帝，他会自承无道么？百姓就只好永远箝口结舌，相率被杀，被奴。这情形一直继续下来，谁也忘记了开口，但也许不能开口。即以前清末年而论，大事件不可谓不多了：雅片战争，中法战争，中日战争，戊戌政变，义和拳变，八国联军，以至民元革命。然而我们没有一部像样的历史的著作，更不必说文学作品了。“莫谈国事”，是我们做小民的本分。
Under deception and oppression, the people lost their strength, their voices were mute, and there were only a few folk songs at most. "If there is a way in the world, then the common people will not discuss." It is Qin Shi Huang Sui Emperor Yang, will he admit his wrongdoing? The people had to remain silent forever, killed and enslaved one after another. This situation continued, and no one forgot to speak, but maybe they couldn't. That is, in terms of the late Qing Dynasty, there are not many major events: the Yapian War, the Sino-French War, the Sino-Japanese War, the Wuxu Coup, the Boxer Change, the Eight-Power Allied Army, and even the Minyuan Revolution. However, we do not have a decent historical work, let alone a literary work. "Don't talk about state affairs" is our duty as a common people.我们的学者也曾说过：要征服中国，必须征服中国民族的心。其实，中国民族的心，有些是早给我们的圣君贤相武将帮闲之辈征服了的。近如东三省被占之后，听说北平富户，就不愿意关外的难民来租房子，因为怕他们付不出房租。在南方呢，恐怕义军的消息，未必能及鞭毙土匪，蒸骨验尸，阮玲玉自杀，姚锦屏化男的能够耸动大家的耳目罢？“一方面是庄严的工作，另一方面却是荒淫与无耻。”
Our scholars have also said: To conquer China, we must conquer the heart of the Chinese nation. In fact, some of the hearts of the Chinese nation have been conquered by our saints, wise ministers, and military generals. After the occupation of the three eastern provinces, when they heard that the wealthy families in Peiping were reluctant to rent houses from outside the pass, they were afraid that they would not be able to pay the rent. In the south, I am afraid that the news of the rebels may not be able to whip the bandits, steam the bones for autopsy, Ruan Lingyu commit suicide, and Yao Jinping's male transformation can sensational everyone's eyes and ears? "On the one hand, it is solemn work, but on the other hand, it is absurd and shameless."但是，不知道是人民进步了，还是时代太近，还未湮没的缘故，我却见过几种说述关于东三省被占的事情的小说。这《八月的乡村》，即是很好的一部，虽然有些近乎短篇的连续，结构和描写人物的手段，也不能比法捷耶夫的《毁灭》，然而严肃，紧张，作者的心血和失去的天空，土地，受难的人民，以至失去的茂草，高粱，蝈蝈，蚊子，搅成一团，鲜红的在读者眼前展开，显示着中国的一份和全部，现在和未来，死路与活路。凡有人心的读者，是看得完的，而且有所得的。
However, I don't know if it is because the people have progressed, or because the times are too close and have not yet disappeared, but I have seen several novels about the occupation of the three eastern provinces. This "August Countryside" is a very good one, although there are some almost short continuities, the structure and the means of describing the characters, cannot compare to Fadeev's "Destruction", but the seriousness, tension, the author's hard work and the lost sky, land, suffering people, and even the lost grass, sorghum, newt, mosquitoes, mixed together, bright red unfolds in front of the reader's eyes, showing China's part and whole, present and future, dead and alive. Readers with hearts can read it all and gain something.“要征服中国民族，必须征服中国民族的心！”但这书却于“心的征服”有碍。心的征服，先要中国人自己代办。宋曾以道学替金元治心，明曾以党狱替满清箝口。这书当然不容于满洲帝国，但我看也因此当然不容于中华民国。这事情很快的就会得到实证。如果事实证明了我的推测并没有错，那也就证明了这是一部很好的书。
"To conquer the Chinese nation, we must conquer the heart of the Chinese nation!" But this book is in the way of "the conquest of the heart". The conquest of the heart must first be handled by the Chinese themselves. Song once used Taoism to govern the heart for Jin Yuan, and Ming once used party prison to silence the Manchu Qing Dynasty. Of course, this book is not tolerated by the Manchurian Empire, but I think it is also incompatible with the Republic of China. This matter will soon be proven. If it turns out that my speculation is not wrong, it proves that this is a good book.好书为什么倒会不容于中华民国呢？那当然，上面已经说过几回了——
Why are good books not tolerated in the Republic of China? Of course, it has been said several times -“一方面是庄严的工作，另一方面却是荒淫与无耻！”
"On the one hand, it is solemn work, but on the other hand, it is absurd and shameless!"这不像序。但我知道，作者和读者是决不和我计较这些的。
This is not like the preface. But I know that the author and the reader will never care about this.一九三五年三月二十八日之夜，鲁迅读毕记。
On the night of March 28, 1935, Lu Xun finished reading the record.

徐懋庸作《打杂集》序

徐懋庸作《打杂集》序

徐懋庸作《打杂集》序

Xu Maoyong wrote the preface to "Miscellaneous Collection"我觉得中国有时是极爱平等的国度。有什么稍稍显得特出，就有人拿了长刀来削平它。以人而论，孙桂云是赛跑的好手，一过上海，不知怎的就萎靡不振，待到到得日本，不能跑了；阮玲玉算是比较的有成绩的明星，但“人言可畏”，到底非一口气吃下三瓶安眠药片不可。自然，也有例外，是捧了起来。但这捧了起来，却不过为了接着摔得粉碎。大约还有人记得“美人鱼”罢，简直捧得令观者发生肉麻之感，连看见姓名也会觉得有些滑稽。契诃夫说过：“被昏蛋所称赞，不如战死在他手里。”真是伤心而且悟道之言。但中国又是极爱中庸的国度，所以极端的昏蛋是没有的，他不和你来战，所以决不会爽爽快快的战死，如果受不住，只好自己吃安眠药片。
I think China is sometimes a country that loves equality very much. If something stood out a little, someone took a long knife to flatten it. In terms of people, Sun Guiyun is a good runner, as soon as he passes Shanghai, he somehow languishes, and when he arrives in Japan, he can't run; Ruan Lingyu is a relatively accomplished star, but "people are terrifying", and she has to take three bottles of sleeping pills in one go. Naturally, there are exceptions, which are held up. But this was held up, but it was just to smash it to pieces. There are probably still people who remember "Mermaid", which simply makes the viewer feel numb, and even when they see the name, they will feel a little funny. Chekhov said: "It is better to die in battle than to be praised by a faint egg." "It's really sad and enlightening. But China is a country that loves the golden mean, so there is no extreme faint, he will not fight with you, so he will never die in battle happily, if you can't stand it, you have to take sleeping pills yourself.在所谓文坛上当然也不会有什么两样：翻译较多的时候，就有人来削翻译，说它害了创作；近一两年，作短文的较多了，就又有人来削“杂文”，说这是作者的堕落的表现，因为既非诗歌小说，又非戏剧，所以不入文艺之林，他还一片婆心，劝人学学托尔斯泰，做《战争与和平》似的伟大的创作去。这一流论客，在礼仪上，别人当然不该说他是“昏蛋”的。批评家吗？他谦虚得很，自己不承认。攻击杂文的文字虽然也只能说是杂文，但他又决不是杂文作家，因为他不相信自己也相率而堕落。如果恭维他为诗歌小说戏剧之类的伟大的创作者，那么，恭维者之为“昏蛋”也无疑了。归根结底，不是东西而已。不是东西之谈也要算是“人言”，这就使弱者觉得倒是安眠药片较为可爱的缘故。不过这并非战死。问是有人要问的：给谁害死的呢？种种议论的结果，凶手有三位：曰，万恶的社会；曰，本人自己；曰，安眠药片。完了。
Of course, there is no difference in the so-called literary world: when there are many translations, some people come to cut the translation, saying that it harms creation; In the past year or two, there have been more short essays, and some people have come to cut "essays", saying that this is a manifestation of the author's depravity, because it is neither a poetry novel nor a drama, so it does not enter the forest of literature and art. In terms of etiquette, others should certainly not say that he is "faint". Critics? He was very modest and did not admit it. Although the text that attacks the essay can only be said to be an essay, he is by no means an essay writer, because he does not believe that he has also fallen into the same path. If he is praised as a great creator of poetry, novels, dramas, etc., then there is no doubt that the compliment is a "fool". At the end of the day, it's not just about things. It is not a matter of talking about things, but it can be regarded as "human words", which makes the weak feel that sleeping pills are more cute. But this is not a death in battle. The question is for someone to ask: Who did he kill? As a result of various discussions, there are three murderers: first, the society of all evils; That is, myself; That is, sleeping pills. Finished.我们试去查一通美国的“文学概论”或中国什么大学的讲义，的确，总不能发见一种叫作Tsa-wen的东西。这真要使有志于成为伟大的文学家的青年，见杂文而心灰意懒：原来这并不是爬进高尚的文学楼台去的梯子。托尔斯泰将要动笔时，是否查了美国的“文学概论”或中国什么大学的讲义之后，明白了小说是文学的正宗，这才决心来做《战争与和平》似的伟大的创作的呢？我不知道。但我知道中国的这几年的杂文作者，他的作文，却没有一个想到“文学概论”的规定，或者希图文学史上的位置的，他以为非这样写不可，他就这样写，因为他只知道这样的写起来，于大家有益。农夫耕田，泥匠打墙，他只为了米麦可吃，房屋可住，自己也因此有益之事，得一点不亏心的糊口之资，历史上有没有“乡下人列传”或“泥水匠列传”，他向来就并没有想到。如果他只想着成什么所谓气候，他就先进大学，再出外洋，三做教授或大官，四变居士或隐逸去了。历史上很尊隐逸，《居士传》不是还有专书吗，多少上算呀，噫！
We try to look up the "Introduction to Literature" in the United States or the handouts of any university in China, and indeed, we cannot find something called Tsa-wen. This really makes young people who aspire to become great writers discouraged and lazy when they see essays: it turns out that this is not a ladder to climb into a noble literary building. When Tolstoy was about to write, did he check the "Introduction to Literature" in the United States or the handouts of some Chinese university, and understood that the novel was the authentic of literature, so he decided to do a great creation like "War and Peace"? I do not know. But I know that the essays of Chinese writers in recent years, his compositions, but none of them think of the provisions of "Introduction to Literature" or the position in the history of Hitu's literature. The farmer plows the fields, the mason hits the wall, he only wants rice and wheat to eat, the house to live in, and he also has a beneficial thing to do, and he has no loss of heart. If he only thinks about what the so-called climate is, he will go to university, then go abroad, become a professor or a high official three times, and become a layman or live in seclusion four times. In history, it is very revered and secluded, isn't there still a special book in "The Biography of the Layman", how much it counts, oh!但是，杂文这东西，我却恐怕要侵入高尚的文学楼台去的。小说和戏曲，中国向来是看作邪宗的，但一经西洋的“文学概论”列为正宗，我们也就奉之为宝贝，《红楼梦》《西厢记》之类，在文学史上竟和《诗经》《离骚》并列了。杂文中之一体的随笔，因为有人说它近于英国的Essay，有些人也就顿首再拜，不敢轻薄。寓言和演说，好像是卑微的东西，但伊索和契开罗，不是坐在希腊罗马文学史上吗？杂文发展起来，倘不赶紧削，大约也未必没有扰乱文苑的危险。以古例今，很可能的，真不是一个好消息。但这一段话，我是和不是东西之流开开玩笑的，要使他爬耳搔腮，热剌剌的觉得他的世界有些灰色。前进的杂文作者，倒决不计算着这些。
However, I am afraid that I will invade the noble literary building. Novels and operas have always been regarded as evil sects in China, but once the Western "Introduction to Literature" is listed as authentic, we also regard them as treasures, such as "Dream of Red Mansions" and "The West Chamber", which are actually juxtaposed with "Book of Songs" and "Li Sao" in the history of literature. An essay in the essay, because some people say that it is close to the British essay, some people bow their heads and do not dare to be frivolous. Fables and oratories seem to be humble things, but Aesop and Checairo, don't they sit in the history of Greco-Roman literature? If the essays are not cut quickly, they may not be without the danger of disrupting the literary garden. Taking the past as an example, it is very likely that it is really not good news. But this paragraph, I was joking with the flow of things, to make him scratch his ears and cheeks, and he felt that his world was a little gray. Forward essay writers never count these.其实，近一两年来，杂文集的出版，数量并不及诗歌，更其赶不上小说，慨叹于杂文的泛滥，还是一种胡说八道。只是作杂文的人比先前多几个，却是真的，虽然多几个，在四万万人口里面，算得什么，却就要谁来疾首蹙额？中国也真有一班人在恐怕中国有一点生气；用比喻说：此之谓“虎伥”。
In fact, in the past year or two, the number of essay collections has not been as numerous as poetry, let alone novels, lamenting the proliferation of essays, which is still a kind of nonsense. It's just that there are a few more people writing essays than before, but it's true, although there are a few more, in a population of 40 million, what is it, but who will frown? There are really a group of people in China who are afraid that China will be a little angry; To use a metaphor: this is called "tiger man".这本集子的作者先前有一本《不惊人集》，我只见过一篇自序；书呢，不知道那里去了。这一回我希望一定能够出版，也给中国的著作界丰富一点。我不管这本书能否入于文艺之林，但我要背出一首诗来比一比：“夫子何为者？栖栖一代中。地犹鄹氏邑，宅接鲁王宫。叹凤嗟身否，伤麟怨道穷。今看两楹奠：犹与梦时同。”这是《唐诗三百首》里的第一首，是“文学概论”诗歌门里的所谓“诗”。但和我们不相干，那里能够及得这些杂文的和现在切贴，而且生动，泼剌，有益，而且也能移人情。能移人情，对不起得很，就不免要搅乱你们的文苑，至少，是将不是东西之流的唾向杂文的许多唾沫，一脚就踏得无踪无影了，只剩下一张满是油汗兼雪花膏的嘴脸。
The author of this collection previously had a "Not Amazing Collection", and I have only seen one self-introduction; I don't know where the book went. This time, I hope to be able to publish it and enrich the Chinese writing community. I don't care if this book can enter the forest of literature and art, but I want to recite a poem to compare: "What is the master doing?" Lingzhi in the generation. The land is still the territory of the Zou clan, and its residence is adjacent to the palace of the King of Lu. I sigh that I am not dead, and I lament that the path is endless. Now look at the two pillars of the memorial service: it is still the same as when I dreamed. This is the first of the "Three Hundred Tang Poems", and it is the so-called "poem" in the poetry gate of "Introduction to Literature". But it has nothing to do with us, where we can catch up with these essays and are close to the present, and they are vivid, splashy, beneficial, and can also change people's feelings. If you can change favors, I'm very sorry, so I can't help but mess up your literary garden, at least, it's a lot of spitting that is not a thing or a thing, and it's stepped on without a trace, leaving only a face full of oil, sweat and alabaster paste.这嘴脸当然还可以唠叨，说那一首“夫子何为者”并非好诗，并且时代也过去了。但是，文学正宗的招牌呢？“文艺的永久性”呢？
Of course, this face can still nag, saying that the "What is the Master" is not a good poem, and the era has passed. But what about the sign of literary authenticity? What about the "permanence of literature and art"?我是爱读杂文的一个人，而且知道爱读杂文还不只我一个，因为它“言之有物”。我还更乐观于杂文的开展，日见其斑斓。第一是使中国的著作界热闹，活泼；第二是使不是东西之流缩头；第三是使所谓“为艺术而艺术”的作品，在相形之下，立刻显出不死不活相。我所以极高兴为这本集子作序，并且借此发表意见，愿我们的杂文作家，勿为虎伥所迷，以为“人言可畏”，用最末的稿费买安眠药片去。
I am a person who loves to read essays, and I know that I am not the only one who loves to read essays, because it "has something to say". I am also more optimistic about the development of essays, and I see them colorful every day. The first is to make China's writing circle lively and lively; the second is to shrink the head of the flow of things that are not things; The third is to make the so-called "art for art's sake" works immediately show the appearance of immortality and immortality in contrast. Therefore, I am very happy to write a preface to this collection, and take this opportunity to express my opinion, I hope that our essay writers will not be confused by the tiger and the tiger, thinking that "human words are terrifying", and use the last manuscript fee to buy sleeping pills.一九三五年三月三十一日，鲁迅记于上海之卓面书斋。
On March 31, 1935, Lu Xun recorded in the Zhuo Facebook study in Shanghai.

人生识字胡涂始

人生识字胡涂始

人生识字胡涂始

Life begins with literacy中国的成语只有“人生识字忧患始”，这一句是我翻造的。
The Chinese idiom only has "the beginning of literacy and worries in life", which I recreated.孩子们常常给我好教训，其一是学话。他们学话的时候，没有教师，没有语法教科书，没有字典，只是不断的听取，记住，分析，比较，终于懂得每个词的意义，到得两三岁，普通的简单的话就大概能够懂，而且能够说了，也不大有错误。小孩子往往喜欢听人谈天，更喜欢陪客，那大目的，固然在于一同吃点心，但也为了爱热闹，尤其是在研究别人的言语，看有什么对于自己有关系——能懂，该问，或可取的。
Children often teach me good lessons, one of which is learning to speak. When they learn to speak, there is no teacher, no grammar textbook, no dictionary, just constantly listening, remembering, analyzing, comparing, and finally understanding the meaning of each word. Children often like to listen to people talk, prefer to accompany guests, the main purpose is of course to eat snacks together, but also to love liveliness, especially to study other people's words, to see what has something to do with them - can understand, should ask, or be desirable.我们先前的学古文也用同样的方法，教师并不讲解，只要你死读，自己去记住，分析，比较去。弄得好，是终于能够有些懂，并且竟也可以写出几句来的，然而到底弄不通的也多得很。自以为通，别人也以为通了，但一看底细，还是并不怎么通，连明人小品都点不断的，又何尝少有？人们学话，从高等华人以至下等华人，只要不是聋子或哑子，学不会的是几乎没有的，一到学文，就不同了，学会的恐怕不过极少数，就是所谓学会了的人们之中，请恕我坦白的再来重复的说一句罢，大约仍然胡胡涂涂的还是很不少。这自然是古文作怪。因为我们虽然拚命的读古文，但时间究竟是有限的，不像说话，整天的可以听见；而且所读的书，也许是《庄子》和《文选》呀，《东莱博议》呀，《古文观止》呀，从周朝人的文章，一直读到明朝人的文章，非常驳杂，脑子给古今各种马队践踏了一通之后，弄得乱七八遭，但蹄迹当然是有些存留的，这就是所谓“有所得”。这一种“有所得”当然不会清清楚楚，大概是似懂非懂的居多，所以自以为通文了，其实却没有通，自以为识字了，其实也没有识。自己本是胡涂的，写起文章来自然也胡涂，读者看起文章来，自然也不会倒明白。然而无论怎样的胡涂文作者，听他讲话，却大抵清楚，不至于令人听不懂的——除了故意大显本领的讲演之外。因此我想，这“胡涂”的来源，是在识字和读书。
We used the same method in learning ancient texts before, and the teacher did not explain it, as long as you read it to death, you can remember, analyze, and compare it yourself. If you do it well, you can finally understand a little, and you can even write a few sentences, but there are many things that you can't understand in the end. I think I understand, and others think I understand, but when I look at the details, I still don't know much, and even the Ming people's sketches are constantly clicked, so why is it rare? People learn to speak, from higher Chinese to lower Chinese, as long as they are not deaf or mute, there are almost no people who can't learn, and when it comes to learning literature, it is different, and I am afraid that only a very small number of people have learned, that is, among the so-called learned people, please forgive me for repeating it frankly, there are still a lot of nonsense. This is naturally an ancient text. Because although we read ancient texts desperately, time is limited, unlike talking, which can be heard all day long; And the books I read, maybe "Zhuangzi" and "Anthology", "Donglai Bo Yi", "Ancient Texts and Observations", from the articles of the Zhou Dynasty to the articles of the Ming Dynasty, are very mixed, and after the brain trampled on various horse teams in ancient and modern times, it made a mess, but of course some hoof prints remained, which is the so-called "gained". Of course, this kind of "gain" will not be clear, probably most of them seem to understand but do not understand, so they think they are knowledgeable, but in fact they are not proficient, they think they are literate, but in fact they do not know. I am a fool, and I naturally write an article, and readers will naturally not understand when they read the article. However, no matter what kind of Hutu author listens to his speech, it is generally clear that it is not incomprehensible - except for the speech that deliberately shows off his skills. Therefore, I think the source of this "nonsense" is literacy and reading.例如我自己，是常常会用些书本子上的词汇的。虽然并非什么冷僻字，或者连读者也并不觉得是冷僻字。然而假如有一位精细的读者，请了我去，交给我一枝铅笔和一张纸，说道，“您老的文章里，说过这山是‘崚嶒’的，那山是‘巉岩’的，那究竟是怎么一副样子呀？您不会画画儿也不要紧，就钩出一点轮廓来给我看看罢。请，请，请……”这时我就会腋下出汗，恨无地洞可钻。因为我实在连自己也不知道“崚嶒”和“巉岩”究竟是什么样子，这形容词，是从旧书上钞来的，向来就并没有弄明白，一经切实的考查，就糟了。此外如“幽婉”，“玲珑”，“蹒跚”，“嗫嚅”……之类，还多得很。
For example, I often use some vocabulary from books. Although it is not a cold word, or even readers do not think it is a cold word. However, if a meticulous reader invites me, hands me a pencil and a piece of paper, and says, "In your old article, you said that this mountain is 'rugged' and that mountain is 'rocky', what does that look like?" It doesn't matter if you don't know how to draw, just hook out a little outline and show me. Please, please, please......" At this time, I will sweat under my armpits, and I hate that there is no hole to drill. Because I really don't even know what "rock" and "rock" look like, this adjective is from old books, and I have never figured it out, and once it is examined, it will be bad. In addition, such as "Youwen", "Exquisite", "Waddle", "Hiccup"...... There are still a lot of them.说是白话文应该“明白如话”，已经要算唱厌了的老调了，但其实，现在的许多白话文却连“明白如话”也没有做到。倘要明白，我以为第一是在作者先把似识非识的字放弃，从活人的嘴上，采取有生命的词汇，搬到纸上来；也就是学学孩子，只说些自己的确能懂的话。至于旧语的复活，方言的普遍化，那自然也是必要的，但一须选择，二须有字典以确定所含的意义，这是另一问题，在这里不说它了。
It is said that vernacular texts should be "clear as words", which is already an old tune that is tired of singing, but in fact, many vernacular texts now do not even achieve "clear as words". If you want to understand, I think the first is that the author first abandons the words that seem to be unrecognizable, takes living words from the mouth of the living, and moves them to the paper; That is, learn from children and only say what they can really understand. As for the revival of the old language and the universalization of the dialect, it is naturally necessary, but it must be chosen, and there must be a dictionary to determine the meaning of the language, which is another issue, and it will not be discussed here.四月二日。
April 2nd.

“文人相轻”

“文人相轻”

“文人相轻”

"Literati look down on each other"老是说着同样的一句话是要厌的。在所谓文坛上，前年嚷过一回“文人无行”，去年是闹了一通“京派和海派”，今年又出了新口号，叫作“文人相轻”。
It's annoying to say the same thing all the time. In the so-called literary world, there was a shout of "literati have no virtue" the year before last, last year it was a "Beijing school and Shanghai school", and this year a new slogan was issued, called "literati look down on each other".对于这风气，口号家很愤恨，他的“真理哭了”，于是大声疾呼，投一切“文人”以轻蔑。“轻蔑”，他是最憎恶的，但因为他们“相轻”，损伤了他理想中的一道同风的天下，害得他自己也只好施行轻蔑术了。自然，这是“即以其人之道，还治其人之身”，是古圣人的良法，但“相轻”的恶弊，可真也不容易除根。
The slogan was very indignant about this atmosphere, and his "truth cried", so he shouted loudly and threw all the "literati" in contempt. "Contempt", he hated the most, but because they "looked down on each other", they damaged his ideal world of the same wind, causing him to have no choice but to practice contempt. Naturally, this is "to treat others in their own way", which is the good law of the ancient sages, but the evil of "looking down on each other" is really not easy to eradicate.我们如果到《文选》里去找词汇的时候，大概是可以遇着“文人相轻”这四个字的，拾来用用，似乎也还有些漂亮。然而，曹聚仁先生已经在《自由谈》（四月九日至十一日）上指明，曹丕之所谓“文人相轻”者，是“文非一体，鲜能备善，是以各以所长，相轻所短”，凡所指摘，仅限于制作的范围。一切别的攻击形体，籍贯，诬赖，造谣，以至施蛰存先生式的“他自己也是这样的呀”，或魏金枝先生式的“他的亲戚也和我一样了呀”之类，都不在内。倘把这些都作为曹丕所说的“文人相轻”，是混淆黑白，真理虽然大哭，倒增加了文坛的黑暗的。
If we go to the "Anthology" to find vocabulary, we can probably encounter the four words "literati look down on each other", and it seems to be a bit beautiful to pick up and use. However, Mr. Cao Juren has already pointed out in "Free Talk" (April 9-11) that Cao Pizhi's so-called "literati are despised" is "literature is not one, and few can be prepared, so each has its own strengths and despises each other's shortcomings". All other attacks on forms, origins, falsehoods, rumors, and even Mr. Shi Zhicun's "He himself is like this" or Mr. Wei Jinzhi's "His relatives are the same as me" are not included. If these are all regarded as what Cao Pi said about "literati look down on each other", it is to confuse black and white, and although the truth cries loudly, it increases the darkness of the literary world.我们如果到《庄子》里去找词汇，大概又可以遇着两句宝贝的教训：“彼亦一是非，此亦一是非”，记住了来作危急之际的护身符，似乎也不失为漂亮。然而这是只可暂时口说，难以永远实行的。喜欢引用这种格言的人，那精神的相距之远，更甚于叭儿之与老聃，这里不必说它了。就是庄生自己，不也在《天下篇》里，历举了别人的缺失，以他的“无是非”轻了一切“有所是非”的言行吗？要不然，一部《庄子》，只要“今天天气哈哈哈……”七个字就写完了。
If we go to "Zhuangzi" to find vocabulary, we can probably encounter two more treasure lessons: "He is also right and wrong, and this is also right and wrong", remembering to be a talisman in times of crisis, it seems to be beautiful. However, this can only be said temporarily and cannot be implemented forever. People who like to quote this kind of maxim are far away in spirit, even more so than Ba'er and Lao Dan, so there is no need to talk about it here. Even Zhuang Sheng himself, in the "Chapter of the World", did not list the shortcomings of others, and used his "no right and wrong" to underestimate all the words and deeds of "right and wrong"? Otherwise, a "Zhuangzi" will be written as long as the seven words "today's weather hahaha......" will be written.但我们现在所处的并非汉魏之际，也不必恰如那时的文人，一定要“各以所长，相轻所短”。凡批评家的对于文人，或文人们的互相评论，各各“指其所短，扬其所长”固可，即“掩其所短，称其所长”亦无不可。然而那一面一定得有“所长”，这一面一定得有明确的是非，有热烈的好恶。假使被今年新出的“文人相轻”这一个模模胡胡的恶名所吓昏，对于充风流的富儿，装古雅的恶少，销淫书的瘪三，无不“彼亦一是非，此亦一是非”，一律拱手低眉，不敢说或不屑说，那么，这是怎样的批评家或文人呢？——他先就非被“轻”不可的！
But we are not in the Han and Wei dynasties, and we do not have to be like the literati at that time, we must "each have their own strengths and look down on each other's weaknesses". It is certainly acceptable for critics to "point out their shortcomings and promote their strengths" to criticize literati or literati to each other, that is, to "cover up their shortcomings and praise their strengths". However, that side must have "strengths", and this side must have clear right and wrong, and warm likes and dislikes. If you are frightened by this year's new notoriety of "literati look down on each other", for the romantic rich children, the villains who pretend to be quaint, and the deflated three who sell obscene books, they all bow their hands and lower their eyebrows, dare not say or disdain to say it, then, what kind of critic or literati is this? ——He must be "light" first!四月十四日。
April 14th.

“京派”和“海派”

“京派”和“海派”

“京派”和“海派”

"Beijing School" and "Shanghai School"去年春天，京派大师曾经大大的奚落了一顿海派小丑，海派小丑也曾经小小的回敬了几手，但不多久，就完了。文滩上的风波，总是容易起，容易完，倘使不容易完，也真的不便当。我也曾经略略的赶了一下热闹，在许多唇枪舌剑中，以为那时我发表的所说，倒也不算怎么分析错了的。其中有这样的一段——
Last spring, the master of the Beijing school once ridiculed the Shanghai clown, and the Shanghai clown also responded a few times, but it didn't take long for it to end. The turmoil on the beach is always easy to start and end, but if it is not easy to end, it is really inconvenient. I also had a little bit of excitement, and in many of the rhetoric, I thought that what I said at that time was not a mistake in analyzing it. There is such a paragraph -“……北京是明清的帝都，上海乃各国之租界，帝都多官，租界多商，所以文人之在京者近官，没海者近商，近官者在使官得名，近商者在使商获利，而自己亦赖以糊口。要而言之：不过‘京派’是官的帮闲，‘海派’则是商的帮忙而已。……而官之鄙商，固亦中国旧习，就更使‘海派’在‘京派’眼中跌落了。……”
“…… Beijing is the imperial capital of the Ming and Qing dynasties, Shanghai is the concession of various countries, the imperial capital has many officials, and the concession is more business, so the literati in Beijing are close to the officials, the sea is close to the merchants, the officials are named in the envoys, and the merchants are profitable, and they also rely on it. In short: However, the 'Beijing school' is the help of the officials, and the 'Shanghai school' is just the help of the merchants. …… And the official's contempt of business, of course, is also an old Chinese habit, which makes the 'Shanghai school' fall in the eyes of the 'Beijing school'. ……”但到得今年春末，不过一整年带点零，就使我省悟了先前所说的并不圆满。目前的事实，是证明着京派已经自己贬损，或是把海派在自己眼睛里抬高，不但现身说法，演述了派别并不专与地域相关，而且实践了“因为爱他，所以恨他”的妙语。当初的京海之争，看作“龙虎斗”固然是错误，就是认为有一条官商之界也不免欠明白。因为现在已经清清楚楚，到底搬出一碗不过黄鳝田鸡，炒在一起的苏式菜——“京海杂烩”来了。
But by the end of spring this year, just a little bit of zero for a whole year, I realized that what I said before was not perfect. The current facts prove that the Beijing faction has degraded itself or exalted the Shanghai faction in its own eyes, not only appearing to say that the faction is not only related to the region, but also practicing the punchline of "because I love him, so I hate him". At the beginning, it was wrong to regard the dispute between Beijing and the sea as a "dragon and tiger fight", but it was inevitable that there was a boundary between officials and businessmen. Because it is now clear that a bowl of yellow eel frog and stir-fried together is here - "Jinghai chowder".实例，自然是琐屑的，而且自然也不会有重大的例子。举一点罢。一，是选印明人小品的大权，分给海派来了；以前上海固然也有选印明人小品的人，但也可以说是冒牌的，这回却有了真正老京派的题签，所以的确是正统的衣钵。二，是有些新出的刊物，真正老京派打头，真正小海派煞尾了；以前固然也有京派开路的期刊，但那是半京半海派所主持的东西，和纯粹海派自说是自掏腰包来办的出产品颇有区别的。要而言之：今儿和前儿已不一样，京海两派中的一路，做成一碗了。
Examples are naturally trivial, and naturally there will be no major examples. Just give a little point. First, it is the power to select and print the Ming people's sketches, and it is assigned to the sea faction; In the past, although there were people in Shanghai who selected and printed Ming people's sketches, they could also be said to be counterfeits, but this time there was a real old Beijing school, so it was indeed an orthodox mantle. second, there are some new publications, the real old Beijing faction is the head, and the real Xiaohai faction is over; Although there were periodicals that opened the way for the Beijing school in the past, it was something hosted by the half-Beijing and half-sea school, which was quite different from the products produced by the pure Shanghai school that it said to pay out of its own pocket. In short: today is different from before, and one of the two factions of Beijing and Hai has been made into a bowl.到这里要附带一点声明：我是故意不举出那新出刊物的名目来的。先前，曾经有人用过“某”字，什么缘故我不知道。但后来该刊的一个作者在该刊上说，他有一位“熟悉商情”的朋友，以为这是因为不替它来作广告。这真是聪明的好朋友，不愧为“熟悉商情”。由此启发，子细一想，他的话实在千真万确：被称赞固然可以代广告，被骂也可以代广告，张扬了荣是广告，张扬了辱又何尝非广告。例如罢，甲乙决斗，甲赢，乙死了，人们固然要看杀人的凶手，但也一样的要看那不中用的死尸，如果用芦席围起来，两个铜板看一下，准可以发一点小财的。我这回的不说出这刊物的名目来，主意却正在不替它作广告，我有时很不讲阴德，简直要妨碍别人的借死尸敛钱。然而，请老实的看官不要立刻责备我刻薄。他们那里肯放过这机会，他们自己会敲了锣来承认的。
I would like to add a little statement here: I deliberately did not mention the name of the new publication. Previously, someone used the word "so-and-so", but I don't know why. But later an author of the journal said in the journal that he had a friend who was "familiar with the business" and thought it was because he did not advertise for it. This is really a smart good friend, worthy of being "familiar with business conditions". Inspired by this, Zi thought about it carefully, and his words were really true: being praised can certainly be an advertisement, being scolded can also be an advertisement, publicizing honor is an advertisement, and publicizing humiliation is not an advertisement. For example, if A and B duel, A wins, B dies, people certainly have to look at the murderer, but they also have to look at the useless corpse, if they are surrounded by reed mats, two copper plates to look at, they can definitely make a little money. I didn't say the name of this publication this time, but my idea was not to advertise it. However, please don't immediately reproach me for being mean. If they are willing to let go of this opportunity, they will admit it by beating the gong.声明太长了一点了。言归正传。我要说的是直到现在，由事实证明，我才明白了去年京派的奚落海派，原来根柢上并不是奚落，倒是路远迢迢的送来的秋波。
The statement is a little too long. Back to the point. What I want to say is that it is not until now, as it has been proven by facts, that I understand that last year's Beijing faction was ridiculed by the sea faction, and it turned out that it was not ridicule at the root, but the autumn waves sent from a long way.文豪，究竟是有真实本领的，法朗士做过一本《泰绮思》，中国已有两种译本了，其中就透露着这样的消息。他说有一个高僧在沙漠中修行，忽然想到亚历山大府的名妓泰绮思，是一个贻害世道人心的人物，他要感化她出家，救她本身，救被惑的青年们，也给自己积无量功德。事情还算顺手，泰绮思竟出家了，他恨恨的毁坏了她在俗时候的衣饰。但是，奇怪得很，这位高僧回到自己的独房里继续修行时，却再也静不下来了，见妖怪，见裸体的女人。他急遁，远行，然而仍然没有效。他自己是知道因为其实爱上了泰绮思，所以神魂颠倒了的，但一群愚民，却还是硬要当他圣僧，到处跟着他祈求，礼拜，拜得他“哑子吃黄连”——有苦说不出。他终于决计自白，跑回泰绮思那里去，叫道“我爱你！”然而泰绮思这时已经离死期不远，自说看见了天国，不久就断气了。
Writers, whether they have real skills, Frances has made a book of "Tai Qisi", and there are already two translations in China, which reveal such news. He said that there was a high monk who was practicing in the desert, and suddenly thought of the famous prostitute Tai Qisi of Alexander's Mansion, a figure who harmed the hearts of the world, and he wanted to influence her to become a monk, save herself, save the confused young people, and accumulate immeasurable merit for himself. Things went well, Tai Qisi actually became a monk, and he hated to destroy her clothes in the world. However, it was very strange that when the eminent monk returned to his cell to continue his practice, he could no longer calm down, seeing monsters and naked women. He hurriedly fled and traveled far away, but it still had no effect. He himself knew that because he was actually in love with Tai Qisi, he was fascinated, but a group of foolish people still insisted on being his holy monk, praying and worshiping him everywhere, and worshiping him so that he "ate coptis with dumbness" - there was no way to say it. He finally decided to confess and ran back to Tai Qisi, shouting, "I love you!" However, Tai Qisi was not far from death at this time, and he said that he saw the kingdom of heaven, and soon died.不过京海之争的目前的结局，却和这一本书的不同，上海的泰绮思并没有死，她也张开两条臂膊，叫道“来！”于是——团圆了。
However, the current ending of the Jinghai dispute is different from this book, Tai Qisi in Shanghai is not dead, she also opened her arms and shouted, "Come !" So—reunion.《泰绮思》的构想，很多是应用弗洛伊特的精神分析学说的，倘有严正的批评家，以为算不得“究竟是有真实本领”，我也不想来争辩。但我觉得自己却真如那本书里所写的愚民一样，在没有听到“我爱你”和“来”之前，总以为奚落单是奚落，鄙薄单是鄙薄，连现在已经出了气的弗洛伊特学说也想不到。
Many of the ideas of "Tai Qisi" apply Freud's psychoanalytic theory, and if there are serious critics who think that it is not "whether there is a real ability", I do not want to argue. But I feel that I am really like the foolish people written in that book, until I hear "I love you" and "come ", I always think that ridicule is ridicule, contempt is contemptible, and even Freud's doctrine, which is now angry, cannot think of Freud's doctrine.到这里又要附带一点声明：我举出《泰绮思》来，不过取其事迹，并非处心积虑，要用妓女来比海派的文人。这种小说中的人物，是不妨随意改换的，即改作隐士，侠客，高人，公主，大少，小老板之类，都无不可。况且泰绮思其实也何可厚非。她在俗时是泼剌的活，出家后就刻苦的修，比起我们的有些所谓“文人”，刚到中年，就自叹道“我是心灰意懒了”的死样活气来，实在更其像人样。我也可以自白一句：我宁可向泼剌的妓女立正，却不愿意和死样活气的文人打棚。
Here is another statement: I cite "Tai Qi Si", but I take its deeds, not deliberately, and use prostitutes to compare the literati of the Shanghai school. The characters in this kind of novel may wish to be changed at will, that is, to hermits, chivalrous, masters, princesses, big boys, small bosses, etc., all of which are possible. Moreover, Tai Qi thought about the facts, so how could he be criticized? Compared with some of our so-called "literati", as soon as she reached middle age, she sighed to herself that "I am discouraged and lazy", which is really more human-like. I can also confess: I would rather stand upright with the prostitutes of Pola than fight with the dead and lively literati.至于为什么去年北京送秋波，今年上海叫“来”了呢？说起来，可又是事前的推测，对不对很难定了。我想：也许是因为帮闲帮忙，近来都有些“不景气”，所以只好两界合办，把断砖，旧袜，皮袍，洋服，巧克力，梅什儿……之类，凑在一处，重行开张，算是新公司，想借此来新一下主顾们的耳目罢。
As for why Beijing sent autumn waves last year, and Shanghai is called "come " this year? Speaking of which, it is speculation in advance, and it is difficult to determine whether it is right or not. I thought: Maybe because of the help, there has been a bit of a "recession" recently, so I had to cooperate with the two worlds, and put broken bricks, old socks, leather robes, clothes, chocolates, and mesh...... Similarly, gathering in one place and reopening, it is considered a new company, and I want to use this to refresh the eyes and ears of customers.四月十四日。
April 14th.

田诚一墓记

田诚一墓记

田诚一墓记

Tian Chengyi's epitaph君以一九三〇年三月至沪，出纳图书，既勤且谨，兼修绘事，斐然有成。中遭艰巨，笃行靡改，扶危济急，公私两全。越三三年七月，因病归国休养，方期再造，展其英才，而药石无灵，终以不起，年仅二十有八。呜呼，昊天难测，蕙荃早摧，晔晔青春，永玄壤，忝居友列，衔哀记焉。
君以一九三〇年三月至沪，出纳图书，既勤且谨，兼修绘事，斐然有成。 中遭艰巨，笃行靡改，扶危济急，公私两全。 越三三年七月，因病归国休养，方期再造，展其英才，而药石无灵，终以不起，年仅二十有八。 呜呼，昊天难测，蕙荃早摧，晔晔青春，永玄壤，忝居友列，衔哀记焉。一九三五年四月二十二日，会稽鲁迅撰。
April 22, 1935, written by Lu Xun in Kuaiji.

弄堂生意古今谈

弄堂生意古今谈

弄堂生意古今谈

The business of the alley is a tale of ancient and modern times“薏米杏仁莲心粥！”
"Barley almond lotus heart porridge!"“玫瑰白糖伦教糕！”
"Rose White Sugar Ethics Cake!"“虾肉馄饨面！”
"Shrimp wonton noodles!"“五香茶叶蛋！”
"Spiced tea eggs!"这是四五年前，闸北一带弄堂内外叫卖零食的声音，假使当时记录了下来，从早到夜，恐怕总可以有二三十样。居民似乎也真会化零钱，吃零食，时时给他们一点生意，因为叫声也时时中止，可见是在招呼主顾了。而且那些口号也真漂亮，不知道他是从《昭明文选》或《晚明小品》里找过词汇的呢，还是怎么的，实在使我似的初到上海的乡下人，一听到就有馋涎欲滴之概，“薏米杏仁”而又“莲心粥”，这是新鲜到连先前的梦里也没有想到的。但对于靠笔墨为生的人们，却有一点害处，假使你还没有练到“心如古井”，就可以被闹得整天整夜写不出什么东西来。
This is the sound of selling snacks inside and outside the alleys in Zhabei four or five years ago, and if it was recorded at that time, from morning to night, I am afraid there could always be twenty or thirty kinds. The residents also seem to really know how to change, eat snacks, and give them a little business from time to time, because the cries are also stopped from time to time, which shows that they are greeting customers. And those slogans are really beautiful, I don't know if he found the vocabulary from "Zhaoming Anthology" or "Late Ming Sketches", or what, it really makes me like a countryman who has just arrived in Shanghai, as soon as I hear it, I have a greedy attitude, "barley almonds" and "lotus heart porridge", which is so fresh that I didn't even think of it in my previous dreams. But for people who make a living from pen and ink, there is a bit of harm, if you haven't practiced "the heart is like an ancient well", you can be made to write nothing all day and night.现在是大不相同了。马路边上的小饭店，正午傍晚，先前为长衫朋友所占领的，近来已经大抵是“寄沉痛于幽闲”；老主顾呢，坐到黄包车夫的老巢的粗点心店里面去了。至于车夫，那自然只好退到马路边沿饿肚子，或者幸而还能够咬侉饼。弄堂里的叫卖声，说也奇怪，竟也和古代判若天渊，卖零食的当然还有，但不过是橄榄或馄饨，却很少遇见那些“香艳肉感”的“艺术”的玩意了。嚷嚷呢，自然仍旧是嚷嚷的，只要上海市民存在一日，嚷嚷是大约决不会停止的。然而现在却切实了不少：麻油，豆腐，润发的刨花，晒衣的竹竿；方法也有改进，或者一个人卖袜，独自作歌赞叹着袜的牢靠。或者两个人共同卖布，交互唱歌颂扬着布的便宜。但大概是一直唱着进来，直达弄底，又一直唱着回去，走出弄外，停下来做交易的时候，是很少的。
Now it's very different. The small restaurant on the side of the road, at noon and evening, was previously occupied by friends in long gowns, but recently it has been mostly "sending pain to leisure"; The old patron sat in the rough snack shop of the rickshaw driver's lair. As for the coachman, he naturally had to retreat to the side of the road to be hungry, or fortunately he was able to bite the cake. The shouting in the alley is strange, and it is actually very different from ancient times, of course, there are still snack sellers, but they are just olives or wontons, but it is rare to meet those "fragrant and fleshy" "art" things. As long as the citizens of Shanghai exist for a day, the shouting will never stop. However, now there are a lot of them: sesame oil, tofu, shavings of moisturized hair, bamboo poles for drying clothes; The method has also been improved, or one person sells socks and writes songs alone to praise the reliability of socks. Or two people sell cloth together, singing to praise the cheapness of cloth. But probably when I keep singing in, go straight to the bottom, and keep singing back, walk out of the lane, and stop to make a deal, there are very few.偶然也有高雅的货色：果物和花。不过这是并不打算卖给中国人的，所以他用洋话：
Occasionally, there are also elegant colors: fruits and flowers. However, this is not intended to be sold to the Chinese, so he uses foreign language:“Ringo，Banana，Appulu-u，Appulu-u-u！”
“Ringo，Banana，Appulu-u，Appulu-u-u！”“Hana呀Hana-a-a！Ha-a-na-a-a！”
"Hana呀Hana-a-a-a! Ha-a-na-a-a!"也不大有洋人买。
也不大有洋人买。间或有算命的瞎子，化缘的和尚进弄来，几乎是专攻娘姨们的，倒还是他们比较的有生意，有时算一命，有时卖掉一张黄纸的鬼画符。但到今年，好像生意也清淡了，于是前天竟出现了大布置的化缘。先只听得一片鼓钹和铁索声，我正想做“超现实主义”的语录体诗，这么一来，诗思被闹跑了，寻声看去，原来是一个和尚用铁钩钩在前胸的皮上，钩柄系有一丈多长的铁索，在地上拖着走进弄里来，别的两个和尚打着鼓和钹。但是，那些娘姨们，却都把门一关，躲得一个也不见了。这位苦行的高僧，竟连一个铜子也拖不去。
Occasionally, there are blind fortune-tellers, monks who are alchemists, almost specializing in aunts, but they are still more business-oriented, sometimes fortune-telling, and sometimes selling a yellow paper ghost talisman. But this year, it seems that the business has also become lighter, so there was a big arrangement of alms the day before yesterday. At first, I only heard the sound of drums and cymbals and iron chains, I was about to make a "surrealist" quotation poem, so that the poem was run away, and looking for the sound, it turned out that it was a monk hooked on the skin of the chest with an iron hook, and the hook handle was tied to an iron cable more than a foot long, dragged into the alley on the ground, and the other two monks were playing drums and cymbals. However, those aunts all closed the door and hid without a single one. This ascetic monk couldn't even drag a piece of copper.事后，我探了探她们的意见，那回答是：“看这样子，两角钱是打发不走的。”
Afterwards, I asked for their opinions, and the answer was: "Look at it like this, two cents can't be dismissed." ”独唱，对唱，大布置，苦肉计，在上海都已经赚不到大钱，一面固然足征洋场上的“人心浇薄”，但一面也可见只好去“复兴农村”了，唔。
Solo, duet, big arrangement, bitter meat, can no longer make a lot of money in Shanghai, on the one hand, it is enough to conquer the "thinning of people's hearts" in the foreign field, but on the other hand, it can also be seen that they have to go to "revive the countryside", hmm.四月二十三日。
April 23.

不应该那么写

不应该那么写

不应该那么写

It shouldn't be written like that凡是有志于创作的青年，第一个想到的问题，大概总是“应该怎样写？”现在市场上陈列着的“小说作法”，“小说法程”之类，就是专掏这类青年的腰包的。然而，好像没有效，从“小说作法”学出来的作者，我们至今还没有听到过。有些青年是设法去问已经出名的作者，那些答案，还很少见有什么发表，但结果是不难推想而知的：不得要领。这也难怪，因为创作是并没有什么秘诀，能够交头接耳，一句话就传授给别一个的，倘不然，只要有这秘诀，就真可以登广告，收学费，开一个三天包成文豪学校了。以中国之大，或者也许会有罢，但是，这其实是骗子。
The first question that comes to mind for any young person who is interested in creation is probably "How should I write?" "Now the "novel method" and "novel method" displayed in the market are specially paid for the pockets of such young people. However, it seems to have no effect, and we have not heard of the author who learned from the "novel method". Some young people try to ask authors who are already famous, and those answers are rarely published, but the result is not difficult to guess: it is not to the point. It's no wonder, because there is no secret to creation, you can listen to each other, and teach it to another person in one sentence, otherwise, as long as you have this secret, you can really advertise, collect tuition fees, and open a three-day literary school. With the size of China, maybe there will be, but this is actually a liar.在不难推想而知的种种答案中，大概总该有一个是“多看大作家的作品”。这恐怕也很不能满文学青年的意，因为太宽泛，茫无边际——然而倒是切实的。凡是已有定评的大作家，他的作品，全部就说明着“应该怎样写”。只是读者很不容易看出，也就不能领悟。因为在学习者一方面，是必须知道了“不应该那么写”，这才会明白原来“应该这么写”的。
Among the various answers that are not difficult to deduce, there should probably always be one of them to "read more works by great writers". This is probably not enough to satisfy the literary youth, because it is too broad and boundless - but it is practical. All the great writers who have been evaluated explain "how to write". It's just that readers can't easily see it, so they can't comprehend it. Because on the one hand, learners must know that "it should not be written like that" in order to understand that it should be written this way.这“不应该那么写”，如何知道呢？惠列赛耶夫的《果戈理研究》第六章里，答复着这问题——
This "shouldn't be written like that", how do you know? In the sixth chapter of Huleseyev's "Gogol Studies", this question is answered -“应该这么写，必须从大作家们的完成了的作品去领会。那么，不应该那么写这一面，恐怕最好是从那同一作品的未定稿本去学习了。在这里，简直好像艺术家在对我们用实物教授。恰如他指着每一行，直接对我们这样说——‘你看——哪，这是应该删去的。这要缩短，这要改作，因为不自然了。在这里，还得加些渲染，使形象更加显豁些。’”
It should be written like this, and it must be understood from the completed works of great writers. Then, I shouldn't write this side like that, I'm afraid it's best to learn from the unfinished manuscript of the same work. Here, it is as if the artist is teaching us with objects. Just as he pointed to each line and said to us directly, 'Look—where, this should be deleted. This needs to be shortened, this needs to be changed, because it is unnatural. Here, some rendering is needed to make the image more open-minded. ’”这确是极有益处的学习法，而我们中国却偏偏缺少这样的教材。近几年来，石印的手稿是有一些了，但大抵是学者的著述或日记。也许是因为向来崇尚“一挥而就”，“文不加点”的缘故罢，又大抵是全本干干净净，看不出苦心删改的痕迹来。取材于外国呢，则即使精通文字，也无法搜罗名作的初版以至改定版的各种本子的。
This is indeed a very beneficial learning method, but we in China lack such teaching materials. In recent years, there have been some manuscripts of stone prints, but they are mostly writings or diaries of scholars. Perhaps it is because it has always advocated "one stroke" and "no dots on the text", but it is probably because the whole book is clean, and there is no trace of painstaking deletion. If you take it from a foreign country, even if you are proficient in writing, you will not be able to search for various books from the first edition to the revised version of the masterpiece.读书人家的子弟熟悉笔墨，木匠的孩子会玩斧凿，兵家儿早识刀枪，没有这样的环境和遗产，是中国的文学青年的先天的不幸。
The children of scholars are familiar with pen and ink, the children of carpenters can play with axes and chisels, and the soldiers know knives and guns early.在没奈何中，想了一个补救法：新闻上的记事，拙劣的小说，那事件，是也有可以写成一部文艺作品的，不过那记事，那小说，却并非文艺——这就是“不应该这样写”的标本。只是和“应该那样写”，却无从比较了。
In desperation, I thought of a remedy: news accounts, clumsy novels, and events can also be written into literary and artistic works, but those records, novels, are not literary and artistic - this is a specimen of "it should not be written like this". It's just that it should be written that way, but it can't be compared.四月二十三日。
April 23.

在现代中国的孔夫子

在现代中国的孔夫子

在现代中国的孔夫子

Confucius in modern China新近的上海的报纸，报告着因为日本的汤岛，孔子的圣庙落成了，湖南省主席何键将军就寄赠了一幅向来珍藏的孔子的画像。老实说，中国的一般的人民，关于孔子是怎样的相貌，倒几乎是毫无所知的。自古以来，虽然每一县一定有圣庙，即文庙，但那里面大抵并没有圣像。凡是绘画，或者雕塑应该崇敬的人物时，一般是以大于常人为原则的，但一到最应崇敬的人物，例如孔夫子那样的圣人，却好像连形象也成为亵渎，反不如没有的好。这也不是没有道理的。孔夫子没有留下照相来，自然不能明白真正的相貌，文献中虽然偶有记载，但是胡说白道也说不定。若是从新雕塑的话，则除了任凭雕塑者的空想而外，毫无办法，更加放心不下。于是儒者们也终于只好采取“全部，或全无”的勃兰特式的态度了。
The latest Shanghai newspaper reported that because of the completion of the temple of Confucius in Yudao, Japan, General He Jian, chairman of Hunan Province, sent a portrait of Confucius that had always been treasured. To be honest, the average Chinese people know almost nothing about what Confucius looked like. Since ancient times, although there must be a holy temple in every county, that is, the Confucian Temple, there are probably no icons in it. When paintings or sculptures should be revered, they are generally larger than ordinary people, but when it comes to the most revered figures, such as saints like Confucius, it seems that even the image has become blasphemous, but it is better not to have it. This is not without reason. Confucius did not leave a photo, so naturally he could not understand the real appearance, although there are occasional records in the literature, but it may be nonsense. If it is a new sculpture, there is no way but to let the sculptor's fantasy take over, and it is even more at ease. So the Confucians finally had to adopt the Brandian attitude of "all or nothing".然而倘是画像，却也会间或遇见的。我曾经见过三次：一次是《孔子家语》里的插画；一次是梁启超氏亡命日本时，作为横滨出版的《清议报》上的卷头画，从日本倒输入中国来的；还有一次是刻在汉朝墓石上的孔子见老子的画像。说起从这些图画上所得的孔夫子的模样的印象来，则这位先生是一位很瘦的老头子，身穿大袖口的长袍子，腰带上插着一把剑，或者腋下挟着一枝杖，然而从来不笑，非常威风凛凛的。假使在他的旁边侍坐，那就一定得把腰骨挺的笔直，经过两三点钟，就骨节酸痛，倘是平常人，大约总不免急于逃走的了。
However, if it is a portrait, it will also be encountered occasionally. I have seen it three times: once is an illustration in "Confucius's Family Sayings"; One is when Liang Qichao fled to Japan, as the frontispiece of the "Qingyi Pao" published in Yokohama, it was imported from Japan to China; Another time is a portrait of Confucius seeing Lao Tzu engraved on the tombstone of the Han Dynasty. Speaking of the impression of Confucius's appearance from these pictures, this gentleman is a very thin old man, wearing a robe with large cuffs, a sword in his belt, or a staff under his armpit, but he never smiles, very majestic. If you sit next to him, you must keep your waist straight, and after two or three o'clock, your joints will be sore, and if you are an ordinary person, you will probably be in a hurry to escape.后来我曾到山东旅行。在为道路的不平所苦的时候，忽然想到了我们的孔夫子。一想起那具有俨然道貌的圣人，先前便是坐着简陋的车子，颠颠簸簸，在这些地方奔忙的事来，颇有滑稽之感。这种感想，自然是不好的，要而言之，颇近于不敬，倘是孔子之徒，恐怕是决不应该发生的。但在那时候，怀着我似的不规矩的心情的青年，可是多得很。
Later, I traveled to Shandong. When I was suffering from the injustice of the road, I suddenly thought of our Confucius. When I think of the saint with a Taoist appearance, he used to sit in a simple car, bumpy and bumpy, and it was quite funny to be busy in these places. This kind of feeling is naturally bad, in short, it is quite close to disrespect, if it is a disciple of Confucius, I am afraid it should never happen. But at that time, there were a lot of young people with unruly moods like me.我出世的时候是清朝的末年，孔夫子已经有了“大成至圣文宣王”这一个阔得可怕的头衔，不消说，正是圣道支配了全国的时代。政府对于读书的人们，使读一定的书，即四书和五经；使遵守一定的注释；使写一定的文章，即所谓“八股文”；并且使发一定的议论。然而这些千篇一律的儒者们，倘是四方的大地，那是很知道的，但一到圆形的地球，却什么也不知道，于是和四书上并无记载的法兰西和英吉利打仗而失败了。不知道为了觉得与其拜着孔夫子而死，倒不如保存自己们之为得计呢，还是为了什么，总而言之，这回是拚命尊孔的政府和官僚先就动摇起来，用官帑大翻起洋鬼子的书籍来了。属于科学上的古典之作的，则有侯失勒的《谈天》，雷侠儿的《地学浅释》，代那的《金石识别》，到现在也还作为那时的遗物，间或躺在旧书铺子里。
When I was born, it was the end of the Qing Dynasty, and Confucius already had the terrifyingly wide title of "King Wenxuan of Dacheng", needless to say, it was the era when the holy way dominated the whole country. The government makes people who read read certain books, namely the Four Books and the Five Classics; make certain annotations observed; make a certain article write, that is, the so-called "eight-strand text"; And make a certain discussion. However, these cookie-cutter Confucian scholars, if it was the earth in all directions, knew it very well, but when they reached the round earth, they knew nothing, so they fought against France and England, which were not recorded in the four books, and failed. I don't know if it's better to preserve themselves than to die worshiping Confucius, or for what, all in all, this time the government and bureaucrats who desperately respected Confucius were shaken first, and used official funds to turn over the books of foreign devils. The classical works in science include Hou Shile's "Tan Tian", Lei Xiaer's "Brief Explanation of Earth Science", and Dai Na's "Identification of Gold and Stone", which are still used as relics of that time, sometimes lying in old bookstores.然而一定有反动。清末之所谓儒者的结晶，也是代表的大学士徐桐氏出现了。他不但连算学也斥为洋鬼子的学问；他虽然承认世界上有法兰西和英吉利这些国度，但西班牙和葡萄牙的存在，是决不相信的，他主张这是法国和英国常常来讨利益，连自己也不好意思了，所以随便胡诌出来的国名。他又是一九〇〇年的有名的义和团的幕后的发动者，也是指挥者。但是义和团完全失败，徐桐氏也自杀了。政府就又以为外国的政治法律和学问技术颇有可取之处了。我的渴望到日本去留学，也就在那时候。达了目的，入学的地方，是嘉纳先生所设立的东京的弘文学院；在这里，三泽力太郎先生教我水是养气和轻气所合成，山内繁雄先生教我贝壳里的什么地方其名为“外套”。这是有一天的事情。学监大久保先生集合起大家来，说：因为你们都是孔子之徒，今天到御茶之水的孔庙里去行礼罢！我大吃了一惊。现在还记得那时心里想，正因为绝望于孔夫子和他的之徒，所以到日本来的，然而又是拜么？一时觉得很奇怪。而且发生这样感觉的，我想决不止我一个人。
However, there must be a reaction. The so-called crystallization of Confucianism in the late Qing Dynasty, which was also a representative of the great scholar Xu Tongshi, appeared. Not only did he denounce arithmetic as the knowledge of foreign devils; Although he admitted that there were countries such as France and England in the world, he never believed in the existence of Spain and Portugal, and he argued that this was the name of the country that France and Britain often came to seek benefits, and even he was embarrassed, so he casually came up with the name of the country. He was also the initiator and commander behind the famous Boxer Rebellion in 1900. But the Boxers completely failed, and Xu Tong also committed suicide. The government also thinks that foreign politics, laws, and academic technology are quite commendable. My desire to study in Japan was also at that time. The place where he entered the school was Kobun Gakuin in Tokyo, which was established by Mr. Kano; Here, Mr. Ritsutaro Misawa taught me that water is a combination of nourishing qi and light qi, and Mr. Shigeo Yamauchi taught me where the place in the shell is called "coat". This is a one-day thing. Mr. Okubo, the superintendent, gathered everyone and said: Because you are all disciples of Confucius, go to the Confucius Temple in Ochanomui today to pay your respects! I was taken aback. I still remember thinking to myself at that time, it was because I was desperate for Confucius and his disciples that I came to Japan, but was it a worship? It felt strange for a while. And I think I'm not the only one who feels like this.但是，孔夫子在本国的不遇，也并不是始于二十世纪的。孟子批评他为“圣之时者也”，倘翻成现代语，除了“摩登圣人”实在也没有别的法。为他自己计，这固然是没有危险的尊号，但也不是十分值得欢迎的头衔。不过在实际上，却也许并不这样子。孔夫子的做定了“摩登圣人”是死了以后的事，活着的时候却是颇吃苦头的。跑来跑去，虽然曾经贵为鲁国的警视总监，而又立刻下野，失业了；并且为权臣所轻蔑，为野人所嘲弄，甚至于为暴民所包围，饿扁了肚子。弟子虽然收了三千名，中用的却只有七十二，然而真可以相信的又只有一个人。有一天，孔夫子愤慨道：“道不行，乘桴浮于海，从我者，其由与？”从这消极的打算上，就可以窥见那消息。然而连这一位由，后来也因为和敌人战斗，被击断了冠缨，但真不愧为由呀，到这时候也还不忘记从夫子听来的教训，说道“君子死，冠不免”，一面系着冠缨，一面被人砍成肉酱了。连唯一可信的弟子也已经失掉，孔子自然是非常悲痛的，据说他一听到这信息，就吩咐去倒掉厨房里的肉酱云。
However, Confucius's mistreatment in his own country did not begin in the twentieth century. Mencius criticized him as "the one who was also a saint", and if it is translated into modern language, there is really no other way but "modern saint". For himself, this is certainly a non-dangerous title, but it is not a very welcome title. But in reality, it may not be like this. Confucius decided that the "modern saint" was after death, but he suffered quite a bit when he was alive. running around, although he was once the superintendent of the police in Lu State, he immediately went out of the field and lost his job; And he was despised by the powerful ministers, ridiculed by the savages, and even surrounded by the mob, starving his stomach. Although there were three thousand disciples, only seventy-two were used, but there was only one person who could really be trusted. One day, Confucius said indignantly: "The Tao is not good, the raft floats on the sea, and the one who follows me, is the reason?" From this negative plan, we can get a glimpse of the news. However, even this reason was later broken because of the battle with the enemy, but it was really worthy of the reason, and at this time he did not forget the lesson he heard from the master, saying, "A gentleman dies, and the crown cannot be avoided", while tying the crown tassel, he was cut into meat sauce. Even the only credible disciple had been lost, and Confucius was naturally very sad, and it is said that as soon as he heard the message, he ordered to pour out the meat sauce cloud in the kitchen.孔夫子到死了以后，我以为可以说是运气比较的好一点。因为他不会噜苏了，种种的权势者便用种种的白粉给他来化妆，一直抬到吓人的高度。但比起后来输入的释迦牟尼来，却实在可怜得很。诚然，每一县固然都有圣庙即文庙，可是一副寂寞的冷落的样子，一般的庶民，是决不去参拜的，要去，则是佛寺，或者是神庙。若向老百姓们问孔夫子是什么人，他们自然回答是圣人，然而这不过是权势者的留声机。他们也敬惜字纸，然而这是因为倘不敬惜字纸，会遭雷殛的迷信的缘故；南京的夫子庙固然是热闹的地方，然而这是因为另有各种玩耍和茶店的缘故。虽说孔子作《春秋》而乱臣贼子惧，然而现在的人们，却几乎谁也不知道一个笔伐了的乱臣贼子的名字。说到乱臣贼子，大概以为是曹操，但那并非圣人所教，却是写了小说和剧本的无名作家所教的。
After Confucius died, I thought it could be said that he was lucky. Because he wouldn't be able to snort, all kinds of powerful people used all kinds of white powder to make him makeup, all the way to a frightening height. But compared to Shakyamuni who was imported later, it was really pitiful. It is true that every county certainly has a holy temple, that is, the Confucian Temple, but it looks lonely and neglected, and ordinary people will never go to worship, and if they want to go, it is a Buddhist temple or a temple. If you ask the people who Confucius is, they will naturally answer that he is a saint, but this is just a gramophone for the powerful. They also cherish the paper, but this is because of the superstition that if they do not cherish the paper, they will be struck by lightning; The Confucius Temple in Nanjing is certainly a lively place, but this is because there are various games and tea shops. Although Confucius wrote the "Spring and Autumn Annals" and the traitors and thieves were afraid, almost no one now knows the name of a rebellious minister and thief who has been cut down. When it comes to traitors and thieves, you probably think it is Cao Cao, but it is not taught by the saints, but by the unknown writers who wrote novels and scripts.总而言之，孔夫子之在中国，是权势者们捧起来的，是那些权势者或想做权势者们的圣人，和一般的民众并无什么关系。然而对于圣庙，那些权势者也不过一时的热心。因为尊孔的时候已经怀着别样的目的，所以目的一达，这器具就无用，如果不达呢，那可更加无用了。在三四十年以前，凡有企图获得权势的人，就是希望做官的人，都是读“四书”和“五经”，做“八股”，别一些人就将这些书籍和文章，统名之为“敲门砖”。这就是说，文官考试一及第，这些东西也就同时被忘却，恰如敲门时所用的砖头一样，门一开，这砖头也就被抛掉了。孔子这人，其实是自从死了以后，也总是当着“敲门砖”的差使的。
All in all, Confucius was held up by the powerful in China, and he was a saint who was in power or wanted to be a powerful person, and had nothing to do with the general public. However, for the temple, those in power were only temporarily enthusiastic. Because when the Confucius was honored, he already had a different purpose, so once the goal was achieved, this instrument was useless, and if it was not achieved, it would be even more useless. Thirty or forty years ago, anyone who tried to gain power, that is, those who wanted to become officials, read the "Four Books" and "Five Classics" and did the "Eight Shares", and some others collectively called these books and articles "stepping stones". This means that as soon as the civil servant exam passes, these things are forgotten at the same time, just like the brick used when knocking on the door, and as soon as the door opens, the brick is thrown away. Confucius was actually a messenger who was always a "stepping stone" since his death.一看最近的例子，就更加明白。从二十世纪的开始以来，孔夫子的运气是很坏的，但到袁世凯时代，却又被从新记得，不但恢复了祭典，还新做了古怪的祭服，使奉祀的人们穿起来。跟着这事而出现的便是帝制。然而那一道门终于没有敲开，袁氏在门外死掉了。余剩的是北洋军阀，当觉得渐近末路时，也用它来敲过另外的幸福之门。盘据着江苏和浙江，在路上随便砍杀百姓的孙传芳将军，一面复兴了投壶之礼；钻进山东，连自己也数不清金钱和兵丁和姨太太的数目了的张宗昌将军，则重刻了《十三经》，而且把圣道看作可以由肉体关系来传染的花柳病一样的东西，拿一个孔子后裔的谁来做了自己的女婿。然而幸福之门，却仍然对谁也没有开。
A look at recent examples makes it even clearer. Since the beginning of the twentieth century, Confucius's luck has been very bad, but in the era of Yuan Shikai, it has been remembered again, not only restored the festival, but also made strange sacrificial clothes for the people who worship them. What followed this was the imperial system. However, the door was finally not knocked open, and Yuan died outside the door. The remaining are the Beiyang warlords, who also use it to knock on other doors of happiness when they feel that they are approaching the end. General Sun Chuanfang, who occupied Jiangsu and Zhejiang and killed the people casually on the road, revived the ritual of throwing pots; General Zhang Zongchang, who went into Shandong and couldn't even count the number of money, soldiers and concubines, re-engraved the "Thirteen Classics", and regarded the holy way as something like the flower willow disease that could be transmitted by physical relationships, and took a descendant of Confucius as his son-in-law. However, the door to happiness is still not open to anyone.这三个人，都把孔夫子当作砖头用，但是时代不同了，所以都明明白白的失败了。岂但自己失败而已呢，还带累孔子也更加陷入了悲境。他们都是连字也不大认识的人物，然而偏要大谈什么《十三经》之类，所以使人们觉得滑稽；言行也太不一致了，就更加令人讨厌。既已厌恶和尚，恨及袈裟，而孔夫子之被利用为或一目的的器具，也从新看得格外清楚起来，于是要打倒他的欲望，也就越加旺盛。所以把孔子装饰得十分尊严时，就一定有找他缺点的论文和作品出现。即使是孔夫子，缺点总也有的，在平时谁也不理会，因为圣人也是人，本是可以原谅的。然而如果圣人之徒出来胡说一通，以为圣人是这样，是那样，所以你也非这样不可的话，人们可就禁不住要笑起来了。五六年前，曾经因为公演了《子见南子》这剧本，引起过问题，在那个剧本里，有孔夫子登场，以圣人而论，固然不免略有欠稳重和呆头呆脑的地方，然而作为一个人，倒是可爱的好人物。但是圣裔们非常愤慨，把问题一直闹到官厅里去了。因为公演的地点，恰巧是孔夫子的故乡，在那地方，圣裔们繁殖得非常多，成着使释迦牟尼和苏格拉第都自愧弗如的特权阶级。然而，那也许又正是使那里的非圣裔的青年们，不禁特地要演《子见南子》的原因罢。
These three people all used Confucius as bricks, but the times were different, so they all clearly failed. Not only did he fail, but he also fell into a tragic situation. They are all characters who don't even know the words, but they want to talk about the "Thirteen Classics" and the like, so people feel funny; The words and deeds are too inconsistent, which is even more annoying. Since he hated the monk and hated the cassock, and the instrument that Confucius was used as a tool or for one purpose became more and more clear from the new, so the desire to overthrow him became more and more vigorous. Therefore, when Confucius is decorated with great dignity, there must be papers and works that find his shortcomings. Even Confucius always has shortcomings, and no one pays attention to them in ordinary times, because saints are also human beings and can be forgiven. However, if the saints come out and talk nonsense, thinking that the saints are like this, that they are like that, so you have to do this, people can't help but laugh. Five or six years ago, there was a problem because of the performance of the script "Zi Jian Nanzi", in that script, Confucius appeared, in terms of saints, of course, it is inevitable that there will be a little unstable and dumbfounded, but as a person, it is a lovely and good character. But the saints were very indignant and took the problem all the way to the official office. Because the place where the performance was performed happened to be the hometown of Confucius, where the saints multiplied a lot and became a privileged class that made both Shakyamuni and Socrates ashamed. However, that may be the reason why the young people who are not of holy descent there can't help but perform "Zi Jian Nanzi".中国的一般的民众，尤其是所谓愚民，虽称孔子为圣人，却不觉得他是圣人；对于他，是恭谨的，却不亲密。但我想，能像中国的愚民那样，懂得孔夫子的，恐怕世界上是再也没有的了。不错，孔夫子曾经计划过出色的治国的方法，但那都是为了治民众者，即权势者设想的方法，为民众本身的，却一点也没有。这就是“礼不下庶人”。成为权势者们的圣人，终于变了“敲门砖”，实在也叫不得冤枉。和民众并无关系，是不能说的，但倘说毫无亲密之处，我以为怕要算是非常客气的说法了。不去亲近那毫不亲密的圣人，正是当然的事，什么时候都可以，试去穿了破衣，赤着脚，走上大成殿去看看罢，恐怕会像误进上海的上等影戏院或者头等电车一样，立刻要受斥逐的。谁都知道这是大人老爷们的物事，虽是“愚民”，却还没有愚到这步田地的。
The general people in China, especially the so-called foolish people, call Confucius a saint, but do not think he is a saint; For him, it is respectful, but not intimate. But I think there is probably no one in the world who can understand Confucius like the foolish people in China. Yes, Confucius once planned an excellent way to govern the country, but it was all for the people who ruled the people, that is, the methods envisioned by the powerful, but not for the people themselves. This is "courtesy to commoners". The saint who became the powerful finally became a "stepping stone", which is really unjust. It has nothing to do with the people, so it cannot be said, but if there is no intimacy, I think it is a very polite statement. If you don't get close to the saint who is not intimate, it is a matter of course, you can do it at any time, try to wear tattered clothes, go barefoot, and walk up to the Dacheng Hall to take a look, I am afraid that you will be immediately expelled like a high-class theater or a first-class tram in Shanghai by mistake. Everyone knows that this is the thing of the lords, although they are "foolish people", but they have not yet reached this level of foolishness.四月二十九日。
April 29th.

六朝小说和唐代传奇文有怎样的区别？

六朝小说和唐代传奇文有怎样的区别？——答文学社问

六朝小说和唐代传奇文有怎样的区别？

What is the difference between the novels of the Six Dynasties and the legends of the Tang Dynasty? ——Answer the question of the Literary Society这试题很难解答。
This test question is difficult to answer.因为唐代传奇，是至今还有标本可见的，但现在之所谓六朝小说，我们所依据的只是从《新唐书艺文志》以至清《四库书目》的判定，有许多种，在六朝当时，却并不视为小说。例如《汉武故事》，《西京杂记》，《搜神记》，《续齐谐记》等，直至刘昫的《唐书经籍志》，还属于史部起居注和杂传类里的。那时还相信神仙和鬼神，并不以为虚造，所以所记虽有仙凡和幽明之殊，却都是史的一类。
Because the legend of the Tang Dynasty is still visible in specimens, but the current so-called Six Dynasties novels, we are only based on the judgment from the "New Tang Book Art and Literature" to the Qing Dynasty's "Four Libraries Bibliography", there are many kinds, but at the time of the Six Dynasties, they were not regarded as novels. For example, "The Story of Han Wu", "Xijing Miscellaneous Notes", "Search for Gods", "Continuation of Qi Harmony", etc., until Liu Xu's "Tang Book Classics", still belong to the daily notes and miscellaneous biographies of the Ministry of History. At that time, they still believed in immortals and ghosts, and did not think they were fabricated, so although there was a difference between immortals and the dark and bright, they were all of the same category of history.况且从晋到隋的书目，现在一种也不存在了，我们已无从知道那时所视为小说的是什么，有怎样的形式和内容。现存的惟一最早的目录只有《隋书经籍志》，修者自谓“远览马史班书，近观王阮志录”，也许尚存王俭《今书七志》，阮孝绪《七录》的痕迹罢，但所录小说二十五种中，现存的却只有《燕丹子》和刘义庆撰《世说》合刘孝标注两种了。此外，则《郭子》，《笑林》，殷芸《小说》，《水饰》，及当时以为隋代已亡的《青史子》，《语林》等，还能在唐宋类书里遇见一点遗文。
Moreover, the bibliography from the Jin to the Sui Dynasty no longer exists, and we no longer know what was regarded as a novel at that time, and what form and content it had. The only earliest catalog in existence is the "Sui Book Classics", and the reviser claims to be "reading the horse history class book from afar, looking at Wang Ruan Zhilu up close", perhaps there are traces of Wang Jian's "Seven Chronicles of the Book of Today" and Ruan Xiaoxu's "Seven Records", but among the twenty-five novels recorded, only "Yan Danzi" and Liu Yiqing's "World Sayings" written by Liu Xiao are two types. In addition, "Guo Zi", "Laughing Forest", Yin Yun's "Novel", "Water Decoration", and "Qing Shizi", "Yulin", etc., which were thought to be dead in the Sui Dynasty at that time, can also meet a little posthumous text in Tang and Song books.单从上述这些材料来看，武断的说起来，则六朝人小说，是没有记叙神仙或鬼怪的，所写的几乎都是人事；文笔是简洁的；材料是笑柄，谈资；但好像很排斥虚构，例如《世说新语》说裴启《语林》记谢安语不实，谢安一说，这书即大损声价云云，就是。
Judging from the above materials alone, arbitrarily speaking, the novels of the Six Dynasties do not describe immortals or ghosts, and almost all of them are human affairs; The writing is concise; The material is a laughing stock, a topic of conversation; But it seems to reject fiction, for example, "The World Says New Words" says that Pei Qi's "Yulin" records Xie An's words are untrue, and Xie An said that this book will greatly damage the reputation and value, that is.唐代传奇文可就大两样了：神仙人鬼妖物，都可以随便驱使；文笔是精细，曲折的，至于被崇尚简古者所诟病；所叙的事，也大抵具有首尾和波澜，不止一点断片的谈柄；而且作者往往故意显示着这事迹的虚构，以见他想象的才能了。
The legendary texts of the Tang Dynasty are two kinds of things: immortals, ghosts, and monsters can be driven at will; The writing is fine and tortuous, as for being criticized by those who advocate simplicity and antiquity; The things described also mostly have beginning and end and waves, more than a few fragments of the story; And the author often deliberately shows the fiction of this deed, so as to show his imaginary talent.但六朝人也并非不能想象和描写，不过他不用于小说，这类文章，那时也不谓之小说。例如阮籍的《大人先生传》，陶潜的《桃花源记》，其实倒和后来的唐代传奇文相近；就是嵇康的《圣贤高士传赞》（今仅有辑本），葛洪的《神仙传》，也可以看作唐人传奇文的祖师的。李公佐作《南柯太守传》，李肇为之赞，这就是嵇康的《高士传》法；陈鸿《长恨传》置白居易的长歌之前，元稹的《莺莺传》既录《会真诗》，又举李公垂《莺莺歌》之名作结，也令人不能不想到《桃花源记》。
But the people of the Six Dynasties were not unimaginable and describable, but he was not used in novels, and this kind of article was not called a novel at that time. For example, Ruan Ji's "Biography of Mr. Adult" and Tao Qian's "Peach Blossom Spring" are actually similar to the later Tang Dynasty legends; It is Ji Kang's "Praise of the Sages and High Scholars" (now only available in editions) and Ge Hong's "Biography of the Immortals", which can also be regarded as the ancestor of the Tang Dynasty's legendary texts. Li Gongzuo wrote "The Biography of Nanke Taishou", and Li Zhao praised it, which is Ji Kang's "Biography of Gao Shi"; Chen Hong's "The Legend of Long Hatred" was placed before Bai Juyi's long song, and Yuan Zhen's "The Legend of Yingying" not only recorded the "Huizhen Poem", but also cited the name of Li Gongchui's "Yingying Song" as the end, which also made people think of "The Peach Blossom Spring".至于他们之所以著作，那是无论六朝或唐人，都是有所为的。《隋书经籍志》抄《汉书艺文志》说，以著录小说，比之“询于刍荛”，就是以为虽然小说，也有所为的明证。不过在实际上，这有所为的范围却缩小了。晋人尚清谈，讲标格，常以寥寥数言，立致通显，所以那时的小说，多是记载畸行隽语的《世说》一类，其实是借口舌取名位的入门书。唐以诗文取士，但也看社会上的名声，所以士子入京应试，也须豫先干谒名公，呈献诗文，冀其称誉，这诗文叫作“行卷”。诗文既滥，人不欲观，有的就用传奇文，来希图一新耳目，获得特效了，于是那时的传奇文，也就和“敲门砖”很有关系。但自然，只被风气所推，无所为而作者，却也并非没有的。
As for the reason why they wrote, it was that both the Six Dynasties and the Tang Dynasty did something. The "Book of Sui Classics" copied the "Book of Han Art and Literature" and said that the novel is compared to "asking the grass", which is proof that although it is a novel, it also has something to do. In practice, however, the scope of this has been narrowed. The Jin people were still talkative, talking about standards, and often used a few words to make it clear, so most of the novels at that time were "Shishuo" that recorded abnormal behaviors and words, but they were actually introductory books for taking the name of the tongue. The Tang Dynasty took scholars with poetry and prose, but also looked at the reputation in society, so when scholars entered Beijing to take the exam, they also had to first pay respects to famous public officials and present poems in the hope of their praise, which was called "running scroll". Poetry and prose are indiscriminate, people don't want to watch, and some use legendary texts to try to refresh their ears and eyes and get special effects, so the legendary texts at that time are also very related to the "stepping stone". But naturally, it is not that it is only pushed by the atmosphere and the author does nothing.五月三日。
May 3rd.

什么是“讽刺”？

什么是“讽刺”？——答文学社问

什么是“讽刺”？

What is "irony"? ——Answer the question of the Literary Society我想：一个作者，用了精炼的，或者简直有些夸张的笔墨——但自然也必须是艺术的地——写出或一群人的或一面的真实来，这被写的一群人，就称这作品为“讽刺”。
I think: An author who uses a refined or simply exaggerated pen and ink - but naturally must also be artistically - writes the truth of a group of people or a side, and this group of people who are written calls this work "satire".“讽刺”的生命是真实；不必是曾有的实事，但必须是会有的实情。所以它不是“捏造”，也不是“诬蔑”；既不是“揭发阴私”，又不是专记骇人听闻的所谓“奇闻”或“怪现状”。它所写的事情是公然的，也是常见的，平时是谁都不以为奇的，而且自然是谁都毫不注意的。不过这事情在那时却已经是不合理，可笑，可鄙，甚而至于可恶。但这么行下来了，习惯了，虽在大庭广众之间，谁也不觉得奇怪；现在给它特别一提，就动人。譬如罢，洋服青年拜佛，现在是平常事，道学先生发怒，更是平常事，只消几分钟，这事迹就过去，消灭了。但“讽刺”却是正在这时候照下来的一张相，一个撅着屁股，一个皱着眉心，不但自己和别人看起来有些不很雅观，连自己看见也觉得不很雅观；而且流传开去，对于后日的大讲科学和高谈养性，也不免有些妨害。倘说，所照的并非真实，是不行的，因为这时有目共睹，谁也会觉得确有这等事；但又不好意思承认这是真实，失了自己的尊严。于是挖空心思，给起了一个名目，叫作“讽刺”。其意若曰：它偏要提出这等事，可见也不是好货。
The life of "irony" is real; It doesn't have to be a fact, but it must be a fact. So it is not a "fabrication" or a "slander"; It is neither "exposing private interests" nor focusing on the so-called "strange news" or "strange status quo" that is appalling. The things it writes about are blatant and common, and no one is usually surprised, and naturally no one pays attention. But at that time, this matter was already unreasonable, ridiculous, contemptible, and even hateful. But after doing this, I got used to it, and although it was in public, no one found it strange; Now to mention it in particular, it is moving. For example, it is a common thing for a young man in a foreign suit to worship Buddha, but it is even more common for a Taoist teacher to get angry, and it only takes a few minutes for this deed to pass and disappear. But the "irony" is a photo taken at this time, one with a pouting buttocks and the other frowning, not only does he and others look a little unelegant, but he even feels that he is not very elegant when he sees it; And if it spreads, it will inevitably hinder the future of science and high talk. If it is said that what is illuminated is not true, it is not possible, because at this time it is obvious to all, and no one will think that such a thing is true; But I was embarrassed to admit that this was true and lost my dignity. So he hollowed out his mind and gave it a name, called "irony". The meaning seems to be that it wants to raise such things, which shows that it is not a good commodity.有意的偏要提出这等事，而且加以精炼，甚至于夸张，却确是“讽刺”的本领。同一事件，在拉杂的非艺术的记录中，是不成为讽刺，谁也不大会受感动的。例如新闻记事，就记忆所及，今年就见过两件事。其一，是一个青年，冒充了军官，向各处招摇撞骗，后来破获了，他就写忏悔书，说是不过借此谋生，并无他意。其二，是一个窃贼招引学生，教授偷窃之法，家长知道，把自己的子弟禁在家里了，他还上门来逞凶。较可注意的事件，报上是往往有些特别的批评文字的，但对于这两件，却至今没有说过什么话，可见是看得很平常，以为不足介意的了。然而这材料，假如到了斯惠夫德（J. Swift）或果戈理（N. Gogol）的手里，我看是准可以成为出色的讽刺作品的。在或一时代的社会里，事情越平常，就越普遍，也就愈合于作讽刺。
Deliberately raising such things, and refining them, even exaggerated, is indeed the ability to "satirical". The same event, in the non-artistic records of Laza, does not become a satire, and no one will be moved. For example, as far as I can remember, I have seen two things this year. First, a young man pretended to be an officer and deceived everywhere, and when he was caught, he wrote a confession, saying that he was just making a living by doing so, and had no other intentions. Second, a thief lured students and taught them how to steal, and the parents knew that they had locked their children at home, and he came to the door to commit murder. For the more noteworthy events, the newspapers often have some special criticism, but for these two things, nothing has been said so far, which shows that it is very ordinary and thinks it is not worth worrying about. However, if this material reaches J. Swift) or Gogol (N. Gogol), I think it can definitely become an excellent satire. In the society of a certain era, the more ordinary things are, the more common they are, and they are more likely to be sarcastic.讽刺作者虽然大抵为被讽刺者所憎恨，但他却常常是善意的，他的讽刺，在希望他们改善，并非要捺这一群到水底里。然而待到同群中有讽刺作者出现的时候，这一群却已是不可收拾，更非笔墨所能救了，所以这努力大抵是徒劳的，而且还适得其反，实际上不过表现了这一群的缺点以至恶德，而对于敌对的别一群，倒反成为有益。我想：从别一群看来，感受是和被讽刺的那一群不同的，他们会觉得“暴露”更多于“讽刺”。
Although the satirist is generally hated by the satirist, he is often well-intentioned, and his satire, in the hope that they will improve, is not to push this group to the bottom of the water. However, when there are satirical authors in the same group, this group is out of control, let alone saved by pen and ink, so this effort is probably in vain, and it is counterproductive. I think that from the perspective of other groups, the feeling is different from that of the group that is being ridiculed, and they will feel that "exposure" is more than "irony".如果貌似讽刺的作品，而毫无善意，也毫无热情，只使读者觉得一切世事，一无足取，也一无可为，那就并非讽刺了，这便是所谓“冷嘲”。
If it seems to be a satirical work, but there is no goodwill, no enthusiasm, and only makes the reader feel that everything in the world is worthless and nothing can be done, then it is not irony, which is the so-called "cynicism".五月三日。
May 3rd.

论“人言可畏”

论“人言可畏”

论“人言可畏”

On "People Speak Fearfully"“人言可畏”是电影明星阮玲玉自杀之后，发见于她的遗书中的话。这哄动一时的事件，经过了一通空论，已经渐渐冷落了，只要《玲玉香消记》一停演，就如去年的艾霞自杀事件一样，完全烟消火灭。她们的死，不过像在无边的人海里添了几粒盐，虽然使扯淡的嘴巴们觉得有些味道，但不久也还是淡，淡，淡。
"People are terrifying" are the words of movie star Ruan Lingyu in her suicide note after she committed suicide. As long as "Lingyu Xiangxiaoji" stops performing, just like last year's Ai Xia suicide incident, it was completely extinguished. Their deaths were like adding a few grains of salt to the boundless sea of people, although they made the nonsense mouths feel a little smelly, but soon they were still light, light, light.这句话，开初是也曾惹起一点小风波的。有评论者，说是使她自杀之咎，可见也在日报记事对于她的诉讼事件的张扬；不久就有一位记者公开的反驳，以为现在的报纸的地位，舆论的威信，可怜极了，那里还有丝毫主宰谁的运命的力量，况且那些记载，大抵采自经官的事实，绝非捏造的谣言，旧报具在，可以复按。所以阮玲玉的死，和新闻记者是毫无关系的。
This sentence also caused a little turmoil at the beginning. Some commentators said that she was to blame for committing suicide, which shows that she also publicized her litigation in the daily newspaper; Soon a reporter publicly refuted, thinking that the status of the current newspaper and the prestige of public opinion were pitiful, and there was still the slightest power to dominate whose fate it was, and those records were mostly from the facts of the officials, and they were by no means fabricated rumors. Therefore, Ruan Lingyu's death has nothing to do with the news reporter.这都可以算是真实话。然而——也不尽然。
This can be regarded as true. However - not necessarily.现在的报章之不能像个报章，是真的；评论的不能逞心而谈，失了威力，也是真的，明眼人决不会过分的责备新闻记者。但是，新闻的威力其实是并未全盘坠地的，它对甲无损，对乙却会有伤；对强者它是弱者，但对更弱者它却还是强者，所以有时虽然吞声忍气，有时仍可以耀武扬威。于是阮玲玉之流，就成了发扬余威的好材料了，因为她颇有名，却无力。小市民总爱听人们的丑闻，尤其是有些熟识的人的丑闻。上海的街头巷尾的老虔婆，一知道近邻的阿二嫂家有野男人出入，津津乐道，但如果对她讲甘肃的谁在偷汉，新疆的谁在再嫁，她就不要听了。阮玲玉正在现身银幕，是一个大家认识的人，因此她更是给报章凑热闹的好材料，至少也可以增加一点销场。读者看了这些，有的想：“我虽然没有阮玲玉那么漂亮，却比她正经”；有的想：“我虽然不及阮玲玉的有本领，却比她出身高”；连自杀了之后，也还可以给人想：“我虽然没有阮玲玉的技艺，却比她有勇气，因为我没有自杀”。化几个铜元就发见了自己的优胜，那当然是很上算的。但靠演艺为生的人，一遇到公众发生了上述的前两种的感想，她就够走到末路了。所以我们且不要高谈什么连自己也并不了然的社会组织或意志强弱的滥调，先来设身处地的想一想罢，那么，大概就会知道阮玲玉的以为“人言可畏”，是真的，或人的以为她的自杀，和新闻记事有关，也是真的。
It is true that the current newspaper cannot be like a newspaper; It is also true that commentators cannot talk freely and lose their power, and discerning people will never blame journalists excessively. However, the power of the news is actually not completely falling to the ground, it does not damage A, but it will hurt B; It is weak to the strong, but it is still strong to the weaker, so sometimes it can still show off its might. So Ruan Lingyu and the like have become good materials for carrying forward Yu Wei, because she is quite famous, but powerless. Small citizens always love to listen to people's scandals, especially those of some familiar people. The old woman in the streets and alleys of Shanghai talked about it when she knew that there were wild men coming in and out of her neighbor's second sister-in-law's house, but if she told her who was stealing Han in Gansu and who was remarrying in Xinjiang, she would not listen. Ruan Lingyu is appearing on the screen and is a person everyone knows, so she is a good material for the newspaper to join the fun, at least it can increase the sales a little. Readers read this, and some thought: "Although I am not as beautiful as Ruan Lingyu, I am more serious than her"; Some thought: "Although I am not as capable as Ruan Lingyu, I am taller than her"; Even after committing suicide, people can also think: "Although I don't have Ruan Lingyu's skills, I have more courage than her, because I didn't commit suicide." A few copper dollars will find their own victory, which is of course very calculated. But for those who make a living from acting, as soon as she encounters the first two impressions of the public, she is enough to reach the end. So let's not talk about social organization or clichés about the strength of the will that even we don't understand, let's put ourselves in the shoes of the people first, then, we will probably know that Ruan Lingyu's thought that "people's words are terrifying" is true, or that people think that her suicide is related to news records, and it is also true.但新闻记者的辩解，以为记载大抵采自经官的事实，却也是真的。上海的有些介乎大报和小报之间的报章，那社会新闻，几乎大半是官司已经吃到公安局或工部局去了的案件。但有一点坏习气，是偏要加上些描写，对于女性，尤喜欢加上些描写；这种案件，是不会有名公巨卿在内的，因此也更不妨加上些描写。案中的男人的年纪和相貌，是大抵写得老实的，一遇到女人，可就要发挥才藻了，不是“徐娘半老，风韵犹存”，就是“豆蔻年华，玲珑可爱”。一个女孩儿跑掉了，自奔或被诱还不可知，才子就断定道，“小姑独宿，不惯无郎”，你怎么知道？一个村妇再醮了两回，原是穷乡僻壤的常事，一到才子的笔下，就又赐以大字的题目道，“奇淫不减武则天”，这程度你又怎么知道？这些轻薄句子，加之村姑，大约是并无什么影响的，她不识字，她的关系人也未必看报。但对于一个智识者，尤其是对于一个出到社会上了的女性，却足够使她受伤，更不必说故意张扬，特别渲染的文字了。然而中国的习惯，这些句子是摇笔即来，不假思索的，这时不但不会想到这也是玩弄着女性，并且也不会想到自己乃是人民的喉舌。但是，无论你怎么描写，在强者是毫不要紧的，只消一封信，就会有正误或道歉接着登出来，不过无拳无勇如阮玲玉，可就正做了吃苦的材料了，她被额外的画上一脸花，没法洗刷。叫她奋斗吗？她没有机关报，怎么奋斗；有冤无头，有怨无主，和谁奋斗呢？我们又可以设身处地的想一想，那么，大概就又知她的以为“人言可畏”，是真的，或人的以为她的自杀，和新闻记事有关，也是真的。
However, the defense of the journalist, thinking that the record is mostly taken from the fact that the official is true. Some newspapers in Shanghai, which are between broadsheets and tabloids, are almost all cases where lawsuits have already been filed by the Public Security Bureau or the Ministry of Works. But there is a bit of a bad habit, which is to add some descriptions, especially for women, they like to add some descriptions; This kind of case will not include famous public officials, so it is better to add some descriptions. The age and appearance of the man in the case are probably written honestly, and when he meets a woman, he has to give full play to his talents, either "Xu Niang is half old, the charm is still there", or "cardamom years, exquisite and cute". A girl ran away, running away or being lured into unknown, and the talent concluded, "The sister-in-law sleeps alone, not used to having no husband", how do you know? A village woman married twice, which was originally a common thing in poor and remote areas, but as soon as it came to the pen of the talent, she was given a title in big characters, "Strange lewdness is not inferior to Wu Zetian", how do you know this extent? These frivolous sentences, coupled with the village girl, probably have no effect, she is illiterate, and her relatives may not read the newspaper. But for an intellectual, especially for a woman who has gone out into society, it is enough to hurt her, not to mention deliberately publicized and specially exaggerated words. However, in China's habit, these sentences come without thinking, not only do they not think that this is also playing with women, but they also do not think that they are the mouthpiece of the people. However, no matter how you describe it, it doesn't matter to the strong, just one letter, there will be a right or wrong or an apology and then posted out, but there is no fist and no courage like Ruan Lingyu, but it is making a hard-working material, she is painted with an extra face, and she can't be washed. Tell her to struggle? She has no organ newspaper, how can she struggle; There is grievance without a head, there is a resentment without a master, who will you struggle with? We can put ourselves in the shoes of others, then, we probably know that her thought that "people are terrifying" is true, or that people think that her suicide is related to news records, and it is also true.然而，先前已经说过，现在的报章的失了力量，却也是真的，不过我以为还没有到达如记者先生所自谦，竟至一钱不值，毫无责任的时候。因为它对于更弱者如阮玲玉一流人，也还有左右她命运的若干力量的，这也就是说，它还能为恶，自然也还能为善。“有闻必录”或“并无能力”的话，都不是向上的负责的记者所该采用的口头禅，因为在实际上，并不如此，——它是有选择的，有作用的。
However, as I have said before, it is true that the current newspaper has lost its power, but I thought it had not yet reached the time when Mr. Reporter was humble and worthless. Because it also has some power that affects her fate for weaker people like Ruan Lingyu, which means that it can still do evil, and naturally it can also do good. "If you hear it, you must record" or "you are not capable" are not mantras that upward responsible journalists should adopt, because in reality, this is not the case,—— it is selective and functional.至于阮玲玉的自杀，我并不想为她辩护。我是不赞成自杀，自己也不豫备自杀的。但我的不豫备自杀，不是不屑，却因为不能。凡有谁自杀了，现在是总要受一通强毅的评论家的呵斥，阮玲玉当然也不在例外。然而我想，自杀其实是不很容易，决没有我们不豫备自杀的人们所渺视的那么轻而易举的。倘有谁以为容易么，那么，你倒试试看！
As for Ruan Lingyu's suicide, I don't want to defend her. I am not in favor of suicide, and I am not prepared to commit suicide. But my unprepared suicide is not disdainful, but because I can't. Whoever commits suicide is now always scolded by a resolute critic, and Ruan Lingyu is certainly no exception. However, I think that suicide is not easy, and it is by no means as easy as those who are not prepared for suicide despise. If anyone thinks it's easy, then you should try it!自然，能试的勇者恐怕也多得很，不过他不屑，因为他有对于社会的伟大的任务。那不消说，更加是好极了，但我希望大家都有一本笔记簿，写下所尽的伟大的任务来，到得有了曾孙的时候，拿出来算一算，看看怎么样。
Naturally, there are probably many brave people who can try, but he disdains it because he has a great task for society. Needless to say, it's even better, but I hope everyone has a notebook to write down the great tasks they have done, and when they have a great-grandson, take it out and do the math to see how it goes.五月五日。
May 5th.

再论“文人相轻”

再论“文人相轻”

再论“文人相轻”

Let's talk about "literati look down on each other"今年的所谓“文人相轻”，不但是混淆黑白的口号，掩护着文坛的昏暗，也在给有一些人“挂着羊头卖狗肉”的。
This year's so-called "literati look down on each other" not only confuses black and white slogans and covers the darkness of the literary world, but also gives some people "selling dog meat with sheep's heads".真的“各以所长，相轻所短”的能有多少呢！我们在近几年所遇见的，有的是“以其所短，轻人所短”。例如白话文中，有些是诘屈难读的，确是一种“短”，于是有人提了小品或语录，向这一点昂然进攻了，但不久就露出尾巴来，暴露了他连对于自己所提倡的文章，也常常点着破句，“短”得很。有的却简直是“以其所短，轻人所长”了。例如轻蔑“杂文”的人，不但他所用的也是“杂文”，而他的“杂文”，比起他所轻蔑的别的“杂文”来，还拙劣到不能相提并论。那些高谈阔论，不过是契诃夫（A. Chekhov）所指出的登了不识羞的顶颠，傲视着一切，被轻者是无福和他们比较的，更从什么地方“相”起？现在谓之“相”，其实是给他们一扬，靠了这“相”，也是“文人”了。然而，“所长”呢？
How many people can really "each have their own strengths, and each is weak"! What we have encountered in recent years is "based on their shortcomings, underestimating others' shortcomings". For example, in the vernacular texts, some of them are difficult to read, and they are indeed a kind of "short", so someone mentioned sketches or quotations and attacked this point proudly, but soon showed their tails, exposing that even the articles he advocated often pointed out broken sentences, which were very "short". Some are simply "based on their shortcomings, underestimating others' strengths". For example, a person who despises "essays" not only uses "essays", and his "essays" are so clumsy that they cannot be compared compared with other "essays" he despises. Those grandiose rhetoric are nothing more than Chekhov's (A. Chekhov) pointed out that he has ascended to the top of shamelessness, looked down on everything, and was compared with them without blessing, so where did he "look" from? Now it is called "Xiang", in fact, it is to give them a boost, relying on this "Xiang", they are also "literati". However, what about the "director"?况且现在文坛上的纠纷，其实也并不是为了文笔的短长。文学的修养，决不能使人变成木石，所以文人还是人，既然还是人，他心里就仍然有是非，有爱憎；但又因为是文人，他的是非就愈分明，爱憎也愈热烈。从圣贤一直敬到骗子屠夫，从美人香草一直爱到麻疯病菌的文人，在这世界上是找不到的，遇见所是和所爱的，他就拥抱，遇见所非和所憎的，他就反拨。如果第三者不以为然了，可以指出他所非的其实是“是”，他所憎的其实该爱来，单用了笼统的“文人相轻”这一句空话，是不能抹杀的，世间还没有这种便宜事。一有文人，就有纠纷，但到后来，谁是谁非，孰存孰亡，都无不明明白白。因为还有一些读者，他的是非爱憎，是比和事老的评论家还要清楚的。
Moreover, the disputes in the literary world are not actually for the length of the writing. The cultivation of literature must not turn people into wood and stone, so the literati are still people, since they are still people, they still have right and wrong, love and hate in their hearts; But because he is a literati, his rights and wrongs are clearer, and his love and hate are more enthusiastic. From the sages to the liar butcher, from the beauty vanilla to the literati who love leprosy, they cannot be found in this world. If the third party disagrees, it can be pointed out that what he is not is actually "yes", and what he hates should actually be loved. As soon as there are literati, there are disputes, but later, who is right and who is wrong, who lives and who dies, is all unclear. Because there are still some readers, his right and wrong, love and hate, are clearer than the old critics.然而，又有人来恐吓了。他说，你不怕么？古之嵇康，在柳树下打铁，钟会来看他，他不客气，问道：“何所闻而来，何所见而去？”于是得罪了钟文人，后来被他在司马懿面前搬是非，送命了。所以你无论遇见谁，应该赶紧打拱作揖，让坐献茶，连称“久仰久仰”才是。这自然也许未必全无好处，但做文人做到这地步，不是很有些近乎婊子了么？况且这位恐吓家的举例，其实也是不对的，嵇康的送命，并非为了他是傲慢的文人，大半倒因为他是曹家的女婿，即使钟会不去搬是非，也总有人去搬是非的，所谓“重赏之下，必有勇夫”者是也。
However, someone came to intimidate. He said, aren't you afraid? In ancient times, Ji Kang, who was striking iron under the willow tree, Zhong Hui came to see him, he was polite and asked, "What did you hear and what did you see?" So he offended Zhong Wenren, and later he was killed in front of Sima Yi. So no matter who you meet, you should quickly bow and bow, let you sit down and offer tea, and even say "long admiration". This may not be without benefits, but isn't it a bit close to bitch to be a literati to this extent? Moreover, the example of this intimidator is actually not right, Ji Kang's death is not because he is an arrogant literati, most of it is because he is the son-in-law of the Cao family, even if Zhong Hui does not move right and wrong, there will always be people who will move right and wrong, the so-called "under the heavy reward, there must be a brave man" is also.不过我在这里，并非主张文人应该傲慢，或不妨傲慢，只是说，文人不应该随和；而且文人也不会随和，会随和的，只有和事老。但这不随和，却又并非回避，只是唱着所是，颂着所爱，而不管所非和所憎；他得像热烈地主张着所是一样，热烈地攻击着所非，像热烈地拥抱着所爱一样，更热烈地拥抱着所憎——恰如赫尔库来斯（Hercules）的紧抱了巨人安太乌斯（Antaeus）一样，因为要折断他的肋骨。
However, I am not here to advocate that literati should be arrogant, or that they should be arrogant, but that literati should not be easy-going; And the literati will not be easy-going, they will be easy-going, only peacemakers. But this is not easy-going, but not avoiding, just singing about what is and what is loved, regardless of what is wrong or hated; He had to attack what was wrong as he was passionately, as he hugged his loved one more fervently, and even more passionately embraced what he hated—just as Hercules hugged the giant Antaeus because he was going to break his ribs.五月五日。
May 5th.

《全国木刻联合展览会专辑》序

《全国木刻联合展览会专辑》序

《全国木刻联合展览会专辑》序

Preface to the "National Woodcut Joint Exhibition Album"木刻的图画，原是中国早先就有的东西。唐末的佛像，纸牌，以至后来的小说绣像，启蒙小图，我们至今还能够看见实物。而且由此明白：它本来就是大众的，也就是“俗”的。明人曾用之于诗笺，近乎雅了，然而归结是有文人学士在它全体上用大笔一挥，证明了这其实不过是践踏。
Woodcut drawings were originally something that existed in China earlier. We can still see the real thing in the Buddha statues, cards, and later novel embroidery and enlightenment pictures at the end of the Tang Dynasty. And from this, it is understood: it is originally popular, that is, "vulgar". The Ming people used it in poetry, almost elegant, but it boils down to the fact that some literati and scholars used a big pen on it all, proving that this was actually just trampling.近五年来骤然兴起的木刻，虽然不能说和古文化无关，但决不是葬中枯骨，换了新装，它乃是作者和社会大众的内心的一致的要求，所以仅有若干青年们的一副铁笔和几块木板，便能发展得如此蓬蓬勃勃。它所表现的是艺术学徒的热诚，因此也常常是现代社会的魂魄。实绩具在，说它“雅”，固然是不可的，但指为“俗”，却又断乎不能。这之前，有木刻了，却未曾有过这境界。
The sudden rise of woodcuts in the past five years, although it cannot be said that they have nothing to do with ancient culture, are by no means buried bones and changed to new clothes, it is the unanimous requirement of the author and the public, so only a pair of iron pens and a few wooden boards of a few young people can develop so vigorously. It expresses the enthusiasm of an art apprentice, and therefore often the soul of modern society. The actual results are there, and it is certainly impossible to say that it is "elegant", but it is absolutely impossible to refer to it as "vulgar". Before this, there were woodcuts, but there was never such a realm.这就是所以为新兴木刻的缘故，也是所以为大众所支持的原因。血脉相通，当然不会被漠视的。所以木刻不但淆乱了雅俗之辨而已，实在还有更光明，更伟大的事业在它的前面。
This is why it is for the sake of emerging woodcuts, and it is also the reason why it is supported by the public. Of course, they will not be ignored. Therefore, woodcuts not only confuse the distinction between elegant and vulgar, but also have a brighter and greater cause ahead of it.曾被看作高尚的风景和静物画，在新的木刻上是减少了，然而看起出品来，这二者反显着较优的成绩。因为中国旧画，两者最多，耳濡目染，不觉见其久经摄取的所长了，而现在最需要的，也是作者最着力的人物和故事画，却仍然不免有些逊色，平常的器具和形态，也间有不合实际的。由这事实，一面固足见古文化之裨助着后来，也束缚着后来，但一面也可见入“俗”之不易了。
The landscapes and still lifes that were once regarded as noble were reduced in the new woodcuts, but in terms of production, these two actually performed significantly better. Because of the old Chinese paintings, the two are the most, and I can't help but see their long-standing strengths, and now what is most needed, and the author's most focused character and story paintings, are still a little inferior, and the usual utensils and forms are also unrealistic. From this fact, on the one hand, it is enough to see that ancient culture helped and bound the later, but on the other hand, it can also be seen that it is not easy to enter the "vulgar".这选集，是聚全国出品的精粹的第一本。但这是开始，不是成功，是几个前哨的进行，愿此后更有无尽的旌旗蔽空的大队。
This anthology is the first book produced by Ju National. But this is the beginning, not a success, but the progress of several outposts, and I hope there will be more endless brigades covering the sky after that.一九三五年六月四日记。
Diary of June 4, 1935.

文坛三户

文坛三户

文坛三户

There are three households in the literary world二十年来，中国已经有了一些作家，多少作品，而且至今还没有完结，所以有个“文坛”，是毫无可疑的。不过搬出去开博览会，却还得顾虑一下。
In the past twenty years, China has had some writers and many works, and they have not yet been completed, so there is no doubt that there is a "literary world". However, if you move out to hold an expo, you still have to worry about it.因为文字的难，学校的少，我们的作家里面，恐怕未必有村姑变成的才女，牧童化出的文豪。古时候听说有过一面看牛牧羊，一面读经，终于成了学者的人的，但现在恐怕未必有。——我说了两回“恐怕未必”，倘真有例外的天才，尚希鉴原为幸。要之，凡有弄弄笔墨的人们，他先前总有一点凭借：不是祖遗的正在少下去的钱，就是父积的还在多起来的钱。要不然，他就无缘读书识字。现在虽然有了识字运动，我也不相信能够由此运出作家来。所以这文坛，从阴暗这方面看起来，暂时大约还要被两大类子弟，就是“破落户”和“暴发户”所占据。
Because of the difficulty of writing and the lack of schools, I am afraid that among our writers, there may not be talented women turned into village girls and literary heroes transformed into shepherd boys. In ancient times, I heard that there were people who watched cattle and sheep and read the scriptures at the same time, and finally became scholars, but now I am afraid that there may not be. ——I said twice "I'm afraid not", if there are really exceptional geniuses, Shang Xijian would be fortunate. In short, anyone who plays with pen and ink always has a little reliance before: either the money that is decreasing from the ancestral legacy, or the money that the father has accumulated is still increasing. Otherwise, he would not have had the opportunity to read and write. Although there is a literacy movement now, I do not believe that writers can be transported from it. Therefore, this literary world, from the dark side, will be occupied by two major categories of children for the time being, namely "broken households" and "nouveau riche".已非暴发，又未破落的，自然也颇有出些著作的人，但这并非第三种，不近于甲，即近于乙的，至于掏腰包印书，仗奁资出版者，那是文坛上的捐班，更不在本论范围之内。所以要说专仗笔墨的作者，首先还得求之于破落户中。他先世也许暴发过，但现在是文雅胜于算盘，家景大不如意了，然而又因此看见世态的炎凉，人生的苦乐，于是真的有些抚今追昔，“缠绵悱恻”起来。一叹天时不良，二叹地理可恶，三叹自己无能。但这无能又并非真无能，乃是自己不屑有能，所以这无能的高尚，倒远在有能之上。你们剑拔弩张，汗流浃背，到底做成了些什么呢？惟我的颓唐相，是“十年一觉扬州梦”，惟我的破衣上，是“襟上杭州旧酒痕”，连懒态和污渍，也都有历史的甚深意义的。可惜俗人不懂得，于是他们的杰作上，就大抵放射着一种特别的神彩，是：“顾影自怜”。
It is no longer an outbreak, and it has not been broken, and naturally there are quite a few people who have written some works, but this is not the third type, not close to A, that is, close to B, as for the publisher who prints books out of his pocket and relies on the dowry to publish, it is a donation class in the literary world, let alone within the scope of this theory. Therefore, if you want to say that the author who specializes in pen and ink, you must first seek it in the broken house. He may have had an outbreak in his ancestors, but now it is elegant than abacus, and the family scene is very unsatisfactory, but because of this, he sees the coldness of the world and the bitterness and joy of life, so he really looks back on the past and "lingers and compassion". One lamented the bad weather, the second lamented the hatred of geography, and the third lamented his own incompetence. But this incompetence is not really incompetent, but that he disdains to be capable, so the nobility of this incompetence is far above the ability. What have you done, sweating? Only my decadent Tang appearance is "ten years of Yangzhou dream", but on my torn clothes, there are "old wine stains from Hangzhou on the collar", and even laziness and stains also have deep historical significance. It's a pity that ordinary people don't understand, so their masterpieces probably radiate a special look, which is: "Gu Ying self-pity".暴发户作家的作品，表面上和破落户的并无不同。因为他意在用墨水洗去铜臭，这才爬上一向为破落户所主宰的文坛来，以自附于“风雅之林”，又并不想另树一帜，因此也决不标新立异。但仔细一看，却是属于别一本户口册上的；他究竟显得浅薄，而且装腔，学样。房里会有断句的诸子，看不懂；案头也会有石印的骈文，读不断。也会嚷“襟上杭州旧酒痕”呀，但一面又怕别人疑心他穿破衣，总得设法表示他所穿的乃是笔挺的洋服或簇新的绸衫；也会说“十年一觉扬州梦”的，但其实倒是并不挥霍的好品行，因为暴发户之于金钱，觉得比懒态和污渍更有历史的甚深的意义。破落户的颓唐，是掉下来的悲声，暴发户的做作的颓唐，却是“爬上去”的手段。所以那些作品，即使摹拟到和破落户的杰作几乎相同，但一定还差一尘：他其实并不“顾影自怜”，倒在“沾沾自喜”。
The works of nouveau riche writers are no different from those of dilapidated households on the surface. Because he intended to wash away the smell of copper with ink, he climbed up to the literary world that had always been dominated by broken households, in order to attach himself to the "forest of elegance", and did not want to be unique, so he would never be unconventional. But if you look closely, it belongs to another household registration book; He seems shallow, and he pretends to be like this. There will be broken sentences in the room, and they can't understand it; There will also be stone prints on the desk, which are constantly read. he would also shout "old wine stains from Hangzhou on his collar", but on the other hand, he was afraid that others would suspect that he was wearing tattered clothes, so he had to try to show that he was wearing a straight suit or a new silk shirt; It will also be said that "ten years of Yangzhou dream", but in fact, it is not a squandering good character, because the nouveau riche feels that money has a deeper historical significance than laziness and stains. The decadence of the broken house is the sad cry of falling, and the pretentious decadence of the nouveau riche is a means of "climbing up". Therefore, those works, even if they are almost identical to the masterpieces of the broken house, must still be missing: he is actually not "self-pitying", but "complacent".这“沾沾自喜”的神情，从破落户的眼睛看来，就是所谓“小家子相”，也就是所谓“俗”。风雅的定律，一个人离开“本色”，是就要“俗”的。不识字人不算俗，他要掉文，又掉不对，就俗；富家儿郎也不算俗，他要做诗，又做不好，就俗了。这在文坛上，向来为破落户所鄙弃。
This "complacent" look, from the eyes of the broken family, is the so-called "small family appearance", that is, the so-called "vulgar". The law of elegance is that if a person leaves his "true color", he must be "vulgar". An illiterate person is not vulgar, he wants to drop the text, and if he doesn't drop it, he will be vulgar; A rich man is not vulgar, he wants to write poetry, but if he can't do it well, he will be vulgar. In the literary world, this has always been despised by the broken households.然而破落户到了破落不堪的时候，这两户却有时可以交融起来的。如果谁有在找“词汇”的《文选》，大可以查一查，我记得里面就有一篇弹文，所弹的乃是一个败落的世家，把女儿嫁给了暴发而冒充世家的满家子：这就足见两户的怎样反拨，也怎样的联合了。文坛上自然也有这现象；但在作品上的影响，却不过使暴发户增添一些得意之色，破落户则对于“俗”变为谦和，向别方面大谈其风雅而已：并不怎么大。
However, when the broken house is dilapidated, the two households can sometimes blend together. If anyone is looking for the "Selected Works" of "Vocabulary", they can check it, I remember that there was an article in it, which was about a fallen family who married his daughter to a full family who pretended to be a family in an outbreak: this shows how the two families rebelled and how they were united. This phenomenon naturally exists in the literary world; However, the influence on the work only adds some pride to the nouveau riche, and the broken house becomes modest about the "vulgar", and talks about its elegance to other aspects: it is not very big.暴发户爬上文坛，固然未能免俗，历时既久，一面持筹握算，一面诵诗读书，数代以后，就雅起来，待到藏书日多，藏钱日少的时候，便有做真的破落户文学的资格了。然而时势的飞速的变化，有时能不给他这许多修养的工夫，于是暴发不久，破落随之，既“沾沾自喜”，也“顾影自怜”，但却又失去了“沾沽自喜”的确信，可又还没有配得“顾影自怜”的风姿，仅存无聊，连古之所谓雅俗也说不上了。向来无定名，我姑且名之为“破落暴发户”罢。这一户，此后是恐怕要多起来的。但还要有变化：向积极方面走，是恶少；向消极方面走，是瘪三。
After a long time, while holding the chips and calculations, while reciting poetry and reading, after several generations, it became elegant, and when the book collection was more and the money was less hidden, it was qualified to do real broken literature. However, the rapid changes in the situation sometimes can not give him a lot of time for self-cultivation, so the outbreak is not long after, and the ruin follows, not only "complacency" but also "self-pity", but also lost the conviction of "self-pity", but has not yet been worthy of the demeanor of "self-pity", only boredom, and even the so-called elegance and vulgarity of ancient times cannot be said. There has never been a fixed name, so I will call it "dilapidated nouveau riche". I am afraid that there will be more of this household in the future. But there must be changes: going to the positive side is a villain; Going to the negative side is deflated three.使中国的文学有起色的人，在这三户之外。
The people who made Chinese literature improve were outside these three households.六月六日。
June 6th.

从帮忙到扯淡

从帮忙到扯淡

从帮忙到扯淡

From helping to nonsense“帮闲文学”曾经算是一个恶毒的贬辞，——但其实是误解的。
"Helping literature" was once a vicious derogatory term,—— but it was actually misunderstood.《诗经》是后来的一部经，但春秋时代，其中的有几篇就用之于侑酒；屈原是“楚辞”的开山老祖，而他的《离骚》，却只是不得帮忙的不平。到得宋玉，就现有的作品看起来，他已经毫无不平，是一位纯粹的清客了。然而《诗经》是经，也是伟大的文学作品；屈原宋玉，在文学史上还是重要的作家。为什么呢？——就因为他究竟有文采。
The Book of Songs is a later classic, but in the Spring and Autumn Period, several of them were used for wine; Qu Yuan is the founding ancestor of "Chuci", but his "Li Sao" is just an injustice that cannot be helped. When it comes to Song Yu, as far as the existing works are concerned, he has no injustice and is a pure Qingke. However, the "Book of Songs" is a scripture and a great literary work; Qu Yuan and Song Yu are still important writers in the history of literature. Why? ——Just because he has literary talent.中国的开国的雄主，是把“帮忙”和“帮闲”分开来的，前者参与国家大事，作为重臣，后者却不过叫他献诗作赋，“俳优蓄之”，只在弄臣之例。不满于后者的待遇的是司马相如，他常常称病，不到武帝面前去献殷勤，却暗暗的作了关于封禅的文章，藏在家里，以见他也有计画大典——帮忙的本领，可惜等到大家知道的时候，他已经“寿终正寝”了。然而虽然并未实际上参与封禅的大典，司马相如在文学史上也还是很重要的作家。为什么呢？就因为他究竟有文采。
The former participated in national affairs and was an important minister, but the latter only asked him to dedicate poems and compose poems, "haiku savings", only in the case of rigoletto. Dissatisfied with the latter's treatment, Sima Xiangru often claimed to be ill and did not go to Emperor Wu to show his hospitality, but secretly wrote an article about Fengshan and hid it at home, so that he also had the ability to plan the ceremony - help, but unfortunately by the time everyone knew, he had already "died". However, although he did not actually participate in the Fengshan ceremony, Sima Xiangru was still an important writer in the history of literature. Why? Just because he has literary talent.但到文雅的庸主时，“帮忙”和“帮闲”的可就混起来了，所谓国家的柱石，也常是柔媚的词臣，我们在南朝的几个末代时，可以找出这实例。然而主虽然“庸”，却不“陋”，所以那些帮闲者，文采却究竟还有的，他们的作品，有些也至今不灭。
But when it comes to the elegant mediocre lord, "help" and "help" can be mixed, and the so-called pillar of the country is often a soft poet, and we can find this example in the last few dynasties of the Southern Dynasty. However, although the Lord is "mediocre", he is not "ugly", so those who help him still have literary talent, and some of their works are still alive today.谁说“帮闲文学”是一个恶毒的贬辞呢？
Who said that "helping literature" is a vicious derogatory term?就是权门的清客，他也得会下几盘棋，写一笔字，画画儿，识古董，懂得些猜拳行令，打趣插科，这才能不失其为清客。也就是说，清客，还要有清客的本领的，虽然是有骨气者所不屑为，却又非搭空架者所能企及。例如李渔的《一家言》，袁枚的《随园诗话》，就不是每个帮闲都做得出来的。必须有帮闲之志，又有帮闲之才，这才是真正的帮闲。如果有其志而无其才，乱点古书，重抄笑话，吹拍名士，拉扯趣闻，而居然不顾脸皮，大摆架子，反自以为得意，——自然也还有人以为有趣，——但按其实，却不过“扯淡”而已。
Even if he is a Qingke of the powerful family, he must also be able to play a few games of chess, write a stroke, draw a picture, know antiques, know some guessing boxing orders, and joke gags, so that he can not lose his Qingke. In other words, Qingke, but also have the ability to Qingke, although it is disdainful of those with backbone, but it is beyond the reach of those who build empty shelves. For example, Li Yu's "Family Words" and Yuan Mei's "Suiyuan Poems" are not made by every helper. There must be the ambition to help, and the talent to help, this is the real help. If you have ambition but no talent, randomly order ancient books, recopy jokes, blow up celebrities, pull funny stories, and actually ignore your face, put on a show, and think you are proud,—— naturally there are still people who think it is interesting,—— but in fact, it is just "nonsense".帮闲的盛世是帮忙，到末代就只剩了这扯淡。
The prosperity of helping is helping, and in the last generation, there is only this nonsense.六月六日。
June 6th.

《中国小说史略》日本译本序

《中国小说史略》日本译本序

《中国小说史略》日本译本序

Preface to the Japanese translation of "A Brief History of Chinese Novels"听到了拙著《中国小说史略》的日本译《支那小说史》已经到了出版的机运，非常之高兴，但因此又感到自己的衰退了。
I was very happy to hear that the Japanese translation of "History of Chinese Novels" had reached the opportunity to be published, but I felt that I was declining.回忆起来，大约四五年前罢，增田涉君几乎每天到寓斋来商量这一本书，有时也纵谈当时文坛的情形，很为愉快。那时候，我是还有这样的余暇，而且也有再加研究的野心的。但光阴如驶，近来却连一妻一子，也将为累，至于收集书籍之类，更成为身外的长物了。改订《小说史略》的机缘，恐怕也未必有。所以恰如准备辍笔的老人，见了自己的全集的印成而高兴一样，我也因而高兴的罢。
Looking back, about four or five years ago, Masuda Wabukun came to the residence almost every day to discuss this book, and sometimes talked about the situation in the literary world at that time, which was very pleasant. At that time, I still had such leisure time, and I also had the ambition to study more. But time flies, but recently even a wife and a son will be tired, and as for collecting books and the like, it has become a long thing outside the body. I am afraid that there may not be an opportunity to revise the "History of Novels". So just like the old man who was about to quit writing was happy to see the printing of his complete works, I was also happy because of it.然而，积习好像也还是难忘的。关于小说史的事情，有时也还加以注意，说起较大的事来，则有今年已成故人的马廉教授，于去年翻印了“清平山堂”残本，使宋人话本的材料更加丰富；郑振铎教授又证明了《西游记》中的《西游记》是吴承恩《西游记》的摘录，而并非祖本，这是可以订正拙著第十六篇的所说的，那精确的论文，就收录在《痀偻集》里。还有一件，是《金瓶梅词话》被发见于北平，为通行至今的同书的祖本，文章虽比现行本粗率，对话却全用山东的方言所写，确切的证明了这决非江苏人王世贞所作的书。
However, the habit seems to be unforgettable. Speaking of bigger things, there is Professor Ma Lian, who has become deceased this year, who reprinted the fragments of "Qingping Shantang" last year, making the materials of the Song people's script richer; Professor Zheng Zhenduo also proved that the "Journey to the West" in "Journey to the West" is an excerpt from Wu Chengen's "Journey to the West", not the ancestral version, which can be corrected in the sixteenth chapter of my book, and the accurate thesis is included in the "Collection of Obsessions". Another thing is that "Jin Ping Mei Ci Words" was discovered in Peiping, which is the ancestor of the same book that has been in use to this day, although the article is rougher than the current version, but the dialogue is all written in the Shandong dialect, which definitely proves that this is by no means a book written by Wang Shizhen from Jiangsu.但我却并不改订，目睹其不完不备，置之不问，而只对于日本译的出版，自在高兴了。但愿什么时候，还有补这懒惰之过的时机。
But I did not revise it, and when I saw its incompleteness, I ignored it, and I was only happy about the publication of the Japanese translation. I hope that someday, there will be an opportunity to make up for this laziness.这一本书，不消说，是一本有着寂寞的运命的书。然而增田君排除困难，加以翻译，赛棱社主三上於菟吉氏不顾利害，给它出版，这是和将这寂寞的书带到书斋里去的读者诸君，我都真心感谢的。
This book, needless to say, is a book with a lonely fate. However, Masuda-kun overcame the difficulties and translated it, and the owner of the Sailing Society, Mikami Yu Tuji, published it regardless of the interests, which is a sincere thank you to all the readers who brought this lonely book to the study.一九三五年六月九日灯下，鲁迅。
Under the lamp on June 9, 1935, Lu Xun.

“题未定”草

“题未定”草

“题未定”草

"Title undecided" draft一
One极平常的豫想，也往往会给实验打破。我向来总以为翻译比创作容易，因为至少是无须构想。但到真的一译，就会遇着难关，譬如一个名词或动词，写不出，创作时候可以回避，翻译上却不成，也还得想，一直弄到头昏眼花，好像在脑子里面摸一个急于要开箱子的钥匙，却没有。严又陵说，“一名之立，旬月踌蹰”，是他的经验之谈，的的确确的。
Very ordinary imaginations are often broken by experiments. I always think that translation is easier than creation, because at least it doesn't need to be conceived. But when it comes to translation, you will encounter difficulties, such as a noun or verb, which cannot be written, can be avoided when creating, but cannot be translated, and you have to think about it until you are dizzy, as if you are touching a key in your head that is eager to open the box, but you don't. Yan Youling said, "A name is established, and it takes ten months to hesitate", which is his experience, and it is true.新近就因为豫想的不对，自己找了一个苦吃。《世界文库》的编者要我译果戈理的《死魂灵》，没有细想，一口答应了。这书我不过曾经草草的看过一遍，觉得写法平直，没有现代作品的希奇古怪，那时的人们还在蜡烛光下跳舞，可见也不会有什么摩登名词，为中国所未有，非译者来闭门生造不可的。我最怕新花样的名词，譬如电灯，其实也不算新花样了，一个电灯的另件，我叫得出六样：花线，灯泡，灯罩，沙袋，扑落，开关。但这是上海话，那后三个，在别处怕就行不通。《一天的工作》里有一篇短篇，讲到铁厂，后来有一位在北方铁厂里的读者给我一封信，说其中的机件名目，没有一个能够使他知道实物是什么的。呜呼，——这里只好呜呼了——其实这些名目，大半乃是十九世纪末我在江南学习挖矿时，得之老师的传授。不知是古今异时，还是南北异地之故呢，隔膜了。在青年文学家靠它修养的《庄子》和《文选》或者明人小品里，也找不出那些名目来。没有法子。“三十六着，走为上着”，最没有弊病的是莫如不沾手。
Recently, because what I thought was wrong, I found a hard time to eat. The editor of "World Library" asked me to translate Gogol's "Dead Souls", and without thinking about it, I agreed. I just read this book hastily, and I felt that the writing was straight, without the strangeness of modern works, and people were still dancing by candlelight at that time, so it can be seen that there would be no modern terms, which were unprecedented in China, and it was impossible for translators to create them behind closed doors. I am most afraid of new tricks, such as electric lights, in fact, they are not new tricks, and I can name six different types of electric lights: flower wires, light bulbs, lampshades, sandbags, flutters, and switches. But this is Shanghainese, and the last three are afraid that they won't work elsewhere. There is a short story in "A Day's Work" about the iron factory, and later a reader in the Northern Iron Works gave me a letter, saying that none of the names of the parts in it could make him know what the real thing was. Oh,—— I have to go here - in fact, most of these names were taught by my teacher when I was studying mining in Jiangnan at the end of the 19th century. I don't know if it's because of the different times in ancient and modern times, or because the north and south are different, it's a barrier. In the "Zhuangzi" and "Anthology" or Ming people's sketches cultivated by young writers, those names cannot be found. There is no way. "Thirty-six, walking is the top", the most flawless thing is not to touch your hands.可恨我还太自大，竟又小觑了《死魂灵》，以为这倒不算什么，担当回来，真的又要翻译了。于是“苦”字上头。仔细一读，不错，写法的确不过平铺直叙，但到处是刺，有的明白，有的却隐藏，要感得到；虽然重译，也得竭力保存它的锋头。里面确没有电灯和汽车，然而十九世纪上半期的菜单，赌具，服装，也都是陌生家伙。这就势必至于字典不离手，冷汗不离身，一面也自然只好怪自己语学程度的不够格。但这一杯偶然自大了一下的罚酒是应该喝干的：硬着头皮译下去。到得烦厌，疲倦了的时候，就随便拉本新出的杂志来翻翻，算是休息。这是我的老脾气，休息之中，也略含幸灾乐祸之意，其意若曰：这回是轮到我舒舒服服的来看你们在闹什么花样了。
I hate that I am still too arrogant, and I actually underestimated "Dead Souls", thinking that this is nothing, and when I take responsibility, I really have to translate it again. So the word "bitter" came up. Read it carefully, yes, the writing is indeed just plain and straightforward, but there are thorns everywhere, some understand, some are hidden, and you have to feel it; Although it is retranslated, it must also be tried to preserve its edge. There were indeed no lights or cars in it, but the menus, gambling tools, and costumes of the first half of the 19th century were also strangers. This is bound to lead to the fact that the dictionary does not leave his hand, and he does not leave his body, and on the other hand, he naturally has to blame his own language level for not being qualified. But this glass of penalty wine that was accidentally arrogant should be drunk: bite the bullet and translate. When I get tired and tired, I just pull a new magazine and flip through it, which is considered a rest. This is my old temper, and during the rest, there is also a slight sense of gloating, which means that it is my turn to see what you are doing comfortably.好像华盖运还没有交完，仍旧不得舒服。拉到手的是《文学》四卷六号，一翻开来，卷头就有一幅红印的大广告，其中说是下一号里，要有我的散文了，题目叫作“未定”。往回一想，编辑先生的确曾经给我一封信，叫我寄一点文章，但我最怕的正是所谓做文章，不答。文章而至于要做，其苦可知。不答者，即答曰不做之意。不料一面又登出广告来了，情同绑票，令我为难。但同时又想到这也许还是自己错，我曾经发表过，我的文章，不是涌出，乃是挤出来的。他大约正抓住了这弱点，在用挤出法；而且我遇见编辑先生们时，也间或觉得他们有想挤之状，令人寒心。先前如果说：“我的文章，是挤也挤不出来的”，那恐怕要安全得多了，我佩服陀思妥也夫斯基的少谈自己，以及有些文豪们的专讲别人。
It seems that the canopy luck has not yet been handed over, and it is still not comfortable. What I pulled in my hand was the fourth volume of "Literature" No. 6, and as soon as I opened it, there was a large advertisement with a red seal at the beginning of the volume, which said that in the next issue, there would be my prose, and the title was called "Undecided". Looking back, the editor did send me a letter asking me to send a little article, but what I was most afraid of was the so-called making an article and not answering. The pain of writing and doing it is understandable. If you don't answer, you mean you don't do it. Unexpectedly, another advertisement came out, and it was like a ticket, which made me embarrassed. But at the same time, I thought that this might be my fault, I once published that my articles were not pouring out, but squeezing out. He probably grasped this weakness and was using the extrusion method; And when I meet the editors, I sometimes feel that they want to squeeze out, which is chilling. If I had previously said: "My article can't be squeezed out", then it would probably be much safer, and I admire Dostoevsky's lack of talk about himself, as well as the focus of some writers on others.但是，积习还未尽除，稿费又究竟可以换米，写一点也还不算什么“冤沉海底”。笔，是有点古怪的，它有编辑先生一样的“挤”的本领。袖手坐着，想打盹，笔一在手，面前放一张稿子纸，就往往会莫名其妙的写出些什么来。自然，要好，可不见得。
However, the accumulated habits have not been completely eliminated, and the manuscript fee can be exchanged for rice, and writing is not a "grievance to the bottom of the sea". The pen is a bit strange, it has the same ability to "squeeze" as Mr. Editor. Sitting with his hands in his hands, wanting to take a nap, as soon as he has a pen in his hand and puts a piece of manuscript paper in front of him, he often writes something inexplicably. Naturally, it is good, but it may not be possible.二
Two还是翻译《死魂灵》的事情。躲在书房里，是只有这类事情的。动笔之前，就先得解决一个问题：竭力使它归化，还是尽量保存洋气呢？日本文的译者上田进君，是主张用前一法的。他以为讽刺传品的翻译，第一当求其易懂，愈易懂，效力也愈广大。所以他的译文，有时就化一句为数句，很近于解释。我的意见却两样的。只求易懂，不如创作，或者改作，将事改为中国事，人也化为中国人。如果还是翻译，那么，首先的目的，就在博览外国的作品，不但移情，也要益智，至少是知道何地何时，有这等事，和旅行外国，是很相像的：它必须有异国情调，就是所谓洋气。其实世界上也不会有完全归化的译文，倘有，就是貌合神离，从严辨别起来，它算不得翻译。凡是翻译，必须兼顾着两面，一当然力求其易解，一则保存着原作的丰姿，但这保存，却又常常和易懂相矛盾：看不惯了。不过它原是洋鬼子，当然谁也看不惯，为比较的顺眼起见，只能改换他的衣裳，却不该削低他的鼻子，剜掉他的眼睛。我是不主张削鼻剜眼的，所以有些地方，仍然宁可译得不顺口。只是文句的组织，无须科学理论似的精密了，就随随便便，但副词的“地”字，却还是使用的，因为我觉得现在看惯了这字的读者已经很不少。
Or the translation of "Dead Souls". Hiding in the study is the only thing like this. Before I start writing, I have to solve a problem: do you try to naturalize it, or try to preserve the foreign style? The Japanese translator Ueda Shinjun advocated the use of the former method. He believes that the translation of satirical works should first be easy to understand, and the easier it is to understand, the greater the effect. Therefore, his translations sometimes turn one sentence into several sentences, which is very close to explanation. My opinions are different. Just want to be easy to understand, it is better to create, or change, change things to Chinese things, and people will become Chinese. If it is still translation, then the first purpose is to read foreign works, not only to empathize, but also to be intellectual, at least to know where and when, and such things are very similar to traveling to foreign countries: it must be exotic, which is the so-called foreign style. In fact, there will be no completely naturalized translation in the world, and if there is, it is a distinction between the two sides, and it cannot be regarded as a translation. All translations must take into account both sides, one is of course striving to be easy to understand, and the other is preserving the richness of the original, but this preservation often contradicts the ease of understanding: I am not used to it. But it was originally a foreign devil, of course, no one was used to it, for the sake of comparison, he could only change his clothes, but he shouldn't cut off his nose and gouge out his eyes. I don't advocate cutting the nose and gouging out the eyes, so in some places, I still prefer to translate it smoothly. It's just that the organization of sentences doesn't need to be as precise as scientific theories, so it's casual, but the word "ground" in the adverb is still used, because I think there are many readers who are used to seeing this word now.然而“幸乎不幸乎”，我竟因此发见我的新职业了：做西崽。
However, "fortunately and unfortunately", I discovered my new profession: being a cub.还是当作休息的翻杂志，这回是在《人间世》二十八期上遇见了林语堂先生的大文，摘录会损精神，还是抄一段——
Or as a break to flip through the magazine, this time I met Mr. Lin Yutang's big article in the 28th issue of "The World", excerpts will hurt the spirit, or copy a paragraph -“……今人一味仿效西洋，自称摩登，甚至不问中国文法，必欲仿效英文，分‘历史地’为形容词，‘历史地的’为状词，以模仿英文之historic-al-ly，拖一西洋辫子，然则‘快来’何不因‘快’字是状词而改为‘快地的来’？此类把戏，只是洋场孽少怪相，谈文学虽不足，当西崽颇有才。此种流风，其弊在奴，救之之道，在于思。”（《今文八弊》中）
“…… Today's people blindly imitate the West, call themselves modern, and even don't ask about Chinese grammar, they must imitate English, dividing 'historical' as an adjective and 'historical' as an adjective, in order to imitate the English historic-al-ly, dragging a Western braid, so why not change 'come quickly' to 'come quickly' because the word 'fast' is an adverb? This kind of trick is just a foreign field monster with few strange appearances, and although the literature is not enough, the Xi cub is quite talented. The problem with this trend lies in slavery, and the way to save it lies in thinking. (From "The Eight Evils of Today's Literature")其实是“地”字之类的采用，并非一定从高等华人所擅长的英文而来的。“英文”“英文”，一笑一笑。况且看上文的反问语气，似乎“一味仿效西洋”的“今人”，实际上也并不将“快来”改为“快地的来”，这仅是作者的虚构，所以助成其名文，殆即所谓“保得自身为主，则圆通自在，大畅无比”之例了。不过不切实，倘是“自称摩登”的“今人”所说，就是“其弊在浮”。
In fact, the use of the word "land" does not necessarily come from the English language that higher Chinese are good at. "English" and "English", smile and smile. Moreover, looking at the rhetorical tone above, it seems that the "modern people" who "blindly imitate the West" actually do not change "come quickly" to "come quickly", which is only the author's fiction, so it helps to make his famous article an example of the so-called "keep oneself as the master, then be at ease and be extremely free". However, if it is not realistic, if it is said by the "modern people" who "call themselves modern", it is "the disadvantage is floating".倘使我至今还住在故乡，看了这一段文章，是懂得，相信的。我们那里只有几个洋教堂，里面想必各有几位西崽，然而很难得遇见。要研究西崽，只能用自己做标本，虽不过“颇”，也够合用了。又是“幸乎不幸乎”，后来竟到了上海，上海住着许多洋人，因此有着许多西崽，因此也给了我许多相见的机会；不但相见，我还得了和他们中的几位谈天的光荣。不错，他们懂洋话，所懂的大抵是“英文”，“英文”，然而这是他们的吃饭家伙，专用于服事洋东家的，他们决不将洋辫子拖进中国话里来，自然更没有捣乱中国文法的意思，有时也用几个音译字，如“那摩温”，“土司”之类，但这也是向来用惯的话，并非标新立异，来表示自己的摩登的。他们倒是国粹家，一有余闲，拉皮胡，唱《探母》；上工穿制服，下工换华装，间或请假出游，有钱的就是缎鞋绸衫子。不过要戴草帽，眼镜也不用玳瑁边的老样式，倘用华洋的“门户之见”看起来，这两样却不免是缺点。
If I still live in my hometown and read this article, I understand and believe it. We only have a few Western churches there, and there must be a few Westerners in them, but it is rare to meet. To study the Xi cub, you can only use yourself as a specimen, although it is not "quite good", it is also suitable enough. It was "fortunate and unfortunate", and then I arrived in Shanghai, where many foreigners lived, so there were many Westerners, so it also gave me many opportunities to meet; Not only did I meet them, but I also had the honor of chatting with several of them. Yes, they understand foreign languages, and what they understand is probably "English", "English", but this is their eating guy, dedicated to serving foreign owners, they will never drag foreign braids into Chinese, naturally there is no meaning of messing with Chinese grammar, and sometimes they also use a few transliterated words, such as "Namowen", "Tusi", etc., but this is also a customary word, not unconventional, to express their own modernity. They are nationalists, and they have leisure, rapihu, and sing "Visiting Mother"; The upper workers wear uniforms, the lower workers change into fancy clothes, and sometimes take leave to travel, and the rich ones are satin shoes and silk shirts. However, if you have to wear a straw hat and glasses, you don't need the old style of tortoiseshell edges, if you use Huayang's "portal view", these two are inevitably disadvantages.又倘使我要另找职业，能说英文，我可真的肯去做西崽的，因为我以为用工作换钱，西崽和华仆在人格上也并无高下，正如用劳力在外资工厂或华资工厂换得工资，或用学费在外国大学或中国大学取得资格，都没有卑贱和清高之分一样。西崽之可厌不在他的职业，而在他的“西崽相”。这里之所谓“相”，非说相貌，乃是“诚于中而形于外”的，包括着“形式”和“内容”而言。这“相”，是觉得洋人势力，高于群华人，自己懂洋话，近洋人，所以也高于群华人；但自己又系出黄帝，有古文明，深通华情，胜洋鬼子，所以也胜于势力高于群华人的洋人，因此也更胜于还在洋人之下的群华人。租界上的中国巡捕，也常常有这一种“相”。
And if I want to find another job and speak English, I am really willing to be a Xizai, because I think that in exchange for work for money, Xizai and Hua Pu are not inferior in personality, just as there is no difference between being humble and noble in exchange for wages in foreign factories or Chinese-funded factories, or using tuition fees to obtain qualifications in foreign universities or Chinese universities. The disgust of the West cub is not in his profession, but in his "West Cub Phase". The so-called "appearance" here is not about appearance, but about "sincerity in the middle and outside", including "form" and "content". This "phase" is to feel that the power of foreigners is higher than that of the Chinese, and they understand foreign languages and are close to foreigners, so they are also higher than the Chinese; But he is also a descendant of the Yellow Emperor, has an ancient civilization, is deeply connected to China, and is better than foreign devils, so he is also better than the foreigners who are more powerful than the Chinese, so he is also better than the Chinese who are still under the foreigners. Chinese patrols on the concession often have this kind of "phase".倚徙华洋之间，往来主奴之界，这就是现在洋场上的“西崽相”。但又并不是骑墙，因为他是流动的，较为“圆通自在”，所以也自得其乐，除非你扫了他的兴头。
Relying on the migration between China and the ocean, traveling between master and slave, this is now the "Western cub phase" on the foreign field. But it's not a wall-riding, because he is fluid and more "round", so he is also happy, unless you sweep away his interest.三
Three由前所说，“西崽相”就该和他的职业有关了，但又不全和职业相关，一部份却来自未有西崽以前的传统。所以这一种相，有时是连清高的士大夫也不能免的。“事大”，历史上有过的，“自大”，事实上也常有的；“事大”和“自大”，虽然不相容，但因“事大”而“自大”，却又为实际上所常见——他足以傲视一切连“事大”也不配的人们。有人佩服得五体投地的《野叟曝言》中，那“居一人之下，在众人之上”的文素臣，就是这标本。他是崇华，抑夷，其实却是“满崽”；古之“满崽”，正犹今之“西崽”也。
As mentioned earlier, the "Xi Zai Xiang" should be related to his occupation, but it is not entirely related to the occupation, and part of it comes from the tradition before the Xi Zhi. Therefore, this kind of appearance is sometimes not exempt even by noble scholars. "big things" have been in history, and "arrogance" is often there in fact; Although "big things" and "arrogance" are incompatible, they are "arrogant" because of "big things", but they are common in practice - he is enough to look down on all people who are not even worthy of "big things". In the "Wild Old Man's Exposure", which some people admire, Wen Suchen, who is "below one person and above everyone", is this specimen. He is Chonghua and Yi, but in fact he is a "full cub"; The ancient "Manzai" is exactly like today's "Xizai".所以虽是我们读书人，自以为胜西崽远甚，而洗伐未净，说话一多，也常常会露出尾巴来的。再抄一段名文在这里——
Therefore, although we scholars think that we are far better than the Xi cubs, we are not clean, and if we talk too much, we will often show our tails. Another famous article is here——“……其在文学，今日绍介波兰诗人，明日绍介捷克文豪，而对于已经闻名之英美法德文人，反厌为陈腐，不欲深察，求一究竟。此与妇女新装求入时一样，总是媚字一字不是，自叹女儿身，事人以颜色，其苦不堪言。此种流风，其弊在浮，救之之道，在于学。”（《今文八弊》中）
“…… In literature, today he introduces Polish poets and tomorrow he introduces Czech writers, but for the already famous British, American, French, and German literati, he is tired of being clichéd, and does not want to investigate deeply and seek the end. This is the same as when a woman wants to enter the new outfit, always a word of charm, lamenting that the girl's body is unbearable. The problem with this kind of trend lies in superficiality, and the way to remedy it lies in learning. (From "The Eight Evils of Today's Literature")但是，这种“新装”的开始，想起来却长久了，“绍介波兰诗人”，还在三十年前，始于我的《摩罗诗力说》。那时满清宰华，汉民受制，中国境遇，颇类波兰，读其诗歌，即易于心心相印，不但无事大之意，也不存献媚之心。后来上海的《小说月报》，还曾为弱小民族作品出过专号，这种风气，现在是衰歇了，即偶有存者，也不过一脉的余波。但生长于民国的幸福的青年，是不知道的，至于附势奴才，拜金崽子，当然更不会知道。但即使现在绍介波兰诗人，捷克文豪，怎么便是“媚”呢？他们就没有“已经闻名”的文人吗？况且“已经闻名”，是谁闻其“名”，又何从而“闻”的呢？诚然，“英美法德”，在中国有宣教师，在中国现有或曾有租界，几处有驻军，几处有军舰，商人多，用西崽也多，至于使一般人仅知有“大英”，“花旗”，“法兰西”和“茄门”，而不知世界上还有波兰和捷克。但世界文学史，是用了文学的眼睛看，而不用势利眼睛看的，所以文学无须用金钱和枪炮作掩护，波兰捷克，虽然未曾加入八国联军来打过北京，那文学却在，不过有一些人，并未“已经闻名”而已。外国的文人，要在中国闻名，靠作品似乎是不够的，他反要得到轻薄。
However, the beginning of this "new outfit" has been remembered for a long time, "Shaojie Polish Poet", still thirty years ago, began with my "Moro Shili Theory". At that time, the Manchu Qing Dynasty ruled China, the Han people were controlled, and the situation in China was quite similar to Poland. Later, Shanghai's "Novel Monthly" also issued a special account for the works of weak ethnic groups, and this trend is now in decline, that is, there are occasional survivors, but it is only the aftermath of a line. But the happy young people who grew up in the Republic of China don't know, and as for the slaves who are attached to the power, the gold cubs, of course, they won't know. But even if the Polish poet and Czech writer are now introduced, how can they be "charming"? Don't they have literati who are "already famous"? Moreover, if it is "already famous", who hears its "name" and how can it "hear"? It is true that "Britain, the United States, France and Germany" have missionaries in China, existing or former concessions in China, garrisons in several places, warships in several places, many merchants, and many Western cubs, as for making ordinary people only know "Great Britain", "Citi", "France" and "Eggplant", but do not know that there are Poland and the Czech Republic in the world. But the history of world literature is seen with the eyes of literature, not with the eyes of snobbery, so literature does not need to be covered by money and guns, Poland and the Czech Republic, although they have not joined the Eight-Power Coalition to fight Beijing, the literature is there, but there are some people who are not "already famous". For a foreign literati to be famous in China, it seems that it is not enough to rely on their works, but he wants to get frivolity.所以一样的没有打过中国的国度的文学，如希腊的史诗，印度的寓言，亚剌伯的《天方夜谈》，西班牙的《堂·吉诃德》，纵使在别国“已经闻名”，不下于“英美法德文人”的作品，在中国却被忘记了，他们或则国度已灭，或则无能，再也用不着“媚”字。
Therefore, the literature that has not played the Chinese country, such as the Greek epic, the Indian fable, Arabe's "Arabian Nights", and Spain's "Don Quixote", even if they are "already famous" in other countries, are no less than the works of "British, American, French, and German literati", but they have been forgotten in China, and they are either destroyed or incompetent, and they no longer need the word "charm".对于这情形，我看可以先把上章所引的林语堂先生的训词移到这里来的——
For this situation, I think we can first move Mr. Lin Yutang's precepts quoted in the previous chapter here——“此种流风，其弊在奴，救之之道，在于思。”
"The problem with this trend is slavery, and the way to save it is to think."不过后两句不合用，既然“奴”了，“思”亦何益，思来思去，不过“奴”得巧妙一点而已。中国宁可有未“思”的西崽，将来的文学倒较为有望。
However, the last two sentences are not suitable, since it is "slave", what good is "thinking", thinking about it, but "slave" is just a little more clever. China would rather have un"thought" cubs, and future literature is more promising.但“已经闻名的英美法德文人”，在中国却确是不遇的。中国的立学校来学这四国语，为时已久，开初虽不过意在养成使馆的译员，但后来却展开，盛大了。学德语盛于清末的改革军操，学法语盛于民国的“勤工俭学”。学英语最早，一为了商务，二为了海军，而学英语的人数也最多，为学英语而作的教科书和参考书也最多，由英语起家的学士文人也不少。然而海军不过将军舰送人，绍介“已经闻名”的司各德，迭更斯，狄福，斯惠夫德……的，竟是只知汉文的林纾，连绍介最大的“已经闻名”的莎士比亚的几篇剧本的，也有待于并不专攻英文的田汉。这缘故，可真是非“在于思”则不可了。
But "British, American, French, and German literati who are already famous" are indeed rare in China. Chinese schools have been learning these four Chinese languages for a long time, and although they were initially intended to train interpreters for embassies, they were later expanded and grand. Learning German was popular in the reform military drills at the end of the Qing Dynasty, and learning French was popular in the "work-study" of the Republic of China. The earliest to learn English, one is for business, the other is for the navy, and the number of people learning English is also the largest, the number of textbooks and reference books for learning English is also the most, and there are many bachelors and literati who started with English. However, the navy only gave away warships, and the "already famous" Scott, Diegens, Defoe, and Swiff were ...... It is Lin Shu, who only knows Chinese, and even several of Shaojie's biggest "already famous" Shakespearean plays are waiting for Tian Han, who does not specialize in English. For this reason, it is really necessary to "think".然而现在又到了“今日绍介波兰诗人，明日绍介捷克文豪”的危机，弱国文人，将闻名于中国，英美法德的文风，竟还不能和他们的财力武力，深入现在的文林，“狗逐尾巴”者既没有恒心，志在高山的又不屑动手，但见山林映以电灯，语录夹些洋话，“对于已经闻名之英美法德文人”，真不知要待何人，至何时，这才来“求一究竟”。那些文人的作品，当然也是好极了的，然甲则曰不佞望洋而兴叹，乙则曰汝辈何不潜心而探求。旧笑话云：昔有孝子，遇其父病，闻股肉可疗，而自怕痛，执刀出门，执途人臂，悍然割之，途人惊拒，孝子谓曰，割股疗父，乃是大孝，汝竟惊拒，岂是人哉！是好比方；林先生云：“说法虽乖，功效实同”，是好辩解。
However, now it has come to the crisis of "today's polish poets, tomorrow's Czech literary giants", the literati of weak countries will be famous in China, the British, American, French and German literary styles, but they can't go deep into the current Wenlin with their financial strength and force, and the "dog chasing the tail" has neither perseverance, and those who aspire to the mountains are disdainful of doing it, but seeing the mountains and forests reflected with electric lights, and the quotations are mixed with some foreign words, "for the British, American, French, and German literati who are already famous", I really don't know who to treat, and when will I come to "seek the end". Of course, the works of those literati are also very good, but A said that he was not good and sighed, and B said, why don't you concentrate on exploring. An old joke goes: "Once upon a time, a filial son encountered his father's illness and heard that the flesh in his thigh could be cured, but he was afraid of pain. He went out with a knife, grabbed a passerby's arm, and brazenly cut it. The passerby was frightened and refused. The filial son said to him, 'Cutting your thigh to treat your father is a great filial piety.' You are so frightened and refused; how could you be human?" It's an analogy; Mr. Lin said: "Although the statement is wrong, the effect is the same", which is a good argument.六月十日。
June 10th.

名人和名言

名人和名言

名人和名言

Celebrities and quotes《太白》二卷七期上有一篇南山先生的《保守文言的第三道策》，他举出：第一道是说“要做白话由于文言做不通”，第二道是说“要白话做好，先须文言弄通”。十年之后，才来了太炎先生的第三道，“他以为你们说文言难，白话更难。理由是现在的口头语，有许多是古语，非深通小学就不知道现在口头语的某音，就是古代的某音，不知道就是古代的某字，就要写错。……”
In the second volume and seventh issue of "Taibai", there is an article by Mr. Nanshan "The Third Strategy of Conserving Classical Language", which he cited: The first is to say that "to do the vernacular because the classical Chinese does not work", and the second is to say that "to do the vernacular well, you must first understand the classical language". Ten years later, Mr. Taiyan's third course came, "He thought it was difficult for you to speak classical Chinese, and it was even more difficult for you to speak vernacular." The reason is that many of the current colloquial languages are ancient languages, and if you are not in Shentong Primary School, you will not know a certain sound of the current spoken language, which is a certain sound in ancient times, and you will not know that it is a certain word in ancient times, so you will write it wrong. ……”太炎先生的话是极不错的。现在的口头语，并非一朝一夕，从天而降的语言，里面当然有许多是古语，既有古语，当然会有许多曾见于古书，如果做白话的人，要每字都到《说文解字》里去找本字，那的确比做任用借字的文言要难到不知多少倍。然而自从提倡白话以来，主张者却没有一个以为写白话的主旨，是在从“小学”里寻出本字来的，我们就用约定俗成的借字。诚然，如太炎先生说：“乍见熟人而相寒暄曰‘好呀’，‘呀’即‘乎’字；应人之称曰‘是唉’，‘唉’即‘也’字。”但我们即使知道了这两字，也不用“好乎”或“是也”，还是用“好呀”或“是唉”。因为白话是写给现代的人们看，并非写给商周秦汉的鬼看的，起古人于地下，看了不懂，我们也毫不畏缩。所以太炎先生的第三道策，其实是文不对题的。这缘故，是因为先生把他所专长的小学，用得范围太广了。
Mr. Taiyan's words are very good. If a person who does vernacular language, he wants to go to the "Shuowen Jie Zi" to find the original word, it is indeed many times more difficult than to do the classical language of borrowed words. However, since the vernacular was advocated, none of the proponents thought that the main purpose of writing the vernacular was to find the original character from the "primary school", and we used the conventional borrowed word. It is true that Mr. Taiyan said: "At first glance, when you meet an acquaintance, you say 'okay', 'ah' is the word 'hu'; But even if we know these two words, we don't use "good" or "yes", or "good" or "yes". Because the vernacular is written for modern people, not for the ghosts of the Shang, Zhou, Qin and Han dynasties, the ancients were underground, and we did not flinch if we did not understand it. Therefore, Mr. Taiyan's third strategy is actually wrong. This is because the teacher uses the primary school he specializes in too widely.我们的知识很有限，谁都愿意听听名人的指点，但这时就来了一个问题：听博识家的话好，还是听专门家的话好呢？解答似乎很容易：都好。自然都好；但我由历听了两家的种种指点以后，却觉得必须有相当的警戒。因为是：博识家的话多浅，专门家的话多悖的。
Our knowledge is very limited, and everyone is willing to listen to the guidance of celebrities, but then the question arises: is it better to listen to the words of the learned or the experts? The answer seems easy: all are good. Naturally, it's all good; But after listening to all the guidance of the two families, I feel that I must be quite vigilant. Because it is: the words of erudite people are shallow, and the words of experts are contradictory.博识家的话多浅，意义自明，惟专门家的话多悖的事，还得加一点申说。他们的悖，未必悖在讲述他们的专门，是悖在倚专家之名，来论他所专门以外的事。社会上崇敬名人，于是以为名人的话就是名言，却忘记了他之所以得名是那一种学问或事业。名人被崇奉所诱惑，也忘记了自己之所以得名是那一种学问或事业，渐以为一切无不胜人，无所不谈，于是乎就悖起来了。其实，专门家除了他的专长之外，许多见识是往往不及博识家或常识者的。太炎先生是革命的先觉，小学的大师，倘谈文献，讲《说文》，当然娓娓可听，但一到攻击现在的白话，便牛头不对马嘴，即其一例。还有江亢虎博士，是先前以讲社会主义出名的名人，他的社会主义到底怎么样呢，我不知道。只是今年忘其所以，谈到小学，说“‘德’之古字为‘’，从‘’从‘心’，‘’即直觉之意”，却真不知道悖到那里去了，他竟连那上半并不是曲直的直字这一点都不明白。这种解释，却须听太炎先生了。
The words of the erudite are shallow, and the meaning is self-explanatory, but the words of the experts are contradictory, and they have to be explained a little. Their paradox is not necessarily about talking about their specialization, but about relying on the name of experts to discuss things other than what they specialize in. Society reveres celebrities, so they think that the words of celebrities are famous words, but they forget that the reason why they got their name is what kind of knowledge or career. Celebrities are tempted by worship, and they forget what kind of knowledge or career they are famous for, and gradually think that everything is invincible and talk about everything, so they go against it. In fact, in addition to his expertise, many of the insights of the specialist are often inferior to those of the erudite or common sense. Mr. Taiyan is the forerunner of the revolution, a master of primary school, if he talks about literature and "Shuowen", of course he is eloquent, but when it comes to attacking the current vernacular, he is not right at the horse's mouth, which is one of them. There is also Dr. Jiang Kanghu, who was famous for talking about socialism before, and I don't know what his socialism is. It's just that this year I forgot why, when it comes to elementary school, I say that "the ancient character for 'virtue' is '', from '' from 'heart', and '' is the meaning of intuition", but he really didn't know where it went, and he didn't even understand the straight word that was not right or wrong in the upper half. This kind of explanation must be heard by Mr. Taiyan.不过在社会上，大概总以为名人的话就是名言，既是名人，也就无所不通，无所不晓。所以译一本欧洲史，就请英国话说得漂亮的名人校阅，编一本经济学，又乞古文做得好的名人题签；学界的名人绍介医生，说他“术擅岐黄”，商界的名人称赞画家，说他“精研六法”。……
However, in society, it is probably always thought that the words of celebrities are famous sayings, and since they are celebrities, they are omniscient and omniscient. Therefore, when translating a European history, ask a celebrity who speaks English beautifully to review it, compile an economics book, and ask for the title of a celebrity who does a good job in ancient text; Dr. Shao Jie, a celebrity in the academic world, said that he was "good at Qihuang", and celebrities in the business world praised the painter, saying that he "studied the six methods intensively". ……这也是一种现在的通病。德国的细胞病理学家维尔晓（Virchow），是医学界的泰斗，举国皆知的名人，在医学史上的位置，是极为重要的，然而他不相信进化论，他那被教徒所利用的几回讲演，据赫克尔（Haeckel）说，很给了大众不少坏影响。因为他学问很深，名甚大，于是自视甚高，以为他所不解的，此后也无人能解，又不深研进化论，便一口归功于上帝了。现在中国屡经绍介的法国昆虫学大家法布耳（Fabre），也颇有这倾向。他的著作还有两种缺点：一是嗤笑解剖学家，二是用人类道德于昆虫界。但倘无解剖，就不能有他那样精到的观察，因为观察的基础，也还是解剖学；农学者根据对于人类的利害，分昆虫为益虫和害虫，是有理可说的，但凭了当时的人类的道德和法律，定昆虫为善虫或坏虫，却是多余了。有些严正的科学者，对于法布耳的有微词，实也并非无故。但倘若对这两点先加警戒，那么，他的大著作《昆虫记》十卷，读起来也还是一部很有趣，也很有益的书。
This is also a common problem now. The German cytopathologist Virchow, a master of medicine, a nationally known celebrity, has an extremely important position in the history of medicine, but he does not believe in evolution, and his several lectures that were used by believers, according to Haeckel, had a lot of negative influences on the public. Because he was very knowledgeable and famous, he thought that what he didn't understand would be understood by no one after that, and he didn't study the theory of evolution deeply, so he attributed it to God. Fabre, a French entomologist who has been repeatedly introduced in China, also has this tendency. His writings also have two shortcomings: one is to ridicule anatomists, and the other is to use human morality in the insect world. But if there is no anatomy, there can be no such precise observation as him, because the basis of observation is still anatomy; It is reasonable for agronomists to divide insects into beneficial insects and pests according to the interests of human beings, but it is superfluous to define insects as good or bad insects based on the morality and laws of human beings at that time. It is not without reason that some serious scientists have complaints about Fabre. But if we are wary of these two points first, then his great book "Insects" in ten volumes is still a very interesting and beneficial book to read.不过名人的流毒，在中国却较为利害，这还是科举的余波。那时候，儒生在私塾里揣摩高头讲章，和天下国家何涉，但一登第，真是“一举成名天下知”，他可以修史，可以衡文，可以临民，可以治河；到清朝之末，更可以办学校，开煤矿，练新军，造战舰，条陈新政，出洋考察了。成绩如何呢，不待我多说。
However, the poison of celebrities is more beneficial in China, which is still the aftermath of the imperial examination. At that time, Confucian scholars figured out the high-level lectures in private schools, and what did they have to do with the countries of the world, but as soon as they passed the exam, they were really "famous in one fell swoop", he could revise history, could balance literature, could govern the people, and could govern rivers; By the end of the Qing Dynasty, it was possible to run schools, open coal mines, train new armies, build warships, and go abroad for inspection. What are the results, I don't need to say more.这病根至今还没有除，一成名人，便有“满天飞”之概。我想，自此以后，我们是应该将“名人的话”和“名言”分开来的，名人的话并不都是名言；许多名言，倒出自田夫野老之口。这也就是说，我们应该分别名人之所以名，是由于那一门，而对于他的专门以外的纵谈，却加以警戒。苏州的学子是聪明的，他们请太炎先生讲国学，却不请他讲簿记学或步兵操典，——可惜人们却又不肯想得更细一点了。
The root of this disease has not been eliminated so far, and once it becomes a celebrity, there is a general idea of "flying all over the sky". I think that from now on, we should separate "famous words" and "famous sayings", and the words of famous people are not all famous sayings; Many famous sayings come from the mouths of farmers and old people. In other words, we should distinguish the reason why celebrities are famous because of which one, and be wary of their non-specialized discussions. The students in Suzhou are smart, they ask Mr. Taiyan to teach Chinese studies, but they don't ask him to teach bookkeeping or infantry drills,—— but unfortunately people refuse to think more carefully.我很自歉这回时时涉及了太炎先生。但“智者千虑，必有一失”，这大约也无伤于先生的“日月之明”的。至于我的所说，可是我想，“愚者千虑，必有一得”，盖亦“悬诸日月而不刊”之论也。
I apologize for involving Mr. Taiyan this time. But "a wise man thinks a thousand times, there must be a mistake", which probably does not hurt Mr. Zhao's "brightness of the sun and moon". As for what I said, I think that "a fool thinks a thousand times and must have a gain", which is also the argument of "hanging on the sun and moon without publishing".七月一日。
July 1st.

“靠天吃饭”

“靠天吃饭”

“靠天吃饭”

"Rely on the sky to eat"“靠天吃饭说”是我们中国的国宝。清朝中叶就有《靠天吃饭图》的碑，民国初年，状元陆润庠先生也画过一张：一个大“天”字，末一笔的尖端有一位老头子靠着，捧了碗在吃饭。这图曾经石印，信天派或嗜奇派，也许还有收藏的。
"Eating by the sky" is our national treasure in China. In the middle of the Qing Dynasty, there was a stele of "Eating by the Sky", and in the early years of the Republic of China, Mr. Lu Runxiang, the champion, also painted one: a big "sky" character, and at the tip of the last stroke, there was an old man leaning on it, holding a bowl and eating. This picture was once a stone seal, a Xintian school or a curiosity-loving school, and maybe a collection.而大家也确是实行着这学说，和图不同者，只是没有碗捧而已。这学说总算存在着一半。
And everyone does practice this doctrine, and the difference from the picture is that there is no bowl. This doctrine finally exists in half.前一月，我们曾经听到过嚷着“旱象已成”，现在是梅雨天，连雨了十几日，是每年必有的常事，又并无飓风暴雨，却又到处发现水灾了。植树节所种的几株树，也不足以挽回天意。“五日一风，十日一雨”的唐虞之世，去今已远，靠天而竟至于不能吃饭，大约为信天派所不及料的罢。到底还是做给俗人读的《幼学琼林》聪明，曰：“轻清者上浮而为天”，“轻清”而又“上浮”，怎么一个“靠”法。
A month ago, we heard shouting that "the drought has become", and now it is the rainy season, and it has rained for more than ten days, which is a common occurrence every year, and there are no hurricanes and rains, but floods are found everywhere. A few trees planted on Arbor Day are not enough to save God's will. The world of Tang and Yu of "one wind in five days, one rain in ten days" is far from the present, and it is impossible to eat by relying on the sky, which is probably unexpected by the Xintian faction. In the end, it is still smart to read "Young Learning Qionglin" for laypeople, saying: "The light and clear one rises to the sky", "light and clear" and "floats", how to "rely on" the method.古时候的真话，到现在就有些变成谎话。大约是西洋人说的罢，世界上穷人有份的，只有日光空气和水。这在现在的上海就不适用，卖心卖力的被一天关到夜，他就晒不着日光，吸不到好空气；装不起自来水的，也喝不到干净水。报上往往说：“近来天时不正，疾病盛行”，这岂只是“天时不正”之故，“天何言哉”，它默默地被冤枉了。
The truth of ancient times has now become a lie. It is probably what Westerners say, the only thing the poor in the world has is sunlight, air and water. This does not apply in Shanghai now, if he is locked up all day until night, he will not be able to bask in the sun and breathe good air; Those who cannot afford tap water cannot drink clean water. Newspapers often say: "Recently, the weather is not right, and diseases are prevalent", which is not just because of "the time is not right", "what does the sky say", it has been silently wronged.但是，“天”下去就要做不了“人”，沙漠中的居民为了一塘水，争夺起来比我们这里的才子争夺爱人还激烈，他们要拚命，决不肯做一首“阿呀诗”就了事。洋大人斯坦因博士，不是从甘肃敦煌的沙里掘去了许多古董么？那地方原是繁盛之区，靠天的结果，却被天风吹了沙埋没了。为制造将来的古董起见，靠天确也是一种好方法，但为活人计，却是不大值得的。
However, if the "sky" goes down, it will not be able to be a "person", and the inhabitants of the desert will compete more fiercely for a pond of water than the talents here will compete for their lovers, and they will work hard and refuse to make a "Ah Ya poem". Didn't the foreigner Dr. Stein dig up a lot of antiques from the sand in Dunhuang, Gansu Province? That place was originally a prosperous area, and the result of relying on the sky was buried by the wind blowing sand. For the sake of making future antiques, relying on heaven is also a good way, but for the sake of the living, it is not worth it.一到这里，就不免要说征服自然了，但现在谈不到，“带住”可也。
As soon as we get here, we can't help but say that we have conquered nature, but now we can't talk about it, and it is okay to "take it".七月一日。
July 1st.

几乎无事的悲剧

几乎无事的悲剧

几乎无事的悲剧

A tragedy that almost nothing happened果戈理（Nikolai Gogol）的名字，渐为中国读者所认识了，他的名著《死魂灵》的译本，也已经发表了第一部的一半。那译文虽然不能令人满意，但总算借此知道了从第二至六章，一共写了五个地主的典型，讽刺固多，实则除一个老太婆和吝啬鬼泼留希金外，都各有可爱之处。至于写到农奴，却没有一点可取了，连他们诚心来帮绅士的忙，也不但无益，反而有害。果戈理自己就是地主。
Nikolai Gogol's name has gradually become known to Chinese readers, and a translation of his famous book "Dead Souls" has been published half of the first part. Although the translation was not satisfactory, I finally learned that from chapters 2 to 6, a total of five typical landlords were written, and there was a lot of irony, but in fact, except for an old woman and a miser Polyushkin, they all had their own cuteness. As for writing about serfs, there is nothing to be desired, and even their sincere help to the gentlemen is not only useless, but harmful. Gogol himself was a landlord.然而当时的绅士们很不满意，一定的照例的反击，是说书中的典型，多是果戈理自己，而且他也并不知道大俄罗斯地主的情形。这是说得通的，作者是乌克兰人，而看他的家信，有时也简直和书中的地主的意见相类似。然而即使他并不知道大俄罗斯的地主的情形罢，那创作出来的脚色，可真是生动极了，直到现在，纵使时代不同，国度不同，也还使我们像是遇见了有些熟识的人物。讽刺的本领，在这里不及谈，单说那独特之处，尤其是在用平常事，平常话，深刻的显出当时地主的无聊生活。例如第四章里的罗士特来夫，是地方恶少式的地主，赶热闹，爱赌博，撒大谎，要恭维，——但挨打也不要紧。他在酒店里遇到乞乞科夫，夸示自己的好小狗，勒令乞乞科夫摸过狗耳朵之后，还要摸鼻子——
However, the gentlemen at that time were very dissatisfied, and a certain counterattack as usual was typical in the book, mostly Gogol himself, and he did not know the situation of the Great Russian landlords. This makes sense, the author is Ukrainian, and reading his letters from home sometimes is simply similar to the opinion of the landlord in the book. However, even if he did not know the situation of the landlords of Great Russia, the footwork he created was so vivid that until now, even though the times and countries are different, it still makes us feel as if we have met some familiar figures. The ability to satirize is not worth talking about here, just talking about its uniqueness, especially in the use of ordinary things and ordinary words, which profoundly shows the boring life of the landlord at that time. For example, in Chapter 4, Ross Straif is a local villainous landlord, who is busy with fun, loves to gamble, lies big, and wants to compliment,—— but it doesn't matter if he gets beaten. He met Chiqikov in the hotel, boasted about his good puppy, and ordered Chichikov to touch the dog's ears and then touch his nose——“乞乞科夫要和罗士特来夫表示好意，便摸了一下那狗的耳朵。‘是的，会成功一匹好狗的。’他加添着说。
"Chichikov wanted to show goodwill to Roshtlaev, so he touched the dog's ears. Yes, a good dog will succeed. He added.“‘再摸摸它那冰冷的鼻头，拿手来呀！’因为要不使他扫兴，乞乞科夫就又一碰那鼻子，于是说道：‘不是平常的鼻子！’”
"'Touch its cold nose again, get your hands!' Because he would not be disappointed, Chichikov touched the nose again, and said: 'Not an ordinary nose!' ’”这种莽撞而沾沾自喜的主人，和深通世故的客人的圆滑的应酬，是我们现在还随时可以遇见的，有些人简直以此为一世的交际术。“不是平常的鼻子”，是怎样的鼻子呢？说不明的，但听者只要这样也就足够了。后来又同到罗士特来夫的庄园去，历览他所有的田产和东西——
This kind of reckless and complacent host, and the smooth socializing of a well-versed guest, is something we can still meet at any time, and some people simply use it as a lifetime of communication. "Not an ordinary nose", what kind of nose is it? It is unclear, but it is enough for the listener to do so. Later, he went with him to Rothschild's manor, and saw all his lands and things—“还去看克理米亚的母狗，已经瞎了眼，据罗士特来夫说，是就要倒毙的。两年以前，却还是一条很好的母狗。大家也来察看这母狗，看起来，它也确乎瞎了眼。”
"I also went to see the of Crimea, who was already blind and, according to Rostlev, was about to die. Two years ago, she was still a good. Everyone also came to inspect the, and it seemed that it was indeed blind. ”这时罗士特来夫并没有说谎，他表扬着瞎了眼的母狗，看起来，也确是瞎了眼的母狗。这和大家有什么关系呢，然而世界上有一些人，却确是嚷闹，表扬，夸示着这一类事，又竭力证实着这一类事，算是忙人和诚实人，在过了他的整一世。
At this time, Rostlev did not lie, he praised the blind, and it looked like a blind. What does this have to do with everyone, but there are some people in the world who do make noise, praise, boast about this kind of thing, and try their best to confirm this kind of thing, and they are busy and honest people, and they have lived their whole lives.这些极平常的，或者简直近于没有事情的悲剧，正如无声的言语一样，非由诗人画出它的形象来，是很不容易觉察的。然而人们灭亡于英雄的特别的悲剧者少，消磨于极平常的，或者简直近于没有事情的悲剧者却多。
These extremely ordinary, or almost nothing, tragedies, like silent words, are not easy to perceive unless the poet paints its image. However, there are few special tragedians who die in heroes, and there are many tragedians who spend their time in the very ordinary, or almost nothing.听说果戈理的那些所谓“含泪的微笑”，在他本土，现在是已经无用了，来替代它的有了健康的笑。但在别地方，也依然有用，因为其中还藏着许多活人的影子。况且健康的笑，在被笑的一方面是悲哀的，所以果戈理的“含泪的微笑”，倘传到了和作者地位不同的读者的脸上，也就成为健康：这是《死魂灵》的伟大处，也正是作者的悲哀处。
I heard that Gogol's so-called "tearful smile" is now useless in his homeland, and there is a healthy smile to replace it. But in other places, it is still useful, because there are many shadows of living people hidden in it. Moreover, a healthy smile is sad on the side of being laughed at, so Gogol's "tearful smile" becomes healthy if it reaches the faces of readers with different status from the author: this is the greatness of "Dead Souls", and it is also the sadness of the author.七月十四日。
July 14th.

三论“文人相轻”

三论“文人相轻”

三论“文人相轻”

Three Discussions on "Literacy and Contempt"《芒种》第八期上有一篇魏金枝先生的《分明的是非和热烈的好恶》，是为以前的《文学论坛》上的《再论“文人相轻”》而发的。他先给了原则上的几乎全体的赞成，说，“人应有分明的是非，和热烈的好恶，这是不错的，文人应更有分明的是非，和更热烈的好恶，这也是不错的。”中间虽说“凡人在落难时节……能与猿鹤为伍，自然最好，否则与鹿豕为伍，也是好的。即到千万没有办法的时候，至于躺在破庙角里，而与麻疯病菌为伍，倘然我的体力，尚能为自然的抗御，因而不至毁灭以死，也比被实际上也做着骗子屠夫的所诱杀脔割，较为心愿。”看起来好像有些微辞，但其实说的是他的憎恶骗子屠夫，远在猿鹤以至麻疯病菌之上，和《论坛》上所说的“从圣贤一直敬到骗子屠夫，从美人香草一直爱到麻疯病菌的文人，在这世界上是找不到的”的话，也并不两样。至于说：“平心而论，彼一是非，此一是非，原非确论。”则在近来的庄子道友中，简直是鹤立鸡群似的卓见了。
In the eighth issue of "Awn Zhong", there is an article by Mr. Wei Jinzhi "Distinguishing Right and Wrong and Warm Likes and Dislikes", which was published for the previous "Literary Forum" "On "Literati Look Down on Each Other". He first gave almost all the approval in principle, saying, "It is good that people should have clear right and wrong, and warm likes and dislikes, and literati should have more clear right and wrong, and more enthusiastic likes and dislikes, which is also good." Although it is said in the middle that "mortals are in trouble...... It is naturally best to be in the company of monkeys and cranes, otherwise it is also good to be with deer and pigs. That is, when there is no way, as for lying in the corner of the ruined temple and being with leprosy germs, if my physical strength can still resist nature, so I will not be destroyed to death, and it is more wishful than being lured and mutilated by a liar butcher who is actually a liar. It seems to be a bit of a hint, but in fact, it is said that he hates liar butchers, far above apes and cranes and leprosy germs, and is no different from what was said in the "Forum" that "from sages to liar butchers, from beauty vanilla to literati who love leprosy germs, cannot be found in this world". As for saying: "To be fair, one is right and wrong, and this is right and wrong, and the original is not a conclusive theory." Among the recent Zhuangzi Taoist friends, he is simply as outstanding as a flock of chickens.然而魏先生的大论的主旨，并不专在这一些，他要申明的是：是非难定，于是爱憎就为难。因为“譬如有一种人，……在他自己的心目之中，已先无是非之分。……于是其所谓‘是’，不免似是而实非了。”但“至于非中之是，它的是处，正胜过于似是之非，因为其犹讲交友之道，而无门阀之分”的。到这地步，我们的文人就只好吞吞吐吐，假揩眼泪了。“似是之非”其实就是“非”，倘使已经看穿，不是只要给以热烈的憎恶就成了吗？然而“天下的事情，并没有这么简单”，又不得不爱护“非中之是”，何况还有“似非而是”和“是中之非”，取其大，略其细的方法，于是就不适用了。天下何尝有黑暗，据物理学说，地球上的无论如何的黑暗中，不是总有X分之一的光的吗？看起书来，据理就该看见X分之一的字的，——我们不能论明暗。
However, the main idea of Mr. Wei's grand theory is not limited to these, what he wants to affirm is: right and wrong are difficult to determine, so love and hate are difficult. Because "there is a kind of person,...... In his own mind, there is no distinction between right and wrong. …… So what he said 'is' is inevitably plausible but not true. But "as for what is wrong, its merits are better than plausible, because it still talks about the way of making friends, and there is no distinction between gates." At this point, our literati had no choice but to hesitate and wipe away their tears. "Plausible" is actually "nonsense", if you have seen through it, isn't it just a matter of giving warm hatred? However, "things in the world are not so simple", and we have to take care of "what is wrong", not to mention that there are "plausible and wrong" and "right and wrong". According to physics, in any darkness on Earth, isn't there always one X tenth of light? Looking at the book, we should see X-tenth of the word,—— we can't talk about light and dark.这并非刻薄的比喻，魏先生却正走到“无是非”的结论的。他终于说：“总之，文人相轻，不外乎文的长短，道的是非，文既无长短可言，道又无是非之分，则空谈是非，何补于事！已而已而，手无寸铁的人呵！”人无全德，道无大成，刚说过“非中之是”，胜过“似是之非”，怎么立刻又变成“文既无长短可言，道又无是非之分”了呢？文人的铁，就是文章，魏先生正在大做散文，力施搏击，怎么同时又说是“手无寸铁”了呢？这可见要抬举“非中之是”，却又不肯明说，事实上是怎样的难，所以即使在那大文上列举了许多对手的“排挤”，“大言”，“卖友”的恶谥，而且那大文正可通行无阻，却还是觉得“手无寸铁”，归根结蒂，掉进“无是非”说的深坑里，和自己以为“原非确论”的“彼亦一是非，此亦一是非”说成了“朋友”——这里不说“门阀”——了。
This is not a mean metaphor, but Mr. Wei is coming to the conclusion of "no right or wrong". He finally said: "In short, the literati look down on each other, nothing more than the length of the text, the right and wrong of the text, the text has no length to speak of, and the Tao has no distinction between right and wrong, so it is empty talk about right and wrong, what good is it!" And that's it, unarmed people! "People have no perfect virtue, and the Tao has no great achievement, and it has just been said that "what is wrong is not in the middle", which is better than "plausible wrong", how can it immediately become "there is no length or shortness in the text, and there is no distinction between right and wrong"? The iron of the literati is the article, Mr. Wei is doing a lot of prose and fighting, why is it said that he is "defenseless" at the same time? This shows that it is necessary to promote the "right and wrong", but refuse to say clearly, in fact, how difficult it is, so even if the big article lists many opponents' "exclusion", "big words", and "selling friends", and that big article is unimpeded, but still feels "defenseless", in the final analysis, falling into the pit of "no right and wrong", and thinking that "the other is also right and wrong, this is also right and wrong" that I think is "original and inconclusive" has become a "friend" - not "gate valve" here.况且，“文既无长短可言，道又无是非之分”，魏先生的文章，就他自己的结论而言，就先没有动笔的必要。不过要说结果，这无须动笔的动笔，却还是有战斗的功效的，中国的有些文人一向谦虚，所以有时简直会自己先躺在地上，说道，“倘然要讲是非，也该去怪追奔逐北的好汉，我等小民，不任其咎。”明明是加入论战中的了，却又立刻肩出一面“小民”旗来，推得干干净净，连肋骨在那里也找不到了。论“文人相轻”竟会到这地步，这真是叫作到了末路！
Moreover, "there is no distinction between right and wrong in the text, and there is no distinction between right and wrong", Mr. Wei's article, as far as his own conclusion is concerned, there is no need to start writing. However, to talk about the result, this does not need to be penned, but it still has the effect of fighting, some literati in China have always been humble, so sometimes they will lie on the ground first and say, "If you want to talk about right and wrong, you should also blame the heroes who chase the north, and I will not let the people blame." Obviously, he joined the debate, but he immediately took out a "small people" flag on his shoulder and pushed it cleanly, and even the ribs could not be found there. On the "literati look down on each other" will come to this point, this is really called the end!七月十五日。
July 15th.

三论“文人相轻”

【备考】：分明的是非和热烈的好恶

三论“文人相轻”

[Preparation]: Distinguishing right from wrong and enthusiastic likes and dislikes魏金枝
Wei Jinzhi人应有分明的是非，和热烈的好恶，这是不错的。文人应更有分明的是非，和更热烈的好恶，这也是不错的。但天下的事情，并没有这么简单，除了是非之外，还有“似是而非”的“是”，和“非中有是”之非，在这当口，我们的好恶，便有些为难了。
People should have clear right and wrong, and enthusiastic likes and dislikes, which is good. It is also good that literati should have a clearer sense of right and wrong, and more enthusiastic likes and dislikes. But things in the world are not so simple, in addition to right and wrong, there are also "plausible" "yes", and "right in non", at this moment, our likes and dislikes are a little embarrassing.譬如有一种人，他们借着一个好看的幌子，做其为所欲为的勾当，不论是非，无分好恶，一概置之在所排挤之列，这叫做玉石俱焚，在他自己的心目之中，已先无是非之分。但他还要大言不惭，自以为是。于是其所谓“是”，不免似是而实非了。这是我们在谈话是非之前，所应最先将它分辩明白的。次则以趣观之，往往有些具着两张面孔的人，对于腰骨硬朗的，他会伏在地下，打拱作揖，对于下一点的，也会装起高不可扳的怪腔，甚至给你当头一脚，拒之千里之外。其时是非，便会煞时分手，各归其主，因之好恶不同，也是常事。在此时际，要谈是非，就得易地而处，平心而论，彼一是非，此一是非，原非确论。
For example, there is a kind of person who does whatever he wants under the guise of being good-looking, regardless of right or wrong, regardless of likes and dislikes, and puts them all in the exclusion list. But he also has to be brazen and self-righteous. So what he said "yes" inevitably seems plausible but not true. This is the first thing we should distinguish between right and wrong before talking about it. Secondly, for the fun, there are often some people with two faces, for those with a tough back, he will lie on the ground, bow and bow, and for the next point, he will also pretend to be an unstoppable strange tone, and even give you a kick in the head, rejecting thousands of miles away. At that time, right and wrong, they will break up at the end of the day, and each will return to their own masters, and it is also common for them to have different likes and dislikes. At this time, if you want to talk about right and wrong, you have to change your place, and in fairness, one is right and wrong, and this is right and wrong, and the original is not a definitive conclusion.至于非中之是，它的是处，正胜过于似是之非，因为其犹讲交友之道，而无门阀之分。凡人在落难时节，没有朋友，没有六亲，更无是非天道可言，能与猿鹤为伍，自然最好，否则与鹿豕为伍，也是好的。即到千万没有办法的时候，至于躺在破庙角里，而与麻疯病菌为伍，倘然我的体力，尚能为自然的抗御，因而不至毁灭以死，也比被实际上也做着骗子屠夫的所诱杀脔割，较为心愿。所以，倘然要讲是非，也该去怪追奔逐北的好汉，我等小民，不任其咎。但近来那般似是的人，还在那里大登告白，说是“少卿教匈奴为兵”，那个意思，更为凶恶，为他营业，卖他朋友，甚而至于陷井下石，望人万劫不复，那层似是的甜衣，不是糖拌砒霜，是什么呢？
As for the right of the wrong, its right is better than the plausible, because it still talks about the way of making friends, but there is no distinction between the family. Mortals have no friends, no relatives, and no right or wrong in the season of disaster, and it is naturally best to be with monkeys and cranes, otherwise it is also good to be with deer and pigs. That is, when there is no way, as for lying in the corner of the ruined temple and being with leprosy germs, if my physical strength can still resist nature, so I will not be destroyed to death, and it is more wishful than being lured and mutilated by a liar butcher who is actually a liar. Therefore, if you want to talk about right and wrong, you should also blame the heroes who chase the north, and we and the common people will not be to blame. But recently, such a plausible person is still there, and Dadeng confessed there, saying that "Shaoqing taught the Xiongnu to be a soldier", that meaning, even more vicious, doing business for him, selling his friends, and even getting into a well, hoping that people will never return, that layer of plausible sweets, not sugar mixed with arsenic, what is it?总之，文人相轻，不外乎文的长短，道的是非，文既无长短可言，道又无是非之分，则空谈是非，何补于事！已而已而，手无寸铁的人呵！
总之，文人相轻，不外乎文的长短，道的是非，文既无长短可言，道又无是非之分，则空谈是非，何补于事！已而已而，手无寸铁的人呵！七月一日，《芒种》第八期。七月一日，《芒种》第八期。

四论“文人相轻”

四论“文人相轻”

四论“文人相轻”

四论“文人相轻”前一回没有提到，魏金枝先生的大文《分明的是非和热烈的好恶》里，还有一点很有意思的文章。他以为现在“往往有些具着两张面孔的人”，重甲而轻乙；他自然不至于主张文人应该对谁都打拱作揖，连称久仰久仰的，只因为乙君原是大可钦敬的作者。所以甲乙两位，“此时此际，要谈是非，就得易地而处”，甲说你的甲话，乙呢，就觉得“非中之是，……正胜过于似是之非，因为其犹讲交友之道，而无门阀之分”，把“门阀”留给甲君，自去另找讲交道的“朋友”，即使没有，竟“与麻疯病菌为伍，……也比被实际上也做着骗子屠夫的所诱杀脔割，较为心愿”了。
I didn't mention it last time, but there is another very interesting article in Mr. Wei Jinzhi's article "Distinguishing Right and Wrong and Warm Likes and Dislikes". He thought that now "there are often some people with two faces", focusing on A and light on B; Naturally, he would not advocate that literati should bow to everyone, and even called him a long-admired author, just because Yijun was originally an admirable author. So A and B, "At this time, if you want to talk about right and wrong, you have to change places", A says your A, and B, you feel that "it is right to be wrong,...... is better than specious, because he still talks about the way of making friends, but there is no distinction between door valves", leaving the "door valve" to Mr. Jia, and going to find another "friend" to deal with, even if he doesn't, he is actually "in the company of leprosy germs,...... It is also more wishful than being trapped and mutilated by a butcher who is actually a liar."这拥护“文人相轻”的情境，是悲壮的，但也正证明了现在一般之所谓“文人相轻”，至少，是魏先生所拥护的“文人相轻”，并不是因为“文”，倒是为了“交道”。朋友乃五常之一名，交道是人间的美德，当然也好得很。不过骗子有屏风，屠夫有帮手，在他们自己之间，却也叫作“朋友”的。
This situation of supporting "literati looking down on each other" is tragic, but it also proves that the so-called "literati look down on each other" in general, at least, is the "literati looking down on each other" supported by Mr. Wei, not because of "literature", but for "communication". Friends are one of the five constants, and friendship is a virtue in the world, and of course it is very good. However, the liar has a screen, the butcher has a helper, and among themselves, they are also called "friends".“必也正名乎”，好名目当然也好得很。只可惜美名未必一定包着美德。“翻手为云覆手雨，纷纷轻薄何须数，君不见管鲍贫时交，此道今人弃如土！”这是李太白先生罢，就早已“感慨系之矣”，更何况现在这洋场——古名“彝场”——的上海。最近的《大晚报》的副刊上就有一篇文章在通知我们要在上海交朋友，说话先须漂亮，这才不至于吃亏，见面第一句，是“格位（或‘迪个’）朋友贵姓？”此时此际，这“朋友”两字中还未含有任何利害，但说下去，就要一步紧一步的显出爱憎和取舍，即决定共同玩花样，还是用作“阿木林”之分来了。“朋友，以义合者也。”古人确曾说过的，然而又有古人说：“义，利也。”呜呼！
"It must also be a correct name", of course a good name is also very good. It's a pity that good name may not necessarily contain virtue. "Turning your hands over the clouds and covering the rain, why do you need to count the frivolity, you don't see Guan Bao being poor when he was poor, and this way is abandoned like dirt today!" This is Mr. Li Taibai, and he has already "sighed", not to mention the current foreign field - the ancient name "Yi Field" - Shanghai. There is an article in the recent supplement of the "Evening News" informing us that we want to make friends in Shanghai, and we must speak beautifully, so as not to suffer losses, and the first sentence of the meeting is "Ge Wei (or 'Di') friend's noble surname? At this time, the word "friend" does not contain any stakes, but if you continue to say it, you have to show your love and hate and trade-off step by step, that is, decide to play tricks together, or use it as "Amulin". "Friends are people who unite by righteousness." The ancients did say, but some ancients said: "Righteousness is also profit." "Alas!如果在冷路上走走，有时会遇见几个人蹲在地上赌钱，庄家只是输，押的只是赢，然而他们其实是庄家的一伙，就是所谓“屏风”——也就是他们自己之所谓“朋友”——目的是在引得蠢才眼热，也来出手，然后掏空他的腰包。如果你站下来，他们又觉得你并非蠢才，只因为好奇，未必来上当，就会说：“朋友，管自己走，没有什么好看。”这是一种朋友，不妨害骗局的朋友。荒场上又有变戏法的，石块变白鸽，坛子装小孩，本领大抵不很高强，明眼人本极容易看破，于是他们就时时拱手大叫道：“在家靠父母，出家靠朋友！”这并非在要求撒钱，是请托你不要说破。这又是一种朋友，是不戳穿戏法的朋友。把这些识时务的朋友稳住了，他才可以掏呆朋友的腰包；或者手执花枪，来赶走不知趣的走近去窥探底细的傻子，恶狠狠的啐一口道：“……瞎你的眼睛！”
If you walk on the cold road, sometimes you will meet a few people squatting on the ground to gamble, the dealer just loses, the bet only wins, but they are actually a group of bookmakers, the so-called "screens" - that is, their own so-called "friends" - the purpose is to attract the eyes of the fool, also to shoot, and then empty his pocket. If you stand down and they think you are not stupid, just because you are curious, you may not be fooled, and they will say, "Friend, just go by yourself, there is nothing to look at." "This is a kind of friend, and it doesn't hurt the friend of the scam. There are tricksters on the wasteland, stones turn into white pigeons, jars hold children, the skills are probably not very strong, and it is very easy for discerning people to see through, so they always clasp their hands and shout: "Rely on your parents at home, rely on your friends when you become a monk!" "This is not asking for money, but asking you not to break it. This is another kind of friend, a friend who does not poke the trick. Only by stabilizing these friends who know current affairs can he dig out his friends' pockets; Or holding a flower gun in his hand, he came to drive away the fool who approached uninterestingly to spy on the details, and said viciously: "...... Blind your eyes! ”孩子的遭遇可是还要危险。现在有许多文章里，不是常在很亲热的叫着“小朋友，小朋友”吗？这是因为要请他做未来的主人公，把一切担子都搁在他肩上了；至少，也得去买儿童画报，杂志，文库之类，据说否则就要落伍。
What happened to the child is even more dangerous. Nowadays, in many articles, don't you often call "children, children" very affectionately? This is because he wants to be the protagonist of the future and put all the burden on his shoulders; At least, you have to buy children's pictorials, magazines, libraries, etc., otherwise you will be outdated.已成年的作家们所占领的文坛上，当然不至于有这么彰明较著的可笑事，但地方究竟是上海，一面大叫朋友，一面却要他悄悄的纳钱五块，买得“自己的园地”，才有发表作品的权利的“交道”，可也不见得就不会出现的。
In the literary world occupied by adult writers, of course, there will be no such obvious and ridiculous things, but the place is Shanghai, while shouting at friends, on the other hand, he is asked to quietly pay five yuan to buy "his own garden", so that he can have the right to publish his works.八月十三日。
八月十三日。

五论“文人相轻”——明术

五论“文人相轻”——明术

五论“文人相轻”——明术

五论“文人相轻”——明术“文人相轻”是局外人或假充局外人的话。如果自己是这局面中人之一，那就是非被轻则是轻人，他决不用这对等的“相”字。但到无可奈何的时候，却也可以拿这四个字来遮掩一下。这遮掩是逃路，然而也仍然是战术，所以这口诀还被有一些人所宝爱。
"Literati look down on each other" is the word of an outsider or pretending to be an outsider. If he is one of the people in this situation, he is either underestimated or underestimated, and he will never use the word "phase" of equality. But when there is no choice, you can also use these four words to cover it up. This concealment is a way out, but it is still a tactic, so this mantra is still cherished by some people.不过这是后来的话。在先，当然是“轻”。
But this is a later word. First, of course, it is "light".“轻”之术很不少。粗糙的说：大略有三种。一种是自卑，自己先躺在垃圾里，然后来拖敌人，就是“我是畜生，但是我叫你爹爹，你既是畜生的爹爹，可见你也是畜生了”的法子。这形容自然未免过火一点，然而较文雅的现象，文坛上却并不怎么少见的。埋伏之法，是甲乙两人的作品，思想和技术，分明不同，甚而至于相反的，某乙却偏要设法表明，说惟独自己的作品乃是某甲的嫡派；补救之法，是某乙的缺点倘被某甲所指摘，他就说这些事情正是某甲所具备，而且自己也正从某甲那里学了来的。此外，已经把别人评得一钱不值了，临末却又很谦虚的声明自己并非批评家，凡有所说，也许全等于放屁之类，也属于这一派。
There are many "light" techniques. Roughly speaking: there are roughly three types. One is low self-esteem, lying in the garbage first, and then dragging the enemy, that is, "I am a beast, but I call you Daddy, you are the father of the beast, it can be seen that you are also a beast". This description is naturally a bit excessive, but the phenomenon of more elegance is not very common in the literary world. The method of ambush is the work of A and B, and their ideas and techniques are clearly different, and even on the contrary, a certain B tries to show that only his own work is the direct faction of a certain A; The remedy is that if a certain B's shortcomings are pointed out by a certain A, he will say that these things are exactly what a certain A has, and he is learning from a certain A. In addition, he has already rated others as worthless, and at the end of his life, he humbly declares that he is not a critic.一种是最正式的，就是自高，一面把不利于自己的批评，统统谓之“漫骂”，一面又竭力宣扬自己的好处，准备跨过别人。但这方法比较的麻烦，因为除“辟谣”之外，自吹自擂是究竟不很雅观的，所以做这些文章时，自己得另用一个笔名，或者邀一些“讲交道”的“朋友”来互助。不过弄得不好，那些“朋友”就会变成保驾的打手或抬驾的轿夫，而使那“朋友”会变成这一类人物的，则这御驾一定不过是有些手势的花花公子，抬来抬去，终于脱不了原形，一年半载之后，花花之上也再添不上什么花头去，而且打手轿夫，要而言之，也究竟要工食，倘非腰包饱满，是没法维持的。如果能用死轿夫，如袁中郎或“晚明二十家”之流来抬，再请一位活名人喝道，自然较为轻而易举，但看过去的成绩和效验，可也并不见佳。
One is the most formal, that is, self-exaltation, on the one hand, all criticism that is not conducive to oneself is called "scolding", and on the other hand, it tries its best to promote its own benefits, ready to step over others. But this method is more troublesome, because in addition to "refuting rumors", it is not very elegant to brag about yourself, so when doing these articles, you have to use another pseudonym, or invite some "friends" who "talk to" to help each other. However, if it is not done well, those "friends" will become thugs or bearers who carry the car, and if the "friends" become this kind of character, then the imperial driver must be just a dandy with some gestures, carrying around, and finally unable to get rid of the original form, after a year and a half, there will be no flowers on top of the flowers, and the thugs, in short, also need to work and food, if the pocket is not full, it cannot be maintained. If you can use a dead sedan chair, such as Yuan Zhonglang or the "Twenty Families of the Late Ming Dynasty", and then invite a living celebrity to shout, it is naturally relatively easy, but looking at the past achievements and effectiveness, it is not good.还有一种是自己连名字也并不抛头露面，只用匿名或由“朋友”给敌人以“批评”——要时髦些，就可以说是“批判”。尤其要紧的是给与一个名称，像一般的“诨名”一样。因为读者大众的对于某一作者，是未必和“批评”或“批判”者同仇敌慨的，一篇文章，纵使题目用头号字印成，他们也不大起劲，现在制出一个简括的诨名，就可以比较的不容易忘记了。在近十年来的中国文坛上，这法术，用是也常用的，但效果却很小。
The other is that he does not even show his name, but only uses anonymity or "friends" to give "criticism" to the enemy - if it is more fashionable, it can be said to be "criticism". It is especially important to give a name, like a general "nickname". Because the readers may not have the same hatred for a certain author as the "critic" or "critic", an article, even if the title is printed with the number one word, they are not very motivated, and now a concise nickname can be compared and not easy to forget. In the Chinese literary world in the past ten years, this spell has been commonly used, but the effect is very small.法术原是极利害，极致命的法术。果戈理夸俄国人之善于给别人起名号——或者也是自夸——说是名号一出，就是你跑到天涯海角，它也要跟着你走，怎么摆也摆不脱。这正如传神的写意画，并不细画须眉，并不写上名字，不过寥寥几笔，而神情毕肖，只要见过被画者的人，一看就知道这是谁；夸张了这人的特长——不论优点或弱点，却更知道这是谁。可惜我们中国人并不怎样擅长这本领。起源，是古的。从汉末到六朝之所谓“品题”，如“关东觥觥郭子横”，“五经纷纶井大春”，就是这法术，但说的是优点居多。梁山泊上一百另八条好汉都有诨名，也是这一类，不过着眼多在形体，如“花和尚鲁智深”和“青面兽杨志”，或者才能，如“浪里白跳张顺”和“鼓上蚤时迁”等，并不能提挈这人的全般。直到后来的讼师，写状之际，还常常给被告加上一个诨名，以见他原是流氓地痞一类，然而不久也就拆穿西洋镜，即使毫无才能的师爷，也知道这是不足注意的了。现在的所谓文人，除了改用几个新名词之外，也并无进步，所以那些“批判”，结果还大抵是徒劳。
Spells are originally extremely beneficial and deadly spells. Gogol praised Russians for being good at naming others - or boasting - saying that as soon as the name comes out, even if you run to the ends of the earth, it will follow you, no matter how you put it off. This is like a freehand painting that conveys the spirit, not finely drawing the beard and eyebrows, not writing the name, but only a few strokes, and the expression is Bixiao, as long as the person who has seen the painted person, he will know who this is at a glance; Exaggerate this person's strengths - regardless of strengths or weaknesses, but know who this person is. Unfortunately, we Chinese are not very good at this skill. The origin is ancient. From the end of the Han Dynasty to the Six Dynasties, the so-called "Pin Tie", such as "Guo Ziheng of the Five Classics", "Five Classics of the Five Classics", is this spell, but it is mostly about the advantages. There are 100 other heroes on Liangshanbo who have nicknames, which are also in this category, but the focus is mostly on the form, such as "Flower Monk Lu Zhishen" and "Blue-faced Beast Yang Zhi", or talents, such as "White Jumping Zhang Shun in the Waves" and "Drum on the Flea Migration", etc., which cannot lift this person in general. Until later litigators, when writing the petition, they often added a nickname to the defendant to see that he was originally a rogue ruffian, but soon the diorama was dismantled, and even the talentless master knew that this was not worth paying attention to. The current so-called literati have not made progress except for using a few new terms, so those "criticisms" are probably in vain.这失败之处，是在不切帖。批评一个人，得到结论，加以简括的名称，虽只寥寥数字，却很要明确的判断力和表现的才能的。必须切帖，这才和被批判者不相离，这才会跟了他跑到天涯海角。现在却大抵只是漫然的抓了一时之所谓恶名，摔了过去：或“封建余孽”，或“布尔乔亚”，或“破锣”，或“无政府主义者”，或“利己主义者”……等等；而且怕一个不够致命，又连用些什么“无政府主义封建余孽”或“布尔乔亚破锣利己主义者”；怕一人说没有力，约朋友各给他一个；怕说一回还太少，一年内连给他几个：时时改换，个个不同。这举棋不定，就因为观察不精，因而品题也不确，所以即使用尽死劲，流完大汗，写了出去，也还是和对方不相干，就是用浆糊粘在他身上，不久也就脱落了。汽车夫发怒，便骂洋车夫阿四一声“猪猡”，顽皮孩子高兴，也会在卖炒白果阿五的背上画一个乌龟，虽然也许博得市侩们的一笑，但他们是决不因此就得“猪猡阿四”或“乌龟阿五”的诨名的。此理易明：因为不切帖。
This failure is not relevant. Criticizing a person, getting a conclusion, and giving a concise name, although there are only a few numbers, it is very necessary to have clear judgment and performance talent. must be cut, so that he is inseparable from the critic, and he will follow him to the ends of the earth. But now it is probably just a casual grasp of the so-called notoriety of a moment and thrown over: or "feudal remnants", or "bourgeois", or "broken gong", or "anarchist", or "egoist"...... Wait a minute; and they are afraid that if they are not deadly enough, they will use some "anarchist feudal remnants" or "bourgeois egoists"; Afraid that one person will say that he has no strength, ask his friends to give him one; I'm afraid that one time is too little, and I will give him a few in a year: change from time to time, each different. This move is indecisive, just because the observation is not fine, so the question is not accurate, so even if you use it hard, sweat profusely, and write it out, it still has nothing to do with the other party, that is, it sticks to him with paste, and it will fall off soon. The motorist was angry, so he scolded the foreign coachman Ah Si for "pig monkey", and the naughty child was happy, and he would also draw a turtle on the back of the fried white Goa Wu, although he might win the laughter of the philistines, but they would never get the nickname "Pig Ah Si" or "Turtle Ah Wu" because of this. This principle is easy to understand: because it is not relevant.五四时代的所谓“桐城谬种”和“选学妖孽”，是指做“载飞载鸣”的文章和抱住《文选》寻字汇的人们的，而某一种人确也是这一流，形容惬当，所以这名目的流传也较为永久。除此之外，恐怕也没有什么还留在大家的记忆里了。到现在，和这八个字可以匹敌的，或者只好推“洋场恶少”和“革命小贩”了罢。前一联出于古之“京”，后一联出于今之“海”。
The so-called "Tongcheng Fallacy" and "Selection of Demons" in the May Fourth era refer to people who make articles that "fly and sing" and hold the "Anthology" to find vocabulary, and a certain kind of person is indeed of this class, and the description is comfortable, so the circulation of this name is also relatively permanent. Other than that, I'm afraid nothing remains in everyone's memory. Up to now, it is comparable to these eight words, or we have to push "foreign villains" and "revolutionary hawkers". The first couplet comes from the ancient "capital", and the last couplet comes from the present-day "sea".创作难，就是给人起一个称号或诨名也不易。假使有谁能起颠扑不破的诨名的罢，那么，他如作评论，一定也是严肃正确的批评家，倘弄创作，一定也是深刻博大的作者。
It is difficult to create, even if it is not easy to give people a title or nickname. If anyone can make an unbreakable reputation, then if he makes a comment, he must also be a serious and correct critic, and if he creates, he must also be a profound and broad author.所以，连称号或诨名起得不得法，也还是因为这班“朋友”的不“文”。——“再亮些！”
Therefore, even the title or nickname is not legal, but it is still because this group of "friends" is not "literate". ——"Brighter more! ”八月十四日。
August 14th.

“题未定”草

“题未定”草

“题未定”草

"Title undecided" draft五
FiveM君寄给我一封剪下来的报章。这是近十来年常有的事情，有时是杂志。闲暇时翻检一下，其中大概有一点和我相关的文章，甚至于还有“生脑膜炎”之类的恶消息。这时候，我就得预备大约一块多钱的邮票，来寄信回答陆续函问的人们。至于寄报的人呢，大约有两类：一是朋友，意思不过说，这刊物上的东西，有些和你相关；二，可就难说了，猜想起来，也许正是作者或编者，“你看，咱们在骂你了！”用的是《三国志演义》上的“三气周瑜”或“骂死王朗”的法子。不过后一种近来少一些了，因为我的战术是暂时搁起，并不给以反应，使他们诸公的刊物很少有因我而蓬蓬勃勃之望，到后来却也许会去拨一拨谁的下巴：这于他们诸公是很不利的。
Mr. M sent me a cut newspaper. This is a common thing in the past ten years, sometimes in magazines. I checked it in my spare time, and there were probably some articles related to me, and there was even bad news such as "meningitis". At this time, I had to prepare about a dollar-plus stamp to send letters to answer the questions I had received. As for the people who send newspapers, there are about two categories: one is friends, which means that some of the things in this publication are related to you; Second, it's hard to say, if you guess, maybe it's the author or editor, "Look, we're scolding you!" It uses the method of "Three Qi Zhou Yu" or "Scolding Wang Lang to Death" in "Romance of the Three Kingdoms". However, the latter has been less common lately, because my tactic is to put it aside for the time being and not to respond, so that their publications rarely hope to flourish because of me, but later they may pluck someone's chin: this is very unfavorable to them.M君是属于第一类的；剪报是天津《益世报》的《文学副刊》。其中有一篇张露薇先生做的《略论中国文坛》，下有一行小注道：“偷懒，奴性，而忘掉了艺术”。只要看这题目，就知道作者是一位勇敢而记住艺术的批评家了。看起文章来，真的，痛快得很。我以为介绍别人的作品，删节实在是极可惜的，倘有妙文，大家都应该设法流传，万不可听其泯灭。不过纸墨也须顾及，所以只摘录了第二段，就是“永远是日本人的追随者的作家”在这里，也万不能再少，因为我实在舍不得了——
Mr. M belongs to the first category; The newspaper clipping is the "Literary Supplement" of Tianjin "Yishi Daily". Among them, there is an article by Mr. Zhang Luwei "A Brief Discussion on the Chinese Literary World", with a small note below: "Lazy, servile, and forgetting art". Just look at this topic and know that the author is a brave critic who remembers art. Looking at the article, really, it was very happy. I think it is a pity to introduce other people's works, and if there is a wonderful article, everyone should try to circulate it, and it must not be extinguished. However, paper and ink must also be taken into account, so only the second paragraph is excerpted, that is, "a writer who will always be a follower of the Japanese" here, and it must not be less, because I am really reluctant to do so——“奴隶性是最‘意识正确’的东西，于是便有许多人跟着别人学口号。特别是对于苏联，在目前的中国，一般所谓作家也者，都怀着好感。可是，我们是人，我们应该有自己的人性，对于苏联的文学，尤其是对于那些由日本的浅薄的知识贩卖者所得来的一知半解的苏联的文学理论家与批评家的话，我们所取的态度决不该是应声虫式的；我们所需要的介绍的和模仿的（其实是只有抄袭和盲目的应声）方式也决不该是完全出于热情的。主观是对于事物的选择，客观才是对于事物的方法。我们有了一般奴隶性极深的作家，于是我们便有无数的空虚的标语和口号。
"Slavery is the most 'conscious' thing, so many people follow others to learn slogans. Especially for the Soviet Union, in the current China, the so-called writers generally have a good impression. However, we are human beings, we should have our own humanity, and our attitude towards Soviet literature, especially to those Soviet literary theorists and critics who were half-informed by the shallow intellectual peddlers of Japan, should never be a response to the insects; The way we introduce and imitate (in fact, only plagiarism and blind response) should never be entirely out of enthusiasm. Subjectivity is the choice of things, and objectivity is the method of things. We have writers who are generally very slave, so we have countless empty slogans and slogans.“然而我们没有几个懂得苏联的文学的人，只有一堆盲目的赞美者和零碎的翻译者，而赞美者往往是牛头不对马嘴的胡说，翻译者又不配合于他们的工作，不得不草率，不得不‘硬译’，不得不说文不对题的话，一言以蔽之，他们的能力永远是对不起他们的思想；他们的‘意识’虽然正确了，可是他们的工作却永远是不正确的。
"However, we do not have a few people who understand Soviet literature, only a bunch of blind praisers and fragmentary translators, and the praisers are often bull-headed nonsense, and the translators do not cooperate with their work, and have to be hasty, have to 'hard translate', and have to say that the text is not on the right topic. Although their 'consciousness' is correct, their work is always incorrect.“从苏联到中国是很近的，可是为什么就非经过日本人的手不可？我们在日本人的群中并没有发现几个真正了解苏联文学的新精神的人，为什么偏从浅薄的日本知识阶级中去寻我们的食粮？这真是一件可耻的事实。我们为什么不直接的了解？为什么不取一种纯粹客观的工作的态度？为什么人家唱‘新写实主义’，我们跟着喊，人家换了‘社会主义的写实主义’，我们又跟着喊；人家介绍纪德，我们才叫；人家介绍巴尔扎克，我们也号；然而我敢预言，在一千年以内：绝不会见到那些介绍纪德，巴尔扎克的人们会给中国的读者译出一两本纪德，巴尔扎克的重要著作来，全集更不必说。
"It is very close from the Soviet Union to China, but why does it have to pass through the hands of the Japanese? We did not find a few people in the Japanese group who really understood the new spirit of Soviet literature, so why did they look for our food from the shallow Japanese intelligentsia? This is a shameful fact. Why don't we know directly? Why not adopt a purely objective attitude towards work? Why do we shout 'neo-realism', and when they change to 'socialist realism', we shout again; when they introduce Gide, we call it; when they introduce Gide, we call it; but I dare to predict that within a thousand years, we will never see those who introduce Gide, and Balzac will translate one or two copies of Gide, Balzac's important works, not to mention the complete works.“我们再退一步，对于那些所谓‘文学遗产’，我们并不要求那些跟着人家对喊‘文学遗产’的人们担负把那些‘文学遗产’送给中国的‘大众’的责任。可是我们却要求那些人们有承受那些‘遗产’的义务，这自然又是谈不起来的。我们还记得在庆祝高尔基的四十年的创作生活的时候，中国也有鲁迅，丁玲一般人发了庆祝的电文；这自然是冠冕堂皇的事情。然而那一群签名者中有几个读过高尔基的十分之一的作品？有几个是知道高尔基的伟大在那儿的？……中国的知识阶级就是如此浅薄，做应声虫有余，做一个忠实的，不苟且的，有理性的文学创作者和研究者便不成了。”
"Let's take a step back, for those so-called 'literary heritage', we do not require those who follow others to shout 'literary heritage' to take responsibility for giving those 'literary heritage' to the 'public' in China. But we demand that those people have the obligation to bear those 'inheritances', which is naturally not to be discussed. We still remember that when celebrating Gorky's forty years of creative life, there were also Lu Xun and Ding Ling in China who sent congratulatory messages; This is naturally a high-sounding thing. However, how many of the signatories had read a tenth of Gorky's works? How many of them know that Gorky's greatness is there? …… China's intellectual class is so shallow that it is more than enough to be a respondent, and it is impossible to be a faithful, unscrupulous, and rational literary creator and researcher. ”五月廿九日天津《益世报》。
May 29 Tianjin "Yishi Daily".我并不想因此来研究“奴隶性是最‘意识正确’的东西”，“主观是对于事物的选择，客观才是对于事物的方法”这些难问题；我只要说，诚如张露薇先生所言，就是在文艺上，我们中国也的确太落后。法国有纪德和巴尔扎克，苏联有高尔基，我们没有；日本叫喊起来了，我们才跟着叫喊，这也许真是“追随”而且“永远”，也就是“奴隶性”，而且是“最‘意识正确’的东西”。但是，并不“追随”的叫喊其实是也有一些的，林语堂先生说过：“……其在文学，今日绍介波兰诗人，明日绍介捷克文豪，而对于已经闻名之英美法德文人，反厌为陈腐，不欲深察，求一究竟。……此种流风，其弊在浮，救之之道，在于学。”（《人间世》二十八期《今文八弊》中）南北两公，眼睛都有些斜视，只看了一面，各骂了一面，独跳犹可，并排跳舞起来，那“勇敢”就未免化为有趣了。
I don't want to study the difficult problems of "slavery is the most 'consciously correct' thing", "subjectivity is the choice of things, and objectivity is the method of things"; I just need to say that, as Mr. Zhang Luwei said, in terms of literature and art, our China is indeed too backward. France has Gide and Balzac, the Soviet Union has Gorky, we don't have it; Japan started shouting, and we followed suit, which may really be "following" and "forever", that is, "slavery", and "the most 'conscious' thing". However, there are actually some shouts that do not "follow", Mr. Lin Yutang said: "...... In literature, today he introduces Polish poets and tomorrow he introduces Czech writers, but for the already famous British, American, French, and German literati, he is tired of being clichéd, and does not want to investigate deeply and seek the end. …… The problem with this kind of trend lies in superficiality, and the way to remedy it lies in learning. (In the twenty-eighth issue of "The World of the World", "Eight Evils of Today's Text") The two men of the north and south, their eyes were a little squinting, they only looked at one side, each scolded one side, danced alone, and danced side by side, then "brave" inevitably turned into fun.不过林先生主张“求一究竟”，张先生要求“直接了解”，这“实事求是”之心，两位是大抵一致的，不过张先生比较的悲观，因为他是“豫言”家，断定了“在一千年以内，绝不会见到那些绍介纪德，巴尔扎克的人们会给中国的读者译出一两本纪德，巴尔扎克的重要著作来，全集更不必说”的缘故。照这“豫言”看起来，“直接了解”的张露薇先生自己，当然是一定不译的了；别人呢，我还想存疑，但可惜我活不到一千年，决没有目睹的希望。
However, Mr. Lin advocates "seeking the end", and Mr. Zhang asks for "direct understanding", and the two are generally the same in this "seeking truth from facts", but Mr. Zhang is more pessimistic, because he is a "prophecyist" and concluded that "within a thousand years, he will never see those Shaojie Gide, and Balzac people will translate one or two books of Gide, Balzac's important works, not to mention the complete works". According to this "prophecy", Mr. Zhang Luwei herself, who "directly understands", must not translate; I still want to doubt others, but unfortunately I will not live for a thousand years, and there is no hope of witnessing it.豫言颇有点难。说得近一些，容易露破绽。还记得我们的批评家成仿吾先生手抡双斧，从《创造》的大旗下，一跃而出的时候，曾经说，他不屑看流行的作品，要从冷落堆里提出作家来。这是好的，虽然勃兰兑斯曾从冷落中提出过伊孛生和尼采，但我们似乎也难以斥他为追随或奴性。不大好的是他的这一张支票，到十多年后的现在还没有兑现。说得远一些罢，又容易成笑柄。江浙人相信风水，富翁往往豫先寻葬地；乡下人知道一个故事：有风水先生给人寻好了坟穴，起誓道：“您百年之后，安葬下去，如果到第三代不发，请打我的嘴巴！”然而他的期限，比张露薇先生的期限还要少到约十分之九的样子。
The prediction is a bit difficult. If you say it closer, it is easy to reveal flaws. I still remember that when our critic Mr. Cheng Fangwu picked up a double axe and jumped out of the banner of "Creation", he once said that he disdained to read popular works and wanted to propose writers from the snub pile. This is good, although Brandeis has mentioned Ibson and Nietzsche out of the cold, but it seems difficult for us to dismiss them as followers or serviles. The bad thing is that his check has not been cashed until more than ten years later. If you say it further, it is easy to become a laughingstock. Jiangsu and Zhejiang people believe in feng shui, and rich people often find burial places in advance; The countrymen know a story: a feng shui gentleman found a grave for people and swore: "After a hundred years, you will be buried, if you don't send it to the third generation, please hit me in the mouth!" However, his time limit is less than Mr. Zhang Luwei's time limit, about nine-tenths of the time.然而讲已往的琐事也不易。张露薇先生说庆祝高尔基四十年创作的时候，“中国也有鲁迅，丁玲一般人发了庆祝的电文，……然而那一群签名者中有几个读过高尔基的十分之一的作品？”这质问是极不错的。我只得招供：读得很少，而且连高尔基十分之一的作品究竟是几本也不知道。不过高尔基的全集，却连他本国也还未出全，所以其实也无从计算。至于祝电，我以为打一个是应该的，似乎也并非中国人的耻辱，或者便失了人性，然而我实在却并没有发，也没有在任何电报底稿上签名。这也并非怕有“奴性”，只因没有人来邀，自己也想不到，过去了。发不妨，不发也不要紧，我想：发，高尔基大约不至于说我是“日本人的追随者的作家”，不发，也未必说我是“张露薇的追随者的作家”的。但对于绥拉菲摩维支的祝贺日，我却发过一个祝电，因为我校印过中译的《铁流》。这是在情理之中的，但也较难于想到，还不如测定为对于高尔基发电的容易。当然，随便说说也不要紧，然而，“中国的知识阶级就是如此浅薄，做应声虫有余，做一个忠实的，不苟且的，有理性的文学创作者和研究者便不成了”的话，对于有一些人却大概是真的了。
However, it is not easy to talk about the trivial things of the past. Mr. Zhang Luwei said that when celebrating Gorky's 40th anniversary of creation, "China also has Lu Xun, and Ding Ling and ordinary people sent congratulatory messages,...... However, how many of the signatories had read a tenth of Gorky's works? "This question is very good. I had to confess: I read very little, and I didn't even know how many of Gorky's tenths of his works were. However, Gorky's complete works have not even been completed in his own country, so there is actually no way to calculate them. As for the telegram, I thought it was appropriate to hit one, and it didn't seem to be a Chinese shame, or it was a loss of humanity, but I didn't send it, nor did I sign any telegram draft. This is not because I am afraid of being "servile", just because no one came to invite me, and I couldn't think of it, and it passed. It doesn't matter if you send it, it doesn't matter if you don't send it, I think: Gorky probably wouldn't say that I was a "writer of Japanese followers", and if I didn't post, I might not say that I was a "writer of Zhang Luwei's followers". But for the congratulatory day of Suilafimovichi, I sent a congratulatory telegram, because I had printed the Chinese translation of "Tie Liu". This is reasonable, but it is also difficult to think that it is not as easy as measuring it for Gorky's power generation. Of course, it doesn't matter if you talk about it casually, however, for some people, "China's intellectual class is so shallow that it is more than enough to be a responder, and it is not possible to be a faithful, unscrupulous, and rational literary creator and researcher", which is probably true for some people.张露薇先生自然也是知识阶级，他在同阶级中发见了这许多奴隶，拿鞭子来抽，我是了解他的心情的。但他和他所谓的奴隶们，也只隔了一张纸。如果有谁看过菲洲的黑奴工头，傲然的拿鞭子乱抽着做苦工的黑奴的电影的，拿来和这《略论中国文坛》的大文一比较，便会禁不住会心之笑。那一个和一群，有这么相近，却又有这么不同，这一张纸真隔得利害：分清了奴隶和奴才。
Mr. Zhang Luwei is naturally also an intellectual class, and he found so many slaves in the same class and whipped them, and I understand his feelings. But he and his so-called slaves were only separated by a piece of paper. If anyone has ever seen the movie of the black slave foreman in Philippine, proudly smoking a black slave with a whip and doing hard labor, and compare it with this article "A Brief Discussion on the Chinese Literary World", he can't help but smile knowingly. That one and a group are so similar, but so different, this piece of paper is really separated: it distinguishes between slaves and slaves.我在这里，自以为总算又钩下了一种新的伟大人物——一九三五年度文艺“豫言”家——的嘴脸的轮廓了。
Here, I think I have finally hooked the outline of the face of a new great figure - the literary and artistic "prophecylist" of 1935.八月十六日。
August 16th.

论毛笔之类

论毛笔之类

论毛笔之类

Discuss brushes and the like国货也提倡得长久了，虽然上海的国货公司并不发达，“国货城”也早已关了城门，接着就将城墙撤去，日报上却还常见关于国货的专刊。那上面，受劝和挨骂的主角，照例也还是学生，儿童和妇女。
Although Shanghai's domestic companies are not developed, the "domestic city" has already closed the city gate, and then the city wall has been removed, but there are still special issues about domestic products in the daily newspaper. Above, the protagonists who are persuaded and scolded are still students, children and women.前几天看见一篇关于笔墨的文章，中学生之流，很受了一顿训斥，说他们十分之九，是用钢笔和墨水的，这就使中国的笔墨没有出路。自然，倒并不说这一类人就是什么奸，但至少，恰如摩登妇女的爱用外国脂粉和香水似的，应负“入超”的若干的责任。
A few days ago, I saw an article about pen and ink, and middle school students were reprimanded, saying that nine out of ten of them used pens and ink, which made China's pen and ink have no way out. Naturally, it is not said that this type of person is a traitor, but at least, just like modern women love to use foreign powders and perfumes, they should bear some responsibilities for "entering the supermarket".这话也并不错的。不过我想，洋笔墨的用不用，要看我们的闲不闲。我自己是先在私塾里用毛笔，后在学校里用钢笔，后来回到乡下又用毛笔的人，却以为假如我们能够悠悠然，洋洋焉，拂砚伸纸，磨墨挥毫的话，那么，羊毫和松烟当然也很不坏。不过事情要做得快，字要写得多，可就不成功了，这就是说，它敌不过钢笔和墨水。譬如在学校里抄讲义罢，即使改用墨盒，省去临时磨墨之烦，但不久，墨汁也会把毛笔胶住，写不开了，你还得带洗笔的水池，终于弄到在小小的桌子上，摆开“文房四宝”。况且毛笔尖触纸的多少，就是字的粗细，是全靠手腕作主的，因此也容易疲劳，越写越慢。闲人不要紧，一忙，就觉得无论如何，总是墨水和钢笔便当了。
This is not bad either. But I think whether we use foreign pen and ink depends on whether we are idle. I myself am a person who first used a brush in a private school, then a pen in school, and then returned to the countryside to use a brush, but I thought that if we could leisurely and leisurely, brush the inkstone, stretch the paper, and grind the ink, then of course the sheep's hair and pine smoke are not bad. But if things have to be done quickly and written a lot, it will not succeed, which means that it is no match for pen and ink. For example, if you copy handouts in school, even if you switch to ink cartridges, you will save the trouble of temporarily grinding ink, but soon, the ink will stick the brush and you won't be able to write, and you have to bring a pen washing pool, and finally get it on a small table and set up the "Four Treasures of the Study". Moreover, the amount of the brush tip touching the paper is the thickness of the words, which is all determined by the wrist, so it is easy to get tired, and the more you write, the slower it becomes. It doesn't matter if you are an idler, when you are busy, you will feel that no matter what, it is always ink and pen bento.青年里面，当然也不免有洋服上挂一枝万年笔，做做装饰的人，但这究竟是少数，使用者的多，原因还是在便当。便于使用的器具的力量，是决非劝谕，讥刺，痛骂之类的空言所能制止的。假如不信，你倒去劝那些坐汽车的人，在北方改用骡车，在南方改用绿呢大轿试试看。如果说这提议是笑话，那么，劝学生改用毛笔呢？现在的青年，已经成了“庙头鼓”，谁都不妨敲打了。一面有繁重的学科，古书的提倡，一面却又有教育家喟然兴叹，说他们成绩坏，不看报纸，昧于世界的大势。
Among the young people, of course, there are people who hang a pen on their clothes and make decorations, but this is a minority, and there are many users, and the reason is still in the bento. The power of convenient tools is by no means stopped by empty words such as persuasion, ridicule, and scolding. If you don't believe it, you can persuade those who ride in cars to switch to mule carts in the north and green tweed sedans in the south. If this proposal is a joke, then what about persuading students to switch to brushes? Today's young people have become "temple drums", and everyone might as well beat them. On the one hand, there are heavy disciplines and the advocacy of ancient books, but on the other hand, there are educators who sigh, saying that they have bad grades, do not read newspapers, and are ignorant of the general trend of the world.但是，连笔墨也乞灵于外国，那当然是不行的。这一点，却要推前清的官僚聪明，他们在上海立过制造局，想造比笔墨更紧要的器械——虽然为了“积重难返”，终于也造不出什么东西来。欧洲人也聪明，金鸡那原是斐洲的植物，因为去偷种子，还死了几个人，但竟偷到手，在自己这里种起来了，使我们现在如果发了疟疾，可以很便当的大吃金鸡那霜丸，而且还有“糖衣”，连不爱服药的娇小姐们也吃得甜蜜蜜。制造墨水和钢笔的法子，弄弄到手，是没有偷金鸡那子那么危险的。所以与其劝人莫用墨水和钢笔，倒不如自己来造墨水和钢笔；但必须造得好，切莫“挂羊头卖狗肉”。要不然，这一番工夫就又是一个白费。
However, even the pen and ink are begging for spirits in foreign countries, which is of course not possible. This is to push the bureaucratic cleverness of the Qing Dynasty, who set up a manufacturing bureau in Shanghai and wanted to make equipment that was more important than pen and ink - although in order to "accumulate heavy weights", they could not make anything in the end. Europeans are also smart, the golden rooster was originally a plant of Feizhou, because of stealing seeds, a few people died, but they actually stole it and planted it here, so that if we have malaria now, we can eat the golden rooster cream pills very conveniently, and there is also "sugar coating", even the young ladies who don't like to take medicine eat sweet honey. The method of making ink and pens is not as dangerous as stealing the golden rooster. Therefore, instead of persuading people not to use ink and pens, it is better to make ink and pens by yourself; But it must be made well, and don't "hang sheep's heads and sell dog meat". Otherwise, this effort will be in vain.但我相信，凡有毛笔拥护论者大约也不免以我的提议为空谈：因为这事情不容易。这也是事实；所以典当业只好呈请禁止奇装异服，以免时价早晚不同，笔墨业也只好主张吮墨舐毫，以免国粹渐就沦丧。改造自己，总比禁止别人来得难。然而这办法却是没有好结果的，不是无效，就是使一部份青年又变成旧式的斯文人。
But I believe that all brush advocates probably can't help but take my proposal as empty talk: because it's not easy. This is also true; Therefore, the pawn industry had to petition for a ban on fancy dresses, so as not to change the price sooner or later, and the pen and ink industry had to advocate sucking ink and licking the brush, so as not to gradually lose the essence of the country. It is more difficult to reform yourself than to prohibit others. However, this method did not yield good results, either it was ineffective, or it turned some young people into old-fashioned Svens.八月二十三日。
August 23.

逃名

逃名

逃名

Escape name就在这几天的上海报纸上，有一条广告，题目是四个一寸见方的大字——
In the Shanghai newspaper in the past few days, there was an advertisement with the title of four large characters one inch square -“看救命去！”
"Look for help!"如果只看题目，恐怕会猜想到这是展览着外科医生对重病人施行大手术，或对淹死的人用人工呼吸，救助触礁船上的人员，挖掘崩坏的矿穴里面的工人的。但其实并不是。还是照例的“筹赈水灾游艺大会”，看陈皮梅沈一呆的独脚戏，月光歌舞团的歌舞之类。诚如广告所说，“化洋五角，救人一命，……一举两得，何乐不为”，钱是要拿去救命的，不过所“看”的却其实还是游艺，并不是“救命”。
If you only look at the title, you may guess that it is an exhibition of surgeons performing major surgeries on seriously ill patients, or artificial respiration on drowning people, rescuing people on reef ships, and digging workers in collapsed mines. But it's not. It is still the usual "Flood Relief Amusement Conference", watching the one-man show of Chen Pimei Shen Yidu, the singing and dancing of the Moonlight Song and Dance Troupe, etc. As the advertisement says, "Transform the ocean into a pentagon and save a life,...... Kill two birds with one stone, why not do it", money is to save lives, but what is "looking" is actually entertainment, not "life-saving".有人说中国是“文字国”，有些像，却还不充足，中国倒该说是最不看重文字的“文字游戏国”，一切总爱玩些实际以上花样，把字和词的界说，闹得一团糟，弄到暂时非把“解放”解作“孥戮”，“跳舞”解作“救命”不可。捣一场小乱子，就是伟人，编一本教科书，就是学者，造几条文坛消息，就是作家。于是比较自爱的人，一听到这些冠冕堂皇的名目就骇怕了，竭力逃避。逃名，其实是爱名的，逃的是这一团糟的名，不愿意酱在那里面。
Some people say that China is a "country of words", some similar, but not enough, China should be said to be the "word game country" that attaches the least importance to words, everything always likes to play tricks above reality, and the boundaries of words and words are said to be a mess, so that for the time being, "liberation" must be interpreted as "killing", and "dancing" must be interpreted as "life-saving". If you make a small mess, you are a great man, if you compile a textbook, you are a scholar, and if you make a few literary news, you are a writer. So the more self-loving people were frightened when they heard these high-sounding names and tried their best to escape. Escaping from the name is actually to love the name, escaping from this messy name, and I don't want to be in it.天津《大公报》的副刊《小公园》，近来是标榜了重文不重名的。这见识很确当。不过也偶有“老作家”的作品，那当然为了作品好，不是为了名。然而八月十六日那一张上，却发表了很有意思的“许多前辈作家附在来稿后面的叮嘱”：
The supplement "Little Park" of Tianjin's "Ta Kung Pao" has recently advertised that it emphasizes literature rather than name. This insight is very true. However, there are occasional works by "old writers", of course, for the sake of good works, not for fame. However, on the one on August 16, a very interesting "advice from many senior writers attached to the manuscript" was published:“把我这文章放在平日，我愿意那样，我骄傲那样。我和熟人的名字并列得厌倦了，我愿着挤在虎生生的新人群里，因为许多时候他们的东西来得还更新鲜。”
"Put my article on weekdays, I want to do that, I am proud of that. I am tired of juxtaposing the names of my acquaintances, and I am willing to squeeze into the new crowd, because many times their things come fresher. ”这些“前辈作家”们好像都撒了一点谎。“熟”，是不至于招致“厌倦”的。我们一离乳就吃饭或面，直到现在，可谓熟极了，却还没有厌倦。这一点叮嘱，如果不是编辑先生玩的双簧的花样，也不是前辈作家玩的借此“返老还童”的花样，那么，这所证明的是：所谓“前辈作家”也者，有一批是盗名的，因此使别一批羞与为伍，觉得和“熟人的名字并列得厌倦”，决计逃走了。
These "senior writers" seem to have lied a little. "Familiarity" will not cause "boredom". We eat or noodles as soon as we are weaned, and until now, we are very familiar, but we have not gotten tired of it. If it is not the double reed trick played by the editor, nor the trick of "rejuvenation" played by the senior writers, then this proves that some of the so-called "senior writers" are also name thieves, so they are ashamed to be with other groups, and feel tired of being "juxtaposed with the names of acquaintances", and decide to escape.从此以后，他们只要“挤在虎生生的新人群里”就舒舒服服，还是作品也就“来得还更新鲜”了呢，现在很难测定。逃名，固然也不能说是豁达，但有去就，有爱憎，究竟总不失为洁身自好之士。《小公园》里，已经有人在现身说法了，而上海滩上，却依然有人在“掏腰包”，造消息，或自称“言行一致”，或大呼“冤哉枉也”，或拖明朝死尸搭台，或请现存古人喝道，或自收自己的大名入辞典中，定为“中国作家”，或自编自己的作品入画集里，名曰“现代杰作”——忙忙碌碌，鬼鬼祟祟，煞是好看。
From then on, as long as they were "crowded in the new crowd of tigers", they were comfortable, or their works were "fresher", which is difficult to determine now. Escaping from fame cannot be said to be open-minded, but there are goings, love and hate, and in the end, it is always a clean and self-righteous person. In "Little Park", there are already people who are showing up to speak, but on the beach, there are still people who are "digging into their pockets" and making news, or claiming to be "consistent with words and deeds", or shouting "unjust", or dragging the dead corpses of the Ming Dynasty to set up a stage, or asking the existing ancients to shout, or accepting their own names into the dictionary and designating them as "Chinese writers", or compiling their own works into the collection of paintings, called "modern masterpieces" - busy, sneaky, and really good-looking.作家一排一排的坐着，将来使人笑，使人怕，还是使人“厌倦”呢？——现在也很难测定。但若据“前车之鉴”，则“后之视今，亦犹今之视昔”，大约也还不免于“悲夫”的了！
Will the writer sit in rows make people laugh, frighten, or "tired" in the future? ——It is also difficult to measure now. But if it is based on the "mirror of the past", then "the future looks at the present, just as the present looks at the past", and it is probably inevitable that it will be "sad"!八月二十三日。
August 23.

六论“文人相轻”——二卖

六论“文人相轻”——二卖

六论“文人相轻”——二卖

Sixth, "literati look down on each other" - two selling今年文坛上的战术，有几手是恢复了五六年前的太阳社式，年纪大又成为一种罪状了，叫作“倚老卖老”。
This year's tactics in the literary world are a few hands that have restored the style of the Sun Society five or six years ago, and it has become a crime when they are older, called "relying on the old and selling the old".其实呢，罪是并不在“老”，而在于“卖”的，假使他在叉麻酱，念弥陀，一字不写，就决不会惹青年作家的口诛笔伐。如果这推测并不错，文坛上可又要增添各样的罪人了，因为现在的作家，有几位总不免在他的“作品”之外，附送一点特产的赠品。有的卖富，说卖稿的文人的作品，都是要不得的；有人指出了他的诗思不过在太太的奁资中，就有帮闲的来说这人是因为得不到这样的太太，恰如狐狸的吃不到葡萄，所以只好说葡萄酸。有的卖穷，或卖病，说他的作品是挨饿三天，吐血十口，这才做出来的，所以与众不同。有的卖穷和富，说这刊物是因为受了文阀文僚的排挤，自掏腰包，忍痛印出来的，所以又与众不同。有的卖孝，说自己做这样的文章，是因为怕父亲将来吃苦的缘故，那可更了不得，价值简直和李密的《陈情表》不相上下了。有的就是衔烟斗，穿洋服，唉声叹气，顾影自怜，老是记着自己的韶年玉貌的少年哥儿，这里和“卖老”相对，姑且叫他“卖俏”罢。
In fact, the sin is not in the "old", but in the "selling", if he is forked with sesame sauce, reciting Amitabha, and not writing a word, he will never provoke the young writers to criticize him. If this speculation is not good, all kinds of sinners will be added to the literary world, because several writers today will inevitably give a little special gift in addition to their "works". some sell rich, saying that the works of literati who sell manuscripts are not wanted; Some people pointed out that his poetry was just in his wife's dowry, and some helpers said that this person was because he couldn't get such a wife, just like a fox can't eat grapes, so he had to say that the grapes were sour. Some sell poverty, or sell disease, saying that his works were made by starving for three days and vomiting blood ten mouthfuls, so they are different. Some sell the poor and the rich, saying that this publication is different because it was ostracized by the literary clergy, paid out of their own pockets, and reluctantly printed it. Some sell filial piety, saying that they are afraid that their father will suffer in the future, which is even more amazing, and the value is simply comparable to Li Mi's "Chen Qing Biao". Some are young brothers who hold pipes, wear clothes, sigh, look at themselves, and always remember their youthful appearance.不过中国的社会上，“卖老”的真也特别多。女人会穿针，有什么希奇呢，一到一百多岁，就可以开大会，穿给大家看，顺便还捐钱了。说中国人“起码要学狗”，倘是小学生的作文，是会遭先生的板子的，但大了几十年，新闻上就大登特登，还用方体字标题道：“皤然一老莅故都，吴稚晖语妙天下”；劝人解囊赈灾的文章，并不少见，而文中自述年纪曰：“余年九十六岁矣”者，却只有马相伯先生。但普通都不谓之“卖”，另有极好的称呼，叫作“有价值”。
However, in Chinese society, there are really a lot of people who "sell the old". Women can thread needles, what's so strange, as soon as they reach more than a hundred years old, they can hold a conference, wear it for everyone to see, and donate money by the way. It is said that Chinese people "at least have to learn dogs", if it is a primary school student's composition, it will be blocked by the teacher, but when it is decades older, it will be deliberately published in the news, and it will be titled in square characters: "An old man comes to the old capital, Wu Zhihui speaks wonderfully"; It is not uncommon for articles to persuade people to donate their pockets for disaster relief, but the only one who states his age in the article is Mr. Ma Xiangbo. But it is not usually called "selling", and there is also an excellent name, called "valuable".“老作家”的“老”字，就是一宗罪案，这法律在文坛上已经好几年了，不过或者指为落伍，或者说是把持，……总没有指出明白的坏处。这回才由上海的青年作家揭发了要点，是在“卖”他的“老”。
The word "old" in "old writer" is a crime, and this law has been in the literary world for several years, but it may refer to being outdated, or it is controlled,...... There is no clear disadvantage. This time, a young writer in Shanghai revealed the main point, which is "selling" his "old".那就不足虑了，很容易扫荡。中国各业，多老牌子，文坛却并不然，创作了几年，就或者做官，或者改业，或者教书，或者卷逃，或者经商，或者造反，或者送命……不见了。“老”在那里的原已寥寥无几，真有些像耆英会里的一百多岁的老太婆，居然会活到现在，连“民之父母”也觉得希奇古怪。而且她还会穿针，就尤其希奇古怪，使街头巷尾弄得闹嚷嚷。然而呀了，这其实是为了奉旨旌表的缘故，如果一个十六七岁的漂亮姑娘登台穿起针来，看的人也决不会少的。
Then there is no need to worry, it is easy to sweep. After a few years of creation, they either became officials, or changed careers, or taught, or fled, or did business, or rebelled, or died...... It's gone. There are very few "old" people there, and they are really a bit like the hundred-year-old woman in the Senior Citizens' Association, who will actually live to this day, and even the "parents of the people" find it strange. And she can thread needles, especially strangely, making the streets and alleys noisy. However, this is actually for the sake of being ordered to honor the order, if a beautiful girl of sixteen or seventeen years old wears a needle on stage, there will be no less people watching.谁有“卖老”的吗？一遇到少的俏的就倒。
Does anyone "sell the old"? As soon as I meet a few pretty ones, I will fall.不过中国的文坛虽然幼稚，昏暗，却还没有这么简单；读者虽说被“养成一种‘看热闹’的情趣”，但有辨别力的也不少，而且还在多起来。所以专门“卖老”，是不行的，因为文坛究竟不是养老堂，又所以专门“卖俏”，也不行的，因为文坛究竟也不是妓院。
However, although the Chinese literary world is naïve and dim, it is not that simple; Although readers are "developed a taste of 'watching the fun'", there are many people who have discernment, and there are still many of them. Therefore, it is not possible to specialize in "selling the old", because the literary world is not a retirement hall, and it is not possible to specialize in "selling pretty", because the literary world is not a brothel after all.二卖俱非，由非见是，混沌之辈，以为两伤。
二卖俱非，由非见是，混沌之辈，以为两伤。九月十二日。
September 12th.

七论“文人相轻”——两伤

七论“文人相轻”——两伤

七论“文人相轻”——两伤

七论“文人相轻”——两伤所谓文人，轻个不完，弄得别一些作者摇头叹气了，以为作践了文苑。这自然也说得通。陶渊明先生“采菊东篱下”，心境必须清幽闲适，他这才能够“悠然见南山”，如果篱中篱外，有人大嚷大跳，大骂大打，南山是在的，他却“悠然”不得，只好“愕然见南山”了。现在和晋宋之交有些不同，连“象牙之塔”也已经搬到街头来，似乎颇有“不隔”之意，然而也还得有幽闲，要不然，即无以寄其沉痛，文坛减色，嚷嚷之罪大矣。于是相轻的文人们的处境，就也更加艰难起来，连街头也不再是扰攘的地方了，真是途穷道尽。
The so-called literati are endless, which makes some other authors shake their heads and sigh, thinking that they have practiced the literary garden. This naturally makes sense. Mr. Tao Yuanming "picks chrysanthemums under the east fence", his mood must be quiet and leisurely, so he can "leisurely see Nanshan", if outside the fence, someone shouts and jumps, scolds and beats, Nanshan is there, but he can't be "leisurely", so he has to "see Nanshan in astonishment". Now it is a little different from the turn of the Jin and Song dynasties, even the "Ivory Tower" has been moved to the streets, which seems to have the meaning of "not separated", but there must also be leisure, otherwise, there is no way to send its pain, the literary world is less colored, and the sin of shouting is great. As a result, the situation of the literati who looked down on each other became more difficult, and even the streets were no longer a disturbing place, and they were really at the end of their way.然而如果还要相轻又怎么样呢？前清有成例，知县老爷出巡，路遇两人相打，不问青红皂白，谁是谁非，各打屁股五百完事。不相轻的文人们纵有“肃静”“回避”牌，却无小板子，打是自然不至于的，他还是用“笔伐”，说两面都不是好东西。这里有一段炯之先生的《谈谈上海的刊物》为例——
But what if you want to be light? There was a precedent in the Qing Dynasty that when the county magistrate went out on patrol, he encountered two people fighting each other, regardless of whether they were blue or white, who was right and who was wrong, and each spanked five hundred times to complete the task. Even if the literati who do not take each other lightly have the cards of "silence" and "avoidance", but there is no small board, it is natural to play, and he still uses "pen cutting", saying that both sides are not good things. Here is an example of Mr. Jiongzhi's "Talking about Shanghai Publications" -“说到这种争斗，使我们记起《太白》，《文学》，《论语》，《人间世》几年来的争斗成绩。这成绩就是凡骂人的与被骂的一古脑儿变成丑角，等于木偶戏的互相揪打或以头互碰，除了读者养成一种‘看热闹’的情趣以外，别无所有。把读者养成欢喜看‘戏’不欢喜看‘书’的习气，‘文坛消息’的多少，成为刊物销路多少的主要原因。争斗的延长，无结果的延长，实在可说是中国读者的大不幸。我们是不是还有什么方法可以使这种‘私骂’占篇幅少一些？一个时代的代表作，结起账来若只是这些精巧的对骂，这文坛，未免太可怜了。”（天津《大公报》的《小公园》，八月十八日。）
Speaking of this kind of struggle, we remember the achievements of "Taibai", "Literature", "Analects", and "The Human World" in the past few years. This achievement is that all the scolding and being scolded become a clown, which is equivalent to puppet shows beating each other or touching each other's heads, except for the reader to develop a kind of 'watching the fun'. Cultivating readers to like to watch 'plays' and not 'books', and the amount of 'literary news' has become the main reason for the sales of publications. The prolongation of the struggle and the prolongation of inconclusiveness can really be said to be a great misfortune for Chinese readers. Is there any other way we can make this kind of 'private scolding' less spaced? A masterpiece of an era, if it is just these exquisite scoldings, this literary world is too pitiful. (Tianjin's "Ta Kung Pao" "Little Park", August 18.) ）“这种斗争”，炯之先生还自有一个界说：“即是向异己者用一种琐碎方法，加以无怜悯，不节制的辱骂。（一个术语，便是‘斗争’。）”云。
"This kind of struggle", Mr. Jiongzhi also has his own world: "It is to use a trivial method to insult dissidents without mercy and intemperance." (One term is 'struggle.') Cloud.于是乎这位炯之先生便以怜悯之心，节制之笔，定两造为丑角，觉文坛之可怜了，虽然“我们记起《太白》，《文学》，《论语》，《人间世》几年来”，似乎不但并不以“‘文坛消息’的多少，成为刊物销路多少的主要原因”，而且简直不登什么“文坛消息”。不过“骂”是有的；只“看热闹”的读者，大约一定也有的。试看路上两人相打，他们何尝没有是非曲直之分，但旁观者往往只觉得有趣；就是绑出法场去，也是不问罪状，单看热闹的居多。由这情形，推而广之以至于文坛，真令人有不如逆来顺受，唾面自干之感。到这里来一个“然而”罢，转过来是旁观者或读者，其实又并不全如炯之先生所拟定的混沌，有些是自有各人自己的判断的。所以昔者古典主义者和罗曼主义者相骂，甚而至于相打，他们并不都成为丑角；左拉遭了剧烈的文字和图画的嘲骂，终于不成为丑角；连生前身败名裂的王尔德，现在也不算是丑角。
So this Mr. Jiongzhi with a heart of pity and a pen of moderation, set the two creations as harlequins, and felt that the literary world was pitiful, although "we remember "Taibai", "Literature", "Analects", and "The World of the World" for several years", it seems that not only does "the amount of 'literary news' become the main reason for the sales of publications", but also does not publish any "literary news". However, there is "scolding"; There must be readers who only "watch the excitement". Try to see two people fighting on the road, they have no right or wrong, but bystanders often only find it interesting; Even if they are tied out of the Dharma field, they don't ask about the crime, and most of them just look at the excitement. From this situation, and by extension to the literary world, it really makes people feel that it is better to accept the adversity and spit on their faces. Here is a "but", turning it around to be a bystander or reader, in fact, it is not all the chaos drawn up by Mr. Jiongzhi, and some of it is everyone's own judgment. Therefore, in the past, the classicists and romantics scolded each other, and even fought each other, and they did not all become harlequins; Zola was scolded by violent words and pictures, and finally stopped becoming a harlequin; Even Wilde, who was discredited in his predecessor, is not a harlequin now.自然，他们有作品。但中国也有的。中国的作品“可怜”得很，诚然，但这不只是文坛可怜，也是时代可怜，而且这可怜中，连“看热闹”的读者和论客都在内。凡有可怜的作品，正是代表了可怜的时代。昔之名人说“恕”字诀——但他们说，对于不知恕道的人，是不恕的；——今之名人说“忍”字诀，春天的论客以“文人相轻”混淆黑白，秋天的论客以“凡骂人的与被骂的一古脑儿变成丑角”抹杀是非。冷冰冰阴森森的平安的古冢中，怎么会有生人气？
Naturally, they have works. But China also has it. It is true that Chinese works are very "pitiful", but this is not only the pity of the literary world, but also the pity of the times, and in this pity, even readers and commentators who "watch the excitement" are included. Wherever there are pitiful works, they represent the pitiful times. In the past, famous people said the word "forgiveness" - but they said that for those who do not know the way of forgiveness, they will not forgive; ——Today's celebrities say the word "forbearance", the spring commentator confuses black and white with "literati look down on each other", and the autumn commentator erases right and wrong with "all the scolded and the scolded old brain becomes a harlequin". How can there be any popularity in the cold and gloomy ancient tomb of peace?“我们是不是还有什么方法可以使这种‘私骂’占篇幅少一些？”——炯之先生问。有是有的。纵使名之曰“私骂”，但大约决不会件件都是一面等于二加二，一面等于一加三，在“私”之中，有的较近于“公”，在“骂”之中，有的较合于“理”的，居然来加评论的人，就该放弃了“看热闹的情趣”，加以分析，明白的说出你究以为那一面较“是”，那一面较“非”来。
"Is there any other way we can make this kind of 'private scolding' less space?" ——Mr. Jiongzhi asked. Yes, there is. Even if it is called "private scolding", it is probably not that one side is equal to two plus two, and one side is equal to one plus three, in the "private", some are closer to "public", among the "scolding", some are more in line with "reason", and those who actually come to comment should give up the "fun of watching the excitement", analyze it, and clearly say which side you think is more "yes" and that side is more "wrong".至于文人，则不但要以热烈的憎，向“异己”者进攻，还得以热烈的憎，向“死的说教者”抗战。在现在这“可怜”的时代，能杀才能生，能憎才能爱，能生与爱，才能文。彼兑飞说得好：
As for the literati, they not only attack the "dissidents" with enthusiastic hatred, but also resist the "dead preachers" with passionate hatred. In this "pitiful" era, you can kill to live, you can hate to love, you can be born and loved, and you can write. Peter Duifei said it well:
我的爱并不是欢欣安静的人家，My love is not the joy and quiet of the house, 
花园似的，将平和一门关住， like a garden, closing the door of peace, 
其中有“幸福”慈爱地往来， in which there is "happiness" lovingly coming and going, 
而抚养那“欢欣”，那娇小的仙女。 and raising the "joy", the petite fairy. 
我的爱，就如荒凉的沙漠一般—— My love is like a desolate desert - 
一个大盗似的有嫉妒在那里霸着； A thief is jealous and dominates there; 
他的剑是绝望的疯狂， His sword is desperate madness, 
而每一刺是各样的谋杀！ And every stab is a murder of all kinds!

九月十二日。
September 12th.

萧红作《生死场》序

萧红作《生死场》序

萧红作《生死场》序

Xiao Hong wrote the preface to "The Field of Life and Death."记得已是四年前的事了，时维二月，我和妇孺正陷在上海闸北的火线中，眼见中国人的因为逃走或死亡而绝迹。后来仗着几个朋友的帮助，这才得进平和的英租界，难民虽然满路，居人却很安闲。和闸北相距不过四五里罢，就是一个这么不同的世界，——我们又怎么会想到哈尔滨。
I remember it was four years ago, in February, my wife and children and I were trapped in the line of fire in Zhabei, Shanghai, and saw the Chinese disappear because of escape or death. Later, with the help of a few friends, he had to enter the peaceful British Concession, and although the refugees were full of people, the residents were very comfortable. It is only four or five miles away from Zhabei, which is such a different world,—— how could we think of Harbin.这本稿子的到了我的桌上，已是今年的春天，我早重回闸北，周围又复熙熙攘攘的时候了。但却看见了五年以前，以及更早的哈尔滨。这自然还不过是略图，叙事和写景，胜于人物的描写，然而北方人民的对于生的坚强，对于死的挣扎，却往往已经力透纸背；女性作者的细致的观察和越轨的笔致，又增加了不少明丽和新鲜。精神是健全的，就是深恶文艺和功利有关的人，如果看起来，他不幸得很，他也难免不能毫无所得。
This manuscript arrived on my desk in the spring of this year, and I had already returned to Zhabei, and it was time for the surroundings to be bustling again. But I saw Harbin five years ago, and even earlier. This is naturally just a sketch, narrative and scenery, better than the description of the characters, but the strength of the northern people for life and the struggle for death have often penetrated the back of the paper; The meticulous observation and deviant brushwork of female authors have added a lot of brightness and freshness. The spirit is sound, that is, the person who hates literature and art and utilitarianism, if it seems that he is very unfortunate, he will inevitably gain nothing.听说文学社曾经愿意给她付印，稿子呈到中央宣传部书报检查委员会那里去，搁了半年，结果是不许可。人常常会事后才聪明，回想起来，这正是当然的事：对于生的坚强和死的挣扎，恐怕也确是大背“训政”之道的。今年五月，只为了《略谈皇帝》这一篇文章，这一个气焰万丈的委员会就忽然烟消火灭，便是“以身作则”的实地大教训。
I heard that the Literary Society was willing to pay for her printing, and the manuscript was submitted to the Book and Newspaper Inspection Committee of the Central Propaganda Department, which was shelved for half a year, but the result was not allowed. People often become smart after the fact, and in retrospect, this is a matter of course: for the strength of life and the struggle of death, I am afraid that it is indeed a big departure from the way of "discipline of governance". In May of this year, just for the article "A Brief Talk about the Emperor", this arrogant committee suddenly disappeared, which is a big lesson on the field of "leading by example".奴隶社以汗血换来的几文钱，想为这本书出版，却又在我们的上司“以身作则”的半年之后了，还要我写几句序。然而这几天，却又谣言蜂起，闸北的熙熙攘攘的居民，又在抱头鼠窜了，路上是骆驿不绝的行李车和人，路旁是黄白两色的外人，含笑在赏鉴这礼让之邦的盛况。自以为居于安全地带的报馆的报纸，则称这些逃命者为“庸人”或“愚民”。我却以为他们也许是聪明的，至少，是已经凭着经验，知道了煌煌的官样文章之不可信。他们还有些记性。
The slave society wanted to publish this book with a few pennies of sweat and blood, but half a year after our boss "led by example", he asked me to write a few prefaces. However, in the past few days, rumors have been swirling, and the bustling residents of Zhabei are running around again, with endless luggage carts and people on the road, and yellow and white outsiders on the side of the road, smiling and appreciating the grandeur of this country of courtesy. Newspapers that think they live in safe zones call these fugitives "mediocre" or "foolish people". I thought they might be smart, at least, they already knew from experience that Huanghuang's official articles were not credible. They still have some memory.现在是一九三五年十一月十四的夜里，我在灯下再看完了《生死场》。周围像死一般寂静，听惯的邻人的谈话声没有了，食物的叫卖声也没有了，不过偶有远远的几声犬吠。想起来，英法租界当不是这情形，哈尔滨也不是这情形；我和那里的居人，彼此都怀着不同的心情，住在不同的世界。然而我的心现在却好像古井中水，不生微波，麻木的写了以上那些字。这正是奴隶的心！——但是，如果还是搅乱了读者的心呢？那么，我们还决不是奴才。
It was the night of November 14, 1935, and I finished watching "The Field of Life and Death" under the lamp. The surroundings were as silent as death, the conversations of the neighbors were gone, and the sound of food was gone, but there were occasional barks in the distance. Come to think of it, this is not the case in the Anglo-French Concession, and this is not the case in Harbin; I and the people who live there live in different worlds with different moods. However, my heart is now like water in an ancient well, without microwaves, and I write the above words numbly. This is exactly the heart of a slave! ——But what if it still disturbs the reader's heart? Then, we are by no means slaves.不过与其听我还在安坐中的牢骚话，不如快看下面的《生死场》，她才会给你们以坚强和挣扎的力气。
But instead of listening to my complaints while still sitting, it's better to watch "Life and Death" below, and she will give you strength and struggle.鲁迅。
Lu Xun.

陀思妥夫斯基的事

陀思妥夫斯基的事——为日本三笠书房《陀思妥夫斯基全集》普及本作

陀思妥夫斯基的事

Dostovsky's Affair - popularized this work for the "Complete Works of Dostovsky" by Mikasa Shobo in Japan到了关于陀思妥夫斯基，不能不说一两句话的时候了。说什么呢？他太伟大了，而自己却没有很细心的读过他的作品。
When it comes to Dostovsky, it is time not to say a word or two. What to say? He was so great, but I didn't read his works very carefully.回想起来，在年青时候，读了伟大的文学者的作品，虽然敬服那作者，然而总不能爱的，一共有两个人。一个是但丁，那《神曲》的《炼狱》里，就有我所爱的异端在；有些鬼魂还在把很重的石头，推上峻峭的岩壁去。这是极吃力的工作，但一松手，可就立刻压烂了自己。不知怎地，自己也好像很是疲乏了。于是我就在这地方停住，没有能够走到天国去。
Looking back, when I was young, I read the works of great writers, and although I admired the author, I couldn't love them, there were two people in total. One is Dante, and in the "Purgatory" of the "Divine Comedy", there is a heresy that I love; Some ghosts are still pushing heavy stones up the steep rock walls. This is extremely hard work, but as soon as you let go, you immediately crush yourself. Somehow, I also seemed to be very tired. So I stopped in this place and couldn't go to heaven.还有一个，就是陀思妥夫斯基。一读他二十四岁时所作的《穷人》，就已经吃惊于他那暮年似的孤寂。到后来，他竟作为罪孽深重的罪人，同时也是残酷的拷问官而出现了。他把小说中的男男女女，放在万难忍受的境遇里，来试炼它们，不但剥去了表面的洁白，拷问出藏在底下的罪恶，而且还要拷问出藏在那罪恶之下的真正的洁白来。而且还不肯爽利的处死，竭力要放它们活得长久。而这陀思妥夫斯基，则仿佛就在和罪人一同苦恼，和拷问官一同高兴着似的。这决不是平常人做得到的事情，总而言之，就因为伟大的缘故。但我自己，却常常想废书不观。
There is also Dostovsky. As soon as I read "The Poor", which he wrote when he was twenty-four years old, I was already surprised by his loneliness in his twilight years. Later, he appeared as a sinful sinner and a cruel torturer. He puts the men and women in the novel in unbearable circumstances to test them, not only stripping away the whiteness on the surface, torturing the sins hidden underneath, but also torturing the true whiteness hidden under the sins. And he refused to execute them happily, trying his best to let them live for a long time. And this Dostovsky seems to be distressing with the sinners and happy with the torturers. This is by no means something that ordinary people can do, in short, because of greatness. But myself, I often want to abandon books.医学者往往用病态来解释陀思妥夫斯基的作品。这伦勃罗梭式的说明，在现今的大多数的国度里，恐怕实在也非常便利，能得一般人们的赞许的。但是，即使他是神经病者，也是俄国专制时代的神经病者，倘若谁身受了和他相类的重压，那么，愈身受，也就会愈懂得他那夹着夸张的真实，热到发冷的热情，快要破裂的忍从，于是爱他起来的罢。
Medical scientists often use pathology to explain Dostovsky's work. This Lombrosso-style explanation is probably very convenient in most countries today, and can be praised by ordinary people. However, even if he is a neurotic, a neurotic of the Russian autocratic era, if anyone is under the same heavy pressure as him, then the more he suffers, the more he will understand his exaggerated truth, his passion that is hot and cold, and his patience that is about to break, so he loves him.不过作为中国的读者的我，却还不能熟悉陀思妥夫斯基式的忍从——对于横逆之来的真正的忍从。在中国，没有俄国的基督。在中国，君临的是“礼”，不是神。百分之百的忍从，在未嫁就死了定婚的丈夫，坚苦的一直硬活到八十岁的所谓节妇身上，也许偶然可以发见罢，但在一般的人们，却没有。忍从的形式，是有的，然而陀思妥夫斯基式的掘下去，我以为恐怕也还是虚伪。因为压迫者指为被压迫者的不德之一的这虚伪，对于同类，是恶，而对于压迫者，却是道德的。
However, as a Chinese reader, I am not yet familiar with Dostovsky-style forbearance - the real forbearance of rebellion. In China, there is no Russian Christ. In China, the king's land is "rites", not gods. 100% patience, in the husband who died before he was married, and the so-called chaste woman who lived hard until the age of eighty, may be found by chance, but in ordinary people, there is none. There is a form of forbearance, but Dostovsky-style digging, I think it is still hypocritical. For the hypocrisy of the oppressor as one of the immorality of the oppressed is evil for the same kind, but moral for the oppressor.但是，陀思妥夫斯基式的忍从，终于也并不只成了说教或抗议就完结。因为这是当不住的忍从，太伟大的忍从的缘故。人们也只好带着罪业，一直闯进但丁的天国，在这里这才大家合唱着，再来修练天人的功德了。只有中庸的人，固然并无坠入地狱的危险，但也恐怕进不了天国的罢。
However, Dostovsky's forbearance did not end with preaching or protesting. Because this is the reason for the unbearable forbearance, the great forbearance. People had no choice but to carry their sins and keep breaking into Dante's kingdom of heaven, where everyone sang in chorus and then practiced the merits of heaven and man. Only the mean person is not in danger of falling into hell, but I am afraid that he will not be able to enter the kingdom of heaven.十一月二十日。
November 20th.

孔另境编《当代文人尺牍钞》序

孔另境编《当代文人尺牍钞》序

孔另境编《当代文人尺牍钞》序

Kong Biejing edited the preface to "Contemporary Literati Letters"日记或书信，是向来有些读者的。先前是在看朝章国故，丽句清词，如何抑扬，怎样请托，于是害得名人连写日记和信也不敢随随便便。晋人写信，已经得声明“匆匆不暇草书”，今人作日记，竟日日要防传钞，来不及出版。王尔德的自述，至今还有一部分未曾公开，罗曼罗兰的日记，约在死后十年才可发表，这在我们中国恐怕办不到。
Diary or letter has always been for some readers. Previously, I was looking at the dynasty and the country, beautiful sentences, how to inflect, how to ask, so that celebrities did not dare to write diaries and letters casually. The Jin people wrote letters, and they had to declare that they were "in a hurry to write cursive", and now people keep a diary, and they have to prevent banknotes every day, and they have no time to publish it. Some of Wilde's self-reports have not been made public, and Romain Rolland's diary can only be published about ten years after his death, which may not be possible in our China.不过现在的读文人的非文学作品，大约目的已经有些和古之人不同，是比较的欧化了的：远之，在钩稽文坛的故实，近之，在探索作者的生平。而后者似乎要居多数。因为一个人的言行，总有一部分愿意别人知道，或者不妨给别人知道，但有一部分却不然。然而一个人的脾气，又偏爱知道别人不肯给人知道的一部分，于是尺牍就有了出路。这并非等于窥探门缝，意在发人的阴私，实在是因为要知道这人的全般，就是从不经意处，看出这人——社会的一分子的真实。
However, the purpose of today's non-literary works of literati is somewhat different from that of the ancients, and it is more Europeanized: far away, it is checking the facts of the literary world, and near, it is exploring the author's life. The latter seems to be in the majority. Because a person's words and deeds always have a part that they want others to know, or they might as well let others know, but some of them are not. However, a person's temper prefers to know the part that others refuse to know, so the ruler has a way out. This is not the same as peeking through the cracks of the door, intending to provoke people's private interests, but because to know the general situation of this person, it is to see the truth of this person, a member of society, from inadvertently.就是在“文学概论”上有了名目的创作上，作者本来也掩不住自己，无论写的是什么，这个人总还是这个人，不过加了些藻饰，有了些排场，仿佛穿上了制服。写信固然比较的随便，然而做作惯了的，仍不免带些惯性，别人以为他这回是赤条条的上场了罢，他其实还是穿着肉色紧身小衫裤，甚至于用了平常决不应用的奶罩。话虽如此，比起峨冠博带的时候来，这一回可究竟较近于真实。所以从作家的日记或尺牍上，往往能得到比看他的作品更其明晰的意见，也就是他自己的简洁的注释。不过也不能十分当真。有些作者，是连账簿也用心机的，叔本华记账就用梵文，不愿意别人明白。
Even in the creation of the name of "Introduction to Literature", the author could not hide himself, no matter what he wrote, this person was always this person, but with some decorations and some pomp, as if he was wearing a uniform. Writing letters is certainly relatively casual, but being used to being pretentious, it is still inevitable that there will be some inertia, others think that he is playing naked this time, but he is actually still wearing flesh-colored tight shirts and pants, and even uses a milk cover that is usually never used. Having said that, compared to the time when Eguan Bodai came, this time it was closer to the truth. Therefore, from a writer's diary or letter, you can often get a clearer opinion than looking at his works, that is, his own concise annotations. But it can't be taken very seriously. Some authors even worked their account books, and Schopenhauer used Sanskrit for his accounts, not wanting others to understand.另境先生的编这部书，我想是为了显示文人的全貌的，好在用心之古奥如叔本华先生者，中国还未必有。只是我的做序，可不比写信，总不免用些做序的拳经：这是要请编者读者，大家心照的。
I think Mr. Yijing's compilation of this book is to show the whole picture of the literati, but fortunately, there may not be an ancient person like Mr. Schopenhauer in China. It's just that my preface is not as good as writing a letter, and I can't help but use some preface boxing scriptures: this is to invite the editor and reader, everyone tacitly agrees.一九三五年十一月二十五夜，鲁迅记于上海闸北之且介亭。
On the night of November 25, 1935, Lu Xun recorded in Qiejie Pavilion in Zhabei, Shanghai.

杂谈小品文

杂谈小品文

杂谈小品文

Miscellaneous essays自从“小品文”这一个名目流行以来，看看书店广告，连信札，论文，都排在小品文里了，这自然只是生意经，不足为据。一般的意见，第一是在篇幅短。
Since the name "sketch essay" became popular, looking at bookstore advertisements, even letters and papers are ranked in the sketch text, which is naturally just a business experience and not enough evidence. The first general opinion is that the length is short.但篇幅短并不是小品文的特征。一条几何定理不过数十字，一部《老子》只有五千言，都不能说是小品。这该像佛经的小乘似的，先看内容，然后讲篇幅。讲小道理，或没道理，而又不是长篇的，才可谓之小品。至于有骨力的文章，恐不如谓之“短文”，短当然不及长，寥寥几句，也说不尽森罗万象，然而它并不“小”。
But short length is not a characteristic of essays. A geometric theorem is only a few tens of words, and a "Lao Tzu" is only 5,000 words, which cannot be said to be a sketch. This should be like the Hinayana of the Buddhist scriptures, first look at the content, and then talk about the length. Telling small truths, or not making sense, and not being long, can be called sketches. As for the article with bone strength, it may not be as good as a "short article", of course it is not as long as long, and a few sentences cannot say everything, but it is not "small".《史记》里的《伯夷列传》和《屈原贾谊列传》除去了引用的骚赋，其实也不过是小品，只因为他是“太史公”之作，又常见，所以没有人来选出，翻印。由晋至唐，也很有几个作家；宋文我不知道，但“江湖派”诗，却确是我所谓的小品。现在大家所提倡的，是明清，据说“抒写性灵”是它的特色。那时有一些人，确也只能够抒写性灵的，风气和环境，加上作者的出身和生活，也只能有这样的意思，写这样的文章。虽说抒写性灵，其实后来仍落了窠臼，不过是“赋得性灵”，照例写出那么一套来。当然也有人豫感到危难，后来是身历了危难的，所以小品文中，有时也夹着感愤，但在文字狱时，都被销毁，劈板了，于是我们所见，就只剩了“天马行空”似的超然的性灵。
The "Biography of Bo Yi" and "The Biography of Qu Yuan Jia Yi" in the "Records of the Grand Historian" are actually just sketches, except for the cited poems, just because he is the work of "Tai Shi Gong" and is common, so no one selects and reprints it. From the Jin Dynasty to the Tang Dynasty, there were also several writers; I don't know about Song Wen, but the "Jianghu School" poems are indeed my so-called sketches. What everyone advocates now is the Ming and Qing dynasties, and it is said that "expressing the spirit" is its characteristic. At that time, there were some people who could only express their spirituality, atmosphere and environment, plus the author's origin and life, and could only have this meaning and write such articles. Although it is said that the writing of the spirit of nature is actually out of the ordinary, it is just "endowed with the spirit", and it is written as usual. Of course, there are also people who feel in danger, and later experience danger, so in the sketch text, sometimes there is anger, but when the text prison, they are all destroyed and split, so what we see is only the transcendent spirit like "imaginative".这经过清朝检选的“性灵”，到得现在，却刚刚相宜，有明末的洒脱，无清初的所谓“悖谬”，有国时是高人，没国时还不失为逸士。逸士也得有资格，首先即在“超然”，“士”所以超庸奴，“逸”所以超责任：现在的特重明清小品，其实是大有理由，毫不足怪的。
This "spirit" that has been inspected and selected by the Qing Dynasty has just become appropriate, with the freedom and freedom of the late Ming Dynasty, without the so-called "paradox" of the early Qing Dynasty. Yishi must also be qualified, first of all, in "transcendent", "Shi" is so mediocre, and "Yi" is so responsible for it: the current special Ming and Qing sketches are actually very reasonable, and it is not surprising.不过“高人兼逸士梦”恐怕也不长久。近一年来，就露了大破绽，自以为高一点的，已经满纸空言，甚而至于胡说八道，下流的却成为打诨，和猥鄙丑角，并无不同，主意只在挖公子哥儿们的跳舞之资，和舞女们争生意，可怜之状，已经下于五四运动前后的鸳鸯蝴蝶派数等了。
However, the "dream of a master and a scholar" may not last long. In the past year, it has revealed a big flaw, thinking that it is a little higher, it has been full of empty words, and even nonsense, but the obscene one has become a joke, and the vulgar harlequin, no different, the idea is only to dig up the dancing qualifications of the young masters, and compete with the dancers for business, the pitiful situation, has been lower than the number of mandarin ducks and butterflies before and after the May Fourth Movement.为了这小品文的盛行，今年就又有翻印所谓“珍本”的事。有些论者，也以为可虑。我却觉得这是并非无用的。原本价贵，大抵无力购买，现在只用了一元或数角，就可以看见现代名人的祖师，以及先前的性灵，怎样叠床架屋，现在的性灵，怎样看人学样，啃过一堆牛骨头，即使是牛骨头，不也有了识见，可以不再被生炒牛角尖骗去了吗？
For the prevalence of this small article, there is another reprint of the so-called "rare book" this year. Some commentators also think it is a cause for concern. I don't think it's useless. Originally, it was expensive, and it was probably impossible to buy, but now with only one yuan or a few jiao, you can see the ancestors of modern celebrities, as well as the previous sexual spirits, how to stack beds and frame houses, and the current sexual spirits, how to look at people and imitate them, gnawing on a bunch of cow bones, even if it is a cow bone, don't you also have insight, can you no longer be deceived by the tips of raw fried cow horns?不过“珍本”并不就是“善本”，有些是正因为它无聊，没有人要看，这才日就灭亡，少下去；因为少，所以“珍”起来。就是旧书店里必讨大价的所谓“禁书”，也并非都是慷慨激昂，令人奋起的作品，清初，单为了作者也会禁，往往和内容简直不相干。这一层，却要读者有选择的眼光，也希望识者给相当的指点的。
However, "rare books" are not "rare books", some are precisely because they are boring and no one wants to read them, so they will perish and become less; Because there are few, it is "cherished". Even the so-called "banned books" that must be bargained for in used bookstores are not all impassioned and uplifting works, and in the early Qing Dynasty, they would be banned just for the author, and they were often simply irrelevant to the content. This layer requires readers to have a selective vision, and also hopes that knowledgeable people will give considerable guidance.十二月二日。
December 2nd.

“题未定”草

“题未定”草

“题未定”草

"Title undecided" draft六
Six记得T君曾经对我谈起过：我的《集外集》出版之后，施蛰存先生曾在什么刊物上有过批评，以为这本书不值得付印，最好是选一下。我至今没有看到那刊物；但从施先生的推崇《文选》和手定《晚明二十家小品》的功业，以及自标“言行一致”的美德推测起来，这也正像他的话。好在我现在并不要研究他的言行，用不着多管这些事。
I remember that Mr. T once talked to me: After the publication of my "Collection of Extra-Collections", Mr. Shi Zhicun criticized what publications he had in and thought that this book was not worth printing, and it was best to choose one. I have not seen the publication yet; However, from Mr. Shi's admiration of the "Anthology" and the hand-determined "Twenty Sketches of the Late Ming Dynasty", as well as the virtue of self-labeling "consistent in words and deeds", this is also like his words. Fortunately, I don't want to study his words and deeds now, so I don't need to meddle in these things.《集外集》的不值得付印，无论谁说，都是对的。其实岂只这一本书，将来重开四库馆时，恐怕我的一切译作，全在排除之列；虽是现在，天津图书馆的目录上，在《呐喊》和《彷徨》之下，就注着一个“销”字，“销”者，销毁之谓也；梁实秋教授充当什么图书馆主任时，听说也曾将我的许多译作驱逐出境。但从一般的情形而论，目前的出版界，却实在并不十分谨严，所以印了我的一本《集外集》，似乎也算不得怎么特别糟蹋了纸墨。至于选本，我倒以为是弊多利少的，记得前年就写过一篇《选本》，说明着自己的意见，后来就收在《集外集》中。
The "Collection of Outside the Collection" is not worth printing, no matter who says it, it is right. In fact, not only this book, when the Four Libraries are reopened in the future, I am afraid that all my translations will be excluded; Although it is now, in the catalog of Tianjin Library, under "Scream" and "Wandering", there is a word "sales", and "sales" also means destruction; When Professor Liang Shiqiu served as the director of the library, he heard that many of my translations were also expelled. But in general, the current publishing industry is really not very rigorous, so printing one of my "Collections of Outside Collections" does not seem to be a particularly bad waste of paper and ink. As for the selection, I thought it was more harmful than good, I remember that I wrote a "Selection" the year before last, explaining my opinions, and later it was included in the "Collection of Outside the Collection".自然，如果随便玩玩，那是什么选本都可以的，《文选》好，《古文观止》也可以。不过倘要研究文学或某一作家，所谓“知人论世”，那么，足以应用的选本就很难得。选本所显示的，往往并非作者的特色，倒是选者的眼光。眼光愈锐利，见识愈深广，选本固然愈准确，但可惜的是大抵眼光如豆，抹杀了作者真相的居多，这才是一个“文人浩劫”。例如蔡邕，选家大抵只取他的碑文，使读者仅觉得他是典重文章的作手，必须看见《蔡中郎集》里的《述行赋》（也见于《续古文苑》），那些“穷工巧于台榭兮，民露处而寝湿，委嘉谷于禽兽兮，下糠秕而无粒”（手头无书，也许记错，容后订正）的句子，才明白他并非单单的老学究，也是一个有血性的人，明白那时的情形，明白他确有取死之道。又如被选家录取了《归去来辞》和《桃花源记》，被论客赞赏着“采菊东篱下，悠然见南山”的陶潜先生，在后人的心目中，实在飘逸得太久了，但在全集里，他却有时很摩登，“愿在丝而为履，附素足以周旋，悲行止之有节，空委弃于床前”，竟想摇身一变，化为“阿呀呀，我的爱人呀”的鞋子，虽然后来自说因为“止于礼义”，未能进攻到底，但那些胡思乱想的自白，究竟是大胆的。就是诗，除论客所佩服的“悠然见南山”之外，也还有“精卫衔微木，将以填沧海，形天舞干戚，猛志固常在”之类的“金刚怒目”式，在证明着他并非整天整夜的飘飘然。这“猛志固常在”和“悠然见南山”的是一个人，倘有取舍，即非全人，再加抑扬，更离真实。譬如勇士，也战斗，也休息，也饮食，自然也性交，如果只取他末一点，画起像来，挂在妓院里，尊为性交大师，那当然也不能说是毫无根据的，然而，岂不冤哉！我每见近人的称引陶渊明，往往不禁为古人惋惜。
Naturally, if you play casually, you can choose any selection, "Anthology" is good, and "Ancient Texts and Observations" is also acceptable. However, if you want to study literature or a certain writer, the so-called "knowing people and discussing the world", then it is rare to find a selection that can be applied. What is shown in the selection is often not the author's characteristics, but the vision of the selector. The sharper the vision, the deeper and broader the knowledge, and the more accurate the selection, but unfortunately most of the eyes are like beans, and most of them erase the author's truth, which is a "literati catastrophe". For example, Cai Yong, the selector probably only took his inscriptions, so that the reader only felt that he was the author of the important article, and he must see the "Shuxing Fu" in the "Cai Zhonglang Collection" (also seen in the "Continuation of the Ancient Literary Garden"), those sentences of "poor craftsmen are skillful in the terrace, the people are exposed and wet, the good grain is given to the beasts, and the chaff is without grain" (there is no book at hand, maybe I remember it wrong, and it will be corrected later), only then do I understand that he is not just an old pedant, but also a bloody person, understand the situation at that time, and understand that he does have a way to die. Another example is Mr. Tao Qian, who was admitted to the selected family "Return to the Words" and "The Peach Blossom Spring", and was praised by commentators for "picking chrysanthemums under the east fence and leisurely seeing Nanshan", in the minds of future generations, it has been too long, but in the complete collection, he is sometimes very modern, "I am willing to wear shoes on silk, attach to the elements, and be sad and moderate, and abandon in front of the bed", and actually want to transform into the shoes of "Ah, my lover", although he later said that because of "stopping at propriety and righteousness", he failed to attack to the end, but those cranky confessions, It's bold. It is a poem, in addition to the "leisurely seeing the South Mountain" admired by the commentators, there are also "Jingwei Wei Weimu, will fill the sea, shape the sky dances with the Qi Qi, and the fierce will is always there" and other "King Kong angry eyes" style, which proves that he is not floating all day and night. This "fierce ambition is always there" and "leisurely seeing Nanshan" is a person, if there is a trade-off, that is, it is not a whole person, and if it is intonated, it will be even more far from the truth. For example, a warrior, also fighting, resting, eating, and naturally having sex, if you only take the last bit of him, draw a portrait, hang it in a brothel, and honor it as a master of sexual intercourse, of course, it cannot be said to be unfounded, however, isn't it unjust? Every time I see my neighbors praising Tao Yuanming, I often can't help but feel sorry for the ancients.这也是关于取用文学遗产的问题，潦倒而至于昏聩的人，凡是好的，他总归得不到。前几天，看见《时事新报》的《青光》上，引过林语堂先生的话，原文抛掉了，大意是说：老庄是上流，泼妇骂街之类是下流，他都要看，只有中流，剽上窃下，最无足观。如果我所记忆的并不错，那么，这真不但宣告了宋人语录，明人小品，下至《论语》，《人间世》，《宇宙风》这些“中流”作品的死刑，也透彻的表白了其人的毫无自信。不过这还是空腹高心之谈，因为虽是“中流”，也并不一概，即使同是剽窃，有取了好处的，有取了无用之处的，有取了坏处的，到得“中流”的下流，他就连剽窃也不会，“老庄”不必说了，虽是明清的文章，又何尝真的看得懂。
This is also about the question of accessing literary heritage, and those who are depressed to the point of faintness, whatever is good, he will never get it. A few days ago, I saw that in the "Qingguang" of the "Current Affairs News", Mr. Lin Yutang's words were quoted, and the original text was thrown away, to the effect that Lao Zhuang was upper-class, and shrews scolding the street were obscene, and he had to read it. If what I remember is not good, then this really not only announces the death penalty of Song people's quotations, Ming people's sketches, down to "The Analects", "The World on Earth", "Cosmic Wind" and other "middle-class" works, but also thoroughly confesses his lack of self-confidence. However, this is still an empty and high-minded statement, because although it is a "middle stream", it is not generalized, even if it is plagiarism, there are those who take benefits, there are useless things, there are bad points, and when it comes to the "middle stream" of the lewdness, he will not even plagiarize, "Lao Zhuang" needless to say, although it is an article of the Ming and Qing dynasties, how can it really be understood.标点古文，不但使应试的学生为难，也往往害得有名的学者出丑，乱点词曲，拆散骈文的美谈，已经成为陈迹，也不必回顾了；今年出了许多廉价的所谓珍本书，都有名家标点，关心世道者惄然忧之，以为足煽复古之焰。我却没有这么悲观，化国币一元数角，买了几本，既读古之中流的文章，又看今之中流的标点；今之中流，未必能懂古之中流的文章的结论，就从这里得来的。
Punctuating ancient texts not only embarrass the students taking the exam, but also often causes famous scholars to make a fool of themselves, mess up the lyrics and music, and dismantle the beautiful stories of parallel texts, which have become clichés and do not need to be reviewed; This year, many cheap so-called rare books have been published, all of which are punctuated by famous authors, and those who care about the world are worried about it, thinking that it is enough to fan the flame of retro. I was not so pessimistic, I bought a few copies, not only reading the articles of the ancient middle class, but also looking at the punctuation of the middle class today; Today's middle class may not be able to understand the conclusion of the ancient middle class article, which is obtained from here.例如罢，——这种举例，是很危险的，从古到今，文人的送命，往往并非他的什么“意德沃罗基”的悖谬，倒是为了个人的私仇居多。然而这里仍得举，因为写到这里，必须有例，所谓“箭在弦上，不得不发”者是也。但经再三忖度，决定“姑隐其名”，或者得免于难欤，这是我在利用中国人只顾空面子的缺点。
For example, ,—— example of the strike is very dangerous, from ancient times to the present, the death of literati is often not the paradox of his "Yi Devoroki", but mostly for personal personal vendetta. However, it still has to be cited here, because there must be an example to write here, the so-called "arrow on the string, must be shot". But after repeated consideration, I decided to "hide my name" or avoid difficulties, which is the shortcoming of me taking advantage of the Chinese to only care about empty face.例如罢，我买的“珍本”之中，有一本是张岱的《琅嬛文集》，“特印本实价四角”；据“乙亥十月，卢前冀野父”跋，是“化峭僻之途为康庄”的，但照标点看下去，却并不十分“康庄”。标点，对于五言或七言诗最容易，不必文学家，只要数学家就行，乐府就不大“康庄”了，所以卷三的《景清刺》里，有了难懂的句子：
For example, among the "rare books" I bought, one of them is Zhang Dai's "Langhuan Collection", "Special Print Price Four Corners"; According to the "Yihai October, Lu Qianji Yefu", it is "turning the steep and secluded road into a broad place", but if you look at it according to the punctuation, it is not very "broad". Punctuation, for five-character or seven-character poems, it is easiest, there is no need to be a writer, as long as a mathematician, Yuefu is not very "broad", so in the third volume of "Jingqing Tspur", there are difficult sentences:“……佩铅刀。藏膝髁。太史奏。机谋破。不称王向前。坐对御衣含血唾。……”
“…… 佩铅刀。 藏膝髁。 太史奏。 机谋破。 不称王向前。 坐对御衣含血唾。 ……”琅琅可诵，韵也押的，不过“不称王向前”这一句总有些费解。看看原序，有云：“清知事不成。跃而上。大怒曰。毋谓我王。即王敢尔耶。清曰。今日之号。尚称王哉。命抉其齿。王且。则含血前。淰御衣。上益怒。剥其肤。……”（标点悉遵原本）那么，诗该是“不称王，向前坐”了，“不称王”者，“尚称王哉”也；“向前坐”者，“则含血前”也。而序文的“跃而上。大怒曰”，恐怕也该是“跃而。上大怒曰”才合式，据作文之初阶，观下文之“上益怒”，可知也矣。
It can be recited and rhymed, but the sentence "not called Wang Qianqian" is always a bit puzzling. Looking at the original preface, there is a saying: "Qing Zhi is not successful." Jump up . He was very angry. Don't call me king. That is, the king dares to do this. Qing said. Today's title. He still claims to be king. He ordered his teeth to be gouged out. Wang  and. Then he came forward with blood. Dressed in imperial clothing. The emperor became even angrier. Peel off the skin. ......" (Punctuation follows the original) Then, the poem should be "not called king, sit forward", "not called king", "still called king"; "Sitting forward" means "before the blood." And the preface "jumps on. I am afraid it should also be "jumping . The emperor was furious and said, "The talent meets the standards. Based on the initial stage of writing, it is clear from the sentence below that "the emperor is even angrier."纵使明人小品如何“本色”，如何“性灵”，拿它乱玩究竟还是不行的，自误事小，误人可似乎不大好。例如卷六的《琴操》《脊令操》序里，有这样的句子：
No matter how "true colors" and "spirits" the sketches are, it is still not possible to play with them. For example, in the preface to "Qin Cao" and "Ridge Command Cao" in Volume 6, there is such a sentence:“秦府僚属。劝秦王世民。行周公之事。伏兵玄武门。射杀建成元吉魏征。伤亡作。”
“秦府僚属。 劝秦王世民。 行周公之事。 伏兵玄武门。 射杀建成元吉魏征。 伤亡作。 ”文章也很通，不过一翻《唐书》，就不免觉得魏征实在射杀得冤枉，他其实是秦王世民做了皇帝十七年之后，这才病死的。所以我们没有法，这里只好点作“射杀建成元吉，魏征伤亡作”。明明是张岱作的《琴操》，怎么会是魏征作呢，索性也将他射杀干净，固然不能说没有道理，不过“中流”文人，是常有拟作的，例如韩愈先生，就替周文王说过“臣罪当诛兮天王圣明”，所以在这里，也还是以“魏征伤亡作”为稳当。
The article is also very reasonable, but as soon as you turn to the "Book of Tang", you can't help but feel that Wei Zheng was really unjustly shot, and he actually died of illness after King Qin Shimin became emperor for seventeen years. So we have no way, so we have to click here to "shoot and kill Yuanji, Wei Zheng casualties". Obviously it was Zhang Dai's "Qin Cao", how could it be Wei Zheng's work, and he simply shot him clean, of course, it cannot be said that it is unreasonable, but the "middle-class" literati are often drafted, such as Mr. Han Yu, who said for King Wen of Zhou that "the sins of the minister should be punished by the Holy King of Heaven", so here, it is still safe to take "Wei Zheng's casualties".我在这里也犯了“文人相轻”罪，其罪状曰“吹毛求疵”。但我想“将功折罪”的，是证明了有些名人，连文章也看不懂，点不断，如果选起文章来，说这篇好，那篇坏，实在不免令人有些毛骨悚然，所以认真读书的人，一不可倚仗选本，二不可凭信标点。
I also committed the crime of "contempt for literati" here, and its crime is called "nitpicking". But what I think is "taking credit for the crime" is to prove that some celebrities can't even understand the article, and the point is constant, if you choose an article, say that this one is good, that article is bad, it is really a little creepy, so those who read seriously, one should not rely on the selection, and the other should not rely on beacons.七
Seven还有一样最能引读者入于迷途的，是“摘句”。它往往是衣裳上撕下来的一块绣花，经摘取者一吹嘘或附会，说是怎样超然物外，与尘浊无干，读者没有见过全体，便也被他弄得迷离惝恍。最显著的便是上文说过的“悠然见南山”的例子，忘记了陶潜的《述酒》和《读山海经》等诗，捏成他单是一个飘飘然，就是这摘句作怪。新近在《中学生》的十二月号上，看见了朱光潜先生的《说‘曲终人不见，江上数峰青’》的文章，推这两句为诗美的极致，我觉得也未免有以割裂为美的小疵。他说的好处是：
Another thing that can lead readers into confusion the most is "excerpts". It is often an embroidery torn off a piece of clothing, and the picker boasts or agrees with it, saying that it is transcendent and has nothing to do with the dust, and the reader has not seen the whole thing, and he is also confused by him. The most notable is the example of "leisurely seeing Nanshan" mentioned above, forgetting Tao Qian's poems such as "Telling the Wine" and "Reading the Classic of Mountains and Seas", and pinching him into a fluttering sentence, which is this excerpt. Recently, in the December issue of "Middle School Students", I saw Mr. Zhu Guangqian's article "Saying 'The End of the Song is Gone, and the Peaks on the River'", and I think there are inevitably small flaws in separating as beauty. He said the benefits are:“我爱这两句诗，多少是因为它对于我启示了一种哲学的意蕴。‘曲终人不见’所表现的是消逝，‘江上数峰青’所表现的是永恒。可爱的乐声和奏乐者虽然消逝了，而青山却巍然如旧，永远可以让我们把心情寄托在它上面。人到底是怕凄凉的，要求伴侣的。曲终了，人去了，我们一霎时以前所游目骋怀的世界猛然间好像从脚底倒塌去了。这是人生最难堪的一件事，但是一转眼间我们看到江上青峰，好像又找到另一个可亲的伴侣，另一个可托足的世界，而且它永远是在那里的。‘山穷水尽疑无路，柳暗花明又一村’，此种风味似之。不仅如此，人和曲果真消逝了么；这一曲缠绵悱恻的音乐没有惊动山灵？它没有传出江上青峰的妩媚和严肃？它没有深深地印在这妩媚和严肃里面？反正青山和湘灵的瑟声已发生这么一回的因缘，青山永在，瑟声和鼓瑟的人也就永在了。”
"I love these two poems somewhat because they reveal a philosophical meaning to me. ' At the end of the song, the people are gone' is expressed, and the 'several peaks on the river' is eternal. Although the lovely music and musicians are gone, the green mountains are still the same, and we can always pin our feelings on it. People are afraid of desolation and ask for a partner. The song ended, the people were gone, and the world we had been wandering in before suddenly seemed to collapse from the soles of our feet. This is the most embarrassing thing in life, but in the blink of an eye, we see Jiangshang Qingfeng, as if we have found another amiable partner, another world to rely on, and it will always be there. 'The mountains and rivers are full of doubts and there is no way, and the willows are dark and the flowers are bright and there is another village', this kind of flavor is similar. Not only that, but have people and songs really disappeared; This lingering and mournful music did not alarm the mountain spirits? It doesn't convey the charm and seriousness of Qingfeng on the river? Isn't it deeply imprinted in this charm and seriousness? Anyway, the sound of the green mountains and Xiangling has happened such a cause, the green mountains will always be there, and the people of the sound of the seme and the drums will always be there. ”这确已说明了他的所以激赏的原因。但也没有尽。读者是种种不同的，有的爱读《江赋》和《海赋》，有的欣赏《小园》或《枯树》。后者是徘徊于有无生灭之间的文人，对于人生，既惮扰攘，又怕离去，懒于求生，又不乐死，实有太板，寂绝又太空，疲倦得要休息，而休息又太凄凉，所以又必须有一种抚慰。于是“曲终人不见”之外，如“只在此山中，云深不知处”或“笙歌归院落，灯火下楼台”之类，就往往为人所称道。因为眼前不见，而远处却在，如果不在，便悲哀了，这就是道士之所以说“至心归命礼，玉皇大天尊！”也。
This does explain why he is so admirable. But it is not endless. Readers are all kinds of people, some love to read "Jiang Fu" and "Sea Fu", and some appreciate "Little Garden" or "Dead Tree". The latter is a literati who hovers between existence and death, and for life, they are both afraid of disturbance, afraid of leaving, lazy to survive, and not happy to die. Therefore, in addition to "no one is seen at the end of the song", such as "only in this mountain, the clouds are deep and I don't know where it is" or "the sheng song returns to the courtyard, and the lights go down to the building", etc., are often praised. Because it is not in front of you, but it is in the distance, if it is not there, it is sad, which is why the Taoist priest said, "Sincere surrender ceremony, Jade Emperor Tianzun!" "Also.抚慰劳人的圣药，在诗，用朱先生的话来说，是“静穆”：
The holy medicine that soothes people is "quiet" in poetry, in Mr. Zhu's words:“艺术的最高境界都不在热烈。就诗人之所以为人而论，他所感到的欢喜和愁苦也许比常人所感到的更加热烈。就诗人之所以为诗人而论，热烈的欢喜或热烈的愁苦经过诗表现出来以后，都好比黄酒经过长久年代的储藏，失去它的辣性，只剩一味醇朴。我在别的文章里曾经说过这一段话：‘懂得这个道理，我们可以明白古希腊人何以把和平静穆看作诗的极境，把诗神亚波罗摆在蔚蓝的山巅，俯瞰众生扰攘，而眉宇间却常如作甜蜜梦，不露一丝被扰动的神色？’这里所谓‘静穆’（Serenity）自然只是一种最高理想，不是在一般诗里所能找得到的。古希腊——尤其是古希腊的造形艺术——常使我们觉到这种‘静穆’的风味。‘静穆’是一种豁然大悟，得到归依的心情。它好比低眉默想的观音大士，超一切忧喜，同时你也可说它泯化一切忧喜。这种境界在中国诗里不多见。屈原阮籍李白杜甫都不免有些像金刚怒目，愤愤不平的样子。陶潜浑身是‘静穆’，所以他伟大。”
"The highest level of art is not warm. As far as the poet is concerned, the joy and sorrow he feels may be warmer than that of ordinary people. As far as the reason why a poet is a poet, after the warm joy or warm sorrow is expressed in the poem, it is like rice wine that has been stored for a long time, losing its spiciness, and only a mellow and simple thing. I have said this passage in other articles: 'Understanding this truth, we can understand why the ancient Greeks regarded peace and tranquility as the extreme realm of poetry, placing the poetic god Apollo on the top of the blue mountain, overlooking the disturbance of all living beings, but the eyebrows are often like sweet dreams, without showing a hint of disturbance?' The so-called 'Serenity' here is naturally just a supreme ideal, not found in ordinary poetry. Ancient Greece, especially the art of ancient Greece, often makes us feel this 'quiet' flavor. 'Quiet' is a feeling of sudden enlightenment and refuge. It is like Guanyin Guanyin meditating with low eyebrows, surpassing all sorrows and joys, and at the same time, you can also say that it extinguishes all sorrows and joys. This kind of realm is rare in Chinese poetry. Qu Yuan, Ruan Ji, Li Bai, and Du Fu couldn't help but look a little like King Kong's angry eyes and indignant. Tao Qian is 'quiet', so he is great. ”古希腊人，也许把和平静穆看作诗的极境的罢，这一点我毫无知识。但以现存的希腊诗歌而论，荷马的史诗，是雄大而活泼的，沙孚的恋歌，是明白而热烈的，都不静穆。我想，立“静穆”为诗的极境，而此境不见于诗，也许和立蛋形为人体的最高形式，而此形终不见于人一样。至于亚波罗之在山巅，那可因为他是“神”的缘故，无论古今，凡神像，总是放在较高之处的。这像，我曾见过照相，睁着眼睛，神清气爽，并不像“常如作甜蜜梦”。不过看见实物，是否“使我们觉到这种‘静穆’的风味”，在我可就很难断定了，但是，倘使真的觉得，我以为也许有些因为他“古”的缘故。
The ancient Greeks may have regarded peace and tranquility as the extreme state of poetry, but I have no knowledge of this. But in terms of existing Greek poetry, Homer's epic poems are majestic and lively, and Saffle's love songs are clear and warm, and they are not quiet. I think that "tranquility" is the extreme state of poetry, and this state is not found in poetry, perhaps just as the egg shape is the highest form of the human body, and this form is never seen in people. As for Apollo on the top of the mountain, it is because he is a "god", no matter ancient or modern, all god statues are always placed in a higher place. This is like I have seen a photo, with my eyes open and refreshed, not like "always like a sweet dream". However, it is difficult for me to conclude whether seeing the real thing "makes us feel this 'quiet' flavor", but if I really feel it, I think it may be because of its "ancient".我也是常常徘徊于雅俗之间的人，此刻的话，很近于大煞风景，但有时却自以为颇“雅”的：间或喜欢看看古董。记得十多年前，在北京认识了一个土财主，不知怎么一来，他也忽然“雅”起来了，买了一个鼎，据说是周鼎，真是土花斑驳，古色古香。而不料过不几天，他竟叫铜匠把它的土花和铜绿擦得一干二净，这才摆在客厅里，闪闪的发着铜光。这样的擦得精光的古铜器，我一生中还没有见过第二个。一切“雅士”，听到的无不大笑，我在当时，也不禁由吃惊而失笑了，但接着就变成肃然，好像得了一种启示。这启示并非“哲学的意蕴”，是觉得这才看见了近于真相的周鼎。鼎在周朝，恰如碗之在现代，我们的碗，无整年不洗之理，所以鼎在当时，一定是干干净净，金光灿烂的，换了术语来说，就是它并不“静穆”，倒有些“热烈”。这一种俗气至今未脱，变化了我衡量古美术的眼光，例如希腊雕刻罢，我总以为它现在之见得“只剩一味醇朴”者，原因之一，是在曾埋土中，或久经风雨，失去了锋棱和光泽的缘故，雕造的当时，一定是崭新，雪白，而且发闪的，所以我们现在所见的希腊之美，其实并不准是当时希腊人之所谓美，我们应该悬想它是一件新东西。
I am also a person who often wanders between elegance and vulgarity, and at this moment, it is very close to the scenery, but sometimes I think I am quite "elegant": sometimes I like to look at antiques. I remember more than ten years ago, I met a local rich man in Beijing, and somehow, he suddenly became "elegant" and bought a tripod, which is said to be Zhou Ding, which is really mottled and antique. Unexpectedly, a few days later, he asked the coppersmith to wipe off its native flowers and patina, and then placed it in the living room, shining with copper light. I have never seen a second such polished bronze in my life. All the "elegant people" laughed when they heard it, and I couldn't help but laugh at surprise at the time, but then it became solemn, as if I had received a kind of enlightenment. This revelation is not a "philosophical meaning", but a feeling that this is the Zhou Ding who sees close to the truth. The tripod was in the Zhou Dynasty, just like the bowl in modern times, our bowl, there is no reason not to wash it all year round, so the tripod must have been clean and golden at that time, in other words, it was not "quiet", but a little "warm". One of the reasons is that it has been buried in the soil, or has been weathered for a long time, losing its edge and luster, and at the time of carving, it must have been new, snow-white, and shining, so the beauty of Greece we see now is actually not the so-called beauty of the Greeks at that time, and we should think that it is a new thing.凡论文艺，虚悬了一个“极境”，是要陷入“绝境”的，在艺术，会迷惘于土花，在文学，则被拘迫而“摘句”。但“摘句”又大足以困人，所以朱先生就只能取钱起的两句，而踢开他的全篇，又用这两句来概括作者的全人，又用这两句来打杀了屈原，阮籍，李白，杜甫等辈，以为“都不免有些像金刚怒目，愤愤不平的样子”。其实是他们四位，都因为垫高朱先生的美学说，做了冤屈的牺牲的。
In art, you will be confused by the flowers, and in literature, you will be forced to "pick sentences". But the "excerpts" are big enough to trap people, so Mr. Zhu can only take two sentences from the money, and kick away his whole article, and use these two sentences to summarize the author's whole person, and use these two sentences to kill Qu Yuan, Ruan Ji, Li Bai, Du Fu and others, thinking that "they are all a bit like King Kong's angry eyes and indignant appearance". In fact, the four of them all made unjust sacrifices because of Mr. Zhu's aesthetic theory.我们现在先来看一看钱起的全篇罢：
Let's take a look at the whole article of Qian Qi:“省试湘灵鼓瑟
"The provincial test of Xiangling drums善鼓云和瑟，常闻帝子灵。冯夷空自舞，楚客不堪听。善鼓云和瑟，常闻帝子灵。 冯夷空自舞，楚客不堪听。 苦调凄金石，清音入杳冥。苍梧来怨慕，白芷动芳馨。苦调凄金石，清音入杳冥。 苍梧来怨慕，白芷动芳馨。 流水传湘浦，悲风过洞庭。曲终人不见，江上数峰青。”流水传湘浦，悲风过洞庭。 曲终人不见，江上数峰青。 ”
要证成“醇朴”或“静穆”，这全篇实在是不宜称引的，因为中间的四联，颇近于所谓“衰飒”。但没有上文，末两句便显得含胡，不过这含胡，却也许又是称引者之所谓超妙。现在一看题目，便明白“曲终”者结“鼓瑟”，“人不见”者点“灵”字，“江上数峰青”者做“湘”字，全篇虽不失为唐人的好试帖，但末两句也并不怎么神奇了。况且题上明说是“省试”，当然不会有“愤愤不平的样子”，假使屈原不和椒兰吵架，却上京求取功名，我想，他大约也不至于在考卷上大发牢骚的，他首先要防落第。
To prove that it is "mellow" or "quiet", this whole article is really not suitable to be quoted, because the quadruple in the middle is quite close to the so-called "decline". But without the above, the last two sentences seem to contain a beard, but this beard may be the so-called super of the introducer. Now when I look at the title, I understand that the "end of the song" is the "drum se", the "people are not seen" point to the word "spirit", and the "several peaks on the river" are the word "Xiang". If Qu Yuan did not quarrel with Jiao Lan, but went to Beijing to seek fame, I think he probably wouldn't complain on the exam paper, he must first prevent failure.我们于是应该再来看看这《湘灵鼓瑟》的作者的另外的诗了。但我手头也没有他的诗集，只有一部《大历诗略》，也是迂夫子的选本，不过篇数却不少，其中有一首是：
We should then take a look at another poem by the author of "Xiangling Drum Se". But I don't have any collection of his poems at hand, only one "Dali Poems", which is also a selection of Master Yu, but there are a lot of them, one of which is:“下第题长安客舍
"The failure is the Chang'an inn不遂青云望，愁看黄鸟飞。梨花寒食夜，客子未春衣。不遂青云望，愁看黄鸟飞。 梨花寒食夜，客子未春衣。 世事随时变，交情与我违。空余主人柳，相见却依依。”世事随时变，交情与我违。 空余主人柳，相见却依依。 ”
一落第，在客栈的墙壁上题起诗来，他就不免有些愤愤了，可见那一首《湘灵鼓瑟》，实在是因为题目，又因为省试，所以只好如此圆转活脱。他和屈原，阮籍，李白，杜甫四位，有时都不免是怒目金刚，但就全体而论，他长不到丈六。
As soon as he failed, he inscribed a poem on the wall of the inn, and he couldn't help but feel a little indignant, which shows that the song "Xiangling Drum Se" is really because of the title and because of the provincial exam, so it has to be so round and lively. He, Qu Yuan, Ruan Ji, Li Bai, and Du Fu sometimes can't help but glare at King Kong, but as far as the whole is concerned, he is less than six feet tall.世间有所谓“就事论事”的办法，现在就诗论诗，或者也可以说是无碍的罢。不过我总以为倘要论文，最好是顾及全篇，并且顾及作者的全人，以及他所处的社会状态，这才较为确凿。要不然，是很容易近乎说梦的。但我也并非反对说梦，我只主张听者心里明白所听的是说梦，这和我劝那些认真的读者不要专凭选本和标点本为法宝来研究文学的意思，大致并无不同。自己放出眼光看过较多的作品，就知道历来的伟大的作者，是没有一个“浑身是‘静穆’”的。陶潜正因为并非“浑身是‘静穆’，所以他伟大”。现在之所以往往被尊为“静穆”，是因为他被选文家和摘句家所缩小，凌迟了。
There is a so-called "talking about things" in the world, and now it is about poetry, or it can be said that it is unhindered. However, I always think that if you want a paper, it is best to take into account the whole article, and take into account the whole person of the author and the social state in which he lives, which is more certain. Otherwise, it is easy to almost talk about dreams. But I am not against dreaming, I only advocate that the listener understands in his heart that what he is listening to is dreaming, which is roughly no different from my intention to advise serious readers not to rely solely on anthologies and punctuation books as magic weapons to study literature. If you look at more works, you will know that none of the great authors of history are "quiet". Tao Qianzheng is great because he is not "full of 'quietness'". The reason why he is often revered as "quiet" now is because he has been narrowed down by the selectors and excerpts.八
Eight现在还在流传的古人文集，汉人的已经没有略存原状的了，魏的嵇康，所存的集子里还有别人的赠答和论难，晋的阮籍，集里也有伏义的来信，大约都是很古的残本，由后人重编的。《谢宣城集》虽然只剩了前半部，但有他的同僚一同赋咏的诗。我以为这样的集子最好，因为一面看作者的文章，一面又可以见他和别人的关系，他的作品，比之同咏者，高下如何，他为什么要说那些话……现在采取这样的编法的，据我所知道，则《独秀文存》，也附有和所存的“文”相关的别人的文字。
The collection of ancient writings that is still circulating, the Han people no longer have a little bit of the original state, Wei's Ji Kang, there are other people's gifts and criticisms in the preserved collection, Jin's Ruan Ji, there are also letters from Fu Yi in the collection, which are probably very ancient fragments, recompiled by later generations. Although only the first half of the "Xie Xuancheng Collection" remains, there are poems composed by his colleagues. I think this kind of collection is the best, because while reading the author's articles, you can see his relationship with others, how his works are compared to the same singer, and why did he say those words...... Now that this method is adopted, as far as I know, "Duxiu Wencun" also has other people's words related to the "text" in existence.那些了不得的作家，谨严入骨，惜墨如金，要把一生的作品，只删存一个或者三四个字，刻之泰山顶上，“传之其人”，那当然听他自己的便，还有鬼蜮似的“作家”，明明有天兵天将保佑，姓名大可公开，他却偏要躲躲闪闪，生怕他的“作品”和自己的原形发生关系，随作随删，删到只剩下一张白纸，到底什么也没有，那当然也听他自己的便。如果多少和社会有些关系的文字，我以为是都应该集印的，其中当然夹杂着许多废料，所谓“榛楛弗剪”，然而这才是深山大泽。现在已经不像古代，要手抄，要木刻，只要用铅字一排就够。虽说排印，糟蹋纸墨自然也还是糟蹋纸墨的，不过只要一想连杨邨人之流的东西也还在排印，那就无论什么都可以闭着眼睛发出去了。中国人常说“有一利必有一弊”，也就是“有一弊必有一利”：揭起小无耻之旗，固然要引出无耻群，但使谦让者泼剌起来，却是一利。
Those great writers, rigorous to the bone, cherish ink like gold, want to delete the works of a lifetime, only one or three or four words, engrave on the top of Mount Tai, "pass it on to the person", then of course listen to his own convenience, and there are ghostly "writers", obviously there are heavenly soldiers and generals to bless, the name can be made public, but he prefers to dodge, for fear that his "works" will have a relationship with his original form, and he will delete it as he goes, and delete it until there is only a blank piece of paper left, and there is nothing in the end, so of course he also listens to his own convenience. If there are more or less words that have something to do with society, I think they should be printed, of course, there are many waste materials, the so-called "hazel and catalpa are not cut", but this is the deep mountains and great marshes. Now it is not like ancient times, if you want to copy by hand or woodcut, it is enough to use a row of lead characters. Although typesetting and spoiling paper and ink are naturally still spoiling paper and ink, as long as you think that even things like Yang Cun people are still typesetting, then anything can be sent out with your eyes closed. Chinese people often say that "there must be a benefit and a disadvantage", that is, "there must be a disadvantage and a benefit": raising the banner of small shamelessness is certainly to lead out the shameless group, but it is a benefit to make the humble splash.收回了谦让的人，在实际上也并不少，但又是所谓“爱惜自己”的居多。“爱惜自己”当然并不是坏事情，至少，他不至于无耻，然而有些人往往误认“装点”和“遮掩”为“爱惜”。集子里面，有兼收“少作”的，然而偏去修改一下，在孩子的脸上，种上一撮白胡须；也有兼收别人之作的，然而又大加拣选，决不取谩骂诬蔑的文章，以为无价值。其实是这些东西，一样的和本文都有价值的，即使那力量还不够引出无耻群，但倘和有价值的本文有关，这就是它在当时的价值。中国的史家是早已明白了这一点的，所以历史里大抵有循吏传，隐逸传，却也有酷吏传和佞幸传，有忠臣传，也有奸臣传。因为不如此，便无从知道全般。
There are actually not many people who have withdrawn their humility, but most of them are the so-called "cherish themselves". "Cherishing yourself" is certainly not a bad thing, at least, he is not shameless, but some people often mistake "decorating" and "concealing" as "cherishing". In the collection, there are those who combine "less work", but if you modify it, plant a pinch of white beard on the child's face; There are also those who accept the works of others, but they are selective, and they will never take abusive and slanderous articles, thinking they are worthless. In fact, these things are the same as this article, even if the power is not enough to lead out the shameless group, but if it is related to a valuable article, this is its value at that time. Chinese historians have long understood this, so there are probably legends of officials and hermits in history, but there are also legends of cool officials and flatterers, there are legends of loyal ministers, and there are also legends of traitors. Because if you don't do this, you can't know the whole thing.而且一任鬼蜮的技俩随时消灭，也不能洞晓反鬼蜮者的人和文章。山林隐逸之作不必论，倘使这作者是身在人间，带些战斗性的，那么，他在社会上一定有敌对。只是这些敌对决不肯自承，时时撒娇道：“冤乎枉哉，这是他把我当作假想敌了呀！”可是留心一看，他的确在放暗箭，一经指出，这才改为明枪，但又说这是因为被诬为“假想敌”的报复。所用的技俩，也是决不肯任其流传的，不但事后要它消灭，就是临时也在躲闪；而编集子的人又不屑收录。于是到得后来，就只剩了一面的文章了，无可对比，当时的抗战之作，就都好像无的放矢，独个人在向着空中发疯。我尝见人评古人的文章，说谁是“锋棱太露”，谁又是“剑拔弩张”，就因为对面的文章，完全消灭了的缘故，倘在，是也许可以减去评论家几分懵懂的。所以我以为此后该有博采种种所谓无价值的别人的文章，作为附录的集子。以前虽无成例，却是留给后来的宝贝，其功用与铸了魑魅罔两的形状的禹鼎相同。
Moreover, the skills of a ghost can be eliminated at any time, and it is impossible to understand the people and articles of the anti-ghost demon. Needless to say, if this author is in the world and has some combativeness, then he must be hostile in society. It's just that these hostile opponents refused to admit it, and said coquettishly: "It's unjust, this is him treating me as an imaginary enemy!" But if you pay attention, he is indeed firing a hidden arrow, and once pointed out, he changed it to an open gun, but he said that this was because he was falsely accused of being an "imaginary enemy" in retaliation. The techniques used are also absolutely unwilling to be passed on, not only to destroy them afterwards, but also to dodge temporarily; And the people who compiled the collection disdained to include it. So later, there was only one article left, which was incomparable, and the works of the Anti-Japanese War at that time seemed to be aimless, and the only person was crazy in the air. I have seen people comment on the articles of the ancients, saying that who is "too sharp" and who is "tense", just because the article on the opposite side has been completely eliminated, if it is, it may be possible to subtract a little ignorance from the critics. So I think that in the future, there should be a collection of articles by other people that are so-called worthless. Although there was no precedent before, it was left for later treasures, and its function was the same as that of the Yuding cast in the shape of a ghost.就是近来的有些期刊，那无聊，无耻与下流，也是世界上不可多得的物事，然而这又确是现代中国的或一群人的“文学”，现在可以知今，将来可以知古，较大的图书馆，都必须保存的。但记得C君曾经告诉我，不但这些，连认真切实的期刊，也保存的很少，大抵只在把外国的杂志，一大本一大本的装起来：还是生着“贵古而贱今，忽近而图远”的老毛病。
It is also a rare thing in the world that some recent periodicals, which are boring, shameless and obscene, are also rare things in the world, but this is indeed the "literature" of modern China or a group of people, which can be known now and the past, and larger libraries must be preserved. But I remember that Mr. C once told me that not only these, but even serious and practical periodicals are rarely preserved, and they are probably only packing foreign magazines, one by one: there is still an old problem of "valuing the past and despising the present, suddenly near and trying to be far".九
Nine仍是上文说过的所谓《珍本丛书》之一的张岱《琅嬛文集》，那卷三的书牍类里，有《又与毅儒八弟》的信，开首说：
It is still Zhang Dai's "Langhuan Collection", which is one of the so-called "Rare Books Series" mentioned above, and in the book category of Volume 3, there is a letter of "And the Eighth Brother of Yiru", which begins with:“前见吾弟选《明诗存》，有一字不似钟谭者，必弃置不取；今几社诸君子盛称王李，痛骂钟谭，而吾弟选法又与前一变，有一字似钟谭者，必弃置不取。钟谭之诗集，仍此诗集，吾弟手眼，仍此手眼，而乃转若飞蓬，捷如影响，何胸无定识，目无定见，口无定评，乃至斯极耶？盖吾弟喜钟谭时，有钟谭之好处，尽有钟谭之不好处，彼盖玉常带璞，原不该尽视为连城；吾弟恨钟谭时，有钟谭之不好处，仍有钟谭之好处，彼盖瑕不掩瑜，更不可尽弃为瓦砾。吾弟勿以几社君子之言，横据胸中，虚心平气，细细论之，则其妍丑自见，奈何以他人好尚为好尚哉！……”
“前见吾弟选《明诗存》，有一字不似钟谭者，必弃置不取；今几社诸君子盛称王李，痛骂钟谭，而吾弟选法又与前一变，有一字似钟谭者，必弃置不取。 钟谭之诗集，仍此诗集，吾弟手眼，仍此手眼，而乃转若飞蓬，捷如影响，何胸无定识，目无定见，口无定评，乃至斯极耶？盖吾弟喜钟谭时，有钟谭之好处，尽有钟谭之不好处，彼盖玉常带璞，原不该尽视为连城；吾弟恨钟谭时，有钟谭之不好处，仍有钟谭之好处，彼盖瑕不掩瑜，更不可尽弃为瓦砾。 吾弟勿以几社君子之言，横据胸中，虚心平气，细细论之，则其妍丑自见，奈何以他人好尚为好尚哉！……”这是分明的画出随风转舵的选家的面目，也指证了选本的难以凭信的。张岱自己，则以为选文造史，须无自己的意见，他在《与李砚翁》的信里说：“弟《石匮》一书，泚笔四十余载，心如止水秦铜，并不自立意见，故下笔描绘，妍媸自见，敢言刻划，亦就物肖形而已。……”然而心究非镜，也不能虚，所以立“虚心平气”为选诗的极境，“并不自立意见”为作史的极境者，也像立“静穆”为诗的极境一样，在事实上不可得。数年前的文坛上所谓“第三种人”杜衡辈，标榜超然，实为群丑，不久即本相毕露，知耻者皆羞称之，无待这里多说了；就令自觉不怀他意，屹然中立如张岱者，其实也还是偏倚的。他在同一信中，论东林云：
This clearly depicts the face of the selector who turns the rudder with the wind, and also proves that the selection is unbelievable. Zhang Dai himself thought that he had no opinion of his own to select articles and make history, and he said in his letter "With Li Yanweng": "My brother's book "Shikui", the pen has been written for more than 40 years, and the heart is like still water Qin copper, and it does not stand on its own, so it is depicted, beautiful and ugly, and dares to say and carve, and it is just a shape. ......However, the mind is not a mirror, nor can it be empty, so it is not possible to establish "humility and calmness" as the extreme state of poetry selection, and "not independent opinions" as the extreme state of history, just like the extreme state of "tranquility" as poetry, in fact. A few years ago, the so-called "third kind of people" in the literary world, Du Heng and his generation, flaunted themselves as transcendent, but they were actually ugly, and soon their true nature was revealed, and those who knew shame were ashamed to call it, so there was no need to say more here; Even if he feels that he has no ulterior motives and stands neutral like Zhang Dai, he is actually still biased. In the same letter, he said of Donglin:“……夫东林自顾泾阳讲学以来，以此名目，祸我国家者八九十年，以其党升沉，用占世数兴败，其党盛则为终南之捷径，其党败则为元祐之党碑。……盖东林首事者实多君子，窜入者不无小人，拥戴者皆为小人，招徕者亦有君子，此其间线索甚清，门户甚迥。……东林之中，其庸庸碌碌者不必置论，如贪婪强横之王图，奸险凶暴之李三才，闯贼首辅之项煜，上笺劝进之周钟，以致窜入东林，乃欲俱奉之以君子，则吾臂可断，决不敢徇情也。东林之尤可丑者，时敏之降闯贼曰，‘吾东林时敏也’，以冀大用。鲁王监国，蕞尔小朝廷，科道任孔当辈犹曰，‘非东林不可进用’。则是东林二字，直与蕞尔鲁国及汝偕亡者。手刃此辈，置之汤镬，出薪真不可不猛也。……”
“…… 夫东林自顾泾阳讲学以来，以此名目，祸我国家者八九十年，以其党升沉，用占世数兴败，其党盛则为终南之捷径，其党败则为元祐之党碑。 …… 盖东林首事者实多君子，窜入者不无小人，拥戴者皆为小人，招徕者亦有君子，此其间线索甚清，门户甚迥。 …… 东林之中，其庸庸碌碌者不必置论，如贪婪强横之王图，奸险凶暴之李三才，闯贼首辅之项煜，上笺劝进之周钟，以致窜入东林，乃欲俱奉之以君子，则吾臂可断，决不敢徇情也。 东林之尤可丑者，时敏之降闯贼曰，‘吾东林时敏也’，以冀大用。 鲁王监国，蕞尔小朝廷，科道任孔当辈犹曰，‘非东林不可进用’。 则是东林二字，直与蕞尔鲁国及汝偕亡者。 手刃此辈，置之汤镬，出薪真不可不猛也。 ……”这真可谓“词严义正”。所举的群小，也都确实的，尤其是时敏，虽在三百年后，也何尝无此等人，真令人惊心动魄。然而他的严责东林，是因为东林党中也有小人，古今来无纯一不杂的君子群，于是凡有党社，必为自谓中立者所不满，就大体而言，是好人多还是坏人多，他就置之不论了。或者还更加一转云：东林虽多君子，然亦有小人，反东林者虽多小人，然亦有正士，于是好像两面都有好有坏，并无不同，但因东林世称君子，故有小人即可丑，反东林者本为小人，故有正士则可嘉，苛求君子，宽纵小人，自以为明察秋毫，而实则反助小人张目。倘说：东林中虽亦有小人，然多数为君子，反东林者虽亦有正士，而大抵是小人。那么，斤量就大不相同了。
This can really be described as "strict and righteous". The group of small people mentioned is also true, especially Shi Min, although three hundred years later, there are no such people, which is really thrilling. However, his severe reprimand of Donglin is because there are also villains in the Donglin Party, and there is no pure and unmixed group of gentlemen in ancient and modern times, so wherever there is a party society, it must be dissatisfied with those who claim to be neutral. Or it is even more twisted: Although there are many gentlemen in Donglin, there are also villains, although there are many villains who oppose Donglin, but there are also righteous people, so it seems that there are good and bad on both sides, and there is no difference, but because Donglin is called a gentleman in the world, there are villains can be ugly, and those who oppose Donglin are originally villains, so there are righteous people who are commendable. If you say: Although there are villains in Donglin, most of them are gentlemen, and although there are righteous people who oppose Donglin, most of them are villains. Then, the weight of the pound is very different.谢国桢先生作《明清之际党社运动考》，钩索文籍，用力甚勤，叙魏忠贤两次虐杀东林党人毕，说道：“那时候，亲戚朋友，全远远的躲避，无耻的士大夫，早投降到魏党的旗帜底下了。说一两句公道话，想替诸君子帮忙的，只有几个书呆子，还有几个老百姓。”
Mr. Xie Guozhen wrote "Examination of the Party and Social Movement in the Ming and Qing Dynasties", hooked up the literature, worked very hard, and recounted Wei Zhongxian's two abuses of Donglin Party members, saying: "At that time, relatives and friends, all avoided from a distance, and the shameless scholar-officials had already surrendered under the banner of the Wei Party. To say a word or two fairly, there are only a few nerds and a few ordinary people who want to help the gentlemen. ”这说的是魏忠贤使缇骑捕周顺昌，被苏州人民击散的事。诚然，老百姓虽然不读诗书，不明史法，不解在瑜中求瑕，屎里觅道，但能从大概上看，明黑白，辨是非，往往有决非清高通达的士大夫所可几及之处的。刚刚接到本日的《大美晚报》，有“北平特约通讯”，记学生游行，被警察水龙喷射，棍击刀砍，一部分则被闭于城外，使受冻馁，“此时燕冀中学师大附中及附近居民纷纷组织慰劳队，送水烧饼馒头等食物，学生略解饥肠……”谁说中国的老百姓是庸愚的呢，被愚弄诓骗压迫到现在，还明白如此。张岱又说：“忠臣义士多见于国破家亡之际，如敲石出火，一闪即灭，人主不急起收之，则火种绝矣。”（《越绝诗小序》）他所指的“人主”是明太祖，和现在的情景不相符。
This is about Wei Zhongxian envoying Tiqi to capture Zhou Shunchang, who was scattered by the people of Suzhou. It is true that although the common people do not read poetry and books, do not know the historical law, and do not know how to seek flaws in Yu and find the way in, they can see from a general point of view, distinguish between black and white, and distinguish right from wrong, which is often beyond the reach of scholars and officials. At this time, the High School Affiliated to Yanji Middle School and nearby residents have organized comfort teams to send water cakes, steamed buns and other food, and the students have relieved their hunger a little...... "Who said that the Chinese people are mediocre and foolish, and they have been fooled and oppressed until now, and they still understand this." Zhang Dai also said: "Loyal ministers and righteous men are often seen when the country is destroyed and the family is destroyed, such as knocking on a stone and making a fire, which is extinguished in a flash, and the owner does not rush to collect it, then the fire will be extinguished." The "lord" he refers to is Ming Taizu, which is inconsistent with the current situation.石在，火种是不会绝的。但我要重申九年前的主张：不要再请愿！
The stone is there, and the fire will not be extinguished. But I want to reiterate the idea of nine years ago: no more petitions!十二月十八——十九夜。
December 18-19 night.

论新文字

论新文字

论新文字

On the new text汉字拉丁化的方法一出世，方块字系的简笔字和注音字母，都赛下去了，还在竞争的只有罗马字拼音。这拼法的保守者用来打击拉丁化字的最大的理由，是说它方法太简单，有许多字很不容易分别。
As soon as the method of Latinization of Chinese characters was born, the stick figures and phonetic letters of the square character system were all competing, and only Roman pinyin was still competing. The biggest reason why conservatives of this spelling use it to combat Latinized words is that it is too simple and many words are not easy to distinguish.这确是一个缺点。凡文字，倘若容易学，容易写，常常是未必精密的。烦难的文字，固然不见得一定就精密，但要精密，却总不免比较的烦难。罗马字拼音能显四声，拉丁化字不能显，所以没有“东”“董”之分，然而方块字能显“东”“”之分，罗马字拼音却也不能显。单拿能否细别一两个字来定新文字的优劣，是并不确当的。况且文字一用于组成文章，那意义就会明显。虽是方块字，倘若单取一两个字，也往往难以确切的定出它的意义来。例如“日者”这两个字，如果只是这两个字，我们可以作“太阳这东西”解，可以作“近几天”解，也可以作“占卜吉凶的人”解；又如“果然”，大抵是“竟是”的意思，然而又是一种动物的名目，也可以作隆起的形容；就是一个“一”字，在孤立的时候，也不能决定它是数字“一二三”之“一”呢，还是动词“四海一”之“一”。不过组织在句子里，这疑难就消失了。所以取拉丁化的一两个字，说它含胡，并不是正当的指摘。
This is indeed a disadvantage. All words, if they are easy to learn and easy to write, are often not necessarily precise. Difficult words are not necessarily precise, but if they want to be precise, they will always be more troublesome. Romanization can show four tones, and Latinized characters cannot be displayed, so there is no distinction between "Dong" and "Dong", but square characters can show the distinction of "Dong" and "", but Romanization Pinyin cannot be displayed. It is not accurate to determine the merits and demerits of a new character by distinguishing one or two words alone. Moreover, once the text is used to form an article, the meaning will be obvious. Although it is a square word, if you take one or two words alone, it is often difficult to determine its meaning exactly. For example, the word "day", if it is only these two words, we can interpret it as "the sun", "recent days", or "divination of good and bad fortune"; Another example is "sure enough", which probably means "actually is", but it is also the name of an animal, which can also be described as bulging; It is a word "one", and when isolated, it cannot be determined whether it is the "one" of the number "one, two, three", or the "one" of the verb "one of the four seas". But when organized in a sentence, this difficulty disappears. Therefore, taking one or two Latinized words and saying that it contains a beard is not a legitimate accusation.主张罗马字拼音和拉丁化者两派的争执，其实并不在精密和粗疏，却在那由来，也就是目的。罗马字拼音者是以古来的方块字为主，翻成罗马字，使大家都来照这规矩写，拉丁化者却以现在的方言为主，翻成拉丁字，这就是规矩。假使翻一部《诗韵》来作比赛，后者是赛不过的，然而要写出活人的口语来，倒轻而易举。这一点，就可以补它的不精密的缺点而有余了，何况后来还可以凭着实验，逐渐补正呢。
The dispute between the two schools of arguing Romanization and Latinizers is not actually precise and rough, but where it originates, that is, the purpose. Romanization is based on ancient square characters, translated into Roman characters, so that everyone can write according to this rule, but Latinizers mainly use the current dialect and translate it into Latin characters, which is the rule. If a "Poetry Rhyme" is turned into a competition, the latter cannot compete, but it is easy to write the spoken language of a living person. This can more than make up for its imprecise shortcomings, not to mention that it can be gradually corrected by experiments later.易举和难行是改革者的两大派。同是不满于现状，但打破现状的手段却大不同：一是革新，一是复古。同是革新，那手段也大不同：一是难行，一是易举。这两者有斗争。难行者的好幌子，一定是完全和精密，借此来阻碍易举者的进行，然而它本身，却因为是虚悬的计划，结果总并无成就：就是不行。
Easy and difficult are the two major factions of reformers. They are both dissatisfied with the status quo, but the means to break the status quo are very different: one is innovation, the other is retro. The same is innovation, but the means are also very different: one is difficult to do, the other is easy to do. There is a struggle between the two. The good guise of the difficult person must be complete and sophisticated, so as to hinder the progress of the easy one, but itself, because it is a false plan, the result is always nothing: it just can't work.这不行，可又正是难行的改革者的慰藉，因为它虽无改革之实，却有改革之名。有些改革者，是极爱谈改革的，但真的改革到了身边，却使他恐惧。惟有大谈难行的改革，这才可以阻止易举的改革的到来，就是竭力维持着现状，一面大谈其改革，算是在做他那完全的改革的事业。这和主张在床上学会了浮水，然后再去游泳的方法，其实是一样的。
This is not good, but it is the comfort of difficult reformers, because although it has no reform, it has the name of reform. Some reformers love to talk about reform, but when they really reform around them, they are afraid. Only by talking about reforms that are difficult to implement can we prevent the arrival of easy reforms, that is, trying to maintain the status quo and talking about its reforms while doing our best to do his complete reform cause. This is actually the same as advocating learning to float in bed and then swimming.拉丁化却没有这空谈的弊病，说得出，就写得来，它和民众是有联系的，不是研究室或书斋里的清玩，是街头巷尾的东西；它和旧文字的关系轻，但和人民的联系密，倘要大家能够发表自己的意见，收获切要的知识，除它以外，确没有更简易的文字了。
Latinization does not have the disadvantages of empty talk, it can be said, it can be written, it is connected with the people, not a play in the laboratory or study, but a thing in the streets and alleys; It has little to do with the old script, but it is closely connected with the people, and if everyone can express their opinions and gain important knowledge, there is indeed no simpler script besides it.而且由只识拉丁化字的人们写起创作来，才是中国文学的新生，才是现代中国的新文学，因为他们是没有中一点什么《庄子》和《文选》之类的毒的。
Moreover, it is the new life of Chinese literature and the new literature of modern China that is written and created by people who only know Latinized characters, because they do not have any poison such as "Zhuangzi" and "Anthology".十二月二十三日。
December 23.

《死魂灵百图》小引

《死魂灵百图》小引

《死魂灵百图》小引

A small introduction to "The Hundred Pictures of Dead Souls"果戈理开手作《死魂灵》第一部的时候，是一八三五年的下半年，离现在足有一百年了。幸而，还是不幸呢，其中的许多人物，到现在还很有生气，使我们不同国度，不同时代的读者，也觉得仿佛写着自己的周围，不得不叹服他伟大的写实的本领。不过那时的风尚，却究竟有了变迁，例如男子的衣服，和现在虽然小异大同，而闺秀们的高髻圆裙，则已经少见；那时的时髦的车子，并非流线形的摩托卡，却是三匹马拉的篷车，照着跳舞夜会的所谓眩眼的光辉，也不是电灯，只不过许多插在多臂烛台上的蜡烛：凡这些，倘使没有图画，是很难想像清楚的。
When Gogol started the first part of "Dead Souls", it was in the second half of 1835, a hundred years from now. Fortunately, or unfortunately, many of these characters are still very lively, so that readers from different countries and eras also feel as if they are writing about their surroundings, and have to admire his great realism ability. However, the fashion at that time has changed, for example, although men's clothes are slightly different from now, and the high updo and round skirts of ladies are rare; The fashionable cars of that time were not streamlined motorcycles, but three-horse wagons, illuminating the so-called dazzling brilliance of dancing soirées, nor electric lights, but many candles inserted in multi-armed candlesticks: all of this, without pictures, is difficult to imagine.关于《死魂灵》的有名的图画，据里斯珂夫说，一共有三种，而最正确和完备的是阿庚的百图。这图画先有七十二幅，未详何年出版，但总在一八四七年之前，去现在也快要九十年；后来即成为难得之品，新近苏联出版的《文学辞典》里，曾采它为插画，可见已经是有了定评的文献了。虽在它的本国，恐怕也只能在图书馆中相遇，更何况在我们中国。今年秋末，孟十还君忽然在上海的旧书店里看到了这画集，便像孩子望见了糖果似的，立刻奔走呼号，总算弄到手里了，是一八九三年印的第四版，不但百图完备，还增加了收藏家蔼甫列摩夫所藏的三幅，并那时的广告画和第一版封纸上的小图各一幅，共计一百零五图。
Regarding the famous drawings of "Dead Souls", according to Riskov, there are three types, and the most correct and complete is Ah Geng's Hundred Drawings. There were seventy-two of these paintings, and it is unknown when they were published, but they were all before 1847, almost ninety years ago; Later, it became a rare product, and in the "Literary Dictionary" published in the new Soviet Union, it was used as an illustration, which shows that it has already been evaluated. Although in its own country, I am afraid that it can only be met in the library, let alone in China. At the end of the autumn of this year, Meng Shihuanjun suddenly saw this collection of paintings in a second-hand bookstore in Shanghai, and immediately ran to the call sign like a child seeing candy, and finally got it in his hand, which was the fourth edition printed in 1893, not only complete with 100 pictures, but also added three paintings collected by the collector Aifuremov, and one each of the advertising paintings at that time and the small pictures on the cover of the first edition, a total of one hundred and five pictures.这大约是十月革命之际，俄国人带了逃出国外来的；他该是一个爱好文艺的人，抱守了十六年，终于只好拿它来换衣食之资；在中国，也许未必有第二本。藏了起来，对己对人，说不定都是一种罪业，所以现在就设法来翻印这一本书，除绍介外国的艺术之外，第一，是在献给中国的研究文学，或爱好文学者，可以和小说相辅，所谓“左图右史”，更明白十九世纪上半的俄国中流社会的情形，第二，则想献给插画家，借此看看别国的写实的典型，知道和中国向来的“出相”或“绣像”有怎样的不同，或者能有可以取法之处；同时也以慰售出这本画集的人，将他的原本化为千万，广布于世，实足偿其损失而有余，一面也庶几不枉孟十还君的一番奔走呼号之苦。对于木刻家，却恐怕并无大益，因为这虽说是木刻，但画者一人，刻者又别一人，和现在的自画自刻，刻即是画的创作木刻，是已经大有差别的了。
This was around the time of the October Revolution, when the Russians fled abroad; He should be a lover of literature and art, and after sixteen years, he finally had to use it in exchange for food and clothing; In China, there may not be a second book. Hide it, to yourself and others, it may be a kind of sin, so now try to reprint this book, in addition to the introduction of foreign art, first, it is dedicated to Chinese research literature, or literature lovers, can complement the novel, the so-called "left picture and right history", better understand the situation of Russian middle society in the first half of the nineteenth century, second, I want to dedicate it to illustrators, so as to see the realistic models of other countries, know how it is different from the "appearance" or "embroidery of images" that have always been in China, or can have a way to learn from it; At the same time, it is also to comfort the person who sold this collection of paintings, and his original was turned into tens of millions and widely distributed in the world, which is more than enough to compensate for his losses, and on the other hand, it is almost not in vain for Meng Shi to return to the king. For woodcarvers, I am afraid it is not of great benefit, because although this is a woodcut, there is one painter, and the engraver is another, which is very different from the current self-painting and self-carving, and the carving is the creation of woodcuts.世间也真有意外的运气。当中文译本的《死魂灵》开始发表时，曹靖华君就寄给我一卷图画，也还是十月革命后不多久，在彼得堡得到的。这正是里斯珂夫所说的梭可罗夫画的十二幅。纸张虽然颇为破碎，但图像并无大损，怕它由我而亡，现在就附印在阿庚的百图之后，于是俄国艺术家所作的最写实，而且可以互相补助的两种《死魂灵》的插画，就全收在我们的这一本集子里了。
There is really unexpected luck in the world. When the Chinese translation of "Dead Souls" began to be published, Cao Jinghuajun sent me a volume of drawings, which I got in Petersburg not long after the October Revolution. These are exactly the twelve paintings of Sokorov that Rykov said. Although the paper is quite broken, the image is not badly damaged, and I am afraid that it will die from me, so it is now printed after Ah Geng's hundred drawings, so the two most realistic illustrations of "Dead Souls" made by Russian artists and can complement each other are all included in our collection.移译序文和每图的题句的，也是孟十还君的劳作；题句大概依照译本，但有数处不同，现在也不改从一律；最末一图的题句，不见于第一部中，疑是第二部记乞乞科夫免罪以后的事，这是那时俄国文艺家的习尚：总喜欢带点教训的。至于校印装制，则是吴朗西君和另外几位朋友们所经营。这都应该在这里声明谢意。
the translation of the preface and the inscription of each picture is also the work of Meng Shihuanjun; The inscription is probably according to the translation, but there are several differences, and it is not the same now; The inscription of the last picture is not found in the first part, and it is suspected that the second part records the events after Chichikov was acquitted, which was the habit of Russian writers and artists at that time: they always liked to teach a lesson. As for the proofreading and binding system, it is run by Wu Langxijun and several other friends. This should all be a thank you here.一九三五年十二月二十四日，鲁迅。
December 24, 1935, Lu Xun.

后记

后记

后记

postscript这一本的编辑的体例，是和前一本相同的，也是按照着写作的时候。凡在刊物上发表之作，上半年也都经过官厅的检查，大约总不免有些删削，不过我懒于一一校对，加上黑点为记了。只要看过前一本，就可以明白犯官忌的是那些话。
The editing style of this book is the same as the previous one, and it is also written according to the time of writing. All works published in publications have also been inspected by the government office in the first half of the year, and there will be some deletions, but I am too lazy to proofread them one by one, and add black dots as a note. As long as you have read the previous book, you can understand what the officials are taboo about.被全篇禁止的有两篇：一篇是《什么是讽刺》，为文学社的《文学百题》而作，印出来时，变了一个“缺”字；一篇是《从帮忙到扯淡》，为《文学论坛》而作，至今无踪无影，连“缺”字也没有了。
There are two articles that are banned in their entirety: one is "What is Satire", written for the Literary Society's "100 Literary Questions", and when it was printed, it changed to a "lacking" word; The other is "From Help to Nonsense", written for "Literary Forum", which has not yet been traced, and even the word "lacking" is gone.为了写作者和检查者的关系，使我间接的知道了检查官，有时颇为佩服。他们的嗅觉是很灵敏的。我那一篇《从帮忙到扯淡》，原在指那些唱导什么儿童年，妇女年，读经救国，敬老正俗，中国本位文化，第三种人文艺等等的一大批政客豪商，文人学士，从已经不会帮忙，只能扯淡这方面看起来，确也应该禁止的，因为实在看得太明，说得太透。别人大约也和我一样的佩服，所以早有文学家做了检查官的风传，致使苏汶先生在一九三四年十二月七日的《大晚报》上发表了这样的公开信：
For the sake of the relationship between the writer and the inspector, I indirectly got to know the prosecutor, and sometimes I admired it. Their sense of smell is very sensitive. My article "From Help to Nonsense" originally refers to a large number of politicians, wealthy businessmen, literati and scholars who sing about children's years, women's years, reading scriptures to save the country, respecting the elderly and customs, Chinese-based culture, the third kind of humanities and art, etc., and have never been able to help, but can only talk nonsense in this regard, and it should indeed be banned, because it is really too clear and too thorough. Others probably admired me as much as I did, so there were rumors that writers had become prosecutors, which led Mr. Su Wen to publish this open letter in the "Evening News" on December 7, 1934:“《火炬》编辑先生大鉴：
"Torch" Editor Mr. Dajian:顷读本月四日贵刊‘文学评论’专号，载署名闻问君的《文学杂谈》一文，中有——
I recently read the special issue of your magazine 'Literary Review' on the 4th of this month, which contains an article signed by Wen Wenjun "Literary Miscellaneous Talks", which contains -
‘据道路传闻苏汶先生有以七十元一月之薪金弹冠入××（照录原文）会消息，可知文艺虽不受时空限制，却颇受“大洋”限制了。’
According to rumors on the road, Mr. Su Wen entered the ×× meeting with a salary of 70 yuan a month, which shows that although literature and art are not limited by time and space, they are quite limited by the "ocean". ’

等语，闻之不胜愤慨。汶于近数年来，绝未加入任何会工作，并除以编辑《现代杂志》及卖稿糊口外，亦未受任何组织之分文薪金。所谓入××会云云，虽经×报谣传，均以一笑置之，不料素以态度公允见称之贵刊，亦复信此谰言，披诸报端，则殊有令人不能已于言者。汶为爱护贵刊起见，用特申函奉达，尚祈将原书赐登最近贵刊，以明真相是幸。
and so on, and I was indignant when I heard it. In recent years, Wen has never joined any association, and apart from editing Modern Magazine and selling manuscripts for a living, he has not received a penny from any organization. The so-called entry into the ×× meeting, even if it has been passed × newspapers and rumors, is laughed at, but it is not expected that the noble publication, which has always been praised for its fair attitude, also believes this rumor, and when it is published in the newspaper, it is very unbearable to say it. For the sake of caring for your publication, I would like to send you a special letter to convey your request, and I hope that the original book will be published in the most recent noble journal to clarify the truth.专此敬颂
专此敬颂编安。
编安。
苏汶（杜衡）谨上。十二月五日。”
苏汶（杜衡）谨上。 十二月五日。 ”一来就说作者得了不正当的钱是近来文坛上的老例，我被人传说拿着卢布就有四五年之久，直到九一八以后，这才将卢布说取消，换上了“亲日”的更加新鲜的罪状。我是一向不“为爱护贵刊起见”的，所以从不寄一封辨正信。不料越来越滥，竟谣到苏汶先生头上去了，可见谣言多的地方，也是“有一利必有一弊”。但由我的经验说起来，检查官之“爱护”“第三种人”，却似乎是真的，我去年所写的文章，有两篇冒犯了他们，一篇被删掉（《病后杂谈之余》），一篇被禁止（《脸谱臆测》）了。也许还有类于这些的事，所以令人猜为“入××（照录原文）会”了罢。这真应该“不胜愤慨”，没有受惯奚落的作家，是无怪其然的。
It is said that I have been holding the ruble for four or five years, and it was not until after 918 that the ruble was canceled and replaced with a fresher charge of "pro-Japanese". I have never "for the sake of caring for your publication", so I never send a letter of correction. Unexpectedly, it became more and more indiscriminate, and the rumors actually reached Mr. Su Wen's head, which shows that where there are many rumors, it is also "there must be a benefit and a disadvantage". But from my experience, the "love" and "third kind of people" of the prosecutors seem to be true, and two of the articles I wrote last year offended them, one was deleted ("After Illness"), and one was banned ("Facebook Speculation"). Maybe there are things like these, so people guess that it is "entering the ×× (copying the original text) meeting". This should really be "indignant", and it is no wonder that there are no writers who are used to being ridiculed.然而在对于真的造谣，毫不为怪的社会里，对于真的收贿，也就毫不为怪。如果收贿会受制裁的社会，也就要制裁妄造收贿的谣言的人们。所以用造谣来伤害作家的期刊，它只能作报销，在实际上很少功效。
However, in a society where it is not surprising to spread rumors for real rumors, it is not surprising to accept bribes. If a society is sanctioned for accepting bribes, it must also sanction people who spread rumors about accepting bribes. Therefore, journals that use rumors to hurt writers can only be reimbursed, and in fact have little effect.
其中的四篇，原是用日本文写的，现在自己译出，并且对于中国的读者，还有应该说明的地方——
Four of them were originally written in Japanese, but now they have been translated by themselves, and for Chinese readers, there are still things that should be explained -一，《活中国的姿态》的序文里，我在对于“支那通”加以讥刺，且说明日本人的喜欢结论，语意之间好像笑着他们的粗疏。然而这脾气是也有长处的，他们的急于寻求结论，是因为急于实行的缘故，我们不应该笑一笑就完。
First, in the preface to "The Posture of Living China", I ridicule "Chinatong" and explain that the Japanese like to conclude, and the semantics seem to laugh at their roughness. However, this temper also has its strengths, and their eagerness to seek conclusions is because they are eager to implement it, and we should not just smile and finish.二，《在现代中国的孔夫子》是在六月号的《改造》杂志上发表的，这时我们的“圣裔”，正在东京拜他们的祖宗，兴高采烈。曾由亦光君译出，载于《杂文》杂志第二号（七月），现在略加改定，转录在这里。
Second, "Confucius in Modern China" was published in the June issue of "Transformation" magazine, at which time our "holy descendants" were worshiping their ancestors in Tokyo, elated. Translated by Yi Guangjun, published in the second issue of "Miscellaneous Literature" magazine (July), now slightly revised, transcribed here.三，在《中国小说史略》日译本的序文里，我声明了我的高兴，但还有一种原因却未曾说出，是经十年之久，我竟报复了我个人的私仇。当一九二六年时，陈源即西滢教授，曾在北京公开对于我的人身攻击，说我的这一部著作，是窃取盐谷温教授的《支那文学概论讲话》里面的“小说”一部分的；《闲话》里的所谓“整大本的剽窃”，指的也是我。现在盐谷教授的书早有中译，我的也有了日译，两国的读者，有目共见，有谁指出我的“剽窃”来呢？呜呼，“男盗女娼”，是人间大可耻事，我负了十年“剽窃”的恶名，现在总算可以卸下，并且将“谎狗”的旗子，回敬自称“正人君子”的陈源教授，倘他无法洗刷，就只好插着生活，一直带进坟墓里去了。
Third, in the preface to the Japanese translation of "A Brief History of Chinese Novels", I declared my happiness, but there was another reason that I had not said, that after ten years, I actually took revenge on my personal personal vendetta. In 1926, Chen Yuan, Professor Xi Ying, publicly attacked me in Beijing, saying that my work was a part of the "novel" in Professor Shioya Wen's "Speech on Introduction to Chinese Literature"; The so-called "plagiarism of the whole book" in "Gossip" also refers to me. Now Professor Shioya's book has been translated into Chinese, and mine has also been translated into Japanese. Alas, "male thief and female prostitute" is a great shame in the world, I have borne the notoriety of "plagiarism" for ten years, and now I can finally take it off, and return the flag of "lying dog" to Professor Chen Yuan, who calls himself a "righteous gentleman", if he can't wash it away, he has to insert his life and bring it all the way to the grave.四，《关于陀思妥夫斯基的事》是应三笠书房之托而作的，是写给读者看的绍介文，但我在这里，说明着被压迫者对于压迫者，不是奴隶，就是敌人，决不能成为朋友，所以彼此的道德，并不相同。
Fourth, "About Dostovsky" was written at the request of Mikasa Shobo, and it is a summary text written for readers, but here I explain that the oppressed must not be friends with the oppressors, either slaves or enemies, so their morals are not the same.
临末我还要记念田诚一君，他是内山书店的店员，很爱绘画，我的三回德俄木刻展览会，都是他独自布置的；一二八的时候，则由他送我和我的家属，以及别的一批妇孺逃入英租界。三三年七月，以病在故乡去世，立在他的墓前的是我手写的碑铭。虽在现在，一想到那时只是当作有趣的记载着我的被打被杀的新闻，以及为了八十块钱，令我往返数次，终于不给的书店，我对于他，还是十分感愧的。
At the end of my life, I would also like to remember  Tian Seiichi, he was a clerk at Uchiyama Bookstore, he loved painting, and his three German-Russian woodcut exhibitions were arranged by him alone; In 128, he sent me, my family, and a group of other women and children to flee into the British Concession. In July of the third year, he died of illness in his hometown, and in front of his tomb was my handwritten inscription. Although now, when I think of the news that I was beaten and killed as just an interesting record at that time, and the bookstore that made me go back and forth several times for eighty dollars, but finally didn't give it, I am still very ashamed of him.
近两年来，又时有前进的青年，好意的可惜我现在不大写文学，并声明他们的失望。我的只能令青年失望，是无可置辩的，但也有一点误解。今天我自己查勘了一下：我从在《新青年》上写《随感录》起，到写这集子里的最末一篇止，共历十八年，单是杂感，约有八十万字。后九年中的所写，比前九年多两倍；而这后九年中，近三年所写的字数，等于前六年，那么，所谓“现在不大写文章”，其实也并非确切的核算。而且这些前进的青年，似乎谁都没有注意到现在的对于言论的迫压，也很是令人觉得诧异的。我以为要论作家的作品，必须兼想到周围的情形。In the past two years, there have been young people who have moved forward from time to time, and it is a pity that I do not write literature now, and declare their disappointment. My can only disappoint young people, which is undeniable, but there is also a little misunderstanding. Today I checked it myself: from writing "Sui Sensation" in "New Youth" to writing the last article in this collection, it took a total of eighteen years, and there were about 800,000 words of miscellaneous feelings alone. the last nine years were written twice as much as the first nine years; In the next nine years, the number of words written in the past three years is equal to the previous six years, so the so-called "don't write articles now" is actually not an accurate accounting. Moreover, none of these forward-looking young people seem to have noticed the current suppression of speech, which is also very surprising. I thought that if we want to talk about a writer's work, we must also consider the surrounding situation.自然，这情形是极不容易明了的，因为倘一公开，作家要怕受难，书店就要防封门，然而如果自己和出版界有些相关，便可以感觉到这里面的一部份消息。现在我们先来回忆一下已往的公开的事情。也许还有读者记得，中华民国二十三年（一九三四年）三月十四日的《大美晚报》上，曾经登有一则这样的新闻——
Naturally, this situation is extremely difficult to understand, because if it is made public, the writer will be afraid of suffering, and the bookstore will have to prevent closing its doors, but if you have something to do with the publishing world, you can feel part of the news. Now let's recall the past public events. Some readers may remember that in the "Great American Evening News" on March 14, the 23rd year of the Republic of China (1934), there was such a news -中央党部禁止新文艺作品
The Central Party Department banned new literary and artistic works
沪市党部于上月十九日奉中央党部电令、派员挨户至各新书店、查禁书籍至百四十九种之多、牵涉书店二十五家、其中有曾经市党部审查准予发行、或内政部登记取得著作权、且有各作者之前期作品、如丁玲之《在黑暗中》等甚多、致引起上海出版业之恐慌、由新书业组织之中国著作人出版人联合会集议，于二月二十五日推举代表向市党部请愿结果、蒙市党部俯允转呈中央、将各书重行审查、从轻发落、同日接中央复电、允予照准、惟各书店于复审期内、须将被禁各书、一律自动封存、不再发卖、兹将各书店被禁书目、分录如次、
On the 19th of last month, the Shanghai Municipal Party Department was ordered by the Central Party Department to send personnel to various new bookstores door-to-door, banning as many as 149 kinds of books, involving 25 bookstores, among which the Municipal Party Department had reviewed and approved the publication, or the Ministry of the Interior registered and obtained copyrights, and there were many previous works of various authors, such as Ding Ling's "In the Dark", which caused panic in the Shanghai publishing industry. The books will be re-examined, sent lightly, received the central reply on the same day, and allowed to be approved, but during the review period, each bookstore must automatically seal all the banned books and no longer sell them.

店名Store name
书名title
译著者Translated by author

神州China
政治经济学批判Critique of political economy
郭沫若Guo Moruo

文艺批评集Collection of literary and art criticism
钱杏邨Qian Xing Estate

浮士德与城Faust and the city
柔　石Soft stone

现代nowadays
中国古代社会研究Studies in ancient Chinese society
郭沫若Guo Moruo

石炭王Coal King
郭沫若Guo Moruo

黑猫Black cat
郭沫若Guo Moruo

创造十年Decade of creation
郭沫若Guo Moruo

果树园orchard
鲁　迅Lu Xun

田汉戏曲集（五集）Tian Han Opera Collection (5 episodes)
田　汉Tian Han

檀泰琪儿之死The death of Tan Taiqier
田　汉Tian Han

平林泰子集Collection of Yasuko Hirabayashi
沈端先Shen Duanxian

残兵Remnants
周全平Zhou Quanping was pacified

没有樱花There are no cherry blossoms
蓬　子Pengzi

挣扎struggle
楼建南The building is built to the south

夜会Night meeting
丁　玲Ding Ling

诗稿Poetry manuscript
胡也频Hu is also frequent

炭矿夫Coal miner
龚冰庐Gong Binglu

光慈遗集Guangci's posthumous collection
蒋光慈Jiang Guangci

丽莎的哀怨Lisa's lamentation
蒋光慈Jiang Guangci

野祭Wild festival
蒋光慈Jiang Guangci

语体文作法Language style and writing
高语罕High language is rare

藤森成吉集Fujimori Nariyoshi collection
森　堡Senburg

爱与仇Love and hatred
森　堡Senburg

新俄文学中的男女Men and women in neo-Russian literature
周起应Zhou Qi responded

大学生私生活College student private life
周起应Zhou Qi responded

唯物史观研究上下Historical materialism studies up and down
华　汉Hua Han

十姑的悲愁The sadness of the ten aunts
华　汉Hua Han

归家Home
洪灵菲Hong Lingfei

流亡exile
洪灵菲Hong Lingfei

萌芽bud
巴　金Ba Jin

光华Guanghua
幼年时代Childhood
郭沫若Guo Moruo

文艺论集Literary and Art Collection
郭沫若Guo Moruo

文艺论续集Sequel to Literary and Art Theory
郭沫若Guo Moruo

煤油kerosene
郭沫若Guo Moruo

高尔基文集Gorky's Collected Works
鲁　迅Lu Xun

离婚divorce
潘汉年Pan Hannian

小天使Little angel
蓬　子Pengzi

我的童年My childhood
蓬　子Pengzi

结婚集Wedding set
蓬　子Pengzi

妇人之梦A woman's dream
蓬　子Pengzi

病与梦Illness and dreams
楼建南The building is built to the south

路road
茅　盾Mao Dun

自杀日记Suicide diary
丁　玲Ding Ling

我们的一团与他Our group with him
冯雪峰Feng Xuefeng

三个不统一的人物Three disorganized characters
胡也频Hu is also frequent

现代中国作家选集Anthology of Modern Chinese Writers
蒋光慈Jiang Guangci

新文艺辞典New Literary Dictionary
顾凤城Gu Fengcheng

郭沫若论Guo Moruo commented
顾凤城Gu Fengcheng

新兴文学概论Introduction to emerging literature
顾凤城Gu Fengcheng

没落的灵魂Fallen souls
顾凤城Gu Fengcheng

文艺创作辞典Dictionary of Literary and Artistic Creation
顾凤城Gu Fengcheng

现代名人书信Modern celebrity letters
高语罕High language is rare

文章及其作法Articles and their methods
高语罕High language is rare

独清文艺论集Duqing Literary and Art Collection
王独清The king is clear

锻炼exercise
王独清The king is clear

暗云Dark clouds
王独清The king is clear

我在欧洲的生活My life in Europe
王独清The king is clear

湖风Lake breeze
美术考古学发现史History of Discoveries in Art Archaeology
郭沫若Guo Moruo

青年自修文学读本Youth self-study literature reader
钱杏邨Qian Xing Estate

暴风雨中的七个女性Seven women in a storm
田　汉Tian Han

饥饿的光芒Hungry Light
蓬　子Pengzi

恶党Villains
楼建南The building is built to the south

万宝山Wanbao Mountain
李辉英Li Huiying

隐秘的爱Hidden love
森　堡Senburg

寒梅Cold plum
华　汉Hua Han

地泉Di Spring
华　汉Hua Han

赌徒gambler
洪灵菲Hong Lingfei

地下室手记Basement Notes
洪灵菲Hong Lingfei

南强Nanqiang
屠场Slaughterhouse
郭沫若Guo Moruo

新文艺描写辞典（正续编）New Dictionary of Literary and Art Description (Continued Edition)
钱杏邨Qian Xing Estate

怎样研究新兴文学How to study emerging literature
钱杏邨Qian Xing Estate

新兴文学论Emerging Literary Theory
沈端先Shen Duanxian

铁流Iron flow
杨　骚Yang Sao

十月October
杨　骚Yang Sao

大江The Great River
现代新兴文学的诸问题Problems of modern emerging literature
鲁　迅Lu Xun

毁灭destroy
鲁　迅Lu Xun

艺术论Art theory
鲁　迅Lu Xun

文学及艺术之技术的革命The technological revolution of literature and art
陈望道Chen Wang said

艺术简论A Brief Discussion on Art
陈望道Chen Wang said

社会意识学大纲Outline of Social Consciousness
陈望道Chen Wang said

宿莽Stay in Mang
茅　盾Mao Dun

野蔷薇Wild roses
茅　盾Mao Dun

韦护Wei Hu
丁　玲Ding Ling

现代欧洲的艺术Art in modern Europe
冯雪峰Feng Xuefeng

艺术社会学底任务及问题Tasks and problems of art sociology
冯雪峰Feng Xuefeng

水沫Water foam
文艺与批评Literature and criticism
鲁　迅Lu Xun

文艺政策Literary and artistic policy
鲁　迅Lu Xun

银铃Silver bell
蓬　子Pengzi

文学评论Literary Criticism
冯雪峰Feng Xuefeng

流冰Drift ice
冯雪峰Feng Xuefeng

艺术之社会的基础The foundation of the society of art
冯雪峰Feng Xuefeng

艺术与社会生活Art and social life
冯雪峰Feng Xuefeng

往何处去Where to go
胡也频Hu is also frequent

伟大的恋爱Great love
周起应Zhou Qi responded

天马Pegasus
鲁迅自选集Lu Xun's own collection
鲁　迅Lu Xun

苏联短篇小说集A collection of Soviet short stories
楼建南The building is built to the south

茅盾自选集Mao Dun is a collection of his own collections
茅　盾Mao Dun

北新Beixin
而已集It has already been collected
鲁　迅Lu Xun

三闲集Three leisure collections
鲁　迅Lu Xun

伪自由书Pseudo-free book
鲁　迅Lu Xun

文学概论Introduction to Literature
潘梓年Pan Zinian

处女的心Virgin heart
蓬　子Pengzi

旧时代之死The death of the old era
柔　石Soft stone

新俄的戏剧与跳舞Theater and dance in New Russia
冯雪峰Feng Xuefeng

一周间In a week
蒋光慈Jiang Guangci

冲出云围的月亮The moon rushing out of the clouds
蒋光慈Jiang Guangci

合众United States
二心集Two hearts are gathered
鲁　迅Lu Xun

劳动的音乐The music of labor
钱杏邨Qian Xing Estate

亚东Yadong
义冢Righteous tombs
蒋光慈Jiang Guangci

少年飘泊者Young wanderers
蒋光慈Jiang Guangci

鸭绿江上On the Yalu River
蒋光慈Jiang Guangci

纪念碑monument
蒋光慈Jiang Guangci

百花亭畔By the Hundred Flowers Pavilion
高语罕High language is rare

白话书信Vernacular letters
高语罕High language is rare

两个女性Two women
华　汉Hua Han

转变shift
洪灵菲Hong Lingfei

文艺Literary
安特列夫评传Antelev commentary
钱杏邨Qian Xing Estate

光明light
青年创作辞典Dictionary of Youth Creation
钱杏邨Qian Xing Estate

暗云Dark clouds
王独清The king is clear

泰东Taidong
现代中国文学作家Modern Chinese literary writer
钱杏邨Qian Xing Estate

枳花集Orange-flower collection
冯雪峰Feng Xuefeng

俄国文学概论Introduction to Russian Literature
蒋光慈Jiang Guangci

前线front
洪灵菲Hong Lingfei

中华Chinese
咖啡店之一夜One night in a coffee shop
田　汉Tian Han

日本现代剧选Selected Japanese Modern Dramas
田　汉Tian Han

一个女人A woman
丁　玲Ding Ling

一幕悲剧的写实A tragic scene of realism
胡也频Hu is also frequent

开明Enlightened
苏俄文学理论Soviet-Russian literary theory
陈望道Chen Wang said

春蚕Spring silkworms
茅　盾Mao Dun

虹rainbow
茅　盾Mao Dun

蚀erode
茅　盾Mao Dun

三人行Threesome
茅　盾Mao Dun

子夜midnight
茅　盾Mao Dun

在黑暗中In the dark
丁　玲Ding Ling

鬼与人心Ghosts and human hearts
胡也频Hu is also frequent

民智People's wisdom
美术概论Introduction to Fine Arts
陈望道Chen Wang said

乐华Lehua
世界文学史History of World Literature
余慕陶I admire Tao

中外文学家辞典Dictionary of Chinese and Foreign Writers
顾凤城Gu Fengcheng

独清自选集Duqing self-selection
王独清The king is clear

文艺Literary
社会科学问答Social science questions and answers
顾凤城Gu Fengcheng

儿童child
穷儿苦狗记Poor children suffer from dog records
楼建南The building is built to the south

良友Good friend
苏联童话集Collection of Soviet fairy tales
楼建南The building is built to the south

商务Business
希望wish
柔　石Soft stone

一个人的诞生The birth of a person
丁　玲Ding Ling

圣徒saint
胡也频Hu is also frequent

新中国New China
水water
丁　玲Ding Ling

华通Huatong
别人的幸福Happiness of others
胡也频Hu is also frequent

乐华Lehua
黎明之前Before dawn
龚冰庐Gong Binglu

中学生middle school student
中学生文艺辞典Dictionary of Literature and Art for Middle School Students
顾凤城Gu Fengcheng

出版界不过是借书籍以贸利的人们，只问销路，不管内容，存心“反动”的是很少的，所以这请愿颇有了好结果，为“体恤商艰”起见，竟解禁了三十七种，应加删改，才准发行的是二十二种，其余的还是“禁止”和“暂缓发售”。这中央的批答和改定的书目，见于《出版消息》第三十三期（四月一日出版）——
The publishing industry is just people who use books to make profits, only asking about sales, regardless of the content, and there are very few who are "reactionary", so this petition has a good result, and for the sake of "sympathy for the difficulties of business", 37 kinds have been lifted, and 22 types should be deleted and corrected, so that 22 types are allowed to be distributed, and the rest are still "banned" and "suspended sale". The central government's reply and revised bibliography can be found in the thirty-third issue of "Publishing News" (published on April 1) -中国国民党上海特别市执行委员会批答执字第一五九二号
The Executive Committee of the Shanghai Special Municipality of the Kuomintang of China approved the No. 1592
（呈为奉令禁毁大宗刊物附奉说明书恳请转函中宣会重行审核从轻处置以恤商艰由）
(Submitted as an order to prohibit the destruction of bulk publications, with an instruction manual, I earnestly request that it be forwarded to the Central Propaganda Commission for re-examination and lenient disposal to alleviate the difficulties of business)
呈件均悉查此案业准
The submissions are all based on the facts of this case中央宣传委员会公函并决定办法五项一、平林泰子集等三十种早经分别查禁有案应切实执行前令严予禁毁以绝流传二、政治经济学批判等三十种内容宣传普罗文艺或挑拨阶级斗争或诋毁党国当局应予禁止发售三、浮士德与城等三十一种或系介绍普罗文学理论或系新俄作品或含有不正确意识者颇有宣传反动嫌疑在剿匪严重时期内应暂禁发售四、创造十年等二十二种内容间有词句不妥或一篇一段不妥应删改或抽去后方准发售五、圣徒等三十七种或系恋爱小说或系革命以前作品内容均尚无碍对于此三十七种书籍之禁令准予暂缓执行用特分别开列各项书名单函达查照转饬遵照等由合仰该书店等遵照中央决定各点并单开各种刊物分别缴毁停售具报毋再延误是为至要件存此批
The Central Propaganda Committee's official letter and decided on five measures: 1. Thirty kinds of early investigations such as the collection of Pinglin Taizi should be separately investigated and banned, and the previous order should be strictly prohibited and destroyed to prevent their circulation. 2. Thirty kinds of content, such as political economy criticism, should be prohibited from selling or promoting popular literature and art, or provoking class struggle or slandering the party-state authorities. 3. Thirty-one kinds of faust and the city, or those that introduce popular literary theories or neo-Russian works, or contain incorrect consciousness, are suspected of propaganda and reaction, should be temporarily banned from sale during the serious period of suppression of bandits. The content of the 37 kinds of works such as saints or romance novels or works before the revolution is not hindered, and the ban on these 37 books is allowed to be suspended, and the list of books is specially listed, and the letter is sent to check, transfer, and compliance, etc., and the bookstore and others follow the central decision of each point, and separately open various publications to destroy and suspend sales, so as to keep this batch for the most important requirement“附抄发各项书名单一份”
"Attached is a list of copied books"中华民国二十三年三月二十日
March 20, 23rd year of the Republic of China常务委员　吴醒亚
Standing Committee member Wu Xingya潘公展
Pan Gongzhan said童行白
Tong Xing Bai先后查禁有案之书目（略）
Successively banned bibliography (omitted)这样子，大批禁毁书籍的案件总算告一段落，书店也不再开口了。
In this way, a large number of cases of banning and destroying books finally came to an end, and the bookstore no longer spoke.
然而还剩着困难的问题：书店是不能不陆续印行新书和杂志的，所以还是永远有陆续被扣留，查禁，甚而至于封门的危险。这危险，首先于店主有亏，那就当然要有补救的办法。不多久，出版界就有了一种风闻——真只是一种隐约的风闻——
However, there is still a difficult problem: bookstores cannot fail to print new books and magazines one after another, so there is always a danger of being detained, banned, and even closed. This danger is first of all a loss to the shopkeeper, so of course there must be a remedy. It didn't take long for the publishing industry to have a rumor - really just a vague rumor -不知道何月何日，党官，店主和他的编辑，开了一个会议，讨论善后的方法。着重的是在新的书籍杂志出版，要怎样才可以免于禁止。听说这时就有一位杂志编辑先生某甲，献议先将原稿送给官厅，待到经过检查，得了许可，这才付印。文字固然决不会“反动”了，而店主的血本也得保全，真所谓公私兼利。别的编辑们好像也无人反对，这提议完全通过了。散出的时候，某甲之友也是编辑先生的某乙，很感动的向或一书店代表道：“他牺牲了个人，总算保全了一种杂志！”
I don't know what month or day it was, but the party official, the shopkeeper and his editor held a meeting to discuss the aftermath. The focus is on the publication of new books and magazines, how to avoid the ban. I heard that at this time, there was a magazine editor Mr. Moujia, who suggested that the original manuscript be sent to the official office first, and then printed after inspection and permission. Although the text will never be "reactionary", the owner's blood capital must also be preserved, which is really the so-called public and private interests. No other editors seem to have objected, and the proposal was completely passed. When it was dispersed, a certain friend of a certain person who was also an editor said to a representative of a bookstore: "He sacrificed himself and finally saved a kind of magazine!" ”“他”者，某甲先生也；推某乙先生的意思，大约是以为这种献策，颇于名誉有些损害的。其实这不过是神经衰弱的忧虑。即使没有某甲先生的献策，检查书报是总要实行的，不过用了别一种缘由来开始，况且这献策在当时，人们不敢纵谈，报章不敢记载，大家都认某甲先生为功臣，于是也就是虎须，谁也不敢捋。所以至多不过交头接耳，局外人知道的就很少，——于名誉无关。
"He" means Mr. A; The meaning of Mr. Tui Yi is probably that this kind of suggestion is quite damaging to his reputation. In fact, this is just a nervous breakdown worry. Even if there is no suggestion from Mr. A, the inspection of books and newspapers is always implemented, but it starts with another reason, and at that time, people did not dare to talk about it, and the newspapers did not dare to record it, and everyone recognized Mr. A as a hero, so it was a tiger's beard, and no one dared to stroke it. So at most, they only listen to each other, and outsiders know very little,—— it has nothing to do with reputation.总而言之，不知何年何月，“中央图书杂志审查委员会”到底在上海出现了，于是每本出版物上，就有了一行“中宣会图书杂志审委会审查证……字第……号”字样，说明着该抽去的已经抽去，该删改的已经删改，并且保证着发卖的安全——不过也并不完全有效，例如我那《二心集》被删剩的东西，书店改名《拾零集》，是经过检查的，但在杭州仍被没收。这种乱七八遭，自然是普通现象，并不足怪，但我想，也许是还带着一点私仇，因为杭州省党部的有力人物，久已是复旦大学毕业生许绍棣老爷之流，而当《语丝》登载攻击复旦大学的来函时，我正是编辑，开罪不少。为了自由大同盟而呈请中央通缉“堕落文人鲁迅”，也是浙江省党部发起的，但至今还没有呈请发掘祖坟，总算党恩高厚。
All in all, I don't know what year and month the "Central Book and Magazine Review Committee" appeared in Shanghai, so on each publication, there is a line of "Central Propaganda Committee Book and Magazine Review Committee Review Certificate...... Character number ...... The word "number" indicates that what should be removed has been removed, and what should be deleted has been deleted, and the safety of the sale is guaranteed - but it is not entirely effective, for example, the leftover things that were deleted from my "Erxin Collection", the bookstore was renamed "Shiling Collection", which was inspected but still confiscated in Hangzhou. This kind of chaos is naturally an ordinary phenomenon, and it is not surprising, but I think it may still be a little personal grudge, because the powerful figures in the Hangzhou Provincial Party Department have long been Fudan University graduates Xu Shaodi and others, and when "Yusi" published a letter attacking Fudan University, I was the editor and committed a lot of crimes. For the sake of the Freedom Alliance, the central government wanted the "degenerate literati Lu Xun", which was also initiated by the Zhejiang Provincial Party Department, but so far there has been no petition to excavate the ancestral grave, and the party is finally benevolent.至于审查员，我疑心很有些“文学家”，倘不，就不能做得这么令人佩服。自然，有时也删禁得令人莫名其妙，我以为这大概是在示威，示威的脾气，是虽是文学家也很难脱体的，而且这也不算是恶德。还有一个原因，则恐怕是在饭碗。要吃饭也决不能算是恶德，但吃饭，审查的文学家和被审查的文学家却一样的艰难，他们也有竞争者，在看漏洞，一不小心便会被抢去了饭碗，所以必须常常有成绩，就是不断的禁，删，禁，删，第三个禁，删。我初到上海的时候，曾经看见一个西洋人从旅馆里出来，几辆洋车便向他飞奔而去，他坐了一辆，走了。这时忽然来了一位巡捕，便向拉不到客的车夫的头上敲了一棒，撕下他车上的照会。我知道这是车夫犯了罪的意思，然而不明白为什么拉不到客就犯了罪，因为西洋人只有一个，当然只能坐一辆，他也并没有争。后来幸蒙一位老上海告诉我，说巡捕是每月总得捉多少犯人的，要不然，就算他懒惰，于饭碗颇有碍。真犯罪的不易得，就只好这么创作了。我以为审查官的有时审得古里古怪，总要在稿子上打几条红杠子，恐怕也是这缘故。倘使真的这样，那么，他们虽然一定要把我的“契诃夫选集”做成“残山剩水”，我也还是谅解的。
As for the censor, I am very suspicious of a "literary scholar", if not, I cannot do such an admirable job. Naturally, sometimes it is also inexplicably deleted, I think this is probably a demonstration, and the temper of the demonstration is difficult for even a writer to get rid of, and this is not a vice. Another reason is that I am afraid it is in the rice bowl. Eating must not be regarded as a vice, but eating, the censored writers and the censored writers are just as difficult, they also have competitors, they are looking at loopholes, and they will be robbed of their jobs if they are not careful, so they must always have achievements, that is, they are constantly banned, deleted, banned, deleted, and the third is prohibited, deleted. When I first arrived in Shanghai, I once saw a Westerner coming out of a hotel, and several foreign cars rushed towards him, and he took one and left. At this time, a patrol officer suddenly came, slapped the coachman who couldn't pull the passenger, and tore off the note on his car. I know this means that the coachman has committed a crime, but I don't understand why he committed a crime if he couldn't pull a passenger, because there is only one Westerner, and of course he can only ride one, and he didn't fight. Later, an old Shanghai man told me that patrols always have to catch as many prisoners as they do every month, otherwise, even if he is lazy, it will be a hindrance to his job. It's not easy to get a real crime, so I have to create it like this. I think that the censors sometimes have to put a few red bars on the manuscript, and I am afraid that this is also the reason. If this is really the case, then I still understand that although they must make my "Chekhov Anthology" into "remnants of mountains and waters".这审查办得很起劲，据报上说，官民一致满意了。九月二十五日的《中华日报》云——
The review was carried out vigorously, and it was reported that the officials and the people were unanimously satisfied. The "China Daily" on September 25 said——中央图书杂志审查委会工作紧张
The work of the Central Book and Magazine Review Committee is intense中央图书杂志审查委员会、自在沪成立以来、迄今四阅月、审查各种杂志书籍、共计有五百余种之多、平均每日每一工作人员审查字、在十万以上、审查手续、异常迅速、虽洋洋巨著、至多不过二天、故出版界咸认为有意想不到之快、予以便利不少、至该会审查标准、如非对党对政府绝对显明不利之文字、请其删改外、余均一秉大公、无私毫偏袒、故数月来相安无事、过去出版界、因无审查机关、往往出书以后、受到扣留或查禁之事、自审查会成立后、此种事件、已不再发生矣、闻中央方面、以该会工作成绩优良、而出版界又甚需要此种组织、有增加内部工作人员计划、以便利审查工作云、
The Central Book and Magazine Review Committee, since its establishment in Shanghai, has reviewed various magazines and books for more than four months, with a total of more than 500 kinds, and each staff member has reviewed words every day, with more than 100,000 words, and the review procedures are extremely fast. In the past, the publishing industry, because there was no censorship authority, often after the publication of books, was detained or banned, since the establishment of the review committee, such incidents have not happened again, it is reported to the central government, because the association has good work performance, and the publishing industry is in great need of such an organization, there is a plan to increase internal staff to facilitate the review work.如此善政，行了还不到一年，不料竟出了《新生》的《闲话皇帝》事件。大约是受了日本领事的警告罢，那雷厉风行的办法，比对于“反动文字”还要严：立刻该报禁售，该社封门，编辑者杜重远已经自认该稿未经审查，判处徒刑，不准上诉的了，却又革掉了七位审查官，一面又往书店里大搜涉及日本的旧书，墙壁上贴满了“敦睦邦交”的告示。出版家也显出孤苦零丁模样，据说：这“一秉大公”的“中央宣传部图书杂志审查委员会”不见了，拿了稿子，竟走投无路。
Such good governance, less than a year after doing it, unexpectedly came out of the "Gossip Emperor" incident of "New Life". Probably after being warned by the Japanese consul, the resolute method was even stricter than the "reactionary text": the newspaper was immediately banned, the company was closed, and the editor Du Chongyuan had already admitted that the manuscript had not been reviewed, sentenced to imprisonment, and was not allowed to appeal, but seven censors were dismissed, and on the one hand, he searched the bookstore for old books related to Japan, and the walls were covered with notices of "friendly relations". It is said that the "Book and Magazine Review Committee of the Central Propaganda Department" of the "One Bing Da Gong" disappeared, took the manuscript, and was cornered.那么，不是还我自由，飘飘然了么？并不是的。未有此会以前，出版家倒还有一点自己的脊梁，但已有此会而不见之后，却真觉得有些摇摇摆摆。大抵的农民，都能够自己过活，然而奥国和俄国解放农奴时，他们中的有些人，却哭起来了，因为失了依靠，不知道自己怎么过活。况且我们的出版家并非单是“失了依靠”，乃是遇到恢复了某甲先生献策以前的状态，又会扣留，查禁，封门，危险得很。而且除怕被指为“反动文字”以外，又得怕违反“敦睦邦交令”了。已被“训”成软骨症的出版界，又加上了一副重担，当局对于内交，又未必肯怎么“敦睦”，而“礼让为国”，也急于“体恤商艰”，所以我想，自有“审查会”而又不见之后，出版界的一大部份，倒真的成了孤哀子了。
So, isn't it free for me to return? Not really. Before this meeting, publishers still had a little bit of their own backbone, but after this meeting was gone, they really felt a little wobbly. Most peasants were able to live on their own, but when Austria and Russia liberated the serfs, some of them cried because they had lost their support and did not know how to live. Moreover, our publishers are not just "losing their support", but when they encounter the restoration of the state before Mr. A's suggestion, they will detain, ban, and close the door, which is very dangerous. And in addition to being accused of being a "reactionary character", they also have to be afraid of violating the "Order of Diplomatic Relations". The publishing industry, which has been "trained" to chondrosis, has added a heavy burden, and the authorities may not be willing to "get along" with internal communication, and "courtesy for the country" is also eager to "sympathize with business difficulties", so I think that since there was a "censorship committee" and disappeared, a large part of the publishing industry has really become a lonely mourner.所以现在的书报，倘不是先行接洽，特准激昂，就只好一味含胡，但求无过，除此之外，是依然会有先前一样的危险，挨到木棍，撕去照会的。
Therefore, if the current books and newspapers are not contacted first, they will have to blindly hold their beards, but ask for no faults, in addition, there will still be the same danger as before, and they will be torn off by wooden sticks.评论者倘不了解以上的大略，就不能批评近三年来的文坛。即使批评了，也很难中肯。
If critics do not understand the above general idea, they cannot criticize the literary world in the past three years. Even if it is criticized, it is difficult to be pertinent.
我在这一年中，日报上并没有投稿。凡是发表的，自然是含胡的居多。这是带着枷锁的跳舞，当然只足发笑的。但在我自己，却是一个纪念，一年完了，过而存之，长长短短，共四十七篇。
I did not submit any contributions in the daily newspaper during the year. Everything that is published is naturally mostly bearded. This is a dance with shackles, and of course it only makes you laugh. But in myself, it is a commemoration, the year is over, and it is preserved, long and short, a total of forty-seven articles.
一九三五年十二月三十一夜半至一月一日晨，写讫。
Written from midnight on December 31, 1935 to the morning of January 1, 1935.

封面

书名页

版权信息

图书在版编目（CIP）数据
Books in Print (CIP) data且介亭杂文末编／鲁迅著．—南京：译林出版社，2013.11
And Jieting's miscellaneous essays are edited by Lu Xun.—Nanjing: Yilin Publishing House, 2013.11（鲁迅自编文集）
(Lu Xun's self-edited anthology)ISBN 978-7-5447-4455-3
ISBN 978-7-5447-4455-3Ⅰ．①且…　Ⅱ．①鲁…　Ⅲ．①鲁迅杂文－杂文集　Ⅳ．①I210.4
I..(1) and... II..(1) Lu... III..(1) Lu Xun's Essays - Essays IV..(1)I210.4中国版本图书馆CIP数据核字（2013）第223189号
China Version Library CIP Data Verification (2013) No. 223189
书　　名　且介亭杂文末编
Book title and the end of the essays作　　者　鲁　迅
Author: Lu Xun责任编辑　陆元昶
Editor-in-charge: Lu Yuanchang特约编辑　史会美
Special editor Shi Huimei出版发行　凤凰出版传媒股份有限公司
Published and distributed by Phoenix Publishing and Media Co., Ltd译林出版社
Yilin Publishing House出版社地址　南京市湖南路1号A楼，邮编：210009
Publisher's address Building A, No. 1 Hunan Road, Nanjing, Zip Code: 210009电子信箱　yilin@yilin.com
E-mail yilin@yilin.com出版社网址　http://www.yilin.com
Publisher website http://www.yilin.com印　　刷　北京凯达印务有限公司
Printing Beijing Kaida Printing Co., Ltd开　　本　787×1092毫米　1/32
Volume 787×1092 mm 1/32印　　张　5
Print 5字　　数　91千字
Word count: 91,000 words版　　次　2013年11月第1版　2013年11月第1次印刷
Edition November 2013 1st edition November 2013 1st printing标准书号　ISBN 978-7-5447-4455-3
ISBN 978-7-5447-4455-3定　　价　12.80元
The price is 12.80 yuan译林版图书若有印装错误可向承印厂调换

If there are printing errors in the translated version of the book, it can be exchanged with the printing factory

Table of Contents

目录

Table of Contents

directory一九三六年 1936
《凯绥·珂勒惠支版画选集》序目 Preface to the "Selected Prints of Kaisui Kellerhuithi"
记苏联版画展览会 Record the exhibition of prints in the USSR
我要骗人 I'm going to lie
《译文》复刊词 The translation was reprinted
白莽作《孩儿塔》序 Bai Mang wrote the preface to "The Children's Tower."
续记 Continued note
写于深夜里 Written in the middle of the night
三月的租界 March concession
《出关》的“关” The "Pass" of "Out of the Customs"
捷克译本 Czech translation
答徐懋庸并关于抗日统一战线问题 Answer Xu Maoyong and on the issue of the anti-Japanese united front
关于太炎先生二三事 关于太炎先生二三事
曹靖华译《苏联作家七人集》序 Cao Jinghua translated the preface to "Seven Soviet Writers"
因太炎先生而想起的二三事 Two or three things that came to mind because of Mr. Taiyan
附集 Appendix
文人比较学 Comparative studies of literati
大小奇迹 Wonders big and small
难答的问题 Difficult questions to answer
登错的文章 Wrong article
《海上述林》上卷序言 Preface to the first volume of "The Forest of the Sea"
我的第一个师父 My first Master
《海上述林》下卷序言 Preface to the second volume of "The Forest of the Sea"
答托洛斯基派的信 Answer to the Trotskyist letter
论现在我们的文学运动 On our literary movement
《苏联版画集》序 Preface to the "Collection of Soviet Prints"
半夏小集 Small collection of pinellia
“这也是生活” "This is also life"
“立此存照”（一） "Standing here" (1)
“立此存照”（二） "Establish this photo" (2)
死 die
女吊 Female mourning
“立此存照”（三） "Establish this photo" (3)
“立此存照”（四） "Standing here" (4)
“立此存照”（五） "Establish this photo" (5)
“立此存照”（六） "Establish this photo" (6)
“立此存照”（七） "Standing on this photo" (7)
后记（许广平） Postscript (Xu Guangping)
返回总目录 Return to the General Directory

一九三六年

一九三六年

一九三六年

1936

《凯绥·珂勒惠支版画选集》序目

《凯绥·珂勒惠支版画选集》序目

《凯绥·珂勒惠支版画选集》序目

Preface to the "Selected Prints of Kaisui Kellerhuithi"凯绥·勖密特（Kaethe Schmidt）以一八六七年七月八日生于东普鲁士的区匿培克（Koenigsberg）。她的外祖父是卢柏（Julius Rupp），即那地方的自由宗教协会的创立者。父亲原是候补的法官，但因为宗教上和政治上的意见，没有补缺的希望了，这穷困的法学家便如俄国人之所说：“到民间去”，做了木匠，一直到卢柏死后，才来当这教区的首领和教师。他有四个孩子，都很用心的加以教育，然而先不知道凯绥的艺术的才能。凯绥先学的是刻铜的手艺，到一八八五年冬，这才赴她的兄弟在研究文学的柏林，向斯滔发·培伦（Stauffer Bern）去学绘画。后回故乡，学于奈台（Neide），为了“厌倦”，终于向闵兴的哈台列克（Herterich）那里去学习了。
Kaethe Schmidt was born on July 8, 1867 in Koenigsberg, East Prussia. Her maternal grandfather was Julius Rupp, the founder of the local Free Religious Association. My father was originally an alternate judge, but because of religious and political opinions, there was no hope of filling the vacancy, so the poor jurist became a carpenter, as the Russians said, "to the people", and became a carpenter until after Luper's death. He had four children, all of whom were educated with great care, but they did not know Kaisui's artistic talent. Kaisui first learned the craft of copper carving, and in the winter of 1885, she went to Berlin, where her brother was studying literature, to learn painting from Stauffer Bern. Later, he returned to his hometown and studied at Neide, and in order to "get tired of it", he finally went to study with Herterich in Minxing.一八九一年，和她兄弟的幼年之友卡尔·珂勒惠支（Karl Kollwitz）结婚，他是一个开业的医生，于是凯绥也就在柏林的“小百姓”之间住下，这才放下绘画，刻起版画来。待到孩子们长大了，又用力于雕刻。一八九八年，制成有名的《织工一揆》计六幅，取材于一八四四年的史实，是与先出的霍普德曼（Gerhart Hauptmann）的剧本同名的；一八九九年刻《格莱亲》，零一年刻《断头台边的舞蹈》；零四年旅行巴黎；零四至八年成连续版画《农民战争》七幅，获盛名，受Villa-Romana奖金，得游学于意大利。这时她和一个女友由佛罗棱萨步行而入罗马，然而这旅行，据她自己说，对于她的艺术似乎并无大影响。一九〇九年作《失业》，一〇年作《妇人被死亡所捕》和以“死”为题材的小图。
In 1891, she married her brother's childhood friend Karl Kollwitz, a practicing doctor, so Kaiser also lived among the "common people" in Berlin, and then put down painting and carved prints. When the children grow up, they work carving. In 1898, six famous "Weaver's Ikki" were produced, based on historical facts from 1844, which is the same name as the play by Gerhart Hauptmann; In 1899, he engraved "Grammy", and in 01, he engraved "Dance by the Guillotine"; Traveled to Paris in '04; From 04 to 8, he completed seven continuous prints "Peasant War", which became famous, and he received a prize from Villa-Romana to study in Italy. At this time she and a girlfriend walked from Florenza to Rome, but this trip, according to herself, did not seem to have much influence on her art. In 1909, he wrote "Unemployed", and in 10 years, he wrote "A Woman Caught by Death" and a small picture with the theme of "death".世界大战起，她几乎并无制作。一九一四年十月末，她的很年青的大儿子以义勇兵死于弗兰兑伦（Flandern）战线上。一八年十一月，被选为普鲁士艺术学院会员，这是以妇女而入选的第一个。从一九年以来，她才仿佛从大梦初醒似的，又从事于版画了，有名的是这一年的纪念里勃克内希（Liebknecht）的木刻和石刻，零二至零三年的木刻连续画《战争》，后来又有三幅《无产者》，也是木刻连续画。一九二七年为她的六十岁纪念，霍普德曼那时还是一个战斗的作家，给她书简道：“你的无声的描线，侵人心髓，如一种惨苦的呼声：希腊和罗马时候都没有听到过的呼声。”法国罗曼·罗兰（Romain Rolland）则说：“凯绥·珂勒惠支的作品是现代德国的最伟大的诗歌，它照出穷人与平民的困苦和悲痛。这有丈夫气概的妇人，用了阴郁和纤秾的同情，把这些收在她的眼中，她的慈母的腕里了。这是做了牺牲的人民的沉默的声音。”然而她在现在，却不能教授，不能作画，只能真的沉默的和她的儿子住在柏林了；她的儿子像那父亲一样，也是一个医生。
Since the World War, she has almost no production. At the end of October 1914, her very young eldest son died as a volunteer on the Flandern front. In November 18, she was elected a member of the Prussian Academy of Arts, the first woman to be elected. Since 19 years, she has been engaged in printmaking again, as if she had just woken up from a big dream, and is famous for the woodcuts and stone carvings of Liebknecht in this year, the continuous woodcut painting "War" from 02 to 03, and later three "Proletarians", which are also continuous woodcut paintings. In 1927, to commemorate her sixtieth birthday, Hopdemann, who was still a combat writer at the time, wrote to her: "Your silent lines are intrusive, like a miserable cry: a cry that neither Greece nor Rome had ever heard. Romain Rolland of France said: "The work of Kaiser Kölhuitz is the greatest poetry of modern Germany, which reflects the hardship and sorrow of the poor and the common people." This husbandly woman, with gloom and delicate sympathy, took these in her eyes, in the wrist of her loving mother. This is the silent voice of the people who have made sacrifices. "However, she cannot teach or paint now, but can only live in Berlin with her son in silence; Her son, like that father, was also a doctor.在女性艺术家之中，震动了艺术界的，现代几乎无出于凯绥·珂勒惠支之上——或者赞美，或者攻击，或者又对攻击给她以辩护。诚如亚斐那留斯（Ferdinand Avenarius）之所说：“新世纪的前几年，她第一次展览作品的时候，就为报章所喧传的了。从此以来，一个说，‘她是伟大的版画家’；人就过作无聊的不成话道：‘凯绥·珂勒惠支是属于只有一个男子的新派版画家里的’。别一个说：‘她是社会民主主义的宣传家’，第三个却道：‘她是悲观的困苦的画手’。而第四个又以为‘是一个宗教的艺术家’。要之：无论人们怎样地各以自己的感觉和思想来解释这艺术，怎样地从中只看见一种的意义——然而有一件事情是普遍的：人没有忘记她。谁一听到凯绥·珂勒惠支的名姓，就仿佛看见这艺术。这艺术是阴郁的，虽然都在坚决的动弹，集中于强韧的力量，这艺术是统一而单纯的——非常之逼人。”
Among female artists, there is hardly anything that has shaken the art world in modern times above Kaiser Kölhuitsch—either praising her, or attacking, or defending her. As Ferdinand Avenarius said: "In the first few years of the new century, when she first exhibited her work, it was noisy in the newspapers. From then on, one said, 'She is a great printmaker'; people lived a boring nonsense: 'Kaiser Kölhuitz belonged to a new school of printmakers with only one man'. Don't say: 'She is a propagandist of social democracy', and the third says: 'She is a pessimistic and miserable painter'. And the fourth thinks that 'an artist of a religion'. In short: no matter how people interpret art with their own feelings and thoughts, no matter how much they see only one meaning in it—yet one thing is universal: people have not forgotten her. Whoever hears the name of Kaisui Kelehuizhi seems to see this art. This art is gloomy, although it is all resolutely moving, concentrating on the strength of strength, this art is unified and simple—very compelling. ”但在我们中国，绍介的还不多，我只记得在已经停刊的《现代》和《译文》上，各曾刊印过她的一幅木刻，原画自然更少看见；前四五年，上海曾经展览过她的几幅作品，但恐怕也不大有十分注意的人。她的本国所复制的作品，据我所见，以《凯绥·珂勒惠支画帖》（Kaethe Kollwitz Mappe，Herausgegeben Von Kunstwart，Kunstwart-Verlag，Muenchen，1927）为最佳，但后一版便变了内容，忧郁的多于战斗的了。印刷未精，而幅数较多的，则有《凯绥·珂勒惠支作品集》（Das Kaethe Kollwitz Werk，Carl Reisner Verlag，Dresden，1930），只要一翻这集子，就知道她以深广的慈母之爱，为一切被侮辱和损害者悲哀，抗议，愤怒，斗争；所取的题材大抵是困苦，饥饿，流离，疾病，死亡，然而也有呼号，挣扎，联合和奋起。此后又出了一本新集（Das Neue K. Kollwitz Werk，1933），却更多明朗之作了。霍善斯坦因（Wilhelm Hausenstein）批评她中期的作品，以为虽然间有鼓动的男性的版画，暴力的恐吓，但在根本上，是和颇深的生活相联系，形式也出于颇激的纠葛的，所以那形式，是紧握着世事的形相。永田一修并取她的后来之作，以这批评为不足，他说凯绥·珂勒惠支的作品，和里培尔曼（Max Liebermann）不同，并非只觉得题材有趣，来画下层世界的；她因为被周围的悲惨生活所动，所以非画不可，这是对于榨取人类者的无穷的“愤怒”。“她照目前的感觉，——永田一修说——描写着黑土的大众。她不将样式来范围现象。时而见得悲剧，时而见得英雄化，是不免的。然而无论她怎样阴郁，怎样悲哀，却决不是非革命。她没有忘却变革现社会的可能。而且愈入老境，就愈脱离了悲剧的，或者英雄的，阴暗的形式。”
But in China, there are not many Shaojie, I only remember that in the discontinued "Modern" and "Translation", one of her woodcuts was printed, and the original painting was naturally less seen; In the first four or five years, several of her works were exhibited in Shanghai, but I am afraid that not many people paid much attention. As far as I can see, the best of her reproductions in her home country is Kaethe Kollwitz Mappe, Herausgegeben von Kunstwart, Kunstwart-Verlag, Muenchen, 1927, but the content is changed in the latter edition, and it is more melancholy than combat. The printed works are not fine and have a large number of pages, such as "Das Kaethe Kollwitz Werk, Carl Reisner Verlag, Dresden, 1930", as long as you turn to this collection, you will know that she mourned, protested, angered, and struggled for all those who were insulted and harmed with her deep and broad motherly love; The themes taken are mostly hardship, hunger, displacement, disease, death, but there are also cry outs, struggles, unity and rise. After that, a new collection (Das Neue K. Kollwitz Werk, 1933) was published, but it was more clear. Wilhelm Hausenstein criticized her mid-term works, believing that although there were occasional engraving male prints and violent intimidation, they were fundamentally deeply connected to life, and the form was also out of a lot of intense entanglement, so the form was a form that grasped the appearance of the world. Nagata took her later works as insufficient, saying that Kaisui Kölhuitsch's works, unlike Max Liebermann, did not only find the subject matter interesting to depict the lower world; She is moved by the miserable life around her, so she must paint, which is an infinite "anger" for those who exploit humans. She said according to her current feelings,—— Nagata Kazushu - describing the masses of the black soil. She does not range the style of the phenomenon. Sometimes we see tragedy, sometimes we see heroism, which is inevitable. However, no matter how gloomy and sad she is, it is by no means non-revolutionary. She has not forgotten the possibility of changing the current society. And the older you get, the more you detach yourself from tragic, heroic, and dark forms. ”而且她不但为周围的悲惨生活抗争，对于中国也没有像中国对于她那样的冷淡：一九三一年一月间，六个青年作家遇害之后，全世界的进步的文艺家联名提出抗议的时候，她也是署名的一个人。现在，用中国法计算作者的年龄，她已届七十岁了，这一本书的出版，虽然篇幅有限，但也可以算是为她作一个小小的记念的罢。
And she not only fought for the miserable life around her, but also did not have the same indifference to China as China did to her: in January 1931, after the murder of six young writers, she was also one of the signatories when progressive writers and artists from all over the world jointly protested. Now, using Chinese law to calculate the author's age, she is seventy years old, and the publication of this book, although limited in space, can also be regarded as a small memory for her.
选集所取，计二十一幅，以原版拓本为主，并复制一九二七年的印本《画帖》以足之。以下据亚斐那留斯及第勒（Louise Diel）的解说，并略参己见，为目录——
The anthology consists of 21 pieces, mainly original rubbings, and a copy of the 1927 print "Picture Post" to fill it up. The following is based on the explanation of Aphinarius and Louise Diel, and with a brief reference to my own opinion, as a table of contents -（1）《自画像》（Selbstbild）。石刻，制作年代未详，按《作品集》所列次序，当成于一九一〇年顷；据原拓本，原大34×30cm.这是作者从许多版画的肖像中，自己选给中国的一幅，隐然可见她的悲悯，愤怒和慈和。
(1) "Self-Portrait" (Selbstbild). The stone carving, the date of production is unknown, according to the order listed in the "Collection", it is believed to have been completed around 1910; According to the original rubbing, the original size is 34×30cm. This is one that the author chose for China from many prints, and her compassion, anger and kindness are faintly visible.（2）《穷苦》（Not）。石刻，原大15×15cm.据原版拓本，后五幅同。这是有名的《织工一揆》（Ein Weberaufstand）的第一幅，一八九八年作。前四年，霍普德曼的剧本《织匠》始开演于柏林的德国剧场，取材是一八四四年的勖列济安（Schle-sien）麻布工人的蜂起，作者也许是受着一点这作品的影响的，但这可以不必深论，因为那是剧本，而这却是图画。我们借此进了一间穷苦的人家，冰冷，破烂，父亲抱一个孩子，毫无方法的坐在屋角里，母亲是愁苦的，两手支头，在看垂危的儿子，纺车静静的停在她的旁边。
(2) "Not". Stone carving, originally 15×15cm. According to the original rubbing, the last five pieces are the same. This is the first painting of the famous "Weaver's Journey" (Ein Weberaufstand), made in 1898. Four years ago, Hopdemann's play "The Weaver" was first performed in the German theater in Berlin, based on the uprising of the linen workers in Schle-sien in 1844, and the author may have been influenced by this work a little, but this does not need to be discussed in detail, because it is a play, and this is a picture. We took this opportunity to enter a poor house, cold, tattered, the father held a child, sitting in the corner of the house without any way, the mother was sad, holding her head with both hands, looking at her dying son, and the spinning wheel stopped quietly next to her.（3）《死亡》（Tod）。石刻，原大22×18cm.同上的第二幅。还是冰冷的房屋，母亲疲劳得睡去了，父亲还是毫无方法的，然而站立着在沉思他的无法。桌上的烛火尚有余光，“死”却已经近来，伸开他骨出的手，抱住了弱小的孩子。孩子的眼睛张得极大，在凝视我们，他要生存，他至死还在希望人有改革运命的力量。
(3) "Death" (Tod). Stone carving, original size 22×18cm. Ibid. It was still a cold house, and my mother fell asleep from fatigue, and my father was still helpless, but he stood there contemplating his impossibility. The candlelight on the table was still lingering, but "death" was already near, stretched out his bone-out hand, and hugged the weak child. The child's eyes are extremely wide open, staring at us, he wants to survive, and he still hopes that people will have the power to reform their destiny until death.（4）《商议》（Beratung）。石刻，原大27×17cm.同上的第三幅。接着前两幅的沉默的忍受和苦恼之后，到这里却现出生存竞争的景象来了。我们只在黑暗中看见一片桌面，一只杯子和两个人，但为的是在商议摔掉被践踏的运命。
(4) "Consultation" (Beratung). Stone carving, original size 27×17cm. After the silent enduring and distressing of the first two paintings, the scene of survival competition appears here. We only saw a table, a cup and two people in the dark, but we were discussing the fate of being trampled on.（5）《织工队》（Weberzug）。铜刻，原大22×29cm.同上的第四幅。队伍进向吮取脂膏的工场，手里捏着极可怜的武器，手脸都瘦损，神情也很颓唐，因为向来总饿着肚子。队伍中有女人，也疲惫到不过走得动；这作者所写的大众里，是大抵有女人的。她还背着孩子，却伏在肩头睡去了。
(5) "Weaver's Team" (Weberzug). Bronze engraving, originally 22×29cm. The team entered the workshop where the ointment was sucked, holding a very pitiful weapon in their hands, their hands and face were thin, and their expressions were also very depressed, because they were always hungry. There are women in the team, and they are too tired to walk; Among the masses written by this author, there are probably women. She was still carrying the child on her back, but fell asleep on her shoulder.（6）《突击》（Sturm）。铜刻，原大24×29cm.同上的第五幅。工场的铁门早经锁闭，织工们却想用无力的手和可怜的武器，来破坏这铁门，或者是飞进石子去。女人们在助战，用痉挛的手，从地上挖起石块来。孩子哭了，也许是路上睡着的那一个。这是在六幅之中，人认为最好的一幅，有时用这来证明作者的《织工》，艺术达到怎样的高度的。
(6) "Sturm". Bronze engraving, originally 24×29cm. Ibid. The iron gate of the workshop had long been locked, but the weavers wanted to destroy the iron gate with weak hands and pitiful weapons, or fly into the stones. The women were helping the battle, using their cramped hands to dig stones from the ground. The child cried, maybe the one who fell asleep on the road. This is the best of the six paintings, and it is sometimes used to prove what height the author's "Weaver" art has reached.（7）《收场》（Ende）。铜刻，原大24×30cm.同上的第六和末一幅。我们到底又和织工回到他们的家里来，织机默默的停着，旁边躺着两具尸体，伏着一个女人；而门口还在抬进尸体来。这是四十年代，在德国的织工的求生的结局。
(7) "Ende". Bronze engraving, originally 24×30cm. When we returned to their home with the weaver, the loom stopped silently, and there were two corpses lying next to it, lying a woman; And the body was still being carried in at the door. This is the end of the survival of weavers in Germany in the forties.（8）《格莱亲》（Gretchen）。一八九九年作，石刻；据《画帖》，原大未详。歌德（Goethe）的《浮士德》（Faust）有浮士德爱格莱亲，诱与通情，有孕；她在井边，从女友听到邻女被情人所弃，想到自己，于是向圣母供花祷告事。这一幅所写的是这可怜的少女经过极狭的桥上，在水里幻觉的看见自己的将来。她在剧本里，后来是将她和浮士德所生的孩子投在水里淹死，下狱了。原石已破碎。
(8) "Gretchen". Made in 1899, stone carving; According to the "Picture Post", the original size is unknown. Goethe's "Faust" has Faust's love for Gladstone, seducing and having an affair, and being pregnant; She heard from her girlfriend that her neighbor had been abandoned by her lover, and thought of herself, so she offered flowers and prayed to the Virgin. This picture is about this poor girl passing through a very narrow bridge and hallucinating her future in the water. She was in the script, and later she threw the child born to her and Faust into the water and drowned, and was imprisoned. The rough stone is broken.（9）《断头台边的舞蹈》（Tanz Um Die Guillotine）。一九〇一年作，铜刻；据《画帖》，原大未详。是法国大革命时候的一种情景：断头台造起来了，大家围着它，吼着“让我们来跳加尔玛弱儿舞罢！”（Dansons La Carmagnole！）的歌，在跳舞。不是一个，是为了同样的原因而同样的可怕了的一群。周围的破屋，像积叠起来的困苦的峭壁，上面只见一块天。狂暴的人堆的臂膊，恰如净罪的火焰一般，照出来的只有一个阴暗。
(9) "Tanz um Die Guillotine" (Dance by the Guillotine). Made in 1901, bronze engraving; According to the "Picture Post", the original size is unknown. It was a scene from the French Revolution: the guillotine was built, and everyone surrounded it, shouting, "Let's dance the Garma weakling!" ”（Dansons La Carmagnole！ The song is dancing. Not one, but for the same reasons, the same horrible group. The surrounding dilapidated houses are like piled up cliffs, and only a piece of sky can be seen on them. The arms of the violent crowd were like the flame of purification, and only one darkness was illuminated.（10）《耕夫》（Die Pflueger）。原大31×45cm.这就是有名的历史的连续画《农民战争》（Bauernkrieg）的第一幅。画共七幅，作于一九〇四至〇八年，都是铜刻。现在据以影印的也都是原拓本。“农民战争”是近代德国最大的社会改革运动之一，以一五二四年顷，起于南方，其时农民都在奴隶的状态，被虐于贵族的封建的特权；玛丁·路德既提倡新教，同时也传播了自由主义的福音，农民就觉醒起来，要求废止领主的苛例，发表宣言，还烧教堂，攻地主，扰动及于全国。然而这时路德却反对了，以为这种破坏的行为，大背人道，应该加以镇压，诸侯们于是放手的讨伐，恣行残酷的复仇，到第二年，农民就都失败了，境遇更加悲惨，所以他们后来就称路德为“撒谎博士”。这里刻划出来的是没有太阳的天空之下，两个耕夫在耕地，大约是弟兄，他们套着绳索，拉着犁头，几乎爬着的前进，像牛马一般，令人仿佛看见他们的流汗，听到他们的喘息。后面还该有一个扶犁的妇女，那恐怕总是他们的母亲了。
(10) "Die Pflueger". The original size is 31×45 cm. This is the first of the famous historical series "Peasant War" (Bauernkrieg). There are seven paintings, painted from 1904 to 08, all of which are engraved in bronze. Now the photocopies are also the original rubbings. The "Peasant War" is one of the largest social reform movements in modern Germany, starting in the south in 1524, when the peasants were in a state of slavery and were abused by the feudal privileges of the aristocracy; Martin Luther both promoted Protestantism and spread the gospel of liberalism, and the peasants woke up, demanded the abolition of the harsh rules of the lords, issued manifestos, burned churches, attacked landlords, and disturbed the whole country. However, Luther objected at this time, thinking that this kind of destruction was very inhumane and should be suppressed, so the princes let go of the crusade and carried out cruel revenge, and by the second year, the peasants had failed, and the situation was even more miserable, so they later called Luther "Dr. Liar". What is depicted here is two plowmen plowing the land under the sunless sky, about brothers, they are ropes and pulling plowshares, almost crawling forward, like cattle and horses, as if they can see their sweat and hear their breathing. There should be a woman holding the plow in the back, and it will probably always be their mother.（11）《凌辱》（Vergewaltigt）。同上的第二幅，原大35×53cm.男人们的受苦还没有激起变乱，但农妇也遭到可耻的凌辱了；她反缚两手，躺着，下颏向天，不见脸。死了，还是昏着呢，我们不知道。只见一路的野草都被蹂躏，显着曾经格斗的样子，较远之处，却站着可爱的小小的葵花。
(11) "Humiliation" (Vergewaltigt). The second picture of the same as above, the original size is 35×53cm. The suffering of the men has not yet provoked chaos, but the peasant woman has also been shamefully humiliated; she tied her hands behind her back, lay down, and lowered her chin to the sky, without seeing her face. Dead or unconscious, we don't know. I saw that all the weeds along the way were ravaged, and it looked like they had fought, but in the distance, there were cute little sunflowers.（12）《磨镰刀》（Beim Dengeln）。同上的第三幅，原大30×30cm.这里就出现了饱尝苦楚的女人，她的壮大粗糙的手，在用一块磨石，磨快大镰刀的刀锋，她那小小的两眼里，是充满着极顶的憎恶和愤怒。
(12) "Sharpening the Scythe" (Beim Dengeln). The third picture of the same as above, the original size is 30×30cm. Here appears a woman who has suffered a lot, her strong and rough hands, sharpening the blade of the big sickle with a millstone, and her small eyes are full of extreme hatred and anger.（13）《圆洞门里的武装》（Bewaffnung In Einem Gewoelbe）。同上的第四幅，原大50×33cm.大家都在一个阴暗的圆洞门下武装了起来，从狭窄的戈谛克式阶级蜂涌而上：是一大群拚死的农民。光线愈高愈少；奇特的半暗，阴森的人相。
(13) "Bewaffnung In Einem Gewoelbe" (Bewaffnung In Einem Gewoelbe). The fourth picture is the same as above, originally 50×33 cm. Everyone is armed under a gloomy round door, and from the narrow Godik class swarms up: a large group of desperate peasants. The higher the light, the less it is; Strange semi-dark, gloomy physiognomy.（14）《反抗》（Losbruch）。同上的第五幅，原大51×50cm.谁都在草地上没命的向前，最先是少年，喝令的却是一个女人，从全体上洋溢着复仇的愤怒。她浑身是力，挥手顿足，不但令人看了就生勇往直前之心，还好像天上的云，也应声裂成片片。她的姿态，是所有名画中最有力量的女性的一个。也如《织工一揆》里一样，女性总是参加着非常的事变，而且极有力，这也就是“这有丈夫气概的妇人”的精神。
(14) "Resistance" (Losbruch). The fifth picture of the same as above, the original size is 51×50cm. Everyone is dying on the grass and moving forward, the first is the teenager, but the one who calls is a woman, and the whole is full of vengeful anger. She was full of strength and waved her hands, which not only made people feel brave when they saw it, but also like clouds in the sky, which also cracked into pieces. Her posture is the most powerful woman in all famous paintings. Just like in "The Weaver's Ikki", women always participate in extraordinary events, and they are extremely powerful, which is the spirit of "this husbandly woman".（15）《战场》（Schlachtfeld）。同上的第六幅，原大41×53cm.农民们打败了，他们敌不过官兵。剩在战场上的是什么呢？几乎看不清东西。只在隐约看见尸横遍野的黑夜中，有一个妇人，用风灯照出她一只劳作到满是筋节的手，在触动一个死尸的下巴。光线都集中在这一小块上。这，恐怕正是她的儿子，这处所，恐怕正是她先前扶犁的地方，但现在流着的却不是汗而是鲜血了。
(15) "Battlefield" (Schlachtfeld). The sixth picture of the same as above, the original size is 41×53cm. The peasants were defeated, and they were no match for the officers and soldiers. What is left on the battlefield? Almost impossible to see. In the dark night when corpses were vaguely seen, a woman was touching the chin of a corpse with a wind lamp shining on her hand full of tendons. The light is focused on this small area. This is probably her son, this place is probably the place where she used to plow, but now it is not sweat but blood.（16）《俘虏》（Die Gefangenen）。同上的第七幅，原大33×42cm.画里是被捕的孑遗，有赤脚的，有穿木鞋的，都是强有力的汉子，但竟也有儿童，个个反缚两手，禁在绳圈里。他们的运命，是可想而知的了，但各人的神气，有已绝望的，有还是倔强或愤怒的，也有自在沉思的，却不见有什么萎靡或屈服。
(16) "Captive" (Die Gefangenen). The seventh picture of the same as above, the original size is 33×42cm. In the painting are arrested widows, some barefoot, some wearing wooden shoes, all strong men, but there are also children, all of whom are bound with their hands behind their backs and confined in rope rings. Their fate can be imagined, but everyone's spirit is desperate, some are still stubborn or angry, and some are free to contemplate, but there is no malaise or submission.（17）《失业》（Arbeitslosigkeit）。一九〇九年作，铜刻；据《画帖》，原大44×54cm.他现在闲空了，坐在她的床边，思索着——然而什么法子也想不出。那母亲和睡着的孩子们的模样，很美妙而崇高，为作者的作品中所罕见。
(17) "Unemployment" (Arbeitslosigkeit). Made in 1909, bronze engraving; According to the "Picture Post", the original size is 44×54cm. He is now idle, sitting on the edge of her bed, thinking—but he can't think of any way. The appearance of the mother and the sleeping children is wonderful and sublime, which is rare in the author's works.（18）《妇人为死亡所捕获》（Frau Vom Tod Gepackt），亦名《死和女人》（Tod Und Weib）。一九一〇年作，铜刻；据《画帖》，原大未详。“死”从她本身的阴影中出现，由背后来袭击她，将她缠住，反剪了；剩下弱小的孩子，无法叫回他自己的慈爱的母亲。一转眼间，对面就是两界。“死”是世界上最出众的拳师，死亡是现社会最动人的悲剧，而这妇人则是全作品中最伟大的一人。
(18) "Frau Vom Tod Gepackt" (Woman Captured by Death), also known as "Death and Woman" (Tod und Weib). Made in 1910, bronze engraving; According to the "Picture Post", the original size is unknown. "Death" emerged from her own shadow, attacked her from behind, entangled her, and cut her back; The weak child is left and cannot call back his own loving mother. In the blink of an eye, the opposite side is the two realms. "Death" is the most outstanding boxer in the world, death is the most moving tragedy in modern society, and this woman is the greatest person in the whole work.（19）《母与子》（Mutter Und Kind）。制作年代未详，铜刻；据《画帖》，原大19×13cm.在《凯绥·珂勒惠支作品集》中所见的百八十二幅中，可指为快乐的不过四五幅，这就是其一。亚斐那留斯以为从特地描写着孩子的呆气的侧脸，用光亮衬托出来之处，颇令人觉得有些忍俊不禁。
(19) "Mother and Son" (Mutter und Kind). The date of production is unknown, bronze engraving; According to the "Painting Post", the original size is 19×13cm. Among the 182 paintings seen in the "Collected Works of Kaisui Kelehuizhi", only four or five can be referred to as happy, and this is one of them. Aphinarius thought that the place where the child's dull profile was specially described and set off with light was quite funny.（20）《面包！》（Brot！）。石刻，制作年代未详，想当在欧洲大战之后；据原拓本，原大30×28cm.饥饿的孩子的急切的索食，是最碎裂了做母亲的的心的。这里是孩子们徒然张着悲哀，而热烈地希望着的眼，母亲却只能弯了无力的腰。她的肩膀耸了起来，是在背人饮泣。她背着人，因为肯帮助的和她一样的无力，而有力的是横竖不肯帮助的。她也不愿意给孩子们看见这是剩在她这里的仅有的慈爱。
(20) "Bread! 》（Brot！ ）。 The stone carving, the date of production is unknown, presumably after the European War; According to the original rubbing, the original size is 30×28cm. The eager request for food of the hungry child is the most broken mother's heart. Here are the children's eyes that are sad and hopeful in vain, but the mother can only bend her weak waist. Her shoulders shrugged, and she was crying behind her back. She carried people behind her back, because those who were willing to help were as powerless as her, and those who were powerful were those who refused to help. She also did not want to show her children that this was the only love left for her.（21）《德国的孩子们饿着！》（Deutschlands Kinder Hungern！）。石刻，制作年代未详，想当在欧洲大战之后；据原拓本，原大43×29cm.他们都擎着空碗向人，瘦削的脸上的圆睁的眼睛里，炎炎的燃着如火的热望。谁伸出手来呢？这里无从知道。这原是横幅，一面写着现在作为标题的一句，大约是当时募捐的揭帖。后来印行的，却只存了图画。作者还有一幅石刻，题为《决不再战！》（Nie Wieder Krieg！），是略早的石刻，可惜不能搜得；而那时的孩子，存留至今的，则已都成了二十以上的青年，可又将被驱作兵火的粮食了。
(21) "The German Children Are Hungry!" 》（Deutschlands Kinder Hungern！ ）。 The stone carving, the date of production is unknown, presumably after the European War; According to the original rubbing, the original size is 43×29cm. They are all holding empty bowls to people, and the round eyes on their thin faces are burning with fiery eagerness. Who will reach out? There is no way to know here. This was originally a banner with a sentence written on one side that is now the title, which is probably a donation announcement at that time. Later, only the pictures were preserved. The author also has a stone carving entitled "Never Fight Again!" 》（Nie Wieder Krieg！ ), which is a slightly earlier stone carving, but unfortunately cannot be found; And the children at that time, who have survived to this day, have become young people in their twenties, but they will be driven into food for war.一九三六年一月二十八日，鲁迅。
January 28, 1936, Lu Xun.

记苏联版画展览会

记苏联版画展览会

记苏联版画展览会

Record the exhibition of prints in the USSR我记得曾有一个时候，我们很少能够从本国的刊物上，知道一点苏联的情形。虽是文艺罢，有些可敬的作家和学者们，也如千金小姐的遇到柏油一样，不但决不沾手，离得还远呢，却已经皱起了鼻子。近一两年可不同了，自然间或还看见几幅从外国刊物上取来的讽刺画，但更多的是真心的绍介着建设的成绩，令人抬起头来，看见飞机，水闸，工人住宅，集体农场，不再专门两眼看地，惦记着破皮鞋摇头叹气了。这些绍介者，都并非有所谓可怕的政治倾向的人，但决不幸灾乐祸，因此看得邻人的平和的繁荣，也就非常高兴，并且将这高兴来分给中国人。我以为为中国和苏联两国起见，这现象是极好的，一面是真相为我们所知道，得到了解，一面是不再误解，而且证明了我们中国，确有许多“威武不能屈，贫贱不能移”的必说真话的人们。
I remember a time when we could rarely know a little about the Soviet Union from our own publications. Although it is literature and art, some respectable writers and scholars, like Miss Qianjin's encounter with tar, not only will they never touch their hands, but they are still far away, but they have already wrinkled their noses. In the past year or two, it has been different, and naturally I may see a few satirical paintings taken from foreign publications, but more of them are sincere about the achievements of construction, which makes people raise their heads and see airplanes, sluices, workers' houses, collective farms, no longer looking at the ground with two eyes, thinking about the broken leather shoes and shaking their heads and sighing. These introducers are not people with so-called terrible political tendencies, but they are unfortunate and happy to be happy to see the peace and prosperity of their neighbors, and they share this happiness with the Chinese. I think this phenomenon is excellent for the sake of China and the Soviet Union, on the one hand, the truth is known and understood, and on the other hand, it is no longer misunderstood, and it proves that there are indeed many people in China who must tell the truth who are "mighty and unyielding, and poverty cannot be moved".但那些绍介，都是文章或照相，今年的版画展览会，却将艺术直接陈列在我们眼前了。作者之中，很有几个是由于作品的复制，姓名已为我们所熟识的，但现在才看到手制的原作，使我们更加觉得亲密。
But those introductions are all articles or photos, and this year's printmaking exhibition displays art directly in front of our eyes. Many of the authors are already familiar to us due to the reproduction of their works, but now we have seen the original handmade works, which makes us feel even more intimate.版画之中，木刻是中国早已发明的，但中途衰退，五年前从新兴起的是取法于欧洲，与古代木刻并无关系。不久，就遭压迫，又缺师资，所以至今不见有特别的进步。我们在这会里才得了极好，极多的模范。首先应该注意的是内战时期，就改革木刻，从此不断的前进的巨匠法复尔斯基（V. Favorsky），和他的一派兑内加（A. Deineka），冈察洛夫（A. Goncharov），叶卡斯托夫（G. Echeistov），毕珂夫（M. Pikov）等，他们在作品里各各表现着真挚的精神，继起者怎样照着导师所指示的道路，却用不同的方法，使我们知道只要内容相同，方法不妨各异，而依傍和模仿，决不能产生真艺术。
Among printmaking, woodcut has long been invented in China, but it has declined midway, and the emerging one five years ago was taken from Europe, which has nothing to do with ancient woodcuts. Soon, it was oppressed and lacked teachers, so there has been no special progress so far. We have received excellent and many models in this meeting. First of all, it should be noted that during the Civil War, the great master V. Favursky (V. Favresky), who reformed woodcuts and continued to advance ever since. Favorsky), and his faction of A. Favorsky. Deineka), A. Goncharov (A. Goncharov), G. Echeistov), M. Bikov (M. Pikov) and others, they each express their sincere spirit in their works, how the successors follow the path instructed by their mentors, but use different methods, so that we know that as long as the content is the same, the methods may be different, and relying on and imitating must not produce true art.兑内加和叶卡斯托夫的作品，是中国未曾绍介过的，可惜这里也很少；和法复尔斯基接近的保夫理诺夫（P. Pavlinov）的木刻，我们只见过一幅，现在却弥补了这缺憾了。
The works of Duenega and Ekastov have not been introduced in China, but unfortunately there are very few here; P. Pavlinov, who was close to Favorsky, Pavlinov), we have only seen one woodcut, but now it makes up for this shortcoming.克拉甫兼珂（A. Kravchenko）的木刻能够幸而寄到中国，翻印绍介了的也只有一幅，到现在大家才看见他更多的原作。他的浪漫的色彩，会鼓动我们的青年的热情，而注意于背景和细致的表现，也将使观者得到裨益。我们的绘画，从宋以来就盛行“写意”，两点是眼，不知是长是圆，一画是鸟，不知是鹰是燕，竞尚高简，变成空虚，这弊病还常见于现在的青年木刻家的作品里，克拉甫兼珂的新作《尼泊尔建造》（Dneprostroy），是惊起这种懒惰的空想的警钟。至于毕斯凯莱夫（N. Piskarev），则恐怕是最先绍介到中国来的木刻家。他的四幅《铁流》的插画，早为许多青年读者所欣赏，现在才又见了《安娜·加里尼娜》的插画，——他的刻法的别一端。
A. Kravchenko) was fortunately able to be sent to China, and only one was reprinted, and only one of his original works has been reprinted, and only now everyone has seen more of his original works. His romantic colors will inspire the enthusiasm of our youth, and attention to background and meticulous expression will also benefit the viewer. Our paintings, since the Song Dynasty, have been prevalent in "freehand", two points are eyes, I don't know if it is long or round, one painting is a bird, I don't know if it is an eagle or a swallow, competing for simplicity, becoming emptiness, this ill is also common in the works of today's young woodcarvers, Kraf Jianke's new work "Nepal Construction" (Dneprostroy), is a wake-up call for this lazy fantasy. As for Biskelev (N. Piskarev) is probably the first woodcarver to come to China. His four illustrations of "Tie Liu" have long been appreciated by many young readers, and now I see the illustrations of "Anna Gallinina" again,—— another end of his engraving.这里又有密德罗辛（D. Mitrokhin），希仁斯基（L. Khiz-hinsky），莫察罗夫（S. Mochalov），都曾为中国豫先所知道，以及许多第一次看见的艺术家，是从十月革命前已经有名，以至生于二十世纪初的青年艺术家的作品，都在向我们说明通力合作，进向平和的建设的道路。别的作者和作品，展览会的说明书上各有简要说明，而且临末还揭出了全体的要点：“一般的社会主义的内容和对于现实主义的根本的努力”，在这里也无须我赘说了。
Here is also the Midrosyn (D. Mitrokhin), L. Shirensky (L. Khiz-hinsky), S. Mocharov (S. Mochalov), all known to Yuxian in China, and many artists I saw for the first time, from before the October Revolution to the early twentieth century, are young artists who were famous before the October Revolution and are showing us the way to work together to build peace. Other authors and works are briefly explained in the exhibition manual, and the main points of the whole are revealed at the end: "The content of socialism in general and the fundamental efforts for realism", which I do not need to repeat here.但我们还有应当注意的，是其中有乌克兰，乔其亚，白俄罗斯的艺术家的作品，我想，倘没有十月革命，这些作品是不但不能和我们见面，也未必会得出现的。
But we should also pay attention to the works of Ukrainian, Georgian, and Belarusian artists, which, I think, without the October Revolution, would not have been able to meet us, and they might not have appeared.现在，二百余幅的作品，是已经灿烂的一同出现于上海了。单就版画而论，使我们看起来，它不像法国木刻的多为纤美，也不像德国木刻的多为豪放；然而它真挚，却非固执，美丽，却非淫艳，愉快，却非狂欢，有力，却非粗暴；但又不是静止的，它令人觉得一种震动——这震动，恰如用坚实的步法，一步一步，踏着坚实的广大的黑土进向建设的路的大队友军的足音。
Now, more than 200 works have appeared brilliantly together in Shanghai. In terms of printmaking alone, it seems to us that it is not as delicate as French woodcuts, nor is it as bold as German woodcuts; However, it is sincere, but not stubborn, beautiful, but not lewd, pleasant, but not carnival, powerful, but not rude; But it is not static, it makes people feel a kind of vibration - this vibration is just like the footsteps of the big teammates who are stepping on the solid vast black soil to the road of construction step by step.附记：会中的版画，计有五种。一木刻，一胶刻（目录译作“油布刻”，颇怪），看名目自明。两种是用强水浸蚀铜版和石版而成的，译作“铜刻”和“石刻”固可，或如目录，译作“蚀刻”和“石印”亦无不可。还有一种Monotype，是在版上作画，再用纸印，所以虽是版画，却只一幅的东西，我想只好译作“独幅版画”。会中的说明书上译作“摩诺”，还不过等于不译，有时译为“单型学”，却未免比不译更难懂了。其实，那不提撰人的说明，是非常简而得要的，可惜译得很费解，如果有人改译一遍，即使在闭会之后，对于留心版画的人也还是很有用处的。
Note: There are five types of prints in the conference. A woodcut, a rubber engraving (the catalog is translated as "oilcloth carving", quite strange), the name is self-explanatory. The two are made by eroding copper plates and stone tablets with strong water, which can be translated as "copper carving" and "stone carving", or as in the catalog, it is also translated as "etching" and "stone seal". There is also a monotype, which is to paint on a plate and then print it on paper, so although it is a print, it is only one thing, so I think it has to be translated as "single print". The instructions in the meeting are translated as "Mono", which is only equivalent to not translating, and sometimes it is translated as "monotypic", but it is inevitably more difficult to understand than not translating. In fact, the explanation of the author is very concise and necessary, but unfortunately the translation is very confusing, and if someone retranslates it, even after the adjournment, it is still very useful for those who pay attention to printmaking.二月十七日。
February 17th.

我要骗人

我要骗人

我要骗人

I'm going to lie疲劳到没有法子的时候，也偶然佩服了超出现世的作家，要模仿一下来试试。然而不成功。超然的心，是得像贝类一样，外面非有壳不可的。而且还得有清水。浅间山边，倘是客店，那一定是有的罢，但我想，却未必有去造“象牙之塔”的人的。
When I was so tired that I couldn't do anything about it, I also occasionally admired the writers who were beyond the world, and I wanted to imitate it. However, it was unsuccessful. A transcendent mind must be like a shell, and there must be a shell on the outside. And there must be clean water. On the side of Asama Mountain, if it is an inn, there must be one, but I think there may not be people who build the "Ivory Tower".为了希求心的暂时的平安，作为穷余的一策，我近来发明了别样的方法了，这就是骗人。
In order to seek temporary peace in the heart, as a way to be poor, I have recently invented another method, which is deception.去年的秋天或是冬天，日本的一个水兵，在闸北被暗杀了。忽然有了许多搬家的人，汽车租钱之类，都贵了好几倍。搬家的自然是中国人，外国人是很有趣似的站在马路旁边看。我也常常去看的。一到夜里，非常之冷静，再没有卖食物的小商人了，只听得有时从远处传来着犬吠。然而过了两三天，搬家好像被禁止了。警察拚死命的在殴打那些拉着行李的大车夫和洋车夫，日本的报章，中国的报章，都异口同声的对于搬了家的人们给了一个“愚民”的徽号。这意思就是说，其实是天下太平的，只因为有这样的“愚民”，所以把颇好的天下，弄得乱七八糟了。
Last autumn or winter, a Japanese sailor was assassinated in Zhabei. Suddenly, there are many people moving, and car rental is several times more expensive. Naturally, the Chinese moved and the foreigners stood by the road as if they were very interested. I also go to see it often. At night, it was very calm, and there were no small merchants selling food anymore, only sometimes I heard the barking of dogs from afar. However, after two or three days, it seems that moving is prohibited. The police are desperately beating the big coachmen and foreign coachmen who are pulling luggage, and Japanese newspapers and Chinese newspapers have all given a "foolish people" badge to those who have moved. This means that in fact, the world is peaceful, just because there are such "foolish people", so the good world is in a mess.我自始至终没有动，并未加入“愚民”这一伙里。但这并非为了聪明，却只因为懒惰。也曾陷在五年前的正月的上海战争——日本那一面，好像是喜欢称为“事变”似的——的火线下，而且自由早被剥夺，夺了我的自由的权力者，又拿着这飞上空中了，所以无论跑到那里去，都是一个样。中国的人民是多疑的。无论那一国人，都指这为可笑的缺点。然而怀疑并不是缺点。总是疑，而并不下断语，这才是缺点。我是中国人，所以深知道这秘密。其实，是在下着断语的，而这断语，乃是：到底还是不可信。但后来的事实，却大抵证明了这断语的的确。中国人不疑自己的多疑。所以我的没有搬家，也并不是因为怀着天下太平的确信，说到底，仍不过为了无论那里都一样的危险的缘故。五年以前翻阅报章，看见过所记的孩子的死尸的数目之多，和从不见有记着交换俘虏的事，至今想起来，也还是非常悲痛的。
I didn't move from beginning to end, and I didn't join the group of "fools". But this is not for being smart, but only for laziness. I was also trapped in the line of fire of the Shanghai War in the first month of five years ago - the Japanese side seems to like to call it a "incident" - and my freedom had long been deprived of it, and the power that took away my freedom flew into the air with it, so no matter where I went, it was the same. The Chinese people are suspicious. No matter which country they are, they all point to this as a ridiculous shortcoming. However, skepticism is not a disadvantage. Always doubting without making assertions is a disadvantage. I am Chinese, so I know this secret very well. In fact, it is made with an assertiveness, and this assertion is: it is still not credible. But later facts largely proved the truth of this assertion. The Chinese do not doubt their suspiciousness. So I didn't move, not because I was convinced that the world would be peaceful, but because of the same danger everywhere. Five years ago, I flipped through the newspapers and saw the number of dead bodies of children I had recorded, and I never saw any record of the exchange of prisoners, and I am still very sad when I think about it.虐待搬家人，殴打车夫，还是极小的事情。中国的人民，是常用自己的血，去洗权力者的手，使他又变成洁净的人物的，现在单是这模样就完事，总算好得很。
Abusing the moving family and beating the coachman is still a very small thing. The Chinese people often use their own blood to wash the hands of those in power, so that they can become clean figures again.但当大家正在搬家的时候，我也没有整天站在路旁看热闹，或者坐在家里读世界文学史之类的心思。走远一点，到电影院里散闷去。一到那里，可真是天下太平了。这就是大家搬家去住的处所。我刚要跨进大门，被一个十二三岁的女孩子捉住了。是小学生，在募集水灾的捐款，因为冷，连鼻子尖也冻得通红。我说没有零钱，她就用眼睛表示了非常的失望。我觉得对不起人，就带她进了电影院，买过门票之后，付给她一块钱。她这回是非常高兴了，称赞我道，“你是好人”，还写给我一张收条。只要拿着这收条，就无论到那里，都没有再出捐款的必要。于是我，就是所谓“好人”，也轻松的走进里面了。
But when everyone was moving, I didn't stand on the side of the road all day watching the excitement, or sit at home reading the history of world literature. Go a little further and go to the cinema to relieve boredom. Once there, the world is really peaceful. This is where everyone moves to live. I was about to step through the door when I was caught by a twelve or thirteen-year-old girl. He was an elementary school student, and he was collecting donations for the flood, and because of the cold, even the tip of his nose was red from the cold. I said there was no change, and she expressed her disappointment with her eyes. I felt sorry for someone, so I took her into the cinema, bought a ticket, and paid her a dollar. She was very happy this time, praised me, "You are a good person", and wrote me a receipt. As long as you hold this receipt, no matter where you go, there is no need to make a donation. So I, the so-called "good person", also walked into it easily.看了什么电影呢？现在已经丝毫也记不起。总之，大约不外乎一个英国人，为着祖国，征服了印度的残酷的酋长，或者一个美国人，到亚非利加去，发了大财，和绝世的美人结婚之类罢。这样的消遣了一些时光，傍晚回家，又走进了静悄悄的环境。听到远地里的犬吠声。女孩子的满足的表情的相貌，又在眼前出现，自己觉得做了好事情了，但心情又立刻不舒服起来，好像嚼了肥皂或者什么一样。
What movie did you watch? I can't remember it at all now. In short, it is probably nothing more than a cruel chieftain who conquered India for the sake of his homeland, or an American who went to Asia and Africa, made a fortune, and married a peerless beauty. After spending some time like this, I went home in the evening and walked into a quiet environment again. Hear the barking of dogs in the distance. The appearance of the girl's satisfied expression appeared in front of her eyes again, and she felt that she had done a good thing, but her mood immediately became uncomfortable again, as if she had chewed soap or something.诚然，两三年前，是有过非常的水灾的，这大水和日本的不同，几个月或半年都不退。但我又知道，中国有着叫作“水利局”的机关，每年从人民收着税钱，在办事。但反而出了这样的大水了。我又知道，有一个团体演了戏来筹钱，因为后来只有二十几元，衙门就发怒不肯要。连被水灾所害的难民成群的跑到安全之处来，说是有害治安，就用机关枪去扫射的话也都听到过。恐怕早已统统死掉了罢。然而孩子们不知道，还在拚命的替死人募集生活费，募不到，就失望，募到手，就喜欢。而其实，一块来钱，是连给水利局的老爷买一天的烟卷也不够的。我明明知道着，却好像也相信款子真会到灾民的手里似的，付了一块钱。实则不过买了这天真烂漫的孩子的欢喜罢了。我不爱看人们的失望的样子。
It is true that two or three years ago, there was a very flood, which was different from Japan, and did not recede for several months or half a year. But I also know that China has an agency called the "Water Conservancy Bureau", which collects tax money from the people every year and is doing things. But there was such a flood instead. I also knew that there was a group that acted to raise money, because it was only more than 20 yuan, and the yamen was angry and refused to ask for it. Even refugees affected by floods have run to safety in droves, saying that it is harmful to public order, and they have been shot with machine guns. I'm afraid they are all dead long ago. However, the children don't know that they are still desperately trying to raise living expenses for the dead, and if they can't raise money, they will be disappointed, and if they can raise money, they will like it. In fact, one piece of money is not enough to buy cigarettes for a day for the master of the Water Conservancy Bureau. I knew it, but I also seemed to believe that the money would really go to the victims, so I paid a dollar. In fact, it's just the joy of buying this innocent child. I don't like to see people disappointed.倘使我那八十岁的母亲，问我天国是否真有，我大约是会毫不踌蹰，答道真有的罢。
If my eighty-year-old mother asked me if the kingdom of heaven really existed, I would probably answer without hesitation.然而这一天的后来的心情却不舒服。好像是又以为孩子和老人不同，骗她是不应该似的，想写一封公开信，说明自己的本心，去消释误解，但又想到横竖没有发表之处，于是中止了，时候已是夜里十二点钟。到门外去看了一下。
However, the mood later on this day was uncomfortable. As if she thought that children were different from the old man, and that she shouldn't lie to her, she wanted to write an open letter to explain her true intentions and dispel misunderstandings, but she thought that there was no place to publish horizontally and vertically, so she stopped, and it was already twelve o'clock in the night. I went outside the door to take a look.已经连人影子也看不见。只在一家的檐下，有一个卖馄饨的，在和两个警察谈闲天。这是一个平时不大看见的特别穷苦的肩贩，存着的材料多得很，可见他并无生意。用两角钱买了两碗，和我的女人两个人分吃了。算是给他赚一点钱。
I can't even see the shadow of a person. Only under the eaves of a family, there was a wonton seller who was chatting with two policemen. This is a particularly poor shoulder vendor who is not usually seen, and he has a lot of materials in store, which shows that he has no business. I bought two bowls for two dimes and shared them with my woman. It's to make him a little money.庄子曾经说过：“干下去的（曾经积水的）车辙里的鲋鱼，彼此用唾沫相湿，用湿气相嘘，”——然而他又说，“倒不如在江湖里，大家互相忘却的好。”
Zhuangzi once said: "The crucian carp in the ruts that have been dried up (once stagnant water) wet each other with saliva and booe each other with moisture," - but he also said, "It is better to forget each other in the rivers and lakes." ”可悲的是我们不能互相忘却。而我，却愈加恣意的骗起人来了。如果这骗人的学问不毕业，或者不中止，恐怕是写不出圆满的文章来的。
Sadly, we can't forget each other. And I, on the other hand, are deceiving people more and more arbitrarily. If this deceptive knowledge does not graduate or stop, I am afraid that it will not be able to write a satisfactory article.但不幸而在既未卒业，又未中止之际，遇到山本社长了。因为要我写一点什么，就在礼仪上，答道“可以的”。因为说过“可以”，就应该写出来，不要使他失望，然而到底也还是写了骗人的文章。
But unfortunately, before I finished my business and did not stop, I met President Yamamoto. Because if I were asked to write something, I would reply "yes" in terms of etiquette. Because he said "yes", he should write it and not disappoint him, but in the end he still wrote a deceptive article.写着这样的文章，也不是怎么舒服的心地。要说的话多得很，但得等候“中日亲善”更加增进的时光。不久之后，恐怕那“亲善”的程度，竟会到在我们中国，认为排日即国贼——因为说是共产党利用了排日的口号，使中国灭亡的缘故——而到处的断头台上，都闪烁着太阳的圆圈的罢，但即使到了这样子，也还不是披沥真实的心的时光。
Writing such an article is not very comfortable. There is a lot to say, but we have to wait for the time when the "Sino-Japanese friendship" will be further enhanced. Soon, I am afraid that the degree of "goodwill" will reach the point where in our China, we think that anti-Japanese is a national traitor - because it is said that the Communist Party used the slogan of anti-Japanese to bring about the destruction of China - and the guillotine everywhere is full of circles of the sun, but even if it reaches this point, it is not the time to pour out the true heart.单是自己一个人的过虑也说不定：要彼此看见和了解真实的心，倘能用了笔，舌，或者如宗教家之所谓眼泪洗明了眼睛那样的便当的方法，那固然是非常之好的，然而这样便宜事，恐怕世界上也很少有。这是可以悲哀的。一面写着漫无条理的文章，一面又觉得对不起热心的读者了。
It may be the fault of one person alone: to see and understand each other's true hearts, if they can use a pen, tongue, or a convenient method like the so-called tears that wash the eyes with tears, it is very good, but I am afraid that there are very few such cheap things in the world. This can be sad. While writing an unorganized article, I feel sorry for the enthusiastic readers.临末，用血写添几句个人的豫感，算是一个答礼罢。
At the end, write a few words of personal premonition with blood, which is a return gift.二月二十三日。
February 23.

《译文》复刊词

《译文》复刊词

《译文》复刊词

The translation was reprinted先来引几句古书，——也许记的不真确，——庄子曰：“涸辙之鲋，相濡以沫，相煦以湿，——不若相忘于江湖。”
First of all, I will quote a few sentences from ancient books,—— maybe the memory is not true,—— Zhuangzi said: "The crucian carp in the dry rut, wet with each other, warm and wet,—— it is better to forget each other in the rivers and lakes." ”《译文》就在一九三四年九月中，在这样的状态之下出世的。那时候，鸿篇巨制如《世界文学》和《世界文库》之类，还没有诞生，所以在这青黄不接之际，大约可以说是仿佛戈壁中的绿洲，几个人偷点余暇，译些短文，彼此看看，倘有读者，也大家看看，自寻一点乐趣，也希望或者有一点益处，——但自然，这决不是江湖之大。
The "Translation" was born in mid-September 1934, in this state. At that time, masterpieces such as "World Literature" and "World Library" had not yet been born, so at this time of disappointment, it can be said that it was like an oasis in the Gobi, several people stole some leisure time, translated some short articles, looked at each other, if there were readers, everyone would also take a look, find a little fun for themselves, and hope or have a little benefit,—— But naturally, this is by no means a big deal.不过这与世无争的小小的期刊，终于不能不在去年九月，以“终刊号”和大家告别了。虽然不过野花小草，但曾经费过不少移栽灌溉之力，当然不免私心以为可惜的。然而竟也得了勇气和慰安：这是许多读者用了笔和舌，对于《译文》的凭吊。
However, this small journal that is indisputable finally had to say goodbye to everyone with the "final issue" in September last year. Although it is just a wildflower grass, it has spent a lot of power on transplanting and irrigation, of course, it is a pity. However, it also gained courage and comfort: this is the reason why many readers have used their pens and tongues to hang on the "Translation".我们知道感谢，我们知道自勉。
We know to be grateful, we know to encourage ourselves.我们也不断的希望复刊。但那时风传的关于终刊的原因：是折本。出版家虽然大抵是“传播文化”的，而“折本”却是“传播文化”的致命伤，所以荏苒半年，简直死得无药可救。直到今年，折本说这才起了动摇，得到再造的运会，再和大家相见了。
We also continue to hope for the resumption of publication. But at that time, the reason for the final publication was that it was a folded version. Although publishers are mostly "spreading culture", "folding money" is the fatal wound of "spreading culture", so half a year has passed, and it is simply hopeless. It wasn't until this year that Zhe Ben said that this was shaken, and he got the rebuilt Games and met everyone again.内容仍如创刊时候的《前记》里所说一样：原料没有限制；门类也没有固定；文字之外多加图画，也有和文字有关系的，意在助趣，也有和文字没有关系的，那就算是我们贡献给读者的一点小意思。
The content is still the same as what was said in the "Preface" at the time of its inception: there is no limit to raw materials; There is no fixed category; Add more pictures in addition to the text, some are related to the text, are intended to help fun, and some have nothing to do with the text, which is a little meaning we contribute to the reader.这一回，将来的运命如何呢？我们不知道。但今年文坛的情形突变，已在宣扬宽容和大度了，我们真希望在这宽容和大度的文坛里，《译文》也能够托庇比较的长生。
This time, what is the fate of the future? We don't know. But this year's sudden change in the literary world is already preaching tolerance and generosity, and we really hope that in this tolerant and generous literary world, "Translation" can also support comparative longevity.三月八日。
March 8th.

白莽作《孩儿塔》序

白莽作《孩儿塔》序

白莽作《孩儿塔》序

Bai Mang wrote the preface to "The Children's Tower."春天去了一大半了，还是冷；加上整天的下雨，淅淅沥沥，深夜独坐，听得令人有些凄凉，也因为午后得到一封远道寄来的信，要我给白莽的遗诗写一点序文之类；那信的开首说道：“我的亡友白莽，恐怕你是知道的罢。……”——这就使我更加惆怅。
Spring is more than half gone, and it is still cold; Coupled with the rain all day long, dripping, sitting alone late at night, it was a little desolate to listen to, and because I got a letter from afar in the afternoon, asking me to write a little preface to Bai Mang's posthumous poems; The letter began with the words: "My deceased friend Bai Mang, I'm afraid you know." ......" - this made me even more melancholy.说起白莽来，——不错，我知道的。四年之前，我曾经写过一篇《为忘却的记念》，要将他们忘却。他们就义了已经足有五个年头了，我的记忆上，早又蒙上许多新鲜的血迹；这一提，他的年青的相貌就又在我的眼前出现，像活着一样，热天穿着大棉袍，满脸油汗，笑笑的对我说道：“这是第三回了。自己出来的。前两回都是哥哥保出，他一保就要干涉我，这回我不去通知他了。……”——我前一回的文章上是猜错的，这哥哥才是徐培根，航空署长，终于和他成了殊途同归的兄弟；他却叫徐白，较普通的笔名是殷夫。
Speaking of Bai Mang, it's ,—— good, I know. Four years ago, I wrote an article "For the Memory of Forgetting" to forget them. They have been righteous for five years, and my memory has long been covered with a lot of fresh blood; At this mention, his youthful appearance appeared in front of my eyes again, as if he was alive, wearing a big cotton robe on a hot day, his face was full of oil and sweat, and he said to me with a smile: "This is the third time." It came out by itself. The first two times my brother guaranteed it, and he was going to interfere with me as soon as he guaranteed it, but this time I won't notify him. ......" - I guessed wrong in my previous article, this brother is Xu Bacon, the director of aviation, and finally became a brother with him; His name is Xu Bai, and his more common pseudonym is Yin Fu.一个人如果还有友情，那么，收存亡友的遗文真如捏着一团火，常要觉得寝食不安，给它企图流布的。这心情我很了然，也知道有做序文之类的义务。我所惆怅的是我简直不懂诗，也没有诗人的朋友，偶尔一有，也终至于闹开，不过和白莽没有闹，也许是他死得太快了罢。现在，对于他的诗，我一句也不说——因为我不能。
If a person still has friendship, then the posthumous writings of living and deceased friends are really like holding a fire, and they often feel restless and try to spread it. I understand this feeling, and I also know that I have an obligation to write a preface. What I am sad about is that I don't understand poetry at all, and I don't have friends with poets, and if I have it occasionally, I will eventually make trouble, but I didn't make trouble with Bai Mang, maybe he died too quickly. Now, I don't say a word about his poems - because I can't.这《孩儿塔》的出世并非要和现在一般的诗人争一日之长，是有别一种意义在。这是东方的微光，是林中的响箭，是冬末的萌芽，是进军的第一步，是对于前驱者的爱的大纛，也是对于摧残者的憎的丰碑。一切所谓圆熟简练，静穆幽远之作，都无须来作比方，因为这诗属于别一世界。
The birth of this "Children's Tower" is not to compete with ordinary poets today, but to have a different meaning. This is the glimmer of the east, the arrow in the forest, the sprout of the end of winter, the first step of the march, the banner of love for the vanguard, and the monument to the hatred of the destroyer. All the so-called perfect, concise, quiet and distant works do not need to be metaphorized, because this poem belongs to another world.那一世界里有许多许多人，白莽也是他们的亡友。单是这一点，我想，就足够保证这本集子的存在了，又何需我的序文之类。
There were many people in that world, and Bai Mang was also their dead friend. This alone, I think, is enough to ensure the existence of this collection, so why do I need a preface or the like.一九三六年三月十一夜，鲁迅记于上海之且介亭。
On the night of March 11, 1936, Lu Xun recorded in the Qiejie Pavilion in Shanghai.

续记

续记

续记

Continued note这是三月十日的事。我得到一个不相识者由汉口寄来的信，自说和白莽是同济学校的同学，藏有他的遗稿《孩儿塔》，正在经营出版，但出版家有一个要求：要我做一篇序；至于原稿，因为纸张零碎，不寄来了，不过如果要看的话，却也可以补寄。其实，白莽的《孩儿塔》的稿子，却和几个同时受难者的零星遗稿，都在我这里，里面还有他亲笔的插画，但在他的朋友手里别有初稿，也是可能的；至于出版家要有一篇序，那更是平常事。
This was on March 10th. I got a letter from an unknown person from Hankou, saying that he and Bai Mang were classmates at Tongji School, and that he had his posthumous manuscript "Children's Tower" and was running a publishing operation, but the publisher had a request: he wanted me to write a preface; As for the original manuscript, it was not sent because the paper was fragmented, but if you want to see it, you can also send it back. In fact, the manuscript of Bai Mang's "Children's Tower", along with the sporadic manuscripts of several contemporaneous victims, is with me, and there are also his own illustrations, but it is also possible to have a different first draft in the hands of his friends; As for publishers to have a preface, it is even more common.近两年来，大开了印卖遗著的风气，虽是期刊，也常有死人和活人合作的，但这已不是先前的所谓“骸骨的迷恋”，倒是活人在依靠死人的余光，想用“死诸葛吓走生仲达”。我不大佩服这些活家伙。可是这一回却很受了感动，因为一个人受了难，或者遭了冤，所谓先前的朋友，一声不响的固然有，连赶紧来投几块石子，借此表明自己是属于胜利者一方面的，也并不算怎么希罕；至于抱守遗文，历多年还要给它出版，以尽对于亡友的交谊者，以我之孤陋寡闻，可实在很少知道。大病初愈，才能起坐，夜雨淅沥，怆然有怀，便力疾写了一点短文，到第二天付邮寄去，因为恐怕连累付印者，所以不题他的姓名；过了几天，才又投给《文学丛报》，因为恐怕妨碍发行，所以又隐下了诗的名目。
In the past two years, the trend of printing and selling posthumous works has been greatly opened, although it is a periodical, and there are often dead people and living people cooperating, but this is no longer the previous so-called "obsession with bones", but the living are relying on the afterglow of the dead, wanting to use "dead Zhuge to scare away Sheng Zhongda". I don't admire these living guys very much. But this time I was very moved, because a person suffered, or suffered injustice, the so-called previous friends, of course, there were silent friends, and even hurriedly came to throw a few stones, so as to show that they belonged to the victor's side, which was not very rare; As for the posthumous writings, they have to be published for many years, so as to make friends with my deceased friends, but I really rarely know about them. When he had just recovered from a serious illness, he could only sit up, and the night rain was dripping, and he was sad, so he wrote a short article and mailed it the next day, because he was afraid that it would affect the printer, so he did not write his name; A few days later, it was submitted to the "Literary Series", because it was afraid that it would hinder the distribution, so the name of the poem was hidden.此后不多几天，看见《社会日报》，说是善于翻戏的史济行，现又化名为齐涵之了。我这才悟到自己竟受了骗，因为汉口的发信者，署名正是齐涵之。他仍在玩着骗取文稿的老套，《孩儿塔》不但不会出版，大约他连初稿也未必有的，不过知道白莽和我相识，以及他的诗集的名目罢了。
Not long after that, I saw the "Social Daily", saying that it was Shi Jixing, who was good at turning dramas, and now he was pseudonymously Qi Hanzhi. Only then did I realize that I had been deceived, because the sender of Hankou signed Qi Hanzhi. He is still playing with the old trick of deceiving manuscripts, not only will "Children's Tower" not be published, probably he may not even have the first draft, but he knows that Bai Mang and I know each other, and the title of his poetry collection.至于史济行和我的通信，却早得很，还是八九年前，我在编辑《语丝》，创造社和太阳社联合起来向我围剿的时候，他就自称是一个艺术专门学校的学生，信件在我眼前出现了，投稿是几则当时所谓革命文豪的劣迹，信里还说这类文稿，可以源源的寄来。然而《语丝》里是没有“劣迹栏”的，我也不想和这种“作家”往来，于是当时即加以拒绝。后来他又或者化名“彳亍”，在刊物上捏造我的谣言，或者忽又化为“天行”（《语丝》也有同名的文字，但是别一人）或“史岩”，卑词征求我的文稿，我总给他一个置之不理。这一回，他在汉口，我是听到过的，但不能因为一个史济行在汉口，便将一切汉口的不相识者的信都看作卑劣者的圈套，我虽以多疑为忠厚长者所诟病，但这样多疑的程度是还不到的。不料人还是大意不得，偶不疑虑，偶动友情，到底成为我的弱点了。
As for Shi Jixing's correspondence with me, it was very early, or eight or nine years ago, when I was editing "Yusi", and the Creation Society and the Sun Society united to encircle and suppress me, he claimed to be a student of an art college, and the letter appeared in front of my eyes, and the submission was several bad deeds of the so-called revolutionary writers at that time, and the letter also said that such manuscripts could be sent in a steady stream. However, there is no "bad deeds column" in "Yusi", and I didn't want to associate with this kind of "writer", so I refused it at that time. Later, he either changed his name to "彳庍" and fabricated my rumors in the publication, or suddenly turned into "Tianxing" ("Yusi" also has a text of the same name, but no one else) or "Shi Yan", and asked for my manuscript in a despicable way, but I always ignored it. This time, he was in Hankou, I have heard of it, but I can't regard all the letters of strangers in Hankou as a trap of despicable people just because a Shi Jixing is in Hankou. Unexpectedly, people are still careless, occasionally unsuspicious, and occasionally friendship, which has become my weakness.今天又看见了所谓“汉出”的《人间世》的第二期，卷末写着“主编史天行”，而下期要目的豫告上，果然有我的《序〈孩儿塔〉》在。但卷端又声明着下期要更名为《西北风》了，那么，我的序文，自然就卷在第一阵“西北风”里。而第二期的第一篇，竟又是我的文章，题目是《日译本〈中国小说史略〉序》。这原是我用日本文所写的，这里却不知道何人所译，仅止一页的短文，竟充满着错误和不通，但前面却附有一行声明道：“本篇原来是我为日译本《支那小说史》写的卷头语……”乃是模拟我的语气，冒充我自己翻译的。翻译自己所写的日文，竟会满纸错误，这岂不是天下的大怪事么？
Today I saw the second issue of the so-called "Han Chu" "The World of the World", and at the end of the volume it was written "Editor-in-Chief Shi Tianxing", and the next issue was announced, and sure enough, there was my "Preface to the Children's Tower". But the end of the volume also states that the next issue will be renamed "Northwest Wind", so my preface is naturally rolled up in the first "Northwest Wind". The first article of the second issue was actually my article, titled "Preface to the Japanese Translation of the History of Chinese Novels". This was originally written by me in Japanese, but I don't know who translated it here, and the short article is only one page, which is full of errors and incomprehensions, but it is preceded by a line of statement: "This article was originally written by me for the Japanese translation of "History of Chinese Novels"...... "It was a simulated tone of my tone, pretending to be my own translation." Isn't it a big strange thing in the world to translate the Japanese you write, and the paper will be full of errors?中国原是“把人不当人”的地方，即使无端诬人为投降或转变，国贼或汉奸，社会上也并不以为奇怪。所以史济行的把戏，就更是微乎其微的事情。我所要特地声明的，只在请读了我的序文而希望《孩儿塔》出版的人，可以收回了这希望，因为这是我先受了欺骗，一转而成为我又欺骗了读者的。
China was originally a place where people were "treated as inappropriate people", and even if people were falsely accused of surrendering or converting, national traitors or traitors were not surprising in society. Therefore, Shi Jixing's trick is even more insignificant. What I want to declare is that only those who have read my preface and hope that "The Tower of Children" will be published, can withdraw this hope, because I was deceived first, and then I became the reader again.最后，我还要添几句由“多疑”而来的结论：即使真有“汉出”《孩儿塔》，这部诗也还是可疑的。我从来不想对于史济行的大事业讲一句话，但这回既经我写过一篇序，且又发表了，所以在现在或到那时，我都有指明真伪的义务和权利。
Finally, I would like to add a few conclusions from "suspiciousness": even if there is really "Han Chu" "Children's Tower", this poem is still suspicious. I never wanted to say a word about Shi Jixing's great cause, but this time I wrote a preface and published it, so I have the obligation and right to indicate the authenticity now or until then.四月十一日。
April 11th.

写于深夜里

写于深夜里

写于深夜里

Written in the middle of the night一　珂勒惠支教授的版画之入中国
1. The introduction of Professor Kellerhuitt's prints into China野地上有一堆烧过的纸灰，旧墙上有几个划出的图画，经过的人是大抵未必注意的，然而这些里面，各各藏着一些意义，是爱，是悲哀，是愤怒，……而且往往比叫了出来的更猛烈。也有几个人懂得这意义。
There is a pile of burnt paper ash on the field, and there are a few drawings on the old wall, which passers-by may not pay attention to, but in these, each has some meaning, which is love, sorrow, and anger,...... And often more violently than what was screamed. There are also a few people who understand this meaning.一九三一年——我忘了月份了——创刊不久便被禁止的杂志《北斗》第一本上，有一幅木刻画，是一个母亲，悲哀的闭了眼睛，交出她的孩子去。这是珂勒惠支教授（Prof. Kaethe Kollwitz）的木刻连续画《战争》的第一幅，题目叫作《牺牲》；也是她的版画绍介进中国来的第一幅。
In 1931 - I forgot the month - there was a woodcut on the first volume of the magazine "Beidou", which was banned shortly after its launch, a mother closed her eyes sadly and handed over her child. This is Prof. Kölhuitz (Prof. Kaethe Kollwitz) is the first of a series of woodcuts "War", titled "Sacrifice"; It is also the first of her prints to be introduced into China.这幅木刻是我寄去的，算是柔石遇害的纪念。他是我的学生和朋友，一同绍介外国文艺的人，尤喜欢木刻，曾经编印过三本欧美作家的作品，虽然印得不大好。然而不知道为了什么，突然被捕了，不久就在龙华和别的五个青年作家同时枪毙。当时的报章上毫无记载，大约是不敢，也不能记载，然而许多人都明白他不在人间了，因为这是常有的事。只有他那双目失明的母亲，我知道她一定还以为她的爱子仍在上海翻译和校对。偶然看到德国书店的目录上有这幅《牺牲》，便将它投寄《北斗》了，算是我的无言的纪念。然而，后来知道，很有一些人是觉得所含的意义的，不过他们大抵以为纪念的是被害的全群。
This woodcut was sent by me, and it is a memorial to Rou Shi's murder. He is my student and friend, a person who introduces foreign literature and art, especially likes woodcuts, and has compiled and printed three works by European and American writers, although they are not very well printed. However, for some reason, he was suddenly arrested, and soon Long Hua and five other young writers were shot dead at the same time. There was no record in the newspapers at that time, probably not daring or being able to record it, but many people understood that he was no longer in the world, because this was a common occurrence. Only his blind mother, I know she must have thought that her beloved son was still translating and proofreading in Shanghai. I happened to see this "Sacrifice" in the catalog of a German bookstore, so I sent it to "Beidou", which is my silent memorial. However, I later learned that many people felt that it meant, but they probably thought it was a commemoration of the entire group of victims.这时珂勒惠支教授的版画集正在由欧洲走向中国的路上，但到得上海，勤恳的绍介者却早已睡在土里了，我们连地点也不知道。好的，我一个人来看。这里面是穷困，疾病，饥饿，死亡……自然也有挣扎和争斗，但比较的少；这正如作者的自画像，脸上虽有憎恶和愤怒，而更多的是慈爱和悲悯的相同。这是一切“被侮辱和被损害的”的母亲的心的图像。这类母亲，在中国的指甲还未染红的乡下，也常有的，然而人往往嗤笑她，说做母亲的只爱不中用的儿子。但我想，她是也爱中用的儿子的，只因为既然强壮而有能力，她便放了心，去注意“被侮辱的和被损害的”孩子去了。
At this time, Professor Kölhuitsch's printmaking collection was on the way from Europe to China, but when we arrived in Shanghai, the diligent introducers had already slept in the soil, and we didn't even know the location. Okay, I'll come and see it alone. This is poverty, disease, hunger, death...... Naturally, there are struggles and struggles, but there are few; This is like the author's self-portrait, although there is hatred and anger on his face, but more of love and compassion. This is an image of the heart of all "insulted and damaged" mothers. This kind of mother is also common in the countryside of China, where her nails are not yet dyed, but people often laugh at her, saying that mothers only love their useless sons. But I think she also loves her son, just because she is strong and capable, she lets go and pays attention to the "insulted and damaged" children.现在就有她的作品的复印二十一幅，来作证明；并且对于中国的青年艺术学徒，又有这样的益处的——
Now there are twenty-one copies of her works to prove it; And for China's young art apprentices, there is such a benefit -一，近五年来，木刻已颇流行了，虽然时时受着迫害。但别的版画，较成片段的，却只有一本关于卓伦（Anders Zorn）的书。现在所绍介的全是铜刻和石刻，使读者知道版画之中，又有这样的作品，也可以比油画之类更加普遍，而且看见和卓伦截然不同的技法和内容。
First, in the past five years, woodcuts have become quite popular, although they are often persecuted. But the other prints, which are more fragmentary, are only a book about Anders Zorn. Now all the bronze carvings and stone carvings are introduced, so that readers know that there are such works in printmaking, which can also be more common than oil paintings, and see completely different techniques and content from Zhuo Lun.二，没有到过外国的人，往往以为白种人都是对人来讲耶稣道理或开洋行的，鲜衣美食，一不高兴就用皮鞋向人乱踢。有了这画集，就明白世界上其实许多地方都还存在着“被侮辱和被损害的”人，是和我们一气的朋友，而且还有为这些人们悲哀，叫喊和战斗的艺术家。
Second, people who have never been to foreign countries often think that Caucasians are all people who preach the doctrine of Jesus to people or open foreign businesses, wear fresh clothes and eat delicious food, and kick people with leather shoes when they are unhappy. With this collection of paintings, I understand that in many parts of the world, there are still people who are "insulted and damaged", friends who are in the same breath as us, and there are artists who mourn, shout and fight for these people.三，现在中国的报纸上多喜欢登载张口大叫着的希特拉像，当时是暂时的，照相上却永久是这姿势，多看就令人觉得疲劳。现在由德国艺术家的画集，却看见了别一种人，虽然并非英雄，却可以亲近，同情，而且愈看，也愈觉得美，愈觉得有动人之力。
Third, Chinese newspapers now like to publish the portrait of Hitler with his mouth open, which was temporary at the time, but this pose is permanent in the photo, and it makes people feel tired when they look at it too much. Now the collection of paintings by German artists has seen another kind of person, although not a hero, but can be close and sympathetic, and the more I look at it, the more beautiful and moving I feel.四，今年是柔石被害后的满五年，也是作者的木刻第一次在中国出现后的第五年；而作者，用中国式计算起来，她是七十岁了，这也可以算作一个纪念。作者虽然现在也只能守着沉默，但她的作品，却更多的在远东的天下出现了。是的，为人类的艺术，别的力量是阻挡不住的。
Fourth, this year is the fifth year since Rou Shi was killed, and it is also the fifth year since the author's woodcuts first appeared in China; And the author, in Chinese calculations, is seventy years old, which can also be regarded as a commemoration. Although the author can only remain silent now, her works have appeared more in the world of the Far East. Yes, for human art, no other force can stop it.

写于深夜里

二　略论暗暗的死

写于深夜里

2. Briefly discuss the death of darkness这几天才悟到，暗暗的死，在一个人是极其惨苦的事。
In the past few days, I realized that dying secretly is an extremely miserable thing for a person.中国在革命以前，死囚临刑，先在大街上通过，于是他或呼冤，或骂官，或自述英雄行为，或说不怕死。到壮美时，随着观看的人们，便喝一声采，后来还传述开去。在我年青的时候，常听到这种事，我总以为这情形是野蛮的，这办法是残酷的。
Before the revolution in China, death row inmates were first passed on the street when they were executed, so he either cried out for injustice, or scolded officials, or recounted his heroic deeds, or said that he was not afraid of death. When it was magnificent, the people watching cheered, and later it was recounted. When I was young, I often heard this kind of thing, and I always thought that this situation was barbaric, that this method was cruel.新近在林语堂博士编辑的《宇宙风》里，看到一篇铢堂先生的文章，却是别一种见解。他认为这种对死囚喝采，是崇拜失败的英雄，是扶弱，“理想是不能不算崇高。然而在人群的组织上实在要不得。抑强扶弱，便是永远不愿意有强。崇拜失败英雄，便是不承认成功的英雄。”所以使“凡是古来成功的帝王，欲维持几百年的威力，不定得残害几万几十万无辜的人，方才能博得一时的慑服”。
Recently, in "Cosmic Wind" edited by Dr. Lin Yutang, I saw an article by Mr. Zhutang, but it was a different opinion. He believes that this kind of applause for death row inmates is to worship failed heroes and to help the weak, "The ideal cannot be considered noble." However, it is really not necessary in the organization of the crowd. To suppress the strong and support the weak is to never be willing to be strong. To worship failed heroes is to not recognize successful heroes. Therefore, "all successful emperors in ancient times who want to maintain their power for hundreds of years may have to mutilate tens of thousands of innocent people in order to win temporary fear."残害了几万几十万人，还只“能博得一时的慑服”，为“成功的帝王”设想，实在是大可悲哀的：没有好法子。不过我并不想替他们划策，我所由此悟到的，乃是给死囚在临刑前可以当众说话，倒是“成功的帝王”的恩惠，也是他自信还有力量的证据，所以他有胆放死囚开口，给他在临死之前，得到一个自夸的陶醉，大家也明白他的收场。我先前只以为“残酷”，还不是确切的判断，其中是含有一点恩惠的。我每当朋友或学生的死，倘不知时日，不知地点，不知死法，总比知道的更悲哀和不安；由此推想那一边，在暗室中毕命于几个屠夫的手里，也一定比当众而死的更寂寞。
It is really sad to think of a "successful emperor" who has mutilated tens of thousands of people and can only "win a momentary intimidation": there is no good way. But I don't want to advise them, what I realized from this is to give death row inmates the ability to speak in public before execution, but it is the favor of the "successful emperor", and it is also evidence of his confidence and strength, so he has the courage to let the death row prisoner speak, give him a boastful intoxication before he dies, and everyone understands his ending. I only thought it was "cruel" before, not an exact judgment, and it contained a little favor. Whenever I die of a friend or student, if I don't know the time, place, or way of death, I am always sadder and more uneasy than I know; From this, it can be inferred that on the other side, dying in the hands of a few butchers in a dark room must be more lonely than dying in public.然而“成功的帝王”是不秘密杀人的，他只秘密一件事：和他那些妻妾的调笑。到得就要失败了，才又增加一件秘密：他的财产的数目和安放的处所；再下去，这才加到第三件：秘密的杀人。这时他也如铢堂先生一样，觉得民众自有好恶，不论成败的可怕了。
However, the "successful emperor" does not kill secretly, he only keeps one thing secret: teasing with his wives and concubines. When he was about to fail, he added another secret: the number of his property and the place where he was placed; Going further, this is added to the third thing: secret killing. At this time, like Mr. Zhutang, he felt that the people had their own likes and dislikes, no matter whether they succeeded or failed.所以第三种秘密法，是即使没有策士的献议，也总有一时要采用的，也许有些地方还已经采用。这时街道文明了，民众安静了，但我们试一推测死者的心，却一定比明明白白而死的更加惨苦。我先前读但丁的《神曲》，到《地狱》篇，就惊异于这作者设想的残酷，但到现在，阅历加多，才知道他还是仁厚的了：他还没有想出一个现在已极平常的惨苦到谁也看不见的地狱来。
Therefore, the third secret method is always to be adopted at some point even without the advice of the strategist, and perhaps it has been adopted in some places. At this time, the streets were civilized and the people were quiet, but if we tried to guess the heart of the deceased, it must be more miserable than the one who died clearly. I had read Dante's "Divine Comedy" before, and when I read "Hell", I was amazed at the cruelty that the author envisioned, but now, with more experience, I realize that he is still benevolent: he has not yet come up with a hell that is now so common that no one can see it.

写于深夜里

三　一个童话

写于深夜里

3. A fairy tale看到二月十七日的《DZZ》，有为纪念海涅（H. Heine）死后八十年，勃莱兑勒（Willi Bredel）所作的《一个童话》，很爱这个题目，也来写一篇。
Seeing the February 17 "DZZ", there is a tribute to H. Heine. Eighty years after Heine's death, Willi Bredel's "A Fairy Tale" loved this topic very much, and he also wrote one.有一个时候，有一个这样的国度。权力者压服了人民，但觉得他们倒都是强敌了，拼音字好像机关枪，木刻好像坦克车；取得了土地，但规定的车站上不能下车。地面上也不能走了，总得在空中飞来飞去；而且皮肤的抵抗力也衰弱起来，一有紧要的事情，就伤风，同时还传染给大臣们，一齐生病。
There was a time when there was such a country. The powerful subdued the people, but felt that they were all strong enemies, pinyin characters were like machine guns, woodcuts were like tanks; The land was acquired, but it was not possible to get off at the prescribed station. You can't go on the ground, you have to fly around in the air; Moreover, the skin's resistance is also weakened, and whenever there is an urgent matter, it catches a cold, and at the same time, it is also transmitted to the ministers, and they all get sick.出版有大部的字典，还不止一部，然而是都不合于实用的，倘要明白真情，必须查考向来没有印过的字典。这里面很有新奇的解释，例如：“解放”就是“枪毙”；“托尔斯泰主义”就是“逃走”；“官”字下注云：“大官的亲戚朋友和奴才”；“城”字下注云：“为防学生出入而造的高而坚固的砖墙”；“道德”条下注云：“不准女人露出臂膊”；“革命”条下注云：“放大水入田地里，用飞机载炸弹向‘匪贼’头上掷之也。”
There are many dictionaries published, and there is more than one, but they are not practical, and if you want to understand the truth, you must check the dictionary that has never been printed. There are very novel explanations here, for example: "liberation" means "shooting"; "Tolstoyism" means "fleeing"; The word "official" is annotated: "relatives, friends and servants of high officials"; The word "city" is annotated: "A tall and strong brick wall built to prevent students from entering and leaving"; The "moral" article states: "Women are not allowed to show their arms"; The "revolution" article notes: "Amplify the water into the fields and use airplanes to carry bombs on the heads of 'bandits'." ”出版有大部的法律，是派遣学者，往各国采访了现行律，摘取精华，编纂而成的，所以没有一国，能有这部法律的完全和精密。但卷头有一页白纸，只有见过没有印出的字典的人，才能够看出字来，首先计三条：一，或从宽办理；二，或从严办理；三，或有时全不适用之。
Most of the laws published were compiled by scholars who went to various countries to interview the current laws, extract the essence, and compile them, so no country could have the perfection and precision of this law. But there is a page of white paper at the beginning of the book, and only those who have seen the dictionary that has not been printed can see the words, first of all, there are three points: first, or leniency; 2. Or handle it strictly; 3. Sometimes it does not apply at all.自然有法院，但曾在白纸上看出字来的犯人，在开庭时候是决不抗辩的，因为坏人才爱抗辩，一辩即不免“从严办理”；自然也有高等法院，但曾在白纸上看出字来的人，是决不上诉的，因为坏人才爱上诉，一上诉即不免“从严办理”。
Naturally, there is a court, but prisoners who have seen the words on a blank sheet of paper will never defend themselves at the time of the trial, because bad people love to defend, and once they argue, they will inevitably "handle it strictly"; Naturally, there is also a high court, but those who have seen the words on a blank sheet of paper will never appeal, because bad people love to appeal, and once they appeal, they will inevitably "handle it strictly".有一天的早晨，许多军警围住了一个美术学校。校里有几个中装和西装的人在跳着，翻着，寻找着，跟随他们的也是警察，一律拿着手枪。不多久，一位西装朋友就在寄宿舍里抓住了一个十八岁的学生的肩头。
One morning, many military and police surrounded an art school. There were a few people in Chinese and suits in the school jumping, rummaging, searching, and following them were also policemen, all holding pistols. Not long after, a friend in a suit grabbed an eighteen-year-old student by the shoulder in the dormitory.“现在政府派我们到你们这里来检查，请你……”
"Now the government has sent us to you to check, please ......"“你查罢！”那青年立刻从床底下拖出自己的柳条箱来。
"You check!" The young man immediately dragged his wicker box out from under the bed.这里的青年是积多年的经验，已颇聪明了的，什么也不敢有。但那学生究竟只有十八岁，终于被在抽屉里，搜出几封信来了，也许是因为那些信里面说到他的母亲的困苦而死，一时不忍烧掉罢。西装朋友便子子细细的一字一字的读着，当读到“……世界是一台吃人的筵席，你的母亲被吃去了，天下无数无数的母亲也会被吃去的……”的时候，就把眉头一扬，摸出一枝铅笔来，在那些字上打着曲线，问道：
The young people here have accumulated many years of experience, are quite smart, and dare not have anything. But the student was only eighteen years old, and finally a few letters were found in the drawer, perhaps because they talked about his mother's death in hardship, and he couldn't bear to burn them for a while. The friend in the suit read word by word carefully, and when he read "...... The world is a cannibalistic banquet, and if your mother is eaten, countless mothers in the world will also be eaten......", he raised his eyebrows, took out a pencil, made a curve on the words, and asked:“这是怎么讲的？”
"How is this said?"“…………”
“谁吃你的母亲？世上有人吃人的事情吗？我们吃你的母亲？好！”他凸出眼珠，好像要化为枪弹，打了过去的样子。
"Who eats your mother? Is there anyone in the world who cannibalizes? We eat your mother? Good! His eyes bulged out, as if he was about to turn into a bullet and hit the past.“那里！……这……那里！……这……”青年发急了。
"There! …… This...... There! …… This ...... "The young man is in a hurry."但他并不把眼珠射出去，只将信一折，塞在衣袋里；又把那学生的木版，木刻刀和拓片，《铁流》，《静静的顿河》，剪贴的报，都放在一处，对一个警察说：
But he didn't shoot out his eyes, he only folded the letter and stuffed it in his pocket; He put the student's woodblocks, woodcut knives and rubbings, "Tie Liu", "The Quiet Don River", and the cut-and-paste newspaper in one place, and said to a policeman:“我把这些交给你！”
"I'll leave this to you!"“这些东西里有什么呢，你拿去？”青年知道这并不是好事情。
"What's in these things, do you take them?" Young people know that this is not a good thing.但西装朋友只向他瞥了一眼，立刻顺手一指，对别一个警察命令道：
But the suit friend only glanced at him, and immediately pointed at him and ordered another policeman:“我把这个交给你！”
"I'll give you this!"警察的一跳好像老虎，一把抓住了这青年的背脊上的衣服，提出寄宿舍的大门口去了。门外还有两个年纪相仿的学生，背脊上都有一只勇壮巨大的手在抓着。旁边围着一大层教员和学生。
The policeman jumped like a tiger, grabbed the clothes on the young man's back, and offered to send them to the gate of the dormitory. There were two students of similar age outside the door, both holding a brave and huge hand on their backs. There is a large layer of faculty and students surrounding it.

写于深夜里

四　又是一个童话

写于深夜里

Fourth, it is another fairy tale有一天的早晨的二十一天之后，拘留所里开审了。一间阴暗的小屋子里，上面坐着两位老爷，一东一西。东边的一个是马褂，西边的一个是西装，不相信世上有人吃人的事情的乐天派，录口供的。警察吆喝着连抓带拖的弄进一个十八岁的学生来，苍白脸，脏衣服，站在下面。马褂问过他的姓名，年龄，籍贯之后，就又问道：
One morning, twenty-one days later, the trial began in the detention center. In a dark small house, there were two masters sitting on it, one east and one west. The one in the east is a horse coat, and the other in the west is a suit, and the optimist who does not believe in cannibalism in the world records the confession. The police shouted and dragged in an eighteen-year-old student, with a pale face and dirty clothes, standing below. After Ma Yi asked his name, age, and place of origin, he asked again:“你是木刻研究会的会员么？”
"Are you a member of the Woodcut Research Association?"“是的。”
"Yes."“谁是会长呢？”
"Who is the president?"“Ch……正的，H……副的。”
“Ch…… Positive, H...... Vice. ”“他们现在在那里？”
"Where are they now?"“他们都被学校开除了，我不晓得。”
"They were all expelled from school, I don't know."“你为什么要鼓动风潮呢，在学校里？”
"Why are you stirring up a trend, in school?"“阿！……”青年只惊叫了一声。
"Ah! ......" The young man only screamed.“哼。”马褂随手拿出一张木刻的肖像来给他看，“这是你刻的吗？”
"Hmph." Ma Jian casually took out a woodcut portrait and showed it to him, "Is this what you carved?" ”“是的。”
"Yes."“刻的是谁呢？”
"Who is it engraved?"“是一个文学家。”
"He is a writer."“他叫什么名字？”
"What's his name?"“他叫卢那却尔斯基。”
"His name is Lunachersky."“他是文学家？——他是那一国人？”
"He is a writer? ——What country is he from? ”“我不知道！”这青年想逃命，说谎了。
"I don't know!" The young man wanted to run for his life and lied.“不知道？你不要骗我！这不是露西亚人吗？这不是明明白白的露西亚红军军官吗？我在露西亚的革命史上亲眼看见他的照片的呀！你还想赖？”
"I don't know? Don't lie to me!" Isn't this Lucian? Isn't this a clear Lucian Red Army officer? I saw Lucia's picture with my own eyes in the history of her revolution! Do you still want to rely on it? ”“那里！”青年好像头上受到了铁椎的一击，绝望的叫了一声。
"There!" The young man seemed to have been hit on the head by an iron hammer and screamed in despair.“这是应该的，你是普罗艺术家，刻起来自然要刻红军军官呀！”
"This is how it should be, you are a general artist, so you naturally have to carve a Red Army officer!"“那里……这完全不是……”
"There...... This is not ...... at all."“不要强辩了，你总是‘执迷不悟’！我们很知道你在拘留所里的生活很苦。但你得从实说来，好使我们早些把你送给法院判决。——监狱里的生活比这里好得多。”
"Don't argue, you are always 'obsessed'! We know that life in detention is hard. But you must speak the truth so that we may bring you to the court sooner. – Life in prison is much better than here. ”青年不说话——他十分明白了说和不说一样。
The young man did not speak - he understood very well that speaking was the same as not speaking.“你说，”马褂又冷笑了一声，“你是CP，还是CY？”
"You say," Ma Gong sneered again, "Are you CP or CY?" ”“都不是的。这些我什么也不懂！”
"None of them. I don't understand anything about this! ”“红军军官会刻，CP，CY就不懂了？人这么小，却这样的刁顽！去！”于是一只手顺势向前一摆，一个警察很聪明而熟练的提着那青年就走了。
"Red Army officers will carve, CP, CY will not understand? People are so small, but they are so stubborn! Go! So he waved his hand forward, and a policeman carried the young man very smartly and skillfully and left.我抱歉得很，写到这里，似乎有些不像童话了。但如果不称它为童话，我将称它为什么呢？特别的只在我说得出这事的年代，是一九三二年。
I'm sorry, writing this doesn't seem like a fairy tale. But if not to call it a fairy tale, why would I call it? Especially in the era when I can only say this, it is 1932.

写于深夜里

五　一封真实的信

写于深夜里

5. A true letter“敬爱的先生：
"Dear Sir:你问我出了拘留所以后的事情么，我现在大略叙述在下面——
You asked me what happened after I was detained, and I will roughly describe it below——在当年的最后一月的最后一天，我们三个被××省政府解到了高等法院。一到就开检查庭。这检察官的审问很特别，只问了三句：
On the last day of the last month of that year, the three of us were taken to the High Court by the ×× provincial government. As soon as they arrived, the prosecutor's office was held. The prosecutor's interrogation was very special, and he only asked three questions:‘你叫什么名字？’——第一句；
'What's your name?' '—the first sentence;‘今年你几岁？’——第二句；
'How old are you this year?' '—the second sentence;‘你是那里人？’——第三句。
'Are you from there?' '—the third sentence.开完了这样特别的庭，我们又被法院解到了军人监狱。有谁要看统治者的统治艺术的全般的么？那只要到军人监狱里去。他的虐杀异己，屠戮人民，不惨酷是不快意的。时局一紧张，就拉出一批所谓重要的政治犯来枪毙，无所谓刑期不刑期的。例如南昌陷于危急的时候，曾在三刻钟之内，打死了二十二个；福建人民政府成立时，也枪毙了不少。刑场就是狱里的五亩大的菜园，囚犯的尸体，就靠泥埋在菜园里，上面栽起菜来，当作肥料用。
After such a special court, we were sent to the military prison by the court. Who wants to see the ruler's art in general? Then just go to the military prison. His abuse of dissidents and the slaughter of the people is not cruel and unpleasant. As soon as the situation became tense, a group of so-called important political prisoners were pulled out to shoot, regardless of whether the sentence was served or not. For example, when Nanchang was in danger, he killed twenty-two people within three quarters of an hour; When the Fujian People's Government was established, many people were also shot. The execution ground is a five-acre vegetable garden in the prison, and the corpses of prisoners are buried in the vegetable garden with mud, and vegetables are planted on it as fertilizer.约莫隔了两个半月的样子，起诉书来了。法官只问我们三句话，怎么可以做起诉书的呢？可以的！原文虽然不在手头，但是我背得出，可惜的是法律的条目已经忘记了——
After about two and a half months, the indictment came. The judge only asked us three sentences, how can we make an indictment? OK! Although the original text is not at hand, I can memorize it, but unfortunately the entry of the law has been forgotten——‘……Ch……H……所组织之木刻研究会，系受共党指挥，研究普罗艺术之团体也。被告等皆为该会会员，……核其所刻，皆为红军军官及劳动饥饿者之景象，借以鼓动阶级斗争而示无产阶级必有专政之一日。……’
‘…… Ch…… H…… The woodcut research society organized by the organization is a group under the command of the Communist Party to study popular art. The defendants are all members of the association,...... The engravings are all images of Red Army officers and working starving people, in order to incite class struggle and show that the proletariat will have a dictatorship. ……’之后，没有多久，就开审判庭。庭上一字儿坐着老爷五位，威严得很。然而我倒并不怎样的手足无措，因为这时我的脑子里浮出了一幅图画，那是陀密埃（Honoré Daumier）的《法官》，真使我赞叹！
After that, not long after, the trial court was held. There were five masters sitting in the court, very majestic. However, I was not so at a loss, because then a picture came to my mind, it was Honoré Daumier's "The Judge", which really amazed me!审判庭开后的第八日，开最后的判决庭，宣判了。判决书上所开的罪状，也还是起诉书上的那么几句，只在它的后半段里，有——
On the eighth day after the trial court opened, the final judgment was held and the verdict was pronounced. The charges issued in the verdict are still a few sentences on the indictment, but only in the second half of it, there are-‘核其所为，当依危害民国紧急治罪法第×条，刑法第×百×十×条第×款，各处有期徒刑五年。……然被告等皆年幼无知，误入歧途，不无可悯，特依××法第×千×百×十×条第×款之规定，减处有期徒刑二年六个月。于判决书送到后十日以内，不服上诉……’云云。
'If you check what you have done, you should be sentenced to five years in prison in accordance with Article × of the Emergency Punishment Law of the Republic of China and Article × × 100× Paragraph × of the Criminal Law. …… However, the defendants were young and ignorant, and they went astray, which is not without pity, and the sentence was commuted to two years and six months in accordance with the provisions of Section × × × × × of the ×× Act. Within 10 days after the judgment is served, the appeal is not accepted......我还用得到‘上诉’么？‘服’得很！反正这是他们的法律！
Can I still use 'appeal'? 'Convinced' very much! This is their law anyway!总结起来，我从被捕到放出，竟游历了三处残杀人民的屠场。现在，我除了感激他们不砍我的头之外，更感激的是增加了我不知几多的知识。单在刑罚一方面，我才晓得现在的中国有：一，抽藤条，二，老虎凳，都还是轻的；三，踏杠，是叫犯人脆下，把铁杠放在他的腿弯上，两头站上彪形大汉去，起先两个，逐渐加到八人；四，跪火链，是把烧红的铁链盘在地上，使犯人跪上去；五，还有一种叫‘吃’的，是从鼻孔里灌辣椒水，火油，醋，烧酒……；六，还有反绑着犯人的手，另用细麻绳缚住他的两个大拇指，高悬起来，吊着打，我叫不出这刑罚的名目。
To sum up, from the time I was arrested to the time I was released, I traveled to three slaughterhouses that killed people. Now, in addition to being grateful that they didn't cut off my head, I am even more grateful for the increase in my knowledge. In terms of punishment alone, I know that China now has: first, drawing rattan, second, tiger stools, which are still light; Third, stepping on the bar, is to make the prisoner brittle, put the iron bar on the crook of his leg, stand on the big man at both ends, at first two, gradually increase to eight people; 4. Kneeling fire chains are to coil the red-hot iron chains on the ground and make the prisoners kneel on them; Fifth, there is another kind called 'eating', which is to pour chili water, kerosene, vinegar, soju ...... from the nostrils; Sixth, there is also the hand of the prisoner tied back, and his two thumbs are tied with fine hemp rope, hung high, and beaten, I can't name this punishment.我认为最惨的还是在拘留所里和我同栊的一个年青的农民。老爷硬说他是红军军长，但他死不承认。呵，来了，他们用缝衣针插在他的指甲缝里，用榔头敲进去。敲进去了一只，不承认，敲第二只，仍不承认，又敲第三只……第四只……终于十只指头都敲满了。直到现在，那青年的惨白的脸，凹下的眼睛，两只满是鲜血的手，还时常浮在我的眼前，使我难于忘却！使我苦痛！……
I think the worst thing was a young farmer who was with me in the detention center. The master insisted that he was the commander of the Red Army, but he refused to admit it. Oh, here they are, they stick a sewing needle in the crack of his nail and hammer it in. Knocked in one, didn't admit it, knocked on the second one, still didn't admit it, and knocked on the third...... The fourth ...... Finally, ten fingers were knocked full. Until now, the young man's pale face, sunken eyes, and two blood-stained hands still float in front of my eyes from time to time, making it difficult for me to forget! It makes me suffer! ……然而，入狱的原因，直到我出来之后才查明白。祸根是在我们学生对于学校有不满之处，尤其是对于训育主任，而他却是省党部的政治情报员。他为了要镇压全体学生的不满，就把仅存的三个木刻研究会会员，抓了去做示威的牺牲了。而那个硬派卢那却尔斯基为红军军官的马褂老爷，又是他的姐夫，多么便利呵！
However, the reason for the imprisonment was not found out until I came out. The bane is that our students are dissatisfied with the school, especially the director of discipline, who is a political intelligence officer of the provincial party department. In order to suppress the dissatisfaction of all the students, he arrested the only three remaining members of the Woodcut Research Society and sacrificed them for demonstration. And the hard-core Lunachersky is a Red Army officer, and he is his brother-in-law, how convenient!写完了大略，抬头看看窗外，一地惨白的月色，心里不禁渐渐地冰凉了起来。然而我自信自己还并不怎样的怯弱，然而，我的心冰凉起来了……
After writing the general idea, I looked up at the pale moonlight outside the window, and my heart couldn't help but gradually become cold. However, I was confident that I was not so timid, but my heart was cold......愿你的身体康健！
May your health be healthy!人凡。四月四日，后半夜。”
Human. April 4th, the second half of the night. ”（附记：从《一个童话》后半起至篇末止，均据人凡君信及《坐牢略记》。四月七日。）
(Note: From the second half of "A Fairy Tale" to the end of the article, it is all based on the letter of the king and the "Brief Notes on Prison".) April 7th. ）

三月的租界

三月的租界

三月的租界

March concession今年一月，田军发表了一篇小品，题目是《大连丸上》，记着一年多以前，他们夫妇俩怎样幸而走出了对于他们是荆天棘地的大连——
In January this year, Tian Jun published a sketch titled "Dalian Marus", remembering how the couple was lucky enough to get out of Dalian, which was a thorny place for them more than a year ago——“第二天当我们第一眼看到青岛青青的山角时，我们的心才又从冻结里蠕活过来。
"The next day, when we saw the green corners of Qingdao for the first time, our hearts wriggled back from the freeze.“‘啊！祖国！’
"'Ah! Fatherland! ’“我们梦一般这样叫了！”
"We call it like this in our dreams!"他们的回“祖国”，如果是做随员，当然没有人会说话，如果是剿匪，那当然更没有人会说话，但他们竟不过来出版了《八月的乡村》。这就和文坛发生了关系。那么，且慢“从冻结里蠕活过来”罢。三月里，就“有人”在上海的租界上冷冷的说道——
When they returned to the "motherland", if they were attachés, of course no one would speak, and if they were suppressing bandits, of course no one would speak, but they didn't come to publish "August Countryside". This has something to do with the literary world. Then, let's slowly "wriggle out of the freeze". In March, "someone" said coldly in the Shanghai concession -“田军不该早早地从东北回来！”
"Tian Jun shouldn't have come back from the northeast early!"谁说的呢？就是“有人”。为什么呢？因为这部《八月的乡村》“里面有些还不真实”。然而我的传话是“真实”的。有《大晚报》副刊《火炬》的奇怪毫光之一，《星期文坛》上的狄克先生的文章为证——
Who said that? It is "someone". Why? Because this "August Countryside" "some of it is not real". However, my message is "true". There is one of the strange lights of the "Torch" supplement of the "Great Evening News", as evidenced by Mr. Dick's article in the "Weekly Literary World" -“《八月的乡村》整个地说，他是一首史诗，可是里面有些还不真实，像人民革命军进攻了一个乡村以后的情况就不够真实。有人这样对我说：‘田军不该早早地从东北回来’，就是由于他感觉到田军还需要长时间的学习，如果再丰富了自己以后，这部作品当更好。技巧上，内容上，都有许多问题在，为什么没有人指出呢？”
"The Countryside in August" as a whole is an epic, but some of it is not true, like the situation after the People's Revolutionary Army attacked a village. Someone said to me: 'Tian Jun should not come back from the northeast early', because he felt that Tian Jun still needed to study for a long time, and if he enriched himself, this work would be better. There are many problems in terms of technique and content, why is no one pointing it out? ”这些话自然不能说是不对的。假如“有人”说，高尔基不该早早不做码头脚夫，否则，他的作品当更好；吉须不该早早逃亡外国，如果坐在希忒拉的集中营里，他将来的报告文学当更有希望。倘使有谁去争论，那么，这人一定是低能儿。然而在三月的租界上，却还有说几句话的必要，因为我们还不到十分“丰富了自己”，免于来做低能儿的幸福的时期。
Naturally, these words cannot be said to be wrong. If "someone" says that Gorky should not stop being a dock porter early, otherwise, his work should be better; Jixu should not have fled to a foreign country early, and if he sat in Hitler's concentration camp, his future reportage would be more promising. If anyone argues, then this person must be an imbecile. However, in the March concession, it is still necessary to say a few words, because we are not yet very "enriched" and free from the happy period of being an imbecile.这样的时候，人是很容易性急的。例如罢，田军早早的来做小说了，却“不够真实”，狄克先生一听到“有人”的话，立刻同意，责别人不来指出“许多问题”了，也等不及“丰富了自己以后”，再来做“正确的批评”。但我以为这是不错的，我们有投枪就用投枪，正不必等候刚在制造或将要制造的坦克车和烧夷弹。可惜的是这么一来，田军也就没有什么“不该早早地从东北回来”的错处了。立论要稳当真也不容易。
At times like this, people are easily impatient. For example, Tian Jun came to write a novel early, but it was "not real enough", and as soon as Mr. Dick heard the words of "someone", he immediately agreed, blaming others for not pointing out "many problems", and he couldn't wait to "enrich himself" and then make "correct criticism". But I thought it was good, we used the throwing gun when we had it, and we didn't have to wait for the tanks and incendiary bombs that were just being built or were about to be made. Unfortunately, in this way, Tian Jun has nothing wrong with "not coming back from the Northeast early". It is not easy to make a solid statement.况且从狄克先生的文章上看起来，要知道“真实”似乎也无须久留在东北似的，这位“有人”先生和狄克先生大约就留在租界上，并未比田军回来得晚，在东北学习，但他们却知道够不够真实。而且要作家进步，也无须靠“正确”的批评，因为在没有人指出《八月的乡村》的技巧上，内容上的“许多问题”以前，狄克先生也已经断定了：“我相信现在有人在写，或豫备写比《八月的乡村》更好的作品，因为读者需要！”
Moreover, from Mr. Dick's article, it seems that the "real" does not seem to need to stay in the Northeast for a long time, and this "someone" Mr. and Mr. Dick stayed in the concession about the time, not later than Tian Jun came back to study in the Northeast, but they knew whether it was true enough. And for writers to progress, they do not need to rely on "correct" criticism, because before no one pointed out the "many problems" in the technique and content of "August Country", Mr. Dick had already concluded: "I believe that there are people who are now writing, or preparing to write better works than August Country, because readers need them!" ”到这里，就是坦克车正要来，或将要来了，不妨先折断了投枪。
At this point, the tank is coming, or is about to come, so you might as well break the throwing gun first.到这里，我又应该补叙狄克先生的文章的题目，是：《我们要执行自我批判》。
At this point, I should add the title of Mr. Dick's article, which is: "We must practice self-criticism".题目很有劲。作者虽然不说这就是“自我批判”，但却实行着抹杀《八月的乡村》的“自我批判”的任务的，要到他所希望的正式的“自我批判”发表时，这才解除它的任务，而《八月的乡村》也许再有些生机。因为这种模模胡胡的摇头，比列举十大罪状更有害于对手，列举还有条款，含胡的指摘，是可以令人揣测到坏到茫无界限的。
The title is very powerful. Although the author does not say that this is "self-criticism", he implements the task of erasing the "self-criticism" of "August Country", and it is not until the official "self-criticism" he hopes for is published that it will be lifted, and "August Country" may have some more vitality. Because this kind of shaking of the head is more harmful to the opponent than listing the top ten crimes, and the list has clauses, including Hu's accusations, which can make people speculate that they are so bad that there are no boundaries.自然，狄克先生的“要执行自我批判”是好心，因为“那些作家是我们底”的缘故。但我以为同时可也万万忘记不得“我们”之外的“他们”，也不可专对“我们”之中的“他们”。要批判，就得彼此都给批判，美恶一并指出。如果在还有“我们”和“他们”的文坛上，一味自责以显其“正确”或公平，那其实是在向“他们”献媚或替“他们”缴械。
Naturally, Mr. Dick's "self-criticism" is well-intentioned, because "those writers are our bottom". But I think that at the same time, we must never forget "them" outside of "us", nor should we be exclusive to "them" in "us". If you want to criticize, you have to criticize each other, and point out the good and evil together. If in the literary world where there are still "us" and "them", blindly blaming oneself to show that it is "right" or fair, it is actually flattering "them" or disarming "them".四月十六日。
April 16th.

《出关》的“关”

《出关》的“关”

《出关》的“关”

The "Pass" of "Out of the Customs"我的一篇历史的速写《出关》在《海燕》上一发表，就有了不少的批评，但大抵自谦为“读后感”。于是有人说：“这是因为作者的名声的缘故”。话是不错的。现在许多新作家的努力之作，都没有这么的受批评家注意，偶或为读者所发现，销上一二千部，便什么“名利双收”呀，“不该回来”呀，“叽哩咕噜”呀，群起而打之，惟恐他还有活气，一定要弄到此后一声不响，这才算天下太平，文坛万岁。然而别一方面，慷慨激昂之士也露脸了，他戟指大叫道：“我们中国有半个托尔斯泰没有？有半个歌德没有？”惭愧得很，实在没有。不过其实也不必这么激昂，因为从地壳凝结，渐有生物以至现在，在俄国和德国，托尔斯泰和歌德也只有各一个。
As soon as one of my historical sketches "Out of the Customs" was published in "Haiyan", there was a lot of criticism, but most of them were humble as "after reading". So someone said: "This is because of the author's reputation." That's a good thing. Nowadays, the efforts of many new writers have not received such attention from critics, and occasionally they are discovered by readers, and if they sell one or two thousand copies, they will be "fame and fortune", "should not come back", "gurgling", and beat them in groups, for fear that he is still alive, and he must make a silent sound after that, which is considered peaceful in the world and long live the literary world. However, on the other hand, the impassioned man also showed his face, and he shouted with his halberd pointing: "Do we have half of Tolstoy in China?" Is there half a Goethe? "I'm very ashamed, really not. But in fact, there is no need to be so excited, because from the condensation of the earth's crust, there are gradually living things to the present, in Russia and Germany, Tolstoy and Goethe are only one each.我并没有遭着这种打击和恫吓，是万分幸福的，不过这回却想破了向来对于批评都守缄默的老例，来说几句话，这也并无他意，只以为批评者有从作品来批判作者的权利，作者也有从批评来批判批评者的权利，咱们也不妨谈一谈而已。
I am very happy that I have not suffered this kind of blow and intimidation, but this time I want to break the old practice of keeping silent about criticism, and say a few words, which I have no other intention of, I just think that critics have the right to criticize the author from the work, and the author also has the right to criticize the critic from the critic, so we might as well talk about it.看所有的批评，其中有两种，是把我原是小小的作品，缩得更小，或者简直封闭了。
Looking at all the criticisms, two of them are to shrink my original small work to a smaller size, or simply close.一种，是以为《出关》在攻击某一个人。这些话，在朋友闲谈，随意说笑的时候，自然是无所不可的，但若形诸笔墨，昭示读者，自以为得了这作品的魂灵，却未免像后街阿狗的妈妈。她是只知道，也只爱听别人的阴私的。不幸我那《出关》并不合于这一流人的胃口，于是一种小报上批评道：“这好像是在讽刺傅东华，然而又不是。”既然“然而又不是”，就可见并不“是在讽刺傅东华”了，这不是该从别处着眼了么？然而他因此又觉得毫无意味，一定要实在“是在讽刺傅东华”，这才尝出意味来。
One is to think that "Out of the Customs" is attacking a certain person. These words, when friends chat and laugh casually, are naturally omnipotent, but if they are in the form of pen and ink, it shows the reader that he thinks he has the soul of this work, but he is like the mother of a dog in the back street. She only knows and only loves to listen to other people's private interests. Unfortunately, my "Out of the Customs" did not suit the appetite of this type of people, so a tabloid criticized: "This seems to be a satire on Fu Donghua, but it is not." Since "but it is not", it can be seen that it is not "satirizing Fu Donghua", shouldn't this be looked elsewhere? However, he felt that it was meaningless, and he must really be "satirizing Fu Donghua", so that he could taste the meaning.这种看法的人们，是并不很少的，还记得作《阿Q正传》时，就曾有小政客和小官僚惶怒，硬说是在讽刺他，殊不知阿Q的模特儿，却在别的小城市中，而他也实在正在给人家捣米。但小说里面，并无实在的某甲或某乙的么？并不是的。倘使没有，就不成为小说。纵使写的是妖怪，孙悟空一个筋斗十万八千里，猪八戒高老庄招亲，在人类中也未必没有谁和他们精神上相像。有谁相像，就是无意中取谁来做了模特儿，不过因为是无意中，所以也可以说是谁竟和书中的谁相像。我们的古人，是早觉得做小说要用模特儿的，记得有一部笔记，说施耐庵——我们也姑且认为真有这作者罢——请画家画了一百零八条梁山泊上的好汉，贴在墙上，揣摩着各人的神情，写成了《水浒》。但这作者大约是文人，所以明白文人的技俩，而不知道画家的能力，以为他倒能凭空创造，用不着模特儿来作标本了。
There are not a few people who have this view, and I still remember that when I wrote "The True Biography of Ah Q", there were small politicians and small bureaucrats who were angry and insisted that they were satirizing him, but they didn't know that Ah Q's model was in other small cities, and he was really pounding rice for others. But in the novel, is there no real A or B? Not really. If not, it will not become a novel. Even if it is written about monsters, Sun Wukong somersaults 108,000 miles, Zhu Bajie Gao Laozhuang recruits relatives, and there may not be anyone among humans who is spiritually similar to them. Whoever resembles someone is unintentionally chosen as a model, but because it is unintentional, it can also be said that who resembles someone in the book. Our ancients had long felt that they needed to use models to make novels, and I remember a note saying that Shi Nai'an—let's just think that there really is this author—asked the painter to draw one hundred and eight heroes on Liangshanbo, pasted them on the wall, pondered everyone's expressions, and wrote "Water Margin". But this author is probably a literati, so he understands the skills of literati, but does not know the ability of the painter, thinking that he can create out of thin air and does not need a model as a specimen.作家的取人为模特儿，有两法。一是专用一个人，言谈举动，不必说了，连微细的癖性，衣服的式样，也不加改变。这比较的易于描写，但若在书中是一个可恶或可笑的角色，在现在的中国恐怕大抵要认为作者在报个人的私仇——叫作“个人主义”，有破坏“联合战线”之罪，从此很不容易做人。二是杂取种种人，合成一个，从和作者相关的人们里去找，是不能发见切合的了。但因为“杂取种种人”，一部分相像的人也就更其多数，更能招致广大的惶怒。我是一向取后一法的，当初以为可以不触犯某一个人，后来才知道倒触犯了一个以上，真是“悔之无及”，既然“无及”，也就不悔了。况且这方法也和中国人的习惯相合，例如画家的画人物，也是静观默察，烂熟于心，然后凝神结想，一挥而就，向来不用一个单独的模特儿的。
There are two ways for writers to hire people as models. First, it is dedicated to one person, and the words and actions are not changed, not to mention, even the subtle habits and the style of clothes. This is relatively easy to describe, but if it is a hateful or ridiculous character in the book, in today's China, I am afraid that the author is avenging his personal revenge - called "individualism", and has the crime of destroying the "united front", and it is not easy to be a human being from now on. the other is to take all kinds of people, synthesize one, and find it from people related to the author, which cannot be found. But because of "mixing all kinds of people", some similar people are also more numerous, and they can attract the anger of the vast number of people. I have always taken the latter method, I thought I could not offend a certain person, but later I realized that I had violated more than one, which was really "too late to regret". Moreover, this method is also in line with the habits of Chinese, for example, painters paint figures, but also meditate and observe, familiarize themselves with the heart, and then concentrate on it, and achieve it in one stroke, without the need for a separate model.不过我在这里，并不说傅东华先生就做不得模特儿，他一进小说，是有代表一种人物的资格的；我对于这资格，也毫无轻视之意，因为世间进不了小说的人们倒多得很。然而纵使谁整个的进了小说，如果作者手腕高妙，作品久传的话，读者所见的就只是书中人，和这曾经实有的人倒不相干了。例如《红楼梦》里贾宝玉的模特儿是作者自己曹霑，《儒林外史》里马二先生的模特儿是冯执中，现在我们所觉得的却只是贾宝玉和马二先生，只有特种学者如胡适之先生之流，这才把曹霑和冯执中念念不忘的记在心儿里：这就是所谓人生有限，而艺术却较为永久的话罢。
But I am here, not to say that Mr. Fu Donghua cannot be a model, as soon as he enters the novel, he has the qualifications to represent a character; I have no contempt for this qualification, because there are many people in the world who can't enter novels. However, even if someone enters the novel as a whole, if the author is skilled and the work has been passed down for a long time, what the reader sees is only the person in the book, and it has nothing to do with the person who once existed. For example, Jia Baoyu's model in "Dream of Red Mansions" is the author's own Cao Zhan, and Mr. Ma Er's model in "The History of Confucianism" is Feng Zhizhong, but now what we think is only Jia Baoyu and Mr. Ma Er, only special scholars such as Mr. Hu Shizhi and the like, which keep Cao Zhan and Feng Zhizhong in mind: this is the so-called limited life, but art is more permanent.还有一种，是以为《出关》乃是作者的自况，自况总得占点上风，所以我就是其中的老子。说得最凄惨的是邱韵铎先生——
There is also a way to think that "Out of the Customs" is the author's own situation, and the self-situation always has the upper hand, so I am one of them. The most miserable thing is Mr. Qiu Yunduo -“……至于读了之后，留在脑海里的影子，就只是一个全身心都浸淫着孤独感的老人的身影。我真切地感觉着读者是会坠入孤独和悲哀去，跟着我们的作者。要是这样，那么，这篇小说的意义，就要无形地削弱了，我相信，鲁迅先生以及像鲁迅先生一样的作家们的本意是不在这里的。……”（《每周文学》的《海燕读后记》）
“…… As for the shadow left in my mind after reading, it is just the figure of an old man immersed in loneliness. I really feel that readers will fall into loneliness and sadness, following our author. If this is the case, then the meaning of this novel will be invisibly weakened, and I believe that the original intention of Mr. Lu Xun and writers like Mr. Lu Xun is not here. ......" ("Haiyan Reading Postscript" of "Weekly Literature")这一来真是非同小可，许多人都“坠入孤独和悲哀去”，前面一个老子，青牛屁股后面一个作者，还有“以及像鲁迅先生一样的作家们”，还有许多读者们连邱韵铎先生在内，竟一窠蜂似的涌“出关”去了。但是，倘使如此，老子就又不“只是一个全身心都浸淫着孤独感的老人的身影”，我想他是会不再出关，回上海请我们吃饭，出题目征集文章，做道德五百万言的了。
This is really extraordinary, many people have "fallen into loneliness and sorrow", a Lao Tzu in front, an author behind Qing Niu's butt, and "and writers like Mr. Lu Xun", and many readers, including Mr. Qiu Yunduo, have rushed out of the customs like a swarm. However, if this is the case, Lao Tzu will not be "just an old man immersed in loneliness", I think he will no longer go out of customs, go back to Shanghai to invite us to dinner, publish topics and collect articles, and do five million words of morality.所以我现在想站在关口，从老子的青牛屁股后面，挽留住“像鲁迅先生一样的作家们”以及许多读者们连邱韵铎先生在内。首先是请不要“坠入孤独和悲哀去”，因为“本意是不在这里”，邱先生是早知道的，但是没说出在那里，也许看不出在那里。倘是前者，真是“这篇小说的意义，就要无形地削弱了”；倘因后者，那么，却是我的文字坏，不够分明的传出“本意”的缘故。现在略说一点，算是敬扫一回两月以前“留在脑海里的影子”罢——
So now I want to stand at the pass, from behind Lao Tzu's green bull's butt, to retain "writers like Mr. Lu Xun" and many readers, including Mr. Qiu Yunduo. First of all, please don't "fall into loneliness and sadness", because "the original intention is not here", Mr. Qiu knew it for a long time, but he didn't say it, maybe he couldn't see it there. If it is the former, it is really "the meaning of this novel will be invisibly weakened"; If it is because of the latter, then it is because my writing is bad and the "original intention" is not clearly conveyed. Now let's talk about it a little, which can be regarded as a review of the "shadow left in my mind" two months ago -老子的西出函谷，为了孔子的几句话，并非我的发见或创造，是三十年前，在东京从太炎先生口头听来的，后来他写在《诸子学略说》中，但我也并不信为一定的事实。至于孔老相争，孔胜老败，却是我的意见：老，是尚柔的；“儒者，柔也”，孔也尚柔，但孔以柔进取，而老却以柔退走。这关键，即在孔子为“知其不可为而为之”的事无大小，均不放松的实行者，老则是“无为而无不为”的一事不做，徒作大言的空谈家。要无所不为，就只好一无所为，因为一有所为，就有了界限，不能算是“无不为”了。我同意于关尹子的嘲笑：他是连老婆也娶不成的。于是加以漫画化，送他出了关，毫无爱惜，不料竟惹起邱先生的这样的凄惨，我想，这大约一定因为我的漫画化还不足够的缘故了，然而如果更将他的鼻子涂白，是不只“这篇小说的意义，就要无形地削弱”而已的，所以也只好这样子。
Lao Tzu's westward departure from Hangu, for Confucius's words, was not my discovery or creation, it was heard orally from Mr. Taiyan in Tokyo thirty years ago, and later he wrote it in the "Brief Discussion of the Teachings of the Sons", but I do not believe it to be a certain fact. As for the conflict between Confucius and Lao, Confucius wins and loses, but it is my opinion: old is still soft; "Confucianism, softness", Kong is also soft, but Kong enterprising with softness, while Lao retreats with softness. The key to this is that Confucius was a practitioner who did not relax for "knowing that he could not do anything", and the old man was a hollow talker who did nothing and did nothing and was just a big talker. If you want to do everything, you have to do nothing, because once you do something, there is a limit, and it cannot be regarded as "doing everything". I agree with Guan Yinzi's ridicule: he can't even marry a wife. So I caricatured him and sent him out of the customs, without any regret, but unexpectedly provoked Mr. Qiu's misery, I think, this must be because my cartoonization is not enough, but if his nose is painted white, it is not only "the meaning of this novel will be invisibly weakened", so I have to do this.再引一段邱韵铎先生的独白——
Another quote from Mr. Qiu Yunduo's monologue -“……我更相信，他们是一定会继续地运用他们的心力和笔力，倾注到更有利于社会变革方面，使凡是有利的力量都集中起来，加强起来，同时使凡是可能有利的力量都转为有利的力量，以联结成一个巨大无比的力量。”
“…… I am even more convinced that they will continue to use their mental and pen power to devote their energy to more conducive to social change, so that all favorable forces can be concentrated and strengthened, and at the same time, all possible advantageous forces will be transformed into favorable forces, so as to unite into a huge and incomparable force. ”一为而“成一个巨大无比的力量”，仅次于“无为而无不为”一等，我“们”是没有这种玄妙的本领的，然而我“们”和邱先生不同之处却就在这里，我“们”并不“坠入孤独和悲哀去”，而邱先生却会“真切地感觉着读者是会坠入孤独和悲哀去”的关键也在这里。他起了有利于老子的心思，于是不禁写了“巨大无比”的抽象的封条，将我的无利于老子的具象的作品封闭了。但我疑心：邱韵铎先生以及像邱韵铎先生一样的作家们的本意，也许倒只在这里的。
The key to "becoming a huge and incomparable force" is second only to "doing nothing and doing everything", but the difference between us and Mr. Qiu is here, we "we" do not "fall into loneliness and sadness", but Mr. Qiu will "really feel that the reader will fall into loneliness and sadness" The key is also here. He had thoughts that were beneficial to Lao Tzu, so he couldn't help but write an "incomparably huge" abstract seal to close my figurative works that were not beneficial to Lao Tzu. But I suspect that the original intention of Mr. Qiu Yunduo and writers like Mr. Qiu Yunduo may only be here.四月三十日。
April 30th.

捷克译本

捷克译本

捷克译本

Czech translation记得世界大战之后，许多新兴的国家出现的时候，我们曾经非常高兴过，因为我们也是曾被压迫，挣扎出来的人民。捷克的兴起，自然为我们所大欢喜；但是奇怪，我们又很疏远，例如我，就没有认识过一个捷克人，看见过一本捷克书，前几年到了上海，才在店铺里目睹了捷克的玻璃器。
I remember that after the world war, when many emerging countries appeared, we were very happy, because we were also oppressed and struggling people. The rise of the Czech Republic naturally rejoices with us; But strangely, we are very estranged, for example, I have never known a Czech, I have seen a Czech book, and I only witnessed Czech glassware in a store when I went to Shanghai a few years ago.我们彼此似乎都不很互相记得。但以现在的一般情况而论，这并不算坏事情，现在各国的彼此念念不忘，恐怕大抵未必是为了交情太好了的缘故。自然，人类最好是彼此不隔膜，相关心。然而最平正的道路，却只有用文艺来沟通，可惜走这条道路的人又少得很。
We don't seem to remember each other very well. But in terms of the current general situation, this is not a bad thing, and now the countries are not forgetting each other, I am afraid that it may not be because the friendship is too good. Naturally, it is best for humans to not be separated from each other and care about each other. However, the most upright path is only to communicate with literature and art, but unfortunately there are very few people who take this path.出乎意外地，译者竟首先将试尽这任务的光荣，加在我这里了。我的作品，因此能够展开在捷克的读者的面前，这在我，实在比被译成通行很广的别国语言更高兴。我想，我们两国，虽然民族不同，地域相隔，交通又很少，但是可以互相了解，接近的，因为我们都曾经走过苦难的道路，现在还在走——一面寻求着光明。
Unexpectedly, the translator first added to me the honor of trying to complete this task. My work, thus being able to unfold in front of Czech readers, is really much happier for me than it is to be translated into other Chinese languages. I think that although our two countries are of different ethnicities, geographically separated, and have little transportation, we can understand each other and get close, because we have both walked the road of suffering, and we are still walking - seeking the light on the one hand.一九三六年七月二十一日，鲁迅。
July 21, 1936, Lu Xun.

答徐懋庸并关于抗日统一战线问题

答徐懋庸并关于抗日统一战线问题

答徐懋庸并关于抗日统一战线问题

Answer Xu Maoyong and on the issue of the anti-Japanese united front鲁迅先生：
Mr. Lu Xun:贵恙已痊愈否？念念。自先生一病，加以文艺界的纠纷，我就无缘再亲聆□教诲，思之常觉怆然！
Have you recovered from your illness? Nian. Since my husband fell ill and the disputes in the literary and artistic circles, I have not had the opportunity to listen to □ teachings in person, and I often feel sad when I think about it!我现因生活困难，身体衰弱，不得不离开上海，拟往乡间编译一点卖现钱的书后，再来沪上。趁此机会，暂作上海“文坛”的局外人，仔细想想一切问题，也许会更明白些的罢。
I have to leave Shanghai due to difficulties in life and weakness, and plan to go to the countryside to compile some books that sell cash before coming to Shanghai. Take this opportunity to temporarily be an outsider in Shanghai's "literary world", think carefully about all the problems, and maybe you will understand better.在目前，我总觉得先生最近半年来的言行，是无意地助长着恶劣的倾向的。以胡风的性情之诈，以黄源的行为之谄，先生都没有细察，永远被他们据为私有，眩惑群众，若偶像然，于是从他们的野心出发的分离运动，遂一发而不可收拾矣。胡风他们的行动，显然是出于私心的，极端的宗派运动，他们的理论，前后矛盾，错误百出。即如“民族革命战争的大众文学”这口号，起初原是胡风提出来用以和“国防文学”对立的，后来说一个是总的，一个是附属的，后来又说一个是左翼文学发展到现阶段的口号，如此摇摇荡荡，即先生亦不能替他们圆其说。对于他们的言行，打击本极易，但徒以有先生作着他们的盾牌，人谁不爱先生，所以在实际解决和文字斗争上都感到绝大的困难。
At present, I always feel that my husband's words and deeds in the past six months are unintentionally promoting bad tendencies. With the deceit of Hu Feng's temperament and the flattery of Huang Yuan's behavior, Mr. did not examine it carefully, and was forever occupied by them as private property, dazzling the masses like idols, so the separatist movement based on their ambitions was out of control. Hu Feng and his actions are obviously out of selfishness, extreme sectarian movements, and their theories are inconsistent and full of errors. For example, the slogan "popular literature of the national revolutionary war" was originally proposed by Hu Feng to oppose "national defense literature", but later said that one was general and the other was subsidiary, and later it was said that it was the slogan of the development of left-wing literature to the present stage. It is very easy to hit their words and deeds, but they only use Mr. as their shield, and who does not love Mr. Wang, so they feel great difficulties in practical solutions and literary struggles.我很知道先生的本意。先生是唯恐参加统一战线的左翼战友，放弃原来的立场，而看到胡风们在样子上尚左得可爱；所以赞同了他们的。但我要告诉先生，这是先生对于现在的基本的政策没有了解之故。现在的统一战线——中国的和全世界的都一样——固然是以普洛为主体的，但其成为主体，并不由于它的名义，它的特殊地位和历史，而是由于它的把握现实的正确和斗争能力的巨大。所以在客观上，普洛之为主体，是当然的。但在主观上，普洛不应该挂起明显的徽章，不以工作，只以特殊的资格去要求领导权，以至吓跑别的阶层的战友。所以，在目前的时候，到联合战线中提出左翼的口号来，是错误的，是危害联合战线的。所以先生最近所发表的《病中答客问》，既说明“民族革命战争的大众文学”是普洛文学到现在的一发展，又说这应该作为统一战线的总口号，这是不对的。
I know my husband's intentions very well. Mr. is a left-wing comrade-in-arms who is afraid of joining the united front, giving up his original position, and seeing that Hu Feng and the others are still cute in appearance; So agreed with them. But I want to tell you that this is because you do not understand the basic policy now. The current united front - China's and the whole world - is certainly based on Pro, but its main body is not due to its name, its special status and history, but because of its correct grasp of reality and its great ability to fight. So objectively, it is natural for Plo to be the main body. But subjectively, Plow should not hang up obvious badges, not for work, but only for special qualifications to demand leadership, so as to scare away comrades from other classes. Therefore, at present, it is wrong to put forward left-wing slogans in the united front, and it endangers the united front. Therefore, Mr. Chen's recent publication of "Answering Questions in the Sick" not only shows that "popular literature of the national revolutionary war" is a development of Pluto literature until now, but also says that this should be the general slogan of the united front, which is incorrect.再说参加“文艺家协会”的“战友”，未必个个右倾堕落，如先生所疑虑者；况集合在先生的左右的“战友”，既然包括巴金和黄源之流，难道先生以为凡参加“文艺家协会”的人们，竟个个不如巴金和黄源么？我从报章杂志上，知道法西两国“安那其”之反动，破坏联合战线，无异于托派，中国的“安那其”的行为，则更卑劣。黄源是一个根本没有思想，只靠捧名流为生的东西。从前他奔走于傅郑门下之时，一副谄佞之相，固不异于今日之对先生效忠致敬。先生可与此辈为伍，而不屑与多数人合作，此理我实不解。
Besides, the "comrades-in-arms" who participate in the "Writers and Artists Association" may not all be right-leaning and degenerate, as Mr. suspects; Moreover, since the "comrades-in-arms" gathered on the left and right of Mr. include Ba Jin and Huang Yuan and the like, does Mr. think that all the people who participate in the "Writers Association" are not as good as Ba Jin and Huang Yuan? I know from newspapers and magazines that the reactionary "Anarch" between France and Spain and the destruction of the united front are tantamount to Trotskyism, and the behavior of China's "Anarch" is even more despicable. Huang Yuan is a thing that has no thoughts at all and only makes a living by supporting celebrities. In the past, when he was running under Fu Zheng, he had a flattering appearance, which was no different from today's loyalty to Mr. I really don't understand the reason why you can be with these people and disdain to cooperate with most people.我觉得不看事而只看人，是最近半年来先生的错误的根由。先生的看人又看得不准。譬如，我个人，诚然是有许多缺点的，但先生却把我写字糊涂这一层当作大缺点，我觉得实在好笑。（我为什么故意要把“邱韵铎”三字，写成像“郑振铎”的样子呢？难道郑振铎是先生所喜欢的人么？）为此小故，遽拒一个人于千里之外，我实以为不对。
I think not looking at things but only looking at people is the root cause of my husband's mistakes in the past six months. Mr. is not able to see people accurately. For example, I personally have many shortcomings, but my husband regards my confusion as a big flaw, which I find really funny. (Why did I deliberately write the word "Qiu Yunduo" as "Zheng Zhenduo"?) Is Zheng Zhenduo the person you like? For this small reason, I really don't think it's right to suddenly refuse a person a thousand miles away.我今天就要离沪，行色匆匆，不能多写了，也许已经写得太多。以上所说，并非存心攻击先生，实在很希望先生仔细想一想各种事情。
I'm leaving Shanghai today, I'm in a hurry, I can't write more, maybe I've written too much. The above is not an intention to attack Mr. Zhao, I really hope that Mr. will think carefully about various things.拙译《斯太林传》快要出版，出版后当寄奉一册，此书甚望先生细看一下，对原意和译文，均望批评。敬颂
The humble translation of "The Biography of Stalin" is about to be published, and a volume should be sent after publication. Respectfully praised痊安。
Healed.懋庸上。八月一日。
Mao Yong is on top. August 1st.以上，是徐懋庸给我的一封信，我没有得他同意就在这里发表了，因为其中全是教训我和攻击别人的话，发表出来，并不损他的威严，而且也许正是他准备我将它发表的作品。但自然，人们也不免因此看得出：这发信者倒是有些“恶劣”的青年！
The above is a letter from Xu Maoyong to me, and I published it here without his consent, because it was full of words that taught me and attacked others, and publishing it did not damage his dignity, and perhaps it was he who prepared my work to publish. But naturally, people can't help but see that this sender is a "bad" young man!但我有一个要求：希望巴金，黄源，胡风诸先生不要学徐懋庸的样。因为这信中有攻击他们的话，就也报答以牙眼，那恰正中了他的诡计。在国难当头的现在，白天里讲些冠冕堂皇的话，暗夜里进行一些离间，挑拨，分裂的勾当的，不就正是这些人么？这封信是有计划的，是他们向没有加入“文艺家协会”的人们的新的挑战，想这些人们去应战，那时他们就加你们以“破坏联合战线”的罪名，“汉奸”的罪名。然而我们不，我们决不要把笔锋去专对几个个人，“先安内而后攘外”，不是我们的办法。
But I have a request: I hope that Mr. Ba Jin, Huang Yuan, and Hu Fengzhu will not follow Xu Maoyong's example. Because there were words that attacked them in this letter, he also repaid them with teeth, which fell right into his trick. Now that the country is in turmoil, aren't these people the ones who say some high-sounding words during the day and carry out some divisive, provoking, and divisive deeds at night? This letter was planned, a new challenge to those who did not join the "Writers' Association", and wanted these people to fight, and then they added you to the charge of "sabotaging the united front" and "traitor". However, we don't, we must never focus on a few individuals, "first settle inside and then get outside", which is not our way.但我在这里，有些话要说一说。首先是我对于抗日的统一战线的态度。其实，我已经在好几个地方说过了，然而徐懋庸等似乎不肯去看一看，却一味的咬住我，硬要诬陷我“破坏统一战线”，硬要教训我说我“对于现在基本的政策没有了解”。我不知道徐懋庸们有什么“基本的政策”。（他们的基本政策不就是要咬我几口么？）然而中国目前的革命的政党向全国人民所提出的抗日统一战线的政策，我是看见的，我是拥护的，我无条件地加入战线，那理由就因为我不但是一个作家，而且是一个中国人，所以这政策在我是认为非常正确的，我加入这统一战线，自然，我所使用的仍是一枝笔，所做的事仍是写文章，译书，等到这枝笔没有用了，我可自己相信，用起别的武器来，决不会在徐懋庸等辈之下！
But here I have something to say. The first is my attitude towards the anti-Japanese united front. In fact, I have said it in several places, but Xu Maoyong and others seemed to refuse to take a look, but blindly bit me, insisted on framing me of "undermining the united front", and insisted on teaching me a lesson that I "did not understand the current basic policies". I don't know what "basic policies" Xu Maoyong and others have. (Isn't their basic policy to bite me a few times?) However, I have seen the policy of the anti-Japanese united front proposed by China's current revolutionary political parties to the people of the whole country, and I have joined the front unconditionally, because I am not only a writer, but also a Chinese, so this policy is very correct in my opinion, and I joined this united front, naturally, I still use a pen, and what I do is still to write articles and translate books, and when this pen is useless, I can believe that I will never be under Xu Maoyong and others when I use other weapons!其次，我对于文艺界统一战线的态度。我赞成一切文学家，任何派别的文学家在抗日的口号之下统一起来的主张。我也曾经提出过我对于组织这种统一的团体的意见过，那些意见，自然是被一些所谓“指导家”格杀了，反而即刻从天外飞来似地加我以“破坏统一战线”的罪名。这首先就使我暂不加入“文艺家协会”了，因为我要等一等，看一看，他们究竟干的什么勾当；我那时实在有点怀疑那些自称“指导家”以及徐懋庸式的青年，因为据我的经验，那种表面上扮着“革命”的面孔，而轻易诬陷别人为“内奸”，为“反革命”，为“托派”，以至为“汉奸”者，大半不是正路人；因为他们巧妙地格杀革命的民族的力量，不顾革命的大众的利益，而只借革命以营私，老实说，我甚至怀疑过他们是否系敌人所派遣。我想，我不如暂避无益于人的危险，暂不听他们指挥罢。自然，事实会证明他们到底的真相，我决不愿来断定他们是什么人，但倘使他们真的志在革命与民族，而不过心术的不正当，观念的不正确，方式的蠢笨，那我就以为他们实有自行改正一下的必要。我对于“文艺家协会”的态度，我认为它是抗日的作家团体，其中虽有徐懋庸式的人，却也包含了一些新的人；但不能以为有了“文艺家协会”，就是文艺界的统一战线告成了，还远得很，还没有将一切派别的文艺家都联为一气。那原因就在“文艺家协会”还非常浓厚的含有宗派主义和行帮情形。不看别的，单看那章程，对于加入者的资格就限制得太严；就是会员要缴一元入会费，两元年费，也就表示着“作家阀”的倾向，不是抗日“人民式”的了。在理论上，如《文学界》创刊号上所发表的关于“联合问题”和“国防文学”的文章，是基本上宗派主义的；一个作者引用了我在一九三〇年讲的话，并以那些话为出发点，因此虽声声口口说联合任何派别的作家，而仍自己一相情愿的制定了加入的限制与条件。这是作者忘记了时代。我以为文艺家在抗日问题上的联合是无条件的，只要他不是汉奸，愿意或赞成抗日，则不论叫哥哥妹妹，之乎者也，或鸳鸯蝴蝶都无妨。但在文学问题上我们仍可以互相批判。这个作者又引例了法国的人民阵线，然而我以为这又是作者忘记了国度，因为我们的抗日人民统一战线是比法国的人民阵线还要广泛得多的。另一个作者解释“国防文学”，说“国防文学”必须有正确的创作方法，又说现在不是“国防文学”就是“汉奸文学”，欲以“国防文学”一口号去统一作家，也先豫备了“汉奸文学”这名词作为后日批评别人之用。这实在是出色的宗派主义的理论。我以为应当说：作家在“抗日”的旗帜，或者在“国防”的旗帜之下联合起来；不能说：作家在“国防文学”的口号下联合起来，因为有些作者不写“国防为主题”的作品，仍可从各方面来参加抗日的联合战线；即使他像我一样没有加入“文艺家协会”，也未必就是“汉奸”。“国防文学”不能包括一切文学，因为在“国防文学”与“汉奸文学”之外，确有既非前者也非后者的文学，除非他们有本领也证明了《红楼梦》，《子夜》，《阿Q正传》是“国防文学”或“汉奸文学”。这种文学存在着，但它不是杜衡，韩侍桁，杨邨人之流的什么“第三种文学”。因此，我很同意郭沫若先生的“国防文艺是广义的爱国主义的文学”和“国防文艺是作家关系间的标帜，不是作品原则上的标帜”的意见。我提议“文艺家协会”应该克服它的理论上与行动上的宗派主义与行帮现象，把限度放得更宽些，同时最好将所谓“领导权”移到那些确能认真做事的作家和青年手里去，不能专让徐懋庸之流的人在包办。至于我个人的加入与否，却并非重要的事。
Secondly, my attitude towards the united front of the literary and artistic circles. I agree with the idea that all writers, writers of any faction, should be united under the slogan of anti-Japan. I have also put forward my opinions on organizing such a unified group, and those opinions were naturally killed by some so-called "guides", but immediately flew from the sky to accuse me of "undermining the united front". This first made me not join the "Writers and Artists Association" for the time being, because I had to wait a little longer to see what they were doing; At that time, I was really a little suspicious of those young people who claimed to be "guides" and Xu Maoyong-style, because according to my experience, most of those who easily framed others as "traitors", "counter-revolutionaries", "Trotskyists", and even "traitors" on the surface were not righteous passers-by; Because they skillfully kill the power of the revolutionary people, disregarding the interests of the revolutionary masses, and only using the revolution for their own gain, to be honest, I even doubt whether they were sent by the enemy. I think it would be better for me to avoid dangers that are not helpful to people for the time being, and not listen to their commands for the time being. Naturally, facts will prove the truth about them, and I will never conclude who they are, but if they are really interested in revolution and the nation, and are not just improper in their minds, incorrect in their concepts, and stupid in their methods, then I think they really need to correct themselves. My attitude towards the "Writers and Artists Association" is that it is an anti-Japanese writers' group, although there are Xu Maoyong-style people, but it also includes some new people; But it cannot be thought that with the "Writers and Artists Association", the united front of the literary and artistic circles is complete, and it is still far away, and it has not yet united all factions of writers and artists. The reason is that the "Writers and Artists Association" still contains very strong sectarianism and gangs. If you don't look at anything else, just look at the charter, the qualifications of the joiners are too strict; That is, members have to pay a membership fee of one yuan and a two-year fee, which also indicates the tendency of "family valves", not the anti-Japanese "people's style". In theory, the articles on "joint issues" and "national defense literature" published in the first issue of "Literary Circles" are basically sectarian; One author quoted my words in 1930 and used them as a starting point, so that although he kept saying that he would unite with writers of any faction, he still set the restrictions and conditions for joining in his own willingness. This is the author forgetting the times. I think that the unity of writers and artists on the anti-Japanese issue is unconditional, as long as he is not a traitor and is willing or in favor of anti-Japan, it doesn't matter whether he is called brother or sister, or a mandarin duck butterfly. But we can still criticize each other on literary issues. The author also cited the French Popular Front as an example, but I thought this was the author's forgetfulness of the country, because our anti-Japanese people's united front is much broader than the French Popular Front. Another author explained "national defense literature", saying that "national defense literature" must have a correct creative method, and said that it is now either "national defense literature" or "traitor literature", and that in order to unify writers with the slogan "national defense literature", the term "traitor literature" was also prepared for the use of criticism of others in the future. This is really an excellent theory of sectarianism. I thought it should be said: writers united under the banner of "anti-Japan" or "national defense"; It cannot be said: writers unite under the slogan of "national defense literature", because some authors do not write works with the theme of "national defense", but can still participate in the anti-Japanese united front from all aspects; Even if he does not join the "Writers and Artists Association" like me, he may not be a "traitor". "National defense literature" cannot include all literature, because in addition to "national defense literature" and "traitor literature", there is indeed literature that is neither the former nor the latter, unless they have the ability to prove that "Dream of Red Mansions", "Midnight", and "The True Biography of Ah Q" are "national defense literature" or "traitor literature". This kind of literature exists, but it is not the "third literature" of Du Heng, Han Shijiang, Yang Cunren and others. Therefore, I agree with Mr. Guo Moruo's opinions that "national defense literature and art are patriotic literature in a broad sense" and "national defense literature and art are the markers of the relationship between writers, not the markers of the principle of works". I suggest that the "Writers and Artists Association" should overcome its theoretical and practical sectarianism and gang phenomena, and set the limits wider, and at the same time it is best to transfer the so-called "leadership" to those writers and young people who can really do things seriously, and not let people like Xu Maoyong take care of it. As for whether I personally join or not, it doesn't matter.其次，我和“民族革命战争的大众文学”这口号的关系。徐懋庸之流的宗派主义也表现在对于这口号的态度上。他们既说这是“标新立异”，又说是与“国防文学”对抗。我真料不到他们会宗派到这样的地步。只要“民族革命战争的大众文学”的口号不是“汉奸”的口号，那就是一种抗日的力量；为什么这是“标新立异”？你们从那里看出这是与“国防文学”对抗？拒绝友军之生力的，暗暗的谋杀抗日的力量的，是你们自己的这种比“白衣秀士”王伦还要狭小的气魄。我以为在抗日战线上是任何抗日力量都应当欢迎的，同时在文学上也应当容许各人提出新的意见来讨论，“标新立异”也并不可怕；这和商人的专卖不同，并且事实上你们先前提出的“国防文学”的口号，也并没有到南京政府或“苏维埃”政府去注过册。但现在文坛上仿佛已有“国防文学”牌与“民族革命战争大众文学”牌的两家，这责任应该徐懋庸他们来负，我在病中答访问者的一文里是并没有把它们看成两家的。自然，我还得说一说“民族革命战争的大众文学”这口号的无误及其与“国防文学”口号之关系。——我先得说，前者这口号不是胡风提的，胡风做过一篇文章是事实，但那是我请他做的，他的文章解释得不清楚也是事实。这口号，也不是我一个人的“标新立异”，是几个人大家经过一番商议的，茅盾先生就是参加商议的一个。郭沫若先生远在日本，被侦探监视着，连去信商问也不方便。可惜的就只是没有邀请徐懋庸们来参加议讨。但问题不在这口号由谁提出，只在它有没有错误。如果它是为了推动一向囿于普洛革命文学的左翼作家们跑到抗日的民族革命战争的前线上去，它是为了补救“国防文学”这名词本身的在文学思想的意义上的不明了性，以及纠正一些注进“国防文学”这名词里去的不正确的意见，为了这些理由而被提出，那么它是正当的，正确的。如果人不用脚底皮去思想，而是用过一点脑子，那就不能随便说句“标新立异”就完事。“民族革命战争的大众文学”这名词，在本身上，比“国防文学”这名词，意义更明确，更深刻，更有内容。“民族革命战争的大众文学”，主要是对前进的一向称左翼的作家们提倡的，希望这些作家们努力向前进，在这样的意义上，在进行联合战线的现在，徐懋庸说不能提出这样的口号，是胡说！“民族革命战争的大众文学”，也可以对一般或各派作家提倡的，希望的，希望他们也来努力向前进，在这样的意义上，说不能对一般或各派作家提这样的口号，也是胡说！但这不是抗日统一战线的标准，徐懋庸说我“说这应该作为统一战线的总口号”，更是胡说！我问徐懋庸究竟看了我的文章没有？人们如果看过我的文章，如果不以徐懋庸他们解释“国防文学”的那一套来解释这口号，如聂绀弩等所致的错误，那么这口号和宗派主义或关门主义是并不相干的。这里的“大众”，即照一向的“群众”，“民众”的意思解释也可以，何况在现在，当然有“人民大众”这意思呢。我说“国防文学”是我们目前文学运动的具体口号之一，为的是“国防文学”这口号，颇通俗，已经有很多人听惯，它能扩大我们政治的和文学的影响，加之它可以解释为作家在国防旗帜下联合，为广义的爱国主义的文学的缘故。因此，它即使曾被不正确的解释，它本身含义上有缺陷，它仍应当存在，因为存在对于抗日运动有利益。我以为这两个口号的并存，不必像辛人先生的“时期性”与“时候性”的说法，我更不赞成人们以各种的限制加到“民族革命战争的大众文学”上。如果一定要以为“国防文学”提出在先，这是正统，那么就将正统权让给要正统的人们也未始不可，因为问题不在争口号，而在实做；尽管喊口号，争正统，固然也可作为“文章”，取点稿费，靠此为生，但尽管如此，也到底不是久计。
Secondly, my relationship with the slogan "Popular Literature of the National Revolutionary War". The sectarianism of Xu Maoyong and others is also manifested in their attitude towards this slogan. They say that this is both "unconventional" and confrontation with "national defense literature". I really didn't expect them to be so sectarian. As long as the slogan of "popular literature of the national revolutionary war" is not the slogan of "traitor", it is a kind of anti-Japanese force; Why is this "unconventional"? From where do you see that this is a confrontation with "defense literature"? It is your own courage that is narrower than that of Wang Lun, the "white-clothed scholar", who rejects the vitality of friendly forces and secretly murders the anti-Japanese forces. I think that any anti-Japanese force on the anti-Japanese front should be welcomed, and at the same time, everyone should be allowed to put forward new opinions to discuss in literature, and "unconventional" is not terrible; This is different from the monopoly of merchants, and in fact, the slogan of "national defense literature" that you put forward earlier has not been registered with the Nanjing government or the "Soviet" government. But now there seem to be two brands in the literary world: "National Defense Literature" and "National Revolutionary War Popular Literature", and Xu Maoyong and others should bear this responsibility. Naturally, I have to talk about the infallibility of the slogan "popular literature of the national revolutionary war" and its relationship with the slogan of "national defense literature". ——I have to say that the former slogan was not mentioned by Hu Feng, it is true that Hu Feng made an article, but it was I asked him to do it, and it is also true that his article was not explained clearly. This slogan is not my own "unconventional", it was discussed by several people, and Mr. Mao Dun was one of the people who participated in the discussion. Mr. Guo Moruo is far away in Japan, under the surveillance of detectives, and it is not convenient to even go to the letter to ask. It's a pity that Xu Maoyong and others were not invited to participate in the discussion. But the question is not who proposed this slogan, but whether it is wrong. If it is put forward for these reasons to promote left-wing writers who have always been confined to Prussian revolutionary literature to the front line of the national revolutionary war against Japan, to remedy the ambiguity of the term "national defense literature" itself in the meaning of literary thought, and to correct some incorrect opinions injected into the term "national defense literature", then it is justified and correct for these reasons. If people don't use the skin of their feet to think, but use a little brain, then they can't just say "unconventional" and it's over. The term "popular literature of the national revolutionary war" itself has a clearer, more profound, and more substantial meaning than the term "national defense literature". In this sense, in the present of the United Front, Xu Maoyong said that such a slogan could not be put forward, it was nonsense! "Popular literature of the national revolutionary war" can also be advocated by writers of all walks of life, hoping that they will also work hard, in this sense, it is also nonsense to say that such slogans cannot be put forward to writers in general or from all schools! But this is not the standard of the anti-Japanese united front, Xu Maoyong said that I "said that this should be the general slogan of the united front", which is even more nonsense! I asked Xu Maoyong if he had read my article? If people have read my article, if they do not explain this slogan in the same way that Xu Maoyong and others explain "national defense literature", such as Nie Qiannu, then this slogan has nothing to do with sectarianism or closed-door doctrine. The "masses" here can also be interpreted according to the usual meaning of "masses" and "people", not to mention that now, of course, there is the meaning of "the people". I say that "national defense literature" is one of the specific slogans of our current literary movement, because the slogan "national defense literature" is quite popular and has been heard by many people, it can expand the influence of our politics and literature, and it can be interpreted as the reason for the writers' union under the banner of national defense and patriotic literature in a broad sense. Therefore, even if it has been interpreted incorrectly and its own meaning is flawed, it should still exist because it is beneficial to the anti-Japanese movement. I think that the coexistence of these two slogans does not need to be like Mr. Xin's statement of "period" and "temporality", and I do not approve of people adding various restrictions to the "popular literature of the national revolutionary war". If we must think that "national defense literature" is put forward first, which is orthodoxy, then it is not impossible to give up orthodoxy to those who want orthodoxy, because the problem is not to fight for slogans, but to practice; Although shouting slogans and fighting for orthodoxy can certainly be used as "articles", taking some manuscript fees and making a living from it, but nevertheless, it is not a long-term solution.最后，我要说到我个人的几件事。徐懋庸说我最近半年的言行，助长着恶劣的倾向。我就检查我这半年的言行。所谓言者，是发表过四五篇文章，此外，至多对访问者谈过一些闲天，对医生报告我的病状之类；所谓行者，比较的多一点，印过两本版画，一本杂感，译过几章《死魂灵》，生过三个月的病，签过一个名，此外，也并未到过咸肉庄或赌场，并未出席过什么会议。我真不懂我怎样助长着，以及助长什么恶劣倾向。难道因为我生病么？除了怪我生病而竟不死以外，我想就只有一个说法：怪我生病，不能和徐懋庸这类恶劣的倾向来搏斗。
Finally, I would like to say a few things about myself. Xu Maoyong said that my words and deeds in the past six months have fueled bad tendencies. I will check my words and deeds in the past six months. The so-called speaker is that I have published four or five articles, and at most I have talked to the visitor about some free days, and I have reported my condition to the doctor. The so-called walkers, a little more, have printed two prints, a miscellaneous feeling, translated several chapters of "Dead Souls", been ill for three months, signed a name, and in addition, have not been to a bacon or a casino, and have not attended any meetings. I really don't understand how I promote it and what bad tendencies I foster. Is it because I'm sick? In addition to blaming me for being sick and not dying, I think there is only one way to say it: blame me for being sick, and I can't fight against bad tendencies like Xu Maoyong.其次，是我和胡风，巴金，黄源诸人的关系。我和他们，是新近才认识的，都由于文学工作上的关系，虽然还不能称为至交，但已可以说是朋友。不能提出真凭实据，而任意诬我的朋友为“内奸”，为“卑劣”者，我是要加以辩正的，这不仅是我的交友的道义，也是看人看事的结果。徐懋庸说我只看人，不看事，是诬枉的，我就先看了一些事，然后看见了徐懋庸之类的人。胡风我先前并不熟识，去年的有一天，一位名人约我谈话了，到得那里，却见驶来了一辆汽车，从中跳出四条汉子：田汉，周起应，还有另两个，一律洋服，态度轩昂，说是特来通知我：胡风乃是内奸，官方派来的。我问凭据，则说是得自转向以后的穆木天口中。转向者的言谈，到左联就奉为圣旨，这真使我口呆目瞪。再经几度问答之后，我的回答是：证据薄弱之极，我不相信！当时自然不欢而散，但后来也不再听人说胡风是“内奸”了。然而奇怪，此后的小报，每当攻击胡风时，便往往不免拉上我，或由我而涉及胡风。最近的则如《现实文学》发表了O. V. 笔录的我的主张以后，《社会日报》就说O. V. 是胡风，笔录也和我的本意不合，稍远的则如周文向傅东华抗议删改他的小说时，同报也说背后是我和胡风。最阴险的则是同报在去年冬或今年春罢，登过一则花边的重要新闻：说我就要投降南京，从中出力的是胡风，或快或慢，要看他的办法。我又看自己以外的事：有一个青年，不是被指为“内奸”，因而所有朋友都和他隔离，终于在街上流浪，无处可归，遂被捕去，受了毒刑的么？又有一个青年，也同样的被诬为“内奸”，然而不是因为参加了英勇的战斗，现在坐在苏州狱中，死活不知么？这两个青年就是事实证明了他们既没有像穆木天等似的做过堂皇的悔过的文章，也没有像田汉似的在南京大演其戏。同时，我也看人：即使胡风不可信，但对我自己这人，我自己总还可以相信的，我就并没有经胡风向南京讲条件的事。因此，我倒明白了胡风鲠直，易于招怨，是可接近的，而对于周起应之类，轻易诬人的青年，反而怀疑以至憎恶起来了。自然，周起应也许别有他的优点。也许后来不复如此，仍将成为一个真的革命者；胡风也自有他的缺点，神经质，繁琐，以及在理论上的有些拘泥的倾向，文字的不肯大众化，但他明明是有为的青年，他没有参加过任何反对抗日运动或反对过统一战线，这是纵使徐懋庸之流用尽心机，也无法抹杀的。
Secondly, there is my relationship with Hu Feng, Ba Jin, Huang Yuan and others. They and I have only recently met, and because of our literary work, although we cannot be called close friends, we can already be said to be friends. I can't put forward real evidence, but arbitrarily accuse my friends of being "traitors" and "despicable", I want to defend them, which is not only the morality of my friends, but also the result of looking at people and things. Xu Maoyong said that I only look at people, not things, which is false, so I first looked at some things, and then I saw people like Xu Maoyong. I didn't know Hu Feng before, but one day last year, a celebrity asked me to talk, and when I got there, I saw a car coming, and four men jumped out of it: Tian Han, Zhou Qiying, and the other two, all dressed in Western clothes, with a loud attitude, saying that they came to inform me: Hu Feng was a traitor, sent by the official. I asked for evidence, and he said it came from the mouth of Mu Mutian after turning around. The words of the converts were regarded as imperial decrees when they reached the left link, which really stunned me. After a few more questions and answers, my answer was: The evidence is extremely weak, I don't believe it! At that time, they naturally broke up unhappily, but later they no longer heard people say that Hu Feng was a "traitor". However, strangely, whenever the tabloids attacked Hu Feng after that, they often pulled me up, or I was involved in Hu Feng. More recently, "Realistic Literature" published O. V. After the transcript of my claims, the Social Daily said that O. V. It was Hu Feng, and the transcript was also inconsistent with my original intention, and a little further away, such as when Zhou Wen protested to Fu Donghua to delete his novel, the same newspaper also said that it was me and Hu Feng behind it. The most insidious thing is that the same newspaper published an important news article in lace last winter or this spring: saying that I am going to surrender to Nanjing, and it is Hu Feng who contributes from it, whether fast or slow, it depends on his methods. I looked at things other than myself: there was a young man who was not accused of being a "traitor", so all his friends were isolated from him, and finally wandered the streets, with nowhere to return, and was arrested and poisoned? There is another young man who was also falsely accused of being a "traitor", but not because he participated in the heroic battle, and now he is sitting in Suzhou prison, not knowing whether he is alive or dead? These two young people proved that they had neither made a grand repentant article like Mu Mutian and others, nor did they perform in Nanjing like Tian Han. At the same time, I also look at people: even if Hu Feng is not trustworthy, I can always trust myself as a person, and I have not told Nanjing about the conditions through Hu Feng. Therefore, I understood that Hu Feng was straightforward, easy to complain, and approachable, but for young people like Zhou Qiying, who were easy to slander people, I became suspicious and even hated. Naturally, Zhou Qiying may have other advantages. Maybe it will not be like this later, and you will still be a real revolutionary; Hu Feng also has his own shortcomings, neuroticism, cumbersomeness, and some tendencies in theory, and his refusal to popularize words, but he is obviously a promising young man, and he has not participated in any anti-Japanese movement or opposed the united front, which cannot be erased even if Xu Maoyong and others try their best.至于黄源，我以为是一个向上的认真的译述者，有《译文》这切实的杂志和别的几种译书为证。巴金是一个有热情的有进步思想的作家，在屈指可数的好作家之列的作家，他固然有“安那其主义者”之称，但他并没有反对我们的运动，还曾经列名于文艺工作者联名的战斗的宣言。黄源也签了名的。这样的译者和作家要来参加抗日的统一战线，我们是欢迎的，我真不懂徐懋庸等类为什么要说他们是“卑劣”？难道因为有《译文》存在碍眼？难道连西班牙的“安那其”的破坏革命，也要巴金负责？
As for Huang Yuan, I think he is an upward and serious translator, as evidenced by the practical magazine "Translation" and several other translations. Ba Jin is a passionate and progressive writer, one of the few good writers, although he is known as an "Anarchist", but he did not oppose our movement, and was once listed in the declaration of the joint battle of literary and artistic workers. Huang Yuan also signed. We welcome such translators and writers to join the anti-Japanese united front, I really don't understand why Xu Maoyong and others say they are "despicable"? Is it because there is an eyesore in the "Translation"? Is even the sabotage of Spain's "Anarchi" to be responsible for Ba Jin?还有，在中国近来已经视为平常，而其实不但“助长”，却正是“恶劣的倾向”的，是无凭无据，却加给对方一个很坏的恶名。例如徐懋庸的说胡风的“诈”，黄源的“谄”，就都是。田汉周起应们说胡风是“内奸”，终于不是，是因为他们发昏；并非胡风诈作“内奸”，其实不是，致使他们成为说谎。《社会日报》说胡风拉我转向，而至今不转，是撰稿者有意的诬陷；并非胡风诈作拉我，其实不拉，以致记者变了造谣。胡风并不“左得可爱”，但我以为他的私敌，却实在是“左得可怕”的。黄源未尝作文捧我，也没有给我做过传，不过专办着一种月刊，颇为尽责，舆论倒还不坏，怎么便是“谄”，怎么便是对于我的“效忠致敬”？难道《译文》是我的私产吗？黄源“奔走于傅郑门下之时，一副谄佞之相”，徐懋庸大概是奉谕知道的了，但我不知道，也没有见过，至于他和我的往还，却不见有“谄佞之相”，而徐懋庸也没有一次同在，我不知道他凭着什么，来断定和谄佞于傅郑门下者“无异”？当这时会，我也就是证人，而并未实见的徐懋庸，对于本身在场的我，竟可以如此信口胡说，含血喷人，这真可谓横暴恣肆，达于极点了。莫非这是“了解”了“现在的基本的政策”之故吗？“和全世界都一样”的吗？那么，可真要吓死人！
In addition, it has been regarded as normal in China recently, but in fact it is not only "promoted", but it is a "bad tendency", which is unfounded and gives the other party a very bad reputation. For example, Xu Maoyong's "fraud" and Huang Yuan's "flattery" are both. Tian Hanzhou responded to the people saying that Hu Feng was a "traitor", but in the end it was not, because they were in a coma; It is not that Hu Feng pretends to be a "traitor", but in fact it is not, causing them to become liars. "Social Daily" said that Hu Feng pulled me to turn, but it has not changed so far, which is a deliberate slander by the writer; It was not that Hu Feng pretended to pull me, but in fact he didn't, so that the reporter turned into a rumor. Hu Feng is not "cute left", but I think his personal enemy is really "terrible left". Huang Yuan has never written an essay to praise me, nor has he done a biography for me, but he specializes in a kind of monthly magazine, which is quite responsible, and public opinion is not bad, how can it be "flattery", how can it be "allegiance and tribute" to me? Is the "Translation" my private property? Huang Yuan "ran under Fu Zheng's door, a flattering appearance", Xu Maoyong probably knew about it, but I don't know, I haven't seen it, as for his interactions with me, but I don't see the "flattering appearance", and Xu Maoyong has never been with me, I don't know what he is doing to conclude that he is "no different" from flattering Fu Zheng's disciples? At this time, I am also a witness, and Xu Maoyong, who has not seen it, can talk nonsense and spray people with blood on me who is present, which can really be described as tyrannical and unrestrained, to the extreme. Could it be that this is because they "understand" the "current basic policy"? "The same as the whole world"? So, it's really scary!其实“现在的基本政策”是决不会这样的好像天罗地网的。不是只要“抗日”，就是战友吗？“诈”何妨，“谄”又何妨？又何必定要剿灭胡风的文字，打倒黄源的《译文》呢，莫非这里面都是“二十一条”和“文化侵略”吗？首先应该扫荡的，倒是拉大旗作为虎皮，包着自己，去吓呼别人；小不如意，就倚势（！）定人罪名，而且重得可怕的横暴者。自然，战线是会成立的，不过这吓成的战线，作不得战。先前已有这样的前车，而覆车之鬼，至死不悟，现在在我面前，就附着徐懋庸的肉身而出现了。
In fact, the "current basic policy" will never be like this. Isn't it just "anti-Japanese" or comrades-in-arms? What does it matter if you are "deceived", and what does it matter if you are "flattering"? Why must Hu Feng's words be exterminated and Huang Yuan's "Translation" overthrown? The first thing that should be swept away is to pull the flag as a tiger skin, wrap oneself in it, and scare others; If you are unsatisfactory, you can rely on the situation (!) convicted and terribly tyrannical. Naturally, the front line will be established, but this frightened front cannot be fought. There was such a car before, and the ghost of the overturned car, who did not realize it until death, now appeared in front of me, attached to Xu Maoyong's body.在左联结成的前后，有些所谓革命作家，其实是破落户的漂零子弟。他也有不平，有反抗，有战斗，而往往不过是将败落家族的妇姑勃谿，叔嫂斗法的手段，移到文坛上。嘁嘁嚓嚓，招是生非，搬弄口舌，决不在大处着眼。这衣钵流传不绝。例如我和茅盾，郭沫若两位，或相识，或未尝一面，或未冲突，或曾用笔墨相讥，但大战斗却都为着同一的目标，决不日夜记着个人的恩怨。然而小报却偏喜欢记些鲁比茅如何，郭对鲁又怎样，好像我们只在争座位，斗法宝。就是《死魂灵》，当《译文》停刊后，《世界文库》上也登完第一部的，但小报却说“郑振铎腰斩《死魂灵》”，或鲁迅一怒中止了翻译。这其实正是恶劣的倾向，用谣言来分散文艺界的力量，近于“内奸”的行为的。然而也正是破落文学家最末的道路。
Before and after the formation of the Left Alliance, some so-called revolutionary writers were actually the children of the ruins. He also has injustices, resistances, and battles, and often it is just a means of fighting the daughter-in-law and uncle and sister-in-law of the fallen family to the literary world. Chirping, causing trouble, playing with words, never focusing on the big picture. This mantle has been passed down endlessly. For example, Mao Dun and Guo Moruo and I either knew each other, or did not have a face, or did not conflict, or once ridiculed each other with pen and ink, but the big battle was for the same goal, and we never remembered personal grievances day and night. However, the tabloids prefer to remember what Rubi Mao is like and what Guo is about Lu, as if we are only fighting for seats and fighting magic weapons. It was "Dead Souls", when the "Translation" was suspended, the first part was also published in the "World Library", but the tabloids said that "Zheng Zhenduo cut "Dead Souls" in half", or Lu Xun stopped the translation in anger. This is actually a bad tendency, using rumors to disperse the power of the literary and artistic circles, which is close to the behavior of "traitors". However, it is also the last road of broken writers.我看徐懋庸也正是一个嘁嘁嚓嚓的作者，和小报是有关系了，但还没有坠入最末的道路。不过也已经胡涂得可观。（否则，便是骄横了。）例如他信里说：“对于他们的言行，打击本极易，但徒以有先生作他们的盾牌，……所以在实际解决和文字斗争上都感到绝大的困难。”是从修身上来打击胡风的诈，黄源的谄，还是从作文上来打击胡风的论文，黄源的《译文》呢？——这我倒并不急于知道；我所要问的是为什么我认识他们，“打击”就“感到绝大的困难”？对于造谣生事，我固然决不肯附和，但若徐懋庸们义正词严，我能替他们一手掩尽天下耳目的吗？而且什么是“实际解决”？是充军，还是杀头呢？在“统一战线”这大题目之下，是就可以这样锻炼人罪，戏弄威权的？我真要祝祷“国防文学”有大作品，倘不然，也许又是我近半年来，“助长着恶劣的倾向”的罪恶了。
I think Xu Maoyong is also a screaming author, and he has something to do with tabloids, but he has not yet fallen into the last road. But it's already a lot of nonsense. (Otherwise, it is arrogant.) For example, he said in his letter: "It is very easy to strike at their words and deeds, but they only use Mr. You as their shield,...... Therefore, I feel great difficulties in practical solutions and literary struggles. Is it from Xiu to fight Hu Feng's deceit, Huang Yuan's flattery, or from the composition to attack Hu Feng's thesis, Huang Yuan's "Translation"? ——I am not in a hurry to know this; What I want to ask is why I know them and "feel great difficulty" when I "hit"? Of course, I will never agree with the rumors, but if Xu Maoyong and the others are righteous and strict, can I cover the eyes and ears of the world for them? And what is a "practical solution"? Is it to be conscripted into the army or to be beheaded? Under the big topic of "united front", is it possible to train people to commit crimes and tease authoritarianism in this way? I really want to pray that there will be great works in "national defense literature", if not, maybe it is my crime of "promoting bad tendencies" in the past six months.临末，徐懋庸还叫我细细读《斯太林传》。是的，我将细细的读，倘能生存，我当然仍要学习；但我临末也请他自己再细细的去读几遍，因为他翻译时似乎毫无所得，实有从新细读的必要。否则，抓到一面旗帜，就自以为出人头地，摆出奴隶总管的架子，以鸣鞭为唯一的业绩——是无药可医，于中国也不但毫无用处，而且还有害处的。
At the end of the day, Xu Maoyong also asked me to read the "Biography of Stalin" carefully. Yes, I will read carefully, and if I can survive, of course I will still learn; But at the end of my life, I asked him to read it carefully a few more times, because he seemed to gain nothing when translating, and it was really necessary to read it carefully again. Otherwise, if you catch a flag, you will think you will get ahead, put on the shelf of a slave manager, and take the whip as your only achievement - there is no cure, and it is not only useless to China, but also harmful.八月三——六日。
八月三——六日。

关于太炎先生二三事

关于太炎先生二三事

关于太炎先生二三事

关于太炎先生二三事前一些时，上海的官绅为太炎先生开追悼会，赴会者不满百人，遂在寂寞中闭幕，于是有人慨叹，以为青年们对于本国的学者，竟不如对于外国的高尔基的热诚。这慨叹其实是不得当的。官绅集会，一向为小民所不敢到；况且高尔基是战斗的作家，太炎先生虽先前也以革命家现身，后来却退居于宁静的学者，用自己所手造的和别人所帮造的墙，和时代隔绝了。纪念者自然有人，但也许将为大多数所忘却。
Some time ago, the officials and gentry in Shanghai held a memorial service for Mr. Taiyan, and the attendees were less than 100 people, so it closed in loneliness, so some people sighed that young people were not as enthusiastic about foreign scholars as Gorky in foreign countries. This lament is actually inappropriate. The gathering of officials and gentry has always been afraid of the common people; Moreover, Gorky was a writer of battles, and although Mr. Taiyan had previously appeared as a revolutionary, he later retreated to a quiet scholar, using the walls he built with his own hands and those built by others, isolated from the times. There are naturally people who commemorate it, but perhaps it will be forgotten by the majority.我以为先生的业绩，留在革命史上的，实在比在学术史上还要大。回忆三十余年之前，木板的《訄书》已经出版了，我读不断，当然也看不懂，恐怕那时的青年，这样的多得很。我的知道中国有太炎先生，并非因为他的经学和小学，是为了他驳斥康有为和作邹容的《革命军》序，竟被监禁于上海的西牢。那时留学日本的浙籍学生，正办杂志《浙江潮》，其中即载有先生狱中所作诗，却并不难懂。这使我感动，也至今并没有忘记，现在抄两首在下面——
I think that Mr. Trump's achievements in the history of the revolution are really greater than those in the history of academics. Recalling more than 30 years ago, the wooden board's "Obituary" had been published, and I kept reading it, of course, I couldn't understand it, I am afraid that there were so many young people at that time. I know that there is Mr. Taiyan in China, not because of his study of classics and primary school, but because he refuted Kang Youwei and Zou Rong's preface to "Revolutionary Army", and was imprisoned in the Western Prison of Shanghai. At that time, Zhejiang students studying in Japan were running the magazine "Zhejiang Chao", which contained poems written by Mr. in prison, but it was not difficult to understand. This moved me, and I have not forgotten it so far, and now I will copy two poems below——狱中赠邹容
狱中赠邹容邹容吾小弟，被发下瀛洲。快剪刀除辫，干牛肉作糇。邹容吾小弟，被发下瀛洲。 快剪刀除辫，干牛肉作糇。 
英雄一入狱，天地亦悲秋。临命须掺手，乾坤只两头。 英雄一入狱，天地亦悲秋。 临命须掺手，乾坤只两头。
狱中闻沈禹希见杀
狱中闻沈禹希见杀不见沈生久，江湖知隐沦，萧萧悲壮士，今在易京门。不见沈生久，江湖知隐沦，萧萧悲壮士，今在易京门。 
螭鬽羞争焰，文章总断魂。中阴当待我，南北几新坟。 螭鬽羞争焰，文章总断魂。 中阴当待我，南北几新坟。
一九〇六年六月出狱，即日东渡，到了东京，不久就主持《民报》。我爱看这《民报》，但并非为了先生的文笔古奥，索解为难，或说佛法，谈“俱分进化”，是为了他和主张保皇的梁启超斗争，和“××”的×××斗争，和“以《红楼梦》为成佛之要道”的×××斗争，真是所向披靡，令人神旺。前去听讲也在这时候，但又并非因为他是学者，却为了他是有学问的革命家，所以直到现在，先生的音容笑貌，还在目前，而所讲的《说文解字》，却一句也不记得了。
He was released from prison in June 1906, and on the same day he crossed east to Tokyo, where he soon hosted the "Minbao". I love to read this "Minbao", but it is not because of the ancients of Mr. Wang's writing, the difficulty of solving it, or the Buddhist teachings, talking about "evolution", but for him to fight against Liang Qichao, who advocates royalism, the ××× struggle with "××", and the ××× struggle of "taking "Dream of Red Mansions" as the key to Buddhahood, which is really invincible and exciting. It was also at this time that I went to listen to the lecture, but not because he was a scholar, but because he was a learned revolutionary, so until now, Mr. Wang's voice and smile are still in the present, and he doesn't remember a single word of "Shuowen Jiezi".民国元年革命后，先生的所志已达，该可以大有作为了，然而还是不得志。这也是和高尔基的生受崇敬，死备哀荣，截然两样的。我以为两人遭遇的所以不同，其原因乃在高尔基先前的理想，后来都成为事实，他的一身，就是大众的一体，喜怒哀乐，无不相通；而先生则排满之志虽伸，但视为最紧要的“第一是用宗教发起信心，增进国民的道德；第二是用国粹激动种性，增进爱国的热肠”（见《民报》第六本），却仅止于高妙的幻想；不久而袁世凯又攘夺国柄，以遂私图，就更使先生失却实地，仅垂空文，至于今，惟我们的“中华民国”之称，尚系发源于先生的《中华民国解》（最先亦见《民报》），为巨大的记念而已，然而知道这一重公案者，恐怕也已经不多了。既离民众，渐入颓唐，后来的参与投壶，接收馈赠，遂每为论者所不满，但这也不过白圭之玷，并非晚节不终。考其生平，以大勋章作扇坠，临总统府之门，大诟袁世凯的包藏祸心者，并世无第二人；七被追捕，三入牢狱，而革命之志，终不屈挠者，并世亦无第二人：这才是先哲的精神，后生的楷范。近有文侩，勾结小报，竟也作文奚落先生以自鸣得意，真可谓“小人不欲成人之美”，而且“蚍蜉撼大树，可笑不自量”了！
After the revolution in the first year of the Republic of China, Mr. Zhou's ambitions had been achieved, and he should be able to make a big difference, but he was still unsuccessful. This is also completely different from Gorky's life of reverence and death for mourning and glory. I think the reason why the two encountered the difference was that Gorky's previous ideals later became facts, and his body was the unity of the masses, with joys, anger, sorrows, and joys, all of which were connected; Although Mr. Quan's ambition to be full is extended, he regards it as the most important "The first is to use religion to initiate confidence and enhance the morality of the people; the second is to use the quintessence of the country to stimulate the nature and enhance the patriotic enthusiasm" (see the sixth book of "Min Bao"), but it is only a wonderful fantasy; Soon, Yuan Shikai seized the power of the country to achieve his private plans, which made Mr. lose the field even more, and only left empty words, and to this day, only our name "Republic of China" still originated from Mr. 's "Republic of China Solution" (the first also see "Minbao"), which is just a huge memory, but I am afraid that there are not many people who know this heavy public case. After leaving the people, he gradually entered the Tang Dynasty, and later participated in throwing pots and receiving gifts, so he was often dissatisfied with commentators, but this was just a stain on Bai Gui, not an end in his later years. Examining his life, he used the great medal as a fan pendant, and when he came to the door of the presidential palace, he scolded Yuan Shikai for harboring ill intentions, and there was no second person in the world; Seven were hunted down, three were imprisoned, and the revolutionary ambition was never yielding, and there was no second person in the world: this is the spirit of the sages and the model of the younger generation. Recently, there have been literati, colluding with tabloids, and even writing articles to ridicule Mr. Xiang to be proud, which can really be described as "villains don't want to be beautiful", and "centipedes shake the big tree, ridiculous and self-esteem"!但革命之后，先生亦渐为昭示后世计，自藏其锋芒。浙江所刻的《章氏丛书》，是出于手定的，大约以为驳难攻讦，至于忿詈，有违古之儒风，足以贻讥多士的罢，先前的见于期刊的斗争的文章，竟多被刊落，上文所引的诗两首，亦不见于《诗录》中。一九三三年刻《章氏丛书续编》于北平，所收不多，而更纯谨，且不取旧作，当然也无斗争之作，先生遂身衣学术的华衮，粹然成为儒宗，执贽愿为弟子者綦众，至于仓皇制《同门录》成册。近阅日报，有保护版权的广告，有三续丛书的记事，可见又将有遗著出版了，但补入先前战斗的文章与否，却无从知道。战斗的文章，乃是先生一生中最大，最久的业绩，假使未备，我以为是应该一一辑录，校印，使先生和后生相印，活在战斗者的心中的。然而此时此际，恐怕也未必能如所望罢，呜呼！
However, after the revolution, Mr. gradually revealed his plan for future generations and hid his edge. The "Zhang's Series" engraved in Zhejiang was hand-made, probably thought to refute and attack, as for the reprimand, it was contrary to the ancient Confucian style, enough to ridicule the toast, and the previous articles on the struggle that were seen in the journal were mostly published, and the two poems quoted above were not found in the "Poetry Record". In 1933, the "Continuation of Zhang's Series" was engraved in Peiping, and the collection was not much, but more pure, and it did not take the old work, and of course there was no struggle. Recently, I read the daily newspaper, there are advertisements for copyright protection, and there are records of three sequels of books, which shows that there will be posthumous works published, but there is no way to know whether the articles of the previous battles will be added. The article on the battle is the biggest and longest achievement in the life of the gentleman, if it is not ready, I think it should be compiled and proofread one by one, so that the teacher and the younger generation can print each other, and live in the hearts of the fighters. However, at this time, I am afraid that it may not be as expected, alas!十月九日。
October 9th.

曹靖华译《苏联作家七人集》序

曹靖华译《苏联作家七人集》序

曹靖华译《苏联作家七人集》序

Cao Jinghua translated the preface to "Seven Soviet Writers"曾经有过这样的一个时候，喧传有好几位名人都要译《资本论》，自然依据着原文，但有一位还要参照英，法，日，俄各国的译本。到现在，至少已经满六年，还不见有一章发表，这种事业之难可想了。对于苏联的文学作品，那时也一样的热心，英译的短篇小说集一到上海，恰如一胛羊肉坠入狼群中，立刻撕得一片片，或则化为“飞脚阿息普”，或则化为“飞毛腿奥雪伯”；然而到得第二本英译《蔚蓝的城》输入的时候，志士们却已经没有这么起劲，有的还早觉得“伊凡”“彼得”，还不如“一洞”“八索”之有趣了。
There was a time when it was rumored that several celebrities wanted to translate "Capital", naturally based on the original text, but one also referred to the translations of English, French, Japanese, and Russian. Up to now, at least six years have passed, and not a single chapter has been published, and the difficulty of this kind of career can be imagined. As soon as the collection of short stories translated into English arrived in Shanghai, it was like a shoulder of mutton falling into a pack of wolves, and it was immediately torn into pieces, either turning into "Flying Foot Asup" or "Scud O'Sheaber"; However, by the time the second English translation of "The Blue City" was imported, the aspirants were no longer so energetic, and some still felt that "Ivan" and "Peter" were not as interesting as "One Hole" and "Eight Cables".然而也有并不一哄而起的人，当时好像落后，但因为也不一哄而散，后来却成为中坚。靖华就是一声不响，不断的翻译着的一个。他二十年来，精研俄文，默默的出了《三姊妹》，出了《白茶》，出了《烟袋》和《四十一》，出了《铁流》以及其他单行小册很不少，然而不尚广告，至今无煊赫之名，且受挤排，两处受封锁之害。但他依然不断的在改定他先前的译作，而他的译作，也依然活在读者们的心中。这固然也因为一时自称“革命作家”的过于吊儿郎当，终使坚实者成为硕果，但其实却大半为了中国的读书界究竟有进步，读者自有确当的批判，不再受空心大老的欺骗了。
However, there are also people who did not rise up all at once, seemed to be backward at the time, but because they did not coax at once, they later became the backbone. Jinghua is the one that is silent and constantly translating. In the past 20 years, he has studied Russian intensively, silently published "Three Sisters", "White Tea", "Tobacco Bag" and "Forty-One", "Tie Liu" and many other single-line pamphlets, but he did not admire advertising, and so far he has not been famous for his prominence, and he has been squeezed out, and he has been blocked in two places. But he is still constantly revising his previous translations, and his translations are still alive in the hearts of readers. This is certainly because the self-proclaimed "revolutionary writer" was too careless for a while, which eventually made the solid one fruitful, but in fact, most of it was for the sake of the progress of China's reading circle, and readers had their own valid criticism, and they were no longer deceived by hollow elders.靖华是未名社中之一员；未名社一向设在北京，也是一个实地劳作，不尚叫嚣的小团体。但还是遭些无妄之灾，而且遭得颇可笑。它被封闭过一次，是由于山东督军张宗昌的电报，听说发动的倒是同行的文人；后来没有事，启封了。出盘之后，靖华译的两种小说都积在台静农家，又和“新式炸弹”一同被收没，后来虽然证明了这“新式炸弹”其实只是制造化装品的机器，书籍却仍然不发还，于是这两种书，遂成为天地之间的珍本。为了我的《呐喊》在天津图书馆被焚毁，梁实秋教授掌青岛大学图书馆时，将我的译作驱除，以及未名社的横祸，我那时颇觉得北方官长，办事较南方为森严，元朝分奴隶为四等，置北人于南人之上，实在并非无故。后来知道梁教授虽居北地，实是南人，以及靖华的小说想在南边出版，也曾被锢多日，就又明白我的决论其实是不确的了。这也是所谓“学问无止境”罢。
Jinghua is a member of the Unnamed Society; The Weiming Society has always been located in Beijing, and it is also a small group that works on the ground and does not make a fuss. But there were still some unwarranted disasters, and they were quite ridiculous. It was closed once because of the telegram of Zhang Zongchang, the governor of Shandong, and it was heard that it was the literati who were the same as the ones who initiated it; Later, nothing happened, and it was unsealed. After the release of the market, the two novels translated by Jinghua were accumulated in Taijing farmers' homes, and were confiscated together with the "new bomb", and although it was later proved that this "new bomb" was actually just a machine for making cosmetics, the books were still not returned, so these two books became rare books between heaven and earth. Because my "Scream" was burned in the Tianjin Library, when Professor Liang Shiqiu was in charge of the library of Qingdao University, he expelled my translations, and the disaster of the Weiming Society, I felt that the officials in the north were stricter than in the south, and the Yuan Dynasty divided slaves into four classes, placing the northerners above the southerners, which was not without reason. Later, I learned that although Professor Liang lived in the north, he was actually a southerner, and that Jinghua's novels wanted to be published in the south, but he had been imprisoned for many days, so I realized that my conclusion was actually inaccurate. This is also the so-called "endless knowledge".但现在居然已经得到出版的机会，闲话休题，是当然的。言归正传：则这是合两种译本短篇小说集而成的书，删去两篇，加入三篇，以篇数论，有增无减。所取题材，虽多在二十年前，因此其中不见水闸建筑，不见集体农场，但在苏联，还都是保有生命的作品，从我们中国人看来，也全是亲切有味的文章。至于译者对于原语的学力的充足和译文之可靠，是读书界中早有定论，不待我多说的了。
But now that I have actually gotten the opportunity to publish, it is natural to gossip. Back to the point: This is a collection of short stories from two translations, two are deleted, three are added, and the number of chapters is discussed, increasing without decreasing. Although most of the themes taken were 20 years ago, so there were no sluice buildings or collective farms, but in the Soviet Union, they were still works that kept life, and from the perspective of us Chinese, they were all kind and flavorful articles. As for the translator's adequacy of the original language and the reliability of the translation, it has long been decided in the reading circles, so I don't need to say more.靖华不厌弃我，希望在出版之际，写几句序言，而我久生大病，体力衰惫，不能为文，以上云云，几同塞责。然而靖华的译文，岂真有待于序，此后亦如先前，将默默的有益于中国的读者，是无疑的。倒是我得以乘机打草，是一幸事，亦一快事也。
Jinghua did not mind abandoning me, hoping to write a few prefaces when it was published, but I had been seriously ill for a long time, and my physical strength was weak, and I could not write. However, Jinghua's translation is not really waiting for the preface, and there is no doubt that it will silently benefit Chinese readers after that, as before. On the contrary, I was able to take the opportunity to play grass, which was a blessing and a pleasure.一九三六年十月十六日，鲁迅记于上海且介亭之东南角。
On October 16, 1936, Lu Xun recorded in the southeast corner of Qiejieting, Shanghai.

因太炎先生而想起的二三事

因太炎先生而想起的二三事

因太炎先生而想起的二三事

Two or three things that came to mind because of Mr. Taiyan写完题目，就有些踌蹰，怕空话多于本文，就是俗语之所谓“雷声大，雨点小”。
After writing the topic, I was a little hesitant, afraid that there would be more empty words than this article, which is the so-called "thunder is loud, and the rain is small".做了《关于太炎先生二三事》以后，好像还可以写一点闲文，但已经没有力气，只得停止了。第二天一觉醒来，日报已到，拉过来一看，不觉自己摩一下头顶，惊叹道：“二十五周年的双十节！原来中华民国，已过了一世纪的四分之一了，岂不快哉！”但这“快”是迅速的意思。后来乱翻增刊，偶看见新作家的憎恶老人的文章，便如兜顶浇半瓢冷水。自己心里想：老人这东西，恐怕也真为青年所不耐的。例如我罢，性情即日见乖张，二十五年而已，却偏喜欢说一世纪的四分之一，以形容其多，真不知忙着什么；而且这摩一下头顶的手势，也实在可以说是太落伍了。
After doing "Two or Three Things About Mr. Taiyan", it seems that I can still write a little idle article, but I don't have the strength anymore, so I have to stop. When I woke up the next day, the daily report had arrived, I pulled it over and took a look, and I couldn't help but rub the top of my head, and exclaimed: "The 25th anniversary of the Double Tenth Festival!" It turns out that the Republic of China has passed a quarter of a century, isn't it unpleasant! But this "fast" means fast. Later, when I flipped through the supplements, I occasionally saw the articles of new writers who hated the old man, and it was like pouring half a scoop of cold water on the top of my pocket. I thought to myself: The old man is probably really impatient with young people. For example, I have a perverse temperament every day, only twenty-five years, but I prefer to say a quarter of a century to describe it, and I really don't know what I am busy with; And this gesture of rubbing the top of the head can really be said to be too outdated.这手势，每当惊喜或感动的时候，我也已经用了一世纪的四分之一，犹言“辫子究竟剪去了”，原是胜利的表示。这种心情，和现在的青年也是不能相通的。假使都会上有一个拖着辫子的人，三十左右的壮年和二十上下的青年，看见了恐怕只以为珍奇，或者竟觉得有趣，但我却仍然要憎恨，愤怒，因为自己是曾经因此吃苦的人，以剪辫为一大公案的缘故。我的爱护中华民国，焦唇敝舌，恐其衰微，大半正为了使我们得有剪辫的自由，假使当初为了保存古迹，留辫不剪，我大约是决不会这样爱它的。张勋来也好，段祺瑞来也好，我真自愧远不及有些士君子的大度。
This gesture, whenever I am surprised or moved, I have used a quarter of a century, as if "the braid has been cut off", which was originally a sign of victory. This mood is also incompatible with today's youth. If there is a person dragging braids in the city, in the prime of his thirties and in his twenties, I am afraid that I will only think it is strange, or even find it interesting, but I still have to hate and be angry, because I am a person who has suffered because of this, and cutting my braids is a big public case. Most of my love for the Republic of China is to give us the freedom to cut our braids, and if we had kept the braids in order to preserve the monuments, I would probably never have loved it like this. Whether Zhang Xun is here or Duan Qirui is coming, I am really ashamed that I am far inferior to the generosity of some gentlemen.当我还是孩子时，那时的老人指教我说：剃头担上的旗竿，三百年前是挂头的。满人入关，下令拖辫，剃头人沿路拉人剃发，谁敢抗拒，便砍下头来挂在旗竿上，再去拉别的人。那时的剃发，先用水擦，再用刀刮，确是气闷的，但挂头故事却并不引起我的惊惧，因为即使我不高兴剃发，剃头人不但不来砍下我的脑袋，还从旗竿斗里摸出糖来，说剃完就可以吃，已经换了怀柔方略了。见惯者不怪，对辫子也不觉其丑，何况花样繁多，以姿态论，则辫子有松打，有紧打，辫线有三股，有散线，周围有看发（即今之“刘海”），看发有长短，长看发又可打成两条细辫子，环于顶搭之周围，顾影自怜，为美男子；以作用论，则打架时可拔，犯奸时可剪，做戏的可挂于铁竿，为父的可鞭其子女，变把戏的将头摇动，能飞舞如龙蛇，昨在路上，看见巡捕拿人，一手一个，以一捕二，倘在辛亥革命前，则一把辫子，至少十多个，为治民计，也极方便的。不幸的是所谓“海禁大开”，士人渐读洋书，因知比较，纵使不被洋人称为“猪尾”，而既不全剃，又不全留，剃掉一圈，留下一撮，打成尖辫，如慈菇芽，也未免自己觉得毫无道理，大可不必了。
When I was a child, the old man at that time taught me that the flagpole on the shaved head was hung three hundred years ago. When the Manchus entered the customs, they ordered braids to be dragged, and the shaved man pulled people along the road to shave their hair, and whoever dared to resist cut off his head and hang it on the flagpole, and then went to pull others. At that time, shaving my hair was indeed stuffy to wipe with water and then with a knife, but the story of hanging my head did not cause me to be frightened, because even if I was unhappy to shave my hair, the shaver not only did not come to cut off my head, but also took out sugar from the flagpole bucket, saying that it could be eaten after shaving, and it had changed the strategy of Huairou. Those who are used to seeing it are not surprised, and they do not feel ugly about the braids, not to mention the variety of patterns, in terms of posture, the braids have loose beatings, there are tight beatings, the braid line has three strands, there are loose lines, and there are hair (today's "bangs") around it, and the hair can be cut into two thin braids, around the top of the head, looking at the shadow and feeling sorry for yourself, for a beautiful man; In terms of function, it can be pulled out when fighting, it can be cut when committing adultery, the actor can be hung on an iron pole, the father can whip his children, and the trick shakes his head, and he can fly like a dragon and a snake. Unfortunately, the so-called "sea ban is wide open", scholars gradually read foreign books, because they know how to compare, even if they are not called "pig tails" by foreigners, they are neither completely shaved nor completely kept, shaved off a circle, left a handful, and braided into a pointed braid, such as a mushroom bud, they inevitably feel that it is unreasonable, and it is not necessary.我想，这是纵使生于民国的青年，一定也都知道的。清光绪中，曾有康有为者变过法，不成，作为反动，是义和团起事，而八国联军遂入京，这年代很容易记，是恰在一千九百年，十九世纪的结末。于是满清官民，又要维新了，维新有老谱，照例是派官出洋去考察，和派学生出洋去留学。我便是那时被两江总督派赴日本的人们之中的一个，自然，排满的学说和辫子的罪状和文字狱的大略，是早经知道了一些的，而最初在实际上感到不便的，却是那辫子。
I think this is something that even young people born in the Republic of China must know. In the Guangxu period of the Qing Dynasty, there was a Kang Youwei who changed the law, but it did not succeed, as a reactionary, it was the Boxer Rebellion, and the Eight-Nation Allied Forces entered Beijing, which is easy to remember, it was exactly in 1900, the end of the 19th century. As a result, the officials and people of the Manchu Qing Dynasty were going to the Restoration again, and the Restoration had an old genealogy, as usual, sending officials to go abroad for inspection and send students to study abroad. I was one of the people sent to Japan by the governor of Liangjiang at that time, and naturally, I had already known some of the doctrines and the general outline of the braided crimes and literary prisons, but it was the braids that I actually felt inconvenient at first.凡留学生一到日本，急于寻求的大抵是新知识。除学习日文，准备进专门的学校之外，就赴会馆，跑书店，往集会，听讲演。我第一次所经历的是在一个忘了名目的会场上，看见一位头包白纱布，用无锡腔讲演排满的英勇的青年，不觉肃然起敬。但听下去，到得他说“我在这里骂老太婆，老太婆一定也在那里骂吴稚晖”，听讲者一阵大笑的时候，就感到没趣，觉得留学生好像也不外乎嬉皮笑脸。“老太婆”者，指清朝的西太后。吴稚晖在东京开会骂西太后，是眼前的事实无疑，但要说这时西太后也正在北京开会骂吴稚晖，我可不相信。讲演固然不妨夹着笑骂，但无聊的打诨，是非徒无益，而且有害的。不过吴先生这时却正在和公使蔡钧大战，名驰学界，白纱布下面，就藏着名誉的伤痕。不久，就被递解回国，路经皇城外的河边时，他跳了下去，但立刻又被捞起，押送回去了。这就是后来太炎先生和他笔战时，文中之所谓“不投大壑而投阳沟，面目上露”。其实是日本的御沟并不狭小，但当警官护送之际，却即使并未“面目上露”，也一定要被捞起的。这笔战愈来愈凶，终至夹着毒詈，今年吴先生讥刺太炎先生受国民政府优遇时，还提起这件事，这是三十余年前的旧账，至今不忘，可见怨毒之深了。但先生手定的《章氏丛书》内，却都不收录这些攻战的文章。先生力排清虏，而服膺于几个清儒，殆将希踪古贤，故不欲以此等文字自秽其著述——但由我看来，其实是吃亏，上当的，此种醇风，正使物能遁形，贻患千古。
When international students arrive in Japan, they are eager to seek new knowledge. In addition to learning Japanese and preparing to enter a specialized school, I go to the hall, run to the bookstore, go to the assembly, and listen to lectures. The first time I experienced it was in a venue where I forgot my name, and I saw a heroic young man wrapped in white gauze and speaking in a Wuxi accent, and I couldn't help but be in awe. But when he listened to it, he said, "I scold the old woman here, and the old woman must also be scolding Wu Zhihui there", and when the speaker burst into laughter, he felt bored, and felt that the international students seemed to be nothing more than hippie smiling faces. "Old woman" refers to the Empress Dowager Xi of the Qing Dynasty. Wu Zhihui held a meeting in Tokyo to scold Empress Dowager Xi, which is undoubtedly a fact in front of me, but I don't believe it to say that Empress Dowager Xi was also holding a meeting in Beijing at this time to scold Wu Zhihui. Of course, lectures may be accompanied by laughter and scolding, but boring jokes are useless and harmful. However, Mr. Wu was fighting with the minister Cai Jun at this time, and he was famous in the academic world, and under the white gauze, there were scars of reputation. Soon, he was deported back to China, and when he passed by the river outside the imperial city, he jumped down, but was immediately picked up again and escorted back. This is what Mr. Taiyan said in the article when he fought with him, "do not throw into the ravine but throw into the yang ditch, and the face is exposed". In fact, Japan's imperial ditch is not small, but when the police escort it, even if it is not "revealed", it must be picked up. This year, when Mr. Wu ridiculed Mr. Taiyan for being favored by the Nationalist government, he also mentioned this matter, which is an old account from more than 30 years ago, and it has not been forgotten to this day, which shows the depth of resentment. However, the "Zhang's Series" written by Mr. did not include these offensive articles. Mr. tried his best to exclude the Qing Dynasty, and obeyed a few Qing Confucians, and almost hoped to follow the ancient sages, so he did not want to tarnish his writings with these words - but in my opinion, in fact, he suffered a loss and was deceived.剪掉辫子，也是当时一大事。太炎先生去发时，作《解辫发》，有云——
Cutting off the braids was also a major event at that time. When Mr. Taiyan went to his hair, he wrote "Untying the Braids", which said—“……共和二千七百四十一年，秋七月，余年三十三矣。是时满洲政府不道，戕虐朝士，横挑强邻，戮使略贾，四维交攻。愤东胡之无状，汉族之不得职，陨涕涔涔曰，余年已立，而犹被戎狄之服，不违咫尺，弗能剪除，余之罪也。将荐绅束发，以复近古，日既不给，衣又不可得。于是曰，昔祁班孙，释隐玄，皆以明氏遗老，断发以殁。《春秋谷梁传》曰：‘吴祝发’《汉书》《严助传》曰：‘越发’，（晋灼曰：‘，张揖以为古剪字也’）余故吴越间民，去之亦犹行古之道也。……”
“…… 共和二千七百四十一年，秋七月，余年三十三矣。 是时满洲政府不道，戕虐朝士，横挑强邻，戮使略贾，四维交攻。 愤东胡之无状，汉族之不得职，陨涕涔涔曰，余年已立，而犹被戎狄之服，不违咫尺，弗能剪除，余之罪也。 将荐绅束发，以复近古，日既不给，衣又不可得。 于是曰，昔祁班孙，释隐玄，皆以明氏遗老，断发以殁。 《春秋谷梁传》曰：‘吴祝发’《汉书》《严助传》曰：‘越发’，（晋灼曰：‘，张揖以为古剪字也’）余故吴越间民，去之亦犹行古之道也。 ……”文见于木刻初版和排印再版的《訄书》中，后经更定，改名《检论》时，也被删掉了。我的剪辫，却并非因为我是越人，越在古昔，“断发文身”，今特效之，以见先民仪矩，也毫不含有革命性，归根结蒂，只为了不便：一不便于脱帽，二不便于体操，三盘在囟门上，令人很气闷。在事实上，无辫之徒，回国以后，默然留长，化为不二之臣者也多得很。而黄克强在东京作师范学生时，就始终没有断发，也未尝大叫革命，所略显其楚人的反抗的蛮性者，惟因日本学监，诫学生不可赤膊，他却偏光着上身，手挟洋磁脸盆，从浴室经过大院子，摇摇摆摆的走入自修室去而已。
The text was found in the first edition of the woodcut and the reprinted "Obituary", which was later revised and renamed "Jian Lun", but was also deleted. My braids are not because I am a Yue person, the more ancient times, "broken hair and tattoos", today special effects, to see the ancestors' etiquette, it does not contain revolutionary, in the final analysis, just for inconvenience: one is inconvenient to take off the hat, the other is not convenient for gymnastics, and the third plate is on the fontanelle, which is very depressing. In fact, there are many people without braids, after returning to China, who remain silent and become inseparable ministers. When Huang Keqiang was a normal student in Tokyo, he never broke his hair, nor did he shout for revolution, which slightly showed the barbarism of the resistance of the Chu people, but because the Japanese superintendent warned the students not to be shirtless, he was shirtless, holding a magnetic basin in his hand, and walked from the bathroom past the large courtyard to the study room.

附集

附集

附集

Appendix

文人比较学

文人比较学

文人比较学

Comparative studies of literati齐物论
Theory of Qiwu《国闻周报》十二卷四十三期上，有一篇文章指出了《国学珍本丛书》的误用引号，错点句子；到得四十六期，“主编”的施蛰存先生来答复了，承认是为了“养生主”，并非“修儿孙福”，而且该承认就承认，该辨解的也辨解，态度非常磊落。末了，还有一段总辨解云：
In the twelfth volume and forty-third issue of "Guowen Weekly", there was an article pointing out the misuse of quotation marks and the wrong sentences in the "Chinese Studies Rare Book Series"; In the forty-sixth issue, Mr. Shi Zhicun, the "editor-in-chief", came to reply, admitting that it was for the sake of "health preservation", not "cultivating children and grandchildren", and admitting it when it should be admitted, and also explaining what should be discerned, and his attitude was very upright. Finally, there is a general explanation:“但是虽然失败，虽然出丑，幸而并不能算是造了什么大罪过。因为充其量还不过是印出了一些草率的书来，到底并没有出卖了别人的灵魂与血肉来为自己的‘养生主’，如别的一些文人们也。”
"But although it failed, although it was ugly, fortunately it could not be regarded as a great sin. Because at best, it was just some sloppy books printed, and in the end, they did not sell other people's souls and flesh to become their own 'health masters', such as some other literati. ”中国的文人们有两“些”，一些，是“充其量还不过印出了一些草率的书来”的，“别的一些文人们”，却是“出卖了别人的灵魂与血肉来为自己的‘养生主’”的，我们只要想一想“别的一些文人们”，就知道施先生不但“并不能算是造了什么大罪过”，其实还能够算是修了什么“儿孙福”。
There are two "some" of Chinese literati, some are "at best printed some sloppy books", and "other literati" are "selling other people's souls and flesh to become their own 'health lords'".但一面也活活的画出了“洋场恶少”的嘴脸——不过这也并不是“什么大罪过”，“如别的一些文人们也”。
But on the other hand, it also vividly paints the face of the "villain in the foreign field" - but this is not "any great sin", "like some other literati".

大小奇迹

大小奇迹

大小奇迹

Wonders big and small何干
What does it matter?元旦看报，《申报》的第三面上就见了商务印书馆的“星期标准书”，这回是“罗家伦先生选定”的希特拉著《我之奋斗》（A. Hitler：My Battle），遂“摘录罗先生序”云：
On New Year's Day, I read the newspaper, and on the third page of the "Declaration", I saw the "Standard Book of the Week" of the Commercial Press, this time it was "Mr. Luo Jialun's "Mein Kampf" by Hitler (A. Hitler: My Battle), and then "excerpt from Mr. Luo's preface":“希特拉之崛起于德国，在近代史上为一大奇迹。……希特拉《我之奋斗》一书系为其党人而作；唯其如此，欲认识此一奇迹者尤须由此处入手。以此书列为星期标准书至为适当。”
"Hitler's rise in Germany is a great miracle in modern history. …… Hitler's book "Mein Kampf" was written for his party members; Only in this way, those who want to know about this miracle should start here. It is very appropriate to list this book as a standard book of the week. ”但即使不看译本，仅“由此处入手”，也就可以认识三种小“奇迹”，其一，是堂堂的一个国立中央编译馆，竟在百忙中先译了这一本书；其二，是这“近代史上为一大奇迹”的东西，却须从英文转译；其三，堂堂的一位国立中央大学校长，却不过“欲认识此一奇迹者尤须由此处入手”。
But even if you don't read the translation, just "start from here", you can know three small "miracles", one is a dignified National Central Compilation Museum, which actually translated this book first in his busy schedule; second, this "great miracle in modern history" must be translated from English; Third, a dignified president of National Central University said, "Those who want to know this miracle must start from here."真是奇杀人哉！
What a strange killer!

难答的问题

难答的问题

难答的问题

Difficult questions to answer何干
What does it matter?大约是因为经过了“儿童年”的缘故罢，这几年来，向儿童们说话的刊物多得很，教训呀，指导呀，鼓励呀，劝谕呀，七嘴八舌，如果精力的旺盛不及儿童的人，是看了要头昏的。
Probably because of the "Year of Children", in the past few years, there have been many publications that speak to children, teaching, guidance, encouragement, exhortation, and gossip.最近，二月九日《申报》的《儿童专刊》上，有一篇文章在对儿童讲《武训先生》。它说他是一个乞丐，自己吃臭饭，喝脏水，给人家做苦工，“做得了钱，却把它储起来。只要有人给他钱，甚至他可以跪下来的”。
Recently, in the "Children's Special Issue" of the "Declaration" on February 9, there was an article about "Mr. Wuxun" to children. It said that he was a beggar who ate stinky food, drank dirty water, and did hard work for others, "making money, but saving it." As long as someone gives him money, he can even kneel."这并不算什么特别。特别的是他得了钱，却一文也不化，终至于开办了一个学校。
This is nothing special. The special thing is that he got money, but he was penniless, and finally opened a school.于是这篇《武训先生》的作者提出一个问题来道：
So the author of this "Mr. Wuxun" asked a question:“小朋友！你念了上面的故事，有什么感想？”
"Child! How do you feel after reading the above story? ”我真也极愿意知道小朋友将有怎样的感想。假如念了上面的故事的人，是一个乞丐，或者比乞丐景况还要好，那么，他大约要自愧弗如，或者愤慨于中国少有这样的乞丐。然而小朋友会怎样感想呢，他们恐怕只好圆睁了眼睛，回问作者道：
I really want to know how the children will feel. If the person who reads the above story is a beggar, or better than the beggar's situation, then he will probably be ashamed of himself, or indignant that there are few such beggars in China. However, how will the children feel, they may have no choice but to open their eyes and ask the author back:“大朋友！你讲了上面的故事，是什么意思？”
"Big friend! What do you mean by telling the story above? ”

登错的文章

登错的文章

登错的文章

Wrong article何干
What does it matter?印给少年们看的刊物上，现在往往见有描写岳飞呀，文天祥呀的故事文章。自然，这两位，是给中国人挣面子的，但来做现在的少年们的模范，却似乎迂远一点。
In the publications printed for teenagers, there are often stories and articles describing Yue Fei and Wen Tianxiang. Naturally, these two are to earn face for the Chinese, but it seems a little roundabout to be a role model for today's teenagers.他们俩，一位是文官，一位是武将，倘使少年们受了感动，要来模仿他，他就先得在普通学校卒业之后，或进大学，再应文官考试，或进陆军学校，做到将官，于是武的呢，准备被十二金牌召还，死在牢狱里；文的呢，起兵失败，死在蒙古人的手中。
If the teenagers were moved and wanted to imitate him, he would first have to graduate from an ordinary school, or enter a university, then take the civil service examination, or enter the army school, and become a general. Wen Zhi failed to raise an army and died at the hands of the Mongols.宋朝怎么样呢？有历史在，恕不多谈。
What about the Song Dynasty? There is history, so I won't talk about it.不过这两位，却确可以励现任的文官武将，愧前任的降将逃官，我疑心那些故事，原是为办给大人老爷们看的刊物而作的文字，不知怎么一来，却错登在少年读物上面了，要不然，作者是决不至于如此低能的。
However, these two can indeed inspire the current civil and military generals, ashamed of the former generals who defected from the officials, I suspect that those stories, which were originally written for publications for adults and gentlemen, somehow were mistakenly published on the children's books, otherwise, the author would never be so imbecile.

《海上述林》上卷序言

《海上述林》上卷序言

《海上述林》上卷序言

Preface to the first volume of "The Forest of the Sea"这一卷里，几乎全是关于文学的论说；只有《现实》中的五篇，是根据了杂志《文学的遗产》撰述的，再除去两篇序跋，其余就都是翻译。
In this volume, almost all of them are about literature; Only five of the "Reality" are based on the magazine "The Legacy of Literature", and except for the two prefaces, the rest are translations.编辑本集时，所据的大抵是原稿；但《绥拉菲摩维支〈铁流〉序》，却是由排印本收入的。《十五年来的书籍版画和单行版画》一篇，既系摘译，又好像曾由别人略加改易，是否合于译者本意，已不可知，但因为关于艺术的只有这一篇，所以仍不汰去。
When editing this collection, it is mostly based on the original manuscript; However, the "Preface to the Iron Flow" of Suirafi Movizhi was included in the typesetting. The article "Book Prints and Single-line Prints in the Fifteen Years" is not only an excerpt, but also seems to have been slightly changed by others, and it is unknown whether it is in line with the original intention of the translator, but because this is the only article about art, it is still not eliminated.《冷淡》所据的也是排印本，本该是收在《高尔基论文拾补》中的，可惜发见得太迟一点，本书已将排好了，因此只得附在卷末。
"Cold" is also based on a typesetting version, which should have been included in the "Supplement to Gorky's Papers", but unfortunately it was discovered too late, and the book has been arranged, so it has to be attached to the end of the volume.对于文辞，只改正了几个显然的笔误和补上若干脱字；至于因为断续的翻译，遂使人地名的音译字，先后不同，或当时缺少参考书籍，注解中偶有未详之处，现在均不订正，以存其真。
For the wording, only a few obvious clerical errors were corrected and a number of omissions were added; As for the transliteration of place names due to intermittent translations, the order is different, or there is a lack of reference books at that time, and there are occasional unclear points in the annotations, which are not corrected now to preserve their truth.关于搜罗文稿和校印事务种种，曾得许多友人的协助，在此一并志谢。
Regarding the collection of manuscripts and proofreading affairs, I have received the help of many friends, and I would like to thank you here.一九三六年三月下旬，编者。
Late March 1936, editor.

我的第一个师父

我的第一个师父

我的第一个师父

My first Master不记得是那一部旧书上看来的了，大意说是有一位道学先生，自然是名人，一生拚命辟佛，却名自己的小儿子为“和尚”。有一天，有人拿这件事来质问他。他回答道：“这正是表示轻贱呀！”那人无话可说而退云。
I don't remember what it looked like in that old book, to the effect that there was a Taoist teacher, naturally a celebrity, who worked hard to avoid Buddha all his life, but called his youngest son "monk". One day, someone questioned him about this. He replied: "This is exactly a sign of contempt!" The man had nothing to say and retreated.其实，这位道学先生是诡辩。名孩子为“和尚”，其中是含有迷信的。中国有许多妖魔鬼怪，专喜欢杀害有出息的人，尤其是孩子；要下贱，他们才放手，安心。和尚这一种人，从和尚的立场看来，会成佛——但也不一定，——固然高超得很，而从读书人的立场一看，他们无家无室，不会做官，却是下贱之流。读书人意中的鬼怪，那意见当然和读书人相同，所以也就不来搅扰了。这和名孩子为阿猫阿狗，完全是一样的意思：容易养大。
In fact, this Taoist gentleman is sophistry. Children are called "monks", which contain superstitions. There are many demons and monsters in China, who like to kill promising people, especially children; If they want to be lowly, they will let go and feel at ease. Monks, from the standpoint of monks, will become Buddhas—but not necessarily,—— although they are very superb, and from the standpoint of scholars, they have no home, do not know how to be officials, but they are lowly people. The ghost in the scholar's mind, of course, has the same opinion as the scholar, so he doesn't come to disturb it. This is exactly the same as the name of a child as a cat and a dog: easy to raise.还有一个避鬼的法子，是拜和尚为师，也就是舍给寺院了的意思，然而并不放在寺院里。我生在周氏是长男，“物以希为贵”，父亲怕我有出息，因此养不大，不到一岁，便领到长庆寺里去，拜了一个和尚为师了。拜师是否要贽见礼，或者布施什么的呢，我完全不知道。只知道我却由此得到一个法名叫作“长庚”，后来我也偶尔用作笔名，并且在《在酒楼上》这篇小说里，赠给了恐吓自己的侄女的无赖；还有一件百家衣，就是“衲衣”，论理，是应该用各种破布拼成的，但我的却是橄榄形的各色小绸片所缝就，非喜庆大事不给穿；还有一条称为“牛绳”的东西，上挂零星小件，如历本，镜子，银筛之类，据说是可以避邪的。
There is also a way to avoid ghosts, which is to worship the monk as a teacher, that is, to give it to the temple, but it is not placed in the temple. I was born in the Zhou family as the eldest son, "things are precious", my father was afraid that I would have a future, so he couldn't raise it, and before he was a year old, he was taken to Changqing Temple and worshipped a monk as a teacher. I don't know at all whether apprentices need to pay their respects or give alms. I only know that I got a Dharma name called "Chang Geng" from this, and later I occasionally used it as a pseudonym, and in the novel "In the Restaurant", I gave it to the scoundrel who intimidated my niece; There is also a hundred family clothes, which is the "robe", which should be made of various rags, but mine is sewn from olive-shaped small pieces of silk, and it is not worn unless it is a festive event; There is also a thing called a "cow rope", which hangs sporadic small pieces, such as calendars, mirrors, silver sieves, etc., which are said to ward off evil spirits.这种布置，好像也真有些力量：我至今没有死。
This arrangement seems to have some power: I am not dead so far.不过，现在法名还在，那两件法宝却早已失去了。前几年回北平去，母亲还给了我婴儿时代的银筛，是那时的惟一的记念。仔细一看，原来那筛子圆径不过寸余，中央一个太极图，上面一本书，下面一卷画，左右缀着极小的尺，剪刀，算盘，天平之类。我于是恍然大悟，中国的邪鬼，是怕斩钉截铁，不能含胡的东西的。因为探究和好奇，去年曾经去问上海的银楼，终于买了两面来，和我的几乎一式一样，不过缀着的小东西有些增减。奇怪得很，半世纪有余了，邪鬼还是这样的性情，避邪还是这样的法宝。然而我又想，这法宝成人却用不得，反而非常危险的。
However, now the Dharma name is still there, but those two magic weapons have long been lost. When I went back to Peiping a few years ago, my mother gave me a silver sieve from my infancy, which was the only memory of that time. If you look closely, it turns out that the diameter of the sieve is only more than an inch, with a Tai Chi diagram in the center, a book on it, and a scroll of painting below, with extremely small rulers, scissors, abacus, balances, etc. on the left and right. Then I suddenly realized that the evil spirits in China are afraid of things that are categorical and cannot contain beards. Because of my inquiry and curiosity, I went to ask the silver building in Shanghai last year, and finally bought two sides, almost the same as mine, but the small things embellished were a little more or less. It's very strange, more than half a century later, evil ghosts still have such a temperament, and avoiding evil spirits is still such a magic weapon. However, I also think that this magic weapon cannot be used by adults, but it is very dangerous.但因此又使我记起了半世纪以前的最初的先生。我至今不知道他的法名，无论谁，都称他为“龙师父”，瘦长的身子，瘦长的脸，高颧细眼，和尚是不应该留须的，他却有两绺下垂的小胡子。对人很和气，对我也很和气，不教我念一句经，也不教我一点佛门规矩；他自己呢，穿起袈裟来做大和尚，或者戴上毗卢帽放焰口，“无祀孤魂，来受甘露味”的时候，是庄严透顶的，平常可也不念经，因为是住持，只管着寺里的琐屑事，其实——自然是由我看起来——他不过是一个剃光了头发的俗人。
But it reminded me of the first gentleman half a century ago. I still don't know his Dharma name, no matter who calls him "Master Long", with a slender body, a slender face, high cheekbones and thin eyes, monks should not have beards, but he has two sagging mustaches. He is very kind to people and to me, and he does not teach me a sutra, nor does he teach me any Buddhist rules; As for himself, when he wears a robe to be a great monk, or wears a Pilu hat to set off a flame, "a lonely soul without sacrifices, to receive the smell of nectar", he is solemn, and he usually does not recite scriptures, because he is the abbot, only caring about the trivial affairs of the temple, in fact—naturally it seems to me that he is just a layman with shaved hair.因此我又有一位师母，就是他的老婆。论理，和尚是不应该有老婆的，然而他有。我家的正屋的中央，供着一块牌位，用金字写着必须绝对尊敬和服从的五位：“天地君亲师”。我是徒弟，他是师，决不能抗议，而在那时，也决不想到抗议，不过觉得似乎有点古怪。但我是很爱我的师母的，在我的记忆上，见面的时候，她已经大约有四十岁了，是一位胖胖的师母，穿着玄色纱衫裤，在自己家里的院子里纳凉，她的孩子们就来和我玩耍。有时还有水果和点心吃，——自然，这也是我所以爱她的一个大原因；用高洁的陈源教授的话来说，便是所谓“有奶便是娘”，在人格上是很不足道的。
Therefore, I have another master's wife, who is his wife. In theory, a monk should not have a wife, but he does. In the center of the main house of my family, there is a tablet written in gold letters on the five people who must be absolutely respected and obeyed: "Heaven and Earth Lord Teacher". I am an apprentice, he is a teacher, and I must not protest, and at that time, I would never think of protesting, but I thought it seemed a bit strange. But I love my wife very much, and in my memory, when we met, she was about forty years old, a chubby wife, wearing a dark gauze shirt and pants, cooling off in the yard of her house, and her children came to play with me. Sometimes there are fruits and snacks to eat ,—— naturally, which is also a big reason why I love her; In the words of the noble Professor Chen Yuan, the so-called "if you have milk, you are a mother", which is very inadequate in terms of personality.不过我的师母在恋爱故事上，却有些不平常。“恋爱”，这是现在的术语，那时我们这偏僻之区只叫作“相好”。《诗经》云：“式相好矣，毋相尤矣”，起源是算得很古，离文武周公的时候不怎么久就有了的，然而后来好像并不算十分冠冕堂皇的好话。这且不管它罢。总之，听说龙师父年青时，是一个很漂亮而能干的和尚，交际很广，认识各种人。有一天，乡下做社戏了，他和戏子相识，便上台替他们去敲锣，精光的头皮，簇新的海青，真是风头十足。乡下人大抵有些顽固，以为和尚是只应该念经拜忏的，台下有人骂了起来。师父不甘示弱，也给他们一个回骂。于是战争开幕，甘蔗梢头雨点似的飞上来，有些勇士，还有进攻之势，“彼众我寡”，他只好退走，一面退，一面一定追，逼得他又只好慌张的躲进一家人家去。而这人家，又只有一位年青的寡妇。以后的故事，我也不甚了然了，总而言之，她后来就是我的师母。
However, my wife's love story is a bit unusual. "Love", this is the current term, at that time our remote area was only called "good friend". The "Book of Songs" says: "The style is good, and there is no fault", the origin is very ancient, not long after the time of Wen Wu Zhou Gong, but later it seems that it is not a very high-sounding good word. Let's not forget it. In short, I heard that Master Long was a very beautiful and capable monk when he was young, and he was very sociable and knew all kinds of people. One day, when he was doing a social drama in the countryside, he met the actors, so he went on stage to beat the gong for them, and his shiny scalp and clusters of new sea greens were really in the limelight. The countrymen were probably a little stubborn, thinking that monks should only chant scriptures and repent, and someone in the audience scolded them. Not to be outdone, Master also gave them a scolding. So the war began, the tips of sugarcane flew up like raindrops, some warriors, and the offensive momentum, "they are outnumbered", he had to retreat, while retreating, he must chase, forcing him to hide in a panic. And this family has only one young widow. I don't know much about the story in the future, all in all, she later became my wife.自从《宇宙风》出世以来，一向没有拜读的机缘，近几天才看见了“春季特大号”。其中有一篇铢堂先生的《不以成败论英雄》，使我觉得很有趣，他以为中国人的“不以成败论英雄”，“理想是不能不算崇高”的，“然而在人群的组织上实在要不得。抑强扶弱，便是永远不愿意有强。崇拜失败英雄，便是不承认成功的英雄”。“近人有一句流行话，说中国民族富于同化力，所以辽金元清都并不曾征服中国。其实无非是一种惰性，对于新制度不容易接收罢了”。我们怎样来改悔这“惰性”呢，现在姑且不谈，而且正在替我们想法的人们也多得很。我只要说那位寡妇之所以变了我的师母，其弊病也就在“不以成败论英雄”。乡下没有活的岳飞或文天祥，所以一个漂亮的和尚在如雨而下的甘蔗梢头中，从戏台逃下，也就是一个货真价实的失败的英雄。她不免发现了祖传的“惰性”，崇拜起来，对于追兵，也像我们的祖先的对于辽金元清的大军似的，“不承认成功的英雄”了。在历史上，这结果是正如铢堂先生所说：“乃是中国的社会不树威是难得帖服的”，所以活该有“扬州十日”和“嘉定三屠”。但那时的乡下人，却好像并没有“树威”，走散了，自然，也许是他们料不到躲在家里。
Since the birth of "Cosmic Wind", I have never had the opportunity to read it, and I have only seen the "Spring King" in recent days. Among them is Mr. Zhutang's "Not by success or failure as a hero", which I find very interesting, he thinks that the Chinese "do not judge heroes by success or failure", "ideals cannot be noble", "but in the organization of the crowd is really not necessary." To suppress the strong and support the weak is to never be willing to be strong. To worship failed heroes is to not recognize successful heroes." There is a popular saying that the Chinese nation is rich in assimilation, so Liao, Jin, Yuan, and Qing have never conquered China. In fact, it is nothing more than an inertia, and it is not easy to accept the new system." How can we repent of this "inertia", let's not talk about it now, and there are many people who are thinking for us. I only need to say that the reason why the widow became my wife is that she "does not judge heroes by success or failure". There is no living Yue Fei or Wen Tianxiang in the countryside, so a beautiful monk escaped from the stage in the rain of sugarcane tips, which is a real failed hero. She couldn't help but discover the "inertia" of her ancestors, worshipped her, and "did not recognize the heroes of success" for the pursuers, just like our ancestors did for the army of Liao, Jin, Yuanqing, and Qing. In history, this result is as Mr. Zhutang said: "It is rare for Chinese society to be submissive if it does not establish its prestige", so it deserves the "Ten Days of Yangzhou" and the "Three Slaughters of Jiading". But the countrymen at that time didn't seem to have "tree power" and were separated, naturally, maybe they didn't expect to hide at home.因此我有了三个师兄，两个师弟。大师兄是穷人的孩子，舍在寺里，或是卖在寺里的；其余的四个，都是师父的儿子，大和尚的儿子做小和尚，我那时倒并不觉得怎么稀奇。大师兄只有单身；二师兄也有家小，但他对我守着秘密，这一点，就可见他的道行远不及我的师父，他的父亲了。而且年龄都和我相差太远，我们几乎没有交往。
So I have three brothers, two brothers. The senior brother is the child of the poor, who lives in the temple or is sold in the temple; The other four were all master's sons, and the sons of the big monks were small monks, which I didn't find unusual at the time. The senior brother is only single; The second senior brother also has a small family, but he keeps a secret from me, which shows that his Taoist conduct is far inferior to my master and his father. And the age difference is too far from mine, and we hardly have any relationships.三师兄比我恐怕要大十岁，然而我们后来的感情是很好的，我常常替他担心。还记得有一回，他要受大戒了，他不大看经，想来未必深通什么大乘教理，在剃得精光的囟门上，放上两排艾绒，同时烧起来，我看是总不免要叫痛的，这时善男信女，多数参加，实在不大雅观，也失了我做师弟的体面。这怎么好呢？每一想到，十分心焦，仿佛受戒的是我自己一样。然而我的师父究竟道力高深，他不说戒律，不谈教理，只在当天大清早，叫了我的三师兄去，厉声吩咐道：“拚命熬住，不许哭，不许叫，要不然，脑袋就炸开，死了！”这一种大喝，实在比什么《妙法莲花经》或《大乘起信论》还有力，谁高兴死呢，于是仪式很庄严的进行，虽然两眼比平时水汪汪，但到两排艾绒在头顶上烧完，的确一声也不出。我嘘一口气，真所谓“如释重负”，善男信女们也个个“合十赞叹，欢喜布施，顶礼而散”了。
The third senior brother is probably ten years older than me, but our relationship was very good, and I often worried about him. I still remember one time, when he was about to take the Great Precepts, he didn't read much scriptures, and he didn't necessarily understand any Mahayana teachings, so he put two rows of mugwort on the shaved fontanel and burned them at the same time. How is this good? Every time I think about it, I am very anxious, as if I am the one who has been ordained. However, my master was so powerful that he didn't talk about precepts or teachings, he only called my third senior brother early that morning and ordered him sternly: "Hold on desperately, don't cry, don't scream, otherwise, your head will explode and you will die!" This kind of drinking is really more powerful than the "Wonderful Lotus Sutra" or the "Mahayana Theory of Faith", who is happy to die, so the ceremony was carried out very solemnly, although the eyes were more watery than usual, but when the two rows of mugwort were burned on the top of the head, it was indeed not a word. I sighed, the so-called "relief", and the good men and women also "joined their hands in admiration, rejoiced in giving, and bowed and dispersed".出家人受了大戒，从沙弥升为和尚，正和我们在家人行过冠礼，由童子而为成人相同。成人愿意“有室”，和尚自然也不能不想到女人。以为和尚只记得释迦牟尼或弥勒菩萨，乃是未曾拜和尚为师，或与和尚为友的世俗的谬见。寺里也有确在修行，没有女人，也不吃荤的和尚，例如我的大师兄即是其一，然而他们孤僻，冷酷，看不起人，好像总是郁郁不乐，他们的一把扇或一本书，你一动他就不高兴，令人不敢亲近他。所以我所熟识的，都是有女人，或声明想女人，吃荤，或声明想吃荤的和尚。
Monks have received great ordination and have been promoted from novices to monks, just as we have performed the coronation ceremony in our families, from children to adults. Adults are willing to "have a room", and monks naturally can't help but think of women. It is a worldly misconception that monks only remember Shakyamuni or Maitreya Bodhisattva, but they have never worshipped monks as teachers or are friends with monks. There are also monks in the temple who are really practicing, there are no women, and they don't eat meat, for example, my senior brother is one of them, but they are withdrawn, cold, look down on people, as if they are always depressed, and their fans or books, when you touch them, they are unhappy, and people dare not get close to them. So all I know are monks who have women, or who declare that they want to eat women, eat meat, or declare that they want to eat meat.我那时并不诧异三师兄在想女人，而且知道他所理想的是怎样的女人。人也许以为他想的是尼姑罢，并不是的，和尚和尼姑“相好”，加倍的不便当。他想的乃是千金小姐或少奶奶；而作这“相思”或“单相思”——即今之所谓“单恋”也——的媒介的是“结”。我们那里的阔人家，一有丧事，每七日总要做一些法事，有一个七日，是要举行“解结”的仪式的，因为死人在未死之前，总不免开罪于人，存着冤结，所以死后要替他解散。方法是在这天拜完经忏的傍晚，灵前陈列着几盘东西，是食物和花，而其中有一盘，是用麻线或白头绳，穿上十来文钱，两头相合而打成蝴蝶式，八结式之类的复杂的，颇不容易解开的结子。一群和尚便环坐桌旁，且唱且解，解开之后，钱归和尚，而死人的一切冤结也从此完全消失了。这道理似乎有些古怪，但谁都这样办，并不为奇，大约也是一种“惰性”。不过解结是并不如世俗人的所推测，个个解开的，倘有和尚以为打得精致，因而生爱，或者故意打得结实，很难解散，因而生恨的，便能暗暗的整个落到僧袍的大袖里去，一任死者留下冤结，到地狱里去吃苦。这种宝结带回寺里，便保存起来，也时时鉴赏，恰如我们的或亦不免偏爱看看女作家的作品一样。当鉴赏的时候，当然也不免想到作家，打结子的是谁呢，男人不会，奴婢不会，有这种本领的，不消说是小姐或少奶奶了。和尚没有文学界人物的清高，所以他就不免睹物思人，所谓“时涉遐想”起来，至于心理状态，则我虽曾拜和尚为师，但究竟是在家人，不大明白底细。只记得三师兄曾经不得已而分给我几个，有些实在打得精奇，有些则打好之后，浸过水，还用剪刀柄之类砸实，使和尚无法解散。解结，是替死人设法的，现在却和和尚为难，我真不知道小姐或少奶奶是什么意思。这疑问直到二十年后，学了一点医学，才明白原来是给和尚吃苦，颇有一点虐待异性的病态的。深闺的怨恨，会无线电似的报在佛寺的和尚身上，我看道学先生可还没有料到这一层。
I was not surprised that the third senior brother was thinking about women, and I knew what kind of woman he was dreaming of. People may think that he is thinking of a nun, but no, the monk and the nun are "good", which is doubly inconvenient. He thinks of the young lady or the young lady; And the medium of this "lovesickness" or "unrequited love" - which is now called "unrequited love" - is the "knot". In our Kuo family, when there is a funeral, some rituals must be performed every seven days, and there is a seven-day ceremony to hold a "untie" ceremony, because before the dead person dies, he will inevitably sin against others and have grievances, so he must be dissolved for him after death. The method is that in the evening after the prayer and repentance on this day, there are several plates of things displayed in front of the spirit, which are food and flowers, and one of them is made of twine or white rope, put on ten coins, and the two ends are combined to form a butterfly style, eight knots and other complex and difficult to untie knots. A group of monks sat around the table, singing and untiing, and after untiing, the money returned to the monk, and all the grievances of the dead disappeared completely. This may seem a bit strange, but it is not surprising that everyone does this, and it is probably also a kind of "inertia". If a monk thinks that the fight is exquisite, so he loves, or deliberately fights strongly, it is difficult to disband, and therefore hatred, he can secretly fall into the big sleeves of the monk's robe, and let the dead leave grievances and go to hell to endure hardships. This kind of treasure knot is brought back to the temple, and it is preserved and appreciated from time to time, just as we may inevitably prefer to see the works of female writers. When appreciating, of course, I can't help but think of the writer, who is the knot, the man can't, the slave can't, and those who have this kind of ability are needless to say that they are young ladies or young grandmothers. As for the psychological state, although I once worshipped the monk as a teacher, I didn't know the details in the family. I only remember that the third senior brother once gave me a few as a last resort, some of them were really good at fighting, and some were soaked in water after being beaten, and they were smashed with scissors and the like, so that the monk could not be disbanded. Untie the knot, it is a way for the dead, but now it is difficult for the monk, I really don't know what the young lady or the young lady means. It wasn't until twenty years later, after studying a little medicine, that I realized that it was a bit of a pathology of abusing the opposite sex for monks. The resentment of the deep boudoir will be reported to the monks of the Buddhist temple like radio, and I think Mr. Taoism has not yet expected this layer.后来，三师兄也有了老婆，出身是小姐，是尼姑，还是“小家碧玉”呢，我不明白，他也严守秘密，道行远不及他的父亲了。这时我也长大起来，不知道从那里，听到了和尚应守清规之类的古老话，还用这话来嘲笑他，本意是在要他受窘。不料他竟一点不窘，立刻用“金刚怒目”式，向我大喝一声道：
Later, the third senior brother also had a wife, born as a young lady, a nun, or a "small family jasper", I don't understand, he also kept secrets, and his Taoism was far inferior to his father. At this time, I also grew up, and I didn't know from there, I heard old sayings such as monks should abide by the rules, and I used these words to laugh at him, originally intended to embarrass him. Unexpectedly, he was not embarrassed at all, and immediately shouted at me in the "King Kong Angry Eyes" style:“和尚没有老婆，小菩萨那里来！？”
"The monk doesn't have a wife, where is the little bodhisattva!?"这真是所谓“狮吼”，使我明白了真理，哑口无言，我的确早看见寺里有丈余的大佛，有数尺或数寸的小菩萨，却从未想到他们为什么有大小。经此一喝，我才彻底的省悟了和尚有老婆的必要，以及一切小菩萨的来源，不再发生疑问。但要找寻三师兄，从此却艰难了一点，因为这位出家人，这时就有了三个家了：一是寺院，二是他的父母的家，三是他自己和女人的家。
I did see a big Buddha in the temple who was more than ten feet tall and a little bodhisattva a few feet or inches long, but I never thought why they were big. After drinking this, I completely realized the necessity of monks having wives and the source of all little bodhisattvas, and I no longer had any questions. But it was a little more difficult to find the third senior brother, because this monk had three homes at this time: one was the monastery, the second was his parents' home, and the third was his own and the woman's home.我的师父，在约略四十年前已经去世；师兄弟们大半做了一寺的住持；我们的交情是依然存在的，却久已彼此不通消息。但我想，他们一定早已各有一大批小菩萨，而且有些小菩萨又有小菩萨了。
My Master died about forty years ago; Most of the brothers became the abbots of a temple; Our friendship still exists, but we have not communicated with each other for a long time. But I think they must have already had a large number of small bodhisattvas, and some of them have little bodhisattvas.四月一日。
April 1st.

《海上述林》下卷序言

《海上述林》下卷序言

《海上述林》下卷序言

Preface to the second volume of "The Forest of the Sea"这一卷所收的，都是文学的作品：诗，剧本，小说。也都是翻译。
This volume contains literary works: poems, scripts, and novels. They are also translations.编辑时作为根据的，除《克里慕·萨慕京的生活》的残稿外，大抵是印本。只有《没工夫唾骂》曾据译者自己校过的印本改正几个错字。高尔基的早年创作也因为得到原稿校对，补入了几条注释，所可惜的是力图保存的《第十三篇关于列尔孟托夫的小说》的原稿终被遗失，印本上虽有可疑之处，也无从质证，而且连小引也恐怕和初稿未必完全一样了。
At the time of editing, except for the remnants of "The Life of Crimea Samutin", it was mostly printed. Only "No Time to Spit and Scold" has corrected a few typos according to the printed version proofread by the translator himself. Gorky's early work was also proofread by the original manuscript and added several notes, but unfortunately the original manuscript of the "Thirteenth Novel on Lermentov", which he tried to preserve, was finally lost, and although there were suspicions in the print, there was no way to verify it, and even the small quotations were probably not exactly the same as the first draft.译者采择翻译的底本，似乎并无条理。看起来：大约一是先要能够得到，二是看得可以发表，这才开手来翻译。而且有时也许还因了插图的引动，如雷赫台莱夫（B. A. Lekhterev）和巴尔多（R. Barto）的绘画，都曾为译者所爱玩，观最末一篇小说之前的小引，即可知。所以这里就不顾体例和上卷不同，凡原本所有的图画，也全数插入，——这，自然想借以增加读者的兴趣，但也有些所谓“悬剑空垅”的意思的。至于关于辞句的办法，却和上卷悉同，兹不赘。
The translator chooses the original text of the translation, which seems to be unorganized. It seems that one must first be able to obtain it, and the other must be able to be published, and then start translating. And sometimes perhaps because of illustrations, such as B. A. Lekhterev) and R. Barto's paintings have been loved by translators, as can be seen from the small introduction before the last novel. Therefore, regardless of the difference between the style and the previous volume, all the original pictures are also inserted,—— which naturally wants to increase the interest of readers, but there is also some so-called "hanging sword empty mound". As for the method of words and sentences, it is the same as the previous volume, and it will not be repeated.一九三六年四月末，编者。
At the end of April 1936, editor.

答托洛斯基派的信

答托洛斯基派的信

答托洛斯基派的信

Answer to the Trotskyist letter一　来信
1. Letter鲁迅先生：
Mr. Lu Xun:一九二七年革命失败后，中国康缪尼斯脱不采取退兵政策以预备再起，而乃转向军事投机。他们放弃了城市工作，命令党员在革命退潮后到处暴动，想在农民基础上制造Reds以打平天下。七八年来，几十万勇敢有为的青年，被这种政策所牺牲掉，使现在民族运动高涨之时，城市民众失掉革命的领袖，并把下次革命推远到难期的将来。
After the failure of the revolution in 1927, China's Communists did not adopt a policy of withdrawing troops to prepare for a resurgence, but turned to military speculation. They abandoned their work in the cities and ordered party members to riot everywhere after the ebb of the revolution, wanting to create Reds on the basis of the peasants to pacify the world. In the past seven or eight years, hundreds of thousands of brave and promising young people have been sacrificed by this policy, so that when the national movement is rising, the urban people have lost the leader of the revolution and pushed the next revolution far into the difficult future.现在Reds打天下的运动失败了。中国康缪尼斯脱又盲目地接受了莫斯科官僚的命令，转向所谓“新政策”。他们一反过去的行为，放弃阶级的立场，改换面目，发宣言，派代表交涉，要求与官僚，政客，军阀，甚而与民众的刽子手“联合战线”。藏匿了自己的旗帜，模糊了民众的认识，使民众认为官僚，政客，刽子手，都是民族革命者，都能抗日，其结果必然是把革命民众送交刽子手们，使再遭一次屠杀。史太林党的这种无耻背叛行为，使中国革命者都感到羞耻。
Now the Reds' campaign to fight the world has failed. China's Communistol blindly accepted the orders of the Moscow bureaucracy and turned to the so-called "new policy". They reversed their past behavior, abandoned their class positions, changed their faces, issued declarations, sent representatives to negotiate, and demanded a "united front" with bureaucrats, politicians, warlords, and even the executioners of the people. Hiding their own flags, blurring the people's understanding, making the people think that bureaucrats, politicians, and executioners are all national revolutionaries and can resist Japan, and the result will inevitably be to send the revolutionary people to the executioners and make them suffer another massacre. This shameless betrayal of the Stalin Party made all Chinese revolutionaries feel ashamed.现在上海的一般自由资产阶级与小资产阶级上层分子无不欢迎史太林党的这“新政策”。这是无足怪的。莫斯科的传统威信，中国Reds的流血史迹与现存力量——还有比这更值得利用的东西吗？可是史太林党的“新政策”越受欢迎，中国革命便越遭毒害。
Now the general liberal bourgeoisie and the upper class of the petty bourgeoisie in Shanghai all welcome this "new policy" of the Stalin Party. This is not surprising. Moscow's traditional prestige, the bloody history and existing power of the Chinese Reds – is there anything more worth tapping into than this? But the more popular Stalin's "new policy" was, the more poisoned the Chinese revolution became.我们这个团体，自一九三〇年后，在百般困苦的环境中，为我们的主张作不懈的斗争。大革命失败后我们即反对史太林派的盲动政策，而提出“革命的民主斗争”的道路。我们认为大革命既然失败了，一切只有再从头做起。我们不断地团结革命干部，研究革命理论，接受失败的教训，教育革命工人，期望在这反革命的艰苦时期，为下次革命打下坚固的基础。几年来的各种事变证明我们的政治路线与工作方法是正确的。我们反对史太林党的机会主义，盲动主义的政策与官僚党制，现在我们又坚决打击这叛背的“新政策”。但恰因为此，我们现在受到各投机分子与党官僚们的嫉视。这是幸呢，还是不幸？
Our community has fought tirelessly for our claims since 1930 under all kinds of difficult circumstances. After the failure of the Great Revolution, we opposed the blind movement policy of the Stalinists and proposed the path of "revolutionary democratic struggle". We believe that since the Great Revolution has failed, we can only start from scratch. We constantly unite revolutionary cadres, study revolutionary theories, accept the lessons of failure, educate revolutionary workers, and hope to lay a solid foundation for the next revolution during this difficult period of counter-revolution. Various events in the past few years have proved that our political line and working methods are correct. We oppose Stalin's opportunistic, blind policy and bureaucratic party system, and now we are resolutely fighting this rebellious "new policy". But it is precisely because of this that we are now envied by various opportunists and party bureaucrats. Is this fortunate or unfortunate?先生的学识文章与品格，是我十余年来所景仰的，在许多有思想的人都沉溺到个人主义的坑中时，先生独能本自己的见解奋斗不息！我们的政治意见，如能得到先生的批评，私心将引为光荣。现在送上近期刊物数份，敬乞收阅。如蒙赐复，请留存×处，三日之内当来领取。顺颂
Mr. Wang's knowledge, articles and character have been admired by me for more than ten years, and when many thoughtful people are indulging in the pit of individualism, he can struggle endlessly with his own opinions! If our political opinions can be criticized by Mr. Xiang, our selfishness will be honored. Now I send several copies of recent periodicals, please read them. If you are rewarded, please keep it in × place and come to collect it within three days. Shun Song健康！
Healthy!陈××六月三日。
Chen ×× June 3.

答托洛斯基派的信

二　回信

答托洛斯基派的信

2. Reply陈先生：
Mr. Chen:先生的来信及惠寄的《斗争》《火花》等刊物，我都收到了。
I received letters from my husband and publications such as "Struggle" and "Spark" sent by Hui.总括先生来信的意思，大概有两点，一是骂史太林先生们是官僚，再一是斥毛泽东先生们的“各派联合一致抗日”的主张为出卖革命。
The meaning of Mr. Sumbo's letter is probably twofold, one is to scold Mr. Stalin and others as bureaucrats, and the other is to denounce Mr. Mao Zedong's idea of "all factions uniting to resist Japan" as betraying the revolution.这很使我“糊涂”起来了，因为史太林先生们的苏维埃俄罗斯社会主义共和国联邦在世界上的任何方面的成功，不就说明了托洛斯基先生的被逐，飘泊，潦倒，以致“不得不”用敌人金钱的晚景的可怜么？现在的流浪，当与革命前西伯利亚的当年风味不同，因为那时怕连送一片面包的人也没有；但心境又当不同，这却因了现在苏联的成功。事实胜于雄辩，竟不料现在就来了如此无情面的讽刺的。其次，你们的“理论”确比毛泽东先生们高超得多，岂但得多，简直一是在天上，一是在地下。但高超固然是可敬佩的，无奈这高超又恰恰为日本侵略者所欢迎，则这高超仍不免要从天上掉下来，掉到地上最不干净的地方去。因为你们高超的理论为日本所欢迎，我看了你们印出的很整齐的刊物，就不禁为你们捏一把汗，在大众面前，倘若有人造一个攻击你们的谣，说日本人出钱叫你们办报，你们能够洗刷得很清楚么？这决不是因为从前你们中曾有人跟着别人骂过我拿卢布，现在就来这一手以报复。不是的，我还不至于这样下流，因为我不相信你们会下作到拿日本人钱来出报攻击毛泽东先生们的一致抗日论。你们决不会的。我只要敬告你们一声，你们的高超的理论，将不受中国大众所欢迎，你们的所为有背于中国人现在为人的道德。我要对你们讲的话，就仅仅这一点。
This makes me very "confused", because does not the success of Mr. Stalin's Union of Soviet Russian Socialist Republics in any aspect of the world explain the pity of Mr. Trotsky's expulsion, wandering, debauchery, and "desperation" to the point of "having to" use the enemy's money? The current wandering is different from the flavor of pre-revolutionary Siberia, because there was no one to give even a piece of bread; But the state of mind should be different, but this is due to the success of the Soviet Union now. Facts speak louder than words, and I didn't expect such a ruthless irony to come now. Secondly, your "theory" is indeed much more superb than Mr. Mao Zedong's, not only a lot, but one in the sky and the other underground. But Gao Chao is certainly admirable, but this superb is welcomed by the Japanese invaders, so this superb will inevitably fall from the sky and fall to the most unclean place on the ground. Because your superb theories are welcomed by Japan, I can't help but sweat for you when I read your very neat publications. This is by no means because some of you once followed others and scolded me for taking rubles, and now I will take revenge. No, I won't be so obscene, because I don't believe that you will use Japanese money to publish a newspaper to attack Mr. Mao Zedong's unanimous anti-Japanese theory. You will not. I just want to tell you that your superb theories will not be popular with the Chinese public, and your actions are contrary to the morality of the Chinese people now. That's all I have to say to you.最后，我倒感到一点不舒服，就是你们忽然寄信寄书给我，不是没有原因的。那就因为我的某几个“战友”曾指我是什么什么的原故。但我，即使怎样不行，自觉和你们总是相离很远的罢。那切切实实，足踏在地上，为着现在中国人的生存而流血奋斗者，我得引为同志，是自以为光荣的。要请你原谅，因为三日之期已过，你未必会再到那里去取，这信就公开作答了。即颂
In the end, I felt a little uncomfortable, that is, you suddenly sent me a letter, not without reason. That's because some of my "comrades-in-arms" once pointed out what I was. But I, no matter how bad it is, I feel that I am always far away from you. I have to introduce those who are real, on the ground, and shed blood for the survival of the Chinese people, and I am honored to be a comrade. I beg your forgiveness, because the three-day period has passed, and you may not go there to pick it up again, and this letter will be answered publicly. That is, the song大安。
Da'an.鲁迅。六月九日。
Lu Xun. June 9th.（这信由先生口授，O. V. 笔写。）
(This letter was dictated by Mr. O. V. and written by O. V.) ）

论现在我们的文学运动　——病中答访问者，O. V. 笔录

论现在我们的文学运动On Our Literary Movement ——病中答访问者，O. V. 笔录 - Answer to the Interviewer in Illness, O. V. Transcript
“左翼作家联盟”五六年来领导和战斗过来的，是无产阶级革命文学的运动。这文学和运动，一直发展着；到现在更具体底地，更实际斗争底地发展到民族革命战争的大众文学。民族革命战争的大众文学，是无产阶级革命文学的一发展，是无产革命文学在现在时候的真实的更广大的内容。这种文学，现在已经存在着，并且即将在这基础之上，再受着实际战斗生活的培养，开起烂缦的花来罢。因此，新的口号的提出，不能看作革命文学运动的停止，或者说“此路不通”了。所以，决非停止了历来的反对法西主义，反对一切反动者的血的斗争，而是将这斗争更深入，更扩大，更实际，更细微曲折，将斗争具体化到抗日反汉奸的斗争，将一切斗争汇合到抗日反汉奸斗争这总流里去。决非革命文学要放弃它的阶级的领导的责任，而是将它的责任更加重，更放大，重到和大到要使全民族，不分阶级和党派，一致去对外。这个民族的立场，才真是阶级的立场。托洛斯基的中国的徒孙们，似乎胡涂到连这一点都不懂的。但有些我的战友，竟也有在作相反的“美梦”者，我想，也是极胡涂的昏虫。
What the "Left Writers' Union" has led and fought for five or six years is the movement of proletarian revolutionary literature. This literature and movement have been developing; Now it has developed into popular literature of the national revolutionary war in a more specific and practical context. The popular literature of the national revolutionary war is a development of proletarian revolutionary literature and the real and broader content of proletarian revolutionary literature in the present time. This kind of literature already exists now, and it is about to be cultivated by actual combat life on this basis, and bloom rotten flowers. Therefore, the proposal of a new slogan cannot be regarded as the cessation of the revolutionary literary movement, or "this road is not passable". Therefore, it is by no means necessary to stop the traditional struggle against fascism and the blood of all reactionaries, but to deepen, expand, practical, and more subtle and tortuous this struggle, concretize the struggle to resist Japan and anti-traitors, and to converge all struggles into the general flow of the struggle against Japan and against traitors. It is by no means that revolutionary literature should give up its responsibility of class leadership, but that its responsibility should be heavier, magnified, and so heavy that it should make the whole nation, regardless of class and party, unanimously go to the outside world. The position of this nation is really the position of class. Trotsky's Chinese disciples seem to be so foolish that they don't even understand this. But some of my comrades-in-arms are actually making the opposite "sweet dream", and I think they are also very foolish insects.但民族革命战争的大众文学，正如无产革命文学的口号一样，大概是一个总的口号罢。在总口号之下，再提些随时应变的具体的口号，例如“国防文学”“救亡文学”“抗日文艺”……等等，我以为是无碍的。不但没有碍，并且是有益的，需要的。自然，太多了也使人头昏，浑乱。
But the popular literature of the national revolutionary war, like the slogan of the proletarian revolutionary literature, is probably a general slogan. Under the general slogan, there are some specific slogans that are ready to respond, such as "national defense literature", "salvation literature", and "anti-Japanese literature and art"...... Wait, I thought it was okay. Not only is it not a hindrance, but it is also beneficial and necessary. Naturally, too much can also make people dizzy and confused.不过，提口号，发空论，都十分容易办。但在批评上应用，在创作上实现，就有问题了。批评与创作都是实际工作。以过去的经验，我们的批评常流于标准太狭窄，看法太肤浅；我们的创作也常现出近于出题目做八股的弱点。所以我想现在应当特别注意这点：民族革命战争的大众文学决不是只局限于写义勇军打仗，学生请愿示威……等等的作品。这些当然是最好的，但不应这样狭窄。它广泛得多，广泛到包括描写现在中国各种生活和斗争的意识的一切文学。因为现在中国最大的问题，人人所共的问题，是民族生存的问题。所有一切生活（包含吃饭睡觉）都与这问题相关；例如吃饭可以和恋爱不相干，但目前中国人的吃饭和恋爱却都和日本侵略者多少有些关系，这是看一看满洲和华北的情形就可以明白的。而中国的唯一的出路，是全国一致对日的民族革命战争。懂得这一点，则作家观察生活，处理材料，就如理丝有绪；作者可以自由地去写工人，农民，学生，强盗，娼妓，穷人，阔佬，什么材料都可以，写出来都可以成为民族革命战争的大众文学。也无需在作品的后面有意地插一条民族革命战争的尾巴，翘起来当作旗子；因为我们需要的，不是作品后面添上去的口号和矫作的尾巴，而是那全部作品中的真实的生活，生龙活虎的战斗，跳动着的脉搏，思想和热情，等等。
However, it is very easy to raise slogans and make empty arguments. However, if it is applied in criticism and realized in creation, there is a problem. Criticism and creation are both practical work. Based on past experience, our criticism is often too narrow in standards and superficial views; Our creations often show weaknesses that are close to the eight strands of the topic. Therefore, I think we should pay special attention to this point now: the popular literature of the national revolutionary war is by no means limited to writing about the volunteer army fighting and student petitions and demonstrations...... and so on. These are certainly the best, but they should not be so narrow. It is much broader, including all literature that describes the various lives and struggles of China today. Because the biggest problem in China now, the problem common to everyone, is the problem of national survival. All life (including eating and sleeping) is related to this problem; For example, eating can have nothing to do with love, but at present, Chinese eating and love have something to do with the Japanese invaders, which can be understood by looking at the situation in Manchuria and North China. The only way out for China is the national revolutionary war against Japan unanimously. If you understand this, the writer will observe life and process materials as if he were in order; The author is free to write about workers, peasants, students, robbers, prostitutes, the poor, and the wealthy, and any material can be written, and it can become popular literature of the national revolutionary war. There is no need to deliberately insert a tail of the National Revolutionary War at the back of the work, and raise it as a flag; Because what we need is not the slogans and pretentious tails added to the back of the work, but the real life in the whole work, the lively battles, the beating pulse, thoughts and enthusiasm, and so on.六月十日。
June 10th.

《苏联版画集》序　——前大半见上面《记苏联版画展览会》，而将《附记》删去。再后便接下文：

《苏联版画集》序Preface to the "Collection of Soviet Prints" ——前大半见上面《记苏联版画展览会》，而将《附记》删去。再后便接下文： - most of the first half is seen in the "Record of the Soviet Print Exhibition" above, and the "Appendix" is deleted. Then continue the following:
右一篇，是本年二月间，苏联版画展览会在上海开会的时候，我写来登在《申报》上面的。这展览会对于中国给了不少的益处；我以为因此由幻想而入于脚踏实地的写实主义的大约会有许多人。良友图书公司要印一本画集，我听了非常高兴，所以当赵家璧先生希望我参加选择和写作序文的时候，我都毫不思索地答应了：这是我所愿意做，也应该做的。
The right article was written and published in the "Declaration" in February this year, when the Soviet Printmaking Exhibition was held in Shanghai. This exhibition has brought a lot of benefits to China; I thought that there would be many people who went from fantasy to down-to-earth realism. Liangyou Book Company wanted to print a collection of paintings, and I was very happy to hear it, so when Mr. Zhao Jiabi asked me to participate in the selection and writing the preface, I agreed without thinking: this is what I am willing to do and should do.参加选择绘画，尤其是版画，我是践了夙诺的，但后来却生了病，缠绵月余，什么事情也不能做了，写序之期早到，我却还连拿一张纸的力量也没有。停印等我，势所不能，只好仍取旧文，印在前面，聊以塞责。不过我自信其中之所说也还可以略供参考，要请读者见恕的是我竟偏在这时候生病，不能写出一点新的东西来。
I fulfilled my promise to participate in choosing painting, especially printmaking, but then I fell ill and lingered for more than a month, unable to do anything. Stop printing and wait for me, but I can't do it, so I have to take the old text and print it in front to relieve the blame. However, I am confident that what is said in it can also be used for a little reference, and I would like to ask readers to forgive me for being sick at this time and unable to write anything new.这一个月来，每天发热，发热中也有时记起了版画。我觉得这些作者，没有一个是潇洒，飘逸，伶俐，玲珑的。他们个个如广大的黑土的化身，有时简直显得笨重，自十月革命以后，开山的大师就忍饥，斗寒，以一个廓大镜和几把刀，不屈不挠的开拓了这一部门的艺术。这回虽然已是复制了，但大略尚存，我们可以看见，有那一幅不坚实，不恳切，或者是有取巧，弄乖的意思的呢？
For the past month, I have been fever every day, and I sometimes remember prints in the fever. I think none of these authors are chic, elegant, clever, and exquisite. Since the October Revolution, the masters of the mountain have endured hunger and cold, and with a large mirror and a few knives, they have indomitablely opened up the art of this department. Although it has been copied this time, the general idea still exists, and we can see that there is a picture that is not solid, not earnest, or has the meaning of being clever and well-behaved?我希望这集子的出世，对于中国的读者有好影响，不但可见苏联的艺术的成绩而已。
I hope that the publication of this collection will have a good impact on Chinese readers, not only to see the achievements of Soviet art.一九三六年六月二十三日，鲁迅述，许广平记。
June 23, 1936, Lu Xun narrated, Xu Guangping recorded.

半夏小集

半夏小集

半夏小集

Small collection of pinellia一
OneA：你们大家来品评一下罢，B竟蛮不讲理的把我的大衫剥去了！
A: You all come to evaluate it, but B actually stripped off my big shirt quite unreasonably!B：因为A还是不穿大衫好看。我剥它掉，是提拔他；要不然，我还不屑剥呢。
B: Because A still looks good without a big shirt. I stripped it off, to promote him; Otherwise, I wouldn't disdain to peel it off.A：不过我自己却以为还是穿着好……
A: But I think it's still good to wear......C：现在东北四省失掉了，你漫不管，只嚷你自己的大衫，你这利己主义者，你这猪猡！
C: Now that the four northeastern provinces have been lost, you don't care, just shout your own big shirt, you egoist, you pig!C太太：他竟毫不知道B先生是合作的好伴侣，这昏蛋！
Mrs. C: He didn't even know that Mr. B was a good partner to work with, this fool!

半夏小集

二

半夏小集

Two用笔和舌，将沦为异族的奴隶之苦告诉大家，自然是不错的，但要十分小心，不可使大家得着这样的结论：“那么，到底还不如我们似的做自己人的奴隶好。”
It is naturally good to tell everyone the pain of being a slave of a foreign race with a pen and tongue, but we must be very careful not to lead everyone to this conclusion: "Then, it is better to be a slave of our own than us." ”

半夏小集

三

半夏小集

Three“联合战线”之说一出，先前投敌的一批“革命作家”，就以“联合”的先觉者自居，渐渐出现了。纳款，通敌的鬼蜮行为，一到现在，就好像都是“前进”的光明事业。
As soon as the term "united front" came out, a group of "revolutionary writers" who had previously defected to the enemy regarded themselves as "united" preconceived and gradually appeared. The payment of money and the ghostly behavior of colluding with the enemy seem to be a bright cause of "moving forward" until now.

半夏小集

四

半夏小集

Four这是明亡后的事情。
This happened after the fall of the Ming Dynasty.凡活着的，有些出于心服，多数是被压服的。但活得最舒服横恣的是汉奸；而活得最清高，被人尊敬的，是痛骂汉奸的逸民。后来自己寿终林下，儿子已不妨应试去了，而且各有一个好父亲。至于默默抗战的烈士，却很少能有一个遗孤。
Those who are alive are convinced, and most of them are subdued. But the most comfortable and arrogant people are traitors; And the one who lives the most noble and is respected is the Yimin who scolds the traitors. Later, when he died in the forest, his son might as well take the exam, and each had a good father. As for the martyrs who silently resisted the war, they rarely had an orphan.我希望目前的文艺家，并没有古之逸民气。
I hope that the current writers and artists do not have the ancient folk spirit.

半夏小集

五

半夏小集

FiveA：B，我们当你是一个可靠的好人，所以几种关于革命的事情，都没有瞒了你。你怎么竟向敌人告密去了？
A: B, we treat you as a reliable and good person, so we have not hidden several things about the revolution from you. Why did you go to inform the enemy?B：岂有此理！怎么是告密！我说出来，是因为他们问了我呀。
B: How can this be reasonable? How is it a snitch! I said it because they asked me.A：你不能推说不知道吗？
A: Can't you say you don't know?B：什么话！我一生没有说过谎，我不是这种靠不住的人！
B: What! I have never lied in my life, I am not such an unreliable person!

半夏小集

六

半夏小集

SixA：阿呀，B先生，三年不见了！你对我一定失望了罢？……
A: Oh, Mr. B, I haven't seen you for three years! You must be disappointed in me, right?" ……B：没有的事……为什么？
B: Nothing...... Why?A：我那时对你说过，要到西湖上去做二万行的长诗，直到现在，一个字也没有，哈哈哈！
A: I told you at that time that I was going to go to West Lake to write a long poem of 20,000 lines, but until now, there is not a single word, hahaha!B：哦，……我可并没有失望。
B: Oh,...... I was not disappointed.A：您的“世故”可是进步了，谁都知道您记性好，“责人严”，不会这么随随便便的，您现在也学会了说谎。
A: Your "sophistication" has improved, everyone knows that you have a good memory, "strict responsibility", will not be so casual, and you have now learned to lie.B：我可并没有说谎。
B: I'm not lying.A：那么，您真的对我没有失望吗？
A: So, are you really not disappointed in me?B：唔，无所谓失不失望，因为我根本没有相信过你。
B: Well, it doesn't matter if you are disappointed or not, because I never believed you at all.

半夏小集

七

半夏小集

Seven庄生以为“在上为乌鸢食，在下为蝼蚁食”，死后的身体，大可随便处置，因为横竖结果都一样。
Zhuang Sheng thought that "the upper part is the food of the crow, and the lower part is the food of the ants", and the body after death can be disposed of casually, because the horizontal and vertical results are the same.我却没有这么旷达。假使我的血肉该喂动物，我情愿喂狮虎鹰隼，却一点也不给癞皮狗们吃。
I am not so open-minded. If my flesh and blood were to feed animals, I would rather feed ligers, tigers, eagles, and falcons, but not to the leper dogs at all.养肥了狮虎鹰隼，它们在天空，岩角，大漠，丛莽里是伟美的壮观，捕来放在动物园里，打死制成标本，也令人看了神旺，消去鄙吝的心。
Fed ligers, tigers, eagles, and falcons, they are magnificent and magnificent in the sky, rock corners, deserts, and thickets, and they are caught and placed in zoos, killed to make specimens, which also makes people look at the gods and eliminate the stingy heart.但养胖一群癞皮狗，只会乱钻，乱叫，可多么讨厌！
But raising a fat group of leprosy dogs will only drill and bark, how annoying!

半夏小集

八

半夏小集

Eight琪罗编辑圣·蒲孚的遗稿，名其一部为《我的毒》（Mes Poisons）；我从日译本上，看见了这样的一条：
Gilro edited St. Poof's posthumous manuscript and named one of them "Mes Poisons"; I saw this one from the Japanese translation:“明言着轻蔑什么人，并不是十足的轻蔑。惟沉默是最高的轻蔑。——我在这里说，也是多余的。”
"Clearly contemptuous of someone is not complete contempt. But silence is the highest contempt. - I say here that it is also superfluous. ”诚然，“无毒不丈夫”，形诸笔墨，却还不过是小毒。最高的轻蔑是无言，而且连眼珠也不转过去。
It is true that "no poison and no husband", in the form of pen and ink, is just a small poison. The highest contempt is speechlessness, and he doesn't even turn his eyes.

半夏小集

九

半夏小集

Nine作为缺点较多的人物的模特儿，被写入一部小说里，这人总以为是晦气的。
As a model for a character with many shortcomings, it is written into a novel, and this person always thinks it is bad luck.殊不知这并非大晦气，因为世间实在还有写不进小说里去的人。倘写进去，而又逼真，这小说便被毁坏。
As everyone knows, this is not bad luck, because there are really people in the world who can't write into novels. If it is written and realistic, the novel will be destroyed.譬如画家，他画蛇，画鳄鱼，画龟，画果子壳，画字纸篓，画垃圾堆，但没有谁画毛毛虫，画癞头疮，画鼻涕，画大便，就是一样的道理。
For example, a painter paints snakes, crocodiles, turtles, fruit shells, paper baskets, and garbage heaps, but no one draws caterpillars, leprosy, snot, or stool, which is the same principle.有人一知道我是写小说的，便回避我，我常想这样的劝止他，但可惜我的毒还不到这程度。
As soon as someone knew that I was writing a novel, they avoided me, and I often wanted to dissuade him like this, but unfortunately my poison was not to this extent.

“这也是生活”……

“这也是生活”……

“这也是生活”……

"This is also life"......这也是病中的事情。
This is also a sick thing.有一些事，健康者或病人是不觉得的，也许遇不到，也许太微细。到得大病初愈，就会经验到；在我，则疲劳之可怕和休息之舒适，就是两个好例子。我先前往往自负，从来不知道所谓疲劳。书桌面前有一把圆椅，坐着写字或用心的看书，是工作；旁边有一把藤躺椅，靠着谈天或随意的看报，便是休息；觉得两者并无很大的不同，而且往往以此自负。现在才知道是不对的，所以并无大不同者，乃是因为并未疲劳，也就是并未出力工作的缘故。
There are some things that healthy people or patients don't feel, maybe they can't encounter it, maybe it's too subtle. When you are just recovering from a serious illness, you will experience it; For me, the horror of fatigue and the comfort of rest are two good examples. I used to be conceited and never knew what fatigue meant. There is a round chair in front of the desk, sitting and writing or reading attentively, which is work; There is a rattan lounge chair next to it, relying on chatting or reading the newspaper at will, it is a rest; I feel that the two are not very different, and I am often conceited about it. Now I know that it is wrong, so there is no big difference, but because I am not tired, that is, I have not worked hard.我有一个亲戚的孩子，高中毕了业，却只好到袜厂里去做学徒，心情已经很不快活的了，而工作又很繁重，几乎一年到头，并无休息。他是好高的，不肯偷懒，支持了一年多。有一天，忽然坐倒了，对他的哥哥道：“我一点力气也没有了。”
I have a relative's child who graduated from high school, but had to go to the sock factory as an apprentice, and he was already in a very unhappy mood, and the work was very heavy, almost all year round, without rest. He was so tall that he refused to be lazy and supported him for more than a year. One day, he suddenly sat down and said to his brother: "I have no strength at all." ”他从此就站不起来，送回家里，躺着，不想饮食，不想动弹，不想言语，请了耶稣教堂的医生来看，说是全体什么病也没有，然而全体都疲乏了。也没有什么法子治。自然，连接而来的是静静的死。我也曾经有过两天这样的情形，但原因不同，他是做乏，我是病乏的。我的确什么欲望也没有，似乎一切都和我不相干，所有举动都是多事，我没有想到死，但也没有觉得生；这就是所谓“无欲望状态”，是死亡的第一步。曾有爱我者因此暗中下泪；然而我有转机了，我要喝一点汤水，我有时也看看四近的东西，如墙壁，苍蝇之类，此后才能觉得疲劳，才需要休息。
He couldn't stand up from then on, and was sent home, lying down, not wanting to eat, not move, not wanting to speak, and called the doctor of the Jesus Church to see him, saying that all of them were not sick, but they were all tired. There is no way to cure it. Naturally, what is connected is a quiet death. I also had a situation like this for two days, but for different reasons, he was tired and I was sick. I really have no desire, it seems that everything has nothing to do with me, all actions are meddlesome, I don't think of death, but I don't feel life; This is the so-called "desireless state" and is the first step to death. There were those who loved me who secretly wept because of this; However, I have a turnaround, I want to drink a little soup, and I sometimes look at things around me, such as walls, flies, etc., and then I feel tired and need to rest.象心纵意的躺倒，四肢一伸，大声打一个呵欠，又将全体放在适宜的位置上，然后弛懈了一切用力之点，这真是一种大享乐。在我是从来未曾享受过的。我想，强壮的，或者有福的人，恐怕也未曾享受过。
Xiangxin lay down casually, stretched out his limbs, yawned loudly, put them all in a suitable position, and then relaxed all the points of force, which was really a great pleasure. I have never enjoyed it before. I think that the strong, or blessed, have probably not enjoyed it.记得前年，也在病后，做了一篇《病后杂谈》，共五节，投给《文学》，但后四节无法发表，印出来只剩了头一节了。虽然文章前面明明有一个“一”字，此后突然而止，并无“二”“三”，仔细一想是就会觉得古怪的，但这不能要求于每一位读者，甚而至于不能希望于批评家。于是有人据这一节，下我断语道：“鲁迅是赞成生病的。”现在也许暂免这种灾难了，但我还不如先在这里声明一下：“我的话到这里还没有完。”
I remember that the year before last, also after my illness, I made a "Miscellaneous Talk after Illness", a total of five sections, and voted for "Literature", but the last four sections could not be published, and only the first section was printed. Although there is clearly a "one" word in front of the article, and then it stops abruptly, there is no "two" or "three", which is strange if you think about it carefully, but this cannot be required from every reader, and even cannot be hoped for by critics. So someone asserted me based on this verse: "Lu Xun is in favor of getting sick." "Now maybe this disaster is temporarily spared, but I might as well state here: "My words are not over here." ”有了转机之后四五天的夜里，我醒来了，喊醒了广平。
After the turnaround, I woke up and woke up Guangping.“给我喝一点水。并且去开开电灯，给我看来看去的看一下。”
"Give me a little water. And go turn on the light and show me what you can see. ”“为什么？……”她的声音有些惊慌，大约是以为我在讲昏话。
"Why? ......" Her voice was a little panicked, probably thinking that I was talking in a daze.“因为我要过活。你懂得么？这也是生活呀。我要看来看去的看一下。”
"Because I want to live. Do you understand? This is also life. I want to take a look. ”“哦……”她走起来，给我喝了几口茶，徘徊了一下，又轻轻的躺下了，不去开电灯。
"Oh......" She walked up, gave me a few sips of tea, wandered for a while, and lay down gently without turning on the light.我知道她没有懂得我的话。
I know she doesn't understand my words.街灯的光穿窗而入，屋子里显出微明，我大略一看，熟识的墙壁，壁端的棱线，熟识的书堆，堆边的未订的画集，外面的进行着的夜，无穷的远方，无数的人们，都和我有关。我存在着，我在生活，我将生活下去，我开始觉得自己更切实了，我有动作的欲望——但不久我又坠入了睡眠。
The light of the street lamp came in through the window, and the room was faintly bright, and I took a quick look, the familiar walls, the edges at the end of the walls, the familiar piles of books, the unordered art books on the edges of the piles, the night going on outside, the infinite distance, and countless people, all related to me. I exist, I live, I will live, I begin to feel more real, I have the desire to act—but soon I fall asleep again.第二天早晨在日光中一看，果然，熟识的墙壁，熟识的书堆……这些，在平时，我也时常看它们的，其实是算作一种休息。但我们一向轻视这等事，纵使也是生活中的一片，却排在喝茶搔痒之下，或者简直不算一回事。我们所注意的是特别的精华，毫不在枝叶。给名人作传的人，也大抵一味铺张其特点，李白怎样做诗，怎样耍颠，拿破仑怎样打仗，怎样不睡觉，却不说他们怎样不耍颠，要睡觉。其实，一生中专门耍颠或不睡觉，是一定活不下去的，人之有时能耍颠和不睡觉，就因为倒是有时不耍颠和也睡觉的缘故。然而人们以为这些平凡的都是生活的渣滓，一看也不看。
The next morning, I looked at it in the daylight, and sure enough, the familiar walls, the familiar piles of books...... These, which I often look at, are actually a kind of rest. But we have always despised such things, even if they are a part of life, but they are ranked below the tickle of drinking tea, or it is not the same thing at all. What we pay attention to is the special essence, not the branches and leaves. People who write biographies for celebrities are also mostly extravagant, how Li Bai writes poetry, how he plays crazy, how Napoleon fights, how he doesn't sleep, but he doesn't say how they don't play crazy and want to sleep. In fact, if you play upside down or don't sleep in your life, you will definitely not be able to live, and people can sometimes play upside down and not sleep, just because sometimes they don't play upside down and sleep. However, people think that these ordinary things are the dregs of life and don't look at them at all.于是所见的人或事，就如盲人摸象，摸着了脚，即以为象的样子像柱子。中国古人，常欲得其“全”，就是制妇女用的“乌鸡白凤丸”，也将全鸡连毛血都收在丸药里，方法固然可笑，主意却是不错的。
So the people or things they see are like a blind man touching an elephant and touching his feet, thinking that the elephant looks like a pillar. The ancient Chinese often wanted to get its "whole", that is, to make the "black chicken and white phoenix pills" for women, and also collected the whole chicken even the hair and blood in the pills.删夷枝叶的人，决定得不到花果。
Those who cut off the branches and leaves decided not to get flowers and fruits.
为了不给我开电灯，我对于广平很不满，见人即加以攻击；到得自己能走动了，就去一翻她所看的刊物，果然，在我卧病期中，全是精华的刊物已经出得不少了，有些东西，后面虽然仍旧是“美容妙法”，“古木发光”，或者“尼姑之秘密”，但第一面却总有一点激昂慷慨的文章。作文已经有了“最中心之主题”：连义和拳时代和德国统帅瓦德西睡了一些时候的赛金花，也早已封为九天护国娘娘了。
In order not to turn on the lights for me, I was very dissatisfied with Guangping and attacked people when I saw them; When I was able to move around, I went to look through the publications she was reading, and sure enough, during my bedridden, there were already a lot of publications full of essence, and some things, although the back was still "beauty magic", "ancient wood glowing", or "nun's secret", but there was always a little passionate and generous article on the first side. The composition already has the "most central theme": Sai Jinhua, who slept with the German commander Wadesi for some time during the Boxer era, has already been named the Nine Heavens Protector of the Country.尤可惊服的是先前用《御香缥缈录》，把清朝的宫廷讲得津津有味的《申报》上的《春秋》，也已经时而大有不同，有一天竟在卷端的《点滴》里，教人当吃西瓜时，也该想到我们土地的被割碎，像这西瓜一样。自然，这是无时无地无事而不爱国，无可訾议的。但倘使我一面这样想，一面吃西瓜，我恐怕一定咽不下去，即使用劲咽下，也难免不能消化，在肚子里咕咚的响它好半天。这也未必是因为我病后神经衰弱的缘故。我想，倘若用西瓜作比，讲过国耻讲义，却立刻又会高高兴兴的把这西瓜吃下，成为血肉的营养的人，这人恐怕是有些麻木。对他无论讲什么讲义，都是毫无功效的。
What is particularly astonishing is that the "Spring and Autumn Annals" on the "Declaration", which previously used the "Imperial Fragrance Ethereal Record" to talk about the Qing Dynasty's court with relish, has also changed greatly from time to time, and one day in the "Bits and Drops" at the end of the volume, people should also think of our land being cut apart, like this watermelon. Naturally, this is unpatriotic and irreproachable all the time, place, and nothing. But if I think like this and eat watermelon at the same time, I am afraid I will not be able to swallow it, even if I swallow it vigorously, it will inevitably not be digested, and it will rumble in my stomach for a long time. This may not be because of my neurasthenia after my illness. I think that if you use watermelon as an analogy and talk about national humiliation, but immediately happily eat this watermelon and become a nourishing person for flesh and blood, I am afraid that this person will be a little numb. No matter what handouts he preached, it was useless.我没有当过义勇军，说不确切。但自己问：战士如吃西瓜，是否大抵有一面吃，一面想的仪式的呢？我想：未必有的。他大概只觉得口渴，要吃，味道好，却并不想到此外任何好听的大道理。吃过西瓜，精神一振，战斗起来就和喉干舌敝时候不同，所以吃西瓜和抗敌的确有关系，但和应该怎样想的上海设定的战略，却是不相干。这样整天哭丧着脸去吃喝，不多久，胃口就倒了，还抗什么敌。
I have never been a volunteer, not exactly. But I ask myself: If a soldier eats watermelon, does he probably have a ritual of eating and thinking about it at the same time? I think: not necessarily. He probably only felt thirsty, wanted to eat, and tasted good, but he didn't think of any other good truths. After eating watermelon, when you are in good spirits, you will fight differently than when your throat is dry, so eating watermelon does have something to do with resisting the enemy, but it has nothing to do with the strategy set by Shanghai that you should think. In this way, I cried and lost my face all day to eat and drink, and it didn't take long for my appetite to fall, and I still fought against the enemy.然而人往往喜欢说得稀奇古怪，连一个西瓜也不肯主张平平常常的吃下去。其实，战士的日常生活，是并不全部可歌可泣的，然而又无不和可歌可泣之部相关联，这才是实际上的战士。
However, people often like to say strange things, and they refuse to advocate eating even a watermelon normally. In fact, the daily life of a soldier is not all singable and weeping, but it is all related to the part that can be sung and wept, which is the actual warrior.八月二十三日。
August 23.

“立此存照”（一）

“立此存照”（一）

“立此存照”（一）

"Standing here" (1)晓角
Dawn corner海派《大公报》的《大公园地》上，有《非庵漫话》，八月二十五日的一篇，题为《太学生应试》，云：
In the "Grand Park Land" of the Shanghai school "Ta Kung Pao", there is "Non-An Manhua", an article on August 25, entitled "Taixue Students Take the Exam", saying:“这次太学生应试，国文题在文科的是：《士先器识而后文艺》，理科的是《拟南粤王复汉文帝书》，并把汉文帝遗南粤王赵佗书的原文附在题后。也许这个试题，对于现在的异动，不无见景生情之意。但是太学生对于这两个策论式的命题，很有些人摸不着头脑。有一位太学生在试卷上大书：‘汉文帝三字仿佛故识，但不知系汉高祖几代贤孙，答南粤王赵他，则素昧生平，无从说起。且回去用功，明年再见。’某试官见此生误佗为他，辄批其后云：‘汉高文帝爸，赵佗不是他；今年既不中，明年再来吧。’又一生在《士先器识而后文艺》题后，并未作文，仅书‘若见美人甘下拜，凡闻过失要回头’一联，掷笔出场而去。某试官批云：‘闻鼓鼙而思将帅之臣，临考试而动爱美之兴，幸该生尚能悬崖勒马，否则应打竹板四十，赶出场外。’是亦孤城落日中堪资谈助者。”
"This time, the students took the exam, and the Chinese question in the liberal arts was: "Scholars First Know and then Literature and Art", and the science subject was "The Book of the King of Nanyue to Restore Emperor Wen of Han", and the original text of Emperor Wen of Han's letter to Zhao Tuo, the King of Nanyue, was attached to the title. Perhaps this test question is not without the meaning of seeing the scene and feeling affection for the current changes. However, many students are confused about these two strategic propositions. A Taixue student wrote on the test paper: 'The three characters of Emperor Wen of Han seem to be old, but I don't know how many generations of virtuous grandsons of Han Gaozu are the virtuous grandsons of Han Gaozu, and I don't know the life of Zhao him, so I don't know what life he is, and I can't talk about it.' Let's go back and work hard, see you next year. When a certain examiner saw that this life was mistaken for him, he immediately commented on him: 'Father of Emperor Wen of Han, Zhao Tuo is not him; If you don't win this year, come back next year. After the title of "Scholars First Understand and Then Literature and Art", he did not write, only wrote the couplet 'If you see a beauty willing to bow, you must turn back when you hear your mistakes', and threw the pen out of the field. A certain examiner commented: 'Hearing the drum and thinking of the general's ministers, and moving the interest of the beauty before the exam, fortunately, the student can still rein in the cliff, otherwise he should hit the bamboo board forty times and be driven out of the field.' 'This is also a person who can help you talk about the sunset in the lonely city. ”寥寥三百余字耳，却已将学生对于旧学之空疏和官师态度之浮薄写尽，令人觉自言“歇后郑五作宰相，天下事可知”者，诚亦古之人不可及也。
寥寥三百余字耳，却已将学生对于旧学之空疏和官师态度之浮薄写尽，令人觉自言“歇后郑五作宰相，天下事可知”者，诚亦古之人不可及也。但国文亦良难：汉若无赵他，中华民国亦岂得有“太学生”哉。
但国文亦良难：汉若无赵他，中华民国亦岂得有“太学生”哉。

“立此存照”（二）

“立此存照”（二）

“立此存照”（二）

"Establish this photo" (2)晓角
Dawn corner《申报》（八月九日）载本地人盛阿大，有一养女，名杏珍，年十六岁，于六日忽然失踪，盛在家检点衣物，从杏珍之箱箧中发现他人寄与之情书一封，原文云：
"Declaration" (August 9) recorded that a local Sheng A Da, an adopted daughter, named Xingzhen, was sixteen years old, who suddenly disappeared on the 6th.“光阴如飞般的过去了，倏忽已六个月半矣，在此过程中，很是觉得闷闷的，然而细想真有无穷快乐在眼前矣，细算时日，不久快到我们的时候矣，请万事多多秘密为要，如有东西，有机会拿来，请你爱惜金钱，不久我们需要金钱应用，幸勿浪费，是幸，你的身体爱惜，我睡在床上思想你，早晨等在洋台上，看你开门，我多看见你芳影，很是快活，请你勿要想念，再会吧，日健，爱书，”
"Time has passed like flying, suddenly six and a half months, in the process, I feel very stuffy, but if I think about it, there is really infinite happiness in front of me, count the time, soon it will be our time, please keep a lot of secrets, if there is something, there is a chance to bring it, please cherish the money, soon we need money to use, fortunately, don't waste it, it is fortunate, your body cherishes, I sleep in bed thinking about you, wait on the terrace in the morning, watch you open the door, I see your shadow more, very happy, please don't miss it, goodbye, goodbye, I love books,"盛遂将信呈交捕房，不久果获诱拐者云云。
Sheng Sheng then handed the letter over to the arrest room, and soon the abductor was indeed captured.案这种事件，是不足为训的。但那一封信，却是十足道地的语录体情书，置之《宇宙风》中，也堪称佳作，可惜林语堂博士竟自赴美国讲学，不再顾念中国文风了。
This kind of incident is not worth teaching. But that letter is a completely authentic quotation style love letter, placed in "Cosmic Wind", it can also be called a masterpiece, but unfortunately Dr. Lin Yutang went to the United States to give lectures and no longer cared about Chinese literary style.现在录之于此，以备他日作《中国语录体文学史》者之采择，其作者，据《申报》云，乃法租界蒲石路四七九号协盛水果店伙无锡项三宝也。
It is now recorded here for future authors of "History of Chinese Literature", whose author, according to the "Declaration", is Xiang Sanbao of Wuxi, a member of the Xiesheng Fruit Shop, No. 479 Pushi Road, French Concession.

死

死

死

die当印造凯绥·珂勒惠支（Kaethe Kollwitz）所作版画的选集时，曾请史沫德黎（A. Smedley）女士做一篇序。自以为这请得非常合适，因为她们俩原极熟识的。不久做来了，又逼着茅盾先生译出，现已登在选集上。其中有这样的文字：
When printing an anthology of prints by Kaethe Kollwitz, A. Smedley was asked to Smedley) wrote a foreword. I thought it was very appropriate to invite them, because they were very familiar with each other. Soon after, he was forced to translate by Mr. Mao Dun, and it has now been published in the anthology. Among them is the following text:“许多年来，凯绥·珂勒惠支——她从没有一次利用过赠授给她的头衔——作了大量的画稿，速写，铅笔作的和钢笔作的速写，木刻，铜刻。把这些来研究，就表示着有二大主题支配着，她早年的主题是反抗，而晚年的是母爱，母性的保障，救济，以及死。而笼照于她所有的作品之上的，是受难的，悲剧的，以及保护被压迫者深切热情的意识。
"For many years, Kaiser Kölhuitsch – she never once used the title given to her – made a lot of drawings, sketches, pencil and pen sketches, woodcuts, and bronze engravings. Studying these means that there are two major themes dominating: the theme of her early years is resistance, and her later years are maternal love, maternal protection, relief, and death. And what shrouded all her works is suffering, tragedy, and a deep passion for protecting the oppressed.“有一次我问她：‘从前你用反抗的主题，但是现在你好像很有点抛不开死这观念。这是为什么呢？’用了深有所苦的语调，她回答道，‘也许因为我是一天一天老了！’……”
"I once asked her: 'In the past, you used to use the theme of resistance, but now you seem to be a little unable to get rid of the idea of death. Why is that? In a deeply bitter tone, she replied, 'Maybe it's because I'm getting older day by day!' ’……”我那时看到这里，就想了一想。算起来：她用“死”来做画材的时候，是一九一〇年顷；这时她不过四十三四岁。我今年的这“想了一想”，当然和年纪有关，但回忆十余年前，对于死却还没有感到这么深切。大约我们的生死久已被人们随意处置，认为无足重轻，所以自己也看得随随便便，不像欧洲人那样的认真了。有些外国人说，中国人最怕死。这其实是不确的，——但自然，每不免模模胡胡的死掉则有之。
When I saw this at that time, I thought about it. Counting up: When she used "death" as a painting material, it was around 1910; At this time, she was only forty-three or fourteen years old. My "thought about it" this year is of course related to my age, but recalling more than ten years ago, I still don't feel so deep about death. About our life and death have been disposed of at will for a long time, thinking that they are insignificant, so they also look at it casually, not as serious as Europeans. Some foreigners say that Chinese people are most afraid of death. This is actually inaccurate,—— but naturally, there are inevitable deaths.大家所相信的死后的状态，更助成了对于死的随便。谁都知道，我们中国人是相信有鬼（近时或谓之“灵魂”）的，既有鬼，则死掉之后，虽然已不是人，却还不失为鬼，总还不算是一无所有。不过设想中的做鬼的久暂，却因其人的生前的贫富而不同。穷人们是大抵以为死后就去轮回的，根源出于佛教。佛教所说的轮回，当然手续繁重，并不这么简单，但穷人往往无学，所以不明白。这就是使死罪犯人绑赴法场时，大叫“二十年后又是一条好汉”，面无惧色的原因。况且相传鬼的衣服，是和临终时一样的，穷人无好衣裳，做了鬼也决不怎么体面，实在远不如立刻投胎，化为赤条条的婴儿的上算。我们曾见谁家生了小孩，胎里就穿着叫化子或是游泳家的衣服的么？从来没有。这就好，从新来过。也许有人要问，既然相信轮回，那就说不定来生会堕入更穷苦的景况，或者简直是畜生道，更加可怕了。但我看他们是并不这样想的，他们确信自己并未造出该入畜生道的罪孽，他们从来没有能堕畜生道的地位，权势和金钱。
The state after death that everyone believes is even more conducive to the casualness of death. Everyone knows that we Chinese believe that there are ghosts (or "souls" in recent times), and if there are ghosts, after death, although they are no longer human, they are still ghosts, and they are not nothing. However, the envisioned duration of ghosting varies depending on the wealth and poverty of the person during his lifetime. Poor people probably think that they will be reincarnated after death, and their roots are from Buddhism. The reincarnation mentioned in Buddhism is, of course, complicated and not so simple, but the poor are often uneducated, so they do not understand. This is the reason why when death row inmates are tied up to the court, they shout "Twenty years later, he will be a good man again" without fear. Moreover, it is said that the clothes of ghosts are the same as when they are dying, poor people have no good clothes, and they are never very decent to be ghosts, which is far inferior to the calculation of immediately reincarnated and turned into a naked baby. Have we ever seen anyone give birth to a child wearing clothes called a child or a swimmer in the womb? Never. This is good, start over. Some people may ask, since they believe in reincarnation, they may fall into a poorer situation in the next life, or they may simply be in the animal path, which is even more terrifying. But I don't think they think so, they are convinced that they have not created the sins that should enter the animal path, and they have never been able to fall into the animal path, power, and money.然而有着地位，权势和金钱的人，却又并不觉得该堕畜生道；他们倒一面化为居士，准备成佛，一面自然也主张读经复古，兼做圣贤。他们像活着时候的超出人理一样，自以为死后也超出了轮回的。至于小有金钱的人，则虽然也不觉得该受轮回，但此外也别无雄才大略，只豫备安心做鬼。所以年纪一到五十上下，就给自己寻葬地，合寿材，又烧纸锭，先在冥中存储，生下子孙，每年可吃羹饭。这实在比做人还享福。假使我现在已经是鬼，在阳间又有好子孙，那么，又何必零星卖稿，或向北新书局去算账呢，只要很闲适的躺在楠木或阴沉木的棺材里，逢年逢节，就自有一桌盛馔和一堆国币摆在眼前了，岂不快哉！
However, people with status, power and money do not feel that they should fall into the beast path; On the one hand, they turned into laymen and prepared to become Buddhas, and on the other hand, they naturally advocated reading scriptures and being sages. They are beyond human reason when they are alive, and they think that they are beyond reincarnation after death. As for those who have a little money, although they do not feel that they should be reincarnated, they have no other talents and strategies, and they are only prepared to be ghosts with peace of mind. Therefore, when he is about fifty years old, he finds a burial place for himself, combines longevity materials, burns paper ingots, stores them in the underworld, gives birth to descendants, and can eat soup and rice every year. This is really more blessed than being a human being. If I am already a ghost now, and I have good descendants in the human world, then why bother to sell manuscripts sporadically, or go to the Beixin Bookstore to settle accounts, as long as I lie in a coffin made of nanmu or gloomy wood very leisurely, and during the New Year's and holidays, I will have a table of food and a bunch of national coins in front of me, isn't it happy!就大体而言，除极富贵者和冥律无关外，大抵穷人利于立即投胎，小康者利于长久做鬼。小康者的甘心做鬼，是因为鬼的生活（这两字大有语病，但我想不出适当的名词来），就是他还未过厌的人的生活的连续。阴间当然也有主宰者，而且极其严厉，公平，但对于他独独颇肯通融，也会收点礼物，恰如人间的好官一样。
Generally speaking, except for the extremely rich and the law of the underworld, most of the poor are conducive to immediate reincarnation, and the well-off are conducive to being ghosts for a long time. The willingness of the well-off to be a ghost is because the life of a ghost (these two words are very speech-sick, but I can't think of an appropriate term), that is, the continuation of the life of a person who has not yet been tired of it. Of course, there are also rulers in the underworld, and they are extremely strict and fair, but they are very accommodating to him, and they will also accept some gifts, just like a good official in the world.有一批人是随随便便，就是临终也恐怕不大想到的，我向来正是这随便党里的一个。三十年前学医的时候，曾经研究过灵魂的有无，结果是不知道；又研究过死亡是否苦痛，结果是不一律，后来也不再深究，忘记了。近十年中，有时也为了朋友的死，写点文章，不过好像并不想到自己。这两年来病特别多，一病也比较的长久，这才往往记起了年龄，自然，一面也为了有些作者们笔下的好意的或是恶意的不断的提示。
There is a group of people who are casual, even when they are dying, I am afraid they don't think of it, and I have always been one of this casual party. When I was studying medicine thirty years ago, I studied the existence of the soul, but I didn't know it. I also studied whether death was painful, but the results were not uniform, and I didn't delve into it and forgot about it. In the past ten years, I have sometimes written articles for the death of my friends, but I don't seem to think of myself. In the past two years, there have been many illnesses, and the first illness has been relatively long, so I often remember my age, naturally, and on the other hand, I also give good or malicious reminders from some authors.从去年起，每当病后休养，躺在藤躺椅上，每不免想到体力恢复后应该动手的事情：做什么文章，翻译或印行什么书籍。想定之后，就结束道：就是这样罢——但要赶快做。这“要赶快做”的想头，是为先前所没有的，就因为在不知不觉中，记得了自己的年龄。却从来没有直接的想到“死”。
Since last year, whenever I recuperate from illness and lie on a rattan lounger, I can't help but think about what I should do after recovering from my physical strength: what articles to do, what books to translate or print. After thinking about it, he ended: That's it - but do it quickly. This idea of "do it quickly" is something that has never existed before, because unconsciously, I remember my age. But I never thought of "death" directly.直到今年的大病，这才分明的引起关于死的豫想来。原先是仍如每次的生病一样，一任着日本的S医师的诊治的。他虽不是肺病专家，然而年纪大，经验多，从习医的时期说，是我的前辈，又极熟识，肯说话。自然，医师对于病人，纵使怎样熟识，说话是还是有限度的，但是他至少已经给了我两三回警告，不过我仍然不以为意，也没有转告别人。大约实在是日子太久，病象太险了的缘故罢，几个朋友暗自协商定局，请了美国的D医师来诊察了。他是在上海的唯一的欧洲的肺病专家，经过打诊，听诊之后，虽然誉我为最能抵抗疾病的典型的中国人，然而也宣告了我的就要灭亡；并且说，倘是欧洲人，则在五年前已经死掉。这判决使善感的朋友们下泪。我也没有请他开方，因为我想，他的医学从欧洲学来，一定没有学过给死了五年的病人开方的法子。然而D医师的诊断却实在是极准确的，后来我照了一张用X光透视的胸像，所见的景象，竟大抵和他的诊断相同。
It wasn't until this year's serious illness that it clearly aroused the idea of death. Originally, it was still the same as every illness, and it was diagnosed and treated by Dr. S in Japan. Although he is not a pulmonologist, he is old, has a lot of experience, and is my senior from the period of medical practice, and he is very familiar with it and willing to speak. Naturally, no matter how familiar the doctor is with the patient, there is still a limit to what he can say, but he has given me at least two or three warnings, but I still don't care and don't tell others. Probably because it was too long and the disease was too dangerous, a few friends secretly negotiated a decision and invited Dr. D from the United States to come for examination. He was the only European pulmonologist in Shanghai, and after consultation and auscultation, although he praised me as the typical Chinese who could resist the disease the most, he also announced that I was about to perish; And if it were a European, he would have died five years ago. The verdict brought tears to the eyes of the sympathetic friends. I didn't ask him to prescribe a prescription, because I thought that his medicine came from Europe, and he must not have learned how to prescribe a prescription to a patient who had been dead for five years. However, Dr. D's diagnosis was very accurate, and I later took a bust with X-rays, and what I saw was probably the same as his diagnosis.我并不怎么介意于他的宣告，但也受了些影响，日夜躺着，无力谈话，无力看书。连报纸也拿不动，又未曾炼到“心如古井”，就只好想，而从此竟有时要想到“死”了。不过所想的也并非“二十年后又是一条好汉”，或者怎样久住在楠木棺材里之类，而是临终之前的琐事。在这时候，我才确信，我是到底相信人死无鬼的。我只想到过写遗嘱，以为我倘曾贵为宫保，富有千万，儿子和女婿及其他一定早已逼我写好遗嘱了，现在却谁也不提起。但是，我也留下一张罢。当时好像很想定了一些，都是写给亲属的，其中有的是：
I didn't mind his announcement much, but I was also affected by it, lying down day and night, unable to talk, unable to read. I can't even hold the newspaper, and I haven't been able to refine "my heart is like an ancient well", so I have to think, and sometimes I have to think of "death" from now on. However, what I was thinking about was not "being a good man again in twenty years", or how to live in a nanmu coffin for a long time, but trivial matters before dying. At this time, I was convinced that I really believed that there are no ghosts in death. I only thought about writing a will, thinking that if I had been a palace protector and rich in tens of millions, my son, son-in-law and others would have forced me to write a will, but now no one mentions it. However, I will also leave one. At that time, it seemed that some of them were written to relatives, some of which were:一，不得因为丧事，收受任何人的一文钱。——但老朋友的，不在此例。
1. Do not accept a penny from anyone because of funerals. ——But old friends' are not like this.二，赶快收敛，埋掉，拉倒。
Second, quickly converge, bury it, and pull it down.三，不要做任何关于纪念的事情。
Third, don't do anything about commemoration.四，忘记我，管自己生活。——倘不，那就真是胡涂虫。
Fourth, forget me and take care of your own life. ——If not, then it's really a nonsense.五，孩子长大，倘无才能，可寻点小事情过活，万不可去做空头文学家或美术家。
Fifth, when children grow up, if they have no talent, they can find some small things to live, and they must not be empty writers or artists.六，别人应许给你的事物，不可当真。
6. Don't take what others promise you.七，损着别人的牙眼，却反对报复，主张宽容的人，万勿和他接近。
Seventh, those who damage other people's teeth and eyes, but oppose retaliation and advocate tolerance, should never approach him.此外自然还有，现在忘记了。只还记得在发热时，又曾想到欧洲人临死时，往往有一种仪式，是请别人宽恕，自己也宽恕了别人。我的怨敌可谓多矣，倘有新式的人问起我来，怎么回答呢？我想了一想，决定的是：让他们怨恨去，我也一个都不宽恕。
In addition, naturally, there is now, forgotten. I only remember that when I had a fever, I thought that when Europeans were dying, there was often a ritual to ask others to forgive, and I forgave others. I have many enemies, if someone asks me about a new style, how will I answer? I thought about it for a while, and what I decided: let them resent it, and I won't forgive anyone.但这仪式并未举行，遗嘱也没有写，不过默默的躺着，有时还发生更切迫的思想：原来这样就算是在死下去，倒也并不苦痛；但是，临终的一刹那，也许并不这样的罢；然而，一世只有一次，无论怎样，总是受得了的……。后来，却有了转机，好起来了。到现在，我想，这些大约并不是真的要死之前的情形，真的要死，是连这些想头也未必有的，但究竟如何，我也不知道。
But this ceremony was not held, and the will was not written, but lying silently, sometimes more urgent thoughts occurred: it turned out that even if I was dying, it would not be painful; However, at the moment of death, it may not be like this; However, there is only one time in a lifetime, no matter what, and it is always a ...... that can be endured. Later, there was a turnaround, and it got better. Up to now, I think that these are not the situation before I really die, and if I really want to die, I may not even have these thoughts, but I don't know how.九月五日。
September 5th.

女吊

女吊

女吊

Female mourning大概是明末的王思任说的罢：“会稽乃报仇雪耻之乡，非藏垢纳污之地！”这对于我们绍兴人很有光彩，我也很喜欢听到，或引用这两句话。但其实，是并不的确的；这地方，无论为那一样都可以用。
Probably Wang Siren at the end of the Ming Dynasty said: "Kuaiji is the hometown of revenge and shame, not a place to hide dirt and dirt!" This is very glorious for us Shaoxing people, and I also like to hear or quote these two sentences. But in fact, it is not true; This place can be used for that one.不过一般的绍兴人，并不像上海的“前进作家”那样憎恶报复，却也是事实。单就文艺而言，他们就在戏剧上创造了一个带复仇性的，比别的一切鬼魂更美，更强的鬼魂。这就是“女吊”。我以为绍兴有两种特色的鬼，一种是表现对于死的无可奈何，而且随随便便的“无常”，我已经在《朝华夕拾》里得了绍介给全国读者的光荣了，这回就轮到别一种。
However, it is also true that ordinary Shaoxing people do not hate revenge like the "forward writers" in Shanghai. As far as literature and art are concerned, they have created a vengeful ghost in the drama, more beautiful and stronger than all other ghosts. This is the "female hanging". I thought that Shaoxing had two characteristic ghosts, one was to show helplessness about death, and casual "impermanence", I had already won the glory of Shaojie to readers across the country in "Chaohua Xishi", and this time it was the turn of the other one.“女吊”也许是方言，翻成普通的白话，只好说是“女性的吊死鬼”。其实，在平时，说起“吊死鬼”，就已经含有“女性的”的意思的，因为投缳而死者，向来以妇人女子为最多。有一种蜘蛛，用一枝丝挂下自己的身体，悬在空中，《尔雅》上已谓之“蚬，缢女”，可见在周朝或汉朝，自经的已经大抵是女性了，所以那时不称它为男性的“缢夫”或中性的“缢者”。不过一到做“大戏”或“目连戏”的时候，我们便能在看客的嘴里听到“女吊”的称呼。也叫作“吊神”。横死的鬼魂而得到“神”的尊号的，我还没有发见过第二位，则其受民众之爱戴也可想。但为什么这时独要称她“女吊”呢？很容易解：因为在戏台上，也要有“男吊”出现了。
"Female hanging" may be a dialect, translated into ordinary vernacular, so it can only be said that it is "female hanging ghost". In fact, in normal times, when it comes to "hanging ghosts", it already contains the meaning of "female", and women have always been the most women who die because of hanging. There is a kind of spider that hangs its body with a piece of silk and hangs in the air, which has been called "clam, hanged woman" in "Erya", which shows that in the Zhou Dynasty or the Han Dynasty, the self-hanging was probably a woman, so it was not called a male "hanger" or a neutral "hanger" at that time. However, when it comes to doing "big drama" or "mulian drama", we can hear the name of "female hanging" in the mouths of the audience. It is also called "hanging god". I have not yet seen the second person who has been given the honorific title of "god" by the ghost of the sudden death, so it is conceivable that he is loved by the people. But why do you have to call her "female hanging" at this time? It's easy to understand: because on the stage, there must also be a "male hanger".我所知道的是四十年前的绍兴，那时没有达官显宦，所以未闻有专门为人（堂会？）的演剧。凡做戏，总带着一点社戏性，供着神位，是看戏的主体，人们去看，不过叨光。但“大戏”或“目连戏”所邀请的看客，范围可较广了，自然请神，而又请鬼，尤其是横死的怨鬼。所以仪式就更紧张，更严肃。一请怨鬼，仪式就格外紧张严肃，我觉得这道理是很有趣的。
What I know is Shaoxing forty years ago, when there were no dignitaries and eunuchs, so I have never heard of anyone specializing in people (hall meetings?). ) play. Whenever a play is made, it always has a bit of social drama, offering the divine position, which is the main body of watching the play, and people go to see it, but it is just a waste of time. However, the spectators invited by the "big opera" or "Mulian opera" can be wider, and they naturally invite gods and ghosts, especially the resentful ghosts who die suddenly. Therefore, the ceremony is more tense and serious. When the ghost is invited, the ceremony is particularly tense and serious, which I think is very interesting.也许我在别处已经写过。“大戏”和“目连”，虽然同是演给神，人，鬼看的戏文，但两者又很不同。不同之点：一在演员，前者是专门的戏子，后者则是临时集合的Amateur——农民和工人；一在剧本，前者有许多种，后者却好歹总只演一本《目连救母记》。然而开场的“起殇”，中间的鬼魂时时出现，收场的好人升天，恶人落地狱，是两者都一样的。
Maybe I've already written about it elsewhere. "Big Opera" and "Mulian", although they are both dramas for gods, people, and ghosts, they are very different. The differences are: one is the actors, the former is a special actor, and the latter is a temporary collection of Amateur - peasants and workers; One is in the script, the former has many kinds, but the latter always only acts in one "Mu Lian Saves Mother". However, in the opening "Rising Death", the ghost in the middle appears from time to time, and the good guy at the end ascends to heaven and the evil person goes to hell, which is the same for both.当没有开场之前，就可看出这并非普通的社戏，为的是台两旁早已挂满了纸帽，就是高长虹之所谓“纸糊的假冠”，是给神道和鬼魂戴的。所以凡内行人，缓缓的吃过夜饭，喝过茶，闲闲而去，只要看挂着的帽子，就能知道什么鬼神已经出现。因为这戏开场较早，“起殇”在太阳落尽时候，所以饭后去看，一定是做了好一会了，但都不是精彩的部分。“起殇”者，绍兴人现已大抵误解为“起丧”，以为就是召鬼，其实是专限于横死者的。《九歌》中的《国殇》云：“身既死兮神以灵，魂魄毅兮为鬼雄”，当然连战死者在内。明社垂绝，越人起义而死者不少，至清被称为叛贼，我们就这样的一同招待他们的英灵。在薄暮中，十几匹马，站在台下了；戏子扮好一个鬼王，蓝面鳞纹，手执钢叉，还得有十几名鬼卒，则普通的孩子都可以应募。我在十余岁时候，就曾经充过这样的义勇鬼，爬上台去，说明志愿，他们就给在脸上涂上几笔彩色，交付一柄钢叉。待到有十多人了，即一拥上马，疾驰到野外的许多无主孤坟之处，环绕三匝，下马大叫，将钢叉用力的连连掷刺在坟墓上，然后拔叉驰回，上了前台，一同大叫一声，将钢叉一掷，钉在台板上。我们的责任，这就算完结，洗脸下台，可以回家了，但倘被父母所知，往往不免挨一顿竹篠（这是绍兴打孩子的最普通的东西），一以罚其带着鬼气，二以贺其没有跌死，但我却幸而从来没有被觉察，也许是因为得了恶鬼保佑的缘故罢。
Before the opening, it can be seen that this is not an ordinary social drama, because the stage is already covered with paper hats, which is Gao Changhong's so-called "fake crown of paper paste", which is worn for Shinto and ghosts. Therefore, all insiders, slowly eat overnight dinner, drink tea, and leisurely leave, just look at the hanging hat to know what ghosts and gods have appeared. Because this play starts early, "Rising and Falling" is when the sun sets, so if you go to see it after dinner, it must have been done for a while, but it is not the wonderful part. The "mourning" is now largely misunderstood by Shaoxing people as "mourning", thinking that it is to summon ghosts, but in fact it is limited to the tragic death. The "National Death" in the "Nine Songs" says: "The body is dead and the spirit is spiritual, and the soul is resolute as a ghost hero", of course, including the dead in battle. The Ming Society was dying, and many Yue people died in the uprising, and the Qing Dynasty was called a traitor, so we entertained their heroic spirits together. In the twilight, more than a dozen horses stood under the stage; The actor dressed up as a ghost king, with a blue face and scales, holding a steel fork, and there must be more than a dozen ghost soldiers, so ordinary children can enlist. When I was in my teens, I once acted as such a volunteer ghost, climbed onto the stage, and explained my volunteerism, and they painted a few colors on my face and handed me a steel fork. When there were more than ten people, they got on their horses, galloped to many ownerless and lonely graves in the wild, circled three times, dismounted and shouted, threw the steel fork hard and stabbed it on the grave, then pulled out the fork and galloped back, went to the front desk, shouted together, threw the steel fork, and nailed it to the table. Our responsibility, this is over, wash your face and step down, you can go home, but if your parents know about it, you will often have to be beaten with bamboo (this is the most ordinary thing in Shaoxing to beat children), one is to punish him for having ghostly energy, and the other is to congratulate him for not falling to death, but fortunately I have never been noticed, maybe because of the blessing of evil spirits.这一种仪式，就是说，种种孤魂厉鬼，已经跟着鬼王和鬼卒，前来和我们一同看戏了，但人们用不着担心，他们深知道理，这一夜决不丝毫作怪。于是戏文也接着开场，徐徐进行，人事之中，夹以出鬼：火烧鬼，淹死鬼，科场鬼（死在考场里的），虎伤鬼……孩子们也可以自由去扮，但这种没出息鬼，愿意去扮的并不多，看客也不将它当作一回事。一到“跳吊”时分——“跳”是动词，意义和“跳加官”之“跳”同——情形的松紧可就大不相同了。台上吹起悲凉的喇叭来，中央的横梁上，原有一团布，也在这时放下，长约戏台高度的五分之二。看客们都屏着气，台上就闯出一个不穿衣裤，只有一条犊鼻，面施几笔粉墨的男人，他就是“男吊”。一登台，径奔悬布，像蜘蛛的死守着蛛丝，也如结网，在这上面钻，挂。他用布吊着各处：腰，胁，胯下，肘弯，腿弯，后项窝……一共七七四十九处。最后才是脖子，但是并不真套进去的，两手扳着布，将颈子一伸，就跳下，走掉了。这“男吊”最不易跳，演目连戏时，独有这一个脚色须特请专门的戏子。那时的老年人告诉我，这也是最危险的时候，因为也许会招出真的“男吊”来。所以后台上一定要扮一个王灵官，一手捏诀，一手执鞭，目不转睛的看着一面照见前台的镜子。倘镜中见有两个，那么，一个就是真鬼了，他得立刻跳出去，用鞭将假鬼打落台下。假鬼一落台，就该跑到河边，洗去粉墨，挤在人丛中看戏，然后慢慢的回家。倘打得慢，他就会在戏台上吊死；洗得慢，真鬼也还会认识，跟住他。这挤在人丛中看自己们所做的戏，就如要人下野而念佛，或出洋游历一样，也正是一种缺少不得的过渡仪式。
This kind of ceremony, that is, all kinds of lonely ghosts, have followed the ghost king and ghost pawns to watch the play with us, but people don't need to worry, they know the reason, and they will never make any trouble this night. So the drama also began, slowly proceeding, and in the middle of the personnel, there were ghosts: burning ghosts, drowning ghosts, science ghosts (dying in the examination room), tiger injuring ghosts...... Children are also free to pretend, but there are not many people willing to pretend to be this kind of unpromising ghost, and the spectators do not take it seriously. When it comes to "jumping" - "jumping" is a verb, and the meaning is the same as "jumping" in "jumping and adding officials" - the tightness of the situation is very different. A sad trumpet blew on the stage, and on the beam in the center, there was originally a lump of cloth, which was also lowered at this time, about two-fifths of the height of the stage. The spectators held their breath, and a man with no clothes and pants, only a calf nose, and a few strokes of powder on his face broke out on the stage, he was the "male hanging". As soon as he stepped onto the stage, he ran straight to the hanging cloth, like a spider holding on to the silk, and also like a web, drilling and hanging on it. He hung it everywhere: waist, flanks, crotch, elbow bends, legs, back neck socket...... There are a total of seven seven forty-nine places. In the end, it was the neck, but it wasn't really put in, he grabbed the cloth with both hands, stretched his neck, jumped down, and walked away. This "male hanging" is the most difficult to jump, and when performing a drama, this is the only one that requires special actors. The elderly at that time told me that this was also the most dangerous time, because it might recruit real "male hangers". Therefore, you must pretend to be a Wang Lingguan backstage, pinching the spell in one hand and holding the whip in the other, staring intently at a mirror that reflects the front desk. If there are two in the mirror, then one is a real ghost, and he has to jump out immediately and knock the fake ghost off the stage with a whip. As soon as the fake ghost comes off the stage, he should run to the river, wash off the powder, huddle in the crowd to watch the play, and then slowly go home. if he fights slowly, he will hang himself on the stage; If you wash slowly, the real ghost will still know you, follow him. This crowding in the crowd to watch the play they are doing, like asking people to go to the wilderness to chant Buddha, or travel abroad, is also an indispensable transition ritual.这之后，就是“跳女吊”。自然先有悲凉的喇叭；少顷，门幕一掀，她出场了。大红衫子，黑色长背心，长发蓬松，颈挂两条纸锭，垂头，垂手，弯弯曲曲的走一个全台，内行人说：这是走了一个“心”字。为什么要走“心”字呢？我不明白。我只知道她何以要穿红衫。看王充的《论衡》，知道汉朝的鬼的颜色是红的，但再看后来的文字和图画，却又并无一定颜色，而在戏文里，穿红的则只有这“吊神”。意思是很容易了然的；因为她投缳之际，准备作厉鬼以复仇，红色较有阳气，易于和生人相接近，……绍兴的妇女，至今还偶有搽粉穿红之后，这才上吊的。自然，自杀是卑怯的行为，鬼魂报仇更不合于科学，但那些都是愚妇人，连字也不认识，敢请“前进”的文学家和“战斗”的勇士们不要十分生气罢。我真怕你们要变呆鸟。
After this, it is "jumping female hanging". Naturally, there is a sad trumpet first; After a while, the curtain lifted and she appeared. Big red shirt, long black vest, long hair fluffy, two paper ingots hanging around the neck, hanging head, hanging hands, walking a whole stage in a curved way, insiders said: This is a "heart" word. Why do you want to use the word "heart"? I don't understand. I only know why she wants to wear a red shirt. Looking at Wang Chong's "Lunheng", I know that the color of the ghosts of the Han Dynasty is red, but looking at the later texts and pictures, there is no certain color, and in the play, the only one wearing red is this "hanging god". The meaning is easy to understand; Because when she hanged herself, she was ready to be a ghost to take revenge, and red was more yang and easy to get close to strangers,...... Women in Shaoxing still occasionally hang themselves after wearing pink and red. Naturally, suicide is a cowardly act, and ghost revenge is even more unscientific, but those are foolish women, who don't even know the words, and dare not be very angry with the writers who "advance" and the warriors who "fight". I'm really afraid that you will become stupid birds.她将披着的头发向后一抖，人这才看清了脸孔：石灰一样白的圆脸，漆黑的浓眉，乌黑的眼眶，猩红的嘴唇。听说浙东的有几府的戏文里，吊神又拖着几寸长的假舌头，但在绍兴没有。不是我袒护故乡，我以为还是没有好；那么，比起现在将眼眶染成淡灰色的时式打扮来，可以说是更彻底，更可爱。不过下嘴角应该略略向上，使嘴巴成为三角形：这也不是丑模样。假使半夜之后，在薄暗中，远处隐约着一位这样的粉面朱唇，就是现在的我，也许会跑过去看看的，但自然，却未必就被诱惑得上吊。她两肩微耸，四顾，倾听，似惊，似喜，似怒，终于发出悲哀的声音，慢慢地唱道：
She shook her hair back, and then she saw the face: a round face as white as lime, thick black eyebrows, black eyes, and scarlet lips. I heard that in the dramas of several prefectures in eastern Zhejiang, the hanging god dragged a fake tongue several inches long, but not in Shaoxing. It's not that I protect my hometown, I think it's still not good; Then, compared to the current fashion style of dyeing the eyes gray, it can be said to be more thorough and cute. However, the lower corner of the mouth should be slightly upward, so that the mouth becomes a triangle: this is not an ugly appearance either. If after midnight, in the darkness, there is such a pink face and red lips vaguely in the distance, it is me now, I may run over to take a look, but naturally, I may not be tempted to hang myself. She shrugged her shoulders slightly, looked around, listened, seemed surprised, happy, angry, and finally made a sad voice and slowly sang:“奴奴本是杨家女，
"The slave was originally the daughter of the Yang family,呵呀，苦呀，天哪！……”
Oh, bitter, oh my God! ……”下文我不知道了。就是这一句，也还是刚从克士那里听来的。但那大略，是说后来去做童养媳，备受虐待，终于弄到投缳。唱完就听到远处的哭声，这也是一个女人，在衔冤悲泣，准备自杀。她万分惊喜，要去“讨替代”了，却不料突然跳出“男吊”来，主张应该他去讨。他们由争论而至动武，女的当然不敌，幸而王灵官虽然脸相并不漂亮，却是热烈的女权拥护家，就在危急之际出现，一鞭把男吊打死，放女的独去活动了。老年人告诉我说：古时候，是男女一样的要上吊的，自从王灵官打死了男吊神，才少有男人上吊；而且古时候，是身上有七七四十九处，都可以吊死的，自从王灵官打死了男吊神，致命处才只在脖子上。中国的鬼有些奇怪，好像是做鬼之后，也还是要死的，那时的名称，绍兴叫作“鬼里鬼”。但男吊既然早被王灵官打死，为什么现在“跳吊”，还会引出真的来呢？我不懂这道理，问问老年人，他们也讲说不明白。
I don't know the following. It was this sentence that I had just heard from Keshi. But the general idea is that she later became a child bride, was abused, and finally hanged. After singing, I heard crying in the distance, which was also a woman, crying with grievances and preparing to commit suicide. She was extremely surprised and wanted to "ask for a replacement", but unexpectedly she suddenly jumped out of the "male hanging" and insisted that he should beg for it. Fortunately, although Wang Lingguan's face was not beautiful, he was an enthusiastic supporter of feminism, and he appeared at a critical moment, beating the man to death with a whip and letting the woman go to work alone. The old man told me: In ancient times, men and women were the same to hang, and since Wang Lingguan killed the male hanging god, few men have hanged themselves; And in ancient times, there were seven seven and forty-nine places on the body, which could be hanged, and since Wang Lingguan killed the male hanging god, the fatal part was only on the neck. Chinese ghosts are a little strange, it seems that after becoming ghosts, they still have to die, and the name at that time, Shaoxing was called "ghost in the ghost". But since the male hanger was already beaten to death by Wang Lingguan, why does the "jumping hanging" now lead to the real one? I don't understand this truth, and if I ask the elderly, they don't understand.而且中国的鬼还有一种坏脾气，就是“讨替代”，这才完全是利己主义；倘不然，是可以十分坦然的和他们相处的。习俗相沿，虽女吊不免，她有时也单是“讨替代”，忘记了复仇。绍兴煮饭，多用铁锅，烧的是柴或草，烟煤一厚，火力就不灵了，因此我们就常在地上看见刮下的锅煤。但一定是散乱的，凡村姑乡妇，谁也决不肯省些力，把锅子伏在地面上，团团一刮，使烟煤落成一个黑圈子。这是因为吊神诱人的圈套，就用煤圈炼成的缘故。散掉烟煤，正是消极的抵制，不过为的是反对“讨替代”，并非因为怕她去报仇。被压迫者即使没有报复的毒心，也决无被报复的恐惧，只有明明暗暗，吸血吃肉的凶手或其帮闲们，这才赠人以“犯而勿校”或“勿念旧恶”的格言，——我到今年，也愈加看透了这些人面东西的秘密。
Moreover, Chinese ghosts also have a bad temper, that is, "asking for substitution", which is completely egoism; Otherwise, you can get along with them very calmly. The custom follows, although the woman hangs unavoidably, she sometimes only "asks for replacement" and forgets revenge. Shaoxing cooks, mostly use iron pots, burn firewood or grass, bituminous coal is thick, the firepower is not effective, so we often see scraped pot coal on the ground. But it must be scattered, and no one will save some effort from all village girls and village women, and put the pot on the ground and scrape it in clumps, so that the bituminous coal will fall into a black circle. This is because the tempting trap of the hanging god is made of coal rings. Scattering bituminous coal is a passive resistance, but it is to oppose "seeking replacement", not because she is afraid of revenge. Even if the oppressed do not have the poisonous heart of revenge, they will never have the fear of retaliation, only the murderers or their helpers who suck blood and eat flesh and eat flesh and light, this gives people the maxim of "do not commit crimes" or "do not remember old evils",—— I have seen more and more through the secrets of these faces and things.九月十九——二十日。
September 19-20.

“立此存照”（三）

“立此存照”（三）

“立此存照”（三）

"Establish this photo" (3)晓角
Dawn corner饱暖了的白人要搔痒的娱乐，但菲洲食人蛮俗和野兽影片已经看厌，我们黄脸低鼻的中国人就被搬上银幕来了。于是有所谓“辱华影片”事件，我们的爱国者，往往勃发了义愤。
The warm white people want to tickle the entertainment, but the cannibal barbarism and beast films in the Philippines are tired of watching, and our yellow-faced and low-nosed Chinese have been put on the screen. As a result, there was a so-called "insulting film" incident, and our patriots often broke out with righteous indignation.五六年前罢，因为《月宫盗宝》这片子，和范朋克大闹了一通，弄得不欢而散。但好像彼此到底都没有想到那片子上其实是蒙古王子，和我们不相干；而故事是出于《天方夜谈》的，也怪不得只是演员非导演的范朋克。
Five or six years ago, because of the film "Moon Palace Treasure Theft", I had a big fuss with Fan Punk and broke up unhappily. But it seems that neither of us thought that the film was actually a Mongolian prince and had nothing to do with us; And the story is from "Arabian Nights", no wonder it is just a fan punk who is an actor and not a director.不过我在这里，也并无替范朋克叫屈的意思。
But I'm here, and I don't mean to complain for Van Punk.今年所提起的《上海快车》事件，却比《盗宝》案切实得多了。我情愿做一回“文剪公”，因为事情和文章都有意思，太删节了怕会索然无味。首先，是九月二十日上海《大公报》内《大公俱乐部》上所载的，萧运先生的《冯史丹堡过沪再志》：
The "Shanghai Express" incident mentioned this year is much more practical than the "Treasure Theft" case. I would rather be a "literary scissor", because the things and articles are interesting, and if they are too abridged, I am afraid they will be boring. First of all, it is Mr. Xiao Yun's "Von Steinberg's Re-Chronicle of Crossing Shanghai and Re-Zhi" published in the "Ta Kung Pao" in Shanghai on September 20:“这几天，上海的电影界，忙于招待一位从美国来的贵宾，那便是派拉蒙公司的名导演约瑟夫·冯史丹堡（Josef von Sternberg），当一些人在热烈地欢迎他的时候，同时有许多人在向他攻击，因为他是辱华片《上海快车》（Shanghai Express）的导演人，他对于我国曾有过重大的侮蔑。这是令人难忘的一回事！
In the past few days, the film industry in Shanghai has been busy entertaining a VIP from the United States, that is, Josef von Sternberg, a famous director of Paramount Corporation, and while some people are warmly welcoming him, many people are attacking him because he is the director of the insulting film "Shanghai Express", and he has had a major insult to our country. It's a memorable thing!“说起《上海快车》，那是五年前的事了，上海正当一二八战事之后，一般人的敌忾心理还很敏锐，所以当这部歪曲了事实的好莱坞出品在上海出现时，大家不由都一致发出愤慨的呼声，像昙花一现地，这部影片只映了两天，便永远在我国人眼前消灭了。到了五年后的今日，这部片子的导演人还不能避免舆论的谴责。说不定经过了这回教训之后，冯史丹堡会明白，无理侮蔑他人是不值得的。
Speaking of "Shanghai Express", that was five years ago, Shanghai was just after the 128 War, and the hostility of ordinary people was still very sharp, so when this Hollywood production that distorted the facts appeared in Shanghai, everyone couldn't help but unanimously shout out indignation, like a short-lived flower, this film was only screened for two days, and it was forever eliminated in front of our country's eyes. Today, five years later, the director of this film cannot avoid public condemnation. Maybe after this lesson, von Steinberg will understand that it is not worth insulting others unreasonably.“拍《上海快车》的时候，冯史丹堡对于中国，可以说一点印象没有，中国是怎样的，他从来不晓得，所以他可以替自己辩护，这回侮辱中国，并非有意如此。但是现在，他到过中国了，他看过中国了，如果回好莱坞之后，他再会制出《上海快车》那样作品，那才不可恕呢。他在上海时对人说他对中国的印象很好，希望他这是真话。”（下略。）
"When filming "Shanghai Express", von Steinberg can be said to have no impression of China, he never knew what China was like, so he could defend himself, and this time he insulted China, not intentionally. But now, he has been to China, he has seen China, and if he returns to Hollywood, he will produce a work like "Shanghai Express", which is unforgivable. When he was in Shanghai, he told people that he had a good impression of China and hoped that he was telling the truth. (Omitted.) ）但是，究竟如何？不幸的是也是这天的《大公报》，而在《戏剧与电影》上，登有弃扬先生的《艺人访问记》，云：
But, exactly? Unfortunately, it was also the "Ta Kung Pao" on this day, and in "Drama and Film", Mr. Qi Yang's "Artist Interview" was published, saying:“以《上海快车》一片引起了中国人注意的导演人约瑟夫·冯史登堡氏，无疑，从这次的旅华后，一定会获得他的第二部所谓辱华的题材的。
Director Joseph von Sternberg, who attracted the attention of Chinese people with "Shanghai Express", will undoubtedly get his second so-called insulting theme from this trip to China.“‘中国人没有自知，《上海快车》所描写的，从此次的来华，益给了我不少证实……’不像一般来华的访问者，一到中国就改变了他原有的论调；冯史登堡氏确有着这样一种隽然的艺术家风度，这是很值得我们的敬佩的。”
"'Chinese didn't know it, and what 'Shanghai Express' described, from this visit to China, gave me a lot of confirmation......' Unlike ordinary visitors to China, he changed his original tone as soon as he arrived in China; von Sternberg does have such a brilliant artist demeanor, which is very worthy of our admiration. ”（中略。）
(Omitted.) ）“没有极正面去抗议《上海快车》这作品，只把他在美时和已来华后，对中日的感想来问了。
"There was no extremely positive protest against the work "Shanghai Express", but only asked about his feelings about China and Japan after coming to China in the United States and after coming to China.“不立刻置答，继而莞然地说：
Without answering immediately, he said with a smile:“‘在美时和已来华后，并没有什么不同，东方风味确然两样，日本的风景很好，中国的北平亦好，上海似乎太繁华了，苏州太旧，神秘的情调，确实是有的。许多访问者都以《上海快车》事来质问我，实际上，不必掩饰是确有其事的。现在是更留得了一个真切的印象。……我不带摄影机，但我的眼睛，是不会叫我忘记这一些的。’使我想起了数年前南京中山路，为了招待外宾而把茅棚拆除的故事。……”
"'After coming to China, there is no difference, the oriental flavor is indeed different, the scenery of Japan is very good, Peiping in China is also good, Shanghai seems to be too prosperous, Suzhou is too old, and the mysterious mood is indeed there. Many visitors have questioned me about the "Shanghai Express", but in fact, there is no need to hide that it is true. Now I have a real impression. …… I don't bring a camera, but my eyes won't make me forget these things. It reminded me of the story of Zhongshan Road in Nanjing a few years ago, when the thatched hut was demolished to entertain foreign guests. ……”原来他不但并不改悔，倒更加坚决了，怎样想着，便怎么说出，真有日耳曼人的好的一面的蛮风，我同意记者之所说：“值得我们的敬佩”。
It turned out that not only did he not repent, but he was even more resolute, and how he thought about it, how he said that there was really a good side of the Germanic side, and I agreed with what the reporter said: "It is worthy of our admiration".我们应该有“自知”之明，也该有知人之明：我们要知道他并不把中国的“舆论的谴责”放在心里，我们要知道中国的舆论究有多大的权威。
We should have the wisdom of "self-knowledge" and the wisdom of knowing people: we must know that he does not take China's "condemnation of public opinion" to heart, and we must know how authoritative China's public opinion is.“但是现在，他到过中国了，看过中国了”，“他在上海时对人说他对中国的印象很好”，据《访问记》，也确是“真话”。不过他说“好”的是北平，是地方，不是中国人，中国的地方，从他们看来，和人们已经几乎并无关系了。
"But now, he has been to China and seen China", "He told people in Shanghai that he had a good impression of China", according to the "Interview", it is indeed "true". However, what he said was "good" was Peiping, which was a place, not a Chinese, and the place in China had almost nothing to do with people from their point of view.况且我们其实也并无什么好的人事给他看。我看过关于冯史丹堡的文章，就去翻阅前一天的，十九日的报纸，也没有什么体面事，现在就剪两条电报在这里：
Besides, we don't actually have any good personnel to show him. I have read the article about von Steinberg, so I went to read the newspaper of the previous day, the 19th, and there is nothing decent, and now I will cut two telegrams here:“（北平十八日中央社电）平九一八纪念日，警宪戒备极严，晨六时起，保安侦缉两队全体出动，在各学校公共场所冲要街巷等处配置一切，严加监视，所有军警，并停止休息一日。全市空气颇呈紧张，但在平安中渡过。”
From 6 o'clock in the morning, all the security and investigation teams were dispatched to configure everything in the public places of each school, strictly monitor, and all military and police officers stopped resting for one day. The air in the city was quite tense, but it was safe. ”“（天津十八日下午十一时专电）本日傍晚，丰台日军突将二十九军驻防该处之冯治安部包围，勒令缴械，入夜尚在相持中。日军已自北平增兵赴丰台，详况不明。查月来日方迭请宋哲元部将冯部撤退，宋迄未允。”
(Tianjin 18 p.m. special telegram) This evening, the Fengtai Japanese army surrounded the Feng Public Security Department of the 29th Army stationed there, ordered them to disarm, and was still in a stalemate at night. The Japanese army has increased its troops from Beiping to Fengtai, but the details are unknown. Cha Yue came to Japan and asked Song Zheyuan's troops to retreat Feng's department, but Song did not agree. ”跳下一天，二十日的报上的电报：
Jump to the telegram in the newspaper on the 20th:“（丰台十九日同盟社电）十八日之丰台事件，于十九日上午九时半圆满解决，同时日本军解除包围形势，集合于车站前大坪，中国军亦同样整列该处，互释误会。”
The Fengtai incident on the 18th was successfully resolved at half past nine a.m. on the 19th, and at the same time, the Japanese army lifted the siege and gathered in Daping in front of the station, and the Chinese army also lined up there to resolve misunderstandings.再下一天，二十一日报上的电报：
The next day, the telegram on the 21st:“（北平二十日中央社电）丰台中日军误会解决后，双方当局为避免今后再发生同样事件，经详细研商，决将两军调至较远之地方，故我军原驻丰台之二营五连，已调驻丰台迤南之赵家村，驻丰日军附近，已无我军踪迹矣。”
After the misunderstanding between the Japanese army in Fengtai was resolved, the authorities of both sides decided to transfer the two armies to a farther place after detailed research and discussion in order to avoid the same incident in the future.我不知道现在冯史丹堡在那里，倘还在中国，也许要错认今年为“误会年”，十八日为“学生造反日”的罢。
I don't know if von Steinberg is there now, if he were still in China, he might mistakenly think that this year is the "Year of Misunderstanding" and that the 18th is "Student Rebellion Day".其实，中国人是并非“没有自知”之明的，缺点只在有些人安于“自欺”，由此并想“欺人”。譬如病人，患着浮肿，而讳疾忌医，但愿别人胡涂，误认他为肥胖。妄想既久，时而自己也觉得好像肥胖，并非浮肿；即使还是浮肿，也是一种特别的好浮肿，与众不同。如果有人，当面指明：这非肥胖，而是浮肿，且并不“好”，病而已矣。那么，他就失望，含羞，于是成怒，骂指明者，以为昏妄。然而还想吓他，骗他，又希望他畏惧主人的愤怒和骂詈，惴惴的再看一遍，细寻佳处，改口说这的确是肥胖。于是他得到安慰，高高兴兴，放心的浮肿着了。
In fact, Chinese people are not "self-aware", and the shortcoming is only that some people are content with "self-deception" and want to "deceive others". For example, a patient suffers from edema, but avoids illness and avoids doctors, hoping that others will mistakenly think that he is obese. After thinking about it for a long time, sometimes I feel like I am obese, not edema; Even if it is still puffy, it is a special good puffiness that is different. If someone points out to their face: this is not obesity, but edema, and it is not "good", it is just a disease. Then he was disappointed and shy, and became angry, and scolded the one who pointed out, thinking that he was foolish. However, he still wanted to scare him, deceive him, and hope that he would be afraid of his master's anger and scolding, so he looked at it again anxiously, looked for the good points, and changed his words to say that this was indeed obesity. So he was comforted, happy, and relieved and swollen.不看“辱华影片”，于自己是并无益处的，不过自己不看见，闭了眼睛浮肿着而已。但看了而不反省，却也并无益处。我至今还在希望有人翻出斯密斯的《支那人气质》来。看了这些，而自省，分析，明白那几点说的对，变革，挣扎，自做工夫，却不求别人的原谅和称赞，来证明究竟怎样的是中国人。
It is not beneficial to me not to watch the "insulting film", but I don't see it, I just close my eyes and swell. But it is not beneficial to read it without reflection. I still hope that someone will turn out Smith's "Chinese Temperament". After reading these, I introspected, analyzed, and understood that those points were right, change, struggle, and work on my own, but did not ask for forgiveness and praise from others to prove what kind of Chinese people were.

“立此存照”（四）

“立此存照”（四）

“立此存照”（四）

"Standing here" (4)晓角
Dawn corner近年的期刊有《越风》，撰人既非全是越人，所谈也非尽属越事，殊不知其命名之所以然。自然，今年是必须痛骂贰臣和汉奸的，十七期中，有高越天先生作的《贰臣汉奸的丑史和恶果》，第一节之末云：
In recent years, there is a journal "Yue Feng", and the author is not all Yue, and what he talks about is not all Yue, but he does not know why it is named. Naturally, this year must scold the second minister and the traitor, and in the seventeenth issue, there is Mr. Gao Yuetian's "The Ugly History and Evil Consequences of the Second Minister Traitor", which ends the first section:“明朝颇崇气节，所以亡国之际，忠臣义烈，殉节不屈的多不胜计，实为我汉族生色。但是同时汉奸贰臣，却也不少，最大汉奸吴三桂，贰臣洪承畴，这两个没廉耻的东西，我们今日闻名，还须掩鼻。其实他们在当时昧了良心努力讨好清廷，结果还是‘鸟尽弓藏，兔死狗烹’，真是愚不可及，大汉奸的下场尚且如此，许多次等汉奸，结果自更属可惨。……”
"The Ming Dynasty was quite upright and integral, so when the country was destroyed, there were countless loyal ministers and righteous martyrs, and there were countless martyrs, which really made my Han people colorful. But at the same time, there are many traitors and ministers, the biggest traitor Wu Sangui, the second minister Hong Chengchou, these two shameless things, we are famous today, and we have to cover our noses. In fact, they tried to please the Qing court without conscience at that time, but the result was still 'the birds are hidden, the rabbits are dead and the dogs are cooked', which is really foolish, and the fate of the big traitors is still like this, and the results of many traitors are even more miserable. ……”后又据《雪庵絮墨》，述清朝对于开创功臣，皆配享太庙，然无汉人之耿精忠，尚可喜，吴三桂，洪承畴四名，洪且由乾隆列之《贰臣传》之首，于是诫曰：
后又据《雪庵絮墨》，述清朝对于开创功臣，皆配享太庙，然无汉人之耿精忠，尚可喜，吴三桂，洪承畴四名，洪且由乾隆列之《贰臣传》之首，于是诫曰：“似这样丢脸的事情，我想不独含怨泉下的洪经略要大吃一惊，凡一班吃里爬外，枪口向内的狼鼠之辈，读此亦当憬然而悟矣。”
"Such a humiliating thing, I think not only Hong Jinglue under the resentment should be surprised, but all the wolves and rats who eat inside and crawl inside and the gun inward, should also realize this when they read this."这种训诫，是反问不得的。倘有不识时务者问：“如果那时并不‘鸟尽弓藏，兔死狗烹’，而且汉人也配享太庙，洪承畴不入《贰臣传》，则将如何？”我觉得颇费唇舌。
This kind of admonition cannot be asked again. If someone who doesn't know the current affairs asks: "What if it wasn't 'the birds are hidden, the rabbits are dead and the dogs are cooked', and the Han people are also worthy of the Grand Ancestral Temple, and Hong Chengchou is not included in the "Biography of the Second Minister"? "I think it's quite tongue-in-cheek.因为卫国和经商不同，值得与否，并不是第一着也。
Because defending the country and doing business are different, whether it is worth it or not is not the first thing.

“立此存照”（五）

“立此存照”（五）

“立此存照”（五）

"Establish this photo" (5)晓角
Dawn corner《社会日报》久不载《艺人腻事》了，上海《大公报》的《本埠增刊》上，却载起《文人腻事》来。“文”“腻”两音差多，事也并不全“腻”，这真叫作“一代不如一代”。但也常有意外的有趣文章，例如九月十五日的《张资平在女学生心中》条下，有记的是：
"Social Daily" has not published "Artist Tired Things" for a long time, but the "Local Port Supplement" of Shanghai's "Ta Kung Pao" has carried "Literati Tired Things". There is a lot of difference in the two sounds of "wen" and "greasy", and things are not all "tired", which is really called "one generation is not as good as a generation". But there are often unexpected and interesting articles, such as the article "Zhang Ziping in the Hearts of Female Students" on September 15, which records:“他虽然是一个恋爱小说作家，而他却是一个颇为精明方正的人物。并没有文学家那一种浪漫热情不负责任的习气，他之精明强干，恐怕在作家中找不出第二个来吧。胖胖的身材，矮矮的个子，穿着一身不合身材的西装，衬着他一付团团的黝黑的面孔，一手里经常的夹着一个大皮包，大有洋行大板公司经理的派头，可是，他的大皮包内没有支票账册，只有恋爱小说的原稿与大学里讲义。”
Although he is a love novel writer, he is a rather shrewd and upright character. He does not have the romantic enthusiasm and irresponsible habits of a writer, and he is shrewd and capable, so I am afraid that he will not be able to find a second among writers. Fat figure, short stature, wearing an ill-fitting suit, lining his round dark face, often holding a big leather bag in one hand, with the style of a manager of a foreign company, but there is no check account book in his big leather bag, only the original manuscript of love novels and university handouts. ”原意大约是要写他的“颇为精明方正的”，但恰恰画出了开乐群书店赚钱时代的张资平老板面孔。最妙的是“一手里经常夹着一个大皮包”，但其中“只有恋爱小说的原稿与大学里讲义”：都是可以赚钱的货色，至于“没有支票账册”，就活画了他用不着记账，和开支票付钱。所以当书店关门时，老板依然“一付团团的黝黑的面孔”，而有些卖稿或抽板税的作者，却成了一付尖尖的晦气色的面孔了。
The original intention was probably to write about his "quite shrewd and upright", but it just painted the face of Zhang Ziping's boss in the era of making money from Kailequn Bookstore. The best thing is that "he often has a big leather bag in his hand", but among them, "there are only the manuscripts of love novels and university handouts": they are all goods that can make money, as for "no check book", he doesn't need to keep accounts, and write checks to pay. So when the bookstore closed, the boss still had a "dark face", while some authors who sold manuscripts or collected board taxes became a sharp and unlucky face.

“立此存照”（六）

“立此存照”（六）

“立此存照”（六）

"Establish this photo" (6)晓角
Dawn corner崇祯八年（一六三五）新正，张献忠之一股陷安徽之巢县，秀水人沈国元在彼地，被斫不死，改名常，字存仲，作《再生纪异录》。今年春，上虞罗振常重校印行，改名《流寇陷巢记》，多此一改，怕是生意经了。其中有这样的文字：
In the eighth year of Chongzhen (1635), Zhang Xianzhong's share fell into Chao County, Anhui Province, and Shen Guoyuan, a native of Xiushui, was killed there, changed his name to Chang, and wrote the "Chronicle of Rebirth". In the spring of this year, Luo Zhenchang from Shangyu re-edited the printing and renamed it "The Story of the Bandits' Nest". Among them is the following text:“元宵夜，月光澄湛，皎如白日。邑前居民神堂火起，严大尹拜灭之；戒市人勿张灯。时余与友人薛希珍杨子乔同步街头，各有忧色，盖以贼锋甚锐，毫无防备，城不可守也。街谈巷议，无不言贼事，各以‘来了’二字，互相惊怖。及贼至，果齐声呼‘来了来了’：非市谶先兆乎？”
“元宵夜，月光澄湛，皎如白日。 邑前居民神堂火起，严大尹拜灭之；戒市人勿张灯。 时余与友人薛希珍杨子乔同步街头，各有忧色，盖以贼锋甚锐，毫无防备，城不可守也。 街谈巷议，无不言贼事，各以‘来了’二字，互相惊怖。 及贼至，果齐声呼‘来了来了’：非市谶先兆乎？”《热风》中有《来了》一则，臆测而已，这却是具象的实写；而贼自己也喊“来了”，则为《热风》作者所没有想到的。此理易明：“贼”即民耳，故逃与追不同，而所喊的话如一：易地则皆然。
There is a "Coming" in "Hot Wind", which is just speculation, but this is a concrete real writing; And the thief himself shouted "Here it comes", which was not expected by the author of "Hot Wind". This principle is easy to understand: "thieves" are the people, so fleeing is different from chasing, but the shouting is the same: the same is true for changing places.又云：
He also said:“二十二日，……余……匿金身后，即闻有相携而蹶者，有痛楚而呻者，有襁负而至者，一闻贼来，无地可入，真人生之绝境也。及贼徜徉而前，仅一人提刀斫地示威耳；有猛犬逐之，竟惧而走。……”
“二十二日，…… 余…… 匿金身后，即闻有相携而蹶者，有痛楚而呻者，有襁负而至者，一闻贼来，无地可入，真人生之绝境也。 及贼徜徉而前，仅一人提刀斫地示威耳；有猛犬逐之，竟惧而走。 ……”非经宋元明三朝的压迫，杀戮和麻醉，不能到这田地。民觉醒于四年前之春，而宋元明清之教养亦醒矣。
Without the oppression, killing and anesthesia of the Song, Yuan and Ming dynasties, you cannot reach this field. The people woke up in the spring of four years ago, and the education of the Song, Yuan, Ming and Qing dynasties also woke up.

“立此存照”（七）

“立此存照”（七）

“立此存照”（七）

"Standing on this photo" (7)晓角
Dawn corner近来的日报上作兴附“专刊”，有讲医药的，有讲文艺的，有谈跳舞的；还有“大学生专刊”，“中学生专刊”，自然也有“小学生”和“儿童专刊”；只有“幼稚园生专刊”和“婴儿专刊”，我还没有看见过。
Recently, there have been "special issues" in the daily newspaper, some talking about medicine, some talking about literature and art, and some talking about dancing; There are also "special issues for college students" and "special issues for middle school students", and naturally there are also "primary school students" and "children's special issues"; Only the "special issue for kindergarten students" and "special issue for babies", I have not seen it yet.九月二十七日，偶然看《申报》，遇到了《儿童专刊》，其中有一篇叫作《救救孩子！》，还有一篇“儿童作品”，教小朋友不要看无用的书籍，如果有工夫，“可以看些有用的儿童刊物，或则看看星期日《申报》出版的《儿童专刊》，那是可以增进我们儿童知识的”。
On September 27, I happened to read "Declaration" and came across the "Children's Special Issue", one of which was called "Save the Child! There is also a "children's work", teaching children not to read useless books, if there is work, "you can read some useful children's publications, or read the "Children's Special Issue" published by the "Declaration" on Sunday, which can enhance our children's knowledge."在手里的就是这《儿童专刊》，立刻去看第一篇。果然，发见了不忍删节的应时的名文：
In my hand, I have this "Children's Special Issue", and I immediately read the first article. Sure enough, I found a famous article that I couldn't bear to abridge:小学生们应有的认识
Primary school students should know梦苏
Meng Su最近一个月中，四川的成都，广东的北海，湖北的汉口，以及上海公共租界上，连续出了不幸的案件，便是日本侨民及水兵的被人杀害，国交显出分外严重的不安。
In the past month, there have been a series of unfortunate cases in Chengdu in Sichuan, Beihai in Guangdong, Hankou in Hubei, and in the Shanghai Public Concession, that is, the murder of Japanese expatriates and sailors.小朋友对于这种不幸的案件，作何感想？于我们民族前途的关系是极大的。
How do children feel about this unfortunate case? It has a great relationship with the future of our nation.国际的交涉，在非常时期，做国民的不可没有抗敌御侮的精神；但国交尚在常态的时期，却绝对不可有伤害外侨的越轨行动。倘若以个人的私忿，而杀害外侨，这比较杀害自国人民，罪加一等。因为被杀害的虽然是绝少数人，但会引起别国的误会，加重本国外交上的困难；甚至发生意外的纠纷，把整个民族复兴运动的步骤乱了。这种少数人无意识的轨外行动，实是国法的罪人，民族的败类。我们当引为大戒。要知道这种举动，和战士在战争时的杀敌致果，功罪是绝对相反的。
In international negotiations, in extraordinary times, the people must not have the spirit of resisting the enemy and resisting insults; However, when diplomatic relations are still normal, there must be no deviant actions that harm foreigners. If you kill foreigners out of personal anger, it is a crime that is higher than killing your own people. Because although the vast majority of people were killed, it would cause misunderstandings in other countries and aggravate the diplomatic difficulties of their own countries; There were even unexpected disputes, which disrupted the steps of the entire national revival movement. This kind of unconscious extraterrestrial action of a few people is actually a sinner of national law and a scum of the nation. We should take it as a great precept. You must know that this kind of action is absolutely opposite to the merits and demerits of soldiers killing the enemy during war.小朋友们！试想我们住在国外的侨民，倘使被别国人非法杀害，虽然我们没有兵舰派去登陆保侨，小题大做：我们政府不会提出严厉的要求，得不到丝毫公道的保障；但总禁不住我们同情的愤慨。
Children! Just imagine that if our expatriates living abroad are illegally killed by other people, even though we do not have warships to land and protect overseas Chinese, we will make a big fuss: our government will not make strict demands and will not receive the slightest guarantee of justice; But we can't help but feel the indignation of our sympathy.我们希望别国人民敬视我们的华侨，我们也当敬视任何的外侨；使伤害外侨的非法行为以后不再发生。这才是大国民的风度。
We hope that the people of other countries will respect our overseas Chinese, and we should also respect any foreigners; so that illegal acts of harming aliens will not occur in the future. This is the demeanor of a great nation.这“大国民的风度”非常之好，虽然那“总禁不住”“同情的愤慨”，还嫌过激一点，但就大体而言，是极有益于敦睦邦交的。不过我们站在中国人的立场上，却还“希望”我们对于自己，也有这“大国民的风度”，不要把自国的人民的生命价值，估计得只值外侨的一半，以至于“罪加一等”。主杀奴无罪，奴杀主重办的刑律，自从民国以来（呜呼，二十五年了！）不是早经废止了么？
Although the "can't help it" and "sympathetic indignation" are a bit excessive, on the whole, it is very beneficial to friendly diplomatic relations. However, from the standpoint of the Chinese, we still "hope" that we also have this "great national demeanor" for ourselves, and do not estimate the value of the lives of our own people to be only half of that of foreigners, so that "crime is added to the first degree". Since the Republic of China (ah, twenty-five years!) Isn't it abolished long ago?真的要“救救孩子”。这“于我们民族前途的关系是极大的”！
It is really necessary to "save the child". This "has a great relationship with the future of our nation"!而这也是关于我们的子孙。大朋友，我们既然生着人头，努力来讲人话罢！
And it's about our children and grandchildren. Big friend, since we have human heads, let's try to speak human language!九月二十七日。
September 27th.

后记

后记

后记

postscript《且介亭杂文》共三集，一九三四和三五年的两本，由先生自己于三五年最末的两天编好了，只差未有重看一遍和标明格式。这，或者因为那时总不大健康，所以没有能够做到。
There are three volumes of "Qiejieting Miscellaneous Essays", two copies in 1934 and 35, which were compiled by Mr. himself on the last two days of 35, but they were not reread and marked in format. This, or because I was not very healthy at that time, I was not able to do it.一九三六年作的《末编》，先生自己把存稿放在一起的，是自第一篇至《曹靖华译〈苏联作家七人集〉序》。《因太炎先生而想起的二三事》，和《关于太炎先生二三事》，似乎同属姊妹篇，虽然当时因是未完稿而另外搁开，此刻也把它放在一起了。
In the "Final Compilation" written in 1936, Mr. himself put together the archived manuscripts, from the first article to the "Preface to Cao Jinghua's Translation of the Seven Collections of Soviet Writers". "Two or Three Things Reminded of Mr. Taiyan" and "Two or Three Things About Mr. Taiyan" seem to belong to the same sister chapter, although it was set aside because it was unfinished at the time, and it is also put together at this moment.《附集》的文章，收自《海燕》，《作家》，《现实文学》，《中流》等。《半夏小集》，《这也是生活》，《死》，《女吊》四篇，先生另外保存的，但都是这一年的文章，也就附在《末编》一起了。
The articles of "Supplementary Collection" are collected from "Haiyan", "Writer", "Realistic Literature", "Middle Stream", etc. "Banxia Collection", "This is also Life", "Death", and "Female Hanging" are four articles that Mr. saved separately, but they are all articles of this year, and they are attached to the "Last Compilation".先生在《白莽作〈孩儿塔〉序》中说：“一个人如果还有友情，那么，收存亡友的遗文真如捏着一团火，常要觉得寝食不安，给它企图流布的。”所以就不自量其浅陋，和排印，装订的草率，急于出版的罢。
Mr. said in the "Preface to Bai Mang's 'Children's Tower'": "If a person still has friendship, then the posthumous writings of living and deceased friends are really like pinching a fire, and they often feel restless and try to spread it. "So I don't think I'm shallow, and the typesetting and binding are sloppy, and I'm in a hurry to publish.这里重承好几位朋友的帮助，使这集子能够迅速付印。又蒙内山先生给予便利，得以销行，谨当深深表示谢意的。
With the help of several friends, this collection can be printed quickly. In addition, Mr. Meng Neishan gave me the convenience and was able to sell it, and I would like to express my deep gratitude.一九三七年六月二十五日，许广平记。

June 25, 1937, Xu Guangping Ji.

封面

书名页

版权信息

图书在版编目（CIP）数据
Books in Print (CIP) data
集外集/鲁迅著．—南京：译林出版社，2014.1
Collection of Extraordinary/Lu Xun.—Nanjing: Yilin Publishing House, 2014.1（鲁迅自编文集）
(Lu Xun's self-edited anthology)ISBN 978-7-5447-4586-4
ISBN 978-7-5447-4586-4
Ⅰ．①集…　Ⅱ．①鲁…　Ⅲ．①鲁迅著作-选集　Ⅳ．①I210.2
I..(1) Episode... II..(1) Lu... III..(1) Lu Xun's Writings-Anthology IV..(1)I210.2
中国版本图书馆CIP数据核字（2013）第250827号
China Version Library CIP Data Verification (2013) No. 250827
书　　名　集外集
Book title collection outer collection作　　者　鲁　迅
Author: Lu Xun责任编辑　陆元昶
Editor-in-charge: Lu Yuanchang特约编辑　史会美
Special editor Shi Huimei出版发行　凤凰出版传媒股份有限公司
Published and distributed by Phoenix Publishing and Media Co., Ltd译林出版社
Yilin Publishing House出版社地址　南京市湖南路1号A楼，邮编：210009
Publisher's address Building A, No. 1 Hunan Road, Nanjing, Zip Code: 210009电子信箱　yilin@yilin.com
E-mail yilin@yilin.com出版社网址　http://www.yilin.com
Publisher website http://www.yilin.com印　　刷　北京凯达印务有限公司
Printing Beijing Kaida Printing Co., Ltd开　　本　787×1092毫米　　1/32
Volume 787×1092 mm 1/32印　　张　5.75
Print 5.75字　　数　105千字
Word count: 105,000 words版　　次　2014年1月第1版　2014年1月第1次印刷
Edition January 2014 1st edition January 2014 1st printing标准书号　ISBN 978-7-5447-4586-4
ISBN 978-7-5447-4586-4定　　价　16.00元
The price is 16.00 yuan译林版图书若有印装错误可向承印厂调换

If there are printing errors in the translated version of the book, it can be exchanged with the printing factory

Table of Contents

目录

Table of Contents

directory序言 序言
一九〇三年 1903
斯巴达之魂 The soul of Sparta
说 说
一九一八年 1918
梦 dream
爱之神 God of love
桃花 peach blossom
他们的花园 their garden
人与时 People and time
渡河与引路 Crossing the Yellow River and leading the way
一九二四年 1924
“说不出” "I can't tell"
记杨树达君的袭来 记杨树达君的袭来
关于杨君袭来事件的辩正 Justification for Yang Jun's attack
烽话五则 Five beacon talks
“音乐”？ "Music"?
我来说“持中”的真相 Let me tell the truth of "holding the center"
一九二五年 1925
Petöfi Sándor的诗 Poem by Petöfi Sándor
咬嚼之余 After chewing
咬嚼未始“乏味” Chewing is not "boring"
杂语 Miscellaneous
编完写起 After compiling and writing
俄文译本《阿Q正传》序及著者自叙传略 The Russian translation of the "The Main Biography of Ah Q" and the author's autobiography and biography
田园思想 Pastoral thought
流言和谎话 流言和谎话
通信 correspondence
一九二六年 1926
《痴华鬘》题记 The inscription of "Foolish Hair"
《穷人》小引 "Poor Man" small introduction
通信（附来信） Communications (with letters)
一九二七年 1927
文艺与政治的歧途 The wrong path between literature and politics
一九二九年 In 1929
《近代世界短篇小说集》小引 A small introduction to the "Collection of Short Stories in the Modern World"
关于《关于红笑》 About "About Red Smile"
通讯（付来信） Communications (Letters to Fu)
一九三二年 1932
《淑姿的信》序 Preface to "Shuzi's Letter"
一九三三年 In 1933
选本 Anthology
诗 poem
哭范爱农（一九一三年） Crying Fan Ainong (1913)
送O．E．君携兰归国 送O．E．君携兰归国
无题（大野多钩棘）（一九三二年） Untitled (Ono has many hooks and thorns) (1932)
题《彷徨》（一九三二年） Titled "Wandering" (1932)
赠日本歌人（一九三二年） Tribute to Japanese Poets (1932)
无题（洞庭木落楚天高）（一九三二年） 无题（洞庭木落楚天高）（一九三二年）
湘灵歌（一九三二年） 湘灵歌（一九三二年）
二十二年元旦（一九三三年） 二十二年元旦（一九三三年）
自嘲（一九三三年） 自嘲（一九三三年）
悼丁君（一九三三年） 悼丁君（一九三三年）
阻郁达夫移家杭州（一九三三年） 阻郁达夫移家杭州（一九三三年）
题三义塔（一九三三年） Title Sanyi Pagoda (1933)
赠人二首（一九三四年） Two Gifts (1934)
附录 appendix
《奔流》编校后记（一——十一）（一九二八——一九二九年） Postscript to the editor of "Rush" (1-11) (1928-1929)
返回总目录 Return to the General Directory

序言

序言

序言

序言听说：中国的好作家是大抵“悔其少作”的，他在自定集子的时候，就将少年时代的作品尽力删除，或者简直全部烧掉。我想，这大约和现在的老成的少年，看见他婴儿时代的出屁股，衔手指的照相一样，自愧其幼稚，因而觉得有损于他现在的尊严，——于是以为倘使可以隐蔽，总还是隐蔽的好。但我对于自己的“少作”，愧则有之，悔却从来没有过。出屁股，衔手指的照相，当然是惹人发笑的，但自有婴年的天真，决非少年以至老年所能有。况且如果少时不作，到老恐怕也未必就能作，又怎么还知道悔呢？
I heard that good Chinese writers generally "regret their lack of work", and when they set their own collections, they try their best to delete their youthful works, or simply burn them all. I think this is about the same as the old boy now, who saw the photo of his buttocks sticking out and holding his finger when he was a baby, and felt that it was detrimental to his current dignity,—— so he thought that if he could hide it, it would always be better to hide. But I am ashamed of my "less work", but I have never regretted it. The photo of sticking out the buttocks and holding the finger is of course laughable, but the innocence of infancy is by no means something that teenagers and old age can have. Moreover, if you don't do it when you are young, you may not be able to do it when you are old, so how can you still know how to regret it?先前自己编了一本《坟》，还留存着许多文言文，就是这意思；这意思和方法，也一直至今没有变。但是，也有漏落的：是因为没有留存着底子，忘记了。也有故意删掉的：是或者因为看去好像抄译，却又年远失记，连自己也怀疑；或者因为不过对于一人，一时的事，和大局无关，情随事迁，无须再录；或者因为本不过开些玩笑，或是出于暂时的误解，几天之后，便无意义，不必留存了。
Previously, I compiled a book of "Tomb", and there are still many classical Chinese texts, which is what it means; This meaning and method have not changed to this day. However, there are also omissions: it is because there is no foundation left and forgotten. There are also those who are deliberately deleted: yes or because it looks like a copy, but it is old and forgets, and even I doubt it; Or because it is just for one person, a temporary matter has nothing to do with the overall situation, and the situation changes with the situation, so there is no need to record it again; Or because it was just a joke, or out of a temporary misunderstanding, after a few days, it was meaningless and did not need to be kept.但使我吃惊的是霁云先生竟抄下了这么一大堆，连三十多年前的时文，十多年前的新诗，也全在那里面。这真好像将我五十多年前的出屁股，衔手指的照相，装潢起来，并且给我自己和别人来赏鉴。连我自己也诧异那时的我的幼稚，而且近乎不识羞。但是，有什么法子呢？这的确是我的影像，——由它去罢。
But what surprised me was that Mr. Jiyun copied such a large number of them, even the current texts from more than 30 years ago and the new poems from more than ten years ago. This is really like decorating the photos of my buttocks and fingers more than fifty years ago, and giving them to myself and others to appreciate. Even I myself was surprised at my naivety at that time, and I was almost ashamed. But what can be done? This is indeed my image,—— let it go.不过看起来也引起我一点回忆。例如最先的两篇，就是我故意删掉的。一篇是“雷锭”的最初的绍介，一篇是斯巴达的尚武精神的描写，但我记得自己那时的化学和历史的程度并没有这样高，所以大概总是从什么地方偷来的，不过后来无论怎么记，也再也记不起它们的老家；而且我那时初学日文，文法并未了然，就急于看书，看书并不很懂，就急于翻译，所以那内容也就可疑得很。而且文章又多么古怪，尤其是那一篇《斯巴达之魂》，现在看起来，自己也不免耳朵发热。但这是当时的风气，要激昂慷慨，顿挫抑扬，才能被称为好文章，我还记得“被发大叫，抱书独行，无泪可挥，大风灭烛”是大家传诵的警句。但我的文章里，也有受着严又陵的影响的，例如“涅伏”，就是“神经”的腊丁语的音译，这是现在恐怕只有我自己懂得的了。以后又受了章太炎先生的影响，古了起来，但这集子里却一篇也没有。
But it also seems to evoke a little memory for me. For example, the first two articles were deliberately deleted by me. One is the initial introduction of "Thunder Ingot", and the other is a description of Sparta's martial spirit, but I remember that my chemistry and history at that time were not so high, so they were probably always stolen from somewhere, but no matter how I remember them later, I can no longer remember their hometown; And when I was new to Japanese, I didn't understand the grammar, so I was eager to read the book, and I didn't understand the book very well, so I was eager to translate, so the content was very suspicious. And how strange the article is, especially the "Soul of Sparta", now it seems that my ears are hot. But this was the atmosphere at that time, it was necessary to be passionate and generous, frustrated and intonated, in order to be called a good article, I still remember that "being screamed, holding a book alone, no tears to wave, strong wind extinguishing candles" is an aphorism recited by everyone. But in my articles, there are also those influenced by Yan Youling, such as "Nirvana", which is the transliteration of the Latin word for "nerve", which I am afraid only I understand now. Later, under the influence of Mr. Zhang Taiyan, it became ancient, but there was not a single one in this collection.以后回到中国来，还给日报之类做了些古文，自己不记得究竟是什么了，霁云先生也找不出，我真觉得侥幸得很。
When I returned to China in the future, I also made some ancient texts for daily newspapers and the like, but I don't remember what it was, and Mr. Jiyun couldn't find it, I really felt very lucky.以后是抄古碑。再做就是白话；也做了几首新诗。我其实是不喜欢做新诗的——但也不喜欢做古诗——只因为那时诗坛寂寞，所以打打边鼓，凑些热闹；待到称为诗人的一出现，就洗手不作了。我更不喜欢徐志摩那样的诗，而他偏爱到各处投稿，《语丝》一出版，他也就来了，有人赞成他，登了出来，我就做了一篇杂感，和他开一通玩笑，使他不能来，他也果然不来了。这是我和后来的“新月派”积仇的第一步；《语丝》社同人中有几位也因此很不高兴我。不过不知道为什么没有收在《热风》里，漏落，还是故意删掉的呢，已经记不清，幸而这集子里有，那就是了。
In the future, it will be a copy of ancient monuments. If you do it again, it will be vernacular; also made several new poems. I actually don't like to make new poems - but I don't like to make ancient poems - just because the poetry world was lonely at that time, so I played drums and joined in the fun; When the poet appears, he washes his hands and stops working. I don't like poems like Xu Zhimo even more, and he prefers to submit everywhere, as soon as "Yusi" was published, he came, someone approved of him, and he posted it, so I made a miscellaneous feeling and made a joke with him, so that he couldn't come, and he really didn't come. This was the first step in my feud with the later "Crescent Sect"; Several of the "Yusi" fandom members were also very unhappy with me. But I don't know why it was not included in "Hot Wind", it was omitted, or it was deliberately deleted, I can't remember clearly, but fortunately there is it in this episode, that's it.只有几篇讲演，是现在故意删去的。我曾经能讲书，却不善于讲演，这已经是大可不必保存的了。而记录的人，或者为了方音的不同，听不很懂，于是漏落，错误；或者为了意见的不同，取舍因而不确，我以为要紧的，他并不记录，遇到空话，却详详细细记了一大通；有些则简直好像是恶意的捏造，意思和我所说的正是相反的。凡这些，我只好当作记录者自己的创作，都将它由我这里删掉。
There are only a few lectures, which are now deliberately deleted. I used to be able to lecture, but I was not good at speaking, which is no longer necessary to save. And the person who recorded, or because of the difference in square sound, did not understand very well, so he omitted and made a mistake; Or because of the difference of opinion, the choice is inaccurate, I think it is important, he does not record, encounters empty words, but remembers a lot in detail; Some seem to be malicious fabrications, meaning exactly the opposite of what I said. All of this, I had to delete it from me as the recorder's own creation.我惭愧我的少年之作，却并不后悔，甚而至于还有些爱，这真好像是“乳犊不怕虎”，乱攻一通，虽然无谋，但自有天真存在。现在是比较的精细了，然而我又别有其不满于自己之处。我佩服会用拖刀计的老将黄汉升，但我爱莽撞的不顾利害而终于被部下偷了头去的张翼德；我却又憎恶张翼德型的不问青红皂白，抡板斧“排头砍去”的李逵，我因此喜欢张顺的将他诱进水里去，淹得他两眼翻白。
I am ashamed of my youthful work, but I don't regret it, and even have some love, which is really like "the calf is not afraid of tigers", and the attack is indiscriminate, although there is no strategy, but there is innocence. Now it's more refined, but I have other dissatisfactions with myself. I admire the veteran Huang Hansheng who can use a drag knife, but I love Zhang Yide, who was reckless and finally stolen by his subordinates regardless of interests; But I hate Zhang Yide's type of Li Kui, who doesn't care about red and white, and "chops the head of the line" with an axe, so I like Zhang Shun to lure him into the water, drowning his eyes to roll.一九三四年十二月二十日夜，鲁迅记于上海之卓面书斋。
On the night of December 20, 1934, Lu Xun recorded in the Zhuo Facebook study in Shanghai.

一九〇三年

一九〇三年

一九〇三年

1903

一九〇三年

斯巴达之魂

一九〇三年

The soul of Sparta西历纪元前四百八十年，波斯王泽耳士大举侵希腊。斯巴达王黎河尼佗将市民三百，同盟军数千，扼温泉门（德尔摩比勒）。敌由间道至。斯巴达将士殊死战，全军歼焉。兵气萧森，鬼雄昼啸，迨浦累皆之役，大仇斯复，迄今读史，犹懔懔有生气也。我今掇其逸事，贻我青年。呜呼！世有不甘自下于巾帼之男子乎？必有掷笔而起者矣。译者无文，不足摸拟其万一。噫，吾辱读者，吾辱斯巴达之魂！
西历纪元前四百八十年，波斯王泽耳士大举侵希腊。 斯巴达王黎河尼佗将市民三百，同盟军数千，扼温泉门（德尔摩比勒）。 敌由间道至。 斯巴达将士殊死战，全军歼焉。 兵气萧森，鬼雄昼啸，迨浦累皆之役，大仇斯复，迄今读史，犹懔懔有生气也。 我今掇其逸事，贻我青年。 呜呼！世有不甘自下于巾帼之男子乎？必有掷笔而起者矣。 译者无文，不足摸拟其万一。 噫，吾辱读者，吾辱斯巴达之魂！依格那海上之曙色，潜入摩利逊之湾，衣驮第一峰之宿云，亦冉冉呈霁色。湾山之间，温泉门石垒之后，大无畏大无敌之希腊军，置黎河尼佗王麾下之七千希腊同盟军，露刃枕戈，以待天曙。而孰知波斯军数万，已乘深夜，得间道，拂晓而达衣驮山之绝顶。趁朝暾之瑟然，偷守兵之微睡。如长蛇赴壑，蜿蜒以逾峰后。
依格那海上之曙色，潜入摩利逊之湾，衣驮第一峰之宿云，亦冉冉呈霁色。 湾山之间，温泉门石垒之后，大无畏大无敌之希腊军，置黎河尼佗王麾下之七千希腊同盟军，露刃枕戈，以待天曙。 而孰知波斯军数万，已乘深夜，得间道，拂晓而达衣驮山之绝顶。 趁朝暾之瑟然，偷守兵之微睡。 如长蛇赴壑，蜿蜒以逾峰后。旭日最初之光线，今也闪闪射垒角，照此淋漓欲滴之碧血，其语人以昨日战争之烈兮。垒外死士之残甲累累成阜，上刻波斯文“不死军”三字，其示人以昨日敌军之败绩兮。然大军三百万，夫岂惩此败北，夫岂消其锐气。噫嘻，今日血战哉！血战哉！黎河尼佗终夜防御，以待袭来。然天既曙而敌竟杳，敌幕之乌，向初日而噪，众军大惧；而果也斥候于不及防之地，赍不及防之警报至。
旭日最初之光线，今也闪闪射垒角，照此淋漓欲滴之碧血，其语人以昨日战争之烈兮。 垒外死士之残甲累累成阜，上刻波斯文“不死军”三字，其示人以昨日敌军之败绩兮。 然大军三百万，夫岂惩此败北，夫岂消其锐气。 噫嘻，今日血战哉！血战哉！黎河尼佗终夜防御，以待袭来。 然天既曙而敌竟杳，敌幕之乌，向初日而噪，众军大惧；而果也斥候于不及防之地，赍不及防之警报至。有奢刹利人曰爱飞得者，以衣驮山中峰有他间道告敌；故敌军万余，乘夜进击，败佛雪守兵，而攻我军背。
有奢刹利人曰爱飞得者，以衣驮山中峰有他间道告敌；故敌军万余，乘夜进击，败佛雪守兵，而攻我军背。咄咄危哉！大事去矣！警报戟脑，全军沮丧，退军之声，嚣嚣然挟飞尘以磅礴于军中。黎河尼佗爰集同盟将校，以议去留，佥谓守地既失，留亦徒然，不若退温泉门以为保护希腊将来计。黎河尼佗不复言，而徐告诸将曰，“希腊存亡，系此一战，有为保护将来计而思退者，其速去此。惟斯巴达人有‘一履战地，不胜则死’之国法，今惟决死！今惟决死战！余者其留意。”
咄咄危哉！大事去矣！警报戟脑，全军沮丧，退军之声，嚣嚣然挟飞尘以磅礴于军中。 黎河尼佗爰集同盟将校，以议去留，佥谓守地既失，留亦徒然，不若退温泉门以为保护希腊将来计。 黎河尼佗不复言，而徐告诸将曰，“希腊存亡，系此一战，有为保护将来计而思退者，其速去此。 惟斯巴达人有‘一履战地，不胜则死’之国法，今惟决死！今惟决死战！余者其留意。 ”于是而胚罗蓬诸州军三千退，而访嘻斯军一千退，而螺克烈军六百退，未退者惟刹司骇人七百耳。慨然偕斯巴达武士，誓与同生死，同苦战，同名誉，以留此危极凄极壮绝之旧垒。惟西蒲斯人若干，为反复无常之本国质，而被抑留于黎河尼佗。
于是而胚罗蓬诸州军三千退，而访嘻斯军一千退，而螺克烈军六百退，未退者惟刹司骇人七百耳。 慨然偕斯巴达武士，誓与同生死，同苦战，同名誉，以留此危极凄极壮绝之旧垒。 惟西蒲斯人若干，为反复无常之本国质，而被抑留于黎河尼佗。嗟此斯巴达军，其数仅三百；然此大无畏大无敌之三百军，彼等曾临敌而笑，结怒欲冲冠之长发，以示一瞑不视之决志。黎河尼佗王，亦于将战之时，毅然谓得“王不死则国亡”之神诫；今无所迟疑，无所犹豫，同盟军既旋，乃向亚波罗神而再拜，从斯巴达之军律，舆榇以待强敌，以待战死。
嗟此斯巴达军，其数仅三百；然此大无畏大无敌之三百军，彼等曾临敌而笑，结怒欲冲冠之长发，以示一瞑不视之决志。 黎河尼佗王，亦于将战之时，毅然谓得“王不死则国亡”之神诫；今无所迟疑，无所犹豫，同盟军既旋，乃向亚波罗神而再拜，从斯巴达之军律，舆榇以待强敌，以待战死。呜呼全军，惟待战死。然有三人焉，王欲生之者也，其二为王戚，一则古名祭司之裔，曰豫言者息每卡而向以神诫告王者也。息每卡故侍王侧，王窃语之，彼固有家，然彼有子，彼不欲亡国而生，誓愿殉国以死，遂侃然谢王命。其二王戚，则均弱冠矣；正抚大好头颅，屹立阵头，以待进击。而孰意王召之至，全军肃肃，谨听王言。噫，二少年，今日生矣，意者其雀跃返国，聚父母亲友作再生之华筵耶！而斯巴达武士岂其然？噫，如是我闻，而王遂语，且熟视其乳毛未褪之颜。
呜呼全军，惟待战死。 然有三人焉，王欲生之者也，其二为王戚，一则古名祭司之裔，曰豫言者息每卡而向以神诫告王者也。 息每卡故侍王侧，王窃语之，彼固有家，然彼有子，彼不欲亡国而生，誓愿殉国以死，遂侃然谢王命。 其二王戚，则均弱冠矣；正抚大好头颅，屹立阵头，以待进击。 而孰意王召之至，全军肃肃，谨听王言。 噫，二少年，今日生矣，意者其雀跃返国，聚父母亲友作再生之华筵耶！而斯巴达武士岂其然？噫，如是我闻，而王遂语，且熟视其乳毛未褪之颜。王“卿等知将死乎？”少年甲“然，陛下。”王“何以死？”甲“不待言：战死！战死！”王“然则与卿等以最佳之战地，何如？”甲乙“臣等固所愿。”王“然则卿等持此书返国以报战状。”
王“卿等知将死乎？”少年甲“然，陛下。 ”王“何以死？”甲“不待言：战死！战死！”王“然则与卿等以最佳之战地，何如？”甲乙“臣等固所愿。 ”王“然则卿等持此书返国以报战状。 ”异哉！王何心乎？青年愕然疑，肃肃全军，谛听谛听。而青年恍然悟，厉声答王曰，“王欲生我乎？臣以执盾至，不作寄书邮。”志决矣，示必死矣，不可夺矣。而王犹欲遣甲，而甲不奉诏；欲遣乙，而乙不奉诏。曰，“今日之战，即所以报国人也。”噫，不可夺矣。而王乃曰，“伟哉，斯巴达之武士！予复何言。”一青年退而谢王命之辱。飘飘大旗，荣光闪灼，於铄豪杰，鼓铸全军，诸君诸君，男儿死耳！
异哉！王何心乎？青年愕然疑，肃肃全军，谛听谛听。 而青年恍然悟，厉声答王曰，“王欲生我乎？臣以执盾至，不作寄书邮。 ”志决矣，示必死矣，不可夺矣。 而王犹欲遣甲，而甲不奉诏；欲遣乙，而乙不奉诏。 曰，“今日之战，即所以报国人也。 ”噫，不可夺矣。 而王乃曰，“伟哉，斯巴达之武士！予复何言。 ”一青年退而谢王命之辱。 飘飘大旗，荣光闪灼，於铄豪杰，鼓铸全军，诸君诸君，男儿死耳！初日上，征尘起。睁目四顾，惟见如火如荼之敌军先锋队，挟三倍之势，潮鸣电击以阵于斯巴达军后。然未挑战，未进击，盖将待第二第三队至也。斯巴达王以斯巴达军为第一队，刹司骇军次之，西蒲斯军殿；策马露刃，以速制敌。壮哉劲气亘天，踆乌退舍。未几惟闻“进击”一声，而金鼓忽大振于血碧沙晶之大战斗场里；此大无畏，大无敌之劲军，于左海右山，危不容足之峡间，与波斯军遇。呐喊格击，鲜血倒流，如鸣潮飞沫，奔腾喷薄于荒矶。不刹那顷，而敌军无数死于刃，无数落于海，无数蹂躏于后援。大将号令，指挥官叱咤，队长鞭遁者，鼓声盈耳哉。然敌军不敢迎此朱血涂附，日光斜射，愈增熣灿，而霍霍如旋风之白刃，大军一万，蜂涌至矣。然敌军不能撼此拥盾屹立，士气如山，若不动明王之大磐石。
初日上，征尘起。 睁目四顾，惟见如火如荼之敌军先锋队，挟三倍之势，潮鸣电击以阵于斯巴达军后。 然未挑战，未进击，盖将待第二第三队至也。 斯巴达王以斯巴达军为第一队，刹司骇军次之，西蒲斯军殿；策马露刃，以速制敌。 壮哉劲气亘天，踆乌退舍。 未几惟闻“进击”一声，而金鼓忽大振于血碧沙晶之大战斗场里；此大无畏，大无敌之劲军，于左海右山，危不容足之峡间，与波斯军遇。 呐喊格击，鲜血倒流，如鸣潮飞沫，奔腾喷薄于荒矶。 不刹那顷，而敌军无数死于刃，无数落于海，无数蹂躏于后援。 大将号令，指挥官叱咤，队长鞭遁者，鼓声盈耳哉。 然敌军不敢迎此朱血涂附，日光斜射，愈增熣灿，而霍霍如旋风之白刃，大军一万，蜂涌至矣。 然敌军不能撼此拥盾屹立，士气如山，若不动明王之大磐石。然未与此战者，犹有斯巴达武士二人存也；以罹目疾故，远送之爱尔俾尼之邑。于郁郁闲居中，忽得战报。其一欲止，其一遂行。偕一仆以赴战场，登高远瞩，呐喊盈耳，踊跃三百，勇魂早浮动盘旋于战云黯淡处。然日光益烈，目不得瞬，徒促仆而问战状。
然未与此战者，犹有斯巴达武士二人存也；以罹目疾故，远送之爱尔俾尼之邑。 于郁郁闲居中，忽得战报。 其一欲止，其一遂行。 偕一仆以赴战场，登高远瞩，呐喊盈耳，踊跃三百，勇魂早浮动盘旋于战云黯淡处。 然日光益烈，目不得瞬，徒促仆而问战状。刃碎矣！镞尽矣！壮士歼矣！王战死矣！敌军猬集，欲劫王尸，而我军殊死战，咄咄……然危哉，危哉！其仆之言盖如是。嗟此壮士，热血滴沥于将盲之目，攘臂大跃，直趋战垒；其仆欲劝止，欲代死，而不可，而终不可。今也主仆连袂，大呼“我亦斯巴达武士”一声，以闯入层层乱军里。左顾王尸，右拂敌刃，而再而三；终以疲惫故，引入热血朱殷之垒后，而此最后决战之英雄队，遂向敌列战死之枕。噫，死者长已矣，而我闻其言：
刃碎矣！镞尽矣！壮士歼矣！王战死矣！敌军猬集，欲劫王尸，而我军殊死战，咄咄…… 然危哉，危哉！其仆之言盖如是。 嗟此壮士，热血滴沥于将盲之目，攘臂大跃，直趋战垒；其仆欲劝止，欲代死，而不可，而终不可。 今也主仆连袂，大呼“我亦斯巴达武士”一声，以闯入层层乱军里。 左顾王尸，右拂敌刃，而再而三；终以疲惫故，引入热血朱殷之垒后，而此最后决战之英雄队，遂向敌列战死之枕。 噫，死者长已矣，而我闻其言：汝旅人兮，我从国法而战死，其告我斯巴达之同胞。
汝旅人兮，我从国法而战死，其告我斯巴达之同胞。巍巍乎温泉门之峡，地球不灭，则终存此斯巴达武士之魂；而七百刹司骇人，亦掷头颅，洒热血，以分其无量名誉。此荣光纠纷之旁，犹记通敌卖国之奢刹利人爱飞得，降敌乞命之四百西蒲斯军。虽然，此温泉门一战而得无量光荣无量名誉之斯巴达武士间，乃亦有由爱尔俾尼目病院而生还者。
巍巍乎温泉门之峡，地球不灭，则终存此斯巴达武士之魂；而七百刹司骇人，亦掷头颅，洒热血，以分其无量名誉。 此荣光纠纷之旁，犹记通敌卖国之奢刹利人爱飞得，降敌乞命之四百西蒲斯军。 虽然，此温泉门一战而得无量光荣无量名誉之斯巴达武士间，乃亦有由爱尔俾尼目病院而生还者。夏夜半阑，屋阴覆路，惟柝声断续，犬吠如豹而已。斯巴达府之山下，犹有未寝之家。灯光黯然，微透窗际。未几有一少妇，送老妪出，切切作离别语；旋铿然阖门，惨淡入闺里。孤灯如豆，照影成三；首若飞蓬，非无膏沐，盖将临蓐，默祝愿生刚勇强毅之丈夫子，为国民有所尽耳。时适万籁寥寂，酸风戛窗，脉脉无言，似闻叹息，忆征戍欤？梦沙场欤？噫，此美少妇而女丈夫也，宁有叹息事？叹息岂斯巴达女子事？惟斯巴达女子能支配男儿，惟斯巴达女子能生男儿。此非黎河尼佗王后格尔歌与夷国女王应答之言，而添斯巴达女子以万丈荣光者乎。噫，斯巴达女子宁知叹息事。
夏夜半阑，屋阴覆路，惟柝声断续，犬吠如豹而已。 斯巴达府之山下，犹有未寝之家。 灯光黯然，微透窗际。 未几有一少妇，送老妪出，切切作离别语；旋铿然阖门，惨淡入闺里。 孤灯如豆，照影成三；首若飞蓬，非无膏沐，盖将临蓐，默祝愿生刚勇强毅之丈夫子，为国民有所尽耳。 时适万籁寥寂，酸风戛窗，脉脉无言，似闻叹息，忆征戍欤？梦沙场欤？噫，此美少妇而女丈夫也，宁有叹息事？叹息岂斯巴达女子事？惟斯巴达女子能支配男儿，惟斯巴达女子能生男儿。 此非黎河尼佗王后格尔歌与夷国女王应答之言，而添斯巴达女子以万丈荣光者乎。 噫，斯巴达女子宁知叹息事。长夜未央，万籁悉死。噫，触耳膜而益明者何声欤？则有剥啄叩关者。少妇出问曰：“其克力泰士君乎？请以明日至。”应曰，“否否，予生还矣！”咄咄，此何人？此何人？时斜月残灯，交映其面，则温泉门战士其夫也。
长夜未央，万籁悉死。 噫，触耳膜而益明者何声欤？则有剥啄叩关者。 少妇出问曰：“其克力泰士君乎？请以明日至。 ”应曰，“否否，予生还矣！”咄咄，此何人？此何人？时斜月残灯，交映其面，则温泉门战士其夫也。少妇惊且疑。久之久之乃言曰：“何则……生还……污妾耳矣！我夫既战死，生还者非我夫，意其鬼雄欤。告母国以吉占兮，归者其鬼雄，愿归者其鬼雄。”
少妇惊且疑。 久之久之乃言曰：“何则…… 生还…… 污妾耳矣！我夫既战死，生还者非我夫，意其鬼雄欤。 告母国以吉占兮，归者其鬼雄，愿归者其鬼雄。 ”读者得勿疑非人情乎？然斯巴达固尔尔也。激战告终，例行国葬，烈士之毅魄，化无量微尘分子，随军歌激越间，而磅礴戟刺于国民脑筋里。而国民乃大呼曰，“为国民死！为国民死！”且指送葬者一人曰，“若夫为国民死，名誉何若！荣光何若！”而不然者，则将何以当斯巴达女子之嘉名？诸君不见下第者乎？泥金不来，妇泣于室，异感而同情耳。今夫也不良，二三其死，奚能勿悲，能勿怒？而户外男子曰，“涘烈娜乎？卿勿疑。予之生还也，故有理在。”遂推户脱扃，潜入室内，少妇如怨如怒，疾诘其故。彼具告之。且曰，“前以目疾未愈，不甘徒死。设今夜而有战地也，即洒吾血耳。”
读者得勿疑非人情乎？然斯巴达固尔尔也。 激战告终，例行国葬，烈士之毅魄，化无量微尘分子，随军歌激越间，而磅礴戟刺于国民脑筋里。 而国民乃大呼曰，“为国民死！为国民死！”且指送葬者一人曰，“若夫为国民死，名誉何若！荣光何若！”而不然者，则将何以当斯巴达女子之嘉名？诸君不见下第者乎？泥金不来，妇泣于室，异感而同情耳。 今夫也不良，二三其死，奚能勿悲，能勿怒？而户外男子曰，“涘烈娜乎？卿勿疑。 予之生还也，故有理在。 ”遂推户脱扃，潜入室内，少妇如怨如怒，疾诘其故。 彼具告之。 且曰，“前以目疾未愈，不甘徒死。 设今夜而有战地也，即洒吾血耳。 ”少妇曰，“君非斯巴达之武士乎？何故其然，不甘徒死，而遽生还。则彼三百人者，奚为而死？噫嘻君乎！不胜则死，忘斯巴达之国法耶？以目疾而遂忘斯巴达之国法耶？‘愿汝持盾而归来，不然则乘盾而归来。’君习闻之……而目疾乃更重于斯巴达武士之荣光乎？来日之行葬式也，妾为君妻，得参其列。国民思君，友朋思君，父母妻子，无不思君。呜呼，而君乃生还矣！”
少妇曰，“君非斯巴达之武士乎？何故其然，不甘徒死，而遽生还。 则彼三百人者，奚为而死？噫嘻君乎！不胜则死，忘斯巴达之国法耶？以目疾而遂忘斯巴达之国法耶？‘愿汝持盾而归来，不然则乘盾而归来。 ’君习闻之…… 而目疾乃更重于斯巴达武士之荣光乎？来日之行葬式也，妾为君妻，得参其列。 国民思君，友朋思君，父母妻子，无不思君。 呜呼，而君乃生还矣！”侃侃哉其言。如风霜疾来，袭击耳膜；懦夫懦夫，其勿言矣。而彼犹嗫嚅曰，“以爱卿故。”少妇拂然怒曰，“其诚言耶！夫夫妇之契，孰则不相爱者。然国以外不言爱之斯巴达武士，其爱其妻为何若？而三百人中，无一生还者何……君诚爱妾，曷不誉妾以战死者之妻。妾将娩矣，设为男子，弱也则弃之泰噶托士之谷；强也则忆温泉门之陈迹，将何以厕身于为国民死之同胞间乎？……君诚爱妾，愿君速亡，否则杀妾。呜呼，君犹佩剑，剑犹佩于君，使剑而有灵，奚不离其人？奚不为其人折？奚不断其人首？设其人知耻，奚不解剑？奚不以其剑战？奚不以其剑断敌人头？噫，斯巴达之武德其式微哉！妾辱夫矣，请伏剑于君侧。”
侃侃哉其言。 如风霜疾来，袭击耳膜；懦夫懦夫，其勿言矣。 而彼犹嗫嚅曰，“以爱卿故。 ”少妇拂然怒曰，“其诚言耶！夫夫妇之契，孰则不相爱者。 然国以外不言爱之斯巴达武士，其爱其妻为何若？而三百人中，无一生还者何…… 君诚爱妾，曷不誉妾以战死者之妻。 妾将娩矣，设为男子，弱也则弃之泰噶托士之谷；强也则忆温泉门之陈迹，将何以厕身于为国民死之同胞间乎？…… 君诚爱妾，愿君速亡，否则杀妾。 呜呼，君犹佩剑，剑犹佩于君，使剑而有灵，奚不离其人？奚不为其人折？奚不断其人首？设其人知耻，奚不解剑？奚不以其剑战？奚不以其剑断敌人头？噫，斯巴达之武德其式微哉！妾辱夫矣，请伏剑于君侧。 ”丈夫生矣，女子死耳。颈血上薄，其气魂魂，人或疑长夜之曙光云。惜也一应一答，一死一生，暮夜无知，伟影将灭。不知有慕涘烈娜之克力泰士者，虽遭投梭之拒，而未能忘情者也。是时也，彼乃潜行墙角以去。
丈夫生矣，女子死耳。 颈血上薄，其气魂魂，人或疑长夜之曙光云。 惜也一应一答，一死一生，暮夜无知，伟影将灭。 不知有慕涘烈娜之克力泰士者，虽遭投梭之拒，而未能忘情者也。 是时也，彼乃潜行墙角以去。初日曈曈，照斯巴达之郊外。旅人寒起，胥驻足于大逵。中有老人，说温泉门地形，杂以往事；昔也石垒，今也战场，絮絮不休止。噫，何为者？——则其间有立木存，上书曰：
初日曈曈，照斯巴达之郊外。 旅人寒起，胥驻足于大逵。 中有老人，说温泉门地形，杂以往事；昔也石垒，今也战场，絮絮不休止。 噫，何为者？——则其间有立木存，上书曰：“有捕温泉门堕落武士亚里士多德至者膺上赏。”
“有捕温泉门堕落武士亚里士多德至者膺上赏。 ”盖政府之令，而克力泰士所诉也。亚里士多德者，昔身受迅雷，以霁神怒之贤王，而其余烈，乃不能致一士之战死，咄咄不可解。
盖政府之令，而克力泰士所诉也。 亚里士多德者，昔身受迅雷，以霁神怒之贤王，而其余烈，乃不能致一士之战死，咄咄不可解。观者益众，聚讼嚣嚣。遥望斯巴达府，有一队少年军，鍪甲映旭日，闪闪若金蛇状。及大逵，析为二队，相背驰去，且抗声而歌曰：
观者益众，聚讼嚣嚣。 遥望斯巴达府，有一队少年军，鍪甲映旭日，闪闪若金蛇状。 及大逵，析为二队，相背驰去，且抗声而歌曰：“战哉！此战场伟大而庄严兮，尔何为遗尔友而生还兮？尔生还兮蒙大耻，尔母笞尔兮死则止！”
“战哉！此战场伟大而庄严兮，尔何为遗尔友而生还兮？尔生还兮蒙大耻，尔母笞尔兮死则止！”老人曰，“彼等其觅亚里士多德者欤……不闻抗声之高歌乎？此二百年前之军歌也，迄今犹歌之。”
老人曰，“彼等其觅亚里士多德者欤…… 不闻抗声之高歌乎？此二百年前之军歌也，迄今犹歌之。 ”而亚里士多德则何如？史不曰：浦累皆之战乎，世界大决战之一也，波斯军三十万，拥大将漠多尼之尸，如秋风吹落叶，纵横零乱于大漠。斯巴达鬼雄三百，则凭将军柏撒纽，以敌人颈血，一洗积年之殊怨。酸风夜鸣，薤露竞落，其窃告人生之脆者欤。初月相照，皎皎残尸，马迹之间，血痕犹湿，其悲蝶尔飞神之不灵者欤。斯巴达军人，各觅其同胞至高至贵之遗骸，运于高原，将行葬式。不图累累敌尸间，有凛然僵卧者，月影朦胧，似曾相识。其一人大呼曰，“何战之烈也！噫，何不死于温泉门而死于此。”识者谁：克力泰士也。彼已为戍兵矣，遂奔告将军柏撒纽。将军欲葬之，以询全军；而全军哗然，甚咎亚里士多德。将军乃演说于军中曰：
而亚里士多德则何如？史不曰：浦累皆之战乎，世界大决战之一也，波斯军三十万，拥大将漠多尼之尸，如秋风吹落叶，纵横零乱于大漠。 斯巴达鬼雄三百，则凭将军柏撒纽，以敌人颈血，一洗积年之殊怨。 酸风夜鸣，薤露竞落，其窃告人生之脆者欤。 初月相照，皎皎残尸，马迹之间，血痕犹湿，其悲蝶尔飞神之不灵者欤。 斯巴达军人，各觅其同胞至高至贵之遗骸，运于高原，将行葬式。 不图累累敌尸间，有凛然僵卧者，月影朦胧，似曾相识。 其一人大呼曰，“何战之烈也！噫，何不死于温泉门而死于此。 ”识者谁：克力泰士也。 彼已为戍兵矣，遂奔告将军柏撒纽。 将军欲葬之，以询全军；而全军哗然，甚咎亚里士多德。 将军乃演说于军中曰：“然则从斯巴达军人之公言，令彼无墓。然吾见无墓者之战死，益令我感，令我喜，吾益见斯巴达武德之卓绝。夫子勖哉，不见夫杀国人媚异族之奴隶国乎，为谍为伥又奚论？而我国则宁弃不义之余生，以偿既破之国法。嗟尔诸士，彼虽无墓，彼终有斯巴达武士之魂！”
“然则从斯巴达军人之公言，令彼无墓。 然吾见无墓者之战死，益令我感，令我喜，吾益见斯巴达武德之卓绝。 夫子勖哉，不见夫杀国人媚异族之奴隶国乎，为谍为伥又奚论？而我国则宁弃不义之余生，以偿既破之国法。 嗟尔诸士，彼虽无墓，彼终有斯巴达武士之魂！”克力泰士不觉卒然呼曰，“是因其妻涘烈娜以死谏！”阵云寂寂，响渡寥天；万目如炬，齐注其面。将军柏撒纽返问曰，“其妻以死谏？”
克力泰士不觉卒然呼曰，“是因其妻涘烈娜以死谏！”阵云寂寂，响渡寥天；万目如炬，齐注其面。 将军柏撒纽返问曰，“其妻以死谏？”全军咽唾，耸听其说。克力泰士欲言不言，愧恧无地；然以不忍没女丈夫之轶事也，乃述颠末。将军推案起曰，
全军咽唾，耸听其说。 克力泰士欲言不言，愧恧无地；然以不忍没女丈夫之轶事也，乃述颠末。 将军推案起曰，“猗欤女丈夫……为此无墓者之妻立纪念碑则何如？”
“猗欤女丈夫…… 为此无墓者之妻立纪念碑则何如？”军容益庄，惟呼欢殷殷若春雷起。
军容益庄，惟呼欢殷殷若春雷起。斯巴达府之北，侑洛佗士之谷，行人指一翼然倚天者走相告曰，“此涘烈娜之碑也，亦即斯巴达之国！”
斯巴达府之北，侑洛佗士之谷，行人指一翼然倚天者走相告曰，“此涘烈娜之碑也，亦即斯巴达之国！”

一九〇三年

说

一九〇三年

说昔之学者曰：“太阳而外，宇宙间殆无所有。”历纪以来，翕然从之；怀疑之徒，竟不可得。乃不谓忽有一不可思议之原质，自发光热，煌煌焉出现于世界，辉新世纪之曙光，破旧学者之迷梦。若能力保存说，若原子说，若物质不灭说，皆蒙极酷之袭击，跄踉倾欹，不可终日。由是而思想界大革命之风潮，得日益磅薄，未可知也！此新原质以何因缘，乃得发见？则不能不曰：“X线（旧译透物电光）之赐。”
昔之学者曰：“太阳而外，宇宙间殆无所有。 ”历纪以来，翕然从之；怀疑之徒，竟不可得。 乃不谓忽有一不可思议之原质，自发光热，煌煌焉出现于世界，辉新世纪之曙光，破旧学者之迷梦。 若能力保存说，若原子说，若物质不灭说，皆蒙极酷之袭击，跄踉倾欹，不可终日。 由是而思想界大革命之风潮，得日益磅薄，未可知也！此新原质以何因缘，乃得发见？则不能不曰：“X线（旧译透物电光）之赐。 ”X线者，一八九五年顷，德人林达根所发明者也。其性质之奇异：若（一）贯通不透明体，（二）感写真干板，（三）与气体以导电性等。大惹学者之注意，谓X线外，当更有Y线，若Z线等者。相率覃思，冀获新质。乃果也驰运涅伏，必获报酬。翌年而法人勃克雷复有一大发见。
X-rays were invented by German Linda Gen in 1895. The properties of the gas are peculiar: such as (1) penetrating opaque material, (2) sensing the photoresist plate, and (3) conductivity with gases. It has attracted the attention of scholars who believe that in addition to X-rays, there should be Y-rays, such as Z-rays. They pondered deeply, hoping to obtain new qualities. It is indeed a matter of speeding to Niev, and it will definitely be rewarded. The following year, the French Berkeley made another major discovery.或曰，勃氏以厚黑纸二重，包写真干板，暴之日光，越一二日，略无感应，乃上置磷光体铀盐，欲再行实验，而天适晦，不得已姑纳机兜中，数日后检之，则不待日光，已感干板。勃氏大骇异，细测其理，知其力非借磷光，而铀之盐类，实自具一种类似X线之辐射线，爰名之曰铀线，生此种线之体曰剌伽刻佉夫体。此种物体所放射之线，则例以发见者之名名之曰勃克雷线。犹X线之亦名林达根线也。然铀线则无待器械电气之助，而自能放射，故较X线已大进步。
或曰，勃氏以厚黑纸二重，包写真干板，暴之日光，越一二日，略无感应，乃上置磷光体铀盐，欲再行实验，而天适晦，不得已姑纳机兜中，数日后检之，则不待日光，已感干板。 勃氏大骇异，细测其理，知其力非借磷光，而铀之盐类，实自具一种类似X线之辐射线，爰名之曰铀线，生此种线之体曰剌伽刻佉夫体。 此种物体所放射之线，则例以发见者之名名之曰勃克雷线。 犹X线之亦名林达根线也。 然铀线则无待器械电气之助，而自能放射，故较X线已大进步。尔后研究益盛，学者涅伏中，均结种种Y线Z线之影。至一八九八年，休密德氏于钍之化合物中，亦发见林达根线。
Since then, research has intensified, and scholars have discovered various Y-Z-ray images in the Nevada. By 1898, Hume Meade had also discovered Linda root threads in thorium compounds.同时，法国巴黎工艺化学学校教授古篱夫人，于授业时，为空气传导之装置，偶于别及不兰（奥大利产之复杂矿物）中，见有类似X线之放射线，闪闪然光甚烈。亟告其夫古篱，研究之末，知含有铋化合物，其放射性凡四千倍于铀盐。以夫人生于坡兰德故，即以坡罗尼恩名之。既发表于世，学者大感谢，法国学士会院复酬以四千法郎，古篱夫妇益奋励，日事研究，遂于别及不兰中，又得一新原质曰（Radium），符号为Ra。（按旧译Germanium曰。然其音义于Radium尤惬，故篡取之，而Germanium则别立新名可耳。）
At the same time, Mrs. Gu Li, a professor at the School of Technical Chemistry in Paris, France, was teaching an air conduction device, and accidentally saw X-ray-like radiation in Beji Bran (a complex mineral produced in Austria), which shone very strongly. He quickly informed her husband that after research, he learned that it contained bismuth compounds, which were 4,000 times more radioactive than uranium salts. Because his wife was born in Poland County, he was named after Polonien. After it was published, the scholars were greatly grateful, and the French Academy of Scholars rewarded them with 4,000 francs, and the Guli couple worked even harder, and they worked hard every day, and finally found a new primordial substance (Radium) in Beiji and Bran, with the symbol Ra. (According to the old translation of Germanium.) However, the sound and meaning of Radium are particularly pleasing to Radium, so it is usurped and Germanium can be used as a new name. ）一八九九年，独比伦氏亦于别及不兰中得他种剌伽刻佉夫体，名曰爱客地恩。然其辐射性不及。
一八九九年，独比伦氏亦于别及不兰中得他种剌伽刻佉夫体，名曰爱客地恩。 然其辐射性不及。坡罗尼恩与铋，爱客地恩与钍，与钡，均有相似之性质。而其纯质，皆不可得。惟则经古篱夫人辛苦经营，始得略纯粹者少许，测定分剂及光图，已确认为一新原质，其他则尚在疑似之间，或谓仅得保存其能力而已。
Polonian and bismuth, Aikedien and thorium, and barium all have similar properties. And its purity is not available. Only  has been painstakingly managed by Mrs. Gu Li, and a few of them have been slightly purified, and the determination of the dosage and photogram have been confirmed to be a new primordial material, while the others are still in doubt, or it is said that only their ability has been preserved.盐类之水溶液，加以铔，或轻二硫，或铔二硫，不生沉淀。硫养四或炭养三，不溶解于水，其绿二，则易溶于水，而不溶解于强盐酸及酒精中。利用此性，可于制铀之别及不兰残滓中，分析质。然因性殊类钡，故钡恒羼杂其间，去钡之法，须先令成盐化物，溶于水中，再注酒精，即生沉淀，然终不免有钡少许，存留溶液内，反复至再，始得略纯之盐。至于纯质，则迄今未能得也。且其量极稀，制铀残滓五千吨，所得盐不及一启罗格兰，此三年间所取纯与不纯者合计仅五百格兰耳。而有谓世界中全量恐已尽是者，其珍贵如此。故值亦綦昂，虽含钡甚多者，每一格兰，非三十五弗不能得。至古篱氏之最纯品，以世界惟一称者，亦仅如微尘大，积二万购之，犹不可得，其放射力则强于铀盐百万倍云。
盐类之水溶液，加以铔，或轻二硫，或铔二硫，不生沉淀。 硫养四或炭养三，不溶解于水，其绿二，则易溶于水，而不溶解于强盐酸及酒精中。 利用此性，可于制铀之别及不兰残滓中，分析质。 然因性殊类钡，故钡恒羼杂其间，去钡之法，须先令成盐化物，溶于水中，再注酒精，即生沉淀，然终不免有钡少许，存留溶液内，反复至再，始得略纯之盐。 至于纯质，则迄今未能得也。 且其量极稀，制铀残滓五千吨，所得盐不及一启罗格兰，此三年间所取纯与不纯者合计仅五百格兰耳。 而有谓世界中全量恐已尽是者，其珍贵如此。 故值亦綦昂，虽含钡甚多者，每一格兰，非三十五弗不能得。 至古篱氏之最纯品，以世界惟一称者，亦仅如微尘大，积二万购之，犹不可得，其放射力则强于铀盐百万倍云。此最纯品，即绿二也。昨年古篱夫人化分其绿，令成银绿二，计其量，然后算得之分剂为二百二十五。
此最纯品，即绿二也。 昨年古篱夫人化分其绿，令成银绿二，计其量，然后算得之分剂为二百二十五。多漠尔愢氏曾照以分光器，之特有光图外，不复有他光图，亦为新原质之一证。线虽多与X线同，而此外复有与玻璃陶器以褐色或革色，令银绿二复原，岩盐带色，染白纸，一昼夜间变黄磷为赤磷，及灭亡种子发芽力之种种性。又以色儿路多皿贮盐（放射性强于铀线五千倍者），握掌中二时间，则皮肤被灼，今古篱氏伤痕历历犹未灭也。古篱氏曰：“若有人入置纯一密里格兰之室中，则当丧明焚身，甚或致死。”而加奈大之卢索夫氏，则谓纯一格兰，足起一磅之重高及一呎。甚或有谓足击英国所有军舰，飞上英国第一高山辩那维之巅者，则维廉可洛克之言也。综观诸说，虽觉近夸，而放射力之强，亦可想见矣。尤奇者，其放射力，毫不假于外物，而自发于微小之本体中，与太阳无异。
多漠尔愢氏曾照以分光器，之特有光图外，不复有他光图，亦为新原质之一证。 线虽多与X线同，而此外复有与玻璃陶器以褐色或革色，令银绿二复原，岩盐带色，染白纸，一昼夜间变黄磷为赤磷，及灭亡种子发芽力之种种性。 又以色儿路多皿贮盐（放射性强于铀线五千倍者），握掌中二时间，则皮肤被灼，今古篱氏伤痕历历犹未灭也。 古篱氏曰：“若有人入置纯一密里格兰之室中，则当丧明焚身，甚或致死。 ”而加奈大之卢索夫氏，则谓纯一格兰，足起一磅之重高及一呎。 甚或有谓足击英国所有军舰，飞上英国第一高山辩那维之巅者，则维廉可洛克之言也。 综观诸说，虽觉近夸，而放射力之强，亦可想见矣。 尤奇者，其放射力，毫不假于外物，而自发于微小之本体中，与太阳无异。线亦若X线然，有贯通金属力，此外若纸木皮肉等，俱无所沮。然放射后，每为被贯通之物质所吸收，而力变弱，设以线通过〇〇〇二五密里之铂箔，则强率变为其初之四十九％，再一次则又减为三十六％，二次以后，减率乃不如初之著矣。由是知线决非单纯，有易被他物所吸收者，有强于贯通力者，其贯物而过也若滤分然。各放射线，析为数种，感写真干板之力强者，即贯通线也，其中复有善感眼之组织者，故虽瞑目不视，而仍见其所在。
线亦若X线然，有贯通金属力，此外若纸木皮肉等，俱无所沮。 然放射后，每为被贯通之物质所吸收，而力变弱，设以线通过〇〇〇二五密里之铂箔，则强率变为其初之四十九％，再一次则又减为三十六％，二次以后，减率乃不如初之著矣。 由是知线决非单纯，有易被他物所吸收者，有强于贯通力者，其贯物而过也若滤分然。 各放射线，析为数种，感写真干板之力强者，即贯通线也，其中复有善感眼之组织者，故虽瞑目不视，而仍见其所在。之奇性，犹不止是。有拔尔敦者，曾于暗室中，解包出，忽闪闪然发青白色光，室中骤明，其纸裹亦受微光，良久不灭。是即副放射线，感写真干板之作用，亦与主放射同。盖能本体发光，及与光于接近物体之二性质，宛如太阳与光于周围游星然。其能力之根源，竟不可测。
's peculiar properties are not limited to this. There was a man named Baldun, who once unpacked id_00001 a package in a dark room, and suddenly a bluish-white light flashed, and the room suddenly brightened, and the paper wrap was also shimmering, not extinguished for a long time. This is secondary radiation, which senses the effect of the trunk plate, which is the same as the main radiation. It is because  can emit light ontology, and it is similar to the two properties of light in close proximity to objects, just like the sun and light flying around the stars. The root of his ability is unfathomable.或曰勃克雷氏贮比较的纯于管中，藏之衣底，六小时后，体上忽现焦灼痕，未几忽隐现于头腕间，不能指其定处。后古篱氏乃设法测其热度，法用热电柱，其一方接合点，置纯铜盐，他方接合点，置含铜盐六分一之锡盐。计算所生电流之强率，知置铜盐处之温度，高一度半。又以篷然测热器，测定〇·〇八格兰之纯盐所生温度，一小时凡十四加罗厘；即一格兰所放射之热，每一小时凡百加罗厘以上也。其光与热，既非出于燃烧，亦无化学的变化，不知此多量能力，以何为根？如曰本体所自发欤，则昔所谓能力之原则者，不得不破。如曰由外围能力而发欤，则必当有利用外围能力之性，而此能力之本性，又为吾人所未及知者也。
Some say that Berkeley stored pure  in a tube and hid it under his clothes, and after six hours, burn marks suddenly appeared on his body, and soon faintly appeared on his head and wrists, and he could not point to the fixed location. Later, the Gu Li family tried to measure the heat of the phosphorus, using a thermoelectric column, with pure copper salt at one junction point, and a tin salt containing one-sixth copper salt at the other junction point. The intensity of the generated current is calculated, and the temperature at the place where the copper salt is placed is one and a half degrees higher. A thermometer was used to measure the temperature produced by the pure id_00001 salt of 0.08 gallons, which was 14 gallons per hour; That is, the heat emitted by one gram is more than 100 gallons per hour. The light and heat of this process are neither caused by combustion nor chemical changes, so I don't know what the root of this multi-energy capability is. If it is said that the ontology originates from itself, then the principle of ability that was previously called must be broken. If it is said to be caused by peripheral capabilities, then  must have the property of using peripheral capabilities, and the nature of this ability is something we do not know.线亦有与空气以导电性之性质，设有钢板及锌板各一，联以铜丝，两板间之空气，令线通过之，则铜丝即生电流，与两板各浸于稀硫酸液中无稍异。盖线能令气体为衣盎（集于两极间之电解质之总名），分出荷阴阳电气之部分，故气体之作用，遂与液体电解质同。线中之易被他物吸收者，此性尤著。
The  wire also has the property of conducting electricity with air, and is equipped with a steel plate and a zinc plate, connected to a copper wire, and the air between the two plates allows the  wire to pass through it, so that the copper wire will generate an electric current, which is no different from the two plates immersed in dilute sulfuric acid solution. Because the  line can cause the gas to form a coating (a general term for electrolytes gathered between the two poles) and separate the negative and yang electrical parts, the gas acts in the same way as a liquid electrolyte.  threads are easily absorbed by other things, and this property is particularly pronounced.从克尔格司管阴极发生之恺多图线，及林达根线，及线，若受强磁力之作用，则进行必偏，设与线成直角之方向，有磁力作用，则线即越与磁力相对之左而行；然因线非单纯者，故析出屈于磁力及不屈于磁力之种种线，进路各不相同，与日光过三棱玻璃而成七色无异。线中之强于贯通力者，此性尤著，且因对于磁力之作用，故线之大部分，遂含有荷阴电气而飞运极迅之微粒云。
From the Kaidodia line of the cathode generation of the Kells, the Linda Root line, and the  line, if it is subjected to the action of strong magnetic force, it must be biased, and if it is at right angles to the {{id_00001 id_00002}} line, there is a magnetic force, then the {{}} line will move further to the left of the magnetic force; However, because the  wire is not simple, various lines that are bent to magnetic force and not bent to magnetic force are separated, and the paths are different, which is no different from the seven colors formed by sunlight passing through triangular glass. This property is particularly pronounced in the  line, and because of its effect on magnetic force, most of the  line contains particles that carry negative electricity and fly very quickly.被磁力而偏之线中，既含有荷阴电之微粒，则以之投射于或物体，亦当得阴电。古篱夫妇曾用封蜡绝缘之导电体，投以线，而确得阴电；又以同法绝缘之铜盐，因带阴电之微粒飞去，而荷阳电。此电气之集积量，每一平方密厘每一秒时凡得4×19-12安培云。线中带阴电之微粒，在强电场时，必偏其进行方向，即在一密厘有一万波的之强电场，则偏四生的许，此勃克雷氏所实证者也。
If a line def id_0000 lected by magnetic force contains negatively charged particles, it should also be negatively charged when projected onto an object. The Gu Li couple once used a conductive body insulated by sealing wax and threw  wire, and it was indeed negative electricity; In addition, the copper salts insulated by the same method are charged by the negative particles flying away and are charged with positive electricity. This is the volume of electricity, which yields 4×19-12 amperes per square millimeter per second.  The negatively charged particles in the line must be biased in the direction of their movement when the electric field is strong, that is, at a strong electric field of 10,000 waves per millimeter, it will be biased to about 4 degrees, which is what Berkeley demonstrated.自所发射微粒之速度，每秒凡1.6×1010密厘，约当光速度之半，因此微粒之飞散，故于一小时所失之能力额凡4.4×10-6加罗厘，与前记之放出热量较，则觉甚微。又从之表面一平方密厘所放射之微粒，其质量亦綦少，计每一格兰之飞散，约需十亿万年。准此，则其微粒之大，应为轻气原子三千分之一，是名电子。
The velocity of particles emitted by  is 1.6×1010 milliseconds per second, which is about half the speed of light, so the particles are scattered, so  loses 4.4×10-6 gallons in an hour, which is very small compared to the previously recorded heat release. In addition, the mass of particles emitted from a square millimeter of the surface of  is also very small, and it takes about a billion years for each gram to scatter. According to this, the size of the particle should be 1/3,000 of a light gas atom, called an electron.电子说曰，“凡物质中，皆含原子，而原子中，复含电子，电子之于原子，犹原子之于物质也。此电子受四围之电气与磁气之感化，循环飞运，无有已时，凡诸物体，罔不如是，虽吾人类，亦由是成。然飞运迟速，则因物而异，之电子，乃极速者，以过速故，有一部分，飞出体外，而光与热，自然发生，为辐射线。”然是说也，必电子自具物质构成之能，乃得秩然成理。不然，则纵调和之曰飞散极微，悠久之曰须无量载，而于物质不灭之说，则仍无救也。且创原子说者，非以是为至微极小，分割物质之达于究极者乎。电子说兴，知飞动之微点，实小于原子千分之一，乃不得不褫原子宇宙间小达极点之嘉名，以归电子，而原子说亡。
The electron theory says, "All matter contains atoms, and atoms contain electrons, and electrons are to atoms what atoms are to matter. These electrons are influenced by the surrounding electricity and magnetism, and they circulate and fly endlessly, and all objects are like this, even for us humans. However, the speed of flight varies depending on the object, and the electrons are extremely fast, because due to excessive speed, some of them fly out of the body, and light and heat naturally occur as radiation rays. "However, this statement requires electrons to have the ability to form matter in order to be orderly. Otherwise, even if we reconcile it with the extremely small amount of scattering, and the long-term claim that it must be infinitely loaded, then the theory of material indestructibility is still indestructible. Moreover, those who created the atomic theory did not believe that this is the smallest and the smallest division of matter to the ultimate extreme. The theory of electrons was abandoned, and it was known that the particles of movement were actually smaller than one-thousandth of an atom, so they had to remove the good name of the small pole in the atomic universe and attribute it to electrons, and the atomic theory was lost.自X线之研究，而得线；由线之研究，而生电子说。由是而关于物质之观念，倏一震动，生大变象。最人涅伏，吐故纳新，败果既落，新葩欲吐，虽曰古篱夫人之伟功，而终当脱冠以谢十九世末之X线发见者林达根氏。From X-ray research,  lines were obtained; The study of the  line gave rise to the electronic theory. As a result, the concept of matter suddenly shook and changed greatly. Although it is said that Mrs. Gu Li is a great achievement, she should finally take off her hat to thank Linda Gen, who discovered X-rays at the end of the 19th century.

一九一八年

一九一八年

一九一八年

1918

一九一八年

梦

一九一八年

dream很多的梦，趁黄昏起哄，Many dreams, taking advantage of the dusk to coax, 
前梦才挤却大前梦，后梦又赶走了前梦。 The previous dream squeezes out the big front dream, and the second dream drives away the previous dream. 
　　去的前梦黑如墨，在的后梦墨一般黑； The dream before going is as black as ink, and after the dream is as black as ink; 
　　去的在的仿佛都说，“看我真好颜色。” Everyone who goes to it seems to say, "Look at my good color." 
颜色许好，暗里不知； The color is good, but I don't know it secretly; 
而且不知道：说话的是谁？ and don't know: who is talking?
暗里不知，身热头痛。I don't know it, my body is hot and I have a headache. 
你来你来，明白的梦！ You come, you come, understand the dream!

一九一八年

爱之神

一九一八年

God of love一个小娃子，展开翅子在空中，A little baby, spreading his wings in the air, 
一手搭箭，一手张弓， with an arrow in one hand and a bow in the other, 
不知怎么一下，一箭射着前胸。 Somehow, an arrow shot into the chest. 
　　“小娃子先生，谢你胡乱栽培！ "Mr. Little Baby, thank you for cultivating indiscriminately! 
　　但得告诉我：我应该爱谁？” But tell me: Who should I love? 
娃子着慌，摇头说，“唉！ The baby panicked, shook his head and said, "Alas! 
你是还有心胸的人，竟也说这宗话。 You are a person with a heart, and you actually say this. 
　　你应该爱谁，我怎么知道。 Who should you love, how do I know. 
　　总之我的箭是放过了！ Anyway, my arrow was let go! 
　　你要是爱谁，便没命的去爱他； If you love anyone, you will love him without your life; 
　　你要是谁也不爱，也可以没命的去自己死掉。” If you don't love anyone, you can die by yourself. ”

一九一八年

桃花

一九一八年

peach blossom春雨过了，太阳又很好，随便走到园中。After the spring rain and the sun was good, I walked to the garden casually. 
桃花开在园西，李花开在园东。 Peach blossoms bloom in the west of the garden, and plum blossoms bloom in the east of the garden. 
　　我说，“好极了！桃花红，李花白。” I said, "Great! The peach blossoms are red, and the plum blossoms are white. 
　　（没说，桃花不及李花白。） (I didn't say it, the peach blossoms are not as white as the plum blossoms.) 
桃花可是生了气，满面涨作“杨妃红”。 Taohua was angry, and her face was full of "Yang Fei Hong". 
　　好小子！真了得！竟能气红了面孔。 Good boy! It's amazing! He was so angry that his face turned red. 
　　我的话可并没得罪你，你怎的便涨红了面孔？ My words didn't offend you, so why did you turn red? 
　　唉！花有花道理，我不懂。 Alas! Flowers have a reason, I don't understand.

一九一八年

他们的花园

一九一八年

their garden小娃子，卷螺发，The little boy, with curly hair, 
银黄的面庞上还有微红，——看他意思是正要活。 There is a slight reddish on his silvery face,—— it seems that he means he is about to live. 
　　走出破大门，望见邻家： Walking out of the broken gate, he saw his neighbor: 
　　他们大花园里，有许多好花。 There were many good flowers in their big garden. 
用尽小心机，得了一朵百合； I used all my caution and got a lily; 
又白又光明，像才下的雪。 White and bright, like snow that has just fallen. 
好生拿了回家，映着面庞，分外映出血色； Haosheng took it home, reflecting his face and showing blood; 
　　苍蝇绕花飞鸣，乱在一屋子里—— Flies fly around the flowers, scattered in the room - 
　　“偏爱这不干净花，是胡涂孩子！” "Prefer this unclean flower, it's a foolish child!" 
　　忙看百合花，却已有几点蝇矢。 Busy looking at the lilies, but there are already a few fly arrows. 
看不得；舍不得。 is not visible; Reluctant. 
瞪眼望着天空，他更无话可说。 stared at the sky, and he had nothing to say. 
　　说不出话，想起邻家： Speechless, thinking of the neighbors: 
　　他们大花园里，有许多好花。 They have many good flowers in their big garden.

一九一八年

人与时

一九一八年

People and time一人说，将来胜过现在。One person said that the future is better than the present. 
一人说，现在远不及从前。 One person said that it is far less than it used to be. 
一人说，什么？ One person said, what? 
时道，你们都侮辱我的现在。 said, "You all insult my present." 
　　从前好的，自己回去。 Once upon a time, go back yourself. 
　　将来好的，跟我前去。 Come with me. 
　　这说什么的， What do you say, 
　　我不和你说什么。 I don't say anything to you.

一九一八年

渡河与引路

一九一八年

Crossing the Yellow River and leading the way玄同兄：
Brother Xuantong:两日前看见《新青年》五卷二号通信里面，兄有唐俟也不反对Esperanto，以及可以一齐讨论的话；我于Esperanto固不反对，但也不愿讨论：因为我的赞成Esperanto的理由，十分简单，还不能开口讨论。
Two days ago, I saw in the correspondence of "New Youth" Volume 5, No. 2, that my brother Tang Qi did not object to Esperanto, and that we could discuss it together; I have no objection to Esperanto, but I do not want to discuss it: because my reasons for favoring Esperanto are very simple and cannot be discussed yet.要问赞成的理由，便只是依我看来，人类将来总当有一种共同的言语；所以赞成Esperanto。
If you want to ask the reason for approval, it is simply that, in my opinion, there should always be a common language in the future; So I support Esperanto.至于将来通用的是否Esperanto，却无从断定。大约或者便从Esperanto改良，更加圆满；或者别有一种更好的出现；都未可知。但现在既是只有这Esperanto，便只能先学这Esperanto。现在不过草创时代，正如未有汽船，便只好先坐独木小舟；倘使因为豫料将来当有汽船，便不造独木小舟，或不坐独木小舟，那便连汽船也不会发明，人类也不能渡水了。
As for whether it will be Esperanto in the future, it is impossible to conclude. About or more complete from Esperanto; Or there is a better kind of appearance; It is still unknown. But now that there is only this Esperanto, we can only learn this Esperanto first. Now is just the beginning of the era, just like there is no steamboat, so you have to take a canoe first; If you don't build a canoe or ride a canoe because you expect there to be a steamboat in the future, then even the steamboat will not be invented, and humans will not be able to cross the water.然问将来何以必有一种人类共通的言语，却不能拿出确凿证据。说将来必不能有的，也是如此。所以全无讨论的必要；只能各依自己所信的做去就是了。
However, if you ask why there must be a common language for mankind in the future, you cannot provide conclusive evidence. It is said that there will be no one in the future, and it is the same. So there is no need to discuss it at all; You can only do what you believe in.但我还有一个意见，以为学Esperanto是一件事，学Esperanto的精神，又是一件事。——白话文学也是如此。——倘若思想照旧，便仍然换牌不换货：才从“四目仓圣”面前爬起，又向“柴明华先师”脚下跪倒；无非反对人类进步的时候，从前是说no，现在是说ne；从前写作“咈哉”，现在写作“不行”罢了。所以我的意见，以为灌输正当的学术文艺，改良思想，是第一事；讨论Esperanto，尚在其次；至于辨难驳诘，更可一笔勾消。
But I also have an opinion, thinking that learning Esperanto is one thing, and learning the spirit of Esperanto is another. ——The same is true for vernacular literature. ——If the mind is the same, it will still change the card and not exchange the goods: he got up in front of the "Four-eyed Cang Sheng" and knelt down at the feet of "Master Chai Minghua"; It is nothing more than opposing human progress, which used to say no, and now it is said ne; In the past, it was written as "no", but now it is written as "no". Therefore, my opinion is that instilling correct academic literature and art and improving ideas is the first thing; Esperanto is still secondary; As for the arguments and refutations, they can be erased in one stroke.《新青年》里的通信，现在颇觉发达。读者也都喜看。但据我个人意见，以为还可酌减：只须将诚恳切实的讨论，按期登载；其他不负责任的随口批评，没有常识的问难，至多只要答他一回，此后便不必多说，省出纸墨，移作别用。例如见鬼，求仙，打脸之类，明明白白全是毫无常识的事情，《新青年》却还和他们反复辩论，对他们说“二五得一十”的道理，这功夫岂不可惜，这事业岂不可怜。
The correspondence in "New Youth" is now quite developed. Readers also like to read it. However, in my personal opinion, I think it can be reduced: only the sincere and practical discussion should be published on schedule; Other irresponsible casual criticisms, questions without common sense, at most only need to answer him once, and then there is no need to say more, save paper and ink, and transfer it to other uses. For example, seeing ghosts, seeking immortality, slapping in the face, etc., are all things without common sense, but "New Youth" still debates with them repeatedly, telling them the truth of "two five get ten".我看《新青年》的内容，大略不外两类：一是觉得空气闭塞污浊，吸这空气的人，将要完结了；便不免皱一皱眉，说一声“唉”。希望同感的人，因此也都注意，开辟一条活路。假如有人说这脸色声音，没有妓女的眉眼一般好看，唱小调一般好听，那是极确的真话；我们不必和他分辩，说是皱眉叹气，更为好看。和他分辩，我们就错了。一是觉得历来所走的路，万分危险，而且将到尽头；于是凭着良心，切实寻觅，看见别一条平坦有希望的路，便大叫一声说，“这边走好。”希望同感的人，因此转身，脱了危险，容易进步。假如有人偏向别处走，再劝一番，固无不可；但若仍旧不信，便不必拚命去拉，各走自己的路。因为拉得打架，不独于他无益，连自己和同感的人，也都耽搁了工夫。
I look at the content of "New Youth", which is roughly divided into two categories: one is that the air is blocked and dirty, and the person who breathes this air is about to end; He couldn't help but frown and said "sigh". I hope that those who feel the same way will also pay attention and open up a way to live. If someone says that this face and voice are not as beautiful as the eyebrows and eyes of a prostitute, or as good as singing a minor tune, that is the very truth; We don't have to argue with him, saying that it is frowning and sighing, it is more beautiful. Arguing with him, we are wrong. First, I feel that the road I have taken is extremely dangerous and will come to an end; So with his conscience, he really searched, and when he saw another smooth and hopeful road, he shouted, "Go this way." "I hope that those who feel the same way will turn around, get out of danger, and make progress easily. If someone prefers to go elsewhere, it is not impossible to persuade them again; But if you still don't believe it, you don't have to try hard to pull it, and go your own way. Because of the fight, not only was it useless to him, but even he and those who felt the same way delayed his work.耶稣说，见车要翻了，扶他一下。Nietzsche说，见车要翻了，推他一下。我自然是赞成耶稣的话；但以为倘若不愿你扶，便不必硬扶，听他罢了。此后能够不翻，固然很好，倘若终于翻倒，然后再来切切实实的帮他抬。
Jesus said that when he saw that the car was about to overturn, he helped him. Nietzsche said he saw the car about to overturn and pushed him. Naturally, I agree with Jesus' words. But I thought that if I didn't want you to help me, I didn't have to help him, just listen to him. It is good to be able not to turn over after that, but if it finally falls, then come and help him lift it.老兄，硬扶比抬更为费力，更难见效。翻后再抬，比将翻便扶，于他们更为有益。
Dude, hard support is more laborious and more difficult to achieve results than lifting. It is more beneficial for them to lift it after turning it over than to support it when it is turned over.唐俟。十一月四日。Tang Qi. November 4th.

一九二四年

一九二四年

一九二四年

1924

一九二四年

“说不出”

一九二四年

"I can't tell"看客在戏台下喝倒采，食客在膳堂里发标，伶人厨子，无嘴可开，只能怪自己没本领。但若看客开口一唱戏，食客动手一做菜，可就难说了。
The spectators cheered under the stage, the diners issued bids in the dining hall, and the performers and cooks had no mouths to open, so they could only blame themselves for their lack of skills. But if the spectators sing and the diners start cooking, it is difficult to say.所以，我以为批评家最平稳的是不要兼做创作。假如提起一支屠城的笔，扫荡了文坛上一切野草，那自然是快意的。但扫荡之后，倘以为天下已没有诗，就动手来创作，便每不免做出这样的东西来：
Therefore, I think the most stable thing for critics is not to also create. If you mention a pen that slaughters the city and sweep away all the weeds in the literary world, it will naturally be happy. But after the sweep, if you think that there is no poetry in the world, you will start to create, and you will inevitably make something like this:宇宙之广大呀，我说不出；The vastness of the universe, I can't say; 
父母之恩呀，我说不出； Parents' kindness, I can't say; 
爱人的爱呀，我说不出。 I can't tell you the love of my lover. 
阿呀阿呀，我说不出！ Ah, I can't tell!
这样的诗，当然是好的，——倘就批评家的创作而言。太上老君的《道德》五千言，开头就说“道可道非常道”，其实也就是一个“说不出”，所以这三个字，也就替得五千言。
Such poems are of course good,—— if they are concerned with the creation of critics. Taishang Laojun's "Taoism" has 5,000 words, and at the beginning it says "Tao can be said to be very Tao", but in fact, it is a "can't say", so these three words are replaced by 5,000 words.呜呼，“王者之迹熄，而《诗》亡；《诗》亡，然后《春秋》作。”“予岂好辩哉？予不得已也！”
呜呼，“王者之迹熄，而《诗》亡；《诗》亡，然后《春秋》作。 ”“予岂好辩哉？予不得已也！”

一九二四年

记杨树达君的袭来

一九二四年

记杨树达君的袭来今天早晨，其实时候是大约已经不早了。我还睡着，女工将我叫了醒来，说：“有一个师范大学的杨先生，杨树达，要来见你。”我虽然还不大清醒，但立刻知道是杨遇夫君，他名树达，曾经因为邀我讲书的事，访过我一次的。我一面起来，一面对女工说：“略等一等，就请罢。”
This morning, it was actually about late. I was still asleep, and the female worker woke me up and said, "There is a Mr. Yang from Normal University, Yang Shuda, who wants to see you." "Although I was not very sober, I immediately knew that it was Yang Yufujun, his name was Shuda, who had visited me once because he invited me to give a lecture. As I got up, I said to the female worker, "Wait a moment, please stop." ”我起来看钟，是九点二十分。女工也就请客去了。不久，他就进来，但我一看很愕然，因为他并非我所熟识的杨树达君，他是一个方脸，淡赭色脸皮，大眼睛长眼梢，中等身材的二十多岁的学生风的青年。他穿着一件藏青色的爱国布（？）长衫，时式的大袖子。手上拿一顶很新的淡灰色中折帽，白的围带；还有一个采色铅笔的扁匣，但听那摇动的声音，里面最多不过是两三支很短的铅笔。
I got up to look at the clock, and it was 9:20. The female worker also went to treat the guests. Soon, he came in, but I was stunned when I saw him, because he was not the Yang Shuda Jun I knew, he was a young man in his twenties with a square face, pale ochre face, big eyes and long eyes, and a medium build. He was wearing a navy blue patriotic cloth (?) The long shirt, the large sleeves of the fashion style. In his hand, he held a very new pale gray mid-fold hat with a white belt; There was also a flat box of colored pencils, but listening to the shaking sound, there were only two or three very short pencils inside.“你是谁？”我诧异的问，疑心先前听错了。
"Who are you?" I asked in surprise, suspecting that I had heard it wrong before.“我就是杨树达。”
"I'm Yang Shuda."我想：原来是一个和教员的姓名完全相同的学生，但也许写法并不一样。
I thought: It turned out to be a student with the exact same name as the faculty member, but maybe the writing method was different.“现在是上课时间，你怎么出来的？”
"It's class time, how did you get out?"“我不乐意上课！”
"I'm not happy to go to class!"我想：原来是一个孤行己意，随随便便的青年，怪不得他模样如此傲慢。
I thought: It turned out to be a young man who was going his own way and being casual, no wonder he looked so arrogant.“你们明天放假罢……”
"You have a holiday tomorrow......“没有，为什么？”
"No, why?"“我这里可是有通知的，……”我一面说，一面想，他连自己学校里的纪念日都不知道了，可见是已经多天没有上课，或者也许不过是一个假借自由的美名的游荡者罢。
"I have a notice here,...... I said, thinking that he didn't even know about the anniversary in his school, so it was clear that he hadn't been in class for many days, or maybe he was just a wanderer in the name of freedom.“拿通知给我看。”
"Show me the notice."“我团掉了。”我说。
"I fell into a group." I say.“拿团掉的我看。”
"I'll take the ball and see it."“拿出去了。”
"Take it out."“谁拿出去的？”
"Who took it out?"我想：这奇怪，怎么态度如此无礼？然而他似乎是山东口音，那边的人多是率直的，况且年青的人思想简单，……或者他知道我不拘这些礼节：这不足为奇。
I thought: This is strange, why is the attitude so rude? However, he seems to have a Shandong accent, and most of the people over there are straightforward, and the young people are simple,...... Or he knows that I don't adhere to these etiquette: it's not surprising.“你是我的学生么？”但我终于疑惑了。
"Are you my student?" But I finally wondered.“哈哈哈，怎么不是。”
"Hahaha, why not."“那么，你今天来找我干什么？”
"So, what are you doing with me today?"“要钱呀，要钱！”
"I want money, I want money!"我想：那么，他简直是游荡者，荡窘了，各处乱钻。
I thought: Well, he is simply a wanderer, embarrassed, and drilling everywhere.“你要钱什么用？”我问。
"What do you want money for?" I asked.“穷呀。要吃饭不是总要钱吗？我没有饭吃了！”他手舞足蹈起来。
"Poor. Doesn't it always cost money to eat? I have no food to eat! He danced.“你怎么问我来要钱呢？”
"Why do you ask me to ask for money?"“因为你有钱呀。你教书，做文章，送来的钱多得很。”他说着，脸上做出凶相，手在身上乱摸。
"Because you have money. You teach, make articles, and send a lot of money. He said, his face made a fierce look, and his hands touched his body.我想：这少年大约在报章上看了些什么上海的恐吓团的记事，竟模仿起来了，还是防着点罢。我就将我的坐位略略移动，预备容易取得抵抗的武器。
I thought: This young man probably read some accounts of the Shanghai terror group in the newspaper, and he actually imitated it, so let's just be on guard. I moved my seat slightly, preparing a weapon that was easy to resist.“钱是没有。”我决定的说。
"There is no money." I decided to say.“说谎！哈哈哈，你钱多得很。”
"Lie! Hahaha, you have a lot of money. ”女工端进一杯茶来。
The female worker brought a cup of tea.“他不是很有钱么？”这少年便问她，指着我。
"Isn't he rich?" The young man asked her and pointed at me.女工很惶窘了，但终于很怕的回答：“没有。”
The female worker was very embarrassed, but finally replied fearfully: "No." ”“哈哈哈，你也说谎！”
"Hahaha, you're lying too!"女工逃出去了。他换了一个坐位，指着茶的热气，说：
The female worker escaped. He changed his seat, pointed to the heat of the tea, and said:“多么凉。”
"How cool."我想：这意思大概算是讥刺我，犹言不肯将钱助人，是凉血动物。
I think: This is probably a sarcastic remark about me, and I still say that I refuse to give money to help others, and I am a cold-blooded animal.“拿钱来！”他忽而发出大声，手脚也愈加舞蹈起来，“不给钱是不走的！”
"Get the money!" He suddenly made a loud noise, and his hands and feet danced more and more, "If you don't give money, you won't leave!" ”“没有钱。”我仍然照先的说。
"No money." I still said it as before.“没有钱？你怎么吃饭？我也要吃饭。哈哈哈哈。”
"No money? How do you eat? I want to eat too. Hahahaha. ”“我有我吃饭的钱，没有给你的钱。你自己挣去。”
"I have money for my meals, not money for you. You earn it yourself. ”“我的小说卖不出去。哈哈哈！”
"My novels can't sell. Hahaha! ”我想：他或者投了几回稿，没有登出，气昏了。然而为什么向我为难呢？大概是反对我的作风的。或者是有些神经病的罢。
I think: He may have submitted a few manuscripts, but he didn't publish them, and he was angry. But why are you embarrassing me? Probably against my style. Or maybe it's just a bit of a neuropathy.“你要做就做，要不做就不做，一做就登出，送许多钱，还说没有，哈哈哈哈。晨报馆的钱已经送来了罢，哈哈哈。什么东西！周作人，钱玄同；周树人就是鲁迅，做小说的，对不对？孙伏园；马裕藻就是马幼渔，对不对？陈通伯，郁达夫。什么东西！Tolstoi，Andreev，张三，什么东西！哈哈哈，冯玉祥，吴佩孚，哈哈哈。”
"If you want to do it, do it, if you don't do it, you don't do it, log out as soon as you do it, give a lot of money, and say no, hahahahaha. The money from the morning newspaper has already been delivered, hahaha. What is it! Zhou Zuoren, Qian Xuantong; Zhou Shuren is Lu Xun, the one who makes novels, right? Sun Fuyuan; Ma Yuzao is Ma Youyu, right? Chen Tongbo, Yu Dafu. What is it! Tolstoi, Andreev, Zhang San, what the thing! Hahaha, Feng Yuxiang, Wu Peifu, hahaha. ”“你是为了我不再向晨报馆投稿的事而来的么？”但我又即刻觉到我的推测有些不确了，因为我没有见过杨遇夫马幼渔在《晨报副镌》上做过文章，不至于拉在一起；况且我的译稿的稿费至今还没有着落，他该不至于来说反话的。
"Are you here for me to stop contributing to the Morning Newspaper?" But I immediately felt that my speculation was a little inaccurate, because I had never seen Yang Yufu and Ma Youyu write an article in the "Morning Newspaper Deputy Engraved", so they would not be pulled together; Moreover, the manuscript fee for my translation has not yet been settled, so he should not say anything against it.“不给钱是不走的。什么东西，还要找！还要找陈通伯去。我就要找你的兄弟去，找周作人去，找你的哥哥去。”
"If you don't give money, you won't leave. What is it, you still have to find! I also want to find Chen Tongbo. I will go to your brother, find Zhou Zuoren, and find your brother. ”我想：他连我的兄弟哥哥都要找遍，大有恢复灭族法之意了，的确古人的凶心都遗传在现在的青年中。我同时又觉得这意思有些可笑，就自己微笑起来。
I think: He even has to find my brothers and brothers, and he has the intention of restoring the extermination law, and it is true that the ferocity of the ancients is inherited among today's young people. At the same time, I thought this was a bit ridiculous, so I smiled myself.“你不舒服罢？”他忽然问。
"Are you uncomfortable?" He asked suddenly.“是的，有些不舒服，但是因为你骂得不中肯。”
"Yes, it's a little uncomfortable, but because you scolded it unfairly."“我朝南。”他又忽而站起来，向后窗立着说。
"I'm facing south." He suddenly stood up again and stood at the back window.我想：这不知道是什么意思。
I thought: I don't know what that means.他忽而在我的床上躺下了。我拉开窗幔，使我的佳客的脸显得清楚些，以便格外看见他的笑貌。他果然有所动作了，是使他自己的眼角和嘴角都颤抖起来，以显示凶相和疯相，但每一抖都很费力，所以不到十抖，脸上也就平静了。
He suddenly lay down on my bed. I pulled back the curtain so that my guest's face was more clearly visible so that his smile could be seen in particular. He really made a move, which was to make the corners of his eyes and mouth tremble to show his fierce and crazy looks, but each shake was very laborious, so in less than ten shakes, his face was calm.我想：这近于疯人的神经性痉挛，然而颤动何以如此不调匀，牵连的范围又何以如此之大，并且很不自然呢？——一定，他是装出来的。
I thought: This is close to the nervous spasm of a madman, but why is the tremor so uneven, and why is the scope of implication so large and unnatural? - Definitely, he pretended.我对于这杨树达君的纳罕和相当的尊重，忽然都消失了，接着就涌起要呕吐和沾了龌龊东西似的感情来。原来我先前的推测，都太近于理想的了。初见时我以为简率的口调，他的意思不过是装疯，以热茶为冷，以北为南的话，也不过是装疯。从他的言语举动综合起来，其本意无非是用了无赖和狂人的混合状态，先向我加以侮辱和恫吓，希图由此传到别个，使我和他所提出的人们都不敢再做辩论或别样的文章。而万一自己遇到困难的时候，则就用“神经病”这一个盾牌来减轻自己的责任。但当时不知怎样，我对于他装疯技术的拙劣，就是其拙至于使我在先觉不出他是疯人，后来渐渐觉到有些疯意，而又立刻露出破绽的事，尤其抱着特别的反感了。
My respect for this Yang Shudajun suddenly disappeared, and then I felt like I was about to vomit and get dirty. It turns out that my previous speculation is too close to ideal. When I first saw him, I thought he was just pretending to be crazy, taking hot tea as cold, and taking north as south, he was just pretending to be crazy. From the sum of his words and actions, his original intention was nothing more than to use a mixture of scoundrel and madman, to insult and intimidate me first, and from this to other places, so that neither I nor the people he proposed dared to debate or write other articles again. And in case you encounter difficulties, you will use the shield of "neuropathy" to reduce your responsibilities. But somehow at the time, I was so clumsy about his pretending to be crazy that I couldn't realize he was crazy at first, and then I gradually felt a little crazy, and immediately revealed flaws, especially with a special disgust.他躺着唱起歌来。但我于他已经毫不感到兴味，一面想，自己竟受了这样浅薄卑劣的欺骗了，一面却照了他的歌调吹着口笛，借此嘘出我心中的厌恶来。
He lay down and sang. But I was no longer interested in him, and while I thought that I had been deceived by such a shallow and despicable way, I played a whistle to the tune of his song, so as to boo the disgust in my heart.“哈哈哈！”他翘起一足，指着自己鞋尖大笑。那是玄色的深梁的布鞋，裤是西式的，全体是一个时髦的学生。
"Hahaha!" He raised his foot and pointed to the toe of his shoe and laughed. They were dark deep-brimmed cloth shoes, the pants were Western-style, and all of them were fashionable students.我知道，他是在嘲笑我的鞋尖已破，但已经毫不感到什么兴味了。
I knew he was laughing at my broken toe, but he didn't feel any interest anymore.他忽而起来，走出房外去，两面一看，极灵敏地找着了厕所，小解了。我跟在他后面，也陪着他小解了。
He suddenly got up, walked out of the room, looked at both sides, and found the toilet very sensitively, which was a little relieved. I followed him and accompanied him to solve the problem.我们仍然回到房里。
We still go back to the room.“吓！什么东西！……”他又要开始。
"Huh! What is it! ...... he is going to start again.我可是有些不耐烦了，但仍然恳切地对他说：
I was a little impatient, but I still said to him earnestly:“你可以停止了。我已经知道你的疯是装出来的。你此来也另外还藏着别的意思。如果是人，见人就可以明白的说，无须装怪相。还是说真话罢，否则，白费许多工夫，毫无用处的。”
"You can stop. I already know that your madness is pretending. You have other meanings hidden here. If it is a person, you can clearly say it when you see people, and there is no need to pretend to be strange. It's better to tell the truth, otherwise, a lot of effort will be in vain and useless. ”他貌如不听见，两手搂着裤裆，大约是扣扣子，眼睛却注视着壁上的一张水彩画。过了一会，就用第二个指头指着那画大笑：
He didn't seem to hear, his hands were wrapped around his crotch, about buttons, but his eyes were fixed on a watercolor painting on the wall. After a while, he pointed at the painting with his second finger and laughed:“哈哈哈！”
"Hahaha!"这些单调的动作和照例的笑声，我本已早经觉得枯燥的了，而况是假装的，又如此拙劣，便愈加看得烦厌。他侧立在我的前面，我坐着，便用了曾被讥笑的破的鞋尖一触他的胫骨，说：
I already found these monotonous movements and laughter boring, and it was even more boring to watch it because it was pretending and so clumsy. He stood sideways in front of me, and as I sat down, he touched his shin with the toe of his broken shoe, which had been ridiculed, and said:“已经知道是假的了，还装甚么呢？还不如直说出你的本意来。”
"I already know it's fake, so what else do you pretend? It's better to say what you mean. ”但他貌如不听见，徘徊之间，突然取了帽和铅笔匣，向外走去了。
But he didn't seem to hear it, and while wandering, he suddenly took out his hat and pencil case and walked out.这一着棋是又出于我的意外的，因为我还希望他是一个可以理喻，能知惭愧的青年。他身体很强壮，相貌很端正。Tolstoi和Andreev的发音也还正。
This move was another accident for me, because I also wanted him to be a young man who could be reasoned and ashamed. He was very strong and had a good look. Tolstoi and Andreev are also pronounced correctly.我追到风门前，拉住他的手，说道，“何必就走，还是自己说出本意来罢，我可以更明白些……”他却一手乱摇，终于闭了眼睛，拼两手向我一挡，手掌很平的正对着我：他大概是懂得一点国粹的拳术的。
I chased to the damper, took his hand, and said, "Why bother leaving, or just say your own intentions, I can understand better......" He shook his hand wildly, and finally closed his eyes, fighting to block me with both hands, and his palm was facing me very flat: he probably knew a little bit of national boxing.他又往外走。我一直送到大门口，仍然用前说去固留，而他推而且挣，终于挣出大门了。他在街上走得很傲然，而且从容地。
He walked out again. I sent it all the way to the gate, still using the previous words to keep it, and he pushed and earned, and finally broke out of the gate. He walked down the street proudly and calmly.这样子，杨树达君就远了。
In this way, Yang Shudajun is far away.我回进来，才向女工问他进来时候的情形。
I came back and asked the female worker how he was when he came in.“他说了名字之后，我问他要名片，他在衣袋里掏了一会，说道，‘阿，名片忘了，还是你去说一声罢。’笑嘻嘻，一点不像疯的。”女工说。
"After he said his name, I asked him for a business card, and he took it out of his pocket for a while and said, 'Ah, I forgot my business card, so you can just say it.' Smile, not crazy at all. The female worker said.我愈觉得要呕吐了。
The more I feel like I'm going to vomit.然而这手段却确乎使我受损了，——除了先前的侮辱和恫吓之外。我的女工从此就将门关起来，到晚上听得打门声，只大叫是谁，却不出去，总须我自己去开门。我写完这篇文字之间，就放下了四回笔。
However, this method did damage me,—— except for the previous insults and intimidations. My female worker closed the door from then on, and at night I heard the knock on the door, only shouting who it was, but I didn't go out, I always had to open the door myself. Between writing this text, I put down my pen four times.“你不舒服罢？”杨树达君曾经这样问过我。
"Are you uncomfortable?" Yang Shudajun once asked me this.是的，我的确不舒服。我历来对于中国的情形，本来多已不舒服的了，但我还没有预料到学界或文界对于他的敌手竟至于用了疯子来做武器，而这疯子又是假的，而装这假疯子的又是青年的学生。
Yes, I was uncomfortable. I have always been uncomfortable with the situation in China, but I did not expect that the academic or literary circles would use a madman as a weapon against his opponent, and this madman was fake, and the person who pretended to be a fake madman was a young student.二四年十一月十三日夜。
On the night of November 13, 2024.

一九二四年

关于杨君袭来事件的辩正

一九二四年

Justification for Yang Jun's attack一
One今天有几位同学极诚实地告诉我，说十三日访我的那一位学生确是神经错乱的，十三日是发病的一天，此后就加重起来了。我相信这是真实情形，因为我对于神经患者的初发状态没有实见和注意研究过，所以很容易有看错的时候。
Today, several classmates told me very honestly that the student who visited me on the 13th was indeed delirious and that the 13th was the day of the onset of the disease, and it got worse after that. I believe this is the real situation, because I have not seen or paid attention to the initial state of neurological patients, so it is easy to misunderstand.现在我对于我那记事后半篇中神经过敏的推断这几段，应该注销。但以为那记事却还可以存在：这是意外地发露了人对人——至少是他对我和我对他——互相猜疑的真面目了。
Now I should write off the inferences of my nervousness in the second half of my memoir. But I thought that the account still existed: it was an unexpected revelation of the true suspicion of man to man—at least he to me and me to him.当初，我确是不舒服，自己想，倘使他并非假装，我即不至于如此恶心。现在知道是真的了，却又觉得这牺牲实在太大，还不如假装的好。然而事实是事实，还有什么法子呢？我只能希望他从速回复健康。
At first, I was indeed uncomfortable, and I thought to myself, if he hadn't pretended to be, I wouldn't be so disgusted. Now I know it's true, but I feel that the sacrifice is too great, it's better to pretend. However, the fact is the fact, what else can be done? I can only hope that he will return to health as soon as possible.十一月二十一日。
November 21.二
Two伏园兄：
Brother Fuyuan:今天接到一封信和一篇文稿，是杨君的朋友，也是我的学生做的，真挚而悲哀，使我看了很觉得惨然，自己感到太易于猜疑，太易于愤怒。他已经陷入这样的境地了，我还可以不赶紧来消除我那对于他的误解么？
I received a letter and a manuscript today, written by Yang Jun's friend and my student, sincere and sad, which made me feel very miserable when I read it, and I felt that I was too suspicious and angry. He has already fallen into such a situation, can I hurry up and clear up my misunderstanding about him?所以我想，我前天交出的那一点辩正，似乎不够了，很想就将这一篇在《语丝》第三期上给他发表。但纸面有限，如果排工有工夫，我极希望增刊两板（大约此文两板还未必容得下），也不必增价，其责任即由我负担。
So I think that the point of defense I handed over the day before yesterday seems to be insufficient, and I really want to publish this article for him in the third issue of "Yusi". However, the paper is limited, and if there is time to schedule work, I really hope to add two boards (about the two boards of this article may not be accommodated), and there is no need to increase the price, and the responsibility will be borne by me.由我造出来的酸酒，当然应该由我自己来喝干。
Of course, the sour wine I made should be drunk by myself.鲁迅。十一月二十四日。
Lu Xun. November 24th.

一九二四年

烽话五则

一九二四年

Five beacon talks父子们冲突着。但倘用神通将他们的年纪变成约略相同，便立刻可以像一对志同道合的好朋友。
Father and son clashed. But if you use magical powers to make them about the same age, you can immediately become like a pair of like-minded good friends.伶俐人叹“人心不古”时，大抵是他的巧计失败了；但老太爷叹“人心不古”时，则无非因为受了儿子或姨太太的气。
When a clever person sighs that "people's hearts are not ancient", it is probably because his clever plan has failed; But when the old lady sighed that "people's hearts are not ancient", it was nothing more than because he was angry with his son or aunt.电报曰：天祸中国。天曰：委实冤枉！
The telegram said: Disaster for China. Heaven said: It is truly a grievance!精神文明人作飞机论曰：较之灵魂之自在游行，一钱不值矣。写完，遂率家眷移入东交民巷使馆界。
精神文明人作飞机论曰：较之灵魂之自在游行，一钱不值矣。 写完，遂率家眷移入东交民巷使馆界。倘诗人睡在烽火旁边，听得烘烘地响时，则烽火就是听觉。但此说近于味觉，因为太无味。然而无为即无不为，则无味自然就是至味了。对不对？
If the poet sleeps next to the beacon and hears the sound of the beacon, the beacon is hearing. But this statement is close to taste, because it is too tasteless. However, if non-action is doing nothing, then tastelessness is naturally the best taste. Right?

一九二四年

“音乐”？

一九二四年

"Music"?夜里睡不着，又计画着明天吃辣子鸡，又怕和前回吃过的那一碟做得不一样，愈加睡不着了。坐起来点灯看《语丝》，不幸就看见了徐志摩先生的神秘谈，——不，“都是音乐”，是听到了音乐先生的音乐：
I couldn't sleep at night, and I was planning to eat spicy chicken tomorrow, but I was afraid that it would be different from the plate I ate last time, and I couldn't sleep even more. Sitting up and lighting the lamp to watch "Yusi", unfortunately I saw Mr. Xu Zhimo's mysterious talk,—— No, "it's all music", I heard Mr. Music's music:“……我不仅会听有音的乐，我也会听无音的乐（其实也有音就是你听不见）。我直认我是一个甘脆的Mystic。我深信……”
“…… I will not only listen to music with sound, but also music without sound (in fact, there is also sound that you can't hear). I admit that I am a crispy Mystic. I am convinced that ......"此后还有什么什么“都是音乐”云云，云云云云。总之：“你听不着就该怨你自己的耳轮太笨或是皮粗”！
After that, there is nothing "all music" clouds, clouds. In short: "If you can't hear it, you should blame your own earrings for being too stupid or coarse"!我这时立即疑心自己皮粗，用左手一摸右胳膊，的确并不滑；再一摸耳轮，却摸不出笨也与否。然而皮是粗定了；不幸而“拊不留手”的竟不是我的皮，还能听到什么庄周先生所指教的天籁地籁和人籁。但是，我的心还不死，再听罢，仍然没有，——阿，仿佛有了，像是电影广告的军乐。呸！错了。这是“绝妙的音乐”么？再听罢，没……唔，音乐，似乎有了：
At this time, I immediately suspected that my skin was thick, and when I touched my right arm with my left hand, it was indeed not slippery; I touched the earrings again, but I couldn't tell if I was stupid or not. However, the skin is roughly determined; Unfortunately, it is not my skin that "can't hold back", and I can still hear the natural sounds and human sounds taught by Mr. Zhuang Zhou. However, my heart is not dead, and after listening to it again, there is still no ,——, as if there is military music in a movie advertisement. Bah! Wrong. Is this "wonderful music"? After hearing it again, it was gone...... Well, the music seems to have it:“……慈悲而残忍的金苍蝇，展开馥郁的安琪儿的黄翅，唵，颉利，弥缚谛弥谛，从荆芥萝卜玎琤淜洋的彤海里起来。Br-rrr tatata tahi tal无终始的金刚石天堂的娇袅鬼茱萸，蘸着半分之一的北斗的蓝血，将翠绿的忏悔写在腐烂的鹦哥伯伯的狗肺上！你不懂么？咄！吁，我将死矣！婀娜涟漪的天狼的香而秽恶的光明的利镞，射中了塌鼻阿牛的妖艳光滑蓬松而冰冷的秃头，一匹黯黮欢愉的瘦螳螂飞去了。哈，我不死矣！无终……”
“…… The compassionate and cruel golden fly, unfolding the yellow wings of the rich Angel, om, Xieli, and the truth, rising from the sea of red sea of nepeta radish and jade. Br-rrr tatata tahi tal The delicate ghost dogwood of the diamond paradise without end, dipped in the blue blood of the Big Dipper in half of it, writes the emerald green confession on the dog lungs of the rotten parrot brother! Don't you understand? Hey! Alas, I am going to die! The fragrant and filthy bright arrowhead of the graceful rippling Sirius shot the bewitching, smooth, fluffy and cold bald head of the flattened cow, and a dark and joyful thin mantis flew away. Ha, I'm not dead! There is no end......"危险，我又疑心我发热了，发昏了，立刻自省，即知道又不然。这不过是一面想吃辣子鸡，一面自己胡说八道；如果是发热发昏而听到的音乐，一定还要神妙些。并且其实连电影广告的军乐也没有听到，倘说是幻觉，大概也不过自欺之谈，还要给粗皮来粉饰的妄想。我不幸终于难免成为一个苦韧的非Mystic了，怨谁呢。只能恭颂志摩先生的福气大，能听到这许多“绝妙的音乐”而已。但倘有不知道自怨自艾的人，想将这位先生“送进疯人院”去，我可要拚命反对，尽力呼冤的，——虽然将音乐送进音乐里去，从甘脆的Mystic看来并不算什么一回事。
Danger, I suspected that I had a fever and fainted, and immediately introspected, that is, I knew it was not. This is just wanting to eat spicy chicken while talking nonsense yourself; If it is music heard when you are fever and faint, it must be more magical. And in fact, I didn't even hear the military music in the movie advertisement, if it was an illusion, it was probably just a self-deception, and it was a delusion to whitewash the coarse skin. I unfortunately finally became a bitter non-Mystic, who can I blame? I can only praise Mr. Shima for his great blessing and to hear so many "wonderful music". But if there is a person who does not know self-pity and wants to "send this gentleman to a madhouse", I will desperately oppose it, and try my best to cry out for grievances,—— although sending music into music is not a thing from the crisp Mystic.然而音乐又何等好听呵，音乐呀！再来听一听罢，可惜而且可恨，在檐下已有麻雀儿叫起来了。
But how good the music is, music! Let's listen to it again, but unfortunately and hatefully, there are already sparrows calling under the eaves.咦，玲珑零星邦滂砰珉的小雀儿呵，你总依然是不管甚么地方都飞到，而且照例来唧唧啾啾地叫，轻飘飘地跳么？然而这也是音乐呀，只能怨自己的皮粗。
Hey, Linglong sporadically bangs the little birds, you still fly anywhere, and chirp and jump lightly as usual? However, this is also music, and I can only blame myself for being thick-skinned.只要一叫而人们大抵震悚的怪鸱的真的恶声在那里！？
As long as you scream, people will be shocked by the monster owl, where is the real evil sound!?

一九二四年

我来说“持中”的真相

一九二四年

Let me tell the truth of "holding the center"风闻有我的老同学玄同其人者，往往背地里褒贬我，褒固无妨，而又有贬，则岂不可气呢？今天寻出漏洞，虽然与我无干，但也就来回敬一箭罢：报仇雪恨，《春秋》之义也。
It is rumored that my old classmate Xuan Tong is a person, and he often praises and criticizes me behind my back, and it doesn't hurt to praise him, but there is also criticism, so can't I be angry? Today, I found a loophole, although it has nothing to do with me, but I will respect an arrow back and forth: revenge and revenge, which is the meaning of the "Spring and Autumn Annals".他在《语丝》第二期上说，有某人挖苦叶名琛的对联“不战，不和，不守；不死，不降，不走。”大概可以作为中国人“持中”的真相之说明。我以为这是不对的。
He said in the second issue of "Yusi" that someone sarcastically said that Ye Mingchen's couplets "do not fight, discord, and do not defend; He did not die, did not surrender, did not flee. It can probably be used as an explanation of the truth of the Chinese's "holding the center". I thought it was wrong.夫近乎“持中”的态度大概有二：一者“非彼即此”，二者“可彼可此”也。前者是无主意，不盲从，不附势，或者别有独特的见解；但境遇是很危险的，所以叶名琛终至于败亡，虽然他不过是无主意。后者则是“骑墙”，或是极巧妙的“随风倒”了，然而在中国最得法，所以中国人的“持中”大概是这个。倘改篡了旧对联来说明，就该是：
There are probably two attitudes that are close to "holding the center": one is "either that or that", and the other is "yes or that". The former is without ideas, not blindly following, not attaching to power, or having unique opinions; But the situation was very dangerous, so Ye Mingchen was defeated in the end, although he just had no idea. The latter is "riding the wall", or very ingeniously "falling with the wind", but in China it is the most lawful, so the Chinese's "holding the center" is probably this. If the old couplet is tampered with, it should be:“似战，似和，似守；“似战，似和，似守；
似死，似降，似走。” 似死，似降，似走。 ”
于是玄同即应据精神文明法律第九万三千八百九十四条，治以“误解真相，惑世诬民”之罪了。但因为文中用有“大概”二字，可以酌给末减：这两个字是我也很喜欢用的。Therefore, Xuantong should be punished according to Article 93,894 of the Law on Spiritual Civilization for the crime of "misunderstanding the truth and misleading the world and slandering the people". But because the word "probably" is used in the text, it can be subtracted at the end: these two words are also my favorite to use.

一九二五年

一九二五年

一九二五年

1925

一九二五年

Petöfi Sándor的诗

一九二五年

Poem by Petöfi Sándor　　我的父亲的和我的手艺
　　从幼小以来，亲爱的父亲，
你的诚实的嘴嘱咐我，很谆谆，
教我该像你似的，做一个屠兽者——
但你的儿子却成了文人。
　　你用了你的家伙击牛，
我的柔翰向人们开仗——
所做的都就是这个，
单是那名称两样。
　　愿我是树，倘使你……
　　愿我是树，倘使你是树的花朵；
你是露，我就愿意成花；
愿我是露罢，倘使你是太阳的一条光线；
我们的存在这就打成一家。
　　而且，倘使你，姑娘，是高天
我就愿意是，其中闪烁的一颗星；
然而倘使你，姑娘，是地狱，——
为要和你一处，我宁可永不超生。
　　太阳酷热得照临……
　　太阳酷热得照临
周遭的谷子都已成熟；
一到明天早晨，
我就开手去收获。
　　我的爱也成熟了。
红炽的是我的精神；
但愿你，甜蜜的，唯一的，——
但愿你是收割的人！
　　坟墓休息着……
　　坟墓里休息着我的初恋的人儿，
而我的苦痛就如月亮，当坟墓的夜中。
新的爱从我这里起来了，太阳似的，
而那月亮……在太阳的威力下柔融。
　　我的爱——并不是……
　　我的爱——并不是一只夜莺，
在曙红的招呼中觉醒，
用了受白昼的亲吻而赤热了的妙音，
来响彻这人境。
　　我的爱并不是郁郁葱葱的林薮，
有白鹄浮泛于闲静的鱼塘，
而且以雪白的颈子点首，
向了照耀在川水里的月亮的影光。
　　我的爱并不是欢欣安静的人家，
花园似的，将平和一门关住，
其中有“幸福”慈爱地往来，
而抚养那“欢欣”，那娇小的仙女。
　　我的爱，就如荒凉的沙漠一般，——
一个大盗似的有嫉妒在那里霸着；
他的剑是绝望的疯狂，
而每一刺是各样的谋杀。
My Father's and My Craft  From a young age, dear father,  your honest mouth has taught me id_00002 to be a slaughter like you. But your son has become a literati.  You used your guy to hit the bulls,  My Rouhan is going to war on people - that's all  is what  is the name of the two.  May I be a tree, if you ......  May I be a tree, if you are the flower of a tree;  You are dew, I am willing to be a flower;  May I be a dew, if you are a ray of the sun;  Our existence is a family.  And, if you, girl, are high in the sky I would be a twinkling star in it;  But if you, girl, are hell,—— To be with you, I would rather never be reborn.  The sun is so hot that it ......  The sun is so hot  The surrounding millet is ripe;  As soon as tomorrow morning,  I'll start harvesting.  My love has also matured.  It's my spirit that is red;  May you, sweet, the only ,—— May you be the one who reaps!  Grave resting......  My first love rests in the grave,  And my pain is like the moon, when the night of the grave.  A new love has risen from me, like the sun,  And the moon ...... Melt under the power of the sun.  My love - not ......  My love is not a nightingale,  awakens in the dawn greeting,  uses the wonderful sound of being red from the kiss of the day,  to resound the human world.  My love is not the lush forest,  there are white swans floating in the quiet fish pond,  and nodding with a snow-white neck,  is the shadow of the moon shining in the river.  My love is not a joyful and quiet house,  like a garden, shutting a door of peace,  in which there is "happiness" lovingly coming and going,  and raising the "joy", the petite fairy.  My love is like a desolate desert,—— A thief has jealousy that dominates there;  His sword is desperate madness,  and every stab is murder of all kinds.

一九二五年

咬嚼之余

一九二五年

After chewing我的一篇《咬文嚼字》的“滥调”，又引起小麻烦来了，再说几句罢。
The "cliché" of one of mine's "Biting Words and Chewing Words" has caused a little trouble again, so let's say a few more words.我那篇的开首说：“以摆脱传统思想之束缚……”
The beginning of my article says: "To get rid of the shackles of traditional thinking......"第一回通信的某先生似乎没有看见这一句，所以多是枝叶之谈，况且他大骂一通之后，即已声明不管，所以现在也不在话下。
A certain gentleman in the first correspondence didn't seem to see this sentence, so it was mostly a matter of leaves, and after he scolded him, he had already declared that he didn't care, so it was not a problem now.第二回的潜源先生的通信是看见那一句的了，但意见和我不同，以为都非不能“摆脱传统思想之束缚……”。各人的意见，当然会各式各样的。
I saw that sentence in the second letter of Mr. Qianyuan, but my opinion was different from mine, thinking that it was not impossible to "get rid of the shackles of traditional ......". Of course, everyone's opinions will be varied.他说女名之所以要用“轻靓艳丽”字眼者，（一）因为“总常想知道他或她的性别”。但我却以为这“常想”就是束缚。小说看下去就知道，戏曲是开首有说明的。（二）因为便当，譬如托尔斯泰有一个女儿叫作Elizabeth Tolstoi，全译出来太麻烦，用“妥妳丝苔”就明白简单得多。但假如托尔斯泰还有两个女儿，叫做Mary Tolstoi et Hilda Tolstoi，即又须别想八个“轻靓艳丽”字样，反而麻烦得多了。
He said that the reason why female names are used as "light and beautiful" is (1) because "I always want to know his or her gender". But I thought that this "constant thought" was bondage. If you read the novel, you will know that opera is explained at the beginning. (2) Because of the bento, for example, Tolstoy had a daughter named Elizabeth Tolstoi, which is too troublesome to translate, and it is much simpler to use "Tuo You Silk Moss". But if Tolstoy had two daughters, named Mary Tolstoi et Hilda Tolstoi, it would be much more troublesome not to think about the eight words "light and beautiful".他说Go可译郭，Wi可译王，Ho可译何，何必故意译做“各”“旺”“荷”呢？再者，《百家姓》为什么不能有伟力？但我却以为译“郭”“王”“何”才是“故意”，其游魂是《百家姓》；我之所以诧异《百家姓》的伟力者，意思即见前文的第一句中。但来信又反问了，则又答之曰：意思即见前文第一句中。
He said that Go can be translated as Guo, Wi can be translated as Wang, and Ho can be translated as He, so why deliberately translate it as "each", "Wang" and "He"? Furthermore, why can't "Hundred Family Surnames" have great power? But I thought that the translation of "Guo", "Wang" and "He" was "intentional", and its wandering soul was "Hundred Family Surnames"; The reason why I am surprised by the power of "Hundred Family Surnames" is that the meaning is in the first sentence of the previous article. But the letter asked again, and he replied: The meaning is found in the first sentence of the previous sentence.再说一遍罢，我那篇的开首说：“以摆脱传统思想之束缚……。”所以将翻译当作一种工具，或者图便利，爱折中的先生们是本来不在所讽的范围之内的。两位的通信似乎于这一点都没有看清楚。
Again, the beginning of my article says: "To get rid of the shackles of traditional thinking....... Therefore, the gentlemen who regard translation as a tool, or for convenience, love compromise are not within the scope of irony. The correspondence between the two did not seem to be clear at all.末了，我对于潜源先生的“末了”的话，还得辩正几句。（一）我自己觉得我和三苏中之任何一苏，都绝不相类，也不愿意比附任何古人，或者“故意”凌驾他们。倘以某古人相拟，我也明知是好意，但总是满身不舒服，和见人使Gorky姓高相同。（二）其实《呐喊》并不风行，其所以略略流行于新人物间者，因为其中的讽刺在表面上似乎大抵针对旧社会的缘故，但使老先生们一看，恐怕他们也要以为“吹敲”“苛责”，深恶而痛绝之的。（三）我并不觉得我有“名”，即使有之，也毫不想因此而作文更加郑重，来维持已有的名，以及别人的信仰。纵使别人以为无聊的东西，只要自己以为有聊，且不被暗中禁止阻碍，便总要发表曝露出来，使厌恶滥调的读者看看，可以从速改正误解，不相信我。因为我觉得我若专讲宇宙人生的大话，专刺旧社会给新青年看，希图在若干人们中保存那由误解而来的“信仰”，倒是“欺读者”，而于我是苦痛的。
Finally, I have to correct Mr. Qianyuan's "end" words. (1) I personally feel that I am by no means similar to any of the three Su, and I am not willing to be attached to any of the ancients, or "deliberately" surpass them. If I were to compare it to an ancient person, I know it was well-intentioned, but I was always uncomfortable, just like seeing someone who made Gorky's surname high. (2) In fact, "The Scream" is not popular, and the reason why it is slightly popular among new characters is because the satire in it seems to be mostly aimed at the old society on the surface, but if the old gentlemen see it, I am afraid that they will also think that they are "blowing" and "harsh", and they hate it deeply. (3) I don't feel that I have a "name", and even if I do, I don't want to make my composition more solemn because of it to maintain my existing name and other people's beliefs. Even if others think something is boring, as long as they think it is interesting and are not hindered by secret prohibitions, they must always publish and expose it, so that readers who hate clichés can see it, and they can quickly correct their misunderstandings and don't believe me. Because I think that if I focus on talking about the big story of cosmic life and focusing on the old society to show the new youth, I hope to preserve the "faith" that comes from misunderstanding among some people, but it is "deceiving readers", and it is painful for me.一位先生当面，一位通信，问我《现代评论》里面的一篇《鲁迅先生》，为什么没有了。我一查，果然，只剩了前面的《苦恼》和后面的《破落户》，而本在其间的《鲁迅先生》确乎没有了。怕还有同样的误解者，我在此顺便声明一句：我一点不知道为什么。
A gentleman asked me why there was no "Mr. Lu Xun" in the "Modern Review". When I checked, sure enough, only the front "Distress" and the back "Broken Settlement" remained, and the "Mr. Lu Xun" in between was indeed gone. I'm afraid there are other people who misunderstand it, so I would like to declare it by the way: I don't know why at all.假如我说要做一本《妥妳丝苔传》，而暂不出版，人便去质问托尔斯泰的太太或女儿，我以为这办法实在不很对，因为她们是不会知道我所玩的是什么把戏的。
If I say that I want to make a book of "The Legend of Thomas Moss" and not publish it for the time being, and people question Tolstoy's wife or daughter, I think this is really not right, because they will not know what trick I am playing.一月二十日　一九二五年《京报副刊》。
January 20, 1925 Beijing News Supplement.

一九二五年

咬嚼未始“乏味”

一九二五年

Chewing is not "boring"对于四日副刊上潜源先生的话再答几句：
A few more answers to Mr. Qianyuan's words in the supplement on the 4th:一，原文云：想知道性别并非主张男女不平等。答曰：是的。但特别加上小巧的人工，于无须区别的也多加区别者，又作别论。从前独将女人缠足穿耳，也可以说不过是区别；现在禁止女人剪发，也不过是区别，偏要逼她头上多加些“丝苔”而已。
First, the original text says: I want to know that gender does not advocate gender inequality. Answer: Yes. But with the addition of small labor, there is no need to distinguish between those who do not need to be differentiated, which is a different matter. In the past, it was just a difference to wrap a woman's feet and pierce her ears; Now women are prohibited from cutting their hair, which is just a difference, but to force her to add more "silk moss" to her head.二，原文云：却于她字没有讽过。答曰：那是译She的，并非无风作浪。即不然，我也并无遍讽一切的责任，也不觉得有要讽草头丝旁，必须从讽她字开头的道理。
Second, the original text says: But she has not satirized her words. He replied: "That's a translation of She, not without wind and waves." Even if it is not, I have no responsibility to satirize everything, and I do not feel that there is a reason to start with the word satirical to the grass.三，原文云：“常想”真是“传统思想的束缚”么？答曰：是的，因为“性意识”强。这是严分男女的国度里必有的现象，一时颇不容易脱体的，所以正是传统思想的束缚。
3. The original text says: "Chang Xiang" is really "the shackles of traditional thought"? Answer: Yes, because "sexual awareness" is strong. This is a phenomenon that must exist in a country where men and women are strictly separated, and it is not easy to get out of the body for a while, so it is the shackles of traditional thinking.四，原文云：我可以反问：假如托尔斯泰有两兄弟，我们不要另想几个“非轻靓艳丽”的字眼么？答曰：断然不必。我是主张连男女的姓也不要妄加分别的，这回的辩难一半就为此。怎么忽然又忘了？
Fourth, the original text says: I can ask rhetorically: If Tolstoy had two brothers, shouldn't we think of a few other words "not light and gorgeous"? The answer was: Absolutely not. I advocate not even making a distinction between male and female surnames, and this time half of the argument is for this reason. Why did you suddenly forget again?五，原文云：赞成用郭译Go……习见故也。答曰：“习见”和“是”毫无关系。中国最习见的姓是“张王李赵”。《百家姓》的第一句是“赵钱孙李”，“潜”字却似乎颇不习见，但谁能说“钱”是而“潜”非呢？
5. The original text says: I agree with the use of Guo Yi Go...... It is because of habit. Answer: "Xi Xi" and "yes" have nothing to do with it. The most common surname in China is "Zhang Wang Li Zhao". The first sentence of "Hundred Family Surnames" is "Zhao Qian Sun Li", but the word "Qian" seems to be quite unfamiliar, but who can say that "money" is yes and "Qian" is not?六，原文云：我比起三苏，是因为“三”字凑巧，不愿意，“不舒服”，马上可以去掉。答曰：很感谢。我其实还有一个兄弟，早死了。否则也要防因为“四”字“凑巧”，比起“四凶”，更加使人着急。
Sixth, the original text says: I compare with Sansu because the word "three" happens to be unwilling, "uncomfortable", and can be removed immediately. He replied: Thank you very much. I actually have a brother who died early. Otherwise, it is also necessary to guard against the "four" word "coincidence", which is more anxious than the "four evils".一九二五年二月十日《京报副刊》。
February 10, 1925 "Beijing News Supplement".

一九二五年

杂语

一九二五年

Miscellaneous称为神的和称为魔的战斗了，并非争夺天国，而在要得地狱的统治权。所以无论谁胜，地狱至今也还是照样的地狱。
The battle between the gods and the demons is not for the kingdom of heaven, but for the rule of hell. So no matter who wins, hell is still the same hell.两大古文明国的艺术家握手了，因为可图两国的文明的沟通。沟通是也许要沟通的，可惜“诗哲”又到意大利去了。
Artists from the two ancient civilizations shook hands because they could communicate with each other. Communication may be communicated, but unfortunately the "poetry and philosophy" went to Italy again.“文士”和老名士战斗，因为……，——我不知道要怎样。但先前只许“之乎者也”的名公捧角，现在却也准ABCD的“文士”入场了。这时戏子便化为艺术家，对他们点点头。
"Scribes" fight with old celebrities because ......,—— I don't know what to do. But previously, only the famous public of "Zhihu Zhi" was allowed to win, but now the "scribes" of ABCD are also allowed to enter. At this time, the actors turned into artists and nodded to them.新的批评家要站出来么？您最好少说话，少作文，不得已时，也要做得短。但总须弄几个人交口说您是批评家。那么，您的少说话就是高深，您的少作文就是名贵，永远不会失败了。
Will new critics come forward? You'd better talk less, write less, and keep it short when necessary. But you have to get a few people to say that you are a critic. Then, your less talk is profound, and your less composition is precious, and you will never fail.新的创作家要站出来么？您最好是在发表过一篇作品之后，另造一个名字，写点文章去恭维；倘有人攻击了，就去辩护。而且这名字要造得艳丽一些，使人们容易疑心是女性。倘若真能有这样的一个，就更佳；倘若这一个又是爱人，就更更佳。“爱人呀！”这三个字就多么旖旎而饶于诗趣呢？正不必再有第四字，才可望得到奋斗的成功。
Are new creators going to step up? It is best for you to create a different name and write some articles to compliment after publishing a work; If someone attacks, defend it. And the name should be made more gorgeous, making it easy for people to suspect that it is a woman. If there really is such one, it will be even better; If this one is a lover again, it is even better. "Lover!" How beautiful and poetic are these three words? There is no need for a fourth word to hope for success in the struggle.

一九二五年

编完写起

一九二五年

After compiling and writing近几天收到两篇文章，是答陈百年先生的《一夫多妻的新护符》的，据说《现代评论》不给登他们的答辩，又无处可投，所以寄到我这里来了，请为介绍到可登的地方去。诚然，《妇女杂志》上再不见这一类文章了，想起来毛骨悚然，悚然于阶级很不同的两类人，在中国竟会联成一气。但我能向那里介绍呢？饭碗是谁都有些保重的。况且，看《现代评论》的预告，已经登在二十二期上了，我便决意将这两篇没收。
It is said that the "Modern Review" does not give them a reply, and there is nowhere to vote, so they are sent to me, please introduce them to the place where they can be listed. It is true that this kind of article is no longer seen in the "Women's Magazine", and it is creepy to think about it, and I am shocked that the two types of people with very different classes will unite in China. But can I introduce it there? Everyone takes care of their jobs. Moreover, looking at the preview of "Modern Review", it has been published in the 22nd issue, so I decided to confiscate these two articles.但待到看见印成的《现代评论》的时候，我却又决计将它登出来了，因为这比那挂在那边的尾巴上的一点要详得多。但是，委屈得很，只能在这无聊的《莽原》上。我于他们三位都是熟识之至，又毫没有研究过什么性伦理性心理之类，所以不敢来说外行话。可是我总以为章周两先生在中国将这些议论发得太早，——虽然外国已经说旧了，但外国是外国。可是我总觉得陈先生满口“流弊流弊”，是论利害而不像论是非，莫明其妙。
But when I saw the printed "Modern Review", I decided to publish it again, because it was much more detailed than the point hanging on the tail over there. However, I am very aggrieved, and I can only do it in this boring "Mangyuan". I am very familiar with all three of them, and I have never studied any sexual ethics and psychology, so I dare not speak in layman's terms. However, I always thought that Mr. Zhang and Zhou had posted these discussions too early in China,—— although foreign countries have said that they are old, foreign countries are foreign countries. But I always feel that Mr. Chen is full of "corruption and corruption", which is about interests rather than right and wrong, and I don't understand the mystery.但陈先生文章的末段，读来却痛快——
But the last paragraph of Mr. Chen's article is happy to read -“……至于法律和道德相比，道德不妨比法律严些，法律所不禁止的，道德尽可加以禁止。例如拍马吹牛，似乎不是法律所禁止的……然则我们在道德上也可以容许拍马屁，认为无损人格么？”
“…… As for law and morality, morality may be stricter than law, and what is not prohibited by law can be prohibited by morality. For example, bragging does not seem to be prohibited by law...... So, can we morally allow flattery and think that it does not damage our personality? ”这我敢回答：是不能容许的。然而接着又起了一个类似的问题：例如女人被强奸，在法律上似乎不至于处死刑，然则我们在道德上也可以容许被强奸，认为无须自杀么？
I dare to answer: it is not allowed. However, a similar question then arises: for example, if a woman is raped, it does not seem to be legally punishable by death, so can we morally allow rape and think that suicide is not necessary?章先生的驳文似乎激昂些，因为他觉得陈先生的文章发表以后，攻击者便源源而来，就疑心到“教授”的头衔上去。那么，继起者就有“拍马屁”的嫌疑了，我想未必。但教授和学者的话，比起一个小编辑来，容易得社会信任，却也许是实情，因此从论敌看来，这些名称也就有了流弊了，真所谓“有一利必有一弊”。
Mr. Zhang's rebuttal seemed to be more passionate, because he felt that after Mr. Chen's article was published, attackers would come in a steady stream, and he would be suspicious of the title of "professor". Then, the successor is suspected of "flattering", I don't think so. However, the words of professors and scholars are easier to gain the trust of society than a small editor, but they may be the truth, so from the perspective of the enemy, these names also have drawbacks.十一日。
Eleventh day.

一九二五年

俄文译本《阿Q正传》序及著者自叙传略

一九二五年

The Russian translation of the "The Main Biography of Ah Q" and the author's autobiography and biography《阿Q正传》序
Preface to "The True Biography of A Q."这在我是很应该感谢，也是很觉得欣幸的事，就是：我的一篇短小的作品，仗着深通中国文学的王希礼（B．A．Vassiliev）先生的翻译，竟得展开在俄国读者的面前了。
This is something that I should be grateful for, and I am very pleased that one of my short works, translated by Mr. B.A. Vassiliev, who is well versed in Chinese literature, has to be unfolded in front of Russian readers.我虽然已经试做，但终于自己还不能很有把握，我是否真能够写出一个现代的我们国人的魂灵来。别人我不得而知，在我自己，总仿佛觉得我们人人之间各有一道高墙，将各个分离，使大家的心无从相印。这就是我们古代的聪明人，即所谓圣贤，将人们分为十等，说是高下各不相同。其名目现在虽然不用了，但那鬼魂却依然存在，并且，变本加厉，连一个人的身体也有了等差，使手对于足也不免视为下等的异类。造化生人，已经非常巧妙，使一个人不会感到别人的肉体上的痛苦了，我们的圣人和圣人之徒却又补了造化之缺，并且使人们不再会感到别人的精神上的痛苦。
Although I have tried it, I am not sure whether I can really write a modern soul of our people. I don't know about others, but in myself, I always seem to feel that there is a high wall between each of us, separating each other, so that everyone's hearts cannot be sealed. This is our ancient wise people, the so-called sages, who divided people into ten ranks, saying that they were different. Although its name is no longer used, the ghost still exists, and it has intensified, and even a person's body has become inferior, so that hands and feet are inevitably regarded as inferior outliers. The creation of people is already very ingenious, so that a person does not feel the physical pain of others, but our saints and saints make up for the lack of creation, and people no longer feel the spiritual pain of others.我们的古人又造出了一种难到可怕的一块一块的文字；但我还并不十分怨恨，因为我觉得他们倒并不是故意的。然而，许多人却不能借此说话了，加以古训所筑成的高墙，更使他们连想也不敢想。现在我们所能听到的，不过是几个圣人之徒的意见和道理，为了他们自己；至于百姓，却就默默的生长，萎黄，枯死了，像压在大石底下的草一样，已经有四千年！
Our ancients created a kind of text that is so difficult and terrifying that it is difficult to write piece by piece; But I don't really resentful it yet, because I don't think they did it on purpose. However, many people could not speak through this, and the high walls built by the ancient teachings made them even more afraid to think about it. Now all we can hear is the opinions and doctrines of a few saints, for their own sake; As for the people, they have grown silently, wilted, and withered, like grass pressed under a big rock, for four thousand years!要画出这样沉默的国民的魂灵来，在中国实在算一件难事，因为，已经说过，我们究竟还是未经革新的古国的人民，所以也还是各不相通，并且连自己的手也几乎不懂自己的足。我虽然竭力想摸索人们的魂灵，但时时总自憾有些隔膜。在将来，围在高墙里面的一切人众，该会自己觉醒，走出，都来开口的罢，而现在还少见，所以我也只得依了自己的觉察，孤寂地姑且将这些写出，作为在我的眼里所经过的中国的人生。
It is really difficult in China to draw the souls of such silent people, because, as I have said, we are still the people of an ancient country that has not been innovated, so we are still not connected, and even our own hands hardly understand our own feet. Although I try my best to explore people's souls, I always feel a bit separated. In the future, all the people surrounding the high wall will awaken and come out on their own, and they will all come to speak, but now it is still rare, so I have to follow my own awareness and write these out in solitude as the life of China in my eyes.我的小说出版之后，首先收到的是一个青年批评家的谴责；后来，也有以为是病的，也有以为滑稽的，也有以为讽刺的；或者还以为冷嘲，至于使我自己也要疑心自己的心里真藏着可怕的冰块。然而我又想，看人生是因作者而不同，看作品又因读者而不同，那么，这一篇在毫无“我们的传统思想”的俄国读者的眼中，也许又会照见别样的情景的罢，这实在是使我觉得很有意味的。
After the publication of my novel, the first thing I received was a condemnation from a young critic; Later, some thought it was sick, some thought it was funny, and some thought it was ironic; Or I thought it was a cynic, as for making me suspect that there was a terrible ice cube hidden in my heart. However, I also think that life is different for the author, and the work is different for the reader, so this article may see a different scene in the eyes of Russian readers who do not have "our traditional thought", which really makes me feel very meaningful.一九二五年五月二十六日，于北京。鲁迅。
一九二五年五月二十六日，于北京。 鲁迅。著者自叙传略
著者自叙传略我于一八八一年生在浙江省绍兴府城里的一家姓周的家里。父亲是读书的；母亲姓鲁，乡下人，她以自修得到能够看书的学力。听人说，在我幼小时候，家里还有四五十亩水田，并不很愁生计。但到我十三岁时，我家忽而遭了一场很大的变故，几乎什么也没有了；我寄住在一个亲戚家，有时还被称为乞食者。我于是决心回家，而我的父亲又生了重病，约有三年多，死去了。我渐至于连极少的学费也无法可想；我底母亲便给我筹办了一点旅费，教我去寻无需学费的学校去，因为我总不肯学做幕友或商人，——这是我乡衰落了的读书人家子弟所常走的两条路。
I was born in 1881 in Shaoxing Prefecture, Zhejiang Province, to a family surnamed Zhou. Father is a reader; Her mother's surname is Lu, a country person, and she has gained the academic ability to read books through self-study. I heard that when I was young, there were still forty or fifty acres of paddy fields at home, and I was not very worried about making a living. But when I was thirteen years old, my family suddenly suffered a great change, and there was almost nothing left; I stayed with a relative's house and was sometimes called a beggar. I decided to go home, and my father became seriously ill again, and after about three years, he died. I gradually can't even think of a very small tuition fee; My mother arranged a little travel expenses for me and taught me to find a school that did not require tuition, because I always refused to learn to be a staff member or a businessman,—— which are the two roads that the children of declining scholars in my township often take.其时我是十八岁，便旅行到南京，考入水师学堂了，分在机关科。大约过了半年，我又走出，改进矿路学堂去学开矿，毕业之后，即被派往日本去留学。但待到在东京的豫备学校毕业，我已经决意要学医了，原因之一是因为我确知道了新的医学对于日本的维新有很大的助力。我于是进了仙台（Sendai）医学专门学校，学了两年。这时正值俄日战争，我偶然在电影上看见一个中国人因做侦探而将被斩，因此又觉得在中国还应该先提倡新文艺。我便弃了学籍，再到东京，和几个朋友立了些小计画，但都陆续失败了。我又想往德国去，也失败了。终于，因为我底母亲和几个别的人很希望我有经济上的帮助，我便回到中国来；这时我是二十九岁。
At that time, I was eighteen years old, so I traveled to Nanjing and was admitted to the Naval Academy, which was divided into the organ department. About half a year later, I went out again to improve the mining road school to learn to mine, and after graduation, I was sent to Japan to study. But by the time I graduated from the preparatory school in Tokyo, I had decided to study medicine, partly because I knew that the new medicine would greatly contribute to the restoration of Japan. I then entered Sendai Medical College for two years. At this time, it was the Russo-Japanese War, and I happened to see a Chinese person who was going to be beheaded for being a detective in a movie, so I felt that new literature and art should be promoted in China first. I gave up my student status and went to Tokyo, where I made some small plans with a few friends, but they all failed one after another. I wanted to go to Germany again, but I failed. Finally, because my mother and a few others wanted me to have financial help, I returned to China; I was twenty-nine years old at this time.我一回国，就在浙江杭州的两级师范学堂做化学和生理学教员，第二年就走出，到绍兴中学堂去做教务长，第三年又走出，没有地方可去，想在一个书店去做编译员，到底被拒绝了。但革命也就发生，绍兴光复后，我做了师范学校的校长。革命政府在南京成立，教育部长招我去做部员，移入北京，一直到现在。近几年，我还兼做北京大学，师范大学，女子师范大学的国文系讲师。
As soon as I returned to China, I worked as a chemistry and physiology teacher at a two-level normal school in Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province, and in the second year I went out to Shaoxing Middle School to become the provostomy, and in the third year I went out again, with nowhere to go, and wanted to be a compiler in a bookstore, but I was rejected. But the revolution also happened, and after the liberation of Shaoxing, I became the principal of the normal school. The revolutionary government was established in Nanjing, and the Minister of Education recruited me to be a member of the ministry and moved to Beijing, where I have been until now. In recent years, I have also been a lecturer in the Department of Chinese Literature at Peking University, Normal University, and Women's Normal University.我在留学时候，只在杂志上登过几篇不好的文章。初做小说是一九一八年，因了我的朋友钱玄同的劝告，做来登在《新青年》上的。这时才用“鲁迅”的笔名（Penname）；也常用别的名字做一点短论。现在汇印成书的只有一本短篇小说集《呐喊》，其余还散在几种杂志上。别的，除翻译不计外，印成的又有一本《中国小说史略》。
When I was studying abroad, I only published a few bad articles in magazines. The first novel was written in 1918, and on the advice of my friend Qian Xuantong, it was published in "New Youth". At this time, the pen name of "Lu Xun" was used; Other names are also often used to make a short statement. Now only a collection of short stories "The Scream" has been printed into a book, and the rest are scattered in several magazines. In addition, in addition to the translation, there is also a "Brief History of Chinese Novels" printed.

一九二五年

田园思想（通讯）

一九二五年

Pastoral Thought (Communication)白波先生：
Mr. Bai Bo:我们憎恶的所谓“导师”，是自以为有正路，有捷径，而其实却是劝人不走的人。倘有领人向前者，只要自己愿意，自然也不妨追踪而往。但这样的前锋，怕中国现在还找不到罢。所以我想，与其找胡涂导师，倒不如自己走，可以省却寻觅的工夫，横竖他也什么都不知道。至于我那“遇见森林，可以辟成平地，……”这些话，不过是比方，犹言可以用自力克服一切困难，并非真劝人都到山里去。
The so-called "mentors" we hate are people who think they have the right path and shortcuts, but in fact they are people who persuade others not to go. If there is someone who leads people to the front, as long as they are willing, they may wish to follow it. But such a striker, I am afraid that China will not be able to find it yet. So I think that instead of looking for a Hu Tu tutor, it is better to go by yourself, which can save the time of searching, and he doesn't know anything. As for my words "When you meet a forest, you can open up a flat land,......" are just metaphors, saying that you can overcome all difficulties on your own, and it does not really persuade people to go to the mountains.十四年六月十二日。
十四年六月十二日。

一九二五年

流言和谎话

一九二五年

流言和谎话这一回编辑《莽原》时，看见论及北京女子师范大学风潮的投稿里，还有用“某校”字样和几个方匡子的，颇使我觉得中国实在还很有存心忠厚的君子，国事大有可为。但其实，报章上早已明明白白地登载过许多次了。
When I edited "Mangyuan" this time, I saw that in the submission about the trend of Beijing Women's Normal University, there were also those with the word "a certain school" and a few Fang Kuangzi, which made me feel that China is still a very loyal gentleman, and there is a lot to be done in state affairs. But in fact, it has been clearly published many times in the newspaper.今年五月，为了“同系学生同时登两个相反的启事已经发现了……”那些事，已经使“喜欢怀疑”的西滢先生有“好像一个臭毛厕”之叹（见《现代评论》二十五期《闲话》），现在如果西滢先生已回北京，或者要更觉得“世风日下”了罢，因为三个相反，或相成的启事已经发现了：一是“女师大学生自治会”；二是“杨荫榆”；三是单叫作“女师大”。
In May of this year, in order to "have discovered that two opposite notices have been published by students in the same department at the same time...... those things have made Mr. Xiying, who "likes to doubt", sigh that he is "like a stinky toilet" (see "Gossip" in the 25th issue of "Modern Review"), and now if Mr. Xiying has returned to Beijing, he may feel that "the world is declining", because three opposite or mutually beneficial notices have been discovered: first, the "Women's Normal University Student Self-Government Association"; the second is "Yang Yinyu"; The third is simply called "Women's Normal University".报载对于学生“停止饮食茶水”，学生亦云“既感饥荒之苦，复虑生命之危”，而“女师大”云“全属子虚”，是相反的。而杨荫榆云“本校原望该生等及早觉悟自动出校并不愿其在校受生活上种种之不便也”，则似乎饮食确已停止，和“女师大”说相反，与报章及学生说相成。
The report said that students "stop eating tea", students also said that they "feel the pain of famine and worry about the danger of life", while "Women's Normal University" said that "all belong to Zixu", which is the opposite. However, Yang Yinyu said, "The school hopes that the students will realize and leave the school automatically as soon as possible, and do not want them to suffer all kinds of inconveniences in life in school", which seems to have indeed stopped eating and drinking, which is contrary to the "Women's Normal University" and is in line with the newspapers and students.学生云“杨荫榆突以武装入校，勒令同学全体即刻离校，嗣复命令军警肆意毒打侮辱……”，而杨荫榆云“荫榆于八月一日到校……暴劣学生肆行滋扰……故不能不请求警署拨派巡警保护……”，是因为“滋扰”才请派警，与学生说相反的。而“女师大”云“不料该生等非特不肯遵命竟敢任情谩骂极端侮辱……幸先经内右二区派拨警士在校防护……”，是派警在先，“滋扰”在后，和杨荫榆说相反的。至于京师警察厅行政处公布，则云“查本厅于上月三十一日准国立北京女子师范大学函……请准予八月一日照派保安警察三四十名来校……”，乃又与学生及“女师大”说相成了。杨荫榆确是先期准备了“武装入校”，而自己竟不知道，以为临时叫来，真是离奇。
The student said, "Yang Yinyu suddenly entered the school with an armed force, ordered all his classmates to leave the school immediately, and ordered the military and police to beat and insult ......", while Yang Yinyu said that "Yinyu arrived at the school on August 1...... Violent students are wantonly harassing...... Therefore, it is impossible not to ask the police station to send patrol officers to protect the ......", because of "nuisance", the police are requested, contrary to what the students said. And the "Women's Normal University" said: "Unexpectedly, the students not only refused to obey the order, but also dared to insult and insult them willfully...... Fortunately, the second district of the inner right first dispatched police sergeants to protect the ...... on campus", which is the first to send the police and the "nuisance" later, which is the opposite of what Yang Yinyu said. As for the announcement of the Administrative Office of the Beijing Police Department, it said, "The office approved the letter of Beijing Women's Normal University on the 31st of last month...... Please allow 30 to 40 security police officers to come to the school on August 1......," he said with the students and the "Women's Normal University". Yang Yinyu did prepare for "armed entry into the school" in advance, but he didn't know it, thinking that it was called temporarily, which was really bizarre.杨先生大约真如自己的启事所言，“始终以培植人才恪尽职守为素志……服务情形为国人所共鉴”的罢。“素志”我不得而知，至于“服务情形”，则不必再说别的，只要一看本月一日至四日的“女师大”和她自己的两个启事之离奇闪烁就尽够了！撒谎造谣，即在局外者也觉得。如果是严厉的观察者和批评者，即可以执此而推论其他。
Mr. Yang is probably as his notice said, "Always cultivate talents and fulfill their duties as their ambition...... The service situation is shared by the Chinese people". I don't know about "Suzhi", as for the "service situation", there is no need to say anything else, just look at the bizarre flashing of the "Women's Normal University" and her own two announcements from the 1st to the 4th of this month! Lying and spreading rumors is felt by outsiders. If it is a harsh observer and critic, it can be inferred from this and others.但杨先生却道：“所以勉力维持至于今日者非贪恋个人之地位为彻底整饬学风计也”，窃以为学风是决非造谣撒谎所能整饬的；——地位自然不在此例。
But Mr. Yang said: "Therefore, I am trying to maintain my position as of today, not because I am greedy for personal status, but because I am a plan to completely rectify the academic style", I think that the academic style is by no means something that can be corrected by spreading rumors and lying; ——Status is naturally not an example.且住，我又来说话了，或者西滢先生们又许要听到许多“流言”。然而请放心罢，我虽然确是“某籍”，也做过国文系的一两点钟的教员，但我并不想谋校长，或仍做教员以至增加钟点；也并不为子孙计，防她们会在女师大被诬被革，挨打挨饿。我借一句Lermontov的愤激的话告诉你们：“我幸而没有女儿！”
Wait a moment, I'm talking again, or Mr. Xiying will hear a lot of "rumors" again. However, please rest assured, although I am indeed a "certain nationality" and have been a teacher in the Department of Chinese Literature for one or two o'clock, I do not want to become a principal, or still be a teacher or increase my hours; It is not for the sake of their descendants, to prevent them from being falsely accused and dismissed, beaten and starved at the Women's Normal University. I will tell you to borrow Lermontov's indignant words: "I am fortunate to have no daughter!" ”八月五日。
August 5th.

一九二五年

通信

一九二五年

correspondence霉江先生：
Mr. Mold Jiang:如果“叛徒”们造成战线而能遇到敌人，中国的情形早已不至于如此，因为现在所遇见的并无敌人，只有暗箭罢了。所以想有战线，必须先有敌人，这事情恐怕还辽远得很，若现在，则正如来信所说，大概连是友是仇也不大容易分辨清楚的。
If the "traitors" create a front and can encounter the enemy, the situation in China will not be like this long ago, because there is no enemy now, only hidden arrows. So if you want to have a front, you must first have an enemy, this matter is probably still very far away, if now, as the letter said, it is probably not easy to distinguish whether it is friend or enemy.我对于《语丝》的责任，只有投稿，所以关于刊载的事，不知其详。至于江先生的文章，我得到来信后，才看了一点。我的意见，以为先生太认真了，大约连作者自己也未必以为他那些话有这么被人看得值得讨论。
My responsibility for "Yusi" is only to submit, so I don't know the details about the publication. As for Mr. Jiang's article, I read it a little after I got the letter. In my opinion, I think the gentleman is too serious, and even the author himself may not think that his words are so worthy of discussion.先生大概年纪还青，所以竟这样愤慨，而且推爱及我，代我发愁，我实在不胜感谢。这事其实是不难的，只要打听大学教授陈源（即西滢）先生，也许能够知道章士钊是否又要“私禀执政”，因为陈教授那里似乎常有“流言”飞扬。但是，这不是我的事。
My husband is probably still young, so he is so indignant, and he loves me and worries on my behalf, and I am really grateful. This matter is actually not difficult, as long as you inquire about the university professor Mr. Chen Yuan (i.e. Xi Ying), you may be able to know whether Zhang Shizhao wants to "privately govern" again, because Professor Chen seems to have "rumors" flying there. However, this is not my thing.鲁迅。九月一日。Lu Xun. September 1st.

一九二六年

一九二六年

一九二六年

1926

一九二六年

《痴华鬘》题记

一九二六年

The inscription of "Foolish Hair"尝闻天竺寓言之富，如大林深泉，他国艺文，往往蒙其影响。即翻为华言之佛经中，亦随在可见，明徐元太辑《喻林》，颇加搜录，然卷帙繁重，不易得之。佛藏中经，以譬喻为名者，亦可五六种，惟《百喻经》最有条贯。其书具名《百句譬喻经》；《出三藏记集》云，天竺僧伽斯那从《修多罗藏》十二部经中钞出譬喻，聚为一部，凡一百事，为新学者，撰说此经。萧齐永明十年九月十日，中天竺法师求那毗地出。以譬喻说法者，本经云，“如阿伽陀药，树叶而裹之，取药涂毒竟，树叶还弃之，戏笑如叶裹，实义在其中”也。王君品青爱其设喻之妙，因除去教诫，独留寓言；又缘经末有“尊者僧伽斯那造作《痴华鬘》竟”语，即据以回复原名，仍印为两卷。尝称百喻，而实缺二者，疑举成数，或并以卷首之引，卷末之偈为二事也。尊者造论，虽以正法为心，譬故事于树叶，而言必及法，反多拘牵；今则已无阿伽陀药，更何得有药裹，出离界域，内外洞然，智者所见，盖不惟佛说正义而已矣。
尝闻天竺寓言之富，如大林深泉，他国艺文，往往蒙其影响。 即翻为华言之佛经中，亦随在可见，明徐元太辑《喻林》，颇加搜录，然卷帙繁重，不易得之。 佛藏中经，以譬喻为名者，亦可五六种，惟《百喻经》最有条贯。 其书具名《百句譬喻经》；《出三藏记集》云，天竺僧伽斯那从《修多罗藏》十二部经中钞出譬喻，聚为一部，凡一百事，为新学者，撰说此经。 萧齐永明十年九月十日，中天竺法师求那毗地出。 以譬喻说法者，本经云，“如阿伽陀药，树叶而裹之，取药涂毒竟，树叶还弃之，戏笑如叶裹，实义在其中”也。 王君品青爱其设喻之妙，因除去教诫，独留寓言；又缘经末有“尊者僧伽斯那造作《痴华鬘》竟”语，即据以回复原名，仍印为两卷。 尝称百喻，而实缺二者，疑举成数，或并以卷首之引，卷末之偈为二事也。 尊者造论，虽以正法为心，譬故事于树叶，而言必及法，反多拘牵；今则已无阿伽陀药，更何得有药裹，出离界域，内外洞然，智者所见，盖不惟佛说正义而已矣。中华民国十五年五月十二日，鲁迅。
May 12, 15th year of the Republic of China, Lu Xun.

一九二六年

《穷人》小引

一九二六年

"Poor Man" small introduction千八百八十年，是陀思妥夫斯基完成了他的巨制之一《卡拉玛卓夫兄弟》这一年；他在手记上说：“以完全的写实主义在人中间发见人。这是彻头彻尾俄国底特质。在这意义上，我自然是民族底的。……人称我为心理学家（Psychologist）。这不得当。我但是在高的意义上的写实主义者，即我是将人的灵魂的深，显示于人的。”第二年，他就死了。
1880 was the year Dostovsky completed one of his masterpieces, The Brothers Karamazov; He said in his notes: "Discover people among people with complete realism." This is a Russian trait through and through. In this sense, I am naturally national. …… People call me a psychologist. This is inappropriate. I am a realist in a high sense, that is, I am showing the depth of the human soul to people. The following year, he died.显示灵魂的深者，每要被人看作心理学家；尤其是陀思妥夫斯基那样的作者。他写人物，几乎无须描写外貌，只要以语气，声音，就不独将他们的思想和感情，便是面目和身体也表示着。又因为显示着灵魂的深，所以一读那作品，便令人发生精神底变化。灵魂的深处并不平安，敢于正视的本来就不多，更何况写出？因此有些柔软无力的读者，便往往将他只看作“残酷的天才”。
Those who show the depth of the soul should always be regarded as psychologists; Especially authors like Dostovsky. When he writes about characters, he hardly needs to describe their appearance, as long as he uses tone and voice, he not only expresses their thoughts and feelings, but also their faces and bodies. And because it shows the depth of the soul, as soon as you read the work, it makes people change spiritually. The depths of the soul are not peaceful, and there are not many who dare to face it, let alone write it? Therefore, some weak readers often regard him only as a "cruel genius".陀思妥夫斯基将自己作品中的人物们，有时也委实太置之万难忍受的，没有活路的，不堪设想的境地，使他们什么事都做不出来。用了精神底苦刑，送他们到那犯罪，痴呆，酗酒，发狂，自杀的路上去。有时候，竟至于似乎并无目的，只为了手造的牺牲者的苦恼，而使他受苦，在骇人的卑污的状态上，表示出人们的心来。这确凿是一个“残酷的天才”，人的灵魂的伟大的审问者。
Dostovsky put the characters in his works into unbearable, unbearable, unimaginable situations, and so that they could not do anything. They used mental torture to send them on the road of crime, dementia, alcoholism, madness, and suicide. Sometimes, it seems that there is no purpose, but only for the suffering of the victim made by hand, and he suffers, expressing the hearts of people in a terrifyingly despicable state. This is indeed a "cruel genius", the great interrogator of the human soul.然而，在这“在高的意义上的写实主义者”的实验室里，所处理的乃是人的全灵魂。他又从精神底苦刑，送他们到那反省，矫正，忏悔，苏生的路上去；甚至于又是自杀的路。到这样，他的“残酷”与否，一时也就难于断定，但对于爱好温暖或微凉的人们，却还是没有什么慈悲的气息的。
However, in the laboratory of this "realist in the high sense", what is being dealt with is the whole soul of man. He also tortured them from the bottom of the spirit, sending them on the road of reflection, correction, repentance, and resuscitation; It is even a road to suicide again. At this point, it is difficult to determine whether he is "cruel" or not, but there is still no compassionate atmosphere for people who like warmth or coolness.相传陀思妥夫斯基不喜欢对人述说自己，尤不喜欢述说自己的困苦；但和他一生相纠结的却正是困难和贫穷。便是作品，也至于只有一回是并没有豫支稿费的著作。但他掩藏着这些事。他知道金钱的重要，而他最不善于使用的又正是金钱；直到病得寄养在一个医生的家里了，还想将一切来诊的病人当作佳客。他所爱，所同情的是这些，——贫病的人们，——所记得的是这些，所描写的是这些；而他所毫无顾忌地解剖，详检，甚而至于鉴赏的也是这些。不但这些，其实，他早将自己也加以精神底苦刑了，从年青时候起，一直拷问到死灭。
According to legend, Dostovsky did not like to talk about himself to others, especially his hardships; But what entangled his life was difficulties and poverty. It is a work, and only once is a work that does not pay the manuscript fee in advance. But he hides these things. He knows the importance of money, and it is money that he is the least good at using; Until he was so sick that he was fostered in a doctor's house, he still wanted to treat all the patients who came to see him as a guest. What he loves and sympathizes with is these people who are ,—— poor and sick,—— what he remembers and describes; And he dissected, examined in detail, and even appreciated these without scruples. Not only these, in fact, he had already tortured himself mentally, and since he was young, he has been tortured until he died.凡是人的灵魂的伟大的审问者，同时也一定是伟大的犯人。审问者在堂上举劾着他的恶，犯人在阶下陈述他自己的善；审问者在灵魂中揭发污秽，犯人在所揭发的污秽中阐明那埋藏的光耀。这样，就显示出灵魂的深。
Whoever is the great interrogator of the human soul must also be a great prisoner. The inquisitor denounces his evil in the hall, and the prisoner states his own good at the bottom of the steps; The interrogator exposes the filth in the soul, and the prisoner reveals the buried light in the filth it exposes. In this way, the depth of the soul is shown.在甚深的灵魂中，无所谓“残酷”，更无所谓慈悲；但将这灵魂显示于人的，是“在高的意义上的写实主义者”。
In the deep soul, there is no such thing as "cruelty", let alone compassion; But the one who shows this soul to people is "a realist in a high sense".陀思妥夫斯基的著作生涯一共有三十五年，虽那最后的十年很偏重于正教的宣传了，但其为人，却不妨说是始终一律。即作品，也没有大两样。从他最初的《穷人》起，最后的《卡拉玛卓夫兄弟》止，所说的都是同一的事，即所谓“捉住了心中所实验的事实，使读者追求着自己思想的径路，从这心的法则中，自然显示出伦理的观念来。”
Dostovsky's writing career lasted a total of thirty-five years, and although the last ten years were very focused on Orthodox propaganda, his character may be said to have always been the same. Even if it is a work, there is no big difference. From his first "Poor Man" to the last "The Karamazov Brothers", all of them are talking about the same thing, that is, the so-called "grasping the facts of the experiment in the mind, so that the reader pursues the path of his own thought, and from this law of the heart, the concept of ethics is naturally revealed." ”这也可以说：穿掘着灵魂的深处，使人受了精神底苦刑而得到创伤，又即从这得伤和养伤和愈合中，得到苦的涤除，而上了苏生的路。
This can also be said to be that digging into the depths of the soul, causing people to suffer from spiritual torture and get trauma, that is, from this wound, healing and healing, they get rid of suffering and go on the road of resurrection.《穷人》是作于千八百四十五年，到第二年发表的；是第一部，也是使他即刻成为大家的作品；格里戈洛维奇和涅克拉梭夫为之狂喜，培林斯基曾给他公正的褒辞。自然，这也可以说，是显示着“谦逊之力”的。然而，世界竟是这么广大，而又这么狭窄；穷人是这么相爱，而又不得相爱；暮年是这么孤寂，而又不安于孤寂。他晚年的手记说：“富是使个人加强的，是器械底和精神底满足。因此也将个人从全体分开。”富终于使少女从穷人分离了，可怜的老人便发了不成声的绝叫。爱是何等地纯洁，而又何其有搅扰咒诅之心呵！
"The Poor" was written in 1845 and published the following year; It was the first and the work that made him an instant everyone; Grigorovich and Nekrasov were ecstatic, and Pelinsky gave him fair praise. Naturally, this can also be said to show the "power of humility". However, the world is so vast and so narrow; The poor love each other so much, but they can't love each other; In his twilight years, he was so lonely, and he was uneasy about loneliness. His memoirs in his later years said: "Wealth strengthens the individual, and it is the satisfaction of the instrument and the spirit. Therefore, it also separates the individual from the whole. The rich finally separated the girl from the poor, and the poor old man let out a silent scream. How pure love is, and how disturbing and cursing it is!而作者其时只有二十四岁，却尤是惊人的事。天才的心诚然是博大的。
And the author was only twenty-four years old at the time, which is particularly amazing. The heart of a genius is indeed broad.中国的知道陀思妥夫斯基将近十年了，他的姓已经听得耳熟，但作品的译本却未见。这也无怪，虽是他的短篇，也没有很简短，便于急就的。这回丛芜才将他的最初的作品，最初绍介到中国来，我觉得似乎很弥补了些缺憾。这是用Constance Garnett的英译本为主，参考了Modern Library的英译本译出的，歧异之处，便由我比较了原白光的日文译本以定从违，又经素园用原文加以校定。在陀思妥夫斯基全集十二巨册中，这虽然不过是一小分，但在我们这样只有微力的人，却很用去许多工作了。藏稿经年，才得印出，便借了这短引，将我所想到的写出，如上文。陀思妥夫斯基的人和他的作品，本是一时研究不尽的，统论全般，决非我的能力所及，所以这只好算作管窥之说；也仅仅略翻了三本书：Dostoievsky's Literarsche Schriften，Mereschkovsky's Dostoievsky und Tolstoy，昇曙梦的《露西亚文学研究》。
China has known Dostovsky for nearly ten years, and his surname is already familiar, but the translation of his work has not been seen. No wonder, although it is his short story, it is not very short and easy to rush. This time, Cong Wu introduced his original works to China, and I think it seems to have made up for some shortcomings. This is mainly based on the English translation of Constance Garnett, with reference to the English translation of the Modern Library, and the differences are compared by me to determine the contradiction of the original Baiguang's Japanese translation, and then corrected by Suyuan in the original text. Although this is only a small part of the twelve huge volumes of Dostovsky's complete works, it takes a lot of work for people like us who only have little strength. It took a year to print the manuscript, so I borrowed this short quote to write what I thought, as above. Dostovsky's people and his works were inexhaustible for a while, and the overall theory was by no means beyond my ability, so this can only be regarded as a peeping theory; I only skimmed three books: Dostoievsky's Literarsche Schriften, Mereschkovsky's Dostoievsky und Tolstoy, and Shushu Meng's "Lucian Literary Studies".俄国人姓名之长，常使中国的读者觉得烦难，现在就在此略加解释。那姓名全写起来，是总有三个字的：首先是名，其次是父名，第三是姓。例如这书中的解屋斯金，是姓；人却称他马加尔亚列舍维奇，意思就是亚列舍的儿子马加尔，是客气的称呼；亲昵的人就只称名，声音还有变化。倘是女的，便叫她“某之女某”。例如瓦尔瓦拉亚列舍夫那，意思就是亚列舍的女儿瓦尔瓦拉；有时叫她瓦兰加，则是瓦尔瓦拉的音变，也就是亲昵的称呼。
The length of Russian names often annoys Chinese readers, so I will explain it here a little. When the name is written, there are always three words: the first is the first name, the second is the patronymic name, and the third is the surname. For example, the Jiewu Skin in this book is a surname; People call him Magar Yareshevich, which means Magar, the son of Alexhe, which is a polite title; Close people only call by name, and their voices change. If it is a woman, call her "so-and-so's daughter". For example, Varvara Yareshevna, which means Varvara, the daughter of Aleksha; Sometimes calling her Varanga is a transliteration of Varvara, that is, an affectionate name.一九二六年六月二日之夜，鲁迅记于东壁下。
On the night of June 2, 1926, Lu Xun recorded it under the east wall.

一九二六年

通信

一九二六年

correspondence鲁迅先生：
Mr. Lu Xun:我们学校里也有一个小小的图书馆，虽说不到国内的报章刊物杂志一切尽有，大概也有一二种；而办学者虽说不到以全副力量在这里办学，总算得是出了一点狗力在这里厮闹。
We also have a small library in our school, although it is not possible to have all the newspapers and magazines in China, there are probably one or two; Although the scholars cannot run a school here with all their strength, they finally have to make a little bit of a dog fight here.有一天，一位同学要求图书馆主任订购《莽原》，主任把这件事提交教授会议——或者是评议会，经神圣的教授会审查，说《莽原》是谈社会主义的，不能订。然而主任敌不过那同学的要求，终究订了。
One day, a classmate asked the library director to order "Mangyuan", and the director submitted the matter to the professors' meeting—or the council, which was reviewed by the sacred professors' meeting, saying that "Mangyuan" was about socialism and could not be ordered. However, the director couldn't resist the classmate's request and finally made an appointment.我自从听到《莽原》是谈社会主义的以后，便细心的从第一期起，重行翻阅一回，始终一点儿证据也找不着。不知他们所说的根据在何处？——恐怕他们的见解独到罢。这是要问你的一点。
Since I heard that "Mangyuan" was about socialism, I carefully reread it from the first issue, but I could not find any evidence at all. I don't know where the basis of what they say is? ——I'm afraid their views are unique. This is a point to ask you.因为我喜欢看《莽原》，忽然听到教授老爷们说它谈社会主义，像我这样的学生小子，自然是要起恐慌的。因为社会主义这四字是不好的名词，像洪水猛兽的一般——在他们看起来。因为现在谈社会主义的书，就像从前“有图画的本子，就要被塾师，就是当时的‘引导青年的前辈’禁止，呵斥，甚而至于打手心”一样。因为恐怕他们禁止我读我爱读的《莽原》，而要我去读“人之初性本善”，至于呵斥，打手心，所以害怕得要死。这也是要问你的一点，要问你一个明白的一点。
Because I like to watch "Mangyuan", I suddenly heard the professors say that it talks about socialism, and students like me naturally have to panic. Because the four words socialism are bad terms, like a flood beast - in their eyes. Because books that talk about socialism now are like in the past, "books with pictures will be banned and scolded by the tunic teacher, that is, the 'seniors who guide young people' at that time, and even slapped the palm of the hand". Because I was afraid that they forbade me from reading the "Mangyuan" that I loved to read, and asked me to read "The Original Goodness of Man", as for scolding and slapping the palm of my hand, so I was scared to death. This is also a point to ask you, to ask you a clear point.有此两点，所以要问你，因为大学教授说的话，比较的真确——不是放屁，所以要问你，要问你《莽原》到底是不是谈社会主义。
With these two points, I want to ask you, because what the university professor said is more true - not a fart, so I want to ask you, I want to ask you whether "Mangyuan" is about socialism.六，一，未名于武昌。
Six, one, not named in Wuchang.我并不是姓未名名，也不是名未名，未名也不是我的别号，也不是像你们未名社没有取名字的意义。我的名二十一年前已经取好了，只是怕你把它宣布出来，那末他们教授老爷就要加害于我，所以不写出来。因为没有写出自己的真名字，就名之曰未名。
I am not a name, nor a name, nor is I my nickname, nor is it my nickname, nor is it like your Weiming Society has no meaning in choosing a name. My name was already taken twenty-one years ago, but I was afraid that if you announced it, then their professor would harm me, so I didn't write it out. Because he did not write his real name, he named it unnamed.未名先生：
Mr. Unnamed:多谢你的来信，使我们知道，知道我们的《莽原》原来是“谈社会主义”的。
Thank you for your letter, so that we know that our "Mangyuan" was originally "talking about socialism".这也不独武昌的教授为然，全国的教授都大同小异。一个已经足够了，何况是聚起来成了“会”。他们的根据，就在“教授”，这是明明白白的。我想他们的话在“会”里也一定不会错。为什么呢？就因为他们是教授。我们的乡下评定是非，常是这样：“赵太爷说对的，还会错么？他田地就有二百亩！”
This is not only true for professors in Wuchang, but also for professors across the country. One is enough, not to mention that it has become a "meeting". Their basis is in the "professor", which is clear. I think their words will not be wrong in "will". Why? Just because they are professors. Our countryside often judges right and wrong: "Mrs. Zhao is right, can he still be wrong?" He has two hundred acres of land! ”至于《莽原》，说起来实在惭愧，正如武昌的C先生来信所说，不过“是些废话和大部分的文艺作品”。我们倒也并不是看见社会主义四个字就吓得两眼朝天，口吐白沫，只是没有研究过，所以也没有谈，自然更没有用此来宣传任何主义的意思。“为什么要办刊物？一定是要宣传什么主义。为什么要宣传主义？一定是在得某国的钱”这一类的教授逻辑，在我们的心里还没有。所以请你尽可放心看去，总不至于因此会使教授化为白痴，富翁变成乞丐的。——但保险单我可也不写。
As for "Mangyuan", it is really ashamed to say, as Mr. C from Wuchang said, but "it is some nonsense and most of the literary and artistic works". We are not frightened and foam at the mouth when we see the word socialism, but we have not studied it, so we have not talked about it, and naturally we do not use it to promote any doctrine. "Why do you want to run a publication? It must be to propagate some doctrine. Why propaganda? It must be getting money from a certain country" and other teaching logic is not in our hearts. So please look at it with confidence, so that it will not turn the professor into an idiot and the rich man into a beggar. ——But I don't write insurance policies.你的名字用得不错，在现在的中国，这种“加害”的确要防的。北京大学的一个学生因为投稿用了真名，已经被教授老爷谋害了。《现代评论》上有人发议论道，“假设我们把知识阶级完全打倒后一百年，世界成个什么世界呢？”你看他多么“心上有杞天之虑”？
Your name is used well, and in today's China, this kind of "harm" really needs to be guarded against. A student at Peking University has been murdered by the professor because he used his real name for submitting his submission. Someone in the "Modern Review" commented, "Assuming that we completely overthrow the intellectual class, what kind of world will the world become?" Do you see how "worried he is"?鲁迅。六，九。
Lu Xun. Six, nine.顺便答复C先生：来信已到，也就将上面那些话作为回答罢。By the way, reply to Mr. C: The letter has arrived, so let's answer the above words.

一九二七年

一九二七年

一九二七年

1927

一九二七年

文艺与政治的歧途The Wrong Path of Literature and Politics ——在暨南大学讲演 - Lecture at Jinan University
我是不大出来讲演的；今天到此地来，不过因为说过了好几次，来讲一回也算了却一件事。我所以不出来讲演，一则没有什么意见可讲，二则刚才这位先生说过，在座的很多读过我的书，我更不能讲什么。书上的人大概比实物好一点，《红楼梦》里面的人物，像贾宝玉林黛玉这些人物，都使我有异样的同情；后来，考究一些当时的事实，到北京后，看看梅兰芳姜妙香扮的贾宝玉林黛玉，觉得并不怎样高明。
I don't come out to give lectures; I'm here today, but because I've said it several times, it's one thing to talk about it once. The reason I don't come out to give a speech is that I have no opinions to say, and secondly, this gentleman just said that many of you here have read my books, and I can't say anything. The people in the book are probably a little better than the real thing, and the characters in "Dream of Red Mansions", such as Jia Baoyu and Lin Daiyu, all make me feel strange sympathy; Later, after studying some facts at that time, after arriving in Beijing, I looked at Jia Baoyu and Lin Daiyu played by Mei Lanfang and Jiang Miaoxiang, and I felt that they were not very clever.我没有整篇的鸿论，也没有高明的见解，只能讲讲我近来所想到的。我每每觉到文艺和政治时时在冲突之中；文艺和革命原不是相反的，两者之间，倒有不安于现状的同一。惟政治是要维持现状，自然和不安于现状的文艺处在不同的方向。不过不满意现状的文艺，直到十九世纪以后才兴起来，只有一段短短历史。政治家最不喜欢人家反抗他的意见，最不喜欢人家要想，要开口。而从前的社会也的确没有人想过什么，又没有人开过口。且看动物中的猴子，它们自有它们的首领；首领要它们怎样，它们就怎样。在部落里，他们有一个酋长，他们跟着酋长走，酋长的吩咐，就是他们的标准。酋长要他们死，也只好去死。那时没有什么文艺，即使有，也不过赞美上帝（还没有后人所谓God那么玄妙）罢了！那里会有自由思想？后来，一个部落一个部落你吃我吞，渐渐扩大起来，所谓大国，就是吞吃那多多少少的小部落；一到了大国，内部情形就复杂得多，夹着许多不同的思想，许多不同的问题。这时，文艺也起来了，和政治不断地冲突；政治想维系现状使它统一，文艺催促社会进化使它渐渐分离；文艺虽使社会分裂，但是社会这样才进步起来。文艺既然是政治家的眼中钉，那就不免被挤出去。外国许多文学家，在本国站不住脚，相率亡命到别个国度去；这个方法，就是“逃”。要是逃不掉，那就被杀掉，割掉他的头；割掉头那是最好的方法，既不会开口，又不会想了。俄国许多文学家，受到这个结果，还有许多充军到冰雪的西伯利亚去。
I don't have a whole grand theory, nor do I have brilliant opinions, so I can only talk about what I have thought of recently. I always feel that literature and art and politics are always in conflict; Literature and art and revolution are not opposites, but between the two, there is the same thing that is uneasy about the status quo. However, politics is to maintain the status quo, and nature and literature and art that are uneasy about the status quo are in different directions. However, literature and art that were dissatisfied with the status quo did not rise until after the 19th century, and only had a short history. Politicians don't like people to resist his opinions, and they don't like people to think and speak. And in the past, no one really thought about anything, and no one spoke up. Let's look at the monkeys among the animals, they have their own leaders; The leader wants them, they do as they are. In the tribe, they have a chief, they follow the chief, and the chief's orders are their standards. The chief wanted them to die, so they had to die. At that time, there was no literature and art, and even if there were, it was just praise to God (not as mysterious as the so-called God of later generations)! Where will there be free thought? Later, one tribe at a time, you eat and I swallow, and gradually expanded, the so-called big country is to devour the more or less small tribes; Once you arrive in a big country, the internal situation is much more complicated, with many different ideas and many different problems. At this time, literature and art also rose, and politics were constantly in conflict; Politics wants to maintain the status quo to unify it, and literature and art urge social evolution to gradually separate it; Although literature and art divide society, society progresses in this way. Since literature and art are a thorn in the side of politicians, they will inevitably be squeezed out. Many foreign writers could not stand in their own countries and fled to other countries; This method is to "escape". if he can't escape, he will be killed and his head cut off; Cutting off the head is the best way, neither opening nor thinking. Many Russian writers were conscripted to Siberia in the ice and snow as a result of this.有一派讲文艺的，主张离开人生，讲些月呀花呀鸟呀的话（在中国又不同，有国粹的道德，连花呀月呀都不许讲，当作别论），或者专讲“梦”，专讲些将来的社会，不要讲得太近。这种文学家，他们都躲在象牙之塔里面；但是“象牙之塔”毕竟不能住得很长久的呀！象牙之塔总是要安放在人间，就免不掉还要受政治的压迫。打起仗来，就不能不逃开去。北京有一班文人，顶看不起描写社会的文学家，他们想，小说里面连车夫的生活都可以写进去，岂不把小说应该写才子佳人一首诗生爱情的定律都打破了吗？现在呢，他们也不能做高尚的文学家了，还是要逃到南边来；“象牙之塔”的窗子里，到底没有一块一块面包递进来的呀！
There is a school of literature and art, advocating leaving life and talking about the moon, flowers, and birds (which is different in China, there is a national quintessence of morality, and even flowers and moons are not allowed to be talked about, as a separate discussion), or they focus on "dreams" and talk about the future society, and don't talk too closely. This kind of writer, they all hide in the ivory tower; But the "Ivory Tower" can't live for a long time after all! The ivory tower always has to be placed in the world, and it is inevitable that it will be oppressed by politics. When a war starts, you can't help but run away. There is a group of literati in Beijing who look down on writers who describe society, and they think that even the life of the coachman can be written in the novel. Now, they can't be noble writers anymore, they still have to flee to the south; In the window of the "Ivory Tower", there was no piece of bread handed in!等到这些文学家也逃出来了，其他文学家早已死的死，逃的逃了。别的文学家，对于现状早感到不满意，又不能不反对，不能不开口，“反对”“开口”就是有他们的下场。我以为文艺大概由于现在生活的感受，亲身所感到的，便影印到文艺中去。挪威有一文学家，他描写肚子饿，写了一本书，这是依他所经验的写的。对于人生的经验，别的且不说，“肚子饿”这件事，要是欢喜，便可以试试看，只要两天不吃饭，饭的香味便会是一个特别的诱惑；要是走过街上饭铺子门口，更会觉得这个香味一阵阵冲到鼻子来。我们有钱的时候，用几个钱不算什么；直到没有钱，一个钱都有它的意味。那本描写肚子饿的书里，它说起那人饿得久了，看见路人个个是仇人，即是穿一件单褂子的，在他眼里也见得那是骄傲。我记起我自己曾经写过这样一个人，他身边什么都光了，时常抽开抽屉看看，看角上边上可以找到什么；路上一处一处去找，看有什么可以找得到；这个情形，我自己是体验过来的。
By the time these writers also escaped, other writers were already dead and fleeing. Other writers have long been dissatisfied with the status quo, and they cannot help but oppose it, and they cannot help but speak out. I thought that literature and art were probably copied into literature and art because of the feelings of life now, and what I felt firsthand. There was a Norwegian writer who wrote a book about hunger, which was written according to his experience. For life experience, not to mention anything else, if you are happy about "hungry", you can try it, as long as you don't eat for two days, the aroma of rice will be a special temptation; If you walk past the door of the restaurant on the street, you will feel that this fragrance rushes to your nose. When we have money, it is nothing to use a few money; Until there is no money, a money has its meaning. In the book about hunger, it talks about the man who has been hungry for a long time, and when he sees that all the passers-by are enemies, that is, he wears a single coat, and he also sees pride in his eyes. I remember that I once wrote about such a person who was exposed to everything around him, and often opened the drawer to see what could be found on the corner; look for it everywhere on the road to see what you can find; I have experienced this situation myself.从生活窘迫过来的人，一到了有钱，容易变成两种情形：一种是理想世界，替处同一境遇的人着想，便成为人道主义；一种是什么都是自己挣起来，从前的遭遇，使他觉得什么都是冷酷，便流为个人主义。我们中国大概是变成个人主义者多。主张人道主义的，要想替穷人想想法子，改变改变现状，在政治家眼里，倒还不如个人主义的好；所以人道主义者和政治家就有冲突。俄国文学家托尔斯泰讲人道主义，反对战争，写过三册很厚的小说——那部《战争与和平》，他自己是个贵族，却是经过战场的生活，他感到战争是怎么一个惨痛。尤其是他一临到长官的铁板前（战场上重要军官都有铁板挡住枪弹），更有刺心的痛楚。而他又眼见他的朋友们，很多在战场上牺牲掉。战争的结果，也可以变成两种态度：一种是英雄，他见别人死的死伤的伤，只有他健存，自己就觉得怎样了不得，这么那么夸耀战场上的威雄。一种是变成反对战争的，希望世界上不要再打仗了。托尔斯泰便是后一种，主张用无抵抗主义来消灭战争。他这么主张，政府自然讨厌他；反对战争，和俄皇的侵掠欲望冲突；主张无抵抗主义，叫兵士不替皇帝打仗，警察不替皇帝执法，审判官不替皇帝裁判，大家都不去捧皇帝；皇帝是全要人捧的，没有人捧，还成什么皇帝，更和政治相冲突。这种文学家出来，对于社会现状不满意，这样批评，那样批评，弄得社会上个个都自己觉到，都不安起来，自然非杀头不可。
People who have come from life difficulties can easily become into two situations when they are rich: one is an ideal world, and if you think about people in the same situation, it will become humanitarian; One is that everything is earned by himself, and his past experiences make him feel that everything is cold, so he becomes individualistic. We in China have probably become more individualists. Those who advocate humanitarianism want to think of ideas for the poor and change the status quo, in the eyes of politicians, it is not as good as individualism; So there is a conflict between humanitarians and politicians. The Russian writer Tolstoy talked about humanism, opposed war, and wrote three thick novels - the one "War and Peace", he himself was an aristocrat, but after living on the battlefield, he felt how painful the war was. Especially when he came to the iron plate of the commander (important officers on the battlefield had iron plates to block bullets), it was even more piercing. And he saw that many of his friends died on the battlefield. The result of the war can also be turned into two attitudes: one is a hero, he sees the dead and wounded of others, only he is alive, he thinks it is amazing, so he boasts of his might on the battlefield. One is to become opposed to war, hoping that there will be no more wars in the world. Tolstoy is the latter, advocating the use of non-resistance to eliminate war. He advocated this, and the government naturally hated him; opposed to war and conflicted with the Russian emperor's desire to invade; advocated no resistance, so that soldiers did not fight for the emperor, the police did not enforce the law for the emperor, the judges did not judge for the emperor, and everyone did not praise the emperor; The emperor is all praised by the dignitaries, and if no one holds it, what kind of emperor will he be, and it will conflict with politics. This kind of writer came out and was dissatisfied with the social status quo, and criticized in this way and criticized like that, which made everyone in the society feel uneasy and uneasy, so naturally they had to be killed.但是，文艺家的话其实还是社会的话，他不过感觉灵敏，早感到早说出来（有时，他说得太早，连社会也反对他，也排轧他）。譬如我们学兵式体操，行举枪礼，照规矩口令是“举……枪”这般叫，一定要等“枪”字令下，才可以举起。有些人却是一听到“举”字便举起来，叫口令的要罚他，说他做错。文艺家在社会上正是这样；他说得早一点，大家都讨厌他。政治家认定文学家是社会扰乱的煽动者，心想杀掉他，社会就可平安。殊不知杀了文学家，社会还是要革命；俄国的文学家被杀掉的充军的不在少数，革命的火焰不是到处燃着吗？文学家生前大概不能得到社会的同情，潦倒地过了一生，直到死后四五十年，才为社会所认识，大家大闹起来。政治家因此更厌恶文学家，以为文学家早就种下大祸根；政治家想不准大家思想，而那野蛮时代早已过去了。在座诸位的见解，我虽然不知道；据我推测，一定和政治家是不相同；政治家既永远怪文艺家破坏他们的统一，偏见如此，所以我从来不肯和政治家去说。
However, the words of writers and artists are actually the words of society, and he just feels sensitive and speaks early (sometimes, he speaks too early, and even society opposes him and rejects him). For example, when we learn military gymnastics, we perform a gun salute, and the password is "lifting...... Gun" must wait for the word "gun" to be given before it can be raised. Some people raise it as soon as they hear the word "lift", and the person who calls the password wants to punish him, saying that he has done something wrong. Writers and artists are like this in society; He said it a little earlier, and everyone hated him. Politicians believe that writers are instigators of social disturbance, and they want to kill him, so that society can be safe. As everyone knows, if the writer is killed, society still needs to be revolutionary; Many Russian writers were killed and conscripted, and the flame of revolution was not burning everywhere? Writers probably could not get the sympathy of society during their lifetime, and lived a depressed life, and it was not until forty or fifty years after their death that they were recognized by society, and everyone made a big fuss. Politicians hate writers even more, thinking that writers have already planted a great bane; Politicians can't think about everyone's thoughts, and those barbaric times are long gone. Although I do not know the opinions of everyone here; I speculate that it must be different from politicians; Politicians always blame writers and artists for destroying their unity, and their prejudice is so prejudiced, so I never want to talk to politicians.到了后来，社会终于变动了；文艺家先时讲的话，渐渐大家都记起来了，大家都赞成他，恭维他是先知先觉。虽是他活的时候，怎样受过社会的奚落。刚才我来讲演，大家一阵子拍手，这拍手就见得我并不怎样伟大；那拍手是很危险的东西，拍了手或者使我自以为伟大不再向前了，所以还是不拍手的好。上面我讲过，文学家是感觉灵敏了一点，许多观念，文学家早感到了，社会还没有感到。譬如今天衣萍先生穿了皮袍，我还只穿棉袍；衣萍先生对于天寒的感觉比我灵。再过一月，也许我也感到非穿皮袍不可，在天气上的感觉，相差到一个月，在思想上的感觉就得相差到三四十年。这个话，我这么讲，也有许多文学家在反对。我在广东，曾经批评一个革命文学家——现在的广东，是非革命文学不能算做文学的，是非“打打打，杀杀杀，革革革，命命命”，不能算做革命文学的——我以为革命并不能和文学连在一块儿，虽然文学中也有文学革命。但做文学的人总得闲定一点，正在革命中，那有功夫做文学。我们且想想：在生活困乏中，一面拉车，一面“之乎者也”，到底不大便当。古人虽有种田做诗的，那一定不是自己在种田；雇了几个人替他种田，他才能吟他的诗；真要种田，就没有功夫做诗。革命时候也是一样；正在革命，那有功夫做诗？我有几个学生，在打陈炯明时候，他们都在战场；我读了他们的来信，只见他们的字与词一封一封生疏下去。俄国革命以后，拿了面包票排了队一排一排去领面包；这时，国家既不管你什么文学家艺术家雕刻家；大家连想面包都来不及，那有功夫去想文学？等到有了文学，革命早成功了。革命成功以后，闲空了一点；有人恭维革命，有人颂扬革命，这已不是革命文学。他们恭维革命颂扬革命，就是颂扬有权力者，和革命有什么关系？
Later, society finally changed; Gradually everyone remembered what the writer and artist said before, and everyone agreed with him, complimenting him as a prophet. Although he was alive, how he was ridiculed by society. Just now when I came to give a speech, everyone clapped their hands for a while, and this clapping showed that I was not very great; Clapping is a very dangerous thing, clapping may make me think that greatness is no longer moving forward, so it's better not to clap my hands. As I said above, writers are a little more sensitive, and many concepts have been felt by writers for a long time, but society has not yet felt them. For example, today Mr. Yi Ping wore a leather robe, and I only wore a cotton robe; Mr. Yi Ping feels better about the cold than me. In another month, maybe I also feel that I have to wear a leather robe, and the difference in the weather is a month, and the difference in the feeling in the mind is to thirty or forty years. I say this, and many writers are opposed to this. When I was in Guangdong, I once criticized a revolutionary writer - now in Guangdong, right and wrong cannot be regarded as literature, right and wrong "fighting, killing, revolution, revolution, life", and cannot be regarded as revolutionary literature - I think that revolution cannot be connected with literature, although there is also a literary revolution in literature. But those who do literature must be a little idle, and they are in the midst of a revolution, so they have the kung fu to do literature. Let's think about it: in the midst of poverty in life, pulling a cart on the one hand, and "doing it", is not a big benefit. Although the ancients farmed and wrote poetry, they must not be farming themselves; hired a few people to farm for him before he could recite his poems; If you really want to farm, you don't have the time to write poetry. The same is true during the revolution; is in the revolution, how can you make poetry? I have several students, and when I was fighting Chen Jiongming, they were all on the battlefield; I read their letters and saw that their words and words were rusty one by one. After the Russian Revolution, I took a bread ticket and lined up in rows to receive bread; At this time, the country does not care about you as a writer, artist, or sculptor; Everyone can't even think about bread, so how can they think about literature? By the time there was literature, the revolution had already succeeded. After the success of the revolution, I was a little idle; Some people compliment the revolution, some people praise the revolution, this is no longer revolutionary literature. What does it have to do with the revolution if they compliment the revolution and praise the revolution?这时，也许有感觉灵敏的文学家，又感到现状的不满意，又要出来开口。从前文艺家的话，政治革命家原是赞同过；直到革命成功，政治家把从前所反对那些人用过的老法子重新采用起来，在文艺家仍不免于不满意，又非被排轧出去不可，或是割掉他的头。割掉他的头，前面我讲过，那是顶好的法子咾，——从十九世纪到现在，世界文艺的趋势，大都如此。
At this time, some writers who may feel sensitive feel dissatisfied with the status quo and want to speak out again. In the past, political revolutionaries originally agreed with the words of writers and artists; Until the success of the revolution, politicians re-adopted the old methods used by those who opposed them in the past, and the writers and artists were still dissatisfied, and they had to be pushed out or cut off their heads. Cutting off his head, as I said earlier, that is the best method,—— from the nineteenth century to the present, most of the trends in world literature and art have been like this.十九世纪以后的文艺，和十八世纪以前的文艺大不相同。十八世纪的英国小说，它的目的就在供给太太小姐们的消遣，所讲的都是愉快风趣的话。十九世纪的后半世纪，完全变成和人生问题发生密切关系。我们看了，总觉得十二分的不舒服，可是我们还得气也不透地看下去。这因为以前的文艺，好像写别一个社会，我们只要鉴赏；现在的文艺，就在写我们自己的社会，连我们自己也写进去；在小说里可以发见社会，也可以发见我们自己；以前的文艺，如隔岸观火，没有什么切身关系；现在的文艺，连自己也烧在这里面，自己一定深深感觉到；一到自己感觉到，一定要参加到社会去！
Literature and art after the 19th century are very different from literature and art before the 18th century. The purpose of the eighteenth-century English novel was to provide the pastime of the ladies, and it was all pleasant and funny. The second half of the nineteenth century completely became closely related to life problems. When we watched it, we always felt twelve points uncomfortable, but we still had to look at it without breath. This is because the literature and art in the past seemed to write about another society, and we only need to appreciate it; Today's literature and art are writing about our own society, even ourselves; In novels, we can find society and ourselves; In the past, literature and art, such as watching the fire from the other side, had no personal relationship; The current literature and art are burned in it, and I must feel it deeply; As soon as you feel it, you must participate in the society!十九世纪，可以说是一个革命的时代；所谓革命，那不安于现在，不满意于现状的都是。文艺催促旧的渐渐消灭的也是革命（旧的消灭，新的才能产生），而文学家的命运并不因自己参加过革命而有一样改变，还是处处碰钉子。现在革命的势力已经到了徐州，在徐州以北文学家原站不住脚；在徐州以南，文学家还是站不住脚，即共了产，文学家还是站不住脚。革命文学家和革命家竟可说完全两件事。诋斥军阀怎样怎样不合理，是革命文学家；打倒军阀是革命家；孙传芳所以赶走，是革命家用炮轰掉的，决不是革命文艺家做了几句“孙传芳呀，我们要赶掉你呀”的文章赶掉的。在革命的时候，文学家都在做一个梦，以为革命成功将有怎样怎样一个世界；革命以后，他看看现实全不是那么一回事，于是他又要吃苦了。照他们这样叫，啼，哭都不成功；向前不成功，向后也不成功，理想和现实不一致，这是注定的运命；正如你们从《呐喊》上看出的鲁迅和讲坛上的鲁迅并不一致；或许大家以为我穿洋服头发分开，我却没有穿洋服，头发也这样短短的。所以以革命文学自命的，一定不是革命文学，世间那有满意现状的革命文学？除了吃麻醉药！苏俄革命以前，有两个文学家，叶遂宁和梭波里，他们都讴歌过革命，直到后来，他们还是碰死在自己所讴歌希望的现实碑上，那时，苏维埃是成立了！
The nineteenth century can be said to be an era of revolution; The so-called revolution is those who are uneasy about the present and dissatisfied with the status quo. Literature and art urge the gradual extinction of the old is also a revolution (the old is eliminated, and new talents are born), and the fate of writers does not change because they have participated in the revolution, but they still hit nails everywhere. Now that the revolutionary forces have arrived in Xuzhou, the writers north of Xuzhou are untenable; South of Xuzhou, writers still cannot stand, that is, communism, and writers are still untenable. Revolutionary writers and revolutionaries can be said to be completely different things. to slander the warlords as unreasonable and unreasonable, is a revolutionary writer; Overthrow the warlords are revolutionaries; Sun Chuanfang was driven away by the revolutionaries with artillery, and by no means by the revolutionary writers and artists who made a few articles saying "Sun Chuanfang, we want to get rid of you". During the revolution, writers are dreaming of what kind of world the revolution will have; After the revolution, he saw that the reality was not the same at all, so he had to endure hardships again. They cried and cried and cried without success; If you don't succeed forward, you won't succeed backwards, and your ideals and reality are inconsistent, which is your destiny; As you can see from "The Scream", Lu Xun and Lu Xun on the pulpit are not consistent; Maybe everyone thinks that I wear a dress and my hair is separated, but I don't wear a suit, and my hair is so short. Therefore, those who call themselves revolutionary literature must not be revolutionary literature, and there is revolutionary literature in the world that is satisfied with the status quo? In addition to taking anesthetics! Before the Soviet Russian Revolution, there were two writers, Ye Suining and Sopoli, who both praised the revolution, and until later, they still died on the reality monument they praised and hoped for, and at that time, the Soviet Union was founded!不过，社会太寂寞了，有这样的人，才觉得有趣些。人类是欢喜看看戏的，文学家自己来做戏给人家看，或是绑出去砍头，或是在最近墙脚下枪毙，都可以热闹一下子。且如上海巡捕用棒打人，大家围着去看，他们自己虽然不愿意挨打，但看见人家挨打，倒觉得颇有趣的。文学家便是用自己的皮肉在挨打的啦！
However, society is too lonely, and it is interesting to have such people. Writers themselves come to show the play, or tie it out and behead it, or shoot it at the foot of the wall recently, all of which can be lively. And for example, the Shanghai patrol beat people with sticks, and everyone gathered around to watch, although they themselves were unwilling to be beaten, but they found it quite interesting to see people being beaten. Writers are being beaten with their own flesh!今天所讲的，就是这么一点点，给它一个题目，叫做……《文艺与政治的歧途》。What I will talk about today is just a little bit, give it a title, called ...... "The Wrong Way of Literature and Politics".

一九二九年

一九二九年

一九二九年

In 1929

一九二九年

《近代世界短篇小说集》小引

一九二九年

A small introduction to the "Collection of Short Stories in the Modern World"一时代的纪念碑底的文章，文坛上不常有；即有之，也什九是大部的著作。以一篇短的小说而成为时代精神所居的大宫阙者，是极其少见的。
Articles at the bottom of monuments of an era are not often found in the literary world; Even if there is, nine out of ten are most of the works. It is extremely rare for a short novel to become a great palace where the spirit of the times lives.但至今，在巍峨灿烂的巨大的纪念碑底的文学之旁，短篇小说也依然有着存在的充足的权利。不但巨细高低，相依为命，也譬如身入大伽蓝中，但见全体非常宏丽，眩人眼睛，令观者心神飞越，而细看一雕阑一画础，虽然细小，所得却更为分明，再以此推及全体，感受遂愈加切实，因此那些终于为人所注重了。
But to this day, next to the literature at the base of the majestic and splendid monument, short stories still have the full right to exist. Not only is it high and small, dependent on each other, but it is also like entering a large temple, but seeing the whole is very magnificent, dazzling to the eyes, making the viewer's mind fly over, and looking closely at a carved railing and a painting base, although small, the result is more clear, and then pushed to the whole, the feeling becomes more and more real, so those are finally paid attention to.在现在的环境中，人们忙于生活，无暇来看长篇，自然也是短篇小说的繁生的很大原因之一。只顷刻间，而仍可借一斑略知全豹，以一目尽传精神，用数顷刻，遂知种种作风，种种作者，种种所写的人和物和事状，所得也颇不少的。而便捷，易成，取巧……这些原因还在外。
In the current environment, people are busy with life and have no time to read long stories, which is naturally one of the main reasons for the proliferation of short stories. In just a moment, you can still get a little idea of the whole leopard with a glimpse, and convey the spirit at a glance, and in a few moments, you can know all kinds of styles, all kinds of authors, all kinds of people, things and things written, and you can get a lot. It is convenient, easy to complete, and clever...... These reasons are still out.中国于世界所有的大部杰作很少译本，翻译短篇小说的却特别的多者，原因大约也为此。我们——译者的汇印这书，则原因就在此。贪图用力少，绍介多，有些不肯用尽呆气力的坏处，是自问恐怕也在所不免的。但也有一点只要能培一朵花，就不妨做做会朽的腐草的近于不坏的意思。还有，是要将零星的小品，聚在一本里，可以较不容易于散亡。
China has very few translations of all the masterpieces in the world, but the translation of short stories is particularly large, and the reason is probably for this reason. This is the reason why we, the translator, printed this book. The disadvantages of being greedy for less effort, more Shaojie, and some refusal to use all their strength are inevitable to ask yourself. But there is also a point that as long as you can cultivate a flower, you might as well make rotten grass that is close to not bad. Also, it is necessary to gather sporadic sketches in one book, which can be less difficult to scatter.我们——译者，都是一面学习，一面试做的人，虽于这一点小事，力量也还很不够，选的不当和译的错误，想来是一定不免的。我们愿受读者和批评者的指正。
We, translators, are people who study and try to do at the same time, although this small thing, the strength is still not enough, and the improper choice and translation mistakes must be inevitable. We would like to be corrected by readers and critics.一九二九年四月二十六日，朝花社同人识。
On April 26, 1929, he met the same person as the Morning Flower Society.

一九二九年

关于《关于红笑》

一九二九年

About "About Red Smile"今天收到四月十八日的《华北日报》，副刊上有鹤西先生的半篇《关于红笑》的文章。《关于红笑》，我是有些注意的，因为自己曾经译过几页，那豫告，就登在初版的《域外小说集》上，但后来没有译完，所以也没有出版。不过也许是有些旧相识之故罢，至今有谁讲到这本书，大抵总还喜欢看一看。可是看完这《关于红笑》，却令我大觉稀奇了，也不能不说几句话。为要头绪分明，先将原文转载些在下面——
I received the "North China Daily" on April 18 today, and there was half an article by Mr. Hexi "About Red Smile" in the supplement. "About Red Laughter", I paid some attention, because I had translated a few pages, and the warning was published in the first edition of the "Collection of Extraterritorial Novels", but it was not translated later, so it was not published. But maybe it's because of some old acquaintances, who still talks about this book, probably still likes to read it. But after reading this "About Red Smile", I felt very strange, and I couldn't help but say a few words. In order to have a clear clue, first reprint some of the original text below -“昨天到蹇君家去，看见第二十卷第一号的《小说月报》，上边有梅川君译的《红笑》，这部书，因为我和骏祥也译过，所以禁不住要翻开看看，并且还想来说几句关于《红笑》的话。
"Yesterday I went to Jian Jun's house and saw the "Novel Monthly" in Volume 20, No. 1, which had "Red Smile" translated by Mei Chuanjun, this book, because Jun Xiang and I also translated it, so I couldn't help but open it and read it, and I wanted to say a few words about "Red Smile".“自然，我不是要说梅川君不该译《红笑》，没有这样的理由也没有这样的权力。不过我对于梅川君的译文有一点怀疑的地方，固然一个人原不该随便地怀疑别个，但世上偏就是这点奇怪，尽有是让人意想不到的事情。不过也许我底过虑是错的，而且在梅川君看来也是意想不到的事，那么，这错处就在我，而这篇文字也就只算辩明我自己没有抄袭别人。现在我先讲讲事实的经过。
"Naturally, I don't want to say that Umechuan-kun should not translate "Red Smile", there is no such reason or such power. However, I have a little doubt about Umechuan-kun's translation, although one person should not casually doubt another, but this is the strangeness of the world, and there are all unexpected things. But maybe I was wrong, and it was unexpected in Umechuan-kun's opinion, so the fault was mine, and this text only proved that I did not plagiarize others. Now let me tell you about the facts.“《红笑》，是我和骏祥，在去年暑假中一个多星期内赶完的，……赶完之后就给北新寄去。过了许久才接到小峰君十一月七日的信，说是因系两人所译，前后文不连贯，托石民君校阅，又说稿费在月底准可寄来。以后我一连写了几封信去催问，均未得到回信，……所以年假中就将底稿寻出，又改译了一遍。文气是重新顺了一遍（特别是后半部），错误及不妥的地方一共改了几十处，交岐山书局印行。稿子才交出不久，却接到小峰二月十九日的信，钱是寄来了，虽然被抹去一点零头，因为稿子并未退回，所以支票我也暂时存着，没有退去，以后小峰君又来信说，原书，译稿都可退还，叫我将支票交给袁家骅先生。我回信说已照办，并请将稿子退了回来。但如今，书和稿子，始终还没有见面！
"Red Smile" was completed by Junxiang and I in more than a week during last summer,...... After rushing, send it to Beixin. After a long time, I received a letter from Xiaofengjun on November 7, saying that it was translated by two people, and the text was incoherent, so I asked Shi Minjun to proofread it, and said that the manuscript fee could be sent at the end of the month. After that, I wrote several letters in a row to urge questions, but I didn't get a reply,...... So during the annual vacation, I found the manuscript and retranslated it again. The style was re-ordered (especially the second half), and dozens of errors and inadequacies were corrected and printed by Qishan Bookstore. The manuscript was handed over not long ago, but I received a letter from Xiaofeng on February 19, the money was sent, although it was erased a little bit, because the manuscript was not returned, so I also kept the check temporarily and did not return it, and later Xiaofengjun wrote again saying that the original book and the translated manuscript could be returned, and asked me to hand over the check to Mr. Yuan Jiahua. I replied that I had complied and asked to return the manuscript. But now, the book and the manuscript have never met!“这初次的译稿，我不敢一定说梅川君曾经见过，虽然我想梅川君有见到的可能。自然梅川君不一定会用我们底译文作蓝本来翻译，但是第一部的译文，句法神情都很相似的这一点，不免使我有一点怀疑。因为原来我们底初译是第一部比第二部流畅得多，同时梅川君的译文也是第一部比第二部好些，而彼此神似的又就是这九个断片。在未有更确切的证明时，我也不愿将抄袭这样的字眼，加于别人底头上，但我很希望对这点，梅川君能高兴给一个答复。假如一切真是我想错了呢，前边已经说过，这些话就作为我们就要出版的单行本并非抄袭的证明。”
"I don't dare to say that Umekawa-kun has seen this first translation, although I think Umekawa-kun has seen it. Naturally, Umekawa-kun may not use our original translation as a blueprint for translation, but the fact that the syntax and expression of the first translation are very similar inevitably makes me a little suspicious. Because it turns out that our first translation is much smoother than the second part, and Umekawa-kun's translation is also better than the second part, and it is these nine fragments that are similar to each other. In the absence of more definite proof, I do not want to add the word plagiarism to others, but I hope that Umechuan-kun will be happy to give an answer to this point. If everything is really wrong, as I said before, these words serve as proof that the book we are about to publish is not plagiarism. ”文词虽然极婉委曲折之致，但主旨却很简单的，就是：我们的将出版的译本和你的已出版的译本，很相类似，而我曾将译稿寄给北新书局过，你有见到的可能，所以我疑心是你抄袭我们的，假如不然，那么“这些话就作为我们就要出版的单行本并非抄袭的证明”。
Although the words are extremely tactful and tortuous, the main idea is very simple, that is: our published translation is very similar to your published translation, and I have sent the translation to Beixin Bookstore, you may have seen it, so I suspect that you have plagiarized us, if not, then "these words are used as proof that the single book we are going to publish is not plagiarism."其实是，照原文的论法，则假如不然之后，就要成为“我们抄袭”你的了的，然而竟这么一来，化为神妙的“证明”了。但我并不想研究这些，仅要声明几句话，对于两方面——北新书局，尤其是小说月报社——声明几句话，因为这篇译稿，是由我送到小说月报社去的。
In fact, according to the original text, if not, it will become "we plagiarized" you, but in this way, it has turned into a mysterious "proof". But I don't want to study these, just a few words, for two aspects - Beixin Book Company, especially the Novel Monthly Newspaper - a few words, because this translation was sent to the Novel Monthly Newspaper by me.梅川君这部译稿，也是去年暑假时候交给我的，要我介绍出售，但我很怕做中人，就压下了。这样压着的稿件，现在还不少。直到十月，小说月报社拟出增刊，要我寄稿，我才记得起来，据日本二叶亭四迷的译本改了二三十处，和我译的《竖琴》一并送去了。另外有一部《红笑》在北新书局吃苦，我是一点都不知道的。至于梅川，他在离上海七八百里的乡下，那当然更不知道。
Umekawa-kun's translation was also handed to me during the summer vacation last year, and he asked me to introduce it for sale, but I was afraid of being a middle-earthed person, so I suppressed it. There are still many manuscripts pressed like this. It wasn't until October that the Novel Monthly Newspaper prepared a supplement and asked me to contribute a manuscript, and I remembered that according to the translation of the Japanese Futabatei Shimi, I changed twenty or thirty places, and sent it together with my translation of "Harp". There is another "Red Smile" that suffered in Beixin Bookstore, which I didn't know at all. As for Meichuan, he is in the countryside seven or eight hundred miles away from Shanghai, so of course he doesn't know.那么，他可有鹤西先生的译稿一到北新，便立刻去看的“可能”呢？我想，是不“能”的，因为他和北新中人一个不认识，倘跑进北新编辑部去翻稿件，那罪状是不止“抄袭”而已的。我却是“可能”的，不过我从去年春天以后，一趟也没有去过编辑部，这要请北新诸公谅察。
So, does he have the "possibility" of Mr. Hexi's translation to read it immediately as soon as it arrives in Beixin? I think it is not "possible", because he and the people in Beixin do not know each other, and if he runs into the Beixin editorial office to turn over the manuscript, the crime is more than just "plagiarism". I am "possible", but I have not been to the editorial office since last spring, so I ask the Beijing New Lords to forgive me.那么，为什么两本的好处有些相像呢？我虽然没有见过那一译本，也不知所据的是谁的英译，但想来，大约所据的是同一英译，而第二部也比第一部容易译，彼此三位的英文程度又相仿佛，所以去年是相像的，而鹤西先生们的译本至今未出，英文程度也大有进步了，改了一回，于是好处就多起来了。
So, why are the benefits of the two books somewhat similar? Although I have not seen that translation, and I don't know whose English translation it is based on, but I think it is probably based on the same English translation, and the second part is easier to translate than the first, and the English level of each other is similar, so last year it was similar, and Mr. Hexi's translation has not been published so far, and the English level has also improved a lot.因为鹤西先生的译本至今未出，所以也无从知道类似之度，究竟如何。倘仅有彼此神似之处，我以为那是因为同一原书的译本，并不足异的，正不必如此神经过敏，只因“疑心”，而竟想入非非，根据“世上偏就是这点奇怪，尽有是让人意想不到的事情”的理由，而先发制人，诬别人为“抄袭”，而且还要被诬者“给一个答复”，这真是“世上偏就是这点奇怪”了。
Because Mr. Hexi's translation has not been published so far, there is no way to know how similar it is. If there is only a similarity between each other, I think it is because of the translation of the same original book, which is not unusual, just because of "suspicion", and actually thinking about wrong, according to the reason that "the world is this strange, there are all unexpected things", and preemptively accusing others of "plagiarism", and the accuser has to "give an answer", which is really "the world is this strange".但倘若很是相同呢？则只要证明了梅川并无看见鹤西先生们的译稿的“可能”以后，即不用“世上偏就是这点奇怪”的论法，嫌疑也总要在后出这一本了。
But what if they are very similar? As long as it is proved that Umekawa did not see the "possibility" of Mr. Tsurunishi's translation, that is, there is no need to argue that "the world is just this strange", the suspicion will always come later.北平的日报，我不寄去，梅川是决不会看见的。我就先说几句，俟印出时一并寄去。大约这也就够了，阿弥陀佛。
If I don't send the daily newspaper in Peking, Meichuan will never see it. I'll say a few words first, and I'll send them when they are printed. That's probably enough, Amitabha.四月二十日。
April 20.
写了上面这些话之后，又陆续看到《华北日报》副刊上《关于红笑》的文章，其中举了许多不通和误译之后，以这样的一段作结：
After writing the above words, I saw the article "About Red Smile" in the supplement of "North China Daily", which ended with this paragraph after citing many incomprehensions and mistranslations:“此外或者还有些，但我想我们或许总要比梅川君错得少点，而且也较为通顺，好在是不是，我们底译稿不久自可以证明。”
"In addition, there may be some, but I think we may always have to make fewer mistakes than Umechuan-kun, and it is more smooth, but fortunately, our original translation will soon be able to prove it."那就是我先前的话都多说了。因为鹤西先生已在自己切实证明了他和梅川的两本之不同。他的较好，而“抄袭”都成了“不通”和错误的较坏，岂非奇谈？倘说是改掉的，那就是并非“抄袭”了。倘说鹤西译本原也是这样地“不通”和错误的，那不是许多刻薄话，都是“今日之我”在打“昨日之我”的嘴巴么？总之，一篇《关于红笑》的大文，只证明了焦躁的自己广告和参看先出译本，加以修正，而反诬别人为“抄袭”的苦心。这种手段，是中国翻译界的第一次。
That's what I said before. Because Mr. Hexi has proven the difference between his two books and Umekawa. His is better, and "plagiarism" has become "incomprehensible" and worse than wrong, isn't it a strange story? If it is changed, it is not "plagiarism". If the Hexi translation is also so "incomprehensible" and wrong, isn't it a lot of mean words, but "today's me" is slapping the mouth of "yesterday's me"? In short, a big article "About Red Smile" only proves the painstaking efforts of anxious self-advertisements and reference to the first translation, correcting them, and falsely accusing others of "plagiarism". This method is the first time in the Chinese translation industry.四月二十四日，补记。
April 24, supplementary record.
这一篇还未在《语丝》登出，就收到小说月报社的一封信，里面是剪下的《华北日报》副刊，就是那一篇鹤西先生的《关于红笑》。据说是北平寄来，给编辑先生的。我想，这大约就是作者所玩的把戏。倘使真的，盖未免恶辣一点；同一著作有几种译本，又何必如此惶惶上诉。但一面说别人不通，自己却通，别人错多，自己错少。而一面又要证明别人抄袭自己之作，则未免恶辣得可怜可笑。然而在我，乃又颇叹绍介译作之难于今为甚也。为刷清和报答起见，我确信我也有将这篇送给《小说月报》编辑先生，要求再在本书上发表的义务和权利，于是乎亦寄之。
Before this article was published in "Yusi", I received a letter from the Novel Monthly Newspaper, which contained a cut supplement of "North China Daily", which was Mr. Hexi's "About Red Smile". It is said that it was sent from Peking to Mr. Editor. I think this is probably the trick the author played. If it is true, it is probably a little more vicious; There are several translations of the same work, so why appeal in such a panic. But on the one hand, he said that others didn't understand, but he did, and others made many mistakes and made few mistakes. On the other hand, if you want to prove that others have plagiarized your own work, it is pitiful and ridiculous. However, for me, I am quite lamentable that the difficulty of translating is even greater than it is now. In order to clear up and repay, I am sure that I also have the obligation and right to send this article to the editor of the "Novel Monthly" and ask for it to be published in this book again, so I also send it.五月八日。
May 8th.

一九二九年

通讯：关于孙用先生的几首译诗

一九二九年

Newsletter: Several translated poems about Mr. Sun Yong编者先生：
Mr. Editor:我从均风兄处借来《奔流》第九期一册，看见孙用先生自世界语译的莱芒托夫几首诗，我发觉有些处与原本不合。孙先生是由世界语转译的，想必经手许多，有几次是失掉了原文的精彩的。孙先生第一首译诗《帆》，原文是：
I borrowed a volume of the ninth issue of "Rush" from Brother Junfeng, and when I saw several poems of Lermantov translated by Mr. Sun Yong from Esperanto, I found that some parts were inconsistent with the original. Mr. Sun translated it into Esperanto, and he must have done a lot, and several times he lost the excitement of the original text. Mr. Sun's first translated poem "Sail", the original text is:（原文从略——编者。）
(The original text is omitted - editor.) ）按着我的意思应当译为（曾刊登于《语丝》第五卷第三期）：
According to my meaning, it should be translated as (published in the third issue of the fifth volume of "Yusi"):孤独发白的船帆，Lonely whitish sails, 
在云雾中蔚蓝色的大海里…… in the azure sea in clouds...... 
他到很远的境域去寻找些什么？ What did he go to find in a distant land? 
他在故土里留弃着什么？ What did he leave behind in his homeland?
波涛汹涌，微风吼啸，
船桅杆怒愤着而发着噶吱吱的音调……
喂！他不寻找幸福，
也不是从幸福中走逃！
The waves were raging, the breeze roared, and the mast of the id_0000 ship creaked in anger......  Hey! He doesn't look for happiness, and  doesn't run away from it!他底下是一行发亮光的苍色水流，
他顶上是太阳的金色的光芒；
可是他，反叛的，希求着巨风，
好像在巨风中有什么安宁！
Beneath him was a line of shining azure water, id_0000 and above him was the golden light of the sun;  But he, rebellious, longs for the great wind,  as if there is some peace in the great wind!第二首《天使》，孙先生译的有几处和我译的不同。（原文从略——编者。）我是这样的译：
The second song, "Angel", Mr. Sun's translation is different from mine. (The original text is omitted - editor.) Here's how I translate:夜半天使沿着天空飞翔，In the middle of the night, angels fly along the sky, 
寂静的歌曲他唱着； silence song he sings; 
月，星，和乌云一起很用心听那神的歌曲。 The moon, the stars, and the dark clouds listen attentively to the song of the god.
他歌着在天堂花园里树叶子的底上那无罪He sings of the happiness of the sinless soul 
灵魂的幸福， under the leaves of the Garden of Heaven, 
他歌咏着伟大的上帝， he sings of the great God, and 
真实的赞美着他。 truly praises him.
他抱拢了年青们的心灵，He embraced the hearts of young people, 
为的是这悲苦和泪的世界； for this world of misery and tears; The sound of 
歌曲的声音，留在青年人的灵魂里是—— songs remains in the souls of young people - 
没有只字，但却是活着。 has no words, but it is alive.
为无边的奇怪的希望，For the infinite strange hope, 
在这心灵，长久的于世界上不得安静， In this heart, there will be no silence in the world for a long time, 
人间苦闷的乐曲， The music of the world, 
是不能够代替天上的歌声。 cannot replace the song of heaven.
其余孙先生所译两首《我出来》和《三棵棕榈树》，可惜原本现时不在我手里。以后有工夫时可向俄国朋友处借看。我对孙先生的译诗，并不是来改正，乃本着真挚的心情，随便谈谈，请孙先生原谅！此请
The other two songs translated by Mr. Sun "I Come Out" and "Three Palm Trees" are unfortunately not in my hands at the moment. In the future, when you have time, you can borrow it from a Russian friend. My translation of Mr. Sun's poem is not to correct it, but to talk about it casually in a sincere mood, please forgive Mr. Sun! This request撰安。
Written by An.张逢汉。一九二九，五，七，于哈尔滨灿星社。
Zhang Fenghan. 1929, 5, 7, at the Harbin Canxing Society.逢汉先生：
Mr. Feng Han:接到来信，我们很感谢先生的好意。
We are very grateful for your kindness.大约凡是译本，倘不标明“并无删节”或“正确的翻译”，或鼎鼎大名的专家所译的，欧美的本子也每不免有些节略或差异。译诗就更其难，因为要顾全音调和协韵，就总要加添或减去些原有的文字。世界语译本大约也如此，倘若译出来的还是诗的格式而非散文。但我们因为想介绍些名家所不屑道的东欧和北欧文学，而又少懂得原文的人，所以暂时只能用重译本，尤其是巴尔干诸小国的作品。原来的意思，实在不过是聊胜于无，且给读书界知道一点所谓文学家，世界上并不止几个受奖的泰戈尔和漂亮的曼殊斐儿之类。但倘有能从原文直接译出的稿子见寄，或加以指正，我们自然是十分愿意领受的。
Almost all translations, if they are not marked as "unabridged" or "correct", or are translated by famous experts, will inevitably have some omissions or differences in European and American versions. Translating poetry is even more difficult, because in order to take into account the whole tone and harmony, you must always add or subtract some original words. The same is true for Esperanto translations, if they are translated in the form of poetry rather than prose. However, because we want to introduce some Eastern European and Nordic literature that famous writers disdain, and few people know the original text, we can only use retranslated versions for the time being, especially the works of small Balkan countries. The original meaning is really just a talk is better than nothing, and it gives the reading community a little bit of so-called literary figures, and there are not only a few award-winning Tagore and the beautiful Manshu Phiel in the world. However, if there is a manuscript that can be directly translated from the original text to be sent or corrected, we are naturally very willing to accept it.这里有一件事很抱歉，就是我们所交易的印刷所里没有俄国字母，所以来信中的原文，只得省略，仅能将译文发出，以供读者的参考了。希见谅为幸。
One thing I am sorry to say here is that there is no Russian alphabet in the printing house we deal with, so the original text of the letter has to be omitted, and only the translation can be sent out for the reader's reference. I hope you will forgive me.鲁迅。六月二十五日，于上海。Lu Xun. June 25 in Shanghai.

一九三二年

一九三二年

一九三二年

1932

一九三二年

《淑姿的信》序

一九三二年

Preface to "Shuzi's Letter"夫嘉葩失荫，薄寒夺其芳菲，思士陵天，骄阳毁其羽翮。盖幽居一出，每仓皇于太空，坐驰无穷，终陨颠于实有也。爰有静女，长自山家，林泉陶其慧心，峰嶂隔兹尘俗，夜看朗月，觉天人之必圆，春撷繁花，谓芳馨之永住。虽生旧第，亦溅新流，既茁爱萌，遂通佳讯，排微波而径逝，矢坚石以偕行，向曼远之将来，构辉煌之好梦。然而年华春短，人海澜翻。远瞩所至，始见来日之大难，修眉渐颦，终敛当年之巧笑，衔深哀于不答，铸孤愤以成辞，远人焉居，长涂难即。何期忽逢二竖，遽释诸纷，绮颜于一棺，腐芳心于抔土。从此西楼良夜，凭槛无人，而中国韶年，乐生依旧。呜呼，亦可悲矣，不能久也。逝者如是，遗简廑存，则有生人，付之活字。文无雕饰，呈天真之纷纶，事具悲欢，露人生之鳞爪，既娱以善始，遂凄恻而令终。诚足以分追悼于有情，散馀悲于无著者也。属为小引，愧乏长才，率缀芜词，聊陈涯略云尔。
夫嘉葩失荫，薄寒夺其芳菲，思士陵天，骄阳毁其羽翮。 盖幽居一出，每仓皇于太空，坐驰无穷，终陨颠于实有也。 爰有静女，长自山家，林泉陶其慧心，峰嶂隔兹尘俗，夜看朗月，觉天人之必圆，春撷繁花，谓芳馨之永住。 虽生旧第，亦溅新流，既茁爱萌，遂通佳讯，排微波而径逝，矢坚石以偕行，向曼远之将来，构辉煌之好梦。 然而年华春短，人海澜翻。 远瞩所至，始见来日之大难，修眉渐颦，终敛当年之巧笑，衔深哀于不答，铸孤愤以成辞，远人焉居，长涂难即。 何期忽逢二竖，遽释诸纷，绮颜于一棺，腐芳心于抔土。 从此西楼良夜，凭槛无人，而中国韶年，乐生依旧。 呜呼，亦可悲矣，不能久也。 逝者如是，遗简廑存，则有生人，付之活字。 文无雕饰，呈天真之纷纶，事具悲欢，露人生之鳞爪，既娱以善始，遂凄恻而令终。 诚足以分追悼于有情，散馀悲于无著者也。 属为小引，愧乏长才，率缀芜词，聊陈涯略云尔。一九三二年七月二十日，鲁迅撰。July 20, 1932, written by Lu Xun.

一九三三年

一九三三年

一九三三年

In 1933

一九三三年

选本

一九三三年

Anthology今年秋天，在上海的日报上有一点可以算是关于文学的小小的辩论，就是为了一般的青年，应否去看《庄子》与《文选》以作文学上的修养之助。不过这类的辩论，照例是不会有结果的，往复几回之后，有一面一定拉出“动机论”来，不是说反对者“别有用心”，便是“哗众取宠”；客气一点，也就“彼亦一是非，此亦一是非”，而问题于是呜呼哀哉了。
This fall, there was a small debate in the Shanghai daily newspaper about literature, that is, whether ordinary young people should read "Zhuangzi" and "Anthology" as a help in literary cultivation. However, this kind of debate, as usual, will not be fruitful, and after a few back-and-forths, one side will definitely pull out the "motivation theory", either that the opponents have "ulterior motives", or that they are "sensational"; To be polite, it is "he is also a right and wrong, this is also a right and wrong", and the problem is so sad.但我因此又想到“选本”的势力。孔子究竟删过《诗》没有，我不能确说，但看它先“风”后“雅”而末“颂”，排得这么整齐，恐怕至少总也费过乐师的手脚，是中国现存的最古的诗选。由周至汉，社会情形太不同了，中间又受了《楚辞》的打击，晋宋文人如二陆束晳陶潜之流，虽然也做四言诗以支持场面，其实都不过是每句省去一字的五言诗，“王者之迹熄而《诗》亡”了。不过选者总是层出不穷的，至今尚存，影响也最广大者，我以为一部是《世说新语》，一部就是《文选》。
But I think of the power of "selection". I can't say for sure whether Confucius deleted the "Poems", but looking at it, it is arranged so neatly, I am afraid that at least it has always gone through the hands and feet of musicians, and it is the oldest existing poetry anthology in China. From the Zhou Dynasty to the Han Dynasty, the social situation was too different, and the middle was hit by the "Chu Ci", and the literati of the Jin and Song dynasties, such as Erlu Shu and Tao Qian, although they also made four-character poems to support the scene, in fact, they were just five-character poems that omitted a word for each sentence, "the traces of the king were extinguished and the "poem" was dead". However, there are always endless selectors, and the ones that still exist and have the greatest influence are I think one is "The New Words of the World" and the other is "Anthology".《世说新语》并没有说明是选的，好像刘义庆或他的门客所搜集，但检唐宋类书中所存裴启《语林》的遗文，往往和《世说新语》相同，可见它也是一部抄撮故书之作，正和《幽明录》一样。它的被清代学者所宝重，自然因为注中多有现今的逸书，但在一般读者，却还是为了本文，自唐迄今，拟作者不绝，甚至于自己兼加注解。袁宏道在野时要做官，做了官又大叫苦，便是中了这书的毒，误明为晋的缘故。有些清朝人却较为聪明，虽然辫发胡服，厚禄高官，他也一声不响，只在倩人写照的时候，在纸上改作斜领方巾，或芒鞋竹笠，聊过“世说”式瘾罢了。
"The New Words of the World" does not explain that it was selected, as if it was collected by Liu Yiqing or his disciples, but the posthumous writings of Pei Qi's "Yulin" preserved in the Tang and Song dynasties are often the same as the "New Words of the World", which shows that it is also a work of copying old books, just like the "Youming Record". It was cherished by scholars of the Qing Dynasty, naturally because there are many modern books in the annotations, but for ordinary readers, it is still for this article, since the Tang Dynasty, the author has been endless, and even his own annotations. Yuan Hongdao wanted to be an official when he was in the opposition, and when he became an official, he complained, that is, he was poisoned by this book, and he mistakenly understood that it was for the sake of Jin. Some Qing Dynasty people were smarter, although they braided their hair and Hu clothes, and they were high-ranking officials, he was silent, and only when he was portrayed, he changed them to diagonal scarves or straw sandals and bamboo hats on paper, and talked about the "world" style of addiction.《文选》的影响却更大。从曹宪至李善加五臣，音训注释书类之多，远非拟《世说新语》可比。那些烦难字面，如草头诸字，水旁山旁诸字，不断的被摘进历代的文章里面去，五四运动时虽受奚落，得“妖孽”之称，现在却又很有复辟的趋势了。而《古文观止》也一同渐渐的露了脸。
The influence of "Anthology" is even greater. From Cao Xian to Li Shanjia Wuchen, the number of phonetic commentary books is far from comparable to the "New Words of the World". Those troublesome words, such as the words of the grass head, the words by the water and the mountains, have been constantly picked into the articles of the past dynasties, and although they were ridiculed during the May Fourth Movement and were called "demons", they are now very restorative. And "Ancient Texts and Observations" gradually showed their faces together.以《古文观止》和《文选》并称，初看好像是可笑的，但是，在文学上的影响，两者却一样的不可轻视。凡选本，往往能比所选各家的全集或选家自己的文集更流行，更有作用。册数不多，而包罗诸作，固然也是一种原因，但还在近则由选者的名位，远则凭古人之威灵，读者想从一个有名的选家，窥见许多有名作家的作品。所以自汉至梁的作家的文集，并残本也仅存十余家，《昭明太子集》只剩一点辑本了，而《文选》却在的。读《古文辞类纂》者多，读《惜抱轩全集》的却少。凡是对于文术，自有主张的作家，他所赖以发表和流布自己的主张的手段，倒并不在作文心，文则，诗品，诗话，而在出选本。
It is said that "Ancient Texts and Observations" and "Anthology" seem ridiculous at first glance, but the influence in literature is equally not to be underestimated. Selected books are often more popular and effective than the complete works of the selected families or the selected families' own collections. The number of volumes is not large, and the inclusion of works is certainly a reason, but it is still close by the name of the selector, and far away by the power of the ancients, readers want to glimpse the works of many famous writers from a famous selector. Therefore, there are only more than ten collections of writers from the Han Dynasty to the Liang Dynasty, and there are only a few editions left in the "Collection of Prince Zhaoming", but the "Anthology" is. There are many people who read "Ancient Literature and Literature", but few people read "The Complete Works of Xi Baoxuan". For any writer who has his own ideas about literature, the means he relies on to express and disseminate his ideas are not in the heart of composition, the rules, the poems, and the poems, but in the selection of books.选本可以借古人的文章，寓自己的意见。博览群籍，采其合于自己意见的为一集，一法也，如《文选》是。择取一书，删其不合于自己意见的为一新书，又一法也，如《唐人万首绝句选》是。如此，则读者虽读古人书，却得了选者之意，意见也就逐渐和选者接近，终于“就范”了。
The selection can borrow the articles of the ancients to imply one's own opinions. It is also a method to read a collection of books and collect those that align with one's own opinions, such as the "Anthology". It is another method to choose a book and delete it that does not meet your opinion as a new book, such as "Selected Quatrains of the Tang Dynasty". In this way, although the reader reads the books of the ancients, he gets the will of the chooser, and the opinion gradually approaches the chooser, and finally "complies".读者的读选本，自以为是由此得了古人文笔的精华的，殊不知却被选者缩小了眼界。即以《文选》为例罢，没有嵇康《家诫》，使读者只觉得他是一个愤世嫉俗，好像无端活得不快活的怪人；不收陶潜《闲情赋》，掩去了他也是一个既取民间《子夜歌》意，而又拒以圣道的迂士。选本既经选者所滤过，就总只能吃他所给与的糟或醨。况且有时还加以批评，提醒了他之以为然，而默杀了他之以为不然处。纵使选者非常胡涂，如《儒林外史》所写的马二先生，游西湖漫无准备，须问路人，吃点心又不知选择，要每样都买一点，由此可见其衡文之毫无把握罢，然而他是处州人，一定要吃“处片”，又可见虽是马二先生，也自有其“处片”式的标准了。
Readers read the anthology, thinking that they have obtained the essence of the ancients' writing, but they do not know that the selected person has narrowed their horizons. That is, taking the "Anthology" as an example, there is no Ji Kang's "Family Commandments", which makes the reader only feel that he is a cynical, as if he is living an unhappy life for no reason; Not accepting Tao Qian's "Leisure Love Fu" hides that he is also a pedantic man who not only takes the meaning of the folk "Midnight Song", but also refuses to use the holy way. Since the selected book has been filtered by the selector, it can only eat the bad or the wine he gives. Moreover, sometimes he criticizes it, reminding him of what he thinks, and silently killing what he thinks is not. Even if the selectors are very foolish, such as Mr. Ma Er written in "The History of Confucianism", he is unprepared to visit West Lake, must ask passers-by, eat snacks and don't know how to choose, and buy a little of everything, which shows that he is unsure of Hengwen, but he is a native of Chuzhou, and he must eat "chupian", which shows that although he is Mr. Ma Er, he also has his own "chupian" standard.评选的本子，影响于后来的文章的力量是不小的，恐怕还远在名家的专集之上。我想，这许是研究中国文学史的人们也该留意的罢。
The power of the selection book to influence the later articles is not small, and I am afraid that it is still far above the collection of famous writers. I think this is something that people who study the history of Chinese literature should also pay attention to.十一月二十四日记。November 24 Diary.

诗

诗

诗

poem

诗

哭范爱农

诗

Crying for Fan Ainong把酒论天下，先生小酒人。把酒论天下，先生小酒人。 
大圜犹酩酊，微醉合沉沦。 大圜犹酩酊，微醉合沉沦。 
幽谷无穷夜，新宫自在春。 幽谷无穷夜，新宫自在春。 
旧朋云散尽，余亦等轻尘。 旧朋云散尽，余亦等轻尘。

诗

送O．E．君携兰归国

诗

送O．E．君携兰归国椒焚桂折佳人老，独托幽岩展素心。椒焚桂折佳人老，独托幽岩展素心。 
岂惜芳馨遗远者，故乡如醉有荆榛。 岂惜芳馨遗远者，故乡如醉有荆榛。
二月十二日
二月十二日

诗

无题

诗

Untitled大野多钩棘，长天列战云。The vast wilderness is filled with thorns and thorns, and the sky is filled with clouds of war. 
几家春袅袅，万籁静愔愔。 A few families are in the spring breeze, and the myriad sounds are quiet. 
下土惟秦醉，中流辍越吟。 The land is only drunk in Qin, and the middle class stops singing. 
风波一浩荡，花树已萧森。 The storm is vast, and the flowers and trees are already desolate.
三月
March

诗

题《彷徨》

诗

Titled "Wandering"寂寞新文苑，平安旧战场。The lonely new literary world, the old battlefield of peace. 
两间馀一卒，荷戟独彷徨。 There is only one soldier left in the room, and the spear is alone and hesitant.
三月
March

诗

赠日本歌人

诗

Gifted to Japanese singers春江好景依然在，远国征人此际行。The beautiful scenery of the spring river is still there, and the soldiers from distant countries set out at this time. 
莫向遥天望歌舞，西游演了是封神。 Don't look at the distant sky to sing and dance, Journey to the West is a god.
三月
March

诗

无题

诗

Untitled洞庭木落楚天高，眉黛猩红涴战袍。洞庭木落楚天高，眉黛猩红涴战袍。 
泽畔有人吟不得，秋波渺渺失离骚。 泽畔有人吟不得，秋波渺渺失离骚。
十二月
December

诗

湘灵歌

诗

湘灵歌昔闻湘水碧如染，今闻湘水胭脂痕。昔闻湘水碧如染，今闻湘水胭脂痕。 
湘灵妆成照湘水，皎如皓月窥彤云。 湘灵妆成照湘水，皎如皓月窥彤云。 
高丘寂寞竦中夜，芳荃零落无馀春。 高丘寂寞竦中夜，芳荃零落无馀春。 
鼓完瑶瑟人不闻，太平成象盈秋门。 鼓完瑶瑟人不闻，太平成象盈秋门。
三月
March

诗

二十二年元旦

诗

New Year's Day in the twenty-second year云封高岫护将军，霆击寒村灭下民。The clouds conferred upon Gao Xiu to protect the general, and the thunder strikes the cold village to destroy the common people. 
到底不如租界好，打牌声里又新春。 is not as good as the concession, and it is the New Year in the sound of playing cards.
一月二十六日
January 26th

诗

自嘲

诗

Deprecating运交华盖欲何求，未敢翻身已碰头。What do you want to ask for? 
破帽遮颜过闹市，漏船载酒泛中流。 Wearing a hat to cover one's face, passing through the bustling city, a leaky boat carrying wine drifts in the middle of the river. 
横眉冷对千夫指，俯首甘为孺子牛。 Horizontal eyebrows and cold fingers to the thousand men, bowing their heads willingly to be a cow. 
躲进小楼成一统，管它冬夏与春秋。 Hide in a small building and become a unity, regardless of winter, summer and spring.
十月十二日
十月十二日

诗

悼丁君

诗

悼丁君如磐夜气压重楼，剪柳春风导九秋。如磐夜气压重楼，剪柳春风导九秋。 
瑶瑟凝尘清怨绝，可怜无女耀高丘。 瑶瑟凝尘清怨绝，可怜无女耀高丘。
六月
六月

诗

阻郁达夫移家杭州

诗

阻郁达夫移家杭州钱王登假仍如在，伍相随波不可寻。Qian Wang is still on vacation, and Wu Xiang is untraceable. 
平楚日和憎健翮，小山香满蔽高岑。 The sun is peaceful and hateful, and the small mountain is full of fragrance and covers the high peak. 
坟坛冷落将军岳，梅鹤凄凉处士林。 The grave altar has been snubbed by General Yue, and the plum crane is desolate and desolate. 
何似举家游旷远，风波浩荡足行吟。 How can it be like a family trip to a long distance, and the storm is enough to sing.
十二月
December

诗

题三义塔

诗

Title Sanyi Pagoda三义塔者，中国上海闸北三义里遗鸠埋骨之塔也，在日本，农人共建之。
The Sanyi Pagoda is a pagoda where the bones of doves are buried in Sanyili, Zhabei, Shanghai, China, and was built by farmers in Japan.奔霆飞熛歼人子，败井颓垣剩饿鸠。The rushing thunder and soaring flames annihilate the sons of men, leaving only starving doves in the collapsed wells and collapsed walls. 
偶值大心离火宅，终遗高塔念瀛洲。 Occasionally, the great heart left the fire house, and finally left the tall tower to think of Yingzhou. 
精禽梦觉仍衔石，斗士诚坚共抗流。 The spirit bird wakes up from the dream and still holds the stone, and the warrior is sincere and resolute to resist the current. 
度尽劫波兄弟在，相逢一笑泯恩仇。 The brothers of the Jiebo are here, and when they meet, they smile and erase their grudges.
六月二十一日
June 21st

诗

赠人

诗

Gift明眸越女罢晨装，荇水荷风是旧乡。The bright-eyed Yue girl stops dressing in her morning clothes, and the lotus wind blows through the water, returning to her hometown. 
唱尽新词欢不见，旱云如火扑晴江。 Sing all the new lyrics, the joy is gone, and the dry clouds are like fire rushing to the clear river.
其二
Second秦女端容理玉筝，梁尘踊跃夜风轻。The Qin girl is graceful and straightens the jade zither, and the dust on the beams dances gently, and the night breeze is gentle. 
须臾响急冰弦绝，但见奔星劲有声。 After a while, the sound of the ice was broken, but the rushing star was strong and loud.
七月July

附录

附录

附录

appendix

附录

《奔流》编校后记

附录

"Torrent" editor's postscript一
One创作自有他本身证明，翻译也有译者已经解释的。现在只将编后想到的另外的事，写上几句——
The creation has its own proof, and the translation has been explained by the translator. Now I will only write a few sentences about the other things that came to mind after editing -Iwan Turgenjew早因为他的小说，为世所知，但论文甚少。这一篇《Hamlet und Don Quichotte》是极有名的，我们可以看见他怎样地观察人生。《Hamlet》中国已有译文，无须多说；《Don Quichotte》则只有林纾的文言译，名《魔侠传》，仅上半部，又是删节过的。近两年来，梅川君正在大发《Don Quixote》翻译热，但愿不远的将来，中国能够得到一部可看的译本，即使不得不略去其中的闲文也好。
Iwan Turgenjew has long been known for his novels, but there are very few papers. This "Hamlet und Don Quichotte" is very famous, and we can see how he observed life. "Hamlet" has been translated in China, so there is no need to say more; "Don Quichotte" is only Lin Shu's literary translation, called "The Legend of the Demon Man", only the first half, and it is abridged. In the past two years, Umechuan-kun has been making a big splash in the translation of "Don Quixote", and I hope that in the near future, China will be able to get a readable translation, even if it has to omit the idle text.《Don Quixote》的书虽然将近一千来页，事迹却很简单，就是他爱看侠士小说，因此发了游侠狂，硬要到各处去除邪惩恶，碰了种种钉子，闹了种种笑话，死了；临死才回复了他的故我。所以Turgenjew取毫无烦闷，专凭理想而勇往直前去做事的为“Don Quixote type”，来和一生瞑想，怀疑，以致什么事也不能做的Hamlet相对照。后来又有人和这专凭理想的“Don Quixoteism式”相对，称看定现实，而勇往直前去做事的为“Marxism式”。中国现在也有人嚷些什么“Don Quixote”了，但因为实在并没有看过这一部书，所以和实际是一点不对的。
Although the book "Don Quixote" is nearly a thousand pages long, the deeds are very simple, that is, he loved to read chivalrous novels, so he went on a wandering mania, insisted on going everywhere to remove evil and punish evil, touched all kinds of nails, made all kinds of jokes, and died; Only when he died did he return to his old self. Therefore, Turgenjew took the "Don Quixote type" who was free from boredom and boldly moved forward according to his ideals, in contrast to Hamlet, who had been meditating, doubting, and unable to do anything all his life. Later, some people opposed this "Don Quixoteism" that relied solely on ideals, calling it the "Marxism style" that sees reality and moves forward bravely. There are also people in China who are shouting "Don Quixote" now, but because they have not read this book, it is not at all wrong with reality.《大旱的消失》是Essay，作者的底细，我不知道，只知道是1902年死的。Essay本来不容易译，在此只想绍介一个格式。将来倘能得到这一类的文章，也还想登下去。
"The Disappearance of the Great Drought" is an essay, the author's details, I don't know, I only know that he died in 1902. Essay is not easy to translate, so I just want to introduce a format. If I can get this kind of article in the future, I would like to publish it.跋司珂（Vasco）族是古来住在西班牙和法兰西之间的Pyrenees山脉两侧的大家视为世界之谜的人种。巴罗哈（Pio Barojay Nessi）就禀有这族的血液，以一八七二年十二月廿八日，生于靠近法境的圣舍跋斯丁市。原是医生，也做小说，两年后，便和他的哥哥Ricardo到马德里开面包店去了，一共开了六年。现在Ricardo是有名的画家；他是最独创底的作家，早和Vicente Blasco Ibáñez并称现代西班牙文坛的巨擘。他的著作至今大约有四十种，多是长篇。这里的小品四篇，是从日本的《海外文学新选》第十三编《跋司珂牧歌调》内，永田宽定的译文重翻的；原名《Vidas Sombrias》，因为所写的是跋司珂族的性情，所以仍用日译的题目。
The Vasco people are a race that has been considered a mystery to the world since ancient times when they lived on both sides of the Pyrenees Mountains between Spain and France. Pio Barojay Nessi was born on December 28, 1872, in the city of St. Shebastin near the border of France. Originally a doctor and a novelist, two years later, he and his brother Ricardo went to Madrid to open a bakery, which lasted for a total of six years. Now Ricardo is a famous painter; He is one of the most original writers, and has long been known as a giant in the modern Spanish literary world along with Vicente Blasco Ibáñez. His writings are about forty to date, most of which are long. The four sketches here are reprinted from the translation of Nagata Kansada in the thirteenth volume of Japan's "New Selection of Overseas Literature", "Basike Pastoral Tune"; The original name is "Vidas Sombrias", because it is written about the temperament of the Basike people, so the title is still translated into Japanese.今年一说起“近视眼看匾”来，似乎很有几个自命批评家郁郁不乐，又来大做其他的批评。为免去蒙冤起见，只好特替作者在此声明几句：这故事原是一种民间传说，作者取来编作“狂言”样子，还在前年的秋天，本豫备登在《波艇》上的。倘若其中仍有冒犯了批评家的处所，那实在是老百姓的眼睛也很亮，能看出共通的暗病的缘故，怪不得传述者的。
This year, when it comes to "myopic eyes looking at plaques", it seems that there are a few self-proclaimed critics who are depressed and come to make other criticisms. In order to avoid being wronged, I have to make a few statements on behalf of the author: This story was originally a folklore, and the author took it to make up the appearance of "Kyogen", and it was still published in "Wave Boat" in the autumn of the previous year. If there are still places that offend critics, it is really the eyes of the common people who can see the common dark disease, no wonder the narrator.俄国的关于文艺的争执，曾有《苏俄的文艺论战》介绍过，这里的《苏俄的文艺政策》，实在可以看作那一部的续编。如果看过前一书，则看起这篇来便更为明了。序文上虽说立场有三派的不同，然而约减起来，不过是两派。即对于阶级文艺，一派偏重文艺，如瓦浪斯基等，一派偏重阶级，是《那巴斯图》的人们；Bukharin们自然也主张支持劳动阶级作家的，但又以为最要紧的是要有创作。发言的人们之中，几个是委员，如Voronsky，Bukharin，Iakovlev，Trotsky，Lunacharsky等；也有“锻冶厂”一派，如Pletnijov；最多的是《那巴斯图》的人们，如Vardin，Lelevitch，Averbach，Rodov，Besamensky等，译载在《苏俄的文艺论战》里的一篇《文学与艺术》后面，都有署名在那里。
Russia's dispute over literature and art has been introduced in "The Literary and Art Debate of Soviet Russia", and the "Literary and Art Policy of Soviet Russia" here can really be regarded as a sequel to that one. If you have read the previous book, it will be clearer to read this one. Although the preface says that there are three different positions, they are only two factions. That is, for class literature and art, one school focuses on literature and art, such as Walansky, etc., and the other focuses on class, which is the people of "Nabastu"; Naturally, the Bukharins also advocated supporting working-class writers, but they thought that the most important thing was to have creativity. Among the speakers, several were members, such as Voronsky, Bukharin, Iakovlev, Trotsky, Lunacharsky, etc.; there is also a "forge" school, such as Pletnijov; The most people of "Nabastu", such as Vardin, Lelevitch, Averbach, Rodov, Besamensky, etc., translated into "Literature and Art in Soviet Russia", are signed there.《那巴斯图》派的攻击，几乎集中于一个Voronsky，《赤色新地》的编辑者；对于他的《作为生活认识的艺术》，Lelevitch曾有一篇《作为生活组织的艺术》，引用布哈林的定义，以艺术为“感情的普遍化”的方法，并且指摘Voronsky的艺术论，乃是超阶级底的。这意思在评议会的论争上也可见。但到后来，藏原惟人在《现代俄国的批评文学》中说，他们两人之间的立场似乎有些接近了，Voronsky承认了艺术的阶级性之重要，Lelevitch的攻击也较先前稍为和缓了。现在是Trotsky，Radek都已放逐，Voronsky大约也退职，状况也许又很不同了罢。
The attacks of the Nabastu faction were almost concentrated on one Voronsky, the editor of the Red New Land; Regarding his "Art as Life Knowledge", Lelevitch once wrote "Art as the Organization of Life", quoting Bukharin's definition, using art as a method of "universalizing feelings", and pointing out that Voronsky's theory of art is super-class. This meaning can also be seen in the debate of the council. But later, in "Critical Literature in Modern Russia", Yuito Kurahara said that the positions between the two of them seemed to be somewhat closer, Voronsky acknowledged the importance of the class nature of art, and Lelevitch's attacks were slightly softer than before. Now it's Trotsky, Radek has been banished, Voronsky has probably retired, and the situation may be very different.从这记录中，可以看见在劳动阶级文学大本营的俄国的文学的理论和实际，于现在的中国，恐怕是不为无益的。其中有几个空字，是原译本如此，因无别国译本，不敢妄补，倘有备着原书，通函见教，或指正其错误的，必当随时补正。
From this record, we can see that the theory and practice of Russian literature, which is the literary stronghold of the working class, may not be useless in today's China. There are a few empty words, which are the original translations, because there are no translations from other countries, and I dare not make up for them.一九二八年六月十五日。
June 15, 1928.二
TwoRudolf Lindau的《幸福的摆》，全篇不过两章，因为纸数的关系，只能分登两期了。篇末有译者附记，以为“小说里有一种Kosmopolitisch的倾向，同时还有一种厌世的东洋色彩”，这是极确凿的。但作者究竟是德国人，所以也终于不脱日耳曼气，要绘图立说，来发明“幸福的摆”，自视为生路，而其实又是死因。我想，东洋思想的极致，是在不来发明这样的“摆”，不但不来，并且不想；不但不想到“幸福的摆”，并且连世间有所谓“摆”这一种劳什子也不想到。这是令人长寿平安，使国古老拖延的秘法。老聃作五千言，释迦有恒河沙数说，也还是东洋人中的“好事之徒”也。
Rudolf Lindau's "Pendulum of Happiness" is only two chapters, and because of the number of papers, it can only be published in two issues. At the end of the article, there is a translator's postscript, thinking that "there is a tendency of Kosmopolitisch in the novel, and at the same time there is a world-weary oriental color", which is very conclusive. But the author is German after all, so he finally does not get rid of the Germanic spirit, and wants to draw and talk about it to invent the "pendulum of happiness", which he regards as the way to life, but in fact it is the cause of death. I think the ultimate of Eastern thought is not to invent such a "pendulum", not only not to come, but also not to want; Not only did he not think of the "pendulum of happiness", but he did not even think of the so-called "pendulum" in the world. This is the secret method of longevity and peace, and the ancient delay of the country. Lao Dan wrote 5,000 words, and Shakyamuni had several words about the sand of the Ganges, and he was also a "good person" among the Orientals.奥国人René Fueloep-Miller的叙述苏俄状况的书，原名不知道是什么，英译本曰《The Mind and Face of Bolshevism》，今年上海似乎到得很不少。那叙述，虽说是客观的，然而倒是指摘缺点的地方多，惟有插画二百余，则很可以供我们的参考，因为图画是人类共通的语言，很难由第三者从中作梗的。可惜有些“艺术家”，先前生吞“琵亚词侣”，活剥蕗谷虹儿，今年突变为“革命艺术家”，早又顺手将其中的几个作家撕碎了。这里翻印了两张，都是I．Annenkov所作的画像；关于这画像，著者这样说——
Austrian René Fueloep-Miller's book about the situation in Soviet Russia, the original title is unknown, the English translation is called "The Mind and Face of Bolshevism", and it seems that there are a lot of people in Shanghai this year. Although the narrative is objective, there are many shortcomings, and there are more than 200 illustrations, which can be used as our reference, because pictures are a common language of human beings, and it is difficult for a third party to obstruct them. It is a pity that some "artists", who previously swallowed the "Pia Poets" and stripped the rainbow of the valley alive, suddenly became "revolutionary artists" this year, and have already tore up several of them. Two copies are made here, both by I. Annenkov; about this portrait the author says the following—“……其中主要的是画家Iuanii Annenkov。他依照未来派艺术家的原则工作，且爱在一幅画上将各刹那并合于一件事物之中，但他设法寻出一个为这些原质的综合。他的画像即意在‘由一个人的传记里，抄出脸相的各种表现来’。俄国的批评家特别称许他的才能在于将细小微末的详细和画中的实物发生关连，而且将这些制成更加恳切地显露出来的性质。他并不区别有生和无生，对于他的题目的周围的各种琐事，他都看作全体生活的一部分。他爱一个人的所有物，这生命的一切细小的碎片；一个脸上的各个抓痕，各条皱纹，或一个赘疣，都自有它的意义的。”
“…… The main one was the painter Iuanii Annenkov. He works according to the principles of a futuristic artist and loves to combine moments into one thing in a painting, but he manages to find a synthesis of these primordial essences. His portrait is intended to 'copy various expressions of facial features from a person's biography'. Russian critics particularly praised his talent for connecting the smallest details with the objects in the painting, and in making them more earnestly revealed. He does not distinguish between living and non-living, and he regards all kinds of trivial matters around his topic as a part of the whole life. He loves all the things of a person, all the tiny fragments of this life; Every scratch on a face, every wrinkle, or a wart has its own meaning. ”那Maxim Gorky的画像，便是上文所讲的那些的好例证。他背向西欧的机械文明，面对东方，佛像表印度，磁器表中国，赤色的地方，旗上明写着“R．S．F．S．R．”，当然是“俄罗斯苏维埃联邦社会主义共和国”了，但那颜色只有一点连到Gorky的脑上，也许是含有不满之意的罢——我想。这像是一九二〇年作，后三年，Gorky便往意大利去了，今年才大家嚷着他要回去。
The portrait of Maxim Gorky is a good example of what was mentioned above. He turned his back to the mechanical civilization of Western Europe, facing the East, the Buddha statue represents India, the porcelain represents China, and the red place clearly reads "R. S． F． S． R.", of course, "Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic", but the color only connected to Gorky's mind a little, perhaps with dissatisfaction - I think. This is like a work made in 1920, and three years later, Gorky went to Italy, and this year everyone clamored that he wanted to go back.N．Evreinov的画像又是一体，立方派的手法非常浓重的。Evreinov是俄国改革戏剧的三大人物之一，我记得画室先生译的《新俄的演剧和跳舞》里，曾略述他的主张。这几页“演剧杂感”，论人生应该以意志修改自然，虽然很豪迈，但也仍当看如何的改法，例如中国女性的修改其足，便不能和胡蝶结相提并论了。
N． Evreinov's portrait is one, and the cubist technique is very strong. Evreinov was one of the three major figures of Russian reform theater, and I remember that Mr. Studio's translation of "Acting and Dancing in New Russia" briefly described his ideas. These pages of "acting miscellaneous feelings", on the idea that life should be modified by will, although it is very heroic, but it should still look at how to change the law, for example, the modification of Chinese women is not comparable to Hu Diejie.这回登载了Gorky的一篇小说，一篇关于他的文章，一半还是由那一张画像所引起的，一半是因为他今年六十岁。听说在他的本国，为他所开的庆祝会，是热闹极了；我原已译成了一篇昇曙梦的《最近的Gorky》说得颇详细，但也还因为纸面关系，不能登载，且待下几期的余白罢。
This time it is published a novel by Gorky, an article about him, half of which is caused by that portrait, and half because he is sixty years old this year. I heard that the celebration held for him in his home country was very lively; I have already translated it into a "Recent Gorky" of the Dawn Dream, which is quite detailed, but because of the paper, it cannot be published, and I will wait for the next few issues.一切事物，虽说以独创为贵，但中国既然是世界上的一国，则受点别国的影响，即自然难免，似乎倒也无须如此娇嫩，因而脸红。单就文艺而言，我们实在还知道得太少，吸收得太少。然而一向迁延，现在单是绍介也来不及了。于是我们只好这样：旧的呢，等他五十岁，六十岁……大寿，生后百年阴寿，死后N年忌辰时候来讲；新的呢，待他得到诺贝尔奖金。但是还是来不及，倘是月刊，专做庆吊的机关也不够。那就只好挑几个于中国较熟悉，或者较有意义的来说说了。
Although everything is precious for originality, since China is a country in the world, it is naturally influenced by other countries, that is, it is inevitable, and it seems that there is no need to be so delicate, so it blushes. As far as literature and art are concerned, we really know too little and absorb too little. However, it has always been delayed, and now it is too late for Shaosuke alone. So we had to do this: what about the old one, wait until he is fifty or sixty...... Great longevity, a hundred years after birth, N years after death; The new one will wait until he gets the Nobel Prize. But it's still too late, if it's a monthly magazine, there are not enough organs specializing in celebrations. Then I have to pick a few that are more familiar to China or more meaningful.生后一百年的大人物，在中国又较耳熟的，今年就有两个：Leov Tolstoy和Henrik Ibsen。Ibsen的著作，因潘家洵先生的努力，中国知道的较多。本刊下期就想由语堂，达夫，梅川，我，译上几篇关于他的文章，如H．Ellis，G．Brandes，E．Roberts，L．Aas，有岛武郎之作；并且加几幅图像，自年青的Ibsen起，直到他的死尸，算作一个纪念。
The big people who have been born for a hundred years are more familiar in China, and there are two this year: Leov Tolstoy and Henrik Ibsen. Ibsen's writings, thanks to the efforts of Mr. Pan Jiaxun, are known in China. In the next issue of this magazine, I would like to translate several articles about him, such as H. Ellis, G. Brandes, E. Roberts, L. Aas, and Takero Arishima; and add a few images, starting from the young Ibsen until his dead body, as a memorial.一九二八年七月四日。
July 4, 1928.三
Three前些时，偶然翻阅日本青木正儿的《支那文艺论丛》，看见在一篇《将胡适漩在中心的文学革命》里，有云——
Some time ago, I happened to flip through Japan's Masaji Aoki's "China Literature and Art Series" and saw that in an article "The Literary Revolution with Hu Shixuan in the Center", there was a cloud -“民国七年（1918）六月，《新青年》突然出了《易卜生号》。这是文学底革命军进攻旧剧的城的鸣镝。那阵势，是以胡将军的《易卜生主义》为先锋，胡适罗家伦共译的《娜拉》（至第三幕），陶履恭的《国民之敌》和吴弱男的《小爱友夫》（各第一幕）为中军，袁振英的《易卜生传》为殿军，勇壮地出阵。他们的进攻这城的行动，原是战斗的次序，非向这里不可的，但使他们至于如此迅速地成为奇兵底的原因，却似乎是这样——因为其时恰恰昆曲在北京突然盛行，所以就有对此叫出反抗之声的必要了。那真相，征之同的翌月号上钱玄同君之所说（随感录十八），漏着反抗底口吻，是明明白白的。……”
In June of the seventh year of the Republic of China (1918), "New Youth" suddenly came out with "Ibsen". This is the sound of the revolutionary army attacking the city of the old drama at the bottom of the literature. That formation was based on General Hu's "Ibsenism" as the vanguard, Hu Shi Luo Jialun's "Nala" (to the third act), Tao Lugong's "Enemy of the Nation" and Wu Ruonan's "Little Love Youfu" (each in the first act) as the central army, and Yuan Zhenying's "Biography of Ibsen" as the fourth army, bravely went into battle. Their attack on the city was originally the order of the battle, and it had to be here, but the reason why they became so quickly became a surprise army seemed to be like this—because Kunqu opera was suddenly prevalent in Beijing at that time, so it was necessary to call out a voice of resistance. The truth, what Qian Xuantong said in the next month's issue of Zheng Zhitong (Eighteen Records of Feelings), leaked the bottom tone of resistance, and it was clear. ……”但何以大家偏要选出Ibsen来呢？如青木教授在后文所说，因为要建设西洋式的新剧，要高扬戏剧到真的文学底地位，要以白话来兴散文剧，还有，因为事已亟矣，便只好先以实例来刺戟天下读书人的直感：这自然都确当的。但我想，也还因为Ibsen敢于攻击社会，敢于独战多数，那时的绍介者，恐怕是颇有以孤军而被包围于旧垒中之感的罢，现在细看墓碣，还可以觉到悲凉，然而意气是壮盛的。
But why do you want to choose Ibsen? As Professor Aoki said later, because it is necessary to build a new Western-style drama, to exalt the literary status of drama to the real literary background, to use the vernacular to revive prose drama, and because the matter is urgent, we have to use examples to stab the intuition of scholars around the world: this is naturally true. But I think that also because Ibsen dared to attack society and dare to fight the majority alone, the Shaojie at that time probably had the feeling of being surrounded by the old fortress as a lone army.那时的此后虽然颇有些纸面上的纷争，但不久也就沉寂，戏剧还是那样旧，旧垒还是那样坚；当时的《时事新报》所斥为“新偶像”者，终于也并没有打动一点中国的旧家子的心。后三年，林纾将“Gengangere”译成小说模样，名曰《梅孽》——但书尾校者的按语，却偏说“此书曾由潘家洵先生编为戏剧，名曰《群鬼》”——从译者看来，Ibsen的作意还不过是这样的——
Although there were some disputes on paper after that time, it soon fell silent, the drama was still so old, and the old fortifications were still so strong; At that time, the "Shishi Xinbao" denounced as a "new idol" did not finally touch the hearts of the old Chinese family. Three years later, Lin Shu translated "Gengangere" into a novel, called "Plum Evil" - but the editor at the end of the book said that "this book was once edited into a drama by Mr. Pan Jiaxun, called "Group of Ghosts"" - from the translator's point of view, Ibsen's intention is nothing more than this -“此书用意甚微：盖劝告少年，勿作浪游，身被隐疾，肾宫一败，生子必不永年。……余恐读者不解，故弁以数言。”
“此书用意甚微：盖劝告少年，勿作浪游，身被隐疾，肾宫一败，生子必不永年。 …… 余恐读者不解，故弁以数言。 ”然而这还不算不幸。再后几年，则恰如Ibsen名成身退，向大众伸出和睦的手来一样，先前欣赏那汲Ibsen之流的剧本《终身大事》的英年，也多拜倒于《天女散花》，《黛玉葬花》的台下了。
However, this is not unfortunate. In the following years, just as Ibsen retired after becoming famous and extending a harmonious hand to the public, the young years who had previously appreciated the script "Lifetime Events" by Ji Ibsen and others also bowed down to the audience of "Heavenly Maiden Scattering Flowers" and "Daiyu Funeral Flowers".不知是有意呢还是偶然，潘家洵先生的《Hedda Gabler》的译本，今年突然在《小说月报》上发表了，计算起来，距作者的诞生是一百年，距《易卜生号》的出版已经满十年。我们自然并不是要继《新青年》的遗踪，不过为追怀这曾经震动一时的巨人起见，也翻了几篇短文，聊算一个记念。因为是短文的杂集，系统是没有的。但也略有线索可言：第一篇可略知Ibsen的生平和著作；第二篇叙述得更详明；第三篇将他的后期重要著作，当作一大篇剧曲看，而作者自己是主人。第四篇是通叙他的性格，著作的琐屑的来由和在世界上的影响的，是只有他的老友G．Brandes才能写作的文字。第五篇则说他的剧本所以为英国所不解的缘故，其中有许多话，也可移赠中国的。可惜他的后期著作，惟Brandes略及数言，没有另外的详论，或者有岛武郎的一篇《卢勃克和伊里纳的后来》，可以稍弥缺憾的罢。这曾译载在本年一月的《小说月报》上，那意见，和Brandes的相同。
I don't know if it's intentional or accidental, but the translation of Mr. Pan Jiaxun's "Hedda Gabler" was suddenly published in the "Novel Monthly" this year, calculated, it is a hundred years since the birth of the author, and it has been ten years since the publication of "Ibsen". Naturally, we don't want to follow the legacy of "New Youth", but in order to remember this giant who once shook the moment, we have also turned over a few short articles to talk about a memory. Because it is a collection of short articles, the system does not have it. But there are also some clues: the first one gives a glimpse of Ibsen's life and writings; the second is described in more detail; The third article regards his important later works as a large drama, and the author himself is the master. The fourth article describes his character, the origin of the trivialities of his writings and his influence in the world, and is a text that only his old friend G. Brandes can write. The fifth article talks about the reason why his script is incomprehensible to the British, and there are many words in it, which can also be transferred to China. Unfortunately, his later works, only Brandes briefly mentioned a few words, and there is no other detailed discussion, or Takero Shima's "The Later Days of Lubok and Irina", which can be slightly shortcomed. This was translated into the "Novel Monthly" in January of this year, and the opinion was the same as Brandes's.“人”第一，“艺术底工作”第一呢？这问题，是在力作一生之后，才会发生，也才能解答。独战到底，还是终于向大家伸出和睦之手来呢？这问题，是在战斗一生之后，才能发生，也才能解答。不幸Ibsen将后一问解答了，他于是尝到“胜者的悲哀”。
What about "people" first, "artistic work" first? This question will only occur and be answered after a lifetime of hard work. Will you fight alone to the end, or will you finally extend a hand of harmony to everyone? This question can only occur and be answered after a lifetime of fighting. Unfortunately, Ibsen answered the latter question, and he tasted the "sorrow of the winner".世间大约该还有从集团主义的观点，来批评Ibsen的论文罢，无奈我们现在手头没有这些，所以无从绍介。这种工作，以待“革命的智识阶级”及其“指导者”罢。
There should probably be a group view of criticism of Ibsen's paper, but we don't have these at hand, so we can't introduce them. This kind of work is waiting for the "revolutionary intellectual class" and its "guide".此外，还想将校正《文艺政策》时所想到的说几句：
In addition, I would like to say a few words about what I thought of when correcting the "Literary and Art Policy":托罗兹基是博学的，又以雄辩著名，所以他的演说，恰如狂涛，声势浩大，喷沫四飞。但那结末的豫想，其实是太过于理想底的——据我个人的意见。因为那问题的成立，几乎是并非提出而是袭来，不在将来而在当面。文艺应否受党的严紧的指导的问题，我们且不问；我觉得耐人寻味的，是在“那巴斯图”派因怕主义变质而主严，托罗兹基因文艺不能孤生而主宽的问题。许多言辞，其实不过是装饰的枝叶。这问题看去虽然简单，但倘以文艺为政治斗争的一翼的时候，是很不容易解决的。
Trotsky was erudite and famous for his eloquence, so his speech was like a raging wave, with great momentum and foam. But the premonition at the end is actually too ideal - according to my personal opinion. Because the establishment of that problem is almost not raised but attacked, not in the future but in the face. We will not ask whether literature and art should be strictly guided by the party; What I think is intriguing is the problem that the "Nabastu" school is strict because of the fear of deterioration of doctrine, and that Trotsky gene literature and art cannot be born alone and are broad. Many words are actually just decorative branches and leaves. Although this problem seems simple, it is not easy to solve if literature and art are used as a wing of the political struggle.一九二八年八月十一日。
August 11, 1928.四
Four有岛武郎是学农学的，但一面研究文艺，后来就专心从事文艺了。他的《著作集》，在生前便陆续辑印，《叛逆者》是第四辑，内收关于三个文艺家的研究；译印在这里的是第一篇。
Arishima Takero studied agriculture, but while studying literature and art, he later concentrated on literature and art. His "Collection of Writings" was published one after another during his lifetime, and "Rebel" is the fourth series, which contains research on three writers and artists; The translation here is the first one.以为中世纪在文化上，不能算黑暗和停滞，以为罗丹的出现，是再兴戈谛克的精神：都可以见作者的史识。当这第四辑初出时候，自己也曾翻译过，后来渐觉得作者的文体，移译颇难，又念中国留心艺术史的人还很少，印出来也无用，于是没有完工，放下了。这回金君却勇决地完成了这工作，是很不易得的事，就决计先在《奔流》上发表，顺次完成一本书。但因为对于许多难译的文句，先前也曾用过心，所以遇有自觉较妥的，便参酌了几处，出版期迫，不及商量，这是希望译者加以原宥的。
I think that the Middle Ages cannot be considered dark and stagnant in terms of culture, and that the emergence of Rodin is a revival of the spirit of Godike: you can see the author's historical knowledge. When the fourth series was first published, I also translated it, but later I gradually felt that the author's style was difficult to translate, and there were still very few people who paid attention to art history in China, and it was useless to print it, so it was not finished and put down. This time, Jin Jun bravely completed this work, which was very difficult to obtain, so he decided to publish it in "Rush" first, and complete a book in turn. However, because I had used my heart for many difficult sentences to translate, I felt that it was more appropriate, so I took into account several places, and the publication period was tight, and there was no time to discuss, which I hoped that the translator would forgive.要讲罗丹的艺术，必须看罗丹的作品，——至少，是作品的影片。然而中国并没有这一种书。所知道的外国文书，图画尚多，定价较廉，在中国又容易入手的，有下列的二种——
To talk about Rodin's art, we must look at Rodin's works,—— at least, the films of his works. However, there is no such book in China. There are two types of foreign documents that are known, have many pictures, are cheaper, and are easy to get in China -《The Art of Rodin．》64 Reproductions．Introduction by Louis Weinberg．《Modern Library》第41本。95 cents net．美国纽约Boni and Liveright，Inc．出版。
《The Art of Rodin．》64 Reproductions．Introduction by Louis Weinberg．《Modern Library》第41本。 95 cents net．美国纽约Boni and Liveright，Inc．出版。《Rodin．》高村光太郎著。《Ars美术丛书》第二十五编。特制本一圆八十钱，普及版一圆。日本东京Ars社出版。
"Rodin." by Kotaro Takamura. Ars Art Series, 25th ed. The special version is 80 yuan, and the popular version is 1 yuan. Published by Ars Publishing Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan.罗丹的雕刻，虽曾震动了一时，但和中国却并不发生什么关系地过去了。后起的有Ivan Mestrovic（1883年生），称为塞尔维亚的罗丹，则更进，而以太古底情热和酷烈的人间苦为特色的，曾见英国和日本，都有了影印的他的雕刻集。最近，更有Konenkov，称为俄罗斯的罗丹，但与罗丹所代表是西欧的有产者不同，而是东欧的劳动者。可惜在中国也不易得到资料，我只在昇曙梦编辑的《新露西亚美术大观》里见过一种木刻，是装饰全俄农工博览会内染织馆的《女工》。
Rodin's sculpture, although it shook for a while, passed without much to do with China. Later, Ivan Mestrovic (b. 1883), known as Rodin of Serbia, went further, and his engraving collection, which was characterized by the passion of ancient times and the bitterness of the world, had been seen in England and Japan, and had photocopied collections of his engravings. More recently, there has been Konenkov, called the Russian Rodin, but unlike Rodin, who represents the proletariats of Western Europe, but the laborers of Eastern Europe. Unfortunately, it is not easy to obtain information in China, and I have only seen a woodcut in the "Grand View of New Lucian Fine Arts" edited by Sheng Shumeng, which is the "Female Worker" decorating the dyeing and weaving hall in the All-Russian Agricultural and Industrial Fair.一九二八年九月十五夜。
On the night of September 15, 1928.五
Five本月中因为有印刷局的罢工，这一本的印成，大约至少要比前四本迟十天了。
In the middle of this month, due to a strike by the printing office, this book was printed at least ten days later than the first four.《她的故乡》是从北京寄来的，并一封信，其中有云：
"Her Hometown" was sent from Beijing and a letter with the words:“这篇小文是我在二年前，从《World's Classics》之‘Selected Modern English Essays’里无意中译出的，译后即搁在书堆下；前日在北海图书馆看到W．H．Hudson的集子十多大本，觉得很惊异。然而他的大著我仍然没有细读过，虽然知道他的著作有四种很著名。……
"This essay was inadvertently translated by me from the 'Selected Modern English Essays' in "World's Classics" two years ago, and it was put under the pile of books after translation; the day before yesterday, I saw W. H． Hudson's collection of more than ten large books, I was surprised. However, I still haven't read his works carefully, although I know that there are four famous works of his writings. ……“作者的事情，想必已知？我是不知道，只能从那选本的名下，知他生于一八四一，死于一九二二而已。
"The author's affairs must be known? I don't know, I can only know from the name of the selected book that he was born in 1841 and died in 1922.“末了，还有一极其微小的事要问：《大旱之消失》的作者，《编校后记》上说是一九〇二年死的，然而我看《World's Classics》关于他的生死之注，是：1831—1913，这不知究竟怎样？”
"Finally, there is one more very small thing to ask: the author of "The Disappearance of the Great Drought" is said to have died in 1902 in the "Editor's Afterword", but I read the "World's Classics" note on his life and death, which is: 1831-1913, I don't know what it is?"W．H．Hudson的事情，我也不知道。新近得到一本G．Sam-pson增补的S．A．Brooke所编《Primer of English Literature》，查起来，在第九章里，有下文那样的语句——
W． H． I don't know about Hudson. I recently obtained a copy of S.A. Brooke's "Primer of English Literature" supplemented by G. Sam-pson, and found that in chapter 9, there is a sentence like the following—“Hudson在《Far Away and Long Ago》中，讲了在南美洲的他的青年时代事，但于描写英国的鸟兽研究，以及和自然界最为亲近的农夫等，他也一样地精工。仿佛从丰饶的心中，直接溢出似的他的美妙而平易的文章，在同类中，最为杰出。《Green Mansions》，《The Naturalist in La Plata》，《The Purple Land》，《A Shepherd's Life》等，是在英文学中，各占其地位的。”
In "Far Away and Long Ago", Hudson talks about his youth in South America, but he is equally skilled in describing the study of birds and beasts in England, as well as the farmers closest to nature. His wonderful and plain articles, which seem to overflow directly from his rich heart, are the most outstanding of their kind. "Green Mansions", "The Naturalist in La Plata", "The Purple Land", "A Shepherd's Life", etc., each occupies its own place in English literature. ”再查《蔷薇》的作者P．Smith，没有见；White却有的，在同章中的“后期维多利亚朝的小说家”条下，但只有这几句，就是——
Looking at the author of "The Rose" P. Smith, I didn't see it; White had it, under the "Late Victorian Novelist" article in the same chapter, but only these few sentences, that is——“‘Mark Rutherford’（即Wm．Hale White）的描写非国教主义者生活的阴郁的小说，是有古典之趣的文章，表露着英国人心的一面的。”
"'Mark Rutherford' (i.e. Wm. Hale White's gloomy novel depicting the life of non-conformists, is a classical article with classical interest and reveals the British side. ”至于生卒之年，那是《World's Classics》上的对，我写后记时，所据的原也是这一本书，不知怎地却弄错了。
As for the year of birth and death, it was the right in "World's Classics", and when I wrote the afterword, it was based on this book, but somehow I got it wrong.近来时或收到并不连接的期刊之类，其中往往有关于我个人或和我有关的刊物的文章，但说到《奔流》者很少。只看见两次。一，是说译著以个人的趣味为重，所以不行。这是真的。《奔流》决定底地没有这力量，会每月选定全世界上有世界的意义的文章，汇成一本，或者满印出有世界的意义的作品来。说到“趣味”，那是现在确已算一种罪名了，但无论人类底也罢，阶级底也罢，我还希望总有一日弛禁，讲文艺不必定要“没趣味”。又其一，是说《奔流》的“执事者都是知名的第一流人物”，“选稿也许是极严吧？而于著，译，也分得极为明白，不仅在《奔流》中目录，公布着作译等字样，即是在《北新》，《语丝》……以及一切旁的广告上，也是如此。”但
Recently, I have received journals that are not connected, and there are often articles about me personally or related to me, but there are very few people who talk about "Torrent". I only saw it twice. First, it means that the translation is based on personal interest, so it is not possible. It's true. "Torrent" decided that there was no such power at the bottom, and would select articles with world significance from all over the world every month, and put them together into a book, or print out works with world significance. When it comes to "fun", it is indeed a crime now, but whether it is a human background or a class background, I still hope that one day the ban will be lifted, and talking about literature and art does not have to be "uninteresting". Another is to say that "the deacons of "Torrent" are well-known first-rate figures", "The selection may be extremely strict, right? And the author and translation are also very clearly distinguished, not only in the catalog in "Torrent", but also in the "Beixin" and "Yusi"...... And the same is true for all the advertisements. "But“汉君作的《一握泥土》，实实在在道道地地的的确确是‘道地’地从翻译而来的。……原文不必远求西版书，即在商务出版的《College English Reading》中就有。题目是：
"Han Jun's "A Handful of Soil" is really authentic and indeed translated from the 'authentic' translation. …… The original text does not have to go far from the Western edition, that is, it is in the commercial publication of "College English Reading". The topic is:《A Handful of Clay》
《A Handful of Clay》作者是Henry Van Dyke。这种小错误，其实不必吹毛求疵般斤斤计较，不过《奔流》既然如此地分得明白，那末译而曰作，似乎颇有掠美之嫌，故敢代为宣布。此或可使主编《奔流》的先生，小心下一回耳。”
The author is Henry Van. This kind of small mistake doesn't actually need to be nitpicky, but since "Torrent" is so clearly divided, it seems to be quite suspicious of plundering the beauty of the last translation, so I dare to announce it on my behalf. This may make the editor-in-chief of "Rush" be careful next time. ”其实，《奔流》之在目录及一切广告上声明译作，倒是小心之过，因为恐怕爱读创作而买时未暇细看内容的读者，化了冤钱，价又不便宜，便定下这一种办法，竟不料又弄坏了。但这回的译作不分，却因编者的“浅薄”，一向没有读过那一种“Reading”之类，也未见别的译文，投稿上不写原作者名，又不称译，便以为是做的，简直当创作看了，“掠美”的坏意思，自以为倒并没有的。不过无论如何小心，此后也难保再没有这样的或更大的错误，那只好等读者的指摘，检切要的在次一本中订正了。
In fact, the translation of "Torrent" in the catalog and all advertisements is a mistake of caution, because I am afraid that readers who love to read and create and do not have time to read the content when they buy it will make a wronged money, and the price is not cheap, so they set this method, but unexpectedly broke it again. But this time, the translation is not divided, but because of the "shallowness" of the editor, I have never read that kind of "Reading", nor have I seen any other translations, and I have not written the original author's name on the submission, nor am I called the translation, so I thought it was done. However, no matter how careful you are, it is impossible to guarantee that there will be no such or greater mistakes in the future, so you have to wait for the reader's criticism and correct it in the next book.顺便还要说几句别的话。诸位投稿者往往因为一时不得回信，给我指示，说编辑者应负怎样的责任。那固然是的。不过所谓奔流社的“执事者”，其实并无和这一种堂皇名号相副的大人物；就只有两三个人，来译，来做，来看，来编，来校，搜材料，寻图画，于是信件收送，便只好托北新书局代办。而那边人手又少，十来天送一次，加上本月中邮局的罢工积压，所以催促和训斥的信，好几封是和稿件同到的。无可补救。各种惠寄的文稿及信件，也因为忙，未能壹壹答复，这并非自恃被封为“知名的第一流人物”之故，乃是时光有限，又须谋生，若要周到，便没有了性命，也编不成《奔流》了。这些事，倘肯见谅，是颇望见谅的。因为也曾想过许多回，终于没有好方法，只能这样的了。
A few other words by the way. Contributors often give me instructions on what responsibilities editors should take because they can't reply for a while. That's certainly true. However, the so-called "deacons" of the Benliu Society actually do not have a big man who matches this kind of imposing name; There were only two or three people who came to translate, to do, to see, to edit, to proofread, to search for materials, and to find pictures, so they had to entrust the Beixin Book Company to handle it. And there are few people over there, sent once every ten days, and the strike backlog at the post office in the middle of this month, so several letters of urging and reprimanding arrived with the manuscript. There is no remedy. This is not because he is proud to be named a "well-known first-rate figure", but because time is limited and he has to make a living. If you are willing to forgive these things, you will be forgiven. Because I have thought about it many times, there is no good way to do it, so I can only do this.一九二八年十月二十六日。
October 26, 1928.六
Six编目的时候，开首的四篇诗就为难，因为三作而一译，真不知用怎样一个动词好。幸而看见桌上的墨，边上印着“曹素功监制”字样，便用了这“制”字，算是将“创作”和“翻译”都包括在内，含混过去了。此外，能分清的，还是分清。
When cataloging, the first four poems are embarrassing, because I really don't know what kind of verb to use because I translate it in three works. Fortunately, I saw the ink on the table, and the words "Cao Sugong Supervisor" were printed on the side, so I used the word "make", which can be regarded as including "creation" and "translation", and it was ambiguous. In addition, what can be distinguished is still distinguished.这一本几乎是三篇译作的天下，中间夹着三首译诗，不过是充充配角的。而所以翻译的原因，又全是因为插画，那么，诗之不关重要，也就可想而知了。第一幅的作者Arthur Rackham是英国作插画颇颇有名的人，所作的有《Aesop's Fables》的图画等多种，这幅从《The Springtide of Life》里选出，原有彩色，我们的可惜没有了。诗的作者Algernon Charles Swinburne（1837—1909）是维多利亚朝末期的诗人，世称他最受欧洲大陆的影响，但从我们亚洲人的眼睛看来，就是这一篇，也还是英国气满满的。
This book is almost a world of three translations, with three translated poems in between, but they are full of supporting roles. And the reason for translation is all because of the illustrations, so it can be imagined that poetry is not important. The author of the first painting, Arthur Rackham, is a well-known British illustrator, and he has made a variety of drawings such as "Aesop's Fables", which is selected from "The Springtide of Life", and the original color is not there. The author of the poem, Algernon Charles Swinburne (1837-1909), was a poet at the end of the Victorian dynasty, and he was said to be the most influenced by the European continent, but from the eyes of us Asians, this is still British.《跳蚤》的木刻者R．Dufy有时写作Dufuy，是法国有名的画家，也擅长装饰；而这《禽虫吟》的一套木刻尤有名。集的开首就有一篇诗赞美他的木刻的线的崇高和强有力；L．Pichon在《法国新的书籍图饰》中也说——
R. Dufy, the woodcarver of "Flea", sometimes writes Dufuy, is a famous French painter who is also good at decoration, and this set of woodcuts "Birds and Insects" is particularly famous. At the beginning of the collection, there is a poem praising the sublime and powerful lines of his woodcuts; L. Pichon also said in "New French Book Decoration" -“……G．Apollinaire所著《Le Bestiaire au Cortége d’Orphée》的大的木刻，是令人极意称赞的。是美好的画因的丛画，作成各种殊别动物的相沿的表象。由它的体的分布和线的玄妙，以成最佳的装饰的全形。”
“…… G． The large woodcut of Apollinaire's "Le Bestiaire au Cortége d'Orphée" is highly praised. It is a beautiful series of paintings, creating the appearance of various different animals. By the distribution of its body and the mystery of the line, it becomes the best decoration of the whole shape. ”这书是千九百十一年，法国Deplanch出版；日本有堀口大学译本，名《动物诗集》，第一书房（东京）出版的，封余的译文，即从这本转译。
This book was published in 1911 by Deplanch, France; In Japan, there is a translation of Horiguchi University, called "Animal Poetry Collection", published by the First Shobo (Tokyo), and the remaining translation is translated from this book.蕗谷虹儿的画，近一两年曾在中国突然造成好几个时行的书籍装饰画家；这一幅专用白描，而又简单，难以含胡，所以也不被模仿，看起来较为新鲜一些。
In the past year or two, Hong'er's paintings have suddenly caused several popular book decoration painters in China; This special white painting is simple and difficult to beard, so it is not imitated and looks fresher.一九二八年十一月十八日。
November 18, 1928.七
Seven生存八十二年，作文五十八年，今年将出全集九十三卷的托尔斯泰，即使将一本《奔流》都印了关于他的文献的目录，恐怕尚且印不下，更何况登载记念的文章。但只有这样的材力便只能做这样的事，所以虽然不过一本小小的期刊，也还是趁一九二八年还没有全完的时候，来作一回托尔斯泰诞生后百年的记念。
Tolstoy, who has lived for eighty-two years, composed for fifty-eight years, and will publish a complete collection of ninety-three volumes this year, even if he prints a catalog of documents about him, I am afraid that he will not be able to print it, let alone publish a memorial article. But only such resources can do such things, so although it is just a small periodical, it is still a commemoration of the hundred years after Tolstoy's birth in 1928 when it is not completely finished.关于这十九世纪的俄国的巨人，中国前几年虽然也曾经有人介绍，今年又有人叱骂，然而他于中国的影响，其实也还是等于零。他的三部大著作中，《战争与和平》至今无人翻译；传记是只有Ch．Sarolea的书的文言译本和一小本很不完全的《托尔斯泰研究》。前几天因为要查几个字，自己和几个朋友走了许多外国书的书店，终竟寻不到一部横文的他的传记。关于他的著作，在中国是如此的。说到行为，那是更不相干了。我们有开书店造洋房的革命文豪，没有分田给农夫的地主——因为这也是“浅薄的人道主义”；有软求“出版自由”的“著作家”兼店主，没有写信直斥皇帝的胡涂虫——因为这是没有用的，倒也并非怕危险。至于“无抵抗”呢，事实是有的，但并非由于主义，因事不同，因人不同，或打人的嘴巴，或将嘴巴给人打，倘以为会有俄国的许多“灵魂的战士”（Doukhobor）似的，宁死不当兵卒，那实在是一种“杞忧”。
Regarding the Russian giant of the 19th century, although China has been introduced in previous years and scolded this year, his influence on China is actually equal to zero. Among his three great works, "War and Peace" has not been translated so far; The biography is only a classical translation of Ch. Sarolea's book and a small incomplete copy of "Tolstoy Studies". A few days ago, because I wanted to look up a few words, I and a few friends went to many foreign book stores, but I couldn't find a biography of him in horizontal text. This is true of his writings in China. When it comes to behavior, it is even more irrelevant. We have revolutionary writers who opened bookstores and built bungalows, and landlords who did not divide their land to farmers - because this is also "shallow humanitarianism"; There are "writers" and shopkeepers who seek "freedom of the press" and do not write letters directly denouncing the emperor's Hu Tu worms - because this is useless, but they are not afraid of danger. As for "no resistance", the fact is that there is, but it is not because of ism, because of different things, from different people, or to beat people in the mouth, or to beat people in the mouth, if you think that there will be many "soul warriors" (Doukhobor) in Russia, who would rather die than be soldiers, it is really a kind of "worry".所以这回是意在介绍几篇外国人——真看过托尔斯泰的作品，明白那历史底背景的外国人——的文字，可以看看先前和现在，中国和外国，对于托尔斯泰的评价是怎样的不同。但自然只能从几个译者所见到的书报中取材，并非说惟这几篇是现在世间的定论。
So this time it is intended to introduce the texts of several foreigners—foreigners who have really read Tolstoy's works and understand the historical background—so that you can see how the evaluation of Tolstoy is different between the previous and the present, between China and foreign countries. But naturally, it can only be taken from the books and newspapers seen by a few translators, not that these are the conclusions of the world today.首先当然要推Gorky的《回忆杂记》，用极简洁的叙述，将托尔斯泰的真诚底和粉饰的两面，都活画出来，仿佛在我们面前站着。而作者Gorky的面目，亦复跃如。一面可以见文人之观察文人，一面可以见劳动出身者和农民思想者的隔膜之处。达夫先生曾经提出一个小疑问，是第十一节里有Nekassov这字，也许是错的，美国版的英书，往往有错误。我因为常见俄国文学史上有Nekrassov，便于付印时候改了，一面则寻访这书的英国印本，来资印证，但待到三校已完，而英国本终于得不到，所以只得暂时存疑，如果所添的“r”是不对的，那完全是编者的责任。
First of all, of course, we must recommend Gorky's "Miscellaneous Memories", which uses a very concise narrative to vividly depict both Tolstoy's sincerity and whitewashing, as if standing in front of us. And the face of the author Gorky is also jumping. On the one hand, we can see the literati observing the literati, and on the other hand, we can see the gap between the laborers and the peasant thinkers. Mr. Duff once raised a small question that the word Nekassov was in verse 11, which may be wrong, and the American version of the English book is often wrong. Because I often see Nekrassov in the history of Russian literature, I changed it when it was printed, and on the other hand, I searched for the British print of this book to confirm it, but when the three proofreadings were completed and the British version was finally not available, I had to be suspicious for the time being.第一篇通论托尔斯泰的一生和著作的，是我所见的一切中最简洁明了的文章，从日本井田孝平的译本《最新露西亚文学研究》重译；书名的英译是《Sketches for the History of Recent Russian Literature》，但不知全书可有译本。原本在一九二三年出版；著者先前是一个社会民主党员，屡被拘囚，终遭放逐，研究文学便是在狱中时的工作。一九〇九年回国，渐和政治离开，专做文笔劳动和文学讲义的事了。这书以Marxism为依据，但侧重文艺方面，所以对于托尔斯泰的思想，只说了“反对这极端底无抵抗主义而起的，是Korolienko和Gorki，以及革命底俄国”这几句话。
The first general discussion of Tolstoy's life and writings is the most concise and clear article I have ever seen, retranslated from the translation of "The Latest Lucian Literary Studies" by Kohei Ida in Japan; The English translation of the title of the book is "Sketches for the History of Recent Russian Literature", but I don't know if there is a translation of the whole book. Originally published in 1923; The author was previously a member of the Social Democratic Party, was repeatedly imprisoned and eventually exiled, and studying literature was his job in prison. He returned to China in 1909 and gradually left politics to focus on literary labor and literary lectures. This book is based on Marxism, but focuses on literature and art, so it only says a few sentences about Tolstoy's thought: "It was Korolienko and Gorki who opposed this extreme non-resistanceism, and Russia under the revolution".从思想方面批评托尔斯泰，可以补前篇之不足的，是A．Lunacharski的讲演。作者在现代批评界地位之重要，已可以无须多说了。这一篇虽讲在五年之前，其目的多在和政敌“少数党”战斗，但在那里面，于非有产阶级底唯物主义（Marxism）和非有产阶级底精神主义（Tolstoism）的不同和相碍，以及Tolstoism的缺陷及何以有害于革命之点，说得非常分明，这才可以照见托尔斯泰，而且也照见那以托尔斯泰为“卑污的说教者”的中国创造社旧旗下的“文化批判”者。
Criticizing Tolstoy from the ideological point of view, which can make up for the shortcomings of the previous part, is A. Lunacharski's speech. The importance of the author's position in the modern critical world can be said without saying. Although this article was mostly aimed at fighting against the political opponent "minority party" five years ago, it is very clear about the differences and obstacles between non-proletarian materialism (Marxism) and non-proletarian spiritualism (Tolstoism), as well as the flaws of Tolstoism and why it is harmful to the revolution.Lvov-Rogachevski以托尔斯泰比卢梭，Lunacharski的演说里也这样。近来看见Plekhanov的一篇论文《Karl Marx和Leo Tolstoi》的附记里，却有云，“现今开始以托尔斯泰来比卢梭了，然而这样的比较，不过得到否定底的结论。卢梭是辩证论者（十八世纪少数的辩证论者之一人），而托尔斯泰则到死为止，是道地的形而上学者（十九世纪的典型底形而上学者的一人）。敢于将托尔斯泰和卢梭并列者，是没有读过那有名的《人类不平等起原论》或读而不懂的人所做的事。在俄国文献里，卢梭的辩证法底特质，在十二年前，已由札思律支弄明白了。”三位都是马克斯学者的批评家，我则不但“根本不懂唯物史观”，且未曾研究过卢梭和托尔斯泰的书，所以无从知道那一说对，但能附载于此，以供读者的参考罢了。
Lvov-Rogachevski compared Tolstoy to Rousseau, and Lunacharski also did the same. Recently, in the appendix to one of Plekhanov's papers "Karl Marx and Leo Tolstoi", it is said, "Tolstoy has begun to be compared to Rousseau, but such a comparison is only a negative conclusion." Rousseau was a dialectist (one of the few dialecticists of the eighteenth century), while Tolstoy was an authentic metaphysician (one of the typical underlying metaphysicians of the nineteenth century) until his death. Those who dare to juxtapose Tolstoy and Rousseau are doing what people who have not read the famous "Origin of Human Inequality" or do not understand it. In Russian literature, Rousseau's dialectical underlying characteristics were understood by Zaslütz twelve years ago. All three are critics of Marxist scholars, and I not only "don't understand historical materialism at all", but I have never studied the books of Rousseau and Tolstoy, so I have no way of knowing which one is correct, but I can attach it here for readers' reference.小泉八云在中国已经很有人知道，无须绍介了。他的三篇讲义，为日本学生而讲，所以在我们看去，也觉得很了然。其中含有一个很够研究的问题，是句子为一般人所不懂，是否可以算作好文学。倘使为大众所不懂而仍然算好，那么这文学也就决不是大众的东西了。托尔斯泰所论及的这一层，确是一种卓识。但是住在都市里的小资产阶级，实行是极难的，先要“到民间去”，用过一番苦功。否则便会像创造社的革命文学家一样，成仿吾刚大叫到劳动大众间去安慰指导他们（见本年《创造月刊》），而“诗人王独清教授”又来减价，只向“革命的印贴利更追亚”说话（见《我们》一号）。但过了半年，居然已经悟出，修善寺温泉浴场和半租界洋房中并无“劳动大众”，这是万分可“喜”的。
Koizumi Yakumo is already well known in China, so there is no need to introduce him. His three handouts are for Japanese students, so they are very clear to us. There is a question that is very well studied, which is whether sentences are not understood by ordinary people and can be regarded as good literature. If it is still considered good if it is not understood by the public, then this literature is by no means a thing for the public. This layer discussed by Tolstoy is indeed a kind of insight. However, it is extremely difficult for the petty bourgeoisie living in the city to implement it, and they must first "go to the people" and use some hard work. Otherwise, like the revolutionary writers of the Creation Society, Cheng Fangwu just shouted to the working masses to comfort and guide them (see this year's "Creation Monthly"), and "poet Professor Wang Duqing" came to reduce the price again, only to speak to "the revolutionary printing and sticking to the second one" (see "We" No. 1). But after half a year, I have realized that there is no "working public" in the hot spring baths of Xiushan Temple and the semi-concession bungalows, which is very "gratifying".Maiski的讲演也是说给外国人听的，所以从历史说起，直到托尔斯泰作品的特征，非常明了。日本人的办事真敏捷，前月底已有一本《马克斯主义者之所见的托尔斯泰》出版，计言论九篇，但大抵是说他的哲学有妨革命，而技术却可推崇。这一篇的主意也一样，我想，自然也是依照“苏维埃艺术局”的纲领书的，所以做法纵使万殊，归趣却是一致。奖其技术，贬其思想，是一种从新估价运动，也是廓清运动。虽然似乎因此可以引出一个问题，是照此推论起来，技术的生命，长于内容，“为艺术的艺术”，于此得到苏甦的消息。然而这还不过是托尔斯泰诞生一百年后的托尔斯泰论。在这样的世界上，他本国竟以记念观念相反的托尔斯泰的盛典普示世界，以他的优良之点讲给外人，其实是十分寂寞的事。到了将来，自然还会有不同的言论的。
Maiski's lectures are also addressed to foreigners, so starting from history to the characteristics of Tolstoy's works, it is very clear. At the end of last month, a book "Tolstoy as Seen by Marxists" was published, with a total of nine remarks, but it was mostly said that his philosophy hindered the revolution, but his technology was admirable. The idea of this article is the same, I think, naturally it is also written in accordance with the program of the "Soviet Art Bureau", so even though the approach is different, the purpose is the same. Praising its technology and belittling its ideas is a kind of new valuation movement, and it is also a movement to clear up. Although this seems to lead to a problem, it is inferred that the life of technology is longer than the content, "the art of art", and this is where Su Su's news was obtained. However, this is nothing more than Tolstoy's theory a hundred years after his birth. In such a world, it is actually very lonely for his country to announce to the world with Tolstoy's grand ceremony, which is the opposite of the concept of memory, and to tell outsiders about his good points. In the future, there will naturally be different remarks.托尔斯泰晚年的出奔，原因很复杂，其中的一部，是家庭的纠纷。我们不必看别的记录，只要看《托尔斯泰自己的事情》一篇，便知道他的长子L．L．Tolstoi便是一个不满于父亲的亲母派。《回忆杂记》第二十七节说托尔斯泰喜欢盘问人家，如“你想我的儿子莱阿，是有才能的么？”的莱阿，便是他。末尾所记的To the doctor he would say：“All my arrangements must be destroyed.”尤为奇特，且不易解。托尔斯泰死掉之前，他的夫人没有进屋里去，作者又没有说这是医生所传述，所以令人觉得很可疑怪的。
The reasons for Tolstoy's escape in his later years are complex, one of which is family disputes. We don't have to look at other records, just look at the article "Tolstoy's Own Affairs" to know that his eldest son L.L. Tolstoi was a pro-mother faction who was dissatisfied with his father. Verse 27 of the Miscellaneous Memories says that Tolstoy liked to interrogate people, such as, "Do you think my son Leia is talented?" "Leia, that's him. To the doctor he would say: "All my arrangements must be destroyed." It is particularly peculiar and not easy to understand. Before Tolstoy died, his wife did not enter the house, and the author did not say that this was narrated by the doctor, so it is very suspicious.末一篇是没有什么大关系的，不过可以知道一点前年的Iasnaia Poliana的情形。
The last article has nothing to do with it, but we can know a little about the situation of Iasnaia Poliana the year before last.这回的插图，除卷面的一幅是他本国的印本，卷头的一幅从J．Drinkwater编的《The Outline of Literature》，他和夫人的一幅从《Sphere》取来的之外，其余七幅，都是出于德人Julius Hart的《托尔斯泰论》和日本译的《托尔斯泰全集》里的。这全集共六十本，每本一图，倘使挑选起来，该可以得到很适宜的插画，可惜我只有六本，因此其中便不免有所迁就了。卷面的像上可以看见Gorky看得很以为奇的手；耕作的图是Riepin于一八九二年所作，颇为有名，本期的Lvov-Rogachevski和藏原惟人的文章里，就都提起它，还有一幅坐像，也是Riepin之作，也许将来可以补印。那一张谑画（Caricature），不知作者，我也看不大懂，大约是以为俄国的和平，维持只靠兵警，而托尔斯泰却在拆掉这局面罢。一张原稿，是可以印证他怎样有闲，怎样细致，和Dostoievski的请女速记者做小说怎样两路的：一张稿子上，改了一回，删了两回，临末只剩了八行半了。
The illustrations this time, except for one on the front of the volume is from his own country, the one at the beginning of the volume is from "The Outline of Literature" edited by J. Drinkwater, and the other seven are from the German Julius Hart's "On Tolstoy" and the Japanese translation of "The Complete Works of Tolstoy". There are sixty copies of this complete collection, each with a picture, if you choose it, you should get a very suitable illustration, but unfortunately I only have six, so I can't help but accommodate it. On the rolled portrait you can see Gorky's hand in surprise; The picture of farming was made by Riepin in 1892, which is quite famous, and it is mentioned in the articles of Lvov-Rogachevski and Yuito Kurahara in this issue, and there is also a seated statue, which is also Riepin's work, and may be reprinted in the future. I don't know the author of that caricature, and I don't understand it very well, probably because I think that the peace of Russia depends only on the military and police to maintain it, but Tolstoy is dismantling this situation. An original manuscript can confirm how he was idle, how meticulous, and how Dostoievski asked a female speed reporter to make a novel: on a manuscript, it was changed once, deleted twice, and there were only eight and a half lines left at the end.至于记念日的情形，在他本国的，中国已有记事登在《无轨列车》上。日本是由日露艺术协会电贺全苏维埃对外文化联络协会；一面在东京读卖新闻社讲堂上开托尔斯泰记念讲演会，有Maiski的演说，有Napron女士的Esenin诗的朗吟。同时又有一个记念会，大约是意见和前者相反的人们所办的，仅看见《日露艺术》上有对于这会的攻击，不知其详。
As for the situation of the day of remembrance, in his own country, China has already published a record in "Trackless Train". Japan is a telegram from the Japan-Russia Art Association to the All-Soviet Foreign Cultural Liaison Association; On the other hand, Tolstoy memorial lectures were held at the Yomiuri Shimbun lecture hall in Tokyo, with Maiski's speech and Ms. Napron's recitation of Esenin's poem. At the same time, there was also a memorial meeting, which was probably held by people who had opposite opinions to the former, and I only saw an attack on this meeting in "Rilu Art", but I don't know the details.欧洲的事情，仅有赵景深先生写给我一点消息——
For European affairs, only Mr. Zhao Jingshen wrote me a little news -“顷阅《伦敦麦考莱》十一月号，有这样几句话：‘托尔斯泰研究会安排了各种百年纪念的庆祝。十月末《黑暗的势力》和《教育之果》在艺术剧院上演。Anna Stannard将《Anna Karenina》改编剧本，亦将于十一月六日下午三时在皇家剧院上演。同日下午八时P．E．N．会将为庆祝托尔斯泰聚餐，Galsworthy亦在席云。’
"Recently, I read the November issue of Macaulay London, and there were a few sentences: 'The Tolstoy Society has arranged various centenary celebrations. At the end of October, "The Forces of Darkness" and "The Fruits of Education" were staged at the Art Theater. Anna Stannard's adaptation of the libretto for "Anna Karenina" will also be performed at the Theatre Royal on November 6 at 3 p.m. At 8 p.m. on the same day, the P.E.N. will celebrate Tolstoy's dinner, and Galsworthy will also be present. ’“又阅《纽约时报》十月七号的《书报评论》，有法国纪念托尔斯泰的消息。大意说，托尔斯泰游历欧洲时，不大到法国去，因为他是主张为人生的艺术的，所以不大欢喜法国的文学。他在法国文学中最佩服三个人，就是Stendhal，Balzac和Flaubert。对于他们的后辈Maupassant，Mirbeau等，也还称赞。法国认识托尔斯泰是很早的，一八八四年即有《战争与和平》的法译本，一八八五年又有《Anna Karenina》和《忏悔》的法译本。M．Bienstock曾译过他的全集，可惜没有完。自从Eugène Melchior de Vogüe在一八八六年作了一部有名的《俄国小说论》，法国便普遍的知道托尔斯泰了。今年各杂志上更大大的著论介绍，其中有M．Rappoport很反对托尔斯泰的无抵抗主义，说他是个梦想的社会主义者。但大致说来，对于他还都是很崇敬的，罗曼罗兰对他依旧很是忠心，与以前做《托尔斯泰传》时一样。”
I also read the New York Times' October 7 "Book and Newspaper Review", and there was news of France's commemoration of Tolstoy. To the effect, when Tolstoy traveled to Europe, he did not go to France, because he advocated the art of life, so he did not like French literature. The three people he admired the most in French literature were Stendhal, Balzac and Flaubert. For their juniors Maupassant, Mirbeau, etc., also praised. France has known Tolstoy for a long time, with a French translation of "War and Peace" in 1884 and a French translation of "Anna Karenina" and "Confession" in 1885. M. Bienstock has translated his complete works, but unfortunately they are not finished. Since Eugène Melchior de Vogüe wrote the famous "On the Russian Novel" in 1886, Tolstoy has been widely known in France. This year's magazines introduced larger articles, including M. Rappoport, who opposed Tolstoy's non-resistance and said that he was a socialist of dreams. But generally speaking, he is still very reverent, and Romain Rolland is still very loyal to him, just like when he made "The Biography of Tolstoy" before. ”在中国，有《文学周报》和《文化战线》，都曾为托尔斯泰出了记念号；十二月的《小说月报》上，有关于他的图画八幅和译著三篇。
In China, there are "Literary Weekly" and "Cultural Front", both of which have issued commemorative signs for Tolstoy; In the December "Novel Monthly", there were eight pictures and three translations about him.一九二八年十二月二十三日。
December 23, 1928.八
Eight这一本校完之后，自己觉得并没有什么话非说不可。
After finishing this school, I felt that there was nothing I had to say.单是，忽然想起，在中国的外人，译经书，子书的是有的，但很少有认真地将现在的文化生活——无论高低，总还是文化生活——绍介给世界。有些学者，还要在载籍里竭力寻出食人风俗的证据来。这一层，日本比中国幸福得多了，他们常有外客将日本的好的东西宣扬出去，一面又将外国的好的东西，循循善诱地输运进来。在英文学方面，小泉八云便是其一，他的讲义，是多么简要清楚，为学生们设想。中国的研究英文，并不比日本迟，所接触的，是英文书籍多，学校里的外国语，又十之八九是英语，然而关于英文学的这样讲义，却至今没有出现。现在登载它几篇，对于看看英文，而未曾留心到史底关系的青年，大约是很有意义的。
However, I suddenly remembered that there are outsiders in China who have translated scriptures and sub-books, but few have seriously introduced the current cultural life—whether high or low, or always cultural life—to the world. Some scholars also try their best to find evidence of cannibalism in the records. At this level, Japan is much happier than China, and they often have foreign guests promoting Japan's good things, while at the same time transporting foreign good things in step by step. In terms of English, Koizumi Yakumo is one of them, and his handouts are so brief and clear that they are envisioned for students. China has studied English no later than Japan, and has been exposed to many English books, and nine out of ten foreign Chinese languages in schools are English, but such handouts on English studies have not appeared so far. Publishing a few of them now is probably very meaningful for young people who read English and have not paid attention to the relationship between history.先前的北京大学里，教授俄，法文学的伊发尔（Ivanov）和铁捷克（Tretiakov）两位先生，我觉得却是善于诱掖的人，我们之有《苏俄的文艺论战》和《十二个》的直接译本而且是译得可靠的，就出于他们的指点之赐。现在是，不但俄文学系早被“正人君子”们所击散，连译书的青年也不知所往了。
In the previous Peking University, Mr. Ivanov and Mr. Tretiakov, who taught Russian and French literature, I think they were good at seducing, and we had direct translations of "The Literary and Art Debate of Soviet Russia" and "The Twelve" and they were reliably translated, just because of their guidance. Now, not only has the Russian literature department been dispersed by the "righteous gentlemen", but even the young people who translated books have disappeared.大约是四五年前罢，伊发尔先生向我说过，“你们还在谈Sologub之类，以为新鲜，可是这些名字，从我们的耳朵听起来，好像已经是一百来年以前的名字了。”我深信这是真的，在变动，进展的地方，十年的确可以抵得我们的一世纪或者还要多。然而虽然对于这些旧作家，我们也还是不过“谈谈”，他的作品的译本，终于只有几篇短篇，那比较长些的有名的《小鬼》，至今并没有出版。
About four or five years ago, Mr. Ifael said to me, "You are still talking about Sologub and the like, thinking it was fresh, but these names, from our ears, seem to be more than a hundred years old." "I am convinced that this is true, and in terms of change and progress, ten years can indeed be worth a century or more. However, although we still only "talk" about these old writers, the translations of his works are finally only a few short stories, and the longer and famous "Little Ghost" has not been published so far.这有名的《小鬼》的作者梭罗古勃，就于去年在列宁格勒去世了，活了六十五岁。十月革命时，许多文人都往外国跑，他却并不走，但也没有著作，那自然，他是出名的“死的赞美者”，在那样的时代和环境里，当然做不出东西来的，做了也无从发表。这回译载了他的一篇短篇——也许先前有人译过的——并非说这是他的代表作，不过借此作一点记念。那所描写，我想，凡是不知道集团主义的饥饿者，恐怕多数是这样的心情。
Thoreau Gub, the author of the famous "Little Devil", died in Leningrad last year at the age of sixty-five. During the October Revolution, many literati went to foreign countries, but he did not go, but he did not write, so naturally, he was a famous "praiser of death", in such an era and environment, of course, he could not make anything, and he could not publish it. This translation contains one of his short stories—perhaps translated before—not to say that it is his masterpiece, but to serve as a remembrance. I think that most hungry people who do not know about collectivism are in this mood.一九二九年一月十八日。
January 18, 1929.九
Nine这算是第一卷的末一本了，此后便是第二卷的开头。别的期刊不敢妄揣，但在《奔流》，却不过是印了十本，并无社会上所珍重的“夏历”过年一样，有必须大放爆竹的神秘的玄机。惟使内容有一点小小的结束，以便读者购阅的或停或续的意思，却是有的。然而现在还有《炸弹和征鸟》未曾完结，不过这是在重要的时代，涉及广大的地域，描写多种状况的长篇，登在期刊上需要一年半载，也正是必然之势，况且每期所登也必有两三章，大概在大度的读者是一定很能够谅解的罢。
This is the last book of the first volume, and then it is the beginning of the second volume. Other periodicals dare not speculate, but in "Benliu", only ten copies were printed, and there was no mystery that must be set off like the "summer calendar" cherished by society. However, there is a small end to the content so that readers can stop or continue reading. However, there is still "Bombs and Birds" that has not yet ended, but this is in an important era, involving a vast area, describing a variety of situations, it takes a year and a half to publish in the journal, and it is inevitable, and there must be two or three chapters in each issue, which is probably very understandable to readers in Dadu.其次，最初的计画，是想，倘若登载将来要印成单行本的译作，便须全部在这里发表，免得读者再去买一本一部份曾经看过的书籍。但因为译作者的生活关系，这计画恐怕办不到了，纵有匿名的“批评家”以先在期刊上横横直直发表而后来集印成书为罪状，也没有法子。确是全部登完了的只有两种：一是《叛逆者》，一是《文艺政策》。
Secondly, the original plan was that if a translation was to be published in the future, it would have to be published here in its entirety, so that readers would not have to buy a copy of a book they had read. But because of the translator's life, this project may not be possible, even if there are anonymous "critics" who first publish it in a journal and then print it into a book, there is no way. Indeed, there are only two types that have been published: one is "Rebel" and the other is "Literary and Art Policy".《叛逆者》本文三篇，是有岛武郎最精心结撰的短论文，一对于雕刻，二对于诗，三对于画；附录一篇，是译者所作；插画二十种，则是编者加上去的，原本中并没有。《文艺政策》原译本是这样完结了，但又见过另外几篇关于文艺政策的文章，倘再译了出来，一切大约就可以知道得更清楚。此刻正在想：再来添一个附录，如何呢？但一时还没有怎样的决定。
The three articles of "Rebel" are the most carefully compiled short essays by Takero Arishima, one for sculpture, the second for poetry, and the third for painting; An appendix was written by the translator; Twenty kinds of illustrations, which were added by the editor, were not originally included. This is how the original translation of "Literary and Art Policy" ends, but I have seen several other articles on literary and artistic policies, and if they are translated again, everything will be more clear. At the moment, I was thinking: How about adding another appendix? But there is no decision yet.《文艺政策》另有画室先生的译本，去年就出版了。听说照例的创造社革命文学诸公又在“批判”，有的说鲁迅译这书是不甘“落伍”，有的说画室居然捷足先登。其实我译这书，倒并非救“落”，也不在争先，倘若译一部书便免于“落伍”，那么，先驱倒也是轻松的玩意。我的翻译这书不过是使大家看看各种议论，可以和中国的新的批评家的批评和主张相比较。与翻刻王羲之真迹，给人们可以和自称王派的草书来比一比，免得胡里胡涂的意思，是相仿佛的，借此也到“修善寺”温泉去洗澡，实非所望也。
"Literary and Art Policy" also has a translation by Mr. Studio, which was published last year. I heard that the revolutionary literature of the Creation Society was "criticizing" again, some said that Lu Xun's translation of this book was unwilling to "fall behind", and some said that the studio was actually the first to take the lead. In fact, my translation of this book is not to save the "fall", nor to compete for the first, if translating a book will avoid "falling behind", then the pioneer is also an easy thing. My translation of this book is just to show you all kinds of discussions, which can be compared with the criticisms and ideas of new critics in China. It is similar to the reproduction of Wang Xizhi's authentic work, so that people can compare it with the cursive script that claims to be the Wang school, so as not to have the meaning of Huli Hutu, which is similar, and it is not what is hoped for to go to the hot spring of "Xiushan Temple".又其次，是原想每期按二十日出版，没有迟误的，但竟延误了一个月。近时得到几位爱读者的来信，责以迟延，勉以努力。我们也何尝不想这样办；不过一者其中有三回增刊，共加添二百页，即等于十个月内，出了十一本的平常刊；二者这十个月中，是印刷局的两次停工和举国同珍的一回“夏历”岁首，对于这些大事，几个《奔流》同人除跳黄浦江之外，是什么办法也没有的。譬如要办上海居民所最爱看的“大出丧”，本来算不得乌托邦的空想，但若脚色都回家拜岁去了，就必然底地出不出来。所以，据去年一年所积的经验，是觉得“凡例”上所说的“倘无意外障碍，定于每月中旬出版”的上一句的分量，实在着重起来了。
Secondly, it was originally planned to be published on the 20th of each issue without delay, but it was delayed by a month. Recently, I received letters from several readers who blamed me for delaying and encouraging me to work hard. Why don't we want to do this; However, one of them has three supplements, adding a total of 200 pages, which is equivalent to 11 ordinary publications published within ten months; In the past ten months of the two, it was the two shutdowns of the printing bureau and the beginning of the "summer calendar" that the whole country cherished, and for these major events, several "rushing" fans had no way but to jump into the Huangpu River. For example, if you want to hold the "big funeral" that Shanghai residents love to watch, it is not a utopian fantasy, but if you go home to pay your respects, you will inevitably not be able to get out. Therefore, based on the experience accumulated last year, I feel that the weight of the previous sentence "If there are no unexpected obstacles, it will be published in the middle of every month" mentioned in the "legend" is really emphasized.孙用先生寄来译诗之后，又寄一篇作者《Lermontov小记》来。可惜那时第九本已经印好，不及添上了，现在补录在这里——
After Mr. Sun Yong sent a translation of the poem, he sent another author's "Lermontov's Short Notes". Unfortunately, the ninth book had already been printed at that time, and there was no time to add it, and now it is supplemented here——“密哈尔·古列维支·莱芒托夫（Mikhail Gurievitch Ler-montov）在一八一四年十月十五日生于莫斯科，死于一八四一年七月廿七日。是一个俄国的诗人及小说家，被称为‘高加索的诗人’的，他曾有两次被流放于高加索（1837，1840），也在那儿因决斗而死。他的最有名的著作是小说《我们的时代的英雄》和诗歌《俄皇伊凡·华西里维支之歌》，《Ismail-Bey》及《魔鬼》等。”
Mikhail Gurievitch Ler-montov was born in Moscow on October 15, 1814, and died on July 27, 1841. was a Russian poet and novelist, known as the 'Poet of the Caucasus', who was exiled twice in the Caucasus (1837, 1840), where he also died in a duel. His most famous works are the novel "Heroes of Our Time" and the poems "The Song of Ivan Vasilyevich", "Ismail-Bey" and "The Devil". ”韦素园先生有一封信，有几处是关于Gorky的《托尔斯泰回忆杂记》的，也摘录于下——
Mr. Wei Suyuan has a letter, several of which are about Gorky's "Miscellaneous Memories of Tolstoy", which are also excerpted below——“读《奔流》七号上达夫先生译文，所记有两个疑点，现从城里要来一本原文的Gorky回忆托尔斯泰，解答如下：
Reading Mr. Duff's translation on "Rush" No. 7, there are two doubts, and Gorky, who is now asking for an original text from the city, recalls Tolstoy, and the answer is as follows:1．《托尔斯泰回忆记》第十一节Nekassov确为Nek-rassov之误。涅克拉梭夫是俄国十九世纪有名的国民诗人。
1. Section 11 of "Tolstoy's Memoirs" Nekassov is indeed Nek-rassov's mistake. Nekrasov was a famous national poet of Russia in the 19th century.2．‘Volga宣教者’的Volga是河名，中国地理书上通译为涡瓦河，在俄国农民多呼之为‘亲爱的母亲’，有人译为‘卑汙的说教者’，当系错误。不过此处，据Gorky《回忆杂记》第三十二节原文似应译为‘涡瓦河流域’方合，因为这里并不只Volga一个字，却在前面有一前置词（za）故也。
2. The Volga of 'Volga Missionary' is the name of the river, which is translated as the Worm River in Chinese geography books, and is often called 'dear mother' by Russian farmers, and some people translate it as 'filthy preacher', which is a mistake. However, here, according to the original text of verse 32 of Gorky's "Miscellaneous Memories", it seems to be translated as 'Volga River Basin', because there is not only one word Volga here, but a prefix (za) in front of it.以上系根据彼得堡一九一九年格尔热宾出版部所印行的本子作答的，当不致有大误。不过我看信比杂记写得还要好。”
The above is based on the book printed by the Gerzhebin Publishing Department in Petersburg in 1919, so there should be no major mistakes. But I read the letter better than the miscellaneous notes. ”说到那一封信，我的运动达夫先生一并译出，实在也不只一次了。有几回，是诱以甘言，说快点译出来，可以好好的合印一本书，上加好看的图像；有一回，是特地将读者称赞译文的来信寄去，给看看读书界的期望是怎样地热心。见面时候谈起来，倒也并不如那跋文所说，暂且不译了，但至今似乎也终于没有动手，这真是无可如何。现在索性将这情形公表出来，算是又一回猛烈的“恶毒”的催逼。
Speaking of that letter, my sports Mr. Duff has translated it more than once. Several times, it was tempted to say that if it was translated quickly, it could be printed together with a good book and a beautiful image on it; Once, I specially sent a letter praising the translation from a reader to show how enthusiastic the expectations of the reading community were. When we met, we talked about it, but it wasn't as the postscript said, so I didn't translate it for the time being, but it seems that I haven't done it yet, which is really helpless. Now simply publicizing this situation is another violent "vicious" urging.一九二九年三月二十五日。
March 25, 1929.十
TenE．Dowden的关于法国的文学批评的简明扼要的论文，在这一本里已经终结了，我相信于读者会有许多用处，并且连类来看英国的批评家对于批评的批评。
E． Dowden's concise treatise on French literary criticism has come to an end in this book, and I believe it will be of great use to the reader, and to see the criticism of English critics in parallel.这回译了一篇野口米次郎的《爱尔兰文学之回顾》，以译文而论，自然简直是续貂。但也很简明扼要，于爱尔兰文学运动的来因去果，是说得了了分明的；中国前几年，于Yeats，Synge等人的事情和作品，曾经屡有绍介了，现在有这一篇，也许更可以帮助一点理解罢。
This time, I translated a "Review of Irish Literature" by Yonejiro Noguchi, which is naturally a continuation of the mink. But it is also very concise and concise, and the cause and effect of the Irish literary movement can be clearly explained; In the past few years in China, the affairs and works of Yu Yeats, Synge and others have been repeatedly introduced, and now there is this one, which may help to understand a little.但作者是诗人，所以那文中有许多诗底的辞句，是无须赘说的。只有一端，当翻译完毕时，还想添几句话。那就是作者的“无论那一国的文学，都必须知道古代的文化和天才，和近代的时代精神有怎样的关系，而从这处所，来培养真生命的”的主张。这自然也并非作者一人的话，在最近，虽是最革命底国度里，也有搬出古典文章来之势，编印托尔斯泰全集还是小事，如Trotsky，且明说可以读Dante和Pushkin，Lunacharski则以为古代一民族兴起时代的文艺，胜于近来十九世纪末的文艺。但我想，这是并非中国复古的两派——遗老的神往唐虞，遗少的归心元代——所能引为口实的——那两派的思想，虽然和Trotsky等截然不同，但觉得于自己有利时，我可以保证他们也要引为口实。现在的幻想中的唐虞，那无为而治之世，不能回去的乌托邦，那确实性，比到“阴间”去还稀少；至于元，那时东取中国，西侵欧洲，武力自然是雄大的，但他是蒙古人，倘以这为中国的光荣，则现在也可以归降英国，而自以为本国的国旗——但不是五色的——“遍于日所出入处”了。
But the author is a poet, so there are many poetic words in that text, which need not be repeated. There is only one end, and when the translation is finished, I want to add a few sentences. That is the author's proposition that "no matter which country's literature, we must know what the relationship between ancient culture and genius and the spirit of the modern times is, and cultivate true life from this place". Recently, although in the most revolutionary countries, there is also a trend to move out of classical articles, and it is still a trivial matter to compile and print the complete works of Tolstoy, such as Trotsky, and it is clear that Dante and Pushkin can be read, and Lunacharski believes that the literature and art of the era of the rise of a nation in ancient times are better than the literature and art of the late nineteenth century. But I think that this is not the two schools of Chinese retro - the old people who are fascinated by Tang and Yu, and the young who return to the Yuan Dynasty - the ideas of those two schools can be cited as excuses, although they are completely different from Trotsky and others, but when they feel that they are advantageous, I can guarantee that they will also use them as excuses. The current fantasy of Tang Yu, the world ruled by nothing, the utopia that cannot be returned, that reality is rarer than going to the "underworld"; As for the Yuan, at that time, he took China in the east and invaded Europe in the west, and his military power was naturally majestic, but he was a Mongolian, and if he regarded this as China's glory, he could now surrender to Britain, and thought that his country's flag - but not five-colored - was "everywhere the sun rises".要之，倘若先前并无可以师法的东西，就只好自己来开创。拉旧来帮新，结果往往只差一个名目，拖《红楼梦》来附会十九世纪式的恋爱，所造成的还是宝玉，不过他的姓名是“少年威德”，说《水浒传》里有革命精神，因风而起者便不免是涂面剪径的假李逵——但他的雅号也许却叫作“突变”。
In short, if there is nothing to learn from before, you have to create it yourself. Pulling the old to help the new, the result is often only one name, dragging "Dream of Red Mansions" to attach to the nineteenth-century love, which is still caused by Baoyu, but his name is "Young Weide", saying that there is a revolutionary spirit in "Water Margin", and the one who rises because of the wind is inevitably the fake Li Kui who paints the face and cuts the path - but his nickname may be called "mutation".卷末的一篇虽然不过是对于Douglas Percy Bliss的《A History of Wood-Engraving》的批评，但因为可以知道那一本书——欧洲木刻经过的大略，所以特地登载了。本卷第一，二两册上，还附有木刻的插图，作为参考；以后也许还要附载，以见各派的作风。我的私见，以为在印刷术未曾发达的中国，美术家倘能兼作木刻，是颇为切要的，因为容易印刷而不至于很失真，因此流布也能较广远，可以不再如巨幅或长卷，固定一处，仅供几个人的鉴赏了。又，如果刻印章的人，以铁笔兼刻绘画，大概总也能够开一新生面的。
Although the article at the end of the volume is nothing more than a criticism of Douglas Percy Bliss's "A History of Wood-Engraving", it is specially published because it can know the outline of the book, European woodcuts. On the first and second volumes of this volume, there are also woodcut illustrations for reference; It may be attached in the future to see the style of each school. In my personal opinion, I think that in China, where printing technology has not been developed, it is quite important for artists to double as woodcuts, because it is easy to print without being very distorted, so the circulation can also be wider, and it can no longer be fixed in one place like a huge or long scroll, only for a few people to appreciate. Also, if the person who carves the seal uses an iron pen to carve and paint, he will probably always be able to open a new face.但虽是翻印木刻，中国现在的制版术和印刷术，也还是不行，偶而看看，倒也罢了，如要认真研究起来，则几张翻印的插图，真是贫窭到不足靠，归根结蒂，又只好说到去看别国的书了。Bliss的书，探究历史是好的，倘看作品，却不合宜，因为其中较少近代的作品。为有志于木刻的人们起见，另举两种较为相宜的书在下面——
But even if it is a reprint of woodcuts, China's current platemaking and printing technology are still not good, occasionally look at it, it's okay, if you want to study it seriously, then a few reprinted illustrations are really poor and unreliable, in the final analysis, you have to talk about reading books in other countries. Bliss's book is good for exploring history, but it is not appropriate to look at the works, because there are fewer modern works among them. For those who are interested in woodcuts, here are two more suitable books -《The Modern Woodcut》 by Herbert Furst，published by John Lane，London．42s．1924．
《The Modern Woodcut》 by Herbert Furst，published by John Lane，London．42s．1924．《The Woodcut of To-day at Home and Abroad》，commentary by M．C．Talaman，published by The Studio Ltd.，London．7s．6d．1927．
《The Woodcut of To-day at Home and Abroad》，commentary by M．C．Talaman，published by The Studio Ltd.，London．7s．6d．1927．上一种太贵；下一种原是较为便宜，可惜今年已经卖完，旧本增价到21s．了。但倘若随时留心着欧美书籍广告，大概总有时可以遇见新出的相宜的本子。
The previous one is too expensive; The next one was originally cheaper, but unfortunately it has been sold out this year, and the price of the old book has increased to 21s. But if you pay attention to European and American book advertisements at any time, you can probably sometimes meet new suitable books.一九二九年五月十日。
May 10, 1929.十一
ElevenA Mickiewicz（1798—1855）是波兰在异族压迫之下的时代的诗人，所鼓吹的是复仇，所希求的是解放，在二三十年前，是很足以招致中国青年的共鸣的。我曾在《摩罗诗力说》里，讲过他的生涯和著作，后来收在论文集《坟》中；记得《小说月报》很注意于被压迫民族的文学的时候，也曾有所论述，但我手头没有旧报，说不出在那一卷那一期了。最近，则在《奔流》本卷第一本上，登过他的两篇诗。但这回绍介的主意，倒在巴黎新成的雕像；《青春的赞颂》一篇，也是从法文重译的。
A Mickiewicz (1798-1855) was a poet in Poland during the era of foreign oppression, advocating revenge and liberation, which was enough to resonate with Chinese youth twenty or thirty years ago. I once talked about his career and writings in "Moro Shili Theory", which was later included in the essay collection "Tomb"; I remember that when "Novel Monthly" paid great attention to the literature of oppressed nations, it also discussed it, but I didn't have an old newspaper at hand, so I couldn't tell which volume or issue. Recently, in the first volume of "Rush", two of his poems were published. But this time Shaosuke's idea fell on the newly completed statue in Paris; The article "Praise of Youth" is also retranslated from French.I．Matsa是匈牙利的出亡在外的革命者，现在以科学底社会主义的手法，来解剖西欧现代的艺术，著成一部有名的书，曰《现代欧洲的艺术》。这《艺术及文学的诸流派》便是其中的一篇，将各国的文艺，在综合底把握之内，加以检查。篇页也并不多，本应该一期登毕，但因为后半篇有一幅图表，一时来不及制版，所以只好分为两期了。
I. Matsa is a Hungarian revolutionary in exile, and now uses the technique of socialism under science to dissect modern art in Western Europe and write a famous book called "Art in Modern Europe". This "Schools of Art and Literature" is one of them, which examines the literature and art of various countries within a comprehensive grasp. There are not many pages, and it should have been published in one issue, but because there is a chart in the second half, there is no time to make a plate for a while, so it has to be divided into two issues.这篇里所举的新流派，在欧洲虽然多已成为陈迹，但在中国，有的却不过徒闻其名，有的则连名目也未经介绍。在这里登载这一篇评论，似乎颇有太早，或过时之嫌。但我以为是极有意义的。这是一种豫先的消毒，可以“打发”掉只偷一些新名目，以自夸耀，而其实毫无实际的“文豪”。因为其中所举的各主义，倘不用科学之光照破，则可借以藏拙者还是不少的。
Although most of the new schools mentioned in this article have become obsolete in Europe, in China, some are just famous, and some are not even introduced. It seems that this review is too early or outdated. But I think it makes a lot of sense. This is a kind of disinfection that can be "sent" off and only steal some new names to boast, but in fact there is no actual "literary master". Because the various doctrines listed in it, if they are not broken by the light of science, there are still many people who can hide their clumsiness.Lunacharski说过，文艺上的各种古怪主义，是发生于楼顶房上的文艺家，而旺盛于贩卖商人和好奇的富翁的。那些创作者，说得好，是自信很强的不遇的才人，说得坏，是骗子。但此说嵌在中国，却只能合得一半，因为我们能听到某人在提倡某主义——如成仿吾之大谈表现主义，高长虹之以未来派自居之类——而从未见某主义的一篇作品，大吹大擂地挂起招牌来，孪生了开张和倒闭，所以欧洲的文艺史潮，在中国毫未开演，而又像已经一一演过了。
Lunacharski said that all kinds of eccentricity in literature and art occurred in the rooftops, and flourished among merchants and curious rich people. Those creators, to put it well, are very confident and unappreciated talents, and to put it badly, they are liars. But this statement is embedded in China, but it can only be half combined, because we can hear someone advocating a certain doctrine - such as Cheng Fengwu's big talk about expressionism, Gao Changhong's self-proclaimed futurism - but have never seen a work of a certain doctrine, hanging up a sign with a big blow, and twinning the opening and closing, so the European literary and artistic history tide has not started in China, but it seems to have been performed one by one.得到汉口来的一封信，是这样写着的：
I got a letter from Hankou, which read:“昨天接到北新寄来的《奔流》二卷二期，我于匆匆流览了三幅插画之后，便去读《编辑后记》——这是我的老脾气。在这里面有一句话使我很为奋兴，那便是：‘……又，如果刻印章的人，以铁笔兼刻绘画，大概总也能够开一新生面的。’我在学校的最后一年和离校后的失业时期颇曾学学过刻印，虽然现在已有大半年不亲此道了。其间因偶然尝试，曾刻过几颗绘画的印子，但是后来觉得于绘画没有修养，很少成功之望，便不曾继续努力。不过所刻的这几颗印子，却很想找机会在什么地方发表一下。因此曾寄去给编《美育》的李金髪先生，然而没有回音。第二期《美育》又增了价，要二元一本，不知里面有否刊登。此外亦曾寄到要出画报的汉口某日报去，但是画报没有出，自然更是石沉大海了。倒是有一家小报很承他们赞赏，然而据说所刻的人物大半是‘俄国人’，不妥，劝我刻几个党国要人的面像；可恨我根本就不曾想要刻要人们的尊容。碰了三次壁，我只好把这几枚印子塞到箱子底里去了。现在见到了你这句话，怎不令我奋兴呢？兹特冒盛暑在蒸笼般的卧室中找出这颗印子钤奉一阅。如不笑其拙劣，能在《奔流》刊登，则不胜大欢喜也。
"Yesterday, I received the second volume and issue of "Torrent" from Beixin, and after reading three illustrations in a hurry, I went to read the "Editor's Postscript" - this is my old temper. There is a sentence that excites me, and that is: '...... Also, if the person who carves the seal uses an iron pen to carve and paint, he will probably always be able to open a new face. I learned a lot about engraving in my last year of school and during my unemployment after leaving school, although I haven't done it for more than half a year now. During this period, due to accidental attempts, he carved a few painting marks, but later felt that he had no cultivation in painting and had little hope of success, so he did not continue to work hard. However, I really want to find an opportunity to publish these few seals somewhere. Therefore, it was sent to Mr. Li Jinfa, who edited "Aesthetic Education", but there was no reply. The second issue of "Aesthetic Education" has increased the price, costing two yuan a copy, and I don't know if it will be published in it. In addition, it was also sent to a daily newspaper in Hankou that was going to publish a pictorial, but the pictorial did not come out, so naturally it sank into the sea. However, there was a tabloid that appreciated them, but it was said that most of the characters engraved were 'Russians', which was inappropriate, and advised me to engrave the faces of a few party and state dignitaries; I hate that I never wanted to engrave people's faces at all. After touching the wall three times, I had to stuff these seals into the bottom of the box. Now that I see your words, why doesn't it excite me? Zite braved the heat to find this seal in the steamer-like bedroom and read it. If you don't laugh at its clumsiness, it would be great to be able to publish it in "Torrent".谨上七月十八日。”
Respectfully submitted on July 18th. ”从远远的汉口来了这样的一个响应，对于寂寞的我们，自然也给以很可感谢的兴奋的。《美育》第二期我只在日报上见过目录，不记得有这一项。至于憾不刻要人的小报，则大约误以版画家为照相店了，只有照相店是专挂要人的放大像片的，现在隐然有取以相比之意，所以也恐怕并非真赏。不过这次可还要碰第四次的壁的罢。《奔流》版心太大而图版小，所以还是不相宜，或者就寄到《朝花旬刊》去。但希望刻者告诉我一个易于认识的名字。
Such a response came from far away in Hankou, and we naturally gave a lot of excitement to be grateful for for our loneliness. I have only seen the catalog in the daily newspaper in the second issue of "Aesthetic Education", and I don't remember this item. As for the tabloids that regret not engraved dignitaries, they probably mistakenly regard printmakers as photo shops, only photo shops specialize in enlarged portraits of dignitaries, and now there is a faint meaning of comparison, so I am afraid that it is not a real appreciation. But this time I have to touch the wall for the fourth time. The "Rush" page is too big and the plate is small, so it is still not suitable, or it should be sent to the "Chaohua Periodicals". But I hope the engraver will tell me an easy-to-recognize name.还有，《子见南子》在山东曲阜第二师范学校排演，引起了一场“圣裔”控告，名人震怒的风潮。曾经搜集了一些公文之类，想作一个附录来发表，但这回为了页数的限制，已经不能排入，只好等别的机会或别的处所了。这或者就寄到《语丝》去。
In addition, "Zi Jian Nanzi" was rehearsed at the Second Normal School in Qufu, Shandong Province, which caused a trend of "holy descendants" accusations and celebrities were angry. I once collected some official documents and wanted to publish them as an appendix, but this time due to the limit of the number of pages, I could no longer arrange them, so I had to wait for another opportunity or other place. This may be sent to "Yusi".读者诸君，再见罢。
Goodbye, dear readers.八月十一日。
August 11th.

封面

书名页

版权信息

图书在版编目（CIP）数据
Books in Print (CIP) data中国小说史略/鲁迅著．—南京：译林出版社，2014.2
A Brief History of Chinese Novels/by Lu Xun.—Nanjing: Yilin Publishing House, 2014.2（鲁迅自编文集）
(Lu Xun's self-edited anthology)ISBN 978-7-5447-4668-7
ISBN 978-7-5447-4668-7Ⅰ．①中…　Ⅱ．①鲁…　Ⅲ．①鲁迅著作－小说史－中国　Ⅳ．①I210.91
I..(1)... II..(1) Lu... III..(1) Lu Xun's Writings - History of Novels - China IV. (1) I210.91中国版本图书馆CIP数据核字（2013）第269718号
China Version Library CIP Data Verification (2013) No. 269718
书　　名　中国小说史略
Book Title: A Brief History of Chinese Novels作　　者　鲁　迅
Author: Lu Xun责任编辑　王振华
Editor-in-charge: Wang Zhenhua特约编辑　邓　敏
Special editor Deng Min出版发行　凤凰出版传媒股份有限公司
Published and distributed by Phoenix Publishing and Media Co., Ltd译林出版社
Yilin Publishing House出版社地址　南京市湖南路1号A楼，邮编：210009
Publisher's address Building A, No. 1 Hunan Road, Nanjing, Zip Code: 210009电子信箱　yilin@yilin.com
E-mail yilin@yilin.com出版社网址　http://www.yilin.com
Publisher website http://www.yilin.com印　　刷　北京凯达印务有限公司
Printing Beijing Kaida Printing Co., Ltd开　　本　787×1092毫米　　1/32
Volume 787×1092 mm 1/32印　　张　8.375
Print 8.375字　　数　160千字
Word count: 160,000 words版　　次　2014年2月第1版　2014年2月第1次印刷
Edition February 2014 1st edition February 2014 1st printing标准书号　ISBN 978-7-5447-4668-7
ISBN 978-7-5447-4668-7定　　价　18.80元
The price is 18.80 yuan译林版图书若有印装错误可向承印厂调换

If there are printing errors in the translated version of the book, it can be exchanged with the printing factory

未知

注释
exegesis 

□□□□□
□□□□□ 

本书中所出现的如上方框同原版纸书。

The box above is the same as the original paper book.

Table of Contents

目录

Table of Contents

directory题记 Inscription
序言 序言
第一篇　史家对于小说之著录及论述 The first is the historian's writings and discussions on novels
《汉书》《艺文志》说;《隋书》《经籍志》说。《唐书》《经籍志》始无小序；《新唐书》《艺文志》始退鬼神传入小说。明胡应麟分小说为六类；清《四库书目》分小说为三类。《四库书目》又退古史入小说。书目之变例。
The Book of Han and the Book of Arts and Literature say; The Book of Sui and the Classics say. The Book of Tang and the Classics have no preface; The "New Book of Tang" and "Art and Literature" began to withdraw from ghosts and gods and introduced them into novels. Ming Hu Yinglin's novels are divided into six categories; The Qing Dynasty's "Four Libraries Bibliography" is divided into three categories: novels. The "Four Libraries Bibliography" also retreats ancient history into novels. Variations in the bibliography.第二篇　神话与传说 Chapter 2 Myths and Legends
小说之渊源：神话。中国阙原始神话。神话之成传说。 多含神话及传说之书：《山海经》，《穆天子传》，《楚辞》《天问》等。中国神话散亡之故。
The origin of the novel: mythology. China lacks primitive mythology. Myths become legends. Books containing many myths and legends: "Classic of Mountains and Seas", "Biography of Mu Tianzi", "Chuci", "Tianwen" and so on. The reason for the disappearance of Chinese mythology.第三篇　《汉书》《艺文志》所载小说 The third novel contained in the Book of Han and the Records of Art and Literature
《汉志》所录小说今俱佚。《伊尹说》。《鬻子说》。《青史子》。《师旷》。《虞初周说》。《百家》。《务成子》及《宋子》。
The novels recorded in the "Book of Han Zhi" have now been lost. "Yi Yin Shuo". "The Seller's Theory". "Qing Shizi". "Shi Kuan." "Yu Chu Zhou Shuo". "Hundred Schools." "Wuchengzi" and "Songzi".第四篇　今所见汉人小说 Chapter 4 The Han novels seen today
见存汉人小说皆伪托。东方朔《神异经》，《十洲记》。班固《汉武故事》，《汉武内传》。郭宪《汉武洞冥记》。刘歆《西京杂记》。伶玄《飞燕外传》及汉人《杂事秘辛》。
见存汉人小说皆伪托。 东方朔《神异经》，《十洲记》。 班固《汉武故事》，《汉武内传》。 郭宪《汉武洞冥记》。 刘歆《西京杂记》。 伶玄《飞燕外传》及汉人《杂事秘辛》。第五篇　六朝之鬼神志怪书（上） Chapter 5 The Strange Book of Ghosts and Gods of the Six Dynasties (Part I)
文士之传神怪：魏文帝《列异传》，张华《博物志》，干宝《搜神记》，陶潜《搜神后记》，刘敬叔《异苑》，刘义庆《幽明录》，吴均《续齐谐记》。志怪书中之印度影响。
The biographies of scholars include Emperor Wen of Wei's "Biography of the Strange," Zhang Hua's "Records of Natural History," Gan Bao's "Records of the Search for Gods," Tao Qian's "Records of the Search for Gods," Liu Jingshu's "Strange Gardens," Liu Yiqing's "Records of Youming," and Wu Jun's "Continuation of Qi Harmony." I wonder about the Indian influence in the book.第六篇　六朝之鬼神志怪书（下） Chapter 6 The Ghosts and Gods of the Six Dynasties (Part II)
释家之明因果：王琰《冥祥记》等。方士之行劝诱：王浮《神异记》，王嘉《拾遗记》。
Buddhist Ming Cause and Effect: Wang Yan's "Ming Xiang Ji", etc. The practice of alchemists is to persuade others: Wang Fu's "Records of the Divine," Wang Jia's "Records of the Collected Relics."第七篇　《世说新语》与其前后 Chapter 7 "The New Language of the World" and its before and after
释道互扇而流为清谈。裴启《语林》，郭澄之《郭子》。刘义庆《世说》及刘峻注。沈约《俗说》，殷芸《小说》。《世说》之一体：邯郸淳《笑林》，侯白《启颜录》。历来模仿《世说》者之多。
Buddhism and Taoism fanned each other and flowed into clear talk. Pei Qi's "Yulin," Guo Cheng's "Guo Zi." Liu Yiqing's "Shishuo" and Liu Jun's annotations. Shen Yue's "Common Sayings," Yin Yun's "Novels." One of the "World Sayings": Handan Chun's "Laughing Forest", Hou Bai's "Qiyanlu". There have always been many imitations of "Shishuo".第八篇　唐之传奇文（上） Chapter 8 The Legend of the Tang Dynasty (Part I)
唐人始有意为小说。唐人小说影响于曲为大。王度《古镜记》，无名子《白猿传》，张文成《游仙窟》。开元天宝以后作者蔚起：沈既济《枕中记》等，沈亚之《湘中怨》等，陈鸿《长恨歌传》等，白行简《李娃传》等。
The Tang people began to intend to write novels. Tang novels have a great influence on music. Wang Du's "Ancient Mirror Record," Wu Mingzi's "The Legend of the White Ape," and Zhang Wencheng's "Wandering Immortal Cave." After the Kaiyuan Tianbao era, the authors Weiqi: Shen Jiji's "Pillow Record", etc., Shen Yazhi's "Xiangzhong Resentment", etc., Chen Hong's "Song of Everlasting Hatred", etc., Bai Xingjian's "The Biography of Li Wa", etc.第九篇　唐之传奇文（下） 第九篇 唐之传奇文（下）
作家中之两大：元稹之《莺莺传》及后来之称述；李公佐之《南柯太守传》，《谢小娥传》，《古岳渎经》。
作家中之两大：元稹之《莺莺传》及后来之称述；李公佐之《南柯太守传》，《谢小娥传》，《古岳渎经》。第十篇　唐之传奇集及杂俎 Chapter 10 Tang Legend Collection and Miscellaneous Dishes
牛僧孺《玄怪录》及其仿效者。段成式《酉阳杂俎》与《续集》。李义山《杂纂》及宋明人之续书。
牛僧孺《玄怪录》及其仿效者。 段成式《酉阳杂俎》与《续集》。 李义山《杂纂》及宋明人之续书。第十一篇　宋之志怪及传奇文 Chapter 11 Song Zhi Zhi Strange and Legendary Article
宋初修《太平广记》为小说渊薮。宋志怪之欲取信：徐铉《稽神录》，吴淑《江淮异人传》。宋志怪之求多：洪迈《夷坚志》。宋传奇始多垂诫：乐史《绿珠传》，《杨太真外传》；秦醇《赵飞燕别传》等。宋传奇之托古：《大业拾遗记》等，《梅妃传》。
In the early Song Dynasty, the "Taiping Guangji" was compiled as a novel. Song Zhi found it strange and wanted to gain trust: Xu Xuan's "Record of the Divine," Wu Shu's "The Biography of the Strange People in Jianghuai." Song Zhi is strange and sought more: Hong Mai's "Yi Jian Zhi". Song legends began to give more warnings: music history "The Legend of Green Pearl", "Yang Taizhen's Biography"; Qin Chun's "Zhao Feiyan's Farewell Biography" and so on. Song Legend of the Ancients: "The Records of the Great Cause", etc., "The Biography of Mei Fei".第十二篇　宋之话本 Chapter 12 The Song Dynasty's Story
唐已有俗文故事。宋俗文小说所从出。杂伎艺中之说话。说话四科中之讲史及小说。话本。见存之话本类：《五代史平话》，《京本通俗小说》。
There are already vulgar stories in the Tang Dynasty. The origin of Song folk novels. Speaking in acrobatics. Speaking of history and novels in the four subjects. Storybook. Existing words are in this category: "Five Dynasties History Plain Words", "Jingben Popular Novels".第十三篇　宋元之拟话本 Chapter 13 The Song and Yuan Dynasties
话本影响于著作。刘斧《青琐高议》及《摭遗》。《大唐三藏法师取经记》。《大宋宣和遗事》。
The script affects the writing. Liu Axe's "Qing Suo Gao Yi" and "Collection". "The Records of Master Sanzang of the Tang Dynasty". "The Remains of the Great Song Dynasty Xuanhe".第十四篇　元明传来之讲史（上） Chapter 14 The History of the Yuan and Ming Dynasties (Part I)
元刊本《全相平话》。罗贯中及其著作《：三国志演义》，《隋唐志传》，《残唐五代史演义》，《北宋三遂平妖传》。
The original edition of "Quanxiang Pinghua". Luo Guanzhong and his works "Romance of the Three Kingdoms", "Sui and Tang Chronicles", "Romance of the History of the Five Dynasties of the Remnant Tang Dynasty", "The Biography of the Three Suiping Demons of the Northern Song Dynasty".第十五篇　元明传来之讲史（下） Chapter 15 The History of the Yuan and Ming Dynasties (Part II)
施耐庵与罗贯中。《水浒传》之四本：一百十五回本，一百回本，一百二十回本，七十回本。《荡平四大寇传》。明陈忱《后水浒传》及清俞万春《结水浒传》。明之自开辟至两宋史事平话。清之统叙及订补。
Schneider and Luo Guanzhong. The four books of "Water Margin": one hundred and fifteen times, one hundred and twenty times, and seventy times. "The Biography of the Four Great Bandits." Ming Chen Chen's "Hou Shui Hu Zhuan" and Qing Yu Wanchun's "Jie Shui Hu Zhuan". Mingzhi from the opening to the two Song dynasties. Qingzhi unified and supplemented.第十六篇　明之神魔小说（上） Chapter 16 The Ming Dynasty's Gods and Demons Novel (Part I)
明中叶崇奉道流之影响。《四游记》：吴元泰《上洞八仙传》，余象斗《华光天王传》及《玄天上帝出身传》，杨志和《西游记传》。
In the middle of the Ming Dynasty, the influence of the Taoist teachings was worshipped. "Four Journeys": Wu Yuantai's "Legend of the Eight Immortals of Shangdong", Yu Xiangdou's "Legend of Huaguang Tianwang" and "The Birth of God of Xuantian", Yang Zhihe's "Journey to the West".第十七篇　明之神魔小说（中） Chapter 17 The Novel of the Gods and Demons of the Ming Dynasty (Middle)
吴承恩《西游记》。《后西游记》及《续西游记》。
Wu Cheng'en's "Journey to the West". "Journey to the West" and "Continuation of Journey to the West."第十八篇　明之神魔小说（下） Chapter 18 The Novel of the Gods and Demons of the Ming Dynasty (Part II)
许仲琳《封神传》。罗懋登《三宝太监西洋记》。董说《西游补》。
Xu Zhonglin's "Biography of the Gods". Luo Maodeng wrote "The Three Treasures Eunuch in the West." Dong said "Journey to the West Supplement".第十九篇　明之人情小说（上） Chapter 19 Ming Dynasty's Human Novel (Part I)
《金瓶梅》。明中叶方士文臣以献方药得幸之影响于小说。《玉娇李》。丁耀亢《续金瓶梅》转入因果谈。《隔帘花影》。
"Golden Bottle Plum". In the middle of the Ming Dynasty, alchemists and civil officials were favored by offering prescription medicines, which influenced the novel. "Jade Jiao Li". Ding Yaokang's "Continuation of the Golden Bottle Plum" turned into a causal story. "Shadows of Flowers Through the Curtain".第二十篇　明之人情小说（下） Chapter 20 Ming Dynasty's Human Novel (Part II)
才子佳人小说者流：《玉娇梨》，荻岸山人《平山冷燕》，名教中人《好逑传》。云封山人《铁花仙史》。
Talented and beautiful novelists include: "Jade Jiao Li", "Pingshan Leng Swallow" by Ogishi Mountain, and "The Biography of Good Luck" by the famous teacher. Yun Feng Shanren's "History of the Iron Flower Immortal".第二十一篇　明之拟宋市人小说及后来选本 Chapter 21 Ming Zhi's Novels and Later Selections of Song Shiren
冯梦龙之《古今小说》。三言：《喻世明言》，《警世通言》，《醒世恒言》。凌濛初《拍案惊奇》二刻。周清原《西湖二集》。东鲁古狂生《醉醒石》。明清之选本：抱瓮老人《今古奇观》，东壁山房主人《今古奇闻》，无名氏《续今古奇观》。
Feng Menglong's "Ancient and Modern Novels". Three words: "Metaphor for the World's Clear Words," "Warning World Common Words," and "Awakening the World's Constant Words." Ling Mengchu's "Surprise Shooting Case" is two quarters. Zhou Qingyuan's "West Lake Two Collections". Donglu Gu mad "Drunken Awakening Stone". Selected books of the Ming and Qing dynasties: "Wonders of Ancient and Modern Times" by the old man of the urn, "Strange Stories of Ancient and Modern Times" by the owner of Dongbi Mountain, and "Continuation of Ancient and Modern Wonders" by Anonymous.第二十二篇　清之拟晋唐小说及其支流 Chapter 22 Qing Zhi Simulates Jin and Tang Novels and Their Tributaries
明初拟唐人传奇文之勃兴及禁断。蒲松龄复拟传奇文记狐鬼：《聊斋志异》。纪昀更追踪晋宋志怪为书：《阅微草堂笔记》五种。王韬志异而鬼事渐少：《遁窟谰言》等。志怪末流又坠入因果谈。
In the early Ming Dynasty, it was proposed to imitate the rise and prohibition of Tang legendary literature. Pu Songling also planned to write a legendary essay about the fox ghost: "Liao Zhai Zhi Yi". Ji Yun also traced the Jin and Song dynasties into a book: "Reading Wei Caotang Notes" five kinds. Wang Tao's ambitions are different and the ghostly affairs are gradually decreasing: "Escape Cave Words" and so on. The last stream of ambition and monster fell into the causal talk again.第二十三篇　清之讽刺小说 Chapter 23 Qingzhi's satirical novel
吴敬梓《儒林外史》。《儒林外史》之妄增本。讽刺书无后劲。
Wu Jingzi, "History of Confucianism." A false exaggeration of the "History of Confucianism". The satire has no stamina.第二十四篇　清之人情小说 Chapter 24 Qing Dynasty's Human Novel
《红楼梦》——原名《石头记》——初本及全本。《红楼梦》本事之异说：明珠家事说，董鄂妃故事说，康熙朝政象说。《红楼梦》作者及续成者之考定：曹霑与高鹗。《红楼梦》续书之多。
"Dream of Red Mansions" - formerly known as "The Stone Record" - the first and full versions. "Dream of Red Mansions" is a different story: Mingzhu's family affairs are said, Dong Efei's story is said, and the Kangxi Dynasty is politically symbolic. The author and continuator of "Dream of Red Mansions" are judged: Cao Zhan and Gao E. "Dream of Red Mansions" has many sequels.第二十五篇　清之以小说见才学者 第二十五篇 清之以小说见才学者
文章经济之作：夏敬渠《野叟曝言》。才藻之作：屠绅《蟫史》，陈球《燕山外史》。博物多识之作：李汝珍《镜花缘》。
Articles and economic works: Xia Jingqu's "Wild Old Man's Exposure". Works by talented writers: Tu Shen's "History of the Silkworm," Chen Qiu's "History of Yanshan." Erudite work: Li Ruzhen's "Mirror Flower Edge".第二十六篇　清之狭邪小说 Chapter 26 The narrow evil novel of the Qing Dynasty
唐以来文人即多记曲中琐事。陈森《品花宝鉴》。魏秀仁《花月痕》。俞达《青楼梦》。《红楼梦》余泽之在狭邪小说及其消亡。韩子云《海上花列传》。
Since the Tang Dynasty, literati have often memorized trivial matters in the song. Chen Sen's "Flower Tasting Treasure Book". Wei Xiuren's "Flower Moon Traces". Yu Da's "Dream of the Brothel". "Dream of Red Mansions" Yu Zezhi in the narrow evil novel and its demise. Han Ziyun's "Biography of Flowers on the Sea".第二十七篇　清之侠义小说及公案 Chapter 27 Qingzhi's chivalrous novels and public cases
文康《儿女英雄传》。石玉昆《三侠五义》及俞樾重编之《七侠五义》。《小五义》，《续小五义》；《正续小五义全传》。《施公案》及《彭公案》。拟作与续作之多。《水浒》精神在民间之消灭。
Wenkang's "Biography of Children's Heroes". Shi Yukun's "Three Heroes and Five Righteousness" and Yu Yue's recompilation of "Seven Heroes and Five Righteousness". "Little Five Meanings", "Continuation of the Little Five Meanings"; "The Complete Biography of the Five Meanings of the Continuation". "Shi Gong's Case" and "Peng Gong's Case." There are too many proposed works and sequels. The spirit of "Water Margin" is eliminated among the people.第二十八篇　清末之谴责小说 Chapter 28 The Novel of Condemnation at the End of the Qing Dynasty
李宝嘉《官场现形记》。吴沃尧《二十年目睹之怪现状》及其他。刘鹗《老残游记》。曾朴《孽海花》。谴责之作堕落为谤书及黑幕小说。
Li Baojia's "Officialdom". Wu Woyao's "Twenty Years of Witnessing the Strange Status Quo" and others. Liu E's "Old Disabled Travels". Zeng Pu's "Evil Sea Flower". The work condemned was degraded into a slanderous book and a shady novel.后记 postscript
返回总目录 Return to the General Directory

题记

题记

题记

Inscription回忆讲小说史时，距今已垂十载，即印此梗概，亦已在七年之前矣。尔后研治之风，颇益盛大，显幽烛隐，时亦有闻。如盐谷节山教授之发见元刊全相平话残本及“三言”，并加考索，在小说史上，实为大事；即中国尝有论者，谓当有以朝代为分之小说史，亦殆非肤泛之论也。此种要略，早成陈言，惟缘别无新书，遂使尚有读者，复将重印，义当更张，而流徙以来，斯业久废，昔之所作，已如云烟，故仅能于第十四十五及二十一篇，稍施改订，余则以别无新意，大率仍为旧文。大器晚成，瓦釜以久，虽延年命，亦悲荒凉，校讫黯然，诚望杰构于来哲也。
回忆讲小说史时，距今已垂十载，即印此梗概，亦已在七年之前矣。 尔后研治之风，颇益盛大，显幽烛隐，时亦有闻。 如盐谷节山教授之发见元刊全相平话残本及“三言”，并加考索，在小说史上，实为大事；即中国尝有论者，谓当有以朝代为分之小说史，亦殆非肤泛之论也。 此种要略，早成陈言，惟缘别无新书，遂使尚有读者，复将重印，义当更张，而流徙以来，斯业久废，昔之所作，已如云烟，故仅能于第十四十五及二十一篇，稍施改订，余则以别无新意，大率仍为旧文。 大器晚成，瓦釜以久，虽延年命，亦悲荒凉，校讫黯然，诚望杰构于来哲也。一九三〇年十一月二十五日之夜，鲁迅记。
一九三〇年十一月二十五日之夜，鲁迅记。

序言

序言

序言

序言中国之小说自来无史；有之，则先见于外国人所作之中国文学史中，而后中国人所作者中亦有之，然其量皆不及全书之什一，故于小说仍不详。
中国之小说自来无史；有之，则先见于外国人所作之中国文学史中，而后中国人所作者中亦有之，然其量皆不及全书之什一，故于小说仍不详。此稿虽专史，亦粗略也。然而有作者，三年前，偶当讲述此史，自虑不善言谈，听者或多不憭，则疏其大要，写印以赋同人；又虑钞者之劳也，乃复缩为文言，省其举例以成要略，至今用之。
此稿虽专史，亦粗略也。 然而有作者，三年前，偶当讲述此史，自虑不善言谈，听者或多不憭，则疏其大要，写印以赋同人；又虑钞者之劳也，乃复缩为文言，省其举例以成要略，至今用之。然而终付排印者，写印已屡，任其事者实早劳矣，惟排字反较省，因以印也。
However, in the end, the typesetting has been copied and printed many times, and the person who does it has actually worked too hard, but typesetting is actually cheaper, so it is printed.自编辑写印以来，四五友人或假以书籍，或助为校勘，雅意勤勤，三年如一，呜呼，于此谢之！
Since I edited and printed, four or five friends have either lent me books or helped me proofread, and I have been working diligently, and I have been the same for three years.一九二三年十月七日夜，鲁迅记于北京。
On the night of October 7, 1923, Lu Xun recorded in Beijing.

第一篇　史家对于小说之著录及论述

第一篇　史家对于小说之著录及论述

第一篇　史家对于小说之著录及论述

The first is the historian's writings and discussions on novels小说之名，昔者见于庄周之云“饰小说以干县令”（《庄子》《外物》），然案其实际，乃谓琐屑之言，非道术所在，与后来所谓小说者固不同。桓谭言“小说家合残丛小语，近取譬喻，以作短书，治身理家，有可观之辞。”（李善注《文选》三十一引《新论》）始若与后之小说近似，然《庄子》云尧问孔子，《淮南子》云共工争帝地维绝，当时亦多以为“短书不可用”，则此小说者，仍谓寓言异记，不本经传，背于儒术者矣。后世众说，弥复纷纭，今不具论，而征之史：缘自来论断艺文，本亦史官之职也。
小说之名，昔者见于庄周之云“饰小说以干县令”（《庄子》《外物》），然案其实际，乃谓琐屑之言，非道术所在，与后来所谓小说者固不同。 桓谭言“小说家合残丛小语，近取譬喻，以作短书，治身理家，有可观之辞。 ”（李善注《文选》三十一引《新论》）始若与后之小说近似，然《庄子》云尧问孔子，《淮南子》云共工争帝地维绝，当时亦多以为“短书不可用”，则此小说者，仍谓寓言异记，不本经传，背于儒术者矣。 后世众说，弥复纷纭，今不具论，而征之史：缘自来论断艺文，本亦史官之职也。秦既燔灭文章以愚黔首，汉兴，则大收篇籍，置写官，成哀二帝，复先后使刘向及其子歆校书秘府，歆乃总群书而奏其《七略》。《七略》今亡，班固作《汉书》，删其要为《艺文志》，其三曰《诸子略》，所录凡十家，而谓“可观者九家”，小说则不与，然尚存于末，得十五家。班固于志自有注，其有某曰云云者，唐颜师古注也。
秦既燔灭文章以愚黔首，汉兴，则大收篇籍，置写官，成哀二帝，复先后使刘向及其子歆校书秘府，歆乃总群书而奏其《七略》。 《七略》今亡，班固作《汉书》，删其要为《艺文志》，其三曰《诸子略》，所录凡十家，而谓“可观者九家”，小说则不与，然尚存于末，得十五家。 班固于志自有注，其有某曰云云者，唐颜师古注也。《伊尹说》二十七篇。（其语浅薄，似依托也。）
《伊尹说》二十七篇。 （其语浅薄，似依托也。 ）《鬻子说》十九篇。（后世所加。）
《鬻子说》十九篇。 （后世所加。 ）《周考》七十六篇。（考周事也。）
《周考》七十六篇。 （考周事也。 ）《青史子》五十七篇。（古史官记事也。）
《青史子》五十七篇。 （古史官记事也。 ）《师旷》六篇。（见《春秋》，其言浅薄本与此同，似因托之。）
《师旷》六篇。 （见《春秋》，其言浅薄本与此同，似因托之。 ）《务成子》十一篇。（称尧问，非古语。）
《务成子》十一篇。 （称尧问，非古语。 ）《宋子》十八篇。（孙卿道：“宋子，其言黄老意。”）
《宋子》十八篇。 （孙卿道：“宋子，其言黄老意。 ”）《天乙》三篇。（天乙谓汤，其言者殷时，皆依托也。）
《天乙》三篇。 （天乙谓汤，其言者殷时，皆依托也。 ）《黄帝说》四十篇。（迂诞依托。）
《黄帝说》四十篇。 （迂诞依托。 ）《封禅方说》十八篇。（武帝时。）
《封禅方说》十八篇。 （武帝时。 ）《待诏臣饶心术》二十五篇。（武帝时。师古曰，刘向《别录》云：“饶，齐人也，不知其姓，武帝时待诏，作书，名曰《心术》。”）
《待诏臣饶心术》二十五篇。 （武帝时。 师古曰，刘向《别录》云：“饶，齐人也，不知其姓，武帝时待诏，作书，名曰《心术》。 ”）《待诏臣安成未央术》一篇。（应劭曰，道家也，好养生事，为未央之术。）
《待诏臣安成未央术》一篇。 （应劭曰，道家也，好养生事，为未央之术。 ）《臣寿周纪》七篇。（项国圉人，宣帝时。）
《臣寿周纪》七篇。 （项国圉人，宣帝时。 ）《虞初周说》九百四十三篇。（河南人，武帝时以方士侍郎，号黄车使者。应劭曰：其说以《周书》为本。师古曰，《史记》云：“虞初，洛阳人。”即张衡《西京赋》“小说九百，本自虞初”者也。）
《虞初周说》九百四十三篇。 （河南人，武帝时以方士侍郎，号黄车使者。 应劭曰：其说以《周书》为本。 师古曰，《史记》云：“虞初，洛阳人。 ”即张衡《西京赋》“小说九百，本自虞初”者也。 ）《百家》百三十九卷。
《百家》百三十九卷。右小说十五家，千三百八十篇。
右小说十五家，千三百八十篇。小说家者流，盖出于稗官，街谈巷语，道听途说者之所造也。孔子曰，“虽小道，必有可观者焉，致远恐泥。”是以君子弗为也，然亦弗灭也，闾里小知者之所及，亦使缀而不忘，如或一言可采，此亦刍荛狂夫之议也。
小说家者流，盖出于稗官，街谈巷语，道听途说者之所造也。 孔子曰，“虽小道，必有可观者焉，致远恐泥。 ”是以君子弗为也，然亦弗灭也，闾里小知者之所及，亦使缀而不忘，如或一言可采，此亦刍荛狂夫之议也。右所录十五家，梁时已仅存《青史子》一卷，至隋亦佚；惟据班固注，则诸书大抵或托古人，或记古事，托人者似子而浅薄，记事者近史而悠缪者也。
右所录十五家，梁时已仅存《青史子》一卷，至隋亦佚；惟据班固注，则诸书大抵或托古人，或记古事，托人者似子而浅薄，记事者近史而悠缪者也。唐贞观中，长孙无忌等修《隋书》，《经籍志》撰自魏徵，祖述晋荀勖《中经簿》而稍改变，为经史子集四部，小说故隶于子。其所著录，《燕丹子》而外无晋以前书，别益以记谈笑应对，叙艺术器物游乐者，而所论列则仍袭《汉书》《艺文志》（后略称《汉志》）：
唐贞观中，长孙无忌等修《隋书》，《经籍志》撰自魏徵，祖述晋荀勖《中经簿》而稍改变，为经史子集四部，小说故隶于子。 其所著录，《燕丹子》而外无晋以前书，别益以记谈笑应对，叙艺术器物游乐者，而所论列则仍袭《汉书》《艺文志》（后略称《汉志》）：小说者，街谈巷语之说也，《传》载舆人之颂，《诗》美询于刍荛，古者圣人在上，史为书，瞽为诗，工诵箴谏，大夫规诲，士传言而庶人谤；孟春，徇木铎以求歌谣，巡省，观人诗以知风俗，过则正之，失则改之，道听途说，靡不毕纪，周官诵训掌道方志以诏观事，道方慝以诏避忌，而职方氏掌道四方之政事与其上下之志，诵四方之传道而观其衣物是也。孔子曰，“虽小道，必有可观者焉，致远恐泥。”
小说者，街谈巷语之说也，《传》载舆人之颂，《诗》美询于刍荛，古者圣人在上，史为书，瞽为诗，工诵箴谏，大夫规诲，士传言而庶人谤；孟春，徇木铎以求歌谣，巡省，观人诗以知风俗，过则正之，失则改之，道听途说，靡不毕纪，周官诵训掌道方志以诏观事，道方慝以诏避忌，而职方氏掌道四方之政事与其上下之志，诵四方之传道而观其衣物是也。 孔子曰，“虽小道，必有可观者焉，致远恐泥。 ”石晋时，刘昫等因韦述旧史作《唐书》《经籍志》（后略称《唐志》）则以毋煚等所修之《古今书录》为本，而意主简略，删其小序发明，史官之论述由是不可见。所录小说，与《隋书》《经籍志》（后略称《隋志》）亦无甚异，惟删其亡书，而增张华《博物志》十卷，此在《隋志》，本属杂家，至是乃入小说。
石晋时，刘昫等因韦述旧史作《唐书》《经籍志》（后略称《唐志》）则以毋煚等所修之《古今书录》为本，而意主简略，删其小序发明，史官之论述由是不可见。 所录小说，与《隋书》《经籍志》（后略称《隋志》）亦无甚异，惟删其亡书，而增张华《博物志》十卷，此在《隋志》，本属杂家，至是乃入小说。宋皇祐中，曾公亮等被命删定旧史，撰志者欧阳修，其《艺文志》（后略称《新唐志》）小说类中，则大增晋至隋时著作，自张华《列异传》戴祚《甄异传》至吴筠《续齐谐记》等志神怪者十五家一百十五卷，王延秀《感应传》至侯君素《旌异记》等明因果者九家七十卷，诸书前志本有，皆在史部杂传类，与耆旧高隐孝子良吏列女等传同列，至是始退为小说，而史部遂无鬼神传；又增益唐人著作，如李恕《诫子拾遗》等之垂教诫，刘孝孙《事始》等之数典故，李涪《刊误》等之纠讹谬，陆羽《茶经》等之叙服用，并入此类，例乃愈棼，元修《宋史》，亦无变革，仅增芜杂而已。
宋皇祐中，曾公亮等被命删定旧史，撰志者欧阳修，其《艺文志》（后略称《新唐志》）小说类中，则大增晋至隋时著作，自张华《列异传》戴祚《甄异传》至吴筠《续齐谐记》等志神怪者十五家一百十五卷，王延秀《感应传》至侯君素《旌异记》等明因果者九家七十卷，诸书前志本有，皆在史部杂传类，与耆旧高隐孝子良吏列女等传同列，至是始退为小说，而史部遂无鬼神传；又增益唐人著作，如李恕《诫子拾遗》等之垂教诫，刘孝孙《事始》等之数典故，李涪《刊误》等之纠讹谬，陆羽《茶经》等之叙服用，并入此类，例乃愈棼，元修《宋史》，亦无变革，仅增芜杂而已。明胡应麟（《少室山房笔丛》二十八）以小说繁夥，派别滋多，于是综核大凡，分为六类：
Ming Hu Yinglin ("Shaoshi Mountain House Pen Cluster" 28) is a novel with a large number of factions, so it is divided into six categories:一曰志怪：《搜神》，《述异》，《宣室》，《酉阳》之类是也；
The first is Zhi Gui: "Search for God", "Shu Yi", "Xuan Shi", "Youyang" and so on;一曰传奇：《飞燕》，《太真》，《崔莺》，《霍玉》之类是也；
一曰传奇：《飞燕》，《太真》，《崔莺》，《霍玉》之类是也；一曰杂录：《世说》，《语林》，《琐言》，《因话》之类是也；
一曰杂录：《世说》，《语林》，《琐言》，《因话》之类是也；一曰丛谈：《容斋》，《梦溪》，《东谷》，《道山》之类是也；
一曰丛谈：《容斋》，《梦溪》，《东谷》，《道山》之类是也；一曰辩订：《鼠璞》，《鸡肋》，《资暇》，《辩疑》之类是也；
一曰辩订：《鼠璞》，《鸡肋》，《资暇》，《辩疑》之类是也；一曰箴规：《家训》，《世范》，《劝善》，《省心》之类是也。
一曰箴规：《家训》，《世范》，《劝善》，《省心》之类是也。清乾隆中，敕撰《四库全书总目提要》，以纪昀总其事，于小说别为三派，而所论列则袭旧志。
In the Qianlong period of the Qing Dynasty, the edict was written to write the "Summary of the General Catalogue of the Four Libraries", to summarize the affairs, and the novels were divided into three schools, and the discussions were based on the old records.……迹其流别，凡有三派：其一叙述杂事，其一记录异闻，其一缀缉琐语也。唐宋而后，作者弥繁，中间诬谩失真，妖妄荧听者，固为不少，然寓劝戒，广见闻，资考证者，亦错出其中。班固称“小说家流盖出于稗官”，如淳注谓“王者欲知闾巷风俗，故立稗官，使称说之”。然则博采旁搜，是亦古制，固不必以冗杂废矣。今甄录其近雅驯者，以广见闻，惟猥鄙荒诞，徒乱耳目者，则黜不载焉。
…… 迹其流别，凡有三派：其一叙述杂事，其一记录异闻，其一缀缉琐语也。 唐宋而后，作者弥繁，中间诬谩失真，妖妄荧听者，固为不少，然寓劝戒，广见闻，资考证者，亦错出其中。 班固称“小说家流盖出于稗官”，如淳注谓“王者欲知闾巷风俗，故立稗官，使称说之”。 然则博采旁搜，是亦古制，固不必以冗杂废矣。 今甄录其近雅驯者，以广见闻，惟猥鄙荒诞，徒乱耳目者，则黜不载焉。《西京杂记》六卷。《世说新语》三卷。……
《西京杂记》六卷。 《世说新语》三卷。 ……
右小说家类杂事之属……
右小说家类杂事之属……
《山海经》十八卷。《穆天子传》六卷。《神异经》一卷。……
《山海经》十八卷。 《穆天子传》六卷。 《神异经》一卷。 ……《搜神记》二十卷。……《续齐谐记》一卷。……
《搜神记》二十卷。 ……《续齐谐记》一卷。 ……
右小说家类异闻之属……
右小说家类异闻之属……
《博物志》十卷。《述异记》二卷。《酉阳杂俎》二十卷，《续集》十卷。……
《博物志》十卷。 《述异记》二卷。 《酉阳杂俎》二十卷，《续集》十卷。 ……
右小说家类琐语之属……
右小说家类琐语之属……
右三派者，校以胡应麟之所分，实止两类，前一即杂录，后二即志怪，第析叙事有条贯者为异闻，钞录细碎者为琐语而已。传奇不著录；丛谈辩订箴规三类则多改隶于杂家，小说范围，至是乃稍整洁矣。然《山海经》《穆天子传》又自是始退为小说，案语云，“《穆天子传》旧皆入起居注类，……实则恍忽无征，又非《逸周书》之比，……以为信史而录之，则史体杂，史例破矣。今退置于小说家，义求其当，无庸以变古为嫌也。”于是小说之志怪类中又杂入本非依托之史，而史部遂不容多含传说之书。
右三派者，校以胡应麟之所分，实止两类，前一即杂录，后二即志怪，第析叙事有条贯者为异闻，钞录细碎者为琐语而已。 传奇不著录；丛谈辩订箴规三类则多改隶于杂家，小说范围，至是乃稍整洁矣。 然《山海经》《穆天子传》又自是始退为小说，案语云，“《穆天子传》旧皆入起居注类，…… 实则恍忽无征，又非《逸周书》之比，…… 以为信史而录之，则史体杂，史例破矣。 今退置于小说家，义求其当，无庸以变古为嫌也。 ”于是小说之志怪类中又杂入本非依托之史，而史部遂不容多含传说之书。至于宋之平话，元明之演义，自来盛行民间，其书故当甚夥，而史志皆不录。惟明王圻作《续文献通考》，高儒作《百川书志》，皆收《三国志演义》及《水浒传》，清初钱曾作《也是园书目》，亦有通俗小说《三国志》等三种，宋人词话《灯花婆婆》等十六种。然《三国》《水浒》，嘉靖中有都察院刻本，世人视若官书，故得见收，后之书目，寻即不载，钱曾则专事收藏，偏重版本，缘为旧刊，始以入录，非于艺文有真知，遂离叛于曩例也。史家成见，自汉迄今盖略同：目录亦史之支流，固难有超其分际者矣。
As for the plain stories of the Song Dynasty and the romances of the Yuan and Ming dynasties, they have always been popular among the people, and there should be many books on them, but they are not recorded in historical records. Only Ming Wang Qi wrote "Continuation of the Literature General Examination", Gao Ru wrote "Baichuan Shuzhi", all of which included "Romance of the Three Kingdoms" and "Water Margin", Qian Zeng in the early Qing Dynasty wrote "Yiyuan Bibliography", and there were also three popular novels such as "Romance of the Three Kingdoms", and sixteen kinds such as the Song Dynasty's words "Lantern Flower Mother-in-law". However, in the "Three Kingdoms" and "Water Margin", there was an engraved version of the Censorate in the Jiajing period, which was regarded by the world as an official book, so it was collected. The later bibliography was soon not recorded, and Qian Zeng specialized in collecting, focusing on editions, because it was an old publication, and it was only included in the records. Historians' prejudices are generally the same from the Han Dynasty to the present: catalogues are also tributaries of history, and it is difficult to transcend their boundaries.

第二篇　神话与传说

第二篇　神话与传说

第二篇　神话与传说

Chapter 2 Myths and Legends志怪之作，庄子谓有齐谐，列子则称夷坚，然皆寓言，不足征信。《汉志》乃云出于稗官，然稗官者，职惟采集而非创作，“街谈巷语”自生于民间，固非一谁某之所独造也，探其本根，则亦犹他民族然，在于神话与传说。
志怪之作，庄子谓有齐谐，列子则称夷坚，然皆寓言，不足征信。 《汉志》乃云出于稗官，然稗官者，职惟采集而非创作，“街谈巷语”自生于民间，固非一谁某之所独造也，探其本根，则亦犹他民族然，在于神话与传说。昔者初民，见天地万物，变异不常，其诸现象，又出于人力所能以上，则自造众说以解释之：凡所解释，今谓之神话。神话大抵以一“神格”为中枢，又推演为叙说，而于所叙说之神，之事，又从而信仰敬畏之，于是歌颂其威灵，致美于坛庙，久而愈进，文物遂繁。故神话不特为宗教之萌芽，美术所由起，且实为文章之渊源。惟神话虽生文章，而诗人则为神话之仇敌，盖当歌颂记叙之际，每不免有所粉饰，失其本来，是以神话虽托诗歌以光大，以存留，然亦因之而改易，而销歇也。如天地开辟之说，在中国所留遗者，已设想较高，而初民之本色不可见，即其例矣。
昔者初民，见天地万物，变异不常，其诸现象，又出于人力所能以上，则自造众说以解释之：凡所解释，今谓之神话。 神话大抵以一“神格”为中枢，又推演为叙说，而于所叙说之神，之事，又从而信仰敬畏之，于是歌颂其威灵，致美于坛庙，久而愈进，文物遂繁。 故神话不特为宗教之萌芽，美术所由起，且实为文章之渊源。 惟神话虽生文章，而诗人则为神话之仇敌，盖当歌颂记叙之际，每不免有所粉饰，失其本来，是以神话虽托诗歌以光大，以存留，然亦因之而改易，而销歇也。 如天地开辟之说，在中国所留遗者，已设想较高，而初民之本色不可见，即其例矣。天地混沌如鸡子，盘古生其中，一万八千岁。天地开辟，阳清为天，阴浊为地，盘古在其中，一日九变，神于天，圣于地。天日高一丈，地日厚一丈，盘古日长一丈，如此万八千岁，天数极高，地数极深，盘古极长。后乃有三皇。（《艺文类聚》一引徐整《三五历记》）
The world is as chaotic as an egg, and Pangu was born in it for 18,000 years. Heaven and earth are opened, the yang is clear as the sky, and the yin and turbid are the earth. Pangu is in it, changing nine times in a day, divine in heaven and holy in the earth. The sky and sun are ten feet high, the earth is one zhang thick, and the Pangu days are ten feet long, so for eighteen thousand years, the number of days is extremely high, the earth is extremely deep, and the Pangu is extremely long. Later, there were three emperors. ("Art and Literature Cluster" quotes Xu Zheng's "Three Five Calendars")天地，亦物也。物有不足，故昔者女娲氏练五色石以补其阙，断鳌之足以立四极。其后共工氏与颛顼争为帝，怒而触不周之山，折天柱，绝地维，故天倾西北，日月星辰就焉，地不满东南，故百川水潦归焉。（《列子》《汤问》）
天地，亦物也。 物有不足，故昔者女娲氏练五色石以补其阙，断鳌之足以立四极。 其后共工氏与颛顼争为帝，怒而触不周之山，折天柱，绝地维，故天倾西北，日月星辰就焉，地不满东南，故百川水潦归焉。 （《列子》《汤问》）迨神话演进，则为中枢者渐近于人性，凡所叙述，今谓之传说。传说之所道，或为神性之人，或为古英雄，其奇才异能神勇为凡人所不及，而由于天授，或有天相者，简狄吞燕卵而生商，刘媪得交龙而孕季，皆其例也。此外尚甚众。
迨神话演进，则为中枢者渐近于人性，凡所叙述，今谓之传说。 传说之所道，或为神性之人，或为古英雄，其奇才异能神勇为凡人所不及，而由于天授，或有天相者，简狄吞燕卵而生商，刘媪得交龙而孕季，皆其例也。 此外尚甚众。尧之时，十日并出，焦禾稼，杀草木，而民无所食。猰凿齿九婴大风封豨脩蛇，皆为民害。尧乃使羿……上射十日而下杀猰。……万民皆喜，置尧以为天子。（《淮南子》《本经训》）
尧之时，十日并出，焦禾稼，杀草木，而民无所食。 猰凿齿九婴大风封豨脩蛇，皆为民害。 尧乃使羿…… 上射十日而下杀猰。 …… 万民皆喜，置尧以为天子。 （《淮南子》《本经训》）羿请不死之药于西王母，姮娥窃以奔月。（《淮南子》《览冥训》。高诱注曰，姮娥羿妻。羿请不死之药于西王母，未及服之。姮娥盗食之，得仙，奔入月中为月精。）
羿请不死之药于西王母，姮娥窃以奔月。 （《淮南子》《览冥训》。 高诱注曰，姮娥羿妻。 羿请不死之药于西王母，未及服之。 姮娥盗食之，得仙，奔入月中为月精。 ）昔尧殛鲧于羽山，其神化为黄熊以入于羽渊。（《春秋》《左氏传》）
昔尧殛鲧于羽山，其神化为黄熊以入于羽渊。 （《春秋》《左氏传》）瞽瞍使舜上涂廪，从下纵火焚廪，舜乃以两笠自扞而下，去，得不死。瞽瞍又使舜穿井，舜穿井为匿空，旁出。（《史记》《舜本纪》）
瞽瞍使舜上涂廪，从下纵火焚廪，舜乃以两笠自扞而下，去，得不死。 瞽瞍又使舜穿井，舜穿井为匿空，旁出。 （《史记》《舜本纪》）中国之神话与传说，今尚无集录为专书者，仅散见于古籍，而《山海经》中特多。《山海经》今所传本十八卷，记海内外山川神祇异物及祭祀所宜，以为禹益作者固非，而谓因《楚辞》而造者亦未是；所载祠神之物多用糈（精米），与巫术合，盖古之巫书也，然秦汉人亦有增益。其最为世间所知，常引为故实者，有昆仑山与西王母。
中国之神话与传说，今尚无集录为专书者，仅散见于古籍，而《山海经》中特多。 《山海经》今所传本十八卷，记海内外山川神祇异物及祭祀所宜，以为禹益作者固非，而谓因《楚辞》而造者亦未是；所载祠神之物多用糈（精米），与巫术合，盖古之巫书也，然秦汉人亦有增益。 其最为世间所知，常引为故实者，有昆仑山与西王母。昆仑之丘，是实惟帝之下都，神陆吾司之，其神状虎身而九尾，人面而虎爪。是神也，司天之九部及帝之囿时。（《西山经》）
昆仑之丘，是实惟帝之下都，神陆吾司之，其神状虎身而九尾，人面而虎爪。 是神也，司天之九部及帝之囿时。 （《西山经》）玉山，是西王母所居也。西王母其状如人，豹尾虎齿而善啸，蓬发戴胜，是司天之厉及五残。（同上）
玉山，是西王母所居也。 西王母其状如人，豹尾虎齿而善啸，蓬发戴胜，是司天之厉及五残。 （同上）昆仑之墟方八百里，高万仞；上有木禾，长五寻，大五围；面有九井，以玉为槛；面有九门，门有开明兽守之。百神之所在。在八隅之岩，赤水之际，非仁羿莫能上。（《海内西经》）
昆仑之墟方八百里，高万仞；上有木禾，长五寻，大五围；面有九井，以玉为槛；面有九门，门有开明兽守之。 百神之所在。 在八隅之岩，赤水之际，非仁羿莫能上。 （《海内西经》）西王母梯几而戴胜杖（案此字当衍），其南有三青鸟，为西王母取食，在昆仑墟北。（《海内北经》）
西王母梯几而戴胜杖（案此字当衍），其南有三青鸟，为西王母取食，在昆仑墟北。 （《海内北经》）大荒之中有山，名曰丰沮玉门，日月所入。有灵山，巫咸巫即巫朌巫彭巫姑巫真巫礼巫抵巫谢巫罗十巫从此升降，百药爰在。（《大荒西经》）
大荒之中有山，名曰丰沮玉门，日月所入。 有灵山，巫咸巫即巫朌巫彭巫姑巫真巫礼巫抵巫谢巫罗十巫从此升降，百药爰在。 （《大荒西经》）西海之南，流沙之滨，赤水之后，黑水之前，有大山，名曰昆仑之丘。有神人面虎身有尾皆白处之。其下有弱水之渊环之。其外有炎火之山，投物辄然。有人戴胜，虎齿豹尾，穴处，名曰西王母。此山万物尽有。（同上）
西海之南，流沙之滨，赤水之后，黑水之前，有大山，名曰昆仑之丘。 有神人面虎身有尾皆白处之。 其下有弱水之渊环之。 其外有炎火之山，投物辄然。 有人戴胜，虎齿豹尾，穴处，名曰西王母。 此山万物尽有。 （同上）晋咸宁五年，汲县民不準盗发魏襄王冢，得竹书《穆天子传》五篇，又杂书十九篇。《穆天子传》今存，凡六卷；前五卷记周穆王驾八骏西征之事，后一卷记盛姬卒于途次以至反葬，盖即杂书之一篇。《传》亦言见西王母，而不叙诸异相，其状已颇近于人王。
晋咸宁五年，汲县民不準盗发魏襄王冢，得竹书《穆天子传》五篇，又杂书十九篇。 《穆天子传》今存，凡六卷；前五卷记周穆王驾八骏西征之事，后一卷记盛姬卒于途次以至反葬，盖即杂书之一篇。 《传》亦言见西王母，而不叙诸异相，其状已颇近于人王。吉日甲子，天子宾于西王母，乃执白圭玄璧以见西王母。好献锦组百纯，□组三百纯，西王母再拜受之。□乙丑。天子觞西王母于瑶池之上。西王母为天子谣，曰，“白云在天，山自出，道里悠远，山川间之，将子无死，尚能复来。”天子答之曰，“予归东土，和治诸夏，万民平均，吾愿见汝，比及三年，将复而野。”天子遂驱升于弇山，乃纪丌迹于弇山之石，而树之槐，眉曰西王母之山。（卷三）
吉日甲子，天子宾于西王母，乃执白圭玄璧以见西王母。 好献锦组百纯，□组三百纯，西王母再拜受之。 □乙丑。 天子觞西王母于瑶池之上。 西王母为天子谣，曰，“白云在天，山自出，道里悠远，山川间之，将子无死，尚能复来。 ”天子答之曰，“予归东土，和治诸夏，万民平均，吾愿见汝，比及三年，将复而野。 ”天子遂驱升于弇山，乃纪丌迹于弇山之石，而树之槐，眉曰西王母之山。 （卷三）有虎在乎葭中。天子将至。七萃之士高奔戎请生捕虎，必全之，乃生捕虎而献之。天子命之为柙而畜之东虞，是为虎牢。天子赐奔戎畋马十驷，归之太牢，奔戎再拜首。（卷五）
有虎在乎葭中。 天子将至。 七萃之士高奔戎请生捕虎，必全之，乃生捕虎而献之。 天子命之为柙而畜之东虞，是为虎牢。 天子赐奔戎畋马十驷，归之太牢，奔戎再拜首。 （卷五）汉应劭说，《周书》为虞初小说所本，而今本《逸周书》中惟《克殷》《世俘》《王会》《太子晋》四篇，记述颇多夸饰，类于传说，余文不然。至汲冢所出周时竹书中，本有《琐语》十一篇，为诸国卜梦妖怪相书，今佚，《太平御览》间引其文；又汲县有晋立《吕望表》，亦引《周志》，皆记梦验，甚似小说，或虞初所本者为此等，然别无显证，亦难以定之。
汉应劭说，《周书》为虞初小说所本，而今本《逸周书》中惟《克殷》《世俘》《王会》《太子晋》四篇，记述颇多夸饰，类于传说，余文不然。 至汲冢所出周时竹书中，本有《琐语》十一篇，为诸国卜梦妖怪相书，今佚，《太平御览》间引其文；又汲县有晋立《吕望表》，亦引《周志》，皆记梦验，甚似小说，或虞初所本者为此等，然别无显证，亦难以定之。齐景公伐宋，至曲陵，梦见有短丈夫宾于前。晏子曰，“君所梦何如哉？”公曰，“其宾者甚短，大上小下，其言甚怒，好俯。”晏子曰，“如是，则伊尹也。伊尹甚大而短，大上小下，赤色而髯，其言好俯而下声。”公曰，“是矣。”晏子曰，“是怒君师，不如违之。”遂不果伐宋。（《太平御览》三百七十八）
齐景公伐宋，至曲陵，梦见有短丈夫宾于前。 晏子曰，“君所梦何如哉？”公曰，“其宾者甚短，大上小下，其言甚怒，好俯。 ”晏子曰，“如是，则伊尹也。 伊尹甚大而短，大上小下，赤色而髯，其言好俯而下声。 ”公曰，“是矣。 ”晏子曰，“是怒君师，不如违之。 ”遂不果伐宋。 （《太平御览》三百七十八）文王梦天帝服玄以立于令狐之津。帝曰，“昌，赐汝望。”文王再拜稽首，太公于后亦再拜稽首。文王梦之之夜，太公梦之亦然。其后文王见太公而之曰，“而名为望乎？”答曰，“唯，为望。”文王曰，“吾如有所见于汝。”太公言其年月与其日，且尽道其言，“臣以此得见也。”文王曰，“有之，有之。”遂与之归，以为卿士。（晋立《太公吕望表》石刻，以东魏立《吕望表》补阙字。）
文王梦天帝服玄以立于令狐之津。 帝曰，“昌，赐汝望。 ”文王再拜稽首，太公于后亦再拜稽首。 文王梦之之夜，太公梦之亦然。 其后文王见太公而之曰，“而名为望乎？”答曰，“唯，为望。 ”文王曰，“吾如有所见于汝。 ”太公言其年月与其日，且尽道其言，“臣以此得见也。 ”文王曰，“有之，有之。 ”遂与之归，以为卿士。 （晋立《太公吕望表》石刻，以东魏立《吕望表》补阙字。 ）他如汉前之《燕丹子》，汉杨雄之《蜀王本纪》，赵晔之《吴越春秋》，袁康，吴平之《越绝书》等，虽本史实，并含异闻。若求之诗歌，则屈原所赋，尤在《天问》中，多见神话与传说，如“夜光何德，死则又育？厥利惟何，而顾菟在腹？”“鲧何所营？禹何所成？康回凭怒，地何故以东南倾？”“昆仑县圃，其凥安在？增城九重，其高几里？”“鲮鱼何所？鬿堆焉处？羿焉日？乌焉解羽？”是也。王逸曰，“屈原放逐，彷徨山泽，见楚有先王之庙及公卿祠堂，图画天地山川神灵琦玮谲佹及古贤圣怪物行事，……因书其壁，何而问之。”（本书注）是知此种故事，当时不特流传人口，且用为庙堂文饰矣。其流风至汉不绝，今在墟墓间犹见有石刻神祇怪物圣哲士女之图。晋既得汲冢书，郭璞为《穆天子传》作注，又注《山海经》，作图赞，其后江灌亦有图赞，盖神异之说，晋以后尚为人士所深爱。然自古以来，终不闻有荟萃融铸为巨制，如希腊史诗者，第用为诗文藻饰，而于小说中常见其迹象而已。
他如汉前之《燕丹子》，汉杨雄之《蜀王本纪》，赵晔之《吴越春秋》，袁康，吴平之《越绝书》等，虽本史实，并含异闻。 若求之诗歌，则屈原所赋，尤在《天问》中，多见神话与传说，如“夜光何德，死则又育？厥利惟何，而顾菟在腹？”“鲧何所营？禹何所成？康回凭怒，地何故以东南倾？”“昆仑县圃，其凥安在？增城九重，其高几里？”“鲮鱼何所？鬿堆焉处？羿焉日？乌焉解羽？”是也。 王逸曰，“屈原放逐，彷徨山泽，见楚有先王之庙及公卿祠堂，图画天地山川神灵琦玮谲佹及古贤圣怪物行事，…… 因书其壁，何而问之。 ”（本书注）是知此种故事，当时不特流传人口，且用为庙堂文饰矣。 其流风至汉不绝，今在墟墓间犹见有石刻神祇怪物圣哲士女之图。 晋既得汲冢书，郭璞为《穆天子传》作注，又注《山海经》，作图赞，其后江灌亦有图赞，盖神异之说，晋以后尚为人士所深爱。 然自古以来，终不闻有荟萃融铸为巨制，如希腊史诗者，第用为诗文藻饰，而于小说中常见其迹象而已。中国神话之所以仅存零星者，说者谓有二故：一者华土之民，先居黄河流域，颇乏天惠，其生也勤，故重实际而黜玄想，不更能集古传以成大文。二者孔子出，以修身齐家治国平天下等实用为教，不欲言鬼神，太古荒唐之说，俱为儒者所不道，故其后不特无所光大，而又有散亡。
中国神话之所以仅存零星者，说者谓有二故：一者华土之民，先居黄河流域，颇乏天惠，其生也勤，故重实际而黜玄想，不更能集古传以成大文。 二者孔子出，以修身齐家治国平天下等实用为教，不欲言鬼神，太古荒唐之说，俱为儒者所不道，故其后不特无所光大，而又有散亡。然详案之，其故殆尤在神鬼之不别。天神地祇人鬼，古者虽若有辨，而人鬼亦得为神祇。人神淆杂，则原始信仰无由蜕尽；原始信仰存则类于传说之言日出而不已，而旧有者于是僵死，新出者亦更无光焰也。如下例，前二为随时可生新神，后三为旧神有转换而无演进。
然详案之，其故殆尤在神鬼之不别。 天神地祇人鬼，古者虽若有辨，而人鬼亦得为神祇。 人神淆杂，则原始信仰无由蜕尽；原始信仰存则类于传说之言日出而不已，而旧有者于是僵死，新出者亦更无光焰也。 如下例，前二为随时可生新神，后三为旧神有转换而无演进。蒋子文，广陵人也，嗜酒好色，佻挞无度；常自谓骨青，死当为神。汉末为秣陵尉，逐贼至锺山下，贼击伤额，因解绶缚之，有顷遂死。及吴先主之初，其故吏见文于道，……谓曰，“我当为此土地神，以福尔下民，尔可宣告百姓，为我立庙，不尔，将有大咎。”是岁夏大疫，百姓辄相恐动，颇有窃祠之者矣。（《太平广记》二九三引《搜神记》）
蒋子文，广陵人也，嗜酒好色，佻挞无度；常自谓骨青，死当为神。 汉末为秣陵尉，逐贼至锺山下，贼击伤额，因解绶缚之，有顷遂死。 及吴先主之初，其故吏见文于道，…… 谓曰，“我当为此土地神，以福尔下民，尔可宣告百姓，为我立庙，不尔，将有大咎。 ”是岁夏大疫，百姓辄相恐动，颇有窃祠之者矣。 （《太平广记》二九三引《搜神记》）世有紫姑神，古来相传云是人家妾，为大妇所嫉，每以秽事相次役，正月十五日感激而死。故世人以其日作其形，夜于厕间或猪栏边迎之。……投者觉重（案投当作捉，持也），便是神来，奠设酒果，亦觉貌辉辉有色，即跳躞不住；能占众事，卜未来蚕桑，又善射钩；好则大儛，恶便仰眠。（《异苑》五）
世有紫姑神，古来相传云是人家妾，为大妇所嫉，每以秽事相次役，正月十五日感激而死。 故世人以其日作其形，夜于厕间或猪栏边迎之。 …… 投者觉重（案投当作捉，持也），便是神来，奠设酒果，亦觉貌辉辉有色，即跳躞不住；能占众事，卜未来蚕桑，又善射钩；好则大儛，恶便仰眠。 （《异苑》五）沧海之中，有度朔之山，上有大桃木，……其枝间东北曰鬼门，万鬼所出入也。上有二神人，一曰神荼，一曰郁垒，主阅领万鬼，害恶之鬼，执以苇索而以食虎。于是黄帝乃作礼，以时驱之，立大桃人，门户画神荼郁垒与虎，悬苇索，以御凶魅。（《论衡》二十二引《山海经》，案今本中无之。）
沧海之中，有度朔之山，上有大桃木，…… 其枝间东北曰鬼门，万鬼所出入也。 上有二神人，一曰神荼，一曰郁垒，主阅领万鬼，害恶之鬼，执以苇索而以食虎。 于是黄帝乃作礼，以时驱之，立大桃人，门户画神荼郁垒与虎，悬苇索，以御凶魅。 （《论衡》二十二引《山海经》，案今本中无之。 ）东南有桃都山，……下有二神，左名隆，右名，并执苇索，伺不祥之鬼，得而煞之。今人正朝作两桃人立门旁，……盖遗象也。（《太平御览》二九及九一八引《玄中记》以《玉烛宝典》注补）
东南有桃都山，…… 下有二神，左名隆，右名，并执苇索，伺不祥之鬼，得而煞之。 今人正朝作两桃人立门旁，…… 盖遗象也。 （《太平御览》二九及九一八引《玄中记》以《玉烛宝典》注补）门神，乃是唐朝秦叔保胡敬德二将军也。按传，唐太宗不豫，寝门外抛砖弄瓦，鬼魅呼号。……太宗惧之，以告群臣。秦叔保出班奏曰，“臣平生杀人如剖瓜，积尸如聚蚁，何惧魍魉乎？愿同胡敬德戎装立门外以伺。”太宗可其奏，夜果无警，太宗嘉之，命画工图二人之形像，……悬于宫掖之左右门，邪祟以息。后世沿袭，遂永为门神。（《三教搜神大全》七）
门神，乃是唐朝秦叔保胡敬德二将军也。 按传，唐太宗不豫，寝门外抛砖弄瓦，鬼魅呼号。 …… 太宗惧之，以告群臣。 秦叔保出班奏曰，“臣平生杀人如剖瓜，积尸如聚蚁，何惧魍魉乎？愿同胡敬德戎装立门外以伺。 ”太宗可其奏，夜果无警，太宗嘉之，命画工图二人之形像，…… 悬于宫掖之左右门，邪祟以息。 后世沿袭，遂永为门神。 （《三教搜神大全》七）

第三篇　《汉书》《艺文志》所载小说

第三篇　《汉书》《艺文志》所载小说

第三篇　《汉书》《艺文志》所载小说

The third novel contained in the Book of Han and the Records of Art and Literature《汉志》之叙小说家，以为“出于稗官”，如淳曰，“细米为稗。街谈巷说，甚细碎之言也。王者欲知里巷风俗，故立稗官，使称说之。”（本注）其所录小说，今皆不存，故莫得而深考，然审察名目，乃殊不似有采自民间，如《诗》之《国风》者。其中依托古人者七，曰：《伊尹说》，《鬻子说》，《师旷》，《务成子》，《宋子》，《天乙》，《黄帝》。记古事者二，曰：《周考》，《青史子》，皆不言何时作。明著汉代者四家，曰：《封禅方说》，《待诏臣饶心术》，《臣寿周纪》，《虞初周说》。《待诏臣安成未央术》与《百家》，虽亦不云何时作，而依其次第，自亦汉人。
《汉志》之叙小说家，以为“出于稗官”，如淳曰，“细米为稗。 街谈巷说，甚细碎之言也。 王者欲知里巷风俗，故立稗官，使称说之。 ”（本注）其所录小说，今皆不存，故莫得而深考，然审察名目，乃殊不似有采自民间，如《诗》之《国风》者。 其中依托古人者七，曰：《伊尹说》，《鬻子说》，《师旷》，《务成子》，《宋子》，《天乙》，《黄帝》。 记古事者二，曰：《周考》，《青史子》，皆不言何时作。 明著汉代者四家，曰：《封禅方说》，《待诏臣饶心术》，《臣寿周纪》，《虞初周说》。 《待诏臣安成未央术》与《百家》，虽亦不云何时作，而依其次第，自亦汉人。《汉志》道家有《伊尹说》五十一篇，今佚；在小说家之二十七篇亦不可考，《史记》《司马相如传》注引《伊尹书》曰，“箕山之东，青鸟之所，有卢橘夏熟。”当是遗文之仅存者。《吕氏春秋》《本味篇》述伊尹以至味说汤，亦云“青鸟之所有甘栌”，说极详尽，然文丰赡而意浅薄，盖亦本《伊尹书》。伊尹以割烹要汤，孟子尝所详辩，则此殆战国之士之所为矣。
《汉志》道家有《伊尹说》五十一篇，今佚；在小说家之二十七篇亦不可考，《史记》《司马相如传》注引《伊尹书》曰，“箕山之东，青鸟之所，有卢橘夏熟。 ”当是遗文之仅存者。 《吕氏春秋》《本味篇》述伊尹以至味说汤，亦云“青鸟之所有甘栌”，说极详尽，然文丰赡而意浅薄，盖亦本《伊尹书》。 伊尹以割烹要汤，孟子尝所详辩，则此殆战国之士之所为矣。《汉志》道家有《鬻子》二十二篇，今仅存一卷，或以其语浅薄，疑非道家言。然唐宋人所引逸文，又有与今本《鬻子》颇不类者，则殆真非道家言也。
《汉志》道家有《鬻子》二十二篇，今仅存一卷，或以其语浅薄，疑非道家言。 然唐宋人所引逸文，又有与今本《鬻子》颇不类者，则殆真非道家言也。武王率兵车以伐纣。纣虎旅百万，阵于商郊，起自黄鸟，至于赤斧，走如疾风，声如振霆。三军之士，靡不失色。武王乃命太公把白旄以摩之，纣军反走。（《文选李善注》及《太平御览》三百一）
武王率兵车以伐纣。 纣虎旅百万，阵于商郊，起自黄鸟，至于赤斧，走如疾风，声如振霆。 三军之士，靡不失色。 武王乃命太公把白旄以摩之，纣军反走。 （《文选李善注》及《太平御览》三百一）青史子为古之史官，然不知在何时。其书隋世已佚，刘知几《史通》云“《青史》由缀于街谈”者，盖据《汉志》言之，非逮唐而复出也。遗文今存三事，皆言礼，亦不知当时何以入小说。
青史子为古之史官，然不知在何时。 其书隋世已佚，刘知几《史通》云“《青史》由缀于街谈”者，盖据《汉志》言之，非逮唐而复出也。 遗文今存三事，皆言礼，亦不知当时何以入小说。古者胎教，王后腹之七月而就宴室，太史持铜而御户左，太宰持斗而御户右，太卜持蓍龟而御堂下，诸官皆以其职御于门内。比及三月者，王后所求声音非礼乐，则太史缊瑟而称不习，所求滋味者非正味，则太宰倚斗而不敢煎调，而言曰，“不敢以待王太子。”太子生而泣，太史吹铜曰，“声中某律。”太宰曰，“滋味上某。”太卜曰，“命云某。”然后为王太子悬弧之礼义。……（《大戴礼记》《保傅篇》，《贾谊新书》《胎教十事》）
古者胎教，王后腹之七月而就宴室，太史持铜而御户左，太宰持斗而御户右，太卜持蓍龟而御堂下，诸官皆以其职御于门内。 比及三月者，王后所求声音非礼乐，则太史缊瑟而称不习，所求滋味者非正味，则太宰倚斗而不敢煎调，而言曰，“不敢以待王太子。 ”太子生而泣，太史吹铜曰，“声中某律。 ”太宰曰，“滋味上某。 ”太卜曰，“命云某。 ”然后为王太子悬弧之礼义。 …… （《大戴礼记》《保傅篇》，《贾谊新书》《胎教十事》）古者年八岁而出就外舍，学小艺焉，履小节焉；束发而就大学，学大艺焉，履大节焉。居则习礼文，行则鸣珮玉，升车则闻和鸾之声，是以非僻之心无自入也。……古之为路车也，盖圆以象天，二十八橑以象列星，轸方以象地，三十幅以象月。故仰则观天文，俯则察地理，前视则睹和鸾之声，侧听则观四时之运：此巾车教之道也。（《大戴礼记》《保傅篇》）
古者年八岁而出就外舍，学小艺焉，履小节焉；束发而就大学，学大艺焉，履大节焉。 居则习礼文，行则鸣珮玉，升车则闻和鸾之声，是以非僻之心无自入也。 …… 古之为路车也，盖圆以象天，二十八橑以象列星，轸方以象地，三十幅以象月。 故仰则观天文，俯则察地理，前视则睹和鸾之声，侧听则观四时之运：此巾车教之道也。 （《大戴礼记》《保傅篇》）鸡者，东方之牲也。岁终更始，辨秩东作，万物触户而出，故以鸡祀祭也。（《风俗通义》八）
鸡者，东方之牲也。 岁终更始，辨秩东作，万物触户而出，故以鸡祀祭也。 （《风俗通义》八）《汉志》兵阴阳家有《师旷》八篇，是杂占之书；在小说家者不可考，惟据本志注，知其多本《春秋》而已。《逸周书》《太子晋》篇记师旷见太子，聆声而知其不寿，太子亦自知“后三年当宾于帝所”，其说颇似小说家。
《汉志》兵阴阳家有《师旷》八篇，是杂占之书；在小说家者不可考，惟据本志注，知其多本《春秋》而已。 《逸周书》《太子晋》篇记师旷见太子，聆声而知其不寿，太子亦自知“后三年当宾于帝所”，其说颇似小说家。虞初事详本志注，又尝与丁夫人等以方祠诅匈奴大宛，见《郊祀志》，所著《周说》几及千篇，而今皆不传。晋唐人引《周书》者，有三事如《山海经》及《穆天子传》，与《逸周书》不类，朱右曾（《逸周书集训校释》十一）疑是《虞初说》。
虞初事详本志注，又尝与丁夫人等以方祠诅匈奴大宛，见《郊祀志》，所著《周说》几及千篇，而今皆不传。 晋唐人引《周书》者，有三事如《山海经》及《穆天子传》，与《逸周书》不类，朱右曾（《逸周书集训校释》十一）疑是《虞初说》。山，神蓐收居之。是山也，西望日之所入，其气圆，神经光之所司也。（《太平御览》三）
山，神蓐收居之。 是山也，西望日之所入，其气圆，神经光之所司也。 （《太平御览》三）天狗所止地尽倾，余光烛天为流星，长十数丈，其疾如风，其声如雷，其光如电。（《山海经》注十六）
天狗所止地尽倾，余光烛天为流星，长十数丈，其疾如风，其声如雷，其光如电。 （《山海经》注十六）穆王田，有黑鸟若鸠，翩飞而跱于衡，御者毙之以策，马佚，不克止之，踬于乘，伤帝左股。（《文选李善注》十四）
穆王田，有黑鸟若鸠，翩飞而跱于衡，御者毙之以策，马佚，不克止之，踬于乘，伤帝左股。 （《文选李善注》十四）《百家》者，刘向《说苑》叙录云，“《说苑杂事》，……其事类众多，……除去与《新序》复重者，其余者浅薄不中义理，别集以为《百家》。”《说苑》今存，所记皆古人行事之迹，足为法戒者，执是以推《百家》，则殆为故事之无当于治道者矣。
《百家》者，刘向《说苑》叙录云，“《说苑杂事》，…… 其事类众多，…… 除去与《新序》复重者，其余者浅薄不中义理，别集以为《百家》。 ”《说苑》今存，所记皆古人行事之迹，足为法戒者，执是以推《百家》，则殆为故事之无当于治道者矣。其余诸家，皆不可考。今审其书名，依人则伊尹鬻熊师旷黄帝，说事则封禅养生，盖多属方士假托。惟青史子非是。又务成子名昭，见《荀子》，《尸子》尝记其“避逆从顺”之教；宋子名钘，见《庄子》，《孟子》作宋，《韩非子》作宋荣子，《荀子》引子宋子曰，“明见侮之不辱，使人不斗”，则“黄老意”，然俱非方士之说也。
其余诸家，皆不可考。 今审其书名，依人则伊尹鬻熊师旷黄帝，说事则封禅养生，盖多属方士假托。 惟青史子非是。 又务成子名昭，见《荀子》，《尸子》尝记其“避逆从顺”之教；宋子名钘，见《庄子》，《孟子》作宋，《韩非子》作宋荣子，《荀子》引子宋子曰，“明见侮之不辱，使人不斗”，则“黄老意”，然俱非方士之说也。

第四篇　今所见汉人小说

第四篇　今所见汉人小说

第四篇　今所见汉人小说

Chapter 4 The Han novels seen today现存之所谓汉人小说，盖无一真出于汉人，晋以来，文人方士，皆有伪作，至宋明尚不绝。文人好逞狡狯，或欲夸示异书，方士则意在自神其教，故往往托古籍以衒人；晋以后人之托汉，亦犹汉人之依托黄帝伊尹矣。此群书中，有称东方朔班固撰者各二，郭宪刘歆撰者各一，大抵言荒外之事则云东方朔郭宪，关涉汉事则云刘歆班固，而大旨不离乎言神仙。
现存之所谓汉人小说，盖无一真出于汉人，晋以来，文人方士，皆有伪作，至宋明尚不绝。 文人好逞狡狯，或欲夸示异书，方士则意在自神其教，故往往托古籍以衒人；晋以后人之托汉，亦犹汉人之依托黄帝伊尹矣。 此群书中，有称东方朔班固撰者各二，郭宪刘歆撰者各一，大抵言荒外之事则云东方朔郭宪，关涉汉事则云刘歆班固，而大旨不离乎言神仙。称东方朔撰者有《神异经》一卷，仿《山海经》，然略于山川道里而详于异物，间有嘲讽之辞。《山海经》稍显于汉而盛行于晋，则此书当为晋以后人作；其文颇有重复者，盖又尝散佚，后人钞唐宋类书所引逸文复作之也。有注，题张华作，亦伪。
称东方朔撰者有《神异经》一卷，仿《山海经》，然略于山川道里而详于异物，间有嘲讽之辞。 《山海经》稍显于汉而盛行于晋，则此书当为晋以后人作；其文颇有重复者，盖又尝散佚，后人钞唐宋类书所引逸文复作之也。 有注，题张华作，亦伪。南方有之林，其高百丈，围三尺八寸，促节，多汁，甜如蜜。咋啮其汁，令人润泽，可以节蚘虫。人腹中蚘虫，其状如蚓，此消谷虫也，多则伤人，少则谷不消。是甘蔗能灭多益少，凡蔗亦然。（《南荒经》）
南方有之林，其高百丈，围三尺八寸，促节，多汁，甜如蜜。 咋啮其汁，令人润泽，可以节蚘虫。 人腹中蚘虫，其状如蚓，此消谷虫也，多则伤人，少则谷不消。 是甘蔗能灭多益少，凡蔗亦然。 （《南荒经》）西南荒中出讹兽，其状若菟，人面能言，常欺人，言东而西，言恶而善。其肉美，食之，言不真矣。（原注，言食其肉，则其人言不诚。）一之诞。（《西南荒经》）
西南荒中出讹兽，其状若菟，人面能言，常欺人，言东而西，言恶而善。 其肉美，食之，言不真矣。 （原注，言食其肉，则其人言不诚。 ）一之诞。 （《西南荒经》）昆仑之山有铜柱焉，其高入天，所谓“天柱”也，围三千里，周圆如削。下有回屋，方百丈，仙人九府治之。上有大鸟，名曰希有，南向，张左翼覆东王公，右翼覆西王母；背上小处无羽，一万九千里，西王母岁登翼上，会东王公也。（《中荒经》）
昆仑之山有铜柱焉，其高入天，所谓“天柱”也，围三千里，周圆如削。 下有回屋，方百丈，仙人九府治之。 上有大鸟，名曰希有，南向，张左翼覆东王公，右翼覆西王母；背上小处无羽，一万九千里，西王母岁登翼上，会东王公也。 （《中荒经》）《十洲记》一卷，亦题东方朔撰，记汉武帝闻祖洲瀛洲玄洲炎洲长洲元洲流洲生洲凤麟洲聚窟洲等十洲于西王母，乃延朔问其所有之物名，亦颇仿《山海经》。
The volume of "Records of the Ten Continents" is also written by Dongfang Shuo, which records that Emperor Wu of the Han Dynasty heard about Zuzhou, Yingzhou, Xuanzhou, Yanzhou, Changzhou, Yuanzhou, Liuzhou, Shengzhou, Fenglinzhou, and Jukuzhou in the Queen Mother of the West.玄洲在北海之中，戌亥之地，方七千二百里，去南岸三十六万里。上有大玄都，仙伯真公所治。多丘山。又有风山，声响如雷电，对天西北门。上多太玄仙官宫室，宫室各异。饶金芝玉草。乃是三天君下治之处，甚肃肃也。
玄洲在北海之中，戌亥之地，方七千二百里，去南岸三十六万里。 上有大玄都，仙伯真公所治。 多丘山。 又有风山，声响如雷电，对天西北门。 上多太玄仙官宫室，宫室各异。 饶金芝玉草。 乃是三天君下治之处，甚肃肃也。征和三年，武帝幸安定。西胡月支献香四两，大如雀卵，黑如桑椹。帝以香非中国所有，以付外库。……到后元元年，长安城内病者数百，亡者大半。帝试取月支神香烧之于城内，其死未三月者皆活，芳气经三月不歇，于是信知其神物也，乃更秘录余香，后一旦又失之。……明年，帝崩于五柞宫，已亡月支国人鸟山震檀却死等香也。向使厚待使者，帝崩之时，何缘不得灵香之用耶？自合殒命矣！
征和三年，武帝幸安定。 西胡月支献香四两，大如雀卵，黑如桑椹。 帝以香非中国所有，以付外库。 …… 到后元元年，长安城内病者数百，亡者大半。 帝试取月支神香烧之于城内，其死未三月者皆活，芳气经三月不歇，于是信知其神物也，乃更秘录余香，后一旦又失之。 …… 明年，帝崩于五柞宫，已亡月支国人鸟山震檀却死等香也。 向使厚待使者，帝崩之时，何缘不得灵香之用耶？自合殒命矣！东方朔虽以滑稽名，然诞谩不至此。《汉书》《朔传》赞云，“朔之诙谐逢占射覆，其事浮浅，行于众庶，儿童牧竖，莫不眩耀，而后之好事者因取奇言怪语附著之朔。”则知汉世于朔，已多附会之谈。二书虽伪作，而《隋志》已著录，又以辞意新异，齐梁文人亦往往引为故实。《神异经》固亦神仙家言，然文思较深茂，盖文人之为。《十洲记》特浅薄，观其记月支国反生香，及篇首云，“方朔云：臣，学仙者也，非得道之人，以国家之盛美，将招名儒墨于文教之内，抑绝俗之道于虚诡之迹，臣故韬隐逸而赴王庭，藏养生而侍朱阙。”则但为方士窃虑失志，借以震眩流俗，且自解嘲之作而已。
东方朔虽以滑稽名，然诞谩不至此。 《汉书》《朔传》赞云，“朔之诙谐逢占射覆，其事浮浅，行于众庶，儿童牧竖，莫不眩耀，而后之好事者因取奇言怪语附著之朔。 ”则知汉世于朔，已多附会之谈。 二书虽伪作，而《隋志》已著录，又以辞意新异，齐梁文人亦往往引为故实。 《神异经》固亦神仙家言，然文思较深茂，盖文人之为。 《十洲记》特浅薄，观其记月支国反生香，及篇首云，“方朔云：臣，学仙者也，非得道之人，以国家之盛美，将招名儒墨于文教之内，抑绝俗之道于虚诡之迹，臣故韬隐逸而赴王庭，藏养生而侍朱阙。 ”则但为方士窃虑失志，借以震眩流俗，且自解嘲之作而已。称班固作者，一曰《汉武帝故事》，今存一卷，记武帝生于猗兰殿至崩葬茂陵杂事，且下及成帝时。其中虽多神仙怪异之言，而颇不信方士，文亦简雅，当是文人所为。《隋志》著录二卷，不题撰人，宋晁公武《郡斋读书志》始云“世言班固作”，又云，“唐张柬之书《洞冥记》后云，《汉武故事》，王俭造也。”然后人遂径属之班氏。
称班固作者，一曰《汉武帝故事》，今存一卷，记武帝生于猗兰殿至崩葬茂陵杂事，且下及成帝时。 其中虽多神仙怪异之言，而颇不信方士，文亦简雅，当是文人所为。 《隋志》著录二卷，不题撰人，宋晁公武《郡斋读书志》始云“世言班固作”，又云，“唐张柬之书《洞冥记》后云，《汉武故事》，王俭造也。 ”然后人遂径属之班氏。帝以乙酉年七月七日生于猗兰殿，年四岁，立为胶东王。数岁，长公主抱置膝上，问曰，“儿欲得妇不？”胶东王曰，“欲得妇。”长主指左右长御百余人，皆云不用。
帝以乙酉年七月七日生于猗兰殿，年四岁，立为胶东王。 数岁，长公主抱置膝上，问曰，“儿欲得妇不？”胶东王曰，“欲得妇。 ”长主指左右长御百余人，皆云不用。末指其女问曰，“阿娇好不？”于是乃笑对曰，“好。若得阿娇，当作金屋贮之也。”长主大悦，乃苦要上，遂成婚焉。
末指其女问曰，“阿娇好不？”于是乃笑对曰，“好。 若得阿娇，当作金屋贮之也。 ”长主大悦，乃苦要上，遂成婚焉。上尝辇至郎署，见一老翁，须鬓皓白，衣服不整。上问曰，“公何时为郎？何其老也？”对曰，“臣姓颜名驷，江都人也，以文帝时为郎。”上问曰，“何其老而不遇也？”驷曰，“文帝好文而臣好武，景帝好老而臣尚少，陛下好少而臣已老：是以三世不遇。”上感其言，擢拜会稽都尉。
上尝辇至郎署，见一老翁，须鬓皓白，衣服不整。 上问曰，“公何时为郎？何其老也？”对曰，“臣姓颜名驷，江都人也，以文帝时为郎。 ”上问曰，“何其老而不遇也？”驷曰，“文帝好文而臣好武，景帝好老而臣尚少，陛下好少而臣已老：是以三世不遇。 ”上感其言，擢拜会稽都尉。七月七日，上于承华殿斋，日正中，忽见有青鸟从西方来。上问东方朔，朔对曰，“西王母暮必降尊像上。”……是夜漏七刻，空中无云，隐如雷声，竟天紫气。有顷，王母至，乘紫车，玉女夹驭；戴七胜；青气如云；有二青鸟，夹侍母旁。下车，上迎拜，延母坐，请不死之药。母曰，“……帝滞情不遣，欲心尚多，不死之药，未可致也。”因出桃七枚，母自噉二枚，与帝五枚。帝留核著前。王母问曰，“用此何为？”上曰，“此桃美，欲种之。”母笑曰，“此桃三千年一著子，非下土所植也。”留至五更，谈语世事而不肯言鬼神，肃然便去。东方朔于朱鸟牖中窥母。母曰，“此儿好作罪过，疏妄无赖，久被斥逐，不得还天，然原心无恶，寻当得还，帝善遇之！”母既去，上惆怅良久。
七月七日，上于承华殿斋，日正中，忽见有青鸟从西方来。 上问东方朔，朔对曰，“西王母暮必降尊像上。 ”…… 是夜漏七刻，空中无云，隐如雷声，竟天紫气。 有顷，王母至，乘紫车，玉女夹驭；戴七胜；青气如云；有二青鸟，夹侍母旁。 下车，上迎拜，延母坐，请不死之药。 母曰，“…… 帝滞情不遣，欲心尚多，不死之药，未可致也。 ”因出桃七枚，母自噉二枚，与帝五枚。 帝留核著前。 王母问曰，“用此何为？”上曰，“此桃美，欲种之。 ”母笑曰，“此桃三千年一著子，非下土所植也。 ”留至五更，谈语世事而不肯言鬼神，肃然便去。 东方朔于朱鸟牖中窥母。 母曰，“此儿好作罪过，疏妄无赖，久被斥逐，不得还天，然原心无恶，寻当得还，帝善遇之！”母既去，上惆怅良久。其一曰《汉武帝内传》，亦一卷，亦记孝武初生至崩葬事，而于王母降特详。其文虽繁丽而浮浅，且窃取释家言，又多用《十洲记》及《汉武故事》中语，可知较二书为后出矣。宋时尚不题撰人，至明乃并《汉武故事》皆称班固作，盖以固名重，因连类依托之。
其一曰《汉武帝内传》，亦一卷，亦记孝武初生至崩葬事，而于王母降特详。 其文虽繁丽而浮浅，且窃取释家言，又多用《十洲记》及《汉武故事》中语，可知较二书为后出矣。 宋时尚不题撰人，至明乃并《汉武故事》皆称班固作，盖以固名重，因连类依托之。到夜二更之后，忽见西南如白云起，郁然直来，径趋宫庭，须臾转近。闻云中箫鼓之声，人马之响。半食顷，王母至也。县投殿前，有似鸟集，或驾龙虎，或乘白麟，或乘白鹤，或乘轩车，或乘天马，群仙数千，光曜庭宇。既至，从官不复知所在，唯见王母乘紫云之辇，驾九色斑龙。别有五十天仙，……咸住殿下。王母唯扶二侍女上殿。侍女年可十六七，服青绫之袿，容眸流盼，神姿清发，真美人也！王母上殿，东向坐，著黄金褡，文采鲜明，光仪淑穆，带灵飞大绶，腰佩分景之剑，头上太华髻，戴太真晨婴之冠，履玄璚凤文之舄，视之可年三十许，修短得中，天姿掩蔼，容颜绝世，真灵人也！
到夜二更之后，忽见西南如白云起，郁然直来，径趋宫庭，须臾转近。 闻云中箫鼓之声，人马之响。 半食顷，王母至也。 县投殿前，有似鸟集，或驾龙虎，或乘白麟，或乘白鹤，或乘轩车，或乘天马，群仙数千，光曜庭宇。 既至，从官不复知所在，唯见王母乘紫云之辇，驾九色斑龙。 别有五十天仙，…… 咸住殿下。 王母唯扶二侍女上殿。 侍女年可十六七，服青绫之袿，容眸流盼，神姿清发，真美人也！王母上殿，东向坐，著黄金褡，文采鲜明，光仪淑穆，带灵飞大绶，腰佩分景之剑，头上太华髻，戴太真晨婴之冠，履玄璚凤文之舄，视之可年三十许，修短得中，天姿掩蔼，容颜绝世，真灵人也！帝跪谢。……上元夫人使帝还坐。王母谓夫人曰，“卿之为戎，言甚急切，更使未解之人，畏于意志。”夫人曰，“若其志道，将以身投饿虎，忘躯破灭，蹈火履水，固于一志，必无忧也。……急言之发，欲成其志耳，阿母既有念，必当赐以尸解之方耳。”王母曰，“此子勤心已久，而不遇良师，遂欲毁其正志，当疑天下必无仙人，是故我发阆宫，暂舍尘浊，既欲坚其仙志，又欲令向化不惑也。今日相见，令人念之。至于尸解下方，吾甚不惜。后三年，吾必欲赐以成丹半剂，石象散一。具与之，则彻不得复停。当今匈奴未弥，边陲有事，何必令其仓卒舍天下之尊，而便入林岫？但当问笃志何如。如其回改，吾方数来。”王母因拊帝背曰，“汝用上元夫人至言，必得长生，可不勖勉耶？”帝跪曰，“彻书之金简，以身佩之焉。”
帝跪谢。 …… 上元夫人使帝还坐。 王母谓夫人曰，“卿之为戎，言甚急切，更使未解之人，畏于意志。 ”夫人曰，“若其志道，将以身投饿虎，忘躯破灭，蹈火履水，固于一志，必无忧也。 …… 急言之发，欲成其志耳，阿母既有念，必当赐以尸解之方耳。 ”王母曰，“此子勤心已久，而不遇良师，遂欲毁其正志，当疑天下必无仙人，是故我发阆宫，暂舍尘浊，既欲坚其仙志，又欲令向化不惑也。 今日相见，令人念之。 至于尸解下方，吾甚不惜。 后三年，吾必欲赐以成丹半剂，石象散一。 具与之，则彻不得复停。 当今匈奴未弥，边陲有事，何必令其仓卒舍天下之尊，而便入林岫？但当问笃志何如。 如其回改，吾方数来。 ”王母因拊帝背曰，“汝用上元夫人至言，必得长生，可不勖勉耶？”帝跪曰，“彻书之金简，以身佩之焉。 ”又有《汉武洞冥记》四卷，题后汉郭宪撰。全书六十则，皆言神仙道术及远方怪异之事；其所以名《洞冥记》者，序云，“汉武帝明俊特异之主，东方朔因滑稽以匡谏，洞心于道教，使冥迹之奥，昭然显著。今籍旧史之所不载者，聊以闻见，撰《洞冥记》四卷，成一家之书，”则所凭藉亦在东方朔。郭宪字子横，汝南宋人，光武时征拜博士，刚直敢言，有“关东觥觥郭子横”之目，徒以潠酒救火一事，遽为方士攀引，范晔作《后汉书》，遂亦不察而置之《方术列传》中。然《洞冥记》称宪作，实始于刘昫《唐书》，《隋志》但云郭氏，无名。六朝人虚造神仙家言，每好称郭氏，殆以影射郭璞，故有《郭氏玄中记》，有《郭氏洞冥记》。《玄中记》今不传，观其遗文，亦与《神异经》相类；《洞冥记》今全，文如下：
又有《汉武洞冥记》四卷，题后汉郭宪撰。 全书六十则，皆言神仙道术及远方怪异之事；其所以名《洞冥记》者，序云，“汉武帝明俊特异之主，东方朔因滑稽以匡谏，洞心于道教，使冥迹之奥，昭然显著。 今籍旧史之所不载者，聊以闻见，撰《洞冥记》四卷，成一家之书，”则所凭藉亦在东方朔。 郭宪字子横，汝南宋人，光武时征拜博士，刚直敢言，有“关东觥觥郭子横”之目，徒以潠酒救火一事，遽为方士攀引，范晔作《后汉书》，遂亦不察而置之《方术列传》中。 然《洞冥记》称宪作，实始于刘昫《唐书》，《隋志》但云郭氏，无名。 六朝人虚造神仙家言，每好称郭氏，殆以影射郭璞，故有《郭氏玄中记》，有《郭氏洞冥记》。 《玄中记》今不传，观其遗文，亦与《神异经》相类；《洞冥记》今全，文如下：黄安，代郡人也，为代郡卒，……常服朱砂，举体皆赤，冬不著裘，坐一神龟，广二尺。人问“子坐此龟几年矣？”对曰，“昔伏羲始造网罟，获此龟以授吾；吾坐龟背已平矣。此虫畏日月之光，二千岁即一出头，吾坐此龟，已见五出头矣。”……（卷二）
黄安，代郡人也，为代郡卒，…… 常服朱砂，举体皆赤，冬不著裘，坐一神龟，广二尺。 人问“子坐此龟几年矣？”对曰，“昔伏羲始造网罟，获此龟以授吾；吾坐龟背已平矣。 此虫畏日月之光，二千岁即一出头，吾坐此龟，已见五出头矣。 ”…… （卷二）天汉二年，帝升苍龙阁，思仙术，召诸方士言远国遐方之事。唯东方朔下席操笔跪而进。帝曰，“大夫为朕言乎？”朔曰，“臣游北极，至种火之山，日月所不照，有青龙衔烛火以照山之四极。亦有园圃池苑，皆植异木异草；有明茎草，夜如金灯，折枝为炬，照见鬼物之形。仙人甯封常服此草，于夜暝时，转见腹光通外。亦名洞冥草。”帝令锉此草为泥，以涂云明之馆，夜坐此馆，不加灯烛；亦名照魅草；以藉足，履水不沉。（卷三）
天汉二年，帝升苍龙阁，思仙术，召诸方士言远国遐方之事。 唯东方朔下席操笔跪而进。 帝曰，“大夫为朕言乎？”朔曰，“臣游北极，至种火之山，日月所不照，有青龙衔烛火以照山之四极。 亦有园圃池苑，皆植异木异草；有明茎草，夜如金灯，折枝为炬，照见鬼物之形。 仙人甯封常服此草，于夜暝时，转见腹光通外。 亦名洞冥草。 ”帝令锉此草为泥，以涂云明之馆，夜坐此馆，不加灯烛；亦名照魅草；以藉足，履水不沉。 （卷三）至于杂载人间琐事者，有《西京杂记》，本二卷，今六卷者宋人所分也。末有葛洪跋，言“其家有刘歆《汉书》一百卷，考校班固所作，殆是全取刘氏，小有异同，固所不取，不过二万许言。今钞出为二卷，以补《汉书》之阙。”然《隋志》不著撰人，《唐志》则云葛洪撰，可知当时皆不信为真出于歆。段成式（《酉阳杂俎》《语资篇》）云，“庾信作诗，用《西京杂记》事，旋自追改曰，‘此吴均语，恐不足用。’”后人因以为均作。然所谓吴均语者，恐指文句而言，非谓《西京杂记》也，梁武帝敕殷芸撰《小说》，皆钞撮故书，已引《西京杂记》甚多，则梁初已流行世间，固以葛洪所造为近是。或又以文中称刘向为家君，因疑非葛洪作，然既托名于歆，则摹拟歆语，固亦理势所必至矣。书之所记，正如黄省曾序言，“大约有四：则猥琐可略，闲漫无归，与夫杳昧而难凭，触忌而须讳者。”然此乃判以史裁，若论文学，则此在古小说中，固亦意绪秀异，文笔可观者也。
至于杂载人间琐事者，有《西京杂记》，本二卷，今六卷者宋人所分也。 末有葛洪跋，言“其家有刘歆《汉书》一百卷，考校班固所作，殆是全取刘氏，小有异同，固所不取，不过二万许言。 今钞出为二卷，以补《汉书》之阙。 ”然《隋志》不著撰人，《唐志》则云葛洪撰，可知当时皆不信为真出于歆。 段成式（《酉阳杂俎》《语资篇》）云，“庾信作诗，用《西京杂记》事，旋自追改曰，‘此吴均语，恐不足用。 ’”后人因以为均作。 然所谓吴均语者，恐指文句而言，非谓《西京杂记》也，梁武帝敕殷芸撰《小说》，皆钞撮故书，已引《西京杂记》甚多，则梁初已流行世间，固以葛洪所造为近是。 或又以文中称刘向为家君，因疑非葛洪作，然既托名于歆，则摹拟歆语，固亦理势所必至矣。 书之所记，正如黄省曾序言，“大约有四：则猥琐可略，闲漫无归，与夫杳昧而难凭，触忌而须讳者。 ”然此乃判以史裁，若论文学，则此在古小说中，固亦意绪秀异，文笔可观者也。司马相如初与卓文君还成都，居贫忧懑，以所著鹔鹴裘就市人阳昌贳酒，与文君为欢。既而文君抱颈而泣曰，“我生平富足，今乃以衣裘贳酒！”遂相与谋，于成都卖酒。相如亲着犊鼻裈涤器，以耻王孙。王孙果以为病，乃厚给文君，文君遂为富人。文君姣好，眉色如望远山，脸际常若芙蓉，肌肤柔滑如脂，为人放诞风流，故悦长卿之才而越礼焉。……（卷二）
司马相如初与卓文君还成都，居贫忧懑，以所著鹔鹴裘就市人阳昌贳酒，与文君为欢。 既而文君抱颈而泣曰，“我生平富足，今乃以衣裘贳酒！”遂相与谋，于成都卖酒。 相如亲着犊鼻裈涤器，以耻王孙。 王孙果以为病，乃厚给文君，文君遂为富人。 文君姣好，眉色如望远山，脸际常若芙蓉，肌肤柔滑如脂，为人放诞风流，故悦长卿之才而越礼焉。 …… （卷二）郭威，字文伟，茂陵人也，好读书，以谓《尔雅》周公所制，而《尔雅》有“张仲孝友”，张仲，宣王时人，非周公之制明矣。余尝以问杨子云，子云曰，“孔子门徒游夏之俦所记，以解释六艺者也”。家君以为《外戚传》称“史佚教其子以《尔雅》”，《尔雅》，小学也。又记言“孔子教鲁哀公学《尔雅》”，《尔雅》之出远矣，旧传学者皆云周公所记也，“张仲孝友”之类，后人所足耳。（卷三）
郭威，字文伟，茂陵人也，好读书，以谓《尔雅》周公所制，而《尔雅》有“张仲孝友”，张仲，宣王时人，非周公之制明矣。 余尝以问杨子云，子云曰，“孔子门徒游夏之俦所记，以解释六艺者也”。 家君以为《外戚传》称“史佚教其子以《尔雅》”，《尔雅》，小学也。 又记言“孔子教鲁哀公学《尔雅》”，《尔雅》之出远矣，旧传学者皆云周公所记也，“张仲孝友”之类，后人所足耳。 （卷三）司马迁发愤作《史记》百三十篇，先达称为良史之才。其以伯夷居列传之首，以为善而无报也；为项羽本纪，以踞高位者非关有德也。及其序屈原贾谊，辞旨抑扬，悲而不伤，亦近代之伟才。（卷四）
司马迁发愤作《史记》百三十篇，先达称为良史之才。 其以伯夷居列传之首，以为善而无报也；为项羽本纪，以踞高位者非关有德也。 及其序屈原贾谊，辞旨抑扬，悲而不伤，亦近代之伟才。 （卷四）（广川王去疾聚无赖发）栾书冢，棺柩明器，朽烂无余。有一白狐，见人惊走，左右击之，不能得，伤其左脚。其夕，王梦一丈夫须眉尽白，来谓王曰，“何故伤吾左脚？”乃以杖叩王左脚。王觉，脚肿痛生疮，至死不差。（卷六）
（广川王去疾聚无赖发）栾书冢，棺柩明器，朽烂无余。 有一白狐，见人惊走，左右击之，不能得，伤其左脚。 其夕，王梦一丈夫须眉尽白，来谓王曰，“何故伤吾左脚？”乃以杖叩王左脚。 王觉，脚肿痛生疮，至死不差。 （卷六）葛洪字稚川，丹阳句容人，少以儒学知名，究览典籍，尤好神仙导养之法，太安中，官伏波将军。以平贼功封关内侯。干宝深相亲善，荐洪才堪国史，而洪闻交趾出丹，自求为勾漏令，行至广州，为刺史所留，遂止罗浮，年八十一，兀然若睡而卒（约二九〇——三七〇），有传在《晋书》。洪著作甚多，可六百卷，其《抱朴子》（内篇三）言太丘长颍川陈仲弓有《异闻记》，且引其文，略云郡人张广定以避乱置其四岁女于古冢中，三年复归，而女以效龟息得不死。然陈实此记，史志既所不载，其事又甚类方士常谈，疑亦假托。葛洪虽去汉未远，而溺于神仙，故其言亦不足据。
葛洪字稚川，丹阳句容人，少以儒学知名，究览典籍，尤好神仙导养之法，太安中，官伏波将军。 以平贼功封关内侯。 干宝深相亲善，荐洪才堪国史，而洪闻交趾出丹，自求为勾漏令，行至广州，为刺史所留，遂止罗浮，年八十一，兀然若睡而卒（约二九〇——三七〇），有传在《晋书》。 洪著作甚多，可六百卷，其《抱朴子》（内篇三）言太丘长颍川陈仲弓有《异闻记》，且引其文，略云郡人张广定以避乱置其四岁女于古冢中，三年复归，而女以效龟息得不死。 然陈实此记，史志既所不载，其事又甚类方士常谈，疑亦假托。 葛洪虽去汉未远，而溺于神仙，故其言亦不足据。又有《飞燕外传》一卷，记赵飞燕姊妹故事，题汉河东都尉伶玄子于撰，司马光尝取其“祸水灭火”语入《通鉴》，殆以为真汉人作，然恐是唐宋人所为。又有《杂事秘辛》一卷，记后汉选阅梁冀妹及册立事，杨慎序云，“得于安宁土知州万氏”，沈德符（《野获编》二十三）以为即慎一时游戏之作也。
又有《飞燕外传》一卷，记赵飞燕姊妹故事，题汉河东都尉伶玄子于撰，司马光尝取其“祸水灭火”语入《通鉴》，殆以为真汉人作，然恐是唐宋人所为。 又有《杂事秘辛》一卷，记后汉选阅梁冀妹及册立事，杨慎序云，“得于安宁土知州万氏”，沈德符（《野获编》二十三）以为即慎一时游戏之作也。

第五篇　六朝之鬼神志怪书（上）

第五篇　六朝之鬼神志怪书（上）

第五篇　六朝之鬼神志怪书（上）

Chapter 5 The Strange Book of Ghosts and Gods of the Six Dynasties (Part I)中国本信巫，秦汉以来，神仙之说盛行，汉末又大畅巫风，而鬼道愈炽；会小乘佛教亦入中土，渐见流传。凡此，皆张皇鬼神，称道灵异，故自晋讫隋，特多鬼神志怪之书。其书有出于文人者，有出于教徒者。文人之作，虽非如释道二家，意在自神其教，然亦非有意为小说，盖当时以为幽明虽殊途，而人鬼乃皆实有，故其叙述异事，与记载人间常事，自视固无诚妄之别矣。
中国本信巫，秦汉以来，神仙之说盛行，汉末又大畅巫风，而鬼道愈炽；会小乘佛教亦入中土，渐见流传。 凡此，皆张皇鬼神，称道灵异，故自晋讫隋，特多鬼神志怪之书。 其书有出于文人者，有出于教徒者。 文人之作，虽非如释道二家，意在自神其教，然亦非有意为小说，盖当时以为幽明虽殊途，而人鬼乃皆实有，故其叙述异事，与记载人间常事，自视固无诚妄之别矣。《隋志》有《列异传》三卷，魏文帝撰，今佚。惟古来文籍中颇多引用，故犹得见其遗文，则正如《隋志》所言，“以序鬼物奇怪之事”者也。文中有甘露年间事，在文帝后，或后人有增益，或撰人是假托，皆不可知。两《唐志》皆云张华撰，亦别无佐证，殆后有悟其抵牾者，因改易之。惟宋裴松之《三国志注》，后魏郦道元《水经注》皆已征引，则为魏晋人作无疑也。
《隋志》有《列异传》三卷，魏文帝撰，今佚。 惟古来文籍中颇多引用，故犹得见其遗文，则正如《隋志》所言，“以序鬼物奇怪之事”者也。 文中有甘露年间事，在文帝后，或后人有增益，或撰人是假托，皆不可知。 两《唐志》皆云张华撰，亦别无佐证，殆后有悟其抵牾者，因改易之。 惟宋裴松之《三国志注》，后魏郦道元《水经注》皆已征引，则为魏晋人作无疑也。南阳宗定伯年少时，夜行逢鬼，问曰，“谁？”鬼曰，“鬼也。”鬼曰，“卿复谁？”定伯欺之，言我亦鬼也。鬼问欲至何所，答曰欲至宛市，鬼言我亦欲至宛市。共行数里，鬼言步行大亟，可共迭相担也。定伯曰大善。鬼便先担定伯数里，鬼言卿大重，将非鬼也？定伯言，我新死，故重耳。定伯因复担鬼，鬼略无重。如是再三。定伯复言，我新死，不知鬼悉何所畏忌？鬼曰，唯不喜人唾。……行欲至宛市，定伯便担鬼至头上，急持之。鬼大呼，声咋咋索下。不复听之，径至宛市中，著地化为一羊。便卖之。恐其便化，乃唾之，得钱千五百。（《太平御览》八百八十四，《法苑珠林》六）
南阳宗定伯年少时，夜行逢鬼，问曰，“谁？”鬼曰，“鬼也。 ”鬼曰，“卿复谁？”定伯欺之，言我亦鬼也。 鬼问欲至何所，答曰欲至宛市，鬼言我亦欲至宛市。 共行数里，鬼言步行大亟，可共迭相担也。 定伯曰大善。 鬼便先担定伯数里，鬼言卿大重，将非鬼也？定伯言，我新死，故重耳。 定伯因复担鬼，鬼略无重。 如是再三。 定伯复言，我新死，不知鬼悉何所畏忌？鬼曰，唯不喜人唾。 …… 行欲至宛市，定伯便担鬼至头上，急持之。 鬼大呼，声咋咋索下。 不复听之，径至宛市中，著地化为一羊。 便卖之。 恐其便化，乃唾之，得钱千五百。 （《太平御览》八百八十四，《法苑珠林》六）神仙麻姑降东阳蔡经家，手爪长四寸。经意曰，“此女子实好佳手，愿得以搔背。”麻姑大怒。忽见经顿地，两目流血。（《太平御览》三百七十）
神仙麻姑降东阳蔡经家，手爪长四寸。 经意曰，“此女子实好佳手，愿得以搔背。 ”麻姑大怒。 忽见经顿地，两目流血。 （《太平御览》三百七十）武昌新县北山上有望夫石，状若人立者。相传云，昔有贞妇，其夫从役，远赴国难，妇携幼子，饯送此山，立望而形化为石。（《太平御览》八百八十八）
武昌新县北山上有望夫石，状若人立者。 相传云，昔有贞妇，其夫从役，远赴国难，妇携幼子，饯送此山，立望而形化为石。 （《太平御览》八百八十八）晋以后人之造伪书，于记注殊方异物者每云张华，亦如言仙人神境者之好称东方朔。张华字茂先，范阳方城人，魏初举太常博士，入晋官至司空，领著作，封壮武郡公，永康元年四月赵王伦之变，华被害，夷三族，时年六十九（二三二——三〇〇），传在《晋书》。华既通图纬，又多览方伎书，能识灾祥异物，故有博物洽闻之称，然亦遂多附会之说。梁萧绮所录王嘉《拾遗记》（九）言华尝“捃采天下遗逸，自书契之始，考验神怪，及世间闾里所说，造《博物志》四百卷，奏于武帝”，帝令芟截浮疑，分为十卷。其书今存，乃类记异境奇物及古代琐闻杂事，皆刺取故书，殊乏新异，不能副其名，或由后人缀辑复成，非其原本欤？今所存汉至隋小说，大抵此类。
晋以后人之造伪书，于记注殊方异物者每云张华，亦如言仙人神境者之好称东方朔。 张华字茂先，范阳方城人，魏初举太常博士，入晋官至司空，领著作，封壮武郡公，永康元年四月赵王伦之变，华被害，夷三族，时年六十九（二三二——三〇〇），传在《晋书》。 华既通图纬，又多览方伎书，能识灾祥异物，故有博物洽闻之称，然亦遂多附会之说。 梁萧绮所录王嘉《拾遗记》（九）言华尝“捃采天下遗逸，自书契之始，考验神怪，及世间闾里所说，造《博物志》四百卷，奏于武帝”，帝令芟截浮疑，分为十卷。 其书今存，乃类记异境奇物及古代琐闻杂事，皆刺取故书，殊乏新异，不能副其名，或由后人缀辑复成，非其原本欤？今所存汉至隋小说，大抵此类。《周书》曰，“西域献火浣布，昆吾氏献切玉刀，火浣布污则烧之则洁，刀切玉如蜡。”布汉世有献者，刀则未闻。（卷二《异产》）
《周书》曰，“西域献火浣布，昆吾氏献切玉刀，火浣布污则烧之则洁，刀切玉如蜡。 ”布汉世有献者，刀则未闻。 （卷二《异产》）取鳖锉令如棋子大，捣赤苋汁和合，厚以茅苞，五六月中作，投池中，经旬脔脔尽成鳖也。（卷四《戏术》）
取鳖锉令如棋子大，捣赤苋汁和合，厚以茅苞，五六月中作，投池中，经旬脔脔尽成鳖也。 （卷四《戏术》）燕太子丹质于秦，……欲归，请于秦王。王不听。谬言曰，“令乌头白，马生角，乃可。”丹仰而叹，乌即头白，俯而嗟，马生角。秦王不得已而遣之，为机发之桥，欲陷丹，丹驱驰过之而桥不发。遁到关，关门不开，丹为鸡鸣，于是众鸡悉鸣，遂归。（卷八《史补》）
燕太子丹质于秦，…… 欲归，请于秦王。 王不听。 谬言曰，“令乌头白，马生角，乃可。 ”丹仰而叹，乌即头白，俯而嗟，马生角。 秦王不得已而遣之，为机发之桥，欲陷丹，丹驱驰过之而桥不发。 遁到关，关门不开，丹为鸡鸣，于是众鸡悉鸣，遂归。 （卷八《史补》）老子云，“万民皆付西王母；唯王，圣人，真人，仙人，道人之命，上属九天君耳。”（卷九《杂说》上）
老子云，“万民皆付西王母；唯王，圣人，真人，仙人，道人之命，上属九天君耳。 ”（卷九《杂说》上）新蔡干宝字令升，晋中兴后置史官，宝始以著作郎领国史，因家贫求补山阴令，迁始安太守，王导请为司徒右长史，迁散骑常侍（四世纪中）。宝著《晋纪》二十卷，时称良史；而性好阴阳术数，尝感于其父婢死而再生，及其兄气绝复苏，自言见天神事，乃撰《搜神记》二十卷。以“发明神道之不诬”（自序中语），见《晋书》本传。《搜神记》今存者正二十卷，然亦非原书，其书于神祇灵异人物变化之外，颇言神仙五行，又偶有释氏说。
新蔡干宝字令升，晋中兴后置史官，宝始以著作郎领国史，因家贫求补山阴令，迁始安太守，王导请为司徒右长史，迁散骑常侍（四世纪中）。 宝著《晋纪》二十卷，时称良史；而性好阴阳术数，尝感于其父婢死而再生，及其兄气绝复苏，自言见天神事，乃撰《搜神记》二十卷。 以“发明神道之不诬”（自序中语），见《晋书》本传。 《搜神记》今存者正二十卷，然亦非原书，其书于神祇灵异人物变化之外，颇言神仙五行，又偶有释氏说。汉下邳周式，尝至东海，道逢一吏，持一卷书，求寄载，行十余里，谓式曰，“吾暂有所过，留书寄君船中，慎勿发之！”去后，式盗发视，书皆诸死人录，下条有式名。须臾吏还，式犹视书。吏怒曰，“故以相告，而忽视之！”式叩头流血，良久，吏曰，“感卿远相载，此书不可除卿名，今日已去，还家三年勿出门，可得度也。勿道见吾书！”式还，不出已二年余，家皆怪之。邻人卒亡，父怒使往吊之，式不得已，适出门，便见此吏。吏曰，“吾令汝三年勿出，而今出门，知复奈何？吾求不见连累为鞭杖，今已见汝，可复奈何？后三日日中，当相取也。”……至三日日中，果见来取，便死。（卷五）
汉下邳周式，尝至东海，道逢一吏，持一卷书，求寄载，行十余里，谓式曰，“吾暂有所过，留书寄君船中，慎勿发之！”去后，式盗发视，书皆诸死人录，下条有式名。 须臾吏还，式犹视书。 吏怒曰，“故以相告，而忽视之！”式叩头流血，良久，吏曰，“感卿远相载，此书不可除卿名，今日已去，还家三年勿出门，可得度也。 勿道见吾书！”式还，不出已二年余，家皆怪之。 邻人卒亡，父怒使往吊之，式不得已，适出门，便见此吏。 吏曰，“吾令汝三年勿出，而今出门，知复奈何？吾求不见连累为鞭杖，今已见汝，可复奈何？后三日日中，当相取也。 ”…… 至三日日中，果见来取，便死。 （卷五）阮瞻字千里，素执无鬼论，物莫能难，每自谓此理足以辨正幽明。忽有客通名诣瞻，寒温毕，聊谈名理，客甚有才辨，瞻与之言良久，及鬼神之事，反复甚苦，客遂屈，乃作色曰，“鬼神古今圣贤所共传，君何得独言无？即仆便是鬼！”于是变为异形，须臾消灭。瞻默然，意色大恶，岁余而卒。（卷十六）
阮瞻字千里，素执无鬼论，物莫能难，每自谓此理足以辨正幽明。 忽有客通名诣瞻，寒温毕，聊谈名理，客甚有才辨，瞻与之言良久，及鬼神之事，反复甚苦，客遂屈，乃作色曰，“鬼神古今圣贤所共传，君何得独言无？即仆便是鬼！”于是变为异形，须臾消灭。 瞻默然，意色大恶，岁余而卒。 （卷十六）焦湖庙有一玉枕，枕有小坼。时单父县人杨林为贾客，至庙祈求，庙巫谓曰，“君欲好婚否？”林曰，“幸甚。”巫即遣林近枕边，因入坼中，遂见朱楼琼室。有赵太尉在其中，即嫁女与林，生六子，皆为秘书郎。历数十年，并无思归之志，忽如梦觉，犹在枕傍，林怆然久之。（今本无此条，见《太平寰宇记》一百二十六引）
焦湖庙有一玉枕，枕有小坼。 时单父县人杨林为贾客，至庙祈求，庙巫谓曰，“君欲好婚否？”林曰，“幸甚。 ”巫即遣林近枕边，因入坼中，遂见朱楼琼室。 有赵太尉在其中，即嫁女与林，生六子，皆为秘书郎。 历数十年，并无思归之志，忽如梦觉，犹在枕傍，林怆然久之。 （今本无此条，见《太平寰宇记》一百二十六引）续干宝书者，有《搜神后记》十卷。题陶潜撰。其书今具存，亦记灵异变化之事如前记，陶潜旷达，未必拳拳于鬼神，盖伪托也。
续干宝书者，有《搜神后记》十卷。 题陶潜撰。 其书今具存，亦记灵异变化之事如前记，陶潜旷达，未必拳拳于鬼神，盖伪托也。干宝字令升，其先新蔡人。父莹，有嬖妾。母至妒，宝父葬时，因生推婢著藏中，宝兄弟年小，不之审也。经十年而母丧，开墓，见其妾伏棺上，衣服如生，就视犹暖，舆还家，终日而苏，云宝父常致饮食，与之寝接，恩情如生。家中吉凶辄语之，校之悉验，平复数年后方卒。宝兄常病，气绝积日不冷，后遂寤，云见天地间鬼神事，如梦觉，不自知死。（卷四）
干宝字令升，其先新蔡人。 父莹，有嬖妾。 母至妒，宝父葬时，因生推婢著藏中，宝兄弟年小，不之审也。 经十年而母丧，开墓，见其妾伏棺上，衣服如生，就视犹暖，舆还家，终日而苏，云宝父常致饮食，与之寝接，恩情如生。 家中吉凶辄语之，校之悉验，平复数年后方卒。 宝兄常病，气绝积日不冷，后遂寤，云见天地间鬼神事，如梦觉，不自知死。 （卷四）晋中兴后，谯郡周子文家在晋陵，少时喜射猎。常入山，忽山岫间有一人长五六丈，手捉弓箭，箭镝头广二尺许，白如霜雪，忽出声唤曰，“阿鼠！”（原注，子文小字）子文不觉应曰“喏”。此人便牵弓满镝向子文，子文便失魂厌伏。（卷七）
晋中兴后，谯郡周子文家在晋陵，少时喜射猎。 常入山，忽山岫间有一人长五六丈，手捉弓箭，箭镝头广二尺许，白如霜雪，忽出声唤曰，“阿鼠！”（原注，子文小字）子文不觉应曰“喏”。 此人便牵弓满镝向子文，子文便失魂厌伏。 （卷七）晋时，又有荀氏作《灵鬼志》，陆氏作《异林》，西戎主簿戴祚作《甄异传》，祖冲之作《述异记》，祖台之作《志怪》，此外作志怪者尚多，有孔氏殖氏曹毗等，今俱佚，间存遗文。至于现行之《述异记》二卷，称梁任昉撰者，则唐宋间人伪作，而袭祖冲之之书名者也，故唐人书中皆未尝引。
晋时，又有荀氏作《灵鬼志》，陆氏作《异林》，西戎主簿戴祚作《甄异传》，祖冲之作《述异记》，祖台之作《志怪》，此外作志怪者尚多，有孔氏殖氏曹毗等，今俱佚，间存遗文。 至于现行之《述异记》二卷，称梁任昉撰者，则唐宋间人伪作，而袭祖冲之之书名者也，故唐人书中皆未尝引。刘敬叔字敬叔，彭城人，少颖敏有异才，晋末拜南平国郎中令，入宋为给事黄门郎，数年，以病免，泰始中卒于家（约三九〇——四七〇），所著有《异苑》十余卷，行世。（详见明胡震亨所作小传，在汲古阁本《异苑》卷首）《异苑》今存者十卷，然亦非原书。
刘敬叔字敬叔，彭城人，少颖敏有异才，晋末拜南平国郎中令，入宋为给事黄门郎，数年，以病免，泰始中卒于家（约三九〇——四七〇），所著有《异苑》十余卷，行世。 （详见明胡震亨所作小传，在汲古阁本《异苑》卷首）《异苑》今存者十卷，然亦非原书。魏时，殿前大钟无故大鸣，人皆异之，以问张华，华曰，“此蜀郡铜山崩，故钟鸣应之耳。”寻蜀郡上其事，果如华言。（卷二）
魏时，殿前大钟无故大鸣，人皆异之，以问张华，华曰，“此蜀郡铜山崩，故钟鸣应之耳。 ”寻蜀郡上其事，果如华言。 （卷二）义熙中，东海徐氏婢兰忽患羸黄，而拂拭异常，共伺察之，见扫帚从壁角来趋婢床，乃取而焚之，婢即平复。（卷八）
义熙中，东海徐氏婢兰忽患羸黄，而拂拭异常，共伺察之，见扫帚从壁角来趋婢床，乃取而焚之，婢即平复。 （卷八）晋太元十九年，鄱阳桓阐杀犬祭乡里绥山，煮肉不熟。神怒，即下教于巫曰，“桓阐以肉生贻我，当谪令自食也。”其年忽变作虎，作虎之始，见人以斑皮衣之，即能跳跃噬逐。（卷八）
晋太元十九年，鄱阳桓阐杀犬祭乡里绥山，煮肉不熟。 神怒，即下教于巫曰，“桓阐以肉生贻我，当谪令自食也。 ”其年忽变作虎，作虎之始，见人以斑皮衣之，即能跳跃噬逐。 （卷八）东莞刘邕性嗜食疮痂，以为味似鳆鱼。尝诣孟灵休，灵休先患灸疮，痂落在床，邕取食之，灵休大惊，痂未落者悉褫取饴邕。南康国吏二百许人，不问有罪无罪，递与鞭，疮痂落，常以给膳。（卷十）
东莞刘邕性嗜食疮痂，以为味似鳆鱼。 尝诣孟灵休，灵休先患灸疮，痂落在床，邕取食之，灵休大惊，痂未落者悉褫取饴邕。 南康国吏二百许人，不问有罪无罪，递与鞭，疮痂落，常以给膳。 （卷十）临川王刘义庆（四〇三——四四四）为性简素，爱好文义，撰述甚多（详见《宋书》《宗室传》），有《幽明录》三十卷，见《隋志》史部杂传类，《新唐志》入小说。其书今虽不存，而他书征引甚多，大抵如《搜神》《列异》之类；然似皆集录前人撰作，非自造也。唐时尝盛行，刘知几（《史通》）云《晋书》多取之。
临川王刘义庆（四〇三——四四四）为性简素，爱好文义，撰述甚多（详见《宋书》《宗室传》），有《幽明录》三十卷，见《隋志》史部杂传类，《新唐志》入小说。 其书今虽不存，而他书征引甚多，大抵如《搜神》《列异》之类；然似皆集录前人撰作，非自造也。 唐时尝盛行，刘知几（《史通》）云《晋书》多取之。宋散骑侍郎东阳无疑有《齐谐记》七卷，亦见《隋志》，今佚。梁吴均作《续齐谐记》一卷，今尚存，然亦非原本。吴均字叔庠，吴兴故鄣人，天监初为吴兴主簿，旋兼建安王伟记室，终除奉朝请，以撰《齐春秋》不实免职，已而复召，使撰通史，未就，普通元年卒，年五十二（四六九——五二〇），事详《梁书》《文学传》。均夙有诗名，文体清拔，好事者或模拟之，称“吴均体”，故其为小说，亦卓然可观，唐宋文人多引为典据，阳羡鹅笼之记，尤其奇诡者也。
宋散骑侍郎东阳无疑有《齐谐记》七卷，亦见《隋志》，今佚。 梁吴均作《续齐谐记》一卷，今尚存，然亦非原本。 吴均字叔庠，吴兴故鄣人，天监初为吴兴主簿，旋兼建安王伟记室，终除奉朝请，以撰《齐春秋》不实免职，已而复召，使撰通史，未就，普通元年卒，年五十二（四六九——五二〇），事详《梁书》《文学传》。 均夙有诗名，文体清拔，好事者或模拟之，称“吴均体”，故其为小说，亦卓然可观，唐宋文人多引为典据，阳羡鹅笼之记，尤其奇诡者也。阳羡许彦于绥安山行，遇一书生，年十七八，卧路侧，云脚痛，求寄鹅笼中。彦以为戏言，书生便入笼，笼亦不更广，书生亦不更小，宛然与双鹅并坐，鹅亦不惊。彦负笼而去，都不觉重。前行息树下，书生乃出笼谓彦曰，“欲为君薄设。”彦曰，“善。”乃口中吐出一铜奁子，奁子中具诸肴馔。……酒数行，谓彦曰，“向将一妇人自随。今欲暂邀之。”彦曰，“善。”又于口中吐一女子，年可十五六，衣服绮丽，容貌殊绝，共坐宴。俄而书生醉卧，此女谓彦曰，“虽与书生结妻，而实怀怨，向亦窃得一男子同行，书生既眠，暂唤之，君幸勿言。”彦曰，“善。”女子于口中吐出一男子，年可二十三四，亦颖悟可爱，乃与彦叙寒温。书生卧欲觉，女子口吐一锦行障遮书生，书生乃留女子共卧。男子谓彦曰，“此女虽有情，心亦不尽，向复窃得一女人同行，今欲暂见之，愿君勿泄。”彦曰，“善。”男子又于口中吐一妇人，年可二十许，共酌，戏谈甚久，闻书生动声，男子曰，“二人眠已觉。”因取所吐女人，还纳口中。须臾，书生处女乃出谓彦曰，“书生欲起。”乃吞向男子，独对彦坐。然后书生起谓彦曰，“暂眠遂久，君独坐，当悒悒耶？日又晚，当与君别。”遂吞其女子，诸器皿悉纳口中，留大铜盘可二尺广，与彦别曰，“无以藉君，与君相忆也。”彦大元中为兰台令史，以盘饷侍中张散；散看其铭题，云是永平三年作。
阳羡许彦于绥安山行，遇一书生，年十七八，卧路侧，云脚痛，求寄鹅笼中。 彦以为戏言，书生便入笼，笼亦不更广，书生亦不更小，宛然与双鹅并坐，鹅亦不惊。 彦负笼而去，都不觉重。 前行息树下，书生乃出笼谓彦曰，“欲为君薄设。 ”彦曰，“善。 ”乃口中吐出一铜奁子，奁子中具诸肴馔。 …… 酒数行，谓彦曰，“向将一妇人自随。 今欲暂邀之。 ”彦曰，“善。 ”又于口中吐一女子，年可十五六，衣服绮丽，容貌殊绝，共坐宴。 俄而书生醉卧，此女谓彦曰，“虽与书生结妻，而实怀怨，向亦窃得一男子同行，书生既眠，暂唤之，君幸勿言。 ”彦曰，“善。 ”女子于口中吐出一男子，年可二十三四，亦颖悟可爱，乃与彦叙寒温。 书生卧欲觉，女子口吐一锦行障遮书生，书生乃留女子共卧。 男子谓彦曰，“此女虽有情，心亦不尽，向复窃得一女人同行，今欲暂见之，愿君勿泄。 ”彦曰，“善。 ”男子又于口中吐一妇人，年可二十许，共酌，戏谈甚久，闻书生动声，男子曰，“二人眠已觉。 ”因取所吐女人，还纳口中。 须臾，书生处女乃出谓彦曰，“书生欲起。 ”乃吞向男子，独对彦坐。 然后书生起谓彦曰，“暂眠遂久，君独坐，当悒悒耶？日又晚，当与君别。 ”遂吞其女子，诸器皿悉纳口中，留大铜盘可二尺广，与彦别曰，“无以藉君，与君相忆也。 ”彦大元中为兰台令史，以盘饷侍中张散；散看其铭题，云是永平三年作。然此类思想，盖非中国所故有，段成式已谓出于天竺，《酉阳杂俎》（《续集》《贬误篇》）云，“释氏《譬喻经》云，昔梵志作术，吐出一壶，中有女子与屏，处作家室。梵志少息，女复作术，吐出一壶，中有男子，复与共卧。梵志觉，次第互吞之，柱杖而去。余以吴均尝览此事，讶其说以为至怪也。”所云释氏经者，即《旧杂譬喻经》，吴时康僧会译，今尚存；而此一事，则复有他经为本，如《观佛三昧海经》（卷一）说观佛苦行时白毫毛相云，“天见毛内有百亿光，其光微妙，不可具宣。于其光中，现化菩萨，皆修苦行，如此不异。菩萨不小，毛亦不大。”当又为梵志吐壶相之渊源矣。魏晋以来，渐译释典，天竺故事亦流传世间，文人喜其颖异，于有意或无意中用之，遂蜕化为国有，如晋人荀氏作《灵鬼志》，亦记道人入笼子中事，尚云来自外国，至吴均记，乃为中国之书生。
然此类思想，盖非中国所故有，段成式已谓出于天竺，《酉阳杂俎》（《续集》《贬误篇》）云，“释氏《譬喻经》云，昔梵志作术，吐出一壶，中有女子与屏，处作家室。 梵志少息，女复作术，吐出一壶，中有男子，复与共卧。 梵志觉，次第互吞之，柱杖而去。 余以吴均尝览此事，讶其说以为至怪也。 ”所云释氏经者，即《旧杂譬喻经》，吴时康僧会译，今尚存；而此一事，则复有他经为本，如《观佛三昧海经》（卷一）说观佛苦行时白毫毛相云，“天见毛内有百亿光，其光微妙，不可具宣。 于其光中，现化菩萨，皆修苦行，如此不异。 菩萨不小，毛亦不大。 ”当又为梵志吐壶相之渊源矣。 魏晋以来，渐译释典，天竺故事亦流传世间，文人喜其颖异，于有意或无意中用之，遂蜕化为国有，如晋人荀氏作《灵鬼志》，亦记道人入笼子中事，尚云来自外国，至吴均记，乃为中国之书生。太元十二年，有道人外国来，能吞刀吐火，吐珠玉金银，自说其所受师，即白衣，非沙门也。尝行，见一人担担，上有小笼子，可受升余，语担人云，“吾步行疲极，欲寄君担。”担人甚怪之，虑是狂人，便语之云，“自可耳。”……即入笼中，笼不更大，其人亦不更小，担之亦不觉重于先。既行数十里，树下住食，担人呼共食，云“我自有食”，不肯出。……食未半，语担人“我欲与妇共食”，即复口吐出女子，年二十许，衣裳容貌甚美，二人便共食。食欲竟，其夫便卧；妇语担人，“我有外夫，欲来共食，夫觉，君勿道之。”妇便口中出一年少丈夫，共食。笼中便有三人，宽急之事，亦复不异。有顷，其夫动，如欲觉，妇便以外夫内口中。夫起，语担人曰，“可去！”即以妇内口中，次及食器物。……（《法苑珠林》六十一，《太平御览》三百五十九）
太元十二年，有道人外国来，能吞刀吐火，吐珠玉金银，自说其所受师，即白衣，非沙门也。 尝行，见一人担担，上有小笼子，可受升余，语担人云，“吾步行疲极，欲寄君担。 ”担人甚怪之，虑是狂人，便语之云，“自可耳。 ”…… 即入笼中，笼不更大，其人亦不更小，担之亦不觉重于先。 既行数十里，树下住食，担人呼共食，云“我自有食”，不肯出。 …… 食未半，语担人“我欲与妇共食”，即复口吐出女子，年二十许，衣裳容貌甚美，二人便共食。 食欲竟，其夫便卧；妇语担人，“我有外夫，欲来共食，夫觉，君勿道之。 ”妇便口中出一年少丈夫，共食。 笼中便有三人，宽急之事，亦复不异。 有顷，其夫动，如欲觉，妇便以外夫内口中。 夫起，语担人曰，“可去！”即以妇内口中，次及食器物。 …… （《法苑珠林》六十一，《太平御览》三百五十九）

第六篇　六朝之鬼神志怪书（下）

第六篇　六朝之鬼神志怪书（下）

第六篇　六朝之鬼神志怪书（下）

Chapter 6 The Ghosts and Gods of the Six Dynasties (Part II)释氏辅教之书，《隋志》著录九家，在子部及史部，今惟颜之推《冤魂志》存，引经史以证报应，已开混合儒释之端矣，而余则俱佚。遗文之可考见者，有宋刘义庆《宣验记》，齐王琰《冥祥记》，隋颜之推《集灵记》，侯白《旌异记》四种，大抵记经像之显效，明应验之实有，以震耸世俗，使生敬信之心，顾后世则或视为小说。王琰者，太原人，幼在交趾，受五戒，于宋大明及建元（五世纪中）年，两感金像之异，因作记，撰集像事，继以经塔，凡十卷，谓之《冥祥》，自序其事甚悉（见《法苑珠林》卷十七）。《冥祥记》在《珠林》及《太平广记》中所存最多，其叙述亦最委曲详尽，今略引三事，以概其余。
释氏辅教之书，《隋志》著录九家，在子部及史部，今惟颜之推《冤魂志》存，引经史以证报应，已开混合儒释之端矣，而余则俱佚。 遗文之可考见者，有宋刘义庆《宣验记》，齐王琰《冥祥记》，隋颜之推《集灵记》，侯白《旌异记》四种，大抵记经像之显效，明应验之实有，以震耸世俗，使生敬信之心，顾后世则或视为小说。 王琰者，太原人，幼在交趾，受五戒，于宋大明及建元（五世纪中）年，两感金像之异，因作记，撰集像事，继以经塔，凡十卷，谓之《冥祥》，自序其事甚悉（见《法苑珠林》卷十七）。 《冥祥记》在《珠林》及《太平广记》中所存最多，其叙述亦最委曲详尽，今略引三事，以概其余。汉明帝梦见神人，形垂二丈，身黄金色，项佩日光。以问群臣，或对曰，“西方有神，其号曰佛，形如陛下所梦，得无是乎？”于是发使天竺，写致经像。表之中夏，自天子王侯，咸敬事之，闻人死精神不灭，莫不惧然自失。初，使者蔡愔将西域沙门迦叶摩腾等赍优填王画释迦佛像，帝重之，如梦所见也，乃遣画工图之数本，于南宫清凉台及高阳门显节寿陵上供养。又于白马寺壁画千乘万骑绕塔三匝之像，如诸传备载。（《珠林》十三）
汉明帝梦见神人，形垂二丈，身黄金色，项佩日光。 以问群臣，或对曰，“西方有神，其号曰佛，形如陛下所梦，得无是乎？”于是发使天竺，写致经像。 表之中夏，自天子王侯，咸敬事之，闻人死精神不灭，莫不惧然自失。 初，使者蔡愔将西域沙门迦叶摩腾等赍优填王画释迦佛像，帝重之，如梦所见也，乃遣画工图之数本，于南宫清凉台及高阳门显节寿陵上供养。 又于白马寺壁画千乘万骑绕塔三匝之像，如诸传备载。 （《珠林》十三）晋谢敷字庆绪，会稽山阴人也，……少有高操，隐于东山，笃信大法，精勤不倦，手写《首楞严经》，当在都白马寺中，寺为灾火所延，什物余经，并成煨尽，而此经止烧纸头界外而已，文字悉存，无所毁失。敷死时，友人疑其得道，及闻此经，弥复惊异。……（《珠林》十八）
晋谢敷字庆绪，会稽山阴人也，…… 少有高操，隐于东山，笃信大法，精勤不倦，手写《首楞严经》，当在都白马寺中，寺为灾火所延，什物余经，并成煨尽，而此经止烧纸头界外而已，文字悉存，无所毁失。 敷死时，友人疑其得道，及闻此经，弥复惊异。 …… （《珠林》十八）晋赵泰字文和，清河贝丘人也，……年三十五时，尝卒心痛，须臾而死。下尸于地，心暖不已，屈伸随人。留尸十日，平旦，喉中有声如雨，俄而苏活。说初死之时，梦有一人来近心下，复有二人乘黄马，从者二人，扶泰腋径将东行，不知可几里，至一大城，崔巍高峻，城色青黑。将泰向城门入，经两重门，有瓦屋可数千间，男女大小亦数千人，行列而立。吏著皂衣，有五六人，条疏姓字，云“当以科呈府君”。泰名在三十，须臾，将泰与数千人男女一时俱进。府君西向坐，简视名簿讫，复遣泰南入黑门。有人著绛衣坐大屋下，以次呼名，问“生时所事？作何孽罪？行何福善？谛汝等辞，以实言也！此恒遣六部使者常在人间，疏记善恶，具有条状，不可得虚。”泰答“父兄仕宦，皆二千石。我少在家，修学而已，无所事也，亦不犯恶。”乃遣泰为水官将作。……后转泰水官都督知诸狱事，给泰兵马，令案行地狱。所至诸狱，楚毒各殊：或针贯其舌，流血竟体；或被头露发，裸形徒跣，相牵而行，有持大杖，从后催促，铁床铜柱，烧之洞然，驱迫此人，抱卧其上，赴即焦烂，寻复还生；……或剑树高广，不知限量，根茎枝叶，皆剑为之，人众相訾，自登自攀，若有欣竞，而身首割截，尺寸离断。泰见祖父母及二弟在此狱中，相见涕泣。泰出狱门，见有二人赍文书，来语狱吏，言有三人，其家为其于塔寺中悬幡烧香，救解其罪，可出福舍。俄见三人自狱而出，已有自然衣服，完整在身，南诣一门，云名开光大舍。……泰案行毕，还水官处。……主者曰，“卿无罪过，故相使为水官都督，不尔，与地狱中人无以异也。”泰问主者曰，“人有何行，死得乐报？”主者唯言“奉法弟子精进持戒，得乐报，无有谪罚也。”泰复问曰，“人未事法时所行罪过，事法之后，得以除不？”答曰，“皆除也。”语毕，主者开縢箧检泰年纪，尚有余算三十年在，乃遣泰还。……时晋太始五年七月十三日也。……（《珠林》七，《广记》三百七十七）
晋赵泰字文和，清河贝丘人也，…… 年三十五时，尝卒心痛，须臾而死。 下尸于地，心暖不已，屈伸随人。 留尸十日，平旦，喉中有声如雨，俄而苏活。 说初死之时，梦有一人来近心下，复有二人乘黄马，从者二人，扶泰腋径将东行，不知可几里，至一大城，崔巍高峻，城色青黑。 将泰向城门入，经两重门，有瓦屋可数千间，男女大小亦数千人，行列而立。 吏著皂衣，有五六人，条疏姓字，云“当以科呈府君”。 泰名在三十，须臾，将泰与数千人男女一时俱进。 府君西向坐，简视名簿讫，复遣泰南入黑门。 有人著绛衣坐大屋下，以次呼名，问“生时所事？作何孽罪？行何福善？谛汝等辞，以实言也！此恒遣六部使者常在人间，疏记善恶，具有条状，不可得虚。 ”泰答“父兄仕宦，皆二千石。 我少在家，修学而已，无所事也，亦不犯恶。 ”乃遣泰为水官将作。 …… 后转泰水官都督知诸狱事，给泰兵马，令案行地狱。 所至诸狱，楚毒各殊：或针贯其舌，流血竟体；或被头露发，裸形徒跣，相牵而行，有持大杖，从后催促，铁床铜柱，烧之洞然，驱迫此人，抱卧其上，赴即焦烂，寻复还生；…… 或剑树高广，不知限量，根茎枝叶，皆剑为之，人众相訾，自登自攀，若有欣竞，而身首割截，尺寸离断。 泰见祖父母及二弟在此狱中，相见涕泣。 泰出狱门，见有二人赍文书，来语狱吏，言有三人，其家为其于塔寺中悬幡烧香，救解其罪，可出福舍。 俄见三人自狱而出，已有自然衣服，完整在身，南诣一门，云名开光大舍。 …… 泰案行毕，还水官处。 …… 主者曰，“卿无罪过，故相使为水官都督，不尔，与地狱中人无以异也。 ”泰问主者曰，“人有何行，死得乐报？”主者唯言“奉法弟子精进持戒，得乐报，无有谪罚也。 ”泰复问曰，“人未事法时所行罪过，事法之后，得以除不？”答曰，“皆除也。 ”语毕，主者开縢箧检泰年纪，尚有余算三十年在，乃遣泰还。 …… 时晋太始五年七月十三日也。 …… （《珠林》七，《广记》三百七十七）佛教既渐流播，经论日多，杂说亦日出，闻者虽或悟无常而归依，然亦或怖无常而却走。此之反动，则有方士亦自造伪经，多作异记，以长生久视之道，网罗天下之逃苦空者，今所存汉小说，除一二文人著述外，其余盖皆是矣。方士撰书，大抵托名古人，故称晋宋人作者不多有，惟类书间有引《神异记》者，则为道士王浮作。浮，晋人，有浅妄之称，即惠帝时（三世纪末至四世纪初）与帛远抗论屡屈，遂改换《西域传》造老子《明威化胡经》者也（见唐释法琳《辩正论》六）。其记似亦言神仙鬼神，如《洞冥》《列异》之类。
佛教既渐流播，经论日多，杂说亦日出，闻者虽或悟无常而归依，然亦或怖无常而却走。 此之反动，则有方士亦自造伪经，多作异记，以长生久视之道，网罗天下之逃苦空者，今所存汉小说，除一二文人著述外，其余盖皆是矣。 方士撰书，大抵托名古人，故称晋宋人作者不多有，惟类书间有引《神异记》者，则为道士王浮作。 浮，晋人，有浅妄之称，即惠帝时（三世纪末至四世纪初）与帛远抗论屡屈，遂改换《西域传》造老子《明威化胡经》者也（见唐释法琳《辩正论》六）。 其记似亦言神仙鬼神，如《洞冥》《列异》之类。陈敏，孙皓之世为江夏太守，自建业赴职，闻宫亭庙验（原注云言灵验），过乞在任安稳，当上银杖一枚。年限既满，作杖拟以还庙，捶铁以为干，以银涂之。寻征为散骑常侍，往宫亭送杖于庙中，讫即进路。日晚，降神巫宣教曰，“陈敏许我银杖，今以涂杖见与，便投水中，当以还之。欺蔑之罪，不可容也！”于是取银杖看之，剖视中见铁干，乃置之湖中。杖浮在水上，其疾如飞，遥到敏舫前，敏舟遂覆也。（《太平御览》七百十）
陈敏，孙皓之世为江夏太守，自建业赴职，闻宫亭庙验（原注云言灵验），过乞在任安稳，当上银杖一枚。 年限既满，作杖拟以还庙，捶铁以为干，以银涂之。 寻征为散骑常侍，往宫亭送杖于庙中，讫即进路。 日晚，降神巫宣教曰，“陈敏许我银杖，今以涂杖见与，便投水中，当以还之。 欺蔑之罪，不可容也！”于是取银杖看之，剖视中见铁干，乃置之湖中。 杖浮在水上，其疾如飞，遥到敏舫前，敏舟遂覆也。 （《太平御览》七百十）丹丘生大茗，服之生羽翼。（《事类赋》注十六）
丹丘生大茗，服之生羽翼。 （《事类赋》注十六）《拾遗记》十卷，题晋陇西王嘉撰，梁萧绮录。《晋书》《艺术列传》中有王嘉，略云，嘉字子年，陇西安阳人，初隐于东阳谷，后入长安，苻坚累征不起，能言未然之事，辞如谶记，当时鲜能晓之。姚苌入长安，逼嘉自随；后以答问失苌意，为苌所杀（约三九〇）。嘉尝造《牵三歌谶》，又著《拾遗录》十卷，其事多诡怪，今行于世。传所云《拾遗录》者，盖即今记，前有萧绮序，言书本十九卷，二百二十篇，当苻秦之季，典章散灭，此书亦多有亡，绮更删繁存实，合为一部，凡十卷。今书前九卷起庖牺迄东晋，末一卷则记昆仑等九仙山，与序所谓“事讫西晋之末”者稍不同。其文笔颇靡丽，而事皆诞谩无实，萧绮之录亦附会，胡应麟（《笔丛》三十二）以为“盖即绮撰而托之王嘉”者也。
《拾遗记》十卷，题晋陇西王嘉撰，梁萧绮录。 《晋书》《艺术列传》中有王嘉，略云，嘉字子年，陇西安阳人，初隐于东阳谷，后入长安，苻坚累征不起，能言未然之事，辞如谶记，当时鲜能晓之。 姚苌入长安，逼嘉自随；后以答问失苌意，为苌所杀（约三九〇）。 嘉尝造《牵三歌谶》，又著《拾遗录》十卷，其事多诡怪，今行于世。 传所云《拾遗录》者，盖即今记，前有萧绮序，言书本十九卷，二百二十篇，当苻秦之季，典章散灭，此书亦多有亡，绮更删繁存实，合为一部，凡十卷。 今书前九卷起庖牺迄东晋，末一卷则记昆仑等九仙山，与序所谓“事讫西晋之末”者稍不同。 其文笔颇靡丽，而事皆诞谩无实，萧绮之录亦附会，胡应麟（《笔丛》三十二）以为“盖即绮撰而托之王嘉”者也。少昊以金德王，母曰皇娥，处璇宫而夜织，或乘桴木而昼游，经历穷桑沧茫之浦。时有神童，容貌绝俗，称为白帝之子，即太白之精，降乎水际，与皇娥宴戏，奏便娟之乐，游漾忘归。穷桑者，西海之滨，有孤桑之树，直上千寻，叶红椹紫，万岁一实，食之后天而老。……帝子与皇娥并坐，抚桐峰梓瑟，皇娥倚瑟而清歌曰，“天清地旷浩茫茫，万象回薄化无方，浛天荡荡望沧沧，乘桴轻漾著日傍，当其何所至穷桑，心知和乐悦未央。”俗谓游乐之处为桑中也，《诗》《卫风》云“期我乎桑中”，盖类此也。……及皇娥生少昊，号曰穷桑氏，亦曰桑丘氏。至六国时，桑丘子著阴阳书，即其余裔也。……（卷一）
少昊以金德王，母曰皇娥，处璇宫而夜织，或乘桴木而昼游，经历穷桑沧茫之浦。 时有神童，容貌绝俗，称为白帝之子，即太白之精，降乎水际，与皇娥宴戏，奏便娟之乐，游漾忘归。 穷桑者，西海之滨，有孤桑之树，直上千寻，叶红椹紫，万岁一实，食之后天而老。 …… 帝子与皇娥并坐，抚桐峰梓瑟，皇娥倚瑟而清歌曰，“天清地旷浩茫茫，万象回薄化无方，浛天荡荡望沧沧，乘桴轻漾著日傍，当其何所至穷桑，心知和乐悦未央。 ”俗谓游乐之处为桑中也，《诗》《卫风》云“期我乎桑中”，盖类此也。 …… 及皇娥生少昊，号曰穷桑氏，亦曰桑丘氏。 至六国时，桑丘子著阴阳书，即其余裔也。 …… （卷一）刘向于成帝之末，校书天禄阁，专精覃思。夜，有老人著黄衣，植青藜杖，登阁而进，见向暗中独坐诵书，老父乃吹杖端，烟燃，因以见向，说开辟已前。向因受五行洪范之文，恐辞说繁广忘之，乃裂帛及绅，以记其言，至曙而去。向请问姓名，云“我是太一之精，天帝闻卯金之子有博学者，下而观焉”。乃出怀中竹牒，有天文地图之书，“余略授子焉”。至向子歆，从向授其术。向亦不悟此人焉。（卷六）
刘向于成帝之末，校书天禄阁，专精覃思。 夜，有老人著黄衣，植青藜杖，登阁而进，见向暗中独坐诵书，老父乃吹杖端，烟燃，因以见向，说开辟已前。 向因受五行洪范之文，恐辞说繁广忘之，乃裂帛及绅，以记其言，至曙而去。 向请问姓名，云“我是太一之精，天帝闻卯金之子有博学者，下而观焉”。 乃出怀中竹牒，有天文地图之书，“余略授子焉”。 至向子歆，从向授其术。 向亦不悟此人焉。 （卷六）洞庭山浮于水上，其下有金堂数百间，玉女居之，四时闻金石丝竹之声，彻于山顶。楚怀王之时，举群才赋诗于水湄。……后怀王好进奸雄，群贤逃越。屈原以忠见斥，隐于沅湘，披蓁茹草，混同禽兽，不交世务，采柏实以和桂膏，用养心神，被王逼逐，乃赴清泠之水，楚人思慕，谓之水仙。其神游于天河，精灵时降湘浦，楚人为之立祠，汉末犹在。（卷十）
洞庭山浮于水上，其下有金堂数百间，玉女居之，四时闻金石丝竹之声，彻于山顶。 楚怀王之时，举群才赋诗于水湄。 …… 后怀王好进奸雄，群贤逃越。 屈原以忠见斥，隐于沅湘，披蓁茹草，混同禽兽，不交世务，采柏实以和桂膏，用养心神，被王逼逐，乃赴清泠之水，楚人思慕，谓之水仙。 其神游于天河，精灵时降湘浦，楚人为之立祠，汉末犹在。 （卷十）

第七篇　《世说新语》与其前后

第七篇　《世说新语》与其前后

第七篇　《世说新语》与其前后

Chapter 7 "The New Language of the World" and its before and after汉末士流，已重品目，声名成毁，决于片言，魏晋以来，乃弥以标格语言相尚，惟吐属则流于玄虚，举止则故为疏放，与汉之惟俊伟坚卓为重者，甚不侔矣。盖其时释教广被，颇扬脱俗之风，而老庄之说亦大盛，其因佛而崇老为反动，而厌离于世间则一致，相拒而实相扇，终乃汗漫而为清谈。渡江以后，此风弥甚，有违言者，惟一二枭雄而已。世之所尚，因有撰集，或者掇拾旧闻，或者记述近事，虽不过丛残小语，而俱为人间言动，遂脱志怪之牢笼也。
汉末士流，已重品目，声名成毁，决于片言，魏晋以来，乃弥以标格语言相尚，惟吐属则流于玄虚，举止则故为疏放，与汉之惟俊伟坚卓为重者，甚不侔矣。 盖其时释教广被，颇扬脱俗之风，而老庄之说亦大盛，其因佛而崇老为反动，而厌离于世间则一致，相拒而实相扇，终乃汗漫而为清谈。 渡江以后，此风弥甚，有违言者，惟一二枭雄而已。 世之所尚，因有撰集，或者掇拾旧闻，或者记述近事，虽不过丛残小语，而俱为人间言动，遂脱志怪之牢笼也。记人间事者已甚古，列御寇韩非皆有录载，惟其所以录载者，列在用以喻道，韩在储以论政。若为赏心而作，则实萌芽于魏而盛大于晋，虽不免追随俗尚，或供揣摩，然要为远实用而近娱乐矣。晋隆和（三六二）中，有处士河东裴启，撰汉魏以来迄于同时言语应对之可称者，谓之《语林》，时颇盛行，以记谢安语不实，为安所诋，书遂废（详见《世说新语》《轻诋篇》）。后仍时有，凡十卷，至隋而亡，然群书中亦常见其遗文也。
记人间事者已甚古，列御寇韩非皆有录载，惟其所以录载者，列在用以喻道，韩在储以论政。 若为赏心而作，则实萌芽于魏而盛大于晋，虽不免追随俗尚，或供揣摩，然要为远实用而近娱乐矣。 晋隆和（三六二）中，有处士河东裴启，撰汉魏以来迄于同时言语应对之可称者，谓之《语林》，时颇盛行，以记谢安语不实，为安所诋，书遂废（详见《世说新语》《轻诋篇》）。 后仍时有，凡十卷，至隋而亡，然群书中亦常见其遗文也。娄护字君卿，历游五侯之门，每旦，五侯家各遗饷之，君卿口厌滋味，乃试合五侯所饷之鲭而食，甚美。世所谓“五侯鲭”，君卿所致。（《太平广记》二百三十四）
娄护字君卿，历游五侯之门，每旦，五侯家各遗饷之，君卿口厌滋味，乃试合五侯所饷之鲭而食，甚美。 世所谓“五侯鲭”，君卿所致。 （《太平广记》二百三十四）魏武云，“我眠中不可妄近，近辄斫人不觉。左右宜慎之！”后乃阳冻眠，所幸小儿窃以被覆之，因便斫杀，自尔莫敢近。（《太平御览》七百七）
魏武云，“我眠中不可妄近，近辄斫人不觉。 左右宜慎之！”后乃阳冻眠，所幸小儿窃以被覆之，因便斫杀，自尔莫敢近。 （《太平御览》七百七）钟士季尝向人道，“吾年少时一纸书，人云是阮步兵书，皆字字生义，既知是吾，不复道也。”（《续谈助》四）
钟士季尝向人道，“吾年少时一纸书，人云是阮步兵书，皆字字生义，既知是吾，不复道也。 ”（《续谈助》四）祖士言与钟雅语相调，钟语祖曰，“我汝颍之士利如锥，卿燕代之士钝如槌。”祖曰，“以我钝槌，打尔利锥。”钟曰，“自有神锥，不可得打。”祖曰，“既有神锥，必有神槌。”钟遂屈。（《御览》四百六十六）
祖士言与钟雅语相调，钟语祖曰，“我汝颍之士利如锥，卿燕代之士钝如槌。 ”祖曰，“以我钝槌，打尔利锥。 ”钟曰，“自有神锥，不可得打。 ”祖曰，“既有神锥，必有神槌。 ”钟遂屈。 （《御览》四百六十六）王子猷尝暂寄人空宅住，使令种竹。或问暂住何烦尔？啸咏良久，直指竹曰，“何可一日无此君。”（《御览》三百八十九）
王子猷尝暂寄人空宅住，使令种竹。 或问暂住何烦尔？啸咏良久，直指竹曰，“何可一日无此君。 ”（《御览》三百八十九）《隋志》又有《郭子》三卷，东晋中郎郭澄之撰，《唐志》云，“贾泉注”，今亡。审其遗文，亦与《语林》相类。
《隋志》又有《郭子》三卷，东晋中郎郭澄之撰，《唐志》云，“贾泉注”，今亡。 审其遗文，亦与《语林》相类。宋临川王刘义庆有《世说》八卷，梁刘孝标注之为十卷，见《隋志》。今存者三卷曰《世说新语》，为宋人晏殊所删并，于注亦小有剪裁，然不知何人又加新语二字，唐时则曰新书，殆以《汉志》儒家类录刘向所序六十七篇中，已有《世说》，因增字以别之也。《世说新语》今本凡三十八篇，自《德行》至《仇隙》，以类相从，事起后汉，止于东晋，记言则玄远冷俊，记行则高简瑰奇，下至缪惑，亦资一笑。孝标作注，又征引浩博。或驳或申，映带本文，增其隽永，所用书四百余种，今又多不存，故世人尤珍重之。然《世说》文字，间或与裴郭二家书所记相同，殆亦犹《幽明录》《宣验记》然，乃纂缉旧文，非由自造：《宋书》言义庆才词不多，而招聚文学之士，远近必至，则诸书或成于众手，未可知也。
宋临川王刘义庆有《世说》八卷，梁刘孝标注之为十卷，见《隋志》。 今存者三卷曰《世说新语》，为宋人晏殊所删并，于注亦小有剪裁，然不知何人又加新语二字，唐时则曰新书，殆以《汉志》儒家类录刘向所序六十七篇中，已有《世说》，因增字以别之也。 《世说新语》今本凡三十八篇，自《德行》至《仇隙》，以类相从，事起后汉，止于东晋，记言则玄远冷俊，记行则高简瑰奇，下至缪惑，亦资一笑。 孝标作注，又征引浩博。 或驳或申，映带本文，增其隽永，所用书四百余种，今又多不存，故世人尤珍重之。 然《世说》文字，间或与裴郭二家书所记相同，殆亦犹《幽明录》《宣验记》然，乃纂缉旧文，非由自造：《宋书》言义庆才词不多，而招聚文学之士，远近必至，则诸书或成于众手，未可知也。阮光禄在剡，曾有好车，借者无不皆给。有人葬母，意欲借而不敢言。阮后闻之，叹曰，“吾有车而使人不敢借，何以车为？”遂焚之。（卷上《德行篇》）
阮光禄在剡，曾有好车，借者无不皆给。 有人葬母，意欲借而不敢言。 阮后闻之，叹曰，“吾有车而使人不敢借，何以车为？”遂焚之。 （卷上《德行篇》）阮宣子有令闻，太尉王夷甫见而问曰，“老庄与圣教同异？”对曰，“将无同。”太尉善其言，辟之为掾，世谓“三语掾”。（卷上《文学篇》）
阮宣子有令闻，太尉王夷甫见而问曰，“老庄与圣教同异？”对曰，“将无同。 ”太尉善其言，辟之为掾，世谓“三语掾”。 （卷上《文学篇》）祖士少好财，阮遥集好屐，并恒自经营，同是一累，而未判其得失。人有诣祖，见料视财物，客至，屏当未尽，余两小簏，著背后倾身障之，意未能平。或有诣阮，见自吹火蜡屐，因叹曰，“未知一生当著几量屐？”神色闲畅。于是胜负始分。（卷中《雅量篇》）
祖士少好财，阮遥集好屐，并恒自经营，同是一累，而未判其得失。 人有诣祖，见料视财物，客至，屏当未尽，余两小簏，著背后倾身障之，意未能平。 或有诣阮，见自吹火蜡屐，因叹曰，“未知一生当著几量屐？”神色闲畅。 于是胜负始分。 （卷中《雅量篇》）世目李元礼“谡谡如松下劲风”。（卷中《赏誉篇》）
世目李元礼“谡谡如松下劲风”。 （卷中《赏誉篇》）公孙度目邴原：“所谓云中白鹤，非燕雀之网所能罗也。”（同上）
公孙度目邴原：“所谓云中白鹤，非燕雀之网所能罗也。 ”（同上）刘伶恒纵酒放达，或脱衣裸形在屋中。人见讥之。伶曰，“我以天地为栋宇，屋室为衣，诸君何为入我中？”（卷下《任诞篇》）
刘伶恒纵酒放达，或脱衣裸形在屋中。 人见讥之。 伶曰，“我以天地为栋宇，屋室为衣，诸君何为入我中？”（卷下《任诞篇》）石崇每要客燕集，常令美人行酒，客饮酒不尽者，使黄门交斩美人。王丞相与大将军尝共诣崇，丞相素不能饮，辄自勉强，至于沉醉。每至大将军，固不饮以观其变，已斩三人，颜色如故，尚不肯饮，丞相让之，大将军曰，“自杀伊家人，何预卿事？”（卷下《汰侈篇》）
石崇每要客燕集，常令美人行酒，客饮酒不尽者，使黄门交斩美人。 王丞相与大将军尝共诣崇，丞相素不能饮，辄自勉强，至于沉醉。 每至大将军，固不饮以观其变，已斩三人，颜色如故，尚不肯饮，丞相让之，大将军曰，“自杀伊家人，何预卿事？”（卷下《汰侈篇》）梁沈约（四四一——五一三，《梁书》有传）作《俗说》三卷，亦此类，今亡。梁武帝尝敕安右长史殷芸（四七一——五二九，《梁书》有传）撰《小说》三十卷，至隋仅存十卷，明初尚存，今乃止见于《续谈助》及原本《说郛》中，亦采集群书而成，以时代为次第，而特置帝王之事于卷首，继以周汉，终于南齐。
梁沈约（四四一——五一三，《梁书》有传）作《俗说》三卷，亦此类，今亡。 梁武帝尝敕安右长史殷芸（四七一——五二九，《梁书》有传）撰《小说》三十卷，至隋仅存十卷，明初尚存，今乃止见于《续谈助》及原本《说郛》中，亦采集群书而成，以时代为次第，而特置帝王之事于卷首，继以周汉，终于南齐。晋咸康中，有士人周谓者，死而复生，言天帝召见，引升殿，仰视帝，面方一尺。问左右曰，“是古张天帝耶？”答云，“上古天帝，久已圣去，此近曹明帝也。”（《绀珠集》二）
晋咸康中，有士人周谓者，死而复生，言天帝召见，引升殿，仰视帝，面方一尺。 问左右曰，“是古张天帝耶？”答云，“上古天帝，久已圣去，此近曹明帝也。 ”（《绀珠集》二）孝武未尝见驴，谢太傅问曰，“陛下想其形当何所似？”孝武掩口笑云，“正当似猪。”（《续谈助》四。原注云，出《世说》。案今本无之。）
孝武未尝见驴，谢太傅问曰，“陛下想其形当何所似？”孝武掩口笑云，“正当似猪。 ”（《续谈助》四。 原注云，出《世说》。 案今本无之。 ）孔子尝游于山，使子路取水。逢虎于水所，与共战，揽尾得之，内怀中；取水还。问孔子曰，“上士杀虎如之何？”子曰，“上士杀虎持虎头。”又问曰，“中士杀虎如之何？”子曰，“中士杀虎持虎耳。”又问，“下士杀虎如之何？”子曰，“下士杀虎捉虎尾。”子路出尾弃之，因恚孔子曰，“夫子知水所有虎，使我取水，是欲死我。”乃怀石盘欲中孔子，又问“上士杀人如之何？”子曰，“上士杀人使笔端。”又问曰，“中士杀人如之何？”子曰，“中士杀人用舌端。”又问“下士杀人如之何？”子曰，“下士杀人怀石盘。”子路出而弃之，于是心服。（原本《说郛》二十五。原注云，出《冲波传》。）
孔子尝游于山，使子路取水。 逢虎于水所，与共战，揽尾得之，内怀中；取水还。 问孔子曰，“上士杀虎如之何？”子曰，“上士杀虎持虎头。 ”又问曰，“中士杀虎如之何？”子曰，“中士杀虎持虎耳。 ”又问，“下士杀虎如之何？”子曰，“下士杀虎捉虎尾。 ”子路出尾弃之，因恚孔子曰，“夫子知水所有虎，使我取水，是欲死我。 ”乃怀石盘欲中孔子，又问“上士杀人如之何？”子曰，“上士杀人使笔端。 ”又问曰，“中士杀人如之何？”子曰，“中士杀人用舌端。 ”又问“下士杀人如之何？”子曰，“下士杀人怀石盘。 ”子路出而弃之，于是心服。 （原本《说郛》二十五。 原注云，出《冲波传》。 ）鬼谷先生与苏秦张仪书云，“二君足下，功名赫赫，但春华到秋，不得久茂。日数将冬，时讫将老。子独不见河边之树乎？仆御折其枝，波浪激其根；此木非与天下人有仇怨，盖所居者然。子见嵩岱之松柏，华霍之树檀？上叶干青云，下根通三泉，上有猿狖，下有赤豹麒麟，千秋万岁，不逢斧斤之伐：此木非与天下之人有骨肉，亦所居者然。今二子好朝露之荣，忽长久之功，轻乔松之求延，贵一旦之浮爵，夫‘女爱不极席，男欢不毕轮’，痛夫痛夫，二君二君！”（《续谈助》四。原注云，出《鬼谷先生书》。）《隋志》又有《笑林》三卷，后汉给事中邯郸淳撰。淳一名竺，字子礼，颍川人，弱冠有异才，元嘉元年（一五一），上虞长度尚为曹娥立碑，淳者尚之弟子，于席间作碑文，操笔而成，无所点定，遂知名，黄初初（约二二一），为魏博士给事中，见《后汉书》《曹娥传》及《三国》《魏志》《王粲传》等注。《笑林》今佚，遗文存二十余事，举非违，显纰缪，实《世说》之一体，亦后来诽谐文字之权舆也。
鬼谷先生与苏秦张仪书云，“二君足下，功名赫赫，但春华到秋，不得久茂。 日数将冬，时讫将老。 子独不见河边之树乎？仆御折其枝，波浪激其根；此木非与天下人有仇怨，盖所居者然。 子见嵩岱之松柏，华霍之树檀？上叶干青云，下根通三泉，上有猿狖，下有赤豹麒麟，千秋万岁，不逢斧斤之伐：此木非与天下之人有骨肉，亦所居者然。 今二子好朝露之荣，忽长久之功，轻乔松之求延，贵一旦之浮爵，夫‘女爱不极席，男欢不毕轮’，痛夫痛夫，二君二君！”（《续谈助》四。 原注云，出《鬼谷先生书》。 ）《隋志》又有《笑林》三卷，后汉给事中邯郸淳撰。 淳一名竺，字子礼，颍川人，弱冠有异才，元嘉元年（一五一），上虞长度尚为曹娥立碑，淳者尚之弟子，于席间作碑文，操笔而成，无所点定，遂知名，黄初初（约二二一），为魏博士给事中，见《后汉书》《曹娥传》及《三国》《魏志》《王粲传》等注。 《笑林》今佚，遗文存二十余事，举非违，显纰缪，实《世说》之一体，亦后来诽谐文字之权舆也。鲁有执长竿入城门者，初，竖执之不可入，横执之亦不可入，计无所出。俄有老父至曰，“吾非圣人，但见事多矣，何不以锯中截而入！”遂依而截之。（《太平广记》二百六十二）
鲁有执长竿入城门者，初，竖执之不可入，横执之亦不可入，计无所出。 俄有老父至曰，“吾非圣人，但见事多矣，何不以锯中截而入！”遂依而截之。 （《太平广记》二百六十二）平原陶丘氏，取渤海墨台氏女，女色甚美，才甚令，复相敬，已生一男而归。母丁氏，年老，进见女婿。女婿既归而遣妇。妇临去请罪，夫曰，“曩见夫人年德已衰，非昔日比，亦恐新妇老后，必复如此，是以遣，实无他故。”（《太平御览》四百九十九）
平原陶丘氏，取渤海墨台氏女，女色甚美，才甚令，复相敬，已生一男而归。 母丁氏，年老，进见女婿。 女婿既归而遣妇。 妇临去请罪，夫曰，“曩见夫人年德已衰，非昔日比，亦恐新妇老后，必复如此，是以遣，实无他故。 ”（《太平御览》四百九十九）甲父母在，出学三年而归。舅氏问其学何所得，并序别父久。乃答曰，“渭阳之思，过于秦康。”既而父数之，“尔学奚益。”答曰，“少失过庭之训，故学无益。”（《广记》二百六十二）
甲父母在，出学三年而归。 舅氏问其学何所得，并序别父久。 乃答曰，“渭阳之思，过于秦康。 ”既而父数之，“尔学奚益。 ”答曰，“少失过庭之训，故学无益。 ”（《广记》二百六十二）甲与乙争斗，甲啮下乙鼻，官吏欲断之，甲称乙自啮落。吏曰，“夫人鼻高而口低，岂能就啮之乎？”甲曰，“他踏床子就啮之。”（同上）
甲与乙争斗，甲啮下乙鼻，官吏欲断之，甲称乙自啮落。 吏曰，“夫人鼻高而口低，岂能就啮之乎？”甲曰，“他踏床子就啮之。 ”（同上）《笑林》之后，不乏继作，《隋志》有《解颐》二卷。杨松玢撰，今一字不存，而群书常引《谈薮》，则《世说》之流也。《唐志》有《启颜录》十卷，侯白撰。白字君素，魏郡人，好学有捷才，滑稽善辩，举秀才为儒林郎，好为诽谐杂说，人多爱狎之，所在之处，观者如市。隋高祖闻其名，召令于秘书修国史，后给五品食，月余而死（约六世纪后叶）。见《隋书》《陆爽传》。《启颜录》今亦佚，然《太平广记》引用甚多，盖上取子史之旧文，近记一己之言行，事多浮浅，又好以鄙言调谑人，诽谐太过，时复流于轻薄矣。其有唐世事者，后人所加也；古书中往往有之，在小说尤甚。
《笑林》之后，不乏继作，《隋志》有《解颐》二卷。 杨松玢撰，今一字不存，而群书常引《谈薮》，则《世说》之流也。 《唐志》有《启颜录》十卷，侯白撰。 白字君素，魏郡人，好学有捷才，滑稽善辩，举秀才为儒林郎，好为诽谐杂说，人多爱狎之，所在之处，观者如市。 隋高祖闻其名，召令于秘书修国史，后给五品食，月余而死（约六世纪后叶）。 见《隋书》《陆爽传》。 《启颜录》今亦佚，然《太平广记》引用甚多，盖上取子史之旧文，近记一己之言行，事多浮浅，又好以鄙言调谑人，诽谐太过，时复流于轻薄矣。 其有唐世事者，后人所加也；古书中往往有之，在小说尤甚。开皇中，有人姓出名六斤，欲参（杨）素，赍名纸至省门，遇白，请为题其姓，乃书曰“六斤半”。名既入，素召其人，问曰，“卿姓六斤半？”答曰，“是出六斤。”曰，“何为六斤半？”曰，“向请侯秀才题之，当是错矣。”即召白至，谓曰，“卿何为错题人姓名？”对云，“不错。”素曰，“若不错，何因姓出名六斤，请卿题之，乃言六斤半？”对曰，“白在省门，会卒无处觅称，既闻道是出六斤，斟酌只应是六斤半。”素大笑之。（《广记》二百四十八）
开皇中，有人姓出名六斤，欲参（杨）素，赍名纸至省门，遇白，请为题其姓，乃书曰“六斤半”。 名既入，素召其人，问曰，“卿姓六斤半？”答曰，“是出六斤。 ”曰，“何为六斤半？”曰，“向请侯秀才题之，当是错矣。 ”即召白至，谓曰，“卿何为错题人姓名？”对云，“不错。 ”素曰，“若不错，何因姓出名六斤，请卿题之，乃言六斤半？”对曰，“白在省门，会卒无处觅称，既闻道是出六斤，斟酌只应是六斤半。 ”素大笑之。 （《广记》二百四十八）山东人娶蒲州女，多患瘿，其妻母项瘿甚大。成婚数月，妇家疑婿不慧，妇翁置酒盛会亲戚，欲以试之。问曰，“某郎在山东读书，应识道理。鸿鹤能鸣，何意？”曰，“天使其然。”又曰，“松柏冬青，何意？”曰，“天使其然。”又曰，“道边树有骨，何意？”曰，“天使其然。”妇翁曰，“某郎全不识道理，何因浪住山东？”因以戏之曰，“鸿鹤能鸣者颈项长，松柏冬青者心中强，道边树有骨者车拨伤：岂是天使其然？”婿曰，“虾蟆能鸣，岂是颈项长？竹亦冬青，岂是心中强？夫人项下瘿如许大，岂是车拨伤？”妇翁羞愧，无以对之。（同上）
山东人娶蒲州女，多患瘿，其妻母项瘿甚大。 成婚数月，妇家疑婿不慧，妇翁置酒盛会亲戚，欲以试之。 问曰，“某郎在山东读书，应识道理。 鸿鹤能鸣，何意？”曰，“天使其然。 ”又曰，“松柏冬青，何意？”曰，“天使其然。 ”又曰，“道边树有骨，何意？”曰，“天使其然。 ”妇翁曰，“某郎全不识道理，何因浪住山东？”因以戏之曰，“鸿鹤能鸣者颈项长，松柏冬青者心中强，道边树有骨者车拨伤：岂是天使其然？”婿曰，“虾蟆能鸣，岂是颈项长？竹亦冬青，岂是心中强？夫人项下瘿如许大，岂是车拨伤？”妇翁羞愧，无以对之。 （同上）其后则唐有何自然《笑林》，今亦佚，宋有吕居仁《轩渠录》，沈征《谐史》，周文玘《开颜集》，天和子《善谑集》，元明又十余种；大抵或取子史旧文，或拾同时琐事，殊不见有新意。惟托名东坡之《艾子杂说》稍卓特，顾往往嘲讽世情，讥刺时病，又异于《笑林》之无所为而作矣。
其后则唐有何自然《笑林》，今亦佚，宋有吕居仁《轩渠录》，沈征《谐史》，周文玘《开颜集》，天和子《善谑集》，元明又十余种；大抵或取子史旧文，或拾同时琐事，殊不见有新意。 惟托名东坡之《艾子杂说》稍卓特，顾往往嘲讽世情，讥刺时病，又异于《笑林》之无所为而作矣。至于《世说》一流，仿者尤众，刘孝标有《续世说》十卷，见《唐志》，然据《隋志》，则殆即所注临川书。唐有王方庆《续世说新书》（见《新唐志》杂家，今佚），宋有王谠《唐语林》，孔平仲《续世说》，明有何良俊《何氏语林》，李绍文《明世说新语》，焦竑《类林》及《玉堂丛话》，张墉《廿一史识余》，郑仲夔《清言》等；然纂旧闻则别无颖异，述时事则伤于矫揉，而世人犹复为之不已，至于清，又有梁维枢作《玉剑尊闻》，吴肃公作《明语林》，章抚功作《汉世说》，李清作《女世说》，颜从乔作《僧世说》，王晫作《今世说》，汪琬作《说铃》而惠栋为之补注，今亦尚有易宗夔作《新世说》也。
至于《世说》一流，仿者尤众，刘孝标有《续世说》十卷，见《唐志》，然据《隋志》，则殆即所注临川书。 唐有王方庆《续世说新书》（见《新唐志》杂家，今佚），宋有王谠《唐语林》，孔平仲《续世说》，明有何良俊《何氏语林》，李绍文《明世说新语》，焦竑《类林》及《玉堂丛话》，张墉《廿一史识余》，郑仲夔《清言》等；然纂旧闻则别无颖异，述时事则伤于矫揉，而世人犹复为之不已，至于清，又有梁维枢作《玉剑尊闻》，吴肃公作《明语林》，章抚功作《汉世说》，李清作《女世说》，颜从乔作《僧世说》，王晫作《今世说》，汪琬作《说铃》而惠栋为之补注，今亦尚有易宗夔作《新世说》也。

第八篇　唐之传奇文（上）

第八篇　唐之传奇文（上）

第八篇　唐之传奇文（上）

Chapter 8 The Legend of the Tang Dynasty (Part I)小说亦如诗，至唐代而一变，虽尚不离于搜奇记逸，然叙述宛转，文辞华艳，与六朝之粗陈梗概者较，演进之迹甚明，而尤显者乃在是时则始有意为小说。胡应麟（《笔丛》三十六）云，“变异之谈，盛于六朝，然多是传录舛讹，未必尽幻设语，至唐人乃作意好奇，假小说以寄笔端。”其云“作意”，云“幻设”者，则即意识之创造矣。此类文字，当时或为丛集，或为单篇，大率篇幅曼长，记叙委曲，时亦近于俳谐，故论者每訾其卑下，贬之曰“传奇”，以别于韩柳辈之高文。顾世间则甚风行，文人往往有作，投谒时或用之为行卷，今颇有留存于《太平广记》中者（他书所收，时代及撰人多错误不足据），实唐代特绝之作也。然而后来流派，乃亦不昌，但有演述，或者摹拟而已，惟元明人多本其事作杂剧或传奇，而影响遂及于曲。
小说亦如诗，至唐代而一变，虽尚不离于搜奇记逸，然叙述宛转，文辞华艳，与六朝之粗陈梗概者较，演进之迹甚明，而尤显者乃在是时则始有意为小说。 胡应麟（《笔丛》三十六）云，“变异之谈，盛于六朝，然多是传录舛讹，未必尽幻设语，至唐人乃作意好奇，假小说以寄笔端。 ”其云“作意”，云“幻设”者，则即意识之创造矣。 此类文字，当时或为丛集，或为单篇，大率篇幅曼长，记叙委曲，时亦近于俳谐，故论者每訾其卑下，贬之曰“传奇”，以别于韩柳辈之高文。 顾世间则甚风行，文人往往有作，投谒时或用之为行卷，今颇有留存于《太平广记》中者（他书所收，时代及撰人多错误不足据），实唐代特绝之作也。 然而后来流派，乃亦不昌，但有演述，或者摹拟而已，惟元明人多本其事作杂剧或传奇，而影响遂及于曲。幻设为文，晋世固已盛，如阮籍之《大人先生传》，刘伶之《酒德颂》，陶潜之《桃花源记》《五柳先生传》皆是矣，然咸以寓言为本，文词为末，故其流可衍为王绩《醉乡记》韩愈《圬者王承福传》柳宗元《种树郭橐驼传》等，而无涉于传奇。传奇者流，源盖出于志怪，然施之藻绘，扩其波澜，故所成就乃特异，其间虽亦或托讽喻以纾牢愁，谈祸福以寓惩劝，而大归则究在文采与意想，与昔之传鬼神明因果而外无他意者，甚异其趣矣。
幻设为文，晋世固已盛，如阮籍之《大人先生传》，刘伶之《酒德颂》，陶潜之《桃花源记》《五柳先生传》皆是矣，然咸以寓言为本，文词为末，故其流可衍为王绩《醉乡记》韩愈《圬者王承福传》柳宗元《种树郭橐驼传》等，而无涉于传奇。 传奇者流，源盖出于志怪，然施之藻绘，扩其波澜，故所成就乃特异，其间虽亦或托讽喻以纾牢愁，谈祸福以寓惩劝，而大归则究在文采与意想，与昔之传鬼神明因果而外无他意者，甚异其趣矣。隋唐间，有王度者，作《古镜记》（见《广记》二百三十，题曰《王度》），自述获神镜于侯生，能降精魅，后其弟勣（当作绩）远游，借以自随，亦杀诸鬼怪，顾终乃化去。其文甚长，然仅缀古镜诸灵异事，犹有六朝志怪流风。王度，太原祁人，文中子通之弟，东皋子绩兄也，盖生于开皇初（宋晁公武《郡斋读书志》十云通生于开皇四年），大业中为御史，罢归河东，复入长安为著作郎，奉诏修国史，又出兼芮城令，武德中卒（约五八五——六二五），史亦不成（见《古镜记》，《唐文粹》及《新唐书》《王绩传》，惟传云兄名凝，未详孰是），遗文仅存此篇而已。绩弃官归龙门后，史不言其游涉，盖度所假设也。
隋唐间，有王度者，作《古镜记》（见《广记》二百三十，题曰《王度》），自述获神镜于侯生，能降精魅，后其弟勣（当作绩）远游，借以自随，亦杀诸鬼怪，顾终乃化去。 其文甚长，然仅缀古镜诸灵异事，犹有六朝志怪流风。 王度，太原祁人，文中子通之弟，东皋子绩兄也，盖生于开皇初（宋晁公武《郡斋读书志》十云通生于开皇四年），大业中为御史，罢归河东，复入长安为著作郎，奉诏修国史，又出兼芮城令，武德中卒（约五八五——六二五），史亦不成（见《古镜记》，《唐文粹》及《新唐书》《王绩传》，惟传云兄名凝，未详孰是），遗文仅存此篇而已。 绩弃官归龙门后，史不言其游涉，盖度所假设也。唐初又有《补江总白猿传》一卷，不知何人作，宋时尚单行，今见《广记》（四百四十四，题曰《欧阳纥》）中。传言梁将欧阳纥略地至长乐，深入溪洞，其妻遂为白猿所掠，逮救归，已孕，周岁生一子，“厥状肖焉”。纥后为陈武帝所杀，子询以江总收养成人，入唐有盛名，而貌类猕猴，忌者因此作传，云以补江总，是知假小说以施诬蔑之风，其由来亦颇古矣。
唐初又有《补江总白猿传》一卷，不知何人作，宋时尚单行，今见《广记》（四百四十四，题曰《欧阳纥》）中。 传言梁将欧阳纥略地至长乐，深入溪洞，其妻遂为白猿所掠，逮救归，已孕，周岁生一子，“厥状肖焉”。 纥后为陈武帝所杀，子询以江总收养成人，入唐有盛名，而貌类猕猴，忌者因此作传，云以补江总，是知假小说以施诬蔑之风，其由来亦颇古矣。武后时，有深州陆浑人张字文成，以调露初登进士第，为岐王府参军，屡试皆甲科，大有文誉，调长安尉，然性躁卞，傥荡无检，姚崇尤恶之；开元初，御史李全交劾讪短时政，贬岭南，旋得内徙，终司门员外郎（约六六〇——七四〇，详见两《唐书》《张荐传》）。日本有《游仙窟》一卷，题宁州襄乐县尉张文成作，莫休符谓“弱冠应举，下笔成章，中书侍郎薛元超特授襄乐尉”（《桂林风土记》），则尚其年少时所为。自叙奉使河源，道中夜投大宅，逢二女曰十娘五嫂，宴饮欢笑，以诗相调，止宿而去，文近骈俪而时杂鄙语，气度与所作《朝野佥载》《龙筋凤髓判》正同，《唐书》谓“下笔辄成，浮艳少理致，其论著率诋诮芜秽，然大行一时，晚进莫不传记。……新罗日本使至，必出金宝购其文”，殆实录矣。《游仙窟》中国久失传，后人亦不复效其体制，今略录数十言以见大概，乃升堂燕饮时情状也。
武后时，有深州陆浑人张字文成，以调露初登进士第，为岐王府参军，屡试皆甲科，大有文誉，调长安尉，然性躁卞，傥荡无检，姚崇尤恶之；开元初，御史李全交劾讪短时政，贬岭南，旋得内徙，终司门员外郎（约六六〇——七四〇，详见两《唐书》《张荐传》）。 日本有《游仙窟》一卷，题宁州襄乐县尉张文成作，莫休符谓“弱冠应举，下笔成章，中书侍郎薛元超特授襄乐尉”（《桂林风土记》），则尚其年少时所为。 自叙奉使河源，道中夜投大宅，逢二女曰十娘五嫂，宴饮欢笑，以诗相调，止宿而去，文近骈俪而时杂鄙语，气度与所作《朝野佥载》《龙筋凤髓判》正同，《唐书》谓“下笔辄成，浮艳少理致，其论著率诋诮芜秽，然大行一时，晚进莫不传记。 …… 新罗日本使至，必出金宝购其文”，殆实录矣。 《游仙窟》中国久失传，后人亦不复效其体制，今略录数十言以见大概，乃升堂燕饮时情状也。……十娘唤香儿为少府设乐，金石并奏，箫管间响：苏合弹琵琶，绿竹吹筚篥，仙人鼓瑟，玉女吹笙，玄鹤俯而听琴，白鱼跃而应节。清音咷叨，片时则梁上尘飞，雅韵铿锵，卒尔则天边雪落，一时忘味，孔丘留滞不虚，三日绕梁，韩娥余音是实。……两人俱起舞，共劝下官，……遂舞著词曰，“从来巡绕四边，忽逢两个神仙，眉上冬天出柳，颊中旱地生莲，千看千处妩媚，万看万种妍，今宵若其不得，刺命过与黄泉。”又一时大笑。舞毕，因谢曰，“仆实庸才，得陪清赏，赐垂音乐，惭荷不胜。”十娘咏曰，“得意似鸳鸯，情乖若胡越，不向君边尽，更知何处歇？”十娘曰，“儿等并无可收采，少府公云‘冬天出柳，旱地生莲’，总是相弄也。”……
…… 十娘唤香儿为少府设乐，金石并奏，箫管间响：苏合弹琵琶，绿竹吹筚篥，仙人鼓瑟，玉女吹笙，玄鹤俯而听琴，白鱼跃而应节。 清音咷叨，片时则梁上尘飞，雅韵铿锵，卒尔则天边雪落，一时忘味，孔丘留滞不虚，三日绕梁，韩娥余音是实。 …… 两人俱起舞，共劝下官，…… 遂舞著词曰，“从来巡绕四边，忽逢两个神仙，眉上冬天出柳，颊中旱地生莲，千看千处妩媚，万看万种妍，今宵若其不得，刺命过与黄泉。 ”又一时大笑。 舞毕，因谢曰，“仆实庸才，得陪清赏，赐垂音乐，惭荷不胜。 ”十娘咏曰，“得意似鸳鸯，情乖若胡越，不向君边尽，更知何处歇？”十娘曰，“儿等并无可收采，少府公云‘冬天出柳，旱地生莲’，总是相弄也。 ”……然作者蔚起，则在开元天宝以后。大历中有沈既济，苏州吴人，经学该博，以杨炎荐，召拜左拾遗史馆修撰。贞元时炎得罪，既济办贬处州司户参军，既入朝，位礼部员外郎，卒（约七五〇——八〇〇）。撰《建中实录》，人称其能，《新唐书》有传。《文苑英华》（八百三十三）录其《枕中记》（亦见《广记》八十二，题曰《吕翁》）一篇，为小说家言，略谓开元七年，道士吕翁行邯郸道中，息邸舍，见旅中少年卢生侘傺叹息，乃探囊中枕授之。生梦娶清河崔氏，举进士，官至陕牧，入为京兆尹，出破戎虏，转吏部侍郎，迁户部尚书兼御史大夫，为时宰所忌，以飞语中之，贬端州刺史，越三年征为常侍，未几同中书门下平章事。
然作者蔚起，则在开元天宝以后。 大历中有沈既济，苏州吴人，经学该博，以杨炎荐，召拜左拾遗史馆修撰。 贞元时炎得罪，既济办贬处州司户参军，既入朝，位礼部员外郎，卒（约七五〇——八〇〇）。 撰《建中实录》，人称其能，《新唐书》有传。 《文苑英华》（八百三十三）录其《枕中记》（亦见《广记》八十二，题曰《吕翁》）一篇，为小说家言，略谓开元七年，道士吕翁行邯郸道中，息邸舍，见旅中少年卢生侘傺叹息，乃探囊中枕授之。 生梦娶清河崔氏，举进士，官至陕牧，入为京兆尹，出破戎虏，转吏部侍郎，迁户部尚书兼御史大夫，为时宰所忌，以飞语中之，贬端州刺史，越三年征为常侍，未几同中书门下平章事。嘉谟密命，一日三接，献替启沃，号为贤相，同列害之，复诬与边将交结，所图不轨，下制狱，府吏引从至其门而急收之。生惶骇不测，谓妻子曰，“吾家山东有良田五顷，足以御寒馁，何苦求禄？而今及此，思衣短褐乘青驹行邯郸道中，不可得也！”引刃自刎，其妻救之获免。其罹者皆死，独生为中官保之，减罪死投州。数年，帝知冤，复追为中书令，封燕国公，恩旨殊异。生五子，……其姻媾皆天下望族，有孙十余人。……后年渐衰迈，屡乞骸骨，不许。病，中人候问，相踵于道，名医上药，无不至焉，……薨；生欠伸而悟，见其身方偃于旅舍，吕翁坐其傍，主人蒸黍未熟：触类如故。生蹶然而兴曰，“岂其梦寐也？”翁谓主人曰，“人生之适，亦如是矣。”生怃然良久，谢曰，“夫宠辱之道，穷达之运，得丧之理，死生之情，尽知之矣：此先生所以窒吾欲也。敢不受教！”稽首再拜而去。
嘉谟密命，一日三接，献替启沃，号为贤相，同列害之，复诬与边将交结，所图不轨，下制狱，府吏引从至其门而急收之。 生惶骇不测，谓妻子曰，“吾家山东有良田五顷，足以御寒馁，何苦求禄？而今及此，思衣短褐乘青驹行邯郸道中，不可得也！”引刃自刎，其妻救之获免。 其罹者皆死，独生为中官保之，减罪死投州。 数年，帝知冤，复追为中书令，封燕国公，恩旨殊异。 生五子，…… 其姻媾皆天下望族，有孙十余人。 …… 后年渐衰迈，屡乞骸骨，不许。 病，中人候问，相踵于道，名医上药，无不至焉，…… 薨；生欠伸而悟，见其身方偃于旅舍，吕翁坐其傍，主人蒸黍未熟：触类如故。 生蹶然而兴曰，“岂其梦寐也？”翁谓主人曰，“人生之适，亦如是矣。 ”生怃然良久，谢曰，“夫宠辱之道，穷达之运，得丧之理，死生之情，尽知之矣：此先生所以窒吾欲也。 敢不受教！”稽首再拜而去。如是意想，在歆慕功名之唐代，虽诡幻动人，而亦非出于独创，干宝《搜神记》有焦湖庙祝以玉枕使杨林入梦事（见第五篇），大旨悉同，当即此篇所本，明人汤显祖之《邯郸记》，则又本之此篇。既济文笔简炼，又多规诲之意，故事虽不经，尚为当时推重，比之韩愈《毛颖传》；间亦有病其俳谐者，则以作者尝为史官，因而绳以史法，失小说之意矣。既济又有《任氏传》（见《广记》四百五十二）一篇，言妖狐幻化，终于守志殉人，“虽今之妇人有不如者”，亦讽世之作也。
如是意想，在歆慕功名之唐代，虽诡幻动人，而亦非出于独创，干宝《搜神记》有焦湖庙祝以玉枕使杨林入梦事（见第五篇），大旨悉同，当即此篇所本，明人汤显祖之《邯郸记》，则又本之此篇。 既济文笔简炼，又多规诲之意，故事虽不经，尚为当时推重，比之韩愈《毛颖传》；间亦有病其俳谐者，则以作者尝为史官，因而绳以史法，失小说之意矣。 既济又有《任氏传》（见《广记》四百五十二）一篇，言妖狐幻化，终于守志殉人，“虽今之妇人有不如者”，亦讽世之作也。“吴兴才人”（李贺语）沈亚之字下贤，元和十年进士第，太和初为德州行营使者柏耆判官，耆以罪贬，亚之亦谪南康尉，终郢州掾（约八世纪末至九世纪中），集十二卷，今存。亚之有文名，自谓“能创窈窕之思”，今集中有传奇文三篇（《沈下贤集》卷二卷四，亦见《广记》二百八十二及二百九十八），皆以华艳之笔，叙恍忽之情，而好言仙鬼复死，尤与同时文人异趣。《湘中怨》记郑生偶遇孤女，相依数年，一旦别去，自云“蛟宫之娣”，谪限已满矣，十余年后，又遥见之画舻中，含悲歌，而“风涛崩怒”，竟失所在。《异梦录》记邢凤梦见美人，示以“弓弯”之舞；及王炎梦侍吴王久，忽闻笳鼓，乃葬西施，因奉教作挽歌，王嘉赏之。《秦梦记》则自述道经长安，客橐泉邸舍，梦为秦官有功，时弄玉婿箫史先死，因尚公主，自题所居曰翠微宫。穆公遇亚之亦甚厚，一日，公主忽无疾卒，穆公乃不复欲见亚之，遣之归。
“吴兴才人”（李贺语）沈亚之字下贤，元和十年进士第，太和初为德州行营使者柏耆判官，耆以罪贬，亚之亦谪南康尉，终郢州掾（约八世纪末至九世纪中），集十二卷，今存。 亚之有文名，自谓“能创窈窕之思”，今集中有传奇文三篇（《沈下贤集》卷二卷四，亦见《广记》二百八十二及二百九十八），皆以华艳之笔，叙恍忽之情，而好言仙鬼复死，尤与同时文人异趣。 《湘中怨》记郑生偶遇孤女，相依数年，一旦别去，自云“蛟宫之娣”，谪限已满矣，十余年后，又遥见之画舻中，含悲歌，而“风涛崩怒”，竟失所在。 《异梦录》记邢凤梦见美人，示以“弓弯”之舞；及王炎梦侍吴王久，忽闻笳鼓，乃葬西施，因奉教作挽歌，王嘉赏之。 《秦梦记》则自述道经长安，客橐泉邸舍，梦为秦官有功，时弄玉婿箫史先死，因尚公主，自题所居曰翠微宫。 穆公遇亚之亦甚厚，一日，公主忽无疾卒，穆公乃不复欲见亚之，遣之归。将去，公置酒高会，声秦声，舞秦舞，舞者击膊拊髀呜呜而音有不快，声甚怨。……既，再拜辞去，公复命至翠微宫与公主侍人别，重入殿内时，见珠翠遗碎青阶下，窗纱檀点依然，宫人泣对亚之。亚之感咽良久，因题宫门诗曰，“君王多感放东归，从此秦宫不复期，春景自伤秦丧主，落花如雨泪胭脂。”竟别去，……觉卧邸舍。明日，亚之与友人崔九万具道；九万，博陵人，谙古，谓余曰，“《皇览》云，‘秦穆公葬雍橐泉祈年宫下’，非其神灵凭乎？”亚之更求得秦时地志，说如九万云。呜呼！弄玉既仙矣，恶又死乎？
将去，公置酒高会，声秦声，舞秦舞，舞者击膊拊髀呜呜而音有不快，声甚怨。 …… 既，再拜辞去，公复命至翠微宫与公主侍人别，重入殿内时，见珠翠遗碎青阶下，窗纱檀点依然，宫人泣对亚之。 亚之感咽良久，因题宫门诗曰，“君王多感放东归，从此秦宫不复期，春景自伤秦丧主，落花如雨泪胭脂。 ”竟别去，…… 觉卧邸舍。 明日，亚之与友人崔九万具道；九万，博陵人，谙古，谓余曰，“《皇览》云，‘秦穆公葬雍橐泉祈年宫下’，非其神灵凭乎？”亚之更求得秦时地志，说如九万云。 呜呼！弄玉既仙矣，恶又死乎？陈鸿为文，则辞意慷慨，长于吊古，追怀往事，如不胜情。鸿少学为史，贞元二十一年登太常第，始闲居遂志，乃修《大统纪》三十卷，七年始成（《唐文粹》九十五），在长安时，尝与白居易为友，为《长恨歌》作传（见《广记》四百八十六）。《新唐志》小说家类有陈鸿《开元升平源》一卷，注云，“字大亮，贞元主客郎中”，或亦其人也（约八世纪后半至九世纪中叶）。所作又有《东城老父传》（见《广记》四百八十五），记贾昌于兵火之后，忆念太平盛事，荣华苓落，两相比照，其语甚悲。《长恨歌传》则作于元和初，亦追述开元中杨妃入宫以至死蜀本末，法与《贾昌传》相类。杨妃故事，唐人本所乐道，然鲜有条贯秩然如此传者，又得白居易作歌，故特为世间所知，清洪昇撰《长生殿传奇》，即本此传及歌意也。传今有数本，《广记》及《文苑英华》（七百九十四）所录，字句已多异同，而明人附载《文苑英华》后之出于《丽情集》及《京本大曲》者尤异，盖后人（《丽情集》之撰者张君房？）又增损之。
陈鸿为文，则辞意慷慨，长于吊古，追怀往事，如不胜情。 鸿少学为史，贞元二十一年登太常第，始闲居遂志，乃修《大统纪》三十卷，七年始成（《唐文粹》九十五），在长安时，尝与白居易为友，为《长恨歌》作传（见《广记》四百八十六）。 《新唐志》小说家类有陈鸿《开元升平源》一卷，注云，“字大亮，贞元主客郎中”，或亦其人也（约八世纪后半至九世纪中叶）。 所作又有《东城老父传》（见《广记》四百八十五），记贾昌于兵火之后，忆念太平盛事，荣华苓落，两相比照，其语甚悲。 《长恨歌传》则作于元和初，亦追述开元中杨妃入宫以至死蜀本末，法与《贾昌传》相类。 杨妃故事，唐人本所乐道，然鲜有条贯秩然如此传者，又得白居易作歌，故特为世间所知，清洪昇撰《长生殿传奇》，即本此传及歌意也。 传今有数本，《广记》及《文苑英华》（七百九十四）所录，字句已多异同，而明人附载《文苑英华》后之出于《丽情集》及《京本大曲》者尤异，盖后人（《丽情集》之撰者张君房？）又增损之。天宝末，兄国忠盗丞相位，愚弄国柄，及安禄山引兵向阙，以讨杨氏为词。潼关不守，翠华南幸，出咸阳，道次马嵬亭，六军徘徊，持戟不进，从官郎吏伏上马前，请诛晁错以谢天下，国忠奉氂缨盘水，死于道周。左右之意未快，上问之，当时敢言者请以贵妃塞天下怨，上知不免，而不忍见其死，反袂掩面，使牵之而去；仓皇展转，竟就死于尺组之下。（《文苑英华》所载）
天宝末，兄国忠盗丞相位，愚弄国柄，及安禄山引兵向阙，以讨杨氏为词。 潼关不守，翠华南幸，出咸阳，道次马嵬亭，六军徘徊，持戟不进，从官郎吏伏上马前，请诛晁错以谢天下，国忠奉氂缨盘水，死于道周。 左右之意未快，上问之，当时敢言者请以贵妃塞天下怨，上知不免，而不忍见其死，反袂掩面，使牵之而去；仓皇展转，竟就死于尺组之下。 （《文苑英华》所载）天宝末，兄国忠盗丞相位，窃弄国柄，羯胡乱燕，二京连陷，翠华南幸，驾出都西门百余里，六师徘徊，拥戟不行，从官郎吏伏上马前，请诛错以谢之；国忠奉氂缨盘水，死于道周。左右之意未快，当时敢言者请以贵妃塞天下之怒，上惨容，但心不忍见其死，反袂掩面，使牵之而去。拜于上前，回眸血下，坠金钿翠羽于地，上自收之。呜呼，蕙心纨质，天王之爱，不得已而死于尺组之下，叔向母云“甚美必甚恶”，李延年歌曰“倾国复倾城”，此之谓也。（《丽情集》及《大曲》所载）
天宝末，兄国忠盗丞相位，窃弄国柄，羯胡乱燕，二京连陷，翠华南幸，驾出都西门百余里，六师徘徊，拥戟不行，从官郎吏伏上马前，请诛错以谢之；国忠奉氂缨盘水，死于道周。 左右之意未快，当时敢言者请以贵妃塞天下之怒，上惨容，但心不忍见其死，反袂掩面，使牵之而去。 拜于上前，回眸血下，坠金钿翠羽于地，上自收之。 呜呼，蕙心纨质，天王之爱，不得已而死于尺组之下，叔向母云“甚美必甚恶”，李延年歌曰“倾国复倾城”，此之谓也。 （《丽情集》及《大曲》所载）白行简字知退，其先盖太原人，后家韩城，又徙下邽，居易之弟也，贞元末进士第，累迁司门员外郎主客郎中，宝历二年（八二六）冬病卒，年盖五十余，两《唐书》皆附见《居易传》。有集二十卷，今不存，而《广记》（四百八十四）收其传奇文一篇曰《李娃传》，言荥阳巨族之子溺于长安倡女李娃，贫病困顿，至流落为挽郎，复为李娃所拯，勉之学，遂擢第，官成都府参军。行简本善文笔，李娃事又近情而耸听，故缠绵可观；元人已本其事为《曲江池》，明薛近兖则以作《绣襦记》。行简又有《三梦记》一篇（见原本《说郛》四），举“彼梦有所往而此遇之者，或此有所为而彼梦之者，或两相通梦者”三事，皆叙述简质，而事特瑰奇，其第一事尤胜。
白行简字知退，其先盖太原人，后家韩城，又徙下邽，居易之弟也，贞元末进士第，累迁司门员外郎主客郎中，宝历二年（八二六）冬病卒，年盖五十余，两《唐书》皆附见《居易传》。 有集二十卷，今不存，而《广记》（四百八十四）收其传奇文一篇曰《李娃传》，言荥阳巨族之子溺于长安倡女李娃，贫病困顿，至流落为挽郎，复为李娃所拯，勉之学，遂擢第，官成都府参军。 行简本善文笔，李娃事又近情而耸听，故缠绵可观；元人已本其事为《曲江池》，明薛近兖则以作《绣襦记》。 行简又有《三梦记》一篇（见原本《说郛》四），举“彼梦有所往而此遇之者，或此有所为而彼梦之者，或两相通梦者”三事，皆叙述简质，而事特瑰奇，其第一事尤胜。天后时，刘幽求为朝邑丞，尝奉使夜归，未及家十余里，适有佛寺，路出其侧，闻寺中歌笑欢洽。寺垣短缺，尽得睹其中。刘俯身窥之，见十数人儿女杂坐，罗列盘馔，环绕之而共食。见其妻在坐中语笑。刘初愕然，不测其故，久之，且思其不当至此，复不能舍之。又熟视容止言笑无异，将就察之，寺门闭不得入，刘掷瓦击之，中其罍洗，破迸散走，因忽不见。刘逾垣直入，与从者同视殿庑，皆无人，寺扃如故。刘讶益甚，遂驰归。比至其家，妻方寝，闻刘至，乃叙寒暄讫，妻笑曰，“向梦中与数十人同游一寺，皆不相识，会食于殿庭，有人自外以瓦砾投之，杯盘狼藉，因而遂觉。”刘亦具陈其见，盖所谓彼梦有所往而此遇之也。
天后时，刘幽求为朝邑丞，尝奉使夜归，未及家十余里，适有佛寺，路出其侧，闻寺中歌笑欢洽。 寺垣短缺，尽得睹其中。 刘俯身窥之，见十数人儿女杂坐，罗列盘馔，环绕之而共食。 见其妻在坐中语笑。 刘初愕然，不测其故，久之，且思其不当至此，复不能舍之。 又熟视容止言笑无异，将就察之，寺门闭不得入，刘掷瓦击之，中其罍洗，破迸散走，因忽不见。 刘逾垣直入，与从者同视殿庑，皆无人，寺扃如故。 刘讶益甚，遂驰归。 比至其家，妻方寝，闻刘至，乃叙寒暄讫，妻笑曰，“向梦中与数十人同游一寺，皆不相识，会食于殿庭，有人自外以瓦砾投之，杯盘狼藉，因而遂觉。 ”刘亦具陈其见，盖所谓彼梦有所往而此遇之也。

第九篇　唐之传奇文（下）

第九篇　唐之传奇文（下）

第九篇　唐之传奇文（下）

第九篇 唐之传奇文（下）然传奇诸作者中，有特有关系者二人：其一，所作不多而影响甚大，名亦甚盛者曰元稹；其二，多所著作，影响亦甚大而名不甚彰者曰李公佐。
然传奇诸作者中，有特有关系者二人：其一，所作不多而影响甚大，名亦甚盛者曰元稹；其二，多所著作，影响亦甚大而名不甚彰者曰李公佐。元稹字微之，河南河内人，举明经，补校书郎，元和初应制策第一，除左拾遗，历监察御史，坐事贬江陵，又自虢州长史征入，渐迁至中书舍人承旨学士，进工部侍郎同平章事，未几罢相，出为同州刺史，又改越州，兼浙东观察使。太和初，入为尚书左丞检校户部尚书，兼鄂州刺史武昌军节度使，五年七月暴疾，一日而卒于镇，时年五十三（七七九——八三一），两《唐书》皆有传。稹自少与白居易唱和，当时言诗者称元白，号为“元和体”，然所传小说，止《莺莺传》（见《广记》四百八十八）一篇。
元稹字微之，河南河内人，举明经，补校书郎，元和初应制策第一，除左拾遗，历监察御史，坐事贬江陵，又自虢州长史征入，渐迁至中书舍人承旨学士，进工部侍郎同平章事，未几罢相，出为同州刺史，又改越州，兼浙东观察使。 太和初，入为尚书左丞检校户部尚书，兼鄂州刺史武昌军节度使，五年七月暴疾，一日而卒于镇，时年五十三（七七九——八三一），两《唐书》皆有传。 稹自少与白居易唱和，当时言诗者称元白，号为“元和体”，然所传小说，止《莺莺传》（见《广记》四百八十八）一篇。《莺莺传》者，即叙崔张故事，亦名《会真记》者也。略谓贞元中，有张生者，性貌温美，非礼不动，年二十三未尝近女色。时生游于蒲，寓普救寺，适有崔氏孀妇将归长安，过蒲，亦寓兹寺，绪其亲则于张为异派之从母。会浑瑊薨，军人因丧大扰蒲人，崔氏甚惧，而生与蒲将之党有善，得将护之，十余日后廉使杜确来治军，军遂戢。崔氏由此甚感张生，因招宴，见其女莺莺，生惑焉，托崔之婢红娘以《春词》二首通意，是夕得彩笺，题其篇曰《明月三五夜》，辞云，“待月西厢下，迎风户半开，隔墙花影动，疑是玉人来。”张喜且骇，已而崔至，则端服严容，责其非礼，竟去，张自失者久之，数夕后，崔又至，将晓而去，终夕无一言。
《莺莺传》者，即叙崔张故事，亦名《会真记》者也。 略谓贞元中，有张生者，性貌温美，非礼不动，年二十三未尝近女色。 时生游于蒲，寓普救寺，适有崔氏孀妇将归长安，过蒲，亦寓兹寺，绪其亲则于张为异派之从母。 会浑瑊薨，军人因丧大扰蒲人，崔氏甚惧，而生与蒲将之党有善，得将护之，十余日后廉使杜确来治军，军遂戢。 崔氏由此甚感张生，因招宴，见其女莺莺，生惑焉，托崔之婢红娘以《春词》二首通意，是夕得彩笺，题其篇曰《明月三五夜》，辞云，“待月西厢下，迎风户半开，隔墙花影动，疑是玉人来。 ”张喜且骇，已而崔至，则端服严容，责其非礼，竟去，张自失者久之，数夕后，崔又至，将晓而去，终夕无一言。……张生辨色而兴，自疑曰，“岂其梦邪？”及明，睹妆在臂，香在衣，泪光荧荧然犹莹于茵席而已。是后又十余日，杳不复知。张生赋《会真诗》三十韵，未毕而红娘适至，因授之，以贻崔氏。自是复容之，朝隐而出，暮隐而入，同安于曩所谓西厢者几一月矣。张生常诘郑氏之情，则曰，“我不可奈何矣。”因欲就成之。无何，张生将至长安，先以情谕之，崔氏宛然无难词，然而愁怨之容动人矣。将行之夕，不可复见，而张生遂西下。……
…… 张生辨色而兴，自疑曰，“岂其梦邪？”及明，睹妆在臂，香在衣，泪光荧荧然犹莹于茵席而已。 是后又十余日，杳不复知。 张生赋《会真诗》三十韵，未毕而红娘适至，因授之，以贻崔氏。 自是复容之，朝隐而出，暮隐而入，同安于曩所谓西厢者几一月矣。 张生常诘郑氏之情，则曰，“我不可奈何矣。 ”因欲就成之。 无何，张生将至长安，先以情谕之，崔氏宛然无难词，然而愁怨之容动人矣。 将行之夕，不可复见，而张生遂西下。 ……明年，文战不利，张生遂止于京，贻书崔氏以广其意，崔报之，而生发其书于所知，由是为时人传说。杨巨源为赋《崔娘诗》，元稹亦续生《会真诗》三十韵，张之友闻者皆耸异，而张志亦绝矣。元稹与张厚，问其说，张曰：
明年，文战不利，张生遂止于京，贻书崔氏以广其意，崔报之，而生发其书于所知，由是为时人传说。 杨巨源为赋《崔娘诗》，元稹亦续生《会真诗》三十韵，张之友闻者皆耸异，而张志亦绝矣。 元稹与张厚，问其说，张曰：“大凡天之所命尤物也，不妖其身，必妖于人。使崔氏子遇合富贵，秉娇宠，不为云为雨，则为蛟为螭，吾不知其变化矣。昔殷之辛，周之幽，据万乘之国，其势甚厚，然而一女子败之，溃其众，屠其身，至今为天下僇笑，予之德不足以胜妖孽，是用忍情。”
“大凡天之所命尤物也，不妖其身，必妖于人。 使崔氏子遇合富贵，秉娇宠，不为云为雨，则为蛟为螭，吾不知其变化矣。 昔殷之辛，周之幽，据万乘之国，其势甚厚，然而一女子败之，溃其众，屠其身，至今为天下僇笑，予之德不足以胜妖孽，是用忍情。 ”越岁余，崔已适人，张亦别娶，适过其所居，请以外兄见，崔终不出；后数日，张生将行，崔则赋诗一章以谢绝之云，“弃置今何道，当时且自亲，还将旧来意，怜取眼前人。”自是遂不复知。时人多许张为善补过者云。
越岁余，崔已适人，张亦别娶，适过其所居，请以外兄见，崔终不出；后数日，张生将行，崔则赋诗一章以谢绝之云，“弃置今何道，当时且自亲，还将旧来意，怜取眼前人。 ”自是遂不复知。 时人多许张为善补过者云。元稹以张生自寓，述其亲历之境，虽文章尚非上乘，而时有情致，固亦可观，惟篇末文过饰非，遂堕恶趣，而李绅杨巨源辈既各赋诗以张之，稹又早有诗名，后秉节钺，故世人仍多乐道，宋赵德麟已取其事作《商调蝶恋花》十阕（见《侯鲭录》），金则有董解元《弦索西厢》，元则有王实甫《西厢记》，关汉卿《续西厢记》，明则有李日华《南西厢记》，陆采《南西厢记》等，其他曰《竟》曰《翻》曰《后》曰《续》者尤繁，至今尚或称道其事。唐人传奇留遗不少，而后来煊赫如是者，惟此篇及李朝威《柳毅传》而已。
元稹以张生自寓，述其亲历之境，虽文章尚非上乘，而时有情致，固亦可观，惟篇末文过饰非，遂堕恶趣，而李绅杨巨源辈既各赋诗以张之，稹又早有诗名，后秉节钺，故世人仍多乐道，宋赵德麟已取其事作《商调蝶恋花》十阕（见《侯鲭录》），金则有董解元《弦索西厢》，元则有王实甫《西厢记》，关汉卿《续西厢记》，明则有李日华《南西厢记》，陆采《南西厢记》等，其他曰《竟》曰《翻》曰《后》曰《续》者尤繁，至今尚或称道其事。 唐人传奇留遗不少，而后来煊赫如是者，惟此篇及李朝威《柳毅传》而已。李公佐字颛蒙，陇西人，尝举进士，元和中为江淮从事，后罢归长安（见所作《谢小娥传》中），会昌初，又为杨府录事，大中二年，坐累削两任官（见《唐书》《宣宗纪》），盖生于代宗时，至宣宗初犹在（约七七〇——八五〇），余事未详；《新唐书》《宗室世系表》有千牛备身公佐，则别一人也。其著作今存四篇，《南柯太守传》（见《广记》四百七十五，题《淳于棼》，今据《唐语林》改正）最有名，传言东平淳于棼家广陵郡东十里，宅南有大槐一株，贞元七年九月因沉醉致疾，二友扶生归家，令卧东庑下，而自秣马濯足以俟之。生就枕，昏然若梦，见二紫衣使称奉王命相邀，出门登车，指古槐穴而去。使者驱车入穴，忽见山川，终入一大城，城楼上有金书题曰“大槐安国”。生既至，拜驸马，复出为南柯太守，守郡三十载，“风化广被，百姓歌谣，建功德碑，立生祠宇”，王甚重之，递迁大位，生五男二女，后将兵与檀萝国战，败绩，公主又薨。生罢郡，而威福日盛，王疑惮之，遂禁生游从，处之私第，已而送归。既醒，则“见家之童仆拥篲于庭，二客濯足于榻，斜日未隐于西垣，余樽尚湛于东牖，梦中倏忽，若度一世矣。”其立意与《枕中记》同，而描摹更为尽致，明汤显祖亦本之作传奇曰《南柯记》。篇末言命仆发穴，以究根源，乃见蚁聚，悉符前梦，则假实证幻，余韵悠然，虽未尽于物情，已非《枕中》之所及矣。
李公佐字颛蒙，陇西人，尝举进士，元和中为江淮从事，后罢归长安（见所作《谢小娥传》中），会昌初，又为杨府录事，大中二年，坐累削两任官（见《唐书》《宣宗纪》），盖生于代宗时，至宣宗初犹在（约七七〇——八五〇），余事未详；《新唐书》《宗室世系表》有千牛备身公佐，则别一人也。 其著作今存四篇，《南柯太守传》（见《广记》四百七十五，题《淳于棼》，今据《唐语林》改正）最有名，传言东平淳于棼家广陵郡东十里，宅南有大槐一株，贞元七年九月因沉醉致疾，二友扶生归家，令卧东庑下，而自秣马濯足以俟之。 生就枕，昏然若梦，见二紫衣使称奉王命相邀，出门登车，指古槐穴而去。 使者驱车入穴，忽见山川，终入一大城，城楼上有金书题曰“大槐安国”。 生既至，拜驸马，复出为南柯太守，守郡三十载，“风化广被，百姓歌谣，建功德碑，立生祠宇”，王甚重之，递迁大位，生五男二女，后将兵与檀萝国战，败绩，公主又薨。 生罢郡，而威福日盛，王疑惮之，遂禁生游从，处之私第，已而送归。 既醒，则“见家之童仆拥篲于庭，二客濯足于榻，斜日未隐于西垣，余樽尚湛于东牖，梦中倏忽，若度一世矣。 ”其立意与《枕中记》同，而描摹更为尽致，明汤显祖亦本之作传奇曰《南柯记》。 篇末言命仆发穴，以究根源，乃见蚁聚，悉符前梦，则假实证幻，余韵悠然，虽未尽于物情，已非《枕中》之所及矣。……有大穴，根洞然明朗，可容一榻。上有积土壤以为城郭殿台之状，有蚁数斛，隐聚其中。中有小台，其色若丹，二大蚁处之，素翼朱首，长可三寸，左右大蚁数十辅之，诸蚁不敢近，此其王矣：即槐安国都是也。又穷一穴，直上南枝可四丈，宛转方中，亦有土城小楼，群蚁亦处其中：即生所领南柯郡也。……追想前事，感叹于怀，……不欲令二客坏之，遽令掩塞如旧。……复念檀萝征伐之事，又请二客访迹于外，宅东一里有古涸涧，侧有大檀树一株，藤萝拥织，上不见日，旁有小穴，亦有群蚁隐聚其间。檀萝之国，岂非此耶？嗟乎！蚁之灵异犹不可穷，况山藏木伏之大者所变化乎？……
…… 有大穴，根洞然明朗，可容一榻。 上有积土壤以为城郭殿台之状，有蚁数斛，隐聚其中。 中有小台，其色若丹，二大蚁处之，素翼朱首，长可三寸，左右大蚁数十辅之，诸蚁不敢近，此其王矣：即槐安国都是也。 又穷一穴，直上南枝可四丈，宛转方中，亦有土城小楼，群蚁亦处其中：即生所领南柯郡也。 …… 追想前事，感叹于怀，…… 不欲令二客坏之，遽令掩塞如旧。 …… 复念檀萝征伐之事，又请二客访迹于外，宅东一里有古涸涧，侧有大檀树一株，藤萝拥织，上不见日，旁有小穴，亦有群蚁隐聚其间。 檀萝之国，岂非此耶？嗟乎！蚁之灵异犹不可穷，况山藏木伏之大者所变化乎？……《谢小娥传》（见《广记》四百九十一）言小娥姓谢，豫章人，八岁丧母，后嫁历阳侠士段居贞。夫妇与父皆习贾，往来江湖间，为盗所杀，小娥亦折足堕水，他船拯起之，流转至上元县，依妙果寺尼以居。初，小娥尝梦父告以仇人为“車中猴東門草”，又梦夫告以仇人为“禾中走一日夫”，广求智者，皆不能解，至公佐乃辨之曰，“車中猴，車字去上下各一画，是申字，又申属猴，故曰車中猴；草下有門，門中有東，乃蘭字也。又禾中走是穿田过，亦是申字也；一日夫者，夫上更一画，下有日，是春字也。杀汝父是申蘭，杀汝夫是申春，足可明矣。”小娥乃变男子服为佣保，果遇二贼于浔阳，刺杀之，并闻于官，擒其党，而小娥得免死。解谜获贼，甚乏理致，而当时亦盛传，李复言已演其文入《续玄怪录》，明人则本之作平话。（见《拍案惊奇》十九）
《谢小娥传》（见《广记》四百九十一）言小娥姓谢，豫章人，八岁丧母，后嫁历阳侠士段居贞。 夫妇与父皆习贾，往来江湖间，为盗所杀，小娥亦折足堕水，他船拯起之，流转至上元县，依妙果寺尼以居。 初，小娥尝梦父告以仇人为“車中猴東門草”，又梦夫告以仇人为“禾中走一日夫”，广求智者，皆不能解，至公佐乃辨之曰，“車中猴，車字去上下各一画，是申字，又申属猴，故曰車中猴；草下有門，門中有東，乃蘭字也。 又禾中走是穿田过，亦是申字也；一日夫者，夫上更一画，下有日，是春字也。 杀汝父是申蘭，杀汝夫是申春，足可明矣。 ”小娥乃变男子服为佣保，果遇二贼于浔阳，刺杀之，并闻于官，擒其党，而小娥得免死。 解谜获贼，甚乏理致，而当时亦盛传，李复言已演其文入《续玄怪录》，明人则本之作平话。 （见《拍案惊奇》十九）所余二篇，其一未详原题，《广记》则题曰《庐江冯媪》（三百四十三），记董江妻亡更娶，而媪见有女泣路隅一室中，后乃知即亡人之墓，董闻则罪以妖妄，逐媪去之，其事甚简，故文亦不华。其一曰《古岳渎经》（见《广记》四百六十七，题曰《李汤》），有李汤者，永泰时楚州刺史，闻渔人见龟山下水中有大铁锁，乃以人牛曳出之，风涛陡作，“一兽状有如猿，白首长鬐，雪牙金爪，闯然上岸，高五丈许，蹲踞之状若猿猴，但两目不能开，兀若昏昧，……久乃引颈伸欠，双目忽开，光彩若电，顾视人焉，欲发狂怒。观者奔走，兽亦徐徐引锁曳牛入水去，竟不复出。”当时汤与楚州知名之士，皆错愕不知其由。后公佐访古东吴，泛洞庭，登包山，入灵洞，探仙书，于石穴间得《古岳渎经》第八卷，乃得其故，而其经文字奇古，编次蠹毁，颇不能解，公佐与道士焦君共详读之，如下文：
所余二篇，其一未详原题，《广记》则题曰《庐江冯媪》（三百四十三），记董江妻亡更娶，而媪见有女泣路隅一室中，后乃知即亡人之墓，董闻则罪以妖妄，逐媪去之，其事甚简，故文亦不华。 其一曰《古岳渎经》（见《广记》四百六十七，题曰《李汤》），有李汤者，永泰时楚州刺史，闻渔人见龟山下水中有大铁锁，乃以人牛曳出之，风涛陡作，“一兽状有如猿，白首长鬐，雪牙金爪，闯然上岸，高五丈许，蹲踞之状若猿猴，但两目不能开，兀若昏昧，…… 久乃引颈伸欠，双目忽开，光彩若电，顾视人焉，欲发狂怒。 观者奔走，兽亦徐徐引锁曳牛入水去，竟不复出。 ”当时汤与楚州知名之士，皆错愕不知其由。 后公佐访古东吴，泛洞庭，登包山，入灵洞，探仙书，于石穴间得《古岳渎经》第八卷，乃得其故，而其经文字奇古，编次蠹毁，颇不能解，公佐与道士焦君共详读之，如下文：“禹理水，三至桐柏山，惊风走雷，石号木鸣，土伯拥川，天老肃兵，功不能兴。禹怒，召集百灵，授命夔龙，桐柏等山君长稽首请命，禹因囚鸿濛氏，章商氏，兜卢氏，犁娄氏，乃获淮涡水神名无支祁，善应对言语，辨江淮之浅深，原隰之远近，形若猿猴，缩鼻高额，青躯白首，金目雪牙，颈伸百尺，力逾九象，搏击腾踔疾奔，轻利倏忽，闻视不可久。禹授之童律，不能制；授之乌木由，不能制；授之庚辰，能制。鸱脾桓胡木魅水灵山祆石怪奔号聚绕，以数千载，庚辰以战（一作戟）逐去，颈锁大索，鼻穿金铃，徙淮阴之龟山之足下，俾淮水永安流注海也。庚辰之后，皆图此形者，免淮涛风雨之难。”
“禹理水，三至桐柏山，惊风走雷，石号木鸣，土伯拥川，天老肃兵，功不能兴。 禹怒，召集百灵，授命夔龙，桐柏等山君长稽首请命，禹因囚鸿濛氏，章商氏，兜卢氏，犁娄氏，乃获淮涡水神名无支祁，善应对言语，辨江淮之浅深，原隰之远近，形若猿猴，缩鼻高额，青躯白首，金目雪牙，颈伸百尺，力逾九象，搏击腾踔疾奔，轻利倏忽，闻视不可久。 禹授之童律，不能制；授之乌木由，不能制；授之庚辰，能制。 鸱脾桓胡木魅水灵山祆石怪奔号聚绕，以数千载，庚辰以战（一作戟）逐去，颈锁大索，鼻穿金铃，徙淮阴之龟山之足下，俾淮水永安流注海也。 庚辰之后，皆图此形者，免淮涛风雨之难。 ”宋朱熹（《楚辞辨证》中）尝斥僧伽降伏无支祁事为俚说，罗泌（《路史》）有《无支祁辩》，元吴昌龄《西游记》杂剧中有“无支祁是他姊妹”语，明宋濂亦隐括其事为文，知宋元以来，此说流传不绝，且广被民间，致劳学者弹纠，而实则仅出于李公佐假设之作而已。惟后来渐误禹为僧伽或泗洲大圣，明吴承恩演《西游记》，又移其神变奋迅之状于孙悟空，于是禹伏无支祁故事遂以堙昧也。
Song Zhu Xi (in "Chuci Dialectic") once denounced the Sangha's subjugation of Wuzhiqi as slang, Luo Bi ("History of the Road") has "Wuzhiqi Bian", Yuan Wu Changling's "Journey to the West" miscellaneous drama has the phrase "Wuzhiqi is his sister", Ming Song Lian also implicitly included this matter as an article, knowing that since the Song and Yuan dynasties, this theory has been circulated endlessly, and has been widely criticized by the people, causing labor scholars to impeach and correct, but in fact it is only from Li Gongzuo's hypothetical work. However, later on, Yu was gradually mistaken for the Sangha or the Great Sage of Sizhou, and Ming Wu Cheng'en performed "Journey to the West", and transferred his divine transformation and swiftness to Sun Wukong, so the story of Yu Fu Wuzhi Qi was obscured.传奇之文，此外尚夥，其较显著者，有陇西李朝威作《柳毅传》（见《广记》四百十九），记毅以下第将归湘滨，道经泾阳，遇牧羊女子言是龙女，为舅姑及婿所贬，托毅寄书于父洞庭君，洞庭君有弟钱塘君性刚暴，杀婿取女归，欲以配毅，因毅严拒而止。后毅丧妻，徙家金陵，娶范阳卢氏，则龙女也，又徙南海，复归洞庭，其表弟薛嘏尝遇之于湖中，得仙药五十丸，此后遂绝影响。金人已取其事为杂剧（语见董解元《弦索西厢》中），元尚仲贤则作《柳毅传书》，翻案而为《张生煮海》，清李渔又折衷之而成《蜃中楼》。又有蒋防作《霍小玉传》（见《广记》四百八十七），言李益年二十擢进士第，入长安，思得名妓，乃遇霍小玉，寓于其家，相从者二年，其后年，生授郑县主簿，则坚约婚姻而别。及生觐母，始知已订婚卢氏，母又素严，生不敢拒，遂与小玉绝。小玉久不得生音问，竟卧病，踪迹招益，益亦不敢往。一日益在崇敬寺，忽有黄衫豪士强邀之，至霍氏家，小玉力疾相见，数其负心，长恸而卒。益为之缟素，旦夕哭泣甚哀，已而婚于卢氏，然为怨鬼所祟，竟以猜忌出其妻，至于三娶，莫不如是。杜甫《少年行》有云，“黄衫年少宜来数，不见堂前东逝波”，谓此也。又有许尧佐作《柳氏传》（见《广记》四百八十五），记诗人韩翃得李生艳姬柳氏，会安禄山反，因寄柳于法灵寺而自为淄青节度使书记，乱平复来，则柳已为蕃将沙叱利所取，淄青诸将中有侠士许虞侯者，劫以还翃。其事又见于孟棨《本事诗》，盖亦实录矣。他如柳珵（《广记》二百七十五《上清传》）薛调（又四百八十六《无双传》）皇甫枚（又四百九十一《非烟传》）房千里（同上《杨娼传》）等，亦皆有造作。而杜光庭之《虬髯客传》（见《广记》一百九十三）流传乃独广，光庭为蜀道士，事王衍，多所著述，大抵诞谩，此传则记杨素妓人之执红拂者识李靖于布衣时，相约遁去，道中又逢虬髯客，知其不凡，推资财，授兵法，令佐太宗兴唐，而自率海贼入扶余国杀其主，自立为王云。后世乐此故事，至作画图，谓之三侠；在曲则明凌初成有《虬髯翁》，张凤翼张太和皆有《红拂记》。
传奇之文，此外尚夥，其较显著者，有陇西李朝威作《柳毅传》（见《广记》四百十九），记毅以下第将归湘滨，道经泾阳，遇牧羊女子言是龙女，为舅姑及婿所贬，托毅寄书于父洞庭君，洞庭君有弟钱塘君性刚暴，杀婿取女归，欲以配毅，因毅严拒而止。 后毅丧妻，徙家金陵，娶范阳卢氏，则龙女也，又徙南海，复归洞庭，其表弟薛嘏尝遇之于湖中，得仙药五十丸，此后遂绝影响。 金人已取其事为杂剧（语见董解元《弦索西厢》中），元尚仲贤则作《柳毅传书》，翻案而为《张生煮海》，清李渔又折衷之而成《蜃中楼》。 又有蒋防作《霍小玉传》（见《广记》四百八十七），言李益年二十擢进士第，入长安，思得名妓，乃遇霍小玉，寓于其家，相从者二年，其后年，生授郑县主簿，则坚约婚姻而别。 及生觐母，始知已订婚卢氏，母又素严，生不敢拒，遂与小玉绝。 小玉久不得生音问，竟卧病，踪迹招益，益亦不敢往。 一日益在崇敬寺，忽有黄衫豪士强邀之，至霍氏家，小玉力疾相见，数其负心，长恸而卒。 益为之缟素，旦夕哭泣甚哀，已而婚于卢氏，然为怨鬼所祟，竟以猜忌出其妻，至于三娶，莫不如是。 杜甫《少年行》有云，“黄衫年少宜来数，不见堂前东逝波”，谓此也。 又有许尧佐作《柳氏传》（见《广记》四百八十五），记诗人韩翃得李生艳姬柳氏，会安禄山反，因寄柳于法灵寺而自为淄青节度使书记，乱平复来，则柳已为蕃将沙叱利所取，淄青诸将中有侠士许虞侯者，劫以还翃。 其事又见于孟棨《本事诗》，盖亦实录矣。 他如柳珵（《广记》二百七十五《上清传》）薛调（又四百八十六《无双传》）皇甫枚（又四百九十一《非烟传》）房千里（同上《杨娼传》）等，亦皆有造作。 而杜光庭之《虬髯客传》（见《广记》一百九十三）流传乃独广，光庭为蜀道士，事王衍，多所著述，大抵诞谩，此传则记杨素妓人之执红拂者识李靖于布衣时，相约遁去，道中又逢虬髯客，知其不凡，推资财，授兵法，令佐太宗兴唐，而自率海贼入扶余国杀其主，自立为王云。 后世乐此故事，至作画图，谓之三侠；在曲则明凌初成有《虬髯翁》，张凤翼张太和皆有《红拂记》。上来所举之外，尚有不知作者之《李卫公别传》，《李林甫外传》，郭湜之《高力士外传》，姚汝能之《安禄山事迹》等，惟著述本意，或在显扬幽隐，非为传奇，特以行文枝蔓，或拾事琐屑，故后人亦每以小说视之。
上来所举之外，尚有不知作者之《李卫公别传》，《李林甫外传》，郭湜之《高力士外传》，姚汝能之《安禄山事迹》等，惟著述本意，或在显扬幽隐，非为传奇，特以行文枝蔓，或拾事琐屑，故后人亦每以小说视之。

第十篇　唐之传奇集及杂俎

第十篇　唐之传奇集及杂俎

第十篇　唐之传奇集及杂俎

Chapter 10 Tang Legend Collection and Miscellaneous Dishes造传奇之文，会萃为一集者，在唐代多有，而煊赫莫如牛僧孺之《玄怪录》。僧孺字思黯，本陇西狄道人，居宛叶间，元和初以贤良方正对策第一，条指失政，鲠讦不避宰相，至考官皆调去，僧孺则调伊阙尉，穆宗即位，渐至御史中丞，后以户部侍郎同中书门下平章事，武宗时累贬循州长史，宣宗立，乃召还为太子少师，大中二年卒，赠太尉，年六十九（七八〇——八四八），谥曰文简，有传在两《唐书》。僧孺性坚僻，而颇嗜志怪，所撰《玄怪录》十卷，今已佚，然《太平广记》所引尚三十一篇，可以考见大概。其文虽与他传奇无甚异，而时时示人以出于造作，不求见信；盖李公佐李朝威辈，仅在显扬笔妙，故尚不肯言事状之虚，至僧孺乃并欲以构想之幻自见，因故示其诡设之迹矣。《元无有》即其一例：
造传奇之文，会萃为一集者，在唐代多有，而煊赫莫如牛僧孺之《玄怪录》。 僧孺字思黯，本陇西狄道人，居宛叶间，元和初以贤良方正对策第一，条指失政，鲠讦不避宰相，至考官皆调去，僧孺则调伊阙尉，穆宗即位，渐至御史中丞，后以户部侍郎同中书门下平章事，武宗时累贬循州长史，宣宗立，乃召还为太子少师，大中二年卒，赠太尉，年六十九（七八〇——八四八），谥曰文简，有传在两《唐书》。 僧孺性坚僻，而颇嗜志怪，所撰《玄怪录》十卷，今已佚，然《太平广记》所引尚三十一篇，可以考见大概。 其文虽与他传奇无甚异，而时时示人以出于造作，不求见信；盖李公佐李朝威辈，仅在显扬笔妙，故尚不肯言事状之虚，至僧孺乃并欲以构想之幻自见，因故示其诡设之迹矣。 《元无有》即其一例：宝应中，有元无有，常以仲春末独行维扬郊野。值日晚，风雨大至，时兵荒后，人户多逃，遂入路旁空庄。须臾霁止，斜月方出，无有坐北窗，忽闻西廊有行人声，未几见月中有四人，衣冠皆异，相与谈谐吟咏甚畅，乃云，“今夕如秋，风月若此，吾辈岂得不为一言，以展平生之事也？”……吟咏既朗，无有听之具悉。其一衣冠长人即先吟曰，“齐纨鲁缟如霜雪，寥亮高声予所发。”其二黑衣冠短陋人诗曰，“嘉宾良会清夜时，煌煌灯烛我能持。”其三故弊黄衣冠人，亦短陋，诗曰，“清冷之泉候朝汲，桑绠相牵常出入。”其四故黑衣冠人诗曰，“爨薪贮泉相煎熬，充他口腹我为劳。”无有亦不以四人为异，四人亦不虞无有之在堂隍也，递相褒赏，观其自负，则虽阮嗣宗《咏怀》，亦若不能加矣。四人迟明乃归旧所；无有就寻之，堂中惟有故杵灯台水桶破铛：乃知四人即此物所为也。（《广记》三百六十九）
宝应中，有元无有，常以仲春末独行维扬郊野。 值日晚，风雨大至，时兵荒后，人户多逃，遂入路旁空庄。 须臾霁止，斜月方出，无有坐北窗，忽闻西廊有行人声，未几见月中有四人，衣冠皆异，相与谈谐吟咏甚畅，乃云，“今夕如秋，风月若此，吾辈岂得不为一言，以展平生之事也？”…… 吟咏既朗，无有听之具悉。 其一衣冠长人即先吟曰，“齐纨鲁缟如霜雪，寥亮高声予所发。 ”其二黑衣冠短陋人诗曰，“嘉宾良会清夜时，煌煌灯烛我能持。 ”其三故弊黄衣冠人，亦短陋，诗曰，“清冷之泉候朝汲，桑绠相牵常出入。 ”其四故黑衣冠人诗曰，“爨薪贮泉相煎熬，充他口腹我为劳。 ”无有亦不以四人为异，四人亦不虞无有之在堂隍也，递相褒赏，观其自负，则虽阮嗣宗《咏怀》，亦若不能加矣。 四人迟明乃归旧所；无有就寻之，堂中惟有故杵灯台水桶破铛：乃知四人即此物所为也。 （《广记》三百六十九）牛僧孺在朝，与李德裕各立门户，为党争，以其好作小说，李之门客韦瓘遂托僧孺名撰《周秦行纪》以诬之。记言自以举进士落第将归宛叶，经伊阙鸣皋山下，因暮失道，遂止薄太后庙中，与汉唐妃嫔燕饮。太后问今天子为谁？则对曰，“‘今皇帝先帝长子。’太真笑曰，‘沈婆儿作天子也。大奇！’”复赋诗，终以昭君侍寝，至明别去，“竟不知其何如”（详见《广记》四百八十九）。德裕因作论，谓僧孺姓应图谶，《玄怪录》又多造隐语，意在惑民，《周秦行纪》则以身与后妃冥遇，欲证其身非人臣相，“及至戏德宗为沈婆儿，以代宗皇后为沈婆，令人骨战，可谓无礼于其君甚矣！”作逆若非当代，必在子孙，故“须以‘太牢’少长咸置于法，则刑罚中而社稷安”也（详见《李卫公外集》四）。自来假小说以排陷人，此为最怪，顾当时说亦不行。惟僧孺既有才名，又历高位，其所著作，世遂盛传。而摹拟者亦不鲜，李复言有《续玄怪录》十卷，“分仙术感应二门”，薛渔思有《河东记》三卷，“亦记谲怪事，序云续牛僧孺之书”（皆见宋晁公武《郡斋读书志》十三）；又有撰《宣室志》十卷，以记仙鬼灵异事迹者，曰张读字圣朋，则张之裔而牛僧孺之外孙也（见《唐书》《张荐传》），后来亦疑为“少而习见，故沿其流波”（清《四库提要》子部小说家类三）云。
牛僧孺在朝，与李德裕各立门户，为党争，以其好作小说，李之门客韦瓘遂托僧孺名撰《周秦行纪》以诬之。 记言自以举进士落第将归宛叶，经伊阙鸣皋山下，因暮失道，遂止薄太后庙中，与汉唐妃嫔燕饮。 太后问今天子为谁？则对曰，“‘今皇帝先帝长子。 ’太真笑曰，‘沈婆儿作天子也。 大奇！’”复赋诗，终以昭君侍寝，至明别去，“竟不知其何如”（详见《广记》四百八十九）。 德裕因作论，谓僧孺姓应图谶，《玄怪录》又多造隐语，意在惑民，《周秦行纪》则以身与后妃冥遇，欲证其身非人臣相，“及至戏德宗为沈婆儿，以代宗皇后为沈婆，令人骨战，可谓无礼于其君甚矣！”作逆若非当代，必在子孙，故“须以‘太牢’少长咸置于法，则刑罚中而社稷安”也（详见《李卫公外集》四）。 自来假小说以排陷人，此为最怪，顾当时说亦不行。 惟僧孺既有才名，又历高位，其所著作，世遂盛传。 而摹拟者亦不鲜，李复言有《续玄怪录》十卷，“分仙术感应二门”，薛渔思有《河东记》三卷，“亦记谲怪事，序云续牛僧孺之书”（皆见宋晁公武《郡斋读书志》十三）；又有撰《宣室志》十卷，以记仙鬼灵异事迹者，曰张读字圣朋，则张之裔而牛僧孺之外孙也（见《唐书》《张荐传》），后来亦疑为“少而习见，故沿其流波”（清《四库提要》子部小说家类三）云。他如武功人苏鹗有《杜阳杂编》，记唐世故事，而多夸远方珍异，参寥子高彦休有《唐阙史》，虽间有实录，而亦言见梦升仙，故皆传奇，但稍迁变。至于康骈《剧谈录》之渐多世务，孙棨《北里志》之专叙狭邪，范摅《云溪友议》之特重歌咏，虽若弥近人情，远于灵怪，然选事则新颖，行文则逶迤，固仍以传奇为骨者也。迨裴铏著书，径称《传奇》，则盛述神仙怪谲之事，又多崇饰，以惑观者。铏为淮南节度副大使高骈从事，骈后失志，尤好神仙，卒以叛死，则此或当时谀导之作，非由本怀。聂隐娘胜妙手空空儿事即出此书（文见《广记》一百九十四），明人取以入伪作之段成式《剑侠传》，流传遂广，迄今犹为所谓文人者所乐道也。
他如武功人苏鹗有《杜阳杂编》，记唐世故事，而多夸远方珍异，参寥子高彦休有《唐阙史》，虽间有实录，而亦言见梦升仙，故皆传奇，但稍迁变。 至于康骈《剧谈录》之渐多世务，孙棨《北里志》之专叙狭邪，范摅《云溪友议》之特重歌咏，虽若弥近人情，远于灵怪，然选事则新颖，行文则逶迤，固仍以传奇为骨者也。 迨裴铏著书，径称《传奇》，则盛述神仙怪谲之事，又多崇饰，以惑观者。 铏为淮南节度副大使高骈从事，骈后失志，尤好神仙，卒以叛死，则此或当时谀导之作，非由本怀。 聂隐娘胜妙手空空儿事即出此书（文见《广记》一百九十四），明人取以入伪作之段成式《剑侠传》，流传遂广，迄今犹为所谓文人者所乐道也。段成式字柯古，齐州临淄人，宰相文昌子也，以荫为校书郎，累迁至吉州刺史，大中中归京，仕至太常少卿，咸通四年（八六三）六月卒，《新唐书》附见段志玄传末（余见《酉阳杂俎》及《南楚新闻》）。成式家多奇篇秘籍，博学强记，尤深于佛书，而少好畋猎，亦早有文名，词句多奥博，世所珍异，其小说有《庐陵官下记》二卷，今佚；《酉阳杂俎》二十卷凡三十篇，今具在，并有《续集》十卷：卷一篇，或录秘书，或叙异事，仙佛人鬼以至动植，弥不毕载，以类相聚，有如类书，虽源或出于张华《博物志》，而在唐时，则犹之独创之作矣。每篇各有题目，亦殊隐僻，如纪道术者曰《壶史》，钞释典者曰《贝编》，述丧葬者曰《尸窀》，志怪异者曰《诺皋记》，而抉择记叙，亦多古艳颖异，足副其目也。
段成式字柯古，齐州临淄人，宰相文昌子也，以荫为校书郎，累迁至吉州刺史，大中中归京，仕至太常少卿，咸通四年（八六三）六月卒，《新唐书》附见段志玄传末（余见《酉阳杂俎》及《南楚新闻》）。 成式家多奇篇秘籍，博学强记，尤深于佛书，而少好畋猎，亦早有文名，词句多奥博，世所珍异，其小说有《庐陵官下记》二卷，今佚；《酉阳杂俎》二十卷凡三十篇，今具在，并有《续集》十卷：卷一篇，或录秘书，或叙异事，仙佛人鬼以至动植，弥不毕载，以类相聚，有如类书，虽源或出于张华《博物志》，而在唐时，则犹之独创之作矣。 每篇各有题目，亦殊隐僻，如纪道术者曰《壶史》，钞释典者曰《贝编》，述丧葬者曰《尸窀》，志怪异者曰《诺皋记》，而抉择记叙，亦多古艳颖异，足副其目也。夏启为东明公，文王为西明公，邵公为南明公，季札为北明公，四时主四方鬼。至忠至孝之人，命终皆为地下主者，一百四十年，乃授下仙之教，授以大道。有上圣之德，命终受三官书，为地下主者，一千年乃转三官之五帝，复一千四百年方得游行太清，为九宫之中仙。（卷二《玉格》）
夏启为东明公，文王为西明公，邵公为南明公，季札为北明公，四时主四方鬼。 至忠至孝之人，命终皆为地下主者，一百四十年，乃授下仙之教，授以大道。 有上圣之德，命终受三官书，为地下主者，一千年乃转三官之五帝，复一千四百年方得游行太清，为九宫之中仙。 （卷二《玉格》）始生天者五相，一光覆身而无衣，二见物生希有心，三弱颜，四疑，五怖。（卷三《贝编》）
The first generation of heaven has five phases: first, light covers the body without clothing; second, seeing things gives rise to rare thoughts; third, a weak face; fourth, doubt, and fifth, fear. (Volume 3 "Bei Compilation")国初僧玄奘往五印取经，西域敬之。成式见倭国僧金刚三昧，言尝至中天寺，寺中多画玄奘麻及匙箸，以彩云乘之，盖西域所无者，每至斋日，辄膜拜焉。（同上）
国初僧玄奘往五印取经，西域敬之。 成式见倭国僧金刚三昧，言尝至中天寺，寺中多画玄奘麻及匙箸，以彩云乘之，盖西域所无者，每至斋日，辄膜拜焉。 （同上）天翁姓张，名坚，字刺渴，渔阳人，少不羁，无所拘忌。常张罗得一白雀，爱而养之，梦刘天翁责怒，每欲杀之，白雀辄以报坚，坚设诸方待之，终莫能害。天翁遂下观之，坚盛设宾主，乃窃骑天翁车，乘白龙，振策登天，天翁乘余龙追之，不及。坚既到玄宫，易百官，杜塞北门，封白雀为上卿侯，改白雀之胤不产于下土。刘翁失治，徘徊五岳作灾，坚患之，以刘翁为太山太守，主生死之籍。（卷十四《诺皋记》）
天翁姓张，名坚，字刺渴，渔阳人，少不羁，无所拘忌。 常张罗得一白雀，爱而养之，梦刘天翁责怒，每欲杀之，白雀辄以报坚，坚设诸方待之，终莫能害。 天翁遂下观之，坚盛设宾主，乃窃骑天翁车，乘白龙，振策登天，天翁乘余龙追之，不及。 坚既到玄宫，易百官，杜塞北门，封白雀为上卿侯，改白雀之胤不产于下土。 刘翁失治，徘徊五岳作灾，坚患之，以刘翁为太山太守，主生死之籍。 （卷十四《诺皋记》）大历中，有士人庄在渭南，遇疾卒于京，妻柳氏因庄居。……士人祥斋日，暮，柳氏露坐逐凉，有胡蜂绕其首面，柳氏以扇击堕地，乃胡桃也。柳氏遽取，玩之掌中；遂长，初如拳，如椀，惊顾之际，已如盘矣。曝然分为两扇，空中轮转，声如分蜂，忽合于柳氏首。柳氏碎首，齿著于树。其物因飞去，竟不知何怪也。（同上）
大历中，有士人庄在渭南，遇疾卒于京，妻柳氏因庄居。 …… 士人祥斋日，暮，柳氏露坐逐凉，有胡蜂绕其首面，柳氏以扇击堕地，乃胡桃也。 柳氏遽取，玩之掌中；遂长，初如拳，如椀，惊顾之际，已如盘矣。 曝然分为两扇，空中轮转，声如分蜂，忽合于柳氏首。 柳氏碎首，齿著于树。 其物因飞去，竟不知何怪也。 （同上）又有聚文身之事者曰《黥》，述养鹰之法者曰《肉攫部》，《续集》则有《贬误》以收考证，有《寺塔记》以志伽蓝，所涉既广，遂多珍异，为世爱玩，与传奇并驱争先矣。
又有聚文身之事者曰《黥》，述养鹰之法者曰《肉攫部》，《续集》则有《贬误》以收考证，有《寺塔记》以志伽蓝，所涉既广，遂多珍异，为世爱玩，与传奇并驱争先矣。成式能诗，幽涩繁缛如他著述，时有祁人温庭筠字飞卿，河内李商隐字义山，亦俱用是相夸，号“三十六体”。温庭筠亦有小说三卷曰《干子》，遗文见于《广记》，仅录事略，简率无可观，与其诗赋之艳丽者不类。李于小说无闻，今有《义山杂纂》一卷，《新唐志》不著录，宋陈振孙（《直斋书录解题》十一）以为商隐作，书皆集俚俗常谈鄙事，以类相从，虽止于琐缀，而颇亦穿世务之幽隐，盖不特聊资笑噱而已。
成式能诗，幽涩繁缛如他著述，时有祁人温庭筠字飞卿，河内李商隐字义山，亦俱用是相夸，号“三十六体”。 温庭筠亦有小说三卷曰《干子》，遗文见于《广记》，仅录事略，简率无可观，与其诗赋之艳丽者不类。 李于小说无闻，今有《义山杂纂》一卷，《新唐志》不著录，宋陈振孙（《直斋书录解题》十一）以为商隐作，书皆集俚俗常谈鄙事，以类相从，虽止于琐缀，而颇亦穿世务之幽隐，盖不特聊资笑噱而已。杀风景
Kill the scenery松下喝道　看花泪下　苔上铺席　斫却垂杨花下晒裩　游春重载　石笋系马　月下把火步行将军　背山起楼　果园种菜　花架下养鸡鸭
Panasonic shouted, looking at the flowers and tears, laying mats on the moss, cutting off the weeping willows drying pants under the flowers, traveling in spring heavy loads, stalagmites tying horses, lighting fire under id_00001 the moon, walking generals, building buildings on the back of the mountain, planting vegetables in the orchard, raising chickens and ducks under the flower trellis恶模样
Ugly appearance作客与人相争骂……　做客踏翻台桌……The guests quarreled and cursed with others...... Being a guest on the table...... 对丈人丈母唱艳曲　嚼残鱼肉归盘上　对众倒卧　横箸在羹碗上 Sing a beautiful song to the father-in-law and mother-in-law, chew the leftover fish and put it on the plate, lie down in front of the public, and lay down on the soup bowl
十诫
The Ten Commandments不得饮酒至醉　不得暗黑处惊人　不得阴损于人不得饮酒至醉 不得暗黑处惊人 不得阴损于人不得独入寡妇人房　不得开人家书　不得戏取物不不得独入寡妇人房 不得开人家书 不得戏取物不令人知　不得暗黑独自行　不得与无赖子弟往还不得借人物用了经旬不还（原缺一则）令人知 不得暗黑独自行 不得与无赖子弟往还不得借人物用了经旬不还（原缺一则）
中和年间有李就今字衮求，为临晋令，亦号义山，能诗，初举时恒游倡家，见孙棨《北里志》，则《杂纂》之作，或出此人，未必定属商隐，然他无显证，未能定也。后亦时有仿作者，宋有续，称王君玉，有再续，称苏东坡，明有三续，为黄允交。
中和年间有李就今字衮求，为临晋令，亦号义山，能诗，初举时恒游倡家，见孙棨《北里志》，则《杂纂》之作，或出此人，未必定属商隐，然他无显证，未能定也。 后亦时有仿作者，宋有续，称王君玉，有再续，称苏东坡，明有三续，为黄允交。

第十一篇　宋之志怪及传奇文

第十一篇　宋之志怪及传奇文

第十一篇　宋之志怪及传奇文

Chapter 11 Song Zhi Zhi Strange and Legendary Article宋既平一宇内，收诸国图籍，而降王臣佐多海内名士，或宣怨言，遂尽招之馆阁，厚其廪饩，使修书，成《太平御览》《文苑英华》各一千卷；又以野史传记小说诸家成书五百卷，目录十卷，是为《太平广记》，以太平兴国二年（九七七）三月奉诏撰集，次年八月书成表进，八月奉敕送史馆，六年正月奉旨雕印板（据《宋会要》及《进书表》），后以言者谓非后学所急，乃收版贮太清楼，故宋人反多未见。《广记》采摭宏富，用书至三百四十四种，自汉晋至五代之小说家言，本书今已散亡者，往往赖以考见，且分类纂辑，得五十五部，视每部卷帙之多寡，亦可知晋唐小说所叙，何者为多，盖不特稗说之渊海，且为文心之统计矣。今举较多之部于下，其末有杂传记九卷，则唐人传奇文也。
宋既平一宇内，收诸国图籍，而降王臣佐多海内名士，或宣怨言，遂尽招之馆阁，厚其廪饩，使修书，成《太平御览》《文苑英华》各一千卷；又以野史传记小说诸家成书五百卷，目录十卷，是为《太平广记》，以太平兴国二年（九七七）三月奉诏撰集，次年八月书成表进，八月奉敕送史馆，六年正月奉旨雕印板（据《宋会要》及《进书表》），后以言者谓非后学所急，乃收版贮太清楼，故宋人反多未见。 《广记》采摭宏富，用书至三百四十四种，自汉晋至五代之小说家言，本书今已散亡者，往往赖以考见，且分类纂辑，得五十五部，视每部卷帙之多寡，亦可知晋唐小说所叙，何者为多，盖不特稗说之渊海，且为文心之统计矣。 今举较多之部于下，其末有杂传记九卷，则唐人传奇文也。神仙五十五卷　女仙十五卷　异僧十二卷　报应三十三卷　征应（休咎也）十一卷　定数十五卷　梦七卷　神二十五卷　鬼四十卷　妖怪九卷　精怪六卷　再生十二卷　龙八卷　虎八卷　狐九卷
神仙五十五卷 女仙十五卷 异僧十二卷 报应三十三卷 征应（休咎也）十一卷 定数十五卷 梦七卷 神二十五卷 鬼四十卷 妖怪九卷 精怪六卷 再生十二卷 龙八卷 虎八卷 狐九卷《太平广记》以李昉监修，同修者十二人，中有徐铉，有吴淑，皆尝为小说，今俱传。铉字鼎臣，扬州广陵人，南唐翰林学士，从李煜入宋，官至直学士院给事中散骑常侍，淳化二年坐累谪静难行军司马，中寒卒于贬所，年七十六（九一六——九九一），事详《宋史》《文苑传》。铉在唐时已作志怪，历二十年成《稽神录》六卷，仅一百五十事，比修《广记》，常希收采而不敢自专，使宋白问李昉，昉曰，“讵有徐率更言无稽者！”遂得见收。然其文平实简率，既失六朝志怪之古质，复无唐人传奇之缠绵，当宋之初，志怪又欲以“可信”见长，而此道于是不复振也。
《太平广记》以李昉监修，同修者十二人，中有徐铉，有吴淑，皆尝为小说，今俱传。 铉字鼎臣，扬州广陵人，南唐翰林学士，从李煜入宋，官至直学士院给事中散骑常侍，淳化二年坐累谪静难行军司马，中寒卒于贬所，年七十六（九一六——九九一），事详《宋史》《文苑传》。 铉在唐时已作志怪，历二十年成《稽神录》六卷，仅一百五十事，比修《广记》，常希收采而不敢自专，使宋白问李昉，昉曰，“讵有徐率更言无稽者！”遂得见收。 然其文平实简率，既失六朝志怪之古质，复无唐人传奇之缠绵，当宋之初，志怪又欲以“可信”见长，而此道于是不复振也。广陵有王姥，病数日，忽谓其子曰，“我死，必生西溪浩氏为牛，子当赎之，而我腹下有‘王’字是也。”顷之遂卒，其西溪者，海陵之西地名也；其民浩氏，生牛，腹有白毛成“王”字。其子寻而得之，以束帛赎之以归。（卷二）
广陵有王姥，病数日，忽谓其子曰，“我死，必生西溪浩氏为牛，子当赎之，而我腹下有‘王’字是也。 ”顷之遂卒，其西溪者，海陵之西地名也；其民浩氏，生牛，腹有白毛成“王”字。 其子寻而得之，以束帛赎之以归。 （卷二）瓜村有渔人，妻得劳瘦疾，转相传染，死者数人。或云：取病者生钉棺中，弃之，其病可绝。顷之，其女病，即生钉棺中，流之于江，至金山，有渔人见而异之，引之至岸，开视之，见女子犹活，因取置渔舍中，多得鳗鯬鱼以食之，久之病愈，遂为渔人之妻，至今尚无恙。（卷三）
瓜村有渔人，妻得劳瘦疾，转相传染，死者数人。 或云：取病者生钉棺中，弃之，其病可绝。 顷之，其女病，即生钉棺中，流之于江，至金山，有渔人见而异之，引之至岸，开视之，见女子犹活，因取置渔舍中，多得鳗鯬鱼以食之，久之病愈，遂为渔人之妻，至今尚无恙。 （卷三）吴淑，徐铉婿也，字正仪，润州丹阳人，少而俊爽，敏于属文，在南唐举进士，以校书郎直内史，从李煜归宋，仕至职方员外郎，咸平五年卒，年五十六（九四七——一〇〇二），亦见《宋史》《文苑传》。所著《江淮异人录》三卷，今有从《永乐大典》辑成本，凡二十五人，皆传当时侠客术士及道流，行事大率诡怪。唐段成式作《酉阳杂俎》，已有《盗侠》一篇，叙怪民奇异事，然仅九人，至荟萃诸诡幻人物，著为专书者，实始于吴淑，明人钞《广记》伪作《剑侠传》又扬其波，而乘空飞剑之说日炽；至今尚不衰。
吴淑，徐铉婿也，字正仪，润州丹阳人，少而俊爽，敏于属文，在南唐举进士，以校书郎直内史，从李煜归宋，仕至职方员外郎，咸平五年卒，年五十六（九四七——一〇〇二），亦见《宋史》《文苑传》。 所著《江淮异人录》三卷，今有从《永乐大典》辑成本，凡二十五人，皆传当时侠客术士及道流，行事大率诡怪。 唐段成式作《酉阳杂俎》，已有《盗侠》一篇，叙怪民奇异事，然仅九人，至荟萃诸诡幻人物，著为专书者，实始于吴淑，明人钞《广记》伪作《剑侠传》又扬其波，而乘空飞剑之说日炽；至今尚不衰。成幼文为洪州录事参军，所居临通衢而有窗。一日坐窗下，时雨霁泥泞而微有路，见一小儿卖鞋，状甚贫窭，有一恶少年与儿相遇，鞋堕泥中。小儿哭求其价，少年叱之不与。儿曰，“吾家且未有食，待卖鞋营食，而悉为所污。”有书生过，悯之，为偿其值。少年怒曰，“儿就我求食，汝何预焉？”因辱骂之。生甚有愠色；成嘉其义，召之与语，大奇之，因留之宿。夜共话，成暂入内，及复出，则失书生矣，外户皆闭，求之不得，少顷复至前曰，“旦来恶子，吾不能容，已断其首。”乃掷之于地。成惊曰，“此人诚忤君子，然断人之首，流血在地，岂不见累乎？”书生曰，“无苦。”乃出少药，傅于头上，捽其发摩之，皆化为水，因谓成曰，“无以奉报，愿以此术授君。”成曰，“某非方外之士，不敢奉教。”书生于是长揖而去，重门皆锁闭，而失所在。
成幼文为洪州录事参军，所居临通衢而有窗。 一日坐窗下，时雨霁泥泞而微有路，见一小儿卖鞋，状甚贫窭，有一恶少年与儿相遇，鞋堕泥中。 小儿哭求其价，少年叱之不与。 儿曰，“吾家且未有食，待卖鞋营食，而悉为所污。 ”有书生过，悯之，为偿其值。 少年怒曰，“儿就我求食，汝何预焉？”因辱骂之。 生甚有愠色；成嘉其义，召之与语，大奇之，因留之宿。 夜共话，成暂入内，及复出，则失书生矣，外户皆闭，求之不得，少顷复至前曰，“旦来恶子，吾不能容，已断其首。 ”乃掷之于地。 成惊曰，“此人诚忤君子，然断人之首，流血在地，岂不见累乎？”书生曰，“无苦。 ”乃出少药，傅于头上，捽其发摩之，皆化为水，因谓成曰，“无以奉报，愿以此术授君。 ”成曰，“某非方外之士，不敢奉教。 ”书生于是长揖而去，重门皆锁闭，而失所在。宋代虽云崇儒，并容释道，而信仰本根，夙在巫鬼，故徐铉吴淑而后，仍多变怪谶应之谈，张君房之《乘异记》（咸平元年序），张师正之《括异志》，聂田之《祖异志》（康定元年序），秦再思之《洛中纪异》，毕仲询之《幕府燕闲录》（元丰初作），皆其类也。迨徽宗惑于道士林灵素，笃信神仙，自号“道君”，而天下大奉道法。至于南迁，此风未改，高宗退居南内，亦爱神仙幻诞之书，时则有知兴国军历阳郭彖字次象作《睽车志》五卷，翰林学士鄱阳洪迈字景卢作《夷坚志》四百二十卷，似皆尝呈进以供上览。诸书大都偏重事状，少所铺叙，与《稽神录》略同，顾《夷坚志》独以著者之名与卷帙之多称于世。
宋代虽云崇儒，并容释道，而信仰本根，夙在巫鬼，故徐铉吴淑而后，仍多变怪谶应之谈，张君房之《乘异记》（咸平元年序），张师正之《括异志》，聂田之《祖异志》（康定元年序），秦再思之《洛中纪异》，毕仲询之《幕府燕闲录》（元丰初作），皆其类也。 迨徽宗惑于道士林灵素，笃信神仙，自号“道君”，而天下大奉道法。 至于南迁，此风未改，高宗退居南内，亦爱神仙幻诞之书，时则有知兴国军历阳郭彖字次象作《睽车志》五卷，翰林学士鄱阳洪迈字景卢作《夷坚志》四百二十卷，似皆尝呈进以供上览。 诸书大都偏重事状，少所铺叙，与《稽神录》略同，顾《夷坚志》独以著者之名与卷帙之多称于世。洪迈幼而强记，博极群书，然从二兄试博学宏词科独被黜，年五十始中第，为敕令所删定官。父皓曾忤秦桧，憾并及迈，遂出添差敕授福州，累迁吏部郎兼礼部；尝接伴金使，颇折之，旋为报聘使，以争朝见礼不屈，几被抑留，还朝又以使金辱命论罢，寻起知泉州，又历知吉州，赣州，婺州，建宁及绍兴府，淳熙二年以端明殿学士致仕卒，年八十（一〇九六——一一七五），谥文敏，有传在《宋史》。迈在朝敢于谠言，又广见洽闻，多所著述，考订辨证，并越常流，而《夷坚志》则为晚年遣兴之书，始刊于绍兴末，绝笔于淳熙初，十余年中，凡成甲至癸二百卷，支甲至支癸三甲至三癸各一百卷，四甲四乙各十卷，卷帙之多，几与《太平广记》等，今惟甲至丁八十卷支甲至支戊五十卷三志若干卷，又摘钞本五十卷及二十卷存。奇特之事，本缘希有见珍，而作者自序，乃甚以繁夥自憙，耄期急于成书，或以五十日作十卷，妄人因稍易旧说以投之，至有盈数卷者，亦不暇删润，径以入录（陈振孙《直斋书录解题》十一云），盖意在取盈，不能如本传所言“极鬼神事物之变”也。惟所作小序三十一篇，什九“各出新意，不相重复”，赵与峕旹尝撮其大略入所著《宾退录》（八），叹为“不可及”，则于此书可谓知言者已。
洪迈幼而强记，博极群书，然从二兄试博学宏词科独被黜，年五十始中第，为敕令所删定官。 父皓曾忤秦桧，憾并及迈，遂出添差敕授福州，累迁吏部郎兼礼部；尝接伴金使，颇折之，旋为报聘使，以争朝见礼不屈，几被抑留，还朝又以使金辱命论罢，寻起知泉州，又历知吉州，赣州，婺州，建宁及绍兴府，淳熙二年以端明殿学士致仕卒，年八十（一〇九六——一一七五），谥文敏，有传在《宋史》。 迈在朝敢于谠言，又广见洽闻，多所著述，考订辨证，并越常流，而《夷坚志》则为晚年遣兴之书，始刊于绍兴末，绝笔于淳熙初，十余年中，凡成甲至癸二百卷，支甲至支癸三甲至三癸各一百卷，四甲四乙各十卷，卷帙之多，几与《太平广记》等，今惟甲至丁八十卷支甲至支戊五十卷三志若干卷，又摘钞本五十卷及二十卷存。 奇特之事，本缘希有见珍，而作者自序，乃甚以繁夥自憙，耄期急于成书，或以五十日作十卷，妄人因稍易旧说以投之，至有盈数卷者，亦不暇删润，径以入录（陈振孙《直斋书录解题》十一云），盖意在取盈，不能如本传所言“极鬼神事物之变”也。 惟所作小序三十一篇，什九“各出新意，不相重复”，赵与峕旹尝撮其大略入所著《宾退录》（八），叹为“不可及”，则于此书可谓知言者已。传奇之文，亦有作者：今讹为唐人作之《绿珠传》一卷，《杨太真外传》二卷，即宋乐史之撰也，《宋志》又有《滕王外传》《李白外传》《许迈传》各一卷，今俱不传。史字子正，抚州宜黄人，自南唐入宋为著作佐郎，出知陵州，以献赋召为三馆编修，又累献所著书共四百二十余卷，皆记叙科第孝弟神仙之事者，迁著作郎，直史馆，转太常博士，出知舒州，知黄州，又知商州，复职后再入文馆，掌西京勘磨司，赐金紫，景德四年卒，年七十八（九三〇——一〇〇七），事详《宋史》《乐黄目传》首。史又长于地理，有《太平寰宇记》二百卷，征引群书至百余种，而时杂以小说家言，至绿珠太真二传，本荟萃稗史成文，则又参以舆地志语；篇末垂诫，亦如唐人，而增其严冷，则宋人积习如是也，于《绿珠传》最明白：
传奇之文，亦有作者：今讹为唐人作之《绿珠传》一卷，《杨太真外传》二卷，即宋乐史之撰也，《宋志》又有《滕王外传》《李白外传》《许迈传》各一卷，今俱不传。 史字子正，抚州宜黄人，自南唐入宋为著作佐郎，出知陵州，以献赋召为三馆编修，又累献所著书共四百二十余卷，皆记叙科第孝弟神仙之事者，迁著作郎，直史馆，转太常博士，出知舒州，知黄州，又知商州，复职后再入文馆，掌西京勘磨司，赐金紫，景德四年卒，年七十八（九三〇——一〇〇七），事详《宋史》《乐黄目传》首。 史又长于地理，有《太平寰宇记》二百卷，征引群书至百余种，而时杂以小说家言，至绿珠太真二传，本荟萃稗史成文，则又参以舆地志语；篇末垂诫，亦如唐人，而增其严冷，则宋人积习如是也，于《绿珠传》最明白：……赵王伦乱常，孙秀使人求绿珠，……崇勃然曰，“他无所爱，绿珠不可得也！”秀自是谮伦族之。收兵忽至，崇谓绿珠曰，“我今为尔获罪。”绿珠泣曰，“愿效死于君前！”于是堕楼而死。崇弃东市，后人名其楼曰绿珠楼。楼在步庚里，近狄泉；泉在正城之东。绿珠有弟子宋袆，有国色，善吹笛，后入晋明帝宫中。今白州有一派水，自双角山出，合容州江，呼为绿珠江，亦犹归州有昭君村昭君场，吴有西施谷脂粉塘，盖取美人出处为名。又有绿珠井，在双角山下，故老传云，汲此井饮者，诞女必多美丽，里闾有识者以美色无益于时，因以巨石镇之，尔后有产女端妍者，而七窍四肢多不完具。异哉，山水之使然！……
…… 赵王伦乱常，孙秀使人求绿珠，…… 崇勃然曰，“他无所爱，绿珠不可得也！”秀自是谮伦族之。 收兵忽至，崇谓绿珠曰，“我今为尔获罪。 ”绿珠泣曰，“愿效死于君前！”于是堕楼而死。 崇弃东市，后人名其楼曰绿珠楼。 楼在步庚里，近狄泉；泉在正城之东。 绿珠有弟子宋袆，有国色，善吹笛，后入晋明帝宫中。 今白州有一派水，自双角山出，合容州江，呼为绿珠江，亦犹归州有昭君村昭君场，吴有西施谷脂粉塘，盖取美人出处为名。 又有绿珠井，在双角山下，故老传云，汲此井饮者，诞女必多美丽，里闾有识者以美色无益于时，因以巨石镇之，尔后有产女端妍者，而七窍四肢多不完具。 异哉，山水之使然！…………其后诗人题歌舞妓者，皆以绿珠为名。……其故何哉？盖一婢子，不知书，而能感主恩，愤不顾身，志烈懔懔，诚足使后人仰慕歌咏也。至有享厚禄，盗高位，亡仁义之性，怀反复之情，暮四朝三，唯利是务，节操反不若一妇人，岂不愧哉？今为此传，非徒述美丽，窒祸源，且欲惩戒辜恩背义之类也。……
…… 其后诗人题歌舞妓者，皆以绿珠为名。 …… 其故何哉？盖一婢子，不知书，而能感主恩，愤不顾身，志烈懔懔，诚足使后人仰慕歌咏也。 至有享厚禄，盗高位，亡仁义之性，怀反复之情，暮四朝三，唯利是务，节操反不若一妇人，岂不愧哉？今为此传，非徒述美丽，窒祸源，且欲惩戒辜恩背义之类也。 ……其后有亳州谯人秦醇字子复（一作子履），亦撰传奇，今存四篇，见于北宋刘斧所编之《青琐高议前集》及《别集》。其文颇欲规抚唐人，然辞意皆芜劣，惟偶见一二好语，点缀其间；又大抵托之古事，不敢及近，则仍由士习拘谨之所致矣，故乐史亦如此。一曰《赵飞燕别传》，序云得之李家墙角破筐中，记赵后入宫至自缢，复以冥报化为大鼋事，文中有“兰汤滟滟，昭仪坐其中，若三尺寒泉浸明玉”语，明人遂或击节诧为真古籍，与今人为杨慎伪造之汉《杂事秘辛》所惑正同。所谓汉伶玄撰之《飞燕外传》亦此类，但文辞殊胜而已。二曰《骊山记》，三曰《温泉记》，言张俞不第还蜀，于骊山下就故老问杨妃逸事，故老为具道；他日俞再经骊山，遇杨妃遣使相召，问人间事，且赐浴，明日敕吏引还，则惊起如梦觉，乃题诗于驿，后步野外，有牧童送酬和诗，云是前日一妇人之所托也。四曰《谭意歌传》，则为当时故事：意歌本良家子，流落长沙为倡，与汝州民张正字者相悦，婚约甚坚，而正字迫于母命，竟别娶；越三年妻殁，适有客来自长沙，责正字负义，且述意歌之贤，遂迎以归。后其子成进士，意歌“终身为命妇，夫妻偕老，子孙繁茂”，盖袭蒋防之《霍小玉传》，而结以“团圆”者也。
其后有亳州谯人秦醇字子复（一作子履），亦撰传奇，今存四篇，见于北宋刘斧所编之《青琐高议前集》及《别集》。 其文颇欲规抚唐人，然辞意皆芜劣，惟偶见一二好语，点缀其间；又大抵托之古事，不敢及近，则仍由士习拘谨之所致矣，故乐史亦如此。 一曰《赵飞燕别传》，序云得之李家墙角破筐中，记赵后入宫至自缢，复以冥报化为大鼋事，文中有“兰汤滟滟，昭仪坐其中，若三尺寒泉浸明玉”语，明人遂或击节诧为真古籍，与今人为杨慎伪造之汉《杂事秘辛》所惑正同。 所谓汉伶玄撰之《飞燕外传》亦此类，但文辞殊胜而已。 二曰《骊山记》，三曰《温泉记》，言张俞不第还蜀，于骊山下就故老问杨妃逸事，故老为具道；他日俞再经骊山，遇杨妃遣使相召，问人间事，且赐浴，明日敕吏引还，则惊起如梦觉，乃题诗于驿，后步野外，有牧童送酬和诗，云是前日一妇人之所托也。 四曰《谭意歌传》，则为当时故事：意歌本良家子，流落长沙为倡，与汝州民张正字者相悦，婚约甚坚，而正字迫于母命，竟别娶；越三年妻殁，适有客来自长沙，责正字负义，且述意歌之贤，遂迎以归。 后其子成进士，意歌“终身为命妇，夫妻偕老，子孙繁茂”，盖袭蒋防之《霍小玉传》，而结以“团圆”者也。不知何人作者有《大业拾遗记》二卷，题唐颜师古撰，亦名《隋遗录》。跋言会昌年间得于上元瓦棺寺阁上，本名《南部烟花录》，乃《隋书》遗稿，惜多缺落，因补以传；末无名，盖与造本文者出一手。记起于炀帝将幸江都，命麻叔谋开河，次及途中诸纵恣事，复造迷楼，怠荒于内，时之人望，乃归唐公，宇文化及将谋乱，因请放官奴分直上下，诏许之，“是有焚草之变”。其叙述颇陵乱，多失实，而文笔明丽，情致亦时有绰约可观览者。
不知何人作者有《大业拾遗记》二卷，题唐颜师古撰，亦名《隋遗录》。 跋言会昌年间得于上元瓦棺寺阁上，本名《南部烟花录》，乃《隋书》遗稿，惜多缺落，因补以传；末无名，盖与造本文者出一手。 记起于炀帝将幸江都，命麻叔谋开河，次及途中诸纵恣事，复造迷楼，怠荒于内，时之人望，乃归唐公，宇文化及将谋乱，因请放官奴分直上下，诏许之，“是有焚草之变”。 其叙述颇陵乱，多失实，而文笔明丽，情致亦时有绰约可观览者。……长安贡御车女袁宝儿，年十五，腰肢纤堕，冶多态，帝宠爱之特厚。时洛阳进合蒂迎辇花，云得之嵩山坞中，人不知名，采者异而贡之。……帝令宝儿持之，号曰“司花女”。时虞世南草征辽指挥德音敕于帝侧，宝儿注视久之。帝谓世南曰，“昔传飞燕可掌上舞，朕常谓儒生饰于文字，岂人能若是乎？及今得宝儿，方昭前事；然多憨态，今注目于卿，卿才人，可便嘲之！”世南应诏为绝句曰，“学画鸦黄半未成，垂肩亸袖太憨生，缘憨却得君王惜：长把花枝傍辇行。”帝大悦。……
…… 长安贡御车女袁宝儿，年十五，腰肢纤堕，冶多态，帝宠爱之特厚。 时洛阳进合蒂迎辇花，云得之嵩山坞中，人不知名，采者异而贡之。 …… 帝令宝儿持之，号曰“司花女”。 时虞世南草征辽指挥德音敕于帝侧，宝儿注视久之。 帝谓世南曰，“昔传飞燕可掌上舞，朕常谓儒生饰于文字，岂人能若是乎？及今得宝儿，方昭前事；然多憨态，今注目于卿，卿才人，可便嘲之！”世南应诏为绝句曰，“学画鸦黄半未成，垂肩亸袖太憨生，缘憨却得君王惜：长把花枝傍辇行。 ”帝大悦。 …………帝昏湎滋深，往往为妖祟所惑，尝游吴公宅鸡台，恍惚间与陈后主相遇。……舞女数十许，罗侍左右，中一人迥美，帝屡目之。后主云，“殿下不识此人耶？即丽华也。每忆桃叶山前乘战舰与此子北渡，尔时丽华最恨，方倚临春阁试东郭紫毫笔，书小砑红绡作答江令‘璧月’句，诗词未终，见韩擒虎跃青骢驹，拥万甲直来冲人，都不存去就，便至今日。”俄以绿文测海蠡酌红粱新酝劝帝，帝饮之甚欢，因请丽华舞“玉树后庭花”，丽华辞以抛掷岁久，自井中出来，腰肢依拒，无复往时姿态，帝再三索之，乃徐起终一曲。后主问帝，“萧妃何如此人？”帝曰，“春兰秋菊，各一时之秀也。”……
…… 帝昏湎滋深，往往为妖祟所惑，尝游吴公宅鸡台，恍惚间与陈后主相遇。 …… 舞女数十许，罗侍左右，中一人迥美，帝屡目之。 后主云，“殿下不识此人耶？即丽华也。 每忆桃叶山前乘战舰与此子北渡，尔时丽华最恨，方倚临春阁试东郭紫毫笔，书小砑红绡作答江令‘璧月’句，诗词未终，见韩擒虎跃青骢驹，拥万甲直来冲人，都不存去就，便至今日。 ”俄以绿文测海蠡酌红粱新酝劝帝，帝饮之甚欢，因请丽华舞“玉树后庭花”，丽华辞以抛掷岁久，自井中出来，腰肢依拒，无复往时姿态，帝再三索之，乃徐起终一曲。 后主问帝，“萧妃何如此人？”帝曰，“春兰秋菊，各一时之秀也。 ”……又有《开河记》一卷，叙麻叔谋奉隋炀诏开河，虐民掘墓，纳贿，食小儿，事发遂诛死；《迷楼记》一卷，叙炀帝晚年荒恣，因王义切谏，独居二日，以为不乐，复入宫，后闻童谣，自识运尽。《海山记》二卷，则始自降生，次及兴土木，见妖鬼，幸江都，询王义，以至遇害，无不具记。三书与《隋遗录》相类，而叙述加详，顾时杂俚语，文采逊矣。《海山记》已见于《青琐高议》中，自是北宋人作，余当亦同，今本有题唐韩偓撰者，明人妄增之。帝王纵恣，世人所不欲遭而所乐道，唐人喜言明皇，宋则益以隋炀，明罗贯中复撰集为《隋唐志传》，清褚人获又增改以为《隋唐演义》。
又有《开河记》一卷，叙麻叔谋奉隋炀诏开河，虐民掘墓，纳贿，食小儿，事发遂诛死；《迷楼记》一卷，叙炀帝晚年荒恣，因王义切谏，独居二日，以为不乐，复入宫，后闻童谣，自识运尽。 《海山记》二卷，则始自降生，次及兴土木，见妖鬼，幸江都，询王义，以至遇害，无不具记。 三书与《隋遗录》相类，而叙述加详，顾时杂俚语，文采逊矣。 《海山记》已见于《青琐高议》中，自是北宋人作，余当亦同，今本有题唐韩偓撰者，明人妄增之。 帝王纵恣，世人所不欲遭而所乐道，唐人喜言明皇，宋则益以隋炀，明罗贯中复撰集为《隋唐志传》，清褚人获又增改以为《隋唐演义》。《梅妃传》一卷亦无撰人，盖见当时图画有把梅美人号梅妃者，泛言唐明皇时人，因造此传，谓为江氏名采苹，入宫因太真妒复见放，值禄山之乱，死于兵。有跋，略谓传是大中二年所写，在万卷朱遵度家，今惟叶少蕴与予得之；末不署名，盖亦即撰本文者，自云与叶梦得同时，则南渡前后之作矣。今本或题唐曹邺撰，亦明人妄增之。
《梅妃传》一卷亦无撰人，盖见当时图画有把梅美人号梅妃者，泛言唐明皇时人，因造此传，谓为江氏名采苹，入宫因太真妒复见放，值禄山之乱，死于兵。 有跋，略谓传是大中二年所写，在万卷朱遵度家，今惟叶少蕴与予得之；末不署名，盖亦即撰本文者，自云与叶梦得同时，则南渡前后之作矣。 今本或题唐曹邺撰，亦明人妄增之。

第十二篇　宋之话本

第十二篇　宋之话本

第十二篇　宋之话本

Chapter 12 The Song Dynasty's Story宋一代文人之为志怪，既平实而乏文彩，其传奇，又多托往事而避近闻，拟古且远不逮，更无独创之可言矣。然在市井间，则别有艺文兴起。即以俚语著书，叙述故事，谓之“平话”，即今所谓“白话小说”者是也。
宋一代文人之为志怪，既平实而乏文彩，其传奇，又多托往事而避近闻，拟古且远不逮，更无独创之可言矣。 然在市井间，则别有艺文兴起。 即以俚语著书，叙述故事，谓之“平话”，即今所谓“白话小说”者是也。然用白话作书者，实不始于宋。清光绪中，敦煌千佛洞之藏经始显露，大抵运入英法，中国亦拾其余藏京师图书馆；书为宋初所藏，多佛经，而内有俗文体之故事数种，盖唐末五代人钞，如《唐太宗入冥记》，《孝子董永传》，《秋胡小说》则在伦敦博物馆，《伍员入吴故事》则在中国某氏，惜未能目睹，无以知其与后来小说之关系。以意度之，则俗文之兴，当由二端，一为娱心，一为劝善，而尤以劝善为大宗，故上列诸书，多关惩劝，京师图书馆所藏，亦尚有俗文《维摩》《法华》等经及《释迦八相成道记》《目连入地狱故事》也。
然用白话作书者，实不始于宋。 清光绪中，敦煌千佛洞之藏经始显露，大抵运入英法，中国亦拾其余藏京师图书馆；书为宋初所藏，多佛经，而内有俗文体之故事数种，盖唐末五代人钞，如《唐太宗入冥记》，《孝子董永传》，《秋胡小说》则在伦敦博物馆，《伍员入吴故事》则在中国某氏，惜未能目睹，无以知其与后来小说之关系。 以意度之，则俗文之兴，当由二端，一为娱心，一为劝善，而尤以劝善为大宗，故上列诸书，多关惩劝，京师图书馆所藏，亦尚有俗文《维摩》《法华》等经及《释迦八相成道记》《目连入地狱故事》也。《唐太宗入冥记》首尾并阙，中间仅存，盖记太宗杀建成元吉，生魂被勘事者；讳其本朝之过，始盛于宋，此虽关涉太宗，故当仍为唐人之作也，文略如下：
《唐太宗入冥记》首尾并阙，中间仅存，盖记太宗杀建成元吉，生魂被勘事者；讳其本朝之过，始盛于宋，此虽关涉太宗，故当仍为唐人之作也，文略如下：……判官懆恶，不敢道名字。帝曰，“卿近前来。”轻道，“姓崔，名子玉。”“朕当识。”言讫，使人引皇帝至院门，使人奏曰，“伏惟陛下且立在此，容臣入报判官速来。”言讫，使来者到厅拜了，“启判官：奉大王处，太宗是生魂到，领判官推勘，见在门外，未敢引。”判官闻言，惊忙起立，……
…… 判官懆恶，不敢道名字。 帝曰，“卿近前来。 ”轻道，“姓崔，名子玉。 ”“朕当识。 ”言讫，使人引皇帝至院门，使人奏曰，“伏惟陛下且立在此，容臣入报判官速来。 ”言讫，使来者到厅拜了，“启判官：奉大王处，太宗是生魂到，领判官推勘，见在门外，未敢引。 ”判官闻言，惊忙起立，……宋有《梁公九谏》一卷（在《士礼居丛书》中），文亦朴陋如前记，书叙武后废太子为庐陵王，而欲传位于侄武三思，经狄仁杰极谏者九，武后始感悟，召还复立为太子。卷首有范仲淹《唐相梁公碑文》，乃贬守番阳时作，则书出当在明道二年（一〇三三）以后矣。
宋有《梁公九谏》一卷（在《士礼居丛书》中），文亦朴陋如前记，书叙武后废太子为庐陵王，而欲传位于侄武三思，经狄仁杰极谏者九，武后始感悟，召还复立为太子。 卷首有范仲淹《唐相梁公碑文》，乃贬守番阳时作，则书出当在明道二年（一〇三三）以后矣。第六谏
The sixth admonition则天睡至三更，又得一梦，梦与大罗天女对手着棋，局中有子，旋被打将，频输天女，忽然惊觉。来日受朝，问诸大臣，其梦如何？狄相奏曰，“臣圆此梦，于国不祥。陛下梦与大罗天女对手着棋，局中有子，旋被打将，频输天女：盖谓局中有子，不得其位，旋被打将，失其所主。今太子庐陵王贬房州千里，是谓局中有子，不得其位，遂感此梦。臣愿东宫之位，速立庐陵王为储君，若立武三思，终当不得！”
则天睡至三更，又得一梦，梦与大罗天女对手着棋，局中有子，旋被打将，频输天女，忽然惊觉。 来日受朝，问诸大臣，其梦如何？狄相奏曰，“臣圆此梦，于国不祥。 陛下梦与大罗天女对手着棋，局中有子，旋被打将，频输天女：盖谓局中有子，不得其位，旋被打将，失其所主。 今太子庐陵王贬房州千里，是谓局中有子，不得其位，遂感此梦。 臣愿东宫之位，速立庐陵王为储君，若立武三思，终当不得！”然据现存宋人通俗小说观之，则与唐末之主劝惩者稍殊，而实出于杂剧中之“说话”。说话者，谓口说古今惊听之事，盖唐时亦已有之，段成式《酉阳杂俎》（《续集》四《贬误篇》）有云，“予太和末，因弟生日观杂戏，有市人小说，呼扁鹊作‘褊鹊’字，上声。……”李商隐《骄儿诗》（集一）亦云，“或谑张飞胡，或笑邓艾吃。”似当时已有说三国故事者，然未详。宋都汴，民物康阜，游乐之事甚多，市井间有杂伎艺，其中有“说话”，执此业者曰“说话人”。说话人又有专家，孟元老（《东京梦华录》五）尝举其目，曰小说，曰合生，曰说诨话，曰说三分，曰说《五代史》。南渡以后，此风未改，据吴自牧（《梦粱录》二十）所记载则有四科如下：
然据现存宋人通俗小说观之，则与唐末之主劝惩者稍殊，而实出于杂剧中之“说话”。 说话者，谓口说古今惊听之事，盖唐时亦已有之，段成式《酉阳杂俎》（《续集》四《贬误篇》）有云，“予太和末，因弟生日观杂戏，有市人小说，呼扁鹊作‘褊鹊’字，上声。 ……”李商隐《骄儿诗》（集一）亦云，“或谑张飞胡，或笑邓艾吃。 ”似当时已有说三国故事者，然未详。 宋都汴，民物康阜，游乐之事甚多，市井间有杂伎艺，其中有“说话”，执此业者曰“说话人”。 说话人又有专家，孟元老（《东京梦华录》五）尝举其目，曰小说，曰合生，曰说诨话，曰说三分，曰说《五代史》。 南渡以后，此风未改，据吴自牧（《梦粱录》二十）所记载则有四科如下：说话者，谓之舌辨，虽有四家数，各有门庭：
The speaker is called tongue discrimination, although there are four schools, each with its own court:且“小说”名“银字儿”，如烟粉灵怪传奇公案扑刀杆棒发迹变态之事。……谈论古今，如水之流。
Moreover, the name of the "novel" is "silver character", such as the legend of the smoke powder and the monster, the public case, the knife and the rod, and the pervert. …… Talking about ancient and modern times is like the flow of water.“谈经”者，谓演说佛书，“说参请”者，谓宾主参禅悟道等事。……又有“说诨经”者。
"Talking about scriptures" refers to speaking about Buddhist books, and "talking about participation" refers to the guests and hosts participating in Zen and enlightenment. …… There are also those who "preach the scriptures."“讲史书”者，谓讲说《通鉴》汉唐历代书史文传兴废战争之事。
"Talking about history books" refers to talking about the rise and fall of wars in the history of the Han and Tang dynasties.“合生”，与起今随今相似，各占一事也。
"Synthesis" is similar to the present and the present, each occupying a different event.灌园耐得翁（《都城纪胜》）述临安盛事，亦谓说话有四家，曰小说，曰说经说参请，曰说史，曰合生，而分小说为三类，即“一者银字儿，如烟粉灵怪传奇；说公案，皆是搏拳提刀赶棒及发迹变态之事；说铁骑儿，谓士马金鼓之事”是也。周密之书（《武林旧事》六），叙四科又略异，曰演史，曰说经诨经，曰小说，曰说诨话，无合生；且谓小说有雄辩社（卷三），则其时说话人不惟各守家数，且有集会以磨炼其技艺者矣。
灌园耐得翁（《都城纪胜》）述临安盛事，亦谓说话有四家，曰小说，曰说经说参请，曰说史，曰合生，而分小说为三类，即“一者银字儿，如烟粉灵怪传奇；说公案，皆是搏拳提刀赶棒及发迹变态之事；说铁骑儿，谓士马金鼓之事”是也。 周密之书（《武林旧事》六），叙四科又略异，曰演史，曰说经诨经，曰小说，曰说诨话，无合生；且谓小说有雄辩社（卷三），则其时说话人不惟各守家数，且有集会以磨炼其技艺者矣。说话之事，虽在说话人各运匠心，随时生发，而仍有底本以作凭依，是为“话本”。《梦粱录》（二十）影戏条下云，“其话本与讲史书者颇同，大抵真假相半。”又小说讲经史条下云，“盖小说者，能讲一朝一代故事，顷刻间捏合。”《都城纪胜》所说同，惟“捏合”作“提破”而已。是知讲史之体，在历叙史实而杂以虚辞，小说之体，在说一故事而立知结局，今所存《五代史平话》及《通俗小说》残本，盖即此二科话本之流，其体式正如此。
Although the speaker uses his own ingenuity and arises at any time, there is still a foundation as a basis, which is the "book of words". "Dream Liang Lu" (20) Under the film and drama article, "The story is quite similar to that of the history book, and it is roughly half true and half false." "The novelist can tell the story of a generation and put it together in an instant." "The "Capital Chronicle" says the same, except that "pinching" is "tipo". It is known that the body of telling history lies in narrating historical facts mixed with falsehoods, and the style of novels is to tell a story and know the ending.《新编五代史平话》者，讲史之一，孟元老所谓“说《五代史》”之话本，此殆近之矣。其书梁唐晋汉周每代二卷，各以诗起，次入正文，又以诗终。惟《梁史平话》始于开辟，次略叙历代兴亡之事，立论颇奇，而亦杂以诞妄之因果说。
The "New Compilation of the History of the Five Dynasties" is one of the historical lectures, and Meng Yuanlao's so-called "Five Dynasties History" is almost close. The book consists of two volumes for each dynasty, each starting with poetry, entering the main text, and ending with poetry. Only "Liang Shi Pinghua" begins with the opening of the book, and then briefly describes the rise and fall of the past dynasties, with quite strange theories and mixed with absurd causal theories.龙争虎战几春秋，五代梁唐晋汉周，兴废风灯明灭里，易君变国若传邮。
The dragons fought and the tigers fought for several springs and autumns, the Liang and Tang dynasties, the Jin dynasty id_0000, the Han and Zhou dynasties, the rise and fall of the wind and lanterns, the change of rulers and the change of the country, like a messenger.粤自鸿荒既判，风气始开，伏羲画八卦而文籍生，黄帝垂衣裳而天下治。……那时诸侯皆已顺从，独蚩尤共炎帝侵暴诸侯，不服王化。黄帝乃帅诸侯，兴兵动众，……遂杀死炎帝，活捉蚩尤，万国平定。这黄帝做着个厮杀的头脑，教天下后世习用干戈。……汤伐桀，武王伐纣，皆是以臣弑君，篡夺了夏殷的天下。汤武不合做了这个样子，后来周室衰微，诸侯强大，春秋之世二百四十年之间，臣弑其君的也有，子弑其父的也有。孔子圣人为见三纲沦，九法，秉那直笔，做一卷书，唤做《春秋》，褒奖他善的，贬罚他恶的，故孟子道是“孔子作《春秋》而乱臣贼子惧”。只有汉高祖姓刘字季，他取秦始皇天下不用篡弑之谋，真个是：
粤自鸿荒既判，风气始开，伏羲画八卦而文籍生，黄帝垂衣裳而天下治。 …… 那时诸侯皆已顺从，独蚩尤共炎帝侵暴诸侯，不服王化。 黄帝乃帅诸侯，兴兵动众，…… 遂杀死炎帝，活捉蚩尤，万国平定。 这黄帝做着个厮杀的头脑，教天下后世习用干戈。 …… 汤伐桀，武王伐纣，皆是以臣弑君，篡夺了夏殷的天下。 汤武不合做了这个样子，后来周室衰微，诸侯强大，春秋之世二百四十年之间，臣弑其君的也有，子弑其父的也有。 孔子圣人为见三纲沦，九法，秉那直笔，做一卷书，唤做《春秋》，褒奖他善的，贬罚他恶的，故孟子道是“孔子作《春秋》而乱臣贼子惧”。 只有汉高祖姓刘字季，他取秦始皇天下不用篡弑之谋，真个是：手拿三尺龙泉剑，夺却中原四百州。
Holding a three-foot Longquan sword in his hand, he seized four hundred states in the Central Plains.刘季杀了项羽，立着国号曰汉，只因疑忌功臣，如韩王信彭越陈豨之徒，皆不免族灭诛夷。这三个功臣抱屈衔冤，诉于天帝，天帝可怜见三个功臣无辜被戮，令他每三个托生做三个豪杰出来：韩信去曹家托生做着个曹操，彭越去孙家托生做着个孙权，陈豨去那宗室家托生做着个刘备。这三个分了他的天下，……三国各有史，道是《三国志》是也。……
Liu Ji killed Xiang Yu and established the name of the country as Han, just because he was suspicious of the heroes, such as Han Wang Xin Peng Yue and Chen Xi, all of whom were exterminated. These three heroes were wronged and complained to the Emperor of Heaven, who took pity on the three heroes and was killed innocently, so he ordered him to be three heroes every three in his life: Han Xin went to the Cao family to be a Cao Cao, Peng Yue went to the Sun family to be a Sun Quan, and Chen Xi went to the clan to be a Liu Bei. These three divided his world,...... The Three Kingdoms each has its own history, and the Dao is the "Romance of the Three Kingdoms". ……于是更自晋及唐，以至黄巢变乱，朱氏立国，其下卷今阙，必当讫于梁亡矣。全书叙述，繁简颇不同，大抵史上大事，即无发挥，一涉细故，便多增饰，状以骈俪，证以诗歌，又杂诨词，以博笑噱，如说黄巢下第，与朱温等为盗，将劫侯家庄马评事时途中情景，即其例也：
于是更自晋及唐，以至黄巢变乱，朱氏立国，其下卷今阙，必当讫于梁亡矣。 全书叙述，繁简颇不同，大抵史上大事，即无发挥，一涉细故，便多增饰，状以骈俪，证以诗歌，又杂诨词，以博笑噱，如说黄巢下第，与朱温等为盗，将劫侯家庄马评事时途中情景，即其例也：……黄巢道，“若去劫他时，不消贤弟下手，咱有桑门剑一口，是天赐黄巢的，咱将剑一指，看他甚人，也抵敌不住。”道罢便去，行过一个高岭，名做悬刀峰，自行了半个日头，方得下岭。好座高岭！是：根盘地角，顶接天涯，苍苍老桧拂长空，挺挺孤松侵碧汉，山鸡共日鸡齐斗，天河与涧水接流，飞泉飘雨脚廉纤，怪石与云头相轧。怎见得高？
…… Huang Chao said, "If we go to rob him, we don't have to be a good brother, we have a sword from the monk, which is given to Huang Chao by God, we will point the sword, and we will not be able to resist the enemy." After saying that, he went, walked through a high ridge, called Hanging Knife Peak, and went down the ridge for half a day on his own. What a high ridge! Yes: the roots are encircled in the corners of the earth, the top is connected to the ends of the earth, the old cypress brushes the sky, the solitary pine invades the blue Han, the pheasant fights with the sun and the chicken, the Tianhe River meets the stream, the flying spring drifts and the rain are slender, and the strange rocks and clouds collide. How can you see high?几年攧下一樵夫，至今未曾攧到底。
After a few years of catching a woodcutter, I still haven't caught it to the end.黄巢兄弟四人过了这座高岭，望见那侯家庄。好座庄舍！但见：石惹闲云，山连溪水，堤边垂柳，弄风袅袅拂溪桥，路畔闲花，映日丛丛遮野渡。那四个兄弟望见庄舍远不出五里田地，天色正晡，同入个树林中亸了，待晚西却行到那马家门首去。……
The four Huang Chao brothers crossed this high ridge and saw the Houjiazhuang. What a good manor! But see: the stone is idle clouds, the mountains are connected to the stream, the weeping willows by the embankment, the wind blows the creek bridge, the idle flowers on the roadside, and the sun covers the wild crossing. The four brothers saw that the manor was not far away from the fields, and it was getting dark, so they went into the woods together, and when they waited for the evening, they walked to the door of the horse's house. ……《京本通俗小说》不知本几卷，今存卷十至十六，每卷一篇，曰《碾玉观音》，曰《菩萨蛮》，曰《西山一窟鬼》，曰《志诚张主管》，曰《拗相公》，曰《错斩崔宁》，曰《冯玉梅团圆》等，每篇各具首尾，顷刻可了，与吴自牧所记正同。其取材多在近时，或采之他种说部，主在娱心，而杂以惩劝。体制则什九先以闲话或他事，后乃缀合，以入正文。如《碾玉观音》因欲叙咸安郡王游春，则辄举春词至十余首：
《京本通俗小说》不知本几卷，今存卷十至十六，每卷一篇，曰《碾玉观音》，曰《菩萨蛮》，曰《西山一窟鬼》，曰《志诚张主管》，曰《拗相公》，曰《错斩崔宁》，曰《冯玉梅团圆》等，每篇各具首尾，顷刻可了，与吴自牧所记正同。 其取材多在近时，或采之他种说部，主在娱心，而杂以惩劝。 体制则什九先以闲话或他事，后乃缀合，以入正文。 如《碾玉观音》因欲叙咸安郡王游春，则辄举春词至十余首：山色晴岚景物佳，暖烘回雁起平沙，东郊渐觉花供眼，南陌依稀草吐芽。堤上柳，未藏鸦，寻芳趁步到山家，陇头几树红梅落，红杏枝头未着花。
The mountains are clear and the scenery is good, the warm return geese rise from the flat sand, the eastern suburbs gradually feel the flowers for the eyes, and the southern road is faintly sprouting grass. The willows on the embankment have not yet hidden crows, so I hurried to my mountain home in search of fragrance, where a few red plum trees on the ridge have fallen, while the red apricot branches have not yet bloomed.这首《鹧鸪天》说孟春景致，原来又不如仲春词做得好：
This song "Partridge Sky" says that the scenery of Mengchun is not as good as the mid-spring poems:…………
这三首词，都不如王荆公看见花瓣儿片片风吹下地来，原来这春归去是东风断送的。有诗道：
These three words are not as good as Wang Jinggong seeing the petals blown down to the ground by the wind, and it turns out that this spring return was ruined by the east wind. There is a poem:春日春风有时好，春日春风有时恶，不得春风花不开，花开又被风吹落。
The spring breeze is sometimes good, and the spring breeze is sometimes bad id_0000.苏东坡道，不是东风断送春归去，是春雨断送春归去。有诗道：
The slope of Sudong is not the east wind that ruins the return of spring, but the spring rain that ruins the return of spring. There is a poem:雨前初见花间蕊，雨后全无叶底花，蜂蝶纷纷过墙去，却疑春色在邻家。
Before the rain, I first saw the stamens among the flowers, but after the rain, there were no flowers beneath the leaves. id_0000 The bees and butterflies flew over the wall, but I suspected that the spring colors were in the neighbor's house.秦少游道，也不干风事，也不干雨事，是柳絮飘将春色去。有诗道：
Qin Shaoyou did not do wind or rain, it was the willow catkins that drove the spring away. There is a poem:三月柳花轻复散，飘扬淡荡送春归，此花本是无情物，一向东飞一向西。
In March id_0000, the willow flowers gently disperse, fluttering lightly as they bid farewell to spring. This flower is originally a heartless thing, flying east and west.…………
王岩叟道，也不干风事，也不干雨事，也不干柳絮事，也不干蝴蝶事，也不干黄莺事，也不干杜鹃事，也不干燕子事，是九十日春光已过春归去。曾有诗道：
Wang Yansou said, neither does the wind, nor the rain, nor the willow catkins, nor the butterflies, nor the yellow warbler, nor the cuckoo, nor the swallows, it is the ninety-day spring that has passed and the spring has returned. There was a poem that said:怨风怨雨两俱非，风雨不来春亦归，怨风怨雨两俱非，风雨不来春亦归，腮边红褪青梅小，口角黄消乳燕飞，腮边红褪青梅小，口角黄消乳燕飞，蜀魄健啼花影去，吴蚕强食柘桑稀，蜀魄健啼花影去，吴蚕强食柘桑稀，直恼春归无觅处，江湖辜负一蓑衣。直恼春归无觅处，江湖辜负一蓑衣。
说话的因甚说这春归词？绍兴年间，行在有个关西延州延安府人，本身是三镇节度使咸安郡王，当时怕春归去，将带着许多钧眷游春，……
Why do you say this spring return word? During the Shaoxing period, there was a person from Yan'an Prefecture in Yanzhou, Guanxi, who was the governor of the three towns and the king of Xian'an, who was afraid of returning in spring and would take many Jun family members to visit Chun,......此种引首，与讲史之先叙天地开辟者略异，大抵诗词之外，亦用故实，或取相类，或取不同，而多为时事。取不同者由反入正，取相类者较有浅深，忽而相牵，转入本事，故叙述方始，而主意已明，耐得翁之所谓“提破”，吴自牧之所谓“捏合”，殆指此矣。凡其上半，谓之“得胜头回”，头回犹云前回，听说话者多军民，故冠以吉语曰得胜，非因进讲宫中，因有此名也。至于文式，则与《五代史平话》之铺叙琐事处颇相似，然较详。《西山一窟鬼》述吴秀才一为鬼诱，至所遇无一非鬼，盖本之《鬼董》（四）之《樊生》，而描写委曲琐细，则虽明清演义亦无以过之，如其记订婚之始云：
此种引首，与讲史之先叙天地开辟者略异，大抵诗词之外，亦用故实，或取相类，或取不同，而多为时事。 取不同者由反入正，取相类者较有浅深，忽而相牵，转入本事，故叙述方始，而主意已明，耐得翁之所谓“提破”，吴自牧之所谓“捏合”，殆指此矣。 凡其上半，谓之“得胜头回”，头回犹云前回，听说话者多军民，故冠以吉语曰得胜，非因进讲宫中，因有此名也。 至于文式，则与《五代史平话》之铺叙琐事处颇相似，然较详。 《西山一窟鬼》述吴秀才一为鬼诱，至所遇无一非鬼，盖本之《鬼董》（四）之《樊生》，而描写委曲琐细，则虽明清演义亦无以过之，如其记订婚之始云：……开学堂后，有一年之上，也罪过，那街上人家都把孩子们来与它教训，颇有些趱足。当日正在学堂里教书，只听得青布帘儿上铃声响，走将一个人入来。吴教授看那入来的人：不是别人，却是十年前搬去的邻舍王婆。原来那婆子是个“撮合山”，专靠做媒为生。吴教授相揖罢，道，“多时不见。而今婆婆在那里住？”婆子道，“只道教授忘了老媳妇，如今老媳妇在钱塘门里沿城住。”教授问，“婆婆高寿？”婆子道，“老媳妇犬马之年七十有五。教授青春多少？”教授道，“小子二十有二。”婆子道，“教授方才二十有二，却像三十以上人，想教授每日价费多少心神；据我媳妇愚见，也少不得一个小娘子相伴。”教授道，“我这里也几次问人来，却没这般头脑。”婆子道，“这个‘不是冤家不聚会’。好教官人得知，却有一头好亲在这里，一千贯钱房计，带一个从嫁，又好人才，却有一床乐器都会，又写得算得，又是嗻大官府第出身，只要嫁个读书官人。教授却是要也不？”教授听得说罢，喜从天降，笑逐颜开，道，“若还真个有这人时，可知好哩！只是这个小娘子如今在那里？”……
…… After the school opened, there was more than a year, and it was also a sin, and the people on the street came to teach it a lesson, which was quite a bit sloppy. I was teaching in the school that day, and I only heard the bell on the blue cloth curtain ringing, and a person came in. Professor Wu looked at the person who came in: it was none other than the neighbor Wang Po who moved in ten years ago. It turned out that the woman was a "matchmaker" who made a living by being a matchmaker. Professor Wu bowed to each other and said, "I haven't seen you for a long time." Where does my mother-in-law live now? The woman said, "It's just that the professor forgot about the old daughter-in-law, and now the old daughter-in-law lives along the city in the Qiantang Gate." The professor asked, "Mother-in-law longevity?" The mother-in-law said, "The old daughter-in-law is seventy-five years old." How much youth is taught? The professor said, "The kid is twenty-two." The woman said, "The professor is only twenty-two, but he looks like a person over thirty, and he wants to teach how much he spends every day; According to my daughter-in-law's humble opinion, a little lady is also indispensable. The professor said, "I have asked people here several times, but I don't have such a mind." The woman said, "This is not 'not an enemy who does not gather'." A good instructor learns that there is a good relative here, a thousand guan of money, a marriage, and a good talent, but there is a bed of musical instruments, and it is written well, and it is id_0000 from the family of a great official, as long as it marries a scholar. But the professor wants it? After hearing this, the professor was overjoyed, smiled and said, "If there is really this person, it will be good!" It's just that where is this little lady now? ”……南宋亡，杂剧消歇，说话遂不复行，然话本盖颇有存者，后人目染，仿以为书，虽已非口谈，而犹存曩体，小说者流有《拍案惊奇》《醉醒石》之属，讲史者流有《列国演义》《隋唐演义》之属，惟世间于此二科，渐不复知所严别，遂俱以“小说”为通名。
南宋亡，杂剧消歇，说话遂不复行，然话本盖颇有存者，后人目染，仿以为书，虽已非口谈，而犹存曩体，小说者流有《拍案惊奇》《醉醒石》之属，讲史者流有《列国演义》《隋唐演义》之属，惟世间于此二科，渐不复知所严别，遂俱以“小说”为通名。

第十三篇　宋元之拟话本

第十三篇　宋元之拟话本

第十三篇　宋元之拟话本

Chapter 13 The Song and Yuan Dynasties说话既盛行，则当时若干著作，自亦蒙话本之影响。北宋时，刘斧秀才杂辑古今稗说为《青琐高议》及《青琐摭遗》，文辞虽拙俗，然尚非话本，而文题之下，已各系以七言，如
Since speech was popular, several works at that time were also influenced by the story. During the Northern Song Dynasty, Liu Axe Scholar miscellaneously compiled ancient and modern barnyard theories as "Qing Suo Gao Yi" and "Qing Suo Yi", although the text was clumsy and vulgar, but it was not a story, and under the title of the text, it had been tied with seven words, such as《流红记》（红叶题诗娶韩氏）
《流红记》（红叶题诗娶韩氏）《赵飞燕外传》（别传叙飞燕本末）
《赵飞燕外传》（别传叙飞燕本末）《韩魏公》（不罪碎盏烧须人）
《韩魏公》（不罪碎盏烧须人）《王榭》（风涛飘入乌衣国）
《王榭》（风涛飘入乌衣国）等，皆一题一解，甚类元人剧本结末之“题目”与“正名”，因疑汴京说话标题，体裁或亦如是，习俗浸润，乃及文章。至于全体被其变易者，则今尚有《大唐三藏法师取经记》及《大宋宣和遗事》二书流传，皆首尾与诗相始终，中间以诗词为点缀，辞句多俚，顾与话本又不同，近讲史而非口谈，似小说而无捏合。钱曾于《宣和遗事》，则并《灯花婆婆》等十五种并谓之“词话”（《也是园书目》十），以其有词有话也，然其间之《错斩崔宁》《冯玉梅团圆》两种，亦见《京本通俗小说》中，本说话之一科，传自专家，谈吐如流，通篇相称，殊非《宣和遗事》所能企及。盖《宣和遗事》虽亦有词有说，而非全出于说话人，乃由作者掇拾故书，益以小说，补缀联属，勉成一书，故形式仅存，而精采遂逊，文辞又多非己出，不足以云创作也。《取经记》尤苟简。惟说话消亡，而话本终蜕为著作，则又赖此等为其枢纽而已。
etc., all of which are a question and an explanation, very similar to the "title" and "correct name" at the end of the Yuan script, because I suspect that the title of Bianjing's speech, the genre may be the same, and the customs are infiltrating, and it is related to the article. As for all those who have been changed by it, there are still two books circulating today, "The Records of the Tang Sanzang Master" and "The Remains of the Great Song Dynasty Xuanhe", both of which are consistent with poetry, embellished with poetry in the middle, and the words are slang, but they are different from the original text. Qian Zeng in "Xuanhe Legacy", and fifteen other kinds such as "Lantern Flower Mother-in-law" and called it "words" ("Yiyuan Bibliography" 10), because it has words and words, but the two of "Wrong Cutting Cui Ning" and "Feng Yumei Reunion" in the middle are also seen in the "Jingben Popular Novel", one of the subjects of this speech, passed down from experts, the conversation is fluent, and the whole article is commensurate, which is not within the reach of "Xuanhe Legacy". Although the "Xuanhe Legacy" also has words and sayings, it is not entirely from the speaker, but the author picks up the old book, adds novels, supplements the connections, and barely becomes a book, so the form only remains, and the brilliance is inferior, and most of the words are not from his own, which is not enough to be said to be created. The "Record of Taking the Classics" is particularly simplistic. Only the disappearance of speech, and the final transformation of the text into writing, rely on these as its pivots.《大唐三藏法师取经记》三卷，旧本在日本，又有一小本曰《大唐三藏取经诗话》，内容悉同，卷尾一行云“中瓦子张家印”，张家为宋时临安书铺，世因以为宋刊，然逮于元朝，张家或亦无恙，则此书或为元人撰，未可知矣。三卷分十七章，今所见小说之分章回者始此；每章必有诗，故曰诗话。首章两本俱阙，次章则记玄奘等之遇猴行者。
《大唐三藏法师取经记》三卷，旧本在日本，又有一小本曰《大唐三藏取经诗话》，内容悉同，卷尾一行云“中瓦子张家印”，张家为宋时临安书铺，世因以为宋刊，然逮于元朝，张家或亦无恙，则此书或为元人撰，未可知矣。 三卷分十七章，今所见小说之分章回者始此；每章必有诗，故曰诗话。 首章两本俱阙，次章则记玄奘等之遇猴行者。行程遇猴行者处第二
The itinerary encounters the monkey walker in the second place僧行六人，当日起行。……偶于一日午时，见一白衣秀才，从正东而来，便揖和尚，“万福万福！和尚今往何处，莫不是再往西天取经否？”法师合掌曰：“贫道奉敕，为东土众生未有佛教，是取经也。”秀才曰：“和尚生前两回去取经，中路遭难，此回若去，千死万死！”法师云：“你如何得知？”秀才曰：“我不是别人，我是花果山紫云洞八万四千铜头铁额弥猴王。我今来助和尚取经，此去百万程途，经过三十六国，多有祸难之处。”法师应曰：“果得如此，三世有缘，东土众生，获大利益。”当便改呼为猴行者。僧行七人，次日同行，左右伏事。猴行者因留诗曰：
僧行六人，当日起行。 …… 偶于一日午时，见一白衣秀才，从正东而来，便揖和尚，“万福万福！和尚今往何处，莫不是再往西天取经否？”法师合掌曰：“贫道奉敕，为东土众生未有佛教，是取经也。 ”秀才曰：“和尚生前两回去取经，中路遭难，此回若去，千死万死！”法师云：“你如何得知？”秀才曰：“我不是别人，我是花果山紫云洞八万四千铜头铁额弥猴王。 我今来助和尚取经，此去百万程途，经过三十六国，多有祸难之处。 ”法师应曰：“果得如此，三世有缘，东土众生，获大利益。 ”当便改呼为猴行者。 僧行七人，次日同行，左右伏事。 猴行者因留诗曰：百万程途向那边，今来佐助大师前，A million miles to the other side, now in front of Master Sasuke, 一心祝愿逢真教，同往西天鸡足山。 I wish to meet the true religion and go to the western heaven Jizu Mountain together.
三藏法师诗答曰：
Master Tripitaka's poem replied:此日前生有宿缘，今朝果遇大明仙，This day I had a fate, and today I really met the Great Ming Immortal, 前途若到妖魔处，望显神通镇佛前。 If I go to the demon, I hope to show my supernatural powers in front of the Buddha.
于是借行者神通，偕入大梵天王宫，法师讲经已，得赐“隐形帽一顶，金镮锡杖一条，钵盂一只，三件齐全”，复反下界，经香林寺，履大蛇岭九龙池诸危地，俱以行者法力，安稳进行；又得深沙神身化金桥，渡越大水，出鬼子母国女人国而达王母池处，法师欲桃，命猴行者往窃之。
于是借行者神通，偕入大梵天王宫，法师讲经已，得赐“隐形帽一顶，金镮锡杖一条，钵盂一只，三件齐全”，复反下界，经香林寺，履大蛇岭九龙池诸危地，俱以行者法力，安稳进行；又得深沙神身化金桥，渡越大水，出鬼子母国女人国而达王母池处，法师欲桃，命猴行者往窃之。入王母池之处第十一
The place where he entered the Queen Mother Pool was eleventh……法师曰：“愿今日蟠桃结实，可偷三五个吃。”猴行者曰：“我因八百岁时偷吃十颗，被王母捉下，左肋判八百，右肋判三千铁棒，配在花果山紫云洞，至今肋下尚痛，我今定是不敢偷吃也。”……前去之间，忽见石壁高岑万丈，又见一石盘，阔四五里地，又有两池，方广数十里，万丈，鸦鸟不飞。七人才坐，正歇之次，举头遥望，万丈石壁之中，有数株桃树，森森耸翠，上接青天，枝叶茂浓，下浸池水。……行者曰：“树上今有十余颗，为地神专在彼处守定，无路可去偷取。”师曰：“你神通广大，去必无妨。”说由未了，攧下三颗蟠桃入池中去，师甚敬惶，问此落者是何物？答曰：“师不要敬（惊字之略），此是蟠桃正熟，攧下水中也。”师曰：“可去寻取来吃！”……
…… 法师曰：“愿今日蟠桃结实，可偷三五个吃。 ”猴行者曰：“我因八百岁时偷吃十颗，被王母捉下，左肋判八百，右肋判三千铁棒，配在花果山紫云洞，至今肋下尚痛，我今定是不敢偷吃也。 ”…… 前去之间，忽见石壁高岑万丈，又见一石盘，阔四五里地，又有两池，方广数十里，万丈，鸦鸟不飞。 七人才坐，正歇之次，举头遥望，万丈石壁之中，有数株桃树，森森耸翠，上接青天，枝叶茂浓，下浸池水。 …… 行者曰：“树上今有十余颗，为地神专在彼处守定，无路可去偷取。 ”师曰：“你神通广大，去必无妨。 ”说由未了，攧下三颗蟠桃入池中去，师甚敬惶，问此落者是何物？答曰：“师不要敬（惊字之略），此是蟠桃正熟，攧下水中也。 ”师曰：“可去寻取来吃！”……行者以杖击石，先后现二童子，一云三千岁，一五千岁，皆挥去。
行者以杖击石，先后现二童子，一云三千岁，一五千岁，皆挥去。……又敲数下，偶然一孩儿出来，问曰：“你年多少？”答曰：“七千岁。”行者放下金镮杖，叫取孩儿入手中，问和尚你吃否？和尚闻语，心敬便走。被行者手中旋数下，孩儿化成一枚乳枣。当时吞入口中，后归东土唐朝，遂吐出于西川，至今此地中生人参是也。空中见有一人，遂吟诗曰：
…… 又敲数下，偶然一孩儿出来，问曰：“你年多少？”答曰：“七千岁。 ”行者放下金镮杖，叫取孩儿入手中，问和尚你吃否？和尚闻语，心敬便走。 被行者手中旋数下，孩儿化成一枚乳枣。 当时吞入口中，后归东土唐朝，遂吐出于西川，至今此地中生人参是也。 空中见有一人，遂吟诗曰：花果山中一子才，小年曾此作场乖，A talented man in the mountains of flowers and fruits, who once did this in his youth, 而今耳热空中见，前次偷桃客又来。 Now his ears are hot and he sees it in the air, and the last time he stole the peach came again.
由是竟达天竺，求得经文五千四百卷，而阙《多心经》，回至香林寺，始由定光佛见授。七人既归，则皇帝郊迎，诸州奉法，至七月十五日正午，天宫乃降采莲舡，法师乘之，向西仙去；后太宗复封猴行者为铜筋铁骨大圣云。
由是竟达天竺，求得经文五千四百卷，而阙《多心经》，回至香林寺，始由定光佛见授。 七人既归，则皇帝郊迎，诸州奉法，至七月十五日正午，天宫乃降采莲舡，法师乘之，向西仙去；后太宗复封猴行者为铜筋铁骨大圣云。《大宋宣和遗事》世多以为宋人作，而文中有吕省元《宣和讲篇》及南儒《咏史诗》，省元南儒皆元代语，则其书或出于元人，抑宋人旧本，而元时又有增益，皆不可知，口吻有大类宋人者，则以钞撮旧籍而然，非著者之本语也。书分前后二集，始于称述尧舜而终以高宗之定都临安，案年演述，体裁甚似讲史。惟节录成书，未加融会，故先后文体，致为参差，灼然可见。其剽取之书当有十种。前集先言历代帝王荒淫之失者其一，盖犹宋人讲史之开篇；次述王安石变法之祸者其二，亦北宋末士论之常套；次述安石引蔡京入朝至童贯蔡攸巡边者其三，首一为语体，次二为文言而并杂以诗者；其四，则梁山泺聚义本末，首述杨志卖刀杀人，晁盖劫生日礼物，遂邀约二十人，同入太行山梁山泺落草，而宋江亦以杀阎婆惜出走，伏屋后九天玄女庙中，见官兵已退，出谢玄女。
《大宋宣和遗事》世多以为宋人作，而文中有吕省元《宣和讲篇》及南儒《咏史诗》，省元南儒皆元代语，则其书或出于元人，抑宋人旧本，而元时又有增益，皆不可知，口吻有大类宋人者，则以钞撮旧籍而然，非著者之本语也。 书分前后二集，始于称述尧舜而终以高宗之定都临安，案年演述，体裁甚似讲史。 惟节录成书，未加融会，故先后文体，致为参差，灼然可见。 其剽取之书当有十种。 前集先言历代帝王荒淫之失者其一，盖犹宋人讲史之开篇；次述王安石变法之祸者其二，亦北宋末士论之常套；次述安石引蔡京入朝至童贯蔡攸巡边者其三，首一为语体，次二为文言而并杂以诗者；其四，则梁山泺聚义本末，首述杨志卖刀杀人，晁盖劫生日礼物，遂邀约二十人，同入太行山梁山泺落草，而宋江亦以杀阎婆惜出走，伏屋后九天玄女庙中，见官兵已退，出谢玄女。……则见香案上一声响亮，打一看时，有一卷文书在上。宋江才展开看了，认得是个天书；又写着三十六个姓名；又题著四句道：
…… Then he saw a loud sound on the incense table, and when he looked at it, there was a scroll of documents on it. Song Jiang opened it and recognized it as a heavenly book; Thirty-six names were written; He also wrote four sentences:破国因山木，兵刀用水工，The nation was destroyed due to the mountains and trees, and the weapons and swords were made of water. 一朝充将领，海内耸威风。 suddenly became a general, and the nation was filled with prestige.
宋江读了，口中不说，心下思量：这四句分明是说了我里姓名；又把开天书一卷，仔细看觑，见有三十六将的姓名。那三十六人道个甚底？
Song Jiang read it, didn't say it, and thought in his heart: These four sentences clearly say my name; He also took a scroll of the Book of Heaven and looked at it carefully, and saw the names of thirty-six generals. What is the bottom of the thirty-six people?智多星吴加亮　玉麒麟李进义　青面兽杨志　混江龙李海　九纹龙史进　入云龙公孙胜　浪里白条张顺　霹雳火秦明　活阎罗阮小七　立地太岁阮小五　短命二郎阮进　大刀关必胜　豹子头林冲　黑旋风李逵　小旋风柴进　金枪手徐宁　扑天雕李应　赤发鬼刘唐　一直撞董平　插翅虎雷横　美髯公朱同　神行太保戴宗　赛关索王雄　病尉迟孙立　小李广花荣　没羽箭张青　没遮拦穆横　浪子燕青　花和尚鲁智深　行者武松　铁鞭呼延绰　急先锋索超拚命三郎石秀　火船工张岑　摸着云杜千　铁天王晁盖
Zhiduoxing Wu Jialiang, Jade Qilin Li Jinyi, Blue-faced Beast Yang Zhi, Hunjiang Dragon Li Hai, Nine Patterns Dragon Shi Jin, Entering the Cloud Dragon Gongsun Sheng, Lang Li Bai Tiao Zhang Shun, Thunderbolt Fire Qin Ming, Living Yama Ruan Xiaoqi, Standing Tai Sui Ruan Xiaowu, Short-lived Erlang Ruan Jin, Dadao Guan Bisheng, Leopard Head Lin Chong, Black Whirlwind Li Kui, Little Whirlwind Chai Jin, Golden Gunner Xu Ning, Flying Eagle Li Ying, Red-haired Ghost Liu Tang, Constant Heng, Winged Tiger Lei Heng, Bearded Gong Zhu Tong, Shenxing Taibao Dai Zong, Sai Guan Suo Wang Xiong, Sick Captain Chi Sun Li, Xiao Li Guanghua Rong, No Feather Arrow Zhang Qing, No Blocking Mu Heng, Prodigal Son Yan Qing, Flower Monk Lu Zhishen, Walker Wu Song, Iron Whip Hu Yanchuo Pioneer Suo Chao desperately Saburo Shi Xiu Fire Shipwright Zhang Cen touched Yun Du Qian Iron King Chao Gai宋江看了人名，末后有一行字写道：“天书付天罡院三十六员猛将，使呼保义宋江为帅，广行忠义，殄灭奸邪。”
Song Jiang looked at the name, and at the end there was a line that wrote: "The Book of Heaven pays the thirty-six fierce generals of the Tiangang Academy, making Hu Baoyi Song Jiang the commander, widely practicing loyalty and righteousness, and destroying treachery." ”于是江率朱同等九人亦赴山寨，会晁盖已死，遂被推为首领，“各人统率强人，略州劫县，放火杀人，攻夺淮阳，京西，河北三路二十四州八十余县，劫掠子女玉帛，掳掠甚众”，已而鲁智深等亦来投，遂足三十六人之数。
于是江率朱同等九人亦赴山寨，会晁盖已死，遂被推为首领，“各人统率强人，略州劫县，放火杀人，攻夺淮阳，京西，河北三路二十四州八十余县，劫掠子女玉帛，掳掠甚众”，已而鲁智深等亦来投，遂足三十六人之数。一日，宋江与吴加亮商量，“俺三十六员猛将，并已登数，休要忘了东岳保护之恩，须索去烧香赛还心愿则个。”择日起行，宋江题了四句放旗上道：
One day, Song Jiang discussed with Wu Jialiang, "I have thirty-six fierce generals, and I have been counted, don't forget the grace of Dongyue's protection, and I must ask for the incense burning competition to repay my wish." The next day, Song Jiang wrote four sentences and put the flag on the flag:来时三十六，去后十八双，Thirty-six when I came, and eighteen pairs after leaving, 若还少一个，定是不归乡！ If there is one missing, I will definitely not return home!
宋江统率三十六将往朝东岳，赛取金炉心愿。朝廷不奈何，只得出榜招谕宋江等。有那元帅姓张名叔夜的，是世代将门之子，前来招诱；宋江和那三十六人归顺宋朝，各受大夫诰敕，分注诸路巡检使去也；因此三路之寇，悉得平定。后遣宋江收方腊有功，封节度使。
宋江统率三十六将往朝东岳，赛取金炉心愿。 朝廷不奈何，只得出榜招谕宋江等。 有那元帅姓张名叔夜的，是世代将门之子，前来招诱；宋江和那三十六人归顺宋朝，各受大夫诰敕，分注诸路巡检使去也；因此三路之寇，悉得平定。 后遣宋江收方腊有功，封节度使。其五，为徽宗幸李师师家，曹辅进谏及张天觉隐去；其六，为道士林灵素进用及其死葬之异；其七，为腊月预赏元宵及元宵看灯之盛，皆平话体。其叙元宵看灯云：
其五，为徽宗幸李师师家，曹辅进谏及张天觉隐去；其六，为道士林灵素进用及其死葬之异；其七，为腊月预赏元宵及元宵看灯之盛，皆平话体。 其叙元宵看灯云：宣和六年正月十四日夜，去大内门直上一条红绵绳上，飞下一个仙鹤儿来，口内衔一道诏书，有一员中使接得展开，奉圣旨：宣万姓。有那快行家手中把着金字牌，喝道，“宣万姓！”少刻，京师民有似云浪，尽头上戴着玉梅，雪柳，闹蛾儿，直到鳌山下看灯。却去宣德门直上有三四个贵官，……得了圣旨，交撒下金钱银钱，与万姓抢金钱。那教坊大使袁陶曾作词，名做《撒金钱》：
On the night of the fourteenth day of the first month in the sixth year of Xuanhe, he went straight to the inner gate and went straight up to a red cotton rope, flew down a crane, and carried an edict in his mouth. There was a fast connoisseur holding a gold plaque in his hand and shouted, "Xuan Wan's surname! "For a while, the people of the capital were like clouds and waves, wearing jade plums, snow willows, and moths at the end of their heads, until they looked at the lanterns under Ao Mountain. But when I went to Xuande Gate, there were three or four noble officials,...... Get the imperial decree, hand over money and silver, and grab money with the people. The ambassador of the teaching workshop, Yuan Tao, once wrote a lyric called "Scattering Money":
频瞻礼，喜升平又逢元宵佳致。鳌山高耸翠，对端门珠玑交制，似嫦娥，降仙宫，乍临凡世。恩露匀施，凭御阑圣颜垂视。撒金钱，乱抛坠，万姓推抢没理会；告官里，这失仪，且与免罪。
频瞻礼，喜升平又逢元宵佳致。 鳌山高耸翠，对端门珠玑交制，似嫦娥，降仙宫，乍临凡世。 恩露匀施，凭御阑圣颜垂视。 撒金钱，乱抛坠，万姓推抢没理会；告官里，这失仪，且与免罪。
是夜撒金钱后，万姓各各遍游市井，可谓是：
After scattering money that night, all the people went around the market, which can be described as:灯火荧煌天不夜，笙歌嘈杂地长春。
The lights are bright, and the sky is not night, and the music and songs are noisy in Changchun.后集则始自金人来运粮，以至京城陷为第八种；又自金兵入城，帝后北行受辱，以至高宗定都临安为第九第十种，即取《南烬纪闻》《窃愤录》及《续录》而小有删节，二书今俱在，或题辛弃疾作，而宋人已以为伪书。卷末复有结论，云“世之儒者谓高宗失恢复中原之机会者有二焉：建炎之初失其机者，潜善伯彦偷安于目前误之也；绍兴之后失其机者，秦桧为虏用间误之也。失此二机，而中原之境土未复，君父之大仇未报，国家之大耻不能雪，此忠臣义士之所以扼腕，恨不食贼臣之肉而寝其皮也欤！”则亦南宋时桧党失势后士论之常套也。
后集则始自金人来运粮，以至京城陷为第八种；又自金兵入城，帝后北行受辱，以至高宗定都临安为第九第十种，即取《南烬纪闻》《窃愤录》及《续录》而小有删节，二书今俱在，或题辛弃疾作，而宋人已以为伪书。 卷末复有结论，云“世之儒者谓高宗失恢复中原之机会者有二焉：建炎之初失其机者，潜善伯彦偷安于目前误之也；绍兴之后失其机者，秦桧为虏用间误之也。 失此二机，而中原之境土未复，君父之大仇未报，国家之大耻不能雪，此忠臣义士之所以扼腕，恨不食贼臣之肉而寝其皮也欤！”则亦南宋时桧党失势后士论之常套也。

第十四篇　元明传来之讲史（上）

第十四篇　元明传来之讲史（上）

第十四篇　元明传来之讲史（上）

Chapter 14 The History of the Yuan and Ming Dynasties (Part I)宋之说话人，于小说及讲史皆多高手（名见《梦粱录》及《武林旧事》），而不闻有著作；元代扰攘，文化沦丧，更无论矣。日本内阁文库藏元至治（一三二一——一三二三）间新安虞氏刊本全相（犹今所谓绣像全图）平话五种，曰《武王伐纣书》，曰《乐毅图齐七国春秋后集》，曰《秦并六国》，曰《吕后斩韩信前汉书续集》，曰《三国志》，每集各三卷（《斯文》第八编第六号，盐谷温《关于明的小说“三言”》），今惟《三国志》有印本（盐谷博士影印本及商务印书馆翻印本），他四种未能见。其《全相三国志平话》分为上下二栏，上栏为图，下栏述事，以桃园结义始，孔明病殁终。而开篇亦先叙汉高祖杀戮功臣，玉皇断狱，令韩信转生为曹操，彭越为刘备，英布为孙权，高祖则为献帝，立意与《五代史平话》无异。惟文笔则远不逮，词不达意，粗具梗概而已，如述“赤壁鏖兵”云：
The speaker of the Song Dynasty is a master of novels and history (see "Meng Liang Lu" and "Wulin Old Stories"), but he has not heard of any writings; The Yuan Dynasty was in turmoil, and the culture was lost, not to mention. The Japanese Cabinet Library has five kinds of plain words in the Yuan Zhizhi (1321-1323) period of the Xin'an Yu clan's publication (the so-called embroidered image full picture today), namely "The Book of King Wu Attacking Zhou", "Le Yi Tu Qi Seven Kingdoms Spring and Autumn Collection", "Qin Bing the Six Kingdoms", "Lü Hou Killing Han Xin Former Han Shu Sequel", "Romance of the Three Kingdoms", each episode has three volumes ("Swen" Vol. 8, No. 6, Shioya Wen's "Novel "Three Words" about the Ming Dynasty"), and now only the "Romance of the Three Kingdoms" has a print (a photocopy of Dr. Shioya and a reprint of the Commercial Press), The other four have not been seen. Its "Quanxiang Three Kingdoms Plain Talk" is divided into two columns, the upper column is a picture, and the lower column narrates the story, starting with the Taoyuan knot and Kongming dying of illness. The opening chapter also first describes the killing of meritorious officials by Emperor Gaozu of Han, the judgment of the Jade Emperor, and the reincarnation of Han Xin as Cao Cao, Peng Yue as Liu Bei, Ying Bu as Sun Quan, and Gaozu as Emperor Xian, which is no different from the "History of the Five Dynasties". However, the writing is far from enough, the words do not convey the meaning, and it is only a rough summary, such as the description of "Chibi Soldiers":却说武侯过江到夏口，曹操舡上高叫“吾死矣！”众军曰，“皆是蒋干。”众官乱刀锉蒋干为万段。曹操上舡，荒速夺路，走出江口，见四面舡上，皆为火也。见数十只舡，上有黄盖言曰，“斩曹贼，使天下安若太山！”曹相百官，不通水战，众人发箭相射。却说曹操措手不及，四面火起，前又相射。曹操欲走，北有周瑜，南有鲁肃，西有陵统甘宁，东有张昭吴苞，四面言杀。史官曰：“倘非曹公家有五帝之分，孟德不能脱。”曹操得命，西北而走，至江岸，众人撮曹公上马。却说黄昏火发，次日斋时方出，曹操回顾，尚见夏口舡上烟焰张天，本部军无一万。曹相望西北而走，无五里，江岸有五千军，认得是常山赵云，拦住，众官一齐攻击，曹相撞阵过去。……至晚，到一大林。……曹公寻滑荣路去，行无二十里，见五百校刀手，关将拦住。曹相用美言告云长，“看操亭侯有恩。”关公曰：“军师严令。”曹公撞阵却过。说话间，面生尘雾，使曹公得脱。关公赶数里复回，东行无十五里，见玄德，军师。是走了曹贼，非关公之过也。言使人小着玄德（案此句不可解）。众问为何。武侯曰，“关将仁德之人，往日蒙曹相恩，其此而脱矣。”关公闻言，忿然上马，告主公复追之。玄德曰，“吾弟性匪石，宁奈不倦。”军师言，“诸葛赤（亦？）去，万无一失。”……（卷中十八至十九页）观其简率之处，颇足疑为说话人所用之话本，由此推演，大加波澜，即可以愉悦听者，然页必有图，则仍亦供人阅览之书也。余四种恐亦此类。
却说武侯过江到夏口，曹操舡上高叫“吾死矣！”众军曰，“皆是蒋干。 ”众官乱刀锉蒋干为万段。 曹操上舡，荒速夺路，走出江口，见四面舡上，皆为火也。 见数十只舡，上有黄盖言曰，“斩曹贼，使天下安若太山！”曹相百官，不通水战，众人发箭相射。 却说曹操措手不及，四面火起，前又相射。 曹操欲走，北有周瑜，南有鲁肃，西有陵统甘宁，东有张昭吴苞，四面言杀。 史官曰：“倘非曹公家有五帝之分，孟德不能脱。 ”曹操得命，西北而走，至江岸，众人撮曹公上马。 却说黄昏火发，次日斋时方出，曹操回顾，尚见夏口舡上烟焰张天，本部军无一万。 曹相望西北而走，无五里，江岸有五千军，认得是常山赵云，拦住，众官一齐攻击，曹相撞阵过去。 …… 至晚，到一大林。 …… 曹公寻滑荣路去，行无二十里，见五百校刀手，关将拦住。 曹相用美言告云长，“看操亭侯有恩。 ”关公曰：“军师严令。 ”曹公撞阵却过。 说话间，面生尘雾，使曹公得脱。 关公赶数里复回，东行无十五里，见玄德，军师。 是走了曹贼，非关公之过也。 言使人小着玄德（案此句不可解）。 众问为何。 武侯曰，“关将仁德之人，往日蒙曹相恩，其此而脱矣。 ”关公闻言，忿然上马，告主公复追之。 玄德曰，“吾弟性匪石，宁奈不倦。 ”军师言，“诸葛赤（亦？）去，万无一失。 ”…… （卷中十八至十九页）观其简率之处，颇足疑为说话人所用之话本，由此推演，大加波澜，即可以愉悦听者，然页必有图，则仍亦供人阅览之书也。 余四种恐亦此类。说《三国志》者，在宋已甚盛，盖当时多英雄，武勇智术，瑰伟动人，而事状无楚汉之简，又无春秋列国之繁，故尤宜于讲说。东坡（《志林》六）谓“王彭尝云，途巷中小儿薄劣，其家所厌苦，辄与钱，令聚坐听说古话，至说三国事，闻刘玄德败，频蹙眉，有出涕者，闻曹操败，即喜唱快。以是知君子小人之泽，百世不斩。”在瓦舍，“说三分”为说话之一专科，与“说《五代史》”并列（《东京梦华录》五）。金元杂剧亦常用三国时事，如《赤壁鏖兵》《诸葛亮秋风五丈原》《隔江斗智》《连环计》《复夺受禅台》等，而今日搬演为戏文者尤多，则为世之所乐道可知也。其在小说，乃因有罗贯中本而名益显。
说《三国志》者，在宋已甚盛，盖当时多英雄，武勇智术，瑰伟动人，而事状无楚汉之简，又无春秋列国之繁，故尤宜于讲说。 东坡（《志林》六）谓“王彭尝云，途巷中小儿薄劣，其家所厌苦，辄与钱，令聚坐听说古话，至说三国事，闻刘玄德败，频蹙眉，有出涕者，闻曹操败，即喜唱快。 以是知君子小人之泽，百世不斩。 ”在瓦舍，“说三分”为说话之一专科，与“说《五代史》”并列（《东京梦华录》五）。 金元杂剧亦常用三国时事，如《赤壁鏖兵》《诸葛亮秋风五丈原》《隔江斗智》《连环计》《复夺受禅台》等，而今日搬演为戏文者尤多，则为世之所乐道可知也。 其在小说，乃因有罗贯中本而名益显。贯中，名本，钱唐人（明郎瑛《七修类稿》二十三田汝成《西湖游览志余》二十五胡应麟《少室山房笔丛》四十一），或云名贯，字贯中（明王圻《续文献通考》一百七十七），或云越人，生洪武初（周亮工《书影》），盖元明间人（约一三三〇——一四〇〇）。所著小说甚夥，明时云有数十种（《志余》），今存者《三国志演义》之外，尚有《隋唐志传》《残唐五代史演义》《三遂平妖传》《水浒传》等；亦能词曲，有杂剧《龙虎风云会》（目见《元人杂剧选》）。然今所传诸小说，皆屡经后人增损，真面殆无从复见矣。
贯中，名本，钱唐人（明郎瑛《七修类稿》二十三田汝成《西湖游览志余》二十五胡应麟《少室山房笔丛》四十一），或云名贯，字贯中（明王圻《续文献通考》一百七十七），或云越人，生洪武初（周亮工《书影》），盖元明间人（约一三三〇——一四〇〇）。 所著小说甚夥，明时云有数十种（《志余》），今存者《三国志演义》之外，尚有《隋唐志传》《残唐五代史演义》《三遂平妖传》《水浒传》等；亦能词曲，有杂剧《龙虎风云会》（目见《元人杂剧选》）。 然今所传诸小说，皆屡经后人增损，真面殆无从复见矣。罗贯中本《三国志演义》，今得见者以明弘治甲寅（一四九四）刊本为最古，全书二十四卷，分二百四十回，题曰“晋平阳侯陈寿史传，后学罗本贯中编次”。起于汉灵帝中平元年“祭天地桃园结义”，终于晋武帝太康元年“王濬计取石头城”，凡首尾九十七年（一八四——二八〇）事实，皆排比陈寿《三国志》及裴松之注，间亦仍采平话，又加推演而作之；论断颇取陈裴及习凿齿孙盛语，且更盛引“史官”及“后人”诗。然据旧史即难于抒写，杂虚辞复易滋混淆，故明谢肇淛（《五杂组》十五）既以为“太实则近腐”，清章学诚（《丙辰札记》）又病其“七实三虚惑乱观者”也。至于写人，亦颇有失，以致欲显刘备之长厚而似伪，状诸葛之多智而近妖；惟于关羽，特多好语，义勇之概，时时如见矣。如叙羽之出身丰采及勇力云：
罗贯中本《三国志演义》，今得见者以明弘治甲寅（一四九四）刊本为最古，全书二十四卷，分二百四十回，题曰“晋平阳侯陈寿史传，后学罗本贯中编次”。 起于汉灵帝中平元年“祭天地桃园结义”，终于晋武帝太康元年“王濬计取石头城”，凡首尾九十七年（一八四——二八〇）事实，皆排比陈寿《三国志》及裴松之注，间亦仍采平话，又加推演而作之；论断颇取陈裴及习凿齿孙盛语，且更盛引“史官”及“后人”诗。 然据旧史即难于抒写，杂虚辞复易滋混淆，故明谢肇淛（《五杂组》十五）既以为“太实则近腐”，清章学诚（《丙辰札记》）又病其“七实三虚惑乱观者”也。 至于写人，亦颇有失，以致欲显刘备之长厚而似伪，状诸葛之多智而近妖；惟于关羽，特多好语，义勇之概，时时如见矣。 如叙羽之出身丰采及勇力云：……阶下一人大呼出曰，“小将愿往，斩华雄头献于帐下！”众视之：见其人身长九尺五寸，髯长一尺八寸，丹凤眼，卧蚕眉，面如重枣，声似巨钟，立于帐前。绍问何人。公孙瓒曰，“此刘玄德之弟关某也。”绍问见居何职。瓒曰，“跟随刘玄德充马弓手。”帐上袁术大喝曰，“汝欺吾众诸侯无大将耶？量一弓手，安敢乱言。与我乱棒打出！”曹操急止之曰，“公路息怒，此人既出大言，必有广学；试教出马，如其不胜，诛亦未迟。”……关某曰，“如不胜，请斩我头。”操教酾热酒一杯，与关某饮了上马。关某曰，“酒且斟下，某去便来。”出帐提刀，飞身上马。众诸侯听得寨外鼓声大震，喊声大举，如天摧地塌，岳撼山崩。众皆失惊，却欲探听。鸾铃响处，马到中军，云长提华雄之头，掷于地上；其酒尚温。……（第九回《曹操起兵伐董卓》）
…… 阶下一人大呼出曰，“小将愿往，斩华雄头献于帐下！”众视之：见其人身长九尺五寸，髯长一尺八寸，丹凤眼，卧蚕眉，面如重枣，声似巨钟，立于帐前。 绍问何人。 公孙瓒曰，“此刘玄德之弟关某也。 ”绍问见居何职。 瓒曰，“跟随刘玄德充马弓手。 ”帐上袁术大喝曰，“汝欺吾众诸侯无大将耶？量一弓手，安敢乱言。 与我乱棒打出！”曹操急止之曰，“公路息怒，此人既出大言，必有广学；试教出马，如其不胜，诛亦未迟。 ”…… 关某曰，“如不胜，请斩我头。 ”操教酾热酒一杯，与关某饮了上马。 关某曰，“酒且斟下，某去便来。 ”出帐提刀，飞身上马。 众诸侯听得寨外鼓声大震，喊声大举，如天摧地塌，岳撼山崩。 众皆失惊，却欲探听。 鸾铃响处，马到中军，云长提华雄之头，掷于地上；其酒尚温。 …… （第九回《曹操起兵伐董卓》）又如曹操赤壁之败，孔明知操命不当尽，乃故使羽扼华容道，俾得纵之，而又故以军法相要，使立军令状而去，此叙孔明止见狡狯，而羽之气概则凛然，与元刊本平话，相去远矣：
又如曹操赤壁之败，孔明知操命不当尽，乃故使羽扼华容道，俾得纵之，而又故以军法相要，使立军令状而去，此叙孔明止见狡狯，而羽之气概则凛然，与元刊本平话，相去远矣：……华容道上，三停人马，一停落后，一停填了坑堑，一停跟随曹操过险峻，路稍平妥。操回顾，止有三百余骑随后，并无衣甲袍铠整齐者。……又行不到数里，操在马上加鞭大笑。众将问丞相笑者何故。操曰，“人皆言诸葛亮周瑜足智多谋，吾笑其无能为也。今此一败，吾自是欺敌之过，若使此处伏一旅之师，吾等皆束手受缚矣。”言未毕，一声炮响，两边五百校刀手摆列，当中关云长提青龙刀，跨赤兔马，截住去路。操军见了，亡魂丧胆，面面相觑，皆不能言。操在人丛中曰，“既到此处，只得决一死战。”众将曰：“人纵然不怯，马力乏矣：战则必死。”程昱曰：“某知云长傲上而不忍下，欺强而不凌弱，人有患难，必须救之，仁义播于天下。丞相旧日有恩在彼处，何不亲自告之，必脱此难矣。”操从其说，即时纵马向前，欠身与云长曰：“将军别来无恙？”云长亦欠身答曰，“关某奉军师将令，等候丞相多时。”操曰，“曹操兵败势危，到此无路，望将军以昔日之言为重。”云长答曰，“昔日关某虽蒙丞相厚恩，某曾解白马之危以报之。今日奉命，岂敢为私乎？”操曰，“五关斩将之时，还能记否？古之人大丈夫处世，必以信义为重；将军深明《春秋》，岂不知庾公之斯追子濯孺子者乎？”云长闻之，低首良久不语。当时曹操引这件事，说犹未了，云长是个义重如山之人，又见曹军惶惶，皆欲垂泪，云长思起五关斩将放他之恩，如何不动心，于是把马头勒回，与众军曰，“四散摆开！”这个分明是放曹操的意。操见云长勒回马，便和众将一齐冲将过去，云长回身时，前面众将已自护送操过去了。云长大喝一声，众皆下马，哭拜于地，云长不忍杀之，正犹豫中，张辽纵马至，云长见了，亦动故旧之心，长叹一声，并皆放之。后来史官有诗曰：
…… 华容道上，三停人马，一停落后，一停填了坑堑，一停跟随曹操过险峻，路稍平妥。 操回顾，止有三百余骑随后，并无衣甲袍铠整齐者。 …… 又行不到数里，操在马上加鞭大笑。 众将问丞相笑者何故。 操曰，“人皆言诸葛亮周瑜足智多谋，吾笑其无能为也。 今此一败，吾自是欺敌之过，若使此处伏一旅之师，吾等皆束手受缚矣。 ”言未毕，一声炮响，两边五百校刀手摆列，当中关云长提青龙刀，跨赤兔马，截住去路。 操军见了，亡魂丧胆，面面相觑，皆不能言。 操在人丛中曰，“既到此处，只得决一死战。 ”众将曰：“人纵然不怯，马力乏矣：战则必死。 ”程昱曰：“某知云长傲上而不忍下，欺强而不凌弱，人有患难，必须救之，仁义播于天下。 丞相旧日有恩在彼处，何不亲自告之，必脱此难矣。 ”操从其说，即时纵马向前，欠身与云长曰：“将军别来无恙？”云长亦欠身答曰，“关某奉军师将令，等候丞相多时。 ”操曰，“曹操兵败势危，到此无路，望将军以昔日之言为重。 ”云长答曰，“昔日关某虽蒙丞相厚恩，某曾解白马之危以报之。 今日奉命，岂敢为私乎？”操曰，“五关斩将之时，还能记否？古之人大丈夫处世，必以信义为重；将军深明《春秋》，岂不知庾公之斯追子濯孺子者乎？”云长闻之，低首良久不语。 当时曹操引这件事，说犹未了，云长是个义重如山之人，又见曹军惶惶，皆欲垂泪，云长思起五关斩将放他之恩，如何不动心，于是把马头勒回，与众军曰，“四散摆开！”这个分明是放曹操的意。 操见云长勒回马，便和众将一齐冲将过去，云长回身时，前面众将已自护送操过去了。 云长大喝一声，众皆下马，哭拜于地，云长不忍杀之，正犹豫中，张辽纵马至，云长见了，亦动故旧之心，长叹一声，并皆放之。 后来史官有诗曰：彻胆长存义，终身思报恩，威风齐日月，名誉震乾坤，忠勇高三国，神谋陷七屯，至今千古下，军旅拜英魂。（第一百回《关云长义释曹操》）
Courage and righteousness, lifelong desire to repay kindness, majesty like the sun and moon, reputation shakes the world, loyalty and courage surpass the three kingdoms, divine strategy trapped in seven tun, and so far through the ages, the army worships the heroic soul. (The 100th "Guan Yun Changyi Interpretation of Cao Cao")弘治以后，刻本甚多，即以明代而论，今尚未能详其凡几种（详见《小说月报》二十卷十号郑振铎《三国志演义的演化》）。迨清康熙时，茂苑毛宗岗字序始师金人瑞改《水浒传》及《西厢记》成法，即旧本遍加改窜，自云得古本，评刻之，亦称“圣叹外书”，而一切旧本乃不复行。凡所改定，就其序例可见，约举大端，则一曰改，如旧本第百五十九回《废献帝曹丕篡汉》本言曹后助兄斥献帝，毛本则云助汉而斥丕。二曰增，如第百六十七回《先主夜走白帝城》本不涉孙夫人，毛本则云“夫人在吴闻猇亭兵败，讹传先主死于军中，遂驱兵至江边，望西遥哭，投江而死”。三曰削，如第二百五回《孔明火烧木栅寨》本有孔明烧司马懿于上方谷时，欲并烧魏延，第二百三十四回《诸葛瞻大战邓艾》有艾贻书劝降，瞻览毕狐疑，其子尚诘责之，乃决死战，而毛本皆无有。其余小节，则一者整顿回目，二者修正文辞，三者削除论赞，四者增删琐事，五者改换诗文而已。
弘治以后，刻本甚多，即以明代而论，今尚未能详其凡几种（详见《小说月报》二十卷十号郑振铎《三国志演义的演化》）。 迨清康熙时，茂苑毛宗岗字序始师金人瑞改《水浒传》及《西厢记》成法，即旧本遍加改窜，自云得古本，评刻之，亦称“圣叹外书”，而一切旧本乃不复行。 凡所改定，就其序例可见，约举大端，则一曰改，如旧本第百五十九回《废献帝曹丕篡汉》本言曹后助兄斥献帝，毛本则云助汉而斥丕。 二曰增，如第百六十七回《先主夜走白帝城》本不涉孙夫人，毛本则云“夫人在吴闻猇亭兵败，讹传先主死于军中，遂驱兵至江边，望西遥哭，投江而死”。 三曰削，如第二百五回《孔明火烧木栅寨》本有孔明烧司马懿于上方谷时，欲并烧魏延，第二百三十四回《诸葛瞻大战邓艾》有艾贻书劝降，瞻览毕狐疑，其子尚诘责之，乃决死战，而毛本皆无有。 其余小节，则一者整顿回目，二者修正文辞，三者削除论赞，四者增删琐事，五者改换诗文而已。《隋唐志传》原本未见，清康熙十四年（一六七五）长洲褚人获有改订本，易名《隋唐演义》，序有云，“《隋唐志传》创自罗氏，纂辑于林氏，可谓善矣。然始于隋宫剪彩，则前多阙略，厥后补缀唐季一二事，又零星不联属，观者犹有议焉。”其概要可识矣。
The "Biography of the Sui and Tang Dynasties" was originally not seen, but in the fourteenth year of the Qing Kangxi Dynasty (1675), the Chu people in Changzhou obtained a revised version, renamed "The Romance of the Sui and Tang Dynasties", and the preface said, "The Biography of the Sui and Tang Dynasties was created by the Luo family and compiled by the Lin family, which can be described as good." However, starting with the ribbon-cutting of the Sui Palace, there were many omissions in the front, and later supplemented one or two incidents from the Tang Dynasty, and there were sporadic and unrelated matters, which still had some opinions among the audience. "The summary is recognizable.《隋唐演义》计一百回，以隋主伐陈开篇，次为周禅于隋，隋亡于唐，武后称尊，明皇幸蜀，杨妃缢于马嵬，既复两京，明皇退居西内，令道士求杨妃魂，得见张果，因知明皇杨妃为隋炀帝朱贵儿后身，而全书随毕。凡隋唐间英雄，如秦琼窦建德单雌信王伯当花木兰等事迹，皆于前七十回中穿插出之。其明皇杨妃再世姻缘故事，序言得之袁于令所藏《逸史》，喜其新异，因以入书。此他事状，则多本正史纪传，且益以唐宋杂说，如隋事则《大业拾遗记》《海山记》《迷楼记》《开河记》，唐事则《隋唐嘉话》《明皇杂录》《常侍言旨》《开天传信记》《次柳氏旧闻》《长恨歌传》《开元天宝遗事》及《梅妃传》《太真外传》等，叙述多有来历，殆不亚于《三国志演义》。惟其文笔，乃纯如明季时风，浮艳在肤，沉著不足，罗氏轨范，殆已荡然，且好嘲戏，而精神反萧索矣。今举一例：
《隋唐演义》计一百回，以隋主伐陈开篇，次为周禅于隋，隋亡于唐，武后称尊，明皇幸蜀，杨妃缢于马嵬，既复两京，明皇退居西内，令道士求杨妃魂，得见张果，因知明皇杨妃为隋炀帝朱贵儿后身，而全书随毕。 凡隋唐间英雄，如秦琼窦建德单雌信王伯当花木兰等事迹，皆于前七十回中穿插出之。 其明皇杨妃再世姻缘故事，序言得之袁于令所藏《逸史》，喜其新异，因以入书。 此他事状，则多本正史纪传，且益以唐宋杂说，如隋事则《大业拾遗记》《海山记》《迷楼记》《开河记》，唐事则《隋唐嘉话》《明皇杂录》《常侍言旨》《开天传信记》《次柳氏旧闻》《长恨歌传》《开元天宝遗事》及《梅妃传》《太真外传》等，叙述多有来历，殆不亚于《三国志演义》。 惟其文笔，乃纯如明季时风，浮艳在肤，沉著不足，罗氏轨范，殆已荡然，且好嘲戏，而精神反萧索矣。 今举一例：……一日玄宗于昭庆宫闲坐，禄山侍坐于侧旁，见他腹垂过膝，因指着戏说道，“此儿腹大如抱瓮，不知其中藏的何所有？”禄山拱手对道，“此中并无他物，惟有赤心耳；臣愿尽此赤心，以事陛下。”玄宗闻禄山所言，心中甚喜。那知道：
…… 一日玄宗于昭庆宫闲坐，禄山侍坐于侧旁，见他腹垂过膝，因指着戏说道，“此儿腹大如抱瓮，不知其中藏的何所有？”禄山拱手对道，“此中并无他物，惟有赤心耳；臣愿尽此赤心，以事陛下。 ”玄宗闻禄山所言，心中甚喜。 那知道：人藏其心，不可测识。自谓赤心，心黑如墨！
人藏其心，不可测识。 自谓赤心，心黑如墨！玄宗之待安禄山，真如腹心；安禄山之对玄宗，却纯是贼心狼心狗心，乃真是负心丧心。有心之人，方切齿痛心，恨不得即剖其心，食其心；亏他还哄人说是赤心。可笑玄宗还不觉其狼子野心，却要信他是真心，好不痴心。闲话少说。且说当日玄宗与安禄山闲坐了半晌，回顾左右，问妃子何在，此时正当春深时候，天气向暖，贵妃方在后宫坐兰汤洗浴。宫人回报玄宗说道，“妃子洗浴方完。”玄宗微笑说道：“美人新浴，正如出水芙蓉。”令宫人即宣妃子来，不必更洗梳妆。少顷，杨妃来到。你道他新浴之后，怎生模样？有一曲《黄莺儿》说得好：
Xuanzong treated An Lushan like a confidant; An Lushan's attitude towards Xuanzong was purely thief-hearted, wolf-hearted, and really heartless. People with hearts are gritting their teeth and heartache, wishing they could cut open their hearts and eat their hearts; He also coaxed people to say that he was sincere. It's ridiculous that Xuanzong didn't realize his wolf ambitions, but he had to believe that he was sincere, so he was not infatuated. Less gossip. Let's say that Xuanzong and An Lushan sat idle for a long time that day, looked around, and asked where the concubine was, at this time it was late spring, the weather was warm, and the concubine was bathing in the harem. The palace people reported to Xuanzong and said, "The concubine has just finished bathing." Xuanzong smiled and said: "The new bath of the beauty is like a hibiscus out of the water." "Let the palace people come to concubine Xuan, and there is no need to wash and dress up. After a while, Concubine Yang came. How do you think he looks after taking a new bath? There is a song "Huang Ying'er" that says it well:皎皎如玉，光嫩如莹，体愈香，云鬓慵整偏娇样。罗裙厌长，轻衫取凉，临风小立神骀宕。细端详：芙蓉出水，不及美人妆。（第八十三回）
皎皎如玉，光嫩如莹，体愈香，云鬓慵整偏娇样。 罗裙厌长，轻衫取凉，临风小立神骀宕。 细端详：芙蓉出水，不及美人妆。 （第八十三回）《残唐五代史演义》未见，日本《内阁文库书目》云二卷六十回，题罗本撰，汤显祖批评。
"Romance of the History of the Five Dynasties of the Remnant Tang Dynasty" has not been seen, and Japan's "Cabinet Library Bibliography" says two volumes and sixty times, written by Luo Ben and criticized by Tang Xianzu.《北宋三遂平妖传》原本亦不可见，较先之本为四卷二十回，序云王慎修补，记贝州王则以妖术变乱事。《宋史》（二百九十二《明镐传》）言则本涿州人，岁饥，流至恩州（唐为贝州），庆历七年僭号东平郡王，改元得圣，六十六日而平。小说即本此事，开篇为汴州胡浩得仙画，其妇焚之，灰绕于身，因孕，生女，曰永儿，有妖狐圣姑姑授以道法，遂能为纸人豆马。王则则贝州军排，后娶永儿，术人弹子和尚张鸾卜吉左黜皆来见，云则当王，会知州贪酷，遂以术运库中钱米买军倡乱。已而文彦博率师讨之，其时张鸾卜吉弹子和尚见则无道，皆先去，而文彦博军尚不能克。幸得弹子和尚化身诸葛遂智助文，镇伏邪法；马遂诈降击则裂其唇，使不能持咒；李遂又率掘子军作地道入城；乃擒则及永儿。奏功者三人皆名遂，故曰《三遂平妖传》也。
《北宋三遂平妖传》原本亦不可见，较先之本为四卷二十回，序云王慎修补，记贝州王则以妖术变乱事。 《宋史》（二百九十二《明镐传》）言则本涿州人，岁饥，流至恩州（唐为贝州），庆历七年僭号东平郡王，改元得圣，六十六日而平。 小说即本此事，开篇为汴州胡浩得仙画，其妇焚之，灰绕于身，因孕，生女，曰永儿，有妖狐圣姑姑授以道法，遂能为纸人豆马。 王则则贝州军排，后娶永儿，术人弹子和尚张鸾卜吉左黜皆来见，云则当王，会知州贪酷，遂以术运库中钱米买军倡乱。 已而文彦博率师讨之，其时张鸾卜吉弹子和尚见则无道，皆先去，而文彦博军尚不能克。 幸得弹子和尚化身诸葛遂智助文，镇伏邪法；马遂诈降击则裂其唇，使不能持咒；李遂又率掘子军作地道入城；乃擒则及永儿。 奏功者三人皆名遂，故曰《三遂平妖传》也。《平妖传》今通行本十八卷四十回，有楚黄张无咎序，云是龙子犹所补。其本成于明泰昌元年（一六二〇），前加十五回，记袁公受道法于九天玄女，复为弹子和尚所盗，及妖狐圣姑姑炼法事。他五回则散入旧本各回间，多补述诸怪民道术。事迹于意造而外，亦采取他杂说，附会入之。如第二十九回叙杜七圣卖符，并呈幻术，断小儿首，覆以衾即复续，而偶作大言，为弹子和尚所闻，遂摄小儿生魂，入面店覆楪子下，杜七圣咒之再三，儿竟不起。
《平妖传》今通行本十八卷四十回，有楚黄张无咎序，云是龙子犹所补。 其本成于明泰昌元年（一六二〇），前加十五回，记袁公受道法于九天玄女，复为弹子和尚所盗，及妖狐圣姑姑炼法事。 他五回则散入旧本各回间，多补述诸怪民道术。 事迹于意造而外，亦采取他杂说，附会入之。 如第二十九回叙杜七圣卖符，并呈幻术，断小儿首，覆以衾即复续，而偶作大言，为弹子和尚所闻，遂摄小儿生魂，入面店覆楪子下，杜七圣咒之再三，儿竟不起。杜七圣慌了，看着那看的人道，“众位看官在上，道路虽然各别，养家总是一般，只因家火相逼。适间言语不到处，望看官们恕罪则个。这番教我接了头，下来吃杯酒，四海之内，皆相识也。”杜七圣伏罪道，“是我不是了，这番接上了。”只顾口中念咒，揭起卧单看时，又接不上。杜七圣焦躁道，“你教我孩儿接不上头，我又求告你再三，认自己的不是，要你恕饶，你却直恁的无理。”便去后面笼儿内取出一个纸包儿来，就打开，撮出一颗葫芦子，去那地上，把土来掘松了，把那颗葫芦子埋在地下，口中念念有词，喷上一口水，喝声“疾！”可霎作怪：只见地下生出一条藤儿来，渐渐的长大，便生枝叶，然后开花，便见花谢，结一个小葫芦儿。一伙人见了，都喝采道，“好！”杜七圣把那葫芦儿摘下来，左手提着葫芦儿，右手拿着刀，道，“你先不近道理，收了我孩儿的魂魄，教我接不上头，你也休想在世上活了！”向着葫芦儿，拦腰一刀，剁下半个葫芦儿来。却说那和尚在楼上，拿起面来却待要吃；只见那和尚的头从腔子上骨碌碌滚将下来。一楼上吃面的人都吃一惊，小胆的丢了面跑下楼去了，大胆的立住了脚看。只见那和尚慌忙放下碗和箸，起身去那楼板上摸，一摸摸着了头，双手捉住两只耳朵，掇那头安在腔子上，安得端正，把手去摸一摸。和尚道：“我只顾吃面，忘还了他的儿子魂魄，”伸手去揭起楪儿来。这里却好揭得起楪儿，那里杜七圣的孩儿早跳起来；看的人发声喊。杜七圣道，“我从来行这家法术，今日撞着师父了。”……（第二十九回下《杜七圣狠行续头法》）
Du Qisheng panicked and looked at the person who was watching, "All the officials are above, although the roads are different, the support of the family is always the same, just because the family fire is compulsory." If you don't have a place to speak, you can hope that the officials will forgive you. This time I took over, came down to have a glass of wine, and everyone in the world knew each other. Du Qisheng confessed, "It's me who is not, this time I connected." "I just recited the mantra in my mouth, and when I lifted the lying sheet and looked at it, I couldn't catch it. Du Qisheng said anxiously, "You taught me that my child can't catch up, and I begged you again and again, admitting that I was not my own, and asking you to forgive me, but you were so unreasonable." Then he went to the back cage and took out a paper bag, opened it, took out a gourd, went to the ground, dug up the soil, buried the gourd in the ground, muttered something in his mouth, sprayed a mouthful of water, and shouted "Sick!" "But it was strange: I saw a vine growing from the ground, gradually growing up, giving branches and leaves, and then blooming, and then seeing the flowers wither, forming a small gourd. When the group saw it, they all applauded, "Okay! Du Qisheng took off the gourd, held the gourd in his left hand, and held the knife in his right hand, and said, "You are unreasonable, take my child's soul, teach me that I can't take the head, and you don't want to live in the world!" Towards the gourd, he cut off the waist and chopped half of the gourd. But he said that the monk was upstairs, and he picked up the noodles but waited to eat; I saw the monk's head rolling down from the cavity. The people who ate noodles on the first floor were surprised, they boldly lost their noodles and ran downstairs, and stood boldly to watch. I saw the monk hurriedly put down the bowl and chopsticks, got up and touched the floor, touched his head, grabbed both ears with both hands, picked up the other end and put it on the cavity, and put it on the cavity. The monk said: "I only care about eating noodles and forget to return his son's soul," and stretched out his hand to lift the lid. Here it is easy to lift the sword, where Du Qisheng's child jumped early; The people watching shouted. Du Qisheng said, "I have always practiced this spell, and today I bumped into Master." ”…… (The twenty-ninth episode of "Du Qisheng's Ruthless Continuation of the Head Method")此盖相传旧话，尉迟偓（《中朝故事》）云在唐咸通中，谢肇淛（《五杂组》六）又以为明嘉靖隆庆间事，惟术人无姓名，僧亦死，是书略改用之。马遂击贼被杀则当时事实，宋郑獬有《马遂传》。
此盖相传旧话，尉迟偓（《中朝故事》）云在唐咸通中，谢肇淛（《五杂组》六）又以为明嘉靖隆庆间事，惟术人无姓名，僧亦死，是书略改用之。 马遂击贼被杀则当时事实，宋郑獬有《马遂传》。

第十五篇　元明传来之讲史（下）

第十五篇　元明传来之讲史（下）

第十五篇　元明传来之讲史（下）

Chapter 15 The History of the Yuan and Ming Dynasties (Part II)《水浒》故事亦为南宋以来流行之传说，宋江亦实有其人。《宋史》（二十二）载徽宗宣和三年“淮南盗宋江等犯淮阳军，遣将讨捕，又犯京东，江北，入楚海州界，命知州张叔夜招降之”。降后之事，则史无文，而稗史乃云“收方腊有功，封节度使”（见十三篇）。然擒方腊者盖韩世忠（《宋史》本传），于宋江辈无与，惟《侯蒙传》（《宋史》三百五十一）又云，“宋江寇京东，蒙上书，言宋江以三十六人横行齐魏，官军数万，无敢抗者，不若赦江，使讨方腊以自赎。”似即稗史所本。顾当时虽有此议，而实未行，江等且竟见杀。洪迈《夷坚乙志》（六）言，“宣和七年，户部侍郎蔡居厚罢，知青州，以病不赴，归金陵，疽发于背，卒。未几，其所亲王生亡而复醒，见蔡受冥谴，嘱生归告其妻，云‘今只是理会郓州事’。夫人恸哭曰，‘侍郎去年帅郓时，有梁山泺贼五百人受降，既而悉诛之，吾屡谏，不听也。……’”《乙志》成于乾道二年，去宣和六年不过四十余年，耳目甚近，冥谴固小说家言，杀降则不容虚造，山泺健儿终局，盖如是而已。
《水浒》故事亦为南宋以来流行之传说，宋江亦实有其人。 《宋史》（二十二）载徽宗宣和三年“淮南盗宋江等犯淮阳军，遣将讨捕，又犯京东，江北，入楚海州界，命知州张叔夜招降之”。 降后之事，则史无文，而稗史乃云“收方腊有功，封节度使”（见十三篇）。 然擒方腊者盖韩世忠（《宋史》本传），于宋江辈无与，惟《侯蒙传》（《宋史》三百五十一）又云，“宋江寇京东，蒙上书，言宋江以三十六人横行齐魏，官军数万，无敢抗者，不若赦江，使讨方腊以自赎。 ”似即稗史所本。 顾当时虽有此议，而实未行，江等且竟见杀。 洪迈《夷坚乙志》（六）言，“宣和七年，户部侍郎蔡居厚罢，知青州，以病不赴，归金陵，疽发于背，卒。 未几，其所亲王生亡而复醒，见蔡受冥谴，嘱生归告其妻，云‘今只是理会郓州事’。 夫人恸哭曰，‘侍郎去年帅郓时，有梁山泺贼五百人受降，既而悉诛之，吾屡谏，不听也。 ……’”《乙志》成于乾道二年，去宣和六年不过四十余年，耳目甚近，冥谴固小说家言，杀降则不容虚造，山泺健儿终局，盖如是而已。然宋江等啸聚梁山泺时，其势实甚盛，《宋史》（三百五十三）亦云“转略十郡，官军莫敢撄其锋”。于是自有奇闻异说，生于民间，辗转繁变，以成故事，复经好事者掇拾粉饰，而文籍以出。宋遗民龚圣与作《宋江三十六人赞》，自序已云“宋江事见于街谈巷语，不足采著，虽有高如李嵩辈传写，士大夫亦不见黜”（周密《癸辛杂识》续集上）。今高李所作虽散失，然足见宋末已有传写之书。《宣和遗事》由钞撮旧籍而成，故前集中之梁山泺聚义始末，或亦为当时所传写者之一种，其节目如下：
然宋江等啸聚梁山泺时，其势实甚盛，《宋史》（三百五十三）亦云“转略十郡，官军莫敢撄其锋”。 于是自有奇闻异说，生于民间，辗转繁变，以成故事，复经好事者掇拾粉饰，而文籍以出。 宋遗民龚圣与作《宋江三十六人赞》，自序已云“宋江事见于街谈巷语，不足采著，虽有高如李嵩辈传写，士大夫亦不见黜”（周密《癸辛杂识》续集上）。 今高李所作虽散失，然足见宋末已有传写之书。 《宣和遗事》由钞撮旧籍而成，故前集中之梁山泺聚义始末，或亦为当时所传写者之一种，其节目如下：杨志等押花石纲阻雪违限　杨志途贫卖刀杀人刺配卫州　孙立等夺杨志往太行山落草　石碣村晁盖伙劫生辰纲　宋江通信晁盖等脱逃　宋江杀阎婆惜题诗于壁　宋江得天书有三十六将姓名　宋江奔梁山泺寻晁盖　宋江三十六将共反　宋江朝东岳赛还心愿　张叔夜招宋江三十六将降　宋江收方腊有功封节度使
Yang Zhi and others escorted the flower stone gang to block the snow and violated the deadline Yang Zhitu was poor and sold knives to kill and assassinate Weizhou Sun Li and others seized Yang Zhi went to the Taihang Mountains to fall grass Chao Gai and others robbed the birthday gang in Shijie Village Chao Gai and others escaped Song Jiang killed Yan Po and inscribed a poem on the wall Song Jiang obtained the heavenly book with the names of thirty-six generals Song Jiang fled to Liangshan Luo to find Chao Gai Song Jiang rebelled together Song Jiang returned his wish to Dongyue Sai returned his wish Zhang Shuye recruited Song Jiang recruited Fang La and was awarded the title of military governor惟《宣和遗事》所载，与龚圣与赞已颇不同：赞之三十六人中有宋江，而《遗事》在外；《遗事》之吴加亮李进义李海阮进关必胜王雄张青张岑，赞则作吴学究卢进义李俊阮小二关胜杨雄张清张横；诨名亦偶异。又元人杂剧亦屡取水浒故事为资材，宋江燕青李逵尤数见，性格每与在今本《水浒传》中者差违，但于宋江之仁义长厚无异词，而陈泰（茶陵人，元延祐乙卯进士）记所闻于篙师者，则云“宋之为人勇悍狂侠”（《所安遗集补遗》《江南曲序》），与他书又正反。意者此种故事，当时载在人口者必甚多，虽或已有种种书本，而失之简略，或多舛迕，于是又复有人起而荟萃取舍之，缀为巨袟，使较有条理，可观览，是为后来之大部《水浒传》。其缀集者，或曰罗贯中（王圻田汝成郎瑛说），或曰施耐庵（胡应麟说），或曰施作罗编（李贽说），或曰施作罗续（金人瑞说）。
惟《宣和遗事》所载，与龚圣与赞已颇不同：赞之三十六人中有宋江，而《遗事》在外；《遗事》之吴加亮李进义李海阮进关必胜王雄张青张岑，赞则作吴学究卢进义李俊阮小二关胜杨雄张清张横；诨名亦偶异。 又元人杂剧亦屡取水浒故事为资材，宋江燕青李逵尤数见，性格每与在今本《水浒传》中者差违，但于宋江之仁义长厚无异词，而陈泰（茶陵人，元延祐乙卯进士）记所闻于篙师者，则云“宋之为人勇悍狂侠”（《所安遗集补遗》《江南曲序》），与他书又正反。 意者此种故事，当时载在人口者必甚多，虽或已有种种书本，而失之简略，或多舛迕，于是又复有人起而荟萃取舍之，缀为巨袟，使较有条理，可观览，是为后来之大部《水浒传》。 其缀集者，或曰罗贯中（王圻田汝成郎瑛说），或曰施耐庵（胡应麟说），或曰施作罗编（李贽说），或曰施作罗续（金人瑞说）。原本《水浒传》今不可得，周亮工（《书影》一）云“故老传闻，罗氏为《水浒传》一百回，各以妖异语引其首，嘉靖时郭武定重刻其书，削其致语，独存本传”。所削者盖即“灯花婆婆等事”（《水浒传全书》发凡），本亦宋人单篇词话（《也是园书目》十），而罗氏袭用之，其他不可考。
Originally, "Water Margin" is now unavailable, and Zhou Lianggong ("Book Shadow" 1) said, "It is rumored that Luo Shi is "Water Margin" a hundred times, each with a strange language to quote its head, and during the Jiajing period, Guo Wuding re-engraved his book, cut his speech, and left the biography alone." What was cut is probably "Lantern Flower Granny and other things" ("Water Margin Complete Book" Fa Fan), which is also a single word of the Song people ("Yiyuan Bibliography" 10), and Luo Shi inherited it, and the others cannot be examined.现存之《水浒传》则所知者有六本，而最要者四：
There are six known copies of the existing "Water Margin", and the most important are four:一曰一百十五回本《忠义水浒传》。前署“东原罗贯中编辑”，明崇祯末与《三国演义》合刻为《英雄谱》，单行本未见。其书始于洪太尉之误走妖魔，而次以百八人渐聚山泊，已而受招安，破辽，平田虎王庆方腊，于是智深坐化于六和，宋江服毒而自尽，累显灵应，终为神明。惟文词蹇拙，体制纷纭，中间诗歌，亦多鄙俗，甚似草创初就，未加润色者，虽非原本，盖近之矣。其记林冲以忤高俅断配沧州，看守大军草场，于大雪中出危屋觅酒云：
一曰一百十五回本《忠义水浒传》。 前署“东原罗贯中编辑”，明崇祯末与《三国演义》合刻为《英雄谱》，单行本未见。 其书始于洪太尉之误走妖魔，而次以百八人渐聚山泊，已而受招安，破辽，平田虎王庆方腊，于是智深坐化于六和，宋江服毒而自尽，累显灵应，终为神明。 惟文词蹇拙，体制纷纭，中间诗歌，亦多鄙俗，甚似草创初就，未加润色者，虽非原本，盖近之矣。 其记林冲以忤高俅断配沧州，看守大军草场，于大雪中出危屋觅酒云：……却说林冲安下行李，看那四下里都崩坏了，自思曰，“这屋如何过得一冬，待雪晴了叫泥水匠来修理。”在土炕边向了一回火，觉得身上寒冷，寻思“却才老军说（五里路外有市井），何不去沽些酒来吃？”便把花枪挑了酒葫芦出来，信步投东，不上半里路，看见一所古庙，林冲拜曰，“愿神明保祐，改日来烧纸。”却又行一里，见一簇店家，林冲径到店里。店家曰，“客人那里来？”林冲曰，“你不认得这个葫芦？”店家曰，“这是草场老军的。既是大哥来此，请坐，先待一席以作接风之礼。”林冲吃了一回，却买一腿牛肉，一葫芦酒，把花枪挑了便回，已晚，奔到草场看时，只叫得苦。原来天理昭然，庇护忠臣义士，这场大雪，救了林冲性命：那两间草厅，已被雪压倒了。……（第九回《豹子头刺陆谦富安》）
…… But he said that Lin Chong put down his luggage and saw that the four sides had collapsed, and thought to himself, "How can this house survive the winter, and call a plasterer to repair it when the snow clears." "I turned to the fire by the earthen kang, felt cold on my body, and thought," but the old army said (there is a market five miles away), why not buy some wine to eat? Then he picked out the flower gun and took out the wine gourd, walked east, and saw an ancient temple in less than half a mile, Lin Chong bowed and said, "May the gods bless you and come to burn paper another day." But after walking another mile, he saw a cluster of shops, and Lin Chong walked to the store. The shopkeeper asked, "Where are the guests from?" Lin Chong said, "You don't recognize this gourd?" The shopkeeper said, "This is the old army of the pasture." Since the big brother is here, please sit down, and wait for a seat to greet the wind. Lin Chong ate once, but bought a leg of beef and a gourd of wine, picked up the flower gun and went back, it was too late, and when he ran to the pasture to see, he only cried bitterly. It turned out that the heavenly principle was clear, protecting the loyal ministers and righteous men, and this heavy snow saved Lin Chong's life: those two grass halls had been overwhelmed by snow. …… (The ninth episode of "Leopard Head Thorn Lu Qian Fu'an")又有一百十回之《忠义水浒传》，亦《英雄谱》本，“内容与百十五回本略同”（《胡适文存》三）。别有一百二十四回之《水浒传》，文词脱略，往往难读，亦此类。
There are also one hundred and ten times of "Loyalty and Righteousness Water Margin", also the "Hero Genealogy" version, "the content is roughly the same as the one hundred and fifteen times" ("Hu Shi Wencun" III). There are also 124 episodes of "Water Margin", which are often difficult to read due to omission and omissions, which is also of this kind.二曰一百回本《忠义水浒传》。前署“钱塘施耐庵的本，罗贯中编次”（《百川书志》六）。即明嘉靖时武定侯郭勋家所传之本，“前有汪太函序，托名天都外臣者”（《野获编》五）。今未见。别有本亦一百回，有李贽序及批点，殆即出郭氏本，而改题为“施耐庵集撰，罗贯中纂修”。然今亦难得，惟日本尚有享保戊申（一七二八）翻刻之前十回及宝历九年（一七五九）续翻之十一至二十回，亦始于误走妖魔而继以鲁达林冲事迹，与百十五回本同；第五回于鲁达有“直教名驰塞北三千里，证果江南第一州”之语，即指六和坐化故事，则结束当亦无异。惟于文辞，乃大有增删，几乎改观，除去恶诗，增益骈语；描写亦愈入细微，如述林冲雪中行沽一节，即多于百十五回本者至一倍余：
The second is the 100-fold version of "Loyalty and Righteousness Water Margin". Previously signed "Qiantang Shi Nai'an's book, compiled by Luo Guanzhong" ("Baichuan Shuzhi" 6). That is, the book passed down by the family of Guo Xun, the Marquis of Wuding during the Ming Jiajing period, "There is a preface to Wang Taihan, who is pretending to be a foreign minister of Tiandu" ("Wild Harvest Compilation" 5). I haven't seen it yet. There are also 100 other editions, with Li Zhi's preface and annotations, which are almost from Guo's version, and the title is changed to "Shi Nai'an Collection, Luo Guanzhong Compilation". However, it is rare now, but Japan still has the first ten times of the reprint of the Xiangbao Wushen (1728) and the eleventh to twentieth editions of the ninth year of the Baoli era (1759), which also began with the mistaken demon and then followed by the deeds of Lu Da Linchong, which is the same as the one hundred and fifteen times; In the fifth episode, there is a saying in Luda, "The name of the direct religion is three thousand miles north of the frontier, and the first state in the south of the river", which refers to the story of the six harmonies, so the end should be no different. However, in terms of literature, there have been great additions and deletions, almost improving, removing bad poems, and increasing parallel words; The description is also more nuanced, such as the section on the sale of Lin Chong in the snow, which is more than double that of 115 copies:……只说林冲就床上放了包裹被卧，就坐下生些焰火起来，屋边有一堆柴炭，拿几块来生在地炉里；仰面看那草屋时，四下里崩坏了，又被朔风吹撼摇振得动。林冲道，“这屋如何过得一冬，待雪晴了，去城中唤个泥水匠来修理。”向了一回火，觉得身上寒冷，寻思“却才老军所说五里路外有那市井，何不去沽些酒来吃？”便去包里取些碎银子，把花枪挑了酒葫芦，将火炭盖了，取毡笠子戴上，拿了钥匙出来，把草厅门拽上，出到大门首，把两扇草场门反拽上，锁了，带了钥匙，信步投东，雪地里踏着碎琼乱玉，迤背着北风而行，——那雪正下得紧。行不上半里多路，看见一所古庙，林冲顶礼道，“神明庇佑，改日来烧钱纸。”又行了一回，望见一簇人家，林冲住脚看时，见篱笆中挑着一个草帚儿在露天里。林冲径到店里；主人道，“客人那里来？”林冲道，“你认得这个葫芦么？”主人看了，道，“这葫芦是草料场老军的。”林冲道，“如何？便认的。”店主道，“既是草料场看守大哥，且请少坐，天气寒冷，且酌三杯权当接风。”店家切一盘熟牛肉，烫一壶热酒，请林冲。又自买了些牛肉，又吃了数杯，就又买了一葫芦酒，包了那两块牛肉，留下些碎银子，把花枪挑了酒葫芦，怀内揣了牛肉，叫声“相扰”，便出篱笆门，依旧迎着朔风回来。看那雪，到晚越下的紧了。古时有个书生，做了一个词，单题那贫苦的恨雪：
…… Just said that Lin Chong put a package on the bed and lay down, then sat down to light some fireworks, and there was a pile of firewood and charcoal next to the house, and took a few pieces to live in the stove; When I looked up at the thatched hut, it collapsed all around, and it was shaken and swayed by the north wind. Lin Chong said, "How can this house survive the winter, when the snow clears, go to the city to call a plasterer to repair it." "Xiang Yifu, felt cold on his body, and thought, "But there is a market five miles away as the old army said, why not buy some wine to eat?" Then he went to the bag to get some broken silver, picked up the wine gourd with the flower gun, covered the charcoal, took the felt hat and put it on, took the key out, dragged the grass hall door up, went out to the gate, pulled the two grassland doors backwards, locked it, took the key, walked east, stepped on the broken jade in the snow id_0000, and walked with the north wind on his back,—— the snow was falling tightly. After walking more than half a mile, Lin Chong bowed and said, "God bless, come and burn money paper another day." When Lin Chong stopped his feet to look, he saw a straw broom in the open air. Lin Chong walked to the store; The host said, "Where are the guests from?" Lin Chong said, "Do you recognize this gourd?" The master looked at it and said, "This gourd belongs to the old army of the forage yard." Lin Chong said, "How?" I admit it. The shopkeeper said, "Since you are the big brother of the forage yard guard, please sit down for a while, the weather is cold, and drink three cups to catch the wind." "The store cut a plate of cooked beef, scalded a pot of mulled wine, and invited Lin Chong. I bought some beef and ate a few more cups, so I bought another gourd of wine, wrapped the two pieces of beef, left some broken silver, picked the wine gourd with the flower gun, carried the beef in my arms, shouted "disturb", and went out of the fence gate, still coming back against the north wind. Look at the snow, it gets tighter and tighter in the evening. In ancient times, there was a scholar who made a word, the single question of the poor hatred snow:
广莫严风刮地，这雪儿下的正好，拈絮挦绵，裁几片大如栲栳，见林间竹屋茅茨，争些儿被他压倒。富室豪家，却道是“压瘴犹嫌少”，向的是兽炭红炉，穿的是棉衣絮袄，手拈梅花，唱道“国家祥瑞”，不念贫民些小。高卧有幽人，吟咏多诗草。
The wind blew on the ground, and the snow was just right, and he cut a few pieces as big as a oak, and when he saw the bamboo house thatch in the forest, he was overwhelmed by him. The rich and wealthy families said that "the miasma is still too little", facing the beast charcoal red stove, wearing cotton clothes and cotton jackets, holding plum blossoms in their hands, singing "national auspiciousness", and not thinking about the poor people. Lying high in the mountains, there is a recluse, reciting poetry and grass.
再说林冲踏着那瑞雪，迎着北风，飞也似奔到草场门口，开了锁，入内看时，只叫得苦。原来天理昭然，佑护善人义士，因这场大雪，救了林冲的性命：那两间草厅，已被雪压倒了。……（第十回《林教头风雪山神庙》）
Besides, Lin Chong stepped on the auspicious snow, facing the north wind, and Fei also seemed to run to the door of the pasture, unlocked it, and when he went in to look at it, he only screamed bitterly. It turned out that the heavenly principle was clear, and the good people and righteous men were protected, and because of this heavy snow, Lin Chong's life was saved: those two grass halls had been overwhelmed by snow. …… (The tenth "Lin Jiaotou Wind and Snow Mountain Temple")三曰一百二十回本《忠义水浒全书》。亦题“施耐庵集撰，罗贯中纂修”，与李贽序百回本同。首有楚人杨定见序，自云事李卓吾，因袁无涯之请而刻此传；次发凡十条；次为《宣和遗事》中之梁山泺本末及百八人籍贯出身。全书自首至受招安，事略全同百十五回本，破辽小异，且少诗词，平田虎王庆则并事略亦异，而收方腊又悉同。文词与百回本几无别，特于字句稍有更定，如百回本中“林冲道，‘如何？便认的。’”此则作“林冲道，‘原来如此。’”诗词又较多，则为刊时增入，故发凡云，“旧本去诗词之烦芜，一虑事绪之断，一虑眼路之迷，颇直截清明，第有得此以形容人态，颇挫文情者，又未可尽除，兹复为增定，或撺原本而进所有，或逆古意而益所无，惟周劝惩，兼善戏谑”也。亦有李贽评，与百回本不同，而两皆弇陋，盖即叶昼辈所伪托（详见《书影》一）。
三曰一百二十回本《忠义水浒全书》。 亦题“施耐庵集撰，罗贯中纂修”，与李贽序百回本同。 首有楚人杨定见序，自云事李卓吾，因袁无涯之请而刻此传；次发凡十条；次为《宣和遗事》中之梁山泺本末及百八人籍贯出身。 全书自首至受招安，事略全同百十五回本，破辽小异，且少诗词，平田虎王庆则并事略亦异，而收方腊又悉同。 文词与百回本几无别，特于字句稍有更定，如百回本中“林冲道，‘如何？便认的。 ’”此则作“林冲道，‘原来如此。 ’”诗词又较多，则为刊时增入，故发凡云，“旧本去诗词之烦芜，一虑事绪之断，一虑眼路之迷，颇直截清明，第有得此以形容人态，颇挫文情者，又未可尽除，兹复为增定，或撺原本而进所有，或逆古意而益所无，惟周劝惩，兼善戏谑”也。 亦有李贽评，与百回本不同，而两皆弇陋，盖即叶昼辈所伪托（详见《书影》一）。发凡又云，“古本有罗氏致语，相传灯花婆婆等事，既不可复见，乃后人有因‘四大寇’之拘而酌损之者，有嫌一百二十回之繁而淘汰之者，皆失。郭武定本即旧本移置阎婆事，甚善，其于寇中去王田而加辽国，犹是小家照应之法，不知大手笔者正不尔尔。”是知《水浒》有古本百回，当时“既不可复见”；又有旧本，似百二十回，中有“四大寇”，盖谓王田方及宋江，即柴进见于白屏风上御书者（见百十五回本之六十七回及《水浒全书》七十二回）。郭氏本始破其拘，削王田而加辽国，成百回；《水浒全书》又增王田，仍存辽国，复为百二十回，而宋江乃始退居于四寇之外。然《宣和遗事》所谓“三路之寇”者，实指攻夺淮阳京西河北三路强人，皆宋江属，不知何人误读，遂以王庆田虎辈当之。然破辽故事虑亦非始作于明，宋代外敌凭陵，国政弛废，转思草泽，盖亦人情，故或造野语以自慰，复多异说，不能合符，于是后之小说，既以取舍不同而纷歧，所取者又以话本非一而违异，田虎王庆在百回本与百十七回本名同而文迥别，殆亦由此而已。惟其后讨平方腊，则各本悉同，因疑在郭本所据旧本之前，当又有别本，即以平方腊接招安之后，如《宣和遗事》所记者，于事理始为密合，然而证信尚缺，未能定也。
发凡又云，“古本有罗氏致语，相传灯花婆婆等事，既不可复见，乃后人有因‘四大寇’之拘而酌损之者，有嫌一百二十回之繁而淘汰之者，皆失。 郭武定本即旧本移置阎婆事，甚善，其于寇中去王田而加辽国，犹是小家照应之法，不知大手笔者正不尔尔。 ”是知《水浒》有古本百回，当时“既不可复见”；又有旧本，似百二十回，中有“四大寇”，盖谓王田方及宋江，即柴进见于白屏风上御书者（见百十五回本之六十七回及《水浒全书》七十二回）。 郭氏本始破其拘，削王田而加辽国，成百回；《水浒全书》又增王田，仍存辽国，复为百二十回，而宋江乃始退居于四寇之外。 然《宣和遗事》所谓“三路之寇”者，实指攻夺淮阳京西河北三路强人，皆宋江属，不知何人误读，遂以王庆田虎辈当之。 然破辽故事虑亦非始作于明，宋代外敌凭陵，国政弛废，转思草泽，盖亦人情，故或造野语以自慰，复多异说，不能合符，于是后之小说，既以取舍不同而纷歧，所取者又以话本非一而违异，田虎王庆在百回本与百十七回本名同而文迥别，殆亦由此而已。 惟其后讨平方腊，则各本悉同，因疑在郭本所据旧本之前，当又有别本，即以平方腊接招安之后，如《宣和遗事》所记者，于事理始为密合，然而证信尚缺，未能定也。总上五本观之，知现存之《水浒传》实有两种，其一简略，其一繁缛。胡应麟（《笔丛》四十一）云，“余二十年前所见《水浒传》本尚极足寻味，十数载来，为闽中坊贾刊落，止录事实，中间游词余韵神情寄寓处一概删之，遂既不堪覆瓿，复数十年，无原本印证，此书将永废。”应麟所见本，今莫知如何，若百十五回简本，则成就殆当先于繁本，以其用字造句，与繁本每有差违，倘是删存，无烦改作也。又简本撰人，止题罗贯中，周亮工闻于故老者亦第云罗氏，比郭氏本出，始着耐庵，因疑施乃演为繁本者之托名，当是后起，非古本所有。后人见繁本题施作罗编，未及悟其依托，遂或意为敷衍，定耐庵与贯中同籍，为钱塘人（明高儒《百川书志》六），且是其师。胡应麟（《笔丛》四十一）亦信所见《水浒传》小序，谓耐庵“尝入市肆䌷阅故书，于敝楮中得宋张叔夜禽贼招语一通，备悉其一百八人所由起，因润饰成此编”。且云“施某事见田叔禾《西湖志余》”，而《志余》中实无有，盖误记也。近吴梅著《顾曲麈谈》，云“《幽闺记》为施君美作。君美，名惠，即作《水浒传》之耐庵居士也。”案惠亦杭州人，然其为耐庵居士，则不知本于何书，故亦未可轻信矣。
总上五本观之，知现存之《水浒传》实有两种，其一简略，其一繁缛。 胡应麟（《笔丛》四十一）云，“余二十年前所见《水浒传》本尚极足寻味，十数载来，为闽中坊贾刊落，止录事实，中间游词余韵神情寄寓处一概删之，遂既不堪覆瓿，复数十年，无原本印证，此书将永废。 ”应麟所见本，今莫知如何，若百十五回简本，则成就殆当先于繁本，以其用字造句，与繁本每有差违，倘是删存，无烦改作也。 又简本撰人，止题罗贯中，周亮工闻于故老者亦第云罗氏，比郭氏本出，始着耐庵，因疑施乃演为繁本者之托名，当是后起，非古本所有。 后人见繁本题施作罗编，未及悟其依托，遂或意为敷衍，定耐庵与贯中同籍，为钱塘人（明高儒《百川书志》六），且是其师。 胡应麟（《笔丛》四十一）亦信所见《水浒传》小序，谓耐庵“尝入市肆䌷阅故书，于敝楮中得宋张叔夜禽贼招语一通，备悉其一百八人所由起，因润饰成此编”。 且云“施某事见田叔禾《西湖志余》”，而《志余》中实无有，盖误记也。 近吴梅著《顾曲麈谈》，云“《幽闺记》为施君美作。 君美，名惠，即作《水浒传》之耐庵居士也。 ”案惠亦杭州人，然其为耐庵居士，则不知本于何书，故亦未可轻信矣。四曰七十回本《水浒传》。正传七十回楔子一回，实七十一回，有原序一篇，题“东都施耐庵撰”，为金人瑞字圣叹所传，自云得古本，止七十回，于宋江受天书之后，即以卢俊义梦全伙被缚于嵇叔夜终，而指招安以下为罗贯中续成，斥曰“恶札”。其书与百二十回本之前七十回无甚异，惟刊去骈语特多，百廿回本发凡有“旧本去诗词之繁累”语，颇似圣叹真得古本，然文中有因删去诗词，而语气遂稍参差者，则所据殆仍是百回本耳。周亮工（《书影》一）记《水浒传》云，“近金圣叹自七十回之后，断为罗所续，因极口诋罗，复伪为施序于前，此书遂为施有矣。”二人生同时，其说当可信。惟字句亦小有佳处，如第五回叙鲁智深诘责瓦官寺僧一节云：
四曰七十回本《水浒传》。 正传七十回楔子一回，实七十一回，有原序一篇，题“东都施耐庵撰”，为金人瑞字圣叹所传，自云得古本，止七十回，于宋江受天书之后，即以卢俊义梦全伙被缚于嵇叔夜终，而指招安以下为罗贯中续成，斥曰“恶札”。 其书与百二十回本之前七十回无甚异，惟刊去骈语特多，百廿回本发凡有“旧本去诗词之繁累”语，颇似圣叹真得古本，然文中有因删去诗词，而语气遂稍参差者，则所据殆仍是百回本耳。 周亮工（《书影》一）记《水浒传》云，“近金圣叹自七十回之后，断为罗所续，因极口诋罗，复伪为施序于前，此书遂为施有矣。 ”二人生同时，其说当可信。 惟字句亦小有佳处，如第五回叙鲁智深诘责瓦官寺僧一节云：……智深走到面前，那和尚吃了一惊，跳起身来，便道，“请师兄坐，同吃一盏。”智深提着禅杖道，“你这两个，如何把寺来废了？”那和尚便道，“师兄请坐，听小僧……”智深睁着眼道，“你说你说！”“……说：在先敝寺，十分好个去处，田庄又广，僧众极多，只被廊下那几个老和尚吃酒撒泼，将钱养女，长老禁约他们不得，又把长老排告了出去，因此把寺来都废了。……”
…… When Zhishen walked in front of him, the monk was taken aback, jumped up, and said, "Please sit down, senior brother, and have a cup together." Zhishen held the Zen staff and said, "You two, how did you abolish the temple?" The monk said, "Senior brother, please sit down and listen to the little monk......" Zhishen opened his eyes and said, "You say it, you say!" ”“…… He said: In the Xianwe Temple, it is a very good place to go, the farm is wide, and there are a lot of monks, but they were only eaten and splashed by the old monks in the corridor, and they gave money to raise their daughters. ……”圣叹于“听小僧……”下注云“其语未毕”，于“……说”下又多所申释，而终以“章法奇绝从古未有”誉之，疑此等“奇绝”，正圣叹所为，其批改《西厢记》亦如此。此文在百回本，为“那和尚便道，‘师兄请坐，听小僧说。’智深睁着眼道，‘你说你说！’那和尚道，‘在先敝寺，十分好个去处，田庄广有，僧众极多……’”云云，在百十五回本，则并无智深睁眼之文，但云“那和尚曰，‘师兄听小僧说：在先敝寺，田庄广有，僧众也多……’”而已。
圣叹于“听小僧……”下注云“其语未毕”，于“…… 说”下又多所申释，而终以“章法奇绝从古未有”誉之，疑此等“奇绝”，正圣叹所为，其批改《西厢记》亦如此。 此文在百回本，为“那和尚便道，‘师兄请坐，听小僧说。 ’智深睁着眼道，‘你说你说！’那和尚道，‘在先敝寺，十分好个去处，田庄广有，僧众极多……’”云云，在百十五回本，则并无智深睁眼之文，但云“那和尚曰，‘师兄听小僧说：在先敝寺，田庄广有，僧众也多……’”而已。至于刊落之由，什九常因于世变，胡适（《文存》三）说，“圣叹生在流贼遍天下的时代，眼见张献忠李自成一班强盗流毒全国，故他觉得强盗是不能提倡的，是应该口诛笔伐的。”故至清，则世异情迁，遂复有以为“虽始行不端，而能翻然悔悟，改弦易辙，以善其修，斯其意固可嘉，而其功诚不可泯”者，截取百十五回本之六十七回至结末，称《后水浒》，一名《荡平四大寇传》，附刊七十回之后以行矣。其卷首有乾隆壬子（一七九二）赏心居士序。
As for the reason for the publication, it is often due to changes in the world, and Hu Shi ("Wencun" III) said, "Sheng Si was born in an era when bandits were all over the world, and saw that Zhang Xianzhong and Li Zicheng and a group of robbers poisoned the whole country, so he felt that robbers could not be advocated and should be punished." Therefore, when it comes to the Qing Dynasty, the world is different, and there are people who believe that "although he did something wrong at the beginning, he can suddenly repent, change his course, and improve his cultivation, which is certainly commendable, and his merits are indeed indelible", intercepting the sixty-seventh chapter of the 115th edition to the end, called "Hou Shui Hu", also known as "The Biography of the Four Great Bandits", and the appendix was published after 70 episodes. At the beginning of the volume, there is a preface to Qianlong Renzi (1792) appreciating layman.清初，有《后水浒传》四十回，云是“古宋遗民著，雁宕山樵评”，盖以续百回本。其书言宋江既死，余人尚为宋御金，然无功，李俊遂率众浮海，王于暹罗，结末颇似杜光庭之《虬髯传》。古宋遗民者，本书卷首《论略》云“不知何许人，以时考之，当去施罗未远，或与之同时，不相为下，亦未可知”。然实乃陈忱之托名；忱字遐心，浙江乌程人，生平著作并佚，惟此书存，为明末遗民（《两浙轩录》补遗一《光绪嘉兴府志》五十三），故虽游戏之作，亦见避地之意矣。然至道光中，有山阴俞万春作《结水浒传》七十回，结子一回，亦名《荡寇志》，则立意正相反，使山泊首领，非死即诛，专明“当年宋江并没有受招安平方腊的话，只有被张叔夜擒拿正法一句话”，以结七十回本。俞万春字仲华，别号忽来道人，尝随其父宦粤。瑶民之变，从征有功议叙，后行医于杭州，晚年乃奉道释，道光己酉（一八四九）卒。《荡寇志》之作，始于丙戌而迄于丁未，首尾凡二十二年，“未遑修饰而殁”，咸丰元年（一八五一），其子龙光始修润而刻之（本书识语）。书中造事行文，有时几欲摩前传之垒，采录景象，亦颇有施罗所未试者，在纠缠旧作之同类小说中，盖差为佼佼者矣。
清初，有《后水浒传》四十回，云是“古宋遗民著，雁宕山樵评”，盖以续百回本。 其书言宋江既死，余人尚为宋御金，然无功，李俊遂率众浮海，王于暹罗，结末颇似杜光庭之《虬髯传》。 古宋遗民者，本书卷首《论略》云“不知何许人，以时考之，当去施罗未远，或与之同时，不相为下，亦未可知”。 然实乃陈忱之托名；忱字遐心，浙江乌程人，生平著作并佚，惟此书存，为明末遗民（《两浙轩录》补遗一《光绪嘉兴府志》五十三），故虽游戏之作，亦见避地之意矣。 然至道光中，有山阴俞万春作《结水浒传》七十回，结子一回，亦名《荡寇志》，则立意正相反，使山泊首领，非死即诛，专明“当年宋江并没有受招安平方腊的话，只有被张叔夜擒拿正法一句话”，以结七十回本。 俞万春字仲华，别号忽来道人，尝随其父宦粤。 瑶民之变，从征有功议叙，后行医于杭州，晚年乃奉道释，道光己酉（一八四九）卒。 《荡寇志》之作，始于丙戌而迄于丁未，首尾凡二十二年，“未遑修饰而殁”，咸丰元年（一八五一），其子龙光始修润而刻之（本书识语）。 书中造事行文，有时几欲摩前传之垒，采录景象，亦颇有施罗所未试者，在纠缠旧作之同类小说中，盖差为佼佼者矣。此外讲史之属，为数尚多。明已有荒古虞夏（周游《开辟演义》钟惺《开辟唐虞传》及《有夏志传》），东西周（《东周列国志》《西周志》《四友传》），两汉（袁宏道评《两汉演义传》），两晋（《西晋演义》《东晋演义》），唐（熊锺谷《唐书演义》），宋（尺蠖斋评释《两宋志传》）诸史事平话，清以来亦不绝，且或总揽全史（《二十四史通俗演义》），或订补旧文（两汉两晋隋唐等），然大抵效《三国志演义》而不及，虽其上者，亦复拘牵史实，袭用陈言，故既拙于措辞，又颇惮于叙事，蔡奡《东周列国志读法》云，“若说是正经书，却毕竟是小说样子，……但要说他是小说，他却件件从经传上来。”本以美之，而讲史之病亦在此。
In addition, there are many lectures on history. The Ming Dynasty has the ancient Yu Xia (Zhou You's "Opening Romance", Zhong Xing's "Opening Tang and Yu Biography" and "You Xia Zhi Biography"), the Eastern and Western Zhou Dynasty ("Eastern Zhou Chronicles", "Western Zhou Chronicles", "Four Friends Biography"), the Two Han Dynasties (Yuan Hongdao's commentary on "The Romance of the Two Han Dynasties"), the Two Jin Dynasties ("Romance of the Western Jin Dynasty", the Romance of the Eastern Jin Dynasty), the Tang Dynasty (Xiong Zhonggu's "Romance of the Book of Tang"), the Song Dynasty (Chi Zhi Zhai commented on the "Two Song Chronicles"), and the historical affairs have been plain since the Qing Dynasty, and they have been continuously compiled since the Qing Dynasty, or they have taken the whole history ("Twenty-Four Histories of the Popular Romance"), or supplemented the old texts (the Two Han Dynasties, the Two Jins, Sui and Tang Dynasties, etc.), However, most of them imitate the "Romance of the Three Kingdoms" but are not as good as it, even if it is above, it is also bound by historical facts, inheriting the old words, so it is both clumsy in wording and quite afraid of narrative, Cai Huan's "Reading of the Eastern Zhou Dynasty Chronicles" said, "If it is a serious book, it is a novel after all,...... But if you want to say that he is a novel, he comes from the scriptures one by one. "It is originally beautiful, but the problem of telling history is also here.至于叙一时故事而特置重于一人或数人者，据《梦粱录》（二十）讲史条下云，“有王六大夫，于咸淳年间敷衍《复华篇》及《中兴名将传》，听者纷纷。”则亦当隶于讲史。《水浒传》即其一，后出者尤夥。较显者有《皇明英烈传》一名《云合奇踪》，武定侯郭勋家所传，记明开国武烈，而特扬其先祖郭英之功；后有《真英烈传》，则反其事而詈之。有《宋武穆王演义》，熊大本编，有《岳王传演义》，余应鳌编，又有《精忠全传》，邹元标编，皆记宋岳飞功绩及冤狱；后有《说岳全传》，则就其事而演之。清有《女仙外史》，作者吕熊（刘廷玑《在园杂志》云），述青州唐赛儿之乱；有《梼杌闲评》，无作者名，记魏忠贤客氏之恶。其于武勇，则有叙唐之薛家（《征东征西全传》），宋之杨家（《杨家将全传》）及狄青辈（《五虎平西平南传》）者，文意并拙，然盛行于里巷间。其他托名故实，而借以腾谤报怨之作亦多，今不复道。
至于叙一时故事而特置重于一人或数人者，据《梦粱录》（二十）讲史条下云，“有王六大夫，于咸淳年间敷衍《复华篇》及《中兴名将传》，听者纷纷。 ”则亦当隶于讲史。 《水浒传》即其一，后出者尤夥。 较显者有《皇明英烈传》一名《云合奇踪》，武定侯郭勋家所传，记明开国武烈，而特扬其先祖郭英之功；后有《真英烈传》，则反其事而詈之。 有《宋武穆王演义》，熊大本编，有《岳王传演义》，余应鳌编，又有《精忠全传》，邹元标编，皆记宋岳飞功绩及冤狱；后有《说岳全传》，则就其事而演之。 清有《女仙外史》，作者吕熊（刘廷玑《在园杂志》云），述青州唐赛儿之乱；有《梼杌闲评》，无作者名，记魏忠贤客氏之恶。 其于武勇，则有叙唐之薛家（《征东征西全传》），宋之杨家（《杨家将全传》）及狄青辈（《五虎平西平南传》）者，文意并拙，然盛行于里巷间。 其他托名故实，而借以腾谤报怨之作亦多，今不复道。

第十六篇　明之神魔小说（上）

第十六篇　明之神魔小说（上）

第十六篇　明之神魔小说（上）

Chapter 16 The Ming Dynasty's Gods and Demons Novel (Part I)奉道流羽客之隆重，极于宋宣和时，元虽归佛，亦甚崇道，其幻惑故遍行于人间，明初稍衰，比中叶而复极显赫，成化时有方士李孜，释继晓，正德时有色目人于永，皆以方伎杂流拜官，荣华熠耀，世所企羡，则妖妄之说自盛，而影响且及于文章。且历来三教之争，都无解决，互相容受，乃曰“同源”，所谓义利邪正善恶是非真妄诸端，皆混而又析之，统于二元，虽无专名，谓之神魔，盖可赅括矣。其在小说，则明初之《平妖传》已开其先，而继起之作尤夥。凡所敷叙，又非宋以来道士造作之谈，但为人民闾巷间意，芜杂浅陋，率无可观。然其力之及于人心者甚大，又或有文人起而结集润色之，则亦为鸿篇巨制之胚胎也。
奉道流羽客之隆重，极于宋宣和时，元虽归佛，亦甚崇道，其幻惑故遍行于人间，明初稍衰，比中叶而复极显赫，成化时有方士李孜，释继晓，正德时有色目人于永，皆以方伎杂流拜官，荣华熠耀，世所企羡，则妖妄之说自盛，而影响且及于文章。 且历来三教之争，都无解决，互相容受，乃曰“同源”，所谓义利邪正善恶是非真妄诸端，皆混而又析之，统于二元，虽无专名，谓之神魔，盖可赅括矣。 其在小说，则明初之《平妖传》已开其先，而继起之作尤夥。 凡所敷叙，又非宋以来道士造作之谈，但为人民闾巷间意，芜杂浅陋，率无可观。 然其力之及于人心者甚大，又或有文人起而结集润色之，则亦为鸿篇巨制之胚胎也。汇此等小说成集者，今有《四游记》行于世，其书凡四种，著者三人，不知何人编定，惟观刻本之状，当在明代耳。一曰《上洞八仙传》，亦名《八仙出处东游记传》，二卷五十六回，题“兰江吴元泰著”。传言铁拐（姓李名玄）得道，度钟离权，权度吕洞宾，二人又共度韩湘曹友，张果蓝采和何仙姑则别成道，是为八仙。一日俱赴蟠桃大会，归途各履宝物渡海，有龙子爱蓝采和所踏玉版，摄而夺之，遂大战，八仙“火烧东洋”，龙王败绩，请天兵来助，亦败，后得观音和解，乃各谢去，而“天渊迥别天下太平”之候，自此始矣。书中文言俗语间出，事亦往往不相属，盖杂取民间传说作之。
汇此等小说成集者，今有《四游记》行于世，其书凡四种，著者三人，不知何人编定，惟观刻本之状，当在明代耳。 一曰《上洞八仙传》，亦名《八仙出处东游记传》，二卷五十六回，题“兰江吴元泰著”。 传言铁拐（姓李名玄）得道，度钟离权，权度吕洞宾，二人又共度韩湘曹友，张果蓝采和何仙姑则别成道，是为八仙。 一日俱赴蟠桃大会，归途各履宝物渡海，有龙子爱蓝采和所踏玉版，摄而夺之，遂大战，八仙“火烧东洋”，龙王败绩，请天兵来助，亦败，后得观音和解，乃各谢去，而“天渊迥别天下太平”之候，自此始矣。 书中文言俗语间出，事亦往往不相属，盖杂取民间传说作之。二曰《五显灵官大帝华光天王传》，即《南游记》，四卷十八回，题“三台山人仰止余象斗编”。象斗为明末书贾，《三国志演义》刻本上，尚见其名。书言有妙吉祥童子以杀独火鬼忤如来，贬为马耳娘娘子，是曰三眼灵光，具五神通，报父仇，游灵虚，缘盗金枪，为帝所杀；复生炎魔天王家，是为灵耀，师事天尊，又诈取其金刀，炼为金砖以作法宝，终闹天宫，上界鼎沸；玄天上帝以水服之，使走人间，托生萧氏，是为华光，仍有神通，与神魔战，中界亦鼎沸，帝乃赦之。华光因失金砖，复欲制炼，寻求金塔，遂遇铁扇公主，擒以为妻，又降诸妖，所向无敌，以忆其母，访于地府，复因争执，大闹阴司，下界亦鼎沸。已而知生母实妖也，名吉芝陀圣母，食萧长者妻，幻作其状，而生华光，然仍食人，为佛所执，方在地狱，受恶报也，华光乃救以去。
二曰《五显灵官大帝华光天王传》，即《南游记》，四卷十八回，题“三台山人仰止余象斗编”。 象斗为明末书贾，《三国志演义》刻本上，尚见其名。 书言有妙吉祥童子以杀独火鬼忤如来，贬为马耳娘娘子，是曰三眼灵光，具五神通，报父仇，游灵虚，缘盗金枪，为帝所杀；复生炎魔天王家，是为灵耀，师事天尊，又诈取其金刀，炼为金砖以作法宝，终闹天宫，上界鼎沸；玄天上帝以水服之，使走人间，托生萧氏，是为华光，仍有神通，与神魔战，中界亦鼎沸，帝乃赦之。 华光因失金砖，复欲制炼，寻求金塔，遂遇铁扇公主，擒以为妻，又降诸妖，所向无敌，以忆其母，访于地府，复因争执，大闹阴司，下界亦鼎沸。 已而知生母实妖也，名吉芝陀圣母，食萧长者妻，幻作其状，而生华光，然仍食人，为佛所执，方在地狱，受恶报也，华光乃救以去。……却说华光三下酆都，救得母亲出来，十分欢悦。那吉芝陀圣母曰，“我儿你救得我出来，道好，我要讨岐娥吃。”华光问，“岐娥是甚么子，我儿媳俱不晓得。”母曰，“岐娥不晓得，可去问千里眼顺风耳。”华光即问二人。二人曰，“那岐娥是人，他又思量吃人。”华光听罢，对娘曰，“娘，你住酆都受苦，我孩儿用尽计较，救得你出来，如何又要吃人，此事万不可为。”母曰，“我要吃！不孝子，你没有岐娥与我吃，是谁要救我出来？”华光无奈，只推曰，“容两日讨与你吃。”……（第十七回《华光三下酆都》）
…… But it is said that Huaguang went to Fengdu three times and saved his mother, and he was very happy. Our Lady of Najizhita said, "My son, you can save me, and I want to ask Qi'e to eat." Huaguang asked, "What is Qi'e, my daughter-in-law doesn't know." The mother said, "Qi'e doesn't know, you can ask clairvoyance and clairvoyance." Hua Guang asked the two of them. The two said, "That Qi'e is a human, and he thinks about cannibalism." After hearing this, Hua Guang said to his mother, "Mother, you live in Fengdu and suffer, my child has tried his best to save you, how can you eat people again, this matter must not be done." The mother said, "I want to eat!" Unfilial son, you don't have Qi'e to eat with me, who wants to save me? Hua Guang had no choice but to push, "Let me beg you for two days." ”…… (The 17th "Huaguang Three Trips to Fengdu")于是张榜求医，有言惟仙桃可治者，华光即幻为齐天大圣状，窃而奉之，吉芝陀乃始不思食人。然齐天被嫌，询于佛母，知是华光，则来讨，为火丹所烧，败绩；其女月孛有骷髅骨，击之敌头即痛，二日死。华光被术，将不起，火炎王光佛出而议和，月孛削骨上击痕，华光始愈，终归佛道云。
于是张榜求医，有言惟仙桃可治者，华光即幻为齐天大圣状，窃而奉之，吉芝陀乃始不思食人。 然齐天被嫌，询于佛母，知是华光，则来讨，为火丹所烧，败绩；其女月孛有骷髅骨，击之敌头即痛，二日死。 华光被术，将不起，火炎王光佛出而议和，月孛削骨上击痕，华光始愈，终归佛道云。明谢肇淛（《五杂组》十五）以华光小说比拟《西游记》，谓“皆五行生克之理，火之炽也，亦上天下地，莫之扑灭，而真武以水制之，始归正道”。又于吉芝陀出狱即思食人事，则致慨于迁善之难，因知在万历时，此书已有。沈德符论剧曲（《野获编》二十五），亦有“华光显圣则太妖诞”语，是此种故事，当时且演为剧本矣。
明谢肇淛（《五杂组》十五）以华光小说比拟《西游记》，谓“皆五行生克之理，火之炽也，亦上天下地，莫之扑灭，而真武以水制之，始归正道”。 又于吉芝陀出狱即思食人事，则致慨于迁善之难，因知在万历时，此书已有。 沈德符论剧曲（《野获编》二十五），亦有“华光显圣则太妖诞”语，是此种故事，当时且演为剧本矣。其三曰《北方真武玄天上帝出身志传》，即《北游记》，四卷二十四回，亦余象斗编，记真武本身及成道降妖事。上帝为玄天之说，在汉已有（《周礼》《大宗伯》郑氏注），然与后来之玄帝，实又不同。此玄帝真武者，盖起于宋代羽客之言，即《元洞玉历记》（《三教搜神大全》一引）所谓元始说法于玉清，下见恶风弥塞，乃命周武伐纣以治阳，玄帝收魔以治阴，“上赐玄帝披发跣足，金甲玄袍，皂纛玄旗，统领丁甲，下降凡世，与六天魔王战于洞阴之野，是时魔王以坎离二炁，化苍龟巨蛇，变现方成，玄帝神力摄于足下，锁鬼众于酆都大洞，人民治安，宇内清肃”者是也，元尝加封，明亦崇奉。此传所言，间符旧说，但亦时窃佛传，杂以鄙言，盛夸感应，如村巫庙祝之见。初谓隋炀帝时，玉帝当宴会之际，而忽思凡，遂以三魂之一，为刘氏子，如来三清并来点化，乃隐蓬莱；又以凡心，生哥阇国，次生西霞，皆是王子，蒙天尊教，舍国出家，功行既完，上谒玉帝，封荡魔天尊，令收天将；于是复生为净洛国王子，得斗母元君点化，入武当山成道。玄帝方升天宫，忽见妖气起于中界，知即天将，扰乱人间，乃复下凡，降龟蛇怪，服赵公明，收雷神，获月孛及他神将，引以朝天。玉帝即封诸神为玄天部将，计三十六员。然扬子江有锅及竹缆二妖，独逸去不可得，真武因指一化身，复入人世，于武当山镇守之。篇末则记永乐三年玄天助国却敌事，而下有“至今二百余载”之文，颇似此书流行，当在明季，然旧刻无后一语，可知有者乃后来增订之本矣。
其三曰《北方真武玄天上帝出身志传》，即《北游记》，四卷二十四回，亦余象斗编，记真武本身及成道降妖事。 上帝为玄天之说，在汉已有（《周礼》《大宗伯》郑氏注），然与后来之玄帝，实又不同。 此玄帝真武者，盖起于宋代羽客之言，即《元洞玉历记》（《三教搜神大全》一引）所谓元始说法于玉清，下见恶风弥塞，乃命周武伐纣以治阳，玄帝收魔以治阴，“上赐玄帝披发跣足，金甲玄袍，皂纛玄旗，统领丁甲，下降凡世，与六天魔王战于洞阴之野，是时魔王以坎离二炁，化苍龟巨蛇，变现方成，玄帝神力摄于足下，锁鬼众于酆都大洞，人民治安，宇内清肃”者是也，元尝加封，明亦崇奉。 此传所言，间符旧说，但亦时窃佛传，杂以鄙言，盛夸感应，如村巫庙祝之见。 初谓隋炀帝时，玉帝当宴会之际，而忽思凡，遂以三魂之一，为刘氏子，如来三清并来点化，乃隐蓬莱；又以凡心，生哥阇国，次生西霞，皆是王子，蒙天尊教，舍国出家，功行既完，上谒玉帝，封荡魔天尊，令收天将；于是复生为净洛国王子，得斗母元君点化，入武当山成道。 玄帝方升天宫，忽见妖气起于中界，知即天将，扰乱人间，乃复下凡，降龟蛇怪，服赵公明，收雷神，获月孛及他神将，引以朝天。 玉帝即封诸神为玄天部将，计三十六员。 然扬子江有锅及竹缆二妖，独逸去不可得，真武因指一化身，复入人世，于武当山镇守之。 篇末则记永乐三年玄天助国却敌事，而下有“至今二百余载”之文，颇似此书流行，当在明季，然旧刻无后一语，可知有者乃后来增订之本矣。四曰《西游记传》，四卷四十一回，“题齐云杨志和编，天水赵景真校”，叙孙悟空得道，唐太宗入冥，玄奘应诏求经，途中遇难，终达西土，得经东归者也。太宗之梦，唐人已言，张《朝野佥载》云，“太宗至夜半奄然入定，见一人云，‘陛下暂合来，还即去也。’帝问‘君是何人？’对曰，‘臣是生人判冥事。’太宗入见判官，问六月四日事，即令还，向见者又送迎引导出。”又有俗文，亦记斯事，有残卷从敦煌千佛洞得之（详见第十二篇）。至玄奘入竺，实非应诏，事具《唐书》（百九十一《方伎传》），又有专传曰《大慈恩寺三藏法师传》，在《佛藏》中，初无诸奇诡事，而后来稗说，颇涉灵怪。《大唐三藏取经诗话》已有猴行者深沙神及诸异境；金人院本亦有《唐三藏》（陶宗仪《辍耕录》）；元杂剧有吴昌龄《唐三藏西天取经》（钟嗣成《录鬼簿》），一名《西游记》（今有日本盐谷温校印本），其中收孙悟空，加戒箍，沙僧，猪八戒，红孩儿，铁扇公主等皆已见。似取经故事，自唐末以至宋元，乃渐渐演成神异，且能有条贯，小说家因亦得取为记传也。
四曰《西游记传》，四卷四十一回，“题齐云杨志和编，天水赵景真校”，叙孙悟空得道，唐太宗入冥，玄奘应诏求经，途中遇难，终达西土，得经东归者也。 太宗之梦，唐人已言，张《朝野佥载》云，“太宗至夜半奄然入定，见一人云，‘陛下暂合来，还即去也。 ’帝问‘君是何人？’对曰，‘臣是生人判冥事。 ’太宗入见判官，问六月四日事，即令还，向见者又送迎引导出。 ”又有俗文，亦记斯事，有残卷从敦煌千佛洞得之（详见第十二篇）。 至玄奘入竺，实非应诏，事具《唐书》（百九十一《方伎传》），又有专传曰《大慈恩寺三藏法师传》，在《佛藏》中，初无诸奇诡事，而后来稗说，颇涉灵怪。 《大唐三藏取经诗话》已有猴行者深沙神及诸异境；金人院本亦有《唐三藏》（陶宗仪《辍耕录》）；元杂剧有吴昌龄《唐三藏西天取经》（钟嗣成《录鬼簿》），一名《西游记》（今有日本盐谷温校印本），其中收孙悟空，加戒箍，沙僧，猪八戒，红孩儿，铁扇公主等皆已见。 似取经故事，自唐末以至宋元，乃渐渐演成神异，且能有条贯，小说家因亦得取为记传也。全书之前九回为孙悟空得仙至被降故事，言有石猴，寻得水源，众奉为王，而复出山，就师悟道，以大神通，搅乱天地，玉帝不得已，封为齐天大圣，复扰蟠桃大会，帝命灌口二郎真君讨之，遂大战，悟空为所获，其叙当时战斗变化之状云：
全书之前九回为孙悟空得仙至被降故事，言有石猴，寻得水源，众奉为王，而复出山，就师悟道，以大神通，搅乱天地，玉帝不得已，封为齐天大圣，复扰蟠桃大会，帝命灌口二郎真君讨之，遂大战，悟空为所获，其叙当时战斗变化之状云：……那小猴见真君到，急急报知猴王。猴王即掣起金箍棒，步上云履。二人相见，各言姓名，遂排开阵势，来往三百余合。二人各变身万丈，战入云端，离却洞口。……大圣正在开战，忽见本山众猴惊散，抽身就走；真君大步赶上，急走急追。大圣慌忙将身一变，入水中。真君道，“这猴入水必变鱼虾，待我变作鱼鹰逐他。”大圣见真君赶来，又变一鸨鸟，飞在树上，被真君拽弓一弹，打下草坡，遍寻不见，回转天王营中去说猴王败阵等事，又赶不见踪迹。天王把照妖镜一照，急云“妖猴往你灌口去了”。真君回灌口；猴王急变做真君模样，座在中堂，被二郎用一神枪，猴王让过，变出本相，二人对较手段，意欲回转花果山，奈四面天将围住念咒。忽然真君与菩萨在云端观看，见猴王精力将疲，老君掷下金刚圈，与猴王脑上一打。猴王跌倒在地，被真君神犬咬住胸肚子，又拖跌一交，却被真君兄弟等神枪刺住，把铁索绑缚。……（第七回《真君收捉猴王》）
…… The little monkey saw the true king arrive and hurriedly reported to the monkey king. The Monkey King immediately pulled up the golden hoop stick and stepped onto the cloud shoes. When the two met, they each said their names, and then they lined up in formation, going back and forth for over three hundred rounds. The two of them transformed into thousands of feet, fought into the clouds, and left the cave entrance. …… The Great Sage was at war, and suddenly saw the monkeys on the mountain scattered, and withdrew; The true monarch caught up in strides and hurriedly chased after him. The Great Sage hurriedly transformed his body and entered the water. The true monarch said, "This monkey will turn into fish and shrimp when it enters the water, and when I turn into an osprey to chase him." When the Great Sage saw the True King coming, he turned into a bustard bird, flew on the tree, was pulled by the True Monarch and flicked the bow, knocked down the grass slope, and disappeared, and turned around to talk about the defeat of the Monkey King in the camp of the Heavenly King, but he couldn't find a trace. The king looked at the demon mirror and hurriedly said, "The demon monkey has poured into your mouth." The true monarch returned to the mouth; The Monkey King suddenly changed into the appearance of a true king, sitting in the middle hall, and was used by Erlang with a divine gun, the Monkey King gave way, conjuring his true form, and the two compared their means, intending to turn back to Huaguo Mountain, but the four sides of the sky will surround and chant spells. Suddenly the true king and the bodhisattva were watching in the clouds, and seeing that the monkey king's energy was about to be tired, the old lord threw down the diamond ring and hit the monkey king's head. The Monkey King fell to the ground, was bitten in the chest and stomach by the True Monarch Divine Dog, and dragged him down again, but was stabbed by the True Monarch brothers and other sharp guns, and tied up the iron chain. …… (The seventh episode of "The True Monarch Catches the Monkey King")然斫之无伤，炼之不死，如来乃压之五行山下，令待取经人。次四回即魏徵斩龙，太宗入冥，刘全进瓜，及玄奘应诏西行：为求经之所由起。十四回以下则玄奘道中收徒及遇难故事，而以见佛得经东归证果终。徒有三，曰孙行者，猪八戒，沙僧，并得龙马；灾难三十余，其大者五庄观，平顶山，火云洞，通天河，毒敌山，六耳猕猴，小雷音寺等也。凡所记述，简略者多，但亦偶杂游词，以增笑乐，如写火云洞之战云：
然斫之无伤，炼之不死，如来乃压之五行山下，令待取经人。 次四回即魏徵斩龙，太宗入冥，刘全进瓜，及玄奘应诏西行：为求经之所由起。 十四回以下则玄奘道中收徒及遇难故事，而以见佛得经东归证果终。 徒有三，曰孙行者，猪八戒，沙僧，并得龙马；灾难三十余，其大者五庄观，平顶山，火云洞，通天河，毒敌山，六耳猕猴，小雷音寺等也。 凡所记述，简略者多，但亦偶杂游词，以增笑乐，如写火云洞之战云：……那山前山后土地，皆来叩头报名，“此处叫做枯松涧，涧边有一座山洞，叫做火云洞，洞有一位魔王，是牛魔王的儿子，叫做红孩儿。他有三昧真火，甚是利害。”行者听说，叱退土神，……与八戒同进洞中去寻，……那魔王分付小妖，推出五轮小车，摆下五方，遂提枪杀出，与行者战经数合，八戒助阵，魔王走转，把鼻子一捶，鼻中冒出火来，一时五轮车子，烈火齐起。八戒道，“哥哥快走！少刻把老猪烧得囫囵，再加香料，尽他受用。”行者虽然避得火烧，却只怕烟，二人只得逃转。……（第三十二回《唐三藏收妖过黑河》）
…… The land in front of the mountain and behind the mountain all came to bow and sign up, "This place is called Kusong Stream, and there is a cave on the side of the stream, called Huoyun Cave, and there is a demon king in the cave, the son of the Bull Demon King, called the Red Boy." He has the true fire of samadhi, which is very interesting. When the traveler heard this, he scolded the earth god,...... Together with Bajie, I went into the cave to search,...... The demon king assigned the little demon, pushed out the five-wheeled cart, put down the five directions, and then took out the gun and killed it, and fought with the walker for several rounds, Bajie helped, the demon king walked around, punched his nose, and fire came out of his nose, and for a while, the five-wheeled car was on fire. Bajie said, "Brother, hurry up!" After a while, burn the old pig to a boil, add spices, and use it to his advantage. Although the traveler avoided the fire, he was only afraid of smoke, so the two had to flee. …… (The thirty-second episode of "Tang Seng Collects Demons and Crosses the Black River")复请观世音至，化刀为莲台，诱而执之，既降复叛，则环以五金箍，洒以甘露，乃始两手相合，归落伽山云。《西游记》杂剧中《鬼母皈依》一出，即用揭钵盂救幼子故事者，其中有云，“告世尊，肯发慈悲力。我着唐三藏西游便回，火孩儿妖怪放生了他。到前面，须得二圣郎救了你。”（卷三）而于此乃改为牛魔王子，且与参善知识之善才童子相混矣。
复请观世音至，化刀为莲台，诱而执之，既降复叛，则环以五金箍，洒以甘露，乃始两手相合，归落伽山云。 《西游记》杂剧中《鬼母皈依》一出，即用揭钵盂救幼子故事者，其中有云，“告世尊，肯发慈悲力。 我着唐三藏西游便回，火孩儿妖怪放生了他。 到前面，须得二圣郎救了你。 ”（卷三）而于此乃改为牛魔王子，且与参善知识之善才童子相混矣。

第十七篇　明之神魔小说（中）

第十七篇　明之神魔小说（中）

第十七篇　明之神魔小说（中）

Chapter 17 The Novel of the Gods and Demons of the Ming Dynasty (Middle)又有一百回本《西游记》，盖出于四十一回本《西游记传》之后，而今特盛行，且以为元初道士邱处机作。处机固尝西行，李志常记其事为《长春真人西游记》，凡二卷，今尚存《道藏》中，惟因同名，世遂以为一书；清初刻《西游记》小说者，又取虞集撰《长春真人西游记》之序文冠其首，而不根之谈乃愈不可拔也。
又有一百回本《西游记》，盖出于四十一回本《西游记传》之后，而今特盛行，且以为元初道士邱处机作。 处机固尝西行，李志常记其事为《长春真人西游记》，凡二卷，今尚存《道藏》中，惟因同名，世遂以为一书；清初刻《西游记》小说者，又取虞集撰《长春真人西游记》之序文冠其首，而不根之谈乃愈不可拔也。然至清乾隆末，钱大昕跋《长春真人西游记》（《潜研堂文集》二十九）已云小说《西游演义》是明人作；纪昀（《如是我闻》三）更因“其中祭赛国之锦衣卫，朱紫国之司礼监，灭法国之东城兵马司，唐太宗之大学士翰林院中书科，皆同明制”，决为明人依托，惟尚不知作者为何人。而乡邦文献，尤为人所乐道，故是后山阳人如丁晏（《石亭记事续编》）阮葵生（《茶余客话》）等，已皆探索旧志，知《西游记》之作者为吴承恩矣。吴玉搢（《山阳志遗》）亦云然，而尚疑是演邱处机书，犹罗贯中之演陈寿《三国志》者，当由未见二卷本，故其说如此；又谓“或云有《后西游记》，为射阳先生撰”，则第志俗说而已。
然至清乾隆末，钱大昕跋《长春真人西游记》（《潜研堂文集》二十九）已云小说《西游演义》是明人作；纪昀（《如是我闻》三）更因“其中祭赛国之锦衣卫，朱紫国之司礼监，灭法国之东城兵马司，唐太宗之大学士翰林院中书科，皆同明制”，决为明人依托，惟尚不知作者为何人。 而乡邦文献，尤为人所乐道，故是后山阳人如丁晏（《石亭记事续编》）阮葵生（《茶余客话》）等，已皆探索旧志，知《西游记》之作者为吴承恩矣。 吴玉搢（《山阳志遗》）亦云然，而尚疑是演邱处机书，犹罗贯中之演陈寿《三国志》者，当由未见二卷本，故其说如此；又谓“或云有《后西游记》，为射阳先生撰”，则第志俗说而已。吴承恩字汝忠，号射阳山人，性敏多慧，博极群书，复善谐剧，著杂记数种，名震一时，嘉靖甲辰岁贡生，后官长兴县丞，隆庆初归山阳，万历初卒（约一五一〇——一五八〇）。杂记之一即《西游记》（见《天启淮安府志》一六及一九《光绪淮安府志》贡举表），余未详。又能诗，其“词微而显，旨博而深”（陈文烛序语），为有明一代淮郡诗人之冠，而贫老乏嗣，遗稿多散佚，邱正纲收拾残缺为《射阳存稿》四卷《续稿》一卷，吴玉搢尽收入《山阳耆旧集》中（《山阳志遗》四）。然同治间修《山阳县志》者，于《人物志》中去其“善谐剧著杂记”语，于《艺文志》又不列《西游记》之目，于是吴氏之性行遂失真，而知《西游记》之出于吴氏者亦愈少矣。
吴承恩字汝忠，号射阳山人，性敏多慧，博极群书，复善谐剧，著杂记数种，名震一时，嘉靖甲辰岁贡生，后官长兴县丞，隆庆初归山阳，万历初卒（约一五一〇——一五八〇）。 杂记之一即《西游记》（见《天启淮安府志》一六及一九《光绪淮安府志》贡举表），余未详。 又能诗，其“词微而显，旨博而深”（陈文烛序语），为有明一代淮郡诗人之冠，而贫老乏嗣，遗稿多散佚，邱正纲收拾残缺为《射阳存稿》四卷《续稿》一卷，吴玉搢尽收入《山阳耆旧集》中（《山阳志遗》四）。 然同治间修《山阳县志》者，于《人物志》中去其“善谐剧著杂记”语，于《艺文志》又不列《西游记》之目，于是吴氏之性行遂失真，而知《西游记》之出于吴氏者亦愈少矣。《西游记》全书次第，与杨志和作四十一回本殆相等。前七回为孙悟空得道至被降故事，当杨本之前九回；第八回记释迦造经之事，与佛经言阿难结集不合；第九回记玄奘父母遇难及玄奘复仇之事，亦非事实，杨本皆无有，吴所加也。第十至十二回即魏徵斩龙至玄奘应诏西行之事，当杨本之十至十三回；第十四回至九十九回则俱记入竺途中遇难之事，九者究也，物极于九，九九八十一，故有八十一难；而一百回以东返成真终。惟杨志和本虽大体已立，而文词荒率，仅能成书；吴则通才，敏慧淹雅，其所取材，颇极广泛，于《四游记》中亦采《华光传》及《真武传》，于西游故事亦采《西游记杂剧》及《三藏取经诗话》（？），翻案挪移则用唐人传奇（如《异闻集》《酉阳杂俎》等），讽刺揶揄则取当时世态，加以铺张描写，几乎改观，如灌口二郎之战孙悟空，杨本仅有三百余言，而此十倍之，先记二人各现“法象”，次则大圣化雀，化“大鹚老”，化鱼，化水蛇，真君化雀鹰，化大海鹤，化鱼鹰，化灰鹤，大圣复化为鸨，真君以其贱鸟，不屑相比，即现原身，用弹丸击下之。
The order of the whole book of "Journey to the West" is almost the same as Yang Zhihe's forty-one editions. The first seven episodes are the story of Sun Wukong's enlightenment and surrender, and the first nine episodes of Yang Ben; The eighth chapter records Shakyamuni's scripture creation, which is inconsistent with the Buddhist scriptures that Ananda gathers; The ninth episode records the death of Xuanzang's parents and Xuanzang's revenge, which is not true, Yang Ben does not have it, and Wu added it. The tenth to twelfth episodes are Wei Zheng's slaying of the dragon to Xuanzang in response to the edict of the westward journey, when Yang Benzhi's tenth to thirteenth episodes; The fourteenth to ninety-ninth chapters all record the distresses on the way to Zhu, nine is the end, and the object is the nine, ninety-nine and eighty-one, so there are eighty-one difficulties; And the hundred times returned to the east to become a true ending. However, although Yang Zhihe's original was generally established, his words were absurd and could only be written into a book; Wu Ze is a generalist, sensitive and elegant, and his materials are quite extensive, and he also adopts "The Legend of Huaguang" and "The Legend of Zhenwu" in the "Four Journeys", and also adopts "Journey to the West Miscellaneous Dramas" and "Sanzang Scriptures and Poems" (?) The satirical ridicule takes the state of the world at that time, and describes it extravagantly, almost changing the appearance, such as the battle of Guankou Erlang Sun Wukong, Yang Ben only has more than 300 words, and this is ten times more, first remember that the two of them each appeared in the "Dharma Image", and then the Great Sage turned into a sparrow, turned into a "big crane old", turned into a fish, turned into a water snake, the true monarch turned into a sparroweagle, turned into a sea crane, turned into an osprey, turned into a gray crane, and the great sage turned into a bustard.……那大圣趁着机会，滚下山崖，伏在那里又变，变一座土地庙儿：大张着口，似个庙门；牙齿变作门扇；舌头变做菩萨；眼睛变做窗棂；只有尾巴不好收拾，竖在后面，变做一根旗杆。真君赶到崖下，不见打倒的鸨鸟，只有一间小庙，急睁凤眼，仔细看之，见旗杆立在后面，笑道，“是这猢狲了。他今又在那里哄我。我也曾见庙宇，更不曾见一个旗杆竖在后面的。断是这畜生弄喧。他若哄我进去，他便一口咬住。我怎肯进去？等我掣拳先捣窗棂，后踢门扇。”大圣听得，……扑的一个虎跳，又冒在空中不见。真君前前后后乱赶，……起在半空，见那李天王高擎照妖镜，与哪吒住立云端。真君道，“天王，曾见那猴王么？”天王道，“不曾上来，我这里照着他哩。”真君把那赌变化，弄神通，拿群猴一事说毕，却道，“他变庙宇，正打处，就走了。”李天王闻言，又把照妖镜四方一照，呵呵的笑道，“真君，快去快去，那猴子使了个隐身法，走出营围，往你那灌江口去也。”……却说那大圣已至灌江口，摇身一变，变作二郎爷爷的模样，按下云头，径入庙里。鬼判不能相认，一个个磕头迎接。他坐在中间，点查香火：见李虎拜还的三牲，张龙许下的保福，赵甲求子的文书，钱丙告病的良愿。正看处，有人报“又一个爷爷来了”。众鬼判急急观看，无不惊心。真君却道，“有个甚么齐天大圣，才来这里否？”众鬼判道，“不曾见甚么大圣，只有一个爷爷在里面查点哩。”真君撞进门；大圣见了，现出本相道，“郎君，不消嚷，庙宇已姓孙了！”这真君即举三尖两刃神锋，劈脸就砍。那猴王使个身法，让过神锋，掣出那绣花针儿，幌一幌，碗来粗细，赶到前，对面相还。两个嚷嚷闹闹，打出庙门，半雾半云，且行且战，复打到花果山。慌得那四大天王等众堤防愈紧；这康张太尉等迎着真君，合心努力，把那美猴王围绕不题……（第六回下《小圣施威降大圣》）
…… The great sage took the opportunity to roll down the cliff, crouched there and turned into a land temple: with his mouth wide open, like a temple door; teeth become door leaves; the tongue becomes a bodhisattva; the eyes become window lattices; Only the tail is not easy to clean up, standing behind it, and turning into a flagpole. The true monarch rushed to the bottom of the cliff, and there was no downed bustard, only a small temple, he hurriedly opened his phoenix eyes, looked closely, saw the flagpole standing behind, and said with a smile, "It's this monkey." He is there to coax me again. I have also seen temples, let alone a flagpole erected in the back. It must be this beast who makes noise. If he coaxed me in, he would bite me. How can I go in? When I pulled my fist, I first pounded the window lattice, and then kicked the door leaf. "The Great Sage heard,...... A tiger jumped and disappeared in the air. The true monarch rushed back and forth,...... Rising in mid-air, I saw that King Li was holding the demon mirror high, standing in the clouds with Nezha. The True Monarch said, "Heavenly King, have you ever seen the Monkey King?" The King of Heaven said, "I have never come up, I am here to follow him." The true monarch finished talking about the monkeys, but said, "He changed the temple and was beating, and he left." When King Li heard this, he looked the demon mirror in all directions again, and said with a smile, "Zhenjun, go quickly, the monkey used an invisibility method, walked out of the camp, and went to your Guanjiang estuary." ”…… But it is said that the great sage has arrived at the mouth of the Guanjiang River, transformed into the appearance of Erlang's grandfather, pressed the cloud head, and went straight into the temple. The ghosts couldn't recognize each other, and they kowtowed to greet them one by one. He sat in the middle and checked the incense: seeing the three animals returned by Li Hu, the blessings promised by Zhang Long, the documents of Zhao Jia's request for a son, and Qian Bing's good wish to report illness. Just as I was looking, someone reported that "another grandfather is coming". The ghosts were eager to watch, all of whom were shocked. The true monarch said, "Is there a great sage who came here?" The ghosts judged, "I haven't seen any great sage, only one grandfather is checking inside." "The true monarch crashed into the door; The great sage saw it and showed his true nature, "Langjun, don't shout, the temple is already surnamed Sun!" "This true monarch immediately raised the three-pointed two-edged divine blade and slashed his face. The monkey king used a technique, let the divine blade pass, pulled out the embroidery needle, covered it, and the thickness of the bowl came to the front, and returned it to the opposite side. The two shouted and made a fuss, beating out of the temple gate, half fog and half clouds, walking and fighting, and then fighting to Huaguo Mountain. panicked that the four heavenly kings and other embankments became tighter; This Kang Zhang Taiwei and others faced the true king, worked together, and surrounded the Monkey King...... (The sixth episode of "The Little Saint Shiwei Descends to the Great Sage")然作者构思之幻，则大率在八十一难中，如金山之战（五十至五二回），二心之争（五七及五八回），火焰山之战（五九至六一回），变化施为，皆极奇恣，前二事杨书已有，后一事则取杂剧《西游记》及《华光传》中之铁扇公主以配《西游记传》中仅见其名之牛魔王，俾益增其神怪艳异者也。其述牛魔王既为群神所服，令罗刹女献芭蕉扇，灭火焰山火，俾玄奘等西行情状云：
然作者构思之幻，则大率在八十一难中，如金山之战（五十至五二回），二心之争（五七及五八回），火焰山之战（五九至六一回），变化施为，皆极奇恣，前二事杨书已有，后一事则取杂剧《西游记》及《华光传》中之铁扇公主以配《西游记传》中仅见其名之牛魔王，俾益增其神怪艳异者也。 其述牛魔王既为群神所服，令罗刹女献芭蕉扇，灭火焰山火，俾玄奘等西行情状云：……那老牛心惊胆战，……望上便走。恰好有托塔李天王并哪吒太子领鱼肚药叉巨灵神将幔住空中。……牛王急了，依前摇身一变，还变做一只大白牛，使两只铁角去触天王，天王使刀来砍。随后孙行者又到，……道，“这厮神通不小，又变作这等身躯，却怎奈何？”太子笑道，“大圣勿疑，你看我擒他。”这太子即喝一声“变！”变得三头六臂，飞身跳在牛王背上，使斩妖剑望颈项上一挥，不觉得把个牛头斩下。天王丢刀，却才与行者相见。那牛王腔子里又钻出一个头来，口吐黑气，眼放金光。被哪吒又砍一剑，头落处，又钻出一个头来；一连砍了十数剑，随即长出十数个头。哪吒取出火轮儿，挂在老牛的角上，便吹真火，焰焰烘烘，把牛王烧得张狂哮吼，摇头摆尾。才要变化脱身，又被托塔天王将照妖镜照住本像，腾挪不动，无计逃生，只叫“莫伤我命，情愿归顺佛家也！”哪吒道，“既惜身命，快拿扇子出来！”牛王道，“扇子在我山妻处收着哩。”哪吒见说，将缚妖索子解下，……穿在鼻孔里，用手牵来，……回至芭蕉洞口。老牛叫道，“夫人，将扇子出来，救我性命！”罗刹听叫，急卸了钗环，脱了色服，挽青丝如道姑，穿缟素似比丘，双手捧那柄丈二长短的芭蕉扇子，走出门；又见金刚众圣与天王父子，慌忙跪在地下，磕头礼拜道，“望菩萨饶我夫妻之命，愿将此扇奉承孙叔叔成功去也。”……
…… The old cow was terrified,...... Looking up, he ran away. It just so happened that King Tota Li and Prince Nezha led the fish maw medicine fork giant spirit god to cover the air. …… The bull king was anxious, and he changed into a big white bull, so that the two iron horns touched the king, and the king used a knife to slash. Then Sun Walker arrived again,...... Said, "This guy has a lot of magical powers, and he has turned into such a body, but what can he do?" The prince smiled and said, "Don't doubt the great sage, you see me capture him." The prince shouted, "Change!" He became three heads and six arms, flew and jumped on the back of the bull king, so that the demon-slaying sword looked at his neck and swung it, and he didn't feel that he had cut off a bull's head. The king threw his sword, but only met the traveler. Another head came out of the bull king's cavity, spitting out black air and golden light in his eyes. was slashed by Nezha again, and where his head fell, another head came out; He slashed more than a dozen swords in a row, and then grew more than a dozen heads. Nezha took out the fire wheel, hung it on the horn of the old cow, and blew the real fire, the flames were hot, and the bull king roared wildly, shaking his head and tail. Just as he was about to change and escape, he was held by the demon mirror of King Tota, unable to move, and had no way to escape, only shouting, "Don't hurt my life, I would rather submit to Buddhism!" Nezha said, "Since you cherish your life, take out the fan quickly!" The bull king said, "The fan is collected at my mountain wife." Nezha saw it and said, untie the demon-bound rope,...... Threaded in the nostrils and held by hand,...... I returned to the entrance of the banana cave. The old cow shouted, "Madam, take out the fan and save my life!" When the Rakshasa heard the call, he hurriedly took off the hairpin ring, took off his colored clothes, pulled the green silk like a Taoist girl, wore white silk like a monk, held the two-foot-long banana fan in both hands, and walked out the door; Seeing the Vajra saints and the father and son of the King of Heaven, they hurriedly knelt on the ground, kowtowed and bowed, "I hope the Bodhisattva will spare the lives of my husband and wife, and I am willing to flatter Uncle Sun to succeed in this fan." ”…………孙大圣执着扇子，行近山边，尽气力挥了一扇，那火焰山平平息焰，寂寂除光；又扇一扇，只闻得习习潇潇，清风微动；第三扇，满天云漠漠，细雨落霏霏。有诗为证：
…… Sun Dasheng persisted in the fan, approached the side of the mountain, and waved it with all his might, and the flame mountain calmed down the flames, and the silence was removed; Another fan, only to hear the Xi Xiaoxiao, the breeze moves slightly; The third fan is full of clouds, and the fine rain is falling. There is a poem as proof:火焰山遥八百程，火光大地有声名。火煎五漏丹难熟，火燎三关道不清。特借芭蕉施雨露，幸蒙天将助神功。牵牛归佛伏颠劣，水火相联性自平。（第六十一回下《孙行者三调芭蕉扇》）
The flame mountain is 800 miles away, and the fire is famous on the earth. The fire is not cooked, and the fire is unclear in the three passes. I specially borrow the banana to offer rain and dew, hoping that heaven will assist in divine power. The Cowherd returns to the Buddha and hides in the chaos, and the water and fire are intertwined, and the nature is calm. (The sixty-first episode of "Sun Walker's Three Tunes Banana Fan")又作者禀性，“复善谐剧”，故虽述变幻恍忽之事，亦每杂解颐之言，使神魔皆有人情，精魅亦通世故，而玩世不恭之意寓焉（详见胡适《西游记考证》）。如记孙悟空大败于金洞兕怪，失金箍棒，因谒玉帝，乞发兵收剿一节云：
又作者禀性，“复善谐剧”，故虽述变幻恍忽之事，亦每杂解颐之言，使神魔皆有人情，精魅亦通世故，而玩世不恭之意寓焉（详见胡适《西游记考证》）。 如记孙悟空大败于金洞兕怪，失金箍棒，因谒玉帝，乞发兵收剿一节云：……当时四天师传奏灵霄，引见玉陛，行者朝上唱个大喏，道，“老官儿，累你累你。我老孙保护唐僧往西天取经，一路凶多吉少，也不消说。于今来在金山，金洞，有一兕怪，把唐僧拿在洞里，不知是要蒸，要煮，要晒。是老孙寻上他门，与他交战，那怪神通广大，把我金箍棒抢去，因此难缚妖魔。那怪说有些认得老孙，我疑是天上凶星思凡下界，为此特来启奏，伏乞天尊垂慈洞鉴，降旨查勘凶星，发兵收剿妖魔，老孙不胜战栗屏营之至。”却又打个深躬道，“以闻。”旁有葛仙翁笑道，“猴子是何前倨后恭？”行者道，“不敢不敢。不是甚前倨后恭，老孙于今是没棒弄了。”……（第五十一回上《心猿空用千般计》）
…… At that time, the Four Heavenly Masters played Lingxiao and introduced the Jade Emperor, and the walker sang a big song upwards, saying, "Old official, tire you." My old grandson protected Tang Seng to learn scriptures from the West, and there were many bad luck along the way, needless to say. Today, in Jin id_0000Mountain, in the Jin id_00001Cave, there is a rhinoceros monster that takes Tang monk in the cave, I don't know if it wants to be steamed, boiled, or dried. It was Lao Sun who came to his door and fought with him, and that monster had great magical powers and snatched my golden hoop stick, so it was difficult to bind the demon. I suspect that it is the malevolent star Sifan in the lower realm, so I came to report, and I beg the Heavenly Venerable to have mercy and insight, issue an edict to investigate the malevolent star, and send troops to suppress the demons. But he bowed deeply and said, "Hear." Ge Xianweng next to him smiled and said, "Why is the monkey arrogant and respectful?" The traveler said, "I dare not dare." It's not that I'm too arrogant and respectful, but I don't have a stick now. ”…… (The fifty-first episode of "The Heart Ape Uses a Thousand Tricks")评议此书者有清人山阴悟一子陈士斌《西游真诠》（康熙丙子尤侗序），西河张书绅《西游正旨》（乾隆戊辰序）与悟元道人刘一明《西游原旨》（嘉庆十五年序），或云劝学，或云谈禅，或云讲道，皆阐明理法，文词甚繁。然作者虽儒生，此书则实出于游戏，亦非语道，故全书仅偶见五行生克之常谈，尤未学佛，故末回至有荒唐无稽之经目，特缘混同之教，流行来久，故其著作，乃亦释迦与老君同流，真性与元神杂出，使三教之徒，皆得随宜附会而已。假欲勉求大旨，则谢肇淛（《五杂组》十五）之“《西游记》曼衍虚诞，而其纵横变化，以猿为心之神，以猪为意之驰，其始之放纵，上天下地，莫能禁制，而归于紧箍一咒，能使心猿驯伏，至死靡他，盖亦求放心之喻，非浪作也”数语，已足尽之。作者所说，亦第云“众僧们议论佛门定旨，上西天取经的缘由，……三藏箝口不言，但以手指自心，点头几度，众僧们莫解其意，……三藏道，‘心生种种魔生，心灭种种魔灭，我弟子曾在化生寺对佛说下誓愿，不由我不尽此心，这一去，定要到西天见佛求经，使我们法轮回转，皇图永固’”（十三回）而已。
评议此书者有清人山阴悟一子陈士斌《西游真诠》（康熙丙子尤侗序），西河张书绅《西游正旨》（乾隆戊辰序）与悟元道人刘一明《西游原旨》（嘉庆十五年序），或云劝学，或云谈禅，或云讲道，皆阐明理法，文词甚繁。 然作者虽儒生，此书则实出于游戏，亦非语道，故全书仅偶见五行生克之常谈，尤未学佛，故末回至有荒唐无稽之经目，特缘混同之教，流行来久，故其著作，乃亦释迦与老君同流，真性与元神杂出，使三教之徒，皆得随宜附会而已。 假欲勉求大旨，则谢肇淛（《五杂组》十五）之“《西游记》曼衍虚诞，而其纵横变化，以猿为心之神，以猪为意之驰，其始之放纵，上天下地，莫能禁制，而归于紧箍一咒，能使心猿驯伏，至死靡他，盖亦求放心之喻，非浪作也”数语，已足尽之。 作者所说，亦第云“众僧们议论佛门定旨，上西天取经的缘由，…… 三藏箝口不言，但以手指自心，点头几度，众僧们莫解其意，…… 三藏道，‘心生种种魔生，心灭种种魔灭，我弟子曾在化生寺对佛说下誓愿，不由我不尽此心，这一去，定要到西天见佛求经，使我们法轮回转，皇图永固’”（十三回）而已。《后西游记》六卷四十回，不题何人作。中谓花果山复生石猴，仍得神通，称为小圣，辅大颠和尚赐号半偈者复往西天，虔求真解。途中收猪一戒，得沙弥，且遇诸魔，屡陷危难，顾终达灵山，得解而返。其谓儒释本一，亦同《西游》，而行文造事并逊，以吴承恩诗文之清绮推之，当非所作矣。又有《续西游记》，未见，《西游补》所附杂记有云，“《续西游》摹拟逼真，失于拘滞，添出比丘灵虚，尤为蛇足”也。
《后西游记》六卷四十回，不题何人作。 中谓花果山复生石猴，仍得神通，称为小圣，辅大颠和尚赐号半偈者复往西天，虔求真解。 途中收猪一戒，得沙弥，且遇诸魔，屡陷危难，顾终达灵山，得解而返。 其谓儒释本一，亦同《西游》，而行文造事并逊，以吴承恩诗文之清绮推之，当非所作矣。 又有《续西游记》，未见，《西游补》所附杂记有云，“《续西游》摹拟逼真，失于拘滞，添出比丘灵虚，尤为蛇足”也。

第十八篇　明之神魔小说（下）

第十八篇　明之神魔小说（下）

第十八篇　明之神魔小说（下）

Chapter 18 The Novel of the Gods and Demons of the Ming Dynasty (Part II)《封神传》一百回，今本不题撰人。梁章钜（《浪迹续谈》六）云，“林樾亭（案名乔荫）先生尝与余谈，《封神传》一书是前明一名宿所撰，意欲与《西游记》《水浒传》鼎立而三，因偶读《尚书》《武成》篇‘唯尔有神尚克相予’语，衍成此传。其封神事则隐据《六韬》（《旧唐书》《礼仪志》引）《阴谋》（《太平御览》引）《史记》《封禅书》《唐书》《礼仪志》各书，铺张俶诡，非尽无本也。”然名宿之名未言。日本藏明刻本，乃题许仲琳编（《内阁文库图书第二部汉书目录》），今未见其序，无以确定为何时作，但张无咎作《平妖传》序，已及《封神》，是殆成于隆庆万历间（十六世纪后半）矣。书之开篇诗有云，“商周演义古今传”，似志在于演史，而侈谈神怪，什九虚造，实不过假商周之争，自写幻想，较《水浒》固失之架空，方《西游》又逊其雄肆，故迄今未有以鼎足视之者也。
"The Biography of the Gods" has been written a hundred times, and this version does not mention the author. Liang Zhangju ("Continuation of Wandering Stories" VI) said, "Mr. Lin Yueting (case name Qiao Yin) once talked to me that the book "The Biography of the Gods" was written by a former Ming Dynasty person, and he intended to stand with "Journey to the West" and "Water Margin". The consecration of the gods is implicitly based on the "Six Tactics" (quoted in the "Old Book of Tang" and "Ritual Records"), "Conspiracy" (quoted in "Taiping Yulan"), "Historical Records", "Fengshan Book", "Book of Tang", and "Ritual Records". However, the name of the celebrity was not mentioned. The Japanese Tibetan Ming engraved version, edited by Xu Zhonglin ("Cabinet Library Books Part 2 Hanshu Catalogue"), has not seen its preface now, and it is impossible to determine when it was written, but Zhang Wujiao's preface to "The Biography of Ping Yao" has reached the "Fengshen", which was almost completed during the Longqing Wanli period (the second half of the sixteenth century). The opening poem of the book says, "The Romance of the Shang and Zhou Dynasty in Ancient and Modern Times", which seems to be aimed at interpreting history, but the extravagant talk of the supernatural and the supernatural is ninety fictional, but it is actually just a fake Shang and Zhou dispute, writing fantasy by oneself, compared to "Water Margin" is certainly lost in the overhead, and "Journey to the West" is inferior to its heroism, so there has been no one to look at it so far.《史记》《封禅书》云，“八神将，太公以来作之。”《六韬》《金匮》中亦间记太公神术；妲己为狐精，则见于唐李瀚《蒙求》注，是商周神异之谈，由来旧矣。然“封神”亦明代巷语，见《真武传》，不必定本于《尚书》。《封神传》即始自受辛进香女娲宫，题诗黩神，神因命三妖惑纣以助周。第二至三十回则杂叙商纣暴虐，子牙隐显，西伯脱祸，武成反商，以成殷周交战之局。此后多说战争，神佛错出，助周者为阐教即道释，助殷者为截教。截教不知所谓，钱静方（《小说丛考》上）以为《周书》《克殷篇》有云，“武王遂征四方，凡憝国九十有九国，馘魔亿有十万七千七百七十有九，俘人三亿万有二百三十。”（案此文在《世俘篇》，钱偶误记）魔与人分别言之，作者遂由此生发为截教。然“摩罗”梵语，周代未翻，《世俘篇》之魔字又或作磨，当是误字，所未详也。其战各逞道术，互有死伤，而截教终败。于是以纣王自焚，周武入殷，子牙归国封神，武王分封列国终。封国以报功臣，封神以妥功鬼，而人神之死，则委之于劫数。其间时出佛名，偶说名教，混合三教，略如《西游》，然其根柢，则方士之见而已。在诸战事中，惟截教之通天教主设万仙阵，阐教群仙合破之，为最烈：
《史记》《封禅书》云，“八神将，太公以来作之。 ”《六韬》《金匮》中亦间记太公神术；妲己为狐精，则见于唐李瀚《蒙求》注，是商周神异之谈，由来旧矣。 然“封神”亦明代巷语，见《真武传》，不必定本于《尚书》。 《封神传》即始自受辛进香女娲宫，题诗黩神，神因命三妖惑纣以助周。 第二至三十回则杂叙商纣暴虐，子牙隐显，西伯脱祸，武成反商，以成殷周交战之局。 此后多说战争，神佛错出，助周者为阐教即道释，助殷者为截教。 截教不知所谓，钱静方（《小说丛考》上）以为《周书》《克殷篇》有云，“武王遂征四方，凡憝国九十有九国，馘魔亿有十万七千七百七十有九，俘人三亿万有二百三十。 ”（案此文在《世俘篇》，钱偶误记）魔与人分别言之，作者遂由此生发为截教。 然“摩罗”梵语，周代未翻，《世俘篇》之魔字又或作磨，当是误字，所未详也。 其战各逞道术，互有死伤，而截教终败。 于是以纣王自焚，周武入殷，子牙归国封神，武王分封列国终。 封国以报功臣，封神以妥功鬼，而人神之死，则委之于劫数。 其间时出佛名，偶说名教，混合三教，略如《西游》，然其根柢，则方士之见而已。 在诸战事中，惟截教之通天教主设万仙阵，阐教群仙合破之，为最烈：话说老子与元始冲入万仙阵内，将通天教主裹住。金灵圣母被三大士围在当中，……用玉如意招架三大士多时，不觉把顶上金冠落在尘埃，将头发散了。这圣母披发大战，正战之间，遇着燃灯道人，祭起定海珠打来，正中顶门。可怜！正是：
It is said that Lao Tzu and Yuan Shi rushed into the Ten Thousand Immortals Formation and wrapped the Tongtian Sect Master. The Golden Spirit Holy Mother was surrounded by the three great masters,...... When he used jade ruyi to parry the three scholars, he unconsciously fell the golden crown on the top of the dust and scattered his hair. This Holy Mother was fighting with her hair down, and during the battle, she met the Lantern Daoist and sacrificed the Dinghai Pearl to call, hitting the top door. Wretched! Precisely:
封神正位为星首，北阙香烟万载存。
The god is the head of the star, and the incense smoke of the northern palace will last for ten thousand years.
燃灯将定海珠把金灵圣母打死。广成子祭起诛仙剑，赤精子祭起戮仙剑，道行天尊祭起陷仙剑，玉鼎真人祭起绝仙剑，数道黑气冲空，将万仙阵罩住。凡封神台上有名者，就如砍瓜切菜一般，俱遭杀戮。子牙祭起打神鞭，任意施为。万仙阵中，又被杨任用五火扇扇起烈火千丈，黑烟迷空。……哪吒现三首八臂，往来冲突。……通天教主见万仙受此屠戮，心中大怒，急呼曰，“长耳定光仙快取六魂幡来！”定光仙因见接引道人白莲裹体，舍利现光；又见十二代弟子玄都门人俱有璎络金灯，光华罩体，知道他们出身清正，截教毕竟差讹。他将六魂幡收起，轻轻的走出万仙阵，径往芦蓬下隐匿。正是：
Burning the lamp will beat Ding Haizhu to death of the Golden Spirit Holy Mother. Guang Chengzi sacrificed the Immortal Sword, the Red Sperm sacrificed the Immortal Sword, the Dao Xing Tianzun sacrificed the Immortal Sword, and the Jade Ding Zhenren sacrificed the Absolute Immortal Sword, and several black qi rushed into the air, covering the Ten Thousand Immortal Array. All those who are famous on the god platform are killed like chopping melons and vegetables. Ziya sacrificed and beat the divine whip and did whatever he wanted. In the Ten Thousand Immortals Formation, Yang Ren used the Five Fire Fan to fan the flames thousands of feet high, and the black smoke was blurred into the sky. …… Nezha appeared with three heads and eight arms, clashing back and forth. …… Seeing that Wan Xian was being slaughtered by this, the Tongtian Sect Master was furious in his heart and hurriedly shouted, "Long-eared Dingguang Immortal Cache the Six Soul Banner!" "The Dingguang Immortal saw the white lotus wrapped in the guiding Taoist, and the relics appeared in light; I also saw that the twelfth generation of disciples Xuandu disciples all had golden lamps and shining brilliance, knowing that they were from pure backgrounds, and the sect was wrong after all. He put away the six soul banners, gently walked out of the Ten Thousand Immortals Formation, and hid under the reeds. Precisely:
根深原是西方客，躲在芦蓬献宝幡。
The roots are originally Western guests, hiding in the reeds to offer treasure banners.
话说通天教主……无心恋战，……欲要退后，又恐教下门人笑话，只得勉强相持。又被老子打了一拐，通天教主着了急，祭起紫电锤来打老子。老子笑曰，“此物怎能近我？”只见顶上现出玲珑宝塔；此锤焉能下来？……只见二十八宿星官已杀得看看殆尽；止邱引见势不好了，借土遁就走。被陆压看见，惟恐追不及，急纵至空中，将葫芦揭开，放出一道白光，上有一物飞出；陆压打一躬，命“宝贝转身”，可怜邱引，头已落地。……且说接引道人在万仙阵内将乾坤袋打开，尽收那三千红气之客。有缘往极乐之乡者，俱收入此袋内。准提同孔雀明王在阵中现二十四头，十八只手，执定璎络，伞盖，花贯，鱼肠，金弓，银戟，白钺，幡，幢，加持神杵，宝锉，银瓶等物，来战通天教主。通天教主看见准提，顿起三昧真火，大骂曰，“好泼道！焉敢欺吾太甚，又来搅吾此阵也！”纵奎牛冲来，仗剑直取，准提将七宝妙树架开。正是：
Speaking of the Tongtian Sect Master...... I have no intention of fighting,...... I wanted to step back, but I was afraid of teaching the people to laugh, so I had to hold on reluctantly. After being beaten by Lao Tzu again, the Tongtian Sect Master became anxious and sacrificed a purple electric hammer to beat Lao Tzu. Lao Tzu smiled and said, "How can this thing get close to me?" "I saw a delicate pagoda appearing on the top; How can this hammer come down? …… I saw that the twenty-eight star officials had been killed and looked at everything; Zhi Qiu saw that the situation was not good, so he borrowed the soil to escape and left. Seeing it by Lu Press, he was afraid that he would not be able to catch up, so he hurriedly jumped into the air, opened the gourd, and released a white light, and something flew out of it; Lu Press bowed and ordered "baby to turn around", poor Qiu Yin, his head had fallen to the ground. …… Let's say that the guide Taoist opened the Qiankun bag in the Ten Thousand Immortals Formation and received all the three thousand red energy guests. Those who are destined to go to the land of bliss are all included in this bag. Zhun Ti and the Peacock Ming King appeared in the formation with twenty-four heads, eighteen hands, holding fixed silk, umbrella covers, flower pierces, fish intestines, golden bows, silver halberds, white axes, banners, banners, blessing pestles, treasure files, silver vases and other things, to fight the Tongtian Sect Master. When the Tongtian Sect Master saw Zhun Ti, he suddenly ignited the true fire of Samadhi and cursed, "What a splash! How dare you bully me too much and come to disturb my formation again? "Even if Kui Niu rushed over, he took it straight with his sword, and Jun Ti set up the Seven Treasures Wonderful Tree. Precisely:
西方极乐无穷法，俱是莲花一化身。（第八十四回）
The Western Infinite Dharma of Bliss is an incarnation of the lotus. (84th)
《三宝太监西洋记通俗演义》亦一百回，题“二南里人编次”。前有万历丁酉（一五九七）菊秋之吉罗懋登叙，罗即撰人。书叙永乐中太监郑和王景宏服外夷三十九国，咸使朝贡事。郑和者，《明史》（三百四《宦官传》）云，“云南人，世所谓三保太监者也。永乐三年，命和及其侪王景宏等通使西洋，将士卒二万七千八百余人，多赍金帛，造大舶，……自苏州刘家河泛海至福建，复自福建五虎门扬帆，首达占城，以次遍历诸国，宣天子诏，因给赐其君长，不服则以武慑之。先后七奉使，所历凡三十余国，所取无名宝物不可胜计，而中国耗费亦不赀。自和后，凡将命海表者，莫不盛称和以夸外蕃，故俗传‘三保太监下西洋’为明初盛事云。”盖郑和之在明代，名声赫然，为世人所乐道，而嘉靖以后，倭患甚殷，民间伤今之弱，又为故事所囿，遂不思将帅而思黄门，集俚俗传闻以成此作，故自序云，“今者东事倥偬，何如西戎即序，不得比西戎即序，何可令王郑二公见”也。惟书则侈谈怪异，专尚荒唐，颇与序言之慷慨不相应，其第一至七回为碧峰长老下生，出家及降魔之事；第八至十四回为碧峰与张天师斗法之事；第十五回以下则郑和挂印，招兵西征，天师及碧峰助之，斩除妖孽，诸国入贡，郑和建祠之事也。所述战事，杂窃《西游记》《封神传》，而文词不工，更增支蔓，特颇有里巷传说，如“五鬼闹判”“五鼠闹东京”故事，皆于此可考见，则亦其所长矣。五鼠事似脱胎于《西游记》二心之争；五鬼事记外夷与明战后，国殇在冥中受谳，多获恶报，遂大哄，纵击判官，其往复辩难之词如下：
《三宝太监西洋记通俗演义》亦一百回，题“二南里人编次”。 前有万历丁酉（一五九七）菊秋之吉罗懋登叙，罗即撰人。 书叙永乐中太监郑和王景宏服外夷三十九国，咸使朝贡事。 郑和者，《明史》（三百四《宦官传》）云，“云南人，世所谓三保太监者也。 永乐三年，命和及其侪王景宏等通使西洋，将士卒二万七千八百余人，多赍金帛，造大舶，…… 自苏州刘家河泛海至福建，复自福建五虎门扬帆，首达占城，以次遍历诸国，宣天子诏，因给赐其君长，不服则以武慑之。 先后七奉使，所历凡三十余国，所取无名宝物不可胜计，而中国耗费亦不赀。 自和后，凡将命海表者，莫不盛称和以夸外蕃，故俗传‘三保太监下西洋’为明初盛事云。 ”盖郑和之在明代，名声赫然，为世人所乐道，而嘉靖以后，倭患甚殷，民间伤今之弱，又为故事所囿，遂不思将帅而思黄门，集俚俗传闻以成此作，故自序云，“今者东事倥偬，何如西戎即序，不得比西戎即序，何可令王郑二公见”也。 惟书则侈谈怪异，专尚荒唐，颇与序言之慷慨不相应，其第一至七回为碧峰长老下生，出家及降魔之事；第八至十四回为碧峰与张天师斗法之事；第十五回以下则郑和挂印，招兵西征，天师及碧峰助之，斩除妖孽，诸国入贡，郑和建祠之事也。 所述战事，杂窃《西游记》《封神传》，而文词不工，更增支蔓，特颇有里巷传说，如“五鬼闹判”“五鼠闹东京”故事，皆于此可考见，则亦其所长矣。 五鼠事似脱胎于《西游记》二心之争；五鬼事记外夷与明战后，国殇在冥中受谳，多获恶报，遂大哄，纵击判官，其往复辩难之词如下：……五鬼道，“纵不是受私卖法，却是查理不清。”阎罗王道，“那一个查理不清？你说来我听着。”劈头就是姜老星说道，“小的是金莲象国一个总兵官，为国忘家，臣子之职，怎么又说道我该送罚恶分司去？以此说来，却不是错为国家出力了么？”崔判官道，“国家苦无大难，怎叫做为国家出力？”姜老星道，“南人宝船千号，战将千员，雄兵百万，势如累卵之危，还说是国家苦无大难？”崔判官道，“南人何曾灭人社稷，吞人土地，贪人财货，怎见得势如累卵之危？”姜老星道，“既是国势不危，我怎肯杀人无厌？”判官道，“南人之来，不过一纸降书，便自足矣，他何曾威逼于人，都是你们偏然强战，这不是杀人无厌么？”咬海干道，“判官大王差矣。我爪哇国五百名鱼眼军一刀两段，三千名步卒煮做一锅，这也是我们强战么？”判官道，“都是你们自取的。”圆眼帖木儿说道，“我们一个人劈作四架，这也是我们强战么？”判官道，“也是你们自取的。”盘龙三太子说道，“我举刀自刎，岂不是他的威逼么？”判官道，“也是你们自取的。”百里雁说道，“我们烧做一个柴头鬼儿，岂不是他的威逼么？”判官道，“也是你们自取的。”五个鬼一齐吆喝起来，说道，“你说甚么自取，自古道‘杀人的偿命，欠债的还钱’，他枉刀杀了我们，你怎么替他们曲断？”判官道，“我这里执法无私，怎叫做曲断？”五鬼说道，“既是执法无私，怎么不断他填还我们人命？”判官道，“不该填还你们！”五鬼说道，“但只‘不该’两个字，就是私弊。”这五个鬼人多口多，乱吆乱喝，嚷做一驮，闹做一块。判官看见他们来得凶，也没奈何，只得站起来喝声道，“唗，甚么人敢在这里胡说！我有私，我这管笔可是容私的？”五个鬼齐齐的走上前去，照手一抢，把管笔夺将下来，说道，“铁笔无私。你这蜘蛛须儿扎的笔，牙齿缝里都是私（丝），敢说得个不容私？”……（第九十回《灵曜府五鬼闹判》）
…… The five ghosts said, "Even if it's not a private sale law, it's Charlie who doesn't know." The King of Hell said, "That Charlie is unclear?" I listen to you. The splitting head was Jiang Laoxing and said, "The little one is a general officer of the Golden Lotus Elephant Kingdom, forgetting his family for the country, and the position of a courtier, why do you say that I should send the evil division to punish the evil division?" In this way, isn't it wrong to contribute to the country? Judge Cui said, "The country is suffering without great difficulties, how can it be called contributing to the country?" Jiang Laoxing said, "The southerners have a thousand treasure ships, thousands of generals, and millions of soldiers, and they are in danger, and it is said that the country is suffering without major difficulties?" Judge Cui said, "How can southerners destroy people's states, swallow people's land, and greed people's wealth? Jiang Laoxing said, "Since the country is not in danger, how can I be willing to kill people insatiably?" The judge said, "The southerners came, just a letter of surrender, and they were self-sufficient, how could he be coerced by others, it was you who fought strongly, isn't this insatiable killing?" "Bite the sea trunk," Judge Wang said. My Java Kingdom's 500 fisheye troops have two sections, and 3,000 infantry are cooked into a pot, is this also our strong battle? The judge said, "You took it all yourself." Round-eyed Timur said, "We split it into four by ourselves, is this also our strong battle?" The judge said, "You also took it yourself." The third prince of Panlong said, "I raised my sword and committed suicide, isn't it his coercion?" The judge said, "You also took it yourself." Bai Liyan said, "Isn't it his coercion for us to burn a firewood ghost?" The judge said, "You also took it yourself." The five ghosts shouted together and said, "What do you say about self-inflicted, since ancient times, it has been said that 'killing people to pay for their lives, and repaying debts', he killed us in vain, how can you judge them for them?" The judge said, "I am selfless in law enforcement here, how can it be called a distorted judgment?" The five ghosts said, "Since law enforcement is selfless, why does he keep filling our lives?" The judge said, "You shouldn't be paid back!" The five ghosts said, "But only the word 'shouldn't' is a private evil." "These five ghosts are talkative, shouting and drinking, shouting and making a car, and making a mess. The judge saw that they were coming, but he had no choice but to stand up and shout, "Hey, who dares to talk nonsense here!" I have a private life, but my pen is private? The five ghosts stepped forward together, grabbed it with their hands, snatched the pen down, and said, "The iron pen is selfless." You spider pen with a whisker is full of private (silk) between your teeth, dare to say that it is not selfish? ”…… (The 90th "Five Ghosts of Lingyao Mansion")《西游补》十六回，天目山樵序云南潜作；南潜者，乌程董说出家后之法名也。说字若雨，生于万历庚申（一六二〇），幼即颖悟，自愿先诵《圆觉经》，次乃读四书及五经，十岁能文，十三入泮，逮见中原流寇之乱，遂绝意进取。明亡，祝发于灵岩，名曰南潜，号月函，其他别字尚甚夥，三十余年不履城市，惟友渔樵，世推为佛门尊宿，有《上堂晚参唱酬语录》（钮琇《觚賸续编》之江抱阳生《甲申朝事小记》）及《丰草庵杂著》十种诗文集若干卷。《西游补》云以入“三调芭蕉扇”之后，叙悟空化斋，为鲭鱼精所迷，渐入梦境，拟寻秦始皇借驱山铎，驱火焰山，徘徊之间，进万镜楼，乃大颠倒，或见过去，或求未来，忽化美人，忽化阎罗，得虚空主人一呼，始离梦境，知鲭鱼本与悟空同时出世，住于“幻部”，自号“青青世界”，一切境界，皆彼所造，而实无有，即“行者情”，故“悟通大道，必先空破情根，破情根必先走入情内，走入情内见得世界情根之虚，然后走出情外认得道根之实”（本书卷首《答问》）。其云鲭鱼精，云青青世界，云小月王者，即皆谓情矣。或以中有“杀青大将军”“倒置历日”诸语，因谓是鼎革之后，所寓微言，然全书实于讥弹明季世风之意多，于宗社之痛之迹少，因疑成书之日，尚当在明亡以前，故但有边事之忧，亦未入释家之奥，主眼所在，仅如时流，谓行者有三个师父，一是祖师，二是唐僧，三是穆王（岳飞）：“凑成三教全身”（第九回）而已。惟其造事遣辞，则丰赡多姿，恍忽善幻，奇突之处，时足惊人，间以俳谐，亦常俊绝，殊非同时作手所敢望也。
《西游补》十六回，天目山樵序云南潜作；南潜者，乌程董说出家后之法名也。 说字若雨，生于万历庚申（一六二〇），幼即颖悟，自愿先诵《圆觉经》，次乃读四书及五经，十岁能文，十三入泮，逮见中原流寇之乱，遂绝意进取。 明亡，祝发于灵岩，名曰南潜，号月函，其他别字尚甚夥，三十余年不履城市，惟友渔樵，世推为佛门尊宿，有《上堂晚参唱酬语录》（钮琇《觚賸续编》之江抱阳生《甲申朝事小记》）及《丰草庵杂著》十种诗文集若干卷。 《西游补》云以入“三调芭蕉扇”之后，叙悟空化斋，为鲭鱼精所迷，渐入梦境，拟寻秦始皇借驱山铎，驱火焰山，徘徊之间，进万镜楼，乃大颠倒，或见过去，或求未来，忽化美人，忽化阎罗，得虚空主人一呼，始离梦境，知鲭鱼本与悟空同时出世，住于“幻部”，自号“青青世界”，一切境界，皆彼所造，而实无有，即“行者情”，故“悟通大道，必先空破情根，破情根必先走入情内，走入情内见得世界情根之虚，然后走出情外认得道根之实”（本书卷首《答问》）。 其云鲭鱼精，云青青世界，云小月王者，即皆谓情矣。 或以中有“杀青大将军”“倒置历日”诸语，因谓是鼎革之后，所寓微言，然全书实于讥弹明季世风之意多，于宗社之痛之迹少，因疑成书之日，尚当在明亡以前，故但有边事之忧，亦未入释家之奥，主眼所在，仅如时流，谓行者有三个师父，一是祖师，二是唐僧，三是穆王（岳飞）：“凑成三教全身”（第九回）而已。 惟其造事遣辞，则丰赡多姿，恍忽善幻，奇突之处，时足惊人，间以俳谐，亦常俊绝，殊非同时作手所敢望也。行者（时化为虞美人与绿珠辈宴后辞出）即时现出原身，抬头看看，原来正是女娲门前。行者大喜道，“我家的天，被小月王差一班踏空使者碎碎凿开，昨日反拖罪名在我身上。……闻得女娲久惯补天，我今日竟央女娲替我补好，方才哭上灵霄，洗个明白，这机会甚妙。”走近门边细细观看，只见两扇黑漆门紧闭，门上贴一纸头，写着“二十日到轩辕家闲话，十日乃归，有慢尊客，先此布罪”。行者看罢，回头就走，耳朵中只听得鸡唱三声，天已将明，走了数百万里，秦始皇只是不见。（第五回）
The walker (who resigned after the banquet with the poppy beauty and the green pearls) immediately appeared in his original form, and when he looked up, it turned out to be in front of Nuwa's door. The traveler was overjoyed, "My family's sky was cut into pieces by a group of messengers sent by King Xiaoyue, and yesterday the charge of dragging was on me." …… I heard that Nuwa has been accustomed to mending the sky for a long time, and I actually asked Nuwa to make up for me today, and then I cried to Lingxiao, and I understood, this opportunity is wonderful. Approaching the door and looking closely, I saw that the two black lacquer doors were closed, and a paper was pasted on the door, which read, "Go to Xuanyuan's house on the 20th to gossip, and return on the 10th. After reading it, the walker turned around and left, only hearing the rooster singing three times in his ears, the sky was about to dawn, and he walked millions of miles, but Qin Shi Huang just disappeared. (5th)忽见一个黑人坐在高阁之上，行者笑道，“古人世界也有贼哩，满面涂了乌煤在此示众。”走了几步，又道，“不是逆贼。原来倒是张飞庙。”又想想道，“既是张飞庙，该带一顶包巾。……带了皇帝帽，又是玄色面孔，此人决是大禹玄帝。我便上前见他，讨些治妖斩魔秘诀，我也不消寻着秦始皇了。”看看走到面前，只见台下立一石竿，竿上插一首飞白旗，旗上写六个紫色字：
Suddenly seeing a black man sitting on a high pavilion, the traveler smiled and said, "There were also thieves in the ancient world, and their faces were smeared with black coal here to show the public." After walking a few steps, he said, "Not a traitor." It turned out to be Zhang Feimiao. Thinking about it again, "Since it is Zhang Fei Temple, you should bring a towel." …… With the emperor's hat and a dark face, this person must be Emperor Xuan of Dayu. I stepped forward to see him and asked for some secrets to curing demons and slaying demons, and I didn't have to look for Qin Shi Huang. Looking at the front of the audience, I saw a stone pole standing under the stage, with a flying white flag inserted on the pole, and six purple characters written on the flag:
“先汉名士项羽。”
"Xiang Yu, a famous scholar of the Han Dynasty."
行者看罢，大笑一场，道，“真个是‘事未来时休去想，想来到底不如心’。老孙疑来疑去，……谁想一些不是，倒是我绿珠楼上的强遥丈夫。”当时又转一念道，“哎哟，吾老孙专为寻秦始皇，替他借个驱山铎子，所以钻入古人世界来，楚伯王在他后头，如今已见了，他却为何不见？我有一个道理：径到台上见了项羽，把始皇消息问他，倒是个着脚信。”行者即时跳起细看，只见高阁之下，……坐着一个美人，耳朵边只听得叫“虞美人虞美人”。……行者登时把身子一摇，仍前变做美人模样，竟上高阁，袖中取出一尺冰罗，不住的掩泪，单单露出半面，望着项羽，似怨似怒。项羽大惊，慌忙跪下，行者背转，项羽又飞趋跪在行者面前，叫“美人，可怜你枕席之人，聊开笑面”。行者也不做声；项羽无奈，只得陪哭。行者方才红着桃花脸儿，指着项羽道，“顽贼！你为赫赫将军，不能庇一女子，有何颜面坐此高台？”项羽只是哭，也不敢答应。行者微露不忍之态，用手扶起道，“常言道，‘男儿两膝有黄金。’你今后不可乱跪！”……（第六回）
After reading it, the traveler laughed and said, "It's really 'don't think about it when things are in the future, and it's not as good as you think'. Lao Sun hesitated,...... Who would have thought that some would not, but it was my strong husband on the Green Pearl Tower. At that time, he turned his mind and said, "Oh, my old grandson is specially looking for Qin Shi Huang and borrowed a mountain bell for him, so he got into the world of the ancients, King Chu Bo is behind him, and now he has seen it, but why doesn't he see it?" I have a reason: I went straight to the stage to meet Xiang Yu and asked him about the news of the First Emperor, but it was a footnote. The traveler immediately jumped up and looked closely, only to see the high pavilion under the ,...... There was a beauty sitting there, and I could only hear the name "Poppy Poppy Poppy" in my ears. …… The walker immediately shook his body, still stepped forward to transform into a beauty, and went up to the high pavilion, took out a foot of ice from his sleeve, couldn't help but cover his tears, only half of his face was exposed, looking at Xiang Yu, as if resentful and angry. Xiang Yu was shocked and hurriedly knelt down, the walker turned his back, and Xiang Yu flew to kneel in front of the walker, calling "Beauty, pity the person who is on your pillow, talk about smiling." The walker did not make a sound; Xiang Yu had no choice but to cry with him. The walker just blushed and pointed at Xiang Yu and said, "Stubborn thief! You are a great general, and you can't protect a woman, so what face do you have to sit on this high platform? Xiang Yu just cried and didn't dare to agree. The walker showed a slight expression of intolerance, and helped him up with his hands, "As the saying goes, 'A man has gold on his knees.' 'You must not kneel down in the future! ”…… (Episode 6)

第十九篇　明之人情小说（上）

第十九篇　明之人情小说（上）

第十九篇　明之人情小说（上）

Chapter 19 Ming Dynasty's Human Novel (Part I)当神魔小说盛行时，记人事者亦突起，其取材犹宋市人小说之“银字儿”，大率为离合悲欢及发迹变态之事，间杂因果报应，而不甚言灵怪，又缘描摹世态，见其炎凉，故或亦谓之“世情书”也。
当神魔小说盛行时，记人事者亦突起，其取材犹宋市人小说之“银字儿”，大率为离合悲欢及发迹变态之事，间杂因果报应，而不甚言灵怪，又缘描摹世态，见其炎凉，故或亦谓之“世情书”也。诸“世情书”中，《金瓶梅》最有名。初惟钞本流传，袁宏道见数卷，即以配《水浒传》为“外典”（《觞政》），故声誉顿盛；世又益以《西游记》，称三大奇书。万历庚戌（一六一〇），吴中始有刻本，计一百回，其五十三至五十七回原阙，刻时所补也（见《野获编》二十五）。作者不知何人，沈德符云是嘉靖间大名士（亦见《野获编》），世因以拟太仓王世贞，或云其门人（康熙乙亥谢颐序云）。由此复生谰言，谓世贞造作此书，乃置毒于纸，以杀其仇严世蕃，或云唐顺之者，故清康熙中彭城张竹坡评刻本，遂有《苦孝说》冠其首。
诸“世情书”中，《金瓶梅》最有名。 初惟钞本流传，袁宏道见数卷，即以配《水浒传》为“外典”（《觞政》），故声誉顿盛；世又益以《西游记》，称三大奇书。 万历庚戌（一六一〇），吴中始有刻本，计一百回，其五十三至五十七回原阙，刻时所补也（见《野获编》二十五）。 作者不知何人，沈德符云是嘉靖间大名士（亦见《野获编》），世因以拟太仓王世贞，或云其门人（康熙乙亥谢颐序云）。 由此复生谰言，谓世贞造作此书，乃置毒于纸，以杀其仇严世蕃，或云唐顺之者，故清康熙中彭城张竹坡评刻本，遂有《苦孝说》冠其首。《金瓶梅》全书假《水浒传》之西门庆为线索，谓庆号四泉，清河人，“不甚读书，终日闲游浪荡”，有一妻三妾，又交“帮闲抹嘴不守本分的人”，结为十弟兄，复悦潘金莲，酖其夫武大，纳以为妾，武松来报仇，寻之不获，误杀李外傅，刺配孟州。而西门庆故无恙，于是日益放恣，通金莲婢春梅，复私李瓶儿，亦纳为妾，“又得两三场横财，家道营盛”。已而李瓶儿生子；庆则因赂蔡京得金吾卫副千户，乃愈肆，求药纵欲受赇枉法无不为。然潘金莲妒李有子，屡设计使受惊，子终以瘈疭死；李痛子亦亡。潘则力媚西门庆，庆一夕饮药逾量，亦暴死。金莲春梅复通于庆婿陈敬济，事发被斥卖，金莲遂出居王婆家待嫁，而武松适遇赦归，因见杀；春梅则卖为周守备妾，有宠，又生子，竟册为夫人。会孙雪娥以遇拐复获发官卖，春梅憾其尝“唆打陈敬济”，则买而折辱之，旋卖于酒家为娼；又称敬济为弟，罗致府中，仍与通。已而守备征宋江有功，擢济南兵马制置，敬济亦列名军门，升为参谋。后金人入寇，守备阵亡，春梅夙通其前妻之子，因亦以淫纵暴卒。比金兵将至清河，庆妻携其遗腹子孝哥欲奔济南，途遇普净和尚，引至永福寺，以因果现梦化之，孝哥遂出家，法名明悟。
《金瓶梅》全书假《水浒传》之西门庆为线索，谓庆号四泉，清河人，“不甚读书，终日闲游浪荡”，有一妻三妾，又交“帮闲抹嘴不守本分的人”，结为十弟兄，复悦潘金莲，酖其夫武大，纳以为妾，武松来报仇，寻之不获，误杀李外傅，刺配孟州。 而西门庆故无恙，于是日益放恣，通金莲婢春梅，复私李瓶儿，亦纳为妾，“又得两三场横财，家道营盛”。 已而李瓶儿生子；庆则因赂蔡京得金吾卫副千户，乃愈肆，求药纵欲受赇枉法无不为。 然潘金莲妒李有子，屡设计使受惊，子终以瘈疭死；李痛子亦亡。 潘则力媚西门庆，庆一夕饮药逾量，亦暴死。 金莲春梅复通于庆婿陈敬济，事发被斥卖，金莲遂出居王婆家待嫁，而武松适遇赦归，因见杀；春梅则卖为周守备妾，有宠，又生子，竟册为夫人。 会孙雪娥以遇拐复获发官卖，春梅憾其尝“唆打陈敬济”，则买而折辱之，旋卖于酒家为娼；又称敬济为弟，罗致府中，仍与通。 已而守备征宋江有功，擢济南兵马制置，敬济亦列名军门，升为参谋。 后金人入寇，守备阵亡，春梅夙通其前妻之子，因亦以淫纵暴卒。 比金兵将至清河，庆妻携其遗腹子孝哥欲奔济南，途遇普净和尚，引至永福寺，以因果现梦化之，孝哥遂出家，法名明悟。作者之于世情，盖诚极洞达，凡所形容，或条畅，或曲折，或刻露而尽相，或幽伏而含讥，或一时并写两面，使之相形，变幻之情，随在显见，同时说部，无以上之，故世以为非王世贞不能作。至谓此书之作，专以写市井间淫夫荡妇，则与本文殊不符，缘西门庆故称世家，为搢绅，不惟交通权贵，即士类亦与周旋，著此一家，即骂尽诸色，盖非独描摹下流言行，加以笔伐而已。
作者之于世情，盖诚极洞达，凡所形容，或条畅，或曲折，或刻露而尽相，或幽伏而含讥，或一时并写两面，使之相形，变幻之情，随在显见，同时说部，无以上之，故世以为非王世贞不能作。 至谓此书之作，专以写市井间淫夫荡妇，则与本文殊不符，缘西门庆故称世家，为搢绅，不惟交通权贵，即士类亦与周旋，著此一家，即骂尽诸色，盖非独描摹下流言行，加以笔伐而已。……妇人（潘金莲）道，“怪奴才，可可儿的来，想起一件事来，我要说又忘了。”因令春梅，“你取那只鞋来与他瞧。”“你认的这鞋是谁的鞋？”西门庆道，“我不知是谁的鞋。”妇人道，“你看他还打张鸡儿哩。瞒着我黄猫黑尾，你干的好茧儿。来旺媳妇子的一只臭蹄子，宝上珠也一般收藏在藏春坞雪洞儿里拜帖匣子内，搅着些字纸和香儿，一处放着。甚么罕稀物件，也不当家化化的，怪不的那贼淫妇死了堕阿鼻地狱。”又指着秋菊骂道，“这奴才当我的鞋，又翻出来，教我打了几下。”分付春梅，“趁早与我掠出去。”春梅把鞋掠在地下，看着秋菊说道，“赏与你穿了罢。”那秋菊拾着鞋儿说道，“娘这个鞋，只好盛我一个脚指头儿罢。”那妇人骂道，“贼奴才，还叫甚么□娘哩。他是你家主子前世的娘！不然，怎的把他的鞋这等收藏的娇贵？到明日好传代。没廉耻的货！”秋菊拿着鞋就往外走，被妇人又叫回来，分付“取刀来，等我把淫妇鞋剁作几截子，掠到茅厕里去，叫贼淫妇阴山背后永世不得超生”。因向西门庆道，“你看着越心疼，我越发偏剁个样儿你瞧。”西门庆笑道，“怪奴才，丢开手罢了，我那里有这个心。”……（第二十八回）
…… The woman (Pan Jinlian) said, "Strange servant, Coke'er came, I remembered something, I wanted to say it and forgot." "Because of Chunmei, "Take that shoe and show him." "Whose shoes do you recognize?" Ximen Qing said, "I don't know whose shoes it is." The woman said, "Look at him, he's still beating a chicken." Hide from me the yellow cat and black tail, you are a good cocoon. A stinky hoof of Laiwang's daughter-in-law, Baoshangzhu is generally stored in the worship box in the snow cave of Zangchunwu, stirring some word paper and incense, and placing it in one place. What rare objects, not family-oriented, no wonder that the thief and prostitute died and fell into the hell of Abi Nose. He pointed to Qiu Ju and scolded, "This slave used as my shoe, turned it out again, and taught me to hit it a few times." "Divide Chunmei," "Sweep it out with me as soon as possible." Chunmei swept her shoes on the ground, looked at Qiu Ju and said, "Reward you and wear it." Na Qiu Ju picked up the shoes and said, "Mother, this shoe can only hold one of my toes." The woman scolded, "Thief servant, what □ mother are you calling." He is the mother of your master's previous life! Otherwise, how could his shoes be so delicate? Tomorrow it will be passed on. Shameless goods! Qiu Ju took the shoes and walked out, but was called back by the woman and paid "take the knife, wait for me to chop the whore's shoes into a few pieces, sweep them into the toilet, and tell the thief and the prosperous woman to be reborn forever behind the Yin Mountain." Because of Xiang Ximenqing, "The more distressed you look at it, the more I chop it up, look." Ximen Qing smiled and said, "Strange servant, just throw away your hand, I have this heart there." ”…… (Episode 28)……掌灯时分，蔡御史便说，“深扰一日，酒告止了罢。”因起身出席。左右便欲掌灯，西门庆道，“且休掌烛。请老先生后边更衣。”于是……让至翡翠轩，……关上角门，只见两个唱的，盛妆打扮，立于阶下，向前插烛也似磕了四个头。……蔡御史看见，欲进不能，欲退不舍，便说道，“四泉，你如何这等爱厚？恐使不得。”西门庆笑道，“与昔日东山之游，又何异乎？”蔡御史道，“恐我不如安石之才，而君有王右军之高致矣。”……因进入轩内，见文物依然，因索纸笔，就欲留题相赠。西门庆即令书童将端溪砚研的墨浓浓的，拂下锦笺。这蔡御史终是状元之才，拈笔在手，文不加点，字走龙蛇，灯下一挥而就，作诗一首。……（第四十九回）
…… When he was in charge of the lamp, Cai Yushi said, "After a day of deep disturbance, the wine stopped." "So I got up and attended. The left and right wanted to hold the lamp, and Ximen Qingdao, "Don't hold the candle for now." Please change clothes in the back, old gentleman. So...... Rang to the Jade Pavilion,...... Closing the corner door, I saw two singers, dressed in makeup, standing at the bottom of the steps, and the candles in front of me seemed to kowtow four times. …… Cai Yushi saw that he couldn't advance and wanted to retreat, so he said, "Siquan, why are you so loving?" I fear it won't work. Ximen Qing smiled, "What is the difference from the trip to Dongshan in the past?" Cai Yushi said, "I'm afraid I am not as talented as Wang Anshi, but you have the nobility of Wang Youjun." ”…… Because he entered the window and saw that the cultural relics were still there, he asked for paper and pen, and wanted to leave a poem to give to him. Ximen Qing immediately ordered the book boy to brush off the brocade paper with thick ink from Duanxi's inkstone. This Cai Yushi is finally the talent of the champion, holding a pen in his hand, the text is not added, the words are dragon and snake, and he can write a poem under the lamp. …… (Episode 49)明小说之宣扬秽德者，人物每有所指，盖借文字以报夙仇，而其是非，则殊难揣测。沈德符谓《金瓶梅》亦斥时事，“蔡京父子则指分宜，林灵素则指陶仲文，朱勔则指陆炳，其它亦各有所属。”则主要如西门庆，自当别有主名，即开篇所谓“有一处人家，先前怎地富贵，到后来煞甚凄凉，权谋术智，一毫也用不着，亲友兄弟，一个也靠不着，享不过几年的荣华，倒做了许多的话靶。内中又有几个斗宠争强迎奸卖俏的，起先好不妖娆妩媚，到后来也免不得尸横灯影，血染空房”（第一回）者是矣。结末稍进，用释家言，谓西门庆遗腹子孝哥方睡在永福寺方丈，普净引其母及众往，指以禅杖，孝哥“翻过身来，却是西门庆，项带沉枷，腰系铁索。复用禅杖只一点，依旧还是孝哥儿睡在床上。……原来孝哥儿即是西门庆托生”（第一百回）。此之事状，固若玮奇，然亦第谓种业留遗，累世如一，出离之道，惟在“明悟”而已。若云孝子衔酷，用此复仇，虽奇谋至行，足为此书生色，而证佐盖阙，不能信也。
Ming novels promote filthy virtues, and the characters often have their own meanings, probably using words to avenge their past grievances, and it is difficult to guess whether they are right or wrong. Shen Defu said that "Jin Ping Mei" also criticized current affairs, "Cai Jing and his son refer to Fen Yi, Lin Lingsu refers to Tao Zhongwen, Zhu Mianli refers to Lu Bing, and others also belong to their own parts." The main thing is Ximen Qing, who should have a different main name, that is, the so-called "There is a family, how rich and noble it was before, and then it was very desolate, and the power and wisdom were not needed at all, relatives, friends and brothers, none of them could be relied upon, and they could not enjoy the glory of a few years, but they made a lot of targets." There are a few more people who fight for favoritism and rape and pretentiousness, at first they are not enchanting and charming, but later they inevitably have corpses and lamps, and blood stains the empty house" (the first time). At the end of the end, in Buddhist language, it is said that Ximen Qing's posthumous son Xiao Ge was sleeping in the abbot of Yongfu Temple, and Pu Jing led his mother and everyone to the place, pointing to the Zen staff, and Xiao Ge "turned over, but it was Ximen Qing, with a shackle around his neck and an iron chain around his waist." I only used a Zen stick again, and I was still sleeping on the bed. …… It turns out that Xiao Ge'er is Ximen Qing's birth" (the hundredth time). The situation here may seem strange, but it can only be said that the legacy of the seed industry has been the same for generations, and the only way to escape is "enlightenment". If it is said that a filial son harbors cruelty and uses this revenge to seek revenge, although it is a clever plan and a good deed, it is enough to make this scholar look beautiful, but the evidence is lacking and cannot be trusted.故就文辞与意象以观《金瓶梅》，则不外描写世情，尽其情伪，又缘衰世，万事不纲，爰发苦言，每极峻急，然亦时涉隐曲，猥黩者多。后或略其他文，专注此点，因予恶谥，谓之“淫书”；而在当时，实亦时尚。成化时，方士李孜僧继晓已以献房中术骤贵，至嘉靖间而陶仲文以进红铅得幸于世宗，官至特进光禄大夫柱国少师少傅少保礼部尚书恭诚伯。于是颓风渐及士流，都御史盛端明布政使参议顾可学皆以进士起家，而俱借“秋石方”致大位。瞬息显荣，世俗所企羡，侥幸者多竭智力以求奇方，世间乃渐不以纵谈闺帏方药之事为耻。风气既变，并及文林，故自方士进用以来，方药盛，妖心兴，而小说亦多神魔之谈，且每叙床笫之事也。
故就文辞与意象以观《金瓶梅》，则不外描写世情，尽其情伪，又缘衰世，万事不纲，爰发苦言，每极峻急，然亦时涉隐曲，猥黩者多。 后或略其他文，专注此点，因予恶谥，谓之“淫书”；而在当时，实亦时尚。 成化时，方士李孜僧继晓已以献房中术骤贵，至嘉靖间而陶仲文以进红铅得幸于世宗，官至特进光禄大夫柱国少师少傅少保礼部尚书恭诚伯。 于是颓风渐及士流，都御史盛端明布政使参议顾可学皆以进士起家，而俱借“秋石方”致大位。 瞬息显荣，世俗所企羡，侥幸者多竭智力以求奇方，世间乃渐不以纵谈闺帏方药之事为耻。 风气既变，并及文林，故自方士进用以来，方药盛，妖心兴，而小说亦多神魔之谈，且每叙床笫之事也。然《金瓶梅》作者能文，故虽间杂猥词，而其他佳处自在，至于末流，则著意所写，专在性交，又越常情，如有狂疾，惟《肉蒲团》意想颇似李渔，较为出类而已。其尤下者则意欲媟语，而未能文，乃作小书，刊布于世，中经禁断，今多不传。
然《金瓶梅》作者能文，故虽间杂猥词，而其他佳处自在，至于末流，则著意所写，专在性交，又越常情，如有狂疾，惟《肉蒲团》意想颇似李渔，较为出类而已。 其尤下者则意欲媟语，而未能文，乃作小书，刊布于世，中经禁断，今多不传。万历时又有名《玉娇李》者，云亦出《金瓶梅》作者之手。袁宏道曾闻大略，谓“与前书各设报应因果，武大后世化为淫夫，上蒸下报；潘金莲亦作河间妇，终以极刑；西门庆则一憨男子，坐视妻妾外遇，以见轮回不爽”。后沈德符见首卷，以为“秽黩百端，背伦蔑理，……其帝则称完颜大定，而贵溪（夏言）分宜（严嵩）相构，亦暗寓焉。至嘉靖辛丑庶常诸公，则直书姓名，尤可骇怪。……然笔锋恣横酣畅，似尤胜《金瓶梅》”（皆见《野获编》二十五）。今其书已佚，虽或偶有见者，而文章事迹，皆与袁沈之言不类，盖后人影撰，非当时所见本也。
万历时又有名《玉娇李》者，云亦出《金瓶梅》作者之手。 袁宏道曾闻大略，谓“与前书各设报应因果，武大后世化为淫夫，上蒸下报；潘金莲亦作河间妇，终以极刑；西门庆则一憨男子，坐视妻妾外遇，以见轮回不爽”。 后沈德符见首卷，以为“秽黩百端，背伦蔑理，…… 其帝则称完颜大定，而贵溪（夏言）分宜（严嵩）相构，亦暗寓焉。 至嘉靖辛丑庶常诸公，则直书姓名，尤可骇怪。 …… 然笔锋恣横酣畅，似尤胜《金瓶梅》”（皆见《野获编》二十五）。 今其书已佚，虽或偶有见者，而文章事迹，皆与袁沈之言不类，盖后人影撰，非当时所见本也。《续金瓶梅》前后集共六十四回，题“紫阳道人编”。自言东汉时辽东三韩有仙人丁令威；后五百年而临安西湖有仙人丁野鹤，临化遗言，“说‘五百年后又有一人名丁野鹤，是我后身，来此相访’。后至明末，果有东海一人，名姓相同，来此罢官而去，自称紫阳道人。”（六十二回）卷首有《太上感应篇阴阳无字解》，署“鲁诸邑丁耀亢参解”，序有云，“自奸杞焚予《天史》于南都，海桑既变，不复讲因果事，今见圣天子钦颁《感应篇》，自制御序，戒谕臣工。”则《续金瓶梅》当成于清初，而丁耀亢即其撰人矣。耀亢字西生，号野鹤，山东诸城人，弱冠为诸生，走江南与诸名士联文社，既归，郁郁不得志，作《天史》十卷。清顺治四年入京，由顺天籍拔贡，充镶白旗教习，诗名甚盛。后为容城教谕，迁惠安知县，不赴，六十后病目，自称木鸡道人，年七十二卒（约一六二〇——一六九一），所著有诗集十余卷，传奇四种（乾隆《诸城志》十三及三六）。《天史》者，类历代吉凶诸事而成，焚于南都，未详其实，《诸城志》但云“以献益都钟羽正，羽正奇之”而已。
《续金瓶梅》前后集共六十四回，题“紫阳道人编”。 自言东汉时辽东三韩有仙人丁令威；后五百年而临安西湖有仙人丁野鹤，临化遗言，“说‘五百年后又有一人名丁野鹤，是我后身，来此相访’。 后至明末，果有东海一人，名姓相同，来此罢官而去，自称紫阳道人。 ”（六十二回）卷首有《太上感应篇阴阳无字解》，署“鲁诸邑丁耀亢参解”，序有云，“自奸杞焚予《天史》于南都，海桑既变，不复讲因果事，今见圣天子钦颁《感应篇》，自制御序，戒谕臣工。 ”则《续金瓶梅》当成于清初，而丁耀亢即其撰人矣。 耀亢字西生，号野鹤，山东诸城人，弱冠为诸生，走江南与诸名士联文社，既归，郁郁不得志，作《天史》十卷。 清顺治四年入京，由顺天籍拔贡，充镶白旗教习，诗名甚盛。 后为容城教谕，迁惠安知县，不赴，六十后病目，自称木鸡道人，年七十二卒（约一六二〇——一六九一），所著有诗集十余卷，传奇四种（乾隆《诸城志》十三及三六）。 《天史》者，类历代吉凶诸事而成，焚于南都，未详其实，《诸城志》但云“以献益都钟羽正，羽正奇之”而已。《续金瓶梅》主意殊单简，前集谓普净是地藏菩萨化身，一日施食，以轮回大簿指点众鬼，俾知将来恶报，后悉如言。西门庆为汴京富室沈越子，名曰金哥，越之妻弟袁指挥居对门，有女常姐，则李瓶儿后身，尝在沈氏宅打秋千，为李师师所见，艳其美，矫旨取之，改名银瓶。金人陷汴，民众流离，金哥遂沦为乞丐；银瓶则为娼，通郑玉卿，后嫁为翟员外妾，又与郑偕遁至扬州，为苗青所赚，乃自经死。后集则叙东京孔千户女名梅玉者，以艳羡富贵，自甘为金人金哈木儿妾，而大妇“凶妒”，篡取虐使之，梅玉欲自裁，因梦自知是春梅后身，大妇则孙雪娥再世，遂长斋念佛，不生嗔恨，竟得脱离。至潘金莲则转生为山东黎指挥女，名金桂，夫曰刘瘸子，其前生实为陈敬济，以夙业故，体貌不全，金桂怨愤，因招妖蛊，又缘受惊，终成痼疾也。
《续金瓶梅》主意殊单简，前集谓普净是地藏菩萨化身，一日施食，以轮回大簿指点众鬼，俾知将来恶报，后悉如言。 西门庆为汴京富室沈越子，名曰金哥，越之妻弟袁指挥居对门，有女常姐，则李瓶儿后身，尝在沈氏宅打秋千，为李师师所见，艳其美，矫旨取之，改名银瓶。 金人陷汴，民众流离，金哥遂沦为乞丐；银瓶则为娼，通郑玉卿，后嫁为翟员外妾，又与郑偕遁至扬州，为苗青所赚，乃自经死。 后集则叙东京孔千户女名梅玉者，以艳羡富贵，自甘为金人金哈木儿妾，而大妇“凶妒”，篡取虐使之，梅玉欲自裁，因梦自知是春梅后身，大妇则孙雪娥再世，遂长斋念佛，不生嗔恨，竟得脱离。 至潘金莲则转生为山东黎指挥女，名金桂，夫曰刘瘸子，其前生实为陈敬济，以夙业故，体貌不全，金桂怨愤，因招妖蛊，又缘受惊，终成痼疾也。余文俱述他人牵缠孽报，而以国家大事，穿插其间，又杂引佛典道经儒理，详加解释，动辄数百言，顾什九以《感应篇》为归宿，所谓“要说佛说道说理学，先从因果说起，因果无凭，又从《金瓶梅》说起”（第一回）也。明之“淫书”作者，本好以阐明因果自解，至于此书，则因见“只有夫妇一伦，变故极多，……造出许多冤业，世世偿还，真是爱河自溺，欲火自煎，一部《金瓶梅》说了个色字，一部《续金瓶梅》说了个空字，从色还空，即空是色，乃自果报，转入佛法”（四十三回）矣。然所谓佛法，复甚不纯，仍混儒道，与神魔小说诸作家意想无甚异，惟似较重力行，又欲无所执著，故亦颇讥当时空谈三教一致及妄分三教等差者之弊，如述李师师旧宅收没入官，立为大觉尼寺，儒道又出而纷争，即其例也：
余文俱述他人牵缠孽报，而以国家大事，穿插其间，又杂引佛典道经儒理，详加解释，动辄数百言，顾什九以《感应篇》为归宿，所谓“要说佛说道说理学，先从因果说起，因果无凭，又从《金瓶梅》说起”（第一回）也。 明之“淫书”作者，本好以阐明因果自解，至于此书，则因见“只有夫妇一伦，变故极多，…… 造出许多冤业，世世偿还，真是爱河自溺，欲火自煎，一部《金瓶梅》说了个色字，一部《续金瓶梅》说了个空字，从色还空，即空是色，乃自果报，转入佛法”（四十三回）矣。 然所谓佛法，复甚不纯，仍混儒道，与神魔小说诸作家意想无甚异，惟似较重力行，又欲无所执著，故亦颇讥当时空谈三教一致及妄分三教等差者之弊，如述李师师旧宅收没入官，立为大觉尼寺，儒道又出而纷争，即其例也：……这里大觉寺兴隆佛事不题。后因天坛道官并阖学生员争这块地，上司断决不开，各在兀术太子营里上了一本，说道“这李师师府地宽大，僧妓杂居，单给尼姑盖寺，恐久生事端，宜作公所。其后半花园，应分割一半，作三教堂，为儒释道三教讲堂。”王爷准了，才息了三处争讼。那道官见自己不独得，又是三分四裂的，不来照管。这开封府秀才吴蹈理卜守分两个无耻生员，借此为名，也就贴了公帖，每人三钱，倒敛了三四百两分资。不日盖起三间大殿，原是释迦佛居中，老子居左，孔子居右，只因不肯倒了自家门面，便把孔夫子居中，佛老分为左右，以见贬黜异端外道的意思。把那园中台榭池塘，和那两间妆阁，当日银瓶做过卧房的，改作书房。……这些风流秀士，有趣文人，和那浮浪子弟们，也不讲禅，也不讲道，每日在三教堂饮酒赋诗，倒讲了个色字，好个快活所在。题曰三空书院，无非说三教俱空之意。……（第三十七回上《三教堂青楼成净土》）
…… The Dajue Temple here is not a title. Later, because the Temple of Heaven Taoist officials and students fought for this land, the boss decided not to open it, and each of them wrote a book in the Wushu prince's camp, saying, "This Li Shishi's mansion is large, monks and prostitutes live together, and the nuns build a temple alone, for fear of long-term troubles, and it is suitable to be a public office." The second half of the garden should be divided into three churches, which are the lecture halls of Confucianism, Buddhism, Taoism, and Taoism. "The prince allowed it, and only then did he settle three disputes. The Taoist official saw that he was not alone, but also torn apart, so he didn't come to take care of him. This Kaifeng Prefecture scholar Wu Duli Bu Shoufen divided two shameless students, and in the name of this, he also posted an official post, three yuan each, and collected three or four hundred taels of money. Three halls were built in a few days, originally Shakyamuni Buddha was in the center, Laozi was on the left, and Confucius was on the right, but because he refused to collapse his own façade, he put Confucius in the center, and the Buddha and Laozi were divided into left and right, so as to see the meaning of belittling heresy and heresy. The terrace and pond in the garden, and the two dressing rooms, the silver vase that used to be made into a bedroom, were converted into a study. …… These romantic scholars, interesting literati, and the children of the vagrants do not talk about Zen or preach, and drink and compose poetry in the three churches every day. The title is "Three Empty Academy", which means that the three religions are empty. …… (The thirty-seventh episode of "Three Churches and Brothels Become Pure Land")又有《隔帘花影》四十八回，世亦以为《金瓶梅》后本，而实乃改易《续金瓶梅》中人名（如以西门庆为南宫吉之类）及回目，并删略其絮说因果语而成，书末不完，盖将续作，然未出。一名《三世报》，殆包举将来拟续之事；或并以武大被酖，亦为夙业，合数之得三世也。
又有《隔帘花影》四十八回，世亦以为《金瓶梅》后本，而实乃改易《续金瓶梅》中人名（如以西门庆为南宫吉之类）及回目，并删略其絮说因果语而成，书末不完，盖将续作，然未出。 一名《三世报》，殆包举将来拟续之事；或并以武大被酖，亦为夙业，合数之得三世也。

第二十篇　明之人情小说（下）

第二十篇　明之人情小说（下）

第二十篇　明之人情小说（下）

Chapter 20 Ming Dynasty's Human Novel (Part II)《金瓶梅》《玉娇李》等既为世所艳称，学步者纷起，而一面又生异流，人物事状皆不同，惟书名尚多蹈袭，如《玉娇梨》《平山冷燕》等皆是也。至所叙述，则大率才子佳人之事，而以文雅风流缀其间，功名遇合为之主，始或乖违，终多如意，故当时或亦称为“佳话”。察其意旨，每有与唐人传奇近似者，而又不相关，盖缘所述人物，多为才人，故时代虽殊，事迹辄类，因而偶合，非必出于仿效矣。《玉娇梨》《平山冷燕》有法文译，又有名《好逑传》者则有法德文译，故在外国特有名，远过于其在中国。
《金瓶梅》《玉娇李》等既为世所艳称，学步者纷起，而一面又生异流，人物事状皆不同，惟书名尚多蹈袭，如《玉娇梨》《平山冷燕》等皆是也。 至所叙述，则大率才子佳人之事，而以文雅风流缀其间，功名遇合为之主，始或乖违，终多如意，故当时或亦称为“佳话”。 察其意旨，每有与唐人传奇近似者，而又不相关，盖缘所述人物，多为才人，故时代虽殊，事迹辄类，因而偶合，非必出于仿效矣。 《玉娇梨》《平山冷燕》有法文译，又有名《好逑传》者则有法德文译，故在外国特有名，远过于其在中国。《玉娇梨》今或改题《双美奇缘》，无撰人名氏。全书仅二十回，叙明正统间有太常卿白玄者，无子，晚年得一女曰红玉，甚有文才，以代父作菊花诗为客所知，御史杨廷诏因求为子杨芳妇，玄招芳至家，属妻弟翰林吴珪试之。
《玉娇梨》今或改题《双美奇缘》，无撰人名氏。 全书仅二十回，叙明正统间有太常卿白玄者，无子，晚年得一女曰红玉，甚有文才，以代父作菊花诗为客所知，御史杨廷诏因求为子杨芳妇，玄招芳至家，属妻弟翰林吴珪试之。……吴翰林陪杨芳在轩子边立着。杨芳抬头，忽见上面横着一个扁额，题的是“弗告轩”三字。杨芳自恃认得这三个字，便只管注目而视。吴翰林见杨芳细看，便说道，“此三字乃是聘君吴与弼所书，点画遒劲，可称名笔。”杨芳要卖弄识字，因答道，“果是名笔，这轩字也还平常，这弗告二字写得入神。”却将告字读了去声，不知弗告二字，盖取《诗经》上“弗谖弗告”之义，这“告”字当读与“谷”字同音。吴翰林听了，心下明白，便模糊答应。……（第二回）
…… Wu Hanlin accompanied Yang Fang to stand by Xuanzi. Yang Fang looked up and suddenly saw a flat forehead on it, inscribed with the words "Fu Gao Xuan". Yang Fang relied on recognizing these three words, so she just stared at them. Wu Hanlin saw Yang Fang looking closely, so he said, "These three words are written by Wu Yubi, the king of the hired king, and the dot painting is vigorous, which can be called a famous pen." Yang Fang wanted to show off his literacy, so he replied, "If it is a famous pen, this Xuan character is also ordinary, and the word Fugao is written in a daze." But the word "gao" is read to the sound, and I don't know the word "not telling", which is the meaning of "not telling" in the Book of Songs, and the word "gao" should be read as the same as the word "valley". Wu Hanlin listened and understood in his heart, so he vaguely agreed. …… (Part 2)白玄遂不允。杨以为怨，乃荐玄赴乜先营中迎上皇，玄托其女于吴翰林而去。吴珪即挈红玉归金陵，偶见苏友白题壁诗，爱其才，欲以红玉嫁之。友白误相新妇，竟不从。珪怒，嘱学官革友白秀才，学官方踌蹰，而白玄还朝加官归乡之报适至，即依黜之。友白被革，将入京就其叔，于道中见数少年苦吟，乃方和白红玉新柳诗；谓有能步韵者，即嫁之也。友白亦和两首，而张轨如遽窃以献白玄，玄留之为西宾。已而有苏有德者又冒为友白，请婚于白氏，席上见张，互相攻讦，俱败。友白见红玉新柳诗，慕之，遂渡江而北，欲托吴珪求婚；途次遇盗，暂舍于李氏，偶遇一少年曰卢梦梨，甚服友白之才，因以其妹之终身相托。友白遂入京以监生应试，中第二名；再访卢，则已以避祸远徙，乃大失望。不知卢实白红玉之中表，已先赴金陵依白氏也。白玄难于得婿，易姓名游山阴，于禹迹寺见一少年姓柳，才识非常，次日往访，即字以己女及甥女，归而说其故云：
白玄遂不允。 杨以为怨，乃荐玄赴乜先营中迎上皇，玄托其女于吴翰林而去。 吴珪即挈红玉归金陵，偶见苏友白题壁诗，爱其才，欲以红玉嫁之。 友白误相新妇，竟不从。 珪怒，嘱学官革友白秀才，学官方踌蹰，而白玄还朝加官归乡之报适至，即依黜之。 友白被革，将入京就其叔，于道中见数少年苦吟，乃方和白红玉新柳诗；谓有能步韵者，即嫁之也。 友白亦和两首，而张轨如遽窃以献白玄，玄留之为西宾。 已而有苏有德者又冒为友白，请婚于白氏，席上见张，互相攻讦，俱败。 友白见红玉新柳诗，慕之，遂渡江而北，欲托吴珪求婚；途次遇盗，暂舍于李氏，偶遇一少年曰卢梦梨，甚服友白之才，因以其妹之终身相托。 友白遂入京以监生应试，中第二名；再访卢，则已以避祸远徙，乃大失望。 不知卢实白红玉之中表，已先赴金陵依白氏也。 白玄难于得婿，易姓名游山阴，于禹迹寺见一少年姓柳，才识非常，次日往访，即字以己女及甥女，归而说其故云：……“……忽遇一个少年，姓柳，也是金陵人。他人物风流，真个是‘谢家玉树’。……我看他神清骨秀，学博才高，旦暮间便当飞腾翰苑。……意欲将红玉嫁他，又恐甥女说我偏心；欲要配了甥女，又恐红玉说我矫情。除了柳生，若要再寻一个，却万万不能。我想娥皇女英同事一舜，古圣人已有行之者；我又见你姊妹二人互相爱慕，不啻良友，我也不忍分开：故当面一口就都许他了。这件事我做得甚是快意。”……（第十九回）
……“…… Suddenly, he met a young man named Liu, who was also from Jinling. His character is romantic, and he is really 'Xie Jia Yushu'. …… I see that he is clear and beautiful, well-educated, and talented, and sooner or later he will soar to the Hanyuan. …… I want to marry Hongyu to him, but I am afraid that my niece will say that I am partial; I want to marry my niece, but I am afraid that Ruby will say that I am hypocritical. In addition to Yanagi, if you want to find another one, you absolutely cannot. I think that the Queen of E and the Ying colleague Yi Shun, the ancient sages have already done it; I also saw that your two sisters admired each other, not only as good friends, but I couldn't bear to be separated: so I promised him in person. I am very happy with this. ”…… (19th)而二女皆慕友白，闻之甚怏怏。已而柳至白氏，自言实苏友白，盖尔时亦变姓名游山阴也。玄亦告以真姓名，皆大惊喜出意外，遂成婚。而卢梦梨实女子，其先乃改装自托于友白者云。
而二女皆慕友白，闻之甚怏怏。 已而柳至白氏，自言实苏友白，盖尔时亦变姓名游山阴也。 玄亦告以真姓名，皆大惊喜出意外，遂成婚。 而卢梦梨实女子，其先乃改装自托于友白者云。《平山冷燕》亦二十回，题云“荻岸山人编次”。清盛百二（《柚堂续笔谈》）以为嘉兴张博山十四五时作，其父执某续成之。博山名劭，清康熙时人，“少有成童之目，九龄作《梅花赋》惊其师。”（阮元《两浙轩录》七引李方湛语）盖早慧，故世人并以此书附著于彼，然文意陈腐，殊不类童子所为。书叙“先朝”隆盛时事，而又不云何时作，故亦莫详“先朝”为何帝也。其时钦天监正堂官奏奎壁流光，散满天下，天子则大悦，诏求真才，又适见白燕盘旋，乃命百官赋白燕诗，众谢不能，大学士山显仁乃献其女山黛之作，诗云：
《平山冷燕》亦二十回，题云“荻岸山人编次”。 清盛百二（《柚堂续笔谈》）以为嘉兴张博山十四五时作，其父执某续成之。 博山名劭，清康熙时人，“少有成童之目，九龄作《梅花赋》惊其师。 ”（阮元《两浙轩录》七引李方湛语）盖早慧，故世人并以此书附著于彼，然文意陈腐，殊不类童子所为。 书叙“先朝”隆盛时事，而又不云何时作，故亦莫详“先朝”为何帝也。 其时钦天监正堂官奏奎壁流光，散满天下，天子则大悦，诏求真才，又适见白燕盘旋，乃命百官赋白燕诗，众谢不能，大学士山显仁乃献其女山黛之作，诗云：夕阳凭吊素心稀，遁入梨花无是非，淡去羞从鸦借色，瘦来只许雪添肥，飞回夜黑还留影，衔尽春红不涴衣，多少朱门夸富贵，终能容我洁身归。（第一回）
The sunset relies on the simple heart to hang the heart, escaping into the pear blossom without right or wrong, fading away from the shame to borrow color from the crow, thin only allowed snow to add fat, flying back to the night and leaving a shadow, holding the spring red without wet clothes, how many red doors boast of wealth, can finally allow me to return clean. (Part 1)天子即召见，令献策，称旨，赐玉尺一条，“以此量天下之才”；金如意一执，“文可以指挥翰墨，武可以扞御强暴，长成择婿，有妄人强求，即以此击其首，击死勿论”；又赐御书扁额一方曰“弘文才女”。时黛方十岁；其父筑楼以贮玉尺，谓之玉尺楼，亦即为黛读书之所，于是才女之名大著，求诗文者云集矣。后黛以诗嘲一贵介子弟，被怨，托人诬以诗文皆非己出，又奉旨令文臣赴玉尺楼与黛较试，文臣不能及，诬者获罪而黛之名益扬。其时又有村女冷绛雪者，亦幼即能诗，忤山人宋信，信以计陷之，俾官买送山氏为侍婢。绛雪于道中题诗而遇洛阳才人平如衡，然指顾间又相失；既至山氏，自显其才，则大得敬爱，且亦以题诗为天子所知也。平如衡至云间访才士，得燕白颔，家世富贵而有大才，能诗。长官俱荐于朝，二人不欲以荐举出身，乃皆入都应试，且改姓名求见山黛。黛早见其讥刺诗，因与绛雪易装为青衣，试以诗，唱和再三，二人竟屈，辞去。又有张寅者，亦以求婚至山氏，受试于玉尺楼下，张不能文，大受愚弄，复因奔突登楼，几被如意击死，至拜祷始免。张乃嘱礼官奏于朝，谓黛与少年唱和调笑，有伤风化。天子即拘讯；张又告发二人实平燕托名，而适榜发，平中会元，燕会魁。于是天子大喜，谕山显仁择之为婿，遂以山黛嫁燕白颔，冷绛雪嫁平如衡。成婚之日，凡事无不美满：
天子即召见，令献策，称旨，赐玉尺一条，“以此量天下之才”；金如意一执，“文可以指挥翰墨，武可以扞御强暴，长成择婿，有妄人强求，即以此击其首，击死勿论”；又赐御书扁额一方曰“弘文才女”。 时黛方十岁；其父筑楼以贮玉尺，谓之玉尺楼，亦即为黛读书之所，于是才女之名大著，求诗文者云集矣。 后黛以诗嘲一贵介子弟，被怨，托人诬以诗文皆非己出，又奉旨令文臣赴玉尺楼与黛较试，文臣不能及，诬者获罪而黛之名益扬。 其时又有村女冷绛雪者，亦幼即能诗，忤山人宋信，信以计陷之，俾官买送山氏为侍婢。 绛雪于道中题诗而遇洛阳才人平如衡，然指顾间又相失；既至山氏，自显其才，则大得敬爱，且亦以题诗为天子所知也。 平如衡至云间访才士，得燕白颔，家世富贵而有大才，能诗。 长官俱荐于朝，二人不欲以荐举出身，乃皆入都应试，且改姓名求见山黛。 黛早见其讥刺诗，因与绛雪易装为青衣，试以诗，唱和再三，二人竟屈，辞去。 又有张寅者，亦以求婚至山氏，受试于玉尺楼下，张不能文，大受愚弄，复因奔突登楼，几被如意击死，至拜祷始免。 张乃嘱礼官奏于朝，谓黛与少年唱和调笑，有伤风化。 天子即拘讯；张又告发二人实平燕托名，而适榜发，平中会元，燕会魁。 于是天子大喜，谕山显仁择之为婿，遂以山黛嫁燕白颔，冷绛雪嫁平如衡。 成婚之日，凡事无不美满：……二女上轿，随妆侍妾足有上百，一路火炮与鼓乐喧天，彩旗共花灯夺目，真个是天子赐婚，宰相嫁女，状元探花娶妻：一时富贵，占尽人间之盛。……若非真正有才，安能如此？至今京城中俱传平山冷燕为四才子；闲窗阅史，不胜欣慕而为之立传云。（第二十回）
…… 二女上轿，随妆侍妾足有上百，一路火炮与鼓乐喧天，彩旗共花灯夺目，真个是天子赐婚，宰相嫁女，状元探花娶妻：一时富贵，占尽人间之盛。 …… 若非真正有才，安能如此？至今京城中俱传平山冷燕为四才子；闲窗阅史，不胜欣慕而为之立传云。 （第二十回）二书大旨，皆显扬女子，颂其异能，又颇薄制艺而尚词华，重俊髦而嗤俗士，然所谓才者，惟在能诗，所举佳篇，复多鄙倍，如乡曲学究之为；又凡求偶必经考试，成婚待于诏旨，则当时科举思想之所牢笼，倘作者无不羁之才，固不能冲决而高翥矣。
二书大旨，皆显扬女子，颂其异能，又颇薄制艺而尚词华，重俊髦而嗤俗士，然所谓才者，惟在能诗，所举佳篇，复多鄙倍，如乡曲学究之为；又凡求偶必经考试，成婚待于诏旨，则当时科举思想之所牢笼，倘作者无不羁之才，固不能冲决而高翥矣。《好逑传》十八回，一名《侠义风月传》，题云“名教中人编次”。其立意亦略如前二书，惟文辞较佳，人物之性格亦稍异，所谓“既美且才，美而又侠”者也。书言有秀才铁中玉者，北直隶大名府人，
《好逑传》十八回，一名《侠义风月传》，题云“名教中人编次”。 其立意亦略如前二书，惟文辞较佳，人物之性格亦稍异，所谓“既美且才，美而又侠”者也。 书言有秀才铁中玉者，北直隶大名府人，……生得丰姿俊秀，就像一个美人，因此里中起个诨名，叫做“铁美人”。若论他人品秀美，性格就该温存。不料他人虽生得秀美，性子就似生铁一般，十分执拗；又有几分膂力，动不动就要使气动粗；等闲也不轻易见他言笑。……更有一段好处，人若缓急求他，……慨然周济；若是谀言谄媚，指望邀惠，他却只当不曾听见：所以人都感激他，又都不敢无故亲近他。……（第一回）
…… She was born handsome, like a beauty, so she got a nickname, called "Iron Beauty". If you talk about the beauty of others, your character should be warm. Unexpectedly, although others were born beautiful, their temperament was like cast iron, and they were very stubborn; There is also a bit of physical strength, and the air must be thick at every turn; It is not easy to see him laughing and laughing. …… There is also a benefit, if people ask him in an emergency,...... Generous and helpful; If he flattered and hoped for favors, he would just pretend not to hear it: so everyone was grateful to him, but they didn't dare to get close to him for no reason. …… (Part 1)其父铁英为御史，中玉虑以鲠直得祸，入都谏之。会大夬侯沙利夺韩愿妻，即施智计夺以还愿，大得义侠之称。然中玉亦惧祸，不敢留都，乃至山东游学。历城退职兵部侍郎水居一有一女曰冰心，甚美，而才识胜男子。同县有过其祖者，大学士之子，强来求婚，水居一不敢拒，然以侄女易冰心嫁之，婚后始觉，其祖大恨，计陷居一，复百方图女，而冰心皆以智免。过其祖又托县令假传朝旨逼冰心，而中玉适在历城，遇之，斥其伪，计又败。冰心因此甚服铁中玉，当中玉暴病，乃邀寓其家护视，历五日始去。此后过其祖仍再三图娶冰心，皆不得。而中玉卒与冰心成婚，然不合卺，已而过学士托御史万谔奏二氏婚媾，先以“孤男寡女，共处一室，不无暧昧之情，今父母循私，招摇道路而纵成之，实有伤于名教”。有旨查复。后皇帝知二人虽成礼而未同居，乃召冰心令皇后验试，果为贞女，于是诬蔑者皆被诘责，而誉水铁为“真好逑中出类拔萃者”，令重结花烛，以光名教，且云“汝归宜益懋后德以彰风化”也。
其父铁英为御史，中玉虑以鲠直得祸，入都谏之。 会大夬侯沙利夺韩愿妻，即施智计夺以还愿，大得义侠之称。 然中玉亦惧祸，不敢留都，乃至山东游学。 历城退职兵部侍郎水居一有一女曰冰心，甚美，而才识胜男子。 同县有过其祖者，大学士之子，强来求婚，水居一不敢拒，然以侄女易冰心嫁之，婚后始觉，其祖大恨，计陷居一，复百方图女，而冰心皆以智免。 过其祖又托县令假传朝旨逼冰心，而中玉适在历城，遇之，斥其伪，计又败。 冰心因此甚服铁中玉，当中玉暴病，乃邀寓其家护视，历五日始去。 此后过其祖仍再三图娶冰心，皆不得。 而中玉卒与冰心成婚，然不合卺，已而过学士托御史万谔奏二氏婚媾，先以“孤男寡女，共处一室，不无暧昧之情，今父母循私，招摇道路而纵成之，实有伤于名教”。 有旨查复。 后皇帝知二人虽成礼而未同居，乃召冰心令皇后验试，果为贞女，于是诬蔑者皆被诘责，而誉水铁为“真好逑中出类拔萃者”，令重结花烛，以光名教，且云“汝归宜益懋后德以彰风化”也。又有《铁花仙史》二十六回。题“云封山人编次”。言钱唐蔡其志与好友王悦共游于祖遗之埋剑园，赏芙蓉，至花落方别。后入都又相遇，已各有儿女在襁褓，乃约为婚姻，往来愈密。王悦子曰儒珍，七岁能诗，与同窗陈秋麟皆十三四入泮，尝借寓埋剑园，邀友赏花赋诗。秋麟夜遇女子，自称符剑花，后屡至，一夕暴风雨拔去玉芙蓉，乃绝。后王氏衰落，儒珍又不第，蔡嫌其穷困，欲以女改适夏元虚，时秋麟已中解元，急谋于密友苏紫宸，托媒得之，拟临时归儒珍，而蔡女若兰竟逸去，为紫宸之叔诚斋所收养。夏元虚为世家子而无行，怒其妹瑶枝时加讥讪，因荐之应点选；瑶枝被征入都，中途舟破，亦为诚斋所救。诚斋又招儒珍为西宾，而蔡其志晚年孤寂，亦屡来迎王，养以为子，亦发解，娶诚斋之女馨如。秋麟求婚夏瑶枝，诚斋未许，一夕女自来，乃偕遁。时紫宸已平海寇，成神仙，忽遗王陈二人书，言真瑶枝故在苏氏，偕遁者实花妖，教二人以五雷法治之，妖即逸去，诚斋亦终以真瑶枝许之。一日儒珍至苏氏，忽睹若兰旧婢，甚惊；诚斋乃确知所收蔡女，故为儒珍聘妇，亦以归儒珍。后来两家夫妇皆年逾八十，以服紫宸所赠金丹，一夕无疾而终，世以为尸解云。
又有《铁花仙史》二十六回。 题“云封山人编次”。 言钱唐蔡其志与好友王悦共游于祖遗之埋剑园，赏芙蓉，至花落方别。 后入都又相遇，已各有儿女在襁褓，乃约为婚姻，往来愈密。 王悦子曰儒珍，七岁能诗，与同窗陈秋麟皆十三四入泮，尝借寓埋剑园，邀友赏花赋诗。 秋麟夜遇女子，自称符剑花，后屡至，一夕暴风雨拔去玉芙蓉，乃绝。 后王氏衰落，儒珍又不第，蔡嫌其穷困，欲以女改适夏元虚，时秋麟已中解元，急谋于密友苏紫宸，托媒得之，拟临时归儒珍，而蔡女若兰竟逸去，为紫宸之叔诚斋所收养。 夏元虚为世家子而无行，怒其妹瑶枝时加讥讪，因荐之应点选；瑶枝被征入都，中途舟破，亦为诚斋所救。 诚斋又招儒珍为西宾，而蔡其志晚年孤寂，亦屡来迎王，养以为子，亦发解，娶诚斋之女馨如。 秋麟求婚夏瑶枝，诚斋未许，一夕女自来，乃偕遁。 时紫宸已平海寇，成神仙，忽遗王陈二人书，言真瑶枝故在苏氏，偕遁者实花妖，教二人以五雷法治之，妖即逸去，诚斋亦终以真瑶枝许之。 一日儒珍至苏氏，忽睹若兰旧婢，甚惊；诚斋乃确知所收蔡女，故为儒珍聘妇，亦以归儒珍。 后来两家夫妇皆年逾八十，以服紫宸所赠金丹，一夕无疾而终，世以为尸解云。《铁花仙史》较后出，似欲脱旧来窠臼，故设事力求其奇。作者亦颇自负，序言有云，“传奇家摹绘才子佳人之悲欢离合，以供人娱目悦心者也。然其成书而命之名也，往往略不加意。如《平山冷燕》则皆才子佳人之姓为颜，而《玉娇梨》者又至各摘其人名之一字以传之，草率若此，非真有心唐突才子佳人，实图便于随意扭捏成书而无所难耳。此书则有特异焉者，……令人以为铁为花为仙者读之，而才子佳人之事掩映乎其间。”然文笔拙涩，事状纷繁，又混入战争及神仙妖异事，已轶出于人情小说范围之外矣。
《铁花仙史》较后出，似欲脱旧来窠臼，故设事力求其奇。 作者亦颇自负，序言有云，“传奇家摹绘才子佳人之悲欢离合，以供人娱目悦心者也。 然其成书而命之名也，往往略不加意。 如《平山冷燕》则皆才子佳人之姓为颜，而《玉娇梨》者又至各摘其人名之一字以传之，草率若此，非真有心唐突才子佳人，实图便于随意扭捏成书而无所难耳。 此书则有特异焉者，…… 令人以为铁为花为仙者读之，而才子佳人之事掩映乎其间。 ”然文笔拙涩，事状纷繁，又混入战争及神仙妖异事，已轶出于人情小说范围之外矣。

第二十一篇　明之拟宋市人小说及后来选本

第二十一篇　明之拟宋市人小说及后来选本

第二十一篇　明之拟宋市人小说及后来选本

Chapter 21 Ming Zhi's Novels and Later Selections of Song Shiren宋人说话之影响于后来者，最大莫如讲史，著作迭出，如第十四十五篇所言。明之说话人亦大率以讲史事得名，间亦说经诨经，而讲小说者殊希有。惟至明末，则宋市人小说之流复起，或存旧文，或出新制，顿又广行世间，但旧名湮昧，不复称市人小说也。
宋人说话之影响于后来者，最大莫如讲史，著作迭出，如第十四十五篇所言。 明之说话人亦大率以讲史事得名，间亦说经诨经，而讲小说者殊希有。 惟至明末，则宋市人小说之流复起，或存旧文，或出新制，顿又广行世间，但旧名湮昧，不复称市人小说也。此等书之繁富者，最先有《全像古今小说》四十卷，书肆天许斋告白云，“本斋购得古今名人演义一百二十种，先以三之一为初刻”，绿天馆主人序则谓“茂苑野史家藏古今通俗小说甚富，因贾人之请，抽其可以嘉惠里耳者，凡四十种，俾为一刻”，而续刻无闻。已而有“三言”，“三言”云者，一曰《喻世明言》，二曰《警世通言》，今皆未见，仅知其序目。《明言》二十四卷，其二十一篇出《古今小说》，三篇亦见于《通言》及《醒世恒言》中，似即取《古今小说》残本作之。《通言》则四十卷，有天启甲子（一六二四）豫章无碍居士序，内收《京本通俗小说》七篇（见盐谷温《关于明的小说“三言”》及《宋明通俗小说流传表》），因知此等汇刻，盖亦兼采故书，不尽为拟作。三即《醒世恒言》，亦四十卷，天启丁卯（一六二七）陇西可一居士序云，“六经国史而外，凡著述，旨小说也，而尚理或病于艰深，修词或伤于藻绘，则不足以触里耳而振恒心，此《醒世恒言》所以继《明言》《通言》而作也。”是知《恒言》之出，在“三言”中为最后，中有《十五贯戏言成巧祸》一事，即《京本通俗小说》卷十五之《错斩崔宁》，则此亦兼存旧作，为例盖同于《通言》矣。
此等书之繁富者，最先有《全像古今小说》四十卷，书肆天许斋告白云，“本斋购得古今名人演义一百二十种，先以三之一为初刻”，绿天馆主人序则谓“茂苑野史家藏古今通俗小说甚富，因贾人之请，抽其可以嘉惠里耳者，凡四十种，俾为一刻”，而续刻无闻。 已而有“三言”，“三言”云者，一曰《喻世明言》，二曰《警世通言》，今皆未见，仅知其序目。 《明言》二十四卷，其二十一篇出《古今小说》，三篇亦见于《通言》及《醒世恒言》中，似即取《古今小说》残本作之。 《通言》则四十卷，有天启甲子（一六二四）豫章无碍居士序，内收《京本通俗小说》七篇（见盐谷温《关于明的小说“三言”》及《宋明通俗小说流传表》），因知此等汇刻，盖亦兼采故书，不尽为拟作。 三即《醒世恒言》，亦四十卷，天启丁卯（一六二七）陇西可一居士序云，“六经国史而外，凡著述，旨小说也，而尚理或病于艰深，修词或伤于藻绘，则不足以触里耳而振恒心，此《醒世恒言》所以继《明言》《通言》而作也。 ”是知《恒言》之出，在“三言”中为最后，中有《十五贯戏言成巧祸》一事，即《京本通俗小说》卷十五之《错斩崔宁》，则此亦兼存旧作，为例盖同于《通言》矣。松禅老人序《今古奇观》云，“墨憨斋增补《平妖》。穷工极变，不失本来。……至所纂《喻世》《醒世》《警世》‘三言’，极摹世态人情之岐，备写悲欢离合之致。”《平妖传》有张无咎序，云“盖吾友龙子犹所补也”，首叶有题名，则曰“冯犹龙先生增定”，因知“三言”亦冯犹龙作，其曰龙子犹者，即错综“犹龙”字作之。犹龙名梦龙，长洲人（《曲品》作吴县人，《顽潭诗话》作常熟人），故绿天馆主人称之曰茂苑野史，崇祯中，由贡生选授寿宁知县，于诗有《七乐斋稿》，而“善为启颜之辞，间入打油之调，不得为诗家”（朱彝尊《明诗综》七十一云）。然擅词曲，有《双雄记传奇》，又刻《墨憨斋传奇定本十种》，颇为当时所称，其中之《万事足》《风流梦》《新灌园》皆己作；亦嗜小说，既补《平妖传》，复纂“三言”，又尝劝沈德符以《金瓶梅》钞付书坊板行，然不果（《野获编》二十五）。
松禅老人序《今古奇观》云，“墨憨斋增补《平妖》。 穷工极变，不失本来。 …… 至所纂《喻世》《醒世》《警世》‘三言’，极摹世态人情之岐，备写悲欢离合之致。 ”《平妖传》有张无咎序，云“盖吾友龙子犹所补也”，首叶有题名，则曰“冯犹龙先生增定”，因知“三言”亦冯犹龙作，其曰龙子犹者，即错综“犹龙”字作之。 犹龙名梦龙，长洲人（《曲品》作吴县人，《顽潭诗话》作常熟人），故绿天馆主人称之曰茂苑野史，崇祯中，由贡生选授寿宁知县，于诗有《七乐斋稿》，而“善为启颜之辞，间入打油之调，不得为诗家”（朱彝尊《明诗综》七十一云）。 然擅词曲，有《双雄记传奇》，又刻《墨憨斋传奇定本十种》，颇为当时所称，其中之《万事足》《风流梦》《新灌园》皆己作；亦嗜小说，既补《平妖传》，复纂“三言”，又尝劝沈德符以《金瓶梅》钞付书坊板行，然不果（《野获编》二十五）。《京本通俗小说》所录七篇，其五为高宗时事，最远者神宗时，耳目甚近，故铺叙易于逼真。《醒世恒言》乃变其例，杂以汉事二，隋唐事十一，多取材晋唐小说（《续齐谐记》《博异志》《酉阳杂俎》《隋遗录》等），而古今风俗，迁变已多，演以虚词，转失生气。宋事十一篇颇生动，疑《错斩崔宁》而外，或尚有采自宋人话本者，然未详。明事十五篇则所写皆近闻，世态物情，不待虚构，故较高谈汉唐之作为佳。第九卷《陈多寿生死夫妻》一篇，叙朱陈二人以棋友成儿女亲家，陈氏子后病癞，朱欲悔婚，女不允，终归陈氏侍疾，阅三年，夫妇皆仰药卒。其述二人订婚及女母抱怨诸节，皆不务装点，而情态反如画：
《京本通俗小说》所录七篇，其五为高宗时事，最远者神宗时，耳目甚近，故铺叙易于逼真。 《醒世恒言》乃变其例，杂以汉事二，隋唐事十一，多取材晋唐小说（《续齐谐记》《博异志》《酉阳杂俎》《隋遗录》等），而古今风俗，迁变已多，演以虚词，转失生气。 宋事十一篇颇生动，疑《错斩崔宁》而外，或尚有采自宋人话本者，然未详。 明事十五篇则所写皆近闻，世态物情，不待虚构，故较高谈汉唐之作为佳。 第九卷《陈多寿生死夫妻》一篇，叙朱陈二人以棋友成儿女亲家，陈氏子后病癞，朱欲悔婚，女不允，终归陈氏侍疾，阅三年，夫妇皆仰药卒。 其述二人订婚及女母抱怨诸节，皆不务装点，而情态反如画：……王三老和朱世远见那小学生行步舒徐，语音清亮，且作揖次第甚有礼数，口中夸奖不绝。王三老便问，“令郎几岁了？”陈青答应道，“是九岁。”王三老道，“想着昔年汤饼会时，宛如昨日，倏忽之间，已是九年，真个光阴似箭，争教我们不老？”又问朱世远道，“老汉记得宅上令爱也是这年生的。”朱世远道，“果然，小女多福，如今也是九岁了。”王三老道，“莫怪老汉多口，你二人做了一世的棋友，何不扳做儿女亲家。古时有个朱陈村，一村中只有二姓，世为婚姻，如今你二人之姓适然相符，应是天缘。况且好男好女，你知我见，有何不美？”朱世远已自看上了小学生，不等陈青开口，先答应道，“此事最好，只怕陈兄不愿，若肯俯就，小子再无别言。”陈青道，“既蒙朱兄不弃寒微，小子是男家，有何推托？就请三老作伐。”王三老道，“明日是重阳日，阳九不利；后日大好个日子，老夫便当登门。今日一言为定，出自二位本心；老汉只图吃几杯见成喜酒，不用谢媒。”陈青道，“我说个笑话你听：玉皇大帝要与人皇对亲，商量道，‘两亲家都是皇帝，也须得个皇帝为媒才好。’乃请灶君皇帝往下界去说亲。人皇见了灶君，大惊道，‘那个做媒的怎的这般样黑？’灶君道，‘从来媒人，那有白做的？’”王三老同朱世远都笑起来。朱陈二人又下棋至晚方散。
…… Wang Sanlao and Zhu Shiyuan saw that the primary school student walked slowly, his voice was clear, and he bowed very politely, and he praised him endlessly. Wang Sanlao asked, "How old is Linglang?" Chen Qing agreed, "It's nine years old." Wang San Lao said, "Thinking about the soup cake party in the past, it was like yesterday, and in a sudden, it was already nine years. He asked Zhu Shiyuan again, "The old man remembers that Ling Ai was also born in this year." Zhu Shiyuan said, "Sure enough, the little girl is also nine years old now." Wang San said, "Don't blame the old man for talking a lot, you two have been chess friends all your life, why don't you become your children's in-laws." In ancient times, there was a Zhuchen village, there were only two surnames in a village, and the world was married, and now the surnames of the two of you coincide, it should be a natural fate. Moreover, good men and women, you know what I see, what's not beautiful? Zhu Shiyuan had already taken a fancy to the primary school student, and without waiting for Chen Qing to speak, he agreed first, "This matter is the best, I'm afraid that Brother Chen doesn't want to, if he is willing to bow down, the kid has nothing else to say." Chen Qing said, "Since Brother Zhu does not abandon the humble, the kid is a man's family, what excuse is there?" He then invited the three elders to take action. Wang San Lao said, "Tomorrow is the Double Ninth Festival, and Yang Jiu is unfavorable; The day after tomorrow will be a good day, and I will come to the door. Today's word is a decision, from the hearts of the two people; The old man only wants to eat a few glasses of happy wine, and there is no need to thank the matchmaker. Chen Qing said, "Let me tell you a joke: the Jade Emperor wants to be related to the human emperor, and discussed, 'Both in-laws are emperors, and they must also have an emperor as a matchmaker.' So he asked the Kitchen Lord Emperor to go to the lower realm to say goodbye. When the emperor saw the Kitchen Lord, he was shocked and said, 'Why is that matchmaker so dark? The kitchen lord said, 'Ever a matchmaker, how can you do it for nothing?' Wang Sanlao and Zhu Shiyuan both laughed. Zhu Chen and the two played chess again until the evening.只因一局输赢子，定下三生男女缘。
Just because of the winner or loser in one game, the fate of the three men and women is determined.…………
……朱世远的浑家柳氏，闻知女婿得个恁般的病症，在家里哭哭啼啼。抱怨丈夫道，“我女儿又不臭起来，为甚忙忙的九岁上就许了人家？如今却怎么好？索性那癞虾蟆死了，也出脱了我女儿，如今死不死，活不活，女孩儿看看年纪长成，嫁又嫁他的不得，赖又赖他的不得。终不然，看著那癞子守活孤孀不成？这都是王三那老乌龟一力窜掇，害了我女儿终身。”……朱世远原有怕婆之病，凭他夹七夹八，自骂自止，并不插言，心中纳闷。一日，柳氏偶然收拾厨柜子，看见了象棋盘和那棋子，不觉勃然发怒，又骂起丈夫来道，“你两个只为这几著象棋上说得着，对了亲，赚了我女儿。还要留这祸胎怎的？”一头说，一头走到门前，将那象棋子乱撒在街上，棋盘也掼做几片。朱世远是本分之人，见浑家发性，拦他不住，洋洋的躲开去了，女儿多福又怕羞，不好来劝。任他絮聒个不耐烦，方才罢休。……
…… Zhu Shiyuan's Hun family Liu heard that his son-in-law had such a disease, and cried at home. complained to her husband, "My daughter doesn't stink id_0000, why did she promise someone at the age of nine?" How good is it now? Simply the leprosy toad died, and my daughter was freed, and now she is not dead, whether she is alive or not, the girl looks at her age, she can't marry him, and she can't rely on him. After all, watching that leper live as a widow? This is all Wang San's old turtle that has killed my daughter for life. ”…… Zhu Shiyuan originally had the disease of fear of the old woman, and he scolded himself and stopped himself, and he did not interject, wondering in his heart. One day, Liu accidentally cleaned up the kitchen cabinet, saw the chessboard and the chess pieces, and became angry, and scolded her husband again, "You two can only say it for these chess, by the way, you have earned my daughter." Why do you still have this bad fetus? One end said, and the other ended walked to the door, scattered the chess pieces on the street, and made a few pieces of the chessboard. Zhu Shiyuan is a person of duty, seeing the Hun family's temperament, he can't stop him, he dodged Yangyang, and his daughter is blessed and shy, so it's not easy to persuade him. Let him chatter impatiently, and then give up. ……时又有《拍案惊奇》三十六卷，卷为一篇，凡唐六，宋六，元四，明二十，亦兼收古事，与“三言”同。首有即空观主人序云，“龙子犹氏所辑《喻世》等诸言，颇存雅道，时著良规，一破今时陋习，如宋元旧种，亦被搜括殆尽。……因取古今来杂碎事，可新听睹，佐谈谐者，演而畅之，得如干卷。”既而有《二刻》三十九卷，凡春秋一，宋十四，元三，明十六，不明者（明？）五，附《宋公明闹元宵杂剧》一卷，于崇祯壬申（一六三二）自序，略云“丁卯之秋……偶戏取古今所闻，一二奇局可纪者，演而成说，……得四十种。……其为柏梁余材，武昌剩竹，颇亦不少，意不能恝，聊复缀为四十则。……”丁卯为天启七年，即《醒世恒言》版行之际，此适出而争奇，然叙述平板，引证贫辛，不能及也。即空观主人为凌濛初别号，濛初，字初成，乌程人，著有《言诗翼》《诗逆》《国门集》，杂剧《虬髯翁》等（《明的小说“三言”》）。
时又有《拍案惊奇》三十六卷，卷为一篇，凡唐六，宋六，元四，明二十，亦兼收古事，与“三言”同。 首有即空观主人序云，“龙子犹氏所辑《喻世》等诸言，颇存雅道，时著良规，一破今时陋习，如宋元旧种，亦被搜括殆尽。 …… 因取古今来杂碎事，可新听睹，佐谈谐者，演而畅之，得如干卷。 ”既而有《二刻》三十九卷，凡春秋一，宋十四，元三，明十六，不明者（明？）五，附《宋公明闹元宵杂剧》一卷，于崇祯壬申（一六三二）自序，略云“丁卯之秋…… 偶戏取古今所闻，一二奇局可纪者，演而成说，…… 得四十种。 …… 其为柏梁余材，武昌剩竹，颇亦不少，意不能恝，聊复缀为四十则。 ……”丁卯为天启七年，即《醒世恒言》版行之际，此适出而争奇，然叙述平板，引证贫辛，不能及也。 即空观主人为凌濛初别号，濛初，字初成，乌程人，著有《言诗翼》《诗逆》《国门集》，杂剧《虬髯翁》等（《明的小说“三言”》）。《西湖二集》三十四卷附《西湖秋色》一百韵，题“武林济川子清原甫纂”。每卷一篇，亦杂演古今事，而必与西湖相关。观其书名，当有初集，然未见。前有湖海士序，称清原为周子，尝作《西湖说》，余事未详。清康熙时有太学生周清原字浣初，然为武进人（《国子监志》八十二《鹤征录》一）；乾隆时有周昱字清原，钱塘人（《两浙轩录》二十三），而时代不相及，皆别一人也。其书亦以他事引出本文，自名为“引子”。引子或多至三四，与他书稍不同；文亦流利，然好颂帝德，垂教训，又多愤言，则殆所谓“司命之厄我过甚而狐鼠之侮我无端”（序述清原语）之所致矣。其假唐诗人戎昱而发挥文士不得志之恨者如下：
《西湖二集》三十四卷附《西湖秋色》一百韵，题“武林济川子清原甫纂”。 每卷一篇，亦杂演古今事，而必与西湖相关。 观其书名，当有初集，然未见。 前有湖海士序，称清原为周子，尝作《西湖说》，余事未详。 清康熙时有太学生周清原字浣初，然为武进人（《国子监志》八十二《鹤征录》一）；乾隆时有周昱字清原，钱塘人（《两浙轩录》二十三），而时代不相及，皆别一人也。 其书亦以他事引出本文，自名为“引子”。 引子或多至三四，与他书稍不同；文亦流利，然好颂帝德，垂教训，又多愤言，则殆所谓“司命之厄我过甚而狐鼠之侮我无端”（序述清原语）之所致矣。 其假唐诗人戎昱而发挥文士不得志之恨者如下：……且说韩公部下一个官，姓戎名昱，为浙西刺史。这戎昱有潘安之貌，子建之才，下笔惊人，千言立就，自恃有才，生性极是傲睨，看人不在眼里。但那时是离乱之世，重武不重文，若是有数百斤力气，……不要说十八般武艺件件精通，就是晓得一两件的，……少不得也摸顶纱帽在头上戴戴。……马前喝道，前呼后拥，好不威风气势，耀武扬威，何消得晓得“天地玄黄”四字。那戎昱自负才华，到这时节重武之时，却不道是大市里卖平天冠兼挑虎刺，这一种生意，谁人来买，眼见得别人不作兴你了。你自负才华，却去吓谁？就是写得千百篇诗出，上不得阵，杀不得战，退不得虏，压不得贼，要他何用？戎昱负了这个诗袋子，没处发卖，却被一个妓者收得。这妓者是谁？姓金名凤，年方一十九岁，容貌无双，善于歌舞，体性幽闲，再不喜那喧哗之事，一心只爱的是那诗赋二字。他见了戎昱这个诗袋子，好生欢喜。戎昱正没处发卖，见金凤喜欢他这个诗袋子，便把这袋子抖将开来，就像个开杂货店的，件件搬出。两个甚是相得，你贪我爱，再不相舍；从此金凤更不接客。正是：
…… Let's talk about an official under Han Gong, surnamed Rong and named Yu, who is the governor of western Zhejiang. This Rong Yu has the appearance of Pan An, the talent of Zijian, the pen is amazing, a thousand words are established, he is self-reliant, he is extremely arrogant by nature, and he is not in his eyes. But at that time, it was a chaotic world, and the emphasis was on martial arts rather than literature, if there were hundreds of pounds of strength,...... Not to mention that he is proficient in eighteen martial arts, he knows one or two things,...... I must also touch a gauze hat and wear it on my head. …… Shouted in front of the horse, shouted in front and back, so imposing and imposing, showing off his might, how could he know the four words "heaven and earth are yellow". That Rong Yu is conceited and talented, but when he is heavy at this time, he doesn't say that he sells flat heavenly crowns and picks tiger thorns in the big market, this kind of business, who buys it, and sees that others are not interested in you. You are conceited about your talent, but who are you going to scare? He just wrote thousands of poems, but he couldn't go into battle, he couldn't fight, he couldn't retreat, he couldn't suppress the thief, what use was it? Rong Yu carried this poetry bag and had nowhere to sell it, but it was received by a prostitute. Who is this prosthete? surnamed Jin Mingfeng, nineteen years old, unparalleled in appearance, good at singing and dancing, leisurely in nature, no longer liking the noisy thing, only love the word poetry. He was so happy when he saw Rong Yu's poetry bag. Rong Yu was nowhere to sell, and when he saw that Jin Feng liked his poetry bag, he shook the bag open, like a grocery store owner, moving out piece by piece. The two are very compatible, you are greedy for my love, and you will not give up on each other; From then on, Jin Feng no longer received customers. Precisely:悲莫悲兮生别离，乐莫乐兮新相知。
悲莫悲兮生别离，乐莫乐兮新相知。自此戎昱政事之暇，游于西湖之上，每每与金凤盘桓行乐。……（卷九《韩晋公人奁两赠》）
自此戎昱政事之暇，游于西湖之上，每每与金凤盘桓行乐。 …… （卷九《韩晋公人奁两赠》）《醉醒石》十五回，题“东鲁古狂生编辑”。所记惟李微化虎事在唐时，余悉明代，且及崇祯朝事，盖其时之作也。文笔颇刻露，然以过于简炼，故平话习气，时复逼人；至于垂教诫，好评议，则尤甚于《西湖二集》。宋市人小说虽亦间参训喻，然主意则在述市井间事，用以娱心；及明人拟作末流，乃诰诫连篇，喧而夺主，且多艳称荣遇，回护士人，故形式仅存而精神与宋迥异矣。如第十四回记淮南莫翁以女嫁苏秀才，久而女嫌苏贫，自求去，再醮为酒家妇。而苏即联捷成进士，荣归过酒家前，见女当垆，下轿揖之，女貌不动而心甚苦，又不堪众人笑骂，遂自经死，即所谓大为寒士吐气者也。
《醉醒石》十五回，题“东鲁古狂生编辑”。 所记惟李微化虎事在唐时，余悉明代，且及崇祯朝事，盖其时之作也。 文笔颇刻露，然以过于简炼，故平话习气，时复逼人；至于垂教诫，好评议，则尤甚于《西湖二集》。 宋市人小说虽亦间参训喻，然主意则在述市井间事，用以娱心；及明人拟作末流，乃诰诫连篇，喧而夺主，且多艳称荣遇，回护士人，故形式仅存而精神与宋迥异矣。 如第十四回记淮南莫翁以女嫁苏秀才，久而女嫌苏贫，自求去，再醮为酒家妇。 而苏即联捷成进士，荣归过酒家前，见女当垆，下轿揖之，女貌不动而心甚苦，又不堪众人笑骂，遂自经死，即所谓大为寒士吐气者也。……见柜边坐着一个端端正正袅袅婷婷妇人，却正是莫氏。苏进士见了道，“我且去见他一见，看他怎生待我。”叫住了轿，打著伞，穿著公服，竟到店中。那店主人正在那厢数钱，穿著两截衣服，见个官来，躲了。那莫氏见下轿，已认得是苏进士了，却也不羞不恼，打著脸。苏进士向前，恭恭敬敬的作上一揖。他道，“你做你的官，我卖我的酒。”身也不动。苏进士一笑而去。
…… I saw a neat and slender woman sitting by the cabinet, but it was Mo. Su Jinshi saw him and said, "I'll go see him and see how he treats me." He called the sedan chair, wore an umbrella, and wore official clothes, and went to the store. The shopkeeper was counting money in that room, wearing two pieces of clothes, and when he saw an official coming, he hid. When Mo saw that he got out of the sedan chair, he already recognized it as Su Jinshi, but he was not ashamed or annoyed, and slapped him in the face. Su Jinshi stepped forward and bowed respectfully. He said, "You are your official, and I will sell my wine." "I didn't move. Su Jinshi smiled and left.覆水无收日，去妇无还时，覆水无收日，去妇无还时，相逢但一笑，且为立迟迟。相逢但一笑，且为立迟迟。
我想莫氏之心岂能无动，但做了这绝性绝义的事，便做到满面欢容，欣然相接，讨不得个喜而复合；更做到含悲饮泣，牵衣自咎，料讨不得个怜而复收，倒不如硬著，一束两开，倒也干净。他那心里，未尝不悔当时造次，总是无可奈何：
I think Mo's heart cannot remain unmoved, but after doing this absolute thing, he will be full of joy, gladly received, and will not be happy to get back together; It is better to be hard, a bundle of two openings, and it is clean. In his heart, he never regretted his rash at that time, and he was always helpless:心里悲酸暗自嗟，几回悔是昔时差，移将上苑琳琅树，却作门前桃李花。
My heart is filled with sorrow and sorrow, secretly lamenting that I have repeatedly regretted the difference between time and time. I have moved the dazzling tree id_0000 s in the upper garden to become peach and plum blossoms in front of the door.结末有论，以为“生前贻讥死后贻臭”，“是朱买臣妻子之后一人”。引论稍恕，科罪似在男子之“不安贫贱”者之下，然亦终不可宥云：
结末有论，以为“生前贻讥死后贻臭”，“是朱买臣妻子之后一人”。 引论稍恕，科罪似在男子之“不安贫贱”者之下，然亦终不可宥云：若论妇人，读文字，达道理甚少，如何能有大见解，大矜持？况且或至饥寒相逼，彼此相形，旁观嘲笑难堪，亲族炎凉难耐，抓不来榜上一个名字，洒不去身上一件蓝皮，激不起一个惯淹蹇不遭际的夫婿，尽堪痛哭，如何叫他不要怨嗟。但“饿死事小失节事大”，眼睁睁这个穷秀才尚活在，更去抱了一人，难道没有旦夕恩情？忒杀蔑去伦理！这朱买臣妻，所以贻笑千古。
If we talk about women, how can they have great insights and be very reserved? Moreover, they are forced by hunger and cold, dwarfed each other, laughed and embarrassed by bystanders, and their relatives were unbearable, unable to catch a name on the list, unable to sprinkle a piece of blue skin on their bodies, and could not provoke a husband who was used to drowning in troubles. But "starvation to death is a small matter of loss of integrity", seeing that this poor scholar is still alive, and he even hugged someone, is there no immediate kindness? Kill and despise ethics! This Zhu Maichen's wife has been ridiculed for eternity.《喻世》等三言在清初盖尚通行，王士祯（《香祖笔记》十）云“《警世通言》有《拗相公》一篇，述王安石罢相归金陵事，极快人意，乃因卢多逊谪岭南事而稍附益之”。其非异书可知。后乃渐晦，然其小分，则又由选本流传至今。其本曰《今古奇观》，凡四十卷四十回，序谓“三言”与《拍案惊奇》合之共二百事，观览难周，故抱瓮老人选刻为此本。据《宋明通俗小说流传表》，则取《古今小说》者十八篇，取《醒世恒言》者十一篇（第一，二，七，八，十五至十七，二十五至二十八回），取《拍案惊奇》者七篇（第九，十，十八，二十九，三十七，三十九，四十回），二刻三篇。三言二拍，印本今颇难觏，可借此窥见其大略也。至成书之顷，当在崇祯时，其与三言二拍之时代关系，盐谷温曾为之立表（《明的小说“三言”》）如下：
《喻世》等三言在清初盖尚通行，王士祯（《香祖笔记》十）云“《警世通言》有《拗相公》一篇，述王安石罢相归金陵事，极快人意，乃因卢多逊谪岭南事而稍附益之”。 其非异书可知。 后乃渐晦，然其小分，则又由选本流传至今。 其本曰《今古奇观》，凡四十卷四十回，序谓“三言”与《拍案惊奇》合之共二百事，观览难周，故抱瓮老人选刻为此本。 据《宋明通俗小说流传表》，则取《古今小说》者十八篇，取《醒世恒言》者十一篇（第一，二，七，八，十五至十七，二十五至二十八回），取《拍案惊奇》者七篇（第九，十，十八，二十九，三十七，三十九，四十回），二刻三篇。 三言二拍，印本今颇难觏，可借此窥见其大略也。 至成书之顷，当在崇祯时，其与三言二拍之时代关系，盐谷温曾为之立表（《明的小说“三言”》）如下：

《今古奇闻》二十二卷，卷一事，题“东壁山房主人编次”。其所录颇陵杂，有《醒世恒言》之文四篇（《十五贯戏言成大祸》，《陈多寿生死夫妻》，《张淑儿巧智脱杨生》，《刘小官雌雄兄弟》），别一篇为《西湖佳话》之《梅屿恨迹》，余未详所从出。文中有“发逆”字，故当为清咸丰同治时书。
"Ancient and Modern Anecdotes" consists of twenty-two volumes, one volume, titled "Compilation of the Owner of Dongbi Mountain". His records are quite complicated, including four articles of "Awakening the World's Hengyan" ("Fifteen Guan Jokes Become a Great Disaster", "Chen Duoshou's Life and Death Couple", "Zhang Shuer's Clever Wisdom to Get Off Yang Sheng", "Liu Xiaoguan's Male and Female Brothers"), and another article is "Meiyu Hateful Traces" of "West Lake Good Stories", I don't know where it came from. There is the word "rebellion" in the text, so it should be written during the Tongzhi period of Qing Xianfeng.《续今古奇观》三十卷，亦一卷一事，无撰人名。其书全收《今古奇观》选余之《拍案惊奇》二十九篇。而以《今古奇闻》一篇（《康友仁轻财重义得科名》）足卷数，殆不足称选本，同治七年（一八六八），江苏巡抚丁日昌尝严禁淫词小说，《拍案惊奇》亦在禁列，疑此书即书贾于禁后作之。
《续今古奇观》三十卷，亦一卷一事，无撰人名。 其书全收《今古奇观》选余之《拍案惊奇》二十九篇。 而以《今古奇闻》一篇（《康友仁轻财重义得科名》）足卷数，殆不足称选本，同治七年（一八六八），江苏巡抚丁日昌尝严禁淫词小说，《拍案惊奇》亦在禁列，疑此书即书贾于禁后作之。

第二十二篇　清之拟晋唐小说及其支流

第二十二篇　清之拟晋唐小说及其支流

第二十二篇　清之拟晋唐小说及其支流

Chapter 22 Qing Zhi Simulates Jin and Tang Novels and Their Tributaries唐人小说单本，至明什九散亡；宋修《太平广记》成，又置不颁布，绝少流传，故后来偶见其本，仿以为文，世人辄大耸异，以为奇绝矣。明初，有钱唐瞿佑字宗吉，有诗名，又作小说曰《剪灯新话》，文题意境，并抚唐人，而文笔殊冗弱不相副，然以粉饰闺情，拈掇艳语，故特为时流所喜，仿效者纷起，至于禁止，其风始衰。迨嘉靖间，唐人小说乃复出，书估往往刺取《太平广记》中文，杂以他书，刻为丛集，真伪错杂，而颇盛行。文人虽素与小说无缘者，亦每为异人侠客童奴以至虎狗虫蚁作传，置之集中。盖传奇风韵，明末实弥漫天下，至易代不改也。
唐人小说单本，至明什九散亡；宋修《太平广记》成，又置不颁布，绝少流传，故后来偶见其本，仿以为文，世人辄大耸异，以为奇绝矣。 明初，有钱唐瞿佑字宗吉，有诗名，又作小说曰《剪灯新话》，文题意境，并抚唐人，而文笔殊冗弱不相副，然以粉饰闺情，拈掇艳语，故特为时流所喜，仿效者纷起，至于禁止，其风始衰。 迨嘉靖间，唐人小说乃复出，书估往往刺取《太平广记》中文，杂以他书，刻为丛集，真伪错杂，而颇盛行。 文人虽素与小说无缘者，亦每为异人侠客童奴以至虎狗虫蚁作传，置之集中。 盖传奇风韵，明末实弥漫天下，至易代不改也。而专集之最有名者为蒲松龄之《聊斋志异》。松龄字留仙，号柳泉，山东淄川人，幼有轶才，老而不达，以诸生授徒于家，至康熙辛卯始成岁贡生（《聊斋志异》序跋），越四年遂卒，年八十六（一六三〇——一七一五），所著有《文集》四卷，《诗集》六卷，《聊斋志异》八卷（文集附录张元撰墓表），及《省身录》，《怀刑录》，《历字文》，《日用俗字》，《农桑经》等（李桓《耆献类征》四百三十一）。其《志异》或析为十六卷，凡四百三十一篇，年五十始写定，自有题辞，言“才非干宝，雅爱搜神，情同黄州，喜人谈鬼，闲则命笔，因以成编。久之，四方同人又以邮筒相寄，因而物以好聚，所积益夥”。是其储蓄收罗者久矣。然书中事迹，亦颇有从唐人传奇转化而出者（如《凤阳士人》《续黄粱》等），此不自白，殆抚古而又讳之也。至谓作者搜采异闻，乃设烟茗于门前，邀田夫野老，强之谈说以为粉本，则不过委巷之谈而已。
而专集之最有名者为蒲松龄之《聊斋志异》。 松龄字留仙，号柳泉，山东淄川人，幼有轶才，老而不达，以诸生授徒于家，至康熙辛卯始成岁贡生（《聊斋志异》序跋），越四年遂卒，年八十六（一六三〇——一七一五），所著有《文集》四卷，《诗集》六卷，《聊斋志异》八卷（文集附录张元撰墓表），及《省身录》，《怀刑录》，《历字文》，《日用俗字》，《农桑经》等（李桓《耆献类征》四百三十一）。 其《志异》或析为十六卷，凡四百三十一篇，年五十始写定，自有题辞，言“才非干宝，雅爱搜神，情同黄州，喜人谈鬼，闲则命笔，因以成编。 久之，四方同人又以邮筒相寄，因而物以好聚，所积益夥”。 是其储蓄收罗者久矣。 然书中事迹，亦颇有从唐人传奇转化而出者（如《凤阳士人》《续黄粱》等），此不自白，殆抚古而又讳之也。 至谓作者搜采异闻，乃设烟茗于门前，邀田夫野老，强之谈说以为粉本，则不过委巷之谈而已。《聊斋志异》虽亦如当时同类之书，不外记神仙狐鬼精魅故事，然描写委曲，叙次井然，用传奇法，而以志怪，变幻之状，如在目前；又或易调改弦，别叙畸人异行，出于幻域，顿入人间；偶述琐闻，亦多简洁，故读者耳目，为之一新。又相传渔洋山人（王士祯）激赏其书，欲市之而不得，故声名益振，竞相传钞。然终著者之世，竟未刻，至乾隆末始刊于严州；后但明伦吕湛恩皆有注。
《聊斋志异》虽亦如当时同类之书，不外记神仙狐鬼精魅故事，然描写委曲，叙次井然，用传奇法，而以志怪，变幻之状，如在目前；又或易调改弦，别叙畸人异行，出于幻域，顿入人间；偶述琐闻，亦多简洁，故读者耳目，为之一新。 又相传渔洋山人（王士祯）激赏其书，欲市之而不得，故声名益振，竞相传钞。 然终著者之世，竟未刻，至乾隆末始刊于严州；后但明伦吕湛恩皆有注。明末志怪群书，大抵简略，又多荒怪，诞而不情，《聊斋志异》独于详尽之外，示以平常，使花妖狐魅，多具人情，和易可亲，忘为异类，而又偶见鹘突，知复非人。如《狐谐》言博兴万福于济南娶狐女，而女雅善谈谐，倾倒一坐，后忽别去，悉如常人；《黄英》记马子才得陶氏黄英为妇，实乃菊精，居积取盈，与人无异，然其弟醉倒，忽化菊花，则变怪即骤现也。
明末志怪群书，大抵简略，又多荒怪，诞而不情，《聊斋志异》独于详尽之外，示以平常，使花妖狐魅，多具人情，和易可亲，忘为异类，而又偶见鹘突，知复非人。 如《狐谐》言博兴万福于济南娶狐女，而女雅善谈谐，倾倒一坐，后忽别去，悉如常人；《黄英》记马子才得陶氏黄英为妇，实乃菊精，居积取盈，与人无异，然其弟醉倒，忽化菊花，则变怪即骤现也。……一日，置酒高会，万居主人位，孙与二客分左右座，下设一榻屈狐。狐辞不善酒，咸请坐谈，许之。酒数行，众掷骰为瓜蔓之令；客值瓜色，会当饮，戏以觥移上座曰，“狐娘子大清醒，暂借一觞。”狐笑曰，“我故不饮，愿陈一典以佐诸公饮。”……客皆言曰，“骂人者当罚。”狐笑曰，“我骂狐何如？”众曰，“可。”于是倾耳共听。狐曰，“昔一大臣，出使红毛国，著狐腋冠见国王，国王视而异之，问‘何皮毛，温厚乃尔？’大臣以‘狐’对。王言‘此物生平未尝得闻。狐字字画何等？’使臣书空而奏曰，‘右边是一大瓜，左边是一小犬。’”主客又复哄堂。……居数月，与万偕归。……逾年，万复事于济，狐又与俱。忽有数人来，狐从与语，备极寒暄；乃语万曰，“我本陕中人，与君有夙因，遂从尔许时，今我兄弟至，将从以归，不能周事。”留之，不可，竟去。（卷五）
…… 一日，置酒高会，万居主人位，孙与二客分左右座，下设一榻屈狐。 狐辞不善酒，咸请坐谈，许之。 酒数行，众掷骰为瓜蔓之令；客值瓜色，会当饮，戏以觥移上座曰，“狐娘子大清醒，暂借一觞。 ”狐笑曰，“我故不饮，愿陈一典以佐诸公饮。 ”…… 客皆言曰，“骂人者当罚。 ”狐笑曰，“我骂狐何如？”众曰，“可。 ”于是倾耳共听。 狐曰，“昔一大臣，出使红毛国，著狐腋冠见国王，国王视而异之，问‘何皮毛，温厚乃尔？’大臣以‘狐’对。 王言‘此物生平未尝得闻。 狐字字画何等？’使臣书空而奏曰，‘右边是一大瓜，左边是一小犬。 ’”主客又复哄堂。 …… 居数月，与万偕归。 …… 逾年，万复事于济，狐又与俱。 忽有数人来，狐从与语，备极寒暄；乃语万曰，“我本陕中人，与君有夙因，遂从尔许时，今我兄弟至，将从以归，不能周事。 ”留之，不可，竟去。 （卷五）……陶饮素豪，从不见其沉醉。有友人曾生，量亦无对，适过马，马使与陶较饮，二人……自辰以讫四漏，计各尽百壶，曾烂醉如泥，沉睡坐间，陶起归寝，出门践菊畦，玉山倾倒，委衣于侧，即地化为菊：高如人，花十余朵皆大于拳。马骇绝，告黄英；英急往，拔置地上，曰，“胡醉至此？”复以衣，要马俱去，戒勿视。既明而往，则陶卧畦边，马乃悟姊弟菊精也，益爱敬之。而陶自露迹，饮益放，……值花朝，曾来造访，以两仆舁药浸白酒一坛，约与共尽。……曾醉已惫，诸仆负之去。陶卧地又化为菊；马见惯不惊，如法拔之，守其旁以观其变，久之，叶益憔悴，大惧，始告黄英。英闻，骇曰，“杀吾弟矣！”奔视之，根株已枯；痛绝，掐其梗埋盆中，携入闺中，日灌溉之。马悔恨欲绝，甚恶曾。越数日，闻曾已醉死矣，盆中花渐萌，九月，既开，短干粉朵，嗅之有酒香，名之“醉陶”，浇以酒则茂。……黄英终老，亦无他异。（卷四）
…… 陶饮素豪，从不见其沉醉。 有友人曾生，量亦无对，适过马，马使与陶较饮，二人…… 自辰以讫四漏，计各尽百壶，曾烂醉如泥，沉睡坐间，陶起归寝，出门践菊畦，玉山倾倒，委衣于侧，即地化为菊：高如人，花十余朵皆大于拳。 马骇绝，告黄英；英急往，拔置地上，曰，“胡醉至此？”复以衣，要马俱去，戒勿视。 既明而往，则陶卧畦边，马乃悟姊弟菊精也，益爱敬之。 而陶自露迹，饮益放，…… 值花朝，曾来造访，以两仆舁药浸白酒一坛，约与共尽。 …… 曾醉已惫，诸仆负之去。 陶卧地又化为菊；马见惯不惊，如法拔之，守其旁以观其变，久之，叶益憔悴，大惧，始告黄英。 英闻，骇曰，“杀吾弟矣！”奔视之，根株已枯；痛绝，掐其梗埋盆中，携入闺中，日灌溉之。 马悔恨欲绝，甚恶曾。 越数日，闻曾已醉死矣，盆中花渐萌，九月，既开，短干粉朵，嗅之有酒香，名之“醉陶”，浇以酒则茂。 …… 黄英终老，亦无他异。 （卷四）又其叙人间事，亦尚不过为形容，致失常度，如《马介甫》一篇述杨氏有悍妇，虐遇其翁，又慢客，而兄弟祗畏，至对客皆失措云：
又其叙人间事，亦尚不过为形容，致失常度，如《马介甫》一篇述杨氏有悍妇，虐遇其翁，又慢客，而兄弟祗畏，至对客皆失措云：……约半载，马忽携僮仆过杨，直杨翁在门外曝阳扪虱，疑为佣仆，通姓氏使达主人；翁被絮去，或告马，“此即其翁也。”马方惊讶，杨兄弟岸帻出迎，登堂一揖，便请朝父，万石辞以偶恙，捉坐笑语，不觉向夕。万石屡言具食，而终不见至，兄弟迭互出入，始有瘦奴持壶酒来，俄顷引尽，坐伺良久，万石频起催呼，额颊间热汗蒸腾。俄瘦奴以馔具出，脱粟失饪，殊不甘旨。食已，万石草草便去；万锺襆被来伴客寝。……（卷十）
…… 约半载，马忽携僮仆过杨，直杨翁在门外曝阳扪虱，疑为佣仆，通姓氏使达主人；翁被絮去，或告马，“此即其翁也。 ”马方惊讶，杨兄弟岸帻出迎，登堂一揖，便请朝父，万石辞以偶恙，捉坐笑语，不觉向夕。 万石屡言具食，而终不见至，兄弟迭互出入，始有瘦奴持壶酒来，俄顷引尽，坐伺良久，万石频起催呼，额颊间热汗蒸腾。 俄瘦奴以馔具出，脱粟失饪，殊不甘旨。 食已，万石草草便去；万锺襆被来伴客寝。 …… （卷十）至于每卷之末，常缀小文，则缘事极简短，不合于传奇之笔，故数行即尽，与六朝之志怪近矣。又有《聊斋志异拾遗》一卷二十七篇，出后人掇拾；而其中殊无佳构，疑本作者所自删弃，或他人拟作之。
至于每卷之末，常缀小文，则缘事极简短，不合于传奇之笔，故数行即尽，与六朝之志怪近矣。 又有《聊斋志异拾遗》一卷二十七篇，出后人掇拾；而其中殊无佳构，疑本作者所自删弃，或他人拟作之。乾隆末，钱唐袁枚撰《新齐谐》二十四卷，续十卷，初名《子不语》，后见元人说部有同名者，乃改今称；序云“妄言妄听，记而存之，非有所感也”，其文屏去雕饰，反近自然，然过于率意，亦多芜秽，自题“戏编”，得其实矣。若纯法《聊斋》者，时则有吴门沈起凤作《谐铎》十卷（乾隆五十六年序），而意过俳，文亦纤仄；满洲和邦额作《夜谭随录》十二卷（亦五十六年序），颇借材他书（如《佟觭角》《夜星子》《疡医》皆本《新齐谐》），不尽己出，词气亦时失之粗暴，然记朔方景物及市井情形者特可观。他如长白浩歌子之《萤窗异草》三编十二卷（似乾隆中作，别有四编四卷，乃书估伪造）。海昌管世灏之《影谈》四卷（嘉庆六年序），平湖冯起凤之《昔柳摭谈》八卷（嘉庆中作），近至金匮邹弢之《浇愁集》八卷（光绪三年序），皆志异，亦俱不脱《聊斋》窠臼。惟黍余裔孙《六合内外琐言》二十卷（似嘉庆初作）一名《璅蛣杂记》者，故作奇崛奥衍之辞，伏藏讽喻，其体式为在先作家所未尝试，而意浅薄；据金武祥（《江阴艺文志》下）说，则江阴屠绅字贤书之所作也。绅又有《鹗亭诗话》一卷，文词较简，亦不尽记异闻，然审其风格，实亦此类。
乾隆末，钱唐袁枚撰《新齐谐》二十四卷，续十卷，初名《子不语》，后见元人说部有同名者，乃改今称；序云“妄言妄听，记而存之，非有所感也”，其文屏去雕饰，反近自然，然过于率意，亦多芜秽，自题“戏编”，得其实矣。 若纯法《聊斋》者，时则有吴门沈起凤作《谐铎》十卷（乾隆五十六年序），而意过俳，文亦纤仄；满洲和邦额作《夜谭随录》十二卷（亦五十六年序），颇借材他书（如《佟觭角》《夜星子》《疡医》皆本《新齐谐》），不尽己出，词气亦时失之粗暴，然记朔方景物及市井情形者特可观。 他如长白浩歌子之《萤窗异草》三编十二卷（似乾隆中作，别有四编四卷，乃书估伪造）。 海昌管世灏之《影谈》四卷（嘉庆六年序），平湖冯起凤之《昔柳摭谈》八卷（嘉庆中作），近至金匮邹弢之《浇愁集》八卷（光绪三年序），皆志异，亦俱不脱《聊斋》窠臼。 惟黍余裔孙《六合内外琐言》二十卷（似嘉庆初作）一名《璅蛣杂记》者，故作奇崛奥衍之辞，伏藏讽喻，其体式为在先作家所未尝试，而意浅薄；据金武祥（《江阴艺文志》下）说，则江阴屠绅字贤书之所作也。 绅又有《鹗亭诗话》一卷，文词较简，亦不尽记异闻，然审其风格，实亦此类。《聊斋志异》风行逾百年，摹仿赞颂者众，顾至纪昀而有微辞。盛时彦（《姑妄听之》跋）述其语曰，“《聊斋志异》盛行一时，然才子之笔，非著书者之笔也。虞初以下天宝以上古书多佚矣；其可见完帙者，刘敬叔《异苑》陶潜《续搜神记》，小说类也，《飞燕外传》《会真记》，传记类也。《太平广记》事以类聚，故可并收；今一书而兼二体，所未解也。小说既述见闻，即属叙事，不比戏场关目，随意装点；……今燕昵之词，媟狎之态，细微曲折，摹绘如生，使出自言，似无此理，使出作者代言，则何从而闻见之，又所未解也。”盖即訾其有唐人传奇之详，又杂以六朝志怪者之简，既非自叙之文，而尽描写之致而已。昀字晓岚，直隶献县人；父容舒，官姚安知府。昀少即颖异，年二十四领顺天乡试解额，然三十一始成进士，由编修官至侍读学士，坐泄机事谪戍乌鲁木齐，越三年召还，授编修，又三年擢侍读，总纂四库全书，绾书局者十三年，一生精力，悉注于《四库提要》及《目录》中，故他撰著甚少。后累迁至礼部尚书，充经筵讲官，自是又为总宪者五，长礼部者三（李元度《国朝先正事略》二十）。乾隆五十四年，以编排秘籍至热河，“时校理久竟，特督视官吏题签庋架而已，昼长无事”，乃追录见闻，作稗说六卷，曰《滦阳消夏录》。越二年，作《如是我闻》，次年又作《槐西杂志》，次年又作《姑妄听之》，皆四卷；嘉庆三年夏复至热河，又成《滦阳续录》六卷，时年已七十五。后二年，其门人盛时彦合刊之，名《阅微草堂笔记五种》（本书）。十年正月，复调礼部，拜协办大学士，加太子少保，管国子监事；二月十四日卒于位，年八十二（一七二四——一八〇五），谥“文达”（《事略》）。
《聊斋志异》风行逾百年，摹仿赞颂者众，顾至纪昀而有微辞。 盛时彦（《姑妄听之》跋）述其语曰，“《聊斋志异》盛行一时，然才子之笔，非著书者之笔也。 虞初以下天宝以上古书多佚矣；其可见完帙者，刘敬叔《异苑》陶潜《续搜神记》，小说类也，《飞燕外传》《会真记》，传记类也。 《太平广记》事以类聚，故可并收；今一书而兼二体，所未解也。 小说既述见闻，即属叙事，不比戏场关目，随意装点；…… 今燕昵之词，媟狎之态，细微曲折，摹绘如生，使出自言，似无此理，使出作者代言，则何从而闻见之，又所未解也。 ”盖即訾其有唐人传奇之详，又杂以六朝志怪者之简，既非自叙之文，而尽描写之致而已。 昀字晓岚，直隶献县人；父容舒，官姚安知府。 昀少即颖异，年二十四领顺天乡试解额，然三十一始成进士，由编修官至侍读学士，坐泄机事谪戍乌鲁木齐，越三年召还，授编修，又三年擢侍读，总纂四库全书，绾书局者十三年，一生精力，悉注于《四库提要》及《目录》中，故他撰著甚少。 后累迁至礼部尚书，充经筵讲官，自是又为总宪者五，长礼部者三（李元度《国朝先正事略》二十）。 乾隆五十四年，以编排秘籍至热河，“时校理久竟，特督视官吏题签庋架而已，昼长无事”，乃追录见闻，作稗说六卷，曰《滦阳消夏录》。 越二年，作《如是我闻》，次年又作《槐西杂志》，次年又作《姑妄听之》，皆四卷；嘉庆三年夏复至热河，又成《滦阳续录》六卷，时年已七十五。 后二年，其门人盛时彦合刊之，名《阅微草堂笔记五种》（本书）。 十年正月，复调礼部，拜协办大学士，加太子少保，管国子监事；二月十四日卒于位，年八十二（一七二四——一八〇五），谥“文达”（《事略》）。《阅微草堂笔记》虽“聊以遣日”之书，而立法甚严，举其体要，则在尚质黜华，追踪晋宋；自序云，“缅昔作者如王仲任应仲远引经据古，博辨宏通，陶渊明刘敬叔刘义庆简淡数言，自然妙远，诚不敢妄拟前修，然大旨期不乖于风教”者，即此之谓。其轨范如是，故与《聊斋》之取法传奇者途径自殊，然较以晋宋人书，则《阅微》又过偏于论议。盖不安于仅为小说，更欲有益人心，即与晋宋志怪精神，自然违隔；且末流加厉，易堕为报应因果之谈也。
《阅微草堂笔记》虽“聊以遣日”之书，而立法甚严，举其体要，则在尚质黜华，追踪晋宋；自序云，“缅昔作者如王仲任应仲远引经据古，博辨宏通，陶渊明刘敬叔刘义庆简淡数言，自然妙远，诚不敢妄拟前修，然大旨期不乖于风教”者，即此之谓。 其轨范如是，故与《聊斋》之取法传奇者途径自殊，然较以晋宋人书，则《阅微》又过偏于论议。 盖不安于仅为小说，更欲有益人心，即与晋宋志怪精神，自然违隔；且末流加厉，易堕为报应因果之谈也。惟纪昀本长文笔，多见秘书，又襟怀夷旷，故凡测鬼神之情状，发人间之幽微，托狐鬼以抒己见者，隽思妙语，时足解颐；间杂考辨，亦有灼见。叙述复雍容淡雅，天趣盎然，故后来无人能夺其席，固非仅借位高望重以传者矣。今举其较简者三则于下：
惟纪昀本长文笔，多见秘书，又襟怀夷旷，故凡测鬼神之情状，发人间之幽微，托狐鬼以抒己见者，隽思妙语，时足解颐；间杂考辨，亦有灼见。 叙述复雍容淡雅，天趣盎然，故后来无人能夺其席，固非仅借位高望重以传者矣。 今举其较简者三则于下：刘乙斋廷尉为御史时，尝租西河沿一宅，每夜有数人击柝，声琅琅彻晓，……视之则无形，聒耳至不得片刻睡。乙斋故强项，乃自撰一文，指陈其罪，大书粘壁以驱之，是夕遂寂。乙斋自诧不减昌黎之驱鳄也。余谓“君文章道德，似尚未敌昌黎，然性刚气盛，平生尚不作暧昧事，故敢悍然不畏鬼；又拮据迁此宅，力竭不能再徙，计无复之，惟有与鬼以死相持：此在君为‘困兽犹斗’，在鬼为“穷寇勿追’耳。……”乙斋笑击余背曰，“魏收轻薄哉！然君知我者。”（《滦阳消夏录》六）
刘乙斋廷尉为御史时，尝租西河沿一宅，每夜有数人击柝，声琅琅彻晓，…… 视之则无形，聒耳至不得片刻睡。 乙斋故强项，乃自撰一文，指陈其罪，大书粘壁以驱之，是夕遂寂。 乙斋自诧不减昌黎之驱鳄也。 余谓“君文章道德，似尚未敌昌黎，然性刚气盛，平生尚不作暧昧事，故敢悍然不畏鬼；又拮据迁此宅，力竭不能再徙，计无复之，惟有与鬼以死相持：此在君为‘困兽犹斗’，在鬼为“穷寇勿追’耳。 ……”乙斋笑击余背曰，“魏收轻薄哉！然君知我者。 ”（《滦阳消夏录》六）田白岩言，“尝与诸友扶乩，其仙自称真山民，宋末隐君子也，倡和方洽，外报某客某客来，乩忽不动。他日复降，众叩昨遽去之故，乩判曰，‘此二君者，其一世故太深，酬酢太熟，相见必有谀词数百句，云水散人拙于应对，不如避之为佳；其一心思太密，礼数太明，其与人语，恒字字推敲，责备无已，闲云野鹤岂能耐此苛求，故逋逃尤恐不速耳。’”后先姚安公闻之曰，“此仙究狷介之士，器量未宏。”（《槐西杂志》一）
田白岩言，“尝与诸友扶乩，其仙自称真山民，宋末隐君子也，倡和方洽，外报某客某客来，乩忽不动。 他日复降，众叩昨遽去之故，乩判曰，‘此二君者，其一世故太深，酬酢太熟，相见必有谀词数百句，云水散人拙于应对，不如避之为佳；其一心思太密，礼数太明，其与人语，恒字字推敲，责备无已，闲云野鹤岂能耐此苛求，故逋逃尤恐不速耳。 ’”后先姚安公闻之曰，“此仙究狷介之士，器量未宏。 ”（《槐西杂志》一）李义山诗“空闻子夜鬼悲歌”，用晋时鬼歌《子夜》事也；李昌谷诗“秋坟鬼唱鲍家诗”，则以鲍参军有《蒿里行》，幻窅其词耳。然世间固往往有是事。田香沁言，“尝读书别业，一夕风静月明，闻有度昆曲者，亮折清圆，凄心动魄，谛审之，乃《牡丹亭》《叫画》一出也。忘其所以，倾听至终。忽省墙外皆断港荒陂，人迹罕至，此曲自何而来？开户视之，惟芦荻瑟瑟而已。”（《姑妄听之》三）
李义山诗“空闻子夜鬼悲歌”，用晋时鬼歌《子夜》事也；李昌谷诗“秋坟鬼唱鲍家诗”，则以鲍参军有《蒿里行》，幻窅其词耳。 然世间固往往有是事。 田香沁言，“尝读书别业，一夕风静月明，闻有度昆曲者，亮折清圆，凄心动魄，谛审之，乃《牡丹亭》《叫画》一出也。 忘其所以，倾听至终。 忽省墙外皆断港荒陂，人迹罕至，此曲自何而来？开户视之，惟芦荻瑟瑟而已。 ”（《姑妄听之》三）昀又“天性孤直，不喜以心性空谈，标榜门户”（盛序语），其处事贵宽，论人欲恕，故于宋儒之苛察，特有违言，书中有触即发，与见于《四库总目提要》中者正等。且于不情之论，世间习而不察者，亦每设疑难，揭其拘迂，此先后诸作家所未有者也，而世人不喻，哓哓然竞以劝惩之佳作誉之。
昀又“天性孤直，不喜以心性空谈，标榜门户”（盛序语），其处事贵宽，论人欲恕，故于宋儒之苛察，特有违言，书中有触即发，与见于《四库总目提要》中者正等。 且于不情之论，世间习而不察者，亦每设疑难，揭其拘迂，此先后诸作家所未有者也，而世人不喻，哓哓然竞以劝惩之佳作誉之。吴惠叔言，“医者某生素谨厚，一夜，有老媪持金钏一双就买堕胎药，医者大骇，峻拒之；次夕，又添持珠花两枝来，医者益骇，力挥去。越半载余，忽梦为冥司所拘，言有诉其杀人者。至，则一披发女子，项勒红巾，泣陈乞药不与状。医者曰，‘药以活人，岂敢杀人以渔利。汝自以奸败，于我何尤！’女子曰，‘我乞药时，孕未成形，倘得堕之，我可不死：是破一无知之血块，而全一待尽之命也。既不得药，不能不产，以致子遭扼杀，受诸痛苦，我亦见逼而就缢：是汝欲全一命，反戕两命矣。罪不归汝，反谁归乎？’冥官喟然曰，‘汝之所言，酌乎事势；彼之所执者则理也。宋以来固执一理而不揆事势之利害者，独此人也哉？汝且休矣！’拊几有声，医者悚然而寤。”（《如是我闻》三）
吴惠叔言，“医者某生素谨厚，一夜，有老媪持金钏一双就买堕胎药，医者大骇，峻拒之；次夕，又添持珠花两枝来，医者益骇，力挥去。 越半载余，忽梦为冥司所拘，言有诉其杀人者。 至，则一披发女子，项勒红巾，泣陈乞药不与状。 医者曰，‘药以活人，岂敢杀人以渔利。 汝自以奸败，于我何尤！’女子曰，‘我乞药时，孕未成形，倘得堕之，我可不死：是破一无知之血块，而全一待尽之命也。 既不得药，不能不产，以致子遭扼杀，受诸痛苦，我亦见逼而就缢：是汝欲全一命，反戕两命矣。 罪不归汝，反谁归乎？’冥官喟然曰，‘汝之所言，酌乎事势；彼之所执者则理也。 宋以来固执一理而不揆事势之利害者，独此人也哉？汝且休矣！’拊几有声，医者悚然而寤。 ”（《如是我闻》三）东光有王莽河，即胡苏河也，旱则涸，水则涨，每病涉焉。外舅马公周箓言，“雍正末有丐妇一手抱儿一手扶病姑涉此水，至中流，姑蹶而仆，妇弃儿于水，努力负姑出。姑大诟曰，‘我七十老妪，死何害？张氏数世待此儿延香火，尔胡弃儿以拯我？斩祖宗之祀者，尔也！’妇泣不敢语，长跪而已。越两日，姑竟以哭孙不食死；妇呜咽不成声，痴坐数日，亦立槁。……有著论者，谓儿与姑较则姑重，姑与祖宗较则祖宗重。使妇或有夫，或尚有兄弟，则弃儿是；既两世穷嫠，止一线之孤子，则姑所责者是：妇虽死，有余悔焉。姚安公曰，‘讲学家责人无已时。夫急流汹涌，少纵即逝，此岂能深思长计时哉？势不两全，弃儿救姑，此天理之正而人心之所安也。使姑死而儿存，……不又有责以爱儿弃姑者耶？且儿方提抱，育不育未可知，使姑死而儿又不育，悔更何如耶？此妇所为，超出恒情已万万，不幸而其姑自殒，以死殉之，亦可哀矣。犹沾沾焉而动其喙，以为精义之学，毋乃白骨衔冤，黄泉赍恨乎？孙复作《春秋尊王发微》，二百四十年内有贬无褒；胡致堂作《读史管见》，三代以下无完人，辨则辨矣，非吾之所欲闻也。’”（《槐西杂志》二）
东光有王莽河，即胡苏河也，旱则涸，水则涨，每病涉焉。 外舅马公周箓言，“雍正末有丐妇一手抱儿一手扶病姑涉此水，至中流，姑蹶而仆，妇弃儿于水，努力负姑出。 姑大诟曰，‘我七十老妪，死何害？张氏数世待此儿延香火，尔胡弃儿以拯我？斩祖宗之祀者，尔也！’妇泣不敢语，长跪而已。 越两日，姑竟以哭孙不食死；妇呜咽不成声，痴坐数日，亦立槁。 …… 有著论者，谓儿与姑较则姑重，姑与祖宗较则祖宗重。 使妇或有夫，或尚有兄弟，则弃儿是；既两世穷嫠，止一线之孤子，则姑所责者是：妇虽死，有余悔焉。 姚安公曰，‘讲学家责人无已时。 夫急流汹涌，少纵即逝，此岂能深思长计时哉？势不两全，弃儿救姑，此天理之正而人心之所安也。 使姑死而儿存，…… 不又有责以爱儿弃姑者耶？且儿方提抱，育不育未可知，使姑死而儿又不育，悔更何如耶？此妇所为，超出恒情已万万，不幸而其姑自殒，以死殉之，亦可哀矣。 犹沾沾焉而动其喙，以为精义之学，毋乃白骨衔冤，黄泉赍恨乎？孙复作《春秋尊王发微》，二百四十年内有贬无褒；胡致堂作《读史管见》，三代以下无完人，辨则辨矣，非吾之所欲闻也。 ’”（《槐西杂志》二）《滦阳消夏录》方脱稿，即为书肆刊行，旋与《聊斋志异》峙立；《如是我闻》等继之，行益广。其影响所及，则使文人拟作，虽尚有《聊斋》遗风，而摹绘之笔顿减，终乃类于宋明人谈异之书。如同时之临川乐钧《耳食录》十二卷（乾隆五十七年序）《二录》八卷（五十九年序），后出之海昌许秋垞《闻见异辞》二卷（道光二十六年序），武进汤用中《翼稗编》八卷（二十八年序）等，皆其类也。迨长洲王韬作《遁窟谰言》（同治元年成）《淞隐漫录》（光绪初成）《淞滨琐话》（光绪十三年序）各十二卷，天长宣鼎作《夜雨秋灯录》十六卷（光绪二十一年序），其笔致又纯为《聊斋》者流，一时传布颇广远，然所记载，则已狐鬼渐稀，而烟花粉黛之事盛矣。
《滦阳消夏录》方脱稿，即为书肆刊行，旋与《聊斋志异》峙立；《如是我闻》等继之，行益广。 其影响所及，则使文人拟作，虽尚有《聊斋》遗风，而摹绘之笔顿减，终乃类于宋明人谈异之书。 如同时之临川乐钧《耳食录》十二卷（乾隆五十七年序）《二录》八卷（五十九年序），后出之海昌许秋垞《闻见异辞》二卷（道光二十六年序），武进汤用中《翼稗编》八卷（二十八年序）等，皆其类也。 迨长洲王韬作《遁窟谰言》（同治元年成）《淞隐漫录》（光绪初成）《淞滨琐话》（光绪十三年序）各十二卷，天长宣鼎作《夜雨秋灯录》十六卷（光绪二十一年序），其笔致又纯为《聊斋》者流，一时传布颇广远，然所记载，则已狐鬼渐稀，而烟花粉黛之事盛矣。体式较近于纪氏五书者，有云间许元仲《三异笔谈》四卷（道光七年序），德清俞鸿渐《印雪轩随笔》四卷（道光二十五年序），后者甚推《阅微》，而云“微嫌其中排击宋儒语过多”（卷二），则旨趣实异。光绪中，德清俞樾作《右台仙馆笔记》十六卷，止述异闻，不涉因果；又有羊朱翁（亦俞樾）作《耳邮》四卷，自署“戏编”，序谓“用意措辞，亦似有善恶报应之说，实则聊以遣日，非敢云意在劝惩”。颇似以《新齐谐》为法，而记叙简雅，乃类《阅微》，但内容殊异，鬼事不过什一而已。他如江阴金捧阊之《客窗偶笔》四卷（嘉庆元年序），福州梁恭辰之《池上草堂笔记》二十四卷（道光二十八年序），桐城许奉恩之《里乘》十卷（似亦道光中作），亦记异事，貌如志怪者流，而盛陈祸福，专主劝惩，已不足以称小说。
体式较近于纪氏五书者，有云间许元仲《三异笔谈》四卷（道光七年序），德清俞鸿渐《印雪轩随笔》四卷（道光二十五年序），后者甚推《阅微》，而云“微嫌其中排击宋儒语过多”（卷二），则旨趣实异。 光绪中，德清俞樾作《右台仙馆笔记》十六卷，止述异闻，不涉因果；又有羊朱翁（亦俞樾）作《耳邮》四卷，自署“戏编”，序谓“用意措辞，亦似有善恶报应之说，实则聊以遣日，非敢云意在劝惩”。 颇似以《新齐谐》为法，而记叙简雅，乃类《阅微》，但内容殊异，鬼事不过什一而已。 他如江阴金捧阊之《客窗偶笔》四卷（嘉庆元年序），福州梁恭辰之《池上草堂笔记》二十四卷（道光二十八年序），桐城许奉恩之《里乘》十卷（似亦道光中作），亦记异事，貌如志怪者流，而盛陈祸福，专主劝惩，已不足以称小说。

第二十三篇　清之讽刺小说

第二十三篇　清之讽刺小说

第二十三篇　清之讽刺小说

Chapter 23 Qingzhi's satirical novel寓讥弹于稗史者，晋唐已有，而明为盛，尤在人情小说中。然此类小说，大抵设一庸人，极形其陋劣之态，借以衬托俊士，显其才华，故往往大不近情，其用才比于“打诨”。若较胜之作，描写时亦刻深，讥刺之切，或逾锋刃，而《西游补》之外，每似集中于一人或一家，则又疑私怀怨毒，乃逞恶言，非于世事有不平，因抽毫而抨击矣。其近于呵斥全群者，则有《钟馗捉鬼传》十回，疑尚是明人作，取诸色人，比之群鬼，一一抉剔，发其隐情，然词意浅露，已同嫚骂，所谓“婉曲”，实非所知。迨吴敬梓《儒林外史》出，乃秉持公心，指擿时弊，机锋所向，尤在士林；其文又慼而能谐，婉而多讽：于是说部中乃始有足称讽刺之书。
寓讥弹于稗史者，晋唐已有，而明为盛，尤在人情小说中。 然此类小说，大抵设一庸人，极形其陋劣之态，借以衬托俊士，显其才华，故往往大不近情，其用才比于“打诨”。 若较胜之作，描写时亦刻深，讥刺之切，或逾锋刃，而《西游补》之外，每似集中于一人或一家，则又疑私怀怨毒，乃逞恶言，非于世事有不平，因抽毫而抨击矣。 其近于呵斥全群者，则有《钟馗捉鬼传》十回，疑尚是明人作，取诸色人，比之群鬼，一一抉剔，发其隐情，然词意浅露，已同嫚骂，所谓“婉曲”，实非所知。 迨吴敬梓《儒林外史》出，乃秉持公心，指擿时弊，机锋所向，尤在士林；其文又慼而能谐，婉而多讽：于是说部中乃始有足称讽刺之书。吴敬梓字敏轩，安徽全椒人，幼即颖异，善记诵，稍长补官学弟子员，尤精《文选》，诗赋援笔立成。然不善治生，性又豪，不数年挥旧产俱尽，时或至于绝粮，雍正乙卯，安徽巡抚赵国麟举以应博学鸿词科，不赴，移家金陵，为文坛盟主，又集同志建先贤祠于雨花山麓，祀泰伯以下二百三十人，资不足，售所居屋以成之，而家益贫。晚年自号文木老人，客扬州，尤落拓纵酒，乾隆十九年卒于客中，年五十四（一七〇一——一七五四）。所著有《诗说》七卷，《文木山房集》五卷，诗七卷，皆不甚传（详见新标点本《儒林外史》卷首）。
吴敬梓字敏轩，安徽全椒人，幼即颖异，善记诵，稍长补官学弟子员，尤精《文选》，诗赋援笔立成。 然不善治生，性又豪，不数年挥旧产俱尽，时或至于绝粮，雍正乙卯，安徽巡抚赵国麟举以应博学鸿词科，不赴，移家金陵，为文坛盟主，又集同志建先贤祠于雨花山麓，祀泰伯以下二百三十人，资不足，售所居屋以成之，而家益贫。 晚年自号文木老人，客扬州，尤落拓纵酒，乾隆十九年卒于客中，年五十四（一七〇一——一七五四）。 所著有《诗说》七卷，《文木山房集》五卷，诗七卷，皆不甚传（详见新标点本《儒林外史》卷首）。吴敬梓著作皆奇数，故《儒林外史》亦一例，为五十五回；其成殆在雍正末，著者方侨居于金陵也。时距明亡未百年，士流盖尚有明季遗风，制艺而外，百不经意，但为矫饰，云希圣贤。敬梓之所描写者即是此曹，既多据自所闻见，而笔又足以达之，故能烛幽索隐，物无遁形，凡官师，儒者，名士，山人，间亦有市井细民，皆现身纸上，声态并作，使彼世相，如在目前，惟全书无主干，仅驱使各种人物，行列而来，事与其来俱起，亦与其去俱讫，虽云长篇，颇同短制；但如集诸碎锦，合为帖子，虽非巨幅，而时见珍异，因亦娱心，使人刮目矣。敬梓又爱才士，“汲引如不及，独嫉‘时文士’如仇，其尤工者，则尤嫉之。”（程晋芳所作传云）故书中攻难制艺及以制艺出身者亦甚烈，如令选家马二先生自述制艺之所以可贵云：
吴敬梓著作皆奇数，故《儒林外史》亦一例，为五十五回；其成殆在雍正末，著者方侨居于金陵也。 时距明亡未百年，士流盖尚有明季遗风，制艺而外，百不经意，但为矫饰，云希圣贤。 敬梓之所描写者即是此曹，既多据自所闻见，而笔又足以达之，故能烛幽索隐，物无遁形，凡官师，儒者，名士，山人，间亦有市井细民，皆现身纸上，声态并作，使彼世相，如在目前，惟全书无主干，仅驱使各种人物，行列而来，事与其来俱起，亦与其去俱讫，虽云长篇，颇同短制；但如集诸碎锦，合为帖子，虽非巨幅，而时见珍异，因亦娱心，使人刮目矣。 敬梓又爱才士，“汲引如不及，独嫉‘时文士’如仇，其尤工者，则尤嫉之。 ”（程晋芳所作传云）故书中攻难制艺及以制艺出身者亦甚烈，如令选家马二先生自述制艺之所以可贵云：“……‘举业’二字，是从古及今，人人必要做的。就如孔子生在春秋时候，那时用‘言扬行举’做官，故孔子只讲得个‘言寡尤，行寡悔，禄在其中’：这便是孔子的举业。到汉朝，用贤良方正开科，所以公孙弘董仲舒举贤良方正：这便是汉人的举业。到唐朝，用诗赋取士；他们若讲孔孟的话，就没有官做了，所以唐人都会做几句诗：这便是唐人的举业。到宋朝，又好了，都用的是些理学的人做官，所以程朱就讲理学：这便是宋人的举业。到本朝，用文章取士，这是极好的法则。就是夫子在而今，也要念文章，做举业，断不讲那‘言寡尤，行寡悔’的话。何也？就日日讲究‘言寡尤，行寡悔’，那个给你官做？孔子的道，也就不行了。”（第十三回）
"...... the word 'lifting industry' is something that everyone must do from ancient times to the present. Just like Confucius was born in the Spring and Autumn Period, when he used 'words and deeds' to become officials, so Confucius only said 'few words, few regrets, and fortune in it': this is Confucius's career. In the Han Dynasty, the virtuous and upright were used to open the subject, so Gongsun Hong and Dong Zhongshu recommended the virtuous and upright: this is the Han people's career. to the Tang Dynasty, use poetry to select scholars; If they talk about Confucius and Mencius, there will be no officials, so the Tang people will make a few poems: This is the cause of the Tang people. In the Song Dynasty, it was good, and some people of science were used as officials, so Cheng Zhu lectured on science: this is the cause of the Song people. In this dynasty, it is an excellent rule to use articles to select scholars. Even if the Master is alive, he must also read articles and do good deeds, and never say the words of 'few words and few regrets'. Why is that? Just pay attention to 'few words and few regrets' every day, which one is for you to do? Confucius's way is not good. (The thirteenth)《儒林外史》所传人物，大都实有其人，而以象形谐声或词隐语寓其姓名，若参以雍乾间诸家文集，往往十得八九（详见本书上元金和跋）。此马二先生字纯上，处州人，实即全椒冯粹中，为著者挚友，其言真率，又尚上知春秋汉唐，在“时文士”中实犹属诚笃博通之士，但其议论，则不特尽揭当时对于学问之见解，且洞见所谓儒者之心肝者也。至于性行，乃亦君子，例如西湖之游，虽全无会心，颇杀风景，而茫茫然大嚼而归，迂儒之本色固在：
《儒林外史》所传人物，大都实有其人，而以象形谐声或词隐语寓其姓名，若参以雍乾间诸家文集，往往十得八九（详见本书上元金和跋）。 此马二先生字纯上，处州人，实即全椒冯粹中，为著者挚友，其言真率，又尚上知春秋汉唐，在“时文士”中实犹属诚笃博通之士，但其议论，则不特尽揭当时对于学问之见解，且洞见所谓儒者之心肝者也。 至于性行，乃亦君子，例如西湖之游，虽全无会心，颇杀风景，而茫茫然大嚼而归，迂儒之本色固在：马二先生独自一个，带了几个钱，步出钱塘门，在茶亭里吃了几碗茶，到西湖沿上牌楼跟前坐下，见那一船一船乡下妇女来烧香的，……后面都跟着自己的汉子，……上了岸，散往各庙里去了。马二先生看了一遍，不在意里。起来又走了里把多路，望着湖沿上接连着几个酒店，……马二先生没有钱买了吃，……只得走进一个面店，十六个钱吃了一碗面，肚里不饱，又走到间壁一个茶室吃了一碗茶，买了两个钱“处片”嚼嚼，到觉有些滋味。吃完了出来，……往前走，过了六桥。转个湾，便像些村庄地方。又有人家的棺材，厝基中间，走也走不清，甚是可厌。马二先生欲待回去，遇着一个走路的，问道“前面可还有好顽的所在？”那人道，“转过去便是净慈，雷峰。怎么不好顽？”马二先生于是又往前走。……过了雷峰，远远望见高高下下许多房子盖著琉璃瓦，……马二先生走到跟前，看见一个极高的山门，一个金字直匾，上写“敕赐净慈禅寺”；山门旁边一个小门。马二先生走了进去；……那些富贵人家女客，成群结队，里里外外，来往不绝。……马二先生身子又长，戴一顶高方巾，一幅乌黑的脸，腆着个肚子，穿着一双厚底破靴，横着身子乱跑，只管在人窝子里撞。女人也不看他，他也不看女人。前前后后跑了一交，又出来坐在那茶亭内，……吃了一碗茶。柜上摆着许多碟子：饺饼，芝麻糖，粽子，烧饼，处片，黑枣，煮栗子，马二先生每样买了几个钱，不论好歹，吃了一饱。马二先生觉得倦了，直着脚跑进清波门；到了下处，关门睡了。因为多走了路，在下处睡了一天；第三日起来，要到城隍山走走。……（第十四回）
Mr. Ma Er was alone, brought a few money, walked out of the Qiantang Gate, ate a few bowls of tea in the tea pavilion, and sat down in front of the archway along the West Lake, and saw boats of country women coming to burn incense,...... They all followed their own men,...... They went ashore and dispersed to the temples. Mr. Ma Er looked at it again and didn't care. I got up and walked a lot of ways, looking at several hotels on the lakeside,...... Mr. Ma Er had no money to buy food,...... I had to walk into a noodle shop, eat a bowl of noodles for sixteen coins, my stomach was not full, and then I went to a tea room in the wall to eat a bowl of tea, bought two coins to chew "chu slices", and felt a little delicious. Eat and come out,...... Walking forward, I crossed the six bridges. Turn around the bay, and it will be like some villages. There are also people's coffins, in the middle of the foundation, and they can't walk clearly, which is very annoying. Mr. Ma Er wanted to stay back, but when he met a walker, he asked, "Is there still a stubborn place ahead?" The man said, "Turn around and it's Jingci, Lei Feng." Why aren't you stubborn? Mr. Ma Er then walked forward again. …… After passing Leifeng, I saw many houses covered with glazed tiles from a distance,...... Mr. Ma Er walked up to him and saw a very high mountain gate and a golden plaque with the words "Decree to Jingci Zen Temple"; A small door next to the mountain gate. Mr. Ma Er walked in; …… Those rich and noble female guests came and went in groups, inside and out, coming and going. …… Mr. Ma Er was long, wearing a tall scarf, a black face, a shy belly, wearing a pair of thick-soled broken boots, running sideways, just bumping into people's nests. The woman does not look at him, and he does not look at the woman. After running back and forth, he came out and sat in the tea pavilion again,...... Ate a bowl of tea. There were many plates on the cabinet: dumplings, sesame candy, rice dumplings, sesame cakes, slices, black dates, boiled chestnuts, Mr. Ma Er bought a few dollars of each, no matter what, he ate his fill. Mr. Ma Er felt tired and ran straight into the Qingbo Gate; When I got to the bottom, I closed the door and went to sleep. because I walked more, I slept in the lower place for a day; On the third day, I got up and went to the City God Mountain. …… (14th)至叙范进家本寒微，以乡试中式暴发，旋丁母忧，翼翼尽礼，则无一贬词，而情伪毕露，诚微辞之妙选，亦狙击之辣手矣：
至叙范进家本寒微，以乡试中式暴发，旋丁母忧，翼翼尽礼，则无一贬词，而情伪毕露，诚微辞之妙选，亦狙击之辣手矣：……两人（张静斋及范进）进来，先是静斋谒过，范进上来叙师生之礼。汤知县再三谦让，奉坐吃茶。同静斋叙了些阔别的话；又把范进的文章称赞了一番，问道“因何不去会试？”范进方才说道，“先母见背，遵制丁忧。”汤知县大惊，忙叫换去了吉服。拱进后堂，摆上酒来。……知县安了席坐下，用的都是银镶杯箸。范进退前缩后的不举杯箸，知县不解其故。静斋笑道，“世先生因遵制，想是不用这个杯箸。”知县忙叫换去。换了一个磁杯，一双象牙箸来，范进又不肯举动。静斋道，“这个箸也不用。”随即换了一双白颜色竹子的来，方才罢了。知县疑惑：“他居丧如此尽礼，倘或不用荤酒，却是不曾备办。”落后看见他在燕窝碗里拣了一个大虾圆子送在嘴里，方才放心。……（第四回）
…… The two (Zhang Jingzhai and Fan Jin) came in, first Jingzhai visited, and Fan Jin came up to talk about the etiquette between teachers and students. Tang Zhixian repeatedly humbly sat down to eat tea. said some farewell words to Jingzhai; He praised Fan Jin's article again and asked, "Why don't you go to the exam?" Fan Jin just said, "My late mother saw her back and followed the rules of Ding You." Tang Zhixian was shocked and hurriedly changed into auspicious clothes. Arch into the back hall and put on the wine. …… The county magistrate sat down, using silver-inlaid cups and chopsticks. Fan Sheng did not raise his cup or chopsticks before or after stepping back and forth, and the county magistrate did not understand the reason. Jingzhai smiled and said, "Mr. Shi complied with the rules, so I don't think he needs to use this cup and chopsticks." The county magistrate hurriedly called to change. A magnetic cup and a pair of ivory chopsticks came, but Fan Jin refused to move. Jingzhai said, "I don't need these chopsticks." Then he changed to a pair of white bamboo, and that's it. The county magistrate wondered: "He was so polite in mourning, if he didn't use meat and wine, he didn't prepare for it." Later, he saw that he picked a prawn ball from the bird's nest bowl and put it in his mouth, so he was relieved. …… (4th)此外刻划伪妄之处尚多，掊击习俗者亦屡见。其述王玉辉之女既殉夫，玉辉大喜，而当入祠建坊之际，“转觉心伤，辞了不肯来”，后又自言“在家日日看见老妻悲恸，心中不忍”（第四十八回），则描写良心与礼教之冲突，殊极刻深（详见本书钱玄同序）；作者生清初，又束身名教之内，而能心有依违，托稗说以寄慨，殆亦深有会于此矣。以言君子，尚亦有人，杜少卿为作者自况，更有杜慎卿（其兄青然），有虞育德（吴蒙泉），有庄尚志（程绵庄），皆贞士，其盛举则极于祭先贤。迨南京名士渐已销磨，先贤祠亦荒废；而奇人幸未绝于市井，一为“会写字的”，一为“卖火纸筒子的”，一为“开茶馆的”，一为“做裁缝的”。末一尤恬淡，居三山街，曰荆元，能弹琴赋诗，缝纫之暇，往往以此自遣；间亦访其同人。
此外刻划伪妄之处尚多，掊击习俗者亦屡见。 其述王玉辉之女既殉夫，玉辉大喜，而当入祠建坊之际，“转觉心伤，辞了不肯来”，后又自言“在家日日看见老妻悲恸，心中不忍”（第四十八回），则描写良心与礼教之冲突，殊极刻深（详见本书钱玄同序）；作者生清初，又束身名教之内，而能心有依违，托稗说以寄慨，殆亦深有会于此矣。 以言君子，尚亦有人，杜少卿为作者自况，更有杜慎卿（其兄青然），有虞育德（吴蒙泉），有庄尚志（程绵庄），皆贞士，其盛举则极于祭先贤。 迨南京名士渐已销磨，先贤祠亦荒废；而奇人幸未绝于市井，一为“会写字的”，一为“卖火纸筒子的”，一为“开茶馆的”，一为“做裁缝的”。 末一尤恬淡，居三山街，曰荆元，能弹琴赋诗，缝纫之暇，往往以此自遣；间亦访其同人。一日，荆元吃过了饭，思量没事，一径踱到清凉山来。……他有一个老朋友姓于，住在山背后。这于老者也不读书，也不做生意，……督率着他五个儿子灌园。……这日，荆元步了进来，于老者迎着道，“好些时不见老哥来，生意忙的紧？”荆元道，“正是。今日才打发清楚些。特来看看老爹。”于老者道，“恰好烹了一壶现成茶，请用一杯。”斟了送过来。荆元接了，坐着吃，道，“这茶，色香味都好。老爹却是那里取来的这样好水？”于老者道，“我们城西不比你们城南，到处井泉都是吃得的。”荆元道，“古人动说‘桃源避世’，我想起来，那里要甚么桃源。只如老爹这样清闲自在，住在这样‘城市山林’的所在，就是现在的活神仙了。”于老者道，“只是我老拙一样事也不会做，怎的如老哥会弹一曲琴，也觉得消遣些。近来想是一发弹的好了，可好几时请教一回？”荆元道，“这也容易，老爹不嫌污耳，明日携琴来请教。”说了一会，辞别回来。次日，荆元自己抱了琴，来到园里，于老者已焚下一炉好香，在那里等候。……于老者替荆元把琴安放在石凳上，荆元席地坐下，于老者也坐在旁边。荆元慢慢的和了弦，弹起来，铿铿锵锵，声振林木。……弹了一会，忽作变徵之音，凄清宛转。于老者听到深微之处，不觉凄然泪下。自此，他两人常常往来。当下也就别过了。（第五十五回）
One day, Jing Yuan had eaten, thought that it was okay, and walked to Qingliang Mountain. …… He has an old friend named Yu who lives behind the mountain. This old man doesn't read or do business,...... He led his five sons to irrigate the garden. …… On this day, Jing Yuan walked in, and the old man Yu greeted him, "I haven't seen my brother come for a long time, and the business is busy?" Jing Yuan said, "Exactly." I just let it go more clearly today. Come and see Daddy. The old man Yu said, "I happened to cook a pot of ready-made tea, please use a cup." "Pour it over and send it over. Jing Yuan took it, sat down to eat, and said, "This tea has good color and fragrance." Where did Dad get such good water? The old man Yu said, "The west of our city is not as good as the south of your city, and there are wells and springs everywhere." Jing Yuan said, "The ancients often said 'Taoyuan escapes from the world', and I think about it, what kind of Taoyuan do you want there?" Just like my father, who is so leisurely and comfortable, living in such a 'city mountain and forest', is the current living immortal. The old man Yu said, "It's just that I'm old and clumsy and can't do anything, how can I play a piano like my brother, and I also feel that it is a bit of a pastime." Recently, I think it's good to have a shot, but when will I ask for advice? Jing Yuan said, "This is also easy, Dad doesn't think it's dirty, and he will bring the piano tomorrow to ask for advice." After talking for a while, he said goodbye and came back. The next day, Jing Yuan hugged the piano and came to the garden, where the old man had burned a good incense and waited. …… The old man Yu placed the piano on the stone bench for Jing Yuan, Jing Yuan sat down on the ground, and the old man Yu also sat next to him. Jing Yuan slowly harmonized the strings, played, sonorous, and the sound shook the trees. …… After playing for a while, it suddenly became a sound of change, mournful and winding. The old man heard the subtleties and couldn't help but shed tears. Since then, the two of them have been in constant contact. Don't let it go now. (Episode 55)然独不乐与士人往还，且知士人亦不屑与友：固非“儒林”中人也。至于此后有无贤人君子得入《儒林外史》，则作者但存疑问而已。
然独不乐与士人往还，且知士人亦不屑与友：固非“儒林”中人也。 至于此后有无贤人君子得入《儒林外史》，则作者但存疑问而已。《儒林外史》初惟传钞，后刊木于扬州，已而刻本非一。尝有人排列全书人物，作“幽榜”，谓神宗以水旱偏灾，流民载道，冀“旌沉抑之人才”以祈福利，乃并赐进士及第，并遣礼官就国子监祭之；又割裂作者文集中骈语，襞积之以造诏表（金和跋云），统为一回缀于末：故一本有五十六回。又有人自作四回，事既不伦，语复猥陋，而亦杂入五十六回本中，印行于世：故一本又有六十回。
《儒林外史》初惟传钞，后刊木于扬州，已而刻本非一。 尝有人排列全书人物，作“幽榜”，谓神宗以水旱偏灾，流民载道，冀“旌沉抑之人才”以祈福利，乃并赐进士及第，并遣礼官就国子监祭之；又割裂作者文集中骈语，襞积之以造诏表（金和跋云），统为一回缀于末：故一本有五十六回。 又有人自作四回，事既不伦，语复猥陋，而亦杂入五十六回本中，印行于世：故一本又有六十回。是后亦鲜有以公心讽世之书如《儒林外史》者。
After that, there were very few books that satirized the world with public sentiment, such as "The History of Confucianism."

第二十四篇　清之人情小说

第二十四篇　清之人情小说

第二十四篇　清之人情小说

Chapter 24 Qing Dynasty's Human Novel乾隆中（一七六五年顷），有小说曰《石头记》者忽出于北京，历五六年而盛行，然皆写本，以数十金鬻于庙市。其本止八十回，开篇即叙本书之由来，谓女娲补天，独留一石未用，石甚自悼叹，俄见一僧一道，以为“形体到也是个宝物了，还只没有实在好处，须得再镌上数字，使人一见便知是奇物方妙。然后好携你到隆盛昌明之邦，诗礼簪缨之族，花柳繁华之地，温柔富贵之乡，去安身乐业”。于是袖之而去。不知更历几劫，有空空道人见此大石，上镌文词，从石之请，钞以问世。道人亦“因空见色，由色生情，传情入色，自色悟空，遂易名为情僧，改《石头记》为《情僧录》；东鲁孔梅溪则题曰《风月宝鉴》；后因曹雪芹于悼红轩中披阅十载，增删五次，纂成目录，分出章回，则题曰《金陵十二钗》，并题一绝云：‘满纸荒唐言，一把辛酸泪。都云作者痴，谁解其中味？’”（戚蓼生所序八十回本之第一回）
乾隆中（一七六五年顷），有小说曰《石头记》者忽出于北京，历五六年而盛行，然皆写本，以数十金鬻于庙市。 其本止八十回，开篇即叙本书之由来，谓女娲补天，独留一石未用，石甚自悼叹，俄见一僧一道，以为“形体到也是个宝物了，还只没有实在好处，须得再镌上数字，使人一见便知是奇物方妙。 然后好携你到隆盛昌明之邦，诗礼簪缨之族，花柳繁华之地，温柔富贵之乡，去安身乐业”。 于是袖之而去。 不知更历几劫，有空空道人见此大石，上镌文词，从石之请，钞以问世。 道人亦“因空见色，由色生情，传情入色，自色悟空，遂易名为情僧，改《石头记》为《情僧录》；东鲁孔梅溪则题曰《风月宝鉴》；后因曹雪芹于悼红轩中披阅十载，增删五次，纂成目录，分出章回，则题曰《金陵十二钗》，并题一绝云：‘满纸荒唐言，一把辛酸泪。 都云作者痴，谁解其中味？’”（戚蓼生所序八十回本之第一回）本文所叙事则在石头城（非即金陵）之贾府，为宁国荣国二公后。宁公长孙曰敷，早死；次敬袭爵，而性好道，又让爵于子珍，弃家学仙；珍遂纵恣，有子蓉，娶秦可卿。荣公长孙曰赦，子琏，娶王熙凤；次曰政；女曰敏，适林海，中年而亡，仅遗一女曰黛玉。贾政娶于王，生子珠，早卒；次生女曰元春，后选为妃；次复得子，则衔玉而生，玉又有字，因名宝玉，人皆以为“来历不小”，而政母史太君尤钟爱之。宝玉既七八岁，聪明绝人，然性爱女子，常说，“女儿是水作的骨肉，男人是泥作的骨肉。”人于是又以为将来且为“色鬼”；贾政亦不甚爱惜，驭之极严，盖缘“不知道这人来历。……若非多读书识字，加以致知格物之功，悟道参玄之力者，不能知也”（戚本第二回贾雨村云）。而贾氏实亦“闺阁中历历有人”，主从之外，姻连亦众，如黛玉宝钗，皆来寄寓，史湘云亦时至，尼妙玉则习静于后园。右即贾氏谱大要，用虚线者其姻连，著×者夫妇，著*者在“金陵十二钗”之数者也。
本文所叙事则在石头城（非即金陵）之贾府，为宁国荣国二公后。 宁公长孙曰敷，早死；次敬袭爵，而性好道，又让爵于子珍，弃家学仙；珍遂纵恣，有子蓉，娶秦可卿。 荣公长孙曰赦，子琏，娶王熙凤；次曰政；女曰敏，适林海，中年而亡，仅遗一女曰黛玉。 贾政娶于王，生子珠，早卒；次生女曰元春，后选为妃；次复得子，则衔玉而生，玉又有字，因名宝玉，人皆以为“来历不小”，而政母史太君尤钟爱之。 宝玉既七八岁，聪明绝人，然性爱女子，常说，“女儿是水作的骨肉，男人是泥作的骨肉。 ”人于是又以为将来且为“色鬼”；贾政亦不甚爱惜，驭之极严，盖缘“不知道这人来历。 …… 若非多读书识字，加以致知格物之功，悟道参玄之力者，不能知也”（戚本第二回贾雨村云）。 而贾氏实亦“闺阁中历历有人”，主从之外，姻连亦众，如黛玉宝钗，皆来寄寓，史湘云亦时至，尼妙玉则习静于后园。 右即贾氏谱大要，用虚线者其姻连，著×者夫妇，著*者在“金陵十二钗”之数者也。

事即始于林夫人（贾敏）之死，黛玉失恃，又善病，遂来依外家，时与宝玉同年，为十一岁。已而王夫人女弟所生女亦至，即薛宝钗，较长一年，颇极端丽。宝玉纯朴，并爱二人无偏心，宝钗浑然不觉，而黛玉稍恚。一日，宝玉倦卧秦可卿室，遽梦入太虚境，遇警幻仙，阅《金陵十二钗正册》及《副册》，有图有诗，然不解。警幻命奏新制《红楼梦》十二支，其末阕为《飞鸟各投林》，词有云：
事即始于林夫人（贾敏）之死，黛玉失恃，又善病，遂来依外家，时与宝玉同年，为十一岁。 已而王夫人女弟所生女亦至，即薛宝钗，较长一年，颇极端丽。 宝玉纯朴，并爱二人无偏心，宝钗浑然不觉，而黛玉稍恚。 一日，宝玉倦卧秦可卿室，遽梦入太虚境，遇警幻仙，阅《金陵十二钗正册》及《副册》，有图有诗，然不解。 警幻命奏新制《红楼梦》十二支，其末阕为《飞鸟各投林》，词有云：“为官的，家业凋零；富贵的，金银散尽。有恩的，死里逃生；无情的，分明报应。欠命的命已还，欠泪的泪已尽！……看破的，遁入空门；痴迷的，枉送了性命。好一似，食尽鸟投林：落了片白茫茫大地真干净！”（戚本第五回）
"For officials, the family business withers; Those who are rich are gone. those who are benevolent escape death; Ruthless, clear retribution. The life owed to the life has been returned, and the tears of the owe tears have been exhausted! …… those who see through will escape into the empty door; Obsessed with it, it was in vain. It's like eating all the birds and throwing them into the forest: the white earth is so clean! (Qi Ben 5th)然宝玉又不解，更历他梦而寤。迨元春被选为妃，荣公府愈贵盛，及其归省，则辟大观园以宴之，情亲毕至，极天伦之乐。宝玉亦渐长，于外昵秦钟蒋玉函，归则周旋于姊妹中表以及侍儿如袭人晴雯平儿紫鹃辈之间，昵而敬之，恐拂其意，爱博而心劳，而忧患亦日甚矣。
然宝玉又不解，更历他梦而寤。 迨元春被选为妃，荣公府愈贵盛，及其归省，则辟大观园以宴之，情亲毕至，极天伦之乐。 宝玉亦渐长，于外昵秦钟蒋玉函，归则周旋于姊妹中表以及侍儿如袭人晴雯平儿紫鹃辈之间，昵而敬之，恐拂其意，爱博而心劳，而忧患亦日甚矣。这日，宝玉因见湘云渐愈，然后去看黛玉。正值黛玉才歇午觉，宝玉不敢惊动。因紫鹃正在回廊上手里做针线，便上来问他，“昨日夜里咳嗽的可好些？”紫鹃道，“好些了。”（宝玉道，“阿弥陀佛，宁可好了罢。”紫鹃笑道，“你也念起佛来，真是新闻。”）宝玉笑道，“所谓‘病笃乱投医’了。”一面说，一面见他穿着弹墨绫子薄绵袄，外面只穿着青缎子夹背心，宝玉便伸手向他身上抹了一抹，说，“穿的这样单薄，还在风口里坐着。春风才至，时气最不好。你再病了，越发难了。”紫鹃便说道，“从此咱们只可说话，别动手动脚的。一年大二年小的，叫人看着不尊重；又打着那起混账行子们背地里说你。你总不留心，还只管合小时一般行为，如何使得？姑娘常常吩咐我们，不叫合你说笑。你近来瞧他，远着你，还恐远不及呢。”说着，便起身，携了针线，进别房去了。宝玉见了这般景况，心中忽觉浇了一盆冷水一般，只看着竹子发了回呆。因祝妈正来挖笋修竿，便忙忙走了出来，一时魂魄失守，心无所知，随便坐在一块石上出神，不觉滴下泪来。直呆了五六顿饭工夫，千思万想，总不知如何是好。偶值雪雁从王夫人房中取了人参来，从此经过，……便走过来，蹲下笑道，“你在这里作什么呢？”宝玉忽见了雪雁，便说道，“你又作什么来招我？你难道不是女儿？他既防嫌，总不许你们理我，你又来寻我，倘被人看见，岂不又生口舌？你快家去罢。”雪雁听了，只当他又受了黛玉的委屈，只得回至房中，黛玉未醒，将人参交与紫鹃。……雪雁道，“姑娘还没醒呢，是谁给了宝玉气受？坐在那里哭呢。”……紫鹃听说，忙放下针线，……一直来寻宝玉。走到宝玉跟前，含笑说道，“我不过说了两句话，为的是大家好。你就赌气，跑了这风地里来哭，作出病来唬我。”宝玉忙笑道，“谁赌气了？我因为听你说的有理，我想你们既这样说，自然别人也是这样说，将来渐渐的都不理我了。我所以想着自己伤心。”……（戚本第五十七回，括弧中句据程本补。）
On this day, Baoyu saw Xiangyun gradually recovering, and then went to see Daiyu. Just as Daiyu was taking a nap, Baoyu did not dare to be alarmed. Because Zijuan was making needlework in his hand on the cloister, he came up and asked, "How did you cough last night?" Zijuan said, "It's better." (Baoyu said, "Amitabha, I'd rather be better.") Zijuan smiled and said, "You also recite the Buddha, it's really news." Baoyu smiled and said, "The so-called 'sick and chaotic medical treatment'." As he said, seeing that he was wearing a thin cotton jacket made of elastic ink and a green satin vest on the outside, Baoyu stretched out his hand and wiped it on his body, saying, "He is wearing such a thin clothes, and he is still sitting in the tuyere." The spring breeze has just arrived, and the weather is the worst. The more sick you are, the more difficult it will be. Zijuan said, "From now on, we can only talk, don't move our hands and feet." one year old and two years younger, it makes people look disrespectful; He also said about you behind the back of the bastards. You always don't pay attention, and you just care about the general behavior of the hour, how to make it? The girl often told us not to joke with you. If you look at him recently, he is far away from you, and he may not be as good as you. Saying that, he got up, took the needle and thread, and went into another room. Seeing this situation, Baoyu suddenly felt like a basin of cold water poured on him, and only looked at the bamboo in a daze. Because Zhu Ma was coming to dig bamboo shoots and repair poles, she hurriedly walked out, lost her soul for a while, and her heart was ignorant, so she sat on a stone and was distracted, and she couldn't help but shed tears. I was stunned for five or six meals, thinking about it, and I didn't know what to do. By chance, Xueyan took ginseng from Mrs. Wang's room and passed by from there,...... Then he came over, squatted down and smiled, "What are you doing here?" Baoyu suddenly saw Xue Yan and said, "What are you doing to recruit me?" Aren't you your daughter? Since he is suspicious, he will not allow you to pay attention to me, and you will come to find me again, if you are seen, won't you be tongue-in-cheek again? You go home quickly. Xueyan listened, only when he was wronged by Daiyu again, he had to go back to the room, Daiyu did not wake up, and handed over the ginseng to Zijuan. …… Xueyan said, "The girl hasn't woken up yet, who gave Baoyu anger?" Sitting there crying. ”…… When Zijuan heard this, he hurriedly put down his needle and thread,...... I have been looking for treasure jade. Walking up to Baoyu, he said with a smile, "I just said a few words, for everyone's good." You get angry, run into this wind to cry, and get sick to bluff me. Baoyu hurriedly smiled and said, "Who is angry? Because I heard what you said was reasonable, I think that since you say this, naturally others will say the same, and gradually ignore me in the future. That's why I think I'm sad. ”…… (Qi Ben chapter 57, the sentence in parentheses is supplemented by Cheng Ben.) ）然荣公府虽煊赫，而“生齿日繁，事务日盛，主仆上下，安富尊荣者尽多，运筹谋画者无一，其日用排场，又不能将就省俭”，故“外面的架子虽未甚倒，内囊却也尽上来了。”（第二回）颓运方至，变故渐多；宝玉在繁华丰厚中，且亦屡与“无常”觌面，先有可卿自经；秦钟夭逝；自又中父妾厌胜之术，几死；继以金钏投井；尤二姐吞金；而所爱之侍儿晴雯又被遣，随殁。悲凉之雾，遍被华林，然呼吸而领会之者，独宝玉而已。
然荣公府虽煊赫，而“生齿日繁，事务日盛，主仆上下，安富尊荣者尽多，运筹谋画者无一，其日用排场，又不能将就省俭”，故“外面的架子虽未甚倒，内囊却也尽上来了。 ”（第二回）颓运方至，变故渐多；宝玉在繁华丰厚中，且亦屡与“无常”觌面，先有可卿自经；秦钟夭逝；自又中父妾厌胜之术，几死；继以金钏投井；尤二姐吞金；而所爱之侍儿晴雯又被遣，随殁。 悲凉之雾，遍被华林，然呼吸而领会之者，独宝玉而已。……他便带了两个小丫头到一石后，也不怎么样，只问他二人道，“自我去了，你袭人姐姐可打发人瞧晴雯姐姐去了不曾？”这一个答道，“打发宋妈妈瞧去了。”宝玉道，“回来说什么？”小丫头道，“回来说晴雯姐姐直着脖子叫了一夜，今儿早起就闭了眼，住了口，人事不知，也出不得一声儿了，只有倒气的分儿了。”宝玉忙问道，“一夜叫的是谁？”小丫头子道，（“一夜叫的是娘。”宝玉拭泪道，“还叫谁？”小丫头说，）“没有听见叫别人。”宝玉道，“你糊涂，想必没听真。”（……因又想：）“虽然临终未见，如今且去灵前一拜，也算尽这五六年的情肠。”……遂一径出园，往前日之处来，意为停柩在内。谁知他哥嫂见他一气，便回了进去，希图得几两发送例银。王夫人闻知，便赏了十两银子；又命“即刻送到外头焚化了罢。‘女儿痨’死的，断不可留！”他哥嫂听了这话，一面就雇了人来入殓，抬往城外化人厂去了。……宝玉走来扑了个空，……自立了半天，别没法儿，只得翻身进入园中，待回自房，甚觉无趣，因乃顺路来找黛玉，偏他不在房中。……又到蘅芜院中，只见寂静无人。……仍往潇湘馆来，偏黛玉尚未回来。……正在不知所以之际，忽见王夫人的丫头进来找他，说，“老爷回来了，找你呢。又得了好题目来了，快走快走！”宝玉听了，只得跟了出来。……彼时贾政正与众幕友谈论寻秋之胜；又说，“临散时忽然谈及一事，最是千古佳谈，‘风流俊逸忠义慷慨’八字皆备。到是个好题目，大家都要作一首挽词。”众人听了，都忙请教是何等妙题。贾政乃说，“近日有一位恒王，出镇青州。这恒王最喜女色，且公余好武，因选了许多美女，日习武事。……其姬中有一姓林行四者，姿色既冠，且武艺更精，皆呼为林四娘，恒王最得意，遂超拔林四娘统辖诸姬，又呼为姽婳将军。”众清客都称“妙极神奇！竟以‘姽婳’下加‘将军’二字，更觉妩媚风流，真绝世奇文！想这恒王也是第一风流人物了。”……（戚本第七十八回，括弧中句据程本补。）
…… He took two little girls to Yishihou, but they weren't very good, and only asked the two of them, "I'm gone, can you send someone to see if Sister Qingwen has gone?" This one replied, "I sent Mother Song to take a look." Baoyu said, "What did you say when you came back?" The little girl said, "Come back and say that Sister Qingwen has been screaming all night, and she closed her eyes and stopped her mouth when she got up early today. Baoyu hurriedly asked, "Who is it called all night?" The little girl said, ("It's the mother who called me all night.") Baoyu wiped her tears and said, "Who else is it called?" The little girl said, "I didn't hear anyone calling me." Baoyu said, "You are confused, you must not have heard it seriously." ”（…… Because I thought again:)"Although I haven't seen you on my deathbed, now I will go to the spirit to worship you, and I will count the love of these five or six years." ”…… So he walked straight out of the garden and went to the place where he had been the day before, thinking that the coffin was parked inside. Who knew that his brother and sister-in-law saw him id_0000 breathing, so they went back in, hoping to get a few taels of silver. When Mrs. Wang heard about it, she rewarded him with ten taels of silver; He also ordered, "Immediately send it outside to be incinerated." 'Daughter tuberculosis' is dead, and it must not be kept! When his brother and sister-in-law heard this, they hired someone to bury him and carried him to the chemical factory outside the city. …… Baoyu came and threw herself into the air,...... After standing on his own for a long time, he had no choice but to turn over into the garden and wait for his room, which was very boring, so he stopped by to find Daiyu, but he was not in the room. …… When I arrived at the courtyard of Hengwu again, I saw that it was silent and uninhabited. …… I still went to the Xiaoxiang Pavilion, but Daiyu has not yet returned. …… Just when he didn't know why, he suddenly saw Mrs. Wang's girl come in to him and said, "The master is back, looking for you." Another good topic is coming, hurry up and go! Baoyu listened and had to follow. …… At that time, Jia Zheng was talking to his aides about the victory of autumn; He also said, "When I was leaving, I suddenly talked about something, which is the best story of the ages, and the eight characters of 'romantic and handsome, loyal and generous' are all available." When it comes to a good topic, everyone has to write an elegy. Everyone listened and hurriedly asked what a wonderful question it was. Jia Zhengnai said, "Recently, there was a Heng Wang who went out to Qingzhou. This King of Heng likes women the most, and he likes martial arts in his spare time, so he chose many beauties and practiced martial arts every day. …… Among the concubines, there was a woman named Lin Xingsi, who was both beautiful and more skilled in martial arts, and was called Lin Siniang, and King Heng was the most proud, so he promoted Lin Siniang to command the concubines, and also called him the general of the concubine. All the guests said, "It's wonderful!" I actually added the word 'general' to '姽婳', which made me feel even more charming and romantic, truly a peerless and wonderful article! I think this King Heng is also the first romantic figure. ”…… (Qi Ben Chapter 78, the sentence in parentheses is supplemented by Cheng Ben.) ）《石头记》结局，虽早隐现于宝玉幻梦中，而八十回仅露“悲音”，殊难必其究竟。比乾隆五十七年（一七九二），乃有百二十回之排印本出，改名《红楼梦》，字句亦时有不同，程伟元序其前云，“……然原本目录百二十卷，……爰为竭力搜罗，自藏书家甚至故纸堆中，无不留心。数年以来，仅积有二十余卷。一日，偶于鼓担上得十余卷，遂重价购之。……然漶漫不可收拾，乃同友人细加厘剔，截长补短，钞成全部，复为镌板以公同好。《石头记》全书至是始告成矣。”友人盖谓高鹗，亦有序，末题“乾隆辛亥冬至后一日”，先于程序者一年。
《石头记》结局，虽早隐现于宝玉幻梦中，而八十回仅露“悲音”，殊难必其究竟。 比乾隆五十七年（一七九二），乃有百二十回之排印本出，改名《红楼梦》，字句亦时有不同，程伟元序其前云，“…… 然原本目录百二十卷，…… 爰为竭力搜罗，自藏书家甚至故纸堆中，无不留心。 数年以来，仅积有二十余卷。 一日，偶于鼓担上得十余卷，遂重价购之。 …… 然漶漫不可收拾，乃同友人细加厘剔，截长补短，钞成全部，复为镌板以公同好。 《石头记》全书至是始告成矣。 ”友人盖谓高鹗，亦有序，末题“乾隆辛亥冬至后一日”，先于程序者一年。后四十回虽数量止初本之半，而大故迭起，破败死亡相继，与所谓“食尽鸟飞独存白地”者颇符，惟结末又稍振。宝玉先失其通灵玉，状类失神。会贾政将赴外任，欲于宝玉娶妇后始就道，以黛玉羸弱，乃迎宝钗。姻事由王熙凤谋画，运行甚密，而卒为黛玉所知，咯血，病日甚，至宝玉成婚之日遂卒。宝玉知将婚，自以为必黛玉，欣然临席，比见新妇为宝钗，乃悲叹复病。时元妃先薨；贾赦以“交通外官倚势凌弱”革职查抄，累及荣府；史太君又寻亡；妙玉则遭盗劫，不知所终；王熙凤既失势，亦郁郁死。宝玉病亦加，一日垂绝，忽有一僧持玉来，遂苏，见僧复气绝，历噩梦而觉；乃忽改行，发愤欲振家声，次年应乡试，以第七名中式。宝钗亦有孕，而宝玉忽亡去。贾政既葬母于金陵，将归京师，雪夜泊舟毗陵驿，见一人光头赤足，披大红猩猩毡斗篷，向之下拜，审视知为宝玉。方欲就语，忽来一僧一道，挟以俱去，且不知何人作歌，云“归大荒”，追之无有，“只见白茫茫一片旷野”而已。“后人见了这本传奇，亦曾题过四句，为作者缘起之言更进一竿云：‘说到酸辛事，荒唐愈可悲，由来同一梦，休笑世人痴。’”（第一百二十回）
后四十回虽数量止初本之半，而大故迭起，破败死亡相继，与所谓“食尽鸟飞独存白地”者颇符，惟结末又稍振。 宝玉先失其通灵玉，状类失神。 会贾政将赴外任，欲于宝玉娶妇后始就道，以黛玉羸弱，乃迎宝钗。 姻事由王熙凤谋画，运行甚密，而卒为黛玉所知，咯血，病日甚，至宝玉成婚之日遂卒。 宝玉知将婚，自以为必黛玉，欣然临席，比见新妇为宝钗，乃悲叹复病。 时元妃先薨；贾赦以“交通外官倚势凌弱”革职查抄，累及荣府；史太君又寻亡；妙玉则遭盗劫，不知所终；王熙凤既失势，亦郁郁死。 宝玉病亦加，一日垂绝，忽有一僧持玉来，遂苏，见僧复气绝，历噩梦而觉；乃忽改行，发愤欲振家声，次年应乡试，以第七名中式。 宝钗亦有孕，而宝玉忽亡去。 贾政既葬母于金陵，将归京师，雪夜泊舟毗陵驿，见一人光头赤足，披大红猩猩毡斗篷，向之下拜，审视知为宝玉。 方欲就语，忽来一僧一道，挟以俱去，且不知何人作歌，云“归大荒”，追之无有，“只见白茫茫一片旷野”而已。 “后人见了这本传奇，亦曾题过四句，为作者缘起之言更进一竿云：‘说到酸辛事，荒唐愈可悲，由来同一梦，休笑世人痴。 ’”（第一百二十回）全书所写，虽不外悲喜之情，聚散之迹，而人物事故，则摆脱旧套，与在先之人情小说甚不同。如开篇所说：
Although the whole book is written in addition to the feelings of joy and sorrow, the traces of gathering and dispersing, the characters and accidents get rid of the old routine, which is very different from the previous human novels. As mentioned at the beginning:空空道人遂向石头说道，“石兄，你这一段故事，……据我看来：第一件，无朝代年纪可考；第二件，并无大贤大忠，理朝廷治风俗的善政。其中只不过几个异样女子——或情，或痴，或小才微善——亦无班姑蔡女之德能。我纵钞去，恐世人不爱看呢。”
The empty Daoist then said to the stone, "Brother Shi, this story of yours,...... In my opinion: the first one, there is no dynasty age to examine; The second thing is that there is no great sage and loyalty, and the good governance of the court to govern customs. Among them, there are only a few strange women—either love, infatuation, or little talent—and they do not have the virtue of Ban Gu and Cai Nu. I let the money go, I'm afraid the world won't like to see it. ”石头笑曰，“我师何太痴也！若云无朝代可考，今我师竟假借汉唐等年纪添缀，又有何难？但我想历来野史，皆蹈一辙；莫如我不借此套，反到新鲜别致，不过只取其事体情理罢了。……历来野史，或讪谤君相，或贬人妻女，奸淫凶恶，不可胜数。……至若才子佳人等书，则又千部共出一套，且其中终不能不涉于淫滥，以致满纸‘潘安子建’，‘西子文君’；……且环婢开口，即‘者也之乎’，非文即理，故逐一看去，悉皆自相矛盾，大不近情理之说。竟不如我半世亲睹亲闻的这几个女子，虽不敢说强似前代所有书中之人，但事迹原委，亦可以消愁破闷也。……至若离合悲欢，兴衰际遇，则又追踪蹑迹，不敢稍加穿凿，徒为哄人之目，而反失其真传者。……”（戚本第一回）
石头笑曰，“我师何太痴也！若云无朝代可考，今我师竟假借汉唐等年纪添缀，又有何难？但我想历来野史，皆蹈一辙；莫如我不借此套，反到新鲜别致，不过只取其事体情理罢了。 …… 历来野史，或讪谤君相，或贬人妻女，奸淫凶恶，不可胜数。 …… 至若才子佳人等书，则又千部共出一套，且其中终不能不涉于淫滥，以致满纸‘潘安子建’，‘西子文君’；…… 且环婢开口，即‘者也之乎’，非文即理，故逐一看去，悉皆自相矛盾，大不近情理之说。 竟不如我半世亲睹亲闻的这几个女子，虽不敢说强似前代所有书中之人，但事迹原委，亦可以消愁破闷也。 …… 至若离合悲欢，兴衰际遇，则又追踪蹑迹，不敢稍加穿凿，徒为哄人之目，而反失其真传者。 ……”（戚本第一回）盖叙述皆存本真，闻见悉所亲历，正因写实，转成新鲜。而世人忽略此言，每欲别求深义，揣测之说，久而遂多。今汰去悠谬不足辩，如谓是刺和珅（《谭瀛室笔记》）藏谶纬（《寄蜗残赘》）明易象（《金玉缘》评语）之类，而著其世所广传者于下：
盖叙述皆存本真，闻见悉所亲历，正因写实，转成新鲜。 而世人忽略此言，每欲别求深义，揣测之说，久而遂多。 今汰去悠谬不足辩，如谓是刺和珅（《谭瀛室笔记》）藏谶纬（《寄蜗残赘》）明易象（《金玉缘》评语）之类，而著其世所广传者于下：一，纳兰成德家事说。自来信此者甚多。陈康祺（《燕下乡脞录》五）记姜宸英典康熙己卯顺天乡试获咎事，因及其师徐时栋（号柳泉）之说云，“小说《红楼梦》一书，即记故相明珠家事，金钗十二，皆纳兰侍御所奉为上客者也，宝钗影高澹人；妙玉即影西溟先生：‘妙’为‘少女’，‘姜’亦妇人之美称；‘如玉’‘如英’，义可通假。……”侍御谓明珠之子成德，后改名性德，字容若。张维屏（《诗人征略》）云，“贾宝玉盖即容若也；《红楼梦》所云，乃其髫龄时事。”俞樾（《小浮梅闲话》）亦谓其“中举人止十五岁，于书中所述颇合”。然其他事迹，乃皆不符；胡适作《红楼梦考证》（《文存》三），已历正其失。最有力者，一为姜宸英有《祭纳兰成德文》，相契之深，非妙玉于宝玉可比；一为成德死时年三十一，时明珠方贵盛也。
一，纳兰成德家事说。 自来信此者甚多。 陈康祺（《燕下乡脞录》五）记姜宸英典康熙己卯顺天乡试获咎事，因及其师徐时栋（号柳泉）之说云，“小说《红楼梦》一书，即记故相明珠家事，金钗十二，皆纳兰侍御所奉为上客者也，宝钗影高澹人；妙玉即影西溟先生：‘妙’为‘少女’，‘姜’亦妇人之美称；‘如玉’‘如英’，义可通假。 ……”侍御谓明珠之子成德，后改名性德，字容若。 张维屏（《诗人征略》）云，“贾宝玉盖即容若也；《红楼梦》所云，乃其髫龄时事。 ”俞樾（《小浮梅闲话》）亦谓其“中举人止十五岁，于书中所述颇合”。 然其他事迹，乃皆不符；胡适作《红楼梦考证》（《文存》三），已历正其失。 最有力者，一为姜宸英有《祭纳兰成德文》，相契之深，非妙玉于宝玉可比；一为成德死时年三十一，时明珠方贵盛也。二，清世祖与董鄂妃故事说。王梦阮沈瓶庵合著之《红楼梦索隐》为此说。其提要有云，“盖尝闻之京师故老云，是书全为清世祖与董鄂妃而作，兼及当时诸名王奇女也。……”而又指董鄂妃为即秦淮旧妓嫁为冒襄妾之董小宛，清兵下江南，掠以北，有宠于清世祖，封贵妃，已而夭逝；世祖哀痛，乃遁迹五台山为僧云。孟森作《董小宛考》（《心史丛刊》三集），则历摘此说之谬，最有力者为小宛生于明天启甲子，若以顺治七年入宫，已二十八岁矣，而其时清世祖方十四岁。
二，清世祖与董鄂妃故事说。 王梦阮沈瓶庵合著之《红楼梦索隐》为此说。 其提要有云，“盖尝闻之京师故老云，是书全为清世祖与董鄂妃而作，兼及当时诸名王奇女也。 ……”而又指董鄂妃为即秦淮旧妓嫁为冒襄妾之董小宛，清兵下江南，掠以北，有宠于清世祖，封贵妃，已而夭逝；世祖哀痛，乃遁迹五台山为僧云。 孟森作《董小宛考》（《心史丛刊》三集），则历摘此说之谬，最有力者为小宛生于明天启甲子，若以顺治七年入宫，已二十八岁矣，而其时清世祖方十四岁。三，康熙朝政治状态说。此说即发端于徐时栋，而大备于蔡元培之《石头记索隐》。开卷即云，“《石头记》者，清康熙朝政治小说也。作者持民族主义甚挚，书中本事，在吊明之亡，揭清之失，而尤于汉族名士仕清者寓痛惜之意。……”于是比拟引申，以求其合，以“红”为影“朱”字；以“石头”为指金陵；以“贾”为斥伪朝；以“金陵十二钗”为拟清初江南之名士：如林黛玉影朱彝尊，王熙凤影余国柱，史湘云影陈维崧，宝钗妙玉则从徐说，旁征博引，用力甚勤。然胡适既考得作者生平，而此说遂不立，最有力者即曹雪芹为汉军，而《石头记》实其自叙也。
Third, the political state of the Kangxi Dynasty said. This theory originated from Xu Shidong, and was greatly prepared in Cai Yuanpei's "Stone Record Suo Yin". The opening of the book says, "The Stone Record" is also a political novel of the Kangxi Dynasty of the Qing Dynasty. The author is very sincere about nationalism, and the ability in the book is to mourn the death of the Ming Dynasty and reveal the loss of the Qing Dynasty, especially the Han celebrities who are scholars of the Qing Dynasty. ......" is then compared to extension in order to achieve its compatibility, with "red" as the shadow of the word "Zhu"; "stone" refers to Jinling; "Jia" is used as a denunciation of the puppet dynasty; The "Twelve Hairpins of Jinling" are used as the famous scholars of Jiangnan in the early Qing Dynasty: such as Lin Daiyu Yingzhun, Wang Xifeng Yingyu Yu Guozhu, Shi Xiangyun Ying, Chen Weisong, and Baochai Miaoyu from Xu Shuo. However, Hu Shi had already investigated the author's life, and this theory was not established, the most powerful one was Cao Xueqin as a Han army, and "Stone Record" was actually his own narrative.然谓《红楼梦》乃作者自叙，与本书开篇契合者，其说之出实最先，而确定反最后。嘉庆初，袁枚（《随园诗话》二）已云，“康熙中，曹练亭为江宁织造，……其子雪芹撰《红楼梦》一书，备记风月繁华之盛。中有所谓大观园者，即余之随园也。”末二语盖夸，余亦有小误（如以楝为练，以孙为子），但已明言雪芹之书，所记者其闻见矣。而世间信者特少，王国维（《静庵文集》）且诘难此类，以为“所谓‘亲见亲闻’者，亦可自旁观者之口言之，未必躬为剧中之人物”也，迨胡适作考证，乃较然彰明，知曹雪芹实生于荣华，终于苓落，半生经历，绝似“石头”，著书西郊，未就而没；晚出全书，乃高鹗续成之者矣。
然谓《红楼梦》乃作者自叙，与本书开篇契合者，其说之出实最先，而确定反最后。 嘉庆初，袁枚（《随园诗话》二）已云，“康熙中，曹练亭为江宁织造，…… 其子雪芹撰《红楼梦》一书，备记风月繁华之盛。 中有所谓大观园者，即余之随园也。 ”末二语盖夸，余亦有小误（如以楝为练，以孙为子），但已明言雪芹之书，所记者其闻见矣。 而世间信者特少，王国维（《静庵文集》）且诘难此类，以为“所谓‘亲见亲闻’者，亦可自旁观者之口言之，未必躬为剧中之人物”也，迨胡适作考证，乃较然彰明，知曹雪芹实生于荣华，终于苓落，半生经历，绝似“石头”，著书西郊，未就而没；晚出全书，乃高鹗续成之者矣。雪芹名霑，字芹溪，一字芹圃，正白旗汉军。祖寅，字子清，号楝亭，康熙中为江宁织造。清世祖南巡时，五次以织造署为行宫，后四次皆寅在任。然颇嗜风雅，尝刻古书十余种，为时所称；亦能文，所著有《楝亭诗钞》五卷《词钞》一卷（《四库书目》），传奇二种（《在园杂志》）。寅子頫，即雪芹父，亦为江宁织造，故雪芹生于南京。时盖康熙末。雍正六年，頫卸任，雪芹亦归北京，时约十岁。然不知何因，是后曹氏似遭巨变，家顿落，雪芹至中年，乃至贫居西郊，啜粥，但犹傲兀，时复纵酒赋诗，而作《石头记》盖亦此际。乾隆二十七年，子殇，雪芹伤感成疾，至除夕，卒，年四十余（一七一九？——一七六三）。其《石头记》尚未就，今所传者止八十回（详见《胡适文选》）。
雪芹名霑，字芹溪，一字芹圃，正白旗汉军。 祖寅，字子清，号楝亭，康熙中为江宁织造。 清世祖南巡时，五次以织造署为行宫，后四次皆寅在任。 然颇嗜风雅，尝刻古书十余种，为时所称；亦能文，所著有《楝亭诗钞》五卷《词钞》一卷（《四库书目》），传奇二种（《在园杂志》）。 寅子頫，即雪芹父，亦为江宁织造，故雪芹生于南京。 时盖康熙末。 雍正六年，頫卸任，雪芹亦归北京，时约十岁。 然不知何因，是后曹氏似遭巨变，家顿落，雪芹至中年，乃至贫居西郊，啜粥，但犹傲兀，时复纵酒赋诗，而作《石头记》盖亦此际。 乾隆二十七年，子殇，雪芹伤感成疾，至除夕，卒，年四十余（一七一九？——一七六三）。 其《石头记》尚未就，今所传者止八十回（详见《胡适文选》）。言后四十回为高鹗作者，俞樾（《小浮梅闲话》）云，“《船山诗草》有《赠高兰墅鹗同年》一首云，‘艳情人自说《红楼》。’注云，‘《红楼梦》八十回以后，俱兰墅所补。’然则此书非出一手。按乡会试增五言八韵诗，始乾隆朝，而书中叙科场事已有诗，则其为高君所补可证矣。”然鹗所作序，仅言“友人程子小泉过予，以其所购全书见示，且曰，‘此仆数年铢积寸累之辛心，将付剞劂，公同好。子闲且惫矣，盍分任之。’予以是书……尚不背于名教，……遂襄其役。”盖不欲明言己出，而寮友则颇有知之者。鹗即字兰墅，镶黄旗汉军，乾隆戊申举人，乙卯进士，旋入翰林，官侍读，又尝为嘉庆辛酉顺天乡试同考官。其补《红楼梦》当在乾隆辛亥时，未成进士，“闲且惫矣”，故于雪芹萧条之感，偶或相通。然心志未灰，则与所谓“暮年之人，贫病交攻，渐渐的露出那下世光景来”（戚本第一回）者又绝异。是以续书虽亦悲凉，而贾氏终于“兰桂齐芳”，家业复起，殊不类茫茫白地，真成干净者矣。
言后四十回为高鹗作者，俞樾（《小浮梅闲话》）云，“《船山诗草》有《赠高兰墅鹗同年》一首云，‘艳情人自说《红楼》。 ’注云，‘《红楼梦》八十回以后，俱兰墅所补。 ’然则此书非出一手。 按乡会试增五言八韵诗，始乾隆朝，而书中叙科场事已有诗，则其为高君所补可证矣。 ”然鹗所作序，仅言“友人程子小泉过予，以其所购全书见示，且曰，‘此仆数年铢积寸累之辛心，将付剞劂，公同好。 子闲且惫矣，盍分任之。 ’予以是书…… 尚不背于名教，…… 遂襄其役。 ”盖不欲明言己出，而寮友则颇有知之者。 鹗即字兰墅，镶黄旗汉军，乾隆戊申举人，乙卯进士，旋入翰林，官侍读，又尝为嘉庆辛酉顺天乡试同考官。 其补《红楼梦》当在乾隆辛亥时，未成进士，“闲且惫矣”，故于雪芹萧条之感，偶或相通。 然心志未灰，则与所谓“暮年之人，贫病交攻，渐渐的露出那下世光景来”（戚本第一回）者又绝异。 是以续书虽亦悲凉，而贾氏终于“兰桂齐芳”，家业复起，殊不类茫茫白地，真成干净者矣。续《红楼梦》八十回本者，尚不止一高鹗。俞平伯从戚蓼生所序之八十回本旧评中抉剔，知先有续书三十回，似叙贾氏子孙流散，宝玉贫寒不堪，“悬崖撒手”，终于为僧；然其详不可考（《红楼梦辨》下有专论）。或谓“戴君诚夫见一旧时真本，八十回之后，皆与今本不同，荣宁籍没后，皆极萧条；宝钗亦早卒，宝玉无以作家，至沦于击柝之流。史湘云则为乞丐，后乃与宝玉仍成夫妇。……闻吴润生中丞家尚藏有其本。”（蒋瑞藻《小说考证》七引《续阅微草堂笔记》）此又一本，盖亦续书。二书所补，或俱未契于作者本怀，然长夜无晨，则与前书之伏线亦不背。
续《红楼梦》八十回本者，尚不止一高鹗。 俞平伯从戚蓼生所序之八十回本旧评中抉剔，知先有续书三十回，似叙贾氏子孙流散，宝玉贫寒不堪，“悬崖撒手”，终于为僧；然其详不可考（《红楼梦辨》下有专论）。 或谓“戴君诚夫见一旧时真本，八十回之后，皆与今本不同，荣宁籍没后，皆极萧条；宝钗亦早卒，宝玉无以作家，至沦于击柝之流。 史湘云则为乞丐，后乃与宝玉仍成夫妇。 …… 闻吴润生中丞家尚藏有其本。 ”（蒋瑞藻《小说考证》七引《续阅微草堂笔记》）此又一本，盖亦续书。 二书所补，或俱未契于作者本怀，然长夜无晨，则与前书之伏线亦不背。此他续作，纷纭尚多，如《后红楼梦》，《红楼后梦》，《续红楼梦》，《红楼复梦》，《红楼梦补》，《红楼补梦》，《红楼重梦》，《红楼再梦》，《红楼幻梦》，《红楼圆梦》，《增补红楼》，《鬼红楼》，《红楼梦影》等。大率承高鹗续书而更补其缺陷，结以“团圆”；甚或谓作者本以为书中无一好人，因而钻刺吹求，大加笔伐。但据本书自说，则仅乃如实抒写，绝无讥弹，独于自身，深所忏悔。此固常情所嘉，故《红楼梦》至今为人爱重，然亦常情所怪，故复有人不满，奋起而补订圆满之。此足见人之度量相去之远，亦曹雪芹之所以不可及也。仍录彼语，以结此篇：
There are many other sequels, such as "Dream of Red Mansions", "Dream of Red Mansions", "Continuation of Dream of Red Mansions", "Dream of Red Mansions", "Dream of Red Mansions", "Dream of Red Mansions", "Dream of Red Mansions", "Dream of Red Mansions", etc. Most of them inherited Gao E's continuation of the book and made up for its shortcomings, and concluded with a "reunion"; Some even think that the author originally thought that there was no good person in the book, so he drilled and praised it, and made a lot of criticism. However, according to this book, it is only written truthfully, without ridicule, and it is deeply repentant for itself. This is certainly a common commendation, so "Dream of Red Mansions" is still loved and valued by people, but it is also strange to common sense, so some people are dissatisfied and rise up to make it perfect. This shows the great difference between people's measurements, which is why Cao Xueqin cannot match him. I still transcribe his words to conclude this article:……作者自云：因曾历过一番梦幻之后，故将真事隐去，而借“通灵”之说，撰此《石头记》一书也。……自又云：今风尘碌碌，一事无成，忽念及当日所有之女子，一一细考较去，觉其行止见识，皆出于我之上。何我堂堂须眉，诚不若彼裙钗女子？实愧则有余，悔又无益，是大无可如何之日也。当此，则自欲将已往所赖天恩祖德，锦衣纨绔之时，饫甘餍肥之日，背父兄教育之恩，负师友规训之德，以致今日一技无成，半生潦倒之罪，编述一集，以告天下人。我之罪固不免，然闺阁中本自历历有人，万不可因我之不肖，自己护短，一并使其泯灭。虽今日之茅椽蓬牖，瓦灶绳床，其晨夕风露，阶柳庭花，亦未有妨我之襟怀，束笔阁墨；虽我未学，下笔无文，又何妨用俚语村言，敷衍出一段故事来，亦可使闺阁照传，复可悦世之目，破人愁闷，不亦宜乎？……（戚本第一回）
…… 作者自云：因曾历过一番梦幻之后，故将真事隐去，而借“通灵”之说，撰此《石头记》一书也。 …… 自又云：今风尘碌碌，一事无成，忽念及当日所有之女子，一一细考较去，觉其行止见识，皆出于我之上。 何我堂堂须眉，诚不若彼裙钗女子？实愧则有余，悔又无益，是大无可如何之日也。 当此，则自欲将已往所赖天恩祖德，锦衣纨绔之时，饫甘餍肥之日，背父兄教育之恩，负师友规训之德，以致今日一技无成，半生潦倒之罪，编述一集，以告天下人。 我之罪固不免，然闺阁中本自历历有人，万不可因我之不肖，自己护短，一并使其泯灭。 虽今日之茅椽蓬牖，瓦灶绳床，其晨夕风露，阶柳庭花，亦未有妨我之襟怀，束笔阁墨；虽我未学，下笔无文，又何妨用俚语村言，敷衍出一段故事来，亦可使闺阁照传，复可悦世之目，破人愁闷，不亦宜乎？…… （戚本第一回）

第二十五篇　清之以小说见才学者

第二十五篇　清之以小说见才学者

第二十五篇　清之以小说见才学者

第二十五篇 清之以小说见才学者以小说为庋学问文章之具，与寓惩劝同意而异用者，在清盖莫先于《野叟曝言》。其书光绪初始出，序云康熙时江阴夏氏作，其人“以名诸生贡于成均，既不得志，乃应大人先生之聘，辄祭酒帷幕中，遍历燕晋秦陇。……继而假道黔蜀，自湘浮汉，溯江而归。所历既富，于是发为文章，益有奇气，……然首已斑矣。（自是）屏绝进取，壹意著书”，成《野叟曝言》二十卷，然仅以示友人，不欲问世，迨印行时，已小有缺失；一本独全，疑他人补足之。二本皆无撰人名，金武祥（《江阴艺文志》凡例）则云夏二铭作。二铭，夏敬渠之号也；光绪《江阴县志》（十七《文苑传》）云，“敬渠，字懋修，诸生；英敏绩学，通史经，旁及诸子百家礼乐兵刑天文算数之学，靡不淹贯。……生平足迹几遍海内，所交尽贤豪。著有《纲目举正》，《经史余论》，《全史约编》，《学古编》，诗文集若干卷。”与序所言者颇合，惟列于赵曦明之后，则乾隆中盖尚存。
以小说为庋学问文章之具，与寓惩劝同意而异用者，在清盖莫先于《野叟曝言》。 其书光绪初始出，序云康熙时江阴夏氏作，其人“以名诸生贡于成均，既不得志，乃应大人先生之聘，辄祭酒帷幕中，遍历燕晋秦陇。 …… 继而假道黔蜀，自湘浮汉，溯江而归。 所历既富，于是发为文章，益有奇气，…… 然首已斑矣。 （自是）屏绝进取，壹意著书”，成《野叟曝言》二十卷，然仅以示友人，不欲问世，迨印行时，已小有缺失；一本独全，疑他人补足之。 二本皆无撰人名，金武祥（《江阴艺文志》凡例）则云夏二铭作。 二铭，夏敬渠之号也；光绪《江阴县志》（十七《文苑传》）云，“敬渠，字懋修，诸生；英敏绩学，通史经，旁及诸子百家礼乐兵刑天文算数之学，靡不淹贯。 …… 生平足迹几遍海内，所交尽贤豪。 著有《纲目举正》，《经史余论》，《全史约编》，《学古编》，诗文集若干卷。 ”与序所言者颇合，惟列于赵曦明之后，则乾隆中盖尚存。《野叟曝言》庞然巨帙，回数多至百五十四回，以“奋武揆文天下无双正士熔经铸史人间第一奇书”二十字编卷，即作者所以浑括其全书。至于内容，则如凡例言，凡“叙事，说理，谈经，论史，教孝，劝忠，运筹，决策，艺之兵诗医算，情之喜怒哀惧，讲道学，辟邪说，……”无所不包，而以文白为之主。白字素臣，“是铮铮铁汉，落落奇才，吟遍江山，胸罗星斗。说他不求宦达，却见理如漆雕；说他不会风流，却多情如宋玉。挥毫作赋，则颉颃相如；抵掌谈兵，则伯仲诸葛，力能扛鼎，退然如不胜衣；勇可屠龙，凛然若将陨谷。旁通历数，下视一行；闲涉岐黄，肩随仲景。以朋友为性命；奉名教若神明。真是极有血性的真儒，不识炎凉的名士。他平生有一段大本领，是止崇正学，不信异端；有一副大手眼，是解人所不能解，言人所不能言”（第一回）。然而明君在上，君子不穷，超擢飞腾，莫不如意。书名辟鬼，举手除妖，百夷慑于神威，四灵集其家囿。文功武烈，并萃一身，天子崇礼，号曰“素父”。而仍有异术，既能易形，又工内媚，姬妾罗列，生二十四男。男又大贵，且生百孙；孙又生子，复有云孙。其母水氏年百岁，既见“六世同堂”，来献寿者亦七十国；皇帝赠联，至称为“镇国卫圣仁孝慈寿宣成文母水太君”（百四十四回）。凡人臣荣显之事，为士人意想所能及者，此书几毕载矣，惟尚不敢希帝王。至于排斥异端，用力尤劲，道人释子，多被诛夷，坛场荒凉，塔寺毁废，独有“素父”一家，乃嘉祥备具，为万流宗仰而已。
《野叟曝言》庞然巨帙，回数多至百五十四回，以“奋武揆文天下无双正士熔经铸史人间第一奇书”二十字编卷，即作者所以浑括其全书。 至于内容，则如凡例言，凡“叙事，说理，谈经，论史，教孝，劝忠，运筹，决策，艺之兵诗医算，情之喜怒哀惧，讲道学，辟邪说，……”无所不包，而以文白为之主。 白字素臣，“是铮铮铁汉，落落奇才，吟遍江山，胸罗星斗。 说他不求宦达，却见理如漆雕；说他不会风流，却多情如宋玉。 挥毫作赋，则颉颃相如；抵掌谈兵，则伯仲诸葛，力能扛鼎，退然如不胜衣；勇可屠龙，凛然若将陨谷。 旁通历数，下视一行；闲涉岐黄，肩随仲景。 以朋友为性命；奉名教若神明。 真是极有血性的真儒，不识炎凉的名士。 他平生有一段大本领，是止崇正学，不信异端；有一副大手眼，是解人所不能解，言人所不能言”（第一回）。 然而明君在上，君子不穷，超擢飞腾，莫不如意。 书名辟鬼，举手除妖，百夷慑于神威，四灵集其家囿。 文功武烈，并萃一身，天子崇礼，号曰“素父”。 而仍有异术，既能易形，又工内媚，姬妾罗列，生二十四男。 男又大贵，且生百孙；孙又生子，复有云孙。 其母水氏年百岁，既见“六世同堂”，来献寿者亦七十国；皇帝赠联，至称为“镇国卫圣仁孝慈寿宣成文母水太君”（百四十四回）。 凡人臣荣显之事，为士人意想所能及者，此书几毕载矣，惟尚不敢希帝王。 至于排斥异端，用力尤劲，道人释子，多被诛夷，坛场荒凉，塔寺毁废，独有“素父”一家，乃嘉祥备具，为万流宗仰而已。《野叟曝言》云是作者“抱负不凡，未得黼黻休明，至老经猷莫展”，因而命笔，比之“野老无事，曝日清谈”（凡例云）。可知衒学寄慨，实其主因，圣而尊荣，则为抱负，与明人之神魔及佳人才子小说面目似异，根柢实同，惟以异端易魔，以圣人易才子而已。意既夸诞，文复无味，殊不足以称艺文，但欲知当时所谓“理学家”之心理，则于中颇可考见。雍正末，江阴人杨名时为云南巡抚，其乡人拔贡生夏宗澜尝从之问《易》，以名时为李光地门人，故并宗光地而说益怪。乾隆初，名时入为礼部尚书，宗澜亦以经学荐授国子监助教，又历主他讲席，仍终身师名时（《四库书目》六及十《江阴志》十六及十七）。稍后又有诸生夏祖熊，亦“博通群经，尤笃好性命之学，患二氏说漫衍，因复考辨以归于正”（《江阴志》十七）。盖江阴自有杨名时（卒赠太子太傅谥文定）而影响颇及于其乡之士风；自有夏宗澜师杨名时而影响又颇及于夏氏之家学，大率与当时当道名公同意，崇程朱而斥陆王，以“打僧骂道”为唯一盛业，故若文白者之言行际遇，固非独作者一人之理想人物矣。文白或云即作者自寓，析“夏”字作之；又有时太师，则杨名时也，其崇仰盖承夏宗澜之绪余，然因此遂或误以《野叟曝言》为宗澜作。
《野叟曝言》云是作者“抱负不凡，未得黼黻休明，至老经猷莫展”，因而命笔，比之“野老无事，曝日清谈”（凡例云）。 可知衒学寄慨，实其主因，圣而尊荣，则为抱负，与明人之神魔及佳人才子小说面目似异，根柢实同，惟以异端易魔，以圣人易才子而已。 意既夸诞，文复无味，殊不足以称艺文，但欲知当时所谓“理学家”之心理，则于中颇可考见。 雍正末，江阴人杨名时为云南巡抚，其乡人拔贡生夏宗澜尝从之问《易》，以名时为李光地门人，故并宗光地而说益怪。 乾隆初，名时入为礼部尚书，宗澜亦以经学荐授国子监助教，又历主他讲席，仍终身师名时（《四库书目》六及十《江阴志》十六及十七）。 稍后又有诸生夏祖熊，亦“博通群经，尤笃好性命之学，患二氏说漫衍，因复考辨以归于正”（《江阴志》十七）。 盖江阴自有杨名时（卒赠太子太傅谥文定）而影响颇及于其乡之士风；自有夏宗澜师杨名时而影响又颇及于夏氏之家学，大率与当时当道名公同意，崇程朱而斥陆王，以“打僧骂道”为唯一盛业，故若文白者之言行际遇，固非独作者一人之理想人物矣。 文白或云即作者自寓，析“夏”字作之；又有时太师，则杨名时也，其崇仰盖承夏宗澜之绪余，然因此遂或误以《野叟曝言》为宗澜作。欲于小说见其才藻之美者，则有屠绅《蟫史》二十卷。绅字贤书，号笏岩，亦江阴人，世业农。绅幼孤，而资质聪敏，年十三即入邑庠，二十成进士，寻授云南师宗县知县，迁寻甸州知州，五校乡闱，颇称得士，后为广州同知。嘉庆六年以候补在北京，暴疾卒于客舍，年五十八（一七四四——一八〇一）。绅豪放嫉俗，生平慕汤显祖之为人，而作吏颇酷，又好内，姬侍众多（已上俱见《鹗亭诗话》附录）；为文则务为古涩艳异，晦其义旨，志怪有《六合内外琐言》，杂说有《鹗亭诗话》（见第二十二篇），皆如此。《蟫史》为长篇，署“磊砢山房原本”，金武祥（《粟香随笔》二）云是绅作。书中有桑蠋生，盖作者自寓，其言有云，“予，甲子生也。”与绅生年正同。开篇又云，“在昔吴侬官于粤岭，行年大衍有奇，海隅之行，若有所得，辄就见闻传闻之异辞，汇为一编。”且假傅鼐扞苗之事（在乾隆六十年）为主干，则始作当在嘉庆初，不数年而毕；有五年四月小停道人序。次年，则绅死矣。
欲于小说见其才藻之美者，则有屠绅《蟫史》二十卷。 绅字贤书，号笏岩，亦江阴人，世业农。 绅幼孤，而资质聪敏，年十三即入邑庠，二十成进士，寻授云南师宗县知县，迁寻甸州知州，五校乡闱，颇称得士，后为广州同知。 嘉庆六年以候补在北京，暴疾卒于客舍，年五十八（一七四四——一八〇一）。 绅豪放嫉俗，生平慕汤显祖之为人，而作吏颇酷，又好内，姬侍众多（已上俱见《鹗亭诗话》附录）；为文则务为古涩艳异，晦其义旨，志怪有《六合内外琐言》，杂说有《鹗亭诗话》（见第二十二篇），皆如此。 《蟫史》为长篇，署“磊砢山房原本”，金武祥（《粟香随笔》二）云是绅作。 书中有桑蠋生，盖作者自寓，其言有云，“予，甲子生也。 ”与绅生年正同。 开篇又云，“在昔吴侬官于粤岭，行年大衍有奇，海隅之行，若有所得，辄就见闻传闻之异辞，汇为一编。 ”且假傅鼐扞苗之事（在乾隆六十年）为主干，则始作当在嘉庆初，不数年而毕；有五年四月小停道人序。 次年，则绅死矣。《蟫史》首即言闽人桑蠋生海行，舟败堕水，流至甲子石之外澳，为捕鱼人所救，引以见甘鼎。鼎官指挥，方奉檄筑城防寇，求地形家，见生大喜，如其图依甲子石为垣，遂成神奇之城，敌不能瞰。又于地穴中得三箧书，其一凡二十卷，‘题曰‘彻土作稼之文，归墟野凫氏画’。又一箧为天人图，题曰‘眼藏须弥僧道作’。又一箧为方书，题曰‘六子携持极老人口授’。蠋生谓指挥曰，‘此书明明授我主宾矣。何言之？彻土，桑也；作稼，甘也。’……营龛于秘室，置之；行则藏枕中；有所求发明，则拜而同启视；两人大悦。”（第一回）已而有邝天龙者为乱，自署广州王，其党娄万赤有异术，则翊辅之。甘鼎进讨，有龙女来助，擒天龙，而万赤逸去。鼎以功晋位镇抚，仍随石珏协剿海寇，又破交人；万赤在交址，则仍不能得。旋擢兵马总帅，赴楚蜀黔广备九股苗，遂与诸苗战，多历奇险，然皆胜，其一事云：
《蟫史》首即言闽人桑蠋生海行，舟败堕水，流至甲子石之外澳，为捕鱼人所救，引以见甘鼎。 鼎官指挥，方奉檄筑城防寇，求地形家，见生大喜，如其图依甲子石为垣，遂成神奇之城，敌不能瞰。 又于地穴中得三箧书，其一凡二十卷，‘题曰‘彻土作稼之文，归墟野凫氏画’。 又一箧为天人图，题曰‘眼藏须弥僧道作’。 又一箧为方书，题曰‘六子携持极老人口授’。 蠋生谓指挥曰，‘此书明明授我主宾矣。 何言之？彻土，桑也；作稼，甘也。 ’…… 营龛于秘室，置之；行则藏枕中；有所求发明，则拜而同启视；两人大悦。 ”（第一回）已而有邝天龙者为乱，自署广州王，其党娄万赤有异术，则翊辅之。 甘鼎进讨，有龙女来助，擒天龙，而万赤逸去。 鼎以功晋位镇抚，仍随石珏协剿海寇，又破交人；万赤在交址，则仍不能得。 旋擢兵马总帅，赴楚蜀黔广备九股苗，遂与诸苗战，多历奇险，然皆胜，其一事云：……须臾，苗卒大呼曰，“汉将不敢见阵耶？”季孙引五百人，翼而进。两旗忽下，地中飞出滴血鸡六，向汉将啼；又六犬皆火色，亦嚎声如豺。军士面灰死，木立，仅倚其械。矩儿飞椎凿六犬脑，皆裂。木兰袖蛇医，引之啄一鸡，张喙死；五鸡连栖而不鸣。惟见瓦片所图鸡犬形，狼藉于地，实非有二物也。……复至金大都督营中，则癞牛病马各六，均有皮无毛；士卒为角触足踏者皆死，一牛龁金大都督之足，已齿陷于骨；矩儿挥两戚落牛首，齿仍不脱；木兰急遣虎头神凿去其齿，足骨亦折焉，令左右舁归大营。牛马奔突无所制，木兰以鲤鳞帕撒之，一鳞露一剑，并斫一十牛马。其物各吐火四五尺，鳞剑为之焦灼，火大延烧，牛马皆叫嚣自得。见猕猴掷身入，举手作霹雳声，暴雨灭火，平地起水丈余，牛马俱浸死。木兰喜曰，“吾固知乐王子能传灭火真人衣钵矣。”水退，见牛马皆无有，乃砌壁之破瓮朱书牛马字：是为鱻妖之“穷神尽化”云。……（卷九）
…… 须臾，苗卒大呼曰，“汉将不敢见阵耶？”季孙引五百人，翼而进。 两旗忽下，地中飞出滴血鸡六，向汉将啼；又六犬皆火色，亦嚎声如豺。 军士面灰死，木立，仅倚其械。 矩儿飞椎凿六犬脑，皆裂。 木兰袖蛇医，引之啄一鸡，张喙死；五鸡连栖而不鸣。 惟见瓦片所图鸡犬形，狼藉于地，实非有二物也。 …… 复至金大都督营中，则癞牛病马各六，均有皮无毛；士卒为角触足踏者皆死，一牛龁金大都督之足，已齿陷于骨；矩儿挥两戚落牛首，齿仍不脱；木兰急遣虎头神凿去其齿，足骨亦折焉，令左右舁归大营。 牛马奔突无所制，木兰以鲤鳞帕撒之，一鳞露一剑，并斫一十牛马。 其物各吐火四五尺，鳞剑为之焦灼，火大延烧，牛马皆叫嚣自得。 见猕猴掷身入，举手作霹雳声，暴雨灭火，平地起水丈余，牛马俱浸死。 木兰喜曰，“吾固知乐王子能传灭火真人衣钵矣。 ”水退，见牛马皆无有，乃砌壁之破瓮朱书牛马字：是为鱻妖之“穷神尽化”云。 …… （卷九）娄万赤亦在苗中，知交址将有事，潜归。甘鼎至广州，与抚军区星进击交址。区用犷儿策，疾薄宜京，斩关而入，擒其王，交民悉降；甘则由水道进，列营于江桥北。
娄万赤亦在苗中，知交址将有事，潜归。 甘鼎至广州，与抚军区星进击交址。 区用犷儿策，疾薄宜京，斩关而入，擒其王，交民悉降；甘则由水道进，列营于江桥北。……娄万赤与其师李长脚斗法于江桥南。……李长脚变金井绐万赤，即坠入，忽有铁树挺出，井阑撑欲破。犷儿引庆喜至，出白罗巾掷树巅，砉然有声，铁树不复见，李长脚复其形，觅万赤，卧桥畔沙石间。遂袖出白壶子一器，持向万赤顶骨咒曰，……咒毕，举手振一雷。万赤精气已铄，跃入江中，将随波出海。木兰呼鳞介士百人追之飘浮，所在必见吆喝，乃变为璅蛣。乘海蟹空腹，入之，以为“藏身之固”矣，交址人善捞蟹者，得是物如箕，大喜，刳蟹将取其腹腴，一虫随手出，倏坠地化为人形，俄顷长大，固俨然盲僧焉，询之不复语。有屠者携刀来视，咄咄曰，“蟹腹自有‘仙人’，一名‘和尚’，要是谑语；断无别肠容此妖物，不诛戮之，吾南交祸未已也。”挥刀斫其首。时甘君已入城，与区抚军议班师矣；常越所部卒持盲僧首以献，转告两元戎。桑长史进曰，“斯必万赤头也。记天人第二图为大蟹浮海中，篆云‘横行自毙’。某当初疑万赤先亡，乃今始验。”适李长脚入辞，视其头笑曰，“此贼以水火阴阳，为害中国，不死于黄钺而死于屠刀，固犬豕之流耳。仙骨何有哉？……”……（卷二十）
…… 娄万赤与其师李长脚斗法于江桥南。 …… 李长脚变金井绐万赤，即坠入，忽有铁树挺出，井阑撑欲破。 犷儿引庆喜至，出白罗巾掷树巅，砉然有声，铁树不复见，李长脚复其形，觅万赤，卧桥畔沙石间。 遂袖出白壶子一器，持向万赤顶骨咒曰，…… 咒毕，举手振一雷。 万赤精气已铄，跃入江中，将随波出海。 木兰呼鳞介士百人追之飘浮，所在必见吆喝，乃变为璅蛣。 乘海蟹空腹，入之，以为“藏身之固”矣，交址人善捞蟹者，得是物如箕，大喜，刳蟹将取其腹腴，一虫随手出，倏坠地化为人形，俄顷长大，固俨然盲僧焉，询之不复语。 有屠者携刀来视，咄咄曰，“蟹腹自有‘仙人’，一名‘和尚’，要是谑语；断无别肠容此妖物，不诛戮之，吾南交祸未已也。 ”挥刀斫其首。 时甘君已入城，与区抚军议班师矣；常越所部卒持盲僧首以献，转告两元戎。 桑长史进曰，“斯必万赤头也。 记天人第二图为大蟹浮海中，篆云‘横行自毙’。 某当初疑万赤先亡，乃今始验。 ”适李长脚入辞，视其头笑曰，“此贼以水火阴阳，为害中国，不死于黄钺而死于屠刀，固犬豕之流耳。 仙骨何有哉？……”…… （卷二十）自是交址平。桑蠋生还闽；甘鼎亦弃官去，言将度庾岭云。
自是交址平。 桑蠋生还闽；甘鼎亦弃官去，言将度庾岭云。《蟫史》神态，仿佛甚奇，然探其本根，则实未离于神魔小说；其缀以亵语，固由作者禀性，而一面亦尚承明代“世情书”之流风。特缘勉造硬语，力拟古书，成诘屈之文，遂得掩凡近之意。洪亮吉（《北江诗话》）评其诗云，“如栽盆红药，蓄沼文鱼。”汪瑔序其《鹗亭诗话》云，“貌渊奥而实平易，……然笔致逋峭可喜。”即谓虽华艳而乏天趣，徒奇崛而无深意也。《蟫史》亦然，惟以其文体为他人所未试，足称独步而已。
《蟫史》神态，仿佛甚奇，然探其本根，则实未离于神魔小说；其缀以亵语，固由作者禀性，而一面亦尚承明代“世情书”之流风。 特缘勉造硬语，力拟古书，成诘屈之文，遂得掩凡近之意。 洪亮吉（《北江诗话》）评其诗云，“如栽盆红药，蓄沼文鱼。 ”汪瑔序其《鹗亭诗话》云，“貌渊奥而实平易，…… 然笔致逋峭可喜。 ”即谓虽华艳而乏天趣，徒奇崛而无深意也。 《蟫史》亦然，惟以其文体为他人所未试，足称独步而已。以排偶之文试为小说者，则有陈球之《燕山外史》八卷。球字蕴斋，秀水诸生，家贫，以卖画自给，工骈俪，喜传奇，因有此作（《光绪嘉兴府志》五十二）。自谓“史体从无以四六为文，自我作古，极知僭妄，……第行于稗乘，当希末减”。盖未见张《游仙窟》（见第八篇），遂自以为独创矣。其本成于嘉庆中（约一八一〇），专主词华，略以寄慨，故即取明冯梦桢所撰《窦生传》为骨干，加以敷衍，演为三万一千余言。传略谓永乐时有窦绳祖，本燕人，就学于嘉兴，悦贫女李爱姑，迎以同居；久之，父迫令就婚淄川宦族，遂绝去。爱姑复为金陵鹾商所绐，辗转落妓家，得侠士马遴之助，终复归窦，而大妇甚妒，虐遇之，生不能堪，偕爱姑遁去，会有唐赛儿之乱，又相失。比生复归，则资产已空，妇亦求去，孑然止存一身，而爱姑忽至，自言当日匿尼庵中，今遂返矣。是年窦生及第，累官至山东巡抚；迎爱姑入署如命妇。未几生男，求乳媪，有应者，则前大妇也，再嫁后夫死子殇，遂困顿为贱役，而生仍优容之。然妇又设计害马遴，生亦牵连得罪；顾终竟昭雪复官，后与爱姑皆仙去。其事殊庸陋，如一切佳人才子小说常套，而作者奋然有取，则殆缘转折尚多，足以示行文手腕而已，然语必四六，随处拘牵，状物叙情，俱失生气，姑勿论六朝俪语，即较之张之作，虽无其俳谐，而亦逊其生动也。仍录其叙窦生为父促归，爱姑怅怅失所之辞，以备一格：
以排偶之文试为小说者，则有陈球之《燕山外史》八卷。 球字蕴斋，秀水诸生，家贫，以卖画自给，工骈俪，喜传奇，因有此作（《光绪嘉兴府志》五十二）。 自谓“史体从无以四六为文，自我作古，极知僭妄，…… 第行于稗乘，当希末减”。 盖未见张《游仙窟》（见第八篇），遂自以为独创矣。 其本成于嘉庆中（约一八一〇），专主词华，略以寄慨，故即取明冯梦桢所撰《窦生传》为骨干，加以敷衍，演为三万一千余言。 传略谓永乐时有窦绳祖，本燕人，就学于嘉兴，悦贫女李爱姑，迎以同居；久之，父迫令就婚淄川宦族，遂绝去。 爱姑复为金陵鹾商所绐，辗转落妓家，得侠士马遴之助，终复归窦，而大妇甚妒，虐遇之，生不能堪，偕爱姑遁去，会有唐赛儿之乱，又相失。 比生复归，则资产已空，妇亦求去，孑然止存一身，而爱姑忽至，自言当日匿尼庵中，今遂返矣。 是年窦生及第，累官至山东巡抚；迎爱姑入署如命妇。 未几生男，求乳媪，有应者，则前大妇也，再嫁后夫死子殇，遂困顿为贱役，而生仍优容之。 然妇又设计害马遴，生亦牵连得罪；顾终竟昭雪复官，后与爱姑皆仙去。 其事殊庸陋，如一切佳人才子小说常套，而作者奋然有取，则殆缘转折尚多，足以示行文手腕而已，然语必四六，随处拘牵，状物叙情，俱失生气，姑勿论六朝俪语，即较之张之作，虽无其俳谐，而亦逊其生动也。 仍录其叙窦生为父促归，爱姑怅怅失所之辞，以备一格：……其父内存爱犊之思，外作搏牛之势，投鼠奚遑忌器，打鸭未免惊鸳；放苙之豚，追来入苙，丧家之犬，叱去还家。疾驱而身弱如羊，遂作补牢之计，严锢而人防似虎，终无出柙之时；所虞龙性难驯，拴于铁柱，还恐猿心易动，辱以蒲鞭。由是姑也蔷薇架畔，青黛将颦，薜荔墙边，红花欲悴，托意丁香枝上，其意谁知，寄情豆蔻梢头，此情自喻。而乃莲心独苦，竹沥将枯，却嫌柳絮何情，漫漫似雪，转恨海棠无力，密密垂丝。才过迎春，又经半夏，采葑采葛，只自空期，投李投桃，俱为陈迹，依稀梦里，徒栽待女之花，抑郁胸前，空带宜男之草。未能蠲忿，安得忘忧？鼓残瑟上桐丝，奚时续断，剖破楼头菱影，何日当归？岂知去者益远，望乃徒劳，昔虽音问久疏，犹同乡井，后竟梦魂永隔，忽阻山川。室迩人遐，每切三秋之感，星移物换，仅深两地之思。……（卷二）
…… 其父内存爱犊之思，外作搏牛之势，投鼠奚遑忌器，打鸭未免惊鸳；放苙之豚，追来入苙，丧家之犬，叱去还家。 疾驱而身弱如羊，遂作补牢之计，严锢而人防似虎，终无出柙之时；所虞龙性难驯，拴于铁柱，还恐猿心易动，辱以蒲鞭。 由是姑也蔷薇架畔，青黛将颦，薜荔墙边，红花欲悴，托意丁香枝上，其意谁知，寄情豆蔻梢头，此情自喻。 而乃莲心独苦，竹沥将枯，却嫌柳絮何情，漫漫似雪，转恨海棠无力，密密垂丝。 才过迎春，又经半夏，采葑采葛，只自空期，投李投桃，俱为陈迹，依稀梦里，徒栽待女之花，抑郁胸前，空带宜男之草。 未能蠲忿，安得忘忧？鼓残瑟上桐丝，奚时续断，剖破楼头菱影，何日当归？岂知去者益远，望乃徒劳，昔虽音问久疏，犹同乡井，后竟梦魂永隔，忽阻山川。 室迩人遐，每切三秋之感，星移物换，仅深两地之思。 …… （卷二）至光绪初（一八七九），有永嘉傅声谷注释之，然于本文反有删削。
至光绪初（一八七九），有永嘉傅声谷注释之，然于本文反有删削。雍乾以来，江南人士惕于文字之祸，因避史事不道，折而考证经子以至小学，若艺术之微，亦所不废；惟语必征实，忌为空谈，博识之风，于是亦盛。逮风气既成，则学者之面目亦自具，小说乃“道听途说者之所造”，史以为“无可观”，故亦不屑道也；然尚有一李汝珍之作《镜花缘》。汝珍字松石，直隶大兴人，少而颖异，不乐为时文，乾隆四十七年随其兄之海州任，因师事凌廷堪，论文之暇，兼及音韵，自云“受益极多”，时年约二十。其生平交游，颇多研治声韵之士；汝珍亦特长于韵学，旁及杂艺，如壬遁星卜象纬，以至书法弈道多通。顾不得志，盖以诸生终老海州，晚年穷愁，则作小说以自遣，历十余年始成，道光八年遂有刻本。不数年，汝珍亦卒，年六十余（约一七六三——一八三〇）。于音韵之著述有《音鉴》，主实用，重今音，而敢于变古（以上详见新标点本《镜花缘》卷首胡适《引论》）。盖惟精声韵之学而仍敢于变古，乃能居学者之列，博识多通而仍敢于为小说也；惟于小说又复论学说艺，数典谈经，连篇累牍而不能自已，则博识多通又害之。
雍乾以来，江南人士惕于文字之祸，因避史事不道，折而考证经子以至小学，若艺术之微，亦所不废；惟语必征实，忌为空谈，博识之风，于是亦盛。 逮风气既成，则学者之面目亦自具，小说乃“道听途说者之所造”，史以为“无可观”，故亦不屑道也；然尚有一李汝珍之作《镜花缘》。 汝珍字松石，直隶大兴人，少而颖异，不乐为时文，乾隆四十七年随其兄之海州任，因师事凌廷堪，论文之暇，兼及音韵，自云“受益极多”，时年约二十。 其生平交游，颇多研治声韵之士；汝珍亦特长于韵学，旁及杂艺，如壬遁星卜象纬，以至书法弈道多通。 顾不得志，盖以诸生终老海州，晚年穷愁，则作小说以自遣，历十余年始成，道光八年遂有刻本。 不数年，汝珍亦卒，年六十余（约一七六三——一八三〇）。 于音韵之著述有《音鉴》，主实用，重今音，而敢于变古（以上详见新标点本《镜花缘》卷首胡适《引论》）。 盖惟精声韵之学而仍敢于变古，乃能居学者之列，博识多通而仍敢于为小说也；惟于小说又复论学说艺，数典谈经，连篇累牍而不能自已，则博识多通又害之。《镜花缘》凡一百回，大略叙武后于寒中欲赏花，诏百花齐放；花神不敢抗命，从之，然又获天谴，谪于人间，为百女子。时有秀才唐敖，应试中探花，而言官举劾，谓与叛人徐敬业辈有旧，复被黜，因慨然有出尘之想，附其妇弟林之洋商舶遨游海外，跋涉异域，时遇畸人，又多睹奇俗怪物，幸食仙草，“入圣超凡”，遂入山不复返。其女小山又附舶寻父，仍历诸异境，且经众险，终不遇；但从山中一樵父得父书，名之曰闺臣，约其“中过才女”后可相见；更进，则见荒冢，曰镜花冢；更进，则入水月村；更进，则见泣红亭，其中有碑，上镌百人名姓，首史幽探，终毕全贞，而唐闺臣在第十一。人名之后有总论，其文有云：
《镜花缘》凡一百回，大略叙武后于寒中欲赏花，诏百花齐放；花神不敢抗命，从之，然又获天谴，谪于人间，为百女子。 时有秀才唐敖，应试中探花，而言官举劾，谓与叛人徐敬业辈有旧，复被黜，因慨然有出尘之想，附其妇弟林之洋商舶遨游海外，跋涉异域，时遇畸人，又多睹奇俗怪物，幸食仙草，“入圣超凡”，遂入山不复返。 其女小山又附舶寻父，仍历诸异境，且经众险，终不遇；但从山中一樵父得父书，名之曰闺臣，约其“中过才女”后可相见；更进，则见荒冢，曰镜花冢；更进，则入水月村；更进，则见泣红亭，其中有碑，上镌百人名姓，首史幽探，终毕全贞，而唐闺臣在第十一。 人名之后有总论，其文有云：泣红亭主人曰：以史幽探哀萃芳冠首者，盖主人自言穷探野史，尝有所见，惜湮没无闻，而哀群芳之不传，因笔志之。……结以花再芳毕全贞者，盖以群芳沦落，几至澌灭无闻，今赖斯而不朽，非若花之重芳乎？所列百人，莫非琼林琪树，合璧骈珠，故以全贞毕焉。（第四十八回）
泣红亭主人曰：以史幽探哀萃芳冠首者，盖主人自言穷探野史，尝有所见，惜湮没无闻，而哀群芳之不传，因笔志之。 …… 结以花再芳毕全贞者，盖以群芳沦落，几至澌灭无闻，今赖斯而不朽，非若花之重芳乎？所列百人，莫非琼林琪树，合璧骈珠，故以全贞毕焉。 （第四十八回）闺臣不得已，遂归；值武后开科试才女，得与试，且亦入选，名次如碣文。于是同榜者百人大会于宗伯府，又连日宴集，弹琴赋诗，围棋讲射，蹴鞠斗草，行令论文，评韵谱，解《毛诗》，尽觞咏之乐。已而有两女子来，自云考列四等才女，而实风姨月姊化身，旋复以文字结嫌，弄风惊其坐众。魁星则现形助诸女；麻姑亦化为道姑，来和解之，于是即席诵诗，皆包含坐中诸人身世，自过去及现在，以至将来，间有哀音，听者黯淡，然不久意解，欢笑如初。末则文芸起兵谋匡复，才女或亦在军，有死者；而武家军终败。于是中宗复位，仍尊太后武氏为则天大圣皇帝。未几，则天下诏，谓来岁仍开女试，并命前科众才女重赴“红文宴”，而《镜花缘》随毕。然以上仅全局之半，作者自云欲知“镜中全影，且待后缘”，则当有续书，然竟未作。
闺臣不得已，遂归；值武后开科试才女，得与试，且亦入选，名次如碣文。 于是同榜者百人大会于宗伯府，又连日宴集，弹琴赋诗，围棋讲射，蹴鞠斗草，行令论文，评韵谱，解《毛诗》，尽觞咏之乐。 已而有两女子来，自云考列四等才女，而实风姨月姊化身，旋复以文字结嫌，弄风惊其坐众。 魁星则现形助诸女；麻姑亦化为道姑，来和解之，于是即席诵诗，皆包含坐中诸人身世，自过去及现在，以至将来，间有哀音，听者黯淡，然不久意解，欢笑如初。 末则文芸起兵谋匡复，才女或亦在军，有死者；而武家军终败。 于是中宗复位，仍尊太后武氏为则天大圣皇帝。 未几，则天下诏，谓来岁仍开女试，并命前科众才女重赴“红文宴”，而《镜花缘》随毕。 然以上仅全局之半，作者自云欲知“镜中全影，且待后缘”，则当有续书，然竟未作。作者命笔之由，即见于《泣红亭记》，盖于诸女，悲其销沉，爰托稗官，以传芳烈。书中关于女子之论亦多，故胡适以为“是一部讨论妇女问题的小说，他对于这个问题的答案，是男女应该受平等的待遇，平等的教育，平等的选举制度”（详见本书《引论》四）。其于社会制度，亦有不平，每设事端，以寓理想；惜为时势所限，仍多迂拘，例如君子国民情，甚受作者叹羡，然因让而争，矫伪已甚，生息此土，则亦劳矣，不如作诙谐观，反有启颜之效也。
The reason for the author's order to write is seen in "The Weeping Red Pavilion", which covers the daughters, lamenting their decay, so they entrust the barnyard official to convey the fragrance and strength. There are also many theories about women in the book, so Hu Shi thinks that "it is a novel that discusses women's issues, and his answer to this question is that men and women should be treated equally, equal education, and an equal electoral system" (see "Introduction" 4 of this book for details). There are also injustices in the social system, and every time a matter is set up, it is an ideal; Unfortunately, due to the limitations of the times, there are still many pedantic things, such as gentlemen and national sentiments, which are greatly envied by the author, but arguing for concessions is too hypocritical, and living in this land is also laborious. It is better to make humorous observations, which actually have the effect of enlightening faces.……说话间，来到闹市，只见一隶卒在那里买物，手中拿着货物道，“老兄如此高货，却讨恁般贱价，教小弟买去，如何能安？务求将价加增，方好遵教。若再过谦，那是有意不肯赏光交易了。”……只听卖货人答道，“既承照顾，敢不仰体。但适才妄讨大价，已觉厚颜；不意老兄反说货高价贱，岂不更教小弟惭愧？况敝货并非‘言无二价’，其中颇有虚头。俗云‘漫天要价，就地还钱’。今老兄不但不减，反要加增，如此克己，只好请到别家交易，小弟实难遵命。”唐敖道，“‘漫天要价，就地还钱’，原是买物之人向来俗谈；至‘并非言无二价，其中颇有虚头’，亦是买者之话。不意今皆出于卖者之口，倒也有趣。”只听隶卒又说道，“老兄以高货讨贱价，反说小弟‘克己’，岂不失了忠恕之道？凡事总要彼此无欺，方为公允。试问‘那个腹中无算盘’，小弟又安能受人之愚哩？”谈之许久，卖货人执意不增。隶卒赌气，照数付价，拿了一半货物，刚要举步。卖货人那里肯依，只说“价多货少”，拦住不放。路旁走过两个老翁，作好作歹，从公评定，令隶卒照价拿了八折货物，这才交易而去。……唐敖道，“如此看来，这几个交易光景，岂非‘好让不争’的一幅行乐图么？我们还打听甚么？且到前面再去畅游。如此美地，领略领略风景，广广见识，也是好的。”……（第十一回《观雅化闲游君子邦》）
…… As he spoke, he came to the downtown area and saw a servant buying things there, holding goods in his hand and saying, "Brother is such a high price, but you are asking for such a cheap price, teach my little brother to buy it, how can you be safe?" It is necessary to increase the price to comply with the teachings. If you are too humble, it is a deliberate refusal to appreciate the trade. ”…… I only heard the seller reply, "Since you have taken care of me, I dare not look up to you." But just now, I was asking for a big price, and I already felt brazen; Unexpectedly, the old brother said that the goods were high and the price was low, wouldn't it make the younger brother feel ashamed? Moreover, our goods are not 'priceless', and there are quite a few false heads. As the saying goes, 'ask for a price all over the sky, pay back on the spot'. Now the brother not only does not decrease, but also increases, so self-denial, he has to invite to another house to trade, and it is really difficult for the younger brother to obey the order. Tang Ao said, "'Asking for a price all over the sky, repaying the money on the spot' is originally a common saying among buyers; to 'it is not that there is no price, there is quite a false head in it', which is also the buyer's words." I didn't expect it to come from the seller's mouth now, but it's interesting. I only heard the servant say again, "The old brother uses high goods to ask for a low price, but the younger brother 'self-denial', isn't it a loss of loyalty and forgiveness?" Everything must be fair and fair. Let me ask, 'That belly has no abacus', how can my little brother be fooled by others? "After talking for a long time, the seller insisted on not increasing it. The servant was angry, paid the price according to the number, took half of the goods, and was about to take a step. The seller was willing to comply, only saying "the price is more than the goods", and he stopped it. Two old men walked by the roadside, doing good and bad, and ordered the servants to take 80% off the goods according to the price, and then they traded and left. …… Tang Ao said, "From this point of view, isn't these trading scenes a picture of 'good to let go and not fight'?" What else do we inquire? Let's go to the front and swim again. It is also good to appreciate the scenery and see a wide range of things in such a beautiful place. ”…… (The eleventh "Guanya Hua Leisure Gentleman's Country")又其罗列古典才艺，亦殊繁多，所叙唐氏父女之游行，才女百人之聚宴，几占全书什七，无不广据旧文（略见钱静方《小说丛考》上），历陈众艺，一时之事，或亘数回。而作者则甚自喜，假林之洋之打诨，自论其书云，“这部‘少子’，乃圣朝太平之世出的；是俺天朝读书人做的。这人就是老子的后裔。老子做的是《道德经》，讲的都是元虚奥妙。他这‘少子’虽以游戏为事，却暗寓劝善之意，不外风人之旨。上面载着诸子百家，人物花鸟，书画琴棋，医卜星相，音韵算法，无一不备。还有各样灯谜，诸般酒令，以及双陆马吊，射鹄蹴毬，斗草投壶，各种百戏之类。件件都可解得睡魔，也可令人喷饭。”（二十三回）盖以为学术之汇流，文艺之列肆，然亦与《万宝全书》为邻比矣。惟经作者匠心，剪裁运用，故亦颇有虽为古典所拘，而尚能绰约有风致者，略引如下：
In addition, there are many classical talents listed, and the parade of the Tang family and the banquet of 100 talented women account for nearly 70% of the whole book, all of which are widely based on the old texts (see Qian Jingfang's "Novel Series"), and the various arts are presented at the same time, or several times. The author, on the other hand, was very pleased, borrowing Lin Zhiyang's joke and commenting on his book, "This 'young son' was produced in the peaceful era of the Holy Dynasty; it was made by a scholar of my Heavenly Dynasty." This person is a descendant of Lao Tzu. Lao Tzu did the Tao Te Ching, which talked about the mysteries of the metaverse. Although his 'young son' is a game, he implies the meaning of persuading goodness, and he does not go out of the wind. It contains hundreds of philosophers, characters, flowers and birds, calligraphy, painting, piano and chess, medical divination, astrology, phonology algorithms, all of which are complete. There are also various lantern riddles, all kinds of wine orders, as well as backgammon horse hanging, swan shooting, grass fighting, pot throwing, and all kinds of tricks. Everything can solve the sandman and make people squirt. (23 times) It is probably considered to be the confluence of academia and the display of literature and art, but it is also adjacent to the "Complete Book of Wanbao". However, the author's ingenuity, cutting and use, so there are quite a few who are bound by the classics, but can still be elegant and charming, which is briefly quoted as follows:……多九公道，“林兄如饿，恰好此地有个充饥之物。”随向碧草丛中摘了几枝青草。……林之洋接过，只见这草宛如韭菜，内有嫩茎，开着几朵青花，即放入口内，不觉点头道，“这草一股清香，倒也好吃。请问九公，他叫甚么名号？……”唐敖道，“小弟闻得海外鹊山有青草，花如韭，名‘祝余’，可以疗饥。大约就是此物了。”多九公连连点头。于是又朝前走。……只见唐敖忽然路旁折了一枝青草，其叶如松，青翠异常，叶上生着一子，大如芥子，把子取下，手执青草道，“舅兄才吃祝余，小弟只好以此奉陪了。”说罢，吃入腹内。又把那个芥子放在掌中，吹气一口，登时从那子中生出一枝青草来，也如松叶，约长一尺，再吹一口，又长一尺，一连吹气三口，共有三尺之长，放在口边，随又吃了。林之洋笑道，“妹夫要这样很嚼，只怕这里青草都被你吃尽哩。这芥子忽变青草，这是甚故？”多九公道，“此是‘蹑空草’，又名‘掌中芥’。取子放在掌中，一吹长一尺，再吹又长一尺，至三尺止。人若吃了，能立空中，所以叫作蹑空草。”林之洋道，“有这好处，俺也吃他几枝，久后回家，傥房上有贼，俺蹑空追他，岂不省事。”于是各处寻了多时，并无踪影。多九公道，“林兄不必找了。此草不吹不生。这空山中有谁吹气栽他？刚才唐兄吃的，大约此子因鸟雀啄食，受了呼吸之气，因此落地而生，并非常见之物，你却从何寻找？老夫在海外多年，今日也是初次才见。若非唐兄吹他，老夫还不知就是蹑空草哩。”……（第九回）
…… Duo Jiu Gongdao, "Brother Lin is hungry, there happens to be something to satisfy hunger here." Sui picked a few branches of grass from the green grass. …… Lin Zhiyang took it, only to see that this grass was like a leek, with tender stems inside, blooming a few blue flowers, that is, he put it in his mouth, and nodded unconsciously, "This grass has a fragrance, but it is also delicious." May I ask Jiu Gong, what is his name? ...... Tang Ao said, "My younger brother heard that there is grass in overseas Queshan, and the flowers are like leeks, named 'Zhu Yu', which can cure hunger." That's probably what it is. Duo Jiugong nodded repeatedly. So he walked forward again. …… I saw Tang Ao suddenly break a branch of grass on the side of the road, its leaves were like pines, verdant and unusual, and there was a seed on the leaf, as big as a mustard seed, he took off the seed, held the grass in his hand and said, "Uncle and brother just ate Zhu Yu, and my younger brother had to accompany me." After that, he ate it into his belly. He put the mustard seed in his palm, blew on it, and immediately a branch of grass grew out of it, which was also like a pine needle, about a foot long, and then blew another foot, and blew three breaths in a row, a total of three feet long, put it on his mouth, and ate it again. Lin Zhiyang smiled and said, "Brother-in-law wants to chew like this, I'm afraid that you will eat up all the grass here." What is the reason for this mustard seed suddenly turning into grass? "Duo Jiu Gongdao," this is 'stepping on the empty grass', also known as 'mustard in the palm of the hand'. Take the seeds and place them in your palm, blowing one foot long, then blowing again to a foot long, until they reach three feet. If a person eats it, it can stand in the air, so it is called the grass in the air. Lin Zhiyang said, "With this benefit, I will also eat a few of him, and when I go home after a long time, if there is a thief in the room, I will chase him in the air, wouldn't it be troublesome." So I searched everywhere for a long time, but there was no trace. Duo Jiu Gong, "Brother Lin doesn't have to look for it." This grass does not blow and does not grow. Who in this empty mountain blows air and plants him? What Brother Tang ate just now, probably because of the pecking of birds and sparrows, was breathed, so it fell to the ground and was born, which is not a common thing, but where do you look for it? I have been overseas for many years, and today is also the first time I have seen it. If it weren't for Brother Tang blowing him, I wouldn't have known that I was stepping on the grass. ”…… (9th)

第二十六篇　清之狭邪小说

第二十六篇　清之狭邪小说

第二十六篇　清之狭邪小说

Chapter 26 The narrow evil novel of the Qing Dynasty唐人登科之后，多作冶游，习俗相沿，以为佳话，故伎家故事，文人间亦著之篇章，今尚存者有崔令钦《教坊记》及孙棨《北里志》。自明及清，作者尤夥，明梅鼎祚之《青泥莲花记》，清余怀之《板桥杂记》尤有名。是后则扬州，吴门，珠江，上海诸艳迹，皆有录载；且伎人小传，亦渐侵入志异书类中，然大率杂事琐闻，并无条贯，不过偶弄笔墨，聊遣绮怀而已。若以狭邪中人物事故为全书主干，且组织成长篇至数十回者，盖始见于《品花宝鉴》，惟所记则为伶人。
唐人登科之后，多作冶游，习俗相沿，以为佳话，故伎家故事，文人间亦著之篇章，今尚存者有崔令钦《教坊记》及孙棨《北里志》。 自明及清，作者尤夥，明梅鼎祚之《青泥莲花记》，清余怀之《板桥杂记》尤有名。 是后则扬州，吴门，珠江，上海诸艳迹，皆有录载；且伎人小传，亦渐侵入志异书类中，然大率杂事琐闻，并无条贯，不过偶弄笔墨，聊遣绮怀而已。 若以狭邪中人物事故为全书主干，且组织成长篇至数十回者，盖始见于《品花宝鉴》，惟所记则为伶人。明代虽有教坊，而禁士大夫涉足，亦不得挟妓，然独未云禁招优。达官名士以规避禁令，每呼伶人侑酒，使歌舞谈笑；有文名者又揄扬赞叹，往往如狂酲，其流行于是日盛。清初，伶人之焰始稍衰，后复炽，渐乃愈益猥劣，称为“像姑”，流品比于娼女矣。《品花宝鉴》者，刻于咸丰二年（一八五二），即以叙乾隆以来北京优伶为专职，而记载之内，时杂猥辞，自谓伶人有邪正，狎客亦有雅俗，并陈妍媸，固犹劝惩之意，其说与明人之凡为“世情书”者略同。至于叙事行文，则似欲以缠绵见长，风雅为主，而描摹儿女之书，昔又多有，遂复不能摆脱旧套，虽所谓上品，即作者之理想人物如梅子玉杜琴言辈，亦不外伶如佳人，客为才子，温情软语，累牍不休，独有佳人非女，则他书所未写者耳。其叙“名旦”杜琴言往梅子玉家问病时情状云：
明代虽有教坊，而禁士大夫涉足，亦不得挟妓，然独未云禁招优。 达官名士以规避禁令，每呼伶人侑酒，使歌舞谈笑；有文名者又揄扬赞叹，往往如狂酲，其流行于是日盛。 清初，伶人之焰始稍衰，后复炽，渐乃愈益猥劣，称为“像姑”，流品比于娼女矣。 《品花宝鉴》者，刻于咸丰二年（一八五二），即以叙乾隆以来北京优伶为专职，而记载之内，时杂猥辞，自谓伶人有邪正，狎客亦有雅俗，并陈妍媸，固犹劝惩之意，其说与明人之凡为“世情书”者略同。 至于叙事行文，则似欲以缠绵见长，风雅为主，而描摹儿女之书，昔又多有，遂复不能摆脱旧套，虽所谓上品，即作者之理想人物如梅子玉杜琴言辈，亦不外伶如佳人，客为才子，温情软语，累牍不休，独有佳人非女，则他书所未写者耳。 其叙“名旦”杜琴言往梅子玉家问病时情状云：却说琴言到梅宅之时，心中十分害怕，满拟此番必有一场羞辱。及至见过颜夫人之后，不但不加呵责，倒有怜恤之心，又命他去安慰子玉，却也意想不到，心中一喜一悲。但不知子玉病体轻重，如何慰之？只好遵夫人之命，老着脸走到子玉房里。见帘帏不卷，几案生尘，一张小楠木床挂了轻绡帐。云儿先把帐子掀开，叫声“少爷，琴言来看你了”。子玉正在梦中，模模糊糊应了两声。琴言就坐在床沿，见那子玉面庞黄瘦，憔悴不堪。琴言凑在枕边，低低叫了一声，不绝泪涌下来，滴在子玉的脸上。只见子玉忽然呵呵一笑道：
But when Qin Yan arrived at Mei Zhai, he was very scared, and he thought that there would be a humiliation this time. After seeing Mrs. Yan, not only did he not reprimand, but he had pity, and ordered him to comfort Ziyu, but unexpectedly, he was happy and sad in his heart. But I don't know how to comfort Ziyu's illness. I had to obey his wife's order and walk to Ziyu's room with an old face. I saw that the curtains were not rolled up, the tables were dusty, and a small nanmu bed was hung with light silk curtains. Yun'er lifted the tent first and shouted, "Young master, Qin Yan came to see you." Ziyu was in a dream and responded vaguely twice. Qin Yan sat on the edge of the bed and saw that Ziyu's face was yellow and thin, haggard. Qin Yan leaned against the pillow and let out a low cry, tears welling down and dripping on Ziyu's face. I saw Ziyu suddenly smile and said:“七月七日长生殿，夜半无人私语时。”
“七月七日长生殿，夜半无人私语时。 ”子玉吟了之后，又接连笑了两笑。琴言见他梦魔如此，十分难忍，在子玉身上掀了两掀，因想夫人在外，不好高叫，改口叫声“少爷”。子玉犹在梦中想念，候到七月七日，到素兰处，会了琴言，三人又好诉衷谈心，这是子玉刻刻不忘，所以念出这两句唐曲来。魂梦既酣，一时难醒，又见他大笑一会，又吟道：
After Ziyu groaned, he smiled twice in a row. Qin Yan saw that he was dreaming like this, and it was very unbearable, so he lifted it twice on Ziyu, because he thought that his wife was outside, and it was not easy to shout, so he changed his voice to "young master". Ziyu still missed it in his dream, and when he waited until July 7th, he went to Sulan's place, met Qin Yan, and the three of them were good at talking heart-to-heart, which Ziyu never forgotten, so he read these two Tang songs. The dream was intoxicating, and it was difficult to wake up for a while, and when he saw him laughing for a while, he chanted again:“我道是黄泉碧落两难寻，……”
"I say it's a dilemma to find the Yellow Springs and the Blue Fall,......"歌罢，翻身向内睡着。琴言看他昏到如此，泪越多了，只好呆怔怔看着，不好再叫。……（第二十九回）
After singing, he turned over and fell asleep. Qin Yan saw that he was so faint, and the more tears he shed, he had to watch in a daze, not good at screaming. …… (Episode 29)《品花宝鉴》中人物，大抵实有，就其姓名性行，推之可知。惟梅杜二人皆假设，字以“玉”与“言”者，即“寓言”之谓，盖著者以为高绝，世已无人足供影射者矣。书中有高品，则所以自况，实为常州人陈森书（作者手稿之《梅花梦传奇》上，自署毘陵陈森，则“书”字或误衍），号少逸，道光中寓居北京，出入菊部中，因拾闻见事为书三十回，然又中辍，出京漫游，己酉（一八四九）自广西复至京，始足成后半，共六十回，好事者竞相传钞，越三年而有刻本（杨懋建《梦华琐簿》）。
《品花宝鉴》中人物，大抵实有，就其姓名性行，推之可知。 惟梅杜二人皆假设，字以“玉”与“言”者，即“寓言”之谓，盖著者以为高绝，世已无人足供影射者矣。 书中有高品，则所以自况，实为常州人陈森书（作者手稿之《梅花梦传奇》上，自署毘陵陈森，则“书”字或误衍），号少逸，道光中寓居北京，出入菊部中，因拾闻见事为书三十回，然又中辍，出京漫游，己酉（一八四九）自广西复至京，始足成后半，共六十回，好事者竞相传钞，越三年而有刻本（杨懋建《梦华琐簿》）。至作者理想之结局，则具于末一回，为名士与名旦会于九香园，画伶人小像为花神，诸名士为赞；诸伶又书诸名士长生禄位，各为赞，皆刻石供养九香楼下。时诸伶已脱梨园，乃“当着众名士之前”，熔化钗钿，焚弃衣裙，将烬时，“忽然一阵香风，将那灰烬吹上半空，飘飘点点，映着一轮红日，像无数的花朵与蝴蝶飞舞，金迷纸醉，香气扑鼻，越旋越高，到了半天，成了万点金光，一闪不见”云。
As for the author's ideal ending, it is in the last episode, for the celebrities and famous dans to meet in the Jiuxiang Garden, painting the portraits of the performers as flower gods, and praising the celebrities; The performers also wrote the titles of the famous scholars for longevity and longevity, each in praise, and carved stone tablets to offer sacrifices under the Jiuxiang Tower. At that time, the performers had already left the pear orchard, and they were "in front of all the celebrities", melting the hairpins, burning the clothes, and burning them, "suddenly a gust of fragrant wind blew the ashes into the air, fluttering a little, reflecting a round of red sun, like countless flowers and butterflies flying, the gold fan was drunk, the fragrance was fragrant, the more it spiraled, and in the middle of the day, it became a thousand points of golden light, and it was gone."其后有《花月痕》十六卷五十二回，题“眠鹤主人编次”，咸丰戊午年（一八五八）序，而光绪中始流行。其书虽不全写狭邪，顾与伎人特有关涉，隐现全书中，配以名士，亦如佳人才子小说定式。略谓韦痴珠韩荷生皆伟才硕学，游幕并州，极相善，亦同游曲中，又各有相眷妓，韦者曰秋痕，韩者曰采秋。韦风流文采，倾动一时，而不遇，困顿羁旅中；秋痕虽倾心，亦终不得嫁韦。已而韦妾先殁，韦亦寻亡，秋痕殉焉。韩则先为达官幕中上客，参机要，旋以平寇功，由举人保升兵科给事中，复因战绩，累迁至封侯。采秋久归韩，亦得一品夫人封典。班师受封之后，“高宴三日，自大将军以至走卒，无不雀忭。”（第五十回）而韦乃仅一子零丁，扶棺南下而已。其布局盖在使升沉相形，行文亦惟以缠绵为主，但时复有悲凉哀怨之笔，交错其间，欲于欢笑之时，并见黯然之色，而诗词简启，充塞书中，文饰既繁，情致转晦。符兆纶评之云，“词赋名家，却非说部当行，其淋漓尽致处，亦是从词赋中发泄出来，哀感顽艳。……”虽稍谀，然亦中其失。至结末叙韩荷生战绩，忽杂妖异之事，则如情话未央，突来鬼语，尤为通篇芜累矣。
其后有《花月痕》十六卷五十二回，题“眠鹤主人编次”，咸丰戊午年（一八五八）序，而光绪中始流行。 其书虽不全写狭邪，顾与伎人特有关涉，隐现全书中，配以名士，亦如佳人才子小说定式。 略谓韦痴珠韩荷生皆伟才硕学，游幕并州，极相善，亦同游曲中，又各有相眷妓，韦者曰秋痕，韩者曰采秋。 韦风流文采，倾动一时，而不遇，困顿羁旅中；秋痕虽倾心，亦终不得嫁韦。 已而韦妾先殁，韦亦寻亡，秋痕殉焉。 韩则先为达官幕中上客，参机要，旋以平寇功，由举人保升兵科给事中，复因战绩，累迁至封侯。 采秋久归韩，亦得一品夫人封典。 班师受封之后，“高宴三日，自大将军以至走卒，无不雀忭。 ”（第五十回）而韦乃仅一子零丁，扶棺南下而已。 其布局盖在使升沉相形，行文亦惟以缠绵为主，但时复有悲凉哀怨之笔，交错其间，欲于欢笑之时，并见黯然之色，而诗词简启，充塞书中，文饰既繁，情致转晦。 符兆纶评之云，“词赋名家，却非说部当行，其淋漓尽致处，亦是从词赋中发泄出来，哀感顽艳。 ……”虽稍谀，然亦中其失。 至结末叙韩荷生战绩，忽杂妖异之事，则如情话未央，突来鬼语，尤为通篇芜累矣。……采秋道，“……妙玉称个‘槛外人’，宝玉称个‘槛内人’；妙玉住的是栊翠庵，宝玉住的是怡红院。……书中先说妙玉怎样清洁，宝玉常常自认浊物。不见将来清者转浊，浊者极清？”痴珠叹一口气，高吟道，“‘一失足成千古恨，再回头已百年身。’”随说道，“……就书中‘贾雨村言’例之：薛者，设也；黛者，代也。设此人代宝玉以写生，故‘宝玉’二字，宝字上属于钗，就是宝钗；玉字下系于黛，就是黛玉。钗黛直是个‘子虚乌有’，算不得什么。倒是妙玉，真是做宝玉的反面镜子，故名之为妙。一僧一尼，暗暗影射，你道是不是呢？”采秋答应。……痴珠随说道，“‘色即是空，空即是色。’”便敲着案子朗吟道：
…… Autumn picking, "...... Miaoyu is called a 'person outside the cage', Baoyu is called a 'person inside the cage'; Miaoyu lives in the Lu Cui An, and Baoyu lives in Yihong Courtyard. …… The book first talks about how Miaoyu is clean, and Baoyu often admits that she is a turbid thing. Do you not see that in the future, the clear will turn into turbidity, and the turbid will be extremely clear? Zhu sighed and chanted, "'A stumbling block becomes an eternal hatred, and it has been a hundred years when you look back.' Sui said, "...... Take the 'Jia Yucun Yan' in the book as an example: Xue means set, and Dai means to replace. If this person sketched on behalf of Baoyu, the word 'Baoyu' belongs to the hairpin on the treasure character, which is the treasure hairpin; the jade character is tied to Dai, which is Daiyu. Chai Dai is just a 'nothing', nothing. On the contrary, Miaoyu is really the reverse mirror of Baoyu, so it is called wonderful. A monk and a nun, secretly insinuating, don't you think? Caiqiu agreed. …… Zhi Zhu said, "'Color is emptiness, emptiness is color.' Then he knocked on the case and chanted:
“银字筝调心字香，英雄底事不柔肠？我来一切观空处，也要天花作道场。采莲曲里猜莲子，丛桂开时又见君，何必摇鞭背花去，十年心已定香熏。”荷生不待痴珠吟完，便哈哈大笑道，“算了，喝酒罢。”
"The silver zheng tunes the heart and the fragrance, and the hero is not soft? I come to all places to see the sky, and I also want to use the smallpox as a dojo. Guessing the lotus seeds in the lotus picking song, when the osmanthus bush blooms, I see you again. Why bother to wield the whip to carry the flowers? After ten years, my heart has already been set to be fragrant. He Sheng didn't wait for the fool to finish chanting, so he laughed and said, "Forget it, let's drink." ”
说笑一回，天就亮了。痴珠用过早点，坐着采秋的车先去了。午间，得荷生柬帖云：
Once you joke, it's dawn. Zhi Zhu used it too early and went first in the autumn picking car. At noon, I received a letter from Mr. He:
“顷晤秋痕，泪随语下，可怜之至。弟再四慰解，令作缓图。临行，嘱弟转致阁下云，‘好自静养。耿耿此心，必有以相报也。’知关锦念，率此布闻。并呈小诗四章，求和。”
“顷晤秋痕，泪随语下，可怜之至。 弟再四慰解，令作缓图。 临行，嘱弟转致阁下云，‘好自静养。 耿耿此心，必有以相报也。 ’知关锦念，率此布闻。 并呈小诗四章，求和。 ”
诗是七绝四首。……痴珠阅毕，便次韵和云：
诗是七绝四首。 …… 痴珠阅毕，便次韵和云：
“无端花事太凌迟，残蕊伤心剩折枝，我欲替他求净境，转嫌风恶不全吹。蹉跎恨在夕阳边，湖海浮沉二十年，骆马杨枝都去也，……”
“无端花事太凌迟，残蕊伤心剩折枝，我欲替他求净境，转嫌风恶不全吹。 蹉跎恨在夕阳边，湖海浮沉二十年，骆马杨枝都去也，……”
正往下写，秃头回道，“菜市街李家着人来请，说是刘姑娘病得不好。”痴珠惊讶，便坐车赴秋心院来。秋痕头上包着绉帕，趺坐床上，身边放着数本书，凝眸若有所思，突见痴珠，便含笑低声说道，“我料得你挨不上十天。其实何苦呢？”痴珠说道，“他们说你病着，叫我怎忍不来呢？”秋痕叹道，“你如今一请就来，往后又是纠缠不清。”痴珠笑道，“往后再商量罢。”自此，痴珠又照旧往来了。是夜，痴珠续成和韵诗，末一章有“博得蛾眉甘一死，果然知己属倾城”之句，至今犹诵人口。……（第二十五回）
As he was writing, the bald man replied, "The Li family on Caishi Street came to invite them, saying that Miss Liu was not well ill." Zhi Zhu was surprised, so he took the car to Qiuxin Courtyard. Qiu Hen was wrapped in a crepe handkerchief on his head, sitting on the bed, with several books beside him, staring thoughtfully, and suddenly seeing the foolish beads, he smiled and whispered, "I expected you to not last ten days." In fact, why bother? Zhi Zhu said, "They said you are sick, how can I not bear it?" Qiu Hen sighed, "You will come as soon as you are invited now, and you will be entangled in the future." Zhi Zhu smiled and said, "Let's discuss it later." Since then, Zhi Zhu has been in contact with him as usual. That night, the foolish pearl continued to write a rhyming poem, and the last chapter had the line "Winning the moth's eyebrows and dying, and indeed knowing that he belongs to the alluring city", which is still recited to this day. …… (Episode 25)长乐谢章铤《赌棋山庄诗集》有《题魏子安所著书后》五绝三首，一为《石经考》，一为《陔南山馆诗话》，一即《花月痕》（蒋瑞藻《小说考证》八引《雷颠笔记》），因知此书为魏子安作。子安名秀仁，福建侯官人，少负文名，而年二十余始入泮，即连举丙午（一八四六）乡试，然屡应进士试不第，乃游山西陕西四川，终为成都芙蓉书院院长，因乱逃归，卒，年五十六（一八一九——一八七四），著作满家，而世独传其《花月痕》（《赌棋山庄文集》五）。秀仁寓山西时，为太原知府保眠琴教子，所入颇丰，且多暇，而苦无聊，乃作小说，以韦痴珠自况，保偶见之，大喜，力奖其成，遂为巨帙云（谢章铤《课余续录》一）。然所托似不止此，卷首有太原歌妓《刘栩凤传》，谓“倾心于逋客，欲委身焉”，以索值昂中止，将抑郁憔悴死矣。则秋痕盖即此人影子，而逋客实魏。韦韩，又逋客之影子也，设穷达两途，各拟想其所能至，穷或类韦，达当如韩，故虽自寓一己，亦遂离而二之矣。
长乐谢章铤《赌棋山庄诗集》有《题魏子安所著书后》五绝三首，一为《石经考》，一为《陔南山馆诗话》，一即《花月痕》（蒋瑞藻《小说考证》八引《雷颠笔记》），因知此书为魏子安作。 子安名秀仁，福建侯官人，少负文名，而年二十余始入泮，即连举丙午（一八四六）乡试，然屡应进士试不第，乃游山西陕西四川，终为成都芙蓉书院院长，因乱逃归，卒，年五十六（一八一九——一八七四），著作满家，而世独传其《花月痕》（《赌棋山庄文集》五）。 秀仁寓山西时，为太原知府保眠琴教子，所入颇丰，且多暇，而苦无聊，乃作小说，以韦痴珠自况，保偶见之，大喜，力奖其成，遂为巨帙云（谢章铤《课余续录》一）。 然所托似不止此，卷首有太原歌妓《刘栩凤传》，谓“倾心于逋客，欲委身焉”，以索值昂中止，将抑郁憔悴死矣。 则秋痕盖即此人影子，而逋客实魏。 韦韩，又逋客之影子也，设穷达两途，各拟想其所能至，穷或类韦，达当如韩，故虽自寓一己，亦遂离而二之矣。全书以伎女为主题者，有《青楼梦》六十四回，题“釐峰慕真山人著”，序则云俞吟香。吟香名达，江苏长洲人，中年颇作冶游，后欲出离，而世事牵缠，又不能遽去，光绪十年（一八八四）以风疾卒，所著尚有《醉红轩笔话》《花间棒》《吴中考古录》及《闲鸥集》等（邹弢《三借庐笔谈》四）。《青楼梦》成于光绪四年，则取吴中倡女，以发挥其“游花国，护美人，采芹香，掇巍科，任政事，报亲恩，全友谊，敦琴瑟，抚子女，睦亲邻，谢繁华，求慕道”（第一回）之大理想，所写非实，从可知矣。略谓金挹香字企真，苏州府长洲县人，幼即工文，长更慧美，然不娶，谓欲得“有情人”，而“当世滔滔，斯人谁与？竟使一介寒儒，怀才不遇，公卿大夫竟无一识我之人，反不若青楼女子，竟有慧眼识英雄于未遇时也”（本书《题纲》）。故挹香游狭邪，特受伎人爱重，指挥如意，犹南面王。例如：
The whole book is based on the theme of singers, and there are sixty-four episodes of "Dream of Brothels", titled "Lifeng Muzhen Shanren", and the preface is Yun Yu Yinxiang. Yinxiang Mingda, a native of Changzhou, Jiangsu, was quite a smelter in middle age, and wanted to leave later, but the world was entangled, and he could not go immediately, and died of a stroke in the tenth year of Guangxu (1884), and his works include "Drunken Hongxuan Pen Words", "Flower Stick", "Wuzhong Archaeological Records" and "Xiangull Collection" (Zou Tao's "Three Borrowed Lu Pen Talks" four). "Dream of the Brothel" was completed in the fourth year of Guangxu, and it took the Wuzhong singer to give full play to its great ideal of "traveling to the flower country, protecting beauties, picking celery, picking Weike, serving political affairs, repaying relatives, full friendship, Dunqinse, raising children, good neighbors, thanking prosperity, and seeking the way" (the first time). It is said that Jin Yixiang, styled Qizhen, was from Changzhou County, Suzhou Prefecture, who was good at writing when he was young, and became smarter and more beautiful as he grew up, but he did not marry, saying that he wanted to have a "lover", and "the world is so torrent, who is this person with?" It actually made a poor Confucian scholar with talent unmet, and no one knew me, but unlike the woman in the brothel, she actually had the discerning eye to recognize the hero when she did not meet it" ("Outline" of this book). Therefore, he is particularly loved and respected by the artists. For example:……（挹香与二友及十二妓女）至轩中，三人重复观玩，见其中修饰，别有巧思。轩外名花绮丽，草木精神。正中摆了筵席，月素定了位次，三人居中，众美人亦序次而坐：
…… （挹香与二友及十二妓女）至轩中，三人重复观玩，见其中修饰，别有巧思。 轩外名花绮丽，草木精神。 正中摆了筵席，月素定了位次，三人居中，众美人亦序次而坐：第一位鸳鸯馆主人褚爱芳　第二位烟柳山人王湘云　第三位铁笛仙袁巧云　第四位爱雏女史朱素卿　第五位惜花春起早使者陆丽春　第六位探梅女士郑素卿　第七位浣花仙史陆文卿……第十一位梅雪争先客何月娟
The first owner of the Mandarin Duck Pavilion, Chu Aifang, the second Wang Xiangyun, the second Yanliu Mountain man, the third iron flute immortal Yuan Qiaoyun, the fourth beloved young female historian Zhu Suqing, the fifth cherishing flowers, the early messenger of spring rises, Lu Lichun, the sixth lady Tanmei, Zheng Suqing, the seventh Huanhua immortal history, Lu Wenqing...... Eleventh Mei Xue competed for the first guest He Yuejuan末位护芳楼主人自己坐了；两旁四对侍儿斟酒。众美人传杯弄盏，极尽绸缪。挹香向慧琼道，“今日如此盛会，宜举一觞令，庶不负此良辰。”月素道，“君言诚是，即请赐令。”挹香说道，“请主人自己开令。”月素道，“岂有此理，还请你来。”挹香被推不过，只得说道，“有占了。”众美人道，“令官必须先饮门面杯起令，才是。”于是十二位美人俱各斟酒一杯，奉与挹香；挹香一饮而尽，乃启口道，“酒令胜于军令，违者罚酒三巨觥！”众美人唯唯听命。……（第五回）
末位护芳楼主人自己坐了；两旁四对侍儿斟酒。 众美人传杯弄盏，极尽绸缪。 挹香向慧琼道，“今日如此盛会，宜举一觞令，庶不负此良辰。 ”月素道，“君言诚是，即请赐令。 ”挹香说道，“请主人自己开令。 ”月素道，“岂有此理，还请你来。 ”挹香被推不过，只得说道，“有占了。 ”众美人道，“令官必须先饮门面杯起令，才是。 ”于是十二位美人俱各斟酒一杯，奉与挹香；挹香一饮而尽，乃启口道，“酒令胜于军令，违者罚酒三巨觥！”众美人唯唯听命。 …… （第五回）挹香亦深于情，侍疾服劳不厌，如：
Fragrance is also deeply affectionate, and the service is tireless, such as:……一日，挹香至留香阁，爱卿适发胃气，饮食不进。挹香十分不舍，忽想着过青田著有《医门宝》四卷，尚在馆中书架内，其中胃气丹方颇多，遂到馆取而复至，查到“香郁散”最宜，令侍儿配了回来，亲侍药炉茶灶；又解了几天馆，朝夕在留香阁陪伴。爱卿更加感激，乃口占一绝，以报挹香。……（第二十一回）
…… One day, Aiqing went to Liuxiang Pavilion to bring incense to the Liuxiang Pavilion, where Aiqing happened to have an upset stomach and could not eat or drink. Yixiang was very reluctant, and suddenly thought that Qingtian had written four volumes of "Medical Gate Treasure", which were still in the library's bookshelf, among which there were many stomach qi pills, so he went to the library to take them again, and found that "Xiang Yusan" was the most suitable, so he ordered the waiter to come back and serve the medicine stove and tea stove; I stayed in the pavilion for a few more days, and I stayed with him in the Liuxiang Pavilion day and night. Aiqing was even more grateful, so he recited a quatrain to repay Yixiang. …… (Episode 21)后乃终“掇巍科”，纳五妓，一妻四妾。又为养亲计，捐职仕余杭，即迁知府，则“任政事”矣。已而父母皆在府衙中跨鹤仙去；挹香亦悟道，将入山，
后乃终“掇巍科”，纳五妓，一妻四妾。 又为养亲计，捐职仕余杭，即迁知府，则“任政事”矣。 已而父母皆在府衙中跨鹤仙去；挹香亦悟道，将入山，……心中思想道，“我欲勘破红尘，不能明告他们知道，只得一个私自瞒了他们，踱了出去的了。”次日写了三封信，寄与拜林梦仙仲英，无非与他们留书志别的事情，又嘱拜林早日代吟梅完其姻事。过了几天，挹香又带了几十两银子，自己去置办了道袍道服草帽凉鞋，寄在人家，重归家里。又到梅花馆来，恰巧五美俱在，挹香见他们不识不知，仍旧笑嘻嘻在着那里，觉心中还有些对他们不起的念头。想了一回，叹道，“既解情关，有何恋恋！”……（第六十回）
…… I thought in my heart, "I want to break through the red dust, but I can't tell them clearly, so I have to hide it from them and pace out." The next day, he wrote three letters and sent them to Bailin Mengxian Zhongying, which was nothing more than leaving a book with them, and asked Bailin to complete his marriage on behalf of Yinmei as soon as possible. A few days later, Yixiang brought dozens of taels of silver, bought Taoist robes, Taoist robes, straw hats, and sandals, sent them to others, and returned home. When I came to the Plum Blossom Pavilion again, it happened that the five beauties were there, and Yixiang saw that they didn't know each other, but still smiled there, and felt that there were still some thoughts in her heart that were not good for them. After thinking about it once, he sighed, "Since you have solved the relationship, what is the love!" ”…… (60th)遂去，羽化于天台山，又归家，悉度其妻妾，于是“金氏门中两代白日升天”（第六十一回）。其子则早抡元；旧友亦因挹香汲引，皆仙去；而曩昔所识三十六伎，亦一一“归班”，缘此辈“多是散花苑主坐下司花的仙女，因为偶触思凡之念，所以谪降红尘，如今尘缘已满，应该重入仙班”（第六十四回）也。
遂去，羽化于天台山，又归家，悉度其妻妾，于是“金氏门中两代白日升天”（第六十一回）。 其子则早抡元；旧友亦因挹香汲引，皆仙去；而曩昔所识三十六伎，亦一一“归班”，缘此辈“多是散花苑主坐下司花的仙女，因为偶触思凡之念，所以谪降红尘，如今尘缘已满，应该重入仙班”（第六十四回）也。《红楼梦》方板行，续作及翻案者即奋起，各竭智巧，使之团圆，久之，乃渐兴尽，盖至道光末而始不甚作此等书。然其余波，则所被尚广远，惟常人之家，人数鲜少，事故无多，纵有波澜，亦不适于《红楼梦》笔意，故遂一变，即由叙男女杂沓之狭邪以发泄之。如上述三书，虽意度有高下，文笔有妍媸，而皆摹绘柔情，敷陈艳迹，精神所在，实无不同，特以谈钗黛而生厌，因改求佳人于倡优，知大观园者已多，则别辟情场于北里而已。然自《海上花列传》出，乃始实写妓家，暴其奸谲，谓“以过来人现身说法”，欲使阅者“按迹寻踪，心通其意，见当前之媚于西子，即可知背后之泼于夜叉，见今日之密于糟糠，即可卜他年之毒于蛇蝎”（第一回）。则开宗明义，已异前人，而《红楼梦》在狭邪小说之泽，亦自此而斩也。
《红楼梦》方板行，续作及翻案者即奋起，各竭智巧，使之团圆，久之，乃渐兴尽，盖至道光末而始不甚作此等书。 然其余波，则所被尚广远，惟常人之家，人数鲜少，事故无多，纵有波澜，亦不适于《红楼梦》笔意，故遂一变，即由叙男女杂沓之狭邪以发泄之。 如上述三书，虽意度有高下，文笔有妍媸，而皆摹绘柔情，敷陈艳迹，精神所在，实无不同，特以谈钗黛而生厌，因改求佳人于倡优，知大观园者已多，则别辟情场于北里而已。 然自《海上花列传》出，乃始实写妓家，暴其奸谲，谓“以过来人现身说法”，欲使阅者“按迹寻踪，心通其意，见当前之媚于西子，即可知背后之泼于夜叉，见今日之密于糟糠，即可卜他年之毒于蛇蝎”（第一回）。 则开宗明义，已异前人，而《红楼梦》在狭邪小说之泽，亦自此而斩也。《海上花列传》今有六十四回，题“云间花也怜侬著”，或谓其人即松江韩子云，善弈棋，嗜鸦片，旅居上海甚久，曾充报馆编辑，所得笔墨之资，悉挥霍于花丛中，阅历既深，遂洞悉此中伎俩（《小说考证》八引《谈瀛室笔记》）；而未详其名，自署云间，则华亭人也。其书出于光绪十八年（一八九二），每七日印二回，遍鬻于市，颇风行。大略以赵朴斋为全书线索，言赵年十七，以访母舅洪善卿至上海，遂游青楼，少不更事，沉溺至大困顿，旋被洪送令还。而赵又潜返，愈益沦落，至“拉洋车”。书至此为第二十八回，忽不复印。作者虽目光始终不离于赵，顾事迹则仅此，惟因赵又牵连租界商人及浪游子弟，杂述其沉湎征逐之状，并及烟花，自“长三”至“花烟间”具有；略如《儒林外史》，若断若续，缀为长篇。其訾倡女之无深情，虽责善于非所，而记载如实，绝少夸张，则固能自践其“写照传神，属辞比事，点缀渲染，跃跃如生”（第一回）之约者矣。如述赵朴斋初至上海，与张小村同赴“花烟间”时情状云：
《海上花列传》今有六十四回，题“云间花也怜侬著”，或谓其人即松江韩子云，善弈棋，嗜鸦片，旅居上海甚久，曾充报馆编辑，所得笔墨之资，悉挥霍于花丛中，阅历既深，遂洞悉此中伎俩（《小说考证》八引《谈瀛室笔记》）；而未详其名，自署云间，则华亭人也。 其书出于光绪十八年（一八九二），每七日印二回，遍鬻于市，颇风行。 大略以赵朴斋为全书线索，言赵年十七，以访母舅洪善卿至上海，遂游青楼，少不更事，沉溺至大困顿，旋被洪送令还。 而赵又潜返，愈益沦落，至“拉洋车”。 书至此为第二十八回，忽不复印。 作者虽目光始终不离于赵，顾事迹则仅此，惟因赵又牵连租界商人及浪游子弟，杂述其沉湎征逐之状，并及烟花，自“长三”至“花烟间”具有；略如《儒林外史》，若断若续，缀为长篇。 其訾倡女之无深情，虽责善于非所，而记载如实，绝少夸张，则固能自践其“写照传神，属辞比事，点缀渲染，跃跃如生”（第一回）之约者矣。 如述赵朴斋初至上海，与张小村同赴“花烟间”时情状云：……王阿二一见小村，便撺上去嚷道，“耐好啊！骗我，阿是？耐说转去两三个月啘，直到仔故歇坎坎来。阿是两三个月嗄？只怕有两三年哉！……”小村忙陪笑央告道，“耐覅动气，我搭耐说。”便凑着王阿二耳朵边，轻轻的说话。说不到四句，王阿二忽跳起来，沉下脸道，“耐倒乖杀哚。耐想拿件湿布衫拨来别人着仔，耐末脱体哉，阿是？”小村发急道，“勿是呀，耐也等我说完仔了。”王阿二便又爬在小村怀里去听，也不知咕咕唧唧说些甚么，只见小村说着，又努嘴，王阿二即回头把赵朴斋瞟了一眼，接着小村又说了几句。王阿二道，“耐末那价呢？”小村道，“我是原照旧啘。”王阿二方才罢了；立起身来，剔亮了灯台；问朴斋尊姓；又自头至足，细细打量。朴斋别转脸去，装做看单条。只见一个半老娘姨，一手提水铫子，一手托两盒烟膏，……蹭上楼来，……把烟盒放在烟盘里，点了烟灯，冲了茶碗，仍提铫子下楼自去。王阿二靠在小村身旁烧起烟来，见朴斋独自坐着，便说，“榻床浪来軃軃。”朴斋巴不得一声，随向烟榻下手躺下，看着王阿二烧好一口烟，装在枪上，授于小村，飕直吸到底。……至第三口，小村说，“覅吃哉。”王阿二调过枪来，授与朴斋。朴斋吸不惯，不到半口，斗门噎住。……王阿二将签子打通烟眼，替他把火。朴斋趁势捏他手腕，王阿二夺过手，把朴斋腿膀尽力摔了一把，摔得朴斋又痠又痛又爽快。朴斋吸完烟，却偷眼去看小村，见小村闭着眼，朦朦胧胧，似睡非睡光景，朴斋低声叫“小村哥”。连叫两声，小村只摇手，不答应。王阿二道，“烟迷呀，随俚去罢。”朴斋便不叫了。……（第二回）
…… As soon as Wang Aer saw the small village, he went up and shouted, "It's good! Lie to me, ah? It takes two or three months until the child stops coming. Ah, is it two or three months? I'm afraid it will last two or three years! ......" Xiao Mu hurriedly accompanied the smile and begged, "Nai is angry, I will say it." Then he leaned close to Wang Aer's ear and spoke softly. Before he could say four words, Wang Aer suddenly jumped up, sank his face and said, "It's okay to kill it." I want to take a wet cloth shirt and call someone else to wear it, and I can't help but take it off, right? The village said anxiously, "No, wait for me to finish speaking." Wang Aer crawled into Xiaocun's arms to listen again, and didn't know what to say, only to see Xiaocun talking, and pouting, Wang Aer immediately turned around and glanced at Zhao Puzhai, and then Xiaocun said a few more words. Wang Ah Er said, "What about the price of Naimo?" The small village said, "I'm the same as before." "Wang Ah Er is just right; stood up and lit the lampstand; Ask for Park Jae's surname; He looked at it carefully from head to toe. Park Jae-jae don't turn your face and pretend to read a single strip. I saw a half-old lady, holding a water spoon in one hand and two boxes of tobacco cream in the other,...... Rub upstairs,...... Put the cigarette box in the cigarette tray, lit the cigarette lamp, flushed the teacup, and still carried the iron downstairs and went by himself. Wang Aer leaned against the side of the small village and lit a cigarette, and when he saw Pu Zhai sitting alone, he said, "The bed is coming . Park Zhai couldn't help but sigh, lay down under the smoke couch, watched Wang Aer burn a puff of smoke, put it on the gun, gave it to the village, and sucked it to the end id_00003 id_00002. …… At the third bite, Komura said, "Eat it." Wang A Er transferred the gun and gave it to Park Zhai. Park Zhai couldn't get used to it, and before he took a sip, he choked on the door. …… Wang A'er opened the cigarette hole with the sign and lit it for him. Park Zhai took advantage of the situation to pinch his wrist, Wang A'er snatched his hand and threw Park Zhai's leg as hard as he could, causing Park Zhai to be sore, painful and refreshing. After smoking a cigarette, Pu Zhai stole his eyes to look at the village, and saw that the village was closed and hazy, as if he was sleeping but not sleeping, and Park Zhai whispered "Brother Xiaocun". shouted twice, but the village only waved his hand and did not agree. Wang A Er said, "Smoke fans, go with the slang." Park Jae stopped calling. …… (Part 2)至光绪二十年，则第一至六十回俱出，进叙洪善卿于无意中见赵拉车，即寄书于姊，述其状。洪氏无计；惟其女曰二宝者颇能，乃与母赴上海来访，得之，而又皆留连不遽返。洪善卿力劝令归，不听，乃绝去。三人资斧渐尽，驯至不能归，二宝遂为倡，名甚噪。已而遇史三公子，云是巨富，极爱二宝，迎之至别墅消夏，谓将娶以为妻，特须返南京略一屏当，始来迓，遂别。二宝由是谢绝他客，且贷金盛制衣饰，备作嫁资，而史三公子竟不至。使朴斋往南京询得消息，则云公子新订婚，方赴扬州亲迎去矣。二宝闻信昏绝，救之始苏，而负债至三四千金，非重理旧业不能偿，于是复揽客，见噩梦而书止。自跋谓将续作，然不成。后半于所谓海上名流之雅集，记叙特详，但稍失实；至描写他人之征逐，挥霍，及互相欺谩之状，乃不稍逊于前三十回。有述赖公子赏女优一节，甚得当时世态：
至光绪二十年，则第一至六十回俱出，进叙洪善卿于无意中见赵拉车，即寄书于姊，述其状。 洪氏无计；惟其女曰二宝者颇能，乃与母赴上海来访，得之，而又皆留连不遽返。 洪善卿力劝令归，不听，乃绝去。 三人资斧渐尽，驯至不能归，二宝遂为倡，名甚噪。 已而遇史三公子，云是巨富，极爱二宝，迎之至别墅消夏，谓将娶以为妻，特须返南京略一屏当，始来迓，遂别。 二宝由是谢绝他客，且贷金盛制衣饰，备作嫁资，而史三公子竟不至。 使朴斋往南京询得消息，则云公子新订婚，方赴扬州亲迎去矣。 二宝闻信昏绝，救之始苏，而负债至三四千金，非重理旧业不能偿，于是复揽客，见噩梦而书止。 自跋谓将续作，然不成。 后半于所谓海上名流之雅集，记叙特详，但稍失实；至描写他人之征逐，挥霍，及互相欺谩之状，乃不稍逊于前三十回。 有述赖公子赏女优一节，甚得当时世态：……文君改装登场，一个门客凑趣，先喊声“好！”不料接接连连，你也喊好，我也喊好，一片声嚷得天崩地塌，海搅江翻。……只有赖公子捧腹大笑，极其得意。唱过半出，就令当差的放赏。那当差的将一卷洋钱散放在巴斗内，呈赖公子过目，望台上只一撒，但闻索郎一声响，便见许多晶莹焜耀的东西，满台乱滚；台下这些帮闲门客又齐声一号。文君揣知赖公子其欲逐逐，心上一急，倒急出个计较来，当场依然用心的唱，唱罢落场，……含笑入席。不提防赖公子一手将文君拦入怀中；文君慌的推开立起，佯作怒色，却又爬在赖公子肩膀，悄悄的附耳说了几句，赖公子连连点头道，“晓得哉。”……（第四十四回）
…… Wenjun modified and appeared, and a doorman joined in and shouted "Okay!" Unexpectedly, one after another, you shouted well, and I shouted well, and the sky collapsed, and the sea stirred the river. …… Only Lai Gongzi laughed and was extremely proud. After the song is halfway through, the reward will be released. The servant scattered a roll of foreign money in the bucket, and showed it to the young master, and only scattered it on the platform, but when he heard a sound from Solang, he saw many shining things, rolling all over the table; The guests in the audience shouted in unison. Wenjun guessed that Lai Gongzi wanted to chase after him, and he was anxious, but he was anxious to come up with a plan, and he still sang attentively on the spot, and the song ended after the performance,...... He smiled as he sat down. Don't be wary of Lai Gongzi blocking Wenjun into his arms with one hand; Wenjun pushed away in a panic and stood up, pretending to be angry, but crawled on Lai Gongzi's shoulder again, and quietly whispered a few words, and Lai Gongzi nodded repeatedly and said, "I know." ”…… (Episode 44)书中人物，亦多实有，而悉隐其真姓名，惟不为赵朴斋讳。相传赵本作者挚友，时济以金，久而厌绝，韩遂撰此书以谤之，印卖至第二十八回，赵急致重赂，始辍笔，而书已风行；已而赵死，乃续作贸利，且放笔至写其妹为倡云。然二宝沦落，实作者豫定之局，故当开篇赵朴斋初见洪善卿时，即叙洪问“耐有个令妹，……阿曾受茶？”答则曰，“匆曾。今年也十五岁哉。”已为后文伏线也。光绪末至宣统初，上海此类小说之出尤多，往往数回辄中止，殆得赂矣；而无所营求，仅欲摘发伎家罪恶之书亦兴起，惟大都巧为罗织，故作已甚之辞，冀震耸世间耳目，终未有如《海上花列传》之平淡而近自然者。
书中人物，亦多实有，而悉隐其真姓名，惟不为赵朴斋讳。 相传赵本作者挚友，时济以金，久而厌绝，韩遂撰此书以谤之，印卖至第二十八回，赵急致重赂，始辍笔，而书已风行；已而赵死，乃续作贸利，且放笔至写其妹为倡云。 然二宝沦落，实作者豫定之局，故当开篇赵朴斋初见洪善卿时，即叙洪问“耐有个令妹，…… 阿曾受茶？”答则曰，“匆曾。 今年也十五岁哉。 ”已为后文伏线也。 光绪末至宣统初，上海此类小说之出尤多，往往数回辄中止，殆得赂矣；而无所营求，仅欲摘发伎家罪恶之书亦兴起，惟大都巧为罗织，故作已甚之辞，冀震耸世间耳目，终未有如《海上花列传》之平淡而近自然者。

第二十七篇　清之侠义小说及公案

第二十七篇　清之侠义小说及公案

第二十七篇　清之侠义小说及公案

Chapter 27 Qingzhi's chivalrous novels and public cases明季以来，世目《三国》《水浒》《西游》《金瓶梅》为“四大奇书”，居说部上首，比清乾隆中，《红楼梦》盛行，遂夺《三国》之席，而尤见称于文人。惟细民所嗜，则仍在《三国》《水浒》。时势屡更，人情日异于昔，久亦稍厌，渐生别流，虽故发源于前数书，而精神或至正反，大旨在揄扬勇侠，赞美粗豪，然又必不背于忠义。其所以然者，即一缘文人或有憾于《红楼》，其代表为《儿女英雄传》；一缘民心已不通于《水浒》，其代表为《三侠五义》。
Since the end of the Ming Dynasty, the world has regarded "Three Kingdoms", "Water Margin", "Journey to the West" and "Golden Bottle Plum" as the "Four Strange Books", which are the first in the Ministry of Theory, and compared with the Qing Dynasty Qianlong, "Dream of Red Mansions" was prevalent, so it won the seat of "Three Kingdoms", and was especially praised by literati. However, the common people's favorite books are still in the "Three Kingdoms" and "Water Margin." Although it originated from the previous few books, the spirit may be positive and contrary, the main purpose is to praise the brave and chivalrous, praise the rough and bold, but it will not betray loyalty and righteousness. The reason for this is that the literati may have regrets about "Red Mansions", and its representative is "The Legend of Children's Heroes"; One reason is that the people's hearts are no longer connected to "Water Margin", and its representative is "Three Heroes and Five Righteousness".《儿女英雄传评话》本五十三回，今残存四十回，题“燕北闲人著”。马从善序云出文康手，盖定稿于道光中。文康，费莫氏，字铁仙，满洲镶红旗人，大学士勒保次孙也，“以资为理藩院郎中，出为郡守，洊擢观察，丁忧旋里，特起为驻藏大臣，以疾不果行，卒于家。”家本贵盛，而诸子不肖，遂中落且至困惫。文康晚年块处一室，笔墨仅存，因著此书以自遣。升降盛衰，俱所亲历，“故于世运之变迁，人情之反复，三致意焉。”（并序语）荣华已落，怆然有怀，命笔留辞，其情况盖与曹雪芹颇类。惟彼为写实，为自叙，此为理想，为叙他，加以经历复殊，而成就遂迥异矣。书首有雍正甲寅观鉴我斋序，谓为“格致之书”，反《西游》等之“怪力乱神”而正之；次乾隆甲寅东海吾了翁识，谓得于春明市上，不知作者何人，研读数四，“更于没字处求之”，始知言皆有物，因补其阙失，弁以数言云云：皆作者假托。开篇则谓“这部评话……初名《金玉缘》；因所传的是首善京都一桩公案，又名《日下新书》。篇中立旨立言，虽然无当于文，却还一洗秽语淫词，不乖于正，因又名《正法眼藏五十三参》，初非释家言也。后来东海吾了翁重订，题曰《儿女英雄传评话》。……”（首回）多立异名，摇曳见态，亦仍为《红楼梦》家数也。
《儿女英雄传评话》本五十三回，今残存四十回，题“燕北闲人著”。 马从善序云出文康手，盖定稿于道光中。 文康，费莫氏，字铁仙，满洲镶红旗人，大学士勒保次孙也，“以资为理藩院郎中，出为郡守，洊擢观察，丁忧旋里，特起为驻藏大臣，以疾不果行，卒于家。 ”家本贵盛，而诸子不肖，遂中落且至困惫。 文康晚年块处一室，笔墨仅存，因著此书以自遣。 升降盛衰，俱所亲历，“故于世运之变迁，人情之反复，三致意焉。 ”（并序语）荣华已落，怆然有怀，命笔留辞，其情况盖与曹雪芹颇类。 惟彼为写实，为自叙，此为理想，为叙他，加以经历复殊，而成就遂迥异矣。 书首有雍正甲寅观鉴我斋序，谓为“格致之书”，反《西游》等之“怪力乱神”而正之；次乾隆甲寅东海吾了翁识，谓得于春明市上，不知作者何人，研读数四，“更于没字处求之”，始知言皆有物，因补其阙失，弁以数言云云：皆作者假托。 开篇则谓“这部评话…… 初名《金玉缘》；因所传的是首善京都一桩公案，又名《日下新书》。 篇中立旨立言，虽然无当于文，却还一洗秽语淫词，不乖于正，因又名《正法眼藏五十三参》，初非释家言也。 后来东海吾了翁重订，题曰《儿女英雄传评话》。 ……”（首回）多立异名，摇曳见态，亦仍为《红楼梦》家数也。所谓“京都一桩公案”者，为有侠女曰何玉凤，本出名门，而智慧骁勇绝世，其父先为人所害，因奉母避居山林，欲伺间报仇。其怨家曰纪献唐，有大勋劳于国，势甚盛。何玉凤急切不得当，变姓名曰十三妹，往来市井间，颇拓弛玩世；偶于旅次见孝子安骥困厄，救之，以是相识，后渐稔。已而纪献唐为朝廷所诛，何虽未手刃其仇而父仇则已报，欲出家，然卒为劝沮者所动，嫁安骥。骥又有妻曰张金凤，亦尝为玉凤所拯，乃相睦如姊妹，后各有孕，故此书初名《金玉缘》。
所谓“京都一桩公案”者，为有侠女曰何玉凤，本出名门，而智慧骁勇绝世，其父先为人所害，因奉母避居山林，欲伺间报仇。 其怨家曰纪献唐，有大勋劳于国，势甚盛。 何玉凤急切不得当，变姓名曰十三妹，往来市井间，颇拓弛玩世；偶于旅次见孝子安骥困厄，救之，以是相识，后渐稔。 已而纪献唐为朝廷所诛，何虽未手刃其仇而父仇则已报，欲出家，然卒为劝沮者所动，嫁安骥。 骥又有妻曰张金凤，亦尝为玉凤所拯，乃相睦如姊妹，后各有孕，故此书初名《金玉缘》。书中人物亦常取同时人为蓝本；或取前人，如纪献唐，蒋瑞藻（《小说考证》八）云，“吾之意，以为纪者，年也；献者，《曲礼》云，‘犬名羹献’；唐为帝尧年号：合之则年羹尧也。……其事迹与本传所记悉合。”安骥殆以自寓，或者有慨于子而反写之。十三妹未详，当纯出作者意造，缘欲使英雄儿女之概，备于一身，遂致性格失常，言动绝异，矫揉之态，触目皆是矣。如叙安骥初遇何于旅舍，虑其入室，呼人抬石杜门，众不能动，而何反为之运以入，即其例也：
书中人物亦常取同时人为蓝本；或取前人，如纪献唐，蒋瑞藻（《小说考证》八）云，“吾之意，以为纪者，年也；献者，《曲礼》云，‘犬名羹献’；唐为帝尧年号：合之则年羹尧也。 …… 其事迹与本传所记悉合。 ”安骥殆以自寓，或者有慨于子而反写之。 十三妹未详，当纯出作者意造，缘欲使英雄儿女之概，备于一身，遂致性格失常，言动绝异，矫揉之态，触目皆是矣。 如叙安骥初遇何于旅舍，虑其入室，呼人抬石杜门，众不能动，而何反为之运以入，即其例也：……那女子又说道，“弄这块石头，何至于闹的这等马仰人翻的呀？”张三手里拿着镢头，看了一眼，接口说，“怎么‘马仰人翻’呢？瞧这家伙，不这么弄，问得动他吗？打谅顽儿呢。”那女子走到跟前，把那块石头端相了端相，……约莫也有个二百四五十斤重，原是一个碾粮食的碌碡；上面靠边，却有个凿通了的关眼儿。……他先挽了挽袖子，……把那石头撂倒在平地上，用右手推着一转，找着那个关眼儿，伸进两个指头去勾住了，往上只一悠，就把那二百多斤的石头碌碡，单撒手儿提了起来。向着张三李四说道，“你们两个也别闲着，把这石头上的土给我拂落净了。”两个屁滚尿流，答应了一声，连忙用手拂落了一阵，说，“得了。”那女子才回过头来，满面含春的向安公子道，“尊客，这石头放在那里？”安公子羞得面红过耳，眼观鼻鼻观心的答应了一声，说，“有劳，就放在屋里罢。”那女子听了，便一手提着石头，款动一双小脚儿，上了台阶儿，那只手撩起了布帘，跨进门去，轻轻的把那块石头放在屋里南墙根儿底下；回转头来，气不喘，面不红，心不跳。众人伸头探脑的向屋里看了，无不咤异。……（第四回）
…… The woman said again, "If you get this stone, why do you make such a fuss? Zhang San held the headset in his hand, glanced at it, and said, "Why is the horse looking up to the person turning?" Look at this guy, don't do this, can you ask him? Forgive the naughty boy. The woman came up to her and looked at the stone,...... There was also a weight of about two hundred and forty or fifty pounds, which was originally a grain milling pile; There is a hole that has been drilled up. …… He rolled up his sleeves first,...... Knocked the stone down on the flat ground, pushed it with his right hand, found the eye, stretched in two fingers to hook it, and only went up, and lifted the stone weighing more than 200 pounds with his hand. He said to Zhang San and Li Si, "Don't be idle, you two, brush off the soil on this stone for me." The two farts and urine flowed, agreed, and quickly brushed off with their hands for a while, saying, "Okay." The woman turned around and said to Young Master An with a spring on her face, "Honorable guest, where is this stone placed?" Young Master An blushed with shame, and agreed with his eyes and nose, and said, "If you have a job, just put it in the house." When the woman heard this, she held a stone in one hand, moved a pair of small feet, went up the steps, lifted the curtain with one hand, stepped into the door, and gently placed the stone under the root of the south wall of the house; Turning his head, he was not breathing, his face was not red, and his heart was not beating. Everyone stretched out their heads and looked into the room, and they were all surprised. …… (4th)结末言安骥以探花及第，复由国子监祭酒简放乌里雅苏台参赞大臣，未赴，又“改为学政，陛辞后即行赴任，办了些疑难大案，政声载道，位极人臣，不能尽述”。因此复有人作续书三十二回，文意并拙，且未完，云有二续，序题“不计年月无名氏”，盖光绪二十年顷北京书估之所造也。
结末言安骥以探花及第，复由国子监祭酒简放乌里雅苏台参赞大臣，未赴，又“改为学政，陛辞后即行赴任，办了些疑难大案，政声载道，位极人臣，不能尽述”。 因此复有人作续书三十二回，文意并拙，且未完，云有二续，序题“不计年月无名氏”，盖光绪二十年顷北京书估之所造也。《三侠五义》出于光绪五年（一八七九），原名《忠烈侠义传》，百二十回，首署“石玉昆述”，而序则云问竹主人原藏，入迷道人编订，皆不详为何如人。凡此流著作，虽意在叙勇侠之士，游行村市，安良除暴，为国立功，而必以一名臣大吏为中枢，以总领一切豪俊，其在《三侠五义》者曰包拯。拯字希仁，以进士官至礼部侍郎，其间尝除天章阁待制，又除龙图阁学士，权知开封府，立朝刚毅，关节不到，世人比之阎罗，有传在《宋史》（三百十六）。而民间所传，则行事率怪异，元人杂剧中已有包公“断立太后”及“审乌盆鬼”诸异说；明人又作短书十卷曰《龙图公案》，亦名《包公案》，记拯借私访梦兆鬼语等以断奇案六十三事，然文意甚拙，盖仅识文字者所为。后又演为大部，仍称《龙图公案》，则组织加密，首尾通连，即为《三侠五义》蓝本矣。
《三侠五义》出于光绪五年（一八七九），原名《忠烈侠义传》，百二十回，首署“石玉昆述”，而序则云问竹主人原藏，入迷道人编订，皆不详为何如人。 凡此流著作，虽意在叙勇侠之士，游行村市，安良除暴，为国立功，而必以一名臣大吏为中枢，以总领一切豪俊，其在《三侠五义》者曰包拯。 拯字希仁，以进士官至礼部侍郎，其间尝除天章阁待制，又除龙图阁学士，权知开封府，立朝刚毅，关节不到，世人比之阎罗，有传在《宋史》（三百十六）。 而民间所传，则行事率怪异，元人杂剧中已有包公“断立太后”及“审乌盆鬼”诸异说；明人又作短书十卷曰《龙图公案》，亦名《包公案》，记拯借私访梦兆鬼语等以断奇案六十三事，然文意甚拙，盖仅识文字者所为。 后又演为大部，仍称《龙图公案》，则组织加密，首尾通连，即为《三侠五义》蓝本矣。《三侠五义》开篇，即叙宋真宗未有子，而刘李二妃俱娠，约立举子者为正宫。刘乃与宫监郭槐密谋，俟李生子，即易以剥皮之狸猫，谓生怪物。太子则付宫人寇珠，命缢而弃诸水，寇珠不忍，窃授陈林，匿八大王所，云是第三子，始得长育。刘又谗李妃去之，忠宦多死。真宗无子，既崩，八王第三子乃入承大统，即仁宗也。书由是即进叙包拯降生，惟以前案为下文伏线而已。复次，则述拯婚宦及断案事迹，往往取他人故事，并附著之。比知开封，乃于民间遇李妃，发“狸猫换子”旧案，时仁宗始知李为真母，迎以归。拯又以忠诚之行，感化豪客，如三侠，即南侠展昭，北侠欧阳春，双侠丁兆兰，丁兆蕙，以及五鼠，为钻天鼠卢方，彻地鼠韩彰，穿山鼠徐庆，翻江鼠蒋平，锦毛鼠白玉堂等，率为盗侠，纵横江湖间，或则偶入京师，戏盗御物，人亦莫能制，顾皆先后倾心，投诚受职，协诛强暴，人民大安。后襄阳王赵珏谋反，匿其党之盟书于冲霄楼，五鼠从巡按颜查散探访，而白玉堂遽独往盗之，遂坠铜网阵而死；书至此亦完。其中人物之见于史者，惟包拯八王等数人；故事亦多非实有，五鼠虽明人之《龙图公案》及《西洋记》皆载及，而并云物怪，与此之为义士者不同，宗藩谋反，仁宗时实未有，此殆因明宸濠事而影响附会之矣。至于构设事端，颇伤稚弱，而独于写草野豪杰，辄奕奕有神，间或衬以世态，杂以诙谐，亦每令莽夫分外生色。值世间方饱于妖异之说，脂粉之谈，而此遂以粗豪脱略见长，于说部中露头角也。
《三侠五义》开篇，即叙宋真宗未有子，而刘李二妃俱娠，约立举子者为正宫。 刘乃与宫监郭槐密谋，俟李生子，即易以剥皮之狸猫，谓生怪物。 太子则付宫人寇珠，命缢而弃诸水，寇珠不忍，窃授陈林，匿八大王所，云是第三子，始得长育。 刘又谗李妃去之，忠宦多死。 真宗无子，既崩，八王第三子乃入承大统，即仁宗也。 书由是即进叙包拯降生，惟以前案为下文伏线而已。 复次，则述拯婚宦及断案事迹，往往取他人故事，并附著之。 比知开封，乃于民间遇李妃，发“狸猫换子”旧案，时仁宗始知李为真母，迎以归。 拯又以忠诚之行，感化豪客，如三侠，即南侠展昭，北侠欧阳春，双侠丁兆兰，丁兆蕙，以及五鼠，为钻天鼠卢方，彻地鼠韩彰，穿山鼠徐庆，翻江鼠蒋平，锦毛鼠白玉堂等，率为盗侠，纵横江湖间，或则偶入京师，戏盗御物，人亦莫能制，顾皆先后倾心，投诚受职，协诛强暴，人民大安。 后襄阳王赵珏谋反，匿其党之盟书于冲霄楼，五鼠从巡按颜查散探访，而白玉堂遽独往盗之，遂坠铜网阵而死；书至此亦完。 其中人物之见于史者，惟包拯八王等数人；故事亦多非实有，五鼠虽明人之《龙图公案》及《西洋记》皆载及，而并云物怪，与此之为义士者不同，宗藩谋反，仁宗时实未有，此殆因明宸濠事而影响附会之矣。 至于构设事端，颇伤稚弱，而独于写草野豪杰，辄奕奕有神，间或衬以世态，杂以诙谐，亦每令莽夫分外生色。 值世间方饱于妖异之说，脂粉之谈，而此遂以粗豪脱略见长，于说部中露头角也。……马汉道，“喝酒是小事，但不知锦毛鼠是怎么个人？”……展爷便将陷空岛的众人说出，又将绰号儿说与众人听了。公孙先生在旁，听得明白，猛然省悟道，“此人来找大哥，却是要与大哥合气的。”展爷道，“他与我素无仇隙，与我合什么气呢？”公孙策道，“大哥，你自想想，他们五人号称‘五鼠’，你却号称‘御猫’，焉有猫儿不捕鼠之理？这明是嗔大哥号称御猫之故，所以知道他要与大哥合气。”展爷道，“贤弟所说，似乎有理。但我这‘御猫’，乃圣上所赐，非是劣兄有意称‘猫’，要欺压朋友。他若真个为此事而来，劣兄甘拜下风，从此后不称御猫，也未为不可。”众人尚未答言，惟赵虎正在豪饮之间，……却有些不服气，拿着酒杯，立起身来道，“大哥，你老素昔胆量过人，今日何自馁如此？这‘御猫’二字，乃圣上所赐，如何改得？傥若是那个甚么白糖咧，黑糖咧，他不来便罢，他若来时，我烧一壶开开的水，把他冲着喝了，也去去我的滞气。”展爷连忙摆手说，“四弟悄言。岂不闻‘窗外有耳’？”刚说至此，只听得拍的一声，从外面飞进一物，不偏不歪，正打在赵虎擎的那个酒杯之上，只听当啷啷一声，将酒杯打了个粉碎。赵爷唬了一跳，众人无不惊骇。只见展爷早已出席，将槅扇虚掩，回身复又将灯吹灭，便把外衣脱下，里面却是早已结束停当的。暗暗将宝剑拿在手中，却把槅扇假做一开，只听拍的一声，又是一物打在槅扇上。展爷这才把槅扇一开，随着劲一伏身蹿将出去。只觉得迎面一股寒风，嗖的就是一刀，展爷将剑扁着，往上一迎，随招随架，用目在星光之下仔细观瞧，见来人穿着簇青的夜行衣靠，脚步伶俐：依稀是前在苗家集见的那人。二人也不言语，惟听刀剑之声，叮当乱响。展爷不过招架，并不还手，见他刀刀逼紧，门路精奇，南侠暗暗喝采；又想道，“这朋友好不知进退。我让着你，不肯伤你。又何必赶尽杀绝？难道我还怕你不成？”暗道，“也叫他知道知道。”便把宝剑一横，等刀临近，用个“鹤唳长空势”，用力往上一削。只听得噌的一声，那人的刀已分为两段，不敢进步，只见他将身一纵，已上了墙头。展爷一跃身，也跟上去。……（第三十九回）
…… Ma Han said, "Drinking is a trivial matter, but I don't know what kind of person the brocade rat is?" ”…… Master Zhan told everyone who was trapped on the island, and then told everyone the nickname. Mr. Gongsun was beside him, he understood, and suddenly realized, "This person came to find the eldest brother, but he wanted to be in harmony with the eldest brother." Master Zhan said, "He has no enmity with me, what is he angry with me?" Gongsun Ce said, "Big brother, think about it, the five of them are called 'five rats', but you are called 'royal cats', how can there be a reason for cats not to catch mice?" This is obviously because he is angry with the eldest brother for calling himself a royal cat, so he knows that he wants to join forces with the eldest brother. Zhan Ye said, "What my good brother said seems to be reasonable." But my 'royal cat' is a gift from the emperor, not that my bad brother deliberately calls me a 'cat' and wants to bully my friends. If he really came for this matter, the bad brother would bow down, and it would not be impossible for him not to be called a royal cat from now on. Everyone hadn't answered yet, but Zhao Hu was drinking heavily,...... But he was a little unconvinced, took the wine glass, stood up and said, "Big brother, you used to be bold, why are you so hungry today?" The word 'royal cat' is given by the emperor, how can it be changed? If it is some kind of white sugar, brown sugar, if he doesn't come, if he comes, I will boil a pot of boiled water, drink it, and go to get rid of my stagnant qi. Master Zhan hurriedly waved his hand and said, "The fourth brother whispered." Don't you hear 'there are ears outside the window'? As soon as he said this, he only heard a slap, something flew in from the outside, neither biased nor crooked, and it was hitting Zhao Huqing's wine glass, and he only heard a clang, smashing the wine glass. Master Zhao was startled, and everyone was shocked. I saw that Master Zhan had already attended, covered the barrel fan, turned around and blew out the lamp again, and took off his coat, but it was already over inside. Secretly holding the sword in his hand, but pretending to open the barrel fan, only to hear a slap, another thing hitting the barrel fan. Only then did Master Zhan open the barrel fan, and jumped out with a strong bend. I only felt that there was a cold wind in front of me, and the whoosh was a knife, Master Zhan flattened the sword, greeted it upwards, followed the move, and looked carefully under the starlight with his eyes, and saw the person wearing a green night clothes, and his steps were clever: it was vaguely the person I had seen at the Miao family before. The two of them did not speak, but listened to the sound of swords, jingling chaotically. Zhan Ye just parried, did not fight back, seeing that he was tight with a knife and a strange path, Nan Xia secretly applauded; He thought again, "This friend doesn't know how to advance or retreat." I let you go, refusing to hurt you. Why should we kill them all? Am I still afraid that you won't be able to do it? "Secret way," also told him to know. Then he put the sword horizontally, waited for the knife to approach, and used a "crane cry long air" to cut it upwards. I only heard a loud sound, the man's knife had been divided into two sections, and he didn't dare to advance, only to see him put his body in a row and went up to the wall. Master Zhan jumped up and followed. …… (Episode 39)当俞樾寓吴下时，潘祖荫归自北京，出示此本，初以为寻常俗书耳，及阅毕，乃叹其“事迹新奇，笔意酣恣，描写既细入毫芒，点染又曲中筋节，正如柳麻子说‘武松打店’，初到店内无人，蓦地一吼，店中空缸空甏，皆瓮瓮有声：闲中着色，精神百倍”（俞序语）。而颇病开篇“狸猫换太子”之不经，乃别撰第一回，“援据史传，订正俗说。”又以书中南侠北侠双侠，其数已四，非三能包，加小侠艾虎，则又成五，“而黑妖狐智化者，小侠之师也，小诸葛沈仲元者，第一百回中盛称其从游戏中生出侠义来，然则此两人非侠而何？”因复改名《七侠五义》，于光绪己丑（一八八九）序而传之，乃与初本并行，在江浙特盛。
当俞樾寓吴下时，潘祖荫归自北京，出示此本，初以为寻常俗书耳，及阅毕，乃叹其“事迹新奇，笔意酣恣，描写既细入毫芒，点染又曲中筋节，正如柳麻子说‘武松打店’，初到店内无人，蓦地一吼，店中空缸空甏，皆瓮瓮有声：闲中着色，精神百倍”（俞序语）。 而颇病开篇“狸猫换太子”之不经，乃别撰第一回，“援据史传，订正俗说。 ”又以书中南侠北侠双侠，其数已四，非三能包，加小侠艾虎，则又成五，“而黑妖狐智化者，小侠之师也，小诸葛沈仲元者，第一百回中盛称其从游戏中生出侠义来，然则此两人非侠而何？”因复改名《七侠五义》，于光绪己丑（一八八九）序而传之，乃与初本并行，在江浙特盛。其年五月，复有《小五义》出于北京，十月，又出《续小五义》，皆一百二十四回。序谓与《三侠五义》皆石玉昆原稿，得之其徒。“本三千多篇，分上中下三部，总名《忠烈侠义传》，原无大小之说，因上部三侠五义为创始之人，故谓之大五义，中下二部五义即其后人出世，故谓之小五义。”《小五义》虽续上部，而又自白玉堂盗盟单起，略当上部之百一回；全书则以襄阳王谋反，义侠之士竞谋探其隐事为线索。是时白玉堂早被害，余亦渐衰老，而后辈继起，并有父风。卢方之子珍，韩彰之子天锦，徐庆之子良，白玉堂之侄芸生，旨意外凑聚于客舍，益以小侠艾虎，遂结为兄弟。诸人奔走道路，颇诛豪强，终集武昌，拟共破铜网阵，未陷而书毕。《续小五义》即接叙前案，铜网先破，叛王遂逃，而诸侠仍在江湖间诛锄盗贼。已而襄阳王成擒，天子论功，侠义之士皆受封赏，于是全书完。序虽云二书皆石玉昆旧本，而较之上部，则中部荒率殊甚，入下又稍细，因疑草创或出一人，润色则由众手，其伎俩有工拙，故正续遂差异也。
其年五月，复有《小五义》出于北京，十月，又出《续小五义》，皆一百二十四回。 序谓与《三侠五义》皆石玉昆原稿，得之其徒。 “本三千多篇，分上中下三部，总名《忠烈侠义传》，原无大小之说，因上部三侠五义为创始之人，故谓之大五义，中下二部五义即其后人出世，故谓之小五义。 ”《小五义》虽续上部，而又自白玉堂盗盟单起，略当上部之百一回；全书则以襄阳王谋反，义侠之士竞谋探其隐事为线索。 是时白玉堂早被害，余亦渐衰老，而后辈继起，并有父风。 卢方之子珍，韩彰之子天锦，徐庆之子良，白玉堂之侄芸生，旨意外凑聚于客舍，益以小侠艾虎，遂结为兄弟。 诸人奔走道路，颇诛豪强，终集武昌，拟共破铜网阵，未陷而书毕。 《续小五义》即接叙前案，铜网先破，叛王遂逃，而诸侠仍在江湖间诛锄盗贼。 已而襄阳王成擒，天子论功，侠义之士皆受封赏，于是全书完。 序虽云二书皆石玉昆旧本，而较之上部，则中部荒率殊甚，入下又稍细，因疑草创或出一人，润色则由众手，其伎俩有工拙，故正续遂差异也。且说徐庆天然的性气一冲的性情，永不思前想后，一时不顺，他就变脸，把桌子一扳，哗喇一声，碗盏皆碎。钟雄是泥人，还有个土性情，拿住了你们，好眼相看，摆酒款待，你倒如此，难怪他怒发。指着三爷道，“你这是怎样了？”三爷说，“这是好的哪。”寨主说，“不好便当怎样？”三爷说，“打你！”话言未了，就是一拳。钟雄就用指尖往三爷肋下一点。“哎哟！”噗咚！三爷就躺于地下。焉知晓钟寨主用的是“十二支讲关法”，又叫“闭血法”，俗语就叫“点穴”。三爷心里明白，不能动转。钟雄拿脚一踢，吩咐绑起来。三爷周身这才活动，又教人捆上了五花大绑。展南侠自己把二臂往后一背，说，“你们把我捆上！”众人有些不肯，又不能不捆。钟雄传令，推在丹凤桥枭首。内中有人嚷道，“刀下留人！”……（《小五义》第十七回）
Let's say that Xu Qing's natural temperament is a rush, never thinking about the past, and when things don't go well for a while, he changes his face, pulls the table, and with a bang, the bowls and cups are shattered. Zhong Xiong is a clay man, and he has an earthy temperament, he has taken you, looked at each other well, and hosted a banquet, you are like this, no wonder he was angry. Pointing at the third master, "What happened to you?" The third master said, "This is good." The village owner said, "What about a bad bento?" The third master said, "Hit you!" Before the words were finished, it was a punch. Zhong Xiong used his fingertips to put a little under the third master's rib. "Ouch!" Poof! The third master lay on the ground. I know that the owner of Zhongzhai uses the "Twelve Branches of the Customs Method", also known as the "Blood Closure Method", which is commonly called "point point". The third master knew in his heart that he could not move. Zhong Xiong kicked his foot and ordered it to be tied up. The third master's body was then moved, and he taught people to tie up the five flowers. Zhan Nanxia put his arms back and said, "You tie me up!" Everyone was a little unwilling, but they couldn't help but tie it up. Zhong Xiong issued an edict and was beheaded at Danfeng Bridge. Someone inside shouted, "Leave people under the knife!" ”…… ("Little Five Righteousness" Chapter 17)且说黑妖狐智化与小诸葛沈仲元二人暗地商议，独出己见，要去上王府盗取盟单。……（智化）爬伏在悬龛之上，晃千里火照明：下面是一个方匣子，……上头有一个长方的硬木匣子，两边有个如意金环。伸手揪住两个金环，往怀中一带，只听上面嗑一声，下来了一口月牙式铡刀。智化把眼睛一闭，也不敢往前蹿，也不敢往后缩，正在腰脊骨中当啷的一声，智化以为是腰断两截，慢慢睁开眼睛一看，却不觉着疼痛，就是不能动转。列公，这是什么缘故？皆因他是月牙式样；若要是铡草的铡刀，那可就把人铡为两段。此刀当中有一个过陇儿，也不至于甚大；又对着智爷的腰细；又对着解了百宝囊，底下没有东西垫着；又有背后背着这一口刀，连皮鞘带刀尖，正把腰脊骨护住。……总而言之：智化命不该绝。可把沈仲元吓了个胆裂魂飞。……（《续小五义》第一回）
Moreover, it is said that the black demon fox Zhihua and Xiao Zhuge Shen Zhongyuan secretly discussed, and they had their own opinions, and they wanted to go to the palace to steal the alliance list. …… (Zhihua) crawled on the hanging niche, shaking thousands of miles of fire lighting: below is a square box,...... There is a rectangular hardwood box on it, and there is a wishful gold ring on both sides. Reaching out and grabbing the two golden rings, he brought them to his arms, only to hear id_0000 a sound from above, and a crescent-shaped knife came down. Zhihua closed his eyes, didn't dare to jump forward, didn't dare to shrink back, was in the waist with a thud, Zhihua thought that his waist was broken in two, slowly opened his eyes and looked, but he didn't feel pain, he just couldn't move. Lords, what is the reason for this? Because he is a crescent moon; If it is a blade of grass, then it can be cut into two pieces. There is a Guolong'er in this knife, and it is not very big; and to Zhi Ye's waist is thin; He also solved the treasure bag, and there was nothing under it; There are also those who carry this knife on their backs, with a leather sheath with the tip of the knife, protecting their waist and spine. …… In short: the life of intelligence should not be extinguished. But Shen Zhongyuan was frightened. …… (The first episode of "Continuation of the Five Meanings")大小五义之书既尽出，乃即见《正续小五义全传》刊行，凡十五卷六十回，前有光绪壬辰（一八九二）绣谷居士序。其本即取《小五义》及续书，合为一部，去其复重，又汰其铺叙，省略成十三卷五十二回。末二卷八回则谓襄阳王将就擒，而又逸去，至红罗山，举兵复战，乃始败亡，是二书之所无，实为蛇足。行文叙事，亦虽简明有加，而原有之游词余韵，刊落甚多，故神采则转逊矣。
大小五义之书既尽出，乃即见《正续小五义全传》刊行，凡十五卷六十回，前有光绪壬辰（一八九二）绣谷居士序。 其本即取《小五义》及续书，合为一部，去其复重，又汰其铺叙，省略成十三卷五十二回。 末二卷八回则谓襄阳王将就擒，而又逸去，至红罗山，举兵复战，乃始败亡，是二书之所无，实为蛇足。 行文叙事，亦虽简明有加，而原有之游词余韵，刊落甚多，故神采则转逊矣。包拯颜查散而外，以他人为全书枢轴者，在先亦已尝有。道光十八年（一八三八），有《施公案》八卷九十七回，一名《百断奇观》，记康熙时施仕纶（当作世纶）为泰州知州至漕运总督时行事，文意俱拙，略如明人之《包公案》，而稍加曲折，一案或亘数回；且断案之外，又有遇险，已为侠义小说先导。至光绪十七年（一八九一），则有《彭公案》二十四卷一百回，为贪梦道人作，述彭朋（当作鹏）于康熙中为三河县知县，洊擢河南巡抚，回京出查大同要案等故事，亦不外贤臣微行，豪杰盗宝之类，而字句拙劣，几不成文。
包拯颜查散而外，以他人为全书枢轴者，在先亦已尝有。 道光十八年（一八三八），有《施公案》八卷九十七回，一名《百断奇观》，记康熙时施仕纶（当作世纶）为泰州知州至漕运总督时行事，文意俱拙，略如明人之《包公案》，而稍加曲折，一案或亘数回；且断案之外，又有遇险，已为侠义小说先导。 至光绪十七年（一八九一），则有《彭公案》二十四卷一百回，为贪梦道人作，述彭朋（当作鹏）于康熙中为三河县知县，洊擢河南巡抚，回京出查大同要案等故事，亦不外贤臣微行，豪杰盗宝之类，而字句拙劣，几不成文。其他类似《三侠五义》之书尚甚夥，通行者有《永庆升平》九十七回，为潞河郭广瑞录哈辅源演说，叙康熙帝变装私访，及除邪教，平逆匪诸案；寻有续一百回，亦贪梦道人作。又有《圣朝鼎盛万年青》八集，共七十六回，无撰人名，则记康熙帝以大政付刘墉陈宏谋，自游江南，历遇奸徒骫法，英杰效忠之事。余如《英雄大八义》《英雄小八义》《七剑十三侠》《七剑十八义》等，其类尚多，大率出光绪二十年顷。后又有《刘公案》（刘墉），《李公案》（李丙寅当作秉衡）；而《施公案》亦续至十集，《彭公案》续至十七集；《七侠五义》则续至二十四集，千篇一律，语多不通，甚至一人之性格，亦先后顿异，盖历经众手，共成恶书，漫不加察，遂多矛盾矣。
There are many other books similar to "Three Heroes and Five Righteousness", and the popular ones include "Yongqing Shengping" 97 times, which recorded Ha Fuyuan's speech for Guo Guangrui of Luhe, narrating the Kangxi Emperor's private visits in disguise, as well as the removal of cults and the suppression of rebellious bandits; Soon there will be a hundred more episodes, and it is also written by a greedy dreamer. There are also eight episodes of "The Prosperity of the Holy Dynasty", a total of 76 episodes, without the name of the author, which records the Kangxi Emperor's great policy to Liu Yong Chen Hongmou, traveling to Jiangnan, encountering traitors, and the loyalty of heroes. There are still many others, such as "Heroes of the Great Eight Righteousness", "Heroes of the Little Eight Meanings", "Seven Swords and Thirteen Heroes", "Seven Swords and Eighteen Righteousness", etc., most of which are from the twentieth year of Guangxu. Later, there were "Liu Gong's Case" (Liu Yong), "Li Gong's Case" (Li Bingyin as Bingheng); "Shi Gong's Case" also continued to ten episodes, and "Peng Gong's Case" continued to seventeen episodes; "Seven Heroes and Five Righteousness" continues to 24 episodes, the same words, many words are incomprehensible, and even one person's character has changed one after another.《三侠五义》及其续书，绘声状物，甚有平话习气，《儿女英雄传》亦然。郭广瑞序《永庆升平》云，“余少游四海，常听评词演《永庆升平》一书，……国初以来，有此实事流传，咸丰年间有姜振名先生，乃评谈今古之人，尝演说此书，未能有人刊刻，传流于世。余长听哈辅源先生演说，熟记在心，闲暇之时，录成四卷。……”《小五义》序亦谓与《三侠五义》皆石玉昆原稿，得之其徒，则石玉昆殆亦咸丰时说话人，与姜振名各专一种故事。文康习闻说书，拟其口吻，于是《儿女英雄传》遂亦特有“演说”流风。是侠义小说之在清，正接宋人话本正脉，固平民文学之历七百余年而再兴者也。惟后来仅有拟作及续书，且多滥恶，而此道又衰落。
"Three Heroes and Five Righteousness" and its sequels depict sounds and objects, and they have a very plain habit, and the same is true for "The Legend of Children's Heroes". Guo Guangrui's preface to "Yongqing Shengping" said, "Yu Shao traveled all over the world and often listened to the commentary on the book "Yongqing Shengping",...... Since the beginning of the country, there has been this fact circulated, and during the Xianfeng period, there was Mr. Jiang Zhenming, who commented on the ancient and modern people, and once spoke about this book, but no one could print it and spread it to the world. I listened to Mr. Ha Fuyuan's speech for a long time, memorized it by heart, and recorded it into four volumes in my spare time. ...... "The preface to "Little Five Righteousness" also means that it is the original manuscript of Shi Yukun with "Three Heroes and Five Righteousness", and if it is obtained from his disciples, Shi Yukun is probably also the speaker of the Xianfeng period, and Jiang Zhenming is dedicated to one kind of story. Wenkang is accustomed to storytelling and imitates his tone, so "The Legend of Children's Heroes" also has a unique "speech" style. It is the chivalrous novel in the Qing Dynasty, which is in line with the main vein of the Song people's story, and it is a revival of civilian literature after more than 700 years. However, later only proposed works and sequels were made, and many of them were indiscriminate, and this path declined.清初，流寇悉平，遗民未忘旧君，遂渐念草泽英雄之为明宣力者，故陈忱作《后水浒传》，则使李俊去国而王于暹罗（见第十五篇）。历康熙至乾隆百三十余年，威力广被，人民慑服，即士人亦无贰心，故道光时俞万春作《结水浒传》，则使一百八人无一幸免（亦见第十五篇），然此尚为僚佐之见也。《三侠五义》为市井细民写心，乃似较有《水浒》余韵，然亦仅其外貌，而非精神。时去明亡已久远，说书之地又为北京，其先又屡平内乱，游民辄以从军得功名，归耀其乡里，亦甚动野人歆羡，故凡侠义小说中之英雄，在民间每极粗豪，大有绿林结习，而终必为一大僚隶卒，供使令奔走以为宠荣，此盖非心悦诚服，乐为臣仆之时不办也。然当时于此等书，则以为“善人必获福报，恶人总有祸临，邪者定遭凶殃，正者终逢吉庇，报应分明，昭彰不爽，使读者有拍案称快之乐，无废书长叹之时……”（《三侠五义》及《永庆升平》序）云。
清初，流寇悉平，遗民未忘旧君，遂渐念草泽英雄之为明宣力者，故陈忱作《后水浒传》，则使李俊去国而王于暹罗（见第十五篇）。 历康熙至乾隆百三十余年，威力广被，人民慑服，即士人亦无贰心，故道光时俞万春作《结水浒传》，则使一百八人无一幸免（亦见第十五篇），然此尚为僚佐之见也。 《三侠五义》为市井细民写心，乃似较有《水浒》余韵，然亦仅其外貌，而非精神。 时去明亡已久远，说书之地又为北京，其先又屡平内乱，游民辄以从军得功名，归耀其乡里，亦甚动野人歆羡，故凡侠义小说中之英雄，在民间每极粗豪，大有绿林结习，而终必为一大僚隶卒，供使令奔走以为宠荣，此盖非心悦诚服，乐为臣仆之时不办也。 然当时于此等书，则以为“善人必获福报，恶人总有祸临，邪者定遭凶殃，正者终逢吉庇，报应分明，昭彰不爽，使读者有拍案称快之乐，无废书长叹之时……”（《三侠五义》及《永庆升平》序）云。而其时欧人之力又侵入中国。
At that time, the power of Europeans invaded China.

第二十八篇　清末之谴责小说

第二十八篇　清末之谴责小说

第二十八篇　清末之谴责小说

Chapter 28 The Novel of Condemnation at the End of the Qing Dynasty光绪庚子（一九〇〇）后，谴责小说之出特盛。盖嘉庆以来，虽屡平内乱（白莲教，太平天国，捻，回），亦屡挫于外敌（英，法，日本），细民暗昧，尚啜茗听平逆武功，有识者则已翻然思改革，凭敌忾之心，呼维新与爱国，而于“富强”尤致意焉。戊戌变政既不成，越二年即庚子岁而有义和团之变，群乃知政府不足与图治，顿有掊击之意矣。其在小说，则揭发伏藏，显其弊恶，而于时政，严加纠弹，或更扩充，并及风俗。虽命意在于匡世，似与讽刺小说同伦，而辞气浮露，笔无藏锋，甚且过甚其辞，以合时人嗜好，则其度量技术之相去亦远矣，故别谓之谴责小说。其作者，则南亭亭长与我佛山人名最著。
光绪庚子（一九〇〇）后，谴责小说之出特盛。 盖嘉庆以来，虽屡平内乱（白莲教，太平天国，捻，回），亦屡挫于外敌（英，法，日本），细民暗昧，尚啜茗听平逆武功，有识者则已翻然思改革，凭敌忾之心，呼维新与爱国，而于“富强”尤致意焉。 戊戌变政既不成，越二年即庚子岁而有义和团之变，群乃知政府不足与图治，顿有掊击之意矣。 其在小说，则揭发伏藏，显其弊恶，而于时政，严加纠弹，或更扩充，并及风俗。 虽命意在于匡世，似与讽刺小说同伦，而辞气浮露，笔无藏锋，甚且过甚其辞，以合时人嗜好，则其度量技术之相去亦远矣，故别谓之谴责小说。 其作者，则南亭亭长与我佛山人名最著。南亭亭长为李宝嘉，字伯元，江苏武进人，少擅制艺及诗赋，以第一名入学，累举不第，乃赴上海办《指南报》，旋辍，别办《游戏报》，为俳谐嘲骂之文，后以“铺底”售之商人，又别办《海上繁华报》，记注倡优起居，并载诗词小说，殊盛行。所著有《庚子国变弹词》若干卷，《海天鸿雪记》六本，《李莲英》一本，《繁华梦》《活地狱》各若干本。又有专意斥责时弊者曰《文明小史》，分刊于《绣像小说》中，尤有名。时正庚子，政令倒行，海内失望，多欲索祸患之由，责其罪人以自快，宝嘉亦应商人之托，撰《官场现形记》，拟为十编，编十二回，自光绪二十七至二十九年中成三编，后二年又成二编，三十二年三月以瘵卒，年四十（一八六七——一九〇六），书遂不完；亦无子，伶人孙菊仙为理其丧，酬《繁华报》之揄扬也。尝被荐应经济特科，不赴，时以为高；又工篆刻，有《芋香印谱》行于世（见周桂笙《新庵笔记》三，李祖杰致胡适书及顾颉刚《读书杂记》等）。
The head of the Nanting Pavilion is Li Baojia, courtesy name Boyuan, a native of Wujin, Jiangsu Province, who was good at making art and poetry in his youth, entered the school with the first place, and failed repeatedly, so he went to Shanghai to run the "Guide Newspaper", and then stopped and set up a "Game Newspaper", which was a humorous and ridiculous article, and later sold to merchants as a "paving bottom", and also set up a "Sea Prosperity Newspaper", which recorded the daily life of the performers and published poems and novels, which were very popular. He is the author of several volumes of "Gengzi National Change Words", six copies of "The Record of Haitian Hongxue", one book of "Li Lianying", and several copies of "Prosperous Dream" and "Living Hell". There is also a book dedicated to denouncing the current evils called "A Short History of Civilization", which is published in "Embroidery Novels", which is particularly famous. At the time of Gengzi, the government orders were reversed, the whole country was disappointed, and many wanted to find out the cause of the disaster, blaming the sinners for their own pleasure, Baojia also responded to the merchant's entrustment, wrote "Records of the Appearance of Officialdom", which was planned to be ten volumes, twelve times, from the twenty-seventh to the twenty-ninth year of Guangxu, three volumes, and two more volumes, and died of illness in March of the thirty-second year, at the age of forty (1867-1906), and the book was not finished; He also had no children, and the actor Sun Juxian took care of his funeral in response to the ridicule of the "Prosperous Newspaper". He was once recommended to apply for the special subject of economics, but he did not go, and he was considered high at the time; He is also skilled in seal carving, and there is a "Taro Fragrance Seal Score" that is popular in the world (see Zhou Guisheng's "Notes on Xin'an" III, Li Zujie's letter to Hu Shi and Gu Jiegang's "Miscellaneous Notes on Reading", etc.).《官场现形记》已成者六十回，为前半部，第三编印行时（一九〇三）有自序，略谓“亦尝见夫官矣，送迎之外无治绩，供张之外无材能，忍饥渴，冒寒暑，行香则天明而往，禀见则日昃而归，卒不知其何所为而来，亦卒不知其何所为而去。”岁或有凶灾，行振恤，又“皆得援救助之例，邀奖励之恩，而所谓官者，乃日出而未有穷期”。及朝廷议汰除，则“上下蒙蔽，一如故旧，尤其甚者，假手宵小，授意私人，因苞苴而通融，缘贿赂而解释：是欲除弊而转滋之弊也”。于是群官搜括，小民困穷，民不敢言，官乃愈肆，“南亭亭长有东方之谐谑，与淳于之滑稽，又熟知夫官之龌龊卑鄙之要凡，昏聩糊涂之大旨”，爰“以含蓄蕴酿存其忠厚，以酣畅淋漓阐其隐微，……穷年累月，殚精竭诚，成书一帙，名曰《官场现形记》。……凡神禹所不能铸之于鼎，温峤所不能烛之以犀者，无不毕备也”。故凡所叙述，皆迎合，钻营，朦混，罗掘，倾轧等故事，兼及士人之热心于作吏，及官吏闺中之隐情。头绪既繁，脚色复夥，其记事遂率与一人俱起，亦即与其人俱讫，若断若续，与《儒林外史》略同。然臆说颇多，难云实录，无自序所谓“含蓄蕴酿”之实，殊不足望文木老人后尘。况所搜罗，又仅“话柄”，联缀此等，以成类书；官场伎俩，本小异大同，汇为长编，即千篇一律。特缘时势要求，得此为快，故《官场现形记》乃骤享大名；而袭用“现形”名目，描写他事，如商界学界女界者亦接踵也。今录南亭亭长之作八百余言为例，并以概余子：
《官场现形记》已成者六十回，为前半部，第三编印行时（一九〇三）有自序，略谓“亦尝见夫官矣，送迎之外无治绩，供张之外无材能，忍饥渴，冒寒暑，行香则天明而往，禀见则日昃而归，卒不知其何所为而来，亦卒不知其何所为而去。 ”岁或有凶灾，行振恤，又“皆得援救助之例，邀奖励之恩，而所谓官者，乃日出而未有穷期”。 及朝廷议汰除，则“上下蒙蔽，一如故旧，尤其甚者，假手宵小，授意私人，因苞苴而通融，缘贿赂而解释：是欲除弊而转滋之弊也”。 于是群官搜括，小民困穷，民不敢言，官乃愈肆，“南亭亭长有东方之谐谑，与淳于之滑稽，又熟知夫官之龌龊卑鄙之要凡，昏聩糊涂之大旨”，爰“以含蓄蕴酿存其忠厚，以酣畅淋漓阐其隐微，…… 穷年累月，殚精竭诚，成书一帙，名曰《官场现形记》。 …… 凡神禹所不能铸之于鼎，温峤所不能烛之以犀者，无不毕备也”。 故凡所叙述，皆迎合，钻营，朦混，罗掘，倾轧等故事，兼及士人之热心于作吏，及官吏闺中之隐情。 头绪既繁，脚色复夥，其记事遂率与一人俱起，亦即与其人俱讫，若断若续，与《儒林外史》略同。 然臆说颇多，难云实录，无自序所谓“含蓄蕴酿”之实，殊不足望文木老人后尘。 况所搜罗，又仅“话柄”，联缀此等，以成类书；官场伎俩，本小异大同，汇为长编，即千篇一律。 特缘时势要求，得此为快，故《官场现形记》乃骤享大名；而袭用“现形”名目，描写他事，如商界学界女界者亦接踵也。 今录南亭亭长之作八百余言为例，并以概余子：……却说贾大少爷，……看看已到了引见之期，头天赴部演礼，一切照例仪注，不庸细述。这天贾大少爷起了一个半夜，坐车进城，……一直等到八点钟，才有带领引见的司官老爷把他带了进去，不知走到一个甚么殿上，司官把袖一摔，他们一班几个人在台阶上一溜跪下，离着上头约摸有二丈远，晓得坐在上头的就是“当今”了。……他是道班，又是明保的人员，当天就有旨，叫他第二天预备召见。……贾大少爷虽是世家子弟，然而今番乃是第一遭见皇上，虽然请教过多少人，究竟放心不下。当时引见了下来，先看见华中堂。华中堂是收过他一万银子古董的，见了面问长问短，甚是关切。后来贾大少爷请教他道，“明日朝见，门生的父亲是现任臬司，门生见了上头，要碰头不要碰头？”华中堂没有听见上文，只听得“碰头”二字，连连回答道，“多碰头，少说话：是做官的秘诀。”贾大少爷忙分辨道，“门生说的是上头问着门生的父亲，自然要碰头；倘不问，也要碰头不要碰头？”华中堂道，“上头不问你，你千万不要多说话；应该碰头的地方，又万万不要忘记不碰，就是不该碰，你多磕头，总没有处分的。”一席话说得贾大少爷格外糊涂，意思还要问，中堂已起身送客了。贾大少爷只好出来，心想华中堂事情忙，不便烦他，不如去找黄大军机，……或者肯赐教一二。谁知见了面，贾大少爷把话才说完，黄大人先问“你见过中堂没有？他怎么说的？”贾大少爷照述一遍，黄大人道，“华中堂阅历深，他叫你多碰头少说话，老成人之见，这是一点儿不错的。”……贾大少爷无法，只得又去找徐大军机。这位徐大人，上了年纪，两耳重听，就是有时候听得两句，也装作不知。他平生最讲究养心之学，有两个诀窍：一个是“不动心”，一个是“不操心”。……后来他这个诀窍被同寅中都看穿了，大家就送他一个外号，叫他做“琉璃蛋”。……这日贾大少爷……去求教他，见面之后，寒暄了几句，便题到此事。徐大人道，“本来多碰头是顶好的事。就是不碰头，也使得。你还是应得碰头的时候，你碰头；不必碰的时候，还是不必碰的为妙。”贾大少爷又把华黄二位的话述了一遍，徐大人道，“他两位说的话都不错。你便照他二位的话，看事行事，最妥。”说了半天，仍旧说不出一毫道理，只得又退了下来。后来一直找到一位小军机，也是他老人家的好友，才把仪注说清。第二天召见上去，居然没有出岔子。……（第二十六回）
…… But it is said that Master Jia ,...... Look at the introduction period, the first day to go to the ministry to perform the ceremony, everything is as usual, there is no need to go into details. On this day, Young Master Jia got up in the middle of the night and took a car into the city,...... It wasn't until eight o'clock that the master of the department who led the introduction took him in, and when he walked to a hall, the officer dropped his sleeves, and a group of several people knelt down on the steps, about two feet away from the top, knowing that the person sitting on it was "today". …… He was a Taoist class and a member of Mingbao, and he had an order on the same day to prepare for the summons the next day. …… Although Master Jia is a child of a noble family, this is the first time he has seen the emperor, although he has consulted many people, he is not at ease. At that time, I was introduced down and saw Huazhongtang first. Huazhongtang had received 10,000 silver antiques from him, and he was very concerned when he met him. Later, the eldest young master Jia asked him, "Tomorrow morning, the protégé's father is the current Si Si, the protégé sees the top, do you want to meet or not?" Huazhongtang did not hear the above, only heard the word "meeting", and replied again and again, "Meet more, talk less: it is the secret of being an official." Young Master Jia hurriedly distinguished, "The protégé said that he was asking the protégé's father, so naturally he had to meet; If you don't ask, do you want to meet or not? Huazhongtang said, "If you don't ask you, don't talk too much; Where you should meet, don't forget not to touch it, that is, you shouldn't touch it, you kowtow more, there will be no punishment. The words made the eldest young master Jia particularly confused, and he still had to ask, and the middle hall had already gotten up to see off the guests. Young Master Jia had no choice but to come out, thinking that Huazhongtang was busy with things and it was inconvenient to bother him, so it was better to find Huang Dajunji,...... Or be willing to teach me a thing or two. Unexpectedly, when they met, Master Jia finished speaking, and Master Huang asked first, "Have you seen Zhongtang?" What did he say? Master Jia followed the narration, and Master Huang said, "Huazhongtang has a lot of experience, he told you to meet more and talk less, and the old man's opinion is a little good." ”…… Young Master Jia couldn't do it, so he had to go to find Xu Dajunji again. This Master Xu, who is old, has a double hearing in both ears, and sometimes he can hear a couple of sentences, and he pretends not to know. He paid the most attention to the study of nourishing the mind in his life, and had two tricks: one was to "not be moved" and the other was to "not worry". …… Later, his trick was seen through by Tong Yinzhong, and everyone gave him a nickname, calling him "Liuli Egg". …… Young Master Jia on this day...... I went to ask him for advice, and after meeting, I exchanged a few words and then wrote about this matter. Master Xu said, "It was a good thing to meet more. Even if you don't meet, it will also make you. When you still deserve to meet, you meet; When you don't have to touch it, it's better not to touch it. Young Master Jia recounted the words of Hua Huang again, and Master Xu said, "What he said is good." You should act according to the words of the two of them, according to the situation, it is most appropriate." After talking for a long time, he still couldn't say a word, so he had to retreat again. Later, he always found a small military aircraft and a friend of his old man, so he explained the ceremony clearly. The next day, I was summoned, and there was no problem. …… (Episode 26)我佛山人为吴沃尧，字茧人，后改趼人，广东南海人也，居佛山镇，故自称“我佛山人”。年二十余至上海，常为日报撰文，皆小品；光绪二十八年新会梁启超印行《新小说》于日本之横滨，月一册，次年（一九〇三），沃尧乃始学为长篇，即以寄之，先后凡数种，曰《电术奇谈》，曰《九命奇冤》，曰《二十年目睹之怪现状》，名于是日盛，而末一种尤为世间所称。后客山东，游日本，皆不得意，终复居上海；三十二年，为《月月小说》主笔，撰《劫余灰》，《发财秘诀》，《上海游骖录》；又为《指南报》作《新石头记》。又一年，则主持广志小学校，甚尽力于学务，所作遂不多。宣统纪元，始成《近十年之怪现状》二十回，二年九月遽卒，年四十五（一八六六——一九一〇）。别有《恨海》《胡宝玉》二种，先皆单行；又尝应商人之托，以三百金为撰《还我灵魂记》颂其药，一时颇被訾议，而文亦不传（见《新庵笔记》三，《近十年之怪现状》自序，《我佛山人笔记》汪维甫序）。短文非所长，后因名重，亦有人缀集为《趼廛笔记》，《趼人十三种》，《我佛山人笔记四种》，《我佛山人滑稽谈》，《我佛山人札记小说》等。
I am from Foshan as Wu Woyao, the character cocoon people, later changed to Yiren, Guangdong Nanhai people, living in Foshan Town, so I call myself "my Foshan people". When he was in his twenties, he went to Shanghai and often wrote articles for the daily newspaper, all of which were sketches; In the twenty-eighth year of Guangxu, Liang Qichao printed and published "New Novels" in Yokohama, Japan, in a monthly volume, and the following year (1903), Wo Yao began to learn to write long novels, which were sent to him, and there were several kinds of them, namely "Strange Stories of Electric Technology", "Nine Strange Injustices", and "The Strange Status Quo Witnessed in Twenty Years". Later, he lived in Shandong and Japan, but he was not satisfied and finally lived in Shanghai; In the thirty-second year, he was the chief writer of "Yueyue Novel", wrote "The Ashes of the Tribulation", "The Secret of Making a Fortune", and "Shanghai Ranger Record"; He also wrote "New Stone Record" for the Guide. Another year, he presided over Guangzhi Elementary School, dedicating himself very much to academic affairs, but he did not do much. In the era of the Xuantong era, he began to write "The Strange Status of the Past Ten Years" twenty times, and died suddenly in September of the second year at the age of forty-five (1866-1910). There are two other types, "Sea of Hate" and "Hu Baoyu", both of which are single; He also wrote "Return My Soul" to praise his medicine for 300 gold, which was criticized for a while, and the text was not passed on (see "Notes on Xin'an" III, "The Strange Status of the Past Ten Years" self-preface, "Notes of My Foshan People" Wang Weifu preface). Short articles are not his strength, and later because of his reputation, some people have compiled them into "Notes on the House", "Thirteen Kinds of People", "Four Notes of My Foshan People", "Funny Stories of My Foshan People", "Notes of My Foshan People" and so on.《二十年目睹之怪现状》本连载于《新小说》中，后亦与《新小说》俱辍，光绪三十三年乃有单行本甲至丁四卷，宣统元年又出戊至辛四卷，共一百八回。全书以自号“九死一生”者为线索，历记二十年中所遇，所见，所闻天地间惊听之事，缀为一书，始自童年，末无结束，杂集“话柄”，与《官场现形记》同。而作者经历较多，故所叙之族类亦较夥，官师士商，皆著于录，搜罗当时传说而外，亦贩旧作（如《钟馗捉鬼传》之类），以为新闻。自云“只因我出来应世的二十年中，回头想来，所遇见的只有三种东西：第一种是蛇虫鼠蚁；第二种是豺狼虎豹；第三种是魑魅魍魉。”（第一回）则通本所述，不离此类人物之言行可知也。相传吴沃尧性强毅，不欲下于人，遂坎坷没世，故其言殊慨然。惜描写失之张皇，时或伤于溢恶，言违真实，则感人之力顿微，终不过连篇“话柄”，仅足供闲散者谈笑之资而已。其叙北京同寓人符弥轩之虐待其祖云：
"The Strange Status Quo Witnessed in Twenty Years" was serialized in the "New Novel", and later stopped with the "New Novel", and in the thirty-third year of Guangxu, there were four volumes of the single book A to D, and in the first year of Xuantong, four volumes from Wu to Xin, a total of one hundred and eight times. The whole book takes the self-proclaimed "Nine Deaths and Life" as a clue, recording what he has encountered, seen, and heard in the past twenty years, and is compiled into a book, starting from childhood and ending without end. The author has more experience, so the ethnic groups described are also relatively large, and officials, teachers, scholars, and merchants are all recorded in the record, and in addition to collecting the legends of the time, they also sell old works (such as "The Legend of Zhong Kui's Ghost Hunting") as news. He said to himself, "Just because in the twenty years I came out of the world, looking back, I only encountered three things: the first is snakes, insects, rats and ants; the second is jackals, tigers and leopards; The third type is ghosts. "(The first time) is described in the whole book, and it can be known from the words and deeds of such characters. It is said that Wu Woyao was strong and resolute and did not want to be inferior to others, so he died in a difficult situation, so his words were particularly passionate. Unfortunately, the depiction is not in the chaos, sometimes hurt by the overflow, and the words contradict the truth, so the power of touching people is suddenly weakened, and in the end, it is only a series of "talks", which is only enough for idle people to talk and laugh. He described the abuse of his grandfather by his Beijing co-resident Fu Mixuan:……到了晚上，各人都已安歇，我在枕上隐隐听得一阵喧嚷的声音出在东院里。……嚷了一阵，又静了一阵，静了一阵，又嚷一阵，虽是听不出所说的话来，却只觉得耳根不清净，睡不安稳。……直等到自鸣钟报了三点之后，方才朦胧睡去；等到一觉醒来，已是九点多钟了。连忙起来，穿好衣服，走出客堂，只见吴亮臣李在兹和两个学徒，一个厨子，两个打杂，围在一起窃窃私议。我忙问是甚么事。……亮臣正要开言，在兹道，“叫王三说罢，省了我们费嘴。”打杂王三便道，“是东院符老爷家的事。昨天晚上半夜里我起来解手，听见东院里有人吵嘴，……就摸到后院里，……往里面偷看：原来符老爷和符太太对坐在上面，那一个到我们家里讨饭的老头儿坐在下面，两口子正骂那老头子呢。那老头子低着头哭，只不做声。符太太骂得最出奇，说道，‘一个人活到五六十岁，就应该死的了，从来没见过八十多岁人还活着的。’符老爷道，‘活着倒也罢了。无论是粥是饭，有得吃吃点，安分守己也罢了；今天嫌粥了，明天嫌饭了，你可知道要吃的好，喝的好，穿的好，是要自己本事挣来的呢。’那老头子道，‘可怜我并不求好吃好喝，只求一点儿咸菜罢了。’符老爷听了，便直跳起来，说道，‘今日要咸菜，明日便要咸肉，后日便要鸡鹅鱼鸭，再过些时，便燕窝鱼翅都要起来了。我是个没补缺的穷官儿，供应不起！’说到那里，拍桌子打板凳的大骂。……骂够了一回，老妈子开上酒菜来，摆在当中一张独脚圆桌上。符老爷两口子对坐着喝酒，却是有说有笑的。那老头子坐在底下，只管抽抽咽咽的哭。符老爷喝两杯，骂两句；符太太只管拿骨头来逗叭儿狗顽。那老头子哭丧着脸，不知说了一句甚么话，符老爷登时大发雷霆起来，把那独脚桌子一掀，匉訇一声，桌上的东西翻了个满地，大声喝道，‘你便吃去！’那老头子也太不要脸，认真就爬在地下拾来吃。符老爷忽的站了起来，提起坐的凳子，对准了那老头子摔去。幸亏站着的老妈子抢着过来接了一接，虽然接不住，却挡去势子不少。那凳子虽然还摔在那老头子的头上，却只摔破了一点头皮。倘不是那一挡，只怕脑子也磕出来了。”我听了这一番话，不觉吓了一身大汗，默默自己打主意。到了吃饭时，我便叫李在兹赶紧去找房子，我们要搬家了。……（第七十四回）
…… At night, everyone was resting, and I faintly heard a noisy sound coming from the east courtyard on my pillow. …… Shouted for a while, then quieted for a while, quieted for a while, and shouted for a while, although I couldn't hear what was said, I only felt that the roots of my ears were not clean, and I couldn't sleep peacefully. …… It wasn't until the bell rang at three o'clock that he fell asleep hazily; When I woke up, it was already past nine o'clock. I hurriedly got up, got dressed, and walked out of the guest hall, only to see Wu Liangchen Li Zaizi and two apprentices, a cook, and two miscellaneous people, gathered together to whisper. I hurriedly asked what was going on. …… Liangchen was about to speak, and he said, "Tell Wang San to say it, save us from talking about it." The miscellaneous Wang San said, "It's a matter of Master Fu's family in the East Courtyard." In the middle of the night last night, I got up to relieve myself and heard someone arguing in the east courtyard,...... I touched the backyard,...... Peeking inside: It turned out that Master Fu and Mrs. Fu were sitting opposite each other, and the old man who came to our house to beg for food was sitting below, and the couple was scolding the old man. The old man lowered his head and cried, but did not make a sound. Mrs. Fu scolded the most surprisingly, saying, 'A person who lives to be fifty or sixty years old should die, and I have never seen a person in his eighties still alive.' Master Fu said, 'It's okay to be alive.' Whether it is porridge or rice, you have to eat something, and you can keep to yourself; Today I don't like porridge, tomorrow I don't like food, do you know that you have to eat well, drink well, and dress well, you have to earn it by yourself. The old man said, 'It's a pity that I don't want to eat and drink, I just want a little pickles.' When Master Fu heard this, he jumped up and said, 'Today I want pickles, tomorrow I want salted meat, the day after tomorrow I want chickens, geese, fish and ducks, and after a while, the bird's nest shark fins will be up. I am a poor official who has not filled the vacancies, and I can't afford it! Speaking of which, he slammed the table and scolded the bench. …… After scolding enough, the old mother brought wine and food and placed it on a one-legged round table in the middle. Master Fu and his wife sat and drank together, but they were talking and laughing. The old man sat at the bottom and just sobbed and cried. Master Fu drank two glasses and scolded twice; Mrs. Fu just took the bones to tease the dog's naughtyness. The old man cried and lost his face, not knowing what he said, Master Fu immediately became furious, overturned the one-legged table, squeaked, turned the things on the table all over the ground, and shouted loudly, 'You eat it!' The old man was too shameless, so he crawled on the ground to pick it up and eat it. Master Fu suddenly stood up, lifted the stool he was sitting on, and aimed at the old man and threw it away. Fortunately, the standing old mother rushed over to catch it, although she couldn't catch it, but she blocked a lot. Although the stool still fell on the old man's head, it only broke a little scalp. If it weren't for that block, I'm afraid my brain would also come out. When I heard this, I sweated profusely and silently made up my mind. When it was time to eat, I asked Li Zaizi to hurry up and find a house, we were moving. …… (Seventy-fourth)吴沃尧之所撰著，惟《恨海》，《劫余灰》，及演述译本之《电术奇谈》等三种，自云是写情小说，其他悉此类，而谴责之度稍不同。至于本旨，则缘借笔墨为生，故如周桂笙（《新庵笔记》三）言，亦“因人，因地，因时，各有变态”，但其大要，则在“主张恢复旧道德”（见《新庵译屑》评语）　云。
Wu Woyao wrote only three works, including "The Sea of Hate", "The Ashes of the Tribulation", and the translation of "The Strange Tale of Electric Technology", which claimed to be a love novel, and the others were of this kind, but the degree of condemnation was slightly different. As for the main purpose, it is to make a living by pen and ink, so as Zhou Guisheng ("Notes on Xin'an" III) said, it is also "because of people, places, and times, each has its own metamorphosis", but its main point is to "advocate the restoration of old morality" (see the commentary of "Xin'an Translation Fragments").又有《老残游记》二十章，题“洪都百炼生”著，实刘鹗之作也，有光绪丙午（一九〇六）之秋于海上所作序；或云本未完，末数回乃其子续作之。鹗字铁云，江苏丹徒人，少精算学，能读书，而放旷不守绳墨，后忽自悔，闭户岁余，乃行医于上海，旋又弃而学贾，尽丧其资。光绪十四年河决郑州，鹗以同知投效于吴大澂，治河有功，声誉大起，渐至以知府用。在北京二年，上书请敷铁道；又主张开山西矿，既成，世俗交谪，称为“汉奸”。庚子之乱，鹗以贱值购太仓储粟于欧人，或云实以振饥困者，全活甚众；后数年，政府即以私售仓粟罪之，流新疆死（约一八五〇——一九一〇，详见罗振玉《五十日梦痕录》）。其书即借铁英号老残者之游行，而历记其言论闻见，叙景状物，时有可观，作者信仰，并见于内，而攻击官吏之处亦多。其记刚弼误认魏氏父女为谋毙一家十三命重犯，魏氏仆行贿求免，而刚弼即以此证实之，则摘发所谓清官者之可恨，或尤甚于赃官，言人所未尝言，虽作者亦甚自憙，以为“赃官可恨，人人知之，清官尤可恨，人多不知。盖赃官自知有病，不敢公然为非；清官则自以为不要钱，何所不可？刚愎自用，小则杀人，大则误国，吾人亲目所见，不知凡几矣。试观徐桐李秉衡，其显然者也。……历来小说，皆揭赃官之恶。有揭清官之恶者，自《老残游记》始”也。
又有《老残游记》二十章，题“洪都百炼生”著，实刘鹗之作也，有光绪丙午（一九〇六）之秋于海上所作序；或云本未完，末数回乃其子续作之。 鹗字铁云，江苏丹徒人，少精算学，能读书，而放旷不守绳墨，后忽自悔，闭户岁余，乃行医于上海，旋又弃而学贾，尽丧其资。 光绪十四年河决郑州，鹗以同知投效于吴大澂，治河有功，声誉大起，渐至以知府用。 在北京二年，上书请敷铁道；又主张开山西矿，既成，世俗交谪，称为“汉奸”。 庚子之乱，鹗以贱值购太仓储粟于欧人，或云实以振饥困者，全活甚众；后数年，政府即以私售仓粟罪之，流新疆死（约一八五〇——一九一〇，详见罗振玉《五十日梦痕录》）。 其书即借铁英号老残者之游行，而历记其言论闻见，叙景状物，时有可观，作者信仰，并见于内，而攻击官吏之处亦多。 其记刚弼误认魏氏父女为谋毙一家十三命重犯，魏氏仆行贿求免，而刚弼即以此证实之，则摘发所谓清官者之可恨，或尤甚于赃官，言人所未尝言，虽作者亦甚自憙，以为“赃官可恨，人人知之，清官尤可恨，人多不知。 盖赃官自知有病，不敢公然为非；清官则自以为不要钱，何所不可？刚愎自用，小则杀人，大则误国，吾人亲目所见，不知凡几矣。 试观徐桐李秉衡，其显然者也。 …… 历来小说，皆揭赃官之恶。 有揭清官之恶者，自《老残游记》始”也。……那衙役们早将魏家父女带到，却都是死了一半的样子。两人跪到堂上，刚弼便从怀里摸出那个一千两银票并那五千五百两凭据，……叫差役送与他父女们看。他父女回说“不懂，这是甚么缘故？”……刚弼哈哈大笑道，“你不知道，等我来告诉你，你就知道了。昨儿有个胡举人来拜我，先送一千两银子，道，你们这案，叫我设法儿开脱；又说，如果开脱，银子再要多些也肯。……我再详细告诉你，倘若人命不是你谋害的，你家为甚么肯拿几千两银子出来打点呢？这是第一据。……倘人不是你害的，我告诉他，‘照五百两一条命计算，也应该六千五百两。’你那管事的就应该说，‘人命实不是我家害的，如蒙委员代为昭雪，七千八千俱可，六千五百两的数目却不敢答应。’怎么他毫无疑义，就照五百两一条命算帐呢？这是第二据。我劝你们，早迟总得招认，免得饶上许多刑具的苦楚。”那父女两个连连叩头说，“青天大老爷。实在是冤枉。”刚弼把桌子一拍，大怒道，“我这样开导，你们还是不招？再替我夹拶起来！”底下差役炸雷似的答应了一声“嗄！”……正要动刑。刚弼又道，“慢着。行刑的差役上来，我对你说。……你们伎俩，我全知道。你们看那案子是不要紧的呢，你们得了钱，用刑就轻，让犯人不甚吃苦。你们看那案情重大，是翻不过来的了，你们得了钱，就猛一紧，把犯人当堂治死，成全他个整尸首，本官又有个严刑毙命的处分。我是全晓得的。今日替我先拶贾魏氏，只不许拶得他发昏，但看神色不好就松刑，等他回过气来再拶。预备十天工夫，无论你甚么好汉，也不怕你不招！”……（第十六章）
…… The yamen had already brought the Wei family father and daughter, but they all looked like they were half dead. The two knelt down in the hall, and Gangbi took out the 1,000 taels of silver bill and the 5,500 taels of voucher from his arms,...... Ask the officer to show it to his father and daughters. His father and daughter replied, "I don't understand, what is the reason for this?" ”…… Gangbi laughed and said, "You don't know, wait for me to tell you, you'll know." Yesterday, a Hu scholar came to pay my respects, first gave me a thousand taels of silver, and said, "Your case, ask me to try to exonerate myself; He also said that if he was exonerated, he would be willing to ask for more silver. …… Let me tell you in detail, if you didn't murder human life, why would your family be willing to take out thousands of taels of silver to make some money? This is the first evidence. …… If the person is not your fault, I will tell him, 'According to the calculation of five hundred taels and one life, it should also be six thousand five hundred taels. Your steward should say, 'Human life is really not a disaster for my family, if the committee member Zhao Xue is on his behalf, seven thousand or eight thousand is acceptable, but the amount of six thousand five hundred taels does not dare to agree. Why did he settle accounts according to five hundred and two lives without any doubt? This is the second evidence. I advise you to confess sooner or later, so as not to spare the suffering of many torture instruments. The father and daughter bowed their heads again and again and said, "Master Qingtian." It's really unjust. Gang Bi slapped the table and said angrily, "I enlighten you like this, you still don't recruit?" Pick up for me again! The officer below agreed like a thunderstorm, "Hey! ”…… He was about to be executed. Gang Bi said again, "Slow down." The executioner comes up, I say to you. …… I know all your tricks. You see that the case doesn't matter, if you get the money, the punishment will be light, so that the prisoners will not suffer much. You see that the case is serious, it can't be overturned, you get the money, you tighten it, kill the prisoner in court, complete his whole corpse, and I have a severe punishment of death. I know it all. Today, I will greet Jia Wei first, but I am not allowed to say hello to him, but if I see that he looks bad, I will loosen the punishment, and I will say hello when he recovers. Prepare for ten days, no matter what kind of hero you are, you are not afraid that you will not recruit! ”…… (Chapter 16)《孽海花》以光绪三十三年载于《小说林》，称“历史小说”，署“爱自由者发起，东亚病夫编述”。相传实常熟举人曾朴字孟朴者所为。第一回犹楔子，有六十回全目，自金汮抡元起，即用为线索，杂叙清季三十年间遗闻逸事；后似欲以豫想之革命收场，而忽中止，旋合辑为书十卷，仅二十回。金汮谓吴县洪钧，尝典试江西，丁忧归，过上海，纳名妓傅彩云为妾，后使英，携以俱去，称夫人，颇多话柄。比洪殁于北京，傅复赴上海为妓，称曹梦兰，又至天津，称赛金花，庚子之乱，为联军统帅所暱，势甚张。书于洪傅特多恶谑，并写当时达官名士模样，亦极淋漓，而时复张大其词，如凡谴责小说通病；惟结构工巧，文采斐然，则其所长也。书中人物，几无不有所影射；使撰人诚如所传，则改称李纯客者实其师李慈铭字莼客（见曾之撰《越缦堂骈体文集序》），亲炙者久，描写当能近实，而形容时复过度，亦失自然，盖尚增饰而贱白描，当日之作风固如此矣。即引为例：
"Evil Sea Flower" was published in the "Novel Forest" in the thirty-third year of Guangxu, called a "historical novel", signed "initiated by those who love freedom, compiled by the sick man of East Asia". It is said that it was actually written by Zeng Pu, a scholar from Changshu, whose courtesy name was Mengpu. The first time is like a wedge, there are sixty times of the whole eye, starting from Jin Ruiyuan, it is used as a clue to narrate the anecdotes of the Qing Dynasty in the thirty years; Later, it seemed that he wanted to end with a revolution in anticipation, but it was abruptly abandoned, and he immediately compiled it into ten volumes, only twenty times. Jin Rui said that Hong Jun from Wuxian had once presided over the examination in Jiangxi. After returning home due to his death, he passed through Shanghai and took the famous courtesan Fu Caiyun as his concubine. Later, when the emperor sent him to Yingzhou, he took her with him and referred to her as "Madam," which was quite powerful. Bi Hong died in Beijing, Fu Fu went to Shanghai to be a prostitute, called Cao Menglan, and then to Tianjin, called Sai Jinhua, the Gengzi Rebellion, was favored by the commander of the coalition army, and the power was very arrogant. The book is full of bad jokes in Hong Fu, and writes about the appearance of dignitaries and celebrities at that time, which is also very vivid, and sometimes exaggerated, such as condemning the common problems of novels; However, the structure is exquisite, and the writing is brilliant, which is its strength. The characters in the book are almost all insinuated; If the author is true as the legend, then the person who changed his name to Li Chunke is actually his teacher Li Ciming (see Zeng Zhi's "Preface to the Collected Works of Yue Mantang"), and the description should be close to the truth, but the description is excessive, and it is also unnatural. Let's take it as an example:……却说小燕便服轻车，叫车夫径到城南保安寺街而来。那时秋高气爽，尘软蹄轻，不一会，已到了门口。把车停在门前两棵大榆树阴下。家人方要通报，小燕摇手说“不必”，自己轻跳下车。正跨进门，瞥见门上新贴一副淡红朱砂笺的门对，写得英秀瘦削，历落倾斜的两行字，道：
…… But it is said that Xiaoyan is dressed in a light car and asked the driver to come directly to Bao'an Temple Street in the south of the city. At that time, the autumn air was crisp, the dust was soft and the hooves were light, and after a while, they had arrived at the door. Park the car in the shade of two large elm trees in front of the door. The family was about to report, but Xiaoyan shook her hand and said "no need", and jumped out of the car lightly. As he was stepping into the door, he caught a glimpse of a new pair of light red cinnabar paper on the door, written handsomely and thinly, with two lines of slanted words, and said:保安寺街藏书十万卷保安寺街藏书十万卷户部员外补阙一千年户部员外补阙一千年
小燕一笑。进门一个影壁；绕影壁而东，朝北三间倒厅；沿倒厅廊下一直进去，一个秋叶式的洞门；洞门里面，方方一个小院落。庭前一架紫藤，绿叶森森，满院种着木芙蓉，红艳娇酣，正是开花时候。三间静室，垂着湘帘，悄无人声。那当儿恰好一阵微风，小燕觉得在帘缝里透出一股药烟，清香沁鼻。掀帘进去，却见一个椎结小童，正拿着把破蒲扇，在中堂东壁边煮药哩。见小燕进来，正要起立。只听房里高吟道，“淡墨罗巾灯畔字，小风铃佩梦中人。”小燕一脚跨进去，笑道，“‘梦中人’是谁呢？”一面说，一面看，只见纯客穿着件半旧熟罗半截衫，踏着草鞋，本来好好儿，一手捋着短须，坐在一张旧竹榻上看书。看见小燕进来，连忙和身倒下，伏在一部破书上发喘，颤声道，“呀，怎么小翁来，老夫病体竟不能起迓，怎好怎好？”小燕道，“纯老清恙，几时起的？怎么兄弟连影儿也不知？”纯客道，“就是诸公定议替老夫做寿那天起的。可见老夫福薄，不克当诸公盛意。云卧园一集，只怕今天去不成了。”小燕道，“风寒小疾，服药后当可小痊。还望先生速驾，以慰诸君渴望。”　小燕说话时，却把眼偷瞧，只见榻上枕边拖出一幅长笺，满纸都是些抬头。那抬头却奇怪，不是“阁下”“台端”，也非“长者”“左右”，一迭连三，全是“妄人”两字。小燕觉得诧异，想要留心看他一两行，忽听秋叶门外有两个人，一路谈话，一路蹑手蹑脚的进来。那时纯客正要开口，只听竹帘子拍的一声。正是：十丈红尘埋侠骨，一帘秋色养诗魂。不知来者何人，且听下回分解。（第十九回）
Xiaoyan smiled. A shadow wall at the entrance; Around the shadow wall to the east, facing north with three inverted halls; Along the corridor of the inverted hall, there is an autumn leaf-style cave door; Inside the cave entrance, there is a small courtyard. A wisteria in front of the courtyard, green leaves, and wood hibiscus are planted all over the courtyard, red and delicate, and it is the time to bloom. In the three quiet rooms, the curtains hang down, silent and devoid of human sounds. At that time, there was a breeze, and Xiaoyan felt that there was a smell of medicinal smoke coming out of the crack in the curtain, which was fragrant and refreshing. When I lifted the curtain and entered, I saw a boy with a knot knot, holding a broken cattail fan, cooking medicine on the east wall of the main hall. Seeing Xiaoyan come in, she was about to stand up. I only heard the room chanting, "The words by the lamp of the light ink scarf, the little wind chime wears the dreamer." Xiaoyan stepped in and said with a smile, "Who is the 'dream man'?" As he said, he looked at it, and saw Chunke wearing a half-old robe and stepping on straw sandals. Seeing Xiaoyan come in, she quickly fell down, lying on a broken book panting, and said in a trembling voice, "Ah, why is Xiao Weng coming, the old man's sick body can't get up, how good is it?" Xiao Yan said, "Pure old and healthy, when did you get up?" Why don't the brothers even know the shadow? "Chun Ke Dao," it was from the day when the gentlemen decided to celebrate the old man's birthday. It can be seen that the old man's fortune is thin, and he cannot live up to the enthusiasm of everyone. An episode of Yun Woyuan, I'm afraid I won't be able to go today. Xiao Yan said, "A small illness of wind and cold, you should be able to recover after taking the medicine." I hope you will drive quickly to satisfy your desires. When Xiaoyan spoke, she peeked at it, and saw a long piece of paper dragged out by the pillow on the couch, and the paper was full of heads. That look up is strange, it is not "Your Excellency" or "Stage", nor is it "elder" or "left and right", it is all the word "delusion". Xiaoyan was surprised and wanted to pay attention to him for a line or two, but suddenly heard two people outside the Qiu Ye Gate, talking all the way and tiptoeing in. At that time, Chunke was about to speak, only to hear the sound of the bamboo curtain. Exactly: ten zhang of red dust buried the chivalrous bones, a curtain of autumn colors to nourish the soul of poetry. I don't know who is coming, but let's listen to the next breakdown. (19th)《孽海花》亦有他人续书（《碧血幕》，《续孽海花》），皆不称。
"Evil Sea Flower" also has other people's sequels ("Blue Blood Curtain", "Continuation of Evil Sea Flower"), none of which are called.此外以抉摘社会弊恶自命，撰作此类小说者尚多，顾什九学步前数书，而甚不逮，徒作谯呵之文，转无感人之力，旋生旋灭，亦多不完。其下者乃至丑诋私敌，等于谤书；又或有嫚骂之志而无抒写之才，则遂堕落而为“黑幕小说”。
此外以抉摘社会弊恶自命，撰作此类小说者尚多，顾什九学步前数书，而甚不逮，徒作谯呵之文，转无感人之力，旋生旋灭，亦多不完。 其下者乃至丑诋私敌，等于谤书；又或有嫚骂之志而无抒写之才，则遂堕落而为“黑幕小说”。

后记

后记

后记

postscript右中国小说史略二十八篇其第一至第十五篇以去年十月中印讫已而于朱彝尊明诗综卷八十知雁宕山樵陈忱字遐心胡适为后水浒传序考得其事尤众于谢无量平民文学之两大文豪第一编知说唐传旧本题庐陵罗本撰粉妆楼相传亦罗贯中作惜得见在后不及增修其第十六篇以下草稿则久置案头时有更定然识力俭隘观览又不周洽不特于明清小说阙略尚多即近时作者如魏子安韩子云辈之名亦缘他事相牵未遑博访况小说初刻多有序跋可借知成书年代及其撰人而旧本希觏仅获新书贾人草率于本文之外大率刊落用以编录亦复依据寡薄时虑讹谬惟更历岁月或能小小妥帖耳而时会交迫当复印行乃任其不备辄付排印顾畴昔所怀将以助听者之聆察释写生之烦劳之志愿则于是乎毕矣一千九百二十四年三月三日校竟记

右中国小说史略二十八篇其第一至第十五篇以去年十月中印讫已而于朱彝尊明诗综卷八十知雁宕山樵陈忱字遐心胡适为后水浒传序考得其事尤众于谢无量平民文学之两大文豪第一编知说唐传旧本题庐陵罗本撰粉妆楼相传亦罗贯中作惜得见在后不及增修其第十六篇以下草稿则久置案头时有更定然识力俭隘观览又不周洽不特于明清小说阙略尚多即近时作者如魏子安韩子云辈之名亦缘他事相牵未遑博访况小说初刻多有序跋可借知成书年代及其撰人而旧本希觏仅获新书贾人草率于本文之外大率刊落用以编录亦复依据寡薄时虑讹谬惟更历岁月或能小小妥帖耳而时会交迫当复印行乃任其不备辄付排印顾畴昔所怀将以助听者之聆察释写生之烦劳之志愿则于是乎毕矣一千九百二十四年三月三日校竟记

封面

书名页

版权信息

图书在版编目（CIP）数据
Books in Print (CIP) data汉文学史纲要／鲁迅著．—南京：译林出版社，2014.3
Outline of the History of Chinese Literature/Lu Xun.—Nanjing: Yilin Publishing House, 2014.3（鲁迅自编文集）
(Lu Xun's self-edited anthology)ISBN 978-7-5447-4643-4
ISBN 978-7-5447-4643-4Ⅰ．①汉…　Ⅱ．①鲁…　Ⅲ．①鲁迅著作－文学史－中国　Ⅳ．①I210.91
I..(1) Han... II..(1) Lu... III..(1) Lu Xun's Writings-Literary History-China IV..(1)I210.91中国版本图书馆CIP数据核字（2013）第261853号
China Version Library CIP Data Verification (2013) No. 261853
书　　名　汉文学史纲要
Book Title Outline of the History of Chinese Literature作　　者　鲁　迅
Author: Lu Xun责任编辑　王振华
Editor-in-charge: Wang Zhenhua特约编辑　刘　佳　邓　敏
Special editors Liu Jia and Deng Min出版发行　凤凰出版传媒股份有限公司
Published and distributed by Phoenix Publishing and Media Co., Ltd译林出版社
Yilin Publishing House出版社地址　南京市湖南路1号A楼，邮编：210009
Publisher's address Building A, No. 1 Hunan Road, Nanjing, Zip Code: 210009电子信箱　yilin@yilin.com
E-mail yilin@yilin.com出版社网址　http://www.yilin.com
Publisher website http://www.yilin.com印　　刷　北京凯达印务有限公司
Printing Beijing Kaida Printing Co., Ltd开　　本　787×1092毫米　1/32
Volume 787×1092 mm 1/32印　　张　3.375
Print 3.375字　　数　65千字
Word count: 65,000 words版　　次　2014年3月第1版　2014年3月第1次印刷
Edition March 2014 1st edition March 2014 1st printing书　　号　ISBN 978-7-5447-4643-4
ISBN 978-7-5447-4643-4定　　价　12.80元
The price is 12.80 yuan译林版图书若有印装错误可向承印厂调换

If there are printing errors in the translated version of the book, it can be exchanged with the printing factory

Table of Contents

目录

Table of Contents

directory第一篇　自文字至文章 The first article from text to article
第二篇　《书》与《诗》 Chapter 2 "Books" and "Poems"
第三篇　老庄 Chapter 3 Lao Zhuang
第四篇　屈原及宋玉 Chapter 4 Qu Yuan and Song Yu
第五篇　李斯 Chapter 5 Li Si
第六篇　汉宫之楚声 Chapter 6 The Chu Sound of the Han Palace
第七篇　贾谊与晁错 Chapter 7 Jia Yi and Chao Cuo
第八篇　藩国之文术 Chapter 8 The Literary Art of the Domain
第九篇　武帝时文术之盛 Chapter 9 The flourishing of literature during the reign of Emperor Wu
第十篇　司马相如与司马迁 第十篇 司马相如与司马迁
返回总目录 Return to the General Directory

第一篇　自文字至文章

第一篇　自文字至文章

第一篇　自文字至文章

The first article from text to article

第一篇　自文字至文章

在昔原始之民，其居群中，盖惟以姿态声音，自达其情意而已。声音繁变，寖成言辞，言辞谐美，乃兆歌咏。时属草昧，庶民朴淳，心志郁于内，则任情而歌呼，天地变于外，则祗畏以颂祝，踊跃吟叹，时越侪辈，为众所赏，默识不忘，口耳相传，或逮后世。复有巫觋，职在通神，盛为歌舞，以祈灵贶，而赞颂之在人群，其用乃愈益广大。试察今之蛮民，虽状极狉獉，未有衣服宫室文字，而颂神抒情之什，降灵召鬼之人，大抵有焉。吕不韦云，“昔葛天氏之乐，三人操牛尾，投足以歌八阕。”（《吕氏春秋》《仲夏纪》《古乐》）郑玄则谓“诗之兴也，谅不于上皇之世。”（《诗谱序》）虽荒古无文，并难征信，而证以今日之野人，揆之人间之心理，固当以吕氏所言，为较近于事理者矣。
在昔原始之民，其居群中，盖惟以姿态声音，自达其情意而已。 声音繁变，寖成言辞，言辞谐美，乃兆歌咏。 时属草昧，庶民朴淳，心志郁于内，则任情而歌呼，天地变于外，则祗畏以颂祝，踊跃吟叹，时越侪辈，为众所赏，默识不忘，口耳相传，或逮后世。 复有巫觋，职在通神，盛为歌舞，以祈灵贶，而赞颂之在人群，其用乃愈益广大。 试察今之蛮民，虽状极狉獉，未有衣服宫室文字，而颂神抒情之什，降灵召鬼之人，大抵有焉。 吕不韦云，“昔葛天氏之乐，三人操牛尾，投足以歌八阕。 ”（《吕氏春秋》《仲夏纪》《古乐》）郑玄则谓“诗之兴也，谅不于上皇之世。 ”（《诗谱序》）虽荒古无文，并难征信，而证以今日之野人，揆之人间之心理，固当以吕氏所言，为较近于事理者矣。然而言者，犹风波也，激荡既已，余踪杳然，独恃口耳之传，殊不足以行远或垂后。诗人感物，发为歌吟，吟已感漓，其事随讫。倘将记言行，存事功，则专凭言语，大惧遗忘，故古者尝结绳而治，而后之圣人易之以书契。结绳之法，今不能知；书契者，相传“古者庖牺氏之王天下也，仰则观象于天，俯则观法于地，观鸟兽之文与地之宜，近取诸身，远取诸物，于是始作八卦。”（《易》《下系辞》）“神农氏复重之为六十四爻。”（司马贞《补史记》）颇似为文字所由始。其文今具存于《易》，积画成象，短长错综，变易有穷，与后之文字不相系属。故许慎复以为“黄帝之史仓颉，见鸟兽蹄迒之迹，知分理之可相别异也，初造书契”（《说文解字序》）。要之文字成就，所当绵历岁时，且由众手，全群共喻，乃得流行，谁为作者，殊难确指，归功一圣，亦凭臆之说也。
然而言者，犹风波也，激荡既已，余踪杳然，独恃口耳之传，殊不足以行远或垂后。 诗人感物，发为歌吟，吟已感漓，其事随讫。 倘将记言行，存事功，则专凭言语，大惧遗忘，故古者尝结绳而治，而后之圣人易之以书契。 结绳之法，今不能知；书契者，相传“古者庖牺氏之王天下也，仰则观象于天，俯则观法于地，观鸟兽之文与地之宜，近取诸身，远取诸物，于是始作八卦。 ”（《易》《下系辞》）“神农氏复重之为六十四爻。 ”（司马贞《补史记》）颇似为文字所由始。 其文今具存于《易》，积画成象，短长错综，变易有穷，与后之文字不相系属。 故许慎复以为“黄帝之史仓颉，见鸟兽蹄迒之迹，知分理之可相别异也，初造书契”（《说文解字序》）。 要之文字成就，所当绵历岁时，且由众手，全群共喻，乃得流行，谁为作者，殊难确指，归功一圣，亦凭臆之说也。许慎云，“仓颉之初作书，盖依类象形，故谓之文。其后形声相益，即谓之字。字者，言孳乳而浸多也。著于竹帛谓之书。书者，如也。……周礼八岁入小学，保氏教国子，先以六书。一曰指事，指事者，视而可识，察而可见，上下是也；二曰象形，象形者，画成其物，随体诘诎，日月是也；三曰形声，形声者，以事为名，取譬相成，江河是也；四曰会意，会意者，比类合谊，以见指撝，武信是也；五曰转注，转注者，建类一首，同意相受，考老是也；六曰假借，假借者，本无其字，依声托事，令长是也。”（《说文解字序》）指事象形会意为形体之事，形声假借为声音之事，转注者，训诂之事也。虞夏书契，今不可见，岣嵝禹书，伪造不足论，商周以来，则刻于骨甲金石者多有，下及秦汉，文字弥繁，而摄以六事，大抵弭合。意者文字初作，首必象形，触目会心，不待授受，渐而演进，则会意指事之类兴焉。今之文字，形声转多，而察其缔构，什九以形象为本柢，诵习一字，当识形音义三：口诵耳闻其音，目察其形，心通其义，三识并用，一字之功乃全。其在文章，则写山曰崚嶒嵯峨，状水曰汪洋澎湃，蔽芾葱茏，恍逢丰木，鳟鲂鳗鲤，如见多鱼。故其所函，遂具三美：意美以感心，一也；音美以感耳，二也；形美以感目，三也。
许慎云，“仓颉之初作书，盖依类象形，故谓之文。 其后形声相益，即谓之字。 字者，言孳乳而浸多也。 著于竹帛谓之书。 书者，如也。 …… 周礼八岁入小学，保氏教国子，先以六书。 一曰指事，指事者，视而可识，察而可见，上下是也；二曰象形，象形者，画成其物，随体诘诎，日月是也；三曰形声，形声者，以事为名，取譬相成，江河是也；四曰会意，会意者，比类合谊，以见指撝，武信是也；五曰转注，转注者，建类一首，同意相受，考老是也；六曰假借，假借者，本无其字，依声托事，令长是也。 ”（《说文解字序》）指事象形会意为形体之事，形声假借为声音之事，转注者，训诂之事也。 虞夏书契，今不可见，岣嵝禹书，伪造不足论，商周以来，则刻于骨甲金石者多有，下及秦汉，文字弥繁，而摄以六事，大抵弭合。 意者文字初作，首必象形，触目会心，不待授受，渐而演进，则会意指事之类兴焉。 今之文字，形声转多，而察其缔构，什九以形象为本柢，诵习一字，当识形音义三：口诵耳闻其音，目察其形，心通其义，三识并用，一字之功乃全。 其在文章，则写山曰崚嶒嵯峨，状水曰汪洋澎湃，蔽芾葱茏，恍逢丰木，鳟鲂鳗鲤，如见多鱼。 故其所函，遂具三美：意美以感心，一也；音美以感耳，二也；形美以感目，三也。连属文字，亦谓之文。而其兴盛，盖亦由巫史乎。巫以记神事，更进，则史以记人事也，然尚以上告于天；翻今之《易》与《书》，间能得其仿佛。至于上古实状，则荒漠不可考，君长之名，且难审知，世以天皇地皇人皇为三皇者，列三才开始之序，继以有巢燧人伏羲神农者，明人群进化之程，殆皆后人所命，非真号矣。降及轩辕，遂多传说，逮于虞夏，乃有箸于简策之文传于今。
连属文字，亦谓之文。 而其兴盛，盖亦由巫史乎。 巫以记神事，更进，则史以记人事也，然尚以上告于天；翻今之《易》与《书》，间能得其仿佛。 至于上古实状，则荒漠不可考，君长之名，且难审知，世以天皇地皇人皇为三皇者，列三才开始之序，继以有巢燧人伏羲神农者，明人群进化之程，殆皆后人所命，非真号矣。 降及轩辕，遂多传说，逮于虞夏，乃有箸于简策之文传于今。巫史非诗人，其职虽止于传事，然厥初亦凭口耳，虑有愆误，则练句协音，以便记诵。文字既作，固无愆误之虞矣，而简策繁重，书削为劳，故复当俭约其文，以省物力，或因旧习，仍作韵言。今所传有黄帝《道言》（见《吕氏春秋》），《金人铭》（《说苑》），颛顼《丹书》（《大戴礼记》），帝喾《政语》（《贾谊新书》），虽并出秦汉人书，不足凭信，而大抵协其音，偶其词，使读者易于上口，则殆犹古之道也。
巫史非诗人，其职虽止于传事，然厥初亦凭口耳，虑有愆误，则练句协音，以便记诵。 文字既作，固无愆误之虞矣，而简策繁重，书削为劳，故复当俭约其文，以省物力，或因旧习，仍作韵言。 今所传有黄帝《道言》（见《吕氏春秋》），《金人铭》（《说苑》），颛顼《丹书》（《大戴礼记》），帝喾《政语》（《贾谊新书》），虽并出秦汉人书，不足凭信，而大抵协其音，偶其词，使读者易于上口，则殆犹古之道也。由前言更推度之，则初始之文，殆本与语言稍异，当有藻韵，以便传诵，“直言曰言，论难曰语”，区以别矣。然汉时已并称凡箸于竹帛者为文章（《汉书》《艺文志》），后或更拓其封域，举一切可以图写，接于目睛者皆属之。梁之刘勰，至谓“人文之元，肇自太极”（《文心雕龙》《原道》），三才所显，并由道妙，“形立则章成矣，声发则文生矣”，故凡虎斑霞绮，林籁泉韵，俱为文章。其说汗漫，不可审理。稍隘之义，则《易》有曰，“物相杂，故曰文。”《说文解字》曰，“文，错画也。”可知凡所谓文，必相错综，错而不乱，亦近丽尔之象。至刘熙云“文者，会集众彩以成锦绣，会集众字以成辞义，如文绣然也”（《释名》）。则确然以文章之事，当具辞义，且有华饰，如文绣矣。《说文》又有字，云：“也”；“，彰也”。盖即此义。然后来不用，但书文章，今通称文学。
由前言更推度之，则初始之文，殆本与语言稍异，当有藻韵，以便传诵，“直言曰言，论难曰语”，区以别矣。 然汉时已并称凡箸于竹帛者为文章（《汉书》《艺文志》），后或更拓其封域，举一切可以图写，接于目睛者皆属之。 梁之刘勰，至谓“人文之元，肇自太极”（《文心雕龙》《原道》），三才所显，并由道妙，“形立则章成矣，声发则文生矣”，故凡虎斑霞绮，林籁泉韵，俱为文章。 其说汗漫，不可审理。 稍隘之义，则《易》有曰，“物相杂，故曰文。 ”《说文解字》曰，“文，错画也。 ”可知凡所谓文，必相错综，错而不乱，亦近丽尔之象。 至刘熙云“文者，会集众彩以成锦绣，会集众字以成辞义，如文绣然也”（《释名》）。 则确然以文章之事，当具辞义，且有华饰，如文绣矣。 《说文》又有字，云：“也”；“ ，彰也”。 盖即此义。 然后来不用，但书文章，今通称文学。刘勰虽于《原道》一篇，以人“为五行之秀，实天地之心，心生而言立，言立而文明，自然之道也。傍及万品，动植皆文。……”而晋宋以来，文笔之辨又甚峻。其《总术篇》即云，“今之常言：有文有笔。以为无韵者笔也，有韵者文也。”萧绎所诠，尤为昭晰，曰：“今之门徒，转相师受，通圣人之经者谓之儒；屈原宋玉枚乘长卿之徒，止于辞赋则谓之文。……至如不便为诗如阎纂，善为章奏如伯松，若是之流，泛谓之笔。吟咏风谣，流连哀思者谓之文。”又曰，“笔，退则非谓成篇，进则不云取义，神其巧惠，笔端而已。至如文者，惟须绮縠纷披，宫徵靡曼，脣吻遒会，精灵荡摇。而古之文笔今之文笔，其源又异。”（《金楼子》《立言篇》）盖其时文章界域，极可弛张，纵之则包举万汇之形声；严之则排摈简质之叙记，必有藻韵，善移人情，始得称文。其不然者，概谓之笔。
刘勰虽于《原道》一篇，以人“为五行之秀，实天地之心，心生而言立，言立而文明，自然之道也。 傍及万品，动植皆文。 ……”而晋宋以来，文笔之辨又甚峻。 其《总术篇》即云，“今之常言：有文有笔。 以为无韵者笔也，有韵者文也。 ”萧绎所诠，尤为昭晰，曰：“今之门徒，转相师受，通圣人之经者谓之儒；屈原宋玉枚乘长卿之徒，止于辞赋则谓之文。 …… 至如不便为诗如阎纂，善为章奏如伯松，若是之流，泛谓之笔。 吟咏风谣，流连哀思者谓之文。 ”又曰，“笔，退则非谓成篇，进则不云取义，神其巧惠，笔端而已。 至如文者，惟须绮縠纷披，宫徵靡曼，脣吻遒会，精灵荡摇。 而古之文笔今之文笔，其源又异。 ”（《金楼子》《立言篇》）盖其时文章界域，极可弛张，纵之则包举万汇之形声；严之则排摈简质之叙记，必有藻韵，善移人情，始得称文。 其不然者，概谓之笔。辞笔或诗笔对举，唐世犹然，逮及宋元，此义遂晦，于是散体之笔，并称曰文，且谓其用，所以载道，提挈经训，诛锄美辞，讲章告示，高张文苑矣。清阮元作《文言说》，其子福又作《文笔对》，复昭古谊，而其说亦不行。
辞笔或诗笔对举，唐世犹然，逮及宋元，此义遂晦，于是散体之笔，并称曰文，且谓其用，所以载道，提挈经训，诛锄美辞，讲章告示，高张文苑矣。 清阮元作《文言说》，其子福又作《文笔对》，复昭古谊，而其说亦不行。

第二篇　《书》与《诗》

第二篇　《书》与《诗》

第二篇　《书》与《诗》

Chapter 2 "Books" and "Poems"

第二篇　《书》与《诗》

《周礼》，外史掌三皇五帝之书，今已莫知其书为何等。假使五帝书诚为五典，则今惟《尧典》在《尚书》中。“尚者，上也。上所为，下所书也。”（王充《论衡》《须颂篇》）或曰：“言此上代以来之书。”（孔颖达《尚书正义》）纬书谓“孔子求书，得黄帝玄孙帝魁之书，迄于秦穆公，凡三千二百四十篇。断远取近，定可为世法者百二十篇：以百二篇为《尚书》，十八篇为《中候》。去三千一百二十篇。”（《尚书璇玑钤》）乃汉人侈大之言，不可信。《尚书》盖本百篇：《虞夏书》二十篇，《商书》《周书》各四十篇。今本有序，相传孔子所为，言其作意（《汉书》《艺文志》），然亦难信，以其文不类也。秦燔烧经籍，济南伏生抱书藏山中，又失之。汉兴，景帝使晁错往从口授，而伏生旋老死，仅得自《尧典》至《秦誓》二十八篇；故汉人尝以拟二十八宿。
《周礼》，外史掌三皇五帝之书，今已莫知其书为何等。 假使五帝书诚为五典，则今惟《尧典》在《尚书》中。 “尚者，上也。 上所为，下所书也。 ”（王充《论衡》《须颂篇》）或曰：“言此上代以来之书。 ”（孔颖达《尚书正义》）纬书谓“孔子求书，得黄帝玄孙帝魁之书，迄于秦穆公，凡三千二百四十篇。 断远取近，定可为世法者百二十篇：以百二篇为《尚书》，十八篇为《中候》。 去三千一百二十篇。 ”（《尚书璇玑钤》）乃汉人侈大之言，不可信。 《尚书》盖本百篇：《虞夏书》二十篇，《商书》《周书》各四十篇。 今本有序，相传孔子所为，言其作意（《汉书》《艺文志》），然亦难信，以其文不类也。 秦燔烧经籍，济南伏生抱书藏山中，又失之。 汉兴，景帝使晁错往从口授，而伏生旋老死，仅得自《尧典》至《秦誓》二十八篇；故汉人尝以拟二十八宿。《书》之体例有六：曰典，曰谟，曰训，曰诰，曰誓，曰命，是称六体。然其中有《禹贡》，颇似记，余则概为训下与告上之词，犹后世之诏令与奏议也。其文质朴，亦诘屈难读，距以藻韵为饰，俾便颂习，便行远之时，盖已远矣。晋卫宏则云，“伏生老，不能正言，言不可晓，使其女传言教错。齐人语多与颍川异，错所不知，凡十二三，略以其意属读而已。”故难解之处多有。今即略录《尧典》中语，以见大凡：
《书》之体例有六：曰典，曰谟，曰训，曰诰，曰誓，曰命，是称六体。 然其中有《禹贡》，颇似记，余则概为训下与告上之词，犹后世之诏令与奏议也。 其文质朴，亦诘屈难读，距以藻韵为饰，俾便颂习，便行远之时，盖已远矣。 晋卫宏则云，“伏生老，不能正言，言不可晓，使其女传言教错。 齐人语多与颍川异，错所不知，凡十二三，略以其意属读而已。 ”故难解之处多有。 今即略录《尧典》中语，以见大凡：“……帝曰：畴咨若时，登庸。放齐曰：胤子朱，启明。帝曰：吁！嚚讼，可乎？帝曰：畴咨若予采？驩兜曰：都！共工，方鸠僝工。帝曰：吁！静言庸违，象恭，滔天！帝曰：咨，四岳！汤汤洪水方割，荡荡怀山襄陵，浩浩滔天，下民其咨。有能，俾乂。佥曰：於，鲧哉！帝曰：吁，咈哉！方命，圮族。岳曰：异哉！试可，乃已。帝曰：往，钦哉！九载，绩用弗成。帝曰：咨，四岳！朕在位七十载，汝能庸命，巽朕位。岳曰：否德，忝帝位。曰：明明，扬侧陋！师锡帝曰：有鳏在下，曰虞舜。帝曰：俞！予闻。如何？岳曰：瞽子。父顽，母嚚，象傲。克谐以孝，烝烝乂，不格奸。帝曰：我其试哉。女于时观厥刑于二女，釐降二女于妫汭，嫔于虞。”
“…… 帝曰：畴咨若时，登庸。 放齐曰：胤子朱，启明。 帝曰：吁！嚚讼，可乎？帝曰：畴咨若予采？驩兜曰：都！共工，方鸠僝工。 帝曰：吁！静言庸违，象恭，滔天！帝曰：咨，四岳！汤汤洪水方割，荡荡怀山襄陵，浩浩滔天，下民其咨。 有能，俾乂。 佥曰：於，鲧哉！帝曰：吁，咈哉！方命，圮族。 岳曰：异哉！试可，乃已。 帝曰：往，钦哉！九载，绩用弗成。 帝曰：咨，四岳！朕在位七十载，汝能庸命，巽朕位。 岳曰：否德，忝帝位。 曰：明明，扬侧陋！师锡帝曰：有鳏在下，曰虞舜。 帝曰：俞！予闻。 如何？岳曰：瞽子。 父顽，母嚚，象傲。 克谐以孝，烝烝乂，不格奸。 帝曰：我其试哉。 女于时观厥刑于二女，釐降二女于妫汭，嫔于虞。 ”扬雄曰，“昔之说《书》者序以百，……《虞》《夏》之书浑浑尔，《商书》灏灏尔，《周书》噩噩尔。”（《法言》《问神》）虞夏禅让，独饶治绩，敷扬休烈，故深大矣；周多征伐，上下相戒，事危而言切，则峻肃而不阿借；惟《商书》时有哀激之音，若缘厓而失其援，以为夷旷，所未详也。如《西伯戡黎》：
扬雄曰，“昔之说《书》者序以百，……《虞》《夏》之书浑浑尔，《商书》灏灏尔，《周书》噩噩尔。 ”（《法言》《问神》）虞夏禅让，独饶治绩，敷扬休烈，故深大矣；周多征伐，上下相戒，事危而言切，则峻肃而不阿借；惟《商书》时有哀激之音，若缘厓而失其援，以为夷旷，所未详也。 如《西伯戡黎》：“西伯既戡黎，祖伊恐，奔告于王曰：天子！天既讫我殷命，格人元龟，罔敢知吉。非先王不相我后人，惟王淫戏用自绝。故天弃我，不有康食。不虞天性，不迪率典。今我民罔弗欲丧，曰，天曷不降威，大命不挚？今王其如台。王曰：呜呼！我生不有命在天？祖伊反曰：呜呼！乃罪多参在上，乃能责命于天？殷之即丧，指乃功，不无戮于尔邦！”
“西伯既戡黎，祖伊恐，奔告于王曰：天子！天既讫我殷命，格人元龟，罔敢知吉。 非先王不相我后人，惟王淫戏用自绝。 故天弃我，不有康食。 不虞天性，不迪率典。 今我民罔弗欲丧，曰，天曷不降威，大命不挚？今王其如台。 王曰：呜呼！我生不有命在天？祖伊反曰：呜呼！乃罪多参在上，乃能责命于天？殷之即丧，指乃功，不无戮于尔邦！”武帝时，鲁共王坏孔子旧宅，得其末孙惠所藏之书，字皆古文。孔安国以今文校之，得二十五篇，其五篇与伏生所诵相合，因并依古文，开其篇第，以隶古字写之，合成五十八篇。会巫蛊事起，不得奏上，乃私传其业于生徒，称《尚书》古文之学（《隋书》《经籍志》）。而先伏生所口授者，缘其写以汉隶，遂反称今文。
武帝时，鲁共王坏孔子旧宅，得其末孙惠所藏之书，字皆古文。 孔安国以今文校之，得二十五篇，其五篇与伏生所诵相合，因并依古文，开其篇第，以隶古字写之，合成五十八篇。 会巫蛊事起，不得奏上，乃私传其业于生徒，称《尚书》古文之学（《隋书》《经籍志》）。 而先伏生所口授者，缘其写以汉隶，遂反称今文。孔氏所传，既以值巫蛊不行，遂有张霸之徒，伪造《舜典》《汨作》等二十四篇，亦称古文书，而辞义芜鄙，不足取信于世。若今本孔传《古文尚书》，则为晋豫章梅赜所奏上，独失《舜典》；至隋购募，乃得其篇，唐孔颖达疏之，遂大行于世。宋吴棫始以为疑；朱熹更比较其词，以为“今文多艰涩，而古文反平易”，“却似晋宋间文章”，并书序亦恐非安国作也。明梅作《尚书考异》，尤力发其复，谓“《尚书》惟今文传自伏生口诵者为真古文。出孔壁中者，尽后儒伪作，大抵依约诸经《论》《孟》中语，并窃其字句而缘饰之”云。
孔氏所传，既以值巫蛊不行，遂有张霸之徒，伪造《舜典》《汨作》等二十四篇，亦称古文书，而辞义芜鄙，不足取信于世。 若今本孔传《古文尚书》，则为晋豫章梅赜所奏上，独失《舜典》；至隋购募，乃得其篇，唐孔颖达疏之，遂大行于世。 宋吴棫始以为疑；朱熹更比较其词，以为“今文多艰涩，而古文反平易”，“却似晋宋间文章”，并书序亦恐非安国作也。 明梅作《尚书考异》，尤力发其复，谓“《尚书》惟今文传自伏生口诵者为真古文。 出孔壁中者，尽后儒伪作，大抵依约诸经《论》《孟》中语，并窃其字句而缘饰之”云。诗歌之起，虽当早于记事，然葛天《八阕》，黄帝乐词，仅存其名。《家语》谓舜弹五弦之琴，造《南风》之诗曰：“南风之熏兮，可以解吾民之愠兮；南风之时兮，可以阜吾民之财兮。”《尚书大传》又载其《卿云歌》云：“卿云烂兮，糺缦缦兮，日月光华，旦复旦兮！”辞仅达意，颇有古风，而汉魏始传，殆亦后人拟作。其可征信者，乃在《尚书》《皋陶谟》，（伪孔传《尚书》分之为《益稷》）曰：
诗歌之起，虽当早于记事，然葛天《八阕》，黄帝乐词，仅存其名。 《家语》谓舜弹五弦之琴，造《南风》之诗曰：“南风之熏兮，可以解吾民之愠兮；南风之时兮，可以阜吾民之财兮。 ”《尚书大传》又载其《卿云歌》云：“卿云烂兮，糺缦缦兮，日月光华，旦复旦兮！”辞仅达意，颇有古风，而汉魏始传，殆亦后人拟作。 其可征信者，乃在《尚书》《皋陶谟》，（伪孔传《尚书》分之为《益稷》）曰：“……夔曰：於！予击石拊石，百兽率舞，庶尹允谐。帝庸作歌曰：敕天之命，惟时惟几。乃歌曰：股肱喜哉，元首起哉，百工熙哉！皋陶拜手稽首扬言曰：念哉！率作兴事，慎乃宪，钦哉！屡省乃成，钦哉！乃赓载歌曰：元首明哉，股肱良哉，庶事康哉！又歌曰：元首丛脞哉，股肱惰哉，万事堕哉！帝曰：俞，往，钦哉！”
“…… 夔曰：於！予击石拊石，百兽率舞，庶尹允谐。 帝庸作歌曰：敕天之命，惟时惟几。 乃歌曰：股肱喜哉，元首起哉，百工熙哉！皋陶拜手稽首扬言曰：念哉！率作兴事，慎乃宪，钦哉！屡省乃成，钦哉！乃赓载歌曰：元首明哉，股肱良哉，庶事康哉！又歌曰：元首丛脞哉，股肱惰哉，万事堕哉！帝曰：俞，往，钦哉！”以体式言，至为单简，去其助字，实止三言，与后之“汤之《盘铭》曰：苟日新，日日新，又日新”同式；又虽亦偶字履韵，而朴陋无华，殊无以胜于记事。然此特君臣相勗，冀各慎其法宪，敬其职事而已，长言咏叹，故命曰歌，固非诗人之作也。
以体式言，至为单简，去其助字，实止三言，与后之“汤之《盘铭》曰：苟日新，日日新，又日新”同式；又虽亦偶字履韵，而朴陋无华，殊无以胜于记事。 然此特君臣相勗，冀各慎其法宪，敬其职事而已，长言咏叹，故命曰歌，固非诗人之作也。自商至周，诗乃圆备，存于今者三百五篇，称为《诗经》。其先虽遭秦火，而人所讽诵，不独在竹帛，故最完。司马迁始以为“古者《诗》三千余篇，及至孔子，去其重，取其可施于礼义，上采契后稷，中述殷周之盛，至幽厉之缺。”然唐孔颖达已疑其言；宋郑樵则谓诗皆商周人作，孔子得于鲁太师，编而录之。朱熹于诗，其意常与郑樵合，亦曰：“人言夫子删诗，看来只是采得许多诗，夫子不曾删去，只是刊定而已。”
自商至周，诗乃圆备，存于今者三百五篇，称为《诗经》。 其先虽遭秦火，而人所讽诵，不独在竹帛，故最完。 司马迁始以为“古者《诗》三千余篇，及至孔子，去其重，取其可施于礼义，上采契后稷，中述殷周之盛，至幽厉之缺。 ”然唐孔颖达已疑其言；宋郑樵则谓诗皆商周人作，孔子得于鲁太师，编而录之。 朱熹于诗，其意常与郑樵合，亦曰：“人言夫子删诗，看来只是采得许多诗，夫子不曾删去，只是刊定而已。 ”《书》有六体，《诗》则有六义焉：一曰风，二曰赋，三曰比，四曰兴，五曰雅，六曰颂。风雅颂以性质言：风者，闾巷之情诗；雅者，朝廷之乐歌；颂者，宗庙之乐歌也。是为《诗》之三经。赋比兴以体制言：赋者直抒其情；比者借物言志；兴者托物兴辞也。是为《诗》之三纬。风以《关雎》始，雅有大小，小雅以《鹿鸣》始，大雅以《文王》始；颂以《清庙》始；是为四始。汉时，说《诗》者众，鲁有申培，齐有辕固，燕有韩婴，皆尝列于学官，而其书今并亡。存者独有赵人毛苌诗传，其学自谓传自子夏；河间献王尤好之。其诗每篇皆有序，郑玄以为首篇大序即子夏作，后之小序则子夏毛公合作也。而韩愈则云，“子夏不序诗。”朱熹解诗，亦但信诗不信序。然据范晔说，则实后汉卫宏之所为尔。
《书》有六体，《诗》则有六义焉：一曰风，二曰赋，三曰比，四曰兴，五曰雅，六曰颂。 风雅颂以性质言：风者，闾巷之情诗；雅者，朝廷之乐歌；颂者，宗庙之乐歌也。 是为《诗》之三经。 赋比兴以体制言：赋者直抒其情；比者借物言志；兴者托物兴辞也。 是为《诗》之三纬。 风以《关雎》始，雅有大小，小雅以《鹿鸣》始，大雅以《文王》始；颂以《清庙》始；是为四始。 汉时，说《诗》者众，鲁有申培，齐有辕固，燕有韩婴，皆尝列于学官，而其书今并亡。 存者独有赵人毛苌诗传，其学自谓传自子夏；河间献王尤好之。 其诗每篇皆有序，郑玄以为首篇大序即子夏作，后之小序则子夏毛公合作也。 而韩愈则云，“子夏不序诗。 ”朱熹解诗，亦但信诗不信序。 然据范晔说，则实后汉卫宏之所为尔。毛氏《诗序》既不可信，三家《诗》又失传，作诗本义遂难通晓。而《诗》之篇目次第，又不甚以时代为先后，故后来异说滋多。明何楷作《毛诗世本古义》，乃以诗编年，谓上起于夏少康时（《公刘》，《七月》等）而讫于周敬王之世（《下泉》），虽与孟子知人论世之说合，然亦非必其本义矣。要之《商颂》五篇，事迹分明，词亦诘屈，与《尚书》近似，用以上续舜皋陶之歌，或非诬欤？今录其《玄鸟》一篇；《毛诗》序曰：祀高宗也。
毛氏《诗序》既不可信，三家《诗》又失传，作诗本义遂难通晓。 而《诗》之篇目次第，又不甚以时代为先后，故后来异说滋多。 明何楷作《毛诗世本古义》，乃以诗编年，谓上起于夏少康时（《公刘》，《七月》等）而讫于周敬王之世（《下泉》），虽与孟子知人论世之说合，然亦非必其本义矣。 要之《商颂》五篇，事迹分明，词亦诘屈，与《尚书》近似，用以上续舜皋陶之歌，或非诬欤？今录其《玄鸟》一篇；《毛诗》序曰：祀高宗也。“天命玄鸟，降而生商，宅殷土芒芒。古帝命武汤，正域彼四方，方命厥后，奄有九有。商之先后，受命不殆，在武丁孙子。武丁孙子，武王靡不胜，龙旗十乘，大糦是承。邦畿千里，维民所止，肇域彼四海，四海来假。来假祁祁，景员维河，殷受命咸宜，百禄是何。”
“天命玄鸟，降而生商，宅殷土芒芒。 古帝命武汤，正域彼四方，方命厥后，奄有九有。 商之先后，受命不殆，在武丁孙子。 武丁孙子，武王靡不胜，龙旗十乘，大糦是承。 邦畿千里，维民所止，肇域彼四海，四海来假。 来假祁祁，景员维河，殷受命咸宜，百禄是何。 ”至于二《雅》，则或美或刺，较足见作者之情，非如《颂》诗，大率叹美。如《小雅》《采薇》，言征人远戍，虽劳而不敢息云：
As for the two "Ya" poems, they are either beautiful or sarcastic, which shows the author's feelings, unlike the "Song" poems, which are generally praised. For example, "Xiao Ya" and "Cai Wei" say that the conscripts are far away, and although they are tired, they do not dare to rest:“采薇采薇，薇亦作止。曰归曰归，岁亦莫止。靡室靡家，狁之故；不遑启居，狁之故。……彼尔维何？维常之华。彼路斯何？君子之车。戎车既驾，四牡业业；岂敢定居，一月三捷。……昔我往矣，杨柳依依；今我来思，雨雪霏霏，行道迟迟，载渴载饥。我心伤悲，莫知我哀！”
“采薇采薇，薇亦作止。 曰归曰归，岁亦莫止。 靡室靡家，狁之故；不遑启居，狁之故。 …… 彼尔维何？维常之华。 彼路斯何？君子之车。 戎车既驾，四牡业业；岂敢定居，一月三捷。 …… 昔我往矣，杨柳依依；今我来思，雨雪霏霏，行道迟迟，载渴载饥。 我心伤悲，莫知我哀！”此盖所谓怨诽而不乱，温柔敦厚之言矣。然亦有甚激切者，如《大雅》《瞻卬》：
此盖所谓怨诽而不乱，温柔敦厚之言矣。 然亦有甚激切者，如《大雅》《瞻卬》：“瞻卬昊天，则不我惠，孔填不宁，降此大厉。邦靡有定，士民其瘵。蟊贼蟊疾，靡有夷届；罪罟不收，靡有夷廖！人有土田，女反有之；人有民人，女复夺之。此宜无罪，女反收之；彼宜有罪，女复说之！哲夫成城，哲妇倾城。……觱沸槛泉，维其深矣；心之忧矣，宁自今矣。不自我先，不自我后。藐藐昊天，无不克巩；无忝皇祖，式救尔后！”
“瞻卬昊天，则不我惠，孔填不宁，降此大厉。 邦靡有定，士民其瘵。 蟊贼蟊疾，靡有夷届；罪罟不收，靡有夷廖！人有土田，女反有之；人有民人，女复夺之。 此宜无罪，女反收之；彼宜有罪，女复说之！哲夫成城，哲妇倾城。 …… 觱沸槛泉，维其深矣；心之忧矣，宁自今矣。 不自我先，不自我后。 藐藐昊天，无不克巩；无忝皇祖，式救尔后！”《国风》之词，乃较平易，发抒情性，亦更分明。如：
The words of "National Style" are relatively plain, and the lyrical nature is also clearer. As:“野有死麕，白茅包之；有女怀春，吉士诱之。林有朴樕；野有死鹿，白茅纯束；有女如玉。舒而脱脱兮；无感我帨兮；无使尨也吠！”（《召南》《野有死麕》）
“野有死麕，白茅包之；有女怀春，吉士诱之。 林有朴樕；野有死鹿，白茅纯束；有女如玉。 舒而脱脱兮；无感我帨兮；无使尨也吠！”（《召南》《野有死麕》）“溱与洧，方涣涣兮；士与女，方秉蕳兮。女曰观乎，士曰既且。且往观乎，洧之外，洵且乐。维士与女，伊其相谑，赠之以勺药。……”（《郑风》《溱洧》）
“溱与洧，方涣涣兮；士与女，方秉蕳兮。 女曰观乎，士曰既且。 且往观乎，洧之外，洵且乐。 维士与女，伊其相谑，赠之以勺药。 ……”（《郑风》《溱洧》）“山有枢，隰有榆。子有衣裳，弗曳弗娄；子有车马，弗驰弗驱；宛其死矣，他人是愉。山有栲，隰有杻。子有廷内，弗洒弗扫；子有钟鼓，弗鼓弗考，宛其死矣，他人是保。山有漆，隰有栗。子有酒食，何不日鼓瑟？且以喜乐，且以永日。宛其死矣，他人入室。”（《唐风》《山有枢》）
“山有枢，隰有榆。 子有衣裳，弗曳弗娄；子有车马，弗驰弗驱；宛其死矣，他人是愉。 山有栲，隰有杻。 子有廷内，弗洒弗扫；子有钟鼓，弗鼓弗考，宛其死矣，他人是保。 山有漆，隰有栗。 子有酒食，何不日鼓瑟？且以喜乐，且以永日。 宛其死矣，他人入室。 ”（《唐风》《山有枢》）《诗》之次第，首《国风》，次《雅》，次《颂》。《国风》次第，则始周召二南，次邶鄘卫王郑齐魏唐秦陈桧曹而终以豳。其序列先后，宋人多以为即孔子微旨所寓，然古诗流传来久，篇次未必一如其故，今亦无以定之。惟《诗》以平易之《风》始，而渐及典重之《雅》与《颂》；《国风》又以所尊之周室始，次乃旁及于各国，则大致尚可推见而已。
《诗》之次第，首《国风》，次《雅》，次《颂》。 《国风》次第，则始周召二南，次邶鄘卫王郑齐魏唐秦陈桧曹而终以豳。 其序列先后，宋人多以为即孔子微旨所寓，然古诗流传来久，篇次未必一如其故，今亦无以定之。 惟《诗》以平易之《风》始，而渐及典重之《雅》与《颂》；《国风》又以所尊之周室始，次乃旁及于各国，则大致尚可推见而已。《诗》三百篇，皆出北方，而以黄河为中心。其十五国中，周南召南王桧陈郑在河南，邶鄘卫曹齐魏唐在河北，豳秦则在泾渭之滨，疆域概不越今河南山西陕西山东四省之外。其民原重，故虽直抒胸臆，犹能止乎礼义，忿而不戾，怨而不怒，哀而不伤，乐而不淫，虽诗歌，亦教训也。然此特后儒之言，实则激楚之言，奔放之词，《风》《雅》中亦常有，而孔子则曰：“《诗》三百，一言以蔽之，曰：思无邪。”后儒因孔子告颜渊为邦，曰“放郑声”。又曰：“恶郑声之乱雅乐也。”遂亦疑及《郑风》，以为淫逸，失其旨矣。自心不净，则外物随之，嵇康曰：“若夫郑声，是音声之至妙，妙音感人，犹美色惑志，耽槃荒酒，易以丧业，自非至人，孰能御之。”（本集《声无哀乐论》）世之欲捐窈窕之声，盖由于此，其理亦并通于文章。
《诗》三百篇，皆出北方，而以黄河为中心。 其十五国中，周南召南王桧陈郑在河南，邶鄘卫曹齐魏唐在河北，豳秦则在泾渭之滨，疆域概不越今河南山西陕西山东四省之外。 其民原重，故虽直抒胸臆，犹能止乎礼义，忿而不戾，怨而不怒，哀而不伤，乐而不淫，虽诗歌，亦教训也。 然此特后儒之言，实则激楚之言，奔放之词，《风》《雅》中亦常有，而孔子则曰：“《诗》三百，一言以蔽之，曰：思无邪。 ”后儒因孔子告颜渊为邦，曰“放郑声”。 又曰：“恶郑声之乱雅乐也。 ”遂亦疑及《郑风》，以为淫逸，失其旨矣。 自心不净，则外物随之，嵇康曰：“若夫郑声，是音声之至妙，妙音感人，犹美色惑志，耽槃荒酒，易以丧业，自非至人，孰能御之。 ”（本集《声无哀乐论》）世之欲捐窈窕之声，盖由于此，其理亦并通于文章。
参考书：
Reference book:《尚书正义》（唐孔颖达）
"Shangshu Justice" (Tang Kong Yingda)《毛诗正义》（同上）
"Mao's Poetry Justice" (ibid.)《经义考》（清朱彝尊）卷七十二至七十六卷九十八至一百
"Jingyi Kao" (Qing Zhu Yizun) Volumes 72 to 76 Volumes 98 to 100《支那文学史纲》（日本儿岛献吉郎）第二篇二至四章
"Outline of the History of Chinese Literature" (Kojima Keiyoshiro, Japan) Chapter 2 2-4《诗经研究》（谢无量）
"Study of the Book of Songs" (Xie Wuliang)

第三篇　老庄

第三篇　老庄

第三篇　老庄

Chapter 3 Lao Zhuang

第三篇　老庄

周室寖衰，风人辍采；故曰：“王者之迹熄而诗亡。”志士欲救世弊，则穷竭神虑，举其知闻。而诸侯又方并争，厚招游学之士；或将取合世主，起行其言，乃复力斥异家，以自所执持者为要道，聘辩腾说，著作云起矣。然当时足称“显学”者，实止三家，曰道，曰儒，曰墨。
周室寖衰，风人辍采；故曰：“王者之迹熄而诗亡。 ”志士欲救世弊，则穷竭神虑，举其知闻。 而诸侯又方并争，厚招游学之士；或将取合世主，起行其言，乃复力斥异家，以自所执持者为要道，聘辩腾说，著作云起矣。 然当时足称“显学”者，实止三家，曰道，曰儒，曰墨。道家书据《汉书》《艺文志》所录有《伊尹》，《太公》，《辛甲》等，今皆不传；《鬻子》《筦子》亦后人作，故存于今者莫先于《老子》。老子名耳，字聃，姓李氏，楚人，盖生于周灵王初（约西历纪元前五七〇），尝为守藏室之史，见周之衰，遂去，至关，为关令尹喜著书上下篇，言道德之意五千余言而去，莫知其所终也。今书又离为八十一章，亦后人妄分，本文实惟杂述思想，颇无条贯；时亦对字协韵，以便记诵，与秦汉人所传之黄帝《金人铭》，颛顼《丹书》等（见第一篇）同：
道家书据《汉书》《艺文志》所录有《伊尹》，《太公》，《辛甲》等，今皆不传；《鬻子》《筦子》亦后人作，故存于今者莫先于《老子》。 老子名耳，字聃，姓李氏，楚人，盖生于周灵王初（约西历纪元前五七〇），尝为守藏室之史，见周之衰，遂去，至关，为关令尹喜著书上下篇，言道德之意五千余言而去，莫知其所终也。 今书又离为八十一章，亦后人妄分，本文实惟杂述思想，颇无条贯；时亦对字协韵，以便记诵，与秦汉人所传之黄帝《金人铭》，颛顼《丹书》等（见第一篇）同：“视之不见名曰夷，听之不闻名曰希，搏之不得名曰微。此三者不可致诘，故混而为一。其上不皦，其下不昧，绳绳不可名，复归于无物。是谓无状之状，无物之象，是谓惚恍。迎之不见其首，随之不见其后，执古之道，以御今之有。能知古始，是谓道纪。”
“视之不见名曰夷，听之不闻名曰希，搏之不得名曰微。 此三者不可致诘，故混而为一。 其上不皦，其下不昧，绳绳不可名，复归于无物。 是谓无状之状，无物之象，是谓惚恍。 迎之不见其首，随之不见其后，执古之道，以御今之有。 能知古始，是谓道纪。 ”“执大象，天下往。往而不害，安平太。乐与饵，过客止；道之出口，淡乎其无味，视之不足见，听之不足闻，用之不足既。”
“执大象，天下往。 往而不害，安平太。 乐与饵，过客止；道之出口，淡乎其无味，视之不足见，听之不足闻，用之不足既。 ”老子尝为周室守书，博见文典，又阅世变，所识甚多，班固谓“道家者流，盖出于史官，历记成败存亡祸福古今之道，然后知秉要执本，清虚以自守，卑弱以自持”者盖以此。然老子之言亦不纯一，戒多言而时有愤辞，尚无为而仍欲治天下。其无为者，以欲“无不为”也。
老子尝为周室守书，博见文典，又阅世变，所识甚多，班固谓“道家者流，盖出于史官，历记成败存亡祸福古今之道，然后知秉要执本，清虚以自守，卑弱以自持”者盖以此。 然老子之言亦不纯一，戒多言而时有愤辞，尚无为而仍欲治天下。 其无为者，以欲“无不为”也。“大道废，有仁义。智慧出，有大伪。六亲不和有孝慈，国家昏乱有忠臣。”
“大道废，有仁义。 智慧出，有大伪。 六亲不和有孝慈，国家昏乱有忠臣。 ”“民之饥，以其上食税之多，是以饥。民之难治，以其上之有为，是以难治。民之轻死，以其求生之厚，是以轻死。夫唯无以生为者，是贤于贵生。”
“民之饥，以其上食税之多，是以饥。 民之难治，以其上之有为，是以难治。 民之轻死，以其求生之厚，是以轻死。 夫唯无以生为者，是贤于贵生。 ”“……圣人处无为之事，行不言之教，万物作焉而不辞，生而不有，为而不恃，功成而弗居。夫唯弗居，是以不去。”
“…… 圣人处无为之事，行不言之教，万物作焉而不辞，生而不有，为而不恃，功成而弗居。 夫唯弗居，是以不去。 ”“为学日益，为道日损。损之又损，以至于无为。无为而无不为。取天下常以无事；及其有事，不足以取天下。”
“为学日益，为道日损。 损之又损，以至于无为。 无为而无不为。 取天下常以无事；及其有事，不足以取天下。 ”儒墨二家起老氏之后，而各欲尽人力以救世乱。孔子以周灵王二十一年（前五五一）生于鲁昌平乡陬邑，年三十余，尝问礼于老聃，然祖述尧舜，欲以治世弊，道不行，则定《诗》《书》，订《礼》《乐》，序《易》，作《春秋》。既卒（敬王四十一年＝前四七九），门人又相与辑其言行而论纂之，谓之《论语》。墨子亦鲁人，名翟，盖后于孔子百三四十年（约威烈王一至十年生），而尚夏道，兼爱尚同，非古之礼乐，亦非儒，有书七十一篇，今存者作十五卷。然儒者崇实，墨家尚质，故《论语》《墨子》，其文辞皆略无华饰，取足达意而已。时又有杨朱，主“为我”，殆未尝著书，而其说亦盛行于战国之世。孟子名轲（前三七二生二八九卒）者，邹人，受学于子思，亦崇唐虞，说仁义，于杨墨则辞而辟之，著书七篇曰《孟子》。生当周季，渐有繁辞，而叙述则时特精妙，如墦间乞食一段，宋吴氏（《林下偶谈》）极推称之：
儒墨二家起老氏之后，而各欲尽人力以救世乱。 孔子以周灵王二十一年（前五五一）生于鲁昌平乡陬邑，年三十余，尝问礼于老聃，然祖述尧舜，欲以治世弊，道不行，则定《诗》《书》，订《礼》《乐》，序《易》，作《春秋》。 既卒（敬王四十一年＝前四七九），门人又相与辑其言行而论纂之，谓之《论语》。 墨子亦鲁人，名翟，盖后于孔子百三四十年（约威烈王一至十年生），而尚夏道，兼爱尚同，非古之礼乐，亦非儒，有书七十一篇，今存者作十五卷。 然儒者崇实，墨家尚质，故《论语》《墨子》，其文辞皆略无华饰，取足达意而已。 时又有杨朱，主“为我”，殆未尝著书，而其说亦盛行于战国之世。 孟子名轲（前三七二生二八九卒）者，邹人，受学于子思，亦崇唐虞，说仁义，于杨墨则辞而辟之，著书七篇曰《孟子》。 生当周季，渐有繁辞，而叙述则时特精妙，如墦间乞食一段，宋吴氏（《林下偶谈》）极推称之：“齐人有一妻一妾而处室者。其良人出，则必餍酒食而后反；其妻问所与饮食者，尽富贵也。其妻告其妾曰：良人出，则必餍酒食而后反，问其与饮食者，尽富贵也，而未尝有显者来，吾将瞰良人之所之也。蚤起，施从良人之所之。遍国中无与立谈者，卒之东郭墦间之祭者，乞其余，不足，又顾而之他。此其为餍足之道也。其妻归，告其妾曰：良人者，所仰望而终身也，今若此。与其妾讪其良人，而相泣于中庭。而良人未之知也，施施从外来，骄其妻妾。”
“齐人有一妻一妾而处室者。 其良人出，则必餍酒食而后反；其妻问所与饮食者，尽富贵也。 其妻告其妾曰：良人出，则必餍酒食而后反，问其与饮食者，尽富贵也，而未尝有显者来，吾将瞰良人之所之也。 蚤起，施从良人之所之。 遍国中无与立谈者，卒之东郭墦间之祭者，乞其余，不足，又顾而之他。 此其为餍足之道也。 其妻归，告其妾曰：良人者，所仰望而终身也，今若此。 与其妾讪其良人，而相泣于中庭。 而良人未之知也，施施从外来，骄其妻妾。 ”然文辞之美富者，实惟道家，《列子》《冠子》书晚出，皆后人伪作；今存者有《庄子》。庄子名周，宋之蒙人，盖稍后于孟子，尝为蒙漆园吏。著书十余万言，大抵寓言，人物土地，皆空言无事实，而其文则汪洋辟阖，仪态万方，晚周诸子之作，莫能先也。今存三十三篇，《内篇》七，《外篇》十五，《杂篇》十一；然《外篇》《杂篇》疑亦后人所加。于此略录《内篇》之文，以见大概：
然文辞之美富者，实惟道家，《列子》《冠子》书晚出，皆后人伪作；今存者有《庄子》。 庄子名周，宋之蒙人，盖稍后于孟子，尝为蒙漆园吏。 著书十余万言，大抵寓言，人物土地，皆空言无事实，而其文则汪洋辟阖，仪态万方，晚周诸子之作，莫能先也。 今存三十三篇，《内篇》七，《外篇》十五，《杂篇》十一；然《外篇》《杂篇》疑亦后人所加。 于此略录《内篇》之文，以见大概：“齧缺问乎王倪曰：子知物之所同是乎？曰：吾恶乎知之。子知子之所不知邪？曰：吾恶乎知之。然则物无知邪？曰：吾恶乎知之。虽然，尝试言之：庸讵知吾所谓知之非不知邪？庸讵知吾所谓不知之非知邪？且吾尝试问乎女：民湿寝则要疾偏死，然乎哉？木处则惴栗恂惧，猿猴然乎哉？三者孰知正处。……自我观之：仁义之端，是非之途，樊然淆乱。吾恶能知其辩。齧缺曰：子不知利害，则至人固不知利害乎？王倪曰：至人神矣，大泽焚而不能热，河汉冱而不能寒，疾雷破山，风振海而不能惊。若然者乘云气，骑日月，而游乎四海之外。死生无变于己，而况利害之端乎？”（《齐物论》第二）
“齧缺问乎王倪曰：子知物之所同是乎？曰：吾恶乎知之。 子知子之所不知邪？曰：吾恶乎知之。 然则物无知邪？曰：吾恶乎知之。 虽然，尝试言之：庸讵知吾所谓知之非不知邪？庸讵知吾所谓不知之非知邪？且吾尝试问乎女：民湿寝则要疾偏死，然乎哉？木处则惴栗恂惧，猿猴然乎哉？三者孰知正处。 …… 自我观之：仁义之端，是非之途，樊然淆乱。 吾恶能知其辩。 齧缺曰：子不知利害，则至人固不知利害乎？王倪曰：至人神矣，大泽焚而不能热，河汉冱而不能寒，疾雷破山，风振海而不能惊。 若然者乘云气，骑日月，而游乎四海之外。 死生无变于己，而况利害之端乎？”（《齐物论》第二）“泉涸，鱼相与处于陆，相呴以湿，相濡以沫，不如相忘于江湖。与其誉尧而非桀也，不如两忘而化其道。夫大块载我以形，劳我以生，佚我以老，息我以死，故善吾生者，乃所以善吾死也。”（《大宗师》第六）
“泉涸，鱼相与处于陆，相呴以湿，相濡以沫，不如相忘于江湖。 与其誉尧而非桀也，不如两忘而化其道。 夫大块载我以形，劳我以生，佚我以老，息我以死，故善吾生者，乃所以善吾死也。 ”（《大宗师》第六）“南海之帝为儵，北海之帝为忽，中央之帝为混沌。儵与忽时与相遇于混沌之地，混沌待之甚善。儵与忽谋报混沌之德，曰：人皆有七窍以视听食息，此独无有。尝试凿之。日凿一窍，七日而混沌死。”（《应帝王》第七）
“南海之帝为儵，北海之帝为忽，中央之帝为混沌。 儵与忽时与相遇于混沌之地，混沌待之甚善。 儵与忽谋报混沌之德，曰：人皆有七窍以视听食息，此独无有。 尝试凿之。 日凿一窍，七日而混沌死。 ”（《应帝王》第七）末有《天下》一篇（胡适谓非庄周作），则历评“天下之治方术者”，最推关尹老子，以为“古之博大真人”，而自述其文与意云：
末有《天下》一篇（胡适谓非庄周作），则历评“天下之治方术者”，最推关尹老子，以为“古之博大真人”，而自述其文与意云：“芴漠无形，变化无常。死与生与？天地并与？神明往与？芒乎何之，忽乎何适？万物毕罗，莫足以归。古之道术，有在于是者。庄周闻其风而悦之，以谬悠之说，荒唐之言，无端崖之辞，时纵恣而不傥，不以觭见之也。以天下为沉浊不可与庄语，以卮言为曼衍，以重言为真，以寓言为广。独与天地精神往来，而不敖倪于万物；不谴是非，以与世俗处。其书虽瑰玮，而连犿无伤也。其辞虽参差，而诡可观。彼其充实，不可以已。上与造物者游，而下与外死生无终始者为友。其于本也，弘大而辟，深闳而肆；其于宗也，可谓稠适而上遂矣。……”
“芴漠无形，变化无常。 死与生与？天地并与？神明往与？芒乎何之，忽乎何适？万物毕罗，莫足以归。 古之道术，有在于是者。 庄周闻其风而悦之，以谬悠之说，荒唐之言，无端崖之辞，时纵恣而不傥，不以觭见之也。 以天下为沉浊不可与庄语，以卮言为曼衍，以重言为真，以寓言为广。 独与天地精神往来，而不敖倪于万物；不谴是非，以与世俗处。 其书虽瑰玮，而连犿无伤也。 其辞虽参差，而诡可观。 彼其充实，不可以已。 上与造物者游，而下与外死生无终始者为友。 其于本也，弘大而辟，深闳而肆；其于宗也，可谓稠适而上遂矣。 ……”故自史迁以来，均谓周之要本，归于老子之言。然老子尚欲言有无，别修短，知白黑，而措意于天下；周则欲并有无修短白黑而一之，以大归于“混沌”，其“不谴是非”，“外死生”，“无终始”，胥此意也。中国出世之说，至此乃始圆备。
故自史迁以来，均谓周之要本，归于老子之言。 然老子尚欲言有无，别修短，知白黑，而措意于天下；周则欲并有无修短白黑而一之，以大归于“混沌”，其“不谴是非”，“外死生”，“无终始”，胥此意也。 中国出世之说，至此乃始圆备。察周季之思潮，略有四派。一邹鲁派，皆诵法先王，标榜仁义，以备世之急，儒有孔孟，墨有墨翟。二陈宋派，老子生于苦县，本陈地也，言清净之治，迨庄周生于宋，则且以“天下为沉浊不可与庄语”，自无为而入于虚无。三曰郑卫派，郑有邓析申不害，卫有公孙鞅，赵有慎到公孙龙，韩有韩非，皆言名法。四曰燕齐派，则多作空疏迂怪之谈，齐之驺衍，驺奭，田骈，接子等，皆其卓者，亦秦汉方士所从出也。
察周季之思潮，略有四派。 一邹鲁派，皆诵法先王，标榜仁义，以备世之急，儒有孔孟，墨有墨翟。 二陈宋派，老子生于苦县，本陈地也，言清净之治，迨庄周生于宋，则且以“天下为沉浊不可与庄语”，自无为而入于虚无。 三曰郑卫派，郑有邓析申不害，卫有公孙鞅，赵有慎到公孙龙，韩有韩非，皆言名法。 四曰燕齐派，则多作空疏迂怪之谈，齐之驺衍，驺奭，田骈，接子等，皆其卓者，亦秦汉方士所从出也。
参考书：
Reference book:《老子》（晋王弼注）
"Lao Tzu" (annotated by Jin Wang Bi)《庄子》（晋郭象注）
"Zhuangzi" (Jin Guo Xiang Note)《史记》（《孔子世家》，孟、老、庄列传等）
"Historical Records" ("Confucius Family", Biography of Meng, Lao, Zhuang, etc.)《汉书》（《艺文志》）
"Book of Han" ("Art and Literature")《子略》（宋高似孙）
"Zi Lue" (Song Gao Ru Sun)《支那文学史纲》（日本儿岛献吉郎）第二篇第六章
"Outline of the History of Chinese Literature" (Kojima Keiyoshiro, Japan) Chapter 2, Chapter 6《中国大文学史》（谢无量）卷二第七章
"History of Chinese Literature" (Xie Wuliang) Volume 2, Chapter 7《中国哲学史大纲》（胡适）上卷
"Outline of the History of Chinese Philosophy" (Hu Shi), Volume I

第四篇　屈原及宋玉

第四篇　屈原及宋玉

第四篇　屈原及宋玉

Chapter 4 Qu Yuan and Song Yu

第四篇　屈原及宋玉

战国之世，言道术既有庄周之蔑诗礼，贵虚无，尤以文辞，陵轹诸子。在韵言则有屈原起于楚，被谗放逐，乃作《离骚》。逸响伟辞，卓绝一世。后人惊其文采，相率仿效，以原楚产，故称“楚辞”。较之于《诗》，则其言甚长，其思甚幻，其文甚丽，其旨甚明，凭心而言，不遵矩度。故后儒之服膺诗教者，或訾而绌之，然其影响于后来之文章，乃甚或在三百篇以上。
战国之世，言道术既有庄周之蔑诗礼，贵虚无，尤以文辞，陵轹诸子。 在韵言则有屈原起于楚，被谗放逐，乃作《离骚》。 逸响伟辞，卓绝一世。 后人惊其文采，相率仿效，以原楚产，故称“楚辞”。 较之于《诗》，则其言甚长，其思甚幻，其文甚丽，其旨甚明，凭心而言，不遵矩度。 故后儒之服膺诗教者，或訾而绌之，然其影响于后来之文章，乃甚或在三百篇以上。屈原，名平，楚同姓也，事怀王为左徒，博闻强志，明于治乱，娴于辞令，王令原草宪令，上官大夫欲夺其稿，不得，谗之于王，王怒而疏屈原。原彷徨山泽，见先王之庙及公卿祠堂，图画天地山川神灵，琦玮僪佹，及古贤圣怪物行事。因书其壁，呵而问之，以抒愤懑，曰《天问》。辞句大率四言；以所图故事，今多失传，故往往难得其解：
屈原，名平，楚同姓也，事怀王为左徒，博闻强志，明于治乱，娴于辞令，王令原草宪令，上官大夫欲夺其稿，不得，谗之于王，王怒而疏屈原。 原彷徨山泽，见先王之庙及公卿祠堂，图画天地山川神灵，琦玮僪佹，及古贤圣怪物行事。 因书其壁，呵而问之，以抒愤懑，曰《天问》。 辞句大率四言；以所图故事，今多失传，故往往难得其解：“……雄虺九首，儵忽焉在？何所不死，长人何守？靡萍九衢，枲华安居？一蛇吞象，厥大何如？黑水玄趾，三危安在？延年不死，寿何所止？鲮鱼何所，鬿堆焉处？羿焉日，乌焉解羽？……”
“…… 雄虺九首，儵忽焉在？何所不死，长人何守？靡萍九衢，枲华安居？一蛇吞象，厥大何如？黑水玄趾，三危安在？延年不死，寿何所止？鲮鱼何所，鬿堆焉处？羿焉日，乌焉解羽？……”“……中央共牧后何怒？蜂蚁微命力何固？惊女采薇鹿何祜？北至回水萃何喜？兄有噬犬弟何欲，易之以百两卒无禄？……”
“…… 中央共牧后何怒？蜂蚁微命力何固？惊女采薇鹿何祜？北至回水萃何喜？兄有噬犬弟何欲，易之以百两卒无禄？……”后盖又召还，尝欲联齐拒秦，不见用。怀王与秦婚，子兰劝王入秦，屈原止之，不听，卒为秦所留。长子顷襄王立，子兰为令尹，亦谗屈原，王怒而迁之。原在湘沅之间九年，行吟泽畔，颜色憔悴，作《离骚》，终怀石自投汨罗以死，时盖顷襄王十四五年（前二八五或六）也。
后盖又召还，尝欲联齐拒秦，不见用。 怀王与秦婚，子兰劝王入秦，屈原止之，不听，卒为秦所留。 长子顷襄王立，子兰为令尹，亦谗屈原，王怒而迁之。 原在湘沅之间九年，行吟泽畔，颜色憔悴，作《离骚》，终怀石自投汨罗以死，时盖顷襄王十四五年（前二八五或六）也。《离骚》者，司马迁以为“离忧”，班固以为“遭忧”，王逸释以离别之愁思，扬雄则解为“牢骚”，故作《反离骚》，又作《畔牢愁》矣。其辞述己之始生，以至壮大，迄于将终，虽怀内美，重以修能，正道直行，而罹谗贼，于是放言遐想，称古帝，怀神山，呼龙虬，思佚女，申纾其心，自明无罪，因以讽谏。其文几二千言，中有云：
《离骚》者，司马迁以为“离忧”，班固以为“遭忧”，王逸释以离别之愁思，扬雄则解为“牢骚”，故作《反离骚》，又作《畔牢愁》矣。 其辞述己之始生，以至壮大，迄于将终，虽怀内美，重以修能，正道直行，而罹谗贼，于是放言遐想，称古帝，怀神山，呼龙虬，思佚女，申纾其心，自明无罪，因以讽谏。 其文几二千言，中有云：“……跪敷衽以陈辞兮，耿吾既得此中正。驷玉虬以乘鷖兮，埃风余上征。朝发轫于苍梧兮，夕余至乎县圃，欲少留此灵琐兮，日忽忽其将暮。吾令羲和弭节兮，望崦嵫而勿迫，路曼曼其修远兮，吾将上下而求索。饮余马于咸池兮，总余辔乎扶桑，折若木以拂日兮，聊逍遥以相羊。……览相观于四极兮，周流乎天余乃下，望瑶台之偃蹇兮，见有娀之佚女。吾令鸩为媒兮，鸩告余以不好；雄鸠之鸣逝兮，余犹恶其佻巧。……理弱而媒拙兮，恐导言之不固；时混浊而嫉贤兮，好蔽美而称恶。闺中既以邃远兮，哲王又不寤。怀朕情而不发兮，余焉能忍与此终古！……”
“…… 跪敷衽以陈辞兮，耿吾既得此中正。 驷玉虬以乘鷖兮，埃风余上征。 朝发轫于苍梧兮，夕余至乎县圃，欲少留此灵琐兮，日忽忽其将暮。 吾令羲和弭节兮，望崦嵫而勿迫，路曼曼其修远兮，吾将上下而求索。 饮余马于咸池兮，总余辔乎扶桑，折若木以拂日兮，聊逍遥以相羊。 …… 览相观于四极兮，周流乎天余乃下，望瑶台之偃蹇兮，见有娀之佚女。 吾令鸩为媒兮，鸩告余以不好；雄鸠之鸣逝兮，余犹恶其佻巧。 …… 理弱而媒拙兮，恐导言之不固；时混浊而嫉贤兮，好蔽美而称恶。 闺中既以邃远兮，哲王又不寤。 怀朕情而不发兮，余焉能忍与此终古！……”次述占于灵氛，问于巫咸，无不劝其远游，毋怀故宇，于是驰神纵意，将翱将翔，而睠怀宗国，终又宁死而不忍去也：
次述占于灵氛，问于巫咸，无不劝其远游，毋怀故宇，于是驰神纵意，将翱将翔，而睠怀宗国，终又宁死而不忍去也：“……抑志而弭节兮，神高驰之邈邈；奏《九歌》而舞《韶》兮，聊假日以媮乐。陟升皇之赫戏兮，忽临睨夫旧乡；仆夫悲余马怀兮，蜷局顾而不行。乱曰：已矣哉！国无人，莫我知兮，又何怀乎故都？既莫足与为美政兮，吾将从彭咸之所居！”
“…… 抑志而弭节兮，神高驰之邈邈；奏《九歌》而舞《韶》兮，聊假日以媮乐。 陟升皇之赫戏兮，忽临睨夫旧乡；仆夫悲余马怀兮，蜷局顾而不行。 乱曰：已矣哉！国无人，莫我知兮，又何怀乎故都？既莫足与为美政兮，吾将从彭咸之所居！”今所传《楚辞》中有《九章》九篇，亦屈原作。又有《卜居》，《渔父》，述屈原既放，与卜者及渔人问答之辞，亦云自制，然或后人取故事仿作之，而其设为问难，履韵偶句之法，则颇为词人则效，近如宋玉之《风赋》，远如相如之《子虚》，《上林》，班固之《两都》皆是也。
今所传《楚辞》中有《九章》九篇，亦屈原作。 又有《卜居》，《渔父》，述屈原既放，与卜者及渔人问答之辞，亦云自制，然或后人取故事仿作之，而其设为问难，履韵偶句之法，则颇为词人则效，近如宋玉之《风赋》，远如相如之《子虚》，《上林》，班固之《两都》皆是也。《离骚》之出，其沾溉文林，既极广远，评之语，遂亦纷繁，扬之者谓可与日月争光，抑之者且不许与狂狷比迹，盖一则达观于文章，一乃局蹐于诗教，故其裁决，区以别矣。实则《离骚》之异于《诗》者，特在形式藻采之间耳。时与俗异，故声调不同；地异，故山川神灵动植皆不同；惟欲婚简狄，留二姚，或为北方人民所不敢道，若其怨愤责数之言，则三百篇中之甚于此者多矣。楚虽蛮夷，久为大国，春秋之世，已能赋诗，风雅之教，宁所未习？幸其固有文化，尚未沦亡，交错为文，遂生壮采。刘勰取其言辞，校之经典，谓有异有同，固雅颂之博徒，实战国之风雅，“虽取熔经义，亦自铸伟辞。……故能气往轹古，辞来切今，惊采绝艳，难与并能。”（《文心雕龙》《辨骚》）可谓知言者已。
《离骚》之出，其沾溉文林，既极广远，评之语，遂亦纷繁，扬之者谓可与日月争光，抑之者且不许与狂狷比迹，盖一则达观于文章，一乃局蹐于诗教，故其裁决，区以别矣。 实则《离骚》之异于《诗》者，特在形式藻采之间耳。 时与俗异，故声调不同；地异，故山川神灵动植皆不同；惟欲婚简狄，留二姚，或为北方人民所不敢道，若其怨愤责数之言，则三百篇中之甚于此者多矣。 楚虽蛮夷，久为大国，春秋之世，已能赋诗，风雅之教，宁所未习？幸其固有文化，尚未沦亡，交错为文，遂生壮采。 刘勰取其言辞，校之经典，谓有异有同，固雅颂之博徒，实战国之风雅，“虽取熔经义，亦自铸伟辞。 …… 故能气往轹古，辞来切今，惊采绝艳，难与并能。 ”（《文心雕龙》《辨骚》）可谓知言者已。形式文采之所以异者，由二因缘，曰时与地。古者交接邻国，揖让之际，盖必诵诗，故孔子曰：“不学《诗》，无以言。”周室既衰，聘问歌咏，不行于列国，而游说之风寖盛，纵横之士，欲以唇吻奏功，遂竞为美辞，以动人主。如屈原同时有苏秦者，其说赵司寇李兑也，曰：“雒阳乘轩里苏秦，家贫亲老，无罢车驽马，桑轮蓬箧，赢幐担囊，触尘埃，蒙霜露，越漳、河，足重茧，日百而舍，造外阙，愿造于前，口道天下之事。”（《赵策》一）自叙其来，华饰至此，则辩说之际，可以推知。余波流衍，渐及文苑，繁辞华句，固已非《诗》之朴质之体式所能载矣。况《离骚》产地，与《诗》不同，彼有河渭，此则沅湘，彼惟朴樕，此则兰茝；又重巫，浩歌曼舞，足以乐神，盛造歌辞，用于祀祭。《楚辞》中有《九歌》，谓“楚南郢之邑，沅湘之间，其俗信鬼而好祀，……屈原放逐，……愁思怫郁，出见俗人祭祀之礼，歌舞之乐，其词鄙俚，因为作《九歌》之曲”。而绮靡杳渺，与原他文颇不同，虽曰“为作”，固当有本。俗歌俚句，非不可沾溉词人，句不拘于四言，圣不限于尧舜，盖荆楚之常习，其所由来者远矣。今略录其《湘夫人》：
形式文采之所以异者，由二因缘，曰时与地。 古者交接邻国，揖让之际，盖必诵诗，故孔子曰：“不学《诗》，无以言。 ”周室既衰，聘问歌咏，不行于列国，而游说之风寖盛，纵横之士，欲以唇吻奏功，遂竞为美辞，以动人主。 如屈原同时有苏秦者，其说赵司寇李兑也，曰：“雒阳乘轩里苏秦，家贫亲老，无罢车驽马，桑轮蓬箧，赢幐担囊，触尘埃，蒙霜露，越漳、河，足重茧，日百而舍，造外阙，愿造于前，口道天下之事。 ”（《赵策》一）自叙其来，华饰至此，则辩说之际，可以推知。 余波流衍，渐及文苑，繁辞华句，固已非《诗》之朴质之体式所能载矣。 况《离骚》产地，与《诗》不同，彼有河渭，此则沅湘，彼惟朴樕，此则兰茝；又重巫，浩歌曼舞，足以乐神，盛造歌辞，用于祀祭。 《楚辞》中有《九歌》，谓“楚南郢之邑，沅湘之间，其俗信鬼而好祀，…… 屈原放逐，…… 愁思怫郁，出见俗人祭祀之礼，歌舞之乐，其词鄙俚，因为作《九歌》之曲”。 而绮靡杳渺，与原他文颇不同，虽曰“为作”，固当有本。 俗歌俚句，非不可沾溉词人，句不拘于四言，圣不限于尧舜，盖荆楚之常习，其所由来者远矣。 今略录其《湘夫人》：“帝子降兮北渚，目眇眇兮愁余。袅袅兮秋风，洞庭波兮木叶下。登白苹兮骋望，与佳期兮夕张。鸟何萃兮苹中，罾何为兮木上？沅有芷兮澧有兰，思公子兮未敢言；慌惚兮远望，观流水兮潺湲。麋何食兮庭中，蛟何为兮水裔？朝驰余马兮江皋，夕济兮西澨。闻佳人兮召予，将腾驾兮偕逝。筑室兮水中，葺之以荷盖。荪壁兮紫坛，播芳椒兮盈堂，桂栋兮兰橑，辛夷楣兮药房。……芷葺兮荷盖，缭之兮杜衡，合百草兮实庭，建芳馨兮庑门。九疑缤兮并迎，灵之来兮如云。捐余袂兮江中，遗余褋兮澧浦，搴汀洲兮杜若，将以遗兮远者。时不可兮骤得，聊逍遥兮容与。”
“帝子降兮北渚，目眇眇兮愁余。 袅袅兮秋风，洞庭波兮木叶下。 登白苹兮骋望，与佳期兮夕张。 鸟何萃兮苹中，罾何为兮木上？沅有芷兮澧有兰，思公子兮未敢言；慌惚兮远望，观流水兮潺湲。 麋何食兮庭中，蛟何为兮水裔？朝驰余马兮江皋，夕济兮西澨。 闻佳人兮召予，将腾驾兮偕逝。 筑室兮水中，葺之以荷盖。 荪壁兮紫坛，播芳椒兮盈堂，桂栋兮兰橑，辛夷楣兮药房。 …… 芷葺兮荷盖，缭之兮杜衡，合百草兮实庭，建芳馨兮庑门。 九疑缤兮并迎，灵之来兮如云。 捐余袂兮江中，遗余褋兮澧浦，搴汀洲兮杜若，将以遗兮远者。 时不可兮骤得，聊逍遥兮容与。 ”同时有儒者赵人荀况（约前三一五至二三〇），年五十始游学于齐，三为祭酒；已而被谗适楚，春申君以为兰陵令。亦作赋，《汉书》云十篇，今有五篇在《荀子》中，曰《礼》，曰《知》，曰《云》，曰《蚕》，曰《箴》，臣以隐语设问，而王以隐语解之，文亦朴质，概为四言，与楚声不类。又有《佹诗》，实亦赋，言天下不治之意，即以遗春申君者，则词甚切激，殆不下于屈原，岂身临楚邦，居移其气，终亦生牢愁之思乎？
同时有儒者赵人荀况（约前三一五至二三〇），年五十始游学于齐，三为祭酒；已而被谗适楚，春申君以为兰陵令。 亦作赋，《汉书》云十篇，今有五篇在《荀子》中，曰《礼》，曰《知》，曰《云》，曰《蚕》，曰《箴》，臣以隐语设问，而王以隐语解之，文亦朴质，概为四言，与楚声不类。 又有《佹诗》，实亦赋，言天下不治之意，即以遗春申君者，则词甚切激，殆不下于屈原，岂身临楚邦，居移其气，终亦生牢愁之思乎？“天下不治，请陈佹诗：天地易位，四时易乡。列星殒坠，旦暮晦盲。……仁人绌约，敖暴擅强。天下幽险，恐失世英。螭龙为蝘蜓，鸱枭为凤凰。比干见刳，孔子拘匡。昭昭乎其知之明也，郁郁乎其遇时之不祥也。……圣人共手，时几将矣，与愚以疑，愿闻反辞。其小歌曰：念彼远方，何其塞矣。仁人绌约，暴人衍矣。忠臣危殆，谗人般矣。璇玉瑶珠，不知佩也。杂布与锦，不知异也。……以盲为明；以聋为聪；以危为安；以吉为凶。呜呼上天，曷维其同！”
“天下不治，请陈佹诗：天地易位，四时易乡。 列星殒坠，旦暮晦盲。 …… 仁人绌约，敖暴擅强。 天下幽险，恐失世英。 螭龙为蝘蜓，鸱枭为凤凰。 比干见刳，孔子拘匡。 昭昭乎其知之明也，郁郁乎其遇时之不祥也。 …… 圣人共手，时几将矣，与愚以疑，愿闻反辞。 其小歌曰：念彼远方，何其塞矣。 仁人绌约，暴人衍矣。 忠臣危殆，谗人般矣。 璇玉瑶珠，不知佩也。 杂布与锦，不知异也。 …… 以盲为明；以聋为聪；以危为安；以吉为凶。 呜呼上天，曷维其同！”稍后，楚又有宋玉唐勒景差之徒，皆好辞，而以赋见称。然虽学屈原之文辞，终莫敢直谏，盖掇其哀愁，猎其华艳，而“九死未悔”之概失矣。宋玉者，王逸以为屈原弟子；事怀王之子襄王，为大夫，然不得志。所作本十六篇，今存十一篇，殆多后人拟作，可信者有《九辩》。《九辩》本古辞，玉取其名，创为新制，虽驰神逞想，不如《离骚》，而凄怨之情，实为独绝。如：
稍后，楚又有宋玉唐勒景差之徒，皆好辞，而以赋见称。 然虽学屈原之文辞，终莫敢直谏，盖掇其哀愁，猎其华艳，而“九死未悔”之概失矣。 宋玉者，王逸以为屈原弟子；事怀王之子襄王，为大夫，然不得志。 所作本十六篇，今存十一篇，殆多后人拟作，可信者有《九辩》。 《九辩》本古辞，玉取其名，创为新制，虽驰神逞想，不如《离骚》，而凄怨之情，实为独绝。 如：“皇天平分四时兮，窃独悲此凛秋。白露既下降百草兮，奄离披此梧楸。去白日之昭昭兮，袭长夜之悠悠。离芳蔼之方壮兮，余萎约而悲愁。秋既先戒以白露兮，冬又申之以严霜。……岁忽忽而遒尽兮，恐余寿之弗将。悼余生之不时兮，逢此世之俇攘。澹容与而独倚兮，蟋蟀鸣此西堂。心怵惕而震荡兮，何所忧之多方？卬明月而太息兮，步列星而极明。”
“皇天平分四时兮，窃独悲此凛秋。 白露既下降百草兮，奄离披此梧楸。 去白日之昭昭兮，袭长夜之悠悠。 离芳蔼之方壮兮，余萎约而悲愁。 秋既先戒以白露兮，冬又申之以严霜。 …… 岁忽忽而遒尽兮，恐余寿之弗将。 悼余生之不时兮，逢此世之俇攘。 澹容与而独倚兮，蟋蟀鸣此西堂。 心怵惕而震荡兮，何所忧之多方？卬明月而太息兮，步列星而极明。 ”又有《招魂》一篇，外陈四方之恶，内崇楚国之美，欲召魂魄，来归修门。司马迁以为屈原作，然辞气殊不类。其文华靡，长于敷陈，言险难则天地间皆不可居，述逸乐则饮食声色必极其致，后人作赋，颇学其夸。句末俱用“些”字，亦为创格，宋沈存中云，“今夔峡湖湘及南北江獠人，凡禁咒句尾皆称些，乃楚人旧俗”也。
又有《招魂》一篇，外陈四方之恶，内崇楚国之美，欲召魂魄，来归修门。 司马迁以为屈原作，然辞气殊不类。 其文华靡，长于敷陈，言险难则天地间皆不可居，述逸乐则饮食声色必极其致，后人作赋，颇学其夸。 句末俱用“些”字，亦为创格，宋沈存中云，“今夔峡湖湘及南北江獠人，凡禁咒句尾皆称些，乃楚人旧俗”也。“……魂兮归来，南方不可以止些。雕题黑齿，得人肉以祀，以其骨为醢些。蝮蛇蓁蓁，封狐千里些。雄虺九首，往来儵忽，吞人以益其心些。魂兮归来，不可以久淫些。……魂兮归来，君无上天些。虎豹九关，啄害下人些。一夫九首，拔木九千些。犲狼从目，往来侁侁些。悬人以娭，投之深渊些。致命于帝，然后得瞑些。归来归来，往恐危身些。……魂兮归来，入修门些。……室家遂宗，食多方些。稻粢穱麦，挐黄粱些。大苦醎酸，辛甘行些。肥牛之腱，臑若芳些。和酸若苦，陈吴羹些。胹鳖炮羔，有柘浆些。……肴羞未通，女乐罗些。敶锺按鼓，造新歌些。涉江采菱，发扬荷些。美人既醉，朱颜酡些。娭光眇视，目曾波些。被文服纤，丽而不奇些。长发曼鬋，艳陆离些。……”
“…… 魂兮归来，南方不可以止些。 雕题黑齿，得人肉以祀，以其骨为醢些。 蝮蛇蓁蓁，封狐千里些。 雄虺九首，往来儵忽，吞人以益其心些。 魂兮归来，不可以久淫些。 …… 魂兮归来，君无上天些。 虎豹九关，啄害下人些。 一夫九首，拔木九千些。 犲狼从目，往来侁侁些。 悬人以娭，投之深渊些。 致命于帝，然后得瞑些。 归来归来，往恐危身些。 …… 魂兮归来，入修门些。 …… 室家遂宗，食多方些。 稻粢穱麦，挐黄粱些。 大苦醎酸，辛甘行些。 肥牛之腱，臑若芳些。 和酸若苦，陈吴羹些。 胹鳖炮羔，有柘浆些。 …… 肴羞未通，女乐罗些。 敶锺按鼓，造新歌些。 涉江采菱，发扬荷些。 美人既醉，朱颜酡些。 娭光眇视，目曾波些。 被文服纤，丽而不奇些。 长发曼鬋，艳陆离些。 ……”其称为赋者则九篇，（《文选》四篇；《古文苑》六篇，然《舞赋》实傅毅作）大率言玉与唐勒景差同侍楚王，即事兴情，因而成赋，然文辞繁缛填委，时涉神仙，与玉之《九辩》《招魂》及当时情景颇违异，疑亦犹屈原之《卜居》《渔父》，皆后人依托为之。又有《对楚王问》，（见《文选》及《说苑》）自辩所以不见誉于士民众庶之故，先征歌曲，次引鲸凤，以明俗士之不能知圣人。其辞甚繁，殆如游说之士所谈辩，或亦依托也。然与赋当并出汉初。刘勰谓赋萌于《骚》，荀卿宋玉，乃锡专名，与诗划境，蔚成大国；又谓“宋玉含才，始造‘对问’”，于是枚乘《七发》，扬雄《连珠》，抒愤之文，郁然盛起。然则《骚》者，固亦受三百篇之泽，而特由其时游说之风而恢宏，因荆楚之俗而奇伟；赋与对问，又其长流之漫于后代者也。
其称为赋者则九篇，（《文选》四篇；《古文苑》六篇，然《舞赋》实傅毅作）大率言玉与唐勒景差同侍楚王，即事兴情，因而成赋，然文辞繁缛填委，时涉神仙，与玉之《九辩》《招魂》及当时情景颇违异，疑亦犹屈原之《卜居》《渔父》，皆后人依托为之。 又有《对楚王问》，（见《文选》及《说苑》）自辩所以不见誉于士民众庶之故，先征歌曲，次引鲸凤，以明俗士之不能知圣人。 其辞甚繁，殆如游说之士所谈辩，或亦依托也。 然与赋当并出汉初。 刘勰谓赋萌于《骚》，荀卿宋玉，乃锡专名，与诗划境，蔚成大国；又谓“宋玉含才，始造‘对问’”，于是枚乘《七发》，扬雄《连珠》，抒愤之文，郁然盛起。 然则《骚》者，固亦受三百篇之泽，而特由其时游说之风而恢宏，因荆楚之俗而奇伟；赋与对问，又其长流之漫于后代者也。唐勒景差之文，今所传尤少。《楚辞》中有《大招》，欲效《招魂》而甚不逮，王逸云，“屈原之所作也；或曰景差。”审其文辞，谓差为近。
唐勒景差之文，今所传尤少。 《楚辞》中有《大招》，欲效《招魂》而甚不逮，王逸云，“屈原之所作也；或曰景差。 ”审其文辞，谓差为近。
参考书：
Reference book:《楚辞集注》（宋朱熹）
《楚辞集注》（宋朱熹）《荀子》卷十八
《荀子》卷十八《史记》卷八十四《屈原贾生列传》
"Historical Records" Volume 84 "Biography of Qu Yuan Jia Sheng"《文心雕龙讲疏》（范文澜）卷一《辨骚》，卷二《诠赋》，卷三《杂文》
"Wenxin Carving Dragon Lectures" (Fan Wenlan) Volume 1 "Distinguishing Sao", Volume 2 "Interpretation Fu", Volume 3 "Miscellaneous Essays"《支那文学之研究》（日本铃木虎雄）卷一
"Research on Chinese Literature" (Torao Suzuki, Japan) Volume 1《骚赋之生成》
"The Generation of Sao Fu"《楚辞新论》（谢无量）
"New Theory of Chuci" (Xie Wuliang)《楚辞概论》（游国恩）
"Introduction to Chuci" (You Guoen)

第五篇　李斯

第五篇　李斯

第五篇　李斯

Chapter 5 Li Si

第五篇　李斯

秦始皇帝即位之初，相国吕不韦以列国常下士喜宾客，且多辩士，如荀况之徒，著书布天下，乃亦厚养士，使人人著其所知，集以为书，凡二十余万言，号曰《吕氏春秋》，布咸阳市门，延诸侯游士宾客，有能增损一字者予千金。始皇既壮，绌不韦；又渐并兼列国，虽亦召文学，置博士，而终则焚烧《诗》《书》，杀诸生甚众，重任丞相李斯，以法术为治。
秦始皇帝即位之初，相国吕不韦以列国常下士喜宾客，且多辩士，如荀况之徒，著书布天下，乃亦厚养士，使人人著其所知，集以为书，凡二十余万言，号曰《吕氏春秋》，布咸阳市门，延诸侯游士宾客，有能增损一字者予千金。 始皇既壮，绌不韦；又渐并兼列国，虽亦召文学，置博士，而终则焚烧《诗》《书》，杀诸生甚众，重任丞相李斯，以法术为治。李斯，楚上蔡人，少与韩非俱从荀况学帝王之术，成而入秦，为吕不韦舍人，说始皇，拜为长史，渐进至左丞相，二世二年（前二〇八）宦者赵高诬以谋反，杀之，具五刑，夷三族。斯虽出荀卿之门，而不师儒者之道，治尚严急，然于文字，则有殊勋，六国之时，文字异形，斯乃立意，罢其不与秦文合者，画一书体，作《仓颉》七章，与古文颇不同，后称秦篆；又始造隶书，盖起于官狱多事，苟趋简易，施之于徒隶也。法家大抵少文采，惟李斯奏议，尚有华辞，如上书《谏逐客》云：
李斯，楚上蔡人，少与韩非俱从荀况学帝王之术，成而入秦，为吕不韦舍人，说始皇，拜为长史，渐进至左丞相，二世二年（前二〇八）宦者赵高诬以谋反，杀之，具五刑，夷三族。 斯虽出荀卿之门，而不师儒者之道，治尚严急，然于文字，则有殊勋，六国之时，文字异形，斯乃立意，罢其不与秦文合者，画一书体，作《仓颉》七章，与古文颇不同，后称秦篆；又始造隶书，盖起于官狱多事，苟趋简易，施之于徒隶也。 法家大抵少文采，惟李斯奏议，尚有华辞，如上书《谏逐客》云：“……必秦国所生然后可，则是夜光之璧，不饰朝廷；犀象之器，不为玩好；郑卫之女，不充后宫；而骏良，不实外厩；江南金锡不为用，西蜀丹青不为采。……夫击瓮叩缻，弹筝搏髀，而歌呼呜呜快耳目者，真秦之声也。郑卫桑间，《昭虞》《武象》者，异国之乐也。今弃击瓮叩缻而就郑卫，退弹筝而取《昭虞》。若是者，何也？快意当前，适观而已矣。今取人则不然：不问可否，不论曲直，非秦者去，为客者逐。然则是所重者在乎色乐珠玉，而所轻者在乎人民也。此非所以跨海内，制诸侯之术也。……”
“…… 必秦国所生然后可，则是夜光之璧，不饰朝廷；犀象之器，不为玩好；郑卫之女，不充后宫；而骏良，不实外厩；江南金锡不为用，西蜀丹青不为采。 …… 夫击瓮叩缻，弹筝搏髀，而歌呼呜呜快耳目者，真秦之声也。 郑卫桑间，《昭虞》《武象》者，异国之乐也。 今弃击瓮叩缻而就郑卫，退弹筝而取《昭虞》。 若是者，何也？快意当前，适观而已矣。 今取人则不然：不问可否，不论曲直，非秦者去，为客者逐。 然则是所重者在乎色乐珠玉，而所轻者在乎人民也。 此非所以跨海内，制诸侯之术也。 ……”二十八年，始皇始东巡郡县，群臣乃相与诵其功德，刻于金石，以垂后世。其辞亦李斯所为，今尚有流传，质而能壮，实汉晋碑铭所从出也。如《泰山刻石文》：
二十八年，始皇始东巡郡县，群臣乃相与诵其功德，刻于金石，以垂后世。 其辞亦李斯所为，今尚有流传，质而能壮，实汉晋碑铭所从出也。 如《泰山刻石文》：“皇帝临位，作制明法，臣下修饬。二十六年，初并天下，罔不宾服。亲巡天下黎民，登兹泰山，周览东极。从臣思迹，本原事业，祗诵功德。治道运行，诸产得宜，皆有法式。大义休明，垂于后世，顺承勿革。皇帝躬圣，既平天下，不懈于治。……昭隔内外，靡不清净，施于后嗣。化及无穷，遵奉遗诏，永承重戒。”
“皇帝临位，作制明法，臣下修饬。 二十六年，初并天下，罔不宾服。 亲巡天下黎民，登兹泰山，周览东极。 从臣思迹，本原事业，祗诵功德。 治道运行，诸产得宜，皆有法式。 大义休明，垂于后世，顺承勿革。 皇帝躬圣，既平天下，不懈于治。 …… 昭隔内外，靡不清净，施于后嗣。 化及无穷，遵奉遗诏，永承重戒。 ”三十六年，东郡民刻陨石以诅始皇，案问不服，尽诛石旁居人。始皇终不乐，乃使博士作《仙真人诗》；及行所游天下，传令乐人歌弦之。其诗盖后世游仙诗之祖，然不传。《汉书》《艺文志》著秦时杂赋九篇；《礼乐志》云周有《房中乐》，至秦名曰《寿人》，今亦俱佚。故由现存者而言，秦之文章，李斯一人而已。
三十六年，东郡民刻陨石以诅始皇，案问不服，尽诛石旁居人。 始皇终不乐，乃使博士作《仙真人诗》；及行所游天下，传令乐人歌弦之。 其诗盖后世游仙诗之祖，然不传。 《汉书》《艺文志》著秦时杂赋九篇；《礼乐志》云周有《房中乐》，至秦名曰《寿人》，今亦俱佚。 故由现存者而言，秦之文章，李斯一人而已。
参考书：
Reference book:《史记》卷六《秦始皇帝本纪》，卷八十五《吕不韦》，八十七《李斯列传》
"Historical Records", Volume 6, "The Chronicles of Qin Shi Huang", Volume 85 "Lü Buwei", 87 "Biography of Li Si"《全秦文》（清严可均辑）
"All Qin Literature" (Qing Yan can be uniformly compiled)《中国大文学史》（谢无量）第二编第八章
"History of Chinese Literature" (Xie Wuliang), Chapter 8 of the second volume

第六篇　汉宫之楚声

第六篇　汉宫之楚声

第六篇　汉宫之楚声

Chapter 6 The Chu Sound of the Han Palace

第六篇　汉宫之楚声

秦既焚烧《诗》《书》，坑诸生于咸阳，儒者乃往往伏匿民间，或则委身于敌以舒愤怨。故陈涉起匹夫，旬月王楚，而鲁诸儒持孔氏之礼器归之；孔甲则为涉博士，与俱败死。汉兴，高祖亦不乐儒术，其佐又多刀笔之吏，惟郦食其，陆贾，叔孙通文雅，有博士余风。然其厕足汉廷，亦非尽因文术，陆贾虽称说《诗》《书》，顾特以辩才见赏，郦生固自命儒者，而高祖实以说客视之；至叔孙通，则正以曲学阿世取容，非重其能定朝仪，知典礼也。即位之后，过鲁，虽曾以中牢祀孔子，盖亦英雄欺人，将借此收揽人心，俾知一反秦之所为而已。高祖崩，儒者亦不见用，《汉书》《儒林传》云：“孝惠高后时，公卿皆武力功臣。孝文本好刑名之言。及至孝景，不任儒；窦太后又好黄老术，故诸博士具官待问，未有进者。”
秦既焚烧《诗》《书》，坑诸生于咸阳，儒者乃往往伏匿民间，或则委身于敌以舒愤怨。 故陈涉起匹夫，旬月王楚，而鲁诸儒持孔氏之礼器归之；孔甲则为涉博士，与俱败死。 汉兴，高祖亦不乐儒术，其佐又多刀笔之吏，惟郦食其，陆贾，叔孙通文雅，有博士余风。 然其厕足汉廷，亦非尽因文术，陆贾虽称说《诗》《书》，顾特以辩才见赏，郦生固自命儒者，而高祖实以说客视之；至叔孙通，则正以曲学阿世取容，非重其能定朝仪，知典礼也。 即位之后，过鲁，虽曾以中牢祀孔子，盖亦英雄欺人，将借此收揽人心，俾知一反秦之所为而已。 高祖崩，儒者亦不见用，《汉书》《儒林传》云：“孝惠高后时，公卿皆武力功臣。 孝文本好刑名之言。 及至孝景，不任儒；窦太后又好黄老术，故诸博士具官待问，未有进者。 ”故在文章，则楚汉之际，诗教已熄，民间多乐楚声，刘邦以一亭长登帝位，其风遂亦被宫掖。盖秦灭六国，四方怨恨，而楚尤发愤，誓虽三户必亡秦，于是江湖激昂之士，遂以楚声为尚。项籍困于垓下，歌曰：“力拔山兮气盖世，时不利兮骓不逝！骓不逝兮可奈何？虞兮虞兮奈若何？”楚声也。高祖既定天下，因征黥布过沛，置酒沛宫，召故人父老子弟佐酒，自击筑歌曰：“大风起兮云飞扬。威加海内兮归故乡。安得猛士兮守四方！”亦楚声也。且发沛中儿百二十人教之歌，群儿皆和习之。其后欲立戚夫人子赵王如意，因而废太子，不果，戚夫人泣涕，亦令作楚舞，而自为楚歌：
故在文章，则楚汉之际，诗教已熄，民间多乐楚声，刘邦以一亭长登帝位，其风遂亦被宫掖。 盖秦灭六国，四方怨恨，而楚尤发愤，誓虽三户必亡秦，于是江湖激昂之士，遂以楚声为尚。 项籍困于垓下，歌曰：“力拔山兮气盖世，时不利兮骓不逝！骓不逝兮可奈何？虞兮虞兮奈若何？”楚声也。 高祖既定天下，因征黥布过沛，置酒沛宫，召故人父老子弟佐酒，自击筑歌曰：“大风起兮云飞扬。 威加海内兮归故乡。 安得猛士兮守四方！”亦楚声也。 且发沛中儿百二十人教之歌，群儿皆和习之。 其后欲立戚夫人子赵王如意，因而废太子，不果，戚夫人泣涕，亦令作楚舞，而自为楚歌：“鸿鹄高飞，一举千里，羽翼已就，横绝四海。横绝四海，又可奈何？虽有矰缴，尚安所施？”
“鸿鹄高飞，一举千里，羽翼已就，横绝四海。 横绝四海，又可奈何？虽有矰缴，尚安所施？”《房中乐》始于周，以乐祖先。汉初，高帝姬唐山夫人作乐词，以从帝所好，亦楚声。至孝惠二年（前一九三）使乐府令夏侯宽备其箫管，更名《安世乐》，凡十六章，今录其二：
《房中乐》始于周，以乐祖先。 汉初，高帝姬唐山夫人作乐词，以从帝所好，亦楚声。 至孝惠二年（前一九三）使乐府令夏侯宽备其箫管，更名《安世乐》，凡十六章，今录其二：“丰草葽，女罗施。善何如，谁能回？大莫大，成教德；长莫长，被无极。”
“丰草葽，女罗施。 善何如，谁能回？大莫大，成教德；长莫长，被无极。 ”“都荔遂芳，窅窊桂华。孝奏天仪，若日月光。乘玄四龙，回驰北行。羽旄殷盛，芬哉芒芒。孝道随世，我署文章。”
“都荔遂芳，窅窊桂华。 孝奏天仪，若日月光。 乘玄四龙，回驰北行。 羽旄殷盛，芬哉芒芒。 孝道随世，我署文章。 ”又以沛宫为原庙，令歌儿吹习高帝《大风》之歌，遂用百二十人为常员。文景相嗣，礼官肄之。楚声之在汉宫，其见重如此，故后来帝王仓卒言志，概用其声，而武帝词华，实为独绝。当其行幸河东，祠后土，顾视帝京，忻然中流，与群臣醼饮，自作《秋风辞》，缠绵流丽，虽词人不能过也：
又以沛宫为原庙，令歌儿吹习高帝《大风》之歌，遂用百二十人为常员。 文景相嗣，礼官肄之。 楚声之在汉宫，其见重如此，故后来帝王仓卒言志，概用其声，而武帝词华，实为独绝。 当其行幸河东，祠后土，顾视帝京，忻然中流，与群臣醼饮，自作《秋风辞》，缠绵流丽，虽词人不能过也：“秋风起兮白云飞，草木黄落兮雁南归。兰有秀兮菊有芳，怀佳人兮不能忘。泛楼船兮济汾河，横中流兮扬素波，箫鼓鸣兮发棹歌。欢乐极兮哀情多，少壮几时兮奈老何。”
“秋风起兮白云飞，草木黄落兮雁南归。 兰有秀兮菊有芳，怀佳人兮不能忘。 泛楼船兮济汾河，横中流兮扬素波，箫鼓鸣兮发棹歌。 欢乐极兮哀情多，少壮几时兮奈老何。 ”降及少帝，将为董卓所酖，与妻唐姬别，悲歌云：“天道易兮我何艰，弃万乘兮退守藩。逆臣见迫兮命不延，逝将去汝兮适幽玄！”唐姬歌曰：“皇天崩兮后土颓，身为帝兮命夭摧。死生路异兮从此乖，奈我茕独兮中心哀！”虽临危抒愤，词意浅露，而其体式，亦皆楚歌也。
降及少帝，将为董卓所酖，与妻唐姬别，悲歌云：“天道易兮我何艰，弃万乘兮退守藩。 逆臣见迫兮命不延，逝将去汝兮适幽玄！”唐姬歌曰：“皇天崩兮后土颓，身为帝兮命夭摧。 死生路异兮从此乖，奈我茕独兮中心哀！”虽临危抒愤，词意浅露，而其体式，亦皆楚歌也。
参考书：
Reference book:《汉书》（《帝纪》，《礼乐志》）
"Book of Han" ("Imperial Chronicles", "Ritual and Music Records")《全汉诗》（丁福保辑）
"All Han Poems" (edited by Ding Fubao)《中国大文学史》（谢无量）第三编第一章
"History of Chinese Literature" (Xie Wuliang) Volume 3, Chapter 1

第七篇　贾谊与晁错

第七篇　贾谊与晁错

第七篇　贾谊与晁错

Chapter 7 Jia Yi and Chao Cuo

第七篇　贾谊与晁错

汉初善言治道，亦擅文章者，先有陆贾佐高祖，每称说《诗》《书》；高帝命著书言秦所以失天下及古今成败，每奏一篇，帝未尝不称善，名其书曰《新语》；今存。文帝时则有颍川贾山，尝借秦为喻，言治乱之道，名曰《至言》；其后每上书，言多激切，善指事意，然不见用。所言今多亡失，惟《至言》见于《汉书》本传。
汉初善言治道，亦擅文章者，先有陆贾佐高祖，每称说《诗》《书》；高帝命著书言秦所以失天下及古今成败，每奏一篇，帝未尝不称善，名其书曰《新语》；今存。 文帝时则有颍川贾山，尝借秦为喻，言治乱之道，名曰《至言》；其后每上书，言多激切，善指事意，然不见用。 所言今多亡失，惟《至言》见于《汉书》本传。贾谊，雒阳人，尝从秦博士张苍受《春秋左氏传》。年十八，以能诵《诗》《书》属文称于郡中，廷尉吴公荐于文帝，召为博士，时年二十余，而善于答诏令，诸生莫能及。文帝悦之，一岁中超迁至大中大夫，且拟以任公卿。绛灌冯敬等毁之曰：“雒阳之人年少初学，专欲擅权，纷乱诸事。”于是帝亦疏之，不用其议；后以谊为长沙王太傅。谊既以谪去，意不自得，及渡湘水，为赋吊屈原，亦以自谕也：
贾谊，雒阳人，尝从秦博士张苍受《春秋左氏传》。 年十八，以能诵《诗》《书》属文称于郡中，廷尉吴公荐于文帝，召为博士，时年二十余，而善于答诏令，诸生莫能及。 文帝悦之，一岁中超迁至大中大夫，且拟以任公卿。 绛灌冯敬等毁之曰：“雒阳之人年少初学，专欲擅权，纷乱诸事。 ”于是帝亦疏之，不用其议；后以谊为长沙王太傅。 谊既以谪去，意不自得，及渡湘水，为赋吊屈原，亦以自谕也：“恭承嘉惠兮俟罪长沙，侧闻屈原兮自湛汨罗。造托湘流兮敬吊先生，遭世罔极兮乃殒厥身。呜呼哀哉兮逢时不祥，鸾凤伏窜兮鸱枭翱翔。阘茸尊显兮谗谀得志，贤圣逆兮方正倒植。……吁嗟默默，生之无故兮。斡弃周鼎，宝康瓠兮。腾驾罢牛，骖蹇驴兮。骥垂两耳，服盐车兮。章甫荐履，渐不可久兮。嗟苦先生，独离此咎兮。讯曰：已矣，国其莫我知兮，独壹郁其谁语。凤漂漂其高逝兮，夫固自引而远去。袭九渊之神龙兮，沕深潜以自珍；偭獭以隐处兮，夫岂从虾与蛭螾。所贵圣人之神德兮，远浊世而自藏；使骐骥可得系而羁兮，岂云异夫犬羊。般纷纷其离此尤兮，亦夫子之故也；历九州而相其君兮，何必怀此都也！凤凰翔于千仞兮，览德辉而下之；见细德之险征兮，遥曾击而去之。彼寻常之污渎兮，岂能容夫吞舟之巨鱼；横江湖之鳣鲸兮，固将制于蝼蚁。”
“恭承嘉惠兮俟罪长沙，侧闻屈原兮自湛汨罗。 造托湘流兮敬吊先生，遭世罔极兮乃殒厥身。 呜呼哀哉兮逢时不祥，鸾凤伏窜兮鸱枭翱翔。 阘茸尊显兮谗谀得志，贤圣逆兮方正倒植。 …… 吁嗟默默，生之无故兮。 斡弃周鼎，宝康瓠兮。 腾驾罢牛，骖蹇驴兮。 骥垂两耳，服盐车兮。 章甫荐履，渐不可久兮。 嗟苦先生，独离此咎兮。 讯曰：已矣，国其莫我知兮，独壹郁其谁语。 凤漂漂其高逝兮，夫固自引而远去。 袭九渊之神龙兮，沕深潜以自珍；偭獭以隐处兮，夫岂从虾与蛭螾。 所贵圣人之神德兮，远浊世而自藏；使骐骥可得系而羁兮，岂云异夫犬羊。 般纷纷其离此尤兮，亦夫子之故也；历九州而相其君兮，何必怀此都也！凤凰翔于千仞兮，览德辉而下之；见细德之险征兮，遥曾击而去之。 彼寻常之污渎兮，岂能容夫吞舟之巨鱼；横江湖之鳣鲸兮，固将制于蝼蚁。 ”三年，有鸮飞入谊舍，止于坐隅。长沙卑湿，谊自惧不寿，因作《服赋》以自广，服者，楚人之谓鸮也。大意谓祸福纠缠，吉凶同域，生不足悦，死不足患，纵躯委命，乃与道俱，见服细故，无足疑虑。其外死生，顺造化之旨，盖得之于庄生。岁余，文帝征谊，问鬼神之本，自叹为不能及。顷之，拜为帝少子梁怀王太傅。时复封淮南厉王子四人为列侯，谊上疏以谏；又以诸侯王僭拟，地或连数郡，非古之制，乃屡上书陈政事，请稍削之。其治安之策，洋洋至六千言，以为天下“事势，有可为痛哭者一，可为流涕者二，可为长太息者六，若其它背理而伤道者，难遍以疏举”，因历指其失，颇切事情，然不见听。居数年，怀王堕马死，无后；谊自伤为傅无状，哭泣岁余，亦死，年三十三（前二〇〇至一六八）。
三年，有鸮飞入谊舍，止于坐隅。 长沙卑湿，谊自惧不寿，因作《服赋》以自广，服者，楚人之谓鸮也。 大意谓祸福纠缠，吉凶同域，生不足悦，死不足患，纵躯委命，乃与道俱，见服细故，无足疑虑。 其外死生，顺造化之旨，盖得之于庄生。 岁余，文帝征谊，问鬼神之本，自叹为不能及。 顷之，拜为帝少子梁怀王太傅。 时复封淮南厉王子四人为列侯，谊上疏以谏；又以诸侯王僭拟，地或连数郡，非古之制，乃屡上书陈政事，请稍削之。 其治安之策，洋洋至六千言，以为天下“事势，有可为痛哭者一，可为流涕者二，可为长太息者六，若其它背理而伤道者，难遍以疏举”，因历指其失，颇切事情，然不见听。 居数年，怀王堕马死，无后；谊自伤为傅无状，哭泣岁余，亦死，年三十三（前二〇〇至一六八）。晁错，颍川人，少学申商刑名于轵张恢所，文帝时以文学为太常掌故，被遣从济南伏生受《尚书》，还，因上便宜事，以《书》称说，诏以为太子舍人、门大夫，迁博士，拜太子家令。又以辩得幸太子，太子家号曰智囊。举贤良文学，对策高第，又数上书文帝，言削诸侯事及法令可更定者，帝不听，然奇其材，迁中大夫。景帝即位，以为内史，言事辄听，始宠幸倾九卿，法令多所更定，袁盎申屠嘉皆弗善之，而错愈贵，迁为御史大夫。又请削诸侯之地，收其枝郡。其说削吴云：
晁错，颍川人，少学申商刑名于轵张恢所，文帝时以文学为太常掌故，被遣从济南伏生受《尚书》，还，因上便宜事，以《书》称说，诏以为太子舍人、门大夫，迁博士，拜太子家令。 又以辩得幸太子，太子家号曰智囊。 举贤良文学，对策高第，又数上书文帝，言削诸侯事及法令可更定者，帝不听，然奇其材，迁中大夫。 景帝即位，以为内史，言事辄听，始宠幸倾九卿，法令多所更定，袁盎申屠嘉皆弗善之，而错愈贵，迁为御史大夫。 又请削诸侯之地，收其枝郡。 其说削吴云：“昔高帝初定天下，昆弟少，诸子弱，大封同姓，故孽子悼惠王王齐七十二城，庶弟元王王楚四十城，兄子王吴五十余城。封三庶孽，分天下半。今吴王前有太子之隙，诈称病不朝，于古法当诛。文帝不忍，因赐几杖，德至厚也。不改过自新，乃益骄恣，公即山铸钱，煮海为盐，诱天下亡人，谋作乱逆。今削之亦反，不削亦反。削之，其反亟，祸小；不削之，其反迟，祸大。”
“昔高帝初定天下，昆弟少，诸子弱，大封同姓，故孽子悼惠王王齐七十二城，庶弟元王王楚四十城，兄子王吴五十余城。 封三庶孽，分天下半。 今吴王前有太子之隙，诈称病不朝，于古法当诛。 文帝不忍，因赐几杖，德至厚也。 不改过自新，乃益骄恣，公即山铸钱，煮海为盐，诱天下亡人，谋作乱逆。 今削之亦反，不削亦反。 削之，其反亟，祸小；不削之，其反迟，祸大。 ”错请削地之奏，诸贵人皆不敢难，惟窦婴争之，由是与错有隙。诸侯亦先疾其所更法令三十章，于是吴楚七国遂反，以诛错为名；窦婴袁盎又说文帝，令晁错衣朝衣，斩于东市（前一五四年）。
错请削地之奏，诸贵人皆不敢难，惟窦婴争之，由是与错有隙。 诸侯亦先疾其所更法令三十章，于是吴楚七国遂反，以诛错为名；窦婴袁盎又说文帝，令晁错衣朝衣，斩于东市（前一五四年）。晁贾性行，其初盖颇同，一从伏生传《尚书》，一从张苍受《左氏》。错请削诸侯地，且更定法令；谊亦欲改正朔，易服色；又同被功臣贵幸所谮毁。为文皆疏直激切，尽所欲言；司马迁亦云：“贾生晁错明申商。”惟谊尤有文采，而沉实则稍逊，如其《治安策》，《过秦论》，与晁错之《贤良对策》，《言兵事疏》，《守边劝农疏》，皆为西汉鸿文，沾溉后人，其泽甚远；然以二人之论匈奴者相较，则可见贾生之言，乃颇疏阔，不能与晁错之深识为伦比矣。
晁贾性行，其初盖颇同，一从伏生传《尚书》，一从张苍受《左氏》。 错请削诸侯地，且更定法令；谊亦欲改正朔，易服色；又同被功臣贵幸所谮毁。 为文皆疏直激切，尽所欲言；司马迁亦云：“贾生晁错明申商。 ”惟谊尤有文采，而沉实则稍逊，如其《治安策》，《过秦论》，与晁错之《贤良对策》，《言兵事疏》，《守边劝农疏》，皆为西汉鸿文，沾溉后人，其泽甚远；然以二人之论匈奴者相较，则可见贾生之言，乃颇疏阔，不能与晁错之深识为伦比矣。惟其后之所以绝异者，盖以文帝守静，故贾生所议，皆不见用，为梁王傅，抑郁而终。晁错则适遭景帝，稍能改革，于是大获宠幸，得行其言，卒召变乱，斩于东市；又夙以刑名著称，遂复来“为人陗直刻深”之谤。使易地而处，所遇之主不同，则其晚节末路，盖未可知也。但贾谊能文章，平生又坎，司马迁哀其不遇，以与屈原同传，遂尤为后世所知闻。
惟其后之所以绝异者，盖以文帝守静，故贾生所议，皆不见用，为梁王傅，抑郁而终。 晁错则适遭景帝，稍能改革，于是大获宠幸，得行其言，卒召变乱，斩于东市；又夙以刑名著称，遂复来“为人陗直刻深”之谤。 使易地而处，所遇之主不同，则其晚节末路，盖未可知也。 但贾谊能文章，平生又坎，司马迁哀其不遇，以与屈原同传，遂尤为后世所知闻。
参考书：
Reference book:《史记》（卷八十四，一百一）
"Historical Records" (Volume 84, 101)《汉书》（卷四十八，四十九）
Book of Han (Volume 48, 49)《全汉文》（清严可均辑）
"All Chinese Literature" (Qing Yan can be uniformly compiled)《中国大文学史》（第三编第二章）
"History of Chinese Literature" (Part III, Chapter 2)《支那文学史纲》（第三篇第四章）
"Outline of the History of Chinese Literature" (Chapter 4 of Chapter 3)

第八篇　藩国之文术

第八篇　藩国之文术

第八篇　藩国之文术

Chapter 8 The Literary Art of the Domain

第八篇　藩国之文术

汉高祖虽不喜儒，文景二帝，亦好刑名黄老，而当时诸侯王中，则颇有倾心养士，致意于文术者。楚，吴，梁，淮南，河间五王，其尤著者也。
汉高祖虽不喜儒，文景二帝，亦好刑名黄老，而当时诸侯王中，则颇有倾心养士，致意于文术者。 楚，吴，梁，淮南，河间五王，其尤著者也。楚元王交为高祖同父少弟，好书多材艺，少时，与鲁穆生，白生，申公，俱受《诗》于孙卿门人浮丘伯。故好《诗》，既王楚，诸子亦皆读《诗》；申公始为《诗》传，号“鲁诗”；元王亦自为传，号“元王诗”。汉初治《诗》大师，皆居于楚；申公，白公之外，又有韦孟，为元王傅，傅子夷王，及孙王戊。戊荒淫不遵道，孟乃作诗讽谏；后遂去位，徙家于邹，又作诗一篇，其叙事布词，自为一体，皆有风雅遗韵。魏晋以来，逮相师法，用以叙先烈，述祖德，故任昉《文章缘起》以为“四言诗起于前汉楚王傅韦孟《谏楚夷王戊》诗”也。
楚元王交为高祖同父少弟，好书多材艺，少时，与鲁穆生，白生，申公，俱受《诗》于孙卿门人浮丘伯。 故好《诗》，既王楚，诸子亦皆读《诗》；申公始为《诗》传，号“鲁诗”；元王亦自为传，号“元王诗”。 汉初治《诗》大师，皆居于楚；申公，白公之外，又有韦孟，为元王傅，傅子夷王，及孙王戊。 戊荒淫不遵道，孟乃作诗讽谏；后遂去位，徙家于邹，又作诗一篇，其叙事布词，自为一体，皆有风雅遗韵。 魏晋以来，逮相师法，用以叙先烈，述祖德，故任昉《文章缘起》以为“四言诗起于前汉楚王傅韦孟《谏楚夷王戊》诗”也。吴王濞者，高祖兄仲之子。文帝时，吴太子入见，与皇太子争博道，皇太子引博局提杀之。吴王由是怨望，藏亡匿死，积三十余年，故能使其众。然所用多纵横游说之士；亦有并擅文词者，如严忌，邹阳，枚乘等。吴既败，皆游梁。
吴王濞者，高祖兄仲之子。 文帝时，吴太子入见，与皇太子争博道，皇太子引博局提杀之。 吴王由是怨望，藏亡匿死，积三十余年，故能使其众。 然所用多纵横游说之士；亦有并擅文词者，如严忌，邹阳，枚乘等。 吴既败，皆游梁。梁孝王名武，文帝窦皇后少子也。七国之叛，梁距吴楚最有功，又最为大国，卤簿拟天子；招延四方豪杰，自山东游士莫不至。传《易》者有丁宽，以授田王孙，田授施仇，孟喜，梁丘贺，由是《易》有施孟梁丘三家之学。又有羊胜，公孙诡，韩安国，各以辩智著称。吴败，吴客又皆游梁；司马相如亦尝游梁，皆词赋高手，天下文学之盛，当时盖未有如梁者也。
梁孝王名武，文帝窦皇后少子也。 七国之叛，梁距吴楚最有功，又最为大国，卤簿拟天子；招延四方豪杰，自山东游士莫不至。 传《易》者有丁宽，以授田王孙，田授施仇，孟喜，梁丘贺，由是《易》有施孟梁丘三家之学。 又有羊胜，公孙诡，韩安国，各以辩智著称。 吴败，吴客又皆游梁；司马相如亦尝游梁，皆词赋高手，天下文学之盛，当时盖未有如梁者也。严忌本姓庄，后避明帝讳，称严，会稽吴人。好词赋，哀屈原忠贞不遇，作词曰《哀时命》。遭景帝不好词赋，无所得志，乃游吴；吴败，徒步入梁，受知孝王，与邹阳，枚乘同见尊重，而忌名尤盛，世称庄夫子。《汉志》有《庄夫子赋》二十四篇；今仅存《哀时命》一篇，在《楚辞》中。
严忌本姓庄，后避明帝讳，称严，会稽吴人。 好词赋，哀屈原忠贞不遇，作词曰《哀时命》。 遭景帝不好词赋，无所得志，乃游吴；吴败，徒步入梁，受知孝王，与邹阳，枚乘同见尊重，而忌名尤盛，世称庄夫子。 《汉志》有《庄夫子赋》二十四篇；今仅存《哀时命》一篇，在《楚辞》中。邹阳，齐人，初与严忌，枚乘等俱仕吴，皆以文辩著名。吴王将叛，阳作书以谏，不见用，乃去而之梁，从孝王游。其为人有智略，慷慨不苟合，为羊胜，公孙诡所谗，孝王怒，下阳于狱，将杀之。阳在狱中，上书自明：
邹阳，齐人，初与严忌，枚乘等俱仕吴，皆以文辩著名。 吴王将叛，阳作书以谏，不见用，乃去而之梁，从孝王游。 其为人有智略，慷慨不苟合，为羊胜，公孙诡所谗，孝王怒，下阳于狱，将杀之。 阳在狱中，上书自明：“……语曰：有白头如新，倾盖如故。何则？知与不知也。故樊於期逃秦之燕，借荆轲首以奉丹事；王奢去齐之魏，临城自刭，以却齐而存魏。夫王奢樊於期，非新于齐秦而故于燕魏也，所以去二国，死两君者，行合于志而慕义无穷也。……今人主诚能去骄傲之心，怀可报之意，披心腹，见情素，隳肝胆，施德厚，终与之穷达，无爱于士，则桀之犬可使吠尧，而跖之客可使刺由。何况因万乘之权，假圣王之资乎？然则荆轲湛七族，要离燔妻子，岂足为大王道哉？……”
“…… 语曰：有白头如新，倾盖如故。 何则？知与不知也。 故樊於期逃秦之燕，借荆轲首以奉丹事；王奢去齐之魏，临城自刭，以却齐而存魏。 夫王奢樊於期，非新于齐秦而故于燕魏也，所以去二国，死两君者，行合于志而慕义无穷也。 …… 今人主诚能去骄傲之心，怀可报之意，披心腹，见情素，隳肝胆，施德厚，终与之穷达，无爱于士，则桀之犬可使吠尧，而跖之客可使刺由。 何况因万乘之权，假圣王之资乎？然则荆轲湛七族，要离燔妻子，岂足为大王道哉？……”书奏，孝王立出之，卒为上客。后羊胜公孙诡以罪死，阳独为梁王解深怒于天子。盖吴蓄深谋，偏好策士，故文辩之士，亦常有纵横家遗风，词令文章，并长辟阖，犹战国游士之口说也。《汉志》纵横家，有《邹阳》七篇，而不录其词赋，似阳之在汉，固以权略见称。《西京杂记》云：梁孝王游于忘忧之馆，集诸游士，使各为赋。枚乘《柳赋》，路乔如《鹤赋》，公孙诡《文鹿赋》，邹阳《酒赋》，公孙乘《月赋》，羊胜《屏风赋》，韩安国作《几赋》不成，邹阳代作。邹阳安国罚酒三升；赐枚乘路乔如绢，人五匹。《西京杂记》为晋葛洪作，托之刘歆，则诸赋或亦洪之所为耳。
书奏，孝王立出之，卒为上客。 后羊胜公孙诡以罪死，阳独为梁王解深怒于天子。 盖吴蓄深谋，偏好策士，故文辩之士，亦常有纵横家遗风，词令文章，并长辟阖，犹战国游士之口说也。 《汉志》纵横家，有《邹阳》七篇，而不录其词赋，似阳之在汉，固以权略见称。 《西京杂记》云：梁孝王游于忘忧之馆，集诸游士，使各为赋。 枚乘《柳赋》，路乔如《鹤赋》，公孙诡《文鹿赋》，邹阳《酒赋》，公孙乘《月赋》，羊胜《屏风赋》，韩安国作《几赋》不成，邹阳代作。 邹阳安国罚酒三升；赐枚乘路乔如绢，人五匹。 《西京杂记》为晋葛洪作，托之刘歆，则诸赋或亦洪之所为耳。枚乘，字叔，淮阴人，为吴王濞郎中。吴王谋为逆，乘上书以谏，吴王不纳，乃去而之梁。汉既平七国，乘由是知名，景帝召拜弘农都尉。乘久为大国上宾，不乐郡吏，以病去官；复游梁。梁客皆善属词，乘尤高。梁孝王薨，乘归淮阴。武帝自为太子闻乘名，及即位，乘年老，乃以安车蒲轮征乘，道死（前一四〇）。
枚乘，字叔，淮阴人，为吴王濞郎中。 吴王谋为逆，乘上书以谏，吴王不纳，乃去而之梁。 汉既平七国，乘由是知名，景帝召拜弘农都尉。 乘久为大国上宾，不乐郡吏，以病去官；复游梁。 梁客皆善属词，乘尤高。 梁孝王薨，乘归淮阴。 武帝自为太子闻乘名，及即位，乘年老，乃以安车蒲轮征乘，道死（前一四〇）。《汉志》有《枚乘赋》九篇；今惟《梁王菟园赋》存。《临灞池远诀赋》仅存其目，《柳赋》盖伪托。然乘于文林，业绩之伟，乃在略依《楚辞》《七谏》之法，并取《招魂》《大招》之意，自造《七发》。借吴楚为客主，先言舆辇之损，宫室之疾，食色之害，宜听妙言要道，以疏神导体。于是说以声色逸游之乐等等，凡六事，最末为观涛于广陵：
《汉志》有《枚乘赋》九篇；今惟《梁王菟园赋》存。 《临灞池远诀赋》仅存其目，《柳赋》盖伪托。 然乘于文林，业绩之伟，乃在略依《楚辞》《七谏》之法，并取《招魂》《大招》之意，自造《七发》。 借吴楚为客主，先言舆辇之损，宫室之疾，食色之害，宜听妙言要道，以疏神导体。 于是说以声色逸游之乐等等，凡六事，最末为观涛于广陵：“……其始起也，洪淋淋焉若白鹭之下翔；其少进也，浩浩溰溰，如素车白马帷盖之张。其波涌而云乱，扰扰焉如三军之腾装。其旁作而奔起也，飘飘焉如轻车之勒兵。六驾蛟龙，附从太白。纯驰浩蜺，前后骆驿。颙颙卬卬，椐椐强强，莘莘将将。壁垒重坚，沓杂似军行。訇隐匈盖，轧盘涌裔，原不可当。观其两傍，则滂渤怫郁，暗漠感突，上击下律。有似勇壮之卒，突怒而无畏，蹈壁冲津，穷曲随隈，逾岸出追，遇者死，当者坏。……”
“…… 其始起也，洪淋淋焉若白鹭之下翔；其少进也，浩浩溰溰，如素车白马帷盖之张。 其波涌而云乱，扰扰焉如三军之腾装。 其旁作而奔起也，飘飘焉如轻车之勒兵。 六驾蛟龙，附从太白。 纯驰浩蜺，前后骆驿。 颙颙卬卬，椐椐强强，莘莘将将。 壁垒重坚，沓杂似军行。 訇隐匈盖，轧盘涌裔，原不可当。 观其两傍，则滂渤怫郁，暗漠感突，上击下律。 有似勇壮之卒，突怒而无畏，蹈壁冲津，穷曲随隈，逾岸出追，遇者死，当者坏。 ……”其说皆不入，则云：
None of these statements are included, but they say:“将为太子奏方术之士，有资略者，若庄周，魏牟，杨朱，墨翟，便娟，詹何之伦，使之论天下之精微，理万物之是非；孔老览观，孟子持筹而算之，万不失一。此亦天下要言妙道也，太子岂欲闻之乎？于是太子据几而起，曰：涣乎若一听圣人辩士之言。涊然汗出，霍然病已。”
“将为太子奏方术之士，有资略者，若庄周，魏牟，杨朱，墨翟，便娟，詹何之伦，使之论天下之精微，理万物之是非；孔老览观，孟子持筹而算之，万不失一。 此亦天下要言妙道也，太子岂欲闻之乎？于是太子据几而起，曰：涣乎若一听圣人辩士之言。 涊然汗出，霍然病已。 ”由是遂有“七”体，后之文士，仿作者众，汉傅毅有《七激》，刘广有《七兴》，崔骃有《七依》，……凡十余家；递及魏晋，仍多拟造。谢灵运有《七集》十卷，卞景有《七林》十二卷，梁又有《七林》三十卷，盖即集众家此体为之，今俱佚；惟乘《七发》及曹植《七启》，张协《七命》，在《文选》中。
由是遂有“七”体，后之文士，仿作者众，汉傅毅有《七激》，刘广有《七兴》，崔骃有《七依》，…… 凡十余家；递及魏晋，仍多拟造。 谢灵运有《七集》十卷，卞景有《七林》十二卷，梁又有《七林》三十卷，盖即集众家此体为之，今俱佚；惟乘《七发》及曹植《七启》，张协《七命》，在《文选》中。《文选》又有《古诗十九首》，皆五言，无撰人名。唐李善曰：“并云古诗，盖不知作者；或云枚乘，疑不能明也。”然陈徐陵所集《玉台新咏》，则其中九首，明题乘名。审如是，乘乃不特始创七体，且亦肇开五古者矣，今录其三：
《文选》又有《古诗十九首》，皆五言，无撰人名。 唐李善曰：“并云古诗，盖不知作者；或云枚乘，疑不能明也。 ”然陈徐陵所集《玉台新咏》，则其中九首，明题乘名。 审如是，乘乃不特始创七体，且亦肇开五古者矣，今录其三：“西北有高楼，上与浮云齐，交疏结绮窗，阿阁三重阶。上有弦歌声，音响一何悲，谁能为此曲，无乃杞梁妻。清商随风发，中曲正徘徊，一弹再三叹，慷慨有余哀。不惜歌者苦，但伤知音稀。愿为双鸿鹄，奋翅起高飞。”
“西北有高楼，上与浮云齐，交疏结绮窗，阿阁三重阶。 上有弦歌声，音响一何悲，谁能为此曲，无乃杞梁妻。 清商随风发，中曲正徘徊，一弹再三叹，慷慨有余哀。 不惜歌者苦，但伤知音稀。 愿为双鸿鹄，奋翅起高飞。 ”“……相去日已远，衣带日已缓。浮云蔽白日，游子不复返。思君令人老，岁月忽已晚。弃捐勿复道，努力加餐饭。”
“…… 相去日已远，衣带日已缓。 浮云蔽白日，游子不复返。 思君令人老，岁月忽已晚。 弃捐勿复道，努力加餐饭。 ”“迢迢牵牛星，皎皎河汉女。纤纤濯素手，札札弄机杼，终日不成章，泣涕零如雨。河汉清且浅，相处复几许，盈盈一水间，脉脉不得语。”
“迢迢牵牛星，皎皎河汉女。 纤纤濯素手，札札弄机杼，终日不成章，泣涕零如雨。 河汉清且浅，相处复几许，盈盈一水间，脉脉不得语。 ”其词随语成韵，随韵成趣，不假雕琢，而意志自深，风神或近楚《骚》，体式实为独造，诚所谓“畜神奇于温厚，寓感怆于和平，意愈浅愈深，词愈近愈远”者也。稍后李陵与苏武赠答，亦为五言，盖文景以后，渐多此体，而天质自然，终当以乘为独绝矣。
其词随语成韵，随韵成趣，不假雕琢，而意志自深，风神或近楚《骚》，体式实为独造，诚所谓“畜神奇于温厚，寓感怆于和平，意愈浅愈深，词愈近愈远”者也。 稍后李陵与苏武赠答，亦为五言，盖文景以后，渐多此体，而天质自然，终当以乘为独绝矣。淮南王安为文帝所封，好书，鼓琴；招致宾客方术之士数千人，作为《内书》二十一篇，《外书》甚众；又有《中篇》八卷，言神仙黄白之术，亦二十余万言。时武帝方好艺文，以安为诸父，辩博善文辞，甚尊重之。尝使为《离骚传》，旦受诏，日食时上。传今亡；所传者惟《淮南》二十一篇，亦曰《鸿烈》。其书盖与诸游士讲论，掇拾旧文而成。其诸游士著者，则为苏飞，李尚，左吴，田由，雷被，毛被，伍被，晋昌等八人，是曰八公；又分造词赋，以类相从，或称《大山》，或称《小山》，其义犹《诗》之有《大雅》《小雅》也。小山之徒有《招隐士》之赋，其源虽出《离骚》《招魂》等，而不泥于迹象，为汉代楚辞之新声：
淮南王安为文帝所封，好书，鼓琴；招致宾客方术之士数千人，作为《内书》二十一篇，《外书》甚众；又有《中篇》八卷，言神仙黄白之术，亦二十余万言。 时武帝方好艺文，以安为诸父，辩博善文辞，甚尊重之。 尝使为《离骚传》，旦受诏，日食时上。 传今亡；所传者惟《淮南》二十一篇，亦曰《鸿烈》。 其书盖与诸游士讲论，掇拾旧文而成。 其诸游士著者，则为苏飞，李尚，左吴，田由，雷被，毛被，伍被，晋昌等八人，是曰八公；又分造词赋，以类相从，或称《大山》，或称《小山》，其义犹《诗》之有《大雅》《小雅》也。 小山之徒有《招隐士》之赋，其源虽出《离骚》《招魂》等，而不泥于迹象，为汉代楚辞之新声：“桂树丛生兮山之幽，偃蹇连蜷兮枝相缭。山气巃嵸兮石嵯峨；溪谷崭岩兮水曾波。猿狖群啸兮虎豹嗥，攀援桂枝兮聊淹留。王孙游兮不归，春草生兮萋萋，岁暮兮不自聊，蟪蛄鸣兮啾啾。坱兮轧，山曲，心淹留兮恫慌忽；罔兮沕，憭兮栗，虎豹穴，丛薄深林兮人上栗。嵚岑碕礒兮碅磳磈硊，树轮相纠兮林木茷骩；青莎杂树兮草靃靡；白鹿麏麚兮或腾或倚，状兒崟崟兮峨峨，凄凄兮漇漇。猕猴兮熊罴，慕类兮以悲。攀援桂枝兮聊淹留，虎豹斗兮熊罴咆，禽兽骇兮亡其曹。王孙兮归来，山中兮不可以久留。”
“桂树丛生兮山之幽，偃蹇连蜷兮枝相缭。 山气巃嵸兮石嵯峨；溪谷崭岩兮水曾波。 猿狖群啸兮虎豹嗥，攀援桂枝兮聊淹留。 王孙游兮不归，春草生兮萋萋，岁暮兮不自聊，蟪蛄鸣兮啾啾。 坱兮轧，山曲，心淹留兮恫慌忽；罔兮沕，憭兮栗，虎豹穴，丛薄深林兮人上栗。 嵚岑碕礒兮碅磳磈硊，树轮相纠兮林木茷骩；青莎杂树兮草靃靡；白鹿麏麚兮或腾或倚，状兒崟崟兮峨峨，凄凄兮漇漇。 猕猴兮熊罴，慕类兮以悲。 攀援桂枝兮聊淹留，虎豹斗兮熊罴咆，禽兽骇兮亡其曹。 王孙兮归来，山中兮不可以久留。 ”河间献王德为景帝子，亦好书，而所得皆古文先秦旧书。又立《毛氏诗》，《左氏春秋》博士；山东诸儒，多从而游。其所好盖与楚元王交相类。惟吴梁淮南三国之客，较富文词，梁客之上者，多来自吴，甚有纵横家余韵；聚淮南者，则大抵浮辩方术之士也。
河间献王德为景帝子，亦好书，而所得皆古文先秦旧书。 又立《毛氏诗》，《左氏春秋》博士；山东诸儒，多从而游。 其所好盖与楚元王交相类。 惟吴梁淮南三国之客，较富文词，梁客之上者，多来自吴，甚有纵横家余韵；聚淮南者，则大抵浮辩方术之士也。
参考书：
Reference book:《史记》（卷一百六，一百十八）
"Historical Records" (Volume 106, 118)《汉书》（卷三十六，四十四，四十七，五十一，五十三）
Book of Han (Volume 36, 44, 47, 51, 53)《全汉文》（清严可均辑）
"All Chinese Literature" (Qing Yan can be uniformly compiled)《中国大文学史》（第三编第三章）
"History of Chinese Literature" (Part 3, Chapter 3)

第九篇　武帝时文术之盛

第九篇　武帝时文术之盛

第九篇　武帝时文术之盛

Chapter 9 The flourishing of literature during the reign of Emperor Wu

第九篇　武帝时文术之盛

武帝有雄材大略，而颇尚儒术。即位后，丞相卫绾即请奏罢郡国所举贤良治申商韩非苏秦张仪之言者。又以安车蒲轮征申公枚乘等；议立明堂；置“五经”博士。元光间亲策贤良，则董仲舒公孙弘等出焉。又早慕词赋，喜“楚辞”，尝使淮南王安为《离骚》作传。其所自造，如《秋风辞》（见第六篇）《悼李夫人赋》（见《汉书》《外戚传》）等，亦入文家堂奥。复立乐府，集赵代秦楚之讴，以李延年为协律都尉，多举司马相如等数十人作诗颂，用于天地诸祠，是为《十九章》之歌。延年辄承意弦歌所造诗，谓之“新声曲”，实则楚声之遗，又扩而变之者也。其《郊祀歌》十九章，今存《汉书》《礼乐志》中，第三至第六章，皆题“邹子乐”。
武帝有雄材大略，而颇尚儒术。 即位后，丞相卫绾即请奏罢郡国所举贤良治申商韩非苏秦张仪之言者。 又以安车蒲轮征申公枚乘等；议立明堂；置“五经”博士。 元光间亲策贤良，则董仲舒公孙弘等出焉。 又早慕词赋，喜“楚辞”，尝使淮南王安为《离骚》作传。 其所自造，如《秋风辞》（见第六篇）《悼李夫人赋》（见《汉书》《外戚传》）等，亦入文家堂奥。 复立乐府，集赵代秦楚之讴，以李延年为协律都尉，多举司马相如等数十人作诗颂，用于天地诸祠，是为《十九章》之歌。 延年辄承意弦歌所造诗，谓之“新声曲”，实则楚声之遗，又扩而变之者也。 其《郊祀歌》十九章，今存《汉书》《礼乐志》中，第三至第六章，皆题“邹子乐”。“朱明盛长，旉与万物。桐生茂豫，靡有所诎。敷华就实，既阜既昌，登成甫田，百鬼迪尝。广大建祀，肃雍不忘。神若宥之，传世无疆。”（《朱明》四“邹子乐”）
“朱明盛长，旉与万物。 桐生茂豫，靡有所诎。 敷华就实，既阜既昌，登成甫田，百鬼迪尝。 广大建祀，肃雍不忘。 神若宥之，传世无疆。 ”（《朱明》四“邹子乐”）“日出入安穷，时世不与人同。故春非我春，夏非我夏，秋非我秋，冬非我冬。泊如四海之沱，遍观是邪谓何。吾知所乐，独乐六龙。六龙之调，使我心若。訾，黄其何不来下！”（《日出入》九）
“日出入安穷，时世不与人同。 故春非我春，夏非我夏，秋非我秋，冬非我冬。 泊如四海之沱，遍观是邪谓何。 吾知所乐，独乐六龙。 六龙之调，使我心若。 訾，黄其何不来下！”（《日出入》九）是时河间献王以为治道非礼乐不成，因献所集雅乐；大乐官亦肄习之以备数，然不常用，用者皆新声。至敖游醼饮之时，则又有新声变曲。曲亦昉于李延年。延年中山人，身及父母兄弟皆故倡，坐法腐刑，给事狗监中。性知音，善歌舞，武帝爱之，每为新声变曲，闻者莫不感动。尝侍武帝，起舞，歌曰：“北方有佳人，绝世而独立，一顾倾人城，再顾倾人国。宁不知倾城与倾国，佳人难再得。”因进其女弟，得幸，号李夫人，早卒。武帝思念不已，方士齐人少翁言能致其魂，乃夜张烛设帐，而令帝居他帐遥望，见一好女，如李夫人之貌，然不得就视。帝愈益相思悲感，作为诗曰：“是耶非耶？立而望之，偏何姗姗其来迟。”令乐府诸音家弦歌之。随事兴咏，节促意长，殆即所谓新声变曲者也。
是时河间献王以为治道非礼乐不成，因献所集雅乐；大乐官亦肄习之以备数，然不常用，用者皆新声。 至敖游醼饮之时，则又有新声变曲。 曲亦昉于李延年。 延年中山人，身及父母兄弟皆故倡，坐法腐刑，给事狗监中。 性知音，善歌舞，武帝爱之，每为新声变曲，闻者莫不感动。 尝侍武帝，起舞，歌曰：“北方有佳人，绝世而独立，一顾倾人城，再顾倾人国。 宁不知倾城与倾国，佳人难再得。 ”因进其女弟，得幸，号李夫人，早卒。 武帝思念不已，方士齐人少翁言能致其魂，乃夜张烛设帐，而令帝居他帐遥望，见一好女，如李夫人之貌，然不得就视。 帝愈益相思悲感，作为诗曰：“是耶非耶？立而望之，偏何姗姗其来迟。 ”令乐府诸音家弦歌之。 随事兴咏，节促意长，殆即所谓新声变曲者也。文学之士，在武帝左右者亦甚众。先有严助，会稽吴人，严忌子也，或云族家子，以贤良对策高第，擢为中大夫。助荐吴人朱买臣召见，说《春秋》，言“楚词”，亦拜中大夫，与严助俱侍中。又有吾丘寿王，司马相如，主父偃，徐乐，严安，东方朔，枚皋，胶仓，终军，严葱奇等；而东方朔，枚皋，严助，吾丘寿王，司马相如尤见亲幸。相如文最高，然常称疾避事；朔皋持论不根，见遇如俳优，惟严助与寿王见任用。助最先进，常与大臣辩论国家便宜，有奇异亦辄使为文及作赋颂数十篇。寿王字子赣，赵人，年少以善格五召待诏，迁侍中中郎；有赋十五篇，见《汉志》。
文学之士，在武帝左右者亦甚众。 先有严助，会稽吴人，严忌子也，或云族家子，以贤良对策高第，擢为中大夫。 助荐吴人朱买臣召见，说《春秋》，言“楚词”，亦拜中大夫，与严助俱侍中。 又有吾丘寿王，司马相如，主父偃，徐乐，严安，东方朔，枚皋，胶仓，终军，严葱奇等；而东方朔，枚皋，严助，吾丘寿王，司马相如尤见亲幸。 相如文最高，然常称疾避事；朔皋持论不根，见遇如俳优，惟严助与寿王见任用。 助最先进，常与大臣辩论国家便宜，有奇异亦辄使为文及作赋颂数十篇。 寿王字子赣，赵人，年少以善格五召待诏，迁侍中中郎；有赋十五篇，见《汉志》。东方朔字曼倩，平原厌次人也。武帝初即位，征天下举方正贤良文学材力之士，待以不次之位，四方士多上书言得失，自衒鬻者以千数。朔初来，上书曰：“臣朔少失父母，长养兄嫂。年十二学书，三冬，文史足用。十五学击剑。十六学诗书，诵二十二万言。十九学孙吴兵法，战阵之具，钲鼓之教，亦诵二十二万言。凡臣朔固已诵四十四万言。又常服子路之言。臣朔年二十二；长九尺三寸，目若悬珠，齿若编贝；勇若孟贲，捷若庆忌，廉若鲍叔，信若尾生。若此，可以为天子大臣矣。臣朔昧死，再拜以闻。”其文辞不逊，高自称誉。帝伟之，令待诏公车；渐以奇计俳辞得亲近，诙达多端，不名一行，然时观察颜色，直言切谏，帝亦常用之。尝至太中大夫，与枚皋郭舍人俱在左右，但诙啁而已，不得大官，因以刑名家言求试用，辞数万言，指意放荡，颇复诙谐，终不见用，乃作《答客难》（见《汉书》本传）以自慰谕。又有《七谏》（见《楚辞》），则言君子失志，自古而然。临终诫子云：“明者处世，莫尚于中，优哉游哉，与道相从。首阳为拙，柳下为工。饱食安步，以仕代农。依隐玩世，诡时不逢。……圣人之道，一龙一蛇，形见神藏，与物变化，随时之宜，无有常家。”又黄老意也。朔盖多所通晓，然先以自衒进身，终以滑稽名世，后之好事者因取奇言怪语，附著之朔；方士又附会以为神仙，作《神异经》《十洲记》，托为朔造，其实皆非也。
东方朔字曼倩，平原厌次人也。 武帝初即位，征天下举方正贤良文学材力之士，待以不次之位，四方士多上书言得失，自衒鬻者以千数。 朔初来，上书曰：“臣朔少失父母，长养兄嫂。 年十二学书，三冬，文史足用。 十五学击剑。 十六学诗书，诵二十二万言。 十九学孙吴兵法，战阵之具，钲鼓之教，亦诵二十二万言。 凡臣朔固已诵四十四万言。 又常服子路之言。 臣朔年二十二；长九尺三寸，目若悬珠，齿若编贝；勇若孟贲，捷若庆忌，廉若鲍叔，信若尾生。 若此，可以为天子大臣矣。 臣朔昧死，再拜以闻。 ”其文辞不逊，高自称誉。 帝伟之，令待诏公车；渐以奇计俳辞得亲近，诙达多端，不名一行，然时观察颜色，直言切谏，帝亦常用之。 尝至太中大夫，与枚皋郭舍人俱在左右，但诙啁而已，不得大官，因以刑名家言求试用，辞数万言，指意放荡，颇复诙谐，终不见用，乃作《答客难》（见《汉书》本传）以自慰谕。 又有《七谏》（见《楚辞》），则言君子失志，自古而然。 临终诫子云：“明者处世，莫尚于中，优哉游哉，与道相从。 首阳为拙，柳下为工。 饱食安步，以仕代农。 依隐玩世，诡时不逢。 …… 圣人之道，一龙一蛇，形见神藏，与物变化，随时之宜，无有常家。 ”又黄老意也。 朔盖多所通晓，然先以自衒进身，终以滑稽名世，后之好事者因取奇言怪语，附著之朔；方士又附会以为神仙，作《神异经》《十洲记》，托为朔造，其实皆非也。枚皋者字少孺，枚乘孽子也。武帝征乘，道死，诏问乘子，无能为文者。皋上书自陈，得见，诏使作《平乐观赋》，善之，拜为郎，使匈奴。然皋好诙笑，为赋颂多嫚戏，故不得尊显，见视如倡，才比东方朔郭舍人。作文甚疾，故所赋甚多，自谓不及司马相如，而颇诋娸东方朔，又自诋娸。班固云：“其文骳，曲随其事，皆得其意，颇诙笑，不甚闲靡。凡可读者百二十篇，其尤嫚戏不可读者尚数十篇。”
枚皋者字少孺，枚乘孽子也。 武帝征乘，道死，诏问乘子，无能为文者。 皋上书自陈，得见，诏使作《平乐观赋》，善之，拜为郎，使匈奴。 然皋好诙笑，为赋颂多嫚戏，故不得尊显，见视如倡，才比东方朔郭舍人。 作文甚疾，故所赋甚多，自谓不及司马相如，而颇诋娸东方朔，又自诋娸。 班固云：“其文骳，曲随其事，皆得其意，颇诙笑，不甚闲靡。 凡可读者百二十篇，其尤嫚戏不可读者尚数十篇。 ”至于儒术之士，亦擅文词者，则有菑川薛人公孙弘，字次卿，元光中贤良对策第一，拜博士，终为丞相，封平津侯，于是天下学士，靡然向风矣。广川董仲舒与公孙弘同学，于经术尤著，景帝时已为博士，武帝即位，举贤良对策，除江都相，迁胶西相，卒。尝作《士不遇赋》（见《古文苑》），有云：
至于儒术之士，亦擅文词者，则有菑川薛人公孙弘，字次卿，元光中贤良对策第一，拜博士，终为丞相，封平津侯，于是天下学士，靡然向风矣。 广川董仲舒与公孙弘同学，于经术尤著，景帝时已为博士，武帝即位，举贤良对策，除江都相，迁胶西相，卒。 尝作《士不遇赋》（见《古文苑》），有云：“……观上世之清辉兮，廉士亦茕茕而靡归。殷汤有卞随与务光兮，周武有伯夷与叔齐；卞随务光遁迹于深山兮，伯夷叔齐登山而采薇。使彼圣贤其繇周遑兮，矧举世而同迷。若伍员与屈原兮，固亦无所复顾。亦不能同彼数子兮，将远游而终古。……”
“…… 观上世之清辉兮，廉士亦茕茕而靡归。 殷汤有卞随与务光兮，周武有伯夷与叔齐；卞随务光遁迹于深山兮，伯夷叔齐登山而采薇。 使彼圣贤其繇周遑兮，矧举世而同迷。 若伍员与屈原兮，固亦无所复顾。 亦不能同彼数子兮，将远游而终古。 ……”终则谓不若反身素业，归于一善，托声楚调，结以中庸，虽为粹然儒者之言，而牢愁狷狭之意尽矣。
终则谓不若反身素业，归于一善，托声楚调，结以中庸，虽为粹然儒者之言，而牢愁狷狭之意尽矣。小说家言，时亦兴盛。洛阳人虞初，以方士侍郎，号黄车使者，作《周说》九百四十三篇。齐人饶，不知其姓，为待诏，作《心术》二十五篇。又有《封禅方说》十八篇，不知何人作，然今俱亡。
小说家言，时亦兴盛。 洛阳人虞初，以方士侍郎，号黄车使者，作《周说》九百四十三篇。 齐人饶，不知其姓，为待诏，作《心术》二十五篇。 又有《封禅方说》十八篇，不知何人作，然今俱亡。诗之新制，亦复蔚起。《骚》《雅》遗声之外，遂有杂言，是为“乐府”。《汉书》云东方朔作八言及七言诗，各有上下篇，今虽不传，然元封三年作柏梁台，诏群臣二千石有能为七言诗，乃得上坐，则其辞今具存，通篇七言，亦联句之权舆也：
诗之新制，亦复蔚起。 《骚》《雅》遗声之外，遂有杂言，是为“乐府”。 《汉书》云东方朔作八言及七言诗，各有上下篇，今虽不传，然元封三年作柏梁台，诏群臣二千石有能为七言诗，乃得上坐，则其辞今具存，通篇七言，亦联句之权舆也：“日月星辰和四时（皇帝），骖驾驷马从梁来（梁王），郡国士马羽林材（大司马），总领天下诚难治（丞相），和抚四夷不易哉（大将军），刀笔之吏臣执之（御史大夫），（中略）蛮吏朝贺常会期（典属国），柱欂栌相枝持（大匠）。枇杷橘栗桃李梅（太官令），走狗逐兔张罘罳（上林令），啮妃女唇甘如饴（郭舍人），迫窘诘屈几穷哉（东方朔）。”
“日月星辰和四时（皇帝），骖驾驷马从梁来（梁王），郡国士马羽林材（大司马），总领天下诚难治（丞相），和抚四夷不易哉（大将军），刀笔之吏臣执之（御史大夫），（中略）蛮吏朝贺常会期（典属国），柱欂栌相枝持（大匠）。 枇杷橘栗桃李梅（太官令），走狗逐兔张罘罳（上林令），啮妃女唇甘如饴（郭舍人），迫窘诘屈几穷哉（东方朔）。 ”褚少孙补《史记》云：“东方朔行殿中，郎谓之曰：人皆以先生为狂。朔曰：如朔等，所谓避世于朝廷间者也。古之人乃避世于深山中。时坐席中酒酣，乃据地歌曰——
褚少孙补《史记》云：“东方朔行殿中，郎谓之曰：人皆以先生为狂。 朔曰：如朔等，所谓避世于朝廷间者也。 古之人乃避世于深山中。 时坐席中酒酣，乃据地歌曰——陆沉于俗，避世金马门。宫殿中，可以避世全身；何必深山之中，蒿庐之下。”
陆沉于俗，避世金马门。 宫殿中，可以避世全身；何必深山之中，蒿庐之下。 ”亦新体也，然或出后人附会。
亦新体也，然或出后人附会。五言有枚乘开其先，而是时苏李别诗，亦称佳制。苏武字子卿，京兆杜陵人，天汉元年，以中郎将使匈奴，留不遣。李陵字少卿，陇西成纪人，天汉二年击匈奴，兵败降虏，单于以女妻之，立为右校王；汉夷其族。至元始六年，苏武得归，故与陵以诗赠答：
五言有枚乘开其先，而是时苏李别诗，亦称佳制。 苏武字子卿，京兆杜陵人，天汉元年，以中郎将使匈奴，留不遣。 李陵字少卿，陇西成纪人，天汉二年击匈奴，兵败降虏，单于以女妻之，立为右校王；汉夷其族。 至元始六年，苏武得归，故与陵以诗赠答：“携手上河梁，游子暮何之。徘徊蹊路侧，悢悢不能辞。行人难久留，各言长相思。安知非日月，弦望自有时。努力崇明德，皓首以为期。”（李陵与苏武诗三首之一）
“携手上河梁，游子暮何之。 徘徊蹊路侧，悢悢不能辞。 行人难久留，各言长相思。 安知非日月，弦望自有时。 努力崇明德，皓首以为期。 ”（李陵与苏武诗三首之一）“二凫俱北飞，一凫独南翔。子当留斯馆，我当归故乡。一别如秦胡，会见何讵央。怆悢切中怀，不觉泪沾裳。愿子长努力，言笑莫相忘。”（苏武别李陵。见《初学记》卷十八，然疑是后人拟作）
“二凫俱北飞，一凫独南翔。 子当留斯馆，我当归故乡。 一别如秦胡，会见何讵央。 怆悢切中怀，不觉泪沾裳。 愿子长努力，言笑莫相忘。 ”（苏武别李陵。 见《初学记》卷十八，然疑是后人拟作）武归后拜典属国；宣帝即位，赐爵关内侯，神爵二年（前六十）卒，年八十余。陵则在匈奴二十余年，卒，有集二卷。诗以外，后世又颇传其书问，在《文选》及《艺文类聚》中。
武归后拜典属国；宣帝即位，赐爵关内侯，神爵二年（前六十）卒，年八十余。 陵则在匈奴二十余年，卒，有集二卷。 诗以外，后世又颇传其书问，在《文选》及《艺文类聚》中。
参考书：
Reference book:《史记》（卷一百二十六）
"Historical Records" (Volume 126)《汉书》（卷六，二十二，五十一，五十四，六十五，九十三）
"Book of Han" (Volume 6, 22, 51, 54, 65, 93)《乐府诗集》（宋郭茂倩编）
"Yuefu Poetry Collection" (edited by Song Guo Maoqian)《全汉文》（清严可均辑）
"All Chinese Literature" (Qing Yan can be uniformly compiled)《全汉诗》（丁福保辑）
"All Han Poems" (edited by Ding Fubao)《中国大文学史》（第三编第四章）
《中国大文学史》（第三编第四章）

第十篇　司马相如与司马迁

第十篇　司马相如与司马迁

第十篇　司马相如与司马迁

第十篇 司马相如与司马迁

第十篇　司马相如与司马迁

武帝时文人，赋莫若司马相如，文莫若司马迁，而一则寥寂，一则被刑。盖雄于文者，常桀骜不欲迎雄主之意，故遇合常不及凡文人。
武帝时文人，赋莫若司马相如，文莫若司马迁，而一则寥寂，一则被刑。 盖雄于文者，常桀骜不欲迎雄主之意，故遇合常不及凡文人。司马相如字长卿，蜀郡成都人。少时好读书，学击剑，故其亲名之曰犬子；既学，慕蔺相如之为人，更名相如。以訾为郎，事景帝。帝不好辞赋，时梁孝王来朝，游说之士邹阳枚乘严忌等皆从，相如见而悦之，因病免，游梁，与诸侯游士居，数岁，作《子虚赋》。武帝立，读而善之，曰：“朕独不得与此人同时哉？”蜀人杨得意为狗监侍帝，因言是其邑人司马相如作，乃召问相如。相如曰：有是。然此乃诸侯之事，未足观，请为天子游猎之赋。帝令尚书给笔札。相如以“子虚”，虚言也，为楚称；“乌有先生”者，乌有此事也，为齐难；“亡是公”者，亡是人也，欲明天子之义。故虚借此三人为辞，以推天子诸侯之苑囿。其卒章归之于节俭，因以讽谏。其文具存《史记》及《汉书》本传中：《文选》则以后半为《上林赋》，或召问后之所续欤？
司马相如字长卿，蜀郡成都人。 少时好读书，学击剑，故其亲名之曰犬子；既学，慕蔺相如之为人，更名相如。 以訾为郎，事景帝。 帝不好辞赋，时梁孝王来朝，游说之士邹阳枚乘严忌等皆从，相如见而悦之，因病免，游梁，与诸侯游士居，数岁，作《子虚赋》。 武帝立，读而善之，曰：“朕独不得与此人同时哉？”蜀人杨得意为狗监侍帝，因言是其邑人司马相如作，乃召问相如。 相如曰：有是。 然此乃诸侯之事，未足观，请为天子游猎之赋。 帝令尚书给笔札。 相如以“子虚”，虚言也，为楚称；“乌有先生”者，乌有此事也，为齐难；“亡是公”者，亡是人也，欲明天子之义。 故虚借此三人为辞，以推天子诸侯之苑囿。 其卒章归之于节俭，因以讽谏。 其文具存《史记》及《汉书》本传中：《文选》则以后半为《上林赋》，或召问后之所续欤？相如既奏赋，武帝大悦，以为郎；数岁，作《喻巴蜀檄》，旋拜中郎将，赴蜀，通西南夷，以蜀父老多言此事无益，大臣亦以为然，乃作《难蜀父老》文。其后，人有上书言相如使时受金，遂失官，岁余，复召为郎。然常闲居，不慕官爵，亦往往托辞讽谏，于游猎信谗之事，皆有微辞。拜孝文园令。武帝既以《子虚赋》为善，相如察其好神仙，乃曰：“上林之事，未足美也，尚有靡者。臣尝为《大人赋》，未就；请具而奏之。”意以为列仙之儒，居山泽间，形容甚臞，非帝王之仙意。惟彼大人，居于中州，悲世迫隘，于是轻举，乘虚无，超无友，亦忘天地，而乃独存也。中有云：
相如既奏赋，武帝大悦，以为郎；数岁，作《喻巴蜀檄》，旋拜中郎将，赴蜀，通西南夷，以蜀父老多言此事无益，大臣亦以为然，乃作《难蜀父老》文。 其后，人有上书言相如使时受金，遂失官，岁余，复召为郎。 然常闲居，不慕官爵，亦往往托辞讽谏，于游猎信谗之事，皆有微辞。 拜孝文园令。 武帝既以《子虚赋》为善，相如察其好神仙，乃曰：“上林之事，未足美也，尚有靡者。 臣尝为《大人赋》，未就；请具而奏之。 ”意以为列仙之儒，居山泽间，形容甚臞，非帝王之仙意。 惟彼大人，居于中州，悲世迫隘，于是轻举，乘虚无，超无友，亦忘天地，而乃独存也。 中有云：“……屯余车而万乘兮，粹云盖而树华旗。使句芒其将行兮，吾欲往乎南娭。……纷湛湛其差错兮，杂遝胶以方驰。骚扰冲苁其纷挐兮，滂濞泱轧丽以林离。攒罗列聚丛以茏茸兮，曼衍流烂痑以陆离。径入雷室之砰磷郁律兮，洞出鬼谷之掘礨崴魁。……时若暧暧将混浊兮，召屏翳，诛风伯，刑雨师。西望昆仑之轧沕荒忽兮，直径驰乎三危。排阊阖而入帝宫兮，载玉女而与之俱归。登阆风而遥集兮，亢鸟腾而壹止。彽徊阴山翔以纡曲兮，吾乃今日睹西王母，暠然白首戴胜而穴处兮，亦幸有三足乌为之使。必长生若此而不死兮，虽济万世不足以喜。……”
“…… 屯余车而万乘兮，粹云盖而树华旗。 使句芒其将行兮，吾欲往乎南娭。 …… 纷湛湛其差错兮，杂遝胶以方驰。 骚扰冲苁其纷挐兮，滂濞泱轧丽以林离。 攒罗列聚丛以茏茸兮，曼衍流烂痑以陆离。 径入雷室之砰磷郁律兮，洞出鬼谷之掘礨崴魁。 …… 时若暧暧将混浊兮，召屏翳，诛风伯，刑雨师。 西望昆仑之轧沕荒忽兮，直径驰乎三危。 排阊阖而入帝宫兮，载玉女而与之俱归。 登阆风而遥集兮，亢鸟腾而壹止。 彽徊阴山翔以纡曲兮，吾乃今日睹西王母，暠然白首戴胜而穴处兮，亦幸有三足乌为之使。 必长生若此而不死兮，虽济万世不足以喜。 ……”既奏，武帝大悦，飘飘有凌云之气，似游天地之间意。盖汉兴好楚声，武帝左右亲信，如朱买臣等，多以楚辞进，而相如独变其体，益以玮奇之意，饰以绮丽之辞，句之短长，亦不拘成法，与当时甚不同。故扬雄以为使孔门用赋，则贾谊升堂，相如入室。班固以为西蜀自相如游宦京师，而文章冠天下。盖后之扬雄，王褒，李尤，固皆蜀人也。然相如亦作短赋，则繁丽之词较少，如《哀二世赋》，《长门赋》。独《美人赋》颇靡丽，殆即扬雄所谓“劝百而讽一，犹骋郑卫之音，曲终而奏雅”者乎？
既奏，武帝大悦，飘飘有凌云之气，似游天地之间意。 盖汉兴好楚声，武帝左右亲信，如朱买臣等，多以楚辞进，而相如独变其体，益以玮奇之意，饰以绮丽之辞，句之短长，亦不拘成法，与当时甚不同。 故扬雄以为使孔门用赋，则贾谊升堂，相如入室。 班固以为西蜀自相如游宦京师，而文章冠天下。 盖后之扬雄，王褒，李尤，固皆蜀人也。 然相如亦作短赋，则繁丽之词较少，如《哀二世赋》，《长门赋》。 独《美人赋》颇靡丽，殆即扬雄所谓“劝百而讽一，犹骋郑卫之音，曲终而奏雅”者乎？“……途出郑卫，道由桑中，朝发溱洧，暮宿上宫。上宫闲馆，寂寥空虚，门昼掩，暧若神居。臣排其户而造其堂，芳香芬烈，黼帐高张；有女独处，婉然在床，奇葩逸丽，淑质艳光，睹臣迁延，微笑而言曰：‘上客何国之公子，所从来无乃远乎？’遂设旨酒，进鸣琴。臣遂抚弦为《幽兰》《白雪》之曲。女乃歌曰：‘独处室兮廓无依，思佳人兮情伤悲。有美人兮来何迟？日既暮兮华色衰，敢托身兮长自私。’玉钗挂臣冠，罗袖拂臣衣。时日西夕，玄阴晦冥，流风惨冽，素雪飘零，闲房寂谧，不闻人声。……臣乃脉定于内，心正于怀，信誓旦旦，秉志不回，翻然高举，与彼长辞。”
“…… 途出郑卫，道由桑中，朝发溱洧，暮宿上宫。 上宫闲馆，寂寥空虚，门昼掩，暧若神居。 臣排其户而造其堂，芳香芬烈，黼帐高张；有女独处，婉然在床，奇葩逸丽，淑质艳光，睹臣迁延，微笑而言曰：‘上客何国之公子，所从来无乃远乎？’遂设旨酒，进鸣琴。 臣遂抚弦为《幽兰》《白雪》之曲。 女乃歌曰：‘独处室兮廓无依，思佳人兮情伤悲。 有美人兮来何迟？日既暮兮华色衰，敢托身兮长自私。 ’玉钗挂臣冠，罗袖拂臣衣。 时日西夕，玄阴晦冥，流风惨冽，素雪飘零，闲房寂谧，不闻人声。 …… 臣乃脉定于内，心正于怀，信誓旦旦，秉志不回，翻然高举，与彼长辞。 ”相如既病免，居茂陵，武帝闻其病甚，使所忠往取书，至则已死（前一一七）。仅得一卷书，言封禅事。盖相如尝从胡安受经。故少以文词游宦，而晚年终奏封禅之礼矣。于小学，则有《凡将篇》，今不存。然其专长，终在辞赋，制作虽甚迟缓，而不师故辙，自摅妙才，广博闳丽，卓绝汉代，明王世贞评《子虚》《上林》，以为材极富，辞极丽，运笔极古雅，精神极流动，长沙有其意而无其材，班张潘有其材而无其笔，子云有其笔而不得其精神流动之处云云，其为历代评家所倾倒，可谓至矣。
相如既病免，居茂陵，武帝闻其病甚，使所忠往取书，至则已死（前一一七）。 仅得一卷书，言封禅事。 盖相如尝从胡安受经。 故少以文词游宦，而晚年终奏封禅之礼矣。 于小学，则有《凡将篇》，今不存。 然其专长，终在辞赋，制作虽甚迟缓，而不师故辙，自摅妙才，广博闳丽，卓绝汉代，明王世贞评《子虚》《上林》，以为材极富，辞极丽，运笔极古雅，精神极流动，长沙有其意而无其材，班张潘有其材而无其笔，子云有其笔而不得其精神流动之处云云，其为历代评家所倾倒，可谓至矣。司马迁字子长，河内人，生于龙门，年十岁诵古文，二十而南游吴会，北涉汶泗，游邹鲁，过梁楚以归，仕为郎中。父谈，为太史令，元封初卒。迁继其业，天汉中李陵降匈奴，迁明陵无罪，遂下吏，指为诬上，家贫不能自赎，交游莫救，卒坐宫刑。被刑后为中书令，因益发愤，据《左氏》，《国语》；采《世本》，《战国策》；述《楚汉春秋》，终成《史记》一百三十篇，始于黄帝，中述陶唐，而至武帝获白麟止，盖自谓其书所以继《春秋》也。其友益州刺史任安，尝责以古贤臣之义，迁报书有云：
司马迁字子长，河内人，生于龙门，年十岁诵古文，二十而南游吴会，北涉汶泗，游邹鲁，过梁楚以归，仕为郎中。 父谈，为太史令，元封初卒。 迁继其业，天汉中李陵降匈奴，迁明陵无罪，遂下吏，指为诬上，家贫不能自赎，交游莫救，卒坐宫刑。 被刑后为中书令，因益发愤，据《左氏》，《国语》；采《世本》，《战国策》；述《楚汉春秋》，终成《史记》一百三十篇，始于黄帝，中述陶唐，而至武帝获白麟止，盖自谓其书所以继《春秋》也。 其友益州刺史任安，尝责以古贤臣之义，迁报书有云：“……所以隐忍苟活，函粪土之中而不辞者，恨私心有所不尽，鄙没世而文采不表于后也。古者富贵而名摩灭不可胜记，惟倜傥非常之人称焉。盖西伯拘而演《周易》；仲尼厄而作《春秋》；屈原放逐，乃赋《离骚》；左丘失明，厥有《国语》；孙子髌脚，《兵法》修列。……《诗》三百篇，大抵贤圣发愤之所为作也。此人皆意有所郁结，不得通其道，故述往事，思来者。及如左丘明无目，孙子断足，终不可用，退论书策，以舒其愤，思垂空文以自见。仆窃不逊，近自托于无能之辞，网罗天下放失旧闻，考之行事，稽其成败兴衰之理，凡百三十篇。亦欲以究天人之际，通古今之变，成一家之言。草创未就，适会此祸，惜其不成，是以就极刑而无愠色。仆诚已著此书，藏之名山，传之其人，通邑大都，则仆偿前辱之责，虽万被戮，岂有悔哉？然此可为智者道，难为俗人言也！……”
“…… 所以隐忍苟活，函粪土之中而不辞者，恨私心有所不尽，鄙没世而文采不表于后也。 古者富贵而名摩灭不可胜记，惟倜傥非常之人称焉。 盖西伯拘而演《周易》；仲尼厄而作《春秋》；屈原放逐，乃赋《离骚》；左丘失明，厥有《国语》；孙子髌脚，《兵法》修列。 ……《诗》三百篇，大抵贤圣发愤之所为作也。 此人皆意有所郁结，不得通其道，故述往事，思来者。 及如左丘明无目，孙子断足，终不可用，退论书策，以舒其愤，思垂空文以自见。 仆窃不逊，近自托于无能之辞，网罗天下放失旧闻，考之行事，稽其成败兴衰之理，凡百三十篇。 亦欲以究天人之际，通古今之变，成一家之言。 草创未就，适会此祸，惜其不成，是以就极刑而无愠色。 仆诚已著此书，藏之名山，传之其人，通邑大都，则仆偿前辱之责，虽万被戮，岂有悔哉？然此可为智者道，难为俗人言也！……”迁死后，书乃渐出；宣帝时，其外孙杨恽祖述其书，遂宣布焉。班彪颇不满，以为“采经摭传，分散数家之事，甚多疏略，或有抵梧。亦其涉略者广博，贯穿经传，驰骋古今上下数千载间，斯以勤矣。又其是非颇缪于圣人：论大道则先黄老而后六经，序游侠则退处士而进奸雄，述货殖则崇利而羞贫贱，此其所蔽也。”汉兴，陆贾作《楚汉春秋》，是非虽多本于儒者，而太史职守，原出道家，其父谈亦崇尚黄老，则《史记》虽缪于儒术，固亦能远绍其旧业者矣。况发愤著书，意旨自激，其与任安书有云：“仆之先人，非有剖符丹书之功，文史星历，近乎卜祝之间，固主上所戏弄，倡优畜之，流俗之所轻也。假令仆伏法受诛，若九牛亡一毛，与蝼蚁何异。”恨为弄臣，寄心楮墨，感身世之戮辱，传畸人于千秋，虽背《春秋》之义，固不失为史家之绝唱，无韵之《离骚》矣。惟不拘于史法，不囿于字句，发于情，肆于心而为文，故能如茅坤所言：“读游侠传即欲轻生，读屈原，贾谊传即欲流涕，读庄周，鲁仲连传即欲遗世，读李广传即欲立斗，读石建传即欲俯躬，读信陵，平原君传即欲养士”也。
迁死后，书乃渐出；宣帝时，其外孙杨恽祖述其书，遂宣布焉。 班彪颇不满，以为“采经摭传，分散数家之事，甚多疏略，或有抵梧。 亦其涉略者广博，贯穿经传，驰骋古今上下数千载间，斯以勤矣。 又其是非颇缪于圣人：论大道则先黄老而后六经，序游侠则退处士而进奸雄，述货殖则崇利而羞贫贱，此其所蔽也。 ”汉兴，陆贾作《楚汉春秋》，是非虽多本于儒者，而太史职守，原出道家，其父谈亦崇尚黄老，则《史记》虽缪于儒术，固亦能远绍其旧业者矣。 况发愤著书，意旨自激，其与任安书有云：“仆之先人，非有剖符丹书之功，文史星历，近乎卜祝之间，固主上所戏弄，倡优畜之，流俗之所轻也。 假令仆伏法受诛，若九牛亡一毛，与蝼蚁何异。 ”恨为弄臣，寄心楮墨，感身世之戮辱，传畸人于千秋，虽背《春秋》之义，固不失为史家之绝唱，无韵之《离骚》矣。 惟不拘于史法，不囿于字句，发于情，肆于心而为文，故能如茅坤所言：“读游侠传即欲轻生，读屈原，贾谊传即欲流涕，读庄周，鲁仲连传即欲遗世，读李广传即欲立斗，读石建传即欲俯躬，读信陵，平原君传即欲养士”也。然《汉书》已言《史记》有缺，于是续者纷起，如褚先生，冯商，刘歆等。《汉书》亦有出自刘歆者，故崔适以为《史记》之文有与全书乖，与《汉书》合者，亦歆所续也；至若年代悬隔，章句割裂，则当是后世妄人所增与钞胥所脱云。
然《汉书》已言《史记》有缺，于是续者纷起，如褚先生，冯商，刘歆等。 《汉书》亦有出自刘歆者，故崔适以为《史记》之文有与全书乖，与《汉书》合者，亦歆所续也；至若年代悬隔，章句割裂，则当是后世妄人所增与钞胥所脱云。迁雄于文，而亦爱赋，颇喜纳之列传中。于《贾谊传》录其《吊屈原赋》及《服赋》，而《汉书》则全载《治安策》，赋无一也。《司马相如传》上下篇，收赋尤多，为《子虚》（合《上林》），《哀二世》，《大人》等。自亦造赋，《汉志》云八篇，今仅传《士不遇赋》一篇，明胡应麟以为伪作。
迁雄于文，而亦爱赋，颇喜纳之列传中。 于《贾谊传》录其《吊屈原赋》及《服赋》，而《汉书》则全载《治安策》，赋无一也。 《司马相如传》上下篇，收赋尤多，为《子虚》（合《上林》），《哀二世》，《大人》等。 自亦造赋，《汉志》云八篇，今仅传《士不遇赋》一篇，明胡应麟以为伪作。至宣帝时，仍修武帝故事，讲论六艺群书，博尽奇异之好；征能为楚辞者，于是刘向，张子侨，华龙，柳褒等皆被召，待诏金马门。又得蜀人王褒字子渊，诏之作《圣主得贤臣颂》，与张子侨等并待诏。褒能为赋颂，亦作俳文，后方士言益州有金马碧鸡之宝，宣帝诏褒往祀，于道病死。
至宣帝时，仍修武帝故事，讲论六艺群书，博尽奇异之好；征能为楚辞者，于是刘向，张子侨，华龙，柳褒等皆被召，待诏金马门。 又得蜀人王褒字子渊，诏之作《圣主得贤臣颂》，与张子侨等并待诏。 褒能为赋颂，亦作俳文，后方士言益州有金马碧鸡之宝，宣帝诏褒往祀，于道病死。
参考书：
Reference book:《史记》（卷一百十七，一百三十）
"Historical Records" (Volume 117, 130)《汉书》（卷五十七，六十二，六十四）
Book of Han (Volume 57, 62, 64)《史记探源》（崔适）
"Historical Records Exploring the Source" (Cui Shi)《中国大文学史》（第三编第四及第五章）
History of Chinese Literature (Chapters 4 and 5 of Part 3)《支那文学史纲》（第三篇第六章）
"Outline of the History of Chinese Literature" (Chapter 6 of Chapter 3)《支那文学之研究》（日本铃木虎雄）第一卷

"A Study of Chinese Literature" (Torao Suzuki, Japan) Volume 1